f 


^^?*'4»1 


-^"^      V 


M%:. 


^ 
'% 


'V 


4 


'w^i 


/ 


'^^ 


UNIVERSITY 

OF  PITTSBURGH 

LIBRARY 


J -0F>. 


<^ 


A 


THIS  BOOK  PRESENTED  BY 


Katherine  C,   Smith. 


^-:' 


*\ 


xN  ^\     "" 


,^\    X        ^^'^' 


.^^'^»>^-.'>^ 


AN        Jl^ 

ENQUIRY 


/4  ^^    /?^^:i-,^<l  ^/^i.^/^^y^t^'-X^jy'^ 


CONCERNING 


POLITICAL   JUSTICE 


ITS      INFLUENCE 

O  M 

GENERAL    VIRTUE    AND    HAPPINESS. 

B  y 
WILLIAM      GODWIN. 

IN   TWO    VOLUMES. 
V  O  L.      I. 

LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  C.  G.   J.  ANDJ.  ROBINSON,  PATERNOSTER-ROW. 
M.DCC.XCIII. 


-%  -  ^» 


-v     > 


N 


V-  I. 


P   R   E   F   A   C    E 


FE  W  works  of  literature  are  held  in  greater 
eftimation,  than  thofe  which  treat  in  a  me- 
thodical and  elementary  way  of  the  principles  of 
fcience.  But  the  human  mind  in  every  enlight- 
ened age  is  progreffive ;  and  the  bell  elementary 
treatifes  after  a  certain  time  are  reduced  in  their 
value  by  the  operation  of  fubfequent  difcoveries. 
Hence  it  has  always  been  defired  by  candid  en- 
quirers, that  preceding  works  of  this  kind  fhould 
from  time  to  time  be  fuperfeded,  and  that  other 
produ6tions  including  the  larger  views  that  have 
fmce  offered  themfelves,  ftiould  be  fubftituted  in 
their  place- 
It  would  be  llransje  if  fomethingr  of  this  kind 
were  not  dehrable  in  politics,  after  the  great 
change  that  has  been  produced  in  men's  minds 
upon  this  fubjeftj  and  the  light  that  has  been 
1  thrown 


vi  PREFACE. 

thrown  upon  it  by  the  recent  difcuffions  of  Ame- 
rica and  France.  A  fenfe  of  the  value  of  fach  a 
work,  if  properly  executed,  was  the  motive  which 
o-ave  birth  to  thefe  volumes.  Of  their  execution 
the  reader  muft  judge. 

Authors  who  have  formed  the  defign  of  fuper- 
feding  the  works  of  their  predeceffors,  will  be 
found,  if  they  were  ii;i  any  degree  equal  to  the  de- 
fign, not  merely  to  have  Golle6ted  the  fcattered 
information  that  had  been  produced  upon  the 
fubje6l,  but  to  have  increafed  the  fcience  with  the 
fruit  of  their  own  meditations.  In  the  following 
work  principles  will  occafionally  be  found,  which 
it  will  not  be  juft  to  rejeft  without  examination, 
merely  becaufe  they  are  new.  It  was  impoflible 
perfeveringly  to  refleft  upon  fo  prolific  a  fcience, 
and  a  fcience  which  may  be  faid  to  be  yet  in  its 
infancy,  without  being  led  into  ways  of  thinking 
that  were  in  fome  degree  uncommon. 

Another 


PREFACE.  vli' 

Another  argument  in  favour  of  the  utiHty  of 
fuch  a  work  w^as  frequently  in  the  author's  mind, 
and  therefore  ought  to  be  mentioned.  He  con- 
ceived pohtics  to  be  the  proper  vehicle  of  a  libe- 
ral m^orality.  That  defcription  of  ethics  deferves 
to  be  held  in  fliglit  ellimation,  which  feeks  only 
to  regulate  our  conduft  in  articles  of  particular 
and  perfonal  concern,  inftead  of  exciting  our  atten- 
tion to  the  general  good  of  the  Ipecies.  It  ap- 
peared fufficiently  prafticable  to  make  of  fuch  a 
treatife,  exclufively  of  its  dire6l  political  ufe,  an 
advantageous  vehicle  of  moral  improvement.  He 
was  accordingly  defirous  of  producing  a  work,  from 
the  perufal  of  which  no  man  fhould  rife  without 
being  Hrengthened  in  habits  of  fmeerity,  fortitude 
and  juftice. 

Having  ftated  the  confiderations  in  which  the 
work  originated,  it  is  proper  to  mention  a  few  cir- 
ctrmftances  of  the  outline  of  its  hiftory.  The  fen- 
timents  it  contains  are  by  no  means  the  fuggeftions 
©f  a  fudden  effervefcence  of  fancy.  Political  en- 
1  ,  quiry 


Vlll 


PREFACE. 


quiry  had  long  held  a  foremoft  place  in  the  writer's 
attention.  It  is  now  twelve  years  fmce  he  be-^ 
came  fatisfied,  that  monarchy  was  a  fpecies  of  go- 
vernment unavoidably  corrupt.  He  owed  this  con- 
vi6lion  to  the  political  writings  of  Swift  and  to  a 
perufal  of  the  Latin  hiftorians.  Nearly  at  the 
fame  time  he  derived  great  additional  inftru6lion 
from  reading  the  moft  confiderable  French  writers 
upon  the  nature  of  man  in  the  following  order^ 
Syjieme  de  la  Nature,  Rouffeau  and  Helvetius.  Long, 
before  he  thought  of  the  prefent  work,  he  had  fa- 
miliarifed  to  his  mind  the  arguments  it  contains  on 
juftice,  gratitude,  rights  of  man,  promifes,  oaths 
and  the  omnipotence  of  truth.  Political  com- 
plexity is  one  of  the  errors  that  take  ftrongeft  hold 
on  the  underftanding ;  and  it  was  only  by  ideas 
fuggefted  by  the  French  revolution,  that  he  was 
reconciled  to  the  defirablenefs  of  a  government 
of  the  fimpleft  conllruftion.  To  the  fame  event  he 
owes  the  determination  of  mind  which  gave  exill- 
ence  to  this  work» 

Such 


PREFACE. 


IX 


Such  was  the  preparation  which  encouraged  him 
to  undertake  the  prefent  treatife.  The  dire6l  ex- 
ecution may  be  difmiffed  in  a  few  words.  It  was 
projefted  in  the  month  of  May  1791  :  the  com- 
pofition  was  begun  in  the  following  September, 
and  has  therefore  occupied  a  fpace  of  fixteen 
months.  This  period  was  devoted  to"  the  purpofe 
with  unremitted  ardour.  It  were  to  be  wiflied  it 
had  been  longer ;  but  it  feemed  as  if  no  con- 
temptible part  of  the  utility  of  the  work  depended 
upon  its  early  appearance. 

The  printing  of  the  following  treatife,  as 
well  as  the  compofition,  was  influenced  by  the 
fame  principle,  a  defire  to  reconcile  a  certain  de- 
gree of  difpatch  with  the  neceffary  deliberation. 
The  printing  was  for  that  reafon  commenced,  long 
before  the  compofition  was  finiihed.  Some  dif- 
advantages  have  arifen  from  this  circumftance. 
The  ideas  of  the  author  became  more  perfpicuous 
and  digefted,  as  his  enquiries  advanced.  The 
longer  he  confidered  the  fubjeft,  the  more  accu- 

b  rately 


X  PREFACE. 

rately  he  feemed  to  underftand  it.  This  circum- 
fiance  has  led  him  into  a  few  contradiftions.  The 
principal  of  thefe  confifls  in  an  occafional  inaccu- 
racy of  language,  particularly  in  the  lirft  book,  re- 
fpefting  the  word  government.  He  did  not  enter 
upon  the  w^ork,  without  being  aware  that  govern- 
ment by  its  very  nature  countera61;s  the  improve- 
ment of  individual  mind ;  but  he  underftood  the 
full  meaning  of  this  proportion  more  completely 
as  he  proceeded,  and  faw  more  diftinftly  into  the 
nature  of  the  remedy.  This,  and  a  few  other  de- 
fers, under  a  different  mode  of  preparation  would 
have  been  avoided.  The  candid  reader  will 
make  a  fuitable  allowance.  The  author  judges 
upon  a  review,  that  thefe  defe6ls  are  fuch  as  not 
materially  to  injure  the  objeft  of  the  work,  and 
that  more  has  been  gained  than  loft  by  the  con- 
du6l  he  has  purfued. 

The  period  in  which*  the  work  makes  its  ap- 
pearance  is   fmgular.      The   people    of  England 
have  affiduoufly  been  excited  to  declare  their  loy- 
5  alty, 


PREFACE. 


XI 


alty,  and  to  mark  every  man  as  obnoxious  who  is 
not  ready  to  fign  the  Shibboleth  of  the  conftitu- 
tion.  Money  is  raifed  by  voluntary  fubfcription 
to  defray  the  expence  ofprofecutingmen  who  Ihall 
dare  to  promulgate  heretical  opinions,  and  thus  to 
opprefs  them  at  once  with  the  enmity  of  govern- 
ment and  of  individuals.  This  was  an  accident 
wholly  unforefeeiT  when  the  work  was  under- 
taken ;  and  it  will  fcarcely  be  fuppofed  that  fuch 
an  accident  could  produce  any  alteration  in  the 
writer's  defigns.  Every  man,  if  we  may  believe 
the  voice  of  rumour,  is  to  be  profecuted  who 
fliall  appeal  to  the  people  by  the  publication  of 
any  unconftitutional  paper  or  pamphlet ;  and  it  it 
added,  that  men  are  to  be  profecuted  for  any  un- 
guarded words  that  may  be  dropped  in  the 
warmth  of  converfation  and  debate.  It  is  now  to 
be  tried  whether,  in  addition  to  thefe  alarming  en- 
croachments upon  our  liberty,  a  book  is  to  fall 
under  the  arm  of  the  civil  power,  which,  befide 
the  advantage  of  having  for  one  of  its  exprefs  ob*- 
je6ls  the  diffuading  from  all  tumult  and  violence, 

b  2  is 


xii  PREFACE. 

is  by  its  very  nature  an  appeal  to  men  of  ftudy  and 
reflexion.  It  is  to  be  tried  whether  a  projeft  is 
formed  for  fupprelTing  the  aftivity  of  mind,  and 
putting  an  end  to  the  difquifitions  of  fcience. 
Refpe6ling  the  event  in  a  perfonal  view  the  author 
has  formed  his  refolution.  Whatever  condu6l  his 
countrymen  may  purfue,  they  will  not  be  able  to 
fhake  his  tranquillity.  The  duty  he  is  moft 
bound  to  difcharge  is  the  aflifting  the  progrefs  of 
truth ;  and  if  he  fuffer  in  any  refpeft  for  fuch  a 
proceeding,  there  is  certainly  no  viciflitude  that 
can  befal  him,  that  can  ever  bring  along  with  it  a 
more  fatisfa6lory  confolation. 

But,  exclufively  of  this  precarious  and  unim- 
portant confideration,  it  is  the  fortune  of  the  pre- 
fent  work  to  appear  before  a  public  that  is  panic 
ftruck,  and  impreffed  with  the  moft  dreadful  ap- 
prehenfions  of  fuch  doftrines  as  are  here  deli- 
vered. All  the  prejudices  of  the  human  mind 
are  in  arms  againft  it.  This  circumftance  may 
appear  to  be  of  greater  importance  than  the  other. 

But 


PREFACE. 


xin 


But  it  Is  the  property  of  truth  to  be  fearlefs,  and 
to  prove  vi6lorious  over  every  adverfary.  It  re- 
quires no  great  degree  of  fortitude,  to  look  with 
indifference  upon  the  falfe  fire  of  the  moment, 
and  to  forefee  the  calm  period  of  reafon  which 
will  fucceed. 

January  7,  1793; 


C    O    N    T    K    xN    T    S 


OF      THE. 


FIRST        V  O  L   U    M    E. 


BOOK      I. 

OF    THE    IMPORTANCE    OF    POLITICAL 
INSTITUTIONS. 


BOOK      II. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    SOCIETY. 

BOOK      III. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    GOVERNMENT. 


BOOK      IV. 

MISCELLANEOUS    PRINCIPLES, 


CONTENTS 


OF      THE 


FIRST      BOOK. 


OF  THE  IMPORTANCE  OF  POLITICAL 
INSTITUTIONS. 

C  H  A  P.      I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

fnr'HE  fubjeSi  propofed. — Syjlem   of  indifference — of  paffive  obe^ 
"*    dience — of  liberty, — Syjlem  of  liberty  extended^  Page  i 

CHAP.     IL 

HISTORY   OF   POLITICAL   SOCIETY. 

frequency  of  war — among  the  ancients — among  the  moderns — the 
French — the  Engllp. — Caufes  of  war. —  Penal  laws. — i^f-" 
fotlfmy — Dgdudilon^-'Enumeratm  of  arguments,  § 

k  CHAP, 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      III. 

THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN  ORIGINATE  IN 
THEIR  PERCEPTIONS. 

No  mnate  principles. — ObjeSiions  to  this  offer tio7i— from  the  early 
aStions  of  infants— from  the  defre  offelf-prefervation—fromfelf- 
love—from  pity — from  the  vices  of  children — tyranny — fullennefs, 
— Conclufon.  Page  12 

C  H  A  P.      IV. 

THREE   PRINCIPAL   CAUSES    OF   MORAL    IMPROVE- 
MENT    CONSIDERED. 

I.     LITERATURE. 

Benefits  of  literature. — Examples. — Effential  properties  of  literature. 

— Its  defedts. 

II.    EDUCATION. 
Benefits  of  education. — Caufes  of  its  imbecility. 

III.    POLITICAL    JUSTICE. 
Benefits  of  political  injiitution. — Univerfality  of  its  influence— proved 
by  the  mifiakes  offociety. — Origin  of  evil.  ,  19 

C  H  A  P.      V. 

INFLUENCE  OF  POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS 
EXEMPLIFIED. 

Robbery  and  fraud,  two  great  vices  infociety — originate,  1.  in  ex- 
treme poverty — 2.  in  the  ofientation  of  the  rich — 3.  in  their 

tyranny 


CONTENTS. 

tyranny — rendered  permanent — i.  by  kgijlatlon — 2.  by  ths  ad~ 
tnimjlration  of  law — 3.  by  the  inequality  of  conditions.     Page  -Jt'i 

CHAP.      VI. 

HUMAN  INVENTIONS  CAPABLE  OF  PERPETUAL  IM- 
PROVEMENT. 

PerfeStibility  of  man — infanced,  frjl,  in  language.  —  Its  beginnings. 
— AbJlraSlion. — Complexity  of  language. — Second  injiance  :  al' 
phabetical  writing. — Hieroglyphics  atfirfl  univerfal. — ProgreJJive 
deviations. — Application.  43 

CHAP.      VII. 

OF  THE  OBJECTION  TO   THESE   PRINCIPLES  FROM 
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  CLIMATE. 

PARTI. 

OF  MORAL   AND   PHTSICAL   CAUSES. 

'the  queflton  fated. — Provinces  of  fenfation  and  refleSlion. — Moral 
caufes  frequently  mifaken  for  phyfical. — Superiority  of  the  former 
evident  from  the  varieties  of  human  charaSier. — Operation  of 
phyfcal  caufes  rare. — Fertility  of  reflexion. — Phyfical  caufes 
in  the  firfi  infiance  fuperior^  afterwards  moral. — Obje^ion  from 
the  effeit  of  breed  in  animals. — Conclufon,  51 

ba  PART 


CONTENTS. 

P  A  R  T     ir. 

OF   NATIONAL    CHARACTERS. 

CharaSier  of  the  priejlhood. — All  nations  capable  of  liberty. — The 
ajfertion  illujirated. — 'Experience  favours  thefe  reafonings, — Means 
of  introducing  liberty.  Page  60 

CHAP.      VIII. 

OF  THE  OBJECTION  TO  THESE  PRINCIPLES  FROM 
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  LUXURY. 

The  objeSlionfiated, — Source  of  this  objedHon.— Refuted  from  muta- 
bility—frotn  mortality— from  the  nature  of  truth,— 'The  pro- 
bability of  perfeverance  confidered^  ny 


r'  B  O  O  K      II. 

PRINCIPLES   OF  SOCIETr. 

C  H  A  P.      I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Nature  of  the  enquiry. — Mode  of  purfuing  it. — Di/linBion  between 
fociety  and  government  77 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      II. 
OFJUSTICE. 

Connection  of  politics  and  morals. — Extent  and  meaning  of  jujlice.-^- 
Subje^  of  jujlice  :  mankind. — Bs  diflribution  meafured  by  the 
capacity  of  its  fubjeSl — by  bis  ufefulnefs. — Family  affeSlion  con- 
Jidered. — Gratitude  conjidered. — Ohjedlions:  from  ignorance-^ 
from  utility. — An  exception  fated. — Degrees  ofjufice. — AppUcU" 
iion. — Idea  of  political  juf  ice.  Page  8p 

APPENDIX,      No.  I. 

OF     SUICIDE, 

Motives  of  fuicide:    I.   efcape  from  pain — 2.    benevolence.-— 
Martyrdom  confidered.  02 

APPENDIX,      No.  II. 

OF     DUELLING. 

Motives   of  duelling:   \,  revenge — 2.  reputation  for   courage,—' 
Fallacy  of  this  motive. — ObjeSllon  anfwered, — Illujiration.        94 

CHAP.      III. 
OF    DUTY. 

A  difficulty  fated. — Of  abfolute  and  praSllcal  virtue. — Impropriety 

of  this  difinUlion. — Unlverfallty  of  what  is  called  praSlical  virtue 

8  — infanced 


CONTENTS. 

— mjianced  in  robbery — in  religious  fanaticifm. — T/6^  quality  of 
an  aSlion  diJlinSl  from  the  difpojition  with  which  it  is  performed, — 
Farther  difficulty. — Meaning  of  the  term,  duty, — Jipplication. — 
hferences.  Page  97 

CHAP.      IV. 

OF   THE   EQUALITY    OF   MANKIND. 

Phyfcal  equality. — ObjeBion. — Anfwers. — Moral  equality. — How 
limited. — Province  of  political  jujlice.  1 04 

C  H  A  P      V. 

RIGHTS    OF    MAN. 

The  quefiion  flated.— Foundation  of  fociety. — Oppofte  rights  impoji^ 
l,Je, — Conclufon  from  thefe  premifes, — Difcretion  confidered.—- 
Rights  of  kings. — Immoral  confequences  of  the  dodlrine  of  rights. — 
Rights  of  communities. — Ohjediions  :  i.  the  right  of  mutual  aid. 
— Explanation, — Origin  of  the  term,  right. — 2.  rights  of  pri- 
vate judgment  and  of  the  prefs, — Explanation. — Reafons  of  this 
limitation  upon  the  funSlions  of  the  community  :  i.  the  inutility  of 
attempting  rejiraint — 2.  its  pernicious  tendency, — Conclufon. 

C  H  A  P.      VI. 
OF  THE  EXERCISE  OF  PRIVATE  JUDGMENT.  . 

Foundation  of  virtue, — Human  aBions  regulated:   i.  by  the  nature 

of  things— ^,  by  pofitive  infitution, — Tendency  of  the  latter :    i. 

S  ^0 


CONTENTS. 

to  excite  virtue. — Its  equivocal  charadler  in  this  refpedl. — 2.  fa 
inform  the  judgment, — Its  inaptitude  for  that  purpofe. — Province 
of  confclence  conjidered.  —  'Tendency  of  an  Interference  with 
that  province , — Recapitulation. — Arguments  In  favour  of  poftlve 
injiltutlon :  i .  the  necejfity  of  repelling  private  Injifllce. — Objec- 
tions :  the  uncertainty  of  evidence — the  dlverfty  of  motives — 
the  unfultablenefs  of  the  means  of  correSilon — either  to  Imprefs 
new  fentlments — or  to  ftrengthen  old  ones. — Punlfhment  for  the 
fake  of  example  confdered. — Urgency  of  the  cafe. — 2.  rebellion 
— ^.war. — QbjeSilons. — Reply.  Page  120 


BOOK      III. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    G0VERJSr^/^2NT. 

CHAP.      I. 
SYSTEMS    OF    POLITICAL    WRITERS. 

The  queflon  fated. — Flrjl  hypothejis  :  government  founded  in  fu- 
perior  frength.— 'Second  hypothefs  :  government  ]mt  divino. — 
Third  hypothejis  :  the  facial  contraSl. — The  frjl  hypoihefs  exa- 
mined.— The  fecond, — Criterion  of  divine  right  :  i .  patriarchal 
defcent — 2 .  jujiice.  139 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      II. 

OF     THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT. 

^enes propofed. — Who  are  the  contraSl'mg  parties? — What  is  the 
form  of  engagement  ? — Over  ho%v  long  a  period  does  the  contraSi 
extend?— ^To  how  great  a  variety  of  propoftions? — Can  it  extend 
to  laws  hereafter  to  be  made  ? — Addrejfes  of  adhefon  confidersd.. 
'•r-Power  of  a.  majority^  Page  143 

C  H  A  P.      IIL 
OF    PROMISES., 

'ihe  validity  of  promifes  examined.- — Shown  to  be  inconjifent  with- 
jiiftice — to  be  foreign  to  the  general  good. — Of  the  expeSlation  ex-^ 
cited. — The  fidfilUng  expefiation  does  not  imply  the  validity  of  a 
promife, — Conclufon.  x^Ot 

CHAP.      IV. 
OF    POLITICAL    AUTHORITY. 

Common  deliberation  the  true  foundation  of  government — proved  from: 
the  equal  claims  of  mankind— from  the  nature  of  our  faculties — 
from  the  objeSi  of  government— from  the  effeSls  of  common  delibe- 
ration.^— 'Delegation  vindicated. — Difference  between  the  dodlrine 
here  maintained  and  that  of  a  facial  contraSi  apparent — from  the 
merely  profpe5iive  nature  of  the  former— from  the  nullity  of  pro- 
mifes—from  the  fallibility _  of  deliberation, — Conclufon.  is  7 

C  H  A  Pg. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      V. 
OF    LEGISLATION. 

Society  can  declare  and  inter pret^  but  cannot  ena£l,—Its  authority 
only  executive.  Page  i66 

CHAP.      VI. 
OF    OBEDIENCE. 

Obedience  not  the  correlative  of  authority. — No  man  bound  to  yield 
obedience  to  another. — Cafe  of  fubmijjion  conjidered. — Foundation 
of  obedience. — Ufefulnefs  of  facial  communication. — Cafe  of  confi- 
dence conjidered. — Its  limitations. — Mifchief  of  unlimited  confi- 
dence.— SubjeSlion  explained.  igg 

APPENDIX. 

Moral  principles  frequently  elucidated  by  incidental  refleSiion — by  in- 
cidental pajfages  in  various  authors. — Example.  lyQ 

CHAP.      VII. 

OF    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT. 

'Argument  in  favour  of  a  variety  of  forms — compared  with  the  ar- 
gument in  favour  cj  a  variety  of  religious  creeds. — That  there  is 
one  bejl  form  of  government  proved—from  the  unity  of  truth — 
from  the  nature  of  man. — QbjeSlion  from  human  iveakncfs  ana 
prejudice. — Danger  in  efiaUi/lmg  an  imperfedi  code. — Manners 

e  of 


CONTENTS. 

of  nations  produced  by  their  forms  of  government. — Gradual  im- 
provement necejfary. — Simplicity  chiefly  to  be  defired. — Publi- 
cation of  truth  the  grand  in/irument — by  individuals,  not  by  go- 
vernment— the  truth  entire,  and  not  by  parcels.— Sort  of  progrefs 
to  be  defired.  Page  179 


BOOK      IV. 

MISCELLANEOUS    PRINCIPLES. 

CHAP.      I. 
OF    RESISTANCE. 

Every  individual  the  judge  of  his  own  refjldnce, — Objel^ion. — 
uinfwered from  the  nature  of  government— from  the  modes  of  re- 
fflance. — i.  Force  rarely  to  be  employed — either  where  there  is 
fmall  profpeSi  offuccefs — or  where  the  profpedl  is  great. — Hijiory 
of  Charles  the  firji  eflimated.  —  2.  Reafoning  the  legitimate 
mode.  19^ 


CHAP. 


CONTENTS. 

CHAP.      II. 

OF    REVOLUTIONS. 

SECTION    I. 

DUTIES    OF    A    CITIZEN. 

Obligation  to  fupport  the  con/lit ut ion  of  our  country  conftdered— 
mufl  arife  either  from  the  reafon  of  the  cafe,  or  from  a  perfonal 
and  local  confideration. — ThefirH  examined, — l^hefecond. 

Page  198 
SECTION     II. 

MODE    OF   EFFECTING    REVOLUTIONS. 

Perfuafon  the  proper  inflrument — not  violence — nor  refentment, — 
Latenefs  of  event  defrable.  202 

SECTION      III. 

OF   POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS. 

Meaning  of  the  term. — j^Jfociations  objeBed  to — i.  from  the  fort  of 
perfons  with  "whom  a  juf  revolution  fould  originate — 1.  frotn  the 
danger  of  tumult. — ObjeBs  of  association. — In  what  cafes  ad~ 
mijjible. — Argued  for  from  the  necefjlty  to  give  weight  to  opinion 
—from  their  tendency  to  af certain  opitiion. — UnnecejJ'ary  for  thefe 
purpofes. — General  inutility. — ConceJJions. — Importance  of  facial 
ctmmunication. — Propriety  of  teaching  refjlance  confdered.     205 

ca  SECTION 


CONTENTS. 

SECTION    IV. 
OF  THE  SPECIES  OF  REFORM  TO  BE  DESIRED. 

Ought  it  to  be  -bartial  or  entire  ? — Truth  may  not  be  partially 
taught, — Partial  refbrmation  confidered. — Objection. — Anfwer. 
— Partial  reform  indifperjible. — Nature  of  a  juji  revolution — 
how  dijlantf  Page  219 

CHAP.      III. 
OF      TYRANNICIDE. 

D'roerfty  of  opinions  on  this  fuhjeEl. — Argument  in  its  vindication. — • 
'The  defnidllon  of  a  tyrant  not  a  cafe  of  exception. — Confequences 
of  tyrannicide, — AJaJfmation  defcribed. — Importance  of  fncerity, 

226 

C  H  A  P.      IV. 
OF    THE    CULTIVATION    OF    TRUTH. 
SECTION     I. 
OF   ABSTRACT    OR    GENERAL    TRUTH. 
Its  importance  as  conducing — to  our  intelledtual  improvement — to  our 
moral  improvement, — Virtue  the  hejifource  of  happinefs. — Proved 
by  comparifon — by  its  manner  of  adapting  itfelf  to  all  ftuatwns — 
by  its  undecaying  excellence — cannot  be  effeBlually  propagated  but 
by  a  cultivated  mind, — Importance  of  general  truth  4o  our  political 
improvement.  ^3^ 


CONTENTS. 

S  E  C  T  I  O  N     11. 

OF      S  I  N  C  E  R  IT  r. 

Nature  of  this  virtue. — Its  effects — upo?i  our  own  aollons—upon 
our  neighbours. — Its  tendency  to  produce  fortitude. — EfeSls  ofin- 
fincerity.' — CharaSler  which  fncerity  'would  acquire  to  him  who 
praStifed  it. — Objedlions. — The  fear  of  giving  unnecefjary  pain. — 
Anfwer, — "Tbe  defre  of  prefer  ving  my  life. — '^his  objeSiion  proves 
too  much. — Anfwer. — Secrecy  corfdered. — I^he  fecrets  of  others^ 
— State  fecrets. — Secrets  of  philanthropy.  Page  238 

APPENDIX,      No.  I. 

OF  THE  CONNEXION   BETWEEN    UNDERSTANDING 
AND  VIRTUE. 

Can  eminent  virtue  exifl  unconnedled  with  talents  ? —  Nature  of 
virtue. — //  is  the  offspring  of  under/landing. — //  generates  imder- 
(ianding. —  Illuf  ration  from  other  purfuits — love — ambition — 
applied. 

Can  eminent  talents  exifl  unconneSled  with  virtue  f — Argument  in 
the  affirmative  from  analogy — in  the  negative  from  the  iiniver- 
fality  of  moral  fpeculation— -from  the  nature  cfvice  as  founded  i?i 
mijiake. — T^he  argument  balanced, — Importance  of  a  fenfe  of 
jufice. — Its  connexion  with  talents. — Illiberality  with  which 
men  of  talents  are  ufually  treated.  253 

APPENDIX. 


CONTENTS. 

APPENDIX,      No.  II. 
OF  THE  MODE  OF  EXCLUDING  VISITORS. 

Its  impropriety  argued— from  thejituation  in  'which  it  places^  I.  the 
ruijitor — 2.  thefervant. — Objediions  : — Pretended  necejjity  of  this 
praSiice^  i .  to  preferve  us  from  intrufion — 2.  to  free  us  from 
dif agreeable  acquaintance. — CharaSiers  of  the  honefl  and  di/honejl 
man  in  this  refpeSi  compared.  Page  265 

APPENDIX,    No.  III. 

SUBJECT    OF    SINCERITY    RESUMED. 

A  cafe  propofed. — Arguments  in  favour  of  concealment. — Previous 
que/lion:  Is  truth  in  general  to  be  partially  communicated? — 
Cuflomary  effeSis  of  fncerity — of  in/inceriiy — upon  him  who 
praSiifes  it — i.  the  ftfpenjion  of  improvement — 2.  mifanthropy — 
3.  difingenuity — upon  the  fpeSiators. — Sincerity  delineated. — Its 
general  importance. — Application. — Duty  refpeSling  the  choice  of 
a  refdence.  272 

C  H  A  P.      V. 

OF    FREE   WILL   AND  NECESSITY. 

Importance  of  the  que/lion. — Definition  of  neceffity. — Why  fuppofed 
to  exifi-  in  the  operations  of  the  material  univerfe. — T^he  cafe  of  the 
operations  of  mind  is  parallel. — Indications  of  necejjity — in  hi/lory 
— in  our  judgments  of  character — in  our fchemes  of  policy — incur 

ideas 


CONTENTS. 

ideas  of  moral  difcipline. — ObjeSilon  from  the  fallibility  of  our  ex- 
peSlations  in  human  condu5i. — Anfwer. — Origin  and  univerfality 
of  the  fentiment  of  free  will. — 'The  fentiment  ofnecejjlty  alfo  uni- 
verfal. — The  truth  of  this  fentiment  argued  from  the  nature  of 
volition. — Hypothefs  of  free  ivill  examined. — Self-determination. 
— Indifference. — The  will  not  a  difin£t  faculty, — Free  will  dif- 
advantageous  to  its  poffeffor — of  no  fervice  to  morality.      Page  2  8  3 

C  H  A  P.      VI. 

INFERENCES  FROM  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  NECESSITY' 

Idea  it  fuggefs  to  us  of  the  univerfe. — Influence  on  our  moral  ideas 
— a£iion — virtue — exertion — perfuafion  —  exhortation — ardour — 
complacence  and  averfon — punfiiment — repentance — praife  and 
blame  —  intelleSfual  tranquillity.  —  Language  of  neceffiiy  re 
commended.  3^5 

CHAP.      VII. 

OF  THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

Nature  of  mechanifm. — Its  clajfes,  material  and  intelleElual. — 
Material  fyfem,  or  of  vibrations. — The  intelkSlual  fyfetn  mofl 
probable — from  the  confideratlon  that  thought  would  otherwife  be 
a  fuperfluity—from  the  eflabliffed  principles  of  reafo?iing  from 
effeSls  to  caufes. — Objedlions  refuted. — Thoughts  'which  produce 
animal  motion  may  be — i.  Involuntary, — All  animal  motions 
were  firjt  involuntary. — 2.  Unattended  with  confcioufnefs, — The 

mind 


CONTENTS. 

mind  cannot  have  more  than  one  thought  at  any  one  time.'— Ob- 
jeSiion  to  this  aj^ertion  from  the  cafe  of  complex  ideas— from 
various  mental  operations — as  comparifon — apprehenjion — rapidity 
of  the  fuccefjion  of  ideas. — Application. — Duration  meafured  by 
confcioufnefs, — 3.  A  difinSl  thought  to  each  motion  may  be 
unneceffary —  apparent  from  the  complexity  of  fenfible  imprefjions. 
— The  mind  always  thinks. — Conclufon. — The  theory  applied  to 
the  phenomenon  of  walking — to  the  circulation  of  the  blood,— 'Of 
motion  in  general, —  Of  dreams.  Page  318 

CHAP.      VIII. 

OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    VIRTUE. 

Hypothefes  of  benevolence  and  felf  love—fuperiority  of  the  former. — 
A£lion  is  either  voluntary  or  involuntary, — Nature  of  the  firfl  of 
thefe  clajjes. — Argument  that  refults  from  it. — Voluntary  a£lion 
has  a  realexifence, — Confequence  of  that  exiflence. — Experimental 
view  of  the  fubjeSl, — Suppoftions  fuggefed  by  the  advocates  of 
felf  love — that  we  calculate  upon  all  occa/ions  the  advantage  to 
accrue  to  us, — Falfenefs  of  this  fuppofition. — Suppoftion  of  a  con- 
trary fort. — We  do  not  calculate  what  would  be  the  uneafnefs  to 
refult  from  our  refraining  to  a£l — either  in  relieving  dijlrefs — or 
in  adding  to  the  fock  of  general  good. — Uneafinefs  an  accidental 
member  of  the  procefs, — The  fuppoftions  incoffijlently  blended. — 
Scheme  of  felf  love  reconnnended  from  the  propenfty  of  mind  to 
6  abbreviate 


CONTENTS. 

abbreviate  its  procefs—from  the  JimpUcity  that  obtains  in  the 
natures  of  things, — Hypothejis  of  Jelf  love  incompatible  'with 
virtue. — Conclujbn. — Importance  of  the  quefion. — Application, 

Page  341 

CHAP.      IX. 

OF  THE  TENDENCY  OF  VIRTUE. 

//  is  the  road  to  happinefs — to  the  efeem  and  affeSiion  of  others. — . 
Objection  from  mifconjirudlion  and  calumny. — Anfwer. — Virtue 
compared  with  other  modes  of  procuring  efeem. — Vice  and  mi 
virtue  is  the  fubjeSl  of  obloquy — infanced  in  the  hafe  alloy  with 
which  our  virtues  are  mxed — in  arrogance  and  ofentation — in 
the  vices  in  which  perfons  of  moral  excellence  allow  themf elves. 
—  The  virtuous  man  only  has  friends.  —  Virtue  the  road 
to  profperity  and  fuccefs  in  the  world — applied  to  commercial 
iranfadtions — to  cafes  that  depend  upon  patronage.— ^Apparent 
exceptions  ivhere  the  dependent  is  employed  as  the  infrument  of 
vice. — Virtue  compared  with  other  modes  of  becoming  profperous. 
■ — Source  of  the  difrepute  of  virtue  in  this  refpedl. — ConceJJion. — 
Cafe  where  convenient  vice  bids  fair  for  concealment- — Chance  of 
deteSiion. — Indolence — apprehenfivenefs-^and  depravity  the  off- 
fpring  of  vice,  362 


AN 


A   K 


ENQUIRY 


CONCERNING 

POLITICAL       JUSTICE. 

B    Q   O    K     I. 

OF  THE  IMPORrjNCE  OF  POLITICAL  INSTITUriOm. 

C     H    A     P.        L 
INTRODUCTION. 

THE  SUBJECT  PROPOSED.  —  SYSTEM  OF  INDIFFERENCE — OF 
PASSIVE  OBEDIENCE — OF  LIBERTY. — SYSTEM  OF  LIBERTY 
EXTENDED. 

THE  queftion  which  firfl:  prefents  itfelf  in  an  enquiry  con-     BOOK  I. 
ceming  political  inflitution,  relates  to  the  importance  of  ^ .^ ■> 

The  fubjeft 

the  topic  which  is  made  the  fubje'St  of  enquiry.     All  men  will  propofed. 
grant  that  the  happinefs  of  the  human  fpecies  is  the  moft  defir- 
able  objed  for  human  fcience  to  promote ;  and  that  intelleiilual 
and  moral  happinefs  or   pleafure  is  extremely  to  be  preferred 

B  to 


2  introduction; 

BOOK  1.    to  tliofe  which  are  precarious  and  tranfitory.     The  methods' 
CHAP.  I.  ^  ^         _ 

**— -V '  which  may  be  propofed  for  the  attainment  of  this  objeft,  are: 

various.  If  it  could  be  proved  that  a  found  political  inftitutioa 
was  of  all  others  the  moft  powerful  engine  for  promoting  indi- 
vidual good,  or  on  the  other  hand  that  an  erroneous  and  corrupt 
government  was  the  moft  formidable  adverfary  to  the  improve- 
ment of  the  fpecies,  it  would  follow  that  politics  was  the  firft 
and  moft  important  fubjed  of  human  inveftigation.. 

Syacm  of  in-       Ihe  Opinions  of  mankind  in  this  refpeit  have  been  divided,.. 

ditierence :. 

By  one  fet  of  men  it  is  affirmed,  that  the  different  degrees  of 
excellence  afcribed  to  different  forms  of  government  are  rather 
imaginary  than  real;,  that  in  the  great  obje.ds  of  fuperintendance 
no  government  will  eminently  fail ;  and  that  it  is  neither  the 
duty  nor- the  wifdom  of  an  honeft  and  indliftrious  individual  to 
bufv  himfelf  with  concerns  fo  foreign  to  the  fphere.  of  his  in-- 
©fpaffive        duftry.     A  fecond  clafs,  in  adopting  the  fame  principles,  have 

obcdienct : 

given  to  them  a  different  turn.  Believing  that  all  governments 
are  nearly  equal  in  their  merit, ,  they  have  regarded  anarchy  as 
the  only  political  mifchief  that  deferved  to  excite  alarm,  and  have 
been  th-e  zealous  and  undiftinguiftiing  adverfaries  of  all  inno- 
vation. Neither  of  thefe  clafles  has  of  courfe  been  inclined 
to  afcribe  to  the  fcience  and  pradlce  of  politics  a  pre-eminence, 
over  every  other. 

of  liberty*.         But  the  advocates  of  what  is  termed  political  liberty  have  al- 
a.  ways. 


INTRODUCTION. 

■ways  been  numerous.     They  have  placed  this  liberty  prlnclpallv     BOOK  I. 

.    ,  ,        r       '  '  r  r  J    f  f       !        CHAP.  I, 

m  two  articles  ;  the  lecurity  ot  our  perfons,  and  the  lecurity  of  *- — .  •-■' 
our  property.  They  have  perceived  that  thefe  objeds  couid  not 
be  efFeded  but  by  the  impartial  adminiftration  of  general  laws, 
and  the  invefting  in  the  people  at  large  a  certain  power  fuffi- 
cient  to  give  permanence  to  this  adminifli-ation.  They  have 
pleaded,  fome  for  a  lefs  and  fome  for  a  greater  degree  of  equa- 
lity among  the  members  of  the  community ;  and  they  have 
confidered  this  equality  as  infringed  or  endangered  by  enormoui 
taxation,  and  the  prerogatives  and  privileges  of  monarchs  and 
ariftocratical  bodies. 

But,  while  they  have  been  thus  ^xtenfive  in  the  objed  of  their 
■demand,  they  feem  to  have  agreed  with  the  two  former  claffes 
in  regarding  politics  as  an  obje£l  of  fubordinate  importance,  and 
only  in  a  remote  degree  conneded  with  moral  improvement. 
They  have  been  prompted  in  their  exertions  rather  by  a  quick 
fenfe  of  juftlce  and  difdain  of  opprefTion,  than  by  a  confcioufnefs 
of  the  intimate  connexion  of  the  different  parts  of  the  focial 
fyftem,  whether  as  it  relates  to  the  intercourfe  of  individuals,  or 
to  the  maxims  and  inftitutes  of  ftates  and  nations  *. 

It  may  however  be  reafonable  to  confider  whether  the  fcience  Syftcm  ofll- 
of  politics  be  not  of  Ibmewhat  greater  value  than  any  of  thefe  ed. 

*  Thefe  remarks  will  apply  to  the  Enghfli  writers  upon  pohtics  in  general, 
from  Sydney  and  Locke  to  the  author  of  the  Rights  of  Man.  The  more  com- 
ptehenfive  view  has  been  perfpicuoufly  treated  by  RoulTeau  and  Helvetius. 

B  2  reafoners 


^  INTRODUCTION. 

BOOK  I.  reafoners  have  been  inclined  to  fufped.  It  may  fairly  be  quef- 
^'^ — '^-— '  tioned,  whether  government  be  not  ftill  naore  confiderable  in  Its 
incidental  efFedbs,  than  in  thofe  intended  to  be  produced.  Vice, 
for  example,  depends  for  its  exiftence  upon  the  exiftence  of 
temptation.  May  not  a  good  government  ftrongly  tend  to  ex- 
tirpate, and  a  bad  one  to  increafe  the  mafs  of  temptation  ?  Again, 
vice  depends  for  its  exiftence  upon  the  exiftence  of  error.  May 
not  a  good  government  by  taking  avfay  all  reftraints  upon  the 
'  enquiring  mind  haften,  and  a  bad  one  by  its  patronage  of  error' 
procraftinate  the  difcovery  and  eftablifhment  of  truth  ?  Let  us- 
confider  the  fubje£t  in  this  point  of  view.  If  it  can  be  proved* 
that  the  fcience  of  politics  is  thus  unlimited  in  its  importance,, 
the  advocates  of  liberty  will  have  gained  an  additional  recom- 
mendation, and  its  admirers  will  be  incited  with  the  greater 
fagernefs'to  the  inveftigation  of  its  principles. 


G  H  A  E 


t    5    1 

G  H  A  P.      II. 
HISTORY    OF    POLITICAL    SOCIETY. 

FREQUENCY  OF  WAR — AMONG  THE  ANCIENTS — AMONG 
THE  MODERNS — THE  FRENCH — THE  ENGLISH.— CAUSES 
OF  WAR. — PENAL  LAWS. — DESPOTISM. — DEDUCTION. — ■ 
ENUMERATION  OF  ARGUMENTS.. 


WHILE  we  enquire  whether  government  is   capable   of    BOOK  I. 
improvement,  we  fhall  do  well  to  confider  its  prefent 


FrcQiiciicv  o£ 

efFeds.     It  is  an  old  obfervation,  that  the  hiftoiy  of  mankind  war: 
is  little  elfe  than  the  hiftory  of  crimes.     War  has  hitherto  been 
confidered  as  the  infeparable  ally  of  political  inftitutlon.     The  among  the 

ancients  i 

earlieft  records  of  time  are  the  annals  of  conquerors  and  heroes, 
a  Bacchus,  a  Sefoftris,  a  Semiramis  and  a  Cyrus.  Thefe  princes 
led  millions  of  men  under  their  flandard,  and  ravaged  innume- 
rable provinces.  A  fmall  number  only  of  their  forces  ever  re- 
turned to  their  native  homes,  the  reft  having  perifhed  of  dif- 
eafes,  hardfhips  and  mifery.  The  evils  they  infli£led,  and  the 
mortality  introduced  in  the  countries  againft  which  their  expe- 
ditions were  directed,  were  certainly  not  lefs  fevere  than  thofe 
which  their  countrymen  fufFered.  No  fooner  does  hiftoiy  be- 
come more  precife,  than  we  are  prefented  with  the  four  great 
monarchies,  that  is,  with  four  fuccelsful  projeds,  by  means- of 

bloodfhed^ , 


6  HISTORYOF 

BOOK  I.    bloodflied,  violence  and  murder,  of  ennavinjr  mankind.     The 

chap.il  ' 

' V '  expeditions  of  Cambyfes  againft  Egypt,  of  Darius  againft  the 

Scythians,  and  of  Xerxes  againft  the  Greeks,  feem  almoft  to  fet 

credibility  at  defiance  by  the  fatal  confequences  with  which  they 

were  attended.     The  conquefts  of  Alexander  coft  innumerable 

lives,  and  the  immortality  of  Cxlar  is  computed  to  have  been 

purchafed  by  the  death  of  one  million  two  hundred  thoufand 

men.     Indeed  the  Romans,  by  the  long  duration  of  their  wars, 

and  their  inflexible  adherence  to  their  purpofe,  are  to  be  ranked 

among  the  foremoft  deftroyers  of  the  human  fpecies.     Their 

wars  In  Italy  endured  for  more  than  four  hundred  years,  and 

their  conteft  for  fupremacy  with  the  Carthaginians  two  hundred. 

The  Mlthridatic  war  began  with  a  maflacre  of  one  hundred  and 

■fifty  thoufand  Romans,  and  in  three  fingle  a£lions  of  the  war 

five  hundred  thoufand  men  were  loft  by  the  eaftern  monarch. 

Sylla,  his  ferocious  conqueror,  next  turned  his  ai-ms  againft  his 

country,  and  the  ftruggle  between  him  and  Marius  was  attended 

with   profcriptions,  butcheries   and  murders  that  knew  no   re- 

ftralnt  from  mercy   and  humanity.     The   Romans,   at   length, 

fuffered  the  penalty  of  their  iniquitous  deeds  ;  and  the  world  was 

vexed  for  three  hundred  years  by  the  irruptions  of  Goths,  Van- 

«dals,  Oftrogoths,  Huns,  and  innumerable  hordes  of  barbarians. 

Emong  the  I  forbear  to  detail  the  vidorious-  progrefs  of  Mahomet  and 

jnoderns :  ,  i.  .  /-    ,-,i       ,  t        mi 

the  pious   expeditions  of  Charlemagne.     1  will  not  enumerate 
-the  crufades  againft  the   infidels,  the  exploits  of  Aurungzebe, 

Gen- 


POLITICAL    SOCIETY.  7 

Genglfkan  and   Tamerlane,  or  the  extenfive  murders  of  the  ^OOK  L 

Spaniards  in  the  new  world.     Let  us  examine  the  civilized  and   * " ' 

favoured  quarter  of  Europe,  or  even  thofe  countries  of  Europe 
which  are  thought  moft  enlightened. 


'  France  was-  wafted  by  fucceflive  battles  during  a  whole  cen-  the  Frencb: 
tury,  for  the  queftion  of  the  Salic  law,  and  the  claim  of  the 
Plantagenets,  Scarcely  was  this  conteft  terminated,  before  the 
religious  wars  broke  out,  fome  idea  of  which  we  may  form  from 
the  fiege  of  Rochelle,  where  of  fifteen  thoufand  perfons  Ihut  up 
eleven  thoufand  pcrifhed  of  hunger  and  mifery  ;  and  from  the 
nialTaci-e  of  Saint  Bartholomew,  in  which  the  numbers  airaffinated' 
were  forty  thoufand..  This  quarrel  was  appeafed  by  Henry  the 
fourth,  and  fucceeded  by  the  thirty  years  war  in  Germany  for 
fuperiority  with  the  houfa  of  Auftria,  and  afterwards  by  the 
military  tranfa^Stions  of  Louis  the  fourteenths 

In  England  the  war  of  CrefTy  and  'Agincourt  only  gave  place  the  EngHtho 
to  the  civil  war  of  York  and  Lancafter,  and  again  after  an  in- 
terval to  the  war  of  Charles  the  firft  and  his  parliament.     No 
fooner  was   the  conftitution  fettled  by  the  revolution,  than  we  ■ 
were  engaged  in  a  wide  field  of  continental  warfare   by   king 
William,  the    duke   of  Marlborough,   Maria   Therefa   and    thej 
king  of  Pruifia. 

And  what  are  in  moft  cafes  the  pretexts  upon  which  war  Is  Caufes  of 

war, 

under- 


^  HISTORY    OF 

cUAPii    t^ndertaken  ?  What  rational  man  could  poffibly  have  given  hlm- 

*^ ^' '   felf  the  leaft  difturbance  for  the  fake  of  choofing  whether  Henry 

the  fixth  or  Edward  the  fourth  fhould  have  the  ftyle  of  king  of 
England  ?  What  Englifhman  could  reafonably  have  drawn  his 
fvvord  for  the  purpofe  of  rendering  his  country  an  inferior  de- 
pendency of  France,  as  it  muft  neceffarily  have  been  if  the  am- 
bition of  the  Plantagenets  had  fucceeded  ?  What  can  be  more 
deplorable  than  to  fee  us  firft  engage  eight  years  in  war  rather 
than  fuffer  the  haughty  Maria  Therefa  to  live  with  a  diminifhed 
foverelgnty  oi  in  a  private  ftation ;  and  then  eight  years  more 
to  fupport  the  free-booter  who  had  taken  advantage  of  her 
helplefs  (Condition  ? 

The  ufual  caufes  of  war  are  excellently  defcrlbed  by  Swift. 
"  Sometimes  the  quarrel  between  two  princes  is  to  decide  which 
•fcf-th^m  fliall  difpolTefs  a  third  of  his  dominions,  where  neither 
of  them  pretends  to  any  right.  Sometimes  one  prince  quarrels 
with  another,  for  fear  the  other  fhould  quarrel  with  him. 
Sometimes  a  war  is  entered  upon  becaufe  the  enemy  is  too 
ftrong ;  and  fometimes  becaufe  he  is  too  weak.  Sometimes  our 
neighbours  want  the  things  which  w:e  have,  or  have  the  things 
which  we  want ;  and  we  both -fight,  till  they  taT^e-ours,  or  give 
us  theirs.  It  is  a  very  juftifiable  caufe  of  war  to  invade  a  country 
after  the  people  have  been  wafted  by  famine,  deftroyed  by  pef- 
tilence,  or  embroiled  by  factions  among  themfelves.  It  is  jufti- 
iiable  to  enter  into  a  war  againft  our  neareft  ally,  when  one  of 
Jus  towns  lies  convenient  for  us,  or  a  territory  of  -land,  that 

would 


.     POLITICAL     SOCIETY.  9 

would  render  our  dominions  round  and  compad:.     If  a  prince     BOOK  T. 

^  ^  CHAP.  II. 

fends  forces  into  a  nation  where  the  people  are  poor  and  igno-   ^^ ^ — ^ 

rant,  he  may  lawfully  put  the  half  of  them  to  death,  and  make 
flaves  of  the  reft,  in  order  to  civilize  and  reduce  them  from  their 
barbarous  way  of  living.  It  is  a  very  kingly,  honourable  and 
frequent  pradice,  when  one  prince  defires  the  afliftance  of  an- 
other to  fecure  him  againft  an  invafion,  that  the  alliftant,  when 
he  has  driven  out  the  invader,  fhould  feize  on  the  dominions 
himfelf,  and  kill,  imprifon  or  banifh  the  prince  he  came  to  re- 
lieve *." 

If  we  turn  from  the  foreign  tranfadlions  of  ftates  with  each  Penal  laws. 
other,  to  the  principles  of  their  domeftic  policy,  we  fhall  not 
find  much  greater  reafon  to  be  fatisfied.  A  numerous  clafs  of 
mankind  are  held  down  in  a  ftate  of  abjeft  penury,  and  are  con- 
tinually prompted  by  difappointment  and  diftrefs  to  commit 
violence  upon  their  more  fortunate  neighbours.  The  only  mode 
which  is  employed  to  reprefs  this  violence,  and  to  maintain  the 
order  and  peace  of  fociety,  is  punifhment.  Whips,  axes  and 
gibbets,  dungeons,  chains  and  racks  are  the  moft  approved  and 
eftabliihed  methods  of  perfuading  men  to  obedience,  and  im- 
prefling  upon  their  minds  the  leflbns  of  reafon.  Hundreds  of 
vidims  are  annually  facrificed  at  the  fhrine  of  pofitive  law  and 
political  inftitution. 

*  Gulliver's  Travels,  Part  IV.  Ch.  v. 

C  Add 


lo  HISTORYOF 

-JOOK  I.        Add  to  this  the  fpecles  of  government  which  prevails  over 
^TT^ — '   iiine  tenths  of  the  globe,  which  is  defpotifm :  a  government,  as 
Mr.  Locke  juftly  obferves,  altogether  "  vile  and  miferable,"  and 
"  more  to  be  deprecated  than  anarchy  itfelf  *." 

Deduftion.  This  account  of  the  hiftory  and  ftate  of  man  is  not  a  decla- 

mation, but  an  appeal  to  fads.  He  that  confiders  it  cannot 
poflibly  regard  political  difquifition  as  a  trifle,  and  government 
as  a  neutral  and  unimportant  concern.  I  by  no  means  call  uport 
the  reader  implicitly  to  admit  that  thefe  evils  are  capable  of  re- 
medy, and  that  wars,  executions  and  defpotifm  can  be  extir- 
pated out  of  the  world.  But  1  call  upon  him  to  confider  whe- 
ther they  may  be  remedied.  I  would  have  him  feel  that  civil 
policy  is  a  topic  upon  which  the  feverefl  inveftigation  may 
laudably  be  employed. 

If  government  be  a  fubjedt,  which,  like  mathematics,  natural 

*■  Locke  on  Government,  Book  I.  Ch.  i.  J.  i ;  and  Book  II.  Ch.  vii.  J.  91 .  The 
words  in  the  lafl  place  are  :  "  Wherever  any  two  men  are,  who  have  no  Hand- 
ing rule  and  common  judge  to  appeal  to  on  earth  for  the  determination  of  con- 
troverfies  of  right  betwixt  them,  there  they  are  flill  in  the  Jl ate  of  natur&y  and 
under  all  the  inconveniences  of  it,  with  only  this  woeful  difference  to  the  fub- 
jeft,  &c." 

Mofl:  of  the  above  arguments  may  be  found  much  more  at  large  in  Burke's- 
Vindication  of  Natural  Society  ;  a  treatife,  in  which  the  evils  of  the  exifiing 
political  jnfiitutions  are'difplayed  with  incomparable  force  of  reafoning  andluftre 
ef  eloquence,  while  the  intention  of  the  author  was  to  fliew  that  thefe  evils  were 
to  be  confidered  as  trivial. 

4  philofophy 


POLITICAL     SOCIETY. 


philofophy  and  morals,  admits  of  argument  and  demonftratlon, 
then  may  we  reafonably  hope  that  men  fhall  fome  time  or  other 
agree  refpeding  it.  If  it  comprehend  every  thing  that  is  moft 
important  and  interefting  to  man,  it  is  probable  that,  when  the 
theory  is  greatly  advanced,  the  pradice  will  not  be  wholly  neg- 
leded.  Men  may  one  day  feel  that  they  are  partakers  of  a 
common  nature,  and  that  true  freedom  and  perfedl  equity,  like  .  | 

food  and  air,  are  pregnant  with  benefit  to  every  conftitution.  |^    4    siff  ^  i^  ^ 

If  there  be  the  fainteft  hope  that  this  fhall  be  the  final  refult,  W   ^        -t^i'     "" '" 

then  certainly  no  fubjed  can  infpire  to  a  found  mind  fuch  ge- 
nerous enthufiafm,  fuch  enlightened  ardour  and  fuch  invincible 
perfeverance. 

The  probability  of  this  improvement  will  be  fufficiently  efta-  EnumeratioV 

blifhed,  if  we  confider,  first,  that  the  moral  charaders  of  men  °         f^ 
are  the  refult  of  their  perceptions:  and,  secondly,  that  of  all 

the  modes  of  operating  upon  mind  government  is  the  moft  con-  ^ 

fiderable.      In  addition  to  thefe   arguments  it  will  be  found,  '   '^  ^  Jii   , 

THIRDLY,  that  the  good  and  ill  effeds  of  political  inftitution  ^v'^  1^*^     " 

are   not   lefs    confpicuous    in   detail  than  in   principle ;    and,  \'»    *|        !|       "^  f^ 

FOURTHLY,  that  perfedibility  is  one  of  the  moft  unequivocal  .^    i    f    4^  J"t" 

charaderiftics  of  the  human  fpecies,  fo  that  the  political,  as  well  ^    -    '^  ^       i!! 

as  the  intelledual  ftate  of  man,  may  be  prefumed   to  be  in  a  '^  ^  J    ^  X  V 

courfe  of  progreflive  improvement.  \^^    N^^x"^ 


^C2  CHAP. 

S.J^^   fvi  .MA^^t^  ^d^^^^.  on^.v.vi^.    v-^^-^   ^^    __      ^     Z^- 

^  ^,  ^ntl  ^^J"  H  tt^  A.--^  ^^"^  ^^"i 


■4    ^t* 


THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN 


CHAP.      III. 

THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN  ORIGINATE  IN 
THEIR  PERCEPTIONS. 

NO  INNATE  PRINCIPLES. — OBJECTIONS  TO  THIS  ASSERTION 
—  FROM   THE   EARLY   ACTIONS    OF   INFANTS — FROM  THE 

DESIRE      OF      SELF-PRESERVATION — FROM      SELF-LOVE 

FROM  PITY FROM  THE  VICES  OF  CHILDREN — TYRANNY 

■ — SULLENNESS, CONCLUSION. 

E  bring  into  the  world  vflth  us  no  innate  principles : 
confequently  we  are  neither  virtuous  nor  vicious  as  we 
firll  come  into  exiftence.  No  truth  can  be  more  evident  than 
this,  to  any  man  who  will  yield  the  fubjedl  an  impartial  con- 
fideration.  Every  principle  is  a  propofition.  Every  propofition 
confifts  in  the  connexion  of  at  leaft  two  diftind  ideas,  which  are 
affirmed  to  agree  or  difagree  with  each  other.  If  therefore  the 
principles  be  innate,  the  ideas  muft  be  fo  too.  But  nothing  can 
be  more  incontrovertible,  than  that  we  do  not  bring  pre-eftab- 
lllhed  ideas  into  the  world  with  us. 

Let  the  innate  principle  be,  that  virtue  is  a  rule  to  which  we 
are  obliged  to  conform.  Here  are  three  great  and  leading  ideas, 
not  to  mention  Subordinate  ones,  which  it  is  neceflary  to  form,, 
before  we  can  fo  much  as  underftand  the  propofition. 

The 


ORIGINATE  IN  THEIR  PERCEPTIONS.  13 

What  is  virtue  ?  Previoufly  to  our  forming  an  idea  correfpond- 
ing  to  this  general  term,  it  feems  neceflary  that  we  fhould  have 
obferved  the  feveral  features  by  which  virtue  is  diflinguiflied,  and 
the  feveral  fubordinate  articles  of  right  condud,  that  taken 
together,  conftitute  that  mafs  of  praiftical  judgments  to  which 
we  give  the  denomination  of  virtue.  Virtue  may  perhaps  be 
defined,  that  fpecies  of  operations  of  an  intelligent  being,  which 
conduces  to  the  benefit  of  intelligent  beings  in  general,  and  is  pro- 
duced by  a  defire  of  that  benefit.  But  taking  for  granted  the  uni- 
verfal  admiflion  of  this  definition,  and  this  is  no  very  defenfible 
afTumption,  how  widely  have  people  of  different  ages  and  countries 
difagreed  in  the  application  of  this  general  conception  to  particulars? 
a  difagreement  by  no  means  compatible  with  the  fuppofition  that 
the  fentiment  is  itfelf  innate. 

The  next  innate  idea  included  in  the  above  propofition,  is  that 
of  a  rule  or  flandard,  a  generical  meafure  with  which  individuals 
are  to  be  compared,  and  their  conformity  or  difagreement  with 
which  is  to  determine  their  value. 

Laftly,  there  is  the  idea  of  obligation,  its  nature  and  fourcCj 
the  obliger  and  the  fanftion,  the  penalty  and  the  reward. 

Who  is  there  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  fcientifical  improvement, 
that  will  believe  that  this  vafl  chain  of  perceptions  and  notions  is 

fomething 


li^ 

"     1    A 

^  ^    A 

i  ^J 

1^^ 

^^      ^      # 

ii< 

^H  ^ 

^i4  ^' 

,^  THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN 

BOOK  I.     fomething  that  we  bring  into  the  worid  with  us,  a  myftical 

CHAP.  III. 
•-^ -— ^    magazine,  fhut  up  in  the  human  embryo,  whofe  trealures  are  to 

be  gradually  unfolded  as  circumftances  fliall  require  ?   Who  does 

not  perceive  that  they  are  regularly  generated  in  the  mind  by  a 

feries  of  impreffions,  and  digefted  and  arranged  by  affociation 

and  reflexion  ?  ^  . 

Objeaions  to       Experience  has  by  many  been  fuppofed  adverfe  to  thefe  rea- 

this  affertion :  .  i        r  j  u  f  ^1 

f5om  the  early  fonin<^s :  but  it  wiU  upou  examination  be  tound  to  be  periectiy 

aftions  of  in-  *="    '  c  i  •     i  '-^-u  • 

fants:  ^^  harmony  with  them.     The  child  at  the  moment  of  his  birth  is 

totally  unprovided  with  ideas,  except  fuch  as  his  mode  of  exift- 
ence  in  the  womb  may  have  fupplied.  His  firft  impreffions  are 
thofe  of  pleafure  and  pain.  But  he  has  no  forefight  of  the  ten- 
dency of  any  adion  to  obtain  either  the  one  or  the  other,  pre- 
vioufly  to  experience. 

A  certain  irritation  of  the  palm  of  the  hand  will  produce  that 
contradion  of  the  fingers,  which  accompanies  the  adion  of  grafp- 
ing.     This  contradion  will  at  firft  be  unaccompanied  with  defign, 
the  objea  will  be  grafped  without  any  intention  to  retain  it,  and  let 
go  again  without  thought  or  obfervation.     After  a  certain  number 
of  repetitions,  the  nature  «f  the  aftion  will  be  perceived  ;  it  will 
be  performed  with  a  confcioufnefs  of  its  tendency ;  and  even  the 
Jiand  llretched  out  upon  the  approach  of  any  objeft  that  is  de-     ^  "^    ;^ 
■   fired.     Prefent  to  the  child,  thus  far  inftruded,  a  lighted  candle.  ^  *^  ^ 
The  fight  of  it  will  produce  a  pleafurable  ftate  of  the  organs  ot  ^^    ^ 
U   'c^w     j.Ut^f^Ji^^^^-f^y*^  ^^-    ^f%'^^  M.^^^  perception.        '^. 


N.'^ 


/f^ii 


ORIGINATE  IN  THEIR  PERCEPTIONS.  15 

perception.     He  will  ftretch  out  his  hand  to  the  flame,  and  will  rH^p^m 

have  no  apprehenfion  of  the  pain  of  burning  till  he  has  felt  the   * "■ ' 

fenfation. 

At  the  age  of  maturity,  the  eyelids  inftantaneoufly  clofe,  when 
any  fubftance,  from  which  danger  is  apprehended,  is  advanced 
towards  them ;  and  this  adlion  is  fo  fpontaneous,  as  to  be  with 
great  difBcuIty  prevented  by  a  grown  perfon,  though  he  fhould 
explicitly  defire  it.  In  infants  there  is  no  fuch  propenfity ;  and 
an  objeft  may  be  approached  to  their  organs,  however  near  and 
however  fuddenly,  without  producing  this  effedt.  Frowns  will 
be  totally  indifferent  to  a  child,  who  has  never  found  them  afl!b 
ciated  with  the  effects  of  anger.  Fear  itfelf  is  a  fpecies  of  fore- 
fight  ;  and  in  no  cafe  exifts  till  introduced  by  experience. 

It  has  been  faid,  that  the  defire  of  felf-prefervation  is  innate.  I  from  the  de- 
demand  what  is  meant  by  this  defire  ?  Muft  we  not  underftand  prefervation: 
by  itj  a  preference  of  exiftence  to  non-exiftence  ?  Do  we  prefer 
any  thing  but  becaufe  it  is  apprehended  to  be  good  ?  It  follows, 
that  we  cannot  prefer  exiftence,  previoufly  to  our  experience  of 
the  motives  for  preference  it  poffefTes.  Indeed  the  ideas  of  life 
and  death  are  exceedingly  complicated,  and  very  tardy  in  their 
formation.  A  child  defires  pleafure  and  loathes  pain,  long  before 
he  can  have  any  imagination  refped:ing  the  ceafing  to  exift. 

Again,  it  has  been  faid,  that  felf-love  is  innate.     But  there  fromfelf-love; 
cannot  be  an  error  more  eafy  of  detedion.     By  the  love  of 

felf 


i6  THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN 

felf  we  underfland  the  approbation  of  pleafure,  and  diflike  of 
pain :  but  this  is  only  the  facuity  of  perception  under  another 
name.  "Who  ever  denied  that  man  was  a  percipient  being  ? 
Who  ever  dreamed  that  there  was  a  particular  inftinft  neceiTary 
to  render  him  percipient?  -■'-  o^l  o;  . 

from  pity :  Pity  has  fometimes  been  fuppofed  an  inftance  of  innate  prin- 

ciple ;  particularly  as  it  feems  to  arife  more  inflantaneoufly  in 
young  perfons,  and  perfons  of  little  refinement,  than  in  others. 
But  it  was  reafonable  to  expedt,  that  threats  and  anger,  circum- 
ftances  that  have  been  aflbciated  with  our  own  fufferings,  fhould 
excite  painful  feelings  in  us  in  the  cafe  of  others,  independently 
of  any  laboured  analyfis.  The  cries  of  diftrefs,  the  appearance 
of  agony  or  corporal  infli£tion,  irrefiftibly  revive  the  memory  of 
the  pains  accompanied  by  thofe  fymptoms  in  ourfelves.  Longer 
experience  and  obfervation  enable  us  to  feparate  the  calamities  of 
others  and  our  own  fafety,  the  exiflence  of  pain  in  one  fubje(ft 
and  of  pleafure  or  benefit  in  others,  or  in  the  fame  at  a  future 
period,  more  accurately  than  we  could  be  exped:ed,  to  do  pre- 
vioufly  to  that  experience. 


from  the  vkes       Sucli  then  is  univcrfally  the  fubjeit  of  human  inftitutlon  and 
education.      We  bring  neither  virtue  nor  vice  with  us  at  our 
'  entrance  into  the  world.      But  the  feeds  of  error  are  ordinarily 
fown  fo  early  as  to  pafs  with  fuperficial  obfervers  for  innate. 

Our 


ORIGINATE  IN  THEIR  PERCEPTIONS.  17 

Our  conftitutlon  prompts  us  to  utter  a  cry  at  the  unexpeiSled   pfr^l^^^Jy 
ienfation  of  pain.       Infants  early  perceive  the    affiftance  they    "^ ^ ' 

■*•  '     *  '      tyranny: 

obtain  from  the  volition  of  others  ;  and  they  have  at  firft  no 
means  of  inviting  that  affiftance  but  by  an  inarticulate  cry.  In 
this  neutral  and  innocent  circumftance,  combined  with  the  folly 
and  imbecility  of  parents  and  nurfes,  vre  are  prefented  with  the 
firft  occafion  of  vice.  Affiftance  is  neceflary,  conducive  to  the 
exiftence,  the  health  and  the  mental  faulty  of  the  infant.  Em- 
pire in  the  infant  over  thofe  who  proted  him  is  unneceJary. 
If  we  do  not  withhold  our  affiftance  precifely  at  the  moment 
when  it  ceafes  to  be  rcquifite,  if  our  compliance  or  our  refufal 
be  not  in  every  cafe  irrevocable,  if  we  grant  any  thing  to  im- 
patience, importunity  or  obftinacy,  from  that  moment  we  be- 
come parties  in  the  intelledual  murder  of  our  offspring. 


In  this  cafe  we  inftil  Into  them  the  vices  of  a  tyrant ;  but  we  fuUennefs. 
are  in  equal  danger  of  teaching  them  the  vices  of  a  flave.  It  is 
not  till  very  late  that  mankind  acquire  the  ideas  of  juftice,  retri- 
bution and  morality,  and  thefe  notions  are  far  from  exifting  in 
the  minds  of  infants.  Of  confequence,  when  we  ftrike,  or  when 
we  rebuke  them,  we  rifk  at  leaft  the  exciting  in  them  a  fenfe  of 
injury,  and  a  feeling  of  refentment.  Above  all,  fentiments  of 
this  fort  cannot  fail  to  be  awakened,  if  our  a£tion  be  accom- 
panied with  fymptoms  of  anger,  cruelty,  harfhnefs  or  caprice. 
The  fame  imbecility,  that  led  us  to  infpire  them  with  a  fpirit  of 
tyranny  by  yielding  to  their  importunities,  afterwards  didates  to 

D  us 


iS  THE  MORAL  CHARACTERS  OF  MEN,  &c. 

us  an  inconfiftent  and  capricious  condudl,  at  one  time  denying 
them  as  abfurdly,  as  at  another  we  gratified  them  unreafonably* 
Who,  that  has  obferved  the  confequences  of  this  treatment,  how 
generally  thefe  miftakes  are  committed,  how  infeparable  they  are 
in  fome  degree  from  the  wifeft  and  the  beft,  will  be  furprifed  at 
the  early  indications  of  depravity  in  children  *  ? 

Conclufion.  From  thefe  reafonings  it  fufficiently  appears,  that  the  moral 
qualities  of  men  are  the  produce  of  the  impreffions  made  upon 
them,  and  that  there  is  no  inftance  of  an  original  propenfity  to  evil.. 
Our  virtues  and  vices  may  be  traced  to  the  incidents  which  make 
the  hiftory  of  our  lives  i  and  if  thefe  incidents  could  be  divefted 
of  every  improper  tendency,  vice  would  be  extirpated  from  the 
world.  The  tafk  may  be  difBcult,  may  be  of  flow  progrefs,  and 
of  hope  undefined  and  uncertain.  But  hope  will  never  defert 
it ;  and  the  man  who  is  anxious  for  the  benefit  of  his  fpecies, 
'  will  willingly  devote  a  portion  of  his  activity  to  an  enquiry  into 
the  mode  of  efFedling  this  extirpation  in  whole  or  in  part,  an 
enquiry  which  promifes  much,  if  it  do  not  in  reality  promife 
every  thing. 


*  The  arguments  of  this  chapter  are  for  the  mofl;  part  an  abftrafl,  the  dire£t 
ones  from  Locke  on  the  Human  Underftandhig,  thofe  which  relate  to  experience 
from  Hartley's  Obfervations  on  Man,  and  thofe  refpe(3;ing  education  from  the 
Emilc  of  J.  J.  RouiTeau. 


CHAP. 


i    19    ] 


CHAP.      IV. 

THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF   MORAL  IMPROVE- 
MENT CONSIDERED. 

I.  LITERATURE. 

lENEFITS    OF  LITERATURE. — EXAMPLES. — ESSENTIAL  PRO- 
PERTIES OF  LITERATURE. — ITS  DEFECTS. 

II.  EDUCATION. 

BENEFITS  OF  EDUCATION. — CAUSES  OF  ITS  IMBECILITY. 

III.    POLITICAL    JUSTICE. 

BENEFITS  OF  POLITICAL  INSTITUTION. — UNIVERSALITY  OF 
ITS  INFLUENCE — PROVED  BY  THE  MISTAKES  OF  SOCIETY. 
— ORIGIN   OF  EVIL. 


THERE  are  three  principal  caufes  by  which  the  human     BOOK  L 
CHAP  IV. 
mind  Is  advanced  towards  a  ftate  of  perfedlon ;  literature,    ' /— — ■ 

or  the  diffufion  of  knowledge  through  the  medium  of  difcuflion, 

whether  written  or  oral ;  education,  or  a  fcheme  for  the  early 

impreflion  of  right  principles  upon  the  hitherto  unprejudiced 

mind;  and  political  juftice,  or  the  adoption  of  any  principle 

of  morality  and  truth  Into  the  pradlice  of  a  community.     Let  us 

take  a  momentary  review  of  each  of  thefe. 

D2  I.   LITERJ^ 


20  THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF 


T.      LITERAl'URE. 

Few  engines  can  be  more  powerful,  and  at  the  fame  time 
more  falutary  in  their  tendency,  than  literature.  Without  en- 
quiring for  the  prefent  into  the  caufe  of  this  phenomenon,  \t 
is  fufEciently  evident  in  fad:,  that  the  human  mind  is  ftrongly 
infeded  with  prejudice  and  miftake.  The  various  opinions 
prevailing  in  different  countries  and  among  different  claffes  of 
men  upon  the  fame  fubjed,  are  almoft  innumerable ;  and  yet  oF 
all  thefe  opinions  only  one  can  be  true.  Now  the  effedual  way 
for  extirpating  thefe  prejudices  and  miftakes  feems  to  be  lite- 
rature. 


Example?*  Literature  has  reconciled  the  whole  thinking  world  refpeding 

the  great  principles  of  the  fyftem  of  the  univerfe,  and  extirpated 
upon,  this  fubjed  the  dreams  of  romance  and  the  dogmas  of 
fuperftition.  Literatiure  has  unfolded  the  nature  of  the  human 
mind,  and  Locke  and  others  have  eftablifhed  certain  maxims 
refpeding  man,  as  Newton  has  done  refpeding  matter,  that  are^ 
generally  admitted  for  unqueftionable.  Difcuflion  has  afcer- 
tained'  with  tolerable  perfpicuity  the  preference  of  liberty  over 
flavery ;  and  the  Mainwarings,  the  Sibthorpes,  and  the  Filmers, 
the  race  of  fpeculative  reafoners  in  favour  of  defpotifm,  are 
almofl  extinii.  Local  prejudice  had  introduced  innumerable 
privifeges  and  prohibitions  upon  the  fubjed  of  trade ;  fpecu- 
lation  has  nearly  afcertained  that  perfed  freedom  is  moll  favour- 
able 


MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED.  21 

able  to  her  profperity.     If  in  many  Inftances  the  collation  of    BOOK  r. 
t^     t-      J  ;  CHAP.  IV. 

evidence  have  failed  to  produce  univerfal  conviifllon,  it  muft    *— -n ' 

however  be  confidered,  that  it  has  not  failed  to  produce  irre- 
fragable argument,  and  that  falfhood  would  have  been  much 
fliorter  in  duration,  if  it  had  not  been  protected  and  inforced  by 
the  authority  of  political  government.. 

Indeed,  if  there  be  fuch  a  thing  as  truth,  it  muft  infallibly  Effentlal  pro- 
perties of  li- 
be  ftruck  out  by  the  collifion  of  mind  with  mind.     The  reftlefs  teruture. 

activity  of  intelle£l  will  for  a  time   be  fertile  in  paradox  and 

error;  but  thefe  will  be  only  diurnals,  while  the  truths  that  occa- 

fionally  fpring  up,  like  fturdy  plants,  will  defy  the  rigour  of 

feafon  and   climate.     In   proportion  as   one   reafoner  compares 

his   deductions  with  thofe  of  another,  the  weak  places  of  his 

argument  will  be  deteded,  the  principles  he  too  haftlly  adopted 

will  be  overthrown,  and  the  judgments,  in  which  his  mind  was 

expofed  to  no   fmlfter  influence,   will  be  confirmed.     All   that 

is  requifite   in  thefe  difcuflions  is  unlimited  fpeculation,  and  a 

fufficient  variety  of  fyftems  and  opinions.     While  we  only  dif. 

pute  about  the  beft  way  of  doing  a  thing  in  itfelf  wrong,  we  fhall 

indeed  make  but  a  trifling  progrefs  ;  but,  when  we  are  once  per- 

fuaded  that  nothing  is  too  facred  to  be  brought  to  the  touch-^ 

ftone  of  examination,   fcience  will  advance  with  rapid  fl;rides» 

Men,  who  turn  their  attention  to  the  boundlefs  field  of  enquiry, 

and  ftill  more  who  recolledl  the  innumerable  errors  and  caprices 

of.  mind,  are.  apt  to  imagine  that  the  labour. is  without  benefit 

and'. 


THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF 

and  endlefs.  But  this  cannot  be  the  cafe,  if  truth  at  laft  have 
any  real  exiftence.  Errors  will,  during  the  whole  period  of 
their  reign,  combat  each  other  ;  prejudices  that  have  paffed  un- 
fufpeded  for  ages,  will  have  their  era  of  detedion ;  but,  if  in 
any  fcience  we  difcover  one  folitary  truth,  it  cannot  be  over- 
i^thrown. 

Its  defease  '  Such  are  the  arguments  that  may  be  adduced  in  favour  of 
literature.  But,  even  fhould  we  admit  them  in  their  full  force, 
and  at  the  fame  time  fuppofe  that  truth  is  the  omnipotent  arti- 
ficer by  which  mind  can  infallibly  be  regulated,  it  would  yet 
by  no  means  fufficiently  follow  that  literature  is  alone  adequate 
to  all  the  purpofes  of  human  improvement.  Literature,  and 
particularly  that  literature  by  which  prejudice  is  fuperfeded,  and 
the  mind  is  ftrung  to  a  firmer  tone,  exifts  only  as  the  portion 
of  a  few.  The  multitude,  at  leaft  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  human 
fociety,  cannot  partake  of  its  illuminations.  For  that  purpofe 
it  would  be  neceffary,  that  the  general  fyftem  of  policy  fhould 
become  favourable,  that  every  individual  fhould  have  leifure  for 
rcafoning  and  refiedion,  and  that  there  fhould  be  no  fpecies  of 
public  inflitution,  which,  having  falfhood  for  its  bafis,  fhould 
counterad  their  progrefs.  This  ftate  of  fociety,  if  it  did  not 
precede  the  general  diiTemination  of  truth,  would  at  leaft  be  the 
immediate  refult  of  it. 

But  in  reprefenting  this  ftate  of  fociety  as  the  ultimate  refult, 

2  we 


MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED.  23 

we  fliould  incur  an  obvious  fallacy.     The  difcovery  of  truth  is     BOOK  i, 

_     ^                         •'                           CHAP.  IV. 
a  purfuit  of  fuch  vaft  extent,  that  it  is  fcarcely  poflible  to  pre-    ^^ v * 

fcribe  bounds  to  it.  Thofe  great  lines,  which  fecm  at  prefent 
to  mark  the  limits  of  human  underftanding,  will,  like  the  mills 
that  rife  from  a  lake,  retire  farther  and  farther  the  more  clofely 
we  approach  them.  A  certain  quantity  of  truth  will  be  fuffi- 
cient  for  the  fubverfion  of  tyranny  and  ufurpation ;  and  this 
fubverfion,  by  a  refleded  force,  will  affift  our  underftandings 
in  the  difcovery  of  truth.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is  not  eafy  to 
define  the  exa£t  portion  of  difcovery  that  miifh  neceffarily  pre- 
cede political  melioration.  The  period  of  partiality  and  injuftice 
will  be  fliortened,  in  proportion  as  political  redlitude  occupies 
a  principal  fhare  in  our  dlfquifition.  When  the  mofl  confider- 
able  part  of  a  nation,  either  for  numbers  or  influence,  becomes 
convinced  of  the  flagrant  abfurdity  of  its  infUtutions,  the  whole 
will  foon  be  prepared  tranquilly  and  by  a  fort  of  common  eon-- 
fent  to  fuperfede  them. 

11.     EDUCATION. 

But,  if  it  appear  that  literature,  unaided  by  the  regularity  Bencfis  of 
of  inftitution  and  difcipline,  is  inadequate  to  the  reformation  of 
the  fpecies,  it  may  perhaps  be  imagined,  that  education,  com- 
monly fo  called,  is  the  befl  of  all  fubfidiaries  for  making  up  its 
defeats.  Education  may  have  the  advantage  of  taking  mind 
in  its  original  ftate,  a  foil  prepared  for  culture,  and  as  yet  unin- 

fefted 


■Vr' 


34  THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES 

J?9P^^^  }\    felled  with  weeds ;  and  it  is  a  common  and  a  reafonable  opi- 

CHAP.  IV.  '  '^ 

^ •« '    nion,  that  the  tafk  is  much  eafier  to  plant  right  and  virtuous 

difpofitions  in  an  unprejudiced  underftanding,  than  to  root  up 
the  errors  that  have  ah-eady  become  as  it  were  a  part  of 
ourfelves.  If  an  erroneous  and  vicious  education  be,  as  it  has 
been  fhewn  to  be,  the  fource  of  all  our  depravity,  an  education, 
deprived  of  thefe  errors,  feems  to  prefent  itfelf  as  the  moft  na- 
tural exchange,  and  mufl  neceffarily  render  its  fubjedt  virtuous 
and  pure. 

I  will  imagine  the  pupil  never  to  have  been  made  the  victim 
of  tyranny  or  the  flave  of  caprice.  He  has  never  been  per- 
mitted to  triumph  in  the  fuccefs  of  importunity,  and  cannot 
therefore  well  have  become  reftlefs,  inconftant,  fantaftical  or 
unjuft.  He  has  been  inured  to  ideas  of  equality  and  inde- 
pendence, and  therefore  is  not  pailionate,  haughty  and  over- 
bearing. The  perpetual  witnefs  of  a  temperate  condu<St  and 
reafonable  fentiments,  he  is.  not  blinded  with  prejudice,  is  not 
liable  to  make  a  falfe  eflimate  of  things,  and  of  confequence  has 
no  immoderate  defires  after  wealth,  and  fplendour,  and  the  grati- 
fications of  luxury.  Virtue  has  always  been  prefented  to  him 
under  the  moft  attractive  form,  as  the  fureft  medium  of  fuccefs 
in  every  honourable  purfuit,  the  never-failing  confolation  of  dif- 
appointment,  and  infinitely  i*iperior  in  value  to  every  other  ac- 
quifition. 


It 


OF  MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED.  25 

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  fuch  an  education  is  calculated  to     I'OOIC  I. 

CHAP.  IV. 

produce  very  confiderable  effedls.       In  the   world   indeed  the    ' ^ — r* 

Caufcs  of  its 

pupil  will  become  the  fpedator  of  fcenes  very  different  from  imtecllity. 
what  his  preconceived  ideas  of  virtue  might  have  taught  him  to 
expeft.  Let  us  however  admit  it  to  be  poffible  fo  to  temper 
the  mind,  as  to  render  it  proof  againft  the  influence  of  example 
and  the  allurements  of  luxury.  Still  it  may  be  reafonable  to 
doubt  of  the  fufficiency  of  education.  How  many  inftances  may 
we  expedt  to  find,  in  which  a  plan  has  been  carried  into  exe- 
cution, fo  enlightened,  unremitted  and  ardent,  as  to  produce 
thefe  extraordinary  effeds  ?  Where  muft  the  preceptor  himfelf  ' 
have  been  educated,  who  fhall  thus  elevate  his  pupil  above  all 
the  errors  of  mankind  ?  If  the  world  teach  an  implicit  deference 
to  birth  and  riches  and  accidental  diftindions,  he  will  fcarcely 
be  exempt  from  this  deference.  If  the  world  be  full  of  intrigue 
and  rivallhip  and  felfiflinefs,  he  will  not  be  wholly  difinterefted. 
If  falfhood  be  with  mankind  at  large  reduced  to  a  fyftem,  re- 
commended by  the  prudent,  commanded  by  the  maglftrate,  In- 
forced  by  the  moralift*,  and  pradifed  under  a  thoufand  forms, 

the 

*  The  following  paflage  is  extrafted  from  Lord  Kaimes,  late  one  of  the  judges 
of  the  kingdom  of  Scotland. 

"  Cuftom-houfe  oaths  now  a-days  go  for  nothing.  Not  that  the  world 
grows  more  wicked,  but  becaufe  nobody  lays  any  ftrefs  upon  them.  The  duty 
on  French  wine  is  the  fame  in  Scotland  and  in  England.  But  as  we  cannot 
afford  to  pay  this  high  duty,  the  permiflion  underhand  to  pay  Spanifh  duty  for 

E  French 


2  6  THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF 


BOOK  I. 
CHAP.  IV. 


the  Individual  will  not  always  have  the  fimplicity  to  be  fincere,. 
or  the  courage  to  be  true.  If  prejudice  have  ufurped  the  feat  o£ 
knowledge,  if  law  and  religion  and  n^etaphyfics  and  govern- 
ment be  furrounded' with  myfteiy  and  artifice,  he. will  not  know 
the  truth,  and.  therefore  cannot  teach  it ;  he  will  not  pofTefs  the 
criterion,  and  therefore  cannot  fui;nifh  it  to  another.  Again;  if 
a  man  thus  mighty,  thus  accomplifhed,  thus  fuperior  to  rivalfhip 
and  comparifon,  can  be  found,  who  will  confent  to  the  profana- 
tion of  employing  him  in  cultivating  the  mind  of  a  boy,  when 
he  fhould-  be  inllru^ting  the  world  ? . 

Education,  In  tlie  fenfe  in  which  It  has  commonly  been  un- 
derilood,  though  In  one  view  an  engine  of  unlimited  power,  is 

French  wine,  is  found  more  beneficial  to  the  revenue  thantherigour  of  the  law. 
The  oath  however  muft  be  taken  that  the  wine  we  import  is  Spanifh,  to  entitle 
us  to  the  eafe  of  the  Spanifh  duty.  Such  oaths  at  firfl  were  highly  criminal, 
becaufe  direftly  a  fraud  againft  the  public;  but  now  that  the. oath  is. only  ex- 
afted  for  form's  fake,  without  any  faith  intended  to  be  given  or  received,  it 
becomes  very  little  different  from  faying  in  the  way  of  civility,  '  I  am,  fir,  your 
friend,  or  your  obedient  fervant."^ — Loofe  Hints  upon  Education,  Appendii, 
p.  362.     Edinburgh,  1781. 

Archdeacon  Paley  in  a  work,  the  feventh  edition  of  which  lies  before  me, 
and  which  is  ufed  as  a  text  book  in  the  univerfity  of  Cambridge,  fpeaks  thus  : 

"There  are  falfhoods  which  are  not  lies;  that  is,  which  are  not  criminal; 
as — a  fervant's  denying  his  mafter,  a  prifoner's  pleading  not  guilty,  an  advocate 
aflerting  the  juflice,  or  his  belief  of  the  juflice  of  his. client's  caufe.  In  fuch 
inftances  no  confidence  is  deftroyed,  becaufe  none  was  repofed."'  Principles  of 
Moral  and  Political  Philofophy,  Book  III.  Part  I.  Chap.  xv.     London,  1790. 

exceed- 


MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED.  27 

exceedingly    incompetent   to    the    great    bufinefs    of  reforming     ??^J^  J^ 

mankind.     It  performs  its  tafk  weakJy  and  in  detail.     The  grand    ^ ^ ' 

principles  that  the  inventor  feeks  in  his  machines,  and  the  phi- 
lofopher  in  inveftigating  the  fyilem  of  the  univerfe,  are  fuch,  as 
from  a  few  fimple  data  are  fufficient  to  the  produ£lion  of  a 
thoufand  events.  But  the  education  I  have  been  defcribing 
is  the  reverfe  of  this.  It  employs  an  immenfe  combination, of 
powers,  and  an  endlefs  chain  of  caufes  for  the  produftion  of  a 
fingle  fpecimen.  No  tafk,  which  is  not  in  its  own  nature  im- 
pradllcable,  can  eafily  be  fuppofed  more  difficult,  than  that  of 
counteracting  univerfal  error,  and  arming  the  youthful  mind 
againll  the  contagion  of  general  example.  The  ftrongeft  mind 
that  propofed  this  as  its  objed,  would  fcarcely  undertake  the 
forming  more  than  one,  or  at  moft  ft  very  fmall  number,  of 
pupils.  Where  can  a  remedy  be  found  for  this  fundamental 
difadvantage  ?  where  but  in  political  juftice,  that  all  comprehen- 
five  fcheme,  that  -immediately  applies  to  the  removal  of  counter- 
action and  contagion,  that  embraces  millions  in  its  grafp,  and 
•that  educates  in  one  fchool  the  preceptoj  and  the  pupil  ? 


III.     POLITICAL    JUSTICE. 

The   benefits  of  political  juftice  will  beft  be  underftood,  if  Benefits  of 
we  confider   fociety  in  the   moft   comprehenfive  view,   taking   Uce!"^^  ^^ ' 
into  our  eftimate  the  erroneous  inftitutions  by  which  the  human 
.mind  has  been  too  often  checked  in  its  career,  as  well  as  -thofe 

E  2  well 


28  '      THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF 

BOOK  I.     well  founded  opinions  of  public  and  individual  intereft,  which 
CHAP.  IV.  ^  ^ 

* V '    perhaps  need   only  ta  be  clearly  explained,  in  order  to  their 

being  generally  received. 


Umverfali'ty         Now  in  w^hatever  light  it  be  confidered,  we  cannot  avoid 

of  its  influ- 
ence :  perceiving,  firft,  that  political  inftitution  is  peculiarly  ftrong  in 

that  very  point  in  which  the  efficacy  of  education  was  deficient, 

the   extent  of  its  operation.     That  it  in  fome  way  influences 

our  condud  will  hardly  be  difputed.     It  is  fufficiently  obvious 

that  a  defpotic  government  is  calculated  to  render  men  pliant, 

and  a  free  one  refolute  and  independent.     All  the  effeds  that 

any  principle  adopted  into  the  practice  of  a  community  may 

produce,  it  produces  upon  a  comprehenfive  fcale.     It  creates  a 

fimilar  bias  in  the  whole,  or  a  confiderable  part  of  the  fociety. 

The  motive  it  exhibits,  the  ftimulus  it  begets,    are  operative, 

becaufe  they  are   fitted  to  produce  effed  upon   mind.     They 

will  therefore  inevitably  influence  all  to  whom  they  are  equally 

addrefled.     Virtue,  where  virtue  is  the  refult,  will  ceafe  to  be  a 

talk  of  perpetual  watchfulnefs  and  contention.     It  will  neither 

be,  nor  appear  to  be,  a  facrifice   of  our  perfonal  advantage  to 

difinterefl:ed  confiderations.   It  will  render  thofe  the  confederates, 

fupport  and  fecurity  of  our  reditude,  who  were  before  its  moll 

formidable  enemies. 


proved  by  the       Again,  an  additional  argument  in  favour  of  the  efiicacy  of 
{ociety.  political  inftitutions,  arifes  from  the  extenfive  influence  which 

'I  certain 


MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED. 


25^ 


certain  falfe  principles,  engendered  by  an  imperfedt  fyftem  of    BOOK  i. 

fociety,  have  been  found  to  exert.     Superftition,  an  immoderate    *^ v-— ' 

fear  of  fliame,  a  falfe  calculation  of  intereft,  are  errors  that  have 
been  always  attended  with  the  mofl  extenfiv^  confequences. 
How  incredible  at  the  prefent  day  do  the  effeds  of  fuperftition 
exhibited  in  the  middle  ages,  the  horrors  of  excommunication 
and  interdift,  and  the  humiliation  of  the  greateft  monarchs  at 
the  feet  of  the  pope,  appear  ?  What  can  be  more  contrary  to 
European  modes  than  that  dread  of  difgrace,  which  induces  the 
Bramin  widows  of  Indoftan  to  dellroy  themfelves  upon  the 
funeral  pile  of  their  hufbands  ?  What  more  horribly  immoral 
than  the  miftaken  idea  which,  leads  multitudes  in  commercial 
countries  to  regard  fraud,  falfhood  and  circumvention  as  the 
trueft  policy  ?  But,  however  powerful  thefe  errors  may  be,  the 
empire  of  truth,  if  once  eftablifhed,  would  be  incomparably 
greater.  The  man,  who  is  enflaved  by  fhame,  fuperftition  or 
deceit,  will  be  perpetually  expofed  to  an  internal  war  of  opi- 
nions, difapproving  by  an  involuntary  cenfure  the  condudl  he 
has  been  moft  perfuaded  to  adopt.  No  mind  can  be  fo  far  ali- 
enated from  truth,  as  not  in  the  midft  of  its  degeneracy  to  have 
inceflant  returns  of  a  better  principle.  No  fyftem  of  fociety 
can  be  fo  thoroughly  pervaded  with  miftake,  as  not  frequently  to 
fuggeft  to  us  fentiments  of  virtue,  liberty  and  juftice.  But 
truth  is  in  all  its  branches  harmonious  and  confiftent. 


The 


^o  THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES  OF 

The  recoUeftlon  of  this  cu'cumilance  induces  me  to  add  as  a 
concluding  obfervation,  that  it  may  reafonably  be  doubted  whe- 
ther error  could  ever  be  formidable  or  long-lived,  if  government 
did  not  lend  it  fupport.     The  nature  of  mind  is  adapted  to  the 
perception  of  ideas,    their  correfpondence   and  difference.     la 
the  right  difcernment  of  thefe  is  its  ti-ue  element  and  moft  con- 
genial purfuit.     -Jirror  would  indeed  for  a  time  have  been  the 
refult  -of  eur  partial   perceptions ;  but,  as   our  perceptions   are 
continually  changing,  and  continually  becoming  more  definite 
and  correct,  our  errors  would  have  been  momentary,  and  our 
judgments  have  hourly  approached   nearer  to   the  truth.     The 
dodlrine   of  tranfubftantiation,  the  belief  that  men  were  really 
eating  flelh  when  they  feemed  to  be  eating  bread,  and  drinking 
'human  blood  when  they  feemed  -to  be  drinkmg  wine,  could       i 
never  have  maintained  its  empire   fo  long,  if  it  had   not  been        1 
reinforced  by  civil   authority.     Men  would  not  have   fo  long       1 
perfuaded  themfelves  that  an  old  man  elected  by  the   intrigues       | 
of  a  conclave  of  cardinals,  from  the  moment  of  that  eledlion       I 
became  immaculate  and  infallible,  if  the  perfuafion  had  not  been     J 
maintained  by  revenues,  endowments  and   palaces.      A  fyftem 
of  government,  that  fhould  lend  no  fandion  to  ideas  of  fana- 
ticifm  and  hypocrlfy,  would  prefently  accuftom  its  fubjeds   to 
think  juftly  upon  topics  of  moral  worth  and  importance.     A 
ilate,  that  fhould  abftain  from  impofmg  contradidlory  and  im- 
practicable oaths,  and  thus  perpetually  ftimulating  its  members 
I  to 


MORAL  IMPROVEMENT  CONSIDERED.  yi 

to  concealment  and  penury,  would  foon  become  diftlnjruiflied     BOOK  I. 
^    -^      •^'  °  CHAP.  IV, 

for  plain  dealing  and  veracity.     A  country,  in  v/hich  places  of    * ^ ' 

dignity"  and  confidence   fhould  ceafe  to  be  at  the  difpofal   of 

fadlion,  favour  and  intereft,  would  not  long  be  the  refidence  of 
fervility  and  deceit. 

Thefe  remarks  fuggeft  to  us  the  true  anfwer  ro  an  obvrous  OHgIn  of 
objedion,  that  might  otherwife  prefent  itfelf,  to  the  conclufion 
to  which  thefe  principles  appear  to  lead.  It  might  be  faid,  that 
an  erroneous  government  can  never  afford  an  adequate  folution 
for  the  exiflence  of  moral  evil,  fmce  government  was  itfelf  the 
produ(5tion  of  human  intelligence,  and  therefore,  if  ill,  mufl  have 
been  indebted  for  its  ill  qualities  to  fome  wrong  which  had  pre- 
vious exiflence.. 


The  propofition  alTerted  in  this  objedion  is  undoubtedly  true. 
All  vice  is  nothing  more  than  error  and  miftake  reduced  into 
pradice,  and  adopted  as  the  principle  of  our  condudl.  But  error 
is  perpetually  haftening  to  its  own  detection.  Vicious  conduct 
is  foon  difcovered  to  involve  injurious  confequences.  Injuftice 
therefore  by  its  own  nature  is  little  fitted  for  a  durable  exift- 
ence.  But  government  "  lays  its  hand  upon  the  fpring  there  is 
in  fociety,  and  puts  a  flop  to  its  motion  *."  It  gives  fubflance  and 
permanence  to  our  errors.     It  reverfes  the  genuine  propenfities 

*  Logan,  Philofophy  of  Hiflory,  p.  69, 

of 


32  THREE  PRINCIPAL  CAUSES,  &c.  , 

BOOK  I.     of  mind,  and,  inftead  of  fuffering  us  to  look  forward,  teaches  us 
CHAP.  IV.  '        '  °  ' 

' — «-v — -^  to  look  backward  for  perfection.  It  prompts  us  to  feek  the 
public  welfare,  not  in  innovation  and  improvement,  but  in  a 
timid  reverence  for  the  decifions  of  our  anceftors,  as  if  it  were 
the  nature  of  mitid  always  to  degenerate,  and  never  to  advance. 


CHAP. 


[     33     ] 


CHAP.       V, 

INFLUENCE    OF    POLITICAL    INSTITUTIONS 
EXEMPLIFIED. 

310BBERY  AND  FRAUD,  TWO  GREAT  VICES  IN  SOCIETY- 
ORIGINATE,  I.  IN  EXTREME  POVERTY 2.  IN  THE  OS- 
TENTATION   OF     THE    RICH 3.    IN    THEIR    TYRANNY 

RENDERED  PERMANENT — I.  BY  LEGISLATION — 2.  BY 
THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF  LAW — 3.  BY  THE  INEQUA- 
LITY   OF    CONDITION* 

THE  efficacy  of  political  inftitutions  will  be  rendered  ftill    book  l 
CHAP  V 
more  evident,  if  wc  enquire  Into  the  hiftory  of  the  moft   ^       ^  '    '- 

confiderable  vices  at  prefent  exifting  in  fociety ;  and  if  it  can  be 

ihewn  that  they  derive  their  inveteracy  from  political  inftitution. 

Two  of  the  greatell  abufes  relative  to  the  Interior  policy  of  Robbery  and 
nations,  which  at  this  time  prevail  in  the  world,  will  be  allowed  gre"  t\^«°  ii. 
to  confift  in  the  irregular  transfer  of  property,  either  firft  by    °"^'^* 
violence,  or  fecondly  by  fraud.     If  among  the  inhabitants  of 
any  country  there  exifted  no  defire  In  one  Individual  to  poffefs 
himfelf  of  the  fubftance  of  another,  or  no  defire  fo  vehement 
and  reftlefs,  as  to  prompt  him  to  acquire  it  by  means  inconfiftent 
with  order  and  juflice  ;  undoubtedly  in  that  country  guilt  could 

F  hardly 


INFLUENCE  OF  POLITICAL 

hardly  be  known  but  by  report.  If  every  man  could  wltls 
perfedi  facility  obtain  the  neceflaries  of  life,  and,  obtaining  them, 
feel  no  uneafy  craving  after  its  fuperfluities,  temptation  would 
lofe  its  power.  Private  intereft  would  vifibly  accord  with  public 
good ;  and  civil  fociety  become  all  that  poetry  has  feigned  of 
the  golden  age.  Let  us  enquire  into  the  principles  to  which 
thefe  evils  owe  their  exiftence,  and  the  treatm.ent  by  v/hlch  they 
may  be  alleviated  or  remedied. 

originate,  i.        Firfl  then  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that,  in  the  moft  refined  ftates 

in  extreme  ...»  ,  .„  ,  . 

poverty.  of  Europe,  the  inequality  of  property  has  anien  to  an  alarming 

height.  Vail  numbers  of  their  inhabitants  are  deprived  of 
almoil  every  accommodation  that  can  render  life  tolerable  or 
fecure.  Their  utmoft  induftry  fcarcely  fuffices  for  their  fup- 
port.  The  women  and  children  lean  vfith  an  infupportable 
weight  upon  the  efforts  of  the  man,  fo  that  a  large  family  has 
in  the  lower  order  of  life  become  a  proverbial  expreflion  for  an 
uncommon  degree  of  poverty  and  wretchednefs.  If  ficknefs 
or  fome  of  thofe  cafualties  which  are  perpetually  incident  to  an 
aftive  and  laborious  life,  be  fuperadded  to  thefe  burthens,  the 
diftrefs  is  yet  greater. 

It  feems  to  be  agreed  that  In  England  there  Is  lefs  wretched- 
nefs and  diftrefs  than  in  moft  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  continent. 
In  England  the  poors'  rates  amount  to  the  fum  of  two  millions 
fterling  per  annum.     It  has  been  calculated  that  one  perfon  In 

feven 


INSTITUTIONS  EXEMrLIFIED.  35 

feven  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  country  derives  at  fome  period     ^P^]^  ^• 

of  his  life  affiftance  from  this  fund.     If  to  this  we  add  the  per-    ^^ ^ ' 

fons,  who,  from  pride,  a  fpirit  of  independence,  or  the  want  of 
a  legal  fettlement,  though  in  equal  diftrefs,  receive  no  fuch 
affiftance,  the  proportion  will  be  confiderably  increafed. 

I  lay  no  ftrefs  upon  the  accuracy  of  this  calculation ;  the  ge- 
neral fad:  is  fufficient  to  give  us  an  idea  of  the  greatnefs  of  the 
abufc.  The  confequences  that  refult  are  placed  beyond  the 
reach  of  contradidlion.  A  perpetual  ftruggle  M'ith  the  evils  of 
poverty,  if  frequently  ineffedlual,  muft  neceffarily  render  many 
of  the  fufferers  defperate.  A  painful  feeling  of  their  opprefled 
fituation  will  itfelf  deprive  them  of  the  power  of  furmounting 
it.  The  fuperiority  of  the  rich,  being  thus  unmercifully  exer- 
cifed,  muft  inevitably  expofe  them  to  reprifiils ;  and  the  poor 
man  will  be  induced  to  regard  the  ftate  of  fociety  as  a  ftate  of 
war,  an  unjuft  combination,  not  for  proteding  every  man  in 
his.i'ights  and  fecuring  to  him  the  means  of  exiftence,  btit  for 
engroffing  all  its  advantages  to  a  few  fiivoured  individuals,  and 
referving  for  the  portion  of  the  reft  want,  dependence  and  mi- 
fery. 

A  fecond  fource  of  thofe  deftrudive  paflions  by  which  the  2.  in  the  of. 

.  ,      .  '  tentatlon  of 

peace  oi  lociety  is  mterrupted,  is  to  be  found  in  the  luxury,  the  the  rich: 
pageantry   and   magnificence   with   which   enormous   wealth  is 
ufually  accompanied.     Human  beings  are  capable  of  encoun- 

F  2  tering 


'26>  INFLUENCE  OF  POLITICAL- 

CHAP  V  ^^^^"^S ^^*^  chearfulnefs  confiderable  hardfhips,  when  thofe  hard- 
^"- — -^ — —^  fhips  are  impartially  fhared  with  the  reft  of  the  fociety,  and  they 
are  not  infulted  with  the  fpeftacle  of  indolence  and  eafe  in 
others,  no  way  deferving  of  gi-eater  advantages  than  themfelves. 
But  it  is  a  bitter  aggravation  of  their  own  calamity,  to  have  the 
privileges  of  others  forced  on  their  obfervation,  and,  while  they 
are  perpetually  and  vainly  endeavouring  to  fecure  for  themfelves 
and  their  families  the  pooreft  conveniences,  to  find  others  re-»- 
veiling  in  the  fruits  of  their  labours.  This  aggravation  is  afli- 
duoufly  adminiftered  to  them  under  moft  of  the  political  efta- 
bliihments  at  prefent  in  exiftence.  There  is  a  numerous  clafs 
of  individuals,  who,  though  rich,  have  neither  brilliant  talents 
nor  fublime  virtues  ;  and,  however  highly  they  may  prize  their 
education,  their  affability,  their  fuperior  polifh  and  the  elegance 
of  their  manners,  have  a  fecret  confcioufnefs  that  they  poiTefs. 
nothing  by  which .  they  can  fo  fecurely  aflert  their  pre-emi- 
nence and  keep  their  inferiors  at  a  diftance,  as  the  fplendour  of 
their  equipage,  the  magnificence  of  their  retinue  and  the  fump- 
tuoufnefs  of  their  entertainments.  The  poor  man  is  ftruck  with 
this  exhibition ;  he  feels  his  own  miferies ;  he  knows  how  im- 
wearied  are  his  efforts  to  obtain  a  {lender  pittance  of  this  pro- 
digal wafte ;  and  he  miftakes  opulence  for  felicity.  He  cannot 
perfuade  himfelf  that  an  embroidered  garment  may  frequently 
cover  an  aching  heart, 

3,  m  their  A  third  difadvantagc  that  is  apt   to   connedl:  poverty  with 

difcontent 


INSTITUTIONS  EXEMLPLIFIED.  37 

difcontent  confifts  in  the  infolence  and  ufurpation   of  the  rich.     r>OOK  I. 

^  CHAP.  V. 

If  the  poor  man   would  in  other  refped;s  compofe  himfelf  in  .  * ^ ' 

philofophic  indifference,  and,  confcious  that  he  poffeffes  every  / 
thing  that  is  truly  honourable  to  man  as  fully  as  his  rich  neigh-  } 
bour,  would  look  upon  the  reft  as  beneath  his  envy,  his  neigh- 
bour will  not  permit  him  to  do  fo.  He  feems  as  if  he  could 
never  be  fatisfied  with  his  poffeffions  unlefs  he  can  make  the 
fpeftacle  of  them  grating  to  others ;  and  that  honeft  felf-efteem, 
by  which  his  inferior  might  otherwife  arrive  at  apathy,  is  ren- 
dered the  inftrument  of  galling  him  with  oppreffion  and  in- 
juftice.  In  many  countries  jufdce  is  avowedly  made  a  fubjetft 
of  folicitation,  and  the  man  of  the  higheft  rank  and  moft  fplen- 
did  connedions  almoll  infallibly  carries  his  caufe  againfl  the 
unprotected  and  friendlefs.  In  countries  where  this  fliamelefs 
pradice  is  not  eftablifhed,  juftice  is  frequently  a  matter  of  ex- 
penflve  purchafe,  and  the  man  with  the  longeft  purfe  is  pro- 
verbially vidorlous.  A  confcioufnefs  of  thefe  facts  mufl  be 
expcded  to  render  the  rich  little  cautious  of  offence  in  his  deal- 
ings with  the  poor,  and  to  infpire  him  with  a  temper  over- 
bearing, didlatorial  and  tyrannical.  Nor  does  this  indired  op- 
preffion fatisfy  his  defpotifm.  The  rich  are  in  all  fuch  countries 
diredly  or  indiredly  the  legiflators  of  the  ftate  ;  and  of  confe- 
quence  are  perpetually  reducing  oppreffion  into  a  fyftem,  and 
depriving  the  poor  of  that  little  commonage  of  nature  as  it  were, 
which  might  otherwife  ftilT  have  remained  to  them. 


The 


o 


8  INFLUENCE  OF  POLITICAL 


BOOK  I.  The  opinions  of  individuals,  and  of  confequence  their  defires, 

CHAP.  V.  ^  5  ^  » 

*■ ^ ^  for  defire  is  nothing  but  opinion  maturing  for  adion,  will  al- 
ways be  in  a  great  degree  regulated  by  the  opinions  of  the  com- 
munity. But  the  manners  prevailing  in  many  countries 
are  accurately  calciilated  to  imprefs  a  convidtion,  that  inte- 
grity, virtue,  underftanding  and  induilry  are  nothing,  and  that' 
opulence  is  every  thing.  Does  a  man,  whofe  exterior  denotes 
indigence,  expedl  to  be  well  received  in  fociety,  and  efpecially 
by  thofe  who  would  be  underftood  to  didate  to  the  reft  ?  Does 
he  find  or  imagine  himfelf  in  want  of  their  affiftance  and  fa- 
vour ?  He  is  prefently  taught  that  no  merits  can  atone  for  a 
mean  appearance.  The  leflbn  that  is  read  to  him  is,  Go  home, 
enrich  yourfelf  by  whatever  means,  obtain  thofe  fuperfluitles 
which  are  alone  regarded  as  eftimable,  and  you  may  then  be 
fecure  of  an  amicable  reception.  Accordingly  poverty  in  fuch 
countries  is  viewed  as  the  greateft  of  demerits.  It  is  efcaped 
from  with  an  eagernefs  that  has  no  leifure  for  the  fcruples  of 
honefty.  It  is  concealed  as  the  moft  indelible  difgrace.  While 
one  man  choofes  the  path  of  undiftlnguifhing  accumulation,  an- 
other plunges  into  expences  which  are  to  impofe  him  upon  the 
world  as  more  opulent  than  he  is.  He  haftens  to  the  reality 
of  that  penury,  the  appearance  of  which  he  dreads ;  and,  toge- 
ther with  his  property,  facrifices  the  integrity,  veracity  an^ 
character  which  might  have  confoled  him  in  his  adverfity. 


rendered  per-       Such  are  the  caufcs,  that,  in  different  degrees  under  the  dif- 
ferent 


manent : 


INSTITUTIONS   EXEMPLIFIED.  39 

ferent  governments   of  the  world,  prompt   mankind  openly  or     BOOK  I. 

fecretly  to  encroach  upon  the  property  of  each  other.     Let  us    ■• « * 

confider  how  far  they  admit  either  of  remedy  or  aggravation 
from  pohtical  inftitution.  Whatever  tends  to  decreafe  the  in- 
juries attendant  upon  poverty,  decreafes  at  the  fame  time  the  in- 
ordinate defire  and  the  enormous  accumulation  of  wealth.  Wealth 
is  not  purfued  for  its  own  fake,  and  feldom  for  the  fenfual  grati- 
fications it  can  purchafe,  but  for  the  fame  reafons  that  ordinarily 
prompt  men  to  the  acquifition  of  learning,  eloquence  and  fkill, 
for  the  love  of  diftindion  and  fear  of  contempt.  How  few  would 
prize  the  poIlefTion  of  riches,  if  they  were  condemned  to  enjoy 
their  equipage,  their  palaces  and  their  entertainments  in  folitude, 
with  no  eye  to  wonder  at  their  magnificence,  and  no  fordid 
obferver  ready  to  convert  that  wonder  into  an  adulation  of  the 
owner  ?  If  admiration  were  not  generally  deemed  the  exclufive 
property  of  the  rich,  and  contempt  the  conftant  lacquey  of  po- 
verty, the  love  of  gain  would  ceafe  to  be  an  univerfal  paflion. 
Let  us  confider  in  what  refpefts  political  inftitution  is  rendered 
fubfervient  to  this  paflion. 

Firft  then,  legiflation  is  in  almofl:  every  country  grofsly  the  i.  by  legif- 

Istion  ; 

favourer  of  the  rich  againft  the  poor.  Such  is  the  charaQer  of 
the  game  laws,  by  which  the  induftrious  ruftic  is  forbidden  to 
deftroy  the  animal  that  preys  upon  the  hopes  of  his  future  fub- 
fiftence,  or  to  fupply  himfelf  with  the  food  that  unfought  thrufts 
itfelf  in  his  path.     Such  was  the  fpirit  of  the  late  revenue  laws 

of 
) 


40  '  INFLUENCE  OF  POLITICAL 

TH  \p  V  °^  France,  which  in  feveral  of  their  provifions  fell  exclufively 
^ « '  upon  the  humble  and  induftrious,  and  exempted  from  their  ope- 
ration thofe  who  were  beft  able  to  fupport  it.  Thus  in  England 
the  land  tax  at  this  moment  produces  half  a  million  lefs  than  it 
did  a  century  ago,  while  the  taxes  on  confumption  have  ex- 
perienced an  addition  of  thirteen  millions  per  annum  during  the 
fame  period.  This  is  an  attempt,  whether  effedlual  or  no,  to 
throw  the  burthen  from  the  rich  upon  the  poor,  and  as  fuch  is 
an  exhibition  of  the  fpirit  of  legiflation.  Upon  the  fame  princi* 
pie  robbery  and  other  offences,  which  the  wealthier  part  of  the 
community  have  no  temptation  to  commit,  are  treated  as  capital 
crimes,  and  attended  with  the  mod  rigorous,  often  the  moft  in- 
human punifhments.  The  rich  are  encouraged  to  aflbciate  for 
the  execution  of  the  moft  partial  and  oppreffive  pofitive  laws. 
Monopolies  and  patents  are  lavifhly  difpenfed  to  fuch  as  are  able 
to  purchafe  them.  While  the  moft  vigilant  policy  is  employed  to 
prevent  comxbinations  of  the  poor  to  fix  the  price  of  labour,  and 
they  are  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  that  prudence  and  judgment 
which  would  feled  the  fcene  of  their  induftry. 

2.  by  the  ad-        Secondly,  the  adminlftration  of  law  is  not  lefs  iniquitous  than 

miniftration 

•f  law ;  t}ig  fpirit  in  which  it  is  framed.     Under  the  late  government  of 

France  the  office  of  judge  was  a  matter  of  purchafe,  partly  by  an 
open  price  advanced  to  the  crown,  and  partly  by  a  fecret  douceur 
paid  to  the  minifter.  He,  who  knew  beft  how  to  manage  his 
market  in  the  retail  trade  of  juftice,  could  afford  to  ptirchafe  the 
4  good 


.    INSTITUTIONS  EXEMPLIFIED.  41 

"cood  will   of  Its  fundlons  at  the   liio-heft  price.     To  the  client     BOO^:  I. 

*?  or  CHAP.  V. 

juftice  was  avowedly  made  an  objed;  of  perfonal  folicitation,  and    ^ ^ ' 

a  powerful  friend,  a  handfome  woman,  or  a  proper  prefent,  were 
articles  of  much  greater  value  than  a  good  caufe.  In  England 
the  criminal  law  is  adminiftered  with  tolerable  impartiality  fo  far 
as  regards  the  trial  itfelf ;  but  the  number  of  capital  offences,  and 
of  confequence  the  frequency  of  pardons,  open  even  here  a  wide 
door  to  favour  and  abufe.  In  caufes  relating  to  property  the 
pradice  of  law  is  arrived  at  fuch  a  pitch  as  ,to  render  all  juftice 
ineffedual.  The  length  of  our  chancery  fuits,  the  multiplied  ap- 
peals from  court  to  court,  the  enormous  fees  of  counfel,  attornies, 
fecretaries,  clerks,  the  drawing  of  briefs,  bills,  replications  and  re- 
joinders, and  what  has  fometimes  been  called  the  glorious  un- 
certainty of  the  law,  render  it  often  more  advifable  to  refign  a 
property  than  to  conteft  it,  and  particularly  exclude  the  im- 
poveriflied  claimant  from  the  fainteft  hope  of  redrefs.  Nothing 
certainly  is  more  pradicable  .than  to  fecure  to  all  queftions  of 
controverfy  a  cheap  and  fpeedy  decifion,  which,  combined  with 
the  independence  of  the  judges  and  a  few  obvious  improvements 
in  the  conftrudion  of  juries,  would  infure  the  equitable  applica- 
lion  of  general  rules  to  all  charaders  .and  ftations.. 

Thirdly,  the  inequality  of  conditions  ufually  maintained  by  3.  by  the  In- 
equality of 
political  Inftitution,  is  calculated  greatly  to  enhance  the  imagined  conditions. 

-excellence  of  wealth.     In   the  ancient  monarchies  of  the  eaft, 

and  in  Turkey  at  the  prefent  day,  an  eminent  ftation  could 

G  fc  arc  cly 


42  INFLUENCE  OF  POLILTICAL,  &c. 

fcarcely  fail  to  excite  implicit  deference.  The  timid  inhabitant 
trembled  before  his  fuperior;  and  would  have  thought  it  little 
lefs^  than  blafphemy,  to  touch  the  veil  drawn  hj  the  proud  fatrap 
over  his  ingloiious  origin.  The  fame  principles  were  extenfively 
prevalent  under  the  feudal  fyftem.  The  vaffal,  who  was  re- 
garded as  a  fort  of  live  flock  upon  the  eftate,  and  knew  cf  no 
appeal  from  the  arbitrary  fiat  of  his  lord,  would  fcarcely  venture 
to  fufpeft  that  he  was  of  the  fame  fpecies.  This  however  con- 
ftituted  an  unnatural  and  violent  fituation.  There  is  a  propen- 
fity  in  man  to  look  farther  than  the  butfide  ;  and  to  come  with 
a  writ  of  enquiry  into  the  title  of  the  upftart  and  the  fuccefsful. 
In  England  at  the  prefent  day  there  are  few  poor  men  who  do  not 
confole  themfelves,  by  the  freedom  of  their  animadverfions  upon 
their  fuperiors.  The  new-fangled  gentleman  is  by  no  means 
fecure  againft  having  his  tranquillity  difturbed  by  their  furly  and 
pointed  farcafms.  This  propenfity  might  eafily  be  encouraged, 
and  made  conducive  to  the  moll  falutary  purpofes.  Every  man 
might,  as  was  the  cafe  in  certain  countries  upon  record,  be  in- 
fpired  with  the  eonfcioufnefs  of  citizenfhip,  and  be  made  to  feel 
himfelf  an  adive  and  efficient  member  of  the  great  whole.  The 
poor  man  would  then  perceive,  that,  if  eclipfed,  he  could  not  be 
trampled  upon ;  and  he  would  no  longer  be  Hung  with  the  furies 
of  envy,  refentment  and  defpair. 


CHAP. 


[    43     ]  43 


CHAP.      VI, 

HUMAN  INVENTIONS  CAPABLE  OF  PERPETUAL 
IMPROVEMENT. 

PERFECTIBILITY  OF  MAN — INSTANCED,  FIRST,  IN  LAN- 
GUAGE.—  ITS  BEGINNINGS. — ABSTRACTION. — COMPLEXI- 
TY OF   LANGUAGE. — SECOND  INSTANCE:  ALPHABETICAL 

WRITING. HIEROGLYPHICS      AT     FIRST     UNIVERSAL. — 

PROGRESSIVE  DEVIATIONS. — APPLICATION. 

T  F  we  would  form  to  ourfelves  a  folid  eftlmate  of  political,  or     book  i. 
indeed  of  any  other  fcience,  we  ought  not  to  confine  our  -»' 

furvey  to  that  narrow  portion  of  things  which  pafles  under  our  of  man  : 
own  immediate  infpedion,  and  rafhiy  pronounce  every  thing 
that  we  have  not  ourfelves  feen,  to  be  impoffible.  There  is  no 
chara£beriftic  of  man,  which  feems  at  prefent  at  leaft  fo  eminently 
to  diftinguifh  him,  or  to  be  of  fo  much  importance  in  every 
branch  of  moral  fcience,  as  his  perfedtibility.  Let  us  carry  back 
our  minds  to  man  in  his  original  ftate,  a  being  capable  of  im- 
preffions  and  knowledge  to  an  unbounded  extent,  but  not  having 
as  yet  received  the  one  or  cultivated  the  other ;  and  let  us  con- 
trail this  being  with  all  that  fcience  and  genius  have  efFedled : 
and  from  hence  we  may  form  fome  idea  what  it  is  of  which  hu- 

G  2  man 


44  HUMAN  INTENTIONS  CAPABLE 

man  nature  is  capable.  It  is  to  be  remembered,  that  this  being:: 
did  not  as  now  derive  affiftance  from  the  communications  of  his 
fellows,  nor  had  his  feeble  and  crude  conceptions  affifted  by  the 
experience  of  fucceilive  centuries ;  but  that  in  the  ftate  we  are " 
figuiing  all  men  were  equally  ignorant.  The  field  of  improve- 
ment was  before  them,^  but  for  every  ftep  in  advance  they  were 
to  be  indebted  to  their  untutored  efforts.  Nor  is  it  of  any  con- 
fequence  whether  fuch  was  actually  the  progrefs  of  mind,  or 
whether,  as  others  teach, .  the  progrefs  was  abridged,  and  man 
was  immediately  advanced  half  way  to  the  end  of  his  career  by 
the  interpofition  of  the  author  of  his  nature.  In  any  cafe  it  is 
an  allowable  and  no  unimproving  fpeculation,  to  confider  mind 
as  it  is  in  itfelf,  and  to  enquire  what  would  have  been  its  hiftory, 
if,  immediately  upon  its  production,  it  had  been  left  to  be  adled 
upon  by  thofe  ordinary  laws  of  the  univerfe  with  whofe. opera- 
tion we  are  acquainted.  - 

inftanced,  1.        One  of  the  acquifitions  moft  evidently  reouifite  as  a  preliml^ 

in  language,  y  x  i 

nary  to  our  prefent  improvements  is  that  of  language.  But  it  is 
impoffible  to  conceive  of  an  acquifition,  that  mufl  have  been  in 
its  origin  more  different  from  what  at  prefent  it  is  found,  or  that 
lefs  promifed  that  copioufnefs  and  refinement  it  has  fince  ex- 
hibited. 


Its  begin-  Its  beginning   was  probably   from   thofe   involuntary   cries, 

which  infants  for  example  are  found  to  utter  in  the  earlieft 


ftages 


OF  PERPETUAL  IMPROVEMENT.  •     45 

fiages  of  theix"  exiftence,  and  which,  previoufly  to  the  idea  of    BOOK  r. 

CHAP.  VI. 

exciting  pity  or  procuring  afliftance,  fpontaneoufly  arife  from  the    ' * ' 

operation  of  pain  upon  our  ammal  frame.  Thefe  cries,  when 
adlually  uttered,  become  a  fubject  of  perception  to  him  by  whoni 
I'hey  are  uttered;  and,  being  obferved  to  be  conftantly  aflbciated 
with  certain  preliminary  impreffions  and  to  excite  the  idea  of 
thofe  impreffions  in  the  hearer,  may  afterwards  be  repeated  from 
refle£lion  and  tlfe  defire  of  relief.  Eager  defire  to  communicate 
any  information  to  another,  will  alfo  prompt  us  to  utter  fome 
fimple  found  for  the  purpofe  of  exciting  attention :  this  found 
will  probably  frequently  recur  to  organs  unpradtifed  to  variety, 
and  will  at  length  ftand  as  it  were  by  convention  for  the  inform- 
ation intended  to  be  conveyed.  But  the  diftance  is  extreme 
fcom  thefe  funple  modes  of  communication,  which  we  poflefs  in 
common  with  fome  of  the  inferior  animals,  to  all  the  analyfis 
and  abftradlon  which  languages  require. 

Abftradion  indeed,  though  as  it  is  commonly  underflood  it  Abftraclion. 
be  one  of  the  fublimeft  operations  of  mind,  is  in  fome  fort  co- 
eval with  and  infeparabk  from  the  exiftence  of  mind.  Th^  next 
ftep  to  fimple  perception  is  that  of  comparifon,  or  the  coupling 
together  of  two  ideas  and  the  perception  of  their  refemblances 
and  differences.  "Without  comparifon  there  can  be  no  preference, 
and  without  preference  no  adion :  though  it  muft  be  acknow- 
ledged, that  this  comparifon  is  an  operation  that  may  be  per- 
formed by  the  mind  without  adverting  to  its  nature,  and  that 

neither 


46  HUMAN  INVENTIONS  CAPABLE 

BOOK  T.    neither  the  brute  nor  the  favage  has  any  confcioufnefs  of  the 
CHAP.  VI.  ^  ^ 

*— -^' '  feveral  Heps  of  the  intelledual  progrefs.    Comparifon  immediately 

leads  to  imperfed  abftradion.  The  fenfation  of  to-day  is  claffed, 
if  fimilar,  with  the  fenfation  of  yefterday,  and  an  inference  is 
made  refpeding  the  conduit  to  be  adopted.  Without  this  degree 
of  abftradion  the  faint  dawnings  of  language  already  defcribed 
could  never  have  exifted.  Abftradlon,  which  was  neceflary  to 
the  lirft  exiftence  of  language,  is  again  afhfted  in  its  operations 
by  language.  That  generalifation,  which  is  implied  in  the  very 
notion  of  thought,  being  thus  embodied  and  rendered  palpable, 
makes  the  mind  acquainted  with  its  own  powers  and  creates  a 
reftlefs  defire  after  farther  progrefs. 

©nTifgua'ge.  ^^^  though  it  be  by  no  means  impoflible,  to  trace  the  caufes 
that  concurred  to  the  produdion  of  language,  and  to  prove  them 
adequate  to  their  efFe£l,  it  does  not  the  lefs  appear  that  this  is 
an  acquifition  of  flow  growth  and  ineftimable  value.  The  very 
fteps,  were  we  to  purfue  them,  would  appear  like  an  endlefs 
labyrinth.  The  diflance  is  immeafurable  between  the  three  or 
four  vague  and  inarticulate  founds  uttered  by  animals,  and  the 
copioufnefs  of  lexicography  or  the  regularity  of  grammar.  The 
general  and  fpecial  names  by  which  things  are  at  lirfl:  compli- 
cated and  afterwards-  divided,  the  names  by  which  properties 
are  feparated  from  their  fubftances  and  powers  from  both,  the 
comprehenfive  diftribution  of  parts  of  fpeech,  verbs,  adjectives 
and   particles,    the   inflexions  of  words  by   which  the   change 

of 


OF  PERPETUAL  IMPROVEMENT.  47 

of  their  terminations  changes  their  meaning  through  a  variety     BOOK  I. 

of  fhadings,  their  concords  and  their  governments,  all  of  them    *^ • ' 

prefent  us  with  fuch  a  boundlefs  catalogue  of  fcience,  that  he, 
who  on  the  one  hand  did  not  know  that  the  boundlefs  tafk  had 
been  adtually  performed,  or  who  on  the  other  was  not  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  progreffive  nature  of  mind,  would  pro- 
nounce the  accomplifhment  of  them  impoffible.  ■ 


A  fecond  invention,  well  calculated  to  imprefs  us  with  a  fenfe   ^«=°"<5  '"n- 

•"■  Itance  :  al- 

of  the  progreffive  nature  of  man,  is  that  of  alphabetical  writing,   pi'^beucal 

Hieroglyphical  or  pidture  writing  appears  at  fome  time  to  have   Hierogly- 
phics at  firft 

been  univerfal,  and  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  the  gradation  univ'-rfai. 
from  this  to  alphabetical  is  fo  great,  as  to  have  induced  Hartley, 
one  of  the  moft  acute  of  all  philofophical  writers,  to  have  re- 
courfe  to  miraculous  interpofition  as  the  only  adequate  folution. 
In  reality  no  problem  can  be  imagined  more  operofe,  than  that 
of  decompofmg  the  founds  of  words  into  four  and  twenty  fimple 
elements  or  letters,  and  again  finding  thefe  elements  in  all  ether 
words.  When  we  have  examined  the  fubjecft  a  little  more  clofe- 
ly,  and  perceived  the  fteps  by  which  this  labour  was  accom- 
plifhed,  perhaps  the  immenfity  of  the  labour  will  rather  gain 
upon  us,  as  he  that  fhall  have  counted  a  million  of  units,  will 
have  a  vafter  idea  upon  the  fubjed,  than  he  that  only  confiders 
them  in  the  grofs. 


In  China  hieroglyphical  writing  has  never  been  fuperfeded  by  Progrtffive 

deviauons. 

5  alpha- 


43  HUMAN  INVENTIONS  CAPABL-E 

^°9^,?^-    alphabetical,  and  this  from  the  very  nature  of  their  language, 

' • '   which  is  confiderably  monofyllabic,  the  fame  found  being  made 

to  fignify  a  great  variety  of  objedls,  by  means  of  certain  fliadings 
of  tone  too  delicate  for  any  alphabet  to  be  able  to  reprefent. 
They  have  hovKCver  two  kinds  of  writing,  one  for  the  learned, 
and  another  for  the  vulgar.  The  learned  adhere  clofely  to  their 
hieroglyphical  writing,  reprefcnting  every  word  by  its  corre- 
fponding  pidure ;  but  the  vulgar  are  frequent  in  their  deviations 
from  ito 


Hieroglyphical  writing  and  fpeech  may  indeed  be  confidered 
in  the  firft  inftance  as  two  languages,  running  parallel  to  each 
other,  but  with  no  neceffary  connexion.  The  picture  and  the  word 
each  of  them  reprefent  the  idea,  one  as  immediately  as  the  other. 
But,  though  independent,  they  will  become  accidentally  affociated; 
the  pidure  at  firft  imperfedly,  and  afterwards  more  conftantly 
fuggefting  the  idea  of  its  correfpondent  found.  It  is  in  this  man- 
ner that  the  mercantile  clafies  of  China  began  to  corrupt,  as  it  is 
ftyled,  their  hieroglyphical  writing.  They  had  a  word  fuppofe 
of  two  fyllables  to  write.  The  chara£ter  appropriate  to  that 
word  they  were  not  acquainted  with,  or  it  failed  to  fuggeft  itfelf 
to  their  memory.  Each  of  the  fyllables  however  was  a  dillindt 
word  in  the  language,  and  the  characters  belonging  to  them  per- 
fectly familiar.  The  expedient  that  fuggefted  itfelf  was  to  write 
thefe  two  characters  with  a  mark  fignifying  their  union,  though 
la  ■  reality  tlie  characters  had -hitherto  been- appropriated  to  ideas 


OF  PERPETUAL  IMPROVEMENT.  49 

of  a  difterent  fort,  wholly  unconne<fled  with  that  now  Intended     BOOK  I. 

'  ''  CHAP.  VI. 

to  be  conveyed.    Thus  a  fort  of  rebus  or  chararde  was  produced.    "^ ^ ' 

In  other  cafes  the  word,  though  monofyllabic,  was  capable  of  be- 
ing divided  into  two  founds,  and  the  fame  procefs  v/as  employed. 
This  is  a  firft  ftep  towards  alphabetical  analyfis.  Some  word, 
fuch  as  the  interjedlion  0!  or  the  particle  A  is  already  a  found 
perfedly  fimple,  and  thus  furnifhes  a  firft  ftone  to  the  edifice. 
But,  though  thefe  ideas  may  perhaps  prefent  us  v,'ith  a  faint  view 
of  the  manner  in  which  an  alphabet  was  produced,  yet  the  a£tual 
produdion  of  a  complete  alphabet  is  perhaps  of  all  human  dif- 
coveries,  that  which  required  the  moft  perfevering  refleftion,  the 
luckieft  concurrence  of  circumftances,  and  the  moft  patient  and 
gradual  progrefs. 

Let  us  however  fuppofe  man  to  have  gained  the  two  firft  Applicatioa. 
elements  of  knowledge,  fpeaking  and  writing ;  let  us  trace  him 
through  all  his  fubfequent  improvements,  through  whatever 
conftitutes  the  inequality  between  Newton  and  the  ploughman, 
and  indeed  much  more  than  this,  fince  the  moft  ignorant  plough- 
man in  civilifed  fociety  is  infinitely  different  from  what  he  would 
have  been,  when  ftripped  of  all  the  benefits  he  has  derived  from 
literature  and  the  arts.  Let  us  furvey  the  earth  covered  with  the 
labours  of  man,  houfes,  inclofures,  harvefts,  manufactures,  inftru* 
ments,  machines,  together  with  all  the  wonders  of  painting, 
poetry,  eloquence  and  philofophy. 

H  Such 


so  HUMAN  INVENTIONS  CAPABLE,  &c. 

Such  v^as  man  in  his  original  flate,  and  fuch  is  man  as  we  at 
prefent  behold  him.  Is  it  pcffible  for  us  to  contemplate  what 
he  has  already  done,  without  being  impreffed  with  a  ftrong  pre- 
fentiment  of  the  improvements  he  has  yet  to  accomplifh  ?  There, 
is  no  fcience  that  is  not  capable  of  additions ;  there  is  no  art 
that  may  not  be  carried  to  a  ftill  higher  perfedlion.  If  this  he 
true  of  all  other  fciences,  why  not  of  morals  ?  If  this  be  true 
of  all  other  arts,  why  not  of  focial  inftitution  ?  The  very  con- 
ception of  this  as  poffible,,  is  in  the  higheft  degree  encouraging. 
If  we.  can  ftill  farther  demonftrate  it  to  be  a  part  of  the  natural 
and  regular  progrefs  of  mind,  our  confidence  and  our  hopes  will 
then  be  complete.  This  is  the  temper  with  which  we  ought  to , 
engage  in  the  ftudy  of  political  truth.  Let  us  look  back,  that 
we  may  profit  by  the  experience  of  mankind ;  but  let  us  not 
look  back,  as  if  the  wifdom  of  our  anceftors  was  fuch  as  to . 
leave  no  room  for  future  improvement.. 


CHAP. 


[     51     ] 


CHAP.       VII. 

OF  THE   OBJECTION  TO  THESE  PRINCIPLES  FROM 
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  CLIMATE. 

P  A  R  T      L 

OF  MORJL  AND  PHTSICAL  CAUSES. 

THE  QUESTION  STATED. —  PROVINCES  OF  SENSATION  AND 
REFLECTION. — MORAL  CAUSES  FREQUENTLY  MISTAKEN 
FOR  PHYSICAL. — SUPERIORITY  OF  THE  FORMER  EVIDENT 
PROM  THE  VARIETIES  OF  HUMAN  CHARACTER. — OPE- 
RATION   OF     PHYSICAL    CAUSES     RARE. FERTILITY     OF 

REFLECTION. — PHYSICAL  CAUSES  IN  THE  FIRST  IN- 
STANCE SUPERIOR,  AFTERWARDS  MORAL. — OBJECTION 
FROM  THE  EFFECT  OF  BREED  IN  ANIMALS. CONCLU- 
SION. 

THERE  are  certain  propofitions  whicli  may  be  confidered    book  I 
indifferently,  either  as  corollaries  flowing  from  the  prin-   ^    ^l^'^^V 
ciples  already   eftablifhed,  or   as  a   fource    of   new   arguments 
againft  the  validity  of  thofe  principles.     In  the  firfl;  view  they 
are  entitled  to  a  clear  and  perfpicuous  ftatement,  and  in  the  fe- 
cond  to  a  mature  examination.     For  example  : 

H2  The 


52  OF     MORAL     AND 

BOOK  I.        The  caufes  which  appear  to  operate  upon  the  human  mind 
' ' '    may  be  divided  into  two  clafles  :  perceptions,  which  are  ren- 

The  queftion  ^  J    r  r  ' 

ftated,  dered  diredlly  a  fubjedl  of  reafoning,  and  regarded  by  the  intel- 

XtOi  as  inducements  to  a£tion ;  and  perceptions,  which  a£l  indi- 
rectly upon  the  mind,  by  rendering  the  animal  frame  gay,  vi- 
gorous and  elaflic,  or  on  the  contrary  fluggifh,  morbid  and 
inadive.  According  to  the  fyftem  already  eilablifhed,  the 
former  of  thefe  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  whole,  the  latter  being 
fo  comparatively  inefficient  and  fubordinate  as  to  ftand  in  the 
eftimate  as  almoil  nothing.  To  many  reafoners  however  they 
have  by  no  means  appeared  of  fo  trivial  importance,  and  it  may 
not  be  ufelefs  to  examine  for  a  moment  the  ideas  they  have 
formed,  and  the  reafons  which  have  induced  them  to  afcribe 
fo  much  to  the  meaneft  branch  of  the  human  conftitution. 

Impreflions  upon  our  fenfes  may  a£t  either  as  phyfical  or 
moral  caufes..  Indifpofition  of  the  body  operates  upon  the  mind 
principally  in  the  firft  of  thefe  ways,  feeming  without  any 
formal  deliberation  of  the  underftanding  to  incline  us  to  difTa- 
tisfadtibn  and  indolence.  Corporal  punifliment  affe<fls  us  prin- 
cipally in  tlifi  latter  mode,  fmce,  though  it  diredly  introduces  a 
painful  ftate  of  the  mind,  it  influences,  our  condu£t,  only  as  it 
is  reflected  upon  by  the  unde.rfl:anding,  and  converted  into  a^ 
motive  of  adtion. 


Provinces  of        It  may  be  a  curious  fpeculation  to  examine  how  far   thefe 

fenfatior.  and 

lefledion.  6.  claflTes 


PHYSICAL     CAUSES.  53 

clafTes  are  diftindl  from  each  other.  It  cannot  be  denied  but 
that  fenfation  is  of  fome  moment  in  the  affair.  It  poffeffes  the 
initiative.  It  is  that  from  which  all  the  intelledls  with  which 
we  are  acquainted  date  their  operations.  Its  firft  effed:  upon 
mind  does  in  the  majority  of  cafes  precede  refledlion  and  choice* 
In  fome  cafes  the  impreffions  upon  our  fenfes  are  forefeen  by 
us,  and  may  confequently  be  refilled  in  the  outfet.  But  it 
would  be  a  contradiftion  to  affirm  that  they  can  always  be  fore- 
feen.    Forefight  is  itfelf  the  offspring  of  experience. 

Meanwhile,  though  they  can  only  in  particular  inflances  be   Moral  caufes 

frequently 

forefeen,  and  of  confequence  completely  foreftalled,  yet  much   miibkcn  far 

pliyfical, 

of  their  effedl  is  in  all  cafes  to  be  afcribed  to  deliberation  and 
choice.  "  I  feel  a  painful  fenfation,  and  I  perfuade  myfelf  that 
it  is  wifer  to  fubmit,  and  thus  cherlfh  and  fecond  its  influence, 
than  to  refift..  I  conceive  myfelf  unfortunate,  opprefTed  by  a 
combination  of  unfavourable  accidents,  and  am  rendered  by  this 
conception  gloomy,  difcontented  and  wretched.  I  fatisfy  my- 
felf that  my  fituatlon  is  fuch  as  to  render  exertion  unreafon- 
able,  and  believe  that  the  attempt  would  produce  nothing  but 
abortive  and  fruitlefs  torture.  I  remain  liftlefs,  fluggifo  and 
inadlive." 

How  different  would  be  the  fum  of  my  fituatlon,  if  I  were 
animated  by  fentiments  of  chearfulnefs,  induftiy  and  courage  ? 
It  has  been  faid  "  that  a  rainy  day  has  been  known  to  convert  a 

man 


54  ,  OF    MORAL     AND 

man  of  valour  Into  a  coward."  How  eaflly  would  this  external 
difadvantage  have  been  furmounted,  if  his  mind  had  been  more 
full  of  the  benefits  to  arlfe  from  his  valour,  if  the  rainy  day 
had  been  put  in  the  balance  with  his  wife  and  children,  the  moft 
illuftrious  rewards  to  be  beftowed  upon  himfelf,  and  freedom 
and  felicity  to  be  fecured  to  his  country  ?  "  Irfdigeftion,"  we  are 
told,  "  perhaps  a  fit  of  the  tooth-ach,  renders  a  man  incapable  of 
ftrong  thinking  and  fpirited  exertion."  How  long  would  thefe 
be  able  to  hold  out  againft  a  fudden  and  unexpected  piece  of 
intelligence  of  the  moft  delightful  nature  ? 

When  operations  of  an  Injurious  nature  are  Inflifted  on  the 
body,  and  are  encountered  by  the  mind  with  unalterable  firm- 
nefs,  what  Is  the  degree  of  pain  which  in  fuch  inftances  is  fuf- 
fered  ?  Was  the  language  of  Anaxarchus  merely  a  philofophical 
rant,  "  Beat  on,  tyrant !  Thou  mayeft  deftroy  the  fhell  of  Anax- 
archus, but  thou  canft  not  touch  Anaxarchus  himfelf?"  How 
much  pain  was  really  endured  by  Mutius  Scsevola  and  arch- 
bllhop  Cranmer,  when  each  fteadily  held  his  hand  to  be 
devoured  by  the  flames  ?  How  much  is  endured  by  the  favage 
Indkns,  who  fmg  In  the  midft  of  tortures,  and  farcaftically  pro- 
voke their  tormentors  to  more  ingenious  barbarity  ? 

The  truth  that  feems  to  refult  from  thefe  confideratlons  is, 
that  indifpofition  only  becomes  formidable  in  proportion  as  it 
is  feconded  by  the  confent  of  the  mind  ;  that  our  communi- 
cation 


PHYSICAL     CAUSES.  55 

cation  with  the  material  univerfe  is  at  the  mercy  of  our  choice:     BOOK  I. 

^  '    CHAP.  VII. 

and  that  the  inabiUty  of  the  underftanding  for  intelleQual  ex-    ' >/ ^ 

ertion  is  principally  an  affair  of  moral  confideration,  exifting 
only  in  the  degree  in  which  it  is  deliberately  preferred^ 

"  The  hero  of  to-day,"  we  are  told,  "  fhall  by  an  ihdigeftion  or   Superiority  of 

the  former 

a  rainy  atmofphere  be  converted  into  a  coward  to-morrow."   evident  from 

the  varieties 

Waving  the  confideration  of  how  far  this  fadl  where  it  exifts  is  in  of  human 

chara£lcr, 

reality  of  a  moral  and  intelledtual  nature,  let  us  examine  to  what 
degree  a  principle  of  this  fort  is  the  true  index  of  human 
adions.  We  have  already  eftablifhed  it  as  a  fundamental,  that 
there  are  no  innate  ideas.  Of  confequence,  if  men  were  prin- 
cipally governed  by  external  circumftances  fuch  as  that  of  at- 
mofphere, their  characters  and  actions  would  be  much  alike. 
The  fame  weather,  that  made  you  a  coward,  would  make  me 
fo  too,  and  an  army  would  be  defeated  by  a  fog.  Perhaps 
indeed  this  cataftrophe  would  be  prevented  by  the  impartiality 
of  the  moifture,  in  proportion  as  the  enemy  advanced,  which  he 
neceffarily  mull  do,  into  the  fame  atmofphere. 

Every  thing  that  checks  the  uniformity  of  this  effed,  and 
permanently  diftinguifhes  the  charader  of  one  man  from  that 
of  another,  is  to  be  traced  to  the  affociation  of  ideas.  But  affc- 
ciation  is  of  the  nature  of  reafoning.  The  principal,  the  moft 
numerous  and  lafting  of  our  affociations,  are  intelledtual,  not 
accidental,  built  tjpon  the  refemblances  and  differences  of  things, 

ijot 


^6  OF     MORAL     AND 

BOOK  I.     not  upon  the  contingency  of  their  occurring  In  any  given  time 
* V '    or  place.     It  is  thus  that  one  man  appears  courageous  and  an- 
other cowardly,  one  man  vigorous  and  another  dull,  under  the 
fame  or  nearly  the  fame  external  circumftances. 

^h'^^T""^  In  reality  the  atmofphere,  inilead  of  confiderably  afFedling 
tcaufes  rare.  ^]-^g  rmLk  of  mankind,  affeds  in  an  eminent  degree  only  a  fmali 
part  of  that  mafs.  The  majority  are  either  above  or  below  it ; 
are  either  too  grofs  to  feel  ftrongly  thefe  minute  variations,  or 
too  bufy  to  be  at  leifure  to  attend  to  them.  It  is  only  a  few, 
whofe  treatment  has  been  tender  enough  to  imbue  them  with 
extreme  delicacy,  and  whofe  faculties  are  not  roufed  by  ftrong 
and  unintermitted  incitements,  who  can  be  thus  blindly  direded. 
If  it  fliould  be  faid  "  that  the  weather  indeed  is  too  great  a  trifle 
to  produce  thefe  confequences,  but  that  there  are  pains  and  in- 
terruptions which  fcarcely  any  man  can  withftand  j"  it  may  be 
anfwered,  that  thefe  occur  too  feldom  to  be  miftaken  for  the 
efScient  principles  of  human  character,  that  the  fyftem  which 
determines  our  proceedings  rifes  from  a  different  fource,  and 
ordinarily  returns  when  the  pain  or  interruption  has  fubfided. 

There  can  be  no  queftion  more  Interefting  than  that  which 
we  are  now  confidering.  Upon  our  decifion  in  this  cafe  it 
depends,  whether  thofe  perfons  a£t  wifely  who  prefcribe  to 
themfelves  a  certain  difcipline  and  are  anxious  to  enrich  their 
minds  with  fcience,  or  whether  on  the  contrary  it  be  better  to 

truft 


PHYSICAL     CAUSES.  S7 

truft  every  thing  to  the  mercy  of  events.     Is  it  pofTible  that     BOOK  r. 

we  fhould  not  perceive  from  the  very  nature  of  the  thing  the    "^ » ' 

advantages  which  the  wife  man  pofTeiTes  over  the  foolifh  one, 
and  that  the  points  in  which  they  refemble  will  be  as  nothing 
compared  to  thofe  in  which  they  differ?  In  thofe  particulars 
in  w^hich  our  condu*^  is  directed  merely  by  external  impreffions 
we  refemble  the  inferior  animals  ;  we  differ  from  them  in  the 
greater  facility  with  which  %ve  arrange  our  fenfations,  and  com- 
pare, prefer  and  judge. 

Out  of  a  fmele  fenfation  a  great  variety  of  reflections  may  Fertility  of 
be  generated.  Let  the  thing  perceived  be  a  material  fubflance  of 
certain  regular  dimenfions.  I  perceive  that  it  has  an  upper  and 
a  lower  furface,  I  can  therefore  conceive  of  it  as  divided.  I  can 
conceive  of  the  parts  into  which  it  is  formed  as  moving  towards 
and  from  each  other,  and  hence  I  acquire  the  ideas  of  diftance 
and  fpace.  I  can  conceive  of  them  as  ftriking  againft  each  other, 
and  hence  I  derive  the  notion  of  impenetrability,  gravity  and 
momentum,  the  flownefs,  rapidity  and  direction  of  motion.  Let 
the  fenfation  be  a  pain  in  the  head.  I  am  led  to  refled:  upon  its 
caufes,  its  feat,  the  ftrudure  of  the  parts  in  which  it  refides,  the 
inconvenience  it  impofes,  the  ■  confequences  with  which  it  may 
be  attended,  the  remedies  that  may  be  applied  and  their  effedls, 
whether  external  or  internal,  material  or  intelledlual. 


It  is  true  that  the  infant  and  inexperienced  mind  cannot  thus  Pl>yfical 

•    r  t  •  ^•rr  •  n  caufes  in  the 

analyle  and  conjure  up  differtations  of  philofophy  out  of  its  moft  firrt  iuiiance 

I  trivial 


58  OFMORALAND 

r^OOK  I.     trivial  fenfations..     Such  a  capacity  infers  a  lone;  feries  of  pte- 
CHAP.VIL  ^        ^  °  ^ 

"^ — ^^ '    ceding  impreffions.     Mind  is  in  its  infancy  nearly  what  thefe 

fiiperior,  af- 
terwards        philofophers  defcribe,  the  creatlire  of  contingencies^    But  the  far- 

leoral.  ■^ 

ther  it  advances,  the  more  it  individualifes.  Each  tnan  has  habits 
and  prejudices  that  are  properly  his  own.  He  lives  ia  a  little 
tinlverfe  of  his  own  creating,  or  he  communicates  with  the  om- 
niprefent  and  eternal  volume  of  truth.  With  thefe  he  compares, 
the  fucceflive  perceptions  of  his  mind,  and  upon  thefe  depend  the 
conclufions  he  draws  and  the  conduit  he  obferves.  Hence  it  iii'*- 
evitably  follows,  that  phyfical  caufes,  though  of  fome  confe- 
quence  in  the  hiftory  of  man,  fink  into  nothing,  when  compared 
with  the  great  and  inexpreffible  operations  of  refledtion.  They 
are  the  prejudices  we  conceive  or  the  judgments  we  form^  our 
apprehenfions  of  truth  and  falfhood,  that  conftitute  the  true  bafis 
©f  diftinition  betweea  man  and  mam.  The  difference  between 
favage  and  favage  indeed j  in  the  firfl:  generation  of  the  human 
fpecies  and  in  perfed;  folitude,,  can  only  be  afcribed  to  the  dif- 
ferent impreffions  made  upon  th^ir  fenfes..  But  this  difference 
would  be  almoft  imperceptible.  The  ideas  of  wifdom  and  folly 
would  never  have  entered  the  human  mind,  if  men,  like  beafls, 
derived  neither  good  nor  evil  from  the  refledlions  and  difcoveri&s 
cf  their  companions  and  ancefiors.. 


Objcaion     "       Hence  we  are  furnifiied  with  an  anfwer  to  the  analogical  ar-^ 

from  the  cf-  ° 

feet  of  breed    gumcut  from  the  confiderable  effefts  that  phyfical  caufes  appear 

to  produce  upon  brutes.    "  Breed  for  example  appears  to  be  of 

unqueftionable  importance  to  the  character  and  qualifications  of 

6  horfes 


PHYSICAL     CAUSES. 


55 


horfes  and  does :  why  fiiould  we  not  fuppofe  thU  or  certain     BOOK  I. 
'^  '  ff  CHAR  VII. 

other  brute  and  occult  caufes  to  be  equally  efficacious  in  the  cafe    "^ * ^ 

of  men  ?  How  comes  it  that  the  races  of  animals  perhaps  never 
<iegenerate,  if  carefully  cultivated ;  at  the  fame  time  that  we  have 
no  feeurity  againft  the  wifeft  philofopher's  begetting  a  dunce?" 

I  anfwer,  that  the  exiflence  of  phyfical  caufes  cannot  be  con- 
troverted. In  the  cafe  of  man  their  efficacy  is  fwallowed  up  in 
(the  fuperior  importance  of  reflexion  and  fcience.  In  animals 
on  the  contrary  they  are  left  almoft  alone.  If  a  race  of  negroes 
were  taken,  and  maintained  each  man  from  his  infancy,  except 
fo  far  as  was  neceflary  for  the  propagation  of  the  fpecies,  in  fo- 
litude  ;  or  even  if  they  were  excluded  from  an  acquaintance  with 
the  improvements  and  imaginations  of  their  anceftors,  though 
permitted  the  fociety  of  each  other,  the  operation  of  breed  might 
perhaps  be  rendered  as  confpicuous  among  them,  as  in  the  dif- 
ferent dafles  of  horfes  and  dogs.  But  the  ideas  they  would  other- 
•wtfe  receive  firom  their  parents  and  civilifed  or  half-ciyilifed  neigh- 
hours  would  be  innumerable :  and,  if  the  precautions  above  men- 
tioned were  unobfervcd,  all  parallel  between  the  two  cafes  would 
-ceafe. 

Such  Is  the  charader  of  man  confidercd  as  an  individual.    He   Conclufion. 
is  operated  upon  by  exterior  caufes  immediately,  producing  cer- 
tain ■effedls  upon  him  independently  of  the  exercife  of  rcafon ; 
And  he  Is  operated  upon  by  exterior  caufes  mediately,  their  im- 
prcffions  furnlfhing  him  with   materials  for  reflcftlon.,  and  af- 

I  2  fuming 


6o  OF     NATIONAL 

CHAp'Vn    ^"^^""^  ^^^  form  of  motives  to  slQ.  or  to  refrain  from-  adtmgv, 

^ V '    But  th€  latter  of  tbefe,  at  lead  fo  far  as  relates  to  man  in  a 

Givilifed  ftate,  may  ftand  for  the  whole.  He  that  would  change 
the  charatter  of  the  individual,  would  miferably  mifapply  his  ef- 
forts, if  he  principally  fought  to  effedl  this  purpofe  by  the  cpera*- 
tions  of  heat  and  cold,  drynefs  and  moifture  upon  the  animal 
fi-ame.  The  true  inftruments  of  moral  influence,  are  defire  and 
averfion,  punifhmeat  and  reward,  the  exhibition  of  general 
truth,  aad  the  development  of  thofe  punilhments  and.  reward^ 
which  wifdom  and  error  by  tlie  very  nature  of  the  thing  con*- 
ftantLy  bring  along  with  them*. 


PART       IL 
OF    N4TI0NAL    CHARACTERS. 

-CHARACTER  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD.: — ALE  NATIONS.  CAPABLE 

OF   LIBERTY. — THE    ASSERTION    ILLUSTRATED. EXPER.I*- 

ENCE  FAVOURS  THESE  REASONINGS. — MEANS  OE  INTRO*- 
DUCING  LI3ERTY.- 

AS  is  the  charader  of  the  individual;  fo  may  we  exped  to  find 
it  with  nations  and  great  bodies  of  men.  The  operations 
of  law  and  politicai  inftitution  will  be  important  and  ihterefting, 
the  operations  of  climate  trifling  and"  unworthy  of  notice.  Thus 
there  are  particular  profeffions,  fuch  as  that  of  the  priefthood, 
which  mull  always  operate  to  the  produdion  of  a  particular 

charader. 

Priefts 


CHARACTERS.  6r 

Piiefts  arc  upon  all  occafions  acGuftomed  to  have  their  opinions   J^PPi'^  }• 

CHAP.VIU 

liftened  to  with  implicit  deference :  they  will  therefore  be  im-   j!:: ^ i 

^  '  Charafter  of 

perious,  dogmatical  and  impatient  of  oppofition.  Their  fuceefs  ['^^  P''''^''-- 
with  mankind  depends  upon  the  opinion  of  their  fuperior  inno- 
cence ;  they  will  therefore  be  particularly  anxious  about  appear- 
ances, their  deportment,  will  be  grave,  and  their  manners  formal. 
The  frank  and  ingenuous  fallies  of  mind  they  will  be  obliged  to 
flipprefs ;  the  errors  and  irregularities  into  which  they  may  be 
drawn  they  will  be  ftudious  to  conceal.  They  are  obliged  at  fef 
intervals  to  aflume  the  exterior  of  an  ardent  devotion  j  but  it  is 
impoflible  that  this  fhould  at  all  times  be  free  from  occafional 
coldnefs  and  diftradion.  Their  importance  is  conrie£led  with 
their  real  or  fuppoled  mental  fiiperrority  over  the  reft  of  mankind  ; 
they  muft  therefore  be  patrons  of  prejudice  and  implicit  faith. 
Their  profperity  depends  upon  the  reception  of  particular  opinions 
in  the  world  ;  they  muft  therefore  be  enemies  to  freedom  of  en- 
quiry ;  they  muft  have  a  bias  upon  their  minds  impreffed  by 
fomething  different  from  the  force  of  evidence.  Particular  moral 
caufes  may  in  fome  inftances  limit,  perhaps  fuperfede  the  in- 
fluence of  general  ones,  and  render  fome  men  fuperior  to  the 
charader  of  their  prefeffion  ;  but,  exclufively  of  fuch  exceptions, 
priefts  of  all  religions,  of  all  climates  and  of  all  ages  v^ill  have  a 
flriking  fimilarity  of  manners -and  difpofition.  In  the  fame  man- 
ner we  may  reft  affured  that  free  men  in  whatever  country  will 
be  firm,  vigorous  and  fpirited  in  proportion  to  their  freedom,  and 
that  vafTals  and  Haves  will  be  ignorant,  fervile  and  unprin^ 
cipled. .    . 

The 


62  OF     NATIONAL 

The  truth  of  this  axiom  has  indeed  been  pretty  univerfally 
admitted;  but  it  has  been  affirmed  to  be  "  irapoffible  to  eftablifh  9. 

All  nations 

capable  ot       free  p-cvernment  in  certain  warm  and  effeminate  climates."     To 

Ubeit)'.  ° 

enable  us  to  judge  of  the  reafonablenefs  of  this  affirmation,  let 
us  confider  what  procefs  would  be  neceffary  in  order  to  intro- 
duce a  free  government  into  any  country. 

The  anfwer  to  this  queftion  is  to  be  found  in  the  anfwer  to 
that  other,  whether  freedom  have  any  real  and  folid  advan- 
tages over  flavery  ?  If  it  have,  then  our  mode  of  proceeding  re- 
fpe£ling  it  ought  to  be  exadly  parallel  to  that  we  Ihould  em- 
ploy in  recommending  any  other  benefit.  If  I  would  perfuade 
a  man  to  accept  a  great  eflate,  fuppoiing  that  poffeffion  to  be  a 
real  advantage ;  if  I  would  induce  him  to  fele£t  for  his  com- 
panion a  beautiful  and  accomplifhed  woman,  or  for  his  friend 
a  wife,  a  brave  and  difmterefted  man ;  if  I  would  perfuade  him 
to  prefer  eafe  to  pain,  and  gratification  to  torture,  what  more  is 
neceffary,  than  that  I  fhould  inform  his  underftanding,  and  make 
-him  fee  thefe  things  in  their  true  and  genuine  colours  ?  Should 
I  find  it  necellary  to  enquire  firll  of  what  climate  he  was  a 
.  native,  and  whether  that  were  favourable  to  the  poffeffion  of 
a  great  eftate,  a  fine  woman,  or  a  generous  friend  ? 

The  advantages  of  liberty  over  flavery  are  not  lefs  real,  though 
unfortunately  they  ai'e  lefs  palpable,  than  In  the  cafes  jull  enu- 
merated. Every  man  has  a  confufed  fenfe  of  thefe  advanta-ges, 
but  he  has  been  taught  to  believe  that  men  would  tear  each 
other  to  pieces,   if  they  had  not  priefts  to  diredt  their  con- 

fciences, 


CHARACTERS.  6^ 

fcienccs,  and  lords  to  confult  for  their  fubfiftence,  and  kinsrs  to     BOOK  i. 

^  ^  CHAP.Vir. 

(leer  them  in  fafety  through  the  inexplicable  dangers  of  the  po-   ^ . ' 

litical  ocean.  But  whether  they  be  milled  by  thefe  or  other  pre- 
judices, whatever  be  the  fancied  terror  that  induces  them  quietly 
to  fubmit  to  have  their  hands  bound  behind  them,  and  the 
fcourge  vibrated  over  their  heads,  all  thefe  are  queftions  of  rea- 
fon.  Truth  may  be  prefented  to  them  in  fuch  irrefiftible  evi- 
dence, perhaps  by  fuch  juft  degrees  familiarifed  to  their  ap- 
prehenfion,  as  ultimately  to  conquer  the  moft  obftinate  pre- 
pofTeflions.  Let  the  prefs  find  its  way  into  Perfia  or  Indoftan, 
let  the  political  truths  difcovered  by  the  bell  of  the  European 
iages  be  transfufed  into  their  language,  and  it  is  impoffible  that 
a  few  falitary  converts  ihould  not  be  made;^  It  is  the  property 
cf  truth  to  fpread  ;  and,  exclufively  of  great  national  convul- 
fions,  its  advocates  in  each  fucceeding  age  wiU  be  fomewhat 
more  numerous  than  in  that  wliich  went  before.  The  caufes, 
which  fufpend  its  progrefs,  arife,  not  from  climate,  but  from  the 
watchful  and  intolerant  jealoufy  of  defpotic  fovereigas. 

Let  us  fuppofs  then  that  the  majority  of  a  nation  by  how-   The  afllrtion 

.  iliaibattd, 

ever  flow  a  progrefs  are  convinced  of  the  defirablenefs,  or,  which 
amounts  to  the  fame,  the  pradlicability  of  freedom.  The  fup- 
pofitlon  would  be  parallel,  if  we  v/ere  to  imagine  ten  thoufand 
men  of  found  intelledl,  fh»ut  up  in  a  madhoufe,  aad  fuperintended. 
hy  a  fet  of  three  or  four  keepers.  Hitherto  they  have  been  per- 
fuadcd,  for  what  abfurdity  has  been  too  great  for  human  iiitelle{3i: 

to. 


64  OF    NATIONAL 

J^PP^yrh    t-o  entertain  ?  that  thev  were  deftitute  of  reafon,  and  that  the 

CHAP.VII.  ' 

' " '   {"uperintendence  under  which  they  were  placed  was  necefiary 

for  their  prefervation.  They  have  therefore  fubmitted  to  whfps 
and  ftraw  and  bread  and  water,  and  perhaps  imagined  this  ty- 
ranny to  be  a  blefling.  But  a  fufpicion  is  at  length  by  fome 
■means  propagated  among  them,  that  all  they  have  hitherto  en- 
dured has  been  an  impofition.  The  fufpicion  fpreads,  they  re- 
fled,  they  reafon,  the  idea  is  communicated  from  one  to  another 
through  the  chinks  of  their  cells,  and  at  certain  times  when  the 
vigilance  of  their  keepers  has  not  precluded  them  from  the  plea- 
fures  of  mutual  fociety.  It  becomes  the  clear  perception,  the  fet- 
tled perfuafion  of  the  majority  of  the  perfons  confined. 

What  will  be  the  confequence  of  this  opinion  ?  Will  the  In- 
fluence of  climate  prevent  them  from  embracing  the  obvious 
means  of  their  happinefs  ?  Is  there  any  human  underftanding 
that  will  not  perceive  a  truth  like  this,  when  forcibly  and  re- 
peatedly prefented  ?  Is  there  a  mind  that  will  conceive  no  in- 
dignation at  fo  horrible  a  tyranny  ?  In  reality  the  chains  fall  off 
of  themfelves,  when  the  magic  of  opinion  is  diffolved.  When  a 
great  majority  of  any  fociety  are  perfuaded  to  fecure  any  benefit 
to  themfelves,  there  is  no  need  of  tumult  or  violence  to  effefl  it. 
The  effort  would  be  to  refifl:  reafon,  not  to  obey  it.  The  pri- 
soners are  colledled  in  their  common  hall,  and  the  keepers  in- 
form them  that  it  is  time  to  return  to  their  cells.  They  have 
no  longer  the  power  to  obey.     They  look  at  the  impotence  of 

their 


CFIARACTERS.  '  65 

tlieir  late  maflers,  and  fmile  at  their  prefumptlon.  They  quietly     BOOK.  I. 

^            ^                    /  M         /    CHAP.VII. 
leave  the  manfion  where  they  were  hitherto  immured,  and  par-    * v — -* 

take  of  the  bleflings  of  light  and  air  like  other  men. 


Let  us  compare  this  theory  with  the  hiftory  of  mankind.     If  E^tpenence 

11  1  nri..-i..  n   favours  thefe 

the  theory  be  true,  we  may  expect  to  hnd  the  mhamtants  of  rea&uings. 
neighbouring  provinces  in  different  flates,  widely  difcriminated 
by  the  influence  of  government,  and  little  affimilated  by  refem- 
blaace  of  climate.  Thus  the  Gafcons  are  the  gayeft  people 
in  all  France ;  but  the  moment  we  pafs  the  Pyrenees,  we 
find  the  ferious  and  faturnine  charaiSter  of  the  Spaniard.  Thus 
the  Athenians  were  lively,  penetrating  and  ingenious,  but  the 
Thebans  unpolilhed,  phlegmatic  and  dull. — It  would  be  reafon- 
able  to  expe(5l  that  different  races  of  men,  intermixed  with  each 
other,  but  differently  governed,  would  afford  a  flrong  and  vifible 
contrail.  Thus  the  Turks  are  brave,  open  and  fmcere,  but  the 
modei'n  Greeks  mean,  cowardly  and  deceitful. — Wandering  tribes 
clofely  connedled  among  themfelves,  and  having  little  fympathy 
with  the  people  with  whom  they  refide,  may  be  expected  to  have 
great  fimilarity  of  manners.  Their  fituation  renders  them  con- 
fpicuous,  the  faults  of  individuals  refled  difhonour  upon  the  whole,- 
and  their  manners  will  be  particularly  fober  and  reputable,  unlefs 
they  fhould  happen  to  labour  under  fo  peculiar  an  odium  as  to 
render  all  endeavour  after  reputation  fruitlefs.  Thus  the  Armenl- 
iins  in  the  Eaft  are  as  univerfally  diftinguiflied  among  the  nations 
with  whom  they  refide,  as  the  Jews  In  Europe;  but  the  Arme- 

K  nians 


66  OFNATIONAL 

BOOK  I.     nians  are  as  much  noted  for  probity,  as  the  Tews  for  extortion. — ' 
CHAP.VII.  ^  •"  -"_ 

/^ — "-- '   What  refemblance  is  there  between  the  ancient  and  the  modern« 

Greeks,  between  the  old  Romans  and  the  prefent  inhabitants  of 
Italy,  between  the  Gauls  and  the  French  ?  Diodorus  Siculus  de- 
fcribes  the  Gauls  as  particularly  given  to  taciturnity,  and  Ariftotle 
affirms  that  they  are  the  only  warlike  nation  who  are  negligent 
of  women. 

If  on  the  contrary  climate  were  principally  concerned  in  form- 
ing the  charadlers  of  nations,  we  might  expert  to  find  heat  an  J 
cold  producing  an  extraordinary  e&Q.  upon  men,  as  they  da 
upon  plants  and  inferior  animals.  But  the  reverfe  of  this  ap- 
pears to  be  the  fa£lc  Is  it  fuppofed  that  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  fun  renders  men  gay,  fantaftlc  and  ingenious  ?  While  the 
French,  the  Greeks  and  the  Perfians  have  been  remarkable  for- 
their  gaiety,  the  Spaniards,  the  Turks  and  the  Chinefe  are  not 
lefs  diftinguifhed  by  the  ferioufnefs  of  their  deportment.  It  was 
the  opinion  of  the  ancients  that  the  northern  nations  were  in- 
capable of  civil  ifation  and  improvement ;  but  the  moderns  have 
found  that  the  Englifh  are  not  inferior  in  literary  eminence  to 
any  nation  in  the  world.  Is  it  alTerted,  that  the  northern  na- 
tions are  more  hardy  and  courageous,  and  that  conqueft  has 
ufually  travelled  from  that  to  the  oppofite  quarter  ?  It  would 
have  been  truer  to  fay  that  conqueft  is  ufually  made  by  poverty 
upon  plenty.  The  Turks,  who  from  the  deferts  of  Tai-tary  in- 
vaded the  fertile  provinces  of  the  Roman  empire,  met  the  Sara- 
cens 


CHARACTERS.  67 

cens  half  way,  who  were  advancuie;  with  fimilar  views  from  the     BOOK  I. 

.          ^                                                          CHAP.VIL 
no  lefs  dreary  deferts  of  Arabia.     In  their  extreme  perhaps  heat    '^ • ' 

and  cold  may  determine  the  charadlers  of  nations,  of  the  negroes 
for  example  on  one  fide  and  the  Laplanders  on  the  other.  Not 
but  that  in  this  very  inftance  much  may  be  afcribed  to  the 
wretchednefs  of  a  fterile  climate  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  in- 
dolence confequent  upon  a  fpontaneous  fertility  on  the  other. 
As  to  what  is  more  than  this,  the  remedy  has  not  yet  been  dif- 
covered.  Phyfical  caufes  have  already  appeared  to  be  powerful 
till  moral  ones  can  be  brought  into  operation. 

Has  It  been  alledged  that  carnivorous  nations  are  endowed 
with  the  greateft  courage  ?  The  Swedes,  whofe  nutriment  is 
meagre  and  fparing,  have  ranked  with  the  moft  diftinguifhed 
modern  nations  in  the  operations  of  war. 

It  is  ufually  flxid,  that  northern  nations  are  moll  addldted  to 
wine,  and  fouthern  to  women.  Admitting  this  obfervatlon  in  its 
full  force,  it  would  only  prove  that  climate  may  operate  upon 
the  groffer  particles  of  our  frame,  not  that  it  influences  thofe 
finer  organs  upon  which  the  operations  of  intelled;  depend.  But 
the  truth  of  the  firfl  of  thefe  remarks  may  well  be  doubted.  The 
Greeks  appear  to  have  been  fuflScIently  addldled  to  the  pleafures 
of  the  bottle.  Among  the  Perfians  no  character  was  more  co- 
veted than  that  of  a  hard  drinker.     It  is  eafy  to  obtain  any  thing 

K  2  of 


68  OF    NATIONAL 

^  BOOK  I.     of  the  negroes,  even  their  wives  and  children,  In  exchange  for 
Hquor. 


As  to  vv-omen  the  clrcumftance  may  be  accounted  for  from 
moral  caufes.  The  beat  of  the  climate  obliges  both  fexes  to  go 
half  naked.  The  animal  arrives  fooner  at  maturity  in  hot  coun- 
tries. And  both  thefe  circumftances  produce  vigilance  and  jea- 
loufy,  caufes  which  inevitably  tend  to  inflame  the  paffions  *. 

Means  of  in-        The  refult  of  thefe  reafonings  Is  of  the  utmoil  importance  to' 

troducing 

liberty .^  him  who  fpeculates  upon  principles  of  government.    It  is  of  little. 

Gonfequence  what  difcoverles  may  be  made  in  moral  and  political 
fclence,  if,  when  we  have  afcertained  moft  accurately  what  are 
the  Intelledlual  requifites  that  lead  to  wifdom  and  virtue,  a  blind  ^ 
and  capricious  principle  is  to  Intrude  Itfelf,  and  taint  all  our  con-- 
clufions.    Accordingly  there  have  been  writers  on  the  fubje£t  of 
government,  who,  .idmitting,  and  even  occafionally  declaiming 
with  enthufiafm  upon  the  advantages  of  liberty  and  the  equal 
claims  of  mankind  to  every  focial  benefit,  have  yet  concluded 
that  the  corruptions  of  defpotifm  and  the  ufurpations  of  arifto-  - 
cracy  were  congenial  to  certain  ages  and  divlfions  of  the  world,, 
and  under  proper  limitations  entitled  to  our  approbation. - 

*  The  majority  of  inftances  in  the  three  preceding  pages  are  taken  from 
Hume's  Effay  on  National  Charadlers,  where  this  fubje(5t  is  treated  with  mucli 
ability,     Effays,  Vol.  I,  Part  I,  Eflay  xxi. 

But 


CHARACTERS.  tg 

Fut  this  hypothefis  will  be  found  incapable  of  holding  out     EOOK  I. 

^^  ^  ^  CHAF.VII. 

againft  a  moment's  ferious  reflection.     Can  there  be  any  flate  of   * « ' 

mankind  that  renders  them  incapable  of  the  exercife  of  reafon  ? 
Can  there  be  a  period  in  which  it  is  neceflary  to  hold  the  human 
fpecies  in  a  condition  of  pupillage  ?  If  there  be,  it  feems  but 
reafonable  that  their  fuperintendents  and  guardians,  as  in  the  cafe 
of  infants  of  another  fort,  fhould  provide  for  the  means  of  their 
fubfiftence  without  calling  upon  them  for  the  exertions  of  manual 
induftry.  Wherever  men  are  competent  to  look  the  firft  duties 
of  humanity  in  the  face,  and  to  provide  for  their  defence  againft 
the  invafions  of  hunger  and  the  inclemencies  of  the  fky,  there 
they  will  out  of  all  doubt  be  found  equally  capable  of  every  other 
exertion  that  may  be  neceflary  to  their  fecurity  and  welfare. 
Prefent  to  them  a  conftitution  which  fhall  put  them  into  a  fimple 
and  intelligible  method  of  direding  their  own  affairs,  adjudg- 
ing their  conteflis  among  themfelves,  and  cherifhing  in  their 
bofoms  a  manly  fenfe  of  dignity,  equality  and  independence, 
and  you  need  not  doubt  that  profperity  and  virtue  will  be  the 
refult. 

The  real  enemies  of  liberty  in  any  country  are  not  the  peo- 
ple, but  thofe  higher  orders  who  profit  by  a  contrary  fyfl:em» 
Infufe  juft  views  of  foclety  into  a  certain  number  of  the  liberally 
educated  and  refledling  members ;  give  to  the  people  guides  and 
inftrudtors ;  and  the  bufmefs  is  done.  This  however  is  not  to 
be  accomplifhed  but  in  a  gradual  manner,  as  will  more  fully 
4.  appeal- 


70  OF   NATIONAL    CHARACTERS. 

r^P'^p'^vn    ^PP^^^  ^""^  ^^'^^  fequel.    The  error  lies,  not  in  tolerating  the  worft 
' V ^    forms  of  government  for  a  time,  but  in  fuppofing  a  change  im- 

pradicable,  and  not  incefiantly  looking  forward  to  its  accom- 

plifliment. 


CHAP. 


[    7^     ] 


CHAP.       VIII. 

OF  THE  OBJECTION    TO   THESE   PRINCIPLES    FROM 
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  LUXURY. 

THE  OBJECTION  STATED. — SOURCE  OF  THIS  OBJECTION. — • 
REFUTED  FROM  MUTABILITY — FROM  MORTALITY — FROM 
SYMPATHY FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  TRUTH. THE  PRO- 
BABILITY OF    PERSEVERANCE  CONSIDERED. 

THERE    Is   another  propofition   relative   to   the   fubje6I,    book  I. 
CH  W  VIII. 
which  is  lefs  to  be  confidered  as  an  aflertion  diftind  in   ^    '   ^       / 

•    1  •     n   1  '^'^^  objec- 

itfelf,  than  as  a  particular  branch  of  that  which  has  juft  been  tion  ftated. 
difculTed  ;I  mean  the  propofition  which  affirms,  "  that  nations  like 
individuals  are  fubjedt  to  the  phenomena  of  youth  and  old  age, 
and  that,  when  a  people  by  luxury  and  depravation  of  manners 
have  funk  into  decrepitude,  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  legiflation 
to  reftore  them  to  vigour  and  innocence." 

This  Idea  has  partly  been  founded  upon  the  romantic  notions  Source  of  thu 

objeftion. 

ofpaftoral  life  and  the  golden  age.  Innocence  is  not  virtue. 
Virtue  demands  the  aftive  employment  of  an  ardent  mind  in 
the  promotion  of  the  general  good.  No  man  can  be  eminently 
virtuous,  who  Is  not  accuftomed  to  an  extenfive  range  of  reflec- 
tion.    He  muft  fee  all  t^e  benefits  to  arlfe  from  a  difinterefted 

proceed- 


72  OF    THE    INFLUENCE 

BOOK  I.    proceeding,  and  muft  underftand  the  proper  method  of  producing 

* ^^ '   thofe  benefits.     Ignorance,  the  flothful  habits  and  Umited  views 

of  uncultivated  life  have  not  in  them  more  of  true  virtue,  though 
they  may  be  more  harmlefs,  than  luxury,  vanity  and  extrava- 
gance. Individuals  of  exquifite  feeling,  vv^hofe  difguft  has  been 
excited  by  the  hardened  felfifhnefs  or  the  unblufhing  corruption 
which  have  prevailed  in  their  own  times,  have  recurred  in 
imagination  to  the  forefts  of  Norway  or  the  bleak  and  uncom- 
fortable Highlands  of  Scotland  in  fearch  of  a  purer  race  of  man- 
kind. This  imagination  has  been  the  offspring  of  difappoint- 
ment,  not  the  diftate  of  reafon  and  philofophy. 

It  may  be  true,  that  ignorance  is  nearer  than  prejudice  to  the 
reception  of  wifdom,  and  that  the  abfence  of  virtue  is  a  con- 
dition more  hopeful  than  the  prefence  of  its  oppofite.  In  this 
cafe  it  would  have  been  jufter  to  compare  a  nation  funk  in 
luxury,  to  an  individual  with  confirmed  habits  of  wrong,  than 
to  an  individual  whom  a  debilitated  conftitution  was  bringing 
faft  to  the  grave.  But  neither  would  that  comparifon  have 
been  fair  and  equitable. 

Refuted  from       The  Condition  of  nations  Is  more  fludluating,  and  will  be 

mutability : 

found  lefs  obftinate  in  its  refillance  to  a  confiftent  endeavour  for 
their  improvement,  than  that  of  individuals.  In  nations  fome 
of  their  members  wall  be  lefs  confirmed  in  error  than  others. 
A  certain-  number  will  be  only  in  a  very  fmall  degree  indifpofed 

t© 


OF    LUXURY. 


73 


to  liften  to  the  voice  of  truth.     This  number  will  perpetually     BOOK  I. 

^    '^  -'    CHAP. via. 

increafe.     Every  new  convert  will  be  the  means  of  converting    * v ' 

others.  In  proportion  as  the  body  of  difciples  is  augmented,  the 
modes  of  attack  upon  the  prejudices  of  others  will  be  varied,  and 
fuited  to  the  variety  of  men's  tempers  and  prepofleflions. 

Add  to  this  that  generations  of  men  are  perpetually  going  off  frcnmi^ita- 

lity: 

the  ftage,  while  other  generations  fucceed.  The  next  gene- 
ration will  not  have  fo  many  prejudices  to  fubdue.  Suppofe  a 
defpotic  nation  by  fome  revolution  in  its  affairs  to  become  pof- 
feffed  of  a  free  conftitution.  The  children  of  the  prefent  race 
will  be  bred  in  more  firm  and  independent  habits  of  thinking ; 
the  fupplenefs,  the  timidity  and  the  vicious  dexterity  of  their 
fathers  will  give  place  to  an  ereO.  mien,  and  a  clear  and  decifive 
judgment.  The  partial  and  imperfe£l  change  of  character  which 
was  introduced  at  firft,  will  in  the  fucceeding  age  become  more 
unalloyed  and  complete. 

Laftly,  the  power  of  fecial  inftitutions  changing  the  character  from  fympa- 
of  nations  is  very  different  from  and  infinitely  greater  than  any  ^  '^ ' 
power  which  can  ordinarily  be  brought  to  bear  upon  a  folitary 
individual.  Large  bodies  of  men,  when  once  they  have  been  en- 
lightened and  perfuaded,  a£l  with  more  vigour  than  folitary  in- 
dividuals. They  animate  the  mutual  exertions  of  each  other, 
and  the  united  forces  of  example  and  fhame  urge  them  to  per- 
feverance.     The  cafe  is  not  of  that  cuftomary  fort  where  the 

L  power 


74  OF    THE    INFLUENCE 

BOOK  I.     power  of  reafon  only  is  tried  in  curing  any  perfon  of  his  errors; 

' — -*    but  is  as  if  he  fhould  be  placed  in  an  entirely  new  fituation. 

His  habits  are  broken  through,  and  his  motives  of  adion 
changed.  Inftead  of  being  perpetually  recalled  to  vicious  prac- 
tices by  the  recurrence  of  his  former  connections,  the  whole 
fociety  receives  an  impulfe  from  the  fame  caufe  that  a£ts  upon 
any  individual.  New  ideas  are  fuggefted,  and  the  furprife  of 
novelty  confpires  with  the  approbation  of  truth  to  prevent  men 
from  falling  back  into  imbecility  and  languor. 

from  tlie  na-        The  queftion  may  in  reality  be  reduced  to  an  enquiry,  whe- 

ture  of  truth. 

ther  the  human  underflanding  can  be  made  the  recipient  of 
truth,  whether  it  be  poffible  for  an  effort  fo  ftrenuous  to  exifl 
as  to  make  men  aware  of  their  true  interefts.  For  let  this  be 
granted,  and  the  confequence  is  inevitable.  It  has  already  fuf- 
ficiently  appeared,  that  whatever  is  politically  right  or  politically 
wrong,  muft  be  in  all  cafes  of  no  trivial  confequence  to  the  wel- 
fare of  mankind.  Monarchy  for  example  will  by  all  men  be 
acknowledged  to  be  attended  with  many  difadvantages.  It  a<Sts 
upon  infufhcient  and  partial  information,  it  generates  intrigue, 
corruption,  adulation  and  fervility.  If  it  could  be  proved,  that 
it  produced  no  advantages  in  equal  proportion,  and  that  its 
abolition  would  not  lead  to  mifchief,  anarchy  and  diforder,  is 
there  a  nation  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  to  whom  thefe  propofi- . 
tions  were  rendered  palpable,  that  would  endure  to  fubmit  to  it  ? 
Is  there  a  nation  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  that  would  fubmit 

7  to 


OFLUXURY.  75 

to  the  Impofitlons  of  its  adminlftration,  the  wars  It  occafions,     book  i. 

^  '  '     CHAP.VIir. 

and  the  lavifh  revenues  by  which  it  is  maintained,  if  they  knew    *^ >' — "* 

it  to  be  merely  an  excrefcence  and  a  difeafe  in  the   order  of 
fociety  ? 


But  it  has  been  farther  alledged,  that,  even  fhould  a  luxurious   The  proba- 

.  .         ,  .  .  bllityofper- 

nation   be    prompted   by  intolerable    grievances    and    notorious   feveiance 

confidered. 

ufurpation  to  afTert  the  juft  principles  of  human  fociety,  they 
would  be  unable  to  perpetuate  them,  and  would  foon  be  led 
back  by  their  evil  habits  to  their  former  vices  and  corruption : 
that  is,  they  would  be  capable  of  the  heroic  energy  that  fhould 
expel  the  ufurper,  but  not  of  the  moderate  refolution  that  fhould 
prevent  his  return.  They  would  roufe  themfelves  fo  far  from 
their  lethargy  as  to  affume  a  new  character  and  enter  into  dif-^ 
ferent  views ;  but,  after  having  for  fome  time  a£led  upon  their 
convi£lions,  they  would  fuddenly  become  incapable  of  under- 
Handing  the  truth  of  their  principles  and  feeling  their  influence. 

Men  always  a£t  upon  their  apprehenfions  of  preferablenefs. 
There  are  few  errors  of  which  they  are  guilty,  which  may  not 
be  refolved  into  a  narrow  and  inadequate  view  of  the  alternative 
prefented  for  their  choice.  Prefent  pleafure  may  appear  more 
certain  and  eligible  than  diftant  good.  But  they  never  choofe  evil 
as  apprehended  to  be  evil.  Wherever  a  clear  and  unanfwerable 
notion  of  any  fubje£t  is  prefented  to  their  view,  a  correfpondcnt 
adtion  or  courfe  of  a<!^ions  inevitably  follows.    Having  thus  gained 

L   2  one 


76  OF   THE    INFLUENCE    OF   LUXURY. 

one  ftep  in  the  acquifition  of  Jruth,  it  cannot  eafily  be  conceived 
of  as  loft.  A  body  of  men,  having  deteded  the  injurious  con- 
fequences  of  an  evil  under  which  they  have  long  laboured,  and 
having  fhaken  it  off,  will  fcarcely  voluntarily  reftore  the  mifchief 
they  have  annihilated.  Nothing  can  reconcile  them  to  the  re- 
vival of  falfhood,  which  does  not  obliterate  their  prefent  con- 
vidion  of  truth. 


AN 


77 


A  N 


ENQUIRY 


CONCERNING 

POLITICAL       JUSTICE. 

B   O   O   K       II. 

PRINCIPLES    OF    SOCIETT. 

C  H  A  P.       I. 
INTRODUCTION. 

NATURE  OF  THE  ENQUIRY — MODE  OF    PURSUING  IT. — DIS- 
TINCTION BETWEEN  SOCIETY  AND  GOVERNMENT. 

MR.  Locke  begins  his  celebrated  Treatife  of  Government    book  ii. 
.  CHAP   I 

with  a  refutation  of  the  patriarchal  fcheme  of  fir  Robert    ».       ^  '   'j 

Filmer  ;  and,  having  thus  cleared  his  ground,  proceeds  to  obferve,  enquiry. 
that  "  he,  that  will  not  give  juft  occafion  to  think  that  all  go- 
vernment in  the  world  is  the  produsfl  only  of  force  and  violence, 
and  that  men  live  together  by  no  other  rules  but  that  of  beafts, 

muft 


7S  .     PRINCIPLES 

BOOKir.    niuft  of  neceflity  find   out   another  rife   of  government,   and 

CHAP.  I.  -^  &  » 

^^ "— ^    another  original  of  political  power  *."    Accordingly  he  proceeds 

through  the  greater  part  of  his  treatife  to  reafon  abftradedly 
•upon  the  probable  hiftory  of  the  early  ages  of  mankind,  and 
concludes  that  no  legitimate  government  could  be  built  upon 
Any  other  foundation  than  that  of  an  original  contract. 

^  It  is  to  be  fufpeded  that  this  great  man,  friend  as  he  was  to 
the  liberty  and  the  interefts  of  mankind,  intrepid  and  fagacious 
in  his  fearch  after  truth,  has  been  guilty  of  an  overfight  in  the 
firft  flep  of  the  inveftigation. 

Mode  of  pur-        There  are  two  modes,  according  to  which  we  may  enquire 

.fuingit.  JO  J  n. 

into  the  origin  of  fociety  and  government.  We  may  either 
examine  them  hiftorically,  that  is,  confider  in  what  manner  they 
-have  or  ought  to  have  begun,  as  Mr.  Locke  has  done ;  or  we 
may  examine  them  philofophically,  that  is,  confider  the  moral 
principles  upon  which  they  depend.  The  firft  of  thefe  fubjeds 
is  not  without  its  ufe ;  but  the  fecond  is  of  a  higher  order  and 
more  efl'ential  importance.  The  firft  is  a  queftion  of  form  ;  the 
fecond  of  fubftance.  It  would  be  of  trivial  confequence  pradli- 
cally  confidered,  from  what  fource  any  form  of  fociety  flowed, 
and  by  what  mode  its  principles  v^rere  fanSioned,  could  we  be 
always  fecure  of  their  conformity  to  the  dictates  of  truth  and 
juftice. 

-*  Book  II.  Chap.  i.  §  i. 

It 


OF     SOCIETY. 

It  Is  farther  rieceflary  before  we  enter  upon  the  fubjed  care- 
fully to  diftinguifh  between  fociety  and  government.  Men  af- 
fociated  at  firft  for  the  fake  of  mutual  affiftance.  1  hey  did  not 
forefee  that  any  reftraint  would  be  necefTary,  to  regulate  the  con- 
dudl  of  individual  members  of  the  fociety,  tovvards  each  other, 
or  towards  the  whole.  The  neceffity  of  reftraint  grew  out  of  the 
errors  and  perverfenefs  of  a  few.  An  acute  writer  has  expreffed 
this  idea  with  peculiar  felicity.  "  Society  and  government,"  fays 
he,  "  are  different  in  themfelves,  and  have  different  origins. 
Society  is  produced  by  our  wants,  and  government  by  our  wick- 
ednefs.  Society  is  in  every  ftate  a  bleffing  ;  government  even 
In  its  beft  ftate  but  a  necefTary  evil  *." 

*  Common  Senfe,  p.  i. 


79 


€  H  A  F,'. 


[      &0     ] 


C.H  A  p.       II. 
OF      JUSTICE. 

eONNECTION  OF  POLITICS  AND  MORALS. — EXTENT  AND 
MEANING  OF  JUSTICE. SUBJECT  OF  JUSTICE  :  MAN- 
KIND.  ITS  DISTRIBUTION  MEASURED  BY  THE  CAPACITY 

OF  ITS  SUBJECT BY  HIS  USEFULNESS. — FAMILY  AFFEC- 
TION CONSIDERED. GRATITUDE  CONSIDERED. — OBJEC- 
TIONS :  FROM  IGNORANCE  —  FROM  UTILITY. AN  EX- 
CEPTION STATED. DEGREES  OF  JUSTICE. APPLICA- 
TION.— IDEA    OF    POLITICAL    JUSTICE. 

'ROM  what  has  been  faid  It  appears,  that  the  fubje£t   of 
the  prefent   enquiry  is  ftridtly  Ipeaking  a  department  of 
ofpoliticsand   ^j^g  fcience  of  morals.     MoraUty  is  the  fource  from  which  its 

morals,  ^ 

fundamental   axioms   muft  be  drawn,  and   they  will   be   made 
fomewhat  clearer  in  the  prefent  inftance,  if  we  aflume  the  term 

IB 

juftice  as  a  general  appellation  for  all  moral  duty. 
Extent  and  That  this  appellation  is  fufficiently  expreffive  of  the  fubje£l 

meaning  of 

juftice.  will  appear,  if  we  confider  for  a  moment  mercy,  gratitude,  tem- 

perance, or  any  of  thofe  duties  which  in  loofer  fpeaking  are  con- 
tradiftinguifhed  from  juftice.    Why  fhould  I  pardon  this  criminal, 
2  remunerate 


OF    JUSTICE.  8i 

remunerate  tliis   favour,  abflain  from  this   indulgence  ?     If  it    ^-9?^ }]' 

partake  of  the  nature  of  morality,   it  muil   be  either  right   or    '       ^^ ^ 

wrong,  juil  or  unjuft.  It  mufl:  tend  to  the  benefit  of  the  in- 
dividual, either  without  intrenching  upon,  or  with  adual  advan- 
tage to  the  mafs  of  individuals.  Either  way  it  benefits  the  whole, 
becaufe  individuals  arc  parts  of  the  whole.  Therefore  to  do  it 
is  juft,  and  to  forbear  it  is  unjuft.  If  juftice  have  any  meaning, 
it  is  juft  that  I  fhould  contribute  every  thing  in  my  power  to  the 
benefit  of  the  whole. 


Confiderable  light  will  probably  be  thrown  upon  our  invefti-  Subjeft  of 

ji'.flfce  :  man- 

gation,  if,  quitting  for  the  prefent  the  political  view,  we  examine  '^'"d. 
juftice  merely  as  it  exifts  among  individuals.  Juftice  is  a  rule  of 
condu£l  originating  in  the  connedlion  of  one  percipient  being 
with  another.  A  comprehenfive  maxim  which  has  been  laid 
down  upon  the  fubjed  is,  "  that  we  fhould  love  our  neighbour 
as  ourfelves."  But  this  maxim,  though  poflefling  confiderable 
merit  as  a  popular  principle,  is  not  modelled  with  the  ftridncfs 
of  philofophical  accuracy. 

In  a  loofe  and  general  view  I  and  my  neighbour  are  both  of  ^}^  dlftribu* 

tion  mea- 

us  men  3  and  of  confequence  entitled  to  equal  attention.     But  in  f"rcd  by  the 

capacity  of 

reality  it  is  probable  that  one  of  us  is  a  being  of  more  worth  "sfubjta; 
and  importance  than  the  other.     A  man  is  of  more  worth  than 
a  beaft ;  becaufe,  being  pofTeffed  of  higher  faculties,  he  is  capable 
of  a  more  refined  and  genuine  happinefs.     In  th-e  fame  manner 

M  the 


82  OF     JUSTICE. 

BOOK  IT,    the  illuftriotis  archbifhop  of  Cambray  was  of  more  worth  thaia- 
CHAP.  II.  -^  ' 

'^ . '   his  chambermaid,   and  thei"e  are  few  of  us   that  would  hefitate, 

to  pronounce,  if  his  palace  were  in  flames,  and  the  life  of  only 
one  of  them  could  be  preferved,  which  of  the  two  ought  to  be 
preferred. 

by  Ills  ufeful-  g^jj-  t^e^g  jg  another  ground  of  preference,  befide  the  private- 
coniideration  of  one  of  them  being  farther  removed  from  the 
flate  of  a  mere  animal.  We  are  not  connected  with  one  or  two^ 
percipient  beings,  but  with  a  fociety,  a  nation,  and  in  fome 
fenfe  v,^ith  the  whole  family  of  mankind.  Of  confequeiice  that 
life  ought  to  be  preferred  which  will  be  moft  conducive  to  the. 
general  good.  In  faving  the  life  of  Fenelon,  fuppofe  at  the  mo- 
ment when  he  was  conceiving  the  projedl  of  his  immortal  Te- 
lemachus,  I  fhould  be  promoting  the  benefit  of  thoufands,  who 
have  been  cured  by  the  perufal  of  it  of  fome  error,  vice  and  con- 
fequent  unhappinefs.  Nay,  my  benefit  would  extend  farther 
than  this,  for  every  individual  thus  cured  has  become  a  better 
member  of  fociety,  and  has  contributed  in  his  turn  to  the  hap- 
pinefs,  the  infonnation  and  improvement  of  others. 

Suppoiing  I  had  been  myfelf  the  chambermaid,  I  ought  to. 
have  chofen  to  die,  rather  than  that  Fenelon  fhould  have  died,. 
The  life  of  Fenelon  was  really  preferable  to  that  of  the  chamber- 
maid. But  underftanding  is  the  faculty  that  perceives  the  truth, 
of  this  and  fimilar  propofitions  j  and  juftice  is  the  principle  that 
1  regulates 


OF    JUSTICE.  §3 

reeulates  my  condufl  accordinp;ly.     It  would  have  been  jufl:  in  BOOK  IT. 

,  CHAP.  II. 

the  chambermaid  to   have  preferred  the  archbifhop   to  herfelf.    ^- — ^ ^ 

To  have  done  otherwife  would  have  been  a  breach  of  jufticc. 


Suppofing  the  chambermaid  had  been  my  wife,  my  mother    ramiif  afT^rc- 

tion  conii- 

or  my  benefadlor.  This  would  not  alter  the  truth  of  the  pro-  deicd. 
pofition.  The  life  of  Fenelon  would  ftill  be  more  valuable  than 
that  of  the  chambermaid  ;  and  juftice,  pure,  unadulterated  juftice, 
would  ftill  have  preferred  that  which  was  moft  valuable.  Juftice 
would  have  taught  me  to  fave  the  life  of  Fenelon  at  the  expence 
of  the  other.  What  magic  is  there  in  the  pronoun  "  my,"  to 
overturn  the  decifions  of  everlafting  truth  ?  My  wife  or  my 
mother  may  be  a  fool  or  a  proftitute,  malicious,  lying  or  dllhoneft. 
If  they  be,  of  what  confequence  is  it  that  they  are  mine  ? 

"  But  my  mother  endured  for  me  the  pains  of  child  bearings   Gratkuae 

confidered. 

and  nouriihed  me  in  the  helpleffhefs  of  infancy."  When  flie  firft 
fubjedled  herfelf  to  the  neceffity  of  thefe  cares,  ftie  was  probably 
influenced  by  no  particular  motives  of  benevolence  to  her  future 
■offspring.  Every  voluntary  benefit  however  entitles  the  beftower 
to  fome  kindnefs  and  retribution.  But  why  fo  ?  Becaufe  a 
voluntary  benefit  is  an  evidence  of  benevolent  intention,  that  is, 
of  virtue.  It  is  the  difpofition  of  the  mind,  not  the  external 
adion,  that  entitles  to  refpedt.  But  the  merit  of  this  difpofition 
is  equal,  whether  the  benefit  was  conferred  upon  me  or  upon 
another,     I  and  another  man  cannot  both  be  right  in  preferring 

•M  2  .  our 


O  F    J  U  S  T  I  C  E. 

our  own  individual  benefador,  for  no  man  can  be  at  the  fame 
time  both  better  and  worfe  than  his  neighbour.  My  benefactor 
ought  to  be  efleemed,  not  becaufe  he  bellowed  a  benefit  upoa 
me,  but  becaufe  he  beftowed  it  upon  a  human  being.  His  de- 
fert  will  be  in  exadt  proportion  to  the  degree,  in  which  that 
human  being  was  worthy  of  the  diftindlion  conferred.  Thus. 
every  view  of  the  fubjedl  brings  us  back  to  the  confideration  of  my- 
neighbour's  moral  worth  and  his,  importajice  to  the  general  weal^ 
as  the  only  ftandard  to  datermine  the  treatmentto  which  he  i& 
entitled.  Gratitude  therefore,  a  principle  which  has  fo  often  beea 
the  theme  of  the  moralift  and  the  poet,  is  no  part  either  of  juftice. 
©r  virtue..  By  gratitude  I  underftand  a  fentiment,  which  would, 
lead  me  to  prefer  one  m.an  to  another,  from  fome  other  con* 
fideration  than , that  of  his  fuperior  ufefulnefs  ox  worth:  that  is, 
which  would  make  fomething  true  to  me  (for  example  this  pre-- 
ferablenefs),  which  cannot  be,  true  to  another  man,  and  is  not: 
true  in  itfelf  *.. 

Objeftions:         It  may  be  obje<Sed,  "  that  my  relation,  my  companion,  or  my- 

benefadlpr  will  of  cpurfe  in  many  inftances  obtain  an  uncommon  ■■ 
fromlgno-      portion  of  my  regard:  for,  not  being  univerfally  capable  of  dif- 

criminatifig  the  comparative  worth  of  different  men,  I  Ihall  in-. 

eyitably  judge  moll  favourably  of  him,  of  whofe  virtues  I  have. 

received,  the  moft  unqueftionable  proofs ;  and  thus  fhall  be  coni- 

*  This -argument -refpefting  gratitude  is  flated  with  great  clearnefs  in  anEflay* 
sm  the  Nature  of  True  Virtue,  by  the  Rev.  Jonathan  Edwards.    lamo.  Dilly.  . 

6  pelled 


Tapce 


OF    JUSTICE  85 

pelled  to  prefer  the  man  of  moral  worth  whom  I  know,  to    COOK  11. 

^  ^  '  CHAP.  II. 

another  who  may  pofTefs,  unknown  to  me,  an  effential  fupe-    * — -' 

liority." 

This  compulfiott  however  is  founded  only  in  the  prefent  im* 
perfedtion  of  human  nature.  It  may  ferve  as  an  apology  for 
my  error,  but  can  never  turn  error  into  truth.  It  will  always 
remain  contrary  to  the  ftridt  and  inflexible  decifions  of  juftice. 
The  difficulty  of  conceiving  this  is  owing  merely  to  our  con- 
founding the  difpofition  from  which  an  adion  is  chofen,  with 
the  adlion  itfelf.  The  difpolltion,  that  would  prefer  virtue  to 
vice  and  a  greater  degree  of  virtue  to  a  lefs,  is  undoubtedly  a 
fubje<3:  of  approbation  ;  the  erroneous  exercife  of  this  difpofition 
by  which  a  wrong  objedl  is  feleited,  if  unavoidable,  is  to  be  de- 
plored, but  can  by  no  colouring  and  under  no  denomination  be 
converted  into  right*.. 

It  may  in  the  fecond  place  be  objeded,  "  that  a  mutual  from  utility, . 
commerce  of  benefits  tends  to  increafe  the  mafs  of  benevolent 
action,  and  that  to  increafe  the  mafs  of  benevolent  adion  is  to 
contribute  to  the  general  good."  Indeed  !  Is  the  general  good 
promoted^  by  flUfhood,  by  treating  a  man  of  one  degree  of  worth, 
as  if  he  had  ten  times  that  worth  ?  or  as  if  he  were  in  any  de- 
gree different  from  what  he  really  is  ?  Would  not  the  moft 
beneficial  confequences  refult  from  a  different  plan;  from  my 

*  See  this  fubjeft  more  copioufly  treated  in  the  following  chapter. 

conftantly,' 


86  ^  -OFJUSTICE. 

BOOK  IT.     conftantly  and  carefully  enquiring  into  the  deferts  of  all  tliofe 

' ^ '    with  whom  I  am  connefted,  and  from  their  being  fure,  after  a 

certain  allowance  for  the  fallibility  of  human  judgment,  of  being 
•treated  by  me  exadlly  as  they  deferved  ?  Who  can  tell  what 
would  be  the  effefts  of  fuch  a  plan  of  condud  univerfally 
adopted .? 

An  exception       There  feems  to  be  moretruth  in  the  argument,  derived  chiefly 

ibted. 

from  the  unequal  diftribution  of  property,  in  favour  of  my  pro- 
viding in  ordinary  cafes  for  my  wife  and  children,  my  brothers 
and  relations,  before  I  provide  for  ftrangers.  As  long  as  pro- 
ividing  for  individuals  belongs  to  individuals,  it  feems  as  if  there 
muft  be  a  certain  diftribution  of  the  clafs  needing  fuperintendence 
;and  fupply  among  the  clafs  affording  it,  that  each  man  may 
have  his  claim  and  refource.  But  this  argument,  if  admitted  at 
all,  is  to  be  admitted  with  great  caution.  It  belongs  only  to  or- 
idinary  cSfes ;  and  cafes  of  a  higher  order  or  a  more  urgent 
meceflity  will  perpetually  occur,  in  competition  with  which  thefe 
•will  be  altogether  impotent.  We  muft  be  feverely  fcrupulous  in 
meafuring  out  the  quantity  of  fupply;  and,  with  refped  to 
money  in  particular,  muft  remember  how  little  is  yet  underftood 
-of  the  true  mode  of  employing  it  for  the  public  benefit. 

©egrees  of  Having  confidercd  the  perfons  with  v/hom  juftice  is  conver- 

•jjuilice. 

fant,  let  us  next  enquire  into  the  degree  in  which  we  are  obliged 
to  confult  the  good  of  others.     And  here  I  fay,  that  it  is  juft 

that 


OFJUS'^ICE.  ^j 

thaX  I  iliould  do  all  the  good  in  my  power.     Does  any  perfon    E<^OK  ir. 

in  diftrefs  apply  to  me  foi-  relief?     It   is  my  duty  to  grant  it,    '" ' 

and  I  commit  a  breach  of  duty  in  refufing.  If  this  principle  be 
not  of  univerfal  application,  it  is  becaufe,  in  conferring  a  benefit 
upon  an  individual,  I  may  in  fome  inftances  infli(Sl  an  injury 
of  fuperior  magnitude  upon  myfelf  or  fociety.  Now  the  fame 
juftice,  that  binds  me  to  any  individual  of  my  fellow  men,  binds 
me  to  the  whole.  If,  while  I  confer  a  benefit  upon  one  man,  it 
appear,  in  ftriking  an  equitable  balance,  that  I  am  injuring  the 
whole,  my  adlion  ceafes  to  be  right  and  becomes  abfolutely 
wrong.  But  how  much  am  I  bound  to  do  for  the  general  weal, 
that  is,  for  the  benefit  of  the  individuals  of  whom  the  whole  is 
compofed  ?  Every  thing  in  my  power.  What  to  the  negledl  of 
the  means  of  my  own  exiftence  ?  No  ;  for  I  am  myfelf  a  part 
of  the  Avhole.  Befide,  it  will  rarely  happen  but  that  the  pi-o- 
jedl  of  doing  for  others  every  thing  in  my  power,  will  demand 
for  its  execution  the  prefervation  of  my  own  exiftence  ;  or  in 
other  words,  it  will  rarely  happen  but  that  I  can  do  more  good 
in  twenty  years  than  in  one.  If  the  extraordinary  cafe  fhould 
occur  in  which  I  can  promote  the  general  good  by  my  death, 
more  than  by  my  life,  juftice  requires  that  I  fhould  be  content 
to  die.  In  all  other  cafes,  it  is  juft  that  I  fhould  be  careful  to- 
maintain  my  body  and  my  mind  in  the  utmoft  vigour,  and  irt 
the  beft  condition  for  fervice  *. 

■   *  Vide  Appendix  to  this  chapter,  No.  I. 

I  will 


OF    JUSTICE. 

1  will  fuppofe  for  example  that  it  is  right  for  one  man  to 
.poffefs  a  greater  portion  of  property  than  another,  either  as  the 
'fruit  of  his  iaduftry,  or  the  inheritance  of  his  anceftors.  Juftice 
•obliges  him  to  regard  this  property  as  a  truft,  and  calls  upon 
him  maturely  to  confider  in  what  manner  it  may  beft  be  em- 
ployed for  the  increafe  of  liberty,  knowledge  and  virtue.  He 
has  no  right  to  difpofe  of  a  (lulling  of  it  at  the  will  of  his  caprice. 
So  far  from  being  entitled  to  well  earned  applaufe  for  having 
employed  fome  fcanty  pittance  in  the  fervice  of  philanthropy, 
he  is  in  the  eye  of  juftice  a  delinquent  if  he  withhold  any  portion 
from  that  fervice.  Nothing  can  be  more  incontrovertible.  Could 
that  portion  have  been  better  or  more  worthily  employed  ?  That 
it  could  is  implied  in  the  very  terms  of  the  proportion.  Then  it 
was  juft  it  fhould  have  been  fo  employed. — In  the  fame  manner 
as  my  property,  I  hold  my  perfon  as  a  truft  in  behalf  of  man- 
kind.  I  am  bound  to  employ  my  talents,  my  underftanding,  my 
ftrength  and  my  time  for  the  produdion  of  the  greateft  quantity 
of  general  good.  Such  are  the  declarations  of  juftice,  fo  great 
is  the  extent  of  my  duty. 

But  juftice  is  reciprocal.  If  it  be  juft  that  I  fhould  confer  a 
benefit,  it  is  juft  that  another  man.  fhould  receive  it,  and,  if  I 
withhold  from  him  that  to  which  he  is  entitled,  he  may  juftly 
complain.  My  neighbour  is  in  want  of  ten  pounds  that  I  can 
fpare.  There  is  no  law  of  political  inftitution  that  has  been  made 
to  reach  this  cafe,  and  to  transfer  this  property  from  me  to  him. 

But 


OF    JUSTICE.  89 

Cut  in  the  eye  of  fimple  juftice,  unlefs  it  can  be  fhewn  that  the    BOOK  II. 

CHAP.  II. 
money  can  be  more  beneficently  employed,  his  claim  is  as  com-   ^ ^^ ' 

plete,  as  if  he  had  my  bond  in  his  pofleflion,  or  had  fupplied 

me  with  goods  to  the  amount  *. 

To  this  it  has  fometimes  been  anfwered,  "  that  there  is  more 
than  one  perfon,  that  ftands  in  need  of  the  money  I  have  to 
fpare,  and  of  confequence  I  rauft  be  at  liberty  to  beftow  it  as  I 
pleafe."  I  anfwer,  if  only  one  perfon  offer  himfelf  to  my  know- 
ledge or  fearch,  to  me  there  is  but  one.  Thofe  others  that  I  cannot 
find  belong  to  ether  rich  men  to  aflift  (rich  men,  I  fay,  for  every  ■ 
man  is  rich,  who  has  more  money  than  his  juft  occafions  de- 
mand), and  not  to  me.  If  more  than  one  perfon  offer,  I  am 
obliged  to  balance  their  fitnefs,  and  condu£l  myfelf  accordingly. 
It  is  fcarcely  poffible  to  happen  that  two  men  fhall  be  of  exactly 
equal  fitnefs,  or  that  I  fhall  be  equally  certain  of  the  fitnefs  of 
the  one  as  of  the  other.  * 

It  is  therefore  impoffible  for  me  to '  confer  upon  any  man  a 
favour,  I  can  only  do  him  a  right.  Whatever  deviates  from  the 
law  of  juflice,  even  I  will  fuppofe  in  the  too  much  done  in 
favour  of  fome  individual  or  fome  part  of  the  general  whole,  is 
fo  much  fubtraded  from  the  general  flock,  is  fo  much  of  abfolute 
injuflice. 

*  A  fphited  outline  of  thefe  principles  is  flcetched  in  Swift's  Sermon  on 
Mutual  Subjection. 

N  The 


90  OFJUSTICE. 

PHA  p  tt'  The  inference  moft  clearly  afforded  by  the  preceding  reafon- 
V  prT"^  '^^b^i  is  the  competence  of  juftice  as  a  principle  of  deduftion  in  all 
cafes  of  moral  enquiry.  The  reafonings  themfelves  are  rather  of 
the  nature  of  illuftration  and  example,  and  any  error  that  may 
be  imputed  to  them  in  particulars,  will  not  invalidate  the  general 
conclufion,  the  propriety  of  applying  moral  juftice  as  a  criterion 
in  the  inveftigation  of  political  truth. 

Idea  of  poll-        Society  is  nothing  more  than  an  aggregation  of  individuals. 

tical  juilice. 

Its  claims  and  its  duties  muft  be  the  aggregate  of  their  claims 
and  duties,  the  one  no  more  precarious  and  arbitrary  than 
the  other.  What  has  the  fociety  a  right  to  require  from  me  ? 
The  queftion  is  already  anfwered :  every  thing  that  it  is  my 
duty  to  do.  Any  thing  more  ?  Certainly  not.  Can  they  change 
eternal  truth,  or  fubvert  the  nature  of  men  and  their  adions  ^ 
Can  they  make  it  my  duty  to  commit  intemperance,  to  maltreat 
or  affaflinate  my  neighbour  ? — Again.  What  is  it  that  the  fociety 
is  bound  to  do  for  its  members  ?  Every  thing  that  can  contri- 
bute to  their  welfare.  But  the  nature  of  their  welfare  is  defined 
by  the  nature  of  mind.  That  will  moft  contribute  to  it,  which 
enlarges  the  underftanding,  fupplies  incitements  to  virtue,  fills  us 
with  a  generous  confcioufnefs  of  our  independence,  and  carefully 
removes  whatever  can  impede  our  exertions. 

Should  it  be  affirmed,  "  that  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  any  po- 
litical fyftem  to  fecure  to  us  thefe  advantages,"  the  conclufion  I 

am 


OF    JUSTICE.  9, 

am  drawing  will  ftlll  be  incontrovertible.    It  is  bound  to  contribute    ^^OK  ir. 

^    \     ^  CHAP.  II. 

every  thing  it  is  able  to  thefe  purpofes,  and  no  man  was  ever    *^ ■^ ' 

yet  found  hardy  enough  to  affirm  that  it  could  do  nothing. 
Suppofe  its  influence  in  the  utmoft  degree  limited,  there  muft  be 
one  method  approaching  nearer  than  any  other  to  the  defired 
objed,  and  that  method  ought  to  be  univerfally  adopted.  There 
is  one  thing  that  political  inftitutions  can  alTuredly  do,  they  can 
avoid  pofitively  counterafting  the  true  interefts  of  their  fubjeds. 
But  all  capricious  rules  and  arbitrary  diftindions  do  pofitively 
counteradt  them.  There  is  fcarcely  any  modification  of  fociety 
but  has  in  it  fome  degree  of  moral  tendency.  So  far  as  it  pro- 
duces neither  mifchief  nor  benefit,  it  is  good  for  nothing.  So  far 
as  it  tends  to  the  improvement  of  the  community,  it  ought  to  be 
univerfally  adopted. 


N  2  APPENDIX, 


92 


OF     SUICIDE. 


A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X,     No.  I.    p.  37. 
OF       SUICIDE. 

MOTIVES   OF  SUICIDE  :    I.  ESCAPE   FROM  PAIN. — 2.  BENEVO- 
LENCE.  MARTYRDOM    CONSIDERED. 

BOOK  II.     T^HIS  reafonine;  will  explain  to  -us  the  long  difputed  cafe 

CHAP.  II.         I  . 

* V ^       -*-     of  fuicide.     "  Have  I  a  right  under  any  circumftances 

Appendix. 

Motivts  of      to  deftroy  myfelf  in  order  to  efcape  from  pain  or  difgrace  ?' 

filicide. 

I.  Efcape  Probably  not.  It  is  perhaps  impoflible  to  imagi.ne  a  fituation, 
that  fhall  exclude  the  poflibility  of  future  life,  vigour  and  ufeful- 
nefs.  The  motive  alligned  for  efcape  is  eminently  trivial,  to 
avoid  pain,  which  is  a  fmall  inconvenience ;  or  difgrace,  which  is 
an  imaginary  evil.  The  example  of  fortitude  in  enduring  them, 
if  there  were  no  other  coniideration,  would  probably  afford  a 
better  motive  for  continuing  to  live. 


2.  Benevo- 
lence. 


"  Is  there  then  no  cafe  in  which  fuicide  is  a  virtue  ?"  What  fhall 
we  think  of  the  reafoning  of  Lycurgus,  who,  when  he  deter- 
mined upon  a  voluntary  death,  remarked, "  that  all  the  faculties  a 
rational  being  poffeffed  were  capable  of  a  moral  ufe,  and  that, 
after  having  fpent  his  life  in  the  fervice  of  his  country,  a  man 
ought,  if  poffible,  to  render  his  death  a  fource  of  additional 
benefit  ?"  This  was  the  motive  of  the  fuicide  of  Codrus,  Leonidas 
and  Decius.  If  the  fame  motive  prevailed  in  the  much  admired 
7  '  fuicide 


O  F     S  U  I  C  I  D  E,  93 

fuicide  of  Cato,  if  he  were  inftigated  by  reafons  purely  benevo-    BOOK  n. 
lent,   it  is  impoilible  not  to   applaud  his  intention,  even  if  he    ^ ^ 

'  ^  ^^  '  .  ArrtNDix. 

were  miftaken  in  the  application. 

The  difficulty  is  to  decide  in  any  inftance  whether  the  re- 
courfe  to  a  voluntary  death  can  overbalance  the  ufefulnefs  i  may 
exert  in  twenty  or  thirty  years  of  additional  life.  But  furely  it 
would  be  precipitate  to  decide  that  there  is  no  fuch  inftance. 
There  is  a  proverb  which  affirms,  "  that  the  blood  of  the  martyrs 
is  the  feed  of  the  church."  It  is  commonly  fuppofed  that  Junius 
Brutus  did  right  in  putting  his  fons  to  death  in  the  firft  year  of 
the  Roman  republic,  and  that  this  adion  contributed  more  than 
any  other  caufe,  to  generate  that  energy  and  virtue  for  which 
his  counfry  was  afterwards  fo  eminently  diftinguifhed.  The  death 
of  Cato  produced  an  effedl  fomewhat  fmiilar  to  this.  It  was 
dwelt  on  with  admiration  by  all  the  lovers  of  virtue  under  the 
fubfequent  tyrants  of  Rome.  It  feemed  to  be  the  ramp  from 
which  they  caught  the  facred  flame.  Who  can  tell  how  much  it 
has  contributed  to  revive  that  flame  in  after  ages,  when  it  feemed 
to  have  been  fo  long  extinit  ? 


Let  it  be  obferved  that  all  martyrs  [iu(.ap%p;i]  are  fuicides  by  the  Martyrdorr 
very  fignification  of  the  term.  They  diefor  a  teftimony  [^apWs  ]; 
that   is,  they  have   a  motive   for   dying.     But   motives    refpedl 
only  our  own  voluntary  adls,  not  the  violence  put  upon  us  by 
another. 

APPENDIX, 


OF    DUELLING. 

APPENDIX,      No.  IL        ' 
OF    DUELLING. 

MOTIVES  OF  duelling:  I.  REVENGE. — 2.  REPUTATION  FOR 
COURAGE. FALLACY  OF  THIS  MOTIVE. — OBJECTION  AN- 
SWERED.  ILLUSTRATION. 

JC»0KII.     T'p  jji^y  \yQ  proper  in  this  place  to  beftow  a  moment's  confi- 


I 


CHAP.  II. 

deration  upon  the  trite,  but  very  important  cafe  of  duelling;. 

Appendix.  ^  ^  J  r  t» 

Motives  of      ^  very  fhort  reliedion  will  fufEce  to  fet  it  in  its  true  lieht. 

duelling.  '  ° 

I.  Revenge.  This  deteftable  pradlice  was  originally  invented  by  barbarians 
for  the  gratification  of  revenge.  It-  was  probably  at  that  time 
thought  a  very  happy  projedt  for  reconciling  the  odioufnefs  of 
mallgnil|Pwith  the  gallantry  of  courage. 

2.Reputat'on        gm  [^  tj^jg  [irrht  it  is  now  generally  given  up.     Men  of  the 

for  courage.  °  o  /    <->  a 

beft  underftanding  who  lend  it  their  fan£tion,  are  unwillingly 
induced  to  do  fo,  and  engage  in  fingle  combat  merely  that  their 
reputation  may  fuftain  no  flander. 

Fallacy  of  Which  of  thefe  two  actions  is  the  trueft  teft  of  courage  :  the 

this  motive. 

engaging  in  a  practice  which  our  judgment  difapproves,  becaufe 
we  cannot  fubmit  to  the  confequences  of  following  that  judg- 
ment ;  or  the  doing  what  we  believe  to  be  right,  and  chearfully 

encoun- 


O  F     D  U  E  L  L,  I  N  G.  95 

encountering  all  the  confequences  that  may  be  annexed  to  the    ^^^p  11" 

nradice  of  virtue  ?     With  what  patience  can  a  man  of  virtue    "-; — » ' 

think  of  cutting  off  the  life  of  a  fellov^r  mortal,  or  of  putting  an 
abrupt  clofe  to  all  the  generous  projedls  he  may  himfelf  conceive 
for  the  beneht  of  others,  merely  becaufe  he  has  not  firmnefs 
enough  to  awe  impertinence  and  falfhood  into  filence  ? 

"  But  the  refufing  a  duel  is  an  ambiguous  adion.     Cowards    Obj^aion. 
may  pretend  principle  to  fhelter  themfelves  from  a  danger  they 
dare  not  meet." 

This  is  partly  true  and  partly  falfe.     There  are  few  adions    Anfwered. 
indeed  that  are  not  ambiguous,  or  that  with  the  fame  general 
outline  may  not  proceed  from  different  motives.     But  the  man- 
ner of  doing  them  will  fufficiently  fhew  the  principle  from  which 
they  fpring. 

He,  that  would  break  through  an  unlverfally  received  cuftom  IlIuflratloB. 
becaufe  he  believes  it  to  be  wrong,  muft  no  doubt  arm  himfelf 
with  fortitude.  The  point  in  which  we  chiefly  fliil,  is  in  not 
accurately  underftanding  our  own  intentions,  and  taking  care 
beforehand  to  free  ourfelves  from  any  alloy  of  weaknefs  and 
error.  He,  who  comes  forward  with  no  other  idea  in  his  mind 
but  that  of  rectitude,  and  who  expreffes,  with  the  funplicity  and 
firmnefs  which  full  convidtion  never  fails  to  infpire,  the  views  with 
which  he  is  imprefled,  is  in  no  danger  of  being  miflaken  for  a 
3  coward. 


96  OF    DUELLING. 

rS  AP  u'    coward.     If  he  hefitate,  it  is  becaufe  he  has  not  an  idea  perfedlly 
^T — ^' '    clear  of  the  fentiment  he  intends  to  convey.     If  he  be  in  any 

Appendix.  '  ' 

degree  embarrafled,  it  is  becaufe  he  has  not  a  feeling  fufficlently 
generous  and  intrepid  of  the  guilt  of  the  action  in  which  he  is 
preffed  to  engage. 

If  there  be  any  meaning  in  courage,  its  firfl;  ingredient  muflbe 
the  daring  to  fpeak  the  truth  at  all  times,  to  all  perfons,  and  in  every 
ppffible  fituation.  What  is  it  but  the  want  of  courage  that  fliould 
prevent  me  from  faying,  "  Sir,  I  ought  to  refufe  your  challenge. 
What  I  ought  to  do,  that  I  dare  do.  Have  I  injured  you  ?  I 
will  readily  and  v/ithout  coffipulfion  repair  my  injuftice  to  the 
uttermoft  mite.  .Have  you  mifconftrued  me  ?  State  to  me  the 
particulars,  and  doubt  not  that  what  is  true  I  Mall  make  appear 
to  be  true.  Thus  far  I  will  go.  But,  though  I  fhould  be  branded 
for  a  coward  by  all  mankind,  I  will  not  repair  to  a  fcene  of  de- 
liberate i#urder.  I  will  not  do  an  a£t  that  I  know  to  be  flagitious. 
I  will  exercife  my  judgment  upon  every  proportion  that  comes 
before  me  ;  the  dictates  of  that  judgment  I  will  fpeak ;  and  upon 
them  I  will  form  my  condud."  He  that  holds  this  language 
wuth  a  countenance  in  unifon  with  his  w^ords,  will  never  be  fuf- 
peded  of  ading  from  the  impulfe  of  fear. 


CHAP. 


[    97    ] 


CHAP.         III. 
O  F      D  U  T  Y. 

A  DIFFICULTY  STATED. — OF  ABSOLUTE  AND  PRACTICAL. 
VIRTUE. — IMPROPRIETY  OF  THIS  DISTINCTION. — UNI- 
VERSALITY   OF    WHAT  IS    CALLED    PRACTICAL  VIRTUE — 

INSTANCED  IN  ROBBERY — IN  RELIGIOUS  FANATICISM. 

THE  QUALITY  OF  AN  ACTION  DISTINCT  FROM  THE  DIS- 
POSITION WITH  WHICH  IT  IS  PERFORMED — FARTHER 
DIFFICULTY. — MEANING  OF  THE  TERM,  DUTY. — APPLI- 
CATION.— INFERENCES. 

THERE  is  a  difliculty  of  confiderable  magnitude  as  to  the    BOOK  II. 
r  1  •    rL      r    1  I-  1  r  ,     ,  CHAP.  III", 

lubject  or  the  preceding  chapter,  lounded  upon  the  dif-    ^       ,       ' 

.  A  difficulty 

ference  which  may  exift  between  abltraa:  juftice  and  my  appre-  ftated. 
henfions  of  juftice.     When  I   do   an  adl,  wrong  in  itfelf,   but 
which  as  to  all  the  materials  of  judging  extant  to  my  under- 
ftanding  appears  to  be  right,  is  my  condiid  virtuous  or  vicious? 

Certain  moralifts  have  introduced  a  dIftin61:ion  upon  this  head  of  abfolute 
between  ablblute  and  pradical  virtue.    "  There  is  one  fpecies  of  v"rtu^"^"" 
virtue,"  they  fay,  "  which  rifes  out  of  the  nature  of  things  and 
is  immutable,  and  another  which  rifes  out  of  the  views  extant 
to  my  underftanding.    Thus  for  example  fuppofe,  I  ought  to 

O  worfliip 


98  O  F    D  U  T  Y. 

^9??^^*     worfliip  Tefus  Chrlft ;  but,  having  been  bred  in  the  reIie;ion  of 
CRAP.  in.  ^  -'  »  5  to  to 

*^ ^ '  Mahomet,  L ought  to  adhere  to  that  religion,  as  long  as  its  evi- 
dences fhall  appear  to  me  conclufive.  I  am  irapannelled  upon 
'a  jury  to  try  a  man  arraigned  for  murder,  and  who  is  really  in- 
nocent. Abflractedly  confidered,  I  ought  to  acquit  him.  But 
I  am  unacquainted  with  his  innocence,  and  evidence  is  adduced 
fuch  as  to  form  the  ftrongefl  prefumption  of  his  guilt,  De- 
monftration  in  fuch  cafes  is  not  to  be  attained ;  I  am  obliged  in 
every  concern  of  human  life  to  adl  upon  prefumption  j  I  ought 
therefore  to  convldt  him." 

Impropriety         It  may  be  doubtcd  however  whether  any  good  purpofe  is 

of  this  dif- 

tiudion.  likely  to  be  anfwered  by  employing  the  terms  of  abftra£l  fcience 
in  this  verfatile  and  uncertain  manner.  Morahty  Is,  if  any  thing 
can  be,  fixed  and  immutable ;  and  there  muft  furely  be  fome 
ftrange  deception  that  fhould  induce  us  to  give  to  an  a(flion 
eternally  and  unchangeably  wrong,  the  epithets  of  reditude^ 
duty  and  virtue. 

Unlverfaiity        JsJor  have  tliefe  morallfts  been  thoroughly  aware  to  what  ex- 

of  what  is 

called  praai-    tcut  this  admiffion  would  carry  them.     The  human  mind  is  in- 

cal  virtue  : 

credibly  fubtle  in  inventing  an  apology  for  that  to  which  its 
inclination  leads.  Nothing  is  fo  rare  as  pure  and  unmingled 
hypocrify.  There  is  no  action  of  our  lives  which  we  were  not 
ready  at  the  time  of  adopting  it  to  juftify,  unlefs  fo  far  as  we 
were  prevented  by  mere  indolence  and  unconcern.     There  Is 

fcarcely 


O  F     D  U  T  Y.  99 

fcarcely  any  juftiiicadon  which  we  endeavour  to  pals  upon  others,  BOOKir. 

'        '  ^                                                                         ^          r                    •>  CHAP.  III. 

which   we   do  not   with   tolerable  fuccefs   pals  upon   ourfelves.    *"- — ^ '* 

The  diftinftion  therefore  which  is  here  fet  up  would  go  near  to 
prove  that  every  adtion  of  every  human  being  is  entitled  to  the 
appellation  of  virtuous. 


There  is  perhaps  no  man  that  cannot  recollctS  the  time  when  -inttanced  \n 

robbery  : 

he  fecretly  called  in  queftion  the  arbitrary  divifion  of  property 
eftablilhed  in  human  fociety,  and  felt  inclined  to  appropriate  to 
his  ufe  any  thing  the  poffeffion  of  which  appeared  to  him  de- 
firable.  It  is  probably  in  Ibme  fuch  way  that  men  are  ufually 
influenced  in  the  perpetration  of  robbery.  They  perluade  them-- 
felves  of  the  comparative  inutility  of  the  property  to  its  prefent 
pofleflbr,  and  the  ineftimable  advantage  that  would  attend  it  in 
their  hands.  They  believe  that  the  transfer  ought  to  be  made. 
It  is  of  no  confequence  that  they  are  not  confiftent  in  thefe 
views,  that  the  impreflions  of  education  fpeedily  recur  to  their 
minds,  and  that  in  a  feafon  of  adverfity  they  readily  confefs  the 
wickednefs  of  their  proceeding.  It  is  not  lefs  true  that  they  did 
what  at  the  moment  they  thought  to  be  right. 

But  there  is  another  confideration  that  feems  ftill  more  decifive   '"  rellgi'ous 

fanaticifm. 

of  the  fubjedl  before  us.  The  worft  adions,  the  moft  contrary  to 
abftradl  juftice  and  utility,  have  frequently  been  done  from  the 
moft  confcientious  motives.  Clement,  Ravaillac,  Damiens  and 
Gerard  had  their  minds  deeply  penetrated  with  anxiety  for  the 

O  2  eternal 


loo  O  F    D  U  T  Y. 

eternal  welfare  of  mankind.  For  thefe  obje£ls  they  facrifieed 
their  eafe,  and  chearfully  expofed  themfelves  to  tortures  and  death. 
It  v/as  benevolence  probably  that  contributed  to  light  the  fires  of 
Smithfield,  and  point  the  daggers  of  Saint  Bartholomew.  The 
inventors  of  the  Gunpowder  Treafon  were  in  general  men  re- 
markable for  the  fandity  of  their  lives  and  the  feverity  of  their 
manners.  It  is  probable  indeed,  that  fome  ambitious  views,  and 
fome  fentiments  of  hatred  and  abhorrence  mixed  with  the  benevo- 
lence and  integrity  of  thefe  perfons.  It  is  probable  that  no  wrong 
adion  was  ever  committed  from  views  entirely  pure.  But  the  de- 
ception they  put  upon  themfelves  might  neverthelefs  be  com- 
plete. At  all  events  their  opinions  upon  the  fubjetS  could  not 
alter  the  real  nature  of  the  adtion.. 


The  quality         The  true  folutlon  of  the  queftion  lies  In  obferving,  that  the 

of  an  aftion 

diftind  from    difpofitiou  with  which  an  adtion  is  adopted  is  one  thing,  and  the 

the  difpofi- 

tion  with        adtion  itfelf  another.     A  right  adion  may  be  done  from  a  wrong 

which  it  is 

performed.  difpofition  ;  in  that  cafe  we  approve  the  adlion,  but  condemn  the 
ador.  A  wrong  adion  may  be  done  from  a  right  difpofition ; 
in  that  cafe  we  condemn  the  adion,  but  approve  the  ador.  If 
the  difpofition  by  which  a  man  is  governed  have  a  fyllematical 
tendency  to  the  benefit  of  his  fpecies,  he  cannot  fail  to  obtain 
our  efteem,  however  miftaken  he  may  be  in  his  condud. 

Farther  dif-         Eut  what  fhall  we  fay  to  the  duty  of  a  man  under  thefe  cir- 

ficulty. 

cumftances  ?     Calvin,  we  will  fuppofe,  was  clearly  and  confcien- 


tioufly 


OF     DUTY.  loi 

tioully  perfuaded  that  he  ousht  to  burn  Servetus.     Oueht  he  to    r^OOK  II. 

'   ^  _  ^  _  _     ^  CHAP.  III. 

have  burned  him  or  not  ?     "  If  he  burned  him,  he  did  an  action    '^ v ' 

deteftable  in  its  own  nature ;  if  he  refrained,  he  afted  in  oppoli- 

tion  to  the  befl  judgment  of  his  own  underftanding  as  to  a  point 

of  moral  obUgation."     It  is  abfurd  however  to  fay,  that  it  was  in 

any  fenfe  his  duty  to  burn  him.     The  moft  that  can  be  admitted 

is,  that  his  difpofition  was  virtuous,  and  that  in  the  circumftances 

in  which  he  was  placed  an  action  greatly  to  be  deplored  flowed 

from  that  difpofition  by  invincible  neceffity. 

Shall  we  fay  then  that  it  was  the  duty  of  Calvin,  who  did 
not  underftand  the  principles  of  toleration,  to  a£l  upon  a  truth 
of  which  he  was  ignorant  ?  Suppofe  that  a  perfon  is  to  be  tried 
at  York  next  week  for  murder,  and  that  my  evidence  would  ac- 
quit him.  Shall  we  fay  that  it  was  my  duty  to  go  to  York, 
though  I  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  ?  Upon  the  fame  prin- 
ciples we  might  affii-m  that  it  is  my  duty  to  go  from  London  to 
York  in  half  an  hour,  as  the  trial  will  come  on  within  that 
time ;  the  impoifibility  not  being  more  real  in  one  cafe  than  in 
the  other.  Upon  the  fame  principles  we  might  affirm,  that  it 
is  my  duty  to  be  impeccable,  omnifcient  and  almighty^ 

Duty  is  a  term  the  ufe  of  which  feems  to  be  to  defcribe  the  mode  Meaning  of 
in  which  any  being  may  bell  be  employed  for  the  general  good.   duty. 
It  is  limited  in  its  extent  by  the  extent  of  the  capacity  of  that 
being.     Now  capacity  varies  in  its  idea  in  proportion  as  we 


102  ^  O  F     D  U  T  Y.  - 

rHAP^TH  varjT  our  view  of  the  fubjed  to  which  it  belongs.  What  I  am 
'^  •" — ^  capable  of,  if  you  connder  me  merely  as  a  man,  is  one  thing ; 
what  I  am  capable  of  as  a  man  of  a  deformed  figure,  of  weak 
imderftandlng,  of  fuperftitious  prejudices,  or  as  the  cafe  may  hap- 
pen, is  another..  So  much  cannot  be  expedted  of  me  under  thefe 
difadvantages,  as  if  they  were  abfent.  But,  if  this  be  the  true  de- 
finition of  duty,  it  is  abfurd  to  fuppofe  in  any  cafe  that  an  adion 
injurious  to  the  general  welfare  can  be  clafTed  in  the  rank  of 
duties.  .       ~ 

Application.  To  apply  thefe  obfervations  to  the  cafes  that  have  been  Hated. 
Ignorance,  fo  far  as  it  goes,  completely  annihilates  capacity.  As 
I  was  uninformed  of  the  trial  at  York,  I  could  not  be  influenced 
by  any  confideration  refpeiling  it.  But  it  is  abfurd  to  fay  that  it 
was  my  duty  to  negledl  a  motive  with  which  I  was  unacquainted. 
If  you  alledge,  "  that  Calvin  was  ignoi"ant  of  the  principles  of  tole- 
ration, and  had  no  proper  opportunity  to  learn  them,"  it  follows 
that  in  burning  Servetus  he  did  not  violate  his  duty,  but  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  was  his  duty  to  burn  him.  Upon  the  fup- 
pofition  here  ftated  duty  is  filent.  Calvin  was  unacquainted  with 
the  principles  of  juftice,  and  therefore  could  not  pradtife  them. 
The  duty  of  no  man  can  exceed  his  capacity ;  but  then  neither 
can  in  any  cafe  an  a£t  of  injuftice  be  of  the  nature  of  duty. 

Inferences.  There  are  certain  Inferences  that  flow  from  this  view  of  the 

fubjedt,  which  it  may  be  proper  to  mention.     Nothing  is  more 

4  .  common 


OF     DUTY.  103 

common  than  for  Individuals  and  ibcietles  of  men  to  alledge  that     -^'i^'^J^  ^^- 

C-Ia/il  .  111. 

they  have  adled  to  the  befh  of  their  judgment,  that  they  have    " ' 

done  their  duty,  and  therefore  that  their  condudt,  even  fliould 
it  prove  to  be  miil;aken,  Is  neverthelefs  virtuous.  This  appears 
to  be  an  error.  An  adlon,  though  done  with  the  befl:  intention 
in  the  world,  may  have  nothing  in  it  of  the  nature  of  virtue. 
In  reality  the  moft  efTentlal  part  of  virtue  confifts  in  the  incef- 
fantly  feeking  to  inform  ourfelves  more  accurately  upon  the  fub- 
je£l  of  utility  and  right.  Whoever  is  greatly  mlfmformed  re- 
fpedling  them,  is  Indebted  for  his  error  to  a  defedl  in  his  philan- 
thropy and  zeal. 

Secondly,  fince  abfolute  virtue  may  be  out  of  the  power  of  a 
human  being,  it  becomes  us  in  the  mean  time  to  lay  the  greateft 
ftrefs  upon  a  virtuous  difpofition,  which  is  not  attended  with  the 
fame  ambiguity.  A  virtuous  difpofition  is  of  the  utmofl:  con- 
fequence,  fince  it  will  In  the  majority  of  inftances  be  productive 
of  virtuous  adllons ;  fince  it  tends,  in  exail  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  virtue,  to  increafe  our  difcernment  and  improve  our 
underftanding ;  and'  fince,  if  it  were  unlverfally  propagated,  It 
would  immediately  lead  to  the  great  end  of  virtuous  adllons,  the 
pureft  and  moft  exqulfite  happlnefs  of  intelligent  beings.  But 
a  virtuous  difpofition  is  principally  generated  by  the  uncontrolled 
exercife  of  private  judgment,  and  the  rigid  conformity  of  every 
man  to  the  didlates  of  his  confcience. 

CHAP. 


I04  OF    THE    EQUALITY 


CHAP.       IV. 


OF    THE    EQUALITY    OF    MANKIND. 

PHYSICAL     EQUALITY.  —  OBJECTION. ANSWERS. MORAL 

EQUALITY. — HOW     LIMITED. PROVINCE    OF     POLITICAL 

JUSTICE. 

BOOK  II.    /   B  "^HE    equality  of  mankind   Is  either   pliyfical  or   moral. 

CHAP.  IV.         I  .  .  . 

•^ V >      -»-      Their  phyfical  equality  may  be  confidered  either   as  it 

Phyfical 

equality.         relates  to  the  ftrength  of  the  body  or  the  faculties  of  the  mind. 

Objeaion.  This  part  of  the  fubjed:  has  been  expofed  to  cavil  and  ob- 

jedlion.     It  has  been  faid,  "  that  the  reverfe  of  this  equality  Is 
the  refult   of  our  expeiience.     Among  the  individuals   of  our 
fpecies  we  adually  find  that  there  are  not  two  alike.     One  man 
'  is  ftrong  and   another  weak.     One   man  is   wife  and   another 

foolifh.  All  that  exifts  in  the  world  of  the  inequality  of  con- 
ditions is  to  be  traced  to  this  as  their  fource.  The  ftrong  man 
poflefles  power  to  fubdue,  and  the  weak  ftands  in  need  of  an 
ally  to  protedl.  The  confequence  is  inevitable :  the  equality  of 
conditions  is  a  chimerical  affumption,  neither  poffible  to  be  re- 
duced into  practice,  nor  defirable  if  it  could  be  fo  reduced." 

3 

Upon 


OF    MANKIND.  105 

Upon  this  ftatement  two  obfervations  are  to  be  made.     Firft,    BOOK  ii. 

'    CHAP.  IV. 
this  inequality  was  in  its  origin  infinitely  lefs  than  it  is  at  pre-   * ^^ ' 

Anfwers. 

fent.  In  the  uncultivated  ftate  of  man  difeafes,  efFeminacy  and 
luxury  were  little  known,  and  of  confequence  the  ftrength  cf 
every  one  much  more  nearly  approached  to  the  ftrength  of  his 
neighbour.  In  the  uncultivated  ftate  of  man  the  underftandings 
of  all  were  limited,  their  wants,  their  ideas  and  their  viev.'s  nearly 
upon  a  level.  It  was  to  be  expected  that  in  their  firft  departure 
from  this  ftate  great  irregularities  would  introduce  themfelves ; 
and  it  is  the  objedt  of  fubfequent  wifdom  and  improvement  to 
mitigate  thefe  irregularities. 

Secondly,  notwithftanding  the  incroachments  that  have  been 
made  upon  the  equality  of  mankind,  a  great  and  fubftantial. 
equality  remains.  There  is  no  fuch  difparity  among  the  human 
race  as  to  enable  one  man  to  hold  fevei-al  other  men  in  fub- 
jiedion,  except  fo  far  as  they  are  willing  to  be  fubjedl.  All  go- 
vernment is  founded  in  opinion.  Men  at  prefent  live  under  any 
particular  form,  becaufe  they  conceive  it  their  intereft  to  do  fo. 
One  part  indeed  of  a  community  or  empire  may  be  held  in  fub- 
je£lion  by  force  ;  but  this  cannot  be  the  perfonal  force  of  their 
defpot ;  it  muft  be  the  force  of  another  part  of  the  community, 
who  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  their  intereft  to  fupport  his  au- 
thority. Deftroy  this  opinion,  and  the  fabric  vs^hich  is  built  upon 
it  falls  to  the  ground.  It  follows  therefore  that  all  men  are 
effentially  independent. — So  much  for  the  phyfical  equality. 

P  The 


io5  OF     THE     EQ^UALITY 

The  moral  equality  is  ftill  lefs  open  to  reafonable  exception. 
By  moral  equality  I  underftand  the  propriety  of  applying  one 
unalterable  rule  of  juftice.to  every  -cafe  that  may  arife.  This 
cannot  be  queftioned  but  upon  arguments  that  would  fubvert  th^e 
very  nature  of  virtue.  "  Equality,"  it  has  been  affirmed,  "  v^^ill 
always  be  an  unintelligible  fidion,  fo  long  as  the  capacities  of 
men  fhall  be  unequal,  and  their  pretended  claims  have  neither 
guarantee  nor  fan£tIon  by  which  they  can  be  inforced  *."  But 
furely  juftice  is  fufficiently  intelligible  in  its  own  nature,  ab- 
ftradled  from  the  confideration  whether  it  be  or  be  not  reduced 
into  practice.  Juftice  has  relation  to  beings  endowed  with  per- 
ception, and  capable  of  pleafure  and  pain.  Now  it  immediately 
refults  from  the  nature  of  fuch  beings,  independently  of  any  arbi- 
trary conftitution,  that  pleafure  is  agreeable  and  pain  odious,  plea- 
fure to  be  defired  and  pain  to  be  obviated.  It  is  therefore  juft  and 
reafonable  that  fuch  beings  fhould  contribute,  fo  far  as  it  lies  in 
their  power,  to  the  pleafure  and  benefit  of  each  other.  Among 
pleafures  fome  are  more  exquifite,  more  unalloyed  and  lefs  pre- 
carious than  others.     It  is  juft  that  thefe  fhould  be  preferred. 

From  thefe  fimple  principles  we  may  deduce  the  moral 
equality  of  mankind.     We  are  partakers  of  a  common  nature, 

*  "  0»  fl  dit — que  nous  avians  tons  les  memes  droits.  J'igfiore  ce  que  c'ejt  que  les 
tnemes  droits,  oil  il  y  a  inegalite  de  talens  ou  de  force,  iS  nulle  garantie,  niille 
fanElion."     Rayjial,  Revolution  d'/lmeriqiie,  p.  34. 

7  and 


OF    MANKIND.  107 

and  the  fame  caufes  that  contribute  to  the  benefit  of  one  con- 
tribute to  the  benefit  of  another.  Our  fenfes  and  faculties  are  of 
the  fame  denomination.  Our  pleafures  and  pains  will  therefore 
be  the  fame.  We  are  all  of  us  endowed  with  reafon,  able  to  com- 
pare, to  judge  and  to  infer.  The  improvement  therefore  which 
is  to  be  defired  for  the  one  is  to  be  defired  for  the  other.  We 
fhall  be  provident  for  ourfelves  and  ufeful  to  each  other,  in  pro- 
portion as  we  rife  above  the  atmofphere  of  prejudice.  The  fame 
independence,  the  fame  freedom  from  any  fuch  reflraint,  as  fhould 
prevent  us  -from  giving  the  reins  to  our  own  underftanding,  or 
from  uttering  upon  all  occafions  whatever  we  think  to  be  true, 
will  conduce  to  the  improvement  of  all.  There  are  certain  op- 
portunities and  a  certain  fituation  moft  advantageous  to  every 
human  being,  and  it  is  juft  that  thefe  fhould  be  communicated 
to  all,  as  nearly  at  leaft  as  the  general  economy  will  permit. 

There  is  indeed  one  fpecies  of  moral  inequality  parallel  to  the  How  limited. 
phyfical  inequality  that  has  been  already  defcribed.  The  treat- 
ment to  which  men  are  entitled  is  to  be  meafured  by  their 
merits  and  their  virtues.  That  country  would  not  be  the  feat 
of  wifdom  and  reafon,  where  the  benefaftor  of  his  fpecies  was 
confidered  in  the  fame  point  of  view  as  their  enemy.  But  in 
reality  this  diftindlion,  fo  far  from  being  adverfe  to  equality  in 
any  tenable  fenfe,  is  friendly  to  it,  and  is  accordingly  known 
by  the  appellation  of  equity,  a  term  derived  from  thd  fame 
origin.     Though  in  fome  fenfe  an  exception,  it  tends  to  the  fame 


P  2 


purpo'e 


io8  OF  THE  EQUALITY  OF  MANKIND. 

BOOK  IT.    purpofe  to  which  the  principle  itfelf  is  indebted  for  its  value, 
CHAP.  IV.  ^    ^  f        f 

' « '   It  is  calculated  to  infufe  into  every  bofom  an  emulation  of  ex- 
Province  of    cellence.    The  thing  really  to  be  defired  is  the  removing  as  much 

political  juf-  , .  „ .        .  11' 

tice.  as  pouible   arbitrary   diumdlions,  and   leavmg   to   talents   and 

virtue  the  field  of  exertion  unimpaired.  We  fliould  endeavour 
to  afford  to  all  the  fame  opportunities  and  the  fame  encourage- 
ment, and  to  render  juftice  the  common  intereft  and  choice. 


CHAP. 


[     109    ]  I09 


CHAP.       V. 

RIGHTS     OF     MAN. 

THE  QUESTION   STATED. FOUNDATION  OF  SOCIETY. —  OP- 
POSITE RIGHTS  IMPOSSIBLE. — CONCLUSION  FROM  THESE 

I'REMISES.  DISCRETION       CONSIDERED. RIGHTS       OF 

KINGS. — IMMORAL    CONSEQUENCES     OF    THE     DOCTRINE 

OF    RIGHTS. RIGHTS    OF    COMMUNITIES. — OBJECTIONS  : 

I.  THE  RIGHT  OF  MUTUAL  AID. — EXPLANATION. — ORI- 
GIN OF  THE  TERM,  RIGHT. 2.  RIGHTS  OF  PRIVATE  JUDG- 
MENT AND  OF  THE  PRESS. — EXPLANATION. — REASONS 
OF  THIS  LIMITATION  UPON  THE  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE 
COMMUNITY:  I.  THE  INUTILITY  OF  ATTEMPTING  RE- 
STRAINT.  2.  ITS  PERNICIOUS  TENDENCY. — CONCLU- 
SION. 

THERE  is  no  fubjed  that  has  been  difcufled  with  more    BOOK  ii. 
CHAP.  V. 
eagernefs  and  pertinacity  than  the  rights  of  man.    Has  he    * v * 

,  The  quellion 

any  rights,  or  has  he  none  ?  Much  may  plaufibly  be  alledged  on  ftated. 
both  fides  of  this  queftion ;  and  in  the  conchifion  thofe  reafoners 
appear  to  exprefs  themfelves  with  the  greateft  accuracy  who  em- 
brace the  negative.  There  is  nothing  that  has  been  of  greater 
differvice  to  the  caufe  of  truth,  than  the  hafty  and  unguarded 
manner  in  which  its  advocates  have  fometimes  defended  it :  and 

it 


:iIO 


RIGHTS    OF    MAN. 


BOOK  ir.    it  ^111  be  admitted  to  be  peculiarly  unfortunate,  if  the  advocates 

CHAP.  V.  r  y  7 

^ V— — '   on  one  fide  of  this  queilion  ihould  be  found  to  have  the  greateft 

quantity  of  truth,  while  their  adverfaries  have  expreffed  them- 
felves  in  a  manner  more  confonant  to  reafon  and  the  nature  of 
things.  Where  the  queftion  has  been  fo  extremely  darkened  by 
an  ambiguous  ufe  of  terms,  it  may  at  any  rate  be  defirable  to' 
try,  whether,  by  a  patient  and  fevere  inveftigation  of  the  firft 
principles  of  political  fociety,  it  may  be  placed  in  a  light  confi- 
derably  different  from  the  views  of  both  parties. 


Toundatlon 
of  fociety. 


Political  fociety,  as  has  already  been  obferved,  is  founded  in 
the  principles  of  morality  and  jufxice.  It  is  impoffible  for  intel- 
lectual beings  to  be  brought  into  coalition  and  intercourfe,  with 
out  a  certain  mode  of  conduft,  adapted  to  their  nature  and  con- 
nexion, immediately  becoming  a  duty  inciimbent  on  the  parties 
concerned.  Men  would  never  have  aflbciated,  if  they  had  not 
imagined  that  in  confequence  of  that  affociatlon  they  would  mu- 
tually conduce  to  the  advantage  and  happinefs  of  each  ether. 
This  is  the  real  purpofe,  the  genuine  bafis  of  their  intercourfe  ; 
and,  as  far  as  this  purpofe  is  anfwered,  fo  far  does  fociety  anfwer 
the  end  of  its  inftitution. 


Oppofite 
lights  im- 
pofilble. 


There  is  only  one  poftulate  more,  that  is  neceffary  to  bring 
us  to  a  conclufive  mode  of  reafoning  upon  this  fubjedt.  What-' 
ever  is  meant  by  the  term  right,  for  it  will  prefently  appear  that 
the  fenfe  of  the  term  itfelf  has  never  been  clearly  underftood, 

there 


R  I  G  H  T  S     O  F     M  A  N.  in 

tliere  can  neither  be  oppofite  rights,  nor  rights  and  duties  hoftlle     BOOKir. 

^^  °  °  CHAP.  V. 

to  each  other.     The  rights  of  one  man  cannot  cla^Ti  with  or  be    ^^ v ■' 

deftrudive  of  the  rights  of  another  ;  for  this,  inftead  of  ren  Jer- 

ing  the  fubjedl  an  important  branch  of  truth  and  morality,  as  the 

advocates   of  the  rights  of  man   certainly  underfland   it   to  be, 

would  be  to  reduce  it  to  a  heap  of  unintelligible  jargon  and  in- 

confiftency.     If  one  man  have  a  right  to  be  free,  another  man 

cannot  have  a  right  to   make   him  a  flave ;  if  one  man   have 

a  right  to  infli(fl  chaftifement  upon  me,  I  cannot  have  a  right  to. 

withdraw  myfelf  from   chaftifement ;   if  my  neighbour  have  a 

right  to  a  fum  of  money  in  my  poffeflion,  I  cannot  have  a  right 

to  retain  it  in  my  pocket. — It  cannot  be  lefs  incontrovertible,  that 

I  have  no  right  to  omit  what  my  duty  prefcribes. 

From  hence  it  inevitably  follows  that  men  have  no  rights,.  Conclufion 
By  right,  as  the  word  is  employed  in  this  fubjedl,  has  always  p^cmifes. ' 
been  imderftood  difcretion,  that  is,  a  full  and  complete  power  of 
either  doing  a  thing  or  omitting  it,  without  the  perfon's  becoming 
liable  to  animadverfion  or  cenfure  from  another,  that  is,  in  other 
words,  without  his  incurring  any  degree  of  turpitude  or  guilt. 
Now  in  this  fenfe  I  affirm  that  man  has  no  rights,  no  difcretionary 
power  whatever. 


coniidered. 


It  is  commonly  faid,  "  that  a  man  has  a  right  to  the  difpofal   Difcretion 
of  his  fortune,  a  right  to  the  employment  of  his  time,  a  right  to 
the  uncontrolled  choice  of  his  profeffion  or  purfuits."    But  this 

can 


114  RIGHTSOFMAN. 

BOOK  II.    can  never  be  confiftently  affirmed  till  it  can  be  fliewn  that  he 

CHAP.V.  ^ 

* V '   has  no  duties,  prefcribing  and  limiting  his  mode  of  proceeding  in 

all  thefe  refpeds.  My  neighbour  has  juft  as  much  right  to  put 
an  end  to  my  exiftence  with  dagger  or  poifon,  as  to  deny  me 
that  pecuniary  affi  fiance  without  which  I  muft  ftarve,  or  as  to 
deny  me  that  affiftance  without  which  my  intelledtual  attain- 
ments or  my  moral  exertions  will  be  materially  injured.  He  has 
juft  as  much  right  to  amufe  himfelf  with  burning  my  houfe  or 
torturing  my  children  upon  the  rack,  as  to  fhut  himfelf  up  in 
a  cell  carelefs  about  his  fellow  men,  and  to  hide  "  his  talent  in 
a  napkin." 

If  men  have  any  rights,  any  difcretlonary  powers,  they  muft 
be  in  things  of  total  indifference,  as  whether  I  fit  on  the  right 
or  on  the  left  fide  of  my  fire,  or  dine  on  beef  to  day  or  to- 
morrow. Even  thefe  rights  are  much  fewer  than  we  are  apt  to 
imagine,  fince  before  they  can  be  completely  eftabliihed,  it  muft 
be  proved  that  my  choice  on  one  fide  or  the  other  can  in  no 
poffible  way  contribute  to  the  benefit  or  injury  of  myfelf  or  of 
any  other  perfon  in  the  world.  Thofe  muft  indeed  be  rights 
well  worth  the  contending  for,  the  very  effence  of  which  con- 
fifts  in  their  abfolute  nugatorinefs  and  inutility. 

In  reality  nothing  can  appear  more  wotfderful  to  a  careful 

enquirer,  than  that  two  ideas  fo  incompatible  as  man  and  rights^ 

fliould  ever  have  been  affociated  together.    Certain  it  is,  that  one 

4  of 


RIGHTS     OF    MAN.  113 

of  them  mufl  be  utterly  exclufive  and  annihilatory  of  the  other.     I'OOK  11. 
^  •'  C  H  AP.  V. 

Before  we  afcribe  rights  to  man,  we  mijfl;  conceive  of  him  as  a    ' ^^ ' 

behig  endowed  with  intelleiSt,  and  capable  of  difcerning  the  dif- 
ferences and  tendencies  of  things.  But  a  being  endowed  with 
intelleft,  and  capable  of  difcerning  the  differences  and  tendencies 
of  things,  inftantly  becomes  a  moral  being,  and  has  duties  in- 
cumbent on  him  to  dlfcharge :  and  duties  and  rights,  as  has  al- 
ready been  fliewn,  are  abfolutely  exclufive  of  each  other. 

It  has  been  affirmed  by  the  zealous  advocates  of  liberty,  "  that  Rights  of 
princes  and  magiftrates  have  no  rights ;"  and  no  pofition  can  be 
more  incontrovertible.  There  is  no  fituation  of  their  lives  that 
has  not  its  correfpondent  duties.  There  Is  no  power  intruded  to 
them  that  they  are  not  bound  to  exercife  exclufively  for  the 
public  good.  It  is  firange  that  perfons  adopting  this  principle 
xiid  not  go  a  ftep  farther,  and  perceive  that  the  fame  reftridions 
were  applicable  to  fubjetSs  and  citizens. 

Nor  Is  the  fallacy  of  this  language  more  confplcuous  than  Its   immoral 
Immoral  tendency.     To  this  Inaccurate  and  unjuft  ufe  of  the  of  the  duc- 
rerm  right  we  owe  it,  that  the  mifer,  who  accumulates  to  no  end  ,,ghts. 
that  which  dlfFufed  would  have  conduced  to  the  welfare  of  thou- 
fands,  that  the  luxurious  man,  who  wallows  In  Indulgence  and 
fises  numerous  families  around  him  pining  In  beggary,  never  fail 
■to  tell  us  of  their  rights,  and  to  filence  animadverfion  and  quiet 
tJie  cenfure  of  their  own  mind  by  reminding  us,  "  that  they 

Q_  came 


114  RIGHTS     OF    MAN. 

BOOK  11.    came  fairly  into  poffeffion  of  their  wealth,  that  they  owe  no 

* « '    debts,  and  that  of  confequence  no  man  has  authority  to  enquire 

^nto-  their  private  manner  of  difpofmg  of  that  which  is  their 
own."  A  great  majority  of  mankind  are  confcious  that  they 
ftand  in  need  of  this  fort  of  defence,  and  are  therefore  very  ready 
to  combine  againft  the  infolent  intruder,  who  ventures  to  en- 
quire into  "  things  that  do  not  concern  him."  They  forget,  that 
the  wife  man  and.  the  Koneft  man,  the  friend  of  his  country  andJ 
his  kind,  is  concerned  for  every  thing  by  which  they  may  be 
.  '  affeded,  and  qaxries  about  with^him  a  diploma,  conftituting  him 

inquifitor  general  of  the  moral  conduit  of  his  neighbours,  with' 
a  duty  annexed  to  recal  them  to  virtue,  by  every  leffon  that 
truth  can  enable  him  to  read,  and  every  punilhment  that  plaitt. 
fpeaking  is  competent  to  Inflid.. 

RiVhts  of  It  Is.  fcarcely  necefFary  to  add,  that,  if  individuals  have  no 

commum-  j-Jg^ts,  neither  has  fociety,  which  poffeffes  aothing  but  what  in- 
dividuals have  brought  into  a  common  flock.  The  abfurdity  of 
the  common,  opinion,  as  applied  to  this  fubjefl,  is:  ftill  more 
glaring,  if  poffible,  than  in  the  view  in  which  we  have  already 
confidered  it.  According  to  the  ufual  fentiment  every  club  aflem- 
bling  for  any  ci-^^  purpofe,  every  congregation  of  religionifts  aC 
fembling  for  "the  worfliip  of  God,  has  a  right  to  eftablifli  any 
provifions  or  ceremonies,,  na  matter  how  ridiculous,  or  deteftable, 
provided  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  freedom  of  others.  Rea- 
fon  lies'  proftrate  under  their  feet.    They  have  a  right  to  trample 

upofi 


RIGHTS    OF    MAN.  u? 

upon  and  infult  her  as  they  pleafe.     It  is  in  the  fame  fpirit  wc    pS9  p  v* 

have   been    told-  that   every  nation   has  a  right   to    choofe    its   ' ^ ' 

form  of  government.  A  moft  acute,  original  and  ineftimable 
author  was  probably  mifled  by  the  vulgar  phrafeology  on  this 
fubje£t,  when  he  aflerted,  that,  "  at  a  time  when  neither  the  peo- 
ple of  France  nor  the  national  affembly  were  troubling  themfelves 
about  the  affairs  of  England  or  the  Englifli  parliament,  Mr. 
Burke's  condudl  was  unpardonable  in  commencing  an  unpro- 
voked attack  upon  them  *." 

There  are  various  objecflions  that  fuggeft  themfelves  to  the  Objeaiom. 
theory  which  fubverts  the  rights  of  men ;  and  if  the  theory 
be  true,  they  will  probably  appear  in  the  refult  to  be  fo  far 
from  really  hoftile  to  it,  as  to  be  found  more  fairly  deducible 
from  and  confiftent  with  its  principles,  than  with  any  of  thofe 
with  which  they  have  inadvertently  been  conneded. 

In  the  firfl  place  it  has  fometlmes  been  alledged,  and  feems  to  i.  The  rights 

r  1     r  1  r      •  it  ii  of  mutual  aid. 

refult  from  the  reafonings  already  adduced  under  the  head  of  juf- 
tice,  that  "  men  have  a  right  to  the  afliftance  and  co-operation 
of  their  fellows  in  every  honeft  purfuit,"  But,  when  we  affert  Explanation. 
this  propofition,  we  mean  fomething  by  the  word  right  exceed- 
ingly different  from  what  is  commonly  underftood  by  the  term. 
We  do  not  underftand  fomething  difcretionary,  which,  if  not 
voluntarily  fulfilled,  cannot  be  confidered  as  a  matter  of  claim. 

*  Rights  of  Man,  page  i . 

Q^a  On 


ii6  RIGHTS     OF     MAN. 

BOOK  ir.  On  the  contrary  every  thing  adduced  upon  that  occafion  was 
* « '  calculated  to  fhew  that  it  was  a  matter  of  llrid;  claim  ;  and  per- 
haps fomething  would  be  gained  with  refpedl  to  perfpicuity,  if 
we  rather  chofe  to  diftinguifh  it  by  that  appellation,  than  by  a 
name  fo  much  abufed,  and  fo  ambiguous  in  its  application,  as 
the  term  right. 

Orr^nofthe       The  true  Origin  of  this  latter  term  is  relative  ^to  the  prefent 

term,  right.  .  ,  .    ,  r     i      r  • 

ftate  of  political  government,  m  which  many  of  thole  actions 
which  moral  duty  mofi:  ftridly  enjoins  us  are  In  no  degree  brought 
within  the  fphere  of  legiflative  fanftion.  Men  uninfluenced  by 
comprehenfive  principles  of  juftice,  commit  every  fpecies  of  in- 
temperance, are  felfifh,  hard-hearted,  licentious  and  cruel,  and 
maintain  their  right  to  all  thefe  caprices,  becaufe  the  laws  of 
their  country  are  filent  with  regard  to  them.  Philofophers  and 
political  enquirers  have  too  frequently  adopted  the  fame  princi- 
ples with  a  certain  degree  of  accommodation ;  though  in  fadt 
men  have  no  more  right  to  thefe  erroneous  propenfities  in  their 
moft  qualified  fenfe,  than  they  had  to  them  originally  in  all  their 
extravagance.  It  is  true,  that,  under  the  forms  of  fociety  now 
exifting  in  the  world,  intemperance  and  the  caprices  of  perfonal 
intercourfe  too  frequently  efcape  without  animadverfion.  But 
in  a  more  perfect  form,  though  they  may  not  fall  under  the 
cognifance  of  law,  the  offender  will  probably  be  fo  unequivocally 
reminded  by  the  fincerity  of  his  neighbours  of  the  error  he  has 
6  com- 


RIGHTSOFMAN.  117 

committed,  as  to  be  in  no  danger  of  running  away  with  the     pu^^p  v' 
opinion  that  he  had  a  right  to  commit  it.      ^  * v ' 

A  fecond  and  more  important  obje£lion  to  the  dodi-ine  I  am    2.  Rights  of 

private  jiidg- 

maintaining  is  derived  from  the  rights  as  they  are  called  of  pri-  ment  and  of 
vate  judgment,  and  the  liberty  of  the  prefs.  But  it  may  eafily  be 
fhewn,  that  thefe,  no  more  than  the  articles  already  mentioned, 
are  rights  of  difcretion.  If  they  were,  they  would  prove,  that  a 
man  was  ftridtly  juftifiable  in  publifhing  what  he  believed  to  be 
pernicious  or  falfe,  and  that  it  was  a  matter  of  perfedt  moral  in- 
difference whether  he  conformed  to  the  religious  rites  of  Con- 
fucius, of  Mahomet,  or  of  Chrift.  The  political  freedom  of  Explanation. 
confcience  and  of  the  prefs,  fo  far  from  being  as  it  is  commonly 
fuppofed  an  extenlion,  is  a  new  cafe  of  the  limitation  of  rights 
and  difcretion.  Confcience  and  the  prefs  ought  to  he  unreftrained, 
not  becaufe  men  have  a  right  to  deviate  from  the  exadl  line  that 
duty  prefcribes,  but  becaufe  fociety,  the  aggregate  of  individuals, 
has  no  right  to  afllime  the  prerogative  of  an  infallible  judge,  and 
to  undertake  authoritatively  to  prefcribe  to  its  members  in  mat- 
ters of  pure  fpeculation. 


One  obvious  reafon  againfl  this  affumption  on  the  part  of  the    Rraionaof 
fociety  is  the  impoifibility  by  any  compulfatory  method  of  bring-   tion  upon' the 

•  c  '  r        •     •  --ni        •      1  ,-  fundions  of 

mg  men  to  unitormity  01  opmion.     1  he  judgment  we  form  upon    the  commu- 

topics  of  general  truth,  is  or  is  imagined  to  be  founded  upon    i.  The  inu- 
tility of  at- 
evidence  :  and,  however  it  may  be  foothed  by  gentle  applications   tempting  re- 

Ihaiiit. 

to 


ii8 


RIGHTS     OF    MAN. 


BOOK  IT.    to  the  betraying  its  impartiality,  it  is  apt  to  repel  with  no  little 

* ^ '    pertinacity  whatever  comes  under  the  form  of  compulfion.     Per- 

Tecution  cannot  perfuade  the  underftanding,  even  when  it  fub- 
dues  our  refolution.  It  may  make  us  hypocrites ;  but  cannot 
make  us  converts.  The  government  therefore,  which  is  anxious 
above  all  things  to  imbue  its  fubjedls  with  integrity  and  virtue, 
will  be  the  fartheft  in  the  world  from  difcouraging  them  in  the 
explicit  avowal  of  their  fentiments. 


3.  Its  perni- 
cious ten- 
dency. 


But  there  is  another  reafon  of  a  higher  order.  Man  is  not,  as 
has  been  already  fhewn,  a  perfect  being,  but  perfectible.  No 
government,  that  has  yet  exifted,  or  is  likely  prcfently  to  exift 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  is  faultlefs.  No  government  ought 
therefore  pertinacioufly  to  refift  the  change  of  its  own  inftitu- 
tions ;  and  ftill  lefs  ought  it  to  fet  up  a  ftandard  upon  the  vari- 
ous topics  of  human  fpeculation,  to  reftrain  the  excurfions  of  an 
inventive  mind.  It  is  only  by  giving  a  free  fcope  to  thefe  ex- 
curfions, that  fcience,  philofophy  and  morals  have  arrived  at  their 
prefent  degree  of  perfection,  or  are  capable  of  going  on  to 
that  ftill  greater  perfection,  in  comparifon  of  which  all  that 
has  been  already  done  will  perhaps  appear  childifh.  But  a  pro- 
ceeding, abfolutely  necefTary  for  the  purpofe  of  exciting  the  mind 
to  thefe  falutary  excurfions,  and  ftill  more  necefTary  in  order  to, 
give  them  their  proper  operation,  confifts  in  the  unreftrained 
communication  of  men's  thoughts  and  dijloveries  to  each  other. 
If  every  man  have  to  begin  again  at  the  point  from  which  his 

neigh- 


RIGHTS    OF    MAN. 


119 


neighbour  fet  out,  the  labour  will  be  endlefs,  and  the  progrefs  in    BOOK  IT. 

an  unvarying  circle.    There  is  nothing  that  more  eminently  con-   * v— — ' 

tributes  to  intellectual  energy,  than  for  every  man  to  be  habi- 
tuated to  follow  without  alarm  the  train  of  his  fpeculations,  and 
to  utter  without  fear  the  conclufions  that  have  fuggefted  them-  ConcluGoi. 
felves  to  him. — But  does  all  this  imply  that  men  have  a  right  to 
adt  any  thing  but  virtue,  and  to  utter  any  thing  but  truth  ? 
Certainly  not.  It  implies  indeed  that  there  are  points  with  which 
fociety  has  no  right  to  interfere,  not  that  difcretion  and  caprice 
are  more  free,  or  duty  lefs  flrid  upon  thefe  points,  than  upoa 
any  others  with  which  huinaa  adtion  is  converfant* 


CHAP, 


I20       •  OF    THE    EXERCISE 


C  H  A  P.     VI. 

OF  THE  EXEPvCISE  OF  PRIVATE  JUDGMENT. 

FOUNDATION  OF  VIRTUE. — HUMAN  ACTIONS  REGULATED*. 
I.  BY  THE  NATURE  OF  THINGS. — 2.  BY  POSITIVE  INSTI- 
TUTION.— TENDENCY    OF    THE    LATTER:     I.    TO    EXCITE 

VIRTUE. ITS  EQUIVOCAL  CHARACTER  IN  THIS  RESPECT. 

— ■2.  TO  INFORM  THE  JUDGMENT. — ITS   INAPTITUDE  FOR 

THAT  PURPOSE. PROVINCE  OF  CONSCIENCE  CONSIDERED. 

TENDENCY  OF  AN  INTERFERENCE  WITH  THAT  PROVINCE. 
— RECAPITULATION. — ARGUMENTS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  POSI- 
TIVE INSTITUTION:  I. THE  NECESSITY  OF  REPELLING  PRI- 
VATE INJUSTICE. OBJECTIONS  :    THE  UNCERTAINTY  OF 

EVIDENCE. — THE  DIVERSITY  OF  MOTIVES. THE  UNSUIT- 

ABLENESS   OF    THE   MEANS    OF  CORRECTION EITHER  TO 

IMPRESS  NEW  SENTIMENTS — OR  TO  STRENGTHEN  OLD 
ONES. PUNISHMENT  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  EXAMPLE  CON- 
SIDERED.  URGENCY     OF    THE     CASE. — 2.     REBELLION.— 

3.  WAR. — OBJECTIONS. — REPLY. 

BOOK  IL    f  's   ^ O  a  rational  beins;  there  can  be  but  one  rule  of  condud, 

CHAP.VL         1 

":: — y~. — '      -^     juflice,  and  one  mode  of  afcertaining  that  rule,  the  exer- 

Foundation 

of  Virtue,        ^-.fQ  Qf  j^-.g  underftandlng.     If  in  any  inflance  I  be  made  the  me- 
chanical inftrument  of  abfolute  violence,  in  that  inftance  I  fall 

under 


OF     PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  '  121 

under  no  defcription  of  moral  conduit  either  eood  or  bad.     But,     BOOK  ir. 
^  ^  '    CHAP. VI. 

if,  not  being  operated  upon  by  abfolute  compulfion,  I  be  wholly    "^ v ' 

prompted  by  fomething  that  is  frequently  called  by  that  name, 
and  adl  from  the  hope  of  reward  or  the  fear  of  punifhment,  my 
conduct  is  pofitively  wrong. 

Here  however  a  diftindlion  is  to  be  made.  Juflice,  as  it  was 
defined  in  a  preceding  chapter,  is  coincident  with  utility.  I  am 
myfelf  a  part  of  the  great  whole,  and  my  happinefs  is  a  pait  of 
that  complex  view  of  things  by  which  juftice  is  regulated.  The 
hope  of  reward  therefore  and  the  fear  of  punifhment,  confined 
within  certain  ftrid  limits,  are  motives  that  ought  to  have  in- 
fluence with  my  mind. 


things  : 


There  are  two  defcriptions  of  tendency  that  may  belong  to  Human  ac- 
any  adion,  the  tendency  which  it  poffefles  by  the  neceflary  and  gulated, 
univerfal  laws  of  exiftence,  and  the  tendency  which  refults  from  tureof 
the  pofitive  interference  of  fome  intelligent  being.     The  nature 
of  happinefs  and  mifery,  pleafure  and  pain,  is  independent  of  all 
pofitive  inftitution :  that  is,  it  is   immutably  true  that  whatever 
tends  to  procure  a  balance  of  the  former  is  to  be  defired,  and 
whatever  tends  to  procure  a  balance  of  the  latter  is  to  be  re- 
je£led.     In  like  manner  the  promulgation  of  virtue,  truth  and 
political  juflice  muft  always  be  right.     There  is  perhaps  no 
adtion  of  a  rational  being  that  has  not  fome  tendency  to  promote 
thefe  objedts,  and  confequently  that  has  not  a  moral  character 
founded  in  the  abflrad  nature  of  things. 

R  The 


i^^  OF     THE     EXERCISE    • 

CUAF.  vi  '^^^  tendency  of  pofitive  inftitution  is  of  two  forfs,  to  fur- 
a^TBTpoJi^  ^^^  "^^  "^'^^^  ^^  additional  motive  to  the  pradice  of  virtue  or 
tion.'"  '  ""  ^^g^^  ^"^^  ^'^  inform  my  underftanding  as  to  what  adtions  are 
the"ktte7°^  right  and  what  adlions  are  wrong.  Much  cannot  be  faid  in  com- 
mendation of  either  of  thefe  tendencies. 

I.  To  excite         Firfl:,  pofitive  inftitution  may  furnifh  me  with  an  additional 

virtue.  •' 

Its  equivo.      motive  to  the  praftice  of  virtue.     I  have  an  opportunity  of  con- 

cal  charafter 

in  this  re-       tributiug  Very  eflentially  to  the  advantage  of  twenty  individuals  ; 

fpeft, 

they  will  be  benefited,  and  no  other  perfons  will  fuftain  a  ma- 
terial injury.  I  ought  to  embrace  this  opportunity.  Here  let 
us  fuppofe  pofitive  inftitution  to  interfere,  and  to  annex  fome 
great  perfonal  reward  to  myfelf  to  the  performance  of  my  duty. 
This  immediately  changes  the  nature  of  the  adlion.  Before  I 
preferred  it  for  its  intrinfic  excellence.  Now,  fo  far  as  the  po- 
-  fitive  inftitution  operates,  I  prefer  it,  becaufe  fome  perfon  has 
arbitrarily  annexed  to  it  a  great  weight  of  felf-intereft.  But  vir- 
tue, confidered  as  the  quality  of  an  intelligent  being,  depends 
upon  the  difpofition  with  which  the  adlion  is  accompanied. 
Under  a  pofitive  inftitution  then  this  very  adlion,  which  is  in- 
trinfically  virtuous,  may,  fo  far  as  relates  to  the  agent,  become 
vicious.  The  vicious  man  would  before  have  negledied  the  ad- 
vantage of  thefe  twenty  individuals,  becaufe  he  would  not  bring 
a  certain  inconvenience  or  trouble  upon  himfelf.  The  fame  man 
with  the  fame  difpofition  will  now  promote  their  advantage,  be- 
caufe his  own  welfare  is  concerned  in  it.     Twenty,  other  things 

equal,, 


OF     PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  123 

equal,  is  twenty  times  better  than  one.     He  that  is  not  gOA'erned  ^^2p'  vi 

by  the  moral  arithmetic  of  the  cafe,  or  who  ads  from  a  difpo-   * ' 

fition  dlredly  at  war  with  that  arithmetic,  is  unjuft.  In  other 
words,  morahty  requires  that  we  fhould  be  attentive  only  to  the 
tendency  which  belongs  to  any  a£lion  by  the  neceflary  and  uni- 
verfal  laws  of  exiftence.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  princi- 
ple, "  that  we  fhould  do  good,  regardlefs  of  the  confequences ;" 
and  by  that  other,  "  that  we  may  not  do  evil,  from  the  profped  of 
STOod  to  refult  from  it."  The  cafe  would  have  been  rendered  ftill 
more  glaring,  if,  inftead  of  the  welfare  of  twenty,  we  had  fup- 
pofed  the  welfare  of  millions  to  have  been  concerned.  In  reality, 
whether  the  difparity  be  great  or  fmall,  the  inference  ought  to 
be  the  fame. 

Secondly,  pofitlve  inftitution  may  inform  my  underftanding   2.  To  inform 

the  judg- 

as  to  what  actions  are  right  and  what  adlions  are  wrong.     Here   ment. 

Its  inaptitude 

it  is  proper  for  us  to  reflect  upon  the  terms  underftanding  and  for  that  pur- 

pofe. 

information.  Underftanding,  particularly  as  it  is  concerned  with 
moral  fubjeds,  is  the  percipient  of  truth.  This  is  its  proper 
fphere.  Information,  fo  far  as  it  is  genuine,  is  a  portion  detached 
from  the  great  body  of  truth.  You  inform  me,  "  that  Euclid 
aflerts  the  three  angles  of  a  plane  triangle  to  be  equal  to  two  right 
angles."  Still  I  am  unacqviainted  with  the  truth  of  this  propo- 
fition.  "  But  Euclid  has  demonftrated  it;  His  demonftration  has 
exifted  for  two  thoufand  years,  and  during  that  term  has  proved 
fatisfadtory  to  every  man  by  whom  it  has  been  underftood." 

•    R  2  I  am 


124  OF    THE    EXERCISE 

I  am  neverthelefs  uninformed.  The  knowledge  of  truth  lies  In 
the  perceived  agreement  or  difagreement  of  the  terms  of  a  pro- 
pofition.  So  long  as  I  am  unacquainted  -with  the  middle  term 
by  means  of  which  they  may  be  compared,  fo  long  as  they  are 
incommenfurate  to  my  underftanding,  you  may  have  furnifhed 
me  with  a  principle  from  which  I  may  reafon  truly  to  farther 
confequences,  but  as  to  the  principle  itfelf  I  may  llridily  be  faid 
to  know  nothing  about  it.. 

Every  propofition  has  an  intrinfic  evidence  of  its  own»  Every 
eonfequence  has  premifes  from  which  it  flows ;  and  upon  them,, 
and  not  upon  any  thing  elfe,  Its  validity  depends.  If  you  could 
work  a  miracle  to  prove, "  that  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  were 
equal  to  two  right  angles,"  I  fhouM  ftill  know,  that  the  propofi- 
tion was  either  true  or  falfe  previoully  to  the  exhibition  of  that 
miracle ;  and  that  there  was  no  neceffary  connediion  between, 
any  one  of  its  terms  and  the  miracle  exhibited.  The  miracle 
would  take  off  my  attention  from  the  true  queftion  to  a  queftion 
altogether  different,  thfit  of  authority.  By  the  authority  ad- 
duced I  might  be  prevailed  on  to  yield  an  irregular  affent  to  the 
propofition ;  but  I  could  not  properly  be  faid  to  perceive  its 
truth. 

But  this  Is  not  all.  If  it  were,  it  might  perhaps  be  regarded 
as  a  refinement  foreign  to  the  concerns  of  human  life.  Pofitive 
inftitutions  do  not  content  themfelves  with  requiring  my  affent 

to- 


OF    PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  12^ 

to  certala  propofitions,  in  confideratlon  of  the  refpecftable  tefll-    BOOK  II. 

iiioiiy  by  which  they  are  inforced.     This  would  amount  to  no    *^ v * 

more,  than  advice  flowing  from  a  refpedable  quarter,  which  after 
all  I  might  reject,  if  it  did  not  accord  with  the  mature  judg- 
ment of  my  own  underftanding.  But  in  the  very  nature  of  thefe 
inftitutions  there  is  included  a  iandion,  a  motive  either  of  punifh- 
ment  or  reward  to  induce  me  to  obedience. 

It  is  commonly  faid,  "  that  pofitive  infl;itutions  ought  to  leave   Province  of 

confcience 

me  perfedlly  free  in  matters  of  confcience,  but  may  properly  in-  confidered- 
terfere  with  my  condudl  in  civil  concerns."  But  this  diftindlion 
feems  to  have  been  very  lightly  taken  up.  What  fort  of  moralift 
muft  he  be,  who  makes  no  confcience  of  what  pafles  in  his  in- 
tercourfe  with  other  men  ?  Such  a  diftindlion  proceeds  upon  the 
fuppofition,  "  that  it  is  of  great  confequence  whether  I  bow  to 
the  eaft  or  the  weft ;  whether  I  call  the  objedt  of  my  worfhip 
Jehovah  or  Alia ;  whether  I  pay  a  priefl  in  a  furplice  or  a  black 
coat.  Thefe  are  points  in  which  an  honeft  man  ought  to  be 
rigid  and  inflexible.  But  as  to  thofe  other,  whether  he  fhall  be 
a  tyrant,  a  flave  or  a  free  citizen ;  whether  he  fhall  bind  himfelf 
with  multiplied  oaths  impofllble  to  be  performed,  or  be  a  rigid 
obferver  of  truth ;  whether  he  fhall  fwear  allegiance  to  a  king 
de  jure  or  a  king  defaBo^  to  the  beft  or  the  worft  of  all  poffible 
governments  ;  refpeding  thefe  points  he  may  fafely  commit  his 
eonfcience  to  the  keeping  of  the  civil  magiftrate."  In  reality 
there  are  perhaps  no  concerns  of  a  rational  being,  over  which 
4  morality 


126  OF     THE     EXERCISE 

f?L??p^vf    inordity  does  not  extend  its  province,  and  refpeding  wliich  he 
"^       ''       '   is  not  bound  to  a  confcientious  proceeding. 

Tendency  of        j         fatisficd  at  prefent,  that  a  certain  condud,  funpofe  it  be 

an  interte-  r  J  '        i.  r 

tharr'";  ^  ''^S^^  attention  to  the  confidence  of  private  converfation,  is  in- 
cumbent upon  me.  You  tell  me,  "  there  are  certain  cafes  of 
fuch  peculiar  emergency  as  to  fuperfede  this  rule."  Perhaps  I 
think  there  are  not.  If  I  admit  your  propofition,  a  wide  field  of 
enquiry  is  opened,  refpeiSling  M'hat  cafes  do  or  do  not  deferve  to  be 
confidered  as  exceptions.  It  is  little  likely  that  we  fhould  agree 
refpe£ling  all  thefe  cafes.  How  then  does  the  law  treat  me,  for 
my  confcientious  difcharge  of  what  I  conceive  to  be  my  duty  ? 
Becaufe  I  will  not  turn  informer  (which,  it  may  be,  I  think  an 
infamous  character)  againft  my  Tnoft  valued  friend,  the  law  ac- 
cufes  me  of  mifprifion  of  treafon,  felony  or  murder,''and  perhaps 
hangs  me.  I  believe  a  certain  individual  to  be  a  confirmed  vil- 
lain, and  a  moft  dangerous  member  of  fociety,  and  feel  it  to  be 
my  duty  to  warn  others,  perhaps  the  public,  againft  the  efFed: 
of  his  vices.  Becaufe  I  publifli  what  I  know  to  be  true,  the  law 
convids  me  of  libel,  fcandalum  magnatum^  and  crimes  of  I 
know  not  what  complicated  denomination. 

If  the  evil  flopped  here,  it  would  be  well.  If  I  only  fufFered 
a  certain  calamity,  fuppofe  death,  I  could  endure  it.  Death  has 
hithert©  been  the  common  lot  of  men,  and  I  expe£t  at  fome  time 
or  other  to  fubmit  to  it.     Human  fociety  muft  fooner  or  later 

be 


OF     PRIVATE    JUDGMENT.  127 

be  deprived  of  its  individual  members,  whether  they  be  vahiable,    BOOK  II. 
^  '  /  »    CHAP. VI. 

or  whether  they  be  inconfiderable.     But  the  punifhment  ad:s  not    *■ v ' 

only  retrofpedlively  upon  me,  but  profped:ively  upon  my  con- 
temporaries and  countrymen.  My  neighbour  entertains  the  fame, 
opinion  refpedling  the  condudl  he  ought  to  hold  as  I  did.  But 
the  executioner  of  public  juftice  interpofas  with  a  powerful  argu- 
ment, to  convince  him  that  he  has  miftaken  the  path  of  abftra£t- 
reditude.. 

What  fort  of  converts-  will  be  produced  by  this  unfeeling- 
logic  ?  "  I  have  deeply  refledled,"  fuppofe,  "  upon  the  nature  o£ 
virtue,  and  am  convinced  that  a  certain  proceeding  is  incumbent 
on  me.  But  the  hangman,  fupported  by  an  adl  of  parliament, 
aflures  me  I  am  miftaken."  If  I  yield  my  opinion  to  his  di£lum^ 
my  a£lion  becomes  modified,  and  my  charadler'  too.  An  in- 
fluence like  this  is  inconfiftent  with  all  generous  magnanimity 
of  fpirit,  all  ardent  impartiality  in  the  difcovery  of  truth,  and  all  ^ 
inflexible  perfeverance  in  its  aflertion.  Countries,  expofed  to  the 
perpetual  interference  of  decrees  inftead  of  arguments,  exhibit 
within  their  boundaries  the  mere  phantoms  of  men.  We  can 
never  judge  from  an  obfervation  of  their  inhabitants  what  men 
would  be,  if  they  knew  of  no  appeal  from  the  tribunal  of  con- 
fcience,  anJ  if,  whatever  they  thought,  they  dared  to  fpeak,  and 
dared  to  aft. , 

At  prefent  there  will  perhaps  occur  io  the  majority  of  readers 

but 


128  OF    THE    EXERCISE 

BOOK  II.    but  few  inftances  of  laws,  which  may  be  fuppofed  to  interfere 
CHAP.  VI.       _  J  /  ri 

^ V '  with  the  confcientious  difcharge  of  duty.  A  confiderable  num- 
ber will  occur  in  the  courfe  of  the  prefent  enquir)\  More  would 
readily  offer  themfelves  to  a  patient  refearch.  Men  are  fo  fuc- 
cefsfuUy  reduced  to  a  common  ftandard  by  the  operation  of  po- 
fitive  law,  that  in  mofl  countries  they  are  capable  of  little  more 
than  like  parrots  repeating  each  other.  This  uniformity  is  ca- 
pable of  being  produced  in  two  ways,  by  energy  of  mind  and 
indefatigablenefs  of  enquiry,  enabling  a  confiderable  number  to 
penetrate  with  equal  fuccefs  into  the  receffes  of  truth ;  and  by 
pufillanimity  of  temper  and  a  frigid  indifference  to  right  ajid 
wrong,  produced  by  the  penalties  which  are  fufpended  over  fuch 
as  fhall  difmterefledly  enquire,  and  communicate  and  adt  upon 
the  refult  of  their  enquiries.  It  is  eafy  to  perceive  which  of 
thefe  is  the  caufe  of  the  uniformity  that  prevails  in  the  prefent 
inftance. 

Recapitula-         If  there  be  any  truth  more  unqueftlonable  than  the  reft,  it  is, 

tion, 

that  every  man  is  bound  to  the  exertion  of  his  faculties  in  the 
difcovery  of  right,  and  to  the  carrying  into  effedt  all  the  right 
with  which  he  is  acquainted.  It  may  be  granted  that  an  infallible 
ftandard,  if  it  could  be  difcovered,  would  be  confiderably  bene- 
ficial. But  this  infallible  ftandard  itfelf  would  be  of  little  ufe  in 
human  affairs,  unlefs  it  had  the  property  of  reafoning  as  well 
as  deciding,  of  enlightening  the  mind  as  well  as  conftraining  the 
body.     If  a  man  be  in  fome  cafes  obliged  to  prefer  his  own 

judg- 


OF     PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  129 

]ud";ment,  he  is  in  all   cafes  obliged  to  confult  that  iudp-ment,     BOOK  ir. 

J      to  '  &  J       fa  J     CHAP.  VI. 

before  he  can  determine  whether  the  matter  in  queftion  be  of   "^ ^ ' 

the  fort  provided  for  or  no.  So  that  from  this  reafoning  it  ulti- 
mately appears,  that  no  man  is  obliged  to  conform  to  any-  rule 
of  conduct,  farther  than  the  rule  is  confident  with  juftice. 

Such   are   the   genuine   principles   of  human   fociety.     Such   Ai-gumeius 

in  favour  of 

would  be  the  unconftrained  concord  of  its  members,  in  a  ftate   pofitiye  in- 

Ititution  : 

where  every  individual  within  the  fociety,  and  every  neighbour 
without,  was  capable  of  liftening  with  fobriety  to  the  didlates  of 
reafon.  We  fhall  not  fail  to  be  imprefl'ed  with  confiderable  re- 
gret, if,  when  we  defcend  to  the  prefent  mixed  chara£lers  of 
mankind,  we  find  ourfelves  obliged  in  any  degree  to  depart  from 
fo  fimple  and  grand  a  principle.  The  univerfal  exercife  of  pri- 
vate judgment  is  a  doftrine  fo  unfpeakably  beautiful,  that  the 
true  politician  will  certainly  refolve  to  interfere  with  it  as  fpar- 
ingly  and  in  as  few  inftances  as  poffible.  Let  us  confider  what 
are  the  emergencies  that  may  be  thought  to  demand  an  ex- 
ception. They  can  only  be  briefly  flated  in  this  place,  each  of 
them  requiring  to  be  minutely  examined  in  the  fubfequent  ftages 
of  the  enquiry. 

In  the  firfl:  place  then  it  feems  neceflary  for  fome  powerful    i.Thenecef- 
arbitrator  to  interfere,  where  the  proceedings  of  the  individual    ling  private 
threaten  the  moil  injurious  confequences  to  his  neighbours,  and 
where  the  infiant  nature  of  the  cafe  will  not  accord  with  the 

S  uncertain 


I30  OF     THE     EXERCISE 

BOOK  ri.    uncertain  prosirefs  of  argument  and  convidion  addrefled  to  the 
CHAP.vr.  ^     -^  ^ 

* — -V '    mind  of  the  offender.     A  man,  fuppofe,  has  committed  murder, 

or,  to  make  the  cafe  more  aggravated,  feveral  murders  ;  and, 
having  thus  far  over-ftepped  all  thofe  boundaries  of  innocence 
and  guilt  which  reftrain  the  generality  of  men.  It  is  to  be  pre- 
fumed  from  analogy  that  he  may  be  led  to  the  commiffion  of 
other  murders.  At  firft  it  may  appear  to  be  no  great  infringe- 
ment upon  the  exercife  of  private  judgment,  to  put  it  under  fome 
degree  of  reftraint,  when  it  leads  to  the  commiffion  of  atrocious 
crimes.  There  are  however  certain  difficulties  in  the  cafe  which 
are  worthy  to  be  confidered. 

Objeaions :  Firft,  as  foon  as  we  admit  the  propriety  of  a  rule  fuch  as  that 
above  ftated,  our  next  concern  will  be  with  the  evidence,  which 
fhall  lead  to  the  acquittal  or  convi<£tion  of  the  perfon  accufed,, 

the  uncer-       Now  it  is  wcU  known,  that  no  principles  of  evidence  have  yet. 

tainty  of  evi- 
dence :  been  laid  down  that  are  infallible.      Human  affairs  univerfally 

proceed  upon  prefumption  and  probability.    An  eye-witnefs  muft 

identify  the  perfon  of  the  offender,  and  in  this  he  may  be  mif- 

taken.    We  muft  neceffarily  be  contented  with  prefumptive  proofs 

of  his  intention  j  and  often  are  or  imagine  ourfelves  to  be  obliged 

to  admit  prefumptive  evidence  of  the  fa£l  itfelf.     The  confe- 

quence  is  inevitable.     And  furely  it  is  no  trivial  evil,  to  fubjedt 

an  innocent  man  eventually,  to  the  public  award  and  the  efta- 

blifhed  puniihiiient  aonexed  to  the  moft  atrocious  crimes. 

Secondly, 


OF    PRIVATE    JUDGMENT.  131 

Secondly,  the  fame  external  adion  will  aditiit  of  every  pof-    BOOK  ir. 
•^        _  _  •'  ^  CHAP.VI. 

fible  fhade  of  virtue  or  vice.     One  man  fhall  commit  murder,  to    ^ — i^^ ' 

the  diverfity 

remove  a  troublefome  obferver  of  his  depraved  difpofitions,  who  of  motives.- 
will  otherwife  counteract  and  expofe  him  to  the  world.  A  fe- 
cond,  becaufe  he  cannot  bear  the  ingenuous  fmcerity  with  which 
he  is  told  of  his  vices.  A  third,  from  his  intolerable  envy  of 
fuperior  merit.  A  fourth,  becaufe  he  knows  his  adverfary  me- 
ditates an  ad:  pregnant  with  extenfive  mifchief,  and  he  perceives 
no  other  mode  by  which  its  perpetration  can  be  prevented.  A 
fifth,  in  the  adlual  defence  of  his  father's  life  or  his  daughter's 
chaftity.  Each  of  thefe  men,  except  perhaps  the  lafi:,  may  adt 
either  from  momentary  impulfe,  or  from  any  of  the  infinite 
fnades  and  degrees  of  deliberation.  Would  you  award  one  in- 
dividual punifliment  to  all  thefe  varieties  of  adion  ?  Can  you 
pretend  in  each  inftance  to  afcertain  the  exadl  quantity  of  wrong, 
equivalent  to  each  ?  Stridly  fpeaking  no  tv/o  men  were  ever 
guilty  of  the  fame  crime;  but  here  comes  in  pofitive  law  with  its 
Procruftes's  bed,  and  levels  all  charaders,  and  tramples  upon  all 
diftindions. 

Thirdly,  punifhment  is  not  the  appropriate  mode  of  corred-   the  unfm't- 

c  ablenefs  of 

mg  the  en-ors  ol  mankmd.     It  will  probably  be  admitted,  that   the  means  of 

1  1  ^       r  'r,  .  correftion: 

the  only  true  end  of  punifhment  is  corredion.  That  queflion 
will  be  difcuffed  in  another  part  of  the  prefent  enquiry.  "  I  have 
done  fomething,  which  though  wrong  in  itfelf,  I  i)elieve  to  be 
right ;  or  I  have  done  fomething  which  I  ufually  admit  to  be 

S  2  wrong; 


132  OFTHEEXERCISE 

wrong ;  but  my  conviiflion  upon  the  fubjedl  is  not  fo  clear  and 
forcible,  as  to  prevent  my  yielding  to  a  powerful  temptation." 
There  can.be  no  doubt,  that  the  proper  way  of  conveying  to  my 
underftanding  a  truth  of  which  I  am  ignorant,  or  of  irnpreffing 
-  upon  me  a  firmer  perfuafion  of  a  truth  with  which  I  am  ac- 
quainted, is  by  an  appeal  to  my  reafon.  Even  an  angry  expof- 
tulation  with  me  upon  my  condudl  will  but  excite  fimilarpaf- 
fions  in  me,  and  cloud  inftead  of  illuminate  my  underftanding. 
There  is  certainly  a  way  of  expreffing  truth,  with  fuch  benevo- 
lence as  to  command  attention,  and  fuch  evidence  as  to  inforce 
convidtion  in  all  cafes  whatevei", 

cithei-  to  im-         Punifhment  inevitably  excites   In  the  fufferer,  and  ought  to 

prefs  new 

feutiments:  cxcItc,  a  fenfe  of  Injuftlce.  Let  its  purpofe  be  to  convince  me 
of  the  truth  of  a  propofition,  which  I  at  prefent  believe  to  be 
falfe.  It  is  not  abftradtedly  confidered  of  the  nature  of  an  argu- 
ment, and  therefore  It  cannot  begin  with  producing  convidion. 
Punifhment  is  a  fpecious  name,  but  is  in  reality  nothing  more 
than  force  put  upon  one  being  by  another  who  happens  to  be 
ftronger.  Now  ftrength  apparently  does  not  conftitute  juftice, 
nor  ought  "  might,"  according  to  a  trite  proverb,  to  "  overcome 
right."  The  cafe  of  punifhment,  which  we  are  uovn'  confidering, 
is  the  cafe  of  you  and  I  differing  In  opinion,  and  your  telling  me 
that  you  muft  be  right,  fmce  you  have  a  more  brawny  arm,  or 
have  applied  your  mind  more  to  the  acquiring  fkill  in  your- 
weapons  than  I  have. 

But 


OF    PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  i>3 

But  let  us  fuppole,  "  that  I  am  convinced  of  my  error,  but   ^5*?J^  -t 
^  ■  CrlAP.   \  I. 

that  my  convid;ion  is  fuperficid  and  fluftuatins;,  and  the  object  * — r^^ — -f 
you  propofe  is  to  render  it  durable  and  profound."  Ought  it  to  ^"  old  ones, 
be  thus  durable  and  profound  ?  There  are  no  doubt  arguments 
and  reafons  calculated  to  render  it  fo.  Is  it  in  reality  problema_ 
tical,  and  do  you  wifh  by  the  weight  of  your  blows  to  make 
up  for  the  deficiency  of  your  logic  ?  This  can  never  be  de- 
fended. An  appeal  to  force  muft  appear  to  both  parties,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  foundnefs  of  their  underftanding,  to  be  a  coa- 
feffion  of  imbecility.  He  that  has  recourfe  to  it,  would  have  no 
occafion  for  this  expedient,  if  he  were  fufficiently  acquainted 
with  the  powers  of  that  truth  it  is  his  office  to  communicate.  If 
there  be  any  man,  who,  in  fuffering  punifliment,  is  not  confcious 
of  injuftice,  he  muft  have  had  his  mind  previoufly  debafed  by 
llavery,  and  his  fenfe  of  moral  right  and  wrong  blunted  by  a 
feries  of  oppreffion. 


The  cafe  is  not  altered  for  the  better,  if  I  fuffer  punirnment,   punlfli 


ment 


not  for  my  own  corredion,  but  for  an  example  to  others.    Upon  of'exampl7 


this  fuppofition  a  new  difficulty  is  introduced,  refpedting  the  pro- 
priety of  one  man's  being  fubjeded  to  pain,  for  the  fake  of  im- 
proving the  charadler  and  eradicating  the  vices  of  another. 
The  fuffering  is  here  alfo  involuntary.  Now,  though  will  cannot 
alter  the  nature  of  juftice,  it  muft  be  admitted  that  the  voluntary 
fufferer  has  at  leaft  one  advantage  over  the  involuntary,  in  the 
confcious  liberality  of  his  purpofe.     He  that  fuffers,  not  for  his 


confidered, ; 


■134  OF    THE    EXERCISE 

^OOK II.    ov/n  correftion,  but  for  the  advantage  of  others,  Hands,  fo  far 

CHAP,  VI.  '  b  '  ' 

''— — >-^ '    as  relates  to  that  fufFering,  in  the  fituation  of  an  innocent  perfon. 

If  the  fufFering  had  relation  to  him  perfonally  as  a  vicious  or 
imperfeft  charadlei-,  it  mufl  have  relation  to  him  in  refped:  either 
to  the  pall  or  the  future.  It  cannot  have  relation  to  him  as  to 
the  paft,  for  that  is  concluded  and  beyond  the  reach  of  altera- 
tion or  remedy.  By  the  fuppofition  it  has  not  relation  to  him 
but  to  others  as  to  the  future. 

It  ought  to  be  obferved  in  this  place,  that  by  innocence  I  do 
not  underftand  virtue.  Innocence  is  a  fort  of  neutral  character, 
and  flands  in  the  mid  way  between  good  and  harm.  Undoubtedly 
it  were  better,  that  a  perfon  ufelefs  to  fociety  fhould  be  deftroyed 
than  a  man  of  eminent  worth,  and  a  perfon  likely  to  prove  in- 
jurious than  either.  I  fay  likely  to  prove  injurious  ;  for  the 
fault  already  committed,  being  irrevocable,  ought  not  to  enter  into 
the  account,  and  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  with  the  probability 
of  its  repetition.  It  is  in  this  fenfe  that  the  fufFerer  ftands  upon 
a  level  with  many  of  thofe  perfons,  who  are  ufually  denomi- 
nated innocent. 

It  muft  alfo  be  allowed,  that  there  are  cafes  in  which  it  is 
proper  that  innocent  men  fhould  fuffer  for  the  public  good.  Bul| 
this  is  a  queftion  of  a  very  delicate  nature,  and  the  fevere  moralift 
will  be  very  reludant  to  condemn  that  man  to  die  for  the  be- 
nefit of  others,  who  is  defirous  to  live. 

7  As 


OF     PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  135 

As  to  every  other  circuinftance  in   the  cafe  of  him  who  is     I^OOK  II. 

...                               CHAP.  VI. 
punifked  for  an  example  to  others,  it  remains  precifely  the  fame    •■ v ' 

as  when  we  fuppofed  him  to  be  punilhed  for  his  own  reformation. 
It  is  ftill  an  argmnent  of  the  moft  exceptionable  nature  employed 
to  con-e£l  the  opinions  of  mankind.  It  is  ftill  a  menace  of  vio- 
lence made  ufe  of  to  perfuade  them  of  the  truth  or  falfliood  of 
a  propofition.  It  has  little  chance  of  making  them  wife,  and  can 
fcarcely  fail  of  maldng  them  timid,  diflembling  and  corrupts 

Not  with  (landing  all  thefe  objedtions,  it  would  be  difficult  to  Urgency  of 
find  a  country,  refpeding  which  we  could  fay,  that  the  inhabi- 
tants might  with  fafety  be  difmiffed  from  the  operation  of  punifh- 
ment.  So  mixed  is  human  charadler,  fo  wild  are  its  excurfions, 
fo  calamitous  and  deteftable  are  the  errors  into  which  it  occa- 
fionally  falls,  that  fomething  more  than  argument  feems  neceflary 
for  their  fuppreffion.  Human  beings  are  fuch  tyros  in  the  art 
of  reafoning,  that  the  wifeft  of  us  often  prove  impotent  in  our 
attempts,  where  an  inftant  efFed:  was  moft  powerfully  wanted. 
While  I  ftand  ftill  to  reafon  with  the  thief,  the  aflliffin  or  the 
oppreflbr,  they  haften  to  new  fcenes  of  devaftation,  and  with  un- 
fparing  violence  confound  all  the  principles  of  human  fociety.  I . 
Ihould  obtain  little  fuccefs  by  the  abolitior.  of  puniftiment,  unlefs 
I  could  at  the  fame  time  abolifti  thofe  caufes  that  generate  tempt- 
ation and  make  puniftiment  neceflaiy.  Meanwhile  the  argu- 
ments already  adduced  may  be  fufficient  to  flaew  that  punifti- 
ment : 


135  OF    THE     EXERCISE 

rHAP^VT     ^^^^  is  always  an  evil,  and  to  perfuade  us  never  to  recur  to  It 
^ ^^ '    but  from  the  moft  evident  heceffitv. 


2.  Rebellion.         Thg  remaining  cafes  in  which  it  may  feera  requiiite  to  have 

3.  War.  recourfe  to    the    general  will    of  the  fociety,  and  to   fuperfede 

the  private  judgment  of  individuals,  are,  when  we  are  called 
upon  to  counteract  the  hoftilities  of  an  internal  enemy,  or  to  re- 
Objeaions.  pel  the  attacks  of  a  foreign  invader.  Here  as  in  the  former  in- 
ftance  the  evils  that  arife  from  an  ufurpatlon  upon  private  judg- 
ment are  many  and  various.  It  is  wrong  that  I  fhould  contribute 
in  any  mode  to  a  proceeding,  a  war  for  example,  that  I  believe  to 
be  unjuft.  Ought  I  to  draw  my  fword,  when  the  adverfary  appears 
to  me  to  be  employed  in  repelling  a  wanton  aggreflion  ?  The 
cafe  feems  not  to  be  at  all  different,  if  I  contribute  my  property, 
the  produce  it  may  be  of  my  perfonal  labour;  though  cuftom 
has  reconciled  us  to  the  one  rather  than  the  other. 

The  confequences  are  a  degradation  of  character  and  a  relaxa- 
tion of  principle,  in  the  perfon  who  is  thus  made  the  inftrument 
of  a  tranfadlion,  which  his  judgment  difapproves.  In  this  cafe, 
as  has  been  already  ftated  generally,  the  human  mind  is  <;om- 
preffed  and  unnerved, -dll  it  affords  us  fcarcely  the  femblance  of 
what  it  might  otherwife  have  been.  And,  in  addition  to  the 
general  confi derations  in  limilar  cafes,  it  may  be  obferved,  that 
the   frequent   and  obftinate  wars  which  at  prefent  defolate  the 

human 


OF     PRIVATE     JUDGMENT.  137 

human  race  would  be  nearly  extirpated,  if  they  were  funported    ,ri?P^/J; 

CHAP.  VI. 

only  by  the  voluntary  contributions  of  thofe  by  whom  their  prin-    *• ^ ' 

ciple  was  approved. 

The  objection,  which  has  hitherto  been  permitted  pradlically  Reply. 
to  fuperfede  thefe  reafonings,  is  the  difficulty  of  conducing  an 
affair,  in  the  fuccefs  of  which  millions  may  be  interefted,  upon 
fo  precarious  a  fupport  as  that  of  private  judgment.  The  men, 
with  whom  we  are  ufually  concerned  in  human  fociety,  are  of  fo 
mixed  a  character,  and  a  felf-love  of  the  narroweft  kind  is  fo 
deeply  rooted  in  many  of  them,  that  it  feems  nearly  unavoidable 
upon  the  fcheme  of  voluntary  contribution,  that  the  moll  gene- 
rous would  pay  a  very  ample  proportion,  while  the  mean  and 
avaricious,  though  they  contributed  nothing,  would  come  in  for 
their  full  (hare  of  the  benefit.  He  that  would  reconcile  a  perfed 
freedom  in  this  refpedt  with  the  interell  of  the  whole,  ought 
to  propofe  at  the  fame  time  the  means  of  extirpating  felfifhnefs 
and  vice.  How  far  fuch  a  propofal  is  feafible  will  come  hereafter 
to  be  confidered. 


AN 


A  N 


ENQUIRY 


CONCERNING 

POLITICAL       JUSTICE, 

BOOK       III. 

PRINCIPLES     OF    GO  FERN  ME  NT. 

C  H  A  P.       I. 
SYSTEMS    OF    POLITICAL    WRITERS. 

THE     (QUESTION     STATED. FIRST     HYPOTHESIS  :     GOVER>7- 

MENT  FOUNDED  IN  SUPERIOR  STRENGTH. — SECOND  HY- 
POTHESIS ;■  GOVERNMENT  JVRE  DIFINO. THIRD  HYPO- 
THESIS :  THE  SOCIAL  CONTRACT. — THE  FIRST  HYPOTHE- 
SIS EXAMINED. — THE  SECOND — CRITERION  OF  DIVINE 
right;    I.    PATRIARCHAL  DESCENT — 2.  JUSTICE. 

IT  has  appeared  in  the  courfe  of  our  reafonlngs  upon  the  na-  BOOK  III. 
CHAP  I 
ture  of  fociety,  that  there  are  occafions  in  w^hich  it  may  be    ^       ^  '    i 

rr  r  r  •  •  r  '^^^  queflion 

neceiTary,  to  fuperfede  private  judgment  for  the  fake  of  public  ftated. 

T  2  good, 


I40  SYSTEMS    OF 

BOOK  III.    crood,  and  to  cftntrol  the  a£hs  of  the  Individual  by  an  ad  to  be 
CHAP.  I.     ^       '  ^  ^ 

"" '    performed  in  the  name  of  the  whole.     It  is  therefore  an  intereft- 

ing  enquiry  to  afcertain  in  what  manner  fuch  ads  are  to  be 
originated,  or  in  other  words  to  afcertain  the  foundation  of  po- 
litical government. 


FIrft  hypo-  There  are  three  hypothefes  that  have  been  principally  main- 

thefis :  go- 
vernment        tained  upon  this  fubjed.      Firft,  the  fyftem  of  force,  according 

founded  in 

fupeiior  to  which  it  is  affirmed,  "  that,  inafmuch  as  it  is  neceflary  that  the 

ilrength.  _  /       _ 

great  mafs  of  mankind  fhould  be  held  under  the  fubjedion  of 
compulfory  reftraint,  there  can  be  no  other  criterion  of  that  re- 
ftraint,  than  the  power  of  the  individuals  who  lay  claim  to  its 
exercife,  the  foundation  of  which  power  exifts  in  the  unequal 
degrees,  in  which  corporal  ftrength  and  intelledual  fagacity  are 
diftributed  among  mankind." 

Second  hypo-       There  Is  a  fecond  clafs  of  reafoners,  who  deduce  the  origin  of 

theiis :  go- 
vernment       2A.  government  from  divine  right,  and  affirm,  "  that,  as  men  de- 
jure  d'mno, 

rived  their  exiftence  from  an  infinite  creator  at  firft,  fo  are  they 
ftill  fubjed  to  his  providential  care,  and  of  confequence  owe  alle- 
giance to  their  civil  governors,  as  to  a  power  which  he  has 
thought  fit  to  fet  over  them." 


Third  hypo-        The  third  fyftem  Is  that  which  has  been  moft  ufually  main- 

thefis :  the 

focial  con-       tained  by  the  friends  of  equality  and  juftice  ;  the  fyftem  Accord- 
ing to  which  the  Individuals  of  any  foclety  are  fuppofed  to  have 

entered 


POLITICAL     WRITERS.  141 

entered  into  a  contrad;  with  their  governors  or  with  each  other,  BOOK  ill. 

_  CHAP.  I. 

and  which  founds  the  rights  of  government  in  the  confent  of    *«— v ' 

the  governed. 


The  two  firft  of  thefe  hypothefes  may  eafily  be   difmifled.    Tlie  fiift  hy. 

potheiis  exa- 

That  of  force  appears  to  proceed  upon  the  total  negation  of  ab-  '"i""!. 
ftradl  and  immutable  juftice,  affirming  every  government  to  be 
right,  that  is  poflefTed  of  power  fufficient  to  inforce  its  decrees. 
It  puts  a  violent  termination  upon  all  political  fcience ;  and 
feems  intended  to  perfuade  men,  to  fit  down  quietly  under  their 
prefent  difadvantages,  whatever  they  may  be,  and  not  exert  them- 
felves  to  difcover  a  remedy  for  the  evils  they  fufFer.  The  fecond  The  fecond. 
hypothefis  is  of  an  equivocal  nature.  It  either  coincides  with 
the  firft,  and  affirms  all  exifting  power  to  be  alike  of  divine  de- 
rivation ;  or  it  muft  remain  totally  ufelefs  till  a  criterion  can  be 
found,  to  diftinguifh  thofe  governments  which  are  approved  by 
God,  from  thofe  which  cannot  lay  claim  to  that  fan£lion.     The    Critoiion  of 

divine  right. 

criterion  of  patriarchal  defcent  will  be  of  no  avail,  till  the  true    i.  Patriarchal 

dcfccnt* 

claimant  and  rightful  heir  can  be  difcovered.  If  we  make  utility  ^  yuftice. 
and  juftice  the  teft  of  God's  approbation,  this  hypothefis  will  be 
liable  to  little  objection ;  but  then  on  the  other  hand  little  will 
be  gained  by  it,  fince  thofe  who  have  not  introduced  divine 
right  into  the  argument,  will  yet  readily  grant,  that  a  government 
which  can  be  fliewn  to  be  agreeable  to  utility  and  juftice,  is  a 
rightful  government. 


The 


142  SYSTEMS    OF    POLITICAL    WRITERS. 

The  third  hypothefis  demands  a  more  careful  examination.  If 
any  error  have  infmuated  itfelf  into  the  fupport  of  truth,  it  be- 
comes of  particular  confequence  to  detedt  it.  Nothing  can  be  of 
more  importance,  than  to  feparate  prejudice  and  miftake  on  the 
one  hand,  from  reafon  and  demonftration  on  the  other.  Where- 
ever  they  have  been  confounded,  the  caufe  of  truth  muft  necef- 
farily  be  a  fufferer.  That  caufe,  fo  far  from  being  injured  by  the 
diifolution  of  the  imnatural  alliance,  may  be  expected  to  derive 
from  that  difTolution  an  eminent  degree  of  profperity  and  luftre. 


CHAP. 


[     H3     ] 

C     H     A     P.         II. 

OF     THE     SOCIAL    CONTRACT. 

QUERIES    PROPOSED. — WHO   ARE    THE    CONTRACTING  PAR- 
TIES ? — WHAT    IS    THE    FORM    OF    ENGAGEMENT? — OVER 

HOW  LONG  A    PERIOD   DOES   THE    CONTRACT   EXTEND? 

TO  HOW  GREAT  A  VARIETY  OF  PROPOSITIONS? — CAN  IT 

EXTEND  TO  LAWS  HEREAFTER  TO  BE  MADE? ADDRESSES 

OF  ADHESION  CONSIDERED. POWER  OF  A   MAJORITY. 

UPON  the  firft  ftatement  of  the  fyftem  of  a  fecial  contract  BOOK  ill. 
CHAP  II 
various  difficulties  prefent  themfelves.  Who  are  the  parties   ^       ^       -» 

Qiienes  pro- 

to  this  contrad  ?     For  whom  did  they  confent,  for  themfelves  puled. 
only  or  for  others  ?     For  how  long  a  time  is  this  contrad  to  be 
confidered  as  binding  ?     If  the  confent  of  every  individual  be 
neceffary,  in  what  manner  is  that  confent  to  be  given  ?     Is  it 
to  be  tacit,  or  declared  in  exprefs  terms  ? 

Little  will  be  gained  for  the  caufe  of  equality  and  juftice,  if  Who  are  the 

coiitrafting 

our  anceftors,  at  the  firft  inftitution  of  government,  had  a  right  parties? 
indeed  of  choofmg  the  fyftem  of  regulations  under  which  they 
thought  proper  to  live,  but  at  the  fame  time  could  barter  away 
the  underftandings  and  independence  of  all  that  came  after  them 
3  to 


144  OF   THE   SOCIAL    CONTRACT, 

^9PA  W-   1^0  the  lateft  pofterity.     But,  if  the  contradl  mull  be  renewed  la 
CHAP.  II.  ^  '  ' 

*^ .— — '    each  fucceflive  generation,  what  periods  muft  be  fixed  on  for 

that  purpofe^  And  if  I  be  obliged  to  fubmit  to  the  eftabUflied 
government  till  my  turn  comes  to  aflent  to  it,  upon  what  prin- 
ciple is  that  obligation  founded  ?  Surely  not  upon  the  contrail 
into  which  my  father  entered  before  I  was  born  ? 

What  Js  the         Secondly,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  confent,  in  confequence 

form  of  en- 

gagement  ?  of  which  I  am  to  be  reckoned  the  fubjeit  of  any  particular  go- 
vernment ?  It  is  ufually  faid,  "  that  acquiefcence  is  fufficient; 
and  that  this  acquiefcence  is  to  be  inferred  from  my  living 
quietly  under  the  protedlion  of  the  laws."  But  if  this  be  true, 
an  end  is  as  effedlually  put  to  all  political  fcience,  all  difcrimina- 
tion  of  better  and  worfe,  as  by  any  fyftem  invented  by  the  moil 
flavifh  fycophant  that  ever  exifled.  Upon  this  hypothefis  every 
government  that  is  quietly  fubmitted  to  is  a  lawful  government,, 
whether  it  be  the  ufurpation  of  Cromwel  or  the  tyranny  of  Cali- 
gula. Acquiefcence  is  frequently  nothing  more  than  a  choice  on  the 
part  of  the  individual  of  what  he  deems  the  leall  evil.  In  many 
cafes  it  is  not  fo  much  as  this,  fince  the  peafant  and  the  artifan, 
who  form  the  bulk  of  a  nation,  however  diffatisfied  with,  the 
government  of  their  country,  feldom  have  it  in  their  power  to 
itranfport  themfelves  to  another.  It  is  alfo  to  be  obferved  upon 
the  fyftem  of  acquiefcence,  that  it  is  in  little  agreement  with  the 
eftablilhed  opinions  and  practices  of  mankind.  Thus  what  has 
been  called  the  law  of  nations,  lays  leafl:  ftrefa  upon  the  allegiance 
5  of 


tjF    THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT.  145 

of  a  foreigner  fettling  among  us,  though  his  acquiefcence  Is  cer-    p9R^^U* 

tainly  mod  complete  ;    while   natives   removing  into  an  unin-    *■ >' ' 

feabited  region  are  claimed  by  the  mother  country,  and  removing 
into  a  neighbouring  territory  are  punifhed  by  municipal  law,  if 
they  take  arms  againft  the  country  in  which  they  were  born. 
Now  furely  acquiefcence  can  fcarcely  be  conftrued  into  confent, 
while  the  individuals  concerned  are  wholly  unapprifed  of  the 
authority  intended  to  be  refted  upon  it.  * 

Mr.  Locke,  the  great  champion  of  the  dodrine  of  an  original 
contradl,  has  been  aware  of  this  difficulty,  and  therefore  obferves, 
that  "  a  tacit  confent  indeed  obliges  a  man  to  obey  the  laws  of 
any  government,  as  long  asiie  has  any  pofleffions,  or  enjoyment 
of  any  part  of  the  dominions  of  that  government ;  but  nothing 
can  make  a  man  a  member  of  the  commonwealth,  but  his 
adlually  entering  into  it  by  pofitive  engagement,  and  exprefs 
promife  and  compadt.  f"  A  fingular  diftinftion  ;  implying  upon 
the  face  of  it,  that  an  acquiefcence,  fuch  as  has  juft  been  de- 
fcribed,  is  fufficient  to  render  a  man  amenable  to  the  penal  re- 
gulations of  fociety  ;  but  that  his  own  confent  is  neceffary  to 
entitle  him  to  its  privileges. 

A  third  objedion  to  -the  focial  contrail  will  fuggeft  Itfelf,  as   Over  how 
foon  as  we  attempt  to  afcertain  the  extent  of  the  obligation,  even   does  the  cin- 

traft  extend  ? 
*  See  Hume's  Eflays.     Part  II.  Eflay  x'ri. 
t  Treatife  of  Government.  Boole  II.  Ch.  viii.  §.  no,  122. 

U  fuppofing 


14$  OF    THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT. 

BOOK  TIT.    fuppofing:  It  to  have  been,  entered  into  in  the  moft  folemn  man- 

CHAP.  II.        ^^        ° 

' w '    ner  by  every  member  of  the  community.     Allowing  that  I  am^ 

called  upon,  at  the  period  of  ray  coming  of  age  for  example,  to 
declare  my  afTent  or  diflent  to  any  fyftem  of  opinions  or  any 
code  of  pradlical  inilitutes  ;  for  how  long  a  period  does  this  de- 
claration bind  me  ?  Am  I  precluded  from  better  information  for 
the  whole  courfe  of  my  life?  And,  if  not  for  my  whole  life, 
why  for  a  year,  a  week  or  even  an  hour  ?  If  my  deliberate 
judgment  or  my  real  fentiment  be  of  no  avail  in  the  cafe,  in. 
what  fenfe  can  it  be  afBrmed  that  all  lawful  government  is. 
founded  in  my  confent  t 

I°^Aet^^ot        ^^^^  *^^  queftion  of  time  is  not  the  only   difficulty.     If  you. 

propoiitions .  jj^-^^^j^j  ^j  affent  to  any  proportion,  it  is  necelTary  that  the 
propofition  fliould  be  ftated  fimply  and  clearly.  So  numerous 
are  the  varieties  of  humian  underftanding,  in  all  cafes  where  its 
independence  and  integrity  are  fufficiently  preferved,  that  there 
is  little  chance  of  any  two  men  coming  to  a  precife  agreement : 
about  ten  fucceffive  propofitions  that  are  in  their  own  nature 
open  to  debate.  What  then  can  be  more  abfurd  than  to  prefent 
to  me  the  laws  of  England  in  fifty  volumes  folio,  and  call  upoa; 
me  to  give  an  honeft  and  uninfluenced  vote  upon  their  whole, 
contents  at  once  ?. 


Cankextend       But  the  focial  contradl,  confidered  as  the  foundation  of  civil' 

to  laws  here- 
after to  be       government,  requires  more  of  me  than  this.     I  am  not  only 

made  ? 

obliged; 


OF    THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT.  147 

obliged  to  confent  to  all  the  laws  that  are  adually  upon  record.    BOOK  11^. 

■^     ^                  '    CHAP.  II. 
but  to  all  the  laws  that  fhall  hereafter  be  made.     It  was  under    ^^ ^^ ^ 

this  view  of  the  fubjeft,  that  Roufleau,  in  tracing  the  con- 
fequences  of  the  fecial  contract,  was  led  to  aflert,  that  "  the  great 
body  of  the  people,  in  whom  the  fovereign  authority  refides, 
can  neither  delegate  nor  refign  ir.  The  effence  of  that  autho- 
rity," he  adds,  "  is  the  general  will ;  and  will  cannot  be  repre- 
fented.  It  muft  either  be  the  fame  or  another  ;  there  is  no 
alternative.  The  deputies  of  the  people  cannot  be  its  reprefen- 
tatives  ;  they  are  merely  its  attorneys.  The  laws,  that  the  com- 
munity does  not  ratify  in  perfon,  are  no  laws,  are  nullities.*" 

The  difficulty  here  ftated  has  been  endeavoured  to  be  provided  AddrefTes  of 
againft  by  fome  late  advocates  for  liberty,  in  the  way  of  addrefles  fidered. 
of  adhefion ;  addreffes,  originating  in  the  various  diftrid;s  and 
departments  of  a  nation,  and  without  which  no  regulation  of 
•conftitutional  importance  is  to  be  deemed  valid.  But  this  is  a 
very  inadequate  and  fuperficial  remedy.  The  addreflers  of  courfe 
liave  feldom  any  other  remedy  than  that  above  defcribed,  of  in- 

*  "  La  fouyerainete  ne  pcut  etre  reprefentee,par  la  tn^me  rat/on  qu'clle  ne  pent  lire 
.alienee  ;  elie  conjijle  ejfentielleinent  dans  la  volonte  gene  rale,  et  la  volant e  ne  fe  repre- 
fente  point :  elk  ejl  la  meme,ou  elle  eft  autre  ;  il  n^y  a  point  de  milieu.  Lcs  deputes  du 
peuple  tie  ford  done  point  fes  reprefenians,  ils  ne  font  que  fes  commiffaires  ;  ils  ne  peuvent 
rien  conclure  definitivcment.  Toute  loi  que  le  peuple  en  peifofme  n'a  pas  ratifiee,  eft 
aiulle  ;  ce  n' eft  point  unc  lei"  Du  Contrail  Social.  Liv.  111.  Chap.  xv-. 

U  2  difcriminate 


148  OF   THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT: 

BOOK  III.    difcrlmlnate  admifTion  or  rejection.     There  is  an  infinite  differ-- 
CHAP.  II.  -^ 

^ '    ence  between  the  firft  deliberation,  and  the  fubfequent  exercife 

of  a  negative.  The  former  is  a  real  power,  the  latter  is  feldonx 
more  than  the  fhadow  of  a  power.  Not  to  add,  that  addreffes 
are  a  moft  precarious  and  equivocal  mode  of  collecting  the  fenfe 
ef  a  nation..  They  are  ufually  voted;  in  a- tumultuous  and  fum- 
mary  manner ;  they  are  carried  along  by  the  tide  of  party  ;  and 
the  fignaturcs  annexed  to  them  are  obtained  by  indiredt  and  ac-r 
cidental  methods,  while  multitudes  of  byftanders,  unlefs  upoa 
fome  extraordinary  occafion,  remain  ignorant  of  or  indifferent 
to  the  tranfadion. . 

Power  of  a  Laftlv,  if  government  be  founded  in  the"confent  of  the  peoplei. 

majonLj-.-  jig  r      r     v^ 

it  can  have  no  power  over  any  individual  by  whom  that  confent 
is  refufed.  If  a  tacit  confent  be  not  fufhcient^  ftill  lefs  can  I  be 
deemed  to  have  confented  to  a  meafure  upon  wiiich  T  put  an. 
exprefs  negative.  This  immediately  follows  from  the  obferva- 
tions  of  Rouffeau.  If  the  people,  or  the  individuals  of  whom 
the  people  is  conftituted,  cannot  delegate  their  authority  to  a  rC'^ 
prefentative  ;  neither  can  any  individual  delegate  his  authority 
to  a  majority,  in  an  affembly  of  which  he  is  himfelf  a  member.. 
The  rules  by  which  my  actions  IBall  be  directed  are  matters  of  a 
confideration  entirely  perfonal ;  and  no  man  can  transfer  tO' 
another  the  keeping  of  his  confcience  and  the  judging  of  his 
duties.     But  this  brings  us  back  to  the  point  from  which  we  fet 

out*. 


OF    THE    SOCIAL    CONTRACT,  >49 

out.     No  confent  of  ours  can  diveft  us  of  our  moral  capacity,  ^^r^^  m* 

This  is  a  fpecies  of  property  which  we  can  neither  barter  nor  *— — v-— » 
refign  ;  and  of  confequence  it  is  impoffible  for  any  government 
to  derive  its  authority  from  an  original  contract.. 


CHAP. 


r  ^50  ] 

G  HAP.       HL 
OF      PROMISES. 

■THE  VALIDITY  OF  PROMISES  EXAMINED. SHEWN  TO  BE  IN- 
CONSISTENT   WITH    JUSTICE. TO    BE    FOREIGN    TO    THE 

GENERAL   GOOD. OF   THE   EXPECTATION    EXCITED. THE 

FULFILLING   EXPECTATION    DOES    NOT    IMPLY    THE   VALI^- 
DITY  OF  A   PROMISE. CONCLUSION. 

BOOK  III.   r~|~^HE  whole  principle  of  an  original  contract  proceeds  upon 
' " ^      -"-    the  obligation  under  which  we  are  placed  to  obferve  our 

The  validity  °  ... 

ofpromif-s      promifes.    The  reafoning  upon  which  it  is  founded  is,  "  that  we 

■examined. 

have  promifed  obedience  to  government,  and  therefore  are  bound 
to  obey."  It  may  confequently  be  proper  to  enquire  into  the  na- 
ture of  this  obligation  to  obferve  our  promifes. 

Shewn  to  be        We  have  alvcady  eftablifhed  juftice  as  the  fum  of  moral  and 

linconfiftent 

Avith  juftice :  political  duty.  Is  juftice  then  in  its  own  nature  precarious  or 
immutable  ?  Surely  immutable.  As  long  as  men  are  men,  the 
condud:  I  am  bound  to  obferve  refpeding  them  muft  remain  the 
fame.  A  good  man  muft  always  be  the  proper  objedl  of  my 
fupport  and  cooperation ;  vice  of  my  cenfure ;  and  the  vicious 
jnan  of  iaftruftion  and  reform. 

.1  What 


OF     PROMISES.  ijr 

What  Is  It  then  to  which  the  obhgation  of  a  promife  applies  ?   il^^p  l\\- 

What  I  have  promifed  is  either  right,   or  wrong,   or  indifferent.    ' « ' 

There  are  few  articles  of  human  condudt  that  fall  under  the  latter 
clafs  ;  and  the  greater  fhall  be  our  improvements  in  moral  fcience 
the  fewer  ftill  will  they  appear.  Omitting  thefe,  let  us  then  con- 
iider  only  the  tvro  preceding  clafles.  "  I  have  promifed  to  do 
fomething  juft  and  right."  This  certainly  I  ought  to  perform. 
Why  ?  Not  becaufe  I  promifed,  but  becaufe  juftice  prefcribes  it. 
"  I  have  promifed  to  beftow  a  fum  of  money  upon  fome  good  and 
refpedtable  purpofe.  In  the  interval  between  the  promife  and 
my  fulfilling  it,  a  greater  and  nobler  purpofe  offers  itfelf,  and 
calls  with  an  imperious  voice  for  my  cooperation."  Which. 
ought  I  to  prefer  ?  That  which  beft  deferves  my  preference. 
A  promife  can  make  no  alteration  in  the  cafe.  I  ought  to  be  guid- 
ed by  the  intrinfic  merit  of  the  objedts,  and  not  by  any  external 
and  foreign  confideration.  No  engageiBents  of  mine  caa  change 
their  intrinfic  claims.- 

AU  this  muff  be  exceedingly  plain  to  the  readerwho  has  follow- 
ed me  in  my  early  reafonings  upon  the  nature  of  juftice.  If  every 
fhilling  of  our  property,  every  hour  of  our  time  and  every  faculty 
of  our  mind,  have  already  received  their  deftination  from  the  prin- 
ciples of  immutable  juftice,  promifes  have  no  department  left  up- 
on which  for  them  to  decide.  Juftice  it  appears  therefore  ought 
to  be  done,  whether  we  have  promifed  it  or  not.  If  we  difcover 
any  thing  to  be  unjuft,  we  ought  to  abftain  from  it,  with  what- 
ever 


IJ2  OF     PROMISES. 

i|^^^''  1^^-    ever  folemnky  we  have  engaged  for  its  perpetration.     We  were 

" V '  .erroneous   and  vicious  when  the  promife  was  made;  but  this 

affords  no  fufEcient  reafon  for  its  performance. 

.to  be  fo-  But  it  -^vill  be  fald,  "  if  promifes  be  not  made,  or  when  made 

vreign  to  ge- 

,ijeial  good,  be  not  fulfilled,  how  can  the  affairs  of  the  world  be  carried  on  ?" 
By  rational  and  intelligent  beings  ading  as  if  they  v.-ere  rational 
and  intelligent.  A  promife  would  perhaps  be  fufEciently  inno- 
cent, if  it  were  unda'ftood  merely  as  declaratory  of  intention,  and 
not  as  precluding  farther  information.  Even  in  -this  reftrained 
fenfe  however  it  is  far  from  being  •generally  neceffary.  Why 
Ihould  it  be  fuppofed  that  the  affairs  of  the  world  would  not  go 
on  fufficiently  well,  though  my  neighbour  could  no  farther  de- 
pend upon  my  afliftance  than  it  appeared  rational  to  grant  it  ? 
This  would  be  a  fufEcient  dependence  if  I  were  honeft,  nor 
^  would  he  if  he  were  honeft  delire  any  thing  more.     If  I  were 

difhonefl,  if  I  could  not  be  bound  by  the  reafon  and  juflice  of 
the  cafe,  it  would  afford  him  a  flender  additional  dependence  to 
call  in  the  aid  of  a  principle  founded  in  prejudice  and  miftake  : 
not  to  fay,  that,  let  it  afford  ever  fo  great  advantage  in  any  par- 
ticular cafe,  the  evil  of  the  immoral  precedent  would  outweigh 
the  individual  advantage. 

It  may  be  farther  objected,  "  that  this  principle  might  be  fuf- 
ficiently fuited  to  a  better  and  more  perfedl  flate  of  fociety,  but 
that  at  prefent  there  are  difhonefl:  members  of  the  community, 

who 


O  F    P  R  O  M  I  S  E  S.  153 

•who  will  not  f  erform  their  duty,  if  they  be  not  bound  to  it  by  ^^^p  ^u 
fome  grofler  motive,  than  the  mere  moral  confideration."  Be  '  ^  ' 
it  fo.  This  I3  a  queftlon  altogether  different  from  that  we  have 
been  examining.  We  are  not  now  enquiring  whether  the  com- 
munity ought  to  animadvert  upon  the  errors  of  its  members. 
This  animadverfion  the  upright  man  is  not  backward  to  encoun- 
ter, and  willingly  rifks  the  penalty,  which  the'  fociety  (for  the 
fociety  is  more  competent  to  afcertain  the  juft  amount  of  the 
penalty  than  the  preceding  caprice  of  the  parties)  has  awarded 
in  cafes  apparently  fimilar,  if  he  conceive  that  his  duty  requires 
from  him  that  riik. 


tation  esci- 


But  to  return  to  the  cafe  of  promifes.     I  fhall  be  told,  that,   Oftheexpec 

tatio: 

*'  in  choofing  between  two  purpofes  about  which  to  employ  my  ted. 
money,  my  time  or  my  talents,  my  promife  may  make  an  effen- 
tlal  difference,  and  therefore  having  once  been  given  ought  to 
be  fulfilled.  The  party  to  whom  it  was  made  has  had  expe£la- 
dons  excited  in  him,  which  I  ought  not  to  difappoint ;  the  party 
to  whom  I  am  under  no  engagement  has  no  fuch  difappoint- 
ment  to  encounter."  What  is  this  tendernefs  to  which  I  am 
bound,  this  expectation  I  muft  not  dare  to  difappoint  ?  An  ex- 
peftation  that  I  fhould  do  wrong,  that  I  fhould  prefer  a  lefs  good 
■to  a  greater,  that  I  fhould  commit  abfolute  evil ;  for  fuch  muft  b& 
the  refult  when  the  balance  has  been  ftruck.  "  But  his  expefla- 
tion  has  altered  the  nature  of  his  fituation,   has  engaged  him  in 

X  under- 


154  OF    PROMISES. 

BOOK  III.   undertakings  from  which  he  would  otherwife  have  abftained.^ 

CHAP.  III.  ^ 

■""^ — « '    Be  it  fo.     He  and  all  other  men  will  be  taught  to  depend  more 

upon  their  own  exertions,  and  lefs  upon  the  afliftaace  of  others^ 
which  caprice  may  refufe,  or  juftice  oblige  me  to  withhold.  He 
and  all  others  will  be  taught  to  acquire  fuch  merit,  and  to  en- 
gage in  fuch  purfuits,  as  fliall  oblige  every  honeft  man  to  comer 
to  their  fuccour,  if  they  fliould  ftand  in  need  of  affiftance.  Thc: 
refolute  execution  of  juftice,  without  liftening  to  that  falfe  pity, 
which,  to  do  imaginary  kindnefs  to  one,,  would,  lead  us  to  injure 
the  whole,  would  in  a  thoufand  ways  increafe  the  independence,, 
the  energies  and  the  vutue  of  mankind;^ 

The  fulfilling       Let  US  howevcr  fuppofe,  "-that  my  condudt  ought  to  be  In- 

expeftation 

does  not  im-   fluenced  by  this  previous  expedtation  of  the  individual."     Let 

ply  the  validi- 
ty of  a  pro-     US  fuppofe,  "  that,  in  feleiting  an  individual  for  a.  certain  officCj^., 
aiife. 

my  choice  ought  not  to  be  governed  merely  by  the  abftradl  fitnefs . 
of  the  candidates,  but  that  I  ought  to  take  into  the  account  the 
extreme  value  of  the  appointment  from  certain  circumftances  to 
one  of  the  candidates,  and  its  comparative  inutility  to  the  other." 
Let  US  farther  fuppofe,  "  that  the  expectation  excited  in  one  of 
them  has  led  him  into  ftudies  and  purfuits  to  qualify  himfelf  for 
the  office,  which  will  be  ufelefs  if  he  do  not  fucceed  to  it ;  and; 
that  this  is  one  of  the  confiderations  which  ought  to  govern  my 
determination."- — All  this  does  not  come  up  to  what  we  have  been; 
taught  refpeding  the  obligation  of  a  promife.. 

2-  Eor,. 


OF    PROMISES.  r^5 

For,  firft,  it  may  be  obferved,  that  It  feems  to  be  of  little  con-    BOOK  ill. 

CHAP.III. 

iequence  in  this  ftatement,  whether  the  expeilation  were  excited  *- — - — -^ 
by  a  direct:  promife  or  in  fome  other  manner,  whether  it  were 
excited  by  a  declaration  of  mine  or  of  a  third  perfon,  or  laftly, 
whether  it  arofe  fmgly  out  of  the  reafon  of  the  cafe  and  the  pure 
deductions  and  reflections  of  the  expedter's  mind.  Upon  every 
one  of  thefe  fuppofitions  his  condudl,  and  the  injury  he  may 
fuftain  from  a  difappointment,  will  remain  the  fame.  Here  then 
all  that  has  been  commonly  underftood  by  the  obligation  of  a 
promife  is  excluded.  The  motive  to  be  attended  to,  flows  from 
no  folemn  engagement  of  mine,  but  from  an  incidental  confe- 
quence  of  my  declaration,  and  which  might  juft  as  eafily  have 
been  the  confequence  of  many  other  circumflances.  The  con- 
fideration  by  which  it  becomes  me  to  be  influenced  is,  not  a  re- 
gard for  veracity,  or  a  particular  defire  to  preferve  my  integrity, 
both  of  which  are  in  reality  wholly  unconcerned  in  the  tranfac- 
tion,  but  an  attention  to  the  injury  to  be  fuftalned  by  the  lofmg 
candidate,  whatever  might  be  the  original  occafion  of  the  condudl 
out  of  which  the  injury  has  proceeded. 

Let  us  take  an  example  of  a  fl:ill  fmipler  nature.  "  I  live  in 
Weftminfter ;  and  I  engage  to  meet  the  captain  of  a  fliip  from 
Blackwal  at  the  Royal  Exchange.  My  engagement  is  of  the 
nature  of  information  to  him,  that  I  ihall  be  at  the  Exchange  at 
a  certain  hour.  He  accordingly  lays  afide  his  other  bufmefs, 
and  comes  thither  to  meet  me."     This  is  a  reafon  why  I  fhoulJ 

X  2  .not 


156  O  F    P  R  O  M  I  S  E  S. 

not  fail  him  unlefs  for  fome  very  material  caufe.  But  It  would 
feem  as  if  the  reafon  why  I  fhould  not  fail  him  would  be  equally 
cogent,  if  I  knew  from  any  other  fource  that  he  would  be  there, 
and  that  a  quantity  of  convenience  equal  to  the  quantity  upon  the 
former  fuppofition  would  accrue  from  my  meeting  him.  It  may 
be  faid,  "  that  it  is  effential  to  various  circumftances  of  human  in- 
tercourfe,  that  we  fhould  be  able  to  depend  on  each  other  for  a 
fteady  adherence  to  engagements  of  this  fort."  The  ftatement 
however  would  be  fomewhat  more  accurate  if  we  faid,  "  that  it 
was  effential  to  various  circumftances  of  human  intercourfe,  that 
we  fhould  be  known  to  beftow  a  fteady  attention  upon  the 
quantities  of  convenience  or  inconvenience,  of  good  or  evil,  that 
might  arife  to  others  from  our  conduct." 

ConelnfioB.  It  is    undoubtedly   upon   this  hypothefis  a  part  of  our  duty 

to  make  as  few  promifes  or  declarations  exciting  appropriate 
expectations  as  poffible.  He  who  lightly  gives  to  another  the 
idea  that  he  will  govern  himfelf  in  his  future  conduift,  not  by 
the  views  that  fhall  be  prefent  to  his  mind  when  the  conduit 
fhall  come  to  be  determined  on,  but  by  the  view  he  fhall  be  able 
to  take  of  it  at  fome  preceding  period,  is  vicious  in  fo  doing. 
But  the  obligation  he  is  under  refpedting  his  future  condudt  is,  to 
adt  juftly,  and  not,  becaufe  he  has  committed  one  error,  for  that 
reafon  to  become  guilty  of  a  fecond. 


GHAP, 


[     157    ] 


CHAP.     IV. 
OF    POLITICAL    AUTHORITY. 

COMMON    DELIBERATION    THE   TRUE    FOUNDATION    OF    GO- 
VERNMENT—  PROVED      FROM     THE      EQUAL      CLAIMS      OF 

MANKIND — FROM     THE     NAlURE     OF     OUR     FACULTIES 

FROM  THE  OBJECT  OF  GOVERNMENT FROM  THE  EF- 
FECTS OF  COMMON  DELIBERATION.  —  DELEGATION  VIN- 
DICATED.  DIFFERENCE    BETWEEN    THE   DOCTRINE    HERE 

MAINTAINED  AND  THAT  OF  A  SOCIAL  CONTRACT  AP- 
PARENT  FROM    THE    MERELY    PROSPECTIVE    NATURE    OF 

THE  FORMER FROM   THE   NULLITY   OF  PROMISES FROM 

THE   FALLIBILITY  OF  DELIBERATION. — CONCLUSION. 

AVING  rejeded  the  hypothefes  that  have  moft  generally  BOOK  lir. 

CHAP.  IV. 
been  adduced  to  account  for  the  origin   of  govei'nment    '^ v — -' 

confiftently  with  the  principles  of  moral  juftice,   let  us  enquire 

whether  we  may  not  arrive  at  the  fame  objed:,   by  a  iimple  in- 

veftigation  of  the  obvious  reafon  of  the  cafe,    without  having  re- 

courfe  to  any  refinement  of  fyftem  or  fidtion  of  procefs. 


Government  then  being  introduced   for  the  reafons  already  Common  de- 
liberation the 
affigned,  the  firft  and  moft  important  principle  that  can  be  ima~  tyue  founda- 
tion of  go- 

gined  relative  to  its  form  and  ftrudure,  feems  to  be  this ;  that^  as  vernnifat ; 

government 


ijS  OF    POLITICAL    AUTHORITY. 

BOOK  III.    fvovernment  is  a  tranfadlon  in  the  name  and  for  the  benefit  of 

CHAP.IV.      ^ 

^^ — -^'—-^  the  whole,  every  member  of  the  community  ought  to  have  fome 
fhare  in  its  adminiftration.  The  arguments  in  fupport  of  this 
propofition  are  various. 

proved  from         i.  It  has  aheady  appeared  that  there  is  no  criterion  perfpicuoufly 

the  equal 

claims  of        defignating  any  one  man  or  fet  of  men  to  prefide  over  the  reft. 

mankind,: 

from  the  na-         2.  All  men  are  parta"kers  of  the  common  faculty  reafon,  and  may 

tare  of  our 

faculties :  be  fuppofed  to  have  fome  communication  v^ath  the  common  pre- 
ceptor truth.  It  would  be  wrong  in  an  affair  of  fuch  momen- 
tous concern,  that  any  chance  for  additional  wifdom  Ihould  be 
rejeded ;  nor  can  we  tell  in  many  cafes  till  after  the  experiment 
how  eminent  any  individual  may  one  day  be  found  in  the  bufi- 
nefs  of  guiding  and  deliberating  for  his  fellows, 

■from  theob-         3.  Government  is  a  contrivance  inftituted  for  the  fecurity  of  in- 

jeft  of  go- 

yernment :  dividuals ;  and  it  feems  both  reafonable  that  each  man  fliould 
have  a  fhare  in  providing  for  his  own  fecurity,  and  probable  that 
partiality  and  cabal  Ihould  by  this  means  be  moft  effeitually 
excluded. 


from  the  ef-  ^.  Laftly,  to  give  cach  man  a  voice  in  the  public  concerns  comes 

■fefts  of  com- 
mon delibe-     neareft  to  that  admirable  idea  of  which  we   fhould    never  lofe 

fight,  the  uncontrolled  exercife  of  private  judgment.     Each  man 
would  thus  be  infpired  with  a  confcioufnefs  of  his  own  import- 
ance. 


ration. 


OF    POLITICAL    AUTHORtTY.  159 

ance,  and  the  flaviih  feelines  that  fhrink  up  the  foul  in  the  pre-  BOOK  iir. 

'                                                     o                                   r-                                       r  CHAP.  IV. 

fence  of  an  imagined  fuperior  would  be  unknown.  ^ ^' ' 


Admitting  then  the  propriety  of  each  man  having  a  fhare  ia 
dire£ting  the  affairs  of  the  whole  in  the  firfl  inftance,  it  feems 
neceffary  that  he  fhould  concur,  in  eledling  a  houfe  of  reprefenta- 
tives,  if  he  be  the  member  of  a  large  ftate  ;  or,  even  in  a  fmall 
one,  that  he  fhould  aflift  in  the  appointment  of  officers  and  ad- 
miniftrators  ;  which  implies,  firft,  a  delegation  of  -authority  to- 
thefe  officers,  and,  fecondly,  a  tacit  confent,  or  rather  an  admiffion 
of  the  neceffity,  that  the  queftions  to  be  debated  fhould  abide 
the  decifioji  of  a  majority,. 

But  to  this  fyftem  of  delegation  the  fame  objedions  may  be  Delegation 

vindicated, 

urged,  that  were  cited  from  Roufleau  in  the  chapter  of  the  Social 
Contrad:.  It  may  be  alleged  that,  "  if  it  be  the  bufmefs  of  every 
man  to  exercife  his  own  judgment,  he  can  in  no  inftance  fur- 
render  this  fundlion  into  the  hands  of  another." 

To  this  objeftion  It  may  be  anfwered,  firft,  that  the  parallel  is 
by  no  means  complete  between  an  individual's  exercife  of  his 
judgment  in  a  cafe  that  is  truly  his  own,  and  his  exercife  of  his 
judgment  in  an  article  where  the  neceffity  and  province  of  go- 
vernment are  already  admitted.  Wherever  there  is  a  government, 
there  muft  be  a  will  fuperfeding  that  of  individuals.     It  is  abfurd. 

to 


i6o  OF     POLITICAL     AUTHORITY. 

PH  AP  rv"    *°  ^xped  that  every  member  of  a  fociety  fhould  agree  with  every. 

* * — '^   other  member  in  the  various  meafui^es  it  may  be  found  neceflary 

to  adopt.  The  fame  neceffity,  that  requires  the  introdudlion  of 
force  to  fupprefs  injuftice  on  the  part  of  a  fev^r,  requires  that  the 
fentiments  of  the  majority  fhould  diredt  that  force,  and  that  the 
minority  fhould  either  fecede,  or  patiently  wait  for  the  period 
when  the  truth  on  the  fubjedt  contefted  fhall  be  generally  un- 
derftood. 

Secondly,  delegation  is  not,  as  at  firft  fight  it  might  appear  to 
be,  the  a£t  oi  one  man  committing  to  another  a  fundtion,  which 
ftridtly  fpeaking  it  became  him  to  exercife  for  himfelf-  Delega- 
tion, in  every  inftance  in  which  it  can  be  reconciled  with  juftice, 
is  an  a6;  which  has  for  its  obje£l  the  general  good.  The  indivi- 
duals to  whom  the  delegation  is  made,  are  either  more  likely 
from  talents  or  leifure  to  perform  the  function  in  the  moft  eligi- 
ble manner,  or  at  leail  there  is  fome  public  intereft  requiring  that 
it  fhould  be  performed  by  one  or  a  few  perfons,  rather  than  by 
every  individual  for  himfelf.  This  is  the  cafe,  whether  in  that 
firft  and  fimpleft  of  all  delegations  the  prerogative  of  a  majority, 
•or  in  the  eleftion  of  a  houfe  of  reprefentatives,  or  in  the  appoint- 
ment of  public  officers.  Now  all  contefl  as  to  the  perfon  who 
fhall  exercife  a  certain  fundion,  and  the  propriety  of  refigning 
it,  is  frivolous,  the  moment  it  is  decided  how  and  by  whom  it 
,can  moft  advantageoully  be  exercifed.     It  is  of  no  confequence 

that 


OF    POLITICAL     AUTHORITY.  i6i 

that  I  am  the  parent  of  a  child,  when  it  has  once  been  afcertain-   ^^^^^  ^^'^• 

cd  that  the  child  will  receive  greater  benefit  by  living  under  the    "^ v ' 

fuperintendence  of  a  ftranger. 

Laftly,  it  is  a  miftake  to  Imagine  that  the  propriety  of  reftrain- 
ing  me  when  my  condudl  is  injurious,  rifes  out  of  any  delegation 
of  mine.  The  juftice  of  employing  force  when  every  other 
means  was  infufficient,  is  even  prior  to  the  exiftence  of  fociety. 
Force  ought  never  to  be  reforted  to  but  in  cafes  of  abfolute  ne- 
ceflity  ;  and,  when  fuch  cafes  occur,  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man 
to  defend  himfelf  from  violation.  There  is  therefoi'e  no  delega- 
tion neceffary  on  the  part  of  the  offender ;  but  the  community 
in  the  cenfure  it  exercifes  over  him  ftands  in  the  place  of  the  in- 
jured party. 

It  may  perhaps  by  fome  perfons  be  imagined,  that  the  dodrine   Difference 

,      r    i_       ■    n-  r  between  the 

here  delivered  of  the  juitxce  of  proceeding  in  common  concerns   doftrine  here 

.  maintained 

by  a  common  deliberation,  is  nearly  coincident  with  that  other   and  that  of  a 

.  1  •   1  1  focial  con- 

doctrine  which  teaches  that  all  lawful  government  derives  its   traft  appa- 
rent : 
authority  from  a  focial  contraft.     Let  us  confider  what  is  the 

true  difference  between  them. 

In  the  firft  place,  the  dodrine  of  common  deliberation  is  of  a   from  the 

„       -  ,  ^  .  merely  pro- 

prolpettive,  and  not  a  retrofpeiSlive  nature.     Is  the  queftion  re-   fpeaive  na- 
fpeding  fome  future  meafure   to  be  adopted  in  behalf  of  the   former: 
community  ?  Here  the  obligation  to  deliberate  in  common  pre- 

Y  fents 


i62  OF-    POLITICAL    AUTHORITY. 

rHAP  ru    ^^^^^  itfelf,  as  eminently  to  be  preferred  to  every  other  mode  of 

•^ V '    deciding   upon   the   interelts   of  the   whole.     Is  the   queftiori 

whether  I  fhall  yield  obedience  to  any  meafure  already  promul- 
gated ?  Here  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  confideration  of 
how  the  meafure  originated  ;  unlefs  perhaps  in  a  country  where 
common  deliberation  has  in  fome  fort  been  admitted  as  a  Hand- 
ing principle,  and  where  the  objed  may  be  to  refill  an  innova- 
tion upon  this  principle.  In  the  cafe  of  fhip  money  under  king 
Charles  the  firft,  it  was  perhaps  fair  to  refift  the  tax,  even  fup- 
pofing  it  to  be  abftradledly  a  good  one,  upon  account  of  the  au- 
thority impofing  it ;  though  that  reafon  might  be  infufficien't,  in 
a  country  unufed  to  reprefentative  taxation. 

Exclufively  of  this  confideration,  no  meafure  is  to  be  refifted 
on  account  of  the  irregularity  of  its  derivation.  If  it  be  juft,  it 
is  entitled  both  to  my  chearful  fubmiflion  and  my  zealous  fup- 
port.  So  far  as  it  is  deficient  in  juftice,  I  am  bound  to  refift. 
My  fituation  in  this  refpeiSt  is  in  no  degree  different  from  what 
it  was  previoufly  to  all  organifed  government.  Juftice  was  at 
that  time  entitled  to  my  affent,  and  injuftice  to  my  difapproba- 
tion.  They  can  never  ceafe  to  have  the  fame  claims  upon  me, 
till  they  fliall  ceafe  to  be  diftinguifhed  by  the  fame  unalterable 
properties.  The  meafure  of  my  refiftance  will  however  vary 
with  circumftances,  and  therefore  will  demand  from  us  a  fepa- 
rate  examination. 

Secondly, 


OF    POLITICAL    AUTHORITY.  i6 


o 


Secondly,  the  diftindion  between  the  dodrlne  here  advanced  BOOK  ill. 

^  _  CHAP.  IV. 

and  that  of  a  fecial  contrad  will  be  better  underftood,  if  we  re-   * ^ * 

from  the 

colled:  what  has  been  faid  upon  the  nature  and  validity  of  pro-  ""^'');°f 

■^  /  r  promiles : 

mifes.  If  promife  be  in  all  cafes  a  fallacious  mode  of  binding  a 
man  to  a  fpecific  mode  of  adion,  then  muft  the  argument  be  in 
all  cafes  impertinent,  that  I  confented  to  fuch  a  decifion,  and  am 
therefore  bound  to  regulate  myfelf  accordingly.  It  is  impoflible 
to  imagine  a  principle  of  more  injurious  tendency,  than  that 
which  fhall  teach  me  to  difarm  my  future  wifdom  by  my  paft 
folly,  and  to  confult  for  my  diredllon  the  errors  in  which  my  ig- 
norance has  involved  me,  rather  than  the  code  of  eternal  truth. 
So  far  as  confent  has  any  validity,  abftra£t  juftice  becomes  a 
matter  of  pure  indifference  :  fo  far  as  juftlce  deferves  to  be  made 
the  guide  of  my  life,  it  is  in  vain  to  endeavour  to  fharc  its  au- 
thority with  compacts  and  promifes. 

We   have  found  the  parallel  to  be  In  one  refped  incomplete  f'om  the 

fallibility  of 

between  the  exercife  of  thefe  two  fundlions,  private  judgment  deliberation. 
and  common  deliberation.  In  another  refpecl  the  analogy  is 
exceedingly  ftriking,  and  confiderable  perfpicuity  will  be  given 
to  our  ideas  of  the  latter  by  an  illuftration  borrowed  from  the 
former.  In  the  one  cafe  as  in  the  other  there  is  an  obvious 
principle  of  juftlce  In  favour  of  the  general  exercife.  No  indi- 
vidual can  arrive  at  any  degree  of  moral  or  intelledual  improve- 
ment, unlefs  in  the  ufe  of  an  independent  judgment.     No  ftate 

Y  2  can 


i54  OF    POLITICAL     AUTHORITY. 

CHAP  iv'  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^'^  happily  adminiftered,  unlefs  in  the  perpetual  ufe 
*■  ^  \  of  common  deliberation  refpefting  the  meafures  it  may  be  requi- 
fite  to  adopt.  But,  though  the  general  exercife  of  thefe  faculties 
be  founded  in  immutable  juftice,  juftice  will  by  no  means  uni- 
formly vindicate  the  particular  application  of  them.  Private 
judgment  and  public  deliberation  are  not  themfelves  the  ftandard 
of  moral  right  and  wrong  ;  they  are  only  the  means  of  difco- 
vering  right  and  wrong,  and  of  comparing  particular  propor- 
tions with  the  ftandard  of  eternal  truth. 

ConcluCon.  Too  much  ftrefs  has  undoubtedly  been  laid  upon  the  idea,  as  of 

a  grand  and  magnificent  fpedtacle,  of  a  nation  deciding  for  itfelf 
upon  fome  great  public  principle,  and  of  the  higheft  magiftracy 
yielding  its  claims  when  the  general  voice  has  pronounced. 
The  value  of  the  whole  muft  at  laft  depend  upon  the  quality  of 
their  decifion.  Truth  cannot  be  made  more  true  by  the  number 
of  its  votaries.  Nor  is  the  fpedlacle  much  lefs  interefting,  of  a 
folitary  individual  bearing  his  undaunted  teftimony  in  favour  of 
juftice,  though  oppofed  by  mifguided  millions.  Within  certain 
limits  however  the  beauty  of  the  exhibition  muft  be  acknow- 
ledged. That  a  nation  ftiould  dare  to  vindicate  its  fundion  of 
comxmon  deliberation,  is  a  ftep  gained,  and  a  ftep  that  inevitably 
leads  to  an  improvement  of  the  charadter  of  individuals.  That 
men  fliould  unite  in  the  aflertion  of  truth,  is  no  unpleafing  evi- 
dence of  their  virtue.     Laftly,  that  an  individual,  however  great 

ma.j 


OF    POLITICAL     AUTHORITY.  165 

may  be  his  imaginary  elevation,  fhould  be   obliged  to  yield  his  BOOK  III. 

perfonal  pretenfions   to  the   fenfe   of  the   community,   at  leaft    ^ v ' 

bears  the  appearance  of  a  practical  confirmation  of  the  great 
principle,  that  all  private  confiderations  muft  yield  to  the  gene- 
ral good. 


CHAP. 


t   is§  3 


C  H  A  p.     V. 

OF     LEGISLATION. 

SOCIETY    CAN     DECLARE    AND    INTERPRET,    BUT    CANNOT 
ENACT. — ITS  AUTHORITY  ONLY  EXECUTIVE. 

'AVING  thus  far  inveftigated  the  nature  of  political  func- 
tions, it  feems  neceffary  that  fome  explanation  fhould  be 
given  in  this  place  upon  the  fubje£t  of  legiflation.  Who  is  it  that 
has  the  authority  to  make  laws  ?  What  are  the  chara£teriftics  by 
which  that  man  or  body  of  men  is  to  be  known,  in  whom  the 
faculty  is  veiled  of  legiflating  for  the  reft  ? 

Society  can         To  thefe  queftions  the  anfwer  is  exceedingly  fimple  :  Legifla- 

declare  and 

interpret,  but  tion,  as  it  has  been  ufually  underftood,  is  not  an  affair  of  human 

fiannot  enadt. 

competence.  Reafon  is  the  only  legiflator,  and  her  decrees 
are  irrevocable  and  uniform.  The  fundtions  of  fociety  extend, 
not  to  the  making,  but  the  interpreting  of  law  ;  it  cannot  decree, 
it  can  only  declare  that,  which  the  nature  of  things  has  already 
decreed,  and  the  propi^iety  of  which  irrefiftibly  flows  from  the 
circumftances  of  the  cafe.  Montefquieu  fays,  that  "  in  a  free 
3  ftate 


OF    LEGISLATION.  167 

ftate  every  man  will  be  his  own  legiflator  *."     This  is  not  true,    521^"' 

fetting  apart  the  fundtiQns  of  the  community,   unlefs   in   the    * » ' 

limited  fenfe  already  explained.  It  is  the  office  of  confcience  to 
determine,  "  not  like  an  Afiatic  cadi,  according  to  the  ebbs  and 
flows  of  his  own  paffions,  but  like  a  Britifh  judge,  who  makes 
no  new  law,  but  faithfully  declares  that  law  which  he  finds  al- 
ready writtenf." 

The  fame  diflindion  is  to  be  made  upon  the  fubje£t  of  autho-   Its  authority 

only  execu- 

rity.  All  political  power  is  flridly  fpeaking  executive.  It  has  tive. 
appeared  to  be  neceflary,  with  refped  to  men  as  we  at  prefent 
find  them,  that  force  fhould  fometimes  be  employed  in  reprefllng 
injuftice  ;  and  for  the  fame  reafons  it  appears  that  this  force 
fhould  as  far  as  poffible  be  veiled  In  the  community.  To  the 
public  fupport  of  juftice  therefore  the  authority  of  the  commu- 
nity extends.  But  no  fooner  does  it  wander  in  the  fmalleft 
degree  from  the  great  line  of  juftice,  than  its  authority  is  at  an 
end,  it  ftands  upon  a  level  with  the  obfcurefl  individual,  and 
every  man  is  bound  to  refift  its  decifions. 

*  "  Dans  tin  etat  hire,  tout  hoinme  qui  eft  ceiife  avoir  une  ame  lihre,  deit  etre  gouver^ 
m  par  lui-meme."  EJprit  des  Loi^,  Liv.  XI.  Ch.  vL. 

I  Sterne's  Sermons. — "  On  a  Good  Confcience." 


CHAP. 


C    i6S   ] 


C  H  A  p.      VI. 

OF       OBEDIENCE. 

OBEDIENCE   NOT   THE   CORRELATIVE   OF    AUTHORITY. — NO 

MAN  BOUND  TO   YIELD   OBEDIENCE   TO   ANOTHER. CASE 

OF  SUBMISSION  CONSIDERED. — FOUNDATION  OF  OBEDI- 
ENCE.  USEFULNESS  OF  SOCIAL  COMMUNICATION. CASE 

OF  CONFIDENCE  CONSIDERED. ITS  LIMITATIONS. —  MIS- 
CHIEF OF  UNLIMITED  CONFIDENCE. SUBJECTION  EX- 
PLAINED. 


BOOK  III. 
CHAP.  VI. 


AVING  enquired  into  the  juft  and  legitimate  fource  of 
authority,  we  will  next  turn  our  attention  to  what  has 
ufually  been  confidered  as  its  correlative,  obedience.  This  has 
always  been  found  a  fubje£l  of  peculiar  difficulty,  as  well  in  re- 
lation to  the  meafure  and  extent  of  obedience,  as  to  the  fource 
of  our  obligation  to  obey. 


Obedience  The  truc  folution  will  probably  be  found  in  the  obfervation 

not  the  cor- 
relative of       that  obedience  is  by  no  means  the  proper  correlative.     The  ob- 
authority. 

je£l  of  government,  as  has  been  already  demonftrated,  is  the 
exertj.on  of  force.  Now  force  can  never  be  regarded  as  an  ap- 
peal to  the  underftanding ;  and  therefore  obedience,  which  is  an 

aft 


OF     OBEDIENCE.  691 

ciCt  of  tlie  unJcrftanding  or  will,  can  have  no  leQ;ltlinate  connec-   BOOK  III. 

'^  _  "  CHAP.  VI. 

tion  with  it.      I  am  bound  to  fubmit  to  juflice  and  truth,  be-    ^ v ' 

caufe  they  approve  themfelves  to  my  judgment.  I  am  bound  to 
co-operate  with  government,  as  far  as  it  appears  to  me  to  coin- 
cide with  thefe  principles.  But  I  fubmit  to  government  when  I 
think  it  erroneous,  merely  becaufe  I  have  no  remedy. 

No  truth  can  be  more  fimple,  at  the  fam.e  time  that  no  truth   No  mas 

bound  to 

has  been  more  darkened  by  the  glolles  of  nitereited  individuals,   yield  obedi- 

,     ,        ,  ei:ce  to 

than  that  one  man  can  m  no  cale  be  bound  to  yield  obedience   another. 
to  any  other  man  or  fet  of  men  upon  earth. 

There  is  one  rule  to  which  we  are  univerfally  bound  to  con- 
form ourfelves,  juftice,  the  treating  every  man  precifely  as  his 
ufefulnefs  and  worth  demand,  the  ading  under  every  circum- 
ftance  in  the  manner  that  fhall  procure  the  greateil  quantity  of 
general  good.  When  we  have  done  thus,  what  province  is  there 
left  to  the  difpofal  of  obedience  ? 


I  am  fummoned  to  appear  before  the  magiftrate  to  anfwer  Cafeoffub- 
for  a  libel,  an  imaginary  crime,  an  a£t  which  perhaps  I  am  con-   dered." 
vinced  ought  in  no  cafe  to  fall  under  the  animadverfion  of  law. 
I  comply  with  this  fummons.    My  compliance  proceeds,  perhaps 
from  a  convidion  that  the  arguments  I  fhall  exhibit  in  the  court 
form  the  beft  refiftance  I  can  give  to  his  injuftice,  or  perhaps 

2  from 


1 70 


OF     OBEDIENCE. 


BOOK  III.    fi-om  perceiving  that  my  non-compliance  would  frlvoloully  and 
' ^ '    without  real  ufe  interrupt  the  public  tranquillity. 


A  quaker  refufes  to  pay  tithes.  He  therefore  fuiTers  a  tithe 
proSor  to  diilrain  upon  his  goods.  In  this  action  morally  fpeak- 
ing  he  does  wrong.  The  diftindtion  he  makes  is  the  ai-gument; 
of  a  mind  that  delights  in  trifles.  That  which  will  be  taken  from 
me  by  force,  it  is  no  breach  of  morality  to  deliver  with  my  own 
■  hand.  The  money  which  the  robber  extorts  from  me,  I  do  not 
think  it  neceflary  to  oblige  him  to  take  from  my  perfon.  If  I 
walk  quietly  to  the  gallows,  this  does  not  imply  my  confent  tO; 
be  hanged. 

'  In  all  thefe  cafes  there  is  a  clear  diftindllon  between  my  com- 
pliance with  juflice  and  my  compliance  with  injuftice.  I  con- 
form to  the  principles  of  juHice,  becaufe  I  perceive  them  to  be 
intrinfically  and  unalterably  right.  I  yield  to  injuftice,  though  I 
perceive  that  to  which  I  yield  to  be  abftradledly  wrong,  and 
only  choofe  the  leaft  among  inevitable  evils. 

Foundation  The  cafe  of  volition,  as  it  is  commonly  termed,  feems  parallel 

of  obedience. 

to  that  of  intelled.  You  prefent  a  certain  propofition  to  my 
mind,  to  which  you  require  my  aiTent.  If  you  accompany  the 
propofition  with  evidence  calculated  to  fhew  the  agreement  be- 
tween the  terms  of  which  it  confills,  you  may  obtain  my  aflcnt. 
I  If 


OF     OBEDIENCE. 


171 


If  you  accompany  the   propofition  with   authority,  tclUnc:  me    BOOK  III. 

J  I.       J  ir  /'to  CHAP.  VI. 

that  you  have  examined  it  and  find  it  to  be  true,  that  thoufands    ' ^^ ' 

of  wife  and  difintereiled  men  have  admitted  it,  that  angels  or 
Gods  have  affirmed  it,  I  may  afient  to  your  authority  j  bur, 
with  refpedl  to  the  propofition  itfelf,  my  underftanding  of  its 
reafonablenefs,  my  perception  of  that  in  the  propofition  which 
ftridlly  fpeaking  conPcitutes  its  truth  or  its  falfliood,  remain  jufl: 
as  they  did.  I  believe  fomething  e!fe,  but  I  do  not  believe  the 
propofition. 

Juft  fo  in  morals.  I  may  be  perfuaded  of  the  propriety  of 
yielding  compliance  to  a  requifition  the  juftice  of  which  I  can- 
not difcern,  as  I  may  be  perfuaded  to  yield  compliance  to  a  re- 
quifition which  I  know  to  be  unjufl.  But  neither  of  thefe 
requifitions  is  flridly  fpeaking  a  proper  fubjeft  of  obedience. 
Obedience  feenis  rather  to  imply  the  unforced  choice  of  thef 
mind  and  aflent  of  the  judgment.  But  the  compliance  I  yield 
to  government,  independently  of  my  approbation  of  its  mea- 
fures,  is  of  the  flune  fpecies  as  my  compliance  with  a  wild  beaft, 
that  forces  me  to  run  north,  when  my  judgment  and  hiclinatioa 
prompted  me  to  go  fouth. 

But,   though  morality    in  its   purcft    conftruftion   altogether   Ufefulncfs  of 

1     J  1        •  1    •        r  »         •    1  !•  IT  focial  coin- 

excludes  the  idea  of  one  man  s  yieldmg   obedience   to  another,    mimicaiiou. 

yet  the  greateft  benefits  will  refult  from  mutual  communication. 

There   is   fcarcely   any   man,    whofe    communications   will   not 

Z  2  fome- 


172  OF    OBEDIENCE. 

CHAP  vi'    ^°"^£ti"^6S  enligiiten  my  judgment  and  redify  my  condu£l.    But 

'^ — -^' '   the  perfons  to  whom  it  becomes  me  to  pay  particular  attention 

in   this   refpedt,   are   not  fuch    as   may   exercife   any  particular 
magiftracy,    but  fuch,   M-hatever   may  be   their  flation,   as    are 
-  wifer  or  better  informed  in  any  refpedt  than  myfelf. 

Caeofcon-         There  are  two  ways  in  which  a  man  wifer  than  myfelf  may 

ndence  conli-  ■'  J  - 

""^  '  be   of  ufe  to  me ;  by  the  communication   of  thofe  arguments 

by  which  he  is  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  judgments  he  has 
formed ;  and  by  the  communication  of  the  judgments  them- 
felves  independent  of  argument.  This  laft  is  of  ufe  only  in  re- 
fpe£t  to  the  narrownefs  of  our  own  underftandings,  and  the  time 
that  might  be  requifite  for  the  acquifition  of  a  fcience  of  which 
we  are  at  prefent  ignorant.  On  this  account  I  am  not  to  be 
blamed,  if  I  employ  a  builder  to  conftruit  me  a  houfe,  or  a 
mechanic  to  fmk  me  a  well ;  nor  fliould  I  be  liable  to  blame, 
if  I  worked  in  perfon  under  their  diredlion.  In  this  cafe,  not 
having  opportunity  or  ability^ to  acquire  the  fcience  myfelf,  I 
truft  to  the  fcience  of  another.  I  choofe  from  the  deliberation 
of  my  own  judgment  the  end  to  be  purfued ;  I  am  convinced 
that  the  end  is  good  and  commendable ;  and,  having  done  this, 
I  commit  the  feledlon  of  means  .to  a  perfon  whofe  qualifications 
are  fuperior  to  my  own.  The  confidence  repofed  in  this  in- 
ftance  is  precifely  of  the  nature  of  delegation  in  general.  No 
term  furely  can  be  more  unapt  than  that  of  obedience,  to  exprefs 
our  duty  towards  the  overfeer  we  have  appointed  in  our  affairs. 
3  Similar 


OF     OBEDIENCE. 


^73 


Similar  to  the  confidence  I  repofe  in  a  flcilful  mechanic  Is  the   BOOK  lir. 

/  CHAP.  VI. 

attention  which  ought  to  be  paid  to  the  commander  of  an  army.    * >- ' 

It  is  my  duty  in  the  firft  place  to  be  fatisfied  of  the  goodnefs  of 
the  caufe,  of  the  propriety  of  the  war,  and  of  the  truth  of  as  many 
general  propofitions  concerning  the  condudl  of  it,  as  can  poffibly 
be  brought  within  the  fphere  of  my  underftanding.  It  may  well 
be  doubted  whether  fecrecy  be  in  any  degree  neceffary  to  the 
conduct  of  war.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  treachery  and  fur- 
prife  are  to  be  claffed  among  the  legitimate  means  of  defeating 
our  adverfary.  But  after  every  dedudlion  has  been  made  for 
confiderations  of  this  fort,  there  will  ftlU  remain  cafes,  where 
fomething  mull;  be  confided,  as  to  the  plan  of  a  campaign  or  the 
an-angement  of  a  battle,  to  the  fkill,  fo  far  as  that  fkill  really 
exifts,  of  the  commander.  When  he  has  explained  both  to  the 
utmoft  of  his  ability,  there  may  remain  parts,  the  propriety  of 
which  I  cannot  fully  comprehend,  but  which  I  have  fufficient 
reafon  to  confide  to  his  judgments 

This  dodrine  however  of  limited  obedience,  or,  as  it   may  Its  limita- 
tions. 
more  properly  be  termed,  of  confidence  and  delegation,  ought  to 

be  called  Into  adion  as  feldom  as  poffible.     Every  man  fliould 

difcharge  to  the  utmoft  pradlcable  extent  the  duties  which  arlfe 

from  his  fituatlon.      If  he  gain  as  to  the  ability  with  which  they 

may  be  difcharged,  when  he  delegates  them  to  another,  he  lofes 

with  refped  to  the  fidelity ;   every  one  being  confclous  of  the 

fiucerlty  of  his  own  Intention,  and  no  one  having  equal  proof 

of 


174  OF     OBEDIENCE. 

SR-?*;^  ^^^;    of  that  of  another.     A  virtuous  man  will  not  fail  to  perceive  the 

CHAP.  VI.  ^     . 

' ^ '    obligation  under  which  he  is  placed  to  exert  his  own  under- 

ftanding,  and  to  judge  for  himfelf  as  widely  as  his  circuraftances 
will  permit, 

Mifchiefof  Tfi-^e  abufe  of  the  doftrine  of  confidence  has  been  the  fource  of 

luiliniited 

confidence.  more  calamities  to  mankind  than  all  the  other  errors  of  the 
human  underftanding.  Depravity  would  have  gained  little  ground 
in  the  w^orld,  if  every  man  had  been -in  the  exercife  of  his  inde- 
pendent judgment.  The  inftrument  by  which  extenfive  mif- 
chiefs  have  in  all  ages  been  perpetrated  has  been,  the  principle 
of  many  men  being  reduced  to  mere  machines  in  the  hands  of 
a  few.  Man,  while  he  confults  his  own  underftanding,  is  the  or- 
nament of  the  univerfe.  Man,  when  he  furrenders  his  reafon, 
and  becomes  the  partifan  of  implicit  faith  and  palTive  obedience, 
is  the  moft  mifchievous  of  all  animals.  Ceafing  to  examine  every 
propofition  that  comes  before  him  for  the  direction  of  his  con- 
du£t,  he  is  no  longer  the  capable  fubjedl  of  moral  inflruiflion. 
He  is,  in  the  inftant  of  fubmiffion,  the  blind  inftrument  of  every 
nefarious  purpofe  of  his  principal ;  and,  when  left  to  himfelf,  is 
open  to  the  fedudion  of  injuftice,  cruelty  and  profligacy. 

■Snb^eaion  Thefe  reafonings  lead  to  a  proper  explanation  of  the  word 

fubjedx.  If  by  the  fubjedl  of  any  government  we  mean  a  perfon 
whofe  duty  it  is  to  obey,  the  true  inference  from  the  preceding 
principles  is,  that  no  government  ht^s  any  fubjedls.     If  on  the 

contrary 


OF     OBEDIENCE.  lyy 

contrary  we  mean  a  perfon,  whom  the  2;overnment  Is  bound  to   POOK  ill. 

^  .  .  ,  CHAP.  VI. 

proted,  or  may  juflly  reftrain,  the  word  is  fufficlently  admiffible.   '^ v ' 

This  remark  enables  us  to  folve  the  long-diiputed  queftion,  what 

it  is  that  conftitutes  a  man  the  fubjed:  of  any  government.    Every 

man  is  in  this  fenfe  a  fubjeit,  whom  the  government  is  competent 

to  protect  on  the  one  hand,  or  who  on  the  other,  by  the  violence 

of  his  proceedings,  renders  force  requifite  to  prevent  him  from 

difturbing  that  community,  for  the  prefervation  of  whofe  peace. 

th.e  government  is  inftituted» 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX. 

iMOT^AL  PRINCIPLES  FREQJJENTLY  ELUCIDATED  BY  INCI- 
DENTAL REFLECTION  —  BY  INCIDENTAL  PASSAGES  IN 
VARIOUS   AUTHORS. EXAMPLE. 


■^S^^p  ^'^t'    X  T  will  generally  be  found  that,  even  where  the  truth  upoa 


Appendix. 


any  fubjedl  has  been  moll  induftrioui]y  obfcured,  its  occa- 
Moral  prin-     fjonal  irradiations  have  not  been  wholly  excluded.     The  mind 

cipks  ire-  ■' 

^^'d'^db'^"     ^^^  ^°  fooner  obtained  evidence  of  any  new  truth,  efpecially  in 

incidental  re-  ^    fcieucc  of  morals,  but  it  recollects  numerous  intimations  of 

that  truth  which  have  occafionally  fuggefted  themfelves,  and  is 

aftonifhed  that  a  difcovery  which  was  pei-petually  upon  the  eve 

of  being  made,  fhould  have  been  kept  at  a  diftance  fo  long. 


by  JncI-  This   is  eminently  the  cafe  in  the  fubjed;  of  which  we  are 

dental  paf- 
fages  in  va- 
rious authors. 


^"es'i^va-     treating.     Thofe  numerous  paflages  in  poets,  divines*  and  phi- 


lofophers,  which  have  placed  our  unalterable  duty  in  the  ftrongeft 
contrail  with  the  precarious  authority  of  a  fuperior,  and  have 
taught  us  to  difclaim  all  fubordination  to  the  latter,  have  always 
been  received  by  the  ingenuous  mind  with  a  tumult  of  applaufe. 
There  is  indeed  no  fpecies  of  compofition,  in  which  the  feeds  of 

*  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more 
that  they  can  do."  Luke,  Ch.  XII.  Ver.  4. 

a  morality 


OF    OBEDIENCE.  177 

a  morality  too  perfed  for  our  prefent  improvements  in  fclence.   r>OOK  irr. 

^  .  CHAr.  VI. 

-may  more  reafonably  be  exped:ed  to  difcover  themfelves,  than  in    * ^ ' 

Appendix. 

works  of  imagination.  When  the  mind  fhakes  off  the  fetters 
of  prefcription  and  prejudice,  when  it  boldly  takes  a  flight,  ip/.o 
the  world  unknown,  and  employs  itfelf  in  feardi  of  thoie  grand 
and  interefting  pi-inciples  which  fhall  tend  to  impart  to  every 
reader  the  glow  of  enthufiafm,  it  is  at  fuch  moments  that  the 
enquiring  and  philofophical  reader  may  expe£l  to  be  prefented 
with  the  materials  and  rude  fketches  of  intellectual  improvement*. 

Among  the  many  paflages  from  writers  of  every  denomina-   Example. 
tion  that  will  readily  fuggefl  themfelves   under  this  head  to  a 
-well  informed  mind,    we  may   naturally  recoiled:  the   fpirited 
reafoning  of  young  Norval  in  the  tragedy  of  Douglas,  when  he 

*  This  was  the  opinion  of  the  celebrated  INIr.  Turgot.  "  He  thought  that 
the  moral  fentiments  of  mankind  might  be  confiderably  ftrengthened,  and  the 
perception  of  them  rendered  more  delicate  and  precife,  either  by  frequent  ex- 
ercife,  or  the  perpetually  fubje£ting  them  to  the  anatomy  of  a  pure  and  en- 
lightened underftanding.  For  this  reafon  he  confidered  romances  as  holding 
a  place  among  treatifes  of  morality,  and  even  as  the  only  books  in  which 
he  was  aware  of  having  feen  moral  principles  treated  in  an  impartial 
manner."  "  Jll.  'Turgot  penfoit  qu^on  pent  parvtntr  a  fortifier  dans  ks  hommes  leurs 
Jentmiem  nioratix,  a  les  reiidre  plus  delicats  .et  plus  jt.Jles,  foit  par  I'exercice  de  ccs 
fciitunens,  foit  en  apprenant  a  les  foumettre  a  rannlyfe  d'une  raifon  faitu  et  eclair ee^ 
Cejl  par  ce  motif  qu'il  regardoit  les  romans  comme  des  livres  de  morale,  et  iiicnii', 
difoit-il,  comme  les  feu  Is  ou  il  eiet  vu  de  la   morale." 

Vie  de  II.  Turgot,  par  Jll.  de  Condorcet. 

A  a  is 


178  OF    OBEDIENCE. 

BOOK  III.    is  called  upon  bv  lord  Randolph  to  ftate  the  particulars  of  a 

CHAP.  VI.  r  /  t  r 

' '    conteft  in  which  he  is  ene-aged,  that  lord  Randolph  may  be 

Appendix.  b  t>      '  xr  / 

*  ahle  to  decide  between  the  difputants. 

"  Nay,  my  good  lord,  though  I  revere  you  much,  . 

My  caufe  I  plead  not,  nor  demand  your  judgment. 

To  the  liege  lord  of  my  dear  native  land 

I  owe  a  fubjeft's  homage ;  but  even  him 

And  his  high  arbitration  I  rejeft. 

Within  my  bofom  reigns  another  lord^- 

Honour ;  fole  judge  and  umpire  of  itfelf."  Act  IV. 

Nothing  can  be  more  accurate  than  a  confiderable  part  of  the 
philofophy  of  this  paflage.  The  term  "honour"  indeed  has 
been  too  much  abufed,  and  prefents  to  the  mind  too  fantaftical 
an  image,  to  be  fairly  defcriptive  of  that  principle  by  which  the 
actions  of  every  intelledual  being  ought  to  be  regulated.  The 
principle  to  which  it  behoves  us  to  attend,  is  the  internal  deci- 
fion  of  our  own  underflanding  ;  and  nothing  can  be  more  evident 
than  that  the  fame  reafoning,  which  led  Norval  to  rejedl  the 
authority  of  his  fovereign  in  the  quarrels  and  difputes  In  which 
he  was  engaged,  ought  to  have  led  him  to  rejed  it  as  the  regula- 
tor of  any  of  his  adions,  and  of  confequence  to  abjure  that 
homage  which  he  fets  out  with  referving.  Virtue  cannot  pof- 
fibly  be  meafured  by  the  judgment  and  good  pleafure  of  any 
man  with  whom  we  are  concerned. 

CHAR 


C   179   ] 

CHAP.      VII. 
OF   FORMS    OF   GOVERNMENT, 

ARGUMENT  IN  FAVOUR  OF  A  VARIETY  OF  FORMS — COMPAR~ 
ED  WITH  THE  ARGUMENT  IN  FAVOUR  OF  A  VARIETY  OF 
RELIGIOUS  CREEDS. — THAT  THERE  IS  ONE  BEST  FORM  OF 
GOVERNMENT  PROVED — FROM  THE  UNITY  OF  TRUTH  — 
FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  MAN. —  OBJECTION  FROM  HUMAN 
WEAKNESS  AND  PREJUDICE. — DANGER  IN  ESTABLISHING 
AN  IMPERFECT  CODE. MANNERS  OF  NATIONS  PRODU- 
CED BY  THEIR  FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT. — GRADUAL  IM- 
PROVEMENT NECESSARY. — SIMPLICITY  CHIEFLY  TO  BE 
DESIRED. — PUBLICATION  OF  TRUTH  THE  GRAND  IN- 
STRUMENT  BY   INDIVIDUALS,    NOT    BY    GOVERNMENT 

THE    TRUTH    ENTIRE,    AND    NOT    BY  PARCELS. — SORT  OF 
PROGRESS    TO    BE    DESIRED. 


A  PROPOSITION  that  by  many  political  reafoners  has  BOOK  in. 
■;              /                                                                 CHAP.  VII. 
been  vehemently  maintained,  is  that  of  the  propriety  of  "■ v ■;> 

Argument  in 

jnflituting   different  political  governments   fuited  to  the  charac-  favour  of  a 

variety  of 

ters,  the  habits  and  prejudices  of  different  nations,    "  The  Englifh  ^°''™^  '• 
conftitution,"  fay  thefe  reafoners,  "  is  adapted  to  the  thought- 
ful, rough  and  unfubmitting  character  of  this  ifland  race  j    the 

A  a  2  flownefs 


i8o  OF    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT. 

flownefs  and  complication  of  Dutch  formality  to  the  phlegma- 
tic Hollander;  and  the  fplendour  of  the  grand  monarque  to  the 
vivacity  of  Frenchmen.  Among  the  ancients  what  could  be 
better  aflbrted  than  a  pure  democracy  to  the  intelleiStual  acute- 
nefs  and  impetuous  energy  of  the  Athenians  ;  while  the  hardy 
and  unpolilhed  Spartan  flouriihed  much  more  under  the  rugged 
and  inflexible  difcipline  of  Lycurgus  ?  The  great  art  of  the 
legiflator  is  to  penetrate  into  the  true  character  of  the  nation 
with  whom  he  is  concerned,  and  to  difcover  the  exadl  ftrucSture 
of  government  which  is  calculated  to  render  that  nation  flourifh- 
Ing  and  happy."  Accordingly  an  Englifhman  who  Ihould 
reafon  upon  thefe  poftulata  might  fay,  "  It  is  not  necefTary  I 
fhould  affert  the  Englifh  conftitution  to  be  the  happieft  and 
fublimell  conception  of  the  human  mind  ;  I  do  not  enquire  into- 
the  abfl;ra£t  excellence  of  that  government  under  which  France 
made  herfelf  illuftrious  for  centuries.  I  contemplate  with  en- 
thufiafm  the  venerable  republics  of  Greece  and  Rome.  But  I 
am  an  enemy  to  the  removing  ancient  land-marks,  and  difturbing 
with  our  crude  devices  the  wifdom  of  ages.  I  regard  ^vith 
horror  the  Quixote  plan,  that  would  reduce  the  irregular  great- 
nefs  of  nations  to  the  frigid  and  impracticable  llandard  of  meta- 
phyfical  accuracy*." 

This 

*  Thefe  arguments  bear  fonie  refemblance  to  tliofe  of  Mr.  Burke.  It 
was  not  neceffary  that  they  fliould  do  fo  precifely,  or  that  we  fhould  take  ad- 
vantage of  the  argumentitm  ad  hominem  built  upon  his  fervent  admiration  of  the 

Englifli 


OF    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT.  i8i 

This  queftion  has  been  anticipated  in  various  parts  of  the  BOOK  III. 
prefent  work  ;  but  the  argument  is  fo  popular  and  plaufible  to  a  '  v— ' 
fuperficial  view,  as  juflly  to  entitle  it  to  a  feparate  examination. 

The  idea  bears  fome  refemblance  to  one  which  was  formerly  compared 

with  the  ar- 

infifted   upon    by    certain    latitudinarians    in    religion.     "It    is  gamcnt  in  fa. 

vour  of  a  va- 

impious,"  faid  they,  "  to  endeavour  to  reduce  all  men  to  uni-  «'5ty  of  reU- 

gious  creeds. 

formity  of  opinion  upon  this  fubje£t.  Men's  minds  are  as 
various  as  their  faces.  God  has  made  them  fo  ;  and  it  is  to  be 
prefumed  that  he  is  well  pleafed  to  be  addrefled  In  different 
languages,  by  different  names,  and  with  the  confenting  ardour 
of  difagreeing  fedls."  Thus  did  thefe  reafoners  confound  the 
majefty  of  truth  with  the  deformity  of  falfhood  ;  and  fuppofe 
that  that  being  who  was  all  truth,,  took  delight  in  the  errors, 
the  abfurdities,  and  the  vices,  for  all  falfhood  in  fome  way  or 
other  engenders  vice,  of  his  creatures.  At  the  fame  time  they 
were  employed  in  unnerving  that  adivlty  of  mind,  which  is  the 
fmgle  fource  of  human  improvement.  If  truth  and  falfhood  be 
in  reality  upon  a  level,  I  fhall  be  very  weakly  employed  in  a 
ftrenuous  endeavour  either  to  difcover  truth  for  myfelf,  or  to 
imprefs  it  upon  others. 

Truth  is  in  reality  fmgle  and  uniform.     There  mufl  in  the  That  there 


IS  one 


bdl 


EngUlh  conftltutlon.  Not  to  fay  that  we  fliall  feel  ourfelves  more  at  our  eafe  in 
examining  the  queftion  generally,  than  in  a  perfonal  attack  upon  this  illuflrious 
and  virtuous  hero  of  former  times. 

I  nature 


1^2 


0F    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT. 


CH^S'^^^vu '  '^^t^^'^6  °f  things  be  one  beft  form  of  government,  whieh  all 
f~~~Y~~^  intelledlts,  fufficiently  roufed  from  the  flumbsr  of  favage  ignorance, 
vernment  ^^^jj  ]^q  irrefiftibly  incited  to  approve.  If  an  equal  participation 
of  the  benefits  of  nature  be  good  in  itfelf,  it  muft  be  good  for 
-you  and  me  and  all  mankind.  Defpotifm  may  be  of  ufe  to  keep 
Jiuman  beings  in  ignorance,  but  can  .never  conduce  to  render 
them  wife  or -virtuous  or  happy.  If  the  general  tendency  of 
defpotifm  be  injurious,  every  portion  and  fragment  of  it  muft 
-be  a  noxious  ingredient.  Truth  cannot  be  fo  variable,  as  to 
change  its  nature  by  croffing-^n  arm  of  the  fea,  a  petty  brook 
or  an  ideal  line,  and  become  fallliood.  On  the  contrary  it  is.  at 
^.11  times  and  in  all  places  the  fame. 


from  tne 
unity  of 
truth  : 


from  the  na- 
rturc  of  man. 


The  fubjedl  of  legrllation  is  every  where  the  fame,  man. 
The  points  in  which  human  beings  refemble  are  infinitely  more 
confidei-able  than  thofe  in  which  they  differ.  We  have  the  fame 
■fenfes,  the  fame  inlets  of  pleafure  and  paiq,  the  fame  faculty  to 
-reafon,  to  judge  and  .to  infer.  The  lame  caufes  that  make 
me  happy  will  make  you  happy.  We  may  differ  in  our  opi- 
jiions  upon  this  fubje.£t  at  firft,  but  this  difference  is  only  in  pre- 
judice, and  is  by  no  means  invincible.  An  event  may  often 
conduce  moft  to  the  benefit  of  a  human  being,  which  his  erro- 
neous judgment  perhaps  regarded  with  leaft  complacency.  A 
wife  fuperintendent  of  affairs  would  purfue  with  fteady  attention 
^he  real  advantage  of  thofe  over  whom  he  prefided,  carelefs  of 
"the  temporary  difapprcbation  he  incurred,  and  which  would  laft  no 
.2  longer 


OF    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT.  i8j 

longer  than  the  partial  and  mifguided  apprehenfion  from  which   BOOK  iii. 
it  flowed.  ''^ " ' 


Is  there  a  country  In  which  a  prudent  director  of  education 
would  propofe  fome  other  objedt  for  his  labours  than  to  make 
his  pupil  temperate  and  juft  and  wife  ?  Is  there  a  climate  that 
requires  its  inhabitants  to  be  hard  drinkers  or  horfe-jockies 
or  gamefters  or  bullies,  rather  than  men  ?  Can  there  be  a  corner 
of  the  world,  where  the  lover  of  juftice  and  truth  would  find  him- 
felf  out  of  his  element  and  ufelefs  ?  If  no  ;  then  liberty  muft  be 
every  where  better  than  flavery,  and  the  government  of  recSlI- 
tude  and  impartiahty  better  than  the  government  of  caprice. 

But  to  this  It  may  be  objected  that  "  men  may  not  be  every  Obj-aion 

1  t  r  fi  n        'r    1  •  from' human 

where  capable  of  liberty.     A  gift  however  valuable  in  itfelf,  if  weaknefs  and 

r*    •  prejudice. 

it  be  intended  to  be  beneficial,  muft  be  adapted  to  the  capacity 
of  the  receiver.  In  human  affairs  every  thing  muft  be  gradual ; 
and  it  is  contrary  to  every  idea  that  experience  furniflies  of  the 
nature  of  mind  to  expert  to  advance  men  to  a  ftate  of  perfedtion 
at-  once.  It  was  in  a  fpirit  fomewhat  fimilar  to  this,  that  Solon, 
the  Athenian  lawgiver,  apologifed  for  the  imperfedion  of  his 
code,  faying,  "  that  he  had  not  fought  to  promulgate  fuch  laws 
as  were  good  in  themfelves,  but  fuch  as  his  countrymen  werC' 
able  to  bear." 


The  experiment  of  Solon  feems  to  be  of  a  dangerous  nature.  Danger  in 

1  •  1     r  •       r  elhiblifliinj 

A  code,   fuch  as  his,   bid  fair  for  permanence,  and   does  not  an  imperfta 

code. 

appear 


i84  OF    FORMS    OF    GOVERNMENT. 

appear  to  have  contained  in  it  a  principle  of  improvement.     He" 
did  not   meditate  that  gradual  progrefs  which   was  above  de-- 
fcribed,  nor  contemplate  in  the  Athenians  of  his  own  time,  the 
,  root  from  which  were  to  fpring  the  polTible  Athenians  of  fome 

future  period,  v/ho  might  realife  all  that  he  was  able  to  conceive 
of  good  fenfe,  fortitude  and  virtue.  His  inflitutions  were  rather 
calculated  to  hold  them  down  in  perpetuity  to  one  certain  de- 
gree of  excellence  and  no  more. 

Manners  of  This  fugg^ftion  fumifhes  US  with  the  real  clue  to  that  ftriking 

duced  by        Coincidence  between  the  manners  of  a  nation  and  the  form  of  its 

their  forn;is  of 

government,  government,  which  was  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  the 
chaptei",  and  v/hich  has  furnifhed  fo  capital  an  argument  to  the 
advocates  for  the  local  propriety  of  different  forms  of  government. 
It  was  in  reality  fomewhat  illogical  in  thefe  reafoners  to  employ 
.this  as  an  argument  upon  the  fubjedl,  without  previoufly  afcer- 
:taining  which  of  the  two  things  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  caufe 
and  which  as  an  effedt,  whether  the  government  arofe  out  of 
the  manners  of  the  nation,  or  the  manners  of  the  nation  out  of 
the  government.  The  laft  of  thefe  ftatements  appears  upon  the 
whole  to  be  neareft  to  the  fa£t.  The  government  may  be  in- 
debted for  its  exiftence  to  accident  or  force.  Revolutions,  as 
they  have  moft  frequently  taken  place  in  the  world,  are  epochas, 
in  which  the  temper  and  wifhcs  of  a  nation  are  lead  confulted*. 
When   it   is  otherwife,    ftlU  the  real  effedl  of  the  governmeat 

*  See  Kume's  Effays.     Part  II.  EiTliy  xii. 

which 


OF     OBEDIENCE.  1S5 

which  is  inftituted,  is  to  perpetuate  propenfities  and  fentiments,  p,?fp' J|?" 
which  without  its  operation  would  fpeedily  have  given  place  to    *^       ^^       ' 
other  propenfities.     Upon  every  iuppofition,  the  exifting  corre- 
fpondence  between  national  chara£ter  and  national  government 
will  be  found  in  a  jufi:  confideration  to  arife  outof  the  latter. 

The   principle  of  c;radual  improvement  advanced  in  the  lafl    Gradual  Im- 

r  i:  o  i.  proveinent 

cited  objection  muft  be  admitted  for  true  ;  but  then  it  is  necef-    "eceffaq'. 
fary,  while  we  adopt  it,  that  we  iTiould  not  fuffer  ourfelves  to 
a£t  in  dire£l  oppofition  to  it ;  and  that  we  fliould  choofe  the  beft 
and  moll  powerful  means  for  forwarding  that  improvement. 

Man  is  in  a  ftate  of  perpetual  progrefs.     He  muft  grow  either   Si'mpHcky 
better  or  worfe,  either  correal  his  habits  or  confirm  them.     The    defued. 
government  propofed  muft  either  increafe  our  paflions  and.  pre- 
judices by  fanning  the  flame,  or  by  gradually  difcouraging  tend 
to  extirpate  them.      In  reality,  it  is  fufficiently  difficult  to  imagine 
a  government  that  fhall  have  the  latter  tendency.     By  its  very 
nature  political  inftitution  has  a  tendency  to  fufpend  the  elafticity, 
and  put  an  end  to  the  advancement  of  mind.     Every  fcheme  for 
embodying   imperfedlion   muft    be    injurious.     That    which    is 
to-day  a  confiderable  melioration,  will  at  fome  future  period,  if 
preferved  unaltered,  appear  a  defedt  and  dileafe  in  the  body  po- 
litic.    It  were  earneftly  to  be  defired  that  each  man  was  wife  ■ 
enough  to  govern  himfelf  without  the  intervention  of  any  com- 
pulfory  reftraint ;  and,  fmce  government  even  in  its  beft  ftate  is 

Bb  an^ 


iS6  OF     OBEDIENCE. 

CHAP^vir'    ''^"  ^^'^^'  ^^^  obje(Et   principally  to  be  aimed  at  is,  that  we  fliould 
"  have  as  little  of  it  as  the  general  peace  of  human  fociety  will 

permit. 

Tublicntion  But  the  grand  inftrument  for  forwarding  the  improvement  of 

of  truth  the 

grand  inftiu-   mind  is  the  publication  of  truth.     Not  the  publication  on  the 

ment : 

by  iiidiW-  P^^^  °^  government ;  for  it  is  infinitely  difEcult  to  difcover  in- 
£ovcnim"ent^  fallibly  what  the  truth  is,  efpecially  upon  controverted  points, 
and  government  is  as  liable  as  individuals  to  be  miftaken  in  this 
refpeft.  In  reality  it  is  more  liable  ;  for  the  depofitaries  of  go- 
vernment have  a  very  obvious  temptation  to  defire,  by  means 
of  ignorance  and  implicit  faith,  to  perpetuate  the  exifting  ftate 
of  things.  The  only  fubftantial  method  for  the  propagation  of 
truth  is  difcuffion,  fo  that  the  errors  of  one  man  may  be  detect- 
ed by  the  acutenefs  and  fevere  difquifition  of  his  neighbours. 
All  we  have  to  demand  from  the  ofBcers  of  government,  at  leaft 
in  their  public  charadler,  is  neutrality.  The  intervention  of 
authority  in  a  field  proper  to  reafcning  and  demonftration  is 
alvvays  injurious.  If  on  the  right  fide,  it  can  only  difcredit 
truth,  and  call  off  the  attention  of  men  to  a  foreign  confideration. 
If  on.  the  wrong,  though  it  may  not  be  able  to  fupprefs  the 
fpirit  of  enquiry,  it  will  have  a  tendency  to  convert  the  calm 
purfuit  of  knowledge  into  paffion  and  tumult. 


the  truth  en-       "  But  in  v/hat  manner  fhall  the  principles  of  truth  be  commu- 

tire,  and  not 

by  parcels,      nicated  fo  .as  bell  to  lead  to  the  pra<aice  ?  By  fliewing  to  man- 
A  .  kind 


OF     OBEDIENCE.  187 

kind  truth  in  all  its  evidence,  or  concealinjj;  one  half  of  it  ?  Shall  BOOK  ill. 

they  be  initiated  by  a  partial   difcovery,  and  thus  led  on   by     *■ v ' 

regular  degrees  to  conclufions  that  would  at  firft  have  wholly 
alienated  their  minds  ?" 


This  queflion  will  come  to  be  more  fully  difcufled  in  a  fol- 
lowing chapter.  In  the  mean  time  let  us  only  confider  for  the 
prefent  the  quantity  of  efFedt  that  may  be  expedled  from  thefe 
two  oppofite  plans. 

An  inhabitant  of  Turkey  or  Morocco  may  perhaps  be  of 
opinion,  that  the  vefting  power  in  the  arbitrary  will  or  caprice 
of  an  individual  has  in  it  more  advantages  than  difadvantages. 
If  I  be  defirous  to  change  his  opinion,  fhould  I  undertake  to  re- 
commend to  him  in  animated  language  fome  modification  of 
this  caprice  ?  I  fhould  attack  it  in  its  principle.  If  I  do  other- 
wife,  I  fhall  betray  the  ftrength  of  my  caufe.  The  principle 
oppofite  to  his  own,  will  not  poflefs  half  the  irrefiftible  force 
which  I  could  have  given  to  it.  His  objections  will  affiime 
vigour.  The  principle  I  am  maintaining  being  half  truth  and 
half  falfhood,  he  will  in  every  ftep  of  the  conteft  pofTefs  an  advan- 
tage in  the  offenfive,  of  which,  if  he  be  fufficiently  acute,  I 
can  never  deprive  him. 

Now  the  principle  I  fhould  have  to  explain  of  equal  law  and 
equal  juflice  to  the  inhabitant  of  Morocco,  would  be  as  new  to 

B  b  2  him. 


i8»  O  F    O  B  E  D  I  E  N  C  E. 

CHA?  vn  ^"^'  ^®  ^^y  principle  of  the  boldeft  political  defcrlptlon  that  I 
"^  •^  '  could  propagate  in  this  country.  Whatever  apparent  difference 
may  exift  between  the  two  cafes,  may  fairly  be  fufpeited  to 
ov/e  its  exiftence  to  the  imagination  of  the  obferver.  The  rule 
therefore  which  fuggefts  itfelf  in  this  cafe  is  fitted  for  univer- 
fal  application. 


^refs  to  be 
dcfired, 


^refs  to  be°'  -^^^  ^°  *^^  improvements  which  are  to  be  introduced  Into  the 
political  fyftem,  their  quantity  and  their  period  muft  be  deter- 
mined by  the  degree  of  knowledge  exifting  in  any  country,  and 
the  ftate  of  prepai^ation  of  the  public  mind  for  the  changes  that 
are  to  be  defired.  Political  renovation  may  ftridly  be  confider- 
ed  as  one  of  the  ftages  in  intelledlual  improvement.  Literature 
and  difquifition  cannot  of  themfelves  be  rendered  fufficiently 
general ;  it  will  be  only  the  cruder  and  grofler  parts  that  can  be 
expefted  to  defcend  in  their  genuine  form  to  the  multitude  ; 
while  thofe  abftrad;  and  bold  fpeculations,  in  which  the  value  of 
literature  principally  confifts,  muft  necefTarily  continue  the  por- 
tion of  th€  favoured  few.  It  is  here  that  focial  inftitution  offers 
itfelf  in  aid  of  the  abftrufer  powers  of  argumentative  communi- 
cation. As  foon  as  any  important  truth  has  become  eftablifhed 
to  a  fufFicient  extent  in  the  minds  of  the  enterprifmg  and  the 
wife,  it  may  tranquilly  and  with  eafe  be  rendered  a  part  of  the 
general  fyftem  ;  fmce  the  uninlliruded  and  the  poor  are  never 
the  ftrenuous  fupporters  of  thofe  complicated  fyftems  by  which 
oppreffion  is  maintained  ;  and  fince  they  have  an  obvious  in- 

tereft 


OF    OBEDIENCE.  189 

tereft  in  the  pra£llcal  introdudion  of  fimpliclty  and  truth,     One  BOOK  III. 

valuable  principle  being  thus  realifed,  prepares  the  way  for  the    *^ v- — ' 

realifing  of  more.  It  ferves  as  a  refting-place  to  the  human  mind 
in  its  great  bufinefs  of  exploring  the  regions  of  truth,  and 
gives  it  new  alacrity  and  encouragement  for  farther  exertions. 


AN 


A  N 


ENQUIRY 

CONCERNING 

POLITICAL       JUSTICE. 

B   O   O   K       IV. 

MISCELLANEOUS    PRINCIPLES. 

CHAP.     I. 
OF     RESISTANCE. 

EVERY  INDIVIDUAL  THE  JUDGE  OF  HIS  OWN  RESISTANCE. 

OBJECTION. ANSWERED  FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  GO- 
VERNMENT  FROM  THEMODESOF  RESISTANCE. 1.  FORCE 

RARELY     TO     BE     EMPLOYED EITHER    WHERE    THERE    IS 

SMALL  PROSPECT  OF  SUCCESS  —  OR  WHERE  THE  PROSPECT 
15  GREAT. — HISTORY  OF  CHARLES  THE  FIRST  ESTI- 
MATED.  2.  REASONING  THE  LEGITIMATE  MODE. 


IT  has  appeared  in  the  courfe  of  our  reafonings  upon  politi-   BOOK  IV. 
cal  authority,  that  every  man  is  bound  to  refift  every  unjuft    ^^ ^ ' 

Every  indi- 

proceeding  on  the  part  of  the  community.     But  who  is  the  vidualthe 

judge  X 


192  OFRESISTANCE. 

BOOK  IV.  judge  of  this  injuPdce  ?  The  queftion  anfwers  Itfelf:  the  private 
judgment  of  the  individual.  Were  it  not  fo,  the  appeal  would 
be  nugatory,  for  w^e  have  no  infallible  judge  to  whom  to  refer 
our  controverfies.  He  is  obliged  to  confult  his  own  private 
judgment  in  this  cafe,  for  the  fame  reafon  that  obliges  him  to 
confult  it  in  every  other  article  of  his  condudt. 

Objeaion.  "  But  is  not  this  pofition  neceiTarily  fubverfive  of  all  govern- 

ment ?  Can  there  be  a  power  to  rule,  where  no  man  is  bound  to 
obey  ;  or  at  leaft  where  every  man  is  to  confult  his  own  under- 
ftanding  firft,  and  then  to  yield  his  concurrence  no  farther  than 
he  fhall  conceive  the  regulation  to  be  juft  ?  The  very  idea  of 
government  is  that  of  an  authority  fuperfeding  private  judgment ; 
how  then  can  the  exercife  of  private  judgment  be  left  entire  ? 
What  degree  of  order  is  to  be  expected  in  a  community,  where 
every  man  is  taught  to  indulge  his  own  fpeculations,  and  even 
to  refift  the  decifion  of  the  whole,  whenever  that  decifion  is  op- 
pofed  to  the  didates  of  his  own  fancy  ?" 

Anfwered  The  true  anfwer  to  thefe  queftions  lies  in  the  obfervation  with 

from  the  na-         ,  ,    ,  ,  „^      .^   .  i  ,  . 

of  go-  VN^hich  we  began  our  dilquilition  on  governm.ent,  that  this 
boafted  inftitution  is  nothing  more  than  a  fcheme  for  enforcing 
by  brute  violence  the  fenfe  of  one  man  or  fet  of  men  upon 
another,  neceffary  to  be  employed  in  certain  cafes  of  peculiar 
emergency.  Suppofnig  the  queftion  then  to  lie  merely  between 
the  force  of  the  community  on  one  part>   and  the  force  with 

which 


tare  or  go 
vcrnment 


OF     RESIST  AN  CE.  jg^ 

which  any  hidlvldual  member  fhould  think  it  Incumbeni  upon  l^OOK  iv. 

r            .           .  CHAP.  I. 

him  to  refift  their  decifions  on  the  other,  it  is  fufficiently  evident    * <- ' 

that  a  certain  kind  of  authority  and  fupremacy  M'ould  be  the  re- 
fult.     But  this  is  not  the  true  ftate  of  the  queftion. 


It  is  farther  evident,  that,  though  the  duty  of  every  man  to 
exercife  his  private  judgment  be  unalterable,  yet  fo  far  as  relates 
to  pradlice,  wherever  government  fubfifts,  the  exercife  of  private 
judgment  is  fubftantially  intrenched  upon.  The  force  put  by 
the  community  upon  thofe  who  exercife  rapine  and  injuftice, 
and  the  influence  of  that  force  as  a  moral  motive  upon  its  mem- 
bers in  general,  are  each  of  them  exhibitions  of  an  argument, 
not  founded  in  general  reafon,  but  in  the  precarious  interference 
of  a  fidlible  individual.  Nor  is  this  all.  Without  anticipating 
the  queftion  of  the  different  kinds  of  refiftance  and  the  election 
that  it  may  be  our  duty  to  make  of  one  kind  rather  than  another, 
it  Is  certain  in  fa<3:,  that  my  condud  will  be  materially  altered 
by  the  forefight  that,  if  I  ad  in  a  certain  manner,  I  fhall  have 
the  combined  force  of  a  number  of  individuals  to  oppofe  me. 
That  government  therefore  is  the  beft,  which  in  no  one  inftance 
interferes  with  the  exercife  of  private  judgment  without  abfolute 
neceflity. 

The  modes  according  to  which  an  individual  may  oppofe  any   from  die 

meafure  which  his  judgment  difapproves  are  of  two  forts,  adion   lidance. 

and  fpeech.     Shall  he  upon  every  occafion  have  recourfe  to  the    '■  Force  rare- 
ly to  be  em- 
C  c  former  ?   F'^yed, 


194  OFRESISTANCE. 

former  ?  This  it  is  ablurd  fo  much  as  to  fuppofe.  The  ob- 
je£i:  of  every  virtuous  man  is  the  general  good.  But  how  can 
he  be  faid  to  pi-omote  the  general  good,  who  is  ready  to  wafte 
his  a£live  force  upon  every  trivial  occafion,  and  facrifice  his  life 
without  the  chance  of  any  public  benefit  I 

either  where        "  But  he  refcrves  himfelf,"  I  will  fuppofe,  "  for  fome  great  oc- 

there  is  fmall  ,-  .  ^  ,.,.  ,  •••« 

profped  of      cafion ;  and  then,  carelels  as  to  luccels,  which  is  a  large  object' 

fuccefs,  1       1      • 

only  to  little  minds,  generoufly  embarks  in  a  cauie  where  he  has 
no  hope  but  to  perifh.  He  becomes  the  martyr  of  truth.  He 
believes  that  fuch  an  example  will  tend  to  imprefs  the  minds  of 
his  fellow  men,  and  to  roufe  them  from  their  lethargy." 

The  queftion  of  martyrdom  is  of  a  difficult  nature;  I  had 
rather  convince  men  by  my  arguments,  than  feduce  them  by 
my  example.  It  is  fcarcely  poffible  for  me  to  tell  what  oppor-- 
tunities  for  ufefulnefs  may  offer  themfelves  in  the  future  years  of 
my  exiftence.  Nor  is  it  improbable  in  a  general  confidcration. 
that  long  and  perfevering  fervices  may  be  more  advantageous 
than  brilliant  and  tranfitory  ones.  The  cafe  being  thus  circum- 
ftanced,  a  truly  wife  man  cannot  fail  to  hefitate  as  to  the  idea  of 
offering  up  his  life  a  voluntary  oblation... 

Whenever  martyrdom  becomes  an  indifpenfible  duty,  when: 
nothing  can  preferve  him  fhort  of  the  cleareft  derelidion  of  prin- 
ciple and  the  moll  palpable  defertion  of  truth,  he  will  then  meet 

it 


OF    RESISTANCE.  195 

It  with  perfed  ferenky.     He  did  not  avoid  it  before  from  any  ^9?iyy' 

weaknefs  of  perfonal  feeling.     When  it  muft  be  encountered,   ' » ' 

he  knows  that  it  is  indebted  for  that  hiflre  which  has  been  fo 
generally  acknowledged  among  mankind,  to  the  intrepidity  of  the 
fufferer.  He  knows  that  nothing  is  fo  eflential  to  true  virtue, 
as  an  utter  difregard  to  individual  advantage. 

The  objedions  that  offer  themfelves  to  an  exertion  of  adual 
force,  where  there  are  no  hopes  of  fuccefs,  are  numerous.  Such 
an  exertion  cannot  be  made  without  injury  to  the  lives  of  more 
than  a  fingle  individual.  A  certain  number  both  of  enemies  and 
friends  muft  be  expected  to  be  the  victims  of  fo  wild  an  under- 
taking. It  is  regarded  by  contemporaries,  and  recorded  by  hiftory 
as  an  intemperate  ebullition  of  the  pafTions ;  and  ferves  rather  as 
a  beacon  to  deter  others,  than  as  a  motive  to  animate  them.-  It 
is  not  the  frenzy  of  enthufiafm,  but  the  calm,  fagacious  and  de- 
liberate effort  of  reafon,  to  which  truth  muft  be  indebted  for  its 
progrefs. 

But  let  us  fuppole,  "  that  the  profpeit  of  fuccefs  is  confidera-  or  where  the 
ble,  and  that  there  is  reafon  to  believe  that  refolute  violence  may  great. 
in  no  long  time  accompliih  its  purpofe."  Even  here  we  may  be 
allowed  to  hefitate'.  Force  has  already  appeared  to  be  an  odious 
weapon ;  and,  if  the  ufe  of  it  be  to  be  regretted  in  the  hands  of 
government,  it  does  not  change  its  nature  though  wielded  by  a 
band  of  patriots.     If  the  caufe  we  plead  be  the  caufe  of  truth, 

C  c  2  there 


ig6  OF     RESISTANCE. 

I\^OK  iV.   there  is  no  douk  thfit  by  our  reafonings,  if  fufficieiitly  ziealouj 

' -^ ^    and  couftant,  the  flxine  purpofe.  may  be  eiTedied  iu  a  milder  and 

more  Uberal  way  *v 

In  a  word,  it-  is  proper  to  reeolIecSt  hsre  what  has  been  effa-- 
blilhed  as  to  the  dodrine  offeree  in  general,-- that  it- is  in  no  cafe 
to  be  employed  but  where  every  other  means-  is  ineffefhual.  In: 
the  queilion  therefore  of  refiflance  to  government,  force  ought: 
-  never  to  be  introduced  without  the  moft  imminent  neceffity ; 
never  but  in  ci-rcumftances  fimilar  to  thofe  of  defending  my 
life  from  a  ruffian,  where  time  can  by  no  means  be  gained,  and 
the  confequences  inftantly  to.  enfue  are.  unqueftionably  fatal. 

Hiiioryof  The  hiftoiy  of  Icing  Charles  the  firll  furnifhes  an  inftrudlve 

Charles  the 

firil  efti-  example  in  both  kinds.     The  original  defign  of  Ms  opponents 

was- that  of  confining  his  power  within  narrow  and  palpable 
limits.  This  objeft,  after  a  ftruggle  of  many  years,,  was  fully 
accompliftied  by  the  parliament  of  1640,  without  bloodflxed 
(except  indeed  in  the  fmgle  inftance  of  lord  Strafford)  and 
without  commotion.-  They  next  conceived  the  project  of  over- 
turning the  hierarchy  and  the  monarchy  of  England,  in  oppofi- 
tion  to  great  numbers,  and.  in  the  lail  point  no  doubt  to  a  ma- 
jority of  their  countrymen.  Admitting  thefe  objedls  to  have- 
been  in  the  utmoft  degree  excellent,  they  ought  not,  for  the  pur-- 

*  See  this  cafe  more  fully  difcufled  in  the  foUowihg  chapter.. 

pofe 


mated. 


OF     RESISTANCE. 


[97 


fofs  of  obtaining  them,  to  have  precipitated  the  queflioa  to  the    BOOK  IV. 
extremity  of  a  civil  war..  ' » ' 

"  But,  fmce  force  is  fcarcely  under  any  circumftances  to  be   2.  Reafonmg 

the  legitimate 

employed,  of  w^hat  nature  is  that  refiftance  which  ought  con-  mode, 
ftantly  to  be  given  to  every  mftance  of  injuftice  ?"  The  refift- 
ance  I  am  bound  to  employ  is  that  of  uttering  the  truth,  of 
eenfuring  in  the  mofl  explicit  manner  every  proceeding  that  I 
perceive  to  be  adverfe  to  the  true  interefts  of  mankind.  I  am 
bound  to  difleminate  without  referve  all  the  principles  with 
which  I  am  acquainted,  and  which  it  may  be  of  importance  to 
mankind  to  know  ;  and  this  duty  it  behoves  me  to  pradlife  upon 
every  occafion  and  with  the  moft  perfevering  conftancy.  I 
muft  difclofe  the  whole  fyflem  of  moral  and  political  truth, 
without  fuppreffing  any  part  under  the  idea  of  its  being  too 
bold  and  paradoxical,  and  thus  depriving  the  whole  of  that 
complete  and  irrefiflible  evidence,  without  which  its  effeds  muft 
always  be  feeble,  partial  and  uncertain. 


CHAP. 


[     19S     ] 

CHAP.     IL 
OF     REVOLUTIONS. 

SECTION      I. 

DUTIES      OF     A     CITIZEN. 

OBLIGATION  TO  SUPPORT  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  OUR 
COUNTRY  CONSIDERED — MUST  ARISE  EITHER  FROM  THE 
REASON  OF  THE  CASE,  OR  FROM  A  PERSONAL  AND 
LOCAL  CONSIDERATION. — THE  FIRST  EXAMINED. — THE 
SECOND. 


BOOK  IV.    T^T  O  queftion  can  be  more  important  than  that  which  relpedts 

Section  I, 


CHAP.  II. 


the  beft  mode  of  efFeding  revolutions.     Before  we  enter 


Obligation  to  upon  it  howevcr,  it  may  be  proper  to  remove  a  difficulty  which 

fupport  the  .  r  •      ^        r  r 

conftkution     has  fuggcfted  itfclf  to  the  minds  of  fome  men,  how  far  we  ought 

ofourcountry 

confidered :  generally  fpeaking  to  be  the  friends  of  revolution ;  or,  in  other 
words,  whether  it  be  juftifiable  in  a  man  to  be  the  enemy  of  the 
conftitution  of  his  countr)% 


*'  We  live,"  it  will  be  faid,  "  under  the  protection  of  this  con- 
ftitution ;  and  protedion,  being  a  benefit  conferred,  obliges  us 
to  a  reciprocation  of  fupport  in  return." 

7       .  To 


DUTIES    OF    A    CITIZEN. 


199 


To  this  it  may  be  anfwered,  firft,  that  this  protedion  is  a  very    BOOK  iv. 
equivocal  thino; ;  and,  till  it  can  be  flaown  that  the  vices,  from   j! -^ ' 

^  "  Section  I. 

the  efFedls  of  which  it  protects  us,  are  not  for  the  moft  part  the 
produce  of  that  conflitutlon,  we  fhall  never  fufEciently  under- 
ftand  the  quantity  of  benefit  it  includes. 

Secondly,  gratitude,  as  has  aheady  been  proved  *,  is  a  vice  and 
not  a  virtue.  Every  man  and  every  colleftion  of  men  ought  to 
be  treated  by  us  in  a  manner  founded  upon  their  intrinfic  qualities 
and  capacities,  and  not  according  to  a  rule  which  has  exiftence 
only  in  relation  to  ourfelves. 

Add  to  this,  thirdly,  that  no  motive  can  be  more  equivocal 
than  the  gratitude  here  recommended.  Gratitude  to  the  confti- 
tution,  an  abftrad  idea,  an  imaginary  exiftence,  is  altogether 
unintelligible.  Affedion  to  my  countrymen  will  be  much  better 
proved,  by  my  exertions  to  procure  them  a  fubftantial  benefit, 
than  by  my  fupporting  a  fyftem  which  I  believe  to  be  fraught 
with  injurious  confequences. 

He  who  calls  upon  me  to  fupport  the  conftitution  muft  found  J""^  arlfe 

either  from 

his  requifition  upon  one  of  two  principles.     It  has  a  claim  upon  ^^^  '''^^'^"  °^' 

the  cafe,  or 

my  fupport  either  becaufe  it  is  good,  or  becaufe  it  is  Britiih.  ^'^°^  •'•  P"-""- 

fonal  and  lo' 
cal  confidera- 
tion. 
*  Book  II.  chap.  ii.  p.  83. 

Againft 


200  DUTIES   OF    A    CITIZEN. 

Againft  the  requifition  in  the  firft  fenfe  there  is  nothing  to 
objeft.  All  that  is  neceflary  is  to  prove  the  goodnefs  which  is 
afcribed  to  it.  But  perhaps  it  will  be  faid,  "  that,  though  not 
abfolutely  good,  more  mifchief  will  refult  from  an  attempt  to 
overturn  it,  than  from  maintaining  it  VN^ith  its  mixed  character  of 
partly  right  and  partly  wrong."  If  this  can  be  made  evident, 
undoubtedly  I  ought  to  fubmit.  Of  this  mifchief  however  I 
can  be  no  judge  but  in  confequence  of  enquiry.  To  fome  the 
evils  attendant  on  a  revolution  will  appear  greater,  and  to  others 
lefs.  Some  vv'ill  imagine  that  the  vices  with  which  the  Englifli 
conftitution  is  pregnant  are  confiderable,  and  fome  tliat  it  is 
nearly  innocent.  Before  I  can  decide  between  thefe  oppofite 
opinions  and  balance  the  exifting  and  the  poflible  evils,  I  mufl; 
examine  for  myfelf.  But  examination  in  its  nature  implies  un- 
certainty of  refult.  Were  I  to"  determine  before  I  fat  down  on 
which  fide  the  decifion  fhould  be,  I  could  not  ftridly  fpeaking  be 
faid  to  examine  at  all.  He  that  defires  a  revolution  for  its  own 
fak-e  is  to  be  regarded  as  .a  madman.  He  that  defires  it  from  a 
thorough  convi£tlon  of  its  ufefulnefs  and  necefTity  has  a  claim 
upon  us  for  candour  and  refpeft. 

Thefccoiid.  ■  As  to  the  demand  upon  me  for  fupport  to  the  Englifli  confti- 
tution,  becaufe  it  is  Englifli,  there  is  little  plaufibility  in  this 
arsiument.  It  is  of  the  fame  nature  as  the  demand  upon  me  to 
be  a  Chriftian.  becaufe  I  am  a  Briton,  or  a  Mahometan,  becaufe 

I  am 


DUTIES    OF   A    CITIZEN.  201 

I  am  a  native  of  Turkey.     Inftead  of  being  an  expreffion  of  re-    fPf^i  lY* 

fpedt,  it  argues  contempt  of  all  government,  religion  and  virtue,     ^—r^ 

and  every  thing  that  is  facred  among  men.  If  there  be  fuch  a 
thing  as  truth,  it  muft  be  better  than  error.  If  there  be  fuch  a 
faculty  as  reafon,  it  ought  to  be  ex-^rted.  But  this  demand  makes' 
truth  a  matter  of  abfolute  indifference,  and  forbids  us  the  exercife 
of  our  reafon.  If  men  reafon  and  reflsii,  it  muft  neceflarily 
Iiappen  that  either  the  Englifhman  or  the  Turk  will  find  his 
government  to  be  odious  and  his  religion  falfe.  For  virhat  pur- 
pofe  employ  his  reafon,  if  he  muft  for  ever  conceal  the  conclu- 
fions  to  w^hich  it  leads  him  ?  How  would  man  have  arrived 
at  his  prefent  attainments,  if  he  had  always  been  contented  with 
the  ftate  of  fociety  in  which  he  happened  to  be  born  ?  In 
a  word,  either  reafon  is  the  curfe  of  our  fpecies,  and  human 
nature  is  to  be  regarded  with  horror ;  or  it  becomes  us  to  em- 
ploy our  underftanding  and  to  ad;  upon  it,  and  to  follow  truth 
wherever  it  may  lead  us.  It  cannot  lead  us  to  mifchief,  fmce 
utility,  as  It  regards  percipient  beings.  Is  the  only  bafis  of  moral 
and  political  truth. 


Dd  SECTION 


[       202       ] 

S  E  C  T  I  O  N      II. 

MODE    OF   EFFECTING    REVOLUTIONS. 

PERSUASION  THE  r?.0?ER  IN?TRUMENT — NOT  VIOLENCE— 
NOR  RESENTMENT. — LATENESS  OF  EVENT  DESIRABLE. 

^  O  return  to  the  enquiry  refpeding  the  mode  of  efFeccIng 
revokitions.     If  no  queilion  can  be  more  important,  there 

Section  II.  i  i      •  r  i 

Perfuafion       is  fortunately  no  queftion  perhaps  that  admits  ot  a  more  complete 

the  proper  in- 

ftrument :  and  fatisfaftory  general  anfwer.  The  revolutions  of  ilates,  which 
a  philanthropift  vs^ould  defire  to  witnefs,  or  in  which  he  would 
willingly  co-operate,  confift  principally  in  a  change  of  fenti- 
raents  and  difpofitions  in  the  members  of  thofe  ftates.  The  true 
inftruments  for  changing  the  opinions  of  men  are  argument  and 
perfuafion.  The  beft  fecurity  for  an  advantageous  iffiie  is  free 
and  unreftritled  difcuffion.  In  that  field  truth  muft  always 
prove  the  fuccefsful  champion.  If  then  we  would  improve  the 
focial  inftitutions  of  mankind,  we  muft  write,  we  muft  argue,  we 
muft  converfe.  To  this  bufinefs  there  is  no  clofe ;  in  this  pur- 
fuit  there  fhould  be  no  paufe.  Every  method  fhould  be  cm- 
ployed, — not  fo  much  pofitively  to  allure  the  attention  of  man- 
kind, or  perfuafively  to  invite  them  to  the  adoption  of  our 
opinions, — as  to  remove  every  reftraint  upon  thought,  and  to 

throw 


MODE  OF  EFFECTING  REVOLUTIONS.  103 

throw  open  the  temple  of  fclence  and  the  field  of  enquiry  to  all  BOOK  iv. 
the  world.  * .^ ' 

Section  II, 

Thofe  inftruments  will  always  be  regarded  by  the  difcerning  not  violence : 
mind  as  fufpicious,  which  may  be  employed  with  equal  profpedt 
of  fuccefs  on  both  fides  of  every  queftion.  This  confideration 
fhould  make  us  look  with  averfion  upon  all  refources  of  violence. 
When  we  defcend  into  the  lifted  field,  we  of  courfe  defert  the 
vantage  ground  of  truth,  and  commit  the  decifion  to  uncertainty 
and  caprice.  The  phalanx  of  reafon  is  invulnerable  ;  it  advances 
with  deliberate  and  determined  pace ;  and  nothing  is  able  to 
refift  it.  But  when  we  lay  down  our  arguments,  and  take  up 
our  fwords,  the  cafe  is  altered.  Amidft  the  barbarous  pomp  of 
war  and  the  clamorous  din  of  civil  brawls,  who  can  tell  whether 
the  event  fhall  be  profperous  or  miferable  ? 

We  muft  therefore  carefully  diftlnguifh  between  informing  nofrefent- 
the  people  and  inflaming  them.  Indignation,  refentment  and  fury 
are  to  be  deprecated  ;  and  all  we  fhould  afk  is  fober  thought, 
clear  difcernment  and  intrepid  difcuffion.  Why  were  the  revo- 
lutions of  America  and  France  a  general  concert  of  all  orders  and 
defcriptions  of  men,  without  fo  much  (if  we  bear  in  mind  the 
multitudes  concerned)  as  almoft  a  diflentient  voice ;  while  the 
refiftance  againft  our  Charles  the  firft  divided  the  nation  into 
two  equal  parts  ?  Becaufe  the  latter  was  the  affair  of  the  feven- 
teenth  century,  and  the  former  happened  in  the  clofe  of  the 
D  d  2  eighteenth. 


204 


MODE  OF  EFFECTING  REVOLUTIONS. 


BOOK  IV.     eighteenth.     Becaufe  in  the  cafe  of  America  and  France  philo- 
CHAP.  II.        °  '^ 

^ ^~7f'    fophy  had   already   developed  fome  of  the  great  principles  of 

political  truth,  and  Sydney  and  Locke  and  Montefquieu  and 
RoulTeau  had  convinced  a  majority  of  refiedling  and  powerful 
minds  of  the  evils  of  usurpation.  If  thefe  revolutions  had  hap- 
pened ftill  later,  not  one  drop  of  the  blood  of  one  citizen  vi^ould 
have  been  fhed  by  the  hands  of  another,  nor  would  the  event 
have  been  marked  fo  much  perhaps  as  with  one  folitary  inftance 
of  violence  and  confifcation. 


Latenefs  of 
event  defira- 
ble. 


There  are  two  principles  therefore  which  the  man  who  defires 
the  regeneration  of  his  fpecies  ought  ever  to  bear  in  mind,  to 
regard  the  improvement  of  every  hour  as  eflential  in  the  difco- 
very  and  diffemination  of  truth,  and  willingly  to  fufFer  the  lapfe 
of  years  before  he  urges  the  reducing  his  theory  into  adlual  exe- 
cution. With  all  his  caution  it  is  pofTible  that  the  impetuous 
multitude  will  run  before  the  ftill  and  quiet  progrefs  of  reafon  ; 
nor  will  he  fternly  pafs  fentence  upon  every  revolution  that  fhall 
by  a  few  years  have  anticipated  the  term  that  wifdom  would 
have  prefcribed.  But,  if  his  caution  be  firmly  exerted,  there  is 
no  doubt  that  he  will  fuperfede  many  abortive  attempts,  and  con- 
fiderably  prolong  the  general  tranquillity. 


SECTIO 


[       205       ] 


SECTION      III. 

OF    POLITICAL    ASSOCIATION S.  . 

MEANING   OF    THE    TERM. ASSOCIATIONS  OBJECTED  TO 

I.  FROM  THE  SORT  OF  PERSONS  WITH  WHOM  A  JUST 
REVOLUTION  SHOULD  ORIGINATE — '2.  FROM  THE  DAN- 
GER OF  TUMULT. OBJECTS  OF  ASSOCIATION. IN   WHAT 

CASES   ADMISSIBLE. ARGUED  FOR  FROM  THE  NECESSITY 

TO  GIVE  WEIGHT  TO  OPINION — FROM  THEIR  TENDENCY 

TO    ASCERTAIN     OPINION. UNNECESSARY     FOR     THESE 

PURPOSES. —  GENERAL  INUTILITY. CONCE6SIONS. — IM- 
PORTANCE OF  SOCIAL  COMMUNICATION. —  PROPRIETY 
OF  TEACHING  RESISTANCE  CONSIDERED. 


A  QUESTION  naturally  fuggefts  itielf  in  this  place  re-    boOKIV. 
CHAP   II 
fpeding  the  propriety  of  aflbciations  among  the  people  at    >  '     'j 

large,  for  the  purpofe  of  effedling  a  change  in  their  political  in-   Meaning  of 

ftitutions.    It  fliould  be  obferved,  that  the  aflbciations  here  fpoken 

of  are  voluntary  confederacies  of  certain  members  of  the  fociety 

with  each  other,  the  tendency  of  which  is  to  give  weight  to  the 

opinions  of  the  perfons  fo  affbciated,  of  which  the  opinions  of 

the  unconfoderated  and  infulated  part  of  the  community  are  def- 

titute* 


2o6  OF   POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS. 

2^9'i  ^y*     titute.     This  queftion  therefore  has  nothins:  in  common  with  that 
CHAP.  II.  ^  *=• 

1!; ^"TT^    other,  whether  in  a  well  organized  flate  every  individual  would 

Section  III.  '  o  j 

not  find  his  place  in  a  deliberative  as  well  as  an  ele<flive  capacity  ; 
the  fociety  being  diftributed  into  diftrifls  and  departments,  and 
each  man  polTeffing  an  importance,  not  meafured  by  the  capri- 
cious ftandard  of  fome  accidental  confederacy,  but  by  a  rule  im- 
partially applied  to  every  mem^ber  of  the  community. 

AlTociations  Relative  then  to  political  affociations,  as  thus  explained,  there 

are  two  confiderations,  which,  if  they  do  not  afford  reafon  for 
undiftinguifhing  condemnation,  at  leaft  tend  to  diminifh  our 
anxiety  to  their  introdudlion. 


I.  from  the  In  the  firft  place  revolutions  lefs  originate  in  the  energies  of 

fortofperfons  ,.,                          .               _._^ 

with  whom  a  the  people  at  large,  than  in  the  conceptions  of  perlons  of  lome 

jufl  revolu-  n         •                                              .     .                  r           • 

tion  (houid  degree  of  ftudy  and  reflediion.     I    fay,  originate,  for   it  mufl 

oi-iginate  : 

be  admitted,  that  they  ought  ultimately  to  be  determined  on  by 


the  choice  of  the  whole  nation.  It  is  the  property  of  truth  to 
difFufe  itfelf.  The  difficulty  is  to  diftinguifli  it  in  the  firft 
inftance,  and  in  the  next  to  prefent  it  in  that  unequivocal  form 
which  fhall  enable  it  to  command  univerfal  affent.  This  muft 
necefTarily  be  the  tafk  of  a  few.  Society,  as  it  at  prefent  exifts 
in  the  world,  will  long  be  divided  into  two  claiTes,  thofe  who 
have  leifure  for  ftudy,  and  thofe  whofe  Importunate  neceffities 
perpetually  urge  them  to  temporary  induftry.  It  is  no  doubt  to 
be  defired,  that  the  latter  clafs  fliould  be  made  as  much  as  poffible 

to 


OF  POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS.  207 

to  partake  of  the  privileges  of  the  former.     But  we  fhould  be    BOOK  IV. 
^  ^  r  b  CHAP.  11. 

careful,  while  we  liften  to  the  imdiftinguifhing  demands  of  be-    *■ « ' 

Section  III. 

nevolence,  that  we  do  not  occafion  a  greater  mifchief  than  that 
we  undertake  to  cure.  We  Ihculd  be  upon  our  guard  againfl  an 
event  the  confequences  of  which  are  always  to  be  feared,  the 
propagating  blind  zeal,  where  we  meant  to  propagate  reafon. 

The  ftudlous  and  reflefting  only  can  be  expelled  to  fee 
deeply  into  future  events.  To  conceive  an  order  of  fociety 
totally  different  from  that  which  is  now  before  our  eyes, 
and  to  judge  of  the  advantages  that  would  accrue  from  its  infti- 
tution,  ar§  the  prerogatives  only  of  a  few  favoured  minds. 
When  thefe  advantages  have  been  unfolded  by  fuperior  penetra- 
tion, they  cannot  yet  for  fome  time  be  expected  to  be  under- 
ftood  by  the  multitude.  Time,  reading  and  converfation  are 
neceffary  to  render  them  familiar.  They  muft  defcend  in  regu- 
lar gradation  from  the  mofl;  thoughtful  to  the  mofl:  unobfervant. 
He,  that  begins  with  an  appeal  to  the  people,  may  be  fufpeded 
to  underftand  little  of  the  true  character  of  mind.  A  finifter  de- 
fign  may  gain  by  precipitation ;  but  true  wifdom  is  heft  adapted 
to  a  flow,  unvarying,  inceflant  progrefs. 

Human  affairs,    through   every   link  of  the   great   chain   of 

neceffity,  are  admirably  harmonlfed  and  adapted  to  each  other. 

As  the    people    form    the    lall    ftep    in   the    progrefs  of  ti'uth, 

they  need  leaft  preparation  to  induce  them  to  affert  it.     Their 

3  prejudices 


Section  III. 


2oS  OF   POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS. 

prejudices  are  few  and  upon  the  furface.  They  are  the  higher 
orders  of  fociety,  that  find,  or  imagine  they  find,  their  advantage 
in  injuftice,  and  are  eager  to  invent  arguments  for  its  defence. 
In  fophiftry  they  firft  feek  an  excufe  for  their  conduct,  and  then 
become  the  redoubted  champions  of  thofe  errors  which  they  have 
been  afliduous  to  cultivate.  The  vulgar  have  no  fuch  intereft,  and 
fubmit  to  the  reign  of  injuftice  from  habit  only  and  the  want  of 
reflection.  They  do  not  want  preparation  to  feceive  the  truth, 
fo  much  as  examples  to  embody  it.  A  very  Ihort  catalogue  of 
reafons  is  fufficient  for  them,  when  they  fee  the  generous  and 
the  wife  refolved  to  aflert  the  caufe  of  juftice.  A  very  fliort 
period  is  long  enough  for  them  to  imbibe  the  fentiments  of 
patriotifm  and  liberty, 

2.  from  the         Secondly,   aflbciations  muft   be   formed    with   great  caution 
tumult.  j^Qj  ^Q  jjg  allied  to  tumult.     The  conviviality  of  a  feaft  may  lead 

to  the  depredations  of  a  riot.  While  the  fympai.hy  of  opinion 
catches  from  man  to  man,  efpecially  in  numerous  meetings,  and 
among  perfons  whofe  paffions  have  not  been  ufed  to  the  curb  of 
judgment,  actions  may  be  determined  on,  which  folitary  reflec- 
tion would  have  rejected.  There  is  nothing  more  barbarous,  cruel 
and  blood-thirfty,  than  the  triumph  of  a  mob.  Sober  thought 
'  fliould  always  prepare  the  way  to  the  public  afl'ertion  of  truth. 
He,  that  would  be  the  founder  of  a  republic,  fhould,  like  the 
firft  Brutus,  be  infenfible  to  the  energies  of  the  moft  imperious 
paflTions  of  our  nature. 

Upon 


OF   POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS.  209 

Upon  this  fubjedt  of  anbciations  an  obvious  diftlncllon  is  to  ^[^^^p  ^j^" 
be  made.     Thofe,  who  are  dlflatisfied  with  the  o-ovcrninent  of  „'- — ^-~rr:! 

'  "  OKCTION  111. 

their  country,  may  aim  either  at  the  corredion  of  old  errors,  or  0„^J-.'^^^.  °^  ■ 
the  counteracting  of  new  encroachments.  Both  thcfe  objefts  are 
legitimate.  The  wife  and  the  virtuous  man  ought  to  fee  things 
precifely  as  they  are,  and  judge  of  the  actual  conftitution  of  his 
country  with  the  fame  impartiality,  as  if  he  had  funply  read  of 
it  in  the  remotell  page  of  hiflory. 

Thefe  two  obieds  may  be  entitled  to  a  different  treatment.  The  ^"  what  cafe* 

•"       .  '  admiUible. 

firft  ought  undoubtedly  to  proceed  with  a  leifurely  ftep  and  in  all 
poffible  tranquillity.  The  fecond  appears  to  require  fomething 
more  of  adivity.  It  is  the  charaderiftic  of  truth,  to  truft  much 
to  its  own  energy,  and  to  refifl  invafion  rather  by  the  force  of 
conviftion  than  the  force  of  arms.  The  individual  opprefTed 
feems  however  particularly  entitled  to  our  affiflance,  and  this  can 
beft  be  afforded  by  the  concurrence  of  many.  The  cafe  may  re- 
quire an  early  and  unequivocal  difplay  of  opinion,  and  this  per- 
haps will  afford  an  apology  for  fomc  fort  of  afTociation,  provided 
it  be  conducted  with  all  pofTible  attention  to  peaceablenefs  and 
good  order. 


Few  arguments  can  be  of  equal  importance  with  that  v>rhlch  we  Argued  for 

from  the  ne- 

are  here  difcuffmg.     Few  miftakes  can  be  more  to  be  deplored  '^':^^^y  ^? 

*  give  weight 

than  that  which  fhould  induce  us  to  employ  immoral  and  in-  '°  opinion ; 
jurious  methods  for  the  fupport  of  a  good  caufe.     It  may  be 

E  e  alledged, 


2IO  OF   POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS. 

CHAP  ^n'  ^^'^dg^^^?  "  ^^^^  affociation  is  the  only  expedient  for  arming  the 
^^"^'^^TTj'  fenfe  of  the  country  againfc  the  arts  of  its  oppreffors."  Why  arm? 
Why  fpread  a  reftlefs  commotion  over  the  face  of  a  nation,  which 
may  lead  to  the  moft  deftrudlive  confequences  ?  Why  feek  to 
beftow  upon  truth  a  weight  that  is  not  her  own  ?  a  weight  that 
muft  always  produce  fome  obliquity,  fome  blind  and  unen- 
lightened zeal  ?  In  attempting  prematurely  to  anticipate  the 
conqueft:  of  truth,  we  fhall  infallibly  give  birth  to  deformity 
and  abortion.  If  we  have  patience  to  wait  her  natural  progrefs, 
and  to  afhft  her  caufe  by  no  arguments  that  are  not  worthy  of 
her,  the  event  will  be  both  certain  and  illuftrious. 

from  their  A  fimilar  anfwer  will  fuggeft   itfelf  to  the  objedion,  "  that 

tendency  to 

afcertain         affociations  are  neceffary  unequivocally  to  afcertain  the  opinioa 

opinion. 

^        of  the  people."     What  fort  of  opinion  is  that,  which  thus  ftands 

Unnecefiary  -"^       ■*■ 

for  thefe         j^  need  of  fome  fudden  violence  to  oblige  it  to  ftart  from  its 

purpofes. 

hiding-place  ?  The  fentiments  of  mankind  are  then  only  equi- 
vocal in  external  appearance,  when  they  are  unformed  and  un- 
certain in  the  conception.  When  once  the  individual  knows  his 
own  meaning,  its  fymptoms  will  be  clear  and  unequivocal.  Be 
not  precipitate.  If  the  embryo  fentiment  at  prefent  exifting  ia 
my  mind  be  true,  there  is  hope  that  it  will  gain  ftrength  by 
time.  If  you  wifh  to  affift  its  grov/th,  let  it  be  by  inftrudlion, 
not  by  attempting  to  pafs  that  fentiment  for  mine  which  you 
only  wifh  to  be  fo.  If  the  opinion  of  the  people  be  not  known 
to-day,  it  will  not  fail  to  Ihew  itfelf  to-morrow.     If  the  opinion 

of 


OF    POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS.  211 

of  the  people  be  not  known  to-day,  it  is  bccaufe  that  which  vou    BOOK  IV. 

•'  .  ....  CHAP.  II. 

would  have  fuppofed  to  be  their  opinion  is  not  fufficiently  their    *^ v ' 

SLCTiOnIIL 

opinion.  You  might  as  well  think  of  hiding  the  inhabitants  of 
England,  concealing  their  towns  and  their  cultivation,  and 
making  their  country  pafs  for  a  defert,  as  of  concealing  their 
real  and  deliberate  fentiment. 

Thefe  are  the  expedients  of  men  who  do  not  know  that  truth  is    General  in- 

utility. 

omnipotent.  It  may  appear  to  die  for  a  time,  but  it  will  not 
fail  to  revive  with  frefh  vigour.  If  it  have  ever  failed  to  pro- 
duce gradual  convidtion,  it  is  becaufe  it  has  been  told  in  a 
meagre,  an  obfcure  or  a  pufillanimous  manner.  Ten  pages  that 
ihould  contain  an  abfolute  demonftration  of  the  true  interefls  of 
mankind  in  fociety  could  no  otherwife  be  prevented  from 
changing  the  face  of  the  globe,  than  by  the  literal  deftrudtion  of 
the  paper  on  which  they  were  written.  It  would  become  us  to 
repeat  their  contents  as  widely  as  we  were  able  ;  but, .  if  we  at- 
tempted any  thing  more  than  this,  it  would  be  a  pradtical  proof 
that  we  did  not  know  they  contained  a  demonftration. 

Such  are  the  reafonings  that  fhould  decide  upon  our  abftrad   Conceffions. 
opinion  of  every  cafe  of  aflbciation  that  comes  before  us.     But,  * 

though  from  hence  it  Ihould  fufficiently  appear  that  aflbciation  is 
fcarcelyin  any  cafe  to  be  defired,  there  are  confiderations  that  lhoul4 
lead  us  fometimes  to  judge  it  with  moderation  and  forbearance. 
There  is  one  m.ode,  according  to  which  the  benefit  of  mankind 

E  e  2  m.ay 


212  OF   POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS. 

"^'2^  p  ^^  *    ^^'^y  ^^^  ^^  promoted,  and  which  ought  always  to  be  employed. 
!: — T"*    But  mankind  are  imperfetSl  beines,  and  there  are  certain  errors 

bLwTiOK  111.  ^  ° 

of  his  fpecies  which  a  wife  man  will  be  inclined  to  regard  with 
indulgence.  Affbciations,  as  a  meafure  intrinfically  wrong,  he 
will  endeavour  at  leaft  to  poftpone  as  long  as  he  can.  But  it 
muft  not  be  dilTembled  that  in  the  crifis  of  a  revolution  they  will 
fometimes  be  unavoidable.  While  opinion  is  advancing  with 
filent  ftep,  imagination  and  zeal  may  be  expe£led  fomewhat  to 
outrun  her  progrefs.  "VVifdom  will  be  anxious  to  hold  them  at 
bay ;  and,  if  her  votaries  be  many,  flie  will  be  able  to  do  this 
long  enough  to  prevent  tragical  confequences.  But,  when  the 
call  is  thrown,  when  the  declaration  is  made  and  irrevocable, 
fhe  will  not  fail,  be  the  confufion  greater  or  lefs,  to  take  the 
fide  of  truth,  and  forward  her  reign  by  the  beft  means  that  the 
neceffity  of  the  cafe  will  admit. 

Importance  But,  though  affociation,  in  the  received  fenfe  of  that  term, 

of  focial  com-  1         1  •     n 

munkation.  muft  be  granted  to  be  an  mftrument  or  a  very  dangerous  nature, 
it  fhould  be  remembered  that  unreferved  communication  in  a 
fmaller  circle,  and  efpecially  among  perfons  who  are  already 
awakened  to  the  purfuit  of  truth,  is  of  unqueftionable  advantage. 
There  is  at  prefent  in  the  world  a  cold  referve  that  keeps  man 
at  a  diftance  from  man.  There  is  an  art  in  the  pradice  of 
which  individuals  communicate  for  ever,  without  any  one  telling 
-  his  neighbour  what  eftimate  he  fliould  form  of  his  attainments 
and  charader,  how  they  ought  to  be  employed,  and  how  to  be 

improved. 


OF   POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS.  213 

improved.     There  is  a  fort  of  domeftic  tadics,    the  obieft   of  ROOK  TV. 

,        ,  ,  CHAP.  IL 

which  is  to  inftrudl  us  to  elude  curiofity,  and  to  keep  up  the    ^ ^ ' 

SliCTIuN  ill. 

tenour  of  converfation,  without  the  dirclofure  either  of  our 
feelings  or  our  opinions.  The  philanthropift  has  no  objedt  more 
deeply  at  heart  than  the  annihilation  of  this  duplicity  and  re- 
ferve.  No  man  can  have  much  kindnefs  for  his  fpecies,  who 
does  not  habituate  himfelf  to  confider  upon  each  fucceffive  occa- 
fion  of  focial  intercourfe  how  that  occallon  may  be  moft  benefi- 
cently improved.  Among  the  topics  to  which  he  will  be  anxious 
to  awaken  attention,  politics  will  occupy  a  principal  fhare. 

Books  have  by  their  very  nature  but  a  limited  operation  ; 
though,  on  account  of  their  permanence,  their  methodical  dil- 
quifition,  and  their  eafmefs  of  accefs,  they  are  entitled  to  the 
foremoft  place.  But  their  efficacy  ought  not  to  engrofs  our 
confidence.  The  number  of  thofe  by  whom  reading  is  negled- 
ed  is  exceedingly  great.  Books  to  thofe  by  whom  they  are  read 
have  a  fort  of  conftitutional  coldnefs.  We  review  the  arguments 
of  an  "  infolent  innovator"  with  fullennefs,  and  are  unwilling  to 
ftretch  our  minds  to  take  in  all  their  force.  It  is  with  difficulty  that 
we  obtain  the  courage  of  ftriking  into  untrodden  paths,  and  quel- 
tioning  tenets  that  have  been  generally  received.  But  converfation 
accuftoms  us  to  hear  a  variety  of  fentiments,  obliges  us  to  cxerclfe 
patience  and  attention,  and  gives  freedom  and  elafticity  to  our  men- 
tal difquifitions.  A  thinking  man,  if  he  will  recoiled  hisintelledlual 
hiftory,  will  find  that  he  has  derived  ineftimable  advantage  from 
the  ftimulus  and  furprife  of  colloquial  fuggcRions ;    and,  if  he 

review 


214  '      OF    POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS. 

BOOK  IV.     review  the  hiflory  of  literature,  will  perceive  .that  .minds  of  2;reat 
CHAP.  II.  ■'  »  r  6 


Si- C  TJOX  III. 


icutenefs  and  ability  have'  commonly  exifted  in  a  cluiler. 

It  follows  that  the  promoting  of  the  bell  interefts  of  mankind 
eminently  depends  upon  the  freedom  of  focial  communication. 
Let  us  imagine  to  ourfelves  a  number  of  individuals,  who,  having 
firft  ftored  their  minds  with  reading  and  relledion,  proceed 
afterwards  in  candid  and  unreferved  converfation  to  compare 
their  ideas,  to  fuggeft  their  doubts,  to  remove  their  difficulties, 
and  to  cultivate  a  collected  and  ftriking  manner  of  delivering 
their  fentiments.  Let  us  fuppofe  thefe  men,  prepared  by  mu- 
tual intercourfe,  to  go  forth  to  the  world,  to  explain  with  fuc- 
cinctnefs  and  funplicity,  and  in  a  manner  well  calculated  to  arrefh 
attention,  the  true  principles  of  fociety.  Let  us  fupvofe  their 
hearers  inftigated  in  their  turn  to  repeat  thefe  truths  to  their 
companions.  We  fliall  then  have  an  idea  of  knowledge  as  per- 
petually gaining  ground,  unaccompanied  with  peril  in  the  means 
of  its  diffufion.  Reafon  will  fpread  itfelf,  and  not  a  brute  and 
unintelligent  fympathy.  DifcuiTion  perhaps  never  exifts  with  fo 
much  vigour  and  utility  as  in  the  converfation  of  two  perfons. 
It  may  be  carried  on  with  advantage  in  fmall  and  friendly 
focieties.  Does  the  fewnefs  of  their  numbers  imply  the  rarity 
of  their  exiftence  ?  Far  otherv/ife :  the  time  perhaps  will  come 
when  fuch  inftitutions  will  be  univerfid.  Shev/  to  mankind  by  a 
few  examples  the-  advanta;ge,s  of  political  difcufuon  undebauched 
by  political  enmity  and  vehemence,  and  the  beauty  of  the  fpec- 
tacle  will  foon  render  the  example  contagious.     Every  man  will 

commune 


OF   POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS.  215 

commune  with  his  neighbour.     Eveiy  man  will  be  ca^er  to  tell    BOOK  iv. 

CHAP.  11. 
and   to  hear  what   the  intereft  of  all  requires  them  to  know.    ' ^^ ' 

SectiunIII. 

The  bolts  and  fortifications  of  the  temple  of  truth  will  be  re- 
moved. The  craggy  fleep  of  fcience,  which  it  was  before  difficult 
to  afcend,  will  be  levelled  with  the  plain.  Knowledge  will  be  ac- 
cefTible  to  all.  Wifdom  will  be  the  inheritance  of  man,  from 
which  none  will  be  excluded  but  by  their  own  heedleffnefs  and 
prodigality.  If  thefe  ideas  cannot  completely  be  reahfed,  till 
the  inequality  of  conditions  and  the  tyranny  of  government  are 
rendered  fomewhat  lefs  oppreffive,  this  affords  no  reafon  againft 
the  fetting  afloat  fo  generous  a  fyftem.  The  improvement  of 
individuals  and  the  melioration  of  political  inftitutions  are 
deftined  mutually  to  produce  and  reproduce  each  other.  Truth 
and  above  all  political  truth,  is  not  hard  of  acquifition,  but  from 
the  fupercilioufnefs  of  its  profeffors.  It  has  been  flow  and 
tedious  of  improvement,  becaufe  the  Iludy  of  it  has  been  rele- 
gated to  dodlors  and  civilians.  It  has  produced  little  effedl  upon 
the  practice  of  mankind,  becaufe  it  has  not  been  allowed  a  plain 
and  dire£l  appeal  to  their  underfl:andings.     Rem.ove  thefe  obfta-  \ 

cles,  render  it  the  common  property,  bring  it  into  daily  ufc 
and  you  may  reafonably  promife  yourfelf  confequenccs  of  the 
moft  inefliimable  value.  .. 

But  thefe  confequenccs  are  the  property  only  of  independent 

and  impartial   difcuflion.     If  once  the  unambitious  and  candid 

circles  of  enquiring  men  be  fwallowed  up  in  the  infatiate  gulf 

of  noify  afl'emblies,  the  opportunity  of  improvement  is  inflantly  ■ 

4  annihilated. 


Section 


2i6  OF    POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS. 

BOO"  TV.     annihilated.     Tlie  happy  varieties;  of  fentiment   which  fo  emi- 

— '    nentlv  contribute  to  iucellectual  acutenefs  are  lofl.     Adivity  of 
III.  ^ 

thoueht  is  fliackled  bv  the  fear  that  our  afibciates  fnould  difclaim 
us.  A  fallacious  uniformity  of  opinion  Is  produced,  which  no 
man  efpoufes  from  convidion,  but  which  carries  all  men  along 
with  a  refiftlefs  tide.  Clubs,  in  the  old  Englifh  fenfe,  that  is, 
the  periodical  meeting  of  fmall  and  independent  circles,  may 
be  admitted  to  fall  within  the  line  of  thefe  principles.  But  they 
ceafe  to  be  admiifible,  when  united  with  the  tremendous  appa- 
ratus of  articles  of  confederacy  and  committees  of  correfpond- 
ence.  Human  beings  fliould  meet  together,  not  to  enforce, 
but  to  enquire.  Truth  difclaims  the  alliance  of  marfiialled 
numbers.  ■ 

It  feems  fcarcely  neceuliry  to  add,  that  the  individuals  who 
are  engaged  in  the  tranfa£lions  here  cenfured,  have  frequently 
been  inftigated  by  the  beft  intentions,  and  informed  with  the 
moft  liberal  views.  It  would  be  in  the  higheft  degree  unjuft,  if 
their  undertakings  fhould  be  found  of  dangerous  tendency,  to 
'  involve  the  authors  in  indifcriminate  cenfure  for  confequences 
which  they  did  not  forefee.  But  at  the  fame  time,  in  propor- 
tion to  the  purity  of  their  views  and  the  foundnefs  of  their 
principles,  it  were  earneftly  to  be  defired  that  they  would 
feriouily  refiedl  on  the  means  they  employ.  It  would  be  deeply 
to  be  lamented,  if  thofe  who  were  the  trueft  friends  to  the  wel- 
fare of  mankind,  fhould  come,  by  the  injudicioufneifi  of  their 
eonduCt,  to  rank  among  its  enemies. 

From 


g 

iiltanci=  eon- 
fidcre. 


OF    POLITICAL    ASSOCIATIONS.  217 

From  what  has  been  f.m]  It  is  fufficlently  evident,  that  no  alarm   I'-OOK  IV. 

^                                                  CHAP.  II. 
can   be  more  groundlefs,  than  that  of  violence  and  precipitation    ' ' 

Reciiom  III. 

from   the  enlightened   advocates  of  political   iuftice.     There  is  P't^pi'^}- of 

1  J  terxhiug:  re- 

hov/ever  another  objetftion  which  has  been  urged  againft  them, 
built  upon  the  fuppofed  inexpediency  of  inculcating  upon  the  peo- 
ple at  large  the  propriety  of  occafional  refiflance  to  the  authority 
of  government.  "  Obedience,"  fay  thefe  objecSlors  "  is  the  rule  ; 
refiftance  the  exception.  Now  what  can  be  more  prepofterous, 
than  perpetually  to  infift  with  all  the  pomp  of  eloquence  upon 
an  expedient,  to  which  only  an  extreme  neceffity  can  oblige  us 
to  have  recourfe*  ?" 

ft  has  already  been  fhewn  that  obedience,  that  is,  a  furrender 
of  the  underftanding  to  the  voice  of  authority,  is  a  rule  to  which 
It  can  never  be  creditable  to  human  beings  to  conform.  Tran- 
quillity indeed,  a  ftate  in  wlilch  a  man  fhall  leaft  be  difturbed 
in  the  exercife  of  his  private  judgment  by  the  interpofition  of 
violence,  Is  an  object  we  fhould  conftantly  endeavour  to  promote  5 
but  this  tranquillity  the  principles  here  inculcated  have  little 
tendency  to  difturb. 

There  is  certainly  no  truth  which  It  can  be  for  the  general 
Intereft  to  conceal.     It  muft  be  confeffed  indeed,  that  a  fmgle 

*  This  argument,  nearly  in  the  words  here  employed,  may  be  found  in 
Hume's  Eflay  on  Paflive  Obedience.     Eflays,  Part  II,  EfTay  xiii. 

F  f  truth 


2i8  OF   POLITICAL   ASSOCIATIONS. 

PHAP  ^n'  ^^^^^^^  ^^J  ^^  ^^  detached  from  the  feries  to  which  it  belongs,  as, 

.!; ^ — ;-;'   when  feparately  told,  to  have  the  nature  of  falfliood.     But  this 

is  by  no  means  the  cafe  in  the  prefent  inftance.  To  infornj 
mankind  of  thofe  general  principles  upon  which  all  political  in- 
fiitutions  ought  to  be  built,  is  not  to  difFufe  partial  information. 
To  difcover  to  them  their  true  interefts,  and  lead  them  to  conceive 
of  a  ftate  of  fociety  more  uncorrupt  and  more  equitable  than 
that  in  which  they  live,  is  not  to  inculcate  fome  rare  exception 
to  a  general  rule.  If  there  be  any  government  which  muft  be 
indebted  for  its  perpetuity  to  ignorance,  that  government  is  the 
curfe  of  mankind.  In  proportion  as  men  are  made  to  under- 
ftand  their  true  interefts,  they  will  condu£t  themfelves  wifely,. 
both  when  they  a£t  and  when  they  forbear,  and  their  condudt 
will  therefore  promife  the  moft  advantageous  iflue.  He,,  whofe- 
mind  has  carefully  been  inured  to  the  didates  of  reafon,  is  of  all 
men  leaft  likely  to  convert  into  the  rafh  and  headftrong  invades; 
of  the  general  weal.. 


SECTION- 


[      219      ] 

SECTION    IV. 

OF  THE  SPECIES  OF  REFORM  TO  BE  DESIRED. 

OUGHT  IT  TO  BE  PARTIAL  OR  ENTIRE  ? — TRUTH  MAY 
NOT  BE  PARTIALLY  TAUGHT. PARTIAL  REFORMA- 
TION     CONSIDERED. — OBJECTION. — ANSWER. PARTIAL 

REFORM    INDISPENSIBLE. —  NATURE   OF   A  JUST    REVOLU- 
TION— HOW  DISTANT  ? 

THERE  is  one  more  queftion  which   cannot   fail   occa-  BOOK IV. 
CHAP.  ir. 
fionally  to  fuggeft  itfelf  to  the  advocate  of  fecial  reform-    * v ' 

Section  IV. 

atlon.     "  Ought  we  to  defire  to  fee  this  reformation  introduced  Ought  it  to 

be  partial  or 

gradually  or  at  once  ?"     Neither  fide  of  this  dilemma  prefents  <^"t'r^  • 
US  with  the  proper  expedient. 

No  project  can  be  more  injurious  to  the  caufe  of  truth,  than  Truth  may 

not  be  par- 

that  of  prefenting  it  imperfedtly  and  by  parcels  to  the  attention  t^'^'b'  taught. 
of  mankind.     Seen  in  its  juft  light,  the  effedt  produced  cannot 
fail  to  be  confiderable  ;  but,  fhewn  in  fome  partial  and  imperfetl:  * 

way,  it  will  afford  a  thoufand  advantages  to  its  adverfaries. 
Many  obje£lions  will  feem  plaufible,  which  a  full  view  of  tlie 
fubjeft  would  have  diffipated.  Whatever  limits  truth  is  error; 
and  of  confcquence  fuch  a  limited  view  cannot  fall  to  include  a 

F  f  2        ■  confiderable 


220 


OF     THE    SPECIES     OF 


S?.R^5.  ^Yr     conficierable  mixture  of  error.     Many  ideas  mary  be  excellent  as 

CHAP.  II.  -'  ■' 

^ — — ;*    parts  of  a  ereat  whole,  which,  when  violently  torn  from  their 

faEcnoN  IV.    *  -         o    .  7  J   ^  J 

conned:ion,  will  not  only  ceafe  to  be  excellent,  but  may  in  fome 
cafes  become  pofitively  injurious.  In  this  war  of  pofts  and 
fkirmiihes  victory  will  perpetually  appear  to  be  doubtful,  and 
men  will  either  be  perfuaded,  that  truth  itfelf  is  of  little  value, 
or  that  human  intelledl  is  fo  narrow  as  to  render  the  difcoverj 
of  truth  a  hopelefs  purfuit. 


Partial  re- 
formation 
confidered. 

Objeftion. 


It  may  be  alledged,  that  "  one  of  the  confiderations  of 
greateft  influence  in  human  affairs  is  that  of  the  gradual  decline 
of  ill  things  to  worfe,  till  at  length  the  mifchief,  having  proceed- 
ed to  its  higheft  climax,  can  maintain  itfelf  no  longer.  The 
argument  in  favour  of  fecial  improvement  would  lofe  much  of 
its  relative  energy,  if  the  opportunity  of  a  fecret  comparifon  of 
pofllble  good  with  actual  evil  were  taken  away.  All  partial 
reforms  are  of  the  nature  of  palliatives.  They  Ikin  over  the 
difeafed  part  inftead  of  extirpating  the  difeafe.  By  giving  a 
fmall  benefit,  perhaps  a  benefit  only  in  appearance,  they  cheat 
us  of  the  fuperior  good  we  ought  to  have  demanded.  By 
ftripping  error  of  a  part  of  its  enormities,  they  give  it  freft 
vigour  and  a  longer  duration." 


Anfwer.  We  muft  be  cautious  however  of  pufhing  this  argument  too 

far.     To  fuppofe  that  truth   Hands  in   abfolute  need  of  a  foil, 

or  that  fhe  cannot  produce  full  convidion  by  her  native  light,  is 

4.  a  con- 


REFORM     TO     BE     DESIRED.  221 

a  conception  unworthy  of  her  enlijrhtened  advocates.     The  true   BOOK  IV. 
.  .  .  ...  CHAP.  II. 

folution  will  probablybe  found  in  the  accurately  diftiuguifhine    "^ * 

Section  IV. 

the  fources  of  reform.  W  hatever  reform,  general  or  partial,  iliall 
be  fuggefted  to  the  community  at  large  by  an  unmutilated  view 
of  the  fubjed,  ought  to  be  feen  with  fomc  degree  of  complacency. 
But  a  reform,  that  fhall  be  offered  us  by  thofe  whofe  intereft  is 
fuppofed  to  lie  in  the  perpetuating  of  abufe,  and  the  intention  of  ^ 

which  is  rather  to  give  permanence  to  error  by  diverting  it  of  its 
moft  odious  features,  is  little  entitled  to  our  countenance.  The 
true  principle  of  focial  improvement  lies  in  the  corredling  public 
opinion.  Whatever  reform  is  ftolen  upon  the  community  un- 
regarded, and  does  not  fpontaneoufly  flov»'  from  the  energy  of 
the  general  mincj,  is  unworthy  of  congratulation.  It  is  in 
this  refpedl  with  nations  as  with  individuals.  He  that  quits  a 
vicious  habit,  not  from  reafon  and  convidion,  but  becaufe  his 
appetites  no  longer  folicit  him  to  its  indulgence,  does  not  deferve 
the  epithet  of  virtuous.  The  objea  it  becomes  us  to  purfue  is, 
to  give  vigour  to  public  opinion,  not  to  fmk  it  into  liftleffnefs 
and  indifference. 

When  partial  reformation  proceeds  from  its  legitimate  caufe,   Gradual  re 
the   progrefs    fociety    has    made    in    the    acquifition   of    truth,   penfibie. 
it   may  frequently  be   entitled   to   our  applaufe.     Man   is   the 
creature  of  habits.     Gradual  improvement  is  a  moft  confpicuous 
law  of  his  nature.     When  therefore  fome  confiderable  advantage 
is  fufficiently  underftood  by  the  community  to  induce  them  to 

defire 


222  OFTHESPECIESOF 

BOOK  IV.    defire  its  eftablifhment,  that  eftablifliment  will  afterwards  read 

CHAP.  II. 

' V '    to  the  enlightening  of  intellect  and  the  generating  of  virtue.     It 

Section  IV. 

is  natural  for  us  to  take  our  Hand  upon  fome  leading  truth,  and 
from  thence  explore  the  regions  we  have  ftill  to  traverfe. 


There  is  indeed  a  fenfe  in  which  gradual  improvement  is  the 
only  alternative  between  reformation  and  no  reformation.  All 
human  intelleds  are  at  fea  upon  the  great  ocean  of  infinite  truth, 
and  their  voyage  though  attended  with  hourly  advantage  will 
never  be  at  an  end.  If  therefore  we  will  ftay  till  we  fhall  have 
devifed  a  reformation  fo  complete,  as  fhall  need  no  farther  re- 
formation to  render  it  more  complete,  we  fhall  eternally  remain 
in  inadion.  Whatever  is  fairly  underftood  upon  general  prin- 
ciples by  a  confiderable  part  of  the  community,  and  oppofed  by 
none  or  by  a  very  few,  may  be  confidered  as  fufficiently  ripe  for 
execution. 

Nature  of  a         'j'q  recapitulate  the  principal  obie(£l  of  this  chapter,  I  would 

juft  revolu-  ^  r  r  J  I        J 

^'°""  once  again  repeat,  that  violence  may  fuit  the  plan  of  any  political 

partifan,  rather  than  of  him  that  pleads  the  caufe  of  fimple  juf- 
tice.  There  is  even  a  fenfe  in  which  the  reform  aimed  at  by  the 
true  politician  may  be  affirmed  to  be  lefs  a  gradual  than  an  entire 
one,  vvithout  contradifting  the  former  polition.  The  complete  re- 
formation that  is  wanted,  is  not  inftant  but  future  reformation. 
It  can  in  reality  fcarcely  be  confidered  as  of  the  nature  of  action. 
It  confifts  in  an  univerfal  illumination.  Men  feel  their  fitua- 
7  tion, 


REFORM     TO     BE     DESIRED.  223 

tion,  and  the  reftraints,  that  Ihackled  them  before,  vanifh  like  a   EOOK  iv, 

'  .  CHAP.  II. 

mere  deception.     When  the  true  crifis  fhall  come,  not  a  fword    "^ v * 

Section  IV. 

will  need  to  be  drawn,  not  a  finger  to  be  lifted  up.  The  adver- 
faries  will  be  too  few  and  too  feeble  to  dare  to  make  a  ftand 
againft  the  univerfal  fenfe  of  mankind. 

Nor  do  thefe  ideas  imply,  as  at  firft  fight  they  might  feem  to  Howdlftant? 
imply,  that  the  revolution  is  at  an  immeafurable  diftance.  It  is 
of  the  nature  of  human  affairs  that  great  changes  fhould  appear 
to  be  fudden,  and  great  difcovcries  to  be  made  unexpedledly, 
and  as  it  were  by  accident.  In  forming  the  mind  of  a  young 
perfon,  in  endeavouring  to  give  a  new  bent  to  that  of  a  perfon 
of  maturer  years,  I  fliall  for  a  long  time  feem  to  have  produced 
little  effedl,  and  the  fruits  will  fliew  themfelves  when  I  leall  ex- 
pedted  them.  The  kingdom  of  truth  comes  not  with  oftentation. . 
The  feeds  of  virtue  may  appear  to  perifh  before  they  germinate. . 

To  recur  once  more  to  the  example  of  France,  the  works  of 
her  great  political  writers  feemed  for  a  long  time  to  produce  little 
profpedt  of  any  pradical  effeft.  Helvetius,  one  of  the  lateft,  in  a 
work  publifhed  after  his  death  in  1 771,  laments  in  pathetic  ftrains 
the  hopelefs  condition  of  his  country.  "  In  the  hiftory  of  every 
people,"  fays  he,  "  there  are  moments,  in  which,  uncertain  of 
the  fide  they  fliall  choofe,  and  balanced  between  political  good 
and  evil,  they  feel  a  defire  to  be  inftruded ;  in  which  the  foil,  fo 
to  exprefs  m^felf,  is  in  fome  manner  prepared,  and  may  eafily  be 

impregnated 


SECTlOr 


224  OF     THE     SPECIES     OF 

r.OoK  IV.    imprerrnated  with  the  dew  of  truth.     At  fuch  a  incment  the  pub- 
CilAi-.  II.  "      '-'  '■ 

hcation  of  a  vahiable  book  may  give  birth  to  the  moft  aufpicious 
reforms  :  but,  Vv-hen  that  moment  is  no  more,  the  naticn,  become 
infenfible  to  the  beft  motives,  is  by  the  nature  of  its  government 
phmged  deeper  and  deeper  in  ignorance  and  ftupidity.  The  foil 
of  inteliefh  is  then  hard  and  impenetrable ;  the  rains  may  fall, 
may  fpread  their  moifture  upon  the  furface,  but  the  profpedt  of 
fertility  is  gone.  Such  is  the  condition  of  France.  Her  people 
are  become  the  contempt  of  Europe.  No  falutary  crifis  fhall  ever 
reflore  them  to  liberty*." 

But  in  fpite  of  thefe  melancholy  predi£lions,  the  work  of  re- 
novation was  in  continual  progrefs.  The  American  revolution 
gave  the  finifhing  ftroke,  and  only  fix  years  elapfed  between  the 
completion  of  American  liberty  and  the  commencement  of  the 
French  revolution.     Will  a  term  longer  than  this  be  neceflary, 

*  "  Dans  chaqne  nation  U  eft  des  moinens  ou  les  citoyens,  incertains  du  parti  qu'ih 
doivent  prendre,  et  fiifpendus  entre  tin  ton  et  tin  mauvais  gouvirnement,  eprouvtnt  la 
foifde  I'inJlriiBion,  olt  les  efprits,ft  je  Voje  dire,  preprres  et  ameublis  peuvent  etrefa- 
silement p'cnetres  de  la  rofte  de  la  verite.  ^u'en  ce  moment  un  ban  ouvrage  paroijfe, 
il  pent  opcrer  d'l'enreufes  reforvies  :  mais  cet  injlant  pajfe,  les  citoyens,  infenjihles  cl  la 
gloire,fojtt  par  la  forme  de  leur  gotivernement  invinciblement  entratnes  vers  I' ignorance 
et  Vahrutijfemcnt.  Alors  les  efpriis  font  la  terre  endurcie  :  I'eau  de  la  verite  y  tombe, 
y  coule,  mais  fans  lafeconder.  Tel  eji  I'itat  de  la  France.  Cetie  nation  avilie  efl  au- 
jourd'hui  k  nupris  de  V Europe.     Ntille  crife  falutaire  ne  lui  rendra  la  Uberte." 

De  I'Homme,  Preface. 

before 


REFORM    TO     BE    DESIRED,  tzs 

before  France,  the  moft  refined  and  confiderable  nation  in  the  529^  T* 

world,  will  lead  other  nations  to  imitate  and  improve  upon  her    <- — ^ 

plan  ?     Let  the  true  friend  of  man  be  inceflant  in  the  propaga- 
tion of  truth,  and  vigilant  to  counteract  all  the  caufes  that  might 

diuU'rb  the  regularity  of  her  progrefs,  and  he  wUl  hays  every  '   " 
rtaron  to  hope  an  early  and  a  favourable  event. 


CJHAP. 


[      226 


CHAP.     III. 
OF     TYRANNICIDE. 

DIVERSITY  OF  OPINIONS  ON  THIS  SUBJECT. ARGUMENT  IN 

ITS    VINDICATION. THE     DESTRUCTION     OF    A    TYRANT 

NOT  A  CASE  OF   EXCEPTION. CONSEQUENCES  OF  TYRAN- 
NICIDE.  ASSASSINATION  DESCRIBED. IMPORTANCE  OF 

SINCERITY. 

QUESTION,  connected  with  the  mode  of  effedtlng  re- 
volutions, and  which  has  been  eagerly  difcufled  among 

Diverfity  of 

opinions  on     political  rcafoners,  is  that  of  tyrannicide.     The  moralifts  of  anti- 

thisfubjeft.      ^  '  ■' 

qiiity  warmly  contended  for  the  lawfulnefs  of  this  prailice ;  by 
the  moderns  it  has  generally  been  condemned. 

Argument  in        The  arguments  in  its  favour   are  built  upon  a  very  obvious 

its  vindica- 
tion, principle.    "  Juftice  ought  univerfally  to  be  adminiftered.    Upon 

leffer  criminals  it  is  done,  or  pretended  to  be  done,  by  the  laws 
of  the  community.  But  criminals  by  whom  law  is  fubverted,  and 
who  overturn  the  liberties  of  mankind,  are  out  of  the  reach  of  the 
ordinary  adminiftration  of  juftice.  If  juftice  be  partially  admi- 
niftered in  fubordinate  cafes,  and  the  rich  man  be  able  to  opprefs 
I  the 


OF     TYRANNICIDE. 


227 


the  poor  with  impunity,  it  muft  be  admitted  that  a  few  examples   BOOK  IV. 

CHAP.  III. 

of  this  fort  are  infuflicient  to   authorife  the  laft  appeal  of  human    ^-^ ^ ' 

beings.  But  no  man  will  deny  that  the  cafe  of  the  ufurper  and 
the  defpot  is  of  the  moft  atrocious  nature.  In  this  inftance,  all 
the  provifions  of  civil  policy  being  fuperfeded,  and  juftice  poi- 
foned  at  the  fource,  every  man  is  left  to  execute  for  himfelf  the 
■  decrees  of  eternal  equity." 

It  may  however  be  doubted  whether  the  deftrudlion  of  a  ty-  The  deflmc- 
rant  be  in  any  refpedl  a  cafe  of  exception  from  the  rules  proper   rant  not  a 
to  be  obferved  upon  ordinary  occafions.     The  tyrant  has  cer-  tba. 
tainly  no  particular  fandity  annexed  to  his  perfon,  and  may  be 
killed  with  as  little  fcruple  as  any  other  man,  when  the  objed:  is 
that  of  repelling  immediate  violence.     In  all  other  cafes,  the  ex- 
tirpation of  the  offender  by  a  felf-appointed  authority,  does  not 
appear  to  be  the  proper  mode  of  counteracting  injuftice. 

For,  firft,  either  the  nation,  whofe  tyrant  you  would  deftroy,  Confequence» 
is  ripe  for  the  affertion  and  maintenance  of  its  liberty,  or  it  is  not.  cide!"^^""' 
If  it  be,  the  tyrant  ought  to  be  depofed  with  every  appearance 
of  publicity.  Nothing  can  be  more  improper,  than  for  an  affair, 
interefting  to  the  general  weal,  to  be  conduced  as  if  it  were  an 
aft  of  darknefs  and  ihame.  It  is  an  ill  leffon  we  read  to  man- 
kind, when  a  proceeding,  built  upon  the  broad  bafis  of  general 
juftice,  is  permitted  to  fhrink  from  public  fcrutiny.  The  piftol 
and  the  dagger  may  as  eafily  be  made  the  auxiliaries  of  vice  as 

G  2  2  of 


«a8  OF    TYRANNICIDE. 

<^Ap!'in,  °f"^i'''^u^'     1"°  profcribe  all  violence,  and  negled  no  means  of 
*'~~^'       '    information  and  impartiality,  is  the  moft  efFedlual  fecurity  we 

can  have  for  an  iflue  conformable  to  the  voice  of  reafon  and 

truth. 

If  the  nation  be  not  ripe  for  a  flatd  of  freedom,  the  man, 
who  affumes  to  himfelf  the  right  of  interpofmg  violence,  may  in- 
deed ihew  the  fervour  of  his  conception,  and  gain  a  certain  de- 
gree of  notoriety.  Fame  he  will  not  gain,  for  mankind  at  pre- 
fent  regard  an  a£t  of  this  fort  with  merited  abhorrence ;  and  he 
will  infli£t  new  calamities  on  his  country.  T  he  confequences 
of  tyrannicide  are  well  known.  If  the  attempt  prove  abortive, 
it  renders  the  tyrant  ten  times  more  bloody,  ferocious,  and  cruel 
than  before.  If  it  fucceed,  and  the  tyranny  be  reftored,  it  pro- 
duces the  fame  effed  upon  his  fucceffors.  In  the  climate  of  def- 
potifm  fome  folitary  virtues  may  fpring  up.  But  in  the  midft  of 
plots  and  confpiracies  there  is  neither  truth,  nor  confidence,  nor 
love,  nor  humanity. 

AfTaffinatJon         Secondly,  the  true  merits  of  the  queftion  will  be  ftill  farther 

defcribed. 

underftood,  if  we  refled  on  the  nature  of  aflaflination.  The 
miftake,  which  has  been  incurred  upon  this  fubjed,  is  to  be  im- 
puted principally  to  the  fuperficial  view  that  has  been  taken  of 
it.  If  its  advocates  had  followed  the  confpirator  through  all  his 
windings,  and  obferved  his  perpetual  alarm  left  truth  fhould  be- 
come known,  they  would  probably  have  been  lefs  indifcriminate 

4  in 


OF    TYRANNICIDE.  229 

in  their  applaufe.     No  adtlon  can  be  imasined  more  dircdlv  at    BOOK  iv. 

^  ^  CHAP.  III. 

war  with  a  principle  of  ingenuoufnefs  and  candour.     Like  all    ^^ ^ ' 

that  is  moft  odious  in  the  catalogue  of  vices,  it  delights  in  obfcu- 
rity.  It  Ihrinks  from  the  penetrating  eye  of  wifdom.  It  avoids 
all  queftion,  and  hefitates  and  trembles  before  the  queftloner.  It 
ftruggles  for  a  tranquil  gaiety,  and  Is  only  complete  where  there 
is  the  moft  perfect  hypocrlfy.  It  changes  the  ufe  of  fpeech,  and 
compofes  every  feature  the  better  to  deceive.  Imagine  to  your- 
felf  the  confplrators,  kneeling  at  the  feet  of  Ccefar,  as  they  did 
the  moment  before  they  deftroyed  him.  Not  all  the  virtue  of 
Brutus  can  fave  them  from  your  indignation. 

There  cannot  be  a  better  inftance  than  that  of  which  we  are  Importance 

1       •  r  J  r  '  -ytT      r       •        °^  lincerity. 

treatmg,  to  prove  the  importance  of  general  Imcerity.  We  fee  m 
this  example,  that  an  a£tIon,  which  has  been  undertaken  from  '    • 

the  beft  motives,  may  by  a  defedl  In  this  particular  tend  to  over- 
turn the  very  foundations  of  juftlce  and  happlnefs.  Wherever 
there  is  aflafli nation,  there  is  an  end  to  all  confidence  among 
men.  Protefts  and  affeveratlons  go  for  nothing.  No  man  pre- 
fumes  to  know  his  neighbour's  intention.  The  boundaries,  that  v 
have  hitherto  ferved  to  divide  virtue  and  vice,  are  gone.  The 
true  Interefts  of  mankind  require,  not  their  removal,  but  their 
confirmation.  All  morality  proceeds  upon  the  aflumption  of 
fomething  evident  and  true,  will  grow  and  expand  in  proportion, 
as  thefe  indications  are  more  clear  and  unequivocal,  and  could 
not  exift  for  a  moment,  if  they  were  deftroyed. 

CHAP.       - 


I  230  ] 


CHAP.     IV. 
OF    THE    CULTIVATION    OF    TRUTH. 

JjERHAPS  there  cannot  be  a  fubjeft  of  greater  political 
-*-  importance,  or  better  calculated  to  lead  us  in  fafety  through 
the  mazes  of  controverfy,  than  that  of  the  value  of  truth.  Truth 
may  be  confidered  by  us,  either  abftraftedly,  as  it  relates  to  certain 
general  and  unchangeable  principles,  or  pi-a£tically,  as  it  relates 
to  the  daily  incidents  and  ordinary  commerce  of  human  life. 
In  whichever  of  thefe  views  we  confider  it,  the  more  deeply  we 
meditate  its  nature  and  tendency,  the  more  fhall  we  be  ftruck 
with  its  unrivalled  importance. 


SECTION 


[     231     ] 

SECTION      I. 

OF  ABSTRACT   OR    GENERAL    TRUTH. 

ITS  IMPORTANCE  AS  CONDUCING — TO  OUR  INTELLECTUAL 

IMPROVEMENT TOOUR  MORAL  IMPROVEMENT. VIRTUE 

THE  BEST  SOURCE  OF  HAPPINESS. — PROVED  BY  COMPARI- 
SON—  BY  ITS  MANNER  OF  ADAPTING  ITSELF  TO  ALL 
SITUATIONS BY  ITS  UNDECAYING  EXCELLENCE  —  CAN- 
NOT BE  EFFECTUALLY  PROPAGATED  BUT  BY  A  CULTI- 
VATED    MIND. IMPORTANCE     OF    GENERAL    TRUTH    TO 

OUR  POLITICAL   IMPROVEMENT. 


ABSTRACTEDLY  confidered,  it  conduces  to  the  perfedion    BOOK  iv. 
CHAP.  IV. 
of  our  underftandings,  our  virtue  and  our  political  infti-    ' .^ ' 

Section  I. 
tUtionS.  Its   import- 

ance as  con- 
ducing 

In  the  difcovery  and  knowledge  of  truth  is  comprifed  all  that  toourintd- 

leiTtual  iin- 

which  an  impartial  and  reflefting  mind  is  accuftomed  to  admire,  proveracnt; 
It  is  not  poffible  for  us  ferioufly  to  doubt  concerning  the  pre- 
ference of  a  capacious  and  ardent  intelligence  over  the  limited 
perceptions  of  a  brute.  All  that  we  can  imagine  of  angels  and 
Gods  condfts  in  fupcrior  wifJom.  Do  you  fay  in  power  alfo  ? 
It  will  prefently  appear  that  wifdom  is  power.     The  truths  of 

general 


232  OFTHECULTIVATION 

BOOK  IV.    p-cncral  nature,  thofe  truths  which  preceded,  either  fubftantially 

CHAP.  IV.    *^  _  .  . 

' -' ■'    or  in  the  nature  of  things,  the   particular  exiftences  that  fur- 

Section  I. 

round  us,  and  are  independent  of  them  all,  are  inexhauftible. 
Is  it  poffible  that  a  knowledge  of  thefe  truths,  the  truths  of  ma- 
thematics, of  metaphyfics  and  morals,  the  truths  which,  accord- 
ing to  Plato's  conception  '*,  taught  the  creator  of  the  world  the 
nature  of  his  materials,  the  refult  of  his  operations,  the  confe- 
quences  of  all  poffible  fyftems  in  all  their  detail,  fhould  not  exalt 
and  elevate  the  mind  ?  The  truths  of  particular  nature,  the  hif- 
tory  of  man,  the  chara£l:ers  and  propenfities  of  human  be- 
ings, the  procefs  of  our  own  minds,  the  capacity  of  our  natures, 
are  fearcely  lefs  valuable.  The  reafon  they  are  fo  will  beft  ap- 
pear if  we  confider,  fecondly,  the  tendency  of  truth  in  con- 
ducing to  the  perfedion  of  our  virtue. 

to  our  moral  Virtue  Cannot  exill  In  an  eminent  degree,  unaccompanied  by 
an  extenfive  furvey  of  caufes  and  their  confequences,  fo  that, 
having  ftruck  an  accurate  balance  between  the  mixed  benefits 
and  injuries  that  for  the  prefent  adhere  to  all  human  affairs,  we 
may  adopt  that  condud  which  leads  to  the  greateft  poffible  ad- 
vantage. If  there  be  fuch  a  thing  as  virtue,  it  mull  admit  of 
degrees.  If  it  admit  of  degrees,  he  muft  be  moft  virtuous,  who 
choofes  with  the  foundeft  judgment  the  greateft  poffible  good  of 
his  fpecies.     But,  in  order  to  choofe  the  greateft  poffible  good, 

*  See  the  jParmenides. 


OF     TRUTH.  233 

he  muft  be  deeply  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  man,  its  gene-  529  p  t  v' 
ral  features  and  its  varieties.     In  order  to  execute  it,  he  muft    *; -^ — -^ 

Section  I. 

have  confidered  all  the  inftruments  for  imprefllng  mind,  and 
the  different  modes  of  applying  them,  and  muft  know  exadlly 
the  proper  moment  for  bringing  them  into  adlion.  In  what- 
ever light  we  confider  virtue,  whether  we  place  it  in  the  adion 
or  the  difpofition,  its  degree  muft  be  intimately  connected  with 
the  degree  of  knowledge.  No  man  can  love  virtue  fufficicntly, 
who  has  not  an  acute  and  lively  perception  of  its  beauty,  and 
its  tendency  to  produce  the  only  folid  and  permanent  happinefs. 
What  comparifon  can  be  made  between  the  virtue  of  Socrates 
and  that  of  a  Hottentot  or  a  Siberian  ?  A  humorous  example 
how  univerfally  this  truth  has  been  perceived  might  be  drawn 
from  Tertullian,  who,  as  a  father  of  the  church,  was  obliged  to 
maintain  the  hollownefs  and  infignificance  of  pagan  virtues,  and 
accordingly  afllires  us,  "  that  the  moft  ignorant  peafant  under  the 
Chriftian  difpenfation  poflefled  more  real  knowledge  than  the 
wifeft  of  the  ancient  philofophers  *." 


We  ftiall  be  ftill  more  fully  aware  of  the  connedion  between   viitu?  the 
virtue  and  knowledge,  if  we  confider  that  the  higheft  employ-   ofhapphiefs: 
ment  of  virtue  is  to  propagate  itfelf.     Virtue  alone  is  happinefs.    proved  by 

compaiifuii  : 

The  happinefs  of  a  brute  that  fpends  the  greater  part  of  his  life 
in  liftleflhefs  and  fleep,  is  but  one  remove  from  the  happinefs  of 
a  plant  that  is  full  of  fap,  vigour  and  nutriticn.     The  happinefs 

*  Apologia,  Cap.  xlvi.     See  this  fubjedl  farther  purfued  in  Appendix,  No.  I. 

H  h  ,  of 


Skction   I. 


234  OF     THE     CULTIVATION 

of  a  man  who  purfues  licentious  pleafure  is  momentaiy,  and  his 
inten^als  of  wearinef^  and  difguft  perpetual.  He  fpeedily  wears 
himfelf  out  in  his  fpecious  career  ;  and,  every  time  that  he  em- 
ploys the  means  of  delight  which  his  corporeal  exiftence  affords 
him,  takes  fo  much  from  his  capacity  of  enjoyment.  If  he  be 
wdfe  enough  like  Epicurus  to  perceive  a  part  of  thefe  difad- 
vantages,  and  to  find  in  frelh  herbs  and  the  water  of  the  Ipring 
the  trueft  gratification  of  his  appetite,  he  will  be  obliged  to  feek 
fome  addition  to  his  flock  of  enjoyment,  and  like  Epicurus  to 
become  benevolent  out  of  pure  fenfuality.  But  the  virtuous 
man  has  a  perpetual  fource  of  enjoyment.  The  only  reafon  on 
account  of  which  the  truth  of  this  affertion  was  ever  contro- 
verted, is,  that  men  have  not  underftood  what  it  was  that  con- 
ftituted  virtue. 

by  Its  manner       It  is  impoffiblc  that  any  fituation  can  occur  In  which  virtue 

of  adapting 

itfdftoall       cannot   find  room  to  expatiate.     In  fociety  there  is  continual 

Situations  : 

opportunity  for  its  adive  employment.  I  cannot  have  inter- 
courfe  with  any  human  being  who  may  not  be  the  better  for 
that  intercourfe.  If  he  be  already  juft  and  virtuous,  thefe  qua- 
lities are  improved  by  communication.  It  is  from  a  fimilar 
principle  that  it  has  been  obferved  that  great  geniufes  have 
ufually  exifted  in  a  clufter,  and  have  been  awakened  by  the  fire 
Ilruck  into  them  by  their  neighbours.  If  he  be  imperfed;  and 
erroneous,  there  mufl  be  always  fome  prejudice  I  may  contri- 
bute to  deftroy,  fome  motive  to  delineate,  fome  error  to  remove. 
7  If 


O  F     T  R  U  T  H.  235 

If  I  be  prejudiced  and  imperfe£t  myfelf,  it  cannot  however  happen    BOCK  iv. 

that  my  prejudices  and  imperfedlions  fhall  be  exactly  coincident    ^■; — ^ — 7^ 

with  his.     I  may  therefore  inform  him  of  the  truths  that  I  know, 

and  even  by  the  coUifion  of  prejudices  truth  is  elicited.     It  is 

impoffible  that  1  fhould  flrenuoufly  apply  myfelf  to  his  mind 

with  fincere  motives  of  benevolence  without  fome  good  being        .•:--. 

the  refult.     Nor  am  I  more  at  a  lofs  in  folitude.     In  folitude  I 

may  accumulate  the  materials  of  focial  benefit.     No  fituation  can 

be   fo   defperate  as   to  preclude   thefe   efforts.     Voltaire,   when 

fliut  up  in  the  Baftille,  and  for  ought  he  knew  for  life,  deprived 

of  books,  of  pens  and  of  paper,  arranged  and  in  part  executed 

the  projedt  of  his  Henriade  *.  vv.. 

Another  advantage  of  virtue   in  this  perfonal  view,  is  that,    by  its  unde- 

caying  exccl- 

while  fenfual  pleafure  exhaufts  the  frame,  and  paffions  often  ex-  icnce : 
cited  become  frigid  and  callous,  virtue  has  exadtly  the  oppofite 
propenfities.  Paffions,  in  the  ufual  acceptation  of  that  term, 
having  no  abfolute  foundation  in  the  nature  of  things,  delight 
only  by  their  novelty.  But  the  more  we  are  acquainted  with 
virtue,  the  more  eflimable  will  it  appear ;  and  its  field  is  as  end- 
lefs  as  the  progrefs  of  mind.  If  an  enlightened  love  of  it  be 
once  excited  in  the  mind,  it  is  impoffible  that  it  fhould  not  con- 
tinually increafe.     By  its  variety,  by  its  activity  it  perpetually 

*  Fie  de  Voltaire,  par  M***  (faid  to  be  the  marquis  de  Villette).  A  Geneve, 
1"]%^.  Chap.  iv.  This  is  probably  the  beft  hiflory  of  this  great  man  which  has 
yet  appeared.  .    * 

■  H  h  2  renovates 


236  OF     THE     CULTIVATION 

renovates  itfelf,   and  rend( 
ever  new  and  ever  young. 


BOOK  IV.    renovates  itfelf,   and  renders  the  intelled  in  which   it  refides 
CKAP.  IV.  ' 


SliCTlON  I. 

cannot  be  ef-        All  thefe  reafonings  are  calculated  to  perfuade  us  that  the  moft 

fcClually  pro- 

pagatedbut     precious  boon   we  can  beftow  upon  others  is  virtue,  that  the 

by  a  culti-  ^ 

vatedmind.  higheft  employment  of  virtue  is  to  propagate  itfelf.  But,  as 
virtue  is  infeparably  connected  with  knowledge  in  my  own 
mind,  fo  can  it  only  by  knowledge  be  communicated  to  others^ 
How  can  the  virtue  we  have  jufl  been  contemplating  be  created, 
but  by  infufmg  comprehenfive  views  and  communicating  ener- 
getic truths  ?  Now  that  man  alone  is  qualified  to  give  thefe 
views,  and  communicate  thefe  truths,  who  is  himfelf  pervaded 
with  them» 

Let  us  fuppole  for  a  moment  virtuous  difpofitions  as  exifting 
without  knowledge  or  outrunning  knowledge,  the  laft  of  which 
is  certainly  poflible,  and  we  ihall  prefently  find  how  little  fuch 
virtue  is  worthy  to  be  propagated.  The  moft  generous  views 
will  in  fuch  cafes  frequently  lead  to  the  moft  nefarious  aftions. 
A  Calvin  will  burn  Servetus,  and  a  Digby  generate  the  gun- 
powder treafon.  But,  to  leave  thefe  extreme  inftances,  in  all 
cafes  where  miftaken  virtue  leads  to  cruel  and  tyrannical  adlions^ 
the  mind  will  be  foured  and  made  putrefcent  by  the  adlions  it 
perpetrates.  Truth,  immortal  and  ever  prefent  truth,  is  fo 
powerful,  that,  in  fpite  of  all  his  inveterate  prejudices,  the 
upright  man  will  fufped  himfelf^  wheu  he  refolves  upon  an 


O  F     T  R  U  T  H.  237 

a£tion  that  is   at  war  witli  the  plaineft  principles   of  morality.  ^^^5-  ^X: 
He  will  become  melancholy,  clifTatisfied  and  anxious.     His  firm-  ^ ^ — — ^ 

^  '  Section  I. 

nefs  will  degenerate  into  obftinacy,  and  his  juftice  Into  inexora- 
ble feverity.  The  farther  he  purfues  his  fyflem,  the  more  erro- 
neous will  he  become.  The  farther  he  purfues  it,  the  lefs  will 
he  be  fatisfied  with  it.  As  truth  is  an  endlefs  fource  of  tranquil- 
lity and  delight,  error  will  be  a  prolific  fountain  of  new  raiftakes 
and  new  difcontent. 

As  to  the  third  point,  the  tendency  of  truth  to  the  improve-  Importance 

of  general 

ment  of  our  political  inftitutions,  this  is  in  reality  the  fubjedl  of  t^t'^  ^°  ?"■" 

political  im- 

the  prefent  volume,  and  has  been  particularly  argued  in  fome  of  provement. 
the  earlier  divifions  of  the  work.  If  politics  be  a  fcience,  the 
inveftigation  of  truth  muft  be  the  means  of  unfolding  it.  If 
men  refemble  each  other  in  more  numerous  and  eflential  par- 
ticulars than  thofe  in  which  they  differ,  if  the  beft  purpofes  that 
can  be  accomplifhed  refpefting  them  be  to  make  them  free  and 
virtuous  and  wife,  there  muft  be  one  beft  method  of  advancing 
thefe  common  purpofes,  one  beft  mode  of  focial  exiftence 
deducible  from  the  principles  of  their  nature.  If  truth  be  one, 
there  muft  be  one  code  of  truths  on  the  fubjedl  of  our  reciprocal 
duties.  Nor  is  the  inveftigation  of  truth  only  the  beft  mode  of 
arriving  at  the  obje£t  of  all  political  inftitutions,  but  it  is  alfo  the 
heft  mode  of  introducing  and  eftablifhing  it.  Difcuflion  is  the  - 
path  that  leads  to  difcovery  and  demonftration.  Motives  fer- 
ment in  the  minds  of  great  bodies  of  men  till  all  is  ripe  for 

adlon^ 


23?  OF     SINCERITY. 

52^9  D  ^Y;    adion.     The  more  familiar  the  mind  becomes  with  the  ideas  of 
^^^^^^^~[^  .which  they  confift  and  the  propofitions  that  exprefs  them,  the 
more  fully  is  it  pervaded  with  their  urgency  and  importance. 


SECTION       II. 

OF     SINCE  Rirr. 

NATURE  OF  THIS  VIRTUE. — ITS  EFFECTS — UPON  OUR  OWN 
ACTIONS — UPON  OUR  NEIGHBOURS. — ITS  TENDENCY  TO 
PRODUCE  FORTITUDE. — EFFECTS  OF  INSINCERITY. CHA- 
RACTER WHICH  SINCERITY  WOULD  ACQUIRE  TO  HIM 
WHO     PRACTISED     IT.  —  OBJECTIONS.  —  THE     FEAR     OF 

GIVING     UNNECESSARY     PAIN. ANSWER. — THE     DESIRE 

OF     PRESERVING     MY     LIFE. THIS     OBJECTION     PROVES 

TOO  MUCH. — ANSWER. SECRECY  CONSIDERED. — THE  SE- 
CRETS OF  OTHERS. — STATE  SECRETS. — SECRETS  OF  PHI- 
LANTHROPY. 

Section  IT.  T  T  is  evident  in  the  laft  place,  that  a  fl:ri£t  adherence  to  truth 
Nature  of  this  wiU  havc  the  beft  effect  upon  our  minds  in  the  ordinary 
commerce  of  life.  This  is  the  virtue  which  has  commonly  been 
known  by  the  denomination  of  fmcerity ;  and,  whatever  certain 

accom- 


Tirtue. 


OF    SINCERITY. 


239 


II. 


accommodating  moralifts  may  teach  us,  the  value  of  nncenty    BOOK  iv. 
,  ^     CHAP.  IV. 

will  be  in  the  higheft  degree  obfcured,  when  it  is  not  complete.    ^— 

Sec 

Real  fmcerity  depofes  me  from  all  authority  over  the  ftatement    \ 
of  fa(£ls.     Similar  to  the  duty  which  Tully  impofes  upon  the       ] 
hiftorian,  it  compels  me  not  to  dare  "  to  utter  what  is  flilfe,  or       j 
conceal  what  is  true."     It  annihilates  the  baftard  prudence,  which      / 
would  inllrudl  me  to  give  language  to  no  fentiment  that  may  be      \ 
prejudicial   to   my  interefts.     It  extirpates   the  low  and  felfifli     | 
principle,  v/hich  would  induce  me  to  utter  nothing  "  to  the  dif- 
advantage  of  him  from  whom  I  have  received  no  injury."     It     \ 
compels,  me  to  regard  the  concerns  of  my  fpecies  as  my  own     \ 
concerns.     What   I   know   of  truth,    of  morals,  of  religion,  of      \ 
government,    it  compels   me   to  communicate.     All   the  praife       ^ 
which  a   virtuous  man  and  an  honeft  adion  can  merit,    I  am 
obliged  to  pay  to  the    uttermoft  mite.     I  am  obliged  to  give 
language    to    all  the    blame   to  which  profligacy,  venality,  hy- 
pocrify  and  circumvention  are  fo  juftly  entitled.     I  am  not  em- 
powered to  conceal  any  thing  I  know  of  myfelf,  whether  it  tend 
to  my  honour  or  to  my  difgrace.     I  am  obliged  to  treat  every 
other  man  with  equal  franknefs,  without  dreading  the  imputation 
of  flattery  on  the  one  hand,    without  dreading  his  refentment 
and  enmity  on  the  other. 


Did  every  man  impofe  this  law  upon  himfelf,  he  would  be    itsefFea* 
obliged  to  confider  before  he  decided  upon  the  commiffion  of  an   aaion°s^'^''^'* 
equivocal  adion,  whether  he  chofe  to  be  his  own  hiftorian,  to 

be 


Section  II. 


240  O  F     S  I  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y. 

be  the  future  narrator  of  the  fcene  in  which  he  was  engaging. 
It  has  been  juftly  obferved  that  the  popifh  practice  of  auricular 
confeflion  has  been  attended  with  fome  falutary  efFedls.  How 
much  better  would  it  be,  if,  inftead  of  a  practice  thus  ambigu- 
ous, and  which  may  be  converted  into  fo  dangerous  an  engine 
of  ecclefiaftical  defpotifm,  every  man  would  make  the  world  his 
confelfional,  and  the  human  fpecies  the  keeper  of  his  con- 
fcience  ? 


upon  our 

nelghbourf. 


How  extenfive  an  effedt  would  be  produced,  if  every  man 
were  fure  of  meeting  in  his  neighbour  the  ingenuous  cenfor, 
who  would  tell  to  himfelf,  and  publifh  to  the  world,  his  virtues, 
his  good  deeds,  his  meanneffes  and  his^'follies  ?  I  have  no  right 
to  rejedl  any  duty,  becaufe  it  is  equally  incumbent  upon  my 
neighbours,  and  they  do  not  pradlife  it.  When  I  have  dif- 
charged  the  whole  of  my  duty,  it  is  weaknefs  and  vice  to  make 
myfelf  unhappy  about  the  omiffions  of  others.  Nor  is  it  poifible 
to  fay  how  much  good  one  man  fufficiently  rigid  in  his  ad- 
herence to  truth  would  effedt.  One  fuch  man,  with  genius, 
information  and  energy,  might  redeem  a  nation  from  vice. 


niicr.c         ^^^^  confequence  to  myfelf  of  telling  every  man  the  truth, 

to  produce      regardlefs  of  perfonal  danger  or  of  injury  to  my  interefis  in  the 

world,  would  be  uncommonly  favourable.     I  fhould  acquire  a 

fortitude  that  would  render  rr^e  equal  to  the  mod  tiying  fitua- 

tionS;  that  would  maintain  my  prefence  of  mind  entire  in  fpite 

of 


O  F     S  I  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y.  241 

urrences,  that  would  furnlfh  me  with  extem- 
porary  arguments  and  vvUtJom,    and   endue  my   tongue    with 


cf  unexpedied  occurrences,  that  would  furnifh  me  with  extem-   BOOK  iv. 

^  CHAP.  IV 


Section  11. 

irrefiftible  eloquence.  Animated  by  the  iove  of  truth,  my 
underftanding  would  always  be  vigorous  and  alert,  not  as  before 
frequently  fubjed  to  liftleflhefs,  timidity  znd  infipidity.  Ani- 
mated by  the  love  of  truth,  and  by  a  pafTion  infeparable  from  its 
nature,  and  which  is  almoft  the  fame  thing  under  another  name, 
the  love  of  my  fpecies,  I  fhould  carefully  feek  for  fuch  topics  as 
might  mofl  conduce  to  the  benefit  of  my  neighbours,  anxioully 
watch  the  progrefs  of  mind,  and  inceffantly  labour  for  the  extir- 
pation of  prejudice. 

What  is  it  that  at  this  day  enables  a  thoufand  errors  to  keep  -^^^^^  ^f  ;„, 
their  ftation  in  the  world,  prieftcraft,  tefts,  bribery,  war,  cabal,  '"'^'^"'y- 
and  whatever  elfe  is  the  contempt  and  abhorrence  of  the  enlight- 
ened and  honeft  mind  ?  Cowardice.  Becaufe,  while  vice  walks 
ere£t  with  an  unabafhed  countenance,  men  lefs  vicious  dare  not 
paint  her  with  that  truth  of  colouring,  which  fhould  at  once 
confirm  the  innocent  and  reform  the  guilty.  Becaufe  the 
majority  of  thofe  who  are  not  involved  in  the  bufy  fcene,  and 
who,  poflefling  fome  difcernment,  fee  that  things  are  not  alto- 
gether right,  yet  fee  in  fo  frigid  a  way,  and  with  fo  imperfedt  a 
view.  Many,  who  deteiS  the  impofture,  are  yet  abfurd  enough 
to  imagine  that  impofture  is  neceflary  to  keep  the  world  in 
awe,  and  that  truth  being  too  weak  to  curb  the  turbulent  paf- 
fions  of  mankind,  it  is  exceedingly  proper  to  call  in  knavery 
and  artifice  as  the  abettors  of  her  power.     If  every  man  to-day 

I  i  would 


2^2  OF     SINCERITY. 

^?,^^5:  ^}l:    would  tell  all  the  truth  he  knows,  three  years  hence  there  vfoufcf 

CriAP.  IV. 

>~-'7— ^    be   fcarcely   a   falfhood    of  any   magnitude  remaining  in  th& 
civilifed  worlds 

S^?"'^''  There  is  no  fear  that  the'  character  here  defcribed  fhould  de- 

cemy  would    c;enerate  into  ruir^ednefs  and  brutality-*.     The  motive  by  which 

acquire  to  "  ^^  •'  •' 

raalf  dit  '^^  '^^  animated  affords  a  fufficient  fecurity  againft  fuch  con- 
fequences.  "  I  tell  an  unpleafant  truth  to  my  neighbour  from  a 
convidlion  that  it  is  my  duty.  I  am  convinced  it  is  my  duty, 
becaufe  I  perceive  the  communication  is  calculated  for  his 
benefit."  His  benefit  therefore  is  the  motive  of  my  proceeding, 
and  vdth  fuch  a  motive  it  Is  impoffible  I  fhould  not  feek  to 
communicate  it  in  the  moft  efficacious  form,  not  roufing  his 
refentment,  but  awakening  his  moral  feelings  and  his  energy. 
Meanwhile  the  happieft  of  all  qualifications  in  order  to  render 
truth  palatable,  is  that  which  rifes  fpontaneoully  In  the  fituation 
we  have  been  confidering.  Truth  according  to  the  terms  of  the 
fuppofition  Is  to  be  fpoken  from  the  love  of  truth.  But  the  face,- 
the  voice,  the  geflure  are  fo  many  indexes  to  the  mind.  It  is 
fcareely  poffible  therefore  that  the  perfon  v^^ith  whom  lam  con- 
verfing  fhould  not  perceive,  that  I  am  influenced  by  no  malig- 
nity, acrimony  and  envy.  In  proportion  as  my  motive  is  pure, 
at  leaft  after  a  few  experiments,  my  manner  will  become  unem- 
barraffed.  There-  will  be  franknefs  In  my  voice,  fervour  in  my 
geflure,  and  kindnefs  in  my  heart.     That  man's  mind  mufl  be 

*  See  a  particular  cafe  of  this  fincerity  difcufled  in  Appendix,  No.  II. 
I  of 


OF    SINCERITY.  243 

of  a  very  perverfe  texture,  that  can  convert  a  beneficent  potion  BOOK  iv. 

^  CHAP.  IV. 

adminiflered  with  no  ungenerous  retrofpedl",  no  felfiih  triumph,    "^ ^ ' 

SSCTION  IL 

Into  rancour  and  averfion.     There  is  an  energy  in  the  fincerity 
of  a  virtuous  mind  that  nothing  human  can  refift. 


I  flop  not  to  confider  the  objections  of  the  man  who  is  im-   OLjeaions. 
merfed  in  worldly  profpedts  and  puriuits.     He  that  does  not 
know  that  virtue  is  better  than  riches  or  title  mufl;  be  convinced 
by  arguments  foreign  to  this  place. 

But  it  will  be  afked,  "  What  then,  are  painful  truths  to  be  dif-   The  fear  of 
clofed  to  perfons  who  are  already  in  the  moft  pitiable  circum-   ceflary  pain, 
ftances  ?     Ought  a  woman  that  is  dying  of  a  fever  to  be  informed 
of  the  fate  of  her  hufband  whofe  fkuU  has  been  fradured  by  a 
fall  from  his  horfe  ?" 

The  moft  that  could  poflibly  be  conceded  to  a  cafe  like  this,  Anfwcr. 
Is,  that  this  perhaps  is  not  the  moment  to  begin  to  treat  like  a  ra- 
tional being  a  perfon  who  has  through  the  courfe  of  a  long  life 
been  treated  like  an  infant.  But  in  reality  there  is  a  mode  in 
which  under  fuch  clrcumftances  truth  may  fafely  be  communi- 
cated ;  and,  if  it  be  not  thus  done,  there  is  perpetual  danger  that 
it  may  be  done  in  a  blunter  way  by  the  heedlefs  loquacioufnefs 
of  a  chambermaid,  or  the  yet  undebauched  fmcerity  of  an  infant. 
How  many  arts  of  hypocrify,  ftratagem  and  falfliood  muft  be 
employed  to  cover  this  pitiful  fecret  ?     Truth  was  calculated  in 

I  i  2  the 


244  C>F    SINCERITY. 

BOOK  IV.    tj-ie  nature  of  things  to  difcipline  the  mind  to  fortitude,  humanity 

CHAP.  IV.  ° 

*^ .. ■'   and  virtue.     Who  are  we,  that  we  fhould  fubvert  the  nature  of 

Section  II. 

things  and  the  fyftem  of  the  univerfe,  that  we  fhould  breed  up 
a  fet  of  fummer  infe£ls,  upon  which  the  breeze  of  fmcerity  may 
'  never  blow,  and  the  temped  of  misfortune  never  beat  ■? 


The  defire  of       "  But  truth  may  fometlmes  be   fatal  to  him  that  fpeaks  It. 

mj  life.  A  man,  who  fought  for  the  Pretender  in  the  year  1 745,  when 

the  event  happened  that  difperfed  his  companions,  betook  him- 
felf  to  folltary  flight.  He  fell  in  with  a  party  of  loyalifts  who 
were  feeking  to  apprehend  him ;  but  not  knowing  his  perfon, 
they  enquired  of  him  for  intelligence  to  guide  them  in  their  pur- 
fuit.  He  returned  an  anfwer  calculated  to  cheriih  them  in  their 
miftake,  and  faved  his  life." 

This  objec-  This  like  the  former  Is  an  extreme  cafe  ;  but  the  true  anfwer 
to°o  much.  will  probably  be  found  to  be  the  fame.  If  any  one  fhould  quef- 
tion  this,  let  him  confider  how  far  his  approbation  of  the  con- 
duit of  the  perfon  above  cited  would  lead  him.  The  rebels^  as 
they  were  called,  were  treated  in  the  period  from  which  the 
example  is  drawn  with  the  molt  illiberal  injuftice.  This  man, 
guided  perhaps  by  the  moll  magnanimous  motives  in  what  he 
had  done,  would  have  been  put  to  an  ignominious  death.  But, 
if  he  had  a  right  to  extricate  himfelf  by  falfhood,  why  not  the 
wretch  who  has  been  guilty  of  forgery,  who  has  deferved  pu- 
nifhment,  but  who  may  now  be  confcious  that  he  has  in  him 

materials 


Section  II. 


O  F     S  I  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y.  245 

materials  and  inclination  to  make  a  valuable  member  of  fociety  ?    BOOK  iv, 

■I        CHAP.  IV. 

Nor  is  the  inclination  an  effential  part  of  the  fuppofition.  Where- 
ever  the  materials  exift,  it  will  perhaps  be  found  to  be  flagrantly 
unjufi:  on  the  part  of  fociety  to  deftroythem,  inftead  of  difcovering 
the  means  by  which  they  might  be  rendered  innocent  and  ufe-  ' 

ful.  At  this  rate,  a  man  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  commit  one 
crime,  in  order  to  give  him  a  right  to  commit  a  fecond  which 
fliall  fecure  impunity  to  the  firft. 

But  why,  when  fo  many  hundred  individuals  have  been  con-  Anfwer. 
tented  to   become  martyrs   to  the  unintelligible  principles  of  a 
pitiful  fe(St:,  fhould  not  the  one  innocent  man   I  have  been  de- 
fcribing  be  contented  to  offer  himfelf  up  a  vidim  at  the  fhrine  of  , 

veracity  ?  Why  fhould  he  purchafe  a  few  poor  years  of  exile 
and  mifery  by  the  commiffion  of  falfhood  ?  Had  he  furren- 
dered  himfelf  to  his  purfuers,  had  he  declared  in  the  prefence  of 
his  judges  and  his  country,  "  I,  whom  you  think  too  wicked  and 
degenerate  to  delerve  even  to  live,  have  chofen  rather  to  en- 
counter your  injuftlce  than  be  guilty  of  an  untruth  :  I  would 
have  efcaped  from  your  iniquity  and  tyranny  if  I  had  been  able; 
but,  hedged  in  on  all  fidcci,  having  no  means  of  deliverance  but  in 
falfhood,  I  chearfully  fubmit  to  all  that  your  malice  can  inflitft  ^ 
rather  than  violate  the  majefty  of  truth :"  would  he  not  have 
done  an  honour  to  himfelf,  and  afforded  an  example  to  the 
world,  that  would  have  fully  compenfated  the  calamity  of  his 
untimely  death  ?     It  is  in  all  cafes  incumbent  upon  us  to  dif- 

charge 


246  OF    SINCERITY. 

charge  our  own  duty,  without  being  infiuenci 
whether  other  men  will  difcharge  or  negled;  theirs. 


BOOK  IV.     charge  our  own  duty,  without  being  influenced  by  the  enquliy 


Section  II. 


It  muit  be  remembered  however  that  this  is  not  the  true  jet 
.  of  the  argument.     The  ftrefs   does  not  lie  upon  the    good   he 
would   have   done :    that   is  precarious.     This   heroic  adion,  as 
;it  is  to  be  feared  has  been  the  cafe  with  many  others,  migiit  be 
.configned  to  oblivion.     The  obje£t  of  true  wifdom  under  the 
circumftances  we  are  confidering,  is  to  weigh,  not  fo  much  what 
is  to  be  done,  as  what  is  to  be  avoided.     We  mull  not  be  guilty 
of  infmcerity.     We  muft  not  feek  to  obtain  a  defirable  obje£t  by 
vile  means.     We  muft  prefer  a  general  principle  to  the  merc- 
-tricious  attradlions  of  a  particular  deviation.     We  muft  perceive 
:in  the  prefervation  of  that  general  principle  a  balance  of  univer- 
fal  good,  outweighing  the  benefit  to  arife  in  any  inftance  from 
fuperfeding  it.     It  is  by  general  principles  that  the  bufniefs  of 
the  univerfe  is  carried  on.     If  the  laws  of  gravity  and  impulfe 
did  not  make  us  know  the  confequences  of  our  adions,  we  fhould 
be  incapable  of  judgment  and  inference.     Nor  is  this  lefs  true 
in  morals.     He  that,  having  laid  down  to   himfelf  a  plan  of  fm- 
.cerity,  is  guilty  of  a  fingle  deviation,  infeds  the  whole,  conta- 
minates the  franknefs  and  magnanimity  of  his   temper  (for  for- 
titude in   the  intrepidity  of  lying  is  bafenefs),  and  is    lefs  vir- 
tuous than  the  foe  againft  whom  he  defends  himfelf;   for  it  Is 
more  virtuous  in  my  neighbour  to  confide  in  my  apparent  ho- 
.Jiefty,  than  in  me  to  abufe  his  confidence.     In  the  cafe  of  mar- 
tyrdom 


O  F    S  I  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y.  247 

tyrdom  there  are  two  thinf^s  to  be  confiJered.      It  is  an  evil  not    ^>^0KIV. 

^  °  CHAP.  IV. 

wantonly  to  be  incurred,   for  we   know  not  what  c;ood  yet  re-    '^ ' 

°  ^  Section  II. 

mains  for  us  to  do.  It  is  an  evil  not  to  be  avoided  at  the  ex- 
pence  of  principle,  for  we  fhould  be  upon  our  guard  againfl  fet- 
ting  an  inordinate  A^alue  upon  our  own  efforts,  and  imagining 
that  truth  would  die,  if  we  were  to  be  deflroyed. 

*'  But  what  becomes  of  the  great  duty  of  fecrecy,  which  the  Secrecy  con- 

fideied. 

incomparable  Fenelon  has  made  a  capital  branch  in  the  education 
of  his  Telemachus  ?"  It  is  annihilated.  It  becomes  a  truly  vir- 
tuous man  not  to  engage  in  any  adion  of  which  he  would  be 
afhamed  though  all  the  world  were  fpedator.  Indeed  Fenelon 
with  all  his  ability  has  fallen  into  the  moft  palpable  inconfiftency 
upon  this  fubjedt.  In  Ithaca  a  confiderable  part  of  the  merit  of 
Telemachus  confifts  in  keeping  his  mother's  fecrets  *.  When 
he  arrives  in  Tyre,  he  will  not  be  perfuaded  to  commit  or 
fuffer  a  deception,    though  his  life  was  apparently  at  flake  \, 

What  is  it  of  w^hich  an  honeft  man  is  commonly  afliamed  ? 
Of  virtuous  poverty,  of  doing  menial  offices  for  himfelf,  of  hav- 
ing raifed  himfelf  by  merit  from  a  humble  fituation,  and  of  a 
thoufand  particulars  which  in  reality  conftitute  his  glory.  With 
refped;  to  aftions  of  beneficence  we  cannot  be  too  much  upoa 
our  guard  againfl  a  fpirit  of  oftentation  and  the  charader  that 
imperioully  exacts  the  gratitude  of  its  beneficiaries  ;  but  it  is 
certainly  an  extreme  weaknefs  to  defire  to  hide  our  deferts.     So 

*  Telemaque.  Liv.  XVI.  f  Liv.  Ill, 

far 


248  OF     SINCERITY. 

BOOK  IV.    £ij.  from    defirlno:    to  withhold   from   the    world    the    know- 
C  HAP.  IV.  '^ 

"• ^ '   ledo;e  of  our  eood  deeds,  we  ought  to  be  forward  to  exhibit  an 

Si;ctionII.  00  o 

attradtive  and  illuftrious  example.  We  cannot  determine  to 
keep  any  thing  fecret  without  rilking  at  the  fame  time  to 
commit  a  hundred  artifices,  quibbles,  equivocations  and  falf- 
hoods. 

The  feciets  But  the  fecrets  of  others,  "  have  I  a  power  over  them  ?"  Pro- 

of others.  r         •  r  •  1 

bably  not :  but  you  have  a  duty  refpefting  them.  The  fa£ts  with 
which  you  are  acquainted  are  a  part  of  your  pofieffions,  and  you 
are  as  much  obliged  refpeding  them  as  in  any  other  cafe,  to 
employ  them  for  the  public  good.  Have  I  no  right  to  indulge 
in  myfelf  the  caprice  of  concealing  any  of  my  affairs,  and  can 
another  man  have  a  right  by  his  caprice  to  hedge  up  and  re- 
state fecrets.  ftrain  the  pa:th  of  my  duty?—"  But  fta;te  fecrets  ?"  This  perhaps 
is  a  fubje£t  that  ought  not  to  be  anticipated.  We  fhall  have 
occafion  to  enquire  how  minifters  of  the  concerns  of  a  nation 
came  by  their  right  to  equivocate,  to  juggle  and  over-reach, 
while  private  men  are  obliged  to  be  ingenuous,  diredl  and 
fmcere. 

S   rets  oF  There  is  one  cafe  of  a  fmgular  nature  that  feems  to  deferve  a 

philanthropy,  fgpg^^j-g  examination ;  tlie  cafe  of  fecrets  that  are  to  be  kept  for 
the  fake  of  mankind.  Full  juftice  is  done  to  the  affirmative  fide 
of  this  argument  by  Mr.  Condorcet  in  his  Life  of  Voltaire,  where 
he  is  juftifying  this  illuftrious  friend  of  mankind,  for  his  gentle- 
nefs  and  forbearance  in  aflertir^g  the  liberties  .of  the  fpecies.     He 

iirft 


O  F     S  I  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y.  24c, 

firfl;  enumerates  the  inceffant  attacks  of  Voltaire  upon  fuperllltion,    BOOK  IV. 
..,„..  ,  ,    ,   ,  ,  CHAP.  IV. 

hypocritical  aulterities  and  war  j  and  then  proceeds  :  "  It  is  true,    ^ 

the  more  men  are  enliglitened,  the  more  they  will  be  free ;  but 
let  us  not  put  defpots  on  their  guard,  and  incite  them  to  form 
a  league  againft  the  progrefs  of  reafon.  Let  us  conceal  from 
them  the  ftridt  and  eternal  union  that  fubfifts  between  knowledge 
and  liberty.  Voltaire  thought  proper  to  paint  fuperftition  as  the 
enemy  of  monarchy,  to  put  kings  and  princes  upon  their  guard 
againft  the  gloomy  ferocity  and  ambition  of  the  priefthood,  and 
to  demonftrate  that,  were  it  not  for  the  freedom  of  thought  and 
inveftigation,  there  would  be  no  fecurity  againft  the  return  of 
papal  infolence,  of  profcriptions,  aflaflinations  and  religious  war. 
Had  he  taken  the  other  fide  of  the  queftion,  had  he  maintained, 
which  is  equally  true,  that  fuperftition  and  ignorance  are  the 
fupport  of  defpotlfm,  he  would  only  have  anticipated  truths  for 
which  the  public  were  not  ripe,  and  have  {een  a  fpeedy  end  to 
his  career.  Truth  taught  by  moderate  degrees  gradually  en- 
larges the  intelle£lual  capacity,  and  infenfibly  prepares  the  equa- 
lity and  happinefs  of  mankind  ;  but  taught  without  prudential 
reftraint  would  either  be  nipped  in  the  bud,  or  occafion  national 
concuftions  in  the  world,    that  would  be  found  premature  and 

therefore  abortive*." 

What 

*  "  Pius  ks  homines  feront  eclaires,  plus  ils  ferotit  libi'es. — Mais  n^avertiJToiis  point 
ies  oppvtjjeurs  de  former  tine  ligue  contre  la  raifon,  cachotis  letir  Pctroite  et  nece/fiiire 
union  dcs  l:in:i'erjs  it  de  la  liberte. — i^vc/  fcra  done  le  devoir  d'un  pl.ilofiphe  P — // 
ielairera  les  gouvernemens  fur  tsut  ce  quits  ont  a  craindre  des  pretres. — //  fera  voir 

K  k  (^ue 


Sf.CTlON  11. 


250  OF     SINCERITY. 

Wliat  a  co^vardly  diftrufi;  do  reafonings  IlketHefe  exhibit  of  the 

omnipotence  of  truth  !  With  refped:  to  perfonal  fafety,  it  will  be 

found  upon  an  accurate  examination  that  Voltaire  with  all  his 

ingenuity  and  ftratagera  was-  for  fixty  years  together  the  objed' 

of  perpetual,  almoft  daily  perfeciition  from  courts  and  minifters*. 

He  was  obliged  to  retire  from  country  to  country,  and  at  lafl:  to 

take   advantage  of  a  refidence   upon  the  borders  of  two   flates 

with  a  habitation  in  each*     His  attempts  to  fecure  the  patronage 

of  princes  led  only  to  viciffitude  and  difgrace.     If  his  plan  had 

been  more  firm  and  diredl,  he  would  not  have  been  lefs  fafe. 

Timidity,    and   an  anxious  endeavour  to  fecure  to  ourfelves  a 

protedlor,.  invite  perfecution.     With  the  advantages  of  Voltaire, 

with   his  talents   and'  independence,   he  might  have  held   the 

tyrants  of  the  world  in  awe* 

Bue  fans  la  liherte  de  penfir  le  meme  efprit  dans  le  clerge  rai7teneralt  Us  tnemes 
afpiffinats,  les  mimes  fupplkes,  les  niemes  profcriptionsy  les  memes  guerres  civiles.— 
All  lien  de  montrer  que  la  fuperjlition  ejl  I'appui  du  d'efpotifme,  avant  que  la  raifon  ait 
raffemhle  ajfez  de  force,  il  prouvera  qu^elle  ejl  Veiinemie  des  rois. — Tel  eft  V efprit  de 
tons  les  ouvrages  de  Voltaire — ^le  des  hommes^  inferieurs  a  lui,  ne  voyent  pas  que  ft 
Voltaire  eut  fait  autrement,  ni  Montefquieu  ni  Roujfau  n'ouraient  pu  ecrire  leurs 
ouvrages,  que  I' Europe  fer ait  encore  fuperflitieufe,  et  reflerait  long-terns  efclave. — Ell 
(tttaquant  les  opprejfeurs  avant  d' avoir  eclaire  les  citoyens,  on  rifque  de  perdre  la  liberti 
et  d'etouffer  la  raifon.  L'hifoire  offre  la  preuve  de  ceite  verite.  Cambien  de  foisy 
nialgre  les genereux  efforts  des  amis  de  la  liberie,  une  feule  bataille  n'' a-t-elle pas  reduit 
des  nations  a  une  fervitude  de  plnfteurs  ftecles  !■ — Pourquoi  ne  pas  profter  de  cette 
txperience  funefle,  et  favoir  attendre  des  progrh  des  lumieres  une  liberie  plus  reellty 
plus  durable  et  plus  paiftble  P" 

*  Vie  de  Voltaire,  par  M***,  throughout^ 

As 


OF    SINCERITY.  251 

As  to  the  proerefs  of  truth,  it  is  not  fo  precarious  as  its  fear-  BOOK  IV. 

°        ^                                              ^                                             CHAP.  IV. 
ful  friends  may  imagine.     Air.  Condorcet  has  juftly  infinuated    * ■' ' 

■^  Skctios  II. 

in  the  courfe  of  his  argument,  that  "  in  the  invention  of  printin<' 
is  contained  the  embryo,  which  in  its  maturity  and  vigour  is 
deftined  to  annihilate  the  ilavery  of  the  human  race*."  Books, 
if  proper  precautions  be  employed,  cannot  be  defti-oyed.  Knovr- 
ledge  cannot  be  extirpated.  Its  progrefs  is  filent,  but  infallible  ; 
and  he  is  the  moft  ufeful  foldler  in  this  war,  who  accumulates 
in  an  unperifhable  form  the  greateft  mafs  of  truth. 

As  truth  has  nothing  to  fear  from  her  enemies,  fhe  needs  not 
have  any  thing  to  fear  from  her  friends.  The  man,  who  pub- 
lifhes  the  fublimeft  difcoveries.  Is  not  of  all  others  the  moft  likely 
to  inflame  the  vulgar,  and  hurry  the  great  queftion  of  human 
happinefs  to  a  premature  crifis.  The  obje£t  to  be  purfued  un- 
doubtedly is,  the  gradual  Impi-ovement  of  mind.  But  this  end 
will  be  better  anfwered  by  exhibiting  as  much  truth  as  poffible, 
enlightening  a  few,  and  fufFering  knowledge  to  expand  in  the 
proportion  which  the  laws  of  nature  and  neceffity  prefcribe,  than 
Tjy  any  artificial  plan  of  piecemeal  communication  that  M'e  can 
Invent.  There  is  in  the  nature  of  things  a  gradation  in  difcovery 
and  a  progrefs  in  improvement,  which  do  not  need  to  be  affifted  ' 
by  the  ftratagems  of  their  votaries.  In  a  word,  there  cannot  be 
-a   more  unworthy  idea,    than  that  truth  and  virtue  fhould   be 

*  "  Peut-ctre  avant  P invention  de  /'  imprimerie  itait-il  impoffibk  a  fe  foujii-aire  au 

K  k  2  ynder 


Section  IL 


252  OF    SINCERITY. 

BOOK  IV.     under  the  neceffity  of  feekinc;  alliance  with  concealment.     The 

CHAP.  IV.  '  ^  _ 

man,  who  would  artfully  draw  me  into  a  little,  that  by  fo  doing 

he  may  unawares  furprife  me  into  much,  I  infallibly  regard  as 

an  impoftor.     Will  truth,  contraded  into  fome  petty  fphei-e  and 

fhorn  of  its  beams,  acquire  additional  evidence  \  Rather  let  iBe 

trufl  to  its  omnipotence,  to  its  congeniality  with  the  nature  of 

Intelledl,  to  its  diredl  and  irrefiftible  tendency  to  produce  liberty, 

and  happinefs,  and  virtue.     Let  me  fear  that  I  have  not  enough  of 

it,  that  my  views  are  too  narrow  to  produce   impreflion,   and 

anxioufly  endeavour  to  add  to  my  flock  j  not  apprehend  that^ 

exhibited  in  its  noon-day  brightnefs,  its  luflre  and  genial  nature- 

fliould  not  be  univerfally  confefled  *^ 

*  See  this  fubjeft  farther  purfued  In  Appeadix,  No.  IIL 


APPENDIX, 


I    ^S3     ] 


APPENDIX,    No.  I.     p.  233. 


OF    THE   CONNEXION    BETWEEN   UNDERSTANDING 
AND    VIRTUE. 


CAN  EMINENT  VIRTUE  EXIST  UNCONNECTED  WITH  TA- 
LENTS ? — NATURE  OF  VIRTUE. — IT  IS  THE  OFFSPRING 
OF  UNDERSTANDING. — IT  GENERATES  UNDERSTAND- 
ING.  ILLUSTRATION     FROM    OTHER   PURSUITS LOVE — ' 

AMBITION APPLIED. 

CAN  EMINENT  TALENTS  EXIST  UNCONNECTED  V^^ITH  VIR- 
TUE ? ARGUMENT  IN  THE  AFFIRMATIVE  FROM  ANA- 
LOGY  IN   THE   NEGATIVE    FROM   THE   UNIVERSALITY    OF 

MORAL  SPECULATION — FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  VICE  AS 
FOUNDED  IN  MISTAKE. — THE  ARGUMENT  BALANCED. — 
IMPORTANCE'OF   A  SENSE    OF  JUSTICE. — ITS  CONNEXION 

WITH   TALENTS. ILLIBERALITY    WITH    WHICH     MEN    OF 

TALENTS   ARE  USUALLY  TREATED., 


A  PROPOSITION  which,  however  evident  in  itfelf,  feems   BOOK  iv. 
.        ,                 .        .            CHAP.  IV, 
never  to  have  been  confidered  with  the  attention  it  de-    * ., / 

.  rf  •  Appendix, 

ferves,  is  that  which  affirms  the  connexion  between  underftand-       No.  i. 

Can  eminent 

ing  and  virtue.     Can  an  honeft  ploughman  be  as  virtuous  as  virtue  exift 

unconnffied 
CatO  ?    with  talents  ? 


254  CONNEXION    BETWEEN 

BOOK  IV.    Cato  ?     Is  a  man  of  weak  intelleds  and  narrow  education  as 

CHAP.  IV. 

' '    capable  of  moral  excellence  as  the  fublimefl  genius  or  the  mind 

Appendix,  ^ 

No.  I.       jnoft  ftored  with  information  and  fcience  ? 


Nature  of  vir-       To  determine  thefe  queftions  it  .is  neceflary  we  fhould  recol- 

tue.  .       , 

ledt  the  nature  of  virtue.  Confidered  as  a  perfonal  quality  it 
confifts  in  the  difpofition  of  the  mind,  and  may  be  defined  a  de- 
fire  to  promote  the  benefit  of  intelligent  beings  in  general,  the 
quantity  of  virtue  being  as  the  quantity  of  defire.  Novv^  defire 
is  another  name  for  preference,  or  a  perception  of  the  excel- 
lence real  or  fuppofed  of  any  objed.  I  fay  real  or  fuppofed,  for 
an  objedt  totally  deflitute  of  real  and  intrinfic  excellence,  may 
become  an  obje£t  of  defire  by  means  of  the  imaginary  excellence 
that  is  afcribed  to  It.  Nor  Is  this  the  only  miftake  to  which  hu- 
man intelligences  are  liable.  We  may  defire  an  objed  of  abfo- 
lute  excellence,  not  for  its  real  and  genuine  recommendations' 
but  for  fome  fiditious  attradions  we  may  impute  to  it.  This  is 
always  in  fome  degree  the  cafe,  when  a  beneficial  adion  is  per- 
formed from  an  ill  motive. 

How  far  is  this  mifi:ake  compatible  with  real  virtue  ?  If  I  de- 
fire the  benefit  of  intelligent  beings,  not  from  a  clear  and  dift:ind 
perception  of  what  it  is  in  wliich  their  benefit  confifts,  but  from 
the  unexamined  leffons  of  education,  from  the  phyfical  effed  of 
Sympathy,  or  from  any  fpecies  of  zeal  unallied  to  and  incom- 
jnenfurate  with  knowledge,  can  this  defire  be  admitted  for  vir- 
tuous ? 


UNDERSTANDING    AND    VIRTUE.  255 

tnous  ?  Nothing  feems  more  inconfiftent  with  our  ideas  of  virtue. 
A  virtuous  preference  is  the  preference  of  an  obje£l  for  the  fake 
of  certain  beneficial  qualities  which  really  belong  to  that  obje£t. 
To  attribute  virtue  to  any  other  fpecies  of  preference  would  be 
the  fame  as  to  fuppofe  that  an  accidental  eifedl  of  my  condud;^- 
which  was  altogether  out  of  my  view  at  the  time  of  adopting  it, , 
might  entitle,  me  to  the  appellation  of  virtuous. 

Hence  It  appears,  firft,  that '  virtue  confifts  in  a  defire -of  the  Tt  JstheofF- 
benefit  of  the  fpecies  :  and,  fecondly,  that  that  defire  only  can  be  dcritanding. 
denominated  virtuous,  which  flows  from  a  diftindt  perception 
of  the  value,  and  confequently  of  the  nature,  of  the  thing  defired. 
But  how  extenfi ve  muft  be^  the  capacity  that  comprehends  tlie 
full  value  of  that  benefit  which  is  the  objed:  of  virtue  !  It 
muft  begin  with  a  colle£live  idea  of  the  human  fpecies.  It  . 
muft  difcriminate,  among  all  the  different  caufes  that  produce  a 
pleafurable  ftate  of  mind,  that  which  produces  the  moft  exqui- 
fite  and  durable  pleafure.  Eminent  virtue  requires  that  I  fhould 
have  a  grand  view  of  the  tendency  of  knowledge  to  produce 
happinefs,  and  of  juft  political  inftitution  to  favour  the  progrcfa 
of  knowledge.  It  demands  that  I  fhould  perceive  in  what  man- 
ner fecial  intercourfe  may  be  made  conducive  to  virtue  and  fe- 
licity, and  imagine  the  unfpeakable  advantages  that  may  arife 
from  a.  coincidence  and  fucceflion  of  generous  efforts.  Thefe 
things  are  neceflary,  not  merely  for  the  purpofe  of  enabling  me 
to  employ  my -virtuous  difpofition  in  the  beft-  manner,  but  alfo 
2  for 


256 


CONNEXION     BETWEEN 


BOOK  IV.    for  the  purpofe  of  giving  to  that  difpofition  a  juft  animation  and 
vigour.     God,  according  to   the  ideas  ufually  conceived  of  that 


Appendix, 


No.  I.  being,  is  more  benevolent  than  man,  becaufe  he  has  a  conftant 
and  clear  perception  of  the  nature  of  that  end  which  his  pro- 
vidence purfues. 


It  generates         A  farther  proof  that   a  powerful  underftanding  is  infeparable 
ftanding.        from  eminent  virtue  will  fuggeft  itfelf,  if  we  recoiled  that  earneft 
defire  never  fails  to  generate  capacity. 


Illuftration 
from  other 
puifuits  : 


love: 


This  propofition  has  been  beautifully  illuftrated  by  the  poets, 
when  they  have  reprefented  the  paflion  of  love  as  immediately 
leading  in  the  bread  of  the  lover  to  the  attainment  of  many 
arduous  accompllfhments.  It  unlocks  his  tongue,  and  enables 
him  to  plead  the  caufe  of  his  paffion  with  Infmuating  eloquence. 
It  renders  his  converfation  pleafmg  and  his  manners  graceful. 
Does  he  defire  to  exprefs  his  feelings  in  the  language  of  verfe  ? 
It  dictates  to  him  the  moft  natural  and  pathetic  ftrains,  and  fup- 
plieshim  with  a  juft  and  Intereftlng  language  which  the  man  of 
mere  refledion  and  fcience  has  often  fought  for  in  vain. 


iimbJtion 


No  pidure  can  be  more  truly  founded  in  a  knowledge  of 
human  nature  than  this.  The  hiftory  of  all  eminent  talents  is  of 
a  fnnilar  kind.  Did  Themiftocles  defire  to  eclipfe  the  trophies 
of  the  battle  of  Marathon?  The  uneafmefs  of  this  defire  would 
not  let  him  fleep,  and  all  his  thoughts  were  occupied  with  the 
2  invention 


UNDERSTANDING    AND    VIRTUE.  257 

mvention  of  means  to  accomplifh  the  purpofe  he  had  chofcn.     It    BOOK  iv. 

.              .                                           CHAP.  IV. 
is-  a  well  known  maxim  in  the  forming  of  juvenile  minds,  that    ^^ ^ ' 

the    inftrudion,   which    is   communicated   by   mere   conftraint;j       No..  L 

makes  a  flow  and  feeble  impreffion  ;  but  that,  when  once  you 

have  infpired  the  mind  with  a  love  for  its  objed,  the  fcene  and 

the  progrefs  are  entirely  altered.     The  uneafinefs  of  mind  which 

eameft  defire  produces,  doubles  our  intelledlual  a£tivity  ;  and  as 

furely  carries  us   forward  with  increafed  velocity  towards  our 

goal,  as  the  expedation   of  a  reward   of  ten   thoufand   pounds 

would  prompt  me  to  walk  from  London  to  York  with  firmer 

refolution  and  in  a  fhorter  time. 


Let  the  obje£l  be  for  a  perfon  uninftruded  in  the  rudiments 
of  drawing  to  make  a  copy  of  fome  celebrated  ftatue.  At  firft, 
wewill  fuppofe,  his  attempt  fhall  be  mean  .and  unfuccefsful. 
If  his  defire  be  feeble,  he  will  be  deterred  by  the  mifcarriage 
of  this  effay.  If  his  defire  be  ardent  and  invincible,  he  will 
return  to  the  attack.  He  will  derive  inftrudion  from  his  failure. 
He  will  examine  where  and  why  he  mifcarried.  He  will  ftudy 
his  model  with  a  more. curious  eye.  He  will  perceive  that  he 
failed  principally  from  the  loofe  and  undigefted  idea  he  had 
formed  of  the  objed  before  him.  It  will  no  longer  ftand  in  his  ^ 
mind' as  one  general  mafs^  but  he  will  analyfe  it,  befto wing  upon . 
each  part  infucceflion  a  feparate  confideration. 

The.  cafe,  is  fxmikr  in  virtue  as  in  fcience.     If  Lhave  con-  applied. 

L 1  ceived 


sjS  CONNEXION     BETWEEN 

BOOK  IV.    ceived  an  earneft  defire  of  beine;  :a  benefactor  of  my  fpecies,  T 

CHAP.  IV.  °  _  /      r  ' 

fhall  no  doubt  find  out  a  channel  in  which  for  my  defire  to 
operate,  and  fhall  be  quick-fighted  in  difcovering  the  defedts  or 
comparative  littlenefs  of  the  plan  1  have  ch  fen.     But  the  choice 

iOf  an  excellent  plan  for  the  accomplifhmr-nt  of  an  important 
purpofe,  and  the  .exertion  of  a  mind  perpetually  watchful  to  re- 
move its  defeats,  imply  confiderable  underfcanding.  The  far- 
ther I  am  engaged  in  the  purfuit  of  this  plan  the  more  will  my 

:capacity  increafe.  If  my  mind  flag  and  be  difcouraged  in  the 
purfuit,  it  will  not  be  merely  want  of  underftanding,  but  want 
of  defire.  My  defire  and  my  virtue  "will  be  lefs,  than  thofe  of 
the  man,  who  goes  .on  with  unremitted  conftancy  in  the  fame 

.career. 


-Can  emment        Thus  far  wc  have  Only  teen  confiderlng  Iiow  impoflible  it  is 

^talents  exift  ^  .  ^       _  •  j  • 

uriconnefted    that  eminent  virtue  fhould  exift  in  a  weak  underftanding,  and  it 

'with  virtue  ? 

is  furprifing  that  fuch  a  propofition  fhould  ever  have  been  con- 
tefted.  It  is  a  curious  queftion  to  examine,  how  far  the  con_ 
verfe  of  this  propofition  is  true,  and  in  what  degree  eminent 
talents  are  compatible  with  the  abfence  of  virtue. 

Areument  in  Ffom  the  arguments  already  adduced  it  appears  that  virtuous 
ti'^efromara-  ^^^''^  '^^  another  name  for  a  clear  and  diftind:  perception  of  the 
°^^"  nature  and  value  of  the  objeft  of  virtue.     Hence  it  feems  moft 

natural  to  conclude,  that,  though  underftanding,  or  ftrong  perci- 
pient power  is  th^  indifpenfible  prerequifite  of  virtue,  yet  it  is 
1  neceflary 


UNDERSTANDING    AND    VIRTUE.  255 

neceflary  that  this  power  fhould   be  fixed  upon  this  obieifl,  in  ^^OK  IV. 

•*       '  CHAP.  IV. 

order  to  its  producing   the  defired  effed.     Thus  it   is  in  art.    *^ ■. > 

ApTENDIXj 

Without  genius  no  man  ever  was  a  poet  ;  but  it  Is  neceflary  that  No.  I. 
general   capacity  fhould  have   been  direfted   to   this  particular 
channel,  for  poetical  excellence  to  be  th^  refult- 


There  is  however  fome   difference  between  the  two  cafes,  (n  the  neg^- 
Poetry  is  the  bufinefs  of  a  few,  virtue  and  vice  are  the  affairs  of  univerfalltyof 

.        ,,  .^  t  f  r-     moral  fpecu- 

all  men.  To  every  uitellect  that  exilts  one  or  other  of  thefe  lation: 
qualities  mufl  properly  belong.  It  mufl  be  granted  that,  where 
every  other  circumflance  is  equal,  that  man  will  be  mol-l:  virtuous, 
whofe  underflanding  has  been  moft  actively  employed  in  the 
fludy  of  virtue.  But  morality  has  been  in  a  certain  degree  aa- 
objedl  of  attention  to  all  men.  No  perfon  ever  failed  more  or 
lefs  tc  apply  the  flandard  of  juft  and  unjuft  to  his  own  a£tionS 
and  thofe  of  others;  and  this  has  of  courfe  been  generally  done 
with  mofl  ingenuity  by  men  of  the  greateft  capacity. 

It  mufl  farther  be  remembered  that  a  vicious  condud  is  always  from  the  na- 

•1  r   1         r  .  A  r  n   ^  .  ,     '"''^  of  vice  as 

the  refult  us.  nan'ow  views.  A  man  ot  powerful  capacity  and  foimded  in 
extenfive  obfer\Mtion  is  leaft  likely  to  commit  the  mifl:ake,  either 
of  feeing  himfelf  as  the  only  objed:  of  importance  in  the  uni- 
verfe,  or  of  conceiving  that  his  own  advantage  may  beft  be  pro" 
moted  by  trampling  on  that  of  others.  Liberalaccomplirhments 
are  furely  in  fome  degree  connected  with  liberal  principles.  He,, 
who  takes  into  his  view  a  whole  nation  as  the  fubjeds  of  his 
L  1  i  '       operation: 


25o  CONNEXION    BETWEEN 

BOOK  IV.     operation  or  the  inftruments  of  his  greatnefs,  may  naturally  be 
*^;^ — ^    expected  to  entertain  fome  klndnefs  for  the  whole.     He,  whofe 

ArPENDIS,  '■ 

No.  I.  mind  is  habitually  elevated  to  magnificent  conceptions,  is  not 
likely  to  fmk  without  ftrong  reludlance  into  thofe  fordid  pur- 
fuits,  which  engrofs  fo  large  a  portion  of  mankind. 

Theargu-  [g^f  though  thefe  general  maxims  muft  be  admitted  for  true, 

ment  ba-  jo  o 

laaeed.  ^^^  would  incline  us  to  hope  for  a  conftant  union  between  em.i- 

nent  talents  and  great  virtues,  there  are  other  confiderations 
which  prefent  a  ftrong  drawback  upon  fo  agreeable  an  expedta- 
tion.  It  is  fufficiently  evident  that  morality  in  fome  degree 
enters  into  the  refledions  of  all  mankind.  But  it  is  equally 
evident,  that  it  may  enter  for  more  or  for  lefs ;  and  that  there 
will  be  men  -of  the  highefl  talents,  who  have  their  attention 
diverted  to  other  objects,  and  by  whom  it  will  be  meditated 
upon  with  lefs  earneftnefs,  than  it  may  fometimes  be  by  other 
men  who  are  in  a  general  view  their  inferiors.  The  human  mind 
is  in  fome  cafes  fo  tenacious  of  its  errors,  and  fo  ingenious  in  the 
kivention  of  a  fophiftry  by  which  they  may  be  vindicated,  as  to 
fruftrate  expe6lations  of  virtue  in  other  r^fpeds  the  beft  founded. 

Importance  From  the  wholc  of  the  fubje£t  it  feems  to  appear,  that  men 

of  a  fenfc  of 

uftice.  of  talents,  even  when  they  are  erroneous,  are  not  deftitute  of 

virtue,  and  that  there  is  a  degree  of  guilt  of  which  they  are 

incapable.     There  is  no  ingredient  that  fo  eifentially  contributes 

to  a  virtuous  charadler  as  a  fenfe  of  juftice.     Philanthropy,  as 

2    '  con- 


UNDERSTANDING    AND    VIRTUE.  261 

contradiftineuifhed  to  jnftice,    is  rather  an  unrefleaine  feelinfr.    r.OOK  iv. 

^  ^'     CHAP.  IV, 

than   a  rational   principle.     It  leads  to  an   abfurd    indulgence, 

which  is  frequently  more  injurious  than  beneficial  even  to  the 

individual  it  propofes  to  favour.     It  leads  to  a  blind  partiality, 

infliding   calamity   without   remorfe  upon    many  perhaps,   in 

order  to  promote  the  imagined  intereft  of  a  few.     But  juftice 

meafures  by  one  inflexible  ftandard  the  claims  of  all,    weighs 

their  oppofite  pretenfions,  and  feeks  to  difFufe  happinefs,  becaufe 

happinefs  is  the  fit  and  reafonable  adjunct  of  a  confcious  being. 

"Wherever  therefore  a  ilrong  fenfe  of  juftice  exifts,  it  is  common 

and   reafonable   to   fay,    that  in   that    mind   exifts    confiderable 

virtue,  though  the  individual  from  an  unfortunate  concurrence 

of  circumftances  may  with  all  his  great  qualities  be  the  inftru- 

ment  of  a  very  fmall  portion  of  benefit.     Can  great  intellectual 

energy  exift  without  a  ftrong  fenfe  of  juftice  ? 

It  has  no  doubt  refultcd  from  a  train  of  fpeculation  fimllar  to  its  con- 
this,  that  poetical  readers  have  commonly  remarked  Milton's  taklus."^' 
devil  to  be  a  being  of  confiderable  virtue.  It  muft  be  admitted 
that  his  energies  centered  too  much  In  perfonal  regards.  But 
wliy  did  he  rebel  againft  his  maker  ?  It  was,  as  he  himfelf 
informs  us,  becaufe  lie  fav/  no  fufficient  reafon  for  that  extreme 
inequality  of  rank  and  power  which  the  creator  afllimed.  It 
was  becaufe  prefcription  and  precedent  form  no  adequate  ground 
for  "implicit  faith.  After  "his  fall,  why  did  he  ftill  cherifh  the 
fpifit  of  oppofition  ?  Prom  a  perfuafion  that  he  was  hardly  and 

injurioufly 


36».  CONNEXION    BETWEEN 

BOOK  IV.    injuiioufly  treated.     He  was   not  difcouraged  by  the  apparent' 
inequality  of  the  conteft ;-  becaufe  a  fenfe  of  reafon  and  juftice 


Appendix, 

No.. I.  ^as  ftronger  in  his  mind,  than  a  fenfe  of  brute  force  :.  becaufe 
he  had  much  of  the  feelings  of  an;  Epi(3:etus  or  a  Cato,  and  little 
of  thofe  of  a  flave..  He  bore  his  torments  with  fortitude,  becaufe- 
he  difdained  to  be  fubdued  by  defpotic  power..  He  fought  re-- 
venge,  becaufe  he  could  not  think  with  tamenefs  of  the  unex-- 
poftulating  authority  that  aiTumed  to  difpofe  of  him.  How  bene- 
ficial and  illuftrious  might  the  temper  from  which  thefe  qualities; 
flowed  have  proved  with  a  fmall.  diver fity  of  fituation  ! 

Let  us  defcend  from  thefe  imaginary  exiftences  to  real  hlf- 
tory.  We  flialf  find  that  even  Casfar  and  Alexander  had  their 
virtues.  There  is  great  reafon  to  believe,  that,  however  miflaken 
was  their  fyftem  of  conduct,  they  imagined  it  reconcileable  and 
even  conducive  to  the  general  good.  If  they  had  defired  the 
general  good  more  earneftly,  they  would  have  underftood  betterv^ 
how  to  promote  it.. 

Upon  the  whole  it  appears,  tKat  great  talents  are  great  ener- 
gies, and  that  great  energies  cannot  flow  but  from  a  powerfitl' 
fenfe  of  fitnefs  and  jufl:ice.  A  man  of  uncommon  genius  Is  a. 
man  of  high  pafllons  and  lofty  defign  ;  and  our  pafllons  will  be 
found  in  the  lall  analyfiS  to  have  their  fureft  foundation  in  a 
-  fentiment  of  jullice.  If  a  man  be  of  an  afpiring  and  ambitious 
^mper,  it  is  becaufe  at  prefent  he  finds  himfelf  out  of  his  place^, 

and 


UNDERSTANDING    AND    VIRTUE.  265 

and  willies  to  be  in  it.     Even  the  lover  imagines  that  his  qua-    ^O*-*^^  ^^' 

°  ^         CHAP.  IV. 

Jities  or  his  paflion  eive  Li'i  a  title  fuperior  to  that  of  other  men,    ^; ' 

*  ^  ^  Appendix, 

If  I  accumulate  wealth,  it  i^  becaufe  I  think  that  the  moft  rational  ^°'  ^' 
plan  of  life  cannot  be  fecured  without  it ;  and,  if  I  dedicate  my 
energies  to  feiifual  pleafures,  it  is  that  I  regard  other  purfuits  as 
irrational  and  vifionary.  All  our  paflions  would  die  in  the  mo- 
ment they  were  conceived,  were  it  not  for  this  reinforcement. 
A  man  of  quick  refentment,  of  ftrong  feelings,  and  who  per- 
tinacioufly  refifts  eveiy  thing  that  he  regards  as  an  unjuft 
affumption,  may  be  confidered  as  having  In  him  the  feeds  of 
eminence.  Nor  is  it  eafily  to  be  conceived  that  fuch  a  man 
ihould  not  proceed  from  a  fenfe  of  juftice  to  fome  degree  of 
benevolence  ;  as  Milton's  hero  felt  real  compaffion  and  fympathy 
for  his  partners  in  misfortune. 

If  thefe  reafonings  are  to  be  admitted,  what  judgment  fhall   iliiberalitf 

with  which 

•we  form  of  the  decifion  of  dodtor  Johnfon,  who,  fpeaking  of  a   men  of  ta- 
lents are 
-certain  obfcure  tranflator  of  the  odes  of  Pindar,  fays,  that   he   ufually 

treated. 

•was  "  one  of  the  few  poets  to  whom  <leath  needed  not  to  be 
terrible  *i"  Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  error  is  by  no  means 
peculiar  to  do£tor  Johnfon,  though  there  are  few  inftances  in 
which  it  is  carried  to  a  more  violent  extreme,  than  in  the  general 
tenour  of  the  work  from  which  this  quotation  is  taken.  It  was 
natural  to  expert  that  there  would  be  a  combination  among  the 
multitude  to  pull  down  intellectual  eminence.  Ambition  is  com- 
*  Lives  of  the  Poets  :  Life  of  Weft. 

mon 


264  CONNEXION,   &c. 

mon  to  all  men ;  and  thofe,  who  are  unable  to 

are  at  lead  willing  to  reduce  others  to  their  own  ftandard.     Na 


BOOK  iv.    n^on  to  all  men  ;  and  thofe,  who  are  unable  to  rife  to  diftindionjp 

CHAP.  IV.  *  ' 


Appendix, 

No.  I.  jnan  can  completely  underftand  the  character  of  him  with  whom; 
he  has  no  fympathy  of  views,  and.  we  may  be  allowed  tO' 
revile  what  we  do  not  underftand.  But  it  is  deeply  to  be  re- 
g-retted  that  men  of  talents  Ihould  fo  often  have  entered  into  this 
combination.  Who  does  not  recolle£t  with  pain  the  vulgar 
abufe  that  Swift  has  thrown  upon  Dryden,  and  the  mutual  jea- 
Ipufies  and  animofities  of  Roufleau  and  Voltaire,  men  wh©; 
QUght  to  have  co-operated  for  the.  falvation  of  the  world  ?. 


APPENDIX, 


[     265     ] 

APPENDIX,  No.  II,  p.  242.  - 

OF  THE  MODE  OF  EXCLUDING  VISITORS. 

ITS  IMPROPRIETY  ARGUED  —  FROM  THE  SITUATION  IN 
WHICH  IT  PLACES,  I.  THE  VISITOR — 2.  THE  SERVANT. — 
objections: — pretended  necessity  of  THIS  PRAC- 
TICE, I.  TO  PRESERVE  US  FROM  INTRUSION — 2,  TO  FREE 
US  FROM  DISAGREEABLE  ACQUAINTANCE. — CHARACTERS 
OF  THE  HONEST  AND  DISHONEST  MAN  IN  THIS  RESPECT 
COMPARED. 

THIS  principle  refpeding  the  obfervation  of  truth  in  the  boo  k  iv. 
r             r    ,-r                                                                                 CHAP.  IV. 
common   mtercourles   of  hfe   cannot   perhaps   be   better   ^ ^ 

.    .  Appendix, 

lliullrated,  than  from  the  famihar  and  trivial  cafe,  as  it  is  com-      No.  ii. 

Its  inipro- 

monly  fuppofed  to  be,   of  a  mafter  direding  his  fervant  to  fay  piiety 

argued  : 

he  is  not  at  home,  as  a  means  of  freeing  him  from  the  intruuon 
of  impertinent  guefts.  No  queftion  of  moraUty  can  be  foreign 
to  the  fcience  of  politics  ;  nor  will  thofe  few  pages  of  the  prefent 
work  be  found  perhaps  the  Icaft  valuable,  which  here  and  in 
other  places*  are  dedicated  to  the  refutation  of  errors,  that 
by  their  extenfive  influence  have  perverted  the  foundation  of 
moral  and  political  juftice. 

*  Vide  Appendices  to  Book  II,  Chap.  II. 

M  m  Let 


266  OF    THE    MODE    OF 

Let  us  firft,  according  to  the  well  known  axiom  of  moralitj^ 
put  ourfelves  in  the  place  of  the  perfon   whom   this   anfwer 
excludes.     It  feldom  happens  but  that  he  is  able,  if  he  be  in 
pofTeffion  of  any  difcernment,  to  difcover  with  tolerable  accuracy 
places,  i.the  -whether  the  anfwer  he  receives  be  true  or  falfe.     There  are  a 

vilitor : 

thoufand  petty  circumflances  by  which  falfhood  continually 
deteils  itfelf.  The  countenance  and  the  voice  of  the  fervant, 
unlefs  long  pradtifed  indeed  in  this  leflbn  of  deceit,  his  cold  and 
referved  manner  in  the  one  cafe,  and  his  free,  ingenuous  and 
unembarrafTed  air  in  the  other,  will  almoft  always  fpeak  a 
language  lefs  ambiguous  than  his  lips.  But  let  us  fuppofe  only 
that  we  vehemently  fufpedl  the  truth.  It  is  not  intended  to 
keep  us  in  ignorance  of  the  exiftence  of  fuch  a  pradlice.  He 
that  adopts  it,  is  willing  to  avow  in  general  terms  that  fuch  is 
his  fyftem,  or  he  makes  out  a  cafe  for  himfelf  much  lefs  favour- 
able than  I  was  making  out  for  him.  The  vifitor  then  who 
receives  this  anfwer,  feels  in  fpite  of  himfelf  a  contempt  for  the 
prevarication  of  the  perfon  he  vifits.  I  appeal  to  the  feelings  of 
every  man  in  the  fituation  defcribed,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
he  will  find  this  to  be  their  true  ftate  in  the  firft  inftance,  how- 
ever he  may  have  a  fet  of  fophiftical  reafonings  at  hand  by 
which  he  may  in  a  few  minutes  reafon  down  the  firft  move- 
ments of  indignation.  He  feels  that  the  trouble  he  has  taken 
and  the  civility  he  intended  intitled  him  at  leaft  to  truth  in 
return. 

Having 


EXCLUDING     VISITORS.  2C7 

Having  put  ourfelves  in  the  place  of  the  vifitor,  let  us  next   BOOK  IV. 

CHAP,  IV. 

put  ourfelves  in  the  place  of  the  poor  defpifed  fervant.  Let  us 
fuppofe  that  we  are  ourfelves  deftined  as  fons  or  hufbands  to 
give  this  anfwer  that  our  father  or  our  vv^ife  is  not  at  home, 
when  he  or  fhe  is  really  in  the  houfe.  Should  we  not  feel  our 
tongues  contaminated  with  the  bafe  plebeian  lie  ?  Would  it  be 
a  fufficient  opiate  to  our  confciences  to  fay  that  "fuch  is  the 
pradice,  and  it  is  well  under  flood  ?"  It  never  can  be  underftood  ; 
its  very  intention  is,  not  to  be  underflood.  We  fay  that  "  wc 
have  certain  arguments  that  prove  the  practice  to  be  innocent." 
Are  fervants  only  competent  to  underfland  thefe  arguments  J 
Surely  we  ought  beft  to  be  able  to  underftand  our  own  argu- 
ments, and  yet  we  Ihrink  with  abhorrence  from  the  idea  of  pcr- 
fonally  acting  upon  them. 

Whatever  fophlftry  we  may  have  to  excufe  our  error,  nothing 
Is  more  certain  than  that  our  fervants  underftand  the  leflon  we 
teach  them  to  be  a  lie.     It  is  accompanied  by  all  the  retinue  of 
falfliood.     Before   It  can  be   gracefully   pradlifed,    the  fervant 
muft  be  no  m<?an  proficient  in  the  myfteries  of  hypocrify.     By 
the  eafy  impudence  with  which  it  Is  uttered,  he  beft  anfwers  the 
purpofe  of  his  mafter,  or  in  other  words  the  purpofe  of  deceit. 
By  the  eafy  impudence  with  which  it  is  uttered,  he  beft  ftlfles 
the  upbraidings  of  his  own  mind,  and  conceals  from  others  tl^e 
fhame  impofed  on  him  by  his  defpotic  taik-mafter.     Before  this 
can  be  fufficiently  done,  he  muft  have  difcarJed  the  ingenuous 
M  m  2  franknefs 


26S  OF    THE     MODE     OF 

^OOK  IV,    fj-anknefs  by  means  of  which  the  thoughts  find  eafy  commerce 

CJrlAl  .IV. 

!^ ■ '  with   the   toneue,   and  the  clear  and  undifguifed   countenance 

Appendix,  o      '  <-> 

No.  II.  which  ought  to  be  the  faithful  mirror  of  the  mind.  Do  you 
think,  when  he  has  learned  this  degenerate  leiTon  in  one 
"  inftance,  that  it  will  produce  no  unfavourable  efFeds  upon  his 
general  condudt  ?  Surely,  if  we  will  pra£tife  vice,  we  ought  at 
leafl  to  have  the  magnanimity  to  pradife  it  in  perfon,  not 
cowardlike  corrupt  the  principles  of  another,  and  oblige  him  to 
do  that  which  we  have  not  the  honefty  to  dare  to  do  for 
ourfelves. 

Objcftlons :  ^ut  it  is  faid,  "  that  this  lie  is  neceflary,  and  that  the  inter- 
Pretended  courfe  of  human  fociety  cannot  be  carried  on  without  it."  What, 
thTs^praft^ce,   is  it  uot  as  eafy  to  fay,  "  I  am  engaged,"  or  "  indifpofed,"  or  as 

I.  to  preferve  ^  ,  ^^^     a  i      r 

us  fiom  In-  the  cafe  may  happen,  as  "  I  am  not  at  home  ?  Are  thele  an- 
fwers  more  infulting,  than  the  univerfally  fufpedted  anfwer, 
the  notorious  hypocrify  of  "  I  am  not  at  home  ?" 

The  purpofe  indeed  for  which  this  anfwer  is  ufually  em- 
ployed is  a  deceit  of  another  kind.  Every  man  has  in  the  ca- 
'  talogue  of  his  acquaintance  fome  that  he  particularly  loves,  and 
others  to  whom  he  is  indifferent,  or  perhaps  worfe  than  indif- 
ferent. This  anfwer  leaves  the  latter  to  fuppofe,  if  they  pleafe, 
that  they  are  in  the  clafs  of  the  former.  And  what  is  the  bene- 
fit to  refult  from  this  indifcriminate,  undiftinguiihing  manner  of 
treating  our  neighbours  ?     Whatever  benefit  it  be,  it  no  doubt 

exifls 


t-rufion 


EXCLUDINGVISITORS.  269 

exifts  in  confiderable  vigour  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  pollflied  fo-   BOOK  iv. 

,                                                                    CHAP.  IV. 
ciety,  where  forms  perpetually  intrude  to  cut  off  all  intercourfe    ' v ' 

Appendix, 

between  the  feelings  of  mankind;  and  I  can  fcarcely  tell  a  man  No.  ii. 
on  the  one  hand  "  that  I  efteem  his  charadler  and  honour  his 
virtues,"  or  on  the  other  "  that  he  is  fallen  into  an  error  which 
will  be  of  prejudicial  confequence  to  him,"  without  trampling 
upon  all  the  barriers  of  politenefs.  But  is  all  this  right  ?  Is 
not  the  efteem  or  the  difapprobation  of  others  among  the  moft 
powerful  incentives  to  virtue  or  punilhments  of  vice  ?  Can  we 
even  underftand  virtue  and  vice  half  fo  well  as  we  otherwife 
fhould,  if  we  be  unacquainted  with  the  feelings  of  our  neigh- 
bours refpedling  them  ?  If  there  be  in  the  lift  of  our  acquaintance  > 
any  perfon  whom  we  particularly  diflike,  it  ufually  happens  that 
it  is  for  fome  moral  fault  that  we  perceive  or  think  we  perceive 
in  him.  Why  fhould  he  be  kept  in  ignorance  of  our  opinion 
refpeding  him,  and  prevented  from  the  opportunity  either  of 
amendment  or  vindication  ?  If  he  be  too  wife  or  too  foolifli,  too 
virtiious  or  too  vicious  for  us,  why  fhould  he  not  be  ingenu- 
oufly  told  of  his  miftake  in  his  intended  kindnefs  to  us,  rather 
than  be  fuffered  to  find  it  out  by  fix  months  enquiry  from  our 
fervants  ? 

This  leads  us  to  yet  one  more  argument  in  favour  of  this  dif-   2.  to  free  us 
ingenuous  pradlice.     We  are  told,  "  there  is  no  other  by  which   agreeable 
we  can  rid  ourfelves  of  difagreeable  acquaintance."     How  long  ^'^'^"^'"  ^"^^* 
ihall  this  be  one  of  the  efFe<^s  of  polifhed  fociety,  to  perfuade  us 

that 


270  OFTHEMODEOF 

BOOK  IV,   ti^j^t;  ^ye  are  incapable  of  doing  the  moft  trivial  offices  for  our- 

CHAP.  IV.      ■  ^  ° 

* -^ '    felves  ?     You  may  as  well  tell  me,  "  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indif- 

ApPtNDIX, 

No.  ir.  penfible  neceffity  to  have  a  valet  to  put  on  my  flockings."  In 
reality  the  exiftence  of  thefe  troublefome  vifitors  is  owing  to 
the  hypocrify  of  politenefs.  It  is  that  we  wear  the  fame  indifcri- 
minate  fmile,  the  fame  appearance  of  cordiality  and  complacence  to 
all  our  acquaintance.  Ought  we  to  do  thus  ?  Are  virtue  and 
excellence  entitled  to  no  diftindions  ?  For  the  trouble  of  thefe 
impertinent  vifits  we  may  thank  ourfelves.  If  we  pradifed  no 
deceit,  if  we  affumed  no  atom  of  cordiality  and  efteem  we  did 
not  feel,  we  fhould  be  Httle  peftered  with  thefe  buzzing  intruders. 
But  one  fpecies  of  falfhood  involves  us  in  another ;  and  he,  that 
pleads  for  thefe  lying  anfwers  to  our  vifitors,  in  reality  pleads 
the  caufe  of  a  cowardice,  that  dares  not  deny  to  vice  the  diilinc- 
tion  and  kindnefs  that  are  exclufively  due  to  virtue. 

Charafters  of       The  man  who  afted  upon  this  fyftem  would  be  very  far  re- 
and  diftioneft   moved  from  a  Cynic.     The  condudl  of  men   formed   upon  the 

man  in  this  '  ,  t  o  •  a 

refpeft  com-    faihionablc  fyftem  is  a  perpetual  contradidtion.     At  one  moment 

pared. 

they  fawn  upon  us  with  a  fervility  that  diflionours  the  dignity 
of  man,  and  at  another  treat  us  with  a  negledl,  a  farcaftic  info- 
lence,  and  a  fupercilious  difdain,  that  are  felt  as  the  fevereft 
cruelty,  by  him  who  has  not  the  firmnefs  to  regard  them  with 
negle£l.  The  conduit  of  the  genuine  moralift  is  equable  and 
uniform.  He  loves  all  mankind,  he  defires  the  benefit  of  all, 
and  this  love  and  this  defire  are  legible  in  his  condudl.  Does 
5  ^e 


EXCLUDING    VISITORS.  271 

he  remind  us  of  our  faults '?     It  Is  with  no  mixture  of  afoerltv.   BOOK  IV. 

^        J^    CHAP.  IV. 

of  felfifh  difdain  and  infolent  fuperiorlty.     Of  confequence  it  is   * ' 

Appendix, 

fcarcely  poffible  he  fhould  wound.  Few  indeed  are  thofe  effc-  No.  ii. 
minate  valetudinarians,  who  recoil  from  the  advice,  when  they 
dillinguifh  the  motive.  But,  were  it  otherwife,  the  injury  Is  no- 
thing. Thofe  who  feel  themfelves  incapable  of  fuffering  the 
moft  benevolent  plain  dealing,  would  derive  leaft  benefit  from 
the  prefcription,  and  they  avoid  the  phyfician.  Thus  is  he  de- 
livered, without  harfhnefs,  hypocrify  and  deceit,  from  thofe  whofe 
intercourfe  he  had  leaft  reafon  to  defire  ;  and  the  more  his  cha- 
racter Is  underftood,  the  more  his  acquaintance  will  be  feled,  his 
company  being  chiefly  fought  by  the  ingenuous,  the  well  dif- 
pofed,  and  thofe  who  are  defirous  of  improvement. 


APPENDIX,, 


[       272       ]• 

APPENDIX,    No.   Ill,    p.  252, 
SUBJECT    OF    SINCERITY    RESUMED. 

A  CASE  PROPOSED. — ARGUMENTS  IN  FAVOUR  OF  CONCEAL- 
MENT.— PREVIOUS  QUESTION  t  IS  TRUTH  IN  GENERAL 
TO  BE  PARTIALLY  COMMUNICATED? — CUSTOMARY  EF- 
FECTS OF  SINCERITY — OF  INSINCERITY  —  UPON  HIM 
WHO  PRACTISES  IT — I.  THE  SUSPENSION  OF  IMPROVE- 
MENT  2,   MISANTHROPY 3.    DISINGENUITY  —  UPON 

THE  SPECTATORS. — SINCERITY  DELINEATED — ITS  GENE- 
RAL IMPORTANCE. APPLICATION. DUTY    RESPECTING 

THE  CHOICE  OF  A  RESIDENCE. 

*0  enable  us  more  accurately  to  judge  of  the  extent  of  the 
obligation  to    be   fincere,  let  us  fuppofe,  "  that  I  am 

Appendix,  i  •        1  en 

No.  III.       refident,  as  a  native  or  otherwife,  m  the  kmgdom  of  Portugal, 

A  Cafe  pro-  n        •  •    • 

pofed.  and  that  I  am  of  opinion  rhat  the  enablifhment,  civil  and  re- 

ligious, of  that  country  is  in  a  high  degree  injurious  to  the  wel- 
fare and  improvement  of  the  inhabitants."  Ought  I  explicitly 
to  declare  the  fentlments  I  entertain  ?  To  this  queftion  I  an- 
fwer,  that  "  my  Immediate  duty  is  to  feek  for  myfelf  a  different 
refidence." 

The 


SINCERITY     RESUMED,  273 

The  arguments  in  favour  of  concealment  in  this  cafe  are  ob-    COOK  IV. 
°  CHAP.  IV. 

vious.     "  That  country  is  fubje£t  to  a  high  degree  of  defpotifm,   ^- — v ' 

and,  if  I  delivered  my  fentiments  in  this  frank  manner,  efpe-   ,  ^°-  ^^^' 

'  •'  '■  Arguments 

cially  if  alone;  with  this  I  were  ardent  and  indefatigable  in  en-  '"  ^^^'°"''  °^ 

'  "-■  '-'  concealment. 

deavouring  to  profelyte  the  inhabitants,  my  fincerity  would  not 
be  endured.  In  that  country  the  inftitution  of  the  holy  inqui- 
fition  ftill  flourillies,  and  the  fathers  of  this  venerable  court  would 
find  means  effeitually  to  filence  me,  before  I  had  well  opened  my 
commilfion.  The  inhabitants,  wholly  unaccuftomed  to  fuch  bold 
affertions  as  thofe  I  uttered,  would  feel  their  pious  ears  inexpref- 
fibly  fhocked,  and  the  martyrdom  I  endured,  inftead  of  pro- 
ducing the  good  efFe£ts  with  which  martyrdom  is  fometimes  at- 
tended, would  foon  be  forgotten,  and,  as  long  as  it  was  remem- 
bered, would  be  remembered  only  with  execrations  of  my  me- 
mory. If  on  the  contrary  I  concealed  my  fentiments,  I  might 
fpend  a  long  life  in  aOis  of  fubftantial  benevolence.  If  I  con- 
cealed them  in  part,  I  might  perhaps  by  a  prudent  and  gradual 
difclofure  efFedl  that  revolution  in  the  opinions  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, which  by  my  precipitation  in  the  other  cafe  I  defeated 
in  the  outfet.  Thefe  arguments  in  favour  of  concealment  are 
not  built  upon  cowardice  and  felfifhnefs,  or  upon  a  recolledion 
of  the  horrible  tortures  to  which  I  fhould  be  fubjeded.  They 
flow  from  confideraiions  of  philanthropy,  and  an  endeavour 
fairly  to  eftimate  in  what  mode  my  exertions  may  be  rendered 
moll  conducive  to  the  general  good." 

N  n  Before 


274  SUBJECT    OF 

f,9,'j^p  \Y;        Before  we  enter  upon  their  diredt  examination,  It  may  be  pro- 
*7 — " '   per  to  premife  fome  general  obfervatlons.     In  the  firft  place,  let 

Appendix,     a  r  d  i  j 

No.  III.      yg  calmly  enquire  whether  the  inftance  here  ftated  be  of  the  na- 

x^revious  •'  '■ 

queition:  Is    ^.^J.g  p£  ^^  exceptlon  Or  a  rule.     "  Ought  I  univerfally  to  tell 
neral  to  be      ^j^j     ^  fmall  part  of  the  truth  at  a  time,  careful  not  to  fhock  the 

partially  com-  j  r  ' 

municated?  prejudices  of  my  hearers,  and  thus  lead  them  imperceptibly  to 
conclufions  which  would  have  revolted  them  at  firft ;  or  am  I 
to  pradife  this  method  only,  where  the  rilk  Is  great,  and  my  life 
may  be  the  forfeit  ?"  It  would  feem  as  if  truth  were  a  facred 
depofit,  which  I  had  no  right  to  deal  out  in  fhreds  to  my  fellow 
men,  juft  as  my  temper  or  my  prudence  fhould  didate.  It 
would  feem  as  if  it  were  an  unworthy  artifice,  by  an  ingenious 
an-angement  of  my  materials  to  trick  men  into  a  conclufion,  to 
which  franknefs,  ingenuity  and  fincerity  would  never  have  con- 
duced them.  It  would  feem  as  if  the  fhock  I  am  fo  careful  to 
avoid  were  favourable  to  the  health  and  robuft  conftitution  of 
mind  ;  and  that,  though  I  might  in  this  way  produce  kaft  tenv- 
porary  effed,  the  ultimate  refult  would  afford  a  balance  greatly 
in  favour  of  undifguifed  fincerity. 

Cuftomary  A  fecond  preliminary  proper  to  be  Introduced  in-  this  place 

efFefts  of  fin- 
cerity: confifts  in  a  recolledion  of  the  general  effeds  of  fincerity  and 

infincerlty,  the  reafons  for  which  the  one  is  commonly  laudable 

and  the  other  to  be  blamed,  independently  of  the  fubjeds  about 

which  they  may  be  employed.     Sincerity  Is  laudable,  on  account 

of  the  firmnefs  and  energy  of  charader  it  never  fails  to  produce. 

«  An 


SINCERITY     RESUMED.  275 

"  An  uprig-ht   man,"  it  has  fometimes   been   faid,  "  ousrlit  to   r.OOK  IV. 

ir    b  ^  >  o  CHAP.  [V. 

carry  his  heart  in  his  hand."  He  ought  to  have  an  ingenuouf- 
nefs  which  flirinks  from  no  examination.  The  commerce  be- 
tween his  tongue  and  his  heart  is  uniform.  Whatever  he  fpeaks 
you  can  depend  upon  to  be  the  truth  and  the  whole  truth.  The 
defigns  he  has  formed  he  employs  no  artifice  to  conceal.  He 
tells  you  in  the  firil  inftance  :  "  This  is  the  propofition  I  mean 
to  demonftrate.  I  put  you  upon  your  guard.  I  will  not  take 
you  by  furprife.  If  what  I  affirm  be  the  truth,  it  will  bear  your 
fcrutiny.  If  it  were  error,  I  could  have  recourfe  to  no  means 
more  equivocal,  than  that  of  concealing  in  every  ftep  of  the  procefs 
the  objed:  in  which  my  exertions  were  intended  to  terminate." 


Infincerity  is  to  be   blamed,    becaufe   it    has    an    immediate  ofinfince- 

rity  ; 
upon 


tendency  to  vitiate  the  integrity  of  charader.     "  I  muft  conceal  „pon  |„^ 


^he   opinions  I  entertain,"  fuppofe,  "  from  the   holy  father  in-  ^^^k2_PI5h>^ 
quifitor."   What  method  fliall  I  employ  for  this  purpofe  ?  Shall  I   i.thefufpen- 
hide  them  as  an  impenetrable  fecretfrom  all  the  world  ?  If  this  be  provement: 
the  fyftem  I  adopt,  the  confequence  is  an  inftant  and  immediate 
end  to  the  improvement  of  my  mind.     It  is  by  the  efforts  of  a 
daring   temper   that   improvements    and    difcoveries    are    made. 
The   feeds   of  difcovery   are  fcattered  in  every  thinking  mind, 
but  they  are  too  frequently  flarved  by  the  ungenial  foil  upon  which 
they  fall.     Every  man  fufpeds  the  abfurdity  of  kings  and  lords, 
and  the  injuflice  of  that  glaring  and  opprefTive  inequality  which 
iubfifts  in  mofl  civilifed  countries.     But  he  dares  not  let  his 

N  n  2  mind 


276  SUBJECTOF 

BOOK  IV.    jnlnd  loofe  In  fo  adventurous  a  fubjed.     If  I  tell  my  thoughts, 
^; >^ ^    I    derive   from   the    ad:   of  communication   encouragement  to 

Appendix, 

No.  III.  proceed.  I  perceive  in  what  manner  they  are  received  by  others, 
and  this  perception  ads  by  rebound  upon  my  own  progrefs.  If 
•they  be  received  cordially,  I  derive  new  encouragement  from 
the  approbation  of  others.  If  they  be  received  with  oppofition 
and  diftruft,  I  am  induced  to  revife  them.  I  deted  their  errors, 
cr^  I  ftrengthen  my  arguments,  and  add  new  truths  to  thofe 
■which  I  had  previoufly  accumulated.  What  can  excite  me  to 
the  purfuit  of  difcovery,  if  I  know  that  I  am  never  to  commu- 
nicate my  difcoveries  ?  It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  impoffible, 
that  the  man,  who  has  determined  with  himfelf  never  to  utter 
the  truths  he  knows,  fhould  be  an  intrepid  and  indefatigable 
thinker.  The  link  which  binds  together  the  inward  and  the 
outward  man  is  indiflbluble ;  and  he,  that  is  not  bold  in  fpeech, 
2.  mifan-  will  never  be  ardent  and  unprejudiced  in  enquiry.  Add  to  this, 
that  confcious  difguife  has  the  worft  eiFed  upon  the  temper,  and 
converts  virtue,  which  ought  to  be  frank,  fecial  and  ingenuous, 
into  a  folitary,  morofe  and  mifanthropical  principle. 

jjj5n  J  But  let  us  conceive  that  the  method  I  employ  to  proted  my- 

nuity  :  ^-^j£  ^^^^  perfecution  is  different  from  that  above  ftated.     Let  us 

fuppofe  that  I  communicate  my  fentiments,  but  with  caution 
and  referve.  This  fyftem  involves  with  it  an  endlefs  train  of 
falfhood,  duplicity  and  tergiverfation.  When  I  communicate 
my  fentiments,  it  is  under  the  inviolable  feal  of  fecrecy.     If  my 

zeal 


SINCE  RI  TY     R  ES  UMED.  277 

zeal  carry  me  any  ^reat  leno-ths,  and  my  love  of  trut'i  be  ardent,    BOOK  iv. 

.        :  .         .  ^  >     '   CHAP.  IV. 

I  fhall  wiih  to  communicate  it  as  far  as  the  bounds  of  prudence    ' <- ' 

Al-PEMMX, 

will  pofTibly  admit,  and  it  will  be  flrange  if  in  a  courfe  of  ye^rs  ^■">'  l-^^- 
I  do  net  com.Tait  one  miflake  in  my  calculation.  My  grand 
fecret  is  betrayed,  and  fufpicion  is  excited  in  the  breafl  of  the 
father  inquifitor.  What  fhall  I  do  now  ?  I  muH:,  I  fuppofe, 
ftoutly  deny  the  fad:.  I  mufl:  coaipofe  my  features  into  a  con- 
fiftent  expreflion  of  the  mod  natural  ignoran-ce  and  farprife,  , 
happy  if  I  have  made  fuch  progrefs  in  the  arts  of  hypocrify  and 
fal.Tiood,  as  to  put  the  change  upon  the  wild  bcafl  who  is  ready 
to  devour  me.  The  moft  confummate  impoftor  is  upon  this 
hypothelis  the  man  of  moft  perfevSt  virtue. 

But  this  is  not  all.     My  character  for  benevolence  being  well  '• 
known,    I    am   likely    to   be    furrounded   by  perfons    of  good  ^ 
humoured   indifcretion  rather  than  by  inveterate   enemies.     Of 
every  man  who  queftions  me  about  my  real  fentiments  I  muft 
determine   firft,    whether   he   fimply   wifh  t     be  informed,    or 
whether  his  defign  be  to  betray  me.     The  charader  of  virtue 
feems  in  its  own  nature  to  be  that  of  firm  and  unalterable  reio-  - 
lution,   confident  in  its  own  integrity.     But  the  character  that 
refults  from  this  fyftem  begins  in  hefitation,  and  ends  in  difgrace.  • 
I  am  queftioned  whether  fuch  be  my  real  fentiments.     I  deny  it. 
My  queftioner  returns  to  the  charge  with  an,  "  Oh,  but  I  heard 
it  from   fuch  a  one,  and  he  was  prefent  when  you  delivered 
them."  What  am  I  to  do  now  ?  Am  I  to  afperfe  the  character  of 

the 


278  SUBJECT    OF 

the  honefl  reporter  of  my  words  ?  Am  I  to  make  an  Impotent 
effort  to  get  rid  of  the  charge  ;  and,  inftead  of  ellablifhing  my 
chara£ter  for  orthodoxy,  aftonifh  my  informer  with  my  cool  and 
intrepid  effrontery  ? 

upon  tlie  Infmcerity  has  the  worft  effect  both  upon  him  who  pra£bifes, 

fpedators.  •'  r  r  J 

and  upon  them  who  behold  it.  It  deprives  virtue  of  that 
eonfcious  magnanimity  and  eafe,  which  ought  ever  to  be  ranked 
among  its  nobleft  «ffe£l:s.  It  requires  the  perpetual  exercife  of 
prefence  of  mind,  not  for  the  purpofe  of  telling  the  moft  ufeful 
truths  in  the  beft  manner,  but  in  order  to  invent  a  confiftent 
catalogue  of  lies,  and  to  utter  them  with  a  countenance  at  war 
with  every  thing  that  is  pafling  in  my  heart.  It  deftroys  that 
confidence  on  the  part  of  my  hearers,  which  ought  to  be  infe- 
parable  from  virtue.  They  cannot  all  of  them  be  expected  to 
underftand  the  deep  plan  of  benevolence  and  the  total  negledt  of 
all  felfiih  and  timid  confi derations  by  which  I  am  fuppofmg  my 
condudt  to  be  regulated.  But  they  can  all  fee  my  duplicity  and 
tergiverfation.  They  all  know  that  I  excel  the  moft  confum- 
mate  impoftor  in  the  coolnefs  with  which  I  can  utter  fallhood, 
and  the  craft  with  which  I  can  fupport  it. 

Sincerity de-        Sincerity  has  fometimes  been  brought  into  difrepute  by  the 

.liueated. 

abfurd  fyftem  according  to  which  it  has  been  purfued,  and  ftill 
oftener  by  the  whimfical  pidure  which  the  adverfaries  of  undif- 
ti-nguifliing  fincerity  have  made  of  it.     It  is  not  neceffary  that  I 

fhould 


S  r  N  C  E  R  I  T  Y     R  E  S  U  M  E  D.  279 

fiiould  flop  every  perfon  that  I  meet  in  the  ftreet  to  inform  him    BOOK  IV. 
^                      .                                                                           CHAP.  IV. 
of  my  fentiments.     It  is  not  neceflary  that  I  fhould  perpetually    '^ v * 

talk  to  the  vulgar  and  illiterate  of  the  deepeft  and  fublimeft  ^^*  ^^^' 
truths.  All  that  is  neceflary  is,  that  I  lliould  pradife  no  con- 
cealment, that  I  fhould  preferve  my  difpofition  and  charader 
untainted.  Whoever  queftions  me,  it  is  neceffajy  that  I  fhould 
have  no  fecrets  or  referves,  but  be  always  ready  to  return 
a  frank  and  explicit  anfwer.  When  I  undertake  by  argu- 
ment to  eftablilh  any  principle,  it  is  neceflary  that  I  fliould 
employ  no  circuitous  methods,  but  clearly  fl:ate  in  the  firft 
inftance  the  objed  I  have  in  view.  Having  fatisfied  this  origi- 
nal duty,  I  may  fairly  call  upon  my  hearer  for  the  exercife  of 
his  patience.  "  It  is  true,"  I  may  fay,  "  that  the  opinion  I  deliver 
w^ill  appear  fhocking  to  your  prejudices,  but  I  will  now  deli- 
berately and  minutely  afllgn  the  reafons  upon  which  it  is  founded. 
If  they  appear  fatisfadory,  receive  ;  if  they  be  Inconclufive,  rejed 
it."  This  is  the  ground  work  of  fmcerity.  The  fuperftrudure 
is  the  propagation  of  every  important  truth,  becaufe  it  conduces 
to  the  improvement  of  man  whether  individually  or  collec- 
tively ;  and  the  telling  all  I  know  of  myfelf  and  of  my  neigh- 
bour, becaufe  ftrid  juftice  and  unequivocal  publicity  are  the  befl 
fecurity  for  every  virtue. 

Sincerity  then,  in  ordinary  cafes  at  l^leaft,  feems  to  be  of  fo   its  general 
much  importance,   that  it  is  my  duty  firft  to  confider  how  to  '  ^°'  '""'*^' 

preferva 


iSo  SUBJECT    OF 

preferve  my  fincerlty  untainted,  and  afterwa 

means  in  my  power  in  each  particular  fituation,  of  benefiting 


BOOK  IV.    preferve  my  fmcerity  untainted,  and  afterwards  to  feled  the  befl 

CHAP.  IV.     ^  ■'  ■>  ' 


ApPENDiy, 

No.  IIJ.  mankind.  Sincerity  is  one  of  thofe  paramount  and  general  rules* 
^  which  is  ncA'^er  to  give  way  to  the  affair  of  the  day.  I  may 
imagine  perhaps  that  falfhood  and  deceit  may  be  moft  beneficial 
in  fome  particHgar  inftances,  as  I  might  imagine  upon  the  fubjedt 
of  a  preceding  chapter,  that  it  would  be  virtuous  to  plant  my 
dagger  in  the  heart  of  a  tyrant.  But  we  fhould  be  cautious  of 
indulging  our", imaginations  in  thefe  inftances.  The  great  law  of 
always  employing  ingenuous  and  honourable  means  feems  to  be 
of  more  importance  than  the  exterminating  any  local  and  tem- 
porary evils.  I  well  know  in  the^^^prefent  cafe  what  good  will 
refult  from  a  frank  and  undifguifed  principle  of  aftion,  and 
what  evil  from  deceit,  duplicity  and  falfhood.  But  I  am  much 
lefs  certain  of  the  good  that  will  arife  under  particular  circum- 
ftances  from  a  negled  of  thefe  principles. 

Application.  Having  thus  unfolded  the  true  ground  of  reafonlng  upon  this 
fubjedt,  we  will  return  to  the  queftion  refpedting  the  condudt  to 
be  obferved  by  the  reformer  in  Portugal. 

Duty  re-  And  here  the  true  anfwer  will  perhaps  be  found  to  be  that 

fpefting  the 

choice  of  a      which  has  been  above  delivered,  that  a  perfon  fo  far  enlightened 

refideoce. 

upon  thefe  fubjedls,  ought  by  no  confideration  to  be  prevailed 

upon  to  fettle  in  Portugal ;  and,  if  he  were  there  already,  ought 

4  to 


SINCERITY     RESUMED.  281 


IV. 
V. 


to  quit  the  country  with  all  convenient  fpeed.     His  efForts  In  For-   BOOK  iv 

^  .  .  CHAP.  i\ 

tugal  would  probahly  be  vain  ;  but  there  is  fome  other  country  in    '^ v 

Appendix, 

which  they  will  be  attended  with  the  happieft  confequences.  No.  ill. 

'  It  may  be  objeded,  "  that  fome  perfon  mull  begin  the  work 
of  reformation  in  Portugal,  and  why  fliould  it  not  be  the  indi- 
vidual of  whom  we  are  treating  ?"  But  the  anfwer  is,  that,  in 
the  fenfe  fuppofed  in  this  objection,  it  is  not  neceffary  that  any 
body  fhould  begin.  Thefe  great  and  daring  truths  ought  to  be 
publifhed  in  England,  France  and  other  countries ;  and  the  d'lC- 
femination  that  will  attend  them  here,  will  produce  a  report  and 
afford  an  example,  which  after  fome  time  may  prepare  them  a 
favourable  reception  there. 

The  great  chain  of  caufes  from  which  every  event  In  the  uni- 
verfe  takes  its  rife,  has  fufficiently  provided  for  the  gradual  in- 
ftrudion  of  mankind,  without  its  being  neceffary  that  indivi- 
duals fhould  violate  their  principles  and  facrifice  their  integrity 
to  accomplifh  it.  Perhaps  there  never  was  a  mind  that  fo  far 
outran  the  refl  of  the  fpecies,  but  that  there  was  fome  country 
in  which  the  man  that  poffeffed  it  might  fafely  tell  all  he  knew. 
The  fame  caufes  that  ripen  the  mind  of  the  individual  are  ading 
generally,  ripening  fimilar  minds,  and  giving  a  certain  depree 
of  fimilar  imprefTion  to  whole  ages  and  countries.  There  exifl 
perhaps  at  this  very  moment  in  Portugal,  or  foon  will  exifl, 
minds,  which,  though  mere  children  in  fcience  compared  with 

O  o  their 


282  SUBJECT  OF  SINCERITY  RESUMED. 

CHAP  IV*  ^^^^^'  S^S^^^^'^  neighbours  in  a  more  favoured  foil,  are  yet  accu- 
^  ^  '  rately  adapted  to  the  improvement  of  their  countrymen.  If  by  any 
No.  Ill,  fport  of  nature  an  exotic  fhould  fpring  up,  let  him  be  tranfplant- 
ed  to  a  climate  that  will  prove  more  favourable  to  -his  vigour  and 
utility.  Add  to  this,  that,  when  we  are  inclined  to  fet  an  inordinate 
value  upon  our  own  importance,  it  may  be  reafonable  to  fufpe£t 
that  we  are  influenced  by  fome  lurking  principle  of  timidity  or 
vanity.  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  the  individual  ever  yet 
exifted,  whofe  life  was  of  fo  much  value  to  the  community,  as 
to  be  worth  preferving  at  fo  great  an  expence,  as  that  of 
his  fincerlty. 


CHAP. 


C     ^^3     ] 


CHAP.     V. 
OF    FREE    WILL    AND    NECESSITY. 

IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  QUESTION. DEFINITION  OF  NECES- 
SITY.— WHY  SUPPOSED  TO  EXIST  IN  THE  OPERATIONS 
OF  THE  MATERIAL  UNIVERSE. — THE  CASE  OF  THE  OPE- 
RATIONS OF  MIND  IS  PARALLEL. — INDICATIONS  OF  NE- 
CESSITY—  IN  HISTORY IN  OUR  JUDGMENTS  OF  CHA- 
RACTER—  IN  OUR  SCHEMES  OF  POLICY — IN  OUR  IDEAS 
OF  MORAL  DISCIPLINE. OBJECTION  FROM  THE  FALLI- 
BILITY OF  OUR  EXPECTATIONS  IIM  HUMAN  CONDUCT. — • 
ANSWER. — ORIGIN  AND  UNIVERSALITY  OF  THE  SENTI- 
MENT OF    FREE    WILL. — THE    SENTIMENT    OF    NECESSITY 

ALSO    UNIVERSAL. THE    TRUTH     OF     THIS     SENTIMENT 

ARGUED  FROM  THE  NATURE  OF  VOLITION. — HYPOTHE- 
SIS OF  FREE  WILL  EXAMINED. — SELF-DETERMINATION. — - 
INDIFFERENCE. — THE  WILL  NOT    A    DISTINCT    FACULTY. 

FREE    WILL    DISADVANTAGEOUS    TO    ITS    POSSESSOR. 

OF    NO    SERVICE    TO    MORALITY, 

AVING   now  finlfhed  the  theoretical  part  of  our  enquiry,   gQOK  IV 
.    fo  far  as  appeared  to  be  necefTary  to  afford  a  foundation  ^^"'^^'^^y 
for  our  reafoning  refpeding  the  different  provifions  of  political 
O  o  2  inftitution, 


284  '  OFFREEWILL 

BOOK  IV.    inftitution,   we  mieht  dire(£lly  proceed  to  the  confideration  of 

CHAP.  V.  '  ^  -^    ^ 

*^ V '   thofe  provifions.      It  will   not  however  be  ufelefs  to  paufe  in 

this  place,  in  order  to  confider  thofe  general  principles  of  the  hu- 
man mind,  which  are  moft  intimately  conneded  with  the  topics 
of  political  reafoning  *, 


None  of  thefe  principles  feems  to  be  of  greater  importance 
than  that  which  affirms  that  all  adtions  are  neceffary. 

Importance  Moft  of  the  rcafonings  upon  which  we  have  hitherto  been 
tion.^*^"^'  employed,  though  perhaps  conftantly  built  upon  this  dodrine 
as  a  poftulate,  wilf  yet  by  their  intrinfic  evidence,  however  in- 
confiftently  with  his  opinion  upon  this  primary  topic,  be  admit- 
ted by  the  advocate  of  free  will.  But  it  ought  not  to  be  the 
prefent  defign  of  political  enquirers  to  treat  the  queftions  that 
may  prefent  themfelves  fuperficially.  It  will  be  found  upon 
maturer  reflection  that  this  do£trine  of  moral  neceffity  includes  in 
it  confequences  of  the  highell  moment,  and  leads  to  a  bold  and 
comprehenfive  view  of  man  in  fociety,  which  cannot  poffibly  be 
entertained  by  him  who  has  embraced  the  oppofite  opinion. 
Severe  method  would  have  required  that  this  propofition  fhould 
have  been  eftablilhed  in  the  firft  inflance,   as  an  indifpenfible 

*  The  reader,  who  is  indifpofed  to  abflrufe  fpeculations,  will  find  the  other 
niembers  of  the  enquiry  fufficiently  connefled,  without  an  exprefs  reference  to 
the  remaining  part  of  the  prefent  book. 

foundation 


A  N  D     N  E  C  E  S  S  I  T  Y.  285 

foundation  of  moral  reafoning  of  every  fort.     But  there  are  well   BOOK  iv. 

difpofed  perfons,  who  notwithftanding  the  evidence  with  which    *^ ^ * 

it  is  attended,  have  been  alarmed  at  its  confequences ;  and  it  was 
perhaps  proper,  in  compliance  with  their  miftake,  to  fliew  that 
the  moral  reafonings  of  this  work  did  not  ftand  in  need  of  this 
fupport,  in  any  other  fenfe  than  moral  reafonings  do  upon  every 
ether  fubjed;. 

To  the  right  underftanding  of  any  arguments  that  may  be  Definition  of 

neceffity. 

adduced  under  this  head,  it  is  requifite  that  we  fhould  have  a  clear 
idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  term  neceffity.  He  who  affirms  that 
all  actions  are  neceffary,  means,  that,  if  we  form  a  juft  and 
complete  view  of  all  the  circumftances  in  which  a  living  or  in- 
telligent being  is  placed,  we  fhall  find  that  he  could  not  in  any 
moment  of  his  exiftence  have  adled  otherwife  than  he  has  a£ted. 
According  to  this  affertion  there  is  in  the  tranfadlions  of  mind 
nothing  loofe,  precarious  and  uncertain.  Upon  this  queftion 
the  advocate  of  liberty  in  the  philofcphical  fenfe  muft  join  ifllie. 
He  muft,  if  he  mean  any  thing,  deny  this  certainty  of  conjunc- 
tion between  moral  antecedents  and  confequents.  Where  all  is 
conftant  and  invariable,  and  the  events  that  arife  uniformly  flow 
from  the  circumftances  in  which  they  originate,  there  can  be  no 
liberty. 


It  is  acknowledged  that  In  the  events  of  the  material  unlverfe  why  fup- 

pofc'd  to  exift 

every 


2S6    ,  OF    PREE    WILL 

XOOKiy.     thing  is  fiibjeded  to  this  neceflity.     The  tendency  of  inveftiga- 
' '    tion  and   enquiry  relatively  to  this  topic  of  human  knowledge 

in  the  opera-  ^       y     • 

tionsofthe      has  been,  more  efFedually  to  exclude  chance,  as  our  improve- 

material  uui- 

verfe.  ments  extended.     Let  us  confider  what  is  the  fpecies  of  evidence 

that  has  fatisfied  philofophers  upon  this  point.  Their  only  folid 
"■round  of  reafoning  has  been  from  experience.  The  argument 
which  has  induced  mankind  to  conceive  of  the  univerfe  as  go- 
verned by  certain  laws,  and  to  entertain  the  idea  of  neceffary 
connexion  between  fucceffive  events,  has  been  an  obferved  fimi- 
larity  in  the  order  of  fucceflion.  If,  when  we  had  once  remark- 
ed two  events  fucceeding  each  other,  we  had  never  had  occafion 
to  fee  that  individual  fuccefTion  repeated  ;  if  we  faw  innumerable 
events  in  perpetual  progreffion  without  any  apparent  order,  fo 
that  all  our  obfervation  would  not  enable  us,  when  we  beheld 
one,  to  pronounce  that  another  of  fuch  a  particular  clafs  might 
be  expeded  to  follow  ;  we  fhould  never  have  conceived  of  the 
exiftence  of  necefiary  connexion,  or  have  had  an  idea  corre- 
fponding  to  the  term  caufe. 

Hence  it  follows  that  all  that  ftridly  fpeaking  we  know 
of  the  material  univerfe  is  this  fucceflion  of  events.  Uniform 
fucceflion  irrefiftibly  forces  upon  the  mind  the  idea  of  abflrad: 
connexion.  When  we  fee  the  fun  confl:antly  rife  in  the  morning 
and  fet  at  night,  and  have  had  occafion  to  obferve  this  pheno- 
menon invariably  taking  place  through  the  whole  period  of  our 

exiftence, 


AND     NECESSITY.  2S7 

exigence,  we  cannot  avoid  believinp;  that  there  is  feme  caufe  pre-  EOOK  I  v. 

'^  ^  CHAP.V. 

ducing  this  uniformity  of  event.     But  the  principle  or  virtue  by  '^ v ' 

which  one  event  is  conjoined  to  another  we  never  fee. 


Let  us  take  fome  familiar  ilhiftrations  of  this  truth.  Can  it  be 
imagined  that  any  man  by  the  infpedtion  and  analyfis  of  gun- 
powder would  have  been  enabled,  previoufly  to  experience,  to 
predidl  its  explofion  ?  Would  he  previoufly  to  experience  have 
been  enabled  to  predi£t,  that  one  piece  of  marble  having  a  flat  and 
polifhed  furface  might  with  facility  be  protruded  along  another 
In  a  horizontal,  but  would  with  confiderable  pertinacity  refift 
reparation  in  a  perpendicular  direction  ?  The  fimpleft  pheno- 
mena of  the  mofl  hourly  occurrence  were  originally  placed  at  an 
equal  diftance  from  human  fagacity. . 

There  is  a  certain  degree  of  obfcurity  incident  to  this  fubjeft 
arifing  from  the  following  circumflance.  All  human  knowledge 
Is  the  refult  of  perception.  We  know  nothing  of  any  fubfl:ance 
but  by  experience.  If  it  produced  no  e£fe£ts,  it  would  be  no 
fubjedl  of  human  intelligence.  We  collect  a  confiderable  num- 
ber of  thefe  efFeds,  and,  by  their  perceived  uniformity  having 
reduced  them  into  general  clafl^es,  form  a  general  idea  annexed 
to  the  fubjedl  that  produces  them.  It  muft  be  admitted,  that  a 
definition  of  any  fubfl:ance,  that  is,  any  thing  that  deferves  to  be 
^alled  knowledge  refpeding  it,  will  enable  us  to  predidl  fome  of 
its  future  poflible  effei^s,  and  that  for  this  plain  reafon,  that  defi-  - 

nitlon  1 


2S8  O  F     F  R  E  E     W  I  L  L 

nition  is  prcdlclion  under  another  name.  But,  though,  when 
we  have  gained  the  idea  of  impenetrability  as  a  general  pheno- 
menon of  matter,  we  can  predi£t  fome  of  its  effects,  there  are 
others  which  v.^e  cannot  predift :  or  in  other  words,  we  know 
none  of  its  effe£ls  but  fuch  as  we  have  adually  remarked,  added 
to  an  expeiflation  that  fimilar  events  will  arife  under  fimilar  cir- 
cumftances,  proportioned  to  the  conftancy  with  which  they  have 
been  obferved  to  take  place  in  our  pafl:  experience.  Finding  as 
we  do  by  repeated  experiments,  that  material  fubftances  have  the 
property  of  refulance,  and  that  one  fubftance  in  a  Hate  of  reft, 
when  impelled  by  another,  paffes  into  a  ftate  of  motion,  we  are 
ftill  in  want  of  more  particular  obfervation  to  enable  us  to  pre- 
didl  the  fpecific  efFefts  that  will  follow  from  this  impulfe  in  each 
of  the  bodies.  Enquire  of  a  man  who  knows  nothing  more  of 
matter  than  its  general  property  of  impenetrability,  what  will  be 
the  refult  of  one  ball  of  matter  impinging  upon  another,  and 
you  will  foon  find  how  little  this  general  property  can  inform 
him  of  the  particular  laws  of  motion.  We  fuppofe  him  to  know 
that  it  will  commimicate  motion  to  the  fecoad  ball.  But  what 
quantity  of  motion  will  it  communicate  ?  What  effeds  will  the 
impulfe  produce  upon  the  impelling  ball  ?  Will  it  continue  to 
move  in  the  fame  diredlion  ?  will  it  recoil  in  the  oppofite  direc- 
tion ?  will  it  fly  off  obliquely,  or  will  it  fubfide  into  a  ftate  of 
reft  ?  All  thefe  events  will  appear  equally  probable  to  him  whom 
a  feries  of  obfervations  upon  the  paft  has  not  inftrudted  as  to 
what  he  is  to  exped  from  the  future. 

A  From 


AND    NECESSITY.  2S9 

From  thefe  remarks  we  may  fufficiently  colle£t  what  is  the    BOOK  iv. 

■^  •'  CHAP.  V. 

ipecies  of  knowledge  we  poflefs  refpe£ling  the  laws  of  the  material    * « ' 

univerfe.  No  experiments  we  are  able  to  make,  no  reafonings  we 
are  able  to  deduce,  can  ever  inftrudl  us  in  the  principle  of  caufa- 
tlon,  or  fhew  us  for  what  reafon  it  is  that  one  event  has,  in 
every  inftance  in  which  it  has  been  known  to  occur,  been  the 
precurfor  of  another  event  of  a  certain  given  defcription.  Yet 
we  reafonably  believe  that  thefe  events  are  bound  together  by  a 
perfedl  neceffity,  and  exclude  from  our  ideas  of  matter  and 
motion  the  fuppofition  of  chance  or  an  uncaufed  event.  AfTo- 
ciation  of  ideas  obliges  us,  after  having  feen  two  events  perpetu- 
ally conjoined,  to  pafs,  as  foon  as  one  of  them  occurs,  to  the  re- 
colledion  of  the  other  :  and,  in  cafes  where  this  tranfition  never 
deceives  us,  but  the  ideal  fucceffion  is  always  found  to  be  an 
cxad  copy  of  the  future  event,  it  is  impoffible  that  this  fpecies 
of  forefight  Ihould  not  convert  into  a  general  foundation  of  rea- 
foning.  We  cannot  take  a  fmgle  ftep  upon  this  fubjed,  which 
does  not  partake  of  the  fpecies  of  operation  we  denominate  ab- 
ftradion.  Till  we  have  been  led  to  confider  the  rifmg  of  the 
fun  to-morrow  as  an  incident  of  the  fame  fpecies  as  its  rifrng  to- 
day, we  cannot  deduce  from  it  fimilar  confequences.  It  is  the 
bufmefs  of  fcience  to  carry  this  tafk  of  generalifatlon  to  its 
fartheft  extent,  and  to  reduce  the  diverfified  events  of  the  uni- 
verfe  to  a  fmall  number  of  original  principles. 


Let  us  proceed  to  apply  thefe  reafonings  concerning  matter  to  Thecal  of 

_  the  opera 

P  P  the 


2go  ^  OF     FREE     WILL 

BOOK  IV.    tiie  illuftratlon  of  the  theory  of  mind.     Is  it  poffible  in  this  latter 

'; •< — — '   theory,  as  in  the  former  fubjeft,  to  difcover  any  general  prlnci- 

S6  parallel.  pj^g  ?  Q^j^  intelled:  be  made  a  topic  of  fcience  ?  Are  we  able  to 
reduce  the  multiplied  phenomena  of  mind  to  any  certain  ftand- 
ard  of  reafoning  ?  If  the  affirmative  of  thefe  queftions  be  con- 
ceded, the  inevitable  confequence  appears  to  be,  that  mind,  as 
well  as  matter,  exhibits  a  conftant  conjundlion  of  events,  and 
affords  a  reafonable  prefumption  to  the  neceffary  connexion  of 
thofe  events.  It  is  of  no  importance  that  we  cannot  fee  the 
ground  of  that  connexion,  or  imagine  how  propofitions  and 
reafoning,  when  prefented  to  the  mind  of  a  percipient  being, 
are  able  by  neceffary  confequence  to  generate  volition  and  animal 
motion ;  for,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  the  above  reafonings,  we 
are  equally  incapable  of  perceiving  the  ground  of  conaexioa 
between  any  two  events  in  the  material  univerfe,  the  common, 
and  received  opinion  that  we  do  perceive  fuch  ground  of  con- 
nexion being  in  reality  nothing  more  than  a  vulgar  prejudice.. 

indicatlonsof       That  mind  is  a  topic  of  fcience  may  be  argued  from  all  thofe 

aeceflity : 

branches  of  literature  and  enquiry  which  have  mind  for  their 
i'b  luftory :  fubje£t.  What  fpecies  of  amufement  or  inftru£tion  would  hif- 
tory  afford  us,  if  there  were  no  ground  of  inference  from  moral 
caufes  to  effeds,  if  certain  temptations  and  inducements  did  not 
in  all  ages  and  climates  produce  a  certain  feries  of  adtions,  if  we 
were  unable  to  trace  connexion  and  a  principle  of  unity  in  men's 
tempers,  propenfities  and  traufa^^ions  ?   The  amufement  would 

be 


ANDNECESSITY.  291 

be  inferior  to  that  which  we  derive  from  the  perufal  of  a  chro-    BOOK  iv. 

1     .    ,     1,  CHAP.  V, 

nological  table,  where  events  have  no  order  but  that  of  time  •    * ^r—^ 

fmce,  however  the  chronologift  may  negledt  to  mark  the  inter- 
nal connexion  between  fucceffive  tranfadions,  the  mind  of  the 
reader  is  bufied  in  fupplying  that  connexion  from  memory  or 
imagination  :  but  the  very  idea  of  fuch  connexion  would  never 
have  fuggefted  itfelf,  if  we  had  never  found  the  fource  of  that 
Idea  in  experience.  The  inftrudlon  arifing  from  the  perufal  of 
hiftory  would  be  abfolutely  none ;  fmce  inftrudtion  implies  in 
its  very  nature  the  claffing  and  generalifing  of  objeds.  But, 
upon  the  fuppofition  on  which  we  are  arguing,  all  objedls  would 
be  unconneded  and  disjund,  without  the  poffibility  of  afford- 
ing any  grounds  of  reafoning  or  principles  of  fcience. 

The  idea  correfpondent  to  the  term  charader  inevitably  in-  Inourjudg- 

■1     ,        .      .       1  rr  •  r  <r-  .  r^,  ,  ments  of  cha. 

eludes  m  it  the  allumption  ot  neceliary  connexion.  The  cha-  rafter: 
rader  of  any  man  is  the  refult  of  a  long  feries  of  impreflions 
communicated  to  his  mind,  and  modifying  it  in  a  certain  man- 
ner, fo  as  to  enable  us,  from  a  number  of  thefe  modifications  and 
impreffions  being  given,  to  predid  his  condud.  Hence  arife 
his  temper  and  habits,  refpeding  which  we  reafonably  conclude, 
that  they  will  not  be  abruptly  fuperfeded  and  reverfed ;  and  that, 
if  they  ever  be  reverfed,  it  will  not  be  accidentally,  but  in  con- 
fequence  of  fome  ftrong  reafon  perfuading,  or  fome  extraordinary 
event  modifying  his  mind.  If  there  were  not  this  original  and 
effential  connexion  between  motives  and  adions,  and,  which 

P  p  2  forms 


2^2 


OF    FREE    WILL 


BOOK  IV.    forms  one  particular  branch   of  this  principle,  between  menu's. 

CHAP.V.  ^ 

* V '    paft  and  future  adions,  there  could  be  no  fuch  thing  as  charader,, 

or  as  a  ground  of  inference  enabling  us  to  predid  what  men. 

■would  be  from  what  they  have  been.. 

inouifcliemes       From  the   fame  idea   of  neceflary   connexion   arife  all  the 

ef  policy  : 

fchemes  of  policy,  in  confequence  of  which  men  propole  to 
themfelves  by  a  certain  plan  of  condud  to  prevail  upon  others 
to  become  the  tools  and  inftruments  of  their  purpofes.  All  the 
arts  of  courtfhip  and  flattery,  of  playing  upon  men's  hopes  and 
fears,  proceed  upon  the  fuppofition  that  mind  is  fubjed  to  cer-- 
tain  laws,  and  that,  provided  we  be  fkilful  and  affiduous  enough 
in  applying  the  caufe,  the  effed  will  inevitably  follow,. 


in  o«r  Ideas         Laftly,  the  idea  of  moral  difcipline  proceeds  entirely  upon  thts: 

of  moral  dif- 
cipline. principle.     If  I  carefully  perfuade,  exhort,  and  exhibit  motives, 

to  another,  it  is  becaufe  I  believe  that  motives  have  a  tendency 

to  influence  his  condud.     If  I  reward  or  punifh  him,  either  with 

a  view  to  his  own   improvement  or  as  an  example  to  others,  it 

is  becaufe  I  have  been  led  to  believe  that  rewards  and  punifh-- 

ments  are  calculated  in  their  own  nature  to  afFed  the  fentiments. 

and  pradices  of  mankind. 

Objeftion  There  is  but  one  conceivable  objedion  againfl:  the  inference 

from  the  falli-  _  rr  r   i  •  t 

biiityofour     from  thcfc  premifes  to  the  necefl[ity  of  human  adions.     It  may 

cxpeftatlons 

{n  human       bc  allcdgcd,  that  "  though  there  is  a  real  connexion  between 

conduft^ 

motives 


AND     NECESSITY.  293 

motives  and  adions,  yet  that  this  connexion  may  not  amount    BOOK  IV. 

^                          CHAP.V. 
to  a  certainty,  and  that  of  confequence  the  mind  ftill  retains  an    * — -* 

inherent  adivity  by  which  it  can  at  pleafure  diflblve  this  con- 
nexion. Thus  for  example,  when  I  addrefs  argument  and  per- 
fuafion  to  my  neighbour  to  induce  him  to  adopt  a  certain  fpc- 
cies  of  condutSl,  I  do  it  not  with  a  certain  expedlation  of  fuccefs, 
and  am  not  utterly  difappointed  if  all  my  efforts  fail  of  their 
efFe£t.  I  make  a  referve  for  a  certain  faculty  of  liberty  he  is 
fuppofed  to  poflefs,  which  may  at  laft  counteradt  the  befl  digefted 
projedls." 

But  in  this  objedlon  there  Is  nothing  peculiar  to  the  cafe  of  Anfwer^ 
mind.     It  is  juft  fo  in  matter.     I  fee  a  part  only  of  the  premifes, 
and  therefore  can  pronounce  only  with  uncertainty  upon  the  con- 
clufion.     A   philofophical  experiment,   which   has   fucceeded  a 
hundred  times,  may  altogether  fail  upon  the  next  trial.     But 
what  does  the  phllofopher  conclude  from  this  ?    Not  that  there 
is  a  liberty  of  choice  in  his  retort  and  his  materials,  by  which 
they  baffle  the   befl  formed   expectations.     Not  that  the  con- 
nexion between  effedls  and  caufes  is  imperfed,  and  that  part  of 
the  effed  happens  from  no  caufe  at  all     But  that  there  was 
fome  other  caufe  concerned  whofe  operation  he  did  not  perceive, 
but  which  a  frefh  invefligation   will  probably  lay  open  to  him. 
When  the  fcience  of  the  material   univerfe  was  in  its  infancy, 
men  were  fufficiently  prompt  to  refer  events  to  accident  and 
chance  j  but  the  farther  they  have  extended  their  enquiries  and 

obfervation. 


294 


OF     FREE    WILL 


BOOK  [V.    obfervation,  the  more  reafon  they  have  found  to  conclude  that 

CHAP.  V.  '  ^ 

* — --.^ '    every  thing  takes  place   according   to   neceffary   and  univerfal 

laws. 


The  cafe  is  exactly  parallel  with  refped  to  mind.  The  po- 
litician and  the  philofopher,  however  they  may  fpeculatively  en- 
tertain the  opinion  of  free  will,  never  think  of  introducing  it 
into  their  fcheme  of  accounting  for  events.  If  an  incident  turn 
out  otherwife  than  they  expected,  they  take  it  for  granted,  that 
there  was  fome  unobferved  bias,  fome  habit  of  thinking,  fome 
prejudice  of  education,  fome  fmgular  affociation  of  ideas,  that 
difappointed  their  predidion  ;  and,  if  they  be  of  an  adive  and 
enterprifmg  temper,  they  return,  like  the  natural  philofopher,  to 
fearch  out  the  fecret  fpring  of  this  unlocked  for  event. 


tDrigin  and 
univerfality 
of  the  fenti- 
nient  of  free 
v.-iU. 


The  refledions  Into  which  we  have  entered  upon  the  dodrine 
of  caufes,  not  only  afford  us  a  fimple  and  impreffive  argument 
in  fa.vour  of  the  dodrine  of  neceflity,  but  fuggeft  a  very  obvious 
reafon  why  the  dodrine  oppofite  to  this  has  been  in  a  certain 
degree  the  general  opinion  of  mankind.  It  has  appeared  that 
the  idea  of  neceffary  connexion  between  events  of  any  fort  is 
the  kffon  of  experience,  and  the  vulgar  never  arrive  at  the  uni- 
verfal application  of  this  principle  even  to  the  phenomena  of 
the  material  vmiverfe.  In  the  eafieft  and  moft  familiar  inftances, 
fuch  as  the  impinging  of  one  ball  of  matter  upon  another  and 
ks  confequences,  they  willingly  admit  the  interference  of  chance, 
y  or 


ANDNECESSITY.  295 

or  an  event  uncaufed.     In  this  inftance  however,  as  both  the  hn-   ^'^^^  ^^' 

puhe  and  its  effeds  are  fubje£ls  of  obfervatiou  to  the  I'enfes,  they    * * ' 

readily  imagine  that  they  perceive  the  abfolute  principle  which 
caufes  motion  to  be  communicated  from  the  firft  ball  to  the  fe- 
cond.  Now  the  very  fame  prejudice  and  precipitate  conclufion, 
which  induce  them  to  believe  that  they  difcover  the  principle 
of  motion  in  objedts  of  fenfe,  a£l  in  an  oppofite  diredion 
with  refpe£t  to  fuch  objedls  as  cannot  be  fubjeded  to  the  exa- 
mination of  fenfe.  The  manner  in  which  an  idea  or  propofition 
fuggelled  to  the  mind  of  a  percipient  being  produces  animal  mo- 
tion they  never  fee ;  and  therefore  readily  conclude  that  there  is 
no  neceffary  connexion  between  thefe  events. 


But,  if  the  vulgar  will  unlverfally  be  found  to  be  the  advo-  The  fentf- 
cates  of  free  will,  they  are  not  lefs  ftrongly,  however  inconfift-  ceffityaifo 


ently,  impreffed  with  the  belief  of  the  dodrine  of  neceflity.  It 
is  a  well  known  and  a  juft  obfervation,  that,  were  it  not  for  the 
exiftence  of  general  laws  to  which  the  events  of  the  material 
univerfe  always  conform,  man  could  never  have  been  either  a 
reafoning  or  a  moral  being.  The  moil  confiderable  adlions  of 
our  lives  are  directed  by  forefight.  It  is  becaufe  he  forefees  the 
regular  fucceflion  of  the  feafons,  that  the  farmer  fows  his  field, 
and  after  the  expiration  of  a  certain  term  experts  a  crop.  There 
would  be  no  kindnefs  in  my  adminiftering  food  to  the  hungry,, 
and  no  injuftice  in  my  thrufting  a  drawn  fword  agalnft  the 

bofom. 


univerfali 


296  OF    FREE    WILL 

chTp  ^v"    ^'-'^'^^'^  °^  "^7  friend,  if  it  were  not  the  eftablifhed  quality  of  food 
* ^ '   to  nourifh,  and  of  a  fword  to  wound. 

But  the  regularity  of  events  in  the  material  univerfe  will  not 
of  itfelf  afford  a  fufficient  foundation  of  morality  and  prudence. 
The  voluntary  condudl  of  our  neighbours  enters  for  a  fhare  into 
almofl:  all  thofe  calculations  upon  which  our  own  plans  and  de- 
terminations are  founded.  If  voluntary  condud:,  as  well  as  ma- 
terial Impulfe,  were  not  fubjedled  to  general  laws,  included  in 
the  fyftem  of  caufe  and  efFed:,  and"  a  legitimate  topic  of  predic- 
tion and  forefight,  the  certainty  of  events  in  the  material  uni- 
verfe would  be  produ«3:ive  of  little  benefit.  But  in  reality  the 
mind  pafles  from  one  of  thefe  topics  of  fpeculation  to  the  other, 
without  accurately  dillributing  them  into  clafles,  or  imagining 
that  there  is  any  difference  in  the  certainty  with  which  they  are 
attended.  Hence  it  appears  that  the  moft  uninllrudied  peafant 
or  artifan  is  practically  a  neceffarian.  The  farmer  calculates  as 
fecurely  upon  the  inclination  of  mankind  to  buy  his  corn  when 
it  is  brought  into  the  market,  as  upon  the  tendency  of  the  feafons 
to  ripen  it.  The  labourer  no  more  fufpeds  that  his  employer 
will  alter  his  mind  and  not  pay  him  his  daily  wages,  than  he 
fufpeQs  that  his  tools  will  refufe  to  perform  thofe  functions  to- 
day, in  which  they  were  yefterday  employed  with  fuccefs  *. 

*  The  reader  will  find  the  fubllance  of  the  above  arguments  In  a  more  diffu- 
five  form  in  Hume's  Enquiry  concerning  Human  Underftanding,  being  the 
ihivd  part  of  his  Effays. 

Another 


A"N  D     N  E  C  E  S  S  I  T  Y.  297 

Another  argument  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  of  neceffity,  not    ^^^^^^^'• 
kfs  clear  and  irrefiftible  than  that  from  the  confideration  of  caufe  > — '- — ' 

1  he  truth  or 

and  efFed,  will  arife  from  any  confiftent  explication  that  can  be   ''"^  f'-"''"  , 

'  J  ^  ment  argued 

eiven  of  the  nature  of  voluntary  motion.     The  motions  of  the  f''"'"  *'"^  "?• 

o  J  ture  01  voh- 

animal  fyftem  diftribute  them-felves  into  two  great  clafles,  vo-  '^'°"' 
luntary  and  involuntary.  Involuntary  m.otion,  whether  it  be 
conceived  to  take  place  independently  of  the  mind,  or  to  be  the 
refult  of  thought  and  perception,  is  fo  called,  becaufe  the  coi"u 
fequences  of  that  motion,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  did  not 
enter  into  the  view  of  the  mind  when  the  motion  commenced. 
Thus  the  cries  of  a  new-born  infant  are  not  lefs  involuntary 
than  the  circulation  of  the  blood ;  It  being  impoflible  that  the 
founds  firfl;  refulting  from  a  certain  agitation  of  the  animal 
frame  fhould  be  forefeen,  fmce  forefight  is  the  fruit  of  expe- 
rience. ^ 

From  thefe  obfervations  we  may  deduce  a  rational  and  con- 
fiftent account  of  the  nature  of  volition.  Voluntary  motion  is 
that  which  is  accompanied  with  forefight,  and  flows  from  inten- 
tion and  defign.  Volition  is  that  .flate  of  an  intellectual  being, 
in  which,  the  mind  being  affefted  in  a  certain  manner  by  the 
apprehenfion  of  an  end  to  be  accomplllhed,  a  certain  motion  of 
the  organs  and  members  of  the  animal  frame  is  found  to  be  pro- 
duced. 

Here  then  the  advocates  of  intellcdual  liberty  have  a  clear 

Q^q  dilemma 


298  O  F    F  R  E  E    W  I  L  L 

BOOK  IV.    dilemma  propofed  to  their  choice.     They  mull  afcribe  this  free^ 
CHAP.  V.  ^^    ^  _  ^ 

^ V     '  •*    dom,  this  imperfed;  connexion  of  effects  and  caufes,  either  to  our 

voluntary  or  our  involuntary  motions.  They  have  already  made 
their  determination.  They  are  aware  that  to  afcribe  freedom  ta 
that  which  is  involuntary,  even  if  the  affumption.  could  be  main- 
tained, would  be  altogether  foreign  to  the  great  fubjefts  of  mo- 
ral, theological  or  political  enq^uiry.  Man  would  not  be  in  any 
degree  more  of  an  agent  or  an  accountable  being,  though  it  could 
be  proved  that  all  his  involuntary  motions  fprung  up  in  a  for- 
tuitous and  capricious  manner^ 

But  on  the  other  hand  to  afcribe  freedom  to  our  voluntary 
aftions  is  an  exprefs  contradi£tion  in  terms.  No  motion  is  vo- 
luntary any  farther  than  it  is  accompanied  with  intention  and 
defign,  and  flows  from  the  apprehenfion  of  an  end  to  be  ac- 
complifhed.  So  far  as  it  flows  in  any  degree  from  another  fource,. 
fo  far  it  is  involuntary.  The  new-born  infant  forefees  nothing, 
therefore  all  his  motions  are  involuntary.  A  perfon  arrived  at 
maturity  takes  an  extenfive  furvey  of  the  confequences  of  his  ac- 
tions, therefore  he  is  eminently  a  voluntary  and  rational  being. 
If  any  part  of  my  condudt  be  deftitute  of  all  forefight  of  the  ef- 
feds  to  refult,  who  is  there  that  afcribes  to  it  depravity  and 
vice  ?  Xerxes  aded  juft  as  foberly  as  fuch  a  reafoner,  when  he 
caufed  his  attendants  to  inflidl  a  thoufand  laflies  on  the  waves  of 
the  Hellefpont, 


The 


AND    NECESSITY. 


299 


The  truth  of  the  dodlrlne  of  neceffity  will  be  ftill  more  evl-   T^OOK  iv. 

^  CHAP.V. 

•dent,  if  we  confider  the  abfurdity  of  the  oppofite  hypothefis,   .V — 'f-r-^ 
One  of  its  principal  ingredients  is  felf  detei-mination.     Liberty  of^'^wll 

'■  '■  '^  J     examined. 

in  an  imperfedt  and  popniar  fenfe  is  afcribed  to  the  motions  of  ^^\ii  determi- 
the  animal  fyflem,  when  they  refult  from  the  forefight  and  de- 
liberation of  the  intelle(5b,  and  not  from  external  compulfion.    It 
is  in  this  fenfe  that  the  word  is  commonly  ufed  in  moral  and  po- 
litical reafoning.      Philofophical  reafoners  therefore,  who  have 
defired  to  vindicate  the  property  of  freedom,  not  only  to  our 
external  motions,  but  to  the  a£ts  of  the  mind,  have  been  obliged 
to  repeat  this  procefs.     Our  external  actions  are  then  faid  to  be 
free,  when  they  truly  refult  from  the  determination  of  the  mind. 
If  our  volitions,  or  internal   adts  be  alfo  free,  they  muft  in  like 
manner  refult  from  the  determination  of  the  mind,  or  In  other 
words,  "  the  mind  in  adopting  them"  muft  be  "  felf  determined." 
Now  nothing  can  be  more  evident  than  that  that  in  which  the 
mind  exercifes  its  freedom,  muft  be  an  adl  of  the  mind.    Liberty 
therefore  according  to  this  hypothefis  confifts  in  this,  that  every 
•choice  we  make  has  been  chofen  by  us,  and   every  z£t  of  the 
mind  been  preceded  and  produced  by  an  a£t  of  the  mind.    This 
Is  fo  true,  thai  in  reality  the  ultimate  adt  is  not  ftyled  free  from 
•any  quality  of  its  own,  but  becaufe  the  mind  in  adopting  It  was 
felf  determined,  that  Is,  becaufe  It  was  preceded  by  another  ad:. 
The  ultimate   adt  refulted   completely  from  the   determination 
that  was  its  precurfor.     It  was  itfelf  necefliuy  ;  and,  If  we  would 
look  for  freedom,  it  muft  be  in  the  preceding  ad.     But  In  that 

Q^q  2  preceding 


300  O  F    F  R  E  E     W  I  L  L 

^^\Vy/    preceding  a<3:  alfo,  if  the  mind  were  free,  it  was  felf  determihed„\ 

^ ■^ '    that  is,  this  volition  was  chofen  by  a  preceding  volition,  and  by 

the  fame,  reafoning  this  alfo  by  another. antecedent  to  itfelf.     All . 
the  a<fls  except  the  {irft  were  necefiary,  and  followed  each  other 
as  inevitably  as  the  links  of  a  chain  do,  when  the  firft  link-  is  ■ 
drawn  forward.     But  then  neither  was  this  firft  a£l  free,  unlefs 
the  mind  in  adopting  it  were  felf  determined,  that  is,  unlefs  this 
a£t  were  chofen  by  a  preceding  a£t.     Trace  back  the  chain  .as 
far  as  you  pleafe,  every  aO.  at   which  you   arrive  is  necelTary,  . 
That  ad,  which  gives  the  charadter  of  freedom  to  the  whole,  can 
never  be  dlfcovered ;  and,  if  it  could,  in  its  own  nature  includes 
a  cojatradidion.  - 

Indifference.  Another  Idea  which  belongs  to  the  hypothefis  of  felf  detsr- 
mination,  is,  that  the  mind  is  not  necelfarily  inclined  this  way 
or  that  by  the  motives  which  are  prefented  to  it,  by  the  clear- 
nefs  or  obfcurity  with  which  they  are  apprehended,  or  by  the 
tamper  and  character ■  which  preceding- habits  may  have  gene- 
rated ;  but  that  by  its  inherent  adivity  it  is  equally  capable  of 
proceeding  either  way,  and  pafles  to  its  determination  from  a 
previous  ftate  of  abfolute  indifference.  Now  what  fort  of  adivlty 
is  that  which  is  equally  inclined  to  all  kinds  of  adions  ?  Let  us 
fuppofe  a  particle  of  matter  endovvcd  with  an  inherent  propenfity 
to  motion.  This  propenfity  muft  either  be  to  move  in  one  par- 
ticular diredion,  and  then  it  muft  for  ever  move  in  that  direc- 
tion unlefs  counteraded  by  fome  external  impreffion  j  or  it  muft 

have 


AND    NECESSITY.  301 

idencyto  a 
be  a  ftate  of  perpetual  reft. 


Irave  an  equal  tendency  to  all  diredions,  and  then  the  refult  muft  BOO"  iv. 

^  ^  CHAP.  V. 


The  abfiirdlty  of  this  confequence  Is  fo  evident,  that  the  ad-^ 
"^TOcates  of  intelledual  liberty  have  endeavoured  to  deftroy  its 
force  by  means  of  a  diftindion,  "  Motive,"  it  has  been  faid, 
*'  is  indeed  the  occafion,  xht  fihe  qua  non  of  volition,  but  it  has 
no  inherent  power  to  compel  volition.-  Its  influence  depends' 
upon  the  free  and  unconftrained  furrender  flf  the  mind.  Be- 
tween  oppofite  motives  and  confiderations  the  mind  can  chcofe 
as  it  pleafes,  and  by  its  determination  can  convert  the  motive 
which  Is  weak  and  infufficlent  In  the  comparlfon  Into  theftrongeft." 
But  this  hypothefis  will  be  found  exceedingly  inadequate  to  the 
purpofe  for  which  It  is  produced.  Motives  muft  either  have  a 
neceflary  and  irrefxftible  influence,  or  they  can  have  no  influence^ 
at  alh- 

For,  firft,  it  muft  be  remembered,  that  the  ground  or  reafon  ' 
of  any  event,  of  whatever  nature  It  be,  muft  be  contained 
among  the  circumftances  which  precede  that  event.  The  mind 
is  fuppofed  to  be  in  a  ftate  of  previous  indifference,  and  there-^ 
fore  cannot  be,  in  Itfelf  confidered,  the  fcurce  of  the  particular- 
choice  that  is  made.  There  is  a  motive  on  one  fide  and  a  m_o^ 
tive  on  the  other:  and  between  thefe  lie  the  true  ground  and- 
reafon  of  preference.  But,  wherever  there  is  tendency  to  pre- 
ference, there  may  be  degrees  of  tendency.     If  the  degrees  be- 

equal, 


503  OF    FREE    WILL 

pHAP  v^'    ^^'^^^»  preference  cannot  follow  :    it  Is  equivalent  to  the  putting 

* ^ '    equal  weights  Into  the  oppofite  fcales  of  a  balance.     If  one  of 

them  have  a  greater  tendency  to  preference  than  the  other,  that 
which  has  the  greateft  tendency  muft  ultimately  prevail.  When 
two  things  are  balanced  againil  each  other,  fo  much  amount 
may  be  conceived  to  be  llruck  off  from  each  fide  as  exlfls  in  the 
fmaller  fum,  and  the  overplus  that  belongs  to  the  greater  is  all 
that  truly  enters  into  the  confideration. 

Add  to  this,  fecondly,  that,  if  motive  have  not  a  neceflary  In- 
fluence, it  Is  altogether  fuperfluous.  The  mind  cannot  firft 
choofe  to  he  influenced  by  a  motive,  and  afterwards  fubmit  to 
its  operation  :  for  In  that  cafe  the  preference  would  belong 
wholly  to  this  previous  volition.  The  determination  would  in 
reality  be  complete  In  the  firft  inftance  ;  and  the  motive,  which 
came  in  afterwards,  might  be  the  pretext,  but  could  not  be  the 
true  fource  of  the  proceeding*. 

Tlw  win  not  Lafl;ly,  it  may  be  obferved  upon  the  hypothecs  of  free  will, 
xuky?  ^"  that  the  whole  fyftem  Is  built  upon  a  diftlndion  where  there  is 
no  difference,  to  wit,  a  diftlndion  between  the  Intelledual  and 
adtive  powers  of  the  mind.  A  myilerious  phllofophy  taught 
men  to  fuppofe,  that,  when  the  underftanding  had  perceived 
any  cbjed   to  be  defirable,    there  was  need    of  fome   dIftIn<Sl 

*  The  argument  from  the  impofllbility  of  free  will  is  treated  with  great  force 
-of  reafoning  in  Jonathan  Edwards's  Enquiry  into  the  Freedom  of  the  Will. 

2  power 


AND    NECESSITY.  303 

power  to  put  the  body  in  motion.     But  reafon  finds  no  ground  BOOK  IV. 

for  this  fuppofition  ;  nor  is  it  poffible  to  conceive,  that,  in  the   * « ' 

cafe  of  an  intelle<3:ual  faculty  placed  in  an  aptly  organifed  body, 
preference  can  exift,  together  with  a  confcioufnefs,  gained  from 
experience,  of  our  power  to  obtain  the  objedt  preferred,  without 
a  certain  motion  of  the  animal  frame  being  the  neceflary  refult. 
We  need  only  attend  to  the  obvious  meaning  of  the  terms  in 
order  to  perceive  that  the  will  is  merely,  as  it  has  been  happily 
termed,  the  laft  a(£t  of  the  underftanding,  one  of  the  different 
cafes  of  the  aflbciation  of  ideas.  What  indeed  is  preference,^ 
but  a  perception  of  fomething  that  really  inheres  or  is  fuppofed 
to  inhere  in  the  objet!s  themfelves  ?  It  is  the  judgment,  true  or 
erroneous,  which  the  mind  makes  refpedting  fuch  things  as  are 
brought  into  comparifon  with  each  other.  If  this  had  been 
fufficiently  attended  to,  the  freedom  of  the  will  would  never 
have  been  gravely  maintained  by  philofophical  writers,  fmce  no 
man  ever  imagined  that  we  were  free  to  feci  or  not  to  feel  an 
impreflion  made  upon  our  organs,  and  to  believe  or  not  ta 
believe  a  propofition  dem.onftrated  to  our  underftanding.. 

It  muft  be  unnecelfary  to  add  any  thing  fartha-  on  this  head,   ^'"««  ^^'1'  dif- 

atlvantageous 

unlefs  it  be  a  momentary  recolleilion  of  the  fort  of  benefit  that  '°  "^  poAef- 

for  ; 

freedom  of  the  will  would  confer  upon  us,  fuppofing  it  to  be 
poffible.  Man  being,  as  we  have  now  found  him  to  be,  a 
fimple  fubftance,  governed  by  the  apprehenfions  of  his  under- 
ftanding, nothing  farther  is  requifue  but  the  improvement  of  hi& 

reafoning 


5C4  OF   FRE^E    WILL    AND    NECESSITY. 

reafoning  faculty,  to  make  him  virtuous  and  happy.  But,  did 
he  poflefs  a  faculty  independent  of  the  underftanding,  and  capa- 
ble of  refifting  from  mere  caprice  the  moft  powerful  arguments, 
the  beft  education  and  the  moft  fedulous  inftrudlion  -might  be  of 
no  ufe  to  him.  This  freedom  we  fhall  eafily  perceive  to  be  his 
bane  and  his  curfe ;  and  the  only  hope  of  lafting  benefit  to  the 
fpecies  would  be,  by  drawing  clofer  the  connexion  between  the 
external  motions  and  the  underftanding,  wholly  to  .extirpate  it. 
The  virtuous  man,  in  proportion  to  his  improvement,  will  be 
under  the  conftant  influence  of  fixed  and  invariable  principles ; 
and  fuch  a  being  as  we  conceive  God  to  be,  can  never  in  any 
one  mftance  have  exercifed  this  liberty,  that  is,  can  never 
ofnofervlce  have  aded  in  a  foolifh  and  tyrannical  manner.  Freedom  of  the 
will  is  abfurdly  reprefented  as  neceffary  to  render  the  mind  fuf- 
ceptible  of  moral  principles  ;  but  in  reality,  fo  far  as  we  a£l  with 
liberty,  fo  far  as  we  are  independent  of  motives,  our  conduift  Is 
as  independent  of  morality  as  it  is  of  reafon,  nor  is_  it  poffible 
that  we  fhould  deferve  either  praife  or  blame  for  a  proceeding 
-thus  capricious  and  indifciplinable. 


CHAP. 


C    305    ] 


C  H  A  P.     Vi; 

INFERENCES    FROM   THE    DOCTRINE   OF 
NECESSITY. 

IDEA  IT  SUGGESTS  TO  US  OF  THE  UNIVERSE. — INFLUENCE 
ON  OUR  MORAL  IDEAS — ACTION — VIRTUE  —  EXERTION 
•^PERSUASION  —  EXHORTATION —  ARDOUR —  COMPLA- 
CENCE     AND     AVERSION PUNISHMENT— REPENTANCE 

— PRAISE  AND   BLAME — INTELLECTUAL   TRANQUILLITY. 
—LANGUAGE  OF  NECESSITY  RECOMMENDED. 


CONSIDERING   then   the  dodrlne  of  moral   neceflity  as    BOOK  IV. 
CHAP.  VI. 
fufficiently  eftablifhed,  let  us  proceed  to  the  confequences    * ^. ' 

Idea  it  fug- 
that  are  to  be  deduced  from  it.     This  view  of  things  prefents  us   g*=^^  *?  "^  °^ 

the  univerfe. 

with  an  idea  of  the  univerfe  as  connected  and  cemented  in  all  its 
parts,  nothing  in  the  boundlefs  progrefs  of  things  being  capable 
of  happening  otherwife  than  it  has  adlually  happened.  In  the 
life  of  every  human  being  there  is  a  chain  of  caufes,  generated 
in  that  eternity  v^hich  preceded  his  birth,  and  going  on  in  regu- 
lar proceffion  through  the  whole  period  of  his  exiftence,  in  con- 
fequence  of  which  it  was  impoflible  for  him  to  ad  in  any 
inftance  otherwife  than  he  has  aded. 

R  r  The 


3o6  INFERENCES     FROM    THE 

The  contrary  of  this  having  been  the  conception  of  the  mafs 
of  mankind  in  all  ages,  and  the  ideas  of  contingency  and  acci- 
dent having  perpetually  obtruded  themfelves,  the  eftablifhed 
language  of  morality  has  been  univerfally  tinctured  with  this 
error.  It  will  therefore  be  of  no  trivial  importance  to  enquire 
how  much  of  this  language  is  founded  in  the  truth  of  things, 
and  how  much  of  v/hat  is  exprefled  by  it  is  purely  imaginary ,>^ 
Accuracy  of  language  is  the  indifpenfible  prerequifite  of  found 
knowledge,  and  without  attention  to  that  fubjedt  we  can  never 
afcertain  the  extent  and  importance  of  the  confequences  of 
necefEty* 

i&.hn :  Firft  then  it  appears,  that,  in  the  emphatical  and  refined  fenfe 

in  which  the  word  has  fometimes  been  ufed,  there  is  no  fuch 
thing  as  adtion.  Man  is  in  no  cafe  ftridly  fpeaking  the  begin- 
ner of  any  event  or  feries  of  events  that  takes  place  in  the  uni- 
verfe,  but  only  the  vehicle  through  which  certain  caufes  operate, 
which  caufes,  if  he  were  fuppofed  not  to  exift,  would  ceafe  to 
operate.  Adion  however,  in  its  more  fimple  and  obvious  fenfe, 
is  fufEciently  real,  and  exifts  equally  both  in  mind  and  in  matter* 
When  a  ball  upon  a  billiard  board  is  ftruck  by  a  perfon 
playing,  and  afterwards  impinges  upoa  a  fecond  ball,  the  ball 
which  was  firft  in  motion  is  faid  to  a£l  upon  the  fecond,  though  it 
operate  in  the  ftridleft  conformity  to  the  impreffion  it  received,  and 
^he  motion  it  communicates  be  precifely  determined  by  the  cir- 
cumftances  of  the  cafe.  Exadly  fimilar  to  this,  upon  the  prin- 
ciples 


DOCTRINE     OF    NECESSITY.  307 

ciples  already  explained,   are  the  a£lions  of  the  human  mind.   BOOK  IV. 
^  /        r  >  CHAP.  VI. 

Mind  is  a  real  caufe,  an  indifpenfible  link  in  the  great  chain  of   * ' 

the  univerfe  j  but  not,  as  has  fometimes  been  fuppofed,  a  caufe 
of  that  paramount  defcription,  as  to  fuperfede  all  neceffities,  and 
be  itfelf  fubjedl  to  no  laws  and  methods  of  operation.  Upon 
the  hypothefis  of  a  God,  it  is  not  the  choice,  apprehenfion  or 
judgment  of  that  being,  fo  properly  as  the  truth  which  was  the 
foundation  of  that  judgment,  that  has  been  the  fource  of  all  con- 
tingent and  particular  exiftences.  His  exiftence,  if  neceffary, 
was  neceffary  only  as  the  fenforium  of  truth  and  the  medium  of 
its  operation. 

Is  this  view  of  things  incompatible  with  the  exiftence  of  virtues 
virtue  ? 

If  by  virtue  we  underftand  the  operation  of  an  Intelligent 
being  in  the  exercife  of  an  optional  power,  fo  that  under  the 
fame  precife  circumftances  it  might  or  might  not  have  taken 
place,  undoubtedly  it  will  annihilate  it. 

But  the  dodlrine  of  neceffity  does  not  overturn  the  nature  of 
things.  Happinefs  and  mifery,  wifdcm  and  error  will  ftill  be 
diftlnd:  from  each  other,  and  there  will  ftill  be  a  connexion 
between  them.  Wherever  there  is  diftindion  there  is  ground 
for  preference  and  defire,  or  on  the  contrary  for  negledl  and 
averfion.     Happinefs  and  wifdom  will  be  obje<3;s  worthy  to  be 

R  r  2  defired, 


3o8  INFERENCES    FROM    THE 

BOOK  IV.    defired,  mifery  and  error  worthy  to  be  difliked.     If  therefore 

CHAP.  VI.  •'  ^        ^ 

* V '   by  virtue  we  mean  that  principle  which  aiferts  the  preference  of 

the  former  over  the  latter,  its  reality  will  remain  undiminifhed  by 
the  dodrine  of  neceffity. 


Virtue,  if  we  would  fpeak  accurately,  ought  to  be  confidered 
by  us  in  the  firft  inftance  objedively,  rather  than  as  modifying 
any  particular  beings.  It  is  a  fyftem  of  general  advantage,  in 
their  aptitude  or  inaptitude  to  which  lies  the  value  or  worth- 
lefsnefs  of  all  particular  exiftences.  This  aptitude  is  in  intel- 
ligent beings  ufually  termed  capacity ,  or  power.  Now  power  Id 
the  fenfe  of  the  hypothefis  of  liberty  is  altogether  chimerical. 
But  power  in  the  fenfe  in  which  it  is  fometimes  affirmed  of  in- 
animate fubftances,  is  equally  true  of  thofe  which  are  animate* 
A  candleftick  has  the  power  or  capacity  of  retaining  a  candle  in 
a  perpendicular  dire<ftion.  A  knife  has  a  capacity  of  cutting. 
In  the  fame  manner  a  human  being  has  a  capacity  of  walking  : 
though  it  may  be  no  more  true  of  him,  than  of  the  inanimate 
fubftance,  that  Ke  has  the  power  of  exercifmg  or  not  exercifmg 
that  capacity.  Again,  there  are  different  degrees  as  well  as  dif- 
ferent claffes  of  capacity.  One  knife  is  better  adapted  for  the; 
purpofes  of  cutting  than  another.. 

Now  there  are  two  confiderations  relative  to  a«y  particular- 
being,  that  excite  our  approbation,  and  this  whether  the  being- 
be  poffeffed  of  confcioufnefs  or  no.     Thefe  confiderations  are 

capacity 


DOCTRINE    OF    NECESSITY.  309 

capacity  and  the  application  of  that  capacity.    We  approve  of  a    BOOK  IV. 

fliarp  knife  rather  than  a  blunt  one,  becaufe  its  capacity  is  greater.    ^ * ' 

We  approve  of  its  being  employed  in  carving  food,  rather  than 
in  maiming  men  or  other  animals,  becaufe  that  application  of 
its  capacity  Is  preferable.  But  all  approbation  or  preference  is 
relative  to  utility  or  general  good.  A  knife  is  as  capable  as  a 
man  of  being  employed  in  the  purpofes  of  virtue,  and  the  one 
is  no  more  free  than  the  other  as  to  its  employment.  The  mode 
in  which  a  knife  is  made  fubfervient  to  thefe  purpofes  is  by  ma- 
terial impulfe.  The  mode  in  which  a  man  is  made  fubfervient 
is  by  inducement  and  perfuafion.  But  both  are  equally  the 
affair  of  neceffity.  The  man  differs  from  the  knife,  juft  as  the 
Iron  candleftick  differs  from  the  brafs  one ;  he  has  one  more 
way  of  being  a£ted  upon.  This  additional  way  in  man  is  mo^- 
tlve,  in  the  candleftick  is  magnetifm. 

But  virtue  has  another  fenfe,  in  which  it  Is  analogous  to  duty. 
The  virtue  of  a  human  being  Is  the  application  of  his  capacity 
to  the  general  good  ;  his  duty  is  the  beft  poffible  application  of 
that  capacity.  The  words  thus  explained  are  to  be  confidered  as 
rather  fimilar  to  grammatical  diftindion^  than  to  real  and  phl- 
lofophlcal  difference.  Thus  In  Latin  bonus  is  good  as  affirmed 
of  a  man,  botia  is  good  as  affirmed  of  a  woman.  In  the  fame 
manner  we  can  as  eafily  conceive  of  the  capacity  of  an  inanimate 
as  of  an  animate  fubftance  being  applied  to  the  general  good, 
and  as  accurately  defcribe  the  beft  poffible  application  of  the  one 


3IO 


INFERENCES    FROM    THE 


BOOR  IV.     as  of  tlie  other.     There  is  no  effential  difference  bctw^een  the 
CHAP.  VI, 

^-- — ^~ — '  two  cafes.  But  we  call  the  latter  virtue  and  duty,  and  not  the 
former.  Thefe  words  may  in  a  popular  fenfe  be  confidered  as 
either  mafculine  or  feminine,  but  never  neuter. 

exertion :  But,  If  the  dodrine  of  neceffity  do  xtot  annihilate  virtue,  it 

tends  to  Introduce  a  great  change  into  our  ideas  refpedling 
it.  According  to  this  do£trine  it  will  be  abfurd  for  a  man  to 
fay,  "  I  win  exert  myfelf,"  "  I  will  take  care  to  remember," 
or  even  "  I  will  do  this."  All  thefe  expreffions  imply  as  if 
man  was  or  could  be  fomething  elfe  than  what  motives  make 
him.  Man  is  in  reality  a  paffive,  and  not  an  aftive  being.  In 
another  fenfe  however  he  is  fufEciently  capable  of  exertion. 
The  operations  of  his  mind  may  be  laborious,  like  thofe  of 
the  wheel  of  a  heavy  machine  in  afcending  a  hill,  may  even  tend 
to  wear  out  the  fubftance  of  the  Ihell  in  which  it  a£ts,  without 
in  the  fmalleft  degree  impeaching  its  pafhve  character.  If  we 
were  conftantly  aware  of  this,  our  minds  would  not  glow  lels 
ardently  with  the  love  of  truth,  juftice,  happinefs  and  man- 
kind. We  fhould  have  a  firmnefs  and  fimplicity  in  our  condudt, 
not  wafting  itfelf  in  fruitlefs  ftruggles  and  regrets,  not  hurried 
along  with  infantine  impatience,  but  feeing  events  with  their 
confequences,  and  calmly  and  unrefervedly  given  up  to  the  influ- 
ence of  thofe  comprehenfive  views  which  this  dod:rine  infpires. 


perfuafion :         As  to  GUI  condii(!t  towards  others  in  inftances  where  we  were 

2  concerned 


DOCTRINE    OF    NECESSITY.  311 

concerned  to  improve  and  meliorate  their  minds,  we  fhould  ad-   BOOK  iv. 

CHAP.  VI. 
drefs  our  reprefentations  and  remonftrances  to  them  with  double    ^ v ' 

confidence.     The  believer  in  free  will  can   expoftulate  with  or 

corre(Sl:  his  pupil  with  faint  and  uncertain  hopes,  confcious  that 

the  cleareft  exhibition  of  truth  is  impotent,  when  brought  into 

conteft  with  the  unhearing  and  indifciplinable  faculty  of  will  ; 

or  in  reality,  if  he  were  confiflent,  fecure  that  it  could  produce 

no  effedt  at  all.     The  neceflarian  on  the  contrary  employs  real 

antecedents,  and  has  a  right  to  exped  real  effeds. 

But,  though  he  would  reprefent,  he  would  not  exhort,  for  exhortation : 
this  is  a  term  without  a  meaning.  He  would  fuggeft  motives 
to  the  mind,  but  he  would  not  call  upon  it  to  comply,  as  if  it 
had  a  power  to  comply  or  not  to  comply.  His  office  would 
confift  of  two  parts,  the  exhibition  of  motives  to  the  purfuit  of 
a  certain  end,  and  the  delineation  of  the  eafieft  and  moft.  ef- 
fectual way  of  attaining  that  end. 

There  is  no  better  fcheme  for  enabling  us  to  perceive  how 
far  any  idea  that  has  been  connected  with  the  hypothefis  of  li- 
berty has  a  real  foundation,  than  to  tranflate  the  ufual  mode  of 
expreffing  it  into  the  language  of  neceffity.  Suppofe  the  idea 
of  exhortation  fo  tranflated  to  ftand  thus :  "  To  enable  any  ar- 
guments I  may  fuggeft  to  you  to  make  a  fuitable  impreffion  it 
is  neceflary  that  they  fliould  be  fairly  confidered.  I  proceed 
therefore  to  evince  to  you  the  importance  of  attention,  knowing. 


312  INFERENCES    FROM   THE 

BOOK  IV.    that,  if  I   can  make  this  importance  fufEciently  manifeft   at- 
CHAP.  VI.         '  ^  ^ 

' V '   tention  will  inevitably  follow."     I  fhould  however  be  far  better 

employed  in  enforcing  diredly  the  truth  I  am  defirous  to  im- 
prefs,  than  in  having  recourfe  to  this  circuitous  mode  of  treating 
attention  as  if  it  were  a  feparate  faculty.  Attention  will  in  rea- 
lity always  be  proportionate  to  our  apprehenfion  of  the  import- 
ance of  the  fubjed  before  us. 

ardour :  At  firft  fight  it  may  appear  as  if,  the  moment  I  was  fatisfied 

that  exertion  on  my  part  was  no  better  than  a  fidion,  and  that 
I  was  the  paffive  inftrument  of  caufes  exterior  to  myfelf,  I 
fhould  become  indifferent  to  the  obje£ts  which  had  hitherto  in- 
terefted  me  the  moH  deeply,  and  lofe  all  that  inflexible  perfe- 
verance,  which  feems  infeparable  from  great  undertakings.  But 
this  cannot  be  the  true  Hate  of  the  cafe.  The  more  I  refign 
myfelf  to  the  influence  of  truth,  the  clearer  will  be  my  per- 
ception of  it.  The  lefs  I  am  interrupted  by  quefl:Ions  of  li- 
berty and  caprice,  of  attention  and  indolence,  the  more  uniform 
will  be  my  confl;ancy.  Nothing  could  be  more  unreafonable 
than  that  the  fentiment  of  necefllty  fhould  produce  in  me  a 
fpirit  of  neutrality  and  indifference.  The  more  certain  is  the 
connexion  between  effetfls  and  caufes,  the  more  chearfulnefs 
fhould  I  feel  in  yielding  to  painful  and  laborious  employments. 


•ompkccnce        It  13  commou  for  men   imprefl"ed  with  the  opinion  of  free 
and  averijon .  ^.^  ^^  entertain  refeutment,  indignation  and  anger  againfl  thofe 

who 


DOCTRINE    OF    NECESSITY.  ^x^ 

who  fall   into  the  commifllon  of  vice.     How   much   of  thefe   ^^^^  '^V. 

CHAl'.  VI. 

feelings  is  juft,  and  how  much  erroneous  ?    The  difference  be-    ^^ v—^ 

tween  virtue  and  vice  will  equally  remain  upon  the  oppofite 
hypothefis.  Vice  therefore  mull  be  an  objedt  of  rejeQion  and 
virtue  of  preference  ;  the  one  muft  be  approved  and  the  other 
difapproved.  But  our  difapprobation  of  vice  will  be  of  the 
fame  nature  as  our  difapprobation  of  an  infedlious  diftemper. 


One  of  the  reafons  why  we  are  accuftomed  to  regard  the 
murderer  with  more  acute  feelings  of  difpleafure  than  the  knife 
he  employs,  is  that  we  find  a  more  dangerous  property,  and 
greater  caufe  for  apprehenfion,  in  the  one  than  in  the  other. 
The  knife  is  only  accidentally  an  object  of  terror,  but  againft 
the  murderer  we  can  never  be  enough  upon  our  guard.  In  the 
fame  manner  we  regard  the  middle  of  a  bufy  ftreet  with  lefs 
complacency  as  a  place  for  walking  than  the  fide,  and  the  ridge 
of  a  houfe  with  more  averfion  than  either.  Independently 
therefore  of  the  idea  of  freedom,  mankind  in  general  find  in 
the  enormoufly  vicious  a  fufficient  motive  of  antipathy  and 
dlfguft.  With  the  addition  of  that  idea,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
they  fhould  be  prompted  to  expreffions  of  the  moft  intemperate 
abhorrence. 

Thefe  feelings  obvioufly  lead  to  the  prevailing  conceptions  on   puniiLment; 
the  fubjedt  of  punifhment.  The  dodrine  of  necefllty  would  teach 
us  to  clafs  punifhment  in  the  lift  of  the  means  we  pofl^fs  of  re- 

S  s  forming 


;.*j  -.^ 


314  INFERENCES    FROM    THE 

•^.9^?  ^^*    forminp:  error.     The  more  the  human  mind  can  be  fhewn  to  be 
CHAP.  VI.  ° 

* ^ '   under  the  influence  of  motive,  the  more  certain  it  is  that  pu- 

nifhment  will  produce  a  great  and  unequivocal  effe£t.  But  the 
doctrine  of  neceffity  will  teach  us  to  look  upon  punifhment 
with  no  complacence,  and  at  all  times  to  prefer  the  moft  direct 
means  of  encountering  error,  which  is  the  development  of 
truth.  Whenever  punifhment  is  employed  under  this  fyftem, 
it  will  be  employed,  not  for  any  intrinfic  recommendation  it  pof- 
feffes,  but  juft  fo  far  as  it  Ihall  appear  to  conduce  to  general 
utility. 

On  the  contrary  it  Is  ufually  Imagined,  that.  Independently  of 
'  the  utility  of  punifhment,  there  is  proper  defert  In  the  criminal, 
a  certain  fitnefs  in  the  nature  of  things  that  renders  pain  the 
fuitable  concomitant  of  vice.  It  Is  therefore  frequently  fald, 
that  it  Is  aot  enough  that  a  murderer  fhould  be  tranfported  to 
a  defert  Ifland,  where  there  fhould  be  no  danger  that  his  malig- 
nant propenfities  fhould  ever  again  have  opportunity  to  aQ  j 
but  that  It  is  alfo  right  the  indignation  of  mankind  againft  him. 
fhould  exprefs  Itfelf  In  the  Inflidlon  of  fome  adlual  Ignominy 
and  pain.  On  the  contrary,  under  the  fyflem  of  neceffity  the 
ideas  of  guilt,  crime,  defert  and  accountablenefs  have  no  place. 

Kpentancc:  Correlative  to  the  feelings  of  refentment.  Indignation  and  an- 
ger againft  the  oiFences  of  others,  are  thofe  of  repentance,  con- 
trition, and  forrow  for  our  own.    As  long  as  we  admit  of  an- 

effential 


DOCTRINE    OF    NECESSITY.  315 

eflential  difference  between  virtue  and  vice,  no  doubt  all  erroneous   BOOK  iv. 

CHAP.  VI. 

conduit  whether  of  ourfelves  or  others  will  be  regarded  with    * v— — * 

difapprobation.  But  it  will  in  both  cafes  be  confidered,  under 
the  fyftem  of  neceflity,  as  a  link  in  the  great  chain  of  events 
which  could  not  have  been  otherwife  than  it  is.  We  fhall  there- 
fore no  more  be  difpofed  to  repent  of  our  own  faults  than  of 
th^  faults  of  others.  It  will  be  proper  to  view  them  both  as 
actions,  injurious  to  the  public  good,  and  the  repetition  of 
which  is  to  be  deprecated.  Amidft  our  prefent  imperfedlions 
it  will  perhaps  be  ufeful  to  recoiled:  what  is  the  error  by  which 
we  are  moft  eafily  feduced.  But  in  proportion  as  our  views  ex- 
tend, we  fhall  find  motives  enough  to  the  practice  of  virtue, 
without  any  partial  retrofpe£t  to  ourfelves,  or  recolleQ:ion  of  our 
own  propenfities  and  habits. 

In  the  ideas  annexed  to  the  words  refentment  and  repentance  praife  and 
there  is  fome  mixture  of  true  judgment  and  a  found  conception 
of  the  nature  of  things.  There  is  perhaps  ftill  more  juftice  in  the 
notions  conveyed  by  praife  and  blame,  though  thefe  alfo  are  for 
the  moft  part  founded  in  the  hypothefis  of  liberty.  When  I 
fpeak  of  a  beautiful  landfcape  or  an  agreeable  fenfation,  I  em- 
ploy the  language  of  panegyric.  I  employ  it  ftill  more  empha- 
tically, when  I  fpeak  of  a  good  action ;  becaufe  I  am  confcious 
that  panegyric  has  a  tendency  to  procure  a  repetition  of  fuch 
ailions.  So  far  as  praife  implies  nothing  more  than  this,  it  pcr- 
fedly  accords  with  the  fevereft  phllofophy.     So  far  as  it  im- 

S  s  2  piles 


5i6  INFERENCES    FROM    THE 

BOOK  IV.  pijgg  tjj^f  fi-^Q  jj^j^n  could  have  abftalned  from  the  vhtuous  adion 

CHAP.  VI.  ^ 

* « '  I  applaud,  it  belongs  only  to  the  delufive  fyilem  of  liberty. 


intelleaual  A  farther  confequence  of  the  doctrine  of  neceffity  is  its  ten- 

tranq^uillitj-. 

dency  to  make  us  furvey  all  events  v^dth  a  tranquil  and  placid 
temper,  and  approve  and  difapprove  without  impeachment  to 
our  felf  pofleffion.  It  is  true,  that  events  may  be  contingent  as 
to  any  knowledge  we  poflefs  refpe£ting  them,  however  certain 
they  are  in  themfelves.  Thus  the  advocate  of  liberty  knows 
that  his  relation  was  cither  loft  or  faved  in  the  great  ftorm  that 
happened  two  months  ago ;  he  regards  this  event  as  paft  and 
certain,  and  yet  he  does  not  fail  to  be  anxious  about  it.  But 
it  is  not  lefs  true,  that  all  anxiety  and  perturbation  imply  an  im- 
perfed;  fenfe  of  contingency,  and  a  feeling  as  if  our  efforts 
could  make  fome  alteration  in  the  event.  When  the  perfon  re- 
colle£ts  with  clearnefs  that  the  event  is  over,  his  mind  grows 
compofed  ;  but  prefently  he  feels  as  if  it  were  in  the  power  of 
God  or  man  to  alter  it,  and  his  diftrefs  is  renewed.  All  that 
is  more  than  this  is  the  impatience  of  curiofity  ;  but  philofophy 
and  reafon  have  an  evident  tendency  to  prevent  an  ufelefs  curio- 
fity from  difturbing  our  peace.  He  therefore  who  regards  all 
things  paft,  prefent  and  to  come  as  links  of  an  indiflbluble 
chain,  will,  as  often  as  he  recolle£ls  this  comprehenfive  view, 
be  fuperior  to  the  tumult  of  paffion  ;  and  will  reflect  upon  the 
moral  concerns  of  mankind  with  the  fame  clearnefs  of  percep- 
tion, the  fame  unalterable  firmnefs  of  judgment,  and  the  fame 
8  tranquillity 


DOCTRINE    OF    NECESSITY.  517 

tranquillity  as  we  are   accuflomed  to  do  upon  the  truths   of  ^9^^^  ^^' 
'■         ^  ^  CHAP.  VI. 

geometry.  "^ « ' 

It  would  be  of  infinite  importance  to  the  caufe  of  fcicnce  and   Lancrunge  of 

ncccl'ity  re- 
virtue  to  exprelb   ourfelves   upcn  all  occafions  in   the  language    commended.. 

of  neceffity.     The  contrary  language   is   perpetually  intruding, 

and  it   is  difficult  to  fpeak  two  fentences   upon  any  topic   con- 

neded  with  human  adlon  without  it.     The  expreflions  of  both 

hypothefes  are  mixed  in  inextricable  confufion,  j  uft  as  the  belief 

of  both   hypothefes,    however  incompatible,   will   be  found   to 

exift  in  all  uninflrudled   minds.      The  reformation  of  which  I 

fpeak   would   probably  be  found   exceedingly   pradlcable   in   it- 

felf :   though,,  fuch  is  the  fubtlety  of  error,  that  we  fliould  at  firfl 

find  feveral  revifals  and  much  laborious  ftudy  neceffary  before  it. 

could    be   perfedtly    weeded    out.     This  muft  be  the    author's. 

apology  for  not  having  attempted  in  the  prefent  work  what  he 

recommends  to  others.     Objeds  of  more  immediate  importance:- 

demanded  his  attention,  and  engrofTed  his  faculties. 


e  H  A  R 


[    3i8    ] 

CHAP.     VII. 
OF  THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

NATURE  OF  MECHANISM — ITS  CLASSES,  MATERIAL  AND 
INTELLECTUAL. MATERIAL  SYSTEM,  OR  OF  VIBRA- 
TIONS.— THE    INTELLECTUAL   SYSTEM    MOST    PROBABLE 

FROM  THE  CONSIDERATION    THAT    THOUGHT  WOULD 

OTHERWISE  BE  A  SUPERFLUITY FROM  THE  ESTA- 
BLISHED   PRINCIPLES    OF  REASONING    FROM   EFFECTS   TO 

CAUSES. OBJECTIONS      REFUTED. THOUGHTS      WHICH 

PRODUCE   ANIMAL    MOTION    MAY  BE — I.    INVOLUNTARY. 

ALL    ANIMAL    MOTIONS    WERE    FIRST     INVOLUNTARY. 

1.  UNATTENDED  WITH  CONSCIOUSNESS. —  THE  MIND 
CANNOT  HAVE  MORE  THAN  ONE  THOUGHT  AT  ANY 
ONE  TIME. — OBJECTION  TO    THIS  ASSERTION  FROM  THE 

CASE      OF      COMPLEX     IDEAS FROM      VARIOUS     MENTAL 

fj                             OPERATIONS AS     COMPARISON APPREHENSION  —  RA- 
PIDITY OF  THE    SUCCESSION  OF   IDEAS. APPLICATION. 

DURATION  MEASURED  BY  CONSCIOUSNESS. 3.  A  DIS- 
TINCT THOUGHT  TO  Ex\CH  MOTION  MAY  BE  UNNECES- 
SARY.—  APPARENT  FROM  THE  COMPLEXITY  OF  SEN- 
SIBLE IMPRESSIONS. THE  MIND  ALWAYS  THINKS. — CON- 
CLUSION.  THE  THEORYAPPLIED  TO  THE    PHENOMENON 

OF  WALKING — TO  THE  CIRCULATION  OF  THE  BLOOD. — • 
OF  MOTION  IN  GENERAL. —  OF  DREAMS. 

BOOK  IV.  rf^HE  dodrine  of  neceffity  beina;   admitted,  it  follows  that 

CHAP.VII.  I                                                                          ... 

^ ^ '  -^      the  theory  of  the  human    mind    is  properly,   like    the 

Nature  of  '                                                           r     r      y> 

jiiechanifm :    j-|-jeory  of  every  other  feries  of  events  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted, 


OF  THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  319' 

Quainted,  a  fyftem  of  mechanifm  1   underftandinrr  bv  mechanifm   ^f^OK  IV. 

nothing  more  than  a  regular  connexion   of  phenomena  without    "■ ^ ' 

any  uncertainty  of  event,  fo  that  every  incident  requires  a  fpe- 
ciiic  caufe,  and  could  be  no  otherw^ife  in  any  refpe£t  than  as  the 
caule  determined  it  to  be. 

But  there  are  two  forts  of  mechanifm  capable  of  being  applied   its  dafTes 

material  and 

to  the  folution  of  this  cafe,    one  which  has  for  its  medium  only   intelleaual, 
matter  and  motion,  the  other  which  has  for  its  medium  thought. 
Which  of  thefe  is  to  be  regarded  as  moft  probable? 

According  to  the  firft  we  may  conceive  the  human  body  to  Material  fyf- 
be  fo  conftituted  as  to  be  fufceptible  of  vibrations,  in  the  fame  bmions! 
manner  as  the  ftrings  of  a  mufical  inftrument  are  fufceptible  of 
vibrations.  Thefe  vibrations,  having  begun  upon  the  furface 
of  the  body,  are  conveyed  to  the  brain  ;  and,  in  a  manner  that 
is  equally  the  refuJt  of  conftrudion,  produce  a  fecond  fet  of 
vibrations  beginning  in  the  brain,  and  conveyed  to  the  different 
organs  or  members  of  the  body.  Thus  it  may  be  fuppofed, 
that  a  piece  of  iron  confiderably  heated  is  applied  to  the 
body  of  an  infant,  and  that  the  report  of  this  uneafinefs,  or  ir- 
ritation and  feparation  of  parts  being  conveyed  to  the  brain, 
vents  itfelf  again  in  a  fhrill  and  piercing  cry.  It  is  in  this  man- 
ner that  we  are  apt  to  imagine  certain  convulfive  and  fpafmodic 
aiFedions  to  take  place  in  the  body.  The  cafe,  as  here  defcribed, 
is  fimilar  to  that  of  the  bag  of  a  pair  of  bagpipes,  which,  being 
8.  prelfed 


320  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

prefTed  In  a  certain  manner,  utters  a  groan,  without  any  thing 
more  being  necefiai-y  to  account  for  this  phenomenon,  than  the 
known  laws  of  matter  and  motion.  Let  us  add  to  thefe  vi- 
brations a  fyftem  of  aflbciations  to  be  carried  on  by  traces  to 
be  made  upon  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain,  by  means 
of  which  paft  and  prefent  impreffions  are  connedted  according 
to  certain  laws,  as  the  traces  happen  to  approach  or  run  into 
each  other ;  and  we  have  then  a  complete  fcheme  for  accounting 
in  a  certain  way  for  all  the  phenomena  of  human  adtion.  It  is 
to  be  obferved,  that,  according  to  this  fyftem,  mind  or  perception 
is  altogether  unneceffary  to  explain  the  appearances.  It  might 
for  other  reafons  be  defirable  or  wife,  in  the  author  of  the  uni- 
verfe  for  example,  to  introduce  a  thinking  fubftance  or  a  power 
of  perception  as  a  fpedator  of  the  procefs.  But  this  percipient 
power  Is  altogether  neutral,  having  no  concern  either  as  a  me- 
dium or  otherwife  in  producing  the  events  *. 

The  intellec-       •j't^q  fecond  fyftem,  which  reprefents  thought  as  the  medium 

iiial  iydem  ■' 

moil  Tjroba- 

ible  • 

*  The  above  will  be  found  to  be  a  tolerably  accurate  defcription  of  the  hypo- 
thecs of  the  cekbrated  Hartley.  It  was  unneceflary  to  quote  his  words,  as  it 
would  be  foreign  to  the  plan  of  the  prefent  work  to  enter  into  a  refutation  of 
any  individual  writer,  'i'he  fagnclty  of  Hartley,  in  having  pointed  out  the 
neceflary  connexion  of  the  phenomena  of  mind,  and  (hewn  the  practicability 
of  reducing  its  different  operations  to  a  fimple  principle,  cannot  be  too  highly  ap- 
phuuled.  The  reafonings  of  the  prefent  chapter,  if  true,  may  be  confideredi. 
as  giving  farther  ftablHty  to  his  principa'  doclrine  by  freeing  it  from  the  fcheme 
©f  material  automatifm  with  which  it  was  unneceffarily  clogged. 

of 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  321 

of  operation,  is  not  lefs  a  fyftem  of  mechanifm,  according  to  BOOK  iv. 

^  CHAP.vir. 

the  dodrine  of  neceflity,  than  the  other,  but  it  is  a  mechanifm    ' v ' 

of  a  totally  different  kind. 


There  are  various  reafons  calculated  to  perfuade  us  that  this  lafl:  from  the  con- 

.  1      r      •        1  n  XT      •  r  fideration  that 

nypotheus  is  tne  moil  probable.     No  mconnderable  argument  thought  would 

1         1      •        1     f-  1        r  1    '  otherwife  be  * 

may  be  derived  from  the  lingular  and  important  nature  of  that  fupcifluity  : 
property  of  human  beings,  which  we  term  thought ;  which  it 
is  furely  fomewhat  violent  to  ftrike  out  of  our  fyftem  as  a  mere 
fuperfluity. 


A  fecond    reafon  ftill  more  decifive  than  the'  former,  arifes  from  the 

eaablifhed 

from  the  conftancy  with  which  thought  in  innumerable  inftances  principles  of 

reafoning 

accompanies  the  functions  of  this  mechanifm.     Now  this  con-  fromeffeast» 

caufes. 

ftancy  of  conjun£tion  has  been  fhewn  to  be  the  only  ground  we 
have  in  any  imaginable  fubje£t  for  inferring  neceffary  connexion, 
or  that  fpecies  of  relation  which  exifls  between  caufe  and  effect. 
We  cannot  therefore  rejed  the  principle  which  fuppofes  thought 
to  have  an  efficient  fhare  in  the  mechanifm  of  man,  but  upon 
grounds  that  would  vitiate  all  our  reafonings  from  effeds  to 
caufes. 

It  may  be  objeded,  "  that,  though  this  contiguity  of  event  Objeftiom 

rr  •  ,  .  ,  refuted. 

argues  necellary  connexion,  yet  the  connexion  may  be  exadly 
the  reverfe  of  what  is  here  flated,  motion  being  in  all  inftances 
the  caufe,  and  thought  never  any  thing  more  than  an  effed." 
But  this  is  contrary  to  every  thing  we  know  of  the  fyflem  of 

T  t  the 


!22 


OF    THE    MECHANISM 


^?,^p  J^Y;    the  univerfe,  in  which  each  event  appears  to  be  alternately  both 

* " '   the  one  and  the  other,  nothing  terminating  in  itfelf,  but  every 

thing  leading  on  to  an  endlefs  chain  of  confequenceSr 

It  virbuld  be  equally  vain  to  objed,  "  that  we  are  unable  to' 
conceive  how  thought  can  have  any  tendency  to  produce  mo- 
tion in  the  animal  fyftem  ;"  fmce  it  has  juft  appeared  that  this 
ignorance  is  by  no  means  peculiar  to  the  fulye£t  before  us.  We 
are  univerfally  unable  to  perceive  the  ground  of  neceflary  con- 
nexion. 


Thonghts 
which  pro- 
duce animal 
motion  may 
be. 


It  being  then  fufficiently  clear  that  there  are  cogent  reafons  W 
perfuade  us  that  thought  is  the  medium  through  which  the  mo- 
tions of  the  animal  fyftem  are  generally  carried  on,  let  us  pro- 
ceed to  confider  what  is  the  nature  of  thofe  thoughts  by  which 
the  limbs  and  organs  of  our  body  are  fet  in  motion.  It  will 
then  probably  be  found,  that  the  difficulties  which  have  clogged 
the  intellectual  hypothefis,  are  principally  founded  in  erroneous 
notions  derived  from  the  fyftem  of  liberty ;  as  if  there  were  any 
eflential  difference  between  thofe  thoughts  which  ar6  the  me- 
dium of  generating  motion,  and  thoughts  in  general. 


1. involuntary.  Firft,  thought  may  be  the  fource  of  animal  motion,  without 
partaking  in  any  degree  of  volition,  or  defign.  It  is  certain 
that  there  is  a  great  variety  of  motions  in  the  animal  fyftem, 
which  are  in  every  view  of  the  fubjed  involuntary.  Such,  for 
example,  are  the  cries  of  an  infant,  when  it  is  firft  impreffed 
4  with 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  323 

with  the  fenfation  of  pain.     Such  miifl:  be  all  thofe    motions    l^OOK  IV. 

\    .  .  .  CHAP.VII. 

which  flowed  from  fenfation  previoufly  to  experience.     Voli-    ^ v ' 

tion  implies  that  fomething  which  is  the  fubjed  of  volition, 
is  regarded  as  defirable  ;  but  v/e  cannot  defire  any  thing,  till  we 
have  an  idea  correfponding  to  the  term  futurity.  Volition  im^ 
plies  intention,  or  defign;  but  we  cannot  defign  any  thing,  till  we 
have  the  expedlation  that  the  exiftence  of  that  thing  is  in  fome  way 
conne£ted  with  the  means  employed  to  produce  it.  An  infant, 
when  he  has  obferved  that  a  voice  exciting  compallion  is  the  re- 
fult  of  certain  previous  emotions,  may  have  the  idea  of  that 
voice  predominant  in  his  mind  during  the  train  of  emotions 
that  produce  it.  But  this  could  not  have  been  the  cafe  the  firft 
time  it  was  uttered.  In  the  firft  motions  of  the  animal  fyftem,  nor- 
thing of  any  fort  could  poffibly  be  forefeen,  and  therefore  nothing 
of  any  fort  could  be  intended.  Yet  in  the  very  inftances  here  pro- 
duced the  motions  have  fenfation  or  thought  for  their  conftant 
concomitant ;  and  therefore  all  the  arguments,  which  have  been 
already  alledged,  remain  in  full  force  to  prove  that  thought  is 
the  medium  of  their  produftion. 

Nor  will  this  appear  very  extraordinary,  if  we  confider  the 
nature  of  volition  itfelf.  In  volition,  if  the  dodrine  of  necef- 
fity  be  true,  the  mind  is  altogether  paffive.  Two  ideas  prefent 
themfelves  in  fome  way  connected  with  each  other  ;  and  a  per- 
ception of  preferablenefs  neceflarily  follows.  An  object  having 
certain  defirable  qualities,  is  perceived  to  be  within  my  reach ; 

T  t  2  and 


324  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

and  my  hand  is  neceflarily  flretched  out  ■ulLn  an  intention  to 
obtain  it.  If  a  perception  of  preferablenefs  and  a  perception  of 
defirablenefs  irrefiftibly  lead  to  animal  motion,  why  may  not  the 
mere  perception  of  pain  ?  All  that  the  adverfary  of  automa, 
tifm  is  concerned  to  maintain  is,  that  thought  is  an  effential  link 
in  the  chain  ;  and  that,  the  moment  it  is  taken  away,  the  links 
that  were  before  it  have  no  longer  any  tendency  to  produce  ibo- 
tion  in  the  links  that  were  after  it.  It  is  pofTible,  that,  as  a  nu- 
merous clafs  of  motions  have  their  conftant  origin  in  thought, 
fo  there  may  be  no  thoughts  altogether  unattended  with  motion. 


All  animal  Here  it  may  be  proper  to  obferve,  that,  from  the  principles 

motions  were 

firft  involun-     already  delivered,  it  follows  that  all  the  original  motions  of  the 

tary. 

animal  fyftem  are  involuntary.  In  proportion  however  as  we 
obtain  experience,  they  are  fucceffively  made  the  fubjedts  of 
reflexion  and  forefight ;  and  of  confequence  become  many  of 
them  the  themes  of  intention  and  defign,  that  is,  become  vo- 
luntary. We  fhall  prefently  have  occafion  to  fufpedt  that  mo- 
tions, which  were  at  firft  involuntary,  and  afterwards  by  ex- 
perience and  affociation  are  made  voluntary,  may  in  the  procefs 
of  intelledlual  operation  be  made  involuntary  again. — But  to 
proceed. 

3.  unattend-        Secondly,  thought  may  be  the  fource  of  animal  motion,  and 

fcioufnefs.        yet  be  Unattended  with  confcioufnefs.     This   is   undoubtedly  a 

diftindion  of  confiderable  refinement,  depending  upon  the  pre- 

cife 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  325 

cife  meaning  of  words  ;   and,  if  any  perfon  fhould  choofe  to  ex-  p2?p  vu 

prefs   himfelf  differently  on  the  fubjedl,  it  would  be  ufelefs  ob-  "^ ^ ' 

ftinately  to  difpute  that  difference  with  him.  By  the  confciouf- 
nefs  which  accompanies  any  thought  there  feems  to  be  fomething 
implied  diflinit  from  the  thought  itfelf.  Confcioufnefs  is  a  fort 
of  fupplementary  refleiSion,  by  which  the  mind  not  only  has  the 
thought,  but  adverts  to  its  own  fituation  and  obferves  that  it  has 
it.  Confcioufnefs  therefore,  however  nice  the  diftinction,  feems 
to  be  a  fecond  thought. 

In  order  to  afcertaia  whether  every  thought  be  attended  with  The  mind 

.  ,  ^  ,  ,  .  cannot  lir.ve 

confcioufne.s,  it  may  be  proper  to  confider  whether  the  mmd  morcthauone 

tlio'.ight  at 

can  ever  have  more  than  one  thought  at  any  one  time.  Now  any  one  time. 
this  feems  altogether  contrary  to  the  very  nature  of  mind. 
My  prefcnt  thought  is  that  to  which  my  prefent  attention  is 
yielded  ;  but  I  cannot  attend  to  feveral  things  at  once.  This  af- 
fertion  appears  to  be  of  the  nature  of  an  intuitive  axiom ;  and 
experience  is  perpetually  reminding  us  of  its  truth.  In  com- 
paring two  objects  we  frequently  endeavour  as  it  were  to  draw 
them  together  in  the  mind,  but  we  feem  to  be  obliged  to  pafs 
fuccelTively  from  the  one  to  the  other. 


But  this  principle,  though  apparently  fupported  both  by  rea-  Objeaion  to 

this  alTeitioa 

fon  and  experience,  is  not  unattended  with  difficulties.   The  firft  ^'"'^^  '^■'i  '^^^^ 

ot  complex 

is  that  which  arifes  from  the  cafe  of  complex  ideas.     This  will  ^^^^*  '• 
bell  bq  apprehended  if  we  examine  it  as  relates  to  vifible  objedls. 

"Let 


326  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

^Sap  vn    "  ^'^^  ^®  fuppofc  that  I  am  at  prefent  employed  in   the  adl  of 
*~ — ^^ — ^    reading.     I  appear  to  take  in  whole  words  and  indeed  clufters 
of  \vords  by  a  fingle  uCt  of  the  mind.     But  let  it  be  granted  for 
a  moment  that  I  fee  each  letter  fucceffively.     Yet  each   letter  is 
made  up  of  parts :   the  letter  D  for  example  of  a  right  line  and 
a  curve,  and  each  of  thefe  lines  of  the  fucceffive   additioi:i   or 
fluxion  of  points.     If  I  confider  the  line  as  a  v/hole,  yet  its  ex- 
tenfion  is  one  thing,  and  its  terminations   another.     I  could  not 
fee  the  letter  if  the  black  line  that  defcribes  it  and  the  white  fur- 
face  that  bounds  it  were  not   each  of  them  in  the  view  of  my 
organ.     There  muft  therefore,  as  it  fliould  feem,  upon  the  hy- 
pothefis  above  ftated,  be  an  infinite  fucceffion  of  ideas  in  the 
mind,  before  it  could  apprehend  the  fimpleft  objeds  with  which 
we  are  converfant.     But  we  have  no  feeling  of  any  fuch  thing, 
but  rather  of  the   precife  contrary.     Thoufands  of  human  be- 
ings go  out  of  the  world  without  ever  apprehending  that  lines 
are  compofed  of  the  addition  or  fluxion  of  points.     An  hypo- 
thefis  therefore,  that  is  in  dired  oppofition  to  fo  many  apparent 
fads,  mufl  have  a  very  uncommon  portion  of  evidence  to  fuf- 
tain  it,  if  indeed  it  can  be  fufl:ained  at  all." 

The  true  anfwer  to  this  objedion  feems  to  be  the  following. 
The  mind  can  apprehend  only  a  fmgle  idea  at  once,  but  that 
idea  needs  not  be  in  every  fenfe  of  the  word  a  fimple  idea.  The 
mind  can  apprehend  two  or  more  objeds  at  a  fingle  efFort,  but 
it  cannot  apprehend  them  as  two.     There  feems  no  fufiicient 

reafon 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  .27 

reafon  to  deny  that  all   thofe  objedts  which  are  painted  at  once  BOOK  iv. 

c    ^                          ,                .    .                   ^                            CHAP.VIL 
upon  the  retina  or  the  eye,  produce  a  jouit  and  fimultaneous   ^ v— — ' 

impreflion  upon  the  mind.  But  they  are  not  immediately  con- 
ceived by  the  mind  as  many,  but  as  one :  fo  foon  as  the  idea 
fuggefts  itfelf  that  they  are  made  up  of  parts,  thefe  parts  can- 
not be  confidered  by  us  otherwife  than  fucceffively.  The  re- 
folution  of  objedts  into  their  funple  elements,  is  an  operation 
of  fcience  and  improvement ;  but  it  is  altogether  foreign  to 
our  firft  and  original  conceptions.  In  all  cafes  the  operation  is 
rather  analytical  than  fynthctical,  rather  that  of  refolution  than 
compofition.  We  do  not  begin  with  the  fucceffive  perception 
of  elementary  parts  till  we  have  obtained  an  idea  of  a  whole  ; 
but,  beginning  with  a  whole,  are  capable  of  reducing  it  into  its 
elements. 

The  fecond  difficulty  is  of  a  much  fubtler  nature.     It  confifls  f™™  various 

,  ,  ^  mental  opera- 

in  the  feeming  "  impoffibility  of  performing  any  mental  opera-  ''""^  = 
tion,  fuch  as  comparifon  for  example,  which  has  relation  to  two  ascompari- 
or  more  ideas,  if  we  have  not  both  ideas  before  us  at  once,  if 
one  of  them  be  completely  vanilhed  and  gone,  before  the  other 
begins  to  exift."     The  caufe  of  this  difficulty  feems  to  lie  in  the 
miftake  of  fuppofmg  that  there  is  a  real  Interval  between  the  two 
ideas.     It  will  perhaps  be  found  upon  an  accurate  examination, , 
that,  though  we  cannot  have  two  ideas  at  once,   yet  it  is  not 
juft  to  fay,  that  the  firft  has  perifhed  before  the  fecond  begins  to 
exift.     The  inftant  that  conneds  them,  is  of  no  real  magnitude, . 

and ' 


Ton ; 


32S  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

BOOK  IV.    and  produces  no  real  divifion.     The  mind  is  always  full.     It  is 

CHAP.  VII.  ^ 

' «/ '    this  inftant  therefore  that  is  the  true  point  of  compariion. 

It  may  be  objedted,  "  that  this  cannot  be  a  juft  reprefentation, 
fince  comparifon  is  rather  a  matter  of  retrofpeft  deciding  be- 
tween two  ideas  that  have  been  corny  ktely  apprehended,  than  a 
perception  which  occurs  in  the  n.iddle,  before  thv  fecond  has 
been  yet  obferved."  To  this  objection  experience  .rill  perhaps 
be  found  to  furnifh  the  true  anfwer.  We  find  in  fa£l  that  we 
cannot  compare  two  objeds  till  we  have  paffed  and  repaffed  them 
in  the  mind. 

apprehenfion:  «  Suppofmg  this  account  of  the  operation  of  the  mind  in 
comparifon  to  be  admitted,  yet  what  fhall  we  fay  to  a  complex 
fentence  containing  twenty  ideas,  the  fenfe  of  which  I  fully 
apprehend  at  a  fmgle  hearing,  nay,  even  in  fome  cafes  by  that 
time  one  half  of  it  has  been  uttered  ?"  .^ 

The  mere  tafk  of  underilanding  what  Is  affirmed  to  us  Is  of 
a  very  different  nature  from  that  of  comparifon,  or  any  other 
fpecies  of  judgment  that  is  to  be  formed  concerning  this  affirma- 
tion. "When  a  number  of  ideas  are  prefented  in  a  train,  though 
in  one  fenfe  there  be  variety,  yet  in  another  there  is  unity. 
I'irft,  there  is  the  unity  of  uninterrupted  fucceffion,  the  perennial 
■  flow  as  of  a  flream,  where  the  drop  indeed  that  fucceeds  is  nu- 
merically diftindt  from  that  v^hich  went  before,  but  there  is  no 

ceffation. 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  329 

ccfTation.     Secondly,  there  is  the  unity  of  method.     The  mind   "^OOK  iv. 
-^'  ^  CHAP.vrr. 

apprehends,  as  the  difcourfe  proceeds,  a  ftrift   aflbciation,   from    * » ' 

fimilarity  or  fome  other  fource,  between  each  idea  as  it   follows 
in  the  procefs,  and  that  which  went  before  it. 

The  faculty  of  underftanding  the  different  parts  of  a  difcourfe 
in  their  connexion  with  each  other,  fnnple  as  it  appears,  is  in 
reality  of  gradual  and  flow  acquifition.  "We  are  by  various 
caufes  excluded  from  a  minute  obfervation  of  the  progrefs  of  the 
infant  mind,  and  therefore  do  not  readily  conceive  by  how  im- 
perceptible advances  it  arrives  at  a  quicknefs  of  apprehenfion 
relative  to  the  fimpleft  fentences.  But  we  more  eafily  remark 
its  fubfequent  improvement,  and  perceive  how  long  it  is  be- 
fore it  can  apprehend  a  difcourfe  of  any  length  or  a  fentence  of 
any  abllradion. 

Nothing  is  more  certain  than  the  poffibility  of  my  perceiving 
the  fort  of  relation  that  exifts  between  the  different  parts  of  a 
methodical  difcourfe,  for  example,  Mr.  Burke's  Speech  upon 
Oeconomical  Reform,  though  it  be  impoffible  for  me  after  the 
fevereft  attention  to  confider  the  feveral  parts  otherwife  than 
fucceffively.  I  -have  a  latent  feeling  of  this  relation  as  the  dif- 
courfe proceeds,  but  I  cannot  give  a  firm  judgment  refpeding 
it  otherwife  than  by  retrofpedt.  It  may  however  be  fufpedted 
that,  even  in  the  cafe  of  fnuple  apprehenfion,  an  accurate  at- 
tention to  the  operations  of  mind  would  £how,  that  we  fojcely 

U  u-  in 


330  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

In  any  inftance  hear  a  fmgle  fentence,  witliout  returning  again 
and  again  upon  the  fteps  of  the  fpeakcr,  and  drawing  more 
clofely  in  our  minds  the  preceding  members  of  his  period,  before 
he  arrives  at  its  conclufion  ;  though  even  this  exertion  of  mind, 
fubtle  as  it  is,  be  not  of  itfelf  thought  fufficient  to  authorife  us 
to  give  a  judgment  upon  the  whole.  There  may  perhaps  be 
cafes  where  the  apprehenfion  is  more  inftantaneous.  A  fimilar 
exception  appears  to  take  place  even  in  fome  cafes  of  judgment 
or  comparifon.  A  new  affociation,  or  a  connedling  of  two  ideas 
by  means  of  a  middle  term,  which  were  never  brought  into 
this  relation  before,  is  a  talk  of  fuch  a  nature,  that  the  ftrongeft 
mind  feels  fome  fenfe  of  effort  in  the  operation.  Eut,  where 
the  judgment  accurately  fpeaking  is  already  made,  the  operation 
is  in  a  manner  inftantaneous.  If  you  fay,  that  a  melon  is  a 
larger  fruit  than  a  cherry,  I  immediately  affent.  The  judgment, 
though  perhaps  never  applied  to  this  individual  fubjed:,  may  be 
faid  to  have  been  made  by  me  long  before.  If  again  you 
tell  me  that  Ctsfar  was  a  worfe  man  than  Alexander,  I  inftantly 
apprehend  your  meaning  ;  but,  unlefs  I  have  upon  fome  former 
occafion  confidered  the  queftion,  I  can  neither  affent  nor  diffent 
till  after  fome  refledlion. 

Rapldky  of  But,  if  the  principle  here  ftated  be  true,  how  infinitely  rapid 

the  fucceflion  _ 

©f  ideas.  muft  be  the  fucceffion  of  ideas  ?  While  I  am  fpeaking  no  two 

ideas  are  in  my  mind  at  the  fame  time,  and  yet  with  what  fa- 
cility do  I  pafs  from  one  to  another  ?  If  my  difcourfe  be  argu- 
mentative, 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  331 

mentative,  how  often  do  I  pafs  the  topics  of  which  It  confifls  In    ^^'^'^^  J7; 

'■  '■  CtiAP.VIT. 

review  before  I  utter  them,  and  even  while  I  am  fpcaking  con-    *^ ^^ ' 

tinue  the  review  at  intervals  without  producing  any  paufe  in  my 
difcourfe  ?  How  many  other  fenfations  are  perceived  by  me  du- 
ring this  period,  without  fo  much  as  interrupting,  that  is,  with- 
out materially  diverting  the  train  of  ray  ideas  ?  My  eye  fuccef- 
fively  remarks  a  thoufand  objedls  that  prefent  themfelves.  My 
mind  wanders  to  the  different  parts  of  my  body,  and  receives  a 
fenfatica  from  the  chair  upon  which  I  fit,  from  the  table  upon 
which  I  lean ;  from  the  pinching  of  a  flioe,  from  a  fmging  in 
my  ear,  a  pain  in  my  head,  cr  an  irritation  of  the  bread. 
When  thefe  moft  perceptibly  occur,  my  mind  paffes  from  one  to 
another,  without  feeling  the  minuteft  obllacle,  or  being  in  any 
degree  diflraited  by  their  multiplicity.  From  this  curfory  view 
of  the  fubje£t  it  appears  that  we  have  a  multitude  of  different  fuc- 
ceffive  perceptions  in  every  moment  of  ourexiftence*. 

Confcioufnefs,  as  it  has  been  above  defined,  appears  to  be  one   Application. 
of  the  departments  of  memory.     Now  the  nature  of  memory, 
fo  far  as  it  relates  to  the  fubjedt  of  which  we  are  treating,  is  ex- 
ceedingly obvious.     An    infinite  number   of  thoughts   pafl'ed 

*  An  attempt  has  been  made  to  calculate  thefe,  but  there  is  no  reafon  to  be- 
lieve that  the  calculation  deferves  to  be  confidercd  as  a  ftandard  of  truth.  Senfa. 
tions  leave  their  images  behind  them,  fome  for  a  longer  and  fome  for  a  (horter 
tin^e  5  fo  that,  in  two  different  inftaticcs,  the  calculation  is  in  one  cafe  eight,  and 
in  another  three  hundred  and  twenty  to  a  fecond. 

See  Watfon  on  Time,  Ch.  11. 
U  u  3  through 


Z^' 


OF    THE    MECHANISM 


BOOK  IV.   through  my  mind  in  the  laft  five  minutes  of  my  exiftence.  How 
CHAP.Vll.  fa        /  J 

"" " — ^    many  of  them  am  I  now  able  to  recoiled  ?  How  many  of  them 

Ihall  I  recollect  to-morrow  ?  One  impreffion  after  another  is  per- 
petually effacing  from  this  intelledtual  regifter.  Some  of  them 
may  with  great  attention  and  effort  be  revived ;  others  obtrude 
themfelves  uncalled  for  ;  and  a  third  fort  are  perhaps  out  of  the 
reach  of  any  power  of  thought  to  reproduce,  as  having  never 
left  their  traces  behind  them  for  a  moment.  If  the  memory  be 
capable  of  fo  many  variations  and  degrees  of  intenfity,  may 
there  not  be  fome  cafes  with  which  it  never  conneds  itfelf  ?  If 
the  fuccefBon  of  thoughts  be  fo  inexpreffibly  rapid,  may  they  not 
pafs  over  fome  topics  with  fo  delicate  a  touch,  as  to  elude  the 
fupplement  of  confcioufnels  ? 

Duration  It  feems  to  be   confcioufnefs,  rather  than  the  fucceflion  of 

meafured  by 

confcioufnefs.  jdeas,  that  meafurcs  tim.e  to  the  mind.  The  fucceflion  of  ideas 
is  in  all  cafes  exceedingly  rapid,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that 
it  can  be  accelerated.  We  find  it  impradicable  in  the  experi- 
ment to  retain  any  idea  in  our  minds  unvaried  for  any  percep- 
tible duration.  Continual  flux  appears  to  take  place  in  every 
part  of  the  univerfe.  It  is  perhaps  a  lav/  of  our  nature,  that 
thoughts  fhall  at  all  times  fucceed  to  each  other  with  equal  ra- 
pidity. Yet  time  feems  to  our  apprehenfion  to  flow  now  with  a 
precipitated  and  now  with  a  tardy  courfe.  The  indolent  man 
reclines  for  hours  in  the  fhade  ;  and,  though  his  mind  be  per- 
petually at  work,  the  filent  lapfe  of  duration  is  unobferved. 
3  ^  Butj 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  33^ 

But,  when  acute,  pain  or  uneafy  expe<flation  obliges  confcloufnefs    -^S^^  \fn 

to  recur  with  unufual  force,  the  time  then  appears  infupportably    ^ « ^ 

long.  Indeed  it  is  a  contradidlion  in  terms  to  fuppofe  that  the 
fucceffion  of  thoughts,  where  there  is  nothing  that  perceptibly 
links  them  together,  where  they  totally  elude  or  inftant'y 
vanifli  from  the  memory,  can  be  a  meafure  of  time  to  the  mind. 
That  there  is  fuch  a  ftate  of  mind  in  fome  cafes  affuming  a  per- 
manent form,  has  been  fo  much  the  general  opinion  of  man- 
kind, that  it  has  obtained  a  name,  and  is  called  reverie.  It  is 
probable  from  what  has  been  faid  that  thoughts  of  reverie,  un- 
derftanding  by  that  appellation  thoughts  untranfmitted  to  tho 
memory,  perpetually  take  their  turn  wnth  our  more  exprefs 
and  digefted  thoughts,  even  in  the  moil  adive  fcenea  of  our  life. 


Laftly,  thought  may  be  the  fource  of  animal  motion,  and  yet    3.3  dlftlnd 

.  thou;;ht  to 

there  may  be  no  need  of  a  diltmcc  thought  producing  each  in-    ••ich'motion 

liny  be  un- 

dividual  motion.     This  is  a  veiy  important  point  in  the  fubjed    neceilary  : 
before    us.     In    uttering    a    cry   for    example,    the    number  of 
mufcles  and  articulations  of  the  body  concerned  in-this  operation 
is  very  great ;  fliall  we  fay  that  the  infant  has  a  diftindl  thought 
for  each  motion  of  thefe  articulations  ? 


The  anfwer  to  this  queftion  will  be  confiderably  facilitated,  if  apparent 

.,.,,.  rr.  from  the 

we  recollect  the  manner  m  which  the  imprelhons  are  blended,   complexity  of 

,       ,  •  ,  *  fen'"ble  im- 

which  we  receive  from  external  objeds.     The  fenfe  of  feeling   preffions, 
is  difFufed  over  every  part  of  my  body,  I  feel  the  different  fub- 

ftances 


334 


OF    THE    MECHANISM 


BOOK  IV.    fiances  that  fupport  me,  the  pen  I  eulde,  various  afFedions  and 
CHAP.  VII.  ^'  >  r  b         » 

' '    petty  irregularities  in  different  parts  of  my  frame,  nay,  the  very 

air  that  environs  me.  But  all  thefe  Impreffions  are  abfolutely 
fnnultaneous,  and  I  can  have  only  one  perception  at  once.  Out  of 
thefe  various  impreffions,  the  moft  powerful,  or  that  which  has 
the  greateft  advantage  to  folicit  my  attention,  overcomes  and 
drives  out  the  reft ;  or,  which  not  lefs  frequently  happens, 
fome  idea  of  affociation  fuggefted  by  the  laft  preceding  idea 
wholly  withdraws  my  attention  from  every  external  objeft.  It 
is  probable  however  that  this  perception  is  imperceptibly  modi- 
fied by  the  miniature  impreffions  that  accompany  it,  juft  as  we 
adlually  find  that  the  very  fame  ideas  prefented  to  a  fick  man, 
take  a  peculiar  tinge,  that  renders  them  exceedingly  different 
from  what  they  are  in  the  mind  of  a  man  in  health.  It  has  been 
already  fhown,  that,  though  there  is  nothing  lefs  frequent  than 
the  apprehending  of  a  fimple  idea,  yet  every  idea,  however 
complex,  offers  itfelf  to  the  mind  under  the  conception  of  unity. 
The  blending  of  numerous  impreffions  into  one  perception  is  a 
law  of  our  nature,  and  the  cuftomary  train  of  our  perceptions  is 
entirely  of  this  denomination.  Mean  while  it  deferves  to  be  re- 
marked by  the  way,  that,  at  the  veiy  time  that  the  moft  methodical 
feries  of  perceptions  is  going  on  in  the  mind,  there  is  another  fet 
of  perceptions,  or  rather  many  fets  playing  an  under  or  in- 
termediate part ;  and,  though  thefe  perpetually  modify  each 
other,  yet  the  manner  in  which  it  is  done  is  in  an  eminent  degree 
minute  and  unobferved. 

Thefe 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^;^s 

Th^fe  remarks  furnifli  us  with  an  anfwer  to  the  lonp-  dlfputed  r.OOK  IV. 

^        ^  CHAP.VII. 
queftion,  whether  the  mhid  always  thinks  ?    It  appears  that  in 


The  ini:id 

numerable  impreffions   are   perpetually   made   upon    our  body,  always 

thinks. 

and  the  only  v»'ay,  in  which  the  flighteft  of  thefe  is  prevented 
from  conveying  a  diftindl  report  to  the  mind,  is  in  confequence 
of  its  being  overpowered  by  fome  more  confiderable  impreflion. 
It  cannot  therefore  be  alledged,  "  that,  as  one  impreflion  is  found 
to  be  overpow  cred  by  another  while  we  wake,  the  ftrcngeft  only 
of  the  fimultaaeous  impreflions  furnifhing  an  idea  to  the  mind ; 
fo  the  whole  fet  of  fimultaneous  impreflions  during  fleep  may 
be  overpowered  by  fome  indifpofition  of  the  fenforium,  and 
entirely  fail  of  its  effect."  For,  firft,  the  cafes  are  altogether 
different.  From  the  explication  above  given  it  appeared,  that 
not  one  of  the  impreflions  was  really  lofl:,  but  tended,  though 
in  a  very  limited  degree,  to  modify  the  predominant  impreflion. 
Secondly,  nothing  can  be  more  unintelligible  tlian  this  indifpo- 
fition. Were  it  of  the  nature  which  the  objedion  requires, 
fleep  ought  to  ceafe  of  its  own  accord  after  the  expiration  of  a 
certain  term,  but  to  be  incapable  of  interruption  from  any 
experiment  I  might  make  upon  the  fleeper.  To  what  purpcfe 
call  or  fhake  him  ?  Shall  we  fay,  that  it  requires  an  impreflion 
of  a  certain  magnitude  to  excite  the  fenforium  ?  But  a  clock  fliall 
ftrike  in  the  room  and  not  wake  him,  when  a  voice  of  a  much 
lower  key  produces  that  efi^eft.  What  is  the  precife  degree  of 
magnitude  neceflary  ?  We  actually  find  the  ineffedlual  calls  that 
are  addrefied  to  us,  as  well  as  various  other  founds,  occafionally 

mixing 


2,^6  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

EOOK  IV.    mixins;  with  our  dreams,  without  our  being  aware  from  whence 
CHAP.VII.  &  .  >  t> 

^ V '    this  new  perception  arofe. 

To  apply  thefe  obfervations.  If  a  number  of  impreflions  may- 
come  blended  to  the  mind,  fo  as  to  make  up  one  thought  or 
perception,  why  may  not  one  thought,  in  cafes  where  the  mind 
ads  as  a  caufe,  produce  a  variety  of  motions  ?  It  has  already 
been  fhown  that  there  is  no  eifential  difference  between  the  two 
cafes.  The  mind  is  completely  paffive  in  both.  Is  there  any 
fufficient  reafon  to  fhow,  that,  though  it  be  poffible  for  one  fub- 
ftance  confidered  as  the  recipient  of  effeds  to  be  the  fubjedl  of  a 
'  variety  of  fimultaneous  impreflions,  yet  it  is  impoffible  for  one 
fubftance  confidered  as  a  caufe  to  produce  a  variety  of  fimulta- 
neous motions  ?  If  it  be  granted  that  there  is  not,  if  the  mere 
modification  of  a  thought  defigning  a  motion  in  chief,  may 
produce  a  fecondary  motion,  then  it  muft  perhaps  farther  be 
confefled  poffible  for  that  modification  which  my  firft  thought 
produced  in  my  fecond,  to  carry  on  the  motion,  even  though 
the  fecond  thought  be  upon  a  fubjed  altogether  different. 

Conclufion.  The  confequences,  which  feem  deducible  from  this  theory  of 

mind,  are  fufficiently  memorable.  By  fhowing  the  extreme 
fubtlety  and  fimplicity  of  thought,  it  removes  many  of  the  diffi- 
culties that  might  otherwife  reft  upon  its  finer  and  more  evanef- 
'cent  operations.  If  thought,  in  order  to  be  the  caufe  of  animal 
motion,  need  not  have  either  the  nature  of  volition,   or  the 

concomitant 


OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  337 

concomitant    of  confcioufnefs,    and    if  a    fintrle    thought    may   BOOK  IV. 

^                 '^               ^     CHAP.Vir. 
become   a  complex  caufe  and   produce  a  variety  of  motions,  it    ^ v ^ 

will  then  become  exceedingly  difEcvilt  to  trace  its  operations,  or 

to  difcover  any  circumftances  in  a  particular  inftance  of  animal 

motion,  which  can  fufficiently  indicate  that  thought  Vv\as  not  the 

principle  of  its  production,  and  by  that  means  fuperfede  the  force 

of  the    general    arguments    adduced  in   the   beginning  of  this 

chapter.      Hence    therefore    it  appears    that   all    thofe    motions 

which  are  obferved  to  exift  in  fubftances  having  perception,  and 

which  are  not  to  be  difcovcred  in  fubftances  of  any  other  fpecies, 

may  reafonably  be  fufpeded  to  have  thought,  the  diftinguiiliing 

peculiarity  of  fuch  fubftances,  for  their  caufe. 

There  are  various  clafles  of  motion  which  will  fall  under  The  theoi-y 
this  definition,  befide  thofe  already  enumerated.  An  example  plier.omenon 
of  one  of  thefe  claffes  fuggefts  itfelf  in  the  phenomenon  of  walk-  "^ " 

ing.  An  attentive  obferver  M'ill  perceive  various  fymptoms  cal- 
culated to  perfliade  him,  that  every  ftep  he  takes  during  the 
longeft  journey  is  the  produtTtion  of  thought.  Walking  is  in 
all  cafes  originally  a  voluntary  motion.  In  a  child  when  he 
learns  to  walk,  in  a  rope  dancer  when  he  begins  to  pracPcife 
that  particular  exercifc,  the  diftindl  determination  of  mind  pre- 
ceding each  ftep  is  fufiiciently  perceptible.  It  may  be  abfurd  to 
fay,  that  a  long  feries  of  motions  can  be  the  rcfult  of  fo  many 
exprefs  volitions,  ^.vhel\  thefe  fuppofed  volitions  leave  no  trace 
in  the  memory.     But  it  is  not  unreafonable  to  believe,  that  a 

X  X  i]-)ecies 


338  OF    THE    MECHANISM 

fpecles  of  motion  which  began  in  exprefs  defign,  may,  though 
it  ceafes  to  be  the  fubje£l  of  confcious  attention,  owe  its  con- 
tinuance to  a  continued  feries  of  thoughts  flowing  in  that  direc- 
tion, and  that,  if  Ufa  were  taken  away,  material  impulfe  would 
not  carry  on  the  exercife  for  a  moment.  We  actually  find, 
that,  when  our  thoughts  in  a  train  are  more  than  commonly 
earneft,  our  pace  flackens,  and  fometimes  our  going  forward  is 
wholly  fufpended,  particularly  in  any  lefs  common  Ipecles  of 
walking,  fuch  as  that  of  defcending  a  flight  of  flairs.  In 
afcending  the  cafe  is  ftill  more  diflicult,  and  accordingly  we  are 
accufliomed  wholly  to  fufpend  the  regular  progrefs  of  reflection 
during  that  operation. 

to  the  ci'rcu-         Another  clafs  of  motions  of  a  fl:ill  fubtler  nature,  are  the  re- 
lation of  the 
blood.  gular  motions  of  the  animal  economy,  fuch  as  the  circulation  of 

the  blood,  and   the  pulfatlon  of  the  heart.     Are  thought  and 

perception   the  medium  of  thefe   motions  ?    We  have  the  fame 

argument  here  as  in  the  former  infl:ances,  conjundlion  of  event. 

When  thought  begins,  thefe  motions  alfo  begin  ;    and,  when  it 

ceafes,  they  are  at  an  end.     They  are  therefore  either  the  caufe 

or  efFe£t  of  percipiency,  or  mind  ;    but  we  fhall  be  inclined  to 

embrace  the  latter  fide  of  this  dilemma,  when  we  recolle£t  that 

we    are   probably    acquainted    with    many  Infliances    In   which 

thoup-ht  is  the  immediate  caufe  of  motions,  which  fcarcely  yield 

in  fubdety  to  thefe ;  but  that,    as  to  the  origin  of  thought,  we 

are  wholly  uninformed.     Add  to  this,  that  there  ai^e  probably 

no 


OF    TH  E    HUMAN    MIND.  V,o 

!io  motions  of  the  animal  economy,  which  we  do  not  find  it  In   BOOK  IV. 

CHAP.VII. 
the  power  of  voUtion,  and  flill  more  of  our  invohmtary  fenili-    *^ v ' 

tions,  to  haften  or  retard. 


It  is  far  from  certain  that  the  phenomenon  of  motion  can  any  Of  motJon  m 

g-cncriil. 

Vsrhere  exift  where  there  is  not  thought.  Motion  may  be  diftri- 
buted  into  four  clafles  ;  the  fimpler  motions  which  refult  from 
what  are  called  the  efTential  properties  of  matter  and  the  laws  of 
impulfe  ;  the  more  complex  ones  which  cannot  be  accounted 
for  by  the  affumption  of  thefe  laws,  fuch  as  gravitation,  elafli- 
city,  electricity  and  magnetifm ;  and  the  motions  of  the  vege- 
table and  animal  fyftems.  Each  of  thefe  feems  farther  than 
that  which  preceded  it  from  being  able  to  be  accounted  for  by 
any  thing  we  underftand  of  the  nature  of  matter. 

Some  light  may  be  derived  from  what  has  been  here  ad-  Of  dreams. 
vanced  upon  the  phenomenon  of  dreams.  "  In  lleep  we  fome- 
times  imagine"  for  example  "that  we  read  long  paflages  from 
books,  or  hear  a  long  oration  from  a  fpeaker.  In  all  cafes 
fcenes  and  incidents  pafs  before  us  that  in  various  ways  excite 
our  pafTions  and  Intereft  our  feelings.  Is  It  poffible  that  thefe 
Ihould  be  the  imconfclous  produdlion  of  our  own  minds  ?" 

It  has  already  appeared,  that  volition  is  the  accidental,  and  by 

no   means   the   neceffary  concomitant,    even  of  thofe  thoughts 

which  are  mofl  aQive  and  eHicient  in  the  producing  of  motion. 

X  X  2  It 


340 


OF  THE  MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  MlND. 

It  is  therefore  no  more  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  mind  fhould 
be  bufied  in  the  compofition  of  books  which  it  appears  to  read, 
than  that  a  train  of  thoughts  of  any  other  kind  Ihould  pafs 
through  it  without  a  confcioufnefs  of  its  being  the  author.  In 
fadl  we  perpetually  annex  wrong  and  erroneous  ideas  to  this 
phrafe,  that  we  are  the  authors.  Though  mind  be  a  real  and 
efficient  caufe,  it  is  in  no  cafe  a  firft  caufe.  It  is  the  medium 
through  which  operations  are  produced.  Ideas  fucceed  each 
other  in  our  fenforium  according  to  certain  necefTary  laws. 
The  mofb  powerful  impreffion,  either  from  without  or  from 
within,  conftantly  gets  the  better  of  all  its  competitors,  and 
forcibly  drives  out  the  preceding  thought,  till  it  is  in  the  fame 
irrefiftible  manner  driven  out  by  its  fucceflbr. 


CHAP. 


[    341     ] 
CHAP.     viir. 

OF    THE    PRINCIPLE    OF    VIRTUE. 

HYPOTHESES  OF  BENEVOLENCE  AND  SELF  LOVE — SUPERIOR- 
ITY OF    THE    FORMER. ACTION    IS    EITHER    VOLUNTARY 

OR   INVOLUNTARY. NATURE   OF     THE    FIRST   OF   THESE 

CLASSES. ARGUMENT  THAT  RESULTS  FROM  IT. — VO- 
LUNTARY ACTION  HAS  A  REAL  EXISTENCE. CONSE- 
QUENCE    OF     THAT     EXISTENCE. EXPERIMENTAL    VIEW 

OF     THE    SUBJECT. SUPPOSITIONS     SUGGESTED    BY     THE 

ADVOCATES   OF   SELF  LOVE — THAT  WE   CALCULATE    UPON 

ALL  OCCASIONS   THE    ADVANTAGE    TO    ACCRUE    TO    US. 

FALSENESS     OF    THIS    SUPPOSITION. SUPPOSITION    OF    A 

CONTRARY  SORT.  — WE  DO  NOT  CALCULATE  WHAT 
WOULD  BE  THE  UNEASINESS  TO  RESULT  FROM  OUR  RE- 
FRAINING  TO    ACT EITHER    IN    RELIEVING    DISTRESS 

OR  IN    ADDING    TO    THE    STOCK    OF     GENERAL    GOOD. 

UNEAs'lNESS  AN  ACCIDENTAL  MEMBER  OF  THE  PROCESS. 

THE      SUPPOSITIONS      INCONSISTENTLY      BLENDED.  

SCHEME  OF  SELF  LOVE  RECOMMENDED  FROM  THE  PRO- 
PENSITY  OF   MIND    TO  ABBREVIATE    ITS    PROCESS FROM 

THE    SIMPLICITY    THAT    OBTAINS    IN    THE    NATURES     OF 

THINGS. HYPOTHESIS     OF     SELF     LOVE     INCOMPATIBLE 

WITH  VIRTUE.  —  CONCLUSION.  —  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE 
QUESTION. APPLICATION. 

THE  fubjed:  of  intelledual  mechanifm  fuggefled  itfelf  as  BOOK  IV. 
1  n  r  •  .  1  •  1  r^-  CHAP.  \l(r. 
the    molt    luitable    introduaion    to  an   enquiry  into    the   ^^ ^ -> 

moral   principles  of  human  condudl.     Having  lirft  afcertaincd 

that 


342  OF     THE     PRINCIPLE 

CHAP^vnr    ^^^^^  thought  is  the  real  and  efficient  fource  of  animal  motion,  It 
*^       "       '    remains  to  be  confideved  what  is  the  nature  of  thofe  particular 
thouehts  in  \Yhich  the  moral  conduct  of  man  originates. 


Hypotliefes  Upon   this  Queftion  there  are  two  opinions.     By  fome  It  Is 

felFlove'^  fuppofed  that  the  human  mind  is  of  a  temper  confiderably  duc- 
tile, fo  that,  as  we  in  certain  inftances  evidently  propofe  our 
own  advantage  for  the  object  of  our  purfuit,  fo  we  are  capable 
no  lefs  fuicerely  and  direcStly  in  other  inftances  of  defiring  the 
benefit  of  our  neighbour.  By  others  it  is  affirmed,  that  we  are 
incapable  of  acting  but  from  the  profpe£t  or  ftimulant  of  per- 
fonal  advantage,  and  that,  when  our  condufb  appears  moft  re- 
trograde from  this  cbjeft,  the  principle  from  which  it  flows  is 
Superiority      fecretly  the  fame.     It  fliall  be  the  bufinefs  of  this  chapter  to 

of  the  for- 
mer, prove  that  the  former  hypothefis  is  conformable  to  truth. 

Aaion  is  j(.  ig  iQ  |je  prefumed  from  the  arguments  of  the  preceSing  chap- 

either  voiun-  ^  °  "^  °  .      ^ 

tary  or  mvo-    j-gj-  that  there  exift  in  the  theory  of  the  human  mind  two  clafTes  of 

luutary.  •' 

adion,  voluntary  and  involuntary.  The  laft  of  thefe  v/e  have 
minutely  invefligated.  It  has  fufficiently  appeared  that  there 
are  certain  motions  of  the  animal  fyftem,  which  have  fenfation 
or  thought  for  their  medium  of  produGion,  and  at  the  fame  time 
arife,  to  have  recourfe  to  a  ufual  mode  of  expreffion,  Ipon- 
taneoufly,  without  forefight  of  or  a  dired  reflediing  on  the  refult 
which  is  to  follow.  But,  if  we  admit  the  exiftence  of  this 
phenomenon,  there  does  not  feem  lefs  reafon  to  admit  the 
exiftence  of  the  other  clafs  of  adlion  above  enumerated,  which 
6  is 


O  F     V  I  R  T  U  E.  543 

IS  accompanied  In  its   operation  with   a  forefight  of  its   refult,    ^C)OK  IV. 

and  to  which  that  forefight  ferves  as  the  reafon  and  caufe  of  ex-    * • ' 

iftence. 

Vohintary  a£lion  cannot  proceed  from  all  perceptions  indif-  ^'''"''^  °^  ^.'^^ 
criminately,  but  only  from  !percepticns  of  a  peculiar  ciafs,  viz.  cla*l>^s, 
fuch  perceptions  as  are  accompanied  with  the  idea  of  fomething 
as  true  refpedting  them,  fomething  which  may  be  affirmed  or 
denied.  One  of  the  firft  inferences  therefore  from  the  dodlrine 
of  voluntary  adlion,  is  the  exiftence  of  the  underftanding  as  a  fa- 
culty diftindl  from  fenfation,  or,  to  fpeak  more  accurately,  the 
polTibility  of  employing  the  general  capacity  of  perception,  not 
merely  as  the  vehicle  of  diftindt  ideas,  but  as  the  medium  of 
connedting  two  or  more  ideas  together.  This  particular  habit, 
when  it  has  once  been  created,  gradually  extends  itfelf  to  every 
province  of  the  mind,  till  at  length  it  is  impoffible  for  any  thing 
to  make  a  clear  and  diftindl  impreffion  upon  the  fenforium,  with- 
out its  being  followed  with  fome  judgment  of  the  mind  con- 
cerning it. 

It  is  thus  that  man  becomes  a  moral  being.  He  is  no  farther 
fo  than  he  is  capable  of  connedling  and  comparing  ideas,  of 
making  propofitions  concerning  them,  and  of  forefeeing  certain 
confequences  as  the  refult  of  certain  motions  of  the  animal  fyftem. 

But,  if  the  forellght  of  certain  confequences  to  refult  may  be 

the 


344  OF     THE     PRINCIPLE 

BOOK  IV.    tiie  fufficlent  reafon  of  adion,  that  is,  if  there  be  fuch   a  thin? 

*^  "  ^  as  volition,  then  every  forefight  of  that  kind  has  a  tendency  to 
a£lion.  If  the  perception  of  fomething  as  true,  joined  with 
the  confcioufnefs  of  my  capacity  to  aft  upon  this  truth,  be  of  it- 
felf  fufficient  to  produce  motion  in  the  animal  fyftem,  then  every 
perception  fo  accompanied  has  a  tendency  to  inotion.  To  apply 
this  to  the  fubjedt  before  us. 

Argument  I  pcrceive  a  certain  agreeable  food,  I   perceive  in   myfelf  an 

that  1  tlults  .  i.-ii-i-i.  •  r  1      T      r 

from  it.  appetite  which  this  food  is  adapted  to  gratify,  and  thele  percep- 
tions are  accompanied  with  a  confcioufnefs  of  my  power  to  ap- 
propriate this  food.  If  no  other  confideration  exift  in  my  mind 
beyond  thofe  which  have  jufi;  been  ftated,  a  certain  motion  of  the 
animal  fyftem  irrefiflibly  follows. 

Suppofe  now  that  the  perfon  about  whofe  appetites  thefe  pro- 
pofitions  are  converfant,  is  not  myfelf  but  another.  This  varia- 
tion cannot  materially  alter  the  cafe.  Still  there  remain  all  the 
circumftances  neceffary  to  generate  motion.  I  perceive  the 
food,  I  am  acquainted  \vith  the  wants  of  the  perfon  in  queftion, 
and  I  am  confcious  of  my  power  of  adminiftering  to  them. 
Nothing  more  is  neceffary  in  order  to  produce  a  certain  move- 
ment of  my  body.  Therefore,  if,  as  in  the  former  cafe,  no 
other  confideration  exift;  in  my  mind,  a  certain  motion  of  the 
animal  fyftem  irrefiftibly  follows.  Therefore,  if  ten  thoufand 
other  confiderations  exift,  yet  there  was  in  this,  feparately  con- 

ftdered, 


OF    VIRTUE. 


345 


fidered,  a  tendency  to  motion.    That  which,  when  alone,   muft   ^^OOK  iv. 

•'  '  CHAP.  VII r. 

inevitably  produce  motion,  muft,  however  accompanied,  retain    *^ ^ ' 

its  internal  charader. 

Let  us   however  fuppofe,  which  feeins  the  only  confiftent   Y"i""taryac- 

^  tion  has  a  real 

mode  of  fupporting  the  dodlrine  of  felf  love,  "  that  there  is  no  exillcncc, 
fuch  thing  pradlically  confidered  as  volition,  that  man  never 
adis  from  a  forefight  of  confequences,  but  always  continues  to 
ad;,  as  we  have  proved  him  to  adt  at  lirft,  from  the  mere  im- 
pulfe  of  pain,  and  precifely  in  the  manner  to  which  that  im- 
pulfe  prompts  him,  without  the  rational  faculty  having  any  ten- 
dency to  prolong,  to  check  or  to  regulate  his  adlions."  What 
an  incredible  pidure  does  this  exhibit  to  us  of  the  human  mind? 
We  form  to  ourfelves,  for  this  cannot  be  difputed,  opinions,  we 
meafure  the  tendency  of  means  to  the  promotion  of  ends,  we 
compare  the  value  of  different  objeds,  and  we  imagine  our 
condud  to  be  influenced  by  the  judgments  we  are  induced  to 
make.  We  perceive  the  preferablenefs  of  one  thing  to  another, 
we  defire,  we  chufe ;  all  this  cannot  be  denied.  But  all  this 
is  a  A'ain  apparatus  ;  and  the  whole  fyftem  of  our  condudt  pro- 
ceeds, uninfluenced  by  our  apprehenfion  of  the  relative  value 
of  objects,  and  our  forefight  of  confequences  favourable  or 
adverfe. 


There  is  no  other  alternative.     Once  admit  the  underftanding    Confcquepce 
to  an  efficient  fhare  in  the  bufinefs,  and  there  is  no  reafon  that   ence. 

Y  y  can 


346  OFTHEPRINCIPLE 

BOOK  IV.    can  poffibly  be  afligned,  why  every  topic,  which   is  the  objedl 
*"" — " '    of  human  underftanding,  fliould    not  have  its  portion  of  effi- 
ciency..    Once  admit  that  wc    ad    upon    the   apprehenfion    of 
fomething  that  may  be  affirmed  or  denied  refpeding  an  idea,  and 
we  ffiall  be  compelled  to  acknowledge   that  every  propofition 
including  in  it  the  notion  of  preferablenefs  or  the  contrary,  of 
better  or  worfe,   wnll,   fo  far  as  it  falls  within  the  compafs  of 
our  power  real  or  fuppofed  to  effe£t,  afford  a  motive  inducing, 
though  with  different    degrees  of  energy,    to    animal  motion. 
But  this  is  dlredlly  contrary  to  the  theory  of  felf  love.     They 
who  maintain  that  felf  love  is  the  only  fpring  of  adion,  fay  in 
effed,   not  only  that  no  adion  is  dilinterefted,  but-  that  no  dif- 
Interefted  confideratlon  contributes  in  any  degree  as  an  induce- 
ment to  adion.     If  I   relieve   the  virtuous   diftrefs  of  the  heft 
of  men,  I  am  influenced  according  to  them   by  no  particle  of 
love  for  the  individual  or  compaffion  for  his  diftrefs,  but   ex- 
clufively  by  the  defire  of  procuring  gratification  to  myfelf.. 

Let  us  confider  this  cafe  a  little  more  clofely.  If  I  perceive 
either  that  my  profperity  or  exiftence  muft  be  facrificed  to 
thofe  of  twenty  men  as  good  as  myfelf,  or  theirs  to  mine, 
furely  this  affords  feme  fmall  inducement  to  adopt  the  former 
part  of  the  alternative.  '  It  may  not  be  fuccefsful,  but  does  it 
excite  no  wifh  however  fleeting,  no  regret  however  ineffedual  ? 
The  decifion  of  the  queftion  is  in  reality  an  affair  of  arithmetic ; 
is  there  no  hiunan  being  that  was  ever  competent  to  underftand 

it? 


O  F    V  I  R  T  U  E.  347 

It  ?  The  value  of  a  man  is  his  ufefulnefs ;  has  no  man  ever  be-  (^j^^W^J 
lieved  that  another's  capacity  for  ufefulnefs  was  equal  to  his  own?    *       *       ' 
I  am  as  40,  confequently  the  others  are  as  800  ;  if  the  40  were 
not  myfelf,  I  fhould  pereive  that  it  was  lefs  than  800  ;  is  it  pof- 
fible  I  Ihould  not  perceive  it,  when  the  cafe  becomes  my  own  ? 


But  the  advocates  for  the  fyftem  of  felf  love  generally  admit, 
"  that  it  is  poffible  for  a  man  to  facrifice  his  own  exiftence  in 
order  to  preferve  that  of  twenty  others ;"  but  they  affirm, 
"  that  in  fo  doing  he  ad:s  from  perfonal  intereft.  He  perceives 
that  it  is  better  for  him  to  die  with  the  confcioufnefs  of  an  he- 
roic action,  than  live  with  the  remorfe  of  having  declined  it." 
That  is,  here  is  an  adlion  attended  with  various  recommenda- 
tions, the  advantage  to  arife  to  twenty  men,  their  tranquillity 
and  happinefs  through  a  long  period  of  remaining  exiftence,  the 
benefits  they  will  not  fail  to  confer  on  thoufands  of  their  contem- 
poraries, and  through  them  on  millions  of  pofterity,  and  laftly  his 
own  efcape  from  remorfe  and  momentary  exultation  in  the  per- 
formance of  an  a£t  of  virtue.  From  all  thefe  motives  he  feleds 
the  laft,  the  former  he  wholly  dlfregards,  and  adopts  a  condudl 
of  the  higheft  generofity  from  no  view  but  to  his  own  advantage. 
Abftradedly  and  impartially  confidered,  and  putting  felf  as  fuch 
out  of  the  queftion,  this  is  its  leaft  recommendation,  and  he  is 
■abfolutely  and  unlimitedly  callous  to  all  the  reft. 


Confidering  then  the  fyftem  of  difintereftednefs  as  fufficiently  ExpcrlmentaJ 

view  of  the 

y  y  2  eftablifhed  Aibjeit. 


348  OF     THE     PRINCIPL  E 

BOOK IV.    eftabliflied  In  theory,  let  us   compare  it  -with  the  leflbns  of  ex- 
CHAP.  VIII  •"  ^ 

^ f. — '    perience.     There  are   two  different  hypothefes    by  which  this 

buppoiitions      ■•■  J  1.  J 

fuggefted  by  ^i^gory  is  oppofed  ;  the  one  affirming  "  that  in  every  thing  we 
of  felf  love:  ^^^  ^^  employ,  previoufly  to  the  choice  of  the  mind,  a  calculation 
by  which  we  determine  how  far  the  thing  to  be  done  will  con- 
duce to  our  own  advantage  ;"  the  other  afcribing  our  adtions 
"  to  the  fame  blind  and  unintelligent  principle,  by  which,  when  a 
child  cries,  he  frequently  utters  a  found  unexpefted  by  himfelf, 
hut  which  inevitably  refults  from  a  certain  connexion  of  an  02> 
ganized  body  with  an  irritated  mind," 


fhtit  we  cal-  How  far  docs  experience  agree  with  the  firfl:  of  thefe  hy- 
all  occafions  pothefcs  ?  Surely  nothing  can  be  more  contrary  to  any  thing  we 
to  accrue  to  are  able  to  obferve  of  ourfelves,  than  to  imagine,,  that  in  every 
ad,  of  pity  fuppofe,  we  efhiraate  the  quantity  of  benefit  to  ariie 
to  ourfelves,  before  we  yield  to  the  emotion.  It  might  be  faid 
indeed,  that  the  mind  is  very  fubtle  in  its  operations,  and  that,  a 
certain  train  of  reafoning  having  been  rendered  familiar  to  us, 
we  pafs  it  over  in  our  reflections  with  a  rapidity  that  leaves  no 
trace  in  the  memory.  But  this,  though  true,  will  contribute 
little  to  relieve  the  fyftem  we  are  ccnfidering,  fince  it  unfortu- 
nately happens  that  our  firft  emotions  of  pity  are  leafl  capable  of 
being  accounted  for  in  this  way. 


Faifenefs  of         To  uudcrfland  this  let  us  begin  with  the  cafe  of  an  Infant, 

this  fuppofi- 

tJoE.  Before   he  can  feel  fympathy,   he  mult  have   been  led   by  a 

feries 


OF     VIRTUE.  3^ 

feiies  of  obfervations  to  perceive  that  his  nurfe  for  example    is    BOOK  iv. 

^     '  CHAP.  VIIX. 

a  being  poflefled  of  confcioufnefs,  and  fufceptible  Hke  himfelf   ' ' 

of  the  imprellions  of  pleafure  and  pain.     Having  fuppUed  him 
with  this  previous  knowledge,  let   us  fuppofe  his  nurfe  to  fall 
from  a  flight  of  flairs  and  break  her  leg.     He  will  probably  feel 
fome  concern  for  the  accident ;  he  will  uaderPcand  the  meaning 
of  her  cries,  fnnilar  to  thofe  he  has  been   accuftomed  to  utter 
in    diftrefs^   and   he    will   difcover  fome  wifh    to  relieve    her. 
Pity  is  perhaps  firfl  introduced  by  a  mechanical  impreffion  upon 
the   organs,    in  confequence    of   wliich  the    cries     uttered     by 
another  prompt   the.  child  without  dire£l  defign  to   utter  cries 
of  his  own.     Thefe  are  at  firft  unaccompanied  with  compaflion, 
but  they  naturally  induce  the  mind  of  the  infant  to  yield  atten- 
tion to  the  appearance,  which  thus  impreffed  him.. 

In^  the  relief  he  wilhes  to  communicate  is  he  prompted  by 
refleding  on  the  pleafures  of  generofity  ?  This  is  by  the  fuppo- 
fition  the  firft  benevolent  emotion  he  has  experienced,  and  pre- 
vioufly  to  experience  it  is  impofTible  he  fhould  forefee  the  plea^ 
fures  of  benevolence.  Shall  we  fuppofe  that  he  is  influenced 
by  other  felfifh  confiderations  ?  He  confiders,  that,  if  his 
nurfe  die,  he  will  be  in  danger  of  perifhing;  and  that,  if 
fhe  be  lame,  he  will  be  deprived  of  his  airings.  Is  it  poi>- 
fible  that  any  man  fhould  believe,  that,  in  the  inftantaneous 
impulfe  of  fympathy,  the  child  is  guided  by  thefe  remote  con- 
fiderations ?  Indeed  it  was  unneceflary  to  have  inftanced  in  a-n 
adion  apparently  benevolent,  fmce  it  is  equally  clear  that  our 

mofl 


35° 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE 


BOOK  IV.    nioft  familiar  adions   are   inconfiftent   with   this    explanation. 

CHAP.  VIII.  ^ 

'' " '    We  do  not  fo  much  as  eat  and  drink,   from  the  recollection  that 

;thefe  functions  are  neceifary  to  our  fupport. 

Suppofiuon  The  fecond  of  the  two  hypothefes  enumerated,  is  diametrically 

of  a  contrary  -  i      11    t 

fort.  the  reverfe  of  the  firft.     As   the  former  repreleated  all  human 

adtions  as  proceeding  from  a  very  remote  deduction  of  the  in- 
;telled;,  the  latter  confiders  the  whole  as  merely  phyfical.  In 
its  literal  fenfe,  as  has  already  been  feen,  nothing  can  be  more 
incompatible  with  experience.  Its  advocates  therefore  are  obliged 
to  modify  their  original  aflumption,  and  to  fay,  not  that  we  adt 
.^merely  from  fenfation,  but  that  fenfation  affords  the  balls  for 
refleflion ;  and  that,  though  we  be  capable  of  conducing  our- 
felves  by  fyftem  and  forefight,  yet  the  only  topic  to  which  we 
can  apply  that  forefight  is  the  removal  of  pain.  In  reality  all 
•that  which  is  regularly  adapted  to  the  accomplifhment  of  a  certain 
purpofe,  muft  be  admitted  to  flow  from  the  didates  of  reflection. 
The  tear  ftarts,  the  cry  is  uttered  at  the  prompting  of  fenfation' 
only,  but  we  cannot  lift  a  finger  to  relieve  except  as  we  are  com- 
manded by  the  underfl:anding. 


We  do  not  Here  then  we  are  prefented  with  the  commencement  of  a  new 

calculate  what 

would  be  the    ferics.     If  uneafiiiefs  be   ftill   the  fource  of  the  phenomena,  at 

uneafmefs  to 

refuitfromour  leaft  it  is  now  under  a  different  form.     Before,  a  certain  emotion 

refraining  to 

.^a :  was  produced,  refpedting  which  no  intention  was  extant  in  the 

either  in  re-     mind.     Now  an  adtiou  or  a  feries  of  actions  is  adopted  with  a 

Keving  dif- 

-trefe;  certain  view  and  leading  to  a  certain  end.     This  end  is  faid  to 

a  be 


OF     VIRTUE.  351 

be  the  removal  of  uneafinefs.    Whether  it  be  or  no  is  a  queftlon  BOOK  iv. 

^  CHAP.  VIII. 

which  recolledion  in  ma.ny  cafes  is  competent  to  enable  us  to    ^^ ^^ ' 

decide.  If  we  frequently  deceive  ourfelves  as  to  the  motive  by 
which  we  are  prompted  to  ad,  this  is  chiefly  owing  to  vanity, 
Or  defire  of  imputing  to  ourfelves,  or  being  underftood  by  the 
world  to  a£l  from  a  principle  more  elevated  than  that  which 
truly  belongs  to  us.  But  this  idea  is  leafl:  prevalent  v/ith  chil- 
dren and  favages,  and  of  confequence  they  ought  to  be  mofl: 
completely  aware  that  the  proje<fl  they  have  conceived  is  that  of 
removing  uneafinefs.  It  feems  to  be  an  uncommon  refinement 
in  abfurdity  to  fay,  that  the  end  we  really  purfue  is  one  to 
which  we  are  in  no  inftance  confcious  ;  that  our  a£lion  is  wholly 
derived  from  an  unperceived  influence,  and  the  view  extant  ia 
tke  underftanding  altogether  impotent  and  unconcerned. 

In  the  cafe  we  have  juft  examined  uneafinefs  is  the  firft  flep   or  in  adding 

.  .  '  to  the  ftock 

in  the  procefs  ;   m  others  which  might  be  ftated  uneafinefs  is    ofgcneial 

good. 

not  the  firfi  ftep.  "  In  the  purfuit"  fuppofe  "  of  a  chemical 
procefs  I  accidentally  difcover  a  circumftance,  which  may  be  of 
great  benefit  to  mankind.  I  inftantly  quit  the  objeft  I  was  ori- 
ginally purfuing,  profecute  this  difcovery,  and  communicate  it 
to  the  world."  In  the  former  proceeding  a  fenfation  of  pain 
was  the  initiative,  and  put  my  intelledbual  powers  into  acflion. 
In  the  prefent  cafe  the  perception  of  truth  is  the  original  mover. 
Whatever  uneafinefs  may  be  fuppofed  to  exift,  rendering  me  ' 
anxious  for  the  publication  of  this  benefit,  is  the  confequence  of 

the 


35^ 


OF    THE    PRINCIPLE 


BOOK  IV.    i\^Q  perception.     The  uneafinefs  would  never  have  exifled  if  the 

CHAP.  VIII.  ^  ^ 

*       "      '    perception  had  not  gone  before  it. 

Uneafinefs  But  it  has  been  faid,  "  that,  though  the  perception  of  truth  in 

an  accidental  ,    ^      .      ,.-         -,  , 

member  of      this  cafe  gocs  firft,    the  pain  was  not  lefs  indifpeniible  m  the 

the  procefs. 

procefs,  fince,  without  that,  adlion  would  never  have  followed, 
A£tion  is  the  child  of  defire,  and  a  cold  and  uninterefting  deci- 
fion  of  the  underftanding  would  for  ever  have  laid  dormant  in 
the  mind."  Granting  that  pain  in  a  certain  modified  degree  is  a 
conftant  ftep  in  the  procefs,  it  may  neverthelefs  be  denied  that 
it  is  in  the  flrideft  fenfe  of  the  word  indifpenfible.  To  perceive 
that  I  ought  to  publilh  a  certain  difcovery,  is  to  perceive  that 
publifhing  is  preferable  to  not  publifhing  it.  But  to  perceive  a 
preference  is  to  prefer,  and  to  prefer  is  to  choofe.  The  procefs 
is  in  this  cafe  complete,  and  pain,  in  the  fenfe  in  which  it  comes 
in  at  all,  is  merely  an  accident.  Why  do  I  feel  pain  in  the 
negledl  of  an  a£t  of  benevolence,  but  becaufe  benevolence  is 
judged  by  me  to  be  a,  condud:  vv^hich  it  becomes  me  to  adopt  ? 
Does  the  underftanding  wait  to  enquire  what  advantage  will  re- 
fult  from  the  propofitions,  that  two  and  two  make  four,  or  that 
fuch  and  fuch  caufes  vdll  contribute  to  the  happinefs  of  my 
neighbour,  before  it  is  capable  of  perceiving  them  to  be  true  ? 

The  fame  principle  which  is  applied  here,  is  not  lefs  applica- 
ble to  fame,  wealth  and  power,  in  a  word  to  all  thofe  purfuits 
which  engage  the  refle<3:ing  and  fpeculative  part  of  the  civilifed 

world. 


O  F     V  I  R  T  U  E.  .^^ 

world.     None  of  thefe  objeds  would  ever  have  been  ijiuTued     EOOK  iv. 

.  ^  '    CHAl'.  Vlll. 

if  the  decifions  of  the  intelledl  had  not  gone  firft,  and  informed    *^ ^ ' 

us  that  they  were  worthy  to  be  purfued. 

Neither  of  the  two  hypothefes  we  have  been  examining  would   THe  fuppcii- 

tioiis  incon- 

perhaps  have  been  reckoned  fo  much  as  plaufible  in  themfelves,  fiitently 

blended. 

if  they  had  not  been  blended  together  by  the  inadvertence  of  their 
fupporters.  The  advocates  of  felf  love  have  been  aware,  that 
the  mere  fenfitive  impulfe  of  pain  would  account  for  a  very 
fmall  part  of  the  hiftory  of  man  ;  and  they  have  therefore  infen- 
fibiy  Aided  from  the  confideration  of  uneafmefs  to  be  removed, 
to  that  of  intereft  to  be  promoted.  They  have  confounded  the 
two  cafes  of  fenfation  and  refledlion  j  and,  taking  it  for  granted 
in  the  latter  that  private  gratification  was  the  objedt  univerfally 
purfued,  have  concluded  that  they  were  accounting  for  all  human 
adions  from  one  principle.  In  reality  no  two  principles  can  be 
more  diftind,  than  the  impulfe  of  uneafmefs,  which  has  very 
improperly  been  denominated  the  love  of  ourfelves,  and  that  de- 
liberate felf  love,  by  which  of  fet  defign  we  purfue  our  own  ad- 
vantage. One  circumftance  only  they  have  in  common,  that  of 
reprefenting  us  as  incapable  of  underftanding  any  propofition, 
till  we  have  in  fome  way  or  other  conneded  it  with  perfonal  in- 
tereft. This  is  certainly  a  juft  reprefentation  of  their  confe- 
quences ;  fince,  if  I  were  capable  of  underftanding  the  naked 
propofition,  that  my  neighbour  ftood  in  need,  of  a  candle  for 

Z  z  inftance 


354  O  F     T  H  E     P  R  I  N  C  T  P  L  E 

BOOK  IV.   inftance  to  be  removed  from  one  end  of  a  room  to  tlie  other, 

CHAlW'IIf.  ' 

' ■^ '    this  would  be  a  reafon  of  adlon,  a  motive,  either  ftrong  or  vreak, 

either  predominant  or  the  contrary.  But,  if  this  conlidcratiou 
entered  for  any  thing  into  the  ground  of  my  proceeding,  the 
whole  would  not  be  refolvable  into  felf  love. 

Scheme  of  An   hypothefis,   which   has  been  thought  to  have  fome  ten- 

felf  love  re- 
commended    dency  to  relieve  the  difficulties  of  the  fyftem  of  felf  love,  is  that 

from  the  pro- 

penfity  of       "  of  the  mliid's  reafoning  out  for  itfelf  certain  general  principles, 

mind  to  ab- 
breviate its      which  are  a  fort  of  refting-places  in  the  procefs,    to  which  it 

procefs. 

afterwards  recurs,  and  upon  which  it  acSts,  without  being  at  the 
trouble  in  each  inftance  of  application,  of  repeating  the  reafons 
upon  which  the  general  principle  was  founded.  Thus  in  geo- 
metry, as  we  proceed  to  the  higher  branches,  we  perpetually 
refer  to  the  earlier  proportions  as  eftabliflied  and  certain,  with- 
out having  at  the  time  in  our  minds  perhaps  the  fmalleft  recol- 
leclion  of  the  way  in  which  thofe  early  propofitions  were 
demonftrated."  But  this  reprefentation,  though  true,  has  A'ery 
little  tendency  to  decide  in  the  fubjeft  before  us.  It  is  ftill  true, 
that,  if  I  be  capable  of  underftanding  a  propofition  as  it  relates 
to  the  interefi:  of  my  neighbour,  any  reafoning  about  the  pro- 
pofition by  vv^hich  it  is  indiredly  connefted  Mnth  my  own 
intereft,  is  unneceffary  to  put  me  into  a  ftate  of  adion.  It  is 
ftill  true,  that  my  a6iion  has  a  dired  and  an  indiredl  tendency ; 
^nd,  till  it  can  be  fhown  that  there  is  fomething  in  the  nature  of 

mind 


OF    VIRTUE.  3^5 

mind  that  unfits  it  for  entertalnin":  the  diredl  pni-pofe,  an  un-    BOOK  iv. 

prejudiced   enquirer  wil!  be  very   little  difpofed  univerfally  to    ^ -^ — ' 

iiave  recourfe  to  thdt  which  is  indirctfl. 

The  hypothefis  of  felf  love  fecms  to  have  been  originally  in-   from  the  fim- 

pl,L'f/  tiint 

vculxd  froni  a  Icve  of  "  that  fimplicitv,  which  appears  to  be  the    cl  tain,  in  the 

'  natures  of 

ultimate  term  in  all  grand  difcoveries  relative  to  the  fyftem  of  things, 
the  univtrfe."  But  fimplicity,  though  well  defervlng  our  appro- 
bation, can  fcarcely  of  itfelf  be  a  fuflicient  llipport  for  any 
opinion.  The  fimplicity  however  in  this  cafe  is  more  apparent 
than  real.  Not  to  repeat  what  has  been  faid  relative  to  the 
coalition  of  two  hypothefes  very  Incongruous  in  their  own  nature, 
there  is  little  genuine  fimplicity  in  a  fcheme,  that  reprefents  us 
as  perpetually  ading  from  a  motive  which  we  leaft  fufpe£ted, 
and  feeks  by  a  circuitous  and  intricate  method  for  a  recommen- 
dation of  little  intrinfic  value,  rejeding  in  all  cafes  the  great  and 
obvious  reafon  which  the  firft  vievv^  of  the  fubjeft  fuggefted. 
True  fimplicity  is  altogether  on  the  fide  of  the  oppofite  fyftem, 
which  reprefents  man  as  capable  of  being  governed  by  the 
nature  of  the  thing,  and  of  ad:ing  from  the  motive  which  he 
fuppofes  to  Influence  him  ;  which  requires  nothing  but  percep- 
tion to  account  for  all  the  phenomena  of  mind,  and,  when  a 
veafon  exciting  to  a(ftion  is  apprehended,  does  not  feek  for  an 
additional  principle  to  open  a  communication  between  the  judg- 
ment and  the  choice. 

Z  z  2  There 


^^6  OF     THE     PRINCIPLE 

There  is  one  obfervation  more,  which,  though  it  be  not  fb 
conclufive  as  feme  of  thofe  which  have  been  mentioned,  ought 
not  to  be  omitted.  If  felf  love  be  the  only  principle  of  aftion, 
there  can  be  no  fuch  thing  as  virtue.  Virtue  is  a  principle  in 
the  mind,  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  form  a  true  eftimate  of 
the  pretenfions  of  different  reafons  inviting  us  to  preference. 
He,  that  makes  a  falfe  eftimate,  and  prefers  a  trivial  and  partial 
good  to  an  important  and  comprehenfive  one,  is  vicious.  It  is 
I  in  the  difpofition  and  view  of  the  mind,  and  not  in  the  good 
which  may  accidentally  and  unintentionally  refult,  that  virtue 
confifts.  Judas's  a£t  in  betraying  Chrift,  according  to  the 
Chriftian  fyftem,  may  be  regarded  as  a  real  and  effential  caufe 
conducing  to  the  falvation  of  mankind.  Yet  Judas's  ad:  was 
not  virtuous,  but  vicious.  He  thought  only  of  the  forty  pieces 
of  filver,  the  price  of  his  treachery,  and  negleded  every  confi- 
deration  of  public  utility  and  juftice.  Juft  fo  in  the  cafe  ftated 
early  in  the  prefent  chapter,  the  public  benefadtor,  abfolutely  and 
ftridly  fpeaking,  prefers  forty  to  eight  hundred  or  eight  hundred 
millions.  So  far  as  relates  to  the  real  merits  of  the  cafe,  his 
own  advantage  or  pleafure  is  a  very  infignificant  confideration, 
and  the  benefit  to  be  produced,  fuppofe  to  a  world,  is  ineftima- 
ble.  Yet  he  falfely  and  unjuftly  prefers  the  firft,  and  regards 
the  latter,  abftradedly  confidered,  as  nothing.  If  there  be  fuch  a 
thing  as  juftice,  if  I  have  a  real  and  abfolute  value,  upon  which 
truth  can  decide,  and  which  can  be  compared  with  what  is 
greater  or  lefs,  then,  according  to  this  fyftem,  the  beft  adtion  that 
5  ever 


OF    VIRTUE.  357 

ever  was  performed,  may,  for  any  thinp;  we  know,  have  been  the    BOOK  IV. 
^  '        /'  y  &  CHAP.viri. 

action  in  the  whole  world  of  the  moft  exquifite  and  deliberate    * « ' 

injuftice.  Nay,  it  could  not  have  been  otherwife,  fince  it  pro- 
duced the  greateft  good,  and  therefore  was  the  individual  in- 
ftance  in  which  the  greateft  good  was  moft  diredlly  poftponed 
to  peribnal  gratification. 

Nor  will  this  objedlon  be  much  relieved  by  the  fyftem 
already  alluded  to  of  refting-places,  enabling  a  man  in  a  certain 
degree  to  forget  the  narrow  and  fellifh  principles  in  which  his  con- 
duct originated.  It  can  fcarcely  be  queftioned,  that  the  motives 
which  induced  a  man  to  adopt  his  fyftem  of  condufi:,  and  with- 
out which  he  never  would  have  adopted  it,  are  of  more  import- 
ance, than  the  thoughtleflhefs  and  inattention  by  which  they  are 
forgotten,  in  deciding  upon  the  morality  of  his  charader. 

From  this  train  of  reafoning  the  refult  is,  that  men  are  capa-  Conclufion. 
ble  of  underftanding  the  beauty  of  virtue,  and  the  claims  of 
other  men  upon  their  benevolence ;  and,  underftanding  them, 
that  thefe  views,  as  well  as  every  other  perception  of  the  in- 
telled,  are  of  the  nature  of  motives,  fometimes  overpowered 
by  other  confiderations,  and  fometimes  overpowering  them,  but 
always  in  their  own  nature  capable  of  exciting  to  adion,  when 
not  counteracted  by  pleas  of  a  different  fort.  Men  are  capable 
no  doubt  of  preferring  an  inferior  intereft  of  their  own  to 
a  fuperior  intereft  of  other  people  ;  but  to  this  preference  it  is 

perhaps 


J^' 


OF     THE     PRINCIPLE 


BOOK  IV.     perhaps    nece.(iary,    t'lat    tliey    fliould    lma;^ine    the    benefit    to 

'' '^ '    themfclves  to    be  great  and  the  injaiy  to  others   comparatively 

fmall,  or  ehe  that  they  fhould  have  embraced  the  pernicious 
opinion  that  the  general  good  is  heft  lerved  by  each  man's 
applying  himfclf  exclulively  to  his  perfonal  advantage. 

Importance  Th<;re    IS    no   doclrine   in  which   the  generous    and    elevated 

of  the  QUti-  .,.  .  ri'i 

tioii.    ■  mind  refts  with  more  iatisiaaion,  than  m  tnat  ot  which  we  are 

treatin"-.  If  it  be  falfe,  it  is  no  doubt  incumbent  upon  us  to 
make  the  bell  of  the  fmall  rem.nant  of  good  that  remains.  But 
it  is  a  heartlefs  profpect  for  the  moralift,  who,  when  he  has 
done  all,  has  no  hope  to  perfuade  mankind  to  one  atom  of  real 
affedion  towards  any  one  Individual  of  their  fpecies.  We  may 
be  made  indeed  the  inftruments  of  good,  but  in  a  way  lefs 
honourable,  than  that  in  which  a  frame  of  wood  or  a  fheet  of 
paper  may  be  made  the  inftrum^nt  of  good.  The  wood  or  the 
paper  are  at  lead  neutral.  But  we  are  drawn  into  the  fervice 
with  aifedions  of  a  diametrically  oppofite  diredion.  When  we  do 
the  moft  benevolent  action,  it  is  with  a  view  only  to  our  own 
advantage,  and  with  the  moft  fovereign  and  unrefer\'ed  negledl  of 
that  of  others.  We  are  inftruments  of  good,  juft  in  the  fame 
manner  as  bad  men  are  faid  to  be  the  inftruments  of  providence, 
even  when  their  inclinations  are  moft  refraftory  to  its  decrees. 
In  this  fenfe  we  may  admire  the  fyftem  of  the  univerfe,  where 
public  utility  refults  from  each  man's  contempt  of  that  utility,  and 
where  the  moft  beneficial  adions  of  thofe,  whom  we  have  been 

accuftomed 


O  F     V  I  R  T  U  E.  359 

accuftomed  to   term  the  beft  men,  ai^e  only  inflances  in  which    BOOF  iv. 

Cm.AI'.V'i- 

juftice  and  the  real  merits  of  the  cafe  are  moft  flagrantly  violated.    ^ ' 

But  we  can  think  with  little  complacence  of  the  individuals  of 
whom  this  univerfe  is  compofed.  It  is  no  wonder  that  philo- 
fophers,  whofe  fyftem  has  taught  them  to  look  upon  their  fellow 
men  as  thus  perverfe  and  unjuft,  have  been  frequently  cold, 
phlegmatic  and  unanimated.  It  is  no  wonder  thai:  R.oufleau 
the  moft  benevolent  of  all  thefe  philofopliers,  and  who  moft 
efcaped  the  general  contagion,  has  been  driven  to  place  the  pei- 
feftion  of  all  virtue  in  doing  no  injury*.  Neither  philofophy 
nor  morality  nor  politics  w^ill  ever  fhow  like  the'mfelves,  till  man 
fhall  be  acknowledged  for  what  he  really  is,  a  being  capable  of 
juftice,  virtue  and  benevolence,  and  who  needs  not  ahvays  to  be 
led  to  a  philanthropical  condudt  by  foreign  and  frivolous  con- 
fiderations. 

The  fyftem  of  difinterefted  benevolence  proves  to  us,  that  it 
is  poflible  to  be  virtuous,  and  not  merely  to  talk  of  virtue ;  that 
all  which  has  been  laid  by  phllolophers  and  moralifts  refpc^ting 
impartial  juftice  is  not  an  unmeaning  rant ;  and  that,  when  we  call 
upon  mankind  to  diveft  themfelves  of  fcliifli  and  perfonal  con- 
fiderations,  we  call  upon  them  for  fomething  which  they  are 
able  to  pra£tlfe.  An  idea  like  this  reconciles  us  to  our  fpecies  j^ 
teaches  us  to  regard  with  enlightened  admiration  the  men  who 

*  "  La  plus  fiiblime  -ccrtu  eft  negative;  elk  nous  Jiiftniit  de  ne  jamnisfalre  du  mal 
a  pcrjhuni."     Emile,  Liv.  II. 

3  have 


360  OFTHEPRINCIPLE 

have  appeared  to  lofe  the  feeling  of  their  perfonal  exiftence  in 
the  purfuit  of  general  advantage  ;  and  gives  us  reafon  to  expe£l:, 
that,  as  men  colleaively  advance  in  fcience  and  ufeful  inftitu- 
tion,  they  will  proceed  more  and  more  to  confolidate  their  pri- 
vate judgment  and  their  individual  will  with  abftrad  juftice  and 
the  unmixed  approbation  of  general  happinefs. 

Application,  What  are  the  Inferences  that  ought  to  be  made  from  this 
dodirine  with  refped  to  political  inftitution  ?  Certainly  not  that 
the  intereft  of  the  individual  ought  to  be  made  incompatible  with 
the  part  he  is  expected  to  take  in  the  intereft  of  the  whole. 
This  is  neither  defirable,  nor  even  poflible.  But  that  focial  in- 
ftitution needs  not  defpair  of  feeing  men  influenced  by  other 
and  better  motives.  The  legiflator  is  bound  to  recolledl 
that  the  true  perfection  of  mind  confifts  in  difmtereftednefs. 
He  fhould  regard  it  as  the  ultimate  objeft  of  his  exertions,  to 
induce  men  to  eftimate  themfelves  at  their  true  value,  and 
neither  to  grant  to  themfelves  nor  claim  from  others  a  higher 
confideration  than  they  juftly  deferve.  Above  all  he  fliould 
be  careful  not  to  add  to  the  vigour  of  the  felfifta  paflions.  He 
ftiould  gradually  wean  men  from  contemplating  their  own  bene- 
fit in  all  that  they  do,  and  induce  them  to  view  with  com- 
placency the  advantage  that  is  to  refult  to  others. 

The  laft  perfedion  of  this,  feeling  confifts  in  that  ftate  of  mind 
which  bids  us  rejoice  as  fully  in  the  good  that  is  done  by  others, 

as 


O  F    V  I  R  T  U  E.  361 

as    if  it    were   done  by  ourfelves.       The   truly  wife  man  will   COOK  IV. 

^  ^  CHAP.  VIIL 

be   actuated    neither    by    intereft    nor   ambition,    the    love    of   ^ ^ * 

honour  nor  the  love  of  fame.  He  has  no  emulation.  Pie  is 
not  made  uneafy  by  a  comparifon  of  his  own  attainments  with 
thofe  of  others,  but  by  a  comparifon  with  the  ftandard  of  right. 
He  has  a  duty  indeed  obliging  him  to  feek  the  good  of  the 
whole  ;  but  that  good  is  his  only  obje6:.  If  that  good  be 
effeded  by  another  hand,  he  feels  no  difappointment.  All  men 
are  his  fellow  labourers,  but  he  is  the  rival  of  no  man.  Like 
Pedaretus  in  ancient  ftory,  he  exclaims  :  "  I  alfo  have  endeavoured 
to  deferve  ;  but  there  are  three  hundred  citizens  in  Sparta  better" 
than  myfelf,  and  I  rejoice." 


3  A  CHAP. 


I    3f^2    ] 


CHAP.     IX. 
OF    THE    TENDENCY    OF    VIRTUE. 

-IT    IS    THE    ROAD    TO    HAPPINESS TO    THE    ESTEEM    AND 

AFFECTION  OF  OTHERS. OBJECTION  FROM  MISCON- 
STRUCTION AND  CALUMNY. — ANSWER. VIRTUE  COM- 
PARED WITH  OTHER  MODES  OF  PROCURING  ESTEEM. — 
VICE  AND  NOT  VIRTUE  IS  THE  SUBJECT  OF  OBLOQUY — 
INSTANCED  IN  THE  BASE  ALLOY  WITH  WHICH  OUR  VIR- 
TUES  ARE  MIXED IN  ARROGANCE  AND  OSTENTATION 

IN  THE  VICES  IN  WHICH  PERSONS  OF  MORAL  EXCEL- 
LENCE ALLOW  THEMSELVES. THE  VIRTUOUS  MAN  ONLY 

HAS    FRIENDS. VIRTUE   THE  ROAD  TO  PROSPERITY  AND 

SUCCESS     IN    THE    WORLD APPLIED    TO    COMMERCIAL 

TRANSACTIONS TO  CASES  THAT  DEPEND  UPON  PA- 
TRONAGE.—  APPARENT  EXCEPTIONS  WHERE  THE  DE- 
PENDENT IS  EMPLOYED  AS  THE  INSTRUMENT  OF  VICE. 
VIRTUE  COMPARED  WITH  OTHER  MODES  OF  BECOM- 
ING PROSPEROUS. —  SOURCE  OF  THE  DISREPUTE  OF  VIR- 
TUE   IN    THIS    RESPECT. CONCESSION. CASE    WHERE 

CONVENIENT    VICE     BIDS     FAIR     FOR   CONCEALMENT. -^ — 

CHANCE     OF     DETECTION.  INDOLENCE  —  APPREHEN- 

,SIVEN£SS  —  AND  DEPRAVITY  THE  OFFSPRING  OF  VICE. 

q^OOK  IV.    T  TAVING  endeavoured  to  eftablifh  the  theory  of  virtue 

CHAP.  IX.    |— I 

v!fc ;,, '    ■*-  -*-   upon  its  true  principle,  and  to  fhew  that  felf  intereft  is 

(neither  its  bafis  in  juftice  and  truth,  nor  by  any  means  neceffary 

to 


OF  THE  TENDENCY  OF  VIRTUE.  ^^t, 

to  incite  us  to  the  pradice,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  confider   EOOK  ly. 

in  what  degree  public  intereft  is  coincident  with  private,  and  bv    ' « ' 

that  means  at  once  to  remove  one  of  the  enticements  and  apo- 
logies of  vice,  and  afford  an  additional  encouragement  and  direc- 
tion to  the  true  politician^ 

In  the  firft  place  then,  there  appears  to  be  fufficient  reafon  it  is  the  road 
to  believe,  that  the  pravSice  of  virtue  is  the  true  road  to  individual 
happinefs.  Many  of  the  reafons  which  might  be  adduced  in 
this  place  have  been  anticipated  in  the  chapter  of  the  Cultivation 
of  Truth.  "Virtue  is  a  fource  of  happinefs  that  does  not  pall  in 
the  enjoyment,  and  of  which  no  man  can  deprive  us  *.  The 
effence  of  virtue  confifts  in  the  feeing  every  thing  in  its  true 
light,  and  eftimating  every  thing  at  its  intrinfic  value.  No  man 
therefore,  fo  far  as  he  is  virtuous,  can  be  in  danger  to  become 
a  prey  to  forrow  and  difcontent.  He  will  habituate  himfelf, 
refpedling  every  fpecies  of  conduct  and  temper,  to  look  at  its 
abfolute  utility,  and  to  tolerate  none  from  which  benefit  cannot 
arife  either  to  himfelf  or  others.  Nor  will  this  be  fo  diificult  a 
tafk  as  it  is  commonly  imagined.  The  man,  who  is  accuftomed 
upon  every  occafion  to  confult  his  reafon,  will  fpeedily  find  a 
habit  of  this  nature  growing  upon  him,  till  the  jufl  and  difpaf- 
fionate  value  of  every  incident  that  befals  him  will  come  at  length 
fpontaneoufly  to  fuggell  itfelf.     Thole  evils  which  prejudice  ha& 

*  Ch.  IV.  p.  233. 

3  A  2  taught 


364  O  F    T  H  E    T  E  M  B  E  N  C  Y 

^*^9\^  ^Z-  taught  fo  great  a  p?a-t  of  mankind  to  regard  with  horror,  will  ap- 
-'— — V-— — '  pear  to  his  underftanding  difarmed  of  their  terrors.  Poverty, 
obloquy  and  difgrace  will  be  judged  by  him  to  be  very  trivial 
.  misfortunes.  Few  conditions  can  bfe  fo  deilitute  as  to  deprive 
us  of  the  means  of  obtaining  for  ourfelves  a  fubfiftence.  The 
reafonable  mind  perceives  at  once  the  poffibility  of  this  and  the 
beft  method  of  executing  it ;  and  it  needs  no  great  ftretch  of  un- 
derftanding to  decide,  that  real  happinefs  does  not  confift  in  lux- 
urious accommodations.  With  refped  to  obloquy  and  difgrace, 
the  wife  man  may  lament  the  tendency  they  poflefs  to  narrow 
the  fphere  of  his  ufefulnefs  ;  but  he  will  readily  perceive,  that, 
feparately  from  this  confideration,  they  are  no  evils.  My  real 
value  depends  upon  the  qualities  that  are  properly  my  own,  and 
.cannot  be  diminiflied  by  the  flander  and  contempt  of  the  whole 
world.  Even  bodily  pain  lofes  much  of  its  fting,  when  it  Is 
encountered  by  a  chearful,  a  compofed,  and  a  determined  fpirit. 
To  all  thefe  negative  advantages  of  virtue,  we  may  add  the  po- 
fitive  fatisfa£lion  of  a  mind  confcious  of  redltude,  rejoicing  in 
the  good  of  the  whole,  and  perpetually  exerted  for  the  promo- 
*      rtion  of  that  good. 

There  are  indeed  fome  extreme  cafes  of  the  eledion  of  a  vir- 
tuous conduft,  refpeding  which  it  is  difficult  to  pronounce. 
Was  it  Regulus's  intereft  to  return  to  Carthage  to  a  tormenting 
death,  rather  than  fave  his  life  by  perfuading  the  Roman  fenate 
io  an  exchange  of  prifonets  ?   Probably  it  w^as.     Probably,  with 

the 


O  F     V  1  R  T  U  E.  2^^ 

tlie  e^rquifite  feellncr  of  duty  with  which  Re^ruhis  was  riulmatcd,    COOK  TV. 
^  to  /  o  .   >   CHAP.  IX. 

a  liiC  that  was  to  be  pei'petually  haunted  with  the  recolleftion  of  *^ v ' 

jiis  having  omitted  the  nobleft  opportunity  of  public  fervice,  was 
not  worth  his  purchafe.  His  reafoning,  fo  far  as  related  to 
perfonal  intereft,  might  be  like  that  of  Cato  in  the  play.; 

"  A  day,  an  hour,  of  virtuous  liberty 
Is  worth  a  whole  eternity  in  bondage  *." 

Secondly,  virtue  not  only  leads  to  the  happinefs  of  him  who  to  tlie  eilenik 
pradlifes  it,  but  to  the  efteem  and  aiTedion  of  others.  Nothing  of  others.' 
can  be  more  indifputable,  than  that  the  direct  road  to  the  efteem 
of  mankind,  is  by  doing  things  worthy  of  their  efteem.  The 
jnoft  artful  fcheme  for  paffing  things  upon  others  for  fomewhat 
different  from  what  they  really  are,  is  in  momentary  danger  of 
-detection  ;  and  it  would  be  an  egregious  miftake  to  fuppofe,  that 
tnien  efteem  any  thing  but  what  comes  to  them  under  the  ap- 

*  The  firft;  of  the  three  heads  difcuffed  in  this  chapter  is  inferted  chiefly  for 
the  fake  of  method,  few  perfons  having  really  doubted  that  virtue  is  the  moft 
genuine  fource  of  individual  tranquillity  and  happinefs.  It  is  therefore  difmilTed 
with  all  practicable  brevity.  The  two  remaining  heads  had  a  fironger  claim  to 
difculTion.  It  unfortunately  happens  to  be  the  generally  received  opinion,  that 
rigid  virtue  is  neither  the  furcfl  road  to  other  men's  approbation  and  efteem, 
nor  the  moft  probable  means  of  fecuring  our  external  profperity.  If  the  author 
had  known  of  any  work  at  prefent  exifting,  that  had  appeared  to  him  to  place 
this  fubjeft  in  any  degree  in  its  true  light,  he  would  have  omitted  the  reafon- 
ings  of  tliis  chapter. 

pearancc 


r^66  OF    THE    TENDENCY 

BOGK  IV.  pearance  of  virtue.     No  man  ever  exiftecl  of  a  tafte  Co  depravecT 

CHAP.  IX.  ^ 

* " '   as  to  feel  real  approbation  of  another,  for  the  artfulnefs  of  his 

flattery,  or  the  cunning  with  which  he  over-reached  his  neighs- 

hours. 


Obieaion     f^  There  is  indeed  one  difadvantage  that  occurs  under  this  head,  \ 
itruftioll '^and  confifting  in  this  circumftance,  "  that  no   man  truly  admires___j 
ealumny.     |  ^^at  he  docs  not  underftand.     Now,  in  order  thoroughly  to- 
comprehend  the  value  of  any  mental  effort,  whether  of  a  purely 
intelledlual  or  moral  nature,  it  is  perhaps  neceflary  that  the  ge- 
i'-  ,  nius  or  virtue  of  the  fpedator  fhould  be  equal  to  that  of  him 

^^  t^^^'  by  whom  it  is  made.     It  is  an  inevitable  law  of  our  nature,  that 

we  fhould  in  a  great  meafure  judge  of  others  by  ourfelves,  and 
form  our  ftandard  of  human  nature  by  an  inveftigation  of  our 
own  minds.  That,  refpeding  which  we  feel  a  clear  and  diftin£t 
convidion  that  we  are  ourfelves  incapable,  we  are  prone  to 
fufpe£t  to  be  mere  fhow  and  deception  in  others.  We  are 
the  more  inclined  to  this,  becaufe  we  feel  their  virtues  to  be  a : 
reproach  to  our  indolence,  and  therefore  are  little  difpofed  to 
make  a  liberal  eftimate  of  them," 

AnfvTcr.  But,  though  there  be  fome  truth  in  thefe  obfervations,  they 

have  frequently  been  made  much  too  indifcriminate,  by  the  mi-  - 

fanthropy  and  impatience  of  thofe,  who  have  conceived  their 

eftimation  with  their  neighbours  or  the   world  to  fall   greatly 

jQiort  of  their  merit,  i    It  mull  be  admitted  that  mankind  are 
J 

relu<Sant 


OF    VIRTUE.  ^sj 

Teludant  to  acknowledge  a  wifdom  or  a  virtue  fuperior  to  their 
own ;  but  this  reludance  is  by  no  means  invincible.  It  is  abfurd 
to  fuppofe  that  no  man  believes  himfelf  the  inferior  of  his  neigh- 
bour, or  that,  when  he  reads  the  plays  of  Shakefpeare,  the  phi- 
lofophy  of  Roufleau,  or  the  actions  of  Cato,  he  fays,  "  I  am  as 
fkilful,  as  wife,  or  as  virtuous  as  this  man."  It  would  be  flill 
more  abfurd  to  fuppofe  that  men  may  not  in  a  eonfiderable  degree 
perceive  the  beauty  of  pa(Kxges  they  could  never  have  written, 
and  adtions  they  would  never  ha-ve  performed. 

It  is  true  that  men  of  high  moral  excellence  are  feldom  efti-  ViVtue  com- 

1  1      •  1  r        •    n        1  1      •  .  pa'cd  with  o- 

xnated  at  then-  true  value,  elpecially   by  their  contemporaries,  t'ler  modes  of 

procuring 

But  the  queilion  does  not  relate  to  this  point,  but  to  that  other,  eaeem. 
whether  they  be  not  efteemed  more  thaii  perfons  of  any  other 
defcription,  and  of  confequence  whether  virtue  be  not  the  befl 
road  to  efteem  ?  Now,  let  a  fpecious  appearance  be  maintained 
with  ever  fo  much  uniformity  of  fuccefs,  it  is  perpetually  in 
danger  of  detedlion.  It  will  always  want  fomething  of  anima- 
tion, of  confiftency  and  firmnefs  that  true  virtue  would  produce. 
The  imitation  will  never  come  up  to  the  life.  That  temporifmg 
and  compliance,  which  are  careful  not  to  contradid  too  much 
the  prejudices  of  mankind,  and  in  which  the  principal  advantage 
-of  a  merely  exterior  virtue  confifts,  will  always  bear  fomething 
-fufpicious  about  them.  Men  do  not  love  him  who  is  perpetually 
courting  their  applaufe.  They  do  not  give  with  a  liberal  fpirit 
iwhat  is  fought  with  too  unwearied  an  affiduity.  But  their  praife 


IS 


358  .      O  F     T  H  E     T  E  N  D  E  N  C  Y' 

BOOK  IV.  ig  involimtanly  extorted,  by  him  who  is  not  fo  anxious  to  oB- 

CHAP.  iX.  .         .  -^  '     •' 

^^ '  tain  fuccefs,  as  to  deferve  it. 


Vice  and  not        If  men  of  Virtue  be  frequently  niifinterpreted  or  mifunder- 

vivtue  is  t'ae 

fubjeftofob-  ftocd,  this  IS  in  a  great  degree  to  be  afcrihed  to  the. imperfection 

loquy  .: 

of  their  virtue  and  the  errors  of  their  condu6t.     True  virtue 
inftanced  In     iliould  hoLl  no  Commerce  with  art.     We  ought  not  to  be  lb  de- 

tlie  bafe  al-  . 

loy  with         firous  to  exhibit  our  virtue  to  advantage,   as  to  give  it  free  fcope 

\vliich  our 

Tirtuss  are       and  fufFer  it   to  exhibit  itfelf.       Art  is  nearly  allied  to  felfifh- 

inixed : 

nefs  5  and  true  virtue  has  already  been  fhown  to  be  perfedtljr 
difmterefted.  The  mind  fhould  be  fixed  only  on  the  objeft 
purfued,  and  not  upon  the  gracefulnefs  or  gallantry  of  the 
purfuit.  We  fhould  be  upon  all  occafions  perfe(5lly  ingenuous,- 
expreffing  with  fimplicity  the  fentiments  of  our  heart,  and 
fpeaking  of  ourfelves,  when  that  may  be  neceffary,  neither  with 
oftentation  and  arrogance  on  the  one  hand,  nor  with  the  frequently 
applauded  lies  of  a  cowardlike  humility  on  the  other.  There  is 
a  charm  in  fincerity  that  nothing  can  refift.  If  once  a  man 
could  be  perfeftly  frank,  open  and  firm  in  all  his  w^ords  and 
adions,  it  would  be  impolTible  for  that  man  to  be  mif- 
interpreted. 


in  arroffance        Another  fruitful  fource  of  mifreprefentation  has  appeared  to 

and  oftcnta-  .^  ,     ,  .  . 

tion:  be    envy.      But,    it    we    be    regarued    with    envy,    it    may    be 

fufpefted  to  be  in  a  great  meafure  our  own  fault.      He  will 

always  be  envied  moft,  who  is  mod  arrogant,  and  whofe  mind 

I  rnoft 


OF     VIRTUE.  365 

moft  frequentiv  recurs  to  his  own  attainments  and  the  inferiaritv  BOOK  iv. 

.  ^    CHAP.  IX. 

of  Others.     Our  virtues  would  feldom  be  contemplated  with  an    *^ v ' 

iineafy  fenfe  of  reproach,    if   they  were  perfedly  unaffuming. 

Any  degree  of  oftenLation  in  their  lefs  corrupted   neighbour,  as 

it  humbles  the  vanity  of  mankind,  mull  be  expeded  to  excite 

\.i\  them  a  defire  of  retaliation.     But  he  whofe  virtues  flow  from 

philanthropy  alone,  whole  heart  expands  with  benevolence  and 

good  will,  and  who  has  no  defire  to  make  his  fuperiority  felt, 

will  at  all  times  have  many  friends  and  few  enemies. 

Virtue  has  aUb  frequently  been  fubjed  to  mifreprefentation  f' tlie  vices 

i  1  which 

from  a  farther  circumftance  which   is   moil  properly  chargeable  p^^rfons  of 

moral  excel 

upon  the  fufferers,  and  that  is,  the  inequality  of  their  adions.   l'"""  allow 

themfclves. 

It  is  no  wonder,  if  we  firft  roufe  the  angry  paffions  of  mankind 
by  our  arrogance,  and  then  render  our  motives  fufpeded  by  a 
certain  mixture  of  art  in  the  exhibition  of  our  cliaraders,  that 
the  follies  and  vices  we  commit,  if  they  be  of  a  glaring  kind, 
fhould  too  often  furnilli  a  triumphant  argument  to  fupport 
againft  us  the  accuHition  of  hypocrify  and  deceit.  It  unfortunate- 
ly happens,  that,  when  men  of  an  ardent  fpirit  fall  into  eri'or 
their  errors  are  inevitably  confpicuous.  It  happens,  that  men, 
v.'ho  have  dedicated  the  flower  of  their  ftrength  to  laudable  pur- 
pofes,  too  often  think  they  have  a  right  to  indulge  in  relax- 
ations unworthy  of  the  energy  of  their  charaders.  They  v,-ould 
furely  avoid  this  fatal  miftake,  if  they  duly  receded,  that  it  is 
not  their  individual  charader  only  that  is  at  flake,  but  that  they 

3  ^  are 


370  O  F    T  H  E    TENDENCY 

rH A p" \y'    ^^'^  injuring  the  caufe  of  juftlce  and  general  good.     Prudential 

"^ ^ '    and  timid    virtues,  unalloyed   with    imprudent  and  thoughtlefs 

vices,  are  beft  underftood  by  the  vulgar.  Their  reign  indeed  is 
Ihort ;  they  triumph  only  for  a  day  :  but  that  they  are  tranfitory 
is  of  little  avail,  while  thofe  who  are  moll  worthy  of  lafting 
cfteem,  wantonly  barter  it  for  gratifications,  contemptible  in 
themfelves,  and  fatally  important  in  their  efFeds. 

The  virtuous        gm;  to  retum  to  the  comparifon  between  the  efteem  and 

man  only  has 

friends.  afFedlon  that  accrue  from  virtue,  and  from  any  other  plan  of 

condud.  The  produce  in  the  latter  cafe  mull  always  be  in 
a  confiderable  degree  barren,  and  of  very  fhort  duration. 
"Whether  the  good  name  acquired  by  virtue  be  more  or  lefs, 
virtue  will  appear  in  the  end  to  be  the  only  mode  for  its  acqui- 
fition.  He  who  merits  the  efteem  of  his  neighbours  and  fellow 
citizens,  will  at  leaft  be  underftood  by  a  few.  Inftances  might 
be  adduced  in  which  perfons  inftigated  by  the  pureft  motives 
hkve  been  eminently  unpopular.  But  there  is  perhaps  no  In- 
ftance  in  which  fuch  men  have  not  had  a  few  friends  of  tried 
and  zealous  attachment.  There  is  no  friendihip  but  this.  No 
man  was  ever  attached  to  an  individual  but  for  the  good  quali- 
ties he  afcribed  to  him  j  and  the  degree  of  attachment  will 
always  bear  fome  proportion  to  the  eminence  of  the  qualities. 
Who  would  ever  have  redeemed  the  life  of  a  knave  at  the  ex- 
pence  of  his  own  ?  And  how  many  inftances  do  there  occur  of 
fuch  heroic  friendihip  w^here  the  charader  was  truly  illuftrious  ? 

In 


OF    VIRTUE.  jyi 

In  the  third  place,  virtue  will  probably  be  found  the  fecureft   BOOK  iv. 

.  X-  ^  CHAP.IX. 

road  to  outward  profperity  and  fuccefs  in  the  world,  according   "^ v ' 

Virtue  tlie 

to   the  old   maxim,    "that  honefty  is  the  beft  policy."     It  is  road  to  prof- 

perity  and 

indeed  natural  to  fuppofe  that  a  good  name  fhould  eminently  ^"^'^^'^'^ "'  the 

■'     world  : 

contribute  to  our  fuccefs.     This  is  evident  even  in  the  humbleft 

walks  of  life.     That  tradefman,  other  things  equal,  will  always  applied  to    • 

1  n  r  !•  n       r  •  i  -i,.  coinnicrcial 

be  molt  prolperous,  who  is  molt  tair  and  equitable  in  his  tiaufaaious: 
dealings.  Which  is  mofl  likely  to  fucceed,  he  who  never  gives 
expectations  that  he  cannot  fulfil,  or  who  is  perpetually  dif- 
appointing  his  cuftomers  ?  he  who  is  contented  with  a  reafon- 
able  profit,  or  who  is  ever  upon  the  watch  to  outwit  thofe  with 
whom  he  deals  ?  he  who  puts  one  conftant  price  upon  his  com- 
modities, or  who  takes  whatever  he  can  get,  favouring  a  fuf- 
picious  cuftomer  unreafouably,  and  extorting  with  mercilefs 
avarice  from  an  eafy  one  ?  in  a  word,  he  who  wilhes  to  keep 
the  perfons  with  whom  he  is  concerned  in  prefent  good  humour 
or  who  would  give  them  permanent  fatisfadion  ? 


There  is  no  doubt,  that,  though  the  former  may  obtain  by 
his  artifices  a  momentary  fuccefs,  the  latter  will  in  thefequel  be 
-generally  preferred.  Men  are  not  fo  blind  to  their  own  intercft 
as  they  have  fometimes  been  reprefentcd,  and  they  will  foon  feel 
the  advantage  of  dealing  with  the  perfon  upon  whom  they  can 
depend.  We  do  not  love  to  be  perpetually  upon  our  guard 
againft  an  enemy,  and  for  ever  prying  into  the  tricks  and  fub- 
terfuges  of  a  d«praved  heart. 

3  B  2  But 


372  OFTHETENDENCy 

,^,9?!^  ^X*        But  what  (hall  we  fay  to  thofe  Cafes  in  which  advancement 
CHAP.  IX.  ^ 

' ;^^--'    depends  upon  patronas2;e  ?    There  are  two  circumftances  under 

to  cafts  that  ^  r  r  o 

depend  upon    tj^js  head  which  feem  to  form  an  exception  to  the  rule  above 

patronage. 

Apparent  ex-  delivered.     The  firft  is   that  of  a  patron,    whofe   vicious    and 

ception  where 

the  depend-     imperfedl  charafter   renders   the  co-oj>€ration  of  vicious   men 

cat  is  em- 
ployed as  the    neceffaiy  to  his  purfuits,  whom  therefore  he  will  be  contented 

inftrunnent 

©fvice.  to  reward,  even  while  he  defpifes.     The  fecond  is  tha.t  of  an 

office,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  fuch  offices  exift,  which  may 
require  a  compliant  and  corrupt  character  in  the  perfon  who  ij 
to  fill  it,  and  for  the  obtaining  of  which  vice  of  a  certain. 
lort  is  a  neceflary  recommendation.. 


Virtue  com-         It  muft  no  doubt  be  admitted  as  to  this  fubje^t  In  gen^ralj 

pared  with 

other  modes    that,  fo  far  as  relates  to  fuccefs  in  the  world,  vicious  men  will 

of  becoming 

profperous.  often  prove  fortunate.  But  it  may  reafonably  be  queftioned, 
whether  vice  be  in  the  firft  inftance  the  moft  likely  road  to  for-, 
tune.  The  candidates  for  this  equivocal  fpecies  of  preferment 
may  be  numerous.  An  individual  cannot  diftinguifli  himfelf^,ffi 
the  crowd  but  by  a  portion  of  ability,  which  it  may  well  be 
fuppofed  would  not  have  been,  unfuccefsful  in  the  career  of 
virtue.  After  all,,  not  every  candidate,  not.  even  every  fkilful 
candidate,  will  be  vicStorious.  There  is  always  a  ftruggle  in  the 
breaft  of  the  patron  between  contempt  and  a  corrupt  motive  j 
and,  where-  there  is  ftruggle,  the  decifion  \ylll  fometimes  he  on 
.the  fide  which  the  client  leaft  defires..  Even  when  fortune 
feems  to  have  overtaken  him,  his  fituation  is  ftill  precarious, 
His  fuccefs  is  founded  upon  a.  local  and  mutable  bafis;  his 
3-  patron 


0  F    V  I  R  T  U  E.  575 

patron  may  defert  him,  may  be  deprived  of  his  pov/er  or  his    p^*^p  ^^* 

life ;  and  the  client,  who,  after  having  facrificed  every  principle    *■ ^■^ ' 

to  his  hopes  of  advantage,  miifes  his  aim,  or  is  cut  fhort  in  his 
career,  is  in  all  cafes  a  fubjedl  of  derifion.  A  bad  eminence  is 
always  unftable  ;  and,  if  we  could  fum  up  the  numbers  of  thofe 
who  have  facrificed  their  virtue  to  their  ambition,  we  fhould 
probably  find  that  a  great  majority  of  them  had  egregioufly 
mifcarried  in  their  calculation. 

In  the  mean  time,  if  we  turn  to  the  other  fide  of  the  eftimate, 
we  fhall  in  the  firfl  place  inevitably  fufpedl  that  efteem  muft  lead 
to  fome  of  the  fruits  of  efteem.  But,  exclufively  of  this  confir- 
deration,  if  there  be  offices  for  which  vice  of  a  certain  fort  is  a 
neceflary  qualification,  there  are  alfo  undoubtedly  a  multitude  of 
offices  which  cannot  be  well  difcharged  but  by  a  man  of  inte- 
grity. The  patron,  though  he  would  perhaps  willingly  provide 
for  his  pander  or  his  parafite  at  the  expence  of  his  country,  will 
not  be  inclined  to  truft  a  man  of  accommodating  principles  with 
the  fuperintendence  of  his  fortune  or  the  education  of  his  child. 
With  the  exception  of  the  two  cafes  that  have  been  ftated,  inter 
grity,  as  it  is  the  firll  qualification  for  difcharging  a  fundlion 
with  propriety,  will  always  occupy  a  foremofl  place  in  the  ro 
commendation  of  the  client.  The  employer,  whofe  objedl  is 
the  real  iatereft  of  himfelf,  his  friends  or  his  country,  will  have 
a  powerful  motive  inducing  him  to  prefer  the  honeft  candidate. 
Ability  may  be  almoft  equally  requifite  j  but  ability  and  virtue, 

if 


374  OF    THE    TENDENCY 

^5^9S  l^    if  we  fhould  choofe  to  fuppofe  that  there  is  no  neceffary  alliance 
CHAP.  IX.  ^^  ^ 

' " '    between  them,  will  at  leaft  by  no  perfon  be  thought  exclufive  of 

each  other.  If  a  knave  may  in  fome  cafes  obtain  an  employ- 
ment of  truft  and  real  importance,  it  is  vehemently  to  be  fuf- 
peded  that  this  would  not  have  happened,  if  an  honeft  man  of 
equal  ability  had  been  at  hand.  Add  to  this  that  virtue  is  per- 
petually gaining  ground  upon  us.  The  more  it  is  tried,  and  the 
more  it  is  known,  the  more  will  it  be  refpeited.  It  is  to  the 
man  of  real  virtue,  whofe  charader  is  not  brought  into  fufpicion 
by  the  equivocal  nature  of  fome  of  his  proceedings,  whofe  virtue 
confifts  in  benevolence,  equanimity  and  juftice,  that  all  will  have 
recourfe,  when  they  have  the  fuccefs  of  the  affair  in  which  they 
are  concerned  deeply  at  heart. 

Source  of  the  Nothing  has  tended  more  to  bring  honefty  as  an  inilrument 
virturb  this  of  fuccefs  into  general  difrepute,  than  the  fort  of  complaint  that  is 
frequently  heard  from  fuch  as  are  unfuccefsful.  Thefe  men  will 
naturally  have  recourfe  to  the  moft  fpecious  topic  of  felf  confo- 
lation,  and  there  is  none  that  more  obvioufly  fuggefts  itfelf  than 
the  fuppofition  that  they  failed  through  their  too  much  virtue. 
Thus  the  man  of  rugged  temper  who  is  perpetually  infulting  the 
foibles  of  others,  the  timid  man  who  is  incapable  of  embracing  at 
once  a  perilous  alternative,  the  fcrupulous  man  who  knows  not 
what  to  admit  or  rejed  and  is  always  undetermined  upon  his 
courfe  of  adlion,  and  a  thoufand  others,  are  forward  to  impute 
their  mifcarriage  to  their  integrity,  though  ftridly  fpeaking  it 
was  in  every  one  of  thefe  cafes  to  be  afcribed  to  their  vices. 

^  There 


r«fpcft» 


OF    VIRTUE.  S7S 


There  is  another  confideratlon  which  deferves  to  be  t;iken    ?u?i^^tY-* 


CoiltcfTlOHt 


into  account  in  this  eftimate.  There  is  a  degree  of  virtue  wliich 
would  probably  render  me  difinclined  to  fill  many  eminent  fta- 
tions,  to  be  a  great  lawyer,  a  great  fenator,  or  a  great  minifter. 
The  fundions  of  thefe  fituations  in  the  prefent  ftate  of  man- 
kind are  of  fo  equivocal  a  nature,  that  a  man,  whofe  moral 
views  are  in  the  higheft  degree  fublime,  will  perhaps  find  in 
himfelf  little  forwardnefs  to  exercife  them.  He  will  perhaps 
conceive  that  in  a  private  ftation,  unincumbered  with  engage- 
ments, unwarped  by  the  finifler  motives  that  high  office  will 
not  fail  to  prefent,  he  may  render  more  lafling  fervices  to  man- 
kind. But  furely  it  is  no  very  formidable  objedtion  to  fay,  that 
honefly  will  prevent  a  man  from  acquiring  what  he  has  no  wifh 
to  a,cquire. 


A  cafe  of  fomewhat  a  different  nature  has  been  fuggefled,  and   Cafe  where 

convenient 

it  has  been  afked,  "  Whether  honefly  be  the  beft  road  to  fuccefs,  vice  bids  fa^ 

for   conceal- 
where  the  violation  of  it  bids  fair  for  perpetual  concealment  ?   '"«"'• 

Fortune  has  led  me  to  the  military  profeffion,  I  lack  advance- 
ment, but  promotions  in  the  army  are  cuftomarily  made  by  pur- 
chafe.  Thus  circumflanced,  I  find  by  accident  a  fum  of  money,  in 
fecreting  which  I  am  in  little  danger  of  detedion,  and  I  apply  this 
ilim  to  purchafe  me  a  commiffion.  Should  I  have  more  effedually 
promoted  my  worldly  fuccefs  by  a  more  fcrupulous  condudl  ?" 


The  anfwer  to  this  queftion  ought  probably  to  be  affirmative,  chance  of  d« 

ttclion. 

In 


376  ^'.  D  F    T  n  E    T  E  N  D  E  N  C  Y  : 

^2?'^^X;    I^  t^e  fi^^ft  place  we  are  to  confider  the   chance  of  deteftlon. 
CHAP.  IX.  ^ 

* ^ ^   The  dire£t  tendency  of  the  laws  of  the  material  univerfe  is  fuch, 

.  .  .  Jf 

as  to  force  the  more  confiderable  and  interefting  a£bions  of  hu- 
man beings  into  publicity.  No  man  can  render  himfelf  invifible. 
The  moft  artful  confpirator  cannot  fufficiently  provide  againft  a 
thoufand  petty  circumftances,  that  will  lead,  if  not  to  convidion, 
at  leaft  to  prefumption  againft  him.  Who  is  there  that  would 
wifh  to  have  faftened  upon  him  the  fufpicion  of  a  bafe  and  difm- 
genuous  procedure  ?  This  feature  in  human  affairs  is  fo  remark- 
able, as  to  have  furnifhed  topics  to  the  literary  induftry  of  former 
centuries,  and  to  have  been  interpreted  God's  revenge  againft  the 
unjuft.  Suppofe  that  in  this  cafe  I  found  the  money  dropped  in 
a  field.  Will  the  owner  have  no  fufpicion  where  he  loft  it  ? 
Will  no  human  being  have  obferved  that  I  was  near  the  fpot  at 
the  queftionable  period  ?  The  chances  are  certainly  againft  me, 
and  a  mere  balance  of  chance  would  probably  have  been  fuffi- 
cient  to  prove  that  honefty  is  the  beft  polic)^  The  bare  circum- 
ftance  of  my  fuddenly  poflefling  a  fum  of  money  without  vi- 
fible  means  of  acquiring  it,  a  circumftance  to  which  the  attention 
of  my  neighbours  is  always  fufficiently  alive,  would  caft  an  un- 
pleafant  ftain  upon  my  character.  How  often  has  the  well  con- 
trived train  of  the  politician,  triumphing  in  the  infcrutability  of 
his  Mafdom,  been  baffled  by  the  moft  trivial  accidents  ?  Since 
therefore,  '"  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,  nor  the  battle  to  the 
ftrong,"  the  trueft  wifdom  is  to  ^di  fo  as  to  fear  no  detec- 
tion. 

There 


O  F    V  i  R  T  U  E.  2>17 

There  are  other  circumftances  which   tend  to  eftabhfli   the    COOK  iv. 

CHAP.  IX. 


Indolence  . 


fame  propofition.  The  man,  who  depends  upon  his  courage, 
his  abiHty,  or  his  amiable  character  for  recommendation,  will 
perpetually  cultivate  thefe.  His  conftancy  will  be  unwearied  ; 
and,  confcious  of  the  integrity  of  his  means,  his  fpirit  will  be  in- 
trepid and  eredt.  The  progrefs  of  this  man,  if  his  ardour  be 
fufEciently  great  to  infpire  him  with  abiHty,  and  to  render  him 
quick  fighted  to  the  detedlion  of  his  miftakes,  will  be  incefiant. 
But  the  man  who  has  employed  foul  means,  will  depend  partly 
upon  them,  and  cannot  be  fo  fervent  in  the  cultivation  of  the 
true.  If  he  always  efcape  detedlion,  he  will  always  fear  it,  and  apprehen- 
this  will  fully  the  clearnefs  of  his  fpirit.  Vice  cannot  compare 
with  virtue  in  its  tendency  to  individual  happinefs.  This  is  not 
the  fubjed  we  are  confidering  in  this  place ;  but  this  will  apply 
to  our  fubjed.  Remorfe,  uneafmefs  and  confufion  of  mind  are 
calculated  to  prevent  me  from  perceiving  the  true  point  of  pro- 
jedion  in  my  affairs,  and  detrad  much  from  the  probability  of 
my  rifmg  to  eminence  in  any  profeflion. 

Laflly,  the  man  who  has  once  yielded  to  a  difhonefl  tempta-  and  depravltj- 
tion,  will  yield  to  it  again.  He  has  loft  the  confiftency  of  cha-  oflice?^""^ 
rader  and  difdain  of  vice,  which  were  his  firmeft  fecurities.  He 
that  fays,  "  I  will  be  difhoneft  now,  and  difhoneft  no  more,"  for- 
gets fome  of  the  moft  obvious  and  charaderiftic  features  of  the 
human  mind.  If  he  efcape  fufpicion  in  the  firft  inftance,  he  will 
•         3  G  only 


378  OF   THE   TENDENCY    OF    VIRTUE. 

TH AP  ^ri    ^^^^  difgrace  himfelf  more  foully  in  the  fecond  :  if  the  remorfe 
*^       "       ^    and  degradation  of  fpirit  arifing  from  one  bafe  adlion  could  pe- 

rifh,  they  would  be  fixed  and  invigorated  by  other  bafe  a<5tions 

growing  out  of  the  firft. 


ERRATA. 

VOL.    I. 

Page  131,  line  15, — after  "quantity  of  wrong,"  read  "  S'ld  to  invent  a  fpecles  of  cor- 
poral punlfhment  or  reftraint,  ' 
P.  181,  note,  1.  lilt., — -for  "  of  former  times'*  rcrt// "  of  the  ancient  model." 
P.  182, — read  the  fule  note  "from  the  unity  of  truth"  as  belonging  to  the  top  of  the  page. 
P.  182,  1.  3  from  the  bottom, — for  "purfue"   read  "  prefs." 

,   I.  2  from  the  bottom, — for  "  over  whom  he  prefided"  read  "  among  whora  he 
refided."  ' 

P.   185,   186,   187,   1S8,   189,  running  t:tle,-/or  "OF  OBEDIENCE"  read  "OF 

FORMS  OF  GOVERNMENT." 
P.  260,.  fide  note, — read  "juflice." 
P.  324,  1.  4, — read  "  automatifm." 
P.  330,  fide  note, — for  "Rapidity"  rfaJ"  rapidity." 
P.  362,  I.  15, — for  "exceptions"  read  "exception." 

VOL.      IL 

P.  403,  fide  note, — for  "  Difiike"  read  "  diflike." 

P.  427,  fide  note, — for  "defire"  read  "dcfires." 

P.  471,  1.  4, /or  "  no  reflexion"  read  "  to  reflexion." 

P.  503,  note,  1.  ult., — for  "volume"  read  "work." 

P.  511,  I.   5  from  the  bottom, — for  "  tranfaftion"  read  "  tranfaftions" 

P.  551,  1.  3  from  the  bottom,— /or  "  underftand  it  ;"  read  "  underftand  it," 

P.   564,  note,— /or  "Book  IV,  Chap.  Vll"  read  "  Book  IV,  Cliap.  VI." 

P.  645,  fide  note, — for  "of  libel:"  read  "of  libel." 

P.   673,  fide  note, — read  "  Rcafons  by  which  they  are  vindicated." 

P.  680,  1.  ult., — for  "  necefiity."  read  "  neceffity," 

P.  706,  1.  14, — for  "look"  read  "voice." 

P.  730,  1.  3  from  the  bottom, — for  "  domeftic"  read  "  municipal." 

P.  774,  fide  note, — fir  "man  :"  read  "man." 

P.  791,  fide  note, — for  "mean"  read  "means." 

P.  807,  fide  note, — after  "  vice"  read  "  generating.'' 

P.   808,  fide  note, — for  "  The"  read  "  the" 

P.  811,  fide  note, — r^a;/ "and  the  misfortunes  of-war." 

P.  837,  fide  note, — read  "  or  from  vanity." 

P.  852,  1.  10, — for  "'be  known"  read  "  will  be  known.  " 

P.   878,  1.  3  from  the  bottom,— /or  "operation"  read  "  operations" 

P.  883,  fide  note,— /^r  "conduft"  read  "Condud" 


DIRECTION  TO  THE  BINDER. 
The  volumes  are  to  be  divided  at  page  3  79  in  fignature  3  C. 
The  tables  of  contents  to  precede  the  refpedlve  volumes. 


^m0 


'■■'fi^ 


*^     A' 


^^'v 

■^t^
