CD 

O 

■CO 

CD 


OBSERVATIONS 


ON 


MAN 


HIS    FRAiME,    HIS    DUTY,    AND   HIS 
EXPECTATIONS. 


IN  TWO  PARTS. 


PART      THE      first: 


CONTAINING 


OBSERVATIONS     ON      THE 


FRAME  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY  AND  MIND, 


AND    ON     THEIR 


MUTUAL    CONNECTIONS    AND    INFLUENCES. 


By    DAVID    HARTLEY,   M.  A. 


'I    EDITION. 


LONDON: 

FIRST  PRINTED  IN  MDCCXLl^- 

Reprinted  for 

J.  JOHNSON,  St.  PAUL'S  CHURCIl-YARD,  BY  W.  EYRtS,  H" 

WAR  KINGTON. 

M  D  C  C  C  I. 


THE 


PREFACE. 


1  HE  work  here  offered  to  the  public  con- 
fifts  of  papers  written  at  different  times,  but 
taking  their  rife  from  the  following  occafion. 

About  eighteen  years  ago  I_was  informed, 
that  the  Rev.  Ml.^Gax,  then  living,  afferted 
the  poflibility  of  deducing  all  our  intelledlual 
pleafures  and  pains  from  alfociation.  This 
put  me  upon  conlidering  the  power  of  affoci- 
ation.  7Mr.  Gay  publiflied,  his  fentiments 
on  this  matter,  about  the  fame  time,  in  a 
Diifertation  on  the  fundamental  Principle  of 
Virtue,  prefixed  to  Mr.  Archdeacon  Law's 
Tranflation  of  Archbifhop  King's  Origin  of 
Evil. 

From  inquiring  into  the  power  of  affo- 
ciation  I  was  led  to  examine  both  its  con- 
fequences,  in  refped:  of  morality  and  religion, 
and  its  phyfical  caufe.  By  degrees  many  dif- 
quifitions  foreign  to  the  dodrine  of  affocia- 
tion,  or  at  lead  not  immediately  conne<5ted 
with  it,  intermixed  themfelves.  I  have  here 
put  together  all   my  feparate   papers  on   thefe 

A  2  fubjeds,. 


iv  P  R  F  F  A  C  E. 

fubjccfls,  digcflini;  thcin  in  fuch  order  as  they 
ffc-HAcd  jvaturally  to  ruggeft  ;  and  adding  fuch 
things  as  were  ncccllliry  to  make  the  whole 
appear  more  complete  and  fyftematical. 
''  I  think,  however,  that  I  cannot  be  called 
a  fyftcm-niakcr,  fince  I  did  not  firit  form  a 
fyllem,  and  then  fuit  the  fadts  to  it,  but  was 
carried  on  by  a  train  of  thoughts  from  one 
thing  to  another,  frequently  without  any 
exprcfs  defign,  or  even  any  previous  fufpicion 
of  the  confequences  that  might  arife.  And 
this  was  moft  remarkably  the  cafe,  in  refpedt 
of  the  dodrine  of  neccjjity  ;  for  I  was  not  at 
all  aware,  that  it  followed  from  that  of  alfo- 
ciation,  for  feveral  years  after  I  had  begun 
my  inquiries  ;  nor  did  I  admit  it  at  lafl  with- 
out the  greateft  reludlance.  " 

There  are  two  things  in  thefe  papers, 
which  require  a  particular  apology.  Firft, 
The  imperfe(fl  flate  in  which  they  are  pre- 
fented  to  the  reader.  Secondly,  The  great 
freedom  which  I  have  ufed  in  refpedt  of  all 
orders  of  men  in  the  conclufion  of  the  fecond 
part. 

As  to  the  firftj'vlf  the  reader  will  be  fo 
"^  favourable  to  me  as  to  expedl  nothing  more 
than  hints  and  conjectures  in  difficult  and 
obfcure  matters,  and  a  fliort  detail  of  the 
principal  rcafons  and  evidences  in  thofe  that 
are  clear,  I  hope  he  will  not  be  much  dif- 
appointed.  However,  be  this  as  it  will,  I 
have  in  one  part  or  other  of  thefe  papers 
alleged  all  that  I  know  material,  in  fupport 
-of  my  fyftem  -,  and  therefore  am  now  deiirous 

to 


PREFACE.  V 

to   recommend    it    to    the    confideration    of 
others. 

I  have  tried  to  reconcile  fuch  inconfift- 
encies,  real  or  apparent,  and  to  cut  ofF  fuch 
repetitions  and  redundancies,  as  have  arifen 
from  my  writing  the  feparate  parts  of  this 
work  at  different  times,  and  in  different 
lituations  of  mind.  But  I  have  ftill  need  of 
great  indulgence  from  the  reader  on  thefe  and 
other  accounts.  ) 

As  to  the  fecond  thing  -,  I  can  truly  fay, 
that  my  free  and  unreferved  manner  of  fpeak- 
ing  has  fiowed  from  the  fincerity  and  earneft- 
nefs  of  my  heart.  But  I  will  not  undertake 
to  juftify  all  that  I  have  faid.  Some  things 
may  be  too  haftv  and  cenforious  ;  or,  how- 
ever, be  unbecoming  my  place  and  flation. 
I  heartily  wifh,  that  I  could  have  obferved 
the  true  medium.  For,  want  of  candour  is 
not  lefs  an  offence  againfl  the  gofpel  of 
Chrift,  than  falfe  fhame,  and  want  of  courage 
in  his  caufe. 

Some  perfons  may  perhaps  think,  that  I 
ought  not  to  have  delivered  my  opinions  fo 
freely  and  openly,  concerning  the  neceifity  of 
human  acfrions,  and  the  ultimate  happlnefs  of 
all  mankind  ;  but  have  left  the  reader  to 
deduce  thefe  confequences,  or  not,  as  Ihould 
appear  mofl:  reafonable  to  him.  But  this 
would,  in  my  opinion,  have  been  a  dilin- 
genuous  procedure.  Befides,  thefe  tenets 
appear  to  me  not  only  innocent,  but  even 
highly  conducive  to  the  promotion  of  piety 
and    virtue    amongfl     mankind.       However, 

A   3  that 


vi  PRE  F  A  C  E. 

that  no  one  may  niHapprchend  nie  to  his  owa 
hurt,  I  will  here  make  two  remarks  hy  way 
ot"  anticipation. 

Firll,  then,  I_  no  where  deny  pradical 
free-will,  or  that  voluntary  power  over  our 
affections  and  anions,  by  which  we  deliberate, 
fufpcnd,  and  choofc,  and  which  makes  ari 
clllntial  part  of  our  ideas  of  virtue  and  vice, 
reward  and  punilhment  ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, eflahlilli  it  (if  fo  plain  a  thing  will 
admit  of  being  farther  eftablifhed)  by  {hew- 
ing in  what  manner  it  refults  from  the  frame 
of  our  natures. 

Secondly,  I  do  n^oil  firmly  believe,  upon 
the  authority  of  the  fcriptures,  that  the 
future  punilhment  of  the  wicked  will  be 
exceedingly  great  both  in  degree  and  duration, 
/.  e.  infinite  and  eternal,  in  that  real  pradical 
fenfe  to  which  alone  our  conceptions  extend. 
And  were  I  able  to  urge  any  thing  upon  a' 
profane  carelefs  world,  which  might  convince 
them  of- the  infinite  hazard  to  which  they 
expofe  themfelves,  I  would  not  fail  to  do  it, 
as  the  reader  may  judge  even  from  thofe 
paifages  for  which  I  have  above  apologized. 

December,   1748. 


THE 


THE 


CONTENTS 


OF      THE 


FIRST    PART. 


INTRODUCTION. 
Definitions  J  i — 4.    DiJiribuHon  of  the  firji  party  Page  4. 

CHAP.     I. 

Of  the  GENERAL  Laws,  according  to  which 
the  Sensations  and  Motions  are  per- 
formed, and  our  Ideas  generated. 

'The  doifrines  of  vibrations  and  affociation  propofedy  5. 
"Their  mutual  connexion y  6. 

SECT.     I. 

Of  the  Dofbrine  of  Vibrations,    and    its    Ufe   for 
explaining  the  Senfations. 

General  evidences  for  the  dependence  of  fenfation  and 
mo  I  ion  on  the  brainy  7,  8.  General  evidences  for  the 
dependence  of  ideas  on  the  brainy  8,  9.  Infia7ices  fhewing 
that  fenfations  remain  in  the  mind  for  a  froort  time  after 
the  fenfible  obje5ls  are  removed y  9 — 11,  The  infinitefi- 
mal  medullary  particles  vibrate  during  fenfation,  11,  12. 
Of  the  Mthery   13 — 16.     Of  the  uniformity y  continuity y 

A  4  foftnefsy 


viii  CONTliNlS    OF    THE 

Joftnefs  and  a^'ive  powers  of  the  medullary  Jubflntice, 
1 6 — -2 1.  Of  the  manner  in  which  vibrations  are 
communicaled  to  the  whole  medullary  fubflancCy  i\ — 25. 
Prefumpions  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  of  vibrations, 
25 — JO.  Corollaries  from  this  do£irinet  30 — 23' 
Jilaterialily  of  the  j'oul  no  confequcnce  of  ity  33,  34. 
Phenomena  of  fenfble  pleaj'ure  and  pain  agreeable  to  the 
dot'trine  of  vibrations ^  34 — 44.  Ph.cnomena  of  Jleep 
agreeable  to  the  dodiritte  of  vibrations,  45  —  55. 

SECT.     II. 

Of  Ideas,  their  Generation  and  Afibciations,  and  of 
the  Agreement  of  the  Dodrinc  of  Vibrati(Jns  with 
the  Phenomena  of  Ideas, 

Of  the  generation- of  the  ideas  of fenjation,  56 — 58. 
'The  repetition  of  Jenfory  vibrations  generates  a  difpofition 
to  correfponding  vibratiuncles  or  miniature  vibrations, 
<j8 — 64.  Of  the  pozver  of  raifing  ideas  by  ajfociation 
in  the  fimplcfl  caje,  65—67.  Of  the  power  of  raijtng 
miniature  vibrations  by  affocialion  in  the  fimplefi  caje, 
67 — 72.  Of  the  formation  of  complex  ideas  by  ajfocia- 
tion, 73— '79-  Of  the  formation  of  complex  miniature 
vibrations  by  ajfociation,  79,  80.  The  complex  vibra- 
tions lafi -mentioned  -may  be  jo  exalted  in  jome  cajes,  as 
to  be  no  longer  jnimaiures,  but  equal  in  ftrength  to 
jenj^jry  vibrations,  bo — 84. 

SECT.     111. 

Of  mufcular  Motion,  and  its  two  Kinds,  automatic 
and  voluntary  ;  and  of  the  Ufe  of  the  Doftrines 
of  Vibrations  and  Aflociation,  for  explaining  thefe 
refpedlively. 

//  is  probable^  that  mujcular  motion  is  performed  by 
the  fame  general  means  as  jenjation,  and  the  perception 
df  ideas,  ^5 — 88.     Phccnomena  of  mujcular  contratlion 

agreeable 


FIRST    PART.  ix 

agreeable  to  the  dotlrine  of  vibrations ^  88 — 90.  Pro- 
'penfity  of  ihe  mujeles  to  alternate  contrarian  and  relaxa- 
tion a<{reeahle  to  the  do5irine  of  vibrations,  90,  91. 
^he  origin  of  motory  vibrations ^  91  —  94.  The  general 
method  of  explaining  the  automatic  motions  by  the  doc- 
trine of  vibrations,  94 — 100.  The  generation  and 
eijfociation  of  motory  vibratiuncleSy  10 1,  102.'  The 
general  method  of  explaining  the  voluntary  and  Jemivo- 
luntary  motions,  103 — !I2.  Of  the  manner  in  which 
the  endeavour  to  obtain  pleafure,  and  remove  ^ain,  is 
generated,  1 1 2 —  1 1 4. 

CHAP.     II. 

Containing  the  Application  of  the  Doc- 
trines of  Vibrations  and  Association 
to  each  of  the  Sensations  and  Motions 
in  particular. 

^  S  E  C  T.     I. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 

Of  the  Jeveral  kinds  of  feeling,  and  the  general  caujes 
of  the  different  degrees  of  exquifitenejs  in  this  fenje,  t  i  5 
— 117.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  fenjations  of  heat  and 
cold  are  agreeable  to  the  docfrine  of  vibrations,  118 — 
125.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  phenomena  of  wottnds, 
burns,  bruijes,  lacerations,  inflammations,  and  ulcers^ 
arc  agreeable  to  the  do 5irine  of  vibrations,  126,  127. 
An  inqtiiry  how  far  the  fh<enQmena  of  itching  and  titil- 
lation  are  agreeable  to  the  doElrine  of  vibrations,  128 
^- 1 30.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  fenjations  attending 
preffure  and  mujcular  contraction  are  agreeable  to  the 
do5frine  of  vibrations,  130,  131.  An  inquiry  hozv  far 
ihe  phenomena  of  numbneffcs,  and^  paralytical  injenfi- 
bilities,  are  agreeable  to  the  do^rine-..,  of  vibrations,  131 
•—134.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  phisnomena  of  ve- 
nomous 


X  COSITENTS    OI'    TEIE 

Homtus  bite's  and  Jlings  art  agreeable  to  the  doElrine  of 
vibrations^  IJ4— ij6.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  tan- 
gibU  qualities  of  bodies  admit  of  an  explanation  ayjee- 
able  to  the  dotlrlne  of  vibrations ^  136 — \yi.  Of  the 
manner  in  which  we  are  enabled  to  judge  of  the /eat  of 
imprejficns  made  on  the  external  Jnrface  of  our  bcdieSj 
ijS — 1 40.  Of  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  we 
are  enabled  to  judge  of  the  feat  of  internal  pains y  140 — 
142.  Of  the  manner -and  degf-ee  in  which  the  pleafures 
and  pains  of  feeling  contribute^  according  to  the  do^rine 
of  affociatiou^  to  the  formation  of  our  intelkolual  plea- 
fures and  pains ^  143 — 145.  Of  the  ideas  generated 
by  tangible  impreffionSy  145  —  147.  Of  the  automatic 
motions  which  arife  from  tangible  impreJfionSj  147  — 
149.  Of  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  theje  autO' 
matic  motions  are  influenced  by  voluntary  and  Jemivolun- 
tary  powers,   149,  150. 

SECT.     II. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafte. 

Of  the  extent  of  the  organ  of  tafle^  and  the  different 
powers  lodged  in  the  different  parts  of  it,  151,  152. 
An  inquiry  how  far  the  ph.cnomeua  of  tajiesy  and  their 
Jpeciftc  differences^  are  agreeable  to  the  doSIrine  of  vibra- 
tions^ 153 — 157.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  fever  al  fen- 
fations  which  affe5l  the  ftcmach  and  bowels^  are  agree- 
able to  the  doolrine  of  vibrations y  157 — 159.  An  in- 
quiry how  far  the  phtenomena  of  hunger  are  agreeable  to 
the  doclrine  of  vibrations y  159 — 161.  An  inquiry  how 
far  the  phd'nomena  of  thirfi  are  agreeable  to  the  do^rine 
of  vibrations y  161.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  changes, 
generally  made  in  the  tafiey  in  paffing  from  infancy  to  old 
a^e,  are  agreeable  to  the  doSirines  of  vibrationSy  and 
affociationy  162 — 164.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  long- 
ings of  pregnant  wor.icn  are  agreeable  to  the  doSirines 
of  vibrations  and  affociafioKy  164 — 166.  Of  the  man- 
ner and  degree  in  which  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  tafle 

contribute. 


FIRST     PART.  >i 

contrihtiiei  according  to  the  doSlrine  of  affhciatioHy  to  th€ 
formation  of  our  intelle^ual  fleajures  and  fains y    166, 

167.  Of  the  ideas  generated  by  the  fever  at  lajfesy   ib~j, 

168.  Of  the  automatic  motions  which  arij'e  from  ihe 
imprejfions  made  on  the  organ  of  tafle^  169—176.  Of 
ihe  manner  and  degree  in  which  theje  automatic  motions 
are  influenced  hy  voluntary  and  Jemivoluntary  powers^ 
176—179. 

SECT.     III. 
Of  the  Senfe  of  Smell. 

Of  the  extent  and  powers  of  the  organ  of  fmelly   180, 
181.      ^n  inquiry  how  far  the  general  phenomena  of 
fmell  are  agreeable  to  the  dc^rine  of  vibrations^   181 — 
184.      An  inquiry   how  far   the  Jpecific   differences   of 
odours  are  agreeable  to  the  do5irines  of  vibrations,   1 84, 
Of  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  pie  of  ant  and  un- 
pleafant  odours  contribute.,    according  to  the  do£lrine  of 
affociation,  to  the  formation  of  our  inielle^lual  pieafures 
and  pains,  185,  186.     Of  the  ideas  generated  by  the 
feveral    odours,    186,    187.       Of  the    automatic   mo- 
tions which  ar'ife  from  the  imprefjions  made  on  the  organ 
cf  fmell,    187 — 190.      Of  the   manner  and   degree   in 
which  thefe  automatic  motions  are  influenced  by  voluntary 
and feniivohntary  powers,   1 90. 

SECT.     IV. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight. 

Of  the  immediate  organ  of  fight,  and  its  powers,  191, 
192.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  phenomena  of  colours, 
are  agreeable  to  the  doSirine  of  vibrations,  192— --197. 
An  inquiry  how  far  flafloes  of  light  from  fir okes  in  the 
eye,  darkfpots,  and  giddinefs,  are  agreeable  to  the  doc- 
trine of  vibrations,  198 — 200.  An  inquiry  how  far 
the  judgments  made  by  fight,  concerning  magnitude, 
difiance,   motion,  figure,  and  pofition,    are  agreeable  to 

the 


xii  CONTENTS    OF    TlllL 

the  do^frine  of  affbciadcttt  aoo — 204.  yfn  inquiry 
boiv  far  the  phenomena  of  ftngle  and  double  vifion  are 
agreeable  to  the  do£Irine  of  ajfociatiouy  204 — 207.  Of 
the  manner  and  degree  in  which  agreeable  and  d.fiyree- 
able  imprej/tons  made  on  the  eye,  comribuley  according 
to  the  dottrine  of  ajfocia/ion,  to  /he  formation  of  our 
inlelle^ual  pleafures  and  pains,  207 — 209.  Of  the 
ideas  generated  by  vifible  impreffions,  209 — 215.  Of 
the  automatic  motions  which  are  '  excited  by  imprcffions 
made  on  the  eye,  215 — ^20.  Of  the  manner  and 
degree  in  which  thefe  automatic  motions  are  influenced  by 
voluntary  nndfemiioluntary  poivers,  2  20 —  222. 

SECT.     V. 

Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing. 

Of  the  iviimcdiate  organ  of  bearing,  and  the  general 
tifes  of  the  fever al  parts  of  the  external  and  internal 
ear,  223 — 225.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  phenomena 
of  mufical  and  other  inarticulate  founds  are  agreeable 
to  the  do£lrine  of  vibrations,  225 — 227.  An  inquiry 
bow  far  the  judgments,  which  we  make  concerning  the 
diflance  and  pofiiion  of  the  founding  body,  are  agreeable 
to  the  docirine  of  affociation,  ii"],  228.  An  inquiry 
how  far  the  power  of  diflinguifhing  articulate  founds 
depends  upon  affociation,  228 — 231.  'The  dotJrine  of 
founds  illuflrates  and  favours  that  of  the  vibrations  of 
the  fmall  meduVary  particles,  231 — 233.  Of  the 
manner  and  degree  in  which  agreeable  and  difagreeable 
founds  contribute,  according  to  the  do6irine  of  affocia- 
tion, to  the  formation  of  our  intelleclual  pleafures  and 
pains,  233,  234.  Of  the  ideas  generated  by  audible 
impreffions,  234 — 237.  Of  the  automatic  motions 
excited  by  impreffions  made  on  the  ear,  237,  238. 
Of  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  theje  automatic 
motions  are  influenced  by  voluntary  and  femivoluntary 
powers,  238. 

SECT. 


FIRST    PART.  xiii 

SECT.     VI. 

^    Of  the  Defires  of  the  Sexes  towards  each  other.      X 

An  inquiry  how  far  the  defires  of  the /exes  towards 
each  other  are  of  a  fa^itious  nature,  and  agreeable  to 
the  theory  of  thefe  papers,  239 — 242. 

SECT.     VII. 

Of  other  Motions,  automatic  and  voluntary,  not  con- 
fidered  in  the  foregoing  Seflions  of  this  Chapter. 

An  inquiry  hozv  far  the  motions  of  the  hearty,  ordi- 
nary and  extraordinary,  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing 
theory,  243 — 248.  An  inquiry  how  far  the  aSlion  of 
rejpiration,  with  thofe  of  fighing,  coughing^  i^c,  are 
agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  248—254.  An  in- 
quiry how  far  conmtlfive  motions  are  agreeable  to  the 
foregoing  theory,  254,  255.  An  inquiry  how  far  the 
anions  of  walking,  handling,  and  fpeaking,  are  agree- 
able to  the  foregoing  theory,  2^6 — 263. 

SECT.     VIII. 

Of  the  Relation  which  the  foregoing  Theory  bears 
to  the  Art  of  Phyfic. 

'The  art  of  phyftc  affords  many  proper  tefls  of  the 
doSirines  of  vibrations  and  ajfociation ;  and  may  re- 
ceive confiderable  improvement  from  them,  if  they  he 
true,  264 — 267. 

CHAP.     III. 

Containing  a  particular  Application  of 
the  foregoing  Theory  to  the  Pheno- 
mena of  Ideas,  or  of  Understanding, 
Affection,  Memory,  and  Imagina- 
tion. SECT. 


xlvr  CONTENTS    OF    THE 

S  K  C  T.     I. 

or  Words,  and  t!ie  Kieas  aHbciatetl  with  thein. 

JTords  ami  fbrnfcs  mujl  excite  ideas  in  us  by  ojfo- 
iiation  \  and  they  excite  idens  in  its  by  no  other 
means,  26S  —  270.  0/  the  manner  in  'ujhich  ideas 
are  djfociaied  wiib  words ^  170 — 277.  Con/eqttences  of 
this  ajfociaticn  of  ideas  with  words ^  277 — 289.  Of 
the  nature  of  charatlcrs  intended  to  reprefent  obje£Js 
and  ideas  immediately,  and  without  the  intervention  of 
words i  289,  290.  Of  the  uje  of  the  foregoing  theory 
for  explaining  the  nature  of  figurative  words  and 
pbra/eSy  and  of  analogy,  291  —  297.  Of  the  nfe  of 
the  foregoing  theory  for  explaining  the  languages  and 
wet  bed  of  writing  of  the  firfi  ages  of  the  world,  icy^ 
— 3 1 5.  Of  the  general  nature  of  a  philcfophical  lan- 
guage y  with  fhori  hints  concerning  the  methods  in 
which  one  might  be  conflruoled,  315 — 318.  /In 
illuflration  and  confirmation  of  the  general  doctrine  of 
ajfcciation,  taken  from  the  particular  ajfociations  which 
take  place  in  re/pec}  of  language,  3  i  8 — 3  2 1 .  Illuftrations 
from  mufical founds,  colours,  and  tafies,   321 — 323. 

SECT.     II. 
Of  Propofiiions,  and  the  Nature  of  Affent. 

Of  the  nature  of  r.ffent  and  diffent,  and  the  caufes 
from  which  they  arife,  324 — 334.  Rules  for  the 
ajcertainment  of  truth,  and  advancement  of  knowledie, 
drawn  from  the  mathematical  methods  of  confidering 
quantity,  22)S — ZSZ-  -^  general  applicalian  of  the 
theory  of  this  and  the  foregoing  feclion  to  the  feveral 
brayiches  offciencCy  2iiiZ — 3^7' 

SECT.     HI. 

Of  the  Affedions  in  "eneral. 


to' 


Of  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  paffions  in  general, 
368-373.  SECT. 


FIRST     PART.  xr 

SECT.     IV. 

Of  Memory. 

jln  inquiry  hoiv  far  the  phauomena  of  'memory  are 
agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory^  374 — 3S2. 

S  E  C  T.     V. 

Of  Imagination,  Reveries,  and  Dreams. 

An  inquiry  hozv  far  the  phenomena  of  imagination, 
reveries,  and  dreams,  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing 
theory,  383—389. 

SECT.     VI. 

Of  Imperfedlions  in  the  rational  Faculty. 

An  inquiry  how  far  deviations  from  found  reafon, 
and  alienations  of  the  mind,  are  agreeable  to  the  fore- 
going theory,  390 — 403. 

SECT.     VII. 

Of  the  intelleflual  Faculties  of  Brutes. 

An  inquiry  how  far  the  inferiority  of  brutes  to  man- 
kind,    in    intellectual    capacities,    is   agreeable   to   thr 
foregoing  theory,  404 — 41^. 

CHAP.     IV. 

Of  the  SIX    Classes    of  intellectual 
Pleasures  and  Pains. 

S  E  C  T.     I. 

Of  the  Pleafures  and  Pains  of  Imagination, 

An  inqtdry  hozv  far  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  imagi- 
nation are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  418 — 442. 

SECT. 


xvi  CONTENTS.    &c. 

SECT.     II. 

Of  the  Plfahires  and  Pains  of  Ambition. 

An  in(fuir\  hozv  far  I  he  plc^Jnres  and  pains  of  ambition 
are  a^ceable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  443 — 437. 

SECT.     III. 

Of  the  I'leafures  and  Pains  of  Sclf-intereft. 

An  inquire  how  far  the  pleajnres  and  pains  of  felf- 
interejl  are  agreeable"  to  the  foregoing  theory,  458 — 470. 

S  E  C  T.     IV. 

Of  the  Pleafurcs  and  Pains  of  Sympathy. 

An  inquire  how  far  the  plea  fur  es  and  pains  of  fympa- 
ihy  are  agieeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  471 — 4S5. 

SECT.     V. 

Of  the  Pleafures  and  Pains  of  Theopathy. 

An  inquiry  hoiv  far  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  theopja- _ 
thy  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  486 — 492. 

S  E  C  T.     VI. 

Of  the  Pleafures  and  Pains  of  the  moral  Senfe. 

An  inquiry  hozv  far  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  the 
moral  fenfe  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,   493 

—499- 

CONCLUSION: 

Containing  feme  remarks  on  the  mechanifm  of  the 
human  mind,  500 — 512. 

OBSER- 


O  B  S  K  R  V  A  T  I  O  N  S 


ON 


M   A,N,      &"€. 


In      two      parts. 


PART     I. 


Containing  Observations  on  the  Frame  of  the 
Human  Body  and  Mind,  and  on  their  mutual 
Connections  ^;/ir/ Influences. 


INTRODUCTION. 

jVIaN  coniifts  of  two  parts,  body  and  mind. 

The  firil  is  fubjefted  to  our  fenfes  and  inquiries, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  other  parts  of  the  exter- 
nal material  world. 

The  laft  is  that  fubftance,  agent,  principle,  &c. 
to  'which  Vv'e  refer  the  fenfations,  ideas,  pleafures, 
pains,  and  voluntary  motions. 

Senfations  are  thofe  internal  feelings  of  the  mind, 
which  iiriie  from  the  impreffions  made  by  external 
objefts  upon  the  feveral  parts  of  our  bodies. 

Vol.  I.  B  All 


ii  INTRODUCTION. 

All  our  otlier  internal  feelings  may  be  called  ideas. 
Some  of  tliclc  appear  to  (pring  up  in  the  mind  of 
themlelves,  fome  arc  liiggelUd  by  words,  others 
arile  in  other  ways.  Many  writers  comprehend 
fnifdtions  under  iJea  j  but  I  every  where  uie  thclc 
words  in  the  lenfes  here  afcribed  to  them. 

The  ideas  which  refemble  fenfations,  are  called 
iJetis  of  fen  fatten  :  all  the  refl  may  therefore  be  called 
intelleclual  ideas. 

It  will  appear  in  the  courfc  of  thefe  obfervations, 
that  the  ideas  of fenfation  are  the  elements  of  which 
all  the  reft  are  compounded.  Hence  ideas  of  fenfa- 
tion may  be  termed  //w/)/tf,  intelledual  ones  complex. 

The  p/eafnres  and  pains  are  comprehended  under 
the  fenlations  and  ideas,  as  thefe  are  explained  above. 
For  all  our  pleafurcs  and  pains  are  internal  feelings, 
and,  converfely,  all  our  internal  feelings  feem  to  be 
attended  with  fome  degree  either  of  pleafure  ox  pain. 
However,  I  Ihall,  for  the  mofl  part,  give  the  names 
of  pleafure  and  pain  only  to  fuch  degrees  as  are 
confiderable ;  referring  all  low,  evanefcent  ones  to 
the  head  oi  mere  fenfations  and  ideas. 

The  pleafures  and  pains  may  be  ranged  under 
feven  general  clafles,  viz. 

1.  Senfation  ; 

2.  Imagination  ; 

3.  Ambition  ; 

4.  Self-intereft ; 

5.  Sympathy; 

6.  Thcopathy ;  and, 

7.  The  moral  fenfe  ;  according  as  they  ari'fc 
from, 

1.  The  impreflions  made  on  the  external  fenfes ; 

2.  Natural  or  artificial  beauty  or  deformity  ; 

3.  The  opinions  of  others  concerning  us ; 

4.  Our  polTeffion  or  want  of  the  means  of  hap- 
pinefs,  and  fecurity  from,  or  fubjedion  to,  the 
hazards  of  mifery ; 

5-  The 


INTRODUCTION.  iii 

5.  The  pleafures  and  pains  of  our  fellow-crea- 
tures ; 

6.  The  afFedions  excited  in  us  bv  the  contem- 
plation of  the  Deity  ;  or, 

7.  Moral  beauty  and  deformity. 

The  human  mind  may  alfo  be  confidered  as  in- 
dued with  the  faculties  of  memor^^  imagimJion  or 
fancy,  nnckrjljmdingy  a£e£Uony  and  zvilL, 

Memory  is  that  faculty,  by  which  traces  of  fenfa- 
tions  and  ideas  recur,  or  are  recalled,  in  the  fame 
order  and  proportion,  accurately  or  nearly,  as  they 
were  once  adually  prefented. 

When  ideas,  and  trains  of  ideas,  occur,  or  are 
called  up,  in  a  vivid  manner,  and  without  regard  to 
the  order  of  former  adual  imprefTions  and  percep- 
tions, this  is  faid  to  be  done  by  the  power  of  imagi- 
naiion  ox  fancy. 

The  imderjlanding  is  that  faculty,  by  which  we 
contemplate  mere  fenfations  and  ideas,  purfue  truth, 
and  affent  to,  or  dilTent  from,  propoiitions. 

The  affe£iions  have  the  pleafures  and  pains  for 
their  objeds ;  as  the  widerjlanding  has  the  mere 
fenfations  and  ideas.  By  the  afFedions  we  are  ex- 
cited to  purfue  happinefs,  and  all  its  means,  fly 
from  mifery,  and  all  its  apparent  caufes.  ^-^ 

The  will  is  that  fhate  of  mind,  which  is  imme- 
diately previous  to,  and  caufes,  thofe  exprefs  ads  of 
memory,  fancy,  and  bodily  motion,  which  are 
termed  voluntary. 

The  motions  of  the  body  are  of  two  kinds,  automa- 
tic and  voluntary.  The  automatic  motions  are  thofe 
which  arile  from  the  mechanifm  of  the  body  in  an  evi- 
dent manner.  They  are  called  automatic,  from  their 
refemblance  to  the  motions  of  automata,  or  ma- 
chines, whofe  principle  of  motion  is  within  themfelves. 
Of  this  kind  are  the  motion  of  the  heart,  and  pcri- 
ftaltic  motion  of  the  bowels.  ,The  voluntary  motions 
are  thofe  which  arife  from  ideas  and  afFedions,  and 

B  2  which 


iv  INTRODUCTION. 

which  therefore  arc  referred  to  tlic  mind;  the  imme- 
diately preceding  (late  ot  the  mind,  or  of  tlie  ideas 
and  at1lolions»  being  termeil  tc///,  as  noted  in  tlie 
lafl  article.  Such  are  the  a(^>ions  of  walking,  iiand- 
ling,  fpeaking,  t^^cc.  when  attended  to,  and  per- 
formed with  an  exprefs  delign. 

Tills  may  fcrvc  as  a  fliort  account  of  the  chief 
fubjeds  confidered  in  the  firft  part  of  thefe  ohjcr- 
vntions.  Thefe  fubjeds  are  fo  much  involved  in 
each  other,  that  it  is  difhcult,  or  even  impoflible,  to 
begin  any  where  upon  clear  ground,  or  fo  as  to  pro- 
ceed entirely  from  the  Data  to  the  ^fa-fita,  from 
things  known  to  fuch  as  are  unknown.  I  will  en- 
deavour it  as  much  as  I  can,  and  for  that  purpofe 
lliall  obferve  the  following  order. 

Firjfy  1  (hall  lay  down  the  general  laws,  accord- 
ing to  which  the  ienfations  and  motions  arc  per- 
formed, and  our  ideas  generated. 

6VroW/v,  I  Ihall  confider  each  of  the- fenfations 
and  motions  in  particular,  and  inquire  how  far  the 
phicnomena  of  each  illuftrate,  and  are  illuflrated  by, 
the  foregoing  general  laws. 

Thirdly^  1  fhall  proceed  in  like  manner  to  the  par- 
ticular phenomena  of  ideas,  or  of  undcrilanding, 
aficction,  memory,  and  imagination;  aj[->plying  to 
them  what  has  been  before  delivered. 

Lajlly,  I  lliall  endeavour  to  give  a  particular 
hiftory  and  analylls  of  the  fix  dalles  of  intelledual 
pleafures  and  pains,  viz.  thofe  of  imagination,  am- 
bition, felf-intereft,  lympathy,  thcopathy,  and  the 
moral  i*tn{t. 


Ol^ 


t 


OF     THE 

DOCTRINES    OF    VIBRATIONS 


AND 


ASSOCIATION  IN  GENERAL. 


CHAP.    I. 

Of  the  General  Laws  according  to  which  the  Sen- 
sations and  Motions  are  perfqrmedy  and  our 
Ideas  generated. 


My  chief  defign  in  the  following  chapter,  is, 
briefly,  to  explain,  eftablilli,  and  apply  the  doctrines 
of  vibrations  and  ajjbciation.  The  firft  of  thefe 
doctrines  is  taken  from  the  hints  concerning  the  per- 
formance of  fenfation  and  motion,  which  Sir  Ifaac 
Nezvton  has  given  at  the  end  of  his  Principia,  and 
in  the  qnejiions  annexed  to  his  Optics  ;  the  laft,  from, 
what  Mr.  Locke^  and  other  ingenious  perfons  fince 
his  time  have  delivered  concerning  the  influence  of 
ajjociation  over  our  opinions  and  affediions,  and  its 
ufe  in  explaining  thofe  things  in  an  accurate  and 
precife  way,  which  are  commonly  referred  to  the 
power  of  habit  and  cuftom,  in  a  general  and  in- 
determinate one. 

B  3  .The 


6  Of  the  DoHrittes  of  Vibrations. 

The  do(5lrIne  of  vihratiotis  may  appear  at  firfl: 
fight  to  have  no  connc(5Vion  with  that  of  ajjociation  \ 
however,  if  thcfe  doiflrines  be  founil  in  fatft  to  con- 
tain the  laws  of  the  bodily  and  mental  powers  re- 
fpedively,  they  mufl:  be  related  to  each  other,  fincc 
the  body  and  m"nd  are.  One  may  expect  that  vi- 
hrtilions  Ihould  inter  affocintion  as  their  efleft,  and 
ajjociation  point  to  vihriitions  as  Its  caufc.  1  will 
endeavour,  in  the  prefent  chapter,  to  trace  out  this 
mutual  relation. 

The  proper  method  of  philolophizing  feems  to 
be,  to  difcover  and  c(hibli(h  the  general  laws  of 
adion,  alVeAing  the  fubjedl  under  confidcration, 
from  certain  feled;,  well-defined,  and  well-atteftcd 
phicnomcna,  and  then  to  explain  and  predid  the 
other  pha^nomena  bv  thcfe  laws.  This  is  the 
method  of  analyfis  and  fynthefis  recommended  and 
followed  by  Sir  Ifaac  Nezvton. 

1  Ihall  not  be  able  to  execute,  with  any  accurac}^ 
what  the  reader  might  exped  of  this  kind,  in  rc- 
fpcd  of  the  dodrines  of  vibrations  and  aUbciatioHy 
and  their  general  laws,  on  account  of  the  great 
intricacy,  extcnfivenefs,  and  novelty  of  the  fubjeft. 
However,  1  will  attempt  a  /ketch  in  the  beft  man- 
ner I  can,  for  the  fervice  of  future  inquirers. 


SECT. 


and  AfTociation  m  general. 


SECT.     I. 

OF  THE  DOCTRINE  OF  VIBRATIONS,   AND  ITS 
USE  FOR  EXPLAINING  THE  SENSATIONS. 

PROP.     I. 

The  white  medullary  Siibjlance  of  the  Brain,  fpinal 
Marrozv,  and  the  Nerves  proceeding  from  them,  is 
the  immediate  Inflniment  of  Senfation  and  Motion, 


Under  the  word  brain,  in  thefe  ohfervations,  I 
comprehend  all  that  lies  within  the  cavity  of  the 
/kull,  i.  e.  the  cerebrum,  or  brain,  properly  fo  called, 
the  cerebellum,  and  the  medulla  oblongata. 

This  propofition  feems  to  be  fufficiently  proved  in 
the  writings  of  phyiicians  and  anatomifts  j  from  the 
flrudlure  and  funftions  of  the  feveral  organs  of  the 
human  body ;  from  experiments  on  living  animals ; 
from  the  fymptoms  of  difeafes,  and  from  dilTec- 
tions  of  morbid  bodies.  Senfibility,  and  the  power 
of  motion,  feem  to  be  conveyed  to  all  the  parts, 
in  their  natural  ftate,  from  the  brain  and  fpinal 
marrow,  along  the  nerves.  Thefe  arife  from  the 
medullary,  not  the  cortical  part,  every  where,  and 
are  themfelves  of  a  white  medullary  fubftance. 
When  the  nerves  of  any  part  are  cut,  tied,  or 
comprelTed  in  any  confiderable  degree,  the  funC" 
tions  of  that  part  are  either  entirely  deftroyed,  or 
much  impaired.  When  the  fpinal  marrow  is  com- 
prelTed by  a  diflocation  of  the  vertebra  of  the  back, 
all  the  parts,  whofe  nerves  arife  below  the  place  of 
diflocation,  become  paralytic.     When  any  confider- 

B  4  able 


S  Of  the  Dofirines  of  Vibrations 

able  injury  is  clt)nc   to  the   nicclullary   fubihiMce  ot 
the  brain,   ienlHtion,    voluntary   motion,    memory, 
antl  Intcllert,  are  either  entirely  loll,  cr   much    im- 
paired ;  and  it"  the  injury  be  very  great,  this  extends 
immediately  to  the  vital  mentions  alio,  viz.  to  thofe 
of  the  heart,  and  organs  ot*  relpiration,  fo  as  to  oc- 
cafion  death.     But  this  does  not  hold  equally  in  re- 
I'pccl  oi  the  cortical  lubllance  ot  the  brain  ;  perhaps 
not  at  all,  unlets  as  tar  as  injuries  done  to  it  extend 
thcmlelvcs  to   the   medullary  lubflance.     In  ditlcc- 
tions  after  apoplexies,  pallies,  epilepfics,   and  other 
diflcmpers  afteding  the  fenfations  and  motions,  it 
is  ufual  to  find  fome  great  dilorder   in  the  brain, 
from  preternatural  tumors,  from  blood,  matter,  or 
ferum,  lying  upon  the  brain,     or  in   its  ventricles, 
&:c.     This  may  fultice  as  general   evidence  for  the 
prefcnt.     The  particular   realons  of  fome   of  thefe 
phiEnomena,  with  more  definitive  evidences,  will  offer 
theml'elves  in  the  courl'e  ot  thefe  obfcrvations. 


PROP.     II. 

Ihe  ivhite  mednllary  Sub  fiance  of  the  Brain  is  aljo  thc 
immcdiate  Infhumenty  h\  which  ideas  are  prefented  to 
the  Mind:  or,,  in  other  IVords,  zvhatevcr  Changes 
are  made  in  this  Suhflance^  correfponding  Changes  are 
made  in  our  Ideas ;  and  vice  verfa. 

The  evidence  for  this  propofition  is  allb  to  be 
taken  from  the  writings  of  phyficians  and  anatomifts; 
but  efpecially  from  tholb  parts  of  thefe  writings, 
which  treat  of  the  faculties  of  memory,  attention, 
imagination,  &c.  and  of  mental  diforders.  It  is 
lufficiently  raanifed  from  hence,  that  the  perfeftion 
of  our  mental  faculties  depends  upon  the  pcrfedlion 
of  this  fubflancc;  that  all  injuries  done  to  it,  affedt 
the  trains  of  ideas  proportionably  j  and  that  thefe 

cannot 


I 


and  AlTociation  in  general.    ■  9 

cannot  be  reftored  to  their  natural  courfe,  till  fuch 
injuries  be  repaired.  Poifons,  fpirituous  liquors, 
opiates,  fevers,  blows  upon  the  head,  &c.  all  plainly 
affeifl  the  mind,  by  firft  difordering  the  medullary 
fubliance.  And  evacuations,  reft,  medicines,  time, 
&c.  as  plainly  reftore  the  mind  to  its  former  ftate, 
by.  reveriing  the  foregoing  fteps.  But  there  will  be 
more  and  more  definite  evidence  offered  in  the 
courfe  of  theie  obfervations. 


PROP.     III. 

the  Senfations  remain  in  the  Mind  for  a  Jhort  'Time 
after  the  fcnfible  Obje5is  are  removed. 


This  is  very  evident  In  the  fenfations  impreffed 
on  the  eye.  Thus,  to  ufe  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  s  words, 
"  If  a  burning  coal  be  nimbly  moved  round  in  a 
"  circle,  with  gyrations  continually  repeated,  the 
"  whole  circle  will  appear  like  fire ;  the  reafon  of 
"  which  is,  that  the  fenfation  of  the  coal,  in  the 
"  feveral  places  of  that  circle,  remains  imprejjed  on 
*'  the  fenforium,  until  the  coal  return  again  to  the 
*'  fame  place.  And  fo  in  a  quick  confecution  of 
*'  the  colours "  (viz.  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  and 
purple,  mentioned  in  the  experiment,  whence  this 
paffage  is  taken)  "  the  impreflion  of  every  colour 
"  remains  on  the  fenforium^  until  a  revolutiou  of  all 
"  the  colours  be  completed,  and  that  firft  colour 
"  return  again.  The  impreffions  therefore  of  all 
"  the  fucceffive  colours,  are  at  once  in  the  fenforium — 
."  and  beget  a  fenfation  of  v/liite."  Opt.  B.  I.  p.  2. 
Experiment  10. 

Thus  alfo,  when  a  perfon  has  had  a  candle,  a 
window,  or  any  other  lucid  or  well-defined  object, 

before 


lo  Of  the  DoHrvici  o/"  V^lbrations 

before  his  eyes,  tor  a  confiderablc  time,  he  may 
perceive  a  very  clear  and  precile  image  tlicreof  to  be 
left  in  the  fenforium^  fancy,  or  mind  (for  thefc  I 
condder  as  eciuivalent  exprefTions  in  our  entrance 
upon  thcfe  dilquiritions),  for  fome  time  after  he  has 
clofed  his  eyes.  At  lead  this  will  happen  frec|uently 
to  pcrfons,  who  are  attentive  to  thefe  things,  in  a 
gentle  way  :  tor  as  this  aiijK\irance  efcapcs  the  notice 
of  thofe  who  are  entirely  inattentive,  to  too  earned 
a  defire  and  attention  prevents  it,  by  introducing 
another  date  of  mind  or  fancy. 

To  thele  may  be  referred  the  appearance  men- 
tioned by  Sir  Ijaac  Newton^  Opt.  .^«.  i6.  viz.  *'  When 
*'  a  man  in  the  dark,  prefles  either  corner  of  his 
"  eye  with  his  finger,  and  turns  his  eye  away  from 
*'  his  finger,  he  will  lee  a  circle  of  colours  like  thofe 
*'  in  the  feather  of  a  peacock's  tail.  And  this 
**  appearance  continues  about  a  fecond  of  time, 
*'  after  the  eye  and  finger  have  remained  quiet.'* 
The  fenfation  continues  therefore  in  the  mind  about 
a  fecond  of  time  after  its  caufe  ceafes  to  aft. 

The  fame  continuance  of  the  fenfations  is  alfo 
evident  in  the  ear.  For  the  founds  which  we  hear, 
are  refleded  by  the  neighbouring  bodies  ;  and 
therefore  confid  of  a  variety  of  founds,  fucceeding 
each  other  at  ditfcrent  didances  of  time,  according 
to  the  didances  of  the  feveral  reflefting  bodies; 
which  yet  caufes  no  confufion,  or  apparent  com- 
plexity of  found,  unlefs  the  didance  of  the  reflefting 
bodies  be  very  confiderable,  as  in  fpacious  buildings. 
Much  lefs  are  we  able  to  didinguifh  the  fucceflive 
pulfes  of  the  air,  even  in  the  gravell:  founds. 

As  to  the  fenles  of  tade  and  fmell,  there  feems  to 
be  no  clear  dired  evidence  for  the  continuance  of 
their  lenfations,  after  the  proper  objeds  are  re- 
moved. But  analog}'  would  incline  one  to  believe, 
that  they  mud  relemble  the  fenfes  of  fight  and 
hearing  in  this  particular,  though  the  continuance 

cannot 


and  Affociation  in  general.  ti 

cannot  be  perceived  diftindlly,  on  account  of  the 
fhortnefs  of  it,  or  other  circumftances.  For  the 
fenfations  muft  be  fuppofed  to  bear  fuch  an  analogy 
to  each  other,  and  fo  to  depend  in  common  upon 
the  brain,  that  all  evidences  for  the  continuance  of 
fenfations  in  any  one  fenfe,  will  extend  themfelves  to 
the  reft.  Thus  all  the  fenfes  may  be  confidered  as 
fo  many  kinds  of  feeling ;  the  tafte  is  nearly  allied 
to  the  feeling,  the  fmell  to  the  tafte,  and  the  fight 
and  hearing  to  each  other.  All  which  analogies 
will  offer  themfelves  to  view,  when  we  come  to 
examine  each  of  thefe  fenfes  in  particular. 

In  the  fenfe  of  feeling,  the  continuance  of  heat, 
after  the  heating  body  is  removed,  and  that  of  the 
fmart  of  a  wound,  after  the  inftant  of  infli6tion, 
feem  to  be  of  the  fame  kind  with  the  appearances 
taken  notice  of  in  the  eye  and  ear. 

But  the  greateft  part  of  the  fenfations  of  this  fenfe 
refemble  thofe  of  tafte  and  fmell,  and  vanifli  to 
appearance  as  foon  as  the  objeds  are  removed. 


PROP.     IV. 

External  ObjeEls  imprejjed  upon  the  Senfes  occaJioHt  firji 
in  the  Nerves  on  which  they  are  imprejjed^  and  then 
in  the  Brain,  Vibrations  of  the  fmall,  and,  as  one  may 
fay,  infinitefimal,  medullary  Particles. 

These  vibrations  are  motions  backwards  and 
forwards  of  the  fmall  particles  ;  of  the  fame  kind 
with  the  ofcillations  of  pendulums,  and  the  trem- 
blings of  the  particles  of  founding  bodies.  They 
muft  be  conceived  to  be  exceedingly  fhort  and 
fmall,  fo  as  not  to  have  the  leaft  efficacy  to  dlfturb 
or  move  the  whole  bodies  of  the  nerves  or  brain. 
For  that  the  nerves  themfelves  Ihould  vibrate  like 

mufical 


12  Of  tbr  Doffriites  of  Vibrations. 

mulical  flrinp;s,  is  liighly  abfunl ;  nor  was  it  ever 
alicTtcil  by  Sir  Iftiar  Nt'wton,  or  any  of  thoCc  who 
have  embraced  his  notion  of  the  performance  of 
Icnlhtion  and  motion,  by  means  oi  vibrations. 

In  like  manner,  we  are  to  fuppofe  the  particles 
which  vibrate,  to  be  of  the  inferior  orders,  and  not 
thofe  biggcll  particles,  on  which  the  operations  in 
chemidry,  and  the  colours  of  natural  bodies,  de- 
pend, according  to  the  opinion  of  'S'w  Ifaac  Nezvton. 
Hence,  in  the  propojiiiou,  1  term  the  medullary 
particles,  which  vibrate,  iufinitcfimal. 

Now  that  external  objects  imprels  vibratory  mo- 
tions upon  the  metiullary  fubflance  of  the  nerves 
and  brain  (which  is  the  immediate  inflrumcnt  of 
lenlation,  according  to  the  firjl  propojition) ,  appears 
.fmm  the  continuance  oi  the  IbnlHtions  mentioned  in 
the  third  ;  lince  no  motion  bcfidcs  a  vibratory 
one,  can  refide  in  anv  part  for  the  Icaft  moment  of 
time.  External  objects,  being  corporeal,  can  ad 
^  upon  the  nerves  and  brain,  which  are  alfo  corporeal, 
by  nothing  but  impreiling  motion  on  them.  A  vi- 
brating motion  may  continue  for  a  fliort  time  in  the 
fmall  medullary  particles  of  the  nerves  and  brain, 
without  diflurbing  them,  and  after  a  (liort  time  would 
ccale  ;  and  fo  would  correfpond  to  tlie  above-men- 
tioned Ihort  continuance  of  the  I'cnfations;  and  there 
feems  to  be  no  other  fpecies  of  motion  that  can 
correfpond  thereto. 

Cor.  As  this  propofition  is  deduced  from  the  fore- 
going, fo  if  it  could  be  eftablilhed  upon  independent 
principles  (of  which  I  fhall  treat -under  the  next),  the 
foregoing  might  be  deduced  from  it.  And,  on  this 
fuppolition,  there  would  be  an  argument  for  the 
continuance  of  the  feniations,  after  the  removal  of 
their  objecls ;  which  would  extend  to  the  fenfes  of 
feeling,  tafte,  and  fmell,  in  the  fame  manner  as  to 
thofe  of  fight  and  hearing. 

PROP. 


find  Aflbciation  /;/  general.  13 


PRO  P.     V. 

T^he  Vibrations  mentioned  in  the  laft  Propoftiion  are'  ex- 
cited,  propagated,  and  kept  up,  partly  by  the  jEther,  - 
(i.e.  by  a  very  fubtle  and  elajlic  Fhdd^and  partly 
by  the  Uniformity,  Continuity,  Softnefs,  and  a^ive 
Powers  of  the  Medullary  Subjlance  of  the  Brain, 
fpinal  Marrow,  and  Nerves. 

This  propofition  is  chiefly  an  evidence  and  expla- 
nation  of  the    foregoing;    and   accordingly    might 
have  been  included  in  it.     However,  as  it  is  of  great  , 
importance  in  the  prefent  fubjed,  I  thought  it  beft 
to  give  it  a  diftindl  place  and  conlideration.. 

Before  I  enter  upon  the  proof  of  it,  it  will  be 
proper  to  premife  fomething  by  way  of  explanation, 
concerning  the  aether,  and  the  qualities  of  the 
medullary  fubftance  jull  mentioned. 

Sir  IJaac  Neivton  fuppofes,  that  a  very  fubtle  and 
elaftic   fluid,  which  he  calls  ather,  for  the  fake  of 
treating  upon  it  commodioufly  under  an  appropriated 
name,  is  diffufed  through  the  pores  of  grofs  bodies, 
as  well  as  through  the  open  fpaces,  that  are  void  of 
grofs  matter.     He  fuppofes  likewife,  that  it  is  rarer, 
in  the  pores  of  bodies  than  in  open  fpaces,  and  even 
rarer  in  fmall  pores  and  denfe  bodies,  than  in  large 
pores  and  rare  bodies ;  and  alfo  that  its  denlity  in- 
creafes  in  receding  from  grofs  matter,  fo,  for  inflance,  1 
'  as, to  be  greater  at  the  -r—  of  an  inch  from,  the  fur- 
face  of  any  body  than  at  its  furface ;  and  fo  on.  To 
the   aftion  of  this  aether  he  afcribes  the  attractions 
of  gravitation   and    cohefion,    the   attraftions   and 
repulfions  of  eleftrical  bodies,    the   mutual  influ- 
ences of  bodies  and,  light  upon   each   other,    the 
efleds  and  communication  of  heat,  and  the  perform- 
ance of  animal  fenfation  and  motion.     My  bufinefs 

in 


14  Of  the  DoHrines  o/*  Vibrations 

in  thcfc  ohfercatioHs^  is  only  with  the  lad  ;  hut  tlic 
rcailcr  will  lU)  well  to  confult  what  Sir  Ifiiac  Newton 
has  hirolclt  ailvanccd  concerning  the  cxitlcnce  of  this 
athcr,  and  the  properties  and  powers  which  he  has 
akrihed  to  it,  in  the  lad  paragraph  of  his  Principia^ 
the  ^tejTtons  annexed  to  his  Optics^  ami  a  Letter 
from  him  to  Mr.  Bo\U\  lately  publillicd  in  Mr. 
Bo\/e\  Lite.  As  to  myfelf,  1  am  not  fatistic^!,  that 
I  underdantl  him  perfeifHy  on  this  fubjcd.  I  will 
hint  a  few  things  partly  from  liim,  partly  from  my 
own  reflexions,  concerning  the  exiltencc  and  pro- 
perties of  this  iether. 

Since  a  thermometer  kept,  /';/  vaaw^  varies  with 
the  heat  and  cold  of  the  room,  in  which  it  is 
placed,  as  much  as  another  furrounded  by  air  ;  and 
fmce  the  fmall  parts  of  hot  bodies  probably  vibrate 
to  and  fro,  and  by  thus  vibrating  keep  up  the  heat 
for  a  certain  time  j  one  may  conjefture,  that  a  fub- 
tle  medium  remains  after  the  air  is  exliaufted,  and 
that  heat  is  communicated  to  the  thermometer 
fulpcndcd  /;/  vacuo  by  the  vibrating  motions  of  this 
medium.     See  Opt.  ^i.  i8. 

The  greater  dcnfity  of  the  sethcr  at  a  diftance 
from  bodies  than  at  their  furface,  may  be  conjedurcd 
from  the  various  phenomena  folved  by  this  fuppo- 
fition  ;  which  pha^nomena  may  alfo  be  alleged  as 
probable  evidences  of  the  exiftence  of  the  aether. 
See  Opt.  §lit.  and  the  Letter  to  Mr.  Boyle. 

The  great  fubtlety  and  claflicity  of  the  sether 
may  be  inferred  from  the  motions  of  the  planets,  . 
and  quick  propagation  of  light,  if  we  firft  fuppofc 
its  exillence,  and  concurrence  in  the  propagation  of 
light,  and  efficacy  in  caufing  gravity.  And  from 
its  great  elallicity  we  may  infer,  that  it  is  extremely 
fufceptible  of  vibrations  and  pulfes,  in  the  fame 
manner  as  common  air.     See  Opt.  ^er. 

Since  the  grofs  bodies  that  lie  upon  the  furface  of 
the  earth  emit   air  particles,    conflituting  a  thin, 

elaftic 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  i^ 

elaftic  fluid,  of  great  efficacy  in  performing  the 
ordinary  operations  of  nature,  it  feems  not  unna- 
tural to  expedl,  that  the  fmall  particles  of  bodies 
fliould  emit  a  proportionably  attenuated  air,  ;.  e.  an 
^ther,  which  may  likewife  have  a  great  fhare  in  the 
fubtle  aftions  of  the  fmall  particles  of  bodies  over 
each  other.  The  emiffion  of  odoriferous  particles, 
light,  magnetical  and  electrical  effluvia,  may  alfo 
be  fome  prefumption  in  favour  of  the  exiftence  of  the 
jBther.  Moreover,  it  is  reafonable  to  expeft,  that  it 
fhould  have  a  repulfive  force  in  refped:  of  the  bodies 
which  emit  it ;  and  for  the  fame  reafons,  its  par- 
ticles may  repel  each  other.  It  may  therefore  be 
elaftic,  compreffible,  and  apt  to  receive  vibrations 
from  the  laft  caufe  ;  and,  from  the  firft,  may  be 
rarer  within  the  pores  of  bodies  than  in  large  open 
fpaces,  and  grow  denfer  as  the  diftance  from  grofs 
matter  increafes.  Our  air  is  indeed  denfer  near  the 
earth  than  in  the  higher  regions  ;  but  this  is  owing 
to  its  gravity,  prevailing  againft  its  expanfive  force. 
If  we  fuppofe  the  gravity  of  the  sether  to  be  very 
fmall,  and  its  elafticity  or  expanfive  and  repulfive 
force  very  great,  both  which  muft  be  fuppoied, 
if  we  admit  it  at  all  in  the  manner  propofed  by 
Sir  If aac  Newton,  its  denfity  may  increafe  in  receding 
from  grofs  matter,  and  be  much  lefs  in  the  pores  of 
bodies,  than  in  open  fpaces  void  of  grofs  matter. 
Thus  we  may  fuppofe  even  the  air,  which  remains 
in  the  large  pores  of  fuch  bodies  as  repel  its  particles, 
to  be  rarer  than  the  common  external  air. 

Laftly,  Let  us  fuppofe  the  exiftence  of  the  aether, 
with  thefe  its  properties,  to  be  deftitute  of  all  dire6fe 
evidence,  ftill,  if  it  ferves  to  explain  and  account  for 
a  great  variety  of  phienomena,  it  will  have  an  indi- 
re(fl  evidence  in  its  favour  by  this  means.  Thus  we 
admit  the  key  of  a  cj'^pher  to  be  a  true  one,  when  it 
explains  the  cypher  completely :,  and  the  decypherer 
judges  himfelf  to  approach  to  the  true  key,  jn  pro- 
portion 


1 6  Of  the  DoHrinei'  '6f  Vibrations 

portion  as  he  atirances  in  tlic  cxphinntihn  of  the 
Cvplicr  ;  and  this  without  any  dircd  cvitlcncc  at  all. 
And  as  the  falle  ami  impelled;  keys,  U'hlch  turn  up 
to  the  dccypherer  in  liis  rcfcarchcs  j>reparc  the 
way  for  the  difcovery  of  the  trtie  and  complete  one, 
fo  any  hypothcfis  that  has  lo  luuch  plaulibility,  as 
to  explain  a  conliderablc  number  of  fads,  helps  us 
to  diged  thefe  fads  in  proju'r  order,  to  bring  new 
opes  to  light,  and  to  m  ike  Experimenta  Cruris  for 
the  fake  of  future  int-iuircrs.  The  rule  of  falfe 
affords  an  obvious  and  flrong  indance  of  the  poflTi- 
bility  of  being  led,  with  precifion  and  certainty  to  a 
true  conclullon  from  a  falfe  pofition  ;  and  it  is  of 
the  very  cHence  of  algebra  to  proceed  in  the  way 
of  fuppofition. 

\Ve  come  next  lo  cuiiu(.ier  the  uniformity  and 
continuity  of  the  white  medullary  fubilance  of  the 
brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  nerves.  Now  thefe  are 
evident  to  the  eye,  as  far  as  that  can  be  a  judge  of 
them.  The  white  medullary  fubftance  appears  to  be 
every  where  uniform  and  fimilar  to  itfelf  throughout 
the  whole  brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  nerves  ;  and 
thouQfh  the  cortical  fubftance  be  mixed  with  the  me- 
dullarv  in  the  brain,  and  fpinal  marrow,  and  perhaps 
in  the  ganglions  and  plexufes,  yet  it  does  not  appear, 
that  the  communication  of  any  one  part  of  the  me- 
dullar}" fubftance  with  e\''ery  other,  is  cut  off  any 
where  by  the  intervention  of  the  cortical.  There 
is  no  part  of  the  medullary  fubftance  feparated  from 
the  reft,  but  all  make  one  continuous  white  body ; 
fo  that  if  we  fuppofe  vibrations  apt  to  run  freely 
along  this  body  from  its  uniformity,  they  muft  per- 
vade the  whole,  in  whatever  part  they  are  lirft  ex- 
cited, from  its  continuity. 

The  cxceffive  minutenefs  of  the  veffels  of  which 
the  medullary  fubftance  confifts,  may  alio  be  con- 
ceived as  inferring  its  uniformity  and  continuity. 
Thefe  veflels  are,  by  'all  anatomifts  and  phyfiolo- 

gifts, 


find  AfTociation  in  general.  I'j 

gifts,  fuppofed  to  arife  from  thofe  of  the  cortical 
fubftance,  this  being  agreeable  to  the  analogy  of  the 
other  parts  of  the  body.  And  it  follows  from  the 
fame  analogy,  that  they  muft  be  fmaller  than  thofe 
veflels  from  which  they  arlfe.  But  the  finer  orders 
of  the  veflels  of  the  cortical  fubftance  are  far  too 
minute  to  admit  of  the  moft  fubtle  injeftions,  the 
beft  injeftors  having  never  penetrated  farther  than 
the  grofler  orders  of  veffcls  in  the  cortical  fubftance. 
We  may  therefore  well  fuppofe,  that  the  medullary 
fubftance  confifts  of  a  texture  of  veflels  fo  fmall  and 
regular,  as  that  it  may  have  no  vacuity  or  interval 
in  it,  fufficient  to  interrupt  or  difturb  the  vibrations 
of  the  sether,  and  concomitant  ones  of  the  fmall 
medullary  particles,  propagated  through  this  fub- 
ftance in  the  manner  to  be  defcribed  below. 

The  foftnefs  of  the  medullary  fubftance  is,  in  like 
manner,  evident  to  the  fenfes,  and  the  natural  con- 
'fequence  of  the  extreme  fmall nefs  of  the  compound- 
ing vefl^els,  and  fluids  circulating  through  them. 

If  we  admit  the  foregoing  account  of  the  uniform 
continuous  texture  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  it 
W\\\  follow,  that  the  nerves  are  rather  folid  cap il la- 
ments, according  to  Sir  Ifaac  Nezvton^  than  fmall 
tubulin  according  to  Boerhaave.  And  the  fame  con- 
clufion  arifes  from  admitting  the  doftrine  of  vibra- 
tions. l"he  vibrations  hereafter  to  be  defcribed  may 
more  eallly  be  conceived  to  be  propagated  along  folid 
capillaments,  lb  uniform  in  their  texture  as  to  be 
pellucid  when  fingly  taken,  than  along  hollow  ttibnli. 
For  the  fame  reaions,  the  doctrine  of  vibrations  will 
fcarce  permit  us  to  fuppofe  the  brain  to  be  a  gland 
properly  lb  called ;  fmce  the  diftbrmity  of  texture 
required  in  a  gland,  appears  inconfiftent  with  the  free 
propagation  of  vibrations.  Neither  can  we  conclude 
the  brain  to  be  a  gland,  from  the  great  quantity  of 
blood  (cnt  to  it  by  the  heart.  It  is  probable  indeed, 
that  this  is  required  on  account  of  the  important 

Vol.  I.  C  fundions 


i8  Of  the  Do^rities  of  Vibrations 

funflions  of  accretion,  nutrition,  Icniation,  and  mo- 
tion, which  arc  plainly  jicrformed  by  the  brain.  But 
then  thcfe  functions  admit  of  as  caly  an  explanation 
on  the  hypothelis  here  propoled,  as  on  that  ot  a  glan- 
dular lecretion,  called  nervous  fluid,  animal  spirits, 
&c.  In  the  mean  time,  I  cannot  but  acknowledge 
many,  or  even  moil  things,  in  the  Boerhnavian  doc- 
trine concerning  the  AruCture  and  fun(flions  of  the 
brain,  to  be  beaut ilul,  jull,  and  ufeful.  And  it  may 
even  be,  that  the  do<ftrinc  of  a  glandular  lecretion, 
properly  qualified,  is  not  inconfiRent  with  that  of 
vibrations. 

Sir  Ifaac  Neivton  fuppofes  the  nerves,  when  fingly 
taken,  to  be  pellucid,  becaufe  otherwife  they  could 
not  be  lufficiently  uniform  for  the  purpofe  of  tranf- 
mitting  vibrations  freely  to  and  from  the  brain ;  the 
opacity  of  any  body  being,  according  to  him,  an 
argument,  that  its  pores  are  fo  large  and  irregular, 
as  to  diilurb  and  interrupt  the  vibrations  of  the 
lEthcr.  For  the  fame  rcalons,  we  muft  i'uppol'e  the 
fibrils  of  the  medullary  fubflance  of  the  brain  to  be 
pellucid,  when  fingly  taken.  And  this  confideration 
may  incline  one  to  conjecture,  that,  in  palfies,  the 
infinitefimal  veflels  of  the  fibrils  of  the  brain,  and 
capillaments  of  the  nerves,  are  fo  obftrudted,  as  to 
render  thcfe  fibrils  and  capillaments  white  and  opake, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  hair  in  old  age,  or  the 
Cornea  in  an  Albugo. 

Since  the  Pia  Mater^  with  its  blood  velTels,  enters 
the  interftices  of  the  feveral  folds  of  the  brain,  one 
may  fufpeft,  that  it  penetrates  not  only  the  cortical 
fubftancc,  but  alfo  the  medullary,  along  with  the 
feveral  defcending  orders  of  vefTels,  and  confcquently 
that  it  divides  and  fubdivides  the  medullary  fubflance 
into  various  greater  and  leflcr  regions.  One  may 
affirm  at  leafl,  that  fuch  a  diftribution  of  the  Pia  Ma- 
ter would  be  greatly  analogous  to  that  of  the  cellnlar 
membrane,    through  the  fyftem  of  mufcles,    their 

feparatc 


and  Affociation  in  general.  19 

feparate  portions,  fibres,  and  fibrils.  But  then  we 
may  reafonably  luppofe  the  Pia  Mater  to  be  fo  attenu- 
ated in  thefe  its  procefles,  as  that  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance  may  ftill  remain  fufficiently  uniform  for  the  free 
propagation  of  vibrations.  Or,  if  there  be  fome  little 
impediment  and  confinemerrt  in  certain  regions,  on 
account  of  fome  exceedingly  fmall  difcontinuity,  ari- 
(ing  from  this  intervention  of  the  Pia  Mater  between 
certain  regions,  it  may,  as  it  feems  to  me,  fuit  this 
theory  rather  better  than  an  abfoiute  and  perfeft 
continuity,  as  before  fuppofed.  It  is  reafonable  alfo 
to  think,  that  the  nerves  of  different  parts  have  innu- 
merable communications  with  each  other  in  the  brain, 
in  the  ganglions  (which  are,  as  it  were,  little  brains, 
according  to  the  opinion  of  JVinJlozv),  and  even  in 
the  plexufes ;  and  that  many  ph^enomena,  particu- 
larly thofe  of  the  fympathetic  kind,  are  deducible 
from  thefe  communications.  But  as  it  feems  impof- 
fible  to  trace  out  thefe  communications  anatomically, 
on  account  of  the  great  foftnefs  of  the  brain,  we  muft 
content  ourlelves  with  fuch  conjeftures  as  the  ph^eno- 
mena  fliall  fuggeft,  trying  them  by  one  another,  and 
admitting  for  the  prefent  thofe  which  appear  mod 
confiftent  upon  the  whole,  till  farther  light  appears. 
The  fame,  or  even  a  greater,  obfcurity  attends  all  in- 
quiries into  the  ufes  of  the  particular  Ihape  and  pro- 
tuberances of  the  medullary  fubfliance  of  the  brain. 

We  come,  in  the  lafl  place,  to  confider  what  adive 
properties  may  belong  to  the  fmall  particles  of  the 
medullary  fubftance,  /.  e.  to  the  fmall  particles  which 
compofe  either  the  ultimate  veHels  of  this  fubftance, 
or  the  fluid  which  circulates  in  thefe  ultimate  veffels. 
The  common  docflrine  concerning;  the  powers  of  the 
nervous  fyfhem  luppofes  the  fluid  fecreted  by,  and 
circulating  through,  the  medullary  fubftance,  to  be 
of  a  very  adive  nature ;  and  this  may  be,  though 
the  tafte  of  the  medullary  fubftance  in  brute  ani- 
mals difcovers  no  iuch  adivity.     For  the  power  of 

C  2  imprefling 


iO  Of  the  Dotlr'mes  of  Vibrations 

imprcfTing  taftcs  fcems  to  rffKlc  in  i)articlcs  much 
larger  than  thole  which  we  arc  here  confidcring.  And 
ic  1^  liirticiently  obvious,  that  many  poilbns,  mineral, 
vegetable,  and  animal,  have  the  moll  aflive  properties 
concealed  under  infipid,  or  at  leall  moderate  favours. 
Now  that  Tome  power.*;  of  attradlion  or  repulfion,  or 
rather  of  both  at  different  dilbnces,  refide  in  the  fmall 
particles  of  the  medullary  fubflance,  can  fcarce  be 
doubted  after  fo  many  indances  and  evidences,  as 
Sir  Jjaac  Nevi'ton  has  produced,  of  attra6\ive  and 
repulfivc  powers  in  the  fmall  particles  of  various 
bodies,  OpticSy  ^^wy  31.  meaning,  as  he  does,  by 
attraction  and  rejiulfion,  a  mere  mathematical  ten- 
dency to  approach  and  recede,  be  the  caufe  what  it 
will,  impulfe,  prefTuie,  an  unknown  one,  or  no  phy- 
fical  caufe  at  all,  but  the  immediate  agency  of  the 
Deity.  Tiie  fmallnefs  alio  of  tlie  particles  of  the 
medullary  fubltance  may  not  improbably  incrcafe 
their  activity,  in  refpeift  of  their  bulk,  agreeably  to 
Sir  Ifaac  Newton  s  conjecfture  concerning  the  particles 
ofthen:ther.  Which  may  be  farther  inferred  from 
the  nature  of  thele  attra<5lions  and  repulfions;  for 
fince  they  feem  to  be  as  fome  reciprocal  power  of  the 
dirtance,  we  may  judge,  that  only  the  nearefl:  parts  of 
large  particles  v;ill  be  eminently  active,  and  that  the 
more  remote  ones  will  be  an  impediment  to  their 
actions ;  whence  fmall  particles,  having  nearly  as 
great  a6live  powers,  and  much  lefs  matter  to  be 
moved,  will,  upon  the  whole,  be  more  active  in  pro- 
portion to  their  bulk,  than  large  ones.  If  we  farther 
luppofe  the  particles  of  the  fluids,  which  circulate 
through  the  ultimate  vcflels  of  the  medullary  fub- 
flance,  to  be  fmaller  than  the  particles  which  compofe 
thefe  vefTcls,  then  will  thev  aljb  be  more  active.  And 
thus  we  feem  to  approach  to  all  th^t  is  probable  in  the 
received  doflrines  concerning  the  nervous  fluid,  and 
the  animal  fpiri:?,  fuppofed  to  be  either  the  fame  or 
difi^erent  things  j  and  all  the  arguments  which  Boer- 

haave 


and  Allbciation  in  general.  2i 

haave  has  brought  for  his  hypothefis,  of  a  glandular 
fecretion  of  a  very  fubtle  adive  fluid  in  the  brain, 
may  be  accommodated  to  the  Newtonian  hypothefis 
of  vibrations. 

Having  thus  endeavoured  to  fettle  our  notions 
concerning  the  sether,  and  eflablilli  our  evidences  for 
its  exiftence  and  properties,  and  for  the  uniformity, 
continuity,  foftnefs,  and  active  powers  of  the  medul- 
lary fubftance,  we  come,  in  the  next  place,  to  inquire 
in  what  manner  thefe  may  ferve  to  explain  or  evince 
the  vibrations  of  the  medullary  particles,  afferted  in 
the  foregoing  ^r(9/)o////(9;i. 

Firft  then,  We  are  to  conceive,  that  when  external  [ 
objects  are  imprelfed  on  the  fenfory  nerves,  they  ex-  \ 
cite  vibrations  in  the  cether  refiding  in  the  pores  of  \ 
thefe  nerves,  by  means  of  the  mutual  aftions  inter-  \ 
ceding  between  the  objeds,  nerves,  and  aether.    For  ; 
there  feem  to  be  mutual  adions  of  all  the  varieties  - 
between  thefe  three,  in  all  the  fenfes,  though  of  a 
different  nature  in  different  fenfes.     Thus  it  feems, 
that  light  affects  both  the  optic  nerve  and  the  ^ther  j 
and  alio,  that  the  affcdions  of  the  aether  are  com- 
municated to  the  optic  nerve,  and  vice  verfd.     And 
the  fame  may  be  obferved  of  fridlons  of  the  fkin, 
taftes,  fmells,  and  founds.     The  impulfe,  attradion, 
or  whatever  elfe  be  the  adion  of  the  objed,  affeds 
both  the  nerves  and  the  ^tether  ;  thefe  affed  each 
other,  and  even  the  objed^  or  im^^reffion  itfelf,  in 
moft  or  all  cafes,  fo  as  to  alter  or  m^odify  it.     And 
the  refult  of  thefe  adions,  upon  the  v.'hole,  may 
be  fuppofed  fuch  a  compreffion  or  increafe  of  denfity 
in  the  jether,  as  muft  agitate  its  particles  with  vibra- 
tions analogous  to  thofe  which  are  excited  in  the  air 
by  the  difcharge  of  guns,  by  thunder-claps,  or  by 
any  other  method  of  caufing  a  fudden  and  violent 
compreffion  in  it. 

Secondly,  We  are  to  conceive,  that  the  vibratioi^s 
thus  excited  in  the  cether  will  agitate  the  fmall  par-  ' 

C  3  tides 


22  Of  the  DoiJyiiies  of  Vibrations 

tides  of  the  medullary  fuhflancc  of  the  fenfory  nerves 
with  Ivnchronous  vibratii)ns,  in  tiic  iiinie  miinncr  as 
the  vibrations  ot  the  air  in  lounds  agitate  many 
regular  bodies  with  correljionding  vibrations  or  trem- 
blings. And  here  the  uniformity,  foftnei's,  and  active 
powers  of  the  medullary  lubllance,  iimll  be  con- 
fideicd  as  previous  rccjuifitcs  and  alnftances.  A  want 
of  uniformity  in  the  medullary  lubllance,  would  ar- 
gue a  like  want  of  uniformity  in  the  xther  contained 
within  it.  The  hardnels  of  it,  if  it  extended  to  the 
particles,  would  caufe  an  ineptitude  to  vibratory  mo- 
tions in  the  particles  of  theie  particles,  ;.  e.  in  the 
inlinilcfimal  jxirticles  confidered  in  this  and  the  fore- 
going/>ro/)<y/V/o;/.  And  a  want  .of  aftive  powers  in 
theie  particles  would  lufibr  the  excited  motions  to 
die  aw;  y  prematurely. 

One  may  conjecture,  indeed,  that  the  rays  of  light 
excite  vibrations  in  the  Imall  particles  of  the  optic 
nerve,  by  a  direct  and  immediate  aftion.  For  it 
feems  probable,  fi-om  the  alternate  fits  of  eafy  tranf- 
milTion  and  refledion,  that  the  rays  of  light  are  them- 
felves  agitated  by  very  fubtle  vibrations,  and  eon- 
fequcntly  that  they  muft  communicate  thefe  direftly 
and  immediately  to  the  particles  of  the  optic  nerves. 
And  it  may  be  alfo,  that  fapid  and  odoriferous  par- 
ticles are  agitated  with  fpecific  vibrations,  and  that 
they  communicate  thefe  dirc(5lly  and  immediately  to 
the  fmall  particles  of  the  guflatory  and  olfaftory 
nerves  refpeftively,  as  well  as  to  the  interjacent 
aether.  Upon  this  fuppofition,  the  vibrations  of  the 
iether  muft  be  conceived  as  regulating  and  fupporting 
the  vibrations  of  the  particles,  not  as  exciting  them 
originally. 

Thirdly,  The  vibrations  thus  excited  in  the  zether, 
and  particles  of  the  fenfory  nerves,  will  be  propa- 
gated along  the  courfe  of  thefe  nerves  up  to  the 
brain.  For  the  <ether  refiding  in  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance,  being  of  an  uniform  denfity  on  account  of 

the 


and  Aflbciation  in  general  23 

the  fmallnefs  of  the  pores  of  the  medullary  fub- 
flance,  and  uniformity  of  its  texture,  before  tal,<:eii 
notice  of,  will  fuffer  the  excited  vibrations  to  run 
freely  through  it.  And  the  fame  uniformity,  toge- 
ther with  the  continuity,  foftnefs,  and  active  powers 
of  the  medullary  fubftance,  will  farther  contribute  to 
the  free  propagadon  of  the  vibrations;  fince,  on 
thefe  accounts,  it  follows,  that  the  particles,  which 
were  laft  agitated,  may  eafily  communicate  their  agi- 
tations or  vibrations  to  the  fimilarly  pofited  and  equally 
contiguous  ones,  without  interruption,  and  almoft 
without  any  diminution  of  force.  This  free  propa- 
gation of  vibrations  along  the  courfe  of  the  nerves 
may  be  ill uft rated  and  confirmed  by  the  like  free 
propagation  of  founds  along  the  furface  of  water, 
which  has  fometimes  been  obferved  in  ftill,  calm 
nights. 

Fourthly,  The  vibrations  here  defcribed  are  con- 
fined to  the  medullary  fubftance,  or  at  leafl:  are  only 
propagated  feebly  and  impecfeftly  into  the  neighbour- 
ing parts,  on  account  of  the  heterogeneity  and  greater 
hardnefs  of  the  neighbouring  pares.  The  firfl  will 
make  the  sether  of  different  denfities,  and,  in  fome 
cafes,  there  may  be  almoft  an  interruption  or  difcon- 
tinuity  of  it ,-  and  the  laft  will  indifpofe  the  particles 
to  receive  and  communicate  vibrations  j  and  we  may 
fuppofe  from  both  together,  agreeably  to  what  has 
been  already  remarked,  that  only  frnaU  vibrations, 
and  fuch  irregular  ones  as  oppofe  each  other,  will  juft 
begin  to  take  place  in  the  immediately  contiguous 
parts,  and  there  ceafe  without  proceeding  farther.  Ic 
is  fomewhat  analogous  to  this  in  founds,  that  they 
are  much  fooner  loft  in  pafting  over  rough  furfaces 
than  fmooth  ones ;  and  particularly,  that  they  receive 
a  much  greater  diminution  from  the  irregular  furface 
of  the  earth,  than  from  that  of  ftill  water.  However, 
a  particular  exception  is  here  to  be  made  in  refpe6t 
of  the  fibres  of  the  mufcles  and  membranes,   into 

C  4  which 


24  Of  the  Doolr'incs  of  Vibrations 

whicli  the  vibrations  of  the  .tthcr  and  metlullaiy 
particles  fcem  to  be  piojiagatcd  with  great  rieetlom 
and  ftrcngih,  as  will  be  ll-en  hereafter.  Which  may 
perhaps  be  fome  argument,  that  nnifciiJar  Hbies  are, 
according  to  Boerhaavc\  oj)inion,  mere  productions  of 
the  ultimate  nerves. 

Fifthly,  As  foon  as  the  vibrations  enter  the  brain, 
thty  begin  to  be  propagated  freely  every  way  over 
tlie  wjiole  medullary  fubllance  ;  being  diminiflied  \\\ 
ftrengih,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  matter 
agitated,  juft  as  in  founds,  t.  e.  as  it  were  in  a  reci- 
procal duplicate  ratio  of  the  diftance  from  the  place 
where  the  fenfory  nerve  affcCled  by  the  vibrations 
enters  the  brain.  Or,  if  we  fuppofe  the  Pia  Mater 
to  make  fome  fmall  difcontinuity  in  the  medullary 
fubftance  by  its  procefles,  as  has  been  hinted  above, 
then  we  muft  alfo  fuppofe,  that  the  vibrations,  which 
afcend  along  any  fenfory  nerve,  affe<5l  the  region  of 
the  brain  which  correlponds  to  this  fenfory  nerve 
more,  and  the  other  regions  lefs,  than  according  to 
this  proportion. 

Sixthly,  Since  the  vibrations,  or  reciprocal  mo- 
tions of  the  fmall  particles  of  each  nerve  are  made 
in  the  fame  line  of  direction  with  the  nerve,  they 
mufl:  enter  the  brain  in  that  direction,  and  may  pre- 
ferve  fome  fmall  regard  to  this  direction  at  confider- 
able  diftances  within  the  brain  ;  efpecially  if  this  be 
favoured  by  the  flruflure  of  the  nervous  fibrils  in  the 
brain.  Hence  the  fame  internal  parts  of  the  brain 
may  be  made  to  vibrate  in  different  dire6lions,  accord- 
ing to  the  different  diredtions  of  the  nerves  by  which 
the  vibrations  enter. 

And  thus  it  appears,  that,  admitting  the  exiftence 
and  fubdety  of  the  aether,  and  the  qualities  of  the 
medullary  fubftance  here  alleged,  a  probable  account 
may  be  given, 'how  the  vibrations,  afferted  in  the  laft 
propofition,  may  be  excited  in  the  fenfory  nerves, 
and  propagated  thence  over  the  whole  medullary  fub- 
ftance. 


and  AfTociation  in  general.  25 

flance,  and  over  that  alone.  And  the  fuitablenels  of 
this  propofition  to  the  lad,  and  of  both  to  a  variety  of 
phasnomena,  which  will  be  fcen  in  the  courfe  of  thefe 
obfervations,  may  be  confidered  as  fome  evidence  for 
both. 

Let  it  be  remarked  alfo,  that,  if  the  performance 
of  fenfation  by  vibratory  motions  of  the  meduliary 
particles  be  admitted,  the  exiftence  of  a  fubtle  elaftic 
fluid  muft  be  admitted  in  xonfequence  thereof,  as  the 
only  means  that  can  be  conceived  for  their  rife  and 
ittt  propagation,  fo  as  to  anfwer  to  the  phenomena 
of  fenfe,  motion,  and  ideas ;  and  reciprocally,  if  the 
exiftence  of  fo  fubtle  and  elaftic  a  fluid,  as  the  -^ther 
defcribed  by  Sir  IJaac  Newtony  can  be  eftabliftied  upon 
independent  principles,  it  may  reafonably  be  fuppofed 
to  penetrate  the  pores  of  the  medullary  fubftance, 
how  fmall  foever  they  be,  in  the  fame  manner  as  air 
penetrates  groflfer  cavities  and  pores,  and,  like  air, 
both  be  itfelf  agitated  by  vibrations  from  a  variety  of 
caufes,  and  alfo  communicate  thefe  to  the  medullary 
particles.  Vv  e  may  therefore  either  deduce  the  doc- 
trine of  vibrations  here  propofed  from  the  confideration 
of  the  sether,  or  the  exiftence  of  the  asther  from  the 
do6trine  of  vibrations,  according  as  either  of  thefe  can 
be  firft  eftabliihed. 

There  is  alfo  fome  light  and  evidence  to  be  caft 
upon  one  or  both  of  thefe  propofitions,  from  feveral 
natural  ph^enomena;  as  I  will  endeavour  to  fhew  in 
the  following  remarks.  > 

I.  Heat  in  natural  bodies  is  probably  attended  by 
vibrations  of  the  fmall  parts.  This  may  be  inferred 
from  the  duration  and  gradual  declenfion  of  heat, 
and  from  the  grofs  general  proportion  which  is  ob- 
ferved  between  this  duration  and  the  denfity  of  the 
heated  body.  For  a  vibratory  motion^  would  fubfift 
for  fome  time,  decline  gradually,  and  be  kept  up 
longer,  cateris  'paribus^  where  the  number  of  vi- 
brating particles  were  many,  than  where  few.  •  The 

fame 


i6  Of  the  Do^rines  of  Vibrations 

fame  hyporhefis  is  well  fulled  to  the  rarefaction, 
nuicliry,  dilVolution,  and  otiier  changes  of  texture 
which  heat  produces  in  bodies,  according  to  their 
various  natures.  And  if  we  farther  confider,  tliat 
all  bodies,  contiguous  to  each  other,  come,  after  a 
fliort  tiiiie,  to  the  lame  degree  of  heat,  viz.  that  of 
the  circumambient  air ;  thole  which  are  hotter  iofing 
fomething,  and  thofe  which  are  colder  gaining  j  ancl 
yet  tliat  the  air  is  not  necclfary  for  the  conveyance 
of  heat,  as  appears  from  Sir  JJaac  Newton*s  expcii- 
ment  of  the  two  thermometers  above-mentioned  j 
it  will  appear  highly  probable,  both  that  heat  in 
bodies  is  attended  by  vibratory  motions  of  the  fmall 
parts,  and  alfo  that  thefe  are  communicated  to  conti- 
guous bodies  by  vibrations  of  a  fubtle  fluid,  by  an 
argument  fomething  different  from  that  urged  above, 
in  fpeaking  of  the  two  thermometers  j  at  leaft  the 
confideration  of  the  equality  of  temperature,  to 
which  all  contiguous  bodies  are  known,  by  common 
obfervations,  to  arrive,  will  caft  fome  light  upon  that 
argument.  And,  upon  the  whole,  it  will  follow,  that 
heat  in  us  is  caufed,  or  attended,  by  fubtle  vibrations 
of  the  medullary  fubftance,  which  is  the  immediate 
inftrument  of  all  the  fenfations ;  and  that  a  fubtle 
fluid  is  concerned  in  the  produftion  of  this  effed. 
And  what  is  thus  proved  of  heat,  may  be  inferred 
to  hold  in  refped  of  all  the  other  fenfations,  from  the 
argument  of  analogy. 

2.  Light  is  fo  nearly  related  to  heat,  that  we  mufl: 
fuppofe  the  argument  of  analogy  to  be  particularly 
ftrong  in  refpeft  of  it :  but,  befides  this,  we  have  an 
independent  argument  for  the  exiftence  of  vibrations 
here,  alfo  for  their  communication  by  a  fubtle  fluid, 
if  we  admit  Sir  Jfaac  Newton's  hypothefis  concern- 
ing the  caufe  of  the  alternate  fits  of  eafy  refleftion 
and  tranfmilTion,  as  1  have  above  remarked. 

3.  As  founds  are  caufed  by  pulfes  or  vibrations 
excited   in   the   air  by  the  tremors   of  the  parts  of 

founding 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  27 

founding  bodies,  they  muft  raife  vibrations  in  the 
membrana  tympani;  and  the  fmall  bones  of  the  ear 
feem  peculiarly  adapted,  by  their  fituation  and  muf- 
cles,  to  communicate  thefe  vibrations  to  the  cavities 
of  the  vejiibulumi  fennicircular  canals,  and  cochkay 
in  which  the  auditory  nerve  is  expanded ;  i.  e.  to  the 
nerve  itfelf.  Now  though  thefe  are  grofs  vibrations, 
in  refpeft  of  thofe  which  we  muft  fuppofe  to  take  place 
in  the  aether  itfelf,  yet  they  prepare  the  way  for  the 
fuppofition  of  the  more  fubtle  vibrations  of  the 
asther,  and  may  be  the  inftrument  of  thefe,  in  the 
fame  manner  as  very  grofs  reciprocal  motions  of 
bodies  in  the  air  are  obferved  to  produce,  by  per- 
cuflion,  thofe  quicker  vibrations  in  which  found 
confifts. 

4.  We  are,  in  fome  meafure,  prepared  alfo  for 
admitting  the  doctrine  of  vibrations  in  the  animal 
funftions,  from  that  difpofition  to  yield  a  found  up- 
on percuffion,  which  appears  in  fome  degree  in  almoft 
all  bodies  J  fince  this  fhews,  that  the  difpofition  to 
vibrate  is  general,  or  even  univerfal,  in  the  bigger 
orders  of  particles ;  and  therefore  makes  it  more 
eafy  to  conceive,  that  there  may  be  a  like  difpofition 
in  the  leffer  orders,  t.  e.  in  the  infinitefimal  medul- 
lary particles,  confidered  in  this  and  the  foregoing 
fropojition, 

5.  The  mutual  attra6lions  and  repulfions  which 
feem  to  intercede  between  all  fmall  particles,  concur 
to  the  fame  purpofe.  For  when  the  attractions  and 
repulfions  are  changed,  by  changing  the  diftances  of 
the  particles,  thefe  muft  ofcillate  to  and  fro  for  fome 
time,  before  they  can  gain  their  former  equilibrium. 

6.  Elafticity  feems  to  refult  from  mutual  attrac- 
tions and  repulfions  of  fome  kind,  and  is  evidently 
the  caufe  of  vibrations  in  mufical  ftrings,  and  many 
other  bodies.  It  feems  alfo,  that  there  is  fcarce  any 
body  entirely  devoid  of  elafticity.  And  thus  elafti- 
city 


a8  Of  the  Dothines  of  Vibrations 

citv  is  connC(5leJ  with  the  dodrinc  of  vibrations  in 
dilfcrcnc  ways. 

7.  The  cHUivia  of  declric  bodies  reeoi  to  have 
vibrating  motions.  Vot  they  are  excited  by  fiiclion, 
patting,  and  heat ;  and  excite  liglit,  found,  and  a 
pricking  fcnfation.  'I'hcy  have  alfo  a  repulfive  power 
in  rcfped  of  each  other,  as  the  particles  of  air  have ; 
and  therefore  mull:,  Hke  them,  be  eafily  fufceptiblc  of 
vibrations.  Their  motions  along  hempen  ftrings  re- 
femhic  the  motions  along;  the  nerves  in  fcnfation  and 
mufcular  contradion  ;  and  tlu'ir  attra(5live  powers,  at 
the  end  of  I'uch  llnngs,  relcnible  the  powers  of  the 
lenfations  over  the  mufcles  for  contra(^l:ing  tliem.  So 
that  elediicity  is  alfo  conneded  in  various  ways  with 
the  doctrine  of  vibrations. 

Laftly,  To  fum  upgLn  one  wh.n  has  been  remarked 
in  the  lafl:  five  paragraphs :  as  the  attradlions  of 
gravitation,  eieftricity,  magnetifm,  and  cohefionj 
with  the  repulfions  which  attend  upon  the  three 
laft,  intimate  to  us  the  general  tenor  of  nature  in 
this  refpedt  -,  viz.  that  many  of  its  phnsnomena  are 
carried  on  by  attraftions  and  repulfions  j  and  that 
thefe  may  be  expected  to  take  place  in  the  fmall  de- 
fcending  orders  of  particles,  as  well  as  in  grofs  bo- 
dies, and  in  the  biggeft  component  particles ;  fo 
the  pulfes  of  the  air,  the  tremors  of  founding  bodies, 
the  propagation  of  founds  both  through  the  air,  and 
along  contiguous  folid  bodies,  the  ofcillations  of  elaftic 
bodies,  and  the  phasnomena  of  electricity,  may,  in 
like  manner,  ferve  as  a  clue  and  guide  to  the  inven- 
tion, and  afford  a  prelumption,  that  other  reciprocal 
motions  or  vibrations  have  a  great  fliare  in  the  pro- 
du(5lion  of  natural  phenomena. 

Nor  is  it  an  objeftion  to  this,  but  rather  a  con- 
firmation of  it,  that  thefe  principles  of  attraftion  and 
repulfion  of  the  feveral  kinds,  and  of  vibrations, 
are  dependent  upon,  and  involved  within  each  other, 

fincc 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  29 

fince  this  alfo  is  agreeable  to  the  tenor  of  nature,  as 
it  is  obferved  in  the  body,  in  the  mind,  in  fcience 
in  general,  and  in  the  feveral  branches  of  each  fci- 
ence in  particular.  Each  part,  fiiculty,  principle, 
&c.  when  confidered  ^nd  purfued  fufficiently,  feems 
to  extend  itfelf  into  the  boundaries  of  the  others,  and, 
as  it  were,  to  inclofe  and  comprehend  them  all. 
Thus  magnetifm  mixes  iifelf  with  the  gravitation 
both  of  bodies  upon  the  furface  of  the  earth,  and 
with  that  of  the  moon  to  the  earth  :  a  polar  virtue 
of  the  fame  kind  feems  to  have  a  principal  fhare  in 
the  formation  of  natural  bodies,  efpeciaily  thofe 
whofe  parts  cohere  in  regular  figures :  eleflricity 
may  alfo  extend,  without  being  excited  by  fridion  or 
otherwife,  to  fmall  diftances,  and  join  with  the  juft 
mentioned  polar  virtue,  in  making  the  parts  of  bo- 
dies cohere,  and,  in  fome  cafes,  in  regular  figures. 
The  efl^ervefcence  which  attends  the  mixture  of  acids 
and  alkalis,  and  the  folution  of  certain  bodies  in 
menflruums,  fermentation,  and  putrefaftion,  are 
all  general  principles  of  very  extenfive  influence, 
nearly  related  to  each  other,  and  to  the  fore-m.entioned 
mutual  attraflions  and  repulfions,  and  are  polTeffed 
of  the  fame  unlimited  power  of  propagating  them- 
felves,  which  belongs  to  the  feveral  fpeciefes  of  plants 
and  animals.  A  repulfion  which  fliould  throw  off 
indefinitely  fmall  corpufcles  with  indefinitely  great  ve- 
locity from  all  the  bodies  of  the  univerfe  (a  thing  that 
would  be  very  analogous  to  the  emiffion  of  light, 
odoriferous  particles,  and  magnetical  and  electrical 
effluvia,  and  to  the  generation  of  air  and  vapour), 
might  caufe  the  gravitation  of  all  the  great  bodies 
of  the  univerfe  to  each  other,  and  perhaps  other  kinds 
of  attraction.  Some  of  thefe  corpufcles,  by  flopping 
each  other  in  the  intermundane  fpaces,  or  other  mu- 
tually repulfive  corpufcles  lodged  there  from  caufes 
not  yet  difcovered,  may  cdmpofe  a  fubtle  vibrating 
medium.     The  vibrations  of  this   medium,    being 

continued 


^o  Of  the  Dodrines  of  Vibrations 

continued  to  the  great  bodies  of  the  univerfe,  may 
i'o  far  agitate  their  rmall   parts,  as  to  give   their  at- 
tracliive  and  repuK'ive  powers  an  opportunity   to  exert 
ihciiirclvcs   witli   great   vigour;   and  the  emifllon   of 
the  above-mentioned  corpufcles  may  be,  in  part,  oc- 
cafioned   by   the  aitradions  and  confequent  coUifions 
of   fmall    [larts    thus    agitated ;    fo    that   elaftic    cor- 
pufcles may  be  thrown  off  from  thcfe  fmall  parts  with 
inilctinitcly  great  .velocity.     And  it  would   be  no  ob- 
jedion   to  tliefe  or    fuch   like    fuppofitions,    that    we 
could  not  explain,  in  any  definite  manner,  how  thefe 
things  are  cffeded,  nor  put   any  limits   to  the   fizes 
of  decreafing   corpufcles,  or  their   adlive   powers    in 
refpeft  of  each  other.     Nor  would  this  be  to  reafon 
in  a  circle,  more  than  when  we  argue,  that  the  heart 
and  brain,  or  the  body  and  the  mind,  depend  upon 
each  other  for  their  funflions ;  which  are  undeniable 
truths,  however  unable  we  may  be  to  give  a  full  and 
ultimate  explanation  of  them.     However,   it   is   not 
impofTible,  on  the  other  hand,  but  future  ages  may 
analyfe  all  the  adtions  of  bodies  upon  each  other,  up 
to  a  few  fimple  principles,  by  making  fuch  fuppofi- 
tions as  the  pha^nomena  fhall  fuggeft,  and  then  trying 
and  m.odelling  them  by  the  phccnomena.    At  leaft  this 
is  what  one  is  led  to  hope,  from  the  many  fimple, 
and  eafy  folutions  of  very  complex  problems,  which 
have  been  produced  within  the  two  lad  centuries. 

We  may  draw  the  following  corollaries  from  the 
hypothefis  of  vibrations,  as  laid  down  in  the  two  fore- 
going propofitions. 

Corollary  i.  The  vibrations  of  the  medullary 
particles  may  be  affecled  with  four  forts  of  differ- 
ences ;  viz.  thofe  of  degree,  kind,  place,  and  line 
of  diretflion.  Vibrations  differ  in  degree,  according 
as  they  are  more  or  lefs  vigorous  -,  i.  e.  as  the  particles 
ofcillate  to  and  fro,  through  a  longer  or  fhorter  very 
fhorc  fpacej  i.  e.  as  the  imprefTion  of  the  object  is 
ftronger  or  weaker,   and  thus  afFeds  the  medullary 

particles 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  31 

particles  more  or  lefs  vigoroufly,  either  diredly  and 
immediately,  or  mediarely,  by  generating  a  greater 
or  lefs  degree  of  condenfation  in  the  pulfes  of  the 
sether.  Vibrations  differ  in  kind,  according  as  they 
are  more  or  lefs  frequent,  /.  e.  more  or  lefs  numer- 
ous, in  the  fame  fpace  of  time.  They  differ  in  place, 
according  as  they  affeft  this  or  that  region  of  the 
medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain  primarily.  And  they 
differ  in  the  line  of  diredion,  according  as  they  enter 
by  different  external  nerves. 

CoR.  2.  The  magnitude  of  each  fenfation  is  chiefly 
to  be  eftimated  from  the  vibrations  which  take  place 
in  the  medullary  fubfl:ance  of  the  brain,  thofe  which 
are  excited  in  the  fpinal  marrow  and  nerves,  being  for 
the  mofl:  part,  fo  inconfiderable,  in  refpedl  of  the  juft 
mentioned  ones,  that  they  may  be  negleded. 

CoR.  3.  The  brain  may  therefore  in  a  common 
way  of  ipeaking,  be  reckoned  the  feat  of  the  fenfitive 
foul,  or  the  fenforium,  in  men,  and  all  thofe  ani- 
mals where  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  nerves  and 
fpinal  marrow  is  much  lefs  than  that  of  the  brain  j 
and  this  even  upon  the  fuppofition  laid  down  in  the 
firft  propofition,  viz.  that  the  whole  medullary  fub- 
ftance of  the  brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  nerves,  is  the 
immediate  inftrument  of  fenfation,  and  equally  related 
to  the  fenfitive  foul,  or  principle.  But  if  there  be 
any  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that  the  firft  propofition  is 
not  ftridly  true,  but  that  the  fpinal  marrow  and 
nerves  are  only  inftruments  fubfervient  to  the  brain, 
juft  as  the  organs  of  the  hand,  eye,  ear,  &c.  are  to 
them,  and  the  brain  itfelf  to  the  foul,  we  may  con- 
clude abfolutely,  that  the  fenforium  of  fuch  animals 
is  to  be  placed  in  the  brain,  or  even  in  the  innermoft 
regions  of  it.  Now  there  are  fome  phsenomena  which 
favour  this,  by  fhewing,  that  whatever  motions  be 
excited  in  the  nerves,  no  fenfation  can  arife,  unlefs 
this  motion  penetrate  to,  and  prevail  in,  the  brain. 
Thus,  when  a  nerve  is  compreffed,  we  lofe  the  fenfe 

of 


32  Of  the  DoJlriues  of  Vibrations. 

of  ffclinp:  in  the  part  to  whicli  it  leads:  a  perfon  nniich 
intent  upon  his  own  thoughts  docs  not  hear  t!ie  found 
of  a  clock ;  /.  e.  the  vibrations  excited  by  this  found 
in  the  auditory  nerve  cannot  penetrate  to,  and  prevail 
in,  the  brain,  on  account  of  ihofe  which  already 
occupy  it:  and  a  peil'on  who  has  loft  a  1  inn b  often 
feels  a  pain,  which  fceins  to  proceed  from  the  ampu- 
tated limb  ;  probably  becaufc  the  region  of  the  brain 
correfi^nding  to  that  limb,  is  ftill  aFFetftcd. 

If  It  be  certain,  tliat  Ibme  of  the  medullary  parts 
have  been  difchargetl,  in  abfcelTes  of  the  brain,  one 
would  incline  to  think,  that  the  external  pans  of  the 
vtcdullti  are  inftrumental,  in  refpecft  of  the  internal. 
And,  on  tlie  other  hand,  one  may  queftion,  whether, 
in  animals  of  the  ferpentinc  form,  and  thofe  whofe 
brains  are  comparatively  fmall,  and  in  all  thofe  of  the 
polypous  kind,  the  fenforinm  be  not  equally  difFufed 
over  the  whole  medullary  fubftance,  or  even  over  all 
the  living  parts.  I  only  hint  thefe  things,  not  pre- 
fuming  even  to  conjefture,  but  only  to  excite  thofe 
who  have  proper  opportunities,  to  inquire  carefully 
into  thefe  matters. 

CoR.  4.  If  we  allow  the  exiftence  of  the  asther, 
and  its  ufe,  in  performing  fenfation,  thought,  and 
motion,  as  it  may  be  infeired  from  the  two  fore- 
going propofitions,  compared  with  fuch  other  things 
as  follow  in  thefe  obfervations,  in  favour  of  the  "tloc- 
trine  of  vibrations  i  we  may  conclude,  that  the  asther 
mull  have  a  confiderable  fhare  in  the  produftion  of 
many  other  natural  phenomena  ;  and  therefore  fhall 
have  a  fuflicient  foundation  for  trying  how  far  it  will 
carry  us,  agreeably  to  the  facts.  I  would  recommend 
this,  in  a  particular  manner,  to  thofe  perfons  who  are 
much  converfant  with  electrical  pha^nomenaj  efpecially 
as  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  him.felf,  whofe  great  caution  and 
refervednefs,  in  difficult  and  doubtful  matters,  arc 
fufficiently  knov/n,  has  made  no  fcruple  to  affirm,  that 
the   powers   of   eledlrical   bodies   are   owing   to   the 

adion 


md  Allbciation  in  general.  33 

a6tion  of  the  lEther.      See  the  hft  'paragraph  of  the 
Principia. 

Scholium.  Ic  may  be  proper  to  remark  here,  that 
I  do  not,  by  thus  afcribing  the  performance  of  fenfii- 
tion  to.  vibrations  excited  in  the  medullary  fubftance, 
in  the  lead  prefume  to  aflert,  or  intimate,  that  matter 
can  be  endued  with  the  power  of  fenfation.  It  is 
common  10  all  fyflems,  to  fuppofe  fome  motions  at- 
tendant upon  fenfation,  fince  corporeal  objefts  muft, 
by  their  adions,  imprefs  fome  motion  upon  our  bo- 
dies, and  particularly  upon  that  part  which  is  mofl 
nearly  related  to  the  fentient  piinciple;  /.  e.  upon  the 
medullary  fubftance,  according  to  the  firft  and  fe- 
cond  propofitions.  I  lay  down  thefe  propofitions, 
therefore,  as 'eftablilhed  by  the  common  confent  of 
phyficians  and  philofophers;  and  upon  that  foundation 
proceed  to  inquire  into,  and  determine,  fome  matters 
of  a  more  difficult  nature ;  fuch  as  the  complex  pro- 
blems concerning  fenfations,  ideas,  and  motions,  and 
their  mutual  influences  and  relations.  . 

The  following  inftance  may  illultrate  this :  the 
quantity  of  matter  in  bodies  is  always  found  to  be 
proportional  to  'heir  gravity:  we  may  therefore  either 
make  the  quantity  of  matter  the  exponent  of  the 
gravity,  or  the  gravity  the  exponent  of  it,  accord- 
ing as  either  can  be  beft  afcertained  j  notwithftanding 
that  we  are  entirely  at  a  lofs  to  determine,  in 
what  mechanical  way  each  atom  contributes  to  the 
gravity  of  the  whole  mafs ;  and  even  though  we 
fhould,  with  fome,  fuppofe  this  effect  to  be  mime- 
chanical,  and  to  arife  from  the  immediate  agency  of 
God.  And,  by  parity  of  reafon,  if  that  fpecies  of 
motion  which  we  term  vibr?  ions,  can  be  fhewn  by 
probable  arguments,  to  attend  upon  all  fenfations, 
ideas,  and  motions,  and  to  be  proportional  to  them, 
then  we  are  at  liberty  either  to  make  vibration?  the 
exponent  of  fenfations,  ideas,  and  motions,  or  thtfe 
the  exponents  of  vibrations,  as  beft  fuits  the  inquiry  j 

Vol,  I,  D       ,  however 


34  Of  the  DocJrines  of  Vibrations. 

however  impoflible  it  may  be  to  difcover  in  what 
way  vibrations  caule,  or  are  conne<5teil  with  fenfa- 
tions,  or  ideas ;  /'.  e.  though  vibrations  be  of  a  cor- 
poreal, lenfations  and  ideas  of  a  mental  nature. 

If  we  fuppofe  an  intinitcfimal  elementary  body  to 
be  intermediate  between  the  foul  and  grofs  body, 
which  appears  to  be  no  improbable  fuppofition, 
then  the  changes  in  our  fenfations,  ideas,  and  mo- 
tions, may  coirefpond  to  the  changes  made  in  the 
medullary  fubllance,  only  as  far  as  thefe  correfpond 
to  the  changes  made  in  tiie  elementary  body.  And 
if  thcfc  lall  changes  have  fome  other  fource  be- 
fides  the  vibrations  in  the  medullary  fubftance,  fomc 
peculiar  original  properties,  for  infkance,  of  the  ele- 
mentary body,  then  vibrations  will  not  be  adequate 
exponents  of  fenfations,  ideas,  and  motions.  Other 
fuppofitions  to  the  fame  purpofe  might  be  madej 
and,  upon  the  whole,  I  conjedlure,  that  though  the 
firft  and  fecond  propofitions  are  true,  in  a  very 
ufeful  practical  lenle,  yet  they  are  not  fo  in  an  ultimate 
and  precife  one. 


PROP.     VI. 

The  Phienomena  ofjenfible  Pleqfure  and  Pain  appear  t§ 
be  very  Jiiil able  to  the  DoSfrine  of  Vibrations. 


The  moft  vigorous  of  our  fenfations  are  termed 
fenfible  pleafures  and  pains,  as  noted  above,  in  the 
introdutflion.  And  the  vivid  nature  of  thefe  engages 
us  to  be  very  attenti^^e  to  their  feveral  properties, 
relations,  and  oppofitions.  It  is  requifite  therefore, 
in  our  inquiry  into  the  doftrine  of  vibrations,  to 
examine,  how  far  the  phienomena  of  fenfible  plea- 
fure  and  pain  can  be  deduced  from,  or  explained  by  it. 

Firft 


and  Aflbciation  in  general,  35 

Firft  then.  The  do6lrine  of  vibrations  feems  to 
require,  that  each  pain  fliould  differ  from  the  corre- 
fponding  and  oppofite  pleafure,  not  in  kind,  but  in 
degree  only ;  i.  e.  that  pain  lliould  be  nothing  more 
than  pleafure  itfelf,  carried  beyond  a  due  limit.  P'or 
of  the  four  differences  of  vibrations  mentioned  in  the 
firft  corollary  of  the  foregoing  propofition,  three  are 
given,  viz.  thofe  of  kind,  place,  and  line  of  direc- 
tion, in  the  pleafures  and  pains  which  correfpond, 
as  oppofites  to  each  other  :  there  is  therefore  nothing 
left,  from  whence  the  difference  of  fuch  pleafures  and 
pains  can  arife,  except  the  difference  of  degree.  But 
the  phsenomena  appear  to  be  fufficiendy  fuitable  to 
this  reafoning,  inafmuch  as  all  pleafure  appears  to 
pafs  into  pain,  by  increafing  its  caufe,  impreffion, 
duration,  fenfibility  of  the  organ  upon  which  it  is 
impreffed,  &c.  Thus  an  agreeable  warmth  may  be 
made  to  pafs  into  a  troublefome,  or  burning  heat,  by 
increafe,  or  continuance  j  and  the  fame  thing  holds, 
in  refpeft  of  friftion,  light,  and  founds.  And  as 
medicinal  bodies  appear,  from  obfervations  both  phi- 
lofophical  and  vulgar,  to  be  endued  with  more  adive 
properties  than  common  aliments  j  i.  e.  xo  be  fitted 
for  exciting  ftronger  vibrations;  fo  their  taftes  and 
fmells  are,  for  the  moft  part,  ungrateful ;  whereas 
thofe  of  common  aliments  are  pleafant.  It  may  be 
obferved  alfo,  that  fome  painful  fenfations,  as  they 
decreafe  by  time,  or  the  removal  of  the  caufe,  pafs 
into  pofitive  local  pleafures,  of  the  fame  fpecies  as 
the  preceding  pain ;  thus  (hewing  the  near  alliance 
between  pleafure  and  pain  ;  and  that  a  mere  difference 
in  degree  puts  on  the  appearance  of  one  in  kind,  at 
a  certain  point.  I  fuppofe  it  may  be  referred  to  this 
head,  that  fome  bitter  and  acrimonious  taftes  leave 
an  agreeable  relifli  of  the  fweet  kind  upon  the  tongue, 
after  fome  time. 

Secondly,   It  agrees  well  with  the  dodrine  of  vi- 
brations, that  all  evident  folutions  of  continuity  in 

D  3  the 


<^ 


3^  Of  the  Doihiues  of  Vibrations 

the  living  parts  occafion  pain,  inafinuch  as  a  folution 
of  continuity  cannot  liappen  without  a  violent  imprel- 
fion  of  fome  fcnfiblc  objtcl,  nor,  by  confequencc, 
without  violent  mutual  actions  between  tlie  objecft, 
nerves,  and  .rther.  'ihe  folution  of  continuity  does 
therefore  prefuppofe  that  degree  of  violence  in  the  vi- 
brations, which  exceeds  the  linnit  of  pleafure,  and  is 
proper  to  pain,  according  to  the  foregoing  paragraph. 

I'hirdiy,  We  tnay,  in  like  manner,  give  a  reafon, 
from  the  doctrine  of  vibrations,  both  why  a  mode* 
rate  degree  of  diftention  in  the  parts  is  neceflary  to 
their  growth,  and  pleafurable  fl:ate ;  and  alfo  why  all 
great  diftentions  are  attended  with  pain  for  a  con- 
fiderable  time,  before  they  are  raifed  to  fuch  a  pitch 
as  to  caufe  a  vifible  folution  of  continuity.  For  a 
great  diftenfion  is  equivalent  to  a  vigorous  impreflion 
of  a  fenfible  objeft,  being  often  caufed  by  fuch  j  and 
as  the  fituation  of  the  fmall  particles  is  changed  in 
great  diftentions,  their  mutual  adions  will  be  changed 
alfo,  and  fo  may  give  rife  to  more  vigorous  vibra- 
tions ;  and  thefe  increafed  vibrations  may  either  fall 
within  the  limits  of  pleafure,  or  go  beyond  them,  ac- 
cording to  their  degree.  We  are  alfo  to  confider, 
that,  in  all  confiderable  diftentions  there  is  an  increafe 
of  fri6lion  between  the  vcficls  and  circulating  fluids, 
and  confequently  of  heat,  i.  e.  of  vibrations. 

But  befides  this,  it  feems  not  in)probable,  that  in 
preternatural  and  painful  diftentions,  the  fmall  par- 
ticles are  perpetually  feparating  themfelves  from  their 
former  cohefions,  and  running  into  new  ones  ;  fo  that 
a  minute  and  invifible  folution  of  continuity  is  carried 
on  during  the  whole  diftention,  till  fuch  time  as  this 
degree  of  diftention  becomes  familiar  to  the  parts, 
and  the  fituation  and  mutual  acSlions  of  the  fmall  par- 
ticles be  accommodated  to  ft.  Thus  the  caufe  of  the 
pain  in  diftentions  will  arife  from  the  folution  of  con- 
tinuity, and  may  be  referred  to  the  foregoing  head. 
And  converfely  it  appears,  that  in  manifeft  foiutions 

of 


and  Aflbciation  in  general,  37 

of  continuity,  occafioned  by  wounds,  burns,  &c.  there 
always  arifes  in  the  neighbouring  parts,  which  are 
inflamed,  a  preternatural  diftention  of  the  fmali 
fibres  and  veflels ;  by  which  means  the  pain  is  re- 
newed and  continued.  Every  manifeil  folution  of 
continuity  does  therefore,  according  to  the  explana- 
tion of  diftention  juft  laid  down,  include  within  itfelf 
an  infinite  number  of  minute  invifible  folutions. 

Hence  we  may  afk,  whether  this  minute  invifible 
folution  of  continuity  in  the  infinitefimal   medullary 
particles  of  the  brain,  is  not  that  common  limit,  and 
middle  point,  which  feparates  pleafure  from  pain,  and 
of  which  the  vifible  folutions  of  continuity,  which  are 
caufed  by  external  injuries,    are  a  type,    and  alfo  a 
means,  viz.  by   propagating  violent  vibrations  up  to 
the  brain.     It  is  iome  prefumption  in  favour  of  this 
pofition,    that    all    conjeftures    concerning    invifible 
things  ought  to  be  taken  from    vifible  ones  of  the 
fame  kind  j  alfo  that  it  is  particularly  fuitable  to  the 
dodrine  of  vibrations;  inafmuch  as,  laying  down  this 
dodtrine,  one  may  eafily  conceive  how  moderate  and 
pleafant  impreflions  may  agitate  the  medullary  par- 
ticles in  fo  moderate  a  degree,  as  that  they  fliall  again 
return    to    their   former   fituations   and    connexions, 
when  the  agitation  is  over;  whereas  violent  and  pain- 
ful ones  may  force  the  particles  from  thence,  and  give 
rife  to  new  ones ;  /'.  e.  to  the  folution  of  continuity. 
And  as  the  body  is  fo  formed,  that  great  and   vifible  ■ 
folutions  of  continuity   may  be  healed  again,  and  the 
parts  refl:ored,  in  great  meafure,    to  their  primitive 
integrity    and    perfedion,    by   the   power  of  nature, 
unlefs  where  there  is  a  lofs  of  fubftance  (and  yet  even 
here  the  fame  end  is  obtained  in  part) ;  fo  we  may 
fuppofe,  that  the  power  of  nature  reflores  all  minute 
folutions  of  continuity  in  the  conftituent,  infinitefimal 
particles,  almoft  inllantaneoufly,  and  fo  that  the  body 
receives   no   perceptible   detriment    from    fingle   in- 
ftances,  though  it  probably  does  from  frequent  repe- 

D  3  titioiiSi 


2%  Of  the  Bo^frines  cf  Vibrations 

titions ;  agreeably  to  which,  it  is  generally  fiippofed, 
that  pain,  by  often  returning,  impairs  the  faculties, 
both  bodily  and  mental. 

I'ourthly,  1  he  bones,  nails,  hair,  and  cuticle, 
may  confilU-ntly  with  the  doctrine  of  vibrations,  have 
a  folution  of  continuity  produced  in  their  parts,  with- 
out pain  enfuing ;  for  they  are  hard  and  therefore  in- 
capable, as  it  feems,  of  receiving  and  communicating 
to  the  contiguous  nerves,  and  thence  to  the  brain, 
vibrations  of  any  confidcrable  degree  of  ftrength.  We 
are  alfo  to  fuppofc,  that  in  palfies,  mortifications,  &:c. 
changes  of  texture  of  fomevvhat  a  like  kind,  are  pro- 
duced, fo  as  to  render  tlie  parts  affe<5led  thereby  in- 
capable of  conveying  fcnfation  to  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance  of  the  brain.  Okl  age,  inadivity,  inflamma- 
tion, pain,  &:c.  are  in  like  manner  to  be  confidered, 
as  inducing  fuch  a  degree  of  condcnfation,  fixation, 
and  callofity,  in  the  medullary  fubftance  itfelf,  as 
muft  end  at  lad:  in  infenfibility  and  death. 

Fifthly,  It  is  not  unfuitablc  to  the  do6lrine  of  vibra- 
tions, that  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  fame  external 
imprefTions  fliould  iiave  die  power  of  converting  original 
pains  into  pleafures,  and  pleafures  into  mere  fenfations, 
;.  e.  into  evanefcent  pleafures,  as  we  find  it  has  in  faft. 
For  this  may  be  efi^eded  by  fuch  a  change  in  the  organ 
and  brain,  as  that  the  organ  (hall  fend  weaker  and 
weaker  vibrations  perpetually  to  the  brain,  upon  every 
fuccelTive  renewal  of  the  fame  imprefTion,  and  the 
brain  become  perpetually  lefs  and  lefs  difpofed  to  re- 
ceive ftrong  vibrations,  though  the  power  of  com- 
munication from  the  imprefTions  fhould  continue  the 
fame.  It  remains  therefore  to  be  inquired,  what  gene- 
ral tendencies  in  the  fmall  medullary  particles,  might 
difpofe  them  to  undergo  fuch  changes.  And  it  ap- 
pears to  me,  that  a  change  of  the  fpheres  of  attrac- 
tion and  repulfion  in  thefe  particles,  upon  every 
change  in  their  fituations,  fo  as  always  to  lean  to- 
wards the  fituation  laft  fuperinduced,  might  be  fuffi- 

cient 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  3g 

cient  for  this  purpofe.  However,  this  is  a  mere  fup- 
pofition,  and  'that  of  a  very  reclufe  nature.  Only 
let  it  be  obferved,  that  the  fa6l  to  be  here  accounted 
for,  viz.  the  decreafe  in  the  efficacy  of  impreffions 
frequently  repeated,  is ,  both  an  evident  one,  and  alfo 
muft  have  its  rife  from  fome  powers  in  the  fmall 
parts  of  matter  over  each  other.  It  muft  therefore 
admit  of  an  explanation,  either  from  the  doflrine  of 
vibrations,  or  from  fome  other  law  of  m.atter  and 
motion.  And  if  the  doctrine  of  vibrations  be  found 
fuitable  to  other  phasnomena,  it  may  be  prefumed  not 
to  be  unfuitable  to  this,  till  fuch  time  as  fome  manifeft 
inconfiftency  between  them  Ihall  appear. 

It  ought  to  be  remarked  here,  that  this  tranfit  of 
original  pains  into  pleafures,  and  of  vivid  pleafures 
into  faint  ones,  by  frequent  repetition,  bears  fome 
relation  to  the  above-mentioned  tranfition  of  pains 
into  pofitive  local  pleafures,  of  the  fame  kind  with 
themfelves. 

To  this  head  of  confideration  may  be  rer'erred  Dr. 
Jurin's  obfervation,  viz.  "  That  when  we  have  been 
"  for  fome  time  affeded  with  one  fenfation,  as  foon 
"  as  we  ceafe  to  be  fo  affedted,  a  contrary  fenfation  is 
"  apt  to  arife  in  us,  fometimes  of  itfelf,  and  fometimes 
"  from  fuch  caufes,  as  at  another  time  would  not  pro- 
"  duce  that  fenfation  at  all,  or,  at  leaft,  not  to  the 
*'  fame  degree."  For  the  continued  impreffion  of 
the  fame  objedt  will  fo  fix  upon  the  fenfory  nerve, 
and  region  of  the  brain  correfponding  thereto,  a 
tendency  to  one  peculiar  fort  of  vibrations,  that  an 
impreffion  of  an  oppofite,  or  very  diffii^rent  fort,  muft 
do  more  than  ufual  violence  to  the  brain,  i.  e.  will 
excite  a  glaring  fenfation  of  an  oppofite  nature.  See 
the  Inftances  mentioned  by  Dr.  Jurin,  in  his  EJfay  on 
diJlinSi  and  indijiin^  vifion. 

Sixthly,  We  may  account  for  the  different  kinds 
and  degrees  of  pleafure  and  pain,  from  the  four 
differences  of  vibrations  mentioned  above,  viz.  thofe 

D  4  of 


40  Of  the  Doflriiies  of  Vibrations 

of  dfgrcf,    kind,    place,    and   line  of  diredion,  and 
their   various   combinations   with  each  other,     lor  it 
is  obvious  to  conceive,  that  thefe  combinations  may 
be  fufliciently  numerous  and  dii^inft  from  each  other, 
to  aniwer  to  the  fafts.     If  the  vibrations  go  beyond 
the  common  limit  of  pleafurc  and   pain  in  one  part 
of  the  brain,  at  the  fame  time  that  they  fall  fhorc  of 
it  in  others,    the  refult  will   be  a   pleafure  or   p.iin, 
according  as  this  or  that  loit  of  vibrations  prevails; 
and  if  they  be  nearly  equal,  it  will  be  difficult  to  de- 
termine of  which  kind  it  is.      If  the  vibrations  fall  a 
little  Ihort  in  all  the  parts,  they  will  generate  a  high 
degree  of  pleafure;    which,    however,    mufl:    be   lefs 
than   the  lead  general  pain,  /.  <?.  fuch  a  one  wherein 
the  vibrations  go  beyond  the  limits  in  all  the  parts: 
but  it  may  be  far  greater  than   partial  pains,  or  than 
thofe  which  afFefl  only  one  j)articular  region  of  the 
brain.     Hence  we  may  fee,  that  the  pains  are  in  ge- 
neral greater  than  the   pleafures ;  but  then   they   are 
more   rare   for   the   fame   realbn,    being   fuch   violent 
flates  as  cannot  arife  from  common  impreflions.     Or, 
if  we  fuppofe  the  pains  to  be  frequent,  they  will  then 
fo  far  alter  the  difpofinon  of  the  medullary  fubftance, 
according    to    what    was    faid    above,    as    that    many 
original  pains  will  be  converted  into  pleafures :   which 
indeed  feems  to  be  the  cafe  not  iinfrequently  ;  for  the 
origans  of  the  new-born  infant  are  fo  delicate,  as  to 
receive  pain  from   many  of  thofe   impreflions  which 
afterwards  yield   pleafure.     But  then,  his   fourccs  of 
pleafure  feem  to  be  multiplied  more  than  in  propor- 
tion   to   what    he    fulFers   by    this    previous    paffage 
through  pain. 

In  certain  cafes  of  excefTive  pains,  the  violent 
vibrations  appear  at  lafl:  to  excite  a  latent  altradive 
power  in  the  medullary  particle?,  in  the  manner  here- 
after to  be  defcribed,  in  refpe6t  of  tlie  fibres  of  the 
mufcles  and  membranes,  which  puts  a  (top  to  thofe 
very  vibrations  that  excited  if.     Hence  faintings  and 

ftupors. 


and  AlTociation  in  general.  41 

ftupors,  i.  e.  the  ceffation  of  pain  from  violent  pains. 
However,  a  greater  degree  of  vibrations  is  probably 
required  for  exciting  this  attra6live  power  in  the  me- 
dullary particles  than  in  white  fibres,  and  in  white 
fibres  than  in  red  ones,  as  will  appear  hereafter. 

It  follows  alfo,  from  the  principles  here  laid  down, 
that  all  the  pkafures,  though  particularly  different 
from  each  other,  ought  to  have  a  general  refemblance, 
in  their  circumftances  and  confequences :  and  the 
pains  likewife. 

Seventhly,  All  the  mere  fenfations,  which  enter 
the  mind  by  the  five  external  fcnfes,  admit  of  a  gene- 
ral analyfis,  upon  the  fame  principles  as  the  pleafures 
and  pains  do.  For  all  the  mere  fenfations  were,  in 
their  original  flate,  either  pleafures  or  pains,  and 
vary  now  from  their  original  (late  only  by  the  dimi- 
nution of  the  degree.  Let  therefore  all  the  differences 
of  kind,  place,  and  line  of  diredtion,  be  combined 
in  all  their  varieties,  the  degree  being  fuppofed  every 
where  evanefcent ;  and  we  fhall  have  all  the  particular 
vibrations  from  whence  each  mere  fenfation  arifes. 
This  is  the  general  account.  But  it  is  a  moft  difficult 
problem  to  explain,  by  what  differences  of  kind  the 
particular  fenfations,  either  of  the  fam.e,  or  of  different 
lenfes,  are  diftinguifhed  from  each  other. 

It  feems  probable  to  me,  that  the  limits  of  the 
(tvQn  primary  colours,  viz.  the  extreme  red,  the 
limit  of  the  red  and  orange,  of  the  orange  and 
yellow,  yellow  and  green,  green  and  blue,  blue 
and  indigo,  indigo  and  violet,  and  the  extreme  vio- 
let, excire  vibrations  in  the  optic  nerve,  whole 
times  are  proportional  to  the  times  of  vibration  of 
a  firing  which  founds  the  notes  in  order,  according 
to  the  key  mentioned  by  Sir  IJaac  Newton  in  his  Op- 
Hcsy  i.  e.  the  notes  D,  E,  F,  G,  A,  B,  C,  D.  This 
hypothefis  affords  at  leaft  a  probable  reafon  for  the 
feveral  very  particular  breadths  of  the  primary  co- 
lours, 


42  Of  the  DoRr'tnes  of  Vibrations 

lours,  in  the  prifinatic  oblong  image  of  the  fun,  as 
I  lliall  endeavour  to  llu'w  in  its  place,  Prop.  56. 

If  the  frequency  of  llie  vibrations  excited  by  the 
fcvcral  fapid  and  odorous  bodies  in  the  nerves  of  the 
tongue  and  membrana  Icrlineideriana,  could  be  dif- 
covered,  it  is  not  improbable  but  this  would  be  a  clue 
to  lead  us  into  the  inner  conftitution  of  natural  bodies, 
fince  one  may  reafonably  luppofe,  that  each  fapid  and 
odorous  body  excites  vibrations  of  the  fame  frequency 
as  thofe  which  take  place  in  it  before  it  is  tailed  or 
fmeit  to. 

The  lolution  of  the  fame  problem,  in  the  feveral 
fenfes,  might  alfo  a  little  unfold  to  us  the  different 
internal  llru6ture  of  the  feveral  nerves,  and  of  the 
parts  of  the  brain  that  correfpond  thereto.  l<'or  it 
feems  probable  to  me,  that  each  nerve  and  region 
is  originally  fitted  to  receive,  and,  as  one  may  fay, 
fympathize  with,  fuch  vibrations  as  are  likely  to  be 
impreffed  upon  them  in  the  various  incidents  of  life ; 
and  not  that  the  auditory  'nerve  could  perform  the 
office  of  the  optic,  if  put  into  its  place,  or  vice  verfd, 
&c.  according  to  Raw. 

Eighthly,  it  is  obferved  by  medical  writers,  that 
pain  is  apt  to  excite  a  contraction  in  the  fibres  of  the 
neighbouring  membranes.  Now  this  is  very  agree- 
able to  that  power  which  fenfory  vibrations  have,  in 
general,  over  the  red  fiefhy  mufcles,  for  contracting 
them  in  the  manner  to  be  defcribed  hereafter.  For 
fince  vibrations  of  a  middle  flrength,  by  defcending 
into  the  red  fibres  of  the  mufcles,  are  fufficicnt  to 
contract  them  in  the  ordinary  funCtions  and  aflions 
of  life,  it  is  not  unrealbnable  to  expeft,  that  the 
ftronger  vibrations  which  attend  pain,  fliould  be  fuf- 
ficient  to  contraCt  the  pale  fibres  of  membranes,  though 
thefe  be  in  themfclves  of  a  lefs  contra6tile  difpofition. 

It  is  agreeable  to  this,  that  titillation  and  itching, 
which  lie,  as  it  were,  upon  the  confines  of  ])leafure 
and  pain,  are  more  apt  to  diffufe  themfelves  over  the 

neighbouring 


and  Affociation  in  general.  43 

neighbouring  parts  than  pain.  For  titillation  and 
itching  only  agitate  the  fmall  particles  of  the  mem- 
branes, and  therefore  run  along  their  furfaces,  by  the 
fucceffive  communication  of  thefe  agitations ;  whereas 
pain,  by  contracting  the  fibres,  puts  a  flop  to  thefe 
agitations,  and  confequently  to  its  own  diffufion  over 
the  neighbouring  parts. 

Ninthly,  Extreme  and  pointed  parts,  fuch  as  the 
extremity  of  the  nofe,  the  uvula,  the  epiglottis, 
the  nipples,  and  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  are  in  ge- 
neral more  fubjeft  to  irritation,  itching,  and  inflamma- 
tion, and  endued  with  a  greater  degree  of  fenfibility 
than  the  other  parts.  Now  this  phsenomenon  agrees 
with  the  doftrine  of  vibrations,  inafmuch  as  fuch 
parts  muft,  according  to  the  Newtonian  hypothefis, 
be  furrounded  with  an  sether  of  a  greater  denfity  than 
that  within  their  pores,  and  which  alfo  grows  denfer 
and  denfer,  in  a  regular  manner.  For  one  may  con- 
ceive, that  the  vibrations  communicated  to  this  denfer 
aether,  will  be  ftronger  in  proportion  to  its  denfity ; 
and  confequently,  that  they  will  agitate  the  fmall  par- 
ticles of  the  extreme  parts  alfo  with  vibrations  ftronger 
than  ordinary. 

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  fenfibility  of  each  part 
does  depend,  in  great  meafure,  on  the  number,  ftruc- 
ture,  and  difpofition  of  the  nervous  papillas,  which 
are  the  immediate  organ  in  the  fenfes  of  feeling, 
tafte,  and  fmell ;  but  then  we  may  remark,  that  the 
fame  obfervation  holds  in  refpeft  of  thefe  nervous 
papillfE.  For  they  are  alfo  extreme  and  pointed  parts, 
and  that  efpecially,  if  we  fuppofe,  which  feems  pro- 
bable, that  when  any  part  is  in  a  ftate  of  exquifite 
fenfibility,  the  nervous  papillae  are  ereded  (in  fome 
fuch  manner  as  the  hairs  of  the  neck  and  back  in  cer- 
tain animals,  when  enraged),  fo  as  to  recede  from 
each  other,  and  confequently,  to  admit  the  denfer 
asther  between  them.  They  may  alfo,  upon  the  fame 
occafions,   be   made  turgid,   by   the  conftriftion  of 

their 


44  Of  the  Doflrhes  of  Vibrations 

their  bafcs,  arul   thus  have  their  iVnfibility,  or  power 
of  rt'Cfivinj;  vibrations,  increaled  by  ciiftcnrion. 

We  ipay  remark  liJcewifc,  in  piufiiing  this  method 
of  realbning,  tliat  the  athcr  whicli  lies  contiguous,  to 
the  metlullary  fubflance  in  the  ventricles  of  the  brain, 
is  denfer   than   that   which   lies  in  the  meiiullary  fub- 
ftance  itfelf.     May  we  not   therefore   conje(5lure,   that 
one  ufe  of  the   cavitie<;  of  the  ventricles  is  to  increafe 
and  keep  up  all   the   vibrations  propagated  from   the 
external   nerves   into  the  medullary    llibdance  of  the 
brain,  by   means  of  the  denfer  rether  lodged  in  thole 
cavities ;     that    blood    and    lerum    extravafatcd,     and 
lying   in   the  ventricles,  luflbcatc  fenfations,    by  ex- 
cluding this  denfer  jEther  as  well   as   by   prcfling  on 
the    medullary    fubftance  ;     and,    laftly,    that    thofe 
brutes    whole    olfa<5lory   nerves    have    cavities    within 
them   continued   from   the  ventricles,  are  more  acute 
than   men,    in   perceiving  odours,  and  diftinguifhing 
them  from  each  other,  in  parr,  upon   this  account  ? 
Boerbaave  is,  indeed,    of  opinion,    that  the  oppofite 
fklcs  of  the  ventricle  always  touch  each  other,  fo  as  to 
leave  no  cavity.      But  it  feems  more  reafonable  to 
fuppofe,  that  a  fubtle  vapour,  which  is  exhaled  from 
the   veflels   of  the    inverting   membrane,    and   whofe 
particles,  like   the   vapour  of  water,  have  a  repulfive 
power,  in  refpcft  of  each   other,  prevents   the  abfo- 
lute  mutual   conta6t  of  the  oppofite   fides,   in   com- 
mon cafes.     And   the  fame  thing  is  favoured  by  the 
experiments   tried   upon   the  Parifian  beggar.     Since 
the  brain   in   him  could   be  fomewhat  prefled   in,  it 
feems  that  the  fkuU  was  not  entirely  full  before. 


PROP. 


and  Aflbclation  in  general,  js^^ 

PROP.     VII. 

'The  Pbcmcmena  of  Sleep  appear  to  he  very  Juitahle  to 
the  Dotlrine  of  Vibrations. 

Here  I  obJerve,  firft,  that  new-born  children 
fleep  almpft  always.  Now  this  may  be  acccounted 
for  by  the  do6lrine  of  vibrations,  in  the  following 
manner :  the  foetus  fleeps  always,  having  no  fenfa- 
tion  from  without  imprelTed  upon  it,  and  only  be- 
comes awake  upon  its  entrance  into  a  new  world, 
viz.  by  means  of  the  vigorous  vibrations  which  are 
i«)prefled  ypon  it.  It  is  reafonable  therefore  to  ex- 
pert, that  the  new-born  child  (hould  fall  back  into 
its  natural  (late  of  fleep,  as  foon  a?  thefe  vibrations 
ceafe,  and  return  again  to  a  ftate  of  vigilance,  only 
from  the  renewal  of  vigorous  impreflionsj  and  foon- 
alternately,  agreeably  to  the  fad. 

Secondly,  Even  adults  are  difpofed  to  fleep,  when 
the  impieffions  of  external  objefts  are  excluded,  and 
their  bodies  kept  in  a  ftate  of  reft,  for  the  fame 
reafons  as  thofejuft  mentioned  '\^  the  fimilar  ftate  of 
young  children.  However,  they  incline  more  to  vi- 
gilance than  children,  partly  becaufe  their  folids  and 
fluids  are  more  aftive,  and  lefs  compreflible,  i.  e, 
more  fufceptible  and  retentive  of  vibrations  j  and 
partly,  becaufe  aflbciation  brings  in  perpetual  trains 
of  ideas,  and  confequently  of  vibrations,  fufiiciently 
vivid  to  keep  up  vigilance  in  common  cafes. 

Thirdly,  Having  prefented  the  reader  with  the 
two  foregoing  obfervations,  which  are  of  a  very 
obvious  kind,  I  will  now  inquire  vv?ith  more  minute- 
nefs,  into  the  intimate  and  precife  nature  of  fle^p. 
It  appears  then,  that,  during  fleep,  the  blood  is 
accumulated  in  the  veins,  and  particularly  in  the  venal 
iinufes  which  furround  the  brain  and  fpinal  m.arrow ; 
and  alfo,  that  it  is  rarefisd,  at  leaft  for  the  moft  part. 

For 


46  Of  the  DoHr'ines  of  Vibrations 

For  as  the  ac^Vioris  of  the  nuifcles  ri]ucczc  the  blood 
out  of  the  veins  during  vigilance,  lo  tlieir  inactivity 
during  flcep  futVers  the  blood  to  lodge  in  the  veins; 
and  the  decumbent  pollure,  which  is  common  to  ani- 
mals in  deep,  fulfcrs  it  to  lodge  particularly  in  the 
venal  finufes  of  the  brain  antl  jpinal  marrow.  And 
it  is  agreeable  to  this,  that,  in  moll  dillcdions,  the 
blood  is  found  chiefly  in  the  veins,  and,  in  diflec- 
tions  after  lethargies,  apoplexies,  &c.  the  venal 
finufes  of  the  brain,  and  confequcntly  thofe  of  the 
fpinal  marrow,  which  communicate  freely  with  tliem, 
arc  particularly  full.  As  to  the  rarefadion  of  the 
blood,  it  follows  from  the  warmth  of  the  body, 
which  is  an  ufual  attendant  upon  fleep,  and  is  caufed 
by  the  reft  of  the  body,  the  warmth  of  the  place 
where  the  perfon  Heeps,  the  coverings,  and  the  fer- 
mentative difpctfition  of  the  frefh  chyle,  which  then 
enters  the  blood.  It  follows  therefore,  that  the  brain 
and  fpinal  marrow  will  be  particularly  comprefled 
during  fleep,  fince  the  blood  then  takes  up  more 
fpace,  is  particularly  accumulated  within  the  cavities 
of  the  fkull  and  vertebrse,  and  the  hardnefs  of  thefe 
bones  will  not  fuffer  them  to  yield  or  make  more 
room.  It  follows  alfo,  that  the  fofcnefs  of  the  me- 
dullary fubftance  will  fubjedt  it  to  the  effedts  of  this 
compreflion,  more  than  the  cortical ;  fo  that,  if  we 
fuppofe  its  fundtions  to  confift  in  receiving,  retaining, 
and  communicating  vibrations,  it  will  be  rendered 
peculiarly  unfit  for  thefe  fundions,  from  the  com- 
prefTion  here  mentioned,  i.  e.  the  animal  will  be 
indifpofed  to  fenfation  and  motion,  agreeably  to 
obfervation. 

There  are  many  other  arguments  which  might  be 
brought  to  fliew,  that  during  fleep,  and  fleepy  dif- 
tempers,  the  brain  is  particularly  comprefled,  if  it 
were  necefl^ary.  But  the  inftance  of  the  Pariftan 
beggar,  above  noted,  is  mod  to  this  purpofe.  Thi*. 
perfon  had  a  perforation  in  his  flvull,  which  did  not 

oflify  i 


-  and  Aflbciation  m  general.  47 

offifyi  whence,  by  external  prcffure  upon  that  part, 
the  internal  regions  of  the  brain  might  be  affeded  5 
and  it  was  conftantly  obferved,  that,  as  the  prefTure 
increafed,  he  grew  more  and  more  fleepy,  and  at  lafl: . 
fell  into  a  temporary  apoplexy. 

In  young  children,  there  feems  to  be  a  conftant 
moderate  preflure  of  the  fkull  upon  the  brain.  For 
the  brain  is  of  a  great  relative  magnitude  in  them, 
and,  by  its  endeavour  to  expand  itfelf,  it  keeps  the 
futures  from  uniting  too  firmly,  till  fuch  time  as  it  is 
arrived  at  its  full  growth.  It  muft  therefore  be  com- 
prefled  in  return,  by  the  re-a6lion  of  the  fkull.  And 
this  may  be  confidered  as  a  circumftance,  which  con- 
curs to  render  young  children  more  apt  to  fleep  than 
adults.  When  old  perfons  are  fleepy,  it  is  a  morbid 
affection,  and  may  arife  either  from  an  hydropical 
difpofition,  whereby  the  turgefcence  of  the  neigh- 
bouring parts  comprefTes  the  medullary  fubftance; 
or  from  a  defe<5l  of  nutrition  in  this  fubftance,  which 
renders  it  foft  and  compreffible  in  a  preternatural  de- 
gree. If  the  venal  finufes,  and  other  blood  velTcls, 
of  the  brain,  be,  by  any  accident  preternaturally  dif- 
tended,  and  continue  fo  for  a  confiderable  time,  they 
will  fcarce  ever  recover  their  priftine  tone  and  dimen- 
fionsj  and  this  fo  much  the  more,  as  the  perfon 
approaches  to  old  age. 

For  the  fame  reafon,  as  the  medullary  fubftance 
within  the  fkull  and  vertebrae  is  comprefled  during 
fleep,  that  of  the  ganglions,  plexufes,  and  trunks 
of  the  nerves  in  other  parts  of  the  body,  will  be 
comprefled  alfo,  though  in  a  lefs  degree.  For  this 
fubftance  has  no  blood  or  grofs  fluids  within  it,  and 
is  far  the  fofceft  of  all  the  parts  of  the  body  i  and 
the  membranes,  which  inveft  all  the  parts  of  the  bo- 
dy, perform  the  fame  office  to  them,  in  a  lefs  degree, 
as  the  flsuU  does  to  the  brain,  /'.  e.  check  their  diften- 
tion.  The  furrounding  membranes  muft  therefore 
comprefs  the  foft  medullary  fubftance  in  the  gan- 
glions. 


\ 


4l  Of  the  Dctlr'mes  cf  Vibrations 

glions,  plcxiilVs,  and  trunks  of  the  nerves,  during 
flcep,  on  account  o(  the  rarefaction  of  the  humours 
at  th;it  tiiiic;  wlience,  according  to  the  dodrine  of 
vibrations,  Jcnfory  ones  can  neither  afccnd  freely  from 
the  fxtern.il  organs  to  the  brain,  nor  motoiy  ones 
defcend  into  the  limbs,  /.  e.  the  animal  will  be  in- 
lenfible  and  inadive,  as  it  is  found  to  be  in  faft. 

Is  it  not  probable,  that,  as  fleep  comes  on,  the 
oppofitc  fides  of  the  ventticles  of  the  brain  approach 
towards  each  other,  on  account  of  the  comprefTion 
here  alfcrtcd ;  alfo,  that  they  become  contiguous  at 
the  inltant  of  lleep,  excluding  the  denfer  aether, 
mentioned  in  t!ie  foregoing  pjopofition,  thereby  ? 
Bv  this  me.iiis,  the  power  of  fenfation  would  receive 
a  remarkable  diminution  at  the  inflant  of  falling 
afleep,  as  it  leems  to  do.  There  might  alfo  in  cer- 
tain circumftanccs,  arile  a  very  vivid  exertion  of  the 
perceptive  and  motive  faculties  at  thiit  inftant,  from 
the  cou.prefTion  of  the  aithrr  previous  to  its  rare- 
fa6lion,  foch  as  would  account  for  the  fudden  terrors 
and  rtartings  which  happen  at  the  inftant  of  going  to 
fleep,  in  lome  morbid  cafes. 

Fourthly,  It  is  obferved,  that  vigilance  continued 
fatigue,  and  pain,  all  difpol'e  ftrongly  to  fleep.  For 
all  vigorous  or  lonai-continued  vibrations  muft  both 
generate  heat,  whereby  the  blood  and  juices  will  be 
rarefied,  fo  as  to  com.prefs  the  medullary  fubftance, 
and  alfo  exhault  this  fubftance  of  its  fluid  and  adive 
particles,  fo  as  to  render  it  more  eafily  comprefllbie, 
and  Icfs  fufceptible  and  retentive  of  vibrations.  Great 
degrees  of  heat  feem  to  produce  an  extraordinary  pro- 
penficy  to  fleep,  in  nearly  the  fame  way. 

And  when  perfons  expofed  to  extreme  cold  are 
overcome  by  a  pleafing,  but  fatal  fleep,  it  feemr.  as  if 
the  internal  parts  were  aftxffted  with  a  preternatural 
warmth,  from  the  vigorous  fenfations  and  concomi- 
tant vibrations  imprellcd  on  the  external  parts  by 
the  cold,  and  thence  afcending  to  \!vit  brain.    It  agrees 

with 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  45 

with  the  hypothefis  here  propofed,  that  thefe  uneafy 
fenfations  decline  by  degrees,  till  they  fall  within  the 
limits  of  pleafure,  and,  at  laft,  end  in  infenfibility. 
This  fleep  may  prove  fatal,  from  the  great  difference 
between  the  internal  and  external  parts,  in  refped:  of 
heat  J  alfo  from  the  cold's  penetrating  farther  and 
farther.  Mufcular  motion  may  prevent  it,  and  its  ill 
effeds,  partly  as  the  veins  are  emptied  by  this,  partly 
as  it  warms  the  external  parts,  and  cools  the  internal, 
from  the  return  of  the  cool  blood  into  the  courfe  of 
the  circulation.  If  we  fuppofe  the  circulation  to  ceale 
entirely,  at  the  furface  of  the  body  from  the  cold, 
then  will  warm  blood  circulate  through  the  internal 
parts  alone ;  and  thefe  parts  will  continue  to  be  de- 
fended from  the  cold  by  the  external  ones,  for  a 
time.  And  thus  the  body  will  approach  to  the  com- 
mon ftate  of  a  perfon  going  to  fleep. 

It  is  eafy  to  fee,  from  the  method  of  reafoning 
here  ufed,  how  perfons  recovering  from  long  illnelTes 
fhould  be  much  difpofed  to  fleep,  viz.  from  the  ex- 
hauftion  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  their  almofl:  con- 
fl:ant  reft,  their  being  kept  warm,  and  the  frequent 
taking  fuftenance,  fo  as  to  beget  great  quantities  of 
frefli  chyle,  and  confequently,  an  extraordinary  de- 
gree of  a  fermentative  heat. 

Fifthly,  The  manner  in  which  opiates  produce 
fleep  may  be  thus  explained,  agreeably  to  the  doc- 
trine of  vibrations.  Opiates' evidently  excite  grateful 
fenfations  in  the  ftomach  and  bowels.  This  appears 
from  the  fliort  time  in  which  liquid  opiates  take 
efFed  j  and  even  from  immediate  and  direft  fenfa- 
tions :  a  perfon  may  even  feel,  that  the  ftomach  is 
the  feat  of  the  pleafurable  impreflions  made  by 
opiates.  We  are  to  fuppofe  therefore,  that  vivid 
vibrations,  which,  however,  lie  within  the  limits  of 
pleafure,  afcend  perpetually  from  the  ftomach  and 
bowels  along  the  par  vagum,  and  intercoftal  nerves, 
up  to  the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow,  diifufe  themfelves 

Vol.  I.  E  over 


^o  Of  the  Do^rines  of  Vibrations 

over  thefc*,  and  from  thence  defccnd  along  the  nerves 
into  all  the  parts  of  the  body.  Hence  it  follows, 
that  they  will  obicure  and  ovcr-powt*r  all  moderate 
fenfalions,  or  vibrations,  which  liibfifted  before,  or 
which  external  objcifls  may  from  time  to  time  endea- 
vour to  excite,  and  introduce  a  general  pleafurable 
ftate  over  ttic  whole  nervous  fyflem  j  with  trains  of 
pleafuiable  ideas,  in  the  manner  to  be  explained  here- 
after, wlien  we  come  to  treat  of  ideas,  their  genera- 
tions, aflbciations,  and  dependencies  on  bodily  dates. 
During  this  pleafurable  ftate,  the  body  will  of  courfe 
be  compofed  to  lell  j  rcftlcffnefs,  tofiings,  and 
changes  of  pofturc,  being  caufed,  for  the  raoft 
part,  by  uneafy  fenfations.  Hence  the  blood  will  be 
accumulated  in  the  veins  and  venal  finufes,  and  grow 
warm  both  from  the  vigorous  vibrations  excited  by 
the  opiate,  and  from  the  ablolute  reft  of  the  body. 
For  abfolute  reft  conduces,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  to 
make  the  body  grow  warm,  by  the  heat  rtfledted 
from  the  contiguous  coverings;  as,  on  the  contrary, 
the  flighteft  motions  frequently  returning,  ventilate 
and  cool  the  parts.  And  thus  the  comprefTion  of 
the  medullary  fubftance  requifite  for  fleep,  will  be 
induced  by  the  aiftion  of  the  opiate  upon  the  ftomach 
and  bowels. 

But,  befides  this,  we  may  conceive,  that  the  opiate 
particles  excite  vibrations  of  the  fame  kind  in  all  the 
parts  of  the  body,  after  they  are  taken  into  the  blood, 
and  circulate  with  it,  till  fuch  time  as,  by  a  perfedt 
afTimilation,  they  lofe  all  their  peculiar  qualities. 

It  feems  alfo,  that  the  continued  defcent  of  vibra- 
tions, from  the  brain,  and  fpinal  marrow,  into  the 
limbs,  and  external  parts,  agitates  them  fo  much,  as  to 
render  them  unfit  for  receiving  fenfation  and  motion, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  continued  fridiion  of  the  head, 
when  newly  ftiaved,  or  fliaking  the  hand,  occafion 
a  kind  of  numbnefs  in  the  head  and  hand  refpec- 
tively.     For  a  diforder  raifcd  in  the  motory  nerves, 

and 


and  AiTociatlon  in  general.  51 

and  mufcular  fibres,  analogous  to  nunnbnefs  in  the 
fenfory  nerves,  and  fentienc  papilla,  muft  produce 
ineptitude  to  motion.  It  feems  therefore,  that  the 
infenfibilicy  and  immobility  which  proceed  from 
opiates,  and  which  concur  in  haftening  the  fleep,  and 
increafing  its  degree,  arife  in  great  part  from  this 
caufe.  The  numbnefs,  and  -  paralytic  weakneffes, 
which  frequendy  fucceed  after  opiates,  are  evidences 
for  what  is  here  alleged. 

Opium  feems  to  have  an  intermediate  degree  of 
aftivity  between  narcotics,  or  ftupefying  poifons,  on 
one  hand,  and  grateful  aliments,  particularly  vinous 
liquors,  on  the  other.  Narcotics  operate  fo  vio- 
lendy  on  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  the  brain,  and 
the  external  parts,  as  to  bring  confufion  on  the  fen- 
fations,  and  trains  of  ideas,  and  convulfions  on  the 
mufcular  fyftem.  And  that  thefe  effefls  are  pro- 
duced by  a  local  influence  on  the  ttomach,  in  the 
manner  propofed  concerning  opiates,  appears,  be- 
caufe  they  ceafe,  or  abate  much,  foon  after  the  nar- 
cotic is  ejefted  by  vomiting ;  alfo  becaufe  whipping 
a  dog,  after  he  has  taken  the  nux  vomica,  contri- 
butes to  obviate  its  ill  efFedls.  Wines,  and  grateful 
aliments,  difpofe  to  fleep,  partly  by  their  immediate 
,efFe<5ts  on  the  fl:omach,  partly  by  their  effefts  after 
they  are  abforbed.  But  the  degree  not  being  fo  great 
as  in  opiates,  it  may  more  eafily  be  overcome  by  a 
variety  of  common  or  vigorous  impreflionsj  in  which 
cafe  the  vivid  vibrations  excited  by  the  wine,  or 
aliment,  will  illuminate  all  the  imprefljons,  and 
add  ftrength  to  all  the  motions.  The  fame  thing  is 
obferved  of  opiates,  in  thofe  who  take  them  fre- 
quendy. 

Sixthly,  Chylification,  fanguification,  nutrition, 
and  growth,  feem  to  proceed  befl:  during  fleep.  This 
may  be  conjeflured  from  the  fleepinefs  of  all  animals 
after  eating,  fince  fleep  and  chylification,  &c.  mufl: 
here  concur;  and  from  the  almoft  conftant  fleep  of 

E  z  new 


52  Of  the  DoHriHes  of  Vibrations 

new-born  children,  above  taken  notice  of,  fince  na- 
ture fecms  chiefly  intent  on  the  due  performance  of 
thcfc  fun(ftions,  for  fomc  time  after  birth.  Now  the 
doctrine  of  vibrations  may  be  made  to  illuftrate  thefe 
points,  in  fome  meafurc.  For  fince  refpiration  be- 
comes ftfong  and  convulfive  at  the  inftant  of  going 
to  fleep,  it  will  renew  and  increafe  the  vibrations  ex- 
cited in  tlic  nerves  of  the  ilomach  and  bowels  by 
their  contents,  which  we  mud  fuppofe  to  have  lan- 
guiflied  before,  in  the  fame  manner  as  thofe  which 
fubfilted  in  the  external  fenfes.  The  organs  of  di- 
gellion  therefore,  as  well  as  thofe  of  refpiration,  are 
in  a  ftate  of  vigilance,  and  are  intent  upon  the  per- 
formance of  their  proper  functions,  while  the  other 
parts  are  in  a  fbate  of  fleep  and  inaction,  and  recruit- 
ing, in  order  to  perform  their  fun(5tions  in  a  due 
manner,  upon  a  return  of  vigilance.  And  this  holds 
moCl  particularly  in  refpedl  of  the  medullary  fub- 
(tance  of  the  brain,  fpinal  marrow,  and  nerves,  which, 
by  the  confent  of  all,  is  the  chief  inftrument  of 
nutrition  and  growth.  Since  the  vibrations  which 
take  place  in  it  during  fleep  are  languid,  it  will 
then  be  filled  and  recruited,  and  confequently  fitted 
for  nutrition  and  growth  ;  which  will  be  farther 
favoured  by  the  concurrence  of  a  complete  chylifi- 
cation  and  fanguification,  at  the  fame  time. 

The  increafed  convulfive  refpiration,  and  increafed 
force  of  the  heart,  which  take  place  at  the  inftant 
of  going  to  fleep,  and  continue  frequently  during 
fleep,  may  perhaps  be  thus  accounted  tor,  agreeably 
to  the  dodlrine  of  vibrations.  When  vivid  vibrations 
ceafe  in  the  external  fenfes,  and  regions  of  the  brain 
belonging  to  them,  alfo  in  the  mufcles  of  the  limbs, 
and  parts  of  the  fpinal  marrow  correfponding  thereto, 
this  abatement  of  vibrations  muft  either  extend 
to  the  whole  medullary  fubftance,  which  feems  to  be 
the  cafe  in  the  night-mare  j  or  if  the  nerves  of  the 
heart,  and  organs  of  refpiration,  and  the  regions  of 

the 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  53 

the  brain  and  fpinal  marrow  correfponding  thereto, 
be  exempted,  they  may  be  agitated  even  with  more  vi- 
gorous vibrations,  on  account  of  the  abatement  in  the 
other  parts,  becaufe  the  vibrations  raifed  in  thefe 
regions  during  deep,  by  fuch  of  their  caufes  as  take 
place  then,  will  be  hindered  from  difFufing  themfelves 
freely,  and  abating  their  own  force  thereby,  as  foon 
as  the  other  regions  are  collapfed  and  compreffed. 
Thefe  caufes  are,  fir  ft,  the  heat  of  the  blood,  and 
pulfation  of  the  arteries  of  the  medullary  fubftance; 
both  which,  when  increafed  on  any  account,  muft  far- 
ther increafe  themfelves  by  a  reflefted  influence,  fince 
both  increafe  the  force  of  the  heart.  Secondly,  the 
fulnefs  and  diftention  of  the  lungs.  Thefe  arife 
from  the  rarefadion  of  the  blood,  and  accumulation 
of  it  in  the  veins  juft  before  fleep  (at  which  time  re- 
spiration is  languid),  and  muft  at  laft  ftimulate  the 
organs  of  refpiration  to  a  vigorous  exertion  of  them- 
felves, /'.  e.  raife  vigorous  vibrations  in  the  region 
of  the  brain  correfponding  thereto,  juft  as  in  the  cafes 
of  fighing,  and  recovering  from  the  night-mare. 
Thirdly,  we  may  fuppofe,  that  the  heart,  and  muf- 
cles  of  refpiration,  do  not  exert  themfelves  during 
vigilance,  with  a  degree  of  force  at  all  approaching 
to  their  utmoft  powers,  as  the  limbs  do^  and  there- 
fore, that  they,  and  the  correfponding  regions  of 
the  brain,  may  be  qualified  for  a  vigorous  exertion 
during  fleep.  Fourthly,  an  increafe  in  the  force  of 
refpiration  muft  alio  increafe  the  force  with  which 
the  heart  moves,  becaufe  it  propels  the  blood  in 
greater  quantities  upon  the  heart.  Fifthly,  an  in- 
creafe of  force  in  the  heart  muft  increafe  both  itfcif, 
and  the  aclion  of  refpiration,  becaufe  the  blood  vef- 
fels  of  the  heart  and  organs  of  refpiration  are  par- 
ticularly near  to  the  heart,  and  therefore  muft  be 
particularly  under  its  influence. 

Corollary  i.  By  laying  together  what  has  been 
delivered  concerning  fleep,    in  this  propofition,    the 

E  3  diflx;rence 


54  ^/  ^^^  Do^ruics  of  Vibrations 

difference  between  the  ftates  of  lleep  and  vigil.ince 
may  be  thus  fct  before  the  reader,  in  one  view.  In 
flccp,  the  nerves  of  the  five  external  fenfes  are  in- 
difpofed  to  receive  vibrations,  and  the  objecHis  them- 
felvcs  arc  either  abfcnt,  or  impreflcd  feebly.  The 
nerves  of  the  llomacli  and  bowels  fympathize  with 
thefc  at  fird,  but  recover  thcmfelves  at  the  inflant  of 
fleep,  the  wnpreflions  of  the  aliment,  &c.  being  then 
made  with  unukial  vigour  ;  and  this  continues  during 
ihc  time  of  fleep.  In  like  manner  the  mufcular  fyffcem 
becoines  inadlive  in  general ;  the  heart,  however,  and 
mufclcs  of  refpiration,  are  excepted,  and  even  exert 
theinlclves  with  an  extraordinary  degree  of  force. 
The  blood  is  rarefied  fo  as  to  take  up  more  fpace  upon 
the  whole ;  and  as  there  is  more  in  the  veins,  and 
particularly  in  thofc  of  the  brain,  and  fpinal  marrow, 
than  in  a  flate  of  vigilance,  the  medullary  fubftance 
is  hereby  expofcd  to  a  conflunt  uniform  comprefTion  j 
whereas,  in  vigilance,  tlie  a6lion  of  the  mufcles 
fqucezes  the  blood  out  of  the  ve?ns,  and  cools  it,  un- 
Icfs  this  aclion  be  violent,  or  long  continued.  The 
glands  are  filled  during  fleep,  and  confequently,  by 
drawing  off  from  the  fulnefs  of  the  blood  veflTels, 
prepare  the  body  for  vigilance,  and  are  themfelves 
fitted  for  the  fundlions  to  be  then  performed,  i.  e.  to 
excrete  their  proper  fluids  from  mufcular  compref- 
fion,  or  vibrations  running  up  their  excretory  du6ts, 
in  the  manner  to  be  hereafter  explained.  The  medul- 
lary fubftance  is,  in  like  manner,  fitted  and  prepared 
for  vigilance,  whether  it  be  of  a  glandular  nature,  or 
not.  However,  fome  vibrations  mufl:  take  place  in 
it  throughout,  and  they  are  particularly  vivid  in  the 
regions  correfponding  to  the  heart,  organs  of  refpi- 
ration, and  organs  of  digeftion ;  alfo  in  the  regions 
correfponding  to  the  eye  and  ear,  where  they  excite 
the  trains  of  images  which  are  prefented  to  us  in  our 
dreams.  But  the  nature  of.  thefe  cannot  be  unfolded 
till  we  have  treated  of  ideas,    their  generation  and 

affociations. 


and  Aflbciation  in  genera!.  55 

affociations,    and  the  nature   of  true   and   erroneous 
judgments,  aflent,  diflent,  imagination  and  memory. 

Cor.  2.  It  appears  alfo  to  follow,  from  the  fore- 
going account  of  fleep,  and  the  effe6t  of  heat,  la- 
bour, piain,  and  opiates,  in  difpofing  to  it,  that,  in 
many  cafes  of  fleep,  the  medullary  fubftance  tends 
to  a  fubde  kind  of  inflammation,  and~  is  preferved 
from  it,  and  refl:ored  to  its  natural  ftate,  and  degree 
of  heat,  by  means  of  fleep  fufficiently  condnued. 
Thus,  in  the  accefs  of  mofl:  fevers,  the  patient  is 
jiftlefs  and  fleepy,  the  external  fenfes,  mufcles,  and 
brain,  being  aff^ecled,  in  fome  refpedls,  as  by  opiates. 
If  the  patient  fleeps,  the  diftemper  is  cut  fhort;  but 
if  the  fubtle  inflammation  be  fo  great  as  to  prevent 
that,  the  diftemper  increafes,  and  comes  to  its  period 
in  fome  other  way,  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
fever,  and  circumftances  .of  the  patient.  In  a  coma 
vigil  it  feems  to  me,  that  the  approach  of  the  oppo-. 
fite  fides  of  the  ventricles  excites  fuch  violent  vibra- 
tions, on  account  of  the  inflammation  of  the  medul- 
lary fubftance,  perhaps  of  thefe  fides  particularly,  as 
to  awake  the  patient,  and  throw  him  into  great  con- 
fufion  and  confternation.  In  a  frenzy,  the  medul- 
lary fubftance  irfelf  feems  to  labour  under  an  acute 
temporary  inflammation,  the  other  parts  having  often 
no  more  than  a  due  heat,  whereas,  in  the  delirium 
of  a  fever,  the  medullary  fubftance  orily  fympathizes 
with  the  other  parts.  If  the  inflammation  of  the  me- 
dullary  fubftance  be  very  fubtle,  moderate,  and  per- 
manent, madnefs  of  fome  fpecies  enfues.  And  it 
feems  to  agree  very  well  with  the  theory  here  pro- 
pofed,  that  in  deliriums,  frenzies,  and  fome  kinds 
of  madnefs,  the  patient  does  not  fleep  at  all,  or,  if  he 
does,  in  a  quiet  manner,  is  freed  from  his  diftemper; 
and  that,  in  other  kinds  of  madnefs,  and  in  cafes  of 
melancholy,  the  fleep  is  very  deep,  and  the  patient 
extremely  fluggifli. 

E  4  SECT. 


56  Of  the  Boiirines  of  Vibrations 


SECT.     II. 

OF  IDEAS,  THEIR  GENERATION  AND  ASSOCIA- 
TIONS ;  AND  OF  THE  AGREEMENT  OF  THE  DOC- 
TRINE OF  VIBRATIONS  WITH  THE  PHENOMENA 
OF  IDEAS. 

PROP.     VIII. 

Se)ifationSy  hy  being  often  repeated^  leave  certain  Vefliges, 
TvpeSt  or  Images,  of  them/elves,  which  may  be  called. 
Simple  Ideas  of  Senfation. 


I  TOOK  notice  in  the  introduflion,  that  thofe 
ideas  which  refemble  fenfations  were  called  ideas 
of  rcnfation;    and    alio   that    they    might    be    called 

fimplc  ideas,  in  refpedl  of  the  intellectual  ones  which 
are  formed  from  them,  and  of  whofe  very  eflence  it 
is  to  be  complex.  But  the  ideas  of  fenfation  are  not 
entirely  fimple,  fince  they  muft  confift  of  parts  both 
co-exiftent  and  fuccefTive,  as  the  generating  fenfations 
themfelves  do. 

Now,  that  the  fimple  idens  of  fenfation  are  thus 
generated,  agreeably  to  the  propofition,  appears,  be- 
caufe  the  mod  vivid  of  thefc  ideas  are  thofe  where  the 
correfponding     fenfations    are    mod    vigoroufly    im- 

/prefTed,  or  mofl:  frequently  renewed ;  whereas,  if  the 
fenfation  be  faint,  or  uncommon,  the  generated  idea 
is  alfo  faint  in  proportion,  and,  in  extreme  cafes, 
evanefcent  and  imperceptible.  The  exad  obfervance 
of  the  order  of  place  in  vifible  ideas,  and  of  the  or- 
der of  time  in  audible  ones,  may  likewife  ferve  to 
(hew,  that  thefe  ideas  are  copies  and  offsprings  of 
the  Imprefficns  r.iade  on  the  eye  and  ear,  in  which 

the 


and  Aflbciatlon  in  general.  57 

the  fame  orders  were  obferved  refpedtively.  And 
though  it  happens,  that  trains  of  vifible  and  audible 
ideas  are  prefented  in  fallitrs  of  the  fancy,  and  in 
dreams,  in  which  the  order  of  time  and  place  is 
different  from  that  of  any  former  impreflions,  yet  the 
fmall  component  parts  of  thefe  trains  are  copies  of 
former  impreflions ;  and  reafons  may  be  given  for 
the  varieties  of  their  compofitions. 

It  is  alfo  to  be  obferved,  that  this  propofition  bears 
a  great  refemblance  to  the  third ;  and  that,  by  this 
refemblance,  they  fomewhat  confirm  and  illuftrate 
one  another.  According  to  the  third  propofition, 
fenfations  remain  for  a  fhort  time  after  the  imprefljorM 
is  removed ;  and  thefe  remaining  fenfations  growl 
feebler  and  feebler,  till  they  vanifh.  They  are  there- 
fore, in  fome  part  of  their  declenfion,  of  about  the 
fame  ftrength  with  ideas,  and,  in  their  firlt  ftate,  are 
intermediate  between  fenfations  and  ideas.  And  it 
feems  reafonable  to  exptdl,  that,  if  a  fingle  fenfation 
can  leave  a  perceptible  effe<ft,  trace,  or  veftige,  for 
a  fhort  time,  a  fufficient  repetition  of  a  fenfation 
may  leave  a  perceptible  eifedt  of  the  fame  kind,  but 
of  a  more  permanent  nature,  i.  e.  an  idea,  which 
fhall  recur  occafionally,  at  long  diflances  of  time, 
from  the  impreflion  of  the  correfponding  fenfation, 
and  vice  verjd.  As  to  the  occafions  and  caules,  which 
make  ideas  recur,  they  will  be  confidered  in  the  next 
propofition  but  one. 

The  method  of  reafoning  ufed  in  the  laft  para- 
graph, is  farther  confirmed  by  the  following  circum- 
flance  j  viz.  that  'both  the  diminutive  declining  fen- 
fations, which  remain  for  a  fhort  fpace  after  the  im- 
pjeflTions  of  the  objefts  ceafe,  and  the  ideas,  which 
are  the  copies  of  fuch  imprefTions,  arc  far  more 
diftin6t  and  vivid,  in  refpe6t  of  vifible  and  audible 
impreflions,  than  of  any  others.  To  which  it  may  be 
added,  that,  after  travelling,  hearing  m.ufick,  &c. 
trains  of  vivid  ideas  are  very  apt  t®  recur,  which  cor- 

refpond 


^8  Of  the  Doilrines  of  Vibrations. 

refpond  very  exa6lly  to  the  late  imprefllons,  and 
which  are  of  an  intermediate  nature  between  the  re- 
maining Icnfations  of  ilie  third  propofition,  in  their 
grcatcll  vigour,  and  the  ideas  mentioned  in  this. 

The  fcnlations  of  feehng,  tafte,  and  fmell,  can 
fcarcc  be  faid  to  leave  ideas,  unlefs  very  indiftind 
and  obfcure  ones.  However,  as  analogy  leads  one 
to  fuppule,  that  thefe  fenfcuions  may  leave  traces  of 
the  fame  kind,  though  not  in  the  fame  degree,  as 
thofe  of  fight  and  iiearing;  lb  the  readinefs  with 
which  we  reconnoitre  fenfations  of  feeling,  tafte,  and 
fmell,  that  have  been  often  imprelTed,  is  an  evidence, 
that  they  do  lb ;  and  thefe  generated  traces  or  difpo- 
fiiions  of  mind  may  be  called  the  ideas  of  feeling, 
tafte,  and  fmell.  In  fleep,  when  all  our  ideas  are 
magnified,  thofe  of  feeling,  tafte,  and  fmell,  are  often 
fufficiently  vivid  and  diftiniSt ;  and  the  fame  thing 
happens  in  fome  few  cafes  of  vigilance. 


PROP.     IX. 

Senfory  Vibrations^  by  being  often  repeated^  beget  in  the 
medullary  Subjlauce  of  the  Brain^  a  Difpojition  to  dimi- 
nutive Vibrations^  which  may  alfo  be  called  Vibra- 
tiuncles  and  Miniatures,  correfponding  to  themfelves 
refpe^ively. 

This  correfpondence  of  the  diminutive  vibrations 
to  the  original  fenfory  ones,  confifts  in  this,  that  they 
agree  in  kind,  place,  and  line  of  direflion  j  and  diflfer 
only  in  being  more  feeble,  i.  e.  in  degree. 

This  propofition  follows  from  the  foregoing.  For 
fince  fenfations,  by  being  often  repeated,  beget  ideas, 
it  cannot  but  be  that  thofe  vibrations,  which  accom- 
pany fenfations,  fhould  beget  fomething  which  may 
accompany  ideas  in  like  manner;  and  this  can  be  no- 
thing but  feebler  vibrations,  agreeing  with  the  lenfory 

generating 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  59 

generating   vibrations    in   kind,    place,    and   line   of 
direflion. 

Or  thus :  By  the  firft  propofition  it  appears,  that 
fome  motion  muft  be  excited  in  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance,  during  each  fenlation  j  by  the  fourth,  this 
motion  is  determined  to  be  a  vibratory  one :  fince 
therefore  fome  motion  muft  alfo,  by  the  fecond,  be 
excited  in  the  medullary  fubftance  during  the  pre- 
fence  of  each  idea,  this  motion  cannot  be  any  other 
than  a  vibratory  one :  elfe  how  fhould  it  proceed 
from  the  original  vibration  attending  the  fenfation,  in 
the  fame  manner  as  the  idea  does  from  the  fenfation 
itfelf  ?  It  muft  alfo  agree  in  kind,  place,  and  line  of 
direftion,  with  the  generating  vibration.  A  vibratory 
motion,  which  recurs  /  times  in  a  fecond,  cannot  be- 
get a  diminutive  one  that  recurs  1/,  or  2/  times;  nor 
one  originally  imprefled  on  the  region  of  the  brain 
correfponding  to  the  auditory  nerves,  beget  diminu- 
tive vibrations  in  the  region  correfponding  to  the 
optic  nerves ;  and  fo  of  the  reft.  The  line  of  direc- 
tion muft  likewife  be  the  fame  in  the  original  and 
derivative  vibrations.  It  remains  therefore,  that  each 
ftmple  idea  of  fenfation  be  attended  by  diminutive 
vibrations  of  the  fame  kind,  place,  and  line  of  di- 
rection, with  the  original  vibrations  attending  the 
fenfation  itfelf:  or,  in  the  words  of  the  propofition,- 
that  fenfory  vibrations,  by  being  frequently  repeated, 
beget  a  difpofition  to  diminutive  vibrations  corre- 
fponding to  themfelves  refpedtiveiy.  We  may  add,' 
that  the  vibratory  nature  of  the  motion  which  at- 
tends ideas,  may  be  inferred  from  the  continuance  of 
fome  ideas,  vifible  ones  for  inftance,  in  the  fancy  for 
a  few  moments. 

This  proof  of  the  prefent  propofition  from  the 
foregoing,  appears  to.be  inconteftable,  admitting  the 
fourth :  however,  it  will  much  eftablilh  and  illuf- 
trate  the  dodrines  of  vibrations  and  aftbciationj  to 
deduce  it  direftly,  if  we  can,  from  the  nature  of  vi- 
bratory 


Co  Of  the  DoHrinei  of  Vibrntions 

bratory  motions,  and  of  an  animal  body  ;  and  not 
only  fioin  the  relation  between  fenlations  and  ideas. 
Let  us  lee,  therefore,  what  pio^rcfii  wc  can  make  in 
luch  an  attempt. 

Fiill,  then,  if  we  admit  vibrations  of  tlie  me- 
dullary particles  at  all,  we  mult  conceive,  that  fomc 
take  place  in  the  fcvtus  in  utero,  both  on  account 
of  the  .warmth  in  which  it  lies,  and  of  the  pulfation 
of  thofe  confiderablc  arteries,  which  pafs  through 
the  medullary  kibitance,  and  wiiich  conlequently  muft 
comprefs  ajid  agitate  it  upon  every  contra6tion  of 
the  heart.  And  thcfe  vibrations  are  probably  either 
uniform  in  kind  and  degree,  if  we  confider  fliort 
ipaces  of  time ;  or,  if  long  ones,  increafe  in  a  (low 
uniform  manner,  and  that  in  degree  only,  as  the 
fcclus  in  utero  increaies  in  bulk  and  ftrength.  They 
are  alio  probably  the  fame  in  all  the  different  regions 
of  the  medullary  fubdance.  Let  thefe  vibrations  be 
called  the  natural  vibrations. 

Secondly,  As  foon  as  the  child  is  born,  external 
objects  act  upon  it  violently,  and  excite  vibrations 
in  the  medullary  fubttance,  which  differ  from  the 
natural  ones,  and  from  each  other,  in  degree,  kind, 
place,  and  line  of  direftion.  We  may  alfo  conceive, 
that  each  region  of  the  medullary  fubftance  has 
fuch  a  texture  as  to  receive,  with  the  greateft  facility, 
the  feveral  fpecific  vibrations,  which  the  objecfts 
correfponding  refpedively  to  thefe  regions,  /.  e.  to 
their  nerves  are  molt  difpofed  to  excite.  Let  thefe 
vibrations  be,  for  the  prefent,  called  •preternatural  ones, 
in  contradiftinction  to  thofe  which  we  juft  now  called 
natural  ones. 

Thirdly,  Reprefenting  now  the  natural  vibrations 
by  iV,  and  the  preternatural  ones,  from  various  ob- 
je6t^,  by  y^,  5,  C,  &:c.  let  us  fuppofe  the  firft  object 
to  imprcfs  the  vibrations  A,  and  then  to  be  removed. 
It  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  vibratory  motions, 
that  the  n[iedullary  fubftance  will  not,    immediately 

upon 


and  Aflbciation  in  general,  61 

upon  the  removal  of  this  objed,  return  to  its  natural 
flate  Nj  but  will  remain,  for  a  fhorc  fpace  of  time, 
in  the  preternatural  ftate  A,  and  pafs  gradually  from 
A  to  N.  Suppofe  the  fame  object  to  be  imprefled 
again  and  again,  for  a  fufficient  number  of  times,  and 
it  feems  to  follow,  that  the  medullary  fubftance  will 
be  longer  in  pafTing  from  A  to  iV,  after  the  fecond 
impreffion,  than  after  the  firft,  after  the  third  imprcf- 
(ion  than  fecond,  &c.  till,  at  lafl-,  it  will  not  return 
to  its  natural  original  ftate  of  vibrations  JV^at  all,  but 
remain  in  the  preternatural  ftate  Ay  after  the  vibra- 
tions have  fallen  to  a  diminutive  pitch,  their  kind 
and  place,  or  chief  feat,  and  their  line  of  direc- 
tion, continuing  the  fame.  This  ftate  may  therefore 
be  fitly  denoted  by  ^,  and  being  now  in  the  place  of 
the  natural  ftate  N,  it  will  be  kept  up  by  the  heat  of 
the  medullary  fubftance,  and  the  pulfation  of  its  ar- 
teries. All  this  feems  to  follow  from  the  above-men- 
tioned difpofition  of  animal  bodies  to  accommodate 
themfelves  to,  and  continue  in,  almoft  any  ftate  that 
is  often  imprefled  j  which  is  evident  from  innumer- 
able both  common  and  medical  obfervations,  what- 
ever be  determined  concerning  the  manner  of  explain- 
ing and  accounting  for  thefe  fa6l:s.  For  the  alter- 
ations which  habit,  cuftom,  frequent  impreflion,  &c. 
make  in  the  fmall  conftituent  particles,  can  fcarce  be 
any  thing  befides  alterations  of  the  diftances,  and 
mutual  a(5lions,  of  thefe  particles  ;  and  thefe  laft 
alterations  muft  alter  the  natural  tendency  to  vi- 
brate. We  muft,  however,  here  refume  the  fup- 
pofition  made  in  the  laft  paragraph,  viz.  that  the 
feveral  regions  of  the  brain  have  fuch  a  texture  as 
difpofes  them  to  thofe  fpecific  vibrations,  which  are 
to  be  imprefled  by  the  proper  obje<fl^s  in  the  events 
of  life.  And  this  will  much  facilitate  and  accelerate 
the  tranfition  of  the  ftate  A^  into  a-y  fince  we  are  to 
fuppofe  a  predifpofition  to  the  ftate  Ay  or  a. 

It 


62  Of  the  Do^hines  of  Vibrations 

It  will  foinewhat  illuftratc  and  confirm  this  reafon- 
ing,  to  remark,  that  mufical  firings  always  accom- 
modaie  themfclves  to,  and  lean  towards,  the  flatc 
into  which  they  were  lall  put.  Thus  the  tone  of  a 
mufical  ftring  either  rifes  or  falls  upon  altering  its 
tcnfion,  according  as  the  preceding  tenfion  was 
greater  or  Icfs  than  its  prefent  tenfion.  Now  the 
fmall  component  parts  of  a  mufical  (Ling  muft  re- 
cede from,  and  approach  to  each  other,  i.  e.  muft 
ofcillate  lengthways,  during  every  tranfverfc  ofcilla- 
tion  of  the  tiring.  And  this  muft  arife  from  the 
mutual  influences  of  the  component  particles  tending 
to  their  lalt  fujierinduced  (late.  Let  us  fuppofe  fome- 
thing  analogous  to  this  to  take  place  in  the  component 
molecules  of  the  brain,  the  molecules  of  the  mole- 
cules, &c.  and  it  will  follow,  that  A  may  over-power 
Ni  and  a  become  the  natural  ftate.  Now,  fince 
the  human  body  is  compofed  of  the  fame  matter  as 
the  external  world,  it  is  reafonable  to  expecSb,  that  its 
component  particles  fhould  be  fubjefled  to  the  fame 
fubde  laws.  xAnd  the  exquifite  ftrudlure  of  animal 
bodies  in  fo  many  other  refpeifls,  makes  it  eafier  to 
conceive,  that  the  organ  of  organs,  viz.  the  medul- 
lary fubftance  fliould  be  endued  with  a  proper  fubtle 
ultimate  ftruflure,  for  the  purpofe  of  retaining  a  ftate 
that  is  frequently  imprefTcd.  One  may  guefs  alfo,  that 
it  is  better  fuited  to  this  purpofe  during  its  growth,  i.  e, 
in  paffing  from  infancy  to  adult  age,  than  afterwards; 
as  this  would  be  very  agreeable  to  the  pha^nomena. 

Fourthly,  Suppofe  now  the  vibrations  Jj  By  C,  D, 
&c.  belonging  to  each  of  the  fenfes,  to  be  excited, 
and  repeated  in  fuch  order  and  manner  as  ufually 
happens  to  the  new-born  infant  upon  its  entrance  into 
this  new  fcene  of  things.  It  is  evident,  that  thefe 
will  have  a  greater  power  to  over- rule  the  natural 
ftate  A^,  than  the  vibrations  A  from  one  fingle  objeft 
could  have :  for  A  affecEled  only  one  region  of  the 
medullary  fubftance  primarily ;  whereas  A^  B,  C,  D, 

&c. 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  6-^ 

&c.  affed  all  the  regions  primarily  in  their  turn.    It  is 
evident  alfo,  that   the  fecondary  vibrations,  or  thofe 
which  are  propagated  from  the  region  of  the  medullary 
fubftance  primarily  affe<5ted  into  the  reft,  will  be  over- 
ruled, in  great  meafure,   in  each  region,  by  the  pri- 
mary vibrations  peculiar  to  that  region.     Laftly,  It  is 
evident,  that  of  the  vibrations  which  are  excited  in 
each  region,  no  one  can  prevail  over  all  the  reft,  but 
each  muft  leave  an  effe6t,  in  proportion  to  its  ftrength 
and  frequency.    We  may  conceive  therefore,  that  each 
region  of  the  medullary  fubftance  will  have  a  tendency 
generated  in  it,  to  vibrate  with  vibrations  of  the  fame  - 
frequency   (but  weaker  in  degree)   as  thofe  which  the 
feveral     appropriated     objects    imprefs   upon    it   re- 
fpeftively ;  and  that  diminutive  vibrations  refembling 
them  will  rife  in  fuccefiion  in  each  region.     For  each 
region  may  eafily  be  conceived  to  lean  fometimes  to 
the  vibrations  from  one  objeft,  fometimes  to  thofe  from 
another,    according  to  the  ftrength,    frequency,    and 
novelty  of  the  impreftion,  the  then  prefent  difpofition 
of  the  nervous  fyftem,  aflbciation  (of  which  in  the  two 
next  propofitions),  and  other  fuch-like  caufes.     And 
for  the  fame  reafon,    as  in   every  fenfe  the  idea  of 
fome  one  object  of  that  fenfe  muft  prevail  over  all  the 
reft,    we   may   conclude,    that    fometimes   the   ideas 
belonging  to  one  fenfe,  fometimes  thofe  belonging  to 
another,  will  prevail  over  the  reft. 

Or  thus :  Some  vibrations  there  muft  always  be  in 
the  medullary  fubftance,  on  account  of  its  heat,  and 
the  pulfation  of  the  arteries  which  pafs  through  it. 
Thefe  cannot  be  the  natural  ones  TV,  becaufe  they  will 
foon  be  over-ruled  by  the  great  force  and  variety  of  the 
impreflions  made  on  the  new-born  infant,  which  muft 
alfo  difpofe  each  region  of  the  brain  to  lean  to  fome 
or  other  of  thofe  vibrations  which  are  excited  in  it 
primarily.  Hence  we  may  conceive,  that  a  very 
complex  fet  of  vibrations,  arifing  from  the  mixture 
and  combinations  of  degree,  kind,  place,  and  line  of 

dire(5lion. 


64  Of  the  Dotlrines  of  Vibrations 

dirccflion,  cxifts  always  in  the  medullary  fubftancc, 
being  kept  up  by  its  heat,  and  the  pulfation  of  its 
arteries,  when  otlier  caufes  arc  wantinLj,  almofl  in 
the  lame  manner  as  in  a  concert  of  mufic  the  air  is 
agitata!  by  vibrations  of  a  very  complex  kind.  But 
then,  as  in  a  concert,  fome  one  inftrument  generally 
Hrikes  the  ear  more  than  the  reft,  io  of  the  complex 
vibrations  which  exift  in  the  medullary  fubllance, 
fome  one  part  will  prevail  over  the  reft,  and  prefent 
the  correlponding  idea  to  the  mind.  Some  region 
muft  be  dilpoled,  at  each  indant,  to  vibrate  ftronger 
than  the  rcll ;  and  of  the  fpecilic  vibrations  which  are 
generally  imprelUd  upon  this  region,  fome  one  will 
have  a  more  favourable  concurrence  of  circumftances 
than  the  reft.  And  thus  ic  will  follow,  according  to 
the  terms  of  the  propofition,  that  fenfory  vibrations, 
by  being  fufficiently  repeated,  will  beget  a  difpofition 
to  miniature  vibrations  correfponding  to  them  re- 
fpe<5livtly  ;  or,  ufing  the  appellations  above-aflumed, 
that  ^^,  B,  C,  die.   will  beget  ^,  Z*,  c,  &c. 

If  we  allow  the  proof  of  this  propofition,  thus  de- 
duced from  the  nature  of  vibratory  motions,  and  of 
an  animal  body,  the  foregoing  propofition  will  fol- 
low from  it,  and  hold  equally  in  refpeft  of  the  fenfes 
of  feeling,  tafte,  and  fmell,  as  of  fight  and  hear- 
ing. Or,  in  other  words,  if  we  allow,  that  original 
imprefl^ed  vibratory  motions  leave  a  tendency  to 
miniature  ones  of  the  fame  kind,  place,  and  line  of 
direc'tion,  it  will  follow,  that  fenfations  muft  beget 
ideas,  and  that  not  only  in  the  fenfes  of  fight  and 
hearing,  where  the  ideas  are  fufiiciently  vivid  and 
diftin^t,  but  in  the  three  others,  fince  their  fenfa- 
tions are  alio  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  means  of  vi- 
bratory motions.  We  may  alfo,  perhaps,  difcover 
hereafter,  from  the  nature  of  vibratory  motions,  and 
of  the  human  brain,  compared  with  the  circumftances 
of  life,  why  the  ideas  of  one  fenfe  are  more  vivid 
and  diftinct  than  thofe  of  another. 

PROP. 


and  Affociation  in  general.  65 

PROP.     X. 

Any  Senjations  A,  B,  C,  ^c.  by  being  ajj'ociated  with 
one  another  a  Jiifficient  Number  of  Times,  get  Juch 
a  Power  over  the  correjponding  Ideas  a,  b,  c,  ^c. 
that  any  one  of  the  Senfations  A,  when  imprej'ed 
alone,  ftodl  be  able  to  excite  in  the  Mind  b,  c,  i^c. 
the  Ideas  of  the  Reji. 

Sensations  may  be  faid  to  be  afibciated  together, 
when  their  impreflions  are  either  made  precifcly  ac 
the  fame  inftant  of  time,  or  in  the  contiguous  fuc- 
eeffive  inllants.  We  may  therefore  diftinguifh  affo- 
ciation  into  two  forts,  the  fynchronous,  and  the 
fucceflive. 

The  influence  of  aflociation  over  our  ideas,  opi- 
nions and  affedions,  is  fo  great  and  obvious,  as  fcarce 
to  have  efcaped  the  notice  of  any  writer  who  has 
treated  of  thefe,  though  the  word  ajfociation,  in  the 
particular  fenfe  here  affixed  to  it,  was  firft  brought 
into  ufe  by  Mr.  Locke.  But  all  that  has  been  deli- 
vered by  the  ancients  and  moderns,  concerning  the 
power  of  habit,  cuftom,  example,  education,  au- 
thority, party-prejudice,  the  manner  of  learning  the 
manual  and  liberal  arts,  &c.  goes  upon  this  doftrine 
as  its  foundation,  and  may  be  confidered  as  the  detail 
of  it,  in  various  circurrftances.  I  here  begin  with  thd 
fimplefl  cafe,  and  fhall  proceed  to  more  and  m.ore 
complex  ones  continually,  till  1  have  exhaulted  what 
has  occuriied  to  me  upon  this  fubjeift. 

This  proportion,  or  firft  and  fimpleft  cafe  of  aflo- 
ciation, is  manifefl:  from  innumerable  common  ob- I 
fervations.  Thus  the  names,  fmells,  taftes,  and 
tangible  qualities  of  natural  bodies,  fuggeft  their  vi- 
fible  appearances  to  the  fancy,  i,  e.  excite  their  vi- 
fible  ideas  j  and,  vice  verfd,  their  vifible  appearances 
impreflfed  on  the  eye  raife  up  thofe  powers  of  recon- 

VoL.  I  F  noitcring 


66  Of  the  Doth'tnes  of  Vibrations 

noitering  their  names,  fmells,  toftcs,  and  tangible 
tjiialitics,  which  may  not  improperly  be  called  tlieir 
ideas,  as  above  noted  ;  and  in  lome  cafes  raile  up 
ideas,  whicii  may  be  compared  with  vifible  onej.,  in 
relpert  of  vividnels.  All  which  is  plainly  owing  to 
the  alVociation  of  the  feveral  fenfible  qualities  of 
bodies  with  their  names,  and  with  each  other.  Jt  is 
remarkable,  however,  as  being  agreeable  to  the  fu- 
pcrior  vivitincfs  of  vifible  and  audible  ideas  before 
taken  notice  of,  that  the  fuggeftion  of  the  vifible  ap- 
pearance from  the  name,  is  the  mod  ready  of  any 
odier;  and,  next  to  this,  that  of  the  name  from  tlie 
vifible  appearance ;  in  which  laft  cafe,  the  reality  of 
the  audible  idea,  when  not  evident  to  the  fancy,  may 
be  inferred  from  the  ready  pronunciation  of  the  name. 
For  it  will  be  flKwn  hereafter,  that  the  audible  idea  is 
moft  commonly  a  previous  requifite  to  pronuncia- 
tion. Other  inftances  of  the  power  of  aflbciation 
may  be  taken  from  compound  vifible  and  audible  im- 
prelFions.  Thus  the  fight  of  part  of  a  large  building 
iuggerts  the  idea  of  the  refb  inftantaneoufly ;  and  the 
found  of  the  words  which  begin  a  familiar  fentence, 
brings  the  remaining  part  to  our  memories  in  order, 
the  airt)ciation  of  the  parts  being  fynchronous  in  the 
Hrrt  cafe,  and  fuccefljve  in  the  lall. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that,  in  fuccefllve  afTociations, 
the  power  of  raifing  the  ideas  is  only  exerted  accord- 
ing to  the  order  in  which  the  afTociation  is  made. 
Thus,  if  the  impreffions  A.,  B,  C,  be  always  made  in 
the  order  of  the  alphabet,  B  imprefled  alone  will  not 
raife  tf,  but  c  only.  Agreeably  to  which,  it  is  eafy  to 
repeat  familiar  fentenccs  in  the  order  in  which  they 
always  occur,  but  impofiible  to  do  it  readily  in  an  in- 
verted one.  The  reafon  of  this  is,  that  the  compound 
idea,  r,  l>,  a^  correfponds  to  the  compound  fenfation 
C,  Bf  A ;  and  therefore  requires  the  impreffion  of 
C,  5,  Aj  in  the  fame  manner  as  a,  hy  c,  does  that  of 
yf,  B,  C.     This  will,  however,  be  more  evident,  when 

we 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  67 

we  come  to  confider  the  aflbciations  of  vibratory  mo- 
tions,  in  the  next  propofition. 

It  is  aifo  to  be  obferved,  that  the  power  of  afibcia- 
tion  grows  feebler,  as  the  number  either  of  fynchronous 
or  fucceffive  irnprcffions  is  increafed,  and  does  not 
extend,  with  due  force,  to  more  than  a  fmall  one,  in 
the  firft  and  fimpleft  cafes.  But,  in  complex  cafes, 
or  the  aflbciations  of  aflbciations,  of  which  the  me- 
mory, in  its  full  extent,  confifl:s,  the  powers  of  the 
mind,  deducible  from  this  fource,  will  be  found  m.uch 
greater  than  any  perfon,  upon  his  fiift  entrance  on 
thefe  inquiries,  could  well  imagine. 


PROP.     Xh 

Anj  Vibrations i  A,  B,  C,  ^c.  by  being  ajociated  toge- 
ther a  Jufficient  Number  of  TimeSy  get  Juch  a  Power 
over  a,  b,  c,  &c.  the  correjfonding  miniature  Vibra- 
tions y  that  any  of  the  Vibrations  A,  when  impeffed 
aloney  fhall  be  able  to  excite  b,  c,  &c,  the  Miniatures 
of  the  Refi. 

This  propofition  may  be  deduced  from  the  fore- 
going, in  the  fame  manner  as  the  ninth  has  been 
from  the  eighth. 

But  it  feems  alfo  deducible  from  the  nature  of  vi- 
brations, and  of  an  animal  body.  Let  A  and  B  be 
two  vibrations,  aflbciated  fynchronically.  Now,  it 
is  evident,  that  the  vibration  A  (for  I  will,  in  this 
propofition,  fpeak  oi  A  and  B  in  the  Angular  number, 
for  the  fake  of  greater  clearnefs)  will,  by  endeavour- 
ing to  difi^ufe  itfelf  into  thofe  parts  of  the  medullary 
fubltance  which  are  afieded  primarily  by  the  vibra- 
tion By  in  fome  meafure  modify  and  change  By  fo  as 
to  make  B  a  little  different  from  what  it  would  be,  if 
imprefled  alone.  For  the  fame  reafons  the  vibration 
A  will  be  a  little  affefted,  even  in  its  primary  feat, 

F  2  bv 


68  Of  the  DoHrwes  of  Vibrations         "^ 

by  the*  cruleavour  of  B  to  difTufe  itfclf  all  over  the 
nHcJDllaiy  lubllanrc.  Siippole  now  the  vibrations 
,'/  and  B  to  be  iniprcned  at  the  fame  inltant,  for  a 
thouland  times;  it  follows,  from  the  ninth  propo- 
fition,  that  they  will  tirft  over-come  the  difpofition  to 
the  natural  vibrations  Nj  and  then  leave  a  tendency 
to  themlc'lves,  which  will  now  occupy  the  place  of 
the  original  natural  tendency  to  vibrations.  When 
therefore  the  vibration  A  is  impreflcd  alone,  it  cannot 
be  entirely  fuch  as  the  objeft  would  excite  of  itfelf,  but 
rourt  lean,  even  in  its  primary  feat,  to  the  modifica- 
tions and  changes  induced  by  i?,  during  their  thou- 
fand  joint  imprefTions ;  and  therefore  much  more,  in 
receding  from  this  primary  feat,  will  it  lean  that  way ; 
and  when  it  comes  lo  the  feat  of  By  it  will  excite  JS's 
miniature  a  little  modified  and  changed  by  itfelf. 

Or  thus;  when  //  is  imprelTed  alone,  fome  vi- 
bration murt  take  place  in  the  primary  feat  of  B^ 
both  on  account  of  the  heat  and  puliation  of  the  ar- 
teries, and  becaufe  /I  will  endeavour  to  difi'ufc  itfelf 
over  the  whole  medullary  fubliance.  This  cannot 
be  th.it  part  of  the  natural  vibrations  N^  which  be- 
longs to  this  region,  becaufe  it  is  fuppofed  to  be  over- 
ruled already.  It  cannot  be  that  which  A  imprefled 
alone  would  have  propagated  into  this  region,  be- 
caufe that  has  always  hitherto  been  over-ruled,  and 
converted  into  B ;  and  therefore  cannot  have  begotten 
a  tendency  to  itfelf.  It  cannot  be  any  full  vivid 
vibration,  fuch  as  5,  C,  I),  &:c.  belonging  to  this 
region,  becaufe  all  full  vibrations  require  the  actual 
impreffion  of  an  objetfl  upon  the  correfponding 
external  organ.  And  of  miniature  vibrations  be- 
longing to  this  region,  fuch  as  by  <r,  dy  &c.  it  is 
evident,  that  b  has  the  preference,  fmce  A  leans  to 
it  a  little,  even  in  its  own  primary  feat,  more  and 
more,  in  receding  from  this,  and  almoft  entirely,  when 
it  comes  to  the  primary  feat  of  B.  For  the  fame 
reafons  B  impreffed  alone  will  excite  a ;  and,  in  ge- 
neral. 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  69 

neral,  if  Ay  5,  C,  &c.  be  vibrations  fynchronically 
imprefled  on  different  regions  of  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance,  A  imprefled  alone  will,  at  laft,  excite  b,  c^ 
fire,  according  to  the  propofition. 

If  A  and  B  be  vibrations  imprefled  fiicceflively, 
then  will  the  latter  part  ofyf,  viz.  that  part  which, 
according  to  the  third  and  fourth  propofitions,  re- 
mains, after  the  impreflion  of  the  objedt  ceafes,  be 
modified  and  altered  by  5,  at  the  fame  time  that  it 
will  a  litde  n,odify  and  alter  it,,  till  at  laft  it  be  quite 
over- powered  by  it,  and  end  in  it.  It  follows  there- 
fore, by  a  like  method  of  reafoning,  that  the  fuc- 
cefllve  impreflion  of  A  and  B,  fufficiently  repeated, 
will  fo  alter  the  medullary  fubfl:ance,  as  that  when 
A  is  impreflTed  alone,  its  latter  part  fhall  not  be 
fuch  as  the  fole  imprefljon  of  A  requires,  bill  lean 
towards  5,  and  end  in  b  at  lafl:.  But^  will  not  excite 
«  in  a  retrograde  order,  fince,  by  fuppofition,  the 
latter  part  of  B  was  not  modified  and  altered  by 
Ay  but  by  fome  other  vibration,  fuch  as  C  or  D. 
And  as  By  by  being  followed  by  C,  may  at  laft  raife 
Cy  fo  b,  when  raifed  by  A,  in  the  method  here  pro- 
pofed,  may  be  alfo  fufficient  to  raife  Cy  inafmuch  as 
the  miniature  c  being  a  feeble  motion,  not  ftronger, 
perhaps,  than  the  natural  vibrations  iV,  requires 
only  to  have  its  kind,  place,  and  line  of  diredlion, 
determined  by  aflbciation,  the  heat  and  arterial  pulfa- 
tion  conveying  to  it  the  requifite  degree  of  ftrength. 
And  thus  A  imprefled  alone,  will  raife  by  f,  &c.  in 
fucceflive  aflbciations,  as  well  as  in  fynchronous  one?, 
according  to  the  propofition. 

It  feems  alfo,  that  the  influence  of  A  may,  in 
fbme  degree,  reach  through  5  to  Cj  fo  that  A  of 
itfelf  may  have  fome  eff'cdl  to  raife  f,  as  well  as  by 
means  of  b.  However,  it  is  evident,  that  this  chain 
muft  break  off',  at  laft,  in  long  fuccelfions,  and  that 
fooner  or  later,  according  to  the  number  and  vigour 
of  the  repeated   imprefllons.      The  power  of  minia- 

F  3  ture 


] 


70  Of  the  Doflrtnes  of  Vibrations 

turf  vibrations  to  railc  other  miniatures  may,  per- 
lia[)s,  be  made  clearer  to  mathematicians,  by  hint- 
ing, that  the  efficacy  of  any  vibration  to  raife  any 
other,  is  not  in  the  fnnple  ratio  of  its  vividnefs,  but 
as  fome  power  thereof  lefs  than  unity;  for  thus  b  may 
raife  c,  a  weaker  vibration  than  ^,  c  may  raife  dy  &c. 
with  more  flicility  than  if  the  efficacy  was  in  the  fim- 
ple  ratio  of  the  vividnefs,  and  yet  fo,  that  the  feries 
ffiall  breakroffat  laft. 

If  the  ninth  propofiiion  be  allowed,  we  may 
prove  this  in  fomewhat  a  ffiorter  and  eafier  manner,  j 
as  follows.  Since  the  vibrations  A  and  B  are  impref-  J 
fed  together,  they  mull,  from  the  diffufion  ncceflary  ^ 
to  vibratory  motions,  run  into  one  vibration  j  and 
confequently,  after  a  number  of  imprcffions  fuffici- 
ently  repeated,  will  leave  a  trace,  or  miniature,  of 
themfelves,  as  one  vibration,  which  will  recur  every 
now  and  then,  from  flight  caufes.  Much  rather, 
therefore,  may  the  part  b  of  the  compound  miniature 
a-\^b  recur,  when  the  part// of  the  compound  original  ^ 
vibration  A-)rR  is  imprefled. 

And  as  the  ninth  propofition  may  be  thus  made  to 
prove  the  prefent,  fo  it  ought  to  be  acknowledged  and 
remarked  here,  that,  unlefs  the  ninth  be  allowed,  the 
prefent  cannot  be  proved,  or  that  the  power  of  aflb- 
ciation  is  founded  upon,  and  necefTirily  requires,  the 
previous  power  of  forming  ideas,  and  miniature  vibra- 
tions. For  ideas,  and  miniature  vibrations,  muft  firft 
be  generated,  according  to  the  eighth  and  ninth  pro- 
pofitions,  before  they  can  be  aflbciated,  according  to 
the  tenth  and  this  eleventh.  But  then  (which  is  very 
remarkable)  this  power  of  forming  ideas,  and  their 
correfponding  miniature  vibrations,  does  equally  pre- 
luppofe  the  power  of  aflbciation.  For  fince  all  {tn- 
fations  and  vibrations  are  infinitely  divifible,  in  refpeift 
of  time  and  place,  they  could  not  leave  any  traces 
or  images  of  themfelves,  /.  e.  any  ideas,  or  minia- 
ture vibrations,    unlefs   their   infinitefimal   parts   did 

cohere 


and  Affociation  in  general.  71 

cohere  together  through  joint  imprefTion  i  t.  e,  aflb- 
ciation.  Thus,  to  mention  a  grofs  inftance,  we  could 
have  no  proper  idea  of  a  horfe,  unlefs  the  particular 
ideas  of  the  head,  neck,  body,  legs,  and  tail,  pecu- 
liar to  this  animal,  ftuck  to  each  other  in  the  fancy, 
fronr)  frequent  joint  impreflion.  And,  therefore,  in 
dreams,  where  complex  aflbciations  are  much  weak- 
ened, and  various  parcels  of  vifible  ideas,  not  joined 
in  nature,  ftart  up  together  in  the  fancy,  con- 
tiguous to  each  other,  we  often  fee  monfters,  chi- 
meras, and  combinations,  which  have  never  been 
actually  prelented. 

Affociation  feems  alfo  neceffary  to  difpofe  the  me- 
dullary fubftance  to  this  or  that  miniature  vibration, 
in  fucceffion,  after  the  miniatures  of  a  large  number 
of  original  vibrations  have  been  generated. 

Nor  does  there  feem  to  be  any  precife  limit  which 
can  be  fet  to  this  mutual  dependence  of  the  powers  of 
generating  miniatures,  and  of  affociation  upon  each 
other :  however,  they  may  both  take  place  together, 
as  the  heart  and  brain  are  fuppofed  to  do,  or  both  de- 
pend upon  one  fimple  principle  j  for  it  feems  impof- 
fible,  that  they  (hould  imply  one  another,  ad  infinitttm. 
There  is  no  greater  difficulty  here  than  in  many  other 
cafes  of  mutual  indefinite  implication,  known  and 
allowed  by  all.  Nay,  one  may  almoft  deduce  fome 
prefumption  in  favour  of  the  hypothefis  here  pro- 
duced, from  this  mutual  indefinite  implication  of  its 
parts,  fo  agreeable  to  the  tenor  of  nature  in  other 
things.  And  it  is  certainly  a  prefumption  in  its  fa- 
vour, that  a  lefs  power  of  generating  miniatures  will 
be  a  foundation  for  a  larger  of  affociation,  and  "dice 
ver/dy  till,  at  laft,  the  whole  fuperftrufture  of  ideas  and 
affociations  obfervable  in  human  life,  may  by  pro- 
ceeding upwards  according  to  analyfis,  and  down- 
wards according  to  fynthefis,  be  built  upon  as  fmall 
a  foundation  as  we  plcafe.  Thus  we  may  obferve, 
that"  neither  does  this  eleventh  propofuion  neceffarily 

F  4  require 


yi  Of  the  Doi^rines  of  Vibrations 

require  the  ninth,  in  its  full  extent,  nor  vice  verfdy 
for  their  deiDoiiftration.  The  leall  miniatures,  with 
the  fecblell  cohelions  of  their  parts,  will,  by  degrees, 
run  into  larger,  with  flionger  cohefions,  from  the 
fan>e  principles ;  nor  are  there  any  vifible  limits  to 
the  inllucncc  and  extent  of  thcfe  powers,  fuppofing 
the  natural  faculties  of  the  being  under  confidcration 
furtkiently  extended. 

Let  me  add,   that  the  generation  of  fenfible  ideas 
from  fcnfations,  and  the  power  of  raifing  them  from 
allbciation,  when  confidered  as  faculties  of  the  mind, 
are  evident  and  unqucftionable.     Since  therefore  fen- 
fations  are  conveyed  to  the  mind,  by  the  efficiency  of 
corporeal   caufes    upon    the    medullary   fubflance,    as 
is  acknowledged  by  all  phyfiologifts  and  phyficians,  it 
feems  to  me,    that    the    pov/ers  of  generating  ideas, 
and  raifing  them  by  aflbciation,  muft  alfo   arile  from 
corporeal   caufes,    and  confequently  admit  of  an  ex- 
plication from  the  fubde  influences  of  the   fmall  parts 
of  matter  upon  each  other,  as  foon  as  thefe  are  fuffi- 
ciently  underftood,  which  is  farther  evinced  from  the 
manifefl:  influences  of  material  caufes  upon  our  ideas 
and  aflbciations,    taken  notice  of  under    the   fecond 
propofition.       And    as    a    vibratory  motion   is   more 
fuitable  to  the  nature  of  fenfation  than  any  other  fpe- 
cies  of  motion,  fo  does  it  fir-em  alfo  more   fuitable  to 
the  powers  of  generating  ideas,  and   raifing  them  by 
aflfociation.     However,    thefCr  powers  are  evident  in- 
dependently, as  jufl:  now  obferved  i  fo  that  the  doc- 
trine of  aflbciation    may  be  laid  down  as  a  certain 
foundation,  and  a  clue  to  dire6l  our  future  inquiries, 
whatever  becomes  of  that  of  vibrations. 


^ 


PROP. 


and  Airoc\?Ltion  in  general.  73 

«.     PROP.     XII. 

Simple  Ideas  will  run  into  complex  ones,  by  Means 

0/  Jjfociation. 

In  order  to  explain  and  prove  this  propofition,  it 
will  be  requifue  to  give  fonne  previous  account  of 
the  manner  in  which  fimple  ideas  of  fenfation  may 
be  afibciated  together.  tp^ 

Cafe  I.  Let  the  fenfation  A  be  often  afibciated 
with  each  of  the  fenfations  By  C,  D,  Sec.  i.  e.  at  cer- 
tain times  with  5,  at  certain  other  times  with  C,  &c. 
it  is  evident,  from  the  tenth  propofition,  that  A^  im- 
prefled  alone,  will,  at  laft,  raife  b,  Cy  dy  &c.  all  to- 
gether i.  e.  aflbciatc  them  with  one  another,  provided 
they  belong  to  different  regions  of  the  medullary 
fubftance ;  for  if  apy  two,  or  more,  belong  to  the 
fame  region,  fince  they  cannot  exift  together  in  their 
diftindl  forms,  A  will  raife  fomething  intermediate 
between  them. 

Cafe  2.  If  the  fenfations  Ay  B,  C,  D,  &c.  be 
afibciated  together,  according  to  various  combina- 
tions of  twos,  or  even  threes,  fours,  &c.  then  will  A 
raife  b,  Cy  dy  &c.  alfo  B  raife  ^,  f,  dy  &c.  as  in  cafe 
the  firft. 

It  may  happen,  indeed,  in  both  cafes,  that  A  may 
raife  a  particular  miniature,  as  by  preferably  to  any  of 
the  refl:,  from  its  being  more  afibciated  with  5,  from 
the  novelty  of  the  imprefllon  of  By  from  a  tendency 
in  the  medullary  fubfi:ance  to  favour  by  &c.  and,  in 
like  m.anner,  that  b  may  raife  c  or  ^preferably  to  the 
reft.  However,  all  this  will  be  over- ruled,  at  lafl:,  by 
the  recurrency  of  the  afiibciations  ;  fo  that  any  one 
of  the  fenfations  will  excite  thfe  ideas  of  the  refi:,  at 
the  fame  inftant,  /.  e.  afix)ciate  them  together. 

Cafe  3.  Let  Ay  By  C,  D,  &c.  reprefent  fuccefiive 
impreflions,    it   follows   from,  the  tenth  and  eleventh 

propofitions,^ 


74  ^f  '^-"■'  Do l1  vines  of  A''! brat  ions 

propofitions,  that  ./  wili,  raifc /5',  r,  d,  &lc.  /?  raife  r, 
^,  &c.  And  thougli  the  ideas  do  not,,  in  this  cafe, 
rife  prccifcly  at  the  liime  intlant,  yet  they  come  nearer 
together  th.ui  ,the  fenfations  themfelves  did  in  their 
original  imprefTion  ;  fo  that  thefe  ideas  arc  alfociated 
ahnoll  lynchronically  at  lall,  and  luccefTively  from  the 
firft.  The  ideas  come  nearer  to  one  another  than  the 
fenfations,  on  account  of  their  diminutive  nature, 
by  which  all  thic  appertains  to  them  is  contra(5led. 
And  this  fccms  to  be  as  agreeable  to  obfervation  as  to 
theory. 

Cafe  4.  All  compound  imprefTions  /!+ B  +  C-i-D, 
&c.  after  futficient  repetition  leave  compound  minia- 
tures a  +  if-i-c-^-dy  &c.  which  recur  every  now  and- 
then  from  flight  caufes,  as  well  fuch  as  depend  on 
^  aflbciation,  as  fome  which  are  different  from  it.  Now, 
in  thele  recurrences  of  compound  miniatures,  the 
•^  parts  are  farther  aflbciated,  and  approach  perpetually 
nearer  to  each  other,  agreeably  to  what  was  juft  now 
obferved ;  /.  e.  the  aflbciation  becomes  perpetually 
more  clofe  and  intimate. 

Cafe  5.  When  the  ideas  ^,  ^,  c,  dy  &c.  have  been 
fufficiently  aflbciated  in  any  one  or  more  of  the  fore- 
i*  going  ways,  if  we  fuppofe  any  fingle  idea  of  ihefe, 

a  for  inftance,  to  be  raifed  by  the  tendency  of  the 
medullary  fubfl:ance  that  way,  by  the  aflbciation  of 
u^  with  a  foreign  fenfation  or  idea  y\r  or  ;c,  &c.  this 
idea  ^,  thus  raifed,  will  frequently  bring  in  all  the 
red,  by  Cy  dy  die.  and  fo  aflbciate  all  of  them  together 
dill  farther. 

And,  upon  the  whole,  it  may  appear  to  the  reader, 
that  the  Ample  ideas  of  fenfation  muft  run  into  clufl:ers 
and  combinations,  by  aflfociation ;  and  that  each  of 
thefe  will,  at  lafl:,  coalefce  into  one  complex  idea,  by 
the  approach  and  commixture  of  the  feveral  com- 
pounding parts. 

It  appears  alfo  from  obfervation,  that  many  of  our 
intelle(5tual  ideas,    fuch  as  thofe   that  belong  to  the 

heads 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  75 

heads  of  beauty,  honour,  moral  qualities,  &c.  are, 
in  fa(51:,  thus  compofed  of  parts,  which,  by  degrees, 
coalefce  into  one  complex  idea. 

And  as  this  coalefcence  of  fimple  ideas  into  com- 
plex ones  is  thus  evinced,  both  by  the  foregoing 
theory,  and  by  obfervation,  fo  it  may  be  illuftrated, 
and  farther  confirmed,  by  the  fimilar  coalefcence  of 
letters  into  fyliables  and  words,  in  which  aflbciation 
is  likewife  a  chief  inftrument.  1  fhall  mention  fome 
of  the  moft  remarkable  particulars,  relating  to  this 
coalefcence  of  fimple  ideas  into  complex  ones,  in  the 
following  corollaries. 

Cor.   I.     If  the   number  of  fimple   ideas   which 
compofe   the   complex   one    be    very    great,    it   may 
happen,  that  the  complex  idea   fhall   not   appear   to 
bear  any  relation  to  thefe  its  compounding  parts,  nor 
to  the  external  fenfes^'upon  which  the  original  fenfa- 
tions,  which  gave  birth  to  the  compounding  ideas, 
were   imprefl!ed.     The   reafon    of  thi^    is,   that   each 
fingle  idea  is  over-powered   by   the  fum  of  all  the 
reft,  as  foon  as   they   are  all  intimately  united  toge- 
ther.    Thus,  in  very  compound  medicines,  the  feve- 
ral  taftes  and  flavours  of  the  feparate  ingredients  are 
loft  and  over- powered   by  the  complex   one   of  the 
who)e  mafs :  fo  that  this  has  a  tafi:e  and  flavour  of 
its  own,  which  appears  to  be  fimple  and  original,  and 
like    that   of  a   natural    body.     Thus   alfo,  white   is 
vulgarly  thought  to  be  the  fimpleft  and  moft  uncom- 
pounded  of  all  colours,  while  yet  it  really  arifes  fom  a 
certain  proportion  of  the  feven  primary  colours,  with 
their    fcveral    fliades,    or   degrees.     And,    to    refume 
the    illuftration    above-mentioned,    taken    from    lan- 
guage, it  does  not  at  all  appear  to  perfons  ignorant 
of  the  arts  of  reading  an\l  writing,    that  the  great 
variety  of  complex  words  of  languages  can  be  analy- 
fed  up  to  a  few  fimple  founds. 

Cor.   2.    One  may  hope,  therefore,  that,  by  pur- 
fuing  and  perfeding  the  doiflrine  of  afTociation,    we 

may 


#»: 


^6  Of  the  Dotlrincs  of  Vibrations 

may  fome  time  or  other  be  enabled  to  analyfe  all 
that  vaft  variety  of  complex  ideas,  which  pafs  under 
the  n.imc  of  ideas  of  refleiflion,  and  intelle(5tual 
ideas,  into  their  fimple  compounding  parts,  ;.  e.  into 
the  fimple  ideas  of  fenfation,  of  which  tliey  confift. 
This  would  be  greatly  analogous  to  the  arts  of  wri- 
ting, and  refolving  the  colours  of  the  fun's  light,  or 
natural  bodies,  into  their  primaiy  conftituent  ones. 
(  The  complex  ideas  which  1  here  fpeak.  of,  are  gene- 
\  rally  excited  by  words,  or  vifible  objefls ;  but  they 
are  alfo  connected  with  other  external  imprefiions,  and 
depend  upon  them,  as  upon  iymbols.  In  whatever 
way  we  confider  them,  the  trains  of  them  which  are 
prefented  to  the  mind  feem  to  depend  upon  the  then 
prefeni  (lace  of  the  body,  the  external  impreffions  and 
I         the  remaining  influence  of  prior  impreffions  and  afToci  • 

ations,  taken  together.  ^ 

^  CoR.  3.    It  would  afford  great  light  ^,t\(\  clearnefs 

to  the  art  of  logic,  thus  to  determine  the  precife 
nature  and  compofition  of  the  ideas  affixed  to  thofe 
words  which  have  complex  ideas,  in  a  proper  fenfe, 
i.  e.  vvhich  excite  any  combinations  of  fimple  ideas 
united  intimately  by  aflbciation  j  alfo  to  explain, 
upo.)  this  foundation,  the  proper  ufe  of  thofe  words, 
which  have  no  ideas.  For  there  are  many  words 
which  are  mere  fubftitutes  for  other  words,  and  many 
which  are  only  auxiliaries.  Now  it  cannot  be  faid, 
that  either  of  thefe  have  ideas,  properly  fo  called. 
And  though  it  may  feem  an  infinite  and  impoffible 
talk,  thus  to  analyfe  the  fignifications  and  ufes  of 
words,  yet,  I  fuppofe,  this  would  not  be  more  diffi- 
cult, with  the  prefent  philological,  and  philofophical 
helps  to  fuch  a  work,  than  the  firft  making  of  dic- 
tionaries and  grammars,  in  the  infancy  of  philology. 
Eerhaps  it  may  not  beamifs  juft  to  hint,  in  this  place, 
that  the  four  following  claffes  comprife  all  the  poffiblc 
kinds  into  which  words  can  be  diftinguiffied,  agreeably 
to  the  plan  here  propofed : 

I.  Words 


^A  ♦  ^^^  Aflbciaiion  in  general  77 

"** 

1.  Words  which  have  ideas,  but  no  definitions. 

2.  Words  which  have  both  ideas  and  definitions. 

3.  Words  which  have  definitions,  but  no  ideas. 

•    4.  Words  which   have   neither   ideas   nor   defini- 
tions. 

It  is  quite  manifeft,  that  words  feen  or  heard,  can 
raife  no  ideas  in  the  mind,  or  vibrations  in  the  brain,  1 
diftind   fi-om   their   vifible   and    audible   imprefTions,  j 
except  as  far  as  they  get  new  powers  fronn  aflbcia-  \ 
tjons,  either  incidental  ones,  or  arifing  fronn   exprefs  ' 
defion,  as  in  definitions  j  and  therefore,  that  all  other 
^a'ys  of  confidering  words,  befides  what  is   here  fug- 
everted,  are  either  falfe  or  imperfed. 

Cor.  4.  As  fimple  ideas  run  into  complex  ones  by 
aflbciation,  fo  complex  ideas  run  into  decomplex  ones 
by  the  fame.  But  here  the  varieties  of  the  afibcia- 
tions,  which  increafe  with  the  complexity,  hinder 
particular  ones  from  being  fo  clofe  and  permanent, 
.between  the  cornplex  paits  of  decomplex  ideas,  as 
between  the  fimple  parts  of  complex  ones  :  to  which 
it  is  analogous,  in  languages,  that  the  letters  of  words 
adhere  clofer  together  than  the  words  of  leniences, 
both  in  writing  and  fpeaking. 

Co^i.  5.  The  fimple  ideas  of  fenfation   are  not   all 
equally  and  uniformly  concerned  in  forming  complex 
?.nd  decomplex  ideas,  i.  e.  thefe  do  not   refuk  from 
all  the    poffible  combinations  of  twos,  threes,  fours, 
&c.  of  all   the  fimple  ideas ;  but,   on   the  contrary, 
fome  fim.ple  ideas  occur  in  the  complex  and  decom- 
plex ones  much   oftener   than  others :  and   the   fame 
holds  of  particular  con-ibinations  by  twos,  threes,  &c. 
and    innumerable    combinations    never    occur   at    all 
in    real   life,    and   confequently    are    never    aflfociated 
into  complex  or  decomplex  ideas.     All  which  cor- 
refponds  to  what  happens  in  real  languages ;   fome 
letters,  and  combinations  of  letters,  occur  much  more 
frequently  than  others,  and  fome  combinations  never 
occur  at  all. 

Cor. 


78  Of  the  DoSIrines  of  Vibrations        ^  ^ 

Cor.  6.  As  pcrfons  who  Ipcak  the  Tame  language 
have,  however,  a  dilTercnt  ufe  and  extent  of  words^ 
lb,  though  mankind,  in  all  ages  and  nations,  agree,  in 
general,  in  thtir  complex  and  decomplex  ideas,  yef 
there  are  many  particular  dilTVrences  in  them ;  and 
thcfe  differences  are  greater  or  lefs,  according  to  the 
difference,  or  rcfemblance,  in  age,  conftitution,  edu- 
cation, profcll'ion,  country,  age  of  the  world,  &c. 
;.  e.  in  their  impreflions  and  allociations. 
^  Cor.  7.  When  a  variety  of  ideas  are  afibciated 
Together,  the  vifible  idea,  being  more  glaring  and 
diftinft  than  the  reft,  peifoims  the  office  of  a  fymbol 
to  all  the  refl,  fuggells  then),  and  connedls  them 
together.  In  this  it  Ibmewhat  relembles  the  firft  let- 
ter of  a  word,  or  firft  word  of  a  fentence,  which  are 
often  made  ufe  of  to  bring  all  the  reft  to  mind. 

Cor.  8.  When  objeds  and  ideas,  with  their  moft 
common  combinations,  have  been  often  prefented  to 
the  mind,  a  tiain  of  them,  of  a  confiderable  length, 
may,  by  once  occurring^  leave  fuch  a  trace,  as  to 
recur  in  imagination,  and  in  miniature,  in  nearly  the 
iame  order  and  proportion  as  in  this  Angle  occur- 
rence. For  fince  each  of  the  particular  imprelTions 
and  ideas  is  familiar,  there  will  want  little  more  for 
their  recurrency,  than  a  few  connecting  links ;  and 
even  thcfe  may  be,  in  fome  meafure,  fupplied  by  for- 
mer fimilar  inftances.  Thefe  confiderations,  when 
duly  unfolded,  fcem  to  me  fufficient  to  explain  the 
chief  phenomena  of  memory ;  and  it  will  be  eafily 
feen  from  them,  that  the  memory  of  adults,  and 
mafters  in  any  fcience,  ought  to  be  much  more  ready 
and  certain  than  that  of  children  and  novices,  as  it  is 
found  to  be  in  fa 61. 

Cor.  9.  When  the  pleafure  or  pain  attending  any 
fenfations,  and  ideas,  is  great,  all  the  aflbciations 
belonging  to  them  are  much  accelerated  and  ftrength- 
ened.  For  the  violent  vibrations  excited  in  fuch 
cafes,    foon    over-rule    the    natural    vibrations,    and 

leave 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  79 

leave  in  the  brain  a  ftrong  tendency  to  themfelvcs, 
from  a  few  infiprefiions.     The  aflbciations  will  there-  i 
fore  be  cemented  Tooner  and  ftronger  than  in  common  II 
•cafes  J  which  is  found  agreeable  to  the  faft. 

CoR.  10.  As  many  words  have  complex  ideas  an-  \ 
nexed  to  them,  fo  fentences,  which  are  colledions  of  ' 
words,  have  colledions  of  complex  ideas,  i.  e.  have 
decomplex  ideas.  And  it  happens,  in  mofl:  cafes, 
that  the  decomplex  idea  belonging  to  any  fentence,  is 
not  compounded  mierely  of  the  complex  ideas  belong- 
ing to  the  words  of  it ;  but  that  there  are  alfo  many 
variations,  fome  oppofitions,  and  numberlefs  addi- 
tions. Thus  propofitions,  in  particular,  excite,  as 
foon  as  heard,  alTent  or  diffent;  which  affent  and 
difient  confiil  chiefly  of  additional  complex  ideas,  not 
included  in  the  terms  of  the  propofition.  And  it 
would  be  of  the  greateft  ufe,  both  in  the  fciences 
and  in  common  life,  thoroughly  to  analyfe  this 
matter,  to  fliew  in  what  /manner,  and  by  what  fteps, 
i.  e.  by  what  impreflfions  and  aflbciations,  our  aflfent 
and  diflent,  both  in  fcientifical  and  moral  fubjefts, 
is  formed. 

PROP.     XIII.  V 

JVben  Jimple  Ideas  run  into  a  complex  one,  according  to 

the  foregoing  Propofition^  we  are  to  fuppoje,  that  the  ,  > 

ftntple  miniature  Vibrations  correfponding  to  thofe  fim- 
ple  Ideas  run^  in  i$ke  Manner,  into  a  complex  minia- 
ture  Vibration^  correfponding  to  the  refulting  complex 
Idea.  ^y. 

This  propofition  is  analogous  to  the  ninth  and 
eleventh,  and  may  be  deduced  from  the  lafl:,  as 
they  are  from  the  eighth  and  tenth  refpeftively.  It 
is  alfo  an  evidence  and  illufl:ration  of  the  fecond, 
fliewing  not  only,  that  the  fl:ate  of  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance  is  changed,  according  to  the  feveral  natures  of  ^ 

the 


^. 


8o  Of  the  DoSlrines  of  Vibrations 

the  ideas  which  arc  prdt-ntcd  to  the  mind;  but  alio 
Ihtwing,  in  general,  ot  what  kind  this  change  is,  and 
in  what  manner  it  is  effedlcd. 


PROP.     XIV. 

It   is   reafonable   to   think,    that  Jome   of  the    complex 

I'ibrations   attending   upon    complex   Ideas,    according 

to  the  lafl  Prcpofuion,  may  ke  as  'vivid,  as  any  of  the 

fcnfoiy     rihaltvns    excited  by   the   diretJ   Atlion   of 

Objetis. 

For  ihele  complex  vibrations  may  confifl:  of  To 
many  parts  co-cxiftcnt  and  ruccelTive,  and  thefc 
parts  may  To  alter  and  exalt  one  another,  as  that 
the  relulting  agitations  in  the  medullary  fubftance 
may  no  longer  be  miniatuie  vibrations,  but  vivid 
ones  equal  to  thofe  excited  by  obje(5ls  imprefled  on 
the  Itnles.  This  proccfs  may  be  farther  favoured 
by  a  n^ixcure  of  vivid  real  imprefTions  among  the 
ideas,  by  the  irritability  of  the  medullary  fubitance, 
by  a  previous  difpofition  to  the  vibrations  to  be 
excited,   &:c. 

Cor,  I.  .When  the  complex  miniature  vibrations 
are  thus  exalted  in  degree,  we  are  to  conceive,  that 
the  corrcfponding  complex  ideas  are  proportionally 
exalted,  and  fo  pafs  into  intelle6lual  afFcclions  and 
palTions.  We  are  therefore  to  deduce  the  origin  of 
the  intelledual  pleafures  and  pains,  which  are  the 
objedls  of  thefe  afFeftions  and  paflions,  from  the 
fource  here  laid  opeo- 

Cor.  1.  Since  the  preient  propofition  unfolds  the 
nature  of  the  affections  and  will,  in  the  fame  man- 
ner, and  from  the  fame  principles,  as  the  twelfth 
does  that  of  ideas,  intelledl,  mcmiory,  and  fancy, 
it  follows,  that  all  thefe  are  of  the  fame  original  and 
confideration,  and  differ  only  in  degree,  or  fome 
accidental  circumdances.    They  are  all  deducible  from 

the 


and  Aflbciation  in  general,  8i 

the  external  irmprelTions  made  upon  the  fenfes,  the 
veftiges  or  ideas  of  thefe,  and  their  nnutual  connec- 
tions by  means  of  aflbciation,  taken  together  and 
operating  on  one  another. 

Cor.  3.  It  follows  alfo  from  this  propofition,  that 
the  intelledliial  pleasures  and  pains  may  be  greater, 
equal,  or  lefs,  than  the  fenfibie  ones,  according  as 
each  perfon  unites  more  or  fewer,  more  vivid  or  more 
languid  miniature  vibrations,  in  the  formation  of  his 
intelleftual  pleafures  and  pains,  &c. 

CoR.  4.  It  is  evident,  that  all  the  vibrations  which 
belong  to  ideas,  and  intelledual  afFedions,  mull  re- 
fide  in  the  brain,  or  even  in  the  mod  internal  parts 
of  it,  not  in  the  fpinal  marrow,  or  nerves.  The 
brain  is  therefore  the  feat  of  the  rational  foul,  i.  e.  of 
the  foul,  as  far  as  it  is  influenced  by  reafons  and  moral 
motives,  even  though  we  (hould  admit,  that  the  fpi- 
'Aal  marrow  and  nerves  are,  in  part,  the  fenforium,  or 
the  feat  of  the  fenfitive  foul ;  which  is  fome  argument, 
that  this  ought  not  to  be  admitted,  but  that  the  fen- 
forium, in  men  at  leaft,  ought  to  be  placed  in  the  in- 
ternal parts  of  the  brain. 

Cor.  5.  It  is  of  the  utmoft  confequence  to  mo- 
rality and  religion,  that  the  affeflions  and  paffionS 
fhould  be  analyfed  into  their  fimple  compounding 
parts,  by  reverfing  the  fteps  of  the  aflbciations  which 
concur  to  form  them.  For  thus  we  may  learn  how 
to  cherifh  and  improve  good  ones,  check  and  root  out 
fuch  as  are  mifchievous  and  immoral,  and  how  to  fuit 
our  manner  of  life,  in  fome  tolerable  meafure,  to  our 
intelle6lual  and  religious  wants.  And  as  this  holds, 
in  refpcfb  of  perfons  of  all  ages,  fo  it  is  particularly 
true,  and  worthy  of  confideration,  in  refpe<5l  of  chil- 
dren and  youth.  The  world  is,  indeed,  fufficiently 
flocked  with  general  precepts  for  this  purpofe, 
grounded  on  experience  j  and  whofoever  will  follow 
thefe  faithfully,  may  expeft  good  general  fuccefs. 
However,  the  doftrine  of  aflbciation,    when   traced 

Vol.  I.  G  up 


82  Of  the    'DoBrines  of  Vibrations 

up  to  the  firfl  rudiments  of  underflanding  and  af- 
fc(5lion,  unfolds  fuch  a  fccne  as  cannot  fail  both  to 
in(t:fU(5t  and  alarm  all  fuch  as  have  any  degree  of 
interclU'd  concern  for  ihemfclves,  or  of  a  benevolent 
one  for  others.  It  ought  to  be  added  here,  that  the 
doftrine  of  allocintion  explains  alfo  the  rife  and  pro- 
grcfs  of  thofc  voluntary  and  fcmivoluntary  powers, 
which  we  exert  over  our  ideas,  aftedions,  and  bodily 
motions  (as  1  fhall  ihew  herealter,  prop.  21.)  i  and, 
by  doing  this,  teaches  us  how  to  regulate  and  im- 
prove thefe  powers. 

Cor.  6.  \{  beings  of  the  fame  nature,  but  whofc 
affcclions  and  p.ilTions  are,  at  prefent,  in  different 
proportions  to  each  other,  be  expofed  for  an  indefinite 
time  to  the  fame  imprefllons  and  affociations,  all 
their  particular  differences  will,  at  laft,  be  over-ruled, 
and  they  will  become  perfedly  fimilar,  or  even  equal. 
They  may  alfo  be  made  perfectly  fimilar,  in  a  finite 
time,  by  a  proper  adjuftment  of  the  impieffions  and 
affociations. 

CoR.  7.  Our  original  bodily  make,  and  the  im- 
preffions  and  affociations  which  affedt  us  in  paffing 
through  life,  are  fo  much  alike,  and  yet  not  the  fame, 
that  there  mult  be  both  a  great  general  refemblance 
amongrt  mankin<d,  in  refpe6t  of  their  intelledual 
affedlions,  and  alfo  many  particular  differences. 

Cor.  8.  Some  degree  of  fpirituality  is  the  necef- 
fary  confequcnce  of  pafllng  through  life.  The  fen- 
fible  pleafures  and  pains  mull  be  transferred  by  affo- 
ciation  more  and  more  every  day,  upon  things  that 
afford  neither  fenfible  pleafure  nor  fenfible  pain  in 
themfelves,  a^nd  fo  beget  the  inrelleclual  pleafures 
and  pains. 

Cor.  9.  Let  the  letters  ^,  b^  c,  d^  e^  &c.  repre- 
fent  the  fenfible  pleafures ;  a*,  ^,  and  2,  the  fenfible 
pains,  fuppofed  to  be  only  three  in  number ;  and 
let  us  fuppofe  all  thefe,  both  pleafures  and  pains,  to 
be  equal  to  one  another  :  if  now  the  ideas  of  thefe 

fenfible 


/ 


and  AlTociation  tn  general.  83 

fenfible  pleafures  and  pains  be  aflbciated  together,  ac- 
cording to  all  the  poffible  varieties,  in  order  to  form 
intelledual  pleafures  and  pains,  it  is  plain,  that  plea- 
fure  nnuft  prevail  in  all  the  combinations  of  feven  or 
more  letters  j  and  alfo,  that  when  the  fcveral  parts  of 
thefe  complex  pleafures  are  fufficiently  united  by  af- 
fociation,  the  pains  which  enter  their  compofition 
will  no  longer  be  diftinguilhed  fcparately,  but  the  re- 
fulting  mixed  and  complex  pleafures  appear  to  be  pure 
and  fimple  ones,  equal  in  quantity  to  the  excels  of 
pleafure  above  pain,  in  each  combination.  Thus 
.  aflbciation  would  convert  a  ftate,  in  which  pleafure 
and  pain  were  both  perceived  by  turns,  into  one  in 
which  pure  pleafure  alone  would  be  perceived ;  at 
leaft,  would  caufe  the  beings  who  were  under  its  in- 
fluence to  an  indefinite  degree,  to  approach  to  this 
laft  (late  nearer  than  by  any  definite  difi^erence.  Or, 
in  other  words,  aflbciation,  under  the  fuppofition  of 
this  corollary,  has  a  tendency  to  reduce  the  ftate  of 
thofe  who  have  eaten  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  back  again  to  a  paradifiacal  one. 
Now,  though  the  circumftances  of  mankind  are  not 
the  fame  with  thofe  fuppofed  in  this  corollary,  yet  they 
bear  a  remarkable  refemblance  thereto,  during  that 
part  of  our  exiftence  which  is  expofed  to  our  ob- 
fervation.  For  our  fenfible  pleafures  are  far  more 
numerous  than  our  fenfible  pains ;  and  though  the 
pains  be,  in  general,  greater  than  the  pleafures,  yet 
the  fum  total  of  thefe  feems  to  be  greater  than  that  of 
thofe  J  whence  the  remainder,  after  the  deftru6tion  of 
the  pains  by  the  oppofite  and  equal  pleafures,  will  be 
pure  pleafure. 

CoR.  10.  The  intelle<5lual  pleafures  and  pains  arc 
as  real  as  the  fenfible  ones,  being,  as  we  have  feen, 
nothing  but  the  fenfible  ones  varioufly  mixed  and 
compounded  together.  The  intelleftual  pleafures  and 
pains  are  alfo  all  equally  of  a  fadlitious  and  acquired 
nature.     We   muft   therefore  ellimate  all  our  plea- 

G  1  fures 


84  Of  the  DoFiriucs  of  Vibrations 

furcs  equally,  by  their  magnitude,  permanency,  and 
tendency  to  procure  others ;  and  our  pains  in  hke 
manner. 

CoR.  II.  The  fenfible  pleafures  and  pains  have  a 
greater  tendency  to  dertroy  the  body,  than  the  intel- 
lc6lual  ones ;  for  they  are  of  a  particular  local  nature, 
and  fo  bear  hard  upon  the  organs  which  convey  them. 
But  the  deftrudlion  of  any  one  confiderable  part  of 
the  body  is  the  dei\ru6tion  of  the  whole,  from  the 
fympathy  of  the  parts ;  whereas  the  intelledual  plea- 
fures and  pains,  being  colle6tcd  from  all  quarters,  do 
not  much  injure  any  oigan  particularly,  but  rather  ' 
bring  on  an  equable  gradual  decay  of  the  whole  medul- 
lary fubftance,  and  all  the  parts  thereon  depending. 

Cor.  12.  This  propofition,  and  its  corollaries, 
afford  fome  pleafing  prefumptions  j  fuch  are,  that 
we  have  a  power  of  fuiting  our  frame  of  mind  to 
our  circumflances,  of  correding  what  is  amifs,  and 
improving  what  is  right :  that  our  ultimate  happi- 
nefs  appears  to  be  of  a  fpiritual,  not  corporeal  na- 
ture ;  and  therefore  that  death,  or  the  (haking  off 
the  grofs  body,  may  not  ftop  our  progrefs,  but  ra-  ' 
thcr  render  us  more  expedite  in  the  purfuit  of  our 
true  end:  that  affbciation  tends  to  make  us  all  ulti- 
mately fimilarj  fo  that  if  one  be  happy,  all  muft : 
and,  laftjy,  that  the  fame  affbciation  may  alfo  be 
fliewn  to  contribute  to  introduce  pure  ultimate  fpi- 
ritual happinefs,  in  all,  by  a  direft  argument,  as 
well  as  by  the  juft  mentioned  indired:  one. 


SECT 


i 


and  AfTociation  in  general.  85 


SECT.     III. 

OF  MUSCULAR  MOTION,  AND  ITS  TWO  KINDS, 
AUTOMATIC  AND  VOLUNTARY  ;  AND  OF  THE 
USE  OF  THE  DOCTRINES  OF  VIBRATIONS  AND 
ASSOCIATION,  FOR  EXPLAINING  THESE  RE- 
SPECTIVELY. 

P  R  O  P.     XV. 

//  is  probable  J  that  mujcular  Motion  is  -performed  in  the 
fame  general  Manner  as  Senfation,  and  the  Perception 
of  Ideas, 

For,  firft,  fenfation,  the  perception  of  ideas,  and 
a  locomotive  faculty,  i.  e.  mufcular  motion,  are  the 
three  moft  eminent  marks  of  diftindion  between  the 
animal  and  vegetable  world :  therefore  fince  it  is 
already  found,  that  the  two  firft  are  performed  by  the 
fame  means,  i.  e.  vibrations,  there  is  fome  prefump- 
tion,  that  the  lad  will  not  require  a  different  one. 

Secondly,  Of  the  two  forts  of  motion,  viz.  auto- 
matic and  voluntary,  the  firit  depends  upon  fenfation, 
the  laft  upon  ideas,  as  I  fhall  fhew  particularly  here- 
after, and  may  appear,  in  general,  to  any  one,  upon 
a  (light  attentions  whence  it  follows,  that  fenfation, 
and  automatic  motion,  mud  be  performed  in  the  fame 
general  manner,  alfo  the  perception  of  ideas,  and 
voluntary  motion :  and  therefore,  fince  fenfation  and 
perception,  the  two  antecedents,  agree  in  their  caufes, 
automatic  and  voluntary  motion,  the  two  confequents, 
/.  e.  all  the  four,  muft  likewife. 

Thirdly,  It  appears  from  the  firft  and  fecond  pro- 
pofitions,  that  the  white  medullary  fubftance  is  the 

G   "X  common 


36  Of  the  Donnnes  of  Vibrations 

cornmon  inftniment  of  fenfation,  ideas,  and  motion  j 
and  by  the  tiftli,  iliat  tliis  rublUncc  is  uniform  and 
continuous  every  whfrt*.  Hence  it  follows,  that  the 
Ibbtle  motions  excited  in  the  fenfory  nerves,  and  me- 
dullary lubllance  of  the  brain,  during  fenfation  and  j 
intelledual  perception,  mull,  of  whatever  kind  they 
be,  pafs  into  the  motory  nerves ,  and  when  they  arc  - 
arrived  there,  it  is  probable,  that  they  mud  caufe  the 
contra<ftion  of  the  mufcles,  both  becaufe  otherwife 
their  arrival  at  the*  motory  nerves  would  be  fuper- 
fluous,  and  becaufe  fome  fuch  fubtle  motions  are 
required  for  this  purpofe. 

Cor.  I.  All  arguments  therefore  which  prove  the 
performance  of  fenfation  and  intelledual  perception,- 
by  means  of  vibrations  of  the  fmall  medullary  par- 
ticles, mull  infer,  that  mufcular  motion  is  pei formed 
by  vibrations  alfo.  And  converfely,  if  vibrations  can 
be  Ihewn  to  take  place  in  mufcular  motion,  they 
mud:  alfo  be  inftrumental  in  fenfation  and  intelle6lual 
perception. 

Cor.  2.  There  are  certain  experiments  and  ob- 
fervations  which  favour  the  fuppofition  of  the  per- 
formance of  mufcular  motion  by  fubtle  agitations  in 
the  fmall  particles  of  the  mufcular  fibres,  /.  e.  by  vi- 
bratory motions.  It  follows  therefore,  that  thefe  ex- 
periments and  obfervations  are  fome  additional  evi- 
dence for  the  exigence  of  fenfory  and  ideal  vibrations, 
as  above  explained.  Such  are,  that  the  motion  of  the 
heart,  and  of  other  mufcles,  may  be  renewed  in  dy- 
ing animals,  and  thofe  that  are  newly  dead,  by  heat, 
injevftion  of  a  fluid,  and  punftures,  it  being  eafy  to  be 
conceived,  that  the  two  laft  caufes  fhould  put  the 
particles  of  the  fibres  into  agitations  for  a  fhort 
tim.e,  ■/'.  e.  till  they  can  recover  their  equilibrium,  by 
altering  their  dillances,  and  mutual  aflions  :  and  the 
firfl;  caufc,  /.  e.  hear,  is,  by  the  common  confent 
of  all,  judged  to  confift  in,  and  to  caufe,  fubde  vi- 
bratory motions.    It  is  alfo  difficult  to  affign  any  other 

adion. 


and  Aflbciation  /;/  general.  87 

aclion  which  thefe  caufes  can  have.  In  like  man- 
ner the  alternate  contratflions  and  relaxations  of  the 
hearts  of  frogs,  vipers,  and  fome  other  animals, 
which  continue  for  long  fpaces  of  time  after  thefe 
have  been  entirely  feparated  from  their  bodies,  feenri 
utterly  inexplicable  upon  any  of  the  common  fuppo- 
fitions,  but  follow  eafily  from  the  dodrine  of  vibra- 
tions, as  it  is  applied  to  mufcular  motion,  in  the  two 
next  propofitions. 

Cor.  3.  Since  the  fame  motion  which  occafions 
fenfation,  and  intelledlual  perception,  pafles  through 
the  feats  of  thefe  into  the  motorv  nerves,  in  order  to' 
excite  there  the  automatic  and  voluntary  motions, 
thus  pervading  the  whole  medullary  fubftance,  in 
various  ways,  according  to  the  variety  of  the  circum- 
itances,  but  in  all  with  the  greateft  precifion  and  ex- 
adnefs,  it  follows,  that  this  muft  be  a  vibratory  one, 
and  that  of  the  moft  fubtle  kind.  For  the  fame  excefs 
of  foftnefs,  which  renders  the  medullary  fubftance 
totally  inelaftic  as  to  fenfe,  and  confeqiiently  unfit  for 
the  groiTer  vibrations  of  the  particles  of  the  firft  or 
largeft  order  (by  the  vibrations  of  which,  in  fonorous 
bodies,  it  feem.s,  that  found  is  excited  in  the  air), 
may  render  it  more  fufceptible  of  vibrations,  in  the 
particles  of  the  fecond,  third,  &c.  orders;  ..and  if 
we  fuppofe  a  proper  ultimate  ftru6lure  in  the  feveral 
parts  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  thefe  vibrations  may 
be  conveyed  with  all  that  precifion  and  variety  which 
the  phsenomena  require.  And,  unlefs  we  do  fuppofe 
fome  fuch  fubtle  vibrations  as  thefe,  it  will  be  ex- 
tremely difficult  to  conceive,  how  fo  foft  a  pulp  as  the 
.  medullary  fubftance  is,  fhould  be  the  common  inftru- 
ment  of  fenfation,  thought,  and  motion ;  which  yet 
all  phyficians  and  philofophers  muft  allow,  according 
to  the  firft  and  fecond  propofitions.  Ifwefetafide 
fubtle  vibratory  motions,  the  impulfe  of  the  objefts 
of  fenfe  can  communicate  nothing,  as  it  feems,  to  fo 
foft  a  fubftance,  but  an  uniform  preflure,  fufceptible 

G  4  of 


S8  Of  the  Do^ fines  of  Vibrations 

of  few  or  no  modifications,  and  confequently  highly 
unfuitable  to  the  great  variety  of  the  phajnomena 
that  are  to  be  folved  by  it.  This  argument  there- 
fore tends  to  fhew,  that  fcnfation,  thought,  and 
motion,  muft  all  be  performed  by  vibrations. 


PROP.     XVI. 

^he  Vhancmena  of  mufcular   Contra5fion  appear  to  be 
fufficiently  agreeable  to  the  Do5frine  of  Vibrations. 

In  order  to  Ihevv  this,  let  us  make  the  following 
fuppofitions : 

Firfl,  That  vibrations  defcend  along  the  motory 
nerves,  /.  e.  the  nerves  which  go  to  the  mufcles,  in 
fome  luch  manner  as  found  runs  along  the  furfaces  of 
rivers,  or  an  eleiftrical  virtue  along  hempen  firings. 

Secondly,  That  thefe  vibrations,  when  they  arrive 
at  the  mufcular  fibres,  are  communicated  to  them, 
fo  that  the  fmall  particles  of  thefe  fibres  fhall  be 
agitated  with  like  vibrations. 

Thirdly,  That  the  vibrations  thus  excited  in  the 
fibres,  put  into  adlion  an  attraftive  virtue,  perhaps 
of  the  cle<5lrical  kind,  which  lies  concealed  in  the  par- 
ticles of  the  fibres,  or  in  the  blood  globules,  or  both. 
That  the  blood  globules  of  animals  are  eleflrical, 
may  be  coniedured  from  the  eleftricity  of  thofe  of 
the  mufcle-fhell  fifh,  obferved  by  Dr.  Hales -y  and 
that  the  red  blood  has  a  principal  fhare  in  mufcular 
contraiftion,  is  highly  probable,  from  the  red  colour 
of  all  the  great  mufcles  of  the  body,  and  from  the 
weaknefs  of  all  young  animals,  and  of  fuch  as  want 
a  due  fhare  of  red  blood.  At  the  fame  time,  it 
appears  from  exanguious  and  tranfparent  animals, 
that  pale  fibres,  and  colourlefs  fluids,  have  all  the 
neceflary  requifices  for  mufcular  contra6lion,  in  cer- 
tain degrees. 

Fourthly, 


and  Affociation  in  general.  89 

Fourthly,  We  muft  now  fuppofe,  in  confequence 
of  the  three  foregoing  fuppofitions,  that  each  muf- 
cular  fibre,  and  confequently  the  whole  nnufcle,  is 
made  fhorter  by  this  increafe  of  attraftion  in  its  par- 
ticles ;  whilft  yet  their  approach  to  each  other  is  fo 
fmall,  as  that  the  whole  bulk  of  the  nnnfcle  is  but 
little  diminifhed ;  for  though  the  length  of  the  mufcle 
is  leflened,  its  other  dimenfions  are  increafcd. 

Fifthly,  If  we  fuppofe  the  fmall  ultimate  fibres  of 
the  mufcles  to  bend  alternately  to  the  right  and  left, 
as  an  eel  does,  at  exceedingly ,  fliort  intervals,  agree- 
ably to  Dr.  LoweVy  this  may  fomewhat  affift  us  to 
conceive  in  what  manner  a  mufcle  may  be  fhortened, 
and  yet  fo  increafed  in  breadth  and  thicknefs,  as  to 
remain  of  nearly  the  fame  dimenfions.  For  if  thefe 
flexures  be  increafed  by  the  increafe  of  the  attradlion 
of  the  parts,  the  whole  mufcle  will  become  fliorter 
and  thicker,  as  it  is  found  to  be  in  contraction ;  and 
converfely  when  the  flexures  are  drawn  out,  the 
mufcle  will  be  longer  and  thinner,  i.  e.  in  a  ftatc  of 
relaxation.  The  fmall  wrinkles  which  have  been 
obferved  in  the  mufcular  fibres,  by  Leenwenhoek,  and 
others,  the  wavings  and  curls  which  frequently  ap- 
pear to  the  eye  in  mufcles,  after  boiling  or  roafl:ing, 
and  the  rhomboidal  pinnulae  taken  notice  of  by  Dr. 
Hales  in  the  abdominal  mufcles  of  a  living  frog, 
when  under  contraction,  all  feem  to  favour  this  fifth 
fuppofition. 

Dr.  Pemherton  conjectures,  that  the  caufe  of  the 
contraction  of  mufcular  fibres  is  no  other  than  the 
com.mon  caufe  of  the  cohefion  of  the  fmall  particles 
of  the  mufcular  fibres  increafed.  And  this  feems 
very  probable  j  for  the  mufcles  are  hard  during  con- 
traction, foft  during  relaxation ;  and  hardnefs  and 
foftnefs  are  evidently  nothing  but  variations  in  the 
cohefion  of  the  fmall  particles  of  bodies.  Neither  is 
this  conjecture  at  all  repugnant  to  the  fuppofition  of 
an  electrical  attraction  above  made,  or  to  the  doc- 
trine 


qo  Of  the  DoBrbtei  of  Vibrations 

trine  of  vibrations ;  for  electricity  may  reach  to  fmall 
dillanccs,  without  being  excited  by  friction,  and  flow 
from  the  fame  principle  as  the  cohefion  of  bodies,  as 
Sir  Ifaac  Newton  has  oblerved.  It  may  tiiercfore  be 
the  general  caufe  of  cohefion,  and  may  be  excited  in 
the  mulcular  fibres  in  an  extraordinary  degree,  when- 
ever extraordinary  vibrations  are  communicated  to 
them.  Or,  if  we  fuppofe  the  caufe  of  cohefion  to  be 
fomethinp;  diflind:  from  eledricity,  in  may,  however, 
be  increafcd  by  vibrations  of  the  fmall  cohering  par- 
ticles. 

PRO  P.     XVII. 

^hat  Tropenfily   to  alternate  ContratVion  and  Relaxa- 
tion,  which  is  obferved  in  almojl  all  the  Mufcles  of 
the  Body  J  admits  of  a  Solution  from  the  Do3irine  of 
Vibrations. 

For,  when  the  fibres  are  in  a  flate  of  contraction, 
they  are  hard  ;  and  this  hardnefs,  if  it  be  fuppofed  to 
extend  to  the  fmall  particles  (which  is  no  unreafon- 
ablc  fuppofition),  mufl  render  the  particles  of  thefe 
particles,  /.  e.  the  particles  fuppofed  in  thefe  pro- 
pofuions  to  be  agitated  with  vibrations  indifpofed  to 
receive  thefe  vibrations ;  but  the  free  admifllon  of 
thefe  vibrations  is  by  fuppofition  the  caufe  which  ex- 
cites the  attractions  of  the  particles,  and  the  confe- 
quent  contraction  of  the  mufcle.  It  follows  there- 
fore, that  the  hardnefs  which  impedes  thefe  vibra- 
tions, mufl:  alfo  lefl'en  the  attraction  and  contraction  j 
or,  in  other  words,  that  the  contraction  of  a  mufcle, 
■when  carried  to  a  certain  degree,  mufl:  check  itfelf,  and 
bring  on  a  relaxation,  after  a  time  fuflicient  for  the 
proper  caufes  to  take  efFeCt. 

In  like  manner,  when  a  mufcle  is  relaxed,  the  vi- 
brations which  defcend  along  the  motory  nerves,  pafs 
freely  into  the  mufcular  fibres,  increafe  the  attractions 

of 


and  AfTociation  in  general.  91 

of  the  particles,  and  bring  on  the  oppofite  ftate,  that 
of  contra<5tion  ;  and  fo  on  alternately. 

The  fibres  of  the  relaxed  mufcle  may  alfo  be  con- 
lidered  as  under  a  ftate  of  diftention  to  a  certain  de- 
gree, and  confequently  as  liable  to  an  increafe  of  vi- 
brations upon  this  account.  To  which  we  nnay  far- 
ther add,  that  fince  vibrations  are  hindered  frooi  pair- 
ing into  the  contrafted  mufcle,  in  the  manner  juft 
now  explained,  they  will  pafs  with  greater  force  into 
the  relaxed  one,  from  the  place  of  the  common  deri- 
vation of  their  nerves,  wherever  there  are  antagonift 
mufcles  that  derive  nerves  from  the  fame  trunk,  as  in 
the  limbs,  and  mufcles  of  refpiration. 

Cor.  It  appears  from  this  method  of  confidering 
the  contraflions  and  relaxations  of  mufcles,  that  there 
is  a  certain  degree  of  hardnefs  or  contradlion  in  muf- 
cular  fibres,  which  may  be  fuppofed  juft  to  balance 
each  degree  of  force  with  which  vibrations  defcend 
into  the  mufcular  fibres  i  and  that,  while  this  equili- 
brium fubfifts,  the  contradion  can  neither  be  increafed 
nor  abated. 

PROP.     XVIII. 

The  Vibrations,  of  which  an  Account  has  been  given  in 
this  Chapter,  may  be  fuppofed  to  afford  a  fufficient 
Supply  of  motory  Vibrations,  for  the  Purpofe  of  con- 
tracing  the  Mufcles. 

In  order  to  make  this  appear,  it  will  be  proper  to 
diflinguifh  the  motory  vibrations,  or  thofe  which  de- 
fcend along  the  nerves  of  the  mufcles  into  their  fibres, 
into  the  five  following  clafTes : 

Firft  then,  we  are  to  conceive,  that  thofe  fenlbry 
vibrations  which  are  excited  in  the  external  organs, 
and  afcend  towards  the  brain,  when  they  arrive,  in 
their  afcent,  at  the  origins  of  motory  nerves,  as  they 
arife  from  the  fame  common  trunk,  plexus,  or  gan- 
glion, 


iji  Of  the  Dooirines  of  Vibrations 

glion,  with  the  knfory  ones  aftedtd,  detach  a  part  of 
thcmlclvcs  at  each  of  thcfc  origins  down  the  inotory 
nerves  ;  which  part,  by  agitating  the  fmail  particles 
of  the  mufcuUr  fibres,  in  tlie  manner  explained  in 
the  fixtcenth  propofition,  excites  them  to  contrac- 
tion. 

Secondly,  The  remainder  of  the  fenfory  vibrations, 
which  arrives  at  the  brain,  not  being  detached  down 
the  motory  nerves  in  its  afcent  thither,  muft  be  dif- 
fuled  over  the  whole  medullary  lubflance.  It  will 
therefore  defcend  from  the  brain  into  the  whole  fyftem 
of  motory  nerves,  and  excite  fome  feeble  vibrations, 
at  lead,  in  them.  The  fame  may  be  obferved  of 
ideal  vibrations  generated  in  the  brain  by  afTociation ; 
thefe  mull  pervade  the  whole  medullary  fubftance, 
and  confequcnily  affccfl  all  the  motory  nerves  in  fome 
degree. 

Thirdly,  The  heat  of  the  blood,  and  pulfation  of 
the  arteries,  which  pafs  through  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance, muft  always  excite,  or  keep  up,  fome  vibra- 
tions in  it;  and  thefe  muft  always  defcend  into  the 
whole  fyftem  of  mufcles.  And  I  apprehend,  that 
from  thefe  two  laft  fources,  taken  together,  we  may 
account  for  that  moderate  degree  of  contraflion,  or 
tendency  thereto,  which  is  obfervable  in  all  the 
mufcles,  at  leaft  in  all  thofe  of  healthy  adults,  du- 
ring vigilance. 

Fourthly,  When  vivid  vibrations  are  excited  in 
membranes  of  an  uniform  texture,  by  a  ftimulus  of 
any  kind,  they  feem  to  run  over  the  whole  extent  of 
fuch  membranes,  and  by  this  means  to  have  a  great 
influence  in  contra6ling  all  the  mufcles  that  lie  near 
any  part  of  this  membrane,  though  they  be  remote 
from  the  place  of  the  ftimulus.  The  manner  in  which 
this  is  effefled,  I  conceive  to  be  as  follows  :  the  re- 
peated or  cdntinued  action  of  the  ftimulus  difFufes  vi- 
brations from  the  place  of  its  aftion  over  the  whole 
membrane,  which,  by  their  reciprocal  influences,  be- 
come 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  93 

come  equal,  or  nearly  fo,  in  every  pare  of  it,  and  are, 
at  Jaft,  fo  exalted,  as  to  contradt  every  part.  As  foon 
as  this  contraflion  takes  place,  the  vibraiions  in  its 
fmall  particles  inuft  ceafe  for  reafons  given  above. 
They  will  therefore  be  propagated  almoft  inftanta- 
neoufly  over  the  neighbouring  mufcles,  frooi  the  nerv- 
ous connmunications  between  the  membrane  and  the 
neighbouring  mufcles  j  by  which  all  changes  made  in 
the  nerves  of  the  membrane  muft  afFeft  thofe  of  the 
neighbouring  mufcles.  As  therefore  during  the  vi- 
vid vibrations  of  the  particles  of  the  membrane,  we 
muft  fuppofe  fome  to  be  propagated  into  the  neigh- 
bouring mufcles,  agreeably  to  the  firft  article  of  this 
propofition,  fo,  upon  their  fudden  ceiTation,  fuch  a 
change  may  reafonably  be  fuppofed,  in  the  communi-, 
eating  nervous  fibrils,  as  ftiali  agitate  the  ^ther  con- 
tained in  them  with  much  more  vivid  vibrations  than 
before ;  and  thefe  vibrations  muft  now  pafs  into  the 
mufcles  alone,  fince  the  contradlion  of  the  membrane 
hinders  them  from  returning  into  it.  I  Ihall  here- 
after produce  feveral  examples  of  this  procefs,  in  de- 
tail. It  may  fuffice,  at  prcfent,  juft  to  mention  the 
a6lion  of  fneezing,  and  to  defire  the  reader  to  com- 
pare this  adion,  in  a  curfory  way,  with  the  foregoing 
account. 

,  Fifthly,  I  have,  in  the  laft  article,  Ihewn  how  ^ 
cefTation  of  vibrations  in  the  particles  of  a  membrane, 
may  increafe  thofe  in  the  neighbouring  mufcles. 
But  it  feems  alfo,  that  a  cefTation  of  vibrations  in 
any  other  confiderable  part  of  the  body,  from  what- 
ever caufe  it  proceeds,  has  a  like  tendency ;  and 
that  this  tendency  is  deducible  fiom  the  change  made 
in  the  nerves  of  the  part  afFeded,  and  thence  propa- 
gated into  the  communicating  branches,  or  even  into 
the  whole  medullary  fubftance.  The  yawnings  and 
ftretchings  of  perfons  difpofed  to  fleep,  the  convul- 
five  refpiration  of  thofe  that  are  jufl  fallen  afleep, 
and  the  convulfive  motions  which  attend  the  extinc- 
tion 


(^4     •  ^f  f^^  DofJrines  of  Vibrations 

tion  of  the  fenfcs  in  epilej^tic  fits,  and  the  near  np- 
proaclies  of  ck-ath,  may  be  derived,  perhaps,  in  part, 
from  this  Iburce,  in  jxirt  from  lome  of  ihe  fore- 
going. 

PROP.     XIX. 

The  automatic  Motion  feems  to  admit  of  a  cotmnodious 
Explanation,  from  the  three  lajl  Vropofitions  taken 
together. 

Tuc  particular  detail  of  tliis  obfcure  and  intri- 
cate matter  will  be  attempted  in  the  proper  places 
of  the  next  chapter,  which  will  contain  the  appli- 
cation of  the  general  pofitions  concerning  fenfation 
and  motion,  in  this,  to  each  of  the  moll:  remark- 
able phjunomena  conlidered  feparately.  1  will,  how- 
ever, prefent  the  reader  here  with  a  fliort  fketch,  to 
enable  him  to  form  fome  notion  of  the  manner  and 
plaufibility  of  the  attempt. 

The  ordinary  motions  of  the  heart  appear  to  arife 
from  the  lecond  and  third  claflTes  of  motory  vibra- 
tions, mentioned  in  the  laft  propofition  i  and  it  is -re- 
markable, that  its  motions  are  found  to  be,  in  gene- 
ral, and  ceteris  paribus,  ftronger  or  v/eaker,  as  the 
fum  total  of  thefe  two  clafTes  is  greater  or  lefs^ 
The  fyftole  and  diaftole  fucceed  each  other,  from 
the  caufes  afllgned  in  the  ieventeenth  propofition. 
We  are  to  conceive,  however,  that  both  the  influx  of 
the  venal  blood  into  the  ventricles,  and  of  the  arte- 
rial into  the  coronary  veflels,  have  a  confiderable 
ihare  in  bringing  on  the  fyftole,  in  the  way  of  dif- 
tention  and  irritation. 

May  we  not  conjedure,  from  that  experiment  of 
Dr.  Hook'Sj  in  which,  he  kept  a  dog  alive,  by  a  mere 
continued  ftream  of  frefh  air  pafTing  through  the 
lung>^,  without  any  fuch  alternate  motion  of  the 
cheft  as  takes  place  in  common  refpiration,  that  one 

principal 


and  Affociation  in  general.  95 

principal  ufe  of  the  air,  which  is  an  eleflric  per  fe, 
in  refpiration,  is  to  reftore  to  the  blood,  as  it  palTes 
through  the  lungs,  that  eledlricity  which  it  has  loft  in 
circulating  through  the  body  ?  For,  upon  this  fuppo- 
fition,  the  blood  which  arrives  at  the  left  ventricle, 
will,  in  ccflations  of  refpiration,  and  alfo  where  foul 
air  is  refpired,  want  its  due  eleftricity  ;  whence, 
according  to  prop.  16.  the  nhufcles,  and  efpecially 
the  heart,  will  want  one  of  the  principal  requifites 
for  contra<5lion.  However,  convuifive  nnotions  may 
enfue  after  a  fyncope,  from  the  fifth  clafs  of  motory 
vibrations. 

It  is  remarkable  here,  that  the  hearts  of  frogs,  vi- 
pers, and  feveral  other  fuch  animals,  as  can  live  in 
crreat  degrees  of  cold,  and  without  refpiration,  con- 
tinue to  beat,  as  has  been  taken  notice  of  above,  for 
a  long  time  after  they  are  taken  out  of  their  bodies. 
We  muft  therefore  fuppofe,  that  the  fibres  of  their 
hearts,  and  the  blood  globules  which  remain  in  them, 
are  endued  with  an  eledric,  or  other  attraflive  virtue, 
of  a  more  durable  kind  than  the  fibres  and  blood 
globules  of  the  more  perfedl  animals  j  alfo,  that  this 
virtue  may  be  put  into  adion  by  a  lefs  degree  of 
heat.  All  which  is  very  agreeable  to  the  other  cir- 
cumftances  of  their  oeconomy. 

Refpiration  and  crying  are  excited  in  the  new-born 
child  from  the  cold,  handling  of  the  midwife,  and 
other  vivid  fenfations  impreflfed  immediately  upon  its 
coming  into  the  world.  Thefe  vivid  fenfations  put 
the  whole  fyftem  of  mufcles,  or  at  leaft  thofe  of  the 
trunk  and  larynx,  into  aftion  at  once,  as  far  as 
\their  mutual  anragonifm  will  permit,  the  ftronger  fee 
of  confpiring  mufcles  over-powering  the  weaker  for  a 
certain  fliort  time,  and  then  after  their  force  is 
<?xhaufted,  according  to  prop.  17.  giving  way  for 
a  Ihorter  time  to  the  weaker.  But  this  alternate 
aftion  of  the  mufcles  of  the  trunk  and  larynx  will 
be  an  imperfe<5t  kind  of  refpiration,  with  crying,  as 

may 


96  Of  the  DoSlrines  of  Vibrations 

may  be  eafily  fft-n  from  the  difpofition  of  the  miifclcs. 
Kcrpir.iiion  is  alttrwards  kept  up,  partly  by  the  pro- 
pciiliiy  of  the  murdes  to  alternate  adion,  explained 
fro/).  17.  partly,  perhaps,  by  the  power  of  habit, 
/.  <f.  alVociation}  paidy  by  the  renewal  of  vivid  im- 
prcJTions;  and  partly,  as  it  feems,  by  vibrations  ex- 
cited in  the  pleura  and  peritonjEum,  and  thence  com- 
municated to  the  diaphragm,  and  to  the  mulclcs  of 
the  brealt  and  belly. 

That  the  lall  caufe  has  a  real  efficacy,  may  appear 
f(om  the  following  inllance.  Let  refpiration  be  fup^ 
pofed  to  be  at  a  ft  ind  for  a  fmall  lime,  on  account 
of  the  perfon's  running,  or  exerting  an  a6t  of  great 
ftrength.  It  is  evident,  that  the  blood  will  both  be 
accumulated  in  the  lungs  and  heated  there,  during 
this  interruption  of  refpiration,  fince  refpiration  both 
ventilates  the  blood,  and  promotes  its  motion  through 
the  lun"S.  The  external  membrane  of  the  lunes  will 
therefore  be  both  diftended  and  heated,  i.  e.  will  have 
an  increafe  of  vibrations  communicated  to  it.  But 
this  membrane  is  continuous  to  the  jpleura,  and,  in- 
deed, is  the  fam^e  membrane  with  it.  An  increafe  of 
vibrations  will  therefore  be  communicated  to  the 
pleura,  and  confequently  to  the  diaphragm,  and  muf- 
cies  of  the  breaft,  which  it  inverts. 

The  periftaltic  motion  of  the  inteftines  is,  in  part, 
to  be  deduced  from  the  fecond  and  third  claiTes  of 
motory  vibrations,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  mo- 
tion of  the  heart,  fince  that  motion,  like  this,  re- 
turns at  intervals  inceflantly.  And  there  is  reafon  to 
believe,  that  vigorous  vibrations,  either  of  the  fen- 
fory  or  ideal  kind,  impart  an  extraordinary  degree  of 
acflivity  to  the  ftomach  and  bowels.  However, 
they  derive  alfo  a  great  part  of  their  motions,  pro- 
bably the  major  part,  from  the  imprefTions  which  the 
aliment,  bile,  and  faeces,  make  upon  the  villous 
coat,  the  vibrations  excited  by  thefe  imprefTions  both 
running  diredtly  into  the  mufcular   coat,  for  the  pur- 

pofe 


and  AfTociation  in  general,  97 

pofe  of  contrafting  that  part  which  adjoins  to  the 
feat  of  impreflion,  and  aifo  running  upwards  and 
downwards  along  the  villous  coat,  fo  as  to  exert  fome 
efficacy  at  a  diftance  from  this  feat. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  pale  fibres  of  the 
inteftines,  in  men,  and  many  other  animals,  pre- 
ferve, their  power  of  alternate  contradion  and  relax- 
ation for  a  confiderable  time  after  death,  whereas  the 
red  fiefhy  miifcles  of  the  fame  animals  lofe  theirs  foon 
after  the  effufion  of  their  blood.  It  is  a  phsenomenon 
of  a  like  kind  with  this,  that  the  whole  mufciilar 
fyfiem  of  fome  anim.als,  that  are  exanguioiis,  or 
nearly  fo,  retain  their  activity  for  a  confiderable  time 
after  thefe  animals  are  cut  into  pieces.  And  both 
may  ferve  to  intimate,  that  the  eledricity,  or  other 
attradlive  virtue,  of  pale  fibres  and  fluids,  at  the 
fame  time  that  it  is  feebler  than  that  of  red  ones,  is, 
however,  of  a  more  durable  kind,  and,  as  was  ob- 
ferved  above  of  the  hearts  of  frogs  and  vipers,  ca- 
pable of  being  put  into  aflion  by  a  lefs  degree  of 
heat. 

The  aftions  *of  fneezing,  fwallovving,  coughing, 
hiccoughing,  vomiting,  and  expelling  the  fseces  and 
urine,  with  othejs  of  a  like  nature,  are  to  be  de- 
duced from  the  firll:  and  fourth  clafTes  of  motory 
vibrations,  i.  e.  either  from  thofe  vibrations  which 
firft  afcend  up  the  fenlbry  nerves,  and  then  are  de- 
tached down  the  motory  nerves,  which  communicate 
with  thefe  by  fome  common  trunk,  plexus,  or 
ganglion,  or  elfe  from  ihofe  vibrations  that  run  along 
the  furfaces  of  uniform  membranes,  and  fo  affed:  all 
the  miufcles  which  lie  contiguous  to  any  part  of  thefe 
membranes.  It  is  a  ftrong  argument  in  favour  of 
the  hypothefis  here  delivered,  that  ail  the  above-men- 
tioned motions  arife  in  the  neighbourhood  of  vivid 
fcnfations,  increafe  when  they  increafe,'  and  languifli 
when  they  languiih. 

Vol.  I.  H  In 


98  Of  the  Doclrines  of  Vibrations 

In  examining  this  hypotbefis  by  the  aflions  of 
ineezing,  Iwallowing,  and  coughing,  regard  muft 
be  had  to  the  noU^  uvula,  and  epiglottis,  rclpec- 
tively,  as  being  extreme  and  pointed  parts,  and  con- 
sequently liable  to  be  affeded  with  extraordinary  vi- 
brations, agreeably  to  the  ninth  ph.tnomenon  of  the 
fixth  propofition. 

In  like  manner,  the  numerous  plexufes  and  gan- 
glions of  the  eighth  pair  of  nerves  and  intercoflal 
nerve  mult  have  great  influence  in  the  motions 
and  functions  of  the  parts  contained  in  the  thorax 
and  belly. 

As  the  motory  vibrations  of  the  fecond  and  third 
clailes  are  of  a  gentle  kind,  for  the  moft  part,  and  de- 
fcend  conftantly  into  the  whole  fyflem  of  the  mufcles, 
it  may  be  expected,  that  young  children  fhould  move 
all  their  limbs  at  times,  with  fome  irregular  kind  of 
fuccefTion,  from  this  caufe.  And  th^s  feems  to  be 
the  fact.  Strong  contraftions  of  the  limbs  are  often 
excited  by  fridions,  gripes,  and  other  vivid  fenfa- 
tions ;  but  then  the  motory  vibrations  here  are  thofc 
of  the  firfl:  and  fourth  clafTes,  General  con''Lilfions, 
from  acidities,  and  other  irritations  in  the  bowels, 
leem  to  be  excited  in  the  fame  way,  the  intercoftal 
nerve  fcrving  to  communicate  the  vibrations  with 
more  readinefs  to  the  mufcles  of  the  trunk  and 
limbs. 

It  appears  to  me  alfo,  that  the  intercoflial  nerve,  j 
which  makes  thofe  of  each  fide  a  feparate  fyftcm,  as 
it  were,  has  fome  fhare  in  determining  hemiplegias 
to  one  fide.  In  like  manner,  the  great  brachial  and 
crural  ganglions  make  all  the  nerves  of  the  fame 
limb  fympathize  with  one  another. 

Whether  the  nerves  of  the  fame  names  through- 
out the  body  have  not  fome  fympathet-.:  influences 
over  each  other,  may  be  doubted.  If  thofe  of  the  m 
right  fide  arife  from  the  left  part  of  the  brain,  and  ■ 
•■jice  verjdj  which  feems  to  be  the  opinion  of  the  bell 

anatomifl:s. 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  99 

anatomifts,  then  one  would  innagine,  that  the  homo- 
nymous nerves  of  the  right  and  left  fides  muft,  in 
croffing  over,  lie  fomewhere  contiguous  to  each  other, 
and  fo  impart  vibrations  to  each  other.  And  there 
feem  to  be  fome  favfts  from  whence  this  may  be  in- 
ferred; but  we  cannot  expefl  to  be  able  to  diftinguifli, 
with  certainty,  fo  feeble  an  influence,  amidft  fo  many 
others  that  are  far  fironger. 

Yawning  and  ftretching  may,  perhaps,  when  con- 
fidered  in  all  their  circumftances,  take  in  all  the  five 
clailes  of  motory  vibrations.  When  they  happen  in 
the  attacks  of  fever- fits,  and  other  morbid  cafes,  the 
firft  feems  to  be  owing  to  pretty  fudden  and  ftrong 
contractions  in  the  membrane  of  the  mouth,  fauces, 
afpera  arteria,  and  oefophagus;  the  laft  to  contrac- 
tions in  the  whole  fkin. 

As  the  bowels  derive  their  periftaltic  motion,  in 
part,  from  the  fecond  and  third  clafles,  fo  it  feems, 
that  the  fecretory  and  excretory  veiTels  of  the  glands 
muft  be  conftandy  agitated  with  a  like  motion,  from 
the  fame  caufes,  performing  their  ordinary  fecretions 
and  excretions  thereby.  Their  extraordinary  ones 
are  generally  owing  to  irritations  in  the  membranes, 
in  which  the  mouths  of  their  excretory  veflTels  lie. 
And  this  agrees  remarkably  with  the  do<5Vrine  of  vibra- 
tions. For  the  vivid  vibrations  excited  in  the  mem- 
branes by  the  irritating  caufe  muft  difFufe  themfelves 
every  way  ;  and  when  they  come  to  the  mouths  of 
the  excretory  veflels,  penetrate  them,  and,  by  pafllng 
up  into  the  vefTcls,  both  excretory  and  fecretory, 
greatly  increafe  their  periftaltic  motion,  and,  by  con- 
fequence,  their  fecretions  and  excretions.  All  this 
feems  equally  to  hold,  in  refpe<5l  of  the  exhaling  and 
abforbing  vefiels  difperfed  throughout  the  body. 

The  external  motions  of  the  eyes  in  young  chil- 
dren are  probably  owing,  in  part  at  leaft,  to  the  im- 
mediate ailion  of  light  upon  the  tendinous  expanfions 
of    the    four    ftraic   mufcles,    and    particularly    upon 

H  2  thofe 


lOO  Of  the  Bo^t tines  of  Vibrations 

thofe  of  the  nddiicens  and  abducens.  But  the  light 
which  palics  thioui^h  ilie  pupil  Iccms  alio  to  have 
ibinc  fliarc,  as  will  be  fliewn  hereafter.  As  to  the  in- 
terna! motions,  it  appears,  that  the  light  which  falls 
\.\[>on  the  cornea  and  uvea  mull  excite  the  greater  and 
Icfler  rings  to  contradion,  in  proportion  to  its  ftrcngth, 
and  conlcquently  prepare  the  eye  to  fee  diltinitly, 
«c  dirtcrcnt  dirtances,  in  the  manner  explained  by 
Dr.  Jurin.  The  hypotiiefis  of  this  propofition  does 
therefore  give  and  receive  light  from  his  ingenious 
theory  of  this  matter, 

The  two  mufcles  which  relax  the  membrana  tym- 
panij  are  mucli  more  cxpofed  to  the  air  than  the  mt'/- 
culus  internus^  or  the  mufculus  Jiapcdis.  When  there- 
fore the  air  is  agitated  with  ftrong  vibrations,  as  in 
loud  founds,  it  will  excite  the  firrt  named  m-jfcles  to 
a(51:ion,  and  confequently  relax  the  membrana  tym- 
panij  as  it  ought  to  do.  For  what  reafons  the  lafl;- 
namcd  mufcles  are  contrafled  in  feeble  founds,  is  a 
quellion  of  a  more  difficult  nature,  as  is  the  parallel 
one  in  the  eye,  viz.  why  the  radiated  fibres  of  the 
uvea  are  contraded  in  fmall  degrees  of  light,  fo  as 
then  to  dilate  the  pupil. 

The  reader  is  defired  to  take  notice,  that,  in  all  the 
inflances  of  this  propofition,  I  confider  the  motions 
as  merely  automatic.  Their  voluntary  and  femivo- 
luntary  (late  will  be  accounted  for  in  the  two  next 
propofitions. 


PROP. 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  loi 


PROP.     XX. 

All  that  has  been  delivered  abovey  concerning  the  Deri- 
vation of  ideal  Fibraliuncles  from  Jenjory  Vibrations 
and  concerning  their  AffcciationSy  may  be  filly  applied, 
to  moiory  Vibrations  and  Vibratiuncles. 

This  propofition  is  the  immediate  confeqiience 
of  admitting  the  do6lrines  of  vibrations  and  ai- 
fociation,  in  the  manner  in  which  they  have  been 
afierted  in  the  foregoing  propofitions.  It  contains  the 
theory  of  the  voluntary  and  femi voluntary  motions; 
to  facilitate  the  application  of  which  theory  in  the 
next  propofition,  1  fliail  deliver  the  principal  cafes  of 
this,  in  the  following  corollaries. 

CoR.  I.  The  motory  vibrations  of  the  five  clafles 
mentioned  prop.  i8.  will  generate  a  propenfity  to 
correfponding  motory  vibratiuncles. 

Cor.  2.  Thefe  motory  vibratiuncles  will  afFedt  the 
brain,  as  well  as  the  motory  nerves  along  which  they 
defcend;  and,  indeed,  their  defcenc  along  the  mo- 
tory nerves  will  be  principally  owing  to  their  being 
firft  excited  in  the  brain.  This  is  fufficiently  evident 
in  the  m.otory  vibratiuncles  which  are  derived  from 
the  motory  vibrations  of  the  fecond  and  third  clalTes. 
As  to  the  motory  vibrations  of  the  other  clafics,  it 
is  evident,  that  the  brain  is  ftrongly  affefted  by  the 
fenfory  vibrations  which  give  birth  to  them.,  and  con- 
fequently,  that  a  proportional  affection  of  the  brain 
mud  take  place  in  the  motory  vibratiuncles  derived 
from  them. 

Cor.  3.  The  motory  vibratiuncles  will  cohere  to 
one  another,  by  alTociations  both  fynchronous  and 
fucceiTive.  Hence  the  fimple  parts,  of  which  com- 
plex and  decomplex  motions  are  compouiided,  may 
cohere  clofely,  and  fucceed  readily  to  each  other. 

H  2  C^^' 


102  Of  the  Do^r'nies  c/"  Vibrations 

Cor.  4.  The  motory  vibratiiincles  will  alfo  cohere 
to  ideal  ones  by  aflociation.  Common  ideas  may 
therefore  excite  motory  vibratiuncles,  ami  conle- 
qiiently  be  able  to  contraifl  the  mulcles,  j^rovided  the 
aclive  powers  lodged  in  their  fibres  and  blood  glo- 
bules be  fufficiently  exalted  for  this  piirpofe. 

Cor.  5.  If  we  luppofe  the  ideal  vibratiuncles  to  be 
fo  much  increaled,  fiom  the  caufes  mentioned  prop. 
14.  as  to  be  equal  in  ftrength  to  the  ufual  fenfory  vi- 
brations, the  motory  vibratiuncles  connedlcd  with 
them  by  aflociation  muft  be  fuj^pofed  to  be  increaled 
proportionably.  Hence  ideas  may  occafion  mufcnlar 
motions  of  the  lame  Qrength  with  the  automatic  mo- 
tions. 

Cor.  6.  The  third  and  lafl:  connecftion  of  the  mo- 
tory vibratiuncles  is  that  with  fenfory  vibrations, 
foreign  to  thein,  /'.  e.  fuch  as  had  no  Hiare  in  gene- 
lating  the  motory  vibratiuncles  under  confideration. 
Particular  motions  of  the  body  may  therefore  by 
aflociation  be  made  to  depend  upon  fenfations,  with 
which  they  have  no  natural  and  original  connexion. 

CoR.  7.  As  mufcular  motion  has  three  con- 
nections deducible  from  affociation,  viz.  thofe  men- 
tioned in  the  third,  fourth,  and  fixth  corollaries,  fo 
the  fenfations  and  ideas  have  the  fame  three  con- 
nections. Hence  the  whole  doflrine  of  afl^bciation 
may  be  comprifed  in  the  following  theorem,  viz. 

If  any  Jenfaiion  A,  idea  B,  or  mufcular  motion  C, 
he  ajfociated  for  a  fufficient  number  of  times  with  any 
other  /enjation  D,  idea  E,  or  mufcular  motion  F,  it 
Willi  ^^  ^^fi  excite  d,  the  fimple  idea  belonging  to  the 
Jenfalicn  D,  the  very  idea  E,  or  the  very  mufcular 
motion  F. 

The  reader  will  obfcrve,  that  aflfociation  cannot 
excite  the  real  fenfation  D,  becaufe  the  impreflion  of 
the  fenfible  object  is  neceflfary  for  this  purpofe.  How- 
ever, in  certain  morbid  cafes,  the  idea  is  magnified  fo 
2s  to  equal,  or  even  over-power,  fenfible  impreffions. 

PROP. 


I 


and  Afibciation  in  general.  103 

PROP.     XXI. 

fhe  voluntary  and  femivohintary  Motions  are  deducihk 
from  JJfociationj  in  the  Manner  laid  down  in  the  laji 
Prcpofition, 

In  order  to  verify  this  propofition,  it  is  neceflary 
to  inquire,  what  connections  each  automatic  Fiiotion 
has  gained   by  affociation   with  other    motions,    with 
ideas,    or   with    foreign   fenfations,    according  to  the 
third,  fourth,    and  fixth   corollaries    of  the  lad  pro- 
pofition, fo  as  to  depend  upon  them,  i,  e.  fo  as  to  be 
excited  no  longer,  in  the  automatic  manner  defcribed 
in    the    nineteenth    propofition,    but    merely    by    the 
previous  introdudion  of  the  afibciated  motion,  idea, 
or  fenfation.     If  it  follows  that  idea,  or  ftate  of  mind 
(/.  e.  fet  of  compound  vibratiuncles),  which  we  term 
the    will,    direftly,    and    without   our    perceiving  the 
intervention  of  any  other  idea,  or  of  any  fenfation  or 
motion,  it  may  be  called  voluntary,   in   the  highefl: 
fenfe    of    this    word.     If  the    intervention    of  other 
ideas,  or  of  fenfations  and  motions  (all  which  we  arc 
to  fuppofe  to  follow  the  will  direclly),  be  neceflary, 
it  is  innperfeclly  voluntary  j  yet  ftill  ic  will   be  called 
voluntary,  in  the  language  of  mankind,  if  it   follow 
certainly  and  readily  upon  the  intervention  of  a  fingle 
fenfation,  idea,  or  m.otion,  excited  by   the  power  of 
the  will :  but  if  more  than  one  of  thefe  be  required, 
or  if  the  motion  do  not  follow  with  certaintv  and  fa- 
cility,  it  is  to  be  efteemed  lefs  and  lefs  voluntary,  fe- 
mivohintary, or.  fcurce  voluntary  at  all,  agreeably  to 
the   eircumftances.     Now,    if  it    be    found,   upon  a 
careful  and  impartial  inquiry,  that  the  motions  which 
occur  every  day   in   conimon  life,  and  which  follow 
the  idea  called  the  will,  immediately  or  mediately, 
perfedly  or  imperfedlly,  do  this,  in  proportion  to  the 
number  and   degree  of  ftrength  in  the  aflbciations, 

H  4  this 


104  Q/^  '^'*  Docirines  of  Vibrations 

Ahis  will  be  fufficient  authority  for  afcribing  all  which 
wc  call  voiuncary  in  ai^lions  to  alTociation,  agreeably 
to  the  purport  of  this  propofition.  And  tliis,  1  think, 
may  be  verified  from  h6tsy  as  far  as  it  is  reafonable  to 
expert,  in  a  fubjed  of  inquiry  fo  novel  and  intricate. 

In  the  fame  manner  as  any  artion  may  be  rendered 
voluntary,  the  ceflation  from  any,  or  a  forcible  re- 
ilraint  upon  any,  may  be  alfo,  viz.  by  proper  af- 
fociations  wirii  the  feeble  vibrations  in  which  in- 
adlivity  confilb,  or  with  the  llrong  adion  of  the  an- 
lagonill  mufcles. 

After  the  aflions,  whicii  are  moft  perfedlly  volun- 
tary, have  been  rendered  fo  by  one  fet  of  afTucia- 
tions,  they  may,  by  another,  be  made  to  depend  upon 
the  mod  diminutive  lenlations,  ideas,  and  motions, 
fuch  as  the  mind  fcarce  /egards,  or  is  confcious  of; 
and  which  therefore  it  can  fcarce  recoiled  the  moment 
after  the  aclion  is  over.  Hence  it  follows,  that  af- 
fociation  not  only  converts  automatic  adions  into  vo- 
luntary, but  voluntary  ones  into  automatic.  For  thefe 
ndions,  of  which  the  mind  is  fcarce  confcious,  and 
which  follow  mechanically,  as  it  were,  fome  precedent 
diminutive  fenfation,  idea,  or  motion,  and  without 
any  effort  of  the  mind,  are  rather  to  be  afcribed  to 
the  body  than  the  mind,  /'.  e.  are  to  be  referred  to 
the  head  of  automatic  motions.  I  fliall  call  them  au- 
tomatic motions  of  the  fecondary  kind,  to  diftinguifh 
them  both  from  thofe  which  are  originally  automatic, 
and  from  the  voluntary  ones ;  and  fhall  now  give  a 
few  inllances  of  this  double  tranfmutation  of  motions, 
viz.  of  autoinatic  into  voluntary,  and  of  voluntary 
into  automatic. 

The  fingers  of  young  children  bend  upon  almoft 
every  im.preffion  which  is  made  upon  the  palm  of  the 
hand,  thus  performing  the  adion  of  grafping,  in  the 
original  automatic  manner.  After  a  fufficient  repe- 
tition of  the  motory  vibrations  which  concur  in  this 
adion,   their  vibratiuncles    are  generated,   and .  a{fo- 

ciated 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  105 

elated  ftrongly  with  other  vibrations  or  vibratiuncles, 
the  moft  cominon  of  which,  I  fiippofe,  are  thofe  ex- 
cited by  the  fight  of  a  favourite  play-thing  which  the 
child  ufcs  to  grafp,  and  hold  in  his  hand.     He  ought, 
therefore,  according  to  the  dodlrine  of  affociation,  to 
perform    and    repeat    the    a6lion    of  grafping,    upon 
having  fuch  a  play-thing  prefented  to  his  fight.     But 
it  is  a  known  (lid,  that  children  do  this.     By   pur- 
fuing   the  fame    method   of  rcafoning,    we   may   fee 
how,  after  a  fufBcient  repetition  of  the  proper  alTo- 
ciations,    the    found    of  the   words   grajpy   take   holdy 
&c.  the  fight  of  the  niirfe's  hand  in  a  ftate  of  con- 
tra6tion,  the  idea  of  a  hand,  and  particularly  of  the 
child's   own   hand,    in    that    ftate,    and    innumerable 
other  alloc iated   circumftances,  i.  e.  fenfations;  ideas, 
and   motions,  will  put  the  child  upon  grafping,  till, 
at  laft,  that  idea,  or  ftate  of  mind  which  we  may  call 
the  will  to  grafp,  is  generated,  and  fufficiently  affo- 
ciated  with  the  action   to  produce  it  inftantaneoufly. 
It  is  therefore  perfeftly  voluntary  in  this  cafe  j  and, 
by  the  innumerable  repetitions  of  it  in  this  perfe6tly 
voluntary  Rate,  it  comes,  at  laft,  to  obtain  a  fufficient 
connection  with  fo  many  diminutive  fenfations,  ideas, 
and  motions,  as  to  follow  them  in  the  fame  manner 
as  originally  automatic  aflions  do  the  correfponding 
fenfations,  and  confequently  to  be  automatic  fecon- 
darily.     And,  in  the  fame  manner,  may  all  the  ac- 
tions performed  with  the  hands  be  explained,  all  thofe 
that  are  very  familiar  in  life  pafting  forn  the  original 
automatic  ftate  through  the  feveral  degrees  of  volun- 
tarinefs  till  they  become  perfstStly  voluntary,  and  then 
repafTing  through  the  fame  degrees  in  an  inverted  or- 
der, till  they   become  fecondarily  automatic  on  many 
occafions,  though  ftill  perfeftiy    voluntary   on   fome, 
viz.  vvhenfoever  an  exprefs  aift  of  the  will  is  exerted. 

I  will,  in  the  next  place,  give  a  ftiort  account  of  I 
the  manner  in  which  we  learn  to  fpeak,  as  it  may  be  \ 
deduced  from  the  foregoing  propofition.     The  new-  j 

born 


I 


106  Of  the  Votlrines  of  Vibrations 

born  child  is  not  able  to  produce  a  found  at  all,  un- 
Icls   the   mufcles   of   the   trunk  and   larynx  be  ftimu- 
I.util  thereto  by  the  itnprellion  of  pain  on  foTnt  p^rrt' 
of  the  body.     As  the  child  atlvances  in  a(j;e,  the. fre- 
quent  returns   of  this   adtion  facilitate  it  j    fo   that   it 
recurs*from  lefs  and   iefs   pains,  from  pleafures,  from    \ 
mere    fenfations,    and    lalUy,     from    (light    ailociated 
circumflances,     in     the    manner    already    explained. 
'  About   the   fame   tinie   that   this    procefs   is   thus    far 
advanced,  the   mufcles  of  fpeech  ad  occafionally,  in 
various  combinations,  according  to  the  allbciations  of 
the  motory   vibratiuncles  with  each  other.     Suppofe 
now  the  mufcles  of  fpeech  to  aft  in  thefe  combina-  I 
tions  at  the  fame  tiiTje  that  found   is  produced  from  | 
fomc  agreeable  imprefTion,  a  mere  fenfation,  or  a  flight  j 
aflbciated   caufe,   which  muft  be  fuppofcd  to  be  often 
the  cafe,  fince  it  is  fo  obfervable,  that  young  children, 
when   in  a   flate  of  health   and  pleafure,  exert  a  va- 
riety of  anions  at  the  fame  time.     It  is  evident,  that 
an  articulate  found,  or  one  approaching  thereto,  will 
fometimes  be  produced  by  this  conjoint  a<5lion  of  the 
mufcles    of   the    trunk,    larynx,     tongue,    and    lips ; 
and  that  both  thefe  articulate  founds,  and  inarticulate 
ones,    will  often  recur,   from   the   recurrence   of  the 
fame  accidental  caufes.     After  they  have  recurred  a 
fufficient    number    of    times,    the    imprefllon    which 
thefe  founds,  articulate  and  inarticulate,  make  upon 
the  ear,   will  become  an  aflbciated  circumftance  (for 
the  child  always  hears  himfelf  fpeak,  at  the  fame  time 
that  he  exerts  the  a6lion)  fufficient  to  produce  a  re- 
petition of  them.      And   thus  it  is^  that  children  re- 
peat the  fame  founds  over  and  over  again,  for  many 
iuccefllons,  the  imprefllon  of  the  lafl  found  upon  the 
ear  exciting  a  frefli  one,  and  fo  on,  till   the   organs 
be  tired.     It  follows  therefore,  that  if  any  of  the  at- 
tendants make  any  of  the  founds  familiar  to  the  child> 
he  will  be  excited  from  this  imprefllon,  confidered  as 
an  affociated  circumfl:ance,  to  return  ic.     But  the  at- 
tendants 


and  Afibciation  in  general.  107 

tendants  make   articulate   founds  chiefly;    there  will 
therefore  be  a  confiderable  balance  in  favour  of  fuch, 
and  that  of  a  growing  nature  :  fo   that  the  child's  ar- 
ticulate  founds  will  be  more  and  more  frequent  every- 
day—  his  inarticulate  ones  grow  into  difufe.     Suppofe 
now,  that  he  compounds  thefe  fimple  articulate  founds, 
making  complex  ones,    which   approach  to  familiar 
words  at  fome  times,  at  others  fuch  as  are  quite  fo- 
reign to  the  words  of  his  native  language,  and  that 
the  firft  get  an  ever-growing  balance  in  their  favour, 
from  the  caufe  juft  now  taken  notice  of;  alfo,  that 
they  are  afibciated  with  vifible  objefls,  adions,  &c. 
and  it  will  be  eafily  feen,  that  the  young  child  ought, 
from  the  nature  of  aflbciation,  to  learn  to  fpeak  much 
in  the  fame  manner  as  he  is  found   in   faft  to  do. 
Speech  will  alfo  become  a  perfectly  voluntary  aftion, 
i.  e.  the  child  will  be  able  to  utter  any  word  or  fen- 
tence  propofed  to  him  by  others,  or  by  himfelf,  from 
a  mere  exertion  of  the  will,  as  much  as  to  grafp : 
only    here    the   introduftory  circumfl:ance,    viz.    the 
imprefllon  of  the  found  on  the  ear,  the  idea  of  this 
found,  or  the  preceding  motion  in   pronouncing  the 
preceding  word,  is  evident;  and  therefore  makes  it 
probable,    that  the  fame  thing  takes   place  in  other 
cafes.     In  like  manner,  fpeech,  after  it  has  been  vo-/ 
luntary  for  a  due  time,  will  become  fecondarily  auto-/ 
matic,  /.  e.  will  follow  afibciated  circumfl:ances,  with! 
out  any  exprefs  exertion  of  the  will. 

From  the  account  here  given  of  the '  adions  of 
handling  and  fpeaking,  we  may  underftand  in  what 
manner  the  firft  rudiments  are  laid  of  that  faculty  of 
imitation,  which  is  fo  obfervable  in  young  children. 
They  fee  the  actions  of  their  own  hands,  and  hear 
themfelves  pronounce.  Hence  the  impreflions  made 
by  themfelves  on  their  own  eyes  and  ears  become  af- 
fociated  circumftances,  and  confequently  mud,  1n  due 
time,  excite  to  the  repetition  of  the  aftions.  Hence 
like    imprefiions   made   on  .  their  eyes   and   ears    by 

others. 


io8  Of  the  DoSf fines  of  Vibrations 

others,  will  liavc  the  fame  cfted ;  or,  in  other  words, 
tliey  will  learn  to  imitate  the  adions  which  they  leCi 
aiicl  the  founds  whicli  tiiey  hear. 

In  the  lame  manner  may  be  explained  the  evident 
powers  which  the  will  has  over  the  aftions  of  fwal- 
lowing,  breathing,  coughing,  and  expelling  the  urine 
and  fitces,  as  well  as  the  tccble  and  impcrfedl  ones 
over  fncezing,  hiccoughing,  and  vomiting.  As  to  tlie 
motion  of  the  heart,  and  perillaltic  motion  of  the 
bowels,  fiDCC  they  are  conftant,  they  muft  be  equally 
alTociated  with  every  thing,  /'.  e.  peculiarly  fo  with 
nt'thing,  a  few  extraordinary  cafes  excepted.  U'hey 
will  therefore  continue  to  move  folely  in  the  original 
automatic  manner,  during  the  whole  courfe  of  our 
lives.  However,  aflociation  may,  perhaps,  liavc 
Tome  fhare  in  keeping  thele  motions,  and  that  of  re- 
fpiration,  up  for  a  time,  when  the  ufual  automatic 
caufes  are  deficient  in  any  meafure ;  and  may  thus 
contribute  to  their  equability  and  condancy.  It 
feems  certain,  at  lead,  that  where  unequable  and  irre- 
gular motions  of  the  heart  and  bowels  are  generated, 
and  made  to  recur  for  a  fufficient  number  of  times, 
from  their  peculiar  caufes,  in  full  quantity,  a  lefi 
degree  of  the  fame  caufes,  or  even  an  alfociated  cir- 
cumllance,  will  fuffice  to  introduce  them  afterwards. 
And  the  fame  thing  may  be  obferved  of  hyfteric  and 
epileptic  fits.  Thefe  recur  from  lefs  and  lefs  caufes 
perpetually,  in  the  fame  manner,  and  for  the  fame 
reafons,  as  original  automatic  motions  are  converted 
into  voluntary  ones. 

I  will  add  one  inftance  more  of  the  tranfition  of 
voluntary  actions  into  automatic  ones  of  the  fccondary 
kind,  in  order  to  make  that  procefs  clearer,  by  hav- 
ing it  fingly  in  view.  Suppole  a  perfon  who  has  a 
perfeftly  voluntary  command  over  his  finger.i,  to  be- 
gin to  learn  to  play  upon  the  harpficord :  the  firft 
ftep  is  to  move  his  finger<s  from  key  to  key,  with  a 
flow  motion,  looking  at  the  notes,  and  exerting  an 

exprefs 


ajjd  Aflbciation  in  general,  109 

xprefs  aft  of  volition  in  every  motion.  By  de- 
rees  the  motions  cling  to  one  another,  and  to  the 
..nprefiions  of  the  notes,  in  the  way  of  aflbciation 
fo  often  mentioned,  the  a6ls  of  volition  growing  Icfs 
and  lefs  exprefs  all  the  time,  till  at  laft  they  become 
evanefcent  and  imperceptible.  For  an  expert  per- 
former will  play  from  notes,  or  ideas  laid  up  in  the 
memory,  or  from  the  connection  of  the  feveral  com- 
plex parts  of  the'  decomplex  motions,  fome  or  allj 
and,  at  the  fame  time,  carry  on  a  quite  different 
train  of  thoughts  in  his  mind,  or  even  hold  a  con- 
verfation  with  another.  Whence  we  may  conclude, 
that  the  paflage  from  the  fenfory,  ideal,  or  motory 
vibrations  which  precede,  to  thofe  motory  ones  which 
follow,  is  as  ready  and  direct,  as  from  the  fenfory  vi- 
brations to  the  original  automatic  motions  correfpond- 
ing  to  them  -,  and  confequently,  that  there  is  no  inter- 
vention of  the  idea,  or  ftate  of  mind,  called  will. 
At  leafc,  the  doftrine  of  affociation  favours  this,  and 
the  fa6t  (hews,  that  there  is  no  perceptible  interven- 
tion, none  of  which  we  are  confcious. 

And  thus,  from  the  prefent  propofition,  and  the 
nineteenth  taken  together,  we  are  enabled  to  account 
for  all  the  motions  of  the  human  body,  upon  prin- 
ciples which,  though  they  may  be  fidtitious,  are,  at 
leaft,  clear  and  intelligible.  The  dodrine  of  vibrations 
explains  all  the  original  automatic  motions,  that  of 
aflbciation  the  voluntary  and  fecondarily  automatic 
ones.  And,  if  the  doftrine  of  affociation  be  founded 
in,  and  deducible  from,  that  of  vibrations,  in  the 
manner  delivered  above,  then  all  the  fenfations, 
ideas,  and  motions,  of  all  animals,  will  be  conducted 
according  to  the  vibrations  of  the  fmall  medullary 
particles.  Let  the  reader  examine  this  hypothefis 
by  the  fads,  and  judge  for  himfelf.  There  are  in- 
numerable things,  which,  when  properly  difcuffed, 
will  be  fufficicnt  tefts  of  it.  It  v/ill  be  neceffary, 
in  examining   the    motions,    carefully    to   diftinguilh 

the 


no  Of  the  Doclrines  of  Vibrations 

ilie  automatic  ftate  from  the  voluntary  one,  and  to 
rrmcmbcr,  that  tiie  firll  is  not  to  be  found  pure,  ex- 
cept in  the  motions  of  ihc  new-born  infant,  or  fuch  as 
are  excited  by  fomc  violent  irritation  or  pain. 

Cor.  I.  The  brain,  not  the  f{)inal  marrow,  or 
nerves,  is  the  leat  of  the  foul,  as  far  as  it  prcfidcs 
over  the  voluntary  motions.  For,  by  Cor.  2.  of  the 
lall:  Propcjiiioiiy  the  efficacy  of  the  motory  vibra-  > 
tiuncles  depends  chiefly  on  that  part  of  them  which  is  • 
excited  within  the  brain. 

CoR.  2.  The  hypothefi^  here  propofed  is  dia- 
metrically oppofite  to  that  of  Stably  and  his  followers. 
They  fuppofe  all  animal  motions  to  be  voluntary  in  ^ 
their  original  ftate,  whereas  this  hypothefis  fuppofes 
them  all  to  be  automatic  at  firft,  i.  e.  involuntary,  . 
and  to  become  voluntary  afterwards  by  degrees,  j 
However,  the  Siabliaus  agree  with  me  concerning 
the  near  relation  of  thefe  two  forts  of  motion  to  each 
other,  as  alfo  concerning  the  tranficion  (or  rather 
return,  according  to  my  hypothefis)  of  voluntary 
motions  into  involuntary  ones,  or  into  thofe  which  I 
call  fecondarily  automatic.  As  to  final  caufes,  which 
are  the  chief  fubjefl  of  inquiry  amongft  the  S/ab- 
liafiSj  they  are,  without  doubt,  every  where  confult- 
ed,  in  the  ftrudure  and  functions  of  the  parts; 
they  are  alfo  of  great  ufe  for  difcovering  the  efficient 
ones.  But  then  they  ought  not  to  be  put  in  the  place 
of  the  efficient  ones  j  nor  fhould  the  fearch  after  the 
efficient  be  baniflied  from  the  ftudy  of  phyfic,  fince 
the  power  of  the  phyfician,  fuch  as  it  is,  extends  to 
thefe  alone.  Not  to  mention,  that  the  knowledge 
of  the  efficient  caufes  is  equally  ufcful  for  difcovering 
the  final,  as  may  appear  from  many  parts  of  thefe- 
obfervations. 

Cor.  3.  It  may  afibrd  the  reader  fome  entertain- 
ment, to  compare  my  hypothefis  wiih  what  Des 
Cartes  and  Leibni!z  have  advanced,  concerning  animal 
motion,    and   the    conneflion   between   the  foul  and 

body. 


and  Aflbciation  in  general.  iii 

body.  My  general  plan  bears  a  near  relation  to 
theirs.  And  ic  feems  not  improbable  to  nne,  that  Des 
Cartes  nnight  have  had  fuccefs  in  the  execution  of  his, 
as  propofed  in  the  beginning  of  his  Treatife  on  Man, 
had  he  been  furnifhed  with  a  proper  aflennblage  of 
fadls  fronrj  anatonny,  phyfiology,  pathology,  and 
philofophy  in  general.  Both  Leibnitz's  Pre-eftabli(hed 
Harmony,  and  Malehranche\  Syftem  of  occafional 
Caufes,  are  free  from  that  great  difficulty  of  fup- 
pofing,  according  to  the  fcholaftic  fyftem,  that  the 
foul,  an  immaterial  fubftance,  exerts  and  receives  a 
real  phyfical  influence  upon  and  from  the  body, 
a  material  fubftance.  And  the  reader  may  obferve, 
that  the  hypothefis  here  propofed  ftands  clear  alfo  of 
this  difficulty.  If  he  admits  the  fimple  cafe  of  the 
conniftion  between  the  foul  and  body,  in  refped  of 
fenfation,  as  it  is  laid  down  in  the  firft  propofition; 
and  only  fuppofes,  that  there  is  a  change  made  in  the 
medullary  fubftance,  proportional  and  correfpondent 
to  every  change  in  the  fenfations ;  the  do61:rine  of 
vibrations,  as  here  delivered,  undertakes  to  account 
for  all  the  reft,  the  origin  of  our  ideas  and  motions, 
and  the  manner  in  which  both  the  fenfations  and 
thefe  are  performed. 

CoR.  4.  I  will  here  add  Sir  IJaac  Newton's  words, 
cohcerning  fenfation  and  voluntary  motion,  as  they 
occur  at  the  end  of  his  Principia,  both  becaufe  they 
firft  led  me  into  this  hypothefis,  and  becaufe  they 
flow  from  it  as  a  corollary.  He  affirms  then,  "  both 
"  that  all  fenfation  is  performed,  and  alfo  the  limbs 
"  of  animals  moved  in  a  voluntary  manner,  by  the 
"  power  and  a6lions  of  a  certain  very  fubtle  Ipirit, 
•"  i.  e.  by  the  vibrations  of  this  fpirit,  propagated 
"  through  the  folid  capillam.enis  of  the  nerves  from 
"  the  external  organs  of  the  fcnfes  to  the  brain,  and 
•"  from  the  brain  into  the  mufcles." 

Cor.  *5.    Ic  follows  from  the  account   here   given 
of  the  voluntary  and  femivoluntary  motions,  that  we 

muft 


112 


Of  the  Doih'mes  of  Vibrations 


mull  get  every  day  voluntary  and  femivoluntary 
powers,  in  rclpctfl  of  our  ideas  and  ;ilVe('tioiis.  Now 
this  confcquence  of  the  doctrine  of  allociation  is  alfo 
agreeable  to  ihc  fad.  Thus  we  have  a  voluntary 
power  of  atteniling  to  an  idea  for  a  lliort  time,  of 
recalling  one,  of  recoiled ing  a  name,  a  fadl,  &:c.  a 
femivoluntary  one  of  quickening  or  retraining  affec- 
tions already  in  motion,  and  a  moll  perfectly  volun- 
tary one  of  exciting  moral  motives,  by  reading,  reHec- 
tion,  6cc. 

P  R  O  P.     XXII. 

//  foUowsj  from  the  Uyfothcfis  here  propofedj  concerning 
the  •voluntary  Alotions,  thut  a  Power  of  obtaining  Plea- 
ftirCy  and  removing  Pain,  will  be  generated  early   in 
Children^  and  increafc  afterwards  every  Day. 

For  the  motions  which  are  previous  and  fubfervient 
to  the  obtaining  of  pleafure,  and  the  removal  of  pain, 
will  be  much  more  frequent,  from  the  very  inftant  of 
birth,  than  thofe  which  occalion  pain.  The  number 
alfo  of  the  firft  will  be  perpetually  increafing,  of  the 
laft  decreafing.  Both  which  pofitions  may  be  evin-^ 
ced  by  the  following  arguments. 

Firll,  The  pleafures  are  much  more  numerous  than 
the  pains.  Hence  the  m.otions  which  are  fubfervient 
to  them  are  much  more  numeious  alfo. 

Secondly,  The  aflbciated  circumftanccs  of  the  plea- 
fures are  many  m-ore  in  number  than  the  pleafures 
themfelves.  But  thefe  circumftanccs,  after  a  fufficient 
aflbciation,  will  be  able  to  excite  the  motions  fubfer- 
vient to  the  pleafures,  as  well  as  thefe  themfelves. 
And  this  will  greatly  augment  the  methods  of  obtain- 
ing pleafure* 

Thirdly,  It  favours  the  pofition  here  advanced, 
that  the  motions  fubfervient  to  pleafure  are  of  a  mo- 
derate nature  j  and  therefore,,  that  they  can  be  cxciced 

with 


/ 


and  Allbciation  in  general  113 

with  the  more  eafe,  both  in  an  autonnatic  and  volun- 
tary manner. 

Fourthly,  The  pains,  and  confequently  the  mo- 
tions fubfervient  to  them,  are  few,  and  of  a  violent 
nature.  Thefe  motions  are  alfo  various,  and  there- 
fore cannot  be  united  to  objeds  and  ideas  with  con- 
flancy  and  fteadinefs  -,  and,  which  is  moll:  to  be  re- 
garded, they  end,  at  laft,  from  the  very  make  of  the 
body,  in  that  fpecies  of  motion  which  contributes 
moll  to  remove  or  affuage  the  pain.  This  fpecies 
therefore,  fince  it  recurs  the  moft  frequently,  and  con- 
tinues longeft,  muft  be  confirmed  by  aflbciation,  to 
the  exclufion  of  the  reft. 

Cor.  I.  Many  changes  in  the  aflions  of  young 
children,  very  difficult  to  be  explained,  according  to 
the  ufual  methods  of  confidering  human  aflions,  appear 
to  admit  of  a  foiution  from  this  ptopofition.  Thefe 
changes  are  fuch  as  tend  to  the  eafe,  convenience, 
pleafure,  of  the  young  child ;  and  they  are  fufficiently 
obfervable  in  the  tranfition  of  the  originally  automatic 
aflions  into  voluntary  ones,  as  matters  of  fa£t,  what- 
ever be  determined  concerning  their  caufe.  I  (hall 
therefore  refer  to  them  occafionally,  in  the  courfe  of 
thefe  papers,  as  allowed  matters  of  fafl. 

Cor.  2.  It  feems  alfa,  that  many  very  complex 
propenfities  and  purfuits  in  adults,  by  which  they 
feek  their  own  pleafure  and  happinefs,  both  explicitly 
and  implicitly,  may  be  accounted  for,  upon  the  fame, 
or  fuch-like  principles. 

CoR.  3.  To  fimilar  caufes  we  muft  alfo  refer  that 
propenfity  to  excite  and  cherifh  grateful  ideas  and 
affedlions,  and  trains  of  thefe,  which  is  fo  obfervable 
in  all  mankind.  However,  this  does  not  hold  in  fo 
lbi6l  a  manner,  but  that  ungrateful  trains  will  prefenc 
ihemfelves,  and  recur  on  many  occafions,  and  parti- 
cularly whenever  there  is  a  morbid,  and  fomewhat 
painful,  ftate  of  the  medullary  fubftance. 

Vol.  I.  I  CoR. 


1 14        Of  the  Doclrines  of  Vibrations,  ^c. 

Cor.  4.  Since  God  is  the  fource  of  all  good,  and 
conllquently  mufl:  at  laft  appear  to  be  lb,  /.  e.  be  af- 
fociatcd  with  all  our  plcalures,  it  fcems  to  follow,  even 
from  this  propofition,  that  the  idea  of  God,  and  of 
the  ways  by  which  his  goodncfs  and  happinefs  are 
made  manifeft,  mufl,  at  laft,  take  place  of,  and  ab- 
Ibrb  all  other  ideas,  and  he  himfelf  become,  accord' 
ing  to  the  language  of  the  fcripturcs,  all  in  all. 

CoR.  5.  This  propofition,  and  its  corollaries,  af- 
ford fome  very  general,  and  perhaps  new,  inftances 
of  the  coincidence  of  efficient  and  final  caufes. 

Cor.  6.  The  agreement  of  the  dodrines  of  vi- 
brations and  aflbciation,  both  with  each  other,  and 
with  lb  great  a  variety  of  the  phsenomena  of  the  body 
and  mind,  may  be  reckoned  a  ftrong  argument  for 
their  truth. 


CHAP. 


[   "5  ] 


CHAP.     II. 

Containing  the  Application  of  the  Doctrines  of 
Vibrations  and  Association  to  each  of  the 
Sensations  and  Motions,  in  particular. 

SECT.     I. 

OF    THE     SENSE    OF    FEELING, 

PROP.     XXIII. 

'To  dinftinguifh  the  fever al  Kinds  of  Feeling  from  each 
other,  and  to  affign  the  general  Caufes  of  the  different 
Degrees  of  Exquifitenefs  in  this  Senfe. 


Here  we  may  firft  diftinguifh  feeling  into  the  ge- 
neral and  particular. 

The  general  feeling  extends  to  all  the  parts  of  the 
body,  external  and  internal :  for  they  are  all  fufcep- 
tible  of  pain  from  wounds  and  infianinnations,  of  be- 
ing put  into  a  pleafurable  ftate,  of  numbnefs,  and 
total  want  of  fenfation,  and  of  perceiving  heat,  cold, 
and  prefTure.  Sonne  writers  confider  all  the  fenfations 
of  all  the  fenfes  as  fo  many  kinds  of  feeling;  but  I  do 
not  here  ufe  this  word  in  fo  extenfive  an  acceptation. 

The  particular  feeling  is  that  more  exquifite  de- 
gree which  refides  in  the  infides  of  the  hands,  and 
efpecially  in  the  ends  of  the  fingers  s  and  by  which 

I  2  we 


ii6  Of  I  be  Senje  of  reeling. 

we  dirtinguifli  the  tangible  qualities  of  bodies,  viz. 
hc.\t,  cokl,  moilUire,  drynefs,  foftnefs,  hardnefs, 
fmootlinefs,  rouglinefs,  alio  their  motion,  reft,  dif- 
tance,  and  figure,  with  more  accuracy  than  by  any 
other  p.itt.  Thcfc  lenlations  arc,  fijr  the  mod  parr, 
adiaphorous  ones. 

The  greater  exquifitenefs  of  the  particular  feeling 
arifes  probably  from  the  following  caufes; 

b'iift,  'J"he  fentient  papilLe  rile  higlifrom  the  fkin 
(becoming  extreme  parts  thereby),  and  receive  a 
large  proportional  quantity  of  nerves  in  the  ends  of 
the  fingers. 

Secondly,  The  ends  of  the  fingers  are  themfelves 
extreme  parts,  and  confequently  receive  ftronger  agi- 
tations in  their  infinitefimal  medullary  particles,  from 
the  ftronger  vibrations  of  the  contiguous  denfer  JElher. 
For  we  muft  fuppofe,  that  the  vibrations  of  tfie  rarer 
aether  within  the  nerves  extend  themfelves  a  little 
way  into  the  denfer  furrounding  icther,  and  even  b^ 
come  ftronger  to  a  certain  diftance  j  after  >vhich  th* 
become  weaker  again,  and  arc,  at  laft,  quite  fuppref- 
fed  by  the  increafe  of  denfity  in  the  xther,  and  by 
their  own  dififufion. 

Tliirdly,  It  is  cuftomary,  in  endeavouring  to  feel 
exquifitely,  to  rub  the  ends  of  the  fingers  againft  the 
tangible  objedl.  Now  this  friftion  may,  by  exciting 
vibrations,  and  a  confequent  contraftion  in  certain 
mufcular  fibrils  belonging  to  the  papiiU^  dijlend  and 
eredl  thefe,  and  thereby  increafe  their  fenfibility. 

Fourthly,  There  is  much  here  to  be  afcribed  to 
pra6lice  and  habit,  ;'.  e.  to  aflbciation ;  and  it  is 
chiefly  on  this  account,  that  the  fenfations  of  the 
ends  of  the  fingers  give  us  fo  much  more  precife  in- 
formation concerning  the  tangible  qualities  of  bodies, 
than  thofe  of  the  ends  of  the  toes,  fince  the  ftrudure 
of  the  nervous  p^/);7/^  is  alike  in  both.  It  ought  to 
be  confidered  as  a  part  of  this  reafon,  that,  accord- 
ing to  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  laft  chapter,  we 

may 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  117 

may  get  a  voluntary 'power  of  ereding  the  papilU 
without  fri(5lion,  or  of  increafing  and  fixing  the  diften- 
tion  during  friftion,  in  order  to  feel  with  greater  ex- 
quifitenefs  and  precifion. 

The  fenfe  of  feeling  may  alfo  be  diftinguifhed  into 
that  of  the  external  furface  of  the  body,  and  that  of 
the  cavities  of  the  nofe,  mouth,  faucesy  alimentary 
du6t,  felv0IM  the  kidneys,  ureters,  bladder  of 
urine,  gall-bra^tler,  follicles  and  du(^s  of  the  glands, 
&c.  The^'t^ibility  in  the  hft  is  much  greater  than 
in  the  firfl,  becaufe  the  impreffions  can  more  eafily 
penetrate  through  the  foft  epithelium,  with  which  the 
internal  cavities  are  inverted,  than  through  the  hard 
cuticle,  becaufe  the  compaft  fibrous  membrane  of  the 
true  fldn  does  not  fufFer  the  vibrations  to  pafs  freely  up 
the  ner*e  through  its  own  fubftance,  but  rather  diffufes 
them  along  its  furface,  and  becaufe  the  moifture  of 
the  epithelium  diflblves,  and  thereby  renders  aftive, 
^  the  faline  particles,  which  touch  the  internal  cavities. 
In  the  mc^th  and  nofe  this  fenfibility  is  ^o  great,  and 
attended  with  fuch  diftinguifliing  circumftances,  as  to 
have  the  names  of  tafte  and  fmell  affigned  refpec- 
tively  to  the  fenfations  imprefied  upon  the/)^/)i//^  of 
thefe  two  organs.  And  as  the  fenfations  of  the  ali- 
mentary du6l  have  a  near  relation  to,  and  connexion 
with,  thbfe  of  the  mouth,  I  (hall  refer  them  to  the 
head  of  tafte.  But  the  fenfations  of  the  other  internal 
cavities  may  be  comprehended  more  properly  under 
feeling. 

It  ought  alfo  to  be  obferved  here,  that  the  lips, 
nipples,  and  external  parts  of  generation,  have  a  more 
exquifite  fenfibility,  than  the  other  external  parts  j 
partly  from  the  fi:ru6i:ure  of  their  papilU,  and  partly 
from  the  thinnefs  of  the  cutis,  and  foftncfs  and  thinnefs 
of  the  cuticle.  The  extreme  fenfibility  of  the  cornea 
and  tunica  cor.jun^iva  of  the  eye  may  arife  from  the 
manner  in  which  the  nerves  are  here  expofed,  and  the 
tenfion  of  thefe  parts. 

I  3  PROP. 


1 1 8  Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 


PROP.     XXIV. 

I'd  eKominc  how  far  the  Scnjations  of  Heat  and  Cold  are 
agreeable  to  the  T>o3rine  of  Vibrations, 

A  BODV  is  termed  hoty  when  its  heat  exceeds  that 
ofihepait,  witli  which  we  touch  it;  cold,  when  its 
heat  is  lels  th.in  this.  The  terms  /'o/and  cold  z\z 
therefore  relative  ones,  and  the  quahties  denoted  by 
them  run  into  each  other  without  any  precile  diftin- 
guiOiing  limits.  We  may  conlVquently  refer  cold  to 
heaty  and,  if  we  admit  the  doflrine  of  vibrations,  we 
arc  to  fuppofe,  that  the  fmall  parts  of  all  bodies  are 
agitated  by  fubtle  vibrations ;  and  that  when  ^cfe  vi- 
brations exceed  thole  of  the  part  with  which  we  touch 
tliem,  they  are  called  ijoarm  or  hot ;  when  they  fall 
fhort,  cold.  ^ 

This  may  be  regarded  as  a  grofs,  general  pofition, 
which  prefents  iifelf  upon  the  firft  confideration  of  this 
matter.  But  then,  as,  according  to  this  definition 
of  heat,  all  thofe  objccls  of  tafte  and  fmell,  which 
excite  ftrong  vibratory  motions  in  the  organs  ought  to 
excite  heat,  we  mull:  inquire  farther  into  the  vibratory 
motions  of  bodies  termed  hot  in  common  language, 
and  into  the  difference  between  thefe  and  the  vibra- 
tions excited  in  the  nerves  of  tafte  and  fmell  by  fapid 
and  odorous  bodies. 

I  conieduie  therefore,  that  the  vibrations  belong- 
ing  to  heat  are  in  general  quicker  and  fliorter,  than  the 
peculiar  ones  excited  by  taftes,  fm.ells,  and  colours  j 
alfo  that  the  laft,  or  the  vibrations  of  the  rays  of  light, 
are  quicker  than  thofe  of  taftes  and  fmells.  We  may 
conceive  farther,  that  all  the  vibrations  of  the  fmall 
p.u  tides  of  the  medullary  fubftance,  and  interjacent 
^ther,  from  whatever  caufe  they  arife,  grow  quicker 
as  they  grow  fhorter,  /.  e.  weaker ;  or,  according  to 

the 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  119 

the  conje(5^ure  juft  made,  that  in  declining  they  tend 
to  thofe  which  imprefs  the  fenfation  of  heat.  For 
vibratory  motions  of  different  lengths  can  be  ifo- 
chronoLis  only  according  to  one  law,  viz.  that  of  the 
accelerating  force  being  in  the  fimple  proportion  of 
the  diftance  from  the  middle  point  of  the  vibration, 
as  when  a  heavy  body  vibrates  in  a  cycloid;  where- v 
as,  if  the  accelerating  force  be  in  any  lefs  ratio  than 
this,  (hort  vibrations  wil  be  quicker  than  long  ones. 
Laftly,  we  are  to  conceive,  that  when  two  vibrations 
of  different  kinds,  or  frequences,  are  impreffed  at  the 
fame  time,  they  muft  reduce  one  another  to  fome 
fingle  intermediate  one,  unlefs  the  quicker  be  fo  much 
more  numerous  than  the  flower,  as  to  be  comprehended 
within  them,  fo  that  both  may  be  performed  together 
without  oppofition  or  confufion. 

Let  us  now  inquire  how  far  the  feveral  effefbs  of 
heat  and  cold  upon  our  bodies  are  agreeable  either 
to  the  notion  of  vibrations  in  general,  or  to  the  par- 
ticular conjeftures  of  the  laft  paragraph. 

Firft,  then,  We  may  expefl  that  heat  will  rarefy 
the  folids  and  fluids  of  the  body,  and  the  laft  more 
than  the  firft,  which  is  agreeable  to  experience.  For 
the  increafe  of  the  agitations  will  make  the  fmall  par- 
ticles recede  from  one  another,  and  that  more  in  fluid 
than  in  fblid  parts,  becaufe  of  their  loofer  texture. 
There  may  be  other  reafons  alfo,  drawn  from  the 
particular  unknown  compofition  of  each  part,  folid  and 
fluid,  which  may  fubjecl  them  to  greater  or  lefs  rare- 
fadlion.  Thus  I  conjeflure,  that  the  red  blood  is  more 
apt  to  be  rarefied  than  the  other  fluids,  and  that  it  is 
by  this  means  made  a  chief  inftrument  in  comprefllng 
the  white  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain,  and  fpinal 
marrow,  in  natural  and  morbid  fleep,  to  both  which 
heat  contributes,  as  has  been  obferved  already. 

Secondly,  If  heat  be  caufed  by  vibrations,  we  may 
expefi,  that  thofe  propagated  from  the  hot  or  cold  body 
Ihould  diffufe  themfelves  freely    and    inftantaneoufly 

I  4  over 


120 


Of  the  Seijje  of  Feeling, 


over  the  whole  nervous  fyftcm,  i.  e.  the  whole 
body  ;  however  along  the  furface  of  the  ll<.in,  in  an 
clpccial  manner.  This  follows  from  the  uniformity 
both  of  the  whole  medullary  fubllance,  and  of  the 
fkin.  The  firll  communicates  the  vibrations  which 
afccnd  along  the  nerves  affeded  to  the  wliole  body, 
tiie  lall  thofc  im[:rcfl*cd  upon  the  part  of  the  (kin,  which 
touches  the  hot  or  cold  body,  to  the  other  paits  of  it. 
Now  this  is  agreeable  to  experience  :  for  when  the 
whole  body  is  too  hot,  or  too  cold,  we  find  tiiat  the 
uiere  touch  of  a  cold  or  hot  body  will  give  general 
relief  immediately  ;  and  in  fome  cafes  a  thrilling  or 
fliivering  may  be  felt  to  run  along  the  fkin. 

Thirdly,  If  the  ikin  be  coniradled  by  any  caufe 
different  from  the  direft  impreffion  of  cold,  as  by 
the  pain  propagated  from  a  wound,  the  colic,  the 
irritation  of  a  ftone  in  the  bladder,  Stc.  this  con- 
tradion,  firft  excited  by  an  increafe  of  vibrations  in  the 
mufcular  variouQy  interwoven  fibrils  of  the  ikin,  may 
be  expe<5ted  afterwards  to  check  and  diminifh  the  vi- 
brations there,  and  thus  to  occafion  the  fenfation  of 
cold,  agreeably  to  experience.  The  chillinefs  arifing 
from  matter  abforbed,  and  from  the  caufe  of  acute 
difiempers,  whatever  that  be,  may  admit  of  a  like 
explanation. 

The  tremors,  /.  e.  fudden,  fliort,  alternate  con- 
tracflions  of  the  antagonifi:  mufcles,  which  happen  in 
the  foregoing  cafes,  arife  probably  from  an  increafe 
of  vibrations,  not  fubjed:  to  ideas,  and  the  volun- 
tary power,  defcending  from  the  brain  into  the  whole 
fyftem  of  the  mufcles  j  and  feem  to  differ  from  the 
ftronger  and  larger  convulfive  motions  of  hyfteric  and 
epileptic  diforders,  called  convulfions  emphatically, 
rather  in  degree  than  kind.  Thefe  tremors  generally 
precede  the  fenfe  of  chillinefs,  when  the  contraflion 
of  the  fibrils  of  the  fldn  does  not  arife  from  the  direft 
imprefiion  of  cold. 

We 


V  Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  i2i 

We  may  from  hence  pafs  to  the  fenfation  of  chil- 
linefs,  and  the  tremors,  which  are  fometimes  occa- 
fioned  by  the  paffions,  fear,  anger,  furprize,  joy,  &c. 
Both  the  rednefs  and  the  palenefs  of  the  lips,  face, 
and  neck,  which  are  obfervable  in  thefe  cafes,  are 
marks  of  a  contraction  in  mufcular  fibrils  j  in  a  lefs 
degree  in  the  firfl:  cafe,  fo  as  to  check  the  return  of 
the  venal  blood  ;  in  a  greater  in  the  laft,  fo  as  to 
prevent  the  influx  of  the  arterial. 

Fourthly,  It  is  eafy  to  conceive,  that  heat  may  oc- 
cafion  pain,  agreeably  to  the  hypothefis  concerning 
pain,  above  propofed.  For  the  ftrong  vibrations  ex- 
cited by  great  heat  mulVput  the  fmall  parts  beyond 
the  fpheres  of  each  other's  attraction,  and  fo  produce 
the  folution  of  continuity.  But  neither  does  it  feem 
inconceivable,  that  cold  may  have  a  like  eflrct,  agree- 
ably to  the  do6trine  of  vibrations,  though  the  procefs 
be  difl^ercnt.  For  great  cold,  by  checking  the  vibra- 
tions in  the  external  part,  to  which  it  is  applied,  will 
alter  the  fituation  and  diftance  of  the  fmall  medullary 
particles  there,  and  fo  m.uft  excite  vigorous  vibrations 
in  the  afcending  nerves,  and  the  correfponding  region 
of  thex  brain,  which  is  juft  the  effect  occafioned  by 
heat,  applied  to  the  fame  external  part.  Hence,  if 
we  are  touched  by  a  very  hot,  or  a  very  cold  body, 
inadvertently,  and  without  feeing  it,  it  ought  to  be 
difficult  to  diftinguifh  which  it  is,  agreeably  to  the 
fa6t.  The  conflict  between  the  diminifhed  vibrations, 
in  the  external  part  to  which  cold  is  applied,  and 
the  previous  ones  fubfifting  in  the  correfponding  part 
of  the  brain,  may  exalt  thefe  previous  ones,  as  much 
as  heat  does,  fo  as  to  render  the  firft  Ample  impref- 
fion  of  cold  fimilar  to  that  of  heat. 

Fifthly,  The  continued  im.prefllon  of  heat  makes 
us  more  fenfible  of  cold.  For  when  heat  has  ra- 
refied the  parts,  and  adapted  them  to  a  peculiar 
ftrength  and  frequency  of  vibrations,  differing  from 
the   ufual  ftandard,  the  cold,  whofe  difference  from. 

the 


122 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 


the  nfual  flanchird  lies  on  the  other  fide,  muft  raifc 
a  greater  conllid,  and  produce  a  greater  change,  than 
if  the  parts  had  rem.iined  at  the  iifiial  ftandard. 
The  continued  imptclfion  of  cold  niuft:  for  the  fame 
reafons  make  us  more  fenfible  of  heat.  This  expli- 
cation will  perhaps  fuit  witii  other  theories  of  fenfa- 
tion,  as  wtll  as  with  that  drawn  from  vibrations. 
However,  the  mere  confiftcncy  of  any  phrenomena 
with  the  doflrine  of  vibrations  is  worthy  of  fome  at- 
tention in  this  inquiry. 

Sixthly,  When  the  calf  of  the  leg  is  affcded  with 
the  cramp,  fetting  the  foot  upon  a  cold  marble  will 
afford  immediate  relief.  For  the  cold  may  check 
xhe  violent  vibrations  in  the  fibres  of  the  gaflrocnemii 
and  fokusy  directly  and  immediately  ^  or  it  may  do 
it  by  exciting  vigorous  vibrations  of  a  different 
kind,  which  extend  to  their  anlagonift  mufcles,  as 
well  as  to  the  fore-mentioned  ones.  But  I  judge  the 
firft  account  to  be  more  probable. 

Seventhly,  If  a  limb,  that  has  been  much  chil- 
led with  cold,  be  brought  to  a  fire  fuddenly,  it  will 
firft  be  much  pained,  and  then  mortify.  For  the 
vibrations  excited  by  the  fire,  though  moderate  in 
refpeft  of  the  ufual  ftandard,  are  yet  exceffive  in  re- 
fpeft  of  thofe  which  the  cold  has  introduced,  alfo 
in  refped  of  that  fphere  of  attraction,  which  it  has 
now  fixed  upon  the  parts :  there  will  arife  there- 
fore a  violent  confli6t,  folution  of  continuity,  and 
confequent  pain  ;  and  the  parts  will  be  agitated  fo 
much  more  than  their  prcfent  fpheres  of  attradtion 
will  permit,  that  they  cannot  return  to  it  any  more, 
but  muft  be  entirely  difunited,  and  run  into  dif- 
ferent combinations,  /.  e.  the  limb  muft  mortify. 
But,  if  the  limb  be  put  into  cold  water,  rubbed, 
and  gradually  exalted  to  the  ufual  ftandard  of  heat,  it 
may  be  perferved.  Where  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that 
the  heat  of  water,  while  fluid,  is  above  the  freez- 
ing point,  and,  confequently,  greater  than  that  of  a 
frozen  limb.  It 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  123 

It  may  fomewhat  confirm  this  reafoning,  to  give  a 
iimilar   explication    of  fome   of   the    phsenomena   of 
glafs  bubbles,  nnade  by  dropping  nnelted  glafs  into 
water.     We  may  fuppofe  then,  that  thefe  fall  at  once 
into  powder,    when   broken  at  their  points,  becaufe 
the  cold  water  has  fo  far  reduced  the   fphere  of  at- 
traftion,  that  all  the  parts  of  the  bubbles  are  agitated 
eyond  this,  by  breaking  their  points.    But  if  a  bubble 
:  heated,  and  its  parts  brought  to  a  larger  fphere  of 
.ttradtion   by    the    agitations    from    heat,    it    will    no 
■  jnger  fall   to  powder  when   broken  at  its  point.     It 
ij  liiay  alfo  haye  its  parts  ground  away  at  pleafure,  with- 
out  falling  to  powder,  becaufe  grinding  agitates  all 
the  contiguous  parts  with  ilrong  vibrations,  like  heat, 
and  enlarges  the  fphere  of  their  attradions. 

Eighthly,  When  the  parts  contiguous  to  a  morti- 
fied flough  have  a  fufficient  heat  in  them,  excited  by 
the  vis  vitay  or  warm  applications,  the  vibrations 
attending  this  life  and  heat  of  the  parts  ought  to  help 
to  Ihake  ofF  and  feparate  the  mortified  flough,  i.  e.  to 
flop  the  mortification ;  which  is  agreeable  to  the  fadV. 
Hence  mortifications  from  external  cold,  in  bodies 
otherwife  healthy,  will  come  to  feparate  fooncft,  and 
mofl:  perfedly,  as  it  is  frequently  feen  in  cold  climates. 
Hence  alfo  mortifications  happening  in  the  acute 
diftempers  of  young  perfons,  if  they  ftop  at  all, 
flop  fooner  than  thofe  in  the  extreme  parts  of  old 
perfons. 

Ninthly,  It  is  faid,  that  cold  water,  fprinkled  upon 
the  diftended  limbs  of  malefaflors  upon  the  rack, 
renews  and  augments  their  pains.  Now,  we  may 
here  fuppofe,  that  the  parts  had,  in  fome  meafure, 
begun  to  accommodate  themfelves  to  their  diftended 
flate,  by  getting  new  and  enlarged  fpheres  of  adion  : 
when  therefore  the  cold  water  endeavours  to  contract 
the  parts  again,  and  to  narrow  the  fpheres  of  adion, 
the  limbs  ftill  continuing  diftended  by  the  rack,  it  is 

evident. 


124  ^f  ^'^''•*  ^^^I'^  Pf  Feeling' 

cviclenr,  that  a  llrong  conlTufl,  with  violent  vibra- 
tions, and  the  lolution  of  continuity,  murt  enlbe. 
Was  the  limb  relcalctl  liifl,  and  then  cold  water 
applied,  it  migiit  contribute,  as  in  fprains,  to  reftorc 
the  parts  to  their  foimL-r  Hate,  without  exciting  any 
I'uch  violent  conrtid:.  The  good  cffecfls  of  vinegar, 
verjuice,  fpirit  of  wine,  and  other  contrading  liquids, 
in  iprains,  are  to  be  explained  upon  the  lame  prin- 
ciples. 

Tenlhly,  Mot  or  cold  water  feels  hotter  or  colder, 
refpedively,  when  the  hand  is  moved  in  it,  than 
when  it  is  kept  at  reft.  For  the  hand,  when  at  reft, 
has  time,  a  little  to  check  or  exalt  the  vibrations  in 
the  contiguous  hot  or  cold  water. 

Eleventhly,  When  a  perfon  goes  into  cold  water 
leilurely,  he  is  apt  to  fob,  and  to  refpire  in  a  convul- 
(we  manner,  for  a  fliort  time.  For  the  imprefllon 
of  the  cold  upon  the  lower  limbs  excites  fuch  vigo- 
rous vibrations  in  the  abdominal,  and  other  mufcles 
of  expiration,  as  being  nearer  to  tlie  feat  of  the  im- 
prelTion  than  the  mufcles  of  infpiration,  that  a  con- 
vulfive  continued  expiration  is  firft  produced,  then  a 
fob,  or  deep  infpiration  j  and  laftly,  (Irong  convulfive 
expirations  and  infpirations  for  fome  fuccefllons. 

The  good  effects  of  cold  bathing  arife  perhaps,  in 
part,  from  its  narrowing  the  fphere  of  attra6tion  in 
the  fmall  parts  of  the  mufcular  fibres,  and  at  the 
fame  time  making  this  attradion  ftronger.  Hence 
it  may  be  prejudicial  in  fome  paralytical  affeftions,  as 
it  is  found  to  be.  For,  if  the  fmall  velTcls  of  the 
nerves  be  obftruded,  it  may,  by  contrafting  the 
folids,  increafe  the  obftrudion,  and,  confequently,  the 
impediment  to  the  free  vibrations  necefiary  to  fenfe 
and  motion. 

Twelfthly,  Bathing  in  warm  water,  impregnated 
with  aclive  mineral  particles,  may,  by  exciting  and 
incrcafing  vibrations  in  the  white  medullary  fubftance, 
as  well  as  by  other  means,  remove  obftruclions  in  its 

fmall 


OJ  the  Senfe  of  Feeling,  125 

fmali  veflels,  and  thus  be  fcrviceable  in  many  para- 
lytica! diforders,  as  ic  is  found  to  be  in  faft.  The 
fame  reafoning  is  applicable  to  the  ftiffnefs,  infenfibi- 
lity,  and  ioipotency,  of  motion,  which  the  rheumatifm 
often  leaves  in  the  limbs. 

Cold  bathing  may  in  like  manner  be  ferviceable  in 
paralytic  and  rheumatic  diforders,  by  exciting  and  in- 
creafing  vibrations ;  provided  the  ill  efFed  from  the 
immediate  cpntraftion  does  not  preclude  this  good  one. 

Thirteenthly,  Since  fridlions,  and  other  impref- 
fions  upon  the  Ikin,  increafe  the  vibrations  there,  it 
may  be  expected,  that  they  fhould  increafe  the  heat. 
And  tliis  is  the  fad.  Ifaperfon  rubs  his  hands  to- 
gether in  cold  weather,  the  fenfation  of  heat  will  be 
felt  to  arife  in  a  moment,  and  to  go  off  again  in  a  mo- 
ment after  he  ceafes  to  rubj  for  thqrvibrations  exci- 
ted by  rubbing  may  be  expcfled  to  languifh  imme- 
diately, if  not  kept  up  by  continuing  the  friflion. 

Fourteenthly,  Strong  taftes  may,  according  to  the 
dodrine  of  vibrations,  be  expedled  to  leave  a  heat 
upon  the  tongue,  mouth,  and  fauces^  as  they  are 
found  to  do.  And,  in  general,  all  vivid  imprefllons 
upon  every  part  of  our  bodies  ought  to  increafe  the 
heat  generally  or  particularly;  which  perhaps  is  the 
cafe,  though  we  are  feldom  able  to  determine  this 
by  obfervation. 

Fifteenthly,  All  ftrong  emotions  of  mind  ought 
alfo  to  increafe  the  heat  of  the  bodv.  This  is  a  mat- 
ter  of  common  obfervation,  if  we  except  the  chillinefs 
of  the  f!<;in,  and  coldnefs  of  the  extremities,  which 
have  been  explained  above,  agreeably  to  the  do6lrine 
of  vibrations. 

The  three  lad  articles  favour  the  above  delivered 
conjeftures  concerning  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  vibra- 
tions belonging  to  heat.  The  ph^nom.ena  enumerated 
in  all  the  fifteen  may  admit  of  other  explanations,  at 
leaft  in  part,  but  of  none,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  that 
are  inconfiftent  with  the  dodrine  of  vibrations. 

PROP. 


1 26  Of  the  Seujc  of  Feeling. 


PROP.     XXV. 

To  ixam'me  hoiv  far  the  Phenomena  of  Wounds ^  Burns y 
BruifeSy  Lacerations^  Inflammations^  and  Ulcers^  are 
agreeable  to  the  Dotirine  of  Vibrations. 

The  nianifcft  folution  of  continuity,  whicli  is  the 
very  efTcnce  of  a  wound,  may  occafion  pain,  agree- 
ably-to  the  doiftrine  of  vibrations,  in  the  manner  that 
ha^  bfcn  explained  already.  This  is  the  immediate 
pain  that  attends  a  wound.  The  fubfequent  one  is  to 
be  referred  either  to  the  head  of  inflammation,  or  to 
that  of  ulcer. 

The  immediate  pain  from  burns  has  likewife  been 
explained  agreeably  to  the  dodlrine  of  vibrations,  alfo 
the  fcparation  of  the  dead  or  mortified  efchar,  under 
the  lafl  propofition.  The  fubfequent  pain  is  to  be 
referred  to  the  heads  of  inflammation  and  ulcer,  as 
before. 

A  bruife  is  fuppofed,  and  with  the  appearance  of 
reafon,  to  be  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  fmall 
wounds.  It  ought  therefore  to  be  attended  with  a 
pain  rcfembling  that  of  a  large  wound,  and  yet  not 
exadly  the  fame,  which  is  the  faft.  As  large  wounds 
are  fometimes  healed  by  the  firft  intention,  without 
any  fubfequent  ulcer,  fo  may  bruifes.  If  otherwife, 
the  fubfequent  pain  mufl:  again  be  referred  to  the  heads 
of  inflammation  and  ulcer. 

Lacerations  are  great  wounds  attended  with  bruifes, 
i.  e.  with  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  fmall  ones. 
Thefe  are  never  cured  without  coming  to  digeftion, 
i.  e.  an  ulcer,  and  the  requifite  previous  inflamma- 
tion. 

The  heat  and  diflention  of  the  foiall  veflels  in  in- 
flammations are  fufficient  to  account  for  the  pain  at- 
tending them,  upon  principles  already  laid  down. 

In 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  127 

In  ulcers  the  nerves  are  expofed  defencelefs,  and 
therefore  are  fufceptible  of  the  nioft  violent  vibra- 
tions, and  confequent  pain  from  flight  imprefljonsj  to 
which  it  is  to  be  added,  that  the  moifture  of  ul- 
cers, by  diflTolving  the  faline  parts  of  bodies  applied, 
greatly  augments  their  atflions  upon  the  naked  nerves. 

Fomentations  and  cataplafms  feem  to  aftoid  relief 
in  the  foregoing  cafes,  partly  by  diffufing  an  equal 
warmth  all  around,  partly  by  their  aqueous  or  oily 
moifture.  For  the  diifufion  of  warmth  prevents  that 
conflift,  which  would  arife  between  neighbouring 
parts  of  different  heats  j  and  the  moifture,  which 
infinuates  itfelf  among  the  fmall  particles,  fets  them 
at  greater  diftances,  and  confequently  lefl^ns  their 
mutual  ailions.  The  violent  vibrations  will  there- 
fore be  moderated  on  both  accounts.  The  friftion 
attending  embrocations  does  in  like  manner  diffule 
vibrations  all  around,  and  the  liniment  or  liquid, 
with  which  the  embrocation  is  made,  may  contri- 
bute according  to  its  particular  qualities.  Hence 
embrocations  are  alfo  of  ufe  in  refolvingobftruftions. 

In  all  thefe  cafes  the  violent  vibrations,  which  afcend 
along  the  nerves  of  the  injured  part,  muft  be  com- 
municated in  a  particular  manner  to  the  neighbouring 
branches,  and  occafion  a  flight  inflammation,  i,  e.  3. 
Ibrenefs,  there.  This  forenefs  is  not  perceived  while 
the  original  inflammation  fubfifts,  being  obfcured  by 
it.  The  vibrations  in-  the  neighbouring  nerves  may 
alfo  be  increafed  by  the  cefiTation  of  violent  ones  in 
the  place  of  original  inflammation.  Hence  the  fore- 
nefs of  the  neighbouring  parts  after  colics,  head-achs, 
&c.  The  pain  in  the  external  parts  of  the  head, 
which  follows  a  debauch,  i.  e.  an  inflammation  of  the 
brain,  and  its  membranes,  may  be  of  the  fame  kind. 

Thefe  hints  may  ferve  to  fliew,  that  the  dodtrine 
of  vibrations  is  as  agreeable  to  the  phsenomena  of 
wounds,  burns,  &c.  as  any  other  yet  propofed,  of 
even  more  fo.     But  much  farther  inquiry  is  requifite. 

P  R  O  P. 


128 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 


r  R  O  P.     XXVI. 

To  examine  hozv  far  the  Plhowncna  of  Itching  and  Titil- 
latiou  are  agreeable  to  the  Do£irinc  of  Vibrations. 


Itching  ofren  attends  the  beginning  and  ending 
of  inlUminations,  and  particularly  the  eruption  of  in- 
Hammatory  pnibiles.  We  may  conclude  therefore, 
according  to  the  foregoing  account  of  inflammations, 
that  itching  is  cauled  by  a  moderate  increafe  of  vi- 
brations, in  a  part  of  fmail  extent. 

It  is  agreeable  to  this,  that  the  lodgment  of  the 
perfpirablc  matter,  or  other  cutaneous  fecretion, 
when  hardened,  occafions  itcliing ;  for  it  is  eafy  to 
conceive,  that,  in  thcle  c^ik^y  an  obllrudlion  and  flight 
inflamm.ation  in  the  fmall  veflels  of  the  flvin  may  arife. 

Prtfllire,  which  allays  itching,  may  be  fuppofed  to 
do  this  by  checking  the  vibrations. 

Scratching  may  convert  it  into  a  pleafure,  by  com- 
municating the  increafcd  vibrations  to  the  neighbour- 
ing parts,  in  fuch  a  degree  as  falls  within  the  limits 
of  pleafure.  And  as  this  freer  communication  caufed 
by  fcratching  may  increafe  the  vibrations  in  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,  fo  it  may  Icflien  thofe  which  fubfllted 
before  in  the  point  that  itched,  thus  reducing  all  to 
an  equality,  or  nearly  fo.  Ac  the  fame  time  if  ap- 
pears, that  rude  or  long-continued  fcratching  mufl:, 
by  the  increafe  of  vibrations,  which  it. occafions,  alfo 
by  laceration,  increafe  the  heat,  inflaaimation,  and 
itching,  and  even  end  in  pain. 

Fridtion  of  the  fkin,  without  previous  itching,  ex- 
cites a  pleafurable  fenfation ;  and  alfo  ends  in  inflam- 
mation and  pain,  when  carried  too  far,  for  the  like 
reafons. 

Since  extreme  parts  are  more  apt  to  receive  an  in- 
creafe of  vibrations  than  others,  as  has  been  o&ferved; 

it 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  129 

.it  appears,  that  the  itching  of  the  nofe  and  anus  may 
be  expefted  to  attend  v.orms  in  the  ftomach  or  in- 
teftines,  and  the  itching  of  the  glans  penis  and  anus  a 
flight  inflammation  at  the  neck  of  the  bladder  from 
a  ftone.  Thefe  inflances  fliew,  that  vibrations  run 
freely  along  the  furfaces  of  uniform  membranes ; 
and  this  is  farther  confirmed  in  the  laft  cafe,  by  the 
check  which  a  prefl'ure  made  in  perin^o,  or  any  where 
upon  the  urelbraj  will  give  to  the  itching  in  the 
glans. 

Titillation  is  nearly  related  to  itching.  It  is  ex- 
cited by  flight  impreffions  uyon  the  more  fenfible 
parts,  frequently  renewed;  and  this  may  fliew,  that  it 
arifes  from  an  increafe  of  vibrations.  The  impref- 
fions muft  be  fo  flight  as  not  to  excite  a  contraflion  in 
the  neighbouring  mufcular  fibrils,  and  alfo  frequently 
renewed,  that  the  increafe  of  vibrations  may  diffufe  it- 
felf  farther  and  farther  perpetually;  and  thus  the  whole 
nervous  fyfrem  may,  in  fome  cafes,  be  at  laft  put  into 
a  pleafurable  ftate,  approaching  to  the  limits  of  pain, 
and  pafling  within  them  at  times. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  as  foon  as  children  have 
learnt  to  cry,  or  yield  a  found,  from  nafcent  pains, 
and  from  pieafures  juft  paffing  into  pains,  titillation 
may  excite  fliort,  alternate,  nafcent  cries  in  them,  /'.  e. 
laughter,  but  not  before.  If  the  impreflions  be  made 
upon  the  cheft,  the  effedt  will  be  quicker  and  (Ironger, 
becaufe  thefe  impreffions  have  a  dire(5l  influence  upon 
the  mufcles  concerned  in  laughter. 

Ifa  feather  be  paflfed  flightly  to  and  fro  between 
the  lips,  it  will  excite  a  titillation  there,  which  will 
dilfufe  itfelf  into  the  neighbouring  parts  of  the  upper 
lip  and  chin,  and  pafs  into  an  itching  in  them.  The 
original  titillation  between  the  lips  may  be  allayed  by 
preifing  them  together,  and  the  confequent  itching  by 
prefl'ure  and  fridion,  as  in  other  cafes.  All  thele 
things  fuit  with  the  hypothefis  of  vibrations,  and  of 
their  free  difi^ufion. 

Vol.  I.  K  In 


ijo  Of  the  Seii/e  of  Feeling. 

In  like  manner,  the  free  tliniifion  of  vibrations, 
and  their  intlucnce  in  conira6ling  the  neighbouring 
mulclcs,  may  be  inferred  from  the  vomitings,  which 
are  excited  by  tickling  x.\\c  fauces  with  a  feather. 


P  R  O  P.     XXVII. 

To  examine  bozv  far  the  Senfations  attcndwg  Vreffiirey  and 
mufcular  Contra^iont  are  agreeable  to  th  Botlrine  of 
Vibrations. 

As  ffidl:ion  and  titillation  agree   with  heat  in  in-    j 
creafing  vibrations,  fo  prelllire  agrees   with  cold  in    ; 
checking    them.      Thus    predure   abates    the   unea-    \ 
finefs  from  itching,  as  mentioned  above;  and  bind- 
ing, or  othcrwife  gently  compieffing,  parts  in  pain, 
or   inflamed,  /'.  e.    parts  in   which   the   vibrations  arc    i 
exceffive,    will,    for    the    mofl:    parr,    afford    relief; 
whereas   friclion   would  increafe  the  pain  to  a  great 
degree.     But  the  pain  ufually  becomes  more  violent 
the  inftant  the  comprefljon    is    removed.      For    the 
mere  elafticity  of  the  parts  alters   their  figure,  i.  e. 
produces     internal     motions,     with     an     increafe    of 
vibrations.     Preffure   may  alfo  increafe  vibrations  in 
the  internal  parts,  contiguous  to  ihofe  where  it  checks 
them  ;  or  even  in  the  external  ones,  if  it  be   fo  great 
as    to  occafion     any     confiderable     diflention     there.   , 
And  thus  there  may  be  a  variety  of  vibrations  occa-  \ 
fioned  by  the  feveral  kinds   and  degrees  of  preffure, 
fufficient  to  correfpond  to  all  the  variety  of  fenfations 
excited  thereby. 

Mufcular  contraflion  moft  commonly  attends  and 
is  attended  by  preffure,  as  in  the  common  motions 
of  handling  and  walking,  whereby  v/e  overcome 
the  vis  inertia  of  our  own  bodies,  and  of  thofe  which 
we  have  occafion  to  move  or  (lop.  Hence  all  the 
fenfations,  which  we  receive  from  the  vis  inertia  of 

matter 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  131 

atter,  muft  be  derived  from  thefe  two  fources  of 
liiiufcular  contraftion  and  preffure. 

Now  it  has  been  obfcrved  already,  that  miifcular 
contra6tion  checks  the  vibrations  in  the  contracted 
fibres,  and  increafes  them  in  the  neighbouring  parts. 
And  it  is  eafy  to  conceive,  that  the  fenfation  corre- 
fponding  to  this  alteration  of  vibrations  may  fome- 
times  fail  within  the  limits  of  pleafure,  fometiriies  go 
beyond  them.  In  young  animals,  alfo  after  fleep 
and  reft,  in  all,  it  is  ufually  pleafant ;  after  much 
labour,  or  fprains,  and  in  inflammations,  painful ; 
and  this,  whether  the  difordered  mufcle  itfelf,  or 
its  antagonift,  be  contradled.  For  there  muft  be  an 
increafe  of  vibrations  in  the  difordered  mufcle  both 
before  it  can  be  itfelf  contrafted,  and  alfo  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  contradtion  of  its  antagonift ;  as  has 
been  fhewn  before. 

PROP.    XXVIII. 

to  examine  hoiju  far  the  Phenomena  of  NumhneJJes,  and 
faralytical  hifenfibilitieSy  are  agreeable  to  the  Doffrine 
of  Vibrations, 

Numbness,  being  a  diminution  of  fenfibility, 
3ughr,  according  to  the  doftrine  of  vibrations,  to 
proceed  from  fuch  caufes^  as  either  indifpofe  the  parts 
"or  the  reception  of  vivid  vibrations,  or  hinder  their 
Tee  afcent  to  the  brain.  Agreeably  to  this,  a  com- 
Dreflion  made  upon  the  nerve,  which  leads  to  any 
Dart,  will  occafion  a  numbnefs  in  that  part,  the 
lerve  below  the  compreffion'  being  unfitted  thereby 
o  receive  vibrations  freely,  and  the  nerve  above  in- 
rapable   of  tranfmitting   freely    fuch    as  are  excited. 

!\  comprefllon  of  a  blood  veffel  may  have  a  like  ef- 
'e6b,  becaufe  it  muft  leflfen  that  heat,  and  inteftine 
notion,  which  a  free  circulation  would  communicate 
o  the  part.  The  compreflion  ufually  made  upon  the 
kin,  when   we  prefs  a  nerve   or   blood   yeflel,   will 

K  2  alfo 


132  Of  the  Scn/e  of  Feeling. 

alio  contribute.  And  external  cold  will  haftcn  the  ef- 
feft,  when  joined  to  the  jull  named  caufes'j  or  pro-  j 
duce  it  alone,  if  intenfe,  or  long  continued.  In  like 
manner,  niimbnefs,  from  a  comprefTion  made  upon 
the  nerves  or  blood  veirds,  is  much  favoured  by  fleep, 
becauf'e  the  parts  are  then  indilpofed  both  to  receive 
and  to  tranfmit  vibrations. 

The  benumbed  limb  feels  larger,  becaufe  any  grofs 
body,  which  encompafles  and  prefles  upon  a  limb 
by  its  weight  or  ftritfture,  deadens  the  vibrations  in 
iti  and  therefore  converfcly,  when  the  vibrations  are  | 
fo  deadened  from  a  different  caufe,  the  idea  of  a  grofs 
encompafTing  body,  or,  which  is  almofl  the  fame 
thing,  of  the  enlargement  of  the  limb,  will  be  fug- 
gefted  to  the  mind.  But  this  circumftance  muft  be 
referred  to  the  head  of  affociation. 

When  the  benumbed  part  begins  to  recover  its 
feeling,  violent  prickings  are  often  perceived.  Now 
thefe  feem  to  take  place  in  the  points  where  the  na- 
tural vibrations  firfl;  return,  fuppofe  at  the  ends  of 
the  nervous  papilU-^  and  to  arife  from  the  conflift 
between  the  natural  vibrations  in  thefe  points,  and 
the  languid  ones  in  the  neighbouring  parts.  Plow- 
ever,  they  come  to  an  equality  at  laft,  by  their  mu- 
tual influences,  as  well  as  by  the  return  of  the  natu- 
ral vibrations  to  all  the  parts ;  which  may  ferve  to 
fhew  how  itchino;  ceafes  at  laft  of  itfelf.  Fridlion 
helps  to  difperfe  and  remove  thefe  prickings,  and  to 
reftore  the  loft  fenfibility,  which  is  very  fuitable  to 
the  notion  of  vibrations,  and  to  the  effect  which  it 
has  in  itchings. 

If  the  hand  be  held  down,  and  ftiaken,  its  mufcles 
being  firft  relaxed  by  a  voluntary  power,  a  numbnels 
will  be  occafioned,  in  which  the  fingers  feel  large, 
for  the  reafon  given  above.  This  numbnefs  feems 
to  arife  from  the  irregular  agitations,  or  vibrations, 
excited  in  the  fmall  parts;  which,  being  different 
from  the  natural  ones,  or  thofe  in  which  fenfibility 

confifts/. 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  133 

confifts,  muft  check  them ;  juft  as  the  agitations 
of  water  from  the  wind  hinder  the  free  propagation 
of  regular  undulations  from  a  (lone  caft  into  iti  or 
as  any  commotion  of  the  air  checks  the  free  and 
diftin<5t  communication  of  a  found.  It  feems  alfo, 
that  thofe  irregular  and  dilTonant  vibrations,  which 
fhaking  the  hand  caufes  in  the  fmall  medullary  par- 
ticles of  its  nerves,  may  pafs  on  from  part  to  part, 
though  not  fo  freely  as  regular  ones. 

From  hence  we  may  proceed  to  confider  the  numb- 
nefs  occafioned  by  the  ftroke  of  the  torpedo.  For 
the  ofciliations  of  this  fidi's  back  may  neither  be 
ifochronous  in  themfelves,  nor  fuitable  to  thofe  which 
exifted  previoufly  in  the  hand  ;  and  yet  they  may  be 
fo  ftrong,  as  not  only  to  check  and  overpower  thofe 
in  the  part  which  touches  the  fifh,  but  alfo  to 
propagate  themfelves  along  the  fkin,  and  up  the 
nerves,  to  the  brachial  ganglion,  and  even  to  the 
fpinal  marrow  and  brain;  whence  the  perfon  would 
firft  feel  the  ftupefa6lion  afcend  along  the  arm  to  the 
(houlder,  and  then  fall  into  a  giddinefs,  and  general 
confufion,  as  is  affirmed  to  happen  fometimes.  Some 
cffefts  of  concufTions  of  the  brain,  and  perhaps  of 
the  fpinal  marrow,  alfo  of  being  toffed  in  a  fhip,  of 
riding  backwards  in  a  coach,  and  of  other  violent 
and  unufual  agitations  of  the  body,  feem  to  bear  a 
relation  to  the  prefent  fubjeft.'  But  it  would  be  too 
minute  to  purfue  thefe  things. 

When  a  palfy  arifes  from  an  internal  caufe,  we  may 
fuppofe,  that  the  medullary  part  of  the  brain,  or  of 
the  fpinal  marrow,  or  the  nerve  itfelf,  in  all  which 
the  vefiels  are  extretnely  fine,  and  therefore  liable  to 
obftrudions,  efpecially  in  old  age,  become  opaque, 
and  unqualified  to  receive  and  tranfmit  vibrations 
freely,  according  to  Sir  IJaac  Newton's  opinion. 
Hence  a  diminution  or  entire  lofs  of  fenfe  or  motion, 
or  both,  may  follow,  according  to  the  degree  and 
extent  of  the  obftrudion  and  opacity.     The  voluntary 

K  3  power 


JJ4  Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 

power  of  motion  is  foon  loft,  as  being  an  acquired 
faculty,  and  depending  upon  aflbciaied  circumflances, 
and  memory.  But  if  there  be  any  degree  of  inflam- 
mation in  the  fine  vcfTels  of  the  motory  nerves,  or 
of  the  corrcfponding  parts  of  the  brain,  this  may  oc- 
cafion  convulfivc  motions ;  and  for  the  fame  reafon, 
an  inllammation  in  tlie  fenfory  nerves,  or  their  origins 
in  the  brain,  may  occafion  pain.  Now  it  is  reafonable 
to  expert  fuch  inflammations  in  many  cafes  as  a  confe- 
qoence  of  the  obftruftions,  and  both  convulfive  motions 
and  pains  are  often  found  to  attend  paralytic  afi^edions. 

PRO  P.     XXIX. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Phcemmena  attending  on  venoms 
ous  Bites  and  Stings  are  agreeable  to  the  Doctrine  of 
Vibrations. 

That  the  aflive  liquors,  infufed  by  venomous 
animals  after  they  bite  or  fting,  operate,  in  part, 
by  the  violent  vibrations  which  they  excite  in  the 
living  parts  immediately  affefted,  and  which  are 
thence  propagated  along  the  nerves  up  to  the  brain, 
and  alfo  along  the  furface  of  the  body,  by  means  of 
the  continuity  and  uniformity  of  the  fkin,  may  appear 
from  the  following  reafons. 

Firft,  As  the  folids  and  fluids,  fcem  in  general, 
equally  concerned  in  all  the  natural  fundtions,  and 
morbid  deviations  from  them,  it  is  moft  reafonable 
to  refer  part  of  the  effcds  of  venomous  bites  and 
(lings  to  each.  But  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  thefe 
poifons  fliould  have  any  immediate  efi^ert  upon  the 
folid  nervous  capillaments,  but  by  agitating  their  parts. 

Secondly,  The  active  particles  of  thefe  poifons, 
which  are  able,  in  fo  fmall  a  quantity,  to  produce 
fuch  violent  diforders,  and  fom.etimes  in  a  very  fhort 
fpace  of  time,  may  well  be  conceived  able  alfo  to 
agitate  the  nervous  parts  with  ftrong  vibrations. 

Thirdly, 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  135 

Thirdly,  If  we  fuppofe  their  firft  and  nnofl:  imme- 
diate effeft  to  be  upon  the  fluids,  yet  this  may,  or 
muft,  be  agitations,  that  will  afterwards  be  communi- 
cated to  the  folids. 

Fourthly,  The  vibrations  of  the  medullary  par- 
ticles, mentioned  in  this  theory,  feem  peculiarly 
fuited  to  anfwer  the  fevcral  quick  and  furprizing  efFedls 
of  thefe  poifons.  The  pain,  fwelling,  rednefs,  and 
lividnefs,  all  around  the  part  aff^e6led,  may  eafily  be 
derived  from  the  vibrations  propagated  all  around. 
Oils  and  fats,  rubbed  upon  the  part,  may,  by  damp- 
ing thefe,  prevent  the  ill  eflfecfls.  Vibrations  propaga- 
ted either  along  the  (kin,  through  the  mouth  and  nofe, 
or  up  to  the  brain,  and  thence  along  the  eighth  pair 
of  nerves,  or,  which  is  moft  probable,  both  ways,  to 
that  very  fenfible  part  the  ftomach,  may  produce 
ficknefs  and  vomitings.  And  if  the  gall-dud  be 
contrafted  from  the  fame  caufe  during  the  vomitings, 
a  fudden  jaundice  will  follow  from  the  violence  with 
which  the  gall  is  forced  back  into  the  blood  by  the 
aftion  of  vomiting.  Joy,  forrow,  fear,  melan- 
choly, may  eafily  follow  according  to  the  refpeftive 
natures  of  the  poifons,  becaufe  thefe,  according  to 
this  theory,  all  arife  from  and  are  attended  by  corre- 
fponding  vibrations  in  the  white  medullary  fubflance 
of  the  brain.  And  a  like  account  may  be  given  of 
the  averfion  to  black,  and  the  delight  in  glaring 
objefts,  and  ftrong  colours.  The  correfponding 
nerves  of  different  animals  have  probably  a  general 
refemblance  to  each  other,  juft  as  the  correfponding 
vijcera  and  fluids  have.  And  thus  the  poifon  of  rabid 
animals  may  have  a  peculiar  power  of  affedting  the 
nerves  of  the  fauces,  and  mufcles  of  deglutition,  fo 
as  to  produce  the  hydrophobia.  Cold  bathing  alfo, 
and  mufic,  whofe  immediate  effeds  feem  confined  to 
the  folids,  to  the  exciting  vibrations  in  them,  may 
cure  refpedively  in  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog,  and  of  the 
tarantula. 

K  4  However, 


136  Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling. 

However,  what  is  here  nllcged  is  not  at  all  to  be  fo 
undeidood,  as  if  the  immediate  effcfls  of  poifons  upon 
the  Huids  were  not  alfo  very  confuierable.  In  fome 
caffs  they  may  be  greater,  in  others,  leCs  than  thofe 
exrrted  upon  the  folids.  It  feems  probable,  that  the 
poifon  is  communicated  from  the  fluids  immediately 
aflt^lcd  to  thofe  at  a  dilbnce,  chiefly  by  means  of  the 
lerous  veflcls.  For  thefe,  having  numerous  immedi- 
ate communications  with  each  other,  will  tranfmit  it 
freely,  and  yet  io  as  that  all  the  neighbouring  parts 
may  be  affeded  fomewhat  in  proportion  to  their  near- 
nefs  to  the  feat  of  the  injury,  as  they  are  found  in  fafl 
to  be ;  whereas,  were  the  diffufion  of  the  poifon  to  be 
made  by  the  circulation  of  the  fluidii  alone,  all  the  parts 
would  have  an  equal  chance.  But  the  propagation  of 
the  poifon  along  the  folid  capillaments  of  the  nerves  is 
alfo  a  principal  reafon  why  the  neighbouring  parts  arc 
more  affedled  than  the  difbant  ones.  The  efFefts  of 
inoculation  bear  a  great  refemblance  to  thofe  of  ve- 
nomous bites  and  llings ;  and  the  fame  may  be  faid  of 
venereal  and  other  infedions. 


PROP.     XXX. 

T/?  examine  how  far  the  tangible  ^aliiies  of  Bodies 
admt!  of  an  Explanation  agreeable  to  the  Do^rine  of 
Vibrations. 


Hitherto  we  have  confidered  only  the  more  vigo- 
rous fenfations  of  feeling,  luch  as  may  be  called  the 
pleafures  and  pains  of  this  fenfe.  We  come  now 
to  the  feeble  and  adiaphorous  fenfations.  Thefe  are 
moifture,  drynefs,  foftnefs,  with  fluidity,  hardnefs, 
fmoothnefs,  roughnefs,  motion,  reft,  difl:ance,  and 
figure.  Now  it  feem.s  very  eafy  to  conceive,  that 
thefe,  with  their  feveral  varieties,  may  imprefs  cor- 
refponding  varieties   of  vibrations   upon   the   nerves 

of 


Of  the  Senje  cf  Feeling.  137 

of  feeling;  alfo,  that  thefe  laft  varieties  will  be  chiefly 
compoficions  of  the  vibrations  arifing  from  preflure, 
and  mufcular  contradlion,  i,  e.  from  the  vis  inertia  of 
matter. 

ThuSj  fince  moid  bodies  adhere  to  the  fingers,  and 
fo  leave  a  fmoothnefs  with  their  own  degree  of  cold 
or  heat  upon  them,  moifture  may  be  judged  of  by 
the  touch  from  this  peculiar  alteration  of  vibrations  j 
and  drynefs  from  the  abfence  of  it.  Liquid  bodies 
make  no  alteration  of  figure  in  our  fingers,  and 
yield  eafily  to  their  motions :  foft  ones  do  the  fame 
in  a  lefs  degree ;  hard  ones  the  contrary.  Smooth 
bodies  make  an  equable  preffure,  and  give  no  refin- 
ance to  a  motion  along  their  furfaces ;  rough  ones 
the  contrary.  The  motions  of  our  own  bodies  are 
attended  by  the  vibrations  peculiar  to  preflure,  and 
mufcular  contraflion;  of  other  bodies,  which  touch 
our  own,  by  thofe  from  preflure.  We  judge  of 
reft  by  the  abfence  of  thefe.  Diftance  is  judged  of  by 
the  quantity  of  motion,  and  figure  by  the  relative 
quantity  of  diftance.  And  thus  it  appears,  that  all 
degrees  and  kinds  of  thefe  tangible  qualities  may 
imprefs  correfponding  vibrations  upon  thofe  regions 
of  white  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain,  and  fpinal 
marrow,  which  correfpond  to  the  fkin  and  mufcles. 

The  fame  qualities  are  made  alfo  by  means  of 
light  to  imprefs  vibrations  upon  our  eyes,  which  cor- 
refpond in  great  meafure  to  thofe  made  on  the  fenfe 
of  feeling,  fo  as  to  vary  with  their  varieties.  And 
as  the  fenfe  of  fight  is  much  more  extenfive  and 
expedite  than  feeling,  we  judge  of  tangible  quali- 
ties chiefly  by  fight ;  which  therefore  may  be  con- 
fidered,  agreeably  to  Bifhop  Berkley's  remark,  as 
a  philofophical  language  for  the  ideas  of  feeling;  be- 
ing, for  the  moft  parr,  an  adequate  reprefentative  of 
them,  and  a  language  common  to  all  mankind,  and 
in  which  they  all  agree  very  nearly,  after  a  moderate 
degree  of  experience. 

However, 


138  Of  the  Scnjc  of  Feeling. 

However,  if  the  informations  from  touch  and  fight 
difagrce  at  any  time,  we  are  always  to  depend  upon 
touch,  as  that  which,  according  to  the  ufual  ways  of 
ipcaking  on  thefe  fubjcifls,  is  the  true  reprelentation 
of  the  elfential  properties,  i.  e.  as  the  earneft  and  pre- 
fage  what  other  tangible  impreflions  the  body  under 
confideration  will  make  upon  our  feeling"  in  other  cir- 
cumftances;  alfo  what  changes  ic  will  produce  in  other 
bodies;  of  which  again  we  are  to  determine  by  our 
feeling,  if  the  vifual  language  fliould  not  happen  to 
coirefpond  to  it  exactly.  And  it  is  from  this  difference 
that  we  call  the  touch  the  reality,  light  the  reprefen- 
tative:  alfo  that  a  perfon  born  blind  uiay  foretcl  with 
certainty,  from  his  prefent  tangible  impreflions,  what 
others  would  follow  upon  varying  the  circumftances; 
whereas  if  we  could  fuppofe  a  perfon  to  be  born  with- 
out feeling,  and  to  arrive  at  man's  eftate,  he  could  not 
from  his  prefent  vifible  impreflions  judge  what  others 
would  follow  upon  varying  the  circumfl:ances.  Thus 
the  pi6lure  of  a  knife,  drawn  fo  well  as  to  deceive  his 
eye,  would  not  when  applied  to  another  body,  pro- 
duce the  fame  change  of  vifible  impreflions,  as  a  real 
knife  does,  when  it  feparates  the  parts  of  the  body 
through  which  it  paffes.  But  the  touch  is  not  liable  to 
thefe  deceptions.  As  it  is  therefore  the  fundamental 
fource  of  information  in  refpeft  of  the  effential  pro- 
perties of  matter,  it  may  be  confidered  as  our  firft  and 
principal  key  to  the  knowledge  of  the  external  world. 

PROP.     XXXI. 

'To  ex-plain  in  zvhat  Manner  we  are  enabled  to  judge  of 
the  Seat  of  Imprejfions  made  on  the  external  Surface  of 
our  Bodies, 

When  we  apply  the  parts  of  our  bodies  to  each 
other,  particularly  our  hands  to  the  feveral  parts  of 
the  furface  of  our   bodies,    we   excite  vibrations    in 

both 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  139 

both  parts,  viz.  both  in  the  hands,  and  in  that  part 
of  the  furface  which  we  touch.  Suppofe  the  hand 
to  pafs  over  the  furface  gradually,  and  the  firft  im- 
prefllon  will  remain  the  fanne,  while  the  lad  alters 
perpetually,  becaufe  the  vibrations  belonging  to  the 
lall  are  excited  in  different  nerves,  and  by  confe- 
quence  enter  the  brain,  or  fpinal  marrow,  at  different 
parts.  And  this  difference  in  the  laft  impreffion, 
or  its  vibrations,  correfponding  always  to  the  part 
on  which  the  impreffion  is  made,  will  at  laft  enable 
us  to  determine  immediately  what  pa^t  of  our  bodies 
we  touch ;  i.  e.  what  is  the  diftance  of  the  part 
touched  from  the  mouth,  nofe,  (boulder,  elbow,  or 
other  remarkable  part,  confidered  as  a  fixed  point. 

For  by  paffing  frequently  from  the  mouth,  nofe,  &c. 
to  the  part  under  confideration,  children  learn  this  very 
early,  even  without  attending  to  it  at  all  explicitly,   • 

Sight  alfo  helps  us  to  judge  of  this  diftance  in  the 
parts,  which  are  frequently  expofed  to  view,  and  this 
in  proportion  to  that  frequency. 

Let  us  fuppofe  then,  that  we  are  able  to  determine 
at  once  what  external  part  of  our  bodies  we  touch,  i.  e. 
to  determine  how  it  is  fituated  in  refpe6l  of  the  other 
parts,  and  to  fnew  the  correfponding  part  in  the  body 
of  another  perfon  j  it  will  follow,  that  if  a  like  impref- 
fion be  made  not  by  our  own  hand,  but  by  that  of 
another,  or  by  any  foreign  body,  we  ftiall  know  at 
once  the  part  on  which  it  is  made.  We  ftiall  alfo,  fup- 
pofing  us  arrived  at  a  fufficient  degree  of  voluntary 
power  over  the  mufcles,  be  able  at  once  to  put  our 
hand  upon  the  part  on  which  the  impreffion  is  made. 

By  degrees  we  ftiall  learn  to  diftinguifh  the  part, 
not  only  when  an  impreffion  like  the  gende  ones  of  our 
hands  is  made  upon  it,  but  alfo  when  a  vivid,  rude, 
or  painful  one  is.  For,  firft,  all  impreffions  made 
upon  the  fame  part  agree  in  this,  whatever  be  their 
differences  as  to  kind  and  degree,  that  they  enter  by 
the  fame  nerves,  and  at  the  fame  part  of  the  brain,  and 

fpinal 


140  Of  the  Scnje  of  Feeling. 

fpinal  marrow.  Secondly,  we  iirprefs  a  great  variety 
of  li^nfations  ourrdves  by  our  hands,  according  as 
they  arc  hot  or  cold,  by  fridion,  fcratching,  &:c.  and 
moll  imjircfnons  from  foreign  bodies  will  bear  fomc 
reicmblance  to  fome  of  thefe.  Thirdly,  we  often 
fee  upon  what  part  imprcflions  from  foreign  bodies 
are  made.  FourLJily,  when  they  leave  permanent  ef- 
fe(ft.s,  as  in  wounds,  burns,  &.c.  we  always  examine 
by  feeling,  where  the  impreffion  was  made. 

Now  from  ail  ihefe  things  laid  together  it  follows, 
that  in  itchings  from  an  internal  caufe,  and  in  im- 
prefilons  where  neither  our  hand  nor  eye  give  us  any 
information,  we  fliall,  however,  be  able  to  determine  at 
once  with  tolerable  accuracy  what  external  part  is  af- 
fecfled,  and  to  put  our  hand  upon  it,  fo  as  to  confirm 
our  prefent  judgment,  and  render  our  future  judg- 
ment, and  voluntary  power,  more  certain  and  ready. 
We  fliall  alfo  do  this  moft  readily  in  thofe  parts  which 
we  fee  and  feel  moft  frequently,  the  hands  for  in- 
ftance ;  lefs  fo,  co'teris  ■paribus,  in  thofe  we  feldoin 
fee  or  feel ;  and  leaft  fo,  where  we  never  fee  the  part, 
and  feldom  touch  it.  At  leaft  this  feems  to  refult 
from  the  theory.  But  it  is  to  be  obfcrved,  that  the 
fa6l  ouglit  to  be  tried  chiefly  in  children.  For  in 
adults  the  fevcral  degrees  approach  more  to  perfec- 
tion, ;".  e.  to  an  equality  among  themfelves. 


PROP.     XXXII. 

^0  explain  in  what  Manner^  and  to  what  Degree^  we 
are  enabled  to  judge  of  the  Seat  of  internal  Pains. 

Here  we  may  obferve,  firft,  that  as  we  never  fee 
or  feel  the  internal  parts,  fuch  as  the  lungs,  heart, 
ftomach,  inteftines,  liver,  kidneys,  bladder,  &:c.  we 
can  have  no  direct  information  in  the  manner  ex- 
plained under  the  foregoing  propofition. 

Secondly, 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  141 

Secondly,  Since  all  pains  difFufe  an  increafe  of 
vibrations  into  the  neighbouring  parts,  the  increafed 
vibrations  in  the  external  parts,  arifing  from  internal 
Dains,  will  be  a  grofs  general  direftion,  fo  as  to  de- 
tern?.ine  the  feat  of  the  pain  within  grofs  limits,  in 
refpeft  of  fuperior  and  inferior,  anterior  and  pofterior, 
right  and  lefc. 

Thirdly,  Prefling  the  external  parts,  fo  as  to  aug- 
ment or'alleviate  the  internal  pain,  muft  contribute  alfo. 
Fourthly,  Since  all  the  internal  parts  in  the  thorax 
and  abdomen  receive  branches  from  the  intercoftal 
nerve,  which  communicates  with  each  vertebral  pair, 
it  follows  that  the  internal  pains  will  fend  vibrations 
up  to  the  fpinal  marrow,  which  will  enter  in  at  the  fame 
parts  of  it,  as  the  vibrations  from  external  pains  in 
the  neighbourhood.  At  the  fame  time  it  appears  from 
the  many  ganglions,  plexufes,  and  communications  of 
nerves  in  the  thorax  and  abdomen^  alfo  from  the 
origin  and  diftribution  of  the  nerves  of  the  cauda 
equina,  that  this  can  be  no  inore  than  a  grofs  general 
ditedbon ;  and  that  the  great  number  of  fy mpathetic 
influences  from  thcfe  caufes,  alfo  from  the  running  of 
vibrations  along  membranes,  and  from  their  fixing  par- 
ticularly in  nervous  parts,  or  extreme  ones,  will  give 
occafion  to  many  deceptions  here,  and  in  certain  cafes 
make  the  pain  be  felt,  i.  e.  appear  to  be,  in  parts  at 
a  confiderablc  diftance  from  the  feat  of  the  diforder. 

Fifthly,  Suppofc  the  patient  to  fhew  by  the  exter- 
nal parts  whereabouts  his  pain  is  felt  internally,  then 
;he  phyfician  may,  from  his  knov/ledge  of  the  fituation 
of  the  internal  parts  in  refpect  of  the  external,  guefs 
pretty  nearly,  what  internal  part  is  affcfted. 

Sixthly,  The  fymptoms  attending  the  pain,  its 
caufe  and  confequences,  compared  with  the  natural 
fundions  of  the  parts,  with  the  hiftory  of  difeafes, 
and  morbid  diffe<5i:ions,  will  enable  the  phyfician  to 
determine  with  great  prccifion  in  fom.e  cafes,  and 
help  a  little  in  moft. 

Seventhly, 


142  Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling. 

Seventhly,  Wlun  the  patient  has  had  long  experi- 
ence of  the  fame  kind  of  internal  pains,  or  of  differ- 
ent ones,  he  dcfcribes  more  exadlly,  and  alfo  gets 
certain  fixed  points,  to  which  he  refers  liis  pains. 

Kighrhly,  Anatomills  and  phyficians  may  fomctimes 
judge  with  great  exadncfs  in  their  own  cafes,  liaving 
both  a  knowledge  of  the  parts,  and  their  funftions, 
and  alfo  their  own  feelings,  to  guide  them. 

This  fubjeft  defer vts  a  particular  and  accurate 
examination,  it  being  of  great  confc^quence  to  be  able 
to  difcover  the  feat  and  cauja  proxima  of  the  dif- 
teiv.per,  from  the  complaints  of  the  patient,  and  from 
the  previous  concomitant,  and  confequent  circum- 
ftances.  I  hope  thefe  two  proportions  may  caft  fomc 
light  upon  it. 

Here  we  may  add  an  obfervation  deducible  from 
the  doftrine  of  aflbciation,  viz.  as  we  learn  by  de- 
grees, from  impreffions  iiiade  on  the  furfaces  of  our 
bodies,  to  attend  particularly  to  the  fenfations  im- 
prtrffed  on,  or  exifting  in  each  part,  at  pleafure,  i.  e. 
to  magnify  the  vibrations  which  take  place  in  it; 
ioy  after  diforders  in  the  internal  parts,  the  aflbciated 
circumflances  feem  often  to  renew  the  painful  vibra- 
tions,there,  and  to  occafion  either  the  return  of  the  like 
diforder,  or  fome  other ;  at  leaft  to  have  a  confider- 
able  fliare  in  thefe  effeds,  when  produced  by  their 
caufes  in  an  inferior  degree.  Thus  diforders  in  the 
bowels,  caufed  at  firft  by  acrid  impreffions,  lay  the 
foundation  for  a  return  of  like  diforders  on"  lefs  oc- 
cafions.  Thus  women  that  have  often  mifcarried, 
feem  to  irritate  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  uterus  by 
the  recollection  of  the  affociated  circumftances,  and  fo 
to  difpofe  thcmfclves  to  mifcarry  more  than  accord- 
ing to  the  mere  bodily  tendency  ;  fear  and  concern 
having  alfo  a  great  influence  here.  All  this  will  be 
farther  illuftrated  by  what  follows  under  the  next 
propofition. 

PROP. 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  143 

PROP.     XXXIII. 

To  explain  in  what  Manner,  and  to  what  Degree,  the 
Pleafu'/es  and  Pains  of  Feeling  contribute,  according 
to  the  Do^rine  of  JJfociation,  to  the  Formation  of  our 
intelMlual  Pleajures  and  Pains, 

It  follows  from  the  foregoing  account  of  the  power 
of  leaving  traces,  and  of  aflbciation,  that  all  the 
pains  from  intenfe  heat  and  cold,  wounds,  inflam- 
mations, &c.  will  leave  a  difpofition  in  the  nervous 
fyftem  to  run  into  miniature  vibrations  of  the  fame 
kind,  and  that  thefe  miniature  vibrations  will  be  exci- 
ted chiefly  by  the  afiTociated  circumftances.  That  is 
to  fay.  The  appearance  of  the  fire,  or  of  a  knife,  efpe- 
cially  in  circumfl:ances  like  to  thofe  in  which  the  child 
was  burnt  or  cut,  will  raife  up  in  the  child's  nervous 
fyftem  painful  vibrations  of  the  fame  kind  with,  but 
lefs  in  degree  than,  thofe  which  the  adual  burn  or 
wound  occafioned. 

By  degrees  thefe  miniature  pains  will  be  transferred   j 
upon  the  words,  and  other  fymbols,  which  denote  thefe   ' 
and  fuch-like  obje(5ts  and  circumftances :  however,  as 
the  diffufion  is  greater,  the  pain  transferred  from  a  fingle     , 
caufe  muft  become  lefs.    But  then,  fince  a  great  variety    ! 
of  particular  miniatures   are   transferred   upon    each 
word,  fince  alfo  the  words  exprelTing  the  feveral  pains 
of  feeling  affed  each  other  by  various  aflbciations, 
and  each  of  them  transfers  a  miniature  of  its  own  minia- 
ture upon  more  general  words,  &c.  it  comes  to  pafs 
^c  laft,  that  the  various  verbal  and  other  fymbols  of 
the  pains  of  feeling,  alfo  of  other  pains  bodily  and 
mental,  excite  a  compound  vibration  formed  from  a 
variety  of  miniatures,  which  exceeds  ordinary  aflual 
pains  in  ftrength.     Thefe  compound   vibrations  will 
alfo  have  a  general  refemblance,  and  particular  differ- 
ences in  refpedl  of  each  other. 

It 


144  W  ^^^  ^^^J^  °f  Reeling. 

It  follows  therefore  a  priori^  as  one  may  fay,  and  by 
a  fynilu'tic  kind  of  demonllration,  that,  admitting  the 
powers  of  leaving  traces,  and  of  alfociation,  compound 
or  mental  pains  will  arife  from  fimple  bodily  ones  by 
means  of  words  fymbols,  and  aHbciated  circumftances. 
And  [hey  fcem  to  me  to  anfwrr  in  kind  and  degree  to 
the  facfls  in  general.  If,  farther,  we  admit  the  doftrine 
of  vibrations,  then  thcfe  compound  mental  pains  will 
arifc  fiom,  or  be  attended  by,  violent  vibrations  in 
the  nervous  fyftem,  and  particularly  in  the  brain. 

Agreeably  to  this  account,  we  may  obferve,  that  the 
mere  words  denocing  bodily  pains,  though  not  formed 
into  pro[)ofitions  or  threatcnings,  affcft  children.  How- 
ever, fince  thtrre  happen  daily  afibciations  of  the  mere 
words  with  freedom  and  fccuriry,  and  of  propofitions 
and  threatenings  with  fiiffcriDgs  children  learn  by  de- 
grees to  confine  their  fear,  forrow,  &c.  to  thofe  things 
which  are  efteemed  the  genuine  figns,  reafons,  caufcs, 
&c.  of  fuf^erings.  This  is  the  cafe  in  general ;  but 
there  are  great  particular  differences  both  in  children 
and  adujtsj  which  yet,  if  accurately  purfued,  would 
probably  not  only  be  confiftent  with,  but  even  con- 
firm and  illuftrate,  the  do6l;ine  of  affociation. 

And  we  may  conclude  upon  the  whole,  fince  the 
pains  of  feeling  are  far  more  numerous  and  violent 
than  thofe  of  all  the  other  fenfes  put  together,  that 
the  greateft  pait  of  our  intelledlual  pains  are  deducible 
from,  them. 

In  like  manner  the  pleafures  of  an  agreeable  warmth, 
and  refrclhing  coolnefs,  when  we  are  cold  or  hot  rc- 
fpedtivcly,  of  gentle  fricftion  and  tftillation,  leave 
traces  of  themfelves,  which  by  affociation  are  made 
to  depend  upon  words,  and  other  fymbols.  But  thefe 
pleafures,  being  faint  and  rare  in  comparifon  of 
others,  particularly  of  thofe  of  tafte,  have  but  a  fmall 
fhare  in  forming  the  intelleflual  pleafures.  Titillation 
may  perhaps  be  excepted.  For  laughter,  which  arifes 
f/om   it,    is    a  principal  pleafure  in  young  children, 

and 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  145 

and  a  principal  foiirce  of  the  other  pleafures,  parti- 
cularly of  thofe  of  fociality,  and  benevolence.  Far- 
ther, fince  the  miniatures  left  by  the  pains  of  feeling 
muft  in  fome  cafes  be  faint  originally,  in  others  decline 
fronn  the  diffufion,  the  faintnefs  of  the  afibciation, 
&c.  thefe  miniature  pains  will  often  fall  within  the 
limits  of  pleafiire,  and  confequendy  become  fources 
of  intellectual  pleafure ;  as  in  recollecting  certain 
pains,  in  feeing  batdes,  ftorms,  wild  beads,  or  their 
pi6lufcs,  or  reading  defcriptions  of  them. 

PROP.     XXXIV. 

'To  give  an  Accourd  of  the  Ideas  generated  by  tangible 

Imprejfions. 

Here  it  may  be  obferved,  firft,  that  the^  very 
words,  buruy  zvound,  &c.  feem  even  in  adults,  though 
not  formed  into  propofitions,  or  heightened  by  a 
conjunction  of  circumftances,  to  excite,  for  the  mofi: 
part,  a  perception  of  the  diliigreeable  kind  j  how- 
ever, fo  faint  in  degree,  that  it  may  be  reckoned 
amongft  the  number  of  ideas,  agreeably  to  the  de- 
finitions given  in  the  introduction. 

Secondly,  The  words  expreffing  the  pleafures  of 
this  fenfe  are  probably  attended  with  perceptions,  though 
ftill  fainter  in  degree.  Thefe  perceptions  may  there- 
fore be  called  the  ideas  belonging  to  thofe  v^^ords. 

Thirdly,  the  words  moijiy  dry,  Joft,  hard,  Jmooih, 
rough,  can  fcarce  be  attended  with  any  diftinguifh- 
able  vibrations '  in  the  fingers,  or  parts  of  the  brain 
correfponding  thereto,  on  account  of  the  faintneli 
of  the  original  impreffions,  and  the  great  varieties 
of  them  J  however,  analogy  leads  us  to  think,  that 
fomething  of  this  kind  muft  happen  in  a  low  degree. 
But  when  the  qualities  themfelves  are  felr,  and  the 
appropriated  vibrations  raifed,  they  lead  by  aiTociation 
to  the  words  expreffing  themj  and  thus  we  can  diftin- 

Vof..  I  L  ,  guifh 


146  Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling. 

guilli  the  feveral  tangible  qualities  from  each  other 
by  the  diflcrenccs  of  their  vibrations,  and  declare  in 
words  what  each  is. 

Fourthly,  The  vibrations  excited  in  the  {en(t  of 
feeling  by  motion,  diltance,  and  figure,  are  fo  faint, 
and  fo  various,  that  neither  thefe  words,  nor  any  rela- 
ted exprellions,  can  be  fuppolcd  to  excite  any  mini- 
ature vibrations  in  this  fenle.  Yet  ftill,  upon  feeling 
motions  and  figures,  and  pafTing  over  diftances,  the 
dilTerences  of  vibrations  from  prellure  and  mufcular 
contraction,  /.  e.  fiom  the  vis  inerti.e  of  our  own 
bodies,  or  of  foreign  matter,  fuggefi:  to  us  the  words 
expreffing  tiicfc,  with  their  varieties,  by  aflbciation. 

Fifthly,  The  great  extent  of  the  fenfe  of  feeling 
tends  to  make  tlie  miniatures  fainter,  efpecialiy  as  far 
as  the  external  parts  are  concerned  ;  and  would  pro- 
bably have  fo  powerful  an  effedt  upon  the  miniatures 
raifed  in  the  internal  parts,  as  to  make  them  by  oppo- 
fing  deflroy  one  another,  did  not  all  the  imprefiions  of 
the  fame  nature,  viz.  all  thofe  from  heat,  from  cold, 
from  friction,  &c.  by  whatever  external  part  they  enter, 
produce  nearly  the  fame  effe(5l  upon  the  brain.  Whence 
the  feveral  miniatures  left  by  particular  imprefllons  of 
the  fame  kind  muft  ftrengthen  one  another  in  the 
internal  parts,  at  the  fame  time  that  they  obliterate  one 
another  in  the  external  ones.  However,  where  a  per- 
fon  has  fufTcred  much  by  a  particular  wound,  ulcer, 
<kc.  it  feems  according  to  the  theory,  that  an  idea  of 
it  fhould  be  left  in  the  part  afFedled,  or  correfponding 
region  of  the  brain,  or  fpinal  marrow. 

Sixthly,  The  vifible  ideas  of  the  bodies  which  im- 
prefs  the  feveral  fenfations  of  feeling  upon  us,  are,  like 
all  other  vifible  ones,  fo  vivid  and  definite,  that  they 
mix  themfelvcs  with,  and  fomewhat  obfcuie,  the  moft 
vivid  ideas  of  feeling,  and  quite  overpower  the  faint 
ones.  Sight  communicates  to  us  at  once  the  fize, 
fhape,  and  colour  of  objefls ;  feeling  cannot  do  the 
lad  at  all,  and  the  two  firfl:  only  in  a  tedious  way  ;  and 

is 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Feeling.  147 

is  fcarce  ever  employed  for  that  purpofe  by  thofe  who 
fee.  Hence  perfons  born  blind  mud  have  far  more 
vivid  and  definite  ideas  of  feeling  than  others.  An 
inquiry  into  their  real  experiences  would  greatly 
contribute  to  correfb,  illuftrate,  and  improve,  the 
theory  of  ideas,  and  their  affociations. 

PROP.     XXXV. 

^'0   explain  the  automatic   Motions^   which  arife  from 

tangible  hnfreffions. 

The  principal  of  thefe  is  the  aflion  of  crying, 
which  is  in  all  animals,  but  efpecially  young  ones, 
the  natural  and  neceffary  confequence  of  pain.  I 
have  already  given  fome  account  of  this  a6lion ;  but 
will  here  enter  into  a  more  particular  detail  of  the 
circumftances,  and  their  agreement  with  the  foregoing 
theory. 

Let  us  fuppofe  then  a  young  child  to  have  a  very 
painful  impreffion  made  upon  the  fkin,  as  by  a  burn. 
It  is  plain  that  the  violent  vibrations  excited  in  the 
injured  part,  will  pafs  up  to  the  brain,  and  over  the 
whole  mufcular  fyftem,  immediately ;  putting  all  the 
mufcles  into  a  ftate  of  contraction,  as  much  as  may 
be,  /.  e.  making  the  ftrongeft  fet  of  mufcles  every 
where  overpower  the  weaker,  for  a  certain  time,  and 
then  give  place  to  them  for  a  certain  other  time,  and 
fo  on  alternately.  Since  therefore  the  mufcles  of  ex- 
piration are  ftronger  than  thofe  of  infpiration,  the 
air  will  be  forced  ftrongly  out  of  the  thorax  through 
the  larynx^  and,  by  confequence,  yield  a  found.  It 
contributes  to  this,  that  the  mufcles  of  the  os  hyoides 
and  larynx^  afting  all  together,  and  drawing  different 
ways,  muft  fufpend  the  cartilages  of  the  larynx^  fo  as 
,both  to  narrow  the  paffage  of  the  air,  and  alfo  render 
thefe  cartilages  more  fufceptible  of  vibrations.  As 
to  the  mufcles  which  contradt  and  dilate  the  larynx:, 

L  1  they 


148  Of  the  Setife  of  Feeling. 

they  arc  pciliaps  about  equal  in  ftrcugth  to  each  other, 
and  therefore  may,  by  oppofing  each  other,  keep 
the  chink  in  a  (late  intermediate  between  its  lead  and 
grcateft  dilatation. 

That  the  (boiigefl:  (ct  of  antagonifl:  mufcles  over- 
power the  weaker,  during  the  great  effort  in  crying, 
may  faitlicr  appear  from  the  a6lion  of  the  extenfors 
of  the  neck,  and  flexors  of  the  liand  (both  which  fets 
are  llronger  than  their  antagoniAs),  at  that  time. 

If  it  be  objctfled  here,  that  the  elevators  of  the 
lower  jaw,  being  Qronger  than  the  depreffors,  ought 
to  keep  the  mouth  fluit  during  the  adion  of  crying, 
according  to  the  foregoing  reafoning,  whereas  the 
contraiy  alvvay  happens  j  I  anfwer,  firfl:,  that  when 
both  thcfe  fets  of  mufcles  a6l  at  the  fame  time,  in 
proportion  to  their  natural  flrengrh,  the  m.outh  ought 
to  be  a  little  opened ,  fecondJy,  that  the  vibrations 
which  take  place  in  the  cartilages  of  the  larynx  feem 
to  impart  a  peculiar  degree  of  force  to  all  the  neigh- 
bouring mufcles,  ;.  e.  to  the  depreflbrs  ^  the  lower 
jaw  3  and,  thirdly,  that  the  mufcles  which  pafs  from 
the  larynx  and  os  hyoides  to  the  lower  jaw  a6l  to  an 
advant.ige  in  drawing  it  down,  in  the  prefent  cafe, 
becaufe  the  os  hyoides  is  at  this  time  fixed  by  its  other 
mufcles. 

The  diftortions  of  the  face,  which  happen  pre- 
vioufly  to  crying,  and  during  the  courfe  of  it,  ieem 
to  be  fufficiently  agreeable  to  the  notions  here  ad- 
vanced ;  the  mufcles,  which  draw  the  lips  from  each 
other,  being  much  (Ironger,  than  thole  which  clofc 
them. 

The  manner  in  which  titillation  occafions  laughter 
in  its  automatic  ftate,  has  been  already  explained. 
We  may  add  here,  that  touching  the  cheeks  of  young 
children  gently  will  excite  fmiling. 

Frid:ion  alio  occafions  many  automatic  motions 
in  young  children,  as  may  be  obferved  when  their 
naked   bodies,   or  hairy  fcaips,    are    rubbed    by    the 

nurle's 


Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling.  14^ 

nurfe's  hand ;  the  motion  being  determined  in  the(e 
cafes,  as  appears,  by  the  ftrengch  and  vicinity  of  the 
mufcles. 

The  contraftion  of  the  hand  in  young  children, 
which  has  been  taken  notice  of  already,  may  be 
excited  by  titillation,  fridlion,  and  almofl:  any  impref- 
fion  on  the  palm  ;  and  is  to  be  deduced  partly  from 
the  fuperior  ftrength  of  the  flexors  here,  partly  from 
the  exquifite  fenfibility  of  the  palm.  The  contradion 
of  the  foot  from  impreffions  made  on  the  fole  is  ana- 
logous to  that  of  the  hand. 

It  may  not  perhaps  be  amifs  to  add  here,  that  the 
cellular  fubftance  intervenes  lefs  between  the  fkin  and 
fubjacent  mufcles  in  the  fcalp,  palm,  and  fole,  than 
in  other  parts,  as  appears  both  from  anatomical  in~ 
fpeflion  and  emphyfemas;  and  that  this  may  increafe 
the  influence  of  the  impreffions  on  thefe  parts  over 
the  fubjacent  mufcles. 


PROP.     XXXVI. 

^0  explain  the  Manner^  in  which  the  automatic  Motions^ 
mentioned  in  the  la(l  Proyofitionj  are  converted  into 
voluntary  and Jemivoluntary  ones. 

Tins  has  been  done,  in  fom,e  meafure,  already, 
in  refpetSt  of  the  actions  of  crying,  and  contrafting 
the  hand,  and  their  derivatives,  fpeaking  and  hand- 
ling ;  and  will  be  done  more  completely  hereafter 
in  a  propofiiion  appropriated  to  the  diflinil  con- 
fideration  of  the  motions  that  are  perfeclly  voluntary. 
1  have  therefore  inlerted  the  prefent  propofition  chiefly 
for  the  fake  of  regularity,  and  that  the  reader  might 
have  in  one  fliort  view,  from  the  propofitions  of  this 
fedlion,  all  the  principal  heads  of  inquiry  relating  to 
the  fenfe  of  feeling. 

L  3  Ir 


150  Of  the  Senje  of  Feeling. 

It  may  not,  however,  be  improper  here  to  oblerve, 
that  the  great  variety  of  fridlionii,  flexures,  and  po- 
fitions,  whicli  nurfes  give  to  young  children,  n  ake 
a  proportional  variety  of  combinations  of  mufcles 
which  art  together ;  and  that  ihefe,  by  oppofing  the 
natural  ones  from  juxtapofition,  derivation  of  nerves, 
bcc.  to  a  certain  degree,  prepare  the  way  for  fuch 
voluntary  combinailoub;,  as  are  requifite  in  the  future 
incidents  of  life. 


SECT. 


Of  the  Senfi  of  Tafte.  151 

SE  CT.     II. 

OF    THE     SENSE    OF    TASTE, 

PROP.     XXXVII. 

fo  affign  the  Extent  of  the  Organ  of  Tafle.  and  to 
explain^  in  general^  the  different  Powers  lodged  in  the 
different  Parts  of  it. 

The  tafte  may  be  diftinguifhed  into  two  kinds,  as. 
before  obferved  of  feeling,  viz.  the  particular  ex- 
quifite  one,  which  rcfides  in  the  tongue,  and  efpeci- 
aily  in  the  tip  of  it ;  and  the  general  one,  which 
extends  itfelf  to  the  infides  of  the  lips  and  cheeks, 
to  the  palate,  fauces^  oefophagus^  ftonnach,  and  whole 
alioientary  dud,  quite  down  to  the  anus ;  the  fenfi- 
bility  growing  perhaps  lefs  and  lefs,  perpetually,  in 
going  from  the  ftomach  to  die  return.  The  ien- 
libility  of  the  alimentary  du6t  is  probably  of  the 
lame  kind  with,  and  not  much  greater  in  degree 
:han,  that  of  the  internal  furfaces  of  the  gall-bladder, 
urinary-bladder,  pehisj  ureters,  and,  in  general, 
)f  the  ftcretory  and  excretory  veffels,  and  of  the 
receptacles  belonging  to  the  glands.  But  I  refer 
the  fcnfations  of  this  du£l  to  the  tafte,  on  account  of 
-heir  connedion  with  thofe  of  the  tongue,  in  refpeft 
of  iheir  caufes,  ufes,  and  effects. 

As  to  the   particular  and   luperior   powers   of  the 

tongue,    they    may,    in    part,    be   deduced    from   the, 

.umber   and  largenefs  of  its  fapUiej  and  from   their 

ifing   above   the  furface   in   living  perfons   more  re- 

viarkably  than  any  other  fentient  -papiiU  in  the  whole 

body,  fo  as  to  be  extreme  parts  in  an  em.inent  degree. 

To  which  we  ought  perhaps  to  add,  that  the  tip  and 

fides,  in  which   the  tafte  is  moft  exquifice,  are  alfo 

L  A  extremq 


151  Of  the  Sevje  <?/ TalU*. 

extreme  pares.  But  tlu-re  may  be  likewile  a  different 
peculiar  dillribution,  and  other  caufes  of  an  cxquifite 
Icnfibility,  in  ilie  nerves  of  the  tongue. 

It  deferves  notice  here,  that  the  fiidlion  of  the 
tongue  againll  the  palate  is  neceflary,  in  order  to  ex- 
cite the  talks  of  the  aliments,  which  we  malVicate,  in 
perfef^ion.  This  pradlice  is  analogous  to  that  of 
rubbing  the  ends  of  the  fingers  upon  fuch  bodies  as 
we  examine  accurately  by  feeling;  and  both  appear 
fuitable  to  the  notion  of  vibrations;  alfo  to  that  of 
the  diflention  and  ereflion  of  the  fentient  papilla : 
which  may  even  be  feen  in  the  papilLe  of  the  tongue. 

It  has  been  obferved,  that  bitters  and  acids  ap- 
plied to  fungulcs  of  the  brain,  and  even  to  iflues  upon 
the  vertexy  have  fometimes  occafioned  the  fenfations 
of  the  tades  refpe(51ively  arifing  from  the  fame  bitters 
and  acids,  when  applied  to  the  tongue.  This  may 
perhaps  be  folved  by  fuppofing,  that  the  bitters  and 
acids,  when  applied  to  the  nerves  of  the  fifth  pair, 
in  the  fungufes  of  the  brain,  and  to  thofc  of  the 
feventh,  or  perhaps  of  the  fifth  alfo,  in  the  iffues  (for 
the  fifth  pair  may  tranfmit  fome  branches  to  the  ex- 
ternal integuments  from  the  dura  matery  at  the  vertex), 
fend  up  their  own  fpecific  vibrations  into  thofe  regions 
of  the  brain,  which  are  the  peculiar  refidence  of  taftes, 
;.  e.  to  the  regions  which  correfpond  to  the  fifth  pair, 
according  to  fome  anaromifts.  And  thefe  fenfations 
may  even  afford  fome  evidence,  that  the  fifth  pair, 
not  the  ninth,  fupplies  the  tongue  with  fenfory  nerves. 


I^ROP. 


Of  tht  Sen/e  of  Tafte.  153 


PROP.     XXXVIII. 

'/(?  examine  how  far  the  Phenomena  of  Ta^eSy  and 
their  fpecific  Differ  ences^  are  f nit  able  to  the  DoBrine 
of  [Vibrations . 

Here  I  obftrve,  firfl,  fhat  heating  any  fapid  liquid 
increafes  its  tafte,  efpecially  if  it  be  of  the  bitter,  fpi- 
rituous,  or  acrid  kind;  and,  converfely,  that  the  im- 
prefl'ion  of  fuch  taftes  generates  a  heat  in  the  organ, 
which  remains  after  the -peculiar  tafte  ceafes.  Now 
this  connexion  of  certain  tallies  with  heat  is  fome 
prefunnption,  that  they  arife  from  vibrations,  provided 
we  allow  heat  to  arife  from  them,  according  to  the 
common  opinion. 

Secondly,  Since  difagreeable  taftes  muft,  accord- 
ing to  the  account  of  pain  given  above,  arife  from 
fuch  a  violence  in  the  vibrations  excited,  as  produce 
the  folution  of  continuity,  and  pleafant  taftes,  from 
more  moderate  degrees  of  vibrations,  which,  though 
they  approach  to  the  folution  of  continuity,  yet  fall 
fhort  of  it;  the  pains  of  tafte  muft  proceed  from 
ftronger  vibrations  than  the  pleafures.  And,  agree- 
ably to  this,  bodies  which  imprefs  very  adive  and 
difagreeable  taftes,  manifeft  great  activity  in  other 
trials,  for  the  moft  part. 

Thirdly,  It  is  very  difficult  to  give  any  plaufible 
account  of  the  great  variety  of  pleafant  and  unpleafant 
taftes  from  the  dodrine  of  vibrations.  FJowever,  the 
different  frequency  of  vibrations,  which  belongs  to 
the.  fmall  particles  of  different  fapid  bodies,  may  be, 
in  a  good  meafure,  the  fource  of  this  great  variety. 
For  if  the  particles  of  the  body  A  ofcillate  twice, 
while  thofe  of  the  body  B  ofcillate  only  once, 
the  fenfations  excited  by  them  may  be  different, 
though  both  fall  within  the  limits  of  pleafure,  or 
both   pafs    into   thofe   of  pain.     The  differences  of 

degree 


^54 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte. 


degree  may  alio  contribute;  for  it  is  obfdrvable,  than 
different  dilagreeable  tartes,  in  declining,  leave  agiec-  fi 
able  ones,  wliicli  apjjioach  to  each  other.  Thjs  I 
have  cxpcricnccil  in  aloes,  lime,  and  green  tea  not 
iwcctened.  It  may  therefore  be,  that  the  different 
difagreeable  talles  were  Inch  rather  on  account  of 
degree  than  kind.  And,  upon  the  whole,  it  may  be, 
that  the  feveral  combinations  of  the  differences  of 
kind  with  thofe  of  degree  may  be  fufficient  in  number 
to  account  for  all  the  varieties  and  fpecific  differenc;?s 
of  taffes. 

Fourthly,  Tafles  appear  to  be  more  different  than 
they  are  from  -the  odours  which  accoiDpany  lome 
of  them.  And  this  obfervation,  by  reducing  the 
number  of  taffes  properly  fo  called,  does  fomewhat 
leffen  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  their  num- 
ber. But  then  it  is  alfo  to  be  obferved,  that  part  of 
this  difficulty  is  to  be  transferred  to  the  head  of  odours. 

Fifthly,  the  power  of  diftinguiOiing  talles  feems 
to  depend  upon  fight,  to  a  certain  degree.  And  this 
confideration  alfo  leffens  the  number  of  taftes  pro- 
perly fo  called. 

Sixthly,  If  we  fuppofe  the  fapid  body  to  connft  of 
particles,  that  excite  vibrations  of  different  frequen- 
cies, which  may  be  the  cafe  of  many  bodies  in  their 
natural  flate,  and  probably  muft  be  with  fuch  as 
are  compounded  by  art,  compound  medicines  for 
inftance,  a  great  variety  of  taffes  may  arife,  fome  re- 
iembling  the  taffes  of  fimple  bodies,  others  totally 
unlike  thele  :  juft  as  fome  of  the  colours  reflected  by 
natural  and  artificial  bodies  refemble  one  or  other  of  the 
fimple  primary  ones,  whilft  others  are  colours  that 
can  fcarce  be  referred  to  any  of  thefe.  And  we  may 
farther  fuppofe,  in  both  cafes,  that  where  the  vibra- 
tions approach  fo  near,  in  frequency  as  to  over-rule 
each  other,  and  produce  one  fpecics  only,  there 
refults  a  tafte,  or  a  colour,  that  refembles  a  primary 
one;  whereas,  if  the  vibrations  differ  ia  much  in  fre- 
quency, 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafte.  155 

quency,  as  that  two  or  more  principal  fpeciefes  keep 
their  own  frequency,  the  talte,  or  colour,  generated 
from  thenn,  cannot  be  likened  to  any  primary  one. 

Seventhly,  That  there  are  different  fpeciefes  of  vi- 
brations, which  yet  all  constitute  fweet  or  bitter,  I 
conjefture  not  only  from  the  foregoing  general  reafon- 
ing,  but  alfo  becaufe  there  are  both  fweets  and  bit- 
ters in  all  the  three  kingdoms,  animal,  vegetable, 
and  mineral.  Thus  milk,  fugar,  and  faccharum  fa- 
turniy  all  yield  a  fweet  tafte  i  gall,  aloes,  and  cryftals 
of  filver,  all  a  bitter  one. 

Eighthly,  Some  differences  of  tafte  may  arife 
from  the  different  time  required  for  the  folution, 
and  confequent  activity,  of  the  fapid  particles,  alfo 
from  the  different  local  effedl  which  they  may  have 
upon  the  papilUy  when  abforbed  by  their  venous 
veffejs,  &c. 

Ninthly,  Very  naufeous  and  ftupefacient  taftes  may 
perhaps  arife  from  violent  and  irregular  vibrations, 
and  bear  fome  analogy  to  the  fenfation,  or  want  of 
it,  impreffed  by  the  ftroke  of  the  torpedo. 

Tenthly,  It  feems  to  deferve  particular  confidera- 
tion  here,  that  milk,  and  the  flefti  of  certain  domef- 
tic  animals,  yield  taftes,  which  are  naturally  and 
originally  pleafant,  to  a  confiderable  degree,  and  yet 
not  in  excefs,  as  fugar,  and  other  very  fweet  bodies, 
are.  For  it  is  reafonable  to  conclude,  that  the  par- 
ticles of  milk,  and  common  flefli-meats,  muft  agree 
very  much  in  the  ftrength  and  frequency  of  vibrations 
with  the  particles  of  our  own  folids  and  fluids.  They 
may  therefore  juft  moderately  increafe  the  natural 
vibrations  of  the  organ,  when  applied  thereto,  and 
enforced  by  fudion,  maftication,  and  friftion  of  the 
tongue  againft  the  palate.  For  the  fame  reafons 
we  may  guefs,  that  the  common  diet  of  animals  does 
not  undergo  very  great  changes,  in  refped  of  the 
vibratory  motions  of  its  particles,  from  its  cir- 
culation,    and    confequent    afllmilation.      However, 

there 


156  Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafle. 

there  arc  fome  eminent  inftances  to  the  contrary, 
clpecially  in  poifons.  Thcfc  lalt  oblervations  may 
be  extended  to  vegetables,  falutary  and  poifonousj 
relpccftively. 

Eleventhly,  Sonne  acrid  taftes,  that  of  muftard 
for  inllance,  alFcift  the  tip  of  the  uvula^  and  the 
eds^e  of  the  loft  palate,  in  a  particular  manner. 
Now  this  may  a  little  confirm  the  conjedtiires  above 
made  concerning  the  fenfibility  and  irritability  of 
extreme  parts. 

Twelfthly,  it  is  cafy  to  conceive,  upon  the  prin- 
ciples of  thefe  papers,  how  fwcets  and  bitters  of  an 
inferior  degree  Ihould  render  thofe  of  a  fuperior  one 
lefs  affe<5ling,  refpe^tively,  as  they  are  found  to  do. 

The  foregoing  articles  are  only  imperfedl  con- 
jeflures,  and  do  not  even  approach  to  a  fatisfa61:ory 
folurion.  They  may  juft  ferve  to  fhew,  that  the 
do6lrine  of  vibrations  is  as  fuitable  to  the  phenomena 
of  taftes,  as  any  other  hypochefis  yet  propofed.  The 
following  methods  may  perhaps  be  of  fome  ufe  for  the 
analyfis  of  taftes. 

Firft,  To  make  trials  upon  bodies  whofe  particles 
feem  fimilar  to  each  other.  Such  are  perhaps  diftilled 
fpirits,  acid,  alkaline,  and  fermented ;  alfo  falts,  and 
oils ;  but  they  muft  all  be  fuiliciently  purified  by  rcn 
peated  diftillations,  folutions,  and  fuch-like  chemical 
operations ;  elfe  we  are  fure,  that  their  component 
particles  a;e  heterogeneous. 

Secondly,  To  note  the  changes  of  tafte  in  chemi- 
cal operations,  and  compare  them  with  the  changes 
of  colour  J  which  laft,  by  difcovering  the  fizes  of 
the  particles,  may  determine  many  things  relating  to 
their  mutual  atSlions.  The  folutions  of  metals  in 
acids,  by  affording  many  fingular  and  vivid  taftes, 
and  fometimes  colours,  feem  to  deferve  efpecial 
notice  here. 

Thirdly,  There  are  many  regular  changes  in  na- 
tural bodies,  which,  by   comparifon  with  other  phas- 

nomenaj 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafte.  157 

nomena,  may  be  of  ufe.  Thus  it  is  remarkable, 
that  the  juice  of  many  or  moft  fruits  is  firft  acid,  i,  e. 
whilft  unripe,  then  fweet,  then  vinous,  after  the 
firfl:  fermentation,  then  acid  again,  after  the  fecond 
fermentation. 

This  inquiry  is  of  great  importance  in  medicine 
and  philofophy.  And  the  theory  of  taftes  appears 
capable  of  becoming  a  principal  guide  in  difcovering 
the  mutual  aftions  of  the  fmall  particles  of  bodies. 
The  difficulty  is  to  make  a  beginning.  This  theory 
may  not  perhaps  be  more  complex  than  that  of 
colours  i  one  may,  at  lead,  affirm,  that  the  theory 
of  colours  appeared  as  complex  and  intricate  before 
Sir  I/aac  Newlons  time,  as  that  of  taftes  does  nowj 
which  is  fome  encouragement  to  make  an  attempt. 

PROP.     XXXIX. 

To  examine  how  far  the  fever al  SenfationSj  which  affe5i 
the  Stomach  and  Bowels^  may  he  explained  agreeably 
to  the  Do5lrine  of  Vibrations. 

It  will  eafily  be  conceived,  that  if  taftes,  properly 
'o  called  (of  which  under  the  laft  propofition), 
avour,  or  fuit  with,  the  doctrine  of  vibrations,  the 
.--nfations  of  the  ftomach  and  bowels  may  likewife. 
>ut  a  particular  examination  of  thefe  fenfations,  and 
:omparifon  of  them  v/ith  taftes,  will  make  this  more 
vident. 

Firft,  then,  we  may  obfcrve,  that  the  ftomach  is 
efs   fenfible  than  the  tongue,  the  bowels  in  general 
rhan  the  ftomach,  and   the  inferior   bowels   than   the 
uiperior.     Thus    opium,  and   bitters,  and   fomctimes 
pifituous    liquors    are   difagreeable    to    tiie    tongue, 
'Ut  fall  within  the  limits  of  pleafure  in  the  ftomach. 
Thus  bile  is  extremely  naufeous   in  the  month,  and 
offends  even  the  ftomach  ;  but  k  cannot  be  difagree- 
able  to   the  diiodemmy    which   it  firft  enters,  or  the 

bowels. 


158  Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte. 

bowels,  through  which  it  pafles.  Thus  alfo  \.\\t  frees 
Teem  10  be  equally  fuitcd  to  the  fcveral  bowels  alon^^ 
which  they  dcfcend,  though  they  giow  perpetually 
more  putrid  and  acrimoniouji  in  their  defccnt ;  /.  c. 
there  is  an  abatement  of  fenfibility  in  tlic  bowels, 
which  correfponds  to  the  increafc  of  acrimony  in 
feces. 

If  it  be  objected  here,  that  honey,  tnenunus  dulcisy 
!czc.  offend  the  ftomach  and  bowels  often,  though 
pleafant  or  infipid  in  the  mouth,  I  anfwer,  that  fuch 
bodies  require  time,  heat,  lolution,  &c.  before  the 
whole  of  thcMr  qualities  can  be  exerted. 

Secondly,  The  particular  manner  in  whi^h  opiates, 
fermented  liquors,  grateful  aliments,  and  narcotics, 
may  a6l  rtrll  upon  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  and  after- 
wards upon  the  whole  body,  agreeably  to  the  dodrine 
of  vibrations,  has  been  given  above  in  treating  of 
fleep. 

Thirdly,  The  a6lion  of  vomits,  purges,  and  acrid 
poifons,  fuch  as  corrofive  fublimate,  is  very  reconcile- 
able  to  this  dodtrine,  by  only  fuppofing,  that  they  ex- 
cite very  vigorous  vibrations,  and  that  thefe  are  com- 
municated to  the  mufcular  coats  of  the  ftomach  and 
bowels,  to  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen^  and,  in 
violent  cafes,  to  the  whole  mufcular  and  nervous 
fyftem.  I  fhall  confider  the  automatic  motions, 
which  arife  from  thefe  caufes,  below,  under  a  particu- 
lar propofition.  It  may  ferve  to  fliew  the  analogy  of 
the  fenfations,  and  the  general  nature  of  aflive 
medicines,  to  obferve,  that  thefe  will  often  operate 
in  feveral  ways,  viz.  as  vomits,  purges,  diuretics, 
diaphoretics,  fternutatories,  vcficatories,  and  cor- 
rofives,  by  a  change  of  application  and  circum- 
flances. 

Fourthly,  Since  the  meats,  to  which  particular 
perfons  have  an  antipathy,  and  from  which  they  re- 
ceive violent  ill  effcfts,  are,  in  general,  highly  grate- 
ful to  others,  one  may  perhaps  conjetlure,  that  the 

vibrations 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  159 

vibrations  excited  by  thefe  meats  in  the  flomachs  of 
thofe  who  have  an  antipathy   to  them,   do   but  juft 
pafs  the  linnits  of  pleafure ;  fo  as  to  difFufe  thennfelves   - 
much  farther,  and  more  powerfully,  than  if  the  firft 
impreffion  was  very  painful. 

Laftly,  The  connexion  between  the  fenfations  of 
the  tongue  and  ftomach,  and  confequently  between 
the  manners  of  explaining  them,  may  be  inferred  from 
the  office  of  the  tafte,  as  a  guide  and  guard  to  the  or- 
gans of  digeftion  ;  which  is  very  evident,  in  general, 
in  all  animals,  notwithftanding  a  few  exceptions,  more 
cfpecially  in  men. 

PROP.     XL. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Phenomena  of  Hunger  are 
agreeable  to  the  Docirine  of  Vibrations. 

'  Natural  hunger  may  be  reckoned  a  pleafure  in  its 
Irft  rife,  and  to  pafs  into  a  pain  only  by  increafe  and 
continuance.  We  may  fuppofe  therefore,  that  during 
hunger  the  nerves  of  the  ftomach  are  fo  irritable,  as 
that  the  common  motions  of  the  mufcular  coat,  and 
the  impreffions  made  by  its  contents,  in  confequence 
of  thefe  motions,  excite  fuch  vigorous  vibrations,  as 
nrft  lie  within  the  limits  of  pleafure,  and  afterwards 
pafs  into  the  limits  of  pain.  And  when  the  fight  of 
bod,  or  any  other  affociated  circumftance,  increafcs 
rhe  fenfe  of  hunger  inftantaneoufly,  it  may  be  conjec- 
rured  to  do  fo,  in  great  meafure,  by  incrcafing  the 
rontraclions  of  the  mufcular  coat  of  the  ftomach. 

But  the  fenfibility  and  irritability  of  the  nerves  of 
the  tongue  are  alfo  increafed  by  hunger;  for  common 
aliments  yield  a  very  different  tafte,  according  as  the 
perfon  is  fatiated  or  hungry.  And  it  is  probable  far- 
ther, that  the  nerves  of  the  upper  part  of  the  bowels 
fympathize  with  thofe  of  the  ftomach  in  hunger  ;  and 
increafe  the  uneafy  fenlation,  in  violent  degrees  of  it. 

Let 


i6o  Of  the  6cnje  of  Tafle. 

Let  us  now  conridcr  in  what  way  food  may  be  fup- 
pofcil  to  IcHcn  this  fcnfibility  and  irritability  of  the 
nerves  of  the  tongue,  llomach  and  bowels ;  and  how 
abllinence,  bitters,  wines,  &c.  inay  incrcafe  them, 
upon  the  principles  of  thcfe  p-ipers. 

Firlt,  then,  As  the  fiiiall  abforbing  veflels  in  the 
mouth,  llomach,  and  bowels,  mull,  after  eating  for 
foine  time,  be  faturated  with  alimentary  particles,  thofe 
that  are  now  applied  will  fcarce  make  any  imprefTion 
for  want  of  a  fufficient  attraftion. 

Secondly,  Such  as  are  attracted  cannot  make  any 
confiderabie  difference  of  vibrations,  becaufe  the  vi- 
brations which  they  are  qualified  to  excite,  do  already 
take  place.  And  thcfe  tv\o  remarks  put  together, 
fliew,  that  a  perlbn  may  relifh  a  fecond  kind  of  food 
after  being  fatiated  wit!)  a  full. 

Thirdly,  'I'he  adions  of  maftication,  deglutition, 
and  digeition,  exhaufl:  the  neighbouring  glands  and 
glandular  receptacles  of  their  liquids,  and  the  neigh- 
bouring mufcular  fibres,  of  their  ready  power  of  con- 
tramline;:  thefe  parts  arc  therefore  no  longer  fiifcep- 
tible  of  a  pleafurable  ftate,  or  only  in  a  low  degree. 

Fourthly,  Abllinence  reverfes  all  thele  fteps  j  in 
which,  however,  the  perpttual  affufion,  dilution,  and 
ablution  of  the  faliva  has  a  confiderable  fhare.  And 
thus  after  a  proper  interval  the  organs  return  to  a  Hate 
of  great  fenfibility  and  irritability. 

Fifthlv,  Bitters  and  acids  exhibited  in  a  moderate 
degree  feem  gently  to  increafe  the  vibratory  motions, 
and  raife  them  before  the  <^\.\ti.  time  to  the  degree  that 
correfponds  to  hunger.  A  fmall  quantity  of  food 
has  the  fame  effed,  alfo  agreeable  emotions  of  mind, 
frefli  air,  exercife,  and  many  other  things.  But  if 
the  bitters,  acids,  &:c.  be  carried  beyond  a  certain  de- 
gree, they  occafion  pain  or  ficknefs,  which  is  very 
agreeable  to  the  doctrine  of  vibrations,  as  laid  down 
in  theie  papers. 

Sixthly, 


I 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  i6i 

Sixthly,  In  fevers  the  mouth,  fauces  cejophagusy 
and  ftomach,  are  hot,  dry,  inflamed,  and  incruiled. 
They  are  therefore  preoccupied  by  vibrations  of  a 
kind  quite  different  from  thofe  which  attend  hunger, 
and  therefore  exclude  this  ftate. 

It  may  not  be  amifs  to  obferve  here,  that  the  fen- 
fation  of  hunger  is  a  guide  and  guard  to  the  organs  of 
digeftion  in  a  ftill  more  eminent  degree,  than  the 
taftes  of  the  feveral  aliments. 


PROP.     XLI. 

To  examine  how  for    the  Phenomena   of  Thirfi  are 
agreeable  to  the  Docfrine  of  Vibrations. 

Thirst  is  oppofite  to  hunger,  and  is  a  general 
attendant  upon  fevers.  It  follows,  alfo,  in  an  evident 
manner  from  all  confiderable  degrees  of  heat  in  the 
fauces.  The  nerves  therefore  of  the  mouth,  fauces y 
eofophagusy  and  ftomach,  are,  during  third,  preoccu- 
pied by  difagreeable  vibrations  of  the  inflammatory 
kind,  as  above  obferved.  And  as  the  pleafures  of 
tafte  may  be  faid  to  refemble  thofe  of  titillation,  fo 
third  feems  allied  to  itching. 

It  is  agreeable  to  this  account  of  thirft,  that  liquors 
aftuaily  cold  afford  immediate  relief  j  alfo  that  warm 
diluents,  which  foften  the  parts,  and  wafli  off  acrimo- 
nious particles,  do  it  after  fome  time.  As  the  caufe 
of  thirft  is  of  a  permanent  nature  in  fevers,  it  muft 
return  again  and  again,  till  the  fever  be  removed. 
Gentle  acids  yield  a  pleafure  in  thirft,  which  feems  to 
correfpond  to  that  which  fcratching  excites  in  parts, 
that  itch  previoufly. 


Vol.  I.  M  PROP. 


1 62  Of  the  Senje  of  Tallc. 


PRO  P.     XLII. 

'To  examine  how  far  the  Chmigcs  generally  made  in  the 
Tajle^  in  faffing  from  Infancy  to  old  Age  ^  are  agreeable 
to  the  Dodrwes  of  Vibrations  and  /tffociation. 


Some  of  thefe  changes  are, 

That  fwcets  generally  grow  lefs  and  lefs  agreeable, 
and  fometimes  even  dilagrecable,  or  naufeous  at  lad. 

That  aftringent,  acid,  and  fpirituous  liquids,  which 
dilpleafe  at  firft:,  afterwards  become  highly  grateful. 

That  even  bitters  and  aciids  firft  lofe  tfieir  offcnfive 
qualities,  and  after  a  fufficient  repetition  give  a  relifh 
to  our  aliment. 

And  that  many  particular  foods  and  medicines  be- 
come either  extremely  pleafant  or  difgufting,  from 
afibciations  with  falhion,  joy,  hope  of  advantage, 
hunger,  the  pleafures  of  cheerful  converfation,  &:c.  or 
with  ficknt-fi-,  vomitings,  gripings,  fear,  forrow,  ^c. 

Now,  in  order  ro  account  for  thefe  changes,  v/e 
may  confider  the  following  things. 

Firft,  That  the  organs  become  lefs  and  lefs  fenfible 
by  age,  from  the  growing  callofity  and  rigidity  of  all 
the  parts  of  animal  bodies.  The  pleafant  favours  may 
therefore  be  expeded  to  become  lefs  pleafant,  and  the 
moderately  difagreeable  ones  to  fall  down  within  the 
limits  of  pleafure,  upon  this  account. 

Secondly,  The  difpofuion  to  vibrations  in  the  or- 
gan and  correfponding  part  of  the  brain  mull:  alfo 
receive  fome  alteration  by  the  frequent  repetition  of 
impreffions.  For  though  this  returns,  at  a  proper  dif- 
tance  from  each  meal,  to  its  former  (late,  within  an 
indefinite  diftance,  as  one  may  fay,  yet  fome  differ- 
ence there  probably  is,  upon  the  whole,  which  in  a 
fufficient  length  of  time  amounts   to   a   perceptible 

one. 


Of  the  Scnje  of  Tafte.  163 

one.  However,  we  mud  alfo  fuppofe  on  the  other- 
hand,  that  the  make  of  the  nervous  fyftem  fets  Tonne 
bounds  to  this  gradual  alteration  in  the  dilpofition 
to  vibrate  J  elfe  the  tafte  would  be  much  more  varia- 
ble than  it  is,  and  continue  to  change  more  after 
adult  age,  than  it  is  found  to  do  in  facl.  It  may 
perhaps  change  fafter  in  the  life  of  a  high  diet  than 
of  a  low  one  J  which  would  be  an  evidence  of  the 
reality  of  the  caufe  here  alTigned. 

Thirdly,  The  pleafant  and  painful  impreflions  which 
particular  foods  and  medicines  make  upon  the  fto- 
mach,  always  either  accompany  the  tafte,  or  follow  it 
in  a  fliort  time  j  and  by  this  means  an  aflbciation  is 
formed,  whereby  the  dirtft  pleafantnefs  or  naufeouf- 
nefs  of  the  tafte  is  enhanced,  if  the  impreflions  upon 
the  tongue  and  ftomach  be  of  the  fame  kind ;  or  di- 
minifticrd,  and  perhaps  overpowered,  and  even  con- 
verted into  its  oppofite,  if  they  be  of  different  kinds. 
For  if  the  two  impreffions  A  and  By  made  upon  the 
tongue  and  ftomach  refpedively,  be  repeated  together 
for  a  fufficient  number  'of  times,  b  will  always  attend 
A  upon  the  firft  moment  of  its  being  made.  If  there- 
fore B  be  of  fuch  a  magnitude  as  to  leave  a  trace  b 
fufficiendy  great,  the  addition  of  this  trace  b  to  A^ 
the  imprefiion  made  upon  the  tongue,  may  produce 
all  the  changes  in  it  above-mentioned,  according  to 
their  feveral  natures  and  proportions.  This  follows 
from  the  dodl:rine  of  aflbciation,  as  it  takes  place  in 
general  j  but  here  the  free  propagation  of  vibrations 
from  the  ftomach  to  the  mouth,  along  the  furface  of 
:he  membranes,  adds  a  particular  force.  In  like  man- 
ler  a  difagreeable  tafte,  by  being  often  mixed  with 
1  pleafant  one,  may  at  laft  become  pleafant  alone,  and 
mce  verja:  hunger  and  fatiety  may  alfo,  by  being 
oined  with  particular  taftes,  contribute  greatly  to  aug- 
iient  or  abace  their  relifti.  And  I  believe  it  is  by  the 
nethods  of  this  third  kind,  that  the  chief  and  moft 
ifual  changes  in  the  tafte  are  made. 

M  2  Fourthly, 


164  Of  the  Senje  of  Taftc. 

Fourthly,    The  changes  which  are  made  by  aflb- 
ciations   with   mental   plcafures   and  pains,  or   bodily 
ones  not  belonging  to  this  organ,  as  with  line  colours, 
mufic,  &:c.  receive  a  like  explication  as  the  laft-men- 
tioncd    inflances    of  alVuciations.     Here    tiic   pleafurc 
excited   in   the  eye  or  ear  over-rules  the  tade  at  firft: 
afterwards  we  may  fuppofe  the  organ  to  be  fo   altered 
by  degrees,  in  refpeft  of  the  difagreeable  tafte,  from 
its  frequent  impreffion,  or  other  caufe,  as  to  have  the 
folution   of  continuity   no   longer   occafioned    by  its 
aftion.     It  is  probable  alfo,  that  evanefcent  pleafures 
of  fight   and   hearing,  at  lead  pleafant  vibrations  in 
the  parts  of  the  brain  correfponding  to  thefe  two  or- 
gans, accompany  thefe  taftes  ever  afterwards 

It  may  be  obfcrved  here,  that  the  defire  of  par- 
ticular foods  and  liquors  is  much  more  influenced 
by  the  aiTociated  circumftances,  than  their  taftes, 
it  being  very  common  for  thefe  circumftances,  parti- 
cularly the  fjght  or  fmell  of  the  food  or  liquor,  to 
prevail  againft  men's  better  judgment,  dire6ling  them 
to  forbear,  and  warning  them  of  the  mifchiefs  likely 
to  arife  from  felf-indulgence. 

PROP.     XLIII. 

^0  examine  bow  far  the  Longings  of  pregnant  Women 
are  agreeable  to  the  DodJrines  of  Vibrations  and 
AJJociation, 

Here  we  muft  lay  down  previoufly,  that  the  uterus 
is  in  a  ftate  of  diftention  during  pregnancy  ;  and  that 
it  propagates  fympathetic  influences  by  means  of  ner- 
vous communications  to  the  ftomach,  fo  as  to  put  it 
into  a  ftate  of  great  fenfibility  and  irritability.  All 
this  will  be  eafily  acknowledged. 

It  follows  therefore,  fince  the  limits  of  pkafure 
and  pain  are  contiguous,  that  the  ftom.ach  during 
pregnancy  may  at  fome  times  have  an  eager  appetite 

for 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafte.  165 

for  food,  as  well  as  a  nauftra  at  others;  that  this  ap- 
petite may  be  the  more  eager,  becaufe  it  borders  upon 
a  naufea;  and  that  it  wiJl  no  more  anfwer  to  the  ufual 
exigencies  and  circumftances  of  the  body,  than  the 
naufea  does.  The  fame  eager  appetite  will  bring  up 
the  ideas  of  various  aliments  from  prior  affociations ; 
and  if  a  new  aflbciation  of  it,  when  particularly  eager, 
happens  to  be  made  with  this  or  that  food  or  liquor, 
the  fympathetic  eager  appetite  will  ever  after  bring 
in  the  idea  of  that  food  or  liquor,  and  adhere  infe- 
parably  to  it.  The  fame  eager  appetite  may  alfo  be 
transferred  upon  fomething  that  is  not  properly  a  food, 
from  its  exorbitant  nature,  prior  naufeas  in  refpeft  of 
common  food,  and  accidental  joint  appearance.  And, 
upon  the  whole,  the  ufual  circumftances  attending  the 
longings  of  pregnant  women  are  deducible  from 
aflbciation,  and  aie  as  agreeable  to  the  doftrine  of 
vibrations,  as  to  any  other  yet  propofed ;  or  even 
more  fo. 

It  may  illuftrate  this  account  to  obferve,  that,  in 
the  ufual  cafes  of  melancholy  madnefs,  an  uneafy  ftate 
feems  to  be  introduced  into  the  white  medullary  fub- 
ftance  of  the  brain  by  the  degeneration  of  the  hu- 
mours, or  other  fuch  like  mechanical  caufe,  which 
carries  the  vibrations  within  the  limits  of  pain,  and 
raifes  an  inflammation  Jui  generis  in  the  infinitefimal 
Veflfels  of  the  medullary  fubftance;  that  ideas  of  ob- 
jefts  of  fear,  forrow,  &c.  are  raifed,  in  confequence 
of  this,  by  means  of  prior  aflbciations ;  and  that,  after 
fome  time,  fome  one  of  thefe,  by  happening  to  be  pre- 
fented  oftener  than  the  reft,  by  falling  m^ore  in  with 
the  bodily  indifpofition,  &c.  overpowers  all  the  reft:, 
excites  and  is  excited  by  the  bodily  fl:ate  of  fear,  for- 
row, &:c.  till  at  lafl:  the  perfon  becomes  quite  irrational 
in  refpeft  of  this  one  idea,  and  its  immediate  and 
clofe  afibciates,  however  rational  he  may  be  in  other 
refpedls.  And  a  like  account  may  be  given  of  the 
violent  particular  deflre  towards  a  perfon  of  a  different 

M  3  fc>:. 


i66 


Of  the  Senjc  of  Taftc. 


Tex,  where  this  dcfire  rcfts  chiclly  in  the  fenfual  gra- 
tification, and  the  beauty  of  the  pcrlbn.  And  all 
thcle  three  inilances  feem  to  me  to  favour  the  dodiine 
of  vibrations  a  litde,  as  well  as  that  of  aflTociation  very 
much. 


PROP.     XLIV. 

To  explain  in  what  Manner  and  to  what  De^ree^  plea- 
[ant  and  nnpleajant  Tafics  contribute^  according  to  the 
DoHrine  of  y/Jfociationy  to  form  our  intellectual  Plea- 
fures  and  Pains. 


The  pleafures  of  the  Tafte,  confidered  as  extending 
itfelf  from  the   mouth  through  the  whole  alimentary 
du»5l,  are   very  confiderable,  and  frequently  repeated ; 
they  mull  therefore   be  one  chief  means,    by  which- 
pleafurable  dates  are  introduced  into  the  brain,  and 
nervous  fyftem.     Thefe  pleafurable  ftates  murt,  afier 
fome  time,  leave  miniatures  of  themftrlves,  fufficiently 
ftrong  to  be  called  up  upon  flight  occafions,  viz.  from 
a  variety  of  alTociations  with  the  common  vifible  and 
audible   obie(5ls,    and   to  illuminate   thefe,    and   their 
ideas.     When  groups  of  thefe  miniatures  have  been 
long  and   clofely   conneftcd   with    particular   objects, 
they  coalefce  into  one  complex  idea,  appearing,  how- 
ever, to  be  a  fimple  one;  and   fo  begin  to  be  trans- 
ferred upon  other  objeds,  and  even  upon  taftes  back 
again,  and  fo  on  without  limits.     And  from  this  way 
of  reifoning  it  may  now  appear,  that  a  great  part  of 
our    intellectual    pleafures    are    ultimately    deducible 
from  ihofe  of  tafte ;  and  that  one  principal  final  caufe 
of  the  greatnefs  and  conftant  recurrency  of  thefe  plea- 
fures, from   our  firft   infancy  to  the  extremity  of  old 
age,  is  to  introduce  and  keep  up  pleafurable  ftates  in 
the  brain,  and  to  connefl  them  with  foreign  objeds. 

The 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  167 

The  focial  pleafures  feem,  in  a  particular  manner, 
:o  be  derived  from  this  fource  i  fince  it  has  been  cuf- 
onnary  in  all  ages  and  nations,  and  is,  in  a  manner, 
neceffary,  that  we  fhould  enjoy  the  pleafures  of  tafte 
in  conjun6tion  with  our  relatives,  friends,  and  neigh- 
bours. 

In  like  manner,  naufeous  taftes,  and  painful  im- 
jreffions  upon  the  alimentary  duft,  give  rile  and 
Irength  to  mental  pains.  The  moft  common  of  thefe 
;:)ainful  impreffions  is  that  from  excefs,  and  the  con- 
sequent indigeftion.  This  excites  and  fupports  thofe 
ineafy  ftates,  which  attend  upon  melancholy,  fear, 
and  forrow. 

It  appears  alfo  to  me,  that  thefe  ftates^are  introduced, 
n  a  great  degree,  during  fleep,  during  the  frightful 
dreams,  agitations,  and  opprefllons,  that  excefs  in 
diet  occafions  in  the  night.  Thefe  dreams  and  dif- 
^^rders  are  often  forgotten  \  but  the  uneafy  ftates  of 
body,  which  then  happen,  leave  veftiges  of  them- 
felves,  which  increafe  in  number  and  ftrength  every 
day  from  the  continuance  of  the  caufe,  till  at  laffc 
they  are  ready  to  be  called  up  in  crowds  upon  flight 
occafions,  and  the  unhappy  perfon  is  unexpededly, 
and  at  once,  as  it  were,  feized  with  a  great  degree  of 
the  hypochondriac  diftemper,  the  obvious  caufe  ap- 
pearing no  ways  proportionable  to  the  effefl.  And 
thus  it  may  appear,  that  there  ought  to  be  a  great  re- 
ciprocal influence  between  the  mind  and  alimentary 
dud,  agreeably  to  common  obfervation;  which  is 
farther  confirmed  by  the  very  large  number  of  nerves 
diftributed  there. 

PROP.     XLV. 

'To  give  an  Account  of  the  Ideas  generated  hy  the  fever  al 

'Tajies, 

As  the  pleafures  of  tafte  are  in  general  greater  than 
thofe   of  feeling,    and  the   pains  in  general  lefs,    it 

M  4  follows 


1 63  Of  the  Senje  of  Talk. 

follows  that  the  ideas  which  are  affixed  to  the  feveral 
words  exfirefllng  the  feveral  pleafant  and  unpleafant 
talks,  will  be  of  a  tniddle  nature  in  refpedl  of  the  ideas 
generated  by  tanfTible  iniprclfions ;  and  lie  between 
the  ideas  of  the  pains  of  feeling,  and  thofe  of  its  plea- 
lures. 

Agreeably  to  this,  it  feems  very  difficult,  or  even 
impolFible,  to  excite  a  genuine  vivid  miniature  of  an 
acid,  I'wcct,  fair,  or  bitter  tafte,  by  the  mere  force 
of  imagination.  However,  the  vibrations  peculiar  to 
each  of  thefe  leave  fuch  vclliges  of  theinfclves,  fuch 
an  effedl  in  the  tongue,  and  correfponding  parts  of 
the  brain,  as,  upon  tailing  the  qualities  themfelves, 
at  once  to  bring  up  tiie  names  whereby  they  are  ex- 
prelll'd,  with  many  other  allbciated  circumftances, 
particularly  the  vifible  appearances  of  the  bodies  en- 
dued with  thefe  qualities.  And  thefe  veftiges  may 
be  called  ideas.  Analogy  leads  us  alfo  to  conclude, 
as  before  obferved  under  feeling,  that  fome  faint  ve- 
ftiges or  ideas  muft  be  raifed  in  the  parts  of  the  brain 
correfponding  to  the  tongue,  upon  the  mere  paffage 
oftachwoid,  that  exprefles  a  remarkable  tafte,  over 
the  ear.  And,  when  the  imagination  is  affifted  by 
the  a(5tual  fight  or  fmell  of  a  highly  grateful  food,  we 
leem  able  to  raife  an  idea  of  a  perceptible  magnitude. 
This  is  confirmed  by  the  manifeft  effect  exerted  upon 
the  mouth,  and  its  glands,  in  luch  cafes. 

The  fight  of  what  we  eat  or  drink  feem.s  alfo,  in 
feveral  inrtances,  to  enable  us  to  judge  more  accurately 
of  the  tafte  and  flavour;  which  ought  to  be  effedted, 
according  to  this  theory,  by  raifing  Tmall  ideas  of  the 
tafte  and  flavour,  and  magnifying  the  real  impref- 
fions  in  confequence  thereof.  For  an  a6lual  impreffion 
muft  excite  vibrations  confiderably  different,  according 
to  the  difference  in  the  previous  ones;  and  v/here 
the  previous  ones  are  of  the  fame  kind  with  thofe  im- 
prefled,  the  laft  muft  be  magnified. 

PROP. 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  169 


PROP.     XLVI. 

To  explain  the  autcmatic  Motions y  which  arife  from  the 
Impreffions  made  on  the  Organ  of  Tafle. 

The  motions  dependent  on  the  fenilitions  of  the 
tongue,  and  alinnentaiy  du6l,  may  be  thus  enu- 
merated :  fu(^ion,  maftication,  deglutition,  the  diftor- 
tion  of  the  mouth  and  face  in  confequence  of  naufe- 
ous  taftes,  the  periftaltic  motion  of  the  ftoinach  and 
bowels,  vomiting,  ruclusy  hiccough,  fpafms,  and 
violent  motions  in  the  bowels,  the  m.otions  which 
empty  the  neighbouring  glands,  and  the  expulfion  of 
iht  feces. 

Firft,  then,  Suflion  in  new-born  children  appears  to 
depend  chiefly  on  the  fenfations  of  the  lips  and 
tongue.  I  fay  chiefly,  becaufe  fome  predifpofition 
thereto  may  be  generated  in  uiero,  or  otherwife  im- 
preffed,  and  the  great  aptnefs  of  new-born  children 
in  fuckino;  feems  to  favour  this.  However,  when 
we  confider,  that  the  imprefTions  of  the  cold  air  up- 
on the  lips  and  mouth  in  its  paffage  to  the  lungs, 
of  the  nipple  upon  the  lips,  and  of  the  milk  upon 
the  tongue,  ought  to  excite  motions  in  the  neigh- 
bouring mufcles  of  the  lips,  and  lower  jaw ;  that  the 
motions  which  concur  to  the  adtion  of  fudion,  are 
fuch  as  might  be  expedled  from  thefe  caufcs ;  and 
even  that  the  motions  of  the  head  and  neck,  by 
which  the  child  indicates  the  want  of  a  breafl:,  may 
flow  from  the  great  fenfibility  and  irritability  of  thefe 
parts,  when  the  child  is  hungry  j  a  prefumption 
arifcs,  that  the  whole  a6lion  of  fu6tion,  with  all  its 
circumftances,  is  excited  by  the  impreffions  mechni- 
cally  or  automatically  j  and  that  by  the  running  .of  vi- 
brations from  the  fenfory  nerves  into  the  neighbouring 
motory  ones. 

Secondly, 


lyo  Of  the  Scnfe  0/ Tafte. 

Secoinlly,  The  firft  rudiments  of  the  acflion  of 
mallication  arc  ilcrivcd  from  that  of  fuftion,  /.  e. 
from  the  alternate  motion  of  the  lower  jaw  neceffary 
to  fquceze  out  the  milk.  After  tliis  adion  has  been 
excited  for  fome  time  by  the  talle  of  the  milk,  it 
will  return  with  lufHcient  facility  from  the  impref- 
fions  made  by  foiid  food;  and  the  farDe  impreflions 
may  excite  other  motions  in  the  mufcles  of  the  tongue 
and  checks,  viz.  thofe  which  concur  to  mike  the 
aftion  of  martication  in  its  impeifedt  and  automatic 
ftate. 

Thirdly,  It  may  appear  in  like  manner,  that  the 
pleafurable  imprefTions  of  the  milk  upon  the  tongue, 
moutli,  and  fauces ^  of  new-born  children,  may  ex- 
cite thofe  niotions  of  the  mufcles  of  the  tongue,  os 
hyoidcs,  foft  palate,  diudfauccsj  which  make  the  adlion 
of  deglutition  ;  and  confequently,  that  this  is  dedu- 
cible  from  fenfation  automatically. 

It  confirms  this  pofition,  that,  according  to  the 
theory  of  thefe  papers,  the  foft  palate  ought  to  be 
drawn  down  by  the  imprefTions  made  on  the  tongue 
and  mouth,  not  drawn  up ;  fince  this  laft  would  be 
to  fuppofe  the  fenfory  vibrations  to  pafs  over  mufcles 
that  are  near,  and  run  to  thofe  at  a  diftance,  which 
is  abfurd.  For  Albintis  has  proved,  both  from  ana- 
tomy, and  the  obfervation  of  the  fa(51,  that  the  foft 
palate  is  drawn  down  in  fwallowingj  not  up,  accord- 
ing to  the  opinion  of  Boerhaave. 

It  confirms  it  alfo,  that  naufeous  liquids  are  imme- 
diately and  mechanically  rejeded  by  young  children  i 
the  imprefTions  arifing  from  them  producing  fuch 
a  contra6lion  as  fhuts  the  pafTage. 

It  confirms  it  ftill  farther,  that  young  children  do 
not  fwallow  their  Jaliva.  For  this  makes  no  impref- 
fion  fufficient  to  generate  the  aflion  of  desjlutition  in 
an  automatic  way. 

We  may  conjecture  here,  that  the  common  vi- 
brations, excited  in   the  membrane  of  the  mouth  and 

faucesy 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  171 

faucesy    grow  particularly  ftrong   at   the   tip   of  the 
uvula  \    and  that   a    greater  power  of  contraflion   is 
\  tranfmitted   to  the   neighbouring  nnufcles    upon    this 
account. 

Fourthly,  It  may  be  obfcrved,  that  naufeous  taftes 
diftort  the  mouth  and  face  automatically,  not  only  in 
young  children,  but  even  in  adults.  And  for  the 
fame  reafon,  pleafant  ones  ought  to  have  a  lefs 
effeil,  of  the  fime  kind;  as  they  feem  to  have. 
And  I  conjedure,  that  the  diftortions  of  the  face, 
which  attend  grief,  alfo  the  gentle,  fmiling  motions, 
which  attend  joy,  are,  in  part,  deducible  from  this 
fource. 

I  conjefture  alfo,  that  the  rijus  Jardonius^  and  the 
tendency  to  laughter,  which  fomej)erfons  obferve  in 
themfelves  in  going  to  fleep,  have  a  relation  to  the 
forementioned  motions  of  the  face.  As  the  mufcles 
here  confidered  are,  in  great  meafure,  cutaneous,  they 
will  on  this  account,  be  more  fubjed  to  vibrations 
excited  in  the  mouth,  or  which  run  up  to  it  fiom  the 
ftomach. 

Fifthly,  It  may  eafily  be  conceived,  that  the  im- 
prefTions,  which  the  aliment  and  f^ces  make  Cipon 
the  ftomiach  and  bowels,  may  excite  the  periftaltic 
motion  in  their  mufcular  coats.  It  only  remains  to 
fhew,  why  this  Ihould  tend  downwards.  Now,  for 
this,  we  may  affign  the  following  reafons.  Firfl-, 
That  the  adlion  of  fwallowing  determines  that  of 
the  ftomach  to  move  the  fame  way  with  itfelf,  i.  e, 
downwards;  and  that  this  determination  may,  in 
common  cafes,  carry  its  influence  as  far  as  the  great 
guts.  Secondly,  That  the  contra6lion  of  the  upper 
orifice  of  the  ftomach  may  (lop  the  waves  that  fome- 
times  come  upwards  in  the  ftomach,  and  return  them 
back,  fo  as  to  force  open  the  pylorus  where  that  is 
lefs  contrafted  ;  as  on  tiie  other  hand,  where  the  fy- 
lorus  is  more  contradled  than  the  upper  orifice,  the 
motion  of  the  ftomach  is  inverted,  and  there  arifes  a 

difpofition 


172  Of  the  Senje  of  TalK\ 

difpofition  to  ruHus  or  vomiting.  Thirdly,  'J'h;u, 
when  waves  alcchd  in  the  lower  bowels,  a  gentle  con- 
tradlion  in  the  'pylorus  may  be  fufficicnt  to  flop  and 
return  them.  Fourthly,  Ihnt  one  piincipal  ufe  of 
the  cecum  and  appcndicula  vermiformis,  which  laft  is 
an  extreme  and  pointed  part,  Teems  to  be,  to  return 
the  waves,  which  the  conftridion  of  the  anus  may 
Tend  upwards.  And  the  cffefts  of  glyflers  and  fup- 
pofitones  in  procuring  ilools,  i.  e.  in  putting  the 
^vhole  colon  into  motion,  agree  wtU  with  this  ufe  of 
the  c.rcum  and  appendicnia  vermiformis.  It  agrees 
alio  with  all  the  realoning  of  this  paragraph,  that 
when  a  rtoppjge  is  made  any  where  in  the  bowels 
by  an  inflammation,  fpafm,  (Irangulation  from  a  rup- 
ture, 6i:c.  the  perjllaltic  motion  is  inverted. 

I  have  been  intcwrned,  that  in  a  perfon  who  had 
fome  inches  of  the  ilium  hanging  out  of  his  body, 
fo  that  the  periftaltic  motion  might  be  viewed,  the 
leafl:  touch  of  a  foreign  body  would  fbop  this  motion 
at  once.  It  agrees  with  this,  that  when  rabbits  are 
opened  alive,  the  periftaltic  motion  does  not  take 
place  till  after  fome  time,  viz.  becaufc  the  handling 
of  the  bowels  has  checked  it.  May  we  not  hence 
fufpecV,  that  the  fibres  of  the  mufcular  coac  of  the 
bowels  are  contra6Ved  by  an  eleflrical  virtue,  which 
paflVi  ofi^,  and  difappears  for  a  time,  upon  the  touch 
of  non-eledlrics  ?  Or  may  we  fuppofe  that  fuch 
touches  ftop  fubtle  vibrations  in  the  fmall  parts  of 
the  fibres  ? 

Sixthly,  Since  vomiting  is  excited  by  difagreeablc 
and  painful  imprefllons  in  the  ftomach,  and  requires 
the  contradlion  of  the  diaphragm,  and  abdominal 
mufcles,  it  agrees  well  with  the  notion,  that  fenfory 
vibrations  run  into  the  neighbouring  mufcles  for  con- 
tracting them.  1  fuppofe  aifo,  that  both  orifices  of 
the  ftomach  are  ftrongly  contracted,  previoufly  to 
vomiting;  and  that  the  upper  orifice,  being  moft 
fenfible,    is    contrafted    molt   ftrongly.      Hence   its 

power 


Of  the  Sen/e  of  Tafte.  173 

power  of  contradion  may  be  foon  exhaufted,  and 
confequently  it  may  open  of  itfelf  in  the  adion  of 
vomiting.  However,  it  may,  in  Tome  cafes,  re- 
quire to  be  forced  open  by  .the  fnperior  aftion  of 
the  diaphragm,  and  abdominal  mufcles.  Almoft  all 
great  pains  and  diforders  in  the  lower  belly  occafion 
vomiting  J  which  is  very  agreeable  to  the  foregoing 
notion. 

The  nofe  itches,  the  mouth  flows  with  water,  the 
lower  lip  trembles,  both  are  pale,  and  the  perfon 
yawns,  previoufly  to  vomiting,  in  many  cafes ;  all 
which  things  favour  the  notion  of  vibrations  running 
freely  along  the  fuifaces  of  membranes. 

RvMus,  or  the  expulfion  of  wind  from  the  fto- 
mach,  is  nearly  related  to  vomiting,  differing  rather 
in  degree  than  kind;  Its  fuitablenefs  therefore  to  the 
theory  of  thefe  papers  muft  be  judged  of  from  what 
has  been  advanced  concerning  vomiting. 

The  hiccough  is  alfo  related  to  vomiting.  It  is 
fuppofed  to  proceed  from  an  irritation  at  the  upper 
orifice  of  the  ftomach,  caufmg  a  fudden  contradlion 
of  the  diaphragm,  fo  as  to  pull  down  the  pharynx 
and  larynx  after  it.  May  it  not  rather  be  a  fudden 
contra(5tion  of  the  inferior  or  fmall  mufcle  of  the 
diaphragm  only  ^  This  is  particularly  near  the  fup- 
pofed feat  of  irritation;  and  upon  this  fuppoficion, 
fneezing,  furprize,  and  ail  other  methods  of  making 
the  v/hole  diaphragm  a6t  together  ftrongly,  would 
remove  it,  as  is  oblerved  in  fad. 

Seventhly,  Permanent  fpafms,  and  violent  mo- 
tions, in  the  bowels,  arife  in  confequence  of  uneafy 
and  painful  imprelTions, there  from  indigefted  aliment, 
acrid /^i-^j,  irritating  purges,  poifons,  &c.  They  are 
2;enerailv  atrtnded  with  the  fermentation  of  the  con- 
tents  of  the  bowels,  and  the  confequent  generation  of 
air ;  which,  when  confined  by  a  fpafm  on  each  hand, 
diftends  the  intermediate  part  of  the  bowel  often  to  an 
exceiTive  degree,-  caufmg   a   proportional   degree   of 

painful 


pjinful  vibrations.  If  wc  fiippofc  tlicfe  vibrations  to 
check  themrdves  all  at  once,  by  occafioning  a  fuddcn 
contraction  in  the  affc«fled  membrane,  they  aiay  be 
propagated  over  the  whole  nervous  fyftem  inllan- 
taneoully,  and  give  rile  to  the  convuifion  tits,  which 
happen  to  young  chiklien  fiom  gripes,  and  dillen- 
tion  of  the  Itomach  and  bowels,  and  to  adults, 
from  poifon";,  ^.tc.  This  is  upon  fuppofition,  that 
neither  fpafm  gives  way ;  for,  if  either  does,  the 
pain  goes  off,  for  a  time  at  Icaft,  without  farther  ill 
fymptoms.  Such  pains  in  the  bowels  refemble  thofe 
in  the  bladder,  wlien  the  detrujor  and  Jph'mbler  are 
both  contraded  violently  at  the  fame  time,  by  the 
irritation  of  a  ftone.  The  flomach,  the  gall  bladder, 
and  re^iu/iiy  all  feem  capable  of  like  contradions  in 
mufcular  fibres,  that  have  oppofite  anions.  The 
caufes  of  all  thefe  fpalms  and  motions  are  evidently 
the  impreffions  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  their  cir- 
cumftances  are,  at  firft  fight,  agreeable  to  the  theory 
of  thefe  papers. 

Eighthly,  The  glands  belonging  to  the  mouth, 
and  alimentary  dud,  appear  to  me  to  be  emptied,  not 
only  by  the  comprefllon,  which  the  neighbouring 
mufcles  and  mufcular  fibres  make  upon  them,  but 
alfo  by  the  fenfory  vibrations  which  run  up  their  ex- 
cretory duds,  into  iht  follicidiy  and  receptacles  where 
there  are  fuch,  and  ev^n  into  the  fecretory  duds  j  by 
which  the  pcriflakic  motion  of  all  thefe  is  increafed, 
fo  as  bo:h  to  receive  more  freely  from  the  blood 
during  their  ftate  of  relaxation,  and  to  fqueeze  more 
ftrongly  through  the  excretory  duds  during  their  flate 
of  contradion.  Thus  tobacco,  -pyrethrumy  and 
other  acrids,  folicit  a  profufe  difcharge  from  the 
falival  glands,  by  being  barely  kept  in  the  rnouth, 
i.  e.  though  the  neighbouring  mufcles  do  not  fqueeze 
the  glands  by  the  adion  of  maftication.  Thus  like- 
wife  vomits  and  purges  increafe  both  the  fecretions 
of  all  the  glands  of  the  inteftines,  and  thofe  of  the 

liver 


Of  the  Senje  of  Tafte.  17^ 

liver  and  -pancreas.  It  may  be  alfo,  that  the  vibra- 
tions which  run  up  the  gall-dudl  are  fometimes  fo 
ftrong  as  to  occafion  a  fpafm  there  j  in  which  cafe,  if 
the  patient  vomits  at  the  fame  time,  a  fymptomatic 
and  temporary  jaundice  may  follow. 

Ninthly,  The  expulfion  of  the  faces  in  new-born 
children  is  perfe6lly  automatic,  and  feems  to  follow 
even  from  very  gentle  compreffions  of  the  abdom.inal 
mufcles,  when  the  re£fum  is  full,  inafmuch  as  the 
fphin£fer  ani  has  in  them  fcarce  any  force.  The 
fame  may  be  faid  of  the  expulfion  of  the  urine,  the 
fphin5fer  vefic^e  being  alfo  very  weak  in  new-born 
children.  To  which  we  may  add,  that  the  leaft 
irritation  from  fulnefs  or  acrimony  in  the  return  or 
bladder  throws  the  abdominal  mufcles  into  contrac- 
tion in  young  children,  both  on  account  of  the  ex- 
treme fenfibility  and  irritability  of  their  whole  ner- 
vous fyftcms,  and  becaufe  they  have,  as  yet,  no 
alTociated  influences  over  the  mufcles  of  the  abdomen, 
whereby  to  reftrain  their  contraflions. 

As  the  fphinfters  of  the  re5lum  and  bladder  gain 
flrength,  more  force  is  required  to  expel  the  faces 
and  urine.  However,  it  appears,  that  thefe  mufcles 
ufually  exhauft  themfelves,  previoufly  to  the  inftant 
of  expulfion,  thus  giving  free  fcope  to  their  anta- 
gonifts.  .For,  according  to  theory,  they  ought  to  be 
contradled  fooner  and  ftronger  than  their  antagonifts, 
as  being  nearer  to  the  feat  of  irritation. 

The  adbons  of  vomiting,  and  expulfion  of  the 
faces^  are  very  nearly  related  to  one  another  in  their 
automatic  ftate.  However,  it  feems  to  me,  that  an 
irritation  in  the  ftomach  produces  only  a  gentle  con- 
tradion  in  the  Jphinoier  ani^  viz.  fuch  .1  one  as  does 
not  exhauft  its  power,  and  which  therefore  tends  to 
confine  the  faces.  In  like  manner,  an  irritation  in 
the  re£lum  may  gently  contrad  the  upper  orifice  of 
the  llomach.  It  defer ves  notice  here,  that  the 
fphin^er  ani  lies  out  of  the  pritonaum ;  and  confe- 

quently. 


1^6  Of  the  Senjc  of  Taftc. 

quently,    that   vibrations   cannot   run   liom   it  to  the 
orifice  of  tlie  Oomach  along  tlie  periion<cumy  nor  vice 
verfa.     'I'he  lame  ohfcrvation  holds  in  rcJpcfl  of  the 
fpi?vUJer  of  the  blatkler. 

The  cticumftnnccs   attending   the  exclulion  of  the 
fcetus^  which  continues  automatic  peifcdly   or   nearly, 
may  be  mucli    illuftrated   by    what  is  here   delivered 
concerning  the  expulfion  ot  \\\\:  f.eces. 


V  R  O  P.     XLVII. 

To  explain  the  Manner  and  Degree  in  which  the  automa- 
tic AElionSy  mentimicd  under  the  lafl  Propofuion,  arc 
influenced  by  voluntary  andjemivoluntary  Powers. 

"When  young  children  continue  to  fuck,  or  maf- 
ticate  a  taftelcfs  body  put  between  their  lips,  or 
into  their  mouths,  we  may  conceive,  that  the  adtions 
of  fudion  and  maftication  brgin  to  pafs  from  their 
automatic  towards  their  voluntary  ftate.  Driii!'-ng 
out  of  a  velTcl,  fo  as  to  draw  up  the  liquid,  is  learnt, 
in  part,  from  fucking  the  bread,  in  moft  cafes  j  but 
it  may  be  learnt  without,  as  is  evident  in  thofe  chil- 
dren that  are  dry-nurfed.  Maftication,  when  it  ap- 
proaches to  a  perfect  ftate  in  children,  is  chiefly  vo- 
luntary, the  fir  ft  rudiments  receiving  perpetual 
changes,  fo  as  to  fall  in  more  and  more  with  pleafurc 
and  convenience.  See  Prop.  11.  Ccr.  i.  In  aduhs, 
both  fuction  and  maftication  follow  the  command  of 
the  will  with  entire  readinefs  and  facility.  The  man- 
ner in  which  this  is  cfTcded  has  been  already  explained 
in  treating  of  the  voluntary  power  of  grafping. 

Deglutition  of  infipid  liquors  becomes  voluntary 
early.  But  it  is  difficult,  even  for  fom.e  adults,  to 
fwallow  pills  and  bolufes,  though  taftclefs ;  and  very 
naufeous  liquids  are  fometimes  rejeded  by  them  au- 
tomaticallv,    as    well    a^    by   young   children.      The 

action 


Of  the  S,enfe  of  Tafte.  177 

a6lion  of  deglutition  affords  manifefl:  evidences  of 
the  gradual  tranfition  of  automatic  motions  into  vo- 
luntary ones,  as  well  as  of  voluntary  ones  into  fuch 
as  are  fecondarily  automatic.  For,  in  common  cafes, 
we  fwallow  without  the  lead  exprefs  intention. 

When  the  face  of  a  child  or  adult  is  diftorted  upon 
the  fight  of  a  naufeous  medicine,  which  has  before 
produced  diftortions  automatically,  /,  e.  from  the 
impreflions  mdAt  on  the  mouth  and  fauces^  we  fee  an 
evident  inftance  of  the  power  of  aflbciated  circum*- 
ftances  j  and  may  have  the  conception  of  voluntary 
powers,  derived  from  a  fucceflion  of  fuch  aflbciations, 
made  eafy  to  the  imagination. 

The  periftakic  motion  of  the  ftomach  and  bowels 
remains  automatic  to  the  laft,  depending  pardy  on 
the  vibrations  defcending  from  the  brain,  partly  on  the 
imprefTions  made  on  the  villous  coat.  It  cannot  de- 
pend on  aflbciated  circumftances  in  its  common  ftate, 
becaufe,  being  perpetual,  it  is  equally  aflbciated  with 
every  thing,  i.  e.  particularly  fo  with  nothing. 
However,  as  grateful  aliments  increafe  it,  the  fight 
of  them  may  do  the  fame  by  aflbciation.  Could  we 
fee  our  ftomachs  and  bowels,  it  is  probable,  that 
we  fliould  get  fome  degree  of  voluntary  power  over 
jhem. 

Vomiting  is  fometimes,  and  a  naufea  often,  excited 
by  affociated  circumftances  j  and  there  have  been 
inftances  of  perfons  who  could  vomit  at  pleafure,  by 
firft  introducing  fome  of  thefe.  But,  1  fuppofe,  this 
aftion  never  follows  the  mere  commjand  of  the  will, 
without  the  intervention  of  fome  ftrong  aflbciated 
circumftance.  We  have,  in  like  manner,  a  femi- 
voluntary  power  of  reftraining  voiniting,  for  a  time 
at  leaft,  by  means  of  ideas  of  decency,  fhame, 
fear,  &c. 

Some  perfons  have  a  power  of  expelling  flatulen- 
cies from  the  ftomach  in  a  manner  which  is  almoft 
voluntary  j  and  many  imitate  an  automatic  hiccough 
Vol.  I.  N  verv 


f 

178  0/ (be  Soi/e  0/ Tadc.  tl 

very  cxaflly.  It  facilitates  thefe  powers,  that  both 
tlic  motions  here  confidertd  are  very  frequent,  ef- 
pccially  ciuVing  childhood.  'I'hofe  who  can  hic- 
cough voluntarily,  attain  to  it  by  repeated  trials,  as 
in  other  cafes  of  voluntary  adions. 

The  fpafms,  and  violent  nnotions  of  the  bowels, 
cannot  be  expeiflcd  to  become  voluntary.  They  do, 
however,  feein  to  return,  in  many  cafes,  from  leis 
and  Icfs  bodily  caufes  perpetually,  on  account  of  aflb- 
ciated  circumftances,  as  has  been  already  remarked. 

In  like  manner,  the  vibrations  which  run  up  the  a. 
excretory  du«5ls  of  the  glands,  mull  be  fuppofed  to^s 
remain  totally  under  the  influence  of  their  original 
caufes  J  unlefs  we  except  the  contraftion  of  the 
gall-du6l,  which  happens  fometimes  in  violent  fits 
of  angei".  This  may  perhaps  arife  from  vibrations 
excited  by  airociated  circumftances. 

Both  the  power  of  exptlling  the  faeces  and  urine, 
and  that  of  checking  this  expulfion,  are  under  the 
influence  of  many  alFociated  ci'cumftances,  and  vo- 
luntary to  a  confiderable  degree.  And  it  will  eafily 
appear,  from  the  principles  of  this  theory,  that  they 
ought  to  be  fo.  The  filling  the  cheft  with  air  by  the 
contra(ftion  of  the  mufcles  of  infpiration,  is  a  cir- 
cumftance  which  never  atrends  thcfe  adions  in  their 
purely  automatic  ftate.  Young  children  learn  it  by 
the  fame  fleps  as  they  do  other  methods  of  exerting 
the  greateft  force,  and  to  the  greatelt  advantage. 
See  Prop.  22.   Co?:  i. 

It  deferves  notice  here,  that  the  aftion  of  the 
mufcular  coat  of  the  ftomach  and  inteftines  is  far  lefs 
fubjed  to  the  power  of  the  will,  than  that  of  the  great 
fiefhy  mufcles  of  the  trunk  and  limbs.  The  efficient 
caufe  of  this  is  the  "great  and  immediate  dependence 
which  the  adion  of  the  mufcular  coat  has  upon  th» 
fenfations  of  the  villous,  on  account  of  the  exquifite-' 
nefs  of  thefe  fenfations,  their  conftant  recurrency,  and 
the  contiguity  of  the  coats.     'And  there  is  a  perfeft 


i? 


i 


agreement 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Tafte.  179 


agreement    of    the    final    caufe    with    the   efficient         4 

here,    as    in    other   cafes.      For   any   great   degree 

,     of    voluntary    power    over    the    inufcuiar    coat   of 

,^   the   bowels   would    much   difturb    the    digeftion   of 

f    the   aliment   as   thofe   nervous     perfons    experience, 

who  are  fo  unhappy  as  to  be  exceptions  to  the 
'    general  rule,  through  the  influence  of  aflbciated  cir-- 

eumftances. 


.jjm^ 


i        ^* 


N  a  SECT, 


iSo  OJ  the  St'ft/e  of  Smell. 

SECT.     III. 

Ol-     THE    SENSE    OF     SMELL. 

P  R  O  r.     XLVIII. 

To  ajftgn  the  Extent  of  the  Organ  of  Smelly  antl  to 
explain  in  general  the  different  Powers  of  which  it  ii 
f>o(TeiTcd, 


Smell  may  be  diftinguiflied  into  two  forts  : 
firft,  that  exquifite  fenfation,  which  odoriferous 
bodies  imprefs  upon  the  nofe  by  means  of  alternate 
infpiration.  This  is  fmcll,  in  the  peculiar  and  moft 
proper  fenfe  of  the  word  j  and  it  refides  chiefly, 
or  perhaps  entirely,  in  that  part  of  the  pituitary  mem-  , 
brane  which  inverts  the  cells  of  the  ojfa  Jpongiofa. 
Secondly,  That  fenfation  or  flavour,  which  mofl:  kinds 
of  aliment  and  medicines  imprefs  upon  the  whole 
pituitary  membrane  during  mailication,  and  juft  after 
deglutition.  And  this  lad  makes  a  principal  part  of 
the  pleafures  and  pains  which  are  ufually  referred  to  the 
tafte.  For  when  a  perfon  has  a  cold,  i.  e.  when  the 
pituitary  membrane  is  obfl:ru(fled  and  loaded  with 
mucusy  meats  lofe  their  agreeable  flavours  j  and  the 
fame  thing  happens  in  a  polypus  Jiarium. 

Befides  this,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  the  pituitary 
membrane  has  an  exquifite  fenfibility,  which  may  be 
referred  to  the  head  of  feeling.  For  aftive  powders, 
/.  e.  fternutatories,  feem  to  irritate  the  membrane  of 
the  nofe  in  the  fame  way,  as  they  do  a  part  of  the 
(kin  deprived  of  the  cuticle,  only  in  a  greater  degree, y 
and  more  iinmediately.  And  thus  fmells  thcmfelves*" 
may  be  referred  to  the  head  of  feeling;  fince  ftrong 
fmells  are  often  obferved  to  occafion  fneezing. 

It  may  alfo  be  remarked,    that  as  the  organ   of 
feeling  paflcs  infenfibly  into  that  of  tafte,  fo  the  organ 

of 


c 


Of  the  Senje  of  Smell.  i8i 

of  tafte  does  into  that  of  fmell.  And  thefe  three 
fenfes  have  a  much  greater  rt- femblance  to  one  ano- 
ther, than  any  of  them  has  to  the  fight,  or  to  the 
hearings  or  than  the  fight  and  hearing  have  to  each 
other.  However,  the  organ  of  feeling  is  diftinguifhed 
froni  that  of  tafte  by  its  being  covered  with  the  hard 
cuticle,  and  the  organ  of  tafte  from  that  of  fmcU 
by  the  laft's  being  extended  upon  bones ;  fo  as  to  be 
much  more  fenfible  and  irritable  upon  that  account. 
To  which  we  may  add,  that  as  a  watery  fluid  is  the 
proper  menjlruum  for  the  diflblution  of  fapid  par- 
ticles, and  conveyance  of  their  taftes,  fo  fmells  feem 
to  make  their  imprefllons  by  means  of  air-particles. 


PROP.    XLIX. 

To  examine  how  far  the  general  Phcenomena  of  Smell 
are  agreeable  to  the  Do^rine  of  Vibrations, 

Here  we  may  obferve,  firft,  that,  fince  the  fmells 
of  bodies  diffufe  themlelves  in  general  to  great  dis- 
tances, and  in  fome  cafes  to  immenfe  ones,  the  odo- 
riferous particles  muft  repel  each  other ;  and  con- 
fequently  be  eafily  fufceptible  of  vibratory  motions, 
'for  the  fame  reafons  as  the  particles  of  common  air, 
or  thofe  of  the  asther.  We  may  even  fuppofe,  that 
odoriferous  particles  are  thrown  off  by  vibratory  mo- 
tions in  the  body  that-emits  them. 

May  not,  however,  the  odoriferous  particles  be 
attracted  by  the  body  which  emits  them,  after  they 
thave  receded  from  it  to  a  certain  diftance,  and  io 
follow  it,  in  fome  meafure,  like  an  atm.ofphere  ?  It 
is  hard  to  account  for  the  fmall  or  no  diminution  of 
weight  in  odoriferous  bodies,  after  they  have  con- 
tinued to  emit  fmells  for  a  long  time,  but  upon  fome 
fuch  fuppofition. 

N  3  Secondly, 


i8i  Of  the  Senje  of  Smell. 

Secondly,    Ht-ar,    friflion,    and  tffervefcence,    are 
all   very  apt   to  excicc  and  incTcafe  iniells ;  and  have 
all   a   connc(5tion  with  vibratory  motions  in  the  judg-  ^\ 
mcntofmolt  philofophcrs. 

Thirdly,  Since  lieat  and  fridion  excite  and  increafe 
fmells,  thefe  may  have  iome  conntrdion  vvith  elec- 
tricity j  which  is  fuppoled  by  many  philofophers  to 
depend  u[>on  vibratory  motions.  And  as  air-particles 
are  elccJrics  per  fe^  they  may  have,  on  this  account, 
a  peculiar  tkncfs  for  conveying  and  imprelTing  fmells. 
May  not  air-particles,  and  odoriferous  ones,  repel 
each  other  ? 

Fourthly,  It  is  ufual,  when  we  defire  to  receive  a 
fmell  in  full  ilrength  and  perfedion,  to  make  quick, 
fhorr,  alternate  infpirations  and  expirations.  This 
corrcfponds  to  the  rubbing  the  ends  of  the  fingers 
upon  the  body  to  be  examined  by  feeling,  and  the 
tongue  againll  the  palate  in  tailing.  And  all  thefc 
three  adions  appear  to  be  fome  prefumption  in  favour 
of  the  doctrine  of  vibrations. 

Fifthly,  The  greatnefs  and  quicknefs  of  the  efFeft 
of  odours  upon  the  whole  nervous  fyftem  feem  very 
fuitable  to  the  dodrine  of  vibrations.  For  this  mud 
be  owing  to  the  mere  imprellion  of  fome  motion, 
thrre  not  being  time  for  the  abforption  of  particles 
fufficient  for  the  cffcd  produced.  When  fweet  fmells 
caufe  a  fudden  faintnefs,  and  deliquium  animiy  they 
may  perhaps  agitate  the  whole  fyftem  of  fmall  me- 
dullary particles  fo  much,  as  to  make  them  attrad  each 
other  with  fufficient  force  to  flop  all  vibratory  mo- 
tions ^  juft  as  has  been  obferved  of  the  particles  of 
mufcular  and  membranous  fibres.  And  the  fmells  to 
which  a  perfon  has  an  antipathy,  may  have  been  ori- 
ginally fweet,  or  lie  fo  near  the  confines  of  pleafure, 
as  to  propagate  their  vibrations  much  farther  than 
original  fctids  can.  For  thefe  feem  to  revive  from 
fainting  by  making  a  vigorous  impreffion  on  the  nofe, 
which  yet  is  not  propagated  freely  over  the  whole 

•    fyftem  i 


Of  the  Senje  of  Smell,.  183 

iyftem;  or,  if  it  be,  will  occafion  immediate  fick- 
nefs  and  fainting.  Fetids  in  this  refemble  other  pains, 
which,  if  moderate,  excite;  if  very  violent,  over- 
power. 

If  it  be  objedled  to  this,  that  fuch  fragrant  fmells, 
as  a  perfon  has  an  antipathy  to,  are  difagreeable  to 
him  in  the  higheft  degree,  and  that  upon  the  firfi: 
perception;  alfo  that  the  fmdl  of  thofe  fetids,  which 
revive,  as  of  aja  fceiida,  fpirit  of  harcfhorn,  &c.  is 
agreeable  to  many ;  1  anfwer,  that  thefe  two  oppo- 
.fite  changes  feem  to  arife  merely  from  aflbciation. 
The  faintncfs  and  revival,  attending  thefe  fmells 
refpedlively,  muft,  by  aflTociation,  transfer  the  vefti- 
ges  and  miniatures  of  themfclves  upon  the  firft  per- 
ception of  the  fm.eils,  whofc  aflbciates  they  are. 

Sixthly,  It  is  agreeable  to  the  notion  of  vibrations, 
that  fpirituous  liquors,  and  opium,  fhould  produce 
their  appropriated  effeds  by  Imeli,  as  well  as  by 
being  taken  into  the  ftomach,  as  they  are  found  to  do 
in  fadt.  For,  if  thefe  effects  arife  fi-om  fpecific  vi- 
brations, the  mere  impreffion  of  fmall  adive  particles 
may  be  fufficient  for  the  purpofe  of  producing  them. 
We  muft,  however,  fuppofe  that  the  exhalations  of 
odoriferous  bodies  are  imbibed  in  fome  fmall  degree 
'Ky^  the  abforbing  vefTels  of  the  membrana  Jclmeidenana. 
We  might  fliew  by  parity  of  reafon,  that  the  great 
fubtlety  of  odoriferous  effluvia  favours  the  dodrine 
of  vibrations. 

Though  odoriferous  particles  are  more  fubtle  than 
the  fapid  ones,  yet  they  are  perhaps  groffer  than  the 
rays  of  light.  For  the  fmoke  of  a  tallow  candle  ceafes' 
to  fmell,  when  it  begins  to  fhine,  i.  e.  when  it  is  more 
attenuated  by  heat.  Since  therefore  the  vibrations 
from  heat  are  probably  fmaller  than  thofe  from  light, 
we  may  range  the  vibrations  of  the  medullary  fubftanc^ 
in  the  following  order,  in  refpecl  of  fubtlety  ;  heat, 
light,  fmell,  taftes,  tangible  imprefiions,  and  the  vibra- 
tions of  the  air,  from  which  found  arifes.     But  it  is  to 

N  4  b^t 


1 84  Of  the  Senjd  of  Smell. 

be  obfcrvcd,  that  ihcfc  lall  may  excite  much  more 
frequent  vibrations  in  the  auditory  nerve,  than  thofe 
of  the  founding  body,  to  which  they  correfpond : 
iuft  as  the  vibrations  from  fricflion  are  much  more 
numerous,  than  the  ftiokes  of  fricflion  j  and  the  tre- 
mors of  liic  particles  of  an  anvil  much  more  numer- 
ous, than  the  (Irokes  of  the  hainmcr. 


PRO  P.     1.. 

I'd  examine  bow  fay  the  Jpccific  Differences  of  Odours 
are  agreeable  to  the  Do^lrine  of  Fibralions, 

This  propofition  is  analogous  to  the  thirty-eighth, 
in  which  the  agreement  of  the  fpecific  differences 
of  tatles  with  the  do(5lrine  of  vibrations  is  confidercd  ; 
and  may  be  illuftrated  by  it.  One  may  fay  indeed, 
that  tafte  and  fmell  are  fo  nearly  allied  to  each  other, 
that,  if  one  be  performed  by  vibrations,  the  other 
muft  alfo.     I  will  repeat  two  principal  obfervations. 

Firft,  If  the  varieties  of  kind  in  vibrations  be  com- 
bined with  thofe  of  degree,  we  fhall  have  a  large  fund 
for  explaining  the  various  fragrant  and  fetid  fmells, 
notwithftanding  that  the  firft  always  agree  in  falling 
Ihort  of  the  folution  of  continuity,  the  laft  in  going 
beyond  it. 

Secondly,  The  differences  of  kind  in  fmells  are 
not  fo  many  as  may  appear  at  firft  fight,  a  difference 
in  degree  often  putting  on  the  appearance  of  one  in 
kind.  Thus  an  onion  cut  frefti,  and  held  clofe  to' 
the  nofe,  fmells  very  like  afa  fcetida  j  and  afa  fcetiday 
in  an  evanefcent  degree,  like  onion  or  garlic.  Thus 
a  dunghill  at  a  diftance  has  fmelt  like  mufk,  and  a 
dead  dog  like  elder-fiowers.  And  fetids  are  faid  to 
enhance  the  flavour  of  fragrants.  The  three  laft  in- 
ftances  ftiew,  that  pleafure  and  pain  are  very  nearly 
allied  to  one  another  in  this  fcnfe  alfo. 

PROP. 


Of  the  Senje  of  Smell.  185 


PROP.     LI. 

^0  explain  in  what  Manner^  ^nd  to  what  Degree^ 
fleajant  and  unpleajant  Odours  contribute^  in  the 
Way  of  Affodation^  to  form  our  intelle^ual  Pleafures 
and  Pains, 

It  will  be  evident,  upon  a  nnoderate  attention,  that 
the  grateful  fcnells,  with  which  natural  produdlions 
abound,  have  a  great  (hare  in  enlivening  nnany  of  our 
ideas,  and  in  the  generation  of  our  intelledlual  plea- 
fures j  which  holds  particularly  in  refpeft  of  thofe  that 
arife  from  the  view  of  rural  objeds  and  fcenes,  and 
from  the  reprefentations  of  them  by  poetry  and  paint- 
ing. This  fource  of  thefe  pleafures  may  not  indeed 
be  eafy  to  be  traced  up  in  all  the  particular  cafes ;  but 
that  it  is  a  fource,  follows  neceffarily  from  the  power 
of  aflbciation. 

In  like  manner,  the  mental  uneafintfs,  which  at- 
tends (hame,  ideas  of  indecency,  &c.  arifes  in  a  con- 
fidcrable  degree,  from  the  offenfive  fmells  of  the  ex- 
crementitious  difcharges  of  animal  bodies.  And  it 
is  remarkable  in  this  view,  that  the  pudenda  are  fitu- 
ated  near  the  palTages  of  the  urine  and  faces,  the 
two  mod  offenfive  of  our  excrements. 

We  may  fuppofe  the  intellectual  pleafures  and  pains, 
which  are  deducible  from  the  flavours,  grateful  and 
ungrateful,  that  afcend  behind  the  wvula  into  .the  nofe 
during  maftication,  and  juft  ar'ter  deglutition,  to  have 
been  confidered  in  the  lad  fedlion  under  the  head  of 
tafte,  fince  thefe  flavours  are  always  efteemed  a  part 
of  the  talles  of  aliments  and  medicines.  And  in- 
deed the  olfaftory  nerves  feem  to  have  as  great  a  fliare 
in  conveying  to  us  both  the  original  and  derivative 
pleafures,  which  are  referred  to  the  tafte,  as  the  nerves 
of  the  tongue ;  which  may  help  us  to  account  for  the 
largenefs  of  thofe  nerves  in    men,    to   whom   fmell, 

properly 


1 86  Of  the  Senje  c/ Smell. 

properly  fo  called,  is  of  far  lefs  confcquence  than  any 
other  of  the  fcnfcs,  and  tafte  of  the  grcatcft,  while 
yet  tiie  nerves  of  tafte  are  comparatively  fmall. 

We  may  add  here,  that  the  fmcll  is  a  guide  and 
guard  placed  Ix-fore  the  tafte,  as  that  is  before  the 
llomacli,  in  a  great  degree  in  men,  but  much  more 
fo  in  brutes,  who  have  Icarce  any  other  means,  than 
that  of  fmcll,  whereby  to  diftinguilh  what  foods  are 
proper  for  them.  It  is  jikewife  probable,  that  the 
fmell  is  a  guard  to  the  lungs ;  and  that  the  grateful 
odours  of  flowers,  fruits,  and  vegetable  produdions, 
in  general,  are  an  indication  of  the  wholefomenefs 
of  country  air ;  as  the  offenfivenefs  of  putrefadion, 
fulphureous  fumes,  &c.  warn  us  beforehand  of  their 
mifchievous  effedls  upon  the  lungs.  However,  the 
rule  is  not  univerfal  in  either  cafe. 

PROP.     LII. 

yb  give  an  Account  of  the  Ideas  generated  by  the  fever  al 

Odours. 

What  has  been  delivered  concerning  the  ideas 
of  feeling  and  tafte,  may  be  applied  to  the  fmell. 
We  cannot,  by  the  power  of  our  will  or  fancy,  raile 
up  any  miniatures  or  ideas  of  particular  fmelK,  fo  as 
to  perceive  them  evidently.  However,  the  aflfociated 
circumftances  feem  to  have  fome  power  of  afteding 
the  organ  of  fmell,  and  the  correfponding  part  of 
the  brain,  in  a  particular  manner  j  whence  we  are 
prepared  to  receive  and  diftinguifti  the  feveral  fmells 
more  readiJy,  and  more  accurately,  on  account  of  the 
previous  influence  of  thefe  aflTociated  circumftances. 
And,  converfejy,  the  aftual  fmelis  of  natural  bodies  * 
enable  us  to  determine  them,  though  wc  do  not  fee 
them,  always  negatively,  and  often  pofitively,  i.  e, 
^y  ^^Jggtft'ng  their  names,  and  viflble  appearances. 
And,  when  we  are  at  a  lofs  in  the  laft  refped,  the 

name    % 


Of  the  Senje  of  Smell.  187 

name  or  vifible  appearance  of  the  body  will  immedi- 
ately revive  the  connediorir 

PROP.     LIII. 

'To  explain  the  automatic  Motions j  which  arije  from  the 
ImpreJJions  made  on  the  Organ  of  Smell. 

THESE-automatic  motions  are  of  three  kinds,  viz. 
the  infpiration,  by  which  young  brute  animals,  efpe- 
cially  quadrupeds,  iinprefs  and  increafe  the  odours 
of  their  refpeftive  foods ;  the  contradlion  oi  i\\t  fauces y 
and  upper  part  of  the  gullet,  which  arifes  from  thofe 
agreeable  flavours,  which  afccnd  behind  the  uvula 
into  the  nofcj  and  the  adion  of  fneezing. 

As  to  the  firftj  it  is  peculiar  to  brutes,  children 
not  iifing  any  methods  of  improving  odours,  till  they 
are  arrived  at  two  or  three  years  of  age.  The  reafons 
of  this  difference  may  be,  that  the  fmell  in  many 
brutes  is  the  leading  fenfe ;  that  their  nofes  are  long 
and  large,  and  the  ojfa  fpongioja  hollowed  by  innumer- 
able cells  i  whereas  in  young  children  the  nole  is 
depreffed  ;  the  pituitary  membrane  loaded  with  mu- 
cus ;  and,  when  they  grow  up,  the  acutenefs  of  their 
fmell  is  far  inferior  to  that  of  quadrupeds. 

If  it  be  faid,  that  this  action  is  not  automatic  in 
brutes,  but  an  inftind,  which  they  bring  into  the 
world  with  them;  1  anfwer,  that  the  nearnefs  of  the 
mufcles  affefted,  viz.  thofe  which  dilate  the  nofe, 
larynxy  and  lungs,  to  the  feat  of  the  impreflion, 
makes  it  probable,  that  the  motion  depends  upon 
the  fenfation,  as  in  other  inftances  mentioned  in  thefe 
papers,  fome  of  which  are  allowed  by  all. 

It  may  be,  that  fomething  of  the  fame  kind  takes 
place  in  young  children-,  as  foon  as  their  fmell  begins 
to  be  fufficienily  acute.  But  it  is  fo  mixed  with, 
and  modelled  by,  voluntary  motions,  as  to  be  fepa- 
rately  indifcernible. 

The 


I  Si)  Of  the  Senje  of  Smell. 

The  li-Tond  irjotion,  or  tlie  coniradion  of  the 
fauccsy  ami  upper  part  of  the  oefopha^usy  from  the 
gi;iceful  tl.ivours  which  afcend  up  into  the  nollnis  be- 
hind the  uvuhiy  is  part  of  the  a(51ion  of  deglutition; 
but  it  could  not  propeily  be  mentioned  in  the  laft  fee- 
lion,  becaufc  it  arifes  from  a  fenfation  rcfencd  to  this. 

Llngrateful  llavours  have  often  a  contrary  efledl, 
and  extend  their  influence  fo  far  as  to  pieclude  the 
pallige  through  the  gullet,  and  even  throw  Jjack  the 
ungrateful  liquid  or  morfcl  with  violence.  And  we 
may  obferve,  that,  in  many  other  cafes  alfo,  whert 
the  pleafure  palfes  into  pain,  the  automatic  motion 
thereon  depending  pafies  into  one  of  an  oppofite  na- 
ture; jull  as  in  algebra,  when  an  affirmative  quan- 
tity in  the  Jala  is  changed  into  a  negative  one,  a 
like  change  is  to  be  made  fomctimes,  and  yet  not 
always,  in  the  conclufion. 

It  deferves  notice  here,  that  pinching  the  nofe 
prevents  the  perception  of  thefe  flavours,  as  it  fecms, 
by  checking  the  vibrations,  which  would  run  along 
the  pituitary  membrane.  When  the  flavours  are 
very  pungent,  they  fix  in  the  tip  of  the  nofe ;  or,  if 
this  be  hindered  by  pinching  the  nofe,  they  fly  to 
the  uvula,  which  is  the  neareft  extreme  part  to  this. 

In  like  manner,  pinching  the  nofe,  or  prefllng  the 
lacrymal  bag,  whofe  membrane  is  continuous  to  the 
pituitary  one,  checks  the  fenfation  that  gives  rife  to 
fneezing.  And  when  looking  at  a  ftrong  light  ex- 
cites this  adion,  or  acrid  vapours  make  the  eyes 
water,  we  may  conjeflure,  that  vibrations  pafs  through 
the  lacrymal  dudt  from  the  eye  to  the  nofe  in  the 
firft  cafe,  and  from  the  nofe  to  the  eye  in  the  laft. 
The  watering  of  the  eyes  from  drinking  haftily, 
efpecially  pungent  liquors,  from  plucking  a  hair  out 
of  the  noftrils,  and  from  fternutatories,  admit  of  a 
like  explication. 

And  thefe  inftances  may  help  to  explain  the  fenfa- 
rions  in  the  fauces,  uvula^  and  tip  of  the  nofe,  alfo 

the 


Of  the  Senfe  cf  Smell.  189 

ihe  flowing  of  tears  from  the  eyes,  which  attend 
orief.  I  conjedure  that  the  ftomach  is  particularly 
affefted  in  grief;  and  that  it  fends  up  vibrations, 
along  the  common  membrane,  to  the  fauces,  uvu/a, 
tip  of  the  nofe,  and  eyes.  However,  the  diforder 
of  the  medullary  fubltance  is  great  and  general  in 
great  mental  uneafinefles.. 

As  to  fneezing  j  no  one  can  doubt  its  being  au- 
tomatic. ^  And  ic  is  reafonable  to  exped,  that  the 
rrufcies  actually  concerned  in  ic,  viz.  thofe  of  in- 
fpiration,  and  the  ere<5lors  of  the  head  and  neck, 
fhould  be  affcfted  by  vivid  fenfations  in  the  pituitary 
membrane.  It  feems  alfo  to  me,  that  the  mufcles 
which  ftop  the  paflage  through  the  nofc,  ought  to  be 
contracted  firft,  /.  e.  during  the  infpiration,  as  being 
nearer  to  the  feat  of  irritation  -,  and  afterwards  re- 
laxed during  expiration,  partly  by  their  having  ex- 
haufted  their  own  power,  partly  by  the  contraction  of 
their  antagonifts,  which  are  irritated  alfo.  The  con- 
trary happens,  but  for  the  fame  general  reafons,  in 
the  adion  of  deglutition  as  has  been  already  ob- 
ferved.  And  there  is  a  remarkable  coincidence  of 
the  efficient  and  final  caufes  in  both  thefe  inftances. 

In  fpeaking  of  the  fources  of  motory  vibrations 
above,  Pr&p.  18.  I  fuppofed,  that,  juft  before  the 
motory  vibrations  excited  by  the  irritation  of  mem- 
branes took  place,  the  fenfory  ones  in  them  were 
checked  by  the  general  contraction  of  their  fibres, 
in  all  their  diredtions.  And  1  mentioned  fneezing, 
as  affording  an  inftance  of  this.  For  the  fenfation, 
which  caufes  it,  difappears  the  inftant  before  the 
infpiration ;  and,  if  this  be  not  ftrong  enough,  ;.  e. 
if  the  mufcles  do  not  receive  the  vibrations  from  the 
pituitary  membrane  with  fufficient  freedom,  it  re- 
turns again  and  again,  being  increafed  by  this  reci- 
procation, till  at  laft  it  caufes  fneezing.  It  feems 
agreeable  to  this  account,  that  the  paflage  of  ai^ 
cold  abfolutely  or  relatively,  through   the  nofe,  will 

often 


# 


190  ^/  the  Setjfe  of  Smell. 

often  occafion  fncezing;  and  through  the  mouth, 
yawning.  For  cold  air  muft  contrad  the  mem- 
branes, along  whofe  furfaces  it  pades. 

When   fneczing  roulVs  fiom   a  ftiipor,   it  may  be     ^ 
fiippofed   to  cxciie   the  nfual   degree  and  kind  of  vi-     i 
^  brations   in   the  medullary   luhllance  of  the  brain,  by 
Inch  a  moderate  concufTion  of  it,  as  lies  within  tlic 
limits  of  nature  and  health. 


P  R  O  P.     LIV. 

To  explain  the  Manner  and  Decree,  in  which  the  au- 
tomatic /l5Jio)t5y  7ncntioncd  in  the  lajl  Propofition^  an 
influenced  by  voluntary  and Jemivoluntary  Powers. 

The  Hiort,  cjuick,  alte/nate  infpirations  and  ex- 
pirations, by  which  we  diftinguifh  fmells  in  perfec- 
tion, are  in  men,  totally  or  nearly,  a  voluntary 
/  adtion,  derived  partly  from  common  refpiration, 
/  partly  from  fneezing,  the  profpedl  of  plealure  and 
/  convenience  concurring  to  it,  and  modelling  it,  as 
/  in  other  cafes.  It  feems  alfo,  that  in  brutes  this 
adtion  muft  pafs  from  its  pure  automatic  ftate  to 
Tome  degree  of  a  voluntary  one. 

In  what  manner  and  degree  deglutition  is  volun- 
tary, has  been  confidered  already. 

Sneezing  is  checked  for  a  time  by  attention,  lur- 
prize,  and  all  ftrong  mental  emotions.  It  may  alfo 
be  perform^ed  voluntarily ;  but  then  the  force  is  much 
inferior  to  that  of  automatic  fneezing.  The  fame 
may  be  obferved  of  hiccough,  coughing,  yawning, 
ftretching,  &c.  and  is  very  agreeable  to  the  deri- 
vative nature  of  thefe  motions,  when  voluntary,  i.  e. 
when  performed  by  motory  vibratiuncles.  The  ac- 
tion of  fneezing  is  differently  modelled  by  voluntary 
^nd  femivoluntary  powers  in  different  perfons. 

'       -    #  •  ^       SECT. 


"^  Jl|h        ty  the  Senfe  of  Sight;  191 


SECT.     IV. 

OF    THE    SENSE    OF    SIGHT. 

PROP.     LV. 

•f     To  determine  the  immediate  Organ  of  Sight,  and  explain 

its  Powers  in  general. 

Since  the  retina  is  an  expanfion  of  the  optic 
nerve,  we  may  conclude,  from  the  analogy  of  the 
other  fenfes,  that  it  is  the  immediate  organ  of  fight. 
Nor  is  the  want  of  fenfibility  in  the  button  of  the 
optic  nerve,  a  fufficient  objeftion  to  this ;  as  the 
minute  ftru(5lure  and  difpofition  of  the  parts  of  this 

^     button  are  not  known. 

I  We  may  alfo  reafon  thus  to  the  fame  purpofe.  It 
may  be  expe<flcd,  that  the  immediate  organ  of  fight 
(hould  be  either  black  or  white,  that  fo  it  may  bear  a 
relation    of  indifference   to    all   the  colours.-'    But  if 

t  we  admit  the  doftrine  of  vibrations,  black,  by  ab- 
forbing  all  kinds  of  rays,  woL/]d  make  a  confufion 
of  vibrations,  whereas  white,  by  reflecting  all,  might 
retain  thfe  imprcfled  vibrations  diftinclly.  The  re- 
tina is  therefore  peculiarly  fitted  for  the  im.mediate 
organ  of  fight,  and  the  choroides  the  contrary.  We 
may  add  farther,  that  the  retina,  by  reflecting  rays 
copioufly,  prevt;nts  their  arrival  at  the  choroides. 

For  the  accurate  diftindlion  of  the  feveral  vifible 
points  of  obje6ts,  it  is  neceffary,  that  thefe  be  placed 
within  the  limits  of  diftinft  vifion  ^  and  alfo,  that 
the  coats  and  humours  of  the  eye  be  fo  circum- 
ftanced,  as  to  bring  the  feveral  pencils  of  rays, 
which  proceed  from  each  vifible  point,  accurately  or 
nearly,  to  a  correfponding  point  upon  the  retina.^ 
This  is  difl:ind:  vifion.     But  colours  alone   may  be 

diftinguiflied 

*  ^ 

'■>■ 


192 


^*^/  the  Soijc  of  Sight.        JtF^ 


diftinc^Liinit'd  fiom  each  other  without  any  exaft  con-  ji 
formation  of  the  eye.  Thus  vifion  may  be  reckoned  « 
of  two  kinds,  as  fechng,  taftc,  and  fmell,  h.ive  been. 

PROP.     LVI. 

To  examine  bow  far   the   rbanomena   of  Colours  are 
agreeable  to  the  DoSlrine  of  Vibratious. 

Here  I  will  make  two  fuppofuions. 

Firll,  That  the  extreme  red  lays  at  F  M^  OpticSy 
book  1.  part  II.  tig.  4.  excite  vibrations  in  the  re- 
tina^  which  are  to  thofe  excited  by  the  extreme  violet 
rays  at  A  Gy  as  1  to  2,  in  rcfpefl  of  frequency. 

Secondly,  That,  in  going  from  the  extreme  red 
to  the  extreme  violet,  the  exceG  of  vibrations  ex- 
cited by  each  colour,  above  thofe  of  the  extreme  red, 
will  be  proportional  to  its  diftance  from  the  extreme 
red. 

If  we  admit  thefe  two  fuppofitions,  then  the  vi- 
brations excited  by  the  extreme  red,  by  the  limit  of 
red  and  orange,  of  orange  and  yellow,  yellow  and 
green,  green  and  blue,  blue  and  indigo,  indigo  and 
violet,  and  by  the  extreme  violet,  as  thefe  colours 
are  fixed  by  Sir  Jfaac  Newtony  will  be  to  one  another 
in  frequency,  refpedlively,  as  the  eight  numbers  100, 
ii2|,  120,  1 334-,  150,  i66p  i77v>  ^nd  200 i  the 
diftances  of  thefe  feveral  limits,  and  of  the  extreme 
violet,  from  the  extreme  red,  being  to  one  another 
refpedively,  as  the  feven  nuiiibers  12A,  20,  ^^t^  50, 
66|,  77I,  and  100. 

Now  the  firft  fuppofition  may  be  rendered  pro- 
bable thus.  The  intervals  of  the  fits  of  eafy  re- 
flexion and  tranfmifllon  of  the  red  and  violet  in 
the  fame  medium,  and  fame  angle  of  refraftion, 
are  nearly  as  5  to  3.  See  OpticSy  book  11.  obf.  13, 
14,  and  prop.  16.  But  the  red  is  Icfs  refraded  by 
the  coats  and  humours  of  the  eye  than  the  violet, 

and 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight.  -         193 

and  conlVqucntly  will  not  have  its  intervals  ib  much' 
diminiflied  in  proportion  ;  whence  they  may  be  to 
thofe  of  the  violet  as  6  to  3,  or  2  to  i,  at  their  ar- 
rival on  the  retina.  But  it  is  probable,  that  the  vi- 
brations of  the  rays  themfelves,  and  confcquently 
thofe  which  they  excite  in  the  retina,  are  recipio- 
cally  as  the  intervals  of  their  fits.  Tlie  frequency 
therefore  of  the  vibrations  excited  by  the  exueme 
red  may  be  to  that  of  the  vibrations  excited  by  the 
extreme  violet  as  i  to  2,  according  to  the  firft  fup- 
pofition. 

The  fecond  fuppofition  is  an  eafy  ftep  after  thefirfl:. 

For  it  is  natural  to  fuppofe,  that  in  paffing  from  F 
to  Ay  in  the  figure  above  referred  to,  equal  diftances 
Ihould  produce  an  equal  increafe  of  vibrations,  Vv'hich 
is  the  fecond  fuppofition. 

Upon  this  foundation  we  may  now  reafon  in  the 
following  manner, 

Firft,  The  feven  primary  <!:olours,  eitimated  both 
from  their  limits,  and  their  middle  points,  excite 
vibrations,  which  are  to  each  oiher  in  the  fimpleft 
ratios  that  a^e  confiftent  with  each  other,  and  all 
comprehended  within  the  firft  and  moft  fimple  of 
all  ratios,  viz.  that  exprtffcd  by  the  two  fiift  num- 
bers I  and  2. 

Secondly,  The  fame  ratios  are  alfo  thofe  of  the 
five  tones,  and  two  femitones,  "comprehended  within 
the  o6tave  ;  as  might  well  be  expcdled.  For  mufic 
muft  take  thofe  which  are  moft  fimple,  and  moft 
confiflent  with  each  other. 

Thirdly,  Since  the  greens  are  refpeflively  to  the 
yellows,  on  one  hand,  as  9  to  8,  and  to  the  blues, 
on  the  other,  as*^  to  10,  /.  e.  in  the  proportion  of 
a  tone;  alfo  to  the  reds,  on  one  hand,  as  4  to  3, 
and  to  the  violets,  on  the  orher,  as  3  to  4,  i.  e.  in 
the  proportion  of  a  fourth;  fince  farther,  the  yellows 
are  as  6  to; 5,  ;.  e.  thirds  minor,  to  the  reds,  as  4  to 

Vol.  I.  O  ,  5>  ^'  ^• 


* 


I  ■ 

194  Of  the  Senje  of  Sight. 

5,  ;.  e.  thirds  major,  to  the  blues,  and  as  1  to  3, 
i.  c.  fifths,  to  the  violets ;  the  blues  as  5  to  6,  ;.  f. 
thirds  minor,  to  the  violets,  and  as  3  to  2,  i.  e.  fifths, 
to  the  reds;  and  the  reds  as  9  to  16,  i.e.  Hat  levenths, 
to  the  violets ;  the  difference  of  vibrations  here  exhi- 
bited may  make  the  five  foregoing  colours  appear  dif- 
tincft  from  each  other  to  the  mind,  for  the  fame  reafons, 
whatever  they  be,  as  take  place  in  founds.  1^'or  natural 
bodies  reflci^t  all  thcfe  colours  in  great  abundance,  and 
in  iufficient  purity  for  this  purpofe.  We  may  begin 
from  green,  as  the  mod  common  of  all.  When  this, 
as  refleded  by  grafs,  fuppofe,  has  been  fufficiently 
familiarized  to  the  eye  of  a  child,  it  is  reafonable  to 
think,  that  it  may  be  diftinguifhed  from  yellow  and 
blue,  and  much  more  from  red  and  violet,  as 
reflecled  by  Howers ;  alfo  that  thefe  may  be  diflin- 
guifhcd  from  each  other.  And  it  feems  to  me,  that 
our  fixed  point  ought  to  be  placed  in  green,  from 
the  commonneis  and  purity  of  the  green  of  the  third 
order,  /.  e.  of  grafs  and  vegetables  in  general.  For 
the  fame  reafons  one  may  exped,  that  the  feverai 
fhades  of  red,  orange,  green,  blue,  and  violet,  fhoold 
be  confidered  as  feverai  degrees  of  the  fame  colour, 
viz.  on  account  of  the  fmall  difference  of  vibrations. 
At  lead  this  correfponds  to  the  ufual  method  of 
proceeding  in  other  things.  We  diftinguifh  great 
differences  in  our  fenfations  by  new  names;  but 
refer  all  fuch  as  are  nearly  related  to  the  fame» 
And  thus  the  two  foregoing  fup[)ofitions  furnifh  us 
with  a  natural  reafon  for  diftinguifhing  the  primary 
colours  into  five,  viz.  red,  yellow,  green,  blue,  and 
violet ;  which,  agreeably  to  this,  were  all  that  Sir 
IJaac  Newton  himfelf  diftinguiflied  the  oblong  folar 
image  into  for  fome  time,  as  may  appear  by  his 
Optical  Ledures. 

Fourthly,  Since,  if  we  proceed  from  the  green  to 
the  yellow  and  red,  on  one  hand,  and  to  the  blue  and 
violet,  on  the  other,  the  ratios  are^the  fame,  only  in- 
verted ; 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight.  195 

verted  j  and  fince  there  is  a  larger  interval  or  ratio 
between  the  yellow  and  red,  alfo  between  the  blue 
and  violet,  than  between  the  green  and  yellow,  or 
green  and  blue  ;  we  may  expeft  to  have  two  more 
diftin6l  primary  colours  correfponding  to  each  other, 
and  to  the  two  femitones  in  an  oftave.  And  thus  it 
is.  Orange,  and  indigo,  are  fufficiently  diftind  from 
their  contiguous  ones^  viz.  orange  from  red  and 
yellow,  and  indigo  from  blue  and  violet;  and  yet 
approach  to  them.  And  thefe  feven  colours  thus 
fixed,  feem  to  be  all  that  we  can  well  call  diftinft 
colours  amongft  the  primary  ones,  the  intermediate 
degrees  being  referred  to  fome  of  thefe  feven,  and 
called  (hades.  Of  compound  colours,  diftind  from 
all  the  primary  ones,  I  fhall  fpeak  below. 

Fifthly,  It  is  remarkable  here,  that  the  order  of  the 
five  tones  and  two  femitones  of  an  oftave,  which 
correfponds  to  the  order  of  the  feven  primary  colours, 
is  the  fecond  in  abfolute  perfeftion  (which  I  have 
from  a  M  S.  paper  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton's  on  mufic, 
not  yet  publidied),  and  the  firft  in  relative,  i.  e.  of 
thofe,  in  which  the  femitones  are  at  equal  diftances 
from  the  middle  or  extremes ;  which  circumftance  is 
evidently  neceffary  in  the  order  of  the  colours.  For 
if  diftind;  colours  arife  from  ratios,  and  a  half-note 
colour  arife  next  after  the  red,  if  you  begin  at  one 
end,  a  correfponding  one  ought  to  appear  next  after 
the  violet,  if  you  begin  at  the  other.  The  famenefs 
of  the  ratios,  that  muft  arife,  makes  this  neceffary, 
on  fuppofition,  that  the  diftindlion  of  colours  is 
founded  on  ratios. 

Sixthly,  If  the  diftindlion  of  colours  arife  from 
the  ratios  of  vibrations,  the  colours  may  be  expe(5l:ed 
to  be  broader  where  the  vibrations  are  more  numer- 
ous, becaufc  a  greater  addition  muft  be  made  to  a 
greater  number,  in  order  to  make  an  equal  ratio. 
And  there  is  a  certain  breadth  for  each  of  the  colours 
refpeftively,  which  fuits  each  fet  of  ratios  of  vibra- 

O  2  tion=i 


196  Of  the  Setije  cf  Sight. 

tions  that  they  can  be  fiippofcd  to  bear  to  one  another, 
according  to  any  liippolld  law  of  incrcafe  of  the  vibra- 
tions  in   pafling   from   one  end   of  the  fohu  image  to 
the  other.     Since  therefore  the  breadth  of  the   feven 
primary  colours,  as  determined  by  Sir  Ifaac  Newtorty 
fiiits    the    fimplcll    ratios    pofhble,    according  to  the 
rimplcd   law  of  increafe   {ioflible,    as    has    been    ex- 
plained   above,    we    I'eem    to    have   from    thence    an 
argument    both     for    the    doftrine   of  vibrations    in 
general,'  and    for    the   particular  ratios   of  vibrations 
here    alleged.       And    there    are    two    things    in    this 
matter  which   dclervc   pariicular   notice.     Fir  ft,   that 
Sir   IJaac  Neivloris  Jpetlrum    was   about   ten    inches 
long  }  and  confequently,  the  breadths  of  the  feven  pri-v 
mary  colours,  red,  orange,  yellow,  green,  blue,  indigo^ 
violet,  in  inche.s,    1,   25;  o,  75;    i,  23^    ^j  ^^  >    ^ 
66  i   1,    II  i   2,   22;  which   magnitudes   are   fo   con- 
fiderable,  that   a  fmall  error   in   fixing  the  limit  of  a 
colour    does   not    much    affedt    their    mutual    ratios. 
Secondly,  That  the   limits  of  the  colouis  were  deter- 
mined  in   a   way,    that    had   no  dependence  on   any 
hypothcTis,  and   the  operation  repeated  feveral  times. 
However,    it  may   peihaps    be   worth   the    time   and 
pains  of  lome  curious   experimenter,  to  examine  the 
breadths     of    the     feven     primary     colours     afrt-fh, 
and     compare     them     with     the     hypothefis    here 
propofed. 

Seventhly,  When  all  the  rays  reflcfled  from  ariy 
natural  body  are  near  to  each  other,  as  in  the  yellows 
of  the  fecond  order,  and  in  the  blues  and  greens  of 
the  third,  we  may  fup}  ofe,  that  the  flower  vibrations 
are  accelerated  by  the  quicker,  and  the  quicker 
retarded  by  the  flower,  fo  as  to  compofe  an  interme- 
diate colour,  fcarce  differing  ffom  homogeneal  light 
in  appearance  of  purity  j  juft  as  in  a  bell,  the  flower 
vibrations  of  the  wider  part,  and  the  quicker  of  the 
narrower,  over-rule  each  other  mutually,'  {o  as  to 
compofe  one  tone.     But  when  the  vibrations  of  the 

extreme 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Siglit.  1 97 

extreme  rays  are  greatly  different  from  each  other, 
it  feems  that  each  ought  to  keep  the  power  of  ex- 
citing its  proper  vibrations,  fo  as  to  make  the  colour 
of  the  middle  rays  j  which  may   be  confidered  as  a 
kind  of  centre  of  gravity,  a  dilute  one,  verging  to 
white.     And   white  itfelf,  when   in   perfedtion,  arifes 
from  a  due  proportion  of  all  the   forts  of  rays,  each 
primary   colour,    perhaps,    keepings  its  own   peculiar 
vibrations,    and  the  feveral   fhades  of  each    primary 
colour  vibrating  in  the  fame  time  as  the  middle  point. 
When  two  colours  confiderably  different,  as  red   and 
blue,    yellow  and  violet,    red   and   violet,    are  com- 
pounded, they  neither  refemble   the  intermediate   ho- 
mogeneal  one,  nor  make  a  white.     Not  the  fiift,  be- 
caufe  they  are  at  fo  great  a  diftance,   that  each  can 
keep  its  own  vibrations,  contrary  to  what  happens  in 
colours  refembling   homogencal  ones;    not   a   white, 
becaufe  there  is  not  a   fufficient  number  of  differing 
vibrations.     By  fuch  con->poficions   it  is,  that  purples, 
and  other   colours,  different  from  all  the  homogeneai 
ones,  are  formed ;  and  whoever  confiders   the  feveral 
Ihades   of  each  colour,  with  the   mutual  proportions 
which    may    be   combined    in    any    compound,   may 
eafily  conceive  how  all  the  colours  of  namral  bodies 
fhould  arife  from  mere  combinations  of  the  primary- 
colours,   agreeably   to  the  fixth  and  fevendi  propo- 
fitions  of  the  fecond  part  of  the  firft  book  of  Sir  IJaac 
Nezvtons  Optics.     What  is  here  delivered  may  ferve 
to  fuit  the  dodrine  of  vibrations  to  thofe  propofitions, 
and,  perhaps,  affift  the  reader  to  fee  the  reafons  of 
the  fixth.  '^ 

CoR.  If  the  difflsrences  of  the  primary  colours  arife 
from  the  fpecific  differences  of  vibrations,  it  is  eafy 
"0  fee,  that  the  diff^erences  of  taftes  and  fmells  mav 
lave  a  like  origin  ;  and  vice  verja. 


O  3  PROP. 


4 


193  Of  thf  Sojfc  of  Sight.  | 

PRO  P.     LVJI. 

'To  examine   bow  far   lumhious   Appearance^y    mt  oc- 
eaftoned  by  tite  Imprefjion  of  the  Rays   of  Light,  with 
fom:  other  Phxnomena  of  a  related  Kind,  are  agree-    k\ 
able  to  the  Doilrine  of  Vibrations.  i 

Flashes  of  light,  and  other  luminous  appearances, 
arc  occafioncd  by  (Irokfs  upon  the  eye,  rubbing  it, 
fainiings,  &c.  Now  it  is  very  eafy  to  conceive, 
that  violent  agitations  in  the  fmall  particles  of  the 
optic  nerve  fliould  arife  from  thefe  caufes;  and  con- 
fequently  that  fucii  deceptions  of  the  fight,  as  one 
may  call  them,  fliould  be  produced,  if  we  admit  the 
dodrine  of  vibrations.  And  1  do  not  fee  how  they 
follow  from  the  common  hypothefis  concerning  the 
manner  of  fenfation. 

The  moft   remarkable  of  thefe   luminous   appear- 
ances is  that  which  refembles  the  eye  of  a  peacock's 
feather,    and    which    offers    itfelf  upon   fluitting  and 
rubbing  the  eye  in  a  morning.     There  is  a  diftinftion 
in  it  between  the  central  parts  and  the  edges.    The  firft 
feem  to  anfwer  to  that  part  of  the  retina,  which  is  oppo- 
fite  to  the  pupil,  and  of  about  the  fame  fizewith  it,  in 
its  ordinary  dimenfions.     The  laft,  or  the  edges,  may 
anfwer  to  thofe  parts  of  the   retina,  which   are  only 
fometimes  expofed  to  the  aflion  of  light,  viz.   in  dila- 
tations of  the  pupil.     It  is  obfervable,  that  the  cen- 
tral parts  are  often  dark,  while  the  edges   are  lumi- 
nous ;    and  z'ice  rerfa.      It  happens   alfo   frequently, 
that  in  the  whole  appearance   a   blue,  a  dilute  yellow, 
and   a   red,    fucceed  each  other  in  the  order  of  the 
colours.     Perhaps,  by   farther  obfervations,  a  perfon 
might  be  able,  in  fome  meafure,  to  predict  the  varia- 
tions   of    this   phjEnomenon.       It   generally    moves, 
which  may  be  perhaps  from  the  motion  of  the  pecu- 
liar vibrations  along  the  furface  of  the  retina. 

Upoa 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight.  199 

Upon  fhutting  one's  eyes  after  they  have  been 
fixed  upon  a  luminous  objeft,  as  a  candle,  a  fire,  a 
window,  ic  is  connmon  to  have  a  faint  image  of  the 
objeft  remain  in  the  eye  for  a  few  moments.  This 
follows  from  the  gradual  declenfion  of  the  vibrations 
excited. 

Sometimes,  inftead  of  a  luminous  image,  a  dark 
one,  correfponding  in  fhape  and  iize  to  the  luminous 
objed:,  prefents  itfelf.  In  this  cafe  we  muft  fuppofe, 
that  the  vivid  vibrations  excited  by  the  luminous 
objedl  pafs  immediately  into  very  feeble  ones,  abfo- 
lutely  or  relatively,  upon  the  cefiTation  of  the  impreffion. 

Boerhaave  fays,  that  he  had  a  luminous  circle  in 
his  eye  for  a  long  time  after  having  viewed  too  intenfely 
the  moon's  light  colle6ted  to  a  focus.  And  looking 
at  the  fun  makes  other  objeds  appear  red  and  lumi- 
nous. It  does  alfo  occafion  dark  fpots  to  appear 
upon  common  objeds  afterwards.  This  laft  effeft 
may  perhaps  fucceed  the  firft.  While  extraordinary 
vibrations,  or  a  difpofition  to  them,  continue  in  the 
retina^  and  optic  nerve  (which  may  be  for  a  long 
time,  if  a  flight  inflammation,  with  the  confequent 
irritability,  be  produced  in  the  fmall  vefl^els  of  the  ' 
nervous  capillaments),  the  common  objefls  may 
appear  luminous.  When  thefe  go  off^,  a  contrary 
ftate  may  take  place,  and  caufe  the  dark  fpots  to  ap- 
pear. Dark  fpots  of  continuance  argue,  that  an 
injury  is  done  to  the  retina,  and  optic  nerve.  The 
permanent  dark  fpots,  which  are  fometimes  previous 
to  a  guttajerena,  feem  to  be  of  this  kind. 

It  is  as;reeable  to  fome  of  the  foregoing  infl:ances, 
that  being  kept  much  in  the  dark  fliould  enable  the 
perfons  to  fee  with  a  very  obfcure  light.  In  fome 
other  cafes  of  a  nyflalcpia  there  may  perhaps  be  the 
firfl:  and  loweft  deo-rce  of  inflammation  in  the  infini- 
tefimal  veflfels  of  the  retina,  fo  as  to  increafe  the  fen- 
fibility  of  the  organ  without  making  the  exercife  of 
its  fundions  painful. 

O  4  Giddinefs, 


200 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight. 


.-f? 


Giddinef';,  or  an  appaient  irregular  motion  in  the 
obje6ls  ot  fight,  aliiioft  always  goes  before  any 
general  confufion  and  privation  of  fcnfe  and  motion  j 
which ^  very  agreeable  to  the  doiflrine  of  vibrations. 
For  the  general  .dilbider  in  the  vibrations  in  the 
niedull.iry  lubllance  may  be  expelled  to  be  perceived 
in  die  optic  nerve,  and  coriclponding  part  of  the 
brain,  full  and  chielly,  on  account  of  the  acuteneis 
and  precifion  of  the  fenfe  of  fight.  Upon  the  fame 
principles  it  is  eafy  to  fee,  how  great  and  iinufual  agi- 
tations of  the  body,  imp.efTions  on  the  (lomach,  on 
the  olfa6lory  nerves,,, on  the  eye,  by  the  quick  tran- 
fition  of  obje»5ls,  on  the  eye  and  fancy  together,  by 
looking  down  a  precipice,  &c.  fhould  occafion  a 
temporary  giddinefs. 

PRO  P.     LVIII. 

To  examine  hoiv  far  the  Judgments  which  we  make  by 
Sight  concerning  Magnitude^  Difance^  Motion^  Figure, 
and  Pofition,  are  agreeable  to  the  Do^lrine  of  ylffoci- 
alion. 

I  HAVE  already  obferved,  Vrop.  30.  that  thefe  judg- 
ments are  to  be  erteemed  true  or  falfe,  according  as 
they  agree  or  difagree  with  thofe  made  by  touch. 

Now  the  allbciates  of  greater  tangible  magnitude 
are  a  larger  pi(5tuie  on  the  retina,  the  difkance  being 
the  fame  j  and  a  larger  diftance,  the  piflure  being 
the  fame.  The  aflbciates  of  a  lefs  tangible  magni- 
tude are  the  oppofites  to  thefe.  And  the  aflbciates 
of  the  famenefs  of  tangible  magnitude  are  the  increafe 
or  diminution  of  the  picture  on  the  retina,  while  the 
diflance  is  diminifhed  or  increafcd  fuitably  thereto., 
All  this  appears  from  optical  confiderations.  Hence 
it  follows,  that  where  the  pi(5lure  on  the  retina  is  of  a 
juft  fize,  and  alfo  the  previous  judgment  concerning 
the  diftance  jufl:,  our  tftimate  of  tangible  magnitude 
by  fight  v.'ili  be  juft  likewife.     But  if  the  picture  on 

the 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  201 

the  retina  be  magnified  or  diminiflied  by  glaffes,  or 
our  previous  judgment  concerning  the  diilance  be 
erroneous,  our  eftimate  of  tangible  magnitude  will 
be  erroneous  in  like  manner.  And,  whether  it  be  jufl: 
or  erroneous,  it  is  entirely  founded  on  aflbciation. 

The  following  inftances,  among  many  others,  con- 
firm thefe  pofitions.  Young  children  judge  righdy 
of  magnitude  only  in  familiar  places,  or  at  fmall  dif-  :\j 
tances.  At  great  diftances  they  always  judge  the  ob- 
jects to  be  lefs  than  the  truth,  not  having  learnt  to 
judge  rightly  of  thefe  diftances,  and  make  allowance 
for  them.  The  generality  of  adults  judge  far  better 
of  magnitude  at  great  diftances  on  level  ground,  than 
from  above,  or  from  below,  on  accountof  their  greater 
experience  in  the  former  cafe.  The  horizontal 
moon  appears  larger  than  the  meridional,  becaufe 
the  pidure  on  the  retina  is  of  nearly  the  fame  fize,  and 
the  diftance  efteemed  to  be  greater.  And  yet  the 
horizontal  moon  appears  far  lefs  than  the  truth,  becaufe 
we  can  form  no  conception  of  its  vaft  diftance.  A 
tree  referred  to  the  horizon  in  "the  dufk  of  the  even- 
ing, or  a  fly  to  the  ground  at  a  diftance,  through  the 
indiftinctnefs  of  vifion,  appears  much  bigger  than 
the  truth.  In  looking  through  glafies,  which 
magnify  or  diminifti  the  picture  on  the  retina,  the 
objeds  themfelves  feem  to  be  magnified  or  dimi- 
niflied, becaufe  our  judgment  concerning  the  diftance 
is  not  altered  proportionally,  &c.  &c. 

There  are,  befides  thefe,  fome  other  aflbciated  cir- 
cumftances,  which  occafionally  impofe  upon  us  in  efti- 
mating  magnitudes.  Thus  a  pcrfon  of  an  ordinary 
height  ftanding  near  a  very  tall  one,  or  coming  in  at 
a  very  high  door,  appears  fhorter  than  the  truth ; 
lean  perfons  feem  tall,  fat  perfona  fhort,  &c. 

The  principal  criterion  of  diftance  is  the  magnitude 
of  the  pi6lure,  which  fome   known  obje(5l  makes  on 
the  retina.     But  the  five  following  aflbciated  circum- 
ftances  feem  to  have  alfo  fome  influence  on  our  judg- 
ments 


f 


202  0/  ibe  Senje  of  Sight. 

ments  concerning  dirtance,  in  certain  cafes,  and 
under  certain  limitations :  the  number  of  objects 
which  intervene,  the  degree  of  diftin^lnefs  in  which 
the  minute  parts  are  feen,  the  degree  of  brightnefs, 
the  inchnation  of  the  optic  axes,  and  the  conforma- 
tion of  the  eye.  It  will  appear  from  the  fixty-fecond 
and  fixty-tliird  propofitions  that  the  two  laft  are  aflb- 
ciaies  to  each  other  in  their  proptr  degrees,  fince  each 
depends  on  the  diftance  of  the  objcdt.  The  influ- 
ence of  the  three  rtrlt,  as  well  as  that  of  the  mag- 
nitude of  the  pidlure  on  tlie  retina^  is  evident  from 
the  methods  of  exprefling  di(\ance  in  pictures. 

From  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  laft  paragraph, 
we  may  explain  the  following  fallacies  in  vifion.  An 
objedl  viewed  thiough  a  perfpedive  appears  to  be 
nearer  than  it  is,  becaufe  the  pi6lure  on  the  relina  is 
thereby  rendered  both  larger,  and  more  diftinft  ;  but 
if  we  invert  the  perfpeftive,  and  fo  diminiOi  the  pic- 
ture, the  objedl  will  appear  farther  off.  At  fea,  and 
on  plains,  where  few  or  no  objefls  intervene,  we 
judge  the  diftances  to  be  lefs  than  the  truth  j  and  the 
.contrary  happens  in  fcenes  diverfified  with  a  proper 
variety  of  objefls.  A  large  objeft,  when  appre- 
hended to  be  one  of  a  common  fize,  appears  nearer 
than  the  truth  j  and  the  fame  happens,  when  we  view 
objedts  in  rural  fcenes,  fuch  as  hoiifes,  towns,  hills, 
&c.  in  a  bright  light,  or  through  a  very  clear  at- 
mofphere.  In  trying  to  judge  of  fmall  diftances  by 
one  eye,  it  is  ufual  to  be'  miftaken  for  want  of  the 
criterion  from  the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes. 

Since  our  judgment  concerning  the  magnitude  of 
an  unknown  obje6t  depends  upon  the  diftance,  and  our 
judgment  concerning  the  diftance  of  every  object 
chiefly  upon  that  concerning  its  magnitude,  the  con- 
je(5tures  of  different  perfons,  concerning  the  magni- 
tudes and  diftances  of  unknown  remote  objefts,  both 
as  {i:Qn  through  telefcopes,  and  with  the  naked  eye, 
may  vary  confiderably  from  each  other  according  to 

their 


) 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  203 

their  refpeflive  affociated  prejudices.     If  the  diftance       ^ 
be  fixed  previoiifly  by  a  known  obje6l,  we  may  after- 
wards judge  of  the  magnitude  of  an  unknown   obje6t 
thereby.     The  number   of  intervening  objefls,    and       ^^ 
the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes,  feem   to  afford  con-      j^P, 
fiderable  affiftance  in   determining   diftances,    where 
known  objc<5ls  are  wanting  j    the  firft  in  large  dif- 
tances, the  lafl.  in  fmall  ones  :    but  the  other  three 
inferior   criterions  above-mentioned,  viz.   the  degree 
of  dillindnefs,    the   degree   of  brightnefs,    and   the 
conformation  of  the  eye,  when  fingly  taken,  are  of 
fmall  fignification. 

We  judge  of  motion  by  the  motion  of  the  piflures 
on  the  retina,  or  of  our  eyes  in  following  the  objefts. 
After  fome  time,  we  learn  to  make  allowance  for 
the  line  of  diredlion,  our  own  motions,  &:c.  If  we 
fail  to  make  the  due  allowance  through  affociated 
circumftances  of  any  kind,  we  mud,  in  confequence 
of  this,  make  a  difproportionate  eftimate  of  mo- 
tion, or  place  it  in  an  undue  objed:. 

We  judge  of  the  figure  or  Ihape  of  bodies,  chiefly 
by  the  variations  of  light  and  fhade;  and  our  affo- 
ciations  taken  thence  are  fo  ftrong,  as  that  we  are 
eafily  impofed  upon  by  a  juft  im.itation  of  the  light 
and  Ihades  belonging  to  each  fhape  and  figure,  in 
their  feveral  fituations  with  refpedt  to  the  quarter 
from  which  the  illumination  proceeds. 

It  is  from  the  affociations,  confidered  under  this 
propofition,  and  particularly  in  the  laft  paragraph, 
that  painting  conveys  fuch  exa<5l  ideas  of  fhapes, 
figures,  magnitudes,  and  diftances,  and  the  camera 
ohjcura  of  motions  alfo,  by  means  of  impreffions  that 
proceed  from  a  plane  furface. 

The  pofition  of  objedts  is  judged  of  entirely  by  the 
part  of  the  rei'ma  on  which  the  rays  fall,  if  we  be  in 
an  eredl  pofture  ourfelves.  If  we  be  not,  we  allow 
for  our  deviation  from  it,  or  make  a  reference  to 
fomething  judged   to  be  in  an  ereft  pofture.     If  we 

fail 


204  Of  the  Senje  of  Sight. 

fail  in  tliclc,  errors  concerning  the  pofirion  of  vifible 
objc(fl:si  mull  hap|)en.  Our  calling  bodies  crc^^  when 
the  lays  proceeding  fioin  their  tops  fall  upon  tlie 
lower  parrs  of  the  retina^  and  vice  verfa^  is  merely 
from  an  allociation  of  the  fame  kind  with  thole  by 
which  the  lenfes  of  other  words  are  determined. 

Thofe  who  are  difpofcd  tu  examine  the  fubjeds 
of  this  and  the  following  propofition  with  accuracy, 
may  fee  a  large  variety  of  proper  inllances  well 
explained  by  Dr.  Smithy  and  Dr.  Juriny  in  Dr.  Simth's 
Optics.  Thefe  gentlemen  infill:  chiefly  on  optical 
confiderations  ;  but  they  every  where  admit  the 
prevalence  of  aflbciation,  though  it  is  not  always  to 
their  puipofe  to  take  expicfs  notice  of  it. 

I  will  juft  remind  the  reader,  that  in  all  the  call's 
of  magnitude,  dillance,  motion,  figure,  and  pofi- 
rion, the  vifible  idea  is  lb  much  more  vivid  and  ready 
than  the  tangible  one,  as  to  prevail  over  it,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  our  information  from  feeling  is  more 
precife  than  that  from  fight,  and  the  teft  of  its  truth. 
However,  if  we  could  fuppofe  a  perfon  to  be  endued 
with  the  fenfes  of  feeing  and  hearing,  and  yet  to  be 
dellitute  of  that  of  feeling,  and  of  the  power  of  mov- 
ing himfclf,  he  might  have  all  the  words  exprefTing 
dillances,  magnitudes,  &c.  fo  much,  and  fo  pro- 
perly, aflbciated  with  the  vifible  appearances  of  theie, 
as  that,  by  pafilng  over  his  ear,  they  would  raife 
up  ail  the  fame  trains  of  vifible  ideas,  as  in  us. 

PROP.     LIX. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Circumfiances  of  fingle  and  dou- 
bk  Vifion  are  agreeable  to  the  DoBrine  of  AJfociation, 

When   we  have  attained  a  voluntary  power  over 
the  external  motions  of  our  eyes,  fo  as  to  direft  them  . 
to  objecls   at   plealure,    we    always  do   it   in  fuch   a-' 
manner,  as  that  the  lame  points  of  objeds  fall  upon 

correfpondtfnt 


I 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  205 

■** 

correfpondent  points  of  the  two  retinas.  And  this 
correfpondence  between  the  refpe^tive  points  of  the 
-etinas  is  permanent  and  invariable.  Thus  the  cen- 
tral points,  or  thofe  where  the  optic  axes  terminate, 
always  correfpond ;  a  certain  point  on  the  right  fide 
of  the  right  retina  always  correfponds  (whatever  ob- 
je6t  we  view)  to  another  certain  point  on  the  right  fide 
of  the  left  retina^  equally  diftant  fronD  the  centre  with 
;t,  &c.  Hence,  if  the  optic  axes  be  direded  to  the 
objetfl  Ai  the  piflure  made  by  it  on  the  right  re- 
tina correfponds  to  that  made  on  the  left;  whereas  the 
5mpreflions  made  by  two  fimilar  objects,  A  and  5, 
upon  the  two  retinas^  do  not  correfpond.  The  im- 
ptefTions  therefore,  that  are  made  upon  portions  of 
the  r(f//«<3j,  which  do  or  do  not  correfpond,  are  the 
affociated  criterions  of  fingle  and  double  vifion. 
For  I  here  fuppofe,  that  the  common  appearances  of 
3  fingle  obje<5l,  and  two  fimilar  ones,  are  refpec- 
tively  called  fingle  and  double  vifion. 

Let  us  now  inquire  into  the  fallacies  whfch  thefe 
aflfociated  criterions  may  occafion. 

Firfl:,  then,  When  a  perfon  diredts  his  eyes  by  a 
voluntary  power  to  a  point  nearer  or  farther  off  than 
the  obje(5l  which  h^  views,  fo  as  to  make  the  pic- 
tures of  the  objedt  fall  upon  the  points  of  the  two 
retinaSy  that  do  not  correfpond,  this  obje6b  will 
appear  double.  The  fame  thing  happens  when  one 
eye  is  diftorted  by  a  fpafm,  when  perfons  lofe  the 
voluntary  power  of  direding  their  optic  axes  to  ob- 
jects, and  in  general  whenever  the  pidlures,  which 
the  objeft  imprints  on  the  two  retinas,  fall  upon 
points  that  do  not  correfpond. 

It  refembles  this,  and  illufirates  it,  that  if  we  crofs 
the  fingers,  and  roll  a  pea  between  two  fides,  which 
are  not  contiguous  naturally,  it  feels  like  two 
peas. 

Secondly,  After  a  perfon,  whofe  eye  is  diftorted 
by  a  fpafii),  has  fcen  double  for  a  certain  time,  this 

ccales, 


C^A^ 


206  C^  ffje  Senfe  of  Sight. 

ceafes,  and  he  gains  the  power  of  feeing  fingle 
agjin,  provided  the  diftoriion  remains  fixed  to  a 
certain  degree.  For  the  aflbciation  between  the 
jxjints  of  the  two  retimsy  which  correfponded  for- 
merly, grows  weaker  by  degrees;  a  new  one  alfo 
between  points,  that  now  correfpond,  takes  place, 
ami  grows  Ihonger  perpetually. 

Thirdly,  if  two  lighted  candles,  of  equal  height, 
be  viewed  at  ihe  diftance  of  two  or  three  feet  from 
the  eyes,  fo  that  the  pidure  of  the  right-hand  candle 
on  the  left  retina  iliail  correfpond  to  that  of  the  left- 
hand  candle  on  the  right  retinay  only  one  image  will 
be  produced  by  thefc  two  coirefponding  piftures. 
But  the  two  pidures  which  do  not  correfpond,  viz. 
that  of  the  right-hand  candle  on  the  right  retina^ 
and  that  of  the  lef't-hand  candle  on  the  left  retina, 
will  each  produce  its  proper  image.  See  Smith's 
OpticSy  Rem.  526. 

But  here  two  queftions  may  be  afked  :  Firft,  Why 
fingle  objrds  appear  the  fame  to  one  as  to  both 
eyes,  allowing  for  the  diminution  of  brightnefs, 
fince,  in  the  firft  cafe,  there  is  one  pidure  only,  in 
the  laft  two.  Ought  not  every  fingle  objeft  to  appear 
fingle  to  one  eye,  and  double  to  both  ? 

Secondly,  How  can  one  objeft  appear  like  two  to 
both  eyes,  fince,  however  the  eyes  be  direfted  or 
diftorted,  it  can  make  but  two  pictures,  whereas  two 
objeds  make  four,  viz.  two  in  each  eye  ? 

It  is  evident,  that  the  difficulty  is  the  fame  in  both 
thefe  queftions.  And  it  feems  to  be  a  fufficient  an- 
fwer  to  allege,  that'-imprefllons  fo  much  alike,  and 
which  are  fo  conftantly  made  together,  as  thofe  upon 
the  correfponding  portions  of  the  two  retinaSy  mufl 
unite  into  one  entirely  in  the  brain,  and  produce  the 
fame  effect  in  kind,  though  fomewhat  different  in 
degree,  as  one  alone.  And  thus,  whether  we  fee 
with  one  eye  or  both,  hear  with  one  ear  or  both,  the 
impreflion  on  the  common  fenfory  in  the  brain  is  the 

fame 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  ^ao; 

fame  in  kind ;   and  therefore,   if  the  firft  be  called 
(ingle,  the  other  nnuft  alfo. 

But  it  deferves  particular  attention  here,  that  the 
optic  nerves  of  nnen,  and  fuch  other  animals  as 
look  the  fame  way  with  both  eyes,  unite  in  the 
fella  turcica^  in  a  ganglion.,  or  little  brain,  as  one 
may  call  it,  peculiar  to  themfelves  j  and  that  the  af- 
fociations  between  fynchronous  impreffions  on  the  two 
retinas  muft  be  made  fooner,  and  cemiCnted  ftronger, 
on  this  account;  alfo,  that  they  ought  to  have  a 
much  greater  power  over  one  another's  images,  than 
in  any  other  part  of  the  body.  And  thus  an  im- 
preffion  made  on  the  right  eye  alone  by  a  fingle 
objeft,  may  propagate  itfelf  into  the  left,  and  there 
raife  up  an  image  almoft  equal  in  vividnefs  to  itfelf: 
and  confequently,  when  we  fee  with  one  eye  only,  we 
may,  however,  have  pidlures  in  both  eyes  -,  and  when 
we  fee  a  fingle  objeft,  with  our  eyes  directed  to  one 
at  a  different  dillance,  we  may  have  four  pictures, 
viz.  two  from  dire6t  impreflion  in  parts  that  do  not 
correfpond,  and  two  others  from  affociation  in  parts 
that  do.  And  thus  both  the  foregoing  queftions 
may  be  anfwered,  in,. a  manner  that  leaves  no  doubt 
or  hefitation. 

PROP.    LX. 

jf  71?  explain  in  what  Manner y  and  to  what  Degree^ 
agreeable  and  dif agreeable  Impreffions  on  the  Eye 
cmtributei  in  the  Way  of  Affociation,  to  form  our 
intelle5lual  Pleafures  and  Pains. 

It  is  evident,  that  gay  colours,  of  all  kinds,  are 
a  principal  fource  of  pleafure  to  young  children ; 
and  they  feem  to  ftrike  them  more  particularly,  when 
mixed  together  in  various  ways.  Whether  there  be 
any  thing  in  colours,  which  correfponds  to  the  har- 
mony between  founds,  may  be  doubted.     If  there  be, 

it 


>^  Of  /fg 


zofr  Of  tWe  Scnfe  £  Sight. 

4 


it  iinid,  liowevcr,  admit  of  much  greatrr  latitude 
than  (ht*  harmony  between  founds,  fincc  all  mixtures 
and  degrees  of  colours,  unlefs  where  ihe  quantity  of 
light  overpowers  the  eye,  are  plearmt;  however, 
one  cohair  may  be  more  lo  originally  than  another. 
Bhick  ap}>ears  to  be  originally  dif.igreeablc  to  the  eyes 
ol  childicn  ;  it  becomes  dif.igrceable  alfo  very  early 
from  alVocrued  inHiiences.  In  adultSj  the  pleafures 
of  mcic  colours  arc  very  languid  in  comparifon  of 
their  prefent  aggregate,  of  plcalure,  formed  by  af- 
fociation.  And  thus  tlie  eye  approaches  more  and 
moic,  as  we  advance  in  fpirituality  and  perfedtion, 
to  an  inlet  for  mental  pleafure,  and  an  oi'gan  fuited 
to  the  exigencies  of  a  being,  whofe  happinefs  con- 
fills  in  the  improvement  of  his  underftanding  and 
affe^ftions.  However,  ihe  original  pleafures  of  mere 
colours  remain,"  in  a  fmall  degree,  to  the  lad,  and 
hofe  transferred  upon  them  by  uflbciation  with  other 
picahires  (for  the  influence  is  in  thefe  things  reci- 
piocal,  without  limits)  in  a  confiderable  one.  So 
that  our  intclleftual  pleafures  are  not  only  at  firft 
generated,  but  afterwards  fupported  and  recruited, 
in  part  from  the  pleafures  affctfting  the  eye;  which 
holds  particularly  in  refpedt  of  the  pleafures  afforded 
fcy  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  by  the  imitations  of 
them,  which  the  arts  of  poetry  and  painting  furnirt^i  g 
us  with.  And  for  the  fame  reafons  the  difagreeable  % 
imprcffions  on  the  eye,  have  feme  fmall  ihare  in  * 
generating  and  feeding  intelledluai  pains. 

It  deferves  notice  here,  that  gieen,  which  is  the 
colour  that^abounds  far  more  than  any  other,  is  the 
middle  one  among  the  primary  colours,  and  the  mod 
univerfally  and  permanently  agreeable  to  the  eye  of 
any  other;  alfo,  that  as  the  common  juice  of  ve^e- 
tables  is  in  general  green,  fo  that  of  animals  is  in 
general  red ;  the  (irft  beiag,  perhaps,  of  the  third 
order,  the  lafl:  of  the  ftcond.  It  appears  to  be  ex- 
tremely worth  the  time  ar.d  pains  of  philofophers  to 

inquire 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight.  209 

inquire  into  the  orders  of  the  colours  of  natural  bodies, 
in  the  manner  propofed  and  begun  by  Sir  IJaac 
Newton  \  and  particularly  to  compare  the  changes  of 
colour,  which  turn  up  in  chemical  operations,  with 
the  other  changes  which  happen  to  the  fubjei^ls  of 
the  operations  at  the  fame  time.  Nothing  feems 
more  likely  than  this  10  be  a  key  to  the  philofophy 
of  the  fmall  parts  of  natural  bodies,  and  of  their 
mutual  influences. 

PROP.     LXI. 

'to  give  an  Account  of  the  Ideas  generated  by  vifihle 

Imprejfions. 

Here  we  may  make  the  following  obfervations : 

Firft,    That  the  ideas  of  this  fenfe  are  far   more    \ 
vivid  and  definite  than  thofe  of  any  other;  agreeably     \ 
CO  which,   the   word  idea  denoted   thefe  alone   in   its" 
original  and  moft  peculiar  fenfe.      Hence  it  is  proper 
to  make  the  ftridleft  examination   into  the   ideas  of 
this  fenfe,  and  their  properties,  fince  it  is   probable, 
from     the     analogies    every     where     confpicuous    in 
natural    things,    that    thefe    are    patterns    of  all    the 
reft.      Their    peculiar    vividnefs    and    precifion    may 
therefore  be  confidered  as  ferving  like  a  microfcope 
in  refped  of  other  ideas,    /*.  e.    as   magnifying  their 
properties. 

Secondly,  The  vividnefs  and  precifion  here  fpoken 
of  relate  chiefly  to  diftance,  magnitude,  motion, 
figure,  and  pofition,  /.  e.  to  the  things  confidered 
in  the  fifty-eighth  propofiiion.  However,  colours 
leave  diftinft  ideas  of  ihemfelves  ;  but  then  thry 
require  an  exertion  of  our  voluntary  powers  for  the 
moft  part,  whereas  the  ideas  of  diftances,  magnitudes, 
&c.  recur  inceffantly  in  the  trains  which  pafs  over 
the  fancy. 

Thirdly,  The  peculiar   vividnefs   and  precifion  of  j 
vifiblc  ideas  may  probably  be  owing  to  the  following  ' 

Vol.  I,  P  caufes, 


2IO  Of  the  Senje  of  Sight. 

caufes,  as  well  as  to  fomc  peculiar  unknown  ftruc- 
turc  of  the  optic  nerve,  and  corrcfponding  region 
of  the  brain ;  viz.  the  perpetual  recurrency  of  vifible 
objefts,  cither  the  Tame,  or  fimilar  ones,  during  the 
^vholc  time  tliat  we  are  awake;  the  diftind  manner 
in  which  tlicy  are  imprelTed  by  means  of  the  fevcral 
proper  conformations  of  the  eye;  and  their  being  re- 
ceived in  general  upon  the  fame  part  of  the  retina^ 
precifcly  or  nearly.  For,  when  we  view  any  objedt 
with  attention,  we  make  the  central  point  of  it  fall 
upon  the  central  part  of  the  retina.  Farther,  as  the 
optic  nerve  fends  off  no  branches,  but  is  fpent  wholly 
upon  Uie  retina^  this  may  perhaps  contribute  in  fomc 
degree.  And  thefe  confidcrations  may  a  little  help 
us  to  conceive  how  the  optic  nerve,  and  corre- 
fponding  region  of  the  brain,  may  be  the  repofitory 
of  fuch  an  immenfe  variety  of  vifible  ideas,  as  they 
are  in  fad:. 

Fourthly,  The  idea  of  every  familiar  objedl  has, 
for  the  moft  part,  fome  particular  magnitude,  pofi- 
tion,  and  aggregate  of  aflbciates,  in  its  recurrencies 
to  the  mind.  And  this  fomewhat  leflens  the  diffi- 
culty mentioned  in  the  lad  paragraph.  The  reafon 
of  this  fourth  obfcrvation  is,  that  though  every  vi- 
fible object  appears  under  different  magnitudes,  in 
different  pofnions,  and  with  different  affociates,  yet 
thefe  differences  deftroy  one  another,  fo  that  the 
ftrongeft  particularity  only  remains.  However,  % 
changes  are  made  from  time  to  time,  each  fubfifting 
for  a  ihort  period,  and  then  giving  way  to  the  next 
in  fucccffion. 

Fifthly,  We  have  fi6litious  vifible  ideas  of  places 
and  pcrfons  that  we   have   never   feen,  as   well  as   of 
thofe  which   we  have.     Thefe  are  derived  from  affo-  ■ 
ciation   evidently,    and   they  often  undergo  fucceffive 
changes,  like  thofe  fpoken  of  in  the  lad  paragraph. 

Sixthly,  Our  vifible  ideas  are  fubjed  to  the  volun- 
tary power  in  a  high  degree,  and  may  be  called   up 

by 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight.  211 

by  the  flighteft  affociated  circumftance,  at  the  fame 
time  that  they  have  very  numerous  connexions  with 
other  ideas,  and  with  aftual  impreffions.  The  name, 
or  its  idea  in  the  region  of  the  brain  correfponding 
to  the  ear,  are  the  circumftances  mofl:  commonly 
made  ufe  of  for  calling  up  vifible  ideas.  But  there 
are  many  ideas,  y.  e.  internal  feelings,  which  have  no 
names,  and  which  yet,  by  attending  our  feveral  vifible 
ideas,  get  this  power  of  introducing  them. 

Here  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that  an  idea  cannot  be 
faid  to  be  voluntarily  introduced,  till  it  be  previoufly 
determined  by  fome  of  its  affociates.  If  I  defire  to 
introduce  a  vifible  idea  of  any  kind,  an  individuum 
vaguniy  and  that  of  an  horfe  offers  itfelf,  it  was  not 
owing  to  the  command  of  my  will,  that  it  was  an 
horfe,  and  nothing  elfe,  but  to  the  connexion  which 
the  idea  of  an  horfe  had  with  fome  other  idea  or  im- 
prelTion,  which  then  happened  to  take  place.  But  if 
1  defire  to  recollect  the  features  of  a  perfon's  face, 
whom  I  faw  yefterday,  I  make  ufe  of  his  name,  his 
drefs,  the  place  in  which  1  faw  him,  or  fome  other 
affociated  circumftance,  for  this  purpofe.  And  this 
may  be  called  a  voluntary  introdudlion  of  an  idea. 
However,  the  introdudlion  of  the  idea  of  an  horfe, 
in  the  circumftances  juft  defcribed,  might  be  termed 
voluntary  in  a  different  fenfe,  if  any  perfon  thought 
fit  to  denominate  it  fo,  on  account  of  the  command 
of  the  will  to  introduce  fome  idea.  My  defign 
here  is,  only  to  fuggeft  to  the  reader  the  proceffes 
generally  made  ufe  of  in  thefe  things.  It  is  to  be  ob- 
ferved farther,  that  the  affociated  circumftance,  which 
determines  what  idea  fliall  be  called  up  voluntarily, 
does,  for  the  moft  part,  raife  it.  Thus,  if  a  perfon 
defires  me  to  call  up  the  idea  of  an  horfe,  the  very 
found  of  the  word  proceeding  from  his  mouth  will 
do  it,  for  moft  part,  immediately.  If  not,  I  go 
back,  by  my  memory,  to  the  trace  left  by  the 
word,  and  thence  to  the  idea,  or  to  fome  common 

P  1  affociate 


f 


212  Of  the  6enje  ^  Sight. 

allbciaic   of  both    the    word    and    idea,    capable    of 
railing  tlie  laft. 

Seventhly,  When  wc  have  converfed  much  with 
the  fame  vifible  objedts,  as  after  having  been  in  a' 
crowd,  travelling,  &c.  for  many  hours  without  in- 
termilfion,  we  may  find  the  ideas  of  thefc  objeds 
pcciiliaily  ftrong,  fo  as  to  intrude  upon  our  fancies, 
and  interfere  with  all  our  other  ideas.  This  may 
fervc  to  flievv,  that  the  permanence  of  the  fcnfations 
imprelTed,  mentioned  in  the  third  propofition,  and 
which  fhews  itfelf  particularly  in  vifible  impreffions, 
as  there  remarked,  is  of  the  nature  of  an  idea.  And 
it  coincides  remarkably  with  this,  that  the  ideas 
fhould  be  peculiarly  vivid  and  precife  in  the  fame 
^cw'i^^  where  the  permanency  of  the  fenfation  im- 
prefled  is  mofl:  confpicuous. 

Eighthly,  The  ideas  of  fight  and  hearing,  and 
the  imprefilons  from  whence  they  proceed,  have  a 
peculiar  connexion  with  each  other.  For  as  woids 
pronounced  call  up  vifible  ideas,  fo  vifible  ideas  and 
objeds  call  up  the  ideas  of  words,  and  the  adioiis  by 
which  they  are  pronounced. 

Ninthly,  The  trains  of  vifible  ideas  are  in  a  par- 
ticular manner  affeded  by  the  general  ftates  of  the 
brain,  as  may  appear  from  the  trains  which  prefcnt 
themfclves  in  madneis,  frenzies,  and  common  de- 
liriums. This  agrees  remarkably  with  what  has  been 
already  obferved  concerning  the  ideas  of  thib  fcnfej 
and  we  may  infer  from  all  together,  that  the  regions 
of  the  brain  correfponding  -to  the  optic  nerve  are 
comparatively  large,  or  peculiarly  fufctptive  of  im- 
prefilons,  or  both. 

Tenthly,  The  imagery  of  the  eye  fympathizes 
alfo  remarkably  with  the  affcdions  of  the  (tomach. 
Thus  the  grateful  imprefllons  of  opium  upon  the 
ftomach  raife  up  the  ideas  of  gay  colours,  and  tranf- 
porting  fcenes,  in  the  eye;  and  fpafms,  and  indi- 
geftions,  have  often  a  contrary   cffed.     The  ghaftly 

faces 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  213 

faces  which  fometimes  appear  in  idea,  particularly 
after  drinking  tea,  feem  10  be  an  cffeft  of  this 
kind,  or  perhaps  of  the  laft-mentioned  one ;  for 
they  are  common  to  pcrfons  of  irritable  nervous 
fyftems.  Ghaftly  faces  may  take  place  preferably 
to  other  difagreeable  ideas,  perhaps  becaufe  charac- 
ters, affedions,  paffions,  are  principally  denoted  and 
expreffcd  by  the  countenance ;  becaufe  faces  are  the 
mod  common  of  vifible  objefts,  and  attended  to 
with  the  greateft  eafneftnefs  ^  becaufe  we  criticife 
much  upon  the  beauty  of  faces,  and  upon  the  pro- 
portion of  the  feveral  features  to  each  other  j  and 
becaufe  evil  fpirits  (the  notions  of  which  generally 
take  ftrong  and  early  pofleffion  of  our  fiincies)  are 
painted  with  ghaftly  faces.  This  mixture  of  reafons 
hinders  each  particular  one  from  being  fo  obvious,  as 
might  othcrwife  be  expefted ;  hov;ever,  the  fame 
I  thing  is  common  in  many  other  cafes.  The  trains 
of  vifible  ideas,  which  occur  in  dreams,  are  dcducible, 
partly  from  the  fympachy  here  mentioned,  partly 
from  that  of  the  la(t  paragraph. 

Eleventhly,  Our  ftock  of  vifible  ideas  may  be 
confidered  as'  a  key  to  a  great  part  of  our  knowledge, 
and  a  principal  fource  of  invention  ia  poetry,  paint- 
ing, mathematics,  mechanics,  and  almoft  every 
other  branch  of  the  arts  and  fciences.  In  mathe- 
atics  and  mechanics  the  invention  of  the  diagram 
;  ,  in  effect,  the  fokition  of  the  problem.  Our 
memories  are  alfo  much  affifted  by  our  vifible  ideas 
in  refped  of  paft  fadls,  and  the  prefervation  of  the 
order  of  time  depends  in  a  particular  manner  upon 
our  vifible  trains  fuggefting  each  other  in  due  fuc- 
ccffion.  Hence  eye-witnefles  generally  relate  in  order 
of  time,  without  any  exprefs  defign  of  doing  fo. 
This  recolleftion  of  vifible  ideas,  in  the  order  in 
which  they  were  impreflTed,  gives  rife  to  the  loci 
wemonalesy  in  which  miatters  principally  worthy  of 
remembrance  are   to  be  repoficed,  and  to  the  artifi- 

P  3  cial 


214  Of  the  Senfe  c/  Sight.  * 

cial  memory,  that  is  borrowed  from  the  eye;  juft 
as  the  facility  of  remembering  wortls  formed  into 
verfes  does  to  the  artificial  memory  borrowed  from 
the  ear.  It  may  dcfervc  notice  here,  that  fomc 
pcrfons  have  imaginary  places  for  the  natural  num- 
bers, as  far  as  one  hundred,  or  farther. 

Tuelfthly,  The  ideas  which  different  perfons  have 
of  the  fame  perfons'  faces,  though  they  be  very  like 
one  another,  cannot  yet  be  prccifely  the  fimie,  on 
account  of  the  addition  and  omifTjon  of  little  cir- 
cumllances,  and  a  variety  of  afTociated  ones,  which 
intermix  themfelves  here.  Hence  the  fame  pidurc 
may  appear  much  more  like  to  one  perfon  than  to 
another,  viz.  according  as  it  refembles  his  idea  more 
or  lefs. 

Thirteenthly,  Painters,  ftatuaries,  anatomifts,  ar- 
chireds,  &c.  fee  at  once  what  is  intended  by  a 
pidlure,  draught,  &c.  from  the  perfeflion  of  their 
vifible  ideas  j  and  carry  off  the  fcene,  plan,  &c.  in 
their  memories,  with  quicknefs  and  facility.  All 
which  is  ftill  owing  to  affociation.  But  it  would  be 
endlefs  to  enumerate  the  inftances  of  afljiciations, 
which  this  fenfe  afi^brds. 

Fourteenthly,  It  is  probable,  that  fables,  parables, 
fimiles,  allegory,  &c.  pleafe,  (Irike  and  inftrudl, 
chiefly  on  account  of  the  vifible  imagery,  which 
they  raife  up  in  the  fancy.  They  are  alfo  much 
more  eafily  remembered  on  the  fame  account.  We 
may  add,  that  idolatry,  heathenifh  and  popifh,  has 
made  a  much  quicker  and  more  extenfive  progrefs  in 
the  world  on  account  of  the  (lability  and  vividnefs 
of  vifible  imprcflions  and  ideas,  and  the  difficulty, 
obfcurity,  and  changeable  nature,  of  abftraft  no- 
tions. And  image-worfhip  fecms  even  to  have  been 
derived  in  great  meafure  from  this  fource. 

Fifteenthly,  It  would  be  a  matter  of  great  curiofity 
and  ufe  (as  far  as  thefe  fpeculations  can  be  of  any 
ufe)   to   inquire   carefully   into   the   progrefs.  of  the 

mind. 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  215 

smind,  and  particularly  of  the  fancy,  in  perfons  born 
blind,  and  connpare  the  refult  with  what  is  advanced 
under  this  propofition,  and  with  other  parts  of  thcfe 
papers,  in  order  to  correA  and  innprove  the  theory 
of  affociation  thereby.  It  is  probable,  that  they  are 
confiderable  lofers,  upon  the  whole,  in  refpedt  of 
knowledge  j  though  their  greater  degree  of  attention, 
and  the  fuperior  acutenefs  of  the  fenfes  of  feeling 
and  hearing,  and  confequently,  perfedlion  of  the 
ideas  of  thefe  fenfes,  muft  give  thenfi  fome  particular 
advantages. 

PROP.     LXII. 

'Co  explain  the  automatic  Motions^    which   are   excited 
by  Impreffions  made  on  the  Eye, 

These  motions  are  of  two  kinds,  external  and 
internal.  The  external  are  the  nnotions  of  the 
globe  of  the  eye,  thofe  of  the  eye-lids,  and  the 
contradlions  of  the  lacrymal,  and  other  neighbour- 
ing glands,  whereby  they  are  evacuated.  The  inter- 
nal ar*  the  contra<5lions  of  the  greater  and  lefier 
mufcular  rings  of  the  iris^  of  the  radiated  fibres  of 
the  iris^  and  of  the  ciliar  ligaments.  I  will  fpeak  of 
each  of  thefe  in  order. 

I  begin  with  the  motions  of  the  globe  of  the  eye. 
And  here  I  obferve,  Firft,  That  the  white  tendinous 
expanfions  of  the  four  ftrait  mufcles  reach  as  far  as 
the  cornea -y  and  confequently,  that  they  are  thereby 
expofed  in  a  particular  manner  to  the  aftion  of  light, 
when  the  eye  is  open,  being  covered  by  nothing  but 
a  thin  membrane.  However,  the  tendinous  expan- 
fions of  the  adducens  and  abducens  are  much  more 
expofed  than  thofe  of  the  attollens  and  deprimens  j  and, 
if  the  eye  be  but  a  little  open,  the  light  cannot  fall 
upon  thefe  laft  at  all. 

Secondly,  If  a  luminous  obje<5l  be  placed  upon  the 
right  fide,  fo  as  that  the  light  fhall  fall  in  a  particu- 

P  4  l?,r 


i\6  Of  the  Senje  of  Sight. 

lar  manner  upon  the  rendinoiis  expanfion  of  the  ahdu' 
U)is  of  the  right  eye,  and  of  the  adduccns  of  the  left,  it 
tnay  by  contracting  thcle  mulclcs  make  the  eyes  move 
in  a  congruous  manner,  turning  them  towards  itfclf ; 
and  the  tendency  of  the  eyes  to  move  towards  the 
right  fide  ought  not  to  ceafe,  till  the  adducens  and  ab- 
duccns  in  each  eye  have  an  equal  quantity  of  light 
fall  upon  thcin  from  the  luminous  ohje(ft,  /'.  e.  till  the 
optic  axes  ht  dueled  to  it.  In  which  cafe  the  eyes 
\v()uld  be  in  aquilihio,  as  far  as  they  are  under  the 
influence  of  the  light  which  falls  upon  the  tendinous 
cxpanfions  of  the  ftrait  mufcles. 

Tiiirdly,  It  agrees  remarkably  with  the  two  lafl 
paragraphs,  that  new-born  children  move  their  eyes 
in  a  congruous  manner  ;  that  the  motions  are  chiefly 
to  the  right  and  lefr,  fcarce  upwards  and  downwards 
at  all,  the  eye- lids  being  fcldom  fo  much  opened  as 
to  expoff  the  tendinous  expanfions  of  the  attollens  and 
deprimens  ;  and  that  their  eyes  are  frequently  turned 
towards  luminous  obje(5ls,  fuch  as  a  candle,  or  a 
window. 

Fourthly,  But  it  is  not  ncceffary,  that  the  eyes  of 
new-born  children  fhould  always  turn  to  the  luminous 
objedl,  or  remain  fixed  upon  it.  For  every  mufcle, 
'\vhen  it  has  exhauffed  icfeU  by  contradfion,  gives  place 
to  its  antagonifl  of  courfe.  If  therefore  the  luminous 
objecl:  be  much  on  one  fide,  the  eyes  ought  to  turn 
back  from  it  almoft  immediately.  To  which  we  may 
add,  that  various  luminous  ob]e£ls  generally  affedt 
the  eyes  at  the  fame  time;  that  the  four  ftrait  mufcles 
do  naturally  balance  each  other,  and  keep  jhe  eyes 
in  a  right  forward  pofition ;  and  that  the  oblique 
mufcles  fcarce  favour  any  particular  oblique  pofition, 
though  they  do  prepare  the  eye  to  turn  with  greater 
facility,  in  compliance  vvith  the  contradlion  of  any  one 
of  the  four  firait  m.ufcle?.  There  are  therefore  fufii- 
cient  fources  for  a  variety  of  motions  in  the  globes  of 
the  eyes,  without  deftroying  their  congruity. 

Fifthly, 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  217 

Fifchly,  It  is  worthy  of  attention  here,  that  tbe  at- 
tollentes  and  deprimentes  do  not  want  the  fame  external 
influence  of  light  to  make  them  move  in  a  congruous 
manner,  as  the  adducenles  and  abducentes\  in  as  much 
as  one  addiicensy  and  one  abducens,  muft  aft  to- 
gether to  make  the  eyes  move  congruoufly  to  the 
right  and  left;  whereas  the  two  attoUenleSy  and  two 
deprimentes^  a6l  together  in  the  congruous  motions 
upwards  and  downwards.  As  far  therefore  as  the 
nerves  of  one  fide  fympathize  with  the  correfponding 
nerves  of  the  other  in  the  influences  which  defcend 
from  the  brain,  there  will  be  a  natural  tendency  in 
the  eyes  to  move  upwards  and  downwards  in  a  con- 
gruous manner,  and  to  the  right  and  left  in  an  incon- 
gruous one.  And  this  fuits  well  with  the  greater  ex- 
pofition  of  the  tendinous  expanfions  of  the  adducentes 
and  ahducentes  before  taken  notice  of.  For  what 
reafon  fo  many  pairs  of  nerves  are  concerned  in  the 
motions  of  the  globe  of  the  eye,  and  of  the  eye-lid, 
remains  to  be  inquired. 

Sixthly,  It  may  perhaps  be,  that  the  light  which 
pafies  in  at  the  pupil  has  fome  efficacy  in  m-oving  the 
globe  of  the  eye,  either  by  unknown  communica- 
tions in  the  brain  between  the  optic  nerve,  and  the 
third,  fourth,  and  fixth  pairs,  or  perhaps  by  pene- 
trating in  a  fmall  degree  through  the  retina^  choroideSy 
zv\d  fclerotka^  to  the  four  fl:rait  mufcles.  If  this  laft 
influence  could  be  allowed,  it  would  oppofe  that 
exerted  upon  the  tendinous  expanfions  -,  but  would, 
however,  join  with  it  in  preferving  the  congruity  of 
the  motions. 

Seventhly,  As  the  two  oblique  mufcles  neither  have 
tendinous  expanfions  expofed  to  the  light,  nor  adhere 
to  the  globe  of  the  eye,  except  juft  at  their  infertion, 
they  cannot  be  under  either  of  the  influences  here  fup- 
poftd  to  afled  the  ftrait  mufcles,  but  mufl:  be  fubjed 
chiefly  to  thofe  v/hich  defcend  from  the  brain  ;  thus 
adling  almoft  uniformlv,  unlels  in  particular  agitations 

of 


2i8  Of  the  Scnfe  of  Sight. 

of  the  wliole  nervous  ryHcm.  And  this  agrees  well- 
with  the  h€ty  and  with  the  iifes  generally  alfigned  to 
ihele  mulcles,  viz.  thole  of  keeping  the  eye  in  a 
moderate  lulpenlion  always,  and  drawing  it  out  on 
eminent  occafions. 

Kighthly,  The  circunillances  which  occafion 
fquinting  in  young  children,  agree  well  with  the  the- 
ory here  propoied.  Tiius,  if  a  child  be  laid  To  into 
his  cradle,  as  that  one  eye  Ihall  be  covered,  the  external 
influences  of  light  cannot  operate  upon  it.  And  if  this 
be  often  repeated,  efpecially  while  the  aflbciation 
■which  confirms  the  congruity  of  the  motions  is  weak, 
the  eye  which  is  covered  will  obey  the  influences 
which  defcend  fiom  the  brain,  and  turn  upwards 
and  inwards  for  the  moft  part.  What  turns  the  fcale 
in  favour  of  this  pofition,  renrains  to  be  inquired. 

The  fecond  of  the  external  motions  is  that  of  the 
eye-lids,  or  the  a(flions  of  the  elevator,  and  orbicu- 
laris palpebrarum.  What  excites  the  firft  to  conftant 
adlion  during  the  whole  time  that  the  new-born 
child  is  awake,  is  difficult  to  fay.  Perhaps  the 
a(5lion  of  light  upon  the  white  of  the  eye,  fending 
vibrations  under  the  upper  eye-lid,  and  thence  into 
the  fibres  of  the  elevator :  or  the  diredl  a6lion  of  light 
through  the  fkin  ;  for  it  is  a  cutaneous  mufde:  or 
influences  which  defcend  into  the  third  pair  from  the 
fecond,  i.  e.  the  optic  nerve :  or  the  fridlion  from 
the  globe  of  the  eye  in  its  motions,  which  may  alfo 
make  the  eye-lid  fympathize  in  monon  with  the  eye: 
or  the  aggregate  of  all  thefe.  As  to  the  orbicularis,  it 
is  evidently  put  into  aflion  by  irritations  afi^efting  the 
eye,  as  from  dufl:,  flies,  &c.  even  in  adults. 

The  third  of  the  external  motions,  or  the  contrac- 
tion of  the  lacrymal,  and  other  neighbouring  glands, 
arifes  from  irritations  in  the  eye,  nofe,  fauces,  and 
fcalp  of  the  head.  The  manner  in  which  thefe  irri- 
tations operate,  has  been  fufficiently  explained  under 
Prop.  S3' 

Of 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  219 

Of  the  internal  motions  I  will  confider  the  con- 
traftion  of  the  greater  and  leffer  rings  together,  as 
proceeding  from  the  fame  caufes,  and  being  cotem- 
poraneous  j  and,  for  the  fame  reafons,  the  contrac- 
tion of  the  radiated  fibres,  and  ciliar  ligament,  to- 
gether alfo.  By  the  firft  the  eye  is  fitted  for  diftinft 
vifion  at  fmall  diftances,  by  the  other  at  great  ones. 
Thus  let  us  fuppofe  a  candle  to  be  brought  nearer 
and  nearer  to  the  child's  eye.  It  is  evident,  that  the 
quantity  of  light  which  falls  upon  the  eye  will  grow 
greater  and  greater.  It  will  therefore  agitate  all  the 
circular  fibres  of  the  iris  more  powerfully,  and  par- 
ticularly the  greater  and  lefler  rings;  i.  e.  it  will 
bend  the  cornea  into  a  greater  convexity,  bring  the 
origin  of  the  ciliar  ligament  nearer  to  its  infertion  in 
the  capjula  of  the  cryftalline,  /.  e.  fufFer  the  capjula  to 
become  more  convex  alfo,  and  narrow  the  pupil,  /.  e. 
leflen  the  radius  of  diffipation.  The  image  of  the 
candle  upon  the  retina  may  therefore  continue  to  be 
diftinft,  as  it  approaches,  by  this  mechanical  influence 
of  light  upon  the  eye.  And,  for  the  fame  reafons, 
it  may  continue  diftindt,  as  it  recedes.  But  there  are 
limits  on  both  hands.  And  thus  the  conformations 
of  the  eye  neceflary  for  diftin6l  vifion,  according  to 
Dr.  Jurin\  moft  accurate  account  of  this  matter,  are 
brought  about  automatically,  and  fuitably  to  the 
general  theory  of  thefe  papers. 

However,  it  is  alio  probable,  that  the  light  which 
paffes  in  at  the  pupil,  has  great  efficacy  in  contrading 
both  the  greater  and  leffer  rings,  as  may  be  con- 
cluded from  the  immobility  of  the  pupil  in  a  gutta 
Jerena ;  alfo  becaufe,  on  this  fuppofition,  the  light, 
which  paffes  in  at  the  pupil  m.uft,  by  contracting  the 
leffer  ring,  become  a  check  and  guard  againff  its  own 
too  free  admiffion,  which  is  agreeable  to  the  tenor 
of  nature  in  like  inftances.  The  retina  extends  to 
the  greater  ring,  and  may  fend  fome  nervous  fibres 
to  it,  and  even  to  the  iris. 

One 


2  20  Of  the  Scu/e  of  Sighr. 

One  or  both  of  thcfc  a61ions  of  light  fecm  fo  in- 
crcafc  the  lecretion  and  circulation  of  the  aqueous 
humour  in  new-born  children,  fo  as  to  fit  the  eye 
for  vifion,  which  it  is  not,  through  the  deficiency  and 
nuiddinels  of  the  aqueous  humour,  till  fome  time 
after  birth.  This  again  may  be  confidered  as  a 
circumilance,  that  favours  our  prefent  conjccftures. 

As  to  the  radiated  fibres  of  the  /m,  and  the  ciliar 
ligament,  they  do  not  feem  fo  much  to  be  excited 
to  adion  by  any  external  influence,  as  to  be  kept 
in  a  ftate  of  conlbnt  fmall  adtivity  by  the  vibrations 
which  defcend  from  the  brain.  When  therefore  the 
rings  are  relaxed,  the  radiated  fibres  will  open  the 
pupil,  and  the  ciliar  ligament  draw  out  the  capfula 
of  the  cryflalline  to  a  flatter  fliape,  and  thus  fuit  the 
eye  to  obfcure  and  diftant  objefls. 

PROP.    Lxrii. 

To  explain  the  Manner  and  Degree,  in  which  the 
automatic  MotionSy  mentioned  in  the  lafi  Propcfttion, 
are  influenced  by  "joluntary  andfemivoluntary  Powers. 

Since  the  motions  of  the  eyes  are  in  every  in- 
ftance  congruous,  from  the  inftant  of  birth,  an  aflR)- 
ciated  tendency  diereto  is  generated  fooner,  and 
more  firmly  ellabliflicd,  than  perhaps  in  any  other 
cafe.  As  therefore  the  external  influence  of  licrhc 
by  growing  languid,  comes  to  have  lefs  and  Jefs 
effe(5t  perpetually  for  this  purpofe,  fo  the  aflbciated 
tendency  grows  ftronger  and  ftrongerj  and  the  fum 
total  of  both  may  perhaps  be  always  about  equal. 

However,  this  congruity  does  not  feem  to  be  fo 
great  in  children  as  in  adults,  who  can  direfl  their 
optic  axes  by  a  perfectly  voluntary  power  to  the  ob- 
je6l  which  they  intend  to  view  with  attention.  We 
mufl:  examine  therefore,  how  the  almoft  perfed 
congruity  becomes  an  entirely  perfect  one. 

Now 


Of  the  Senje  of  Sight.  22 1 

Now  here  we  are  to  obferve,  that  the  almoft  perfeft 
congruity  begets  an  almoft  perfeft  correfpondency  in 
the  points  of  the  retina ;  and  that  hence  it  will  follow 
by  degrees,  that  the  leaft  deviation  fronti  perfe<5t  con- 
gruity will  occafion  double  vifion,  and  confufion. 
But  thefe  are  unpleafant  and  inconvenient,  whereas 
fingle  and  diftind  vilion  is  pleafant  and  convenient. 
Whence  every  recurrency  of  the  laft  will  tend  to 
confirm  it,  of  the  firft  to  exclude  it,  from  principles 
already  laid  down,  Frof.  11.  Cor.  i.  The  child  will 
therefore  come  to  a  perfect  congruity  at  laft,  i.  e.  to 
dire6t  his  optic  axes  precifely  to  the  point  which  he 
intends  to  view.  The  voluntary  power  of  fuiting 
the  internal  motions  to  the  diftance  muft  be  fuppofed 
to  grow  perfect  about  the  fame  time. 

It  agrees  with  this  method  of  reafoning,  that  per- 
fpns  who  lofe  the  fight  of  one  eye  in  their  childhood 
or  youth,  though  long  after  the  external  aflion  of  light 
has  loft  its  efficacy  for  making  the  motions  congruous, 
generally  fquint  a  little  with  that  eye. 

The  perfons  who  fquint,  preferving  the  fight  of 
the  fquinting  eye,  are  obliged  to  move  their  eyes  in 
a  congruous  manner,  for  the  fame  reafon  as  others, 
viz.  to  avoid  double  vifion,  though  the  pofition  be 
incongruous. 

The  conftant  a6lion  of  the  elevator  palpehra  fufe- 
rioris  in  adults  feems  to  be  entirely  from  cuftom,  /.  e. 
aflfociation,  being  kept  up  in  a  more  particular  man- 
ner by  the  variety  of  vifible  objedis,  which  engage 
our  attention  during  the  courfe  of  the  day. 

It  is  generally  Tome  tim.e  before  children  get  the 
voluntary  power  of  (hutting  the  eyes  gently,  or  of 
fliutting  one  and  not  the  other.  They  can  fiiut  them 
with  force  foon,  this  adion  recurrincj  often  from 
motes  in  the  eyes,  pain  of  any  kind,  &c.  The  pro- 
cedure here  is  of  the  fame  kind  as  in  other  voluntary 
adions. 

The 


■121 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Sight. 


The  internal  motions  depend  originally  upon  the 
greater  or  Icfs  quantity  of  light  which  falls  upon  the 
cornea  and  irts^  as  has  been  obferved  already.  But 
the  nearncl's  and  remotencls  of  the  luininous  obje6t 
aie  the  rci'pedive  aflbciates  of  thefc.  1  he  mufcular 
rings  therefore,  which  at  firil  contrafted  only  when 
very  luminous  objeds  ap|)ioached,  will  afterwards 
contra6t  when  moderately  luminous  ones  do.  And 
thus  vifion  will  be  made  dilliniTc  in  general.  But  dif- 
tinfl  vifion,  by  recurring,  will  perpetuate  and  .perfe(5t 
itfelf,  and  indiftinct  check  and  abolirti  itfelf,  from  the 
agreeablenefs  and  difagrceablenefs  accompanying 
them  refpe<5lively,  by  Fro'p.  ■I'l.  Cor.  i.  till  at  lafb 
the  child  gets  a  perfectly  voluntary  power  of  fuiting 
his  eyes  to  the  diftance.  Adults  feem  to  have  a 
power  of  preparing  the  eyes  previoufly  to  fee  at  a 
propofed  dillance  ;  and  fome  to  have  a  femivoluntary 
power  of  conirading  and  dilating  the  pupil,  viz. 
by  fancying  a  bright  objed  near,  and  a  dark  one  far 
off;  though  the  quantity  of  light  which  falls  upon  the 
eye  remain  the  fame. 


SECT. 


vq 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing.  223 

SECT.     V. 

OF    THE     SENSE    OF    HEARING. 

PROP.     LXIV. 

To  ajftgn  the  immediate  Organ  of  Hearing,  and  to  explain 
in  general  the  UJes  of  the  feveral  Parts  of  the 
external  and  internal  Ear, 

The  immediate  organ  of  hearing  appears  to  be  the 
foft  portion  of  the  feventh  pair  of  nerves  dillributed 
in  the  cochlea,  and  femicircular  canals.  What  the 
particular  ufes  of  thefe  cavities  are,  is  not  known. 
They  hear  fome  obfcure  likenefs  to  the  inftruments 
commonly  made  ufe  of  for  increafing  either  the 
loudnefs  of  founds,  or  the  effeds  of  them  upon  the 
ear ;  juft  as  the  coats  and  humours  of  the  eye  re- 
femble  lenfes.  The  auditory  nerve  is  alfo  like  the 
optic  in  detaching  no  branches  off  to  the  neigh- 
bouring parts;  and  there  are  many  other  inftances 
of  refemblance  between  thefe  two  mod  refined  and 
fpiritual,  if  one  may  fo  fay,  of  our  fenfes  j  fome  of 
which  I  (hall  mention  in  the  coorfc  of  this  feftion. 

The  auricle  and  meatus  auditorius  are  cartilaginous, 
and  feem  by  this  means  to  be  peculiarly  fitted  for 
receiving  and  retaining  the  vibrations  of  the  air, 
and  for  communicating  them  to  the  tnembrana  tym- 
pani. 

This  membrane  appears  to  be  kept  in  a  ftate  of 
conftant  tenfion  by  mufcles,  that  a6t  upon  the  fmall 
bones  in  different  ways,  and  thus  to  be  fitted  for  vi- 
brating fynchronoufly  to  the  feveral  founds,  which 
affefl  it.  Agreeably  to  which,  the  degree  of  tenfion 
varies,  fo  as  to  be  lefs  when  the  muf cuius  externus 
and  obliqiius  ad,  greater  when  thefe  are   relaxed,  and 

the 


2  24  Of  the  Senja  of  Hearing. 

the  intcrnus  aifts.  Ihe  degrfe  of  Icnfibility  both  in 
the  Micmbrane  itfclf,  and  in  the  whole  organ,  is  pro- 
bably greater  when  the  tenfion  is  greater. 

The  vibrations  of  the  air  Teem  to  fhake  off  the  mu- 
cus which  lodges  upon  the  membraua  tympaui  in  tlie 
new-born  child  jult  as  the  acftion  of  light  fits  the 
cornea^  and  aqueous  humour,  for  vifion. 

The  eijrtachian  tube  lerves  to  fupply  the  cavity  of 
the  tympmium  with  air,  to  carry  olT  the  vapour  which 
exhales  into  it,  and  perhaps  to  increafe  the  tffedts  of 
founds  by  the  tremors  in  its  cartilaginous  extiemity, 
and  particularly  thofe  of  the  perfon's  own  voice. 

ThcJlafeSt  its  mufclc,  and  iht  foramen  ovale^  feem 
dcfigned  to  convey  the  vibrations  of  the  mcmhrana 
iympani  to  the  auditory  nerve  in  a  piecife  manner. 
But  the  vibrations  exciced  in  its  aether  nuy  be  much 
more  frequent  than  thofe  of  die  membrana  tympanic  as 
has  been  already  obferved. 

There  docs  not  appear  to  be  any  method  for  con- 
veying air  into  the  cavities  of  the  veflibulum^  cochlea^ 
and  femicircular  canals,  nor  any  necefTicy  or  ufe  for 
it  there.  The  great  hardnefs  of  the  bony  part  of  the 
organ  of  hearing  may  make  it  more  eafily  fufceptible 
of  vibrations.  Agreeably  to  which,  it  may  be  ob- 
ferved, that  we  can  hear  imperfectly,  though  the  ears, 
nofe,  and  mouth,  be  all  ftoj  pcd,  and  confequently  all 
accefs  to  the  membrana  tympani  by  the  vibrations  of 
the  air  denied.  The  vibrations  are  here  excited  pro- 
bably in  the  cartilages  of  the  auricle  and  'meatus, 
and  in  the  bones  of  the  f!>;ull,  and  thus  communi- 
cated to  the  cochlea,  and  femicircular  canals.  It 
feems  to  agree  with  this,  that  fome  partially  deaf  per- 
fons  can  hear  befl,  when  driven  in  a  coach  over  flones 
or  gravel  -,  i.  e.  when  all  the  parts  of  their  bodies, 
and  particularly  thofe  of  the  bones,  are  put  into  a 
vibrating  motion. 

The   bony    part  of  the  organ   of  hearing  feems  to 
come  to  its  full  fize  early   in  life.     I;   not  the  final 

caufe 


I 


Of  the  Senje  of  Hearing.  2.25 

caule  of  this,  that  one  part  may,  on  account  of  its 
fize,  be  moll  diipofcd  to  vibrate  with  one  tone,  ano- 
ther with  another  ?  And  does  not  this  hold  particu- 
larly in  refpecfl  of  the  lamina  fpiralis  ? .  For  thus  the 
fame  tone  would  be  affixed  and  affociated  to  the  fame 
nerves,  To  as  to  af/ed  them  peculiarly,  from  child- 
hood or  youth  to  old  age, 

p  R  a  P.  lIcv. 

To  examine  ho-w  far   /he  Phenomena  of  mufical  and 
ether  inarticulate  Sounds  are  agreeable  to  the  DoSirine 

cf  Vibrations.  _        ' 

Here  we  may  confider,  firfl:,  the  different  ftrength 
cf  founds.  Now,  as  this  arifes  from  thS  different 
condenfation  of  the  air  in  the  pulfes,  fo  the  effeft 
which  it  has  upon  the  menibrana  tynipaniy  the  mem- 
brane of  the  foramen  ovaky  and  the  nerves  of  hear- 
ing, mull:  be  different  likewife,  and  afford  the  mind 
a  fufficient  foundation  for  diftinguifhing  founds  in 
refpeft  of  ftrength  and  feeblencfs. 

Secondly,  1  he  gravity  and  acutenefs  of  founds 
arifc  from  the  flowiftl's  or  frequency  of  the  vibrations. 
Now,  as  the  vibrations  of  the  mernbrana  tympani  are 
fynchronous  to  thofe  of  the  air,  they  may  either  ex- 
cite fynchronous  ones  in  the  particles  of  the  auditory 
nerves,  and  thus  be  diftinguilhed  from  each  other  in 
rcfpeft  of  frequency  by  x\\*i  mind;  or  if  every  pulfe 
of  the  air,  and  oicillation  of  the  menibrana  /ympa-iij 
t'xcite  innumerable  infinirelimal  vibrations  in  the  au- 
ditory nerves,  the  renewal  of  thefe  at  different  in- 
tervals according'co  the  different  gravity  or  acute- 
r.efs  of  the  found  will,  however,  afford  a  like  criterion. 

It  may  be  remarked,  that  grave  founds  are  in 
general  ftrong,  acute  ones  feeble.  For  the  bodies 
which  yield  grave  founds  are  in  general  large,  and 
confequer.tly  will  make  an  impreffion  upon  the  air  by 
a  large  number  of  trembling  particles. 

Vol.  I.  Q^  Thirdly, 


f 


226  Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing. 

Thirdly,  All  very  luiiil  noilcs  are  difagreeable. 
Now  it  is  cafy  to  conceive,  that  very  violent  agita- 
tions of  the  membrana  lympam  nnay  produce  the  fo- 
limon  of  contininry  in  the  finall  mcduljjiy  pai  tides 
of  the  auditory  nerve.  An  inflammation  in  the 
fmall  vtHVls  of  the  auditory  nerve  may  render  it  fo 
iulceptible  of  violent  vibiaiions,  as  to  be  hurt  by 
gentle  founds,  as  foiretirnes  h.ippens  in  dirtemj^ers; 
and  10  piodurc  th.it  acutenefs  in  the  fenfe  of  hear- 
ing,  Nvhich  anivvcib  to  the  ny^alopia  in  ihe  eye. 

Fouithly,  Single  mufical,  /.  e.  uniform  founds,  ^ 
whether  vocal  or  inflrumental,  arc  pleafant  in  pro-i; 
portion  to  their  loudnefs,  provided  this  be  not  ex- 
cefTive.  We  muft  therefoie  fuppofe  here,  that  the 
repeated  impulfes  of  the  air,  ac  equal  didances, 
make  the  vibrations  approach  to  the  folution  of 
continuity  j  yet  (bll  fo  as  to  fall  fhort  of  it. 

Fifthly,  Two  n  ufical  notes  founded  together, 
fuppofe  upon  an  organ  or  violin,  afford  a  gi eater 
original  pieafuie  than  one,  piovided  the  ratios  of 
their  vibrations  be  fufticiently  fimple.  Thus  any 
note  founded  with  its  eighth,  fifth,  fourth,  third  major  , 
or  minor,  fixth  major  or  minor,  affords  pleafure,  '"; 
the  ratios  being  here,  refpe6tivcly,  thofe  of  i  to  2,  || 
1  to  3,  3  to  4,  4  to  5,  5  to  6,  3  to  5,  and  5  to  8, 
which  are  all  very  fimple  ones.  But  a  note  with  its 
flat  or  fliarp,  fecond,  or  feventh,  or  flat  fifth,  is 
^^^^riginally  difigreeable.  It  may  be  obferved  alfo,  that 
'  "^^oncords  feem  to  be  originally  pleafant  in  proportion 
to  the  fur.plicity  of  the  ratios  by  which  they  are 
expreffcd,  /.  e.  in  the  order  above  fet  down.  Hence 
we  may  perhups  fufpe61:,  that  everi  the  concords  were 
originally  un;ileafant  to  the  ear  of  the  child,  fiom  the 
irregularity  of  the  vibrations  which  they  imprefs  upon 
the  membrana  tympaniy  and  confcquent  folution  of 
continuity'jTind  that  they  fell  at  laft  within  the  limits 
of  pleafure,' as  many  other  pains  do,  by  repetition. 
For   thus    thofe    concords    in   which    the   ratios  are 

fimpleft 


I 


\ 


^30 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing.  227 

fimpleft  would  become  pleafant  firft,  and  the  others 
would  continue  to  excite  pain,  or  to.  border  upon  it. 
It  is  agreeable  to  this,  that  difcords  become  at  laft 
pleafant  to  the  ears  of  thofe  that  are  much  conver- 
jfant  in  mufic,  and  that  the  too  frequent  recurrency  of 
concords  cloys. 

Sixthly,  Concords  founded  in  fucceflion  feem  to 
have  the  fame  effedl:,  in  kind,  upon  the  ear,  as 
when  founded  together,  only  lefs  in  degree.  But 
difcords  in  fuccefTion  do  not  offend,  unlefs  the 
chromatic  fucceflion  of  half  notes,  or  fome  fuch  re- 
markable ones,  and  even  thefe  pleafe  at  laft.  All 
this  follows  eafily  from  the  laft  paragraph  i  and  the 
prefent  paragraph,  with  the  two  laft,  taken  together, 
contain  the  principal  grounds  of  the  natural  and  ori- 
ginal pleafures  of  mufic.  The  pleafures  which  it  de- 
rives from  afibciation  will  be  confidered  hereafter. 


PROP.    LXVL 

Ti?  examine  how  far  the  Judgments  which  we  make  con- 
cerning the  Dijiance  and  Pojition  of  the  founding  Bodyy 
are  agreeable  to  the  Do6irine  of  Affociation. 

Sounds  ought  to  decreafe  in  the  reciprocal  duplicate 
ratio  of  the  diftance,  did  they  not  receive  fome 
fupport  from  the  refleftion  of  the  bodies  over  which 
|they  pafs.  This  makes  them  decreafe  in  a  lefs  ratio  j 
however,  they  do  decieafe  in  general  with  the  diftance^ 
and  this  decreafe,  being  an  affociate  of  the  increafe 
of  diftance,  ought  to  fuggeft  it  to  the  imagination. 
And,  agreeably  to  this,  we  may  obferve,  that,  when 
the  wind  oppofcs  the  found  of  bells,  they  appear 
Cirther  off;  when  a  perfon  calls  through  a  fpeaking 
rumpet,  he  appears  nearer,  than  at  the  true  diftance. 

Ah  to  the  poficion  of  the  founding  body,  we  have 
10  clear  or  certain  criterion,  unlefs   it  be   very   near 

0^2  us 


a 


22^  Of  the  Senfi  cf  Hearing. 

us ;  io  as  that  the  pulfcs  may  ftrikc  one  car,  or  one 
pare  of  the  licaci,  confuicfrably  Itrongcr  than  another. 
Htrnce  we  judge  of  the  polition  of  the  r[)cakcr,  or 
i'ouniiing  body,  by  the  eye,  or  by  fonie  other  method 
indrprndent  on  the  ear.  And  thus,  if  fron^  fomc 
miftakcn  piefumption  a  voice,  or  fountl,  fhall  be 
deemed  to  come  from  a  quarter  different  from  the 
true  plate  of  it,  we  fl"i?\)li^ontinue  in  that  error  fnjm 
the  ftrrngth  of  that  miliaken  prefumption.  ,■ 

By  laying  thcfe  tWin||  toocther,  and  alfo  confider-  - 
ing  farther,  tliai  inditlin^efs  in  articulate  founds  is 
an  af^bciatcd  maik  of  dillanre,  we  may  fee  hoVr 
ventrihquij  or  perfons  that  fpieak  in  their  throats, 
without  moving  their  lips,  im[>ofe  upon  the  audi- 
ence. Their  voice  is  faint  and  indiflinft,  and  there- 
■%t  fore  appears  to  coire  from  a  more  diflant  quarter 
than  the  fpeaker.  The  hearers  look  about  therc- 
foie,  and,  bring  furpiized,  tbtir  imagination  fixes 
ftrongly  upon  that  corner,  or  cavity,  which  appears 
moft  plaufiblc  ;  and  afttrwardb  they  continue  to  im- 
pofe  upon  theiT^clves  by  the  flrcngch  of  this  pre- 
judice. 

PROP.    Lxvif: 

'To  examwe  hozv  far  the  Poiver  of  dijli)i2,uijhing  articulate^ 
Sounds  depends  itpoti  the  Power  of  /ijjociatiou. 

One  may  fuppofe  the  external  and  internal  ear  to 
be  fo  formed,  as  that  all  the  differences  in  the 
vibrations  of  the  air,  which  arrive  at  the  ear,  may 
affedt  the  auditory  nerves  with  correfponding  dif- 
ferences. Let  us  therefore  fit  ft  confider  in  whdt  man- 
ner different  founds  imprcls  different  vibrations  upon 
the  air. 

Firft,  then,  Since  not  only  the  parts  about  the 
throat,  but  ihofe  of  the  mouth,  checks,  and  even 
of  the   whole  body,  efpecially  of  the  bones,  vibrate 

in 


1 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing.  229 

m  fpeaking,  the  figure  of  the  vibrations  imprefied 
jpon  the  air  by  the  human  voice  will  be  different 
I om  that  of  the  vibrations  prdceeding  from  a  violin, 
fiute,  &c.  provided  the  diltance  be  not  too  gieat. 
This  therefore  may  be  confidered  as  one  help  for 
iiftinfruifliine  articulate  founds  from  ail  others. 

Secondly,  Articulation  confifts  in  breaking  out 
''rom  a  whifper  into  found,  or  clcfing  the  found  in 
different  q-i.snnerSj  the  organs  of  fpeech  being  put 
aifo  into  different  fhapes,  fo  2^8  to  join  the  difFctrences 
mentioned  in  the  laft  paragraph  with  various  erup- 
tions; qnd  interruptions,  afcents  and  defcents  of 
found.  And  thus  each  letter  may  be  diftinguiflied 
from  every  other  by  hearing. 

Thirdly,  It  is  agreeable  to  all  this,  that  It  is  difB- 
cuk  at  great  diftances  to  diRinguifh  the  tone  of 
one  mufical  inftrument  from  another,  or  of  any  from 
the  tone  of  a  human  voice,  ceteris  paribus  j  or  to 
diflinguifh  articulate  Tounds  from  one  another.  For 
at  great  d'iftances  the  vibrations  of  the  air  are  cir- 
cular to  fenfe,  and  all  the  afcents,  defcents,  erup- 
tions and  interruptions  of  found,  which  diflinguifh 
one  compound  found  from  another,  are  confounded 
by  oMmberlefs  refledions  from  the  intermediate 
bodies. 

Fourthly,  We  may  obferve,  that  as  the  prefer ving 
the  diftinflion  of  place  is  the  chief  end  of  the  coats 
and  humours  in  the  organ  of  fight,  fo  the  diftinc- 
rion  of  time  is  of  the  greatefl  importance  in  hear- 
ing. It  feems  probable  therefore,  that  the  membrana 
'tympani,  fmall  bones,  and  their  imufcles,  are  fo  con- 
trived, as  by  their  actions  to  preferve  the  diftin6tion 
of  time,  i.  e.  to  extinsuifli  llrono;  founds,  and  to 
keep  up  weak  ones,  fo  as  that  the  laft  n)ay  not  be  too 
much  oveipowered  by  the  continuance  of  the  firfl  j 
juft  as  the  tteble  notes  of  a  harpfichord  would  be 
by  the  bafs  ones,  did  not  the  bits  of  cloth  affixed  to 

0^3  the 


230  Of  the  Senje  of  Hearing. 

the  jacks  check  the  vibrations  of  ihc  firings  in  clue 
time. 

Having  now  fhewn  how  articulate  founds  may  be 
dlflinguiflied  from  one  another,  and  from  all  other 
Ibunds }  1  next  oblerve,  thar,  in  fjft,  the  fpe.ikers 
do  not  pronounce  \':i  articulatt-iy  and  diflindly  in  com- 
mon converfation,  as  to  furnifh  the  hearers  with  the 
rcquifite  criterions  accoiding  to  the  foregoing  theory  ; 
but  that  wf  arrive  at  a  facility  of  underftanding  one 
another's  difcourfe,  chiefly  by  the  power  of  aflo- 
ciation. 

And,  firft,  It  is  needlef-;  to  pronounce  every  letter 
fo  as  to  diftinguilli    it    from    all   others.      For    then 
words,    which   are   compofed   of  letters,    would  each 
have  as  many  criterions  as  they  have  letters,  and  even 
more  ;  for   the  order  of  the   letters  is  a  criterion,  as 
well   as   the  found  of  each  letter.      In  like   manner, 
fentences   would   have   as   many  compound  criterions 
as  they  have  words,  befides  the  criterion  arifing  from 
the  particular  order  of  the  words. 
\        Secondly,  Since   words  are  formed  from  combina- 
j  \tions,   not   according  to  any   rule,   which    brings   up   '• 
(  all   the  combinations  of  twos,  threes,  &c.  in   order,    • 
I   but   by   particular   afTociaiions,  agreeably   to  the  na- 
\  .ture     of    each     language,     fince    alfo    fentences    are     j 
formed  in  the  fame  way,  the  feveral  component  parts    . 
ofwoids  and  fentences  fuggeit  each   other,  and  alfo 
the    whole    words    and    fentences    by    the    power    of 
affociation.      Thus  the   beginning   is   commonly   ob- 
ferved    to    fugged    the    whole,    both    in    words    and 
i  fentences;  and  the  fame  is  true,  in   a  lefs  degree,  of 
the  middles  and  ends. 

Thirdly,  The .  fubje<5\  matter  of  the  difcourfe, 
the  gedures  ufed  in  fpeaking,  a  familiar  acquaint-  j 
ance  with  the  particular  voice,  pronunciation,  gef- 
tures,  &:r.  of  the  fpeaker,  and  other  affociated  cir- 
cumftances  contribute  greatly  alfo.  And  therefore, 
on  the  other  hand,  we   find  it  difficult  to  diflinguifh 

proper  ,  ' 


fi 


III 


Of^the  Strife  of  Hearing.  231 

proper  names,  and  the  words  of  an  unknown 
Janguage,  and  to  underftand  a  perfon  that  is 
a  (Iranger,  or  that  ufes  no  a6tion. 

We  may  fee  alfo,  that  it  is  chiefly  by  the  means  of 
affbciated  circuml^lances,  that  the  founds  uttered  by 
ventriloqui  fugged  to  us  the  woids,  which  they  are 
fuppofed  to  pronounce  j  for  their  articulations  mud 
be  very  incomplete,  as  they  do  not  move  their  lips 
at  all. 

It  is  by  a  like  fet  of  aflbciated  circumftances  that 
we  are  enabled  to  read  with  fo  much  facility  the 
irregular  hand-writing  of  various  perfons,  and  of 
fome  more  than  others,  in  proportion  as  we  are  better 
acquainted    with    the    fubjeifl,    language,    hand-wri- 


ting, &c. 


PROP.     LXVIII. 


^he  Do5lrine  of  Sounds  illuflrates  and  favours  that  of 
the  Vibrations  of  the  fmall  medullary  Particles  of  the 
Brain^  and  nervous  Syftem. 

For  the  theory  of  founds  deduced  from  the  na- 
ture of  an  elaftic  fluid,  and  the  tremors  of  the 
particles  of  founding  bodies,  and  afterwards  verified, 
as  it  has  been,  by  numerous  ejjperiments,  becomes 
a  guide  to  us  in  all  inquiries  into  the  vibrationb  of 
other  elaftic  mediums,  fuch  as  the  sether,  and  into 
the  efFeifts,  which  fuch  vibrations  muft  impart  to  and 
receive  from  the  fmall  particles,  that  are  furrounded 
by  the  elaftic  medium.  And  the  general  tendency 
which  is  found  in  natural  bodies,  either  to  yield  a 
found  upon  percufllon,  or  at  leaft  to  fupport  and 
convey  founds  by  receiving  ifochronous  vibrations, 
and  reflefting  them,  fliews,  that  there  are  latent  aftive 
powers,  in  the  fmall  paits  of  bodies,  which  difpofe 
them  to  vibrate.  Now,  if  there  be  fuch  powers  in 
the  biggeft  component  particles,  analogy  inclines  one 
to  expedl  them  in  the  feveral  defcending  orders. 

0^4  The 


132 


Of  the  Senje  of  Fkaring. 


i 


The  do(5lrinc  of  founds  does  alfo  furnifh  ns  widi 
an  anfwcr  to  one  of  the  principal  and  mod  obvious 
difficulties  attending  the  fuppofuion,  that  all  rrnfa- 
tion,  thought,  and  motion,  is  performed  by  vibra- 
tions in  the  medullary  fubflc^nce.  For  it  may  be 
objr6led,  that  fuch  a  number  of  different  vibrations, 
as  feems  to  be  required  in  certain  cafes,  can  fcarce 
cxill  together  in  the  medullary  fubltance.  Thus  it 
is  not  uncommon  for  a  perfon  to  receive  a  ferics  of 
fenfations,  carry  on  a  train  of  thought,  and  per- 
form a  courfe  of  externri  atlions,  which  have  little 
conneflion  with  each  other,  at  the  fame  time.  Now 
to  this  we  may  anfwer,  that  vibrations  as  different 
from  each  other  do,  in  h6Xy  exifl:  together  in  common 
air,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  perceived  diftin(5\ly. 
'1  hus  a  perfon  may  liften  to  what  part  he  pleafes  in  a 
concert  of  mufic,  and  maflers  in  th"^  art  can  liften 
to  more  than  one.  They  can  alfo  at  the  fame  time 
receive,  attend  to,  and  underfland  the  vibrations  of 
the  air,  arifing  from  the  difcourfe  of  other  perfons. 
But  in  whatever  manner  thefe  different  vibrations  can 
exifl  together  precifely  at  the  fame  inftant,  or  rather 
fucceed  each  other  at  infinitefimal  intervals,  without 
confufion;  in  the  fame  manner  may  vibrations  and 
vibratiuncles  exift  together,  or  fucceed  each  other, 
without  confufion  alfo,  in  the  medullary  fubftance : 
and  by  whatever  power  the  foul  is  qualified  to  attend 
to,  and  diftinguifh  from  each  other,  thefe  feveral  vibra- 
tions of  the  air,  by  the  fame  power  may  it  corre- 
fpond  to  the  vibrations  in  the  medullary  fubffance, 
fo  that  each  fhall  have  its  peculiar  effe6t  of  producing 
the  appropriated  fenfation,  thought,  and  motion. 
It  is  to  be  obferved  farther,  that  there  is  a  difficulty 
in  performing  both  the  things  here  mentioned  ;  that 
confufion  does  often  arife;  and  that  where  any  perfon 
is  remarkable  for  doing  more  than  one  thing  at  once, 
it  is  in  confequence  of  gieat  practice,  and  alfo  of 
cxquifite  mental   powers,   i.  e.  of  an   exquifite  make 

of  . 


\ 


^. 


Of  the  Senje  of  Hearing.  233 

of  the  medullary  fubftance,  according  to  the  theory 
of  tliefe  papers. 


.•7/     Mft' 


PROP.     LXIX. 

To  explain  in  what  Manner^  and  to  what  Degree, 
agreeable  and  di/agreeable  Sounds  contributey  in  the 
IVay  of  AJfcciaiion^  to  the  Formation  of  our  inteU 
le5iual  Pleafures  and  Pains. 

As  all  moderate  and  tolerably  uniform  founds 
pkafe  young  children,  and  the  original  pleafures 
from  concords  founded  together,  from  the  fucceffion 
of  both  concords  and  difcords,  and  even  from  clear, 
mufical  founds,  confidered  feparately,  remain  wi[h  us 
through  the  whole  progrefs  of  life,  it  is  evident,  that 
many  of  our  intel!e6tual  pleafures  mud  be  illuminated 
and  augmented  by  them.  And,  on  the  contrary, 
harfh,  irregular,  and  violently  loud  noifes  muft  add 
fomething  to  the  difagreeablenefs  of  the  objedls  and 
ideas,  with  which  they  are  often  afibciated. 

The  pleafures  of  mufic  are  compofed,  as  has  been 
already  obferved,  partly  of  the  original,  corporeal 
pleafures  of  found,  and  partly  of  afibciated  ones. 
When  thefe  pleafures  are  arrived  at  tolerable  per- 
fecSbion,  and  the  feveral  compounding  parts  cemented 
fufficiently  by  afibciation,  they  are  transferred  back 
again  upon  a  great  variety  of  objeds  and  ideas,  and 
diffufe  joy,  good- will,  anger,  compafiion,  Ibrrow, 
melancholy,  &c.  upon  the  various  fcenes  and  events 
of  life  J  and  fo  on  reciprocally  without  perceptible 
limits. 

The  corporeal  pleafures  from  articulate  founds  are 
either  evanefcent  from  the  firfb,  or,  however,  become 
fo  very  early  in  life.  By  this  means  we  are  much 
better  qualified  to  receive  information,  with  mental 
pleafure  and  improvement,  from  them ;  and  the  ear 

brrnjTie': 


234 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing. 


I 

I 


becomes,  like  the  eye,  a  method  of  perception  fuited 
to  ihc  wants  of  a  fpiritnal  bting.  And  indeed  when 
wc  compare  the  imperfedions  of  fuch  as  have  never 
heard,  with  thofe  of  perfons  that  have  never  feen,  it 
appears,  that  the  ear  is  of  much  more  importance  to 
us,  confidered  as  fpiriiual  beings,  than  the  eye. 
This  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  great  ufe  and  necefTity 
of  words  for  the  improvement  of  our  knowledge, 
and  enlargement  of  our  affeflions  ;  of  which  I  fliall 
have  particular  occafion  to  treat  hereafter.  An  ac- 
curate inquiry  into  the  mental  progrefs  of  peifons 
deprived  of  the  advantages  of  language,  by  being 
born  deaf,  would  be  a  flill  better  tefh  of  the  theoiy  of 
thefe  papers,  than  a  like  inquiry  concerning  peilbns 
born  blind. 

PROP.     LXX. 

^0  gi'Vi  an  Account  of  the  Ideas  generated  by  audible 

Impreffions, 

The  ideas  which  audible  imprefTions  leave  in  the 
region  of  the  brain,  that  correlponds  to  the  auditory 
nerves,  are,  next  to  the  ideas  of  fight,  the  inoft 
vivid  and  definite  of  anyj  and  all  the  obfervations 
above  made  upon  the  ideas  of  fight  may  be  applied 
to  thofe  of  hearing,  proper  changes  and  allowances 
being  made.  Thus,  after  hearing  mufic,  converfing 
much  with  the  fame  peifon,  in  general  diforders  of 
the  brain,  or  particular  ones  of  the  nervous  fpaf- 
modic  kind  in  the  ftomach,  after  taking  opium,  in 
dreams,  in  madnefs,  trains  of  audible  ideas  force 
themfelves  upon  the  fancy,  in  nearly  the  fame 
manner,  as  trains  of  vifible  ideas  do  in  like  cafes. 
And  ic  may  be,  that  in  pafilng  over  words  with 
our  eye,  in  viewing  objeds,  in  thinking,  and 
particularly  in  writing  and  fpeaking,  faint  miniatures 
of  the  founds  of  words  pafs  over  the  ear.  I  even 
fufpect,  that,  in  fpeaking,  thefe  miniatures  are  the 
aflbciated    circumftances    which    excite    the    aftion, 

be 


Of  the  Senfe  of  Hearing.  235 


.1- 


bb  it  voluntary,  or  fecondarily  automatic.  For  chil- 
dren learn  to  fpeak  chiefly  by  repeating  the  founds 
which  they  hear,  /'.  e.  thefe  founds  are  the  affociaicd 
circumftancesj  which  excite  to  adion.  But  if  the 
found  does  this,  the  idea  of  it  muft  get  the  fame 
power  by  degrees.  I  grant  indeed,  that  the  pitlures 
of  words  in  the  eye,  and  their  ideas,  may  be  like 
alTociated  circumftances,  exciting  to  fpeak ;  and  fince 
it  is  neceffary,  according  to  the  theory  of  thefe 
papers,  that  every  femivoluntary,  voluntary,  and  fe- 
condarily automatic  aflion,  fhould  be  excited  by  an 
aff)ciated  circumftance,  one  may  reckon  words  feen, 
and  their  vifible  ideas,  amongft  the  number  of  fuch 
cir"cumftanc^s.  But  words  heard,  and  their  audible 
ideas,  have  a  prior  claim  ;  and,  in  perfons  that  can- 
not read  or  write,  almoft  the  only  one.  It  confirms 
this,  that  in  writing  one  is  often  apt  to  mif-fpell  in 
conformity  with  the  pronunciation,  as  in  writing  hear 
for  here ;  for  this  may  proceed  from  the  audible  idea, 
which  is  the  fame  in  both  cafes  ;  cannot  from  the 
vifible  one.  Where  a  perfon  mif-fpells  fuitable  to  a 
mifpronunciation,  which  fometimes  happens,  it  can 
fcarce  be  accounted  for  upon  other  principles. 
However,  in  writing,  the  affociated  circumftance, 
which  excites  the  action  of  the  hand,  is  moft  probably 
the  vifible  idea  of  the  word,  not  the  audible  one. 

If  it  be  obie(5led  to  the  fuppofition  of  thefe  audible 
trains,  that  we  ought  to  be  confcious  of  them,  1 
anfwer,  that  we  are  in  fome  cafes ;  which  is  an  argu- 
ment, that  they  take  place  in  all,  in  a  lefs  degree  j 
that  the  greater  vividnefs  of  the  vifible  trains  makes 
us  not  attend  to,  or  recollecfl  them,  till  the  confciouf- 
nefs  or  memory  be  variiihed  ;  and  that  even  vifible 
trains  do  not  appear  as  obje6ls  of  confcioufnefs  and 
memory,  till  we  begin  to  attend  to  them,  and  watch 
the  evanefcent  perceptions  of  our  minds. 
\  The  ideas  of  fight  and  hearing  together  are  the 
\  principal   ftorehoufe   of  the    fancy    or    imagination; 

and 


13^ 


Of  the  Sct}je  of  Hearing. 


and  the  inMginativc  arts  of  painting  and  mufic  ftand 
in  tlir  lame  relation  to  them  refpcrtflivclv.  Poetry 
comprehends  both  by  taking  in  language,  which 
is  the  general  rcprcfintative  of  all  our  ideas  , and 
a(Tc<ftions. 

As   there   is  an   artificial    memory    relative   to    the 
eye,  by  which  trains  of  vifible   ideas,  laid  up  in  the 
ipemorv  in  a  certain  order,  are  made  to  fuggcft  both 
things  thcmfclves,  and   the  order   in   which  we  defne 
to  remember  tliem  ;   To  compendious  trains  of  tech- 
nical  words  formed   into  verfes  may  be  made  to  fug- 
gelt  other  words,  alfo  the   numeral   figures  in   a  cer- 
tain order  J  and,  by  this  means,  to  biing   to  view,  at 
pleafure,    the   principles   and   materials   of  knowledge 
for   meditation,   inquiry,    and    more   pt-rfed   digeliion 
by   the    mind,   as   appears    from    Dr.  Gr^^y's   Memoria 
Tcchiiia.     The  vifible  loci   make   a  ftronge-r  iii>pref- 
fion   on   the    fancy,    and   therefore   excel    the   audible 
ones  in  that  view;   but  the  audible  ones  have  a  m.uch 
mpre   ready  and  definite  connection  with  the  things  to 
be   remembered ;    and   therefore    feem    m.oft    proper, 
upon  the  whole,  in  mofl.  branches  of  literature.     And 
as  Dr.  Grey\  method  is  highly  ufeful  in  general,  fo  it 
is  particularly  excellent  in   refpefl  of  all   mem.oiables 
that   are  reprefented   by  numeral  figures.     For,  when 
the  numeral   figures   are  denoted    by    letters,    collec- 
tions of  them,  fuch   as   date?,    and  quantities  of  all 
kinds,    make   fhort  and  definite  imprefllons  upon  the 
ear  j  which  are  not  only  eafy  to  be   remembert-d,  but 
allb   preferve  the   order  of  the  figures   without  dan- 
ger of  error :  whereas   neither  the  impreffions  which 
collections  of  figures  make  upon   the  eye,  nor  thofe 
which    their    enunciations    in    words  at  length   make 
lipon   the   ear,   csin   be   remembered   Vvith    facility   or 
precifionj    becaufe   neither   figures,    nor  their   names, 
cohere   together,   fo  as   that   the   precedent  fliall   fugj 
ged  the  fubfequent;   as  the   letters  do  in  colledlions 
of  them,  capable  of  being  pronounced.     When  the 

technical 


Of  the  Senje  cf  Hearing.  '.^     237 

cecht^ical  word  coincides  with,    or  approaches  to,  '^  w 
familiar  one,  it  is   remembered  with   greater   facility. 
AlTociation  is  every  where  confpicuous  in  thefe  things. 

^ 
PROP.     LXXI. 

To  explain  the  automatic  Mot  mis  y  which  are  excited  by 
Imfrejfions  made  on  the  Ear, 

It  does  not  appear  at  all  improbable,  that  the  vi- 
brations, which  are  excited  by  founds  in  the  car- 
tildgi^  of  the  auricle  and  meatus  auditoriuSj  fliould 
pafs  into  the  fmail  mufcles  of  the  auricle,  and  there 
occafion  automatic  riiOtions.  And  1  gucfs  in  par- 
ticular, that  in  very  loud  founds,  the  cartilages 
would  be  made  to  lie  clofer  to  the  head.  But  the 
fmallnefs  of  thefe  mufcles,  and  the  pracftice  of  bind- 
ing down  the  ears  of  new-boin  children  clofe  to 
the  head,  which  relirains  the  natural  aflion  of  thefe 
mufcles,  whatever  it  be,  prevent  our  making  any 
certain  judgment. 

As  10  the  four  mufcles  which  belong  to  the  fmall 
bones,  it  appears  to  me,  that  fince  the  exfernus  and 
chiiquus  lie  out  of  the  tympanumy  expofed  to  the 
common  air,  and  are  alfo  fo  fituated,  that  the  ex^ 
termis  may  receive  vibrations  from  the  cartilage  of 
the  meatus  audi/orius,  the  obiiquus  from_the  carti- 
lage of  the  frccejfus  ra-jianus,  into  which  it  is  in- 
fertcd,  they  mult  be  much  more  afFeded  by  loud 
founds,  than  the  internus  or  mujcidus  Jlapedis.  ^It 
follows  therefore,  that  the  membrana  tympani  will  be 
relaxed  automatically  by  loud  founds.  Here  there- 
fore is  another  remarkable  coincidence  between  effi- 
cient and  final  caufcs. 

For  what  reafons  the  mufculus  infernusy  and  muf~ 
cuius  JlapediSy  may  a6t  peculiarly  in  weak  founds,  is 
difficult  to  fay.  They  may  perhaps,  as  was  above 
conjeftured  cf  the  radiated  fibres  of  the  irisy  de- 
pend 


'«• 


238      ^  0/ f be  Sen/e  of  Hearing, 

pcm\  ciiiflly  on  the  influtrnccs  whicli  dcfccnd  from 
the  brain,  and  therefore  a6l:  always,  when  the  other 
two  will  give  them  leave.  It  is  moll  probable, 
ih  It  the  four  iiiulclcs  a6l  in  various  proportions  and 
combinations,  lo  as  to  anfwer  a  variety  of  purpofes. 
liut  there  is  very  little,  that  is  fatisfaftoty,  to  be  met 
wirh  in  books  of  anatomy  and  phyfiology  hitherto, 
concerning  the  peculiar  minuie  ufcs  and  fundlions 
of  the  leveral  parts  of  the  organ  of  hearing. 

P  R  O  P.    Lxxn. 

T'o  explain  the  Marnier  and  Degree^  in  ivhich  the  auto- 
matic Motions^  mentioned  in  the  lajl  Propofitiony  are 
^      influenced  by  "joluntary  andjemivoluntary  Powers. 

Since   grave   founds   are    in  general    loud,    acute 
ones   Weak,  the   relaxation  of  the   memhrana  tympanic 
which   firrt   attends   upon   loud   founds  automatically, 
will    afterwards    by    aflbciation,    be   made    to   attend 
upon   grave  ones,    even   though   they  are   not  loud ; 
and,    in   like   manner,    the   membrane  will   be   tenle 
from   acute   founds,    though  they   fhould   be  fbong ; 
/',  c.    the   membrane    will,    by    afTociation,    be   fitted 
to  vibrate  ifochronoufly   with   the  feveral  tones;  juft 
as  the  convexity  of  the  cornea  is  made  by  aflbciation 
to   fuit  itfelf  to  the  feveral   diftanccs.     The  accom- 
modation is  at  firft  grofs   in   both   cafes;  but   is   per- 
fected   afterwards    from    the    vitw    of    pleafure    and 
convenience,    by  means   of  the  frequent   recurrency 
of  the  a(ftions.     See  Prop.  2.2.   Cor.  i. 
j      We  feem  alfo  to  have   a   voluntary  power  of  pre- 
J  paring  the  ear  previoufly   for  very    ftrong,    or    very 
J  weak  founds,  which  we  expetSt  to  hear,  juft  as  it  was 
I  before  obferved   of  the  eye,  that  we  can  fuit  it  pre- 
/  vioufly  to  fee  at  an  expe6ted  diftance.    The  generation 
ii    of  thcfe  powers   is  the  fame,    as  that   of  the   other 
I     voluntary  ones.  ^ 

SECT. 


Of  the  Defires,  Cfff.  239 


SECT.     VI. 

OF  THE  DESIRES  OF  THE   SEXES  TOWARDS 

EACH    OTHER. 

PROP.     LXXIII. 

'To  examine  how  far  the  Defires  of  the  Sexes  towards 
each  other  are  of  a  fa£iitious  Nature^  and  deducible 
from  the  Theory  of  thefe  Papers. 

Here  we  are  to  obferve,  firft,  That  when  a  ge- 
neral pleafuiable  flate  is  introduced  into  the  body, 
either  by  direct  innpreffions,  or  by  aflfociated  influ- 
ences, the  organs  of  generation  muft  fynnpathize  with 
this  general  (late,  for  the  fame  reafons  as  the^'  other 
parts  do.  They  muft  therefore  be  affcftcd  with  vi- 
brations in  their  nerves,  which  rife  above  indifference 
into  the  limits  of  pleafure  from  youth,  health,  grate- 
ful aliment,  the  pleafures  of  imagination,  ambition, 
and  fympathy,  or  any  other  caufe,  which  diffufes 
grateful  vibrations  over  the  whole  fyftem. 

Secondly,  As  thefe  organs  are  endued  with**a 
greater  degree  of  fcnfibility  than  the  other  parts,  from 
their  make,  and  the  peculiar  ftr^yflure  and  difpofitiori 
of  their  nerves,  whatever  thefe  be,  we  may  expect, 
that  they  fhould  be  more  affedled  by  thefe  general 
pleafurable  ftates  of  the  nervous  fyrttm  than  the 
other  parts. 

Thirdly,  The  diftention  of  the  cells  of  the  veficula 
feminaleSy  and  of  the  finufes  of  the  iiterusy  which  take 
place  about  the  time  of  puberty,  mud  make  thefe 
organs  nijOre  particularly  irritable  then.  It  may 
perhaps  be,  that  the  acrimony  of  the  urine  2,nd  faces ^ 
which  make  vivid  impreffions  on  the  neighbouring 
parts.,  have  alfo  a  fhare  in  increafing  the  irritability 
of  the  organs  of  generation.      <?■ 

Fourthly, 


240  Of  the  Dcfircs  of  the 

Fourthly,  Young  pcrfons  hear  and  read  nuiTibcrlefb 
things  in  this  degenerate  and  corrupt  il.ite  of  human 
lift',  which  carry  nervous  inHuenccs  of  the  pleafurublc 
kind  (he  they  vibrations,  or  any  orhcr  ipecies  of 
motion)  to  the  organs  of  generation.  This  will 
be  better  underftood,  if  the  reader  pleafes  to  recoiled 
what  was  delivered  aiiovc  concerning  the  methods, 
by  which  we  learn  to  diftingiiifh  the  fenfations  of 
the  parts  external  and  int,'rnal  from  each  oth«T.  For 
ir\v!ll  be  eafy  to  fee,  that  when  we  are  once  arrived  at 
this  power,  the  alTociated  circumllances  of  any 
fc-niations,  fuch  as  the  language  that  '  rcFates  to 
fhem^  will  ||cal  the  ideas  of  thefe  fenfations. 

Firthly,  The  particular  fhame  vtbich  regards  the 
organs  of  generation,  may,  when  confidered  as  an 
aflbciatcd  circumfbance,  like  other  pains,  be  fo  far 
diniiniflicd  as  to  fall  within  the  lirnics  of  pleafure,  and 
add  confiderably  to  the  fuiTi  total. 

Sixthly,  The  fources  here  pointed  out  feem   fuffi- 
cient  to   account  for  the  general  defires,    which   arc 
obfervable  in  young  perfonsj  and   which,  when   not 
allov/ed  and  indulged,  may  be  confidered  as  within* 
tjje  confin^  of  viriiie. 

Scventi^,  It  is  ufual  for  thefe  defires,  after  fome 
lime,  to  fix  upon  a  particular  objeifl,  on  account  of 
the  apprehended  bejiipty  of  the  perfon,  or  perfedion 
of  the  mind,  alfo  from  miutual  obligations,  or  maiks 
of  afFedljan,  from  more  frequen:  intercourfcs,  &:c. 
after  which  thefe  defires  fuggefi:,  and  are  fuo^efted 
by,  the  idea  of  the  beloved  perlbn,  and  all  its  alTo- 
ciates,  reciprocally  and  indefinitely,  fo  as  in  fome  cafes 
to  engrofs  the  whole  fancy  and  mind>.  However, 
this  particular  attachment,  when  under  proper  reftric- 
tions  and  regulations,  is  not  only  within  fhe  confines 
of  virtue,  but  ofcen  the  parent  of  the  mod  difin:ere(.lcd,  u 
and  pure,  and  exalted  kinds  of  it.  '\ 

Eighthly,  When  thefe  defires  are  gratified,  the 
id^  of  the  beloved  ^erfon,  and  its  ailbciatcs,  mud 

now 


Sexes  towards  each  other.  241 

now  be  aflbciated  with  the  ftate  of  neutrality  and  indif- 
ference, that  fucceeds  after  gratification.  Whence  it 
appears,  that  that  part  of  the  afFedion  towards  the 
beloved  perfon,  which  arifes  from  giofs  aninnal 
caufes,  cannot  remain  long  at  its  height,  and  may 
fall  very  faft.  However,  if  the  other  fources  of  affec- 
tion grow  ftronger,  the  fum  total  may  continue  the 
fame,  or  even  increafe. 

Ninthly,  When  impure  defires  are  allowed,  in- 
dulged, and  heightened  voluntarily,  it  is  evident  from 
the  dodlrine  of  affociation,  that  they  will  draw  to 
themfelves  all  the  other  pleafures  of  our  nature,  and 
even  by  adhering  to  many  neutral  circumftances, 
convert  them  into  incentives  and  temptations.  So 
that  all  the  defires,  defigns,  and  ideas  of  fuch  per- 
fons  are  tainted  with  luft.  However,  the  dileafes 
and  fufferings,  bodily  and  mental,  which  this  vice 
brings  upon  men,  do,  after  fome  time,  often  check 
the  exorbitancy  of  it,  ftill  in  the  way  of  affociation. 
But  impure  defires  fubfift,  like  vicious  ones  of  other 
kinds,  long  after  the  pains  outweigh  the  pleafures, 
inafmuch  as  they  mud  be  fuppofed  not  to  begin  to 
decline  till  the  pains  apprehended  to  arife  from  them, 
and  thus  aflbciated  with  them,  become  equal  to  the 
pleafures. 

Tenthly,  It  appears  from  the  courfe  of  reafoning 
here  ufed,  that  impure  and  vicious  defires,  indulged 
and  heightened  voluntarily,  can  by  no  means  confifi: 
with  a  particular  attachment  and  coimnement;  alfo 
that  they  muft  not  only  end  frequently  in  indifference 
but  even  in  hatred  and  abhorrence.  For  the  proper 
mental  fources  of  affeftion  are  not  only  wanting  in 
thefe  cafes,  but  many  difpleafing  and  odious  qualities 
and  difpofitions  of  mind  mufi:  offer  themfelves  to  view 
by  degrees. 

Eleventhly,  As  the  defires  and  pleafures  of  this 
kind  are  thus  increafed  by  affociated  influences  from 
other  parts  of  our  natures,  fo  they  are  refleded  back 

Vol.  1.  R  by 


242  Of  the  Defires,  i^c. 

by  innumerable  aflbciatcd  methods,  dirc(5l  and  in- 
dirc(5t,  upon  the  various  incidents  and  events  of  life, 
fo  as  to  alfecfl  in  ffconclary  ways  even  [hofe  who  have 
never  expeticnced  the  grofs  corporeal  gratification. 
And,  notvvithflanding  the  great  and  public  niifchicfs, 
which  arilc  from  the  ungovernable  defircs  of  the  vi- 
cious, there  is  great  rcafon,  even  fiom  this  theory, 
to  apprehend,  that,  if  this  fource  of  the  benevolent 
affe«5lions  was  cut  off,  all  other  circumftances  remain- 
ing the  fame,  mankind  would  become  much  more 
felfifli  and  malicious,  much  more  wicked  and  miler- 
able  upon  the  whole,  than  they  now  are. 

Twelfchly,   I  have  hitherto  chiefly    confidered    how 
far  the  prefcnt  fubjr6l    is  agreeable  to  the  do6lrine  of 
aflbciation,    but,    if    phyficians    and    anatomids    will 
compaie  the  circumftances  of  the  fcnfations  and  mo-      , 
tions  of  thefe   organs   with   the  general   theory   deli-  » j 
vered   in   the   firlt  chapter,  they  may  fee  confiderable 
evidences   for   fenfory    vibrations,    for    their    running 
along    membranes,    and    affcdling    the    neighbouring 
mufcles   in   a  particular   manner :  they    may  fee  aUo,  , 
that  mufcular  contractions,   which  are  nearly  automa- 
tic at  fiift,  become  afterwards  fubjedt  to  the   influence 
of  ideas.  j 

Thirteenthly,  The  theory  here  propofed  for  ex-  ^ 
plaining  the  natui'e  and  growth  of  thefe  defires  fhews 
in  every  flep,  how  watchful  every  perfon,  who  de- 
fines true  chaftity  and  purity  of  heart,  ought  to  be 
over  his  thoughts,  his  difcourfes,  his  ftudies,  and 
his  intercourfes  with  the  world  in  general,  and  with 
the  other  fex  in  particular.  There  is  no  fccurity  but 
in  flight,  in  turning  our  minds  from  all  the  aflTociated 
circumftances,  and  begetting  a  new  train  of  thoughts 
and  defires,  by  an  honcft,  virtuous,  religious  atten- 
tion to  the  duty  of  the  time  and  place.  To  which 
muft  be  added  great  abftinence  in  diet,  and  bodily 
labour,  if  required. 

SECT. 


Of  the  Motions  of  the  Heart.  243 


SECT.     VII. 

OF  OTHER  MOTIONS,  AUTOMATIC  AND  VOLUN- 
TARY, NOT  CONSIDERED  IN  THE  FOREGOING 
SECTIONS  OF  THIS  CHAPTER. 

PROP.     LXXIV. 

7<7  examine  how  far  the  Motions  of  the  Heart ,  ordinary 
and  extraordinary y  are  agreeable  to  the  'Theory  of 
thefe  Papers. 

Here  I  obferve, 

Firft,  That  the  motion  of  the  heart  is  conftant, 
more  equable  than  any  other  in  the  body,  and 
cannot  be  fuppofed  to  proceed  from  impreffions  made 
on  the  neighbouring  parts ;  which  things  agree  well 
together  upon  the  fuppofition  of  the  dodrine  of 
vibrations :  for  thus  it  cannot  proceed  from  the  firft 
or  fourth  fource  of  motoiy  vibrations;  and  if  it 
proceeds  from  the  fecond  and  third,  it  ought  to  be 
conftant,  and  nearly  equable. 

Secondly,  We  are  not  to  inquire,  how  the  heart 
is  firft  put  into  motion  in  the  foetus,  but  only  how 
its  ordinary  motions  may  be  continued,  by  means  of 
vibrations  defcending  from  the  brain,  after  they  are 
once  begun. 

Now,  for  this  purpofe,  let  us  fuppofe,  that  the 
auricles,  with  the  beginnings  of  the  pulmonary  ar- 
tery and  aorta,  have  finiftied  their  contra6tions ;  and 
that  the  ventricles  and  coronary  veflels  are  full.  It 
follows,  that  the  ventricles  will  now  be  excited  to 
contra6lion  by  three  caufes,  viz.  by  the  vibrations 
which  have  continued  to  defcend  freely  into  their 
fibres,  ever  fince  their  laft  contraftion  was  finiftied, 
by  their  diftention  from  fuinefs,  and  by  the  motion 
and  impulfe  of  the  blood  in  the  coronary  veflels :  but 

R  2  from 


244  ^f  '^'  Mofienis  of  the  Heart. 

from  the  moment  that  the  ventricles  begin  to  con- 
iraifl,  the  auricles  and  arteries  will  begin  to  fill,  and 
will  be  fulled  at  the  inltant  when  their  contraftion  is 
finiflicd.  1  he  auricles  and  arteries  miift  therefore 
beoin  to  contraft  at  this  inftant,  from  defcending 
vibrations  and  diftention,  and  the  vrntricles  to  be 
relaxed  and  filled,  the  vibrations  in  their  fibres  being 
checked  by  their  part  coniradion.  Let  thelc  actions 
be  completed,  and  the  heait  will  be  in  the  circum- 
ftances  firil  fiippofcd,  /.  e.  the  ventriclt-s  will  be 
ready  for  a  (vc{\\  contradion,  and  fo  on  alternately, 
as  long  as  life  continues. 

Ihirdly,  The  vibrations  which  keep  up  the  heart's 
motion,  are  nearly  allied  to  thofe  arifing  from  heat; 
for  the  fecond  fource  of  motory  vibrations  is  the  re- 
fidue  of  all  the  vibrations  excited  in  the  various  parts 
of  the  body  ;  and  the  third  arifes  chiefly  from  ihc 
heat  of  the  blood.  We  may  expefl  therefore,  that 
the  heart  fliould  contra<5i:  either  more  frequently,  or 
more  ftrongly,  or  both,  when  the  body  is  heated. 
And  thus  it  is,  as  may  appear  from  obfervations  upon 
the  pulfe  in  fevers,  in  fleep,  after  eating,  in  pains 
or  dillempers  attended  with  an  increafe  of  heat,  &c. 
in  which  the  motion  of  the  blood  isincreafed;  whereas 
in  nervous  pains  attended  with  coldnefs  of  the  extre- 
mities, the  pulfe  is  low  and  flow. 

Fourthly,  In  the  declenfion  of  fevers  the  pulfe  is 
quick  and  feeble.  It  is  feeble,  becaufe  the  whole  * 
body  is  fo ;  and  quick,  partly  from  the  new  habit  \ 
fuperinduced  by  the  heat  in  the  beginning  of  the 
fever ;  partly,  becaufe  in  fevers  the  heart  is  always 
kf'pt  nearly  full,  i.  e.  nearly  at  fuch  a  degree  of  dif- 
tencion  as  incites  it  to  contra6lion,  the  principal  caufes 
of  which  afe  the  weaknefs  and  inaftivity  of  the  body  : 
hence  in  general  the  pulfe  is  quick  and  feeble  in 
perfons  of  relaxed  habits  ;  the  contrary  in  ftrong  ones. 

Fifthly,    The    pulfe   is   quick   in   young  and   fmall 
animals ;  flow  in  old  and  large  ones.     For  this,  va- 
rious 


Of  the  Motions  of  the  Heart.  245 

rious  reafons  may  be  afllgned;  as  firft,  that  if  the 
velocity  wherewith  the  fides  of  the  heart  move  to- 
wards each  other  be  the  fame,  the  contradion  muft 
be  fooner  accomplifhed  in  fmall  hearts  than  in  large 
ones.  Secondly,  that  the  fibres  in  young  animals 
are  irritable,  and  foon  excited  to  contra6lion,  by 
diftention,  &c.  Thirdly,  that  the  contraction  is  per- 
formed flowly  in  old  animals;  and,  fourthly,  that 
fliort  fibres  are  perhaps  fooner  excited  to  contraction 
than  long  ones,  it  being  necefiary  perhaps,  that  the 
vibrations  fhould  be  reverberated  from  each  end 
of  the  fibres,  for  many  fucceffions  before  they  can 
rife  to  a  certain  pitch.  It  agrees  with  this,  that  re- 
ciprocal motions  are  more  frequent  in  general,  and 
ceteris  manentibusy  as  the  anisnal  is  lefs ;  that  the 
limbs  have  both  long  and  fhort  flexors  and  extenfors, 
the  firft  for  great  degiees  of  motion,  the  laft  for  making 
a  quick  beginning;  that  the  capfuiar  ligaments  of  the 
joints  have  (hort  mufcular  fibres  inferred  into  them, 
in  order  to  keep  them  from  being  pinched  between 
the  bones  in  the  motions  of  the  joints,  as  IVinJlow 
has  obferved;  which  they  could  not  do,  had  not  their 
contradlion  the  ftart'of  the  contractjons  which  move 
the  joint;  and,  laftly,  that  the  fibres  which  compofe 
the  heart,  are  all  of  equal  lengths,  according  to  Dr. 
Stewart's,  analyfis  of  them.     See  Phil.  Tranf.  n.  460. 

Sixthly,  The  heart  may  move  inceffantly  without 
fatigue,  if  we  only  fuppofc  the  recruits  to  be  fuffi- 
:ienr,  and  the  degree  of  motion  to  be  within  due  li- 
mits. And  it  may  be,  that  in  labouring  men  the 
mufcles  of  the  limbs  are  as  much  exerted  upon  the 
■/hole  as  the  heart.  The  warmth  in  which  the  heart 
is  kept,  and  its  receiving  nerves  from  the  eighth  pair 
and  intercodal,  which  feem  to  be  particularly  ex- 
empted from  venal  compreflion,  dcferve  notice  here: 
but  the  conftant  motion  of  the  blood  is  principally  to 
be  confidered,  being  the  caufc  as  well  as  the  effecft 
of  the  conftant  motion  of  the  heart. 

R  3  Seventhly, 


246  0/  the  Motions  of  the  Heart. 

Sfventhly,  Since  lying  down  prevents  or  alleviates 
the  f'amliMg  which  fometiines  ha[)})cns  iluring  bleed- 
ing, one  may  kippole  that  this  fainting,  and  the  con- 
fequcnt  abatement  or  cefTation  of  the  motion  of  thq 
lieart  arife,  becaufc  a  quantity  of  blood,  fufficient  to 
keep  up  the  vibrations  in  the  brain,  could  not  afcend 
thither  in  an  ere(fc  pollure. 

Eighthly,  Sudden  and  violent  pain?;,  fuch  as  thofe 
from  wounds  increafe  the  motion  of  the  heart.  This 
may  be  accounted  for  from  the  violent  vibrations  which 
afcend  to  the  brain,  and  are  thence  propagated  to  the 
heart.  But  may  not  vibrations  afcend  alfo  diredtly 
from  the  wounded  part,  along  the  courfc  of  the  ar- 
teries and  veins,  to  the  heart  ? 

Ninthly,  All  the  pafTions  of  the  mind  increafe  the 
motion  of  the  heart,  as  might  be  expected:  but 
melanciioly,  when  it  makes  men  inactive,  and  un- 
influenced by  the  imprefllons  of  objefts,  has  a  con- 
trary tftccl:,  which  is  equally  fuitable  to  the  foregoing 
theory. 

Tenthly,  In  mortifications,  alfo  in  the  languid  ftate 
that  fuccceds   acute  diftempers,  &c.   the  pulfe  fome-    | 
times  intermits,  fuppofe  once  in  5,  10,  20,  &c.  times, 
the  interval  being  about  double,  and   the   ftrength   of 
the  pulfe  which  fucceeds  the  intermiffion  about  double 
alio.     Here   the   force  of  the  heart  fcems  to  languifh, 
and   the  time  of  contradion   of  the   ventricle  to   be 
protraded,  till  a  fecond  contradlion  of  the  auricle  in- 
tervenes,   and    protrads    the    ventricle's    contradion 
ftill  farther,  viz.   to   nearly   twice   the  interval.     The 
heart   muft   therefore   be  furcharged,  and   contrafling 
flronger  from   this   rtfpite,  muft   fend,  as  it  were,  a 
double  quantity  of  blood   into  the  aorta,  i.  e.    make 
the  pulfe  that  fucceeds  much  ftrongcr.     And  this  in- 
termiifion  may  return  at  greater  or  lefs  intervals,  ac- 
cording to  the  circumftances,  while  this  weaknefs  of 
the  heart  continues  :  it  may  alfo  remain,  when  once 
eftabliflied,  from  habit,  or  afTociation. 

This 


Of  the  Motions  of  the  Heart.  247 

This  intermiffion  may  perhaps  rather  be  accounted 
for  thus:  in  languid  ftates  the  blood  is  accumulated 
in  the  beginning  of  rhe  aorta.  The  aorta  will  not 
therefore  receive  much  blood  from  the  heart,  though  it 
dofs  contra6l,  /.  e.  no  pulfe  will  be  felt,  /.  e.  the  in- 
terval will  be  double:  the  fucceeding  pulfe  will  be 
ftrong,  fiom  the  now  greater  emptinels  of  the  aorta, 
and  fuinefs  of  the  heart:  the  intermiffion  will  alio 
return  when  the  accumulation  in  the  aotta  does.  Ic 
agrees  with  this  account,  that  thcfe  intermifTions  are 
ufually  felt  in  the  region  of  the  heart  by  the  patients. 
May  not  intermifTions  arife  from  both  caufes  in  dif- 
ferent circumftances  ? 

Eleventhly,  When  the  pulfe  flutters  from  flatu- 
lencies and  fpafms  in  the  ftomach  and  bowels,  it  ap- 
pears that  a  fudden  ftop  is  put  to  the  blood  of  the 
aorta,  which  by  furcharging  the  left  ventricle  at 
once,  makes  it  contraft  at  a  difl^erent  time  from  the 
right,  and  not  at  a  due  interval  from  the  contrac- 
tion of  the  auricles:  for  this  fluttering  of  the  pulfe 
attacks  generally  in  an  inftant,  and  often  upon  a  fruit- 
lefs  efibrt  to  expel  wind  from  the  ftomach.  When 
the  contra6tions  of  the  ventricles  are  once  become 
afynchronous  and  inharmonious  to  thofe  of  the  auri- 
cles, it  may  require  fome  time  to  reftify  this,  and 
efpecially  while  there  is  an  impediment  to  the  blood's 
motion  through  the  aorta.  This  diforder  may  like- 
wife  continue  through  habit  and  afTociation,  and  recur 
perpetually  from  lefs  and  lefs  caufes.  The  intermif- 
fion of  the  pulfe,  confidered  in  the  two  preceding  pa- 
ragraphs, is  often  caufed  by  flatulencies,  as  well  as 
the  fluttering  of  it,   mentioned  in  this. 

Twelfthly,  The  motions  of  the  heart  remain  in 
their  original  automatic  ftate  more  than  any  other  in 
the  body  ;  the  reafons  of  which  are,  that  the  com- 
mon motions  are  equally  aflociaied  with  every  thing, 
i.e.  peculiarly  fo  with  nothing;  and  that  very  few 
ionprefllons  make  changes  in  the  motions  of  the 
heart  fo  great  iand  fudden,    as  to  fu  bjefl   it  to  the 

R  4  ideag 


L43 


Of  the  /itJion  of  He fpi  ration. 


ideas  of  thefc  imprcffions:  however,  as  great  and 
fuddcn  changes  arc  foineiimes  brought  on  by  pain, 
fear,  furprize,  joy,  ike.  wc  leeiii  to  have  a  Icmi- 
voluntary  power  to  alter  the  motion  of  the  heart  im- 
mediately, by  introducing  ftiong  itieas,  our  power  of 
introducing  thefe  being  feiiiivoluntary  :  nay,  it  may 
be  polliblc  for  perfons  in  very  paiticular  circum- 
Ilances  to  acquire  ftill  greater  degrees  of  power  over 
the  motion  of  the  heart. 

PROP.     LXXV. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Atlion  of  Rejpirationy  ordinary 
and  extraordinary  J  alfo  the  particular  Anions  of 
Sighing^  Coughing^  Laughter ^  Sobbings  and  jhedding 
Tears  from  Griefs  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing 
Theory. 

The  firft  obfervation  to  be  made  here  is,  that 
common  refpiration  is  performed  very  feebly  in 
new-born  children.  A  flight  difpofuion  therefore 
to  alternate  aftion  in  the  diaphragm,  and  other 
mufcles  of  refpiration,  may  be  lufficient  to  account 
for  that  degree  of  refpiration  which  takes  place  in 
new-born  children.  It  is  natural  to  exped,  that  re- 
fpiration in  them  fhould  be  feeble,  fince  they  mud 
lean  in  this,  as  well  as  in  other  things,  to  their  pre- 
ceding ftate  in  utero. 

Secondly,  Tiiat  the  vigorous  impreflions  from  the 
cold  air,  the  hands  of  the  midwife,  &c.  may  excite 
the  ftrong  refpiration  and  crying  which  take  place 
upon  birth  oidinarily,  appears  from  the  methods 
ufed  to  make  the  new-born  child  refpire  freely,  where 
it  fails  to  do  this  in  extraordinary  cafes  j  fuch  as  ap- 
plying volatiles  to  the  nofe,  pouring  wine  into  the 
mouth,  fwinging  it  to  and  fro,  &c.  All  thefe  me- 
thods excite  the  mufcles  to  contradion,  by  making 
ftrong  impreflions  on  the  neighbouring  fenfory  nerves. 

They 


Of  the  A£iion  of  Refpiration.  249 

They    are    alfo    very    agreeable    to    the    notion   of 
vibrations. 

Thirdly,  If  we  fuppofe  the  diaphragm  to  have 
hnifhfd  its  contraftion,  and  confeqiiently  the  thorax 
to  be  raifed,  and  the  abdomen  to  be  dirtended,  ex- 
piration mud  fucceed,  for  three  reafons,  viz.  becaufe 
the  contraflion  of  the  diaphragm  has  checked  the 
vibrations  in  its  fibres,  and  therefore  has  difpofcd 
them  to  relaxation  j  becaufe  the  elafticitv  of  the  carii- 
lages  of  the  ribs  tends  to  reftore  the  thorax  to' a  more 
deprefled  ftate;  and  becaufe  the  fibres  of  the  ab- 
dominal mufcles  are  excited  to  vibrations  and  con- 
tradlion  by  their  diftention.  Suppofe  now  expiration 
to  be  completed,  and  the  vibrations,  which  defcend 
into  the  diaphragm  from  the  fecond  and  third  fource 
of  motory  vibrations,  will  renew  its  contradlion,  and 
confequently  the  adlion  of  infpiration  i  and  fo  on 
alternately. 

Fourthly,  The  diaphragm  is  the  more  difpofed 
to  receive  vivid  vibrations  in  its  fibres,  from  its  near- 
nefs  to  the  heart,  and  the  warmth  in  which  it  is  al- 
ways kept.  It  defcrves  notice  here,  that  the  dia- 
phragm receives  its  nerves  from  the  cervical  pairs, 
not  from  the  eighth  pair  and  intercoftal,  as  the  neigh- 
bouring parts,  the  heart,  ftomach,  &c.  do.  Per- 
haps it  was  requifite,  that  it  fhould  derive  its  nerves 
from  the  fpinal  marrow,  fince  the  other  mufcles  of 
refpiration  do.  The  nerves  of  the  diaphragm  are 
elongated  during  its  contradlion,  the  contrary  to 
which  happens  in  the  nerves  of  other  mufcles.  They 
are  alfo  kept  in  conftant  motion  by  the  conftant  mo- 
tion of  the  thorax,  through  which  they  pafs  j  and  this 
perhaps  may  contribute  to  the  perpetual  aflivity  of 
the  diaphragm. 

Fifthly,  The  intercoftal  mufcles  are  difpofed  to 
alternate  contradlions  for  the  fame  reafons  as  the  dia- 
phragm, though  thefe  reafons  do  not  hold  in  the  fame 
degree :  However,  fince  the'  contradion  of  the  dia- 
phragm, and  confequent  diftention  of  the  abdomen, 

mud 


250  Of  the  AiJ'ton  of  Refpiratlon. 

mud  raile  the  thorax,  the  contraftion  of  the  inter- 
collal  mufclcs  nuifl:  from  the  fiirt  be  fyiichronous  to 
that  of  the  diaphragm  ;  and  aflbciation  will  foon  ge- 
nerate a  permanent  difpofition  to  this  fynchroniiir). 
It  follows  according  to  this  theory  from  the  vicinity 
of  the  internal  intercoftal  mufcles  to  the  external  ones, 
that  they  ought  to  have  the  fame  action.  And  the 
fame  conclufion  appears  to  rcfult  from  anatomical 
confiderations. 

Sixthly,  It  may  however  be  fuppofed,  that  the 
diaphragm  and  inter collal  mufcles  are,  as  it  were, 
fatigued  by  conflant  action  ;  and  that  they  incline  to 
fympathize  in  inactivity  with  the  reft  of  the  mufcles, 
efpecially  during  fleep.  But  then  the  accumulation 
of  blood  in  the  lungs,  which  the  intermilTion  of  re- 
fpiration  mufl:  occafion,  after  it  has  once  had  a  free 
palFagc  through  the  lungs,  by  means  of  refpiration, 
will  produce  fo  much  uneafincfs,  ;'.  e.  fuch  vigorous 
vibrations,  in  the  lungs,  and  particularly  in  their  ex- 
ternal membrane,  which  is  continuous  to  the  pleura, 
as  will  renew  refpiration. 

It  is  agreeable  to  this,  that  if  very  young  children 
flecp  upon  a  bed,  they  often  fall  into  a  great  uneafi- 
ncfs from  the  ftoppage  of  refpiration,  and  recover 
from  it  by  crying;  and  that  locking,  or  any  other 
gentle  motion,  will  prevent  this.  The  laft  circum- 
ftance  is  particularly  favourable  to  the  notion  of 
vibrations. 

The  night-mare  in  adults  appears  to  be  a  dif- 
order  of  the  fame  kind.  A  full  fupper,  and  lying  up- 
on the  back,  difpofe  to  it,  by  hindering  the  free  motion 
of  the  diaphragm.  Motion,  and  efpecially  when  at- 
tended with  quick  refpiration,  laughter,  &c.  pre- 
vent it  by  giving  acflivity  to  the  diaphragm.  Shaking 
the  perfon  afFei5ted,  calling  to  hiiu,  &c.  roufe  from 
ir,  by  exciting  vibrations.  The  uneafinefs  from  ac- 
cumulated blood  does  the  fame  thing  ac  laft. 

Ir  is  eafy  to  fee,  that  if  a  like  difpofition  to  ina(5tion 
fhould  arife  in  the  hearts  of  new-born  children,   or 

adults. 


t 


Of  the  A5lion  of  Refpiration.  251 

adults,  the  motion  and  diftending  force  of  the  ve- 
nal blood  nrjufi:  renew  their  adlion  for  fimilar  rea- 
fons.  It  is  reinarkably  coincident  with  this,  that 
forcing  the  venal  blood  upon  the  heart  has  in  fome  cafes 
been  found  to  renew  its  adion  even  after  death. 

Seventhly,  The  adions  of  fighing,  crying,  cough- 
ing, fneezing,  &c.  by  recurring  frequently,  and  mak- 
ing all  the  mufcles,  which  can  in  any  degree  contribute 
to  refpiration,  unite  therein,  enlarge  the  range  of 
refpiration  by  degrees,  and  make  this  aflion  be 
performed  with  gi eater  ftrength  perpetually  in  the 
young  child.  The  increafe  of  ftrength  in  the  whole 
mufcular  fyftem  mud  however  be  confidered  likewife. 
Eighthly,  The  fame  aflions  have  alfo  a  great  fhare 
in  begetting  voluntary  refpiration.  For  more  muf- 
cles are  put  into  a6tion  in  voluntary  refpiration,  than 
in  that  which  is  ordinary. 

Ninthly,  it  is  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory, 
and  to  parallel  obfervations  on  the  heart,  that  re- 
fpiration fliould  be  llronger  in  fevers,  in  fleep,  and  in 
general  wherever  the  heat  of  the  blood  is  increafed, 
than  in  ordinary  cafes.  For  refpiration  depends 
chiefly  on  the  fecond  and  third  fources  of  motory  vi- 
brations. By  this  means  the  force  of  the  refpira- 
tions  anfvvers  in  a  general  way,  as  it  ought  to  do,  to 
the  force  with  which  the  blood  is  moved,  or  to  the 
force  of  the  heart.  ' 

1  now  come  to  the  particular  confideration  of  the 
a6tions  of  fighing,  coughing,  laughter,  and  fobbing, 
and  fhedding  tears  from  grief. 

Sighing  is  an  extraordinary  contradlion  of  the  dia- 
phragm. It  arifes  not  only  from  all  caufes,  which  ac- 
cumulate the  blood  in  the  lungs,  and  thus  excite  the 
diaphragm  to  an  extraordinary  contraction  ;  but  alfb 
from  fuch  compreffions  of  the  abdomen  as  hinder  the 
free  motion  of  the  diaphragm  for  a  time.  For  thus 
a  difpofition  to  vibrate  is  accumulated  in  the  fibres  of 
the  diaphragm.     It  is  however  to  be  obferved,  that 

this 


252 


Of  the  Aclion  of  Rcfpiration. 


this  comprcfl'ion  of  the  abdomen  docs  alio  accumulate 
blood  in  the  lungs.  The  abdomen  iVems  to  be  coin- 
prcflcd  in  a  Hate  of  forrow,  attention,  &c.  1  he  fre- 
quent rccurrency  of  figliing  makes  it  voluntary  early 
in  youth.  But  it  is  not  performed  voluntarily  with 
the  fame  force,  as  when  fiom  a  prcffing  uneufincfs  in 
the  lungs. 

Coughing  arifes  fiom  an  uneafy  fenfation  in  the 
wind- pipe  fixing  in  the  point  of  the  epi^lottisy  as  the 
fenlation  which  caules  Ineezing  does  in  the  tip  of 
the  nofe.  Tliis  ought  alio  to  become  voluntary,  and 
to  be  weaker  when  voluntary,  than  when  excited  by 
a  ftrong  irritation. 

Hawking  is  a  voluntary  aflion,  derived  from 
coughing,  as  blowing  the  nofe  is  from  fntezing. 
Spitting  is  nearly  related  to  thefe  adions.  It  tallies 
perfe(fliy  with  the  foregoing  theory,  that  children 
cannot  hawk,  fpit,  or  blow  the  nofe,  for  fome 
years. 

Laughter  is  a  nafcent  cry,  recurring  again  and 
again,  as  has  been  obferved  before,  Prop.  16.  By 
degrees  it  puts  on  a  certain  typy,  and  recurs  again 
and  again  according  to  that  type,  juft  as  other  ac- 
tions. And  it  is  excited  in  young  children  not  only 
by  the  fenfation  of  tickling,  which  lies,  as  it  were, 
between  pleafure  and  pain,  but  by  the  apprehenfion 
of  this,  or  any  other  apprehenfion  fufficicntly  mo- 
derate, by  every  furprize,  and  every  mental  emotion 
th^t  lies  between  pleafure  and  pain,  and  by  all  the 
aflbciates  of  thefc,  as  particularly  by  feting  others 
laugh.  And  thus  child;  en  laugh  more  and  more,  and 
get  a  power  of  performing  the  adion  of  laughter 
at  pleafure,  though  with  lefs  force  than  when  it  is 
excited  by  its  proper  caufe  in  full  vigour. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  young  brute  creatures,  in 
their  fportings  with  each  other,  make  fuch  noifes,  as 
bear  the  fame  analogy  to  their  violent  cries^  which 
laughter  in  us  bears  to  crying  from  pain. 

Bodily 


i1 


Of  the  Action  of  Refpi ration.  253 

Bodily  pain  is  attended  with  violent  and  irregular 
refpi  ration  on  account  of  the  violent  and  irregular 
vibrations,  which,  in  this  cafe,  firft  afcend  to  the 
brain,  and  then  defcend  into  the  diaphragm.  Hence 
mental  pain,  which  is  the  offspring  of  bodily  pain, 
is  attended  alfo  with  violent  and  irregular  rcfpiration, 
i.e.  with  fobbing.  The  crying  which  ufed  to  at- 
tend bodily  pain  in  childhood  is  often  checked  in  the 
mental  pains  of  adults  by  fear,  fhame,  &c.  /.  e, 
by  a  voluntary  or  femivoluntary  power ;  and  this 
fccms  to  make  the  rcfpiration  fo  much  the  more 
irregular. 

It  is  more  difficult  to  account  for  the  (bedding 
tears  from  grief;  for  very  young  children  are  not 
apt  to  filed  tears  when  they  cry.  It  feems  to  me, 
that  fo  great  and  general  a  diforder  in  the  brain,  as 
that  which  takes  place  in  violent  grief,  muft  affed 
the  fifth  pair  of  nerves  in  a  particular  manner,  fo 
as  to  influence  the  lachrymal  glands  both  diredly,  and 
alfo  indiredly,  viz.  by  the  ftrong  convulfions  pro- 
duced in  the  mufcles  of  the  eyes  and  face.  The 
membrane  of  the  fauces  and  nofe  are  likewife  af- 
fefted  in  grief,  as  is  evident  from  the  fenfations  in 
the  fauces^  and  tip  of  the  nofe;  and  thus  vibrations 
may  run  to  the  lachrymal  glands  through  the  du5lu.s 
adnafum,  and  lachrymal  points,  as  obferved  before  in 
irritations  from  fternutatories,  &c.  Young  children 
may  not  (bed  tears  freely,  becaufe  very  great  and 
general  difordcrs  of  the  brain,  and  its  influence  over 
the  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  do  not  take  place  till  intellec- 
tual aCTorrePates  are  formed.  And  the  like  reafon  may 
hold  in  refpe6t  of  brutes. 

The  aftions  of  fobbing  and  weeping  are  there- 
fore, in  part,  deducible  from  aflbciation,  /.  e,  are 
not  merely  automatic,  in  the  firfi:  k\\{t  of  that  word. 
Ao^reeably  to  which,  they  are  in  certain  cafes  mani- 
feftly  fubjedl  to  the  voluntary  power.  Thus,  fome 
perfons  can,  by  introducing  imaginary  fcenes  of  com- 

paffion 


^54 


Of  convulfive  Motions. 


palTion  and  forrow,  fo  far  agitate  the  brain,  as  to 
bring  on  the  actions  of  lobbing  and  weeping, 
thougli  not  in  the  fame  degree,  as  when  they  arile 
from  a  ftrong  real  mental  caufe.  1  hey  may  hke-- 
wife  be  caught  by  infeftion,  from  odiers,  as  lauLih- 
ter,  and  moll  of  our  other  femivoUintary  and  volun- 
tary a6lion-,  arc;  which  is  another  argument  of 
their  dependence  on  aflbciation. 


PRO  P.     LXXVI. 

To  examine  hozu  far  convulfive  Motions  of  various 
Kindsy  and  the  Anions  of  Tawning  and  Stretching 
in  particular  J  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  "Theory. 

Since  (Irong  vibrations  mud,  according  to 
the  foregoing  theory,  defcend  at  once  into  the  whole 
mufcular  fyftem  in  general  convulfions,  we  mull  feek 
for  a  caufe  of  fufficient  extent  for  this  purpofe. 
Now  there  feem  to  be  three  kinds  of  vibrations, 
which  may  anfwer  this  condition  :  firft,  violent  vi- 
brations in  the  brain. -^  Secondly,  violent  ones  at  the 
fkin,  fuddenly  checked.  Thirdly,  violent  ones  in 
the  bowels  or  uterus^  fuddenly  checked  alfo,  and 
thence  running  inftantaneouQy  over  the  whole  nervous 
fyftem  by  means  of  the  intercoftal,  or  as  Winflow 
juftly  calls  it,  the  great  fympathetic  nerve. 

Convulfions  fiom  comprefiions  and  inflammations 
of  the  brain,  and  moft  of  thofe  which  are  termed  epilep- 
tic, feem  to  be  of  the  firft  kind.  In  epilepfies  the 
irregular  vibrations,  excited  in  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance  of  the  brain  are  perhaps  fo  violent,  as 
firft  to  make  the  fmall  particles  attraft  each  other, 
and  thus,  by  checking  themfelves,  to  extinguifti 
all  fenfe  and  motion.  However,  they  may  return 
after  a  fliort  time,  and  defcend  into  the  whole  muf- 
cular fyftem. 

The 


Of  convulfive  Motions.  255 

The  flretchings  and  yawnings  which  happen  in 
ague-fits,  in  going  to  fleep  and  waking,  the  (tart- 
ings  to  which  fome  perfons  are  fubjcdl  in  going  to 
Qeep,  and  the  convulfive  tremors,  and  rigidity  in 
ague- fits,  feem  to  be  of  the  fecond  kind,  or  to  arife 
from  a  fudden  check  of  vibrations  at  the  fkin. 
For  in  agues  the  furface  is  chilled,  as  it  is  alfo  by 
xhe  leaft  motions  in  going  to  fleep,  or  waking. 
Agreeably  to  this,  it  may  be  obferved,  that,  upon 
ftepping  into  a  cold  bed,  one  is  difpofed  to  general 
convulfions,  like  thofc  of  ftretching.  Yawning  may 
alfo  depend  in  part  upon  a  like  check  of  violent  vi- 
brations in  the  mouth  and  fauces-,  for  it  is  a  motion 
excited  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  is  obferved  to 
accompany  ficknefs. 

The  ttai tings  and  convulfions  which  happen  to 
children  from  gripes,  to  women  from  diforders  of 
the  uterust  and  to  all  perfons  in  general  from  certain 
poifons,  feem  to  be  of  the  third  kind,  or  to  arife 
from  vigorous  vibrations  in  the  abdomen,  fuddenly 
checked,  and  running  into  the  whole  fyftem  by 
means  of  the  intercoftal  nerve. 

It  has  been  obferved  already,  that  convulfive  mo- 
tions are  apt  to  return  from  lefs  and  lefs  caufes  per- 
petually, on  account  of  the  veltiges  which  they  leave 
of  thcmfelves,  and  the  power  of  aflfociated  circum- 
ftances.  I  will  add  here,  that  feeing  a  perfon  in  con- 
vulfions is  apt  to  occafion  them  in  fuch  as  are  of 
nervous  and  irritable  frames ;  and  that  there  is  reafon 
to  believe,  that  fome  perfons,  who  have  been  enthu- 
fiafts  or  impoftors,  have  been  able  to  throw  them- 
felves  into  convulfions  by  a  femivoluntary  power, 
and  particularly,  as  it  feems,  by  introducing  ftrong 
ideas,  and  internal  feelings. 

It  is  commonly  obferved,  that  yawning  is  apt  to 
infeft  a  whole  company,  after  one  perfon  in  it  has 
fet  the  example;  which  is  a  manifcfl:  infl:ance  of  the 
influence  of  aflbciation  over  motions  originally  au- 
tomatic. PROP. 


256  OJ  the  Motions  that  are 


PRO  P.     LXXVII. 

7*0  examine  how  far  the  Alotions^  that  are  mojl  ferfeEily 
vdluntaryy  fuch  as  tho/e  of  yValking^  Handling,  and 
Speakiugf  "jvith  the  voluntary  Power  of  f  (/pending 
tbemy  and  tbeir  being  formed  according  to  Patterns 
fet  by  thoje  with  whom  we  conver/e,  are  agreeable 
to  the  foregoing  Theory. 

It  was  neceflary  to  deliver  many  things  which  pro- 
perly relate  to  this  propofition  under  the  twenty- 
fiirt,  in  order  to  make  the  derivation  of  voluntary 
motion  from  automatic,  by  means  of  aflbciation, 
in  fome  mcafure  intelligible  to  the  reader.  1  will 
now  refume  the  fubjedt,  and  add  what  I  am  able  for 
the  full  explication  and  eftabliflimcnt  of  the  theory- 
pro  pofcd. 

Walking  is  the  moft  fimple  of  the  three  kinds  of 
voluntary  motion  here  mentioned,  being  common  to 
the  brute  creation  with  man,  whereas  handling  and 
fpeaking  are,  in  a  manner  peculiar  to  him.  His  fupe- 
riority  in  this  refpecl,  when  compared  with  the  fuperi-  ^ 
ority  of  his  mental  faculties  agrees  well  with  the  hypo- 
thcfis  here  advanced  concerning  handling  and  fpeak-  j 
ing,  viz.  their  dependence  on  ideas,  and  the  power 
of  aflbciation. 

The  nev.'-born  child  is  unable  to  walk  on  account  of 
the  want  of  ftrength  to  fupport  his  body,  as  well  as  of  | 
complex  and  decomplex  motory  vibratiuncles,  gene- 
rated  by   alTociation,    and   depending   upon  fenfations    ^ 
and  ideas  by   aflbciation  alfo.     As  he  gets  fl:rength, 
he   advances  likewife   in  the   number  and   variety  of 
compound  motions  of  the  limbs,  their  fpecies  being 
determined  by  the  nature  of  the   articulations,    the 
Dofition  of  the  mufcles,  the  automatic   rrotions  ex- 
cited  by   fridtion,    accidental  flexures   and  extenfions 

made 


k 


mojl  perfe5ily  voluntary.  257 

made  by  the  nurfe,  &c.  When  he  is  tolerably  per- 
fedl  in  thefe  rudiments  of  walking,  the  view  of  a  favour- 
ite plaything  will  excite  various  motions  in  the  limbs  j 
and  thus  if  he  be  fet  upon  his  legs,  and  his  body  car- 
ried forward  by  the  nurfe,  an  imperfed  attempt  to 
walk  follows  of  courfe.  It  is  made  more  perfect  gra- 
dually by  his  improvement  in  the  rudiments,  by  the 
nurfe's  moving  his  legs  alternately  in  the  proper 
manner,  by  his  defire  of  going  up  to  perfons,  play- 
things, &c.  and  thence  repeating  the  procefs  which 
has  fucceeded  (for  he  makes  innumerable  trials,  both 
fuccefsful  and  unfuccefsful) ;  and  by  his  feeing  others 
walk,  and  endeavouring  to  imitate  them. 

It  deferves  notice  here,  that  in  the  limbs,  where 
the  motions  are  moil  perfedlly  voluntary,  all  the 
mufcles  have  antagonifts,  and  often  fuch  as  are  of 
nearly  equal  ftrength  with  themfelves  s  alfo,  that  the 
mufcles  of  the  limbs  are  not  much  influenced  at  firft  by 
com>mon  imprefilons  made  on  the  fkin,  and  fcarce 
at  all  when  the  child  is  fo  far  advanced  as  to  gee  a 
voluntary  power  over  them.  For  thefe  things  fa- 
cilitate the  generation  of  the  voluntary  power,  by 
making  the  mufcles  of  the  limbs  chiefly  dependenc 
on  the  vibrations  which  defcend  from  the  -brain,  and 
alfo  difpoflng  them  to  aft  from  a  fmall  balance  in  fa- 
vour of  this  or  that  fet  of  antagonifts. 

When  the  child  can  walk  up  to  an  objed  that  he 
dcflres  to  walk  up  to,  the  action  may  be  termed  vo- 
luntary, i.  e.  the  ufe  of  language  will  then  juftify 
this  appellation.  But  it  appears  from  the  realbning 
here  uled,  that  this  kind  and  degree  of  voluntary 
power  over  his  motions  is  generated  by  proper  com- 
binations and  aflfociations  of  the  automatic  motions, 
agreeably  to  the  corollaries  of  the  twentieth  propo- 
fition.  Voluntary  powers  may  therefore  refuk  from, 
aflTociation,  as  is  aflferted  in  thefe  papers. 

When  he  is  arrived  at  fuch  a  perfeftion  in  walk- 
ing, as  to  walk  readily  upon  being  defired  by  ano- 

Vol.  I.  S  ther 


•ijS  Of  the  Motions  that  are 

ihcr  perfon,  the  a(5\ion  is  eOeemed  ftill  more  volun-» 
tary.  One  rcafon  of  which  is,  that  the  child,  in 
feme  cafes,  docs  not  walk  when  dcfired,  whilft  yet 
the  circunilldnces  arc  apparently  the  fame  as  when 
he  does.  For  here  the  iinapparent  caufe  of  walk- 
ing, or  not  walking,  is  will.  However,  it  follows 
from  this  theory,  that  all  this  is  ftill  owing  to  aflfo- 
ciation,  or  to  fomcthing  equally  fuitable  to  the  fore- 
going theory  ;  e.  g.  to  the  then  prefent  flrength  or 
weaknefs  of  the  alTociation  of  the  words  of  the  com- 
mand with  the  adion  of  walking,  to  its  proceeding 
from  this  or  that  perfon,  in  this  or  that  manner,  to 
the  child's  being  in  an  adive  or  ina6tive  fbate,  at- 
tentive or  inattentive,  difpofed  by  other  circum- 
ftances  to  move  as  dirtfted,  or  to  move  in  a  different 
way,  &c.  A  careful  obfervation  of  the  fact  will  always 
fhew,  as  far  as  is  reafonable  to  be  expecfled  in  fo  nice 
a  matter,  that  when  children  do  different  thmgs,  the  A. 
real  circumftances,  natural  or  affociated,  are  propor-  W^ 
tionably  different,  and  that  the  ftate  of  mind  called 
will  depends  upon  this  difference.  This  degree  of  t 
voluntary  power  is  therefore,  in  like  manner,  of  an 
acquired  nature. 

Suppofe  an  adult  to  walk,  in  order  to  fhew  his 
perfectly  voluntary  power;  ftill  his  feleifling  this  in-  i, 
fiance  is  owing  to  one  aflbciation,  and  his  per- 
forming the  a<5tion  to  another,  viz.  to  the  introduc- 
tion of  the  audible  idea  of  the  word,  the  vifible  one 
of  the  aflion,  &c. 

Walking  pafles  into  the  fecondarily  automatic  ftate 
more  perfcdly  perhaps,  than  any  other  action  ;  for 
adults  fcldom  exert  any  degree  of  volition  here, 
fufficient  to  affeft  the  power  of  confcioufnefs  or 
memory  for  the  leaft  perceptible  nrioment  of  time. 
Now  this  tranfition  of  walking,  from  its  voluntary  to 
its  fecondarily  automatic  ftate,  muft  be  acknowledged 
by  all  to  proceed  merely  from  affociation.  And  it 
icems  to  follow  by  parity  of  realbn,  that  the  tranfi- 
tion 


i 


moji  ■perfectly  voluntary,  259 

tion  of  primarily  automatic  aflions  into  voluntary 
ones  may  be  merely  from  aflbciation  alfo,  fince  it 
is  evident,  that  aflbciation  has  at  leaft  a  very  great 
and  extenflve  influence  there. 

The  complex  artificial  motions  of  the  lower  limbs, 
ufed  in  the  levcral  kinds  of  dancing,  bear  nearly  the 
lame  relation  to  the  common  motions  ufed  in  walking 
forwards,  backwards,  upwards,  downwards,  and  fide- 
ways,  as  thefe  common  motions  do  to  the  fimple 
rudiments  above-mentioned,  fuch  as  the  fleflion  and 
extenfion  of  the  ancle  or  knee.  Since  therefore  the 
voluntary  and  fecondarily  automatic  power  of  dan- 
cing are  plainly  che  refult  of  aflbciation,  why  may 
we  not  fuppofe  the  fame  of  the  common  motions  in 
walking,  both  in  their  voluntary  and  fecondarily  auto- 
matic flate?  In  learning  to  dance,  the  fcholar  deflres 
to  look  at  his  feet  and  legs,  in  order  to  judge  by  fee- 
ing, when  they  are  in  a  proper  pofition.  By  degrees 
he  learns  to  judge  of  this  by  feeling;  but  the  viflble 
idea  left  partly  by  the  view  of  his  mafter's  motions, 
partly  by  that  of  his  own,  feems  to  be  the  chief 
afibciated  circumftance,  that  introduces  the  proper 
motions.  By  farther  degrees  thefe  are  conncded 
with  each  other,  with  the  rnufic,  and  with  other  more 
and  more  remote  circumftances. 

I  have  already  fhewn,  in  what  manner  children 
learn  the  voluntary  and  fecondarily  automatic  power 
of  grafping.  How  they  learn  the  various  complex 
motions,  by  which  they  feed  and  drefs  ihemfelves,  &c, 
alfo  how  children  and  adults  learn  to  write,  to  prac- 
tife  manual  arts,  &c.  and  in  what  fenfes  and  degrees 
all  thefe  adions  are  voluntary,  and  fecondarily  auto- 
matic, and  yet  ftill  remain  as  purely  mechanical,  as 
the  primarily  automatic  adions  are,  may  now  be  un* 
derflood  from  what  has  been  already  delivered  under 
this  propofition.  The  method  of  playing  upon  mu- 
fical  inftruments  has  alfo  been  explained,  io  as  to  con- 
cur in  cftablilhing  the  fame  concluflons, 

S  2  In 


26o  Of  the  Motions  tbaf  are 

In  like  manner,  the  account  given  of  the  aflion 
of  fpe.iking  might  now  be  completeil,  and  extended 
to  all  the  modes  of  ir,  vulgar  and  aifificiali  and  to  fing- 
ing,  with  its  modes.  I  will  add  a  few  words  con- 
cerning Hammering,  and  the  lols  of  fpccch  by  palfies. 

Stammering  feems  generally  to  atile  from  fear, 
eagernefs,  or  fome  violent  palTion,  which  prevents 
the  child's  articulating  righrly,  by  the  confufion 
which  it  makes  in  the  vibrations  that  defcend 
into  the  miifcular  fyflem  j  fo  that,  finding  himfelf 
wrong,  he  attempts  again  and  again,  till  he  hits  upon 
the  true  found.  It  does  not  begin  therefore  in  general, 
till  children  are  of  an  age  to  diftinguifh  right  from 
wrong  in  refpc6l  of  pronunciation,  and  to  articulate 
with  tolerable  propriety.  A  nervous  diforder  of  the 
mufcles  of  fpeech  may  have  a  like  effeft.  When 
the  trick  of  Hammering  has  once  begun  to  lake 
place  in  a  few  words,  it  will  extend  itfelf  to  more 
and  more  from  very  flight  relcmblances,  and  particu- 
larly to  all  the  firft  words  of  fcntences,  becaufe 
there  the  organs  pafs  in  an  inftant  from  inadivity  to 
aflion ;  whereas  the  fubfequent  parts  of  words  and 
fentences  may  follow  the  foregoing  from  affociation ; 
juft  as,  in  repeating  memoritery  one  is  moft  apt  to 
heficjte  at  the  firft  word  in  each  fentence. 

A  defedl:  of  memory  from  pafllon,  natural  weak- 
nefs,  &c.  lo  that  the  proper  word  does  not  occur 
readily,  occafions  Hammering  alfo.  And,  like  all 
other  modes  of  fpeaking,  it  is  caught,  in  fom.e  cafes, 
by  imitation. 

A  palfy  of  the  organs  of  fpeech  may  be  occafion- 
ed  in  the  fame  manner  as  any  other  palfy  ;  and  yet 
the  mufcles  of  the  lips,  cheeks,  tongue,  and  fau- 
ces, may  Hill  continue  to  perform  the  aftions  of 
maftication  and  deglutition  fufficiently  well,  becaufe 
thefc ,  a(5lions  are  fimpler  than  that  of  fpeech,  and 
are  alfo  excited  by  fenfations,  which  have  an  original 
influence  over  them. 

A  defcd 


moji  perfeflly  voluntary.  261 

A  defefl  of  memory  may  alfo  dcftroy  the  power 
offpeaking,  in  great  meafure,  though  the  organs  be 
not  much  aflfeded  in  a  paralytica!  way.  Thus  a  per- 
ion  who  plays  well  upon  a  harpfichord,  may  by  fome 
years  difule  become  unable  to  play  at  all,  though  the 
inufcles  of  his  hands  be  in  a  perfect  ftate,  merely 
becaufe  his  memory,  and  the  alTociations  of  the  mo- 
tions of  his  fingers  with  the  fight  of  notes,  with  the 
ideas  of  founds,  or  with  one  another,  are  obliterated 
by  diftance  of  time,  and  difufe. 

The  fufpenfion  of  an    aflion    may   be   performed 
two  ways,  as  before-mentioned,  viz.   eithrr   by  put- 
ting the  mufcies  concerned   in   it  into   a  languid  in- 
active  ftate,   or  by   making  the  antagonifts   a6t  with 
vigour..     In  the  firft  cafe,  the  whole  limb  is   put  into 
a    ftate  of  relaxation,    and    extreme    flexibility  j     in 
j  the  laft,    into   a  ftate   of  rigidity.       The    voluntary 
power  of  the  firft  kind    is  obtained   by   aflTociations 
with    the   languor   that    arifes    from    fatigue,    heat, 
fleepinefs,    Sec.    that   of  the   laft   from    the   general 
tenfion  of  the  mufcies,  which   happens  in  pain,  and 
violent    emotions    of  mind.      Children    improve   in 
both    thefe   kinds   of    voluntary    power    by    repeated 
trials,  as  occafion  requires,  by  imitation,  defire,  &c. 
But  they  are  both  difficult  for  fome  time.     Thus  we 
may  obferve,  that  children  cannot  let  their  heads  or 
eye-lids  fall  from  their  mere  weight,  nor  ftop  them- 
felves  in  running  or  ftriking,  till   a  confiderable  time 
after   they  ran   raife  the   head,  or  bend  it,  open  the 
eyes,    or  ftiut  them,    run  or  ftrike  by    a   voluntary 
power. 

Imitation  is  a  great  fource  of  the  voluntary  power, 
and  makes  all  the  feveral  modes  of  walking  hand- 
ling, and  fpeaking,  conformable  to  thofe  of  th;?  age 
and  nation  in  which  a  perfon  lives  in  general,  and  to 
thofe  of  the  perfons  with  whom  he  converfes  in  par- 
ticular. Befides  the  two  fources  already  mentioned. 
Prop.  21.  viz.  the  fight  of  the  child's  own  aflions, 

S  3  and 


iSl  Of  the  Motions  that  are 

and  the  found  of  his  own  words,  it  has  mnny  others* 
Some  of  thcle  are  the  reltmblanre  \Vhich  cliildren 
obfervc  between  their  own  bodies,  with  all  the  func- 
tions of  their,  and  thofe  of  others  \  the  pleafures 
which  they  experience  in  and  by  means  of  all  nrio- 
tions,  r.  e.  imitations  ;  the  dircftions  and  encourage- 
ments given  to  them  upon  this  head  ;  the  high 
opinions  wliich  they  form,  of  the  power  and  happi- 
nefs  of  adults ;  and  their  confcquent  defire  to  refemblc 
them  in  thcfe,  and  in  all  their  afTociates.  Imitation 
begins  in  the  feveral  kinds  of  voluntary  a<5tions  about 
the  fame  time,  and  increafes  not  only  by  the  fources 
alleged,  but  alio  by  the  mutual  influences  of  every 
inflance  of  it  over  every  other,  fo  that  the  velocity 
of  its  growth  is  greatly  accelerated  for  fome  time. 
It  is  of  the  highell  ufe  to  children  in  their  attain- 
ment of  nccomplilhiTients,  bodily  and  mental.  And  „ 
thus  every  thing,  to  which  mankind  have  a  natural  | 
tendency,  is  learnt  much  fooner  in  fociety,  than  the  j^j 
mere  natural  tendency  would  beget  it ;  and  many 
things  are  learnt  fo  early,  and  fixed  fo  deeply,  as  to- 
appear  parts  of  our  nature,  though  they  be  mere 
derivatives  and  acquifitions. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  apes,  whofe  bodies  refemblc 
the  human  body,  more  than  thofe  of  any  other  brute 
creature,    and   whofe    intelle<5ls  alfo  approach    nearer 
to  ours,  which  lad  circumffance  may,  I  fuppofe,  have 
fome   connexion   with   the  firft,    fhould   likewife  re- 
femblc us  fo  much  in  the  faculty  of  imitation.     Their 
aptnefs     in     handling     is     plainly    the    refult   of  the 
fhape  and   make  of  their  fore  legs,  and  their  intel- 
k6bs  together,   as   in  us.     Their  peculiar  chattering 
may   perhaps    be    fome  attempt   towards   fpeech,    to 
which  they   cannot  attain,  partly   from   the  defefb  in' 
the  organs,   partly,    and  that  chiefly,    from   the  nar-j 
rowncfs  of  their   m.emories,  apprehenfions,  and  alTo-i 
ciations ;  for  they  feem   not  to  underftand  words  to] 

any' 


moft  perfectly  voluntary.  263 

any  confiderable  degree.     Or   may    not   their   chat- 
tering be  an  imitation  of  laughter  ? 

Parrots  appear  to  have  far  lefs  intellefl  than  apes, 
but  a  more  diftinguifhing  ear,  and,  like  other  birds, 
a  much  greater  command  of  the  mufcles  of  the 
ihroat.  Their  talk  feems  to  be  almoft  devoid  of 
all  proper  conne6tion  with  ideas.  However,  in  re- 
fpeft  of  founds,  they  imitate  as  much  as  children,  or  as 
apes  in  refpeft  of  other  a(5lions.  And  indeed  the 
talk  of  children,  by  out-running  their  underftand- 
ings  in  many  things,  very  much  refembles  that  of 
parrots. 

As  we  exprefs  our  inward  fentiments  by  words,  fo 
we  do  alfo  by  geftures,  and  particularly  by  the  muf- 
cles of  the  face.  Here,  again,  affociation  and  imi- 
tation difplay  themfelves.  This  dumb  fhew  prevails 
more  in  the  hotter  climates,  where  the  pafiions  are 
more  impetuous,  than  in  thefe  northern  ones.  It  is 
alfo  probable,  that  the  narrownefs  and  imperfedlion 
of  the  ancient  languages  made  it  more  neceffary  and 
prevalent  in  ancient  times.  Deaf  perfons  have  an 
extraordinary  aptnefs  both  in  learning  and  decypher- 
ing  this,  as  might  well  be  expeded.  The  imitation 
of  manners  and  charaders  by  dumb  fhew  is  often 
more  ftriking,  than  any  verbal  defcription  of  them. 


S  4  SECT. 


Id4  Of  the  Relation  of  this  Theory 


SECT.     VIII. 

OF  THE  RELAI'lON   WHICH  THE   FOREGOING 
THEORY    BEARS   TO   THE  AR  T  OF  PHYSIC. 

PROP.     LXXVIII. 

The  Art  cf  Phyfic  affords  many  proper  Tejls  of  the 
Do^rines  of  Fibralions  and  /JJfociation ;  and  may 
receive  confuierabk  Improvement  from  thcm^  if  they 
he  true. 

This  propofitioii  may  appear  from  feveral  hints 
to  that  j^urpofe,  which  have  been  already  given. 

But  it  will  be  nnore  fully  manifcft,  if  I  give  a 
iliort  view  of  the  data  and  qutcfita  in  the  art  of 
phyfic. 

Now  the  general  problem,  which  comprehends  the 
whole  art,  is. 

Having  the  Jymptoms  given y  to  find  the  remedy. 

This  problem  may  be  folved  in  fome  cafes  empiri- 
cally and  direftly  by  the  hiftories  of  diflempers,  and 
of  their  cures.  But  then  there  are  other  cafes,  and 
thofe  not  a  few,  to  which  the  learning  and  experi- 
ence of  the  mod  able  phyficians  either  cannot  find 
hiftories  fufficiently  fimilar,  or  none  where  the  event 
Avas  fuccefsful.  Htnce  it  is  neceflary  to  attempt  the 
folution  of  the  general  problem  rationally  and  in- 
dire^ly,  by  dividing  it  into  the  two  following  left 
comprehenfive  and  confequently  more  manageable 
problems,  viz. 

Firft,  Having  the  Jymptoms  given^  to  find  the  de- 
viation of  the  body  from  its  natural  flate. 

Secondly,  Having  this  deviation  given,  to  find  the 
remedy. 

It 


to  the  Art  of  Phyfic.  265 

It  is  proper  alio  to  invert  thefe  two  problems,  and 
to  inquire,  firft.  Having  the  deviation  giveny  what  the 
Jymptoms  mufi  he. 

Secondly,  Having  the  manner  of  operation  of  a  Juc-. 
cefsful  remedy  given,  what  the  deviation  miifl  be. 

I  here  iiie  the  v^ordsjymptomsy  deviation,  and  remedy, 
in  the  nnoft  general  fenfe  pofllble,  for  the  fake  of 
brevity. 

Now  it  is  very  evident,  that  the  doflrine  of  vi- 
brations, or  fome  other  better  doftrine,  which  teaches 
the  law  of  aftion  of  the  nervous  fyftenn,  has  a  clofe 
conne6lion  with  all  thefe  lafl:  four  problems.  For 
the  nerves  enter  every  part,  as  well  as  the  blood 
veffels  ;  and  the  brain  has  as  great  a  fhare  in  all  the 
natural  functions  of  the  parts,  and  its  difoiders,  in  all 
their  diforders,  as  the  heart,  and  its  diforders,  can 
have }  and  much  more  than  any  other  part,  befides 
the  heart. 

Farther,  If  the  do6lrine  of  afibciation  be  the  ne- 
ceflary  confequence  of  the  doflrine  of  vibrations,  in 
any  fuch  manner  as  I  have  propofed  above.  Prop.  9. 
and  1 1,  it  mufi:  have  a  moft  intimate  connexion  with 
the  theory  of  nervous  diftempers,  and  fome  with 
that  of  others,  on  account  of  the  juft  mentioned  de- 
pendence of  all  the  parts  on  the  brain.  Or,  if  we 
feparate  thefe  doctrines,  dill,  if  that  of  afibciation  be 
true,  of  v/hich  1  fuppofe  there  is  no  doubt,  it  cannot 
but  be  of  great  ufe  for  explaining  thofe  diftempers  in 
which  the  mind  is  afFefted. 

And  it  feems  to  me,  that,  agreeably  to  this,  the 
diftempers  of  the  head,  fpafm.odic  ones,  the  effeds 
of  poifonous  bites  and  ftings,  which,  as  Dr.  Mead 
iuftly  obferves,  are  more  exerted  upon  the  nerves 
than  on  the  blood,  receive  much  light  from  the 
doftrine  of  vibrations,  and,  in  return,  confirm  itj 
and  that  ail  the  diforders  of  the  memory,  fancy, 
and  mind,  do  the  fame  in  refped  of  the  doflrine  of 
afibciation. 

I  do 


166  Of  the  Relation  of  this  theory 

I  do  not  mean  to  intinnatc  here,  that  the  rational  fi 
and  indiie(5l  I'olution  of  the  general  problem,  which 
compichends  the  art  of  phyfic,  is  preferable  to  the 
empirical  and  dircdl  one,  where  this  is  to  be  had  j 
but  only,  fince  this  cannot  be  had  always,  that  we 
ought  to  piocccd  in  an  explicit  and  fcientifical  man- 
ner, rather  than  in  a  confuled  and  popular  one.  For 
where  pradice  is  filent,  phyficians  mull  and  will 
have  jecouifc  to  fome  theory,  good  or  bad.  And 
if  they  do  not  acquaint  ihcinftlves  with  the  real 
ftrudure  and  fundions  of  the  parts,  with  the  ien- 
fible  qualities  and  operations  of  medicines,  and  with 
the  mod  probable  method  of  explaining  both  the 
iymptoms  of  diilempers,  and  the  operations  of  me- 
dicines, they  muft  fancy  fomething  in  rhe  place  of 
thefe,  and  rcafon  from  fuch  falfe  im.aginations,  or 
perhaps  from,  the  mere  agreements,  oppofitions,  and 
Secondary  ideas,  of  Words.  The  hiftory  of  dif- 
cafes,  and  their  cures,  is  the  bafis  of  all  ;  after  this 
come  anatomical  examinations  of  the  body,  both  in 
its  natural  and  morbid  dates;  and,  laft  of  all,  phar- 
macy; thefe  three  anfwering  refpe6tively  to  the 
general  problem,  and  the  two  fubordinace  ones  above- 
mentioned.  And  if  we  reafon  at  all  upon  the  func- 
tions and  diforders  of  the  parts,  and  the  effedls  of 
medicines  upon  the  body,  fo  important  an  organ  as 
the  brain  mufi:  not  be  h  ft  out  entirely. 

It  may  not  be  amifs  to  add  here,  that  as  all  the  na- 
tural funilions  tend  to  the  welfare  of  the  body,  fo 
there  is  a  remarkable  tendency  in  all  the  diforders  of  ^ 
the  body  to  reftify  themfelves.  Thefe  two  tenden-  ? 
cies,  taken  together,  make  what  is  called  nature  by  ' ' 
phvficians;  and  the  feveral  inftances  of  them,  with  ;^ 
their  limits,  dangers,  ill  confequences,  and  devia-  -^ 
tions  in  particular  cafes,  deferve  the  higheft  attention  ^^ 
from  phyficians,  that  fo  they  may  neither  interrupt  a 
favourable  crifis,  nor  concur  with  a  fatal  one.  Stahl 
and  his  followers  fuppofe,  that  thefe  tendencies  arife 

from 


to  the  An  of  Phyfic.  267 

from  a  rational  agent  prefiding  over  the  fabric  of 
the  body,  and  producing  efFeds,  that  are  not  fub- 
je(5t  to  the  laws  of  mechanifm.  But  this  is  grath 
diSlum ;  and  the  plain  traces  of  mechanifnn,  which 
appear  in  fo  many  inftances,  natural  and  morbid, 
are  highly  unfavourable  to  it.  And  ail  the  evidences 
for  the  mechanical  nature  of  the  body  or  mind  are 
fo  many  encouragements  to  ftudy  them  faithfully  and 
diligently,  fince  what  is  mechanical  may  both  be 
underftood  and  remedied. 


CHAP. 


l68 


Of  IVordsy  and  the  Ideas 


CHAP.     III. 

Containing  a  particular  Application  of  the  fore-' 
going  Theory  to  the  Ph.«nomena  of  Ideas,  or 
of  Understanding,  Affection,  Memory,  and 
Imagination. 

SECT.     I. 

i 

OF  WORDS    AND    THE  IDEAS   ASSOCIATED 

WITH    THEM. 


PROP.     LXXIX. 

IFords  and  Fhrajes  mufl  excite  ideas  in  us  by  yljjo- 
ciationy  and  they  excite  Ideas  in  us  by  no  other 
Means,  • 


Words  may  be  confidered  in  four  lights. 

Firft,  As  imprefTions  made  upon  the  ear. 

Secondly,  As  the  adtions  of  the  organs  of  fpeech. 

Thirdly,  As  ImprefTions  made  upon  the  eye  by 
charadlers. 

Fourthly,  As  the  aflions  of  the  hand  in  writing. 

We  learn  the  ufc  of  them  in  the  order  here  fet 
down.  For  children  firft  get  an  imperfed  know- 
ledge of  the  meaning  of  the  words  of  others ;  then 
learn  to  fpeak  themfelves  i  then  to  read ;  and,  laftly, 
to  write. 

Now 


ajfo dated  with  them,  16^ 

Now  it  is  evident,  that  in  the  firll  of  thefe  ways 
many   fenfible  innpreffions,  and   internal   feelings,  are 
affociated   with   particular  words   and  phrafes,    fo    as 
to  give  thefe  the  power  of  raifmg  the  correfponding 
ideas ;  and  that  the  three  following  ways  increafe  and 
innprove  this  power,  with  fome  additions  to  and   va- 
riations of  the   ideas.     The  fecond  is  the  reverfe  of 
the    firfl:,    and   the    fourth   of  the    third.      The    firft 
afcertains  the  ideas   belonging  to  words  and  phrafes 
in  a  grofs  manner,  according  to  their   ufage  in   com- 
mon   life.       The    fecond    fixes    this,    and    makes    ic 
ready  and  accurate ;  having  the  fame  ufe  here  as  the 
Iblution  of  the  inverfe  problem  has  in  other  cafes  in 
refpect  of  the  dired  one.     The  third  has  the  fame 
ffcft  as  the  fecond ;  and  alfo  extends  the  ideas  and 
fignifications  of  words  and  phrafes,  by  new   aflfocia- 
lons ;    and   particularly    by    aflbciations    with    other 
vords,    as    in    definitions,    defcriptions,    &c.       The 
advancement  of  the  arts  and   fciences   is  chiefly   car- 
ried on  by  the  new  fignifications  given  to  words  in 
diis    third    way.       The    fourth,    by    converting    the 
/eader  into  a   writer,  helps  him  to  be  expert  in  dif- 
tinguifhing,  quick   in  recollecting,  and  faithful  in  re- 
aining,    thefe  new  fignifications  of  words  being  the 
inverfe  of  the  third  method,  as  juft  now  remarked. 
The  reader  will  eafily    fee,    that  the  aflion    of  the 
hand     is     not    an    elTeniial   in    this   fourth    method. 
Compofition  by   perfons    born   blind  has   nearly  the 
fame  efFeft.     I   mention  it  as  being  the  common  at- 
tendant upon  compofition,  as  having  a  confidcrable 
Life  deducible  from   afic)ciation,    and   as  making  the 
analogy  between  the  four  methods  more  confpicuous 
and  complete. 

This  may  fufHce  for  the  prefent,  to  prove  the  firft 
part  of  the  propofition,  viz.  that  words  and  phrafes 
muft  excite  ideas  in  us  by  aflbciation.  The  fecond 
parr,  or  that  they  excite  ideas  in  us  by  no  other  means, 
may  appear  at  the  fame  time,  as  it  may  be  found  upon 

reflexion 


270  Of  Wordsy  and  the  Ideas 

rcflciftion  and  examination,  that  all  the  Ideas  which 
any  word  does  excite  arc  dcducible  from  fomc  of 
the  four  fources  above- mentioned,  moll  commonly 
from  the  firft  or  third. 

It  may  appear  alio  from  the  inftahces  of  the  words 
of  unknown  languages,  terms  of  art  not  yet  ex- 
plained, barbarous  words.  &c.  of  which  we  either 
have  no  ideas,  or  only  fuch  as  fomc  fancied  refcm- 
blance,  or  prior  allociation,  fuggefls. 

It  is  highly  worthy  of  remark  here,  that  articulate 
founds  are  by  their  variety,  number,  and  ready 
ufe,  particularly  fuited  to  fignify  and  fuggeft,  by  aflb- 
ciation,  both  our  fimple  ideas,  and  the  complex 
ones  formed  from  them,  according  to  the  twelfth 
propofition. 

CoR.  It  follows  from  this  propofition  that  the 
arts  of  logic,  and  rational  grammar,  depend  entirely 
on  the  dodrine  of  alTociation.  For  logic,  confidcred 
as  the  art  of  thinking  or  reafoning,  treats  only  of 
fuch  ideas  as  are  annexed  to  words ;  and,  as  the  arc 
of  difcourfing,  it  teaches  the  proper  ufe  of  words  in 
a  general  way,  as  grammar  does  in  a  more  minute 
and  particular  one. 

PROP.     LXXX. 

l!o  dejcrihe  the  Manner  in  zuhich  Ideas  are  ajfociated  with 
Words y  beginning  from  Childhood. 

This  may  be  done  by    applying  the  doftrine  o? 
aflbciation,    as    laid    down    in    the    firft    chapter,    to 
words   confidered  in  the  four  lights  mentioned  under 
the  laft  propofition. 

Firft,  then.  The  afibciation  of  the  names  ofvifible 
objecfli:,  with  the  imprelTions  which  thefe  objecfts 
make  upon  the  eye,  feems  to  take  place  more  early 
than  any  other,  and  to  be  cffcded   in  the  following 

manner: 


ajjbciated  with  them»  lyt 

manner :  the  nanne  of  the  vifible  objed,  the  nurfe, 
j  for  inftance,  is  pronounced  and  repeated  by  the  at- 
tendants to  the  child,  more  frequently  when  his  eye 
is  fixed  upon  the  nurfe,  than  when  upon  other 
j  objedts,  and  much  more  fo  than  when  upon  any  par- 
ticular one.  The  word  nurfe  is  alfo  founded  in  an 
emphatical  manner,  when  the  child's  eye  is  directed 
to  the  nurfe  with  earneftnefs  and  defire.  The  af- 
fociation  therefore  of  the  found  nurjd;  with  the  pic- 
ture of  the  nurfe  upon  the  retina^  will  be  far  ftronger 
than  that  with  any  other  vifible  impreffion,  and  thus 
overpower  all  the  other  accidental  aflbciations,  which 
will  alfo  themfeives  contribute  to  the  fame  end  by 
oppofing  one  another.  And  when  the  child  has  gain- 
ed fo  much  voluntary  power  over  his  motions,  as  to 
direct  his  head  and  eyes  towards  the  nurfe  upon 
hearing  her  name,  this  procefs  will  go  on  with  an 
accelerated  velocity.  And  thus,  at  laft,  the  word 
will  excite  the  vifible  idea  readily  and  certainly. 

The  fame  afibciation  of  the  pidture  of  the  nurie 
in  the  eye  with  the  found  nurfe  will,  by  degrees, 
overpower  all  the  accidental  aflbciations  of  this  pic- 
ture with  other  words,  and  be  fo  firmly  cemented  at 
laft,  that  the  picture  will  excite  the  audible  idea  of 
the  word.  But  this  is  not  to  our  prefent  purpofe. 
I  mention  it  here  as  raking  place  at  the  fame  time 
with  the  foregoing  procefs,  and  contributing  to  illu- 
ftrate  and  confirm  it.  Both  together  afford  a  complete 
inftance  for  the  tenth  and  eleventh  propofitions, 
j.  e.  they  fhew,  that  when  the  impreflions  A  and  B 
are  fufficiently  affociated,  A  imprefi'cd  alone  will  ex- 
cite by  B  imprefl^ed  alone  will  excite  a. 

Secondly,  This  aflfociation  of  words  with  vifible 
appearances,  being  made  under  any  particular  cir- 
cumftances,  muft  affe6l  the  vifible  ideas  with  a  like 
particularity.  Thus  the  nurfe's  drefs,  and  the  fitu- 
ation  of  the  fire  in  the  child's  nurfery,  make 
part  of  the  child's  ideas  of  his  nuife  and  fire.     But 

then 


371  OJ  WordSi  and  tbc  Ideas 

then  as  the  nurfc  often  chungcs  Irt  drefs,  and  the 
child  often  iees  a  fire  in  a  dift'erent  place,  and  fiir- 
rouncird  by  diflerenc  vilible  objedt.s,  thele  oppolite 
airociations  iiuill  be  lels  (liong,  than  the  part  which 
is  common  to  them  all  ;  and  conleciucntly  we  may 
liippole,  that  while  his  idea  of  that  part  which  is 
common,  and  which  we  may  call  eHcntial,  continues 
the  lame,  that  of  the  j)ariiculaiities,  circumftances, 
and  adjunds,  varies.  For  he  cannot  have  any  idea, 
but  with  fome  paiticularities  in  the  non-eflentials. 

Thirdly,  When  the  vifible  objects  imprcfs  other 
vivid  leniations  befides  ihofe  of  ffght,  fuch  as  grate- 
ful or  unf]^rateful  taftes,  fmells,  warmth  or  cold- 
neb,  with  fufiicient  frequency,  it  follqws  from  the 
foregoing  theory,  that  thcfe  fenfations  muft  leave 
trace-s  or  ideas,  which  will  be  aflbciatcd  with  the 
names  of  the  objeds,  lb  as  to  depend  upon  them. 
1  luis  an  idea,  or  nafcent  perception,  of  the  fwett- 
nefs  of  the  nurfe's  milk  will  rife  up  in  that  part  of 
the  child's  brain  which  correfponds  to  the  nerves  of 
talle,  upon  his  hearing  her  name.  And  hence  the 
whole  idea  belonging  to  the  word  riurfe  now  begins 
to  be  complex,  as  confifting  of  a  vifible  idea,  and 
an  idea  of  tafte.  And  thele  two  ideas  will  be  aflb- 
ciated  together,  not  only  becaufe  the  word  laifes 
them  both,  but  alio  becaufe  the  original  fenfations 
are.  The  llrongeft  may  therefore  alTift  in  raifing  the 
weakeft.  Now,  in  comm.on  cafes,  the  vifible  idea 
is  ftrongefl,  or  occurs  mofl:  readily  at  leafl: ;  bur,  in 
the  prelent  inftance,  it  feems  to  be  otherwife.  We 
might  proceed  in  like  manner  to  fliew  the  generation 
of  ideas  m.ore  and  more  comiplex,  and  the  various 
ways  by  which  their  parts  are  cemented  together, 
and  all  made  to  d-pend  on  the  refpe6live  names  of 
the  vifible  objedls.  But  what  has  been  faid  may  fuf- 
fice  to  fhew  what  ideas  the  names  of  vifible  objeds, 
proper  and  appellative,  raife  in  us. 

Fourthly, 


ajfociated  with  tkem.  273 

Fourthly,  We  mud,  however,  obfcrve,  in  rcfpeft 
of  appellatives,  that  lometimes  the  idea  is  the  common 
eompound  refult  of  all  the  fenfible  impreffions  re- 
ceived from  the  fcveral  objefls  comprifed  under  the 
'  general  appellation  }  fometimes  the  particular  idea  of 
fome  one  of  thefe,  in  great  meafure  at  leaR,  viz. 
when  the  impreflions  arifing  from  fome  one  are  more 
novel,  frequent,  and  vivid,  than  thofe  from  the  reft. 

Fifthly,  The  words  denoting  fenfible  qualities, 
whether  fubftantive  or  adjedive,  fuch  as  tvhitene/Sy 
while,  &c.  get  their  ideas  in  a  manner  which  will 
be  eafily  underftood  fiom  what  has  been  already 
delivered.  Thus  the  word  white,  being  aflbciated 
with  the  vifible  appearances  of  milk,  linen,  paper, 
^gets  a  ftable  power  of  exciting  the  idea  of  wiiat  is 
common  to  all,  and  a  variable  one  in  rcfpecSl  of  the 
particularities,  circumftances,  and  adjunds.  And  fo 
of  other  fenfible  qualities. 

Sixthly,  The  names  of  vifible  actions,  as  walk- 
ing, ftriking,  &c.  raife  the  proper  vifible  ideas  by 
a  like  procefs.  Other  ideas  may  likewife  adhere  in 
certain  cafes,  as  in  thofe  of  tafting,  feeling,  fpeaking, 
&c.  Senfible  perceptions,  in  which  no  vifible  adilion 
is  concerned,  as  hearing,  may  alfo  leave  ideas  depen- 
dent on  words.  However,  fome  vifible  ideas  gene- 
rally intermix  themfelves  here.  Thefe  adions  and 
perceptions  are  generally  denoted  by  verbs,  though 
fometimes  by  fubftantives. 

And  Vv'e  may  now  fee  in  what  manner  ideas  are 
, aflbciated  with  nouns,  proper  and  appellative,  fub- 
ftantive and  adjeftive,  and  with  verbs,  fuppofing  that 
they  denote  fenfible  things  only.  Pronouns  and  par- 
ticles remain  to  be  confidered.  Now,  in  order  to 
know  their  ideas  and  ufes,  we  muft  obferve, 

Sevendily,    That  as    children    may    learn    to   read 
words  not  only   in  an  elementary  way,  viz.   by  learn- 
ing the  letters  and  fyllables  of  which   they   are   com- 
pofcd,  but  alfo  in  a  fummary  one,  viz.  by  affociating 
Vol.  I.    •  T  the 


^74  ^f  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

the  found  of  entire  words,  with  their  pidlures,  in  the 
eye ;  and  mull,  in  fome  cafes,  be  taught  in  the  laft 
way,    /.  e,    wherefoever  the    found    of  the   word   de- 
viates  from    that  of   its   elements;    fo  both   childreo  > 
and  adults  leain  the   ideas  belonging  to  whole   fen- 
tences   many   times   in    a   fummary   way,  and  not  by 
adding:  tOi:;ether  the  ideas  of  the  feveral  words  in  the 
fentence.     And  wherever  words  occur,  which,  fepa- 
rately  taken,  have  no  proper  ideas,  their  ufe  can  be 
learnt  in  no  other  way  but  this.     Now  pronouns  and 
particles,  and   many  other   words,    are   of  this   kind. 
They  anfwer,    in   fome   meafure,    to  x^  jy,  and  z,  or 
the  unknown  quantities  in  algebra,  being  determinable 
and  decypherable,   as  one  may  fay,  only  by  means  of 
the  known  words  with  which  they  are  joined. 

Thus  /  isjalk  is  aflbciated  at  different  times  with 
the  fame  vifible  impreffion  as  nurje  walks^  brother 
walks y  &c.  and  therefore  can  fugged  nothing  per- 
manently for  a  long  time  but  the  a6tion  of  walk- 
ing. However  the  pronoun  /,  in  this  and  innumer- 
able other  fhort  fentences,  being  always  affociated 
with  the  perfon  fpeaking,  as  thou  is  with  the  perfon 
fpoken  to,  and  he  with  the  perfon  fpoken  of,  the  fre- 
quent recurrency  of  this  teaches  the  child  the  ufe  of 
the  pronoun^,  /.  e.  teaches  him  what  difference  he 
is  to  expeft  in  his  fcnfible  impreffions  according  as 
this  or  that  pronoun  is  ufed;  the  infinite  number  of 
inftances,  as  one  may  fay,  making  up  for  the  infi- 
nitely fmall  quantity  of  information,  which  each, 
fingly  taken,  conveys. 

In  like  manner,  different  particles,  /.  e,  adverbs, 
conjundions,  and  prepofitions,  being  ufed  in  fen- 
tences, where  the  fubftantives,  adjecftives,  and  verbs, 
are  the  fame,  and  the  iame  particles,  where  thefe  are 
different,  in  an  endlefs  recurrency,  teach  children 
the  ufe  of  the  particles  in  a  grofs  general  way.  For 
it  may  be  obferved,  that  children  are  much  at  a 
lofs  for  the  true  ufe  of  the  pronouns  and  particles 

for 


ajjbciated  with  them.  275 

for  fome  years,  and  that  they  often  repeat  the  proper 
name  of  the  perfon  inftead  of  the  pronoun  ;  which 
confirms  the  foregoing  reafoning.  Some  of  the  in- 
ferior parts  or  particles  of  fpeech  make  fcarce  any 
alteration  in  the  fenfe  of  the  fentence,  and  therefore 
are  called  expletives.  The  feveral  terminations  of 
the  Greek  and  Latin  nouns  and  verbs  are  of  the  nature 
of  pronouns  and  particles. 

Eighthly,  The  attempts  which  children  make  to 
exprefs  their  own  wants,  perceptions,  pains,  &c.  in 
words,  and  the  corrediions  and  fuggeftions  of  the 
attendants,  are  of  the  grcateft  ufe  in  all  the  fteps  that 
we  have  hitherto  confidered,  and  efpecially  in  the 
laft,  regarding  the  prohouns  and  particles. 

Ninthly,  Learning  to  read  helps  children  much  in 
the  fame  refpedlsj  efpecially  as  it  teaches  them  to 
feparate  fentences  into  the  feveral  words  which  com- 
pound them  ;  which  thofe  who  cannot  read  are  fcarce 
able  to  do,  even  when  arrived  at  adult  age. 

Thus  we  may  fee,  how  children  and  others  are 
enabled  to  underfland  a  continued  difcourfe  relating 
to  fenfible  impieflions  only,  and  how  the  words  in 
pafling  over  the  ear  muft  raife  up  trains  of  vifible 
and  other  ideas  by  the  power  of  aflbciation.  Our 
next  inquiry  muft  be  concerning  the  words  that  de- 
note either  intelleflual  things,  or  colledions  of  other 
words. 

Tenthly,  The  words,  that  relate  to  the  feveral 
paffions  of  love,  hatred,  hope,  fear,  anger,  &c.  being 
applied  to  the  child  at  the  times  when  he  is  under 
the  influence  of  thefe  paffions,  get  the  power  of  raifing 
the  miniature*  or  ideas  of  thefe  paffions,  and  alfo  of 
the  ufual  afTociated  circumftances.  The  application 
of  the  fame  words   to  others  helps  alfo  to  annex  the 

A. 

ideas  of  the  afibciatcd  circumftances  to  thf.n,  and 
even  of  the  paffions  themfclves,  both  from  the  in- 
feftioufnefs  of  our  natures,  and  from  the  power  of 
afibciated  circumftances  to  raife  the  paffions.     How- 

T  2  ever. 


276  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

.  ever,    it    is    to    be    noted,    that   the   words   denoting 

I  the  panions  do  not,  for  the  moll  part,  raife  up  in  us 
any   degree  of  the  pafTions   ihemlelves,  but  only  the 

I  idea?   of  the  afibciated  circumftances.     We  are  fup-  . 

i  pofed    to    undeiftand    the   continued    difcourfes     into 
which   thefe   woids  enter   lufficiently,  when   we   fornr) 
true   notions   of  the    aflions,    particularly   the   vifiblc    , 
ones  attending  them. 

Eleventhly,  Ihe  names  of  intelleftual  and  moral 
qualities  and  operations,  fuch  as  fancy,  memory, 
wit,  dulnefs,  virtue,  vice,  confcience,  approbation, 
difapprobation,  &c.  Hand  for  a  defcription  of  thefc 
qualities  and  operations;  and  therefore,  if  dwelt  upon, 
excite  fuch  ideas  as  thefe  defcriptions  in  all  their 
particular  ciicumftances  do.  But  the  common  {tT\- 
tences,  which  thefe  words  enter,  pafs  over  the  mind 
too  quick,  for  the  mod  part,  to  allow  of  fuch  a 
delay.  They  are  acknowledged  as  familiar  and  true, 
and  fuggeft  certain  aflbciated  vifible  ideas,  and  nafcent 
internal  feelings,  taken  from  the  defcriptions  of  thefe 
names,  or  from  the  words,  which  are  ufually  joined 
with  them  in  difcourfes  or  writings. 

Twelfthly,  There  are  many  terms  of  art  in  all 
the  branches  of  learning,  which  aie  defined  by  other 
word<:,  and  which  therefore  are  only  compendious 
fubftitutcs  for  them.  The  fame  holds  in  common 
life  in  numberlefs  inflances.  Thus  riches,  honours, 
pleafures,  are  put  for  the  feveral  kinds  of  each. 
Such  woids  fometimes  fuggeft  the  words  of  their 
definitions,  fometimes  the  ideas  of  thefe  words, 
fometimes  a  particular  fpecies  comprehended  under 
the  general  term,  &;c.  But,  whatever  they  fuggeft,  it 
may  be  eafily  fcen,  that  they  derive  the  pov^er  of  do- 
ing this  fiom  aflbciation. 

Thirteenthly,   There  are   many   words  ufcd  in  ab-  \ 
ftradl  fciences,  which  can  fcarce  be  defined  or  defcri-/ 
bed   by   any   other   words ;    and   yet,  by   their  gram- 
matical form,  fcem  to  be  excluded  from  the  clafs  of 

particles. 


ajfociated  wilb  them.  277 

particles.  Such  are  identity,  exiftence,  &c.  The 
ufe  of  thefe  muft  therefore  be  learnt  as  that  of  the 
particles  is.  And  indeed  children  learn  their  firft 
innperfe6l  notions  of  all  the  words  confidered  in  this 
and  the  three  lad  paragraphs  chiefly  in  this  way; 
and  come  to  precife  and  explicit  ones  only  by 
means  of  books,  as  they  advance  to  adult  age,  or 
by  endeavouring  to  ufe  them  properly  in  their  own 
deliberate  compofitions. 

This  is  by  no  means  a  full  or  fatiifa(5Vory  account 
of  the  ideas  which  adhere  to  words  by  afTociation. 
For  the  author  perceives  himfelf  to  be  ftill  a  mere 
novice  in  thefe  fpeculations;  and  it  is  difficult  to  ex- 
plain words  to  the  bottom  by  words  j  perhaps  im- 
poITible.  The  reader  will  receive  fome  addition  of 
light  and  evidence  in  the  courfe  of  this  fedionj 
alfo  in  the  next,  in  which  I  fliall  treat  of  propofitions 
and  affent.  For  our  affent  to  propofitions,  and  the 
influence  which  they  have  over  our  affeftions  and 
aftions,  make  part  of  the  ideas  that  adhere  to  words 
by  aflbciation ;  which  part,  however,  could  not  pro- 
perly be  confidered  in  this  fection. 

Cor.  I.  It  follows  from  this  propofition,  that 
words  may  be  difl:inguiflied  into  the  four  claflfes 
mentioned  under  the  twelfth  propofition. 

1.  Such  as  have  ideas  only. 

2.  Such  as  have  both  ideas  and  definition^. 

3.  Such  as  have  definitions  only. 

4.  Such  as  have  neither  ideas  nor  definitions. 
Under  definition  I  here  include  defcription,  or  any 

other  way  of  explaining  a  word  by  other  words, 
excepting  that  by  a  mere  fynonymous  term ;  and  I 
exclude  from  the  number  of  ideas  the  vifibie  idea  of 
the  character  of  a  word,  and  the  audible  one  of  its 
found  ;  it  being  evident,  that  every  word  heard 
may  thus  excite  a  vifibie  idea,  and  every  word  ktn 
an  audible  one.  I  exclude  alfo  all  ideas  that  are 
either  extremely  faint,  or  extremely  variable. 

T  3  It 


278  0/  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

It  is  difficult  to  fix  precilV  limits  to  thefe  four 
claflVs,  To  as  to  determine  accurately  where  each 
cnd^,  and  the  next  begins ;  and,  if  we  confider  thefii 
things  in  the  moft  general  way,  there  is  perhaps 
no  word  which  has  not  both  an  idea  and  a  defini- 
tion, /.  e.  which  is  not  attended  by  Tome  one  or  more 
internal  feelings  occafionaily,  and  which  may  not 
be  explained,  in  fome  imperfe(ft  manner  at  leaft,  by 
odier  woids.  I  will  give  Tome  inftances  of  words 
which  have  the  faireft  right  to  each  clafs. 

The  names  of  fimple  fenfibJe  qualities  are  of  the 
fir  rt  clafs.  li\\\i?i  whiley  Jzueet^  &c.  excite  ideas  j  but 
cannot  be  defined.  It  is  to  be  obferved  here,  that 
this  clafs  of  words  (lands  only  for  the  ftable  part  of 
the  ideas  refpedively,  not  for  the  feveral  variable 
particularities,  circumftances,  and  adjun61:s,  which  • 
intermix  ihemfelves  here. 

The  names  of  natural  bodies,  animal,  vegetable, 
mineral,  are  of  the  fecond  clafs ;  for  they  excite  ag- 
gregates of  fenfible  ideas,  and  at  the  fame  time  may 
be  defined  (as  appears  from  the  writings  of  natural 
hiftorians)  by  an  enumeration  of  their  properties 
and  charadleriftics.  Thus  likewife  geometrical  figures 
have  both  ideas  and  definitions.  The  definitions  in 
both  cafes  are  fo  contrived  as  to  leave  out  all  the  va- 
riable particularities  of  the  ideas,  and  to  be  alfo  more 
full  and  precife,  than  the  ideas  generally  are  in  the 
parts  that  are  of  a  permanent  nature. 

Algebraic  quantities,  fuch  as  roots,  powers,  furds, 
&c.  belong  to  the  third  clafs,  and  have  defini- 
tions only.  The  fame  may  be  faid  of  fcientifical 
terms  of  art,  and  of  moft  abftraft  general  terms, 
moral,  metaphyfical,  vulgar :  however,  mental  emo- 
tions are  apt  to  attend  fome  of  thefe  even  in  pafllng 
nightly  over  the  ear;  and  thefe  emotions  may  be 
confidered  as  ideas  belonging  to  the  terms  refpec- 
tivelv.  Thus  the  very  words,  gratitude,  mercy,  cruelty, 
treachery,  &c,  feparately  taken,  affedl  the  mind  -,  and 

yet. 


ajjbciated  with  them.  I79 

yetj  fince  all  reafoning  upon  them  is  to  be  founded 
on  their  definitions,  as  will  be  feen  hereafter,  it  feems 
beft  to  refer  them  to  this  third  clafs. 

Laftly,  the  particles  the^  of,  to,  for,  but,  &c.  have 
neither  definitions  nor  ideas. 

Cor.  1.  This  matter  may  be  illuftrated  by  com- 
paring language  to  geometry  and  algebra,  the  two 
general  methods  of  expounding  quantity,  and  invef- 
tigating  all  its  varieties  from  previous  data. 

Words  of  the  firft  clafs  anfwer  to  propofitions 
purely  geometrical,  i.  e.  to  fuch  as  are  too  fimple  to 
admit  of  algebra;  of  which  kind  we  m.ay  reckon 
that  concerning  the  equality  of  the  angles  at  the 
bafis  of  an  Ifofceles  triangle. 

Words  of  the  fecond  clafs  anfwer  to  that  part  of 
geometry,  which  may  be  demontlrated  either  fynthe- 
tically  or  analytically ;  either  fo  that  the  learner's 
imagination  (hall  go  along  \m\.\\  every  ftep  of  the 
procefs  painting  out  each  line,  angle,  &:c.  according 
to  the  method  of  demonftration  ufed  by  the  ancient 
mathematicians ;  or  fo  that  he  fhall  operate  entirely 
by  algebraic  quantities  and  methods,  and  only  repre- 
fent  the  conclufion  to  his  imagination,  when  he  is 
arrived  at  it,  by  examining  then  what  geometrical 
quantities  the  ultimately  refuking  algebraical  ones 
denote.  The  firft  method  is  in  both  cafes  the  mod 
fatisfaftory  and  aff^efting,  the  laft  the  moft  expedi- 
tious, and  not  lefs  certain,  where  due  care  is  taken. 
A  blind  mathematician  muft  ufe  words  in  the  laft  of 
thefe  methods,  when  he  reafons  upon  colours. 

Words  of  the  third  clafs  anfwer  to  fuch  problems 
concerning  quadratures,  and  rectifications  of  curves, 
chances,  equations  of  the  higher  orders,  &c.  as  are 
too  perplexed  to  be  treated  geometrically, 

Laftly,  Words  of  the  fourth  clafs  anf>ver  to  the 
algebraic  figns  for  addition,  fubtraclion,  &c.  to 
indexes,  coefficients,  &c.  Thefe  are  not  algebraic 
quantities  themfelvesj   but  they  alter  the  import  of 

T  4  the 


23o  Of  W6rds,  and  the  Ideas 

the  letters  ih.it  arc;  jiift  as  particles  vary  the  fenie 
of  tlie  piincipai  words  of  a  fcntcncc,  and  yet  fig- 
nify  nothing  of  thcmfelves. 

Geometiical  lic^urcs  may  be  confidered  as  repre- 
fenting  all  the  modes  of  extenfion  in  the  fame  manner, 
as  vifiblc  ideas  do  vifibie  objeifts  ;  and  confequently  , 
the  names  of  geometrical  figures  anfwcr  to  the  names 
of  thcfe  ideas.  Now  as  all  kinds  of  problems 
relating  to  quantity  might  be  expounded  by  modes 
of  excenfion,  and  folvcd  thereby,  were  our  faculties 
I'ulliciently  exalted,  fo  it  appears  pofiible  to  reprefent 
(■jiort  kinds  of  ideas  by  vifible  ones,  and  to  purfue 
them  in  this  way  through  all  their  varieties  and 
combinations.  But  as  it  feems  bed:  in  the  ftrfl:  cafe 
to  confine  geometry  to  problem?,  where  extenfion, 
and  motion,  which  implies  extenfion,  are  concerned, 
iifiiig  algebraic  methods  for  invcftigating  all  other 
kinds  of  quantity,  fo  it  feems  beft  alfo  to  ul'e  vifible 
ideas  only  for  vifible  objects  and  qualities,  of  which 
they  are  the  natural  reprefentativcs,  and  to  denote  all 
other  qualities  by  words  confidered  as  arbitrary  figns. 
And  yet  the  reprefentation  of  other  quantities  by 
geometrical  ones,  and  of  other  ideas  by  vifible  ones, 
is  apt  to  make  a  more  vivid  imprefTion  upon  the 
fancy,  and  a  more  lading  one  upon  the  memory. 
In  fimilcs,  fables,  parables,  allegories,  vifible  ideas 
are  ulVd  for  this  reafon  to  denote  general  and  intel- 
ledludl  ones. 

Since  Vv-ords  may  be  compared  to  the  letters  ufed 
in  algebra,  language  itfelf  may  be  termed  one  fpecies 
of  algebra  ;  and,  converfely,  algcrbra  is  nothing  more 
than  the  language  which  is  peculiarly  fitted  to  ex- 
plain quantity  of  all  kinds.  As  the  letters,  which 
in  algebra  (land  immediately  for  quantities,  anfwer  to 
the  words  which  are  immediate  reprefentativcs  of 
ideas,  and  the  algebraic  figns  for  addition,  &c.  to 
the  particles ;  fo  the  fingle  letters,  which  are  fome- 
timcs  ufed  by  algebraifts  to  denote  fums  or  differ- 
ences, 


ajfociated  -iZH/h  them.  281 

ences,  powers  or  roots  imiverfal  of  other  letters, 
for  brevity  and  convenience,  anfwer  to  fuch  words 
as  have  long  definitions,  to  terms  of  art,  &c.  v/hich 
are  introduced  into  the  fciences  for  the  fake  of 
compendioufnefs.  Now,  if  every  thing  relating  to 
language  had  fomething  analogous  to  it  in  algebra, 
one  might  hope  to  explain  the  difficulties  and  per- 
plexities attending  the  theory  of  language  by  the 
correfponding  particulars  in  algebra,  where  every 
thing  is  clear,  and  acknowledged  by  all  that  have  made 
it  their  ftudy.  However,  we  have  here  no  independ- 
ent point  whereon  to  ftand,  fince,  if  a  perfon  be  dif- 
pofed  to  call  the  rules  of  algebra  in  queftion,  we 
have  no  way  of  demonftrating  them  to  him,  but  by 
Tjfing  words,  the  things  to  be  explained  by  algebra, 
for  that  purpofe.  If  we  fuppofe  indeed  the  fceptical 
perfon  to  allow  only  that  fimple  language,  which  is 
neceflary  for  demonftrating  the  rules  of  algebra,  the 
thing  would  be  done;  and,  as  I  obferved  juft  now,  it 
feems  impoflible  to  become  acquainted  with  this, 
and  at  the  fame  time  to  difallow  it. 

Cor.  3.  It  will  eafily  appear  from  the  obfervations 
here  made  upon  words,  and  the  afTociations  which 
adhere  to  them,  that  the  languages  of  different  ages 
and  nations  muft  bear   a  great  general  refemblance 

'  to  each  other,  and  yet  have  confiderable  particular 
differences ;  whence  any  one  may  be  tranflated  into 
any  ocher,  fo  as  to  convey  the  fame  ideas  in  general, 

.    and   yet   not   with    perfe6l   precifion    and    exadlnefs. 

T'  They  muft  refemble  one  another,  becaufe  the  phee^, 
nomena  of  nature,  which  they  are  all  intended  to  ex- 
prefs,  and  the  ufes  and  exigencies  of  human  life,  to 
which  they  minifter,  have  a  general  refemblance. 
But  then,  as  the  bodily  make  and  genius  of  each 
people,  the  air,  foil,  and  climate,  commerce,  arts, 
fciences,  religion,  &c.  make  confiderable  differen- 
ces in  different  ages  and  nations,  it  is  natural  to  ex- 

pea, 


iSl  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

pe(5l,  that  the   languages  Ihould   have   proportionable 
differences  in  refpcft  of  each  other. 

Where  languages  have  rules  of  etymology  and 
fyntax,  that  differ  greatly,  which  is  the  cafe  of  the 
Hebrew  compared  with  Greek  or  LatWy  this  will 
become  a  new  lource  of  difformity.  For  the  rules 
of  etymology  and  fyntax  determine  the  application 
and  purport  of  words  in  many  cafes.  Agreeably  to 
which  we  fee,  that  children,  while  yet  unacquainted 
with  that  propriety  of  words  and  phrafes,  which 
cu(\om  ellablilhes,  often  make  new  words  and  con- 
llrudions,  which,  though  improper  according  to  com- 
mon iifage,  are  yet  very  analogous  to  the  tenor  of 
the  language,  in  which  they  fpcak. 

The  modern  languages  of  this  weftern  part  of 
the  world  anfwer  better  to  the  Latiuy  than  according 
to  their  original  Gothic  plans,  on  this  account ;  inaf- 
much  as  not  only  great  numbers  of  words  are 
adopted  by  all  of  them  from  the  Latin,  but  alfo  be- 
caufe  the  reading  Latin  authors,  and  learning  the 
Laiin  grammar,  have  difpofed  learned  men  and 
writers  to  mould  their  own  languages  in  fome  mea- 
fure  after  the  Latin.  And,  converfely,  each  nation 
moulds  the  Latin  after  the  idiom  of  its  own  lan- 
guage, the  effeft  being  reciprocal  in  all  fuch  cafes. 

In  learning  a  new  language  the  words  of  it  are  at 
firft  fubftitutes  for  thofe  of  our  native  language,  i.  e. 
they  are  affociated,  by  means  of  thefe,  with  the  proper 
objefls  and  ideas.  When  this  aflbciation  is  fuffici- 
cntly  ftrong,  the  middle  bond  is  dropped,  and  the 
words  of  the  new  lan-guage  become  fubftitutes  for, 
and  fuggeft  diredtly  and  immediately  objefts  and  ideas; 
alfo  clufters  of  other  words  in  the  fame  language. 

In  learning  a  new  language  it  is  much  eafier  to 
tranflate  from  it  into  the  native  one,  than  back  again ; 
juft  as  young  children  are  much  better  able  to  under- 
ftand  the  expreffions  of  others,  than  to  exprefs  their 
own  conceptions.     And   the  reafon   is   the  fame  in 

both 


affociated  with  them,  2.83 

both  cafes.  Young  children  learn  at  firft  to  go 
from  the  words  of  others  j  and  thofe  who  learn  a 
new  language,  from  the  words  of  that  language,  to 
the  things  lignified.  And  the  reverfe  of  this,  viz. 
to  go  from  the  things  fignified  to  the  words,  miift 
be  difficult  for  a  time,  from  what  is  delivered  con- 
cerning fucceflive  aflbciations  under  the  tenth  and 
eleventh  propofitions.  It  is  to  be  added  here,  that 
the  nature  and  conne6tions  of  the  things  fignified 
often  determine  the  import  of  fentences,  though 
their  grammatical  analyfis  is  not  underftood ;  and  that 
we  fuppofe  the  perfon  who  attempts  to  tranQate  from 
a  new  language  is  fufficiently  expert  in  the  inverfe 
problem  of  paffing  from  the  things  fignified  to  the 
correfponding  words  of  his  own  language.  The 
power  of  affociation  is  every  where  confpicuous  in 
thefe  remarks. 

Cor.  4.  It  follows  alfo  from  the  reafoning  of  this 
propofition,    that  perfons  who  fpeak   the   fame   lan- 
guage cannot  always  mean   the  fame  things  by  the 
fame  words ;  but  muft  miftake  each  other's  meaning. 
This  confufion  and  uncertainty  arifes  from  the  dif- 
ferent aflbciations   transferred   upon  the  fame  words 
by  the  difference  in  the  accidents  and  events  of  our 
lives.     It  is,  however,  much  more  common  in  dif- 
courfes  concerning  abftraft  matters,  where  the  terms 
ftand.   for  collec-tions  of  other    terms,    fometimes   at 
„     the  pleafure  of  the  fpeaker  or  writer,    than    in    the 
|// common    and    neceflary    afi^airs    of   life.      For    here 
P^'frequent  ufe,   and  the   conftancy   of  the  phjcnomena 
of  nature,  intended  to  be  expiefTed  by   words,  have 
rendered  their  fenfe  determinate  and  certain.     How- 
i      ever,  it  feems  poffible,  and  even  not  very  difficult,  for 
two  truly  candid  and  intelligent  perfons  to  underfland 
each  other  upon  any  fubjeft. 

That   we   may   enter   more    particularly   into   the 
caufes  of  this   confufion,    and   confequently    be   the 

better 


X 


2S4  Of  Words,  md  the  Ideas 

better  enabled  to  prevent  it,  let  us  confider  words 
according  to  the  four  claircs  above-mentioned. 

Now  nurtakes  will  happen  in  the  words  of  the 
firrt  ciafs,  viz.  luch  as  have  ideas  only,  where  the 
pcrfons  have  alTociatcd  ihcle  words  with  different 
imprcflions.  And  the  method  to  recfbify  any  niidake 
of  this  kind  is  for  each  perfon  to  fhew  with  whac 
adual  iinprefTions  he  has  aflbciatcd  the  word  in 
queftion.     But  miftakes  here  are  not  common. 

In  words  of  the  fecond  ciafs,  viz.  fuch  as  have 
both  ideas  and  definitions,  it  ofcen  happens,  that 
one  perfon's  knowledge  is  much  more  full  than  an- 
other's, and  confequently  his  idea  and  definition  much 
more  extenfive.  1  his  mull:  caufe  a  milapprehenfion 
on  one  fide,  which  yet  may  be  eafily  redified  by  re- 
curring to  the  definition.  It  happens  alio  fometimes 
in  words  of  this  ciafs,  that  a  man's  ideas,  i.e.  the 
miniatures  excited  in  his  nervous  fyftem  by  the 
word,  are  not  always  fuitable  to  his  definition,  /.  e. 
arc  not  the  fame  with  thofe  which  the  words  of  the 
definition  would  excite.  If  then  this  perfon  fbould 
pietend,  or  even  defign,  to  reafon  from  his  definition, 
and  yet  reafon  from  his  idea,  a  mifapprehenfion  will 
aiife  in  the  hearer,  who  fuppofes  him  to  reafon  from 
his  definition  merely. 

In  words  of  the  third  claf«;,  which  have  defini- 
tions only,  and  no  immediate  ideas,  miftakes  gene- 
rally ^rife  through  want  of  fixed  definitions  niutu- 
ally  acknowledged  and  kept  to.  However,  as  imper- 
fed:  fluduating  ideas,  that  have  little  relation  to  the 
definitions,  are  often  apt  to  adhere  to  the  words  of 
this  ciafs,  miftakes  mult  arife  from  this  caule  alfo. 

As  to  the  words  of  the  fourth  ciafs,  or  thofe 
which  have  neither  ideas  nor  definitions,  it  is  eafy  to 
afcertain  their  ufe  by  inferting  them  in  fentences, 
whofe  import  is  known  and  acknowledged  ;  this  being 
the  method  in  which  children  learn  to  dccypher  them: 
fo  that  miftakes  could  not  arife  in  the  words  of  this 

ciafs. 


ajfc dated  with  them.  285 

clafs,  did  we  ufe  moderate  care  and  candour.  And 
indeed  fince  children  learn  the  ufes  of  words  mod 
evidently  without  having  any  data^  any  fixed  point  at 
ail,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  that  philofophers,  and  candid 
perrons7lTiay  learh  at  laft  to  under  (land  one  another 
with  facility  and  certainty  j  and  get  to  the  very  bottonn 
of  the~cbnne6iion  between  words  and  ideas. 

It  feems  practicable  to  make  a  diftionary  of  any 
language,  in  which  the  words  of  that  language  fhall 
all  be  explained  with  precifion  by  words  of  the  fame 
lancruage,  to  perfons  who  have  no  more  than  a  grofs 
knowledge  of  that  language.     Now  this  alfo  fliews, 
chat  with  care  and  candour  we  might  come  to  under- 
ftand   one  another   perfedly.     Thus  fenfible  qualities 
mit^ht  be  fixed  by  the  bodies,  in  which  they  are  moft 
eminent  and  diltinft  j  the  names  of  a  fufficient  num-  • 
ber  of  thefe  bodies   being  very  well  known.     After 
this  thefe  very  bodies,  and  all  others,  might   be  defi- 
ned  by   their   fenfible  properties  j  and  thefe  two  pro- 
cefles   would   help    each   other   indefinitely.     Aflions 
a/ight    be    dcfcribed    from    animals    already    defined, 
alfo    from    the    modes    of   extenfion,    abftraft    terms 
defined,  and  the  peculiar  ufe  of  particles  afcertained- 
And  fuch  a   didlionary   would,  in   fome   meafure,  be 
a   real    as    well    as    a    nominal    one,   and    extend    to 
things  themfclves.     The  writer  of  every  new  and  dif- 
ficult work  may  execute  that  part  of  fuch  a  didionary 
which   belongs   to   his   fubjedt ;    at    leart    in    the    in- 
ftances  where  he  apprehends  the  reader  is  likely  to 
want  it. 

CoR.  5.  When  words  have  acquired  any  confider- 
able  power  of  exciting  pleafant  or  painful  vibrations 
in  tKe  nervous  fyftem,  by  being  often  aflbciated  with 
flich  things  as  do  this,  they  may  transfer  a  part  of 
thefe  pleafures  and  pains  upon  indiff^erent  things, 
by  being  at  other  times  often  afibciaied  with  fuch. 
This  is  one  of  the  principal  fources  of  the  feveral  fic- 
titious pleafures  and  pains  of  human  life.     Thus,  to 

give 


a86  Of  Words,  t^nd  the  Ideas 

give    an    inflancc    from  childhood,  the  words  fweety 
goodf  preltyy   fiitCy    &c.    on    the   one    hand,    and    the 
words,  bad,  ttQ/y,  frightfuly   &c.  on  ihe  other,  being 
applied   by   the   niirfe   and   attendants    in    the    young 
cliild's    hearing    aliiiofl:    promilcuoufly,    and    without 
thole   relliidions   that  are  oblerved  in  cone(5t  fpeak- 
ing,    the    one    to   all   the   pleafutes,    the  other   to  all 
the   pains   of  the   feveral   fenfes,    miift    by   aflbciation 
raifc   up  general    pleafant  and   painful   vibrations,    in 
whicii   no  one   part  can   be  dillinguifhed    above    the 
left ;    and,   when    applied    by    farther    afibciations    to 
obje(5ts  of  a  neutral  kind,  they  mufl:  transfer  a  general 
pleafure  or  pain  upon  them. 
I        All  the  words  affociated  with   pleafures  mufl:  alfo 
'    afFedt    each    other    by    this    promifcuous    application. 
And  the  fame  holds  in  refped:  of  the  words  ailbciated 
with    pains.     However,    fince   both   the  original   and 
the   transferred  pleafures  and  pains  heaped  upon  dif- 
ferent words  are  different,  and  in  fome  cafes  widely 
fo,    every   remarkable  word   will  have  a  peculiar  in-! 
ternal   feeling,    or    fentiment,    belonging    to   it  5    and 
there  will  be  the  fame  relations  of  affinity,  difparity, 
and  oppofition,  between  thele  internal  fentiments,  ;.  £, 
ideas,   belonging    to    words,    as    between   the  feveral 
'genera  and  Jpecies  of  natural   bodies,  between   taftes, 
fmells,  colours,  &c.     Many   of  thefe  ideas,    though 
affording  confiderable  pleafure  at  firfl:,  mufl:  fink  into 
the  limits  of  indifference  i  and  fome  of  thofe   which 
affi)rded    pain    at   firfl:,    into   the    limits   of  pleafure. 
What  is  here  faid  of  words,    belongs  to  clufters  of 
them,  as  well  as  to  feparate  words.     And  the  ideas 
of  all    may  flill  retain   their   peculiarities,    by   which 
they  are  diftinguiflicd   from    each    other,    after    they 
have  fallen  below  the  limits  of  pleafure  into  indiffer- 
ence, juft:  as  obfcure  colours,  or  faint  taftes,  do. 

It  is  obfervable,  that  the  mere  tranfit  of  words 
expreffing  ftrong  ideas  over  the  ears  of  children 
affcfts  them  j  and  the  fame  thing  is  true  of  adults,  in 

a  lefs 


ajfociated  with  them,  287 

a  lefs  degree.  However  the  laft  have  learnt  from 
experience  and  habit  to  regard  them  chiefly,  as  they 
afford  a  rational  expedation  of  pleafure  and  pain. 
This  cannot  be  difcuffed  fully,  till  we  come  to  con- 
fider  the  nature  of  aflent ;  but  it  may  give  fome  light 
and  evidence  to  the  reafoning  of  this  corollary,  juft 
to  have  mentioned  the  manner,  in  which  we  are 
at  firft  affecled  by  words. 

Cor.  6.  Since  words  thus  colle6l  ideas  from  va- 
rious quarters,  unite  them  together  and  transfer  them 
ijoth  upon   other   words,    and   upon   foreign   objeds, 
it  is  evident,   that  the  ufe  of  words   adds  much  to 
:he  number  and  complexnefs  of  our  ideas,  and  is  the 
principal     means    by    which    we    make   intelleftual 
and   moral   improvements.      This  is   verified  abun- 
dantly by  the  obfervations  that  are  made  upon  per- 
ibns  born  deaf,   and  continuing  fo.     It  is  probable, 
however,  that  ihefe  perfons  make   ufe  of  fome  fym- 
bolb  to  aflift  the  memory,  and  fix  the  fancy :  and  they 
mutt   have   a   great   variety    of  pleafures   and    pains 
transferred    upon    vifible    objeds  from   their  alToci- 
ations  with  one  another,  and  with  fenfible  pleafures 
of  all  the  kinds  j  but  they  are  very  deficient  in  this, 
upon  the  whole,  through  the  want  of  the  afTociations 
of  vifible  objefts,  and  ftates  of  mind,  &c.  with  words. 
Learning  to  read  mufl:  add  greatly  to  their  mental 
improvement ;    yet   ftill   their   intelledual   capacities 
cannot  but  remain  very  narrow. 

Perfons  blind  from  birth  muft  proceed  in  a  man- 
ner different  from  that  defcribed  in  this  propofition, 
in  the  firft  ideas,  which  they  afiix  to  words.  As  the 
vifible  ones  are  wanting,  the  others,  particularly  the 
tangible  and  audible  ones,  muft  compofe  the  ag- 
gregates which  are  annexed  to  vvords.  However, 
as  they  are  capable  of  learning  and  retaining  as  great 
a  variety  of  words  as  others,  or  perhaps  a  greater, 
ceteris  paribuSy  and  can  affociate  with  them  pleafures 
and  pains  from  the  four  remaining  fenfes,    alfo  ufe 

them 


2S8  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

thctn  as  alc;cbraifts  do  the  letters  that  repiefcnt 
quantities,  they  fall  little  or  nothing  (hort  of  others 
in  intclledual  accompli  111  mcnts,  and  may  arrive  even 
at  a  greater  degree  of  fpiritiiality,  and  abrtradion  in 
their  complex  ideas. 

CoR.  7.  It  follows  from  this  propofition,  that, 
when  children  or  others  Hrfl:  learn  to  read,  the  view 
of  the  words  excites  ideas  only  by  the  mediation  of 
their  founds,  with  which  alone  their  ideas  have 
hi[lierto  been  allociated.  And  thus  it  is  that  chil- 
dren and  illiterate  perfons  iindcrftand  what  they 
read  beft  by  reading  aloud.  By  degrees,  the  inter- 
nnediare  link,  being  left  out,  the  written  or  printed 
charadlers  fugged  the  ideas  direcftly  and  inftantane- 
oufly  i  io  that  learned  men  underftand  more  readily 
by  pafTing  over  the  words  with  the  eye  only,  fince 
this  method,  by  being  inorc  expeditious,  brings 
the  ideas  clofer  together.  However,  all  men,  both 
learned  and  unlearned,  are  peculiarly  affeded  by 
words  pronounced  in  a  manner  fuitable  to  their  fcnfe 
and  defign;  vvliich  is  flill  an  aflbciated  influence. 

Cor.  8.   As  perfons,  before  they  learn  to  lead,  muft 
have   very   imperfefb   notions    of   the   diflindtion   of 
words,  and  can  only  underftand  language   in  a  grofs 
general  way,  taking  whole  clufters  of  words   for  on^ 
undivided  found,  fo  much   lefs   can  they  be  fuppofed 
to  have   any  conceptions    concerning    the    nature    or 
ufe  of  letters.     Now  all    mankind   muft  have   been 
in  this  ftate   before  the   invention   of  letters.     Nay, 
they  mufl:  have  been   farther   removed   from   all   con- 
ceptions of  letters,  than   the   moft  unlearned  perfons 
amongfl:  us,  fince  thefe  have  at  lead  heaid  of  letters,  and 
know  that  words  may  be  written  and  read  by  means  of 
them.    And  this  makes  it  difficult  to  trace  out  by  what 
fteps  alphabetical   writing  was   invented  ;  or   is  even 
fome  prefumption,  that   it   is  not  a  human  invention. 
To  which  ic  is  to  be  added,  that  theanalyfing  complex 
articulate   founds   into  their  fimple  coirjponent  parts 
appears  to  be  a  problem  of  too  difficult  and  perplexed 

a  nature 


ajfociated  with  them.  289 

a  nature  for  the  rude  early  ages,  occupied  in  getting 
neceflaries,  and  defending  themfelves  fronn  external 
injuries,  and  not  aware  of  the  great  ufe  of  it,  even 
though  they  had  known  the  folution  to  be  poflible  and 
praAicable.  However,  I  iTiall  mention  fome  prefunnp- 
;ions  of  a  contrary  nature  under  the  next  propofition.    . 

PROP.     LXXXI. 

'io  explain  the  Nature  of  CharaFlers  intended  to  reprefent 
OhjeSls  and  Ideas  immediately ^  and  without  the  Inter-- 
vention  of  Words, 

Since  charafters  made  by  the  hand  are  capable 
of  the  greatell:  varieties,  they  might  be  fitted  by 
proper  affociations  to  fugged  objects  and  ideas  im- 
mediately, in  the  fame  manner  as  articulate  founds 
do.  And  there  are  fome  inftances  of  it  in  common 
ufe,  which  may  ferve  to  verify  this,  and  to  lead  us 
into  the  nature  of  charaders  (landing  immediately 
for  objefts  and  ideas.  Thus  the  numeral  figures, 
and  the  letters  in  algebra,  reprefent  objeds,  ideas, 
words,  and  clufters  of  words,  diredly  and  immedi- 
ately; the  pronunciation  of  them  being  of  no  ufe, 
or  necefTity,  in  the  operations  to  be  performed  by 
them.  Thus  alfo  mufical  charaders  reprefent  founds 
and  combinations  of  founds,  without  the  interven- 
tion of  words,  and  are  a  much  more  compendious 
and  ready  reprefentation,  than  any  words  can  be. 

Charaders  feem  to  have  an  advantage  over  articu- 
late founds  in  the  reprefentation  of  viGble  ohjeds, 
inafmuch  as  they  might  by  their  refemblance,  even 
though  only  a  grofs  one,  become  rather  natural,  than 
mere  arbitrary  reprefentatives. 

They  had  alfo  an  advantage  as  reprefentatives 
in  general,  before  the  invention  of  alphabetical  wri- 
ting, fince  perfons  could  by  this  means  convey  their 
,   thoughts  to  eacfi  other  at  a  diftance. 

•  Vol.  I.  U  If 


igo  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

If  we  fiippofe  charaders  to  be  iiTprovcd  to  all 
that  variety  and  nuiltiplicity,  which  is  neccflary  for 
reprcfenting  objcfls,  ideas,  and  clufters  of  charac- 
ters, in  the  lame  manner  as  words  rcprefcnt  objedls, 
ideas,  and  clufters  of  words,  rtill  they  might  be  rc- 
folvtrd  into  fimplc  component  parts  j  and  rendered 
pronLinciable  by  affixing  fome  fimple  or  fhort  found 
to  each  of  ihcle  fimplc  component  parts;  jiill  as  arti- 
culate founds  are  painted  by  being  firll  rclblvcd  into 
tlieir  fimple  component  parts,  and  then  having  each 
of  thcfc  reprefenttd  by  a  fiinple  mark  or  chatadter. 
If  we  fuppofe  the  moft  common  vifibie  objedls  to 
11  be  denoted  both  by  fliort  articulate  founds,  and  by 
;|  ibort  characters  bearing  fome  real,  or  fancied,  im- 
perfect refemblance  to  them,  it  is  evident,  that  the 
found  and  mark,  by  being  both  affociated  with  the 
vifible  objeft,  would  alfo  be  affociated  with  one  an- 
other; and  confequenily  that  the  found  would  be  the 
name  of  the  mark^  and  the  mark  the  picture  of 
the  found.  And  this  laft  circumftance  feems  to  lead 
to  the  denoting  all  founds  by  marks,  and  therefore 
perhaps  to  alphabetical  writing. 

At  the  fame  time  it  muft  be  obferved,  that  the 
marks  would  bear  different  relations  of  fimilarity 
and  diffimilarity  to  one  another  from  ihofe  which  the 
correfponding  founds  did. 

This  would  happen  according  to  whatever  law  the 
marks  were  made,  but  efpecially  if  they  were  re- 
femblances  of  vifible  objefls.  And  this,  as  it  feems, 
would  occafion  fome  difficulty  and  perplexity  in  re- 
prcfenting founds  by  marks,  or  marks  by  founds. 


PROP. 


affociated  with  them.  291 


PROP.     LXXXII. 

To  explain  the  Nature  of  figurative  Words  and  Phrafes, 
and  of  Analogy^  from  the  foregoing  Theory. 

A  FIGURE  is  a  word,  which,  firft  reprefenting  the 
obje(5l  or  idea  A^  is  afterwards  made  to  reprefent 
5,  on  account  of  the  relation,  which  thefe  bear  to 
each  other. 

The  principal  relation,  which  gives  rife  to  figures, 
is  that  of  likenefs ;  and  this  may  be  either  a 
likenefs  in  fhape,  and  vifible  appearance,  or  one  in 
application,  ufe,  &c.  Now  it  is  very  evident  fronf, 
the  nature  of  aflbciation,  that  objedls  which  are  like 
to  a  given  one  in  vifible  appearance,  will  draw  to 
themfelves  the  word  by  which  this  is  expreffed. 
And  indeed  this  is  the  foundation  upon  which  ap- 
pellatives are  made  to  (land  for  fo  great  a  number  of 
particulars.  Let  the  word  man  be  applied  to  the 
particular  perfons  A^  By  Q  &c.  till  it  be  fufficiently 
aflbciaied  with  them,  and  it  will  follow,  that  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  new  particular  perfon  D  will  fuggeft 
the  word,  and  be  denoted  by  it.  But  here  there  is 
no  figure,  becaufe  the  word  man  is  affociated  with 
different  particular  perfons  from  the  firft,  and  that 
equally  or  nearly  fo. 

In  like  manner,  the  correfponding  parts  of  differ- 
ent animals,  /.  e.  the  eyes,  mouth,  breaft,  belly, 
legs,  lungs,  heart,  &c.  have  the  fame  names  applied 
in  a  literal  fenfe,  partly  from  the  likenefs  of 
fliape,  partly  from  that  of  ufe  and  application. 
And  it  is  evident,  that  if  we  fuppofe  a  people  fo  rude 
in  language  and  knowledge,  as  to  have  names  only 
for  the  parts  of  the  human  body,  and  not  to  have 
attended  to  the  parts  of  the  brute  creatures,  affoci- 
ation  would  lead  them  to  apply  the  fame  names  to 
the  parts  of  the  brute  creatures,  as  foon  as  they  be- 

U  2  came 


2^2  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

came  acquainted  with  them.  Now  here  this  appli- 
cation would  at  firrt  have  the  nature  of  a  figure; 
but  when  by  degrees  any  of  thefe  words,  the  eye 
for  inllance,  became  equally  applied  from  the  firft  to 
the  eyes  of  men  and  brutes,  it  would  ceafe  to  be  a 
figure,  and  become  an  appellative  name,  as  Jult  now 
remarked. 

But  when  tiic  original  application  of  the  word  is 
obvious,  and  remains  dillindt  from  the  Iccondary  one, 
as  when  we  fay  the  mouth  or  ear  of  a  vclTel,  or  the 
foot  of  a  chair  or  table,  the  expreflion  is  figura- 
tive. 

Hence  it  is  plain,  that  the  various  refemblancea 
which  nature  and  art  afford  are  the  principal  fources 
of  figures.  PTowever,  many  figures  are  alfo  derived 
from  other  relations,  fuch  as  thofe  of  caufe,  effed, 
oppofition,  derivation,  generality,  particularity ;  and 
language  itfclf,  by  its  refemblances,  oppofitions, 
&c.  becomes  a  new  fource  of  figures,  diftindl  from 
the  relations  of  things. 

Moft  metaphors,  /.  e.  figures  taken  from  like- 
nefs,  imply  a  likenefs  in  more  particulars  than  one, 
clfc  they  would  not  be  fufficiently  definite,  nor  affedt 
the  imagination  in  a  due  manner.  If  the  likenef^ 
extend  to  many  particulars,  the  figure  becomes  im-. 
plicitly  a  fimile,  fable,  parable,  or  allegory. 

Many,  or  moft  common  figures,  pafs  fo  far  into, 
literal  expreffions  by  ufe,  ;.  e,  affociation,  that  we 
do  not  attend  at  all  to  their  figurative  nature.  An4 
thus  by  degrees  figurative  fenfes  become  a  founda- 
tion for  fucceffive  figures,  in  the  fame  manner,  ajs 
originally  literal  fenfes. 

It  is  evident,  that  if  a  language  be  narrow,  and 
much  confined  to  fenfible  things,  it  will  have  great 
occafion  for  figures :  thefe  will  naturally  occur  in  the 
common  intcrcourfes  of  life,  and  will  in  their  turn, 
as  they  become  literal  exprefilons  in  the  fecondary 
fenfes,    much    augment   and   improve   the   language, 

and 


ajfocialed  with  them.  293 

:  and  afllfl:  the  invention.     All  this  is  manifeft:  from  the 
fgrowth  of  modern  languages,    in  thofe  parts  where 
they  were  heretofore  particularly  defeflive. 

We   come   now   to  the  confideration    of  analogy. 
Now  things  are  faid  to  be  analogous  to   one  another, 
in  the  ftrid  mathematical  fenfe  of  the  word  analogy^ 
when    the   correfponding   parts  are  all   in    the    fame 
ratio  to  each  other.     Thus  if  the  feveral  parts  of  the 
body    in  different   perforis  be  Ibppoled  exa6lly    pro- 
portional to  the  whole  bodies,  they  might  be   faid  to 
be    analogous  in  the  original  mathematical  fenfe   of 
that  word.     But  as  this  reftrained   fenfe  is  not  appli-  ' 
cable    to    things,   as   they   really  exift,    another  of  a 
moi'e  enlarged  and  pradlical  nature  has  been  adopted, 
which   may    be   thus    defined.     Analogy   is    that    re- 
.  femblance,  and  in  fome  cafes  famenefs,  of  the  parts, 
properties,    fundlions,    ufes,    &c.    any  or  all,    of  A 
to    Bj  whereby  our  knowledge  conoerning  Ay  and  the 
language  expiefling  this  knowledge,  may   be  applied 
in  the  whole,  or  in  part,  to  5,  without  any   fenfible, 
or,    at  leaft,    any  important  practical  error.     Now 
analogies,    in  this   fenfe   of  the    word,     fome    more 
^exa<5t  and  exten five,  fome  lefs  fo,- prefent   themfelves 
to  us  every  where  in  natural  and  artificial  things ;  and 
thus  whole  groups  of  figurative  phrafes,    which  feem 
at  firft  only   to  anfwer  the   purpofes    of   convenience 
in  affording  names  for   new  objeds,  and    of  pleafing 
the  fancy  in  the  way  to  be  hereafter  mentioned,  pafs 
into  analogical  reafoning,  and  become  a  guide  in  the 
ftarch   after  truth,    and   an  evidence   for   it  in   fome 
degree.       I    will    here    fet    down    fome   inllances   of 
analogies  of  various  decrees  and  kinds. 

The   bodies   of  men,    women,    and    children,    are 

highly  analogous  to  each  other.     This  holds  equally 

in  refpeft    of  every    other  fpecies  of   animals  ;  alfo 

of  the  feveral  correfponding  parts  of  animals  of  the 

I  fame  fpecies,  as   their  flefh,   blood,    bones,    fat,  &c. 

i  and  their  properties.     Here   the    words    applied   to 

!  U  3  •  the 


294  ^  Words,  ^nd  the  Ideas 

the  feveral  analogous  things  are  iifed  in  a  fenfe  equally 
literal  in  refpect  of  all.  And  the  analogy  is  in  moft 
cafes  fo  clofc,  as  rather  to  be  clhemed  a  coincidence, 
or  fdmenefs. 

In  comparing  animals  of  different  kinds  the  ana- 
logy grows  perpetually  leis  and  Icfs,  as  we  take  in  a 
greater  compafs  ;  and  confec]ucntly  our  language 
more  and  more  hailli,  when  confidered  as  literal, 
whilfl:  yet  it  cannot  well  be  Hgurative  in  fome  things, 
and  literal  in  others ;  fo  that  new  words  are  generally 
affigned  to  thofe  parts,  which  do  not  fufficiently  re- 
feniblc  the  correfponding  ones.  Thus  the  fore-legs 
of  men  and  fowls,  as  we  might  call  them  in  a  harfh, 
literal,  or  a  highly  figurative  way,  are  termed  hands 
and  wings  relpedlively.  However,  in  fome  cafes, 
the  Hime  word  is  ufed,  and  confidered  as  a  figure; 
as  when  the  cries  of  birds  and  bealls  are  termed  their 
language.  We  rway  alio  obferve,  that  every  part  in 
every  animal  may,  from,  its  rcfemblance  in  Ihape  and 
ufe  to  the  correfponding  fiarts  in  feveral  other  animals 
have  a  juft  right  to  a  name,  which  fhall  be  common 
to  it  and  them. 

What  has  been  faid  of  animals  of  the  fame  and 
different  kinds  holds  equally  in  refpedt  of  vegetables. 
Thofe  of  the  fame  kind  have  the  fame  names  ap- 
plied to  the  coirefponding  parts  in  a  literal  fenfe. 
Thofe  of  different  kinds  have  many  names  common 
to  all  ufed  in  a  literal  fenfe,  fome  new  ones  peculiar 
to  certain  kinds,  and  fome  that  may  be  confidered  as 
fo  harfh  in  a  literal  fenfe,  that  we  may  rather  call 
them  figurative  terms. 

The  fame  may  be  faid  of  the  mineral  kingdom, 
confidered  alfo  according  to  its  genera  aud/pecies. 

Animals  are  alfo  analogous  to  vegetables  in  many 
things,  and  vegetables  to  minerals:  fo  that  there 
feems  to  be  a  perpetual  thread  of  analogy  continued 
from  the  moft  perfeft  animal  to  the  moft  imperfed 
mineral,  even  till  we  come  to  elementary  bodies  them- 
felves.  Suppofe 


ajjociated  with  them.  295 

Suppofe  the  feveral  particulars  of  the  three  king- 
doms to  be  reprefenred  by  the  letters  of  an  alpha- 
bet fufficiently  large  for  that  purpofe.  Then  we  are 
to  conceive,  that  any  two  contiguous  fpecies,  as  A 
and  By  M  and  N^  are  nnore  analogous  than  A  and  C, 
M  and  O,  which  have  one  between  them.  However, 
fince  A  and  5,  M  and  A^,  are  not  perfeftly  analogous, 
this  deficiency  may  be  fupplied  in  fome  things  from 
C  and  O,  in  others  from  D  and  P,  &c.  fo  that  M  can 
have  no  part,  property,  &c.  but .  what  (hall  have 
fomething  quite  analogous  to  it  in  fome  fpecies,  near 
or  remote,  above  it  or  below  it,  and  even  in  feveral 
fpecies.  And  in  cafes  where  the  parts,  properties, 
&c»  are  not  rigoroufly  exa6l  in  refemblance,  there 
is,  however,  an  imperfect  one,  which  juftifies  the  ap- 
plication of  the  fame  word  to  both ;  if  it  approach 
to  perfe6lion,  the  word  may  be  faid  to  be  ufed  in  a 
literal  fenfe ;  if  it  be  very  imperfe6t,  in  a  figurative 
one.  Thus  v;hen  the  names  of  parts,  properties, 
&c.  are  taken  from  the  animal  kingdom,  and  ap- 
plied to  the  vegetable,  or  vice  verfaj  they  are  more 
frequently  confidered  as  figurative,  than  when  tranf- 
ferred  from  one  part  of  the  animal  kingdom  to 
another. 

In  like  manner,  there  feems  to  be  a  gradation  of 
analogies  refpe(5ling  the  earth,  moon,  planets, 
comets,  fun,  and  fixed  ftars,  compared  with  one 
another.  Or  if  we  defcend  to  the  feveral  parts  of 
individuals,  animals,  vegetables,  or  minerals,  the 
feveral  organs  of  fenfation  are  evidently  analogous 
to  each  other ;  alfo  the  glands,  the  mufcles,  the  parts 
of  generation  in  the  difi^erent  fexes  of  the  fame 
kind,  &c.  &c.  without  limits.  For  the  more  any 
one  looks  into  the  external  natural  world,  the  more 
analogies,  general  or  particular,  perfed  or  imperfeft, 
will  he  find  every  where. 

Numbers,  geometrical  figures,  and  algebraic  quan- 
tities,   are   alfo    mutually    analogous  without   lirn.its. 

U  4  And 


296  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

And  liere  there  is  the  cxadleft  uniformity,  joined 
with  an  cndlcls  variety,  fo  th;u  it  is  always  ceitain 
and  evident  how  far  the  an.ilogy  holds,  and  where  il 
becomes  a  difparity  or  oppofiiion  on  one  hand,  or  a 
coincidence  on  the  other.  Ihere  is  no  room  for 
figures  here;  but  the  terms  mu(t  be  difparate,  oppo- 
litc,  or  the  fame,  in  a  (Iridly  literal  fenle  refpe6lively. 

The  feveral  words  of  each  particular  language, 
the  languages  themfelves,  the  idioms,  figures,  &;c. 
abound  alfo  with  numerous  analogies  of  various 
kinds  and  degrees. 

Analogies  are  likewife  introduced  into  artificial 
things,  houfes,  gardens,  furniture,  drefs,  arts, 
&:c. 

The  body   politic,    the    body  natural,    the    world 

natural,    the    univerfe  ; The    human    mind,    the 

minds  of  brutes  on  one  hand,  and  of  fuperior  beings 

on  the  other,  and  even  the  infinite  mind  himfelf ; 

the  appellations  of  father,  governor,  judge,  king, 
archited,  &c.  referred  to  God  ;  —  the  ages  of  man, 
the  ages  of  the  world,  the  feafons  of  the  year,  the 
times  of  the  day;  —  the  offices,  profeffions,  and 
trades,  of  different  perfons,  ftatefmen,  generals, 
divines,  lawyers,  phyficians,  merchants  ;  —  the 
terms  night,  fleep,  death,  chabs,  darknefs,  &€. 
alfo  light,  life,  happlnefs,  &c.  compared  with  each 
other  refpeflively ;  life  and  death,  as  applied  in 
different  fenfes  to  animials,  vegetables,  liquors,  &:c. 
—  earthquakes,  ftorms,  battles,  tumults,  fermen- 
tations of  liquors,  law-fuits,  games,  &c.  families, 
bodies  politic  lefler  and  greater,  their  laws,  natural 
religion,  revealed  religion,  Sec.  &c.  afford  endlefs 
inftances  of  analogies  natural  and  artificial.  For  the 
mind  being;  once  initiated  into  the  method  of  dif- 
covering  analogies,  and  expreffing  them,  does  by 
affociation  perfevere  in  this  method,  and  even  force 
things  into  its  fyltem  by  concealing  difparities,  mag- 
nifying refemblances,  and  accommodating  language 

thereto. 


ajfociated  with  them.  2gy 

thereto.  It  is  eafy  to  fee,  that  in  the  inftances  laft 
alleged  the  terms  ufed  are  for  the  moft  part  literal 
only  in  one  fenfe,  and  figurative  in  all  their  other 
applications.  They  are  literal  in  the  fenfe  which 
wa-s  their  primary  one,  and  figurative  in  many  or  moft 
of  the  reft.  Similes,  fibres,  parables,  allegories,  &c. 
are  all  inftances  of  natural  analogies  improved  and 
iet  off  by  art.  And  they  have  this  in  common  to 
them  all,  that  the  properties,  beauties,  perfections, 
defires,  or  defe6ls  and  averfions,  which  adhere  by 
aftbciation  to  the  fimile,  parable  of  emblem  of  any 
kind,  are  infenfibly,  as  it  were,  transferred  upon  the 
thing  rcprefented.  Hence  the  paffions  are  moved  to 
good  or  to  evil,  fpeculation  is  turned  into  pradlice, 
and  either  fome  important  truth  felt  and  realized,  or 
fome  error  and  vice  gilded  over  and  recommended. 

PROP.     LXXXIII. 

To  apply  the  foregoing  Account  of  Words  and  CharaSlers 
to  the  Languages  and  Method  of  Writing  of  the  firfi 
Ages  of  the  World. 

Here  there  is  a  great  difficulty  through  the  want 
of  fufficient  data.  I  will  aflume  a  few  of  thofe 
that  appear  to  me  moft  probable,  and  juft  fhew  the 
method  of  applying  the  doftrine  of  affociation  to 
them ;  leaving  it  to  learned  men,  as  they  become 
poiTefied  of  more  and  more  certain  data,  to  make 
farther  advances. 

I  fuppofe  then,  that  Adam  had  fome  language, 
with  fome  inftiodive  knowledge  concerning  the  ufe  of 
it,  as  well  as  concerning  divine  and  natural  things, 
imparted  to  him  by  God  at  his  creation.  It  feems 
indeed,  that  God  made  ufe  of  tiie  vifible  appearances 
or  aflions,  or  perhaps  of  the  feveral  cries  of  the 
brute  creatures,  as  the  means  whereby  he  taught 
Adam  their  names.     But  whether  this  was  fo,    aifo 

whether. 


C98  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

whether,  if  it  was,  any  analogous  method  was  taken 
in  rcfpcj^t  of  the  names  of  other  objefts,  or  of  ideas, 
;»nd  internal  feriings,  is  an  inquiry,  in  which  nothing 
that  yet  a[)pears  can  afford  fatisfadion. 

1  luppofe  alio,  that  the  language,  which  Adam  and 
Hve  were  pollclied  of  in  paradile  was  very  narrow, 
and  confined  in  great  meafure  to  vifible  things ;  God 
himlelf  contlelcending  to  appear  in  a  vifible,  perhaps 
in  a  human  (linpe,  to  them,  in  his  revelations  of  him- 
felf.  It  might  alfo  be  monolVllabic  in  great  meafure. 
They  who  luppofe  Adam  to  be  capable  of  deep 
fpeculations,  and  to  have  exceeded  all  his  poflerity 
in  the  lubtilty  and  extent  of  his  intellectual  faculties,, 
and  confequently  in  the  number  and  variety  of  his 
words,  and  tiie  ideas  belonging  to  them,  have  no 
foundation  for  this  ojiinion  in  fciipture;  nor  do  they 
fcem  to  confider,  that  innocence,  and  pure  unmixed 
happinels,  may  exift  without  any  great  degrees  of 
knowledge ;  or  that  to  fet  a  value  upon  knowledge 
confidered  in  itfelf,  and  exclufively  of  its  tendency 
to  carry  us  to  God,  is  a  mofi:  pernicious  error,  de- 
rived originally  from  Adam's  having  eaten  of  the 
tree  of  knowledge. 

After  the  fall  we  may  fuppofe,  that  Adam  and  Eve 
extended  their  language  to  new  objefts  and  ideas, 
and  efpecially  to  thofe  which  were  attended  with 
pain  ;  and  this  they  might  do  fometimes  by  inventing 
new  words,  fometimes  by  giving  new  fenfes  to  old 
ones.  However,  their  language  would  flill  continue 
narrow,  becaufe  they  had  only  one  another  to  converfe 
with,  and  could  not  extend  their  knowledge  to  any 
great  variety  of  things;  alfo  becaufe  their  founda- 
tion was  narrow.  For  the  growth  and  variations  of 
a  language  fomev.'hat  refcmble  the  increafe  of  money 
at  intereft:  upon  intereft. 

If  to  thefe  reafons  we  add  the  long  lives  of  the 
antediluvian  patria'-chs,  the  want  of  arts  and  fciences 
in  the  antediluvian  world,    and  the   want  of  leifure 

through 


ajjociated  wilh  them.  299 

through  the  great  labour  and  fatigue  ncceffary  to 
provide  food,  clothing,  &c.  we  fhall  have  reafon  to 
conjedlure,  that  the  whole  antediluvian  world  would 
fpeak  the  fame  language  with  Adam^  and  that  with- 
out any  great  additions  or  alterations.  After  a  hundred 
or  two  hundred  years,  afTociation  would  fix  the 
language  of  each  perfon,  fo  that  he  could  not  well 
make  any  alterations ;  but  he  muft  fpeak  the 
language  of  his  forefathers  till  that  time,  becaufe 
thole  to  the  fixth  or  feventh  generation  above  him 
■were  dill  living;  and  confequently  he  would  con- 
tinue to  fpeak  the  fame  language,  i.  e.  the  AdamiCy 
with  few  variations,  to  the.  laft.  The  narrownefs 
of  the  languages  of  barbarous  nations  may  add  fome 
light  and  evidence  here. 

If  we  fuppofe  fome  kind  of  pidure-writing  to 
have  been  imparted  to  Adam  by  God,  or  to  have 
been  invented  by  him,  or  by  any  of  his  pofterity, 
this  might  receive  more  alterations  and  improve- 
ments than  language,  from  the  fucceffive  genera- 
tions of  the  antediluvians.  For  the  variety  of  figures 
in  vifible  objedts  would  fuggeft  a  fufficient  variety 
in  their  charadlers  j  the  hand  could  eafily  execute  this; 
and  their  permanency  would  both  give  the  antedilu- 
vians diftindt  ideas  of  all  the  original  characters,  and 
all  their  variations,  and  alfo  fix  them  in  their  memory. 
We  may  fuppofe  therefore,  that  though  their  words 
and  marks  would  be  fo  aflbciated  together  (agreeably 
to  what  was  before  obferved),  as  that  the  word 
would  be  the  name  of  the  correfponding  mark,  and 
the  mark  the  picture  of  the  word  in  many  cafes,  yet 
their  marks  would  in  fome  inftances  extend  farther 
■  than  their  words  j  and  confequently,  that  on  this 
account,  as  well  as  becaufe  the  marks  would  be 
fimilar  and  different,  where  the  words  were  not, 
there  would  be  no  alphabetical  writing  in  the  ante- 
diluvian world. 

They 


300  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

They  might,  however,  liand  down  a  liiftory  of 
the  creation,  fall,  and  principal  events,  in  this  pi(5liire- 
writing,  attended  with  a  traditional  explanation^ 
\vhicli  might  remiiin  uncorrupted  and  invariable  till 
the  deluge.  And  indeed,  if  we  llippofe  pidiire- 
writing  to  be  of  divine  original,  it  will  be  mod  prp- 
bable,  that  they  received  a  divine  diredion  to  do 
tliis,  and  that  they  would  nut  apply  their  pidure- 
writing  to  any  other  piirpofe  for  fome  time:  ju(t  as 
the  Ifraelitcs  afterwards  feem  to  have  employed  alpha- 
betical writing  chiefly  for  recording  the  divine  difpcii- 
fitions  and  interpofitions. 

After  the  flood  the  great  change  made  in  the  face 
of  things,  and  in  natural  bodies,  with  the  appear- 
ance perhaps  of  fome  entirely  new  ones,  would  make 
fome  parrs  of  the  antediluvian  language  fuperfluous, 
at  the  fame  time  that  it  would  be  gready  defective 
upon  the  whole.  Hence  we  may  fuppofe,  that  the 
antediluvian  language  mufl:  receive  much  greater 
alterations  and  additions  juft:  after  the  flood,  than 
at  any  time  before.  But  Noah  and  his  wife,  having 
thfir  words  and  ideas  more  firmly  aflbciated  to- 
gether, than  Shenii  HarUi  and  Japhet,  and  their 
wives,  on  account  of  their  fuperior  age,  would  be 
far  lefs  able  to  make  the  requifite  changes  in  their 
language.  Something  like  this  mufl:  alfo  take  place 
in  rcfpect  of  their  pidure-writing,  if  we  fuppofe 
there  was  any  fuch  thing  in  the  antediluvian  world. 

Let  us  fuppofe  this,  and  alfo  with  Mr.  Whijlon  and 
Mr.  Shuckford,  that  Noah^  his  wife,  and  their  pofl:- 
diluvian  pofterity,  fettled  early  in  China,  fo  as  to  be 
cut  off^  from  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhef,  and  their 
pofl:erity.  Here  then  we  may  fuppofe  farther,  that 
they  would  alter  and  improve  their  pi6ture-writing, 
or  character,  fo  as  to  fuit  it  to  the  new  face  of 
things  in  the  pofl:diluvian  world,  and  to  make  it 
grow  with  the  growth  of  knowledge,  more  than  they 
would   their  language,    from   the   greater  facility  of 

doing 


ajjbciated  with  ihem,  301 

doing  this :  for  I  prefume,  that  the  antediluvian 
language  contained  but  few  of  the  articulate  founds 
which  are  now  known,  and  that  they  could  not  in- 
vent more.  Thus  their  charader  and  language 
would  both  of  them  be  the  immediate  reprefentatives 
of  objedls  and  ideas  j  only  the  ufe  and  application 
of  the  chara6ter  would  be  much  more  extenfive  than 
that  of  the  language.  After  fome  time,  fome  cen- 
turies, or  even  chiliads,  fuppofe,  both  the  charadter 
and  language  would  begin  to  be  fixed,  to  have  fewer 
new  marks  and  words  added,  and  fewer  alterations 
made  in  the  old  ones  in  any  given  interval  of  time. 
The  words  would  alio  be  fo  firmly  aflbciated  with  the 
correfponding  maiks,  as  to  be  the  names  of  them,  i.  e, 
to  reprefent  them  as  well  as  the  objedls  or  ideas,  to 
which  they  were  originally  affixed.  But  then  there 
would  be  many  marks,  to  which  there  would  be  no 
fuch  names,  taken  from  the  names  of  objefbs  and 
ideas,  on  account  of  the  poverty  of  the  language 
here  fuppolcd.  They  would,  however,  endeavour  to 
give  them  fome  names  ^  and  hence  a  diverfity  would 
^rife  in  their  language.  We  may  conceive  alfo,  that 
as  they  feparated  farther  from  one  another  in  multiply- 
ing, particular  clans  would  deviate  even  in  the  pro- 
nunciation of  the  monofyllabic  words  of  the  original 
language,  as  in  the  fcveral  dialedls  of  other  languages; 
and  confequently  deviate  ftill  more  in  the  compound 
r  names  of  the  marks :  but  the  marks,  being  per- 
manent things,  capable  of  being  handed  down  ac- 
curately to  the  fucceffive  generations,  and  of  being 
conveyed  to  diftant' countries,  would  continue  intel- 
ligible to  all.  And  thus  we  may  conceive,  that  the 
poftdiluvian  pofterity  of  Noah  might  all  write  the 
.fame  characters,  and  yet  fpeak  different  languages;  1 
alfo  that  their  character  would  be  very  extenfive,  and 
I  always  the  immediate  reprefentative  of  objects  and 
lideas^  whereas  their  language  would  be  narrow,  and 
lin  fome  cafes  the  immediate  reprefentative  of  the 
/'  chara<5ter, 


joa  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas       ^ 

charafVer,  and  only  denote  objeifbs  and  ideas  by 
means  of  this.  And  this  1  take  to  be  the  cafe  with  the 
people  of  ChinOy  and  the  neighbouring  countries  of 
Japatiy  TonquiiJiy  Siam,  3^c.  But  I  only  prefume  to'j^ 
offer  conjei!:hircs,  not  having  any  knowledge  of  the 
charafler  or  languages  of  thefe  countries. 

Since  the  Cbinefe  marks  are  very  numerous,  and 
their  fimple  words  very  few,  whereas  our  words  af-e 
very  numerous,  and  our  fimple  marks,  or  the  letters  . 
of  our  alphabet,  very  few;  alio  fince  our  words 
are  the  fole  immediate  reprefentatives  of  objefls  and 
ideas,  our  written  and  printed  marks  being  merely 
artificial  pictures  of  words;  one  might  fufpefl,  that 
the  Chinefe  words  are,  in  correfpondence  to  this,  merely 
an  artificial  enunciation  of  their  charadter.  But  I 
think  this  not  fo  probable,  as  the  mixed  fuppofition 
mentioned  in  the  lad  paragraph.  For  it  cannot  be 
fuppofed,  that  any  nation  fliould  be  fo  far  deftitute  of 
language,  as  not  to  have  words  for  common  ob- 
jects, and  internal  feelings ;  or,  having  thefe,  that  they 
fliould  lay  them  entirely  afide,  and  adopt  the  artificial 
names  of  the  marks  reprefenting  thofe  objeds  and 
ideas  in  their  fteads.  But  they  might  eafily  adopt 
names,  fimple  or  compound,  at  firft  afcribed  arti- 
ficially to  marks,  whofe  objeds  and  ideas  had  before 
this  adoption  no  names. 

That  in  affixing  names  artificially  to  marks  a  great 
diverficy  might  arife,  appears  from  the  great  diver- 
fity  of  alphabetical  charafters  exprefTing  the  fame 
words.  Thus  the  HebreiJOy  Samaritan  and  Syriac 
languages,  agree  nearly  in  found  and  fenfe,  but 
differ  entirely  in  charaders.  Thus  alfo,  amongfl: 
modern  lan<2:ua2es,  feveral  are  written  in  different 
charaders,  as  Engliflo  in  the  common  round-hand 
in  various  law  hands,  and  various  fhor:  hands. 

Let  us  now  return  to  Sheniy  Haniy  and  Japhety  and 
their  pofterity.     They   muft  be  fuppofed  to  proceed 
in  the  fame  manner,  in  general,  as  Noah,  and  his  im- 
mediate 


ajjbciated  with  them,  30 J' 

mediate  pofterity,    till  the   confufion   of  tongues   at 
Baheli  excepting  that  bhem.  Ham,  and   Japhet,  with 
tlieir  wives,  would   be  more   apt  to  alter   their  cha- 
rader   and  language,  and   fuit  them   to  their  prefent 
exigencies,  than   Noah  and   his   wife,    on  account  of 
their  being   all  young  perfons  i    alfo   that,    being  all 
as  it  were  equal  to  each  other  they  might  each  of  them 
be  the  authors  of  certain   diverfities   in  the  common 
character  and  language  and  eftablifh   them    in    their 
refpeftive  pofterities.     However,  if  Noah  be  fuppofed 
to  have  continued  with  them   till   the  divifion  of  the 
earth  by   God's  command,    and    then  only   to  have 
departed  with  his  poftdiluvian  pofterity  for  Chinas  the 
country  afligned  to  him,  whilll  Shem,  Ham,  and   Ja- 
fhelj  with  their  pofterity,  began  to  build  the  tower 
of  Babel   in   oppofition    to    God's   command,    then 
Noahy    and   all   his   fons,  &c.    muft:  be  fuppofed  to 
have  fuited   their  charafter   and  language  to  the  new 
.vorld  in  nearly  the  fame  manner. 

The  confufion  of  tongues  at   Babel  appears   to  me 
to  be  miraculous  for  the  following  reafons. 

Firft,  This  appears  to  be  the  moft  natural  interpre- 
tation of  the  text. 

Secondly,    Thus  the   confufion    of    tongues    will 
orrefpond    to    the    gift    of    language   imparted   to 
Adam  at  his  creation,  which  muft  be  fuppofed  j  alfo 
to  the  gift  of  tongues  at  Pentecoji. 

Thirdly,  Learned  men  feem  to  have  (hewn,  that 
the  diverfity  of  ancient  languages  does  by  no  means 
favour  the  fuppofition  of  a  natural  derivation  of 
them  all  from  one  original  form. 

Fourthly,  The  original  plan  of  the  Greek  and 
I  Latin  languages  (which  1  confider  as  fifter  languages 
I  derived  from  the  fame  mother  or  original  plan),  ap- 
pears to  have  been  very  uniform,  yet  with  a  confider- 
able  variety.  Now  I  think  this  uniformity  and  va- 
riety could  fcarce  be  invented  and  eftablilhed  by  rude 
multitudes,    almoft   entirely    occupied    in   providing 

neceflaries 


JP4  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

neccflaries  for  theiTifclves,  and  much  lefs  an  alphabe- 
tical writing  Teems  to  be  of  later  date  than  the  di- 
vcrfity  of  languages.  And  in  faft  v^c  do  not  find, 
tliat  barbarous  nations  do  by  length  of  time  im|)rovc 
their  languages  lb  as  in  any  incafuie  to  approach  to 
the  pcrrc<tlion  of  the  Greek  or  Latiu^  or  of  their 
common  mother.  It  adds  (Irengih  to  tiiis  argument, 
that  the  original  plan  of  the  Greek  and  Latiu^  i.  e, 
the  rules  of  etymology  and  fyntax,  as  grammarians 
call  them,  is  entirely  different  from  that  of  the  He- 
brew  and  yhabic  (whofe  original  plans  agree),  though 
the  firlt  colonics,  which  came  by  fea  into  Greece  and 
Italy,  came  from  Fale/line  and  Egypt^  i.  e,  from  the 
neighbouriiood  of  countries  where  Hebrew  and  Arabic 
were  fpoken. 

Fiftliiy,  The  natural  deviation  of  languages  fince 
hidory  has  been  clear  and  certain,  does  by  no  means 
correfpond  to  a  fuppofed  natural  derivation  of  all 
languages  from  one  mother-tongue,  efpecially  in  fo- 
fliort  a  time  as  the  interval  between  the  flood  and 
the  rife  of  many  different  ancient  languages.  Lee. 
the  reader  here  only  reflefl  upon  the  great  difference 
of  the  Biblical  Hebrew  from  the  ancienteft  Greek  ex- 
tant, and  the  fmall  difference  of  this  from  modern 
Creeky  or  of  the  Biblical  Hebrew  from  the  Rabbinical. 

if  now  the  confuTion  of  tongues  was  mii-aculous, 
we  may  conje6ture  from  the  agreements  and  difagrce- 
ments  of  mother-languages  from  each  other,  that  it,' 
was  of  the  following  kind. 

Firff,  That  the  original  monofyllabic  words  of 
the  antediluvian  language  were  incorporated  into  each 
new  language. 

Secondly,  That  as  thefe  words  included  only  few 
of  the  articulate  founds  of  which  the  human  voice  is 
capable,  the  feveral  families  were  put  upon  making 
new  articulations,  fome  having  one  fet.  Tome  another, 
imparted  to  them. 

Thirdly, 


\ 


ajjocialed  with  them.  305 

Thirdly,  That  each  family  had  a  new  (lock  of 
words  given  them,  confifting  partly  of  old,  partly 
of  new  articulations ;  and  that  this  new  fcock  far 
exceeded  the  old  one  in  number  and  variety. 

Fourthly,  That  a  new  and  different  etymology  and 
fyntax  were  alfo  communicated  to  each  family. 

Fifthly,  That  there  v;ere  as  many  new  languages 
<jriven  as  there  are  heads  of  families  mentioned  Gen.  x; 
[he  confufion  of  tongues,  by  which  the  divifion 
of  the  earth  was  effedted,  not  happening  till  Joktari^ 
fons  were  old  enough  to  be  heads  of  families,  though 
it  had  been  determined  and  declared  by  God  before. 
Thofe  families,  however,  v^hich  were  derived  from 
the  fame  ftock,  or  had  contiguous  countries  afligned 
to  them,  might  be  infpircd  with  languages,  that  had 
I  proportionable  affinity. 

Whatever  may  become  of  thefe  particular  conjec- 
tures, I  think  it  highly  probable,  that  the  new  lan- 
guages far  exceeded  the  old  common  one  in  the  num- 
i>er  and  variety  of  words  ;  and  that  the  confufion  of 
tongues  was  by  this  means  a  beneficial  gift  and 
blefling  to  mankind,  as  all  God's  other  challifcments 
jfe  to  be. 

We  may  alfo  fee  reafons  to  make  us  judge,  that  a 
iiverfity  of  languages  is  fuited  to  the  other  circum- 
ilances  of  mankind.  For  this  muft  pi  event  the  in- 
fcftion  of  vice  from  fpreading  with  fuch  rapidity, 
as  it  would  otherwife  have  done,  had  mankind  lived 
together  in  one  large  body,  and  had  a  free  commu- 
nication with  each  other  by  means  of  the  fame  lan- 
guage. 

Diverfity  of  languages  does  alfo  both  help  the 
invention,  and  correct  falfe  judgments.  For  we 
think  in  words,  as  appears  by  the  foregoing  theory, 
and  invent  chiefly  by  means  of  their  analogies  ;  at 
the  fame  time  that  a  fervile  adherence  to  thofe  of  any 
one  language,  or  the  putting  words  for  things, 
would  lead  us  into  many  errors.     Now  diverfity  of 

Vol.  I.  X  languages 


jo6  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

languages  does  both  enlarge  the  field  of  invention, 
and  by  oppofing  analogy  to  analogy  prelerve  us 
from  the  prejudices  derived  from  mere  verbal  agree- 
ments. Let  me  add  here,  that  the  abftrad:  terms  of 
logicians,  metaphyficians,  and  fchool-men,  which 
may  be  confidercd  as  a  diftinft  language,  have 
.  fpiritualized  men's  underflandings,  and  taught  them 
to  ufe  words  in  reafoning,  as  algebraifts  do  lym- 
bols. 

Different  languages  do  likewife  improve  one  ano- 
ther, and  help  one  another  to  grow  in  fome  propor- 
tion to  the  advancement  in  the  knowledge  of  things. 

Let  us  now  examine  the  probable  confequences  of 
fuppofing  different  languages,  and  fuch  as  were  far 
more  copious  than  the  old  one,  to  be  given  at  once 
miraculoufly. 

Firft,  then,  The  character,  which  fuited  the  old 
language  very  imperfedly,  would  be  ftill  lefs  fuited 
to  the  new  one. 

Secondly,  The  new  language  might  be  more  co- 
pious, and  better  adjufted  to  exprefs  objefts  and  ideas, 
than  the  character.  And  this  I  think  can  fcarce  be 
doubted,  if  we  fuppofe  the  new  languages  given  mi- 
raculoufly. 

Thirdly,  The  agreement  between  many  of  the 
marks  of  the  character,  and  the  words  of  the  old 
language,  may  be  fuppofed  likely  to  put  lome  per- 
fons  upon  denoting  the  words  of  the  new  language 
by  marks.  But  whether  this  would  neceffarily  lead  to 
alphabetical  writing,  is  very  doubtful.  I  think  not. 
The  firft  attempts  at  leaft  would  not  be  alphabetical 
writing. 

Fourthly,  Perfons  of  different  families,  who  could 
not  underftand  one  another's  language,  might  yet 
correfpond  by  the  character.  However,  one  may 
guefs  from  the  circumftances  of  things  in  ancient 
times,  that  this  would  feldom  take  place  in  fad. 

Fifthly, 


ajfociaied  with  them.  307 

Fifthly,  This  and  the  convenience  of  correfpond- 
ing  with  perfons  of  the  fame  family  at  a  diftance, 
alfo  the  dcfire  of  preferving  memorials  of  remark- 
able events  and  tranfadtions,  might  make  them  con- 
tinue the  ufc  of  the  character,  and  improve  it,  con- 
fidered  as  a  method  of  conveying  ideas,  diftin6t  from 
that  of  language.  And  the  character  thus  feparated 
from  the  language  might  give  rife  to  hieroglyphicai 
writing  in  all  its  varieties. 

Sixthly,  The  patriarchs  after  the  flood  in  the  line  " 
of  Shew  might  convey  in  fucceffion  the  hiftory  of 
the  creation,  fall,  deluge,  calling  of  Abrahmn,  &c. 
either  in  the  original  pidture-writing  improved,  or 
in  the  mixed  character,  which  according  to  the  third 
of  thefe  confequences,  denoted  in  fome  imperfed  grofs 
way  the  words  of  the  new  language.  And  fome 
of  the  difficulties  of  the  book  of  Genejis  may  be 
owing  to  its  confiding  of  patriarchal  records  of  one 
of  thefe  kinds,  tranflated  by  Mojes  into  the  Hebrew 
of  his  own  times,  and  then  written  alphabetically, 

I  do  not  think  it  necejfary  to  have  recourfe  to  any 
fuch  hypothefis  as  this,  in  order  to  vindicate  the  truth 
and  authority  of  the  book  of  Genejis.  The  lensth 
of  life,  even  after  the  flood,  to  the  time  of  MoJeSy 
appears  fufficient  for  the  prefervation  of  fuch  impor- 
tant traditional  hiftories  uncorrupted  in  the  religious 
iine  of  Shern^  by  natural  means.  Or  God  niighc 
interpofe  miraculoufly,  as  in  fo  many  other  inftances 
in  patriarchal  times. 

If  it  be  objeded,  that  we  have  not  the  leafl  intima- 
tion of  writing  of  any  kind  in  GenefiSy  I  anfwer, 
that  this  is  a  difficulty.  However,  one  cannot  draw- 
any  certain  conclufions  from  an  omiffion.  The 
original  of  writing  is  not  likely  to  be  one  of  the 
firfl:  things,  -which  would  be  committed  to  writing. 
And  if  it  was  ufed  only  for  the  conveyance  of  im- 
portant fads  to  the  fuccceding  generations,  we  have 
no  reafon  to  exped  the  incidental  mention  of  it.     It 

X  2  was 


3o8  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

was  probably  To  tedious  and  difRcult  a  thing  to  exprefs 
themfelves  accurately  in  it,  and  vcibal  mtfl'ages  and 
contracts  fo  eafy  and  n.uural  in  thofc  finipie  ages, 
when  the  veracity  of  the  mefTenoer  or  contraftor 
was  not  fufpedled,  as  tliat  wiiting  was  never  iifed 
after  the  confufion  of  tongues,  when  language  be- 
came copious,  unlcfs  in  aftjirs  of  great  confequence.     , 

Pit^lure-writintj  is  alluded  to  in  the  fecond  com- 
mantlnrient,  and  mull  have  been  in  ufe  for  foine  time 
before,  fince  a  fyftem  of  idolatry  had  been  founded 
upon  it.  And  this  may  incline  one  to  think,  that  it 
had  been  chiefly  employed  in  facred  affairs,  and 
therefore  perhaps  communicated  originally  to  Adam 
bv  God.  However,  if  we  fuppofe,  that  it  did  not 
take  place  till  after  the  flood,  this  will  not  totally  vi-. 
tiate  the  foregoing  conjeftures.  The  main  purport 
of  them  may  ftand  with  due  alterations  and  allow- 
ances. But  it  would  be  tedious  to  Hate  all  the  varie- 
ties in  thinsis  of  fo  uncertain  a  nature. 

I  come  now  to  the  art  of  alphabetical  writing. 
This  I  conie6lure  to  have  been  communicated  mira- 
culoufly  by  God  to  Mofes  at  Sinai.,  for  the  following 
reafons,  which,  however,  I  do  not  judge  to  be  deci- 
five  ones. 

Firfl:,  then,  God  is  faid  to  have  written  with  his 
own  finger  upon  the  tables  of  ftone.  And  I  think 
it  would  be  harfh  to  fuppofe  this  done  in  conformity 
to,  and,  as  one  may  fay,  imitation  of,  any  mere  im- 
perfeft  human  invention. 

Secondly,  The  Ifraelites  are  the  only  people  in  the 
whole  world  that  have  preferved  any  regular  account 
of  their  own  original.  This  is  eafily  accounted  for 
upon  fuppofition,  that  alphabetical  writing  was  firfl 
given  to  them  in  per  feci  ion  ;  and  afterwards,  fuppole 
in  the  time  of  £//',  borrowed  by  other  nations,  and 
accommodated  in  an  imperfe<ft  manner  to  their 
languages.  But  if  we  fuppofe  any  other  nation,  the 
Egyptians  or  Arabians  for  inftance,  to  have  invented 

writing 


cijfociated  ivith  them.  30$ 

writing  before  the  time  of  MoJeSy  it  will  be  fome- 
what  difficult  to  afllgn  a  reafon,  why  other  perfons 
lliould  not  have  borrowed  this  invention  as  well  as 
Mo/es,  and,  like  him,  have  given  feme  account  of 
their  own  nation,  and  their  anceftors ;  and  more  dif- 
ficult to  affign  a  reafon  why  the  people,  who  invented 
alphabetical  writing,  (hould  not  do  this. 

As  to  the  Egyptians  in  particular,  their  continuing 
to   \.^^G    hieroglyphical    writing,    and    excelling    in   it, 
fhews,  that  they  could  not  have  invented  alphabetical; 
/or  this,  if  we  fuppofe   it  invented  fo  early  as  before 
the  time   of  Mofes,  would   have  abolifhed  that,    juft 
as  the  ufe  of  the   ten   cyphers  has   ail   the  other  im- 
perfe£t  methods  of  notation  of  numbers.     Nor  does 
it  feem  very  likely,  that  hieroglyphical  writing  fliould 
)■  Jead  to  alphabetical,   but  rather  from   it,   fince  hiero- 
glyphical charadlers  are  the  immediate  reprefentatives 
of  objecfls  and  ideas,  and  the  mediate  reprefentatives 
jnot   of  letters,    or   fimple  articulate    founds,    but  of 
vwords,    and    even    of  cluflers    of  words.      It   feems 
probable  alfo,  that  the  Egyptians  would  even  be  back- 
ward    in     receiving    alphabtrtical    writing  from    the 
IJraelites    at   the   time   that   the   Philijiines   or   Ph^eni- 
dans  d\d;  as  being  then  greatly  advanced   in   the   ufe 
.of  their  own    hieroglyphical    writing,  and   prejudiced 
jn   its    favour.      And    thus  we   may    folve  that  very 
•difficult  queftion,   why   the  F.gyptianSy    who  feem  to 
iaave  ered'ted  a  kingdom  early  (however,  I  judge  Nimr- 
rod's   to   have   been  the  firft  by  the  manner  in  which 
Mofes  has  mentioned   it),  and   to  have  brought  it  to 
confiderable  perfeftion   before   Jojeph's  time,    and   to 
very  great  perfetftion  afterwards,  chiefly  by  his  means, 
ihould  yet  have  left  no  hiftory  of  their  affairs,   not 
(even   of  the  great  empire  under  Sejac  or  SeJoJiriSy  and 
!his   fuccelTors.      For   they   had   no   public   calamities 
^fufficient   in  any   miCafure  to  deftroy  all  their  records, 
■till  the  time  of  Canibyjes;  and   the  defolation  under 
him  being  lefs  in  degree,  fhorter  in  duration,    in  a 

X  3  kingdom 


310  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

kingdom  of  greater  extent,  and  two  generations 
Jaier  in  time,  than  that  of  the  Jewijb  itate  under 
Ncbuchadnezznr^  which  yet  did  not  deflroy  the  Jeivijh 
records,  could  not  have  totally  deftroyed  the  J\^yp(ian 
records  had  they  been  more  early,  and  hiperior 
to  the  JcwSi  in  the  ufe  of  alphabetical  writing, 
Kven  the  Greeks^  who  had  no  alphabetical  writing 
till  fix  hundred  years  after  the  time  o'i IVlqfcSy  have  given 
a  better  account  of  their  aftairs,  than  the  Egyptians, 
It  ought,  however,  to  be  remarked  in  this  place, 
that  if  we  fuppofe  the  Jewijh  hiftory  to  have  been  re- 
corded by  the  divine  appointment  and  direction, 
which  is  iiighly  probable,  this  will  lefl'en  the  force  of 
the  prefent  argument,  but  not  quite  deflroy  it. 

Thirdly,  The  late  reception  of  writing  amongft 
the  Greeks^  is  both  an  argument,  that  it  did  not  exift 
in  any  other  neighbouring  nation  before  the  time  of 
Mofes.,  and  alfo  is  confident  with  its  being  miraculoufly 
communicated  to  hwiy  to  be  made  ufc  of  for  facred 
purpofes,  and  for  the  prcfcrvation  of  the  hiftory 
of  the  world,  and  true  religion,  amongil  God's  pecu-  ' 
liar  people  the  IJraelites.  1  here  fuppofe,  that  the  art 
of  writing  was  not  known  to  the  Greeks^  till  the 
time  q{  Cadmus  \  and  that  he  came  into  Greece,  agree- 
ably to  Sir  JJaac  Neivton's,  opinion,  about  the  middle 
of  David's  reign.  And  indeed,  unlefs  the  principal 
points  of  his  chronology  be  admitted,  it  does  not  ap- 
pear to  me,  that  any  rationale  can  be  given  of  ancient 
times,  the  inventions  that  rofe  up  in  them,  the 
eftablifhment  and  duration  of  kingdoms,  their  mu- 
tual intercourfcs,  &c. 

For,  Firft,  If  alphabetical  writing  was  known  up- 
on the  continent  oi  Afia  and  Africa  fix  hundred  years 
before  Cadmus.,  how  could  it  be  kept  from  the  Greeks 
till  his  arrival  amongfl:  them,  and  then  accommodated 
to  the  Greek  tongue  only  very  imperfectly  ?  For  the 
Greeks  received  but  fixtcen  letters  from  him.  The 
Greek  tongue  came  itfelf  perhaps  from  Egypt,  in  fome 

meafurci 


affbciated  with  them.  3 1 1 

meafure;  and  they  who  brought  the  language  two 
generations  before  Cadmus^  would  have  brought  an 
exad  method  of  writing  it  alphabetically,  had  they 
been  poITefled  of  any  fuch.  For  it  is  not  probable, 
that  Inachus,  and  the  colonies  of  Egyptians  that  came 
with  him,  and  after  him,  fhould  change  their  lan- 
guage entirely  for  that  of  the  poor  wandering  Cmme- 
riansy  whom  they  found  in  Greece,  fince  we  fee  in  fadt, 
that  the  colonies  of  Europeans  do  fometimes  teach  the 
barbarous  natives,  where  they  go,  an  European  lan- 
guage ;  but  never  change  it  for  theirs. 

Secondly,  If  alphabetical  writing  was  given  to 
Mo/es  miraculoufly,  it  is  eafy  to  be  conceived,  that  it 
fhould  not  arrive  at  Greece  fooner  than  the  time  of 
Cadmus.  For  the  Jews  were  a  feparate  people,  their 
priefts  kept  the  writings  of  Mojes  in  the  ark,  i.  e. 
the  only  alphabetical  writings  in  the  world ;  and  mull 
be  fome  time  before  they  could  be  ready  and  experr 
either  in  reading  or  writing :  in  their  attempts  to 
copy,  it  is  probable  they  would  make  fome  miftakes 
fo  as  to  fall  fhort  of  the  purity  and  perfedion  of  the 
art,  as  communicated  by  God  j  the  neighbouring 
nations  feared  and  hated  the  Jfraelites,  their  religion, 
and  their  God  j  they  had  probably  a  pidure-writing, 
or  perhaps  fom>e  imperfedl  method  of  denoting 
words,  agreeably  to  what  has  been  remarked  above, 
■which  anfwered  all  purpofes  that  feemed  neceflary  to 
them ;  and  thus  the  art  of  alphabetical  writing  might 
not  tranfpire  to  any  of  the  neighbouring  nations  till 
the  time  of  Eli,  when  the  ark,  with  the  writings 
oi  MoJes  in  it,  was  taken  by  the  Philijlines.  For  fince 
the  writings  of  MoJes  were  not  in  the  ark,  when  it 
was  put  into  the  temple  by  Solomon,  it  may  be,  that 
the  Philijlines  kept  them,  and  learnt  from  them  the 
art  of  writing  alphabetically,  being  now  fufficiently 
prepared  for  it  by  fuch  notions  concerning  it,  as  had 
tranfpired  to  them  previoufly  in  their  former  inter- 
courfes  with  the  IJraelites.     And  thus  the  Phmicians, 

X  4  or 


312  O/"  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

or  Pbiiijlinesy  will  have  appeared  the  inventors  of 
letters  to  llic  Greeks -J  and  Cadmus  mny  well  be  Tup- 
pofed  to  have  been  able  to  accommodate  the  Phamcian 
method  of  writing,  in  an  impcrfcd  manner,  to  the 
Creek  language,  about  two  generations  after  the 
taking  of  the  ark.  Thus  alfo,  when  Samuel  put  the 
writings  of  Mo/es  together,  as  they  had  been  copied 
by  the  priefts,  or  others,  in  the  oider  in  which  they 
now  ftand  in  the.  Pentateuch,  there  would  be  fomc 
deviations  from  the  original  method  of  writing  com- 
municated to  Mojes  by  God  ;  and  thefe,  with  fuch  as 
happened  in  after-time^;,  particularly  upon  the  return 
from  tiie  Babyiomjh  captivity  (when  it  is  fuppofed  by 
ibme,  that  even  the  original  letters  were  changed), 
may  have  n^ade  the  ancient  method  of  writing  the 
IlebreWy  as  the  Jezvs  pra(ftifc  it  in  their  Bibles  for  the 
Synagogues  without  points,  fo  imperfe(5l  as  not  to 
nppear  to  be  of  divine  original.  For  the  llime  rea- 
fons,  the  corruptions  of  the  Hebrew  language,  or  the 
language  given  to  Heber  or  Peleg,  at  the  confufion 
of  tongues  before  Mofes's  time,  may  incline  us  to 
think  the  Hebrew  of  the  Pentateuch  not  fufficiently 
regular  for  a  divine  communication.  Much  is  alfo  to 
be  afcribed  to  our  own  ignorance  in  both  thefe  cafes. 
Plowever,  there  is  a  wonderful  finiplicity  and  uni- 
formity Hill  left,  both  in  the  Biblical  Hebrew,  and  in 
the  manner  of  writing  it  without  points  j  fo  great, 
as  to  appear  to  me  fuperior  to  the  invention  of  rude 
ancient  times. 

Fourthly,  The  order  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  alpha- 
bets, by  being  taken  from  that  of  the  Hebrew^  as  we  have 
it  in  the  alphabetical  pfalms,  bears  teftimony  to  the 
great  antiquity  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet.  It  is  to  be 
obferved  here,  that  both  the  Greek  and  Latin  alpha- 
bets coincide  with  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  as  much  as 
with  each  other,  or  more ;  and  that  there  is  no  other 
ancient  alphabet  remaining  to  be  a  competitor  to  the 
Hebrew. 

Fifthly, 


J  fijfociated  with  them.  313 

Fifthly,  The  refolution  of  the  complex  articulate 
founds  of  ancient  languages  into  fimple  elements  or 
letters,  and  then  rccompofing  thefe  complex  founds 
in  writing  them  down  alphabetically,  feems  to  me,  as 
obferved  above,  too  difficult  a  problem  for  ancient 
times;  efpecially  as  they  neither  could  fee  the  ufe 
of  it,  nor  conceive  the  practicability.  It  would  have 
appeared  to  them  a  tafk  of  an  infinite  extent ;  they 
would  never  conceive,  that  fb  fmall  a  number  of  ele- 
ments would  be  fufficienr,  even  fuppofing  they  could 
firft  hit  upon  the  defign.  It  confirms  this,  that  no 
barbarous  nation  has  ever  invented  alphabetical  writing 
for  themfclves.  They  continue  ignorant  of  it  till 
taught.  However,  let  it  be  obferved,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  as  the  ancient  languages  were  fimple  and 
narrow,  the  difficulty  of  analyfing  their  complex 
founds  would  be  the  lefs  on  that  account. 

Sixthly,  Since  the  method  of  making  and  ereCling 
the  tabernacle  was  communicated  by  God  to  Mojes, 
Bezaleely  and  Aholiab,  in  a  fupernatural  manner,  we 
may  more  eafily  fuppofe  the  art  of  writing  alphabe- 
tically to  be  a  divine  gift.  But  then  it  is  fome  ob- 
iedlion  to  this,  that  Mojes  has  not  mentioned  it  as  a 
divine  gift,  at  lead  not  exprefsly. 

Seventhly,  The  time  ol  Mofes  appears  to  be  a  fuit- 
able  one  for  fuch  a  gift,  as  human  life  was  then,  per- 
haps, jufl:  brought  down  to  the  prefent  degree  of 
fhortnefs.  Till  Mofes's  timiC,  the  length  of  life  had 
preferved  the  facred  traditions  uncorrupted,  either  with 
or  without  the  helps  above-m.entioned,  at  leaft  in  the 
line  of  Abraham ;  but  then  tradition  began  to  be 
mixed  with  fables,  and  to  lead  to  idolatry. 

Eighthly,  Alphabetical  writing,  by  being  intro- 
duced among  the  IJraelites  in  the  wildernefs,  would 
abolifh  hieroglyphical,  and  confequently  cut  off  one 
fource  of  idolatry.  It  would  likewife  make  them 
fuperior  to  the  Egyptians^  their  enemies,  in  the  art 
of  writing ;    who,  perhaps,  prided  themfelves  much 

upon 


3 14  Of  Words,  and  the  Iiltri^s 

iijion  account  of  their  perfedion  in  hieroglyphical 
writing,  as  they  miglit  alfo  in  ilieir  river,  the  vvif- 
dom  of  their  pohcy,  the  comparative  greatnefs  of 
their  kingdom,  ilieir  magical  arts,  religious  cere- 
monies, iVc.  For  this  would  tend  to  the  glory  of  the 
God  of  the  JfraelUes^  anil  the  cllablifliment  of  the 
true  religion  amongd  them. 

It  may  be  objecfted  here,  that  alphabetical  writing 
was  in  ufe  before  the  giving  of  the  law  at  Sinai,  fince 
Mofes  was  dire(fted  before  this  to  write  an  account 
of  the  battle  with  Amalek  in  a  book ,  alfo  to  write 
the  names  of  the  children  of  Ifrael  upon  the  high 
priefl's  breaft- plate,  like  tlic  engravings  of  a  fignet. 
1  anfwer,  that  both  thefe  may  refer  to  a  pidture- 
writing,  or  to  fome  improvement  of  it,  whereby  entire 
words  were  denoted,  without  being  refolved  into 
their  fimple  founds.  The  firft  might  alfo  be  a  pro- 
phetic intimation  to  Mofes,  however  not  underftood 
by  him  when  it  was  given,  that  he  fhould  be  foon  en- 
abled to  write  in  a  much  more  complete  manner  than 
he,  or  his  enemies  the  Egytians,  could  at  prefent. 

The  Edomites  feem  alio  to  have  had  fome  kind  of 
writing  early,  from  the  account  which  we  have  of 
their  dukes  in  Genefts.  But  this  might  be  only 
pidure  or  verbal  writing,  explained  to  Samuel  by 
fome  Edomite,  at  the  time  when  he  put  together  the 
writings  of  Moj'es :  or  they  might  learn  writing 
from  the  Jfraelites,  fooner  than  any  other  nation,  as 
being  nearly  related  in  blood,  and  contiguous  to  them 
in  fituation. 

The  fimplicity  and  uniformity  of  the  Arabic 
tonsue  would  alfo  incline  one  to  think  that  the  in- 
habitants  of  Arabia  had  alphabetical  writing  early, 
this  having  a  great  tendency  to  preferve  a  fixed 
ftandard  in  a  language.  But  the  IfJimaelites,  or  Midi- 
aniteSy  who  were  nearly  related  to  the  Ifraehtes,  or 
the  Keniies,  who  lived  amongft  them,  might  learn  it 
from  them,  perhaps  even  during  their  abode  in  the 
wildcrncfb.     We  may  obfeive  alfo,   that  the  Arabic 


tongue 


,     affbciated  with  them.  315 

tongue  was  nor  only  fixed,  but  perhaps  rendered 
more  regular,  foon  after  the  time  of  Mahomety  by 
means  of  the  Alcoran^  and  of  the  grammars  that 
were  made  for  this  language  fome  time  afterwards; 
and  that,  before  Mahomet''^,  time  the  Arabians  had 
little  communication  with  their  neighbours,  and 
therefore  would  preferve  their  language  more  pure 
and  fimple. 

■  The  changes  which  have  happened  to  languages, 
and  to  the  methods  of  writing  them  fince  the  in- 
vention of  letters,  and  which  are  treated  of  with 
great  copioufnefs  in  the  writings  of  grammarians  and 
critics,  afford  innumerable  atteftations  to  the  doftrine 
of  afibciation,  and  may,  converfely,  be  much  illuftra- 
ted  by  it.  But  the  full  detail  of  this  mull  be  left  to 
thofe,  who  are  well  fkilled  in  the  feveral  ancient  and 
modern  languages. 


PROP.     LXXXIV. 

T!o  explain  the  general  Nature  of  a  philo/ophical  Lan- 
guage,  and  hint  Jome  Methods^  in  which  it  might  he 
conjiru^ed,  upon  the  foregoing  Principles. 

If  we  fuppofe  mankind  poflfefled  of  fuch  a  lan- 
guage, as  that  they  could  at  pleafure  denote  all 
their  conceptions  adequately,  /.  e.  without  any  defi- 
ciency, fuperfluity,  or  equivocation;  if,  moreover, 
this  language  depended  upon  a  few  principles  alTumed, 
not  arbitrarily,  but  becaufe  they  were  the  fhorteft  and 
beft  pofiible,  and  grew  on  from  the  fame  principles 
indefinitely,  fo  as  to  correfpond  to  every  advancement 
in  the  knowledge  of  things,  this  language  might  be 
termed  a  philofophical  one,  and  would  as  much  exceed 
any  of  the  prefent  languages,  as  a  paradifiacal  ftate 
does  the  mixture  of  happinefs  and  mifery,  which  has 
been  our  portion   ever   fince   the   fall.     And   it   is 

no 


31 6  Of  Words,  and  the  KitMs 

no  improbable  ruppofuion,  that  the  language  given 
by  God  to  /Idam  and  livcy  before  the  fall,  was  of  this 
kind  ;  and,  ihout/Ji  it  nii^iu  be  narrow,  anlwcred  all 
their  exigencies  pcrfedly  well. 

Now  ijiere  are  feveral  methods,  in  which  it  docs 
not  recm  impolliblc  for  mankind  in  future  ages  to 
accomplilh  fo  great  a  dcfign. 

Thus,  Firfl,  They  may  examine  all  the  pofllblc 
fimplc  articulations  of  which  their  organs  are  capable, 
with  all  the  combinations,  or  complex  articulate  founds, 
that  refult  from  them,  and  the  relations  which  ihefe 
bear  one  to  another,  and  affign  to  each  refpeflively 
fuch  fimple  and  complex  ideas,  and  fuch  variations 
of  the  lall,  as  a  deep  infight  into  the  nature  of  things, 
obje^ls,  ideas,  the  powers  of  the  human  mind,  &c. 
Ihall  demand  by  a  natural  claim,  fo  as  to  make  every 
exprefTion  the  fliortert  and  befl:  poflible.  And  though 
this,  in  our  prefent  flate  of  ignorance,  cannot  but 
feem  an  impra6licable  projedV,  yet  the  fame  ignorance 
fhould  teach  us,  that  we  can  form  no  notions  at  all 
of  the  great  increafe  of  knowledge,  which  may  corrje 
in  future  ages,  and  which  feems  promifed  to  come  in 
the  latter  happy  times  preditled  by  the  prophecies. 
However,  the  great,  and  to  former  times  inconceiv- 
able, advancement  of  knowledge,  which  has  been 
made  in  the  two  laft  centuries,  may  help  a  little  to 
qualify  our  prejudices. 

Secondly,  If  all  the  fimple  articulate  founds,  with 
all  the  radical  words,  which  are  found  in  the  prefent 
languages,  were  appropriated  to  objeds  and  ideas 
agreeably  to  the  prefent  fenfes  of  words,  and  their 
fiinefs  to  reprefent  obi'e<5ls  and  ideas,  fo  as  to  make 
all  confiftent  with  itfelf;  if,  farther,  the  bell:  rules  of 
etymology  and  fyntax  were  feledted  from  the  prefent 
languages,  and  applied  to  the  radical  words  here 
fpoken  of,  fo  as  to  render  them  capable  of  cxprclTing 
all  the  variations  in  objedls  and  ideas,  as  far  as  pof- 
fible,  i,  €.  fo  as  to  grow  proportionably  to  the  growth 

of 


ajjbciated  with  them.  317 

of  knowledge,  this  might  alfo  be  termed  a  philofo- 
phical  language ;  and,  though  more  imperfe<5t  and 
narrow  than  the  laft,  yet  feems  more  pofTible  to  be 
brought  to  execution  and  praflice. 

Thirdly,  If  fuch  fimple  articulations  as  are  now 
wanting  in  the  Hebrezu  alphabet  were  added  to  it, 
and  its  radical  words,  compofed  of  all  the  combi- 
nations of  twos  and  threes  completed,  proper  fimple 
fenfes  being  afligned  to  them,  from  other  languages 
fuppofe,  and  particularly  from  the  Arabic^  Chaldecy 
SyriaCy  and  Samariiayiy  as  in  Caftellus\  Lexicon,  and 
other  books  of  a  like  kind  j  if,  farther,  fuch  new 
rules  of  etymology  and  fyntax  were  added  to  thofc 
which  take  place  at  prefent  in  the  Biblical  HebreWy  as 
this  increafe  of  the  radicals,  and  application  of  the 
language  to  the  whole  aggregate  of  objeds  and  ideas 
requires  j  we  fhould  have  a  much  more  fimple,  precile 
and  extenfive  language,  than  any  now  in  being.  It 
would  alio  be  eafy  to  be  underftood  by  the  Jews  in 
all  quarters  of  the  world.  For  moft  of  them  have 
fome  knowledge  of  the  Biblical  HebreWy  and  many 
iinderftand  the  Rabbinical,  which  feems  to  be  formed 
upon  a  plan  not  very  unlike  that  here  propofed,  though 
without  any  exprefs  defign  j  and  to  which,  therefore, 
a  due  regard  ought  to  be  had  by  any  one,  who  fhould 
attempt  to  execute  this  plan.  Many  eallern  nations, 
and  the  Alabometans  every  where,  would  alfo  be  expert 
in  learning  this  language,  from  the  relation  and 
refemblance  which  it  v/ould  bear  to  languages  already 
known  by  them  ;  and  it  would  be  eafier  to  be  learnt 
by  perfed  novices  than  any  other,  on  account  of  its 
greater  firnplicity  and  regularity.  A  didlionary  might 
be  made  for  it  in  itfelf ;  the  Biblical  HebrezVy  where 
its  fenfe  is  determinate  and  known,  being  the  bafis, 
or  thing  given. 

In  the  mean  time,  vt'here  the  writer  endeavours  to 
exprefs    himfclf  with    plainnefi*,    fincerity,    and    pre- 

ciiion, 


ji8  OJ  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

cifion,  bfir\g  fi'lt  duly  qualified  by  the  knowledge  of 
his  rulijtifl:,  and  the  rcatler  pays  a  due  regard  to 
him,  as  his  teacher,  for  the  then  prcfent  time,  by 
uling  fufficient  induftry  and  candour,  the  ill  eflcdtg 
of  the  confufion  of  tongues  become  evanefcent  in 
refpeft  of  them.  But  it  would  be  happy  to  take  away 
all  occalion  of  midake  from  the  bulk  of  mankind, 
and  to  give  them  an  oppoitunity  of  learning  import 
tant  truths  with  more  eafc  and  certainty,  and  in  a 
Ihorter  time,  than  they  can  at  prefent. 

It  may  not  l">e  amifs  to  add  here,  that  Mr.  'Byrom\ 
method  of  Ihort-hand  affords  an  accurate  and  ele- 
gant inftance  of  the  polTibility  of  proceeding  in  fuch 
matters  upon  fimple  and  philofophical  principles; 
his  fhort-hand  being  a  real  and  adequate  reprefen- 
tation  of  the  founds  of  the  EngliJJj  tongue,  as  far  as 
is  necefiary  for  determining  the  fenfe,  and  that  in  the 
fhorteft  manner  polTible.  If  we  were  poflcfled  of  a 
philofophical  language,  it  ought  to  be  denoted  by 
this  charader,  mutatis  mutandis, 

PROP.     LXXXV. 

'^'o  illujlrate  and  confirm  the  general  Do^rine  of  Ajjocia- 
tion  by  the  particular  yljfociations,  that  take  Place  in 
rejpe£l  of  Language, 

This  has  been  done,  in  great  meafure,  already,  in 
the  corollaries  to  the  twelfth  propofition.  I  will 
here  infert  fome  obfervations  of  a  like  kind,  which 
would  have  interrupted  the  reader  too  much  in  that 
place,  but  may  properly  follow  the  account  of  language 
given  in  this  fedliorL 

Let  ^,  hi  r,  d^   &c.  the  feveral   letters  of  an  al- 

,    phabct  fuppofed  to  be  fufficiently  extenfive  for  the 

I    pufpofe,     reprefent    refpedively    the    feveral   fimple 

ienfible  pleafures  and  pains,  to  which  a  child  becomes 

'    fubje6t  upon  its  firfl:  entrance  into  the  world.     Then 

will 


ajjociated  with  them,  319 

mU  the  various  combinations  of  thefe  letters  repre- 
ent  the  various  combinations  of  pleafures  and  pains, 
qrmed  by  the  events  and  incidents  of  human  Hfe ; 
nd,  if  we  fuppofe  them  to  be  alfo  the  words  of  a 
anguage,  this  language  will  be  an  emblem  or 
adumbration  of  our  paflage  through  the  prefent  life  ; 
the  feveral  particulars  in  this  being  reprefentcd  by 
analogous  ones  in  that. 

Thus  the  reiterated  imprefiions  of  the  fimple  fcn- 
fible  pleafures  and  pains  made  upon  the  child,  fo  as 
to  leave  their  miniatures,  or  ideas,  are  denoted  by 
his  learning  the  alphabet;  and  his  various  aflbciations 
of  ihefe  ideas,  and  of  the  pleafures  and  pains  them- 
fclves,  by  his  putting  letters  and  fyllables  together, 
in  order  to  make  words :  and  when  affociation  has 
fo  far  cemented  the  component  parts  of  any  aggre- 
^p.te  of  ideas,  pleafures  and  pains,  together,  as  that 
...icy  appear  one  indivifible  idea,  pleafure  or  pain,  the 
child  muft  be  fuppofed  by  an  analogous  affociation 
to  have  learnt  to  read  without  fpclling. 

As  the  child's  words  become  more  and  more 
polyfyllabic  by  compofition  and  decompofition,  till  at 
length  vv'hole  clufters  run  together  into  phrafes  and 
fentences,  all  whofe  parts  occur  at  once,  as  it  were, 
to  the  memory,  fo  his  pleafures  and  pains  become 
more  and  more  complex  by  the  combining  of  combi- 
nations ;  and  in  many  cafes  numerous  combinations 
concur  to  form  one  apparently  fimple  pleafure. 

The  feveral  relations  of  words,  as  derived  from 
the  fame  root,  as  having  the  fame  prepofitions  and 
terminations,  &c.  reprefent  correfponding  relations 
in  the  compound  ideas,  pleafures  and  pains. 

When  the  complex  pleafures  and  pains,  formed 
fjom  miniatures  of  the  fenfible  ones,  become  the 
means  of  gaining  other  and  greater  pleafures,  viz.  by 
fading  from  frequent  repetition,  and  fo  becoming 
mere  ideas,  or  by  any  other  method,  we  muft  fuppofe, 

that 


jdo  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

that  (Hir   prtd-'Mt   knowkd^e   in  language  is  ufed  as  a 
iiicjns  of  attaining  farther  knowledge  in  it. 

As  the  fight  and  found  of  words,  imprcflcd  upon 
us  on  coninion  occafions,  do  not  at  all  fuggcft  the 
original  of  ihefc  words  from  finiplc  letters,  this 
being  a  light  in  which  grammarians  and  linguifts 
alone  confider  words,  fo  the  complex  pleafures  and 
pains  may  pafs  over  men's  minds,  and  be  felt  daily, 
and  yet  not  be  confidered  by  them  as  mere  combina- 
tions, unk'fs  they  be  peculiarly  attentive  and  inquifi- 
live  in  tliis  rcf^Hrdft. 

This  comparifon  may  ierve  as  a  method  of  anifl:» 
ing  tlie  reader's  C()ncepiions,  in  refpeft  of  the  man- 
ner in  which  combinations  of  n^iniatures  are  formed. 
It  is  alfo  a  confiderable  evidence  in  favour  of  the  ge- 
neral dotflrine  of  aObciation,  fince  language  is  not 
only  a  type  of  thefe  aflbciated  combinations,  but 
one  part  of  the  thing  typified.  Was  human  life 
perfect,  our  happinefb  in  it  would  be  proj^erly  repre- 
fcnted  by  that  accurate  knowledge  of  things  which 
a  truly  philofophical  language  -would  give  us.  And 
if  wc  fuppofc  a  nuiYibcr  of  peifons  thus  making  a 
progrefs  in  puie  unmixed  happinefs,  and  capable 
bvHh  of  expreffing  their  own  feelings,  and  of  undcr- 
flanding  thofe  of  others,  by  means  of  a  p'erfe6l  and 
adequate  language,  they  might  be  like  new  fenles 
and  powers  of  perception  to  each  other,  and  both 
give  to  and  receive  from  each  other  happinefs  indefi- 
nitely. But  as  human  life  is,  in  fad,  a  mixture  of 
happinefs  and  mifery,  fo  all  our  languages  muft, 
from  the  difi^crence  of  our  afibciations,  convey  falfe- 
hood  as  well  as  truth,  as  above  noted.  And  yet,  fincc 
/our  imperfect  languages  improve,  purify,  and  correct 
themfelvcs  perpetually  by  themfelvcs,  and  by  other 
■  means,  fo  that  we  may  hope  at  lall  to  obtain  a  Ian- ' 
guage,  which  fhall  -be  an  adequate  reprefentation  of 
ideab;  and  a   pui-e  channel  of  conveyance  for  truth,- 

alone, 


ajjociated  zvilh  them,  321 

alone,  analogy  feems  to  fuggeft,  that  the  mixture  of 
pleaibres  and  pains,  which  we  now  experience,  will 
gradually  tend  to  a  colledion  of  pure  pleafures  only, 
and  that  aflbciation  may  be  the  means  of  effecting 
this,  as  remarked  in  the  ninth  corollary  of  the  four- 
teenth propofuion. 

SCHOLIUM. 

Mufical  founds  afford,  like  articulate  ones,  various 
inftances  of  the  power  of  aflbciation.  It  ought  to 
be  remarked  here  alfo,  that  the  concords  formed  from 
the  twelve  femitones  in  the  oftave,  are  more  in 
number  than  the  difcords  j  and  that  the  harfhnefs  of 
thefe  laft:  pafles  by  degrees  into  the  limits  of  pleafure, 
partly  from  frequent  repetition,  partly  from  their 
aflbciations  with  concords. 

The  do6lrine  of  aflbciation  may  likewife  be  illuf- 
trated  by  that  of  colours.  Thus,  let  the  feven  pri- 
mary colours,  with  their  (hades,  reprefent  the  ori- 
ginal fenfible  pleafures ;  then  will  the  various  aflbci- 
ated  pleafures  of  human  life,  fuppoflng  that  we  en- 
joyed a  ftate  of  unmixed  happinefs,  be  reprefented 
by  the  compound  vivid  colours,  which  natural  bo- 
dies, of  regular  makes,  and  ftrong  powers  of  re- 
fledion,  exhibit  to  the  eye.  White,  which  is  com- 
pounded of  all  the  colours  reflcfted  copioufly,  and 
which  yet,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  difcern,  bears  no  re- 
femblance  to  any  of  them,  would  reprefent  a  ftate  of 
great  mental  happinefs,  ultimately  deduced  from  all 
the  fenfible  pleafures,  and  in  which  notwithftanding> 
the  perfon  himfelf  diftinguiflies  no  traces  of  any  of 
thefe.  And,  agreeably  to  this,  light,  brightnefs,  and 
whiteneG,  are  often  put  for  perfeflion,  purity,  and 
happinefs,  as  obfcurity,  blacknefs,  and  darknefs,  are 
for  impcrfedlion  and  mifery.  Befides  white,  there 
are  other  compound  colours,  which  bear  little  or  no 
refemblance  to  any  of  the  primary  ones,  as  well  as 

Vol.  I.  Y  many 


322  Of  Words,  and  the  Ideas 

many  in  which  fomc  primary  colour  is  evidently  pre- 
dominant. Thefc  rtpreknt  the  levcral  kinds  and  de- 
grees of  inferior  compound  pleafures,  fome  of  which 
are,  according  to  common  ellimation,  quite  foreign 
to  the  fcnfes,  whilfl:  others  are  manifeftly  tinged  with 
pleafant  fcnfations,  and  their  miniatures. 

If  the  moderate  agitations  which  light  caufes  in 
bodies,  when  it  is  by  tliem  reflcftcd  back  upon,  or 
tranfmitted  to  other  bodies,  be  fuppofed  to  correfpond 
to  pleafant  vibrations  in  tlie  nervous  fyftcm  i  and  the 
greater  agitations,  which  it  excites  in  thofe  that  ab- 
loibir,  to  the  violent  vibrations  in  which  pain  confiftsi 
then  the  colours  of  natural  bodies,  iome  of  which  in- 
cline to  light,  and  fome  to  darknefs,  and  that  with 
all  the  poflible  varieties  and  mixtures  of  the  primary 
colours,  may  be  confidered  as  the  language  by  which 
they  exprefs  that  mixture  of  pleafures  and  pains  in 
human  life,  to  which  their  agitations  are  luppofed 
to  correfpond.  And  htre  again  we  may  obferve,  that 
thougli  there  are  fome  natural  bodies,  which  abforb 
and  ftifle  within  ihemfelves  almoft  all  the  light  which 
they  receive,  and  which  accordingly  are  dark,  black, 
and  unpleafant  to  the  beholders,  yet  the  greatcft  part 
of  natural  bodies  either  refleft  lively  colours,  or  re- 
fle6t  fome,  and  tranfmit  others,  or  tranfmit  all  the 
colours  freely.  And  this  type  is  alfo,  in  part,  the 
thing  typified,  inafmuch  as  agreeable  and  difagree- 
able  colours  make  part  of  the  original  pleafures  and 
pains  of  human  life. 

Compound  taftes  may  likewifc  illuflrate  affoci- 
ation  ;  as  above  noted  under  the  twelfth  propofition  : 
for  where  the  number  of  ingredients  is  very  great, 
as  in  Venice  treacle,  no  one  can  be  tailed  didinflly ; 
whence  the  compound  appears  to  bear  no  relation  to 
its  component  parts,  it  is  to  be  obferved  farther, 
that  ingredients  which  are  feparately  difagreeable,  of- 
ten enter  compounds,  whofe  taftes  are  highly  agree- 
able.    Now  in  thefe  cafes  either  the  oppofite  taftes 

nr>ufl: 


iijfociated  with  them,  323 

murt  coalefce  into  one,  which  pleafes  from  the  propol- 
lence  of  agreeable  taftes  upon  the  whole,  as  foon 
as  the  aflbciation  is  cemented  fufficiently,  or  elfe  the 
difasreeable  taftes  muft,  by  frequent  repetition,  fall 
within  the  limits  of  pleafure  an  laft;  which  feems 
rather  to  be  the  truth. 

The  fimilarity  of  the  three  inftances  of  this  fcho- 

"iuni  arifes  from  the  analogy  of  our  fenfes  to  each 

other,    and   to  our  frame  in   general;    wliich    is  the 

'Sum  total  of  all  our  fenfes.      And,  converfely,  they 

onfirm  this  analogy. 


t 

Y  2  SECT. 


324  Q/^  Propofitions,  and 


SECT.     II. 

OF    PROPOSITIONS.    AND   THE   NATURE 
OF    ASSENT. 

PROP.     LXXXVI. 

To  explain  the  Nature  of  JJJ'cni  and  Dijfent,  and  to 
JJjew  from  what  Caujes  they  arije. 

It  appears  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  laft:  fec- 
tion,  that  afi'ent  and  diflcnt,  whatever  their  pre- 
cife  and  particular  nature  may  be,  muft  come  under 
the  notion  of  ideas,  being  only  thofe  very  complex 
internal  feelings,  which  adhere  by  aflbciation  to  fuch 
clufters  of  words  as  are  called  propofitions  in  gene- 
ral, or  affirmations  and  negations  in  particular.  The 
fame  thing  is  remarked  in  the  tenth  corollary  to  the 
twelfth  propofition. 

But  in  order  to  penetrate  farther  into  this  difficult 
and  important  point,  I  will  diftinguifh  affent  (and 
by  confeciuence  its  oppofite,  difient)  into  two  kinds, 
rational  and  pra6tical ;  and  define  each  of  thefe. 

Rational  aflfent  then  to  any  propofition  may  be 
defined  a  readinefs  to  affirm  it  to  be  tiue,  proceeding 
from  a  clofe  aflbciation  of  the  ideas  fuggefted  by  the 
propofition,  with  the  idea,  or  internal  feeling,  be- 
longing to  the  word  truth  ;  or  of  the  terms  of  the 
propofition  with  the  word  truth.  Rational  diflent 
is  the  oppofite  to  this.  This  aflent  might  be 
called  verbal ;  but  as  every  perfon  fuppoles  himfelf 
always  to  have  fufficient  reafon  for  fuch  readinefs  to 
affirm  or  deny,  1  rather  choofe  to  call  it  rational. 

Prafticai  aflent  is  a  readinefs  to  a6t  in  fuch  man- 
ner as  the  frequent  vivid  recurrency  of  the  rational 

aflent 


the  Nature  of  Aflent.  325 

afTent^difpofes  us  to  aftj  and  praflical  difient  the  con- 
trary. 

Praftical  aflent  is  therefore  the  natural  and  necef- 
fary  confcquence  of  rational,  when  fufficiently  ini- 
preflTcd.  There  are,  however,  two  cautions  to  be 
fubjoined  here,  viz.  Firft,  That  fome  propofitions, 
mathematical  ones  for  inftance,  admit  only  of  a  ra- 
tional aflent,  the  pra6tical  not  being  applied  to  them 
in  common  cafes.  Secondly,  That  the  pradical  af- 
fent  is  fometimes  generated,  and  arrives  at  a  high  de- 
gree of  fl:rength,  without  any  previous  rational  af- 
fent,  and  by  methods  that  have  little  or  no  connexion 
with  it.  Yet  fliill  it  is  in  general,  much  influenced 
by  it,  and,  converfely,  exerts  a  great  influence  upon  it. 

;    All  this  will  appear  more  clearly  when  we  come  to  the 

(    inftances. 

\  Let  us  next  inquire  into  the  caules  of  rational  and 
praftical  aflent,  beginning  with  that  given  to  mar 
tbeiTiatical  conclufions. 

Now  the  caufe  that  a  perfon  affirms  the  truth  of 
the  propofition,  twice  two  is  fouVj  is  the  entire  coin- 
cidence of  the  vifible  or  tangible  idea'of  twice  two 
with  that  of  four,  as  irnprefled  upon  the  mind  by  va- 
rious objeds.  We  fee  every  where,  that  twice  two 
and  four  are  only  diff'ercnt  names  for  the  fame  im- 
preflion.  A''nd  it  is  mere  aflfociation  which  appro- 
priates the  word  truth,  its  definition,  or  its  internal 
feeling,  to  this  coincidence. 

Where  the  numbers  are  fo  large,  that  we  are  not 
able  to  form  any  diftinft  viflble  ideas  of  them,  as 

H  when  we  fay,  that  12  times  12  is  equal  to  144;  a 
coincidence  of  the  words  arifing  from  fome  method 
of  reckoning  up  12  times  12,  fo  as  to  conclude  with 
144,  and  rcfembling  the  coincidence  of  words  which 
attends  the  juft-mentioned  coincidence  of  ideas  in  the 
Ampler  numerical  propofltions,  is.  the  foundation 
of  our  rational  aflent.  For  we  often  do,  and  might 
always  verify  the  fimpleft:  numerical  propofltions  by 

Y  3  reckoning 


326  Of  Propofitions,  and 

reckoning  up  the  numbcis.  The  operations  of  ad- 
dition, Jubtradion,  multijilicntion,  divifion,  and  ex- 
tiadion  of  roots,  with  all  the  moft  coipplex  ones 
relating  to  algebraic  quantities,  confidered  as  the  ex- 
ponents of  nuiTiberSj  are  no  more  tiian  methods  of 
producing  this  coincidence  of  words,  founded  upon 
and  rifing  above  one  another.  And  it  is  mere  aflb- 
ciation  again,  which  appropriates  the  word  truth  to 
the  coincidence  of  the  words,  or  lymbols,  that  de- 
note the  numbers. 

It  is  to  be  remarked,  however,  that  this  coinci- 
dence of  words  is,  by  thofe  who  look  deeper  into 
things,  fuppofed  to  be  a  certain  argument,  that  the 
vifible  ideas  of  the  numbers  under  confideration, 
as  of  12  times  12,  and  144,  would  coincide,  as  much 
as  the  vifible  ideas  of  twice  two  and  four,  were  they 
as  clear  and  diflincV.  And  thus  the  real  and  abfolute 
truth  is  faid  by  kich  perfons  to  be  as  great  in  complex 
numerical  propofitions,  as  in  the  fimplcft.  All  this 
agrees  with  what  Mr.  Locke  has  obferved  concerning 
numbers,  viz.  that  their  names  are  neceflary  in  or- 
der to  our  obtaining  diftinft  ideas  of  them  j  for  by 
dillincl  ideas  he  muft  be  underftood  to  mean  proper 
methods  of  diftinguifhing  them  from  one  another,  fo 
as  to  reafon  juftiy  upon  them.  He  cannot  mean 
didindt  vifible  ideas. 

In  geometry  there  is  a  like  coincidence  of  lines, 
angles,  fpaces,  and  folid  contents,  in  order  to  prove 
them  equal  in  fimple  cafes.  Afterwards,  in  complex 
cafes,  we  fubditute  the  terms  whereby  equal  things 
are  denoted  for  each  other,  alfo  the  coincidence  of 
the  ternns,  for  that  of  the  vifible  ideas,  except  in 
the  new  itep  advanced  in  the  propofition  ;  and  thus 
get  a  new  equality,  denoted  by  a  new  coincidence  of 
terms.  This  refembles  the  addition  of  unity  to  any 
num,ber,  in  order  to  make  the  next,  as  of  1  to  20, 
in  order  to  make  21.  We  have  no  diftincl  vifible 
idea,  either  of  20  or  21  j  but  we  have  of  the  differ- 
ence 


)he  Nature  of  Aiknt,  327 

?nce  between  them,  by  fancying  to  ourfelves  a  con- 
fufed  heap  of  things  fuppofed  or  called  2.0  in  num- 
ber i  and  then  farther  fancying  i  to  be  added  to  ic. 
By  a  like  procefs  in  geometry  we  arrive  at  the  de~ 
monftration  of  the  moft  complex  propofitions. 

The  properties  of  numbers  are  applied  to  geome- 
try in  many  cafes,  as  when  we  demonftrate  a  line 
or  fpace  to  be  half  or  double  of  any  other,  or  in 
any  other  rational  proportion  to  it. 

And  as  in  arithmetic  words  (land  for  indiflinil 
ideas,  in  order  to  help  us  to  realbn  upon  them  as 
accurately  as  if  they  were  diftind  ;  alfo  cyphers  for 
words,  and  letters  for  cyphers,  both  for  the  fame 
purpofe  J  fo  letters  are  put  for  geometrical  quan- 
tities alfo,  and  the  agreerr.ents  of  the  firft  for  thofe 
of  the  lafl.  And  thus  we  fee  the  foundation  upon 
which  the  whole  doflrine  of  quantity  is  built ;  for  all 
quantity  is  expounded  either  by  number  or  exten- 
Hon,  and  their  common  and  fole  exponent  is  alge- 
bra. The  coincidence  of  ideas  is  the  foundation  of 
the  rational  aflent  in  fimple  cafes  j  and  that  of  ideas 
and  terms  together,  or  of  terms  alone,  in  complex 
V  ones.  This  is  upon  fuppofition  that  the  quantities 
under  confideration  are  to  be  proved  equal.  But,  if 
they  are  to  be  proved  unequal,  the  want  of  coinci- 
dence anfwers  the  fame  purpofe.  If  they  are  in  any 
numeral  ratio,  this  is  only  the  introdu6lion  of  a  new 
coincidence.  Thus,  if,  inftead  of  proving  /I  to  be 
equal  to  i?,  we  are  to  prove  it  equal  to  half  5,  the 
two  parts  of  B  muft  coincide  with  each  other,  either 
in  idea  or  terms,  and  yf  with  one. 

And  thus  it  appears,  that  the  ufe  of  words  is  ne- 
cefiary  for  geometrical  and  algebraical  reafonings, 
as  well  as  for  arithmetical. 

We  may  fee  alfo,  that  aflbciation  prevails  in  every 
part  of  the  procefles  hitherto  defcribed. 

But  thefe  are  not  the  only  caufes  of  giving  rational 
ftflent  to  mathematical  propofitions,  as  this  is  defined 

Y  4  above. 


323  Of  Propofitions,  ami 

above.  The  memory  of  having  once  examined  and 
afll'iUfd  to  each  (iep  of  a  demonftration,  the  autho- 
rity of  an  approved  writer,  &:c.  are  fufficient  to  gain 
our  aflcnt,  though  we  undcrftand  no  more  than  the 
import  of  the  propolition  ;  nay,  even  though  we  do 
not  proceed  fo  far  as  this.  Now  this  is  mere  affoci- 
ation  again  \  this  mcmoiy,  authority,  &c.  being,  in 
innumerable  inlUnccs,  afibciated  with  the  before- 
mentioned  coincidence  of  ideas  and  terms. 

But  here  a  new  circumllance  arifcs.  For  memory 
and  authority  are  fomeiimes  found  to  miflcad  ;  and 
this  oppofite  coincidence  of  terms  puts  the  mind  into 
a  (late  of  doubt,  fo  that  fometimes  truth  may  recur, 
and  unite  itfelf  with  the  propofition  under  confidcr- 
ation,  fometimes  falfehood,  according  as  the  memo- 
ry, authority,  &c.  in  all  their  peculiar  circumflances, 
have  been  alVociated  with  truth  or  falfehood.  How- 
ever, the  foundation  of  aflent  is  ftill  the  fame.  I 
here  dcfcribe  the  facfl  only.  And  yet,  fince  this  fadl 
mull:  always  follow  from  the  fixed  immutable  laws 
of  our  frame,  the  obligation  to  aflent  (whatever  be 
meant  by  this  phrafe)  muft  coincide  with  the  faft. 

And  thus  a  mathematical  propofition,  with  the  ra- 
tional afix^nt  or  diflient  arifing  in  the  mind,  as  foon  as 
it  is  prelented  to  it,  is  nothing  more  than  a  group  of 
ideas,  united  by  aflbciation,  ;'.  e.  than  a  very  com- 
plex idea,  as  was  affirmed  above  of  propofitions  in 
general.  And  this  idea  is  not  merely  the  j^m  of 
the  ideas  belonging  to  the  terms  of  the  propofi- 
tion, but  alfo  includes  the  ideas,  or  internal  feelings, 
whatever  they  be,  which  belong  to  equality,  coin- 
cidence, truth,  and,  in  fome  cafes,  thofe  of  utility, 
importance,  &:c. 

For  mathematical  propofitions  are,  in  fome  cafes, 
attended  with  a  practical  afiTcnt,  in  the  proper  fenfe 
of  thefe  words  j  as  when  a  perfon  takes  this  or  that 
method  of  executing  a  projecfled  defign,  in  confe- 
cjuence  of  fome  matiiemacical  propofition  aflfcnted  to 

from 


the  Nature  of  AflTent.  329 

from  his  own  examination,  or  on  the  authority  of 
others.  Now,  that  which  produces  the  train  of  vo- 
luntary adions,  here  denoting  the  praftical  aflent,  is 
the  frequent  recurrency  of  ideas  of  utility  and  im- 
portance. Thefe  operate  according  to  the  method  laid 
down  in  the  twentieth  propofition,  i.  e.  by  aflbciaiion ; 
and  though  the  rational  affcnt  be  a  previous  requi- 
fice,  yet  the  degree  of  the  pra6lical  affenc  is  propor- 
tional to  the  vividnefs  of  thefe  ideas ;  and  in  mofl 
cafes  they  ftrengthen  the  rational  affent  by  a  reflex 
operation. 

Propofitions  concerning  natural  bodies  are  of  two 
kinds,  vulgar  and  fcientifical.  Of  the  firft  kind  arc, 
that  milk  is  white,  gold  yellow y  that  a  dog  barksy 
&c.  Thefe  are  evidently  nothing  but  forming  the 
prefent  complex  idea  belonging  to  material  objedls 
into  a  propofition,  or  adding  fome  of  its  common 
afibciates,  fo  as  to  make  it  more  complex.  There 
is  fcarce  room  for  diffent  in  fuch  propofitions,  they 
being  all  taken  from  common  appearances.  Or  if 
any  doubt  fhould  arife,  the  matter  muft  be  con- 
fidered  fcientifically.  The  affent  given  to  thefe  pro- 
pofitions arifes  from  the  affociations  of  the  terms,  as 
well  as  of  the  ideas  denoted  by  them. 

In  fcientifical  propofitions  concerning  natural  bo- 
dies a  definition  is  made,  as  of  gold  from  its  pro- 
perties, fuppofe  its  colour,  and  fpecific  gravity,  and 
another  property  or  power  joined  to  them,  as  a  con- 
ilant  or  common  affociate.  Thus  gold  is  faid  to  be 
du6lile,  fixed,  or  foluble  in  aqua  regia.  Now  to 
perfons,  who  have  made  the  proper  experiments  a 
fufficient  num^ber  of  times,  thefe  words  fugged  the 
ideas  which  occur  in  ihofe  experiments,  and,  con- 
vcrefely,  are  fuggefted  by  them,  in  the  fame  manner 
as  the  vulgar  propofitions  above-mentioned  fuggeft 
and  are  fuggefted  by  common  appearances.  But 
then,  if  the^  be  fcientifical  perfons,  their  readinefs  to 
affirm,  that  gold  is  foluble  in  aqua  regia  univerfally, 

arifes 


220  Of  Propofitions,  mid 

arifcs  alfo  fiom  the  experiments  of  others,  and  from 
their  own  and  other's  obfervations  on  tlic  conftancy 
and  tenor  of  nature.  'I'hcy  know,  that  the  colour, 
and  fpecific  gravity,  or  almoll  any  two  or  three  re- 
markable qualities  of  any  natural  body,  infer  the  reft, 
being  never  found  without  them.  This  is  a  general 
truth  ;  and  as  thefe  general  terms  are  obferved  to  coin- 
cide, in  fadl,  in  a  great  variety  of  inftances.  To  they 
coincide  at  once  in  the  imagination,  when  applied 
to  gold,  or  any  other  natural  body,  in  particular. 
The  coincidence  of  general  terms  is  alfo  obferved 
to  infer  that  of  the  particular  cafes  in  many  inftances, 
be  files  thofe  of  natural  bodies;  and  this  unites  the 
fubjecl  and  predicate  of  the  propofition,  goU  is  Joluble 
in  aqua  regia^  farther  in  thofe  who  penetrate  ftill 
deeper  into  abftradt  fpeculations.  And  hence  we 
may  fee,  as  before,  Firft,  That  terms  or  words  arc 
abfolutely  necciiary  to  the  art  of  reafoning  :  Secondly, 
That  our  aflenc  is  here  alio,  in  every  ftep  of  the 
procelb,  deducible  from  afibciation. 

The  propofitions  formed  concerning  natural  bodies 
are  often  attended  with  a  high  degree  of  pradical 
aflent,  arifing  chiefly  from  fome  fuppofcd  utility 
and  importance,  and  which  is  no  ways  proportional 
to  the  foregoing,  or  other  fuch  like  allowed  caufes  of 
rational  aflent.  And  in  fome  cafes  the  pradical  af- 
fent  takes  place  before  the  rational.  But  then,  after 
fome  time,  the  i^aiional  alfcnt  is  generated  and  cemented 
moft  firmly  by  the  prevalence  of  the  praflical.  This 
procefs  is  particularly  obfervable  in  the  regards  paid 
to  medicines,  /.  e.  in  the  rational  and  pra6lical  aflfcnt 
to  rhe  propofitions  concerning  their  virtues. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  children,  novices,  un- 
learned perfons,  &c.  give,  in  many  cafes,  a  practical 
aflent  upon  a  fingle  inftancej  and  that  this  arifes  from 
the  fir  ft  and  fimplcfl  of  the  affociations  here  confi- 
dered.  The  influence  of  the  pradlical  afl^ent  over 
the  rational  arifes  plainly  from  their  being  joined  toge- 
ther 


ihe  Nature  of  AfTent.  331 

ther  in  fo  many  cafes.  The  vividnefs  of  the  ideas 
arifing  from  the  fuppofed  utility,  importance,  &c. 
does  alfo  unite  the  fubjed  and  predicate  fooner  and 
clofcr,  agreeably  to  what  has  been  obferved  in  the 
general  account  of  aflbciation. 

The  evidences  for  paft  fafls  are  a  man's  own  me- 
cnory,  and  the  authority  of  others.  Thefe  are  the 
ufuaj  affociates  of  true  paft  fafls,  under  proper 
reftiictions,  and  therefore  beget  the  readinefs  to 
affirm  a  paft  fa6t  to  be  true,  i.  e.  the  rational  afient. 
The  integrity  and  knowledge  of  the  witnefles,  being 
the  principal  reftiiftion,  or  requifite,  in  the  accounts 
of  paft  fads,  become  principal  affociates  to  the  affent 
to  them  j  and  the  contrary  qualities  to  diffent. 

If  it  be  afked,  how  a  narration  of  an  event, 
fuppofed  to  be  certainly  true,  fuppofed  doubtful,  or 
fuppofed  entirely  fiftitious,  differs  in  its  effedt  upon 
the  mind,  in  the  three  circumftances  here  alleged, 
the  words  being  the  fame  in  each,  I  anfwer,  firft, 
in  having  the  terms  true,  doubtful,  and  fiSiitious, 
with  a  variety  of  ufual  affociates  to  thefe,  and  the 
correfponding  internal  feelings  of  refpe(5l,  anxiety, 
diflike,  &c.  conneded  with  them  refpe(5lively;  whence 
the  whole  effefts,  exerted  by^jeach  upon  the  mind, 
will  differ  confiderably  from  one 'another.  Secondly, 
If  the  event  be  of  an  interefting  nature,  as  a  great 
advantage  accruing,  the  death  of  a  near  friend,  the 
affefcing  related  ideas  will  recur  ofccner,  and,  by  fo 
recurring  agitate  the  mind  more,  in  proportion  to  the 
fuppofed  truth  of  the  event.  And  it  confirms  this, 
that  the  frequent  recurrency  of  an  interefting  event, 
fuppofed  doubtful,  or  even  fictitious,  does,  by  de- 
grees, make  it  appear  like  a  real  one,  as  in  reveries, 
reading  romances,  feeing  plays,  &c.  The  affeftion 
of  mind  may  be  called  the  pradlical  affent  to  paft 
faftsj  and   it  frequently  draws  after  it  the  rational,  as 


in  the  other  inftances  above  alleged. 


The 


33^  Of  Propoficions,  and- 

The  evidence  for  future  fa(5ls  is  of  the  fame  kind 
with  that  for  the  propofitions  concerning  natural  bo- 
dies, being  like  ir,  taken  from  indu(5tion  and  ana- 
logy. I'his  is  the  caufe  of  the  rational  aflent.  The 
pra6lic3l  de{)ends  upon  the  iccurrency  of  the  ideas, 
and  the  degree  of  agitation  produced  by  them  in  the 
mind.  Hence  refle(5lion  makes  the  pra6lical  aflent 
grow  for  a  long  time  after  the  rational  is  arifen  to 
its  height  J  or  if  the  practical  arifes  without  the  ra- 
tional, in  any  confiderable  degree,  which  is  often  the 
cafe,  it  will  generate  the  rational.  Thu^  the  lan- 
guine  are  apt  to  believe  and  aflcrt  what  they  hope, 
and  the  timorous  what  they  fear. 

There  are  many  fpeculative,  abftrafled  propofitions 
in  logic,  metaphyfics,  ethics,  controverfial  divinity, 
Sec.  the  evidence  for  which  is  the  coincidence  or 
analogy  of  the  abftra^l  terms,  in  certain  particular 
applications  of  them,  or  as  confidcred  in  their  gram- 
matical relations.  This  caufcs  the  rational  aflTent. 
As  to  the  praftical  aflcnt  or  dilfent,  it  arifes  from  the 
ideas  of  importance,  reverence,  piety,  duty,  ambi- 
tion, jealoufy,  envy,  felf-intereft,  &:c.  which  inter- 
mix themfelves  in  thefe  fubjedls,  and,  by  doing  fo, 
in  fome  cafes  add'gVeat  flrength  to  the  rational  af- 
fcnt  i  in  others  dellroy  it,  and  convert  it  into  its 
oppofite. 

And  thus  it  appears,  that  rational  aflent  has  dif- 
ferent caufes  in  propofitions  of  different  kinds,  and 
priftical  likewife;  that  the  caufes  of  rational  are  alfo 
ditfcreat  from  thofe  of  pradical ;  that  there  is  how- 
ever, a  great  affinity,  and  general  refemblance,  in 
all  the  caufes  j  that  rational  and  pradical  afiient  exert 
a  perpetual  reciprocal  efFeft  upon  one  another;  and 
confequentiy,  that  the  ideas  belonging  to  aflent  and 
difTent,  and  their  equivalents  and  relatives,  are 
highly  complex  ones,  unlefs  in  the  cafes  of  very  fim- 
ple  propofitions,    fuch  as   mathematical  ones.      For, 

be fides 


the  Nature  of  AfTent.  23i 

befides  the  coincidence  of  ideas  and  terms,  they  in- 
clude in  other  cafes,  ideas  of  utility,  importance, 
refpeft,  difrefpedt,  ridicule,  religious  afFcdions,  hope, 
fear,  &c.  and  bear  fome  grofs  general  proportion 
CO  the  vividnefs  of  thefe  ideas. 

Cor.  I.  When  a  perfon  fays  video  meliora  pro- 
iioque,  deteriora  Jequor  ;  it  fhews  that  the  rational  and 
pradlical  aflent  are  at  variance,  that  they  have  oppo- 
fite  caufes,  and  that  neither  of  thefe  has  yet  deftroyed 
the  other. 

CoR.  1.  The  rational  and  pra6lical  faith  in  reli- 
gious matters  are  excellent  means  of  begetting  each 
other. 

,  CoR.  3.  Vicious  men,  i.  e.  all  perfons  who  wane 
pradical  faith,  muft  be  prejudiced  againft  the  hifto- 
rical  and  other  rational  evidences  in  favour  of  revealed 
religion. 

Cor.  4.  It  is  impoffible  any  perfon  fliould  be  (o 
fceptical,  as  not  to  have  the  complex  ideas  denoted  by 
aflent  and  diflent  aflbciated  with  a  great  variety  of 
propofitions,  in  the  fame  manner,  as  in  other  perfons j 
juft  as  he  muft  have  the  fame  ideas  in  general  affixed 
to  the  words  of  his  native  language,  as  other  men 
have.  A  pretended  fceptic  is  therefore  no  more  than 
a  perfon  who  varies  from  the  common  ufagc  in  his 
application  of  a  certain  fet  of  words,  viz.  truth,  cer- 
tainty, aflent,  diflent,  &c. 

Cor.  5.  As  there  is  a  foundation  for  unity  amongft 
mankind  in  the  ufe  and  application  of  words,  (o 
t^here  is  for  a  unity  in  the  aflent,  or  complex  ideas 
belonging  to  propofitions ;  and  a  philofophicaJ  lan- 
guage, or  any  other  method  of  bringing  about  the 
firft  unity,  would  much  conduce  to  this.  A  careful 
examination  of  things,  of  the  world  natural,  the  hu- 
man mind,  the  fcriptures,  would  conduce  much  alfo. 
But  candour,  fimplicity,  and  an  humble  lenfe  of  our 
own  ignorance,  which  may  be  called  a  religious  or 
chriftian   fcepricifm,    is   the    principal    requifite,    and 

that 


334  ^f  Piopofitions,  and 

that  without  wliich  this  part  of  the  confufion  at  Bahet 
can  never  be  remedied.  When  religion  has  equally 
and  fully  nbforbed  difl'erent  perfons,  fo  that  God  is,  in 
relpert  of  them,  all  in  allj  as  far  as  the  prefent  con- 
dition of  mortality  will  permit,  their  practical  aflent 
mu(t  be  the  fame  ;  and  tlierefore  their  rational  cannot 
difter  long  or  widely. 

The  ideas  and  internal  feeling*;  which  arifc  in  the 
mind,  from  words  and  projx)fitions,  may  be  com- 
pared to,  and  illulb.ited  by,  thofe  which  the  ap- 
pearances of  ditVerent  perfons  excite.  Suppofc  two 
perfons,  A  and  i?,  to  go  together  into  a  crowd,  and 
there  each  of  them  to  fee  a  variety  of  perfons  whom 
he  knew  in  different  dcgiees,  as  well  as  many  utter 
ftrangers.  //  would  not  have  the  fame  ideas,  and 
affociations  railed  in  him  from  viewing  the  feveral 
faces, •dreires,  &^c.  of  the  perfons  in  the  crowd,  as 
jB,  partly  from  his  having  a  different  knowledge 
of,  and  acquaintance  with  them ;  partly  from  dif- 
ferent predifpofitions  to  approve  and  difapprove.  But 
let  A  and  B  become  equally  acquainted  with  them 
and  acquire,  by  education  and  affociation,  the  fame 
predifpofitions  of  mind,  and  then  they  will  at  laft 
make  the  fame  judgment  of  each  of  the  perfons 
whom  they  fee. 

Cor.  6.  Religious  controverfies  concerning  ab- 
(Iraft  propofitions  arife  generally  from  the  different 
degrees  of  refpedl  paid  to  terms  and  phrafes,  which 
conduce  little  or  nothing  to  the  generation  of  pradli- 
cal  faith,  or  of  love  to  God,  and  trull  in  him  through 
Chriff. 


PROP. 


ihe  Nature  of  Affent.  335 


PROP.     LXXXVII. 

Wo  deduce  Rules  for  the  Afcertainment  of  Truth,  and 
Advancement  of  Knowledge,  from  the  mathematical 
Methods  of  confidering  ^antity. 

This  is  done  in  the  doftrine  of  chances,  with  re- 
ped  to  the  events  there  confidered.  And  though 
we  feldom  have  fuch  precife  data,  in  mixed  fciences 
as  are  there  aiTuncied,  yet  there  are  two  remarks  of 
very  general  ufe  and  application,  deducible  from 
the  doftrine  of  chances. 

Thus,  Fird,  If  the  evidences  brought  for  any  pro- 
pofition,  fail,  &:c.  be  dependent  on  each  other,  fo 
that  the  firft  is  required  to  fupport  the  fecond,  the 
fecond  to  fupport  the  third,  bcc,  i.  e.  if  a  failure  of 
any  one  of  the  evidences  renders  all  the  reft  of  no 
value,  the  feparate  probability  of  each  evidence  muft 
be  very  great,  in  order  to  make  the  propofition  cre- 
dible j  and  this  holds  fo  much  the  more,  as  the  de- 
'pendent   evidences   are    more    numerous.      For   in- 

ftance,  if  the  value  of  each  evidence  be  — ,   and  the 

a 

number  of  evidences  be  n,  then  will  the  refulting 
probability  be  — -.  I  here  fuppofe  abfolute  certainty 
to  be  denoted  by  i  ;  and  confequentiy,  that  a  can  ne- 
ver be  lefs  than  I.     Now  it  is  evident,  that de- 

creafes  with  e^ery  increafe  both  of  ^  and  n. 

Secondly,  If  the  evidences  brought  for  any  pro- 
pofition, fa6l,  &c.  be  independent  on  each  other,  i,  e, 
if  they  be  not  neceflary  to  fupport  each  other,  but 
concur,  and  can,  each  of  them,  when  eftablifhed  upon 
its  own  proper  evidences,  be  applied  direftly  to  cfta- 
blifh  the  propofition,  fa6t,  &c.  in  queftion,  the  de- 
ficiency in  the  probability  of  each  muft  be  very  great, 

in 


33^  QA  Propofitions,  and 

in  order  to  render  the  propofition  perceptibly  doubt- 
ful ;  and  this  holds  fo  much  the  more,  as  the  evi- 
dences are  more  numerous.  For  inftance,  if  the  evi- 
dences  be  all  equaj,  and   the  common  deficiency   ir\ 

each  be  — ,  if  alio   the  number  of  evidences  be  n  as 

a 

before,  the  deficiency  of  the  refulting  probability  will  be 

no  more  than ,  which  is  pra6lically  nothing,  where 

a  and  ;;  are  confiderable.  Thus  if  a  and  n  be  each 
equal  to  lo, will  be -,  or  only   i   in 

^  a"  10,000,000,000  •' 

ten  thoufand  millions;  a  deficiency  from  certainty, 
which  is  utterly  imperceptible  to  the  human  mind. 

It  is  indeed  evident,  without  having  recourfe  to 
the  dodrine  of  chances  that  the  dependency  of 
evidences  makes  the  refuliing  probability  weak,  their 
independency  firong.  Thus  a  report  pafTing  from  one 
original  author  through  a  variety  of  fucceltive  hands 
lofes  much  of  its  credibility,  and  one  attefted  by  a 
variety  of  original  wirnefies  gains,  in  both  cafes, 
according  to  the  number  of  fuccefiive  reporters,  and 
original  witnefTes,  though  by  no  means  proportion-* 
ably  thereto.  This  is  the  common  judgment  of  man- 
kind, verified  by  obfervation  and  experience.  But 
the  mathematical  method  of  confideringr  thefe  thinos 
is  much  more  precife  and  fatisfadlory,  and  differs 
from  the  common  one,  juft  as  the  judgment  made  of 
the  degrees  of  heat  by  the  thermometer  does  from 
that  made  by  the  hand. 

We  may  thus  alfo  fee  in  a  (horter  and  fimpler  way, 
that  the  refulting  probability  may  be  fufffcienrly  ftrong 
in  dependent  evidences,  and  of  little  value  in  inde- 
pendent ones,  according  as  the  feparate  probability  of 
each  evidence  is  greater  or  lefs.  Thus  the  principal 
fa6ls  of  ancient  hiftory  are  not  lefs  probable  practi- 
cally now,  than  ten  or  fifteen  centuries  ago,  nor  lefs  ^o 

then, 


the  Nature  of  Afient.  337 

then,    than    in   the   times   immediately   fucceeding  j 
becaule  the  diminution  of  evidence  in  each  century  is 

imperceptible.     For,  if—  be  equal  to  i,  will  be 

equal  to  i   alfoj   and  if  the  deficiency  of — from  i 
I">eextremelvfmall,  thatof will  be  extremely  fmall 

an  J 

iifo,  unlcfs  n  be  extremely  great.     And  for  the  fame 
reafon  a  large   number  of  weak   arguments   proves 

ittle;  for — the  deficiency  of  each  argument,  being 

:xtremely  great,  — -,  the  refulting  deficiency  of  inde- 
pendent evidences,  will  be  extremelv  "reat  alfo. 

It  appears  likewife,  that  the  inequality  of  the  fepa- 
rate  evidences  does  not  much  affedt  this  reafoning. 
In  like  manner,  if  the  number  of  evidences,  depen- 
dent or  independent,  be  great,  we  may  make  great 
concefiions  as  to  the  feparate  values  of  each.  Again, 
a  ftrong  evidence  in  dependent  ones  can  add  nothing, 
but  muil  weaken  a  little ;  and,  after  a  point  is  well 
fettled  by  a  number  of  independent  ones,  all  that  come 
afterwards  are  ufclef»,  becaufe  they  can  do  no  more 
than  remove  the  imperceptible  remaining  defici- 
ency, &c.  And  it  will  be  of  great  ufe  to  purfue  thefe, 
and  fuch  like  deductions,  both  mathematically,  and 
by  applying  them  to  proper  in  (lances  feleded  from  the 
fciences,  end  from  com.mon  life,  in  order  to  remove 
certain  prejudices,  which  the  ufe  of  general  ter^ins, 
and  ways  of  fpeaking,  with  the  various  afibciations 
adhering  to  them,  is  apt  to  introduce  and  fix  upon 
the  mind.  It  cannot  but  affift  us  in  the  art  of  reafon- 
'ing,  thus  to  take  to  pieces,  recompofe  and  afcertain 
our  evidences. 

If  it  be  afked,  upon  what  authority  abfolute  cer- 
tainty is  reprefcnted  by  unity,  and  the  feveral  degrees 

Vol.  I.  Z  of 


338  Of  Propofitions,  and 

of  probability  by  fraflions  Icfs  than  unity,  in  the 
do<^rine  of  chances  ?  Alfo,  upon  what  authority  the 
reafoning  ufed  in  that  dodrine  is  transferred  to  other 
fubjcjfis,  and  made  general,  as  licrc  propofed  ?  I 
anlwcr,  that  no  perfon  who  weighs  thefe  matters 
carefully,  can  avoid  giving  his  aflent ;  and  that 
this  precludes  all  objeftions.  No  fceptic  would, 
in  fa-l^,  be  fo  abfurd  as  to  lay  2  to  i,  where  the 
do(flrinc  of  chances  determines  the  probability  to  be 
equal  on  each  fide;  and  therefore  we  may  be  fure, 
that  he  gives  a  practical  affent  at  lead  to  the  doftrinc 
of  chances. 

Mr.  de  Moivre  has  (hewn,  that  where  the  caufes 
of  the  happening  of  an  event  bear  a  fixed  ratio  to  thole 
of  its  failure,  the  happenings  mufl  bear  nearly  the 
fame  ratio  to  the  failures,  if  the  #umber  of  trials 
be  fufficient  -,  and  that  the  laft  ratio  approaches  to 
the  firft  indefinitely,  as  the  number  of  trials  in- 
creafes.  1  his  may  be  confidered  as  an  elegant^ 
method  of  accounting  for  that  order  and  proportion, 
which  we  every  where  fee  in  the  phasnomena  of  na- 
ture. The  determinate  fliapes,  fizes,  and  mutual 
actions  of  the  conftituent  particles  of  matter,  fix  the 
ratios  between  the  caufes  for  the  happenings,  and 
the  failures  ;  and  therefore  it  is  highly  probable,  and 
even  neceflary,  as  one  may  fay,  that  the  happenings 
and  failures  (hould  perpetually  recur  in  the  fame  ra- 
tio to  each  other  nearly,  while  the  circumftances 
are  the-  fame.  When  the  circumftances  are  altered, 
then  new  caufes  take  place ;  and  confcquently  there 
muft  be  a  new,  but  fixed  ratio,  between  the  happen- 
ings and  the  failures.  Let  the  firft  circumftances  be 
called  Ay  the  new  ones  B.  If  now  the  fuppofition  be 
made  fo  general,  as  equally  to  take  in  both  A  and 
By  the  ratio  of  the  happenings  and  failures  will  not 
be  fuch  as  either  A  or  B  required.  But  ftill  it  will 
tend  to  a  precifenefs,  juft  as  they  did,  fince  the  fum 

of 


the  Nature  of  A  (Tent.  339 

of  the  caiifes  of  the  happenings  nnuft  bear  a  fixed 
ratio  to  the  fum  of  the  caufes  of  the  failures. 

An  ingenious  friend  has  communicated  to  me  a 
folution  of  the  inverfe  problem,  in  which  he  has  fhewn 
what  the  expe6lation  is,  when  an  event  has  happened 
■p  times,  and  failed  q  times,  that  the  original  ratio  of 
the  caufes  for  the  happening  or  failing  of  an  event 
fhould  deviate  in  any  given  degree  from  that  of />  to 
2.  And  it  appears  from  this  folution,  that  where  the 
number  of  trials  is  very  great,  the  deviation  muft  be 
inconfiderable :  which  fhews  that  we  may  hope  to 
determine  the  proportions,  and,  by  degrees,  the 
whole  nature,  of  unknown  caufes,  by  a  fufficient  ob- 
fervaiion  of  their  effedts. 

The  inferences  here  drawn  from  thefe  two  pro- 
blems are  evident  to  attentive  perfons,  in  a  grofs  ge- 
neral way,  from  common  methods  of  reafoning. 

Let  us,  in  the  next  place,  confider  the  Newtonian 
differential  method,  and  compare  it  with  that  of  argu- 
ing from  experiments  and  obfervations,  by  induction 
and  analogy.  This  differential  method  teaches, 
having  a  certain  number  of  the  ordinates  of  any  un- 
known curve  given  with  the  points  of  the  abfcifs  on 
which  they  {land,  to  find  out  fuch  a  general  law  for 
this  curve,  /.  e.  fuch  an  equation  expreffing  the  re- 
lation of  an  ordinate  and  abfcifs  in  all  magnitudes  of 
the  abfcifs,  as  will  fuit  the  ordinates  and  points  of 
the  abfcifs  given,  in  the  unknown  curve  under  con- 
fideration.  Now  here  we  may  fuppofe  the  given 
ordinates  (landing  upon  given  points  to  be  analogous 
to  effeds,  or  the  refults  of  various  experiments  in 
given  circumftances,  the  abfcifs  analogous  to  all  pof- 
fible  circumftances,  and  the  equation  afforded  by  the 
differential  method  to  that  law  of  adion,  which,  be- 
ing fuppofed  to  take  place  in  the  given  circumftances, 
produces  the  given  effefls.  And  as  the  ufe  of  the 
differential  method  is  to  find  the  lengths  of  ordinates 
not  given,  ftanding  upon  points  of  the  abfcifs  that 

Z  2  are 


340  ^I  Propofitions,  ar,d 

arc  given,  by  means  of  the  tquation,  fo  the  ufc  of 
attempts  to  make  general  conrlufions  by  intlii(5tion 
and  analogy,  from  particular  eflfe<5ls  or  phnciiomena, 
is  to  enable  us  to  predid  other  phrcnomena  in  differ- 
ent given  circiimrtances,  by  applying  tiie  general 
Jaw  or  concliifion  to  thefc  circumltanccs. 

This  parallel  is -the  more  pertinent  and  inftriiflive, 
inafmiich  as  the  mathematical  conclufion  drawn  by 
the  differential  method,  though  formed  in  a  way  that 
is  ftridlly  juO,  and  fo  as  to  have  thegreatcfl  poffiblc 
probability  in  its  flwour,  is,  however  liable  to  the  J 
iamc  uncertainties,  both  in  kind  and  degree,  as  the 
general  maxims  of  natural  philofophy  drawn  from 
natural  hiftory,  experiments,  &c. 

If  many  ordinates  be  given  ;  if  the  diftances  of 
the  points  of  the  abfcifs,  on  which  they  ftand,  be  equal 
and  fmall ;  if  the  ordinate  required  lie  amongfl  them, 
or  near  them ;  and  if  there  be  realbn  to  think,  that 
the  curve  itfclf  is  formed  according  to  fome  fimple, 
though  unknown  Tawj  then  may  we  conclude,  that 
the  new  ordinate,  determined  by  the  equation,  docs 
not  vary  far  from  the  truth.  And  if  the  refulting 
equation  be  fimple,  and  always  the  fame,  from  what- 
ever given  ordinates  it  be  extrafted,  there  is  the  greateit 
reafon  to  think  this  to  be  the  real  original  law  or 
equation  of  the  curve;  and  confequently  that  all  its 
points  and  properties  may  be  determined  with  pej-fcft 
exadlnefs  by  means  of  it:  whereas,  if  the  given  ordi- 
nates be  few,  their  diftances  great  or  unequal,  the 
ordinate  required  confiderably  diftant  from  mjny  or 
moft  of  them,  the  unknown  curve  be  a  line  drawn 
at  hazard,  and  the  refulting  equation  very  different 
where  different  ordinates  are  given,  though  their  num.- 
ber  be  the  fame,  there  will  be  little  probability  of  de- 
termining the  new  ordinate  with  exadlnefs  ;  however, 
ilill  the  differential  method  affords  us  the  greateft  pro- 
bability which  the  data  permit  in  fuch  cafes. 

In 


the  Nature  of  Allent.  341 

In  like  manner,  if  the  experiments  or  obfervations 

be  many»  their  circumftances  nearly  related  to  each 

other,  and   in   a  regular  feries,  the  circnmftances  of 

the  efFedl   to  be  inveftigated  nearly  related  to  them  ; 

jjfo,   if  the  real  caufe  n:ay   be  fiippofed  to  produce 

thefe  efFeds,   by  the  varieties   of  fome   fimple  law, 

the  method  of  indudion  and  analogy  will  carry  great 

probability  with   it.     And   if  the  general   conclufioa 

)r  law   be  fimple,  and  always  the  fame,  from  what- 

ver  phienomena  it   be  deduced,    fuch   as  the  three 

aws    of   nature,    the    do6lrines    of  gravitation,    and 

of  the    different    refrangibiliiy  of  light;    or,    to   go 

ill  higher,  by  taking  a  mathematical   indance,  the 

iaw  for  finding  the  coefficients  of  the   integral  powers 

rif  a   binomial,  deduced  from  mere  trials   in  various 

powers;  there   can  fcarce  rem.ain  any  doubt,  but  that 

we  are  in  polTefTion  of  the  true  law  inquired  after, 

lb  as  to  be  able  to  predi6t  with  certainty,  in  all   cafes 

where  we  are  mafters  of  the  method  of  computation, 

or  applying  it;  and   have  no  reafon  to  fufped,  that 

odier   unknown    laws    Interfere.      Bur,    if  the   given 

Dhajnomena    be    few,    their    circumftances    very    dif- 

-lent  from  each  other,  and  from  thofc  of  the  effect 

to  be  predicted;  if  there  be  reafon  to  fuppoie,  that 

;any  caufes  concur  in   the  producing  thefe  phnsno- 

rr.ena,  fo  that  the  law  of  their   production   mufl  be 

very   complex ;    if  a   new   hypothefis  be  required  to 

ccount  for  every  new  combination  of  thefe  ph?£no- 

ena ;  or,  at  Icafl:,  one  that  differs  confiderably  from 

lelf;  the  beft   hypothefis   which   we  can   form,  i.  e. 

iS  hypothefis  which  is  moft  conformable  to  all  the 

iisenomeqa,  will  amount  to  no  m.ore  than  an  uncertain 

-.njedure;  and  yet  ftill  it  ought  to  be  preferred  to  all 

ethers,  as  being  the  bed  that  we  can  form. 

That  inflanraneous  and  necefTary  coalefcence  of 
J  leas,  which  makes  intuitive  evidence,  may  be  con- 
fidered  as  the  hijrhefl  kind  of  induction,  and  as  amount- 
ing  to  a   pel  fee:!;  coincidence  of  the  efFeCl  cpncludeJ 

Z  3  wicli 


34i  Of  Propofuions,  and 

with  thofe  from  which  it  is  concluded.  This  takes 
place  only  in  mathematics.  Thus  wc  infer  that  2  ' 
and  1  make  4,  only  from  prior  inftances  of  having 
adually  perceived  this,  and  from  the  neceflary  coin- 
cidence of  all  thcfe  inftances  with  all  other  pofTiblc" 
ones  of  1  and  2.  Mathematical  demonftrations  arc 
made  up  of  a  number  of  thefe,  as  was  oblerved , 
above.  *^ 

Where  the  inflances  from  whence  the  indudlion  is 
made  are  alike,  as  far  as  we  know,  to  that  under 
confiderarion,  at  lead  in  all  things  that  affe6l  the 
prcfent  inquiry,  it  affords  the  higheft  probability,  and 
may  be  termed  indu6lion,  in  the  proper  fcnfe  of  the 
word.  Thus  we  infer,  that  the  bread  before  us  is 
nutritive  and  wholefome,  becaufe  its  fmell,  tafte, 
ingredients,  manner  of  compofition,  &c.  are  the 
fame  as  thofe  of  other  bread,  which  has  often  before 
been  experienced  to  be  fo. 

But,  if  the  inftance  under  confideration  be  in  fomc  | 
refpedis  like  the  foregoing  ones,  in  others  not,  this 
kind  of  proof  is  generally  termed  one  taken  from 
analogy.  Thus,  if  we  argue  from  the  ufe  and  action 
of  the  ftomach  in  one  animal  to  thofe  in  another, 
fuppofed  to  be  unknown,  there  will  be  a  probable 
hazard  of  being  miftaken,  proportional  in  general  to 
the  known  difference  of  the  two  animals  as  well  as 
a  probable  evidence  for  the  tiuth  of  part,  at  leaft, 
of  what  is  advanced,  proportional  to  the  general  re- 
femblance  of  the  two  animals.  But  if,  upon  exami- 
nation, the  ftomach,  way  of  feeding,  &c.  of  the  fe- 
cond  animal  fhould  be  found,  to  fenfe,  the  fame  as  in 
the  firfl,  the  analogy  might  be  confidered  as  an  in- 
duflion  properly  fo  called,  at  leaft  as  approaching  to 
it  J  for  precife  limits  cannot  be  fixed  here.  If  the 
fecond  animal  be  of  the  fame  fpecies,  alfo  of  the 
fame  age,  fex,  &c.  with  the  firft,  the  indu6tion  be- 
comes perpetually  of  a  higher  and  a  higher  order, 
approaching  more  and  more  to  the  coincidence,  which 

obtains 


the  Nature  of  Aflent.  343 

pbtains  in  mathematical  evidences,  and  yet  never  be- 
'ing  able  entirely  to  arrive  at  it.  But  then  the  differ- 
ence, being  only  an  infinitefimal  fraftion,  as  it  were, 
becomes  nothing  to  all  practical  purpofes  vvhatfoever. 
JAnd  if  a  man  confiders  farther,  that  it  would  be  hard 
to  find  a  demonft.ation,  that  he  does  not  miftake  the 
plaineft  truths  i  this  leflens  the  difference  theoretically 
aifo. 

It  is  often  in' our  power  to  obtain  an  analogy  where 
we  cannot  have  an  inducflion;  in  which  cafe  reafon- 
ing  from  analogy  ought  to  be  admitted ;  however, 
with  all  that  uncertainty  which  properly  belongs  to 
'C  confidered  as  more  or  lefs  diftant  from  indu6lion, 

built  upon  more  or  fewer  dependent  or  indepen- 

-nt  evidences,  &c.  analogy   may  alfo  in  all  cafes, 

t  made  ufe  of  as  a  guide  to  the  invention.     But 

coincidence   in  mathematical  matters,  and  induftion 

others,  wherever  they  can  be  had,  muff  be  fought 
tor  as  the  only  certain  tefts  of  truth.  However,  ixi- 
dudlion  feems  to  be  a  very  fufficienc  evidence  in  fome 
mathematical  points,  affording  at  leaft  as  much  evi- 
dence there  as  in  natural  philofophy ;  and  may  be 
fafely  relied  on  in  perplexed  cafes,  fuch  as  complex 
ferieles,  till  fatisfaftory  demonftrations  can  be  had. 

The  analogous  natures  of  all  the  things  about  us, 
are  a  great  affiftance  in  decyphering  their  properties, 
powers,  laws,  &c.  inafmuch  as  what  is  minute  or  ob- 
fcure  in  one  may  be  explained  and  illuftrated  by  the 
analogous  particular  in  anocher,  where  it  is  large  and 
clear.  And  thus  all  things  become  comments  on 
each  other  in  an  endlefs  reciprocation. 

When  there  are  various  arguments  for  the  fame 
thing  taken  from  induction  or  analogy,  they  may 
all  be  confidered  as  fupporting  one  another  in  the 
fame  manner  as  independent  evidences.  Thus,  if  ic 
could  be  (hewed,  that  the  human  underftanding  is 
entirely  dependent  on  affociation  (as  is  remarked  in 
this  and  the  lall   fedion),    the  many  analogies  and 

Z  4  connedlions 


344  Q/*  Propofitions,  and 

connciftions  between  the  iindcrflanding  and  affcflions, 
as  thclc  terms  are  commonly  iindcrflood  and  contra- 
didinguifhcd   by  writers,   would    make    it   very   pron 
bable,  that  aflbciatlon  prelides  in  the  fame  manner  ini 
the   generation    of  the    alfc^lions ;    and    via    verja^ 
And  the  more  analogies,  and  mutual  conneflions,  be-» 
twecn   the   underftanding    and    affedlions,    were    pro-s- 
duced,  fo  many  more  independent  or  concurrent  evi- 
dences wouUl  tlicre  be  for  this  prevalence  of  afibcia- 
tion  in  one,  admitting  it  \\\  the  other.     But,  if  now  it 
be  fliewn   farther,  that   the   underflanding  and  affec- 
tions are  not  really  diflinft  things,  but  only  different 
names,  which  we  give  to  the   fame  kind  of  motions, 
in   the  nervous  fyllem,  on  account  of  a  difference  in. 
degree,  and  other  differences  which   it  would  be  te- 
dious here  to  enumerate,  but  which   make  no  differ- 
ence in  refpedl  of  the   power  of  affociation,  then  ali 
the    arguments    from    analogy    are    transformed    intcj^ 
one  of  indu<ftion ;  which,  iiowever,  is  (Ironger  ihat^ 
the  united  force  of  them  all.     For  now  it  may  be, 
fhewedj  that  affociation   muft  prevail  in  each  motion, 
in  the  brain,  by   which   affeftion   is  expounded,  fronv 
a  large   indu6tion  of  particulars,  in  which  it  prevails 
in   the  generation  of  ideas,    or   of  the    motions    by 
which  they  are  expounded,  and  which  we  fuppofe  to 
be  proved  to  be  of  the   fame  kind  with  thofe  that  ex- 
pound the  affections.     Thus  alfo  induftions  may   be 
taken  from  the  fmell  and  tafte  of  bread,  to  prove  ic 
wholefome;  which   would   both   be   transformed   into 
one  fimple  argument  ftronger  than  both,  could  we  fee 
the   internal    conftitution    of  the    fmall    parts,  of  the 
bread,  from  whence   its  fmell,  and  tafte,  and  whole- 
fomenefs,  are  all  derived.     Thus,  again,  all  the  argu- 
ments of  indudion  for  the  manner  of  extrading  the 
fquare  root  in   numbers  vanifh    into    the    fingle   de- 
monftrative  proof,  as  foon  as  this  is  produced.     And 
the  great  bufinefs  in  all  branches  of  knowledge  is  thus 
to  reduce,   unite,  and  fimplify  our  evidences ;   {o  as 

that 


the  Nature  of  Afltnt.  345 

that  the  one  refulcing  proof,  by  being  of  a  higher 
order,  fhall  be  more  than  equal  in  force  to  all  the 
concurrent  ones  of  the  inferior  orders. 

]  Having  now  confidered  in  what  manner  the  doc- 
trine of  chances,  and  the  Newtohian  differential  me- 
thod, may  ferve  to  fhew  in  general  the  value  of  de- 
pendent and  independent  or  concurrent  evidences, 
and  the  probability  of  general  conclufions  formed  by 
induction  and  analogy  i  let  us  next  inquire  by  what 
means  we  are  to  form  thefe  general  conclufions,  and 
(lifcover  their  evidences.  Now  the  different  me- 
thods of  doing  this  may   be  faid   to  refemble  refpec- 

I  lively  the  rule  of  falfe  in  common  arithmetic ;  the 
algebraic  methods  of  bringing  the  unknown  quantity 
into  an  equation,  under  a  form  capable  of  all  the 
algebraic  operations,  addition,  fijbtradlion,  &c.  the 
algebraic  methods  of  finding  the  roots  of  equations 
of  the  higher  orders  by  approximation  ;  and  the  art 
of  decyphering :  all  which  four  methods  bear  alfo  a 
confiderable  refemblance  to  each  other.  I  will  con- 
fider  them  in  order,  and  endeavour  to  fhew  how  ana- 
logous m.ethods  may  be  introduced  into  the  fciences 
in  general,  to  advantage. 

Firfl,  then.  As,  according  to  the  rule  of  falfe,  the 
arithmetician  fuppofes  a  certain  number  to  be  that 
which  is  fought  forj  treats  it  as  if  it  was  that;  and 
finding  the  deficiency  or  overplus  in  the  conclufion, 
rediftes  the  error  of  his  firft  pofition  by  a  propor- 
tional addition  or  fubtraftion,  and  thus  folves  the 
problem  ;  fo  it  is  ufeful  in  inquiries  of  all  kinds,  to 
try  all  fuch  fuppofitions  as  occur  with  any  appear- 
i  ance  of  probability,  to  endeavour  to  deduce  the  real 
phenomena  from  them;  and  if ,  they  do  not  anfwer 
in  fome  tolerable  meafure,  to  rejecft  them  at  once ;  or 
if  they  do,  to  add,  expunge,  correfl,  and  improve, 
till  we  have  brought  the  hypothefis  as  near  as  we 
can  to  an  agreement  with  nature.  After  this  ic 
muft  be  left  to  be  farther  correfled  and  im.proved, 

or 


34^  Of  Propofitions,  and 

or  entirely  difproved,  by  the  light  and  evidence  re- 
flciflcd  upon  it  froin  the  contiguous,  and  even,  in  fomc 
meafure,  from  the  remote  branches  of  other  fcicnccs. 

Were  this  method  commonly  \.\{t^y  we  might  foon 
cxpedt  a  great  advancement  in  the  fcienccs.  It  would 
much  ab.ite  that  unrcafonable  fondnefs,  which  thofc 
who  make  few  or  no  di(bn6t  hypothefes,  have  for 
fuch  confufed  ones  as  occur  accidentally  to  their  ima- 
ginations, and  recur  afterwards  by  afTociation.  For 
the  ideas,  words,  and  reafonings,  belonging  to  the 
favourite  hypothefis,  by  recurring,  and  being  mucli 
agitated  in  the  brain,  heat  it,  unite  with  each  other, 
and  fo  coalefce  in  the  fame  manner,  as  genuine  trutlis 
do  from  induction  and  analogy.  Verbal  and  gram- 
matical analogies  and  coincidences  are  advanced  into 
real  ones  j  and  the  words  which  pafs  often  over  the 
car,  in  the  form  of  fubjeft  and  predicate,  are  from 
the  influence  of  other  aflbciations  made  to  adhere  to- 
gether infenfibly,  like  fubjefts  and  predicates,  that 
have  a  natural  conne(5lion.  It  is  in  vain  to  bid  an  in- 
quirer form  no  hypothefis.  Every  phaenomenon  will 
fugsreft  fomethins;  of  this  kind  :  and,  if  he  does  not 
take  care  to  ftate  fuch  as  occur  fully  and  fairly,  ar.d 
adjuft  them  one  to  another,  he  may  entertain  a  con- 
fulcd  inconfiftent  mixture  of  all,  of  fi6litious  and  real, 
poffible  and  impofTible  ;  and  become  fo  perfuaded  of 
it,  as  that  counter  afTociations  fhall  not  be  able  (o 
break  the  unnatural  bond.  But  he  that  forms  hypothefes 
from  the  firft,  and  tries  them  by  the  fids,  foon  rejedls 
the  mofl:  unlikely  ones ;  and,  being  freed  from  thefe, 
is  better  qualified  for  the  examination  of  thofe  that  are 
probable.  He  -will  alfo  confute  his  own  pofitions  fo 
often,  as  to  fluduate  in  equilibrio,  in  refped  of  pre- 
judices, and  fo  be  at  perfeft  liberty  to  follow  the 
ft/ongcrft  evidences. 

In  like  manner,  the  frequent  attempts  to  make  an 
hypothefis  that  (hail  fuit  the  phfenomena,  mud  im- 
prove a  man  in  the  method  of  doing  this  \  and  be- 
get 


the  Nature  of  Aflent.  347 

get  in  him  by  degrees  an  imperfeft;  praftical  art,  juft 
as  algebraifts  and  decypherers,  that  are  much  verfed 
in  pradice,  are  poffefled  of  innumerable  fubordinate 
artifices,  befidcs  the  principal  general  ones,  that  are 
taught  by  the  eftablifhcd  rules  of  their  artsj  and  thefe, 
though  of  the  greateft  ufe  to  themfelves,  can  fcarce 
be  explained  or  communicated  to  others.  Thefe  ar- 
tifices may  properly  be  referred  to  the  head  of  fadli- 
tious  fagacity,  being  the  refult  of  experience,  and  of 
imprefTions  often  repeated,  with  fmall  variations  from 
the  general  refemblance. 

Laftly,  The  frequent  making  of  hypothefes,  and 
.irguing  frorh  them  fynthetically,  according  to  the  fe- 
veral  variations  and  combinations  of  v^'hich  they  arc 
capable,  would  fuggeft  numerous  phaenomena,  that 
otherwife  efcape  notice,  and  lead  to  experimenta 
crucisy  not  only  in  refpe6l  of  the  hypothefis  under 
confideration,  but  of  many  others.  The  variations 
and  combinations  juft  mentioned  fuggeft  things  to 
the  invention  which  the  imagination  unaflifted  is  far 
unequal  toj  juft  as  it  would  be  impoflible  for  a  man 
CO  write  down  all  the  changes  upon  eight  bells,  unlefs 
he  had  fome  method  to  direft  him. 

But  this  nhethod  of  making  indefinite  hypothefes, 
ind  trying  them,  is  far  too  laborious  and  mortifying 
for  us  to  hope,  that  inquirers  will  in  general  purfue 
it.  It  would  be  of  great  ufe  to  fuch  as  intend  to  pur- 
fue it,  to  make  hypothefes  for  the  phenomena,  whofe 
theories  are  well  afcertained ;  fuch  as  thofe  of  the 
circulation  of  the  blood,  of  the  prefTure  of  the  air, 
of  the  different  refrangibility  of  the  rays  of  light, 
&c.  and  fee  how  they  are  gradually  compelled  into 
the  right  road,  even  from  wrong  fuppofiiions  fairly 
compared  with  the  phsenomena.  This  would  habi- 
tuate the  mind  to  a  right  method,  and  beget  the 
factitious  fagacity  above-mentioned. 

The  fecond  of  the  four  methods  propofed  is,  that 
of  bringing  the  unknown  quantity  to  an  equation, 
and  putting  it  into  a  form  fufceptible  of  all  the  al- 

"  gebraic 


^4^  Of  Propofitions,  and 

gcbraic  o|>eratIons,  Now  to  this  anlwcrs  in  philo- 
Ibjihy,  the  art  of  giving  names,  expieiring  nothing 
definite,  as  to  manner,  quantity,  &:c.  and  then  infert- 
ing  thcfe  names,  or  indefinite  terms,  in  all  the  enun- 
ciations of  the  ph;i:nomena,  to  fee  whether,  fron)  a 
comparifon  of  thefe  enunciations  with  each  other, 
where  the  terms  are  ufed  in  the  greatelT:  latitude, 
foine  reltri<5lions,  fomething  definite  in  manner,  de- 
gree or  mutual  relation,  will  not  refult.  Things, 
that  are  quite  unknown  have  often  fixed  relations  to 
one  another,  and  fomctimes  relations  to  thintrs 
known,  which,  though  not  determinable  with  cer- 
tainty and  precifion,  may  yet  be  determined  in  fome 
probable  manner,  or  within  certain  limits.  Now, 
as  in  algebra  it  is  impofTible  to  exprefs  the  relation 
of  the  unknown  quantity  to  other  quantities  known 
or  unknown,  till  it  has  a  fymbol  afTigned  to  it  of 
the  fame  kind  with  thofe  that  denote  the  others ;  fo  in 
phiiofophy  we  muft  give  names  to  unknown  quan- 
tities, qualities,  caufes,  &c.  not  in  order  to  reft  in 
them,  as  the  Ariftotelians  did,  but  to  have  a  fixed  ex- 
preffion,  under  which  to  treafure  up  all  that  can  be 
known  of  the  unknown  caufe,  &c.  in  the  imagina- 
tion and  memory,  or  in  writing  for  future  inquirers. 

But  then  it  is  neceflary  for  the  fame  reafons,  that 
thefe  terms  (hould  have  no  more  of  fecondary  ideas 
from  prior  aflociations,  than  the  terms  x  and  y  in 
algebra.  Whence,  if  we  ufe  old  terms  excluding 
the  old  aflociations,  the  reader  fhould  be  made  aware 
of  this  at  firft,  and  incidentally  reminded  of  it  after- 
wards. Sir  IJaac  Newton  has  ufed  the  words  athei'y 
attra5iion,  and  fome  others,  in  this  v.'ay,  not  refling  • 
in  them,  but  enumerating  a  great  variety  of  phaeno- 
mena  i  from  the  due  comparifon  of  which  with  eacli 
other,  and  with  fuch  as  farther  obfervation  and  ex- 
periments fhall  fuggeft,  their  laws  of  adion  will, 
perhaps,  be  dilcovcred  hereafter  j  fo  that  we  may  be 
able  to  predict  the  phenomena.     There  is  alfo  an 

inftance 


the  Nature  of  A  (Tent.  349 

Inftance  of  the  proper  manner  of  rcafoning  concern- 
ing the  knowable  relations  of  unknown  things  in 
Mr.  Medes  Clavis  Apocalyptka. 

The  third  method  is  that  of  approximating  to  the 
roots  of  equations.     Here  a  firft  pofition  is  obtained, 
which,    though    not   accurate,   approaches,    however, 
to  the  truth.     Frort)   this,  applied  to  the  equation,  a 
fecond  pofitiOn  is  deduced,  which  approaches  nearer 
to  the  truth  than  the  firfl;  from  the  fecond,  a  third,  &c, 
till  the  analyft  obtains  the  true  root,  or  fuch  an  ap- 
proximation as  is  pradlically  equivalent,   every  pre- 
ceding difcovery  being   made  the    foundation    for   a 
fubfequent  one,  and  the  equation  refolving  itfelf,  as  it 
were,    gradually.     Now  this  is   indeed   the    way,    in 
which  all  advances  in  fcience  are  carried  on  j  and  fci- 
cntiftc  perfons  are  in  general  aware,  that  it  is  and  muft 
be  fo.     However,  I  thought  it  not  improper  to  illuf- 
trate  this  general  procefs  by   a  parallel  taken   from 
algebra,  in  which  there  is  great  exaftnefs  and  beauty. 
Befides,    writers   do    not   often   difpofe    their    argu- 
ments  and   approximations  in   this   way,  though    for 
want  of  it   they    lofe   much   of  their   clearnefs   and 
force ;    and,   where  the   writer  does  this,  the  reader 
is  frequently  apt  to  Overlook  the  order  of  proofs  and 
pofitions. 

Sir  Ifaac  Newlon''s  Optics,  Chronology,  and  Com- 
ment on  Danidi  abound  with  inftanccs  to  this  pur- 
pofe ;  and  it  is  probable,  that  his  great  abilities  and 
praflice  in  algebraic  invefbigations  led  him  to  it  in- 
fenfibly.  In  his  chronology  he  firft  fhews  in  grofs, 
that  the  technical  chronology  of  the  ancient  Greeks 
led  them  to  carry  their  authorities  higher  than  the 
truth  J  and  then,  that  the  time  of  the  Sejofiris  men- 
tioned by  the  Gr^-d-;^  hiftorians  was  near  that  of  Sejac 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Tcfiam.ent;  whence  it  follows, 
that  thefe  two  perfons  were  the  fame  j  and  confe- 
quently,  that  the  exaft  time  of  SeJoJlris\  expedition 
may  now  be  fixed  by  the  Old  Teftament,     And  now, 

having 


350  Of  Propofitions,  and 

having  two  points  ablblutely  fixec],  vv&,  the  expedi- 
tions of  Sefojlris  and  Xerxes,  he  fixes  all  the  mofl:  re- 
mnrkable  intermediate  events  ;  and  thefe  being  alfo 
fixed,  he  goes  on  to  the  lefs  remarkable  ones  in  the 
Greek  hiflory.  And  the  chronology  of  the  Creeks 
being  re6f  khed,  lie  makes  i)fe  of  it  to  ie<5tify  the  cotem- 
poraiy  affairs  of  the  Egypt ianSy  /IJfyrianSy  Babylonians y 
MedeSy  and  PerfianSy  making  ufe  of  the  preceding 
ftep  every  where,  for  the  determination  of  the  fub- 
fequent  one.  He  does  alfo,  in  many  cafes,  call  light 
and  evidence  back  from  the  fubfequent  ones  upon  the 
precedent.  But  the  other  is  his  own  order  of  proof, 
and  ought  to  be  that  in  which  thofe  who  call  his  chro- 
nology in  queflion  fliould  proceed  to  inquire  into  it. 

The  fourth  and  laft  method  is  that  ufed  by  decy- 
pherers,  in  invertigacing  words  written  in  unknown 
charadteis,  or  in  known  ones  fubflituted  for  one  ano- 
ther, according  to  fecret  and  complex  law?.  The 
paiticular  methods  by  which  this  is  done  are  only 
known  to  thofe  who  ftudy  and  praftice  this  art :  how- 
ever, it  is  manifeft  in  general,  that  it  is  an  algebra 
of  its  own  kind  ;  and  that  it  bears  a  great  refem- 
blance  to  the  three  foregoing  methods ;  alfo,  that  ic 
may  be  faid  with  juftnefs  and  propriety  in  general, 
that  philofophy  is  the  art  of  decypliering  the  myfle- 
ries  of  nature ;  that  criticifm  bears  an  obvious  rela- 
tion to  decypbering ;  and  that  every  theory  which 
can  explain  all  the  pha^nomena,  has  all  the  fame  evi- 
dence in  its  favour,  that  it  is  pofTible  the  key  of  a 
cypher  can  have  from  its  explaining  that  cypher. 
And  if  the  caufe  affigned  by  the  theory  have  alfo  its 
real  exiftence  proved,  it  may  h^  compared  to  the  ex- 
planation of  a  cypher ;  which  may  be  verified  by  the 
evidence  of  the  perfon  who  writes  in  that  cypher. 

Thefe  fpeculations  may  feem  uncouth  to  thofe  who 
are  not  converfant  in  mathematical  inquiries;  but  to 
me  they  appear  to  caft  light  and  evidence  upon  the 
methods  of  purfuing  knowledge  in  other  matters,  to 

fharpen 


the  Nature  of  Aflent.  351 

ihafpen  the  natural  fagacity,  and  to  furnifh  Loci  for 
invention.  It  appears  alfo  not  impoflible,  that  future 
generations  (hould  put  all  kinds  of  evidences,  and  in- 
quiries into  mathematical  forms  j  and,  as  it  were,  re- 
duce AriJiotle\  ten  Categories,  and  bilhop  Wilkins'% 
forty  Summa  Generay  to  the  head  of  quantity  alone, 
fo  as  to  make  mathematics  and  logic,  natural  hiftory, 
and  civil  hiftory,  natural  philofophy,  and  philofophy 
of  all  other  kinds,  coincide  omni  ex  parte. 

I   will  add  two  more  remarks  relating  to  the  pre- 
fent  fubje(5t. 

Firft,  then.  As  in  many  mechanical  problems, 
which  fall  ftriftly  under  the  confideration  of  mathe- 
maticians, the  quantities  confidered  depend  on  feve- 
ral  others,  fo  as  to  increafe  in  the  fimple  or  com- 
pound, direfl  or  inverfe  ratio  of  feveral  others,  and 
not  to  be  greateft  or  leaft,  when  one  or  two  of  thefc 
are  fo,  but  when  the  faSum  of  the  proper  powers  of 
all  is  foj  fo  throughout  natural  philofophy,  in  phyfic, 
in  the  analyfis  of  the  mind,  &c.  it  is  neceffary  to  in- 
quire as  carefully  as  we  can,  upon  how  many  confi- 

.  derable  caufes  each  effe6l:  depends  j  alfo,  whether  the 
ratios  be  fimple  or  compound,  diredl  or  inverfe. 
For  though  it  will  feldom  happen,  that  one  can  bring 
the  practical  problems,  that  occur  in  real  life,  to  an 
exadt  eftimate  in  this  way,  yet  one  may  avoid  part 

.  of  that  uncertainty  and  confufion,  to  which  perfons 
who  take  things  merely  in  the  grofs,  are  liable.  Or 
in  other   words,  it  is  better  in  every  thing  to  have 

'  probable  or  tolerable  limits  for  the  datay  with  a  regu- 
lar method  of  computation,  or  even  an  approxima- 
tion thereto,  than  to  have  only  fuch  grofs  and  gene- 
ral conceptions,  as  refult  from  the  more  or  lefs  fre- 
quent recurrency  of  impreffions  j  even  though  they 
be  fomewhat  improved  by  natural  or  acquired  faga- 

,city,  arifing,  in  a  kind  of  implicit  indefinite  way, 
from  experience. 

Secondly, 


35-  ^^f  l^ropofitions,  and 

Stcondly,  It  feems  to  me,  that  tire  ;ays  of  light 
rnay  be  confidered  as  a  kind  of  fluxions  in  rcfptrdl 
of  the  biggcft  component  particles  of  matter  j  I 
mean  thofc  upon  which  Sir  JJaac  Nnvton  fuppofes  the 
colours  of  natural  bodies,  and  the  changes  ctFcdcd 
in  chemical  procclles,  to  depend.  For,  as  the  incre- 
ments of  variable  quantities,  when  diminifhed  fo  as 
to  bear  no  finite  ratio  to  the  quantities  of  which 
they  are  the  increments,  Ihew  in  a  limple  way  the 
velocities  with  which  thefe  quantities  are  increafed  ; 
and  fo  give  rife  to  the  determination  of  fluxions 
from  fluents,  and  fluents  from  fluxions,  and  to  all 
the  applications  of  thefc  determ.inations  to  real  quan- 
tities, all  which  is  entirely  grounded  upon  the  fuppofi- 
tion,  that  the  fluxions  are  not  increments,  but  relative 
nothing-;;  fo,  fmce  the  rays  of  light  are  fo  fmall  in 
rerpc(5l  of  the  biggefl:  component  particles,  as  to  be 
relatively  and  pradically  nothing  in  relpeft  of  them, 
to  bear  no  relation  to  any  of  them,  all  the  dift^crences 
obfervable  in  the  anions  of  light  upon  thefe  parti- 
cles, and  of  thefe  particles  upon  light,  will  depend 
purely  upon  the  differences  of  thefe  particles  in 
refpedl  of  one  another ;  it  not  being  poffible,  that 
any 'part  of  them  fhould  arife  from  the  comparative 
magnitude  of  light,  which  is  equally  nothing  in 
refpecl  of  them  all.  And  thus  it  feems,  that  optics 
and  chemiflry  will,  at  laft,  become  a  mafl:er-kt^y 
for  uniockinfT  the  mvfteries  in  the  conftitution  of 
natural  bodies,  according  to  the  method  recom- 
mended by  Sir  TJaac  Newton. 

Let  /^,  By  C,  be  three  particles,  whofe  magni- 
tudes are  3,  2,  and  i,  refpedively.  It  is  evident, 
that  the  mutual  influences  between  A  and  C,  B  arfd 
C,  cannot  correfpond  entirely  to  the  ratio  which  yf 
and  B  bear  to  each  other,  becaufe  C  bears  a  differ- 
ent ratio  r.0  A  from  that  which  it  bears  to  B -,  and 
this  difference  of  ratios  mull  have  its  (hare  in  the  eff^e(fl:s 

of 


the  Nature  of  Alien t.  2S2 

of  yf  and  B  upon  C:  whereas  had  C  been  a  particle 
of  light,  it  would  have  been  equally  nothing  in  refped: 
both  of  A  and  B  i  and  fo  the  mutual  influences  be- 
tween A  and  C,  B  and  C,  would  entirely  correfpond 
to  the  difference  between  A  and  5,  and  decypher  it. 
Thus  the  particles  of  light,  by  being  infinitely  fmaller 
than  the  biggeft  component  ones  of  natural  bodies, 
may  become  a  kind  of  communis  norma y  whereby  to 
meafure  their  adlive  powers. 


PROP.     LXXXVIII. 

'to  make  a  general  Application  of  the  'Theory  of  this 
and  the  foregoing  Se^ionj  to  the  fever al  Branches  of 
Science. 

All  the  fciences,  knowledge  of  all  kinds,  may 
be  reduced  to  the  {tvtn  general  heads  following, 
when  they  are  underftood  in  the  latitude  here  ex- 
prelTed. 

Firft,  Philology,  or  the  knowledge  of  words,  and 
their  fignificacions.  It  comprehends  under  it  the 
arts  of  grammar  and  criticifm.  Rhetoric  and  poetry 
may  be  referred  to  it. 

Secondly,  Mathematics,  or  the  dodrine  of  quan- 
tity. It  may  be  divided  into  three  branches,  viz. 
Arithmetic,  which  makes  ufe  of  numbers  as  the  ex- 
ponents of  quantity ;  geometry,  which  ufes  figures 
for  the  fame  purpofej  and  algebra,  which  compre- 
hends both  thefe,  and  whofe  fymbols  are  accordingly 
fo  general,  as  to  reprefent  the  fymbols  of  the  two 
foregoing  parts; 

Thirdly,  Logic,  or  the  art  of  ufing  words,  con- 
fidered  as  fymbols,  for  making  difcoveries  in  all  the 
branches  of  knowledge.  It  prefuppofes  philology  to 
a  certain  degree;  and  muft  evidently,  in  the  view 
here  given  of  it,  receive  great  illuftration  from  ma- 

VoL.  I.  A  a  thematics. 


354  0/  Propofitions,  and 

thematics,  which  is  the  art  of  making  difcoveries  in 
the  fingle  category  of  quantity,  by  means  of  the 
fimplell  kind  of  fymbols. 

Fourthly,  Natural  hiftory,  or  regular  and  well- 
digelled  accounts  of  tlie  pha^nomena  of  the  natural, 
world.  It  may  be  dillributed  into  fix  parts,  ;.  e.  into 
the  natural  hillorics  of  animals,  plants,  minerals,  the 
earch  confidered  as  a  terraqueous  globe,  the  atmo- 
fphere,  and  the  heavenly  bodies. 

Fifthly,  Civil  hiflory,  or  regular  accounts  of  the 
tranfadions  of  the  world  politic.  To  this  head  muft 
be  referred  that  part  of  geography  which  treats  of 
the  prefent  manners,  cuftoms,  laws,  religion,  &c, 
of  the  feveral  nations  of  the  world. 

Sixthly,  Natural  philofophy,  or  the  application  of 
the  arts  of  mathematics  and  logic  to  the  phasno- 
mcna  of  natural  and  civil  hiftory,  communicated 
to  us  by  means  of  our  previous  Ikill  in  philology, 
in  order  to  decypher  the  laws  by  which  the  external 
world  is  governed,  and  thereby  to  predict  or  pro- 
duce fuch  phjenomena,  as  we  are  interefted  in.  Its 
parts  are  mechanics,  hydroftatics,  pneumatics,  op- 
tics, artronomy,  chemiftry,  the  theories  of  the  fe- 
veral manual  arts  and  trades,  medicine  and  pfycho- 
logy,  or  the  theory  of  the  human  mind,  with  that  of 
the  intelledual  principles  of  brute  animals. 

Seventhly,  Religion,  which  might  alfo  be  called 
divine  philofophy.  This  requires  the  application  of 
all  the  foregoing  branches  of  knowledge  to  each  other 
in  an  endlefs  reciprocation,  in  order  to  difcover  the 
nature  of  the  invifible  world,  of  God,  of  good  and 
evil  fpirits,  and  of  the  future  Hate,  which  commences 
at  death,  with  all  the  duties  tha:  refult  from  thefe 
confiderations.  The  arts  of  ethics,  and  politics  are 
to  be  referred  to  this  head.  For,  though  thefe  arts 
are  fuppofed  to  teach  individuals,  and  bodies  politic, 
how  to  arrive  at  their  Jumnmm  bonum  in  the  prefent 
world,   yet,    fince  the  rules  given  for   this   purpofe: 

either 


the  Nature  of  AlTent,  355 

<t"ither  are  or  ought  to  be  the  fame  with  thofe  which 
teach  mankind  how  to  fecure  a  happy  futurity,  it  is 
plain,  that  thefe  arts  are  included  within  the  precepts 
of  religion. 

All  thefe  branches  of  knowledge  are  very  much 
•nvolved  in  each  other;  fo  that  it  is  impoflible  to  make 
any  -eonfiderable  progrefs  in  any  one,  without  the  af- 
Tiftance  of  moft  or  all  the  reft.  However,  each  has 
ilfo  an  independent  parr,  which  being  laid  down  as  a 
foundation,  we  may  proceed  to  improve  it  by  the 
light  afforded  from  the  independent  parts  of  the  other 
tranches.  I  will  here  fubjoin  a  few  hints  concerning 
^he  proper  manner  of  proceeding  in  each  branch, 

OF    PHILOI.OGY. 

The  rudiments  of  the  native  language  arc  learnt 
■n  infancy,  by  the  repeated  impreffions  of  the  founds, 
at  the  fame  time  that  the  things  fignified  are  prefented 
to  the  fenfes,  as  has  been  already  explained.     Words 
ftanding  for  intelledual  things,  particles,  &c.  are  de- 
cyphered   by  their  connexion  with   other  words,  by 
their  making  parts  of  fentences,  whofe  whole  import 
is  known.     Grammatical  analogy   and  derivation  do 
alio,  in  many   cafes,    difcover  the  import  of  words. 
And  many  words  m.ay  be  explained  by  definitions. 
Where  thefe  feveral-  ways   concur,  the   fenfe  is  foon 
learnt,  and   fteadily  fixed;    where  they  oppofc  each 
other,  confufion  arifes  for  a  time,  but  the  ftrongell 
authority  prevails  at  laft.     Tranflations  and  didion- 
aries   explain    the    words   of  unknown  languages   by 
thofe  of  known   ones.     Afterwards   we  decypher  by 
the    context,    deduce    the    fenfe   from    analogy,    &c. 
Thefe  laft  methods  refledl  authority  upon  the  tranf- 
lations and  didionaries,  where  they  agree  with  them. 
In   living   languages    the    import    of    the    principal 
.ivords   may   be   alcertained  v/ith   eafe  and  certainty  j 
«nd  thefe  being  fixed,  the  reft  become  determinable 

A  a  2  and 


356  Of  Propoficions,  and 

and  decyplierable  by  proper  care  and  caution,  fo  that 
no  pradtical  errors  can  remain.     In  dead  languages 
the  difficiiky  is  greater ;  but  the  certainty  that  ulti- 
mately refulcs,  is  not  Icfs  |^>radically  in  refpedl  of  the 
bulk  of  the  language,  on  account  of  the  number  of 
coincidences.     But  much  remains  undone  yet,  parti- 
cularly  in   refpeft  of  the  Hebrew  language,     l^ogic, 
natural  and  civil  hiftory,  philofophical  and   leligions 
knowledge,   may  all,   in  their  fevcral  ways,  contribute 
to   fix  the  true  fenfe  of  words.     And  the  fixing  the 
fenfes  of  words,  by  all  the  methods  here  enumerated, 
may   be  called  the  art   of  making  diftionaries.      It 
receives  great  afTiftance  from  the  art  of  grammar  j 
and  is  at  the  fame  time  the   main  foundation  of  it.  I 
This  lafl  art  has  alfo  the  fame  connexions  with  the 
other  branches  of  knowledge;  as   that  of  fixing  the 
fenfes  of  words.     The  fame  may  be  faid  of  criticifm  j 
which  may  be  defined   the  art  of  reitoring  the  cor-  , 
rupted  pafiages  of  authors,  and  afcertaining  their  ge- 
nuine fenfe,  and  method  of  reafoning. 

In  all  thefe  things  there  feems  to  be  a  fufficient 
faundation  for  unity  of  opinion  amongft  thofe  that 
are  truly  learned  and  candid ;  at  leaft  in  all  important 
points.  And,  in  fad,  the  differences  here  amongft 
the  literati^  are  plainly  owing,  in  great  meafure,  to 
ambition,  envy,  affedation  of  fingularity  and  no- 
velty, &c.  All  thefe  things  magnify  the  ideas  and 
coalefcence?,  which  a  man  calls  his  own,  ihofe  of  his 
party,  &c.  aQbciate  ideas  of  truth,  excellence,  genius, 
&c.  to  them,  and  oppofite  ones  to  all  that  the 
fuppofed  adverfary  delivers. 

No  fceptic  can  proceed  fo  far  as  to  difclaim  the 
fenfe  of  the  words  of  his  native  tongue,  or  of  a. 
foreign  one,  which  he  undcrftands/  The  things  figni- 
fied  thereby  muft  and  will  be  fuggefted  by,  and 
coalefce  with,  the  founds;  fo  that  he  cannot  but  under- 
ftand  what  he  hears  and  reads.     And  this  is  all  the 

trutb 


the  Nature  ^  xVflenr.  ^57 

truth  that  belongs  to  philology  as  fuch.  The  truth 
of  t!ie  things  exprefled  in  words  is  a  confideration 
belonging  to  the  feveral  other  branches  of  knowledge 
refpedively. 

As  the  plain  dida6lic  ftyle  is  intended  merely  to 
inform  the  underftanding,  fo  the  rhetorical  and  poe- 
tical ftyles  are  intended  to  excite  the  paflions  by  the 
aflbciations,  which  figurative  terms  and  forms  of 
expreffion,  flowing  periods,  numbers,  rhymes,  fimi- 
les,  fables,  fiftions,  &c.  draw  after  them. 

Painting  and  mufic  produce  a  like  effe(fl  upon  the 
pafTions  as  rhetoric  and  poetry,  and  by  means  that 
are  not  very  unlike.  But  I  Ihall  have  occafion  here- 
after to  fay  fomething  more  concerning  all  thefe  ima- 
ginative arts. 

OF    MATHEMATICS." 

Mathematics  are  that  branch  of  knowledge  which  is 
the  moft  independent  of  any,  and  the  leaft  liable  to 
uncertainty,  difference  of  opinion,  and  fceptical 
doubts.  However,  uncertainties,  differences,  and 
doubts,  have  arifen  here ;  but  then  they  have  been 
chiefly  about  fuch  parts  of  mathematics  as  fall  under 
the  confideration  of  the  logician.  For,  it  feems 
impoffible  that  a  man  who  has  qualified  himfelf  duly, 
fhould  doubt  about  the  juftnefs  of  an  arithmetical, 
algebraical,  or  fiuxional  operation,  or  the  conclufive- 
nefs  of  a  geom.etrical  demonftration. 

The  words  point,  line,  furface.  infinitely  great, 
infinitely  little,  are  all  capable  of  definitions,  at 
leaft  of  being  explained  by  other  words.  But  then 
thefe  words  cannot  fuggeft  any  vifible  ideas  to 
the  imagination,  but  what  are  inconfiftent  with  the 
very  words  themfelves.  Plowever,  this  inconfift- 
ency  has  no  effeft  upon  the  reafoning.  It  is  evident, 
that  all  that  can  be  meant  by  the  three  angles  of  a 
triangle  being  equal  to  two  right  ones,  or  the  para- 
bolic area  to  t  of  the  circumfcribing  parallelogram, 

A  a  3  or 


3i^  Of  Propofitions,  and 

or  deduced  from  thefe  pofitions,  miift  always  hold  in 
future  fadt ;  and  this,  as  obfcrvcd  above,  is  all  the 
truth  that  any  thing  can  liavc.  In  ikixional  conclu- 
fions  it  is  demonflrativcly  evident,  that  the  quantity 
under  confidcration  cannot  be  greater  or  Icfs  by  any 
thing  afTignablc,  than  according  to  the  fluxional  con- 
clufion ;  and  this  frems  to  nie  entirely  the  fame 
thing  as  proving  it  to  be  equal. 

I  cannot  j)rerumc  to  fuggeft  any  particular  me- 
thods by  which  faither  difcoveries  may  be  made  in 
^  m.uhematical  matters,  which  are  fo  far  advanced, 
that  few  perfons  are  able  to  comprehend  even  what 
is  difcovered  and  unfolded  already.  However,  it  may 
not  be  amifs  to  obferve,  that  all  the  operations  of 
arithmetic,  geometry,  and  algebra,  fliould  be  ap- 
plieil  to  each  other  in  every  polTible  way,  fo  as  to  find 
out  in  each  fomething  analogous  to  what  is  already 
known  and  eftablifhed  in  the  other  two.  The  appli- 
cation of  the  arithmetical  ojierations  of  divifion  and 
extraction  of  roots  to  algebraic  quantities,  and  of  the 
method  of  obtaining  the  roots  of  numeral  equations 
by  approximation  to  fpecious  ones,  as  taught  by  Sir 
JJaac  NewtoHy  have  been  the  fources  of  the  greateft. 
fluxional  difcoveries. 

OF     LOGIC. 

It  is  the  purport  of  this  and  the  foregoing  fetlion, 
to  give  imperfc6l  rudiments  of  fuch  an  art  of  logic, 
as  is  defined  above,  i.  e.  as  fliould  make  ufe  of  words 
in  the  way  of  mathematical  fymbols,  and  proceed 
by  mathematical  methods  of  invefligation  and  com- 
putation in  inquiries  of  Jfll  forts.  Not  that  the  data 
in  the  fciences  are  as  yet,  in  general,  ripe  for  fuch 
methods  j  but  they  feem  to  tend  to  this,  more  and 
more  per[.^etually,  in  particular  branches,  fo  that  it 
cannot  be  amifs  to  prepare  ourfelves,  in  fome  mea- 

fure,  previoufly. 

Logic, 


the  Nature  z/  A  (Tent.  ^59 

Logic,  and  metaphyfics,  which  are  nearly  allied 
to  logic,  feem  more  involved  in  obfcurity  and  per- 
plexity, than  any  other  part  of  fcience.  This  has 
probably  been  the  chief  fource  of  fcepticilm,  fince  it 
appears  necelTary,  that  that  part  of  knowledge,  which 
is  the  bafis  of  all  others,  which  is  to  fhew  whereia 
certainty,  probability,  poffibility,  improbability,  and 
impoffibiiity,  confift,  Ihould  itfelf  be  free  from  all 
doubt  and  uncertainty. 

It  feems  alio,  that  as  logic  is  required  for  the  bafis 
of  the  other  fciences,  fo  a  logic  of  a  fecond  order  is 
required  for  a  bafis  to  that  of  the  fiift,  of  a   third  for 
that  of  the  fecond,  and  (o  on  fine  limit e  :  which,  if  ic 
were  true,  v/ould,  from  the  nature  of  dependent  evi- 
dences, prove  that   logic   is   either  abfolutely  certain, 
or  abfolutely   void  of  all   probability.      For,    if  the 
evidence  for  it  be  ever  fo  little  inferior  to  unity,  ic 
will,  by  the  continual  infi^nite  multiplication  required 
in    dependent   evidences   infinitely   continued,    bring 
itfelf  down   to  nothing.     Therefore,  e  converjo^  fince 
no  one  can   fay,  that  the  rules  of  logic  are  void  of  all 
probability,  the  Jummum  genus  of  them  mufl:  be  cer- 
tain.    This/ummum  genus  is  the  neceiTary  coalefcence 
of  the  fubjedt  with  the  predicate.     But  the  argument 
here  alleged  is   merely   one  ad  homineiiij  and  not  the 
natural  way   of  treating   the  lubje6t.     The  necelTary 
coalefcence  jull  fpoken  of  carries    its  own   evidence 
with  it.     It   is  neceffary  from  the  nature  of  the  brain, 
and  that    in    the    mod    confirmed    fceotic,     as    well 
as  in  any  other   perfon.     And   we  need  oniy  inquire 
nto   the   hiftory   of  the   brain,  and  the   phyfiological 
nfluences  of  words  and  fymbols  upon  it  by  affociation, 
n   order  to  fee  this.     I   am   alfo  inclined  to  believe, 
that  the  method  here   propofed   of  confidering   words 
and   fentences  as    impreifions,     whofe  influence  upon 
tht  mind  is  entirely   to  be  determined   by   the  affo- 
ciations    heaped    upon    them    in   the    intercourfes    of 
life,  and  endeavouring  to  determine  thefe  aiTociations, 

A  a  4  both 


360  0/  Propofitions,  ^«^ 

both  analytically  and  fynthetically,  will  caft  much 
light  upon  logical  fubjedts,  and  cut  off  the  lources 
of  many  doubts  and  differences. 

As  the  theories  of  all  other  arts  and  fcicnces  muft 
be  extra£led  from  ihein,  fo  logic,  which  contains 
the  theory  of  all  ihefe  theories,  muft  be  extradcd 
from  thefe  theories;  and  yet  this  is  not  to  reafon 
in  a  circle  in  either  cafe,  fince  the  theory  is  firft 
cxtrafled  from  felf-cvident  or  allowed  particulars, 
and  then  applied  to  particulars  not  yet  known,  in 
Older  to  difcovcr  and  prove  thtm. 

It  may  not  be  amifs  here  to  take  notice  how  far 
the  theory  of  thefe  papers  has  led  me  to  differ,  in  re- 
fpeift  of  logic,  from  Mr.  ljocke%  excellent  EJJay  on 
Human  Under  ft  anding,  to  which  the  world  are  fo 
much  indeb:ed  for  removing  prejudices  and  incum- 
brances, and  advancing  real  and  uleful  knowledge. 

Firft,  then,  It  appears  to  me,  that  all  the  moft 
complex  ideas  arife  from  fenfation ;  and  that  re- 
fleftion  is  not  a  diftind  fource,  as  Mr,  Locke  makes 
iti 

Secondly,  Mr.  Locke  afcribes  ideas  to  many  words, 
which,  as  I  have  defined  idea,  cannot  be  faid  to  have 
any  immediate  and  precife  onesj  but  only  to  admit 
of  definitions.  However,  lee  definition  be  fubfti- 
tuted  iuftead  of  idea,  in  thefe  cafes,  and  then  all  Mr. 
Locke's  excellent  rules  concerning  words,  delivered 
in  his  third  book,  will  fuit  the  theory  of  thefe  papers. 

As  to   the  firft   difference,  which  I  think  may  be 

\ called  an  error  in  Mr.  Locke,  it  is,  however,  of  little 

Iconfequence.       We    may    conceive,    that    he    called 

fuch  ideas  as  he  could  analyfe  up  to  fenfation,  ideas 

of  fenfation  j   the   reft   ideas    of  reflexion,  ufing   re- 

•  flcftion    as   a    term    of    art,    denoting    an    unknown 

quantity.     Befides   which   it  may   be   remarked,  that 

the   words   which,  according  to  him,  ftand  for  ideas 

of  rtfledtion,  are,  in  general,  words,   that,   according 

to  the  theory  of  thefe  papers,   have  no   ideas,  but 

defi- 


the  Nature  of  Afient.  361 

definitions  only.  And  thus  the  firft  differcncf,  is  as 
\z  were,  taken  away  by  the  fecond  j  for,  if  ihefe 
words  have  no  immediate  ideas,  there  will  be  no  oc- 
cafion  to  have  recourfe  to  reflefbion  as  a  foiirce  of 
ideas  j  and,  upon  the  whole,  there  is  no  material  re- 
pugnancy between  the  confequcnces  of  this  theory, 
and  any  thing  advanced  by  Mr.  Locke. 

The  ingenious  bifhop  Berkeley  has  juftly  obferved 
againft  Mr.  Lockcy  that  there  can  be  no  fuch  thing 
IS  abftradt  ideas,  in  the  proper  fenfe  of  the  word  idea. 
However,  this  does  not  feem  to  vitiate  any  confider- 
able  part  of  Mr.  Locke's  reafoning.  Subftitute  defi- 
nition for  idea  in  the  proper  places,  and  his  conclufions 
will  hold  good  in  general. 


OF    NATURAL    HISTORY. 

Natural  hiftory  is  a  branch  of  knowledge,  which, 
3t  the  firlt  view,  appears  to  have  a  boundlefs  extent, 
and  to  be  capable  of  the  utmoft  pradical  precifion 
and  certainty,  if  fufficient  care  and  induftry  be  em- 
ployed. And,  in  fa6l:,  the  doubts  and  differences  here 
are  not  very  confiderable  j  they  do  alfo  grow  lefs  and 
lefs  every  day,  by  the  great  quantity  of  knowledge 
of  this  kind,  which  is  poured  in  from  all  quarters,  as 
learning  and  inquifitivenefs  diffufe  them.felves  more 
and  more  amongft  all  nations,  and  all  orders  of 
men. 

The  materials  for  natural  hiftory,  which  any  fingle 
perfon  can  colled  from  his  own  obfervation,  being 
very  inconfiderable,  in  refpeft  of  thofe  which  he  wants, 
he  is  obliged  to  have  recourfe  to  others  j  and  there- 
fore muft  depend  upon  their  teftimony,  juft  as  in  civil 
hiftory.  And  our  aflent  in  each  cafe,  being  excited 
by  a  variety  of  concurrent  proofs,  and  o{  coincident 
circumftances,  transfers  part  of  its  authority  upon  the 
other.     We  believe  teftimony  in  natural  hiftory,  be- 

caufe 


362  Of  Propofitions,  and 

caufe  do  we  in  civil,  and  vice  vcrja  ;  and  have  a  vari- 
ety of  concurrent  conliimations  in  both  cafes. 

1  lowever,  as  the  general  fails  are  thus  practically 
certain,  fo  the  fubordinate  ones  are,  in  many  cafes, 
liable  to  doubts.  And  it  is  evident,  that  for  the  re-, 
foUition  of  thtle  doubts  in  natural  hiftory,  \vc  inufl: 
borrow  the  affillance  of  all  the  other  branches  of  fci- 
ence<  and  that  fome  Ikill  in  philology  mu(l  be  attain- 
ed, before  we  can  hope  to  arrive  at  any  tolerable  per- 
fcdion  in  natural  or  civil  hillory.  Natural  hiftory 
is  the  only  fure  bafis  of  natural  philofophy,  and  has 
fome  influence  upon  all  the  other  fciences. 


OF    CIVIL    HISTORY. 

The  general  evidences  upon  which  civil  hillory 
is  grounded,  have  been  juft  hinted  at.  It  is  manifeft, 
that  the  difcoveries  of  natural  hiftorians,  aftrono- 
mers,  linguifts,  antiquaries,  and  philofophers  of  all 
kinds,  have  brought  great  light  and  evidence  upon 
this  branch  of  knowledge  within  the  laft  two  cen- 
turies J  and  are  likely  to  do  fo  more  and  more. 

The  ancient  hiftory  of  the  kingdoms  oi  Afia  Minor^ 
Kgypt,  and  Greece.,  will  probably  be  much  better 
underftood,  when  the  inhabitants  of  thofe  countries 
become  learned. 

He  that  would  fearch  into  the  firft  ages  of  the 
world,  muft  take  the  fcriptures  for  his  guide,  lay 
down  the  truth  of  thefe  as  unqueftionable,  and  force 
all  other  evidences  into  that  pofition.  This  feems  to 
have  been  the  method  taken  by  Sir  IJaac  Newton  in 
his  Chronology,  and  which  at  laft  unfolded  to  him 
the  proper  method  of  detecting  and  corredling  the 
miftakes  in  the  ancient  technical  chronology  of  the 
Creeks  by  icfelf. 

The  concurrent  independent  evidences  in  the  grand 
points  of  hiftory  are  fo  much  more  numerous  than 

the 


j;i 


the  Nature  of  Aflent.  2^3 

the  dependent  ones,  and    mod   of  thenn    fo   ftrong, 

fingly    taken,    that   the  deficiency   from  certainty   in 

thefe   grand    points    cannot    be   diftinguifhed   by   the 

jiuman  mind.     And  therefore   it  is   a  pradlical  error 

of    great    importance    to  fuppofe,   that  fuch  kind  of 

^iftorical  evidences  are  inferior  to  mathematical  ones. 

They  are  equal,  as  far  as  we  have  any  thing  to  do 

ith  them,  i.  e,  can  judge  of  them,  or  be  influenced 

'/  them.     All  future  facts  depending  on  them  have 

s  good  a  bafis,  as  thofe  depending  on  mathematical 

vidences.     I   fpeak  here  of  principal  matters,   fuch 

as  the  conquefts  of  Alexander  and  Julius  Cajar,  and 

the   main   hiflory,  common   and   miraculous,    of  the 

Old  and  New  Teftaments.     Till  our  knowledge  be 

applied   to  the   prediding  or  producing  future  fafts, 

a  fort  of  it  is  of  ufe  or  importance  to  usj  and  the 

pplication    of    mathematical    knowledge   is  juft   as 

nuch  expofed  to  the  feveral  kinds  and   degrees   of 

JHcertainty,  as  that  of  any  other.     That  the  evidence 

■IT   principal   hiftorical  fads   is  not,  in  general,  con- 

iidered  as  equal  to  mathematical  certainty,  arifes  partly 

/rom    the    juft-m.entioned    ill-grounded    affirmations 

of  learned  mjen ;  partly  from  the  complexnefs  of  the 

Oiflorical  proofs,  which  require  time  and  confideration 

o  digefl  them  j  and  partly   becaule  the  uncertainty 

attending  fubordinate   fads  has   diluted  the  evidence 

of  the  principal   and  unqueftionable  ones,    fince  the 

ame  general  forms  of  exprefTion  are,  and  muft  be, 

.ifed  in  both  cafes. 

OF    NATURAL    PHILOSOPHY. 

It  may  be  obferved  of  natural  philofophy,  that 
in  ihe  parts  where  the  ideas  are  fimple,  clear,  and  of 
the  vifible  kind,  or  adequately  expounded  by  fuch, 
and  the  method  of  inveftigation  and  computation 
mathematical,  as  in  mechanics,  hydroftatics,  pneu- 
matics, optica,  and   aflronomy,  the   doubts   and   di- 

verficies 


364  Of  Propofuions,  and 

verficifs  of  opinion  which  arife,  arc  inconfidcrable. 
But  in  the  theories  of  chemilhy,  of  manunl  arts  and 
trades,  of  medicine,  and,  in  general,  of  the  powers 
and  mutual  adions  of  the  fmall  parts  of  matter,  the 
uncertainties  and  perplexities  are  as  great,  as  in  any 
part  of  fcience.  For  the  fmall  parts  of  matter,  with 
their  aftions,  are '  too  minute  to  be  the  objedls  of 
fight;  and  we  are  as  yet  neither  poflcflcd  of  a  detail 
of  the  phjcnomena  fufficiently  copious  and  regular, 
whereon  to  ground  an  invclligation  ;  nor  of  a  method 
of  inveftigaiion  fubtle  enough  to  arrive  at  the  fubtleiy 
of  nature,  even  in  the  biggeft  component  particles, 
much  lefs  in  the  particles  of  the  fmaller  orders  j  and 
how  far  the  number  of  orders  may  go,  is  impolTible 
to  fay.  I  fee  no  contradi6lion  in  fuppofing  it  in- 
finite, and  a  great  difficulty  in  flopping  at  any  par- 
ticular fize. 

Suppole  the  number  of  orders  of  particles  infinite, 
or  at  leaft  very  great ;  and  that  particles  of  all  orders 
are  perpetually  flying  off"  from  all  bodies  with  great  .1 
velocity.  Firft,  This  may  occafion  the  gravitation  ' 
of  the  great  bodies  of  the  univerfe  to  each  other,  by  "', 
the  impulfe  of  the  fmaller  corpufcles  upon  particles  \ 
of  fizes  equal  to  each  other  in  the  greater  bodies,  the 
impulfes  of  the  larger  corpufcles,  and  upon  particles, 
of  unequal  fize,  being  evanefcent  in  refpe6t  of  the 
foregoing  impuifes.  But  where  particles  approach 
near  to  one  another,  and  the  corpufcles  bear  fomc 
finite  ratio  to  the  particles.  To  as  not  to  pervade  them 
freely,  before  they  come  to  particles  of  equal  fize  to 
each  other,  but  affeft  them  in  proportion  to  their 
furfaces,  not  folid  content,  and  I  fuppole  from  many 
other  caufcs,  attraflions  of  other  kinds  may  arife: 
and  if  one  or  both  of  the  contiguous  particles  fend  out 
many  co'pufcles  with  great  force;  alfo,  if  ihcfe  cor- 
pufcles effcrvefce  together  in  the  intermediate  fpace, 
and  gain  new  forces  thence,  &c.  repulfive  powers 
may  rife.     If  it  be  reafonable  to  fuppofe  many  orders 

of 


the  Nature  of  Afient.  2^^ 

of  particles,  it  is  alfo  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that 
their  powers  and  properties  are  fomcwhat  analogous 
to  one  another  J  and  that  thofe  of  the  larger  particles 
arife  from,  and  are  compounded  of,  thofe  of  the 
next  lefs  in  fize,  and  fo  onj  juft  as  the  whole 
gravity  of  the  moon  is  compounded  of  the  gravity 
of  all  its  parts.  But  thefe  are  all  very  grofs  and 
uncertain  conjedures. 

In  the  mean  time,  it  feems  proper  to  ufe  the  words 
magnctifm,  eleftricity,  attradion  of  cohefion,  j(p/n7«j 
.eflovj    acrimony     of    the    animal    juices,    &:c.     as 
terms  of  art,   as  unknown  caufes  of  known  efFeds. 
But  then  they  ought  always  to  be  defined,  the  dcfini- 
dons  rigorouOy  kept  to,  and  all  fecondary  ideas  from 
'3rior  affociations  excluded.     Were  this  done  in  che- 
niftry   and  medicine,  it  would   produce  a  great  re- 
formation, and  at  once  cut  off  many  incumbrances, 
perplexities     and    obfcurities.      The    vis    inertia  of 
bodies,    and  the  equivalent  ternfts,  were  once  terms 
of  this  kind,  (landing  for  the  unknown  caufe  of  known 
phaenomena.      By   degrees    thefe    phenomena   were 
digefted   into  order,  the  terms  contributing  thereto, 
and  the  three  feveral  kinds  of  them,  claffed  refpec- 
tively  under  the  three  laws  of  nature,    which    have 
been    applied  fynthetically  fince,   and   given   rife   to 
the  greateft  mechanical  difcoveries.     The  fame  may 
be  obferved  of  gravity.     And  if  the  laws  of  magnc- 
tifm,   ele6lricity,    and     the     attraction    of    cohefion, 
could  be  afcertained  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  laws 
of  the  vis  inertia  and   gravity,  we  fhould   be  enabled 
to  predict  and  produce  many  effedls  of  great  impor- 
tance to  us. 

It  is  of  the  higheft  ufe  to  us  in  pra6tical  matters, 
that  the  properties  of  bodies  are  fo  clofely  conneded 
with  each  other.  Thus  the  colour  and  fpecific  gra- 
vity of  a  metal,  the  vifible  idea  of  a  plant,  alfo  its 
tafte  or  fmell,  give  us  a  praftical  certainty  in  refpedt 
of  all  the  other  properties.     This  clofe  connexion  of 

the 


j66  Of  Propofitions,  and      " 

the  properties  follows  undoubtedly  from  the  powers 
and  muiual  adions  of  the  iVnall  parts;  lb  that,  if  wc 
could  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  ihcfe  laft,  we  Ihould 
immediately  fee  not  only  the  reafon  of  all  the  proper- 
ties of  bodies,  which  are  known  at  prefent,  but  be 
able  to  difcover  innumerable  other  rchitive  ones.  In 
the  mean  time  wc  mult  endeavour  to  difcover,  digeft, 
and  legirtcr,  the  various  proj^erties  of  natural  bodies,  J 
as  they  rife  to  view  from  fuitable  experiments ;  and  * 
thus  j)repare  the  way  for  thofe  who  fliail  heieafter 
decyphcr  tiicir  internal  confticution. 


OK    RELIGION. 

All   the  foregoing  branches  of  knowledge  ought  to 

be  confidcred  as  mere  preparatories  and  preliminaries 

to  the  knowledge  of  religion,  natural   and   revealed. 

They  all,  in  their  feveral  orders  and  degrees,  concur 

to  eltablilh  the  principal  dodlrines  and   duties  of  it; 

and  thefe,  when  eftabliflied,  become  the   beft   means   ^ 

for   attaining  knowledge.      The   benevolence  of  the 

Deitv,  and  the  do6lrine  of  final  caufes,  are  the  beft    ! 

clue  for  guiding  us  through  the  labyrinths   of  natural    , 

phasnomena,  and  particularly  of  thofe  which  relate  to 

animals.      The  fcriptures   are  the  only   book  which    / 

can   give   us  any  juft  idea  of  ancient  times,   of  the    ■' 

original  of  mankind,   their  difperfion,  &:c.  or  of  what 

will  befal  them   in  future  generations.     As  to  future 

things,    predidted   in  the   fcriptures,    we  can    as    yet 

colled   nothing   more  than   general  intimations ;   but 

thf re  is  reafon  to  believe,  that  fucceeding  generations . 

may  arrive    at  a  far    more    prccife    interpretation   of 

prophecy.      It  may   alfo  be,  that  much  philofophical 

knowledge  is  concealed  in  the  fcriptures ;  and  that  it 

-will  be  revealed  in  its  due  time.    The  analogy  between 

the  word  and  works  of  God,    which  is  a  confideration 

of  the   religious    kind,    f;ems    to    comprehend    the 

mofr 


■is 


-»    the  Nature  of  Aflent.  ^67 

moft  important  truths.  To  all  this  it  muft  be  added, 
that  the  temper  of  mind  prefcribed  by  religion,  viz. 
jr.odefty,  impartiality,  fobriety,  and  diligence,  are 
•  he  bell  qualifications  for  fucceeding  in  all  inquiries. 
iMius   religion   comprehends,    as   it   were,    all  other 

lowledge,  advances,  and  is  advanced  by  all  j  at  the 
iame  time  that  where  there  is  a  morally  good  difpofition, 
a  very  fmall  portion  of  other  knowledge  is  fufficient 
for  the  attainment  of  all  that  is  neceflary  for  virtue 

id  comfort  here,  and  eternal  happinefs  hereafter. 
The  great  differences  of  opinion,  and  contentions 

hich  happen  in  religious  matters,  are  plainly  owing 
to  the  violence  of  men's  paflions,  more  than  to 
any  other  caufe.  Where  religion  has  its  due  effecft 
in  reftraining  thefe,  and  begetting  true  candour,  we 
may  expedt  a   unity   of  opinion,    both    in   religious 

id  other  matters,  as  far  as  is  neceflary  for  ufeful 

adical  purpofes. 


SECT. 


';68  Of  the  Affcdions  in  general. 

SECT.     III. 

OF    THE    AFFECTIONS    IN    GENERAL. 

PRO  P.     l.XXXIX. 

'To  explain  the  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Paffwns  in 

general. 

Here  we  may  obfcrve,  > 

Fir  ft,  Thac  our  pafTions  or  affe(5lions  can  be  no 
more  than  aggregates  of  fimple  ideas  united  by  aiTo- 
ciation.  For  they  are  excited  by  objedls,  and  by 
the  incidents  of  life.  But  thcfe,  if  we  except  the 
imprefled  fenfations,  can  have  no  power  of  affeding 
us,  but  what  they  derive  from  affociation  j  juft  as 
was  obferved  above  of  words  and  fcntences. 

Secondly,  Since  therefore  the  pafTions  are  ftates 
of  confiderable  pleafure  or  pain,  they  muft  be  aggre-\ 
gates  of  the  ideas,  or  traces  of  the  fenfible  pleafures 
and  pains,  which  ideas  make  up  by  their  number, 
and  mutual  influence  upon  one  another,  for  the  faint- 
nefs  and  tranfitory  nature  of  each  fingly  taken.  This 
may  be  called  a  proof  a  priori.  The  proof  a  pofie- 
riori  will  be  given,  when  I  come  to  analyfe  the  fix 
claflfcs  of  intelleftual  affedlions,  viz.  imagination, 
ambition,  felf-intereft,  fympathy,  theopathy,  and  the 
moral  fenfe. 

Thirdly,  As  fcnfation  is  the  common  foundation 
of  all  thefe,  lb  each  in  its  turn,  when  fufficiently 
generated,  contributes  to  generate  and  model  all  the 
reft.  We  may  conceive  this  to  be  done  in  the  follow- 
ing manner.  Let  fenfation  generate  imagination  j 
then  will  fenfation  and  imagination  together  generate 
ambition  j     fenfation,     imagination,     and    ambition, 

fdf- 


Of  the  Affeflions  in  general,  ^^^ 

lelT-intereft ;  fenfation,  imagination,  ambition,  and 
felf-intercft,  fympathy  j  fenfation,  imagination,  am- 
bition, fclf-interell,  and  fympathy,  theopatiiy  j  fen- 
fation, imagination,  ambition,  felf-intereft,  fympa- 
thy, and  theopachy,  the  moral  fenfe :  and,  in  an 
inverted  order,  imagination  will  new-model  fenfa- 
tion ;  ambition,  fenfation  and  imagination  j  felf- 
intereft,  fenfation,  imagination,  and  ambition  j  fym- 
patliy,  fenfation,  imagination,  ambition,  and  felf- 
intereO:  J  theopathy,  fenfation,  imagination,  ambi- 
tion, felf-intereft,  and  fympathy  ;  and  the  moral 
fenfe,  fenfation,  imagination,  ambition,  felf-intereft, 
fympathy,  and  theopathy  :  till  at  laft,  by  the  nu- 
merous reciprocal  influences  of  all  thefe  upon  each 
other,  the  pafllons  arrive  at  that  degree  of  complex- 
nefs,  which  is  obferved  in  fad,  and  which  makes 
them  fo  difficult  to  be  analyfed. 

Fourthly,  As  all  the  paffions  arife  thus  from  plea- 
fure  and  pain,  their  firft  and  moft  general  diftribution 
may  be  into  the  two  clafTes  of  love  and  hatred,  /.  e. 
we  may  term  all  thofe  affe6tions  of  the  pleafurable 
kind,  which  objedls  and  incidents  raifc  in  us,  love; 
all  thofe  of  the  painful  kind,  hatred.  Thus  we 
are  faid  to  love  not  only  intelligent  agents  of  morally 
good  difpofitions,  but  alfo  fenfual  pleafures,  riches, 
and  honours ;  and  to  hate  poverty,  difgracc,  and 
pain,  bodily  and  mental. 

Fifthly,  When  our  love  and  hatred  are  excited  to 
a  certain  degree,  they  put  us  upon  a  variety  of 
actions,  and  may  be  termed  defire  and  averfion ; 
by  which  laft  word  I  underftand  an  adlive  hatred. 
Now  the  adions  which  flow  from  defire  and  averfion, 
are  entirely  the  refuk  of  alfociatcd  powers  and  cir-  \ 
cumftances,  agreeably  to  the  twentieth,  tvventy-firft, 
ij  and  twenty-fecond  propofitions,  with  their  corollaries, ,', 
The  young  child  learns  to  grafp,  and  go  up  to  the 
play-thing  that  pleafes  him,  and  to  withdraw  his  hand 
from  the  fire  that  burns  him,  at  firft  from  the  me- 
VoL.  1.  B  b  chanifm 


370  Of  the  AilVcflions  in  general. 

chanifm  of  his  n.icure,  .ind  witliout  any  deliberate  pur- 
pole  oi  obtaining  pleafure,  and  avoiding  pain,  or  any 
explicit  reafoning  about  them.      By  degrees  he  learns, 
)  partly  from  the  recurrency  of  ihefe   mechanical  ten- 
dencies, infpired  by  God,  as  one  may  fay,  by  means 
of  the  nature  which  he  has  given  us  j  and  partly  from 
the    inftrucftion    and    imitation   of  others  ;    to   purfue 
every  thing  which  he  loves  and  defires ;  fly  from  every 
thing  which  lie  hates ;  and  to'reafon  about  the  method 
of  doing  this,  jull  as  he  does  upon  other  matters.    And, 
becaufc   mankind   are  for   the   moft  part  purfuing  or 
avoiding  fomething  or  other,  the  defnc  of  hapj)inefs, 
and  the  averfion  to  mifery,  are  fuppofed  to  be  infepa* 
rable    from,    and   efl'tntial   to,  all   intelligent   natures. 
But  this  does  not  feem  to  be  an  exadt  or  corred  way 
of  fpeaking.     The   moft  general  of  our  defires  and 
aveifions    aie    faiflitions,    r.  e.   generated    by    aftbcia- 
tion ;    and    therefore    admit    of  intervals,    augmenta- 
tions, and  diminutions.     And,  whoever  will  be  fuffi- 
ciently  attentive   to   the   workings  of  his   own   mind, 
and  the  adlions  refulting  therefrom,  or  to  the  actions 
of  others,  and  the  afFedlions  which  may  be  fuppofed 
to  occafion  them,  will  find  fuch  differences  and  fin- 
gularities  in  different  perfons,  and  in  the  fame  perfon 
at  different  times,  as   no  way  agree  to  the  notion  of 
an   effential,  original,    perpetual   defire    of  happinefs, 
and    endeavour    to    attain    it ;    but    much    rather    to 
the  faftitious   affociated   defires   and  endeavours  her£ 
affrrted.     And  a  due  regard  to  this   will,  as   it  feems 
to  me,  folve  many   difficulties   and  perplexities  found 
in  treatifes  upon  the  pafllons.     The  writers  upon  this 
fubjeft  have  begun  in  the  fynthetical   method  prema- 
turely,   and    without    having    prcmifed  the   analytical 
one.     For   it  is   very   true,  that,  after  general  defires 
and  endeavours  are  generated,  they   give  rife  in  their 
turn  to  a  variety  of  particular  ones.     But  the  origi- 
nal fource  is  in   the  particular  ones,  and   the  general 
ones  never  alter  and  new-model  the  particular  ones  lb 

much, 


Of  the  AfFeftions  in  general.  -371 

much,  as  that  there  are  not  many  traces  and  veftiges 
of  their  oiiginal  mechanical  nature  and  proportions 


remainins;. 


Sixthly,  The  will  appears  to  be  nothing  but  a  de- 
fire  or  averfion  fufficiently  ftrong  to  produce  an  aflioii 
that  is  not  automatic  primarily  or  fecondarily.  An 
leaft  it  appears  to  me,  that  the  fubllitution  of  thefe 
words  for  the  word  iv'iU  may  be  juftified  by  the 
common  ufage  of  language.  The  will  is  therefore 
that  defire  or  averfion,  which  is  ftrongeft  for  the 
then  prcfent  time.  For  if  any  other  defue  was 
flronger,  the  mufcular  motion  conneded  with  it  by 
aflbciation  would  take  place,  and  not  that  which  pro- 
ceeds from  the  will,  or  the  voluntary  one,  which  is 
contrary  to  the  fuppofition.  Since  therefore  all  love 
and  hatred,  all  defire  and  averfion,  are  faditious, 
and  generated  by  aflfociation,  u  e.  mechanically ;  it 
follows  that  the  will  is  mechanical  alfo. 

Seventhly,  Since  the  things  which  we  purfue  do, 
when  obtained,  generally  afford  pleafure,  and  thofe 
which  we  fly  from  affe6t  us  with  pain,  if  they  over- 
take us,  it  follows  that  the  gratification  of  the  will 
is  generally  attended  or  ailociiiCed  with  pleafure,  the 
difappointment  of  it  with  pain.  I Tence  a  mere  alTo- 
ciated  pleafure  is  transferred  upon  the  gratification  of 
the  will ;  a  mere  allociated  pain  upon  the  difappoint- 
ment of  it.  And  if  the  will  was  always  gratified, 
this  mere  afibciated  pleafure  would,  according  to  the 
prefent  frame  of  our  natures,  abforb,  as  it  were,  all 
our  other  pleafures ;  and  thus  by  drying  up  the  fource 
from  whence  it  fprung,  be  itfelf  dried  up  at  lafi: :  and 
the  fiift  difappointments,  after  a  long  courfe  of  gra- 
tification, would  be  intolerable.  Both  which  things 
■are  fufficiently  obfervable,  in  an  inferior  degree,  in  chil- 
dren that  are  much  indulged,  and  in  adults,  after  a 
ferieb  of  fuccefsful  events.  Gratifications  of  the  will 
without  the  confequent  expected  pleafure,  and  difap- 
pointments of   it    without   the   confequent  expelled 

B  b  2  pain. 


372  Of  the  Afl'c6lions  in  general. 

pain,  arc  pnrticiilarly  ulVful  to  us  here.  And  it  is 
by  this,  amon<^ll  other  means,  that  the  human  will  is 
brought  to  a  conformity  with  the  divine;  which  is 
tiie  only  radical  cure  for  all  our  evils  and  difappoint- 
ments,  and  the  only  earneft  and  medium  for  obtain- 
ing lafting  happincfs. 

Eiglithly,  We  often  dcfire  and  purfue  things  wjiicli 
give  pain  rather  than  pleafure.  Here  it  is  to  be  fup- 
pofed,  that  at  firft  they  afforded  pleafure,  and  that 
they  now  give  pain  on  account  of  a  change  in  our 
nature  and  circumftances.  Now,  as  the  continuance 
to  defire  and  purfue  fuch  objecfbs,  notwithftanding  the 
pain  arifing  from  them,  is  the  effeft  of  the  power  of 
alFociation,  fo  the  fame  power  will  at  laft  reveife  its 
own  fteps,  and  free  us  from  fuch  hurtful  defires  and 
purfuits.  The  recurrency  of  pain  will  at  laft  render 
the  objed  undcfirable  and  hateful.  And  the  experi- 
ence of  this  painful  procefs,  in  a  few  particular  in- 
flances,  will  at  laft,  as  in  other  cafes  of  the  fame 
kind,  beget  a  habit  of  ceafing  to  purfue  things,  which 
we  perceive  by  a  few  trials,  or  by  rational  argu- 
ments, to  be  hurtful  to  us  upon  the  whole. 

Ninthly,  A  (late  of  defire  ought  to  be  pleafant  at 
firft  from  the  near  relation  of  defire  to  love,  and 
of  love  to  pleafure  and  happinefs.  But  in  the  courfe 
of  a  long  purfuit,  fo  many  fears  and  difappointments, 
apparent  or  real,  in  refpecft  of  the  fubordinate  means, 
and  fo  many  ftrong  agitations  of  mind  pafling  the 
limits  of  pleafure,  intervene,  as  greatly  to  chequer  a 
ftate  of  defire  v;ith  mifery.  For  the  fame  reafons 
ftates  of  averfion  are  chequered  with  hope  and 
comfort. 

Tenthiy,  Hope  and  fear  are,  as  juft  now  ob- 
ferved,  the  attendants  upon  defire  and  averfion.  Thefe 
affc<El  us  more  or  lefs,  according  to  the  more  or  lefs 
frequent  recurrency  of  the  pleafing  and  painful  ideas, 
according  to  the  greater  or  lefs  probability  of  the  ex- 
pelled event,  according  to  the  greater  or  lefs  diftance 

of 


Of  the  Affc;(5lions  in  general.  373 

of  time,  &c.  the  power  of  afibciation  diTplaying 
itfelf  every  where  in  the  agitations  of  nnind  excited 
by  thefe  pafl^ons.  It  is  particularly  remarkable  here 
that  our  hopes  and  fears  rife  and  fall  with  certain 
bodily  difpofitions,  according  as  thefe  favour  or  op- 
pofe  them. 

*  Eleventhly,  Joy  and  grief  take  place  when  the 
defire  and  averfion,  hope  and  fear,  are  at  an  endj 
and  are  love  and  hatred,  exerted  towards  an  objcft 
which  is  prefenr,  either  in  a  ftnfible  manner,  or  in  a 
rational  one,  /.  e.  fo  as  to  occupy  the  whole  powers 
of  the  mind,  as  fenfible  obje(51:s,  when  prefenr,  and 
attended  to,  do  the  external  fenfes.  It  is  very  evi- 
dent, that  the  objeds  of  the  intelleftual  pleafures  and 
pains  derive  their  power  of  thus  afFefting  the  mind 
from  afibciation. 

Twelfthly,  After  the  aclual  joy  and  grief  are  over, 
and   the  objeft  withdrawn,  there  generally  remains  a 
pleafing    or  difpleafing   recolled:ion    or    refentment, 
which  recurs  with  every  recurrency  of  the  idea  of  the 
obje6l,  or  of  the  afibciated  ones.     This  recol]e(5tion 
keeps  up  the  love  or  hatred.     In  like  manner  the  five 
grateful  pafTions,  love,  defire,  hope,  joy,    and   plea-  t 
fing  recolleftion,  all  enhance  one  another;  as  do  the/ 
five  ungrateful  ones,  hatred,  averfion,  fear,  grief,  andl 
difpleafing  recolledion.      And  the   whole   ten,    theni 
together,    comprehend,    as    appears    to    me,    all    the' 
general  paflions  of  human  nature. 


B  b  3  SECT. 


374  0/  Memory. 

SECT.     IV. 

OF        MEMORY. 


PROP.     XC. 

To  csamim  how  far  ike  Pbcenomena  of  Memory  arc 
agreeable  to  the  foregoing  Theory, 

Memory  was  defined  in  the  introdudlion  to  be 
that  faculty  by  which  traces  of  fenfations  and 
ideas  recur,  or  are  recallc-d,  in  the  fame  order  and 
proportion,  accurately  or  nearly,  as  they  were  once 
prefented. 

Now  here  we  may  obferve, 

Firft,  That  memory  depends  entirely  or  chiefly  on 
the  ftate  of  the  brain.  For  difeafes,  concufTions  of 
the  brain,  fpirituous  liquors,  and  fome  poifons,  im- 
pair or  deftroy  it ;  and  it  generally  returns  again  with 
tiie  return  of  health,  from  the  ufe  of  proper  medi- 
cines and  methods.  And  all  this  is  peculiarly  fuit- 
able  to  the  notion  of  vibrations.  If  fenfations  and 
ideas  arife  from  peculiar  vibrations,  and  difpofitions 
to  vibrate,  in  the  medullary  fubfl:ance  of  the  brain,  it 
is  eafy  to  conceive,  that  the  caufes  above  alleged  may 
fo  confound  the  fenfations  and  ideas,  as  that  the  ufual 
order  and  proportion  of  the  ideas  fliall  be  deftroyed. 

Secondly,  The  rudiments  of  memory  are  laid  in 
the  perpetual  recurrency  of  the  fame  imprefllons,  and' 
clufters  of  imprt-fTions.  How  thefe  leave  traces,  in 
which  the  order  is  preferved,  may  be  underfliood  from 
the  eighth,  ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  propofitions. 
The  traces  which  letters,  and  words,  i.  e.  clufters  of 
letters,  leave,  afford  an  inftance  and  example  of  this. 
And,  as  in  lan^uao-es  the  letters  are  fewer  than  the 
fyllables,  the  fyllables  than  the  words,  and  the  words 

than 


Of  Memory.  375 

fhan  the  fentences,  fo  the  fingle  fenfible  impreffions, 
and  the  fmall  clufters  qF  them,  are  comparatively  few 
in  refpedt  of  the  large  clufters  j  and,  being  fo,  they 
muft  recur  more  frequently,  fo  as  the  fooner  to  beget 
thofe  traces  which  I  call  the  rudiments  or  elements 
of  memory.  When  thefe  traces  or  ideas  begin  to 
recur  frequently,  this  alfo  contributes  to  fix  them,  and 
their  order,  in  the  memory,  in  the  fame  manner  as  the 
frequent  imprefllon  of  the  objects  themfelves. 

Thirdly,  Suppofe  now  a  perfon  fo  far  advanced  in 
life,  as  that  he  has  learnt  all  thefe  rudiments,  i.  e.  that 
he  has  ideas  of  the  common  appearances  and  occur- 
rences of  life,  under  a  confiderable  variety  of  fubor- 
dinate  circumftances,  which  recur  to  his  imagination 
from  the  flighteft  caufes,  and  with  the  moft  perfe^l: 
facility;  and  let  us  afk,  how  he  can  be  able  tore- 
member  or  rccollc6l  a  part  fad:,  confiding  of  one  thou- 
fand  fingle  particulars,  or  of  one  hundred  fuch  clufters 
as  are  called  the  rudiments  of  memory;  ten  fingle  par- 
ticulars being  fuppofed  to  conftitute  a  rudiment  ?  Firft, 
then,  we  may  obferve,  that  there  are  only  one  hun- 
dred links  wanting  in  the  chain  ;  for  he  has  already 
learnt  confiderable  exaftnefs  in  the  fubordinate  cir- 
cumftances of  the  one  hundred  clufters ;  and  perfect 
exa(ftnefs  is  not  to  be  fuppofed  or  required. — Secondly, 
The  one  hundred  clufters  recur  again  and  again  to  the 
imagination  for  fomc  time  after  the  faift,  in  a  quick 
and  tranfient  manner,  as  thofe  who  attend  fumciently 
to  what  paflfes  in  their  own  minds  may  perceive;  and 
this  both  makes  the  impreflion  a  little  deeper,  and 
alfo  ferves  to  preferve  the  order.  If  the  perfon 
attempts  to  recollect  foon  after  the  imprcftion, 
the  effect  remaining  in  the  brain  is  fufficient  to 
enable  him  to  do  this  with  the  accuracy  required 
and  experienced ;  if  a  longer  time  intervenes,  before 
he  attempts  to  recollect,  ftill  the  number  of  invo- 
luntary recurrencies  makes  up  in  fome  meafure  for 
the  want  of  this  voluntary  recolle6tion.  However, 
the  power  of  recollection  declines  in  general,  and  is 

B  b  4  entirel;> 


37^  Of  Memory. 

entirely  lofl  by  degrees.     It  confiims   tliis   reafoning, 
that   a    new    let   of   ftrong    impreflions    clellroys    this 
power    of  recolledion.     For    this   mult   boili   obhte- 
rate  the  cffeds  of  the  foregoing  impreflions,  and  pre- 
vent the   rccurrency  of  the  ideas. —  Thirdly,  As  the 
fmgle  imprefTions,  which  nnake  the  fmall  clufters,  are 
not  combined  together  at  hazard,  but  according  to  a 
general   tenor  in   nature,  lb   the  clufters  which  make 
fadls  fucceed  each   other  according  to  fome  general 
tenor  likewife.     Now   this   both   lellens   the    number 
of  varieties,   and   Ihews  that  the  afibciation   between 
many  of  the  clufters,  or  rudiments,  or  one  hundred 
links,  fuppofcd   to  be  wanting,   is  cemented   already. 
This  may  be  both  illuftrated  and  exemplified   by  the 
obfervation,  that  it  is  difficult  to  remember  even  well- 
known  words  that  have  no  connection  with  each  other, 
and  more   fo  to  remember  collections  of  barbarous 
terms ;  wlicrcas  adepts   in  any  fcience  remember  the 
things   of  that  fcience  with  a  furprizing  exatftnefs  and 
facility. —  Fourthly,  Some  clufters  are  excluded  from 
fucceeding  others,  by  ideas  of  inconfiftency,  impofti- 
bility,  and  by  the  methods  of  reafoning,  of  which  we 
become  mafters  as  we  advance  in  life. — Fifthly,  The 
vifible  impreffions  which  concur  in  the  paft  fa6t,  by 
being  vivid,  and  preferving  the  order  of  place,  often 
contribute   greatly    to   preferve    the   order    of    lime, 
and   to  fuggeft  the  clufters  which  may  be  wanting. — 
Sixthly,   It  is  to  be  obferved,  that  as  we  think  in  words 
both    the   impreflions   and   the  recurrencies    of  ideas 
will  be  attended  with  words;  and   thefe  words,  from 
the  great  ufe  and    familiarity    of  language,    will    fix 
themfelves   ftrongly   in   the  fancy,   and   by    fo   doing 
bring  up  the  affociated  trains  of  ideas  in  the  proper 
order,  accurately  or  nearly.     And  thus,  when  a  perfon 
relates   a    paft    fad:,    the    ideas    do    in    fome    cafes 
fuggeft  the   words,   whilft   in   others   the  words  fug- 
geft   the    ideas.       Hence    illiterate    perfons    do    not 
remember  nearly  fo  well  as  others,  ceteris  'paribus.   And 

I  fuppofe 


Of  Memory.  577 

i  fuppofe  the  fame  is  true  of  deaf  perfons  in  a  dill 
i-^reater  degree.  But  it  arifes  hence  alfo,  that  many 
^niftakcs  in  the  fubordinace  circumftances  are  com- 
mitted in  the  relations  of  pad  fads,  if  the  relater 
defcends  to  minute  particulars.  For  the  fame  reafons 
thefe  miftakes  will  be  fo  aflbciated  with  the  true  fa6ts 
after  a  few  relations,  that  the  relater  himfelf  fhall  be- 
lievCj  that  he  remembers  them  diftinftly. —  Seventhly, 
The  miftakes  which  are  committed  both  on  the  fore- 
going account  and  others,  make  confiderable  abate- 
ments in  the  difficulty  here  to  be  folved. 

Fourthly,  Let  it  now  be  afked,  in  what  the  recol- 
le<5tion  of  a  paft  fa6l,  confifting  of  one  hundred  clufters, 
as  above,  differs  from  the  tranfic  of  the  fame  one 
bundled  clufters  over  the  fancy,  in  the  way  of  a  re- 
verie ?  1  anfwer,  partly  in  the  vividnefs  of  the  cluf-p; 
ters,  pardy  and  principally  in  the  readinefs  and  ftrength 
of  the  afibciations,  by  which  they  are  cemented  to- 
gether. This  follows  from  what  has  been  already  de- 
livered J  but  it  may  be  confirmed  alfo  by  many  other 
obfervations. —  Thus,  firft  many  perfons  are  known 
by  relating  the  fame  falfe  ftory  over  and  over  again, 
i.  e.  by  magnifying  the  ideas,  and  their  aflTociations,  at 
laft  to  believe  that  they  remember  it.  It  makes  as  vi- 
vid an  impreffion  upon  them,  and  hangs  as  clofely  to- 
gether, as  an  afl^emblage  of  paft  fads  recollefted  by 
memory. —  Secondly,  Ail  men  are  fometimes  at  a 
lofs  to  know  whether  clufters  of  ideas  that  ftrike 
the  fancy  ftrongly,  and  fucceed  each  other  readily 
and  immediately,  be  recolleflions,  or  mere  reveries. 
And  the  more  they  agitate  the  matter  in  the  mind, 
the  more  does  the  reverie  appear  like  a  recolledion. 
It  refembles  this,  that  if  in  endeavouring  to  recoiled  a 
verfe,  a  wrong  word,  fuiting  the  place,  firft  occurs, 
and  afterwards  the  right  one,  it  is  difficult  during  the 
then  prefent  agitation  to  diftinguifh  the  right  one. 
But  afterwards,  when  this  agitation  is  fubfided,  the 
right  word  eafily  regains  its  place.  Perfons  of  irri- 
table 

\ 


37 8  Of  Memory; 

table  nervous  fyftems  are  more  fubjed  to  fuch  falla- 
cies than  others.  And  miKlinen  often  impule  upon 
'»  tiiemfclves  in  this  way,  viz.  from  the  vividneis  of 
their  ideas  and  alfociations,  produced  by  bodily 
caufes.  The  lame  thing  often  happens  in  dreams. 
The  vividnefs  of  the  new  fcene  often  makes  it  appear 
like  one  that  we  remember,  and  are  well  acquainted 
with.  Thirdly  if  the  fpecijic  nature  of  memory 
confid  in  the  great  vigour  of  the  ideas,  and  their 
allbciations,  then,  as  this  vigour  abates,  it  ought  to 
fuggeft  to  us  a  length  of  time  elapfed ;  and  ince 
'uerja.,  if  it  be  kept  up,  the  diftance  of  time  ought 
to  appear  contradcd.  Now  this  laft  is  the  cafe  :  for 
the  death  of  a  friend,  or  any  intercfling  event,  often 
recolleded  and  related,  appears  to  have  happened  but 
yefterday,  as  we  term  it,  viz.  on  account  of  the  vi- 
vidnefs  of  the  clulters,  and  their  affociations,  corre- 
fponding  to  the  nature  of  a  recent  event. — Fourthly, 
It  is  not,  however,  to  be  here  fuppofed,  that  we 
have  not  many  other  ways  of  diftinguiHiing  real  recol- 
leftions  from  mere  reveries.  For  the  fiift  are  fup- 
poried  by  their  conne6lion  with  known  and  allowed 
fa6ls,  by  various  methods  of  reafoning,  and  having 
been  related  as  real  recolleflions,  &c. 

Fifthly,  In  like  manner  we  diftinguifli  a  new  place, 
book,  peifon,  &c.  from  one  which  we  remember, 
fuppofing  both  to  be  prefcnted  in  like  circurnftances. 
The  parts,  afibciates,  &c.  of  that  which  we  remem- 
ber, ftrike  us  more  ftrongly,  are  fuggefted  by  each 
other,  and  hang  together,  which  does  not  hold  of  the 
new.  The  old  does  alfo  fuggeft  many  aflbciates, 
which  a  new  one  in  like  circumftances  would  not. 
And  if  from  the  then  (late  of  fancy,  the  diftance  of 
time,  &c.  there  be  any  doubt  of  thefe  things,  eithrr 
with  refped  to  the  old  or  new,  a  like  doubt  arifes  in 
refpecl  of  the  memory.  An  attentive  perfon  may 
obierve,  that  he  determines  of  fuch  things,  whether 
they  be  old  or  new,   by  ihc  vividnefs  of  the  ideas,  and 

their 


Of  Memory.  379 

their  power  of  fuggefting  each  other,    and   foreign 
alTociates. 

Some  perfons  feem  to  fuppofe,  that  the  foul  fur- 
veys  one  objecl,  the  old  for  inftance,  and  comparing 
ir  with  the  impreflions  which  a  fimilar  new  one  woiiid 
excite,  calls  the  old  one  an  objedl  remembered.  But 
,-his  is  like  fuppofing  an  eye  within  the  eye  to  view 
le  pi6tures  miade  by  objects  upon  the  retina.  Not 
LO  mention,  that  the  foul  cannot  in  the  fame  inftant, 
during  the  fame  to  vwv,  furvey  both  the  old  and  new, 
and  compare  them  together;  nor  is  there  any  evi- 
dence, that  this  is  done  in  fa6t.  A  perfon  who 
inquires  into  the  nature  of  memory,  may  indeed 
endeavour  to  ftate  the  difference  between  the  impref- 
fions  of  old  and  new,  as  I  have  done  here ;  but  this 
is  a  fpeculation  that  few  perfons  concern  themfelves 
with,  whereas  all  rememiber  and  apply  the  words 
relative  to  memory,  juft  as  they  do  other  words.  We 
may  conclude  therefore,  that  the  difference  of  vivid- 
nefs  and  conne(5lion  in  the  ideas,  with  the  other 
affociates  of  recolledionsi,  are  a'  fufficient  foundation 
for  the  proper  ufe  of  the  words  relative  to  the 
memory,  juft  as  in  other  like  cafes. 

Sixthly,  The  peculiar  imperfedion  of  the  memory 
in  children  tallies  with  the  foregoing  account  of  this 
faculty ;  and  indeed  this  account   may  be  confidered 
as  a  grofs   general   hiftory  of  the  fuccefllve   growth 
of  the  memory,  in   paffing  from  childhood  to  adult 
'  age.     Children  muft  learn  by  degrees   the  ideas   of 
fingle  impreffions,    the    clufters   which    I    call    rudi- 
ments, and  the  moft  ufual  connexions  and  combi-  j 
nations  of  thefe.     l"hey  have  alfo  the  ufe  of  words,  | 
and  of  objefls  and   incidents,  as  figns  and  fymbols,  1 
with  the  proper  method  of  reafoning  upon  them,  to 
learn  ;  and  during  their  novitiate  in  thefe  things  their 
memories  muft  labour  under  great  imperfe6tions.     It 
appears  alfo,  that  the  imperfeftions  peculiar  to  chil- 
dren correfpond  in  kind  as  well  as  degree  to  the  rea- 

fons 


j8o  Of  Memory. 

fons  here  afllgncd  for  them.  Their  not  being  able  to 
diged  paft  fads  in  order  of  time  is,  in  great  mea- 
fure,  owing  to  their  not  having  the  proper  ufc  of  the 
fymbols,  whereby  time  is  denoted. 

Seventhly,  The  peculiar  imperfedion  of  the  me* 
mory  in  aged  perfons  tallies  allb  with  the  foregoing 
account.  The  vibrations  and  difpofitions  to  vibrate, 
in  the  fmall  medullary  particles,  and  their  alfociations, 
are  all  lb  fixed  by  the  callofity  of  the  medullary  fub 
fiance,  and  by  repeated  imprefTions  and  rccurrencies, 
that  new  imprefTions  can  fcarce  enter,  that  they  recur 
fcldom,  and  that  the  parts  which  do  recur  bring  in 
old  trains  from  eilabliOied  aflociations,  inftead  of 
continuing  thofe  which  were  lately  imprefTed.  Hence 
one  may  almoft  predid  what  very  old  perfons  will 
fay  or  do  upon  common  occuirences.  Which  is  alfo 
the  cafe  frequently  with  perfons  of  ftrong  pafTions, 
for  reafons  that  are  not  very  unlike.  When  old 
perfons  relate  the  incidents  of  their  youth  with  great 
precifion,  it  is  rather  owing  to  the  memory  of  many 
preceding  memories,  recolleflions,  and  relations  than 
to  the  memory  of  the  thing  itfelf. 

Eighthly,  In  recovering  from  concufTions,  and 
ether  diforders  of  the  brain,  it  is  ufual  for  the  patient 
to  recover  the  power  of  remembering  the  then  pre- 
fent  common  incidents  for  minutes,  hours,  and  days, 
by  degrees;  alfo  the  power  of  recalling  the  events 
of  his  life  preceding  his  illnefs.  At  length  he  reco- 
vers this  lad  power  perfedlly,  and  at  the  fame  time 
forgets  almoft  all  that  paft  in  his  illnefs,  even  thofe 
things  which  he  remembered,  at  firft,  for  a  day  or 
two.  Now  the  reafon  of  this  1  take  to  be,  that  upon 
a  perfe6l  recovery  the  brain  recovers  its  natural  ftate, 
i,  e.  all  its  former  difpofitions  to  vibrate ;  but  that 
fuch  as  took  place  during  the  preternatural  ftate  of 
the  brain,  /.  e.  during  his  illnefs,  are  all  obliterated 
by  the  return  of  the  natural  ftate.  In  like  manner 
dreanns,  which  happen  in  a  peculiar  ftate  of  the  brain, 

i.  e.  in 


0/ Memory.  381 

f.  e,  in  fleep,  vanifh,  as  foon  as  vigilance,  a  different 
ftate,  takes  place.  But  if  they  be  coUeded  innme- 
diately  upon  waking,  and  thus  connefted  with  the 
ftate  of  vigilance,  they  may  be  remembered.  But 
I  (hall  have  occafion  to  be  more  explicit  on  this  head 
in  the  next  fetflion. 

Ninthly,  It   is  very  difficult  to  make  any  plaufible 
conjeftures  why  fome   perfons   of  very    weak  judg-  » 
ments,    not  much   below  idiots,    are  endued   with  a  * 
peculiar   extraordinary    memory.      This    memory    is  , 
generally  the  power  of  recolle6ling  a  large  group  of -i 
words,    fuppofe,    as  thofe  of  a  fermon,    in    a   fhort  ' 
time  after  they  are  heard,  with  Vv'onderful  exaftnefs 
and  readinefs  j     but   then    the   whole   is   obliterated, 
after  a  longer  time,  much  more  completely  than   ia 
perfons  of  common  memories  and  judgments.     One 
inay   perhaps   conjecture,  that  the  brain   receives  all 
difpofitions  to  vibrate  fooner   in    thefe  perfons,    and 
lets  them  go  fooner,   than  in  others.     And  the  laft 
may  contribute  to  the  firft  :  for,  new  impreffions  may 
take  place  more  deeply  and  precifely,  if  there  be  few 
old  ones  to  oppofe  them.     The  mod  perfed  memory 
is  that  which  can  both  receive  moft  readily,  and  retain 
moft  durably.     But  we  may  fuppofe,  that  there  are 
limits,    beyond    which    thefe    two    different   powers 
cannot  confift  with  each  other. 

Tenlhly,  When  a  perfon  defires  to  recoiled  a  thing 
that  has  efcaped  him,  fuppofe  the  name  of  a  perfon, 
or  vifible  objed,  he  recalls  the  vifible  idea,  or  fome 
other  aflbciate,  again  and  again,  by  a  voluntary  power, 
the  defire  generally  magnifying  all  the  ideas  and 
affociationsi  and  thus  bringing  in  the  affociation  and 
idea  wanted,  at  laft.  However,  if  the  defire  be  great, 
it  changes  the  ftate  of  the  brain,  and  has  an  oppofite 
effed  ;  fo  that  the  defired  idea  doe,s  not  recur, 
till  all  has  fubfided ;  perhaps  not  even  then. 

Eleventhly,  All  our  voluntary  powers  are  of  the 
nature  of  iremory ;  as  may  be  eafily  (^tn  from  the 

foregoin 


382  Of  Memory. 

foregoing  account  of  it,  compared  with  the  account 
of  the  voluntary  powers  given  in  the  fiift  chapter. 
And  it  agrees  remarkably  with  this,  that,  in  morbid 
affe6lions  of  the  memory,  the  voluntary  adion^  fufFer 
a  like  change  and  imperfc6lion. 

Twelfihly,  For  the  i^xs^  reafons  the  whole  pow- 
ers of  the  foul  may  be  referred  to  the  memory,  when 
taken  in  a  large  fenfe.  Hence,  though  fome  perfons 
m.iy  have  Ibong  memories  with  weak  judgments, 
yet  no  man  can  have  a  ftrong  judgment  with  a  weak 
original  power  of  retaining  and  remembering. 


SECT. 


Of  Dreams.  383 

SECT.     V. 

OF  IMAGINATION,  REVERIES,  AND  DREAMS. 

PROP.     XCI. 

^0  examine  how  far  the  Phenomena  of  Imagination, 
Reveries^  and  t)r earns-,  are  agreeable  to  the^  foregoing 
'Theory. 

The  recurrence  of  ideas,  efpccially  vifible  and 
audible  ones,  in  a  vivid  manner,  but  without  any 
regard  to  the  order  obferved  in  paft  fadls,  is  afcribed 
to  the  power  of  imagination  or  fancy.  Now  here 
we  may  obferve,  that  every  fucceeding  thought  is  the 
refult  either  of  fome  new  impreffion,  or  of  an  aflb- 
ciation  with  the  preceding.  And  this  is  the  com- 
mon opinion.  .  It  is  impoffible  indeed  to  attend  To 
minutely  to  the  fucccfiion  of  our  ideas,  as  to  diflin- 
guifli  and  remember  for  a  fufficient  time  the  very, 
impreffion  or  aflbciation  which-  gave  birth  to  each 
thought ;  but  we  can  do  this  as  far  as  it  can  be 
expeded  to  be  done,  and  in  fo  great  a  variety  of 
inftances,  that  our  argument  for  the  prevalence  of 
the  foregoing  principle  of  afTociation  in  ail  inftances, 
except  thofe  of  new  impreflions,  may  be  efteemcd 
a  complete  indudtion. 

A  reverie  difi^ers  from  imagination  only  in  that  the 
perfon  being  more  attentive  to  his  own  thoughts, 
and  lefs  difturbed  by  foreign  objedls,  m.ore  o\  his 
ideas  are  deducible  from  aflbciation,  and  fewer  from 
new  impreffions. 

It  is  to  be  obferved,  however,  that'  in  all  the  cafes 
of  imagination  and  reverie  the  thoughts  depend,  in 
part,  upon  the  then  ftate  of  body  or  miind.  A 
plcafurable  or  painful  Itace  of  the  ftomach  or  brain, 


384  Q/^  Dreams. 

joy  or  gritf,  will  make  all  the  thoughts  warp  their 
own  way,  little  or  much.  But  this  exception  is  as 
agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory,  as  the  general 
prevalence  of  aflbciation  jull  laid  down. 

We  come  next  to  dreams.  I  fay  then,  that  dreams 
are  nothing  but  the  imaginations,  fancies,  or  reve- 
ries of  a  lleeping  man;  and  that  they  are  deducible 
from  the  three  following  caufcs,  viz.  Firft,  The  im- 
prefTions  and  ideas  lately  received,  and  particularly 
thofe  of  the  preceding  day.  Secondly,  The  ftate  of 
the  body,  particularly  of  the  ftomach  and  brain. 
And,  Thirdly,  AlTociation. 

That  dreams  are,  in  part,  deducible  from  the  Im- 
predlons  and  ideas  of  the  preceding  day,  appears  from 
the  frequent  recurrence  of  thefe  in  greater  or  lelTer 
clutters,  and  efpecially  of  the  vifible  ones,  in  our 
dreams.  We  fometimes  take  in  ideas  of  longer  date, 
in  part,  on  account  of  their  recency  ;  however,  in 
general,  ideas  that  have  not  afFedled  the  mind  for 
fome  days,  recur  in  dreams  only  from  the  fecond  or 
third  caufe  here  affigned. 

That  the  flate  of  the  body  affevEts  our  dreams,  is 
evident  from  the  dreams  of  fick  perfons,  and  of 
thofe  who  labour  under  indigeftions,  fpafms,  and 
flatulencies. 

Laftly,  We  may  perceive  ourfelves  to  be  carried 
on  from  one  thing  to  another  in  our  dreams  partly 
by  aflbciation. 

It  is  alfo  highly  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory 
to  exped,  that  each  of  the  three  foregoing  caufes 
fliould  have  an  influence  upon  the  trains  of  ideas, 
that  are  prefented  in  dream.s. 

Let  us  now  fee.  how  we  can  folve  the  mofl:  ufual 
ph^enomena  of  dreams  upon  thefe  principles. 

Fird,  then,  The  icenes  which  prefent  themfelves 
are  taken  to  be  real.  We  do  not  confider  them  as 
the  work  of  the  fancy ;  but  fuppofe  ourfelves  pre- 
fent,   and    actually    feeing   and   hearing   what  paflTes. 

Now 


Of  Dreams.  385 

Now  this  happens,  Firft,  Becaufe  we  have  no  other 
reality  to  oppofe  to  the  ideas  which  offer  themfelves, 
whereas  in  the  common  ti(5lions  of  the  fancy,  while 
we  are  awake,  there  is  always  a  fet  of  real  external 
objefts  ftriking  fome  of  our  fenfes,  and  precluding 
a  like  mitlake  there :  or,  if  we  become  quite  inatten- 
tive to  external  objefls,  the  reverie  does  fo  far 
put  on  the  nature  of  a  dream,  as  to  appear  a  reality. 
—  Secondly,  The  trains  of  vifible  ideas,  which  occur 
in  dreams,  are  far  more  vivid  than  common  vifible 
ideas ;  and  therefore  may  the  more  eafily  be  taken  for 
adual  impreffions.  For  what  reafons  thefe  ideas 
fhould  be  fo  much  more  vivid,  1  cannot  prefume  to 
iay.  I  guefs,  that  the  exclufion  of  real  imprefllons 
has  fome  Ihare,  and  the  increafed  heat  of  the  brain 
may  have  fome  likewife.  The  fa6l  is  mod  obferva- 
ble  in  the  firft  approaches  of  fleepj  all  the  vifible 
ideas  beginning  then  to  be  more  than  ufually' glaring. 

Secondly,  There  is  a  great  wildnels  and  incon- 
fiftency  in  our  dreams.  For  the  brain,  during  deep, 
is  in  a  ftate  fo  different  from  that  in  which  the  ufuai 
affociations  were  forn>ed,  that  they  can  by  no  means 
take  place  as  they  do  during  vigilance.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  ftate  of  the  body  fuggefts  fuch  ideas, 
amongft  thofe  that  have  been  lately  impreffed,  as  are 
moft  fuitable  to  the  various  kinds  and  degrees  of 
pleafant  and  painful  vibrations  excited  in  the  ftomach, 
brain,  or  fome  other  part.  Thus  a  perfon  who  has 
taken  opium,  fees  either  gay  fcenes,  or  ghaftly  ones, 
according  as  the  opium  excites  pleafant  or  painful 
vibrations  in  the  ftomach.  Hence  it  will  follow,  that 
ideas  will  rife  fucccffivcly  in  dreams,  which  have  no 
fuch  conneflion  as  takes  place  in  nature,  '"n  ^dual 
impreffions,  nor  any  fuch  as  is  deducible  from  aflb- 
ciation.  And  yet,  if  they  rife  up  quick  and  vividly 
one  after  another,  as  fubjefts,  predicates,  and  other 
affociates,  ufe  to  do,  they  will  be  affirmed  of  each 
other,  and  appear  to  hang  together.     Thus  the  fame 

Vol.  I.  C  c  perfon 


f 


336  Of  Dreams. 

pcrfon  appears  in  two  places  at  the  fame  time ;  two 
perlons  appearing  lucceflively  in  tlie  fame  place  coa- 
lefce  into  one ;  a  brute  is  Ibppoled  to  fpeak  (when 
the  idea  of  a  voice  comes  from  that  quarter)  or  to  han- 
dle ;  any  idea,  qualification,  office,  &c.  coinciding  in 
the  inftant  of  time  with  the  idea  of  one's  felf,  or  of 
another  perfon,  adheres  immediately,  &c.  &c. 

Thirdly,  We  do  not  take  notice  of,  or  are  offended 
at,  thele  inconfiftencies ;  but  pafs  on  from  one  to 
another.  For  the  afibciations,  which  fhould  lead  us 
thus  to  take  notice,  and  be  offended,  are,  as  it  were, 
afleep  ;  the  bodily  caufes  alfo  hurrying  us  on  to  new 
and  new  trains  fucceffively.  But  if  the  bodily  ftatc 
be  fuch  as  favours  ideas  of  anxiety  and  perplexity, 
then  the  inconfiftency,  and  apparent  impoffibility, 
occurring  in  dreams,  are  apt  to  give  great  difturbance 
and  uneafinefs.  It  is  to  be  obferved  likewife,  that 
we  forget  the  feveral  parts  of  our  dreams,  very  faft 
in  paffing  from  one  to  another ;  and  that  this  leffens 
the  apparent  inconfiftencies,  and  their  influences. 

Fourthly,  It  is  common  in  dreams  for  perfons  to 
appear  to  themfclves  to  be  trani,ferred  from  one  place 
to  another,  by  a  kind  of  failing  or  flying  motion. 
This  arifes  from  the  change  of  the  apparent  magni- 
tude and  pofition  of  the  images  excited  in  the  brain, 
this  change  being  fuch  as  a  change  of  diftance  and 
pofition  in  Qurfelves  would  have  occafioned.  What- 
ever the  reafons  be,  for  which  vifible  images  are  ex- 
cited in  fleep,  like  to  the  objects  with  which  we  con- 
verfe  when  awake,  the  fame  reafons  will  hold  for 
changes  of  apparent  magnitude  and  pofition  alfoj 
and  thefe  changes  in  fixed  objefls,  being  confl:antly 
affociated  with  motions  in  ourfelves  when  awake, 
will  infer  thefe  motions  when  afleep.  But  then 
we  cannot  have  the  idea  of  the  vis  inerli^e  of  our 
own  bodies,  anfwering  to  die  impreffions  in  walking; 
becaufe  the  nerves  of  the  mufcles  either  do  not  admit 
of  fuch  miniature  vibrations  in  fleep  j  or  do  not  tranf- 

mit 


Of  Dreams.  387 

mic  ideas  to  the  mind  in  confequence  thereof;  whence 
we  appear  to  fail,  fly,  or  ride.  Yet  fometimes  a 
pcrfon  feems  to  walk,  and  even  to  ftrike,  juft  as  in 
other  cafes  he  feems  to  feel  the  impreflion  of  a  foreign 
body  on  his  fkin. 

Thofe  who  walk  and  talk  in  their  fleep,  have  evi- 
dently the  nerves  of  the  mufcles  concerned  fo  {:t^y  as 
that  vibrations  can  defcend  from  the  internal' parts  of 
the  brain,  the  peculiar  refidence  of  ideas,  into  them. 
At  the  fame  time  the  brain  itfelf  is  fo  opprelTed,  that 
they  have  fcarce  any  memory.  Perfons  who  read  in- 
attentively, /.  e.  fee  and  fpeak  almoft  without  remem- 
bering, alio  thofe  who  labour  under  fuch  a  morbid 
lofs  of  memory,  as  that  though  they  fee,  hear,  fpeak, 
and  ad,  pro  re  nata.,  from  moment  to  moment,  yet 
they  forget  all  immediately,  fomewhat  refemble  the 
perfons  who  walk  and  talk  in  fleep. 

Fifthly,  Dreams  confift  chiefly  of  vifible  imagery. 
This  agrees  remarkably  with  the  perpetual  impref- 
fions  made  upon  the  optic  nerves  and  correfponding 
parts  of  the  brain  during  vigilance,  and  with  the  dif- 
tindlnefs  and  vividnefs  of  the  images  irnpreflled. 

We  m.ay  obferve  alfo,  that  the  vifible  imagery  in 
dreams  is  compofed,  in  a  confiderable  degree,  of 
fragments  of  vifible  appearances  lately  impreflTed.  Foi' 
the  difpofition  to  thefe  vibrations  muft  be  greater 
than  to  others,  ceteris  paribus y  zt  the  fame  time  that 
by  the  imperfection  and  interruption  of  the  aflt)cia.- 
tions,  only  fragments,  not  whole  images,  will  gene- 
rally appear.  The  fragments  are  fo  fmail,  and  fo 
intermixed  with  other  fragments  and  appearances, 
that  it  is  difficult  to  trace  them  up  to  the  preceding 
day;  the  fliortnefs  of  our  memory  contributing  alfo 
not  a  little  thereto. 

It  happens  in  dreams,  that  the  fame  fiditious 
places  are  prefented  again  and  again  at  the  difl:ancc 
of  weeks  and  months,  perhaps  during  the  whole  courfe 
of  life.     Thefe  places  are,   I   fuppofe^   compounded 

C  c  2  at 


388  Of  Dreams. 

at  firft,  probably  early  in  youth,  of  fragments  of  real 
places,  which  we  have  leen.  They  afterwards  recur 
in  dreams,  becaufe  the  fame  ftatc  of  brain  recurs; 
and  when  this  has  happened  for  fome  fucccfllons, 
they  may  be  expe6led  to  recur  at  intervals  during 
life.  But  they  may  alfo  admit  of  variations,  cfpe- 
cially  before  frequent  rccurrency  has  eftablifhed  and 
fixed  them. 

Sixthly,  It  has  been  obferved  already,  that  many 
of  the  things  which  are  prefented  in  dreams,  appear 
to  be  rememl)ered  by  us,  or,  at  leaft,  as  familiar  to 
usi  and  that  this  may  be  folved  by  the  readinefs 
with  which  they  ftart  up,  and  fucceed  one  another, 
in  the  fancy. 

Seventhly,  It  has  alfo  been  remarked,  that  dreams 
ought  to  be  foon  forgotten,  as  they  are  in  faft ;  be- 
caufe the  ftate  of  the  brain  fuffcrs  great  changes  in 
pairing  from  fleep  to  vigilance.  The  wildnefs  and 
inconfirtency  of  our  dreams  render  them  ftill  more 
liable  to  be  forgotten.  It  is  faid  that  a  man  may  re- 
member his  dreams  beft  by  continuing  in  the  fame 
pofture  in  which  he  dreamt  j  which,  if  true,  would 
be  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  the  dodlrine  of  vibra- 
tions ;  fince  thofe  which  take  place  in  the  medullary 
fubftance  of  the  brain  would  be  leaft  difturbed  and 
obliterated  by  this  m.eans. 

Eighthly,  The  dreams  which  are  prefented  in  the 
firft  part  of  the  night  are,  for  the  mod  part,  much 
more  confufed,  irregular,  and  difficult  to  be  remem- 
bered, than  thofe  which  we  dream  towards  the  morn- 
ing ;  and  thefe  laft  are  often  rational  to  a  confiderable 
degree,  and  regulated  according  to  the  ufual  courfe 
of  our  affociations.  For  the  brain  begins  then  to  ap 
proach  to  the  (late  of  vigilance,  or  that  in  which  the 
ufual  airociations  were  formed  and  cemented.  How 
ever,  afibciation  has  fome  power  even  in  wild  and 
inconfiftent  dreams. 

CoR. 


le 


Of  Dreams.  38^ 

Cor.  I.  As  the  proph^ies  were,  many  of  them, 
communicated  in  the  way  of  divine  vifions,  trances, 
or  dreams,  fo  tliey  bear  many  of  the  foregoing 
marks  of  dreams.  Thus  they  deal  chiefly  in  vifible 
imagery;  they  abound  with  apparent  impofllbilities, 
and  deviations  from  cpmmon  life,  of  which  ye-t  the 
prophets  take  not  the  lead  notice :  they  fpeak  of  new 
things  as  of  familiar  ones ;  they  are  carried  in  the 
fpirit  from  place  to  place ;  things  requiring  a  long 
feries  of  time  in  real  life,  are  tranfafled  in  the  pro- 
phetical vifions,  as  foon  as  feen  ;  th^ry  afcribe  to 
themfelves  and  others  new  names,  ofBces,  &c.  every 
thing  has  a  real  exiftence  conferred  upon  itj  there 
are  fingular  combinations  of  fragments  of  vifible 
appearances  ;  and  God  himfelf  is  reprefented  in 
a  vifible  fliape,  which  of  all  other  things  muft  be 
iXioH:  offenfive  to  a  pious  Jew.  And  it  feems  to  me, 
that  thefe,  and  fuch  like  criterions  might  eftablifii 
the  genuinenefs  of  the  prophecies,  exclufively  of  all 
other  evidences. 

Cor.  2.  The  wildnels  of  our  dreams  feems  to  be 
of  fingular  ufe  to  us,  by  interrupting  and  breaking  the 
courfe  of  our  aflbciations.  For,  if  we  werp  always 
awake,  fome  accidental  alTociations  would  be  (o 
much  cemented  by  continuance,  as  that  nothing  could 
afterwards  disjoin  them;  which  would  be  madnefs. 

Cor.  3..  A  perfon  may  form  a  judgment  of  the 
(late  of  his  bodily  health,  and  of  his  temperance,  by 
the  general  pleafantnefs  or  unpleafantnefs  of  his 
dreams.  There  alfo  many  ufeful  hints  relating  to 
the  ftrength  of  our  pafljons  deducible  from  them. 


Cc3  SECT. 


3^o  Of  Imperfcaions 


SECT.     VI. 

01'    IMPERFECTIONS    JN   THE    RATIONAL 

FACULTY. 

PROP.     XCII. 

To  examine  how  far  Deviations  from  found  Reajony  and 
Alienations  of  Mindy  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing 
Theory. 

Mad  pcrfons  differ  from  others  in  that  they  judge 
wrong  of  pa(t  or  future  fa<5ts  of  a  common  nature; 
that  their  affedions  and  aflions  are  violent  and  dif- 
ferent from,  or  even  oppofite  to,  thofe  of  others 
upon  the  like  occafions,  and  fuch  as  are  contrary  to 
their  true  happinefs ;  that  their  memory  is  fdllarious, 
and  their  difcourfe  incoherent  j  and  that  they  lofe,  in 
great  mcafure,  that  confcioufnefs  which  accompanies 
our  thoughts  and  aftions,  and  by  which  we  conned 
ourfelves  with  ourfclves  from  time  to  time.  Thefc 
circumllances  are  varioufly  combined  in  the  various 
kinds  and  degrees  of  madnefs ;  and  fome  of  them 
take  place  in  perfons  of  found  minds,  in  certain  de- 
grees, and  for  certain  fpaces  of  timej  fo  that  here, 
as  in  other  cafes,  it  is  impoffible  to  fix  precife  limits, 
and  to  determine  where  foundnefs  of  mind  ends,  and 
madnefs  begins.  I  will  make  fome  fhort  remarks, 
deduced  from  the  theory  of  thefe  papers,  upon  thc', 
following  dates  of  mind,  which  all  bear  fome  rela- 
tion to  one  another,  and  all  differ  from  the  perfedion 
of  reafoning  natural  to  adults,  according  to  the  ordi-' 
nary  courfc  of  things,  viz. 

1.  The  erroneoufnefs  of  the  judgment  in  children 
and  idiots. 

2.  The  dotage  of  old  perfons. 

3.  Drunkennefs. 

4.  The 


in  the  rational  Faculty.  391 

4.  The  deliriums  attending  acute  or  otiier  diftem- 
j-ers. 

5.  The  frequent  recurrency  of  the  fame  ideas  in  a 
ourfe  of  ftudy,  or  otherwife. 

6.  Violent  paffions. 

7.  Melancholy. 

8.  Madnefs. 

OF  THE  ERRONEOUSNESS  OF  THE  JUDGMENT 
IN  CHILDREN  AND  IDIOTS. 

Children  often  mifreprefenc  paft  and  future  fads  i 
their  memories  are  fallacious ;.  their  difcourfe  incohe- 
!nt;  their  affe6tions  and  adions  difproportionate  to 
the  value  of  the  things  defired  and  purfued  j  and 
le  connefting  confcioufnefs  is  in  them  as  yet  imper- 
idi.  But  all  this  follows  naturally  from  the  obfer- 
vations  made  above  concerning  the  methods  in  which 
we  learn  to  remember  and  relate  paft  fadis,  to  judge 
of  future  ones,  to  reafon,  and  to  exprefs  ouifelves 
fuitably  to  each  occafion  j  alfo  in  which  our  hopes 
and  fears  are  made  to  depend  upon  fymbols.  No 
particular  account  is  therefore  required  for  thefe  phse- 
nomena ;  they  are  ftriftly  natural ;  and  many  of  the 
chief  reafons  for  the  imperfeftion  of  the  memory 
and  judgment  in  children  occurring  perpetually,  and 
being  very  obvious,  it  is  not  ufuaily  fuppofed,  that 
any  particular  account  is  required.  However,  if  an 
adult  fhould  become  fubjeft  to  a  like  erroneoufnefs, 
it  would  evidently  be  one  fpecies  of  madnefs ;  as 
fatuity  or  idiotifm  is.  Here  the  brain  labours  under 
fuch  an  original  diforder,  as  either  not  to  receive  a 
difpofition  to  the  miniature  vibraiionc;  in  which  ideas 
confift,  and  whence  voluntary  motions  are  derived, 
but  with  great  difficulty  j  or,  if  it  receives  fuch  dif- 
pofitions  readily,  they  have  not  the  ufual  permanency; 
in  both  which  cafes  it  is  evident,  that  the  memory, 
with    all    the    faculcies     thereon    depending,     muft 

C^  c  4  con- 


391  O/'ImperfefVions 

continue  in  an  imperfoft  ftate,  fuch  as  is  obferved  in 
idiots.  The  want  of  the  connetfting  conrciournfls  in 
children  and  idiots,  and  indeed  in  nnaniacs  of  various 
kinds,  excites  our  pity  in  a  peculiar  manner,  this  con- 
neding  confcioulnefs  being  elleemed  a  principal 
fourcc  and  requifite  of  happinefs.  Their  heipiefs- 
ncfs,  and  the  dangers  to  which  they  are  expofed 
without  forefeeing  tliem,  contribute  alfo  to  enhance 
our  compafTion. 

OF     DOTAGE. 


I 


Tlie   dotage   of  old    perfons   is  oftentimes   ibmc- 
thing   more    than    a    mere   decay    of  memory.     For 
they    miftake    things   prefent    for   others,    and    their 
difcourfe  is  often  foreign  to  the  objeds   that  are  pre- 
fented  to  them.     However,  the  irnperfedlion  of  their 
memories   in   refpecl    of  impreirions   but    juft   made, 
or  at  lliort  intervals  of  paft  time,  is  one  principal  fource 
of  their  miftakes.     One-»may  fuppofe  here,  that  the  . 
parts  of  the  brain,  in  which  the  miniature  vibrations 
belonging  to  ideas  have  taken  place,  are  decayed  in 
a  peculiar  manner,  perhaps  from  too  great  ufe,  while 
the  parts  appropriated  to  the  natural,  vital,  and  anim.al 
motions,  remain  tolerably  perfe6t.     The  finufes  of  the 
brain   are    p'obably    confiderably   diftended    in    thefe 
cafes,  and  the  brain  itfelf  in  a  languifhing  ftate  j  for 
there   feems    to    be   a   confiderable   refemblance   be- 
tween the  inconfiftencies  of  fome  kinds  of  dotage,  and 
thofe  of  dreams.     Befides  which  it  may  be  obferved, 
that  in  dotage  the  perfon  is  often  fluggifli  and  lethargicj 
and   that   as   a  defeft  of  the  nutritive  faculty   in  the 
brain   will    permit  the  finufes  to  be  more  eafily  dif- 
tended, fo   a   diftcntion  of  the   finufes,  from   this  or 
any  other  caufe,    may   impede  the  due  nutrition  of 
the    brain.      We   fee   that,    in   old   perfons,    all   the 
parts,  even    the    bones    themfelves,  wafte,  and   grow 
lefs.     Why   may   not  this  happen  to  the  brain,  the 

oiigin 


in  the  rational  Faculty.  393 

rigin  of  all,  and  arife  from  an  obrtruftion  of  the 
.nhnitefimal  vefTels  of  the  nervous  fyftem,  this  ob- 
ftruftion  caufeth  fuch  a  degree  of  opacity,  as  greatly 
to  abate,  or  even  to  deftroy  the  powers  of  aflbciation 

nd  memory  ?  At  the  fame  time  vibrations,  fo* 
reign  to  the  prefent  objeds,  may  be  excited  from 
caufes  refiding  in  the  brain,  ftomach,  &c.  juft  as  in 
ileep. 

OF     DRUNKENNESS. 

The  common  and  immediate  effeft  of  wine  is  to 
difpofe  to  joy,  i'  e.  to  introduce  fuch  kinds  and  de- 
grees of  vibrations  into  the  whole  nervous  fyftem,  or 
.nto  the  feparate  parts  thereof,  as  are  attended  with 
a  moderate  continued  plcafure.     This  it  feems  to  do 
chiefly   by  imprefllng  agreeable  fenfatlons  upon   the 
ftomach  and   bowels,    which    are   thence   propagated 
into  the  brain,  continue  there,  and  alfo  call  up  the 
feveral    afTociated   pleafures    that   hav?    been    formed 
from  pleafant  impreflions  made  upon  the  alimentary 
duifl,  or  even  upon  any  of  the  external  fenfes.     But 
wine  has  alfo  probably   a  confiderable  effe<fl  of  the 
fame  kind,  after  it  is  abforbed  by  the  veins  and  lac- 
teals,  viz.  by  the  impreftions  which  it  makes  on  the 
folids,  confidered  as  produftions  of  the  nerves,  while 
it  circulates  with  the  fluids  in  an  unafllmilated  ftate, 
in  the  fame  manner,   as  has  been  already  obfsrved 
of    opium ;    which    refembles    wine   in    this   refped 
alio,  that  it  produces  one  fpecies  of  temporary   mad- 
nefs.     And  we  may  fuppofe,  that  analogous  obfer- 
vations  hold  with  regard  to  all  the  medicinal  and  poi- 
fonous  bodies,  which  are  found  to  produce  confider- 
able diforders  in  the  mind  -,  their  greateft  and  moft 
immediate  eflefl  arifes  from  the  iriipreflions  made  on 
the   ftomach,    and    the   diforderly    vibrations   propa- 
gated thence   into  the  brain  ;  and  yet  it  feems  pro- 
bable, that  fuch   particles  as  are  abforbed,  produce/a 
fimiiar  efFed  in  circulating  with  the  blood. 

Wine, 


394  '  ^f  ImperfccSlioiis 

Wine,  afcer  it  is  abfoibed,  mud  rarefy  the  blood, 
and  conl'cqucntly  dillcnd  the  veins  and  (inufcs,  fo  as 
to  make  thenti  comprefs  the  medullary  llibltance,  and 
the  nerves  themklves,  both  in  their  origin  and  pro- 
grefs  i  it  mull  therefore  dilpofe  to  Tome  degree  of  a 
palfy  of  the  feniations  and  motions  j  to  which  there 
will  be  a  farther  difpofition  from  the  great  exhauftioii 
of  the  nervous  capillaments,  and  medullary  fubftance, 
which  a  continued  (late  of  gaiety  and  mirth,  with  the 
various  exprelTions  of  it,   has  occafioncd. 

It  is  moreover  to  be  noted,  that  the  pleafant  vi- 
brations producing  this  gaiety,  by  rifing  higher  and 
higher  perpetually,  as  more  wine  is  takeji  into  the 
ftomach  and  blood  vcfl'cls,  come  at  la(l  to  border  upon, 
and  even  to  pafs  into,  the  difagreeable  vibrations  be- 
longing to  the  palfions  of  anger,  jealoufy,  envy,  &c. 
more  efpccially  if  any  of  the  mental  caufes  of  thefe  be 
prefented  at  the  fame  time. 

Now  it  feems,  that,  from  a  comparifbn  of  thefe  and 
fuch  like  things  witji  each  other,  and  with  what  is 
delivered  in  other  parts  of  thefe  papers,  the  peculiar 
temporary  madnefs  of  drunken  perfons  might  receive 
a  general  explanation.  Particularly  it  feems  natural 
to  expedl,  that  they  fhould  at  firfl:  be  much  difpofed 
to  mirth  and  laughter,  with  a  mixture  of  fmall  in- 
confiftencies  and  abfurdities  j  that  thefe  laft  (hould  in- 
creafe  from  the  vivid  trains  which  force  themfelves 
upon  the  brain,  in  oppofition  to  the  prefent  reality  ; 
that  they  fhould  lofe  the  command  and  {lability  of  the 
voluntary  motions  from  the  prevalence  of  confufed 
vibrations  in  the  brain,  fo  that  thofe  appropriated 
to  voluntary  mdtion  cannot  dcfcend  regularly  as  ufual; 
but  that  they  fhould  (lagger,  and  fee  double  :  that 
quarrels  and  contentions  fliould  arife  after  fome  time ; 
and  all  end  at  lafl  in  a  temporary  apoplexy.  And  it  is 
very  obfervable,  that  the  free  ufe  of  fermented  li- 
quors  difpofes   to   pafTionatenefs,    to    diftempers    of 

the 


I 


in  the  rational  Faculty,  395 

the  head,  to  melancholy,  and  to  downright  mad- 
nefs ;  all  which  things  have  alfo  great  conneftions 
with  each  other. 

The  ficknefs  and  head-ach  which  drunkennefs 
occafions  the  fucceeding  morning,  feem  to  arife,  the 
firfl:  from  the  immediate  impreflions  made  on  the 
nerves  of  the  ftomach ;  the  fecond  from  the  peculiar 
fympathy  which  the  parts  of  the  head,  external  as 
well  as  internal,  have  with  the  brain,  the  pare  princi- 
pally affefted  in  drunkennefs,  by  deriving  their  nerves 
immediately  from  it, 

OF    DELIRIUMS. 

I  come  next  to  confider  the  deliriums  which  Ibme- 
times  attend   diftempers,    efpecially  acute  ones.     In 
thefe  a  difagreeable  ftate  is  introduced  into  the  ner- 
vous fyftem  by  the  bodily  diforder,  which  checks  the 
rife    of    pleafant    affociations,    and   gives   force   and 
quicknefs  to  difguftful  ones  ;  and  which  confcquently 
would  of  itfelf  alone,   if  fufficient  in'  degree,  vitiate 
and  diftort  all  the  reafonings  of  the  fick  perfon.     But 
befides  this,  it  feems,  that,  in  the  deliriums  attend- 
ing diftempers,  a  vivid  train  of  vifible  images  forces 
itfelf  upon  the  patient's  eye,  and  that  either  from  a 
diforder  in  the  nerves  and  blood  veflels  of  the  eye 
itfelf,  or  from  one  in  the  brain,  or  one  in  the  alimen- 
tary dud,  or,  which  is  moft  probable,  from  a  con- 
currence of  all  thefe.     It  feems  alfo  that  the  wild  dif- 
courfe  of  delirious  perfons  is  accommodated  to  this 
train  in  fome  imperfed  manner;  and  that  it  becomes 
fo   wild,    partly   from    the  incoherence  of  the   parts 
of  this  train,  partly  from  its  not  expreffing  even  this 
incoherent  train  adequately,  but  deviating  into  fuch 
phrafes  as  the  vibrations   excited   by    the   diftemper 
in  the  parts  of  the  brain  correfponding  to  the  auditory 
nerves,    or  in  parts   ftill   more  internal,    and    confe- 
quently  the  feats   of  ideas  purely  intelledual,    pro- 
duce 


^ 


396  Of  Imperfc(fbions 

doce  by  their  a(Toci.ncd   influence  over  the  organs  of 
fpccch. 

That  delirious  pcrfons  have  fuch  trains  forced  upon  ^ 
the  eye  from  internal  caufcs,  appears  probable  from  t 
hence,  that  when  they  firll  begin  to  be  delirious, 
and  talk  wildly,  it  is  generally  at  fuch  times  only  as 
jhey  are  in  tlie  dark,  fo  as  to  have  all  vifible  objeAs 
pxclwdedj  for,  upon  bringing  a  candle  to  them,  and 
prefenting  common  objetfts,  they  recover  themfelves, 
and  talk  rationally,  till  the  candle  be  removed  again. 
For  hence  we  may  conclude,  that  the  real  objfds 
overpower  the  vifible  train  from  internal  caufes,  while 
the  delirium  is  in  its  infancy;  and  that  the  pitient 
relaples,  as  foon  as  he  is  fliut  up  in  the  dark,  becaufe 
the  vifible  train  from  internal  caufes  overpowers  that 
which  would  rife  up,  was  the  perfon's  nervous  fyftem 
in  a  natural  flate,  according  to  the  ufual  cou>fe  of 
alFociation,  and  the  recurrent  recollecftion  of  the 
place  and  circumftances  in  which  he  is  fituaied.  By 
degrees  the  vifible  train,  from  internal  caufes,  grows 
fo  vivid,  by  the  increafe  of  the  di.ftemper,  as  even 
to  overpower  the  imprefTions  from  real  objefts,  at 
lead  frequently,  and  in  a  great  degree,  and  fo  as  to 
intermix  itfelf  with  them,  and  to  make  an  inconfift- 
€ncy  in  the  words  and  adions;  and  thus  the  patient 
becomes  quite  delirious, 

Perfons  inclining  to  be  delirious  in  diftempers  are 
mod  apt  to  be  fo  in  going  to  fleep,  and  in  waking  from 
fleep  J  in  which  circumflaaces  the  vifible  trains  are 
more  vivid,  than  when  we  are  quite  awake,  as  has 
been  obferved  above. 

It  cafts  alfo  fome  light  upon  this  fubje61,  that  tea 
and  coffee  will  fometimcs  occafion  fuch  trains;  and 
that  they  arife  in  our  firfl:  attempts  to  fleep  after  thefe 
liquors. 

As  death  approaches,  the  deliriums  attending  dif- 
tempers  abound  with  far  more  incoherences  and  in- 
confiftencies,  than  any  other  fpecies  of  alienations  of 

the 


in  the  rational  Faculty,  397 

the  mind ;  which  may  eafily  be  conceived  to  be  the 
natural  refult  of  the  entire  confufion  and  diforder 
which  then  take  place  in  the  nervous  fyftem.  How- 
ever, there  are  fome  cafes  of  death,  where  the  ner- 
vous fyftem  continues  free  from  this  confufion  to  the 
laft,  as  far  as  the  by-ftanders  can  judge. 

OF  THE  FREQUENT  RECURRENCY  OF 
THE  SAME  IDEAS. 

When  a  peifon  applies  himfelf  to  any  particular 
(tudy,  fo  as   to  fix  his  attention  deeply  on  the  ideas 
and  terms  belonging  to  it,  and  to  be  very  little  con- 
verfant  in  thofc  of  other  branches  of  knowledge,  it  is 
commonly  obfcrved,  that  he  becomes  narrow-minded, 
ftrongly   perfuaded   of  the  truth  and  value  of  many 
things    in    his    own    particular   ftudy,    v.hich   others 
think  doubtful  or  falfe,  or  of  little  importance,  and 
after  fome  time  fubjeft  to  low  fpirits,  and  the  hypo- 
chondriacal diftemper.      Now  all  this   follows   from 
obfervations   already    made.      The   perpetual    recur- 
rency  of  particular  ideas    and  terms  makes  the  vi- 
brations belonging  thereto  become  more  than  ordina- 
rily vivid,  converts  feeble  aflbciations  into  ftrong  ones, 
and   enhances    the    fecondary    ideas   of   dignity    and 
cfteem,  which  adhere  to  them,  at  the  fame  time  that 
all  thefe  things  are  diminifhed  in  refpe6t  of  other  ideas 
and  terms,  that  aje  kept  out  of  view ;    and  which,, 
if  they   weie  to  recur  in  due  proportion,  would  op- 
pofe  and  correct   many  aifociations  in  the  particular 
ftudy,  which   are  made  not   according  to  the  reality 
of  things,    and  keep  down  our   exorbitant  opinions 
of  its  importance.     The   fame  perpetual   lecurrency 
of  vibrations,  affecting  one  and  the  fame  part  of  the 
brain,  in  nearly  one  and  the  fame  manner,  muft  irri- 
tate it  at  laft,  fo  as  to  enter   the  linnits  of  pain,  and 
approach    to    the    ftates    peculiar    to    fear,     anxiety, 
defpondency,    peevifhnefs,   jealoufy,    and   the  reft  of 
the  tribe  of  hypochondriacal  paftions. 

Sleep, 


Dl 


1 

i 

2c^^  Of  Imperfci^tions 

Sleep,  which  prefents  ideas  at  hazard,  as  one  may 
fay,  and  with  Uttld  regard  to  prior  ciflbciarions,  ft-ems 
to  be  of  the  greatdt  life  in  keeping  ofi'  the  hypo- 
chondriacal diltemper  in  fuch  perfons  :  however, 
without  a  change  of  ftudies,  this,  with  great  narrow- 
mindcdncfs,  will  probably  conrie  at  lad. 

It  follows  from  the  fair.e  method  of  reafoning, 
that  fince  the  concerns  of  religion  are  infinite,  fo  that 
we  can  never  over-rate  them,  we  ought  to  make  the 
ideas,  motives,  and  alFcdtions,  of  this  kind,  recur 
as  often  as  polTible.  And  if  this  be  done  in  a  truly 
cniholic  fpirir,  with  all  that  variety  of  actions  which 
our  duty  to  God,  our  neighbour,  and  ourfelves,  re- 
quires, there  will  be  no  danger  of  introducing  either 
narrow-mi ndednefs  or  hypochondriacifm.  And  it 
ought  to  be  edeemed  the  fame  kind  and  degree  of  ali- 
enation of  mind  to  undervalue  a  thing  of  great 
importance,  as  to  overvalue  one  of  fmall. 

OF    VIOLENT    PASSIONS^  Ic 

Perfons  that  are  under  the  influence  of  ftrong  paf- 
fions,  fuch  as  anger,  fear,  ambition,  difappointment, 
have  the  vibrations  attending  the  principal  ideas 
j  fo  much  increafed,  that  thefe  ideas  cling  together, 
\  i.  e.  are  aflbciated  in  an  unnatural  mai;^ner;  at  the 
fame  time  that  the  eagernefs  and  violence  of  the 
pafilon  prevent  the  formation  of  fuch  afibciations, 
or  obfcurc  them,  if  already  formed,  as  are  requifite  for 
the  right  apprehenfion  of  the  paft  and  future  fa6ls, 
which  are  the  objedts  of  this-  padiOn.  Violent  paf- 
fions  mud  therefore  diforder  the  underftanding  and 
judgment,  while  they  laftj  and  if  the  fame  paffion 
returns  frequently,  it  may  have  fo  great  an  effed  upon 
the  aflx)ciations,  as  that  the  intervention  of  foreign 
ideas  fhall  not  be  able  to  fet  things  to  rights,  and 
break  the  unnatural  bond.  The  fame  increafe  of  vi- 
brations makes  all  the  principal  ideas  appear  to  affecl 


in  the  rational  Faculty,  ;399 

felfj  with  the  peculiar  interefting  concern  fuppofed  to 
flow  from  perfonal  identity ;  fo  that  thefe  vibrations 
exert  a  refle6ted  influence  upon  themfelves  by  this 
means.  And  thus  it  appears,  that  all  violent  pafTions 
mufl:  be  temporary  madneires,  and  all  habits  of  them 
permanent  ones,  agreeably  to  the  judgment  of  the 
wife  and  good  in  thefe  things.  It  appears  alfo,  that  vio- 
lent fits  of  pafllon,  and  frequent  recurrencies  of  them, 
muft,  from  the  nature  of  the  body,  often  tranfport 
perfons,  fo  that  they  fhall  not  be  able  to  recover  them- 
felves, but  fall  within  the  limits,  of  the  diftemper  called 
niadnefs  emphatically. 

OF  MELANCHOLY. 

The   next    fpecies    of  alienations   of  the  mind  is 

-lelancholy.     Vapours,    hypochondriacal   and   hyfte- 

:';cal   diforders,    are   comprehended    under  this  clafs. 

The  caufes   of  it  arc  felf-indulgence  in  eating  and 

drinking,  and  particularly  in  fermented  liquors,  want 

of  due  bodily  labour,  injuries  done  to  the  brain  by 

fevers,    concuflTions,    &c.     too   much    application   of 

the  mind,  efpecially  to  the  fame  objefls  and  ideas, 

V  iolent  and  long-continued  pafllons,  profufe  evacua- 

)ns,  and  an  hereditary  difpofitionj    which   lafl   we 

ay  fuppofe  to  confift  chiefly  in  an  undue  make  of 

r'le  brain. 

In   women   the   uneafy   ftates    of   the    uterus   are 

propagated    to    the    brain,    both    immediately    and 

i  mediately,   /.  e.   by  firft   affecfting   the   ftomach,  and 

j thence    the    brain.      In    men    the   original   diforder 

'  ften   begins,  and  continues  for  a  long  time,  chiefly 

a.)  the  organs  of  digeftion, 

I  The  cau/a  froxima  of  melancholy  is  an  irritability 
iof  the  medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain,  difpofing  it 
upon  flight  occafions  to  fuch  vibrations  as  enter  the 
!:mits  of  pain  j  and  particularly  to  fuch  kinds  and 
degrees,  as  belong  to  the  uneafy  pafTions  of  fear,  for- 
row,  anger,  iealoufy,  &c.     And  as  thefe  vibrations, 

when 


400  Of  Impcrkdftions 

when  the  pafTionsarcnot  in  gttac  excels,  do  not  nnuch 
trangrcfs  the  liiiiits  of  plcaluie,  it  will  often  happen 
that  hvpochoniliiac  and  hyltcric  pcrfonb  lli.ili  be  apt 
to  be  tranlpoited  with  joy  from  t/ifiing  caufes,  and 
be,  at  times,  difpofed  to  mirth  and  laughter.  They 
are  alio  very  fickle  and  changeable,  as  having  liieir 
dcfirts,  hopes,  and  fears,  increafed  far  beyond  their 
natural  magnitude,  when  they  happen  to  fall  in  with 
fuch  a  llatc  of  brain  as  favours  them. 

it  often  hnj^pens  to  thelif  perfons  to  have  very  abfurd 
defires,  hopes,  and  fears  ;  and  yet,  at  the  fame  time, 
to  know  them  to  be  abfurd ;  and,  in  conicquencc 
thereof,  to  refift  them*  While  they  do  this,  we  may 
reckon  the  dillempcr  within  the  bounds  of  melan- 
choly; but  when  they  endeavour  to  gratify  very  abfurd 
defires,  or  are  permanently  perfuaded  of  the  reality  of 
very  groundlefs  hopes  and  fears,  and  efpecially  if  they 
lofe  the  conneding  confcioufnefs  in  any  great  dcgree> 
and  violate  the  rules  of  decency  and  virtue  (the  afib- 
ciations  of  this  kind  being  overpowered,  as  it  were,  in 
the  fame  manner  as  they  are  fometimes  in  dreams),  we 
iTiay  reckon  the  diftemper  to  have  pafied  into  mad- 
nefs,  Itridly  fo  called;  of  which  I  now  come  to  fpeak 
in  a  general  brief  way. 

OF     MADNESS. 

The  caufes  of  madnefs  are  of  two  kinds,  bodily 
and  mental.  That  which  arifes  from  bodily  caufes 
is  nearly  related  to  drunkennefs,  and  to  the  deliriums 
attending  diftempers.  That  from  mental  caufes  is 
of  the  fame  kind  with  temporary  alienation^j  of  the 
mind  during  violent  pafiions,  and  witii  the  prejudices 
and  opinionativencfs,  which  much  application  to  one 
fet  of  ideas  only  occafions. 

We  may  thus  diflinguifh  the  caufes  for  the  more 
cafy  conception  and  analyfis  of  the  fubjeft ;  but,  in 
fact,  they  are  both  united  for  the  molt  part.     The 

bodilyi 


in  the  rational  Faculty,  401 

bodily  caufe  lays  hold  of  that  paflion  or  affeflion,  which 
is  moft  difproportionate;  and  the  mental  caufe,  when 
that  is  primary,  generally  waits  till  Ibme  bodily  dif- 
temper  gives  it  full  fcope  to  exert  itfelf.  Agreeably 
to  this,  the  prevention  and  cure  of  all  kinds  of  mad- 
nefs  require  an  attention  both  to  the  body  and  mind  i 
Avhich  coincides  in  a  particular  manner  with  the  gene- 
ral doflrine  of  thefe  papers. 

It  is  obferved,  that  mad  perlbns  often  fpeak  ration- 
ally and  confidently  upon  the  fubjed:s  that  occur, 
provided  that  finglc  one  which  moft  afFefts  them,  be 
kept  out  of  view.  And  the  reafon  of  this  may  be, 
that  whether  they  firft  became  mad,  becaufe  a  parti- 
cular, original,  mental  uneafinefs  falls  in  with  an  ac- 
cidental, bodily  diforder  j  or  becaufe  an  original, 
bodily  diforder  falls  in  with  an  accidental  mental 
one ;  it  muft  follow,  that  a  particular  fet  of  ideas 
fhall  be  extremely  magnified,  and,  confequently,  an 
unnatural  aflbciation  of  famenefs  or  repugnancy  "be- 
tween them  generated,  all  ether  ideas  and  afibciations 
remaining  nearly  the  fame.  Thus,  fuppofe  a  perfon, 
whofe  nervous  fyftem  is  difordercd,  to  turn  his 
thoughts  accidentally  to  fome  barely  pofiible  good  or 
evil.  If  the  nervous  diforder  falls  in  with  this,  it  in- 
creafes  the  vibrations  belonging  to  its  idea  fo  much, 
as  to  give  it  a  reality,  a  connexion  with  /elf.  For 
we  diftinguifh  the  recolleftion  and  anticipation  of 
things  relating  to  ourfelves,  from  thofe  of  things  re- 
lating to  other  perfons,  chiefly  by  the  difi^erence  of 
ftrength  in  the  vibrations,  and  in  their  coalefcences 
with  each  other.  When  one  falfe  pofition  of  this  kind 
is  admitted,  it  begets  more  ofcourfe,  the  fame  bodily 
and  mental  caufes  alfo  continuing ;  but  then  this  pro- 
ccfs  ftops  after  a  certain  number  of  falfe  pofitions 
are  adopted  from  their  mutual  incpnfiftency  (unlefs 
I  the  whole  nervous  fyftem  be  deranged)  i  and  it  is 
often  confined  to  a  certain  kind,  as  the  irafcible,  the 
terrifying,  &c. 

Vol.  1.  D  d  The 


402  Of  Imperfciftions 

The  memory  is  ofcen  much  impaired  in  madnefs, 
whicli  is  both  a  fign  of  the  grcatiiefs  of  the  bodily 
diforder,  and  a  hindrance  to  mental  redilication ; 
and  therefore  a  bad  prognollic.  If  an  oppofite  Hate 
of  body  and  mind  can  be  introduced  early,  before 
the  unnatural  ailociations  are  too  much  cemented, 
the  madnefs  is  cured  ;  if  otherwife,  it  will  remain, 
tliough  both  tlie  bodily  and  mental  caufe  fliould  be 
at  la(t  removed. 

Inquiries  after  the  philofopher's  flone,  the  longi- 
tude, &c.  to  wliich  men  are  prompted  by  ftrong 
ambitious,  or  covetous  defires,  are  often  both  caufe 
and  cfTed,  in  refped  of  madnefs.  ExcelTive  fits  of 
anger  and  fear  are  alfo  found  often  to  hurry  perfons 
into  madnefs. 

In  dilTeftions  after  madnefs  the  brain  is  often  found 
dry,  and  the  blood  veiTcls  much  diftended ;  which  arc 
arguments,  that  violent  vibrations  took  place  in  the 
internal  parts  of  the  brain,  the  peculiar  refidence  of 
ideas  and  paffions ;  and  that  it  was  much  compreiled, 
fo  as  to  obftru6l  the  natural  courfe  of  aflbciation. 

As  in  mad  perfons  the  vibrations  in  the  internal 
parts  of  the  brain  are  preternaturally  increafed,  fo  they 
are  defective  in  the  external  organs,  in  the  glands,  &:c. 
Hence,  maniacs  eat  little,  arc  coflive,  make  little  tva- 
ter,  and  take  fcarre  any  notice  of  external  impredions. 
The  violence  of  the  ideas  and  pafTions  may  give  therr 
great  mufcnlar  ftrength  upon  particular  occafionS; 
when  the  violent  vibrations  deicend  from  the  interna 
parts  of  the  brain  into  the  mufcles,  according  tc 
former  affociations  of  thefe  with  the  voluntary  mo- 
tions (the  fame  increafe  of  vibrations  in  the  interna 
parts  of  the  brain  which  hinders  the  afcending  vibra- 
tions of  fenfation,  augmenting  the  defcending  one; 
of  motion).  But  maniacs  are  often  very  fluggifli,  a! 
well  as  infenfible,  from  the  great  prevalence  of  th< 
ideal  vibrations i  juft  as  perfons  in  a  (late  of  deej 
attention  arc.      An   accurate   hillory   of  the   fevera 

kind 


in  the  rational  Faculty.  403 

kinds  of  madnefs  from  thofe  phyficians,  who  are 
much  converfant  with  this  diftemper,  is  greatly 
wanted,  and  it  would  probably  receive  confiderablc 
light  from  this  theory. 

Religious  confiderations  are  the  beft  prefcrvative 
in  hereditary  or  other  tendencies  to  madnefs  j  as  be- 
ing the  only  fure  means  of  reftraining  violent  paffions, 
at  the  fame  time  that  they  afford  a  conftant  indefi- 
nite hope,  mixed  with  a  filial  awe  and  fear ;  which 
things  are  eminently  qualified  to  keep  up  a  fteadinefs 
and  fobriety  of  mind,  and  to  incite  us  to  fuch  a  courfe 
of  a<5lion,  as  adds  inceffantly  to  the  hope,  and  dimi- 
nifhes  the  fear.  However,  bodily  labour,  with  a 
variety  of  mental  occupations,  and  a  confiderable 
abftemioufnefs  in  the  quantity  and  quality  of  diet, 
ought  always  to  be  joined. 


D  d  2  SECT. 


404  Of  the  Intellcaual 


SECT.     VII. 

OF  THE  INTELLECTUAL  FACULTIES 
OF  BRUTES. 

P  R  O  P.     XCIII. 

'to  examine  how  far  the  Inferiority  of  Brutes  to  Man- 
kind in  intelletlual  Capacities  is  agreeable  to  the  fore- 
going theory. 

If  the  doftrines  of  vibrations  and  aflbciation  be 
found  fufficient  to  folve  the  ph.x'4piTiena  of  fenfa- 
tion,  motion,  ideas,  and  affeftions,  in  men,  it  tvill 
be  rcafonable  to  fuppofe,  that  they  will  alfo  be  fuffi- 
cient to  folve  the  analogous  phzenomena  in  brutes. 
And,  converfely,  it  feems  probable,  that  an  endeavour 
to  apply  and  adapt  ihefe  doctrines  to  brutes  will  caft 
Tome  light  and  evidence  upon  them,  as  they  take 
place  in  men.  And  thus  the  laws  of  vibrations  and 
aflbciation  may  be  as  univcrfal  in  refpedt  of  the  ner- 
vous fyftems  of  animals  of  all  kinds,  as  the  law  of 
circulation  is  with  refpedl  to  the  fyftem  of  the  heart 
and  blood  veflels ;  and  their  powers  of  fenfation  and 
motion  be  the  refult  of  thefe  three  laws,  viz.  circu- 
lation, vibrations,  and  aflbciation,  taken  together. 
Thefe  three  laws  may  alfo  be  mofl;  clofely  united  ia 
their  ultimate  caufe  and  fource,  and  flow  in  ail  their 
varieties  from  very  fimple  principles.  At  leaft  this  is 
the  tenor  of  nature  in  many  fimilar  cafes. 

As  the  whole  brute  creation  diff^ers  much  from, 
and  is  far  inferior  to  man,  in  intellediual  capacities; 
fo  the  feveral  kinds  of  animals  diff'er  much  from 
each  other  in  the  fame  refpe-£t.  But  I  fliall,  in  this 
fedion,   confine   myfelf  chiefly    to   the  confideration 

of 


Faculties  of  Brutes.  405 

of  the  firft  difference,  viz.  of  that  between  mankind 
and  the  brute  creation  in  general  \  and  endeavour  to 
affjgn  fuch  reafons  for  if,  as  flow  from,  or  are 
agreeable  to,  the  theory  of  thefe  papers.  We  may 
fuppofe  then,  that  brutes  in  general  differ  from,  and 
are  inferior  to  man,  in  intelledlual  capacities,  on  the 
following  accounts : 

Firfl,  the  fmall  proportional  (ize  of  their  brains. 

Secondly,  The  imperfeftiop  of  the  matter  of 
their  brains,  whereby  it  is  lefs  fitted  for  retaining  a 
large  number  of  miniatures,  and  combining  them 
by  affociation,  than  man's. 

Thirdly,  Their  wane  of  words,  and  fuch  like 
fymbols. 

Fourthly,  The  inftindive  powers  which  they  bring 
into  the  world  with  them,  or  which  rife  up  from  in- 
ternal caufes,  as  they  advance  towards  adult  age. 

Fifthly,  The  difference  between  the  external  im- 
preffions  made  on  the  brute  creation,  and  on  man- 
kind. 

Firft,  then,  As  the  brains  of  brutes  are  lefs  in 
proportion  to  the  bulk  of  the  other  parts,  than  thofe 
of  men  j  and  as  the  internal  parts  of  the  brain  ap- 
pear from  thefe  papers  to  be  the  peculiar  ieat  of  ideas, 
and  intelleftual  affedions ;  it  feems  very  natural  to 
expert,  that  brutes  lliould  have  a  far  lefs  variety  of 
thefe  than  men.  The  parts  which  intervene  between 
the  optic  and  auditory  nerves,  being  proportionably 
lefs  for  inftance,  in  brutes,  will  not  admit  of  fo  great 
a  variety  of  affociations  between  the  feveral  ideas  of 
thefe  fenfcs,  becaufe  the  optic  and  auditory  nerves 
cannot  have  fo  great  a  variety  of  connexions  and 
communications  with  each  other. 

To  this  it  is  to  be  added,  that  the  internal  parts 
belonging  to  the  olfadory  nerves,  and,  perhaps,  thofe 
belonging  to  the  nerves  of  tafte,  take  up,  probably, 
a  greater  proportional  part  of  the  medullary  fub- 
ftance   of  the   brain   than   in  us,   fince  moft   brutes 

D  d  3  have 


4o6  Of  the  Intelleaual 

have  the  fenfc  of  fmell,  and  perhaps  that  of  tafte 
in  greater  perfeiflion  than  we  have.  There  will  there- 
fore be  ftill  iefs  roonn  left  for  the  variety  of  inter- 
courfes  between  tlie  optic  and  auditory  nerves  in  the 
medullary  fubftance  of  the  brain.  And  yet  it  is  evi- 
dent, from  obvious  obfervations,  as  well  as  from  the 
whole  tenor  of  thefe  papers,  that  the  eye  and  ear, 
with  their  afibciations,  are  the  chief  fources  of  intel- 
le<5t ;  and  that  the  gr^ ateft  part  of  tlie  pleafures  and 
pains  of  human  life  aiife  from  vifible  and  audible 
imprcfTions,  which  in  themfelves  afford  neither  plea- 
fure  nor  pain. 

Thus  it  is  natural  to  expeft,  that  the  happinefs  and 
inifery  of  brutes  fhould  depend  principally,  and  in  a 
direfb  manner,  on  the  impreffions  made  upon  their 
grofs  fenfes,  whilft  that  of  mankind  arifes,  in  great 
ineafure,  from  long  trains  of  aflbciated  ideas  and  emo- 
tions, which  enter  chiefly  by  the  eye  and  ear.  And 
it  feems  to  me  a  very  ftriking  coincidence,  that  man- 
kind fhould  at  the  fame  time  exceed  the  brute  crea- 
tion in  the  variety  of  their  ideas,  arxl  in  the  pro- 
portional largenefs  of  that  part  of  the  body  which  is 
the  peculiar  feat  of  thefe. 

The  fame  proportional  largenefs  may,  as  it  were, 
detain  the  vibrations  which  afccnd  from  external  im- 
preffions  up  to  the  brain,  and  fo  prevent  that  freedom 
of  defcent  into  the  mufcuJar  fyftem  which  takes  place 
in  brutes ;  and  which  difpofes  them  to  move  more 
early,  and  more  readily,  in  confequence  of  diredl  im- 
preffions,  than  men,  at  the  fame  time  that  they  have 
a  far  Iefs  command,  in  refpeft  of  voluntary  motion. 
But  this  difference  depends,  in  great  meafure,  upon 
the  confideracions  that  follow,  as  will  be  fcen. 

Secondly,  That  the  very  conflitution  and  texture 
of  the  nervous  fyftem,  in  its  infinitefimal  veffels, 
fliould  differ  in  brutes  from  that  of  men,  appears 
highly  reafonable  to  be  expected.  And  fince  the 
lives  of  brutes  fall,  in  general,  far  fhort  of  that  of 

man 


Faeukies  of  Brutes.  407 

man,  alio  fince  the  quadrupeds  (which  refemble  man 
iTJore  than  other  animals)  are  far  more  hairy,  and 
fowls  have  feathers,  it  appears  probable,  that  the 
texture  of  the  nervous  fyftem  in  brutes  fhoiild  tend 
more  to  callofity,  and  fixednefs,  in  its  difpofitions  to 
vibrate,  than  in  men.  The  brains  of  young  brute 
animals  will  therefore  be  fooner  able  to  retain  minia- 
tures than  thofe  of  chifdren,  as  tending  more  to  firm- 
nefs  and  fixednefs  in  their  ultimate  texture  and  con- 
llitution ;  at  the  fame  time  that  this  texture  will  unfit 
them  for  receiving  a  variety.  To  which,  if  we 
add  the  (hortnefs  of  their  lives,  and  confequently  of 
their  afcent  to  the  fummit  of  adult  age;  which  afcent 
is  the  proper  time  for  receiving  inftructionj  it  is 
j  eafy  to  fee,  that  on  this  double  account,  as  well  as 
\  that  mentioned  under  the  foregoing  head,  they  muft 
fail  far  fliort  of  mankind  in  the  number  of  their 
intelle6tual  ideas,  pleafures,  and  pains. 

Ic  foUov/s  from  the  fame  method  of  reafoning,  that 
the  few  difpofitions  to  miniature  vibrations,  which 
are  generated  in  brutes,  may  be  as  perfeiSt  in  their 
kinds  J  and  confequently  the  memory,  and  fiioit, 
dire(5l  ratiocination  depending  thereon,  as  perfect 
alfo,  as  the  analogous  things  in  man.  Nay,  they 
may  be  more  fo,  if  the  particular  animal  under  con- 
fideration  excel  man  in  the  acutenefs  and  precifior. 
of  thofe  fenfes,  whofe  ideas  make  a  principal  part  of 
this  ratiocination.  Now  it  appears,  that  moft  qua- 
<4rupeds  exceed  us  in  the  acutenefs  of  the  fmell,  and 
in  the  power  of  diftinguifhing  a  variety  of  fmells. 
And  many  birds  feem  to  be  able  to  fee  difiindly  -w. 
much  greater  diftances.  However,  our  audirorv 
nerves,  and  the  regions  of  the  brain  correfponding 
thereto  appear  far  better  fitted  for  retaining  a  va- 
riety of  miniatures  of  articulate  founds ;  and  our  op- 
tic nerves,  and  the  regions  of  the  brain  correfpond- 
ing thereto,  for  retaining  a  variety  of  miniatures  of 
ftiapes  and  colours.      And,    next  to  man,    quadru- 

D  d.  4  peds. 


4o8  Of  the  Intellectual  : 

pedsi  and  particularly  monkeys,  dogs,  and  horfes, 
i'cem  to  have  thcfe  regions  of  tiic  brain  in  the  greateft 
jxrfeiftion. 

If  the  texture  of  the  brains  of  animals  here  con- 
fidered   be   alfo,  in   part,  the  caufe  of  their  being  co- 
vered witli  hair,   wool,  bridles,  feathers,  &c.  it  may, 
from  ihis  its  effedl,  difpofe   them   ro  greater  ftrength 
and    expertnefs    in     their    motions,    and    that   more 
early,  than  happens  to  men.    For  all  thefe  are  ele^rics 
per  Ji\  and   confequently    may   fuft   have  a   confider- 
ablc  degree  of  this  power    communicated    to    them 
by  the   Iieat  of  the  circulating  blood  ;  and  then,  not 
being  able  to  tranfmit  it  to  the   air,  which   is  alfo  an 
cletlvic  -per  Jcy  may   refled   it   upon   the  rnufcles,  and 
thereby  difpofe  them   to  fomewhat    greater    a6livity. 
It  is  well  known,  that  the  manes  of  horfes,  and  backs 
of  cats,  arc  made  ele6lric   by  their  vital  powers.     It 
may  farther   be  obferved,  that  the  hoofs   of  animals 
are  ele^Irics  per  jc,  and  that  the  feathers   of  water- fowl 
repel  the   water ;    whence  the   eleftric  virtue  may  be 
kept   from   running  off  to  the  earth    and    water    re- 
fpefVivcly.      However,    we   ought    not   to   lay  much 
ftrefs  upon  this  eledric  virtue  in   the  mufcular  fibres 
of  brutes  (if  there  be  any  fuch   virtue)   in  order  to 
account  for  the  fuperior  and   more    early    power   of 
animals,  in  refpefl  of  ordinary  motions.^     The  texture 
of  the  fibres  of  the  mufcles,  and  that  of  the  brain, 
mull  have  the  principal  fhare  in  this  effe(5l. 

It  is  alfo  to  be  confidered,  that  as  they  have  far 
fewer  voluntary  motions,  on  account  of  having  far 
fewer  ideas,  ^o  they  may  arrive  at  a  greater  perfec- 
tion in  the  automatic  ones,  and  the  fmall  number  of 
voluntary  ones  which  they  do  perform,  on  this  account. 
Man  is  diftrafced,  as  it  were,  by  the  endlefs  variety 
of  his  ideas,  and  voluntary  motions  :  and  it  is  notori- 
ous, that  none  befides  extraordinary  geniufes  arrive 
at  perf'eclion  in  any  confidcrable  variety  ;  whereas  a 
perfon  of  fmall   natural  capacity,    by  fclefling  fome 

one 


Faculties  of  Brutei.  409 

one  branch  of  fcience,  or  manual  art,  and  applying 
himfelf  to  this  alone,  may  perform  wonders.  Nay, 
there  have  been  inftances  of  perfons  not  much  removed 
from  idiocifm,  who  could  perform  the  arithmetical 
operations  by  memory,  far  better  than  men  of  good 
underftandings,  well  verfed  in  thofc  operations;  which 
is  a  thing  lomewhat  analogous  to  the  extraordinary 
fagacity  in  inveftigating  and  concluding,  which  brutes 
difcover,  in  refpedt  of  fome  particular  things. 

Thirdly,    The  next  circumftance,    which    renders  I 
brutes  far  inferior  to  man  in  intellectual  acquifitions,  ' 
is  their  want'  of  fymbols,    fuch  as  words,    whereby  , 
to   denote   objedls,    fenfations,    ideas,    and  combina-  1 
tions  of  ideas.     This  may  appear  from  feveral  confi-  1 
derations.     Thofe  men  who  happen  to  be  born  in  a  ! 
country   where    the   mother-tongue    is    copious    and   1 
precife,  who  apply  themfelves  to   the  ftudy  of  their    \ 
mother-tongue,    who,    befides    this,    learn    one    or 
more  foreign   tongues,  &c.    get,  by  thefe  means,  a 
confiderable  fliare  of  the  knowledge  of  things  them- 
felves, learn  to  remark,  prove,  difprove,  and  invent, 
and  ceteris  paribus^  make  a  quicker  progrefs  in  men- 
tal  accomplilhments,  than  others.     On  the  contrary 
the  mental  improvement  of  perfons  born  deaf  is  ex- 
tremely retarded  by  their  incapacity  of  having  things 
fuggefted    by    articulate    founds,    or   the   pictures  of 
thefe,  and  aifo  by  their  not  being  able  to  folve  the 
inverfe     problem,    and    denote   their   own   trains   of 
thought  by  adequate  fymbols.     Words  are  the  fame 
kind  of  helps    in    the   inveftigation   of  qualities,    as 
algebraical  fymbols,    and   methods  are   in  refpeft  of 
quantity,    as    has    been    already   remarked.     Perfons 
born  deaf  cannot  therefore  make  any  great  progrefs 
in  the  knowledge  of  caufes  r.nd   effefts,  in  abftraded 
and  philofophical  matters ;  but  muft  approach,  as  it 
were,    to  the  ftate  of  the  brute   creation.      On   the 
contrary,  brute  creatures,  that  have  much   intercourfe 
with  mankind,  fuch  as  dogs  and  horfes,  by  learning 

the 


4»o  Of  the  Intelleduai 

the  ufe  of  words  and   fymbols  of  other  kinds,    be- 
come more  lagacioiis  than  they  -.vould  otherwife  be. 

And  if  particular  pains  be  taken  with  them,  their 
docihty  and  fagacity,  by  means  of  fymbois,  fome- 
timcs  arife  to  a  very  furprizing  degree. 

Parrots  might  be  thought,  according  to  diis  view 
of  tlie  prefent  fubjcdl,  to  have  fome  particular  ad- 
vantages over  quadrupeds  by  their  being  able  to  pro- 
nounce words;  fince,  as  has  been  obferved  before, 
the  attempts  which  children  make  to  apply  words 
to  things,  afljft  them  very  much  in  underftanding  the 
applications  made  by  others.  But  parrots  do  not 
fcem  to  fpeak  from  any  particular  acutenefs  and  pre- 
cifion  in  the  auditory  nerves,  and  parts  of  the  brain 
correfponding  thereto,  having  no  cochlea,  but  from 
the  perfcdlion  and  pliablenefs  of  their  vocal  organs, 
in  which  they  exceed  other  birds  j  as  birds  in  gene- 
ral do  beafts.  And  it  is  reafonable  to  think,  that  qua- 
drupeds, which  refemble  man  fo  nearly  in  the  make 
of  rhe  organ  of  hearing,  ns  well  as  in  other  parts, 
and  which  alfo  have  naturally  much  more  intercourfe 
with  man  (being  fellow-inhabitants  of  the  earth)  than 
birds  (which  inhabit  the  air),  (hould  likewife  have  a 
gieater  faculty  of  diftingu idling  the  articulate  founds 
of  man's  voice,  retaining  their  miniatures,  and  ap- 
plying them  to  the  things  fignified,  than  birds  ; 
which  feems  evidently  to  be  the  cafe.  Sagacious 
quadrupeds  may  therefore  be  faid  to  refemble  dumb 
perfons  arrived  at  adult  age,  who  are  poffefled  of 
much  knowledge,  which  yet  they  cannot  exprefs,  ex- 
cept by  geftures,  by  dumb  fhew  :  whereas  parrots, 
as  before  remarked,  refemble  children;  thefe  having 
many  words  with  very  little  knowledge  annexed  to 
them. 

Apes  and  monkeys,  of  the  feveral  kinds,  feem  to 
approach  neareft  to  man,  in  the  general  faculty  of 
reafoning,  and  drawing  conclufions ;  but  in  parti- 
cular things,  efpecially  v/here  inllinft  prevails,  fome 

other 


Faculties  of  Brutes,  411 

jther  brutes  far  exceed  them ;  as  indeed  fuch  brutes 
do.  man  himfelf  in  a  few,  on  account  of  the  peculiar 
acutenefs   of  the   fenfe   of  fmell,  and  the  fame  in- 

ftina. 

I  reckon  the  want  of  articulate  founds  to  be  one  of 
the  reafons  why  brutes  are  fo  much  inferior  to  men 
in  intellectual  capacities;  becaufe  it  appears,  from  the 
foreeoincT  and  other  confiderations  of  the  fame  kind, 
that  it  is  fo.     But  this  is  no  imperfeftion  upon  the 
whole.     The  proportional   fmallnefs  of  their  brains, 
the  texture  of  thefe,  their  inftinds,  and  their  external 
circumftances,  are  fuch,  that  they  do  not  want  lan- 
guage much ;  that  they   could  make  no  great  ufe  of 
it,   had  they   proper  organs  for  fpeakingj    and  that 
tKey  would   probably  be  lofers,  upon  the  whole,  by 
having  it.     The   efficient   and  final  caufes  are  here 
fuited  to  each  other,  as  in  all   other  cafes  j  fo   that 
no  circuiTiftance  can  be  changed  for  the  better,  ceteris 
manentibus. 

Fourthly,  Let  us  come  to  the  inftinftive  powers 
of  animals.     Thefe  are  a  point  of  a  very  difficult 
confideration.     They  are  evidently  not  the  refult  of 
external  impreffions  by   means  of  the  miniatures  of 
thefe,    their    aflbciations   and   combinations,    in    the 
manner  according  to  which  I   have  endeavoured  to 
Ihew,    that   the    rational    faculties    of    mankind   are 
formed  and  improved;  and  yet,  in  the  inftances  to 
which  they  extend,  they  very  much  refemble  the  ra- 
tional faculties  of  mankind.    Animals,  in  preparing  and 
providing  for  themfelves  and  their  young,  in  future 
exigencies,  proceed   in  the  fame  manner  as  a  perfon 
of  good  underftanding,  who  forefaw  the  event,  'would 
do ;  and  this,  even  though  they  be  a  litde  put  out  of 
their  way.     And  in  this  they  much  refemble  perfons 
of  narrow  capacities  and  acquificions,  who  yet  excel 
greatly  in  fome  particukr  art  or  fcience ;  of  which 
there  are  many  inftances.     Such  perfons  fiiew  great 
ingenuity  in  the  things  to  which  they  are  accuftomed, 

and 


412  Of  the  Intellectual 

and  in  fomc  others  that  border  upon  them  within 
certain  limits,  lb  as  to  fhew  great  ingenuity  Hill, 
thoiigl;  put  a  little  out  of  their  way  ;  but  if  they  be 
put  much  out  of  their  way,  or  queftioned  abcuit  things 
that  are  entirely  foreign  to  the  art  or  fcience  in  which 
they  excel,  they  are  quite  loft  and  confounded, 

Let  us  fuppofe  this  to  be  the  cafe,  and  then  the 
Inquiry  concerning  inHind  in  brutes  will  be  reduced 
to  this,  viz.  By  what  means  the  nervous  fyftems  of 
brutes  arc  made  to  put  on  difpofitions  to  miniature 
vibrations,  analogous  to  thofc  which  take  place  in 
the  perfons  here  confidercd  ;  and  which  are  in  them 
the  refult  of  foregoing  imprelfions,  if  we  admit  the 
theory  of  thefe  papers.  Nov/,  to  me,  there  feems 
no  difficulty  in  afcribing  this  to  the  mere  bodily  make 
in  brutes,  fo  that  miniature  vibrations,  fuch  as  anfwer 
in  us  to  ideas,  and  voluntary  motions,  fliall  fpring 
up  in  them  at  certain  ages  and  feafons  of  the  year, 
and  mix  themfelves  with  impreffions,  and  acquired 
ideas,  fo  as  to  be,  in  general,  fuitable  to  them ; 
and,  in  general,  to  dired  the  brute  creatures  in  what 
manner  to  provide  for,  and  preferve  themfelves  and 
iheir  young. 

This  would  be  a  kind  of  infpiration  to  brutes, 
mixing  itfelf  with,  and  helping  out,  that  part  of 
their  faculties  which  correfponds  to  reafon  in  us,  and 
which  is  extremely  imperfedl  in  them.  Only  this  in- 
fpiration might  be  called  natural,  as  proceeding  from 
the  fame  ftated  laws  of  matter  and  motion  as  the 
other  phaenomena  of  nature;  whereas  the  infpiration 
of  the  facred  writers  appears  to  be  of  a  much  higher 
fource,  fo  as  to  be  termed  fupernatural  properly,  in 
contradiftinftion  to  all  knowledge  refulting  from  the 
common  laws  of  nature.  And  yet  it  may  refult  from 
fome  higher  laws  of  nature.  For  facred  infpi- 
ration would  lofe  nothing  of  its  authority,  though 
it  fh  )uld  appear  to  be  within  fuch  laws,  as  by  their 
fixcdnefs  might  be  termed   HiAture :   and    indeed   all 

differences 


Faculties  of  Bruits.  413 

differences  in  thefe  things,  after  the  fafts  are  once 
fettled,  wili  be  found,  upon  due  inquiry,  to  be 
merely  verbal. 

Fifthly,  The  laft  caufe  here  afligned  for  the  great 
difference  and  inferiority  of  brutes,  in  refpe6l  of  in- 
tellectual capacities,  is  the  difference  in  the  events 
and  incidents  of  their  lives.  They  converfe  with  far 
fewer  objedls  than  nnen,  and  both  the  obje<5is  and 
pieafures  of  feeling,  tafte,  and  fmell,  have  a  far 
greater  proportional  fliare  in  the  fum  total,  than  in 
us.  Now,  as  in  men,  the  common  events  and  in- 
cidents of  life  give  a  turn  to  the  whole  frame  of 
mind,  and  either  enlarge  the  intelleftual  capacities,  if 
they  be  various,  or  narrow  them,  if  the  fame  occur- 
rences return  again  and  again  perpetually ;  fo,  inde- 
pendently of  all  the  foregoing  confiderations,  the 
lamenefs,  paucity,  and  relation  to  mere  fenfe,  of  the 
impreffions  made  on  brutes,  mull  infer  a  great  nar- 
rownefs  of  undei  Handing. 

From  all  thefe  things  put  together,  it  appears  very 
conceivable,  how  the  mental  faculties  of  brutes  fhould, 
confillendy  with  the  dodtrines  of  vibrations  and  af- 
fociation,  be  what  they  are,  in  faft,  found  to  be.  And 
though  I  fuppofe  with  Dejcartes^  that  all  their  mo- 
tions are  conducted  with  mere  mechanilm  j  yet  I  do 
not  fuppofe  them  to  be  deftitute  of  perception,  but 
that  they  have  this  in  a  manner  analogous  to  that 
which  takes  place  in  us ;  and  that  it  is  fubjected  to 
the  fam.e  mechanical  laws  as  the  motions.  Whether 
the  ideal  vibrations,  which  take  place  in  the  medullary 
fubftances  of  their  brains,  be  the  refult  of  former  im- 
prefiions,  or  the  mere  offspring  of  their  vital  and 
natural  powers,  agreeably  to  the  foregoing  hypothefii 
concerning  inftinft,  or  the  compound  effect  of  both, 
which  we  may  prefume  to  be  generally  the  cafe,  I  al- 
ways fuppofe,  that  correfponding  feeling?,  and  af- 
fedions  of  m.ind,  attend  upon  them,  juft  as  in  us. 
And  the  brute  creatuies  prove  their  near  relation  to 

us, 


414  Q/"  ^^c  Intelkdlual 

us,  not  only  by  the  general  lefemblance  of  the  body, 
but  by  that  of  the  mind  alfo;  inafmuch  as  many  of 
them  have  moll  of  the  eminent  pafllons  in  fome  im- 
pel fe«5t  degree,  and  as  there  is,  perhaps,  no  pafllon 
belonging  to  human  nature,  which  rii^y  not  be  found 
in  fome  brute  creature  in  a  confiderable  degree. 

The  brutes  fecm  fcarce  ever  able  to  arrive  at  any 
proper  felf-inteiell  of  the  abttrad:  and  refined  kind, 
at  confcioufncfs,  fo  as  to  compare  and  connedl  them- 
fclves  wich  themfelves  in  ditrcrent  fituations,  or  at 
any  idea  and  adoration  of  God  j  and  this  from  the 
narrownefs  of  their  capacities  and  opportunities  in  ge- 
neral, but  particularly  from  their  want  of  fymbols. 

The  fame  want  of  fymbols  muft  make  all  their 
reafonings  and  afFedlions,  which  refemble  ours  in  the 
general,  be,  however,  confiderably  different  in  par- 
ticulars, and  far  lefs  complex  j  but  it  is  fufficient  to 
entitle  them  to  the  names  of  lagacity,  cunning,  fear, 
love,  &:a  by  which  ours  are  denoted,  that  the  trains 
of  ideal  vibrations  in  their  brains  bear^  a  general  re- 
femblance  to  the  correfponding  ones  in  ours,  fpring 
from  like  caufes,  and  produce  like  effcds. 

The  power  of  nffociation  over  brutes  is  very  evi- 
dent in  ail  the  tricks  which  they  are  taught;  and  the 
whole  nature  of  each  brute,  which  has  been  brought 
up  amongft  others  of  the  fame  fpecies,  is  a  com- 
pound of  inftincr,  his  own  obfervation  and  experi- 
ence, and  imitation  of  thofe  of  his  own  fpecies.  In- 
ftind  feems  to  have  exerted  its  whole  influence  when 
the  creature  is  arrived  at  maturity,  and  has  brought 
up  young ;  fo  that  nothing  new  can  be  expeded 
from  it  afterwards.  But  their  intellectual  acquifitions 
from  obfervation  and  imitation  continue ;  whence  old 
brutes  are  far  more  cunning,  and  can  aft  far  better, 
pro  re  nata,  than  young  ones. 

It  ought  always  to  be  remembered  in  fpeaking  on 
this  fubje(5b,  that  brutes  have  more  reafon  than  they 
can  Ihew,  from  their  want  of  words,  from  our  in- 
attention. 


{•"acuities  of  Brutes,  415 

attention,  and  from  our  ignorance  of  the  import  of 
thofe  fymbols,  which  they  do  ufe  in  giving  intima- 
tions to  one  another,  and  to  us. 

We  feem  to  be  in  the  place  of  God  to  them,  to 
be  his  vicegerents,  and  empowered  to  receive  homage 
from  them  in  his  name.  And  we  are  obliged  by  the 
fame  tenure  to  be  their  guardians  and  benefactors. 


CHAP. 


41^  Of  the  Pleafures  atnl 


CHAP.     IV. 


Of  the  SIX  Classes^  ^  intellectual  Pleasures 

and  Paii^s. 


I  have  now  difpatched  the  hiftory  and  analyfis  of 
the  fenfations,  motions,  and  ideas  j  and  endeavoured 
to  fuic  them,  as  well  as  I  could,  to  the  principles 
laid  down  in  the  firft  chapter.  My  next  bufinefs, 
is  to  inquire  particularly  into  the  rife  and  gradual 
incrcafe  of  the  plealures  and  pains  of  imagination, 
ambition,  felf-intereft,  iympathy,  theopathy,  and 
the  moral  fenfe  j  and  to  fee  how  far  thefe  can  be 
deduced,  in  the  particular  forms  and  degrees  that 
arc  found  to  prevail,  in  faft,  from  the  fcnfible 
plcafures  and  pains,  by  means  of  the  general  law 
of  aflbciation.  As  to  that  of  vibrations,  it  feems 
of  little  importance  in  this  part  of  the  work,  whether 
it  be  adopted  or  not.  If  any  other  law  can  be  made 
the  foundation  of  aflbciation,  or  confident  with  it, 
it  may  alfo  be  made  confident  with  the  analyfis  of 
the  intellectual  plealures  and  pains,  which  I  fhall 
here  give.  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  other  law 
that  can ,  on  the  contrary,  there  feems  to  be  fo  pe- 
culiar an  aptnefs  in  the  doftrine  of  vibrations,  for 
explaining  many  of  the  phcTnomena  of  the  pafTions, 
as  almofl:  excludes  all  others. 

Now  it  will   be  a   fufficient  proof,  that  all  the  in- 
tellectual pleafures  and  pains  are  deduciblc  ultimately 

from 


Of  the  Plea/ures,  &c.  417 

from  the  fenfible  ones,  if  we  can  (hew  of  each  in- 
tellf(5lual  pleafure  and  pain  in  particular,  that  it  takes 
'  its  rife  from  other  pleafures  and  pains,  cither  fenfible 
or  intellc(5tual.  For  thus  none  of  the  intelledual 
pleafures  and  pains  can  be  original.  But  the  fl-nfibie 
pleafures  and  pains  arc  evidently  originals.  They 
are  therefore  the  only  ones,  /.  e.  they  are  the  com- 
mon fourcc  fiom  whence  all  the  intelleftual  pleafures 
and  pains  are  ultimately  derived. 

When  I  fay,  that  the  intclle6lual  pleafures  J  and 
5  are  deducible  from  one  another,  I  do  not  mean, 
that  ^  receives  back  again  from  B  that  luftre  which 
it  had  conferred  upon  it ;  for  this  would  be  to  argue 
in  a  circle;  but  that  whereas  both  yf  and  B  borrow 
from  a  variety  of  fources,  as  well  as  from  each 
other,  they  may,  and  indeed  mufl:,  transfer  by  aflb- 
ciation  part  of  the  luftre  borrowed  from  foreign 
fources  upon  each  other. 

If  we  admit  the  power  of  aflbciation,  and  can  alfo 
Ihew,  that  aflfociations,  fufficient  in  kind  and  degree, 
concur,  in  faft,  in  the  feveral  inftances  of  our  iniel- 
Jedlual  pleafures  and  pains,  this  will,  of  itfelf,  exclude 
all  other  caufes  for  thefe  pleafures  and  pains,  fuch  as 
inftind:  for  inftance.  If  we  cannot  trace  out  aflbci- 
ations  fufficient  in  kind  and  degree,  ftill  it  will  not 
be  neceflary  to  have  recourfe  to  other  caufes,  becaufe 
great  allowances  are  to  be  made  for  the  novelty, 
complexnefs,  and  intricacy  of  the  fubjedl.  However, 
on  the  other  hand,  analogy  may  perhaps  lead  us  to 
conclude,  that  as  inftind:  prevails  much,  and  reafon  a 
little  in  brutes,  fo  inftinft  ought  to  prevail  a  little  in 
us.     Let  the  fadls  fpeak  for  themfclves. 


Vol.  I.  Ee  SECT. 


41 8  Of  the  Tknjures  and 


SECT.     I. 

OF    THE     PLEASURES     AND    PAINS    OF 
IMAGINATION. 

I  BEGIN  with  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  imagina- 
tion i  and  fliall  endeavour  to  derive  each  fpecies  of 
them  by  aflbciation,  either  from  thofe  of  fenfation, 
ambition,  fclf-intereft,  fympathy,  theopathy,  and  the 
moral  fcnfc,  or  from  foreign  ones  of  imagination. 
They  may  be  diftinguifhed  into  the  feven  kinds  that 
follow. 

Firft,  The  pleafures  arifing  from  the  beauty  of  the 
natural  world. 

Secondly,  Thofe  from  the  works  of  art. 

Thirdly,  From  the  liberal  arts  of  mufic,  painting, 
and  poetry. 

Fourthly,  from  the  fciences. 

Fifthly,  From  the  beauty  of  the  perfon. 

Sixthly,  From  wit  and  humour. 

Seventhly,  The  pains  which  arife  from  grofs  ab- 
furdity,  inconfiftency,  or  deformity. 

PROP.     XCIV. 

^0  examine  how  far  the  juji -mentioned  Pleafures  and 
Pains  of  Imagination  are  agreeable  to  the  Do^rine  of 
^Jfociation. 

Of  the  Pleasures  arifing  from  the  Beauty  of  the 
NATURAL  World. 

The  pleafures  arifing  from  the  contemplation  of 
the  beauties  of  the  natural  world  feem  to  admit  of 
the  following  analyfis. 

The 


Pains  of  Imagination.      '  419 

The  pleafant  taftes,  and  fnnells,  and  the  fine  co- 
lours of  fruits  and  flowers,  the  melody  of  birds,  and 
the  grateful  warmth  or  coolnefs  of  the  air,  in  the 
proper  feafons,  transfer  miniatures  of  thefe  pleafures 
upon  rural  fcenes,  which  ftart  up  inftantaneoufly  fo 
mixed  with  each  ocher,  and  with  fuch  as  will  be 
immediately  enumerated,  as  to  be  feparately  in- 
difcernible. 

If  there  be  a  precipice,  a  catarafb,  a  mountain  of 
fnow,  &c.  in  one  part  of  the  fcene,  the  nafcent  ideas 
of  fear  and  horror  magnify  and  enliven  all  the  other 
ideas,  and  by  degrees  pafs  into  pleafures,  by  fug- 
gefting  the  fecurity  from  pain. 

In  like  manner  the  grandeur  of  fome  fcenes,  and 
the  novelty  of  others,  by  exciting  furprize  and  won- 
der, i.  e.  by  making  a  great  difference  in  the  pre- 
ceding and  fubfequent  dates  of  mind,  fo  as  to  border 
upon,  or  even  enter  the  limits  of  pain,  may  greatly 
enhance  the  pleafure. 

Uniformity  and  variety  in  conjunftion  are  alfo  prin- 
cipal fources  of  the  pleafures  of  beauty,  being  made 
fo  partly  by  their  affociation  with  the  beauties  of 
nature;  partly  by  that  with  the  works  of  art;  and 
with  the  many  conveniences  which  we  receive  from 
the  uniformity  and  variety  of  the  works  of  nature 
and  art.  They  mud  therefore  transfer  part  of  the 
luftre  borrowed  from  the  works  of  art,  and  from 
the  head  of  convenience,  upon  the  works  of  na- 
ture. 

Poetry  and  painting  are  much  employed  in  fetting 
forth  the  beauties  of  the  natural  world,  at  the  fame 
time  that  they  afford  us  a  high  degree  of  pleafure 
from  many  other  fources.  Hence  the  beauties  of 
nature  delight  poets  and  painters,  and  fuch  as  are 
addidled  to  the  ftudy  of  their  works,  more  than 
others.  Part  of  this  effed  is  indeed  owing  to  the 
greater  attention  of  fuch  perfons  to  the  other  fources ; 
but  this  comes  to  the  fame  thing,  as  far  as  the  general 

E  e  2  theory 


4  20  Of  the  rUafures  and 

theory   of  the    factitious,   aflbciatcd   nature   of  thcfc 
pleakircs  is  concerned. 

The  many  fpotts  and  paftinnes,  which  are  peculiar 
to  the  country,  and  whole  ideas  and  pleafures  arc  re- 
vived by  the  view  of  rural  fcenes,  in  an  evancfcent 
ftate,  and  fo  mixed  together  as  to  be  leparately  indif- 
cernible,  do  farther  augment  the  pleafures  fuggclled 
by  the  beauties  of  nature. 

To  thefe  we  may  add,  the  oppofition  between  the 
offenfivenefs,  dangers,  and  corruption  of  populous 
cities,  and  the  health,  tranquillity,  and  innocence, 
which  the  adual  view,  or  the  mental  tonten.plarion, 
of  rural  Icenes  introduces  j  alfo  the  pleafures  of  foci- 
ality  and  mirih,  which  are  often  found  in  the  greateft 
perfedion  in  country  retirements,  the  amorous  plea- 
fures, which  have  many  connexions  wirh  rural  fcenes, 
and  thofe  which  the  opinions  and  encomiums  of  others 
beget  in  us,  in  this,  as  in  other  cafes,  by  means  of 
the  contagioufnefs  obfervable  in  mental  difpofuions, 
as  well  as  bodily  ones. 

Thofe  perfons  who  have  already  formed  high  ideas 
of  the  power,  knowledge,  and  goodnefs  of  the  au- 
thor of  nature,  with  fuitable  affcdions,  generally 
feel  the  exalted  pleafures  of  devotion  upon  every 
view  and  contemplation  of  his  woiks,  either  in  an 
explicit  and  diftindt  manner,  or  in  a  more  fecret  and 
implicit  one.  Hence,  part  of  the  general  indetermi- 
nate pleafures,  here  confidercd,  is  deducible  from 
the  pleafures  of  theopaihy. 

We  jr.ufl:  not  omit  in  this  place  to  remind  the 
reader  of  a  remaik  m.ade  above,  viz.  that  green, 
which  is  the  middle  colour  of  the  feven  primuiy  ones, 
and  confequently  the  mod  agreeable  to  the  organ  of 
fight,  is  alfo  the  general  colour  of  the  vegetable 
kingdom,  i.  e.  of  external  nature. 

Thefe  may  be  confidered  as  fome  of  the  principal 
fources  of  the  beauties  of  nature  to  mankind  in  ge- 
neral. 


\  Pains  of  Imagination,  421 

neral.  Inqiiifitive  and  philofophical  perfons  have  fome 
,  others,  arifing  from  their  peculiar  knowledge  and  ftudy 
\  of  natural  hiftory,  aftrononny,  and  philofophy,  in 
\  general.  For  the  profufion  of  beauties,  ufes,  fic- 
I  nefies,  elegance  in  minute  things,  and  magnificence 
\  m  great  ones,  exceed  all  bounds  of  conception,  fur- 
i'  prize,  and  aftonifliment  j  new  fcenes,  and  thofe 
\  of  unbounded  extent,  feparately  confidered,  ever 
\  prefenring  themfelves  to  view,  the  more  any  one 
I     ftudies  and  contemplates  the  works  of  God. 

And,  upon  the  whole,  the  reader  may  fee,  that 
i  there  are  fufficient  fources  for  all  thofe  pleafures 
of  imagination,  which  the  beauties  of  nature  excite 
in  different  perfons;  and  that  the  differences  which 
are  found  in  different  perfons  in  this  refped,  are 
fufficiently  analogous  to  the  differences  of  their  fitua- 
tions  in  life,  and  of  the  confcquent  affociations  form- 
ed in  them. 

An  attentive  perfon  may  alfo,  in  viewing  or  con- 
templating the  beauties  of  nature,  lay  hold,  as  it 
were,  of  the  remainders  and  miniatures  of  many  of 
the  paiticular  pleafures  here  enumerated,  while  they 
recur  in  a  feparate  fbate,  and  before  they  coalefce 
with  the  general  indeterm.inate  aggregate,  and  thus 
verify  the  hiftory  now  propofed. 

It  is  a  confirmation  of  this  hiftory,  that  an  atten- 
tive perfon  may  alfo  obferve  g.eat  differences  in  the 
kind  and  degree  of  the  relifh  which  he  has  for  the 
beauties  of  nature  in  different  periods  of  his  life; 
cfpecially  as  the  kind  and  degree  may  be  found  to 
agree  in  the  main  with  this  hiftory. 

To  the  fame  purpofe  we  may  remark,  that  thefe 
pleafures  do  not  cloy  very  foon,  but  are  of  a  lafting 
nature,  if  compared  with  the  fenGble  ones;  fince 
this  follows  naturally  from  the  great  variety  of  their 
fources,  and  the  cvanefcent  nature  of  their  con- 
ftituent  parts. 

E  c  3  When 


422  Of  the  PUaJures  and 

When  a  beautiful  fcene  is  firft  prefentrd,  there  is 
generally  great  plcafurc  fiom  furprize,  from  being 
lliuck  with  objcdls  and  circunollanccs  which  we  did 
not  expedl.  This  prtfently  declines}  but  is  abun- 
dantly compenfated  afterwards  by  the  gradual  alter- 
nate exaltation  of  the  leveral  conftitucnt  patts  of  the 
complex  pltafurcs,  which  alfo  do  probably  enhance 
one  another.  And  thus  we  may  take  feveral  reviews 
of  the  fame  fcene,  before  the  pleafure,  which  it  af- 
fords, comes  to  its  maximum.  After  this  the  pleafure 
mufl:  decline,  if  we  review  it  often :  but  if  at  con- 
fiderablc  intervals;  fo  as  that  many  foreign  ftates  of 
mind  intervene,  alfo  fo  as  that  new  fources  of  the 
pleafures  of  this  kind  be  broken  up,  the  pleafure  may 
recur  for  many  fucceflions  of  nearly  the  fame  mag- 
nitude. 

The  fame  obfervations  hold  in  refpe<5l  of  the  plea- 
fures from  the  beauties  of  nature  in  general,  and  in- 
deed from  all  the  other  fources,  works  of  art,  liberal 
aits,  fciences,  &c.  Thefe  all  ftrike  and  furprife  the 
young  mind  at  firft,  but  require  a  confiderable  tinie 
before  they  come  to  their  maximum  j  after  which 
fome  or  other  will  always  be  at  its  maximum  for  a 
confiderable  time.  However,  the  pleafures  of  ima- 
gination in  general,  as  well  as  each  particular  fet  and 
individual,  mufl:  decline  at  laft  from  the  nature  of 
our  frame.  In  what  manner  they  ought  to  decline, 
fo  as  to  be  confident  with  our  Jummum  hnum,  by 
yielding,  in  due  time,  to  more  exalted  and  pure 
pleafures,  whofe  compofition  they  enter,  I  will  en- 
deavour to  fhcw  hereafter. 

Thefe  plealures  are  a  principal  fource  of  thofe 
which  are  annexed  to  the  view  of  uniformity  with 
variety,  as  above  noted,  i.  e.  of  analogies  of  various 
orders  ;  and  confequently  are  a  principal  incitement 
to  our  tracing  out  real  analogies,  and  forming  artificial 
ones. 

The 


Pains  of  Imagination.  423 

The  novel,  the  grand,  and  the  marvellous,  are 
alfo  moft  confpicuous  in  the  works  of  nature  ;  and 
the  laft  ftrikes  us  particularly  in  many  of  the  phse- 
nomena  of  nature,  by  feeming  to  exceed  ail  bounds 
of  credibility,  at  the  fame  time  that  we  are  certified 
by  irrefragable  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  fafls. 
The  fatiety  which  every  pleafure  begets  in  us,  after 
fome  continuance,  makes  us  third  perpetually  after 
the  grand  and  novel ;  and,  as  it  were,  grafp  at  infi- 
nity in  number  and  extent:  there  being  a  kind  of 
tacit  expedation,  that  the  pleafure  will  be  in  pro- 
portion to  the  magnitude  and  variety  of  the  caufes, 
in  the  fame  manner  as  we  obferve,  in  other  cafes, 
the  effefts  to  be  in  fome  degree  proportional  to 
their  caufes. 

The  pleafures  of  novelty  decline  not  only  in  this 
clafs,  but  alfo  in  all  the  others  fenfible  and  intel- 
ledlual,  partly  from  our  bodily  fiame,  partly  from 
the  intermixture,  and  confrquent  afTociation  of  neu- 
tral circumftances  (z.  e.  fuch  as  afford  neither  pleafure 
nor  pain)  in  their  fucceffive  recurrences. 

A  difpofition  to  a  pleafurable  ftate  is  a  general  at- 
tendant upon  health,  and  the  integrity  of  our  bodily 
faculties ;  and  that  in  fuch  a  df  gree,  as  that  aftual 
pleafure  will  fpring  up  from  moderate  incitements, 
from  the  tranfient  introduction  of  the  aflbciated  cir- 
cumftances of  former  pleafurable  ftates.  If  the  body 
be  indifpofcd  in  fome  degree,  it  is,  however,  pofTible 
to  force  it  into  a  ftate  of  pleafure  by  the  vivid  intro- 
duction of  various  and  powerful  circumftances  j  but 
this  unnatural  ftate  cannot  laft  Ion?  :  and,  if  the  in- 
difpofition  to  pleafure  be  great,  it  cannot  be  intro- 
duced at  all.  On  the  contrary,  where  the  difpofition 
to  pleafure  is  preternaturally  prevalent,  as  after  v^ine 
and  opium,  and  in  certain  morbid  cafes,  the  leaft 
hint  will  excite  profufe  joy,  leaning  chiefly  to  the 
pleafures  of  imagination,  ambition,  fympathy,  or 
devotion,  according  to  the  circumftances. 

E  c  4  It 


4^4  0/  ^^^  Plea/uns  and 

It  is  cnfy  to  fee  how  the  doifliinc  of  vibrations, 
which  apptars  to  be  the  only  one  that  admits  of 
periii.inent  ftates  of  motion,  and  difpofition  to  mo- 
tion, in  the  brain,  fuits  thefc  laft  remarks  in  a 
peculiar  manner. 

OF  THE  BllAUTJES  OF  THE  WORKS  OF  ART. 

The  works  of  art,  which  afford  us  the  pleafures 
of  beauty,  are  chiefly  buildings,  public  and  private, 
religious,  civil,  and  military,  with  their  appendages 
and  ornainents,  and  machmes  of  the  feveral  kinds, 
from  the  great  ones  employed  in  war,  commerce, 
and  public  affairs,  fuch  as  fhips,  military  engines, 
machines  for  manufacturing;  metals,  &c.  down  to 
clocks,  watches,  and  domeftic  furniture.  The  fur- 
vey  of  thefc  things,  when  perfect  in  their  kinds, 
affords  great  pleafures  to  the  curious;  and  thefe  plea- 
fures  increafe  for  a  certain  time,  by  being  cultivated 
and  gratified,  till  at  laft  they  come  to  their  height, 
decline,  and  give  way  to  others,  as  has  been  already 
obferved  of  the  pleafures  arifing  from  the  beauties 
of  nature. 

The  chief  fources  of  the  pleafures,  which  the  fore- 
mentioned  woiks  of  art  afford,  appear  to  be  the  fol- 
lowing :  the  beautiful  illuminations  from  gay  co- 
lours j  the  refcmblancc  which  the  play-things,  that 
pleafed  us  when  we  were  children,  bear  to  them  j  the 
great  regularity  and  variety  obfervable  in  them;  the 
grandeur  and  magnificence  of  fome,  and  the  neat- 
nefs  and  elegance  of  others,  and  that  efpecially  if  they 
be  fmall ;  the  fitnefs  to  anfwer  ufeful  ends ;  their 
anfwering  a  multiplicity  of  thefe  by  fimple  means,  or 
by  analogous  complex  ones,  not  exceeding  certain 
limits  in  complexnefs ;  the  knowledge  conveyed  in 
many  cafes  j  the  ftrong  affociations  with  religion, 
death,  war,  juftice,  power,  riches,  titles,  high 
birth,  entertainirents,  mirth,  &c.  fafhion,  with  the 
opinions  and  encomiums  of  perfons  fuppofed  to  be 

judges ; 


Paws  of  Imagination.  425 

judges ;  the  vain  dcfire  of  having  a  rafte,  and  of  be- 
ing thought  connoiffcurs  and  judges,  &c.  &c. 

In  architedure  there  are  certain  proportions  of 
breadths,  lengths,  depths,  and  entire  magnitudes,  to 
each  other,  which  are  by  fotne  fuppofed  to  be  naturally 
beautiful,  juft  as  the  finnple  ratios  of  1  to  2,  2  to  3, 
3  to  4,  &c.  in  mufic,  yield  founds,  which  are  natu- 
rally plcafant  to  the  ear.  But  it  rather  feems  to  me, 
that  ceconomical  convenience  fi'ft  determined  the 
ratios  of  doors,  windows,  pillars,  &c.  in  a  grofs 
way;  and  thtn  that  the  convtriience  of  the  artifts 
fixed  this  de-teimination  to  fome  few  exadl  ratios,  as 
in  the  proportion  between  the  lengths  and  breadths 
of  the  pillars  of  the  feveral  orders.  Afterwards  thefe 
proportions  became  aflbciated  fo  often  with  a  variety 
of  beauties  in  coftiy  buildings,  that  they  could  not 
but  be  thought  naturally  beautiful  at  laft.  In  merely 
ornamental  parts  the  beauty  of  the  proportions  feems 
to  arife  entirely  either  from  fafhion,  or  from  a  fuppofed 
refemblance  to  fomething  already  fixed  as  a  beautiful 
proportion.  It  is  eafy  from  thefe  principles  to  account 
for  the  prevalency  of  different  proportions,  and  ge- 
neral taftes,  in  different  ages  and  countries. 

0/  the  Pleasures  arijing  from    Music,    Painting, 

and  Poetry. 

Let  us  next  confider  the  three  liberal  and  fifter 
arts  of  mufic,  painting  and  poetry. 

OF     MUSIC. 

Now,  in  refped  of  mufic,  it  is  to  be  obferved,  that 
the  fimple  founds  of  all  uniform  fonorous  bodies,  and 
particularly  the  fingle  notes  of  the  feveral  mufical 
kiftfuments,  aifo  all  the  concords,  or  notes,  whofe 
vibrations  bear  to  each  other  the  fimple  ratios  of  i  to 
2,  2  to  3,  3  to  4,  &c.  founded  together,  or  near  to 

each 


4^6  Of  the  PUaJures  and 

each  other,  may,  be  confidered  as  originally  pleafant 
to  the  ear.  Difcords  are  originally  unpleafant,  and 
therefore,  as  in  other  like  cafes,  may  be  made  ufe  of 
to  heighten  our  pleafures,  by  being  properly  and 
fparingly  introduced,  fo  as  to  make  a  ftrong  contrail. 
To  which  if  we  add  the  uniformity  and  variety  ob- 
fervable  in  all  good  mufic,  we  fhall  have  the  chief 
pleafures  affeding  children,  and  young  perfons,  upon 
their  being  firft  accuftomed  to  hear  mufic. 

By  degrees  the  difcords  become  lefs  and  lefs  harfh 
to  the  ear,  and  at  laft  even  pleafant,  at  leaft  by  their 
affociations  with  the  concords,  that  go  before,  or 
follow  them  ;  fo  that  more,  and  alfo  more  harfh  dif- 
cords, are  perpetually  required  to  give  a  relilh,  and 
keep  the  fweetnefs  of  the  concords  from  cloying. 
Particular  kinds  of  air  and  harmony  are  aflbcjated 
with  particular  words  affcdlions,  and  paffions,  and 
fo  are  made  to  exprefs  thefe;  bcfides  which  there  is 
often  a  natural  aptitude  in  the  mufic  to  reprefent  the 
afFeftion,  as  in  quick  mufic,  and  concords,  to  repre- 
fent  mirth.  Mufic  in  general  is  conneflcd  with  gai- 
ety, public  rejoicings,  the  amorous  pleafures,  riches, 
high  rank,  ^c.  or  with  battles,  forrow,  death,  and 
religious  contemplations.  There  is  an  ambition  to 
excel  in  tafte,  in  performance,  and  in  compofition, 
and  a  difficulty  which  enhances  the  pleafure,  i^c.  ^c. 
till,  by  thefe  and  fuch-like  ways,  the  judgments  and 
taftes  of  different  perfons,  in  refpedt  of  mufic,  be- 
come as  different,  as  we  find  them  to  be  in  fad. 


OF     PAINTING. 

Our  pleafures  from  piflures  arc  very  nearly  related 
to  thofe  of  imitation,  which,  as  was  obferved  above, 
take  up  a  confiderable  part  of  our  childhood  i  and  the 
feveral  play  things  reprefenting  men,  houfcs,  horfes, 
i^c.  with  which  children  are  fo  much  delighted,  arc 

to 


Paim  of  Imagination,  427 

to  be  confidered,  both  as  augmenting  and  gratifying' 
this  tafte  in  them. 

To  this  it  is  to  added,  that  as  the  ideas  of  fight 
are  the  mod:  vivid  of  all  our  ideas,  and  thofe  which 
are  chiefly  laid  up  in  the  memory  as  keys  and  repo- 
ficories  to  the  reft,  pidures,  which  are  fomeihing  in- 
termediate between  the  real  object  and  the  idea,  and 
therefore  in  cafes  of  fufficient  likenefs  more  vivid 
than  the  idea,  cannot  but  plcafe  us  by  thus  gratifying 
our  defire  of  raifing  up  a  complete  idea  of  an  abfent 
objefl.  This  an  attentive  perfon  may  obferve  in 
himfclf  in  viewing  pidlures. 

The  furprize  and  contraft  which  arife  in  children, 
upon  their  feeing  pcrfons  and  obje<5ts  prefent  in  their 
piftures,  which  yet  they  know  to  be  abfent  by  ftrik- 
ing  the  mind  with  the  impoffible  conception  of  the 
fame  thing  in  two  places,  are  probably  the  fources 
of  confiderable  plcafure  to  ihem. 

To  thefe  caufes  let  us  add  the  gay  colours,  and 
fine  ornament^,  which  generally  go  along  with  pic- 
tures J  and  we  (hall  have  the  chief  fources  of  the  plea- 
fures  which  painting  affords  to  young  perfons,  and  to 
thofe  who  have  not  yet  been  much  affedled  with  the 
various  incidents  of  life,  and  their  reprefentations, 
or  acquired  a  tafte  and  fkill  in  thefe  things. 

For,  after  this  the  pleafures  arifing  from  pictures 
are  quite  of  another  kind,  being  derived  from  the 
fame  fources  as  thofe  that  belong  to  the  fcenes, 
affedlions  and  pafTions  reprefented,  from  the  poetical 
defcriptions  of  thefe,  from  the  precife  juftncfs  of 
the  imitation,  from  ambition,  fafhion,  the  extrava- 
gant prices  of  the  works  of  certain  mafters,  from 
affociation  with  the  villas  and  cabinets  of  the  noble, 
the  rich,  and  the  curious,  &c.  &c. 

The  nature  of  the  caricatura,  burlefque,  grotefque, 
pifturefque,  &c.  may  be  underftood  from  what  ii,  de- 
livered  in   other   parts   of  this   feftion,    concerning 

laughter. 


428  Of  the  Pleafures  and 

laughter,  wit,   humour,    the  mavellous,  abfurd,  &c. 
to  which  they  correfpond. 

Painting  has  a  great  adv.intnge  over  verbal  de- 
fcription,  in  rclped  of  the  vividncfs  and  number  of 
ideas  to  be  at  once  excited  in  the  fancy  ;  but  its 
compafs  is,  upon  the  whole,  much  narrovvci  j  and 
it  is  alfo  confined  to  one  point  of  time. 

The  rcprefentations  of  battles,  ftorms,  wild  beafls, 
and  other  objefts  of  horror,  in  pidores,  plcafe  us 
peculiarly,  partly  from  the  near  alliance  which  the 
ideas  fuggefted  bear  to  pain,  partly  fom  the  fccret 
confcioulnefs  of  our  own  fecutity,  and  partly  becaufe 
they  awaken  and  agitate  the  mind  fufficiently  to  be 
ftrongly  affcded  with  the  other  pleafures,  which  may 
then  be  offered  to  it. 


OF     POETRY. 

The  beauties  and  excellencies  of  good  poetry  are 
deducible  from  three  fources.  Firft,  The  harmony, 
regularity,  and  variety  of  the  numbers  or  iinetre, 
and  of  the  rhyme.  Secondly,  The  fitnefs  and 
ftrength  of  the  words  and  phrafes.  Thirdly,  The 
fubjeft  matter  of  the  poem,  and  the  invention  and 
judgment  exerted  by  the  poet,  in  regard  to  his 
fubjcdt.  And  the  beauties  arifing  from  each  o" 
ihele  are  much  transferred  upon  the  other  two  by 
affociation. 

That  the  verfification  has  of  itfelf  a  confiderable 
influence,  may  be  feen  by  putting  good  poetical 
pafTages  into  the  order  of  profe.  And  it  may  be 
accounted  for  from  what  has  been  already  obferved 
of  uniformity  and  variety,  from  the  fmoothnefs  and 
facility  with  which  verfes  run  over  the  tongue,  from 
the  frequent  coincidence  of  the  end  of  the  fentence, 
and  that  of  the  v^rk,  at  the  fame  time  that  this  rule 
is  violated  at  proper  intervals  in  all  varieties,  left  the 

ear 


Pains  of  Imagination.  429 

car  ihould  be  tired  with  too  much  famenefs,  from  the 
affiftance  which  verfification  affords  to  the  memory, 
from  fome  faint  refcmblance  which  it  bears  to  mufic, 
and  its  frequent  alTociaticns  with  it,  &c.  &c. 

The  beauties  of  the  didlion  arife  chiefly  from  the 
figures ;  and  therefore  it  will  be  neceflary  here  to 
inquire  into  the  fources  of  their  beauties. 

Now  figurative  words  feem  to  ftrike  and  pleafe  us 
chiefly  from  that  impropriety  which  appears  at  firft 
fight,  upon  their  application  to  the  things  denoted 
by  them,  and  from  the  confcquent  heightening  of  the 
propriety,  as  foon  as  it  is  duly  perceived.  For  when 
figurative  words  have  recurred  fo  often  as  to  excite 
the  fecondary  idea  inftantaneoufly,  and  without  any 
previous  harfhnefs  to  the  imagination,  they  lofe  their 
peculiar  beauty  and  force;  and,  in  order  to  recover 
this,  and  make  ourfclves  fenfible  of  it,  we  are  obliged 
to  recall  the  literal  fenfe,  and  to  place  the  literal  and 
figurative  fenfes  clofe  together,  that  fo  we  may  firft 
be  fenfible  of  the  inconfiftency,  and  then  be  more 
afFcdled  with  the  union  and  coalefcence. 

Bcfides  this,  figurative  exprefllons  illuminate  our 
difcourfes  and  writings  by  transferring  the  proper- 
ties, aflbciations,  and  emotions,  belonging  to  one 
thing  upon  another,  by  augmenting,  diminifhing,  &c. 
and  thu«,  according  as  the  fubje^l  is  ludicrous  or 
grave,  they  either  increafe  our  rnirth  and  laughter, 
or  excite  in  us  love,  tendernefs,  compaflJion,  admi- 
ration, indignation,  terror,  devotion,  &c. 

When  figures  aie  too  diftant,  or  too  obfcure, 
when  they  augment  or  diminifh  too  much,  we  are 
difpleafed  ;  and  the  principal  art  in  the  ufc  of  figures 
is,  to  heighten,  as  far  as  the  imagination  will  permit, 
the  greateft  beauty  lying  upon  the  confines  of  what 
difgufts  by  being  too  remote  or  bombaft.  And 
this  extreme  limit  for  figurative  expreflions  (hews 
evidently,    that    the   pleafure   arifing   from    them    is 

nearly 


430  Of  the  Pknfurcs  and 

nearly  allied  to  pain  ;    and  their  beauty  owing  to  a 
ccitain  kind  and  degree  of  intonfiftency. 

However,  as  the  various  figures  ufcd  in  fpeaking 
and  writing  have  great  ir.fluences  over  each  other, 
alter,  and  are  much  altered,  as  to  their  relative  ener- 
gy, by  our  p.ilTions,  cufloms,  opinions,  conflitulions, 
educations,  &c.  there  can  be  no  fixed  ftandard  for 
determining  what  is  beaury  here,  or  what  is  the  de- 
gree of  it.  Every  perfon  may  find,  that  his  tafte  in 
thcfe  things  receives  confiderable  changes  in  his  pro- 
grels  tliioiigh  life;  and  may, '  by  careful  obfcrvation, 
trace  up  thcfe  changes  to  the  aflbciations  that  have 
caufed  them.  And  yet,  fince  mankind  have  a  gene- 
ral refemblance  to  each  other,  both  in  their  internal 
make,  and  external  circumflances,  there  will  be  fome 
general  agreements  about  thefe  things  common  to  all 
mankind.  The  agreements  will  alfo  become  per- 
petually greater,  as  the  pcifons  under  confideration 
are  fuppofed  to  agree  more  in  their  genius,  ftudies, 
external  circuirllances,  &c.  Hence  may  be  feen,  in 
part,  the  foundation  of  the  general  agreements  obfer- 
vable  in  critics,  concerning  the  beauties  of  poetry,  as 
well  at.  that  of  their  paiiicular  difputes  and  differ- 
ences. 

It  may  alfo  be  proper  to  remark  here,  that  the 
cuftom  of  introducing  figures  in  a  copious  manner 
into  poetry,  together  with  the  tranfpofitions,  ellipfes, 
fupeifluities,  and  high  ftrained  exprefTions,  which 
the  laws  of  the  verfification  have  forced  the  beft 
poets  upon,  in  fom.e  cafes,  have  given  a  fandtion  to 
certain  othervvife  unallowable  liberties  of  exprefTion, 
and  to  a  moderate  degree  of  obfcurity,  and  even  con- 
veited  them  into  beauties.  To  which  it  may  be 
added,  that  a  momentary  obfcurity  is  like  a  difcord 
in  mufic  properly  introduced. 

The   pleafure   which  we  receive  from  the  matter  of 
the  poem,  and  the  invention  and  judgment  of  the 

poet. 


Pains  of  Imagination.  431 

poet,  in  this  refpedt,  arifcs  from  the  things  them- 
felves  defcribed  or  reprefented.  It  is  neceffary  there- 
fore, that  the  poet  (hould  choofe  fuch  fcenes  as  are 
beautiful,  terrible,  or  otherwife  ftrongly  afFeding, 
and  fuch  charadlers  as  excite  love,  pity,  juft  indig- 
nation, &c.  or  rather,  that  he  fhould  prefent  us  with 
a  proper  mixture  of  all  thefe.  For,  as  they  will  all 
pleafe  fingly,  fo  a  well  ordered  fuccefTion  of  them 
will  much  enhance  thefe  feparate  pleafures,  by  the 
contrails,  analogies,  and  coincidences,  which  this 
may  be  made  to  introduce.  In  all  thefe  things  the 
chief  art   is  to  copy   nature  fo   well,    and   to  be  fo  j 

^  exa6l  in  all  the  principal  circumftances  relating  to  I 
actions,  paffions,  &c.  /.  e.  to  real  life,  that  the  reader  ' 
may  be  infenfibly  betrayed  into  a  half  belief  of  thell 
truth  and  reality  of  the  fcene. 

Verfes  well  pronounced  affedt  us  much  more,  than 
when  they  merely  pafs  over  the  eye,  from  the  imita- 
tion of  the  afFedions  and  paffions  reprefented,  by  the 
human  voice  j  and  ftill  much  more,  when  adled 
well,  and  heightened  by  the  proper  conjundlion  of 
realizing  circumftances. 

Since  poetry  makes  ufe  of  words,  which  are  the  I 
principal  channel  of  mutual  communication  for  our 
thoughts  and  afFcflions,  and  has  by  this  means  an 
unlimited  compafs  in  rcfpe£t  of  time,  place,  &c.  it 
muft,  upon  the  whole,  harve  great  advantages  over 
painting. 

As  the  pleafures  of  imagination  are  very  prevalent,- 
and  much  cultivated,  during  youthj  fo,  if  we  confider 
mankind   as  one  great  individual,  advancing   in  age 
perpetually,  it  fcerns   natural  to  expedl,  that  in   the- 

j  infancy  of  knowledge,  in  the  early  ages  of  the  world, 
^he  tafte  of  mankind  would  turn  m.uch  upon  the 
pleafures  of  this  clafs.  And  agreeably  to  this  it  may 
Be  obferved,  that  mufic,  painting,  and  poetry,  were 
much  admired  in  ancient  times;  and  the  two  laft 
brought  to  great  perfedion.  What  was  the  real  per- 
fection 


432  Of  thi  Pkafures  and 

fcdion  of  the  ancient  Grecian  mufic,  alfo  how  far 
the  modetn  very  arcirtcial  connpofuions  ought  lo  be 
allowed  to  excel  thcdi,  muft  be  left  to  thole  who  are 
judges  of  thele  matteis. 

l  he  beauties  of  oratory  are  very  nearly  allied  to 
thofe  of  poetry,  arifing  partly  fiom  an  harmonious 
flow  and  cadence  of  the  periods,  fo  that  uniformity 
and  variety  may  be  properly  mixed,  partly  fronn 
the  juftnefs  and  neivoufnefs  of  the  exprefllons,  and 
partly  from  the  force  of  the  arguments  and  motives 
brought  together  by  the  invention  of  the  orator,  and 
fo  difpofed  as  to  convince  the  judgi  ent,  excite  and 
gain  thr  affections.  In  both  cafes  it  i^  very  necef- 
lary,  that  the  reader  or  hearer  fhould  conceive  fa- 
vourably of  the  defign  and  author,  in  a  moial  light. 
Poetry  has  the  advantage  of  oratory,  in  refpedl  of  the 
fweeinefs  of  the  numbers,  and  boidnefs  of  the 
figuies;  but  oratory,  being  a  real  thing,  and  one 
which  has  great  influence  in  many  the  mofl  im- 
portant tranfadions,  does,  by  this  reality,  aflfetfk 
fome  perfons  more  than  poetry ;  I  mean  perfons 
that  are  mere  readers  or  hearers ;  for,  as  to  thofe 
that  are  interefted  in  the  debate,  to  whom  it  is  a 
reality,  there  can  be  no  doubt. 

The  beauties  of  hiftory  will  eafily  be  underfl^ood 
froin  what  is  faid  of  poetry  and  oratory. 

It  is  to  be  obfeived,  that  poetry,  and  all  fiflirious 

/    hiftory,  borrow  one  chief  part  of  their  influence  from 

'     their   being   imitations   of  real   hiftory,   as   this   again 

does  from   the  ftrong  afi^eftions  and   pafllons  excited 

by  the  events  of  life,  and  from  the  contagioufnefs  of 

our  tempers  and  difpoficions. 

The  fame  kind  of  contrafts  and  coincidences, 
which,  in  low  and  comic  things,  would  be  wit  or 
humour,  become  the  brilliant  paflages  that  afi^efb  and 
ftrike  us  moft  eminently  in  giave  poetry,  in  oratory, 
and  hiftory. 

OF 


1 


Pains  of  imagination.  433 

OF   THE  PLEASURES    ARISING    FROM    THE 
STUDY    OF   THE   SCIENCES. 

The  ftudy  of  the  Icienres  has  a  great  conncflion 
with  the  natural  and  artificial  beauties  already  confi- 
dered,  and  receives  great  luftrc  from  them  in  confe- 
quence  thereof. 

But  befides  this,  there  are  many  original  fources 
of  pleafure  in  the  ftudy  of  the  fcienccs  :  as,  Firft, 
From  the  many  inftanccs  of  uniformity  with  varie- 
ty :  Secondly,  From  the  marvellous  and  feemingly 
impofTibie,  which  occur  in  all  parts  of  knowledge: 
Thirdly,  From  the  great  advantages  refpcfting  hu- 
man life,  which  accrue  to  mankind  in  general  from 
the  purfuit  t>f  knowledge,  alfo  fiotn  the  honours, 
riches,  &c.  which  are  the  rewards  conferred  upon 
particular  perfons  that  are  eminent:  Laftly,  From 
the  numerous  connections  of  truth  of  ail  kinds  with 
thofe  moil  amiable  and  important  doctrines,  which 
religion,  natural  and  revealed,  teaches  us.  And  when 
thele  pleafures,  in  their  feveral  fubordinate  kinds  and 
degrees,  have  been  fufficiently  ,  aflbciated  with  the 
favouite  ftudy,  they  render  it  at  laft:  pleafant  in  itfelf, 
as  we  ufuaily  term  it,  i.  e.  thefe  feveral  particular 
pleafures  coalefce  into  a  fingle  general  one,  in  which 
the  compounding  parts  cannot  be  difcerned  feparately 
from  each  other,  and  which  confequently  appears 
to  have  no  relation  to  its  feveral  compounding  parts; 
unlcfs  when  by  a  particular  attention  to,  and  exami- 
nation of,  what  pafles  in  our  minds,  we  lay  hold  of 
the  laft  compounding  parts  before  their  entire  coa- 
lefcence,  or  reafon  upon  the  caufes  of  thefe  pleafures, 
by  comparing  their  growth,  and  the  changes  made 
in  them,  with  the  concomitant  circum.ftances.  Thus, 
if  it  be  obferved  as  a  general  faft,  that  perfons  grow 
fond  of  particular  ftudies,  remarkably  after  having 
received  fome  great  prefent  advantage,  or  hope  of  a 
future  one  from  them,  we  may  reafonable  prefume, 

Vol.  I.  F  f  .  that 


434  ^f  '^-'^  Pleajures  and 

that  the  pleafiire  which  they  take  in  thefe  ftudies,  is 
in  pait  derived  from  this  foiirce,  even  though  it  can- 
not be  felt  to  arilt:  from  it  explicitly. 


OF    INVENTION. 

The  copioufnefs  and  quicknefs  of  the  invention 
being  principal  requifites  for  the  cultivation  of  the 
arts  and  fciences  with  fuccefs,  1  will  fay  fomething 
concerning  invention  here,  nny  fubjcft  being  now 
fufficiently  opened  for  that  purpofe. 

Invention  then  may  be  defined  the  art  of  produ- 
cing new  beauties  in  works  of  imagination,  and  new 
truths  in  matters  of  fcience.  And  it  feems  to  depend, 
in  both  cafes,  chiefly  upon  thefe  three  things.  Firft, 
A  ft'ong  and  quick  memory:  Secondly,  An  exten- 
five  knowledge  in  the  arts  and  fciences  j  and  parti- 
cularly in  thofe  that  are  contiguous  to,  or  not  far 
diftant  from,  that  under  confideration  :  And,  Thirdly, 
The  habit  of  forming  and  purfuing  analogies,  the 
deviations  from  thefe,  and  the  fubordinate  analogies 
vifible  in  many  of  thefe  firft  deviations,  &c.  &c. 

Firft,  A  ftrong  and  quick  memory  is  necefTary, 
that  fo  the  ideas  of  the  poet  or  philofopher  may  de- 
pend upon,  and  be  readily  fuggefted  by,  each  other. 

Secondly,  He  mufl  have  a  large  (lock  of  ideas 
for  the  purpofes  of  figures,  illuftrations,  comparifons, 
arguments,  motives,  criterions,  &c.  And  it  is  evi- 
dent that  the  ideas  taken  from  fuch  parts  of  know- 
ledge, as  are  pretty  nearly  allied  to  his  particular  ftudy, 
will  be  of  moft  ufe  to  him  in  it. 

Thiidly,  Analogy  will  lead  him  by  degrees,  in 
works  of  fancy,  from  the  beauties  of  celebrated 
mafters  to  others  lefs  and  lefs  refetrjbling  thefe,  till  at 
laft  he  arrives  at  fuch  as  bear  no  vifible  refem- 
blance.  Deviations,  and  the  fubordinate  analogies 
contained  within  them,  will  do  this  in  a  much  greater 
degree ;    and  all  analogies  will  inftru6t  him  how  to 

model 


Pains  of  Imagination.  435 

model  properly  fuch  entirely  new  thoughts,  as  his 
memory  and  acquaintance  with  things  have  fuggefted 
to  him.  In  fcience  analogy  leads  on  prrpetually  to 
new  propofitions  i  and,  being  itfelf  fome  prefumption 
of  truth,  is  a  guide  much  preferable  to  mere  imagi- 
nation. 

It  may  be  obferved,  that  the  trains  of  vifible  ideas, 
which  accompany  our  thoughts,  are  the  principal 
fund  for  invention,  both  in  matters  of  fancy,  and  in 
fcience. 

As  invention  requires  the  three  things  here  fpoken 
of,  fo,  converfcly,  no  perfon  v^ho  is  poffefled  of  them, 
and  who  applies  himfelf  to  any  particular  ftudy  either 
of  the  imaginative  or  abftiatl  kind,  with  fufficienc 
affiduity,  can  fail  for  want  of  invention.  And  the 
nature  of  this  faculty  feems  as  reconcileable  with, 
and  deducible  from,  the  power  of  alTociation,  and 
the  mechanifm  of  the  mind  here  explained,  as  that 
of  any  other. 

OF    THE    BEAUTY    OF   THE    PERSON. 

The  word  heauty  is  applied  to  the  perfon,  parti- 
cularly in  the  female  fex,  in  an  eminent  manner ;  and 
the  defiies  and  pleafures  arifing  from  beauty,  in  this 
fenfe,  may  be  confidered  as  an  intermediate  ftep  be- 
tween the  grofs  fenfual  ones,  and  thofe  of  pure  crteem 
and  benevolence  j  for  they  are,  in  part,  deduced  from 
both  thefe  extremes  j  they  moderate,  fpiritualize,  and 
improve  the  firft,  and,  in  the  virtuous,  are  ultimately 
converted  into  the  lad. 

But  they'arife  alfo  from  many  other  fources  in  their 
intermediate  (late,  particularly  from  aflbciations  with 
the  feveral  beauties  of  nature  and  art  already 
mentioned,  as  of  gay  colours,  rural  fcenes,  mufic, 
painting,  and  poetry  j  from  aflbciations  with  fafhion, 
the  opinions  and  encomiums  of  others,  riches, 
honours,    high  birth,   &c.    from    vanity    and    am- 

F  f  2  bition. 


t 


436  0/  the  Pleafures  and 

bition,  &c.  Befuics  which,  the  pleafuic  of  gratifying 
a  ftrong  dcfirc,  and  the  pain  of  difappoiiuinent,  arc 
to  be  confidered  here,  as  being  evidently  diflinguifh- 
able  from  all  the  lell  in  fome  cafes. 

That  part  of  beauty  which  arifes  from  fynnmetry, 
may  perhaps  be  faid  to  confifl:  in  fuch  proportions  of 
the  features  of  the  face,  and  of  the  head,  trunk, 
and  limbs,  to  each  other,  as  are  intermediate  in  rc- 
fpedl  of  all  other  proportions,  /.  e.  fuch  proportions 
as  would  refult  from  an  eftimation  by  an  average  : 
one  may  fay  at  lead,  that  thefe  proportions  would 
not  differ  much  from  perfefl  fymmetry. 

The  defires  excited  by  the  beauty  of  the  perfon 
increafe  for  fome  tinie,  efpecially  if  the  fenfible  ones 
are  not  gratified,  and  there  be  alfo  a  mixture  of  hope 
and  fear,  in  relation  to  the  attainment  of  the  affec- 
tions of  the  beloved  perfon.  But  they  fometimes 
decreafe,  like  other  defires,  from  mere  want  of 
novelty,  after  the  afFcdions  are  gained ;  and  muft 
always  do  fo  after  gratification.  Neverthelefs,  if  there 
be  the  proper  foundation  for  efleem  and  religious 
affedion  in  each  party,  mutual  love,  with  the  plea- 
fures arifing  from  it,  may  increafe  upon  the  whole, 
the  real  circumflances  of  life  affording  more  than 
fufficient  opportunity  for  gaining  in  one  refpedt,  what 
is  loft  in  another. 

The  beauty  of  the  air,  gefture,  motions,  and 
drefs,  has  a  great  connexion  with  the  beauty  of  the 
perfon,  or  rather  makes  a  confiderable  part  of  it, 
contributing  much  to  the  fum  total ;  and  when  con- 
fidered  feparately,  receiving  much  from  the  other  part 
of  the  beauties  of  the  perfon.  The  feparate  beauty 
of  thefe  things  arifes  from  fome  imitation  of  a  natural 
or  artificial  beauty  already  eftablifhed,  from  falhion, 
high  birth,  riches,  &c.  or  from  their  being  expref- 
five  of  fome  agreeable  or  amiable  quality  of  mind. 
The  reciprocal  influences  of  our  ideas  upon  each  other, 
and  the  endlefs   variety    of  their   combinations,    are 

eminently 


Pahis  of  Imagination.  437 

en^inently  confpicuous  in  this  article ;  the  ftrength 
of  defire  here  rendering  the  afTociations,  with  the 
feveral  fteps  previous  to  the  perfeft  coalefcence  of 
the  ideas  aflbciated,  more  vifible  than  in  moft  other 
cafes. 

OF    WIT    AND    HUMOUR. 

I  come  now  to  examine  the  pleafures  of  mirth; 
wit,  and  humour. 

But,  Firfl,  it  will  be  neceffiry  to  confider  the  caufes 
of  laughter,  and  particularly  the  mental  ones. 

Now  it  may  be  obferved,  that  young  children  do 
not  laugh  aloud  for  fome  months.  The  firft  occafion 
of  doing  this  feems  to  be  a  furprize,  which  brings  on 
a  momentary  fear  firft,  and  then  a  momentary  joy 
in  confequence  of  the  removal  of  that  fear,  agree- 
ably to  what  may  be  obferved  of  the  pleafures  that 
follow  the  removal  of  pain.  This  may  appear  pro- 
bable, inafmuch  as  laughter  is  a  nafcent  crVj  flopped 
of  a  fudden  ;  alfo  becaufe  if  the  fame  furprize,  which 
makes  young  children  laugh,  be  a  very  little  increaf- 
ed,  they  will  cry.  It  is  ufual,  by  way  of  diverting 
young  children,  and  exciting  them  to  laughter,  to 
repeat  the  furprize,  as  by  clapping  the  hands  fre- 
quently, reitering  a  fudden  motion,  &c. 

This  is  the  original  of  laughter  in  children,  in 
general ;  but  the  progrefs  in  each  particular  is  much 
accelerated,  and  the  occafions  multiplied,  by  imita- 
tion. They  learn  to  laugh,  as  they  learn  to  talk  and 
■walk ;  and  are  moft  apt  to  laugh  profufely,  when 
they  fee  others  laugh  ;  the  common  caufe  contribu- 
ting alfo  in  a  great  degree  to  produce  this  eftefl. 
The  fame  thing  is  evident  even  in  adults  ;  and  fhews 
■us  one  of  the  fources  of  the  fympathctic  affecftions. 

To  thefe  things  it  is  to  be  added,  that  the  alter- 
nate motions  of  the  cheft  follow  the  fame  degrees  of 
mental  emotion  with  miOre  and  more  facility  perpe- 
tually, fo  that  at  laft  children  (who  are  likewife  more 

F  f  3  exquifitely 


438  Of  the  rieafures  and 

exquifitely    ftnfible    and    irritable  than  adults)   laugh 
upon  every  trifling  occafion. 

By  degrees  they  learn  the  power  of  fufpending  the 
actions  both  of  laughing  and  crying,  and  afTociate 
thiJ  power  with  a  variety  of  ideas,  fuch  as  thole  of 
decency,  refpetf):,  fear,  and  fhame :  the  incidents 
and  objecTts,  which  before  occafioned  emotion  fuffi- 
cient  to  produce  laughter,  now  occafion  little  or 
none,  from  the  tranfmutation  of  their  aflbciations : 
their  new  aflbciated  pleafures  and  pains  are  of  a 
more  fedate  kind,  and  do  not  affcd  them  fo  much 
by  furprize;  and,  which  is  a  principal  caufe  in  re- 
fpe6l  of  individuals,  their  equals  laugh  kfs,  and,  by 
formino;  them  to  the  fame  model  with  themfelves, 
make  the  difpofition  to  laughter  decreafe  ftill  fader. 
For  whatever  can  be  fhewn  to  take  place  at  all  in 
human  nature,  miift  take  place  in  a  much  higher 
degree,  than  according  to  the  original  caufes,  from 
our  great  difpofition  to  imitate  one  another,  which 
has  been  already  explained. 

It  confirms  this  account  of  laughter,  that  it  fol- 
lows tickling,  as  noted  above,  i.  e.  a  momentary 
pain  and  apprehenfion  of  pain,  with  an  immediately 
fucceeding  removal  of  ihefe,  and  their  alternate  re- 
currency  ;  alfo  that  the  fofter  fex,  and  all  nervous 
pei  fons,  are  much  difpofed  both  to  laugh  and  cry  pro- 
fufely,  and  to  pafs  quickly  from  one  ftate  to  the 
other.  And  it  may  deferve  to  be  inquired,  how  far 
the  profufe,  continued  laughter  and  mirth  on  one 
hand,  forrow,  hanging  the  lip,  and  crying,  on  the 
other,  which  occur  in  madnefs,  agree  with  it. 

As  children  learn  the  ufe  of  language,  they 
learn  alfo  to  laugh  at  fentences  or  (lories,  by  which 
fudden  alarming  emotions  and  expt6lations  are  raifed 
in  them,  and  again  diffipated  inftantaneoufly.  And 
as  they  learnt  before  by  degrees  to  laugh  at  fudden 
.  unexpecSted  noifes,  or  motions,  where  there  was  no 
fear,  or  no  diftinguifhable  one,  fo   it   is  after  fome 

time 


Pains  of  Imagination.  439 

time  in  refpeft  of  words.  Children,  and  young  per- 
fons,  are  diverted  by  every  little  jingle,  pun,  contraft, 
or  coincidence,  which  is  level  to  their  capacities,  even 
though  the  harflinefs  and  inconfiftency,  with  which 
it  firft  ftrikes  the  fancy,  be  fo  minute  as  fcarce  to 
be  perceived.  And  this  is  the  origin  of  that  laughter, 
which  is  excited  by  wit,  humour,  buffoonery,  &c. 

But  this  fpecies  of  laughter  abates  alfo  by  degrees, 
as  the  other  before  confidered  did,  and,  in  general, 
for  the  fame  caufes ;  fo  that  adults,  and  efpecially 
thofe  that  are  judges  of  politenefs  and  propriety,  laugh 
only  at  fuch  ftrokes  of  wit  and  humour,  as  furprize  by 
fome  more  than  ordinary  degree  of  contrail  or  coinci- 
dence j  and  have  at  the  fame  time  a  due  connexion 
with  pleafure  and  pain,  and  their  feveral  afibciations 
of  fitnefs,  decency,  inconfiftency,  abfurdity,  ho- 
nour, fhame,  virtue,  and  vice  j  fo  as  neither  to  be 
too  glaring  on  the  one  hand,  nor  too  faint  on  the 
other.  In  the  firft  cafe,  the  reprefentation  raifes 
diflike  and  abhorrence  j  in  the  lail,  it  becomes  in- 
fipid. 

From  hence  may  be  feen,  that  in  different  perfons 
the  occafions  of  laughter  muft  be  as  different  as  their 
opinions  and  difpofitions  j  that  low  fimilitudes,  al- 
lufions,  contrafts,  and  coincidences,  applied  to  grave 
and  ferious  fubjefts,  muft  occafion  the  moft  profufe 
laughter  in  perfons  of  light  minds ;  and,  converfely, 
increafe  this  levity  of  mind,  and  weaken  the  regard 
due  to  things  facredj  that  the  vices  of  gluttony, 
lewdnefs,  vain  glory,  felf-conceit,  and  covetoufnefs, 
with  the  concomitant  pleafures  and  pains,  hopes, 
fears,  dangers,  &c.  when  reprefented  by  indirect 
circumftances,  and  the  reprefentation  heightened  by 
contrafts  and  coincidences,  muft  be  the  moft  frequent 
fubjed  of  mirth,  wit,  and  humour,  in  this  mixed 
degenerate  ftate,  where  they  are  cenfured  upon  the 
whole  j  and  yet  not  looked  upon  with  a  due  degree 
of  fe verity,   diftance,    and    abhorrence  -,    that   com- 

F  f  4  pany. 


440  Of  the  Pkajures  and 

p;iny,  fc-aOing,  and  wine,  by  parting  fhe  body  into 
a  plrafurable  ftate,  mull  difpofe  to  laughter  upon 
finall  occafionsj  and  that  perfons  who  give  them- 
felves  much  to  mirth,  wit,  and  humour,  mufl  there- 
by greatly  difqualify  their  undei (landings  for  the 
learch  after  tiuth;  inafmuch  as  by  the  pe/petual 
luinring  after  apparent  and  partial  agreements  and 
dilagreements,  as  in  words,  and  indircfb  accidental 
CMCumftancts,  whilft  the  true  natures  of  the  things 
themfclvfs  afford  real  agreements  and  difagreements, 
that  are  very  diffrrent,  or  quite  oppofite,  a  man  mud 
by  degrees  pervert  all  his  notions  of  things  them- 
fclves,  and  become  unable  to  fee  them  as  they  really 
are,  and  as  they  appear  to  confiderate  fober-minded 
inquirers.  He  mufl  lofe  all  his  aflbciations  of  the 
vifible  ideas  of  things,  their  names,  fymbols,  &c. 
with  their  ufeful  pradlical  relations  and  properties ; 
and  get,  in  their  ftead,  accidental,  indirefl:,  and  un- 
natural conjunflions  of  circumftances,  tiiat  are  really 
foreign  to  each  other,  or  oppbfitions  of  thofe  that 
are  united  ;  and,  after  fome  time,  habit  and  cuftom 
will  fix  thefe  upon  him. 

The  mofl:  natural  occafions  of  mirth  and  laughter 
in  adults  feem  to  be  the  little  miftakes  and  follies  of 
children,  and  the  fmaller  inconfiftencies  and  impro- 
prieties, which  happen  in  converfation,  and  the  daily 
occuirences  of  life;  inafmuch  as  thefe  pleafures  are, 
in  great  meafure,  occafioned,  or  at  lead  fupported, 
by  the  general  pleafurable  ftate,  which  our  love  and 
affcdion  to  our  friends  in  general,  and  to  children  in 
particular,  put  the  body  and  mind  into.  For  this 
kind  of  miith  is  always  checked  where  we  have  a  dif- 
like;  alfo  where  the  miftake  or  inconfiftency  rifes 
beyond  a  certain  limit ;  for  then  it  produces  con- 
cern, confufion,  and  uneafjnefs.  And  it  is  ufeful  not 
only  in  refpefc  of  the  good  effefts  which  it  has  upon 
the  bndy,  and  the  prefent  amufement  and  relaxa- 
tion that  it  affords  to  the  mind;  but  alfo,  becaufe  it 

pots 


Paim  of  Imagination.  44^ 

puts  us  upon  reftifying  what  is  fo  amlf-,  or  any  other 
fmiilar  error,  in  one  another,  or  in  children ;  and  has 
a  tendency  to  remove  many  prejudices  from  cuftom 
and  education.  Thus  we  often  laugh  at  children, 
ruftics,  and  foreigners,  when  yet  they  a6t  right,  ac- 
cording to  the  truly  natural,  fimplc,  and  uncorrupted 
diftates  of  reafon  and  propriety,  and  are  guilty  of 
no  other  inconfillency,  than  what  arifes  from  the 
ufurpatinns  of  cuftom  over  nature ;  and  we  often 
take  notice  of  this,  and  correcft  ourfeives,  in  confe- 
quence  of  being  diverted  by  it. 

OF   INCONSISTENCY,   DEFORMITY,  AND 
ABSURDITY. 

Having  now  confidered,  in  a  fhort  and  general  way, 
all  the  pleafures  that  feem  properly  to  belong  to  the 
head  of  imagination,  I  will  fay  fomething  concern- 
ing the  pains  of  this  clafs,  viz.  thofe  which  aiife  fronti 
the  view  of  grofs  inconfiftency,  abfurdity,  and  de- 
formity.    Here  we  may  obferve, 

Firft,  That  thefe  pains  are  the  root  and  fource 
of  many  of  the  fore-mentioned  pleafuies,  particularly 
thofe  arifing  from  figurative  expreffions,  and  of  wit 
and  humour,  as  has  been  fhewn  in  treating  of  thefe 
things. 

Secondly,  That  the  difguft  and  uneafinefs  here 
confidered  never  rife  to  any  very  great  height,  unlefs 
fomeof  the  pains  of  fympathy,  or  of  the  moral  fenfe, 
mix  themfelves  with  them.  From  whence  it  feems  to 
follow,  that  the  mere  pleafures  of  imagination  and 
beauty  are  alfo  of  a  kind  much  inferior  to  thofe  of 
fympathy,  and  the  moral  fenfe. 

The  perplexity,  confufion,  and  uneafinefs,  which 
we  labour  under  in  abftrufe  inquiries,  philofophical, 
moral,  and  reiigiou-,  ought,  perhaps,  to  be  referred 
to  this  head.  Alio  the  fecondary  perplexity  which 
arifes  from  our  being  fubjefl  to  this  perplexity,  con- 
fufion   and  uneafinefs.      However,    all  this  is  to  be 

accounted 


44^  Q/*  ^^^  Pleqfuvcs,  Sec. 

accounted  for  as  any  other  evil,  and  does  not  feem 
to  be  attended  either  with  greater  or  lefs  diHiculties. 
No  perplexity  can  give  us  more  than  a  limited  degree 
of  paini  and  all  our  perplexities  have  probably  both 
the  fame  general  good  efFeds  as  our  other  pains  j 
and  alio,  like  each  of  thefe,  fome  good  effedls  pecu- 
liar to  themfelves. 

We  may  now  obferve  upon  the  whole,  that  ac- 
cording to  the  foregoing  hiftory  of  the  pleafures  of 
imagination,  there  muft  be  great  differences  in  the 
taftes  and  judgments  of  different  perlbns ;  and  that 
no  age,  nation,  clafs  of  men,  &c.  ought  to  be  made 
the  teft  of  what  is  moft  excellent  in  artificial  beauty  ; 
nor  confequently  of  what  is  abfurd.  The  only  things 
that  can  be  fet  up  as  natural  criterions  here  feem  to  be 
uniformity  with  variety,  ufcfulnefs  in  general,  and 
the  particular  fubferviency  of  this  or  that  artificial 
beauty  to  improve  the  mind,  fo  as  to  make  it  fuit 
beft:  with  our  prefent  circumfiances,  and  future  ex- 
peftations.  How  all  thefe  criterions  confill  with  each 
other,  and  unite  in  the  fingle  criterion  of  rehgion, 
or  the  love  of  God,  and  of  our  neighbour,  under- 
ftood  in  the  comprehenfive  fenfe  of  thefe  words,  I 
Ihall  endeavour  to  Ihevv  hereafter. 


SECT. 


Pains  of  Ambition.  443 

SECT.     II. 

OF  THE  PLEASURES  AND  PAINS  OF  AMBITION. 

PROP.     XCV. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Pleajures  and  Pains  of  Ambition 
are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  'Theory. 


The  opinions  of  others  concerning  us,  when  ex- 
preflcd  by  correfponding  words  or  adlions,  arc 
principal  fources  of  happinefs  or  nnifery.  The  plea- 
fures  of  this  kind  are  ufually  referred  to  the  head  of 
honour ;  the  pains  to  that  of  fhame ;  but  as  it  is 
mod  convenient  to  have  a  fingle  word,  to  which  to 
refer  both  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  this  clafs,  I  have 
made  choice  of  ambition  for  that  purpofe.  It  will 
therefore  be  our  bufinefs,  under  this  propofition,  to 
inquire  by  what  aflbciations  it  is  brought  about, 
that  men  are  fo  folicitous  to  have  certain  particulars 
concerning  themfelves  made  known  to  the  circle  of 
their  friends  and  acquaintance,  or  to  the  world  in 
general ;  and  certain  others  concealed  from  them ; 
alfo,  why  all  marks  and  evidences,  that  thefe  twc^ 
feveral  kinds  of  particulars  are  made  known,  fo  as  to 
beget  approbation,  efteem,  praife,  high  opinion,  &c. 
or  diflike,  cenfure,  contempt,  &c.  occafion  fuch 
exquifite  pleafures  and  pains,  as  thofe  of  honour  and 
Iharne,  i.  e.  of  ambition. 

The  particulars  which  we  defire  to  have  made 
known  to,  or  concealed  from,  others,  in  order  to  ob- 
tain praife,  or  avoid  difpraife,  may  be  clafled  under 
the  four  following  heads. 

Firft, 


444  Q/"  ^^^  Vkajurei  and 

Firfl,  External  advantages  or  difadynhtigcs. 

Secondly,   Bodily  pcrfecflions  and  imperfecftions. 

Thirdly,   Inrellcdtual  accomplilhmcnts  or  defeds.- 

Fourihly,  Mot  a!  ones,  ;.  e.  virtue  or  vice. 

1  will  now  endeavour  to  (hew  what  pleafuies  and 
pains,  bodily  and  intcilcchial,  are  afTociated  with  the 
opinions  which  oiiiers  fonrj  of  us,  in  thefe  four  re- 
fpc6ls,  /.  e.  either  with  the  fevcral  methods  by  which 
they  receive  their  information  ;  or  with  thofe  by 
which  they  fignify  their  having  received  it,  and 
their  confequent  approbation  or  difapprobation,  re- 
fpe(5t  or  contempt. 

OF  EXTERNAL  ADVANTAGES  AND  DISAD- 
VANTAGES. 

I  begin  with  the  confideration  of  external  advan- 
tages or  difadvantages.  The  principal  of  thefe  arc 
fine  clothes,  riches,  titles,  and  high  birth,  with  their 
oppofites,  rags,  poverty,  obfcuiity,  and  low  birth. 

Now  it  is  evident,  that  thefe  exter/ial  advantages 
and  difadvantages  become  fuch  by  being  made  known 
to  others;  that  the  fiift  gain  men  certain  privileges 
and  ))leafures  j  and  the  laft  fubjrcSt  them  to  inconve- 
niencies  and  evils  only,  or  chiefly,  when  they  are  dif- 
covered  to  the  world.  It  follows  therefore  that  every 
difcovery  of  this  kind  to  others,  aifo  every  mark  and 
aflbciate  of  fuch  difcovery,  will,  by  aflbciation,  raife 
up  the  miniatures  of  the  privileges  and  plealures,  in- 
conveniencies,  and  evils,  refpetlively  j  and  thus  afford, 
in  each  inftance,  a  peculiar  compound  pleafure  or 
pain,  which,  by  the  ufe  of  language,  has  the  word 
honour  ov  Jhame  refpe^lively  annexed  to  it. 

This  is  the  grofs  account  of  the  generation  of 
thefe  pleafures  and  pains  j  but  the  fubordinate  parti- 
culars contain  many  things  worthy  of  obfervation. 

Thus  fine  clothes  pleafe  both  children  and  adults, 
by   their  natural  or  artificial   beauty  j    they  enhance 

the 


Pains  of  Ambition.  445 

the  beauty  of  the  perfon ;  they  excite  the  compli- 
ments and  careffes  of  the  attendants  in  a  peculiarly 
vivid  manner;  they  arc  the  common  aflbciates  of 
riches,  titles,  and  high  birth  j  they  have  vaft  en- 
comiums bellowed  upon  them  j  and  are  fomctimes 
the  rewards  of  mental  accomplifhments  and  virtue. 
Rags,  on  the  contrary,  arc  often  attended  with  the 
moft  loathfome  and  offenfive  ideas,  with  bodily  infir- 
mity, poverty,  contempt,  and  vice.  It  is  eafy  there- 
fore to  fee,  that  in  our  progrefs  through  life,  a  com- 
pound affociated  defire  of  line  clothes,  and  abhor- 
rence of  rags,  will  fpring  up  fo  early  as  to  be  deemed 
a  natural  one.  And  if  a  perfon  palTes  of  a  fudden 
from  rags  to  fine  clothes,  or  vice  verfay  the  pleafure 
or  pain  will  be  enhanced  accordingly,  by  the  juxta- 
pofition  of  the  oppofites. 

Now  thc-fe  pleafurcs  and  pains,  which  thus  attend 
a  perfon's  being  actually  dreffed  in  fine  clothes,  or 
in  rags,  will,  by  farther  afTociations,  be  transferred  • 
upon  all  the  concomitant  circumftances,  the  polTeffion 
of  fine  clothes,  the  hopes  of  them,  or  the  fear  of 
rags  J  and  particularly  upon  all  narrations  and  fym- 
bols,  whereby  others  are  firft  informed  of  the  perfon's 
drefs,  or  difcover  their  prior  knowledge  of  it ;  fo  that 
the  perfon  fhall  have  his  vanity  gratified,  or  his  fhame 
excited,  by  all  fuch  narrations,  and  by  all  the  conco- 
mitant circumftances  and  fymbols. 

Riches,  titles,  and  high  birth,  are  attended  with 
afTocidtes  of  the  fame  kind  as  fine  clothes  j  with 
this  difference,  however,  that  it  requires  a  farther 
progrefs  in  life  to  be  fulHciently  alfccSted  with  the 
compound  pleafure  refulting  f;om  the  afibciaces  of 
theft-,  and  confcquently  for  acquiring  a  tafte  for  thofe 
pleafures  of  honour,  which  tiches,  titles,  and  high 
birth  afibrd.  Agreeably  to  which  it  may  be  obferved, 
that  the  firft  inftance  of  pride  and  vanity  in  children 
is  that  which  arifes  fjom  fine  clothes. 

In 


44^  Of  ^^^  PUafures  and 

•  In  the  piogrefs  through  life,  efpeclally  in  the  vir- 
tuous, it  okcn  happens,  that  oppofite  airociations  are 
gcncfatcd,  /'.  e.  luch  as  bieak  the  connc6tion  between 
the  ideas  of  happinefs  and  fine  clothes,  riches, 
titles,  high  birth ;  alfo  between  milery  and  rags, 
poverty,  oblcurity,  and  low  birth  ;  nay,  there  are 
forne  inilances  in  which  ihrfe  lall  are  connected  with  ] 
fome  kinds  and  degrees  of  happinefs.  Now  in  all 
thefe  cafes  the  pride  and  vanity,  or  fhame,  by  which 
we  hope  or  fear  to  have  our  circumflances,  in  thefe 
refpedls,  known  to  t!ie  world,  leflen,  ceafe  entirely,  or 
even  turn  about  to  the  oppofite  quarter  accordingly; 
fo  that  when  a  perfon  has  loft  his  defire  of  being 
rich,  or  high  born,  he  alfo  lofes  his  defire  of  being 
thought  fo;  and  when  he  gains  an  oppofite  defire 
of  becoming  poor,  on  a  religious  account,  for  in- 
ilance,  or  a  complacence  in  being  low  born,  on  ac- 
count of  his  prefent  high  ftation,  bcc.  he  dcfires  alfo 
to  have  this  known  to  the  world  And  yet  there 
may,  in  mofl  cafes,  be  perceived  fome  diflance  in 
time  between  the  defire  of  beingy  and  the  fubfequenc 
afibciated  defire  of  being  thought^  viz.  fuch  a  diftance 
of  time  as  may  fuffice  for  the  aflbciations  to  produce 
their  efTecfl  in. 

Riches  are  attended  with  many  conveniencies,  whe- 
ther a  perfon  be  known  to  poflefs  them,  or  no ;   and      { 
there   are   inconveniencies,   as   well   as   conveniencies, 
attending    the    reputation    of  being    rich ;    but   titles 
and   high   birth   are  then    only    produ6live    of  privi-      ^: 
leges    and    pleafures,     when     made    known    to    the      % 
world  i  whence  it   is  eafy   to  fee  that  pride  and  va- 
nity may  fhew  themfelves  much  more  commonly   in       ' 
refpeft    of  titles  and   high   birth,  than  in  refpedt  of      -^ 
riches,  which  is  agreeable  to  the  fa6t.  | 

The  fhamefacednefs  of  ruftics,   poor  perfons,  and      ;' 
inferiors,  in   general,   in   the   prefence    of  their  fupe-  "   | 
riors,   with    the   great    confufion    and   uneafinefs  that 
often  attend  it,  arifes  from  the  fources  of  honour  and 

fhame 


Pains  of  Ambition.  447 

fhame  here  laid  open,  and  particularly  from  the  ftrong 
contraft  between  their  own  circumftances  and  thofe 
of  their  fuperiors. 

OF  BODILY  PERFECTIONS  AND  IMPER- 

FECTIONS. 

The  chief  bodily  circumftances,  which  are  the 
fources  of  the  pleafures  of  honour,  or  of  the  pains 
of  fhame,  are  beauty,  ftrength,  and  health,  on  the 
one  hand ;  and  their  oppofites,  deformity,  imbeci- 
lity, unfitting  a  perfon  for  the  funftions  of  life,  and 
difeafe,  on  the  other.  I  will  make  fome  fhort  re- 
marks upon  each. 

Beauty  has  an  intimate  conneflion  with  one  of  the 
moft  violent  of  our  defires  j  affords  a  great  pleafure, 
even  where  this  defire  is  not  felt  explicitly ;  has  the 
higheft  encomiums  beftowed  upon  it  in  books,  efpe- 
cially  in  fuch  as  are  too  much  in  the  hands  of  young 
pcrfons,  and  the  higheft  compliments  paid  to  it  in 
difcourfej  and  is  often  the  occafion  of  fuccefs  in 
life ;  all  which  holds  more  particularly  in  refpeft  of 
women,  than  of  men.  No  wonder  therefore,  that 
both  fexes,  but  efpecially  women,  fliould  defire  both 
to  be  and  he  thought  beautiful,  and  be  pleafed  with  all 
the  affociated  circumftances  of  thefe  things  ;  and 
that  the  fear  of  being  or  being  thought  deformed, 
fhould  be  a  thing  to  which  the  imagination  has  the 
greateft  relu6lance.  And  the  reputation  of  beauty, 
with  the  fcandal  of  deformity,  influences  fo  much 
the  more,  as  beauty  and  deformity  are  not  attended 
with  their  refpedive  pleafing  or  difpleafing  aflbciates, 
except  when  they  are  made  apparent  to,  and  taken 
notice  of  by  the  world.  So  that  here  the  original 
defire  is  rather  to  be  thought  beautiful  than  to  be  fo ; 
and  this  laft  is  chiefly  a  confequential  one  arifing  in 
our  minds,  from  the  clofe  connexion  of  being  with 
being  thought. 

In 


44l  ^f  '*"  Pleajures  and 

.  Ill  (Irtngth  it  is  othervvilc.  This  is  the  fource  of 
many  convenicncies,  and  imhecihty,  its  oppofitc, 
of  many  inconveiuciicie^,  whether  they  be  taken  no- 
tice of  or  no ;  as  well  as  of  fomc  which  depend  en 
their  being  thus  taken  notice  of.  It  is  lejlunable  there- 
fore here  to  fuppofe,  thjt  our  firll  and  greatell  de-  i 
flic  fhould  be  after  the  thing  itfelf;  and  fo  it  is  in  faft. 
However,  finCG  fevcral  advantages  arife  fiom  fhew- 
ing  our  (licngth ;  fince  alfo  the  oftentation  of  hap- 
pincfs  of  any  kind  belonging  to  ourfclves,  or  the 
notice  which  others  take  of  ir,  bring  in  the  pleafing 
idea  with  great  vigour;  ic  is  evident  that  there  rr.uft 
be  eager  dcfues  of  peing  thought  ftrong,  agile,  &c. 
as  well  as  of  being  fo.  And,  by  parity  of  reafon, 
men  will  be  much  afhamed  of  being  thought  weak  and 
feeble,  as  well  as  afraid  of  being  fo.  And  as  women 
glory  chiefly  in  beauty,  fo  men  do  in  ftrength  ;  this 
being  chiefly  a  fource  of  advantages  and  plcafurcs  to 
men,  as  that  is  to  women.  Nay,  one  may  even  ob- 
ferve,  that  any  great  degree  of  beauty  in  men,  or 
ftrength  in  women,  by  being  oppofite  to  that  per- 
fection, which  is  peculiar  to  each  fcx,  is  thought  ra- 
ther undcfirable  than  dcfirable. 

tlealth  and  ficknefs  have  many  connexions  with 
beauty  and  ftrength,  deformity  and  imbecility,  re- 
Ipedively  ;  and  therefore  may  eafiiy  be  conceived  to 
become  rcfpcclively  the  fouices  of  the  pleafures  of  \ 
honour,  or  of  the  pains  of  Pname,  agreeably  to  the 
fa(ft.  But,  in  difeafe^,  ^o  many  greater  pains  and  i 
evils,  fears,  anxieties,  &c.  wirh  fome  pleafures,  fuch  \ 
as  thofe  of  friendlhip,  occur  iikewile,  that  there  is,  % 
in  m.oft  cafes,  little  rotmi  for  fhame  to  exe/t  itfelf:  k 
however,  if  the  difcafe  be  the  conlequence  either  of  1 
a  viituous,  or  a  vicious,  courfc  of  aclion,  the  ho-  , 
nour  or  Ihame,  belonging  to  virtue  or  vice  refpcc-  I 
lively,  will  be  transferred  upon  it.  | 

There  is  an  high  degree  of  fhame,  which  attend^  the     ' 
natural  evacuations,    particularly   thofe  of  the    faeces    ;-' 

and    ii 


r; 


Pains  of  Ambition.  449 

and  urine,  which  is  in  part  deduced  fiom  the  offen- 
fivenefs  of  the  excrements  of  the  body,  and  is  nearly 
related  to  the  fhamc  attending  bodily  infirmities  and 
difeafes.  But  this  fliame,  as  it  refpe£ls  the  fasces  and 
urine,  has  alfo  a  particular  connexion  v;ith  that  which 
relates  to  the  pudenda,  arifmg  from  the  vicinity  of 
the  organs  j  and  thus  they  give  and  receive  mutually. 
They  are  alfo  both  of  them  much  increafed  by  edu- 
cation, cuftom,  and  the  precepts  and  epithets  of  pa- 
rents and  governors.  The  original  fources  of  the 
fhame  relating  to  the  pudenda  are  probably  the  pri- 
vacy requifite  (which  is  both  caufe  and  cfFeft),  the 
greatnefs  of  the  pleafure,  and  the  fenfe  of  guilt  which 
often  attends  j  and  there  may  be  perhaps  Something  of 
inftinft,  which  operates  here  quite  indcpendcndy  of 
affociation. 

OF  INTELLECTUAL  ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
AND  DEFECTS. 

The  intelleflual  accomplifhments  and  defeds 
which  occafion  honour  and  fhame,  are  fagacity, 
memory,  invention,  wit,  learning ;  and  their  op- 
pofites,  folly,  dulnefs,  and  ignorance.  Here  we  may 
deduce  a  confiderable  part  from  the  many  advan- 
tages arifmg  from  the  accomplifhmient?,  difadvaa- 
tages  from  the  defeAs,  in  the  fame  manner  as  has  been 
done  already  in  the  two  foregoing  articles.  But  a 
great  part,  perhaps  the  greateft,  is  deduced  from  the 
high-ftrained  encomiums,  aj)pl3ufes,  and  fljtteries, 
paid  to  parts  and  learning,  and  the  outrageous  ridi- 
cule and  contempt  thrown  upon  folly  and  ignorance, 
in  all  the  difcourfes  and  writings  of  men  of  genius 
and  learning  j  thefe  perfons  being  extremely  partial 
to  their  own  excellencies,  and  carrying  the  world 
with  them  by  the  force  of  their  parts  and  eloquence. 
It  is  alfo  to  beobferved,  that  in  the  education  of  young 
perfons,  and  efpecially  of  boys  and  young  men,  great 
rewards  are  conferred  in  confequence  of  intelledual 

Vol.  I.  G  g  attain- 


1 


45^  Of  the  Vlcajures  and 

attainments  and  parts ;  and  great  puniflinnents  fol-  \ 
low  negligence  and  ignorance ;  which  rewards  and  \ 
punifliments,  being  rclpcdivtrly  aflbciated  with  the  \ 
^vvords^xprefTing  praife  and  ccnfure,  and  with  all  their 
other  circuhiflances,  transfer  upon  praife  and  ccnfure 
compound  vivid  miniatures,  pleafani  and  painful.  |  ( 

In  like  manner  all  the  kinds  of  lionour  and  fhame, 
by   being  exprelfed  in   words  and    lymbols,   that   are 
nearly   related   to   each    other,    enhance    each    other : 
thus,  for  inflance,  the   carcfies   given   to  a  child  when 
he  is  diefled  in  fine  clothes  prepare  him   to  be   much 
more  affected   with  the  careiTcs   and  encomiums  be- 
llowed upon  him  when  he  has  been  diligent  in  getting 
his    Icfibn,    and    indeed    it    ought    to    be    remarked, 
that  the  words  and  phrafes  of  the  parents,  governors, 
fuperiors,  and   attendants,  have   fo  great  an  influence 
over   children,    when    they   fiift  come   to   the   ufe  of 
language,  as   inftantly   to  generate  an  implicit  belief, 
a  ftrong  defire,  or  a  high  degree  of  pleafure.     They 
have  no  fufpicions,  jealoufies,  memories,  or  expecta- 
tions of  being  deceived  or  difappointed  ;  and   there- 
fore a  fet  of  words  exprefllng  plcafures  of  any  kind, 
which  they  have  experienced,  put  together  in  almoft 
any  manner,  will   raife  up  in  them,  a  pleafurable  (late, 
and  oppofite  words  a  painful  one.     Whence  it  is  eafy 
to  fee,  that  the  fine  language   exprefTing  praife,  and 
the  harfh  one  exprefTing  difpraife,  muft  inftantly,  from 
the  mere  afifociations  heaped  upon  the  feparate  words, 
put  them   into  a  ftate  of  hope    and  joy,    fear    and 
forrow,    refpeflively.     And    when    the    foundation    is 
thus  laid,  praife  and  difpraife   will  keep   their   influ- 
ences from  the  advantages   and  difadvantages  attend- 
ing them,  though  the  feparate  words  fhould  lofe  their  Jj 
particular  influences,   as  they    manifeftly    do   in    our  1 
progrefs  through  life. 

The  honour  and  fliame  arifing  from  intelledlual 
accomplifliments  do  often,  in  learned  men,  after  fome 
time,  deftroy,  in  great  meafure,   their  fenfibility,  in 

refpe(5t 


I 


Pains  of  Ambition.  451 

refpeft  of  every  other  kind  of  honour  and  (hanne; 
which  feems  chiefly  to  arife  from  their  converfing 
much  with  books,  and  learned  men,  fo  as  to  have  a 
great  part  of  the  pleafures,  which  they  receive  from 
this  their  convcrfation,  clofely  connected  with  the 
encomiums  upon  parts  and  learning;  alfo  to  have 
all  terms  of  honour  applied  to  them,  and  the  keeneft 
reproach,  and  moft  infolent  contempt,  cad  upon  the 
contrary  defeats.  And,  as  the  pleafures  which  rail- 
lery, ridicule,  and  fatire,  afford  to  the  by-ftanders, 
are  very  confiderable,  fo  the  perfon  who  is  the  obje(5b 
of  them,  and  who  begins  to  be  in  pain  upon  the  firft 
flight  marks  of  contempt,  has  this  pain  much  enhan- 
ced by  the  contrail,  the  exquifltenefs  of  his  uneafi- 
nefs  and  confufion  rifing  in  proportion  to  the  degree 
of  mirth,  and  infolent  laughter  in  the  by-ftanders : 
whence  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  extremely  few  perfons 
have  courage  to  ftand  the  force  of  ridicule  j  buc 
rather  fubjett  themifelves  to  confiderable  bodily  pains, 
to  loffes,  and  to  the  anxiety  of  a  guilty  mind,  than 
appear  foolifh,  abfurd,  fmgular,  or  contemptible  to  the 
world,  or  even  to  perfons  of  whofe  judgment  and 
abilities  they  have  a  low  opinion. 

All  this  is,  in  general,  more  applicable  to  men 
than  to  women,  juft  as  the  honour  and  fhame  be- 
longing to  beauty  and  deformity  is  more  applicable 
to  women  than  men ;  both  which  obfervations  are 
eafily  deducible  from  the  different  talents  and  fitua- 
tions  in  life  of  the  two  fexes. 

OF    VIRTUE    AND    VICE. 

We  come,  in  the  laft  place,  to  confider  moral  ac- 
complifhments  and  defe6ls,  or  virtue  and  vice.  Now 
it  is  very  evident,  that  the  many  advantages,  public 
and  private,  which  arife  from  the  firft,  will  engage 
the  world  to  beftow  upon  it  much  honour  and  ap- 
plaufe,    in   the  fame  manner  as  the  evil  confequences 

G  g  2  of 


45-  Q/"  l^^  Pkafurcs  and 

of  vice  mult  make  it  the  objc6l  of  cenkirc  and  re- 
proach. Since  therefore  the  child  is  affedled  with 
the  words  cxprcfling  honour  and  cenfiue,  both 
from  the  fcpaiate  influences  of  thefe  words,  and  from 
the  application  of  phrafcs  of  this  kind  to  other  fub- 
jcfks  of  praile  and  difpraife,  he  muft  be  affedted  by 
the  commendations  bcftowed  upon  him  when  he  has 
done  weil^  and  by  the  cenfures  paflTcd  on  him  when 
he  has  done  ill. 

Thefe  commendations  and  cenfures  are  alfo  attend- 
ed with  great  immediate  rewards  and  punifhments, 
likewife  with  the  hopes  and  fears  relating  to  another 
world;  and  when  the  moral  fenfe  is  fufficiently  ge- 
nerated, with  great  fecret  indeterminate  pleafure  or 
pain  of  this  kind  j  and  thefe  affociations  add  a  par- 
ticular force  to  the  honour  and  fhame  belonging  re- 
fpcflively  to  virtue  and  vice.  At  the  fame  time  it  is 
cafy  to  fee,  that  fome  confiderable  progrefs  in  life  is 
ordinarily  required  before  men  come  to  be  deeply  and 
laftingly  affeded  by  thefe  things ;  alfo  that  this  kind 
of  honour  and  fhame  may,  at  laft,  from  the  fuperior 
force  of  the  aflbciated  pleafures  and  pains,  abforb,  as 
it  were,  all  the  other  kinds.  A  religious  man  be- 
comes at  laft  infenfible,  in  great  mcafure,  to  every 
encomium  and  reproach,  excepting  fuch  as  he  ap- 
prehends will  reft  upon  him  at  the  laft  day,  from  him 
whofe  judgment  cannot  err. 

This  is  the  general  account  of  the  honour  and 
fname  paid  to  virtue  and  vice  refpedively.  I  will 
now  make  a  few  fliort  ftridtures  upon  fome  of  the 
principal  virtues  and  vices. 

Firft,  then.  Piety  is  not  in  general,  and  amongft  the 
bulk  of  mankind,  had  in  great  honour.  This  pro- 
ceeds from  fcveral  caufes  ;  as  that  in  the  order  of  our 
progrefs  it  is  the  laft  of  the  virtues,  and  therefore, 
having  few  votaries,  it  muft  have  few  advocates;  that 
in  the  firft  attempts  to  attain  it,  men  often  fall  into 
great  degrees  of  enthufiafm  and  fuperftition,  and  fo 

cxpofe 


I 

I 


y. 


Pains  of  Ambition.  453 

cxpofe  themfelves  to  the  charges  of  folly,  madnefs, 
and  felf-conceic ;  and  that  pretences  to  it  are  often 
made  ufe  of  by  hypocrites  to  cover  the  worft  defigns. 
Now  from  thefe  and  fuch  like  caufes  it  hap-pens,  that 
men  are  much  afhamed  to  be  thought  devout,  fear- 
ing that  exquifite  uneafinefs,  which  being  ridiculed 
and  contemned  as  fools,  madmen,  and  hypocrites, 
occafions.  At  the  fame  time  it  appears,  that  amongft 
thofe  who  have  made  confiderable  advances  in  reli- 
gion, piety  will  be  had  in  the  greateft  honour:  thefe 
fee  evidently  how  it  may  be  diftinguifhed  from  en- 
thufiafm,  fuperftition,  and  hypocrify ;  and  are  very 
little  folicitous  concerning  the  opinions  of  the  profane 
world,  who  are  apt  to  confound  themj  and  there- 
fore as  far  as  their  piety  will  permit  any  foreign  defire 
to  arife,  they  have  an  exquifice  relifli  for  the  honour 
and  efteem  proceeding  from  the  reputation  of  piety. 

Benevolence  fprings  up  more  early  in  life  than 
piety,  and  has  at  fird  view  a  more  immediate  good 
influence  upon  fociety.  There  are  alfo  greater  num- 
bers who  arrive  at  fome  imperfeft  degrees  of  it,  than 
who  arrive  at  like  degrees  of  piety ;  neither  are  the 
degenerations  and  counterfeits  of  benevolence  fo 
common  as  thofe  of  piety.  On  thefe  accounts  much 
greater  and  more  frequent  encomiums  are  bellowed 
upon  it  by  the  bulk  of  mankind,  than  upon  piety j  and 
thefe  with  the  many  advantages  refulting  from  the 
reputation  of  being  benevolent,  make  mofl:  perfons 
eagerly  defire  this  reputation ;  fo  that  they  perform 
many  adions  from  mere  ambition,  or  from  a  mix- 
ture of  this  with  benevolence,  which  they  defne  the 
world  Ihould  think  to  proceed  from  m.ere  benevo- 
lence. 

Military  glory,  and  the  high  applaufes  beftowed 
upon  perfonal  courage,  feem,  in  a  confiderable  de- 
gree, deducible  from  this  fource,  from  the  benevolent 
defign  of  proteding  the  innocent,  the  helplefs,  one's 
friends  and  country,  from  invafions,  robberies,    wild 

G  g  3  beafls. 


I 


454  0/  f^^e  rieafures  and 

bead?,  Sec.  The  connc(5>ion  of  thefc  with  bodily 
fliength,  and  the  chaiaftcrifticnl  peife6lions  of  men 
as  dillinguifhed  from  women  and  children,  the  ra- 
rity and  difficulty  of  them,  the  vaft  encomiums  be- 
llowed upon  them  by  poets,  orators  and  hiltonans, 
cfpecially  in  ancient  times,  i.  e.  by  thofe  authors 
which  are  read  in  fchools,  and  lay  hold  of  our  pliant 
imaginations  when  young,  the  ridicule  caft  upon 
timoroufnefs  of  boys  and  men,  as  not  being  a  com-  | 
mon  imperfection  amongft  them,  and  the  conneflion 
of  the  fear  of  death  with  the  fenfe  of  guilt,  all 
concur  likewife,  and  have  carried  mankind  fo  far  as 
make  them  confer  the  higheft  honours  upon  the  moft 
cruel,  lawlefs,  and  abominable  anions,  and  confe- 
quencly  incite  one  another  to  perform  fuch  aflions 
from  an^bitious  views.  However,  this  falfe  glare 
feems  to  fade  in  theory,  amongft  writers ;  and  one 
may  hope  that  the  praftice  of  mankind  will  be, 
in  Ibme  meafure,  agreeable  to  the  corre<^ions  made 
in  their  theory. 

Temperance  and  chaftity  have  confiderable  ho- 
nours beftowed  upon  them  -,  but  the  fhame  and  fcan- 
dal  attending  the  oppofite  vices,  and  which  arife  from 
the  loathfome  difeafes,  and  the  many  miferies,  which 
men  bring  upon  themfelves  and  others  by  thefe  vices, 
are  much  more  remarkable.  The  detail  of  thefe 
things  might  eafily  be  delivered  from  parallel  ob- 
fervations  already  made.  It  happens  fometimes,  that 
fome  degrees  of  thefe  vices  are  looked  upon  by  young 
and  ignorant  perfons,  as  honourable,  from  certain 
connexions  with  manlinefs,  fafhion,  high  life  : 
however,  this  is  ftill  in  conformity  with  the  doflrine 
of  aflbciation,  and  the  derivation  of  all  the  pleafures 
of  honour  from  happinefs  under  fome  form  or  other ;  \ 
and,  when  the  fame  perfons  become  better  inftruded 
in  the  real  confcquences  and  conneflions  of  things, 
their  opinions  change  accordingly. 

Negative 


Paws  of  Ambition.  455 

Negative  humility,  or  the  not  thinking  better,  or 
more  highly,  of  ourfelves  than  we  ought,  in  refpedt 
jf  external  advantages,  bodily,  intelleftual,  or  moral 
accomplifliments,  and  being  content  with  fuch  re- 
gards as  are  our  due,  which  is  the  firft  ftep ;  and  then 
pofitive  humility,  or  a  deep  fenfe  of  our  own  mifery 
and  imperfe6lions  of  all  kinds,  and  an  acquiefcence 
in  the  treatment  which  we  receive  from  others,  what- 
ever it  bej  being  virtues  which  are  mod  commodious 
to  ourfelves  and  others,  and  highly  amiable  in  the 
light  of  all  thofe  who  have  made  a  due  proficiency  in 
religion,  and  the  moral  fenfe,  come  at  laft  to  be  ho- 
noured and  efteemed  in  an  eminent  manner,  and  con- 
fequently  to  incite  men  from  mere  vanity  and  am- 
bition to  feek  the  praife  of  humility.  And  the  ri- 
dicule and  fhame  which  attend  vanity,  pride,  and 
felf-conceit,  concur  to  the  fame  purpofe;  which  is  a 
remarkable  inftance  of  the  inconfiftency  of  one  part 
of  our  frame  with  itfelf,  as  the  cafe  now  (lands,  and 
of  the  tendency  of  vice  to  check  and  dettroy  itfelf. 

From  the  whole  of  what  has  been  delivered  upon 
this  clafs  of  pleafures  and  pains,  one  may  draw  the 
following  corollaries. 

Cor.  I,  All  the  things  in  which  men  pride  them- 
felves,  and  for  which  they  defire  to  be  taken  notice  of 
by  others,  are  either  means  of  happinefs,  or  have 
fome  near  relation  to  it.  And  indeed  it  is  not  at  all 
uncommon  to  lee  pcrfons  take  pains  to  make  others 
believe,  that  they  are  happy,  by  affirming  it  in  exprefs 
terms.  Nov/  this,  confidered  as  a  mere  matter  of 
faft,  occurring  to  attentive  obfervation,  might  lead 
one  to  conclude,  that  the  pleafures  of  honour  and 
ambition  are  not  of  an  original,  inftindlive,  implanted 
nature,  but  derived  from  the  other  pleafures  of  hu- 
man life,  by  the  aflbciation  of  thefe  into  various  par- 
cels, where  the  feveral  ingredients  are  fo  mixed  amongft 
one   another,   as  hardly  to  be  difcernible  feparately. 

G  g  4  The 


45  6  Of  the  Pleafures  and 

The  young,  the  gay,  and  the  polite,  are  ambitious 
of  being  thought  beautiful,  rich,  high  born,  witty,  &c. 
The  grave,  the  learned,  the  afflidlcd,  the  religious, 
&:€.  feck,  the  praifc  of  wifdom  and  knowledge,  or  to 
be  elleeined  for  piety  and  charity;  every  one  ac- 
cording to  his  opinions  of  thefe  things,  as  the 
Iburces,  marks,  or  offsprings  of  happinefs.  And 
when  men  boafl:  of  their  poverty,  low  birth,  igno- 
rance, or  vice,  it  is  always  in  fuch  circumflances, 
with  fuch  additions  and  contrafts,  or  under  fuch 
reftrictions,  as  that  the  balance,  upon  the  whole, 
may,  fome  way  or  other,  be  the  more  in  their  fa- 
vour on  that  account. 

Cor.  1.    Praife  and   fliame  are  made  ufe  of  by 
parents  and  governors,  as  chief  motives  and  fprings 
of  aflion  j    and    it    becomes    matter   of  praife   to  a    j 
child,  to  be  influenced   by   praife,   and    deterred    by 
fhame ;    and   matter  of  reproach,  to  be  infenfible   in 
thcl'e    refpecfts.     And    thus    it    comes    to    pafs,     that 
praife    and    fhame    have  a   ftrong   reflected   influence 
upon  themfelves ;  and   that   praife  begets  the  love  of 
praife,  and  fhame  increafes  the  fear  of  fhame.     Now, 
though    the   original    praife,    commendation,    blame, 
cenfure,    &c.   of  good    parents    and    preceptors,    ex- 
tend   only,  for    the    moft    part,   to   acquired   accom- 
plifhments    and    defeds,     and    particularly    to    virtue 
and    vice  J    yet    the    fecondary   influence    will    affedt 
men   in   refpetSl  of  all  forts  of  encomiums  and  cen- 
fures,  of  every   thing  that  comes  under  the  fame  de- 
nomination, that  is  aflbciated  with,  or  tied  up  by,  the 
fame    words.       I'hough     the    preceptor    direfl    his 
pupil  only  to  regard   the  judgment  of  the  wife  and 
good,  flUl   there  are   fo  many  like  circumftances  at- 
tending the  judgment  of  others,  that  it  will  be  re- 
garded  fomething   the    more   from    the    leffons    re- 
ceived, in  refpe6t  of  the  wife  and  good,  exclufively 
of  others, 

CoR. 


Pains  of  Ambition,  457 

Cor.  3.  In  confidering  the  fources  of  honour  and 
ftiame  it  will  appear,  that  they  are  by  no  means  con- 
fiftent  with  one  another  j  and,  by  a  farther  inquiry, 
that  the  maximum  of  the  pleafures  of  this  clafs  ulti- 
mately coincides,  omni  ex  parte^  wjth  moral  recti- 
tude. 


SECT. 


45  iJ  Of  the  PUafures  and 


SECT.     III. 

OF    THE    PLEASURES    AND    PAINS    OF    SELF- 
INTEREST. 


PROP.     XCVI. 

To  examine  bow  far  the  Pleafures  and  Pains  of  Self- 
inter  ejl  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  Theory. 

Self-interest  may  be  diftinguiflied  into  three 
kinds,  viz. 

Firft,  Grofs  felf-interefl:,  or  the  cool  purfuit  of  the 
means  whereby  the  pleafures  of  fenfation,  imagina- 
tion, and  ambition,  are  to  be  obtained,  and  their 
pains  avoided. 

Secondly,  Refined  felf-intereft,  or  a  like  purfuit 
of  the  means  that  relate  to  the  pleafures  and  pains  of 
fympathy,  theopathy,  and  the  moral  fenfe. 

And,  Thirdly,  Rational  felf-intereft,  or  the  pur- 
fuit of  a  man's  greateft  pofTible  happinefs,  without 
any  partiality  to  this  or  that  kind  of  happinefs, 
means  of  happinefs,  means  of  a  means,  &c. 

OF  GROSS  SELF-INTEREST. 

The  love  of  money  may  be  confidered  as  the 
chief  fpecies  of  grofs  felf-intereft,  and  will  help  us, 
in  an  eminent  manner,  to  unfold  the  mutual  influ- 
ences of  our  pleafures  and  pains,  with  the  factitious 
nature  of  the  intellectual  ones,  and  the  dodrine  of 
aflbciation  in  general,  as  well  as  the  particular  pro- 
grefs,  windings,  and  endlefs  redoublings  of  felf-love. 
For  it  is  evident  at  firft  fight,  that   money   cannot 

naturally 


Pains  of  Self-Intercft.  459 

naturally  and  originally  be  the  objed  of  our  facul- 
ties i  no  child  can  be  fuppofed  born  with  the  love 
of  it.  Yet  we  fee,  that  fome  fmall  degrees  of  this 
love  rife  early  in  infancy  j  that  it  generally  increafes 
during  youth  and  manhood ;  and  that  at  laft,  in 
fome  old  perfons,  it  fo  engrofles  and  abforbs  all  their 
pafiions  and  purfuits,  as  that  from  being  confidt-red 
as  the  reprefentativc,  ftandard,  common  meafure 
and  means  of  obtaining  the  commodities  which  oc- 
cur in  common  life,  it  fliall  be  efteemed  the  adequate 
exponent  and  means  of  happinefs  in  general,  and 
the  thing  itfelf,  the  fum  total  of  all  that  is  defi- 
rable  in  life.  Now  the  monftrous  and  gigantic  fize 
of  this  palTion,  in  fuch  cafes,  fupported  evidently  by 
aflbciation  alone,  will  render  its  progrefs  and  growth 
more  confpicuous  and  ftriking  ;  and  confequently 
greatly  contribute  to  explain  the  correfponding  parti- 
culars in  other  paffions,  where  they  are  lefs  obvious. 

Let  us  inquire  therefore,  for  what  reafons  it  is  that 
children  firft  begin  to  love  money.  Now  they  ob- 
ferve,  that  money  procures  for  them  the  pleafures 
of  fenfation,  with  fuch  of  imagination  as  they  have 
acquired  a  relifh  for.  They  fee  that  it  is  highly  va- 
lued by  others  j  that  thofe  who  poflcfs  it  are  much  re- 
garded and  carefled :  that  the  poflefTion  of  it  is  ge- 
nerally attended  by  fine  clothes,  titles,  magnificent 
buildings,  &c.  Imitation,  and  the  common  conta- 
gion of  human  life,  having  great  power  here,  as  in 
other  cafes.  Since  therefore  ideas  exciting  defire  are 
thus  heaped  upon  money  by  fucceffive  afibciations 
perpetually  recurring,  the  delire  of  it  in  certain  fums 
and  manners,  viz.  fuch  as  have  often  recurred  with 
the  concomitant  pleafures,  muft  at  laft  grow  ftronger 
than  the  fainter  fenfible  and  intelleftual  pleafures  j  fo 
that  a  child  fhall  prefer  a  piece  of  money  to  many 
aflual  gratifications  to  be  enjoyed  immediately. 

And  as  all  the  fore-mentioned  afibciations,  or  fuch 
as  are  analogous  to   them,   continue   during   life,   it 

feems 


460  Of  the  Plea/ures  and 

fcems  probable,  that  the  love  of  money  would  at  I 
laft:  devour  all  the  particular  dcfires,  upon  which  it  is  \ 
grounded,  was  it  not  rcllrained  by  counter-aflbcia- 
tions  ;  jull  as  it  was  obferved  above,  that  the  pleafurc 
of  gratifying  the  will  would  devour  all  the  particular 
pleafures,  to  which  it  is  a  conllant  aflbciate,  did  not 
repeated  dilappointments  preferve  us  from  this  enor- 
mous incieale  of  wilfulnefs. 

Let  us  next  examine  how  the  love  of  money  is 
checked. 

Firrt,  then,  It  is  checked  by  the  flrong  defires  of 
young  perfons,  and  others,  after  particular  gratifica- 
tions ;  for  thefe  defires,  by  overpowering  their  ac- 
quired averfion  to  part  with  money,  weaken  it  gra- 
dually, and  confequently  weaken  the  pleafurc  of  keep- 
ing, and  the  defirc  of  obtaining,  all  which  arc  clofely 
linked  together  in  this  view;  notwithftanding  that 
the  lad,  viz.  the  defire  of  obtaining,  and  by  confe- 
quencc  (in  an  inverted  order)  the  pleafure  of  keep- 
ing, and  the  averfion  to  part  with,  are  (lengthened  by 
the  defires  of  particular  pleafures  to  be  purchafed  by 
money,  in  another  view.  And  this  contrariety  of  our 
aflbciations  is  not  only  the  means  of  limiting  certain 
paffions,  but  is  a  mark  fet  upon  them  by  the  author 
of  nature,  to  fhew  that  they  ought  to  be  limited, 
even  in  our  progrefs  through  this  life  ;  and  that  they 
muft  ultimately  be  annihilated,  every  one  in  its  pro- 
per order. 

Secondly,  The  infignificancy  of  riches  in  v/arding 
off  death  and  difeafcs,  alfo  Ihame  and  contempt  in 
many  cafes,  and  in  obtaining  the  pleafures  of  reli- 
gion, and  the  moral  fcnfe,  and  even  thofe  of  fympa- 
ihy,  ambition,  imaginacion,  and  fenfation,  firft  lefTen 
their  value  in  the  eyes  of  thofe  who  make  juft  ob- 
fervacions  upon  things  in  their  progrefs  through 
life,  and  afterwards  fix  a  pofitive  nothingnefs  and 
worthleffnefs  upon  them. 

Thirdly, 


Pains  of  Self-Intereft.  461 

Thirdly,  The  eager  purfuit  of  any  particular  end, 
as  fame,  learning,  the  pleafures  of  the  imagination, 
&c.  leaves  little  room  in  the  mind  either  for  ava- 
rice, or  any  other  foreign  end. 

Now  by  thefe  and  Inch  like  confiderations  we  may 
account  not  only  for  the  limitation  put  to  the  love 
of  money,  but  alfo  for  certain  mixtures  of  tempers 
and  difpofitions,  which  are  often  found  in  fa6l,  and 
yet  feem  at  firft  fight  inconfiftent  ones.  Thus  pro- 
fufcnefs  in  refpeft  of  fcnfual  and  felfilh  pleafures  is 
often  joined  with  avarice.  Covetous  perfons  are 
often  rigidly  juft  in  paying,  as  well  as  exafling ;  and 
fomeiimes  generous,  where  money  is  not  immediately 
and  apparently  concerned.  They  have  alfo  moderate 
pafllons  in  other  refpe<5ls;  for  the  moft  part,  are  fufpi- 
cious,  timorous,  and  complaifant.  And  the  moft 
truly  generous,  charitable,  and  pious  perfons,  are 
highly  frugal,  fo  as  to  put  on  the  appearance  of  co- 
vetoufnefs,  and  even  fometimes,  and  in  fome  things, 
to  border  upon  it. 

We  may  fee  alfo,  why  the  love  of  money  muft 
in  general,  grow  ftronger  with  age;  and  efpecially 
if  the  particular  gratifications,  to  which  the  perfon 
was  moft  inclined,  become  infipid  or  unattainable  — 
Why  frequent  reflexions  upon  money  in  poflefllon, 
and  the  adual  viewing  large  fums,  ftrengthen  the 
aflbciations  by  which  covetoufnefs  is  generated  — 
Why  children,  perfons  in  private  and  low  life,  and 
indeed  moft  others,  are  differently  affeded  towards 
the  fame  fum  of  money,  in  different  forms,  gold, 
(ilvcr,  notes,  &c. 

Let  us  next  inquire,  for  what  realbns  it  is  that  the 
love  of  money  has  the  idea  of  felfifiinefs  attached 
to  it  in  a  peculiar  manner,  much  more  fo  than  the 
purfuit  of  the  pleafures  of  honour,  imagination,  or 
fympathy ;  whereas  all  are  equally  generated  by  af- 
fociation,  from  fenfible  and  lelfifli  plealures,  all  in 
their  feveral  degrees  promote  private  happinefs,  and 

are 


462  Of  the  PUiifures  and 


I 


arc  all  purlucd,  in  fome  cafes,  coolly  and  deliberately 
irom  the  piolpedl  of  obtaining  private  happinefs 
thereby.  -  Now  tiie  rcafons  of  this  feem  to  be, 

Firlt,  That  whatever  riches  one  man  obtains,  ano- 
ther muft  lofci  fo  that  rhe  circulation  of  money 
by  trades,  profclTjons,  oflices,  &c.  is  a  kind  of 
gaming ;  and  has  molt  of  the  fame  difguflful  ideas 
annexed  to  it,  when  confideied  witli  fome  attention, 
and  exclufively  of  private  felfifli  feelings ;  whereas 
the  pleafuies  of  lympatliy  confifl:  in  doing  good  to 
others ;  thoie  of  ambition  are  Icarce  attainable  in  any 
great  degree  without  thib,  or  at  leafl:  the  appearance 
of  it  i  and  the  plealures  of  imagination  are  both  capa- 
ble of  a  very  extcnfive  communication,  and  moft 
perfedl  when  enjoyed  in  company. 

Secondly,  A  regard  to  Jelf  frequently  recurring 
muft  denominate  a  pleafure  y*"^' ;  fo  that  if  any  of 
the  moft  generous  pleafiires,  and  fuch  as  at  firft  view 
have  no  immediate  i elation  to  felf-intereft,  be  pur- 
fued  in  a  cool,  deliberate  way,  not  from  the  influence 
of  a  piefent  inclination,  but  the  preconceived  opi- 
nion, that  it  will  afford  pleafure,  this  is  referred  to 
felf-intereft.  Now  money  has  fcarce  any  other  re- 
lation to  pleafure  than  that  of  an  evident  means  ;  fo 
that  even  after  it  has  gained  the  power  of  pleafing  in- 
ftantaneoufly,  the  intermediate  deliberate  fteps  and 
affociations  muft,  however,  frequently  appear.  It 
procures  the  other  pleafures  for  us  every  day,  after 
it  has  become  pleafant  in  itfclf;  and  therefore  muft 
always  be  confidered  as  a  principal  means.  The  other 
pleafures  have,  in  general,  a  far  greater  fhare  of  in- 
diretl  aflociations  with  previous  pleafures,  and  ac- 
quire the  power  of  gratifying,  not  fo  much  from  being  Jj 
manifcft  caufes  of  other  gratifications,  as  their  moft  ^ 
comjmon  adjuncts ;  whereas  money  is  generally  the 
moft  vifible  of  all  the  caufes.  But  honour,  power, 
learning,  and  many  other  things;,  are  purfucd,  in 
part,  after  the  fame  manner,  and  for  the  fame  reafons, 

as 


Pains  of  Self-Intereft.  463 

as  riches,  viz.  from  a  tacit  fuppofition,  that  the  ac- 
quifition  of  every  degree  of  thefe  is  treafuring  up  a 
proportional  degree  of  happinefs,  to  be  produced 
and  enjoyed  at  pleafure.  And  the  defires  of  each  of 
thefe  would  in  like  manner  increafe  perpetually  during 
life,  did  they  not  curb  one  another  by  many  mutual 
inconfiftencies,  or  were  not  all  damped  by  the  fre- 
quent experience  and  recolieflion,  that  all  the  means 
of  happinefs  ceafe  to  be  fo,  when  the  body  or  mind 
ceafe  to  be  difpofed  in  a  manner  proper  for  the 
reception  of  happinefs. 

It  is  alfo  worthy  of  obfervation,  that  riches,  ho- 
nours, power,  learning,  and  ail  other  things,  that 
are  confidered  as  means  of  happinefs,  becom.e 
means  and  ends  to  each  other  in  a  great  variety  of 
ways,  thus  transferring  upon  each  other  all  the  affo- 
ciated  pleafures  which  they  colled  from  different 
quarters,  and  approaching  nearer  and  nearer  perpe- 
tually to  a  perfe6l  fimilarity  and  famenefs  with  each 
other,  in  the  inftantaneous  pleafures  which  they  afford 
when  purfued  and  obtained  as  ends. 

It  appears  likewife,  that  all  aggregates  of  pleafure, 
thus  collefted  by  them  all,  mulf,  from  the  mechanifm 
and  neceflTity  of  our  natures,  and  of  the  world  which 
furrounds  us,  be  made  at  lafl:  to  centre  and  reft  upon 
him  who  is  the  inexhauftible  fountain  of  all  power, 
knowledge,    goodnefs,    majefty,  glory,  property,  &c. 
So  that  even  avarice   and  ambition  are,  in  their  re- 
fpeftive  ways,  carrying  on   the  benevolent  defigns  of 
him   who  is   ail  in  all.     And    the    fame    thing    may 
be  hoped  of  every   other  paffion  and  purfuit.     One 
may  hope,  that  they  all  agree  and  unite  in  leading  to 
ultimate  happinefs    and    perfeftion.     However,    they 
differ   gready   in   their  prefent  confequences,   and  in 
their  future  ones,  reaching  to  certain  intervals  of  time 
indefinite   and  unknown   to   us,  thus  becoming  good 
or  evil,  both  naturally  and  morally,  in  refpeft  of  us, 
and  our  limited   apprehenfions,  judgments,  and   an- 
ticipations. 


464  Of  the  Pkajiires  and 

ticipations.  And  yet  one  may  humbly  hope,  as  was 
faid  above,  that  every  thing  muft  be  ultimately  good, 
both  naturally  and  morally. 

OF    REFINED    SELF-INTEREST. 

The  fecond  fpecies  of  felf-intereft  is  that  which  I 
call  refined  lelf-intereft.  As  the  foregoing  Ipecies  is 
generated  by  an  attention  to,  and  frequent  refleftion 
upon,  the  things  which  piocure  us  the  pleafures  of 
fenfition,  imagination,  and  ambition  ;  and  therefore 
cannot  prevail  in  any  great  degree,  till  thefc  pleafures 
have  been  generated,  and  prevailed  for  fome  time  ; 
fo  this  fpecies,  or  refined  felf-intereft,  which  is  a  cooJ, 
deliberate  fceking  for  ourfelves  the  pleafures  of  fym- 
pathy,  religion,  and  the  moral  fenfe,  prefuppofes 
the  generation  of  thefe  pleafures,  and  the  enjoyment 
of  them  for  a  fufficient  time.  And  as  fome  degree 
of  grofs  felf-intereft  is  the  natural  and  neceflary  con- 
fequence  of  the  three  firft  clafles  of  pleafures,  fo  is 
fome  degree  of  refined  felf-intereft  of  the  three  laft. 
A  perfon  who  has  had  a  fufficient  experience  of  the 
pleafures  of  friendfhip,  generofity,  devotion,  and 
felf-approbation,  cannot  but  defire  to  have  a  return 
of  them,  when  he  is  not  under  the  particular  influ- 
ence of  any  one  of  them,  but  merely  on  account  of 
the  pleafure  which  they  have  afforded  ;  and  will  feek 
to  excite  thefe  pleafures  by  the  ufual  means,  to  trea- 
fure  up  to  himifelf  fuch  means,  keep  himfelf  always 
in  a  difpofition  to  ufe  them,  bcc.  not  at  all  from  any 
particular  vivid  love  of  his  neighbour,  or  of  God, 
or  from  a  fenfe  of  duty  to  him,  but  entirely  from 
the  view  of  private  happinefs.  At  It-aft,  there  will  be 
a  great  mixture  of  this  refined  felf-inteteft  in  all  the 
pleafures  and  duties  of  benevolence,  piety,  and  the 
moral  fenfe. 

But  then  this  refined  felf-intereft  is  neither  fo  com- 
mon, nor  fo  confpicuous  in   real   life,   as    the   grofs 

one. 


Pains  of  Self-Intereft.  465 

one,  fince  it  rifes  late,  is  never  of  any  great  magni- 
tude in  the  bulk  of  nnankind,  through  their  want  of 
the  previous  pleafures  of  fympathy,  religion,  and 
the  moral  fenfe,  in  a  fufficient  degree,  and  in  fome 
ic  fcarce  prevails  at  all ;  whereas  grofs  felf-intereft 
rifes  early  in  infancy,  and  arrives  at  a  confiderabie 
magnitude  before  adult  age.  The  detail  of  this  fe- 
cond  fpecies  of  felf-intereft  may  be  feen  in  books  of 
practical  religion. 

OF    RATIONAL    SELF-INTEREST. 

The  third  fpecies  of  felf-intereft  is  the  rational 
This  is  the  fame  thing  with  the  abftrad  defire  of 
appinefs,  and  averfion  to  mifery,  which  is  fuppofed 
CO  attend  every  intelligent  being  during  the  whole 
courfe  of  his  exiftence.  I  have  already  endeavoured 
r.o  Ihew,  that  this  fuppofition  is  not  true  in  the 
proper  fenfe  of  the  words ;  and  yet  that  very 
general  defires  do  frequently  recur  to  the  mind, 
and  may  be  excited  by  words  and  fymbols  of  general 
i  mport. 

The  hopes  and  fears  relating  to  a  future  ftate,  or 
)  death,  which  is  our  entrance  into  it,  are  of  this 
1  kind,  and  may  be  confidered  as  proceeding  from  ra- 
j  tional  felf-intereft,  in  the  higheft  and  moft  abttraded 
!  fenfe  that  the  terms   admit  of  pradically,    fince  we 
I  have    no    definite    knowledge    of    the    nature    and 
j  kind   of  the  happinefs  or  mifery   of  another  world. 
\  Thefe  hopes  and  fears  are  alfo  the  ftrongeft  of  our 
i't^lfifli  affedions,  and  yet  at  the  fame  time  the  chief 
foundation   of  the   pure   difintereftcd   love   of  God, 
and  of  our  neighbour,   and  the  principal  means  of 
transferring  our  aflbciations,  fo  as  that  we  may  love 
and  hate,  purfue  and  fly,  in  the  manner  the  beft  fuited 
to  our  attainment  of  our  greateft  poITible  happincfs. 
For  hope,  being  itfelf  a  pleafure,  may,  by   aflbcia- 
tion,  render   indifferent,   and   even  difagreeable,  ob- 
VoL.  I.  H  h  jefts 


4-66  Of  the  Pleajurcs  and  \ 

iefls  and  aftions,  pleafant  j  and  fear  may  make 
agreeable  ones  painful :  hence  we  can  neither  increafe 
defires  and  avcrfions,  that  are  fuitable  to  our  ftate, 
or  obliterate  and  convert  them  into  their  contraries, 
if  they  be  unfuitable,  by  means  of  their  connexion 
with  the  hopes  and  fears  of  death,  and  a  future 
rtate.  1  will  therefore  briefly  rtate  the  rife  and  pro- 
grefh  of  thefe  hopes  and  fears. 

All  our   full  affociations    with    the  idea   of  death 

are   of  the   difguftful   and   alarming   kind;  and   they 

are    colle<5led    from    all    quarters,    from    the    fenfible 

pains   of  every    fort,  from    the   imperfeflion,   weak- 

nefs,  loathfomenefs,  corruption,   and   diforder,    where 

difeafe,  old  age,  death   animal  or  vegetable,  prevail, 

in  oppofition  to  the  beauty,  order,  and  luftre  of  life, 

youth,  and    health ;    from   the   fliame  and  contempt 

attending  the  fiilt  in    many    inftances  j    whereas   the 

laft  are  honourable,  as   being  fources  of  power  and 

happinefs,    the    reward    of    virtue,    &c.    and    from 

the    fympathetic    pafTions    in    general.      And    it    is 

neceffary,     that    the    heedleflhefs    and    inexperience 

of  infancy    and    youth   fhould    be   guarded   by  fuch 

terrors,  and  their  headftrong  appetites  and  pafTions 

curbed,    that   they    may  not  be  hurried  into  danger 

and  deftrudlion  before  they  are  aware.     It  is  proper 

alfo,    that  they  fhould  form  fome  expedations  with 

refped  to,  and  fet  fome  value  upon,  their  future  life 

in  this  world,  that  fo  they   may   be   better   qualified 

to  a6l  their  parts  in   it,  and   make  the  quicker  pro- 

grefs  to  perfedion  during  their  paflTage  through  it. 

When  children  begin  to  have  a  fenfe  of  religion 
and  duty  formed  in  them,  thefe  do  ftill  farther 
heighten  and  increafe  the  fear  of  death  for  the  moft 
part.  For  though  there  are  rewards  on  the  one  hand, 
as  well  as  punifhments  on  the  other  i  yet  fear  has  got 
the  ftart  from  the  natural  caufes  of  it  before-men- 
tioned: and  as  pain  is  in  general  greater  than  pleafure, 
as   was  fliewn  above,  from  its  confiding  in  ftronger 

vibrations  i 


Pains  of  Self-Intereft.  467 

vibrations ;  fo  fear  is  in  gcnerial  more  vivid  than  hope,' 

efpecially  in  children. 

Moreover,  the  fenfual  and  felfifli  appetites  are  the- 

original  of  ail  the  reft  i  yet  thefe  are   finfiil,  and   in- 

confiftcnt  with  our  own  and  other's  happinefs  ;  they 
muft  therefore  be  reftrained,  and  at  laft  eradicated/ 
But  parents  and  governors,  are,  in  this  cafe,  more^ 
apt  to  have  recourfe  to  fear,  than  to  hope  (in  general, 
I  fuppofe  with  reafon;  becaufe  hope  is  too  feeble  to 
wichftand  the  violence  of  the  natural  appetites  and 
pallions).  And  it  is  to  be  added  to  all,  that  adults, 
by  difcovering,  in  general,  much  more  of  fear  and 
forrow    in    the    apprehenfions   or    profpe<5l    of  death, 

.than  of  hope  and  eomforr,  from  the  continuance  of 
the  c^ufes  juft  mentioned,  propagate  and  increafe  the 
fear  ftill  farther  in  one  another,  and  in  children,  in^ 
fefling  all  around  them,  as  is  ufual  in  other  cafes  of 
the  like  kind.     And  by  this  means  it  comes  to  pafs, 

]  that  the  fear  of  death  does  in  fome  circumftances, 
particularly  where  the  nervous  fyftem  is,  through  a 
bodily  dlforder,  reduced  to  an  aptnefs  to  receive  un- 
eafy  and  difguftful  vibrations,  only  or  chiefly,  being 
m  a  ftate  of  irritability  approaching  to  pain,  grow  to 
a  moft  enormous  fize,  colIe6ling  and  uniting  every 
difagreeable  idea  and  impreflion  under  the  aflTocia- 
tions  belonging  to  death ;  fo  that  fuch  perfons  live  in 
perpetual'  anxiety  and  flavery  to  the  fear  of  death. 
And  where  there  is  the  confcioufnefs  of  paft  guilr^ 
or  the  want  of  an  upright  intention."  for  the  future, 
it  rages  with  ftill  greater  fiercenefs,  till  thefe  be 
removed  entirely,  or  in  part,  by  repentance  and 
amendment. 

It  is  farther  to  be  obferved,  that  the  fear  of  death 
is  much  increafed  by  the  exquifitenefs  of  the  punifti- 
ments  threatened  in  a  future  ftate,  and  by  the  variety 
of  the  emblems,  reprefentations,  analogies,  and 
evidences,  of  natural  and  revealed  religion,  where- 
by  all  the  terrors  of  all  oriier  things  are  transferred 

H  h  2  upon 


I 


468  Of  the  PUafures  Mid 

upon  thcfe  piinifhments ;    alfo  by  that  peculiar   cir- 
cumlUncc  of  the  eternity   of  them,  which   fcems  to 
have  been  a  general  tradition  previous   to  the   appear- 
ance of  chrillianity,  amongft   both  Jews  and   Pagans^ 
and  which  has  been  the   dodrine  and   oj)inion  of  the 
chriftian    world    ever    fince,    fome    very   few  perfons 
excepted.      The    confideration  of  any    thing  that    is 
infinite,    fpace,    time,    power,    knowledge,   goodnefs, 
perfeiflion,  &:c.  quite  overpowers  the  faculties  of  the 
foul   with   wonder  and   aftonifliment :    and   when   the 
peculiar    feeling    and   concern    belonging    to  Jelf  are 
applied  here,    and  excited   by   the   word   wfinite^    by 
meditation,  reading,    &c.    we  muft,    and   we   ought 
to  be   alarmed   to   the  full  extent  of  our  capacities. 
And  the  fame  conclufion  follows,  though  we  ftiould 
fuppofe   the   punifhments  of  a   future  ftate  not  to  be 
abfolutely  and  metaphyfically  infinite.     For  their  great 
exquifitenefs,    and    long    duration,    which    are    moft 
clearly  and  plainly  declared  in  the  fcriptures,  make 
them  pradically  fo. 

This  is  a  brief  fketch  of  the  origin  and  progrefs 
of  the  fears  attending  the  confideration  of  death,  and 
a  future  ftate.  We  now  come  to  inquire,  how  the 
hopes  are  generated. 

Firft,  then,   We    are    to  obferve,  that  repentance, 
amendment,  the  confcioufnefs  of  part  virtue,  and  of 
good  intentions  for  the  future,   give  a    title  to   the 
hopes  and  rewards  of  a  future  ftate  j  and  that  though 
while  there  are  perpetual  alternations  of  oppofite  con- 
fcioufnefies,  /.  e.   recoUedions  and  judgments  on   our 
own  adliens,  the  fear  may   prevail  in  general,    both 
from  the  additional  weight  of  the  natural    fear,  and 
from   the  previous   poffeffion  which  the  religious  fear 
has  obtained;-  yet  by  degrees  the  agreeable  confciouf- 
nefs muft  prevail  in  ihofe  who  are  fincere  (and  fome- 
.  times  it  is  to  be  feared  a  dclufive  one  of  the  fame  kind 
in  others),  moderate  the  religious  fear   by   little  and 
little,  and,  ifl  great  meafure,   overcome  the  natural 

one  i 


Pmns  of  Self-Intereft:.  469 

one ;  for  which  the  way  has  been  prepared  from  the 
fuperior  ftrength  of  the  religious  fear,  which  has 
already  obfcured  it  in  ferious  perfons.  And  thus  by 
iegrees  hope  will  begin  to  take  place,  as  the  general 
late  of  the  mind,  and  the  confideration  of  death, 
nnd  a  future  (tare,  become,  for  the  moft  part,  matter 
of  joy  and  comfort. 

Secondly,  The  deliverance  from  the  fear  of  death 
adds  greatly  to  this  joy,  in  the  fame  way  as  the  re^ 
moval  of  other  pains  is  made  the  fource  of  pleafure. 
And  the  returns  of  the  fear  of  death  at  certain  inter- 
vals, according  to  the  ftate  of  our  bodies  or  minds, 
and  the  moral  qualities  of  our  adtions,  will,  if  they 
be  not  too  frequent,  keep  up  this  fource  of  pleafure 
n  the  hope  of  futurity. 

Thirdly,  When  the  flavifh  fear  of  God  is  thus  re- 
moved by  faith  and  hope,  all  the  pleafing  fympa- 
thetic  affcdlions,  fuch  as  love,  gratitude,  confidence, 
begin  to  exert  themfclves  with  refped  to  God,  in  a 
manner  analogous,  but  a  degree  far  i'upeiior  to  that  in 
which  they  are  exerted  towards  men.  And  it  is  eafy 
to  fee  how  thefe,  and  fuch  like  caufes  concurring, 
:nay,  in  many  cafes,  quite  overcome  the  natural 
and  religious  fears  of  death  and  pain,  and  even  make 
;hem  acceptable. 

Cor.  From  hence  we  may  pafs  to  the  fervours  of 
devotion;  thefe  being  chiefly  the  hopes,  and  pleaf- 
ing affeftions,  juft  fpoken  of,  coalefcing  together  fo 
intimately  by  repeated  affociations,  as  that  the  fepa- 
rate  parts  there  mentioned  cannot  be  diftinguifhed 
from  each  other  in  the  compound.  And  as  thefe 
fervours  are  thcmfelves  often  efteemed  a  fign  of  ho- 
linefs,  and  confequently  a  foundation  of  farther  hope, 
hey  perpetuate  and  increafe  themfelves  for  a  certain 
time,  /.  e.  till  the  new  convert  finds  the  reiterated 
appearance  of  the  fame  ideas  give  Icfs  and  lefs  emo- 
tion and  pleafure,  jufl:  as  in  the  other  pleafures,  fenfible 
and  intelledlual;  looks  upon  this  as  a  mark  of  fpiricual 

H  h  3  defertion  i 


h 


o  Of  the  Pleajtiresy  Sec. 


47 

deft-rtion;  finds  numberlefs,  unexpeAed,  unthought- 
of,  fins  and  iiiiperfcdions,  not  yet  i'libdued  ;  falls  into 
bodily  dilordtfis,  fronn  unfeafonable  fevciiiies,  or  fpi- 
ritual  intemperance,  &c.  and  thus  becomes  deje(5ted, 
fcriipulous,  and  fearful. 

By  degrees  the  fears  taken  from  death,  and  a  future 
Hate,  are  confined  to  tiic  nnere  apprehenfion  of 
tranfgrelTion,  v/ithout  any  regard  had  to  thofe,  and 
even  where  they,  when  confidered  and  expeded,  raife 
no  fears. 

However,  all  thefe  things  mortify  pride,  and  the 
refined  fclf-intercrt ;  lead,  or  even  compel,  men  to 
refign  all  to  Godj  and  fo  advance  them  to  a  more 
pure,  difintcrefted,  and  permanent  love  of  God,  and 
of  their  neighbour,  than  they  could  have  arrived  at 
(all  other  things  remaining  the  fame),  had  they  not 
undergone  thefe  anxieties;  and  therefore  are  to  be 
efteemed  the  kind  corrections  of  an  infinitely  merci- 
ful Father. 


SECT. 


Of  the  Pleafurei,  &c,  47 1 


SECT.     IV. 

OF   THE   PLEASURES    AND   ?AINS    OF 
SYMPATHY. 

PROP.     XCVII. 

7(3  examine  how  far  the  Plea/ures  and  Pains  of  Sympathy 
are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  theory. 

The  fympathetic  affeclions  may  be  diftinguifhed 
into  four  claffes,  viz. 

Firft,  Thofe  by  which  we  rejoice  at  the  happinefs 
of  others. 

Secondly,  Thofe  by  which  we  giieve  for  their  mi- 
fery. 

Thirdly,  Thofe  by  which  we  rejoice  at  their 
mifery. 

And,  Fourthly,  Thofe  by  which  we  grieve  for  their 
happinefs. 

Of  the  firft  kind  are  fociality,  good-will,  genero- 
fity  and  gratitude.  Of  the  fecond,  compalTion  and 
mercy.  Of  the  third,  morofenefs,  anger,  revenge, 
jealoufy,  cruelty,  and  malice.  And  of  the  fourth, 
emulation  and  envy. 

It  is  eafy  to  be  conceived,  that  aflbciation  fliould 
produce  affe6lions  of  all  thefe  four  kinds,  fince  in 
the  intercourfes  of  life  the  pleafures  and  pains  of  one 
are,  in  various  ways,  intermixed  with,  and  dependent 
upon,  thofe  of  others,  fo  as  to  have  clufters  of  their 
miniatures  excited,  in  all  the  pofTible  ways  in  which 
the  happinefs  or  mifery  of  one  can  be  combined  with 
the  happinefs  or  mifery  of  another  i.  e.  in  the  four 
above-mentioned.  1  will  now  enter  upon  the  detail 
of  the  rife  and  progrefs  of  each  of  them. 

H  h  4  OF 


472  Of  the  Tltajurei  and 


OF  THE   AFFFXTIONS   BY   WHICH  WE   REJOICE 
AT  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  OTHERS. 

The  firft  of  thefe  is  fociality,  or  the  pleafiire  which 
we  take  in  the  mere  company  and  converration  of 
others,  particularly  of  our  friends  and  acquaintance, 
and  whicii  is  attended  with  mutual  affability,  com- 
plaifance,  and  candour.  Now  mod  of  the  pleafures 
which  children  receive  are  conferred  upon  them  by 
otlicrs,  their  parents,  attendants,  or  play-fellows. 
And  the  number  of  the  pleafures  which  they  receive 
in  this  way,  is  far  greater  than  that  of  the  pains 
brought  upon  them  by  others.  Indeed  the  hurts, 
and  bodily  injuries,  which  they  meet  with,  are  chiefly 
from  themfelvesj  and  the  denials  of  gratifications  are 
either  very  few  in  number,  or,  if  they  be  more  fre- 
quent, give  little  uneafinefs.  It  appears  therefore, 
that,  according  to  the  do6lrine  of  aflbciation,  chil- 
dren ought  to  be  pleafed,  in  general,  with  the  fight 
and  company  of  all  their  acquaintance.  And  the 
fame  things,  with  fome  alterations  hold  in  refpeft 
of  adults,  through  the  whole  courfe,  and  general 
tenour  of  human  life. 

Befides  the  pleafures  for  which  we  are  indebted  to 
others,  there  are  many  which  we  enjoy  in  common 
with  others,  and  in  their  company  and  converfation, 
and  which  therefore  both  enhance  and  are  enhanced 
by,  the  gaiety  and  happinefs  that  appear  in  the 
countenances,  geftures,  words,  and  adtions  of  the 
whole  company.  Of  this  kind  are  the  pleafures  of 
feafting,  fports  and  paftimes,  rural  fcenes,  polite 
arts,  mirth,  raillery,  and  ridicule,  public  fliews, 
public  rejoicings,  &c.  And  in  general  it  may  be 
obfcrved,  that  the  caufes  of  joy  and  grief  are  com- 
mon to  great  numbers,  afiVfting  n^ankind  according 
to  the  feveral  divifions  and  fubdivifions  thereof  into 
nations,    ranks,    offices,    ages,    fexes,    families,    &c. 

And 


Pains  of  Syrnpathy.  473 

And  by  all  thefe  things  it  connes  to  pafs,  that  the 
face  of  an  old  acquaintance  brings  to  view,  as  it 
were,  the  indifl:in6l  mixed  recolle(5lion,  the  rennaining 
veftiges  of  all  the  good  and  evil  which  we  have  felt, 
while  his  idea  has  been  prefent  with  us. 

The  fame  obfervation  may  be  made  upon  places; 
and  particularly  u}  on  thofe  where  a  man  has  fpent 
his  infancy  and  youth. 

To  all  this  it  is  to  be  added,  that  the  rules  of  pru- 
dence, good  manners,  and  religion,  by  reftraining 
all  rufticity,  morofenefs,  and  infolcnce,  and  obliging 
us  to  a(5lions  of  a  contrary  nature,  even  though  we 
have  not  the  proper  internal  feelings,  do  by  degrees 
contribute  to  beget  ihefe  in  us,  i.  e.  to  beget  foci- 
ality  and  complaifance  j  juft  in  the  fame  manner, 
as  a  perfon  in  a  paflion  becomes  much  more  in- 
flamed from  his  own  angry  expiefllons,  gellures, 
and  adlions. 

Good-will,  or  benevolence,  when  underftood  in 
a  limited  fenfe,  may  be  termed  that  plcafing  affec- 
tion which  engages  us  to  promote  the  welfare  of 
others  to  the  beft  of  our  power.  If  it  carry  us  {o 
far  as  to  forego  great  pleafures,  or  endure  great 
pains  it  is  called  generofity.  But  good-will  and  be- 
nevolence, in  a  general  fenfe,  are  put  for  all  the 
fympathetic  affe<5lions  of  the  fir  ft  and  fecond  clafs, 
viz.  thofe  by  which  we  either  rejoice  in,  and  pro- 
mote, the  happinefs  of  others,  or  grieve  for,  and 
endeavour  to  remove,  their  mifery  ;  as  ill-will  and 
malevolence,  underftood  in  a  general  fenfe  alfo,  are 
put  for  the  contrary  affedions,  viz.  thofe  of  the  third 
and  fourth  clafs. 

Benevolence,  in  the  limited  fenfe,  is  nearly  con- 
nected with  fociality,  and  has  the  fame  fources.  It 
has  alfo  a  high  degree  of  honour  and  efteem  annexed 
to  it,  procures  us  many  advantages,  and  returns  of 
kindnefs,  both  from  the  perfon  obliged  and  others  j 
and   is   moft    clofely   conneded'^  with    the   hope  of 

reward 


474  ^f  t^^  Plea/ures  and 

reward  in  a  future  llate,  and  with  the  pleafures  of 
religion,  and  of  rdf-approbation,  or  the  moral  fenfe. 
Anil  the  fame  things  hold  with  refpeft  to  generofity 
in  a  much  higher  degree.  It  is  eafy  therefore  to 
lee,  how  fuch  affociations  may  be  formed  in  us, 
as  to  engage  us  to  forego  great  pleafure,  or  endure 
n  great  pain,  for  the  lake  of  others  j  how  thefe  allo- 
h  ciations  may  be  attended  with  fo  great  a  degree  of 
pleafure  as  to  over-rule  the  pofitive  p'.Mn  endured, 
j^  or  the  negative  one  from  the  foregoing  of  a  pleafure  ; 
and  yet  how  there  may  be  no  dire6l,  explicit  ex- 
ped.ition  of  reward,  either  from  God  or  man,  by 
natural  confcquence,  or  exprt-fs  appointment,  not 
even  of  the  concomitant  pleafure  which  engages  the 
agent  to  undertake  the  benevolent  or  generous 
aAion.  And  this  I  take  to  be  a  proof  from  the 
dodrine  of  aflbciation,  that  there  is,  and  muft  be, 
fuch  a  thing  as  pure  difinterefted  benevolence  3  alfo 
ajuft  account  of  the  origin  and  nature  of  it. 

Gratitude  includes  benevolence,  and  therefore  has 
the  fame  fources  with  fome  additional  ones  j  thefe 
laft  are  the  explicit  or  implicit  recolledion  of  the  bene- 
fits and  pleafures  received,  the  hope  of  future  ones, 
the  approbation  of  the  moral  character  of  the  bene- 
factor, and  the  pleafures  from  the  honour  and  efteem 
attending  gratitude,  much  enhanced  by  the  peculiar 
bafcnefs  and  fhamefulnefs  of  ingratitude. 

OF   THE    AFFECTIONS   BY  A^TilCH   WE   GRIEVE 
FOR   THE   MISERY   OF   OTHERS. 

Companion  is  the  uneafinefs  which  a  man  feels  at 
the  mifery  of  another.  Now  this  in  children  feems  to 
,  be  grounded  upon  fuch  afTociations  as  thefe  that  fol- 
low :  the  very  appearance  and  idea  of  any  kind  of 
mifery  which  they  have  experienced,  or  of  any  figns 
of  diftrefs  which  they  underftand,  raife  up  in  their 
nervous  fyftems  a  fbate  of  mifery  from  mere  me- 
mory. 


Pains  of  Sympathy.  475 

mory,  on  account  of  the  ftrength  of  their  imagina- 
tions ;  and  becaufe  the  connexion  between  the  ad- 
jun6ls  of  pain,  and  the  adual  inflidion  of  it,  has  not 
yet  been  fufficiently  broken  by  experience,  as  in  adults. 
—  When  feveral  children  are  educated  together,  the 
pains,  the  denials  of  pleafures,  and  the  forrows,  which 
affc6t  one,  generally  extend  to  all  in  fome  degree, 
Of'^ten  in  an  equal  one.  —  When  their  parents,  attend- 
ants &c.  are  fick  or  afflided,  it  is  ufual  to  raife  in 
their  minds  the  nafcent  ideas  of  pains  and  miferies,  by 
fuch  words  and  figns  as  are  fuited  to  their  capacities ; 
they  alio  find  themfelves  laid  under  many  reftraints 
on  this  account.  —  And  when  thefe  and  fuch  like  cir- 
cumftances  have  raifed  the  defires  and  endeavours  to 
remove  the  caufes  of  .thefe  their  own  internal  uneafy 
feelings,  or,  which  is  the  fame  thing,  of  thefe  mife- 
ries of  others  (in  all  which  they  are  much  influen- 
ced, as  in  other  like  cafes,  by  the  great  difpofition  to 
imitate,  before  fpoken  of)  i  and  a  variety  of  internal 
feelings  and  defires  of  this  kind  are  fo  blended  and 
aflbciated  together,  as  that  no  part  can  be  diftinguifhed 
feparately  from  the  reft ;  the  child  may  properly  be 
faid  to  have  compafTion. 

The  fame  fources  of  compafTion  remain,  though 
with  fome  alterations,  during  our  whole  progrefs 
through  life;  and  an  attentive  perfon  may  plainly 
difcern  the  conftituent  parts  of  his  com.pafilon,  while 
they  are  yet  the  mere  internal,  and,  as  one  may  fay, 
felfifli  feelings  above-mentioned ;  and  before  they 
have  put  on  the  nature  of  compaflion  by  coalefcence 
with  the  reft. 

Agreeably  to  this  method  of  reafoning,  it  may  be 
obferved,  that  perfons  whofe  nerves  are  eafily  irrita- 
ble, and  thofe  who  have  experienced  great  trials  and 
afflidions,  are,  in  general,  more  difpofed  to  compaf- 
fion  than  others ;  and  that  we  are  moft  apt  to  pity 
in  thofe  difeafes  and  calamities,  which  we  either  have 

felt 


47  6  ^f  '^<?  Plea/ures  and 

felt    already,    or    apprehend    ourfclvcs    in    danger   of 
feeling  iiereafter. 

But  adults  have  alfo  many  other  foiirccs  of  com- 
panion, bcfidcs  thofe  already  mentioned,  and  which 
differ  according  to'  their  educations  and  fituations  in 
life.  When  love,  natural  affedtion,  and  friendfliip, 
have  taught  men  to  take  a  peculiar  delight  in  certain 
objeds,  in  mutual  endearments,  and  familiar  inter- 
courfcs,  thofe  mifeiies  affedling  the  beloved  objedts, 
which  either  totally  deftroy,  or  greatly  interrupt, 
thcfe  intercourfes,  mult  give  an  exquifite  uneafineis ; 
and  this  uneafinefs,  by  mixing  itfelf  with  the  other 
parts  of  our  companionate  affedions,  will  greatly 
increafe  the  fum  total  in  refpeft  of  thcfe  beloved 
objedts. — A  compalfionate  temper  being  great  mat- 
ter of  praife  to  thofe  who  are  endued  with  it,  and  the 
adtions  which  flow  from  it  being  a  duty  incumbent 
on  all,  men  are  led  to  pradlife  thefe  aftions,  and  to 
inculcate  upon  themfelves  the  motives  of  compaffion, 
by  attending  to  diftrefs  aftually  prefent,  or  delcribed 
in  hillory,  real  or  fiftitious.  —  The  peculiar  love  and 
cfteem  which  we  bear  to  morally  good  charafleis, 
make  us  more  fenfibly  touched  with  their  miferies  j 
which  is  farther  augmented  by  our  indignation,  and 
want  of  compafTion  for  morally  ill  charafters,  fuffer- 
ing  the  juft  punilhment  of  their  crimes.  In  like 
manner,  the  fimplicity,  the  ignorance,  the  helplefs- 
nefs,  and  the  many  innocent  diverting  follies  of  young 
children,  and  of  Ibme  brutes,  lead  men  to  pity  them 
in  a  peculiar  manner. 

Mercy  has  the  fame  general  nature  and  fources  as 
companion,  and  feems  to  differ  from  it  only  in  this, 
that  the  objeifl  of  it  has  forfeited  his  title  to  happi- 
nefs,  or  the  removal  of  mifery,  by  fome  demerit, 
particularly  againfl:  ourfclves.  Here,  therefore,  re- 
fentment  for  an  injury  done  to  ourfclves,  or  what  is 
called  a  juft  indignation  againft  vice  in  general,  in- 
terferes, and  checks  the  otherwife  natural  courfe  of 

our 


I 


Pains  of  Sympathy.  477 

our  compafTion,  fo  as,  in  the  unmerciful,  entirely  to 
put  a  ilop  to  it.  But,  in  the  merciful,  the  fources 
of  companion  prevail  over  thofe  of  refcntment  and 
indignation  j  whence  it  appears,  that  the  compafTion 
required  in  afts  of  mercy,  is  greater  than  that  in  com- 
mon a61:s  of  mere  companion :  agreeably  to  which, 
it  is  obfervable,  that  mercy  is  held  in  higher  efteem, 
than  mere  compafiion. 

OF  THE    AFFECTIONS    BY   WHICH   WE   REJOICE 
AT  THE  MISERY  OF  OTHERS. 

We  come  now  to  the  affedlions  of  the  third  claf^ 
viz.  morofenefs,  anger,  revenge,  jealoufy,  cruelty, 
and  malice.  Now  morofenefs,  peevifhnefs,  feverity, 
&c.  are  moft  apt  to  arife  in  thofe  perfons  who  have 
fome  real  or  imaginary  fuperiority  ovei*  others,  from 
their  rank,  years,  office,  accompiifhments,  &c. 
which  either  magnifies  the  failures  of  duty  in  inferiors 
with  refpe(5t  to  them,  or  engages  them  to  be  very 
attentive  to  thefe. —  Bodily  infirmities,  and  frequent 
difappoiniments,  by  making  the  common  inter- 
courfes  of  life  infipid,  and  enhancing  fmall  injuries  ; 
delicacy  and  effeminacy,  by  increafing  the  fenfibility 
both  of  body  and  mind,  with  refpedt  to  pain  and 
uneafinefs ;  luxury,  by  begetting  unnatural  cravings, 
which  dafh  not  only  with  the  like  cravings  of  others, 
but  alfo  with  the  common  courfe  and  conveniencies 
of  human  life;  and,  in  fhort,  all  kinds  of  felfifh- 
nefs  J  have  the  fame  ill  efFeft  upon  the  temper. — 
The  fevere  fcrutiny  which  earneft  penitents  make 
into  their  own  lives,  during  their  noviciate,  and 
liie  rigid  cenfures  which  they  pafs  upon  their  own 
aflions,  are  often  found,  in  proud  and  pafTionate 
tempers,  to  raife  fuch  indignation  againft  vice,  as 
breaks  out  into  an  undue  feverity  of  language  and 
behaviour,  in  refpeft  of  others  ;  and  this  efpecially, 
if  they  feem  to  themfelves  to  have  overcome  all  great 

vices. 


47  S  Of  the  VUaJuns  and  % 

vices,  and  are  not  yet  arrived  at  a  jufl:  lenfc  of  the 
many  latent  corruptions  (till  remaining  in  them. 
And  this  is  much  increafed  by  all  opinions  which 
icprelent  the  Deity  as  implicable  towards  a  part  of 
mankind,  and  this*  part  as  reprobate  towards  him. 
By  all  which  we  may  fee,  that  every  thing  which 
makes  dilagrceable  imprefllons  upon  our  minds  at 
the  fame  time  that  our  feilow-creatuies,  or  their  ideas, 
are  prefent  with  us  ;  and  cfpecially  if  thefe  be  linked 
together  in  the  way  of  caufe  and  ellc'cft,  or  by  any 
i'uch  relation  ;  will,  in  fafl:,  beget  in  us  morofencls 
and  peeviflinefs.  'IMiis  follows  from  the  dodlrine 
of  afibciation  ;  and  ia  alfo  an  evident  fadl.  It  is  like- 
wife  a  (Irong  argument  for  chcerfulnefs,  and  the 
pleafures  of  innocei»t  moderate  mirth. 

Anger  and  cruelty  are  the  oppofites  to  mercy 
and  compaflTion ;  the  firft,  as  a  fudden  ftart  of 
pafllon,  by  which  men  wifh  and  endeavour  harm 
to  others,  and  rejoice  in  it  when  done ;  which  is 
revenge  :  the  latter  as  a  mote  fettled  habit  of  mind, 
difpofing  men  to  take  a  delight -in  infliifling  mifery 
and  pnnifliment,  and  in  fatiating  their  thirfl:  after 
thefe,  by  beholding  the  tortures  and  anguifh  of  the 
fufTerers. 

Anger  and  revenge  may  be  analyfed  as  follows. 
The  appearance,  idea,  approach,  actual  attack,  &c. 
of  any  thing  from  which  a  child  has  received  harm, 
mud  raife  in  his  m.ind,  by  the  law  of  afibciation,  a 
miniature  trace  of  that  harnn.  The  fame  harm 
often  arifes  from  different  caufes,  and  difi^erent  harms 
from  the  fame  ca'ule  :  thefe  harms  and  caufes  have  an 
affinity  with  each  other  :  and  thus  they  are  varioufly 
mixed  and  connected  together  j  fo  as  that  a  general 
confufed  idea  of  harm,  with  the  uneafy  ftate  of  the 
nervous  fyftem,  and  the  confequent  activity  of  the 
parts,  are  raifed  up  in  young  children  upon  certain 
appearances  and  circumftances.  By  degrees  the 
denial  of  gratifications,  and  many  intelleflual  aggre- 

gatesj 


Pains  of  Sympathy.  479 

gates,  with  all  the  figns  and  tokens  of  thefe,  raife  up 
a  like  uneafinefs,  in  the  manner  before  explained. 
And  thus  it  happens,  that  when  any  harm  has  been 
received,  any  gratification  denied,  or  other  mental 
uneafinefs  occafioned,  a  long  train  of  aflbciated 
remainders  of  painful  impreffions  enhance  the  dif- 
pleafure,  and  continue  it  much  beyond  its  natural 
period.  This  is  the  nafcent  ftate  of  the  pafiion  of 
anger,  in  which  it  is  nearly  allied  to  fear,  being  the 
continuance  of  the  fame  internal  feelings,  quickened, 
on  one  hand,  by  the  adual,  painful,  or  uneafy 
imprefilon,  but  moderated  on  the  other  by  the 
abfence  of  the  apprehenfion  of  future  danger. 

By  degrees  the  child  learns,  from  obfervation  and 
imitation,  to  ufe  various  mufcular  exertions,  words, 
geftures,  &c.  in  order  to  ward  off  or  remove  the 
caufes  of  uneafinefs  or  pain,  fo  as  to  flrike,  talk  loud, 
threaten,  &c.  and  fo  goes  on  multiplying  perpetually, 
by  farther  and  farther  aflbciations,  both  the  occa- 
(ions  of  anger,  and  the  exprefiions  of  it;  and  parti- 
cularly affociates  a  defire  of  hurting  another  with 
the  apprehenfion,  or  the  aflual  receiving,  of  harm 
from  that  other. 

As  men  grow  up  to  adult  age,  and  diftinguifh 
living  creatures  from  things  inanimate,  rational  and 
moral  agents  from  irrational  ones,  they  learn  to  refer 
effects  to  their  ultimate  caufes ;  and  to  confider  all 
the  intermediate  ones  as  being  themfelves  effects, 
depending  on  the  ultimate  caufe.  And  thus  their 
refcntment  paffes  from  the  inanimate  inftrument  to  the 
living  agent;  and  more  efpecially,  if  the  living  agent 
be  a  rational  and  moral  one.  For,  Firft,  Living  ra- 
tional agents  are  alone  capable  of  being  reftrained  by 
threatenings  and  punifliments  from  committing  the 
injurious  aiflion.  All  our  exprefiions  of  anger  muii 
therefore  be  direded  againft  them. —  Secondly,  In- 
animate things  are  incapable  of  feeling  the  harms 
which    anger   wifhes :    the   defire   of    revenge   m.ufl: 

therefore 


480  Of  the  PUafures  aud 

therefore  be  entirely  confined  to  animals.  And  thefc 
two  things  have  great  inllutnce  on  each  other.  Our 
threatening  harm  merely  ffom  a  motive  of  fecurity, 
leiids  us  to  Willi  It  really  ;  wilhing  it  leads  us  to 
threaten  and  inflidl  it,  where  it  can  atford  no  fecu- 
rity or  advantjge  to  us. —  Thirdly,  As  we  improve 
in  obfervation  and  experience,  and  in  the  faculty  of 
analyfing  the  adions  of  animals,  we  perceive  that 
brutes  and  children,  and  even  adults  in  certain  cir- 
cumrtances,  have  little  or  no  fhare  in  the  afbions  re- 
ferred to  them  ;  but  are  themfelves  under  the  influ- 
ence of  other  caufes,  which  therefore  are  to  be  deemed 
the  ultimate  ones.  Hence,  our  refentment  againfl: 
them  muft  be  much  abated  in  thefc  cafes,  and  tranf- 
ferred  to  the  ultimate  living  cauie,  ufually  called  the 
free  agent,  if  fo  be  that  we  are  able  to  difcover  him. — 
Lartly,  When  the  moral  ideas  of  jufl  and  unjud, 
right  and  wrong,  merit  and  demerir,  have  been 
acquired,  and  applied  to  the  actions  and  circum- 
ftances  of  human  life  in  the  manner  to  be  hereafter 
defcribed,  the  internal  feelings  of  this  clafs,  /.  e.  the 
complacency  and  approbation  attending  the  firil,  the 
difguft,  disapprobation,  and  even  abhorrence,  at- 
tending the  lafl,  have  great  influence  in  moderating 
or  increafing  our  refentment.  The  aflTociations  of 
the  firft  kind  are  at  utter  variance  with  thofe  fuggefted 
by  the  fenfe  of  pain ;  of  the  lafl:,  coincide  with  and 
ftrengthen  it.  And  as  the  reditude  of  the  moral 
fenfe  is  the  highefl.  matter  of  encomium,  men  are 
afliamed  not  to  be  thought  to  fubmit  all  their  private 
feelings  to  its  fuperior  authority,  and  acquiefce  in 
its  determinations.  And  thus,  by  degrees,  all  anger 
and  refentment  in  theory,  all  that  even  ill  men  will 
attempt  to  jufliify,  is  confined  to  injury,  to  fufferings 
which  are  not  deferved,  or  which  are  inflifled  by  a 
perfon  who  has  no  right  to  do  it.  And  this  at  laft 
makes  it  fo  in  fa6l,  to  a  great  degree,  amongft  thofe 
who  are  much  influenced  by  their  own  moral  fenfe, 

or 


I 


Pains  ^Sympathy.  481 

or  by  that  of  others.  Yetftill,  as  a  confirmation  of  the 
foregoing  dodliine,  it  is  eafy  to  obferve,  that  many 
perfons  are  apt  to  be  offended  even  with  Itocks  and 
flones,  with  brutes,  with  hurts  merely  accidental 
and  undcfigned,  and  with  punifhments  acknowledged 
to  be  juftly  infiided;  and  this  in  various  degrees,  ac- 
cording to  the  various  natural  and  acquired  difpofi- 
tions  of  ihcir  minds. 

Cruelty  and  malice  are  confidered,  not  as  paffions 
of  the  mind,  but  as  habits,  as  the  deliberate  wifliing 
of  mifery  to  others,  delighting  in  the  view  and  actual 
inflidion  of  it,  and  this  without  the  confideration  of 
injury  received  or  intended.  However,  it  will  eafily 
appear,  that  they  are  the  genuine  and  neceffary  off- 
fpring  of  anger  indulged  and  gratified.  They  are 
mod  apt  to  arifc  in  proud,  felfifh,  and  timorous  per> 
fons,  thofe  who  conceive  highly  of  their  own  merits, 
and  of  the  confequent  injuftice  of  all  offences  againft 
them  J  and  who  have  an  exquifite  feeling  and  appre- 
henfion,  in  refpeft  of  private  gratifications  and  un- 
eafineffes.  The  low  and  unhappy  condition  of  thofe 
around  a  man  gives  a  dignity  to  his  own ;  and  the 
infliflion  of  punifhment,  or  mere  fuffering,  ftrikes  a 
terror,  and  fo  affords  fecurity  and  authority.  Add 
to  thefe,  the  pleafures  aiifing  from  gratifying  the  will 
before  explained,  and  perhaps  Ibme  from  mere  curio- 
fity,  and  the  roufing  an  obdurate  callous  mind  to  a 
ftate  of  fenfibility.  Thus  we  may  perceive  how 
nearly  one  ill  paffion  is  related  to  another ;  and  that 
it  is  poffible  for  men  to  arrive  at  lad  at  fome  degree 
of  pure  difinterefted  cruelty  and  malice. 

The  jealoufy  againft  a  rival  in  the  affe£tions  of 
a  beloved  perfon  of  the  other  fex ;  alfo  that  peculiar 
refentment  againft  this  beloved  perfon,  when  fufpeded 
to  be  unfaithful,  which  goes  by  the  fame  name; 
are  eafily  deducible  from  their  fources,  in  the  manner 
fo  often  repeated.  And  it  is  owing  to  the  extraordi- 
nary magnitude  of  the  paffions  and  pleafures  between 

Vol.  I.  I  i  the 


4^2  of  the  Pleafures  ami 

the  Icxes,  and  tlie  fingular  contempt  and  ridicule 
thrown  upon  ilic  perfon  dcfpiled  and  deceived  (the 
lafl:  of  which  iprings  from  the  fiift),  that  thefe  two 
forts  of  jealoufy  rife  to  fuch  a  height.  This  is  more 
peculiarly  remarkable  in  the  ibuthern  climates,  where 
the  pafTions  between  the  fexes  are  more  violent  than 
amongit  us.  Tiie  nature  and  origin  of  jealoufics 
and  fufpicions  of  other  kinds,  with  the  affedtions  at- 
tending them,  may  cafily  be  underftood  from  what 
has  been  already  advanced. 

OF  THE  AFFECTIONS  BY  WHICH  WE  GRIEVE  FOR 
THE  HAPPINESS  OF  OTHERS. 

Emulation  and  envy  make  the  fourth  clafs  of  the 
fympathetic  affe»5lions.  Thefe  are  founded  in  the 
defire  of  pleafures,  honours,  riches,  power,  &:c. 
and  the  confequent  engrolTing  what  others  defire, 
lofing  what  they  obtain,  in  a  comparifon  of  our  own 
acquifitions  with  thofe  of  others,  &c.  by  which  the 
happinefs  of  others  is  connefted  with  our  mifcry  ; 
fo  that  at  laft  we  become  uneafy  at  their  happinefs, 
even  where  there  is  no  fuch  connection,  i.  e.  emulate 
and  envy  where  our  own  intereft  is  no  ways  concerned. 

Having  now  feen,  in  fom.e  meafure,  the  nature 
and  origin  of  the  principal  fympathetic  affeftions, 
pleafing  and  tormenting,  moral  and  immoral,  let  us 
confidcr  the  feveral  objeCts  upon  which  thefe  various 
and  contrary  affedions  are  exerted. 

I  begin  with  the  moft  intimate  of  all  the  relations 
of  life  ;  that  of  hufband  and  wife.  Where  this 
union  is  cemented  by  the  feveral  pleafures  of  fenfa- 
tion  and  imagination  before- mentioned,  alfo  by  thofe 
of  the  moral  and  religious  kinds  hereafter  to  be  de- 
fcribed,  love,  generofity,  gratitude,  companion, 
and  all  the  affedions  of  the  firft  and  fecond  clafs, 
prevail  in  the  highefl  degree  pofllble,  to  the  exclu- 
fion  of  all  thofe  of  the  third  and  fourth  clafs ;  fo  that  the 
marriage-ftate,  in  thefe  cafes,  affords  the  moft  perfect 

earnefl 


Pains  of  Sympathy.  483 

earneft  and  pattern,  of  which  our  imperfecSt  condi- 
tion here  admits,  of  the  future  happinefs  of  the  good 
•  in  another  world.  And  it  is  remarkable,  that  this 
ftate  is  in  fcripture  made  the  emblem  of  future  hap- 
pinefs, and  of  the  union  of  Chrift  with  the  church. 

Where  the  ties  of  affeftion  are  weaker,  and  par- 
ticularly where  there  is  a  great  deficiency  in  the 
moral  or  religious  difpofitions  of  either  or  both  the 
parties,  the  paflions  of  the  third  clafs  intermix  them- 
iclvcs  with  thofe  of  the  firft  and  fecond  ;  and,  in  many 
cafes,  the  oppofite  affedions  prevail  in  great  degrees 
alternately,  and  even  at  fliort  and  frequent  intervals. 
And  indeed  each  kind  often  becomes  more  violent 
from  fucceeding  its  oppofite. 

In  very  immoral  and  wicked  perfons  the  pafTions 
of  the  third  clafs  prevail  almoft  entirely,  and  that  efpe- 
cially  where  the  peculiar  affe6tion,  called  love  by 
young  perfons,  and  which  fprings  from  the  pleafures 
of  lenfation,  imagination,  and  ambition,  in  the 
manner  above  explained,  was  originally  weak. 

The  affe<5lion  of  parents  towards  children  feems  to 
begin  from  the  pain  which  the  mother  feels  in  biing- 
ing  them  into  the  world,  and  the  fympathetic  fears 
and  cares  of  the  father  in  confequence  thereof,  and 
in  fome  degree  from  children's  being  fuppofed  to  be- 
long to  their  parents  in  a  very  peculiar  fenfe,  and  be- 
ing parts  of  their  own  bodies.  It  is  increafed,  efpe- 
cially  in  niothers,  by  all  the  figns  of  life,  lenfe,  and 
diftrefij,  which  the  helplefs  tender  infant  fhews  -,  many 
religious  and  moral  confiderations,  with  the  language 
in  which  thefe  are  exprefied,  adding  alfo  great  force 
thereto.  The  giving  fuck  in  the  mother,  with  all 
the  fears  and  cares  in  both  parents,  increafes  it  ftili  far- 
ther; and  as  the  child  advances  in  age  and  under- 
ftanding,  diverts  by  his  little  follies,  pleafes  by  his  na- 
tural beauty,  draws  on  the  encomiums  of  others,  fur- 
prizes  by  his  agility  or  wit,  &c.  the  affeftions  con- 
tinue to  rife.     When  the  time  comes  for  the  culci- 

I  i  2  vation 


484  Of  the  Plea/urcs  and 

vation  of  the  moral  and  religious  powers  of  the  mind, 
thefe  cither  increafe  the  affedlion  by  their  proper  ap- 
pearance and  growth,  or  check  it  by  being  dcHcient, 
and  by  giving  occafion  to  cenfures  and  corredions. 
Yet  even  thefe  laft,  when  jullly  proportioned,  and  fol- 
lowed by  mental  impiovement,  add  greatly  to  the 
warmth  of  affedion  by  raifing  compafTion.  And 
thus  the  remainders  of  former  affcdions,  and  the 
accefllons  of  new  ones,  feem  to  make  a  fum  total, 
which  grows  perpetually  greater  in  tender  and  reli- 
gious parents. 

The  little  affe(5lion  commonly  fhewn  to  baftards 
agrees  very  well  with  the  foregoing  hiftory  of  parental 
affecftion. 

The  affection  towards  grand-children  is,  in  gene- 
ral, the  fame  as  that  towards  children,  differing 
chiefly  in  this,  that  it  is  more  fond  and  tender,  and 
lefs  mixed  with  feverity,  and  the  neceflTary  correftions. 
This  may  be,  perhaps,  becaufe  the  appearance  of 
the  helplefs  infant,  after  fo  long  an  interval,  raifes 
up  all  the  old  traces  of  parental  affe6lion  with  new 
vigour,  from  their  not  having  been  exerted  for  fome 
years,  and  by  recalling  many  of  the  moft  moving 
fcenes  of  the  foregoing  life  j  fo  that  thefe  old 
traces,  increafed  by  the  addition  of  new  fimiliar 
ones,  make  together  a  greater  fum  total  than  before  : 
or,  perhaps,  becaufe  old  perfons  have  miore  expe- 
rience, of  pain,  forrow,  and  infirmity  j  and  fo  are 
more  difpofed  to  compafTion,  in  the  fame  manner 
as  they  are  more  apt  to  weep ;  and  becaufe  they 
excufe  themfelves  from  the  uneafy  tafk  of  cenfuring 
and  reproving. 

'  The  affc6tions  of  children  towards  their  parents 
are  founded  in  the  many  pleafures  which  they  receive 
from  them,  or  in  their  company.  Thefe  affeflions 
are  afterwards  increafed  by  their  improvement  in 
morality  and  religion,  and  by  the  feveral  common 
caufes  of  good-will,  gratitude,  compafTion,  &c.  pre- 
vailing 


Pains  of  Sympathy.  485 

vailing  here  with  peculiar  force.  It  feems,  however, 
that  the  fources  of  this  afFedion  are  fewer  and  weaker 
than  the  fources  of  that  towards  children  ;  and  it  is 
obferved  in  fad,  that  the  affedion  of  children  is  in 
general  weaker  than  that  of  parents.  For  which  alfo 
an  evident  final  caufe  may  be  afllgned.  It  is  to  be 
added  farther,  that  the  many  engagements  and  dif- 
tra<5tions,  which  lay  hold  of  the  opening  faculties  of 
young  perfons,  upon  their  entrance  into  life,  have 
a  principal  fliare  in  this  effe6t. 

Friendfhip,  with  the  bitter  enmities  that  fometimes 
fucceed  the  breaches  of  it,  and  the  emulation  and 
envy  that  are  apt  to  arife  in  friends,  from  the  equa- 
lity and  fimilarity  of  their  circumftances,  may  be 
eafily  underftood  from  what  has  been  delivered  already. 

In  like  manner  we  may  explain  the  affedions  be- 
tween perfons  of  the  fame  family,  brothers,  cou- 
fins,  &c.  of  the  fame  age,  fex,  diftrid,  education, 
temper,  profefTion,  &c. 

By  all  thefe  artificial  ties  our  good-will  and  com- 
panion are  perpetually  extended  more  and  more, 
growing  alfo  perpetually  weaker  and  vv'eaker,  in  pro- 
portion to  their  diff^ufion.  Yet  (till  the  common  bleff- 
ings  and  calamities,  which  fall  upon  whole  nations 
and  communities;  the  general  refemblance  of  the 
circumftances  of  all  mankind  to  each  other,  in  their 
palTage  through  life  ;  their  common  relation  to 
God  as  their  creator,  governor,  and  father ;  their 
common  concern  in  a  future  life,  and  in  the  reli- 
gion of  Chrift,  tec.  are  capable  of  raifing  ftrong 
fympathetic  affedions  towards  all  mankind,  and  the 
feveral  larger  divifions  of  it,  in  perfons  of  religious 
difpofitions,  who  duly  attend  to  thefe  things.  In 
like  manner  the  opinions  of  favagenefs,  barbarity, 
and  cruelty,  which  ignorant  and  unexperienced  per- 
fons are  apt  to  entertain,  concerning  fome  diftant 
nations,  raife  up  in  tlieir  minds  fom.e  degrees  of 
general  diflike,  averfion,  and  hatred. 

I  i  3  SECT. 


486  Of  the  Plcafures  and 


SECT.     V. 

OF  THE  PLEASURES  AND  PAINS  OF  THEOPATHY 

P  R  O  P.     XCVIII. 

'To  examine  bow  far  the  Plcajures  and  Pains  of  Theopa- 
tby  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  'Theory. 

Under  this  clafs  I  compreliend  all  thofc  pica- 
lures  and  pains,  which  the  contemplation  of  God, 
and  his  attributes,  and  of  our  relation  to  him  raifes 
up  in  the  minds  of  different  perfons,  or  in  that  of 
the  fame  perfon  at  different  times.  And  in  order 
to  fpeak  with  more  precifion  concerning  this  clafs  of 
affeSions,  and  to  deduce  them  more  readily  from 
the  theory  of  thefe  papers,  it  will  be  proper  firft  to 
inquire  into  tlie  idea  of  God,  as  it  is  found  in  fad 
amongft  men,  particularly  amongfl;  Jews  and  ChriJ- 
tians,  i.  e.  to  inquire  what  affociations  may  be  obferved 
in  fa6b  to  be  heaped  upon,  and  concur  in  this  word, 
and  the  equivalent  and  related  terms  and  phrafes. 

Firft,  then,  It  is  probable,  that,  fince  many  aflions 
and  attributes  belonging  to  men  are,  and  indeed  muft 
be,  in  common  language,  applied  to  God,  chil- 
dren, in  their  firft  attempts  to  decypher  the  word 
God,  will  fuppofe  it  to  ftand  for  a  man,  whom  they 
have  never  feen,  and  of  whom  confequently  they 
form  a  compound  fi<5litious  idea,  confifting  of  parts 
before  generated  by  men,  whom  they  have  feen. 

Secondly,  when  they  hear  or  read,  that  God  re- 
fides  in  heaven  (/.  e,  according  to  their  conceptions, 

in 


Paim  of  Theopathy.  487 

in  the  fky,  amongft  the  ftars),  that  he  made  all  things, 
that  he  fees,  hears,  and  knows  all  things,  can  do  all 
things,  &c.  with  the  many  particular  modes  of 
expreflion  that  are  comprehended  under  thefe  general 
ones,  vivid  ideas,  which  furprize  and  agitate  the  mind 
(lying  upon  the  confines  of  pain),  are  raifed  in  it;  and 
if  they  be  fo  far  advanced  in  underftanding,  as  to  be 
affefled  with  apparent  inconfiftencies  and  impofTibili- 
ties  in  their  ideas,  they  mud  feel  great  perplexity  of 
imagination,  when  they  endeavour  to  conceive  and 
form  definite  ideas  agreeable  to  the  language  of  this 
kind,  which  they  hear  and  read.  Now  this  perplexity 
will  add  to  the  vividnefs  of  the  ideas,  and  all  toge- 
ther will  transfer  upon  the  word  God,  and  its  equiva- 
lents, fuch  fecondary  ideas,  as  may  be  referred  to 
the  heads  of  magnificence,  aftonifiiment,  and  reve- 
rence. 

Thirdly,  When  children  hear  that  God  cannot  be 
feen,  having  no  vifible  Oiape,  no  parts  j  but  that  he 
is  a  fpiritual  infinite  being;  this  adds  much  to  their 
perplexity  and  aftoniflimenr,  and  by  degrees  deftroys 
the  affociation  of  the  fiditious  vifible  idea  before- 
mentioned  with  the  word  God.  However,  it  is 
probable,  that  fome  vifible  ideas,  fuch  as  thofe  of 
the  heavens,  a  fifcitious  throne  placed  there,  a  multi- 
tude of  angels,  &c.  ftill  continue  to  be  excited  by 
the  word  God,  and  its  equivalents,  when  dwelt  upon 
in  the  mind. 

Fourthly,  When  the  child  hears,  that  God  is  the 
rewarder  of  good  adlions,  and  the  punifiier  of  evil 
ones,  and  that  the  mofl:  exquifite  future  happinefs  or 
mifery  (defcribed  by  a  great  variety  of  particulars 
and  emblems)  are  prepared  by  him  for  the  good 
and  bad  refpedlively  ;  he  feels  ftrong  hopes  and  fears 
rife  alternately  in  his  mind,  according  to  the  judg- 
ment which  he  paflies  upon  his  own  aftions,  founded 
partly  upon  the  previous  judgment  of  others,  partly 

1  i  4  upon 


4B8  Of  the  Pleajures  and 

upon  an  imperfect  moral  fcnfe  begun  to  be  generated 
in  hint. 

And  laying  all  thefe  things  together  it  will  appear, 
that  amongft  Jews  and  Cbrijiiamy  children  begin 
probably  wiih  a  definite  vifible  idea  of  God  j  but  that 
by  degrees  this  is  quite  obliterated,  without  any  thing 
of  a  liable  precife  nature  fucceeding  in  its  room  i 
and  that,  by  farther  degrees,  a  great  variety  of  ftrong 
Secondary  ideas,  /.  e.  mental  affedions  (attended  indeed 
by  vifible  ideas,  to  which  proper  words  are  affixed, 
as  of  angels,  the  general  judgment,  &c.)  recur  in 
their  turns,  when  they  think  upon  God,  /.  e.  when 
this  word,  or  any  of  its  equivalents,  or  any  equiva- 
lent phrafe  or  fym.bol,  ftrike  the  mind  ftrongly,  fo 
that  it  dwells  upon  them  for  a  fufficient  time,  and 
is  affed:ed  by  them  in  a  fufficient  degree. 

Amongfl  heathen  nations,  where  idolatry  and 
polytheifm  prevail,  the  cafe  is  different ;  but  this  dif- 
ference may  eafily  be  underftood  by  applying  the 
foregoing  method  of  reafoning  to  the  circumftances 
of  the  heathen  world. 

I  will  now  inquire  more  particularly  into  the 
nature  and  origin  of  the  affedions  exerted  towards 
God.  They  may  be  ranked  under  two  general 
heads,  love  and  fear  j  agreeably  to  the  general  di- 
vifion  of  the  fympathetic  affetlions  into  benevolence 
and  malevolence.  However,  the  analogy  here  is 
not  a  complete  one,  as  will  be  feen  prefently. 

To  the  love  of  God  may  be  referred  gratitude, 
confidence  and  refignation  j  alfo  enthufiafm,  which 
may  be  confidered  as  a  degeneration  of  it.  To  the 
fear,  reverence  (which  is  a  mixture  of  love  and 
fear)  ;  alfo  fuperrtition  and  atheifm  ,  which  are  de- 
generations of  the  fear  of  God. 


OF 


Pains  of  Theopathy.  4S9 


OF    THE    LOVE    OF    GOD. 

The   love   of  God,  with   its   aflbciates,  gratitude, 
confidence  and  refignation,  is  generated  by   the  con- 
templation of  his  bounty  and  benignity  to  us,  and  to 
all  his  creatures,   as   thefc   appear  from   the  view  of 
the  natural  world,  the   declarations  of  the  fcriptures, 
or  a  man's  own  obfcrvation  and  experience  in  refpedt 
of  the  events  of  life.      It  is  fupported,    and    much 
increafed,  by  the  confcioufnefs  of  upright  intentions, 
and  fincere  endeavours,  with  the  confequent  hope  of 
a  future  reward,  and  by  piayer,  vocal  and   mental, 
public  and  private,  inafmuch   as  this  gives  a  reality 
and  force  to  all  the  fecondary  ideas  before  fpoken  of. 
Frequent  converfation  with  devout  perfons,  and  fre- 
quent reading  of  devout  books,  have  great  efficacy 
alfo,  from   the  infedioufnefs  of  our  tempers  and  dif- 
pofitions,  and  from  the  perpetual  recurrency  of  the 
proper  words,  and  of  their   fecondary   ideas  j  firft  in 
a  faint  ftate,  afterwards  in  a  ftronger  and  ftronger  per- 
petually.    The  contemplation  of  the  reft  of  the  di- 
vine attributes,   his   omnipotence,  omnifcience,  eter- 
nity, ubiquity,   &c.  have  alfo  a  tendency  to  fupport 
and  augment  the  love  of  God,  when  this  is  fo  far  ad- 
vanced, as  to  be  fuperior  to  the  fear  j  till  that  time 
thefe  wondetful  attributes  enhance  the  fear  fo   much, 
as   to  check   the  rife  and  growth  of  the  love  for  a 
time.     Even  the  fear  itfelf  contributes  to  the  gene- 
ration and  augmentation  of  the  love  in  an  eminent 
degree,    and  in  a   manner   greatly   analogous   to  the 
produdion  of  other  pleafures  from  pains.     And  in- 
deed  it  feems,    that,    notwithftanding  the   variety  of 
ways  above-mentioned,    in  which   the  love  of  God 
is  generated,  and  the  confequent  variety  of  the  in- 
telledlual  aggregates,  and  fecondary  ideas,  there  muft 
be  fo  great  a  refemblance  amongft  them,    that  they 
cannot  but  languifii  by  frequent  recurrency,  till  fuch 

time 


490  0/  the  Pknjures  and 

time  as  ideas  of  an  oppofite  nature,  by  intervening 
at  certain  feafons,  give  thenn  new  life. 

The  love  of  God  is,  according  to  this  theory, 
evidently  deduced  in  part  from  interefted  motives 
dire(ftly,  viz.  from  the  hopes  of  a  future  reward ; 
and  ihofe  motives  to  it,  or  fourccs  of  it,  in  which  di- 
recfl  explicit  lelf-interefl:  does  not  appear,  may  yet  be 
analyled  up  to  it  ultimately.  However,  after  all  the 
feveral  fources  of  the  love  of  God  have  coalefced 
together,  this  affedion  becomes  as  difiiuerefted  as 
any  other;  as  the  pleafure  we  take  in  any  natural  or 
artificial  beauty,  in  the  efteem  of  others,  or  even  in 
fenfual  gratifications. 

It  appears  alfo,  that  this  pure  difinterefled  love 
of  God  may,  by  the  concurrence  of  a  fufficient  num- 
ber of  fufficiently  ftrong  affociations,  arife  to  fuch  a 
height,  as  to  prevail  over  any  of  the  other  defires 
interefted  or  difintereftedi  for  all,  except  the  fenfual 
ones,  are  of  a  faflitious  nature,  as  well  as  the  love 
of  God  J  and  the  fenfual  ones  are,  in  our  progrefs 
through  life,  overpowered  by  them  all  in  their  re- 
ipeflive  turns. 

Enthufiafm  may  be  defined  a  miftaken  perfuafion 
in  any  perfon,  that  he  is  a  peculiar  favourite  with 
God ;  and  that  he  receives  fupernatural  marks  there- 
of. The  vividnefs  of  the  ideas  of  this  clafs  eafily  gene- 
rates this  falfe  perfuafion  in  perfons  of  ftrong  fancies, 
little  experience  in  divine  things,  and  narrow  under- 
ftandings  (and  efpecially  where  the  moral  fenfe, 
and  the  fcrupulofity  attending  its  growth  and  im- 
provement, are  but  imperfeftly  formed),  by  giving 
a  reality  and  certainty  to  all  the  reveries  of  a  man's 
own  mind,  and  cementing  the  aftbciations  in  a  pre- 
ternatural manner.  It  may  alfo  be  eafily  contradled 
by  contagion,  as  daily  experience  fhews ;  and  in- 
deed more  eafily  than  moft  other  difpofitions  from 
the  glaring  language  ufed  by  enthufiafts,  and  from 

the 


Pai?fs  of  Theopathy.  491 

the   great   flattery    and    fupport,    which    enthufiafm 
affords  to  pride  and  felf-conceit. 


OF    THE    FEAR    OF    GOD. 

The  fear  of  God  arifcs  from  a  view  of  the  evils  of 
life,  from  the  threateiiings  of  the  fcriptiires,  from 
the  fenfe  of  guilty  from  the  infinity  of  all  God's  at- 
tributes, from  prayer,  meditation,  reading,  and  con- 
verfation  upon  thefe  and  fuch  like  fubjefls,  in  a  man- 
ner analogous  to  the  love  of  God.  When  confined 
within  certain  limits,  and  efpecially  when  tempered 
with  love,  fo  as  to  become  awe,  veneration  and  reve- 
rence, it  remains  in  a  natural  ftate,  i.  e.  fuits  our 
other  circumftances ;  and,  as  before  obferved,  has 
a  confiderable  fhare  in  generating  the  love  of  God. 
When  excefTive,  or  not  duly  regarded,  it  degenerates 
either  into  fuperftition  or  atheifm, 

Superftition  may  be  defined  a  miftaken  opinion 
concerning  the  feverity  and  punifhments  of  God, 
magnifying  thefe  in  refpedl  of  ourfelves  or  others.  It 
ir.ay  arife  from  a  fenfe  of  guilt,  from  bodily  indif- 
pofition,  from  erroneous  reafoning,  &c.  That  which 
arifes  from  the  firft  caufe  has  a  tendency  to  remove 
itfelf  by  regulating  the  perfon's  behaviour,  and  con- 
fequently  leflening  his  fenfe  of  guilt.  The  other 
kinds  often  increafe  for  a  time,  come  to  their  height 
at  laft,  and  then  decline  again.  They  do  alfo,  in 
fome  cafes,  increafe  without  limits  during  life.  All 
kinds  of  fuperftition  have  been  produftive  of  great 
abfurdicies  in  divine  worfhip,  both  amongft  Pagans, 
and  amongft  Jews  and  Chrijiians ;  and  they  have  all 
a  great  tendency  to  four  the  mind,  to  check  natural 
benevolence  and  compaftion,  and  to  generate  a  bitter 
perfecuting  fpirit.  All  which  is  much,  augmented 
where  fuperftition  and  enthufiafm  pafs  alternately 
into  each  other  at  intervals ;  v/hich  is  no  uncommon 
cafe. 

Under 


49-  Q/"  f^^  PUafitres,  &c. 

Under  atheifm  I  here  comprehend  not  only  the 
fpeciilative  kind,  but  the  practical,  or  that  negledl 
of  God,  Nvhere  tlie  j^erfon  thinks  of  him  fcklom,  and 
with  rcluiflancc,  and  pays  little  or  no  regard  to  him 
in  his  acftions,  thougli  he  does  not  deny  him  in 
words.  Both  kinds  feem  in  chriflian  countries, 
where  reafonable  fatisfaftion  in  religious  matters  is 
cafy  to  be  had  by  all  wcU-dirpoft'd  minds,  and 
grofs  ignorance  uncommon  except  in  ill-difpofed 
ones,  to  proceed  from  an  explicit  or  implicit  fcnfe 
of  guilt,  and  a  confcquent  fear  of  God,  fufficicnt 
to  generate  an  averfion  to  the  thoughts  of  him,  and 
to  the  methods  by  which  the  love  might  be  gene- 
rated, and  yet  too  feeble  to  reftrain  from  guilty  fo 
that  they  may  propeily  be  confidered  as  degenera-  » 
tions  of  the  fear  of  God.  What  has  been  delivered 
already  in  thefe  papers,  concerning  the  connexion 
of  fear,  averfion,  and  the  other  uneafy  pafTions,  with 
each  other,  and  alfo  of  the  tendency  of  all  pain  to 
prevent  the  recurrency  of  the  circumftances,  by  • 
which  it  is  introduced,  may  afford  fome  light  here.  ? 

It  appears  upon  the  whole,  that  the  theopathetic 
affeftions  are,  in  fome  things,  analogous  to  the  fym- 
pathetic  ones,  as  well  as  different  in  others  j  and  that 
this  difference  arifes  chiefly  from  the  infinity  and  ab- 
folute  perfeftion  of  the  divine  nature. 

Affeflions  of  an  intermediate  kind  are  generated  in      '^ 
refpedt  of  good  and  evil  beings  of  an  invifible  nature, 
and  of  an  order  fuperior  to  us  (fuch  as  angels  and 
devils);  whofe  origin  and  growth  will  eafily  be  under- 
ilood  from  what  is  here  delivered. 


SECT. 


Of  the  PleafureSi  &c,  495 


SECT.     VI. 

OF  THE  PLEASURES  AND  PAINS  OF  THE 
MORAL  SENSE. 


PROP.     XCIX. 

To  examine  how  far  the  Pleafures  and  Pains  of  the 
moral  Senje  are  agreeable  to  the  foregoing  'Theory. 

There  are  certain  tempers  of  mind,  with  the 
actions  flowing  from  them,  as  of  piety,  humility, 
refignation,  gratitude,  &c.  towards  God ;  of  bene- 
volence, charity,  generofity,  compafTion,  humility, 
gratitude,  &c.  towards  men ;  of  temperance,  pati- 
ence, contentment,  &c.  in  refped:  of  a  pcrfon's  own 
private  enjoyments  or  fufferings  j  which  when  he 
believes  himfelf  to  be  pofleiled  of,  and  reflects  upon, 
a  pleafing  confcioufnefs  and  felf-approbation  rife  up 
in  his  mind,  exclufively  of  any  dired:  explicit  confl- 
deration  of  advantage  likely  to  accrue  to  himfelf, 
from  his  poflTcfllon  of  thefe  good  qualities.  In  like 
manner  the  view  of  them  in  others  raifes  up  a  difin- 
terefted  love  and  efteem  for  thofe  others.  And  the 
oppofite  qualities  of  impiety,  profanenefs,  unchari- 
tablenefs,  refcntment,  cruelty,  envy,  ingratitude,  in- 
temperance, lewdnefs,  felfifhnefs,  &c.  are  attended 
with  the  condemnation  both  of  ourfelves  and  others. 
This  is,  in  general,  the  (late  of  the  cafe ;  but  there 
are  many  particular  difi^erences,  according  to  the 
particular  education,  temper,  profelTion,  fex,  &c.  of 
each  perfon. 

Or, 


494  ^f  ''^'^  Plenfitres  and 

Or,  which  is  the  fame  thing,  the  lecoiidary  ideas 
belonging  to  virtue  and  vice,  duty  and  fin,  inno- 
cence and  guilt,  merit  and  deiiieiit,  right  and  wrong, 
moral  good  and  moral  evil,  jull;  and  iinjutl,  ftt 
and  untir,  obligation  anil  prohibition,  &c.  in  one 
man,  bear  a  great  relemblance  to  thofe  belonging  to 
the  fiime  words  in  another,  or  to  the  correfponding 
words,  if  they  have  different  languages;  and  yet  do 
not  exaflly  coincide,  but  differ  more  or  lefs  accord- 
ing to  the  difference  in  education,  temper,  &c. 

Now  both  this  general  reiemblance,  and  thefe 
paiticular  differences,  in  our  ideas,  and  confequent 
approbation  or  difapprobation,  feem  to  admit  of  an 
analyfis  and  explanation  from  the  following  parti- 
culars. 

Firft,  Children  are,  for  the  mod  part,  infl:ru61ed 
in  the  difference  and  oppofition  between  virtue  and 
vice,  duty  and  fin,  &c.  and  have  fome  general 
defcriptions  of  the  virtues  and  vices  inculcated  upon 
them.  They  are  told,  that  the  fir  ft  are  good,  plea- 
fant,  beautiful,  noble,  fit,  worthy  of  praife  and  re- 
ward, &c.  the  laft  odious,  painful,  fhameful,  worthy 
of  puniiliment,  &c.  fo  that  the  pleafing  and  difplea- 
fing  afibciations,  previoufly  annexed  to  thefe  words  in 
their  minds,  are,  by  means  of  that  confidence  which 
they  place  in  their  fuperiors,  transferred  upon  the 
virtues  and  vices  refpedlively.  And  the  mutual  in- 
tercourfes  of  life  have  the  fame  effe6t  in  a  lefs  de- 
gree, with  refpedl  to  adults,  and  thofe  children  who 
receive  little  or  no  in(lru(5lion  from  their  parents  or 
fuperiors.  Virtue  is  in  general  approved,  and  fet  off 
by  all  the  encomiums,  and  honourable  appellations, 
that  any  other  thing  admits  of,  and  vice  loaded  with 
cenfures  and  reproaches  of  all  kinds,  in  all  good  con- 
verfation  and  books.  And  this  happens  oftener  than 
the  contrary,  even  in  bad  ones ;  fo  that  as  far  as  men 
are  influenced  in  their  judgments  by  thofe  of  others, 
the  balance  is,  upon  the  whole,  on  the  fide  of  virtue. 

Secondly, 


Pains  of  the  Moral  Senfe.  495 

Secondly,  There  are  many  immediate  good  confe- 
quences,  which  attend  upon  virtue,  as  many  ill  ones 
do  upon  vice,   and  that  during  our  whole  progrefs 
through   life.      Senfuality  and    intemperance   fubjedt 
men  to  difeafes  and  pain,  to  fhame,  deformity,  fil- 
thinefs,  terrors,    and   anxieties;    whereas   temperance 
is  attended  with  eafe  of  body,  freedom  of  fpirits,  the 
capacity     of    being    pleafcd     with     the    objefls    of 
pleafure,  the  good  opinion  of  others,  the  perfeftion 
of  the  fenfes,  and  of  the  faculties  bodily  and  men- 
tal,   long  life,    plenty,  &c.      Anger,    malice,    envy, 
bring   upon  us  the  returns  of  anger,    malice,    envy, 
from  others,  with  injuries,  reproaches,  fears,  and  per- 
petual difquietude ;    and    in    like  manner  good-will, 
generofity,     compafTion,    are    rewarded    with    returns 
of  the  fame,  with  the  pleafures  of  fociality  and  friend- 
(hip,  with  good  offices,  and  with  the  higheft  enco- 
rpiums.     And  when  a  perfons  becomes  properly  qua- 
lified by  the  previous  love  of  his  neighbour  to  love 
God,  to  hope  and  truft  in  him,  and   to  worfliip  him 
in  any   meafure  as   he  ought  to  do,  this  affords  the 
fincerefl"  joy  and  comfort;   as,  on  the  contrary,  the 
negledt  of  God,    or  practical  atheifm,  the  murmur- 
ing againft  the  courfe  of  Providence,    fceptical  un- 
fettlednefs,    and    fool-hardy    impiety,    are   evidently 
attended  with  great  anxieties,    gloominefs,    and  dif- 
traflion,  as  long  as  there  are  any  traces  of  morality 
or  religion  left  upon  men's  minds.     Now  thefe  plea- 
fures and  pains,  by  often  recurring  in  various  combi- 
nations, and  by  being  varioufly  transferred  upon  each 
other,    from  the  great   affinity    between   the   feveral 
virtues  and  their  rewards,  with  each  other;  alfo  be- 
tween the  feveral  vices,  and  their  punifhm-ents,  with 
each  other;  will  at  lafl  beget  in  us  a  general,  mixed, 
pleaiing  idea  and  confcioufnef?,  when  we  refiefl  upon 
our  own  virtuous  affeclions  or  adions ;    a  fcnfc    of 
guilt,  and  an  anxiety,  when  we  refle(5l   on  the  con- 
trary } 


496  Of  the  Pleafures  and 

trary  j  and   alio   raife   in   us   the   love  and  efteem   of 
virtue,  and  the  hatred  of  vice  in  others. 

'1  hirdly,  The  many  benefits  which  we  receive  im- 
mediately from,  or  which  have  Tome  evident,  though 
dillant,  connc(5tion  with  the  piety,  bencvoleiiccj  and 
temperance  of  others;  alfo  the  contiary  milchicfs 
from  their  vices;  lead  us  fiift  to  the  love  and  hatred 
of  the  perfons  themfclves  by  allociation,  as  explained 
under  the  head  of  fympathy,  and  then  by  farther 
aflbci.Ttions  to  the  love  and  hatred  of  the  virtues 
and  vices,  confidered  abflractedly,  and  without  any 
regard  to  our  own  interefl: ;  and  that  whether  we  view 
them  in  ourfelves  or  others.  As  our  love  and  efteem 
for  virtue  in  others  is  much  increafed  by  the  pleafing 
confcioufntris,  which  our  own  pra6lice  of  it  affords  to 
ourfelves,  fo  the  pleafute  of  this  confcioufnefs  is  much 
increafed  by  our  love  of  virtue  in  others. 

Fourthly,  The  great  fuitablenefs  of  all  the  virtues 
to  each  other,  and  to  the  beaury,  order,  and  per- 
fe6lion  of  the  world,  animate  and  inanimate,  imprefTes 
a  very  lovely  chara6ler  upon  virtue ;  and  the  contrary 
lei  f- con  trad  id  ion,  deformity,  and  mifchievous  ten- 
dency of  vice,  render  it  odious,  and  matter  of  ab- 
horrence to  all  perfons. that  refledl  upon  thefe  things; 
and  beget  a  language  of  this  kind,  which  is  borrov/- 
cd,  in  great  meafure,  from  the  pleafures  and  pains  of 
imagination,  and  applied  with  a  peculiar  force  and 
fitnefs  to  this  fubjed  from  its  great  importance. 

Fifthly,  The  iiopes  and  fears  which  arife  from 
the  confideration  of  a  future  (late,  are  themfelves 
pleafures  and  pains  of  a  high  nature.  When  there- 
fore a  fufficient  foundation  has  been  laid  by  a  pra6li- 
cal  belief  of  religion,  natural  and  revealed,  by  the 
frequent  view  of,  and  meditation  upon,  death,  by 
the  lofs  of  departed  friends,  by  bodily  pains,  by 
worldly  difappointments  and  affliiflions,  for  forming 
flrong  alTociations  'of  the  pleafures  of  thefe  hopes 
with  duty,  and  the  pains  of  thefe  fears  with  fin,  the 

reiterated 


Pains  of  the  Moral  Senfe.  497 

reiterated  imprefllons  of  thofe  affociations  will  at  laft 
make  duty  itfelf  a  pleafure,  and  convert  fm  into  a 
pain,  giving  a  luftre  and  defornnity  refpeftively  to 
all  their  appellations;  and  that  without  any  cxprefs 
recolleftion  of  the  hopes  and  fears  of  another  world, 
jufl;  as  in  other  cafes  of  affociation. 

Sixthly,  All  meditations  upon  God,  who  is  the 
inexhauftible  fountain,  and  infinite  abyfs,  of  all  per- 
fedtion,  both  natural  and  moral ;  alfo  all  the  kinds 
of  prayer,  i.  e,  all  the  ways  of  exprefling  our  love, 
hope,  truft,  refignation,  gratitude,  reverence,  fear, 
defire,  &c.  towards  him  ;  transfer  by  aflbciation,  all 
the  perfedion,  greatnei's,  and  glorioufnefs  of  his 
natural  attributes  upon  his  moral  ones,  /.  e.  upon 
moral  reftitude.  We  fliall  by  this  means  learn  to 
be  merciful,  holy,  and  perfed,  becaufe  God  is  fo ; 
and  to  love  mercy,  holinefs,  and  perfection,  where- 
ever  we  fee  them. 

And  thus  we  may  perceive,  that  all  the  pleafures 
and  pains  of  fenfation,  imagination,  ambition,  felf- 
intereft",  fympathy,  and  theopathy,  as  far  as  they 
are  confident  with  one  another,  with  the  frame  of  our 
natures,  and  with  the  courfe  of  the  world,  beget  in 
us  a  moral  fenfe,  and  lead  us  to  the  love  and  appro- 
bation of  virtue,  and  to  the  fear,  hatred,  and  abhor- 
rence of  vice.  This  moral  fenfe  therefore  carries 
its  own  authority  with  it,  inafmuch  as  it  is  the  fum 
total  of  all  the  reft,  and  the  ultimate  refult  from 
them  i  and  employs  the  force  and  authority  of  the 
whole  nature  of  man  againft  any  particular  part  of 
it,  that  rebels  againft  the  determinations  and  com- 
mands of  the  confcience  or  moral  judgment. 

It  appears  alfo,  that  the  moral  fenfe  carries  us 
perpetually  to  the  pure  love  of  God,  as  our  bigheft 
and  ultimate  perfetflion,  our  end,  centre,  and  only 
rcfting-place,  to  which  yet  ue  can  never  attain. 

When  the  moral  fenfe  is  advanced  to  confiderable 
perfc(5lion,  a  perfon  may  be  made  to  love  and  hate, 

Vol.  I.  K  k  merely 


49  8  Of  the  Plcajutcs  and 

merely  becaufe  he  ought,  i.  e.  the  pleafures  of 
moral  beauty  and  recflitude,  and  the  pains  of  moral 
deformity  anci  unHtnef?,  may  be  transferred,  and 
made  to  coalefce  almolt  inftantaneoufly. 

Scrupulofity  may  be  confidered  as  a  degeneration 
of  the  moral  fenfe,  refembling  that  by  which  the 
fear  of  God  pafles  into  Ibperftition  -,  for  it  arifes  like 
this,  from  a  confcioufncfs  of  guilt,  explicit  or  impli- 
cit, from  bodily  indifpofition,  and  from  an  erroneous 
method  of  reafoning.  It  has  alfo  a  mod  intimate 
conne6lion  with  fuperftition  (juft  as  moral  rectitude 
has  with  th.e  true  love  and  fear  of  God) ;  and,  like 
iuperftition,  it  is,  in  many  cafes,  obferved  to  work 
its''own  cure  by  rectifying  what  is  amifs;  and  fo  by 
degrees  removing  both  the  explicit  and  implicit  con- 
fcioufnefs  of  guilt.  It  feems  alfo,  that  in  this  im- 
perfeft  ftate  men  feldom  arrive  at  any  great  degree 
of  correflnefs  in  their  actions  without  fome  previous 
fcrupulofity,  by  which  they  may  be  led  to  eftimate 
the  nature  and  confequences  of  affeftions  and  aftions 
with  care,  impartiality  and  exaclnefs. 

The  moral  fenfe  or  judgment  here  fpoken  of,  is 
fometim.es  confidered  as  an  inftinft,  fometimes  as  de- 
terminations of  the  mind,  grounded  on  the  eternal 
reafons  and  relations  of  things.  Thofe  who  main- 
tain either  of  ihefe  opinions  may,  perhaps,  explain 
them  fo  as  to  be  confident  with  the  foregoing  ana- 
lyfis  of  the  moral  fenfe  from  aflbciation.  But  if  by 
inftincft  be  meant  a  difpofition  communicated  to  the 
brain,  and  in  confequence  of  this,  to  the  mwnd,  or  to 
the  mind  alone,  fo  as  to  be  quite  independent  of 
afibciation;  and  by  a  moral  inftinft,  fuch  a  difpofition 
producing  in  us  moral  judgments  concerning  affec- 
tions and  adions ;  it  will  be  neceffary,  in  order  to 
fupport  the  opinion  of  a  moral  inftindl,  to  produce 
inftances,  where  moral  judgments  arife  in  us  in- 
dependently of  prior  aflbciations  determining  thereto. 

In 


Pains  of  the  Moral  Senfe.  499 

In  like  manner,  if  by  founding  the  morality  of 
aftions,  and  our  judgment  concerning  this  mora- 
lity, on  the  eternal  reafons  and  relations  of  things  be 
meant,  that  the  reafons  drawn  from  the  relations  of 
things,  by  which  the  morality  or  imm.orality  of 
certain  adtions  is  commonly  proved,  and  which, 
with  the  relations,  are  called  eternal,  from  their 
appearing  the  fame,  or  nearly  the  fame,  to  the  mind 
at  all  times,  would  determine  the  mind  to  form  the 
correfponding  moral  judgment  independently  of  prior 
afTociations,  this  ought  alfo  to  be  proved  by  the 
allegation  of  proper  inftances.  To  me  it  appears, 
that  the  inftances  are,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  of 
them,  of  an  oppofite  nature,  and  favour  the  deduc- 
tion of  all  our  moral  judgments,  approbations,  and 
difapprobations,  from  aflbciation  alo«e.  However, 
fome  afTociations  are  formed  fo  early,  repeated  fo' 
often,  riveted  fo  ftrong,  and  have  fo  clofe  a  connec- 
tion with  the  common  nature  of  man,  and  the  events 
of  life  which  happen  to  all,  as  in  a  popular  way  of 
fpeaking,  to  claim  the  appellation  of  original  and 
natural  difpofitions ;  and  to  appear  like  inftinfts, 
when  compared  with  difpofitions  evidently  factitious ; 
alfo  like .  axioms,  and  intuitive  propofitions,  eter- 
nally true  according  to  the  ufual  phrafe,  when  com- 
pared with  moral  reafonings  of  a  compound  kind. 
But  I  have  endeavoured  to  fhew  in  thefe  papers, 
that  all  reafoning,  as  well  as  affedion,  is  the  mere 
refult  of  aflbciadon. 


K  k  2  CONCLUSION  J 


(   500  ) 


CONCLUSION; 


CONTAINING    SOME    RBMARKS    ON    THE 


MECHANISM  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND, 


Besides  the  confequences  flowing  from  the 
doiftrine  of  aflbciation,  which  are  ddivered  in  the 
Corollaries  to  the  fourteenth  Propofition,  there  is 
another,  which  is  thought  by  many  to  have  a  per- 
nicious tendency  in  refpefl  of  morality  and  reli- 
gion i  and  which  therefore  it  will  be  proper  that  1 
Ihould  confider  particularly. 

The  confequence  I  mean  is  that  of  the  mechanifm 
or  necefllty  of  human  actions,  in  oppofition  to  what 
is  generally  termed  free-will.     Here  then  I  will, 

Firft,  State  my  notion  of  the  mechanifm  or  ne- 
cefllty of  human  aflions. 

Secondly,  Give  fuch  reafons  as  induce  me  to  em- 
brace the  opinion  of  the  mechanifm  of  human  aftions. 

Thirdly,  Confider  the  objections  and  difficulties 
attending  this  opinion. 

And,  laftly.  Allege  fome  prefumptions  in  favour 
of  it  from  its  confequences. 

By  the  mechanifm  of  human  adlions  I  mean,  that 
each  aftion  refults  from  the  previous  circumfl;ances 
of  body  and  mind,  in  the  fame  manner,  and  with 
the  fame  certainty,  as  other  effefls  do  from  their 
mechanical  caufes ;  fo  that  a  perfon  cannot  do  indif- 
ferently either  of  the  adions  yf,  and  its  contrary  a, 
while  the  previous  circumflances  are  the  fame;  but  is 
under  an  abfolute  necefllty  of  doing  one  of  them, 
and  that  only.  Agreeably  to  this  1  fuppofe,  that  by 
free-will  is  meant  a  power  of  doing  either  the  aiflion, 

Jy  or 


Of  the  Mechanijmy  &c.  501 

.^^rjts  contrary  a\  while  the  previous  circumftances 
rernain  the  fame. 

If  by  free-will  be  meant  a  power  of  beginning 
nrjotion,  this  will  come  to  the  fame  thing;  fince,  ac- 
cording to  the  opinion  of  mechanifm,  as  here  ex- 
plained, man  has  no  fuch  power ;  but  every  aftion, 
or  bodily  motion,  arifes  from  previous  circumftan- 
ces,  or  bodily  motions,  already  exifting  in  the  brain, 
i.  e.  from  vibrations,  which  are  either  the  immediate 
effed  of  impreffions  then  made,  or  the  remote  com- 
pound effeft  of  former  impreffions,  or  both. 

But  if  by  free-will  be  meant  any  thing  different 
from  thefe  two  definitions  of  it,  it  may  not  perhaps 
be  inconfiftent  with  the  mechanifm  of  the  mind  here 
laid  down.  Thus,  if  free-will  be  defined  the  power 
of  doing  v.'hat  a  perfon  defires  or  wills  to  do,  of  deli- 
berating, fufpending,  choofing,  &c.  or  of  refitting 
the  motives,  of  fenfuality,  ambition,  refentment,  &c. 
free-will,  under  certain  limitations,  is  not  only  con- 
fident with  the  do6lrine  of  mechanifm,  but  even 
flows  from  it ;  fince  it  appears  from  the  foregoing 
theory,  that  voluntary  and  femivoluntary  powers  of 
calling  up  ideas,  of  exciting  and  refl:raining  affections, 
and  of  performing  and  fufpending  anions  arife  from 
the  mechanifm  of  our  natures.  This  may  be  called 
free-will  in  the  popular  and  praftical  fenfe,  in  contra- 
diftinftion  to  that,  which  is  oppofed  to  mechanifm, 
and  which  may  be  called  free-will  in  the  philofophical 
fenfe. 

I  proceed  now  to  the  arguments  which  favour  the 
opinion  of  mechanifm. 

Firfl:,  then,  It  is  evident  to,  and  allowed  by  all, 
that  the  adions  of  mankind  proceed,  in  many  cafes, 
from  motives,  /.  e.  from  the  influence  which  the  plea- 
fures  and  pains  of  fenfation,  imagination,  ambition, 
felf-interefl:,  fympathy,  theopathy,  and  the  moral 
fenfe,  have  over  them.  And  thefe  motives  feem  to 
ad  like  all  other  caufes.  When  the  motive  is  flrong, 
the  action  is  performed   with  vigour  i    when   weak, 

K  k  3  feebly. 


502  Of  the  Mecbanijm 

feebly.     When  a  control  y  niotive  intervenr?,  it  checks 
or  over-rules,  in  proportion  to  its  relative  (bength,  as 
far  as  one  can  juilge.     So   that  wiiere  the  motives  are 
the    fan-.e,    the    adions    cannot    be   different ;    where 
the   motives  are  different,  tlie   a6lions  cannot  be   the 
fame.     And  it  is  matter  of  common  obfervation,  that 
this  is  the  cafe  in  faft,  in  the  principal  anions  of  life, 
and   fiich  where  the   motives  arc  of  a  magnitude  fuf- 
ficient  to  be  evident.     It  is  reafonable  therefore  to  in- 
terpret the  obfcure  cafes  by  the  evident  ones  3  and  to 
infer,  that  there  are  in  all  inflances  motives  of  a  proper 
kind  and  degree,  which  generate  each  action  ;  though 
they  are  fometimes  not  feen  through  their  minutenefs, 
or   through  the  inattention   or   ignorance  of  the  ob- 
ferver.     Agreeably  to  which  thofe  pcrfons,  who  ftudy 
the  caufes  and  motives  of  human  anions,  may  de- 
cypher  them  much  more  completely,  both   in  them- 
fclves,    and    thofe   with   whom    they   converfe,    than 
others  can. 

Suppofe  now  a  perfon  able  to  decypher  all  his  own 
aclions   in  this  way,  fo  as  to  ffjew   that   they   corre- 
fponded    in   kind  and    degree  to  the  motives  arifing 
from   the  feven  dalles  of  pleafures   and  pains  confi- 
dered  in  this  theory ;  alfo  able  to  decypher  the  prin- 
cipal adions  of  others   in  the  fame  way  :  this  would 
be  as  good  evidence,  that  motives  were  the  mechani- 
cal caufes  of  actions,  as   natural   phaenomena   are   for 
the   mechanical    operation   of    heat,    diet,    or    medi- 
cines.    Or  if  he  could  not  proceed  fo   far,    but  was 
able  only  to  decypher  mod  of  his  own  adlions,  and 
many  of  the  principal  ones  of  others,  ftill   the  evi- 
dence would  fcarce  be  diminifhed  thereby,  if  the  de- 
ficiency was  no  more  than  is  reafonably  to  be  expefled 
from  our  ignorance  and  inattention,  in  refped  of  our- 
felves    and   others.     Let    the  reader    make  the  trial, 
efpetially   upon   himfelf,  Tince  fuch  a  felf-examination 
cannot  but  be  profitable,  and   may  perhaps  be  plea- 
fant;  and  that  either  according  to  the  feven  claffes  of 
pleafures  and  pains  here  laid  down,   or    any    other 

divifion, 


of  the  Human  Mind.  50J 

divifion,  and  judge   as   he   thinks   fit   upon  mature 
dehberation. 

It  may  be  of  ufe  in  fuch  an  inquiry  into  a  man's 
lelf,  as  I  here  propofe,  for  him  to  confider  in  a  fliort 
timiC  after  any  material  ad:ion  is  paft,  whether,  if  he 
was  once  more  put  into  the  fame  rigidly  exa6t  cir- 
cumftances,  he  could  poffibly  do  otherwife  than  as  he 
did.  Here  the  power  of  imagination  will  intervene,- 
and  be  apt  to  deceive  the  inquirer,  unlefs  he  be  cau- 
tious. For  in  this  review  other  motives,  befides 
thofe  which  did  actually  influence  him,  will  ftart  up ; 
and  that  efpecially  if  the  a6tion  be  fuch  as  he  vvifhes 
to  have  been  performed  with  more  vigour  or  lefs,  or 
not  to  have  been  performed  at  all.  But  when  thefe 
foreign  motives  are  fet  afide,  and  the  imagination 
confined  to  thofe  which  did  in  facfl  take  place,  it  will 
appear  impofllble,  as  it  fcems  to  me,  that  the  perfon" 
fhould  have  done  otherwife  than  the  very  thing  which " 
he  did. 

Secondly,  According  to  the  theory  here  laid  down, 
all  human  adlions  proceed  from  vibrations  in  the 
nerves  of  the  mufcles,  and  thefe  from  others,-  which 
are  either  evidently  of  a  mechanical  nature,  ^  in  the 
automatic  motions ;  or  elfe  have  been  fliewn  to  be  fo 
rn  the  account  given  of  the  voluntary  motions. 

And  if  the  docftrine  of  vibrations  be  rejcded,  and 
fenfation  and  mufcular  motion  be  fuppofed  to  be  per- 
formed by  fom.e  other  kind  of  motion  in  the  nervous 
parts,  ftill  it  feems  probable,  that  the  fanne  method 
of  reafoning  might  be  applied  to  this  other  kind  of. 
motion. 

Laftly,  To  fuppofe,  that  the  adlion  ^,  or  its  con- 
trary tty  can  equally  follow  previous  circumftances, 
that  are  exactly  the  fame,  appears  to  me  the  fame 
thing,  as  affirming  that  one  or  both  of  them  might 
ftart  up  into  being  without  any  caufe  j  which,  if  ad- 
mitted, appears  to  me  to  deftroy  the  foundation  of 
all  general  abftrafl  reafoning;  and  particularly  of 
that  whereby  the  exiftence  of  the  firft  caufe  is  proved,- 

K  k  4  On^ 


504  Of  the  Mechamjm 

One  of  the  principal  objedions  to  the  opinion  of 
mechanifm  is  that  dediicetl  liom  the  exiftence  of  the 
moral  fenfe,  whofe  hiftory  I  have  juft  given.  But  it 
appears  from  that  hillory,  that  God  has  fo  foinicd  the 
world,  and  peihaps  (with  reverence  be  it  fpoken)  was 
obliged  by  his  moral  perfedions  fo  to  form  it,  as  that 
virtue  mufl:  have  amiable  and  pleafing  ideas  affij^ed  to 
it  J  vice,  odious  ones.  The  moral  fenfe  is  therefore 
generated  neceflarily  and  mechanically.  And  it  remains 
to  be  inquired,  whether  the  amiable  and  odious  ideas 
above  fliewed  to  be  neccflarily  affixed  to  virtue  and 
vice  refptdively,  though  differently  according  to  the 
different  events,  of  each  perfon's  life,  do  not  anfwer 
all  tiie  purpofes  of  making  us  ultimately  happy  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  of  our  neighbour ;  and  whether 
they  are  not,  ceteris  paribus^  the  fame  entirely, 
or  at  leaft  in  all  material  refpedls,  in  thofe  who 
believe  mechanifm,  who  believe  free-will,  and  who 
have  not  entered  into  the  difcuffion  of  the  queftion 
at  all :  or  if  there  be  a  difference,  whether  the  affo- 
ciations  aiifing  from  the  opinion  of  neceffity,  do  not 
tend  more  to  accelerate  us  in  our  progrefs  to  the  love 
of  God,  our  only  true  happinefs.  It  appears  to  me, 
that  the  difference  is  in  general  very  fmall;  alfo  that 
this  difference,  whatever  it  be,  is  of  fuch  a  nature  as 
to  be  a  prefumption,  in  favour  of  the  dodrine  of 
neceffity,  all  things  being  duly  confidered. 

When  a  perfon  firft  changes  his  opinion  from  free- 
will to  mechanifm,  or  more  properly  firft  fees  part 
of  the  mechanifm  of  the  mind,  and  believes  the  reft 
from  analogy,  he  is  juft  as  much  affeded  by  his 
Wonted  pleafures  and  pains,  hopes  and  fears,  as  before, 
jby  the  moral  and  religious  ones,  as  by  others.  And 
the  being  perfuaded,  that  certain  things  have  a  ne- 
ceffary  influence  to  change  his  mind  for  the  better  or 
the  worfe,  i.  e.  fo  as  to  receive  more  fenfible,  fym- 
pathetic,  religious  pleafures,  or  otherwife,  will  force 
him  ftill  more  ftrongly  upon  the  right  method,  /.  e. 
put  him  upon  inquiring  after  and  purfuing  this  method,   t 


1 


of  the  Human  Mind.  505 

If  it  be  objefted,  That  the  nnoral  fenfe  fuppofes^  that 
we  refer  actions  to  ourfelves  and  others,  whereas  the 
opinion  of  mechanifm  annihilates  all  thofe  affocia- 
tions,  by  which  we  refer  actions  to  ourfelves  or  others; 
I  anfwer,  that  it  does  this  juft  as  the  belief  of  the 
reality  and  infinite  value  of  the  things  of  another 
world  annihilates  all  the  regards  to  this  world. 
Both  have  a  tendency  to  thefe  refpeftive  ends, 
which  are  indeed  one  and  the  fanne  at  the  bottonn  ; 
but  both  require  time,  in  order  to  produce  their  full 
effedls.  When  religion  has  made  any  one  indif- 
ferent to  this  world,  its  pleafures  and  pains,  then  the 
kingdom  of  God,  or  pure  unmixed  happinefs,  comes 
in  refpeifl  of  him  j  fo  that  he  may  then  well  refer  all 
to  God.  However,  a  man  may  be  thoroughly  fatis- 
fied  in  a  cool  deliberate  way,  that  honours,  riches, 
&c.  can  afford  no  folid  happinefs;  and  yet  defire 
them  at  certain  times,  eagerly,  perhaps,  from  former 
aflbciations.  But  fuch  a  thorough  general  conviflion, 
applied  previoufly  to  the  particular  inftances,  is  a  great 
help  in  time  of  temptation,  and  will  gradually  de- 
ftroy  the  wrong  alTociations.  In  like  manner,  the 
opinion  that  God  is  the  one  only  caufe  of  all  things, 
has  a  tendency  to  beget  the  moft  abfolute  refigna- 
tion,  and  muft  be  a  great  fupport  in  grievous  trials 
and  fufferings. 

We  may  fhew  by  a  like  method  of  reafoning,  that 
the  affeflions  of  gratitude  and  refentment,  which 
are  intimately  connefted  with  the  moral  fenfe,  remain 
notwithitandine  the  doftrine  of  mechanifm.  For  it 
appears  from  the  account  of  refentment  above  deli- 
vered, that  this,  and  by  confequence  gratitude,  in  their 
nafcent  ftate,  are  equally  exerted  towards  all  things, 
animate  and  inanimate,  that  are  equally  conncded  with 
pleafure  and  pain.  By  degrees  all  fucceeding  circum- 
ftances  are  left  out,  and  our  love  and  hatred  confined 
to  preceding  ones,  which  we  confider  as  the  only 
caufes.  We  then  leave  out  inanimate  objefts  entirc- 
'  ly,  brutes  and  children  in   moft  circumftances,   and 

adults 


5o6  Of  the  Mcchanifm 

adults  in  fome.  All  which  is  chiefly  done,  becaufe 
acknowiaigmt:nts,  rewards,  threatenings,  and  pii- 
niHiinenrs,  wjth  the  other  alfociated  ciiciii-nfl:ances  of 
giatiti)de  and  rerentmcnt,  can  have  no  ufe  but  with 
ielpe(5l  to  living  intelligent  beings.  By  farther  degrees 
we  learn  fuch  a  ufe  of  the  woids,  caufe,  and  effeft,  as 
to  call  nothing  a  caufe,  whofe  caufe,  or  preceding 
circumdance,  we  can  fee,  denominating  all  fuch 
things  mere  cfte6ls,  all  others  caufes.  And  thus, 
becaufe  the  fecret  fprings  of  ndion  in  men  are  fre- 
quently concealed,  bodi  fronn  tiie  by-llander,  and  even 
from  the  agent  himfelf,  or  not  attended  to,  we  con- 
fider  men  in  certain  circumftances  as  real  caufes  j  and 
intelligent  beings,  ^  the  only  ones  that  can  be  real 
caufes ;  and  tiius  confine  our  gratitude  and  refent- 
r;  enc  to  them :  whence  it  feems  to  follow,  that  as 
foon  as  we  difcover  created  intelligent  beings  not  to  be 
real  caufes,  we  fhould  ceafe  to  make  them  the  objeds 
either  of  gratitude  or  refentmenr.  But  this  is  in 
great  meafure,  fpeculation ,-  for  it  will  appear  to  every 
attentive  perfon,  that  benevolence,  compafTion,  &:c. 
are  ainiable,  and  the  objects  of  gratitude,  envy  and 
malice  the  contrary,  from  whatever  caufes  they  pro- 
ceed, /.  e.  he  will  find  his  mind  fo  formed  already 
by  aflfocj^ation,  that  he  cannot  withhold  his  gratitude 
or  refentment :  and  it  has  been  '  my  bufinefs  in  the 
foregoing  analyfis  of  the  affections,  to  point  out  the 
feveral  methods  by  which  this  and  fuch  like  thinss 
are  brought  about.  And,  for  the  fame  reafons,  a 
perfon  mud  afcribe  merit  and  demerit,  which  are  alfo 
intimately  connefted  with  the  moral  itw^^^  to  created 
intelligent  beings,  though  he  may  have  a  full  perfua- 
fion,  that  they  are  not  real  caufes. 

It  does  indeed  appear,  that  this  is  owing  to  our 
prefent  imperfedl  ftate,  in  which  v/e  begin  with  the 
idolatry  of  the  creature,  with  the  worfliip  of  every 
affociated  circurnflance  j  and  that  as  we  advance  in 
perfection,  the  afTociations  relating  to  the  one  only, 
ultimate,  infinite  caufe,  mull  at  laft  overpower  all  the 

refti 


Of  the  Human'  Mind.  507 

reft ;  that  we  Ihall  pay  no  regards  but  to  God  alone  j 
and  that  all  refentment,  demerit,  fin  and  mifery, 
will  be  utterly  annihilated  and  abforbed  by  his  infinite 
happinefs  and  perfections.  For  our  aflociaiions  be- 
ing in  this,  as  in  many  other  cafes,  inconfiftent  with 
each  other,  our  firft  grofs  and  tranfuory  ones  muft 
yield  to  thofe  which  fucceed  and  remain. 

While  any  degree  of  relentmenr,  or  unpleafing 
affeftion,  is  left,  it  may  be  fhewn,  that  the  fame  aflb- 
ciations  which  keep  it  op,  will  turn  it  upon  the 
creatures,  and  particularly  upon  ourfelves.  And,  on 
the  other  h-md,  when  the  confideration  of  the  ultimate 
caufe  feems  ready  to  turn  it  from  ourfelves,  it  will 
alfo  fhew  that  it  ought  to  be  annihilated. 

Thcfe  may  be  confidered  as  general  remarks,  tend- 
ing to  remove  the  difficulties  arifing  from  the  confi- 
deration of  the  moral  fenfe.  I  will  now  ftate  the 
principal  objeflions  to  the  opinion  of  mechanifm,  in' 
a  direft,  but  (hort  way,  adding  fuch  hints  as  appear 
to  me  to  aiTord  a  folution  of  them. 

Firft,  then.  It  may  be  faid,  that  a  man  may  prove 
his  own  free-will  by  internal  feeling.  This  is  true, 
if  by  free-will  be  meant  the  power  of  doing  what  a 
man  wills  or  defires ;  or  of  refifting  the  motives  of 
fenfuality,  ambition,  &c.  i.  e.  free-will  in  the  popular 
and  praflical  fenfe.  Every  perfon  may  eafily  recol- 
le6l  inftances,  where  he  has  done  chefe  feveral  things. 
But  then  rhefe  are  entirely  foreign  to  the  prefent 
qucftion..  To  prove  that  a  man  has  free-will  in  the 
fenfe  oppofne  to  mechanifm,  he  ought  to  feel,  that 
he  can  do  different  things,  while  the  motives  remain 
preciftly  the  fame :  and  here  I  apprehend  the  internal 
feelings  are  entirely  againft  free-will,  where  the  mo- 
tives are  of  a  fufficient  magnitude  to  be  evident; 
where  they  are  not,  nothing  can  be  proved. 

Secondly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  unlefs  a  man  have 
free-will,  he  is  not  an  agent.  I  anfwer,  that  this  is 
true,  if  agency  be  fo  defined  as  to  include  free-will. 
But  if  agency  have  its  {tw^c  determined,  like  other 

words, 


5oB  Of  the  Mechanifm 

words,  from  the  affociatcd  appearances,  the  obje^lion 
falls  at  once.  A  man  may  ipeak,  handle,  love,  fear, 
&c.  entirely  by  mcchaniim. 

Thirdly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  the  denial  of  free- 
will in  man  is  the  denial  of  it  in  God  alfo.  But  to 
this  it  may  be  anlwered,  that  one  does  not  know  how 
to  put  the  queftion  in  refpe£t  of  God,  fuppofing  free- 
will to  mean  the  power  of  doing  different  things, 
the  previous  circumftances  remaining  the  fame,  with- 
out grofs  anthropomorphitifm.  It  does  not  at  all 
follow,  however,  becaufe  man  is  fubjeft  to  a 
necefTity  ordained  by  God,  that  God  is  fubjefl  to  a 
prior  neceffity.  On  the  contrary,  according  to  the 
dodlrine  of  mechanifm,  God  is  the  caufe  of  caufes, 
the  one  only  iource  of  all  power. 

Fourthly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  men  are  perpetually 
impofed  upon,  unlefs  they  have  free-will,  fince  they 
think  they  have.  But  here  again  free-will  is  put  for 
the  power  of  doing  what  a  man  wills  or  defires,  &c. 
for,  in  the  fenfe  oppofite  to  mechanifm,  few  perfons 
have  ever  entered  into  the  difcuffion  of  the  point  at 
all  i  and  thofe  who  do  with  fufficient  attention,  can- 
not but  determine  againft  free-will,  as  it  feems  to  me. 

Fifthly,  It  may  be  faid.  That  the  doflrine  of  me- 
chanifm deftroys  the  notion  of  a  particular  Provi- 
dence altering  the  courfe  of  nature  fo  as  to  fuit  it  to 
the  aftions  of  men.  I  anfwer,  That  laying  down 
philofophical  free-will,  fuch  an  alteration  in  the 
courfe  of  nature  may  perhaps  be  neceffary.  But  if 
man's  actions,  and  the  courfe  of  nature,  be  both  fix- 
ed, they  may  be  fuited  to  each  other  in  the  beft  poffible 
manner;  which  is  all  that  can  be  required,  in  order 
to  vindicate  God's  attributes,  as  v/ell  as  all  that  man 
can  defire. 

Sixthly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  all  motives  to  good 
aftions,  and  particularly  to  prayer,  are  taken  away 
by  denying  free-will.  I  anfwer,  that  according  to 
the  mechanical  fyftem,  prayer  and  good  a6tions  are 
the  means  for  obtaining  happinefs  j  and  that  the  be- 
lief 


of  the  Human  Mind,  509 

lief  of  this  is  the  ftrongeft  of  motives  to  impel  men 
to  prayer  and  good  works. 

Seventhly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  the  denial  of  free- 
will deftroys  the  diftin6lion  between  virtue  and  vice. 
I  anfwer,  that  this  is  according  as  thefe  words  are 
defined.  If  free-will  be  included  in  the  definition  of 
virtue,  then  there  can  be  no  virtue  without  free-will. 
But  if  virtue  be  defined  obedience  to  the  will  of 
God,  a  courfe  of  adtion  proceeding  from  the  love 
of  God,  or  from  benevolence,  &c.  free-will  is  not 
at  all  neceflary ;  fince  thefe  affedions  and  adions 
may  be  brought  about  mechanically. 

A  folution  analogous  to  this  may  be  given  to  the 
objedtion  taken  from  the  notions  of  merit  and 
demerit.  Let  the  words  be  defined,  and  they  will 
either  include  free-will,  or,  not  including  it,  will  not 
require  it ;  fo  that  the  propofition,  merit  implies  free- 
willy  will  either  be  identical,  or  falfe. 

Eighthly,  It  may  be  faid,  that  the  doftrine  of 
mechanifm  makes  God  the  author  of  fin.  I  anfwer, 
that  till  we  arrive  at  felf-annihilation,  fin  always  will, 
and  ought  to  appear  to  arife  from  ourfelves ;  and 
that,  when  we  are  arrived  thither,  fin  and  evil  of 
every  kind  vanifli.  I  anfwer  alfo,  that  the  do6trine  of 
philofophical  free-will  does  not  remove  our  difficul- 
ties and  perplexities,  in  refpecl  of  the  moral  attri- 
butes of  God,  unlefs  by  transferring  them  upon  the 
natural  ones,  i.  e.  by  our  fuppofing  that  fome  prior 
necelfity  compelled  God  to  btftow  free-will  on  his. 
creatures.  It  feems  equally  difficult,  in  every  way, 
to  account  for  the  oi'igin  of  evil,  natural  or  moral, 
confidently  with  the  infinity  of  the  power,  knowledge, 
and  goodnefs  of  God.  If  we  fuppofe,  that  all  tends 
to  happinefs  ultimately,  this  removes  the  difficulty 
fo  far  as  to  produce  aCquiefcence  in  the  will  of  God, 
and  thankfulnefs  to  him  j  and  that  juft  as  much  upon 
the  fyftem  of  mechanifm  as  that  of  free-will.  Moral 
evil  has  no  difficulty  in  it,  befides  what  aiifes  from 

the  natural  evil  attending  it. 

Ninthly, 


510  Of  the  Mechiimjm 

Ninthly,  It  may  be  faicl,  th.it  the  exhortations  of 
the  fcripturcs  prcfiippofe  ficc-wiil.  1  anrvvt-r,  That 
they  aic  to  be  rcnfulered  as  motives  impelling  the 
will,  and  contributinrr,  as  far  as  they  are  attended 
to,  to  re(5>iry  it.  A  parent  who  believes  the  doftrine  of 
mechanifm  may,  confidently  with  it,  or  rather  muft 
neceffarily,  in  conlequence  of  this  belief,  exhort  his 
child.  Therefore  God,  who  is  pleafed  to  call  himfelf 
our  heavenly  Father,  may  do  the  fame.  And  if  we 
embrace  the  opinion  of  univerfal  lefloration,  then 
all  the  exhortations  contained  both  in  the  word  and 
works  of  God,  will  produce  their  genuine  effeft,  and 
concur  to  woik  in  us  difpofitions  fie  to  receive  hap- 
pinefs  ultimately. 

I  come  now  to  hint  fome  confequences  of  the  doc- 
trine of  mechanifm,  which  feem  to  me  to  be  ftrong 
prefumptions  in  its  favour. 

Firft,  then.  It  entirely  removes  the  great  difficulty 
of  reconciling  the  prefcience  o(  God  with  the  free- 
will of  man.  For  it  takes  away  philofophical  free- 
will, and  the  practical  is  confident  with  God's  prefci- 
ence. 

Secondly,  It  has  a  tendency  to  beget  the  mod 
profound  humility  and  felf-annihiiation  s  fince,  ac- 
cording to  this,  we  are  entirely  deditute  of  all  power 
and  perfedlion  in  ourfelves,  and  are  what  we  are  en- 
tirely by  the  grace  and  goodnefs  of  God. 

Thirdly,  It  has  a  tendency  to  abate  all  refentment 
againd  men.  Since  all  that  they  do  againd:  us  is  by 
the  appointment  of  God,  it  is  rebellion  againd  him 
to  be  offended  with  them. 

Fourthly,  It  greatly  favours  the  dotflrine  of  uni- 
verfal redoration.  Since  all  that  is  done  is  by  the 
appointment  of  God,  It  cannot  but  end  v/cll  at  lad. 

Fifthly,  It  has  a  tendency  to  make  us  labour 
more  earnedly  with  ourfelves  and  others,  particularly 
children,  from  the  greater  certainty  attending  all  endea- 
vours that  operate  in  a  m.echanical  way. 

Ladly, 


of  the  Human  Mind.  511 

Laftly,  There  are  many  well-known  pafTages  of 
fcripture,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  to  the  do(5lrine 
of  philofophical  free-will,  without  the  greateft  harfli- 
nefs  of  interpretation. 

U  may  alfo  be  objedled  to  the  whole  foregoing  theo- 
ry, as  well  as  to  the  doftrine  of  vibrations  in  particular, 
that  it  is  unfavourable  to  the  immateriality  of  the  foul; 
and,  by  confcquence,  to  its  immortality.     But  to  this 
i  anfwer,  that  I  am  reduced  to  the  necefTity  of  making 
a  fojlulatum  at  the  entrance  of  my  inquiries ;  which 
precludes  all  pofTibility  of  proving  the  materiality  of 
the  foul  from   this  theory   afterwards.     Thus  I   fup- 
pofe,  or  poftulate,  in  my  firft  propofition,  that  fen- 
fatioHS  arife  in  the  foul  from  motions  excited  in  the 
medullary  fubltance  of  the  brain.     I  do  indeed   bring 
fome  arguments  from  phyfiology  and  pathology,  to 
fhevv  this  to  be  a  reafonable  ■pojiulattimy    when  under- 
llood  in  a  general  fenfe;  for  it  is  all  one  to  the  pur- 
pofe  of  the  foregoing  theory,    whether  the  motions 
in  the  medullary  fubftance  be  the  phyfical  caufe  of 
the  fenfations,  according  to  the  fyftem  of  the  fchoolsj 
or    the   occafional   caufe,    according   to  Malbranche ; 
or  only  an  adjunft,  according  to  Leihmtz.     However, 
this  is  not  fuppofing  matter  to  be  endued   with  fenfa-  . 
tion,  or  any   way   explaining  what  the  foul  is ;  but. 
only  taking   its  exiftence,    and  connection  with   the 
bodily  organs  in  the  moft   fimple  cafe,  for  granted, 
in  order  to  make  farther  inquiries.    Agreeably  to  which 
I  immediately  proceed  to  determine  the  fpecies  of  the 
motion,  and   by  determining  it,  to  calt  light  on  fome 
important  and  obfcure  points  relating  to  the  connection 
between  the  body  and  the  foul  in  complex  cafes. 

It  does  indeed  follow  from  this  theory,  that  mat- 
ter, if  it  could  be  endued  with  the  moft  fimple  kinds 
«f  fenfation,  might  alfo  arrive  at  all  that  intelligence 
of  which  the  human  mind  is  poflefled :  whence  this 
theory  muft  be  allowed  to  overturn  all  the  argu- 
ments v/hich  are  ufually  brought  for  the  immateriality 
of  the  foul  from  the  fubtlety  of  the  internal  fenfes, 

and 


512  Of  the  Mccbani/mi  Sec. 

and  of  the  rational  faculty.  But  I  no  ways  prefume 
to  determine  whether  matter  can  be  endued  with  fen- 
fation  or  no.  This  is  a  point  foreign  to  the  purpofe 
of  my  inquiries.  It  is  fufficient  for  me,  that  there  is  a 
certain  connection,  of  one  kind  or  other,  between  the 
lenlations  of  the  foul,  and  [lie  motions  excited  in  the 
medullary  fuhlldtice  of  the  brain  ;  which  is  what  all 
phyficians  and  philofophers  allow. 

I  would  not  therefore  be  any  way  interpreted  fo  as 
to  oppofe  the  immateriality  of  the  foul.  On  the  con- 
trary, I  fee  clearly,  and  acknowledge  readily,  that  mat- 
ter and  motion,  however  fubtly  divided,  or  reafoned 
upon,  yield  nothing  more  than  matter  and  motion 
ftill.  But  then  neither  would  1  affirm,  that  this  con- 
fideration  affords  a  proof  of  the  foul's  immateriality. 
In  like  manner  the  unity  of  confcioufnefs  feems  to 
me  an  inconclufive  argum.ent.  For  confcioufnefs  is 
a  mental  perception  }  and  if  perception  be  a  monad, 
then  every  infeparable  adjunft  of  it  muft  be  fo  too, 
i.  e.  vibrations,  according  to  this  theoiy,  which  is 
evidently  falfe.  Not  to  mention,  that  it  is  difficult  to 
know  what  is  meant  by  the  unity  of  confcioufnefs. 

But  it  is  mod  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  immate- 
riality of  the  foul  has  little  or  no  connexion  with  its 
immortality;  and  that  we  ought  to  depend  upon  him 
who  firfl:  breathed  into  man  the  breath  of  the  prefent 
life,  for  our  refurreflion  to  a  better.  All  live  unto 
him.  And  if  we  depend  upon  any  thing  elfe  befides 
him,  for  any  bleffing,  we  may  be  faid  fo  far  to  re- 
nounce our  allegiance  to  him,  and  to  idolize  that 
upon  which  we  depend. 

l4ND    OF    THE    FIRST    PART. 


WARRINGTON, 
W.  Eyres,  Printer,  Horfe-Market. 


^ 


aiNDINQ  LIST     FLJ  1     1949 


1 


University  of  Toronti 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


; '    !  ..     I '  '    ;    >  I  .  '  f  1  'i  (■.  (V  llr;  I  (|  1  f-     1  ''  I    *
