LETT-ER mb 


PRINTED FOR THE EDITOR, BY J. BROOK, 


CONCERNING | 


TOLERATION. 


„ weeds + $inhdus, M % — . : 


* 


By JOHN LOCKE, Esa. 


SCudderafactd o 


„4 
* 


1796. 


ee 
= ws K — —__ * 00-5 
a A 


nr. 


— 2 Gee A * "ey 8 1 
* f ] Qà—k— ape pe aA 
eee eee , ; 


8 


r a G 
LY 


* 


* . 757 - * 


er — 


$ n ON . ts 2008. >a 
. Co ws; 3 8 


thing furt 


A 


TO THE READ ER. 


— — 


1 H E. enſuing Letter concerning TOLERATION, 


Id printed in Latin, in the year 1089, in Holland, was 


ſoon tranſlated bath into Dutch and French. “o general 


and ſpeedy an approbation may therefore beſpeak its fa- 
mans.” reception in England. I think, indeed, there ts 


no nation under heaven, in which ſo much has already 


been ſaid upon that ſubject, as ours. But yet certainly 

there 1s no Far that ftand in more need of having ſome- 
er both ſaid and done among ſi them, in this 

point, than we do. 5 | | 


Our government has not only been partial in matters 


of religion; but thoſe. alſo wha have ſuffered under that 


partiality, and have therefore endeavoured by their ꝛuri- 
tings to vindicate their aum rights and liberties, have for 
the moſt part done it upon narrow principles, ſuited only 
10 the intereſts of their own ſects. 


This narrowneſs of ſpirit, on all fides, has undoubted- 
ty been the occaſion of our miſeries and 1 But 


whatever has been the occaſion, it is now high time ta ſeek 


for a thorough cure. We have need of more generous re- 


 medies than what have yet been made uſe of in our dif- 
temper. It is neither declarations of indulgence, nor acts 


F comprehenſion, ſuch as have yet been practiſed or pro- 


jected 


O18 6) Ade? ae IA) Os ee + A vo SA 


<<.) 
14 
* 
+ 
1 
1 
1 
s % 
Z 3x 
1 
1 
14 
S 
: 


TO THE READER. . 


jected among ft us, that can do the work. The firſt = | 


but palliate, the ſecond increaſe our evil. 


* 


Abſolute liberty, juſt and true liberty, equal and 11m- 


partial liberty, is the thing that we fland in need of. New, 
though this has indeed been much talked of, 1 doubt it has 


nat been much underſtood ; 1 am ſure not at all prachiſed, 


either by our governors towards the people, in general, or 


by diffenting parties of the people towards me another. 


I cannot therefore but hope, that this diſcourſe, which 
treats of that fubjeft, however briefly, yet more exactly 
ihan any we have yet ſeen, demonſtrating bath the equita- 


bleneſs and practicableneſs of the thing, will be efteemed 
highly ſcaſonable, by all men that have ſouls large enough 


to prefer the true intereſt of the public before that of a 


parity. | 


It is for the uſe of ſuch as are already ſo ſpirited, or ts 


inſpire that ſpirit into theſe that are not, that I have 
tranſlated it into our language. But the thing itſelf is ſ9 
ſhort, that it will not bear a longer preface. 4 leave it 


therefore to the conſideration of my countrymen, and hear- 


zily wiſh they may make the uſe of it that it appears to be 


deſigned for. 


— 


Note. It appears by the firſt paragraph of this preface, that it 


was printed ſoon after the abdication of James II. during whoſe reign, 


as well as before, that juſt and true liberty, that equal and impartial 


liberty, which the great and good Mr. Locks pleads for, did not ex- 


iſt; but it ſhould be acknowledged, with thankfulneſs, that matters 


have been long much altered for the better: May thoſe who have 


power to do it conſider wherein they are ſtill deficient, and exert 


themlelyes to perfect this valuable bleſſing. 


ne aq Goon N 
2 JC ²˙ü ˙ - PCR SG = 
n * 


: 
4-4 
* 
4 
: 
{5 
$ 
1 


2 6 — Las Aman ran _ 9—— 
„ ³²·» . ˙¹üwm⁊̃ ˙˙-V-wr ©. ” 
3 . 7 


THE EDITOR'S . ADDRESS. 


Courteous Reader, 


[T ov art here preſented with a book of great value, The 
name of the author will prepoſſeſs thee in its favour, if thou art 
at all acquainted with him; but the excellency of the ſubje&, and 
the maſterly manner in which it is executed, are ſill more worthy 
of thine eſteem. Philoſophy and Religion are here happily uni- 
3 ted. The learning of the ſchools gives its aid to the ſpirit of the 
7 goſpel. The bigotry and ſuperſtition of men are fairly ſubdued 
# by ſolid argument, and the amiable temper of Chriſt is exempli- 
fed in the defence of that liberty wherewith he has made us free. 


Ioleration is a word which is in general ſacred to religion, and 
comprehends that liberty which one part of the community has 
to worſhip God according to their own views, without any mo- 
leſtation ſrom another. This appears to be the unalienable birth- 
right of man, as he is only accountable to God in matters of 
religion. We readily and cheerfully admit, that the ſubjects of 
2 ſtate are, by the laws of God, accountable to the civil power fer 
their civil and moral conduct, but for any man, or body of men, 
to attempt by force to compel others, either with reſpect to reli- 
gious ſentiments or modes of worſhip, appears the reverſe of the 


ſpirit of the goſpel, as ſet forth by Chriſt and his apoſtles, 


Tho 


14 ) | 
4 THE EDITOR'S ADDRESS, . 
1 The following ſmall treatiſe is calculated to anſwer the moſt 
4 ; laudable ends, viz. To point out the difference between civil and 
| religious authority; ſhewing, by ſcripture and irrefragable argu- 
' ment, that the former belongs to the civil magiſtrate, the latter 
; only to God. Next, to ſuppreſs that bigotry, and all the melan- 
| choly fruits thereof, which, to this day, too much prevails among 
; the different ſects profeſſing Chriſtianity. The coolneſs and tem- : 
1 per, the truth and perſpicuity of idea, the candour and ſolidity of 2 
| argument, with which the author has proſecuted the ſubject of re- | 
ligious Toleration, are ſufficient to endear the memory of the great 
4 Locks to all ſucceeding ages. | 
Halifax, SENT. " 4 
: June 2, 1796, J. COCEIN. 1 
} 
* 
ö 
; | 12 


„ 


* 8 * r 1 8 
e 8 
2 xi 1 . l . 
8 - tt "x 


1 


LD F 
' TOLERATION. 


— — 


Honoured Sir, 


1 
<2 
1 
* 
8 
88 
RF. 
_- 
3 
1 
30 
3 
1 
2 


* 
ae 


S INCE you are pleaſed to inquire, what are my 


thoughts about the mutual toleration of Chriſtians 


in their different profeſſions of religion, I muſt needs 
anſwer you freely, that I efteem that toleration to be 


the chief characteriſtical mark of the true church. 


For whatſoever ſome people boaſt of the antiquity 
of places and names, or of the pomp of their out- 
ward worſhip; others, of the reformation of their 
diſcipline; all, of the orthodoxy of their faith; (for 
every one is orthodox to himſelf:) theſe things, and 
all others of this nature, are much rather marks of 


men ſtriving for power and empire over one another, 


than of the church of Chriſt. Let any one have 
never ſo true a claim to all theſe things, yet if he be 
deſtitute of charity, meekneſs, and good- will in gene- 
ral towards all mankind, even to thoſe that are not 


Chriſtians, he is certainly yet ſhort of being a true 


Chriſtian himſelf. "Fr 
„ g B — _ 


— 


TIES Dues 


e 
. 


6 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


© The kings of the Gentiles exerciſe lordſhip _ 
© over them,” ſaid our Saviour to his diſciples, © but 
© ye ſhall not be ſo.' Luke xxii. 25. The buſineſs _ 
of true religion is quite another thing. It is not in- 
ſtituted in order to the erecting of an external pomp, 
nor to the obtaining of ecclefiaſtical dominion, nor 


to the exerciſing of compulſive force, but to the re- 


gulating of men's lives according to the rules of vir- 


tue and piety. Whoſoever will liſt himſelf under 


the banner of Chriſt, muſt, in the firſt place, and 
above all things, make war upon his own luſts and 


vices. © It is in vain for any man to uſurp the name 
of Chriſtian, without holineſs of life, purity of man- 
ners, and benignity and meekneſs of ſpirit. 


Thou, when thou art converted, ſtrengthen thy 
< thy brethren,” (Luke xxii. 2.) ſaid our Lord to 
Peter. It would indeed be very hard for one that 
appears careleſs about his own ſalvation, to perſuade 
me that he is extremely concerned for mine: for it 
is impoſſible that thoſe ſhould fincerely and heartily 


apply themſelves to make other people Chriſtians, 


who have not really embraced the Chriſtian religion 


in their own hearts. If the goſpel and the apoſtles 
may be credited, no man can be a chriſtian without 


charity, and without that faith which works, not by 
force, but by love. Now, I appeal to the conſcien- 


ces of thoſe that perſecute, torment, deſtroy, and kill 


other men upon pretence of religion, whether they 


do it out of friendſhip and kindneſs towards them, 


or no; and I ſhall then indeed, and not till then, 
believe they do fo, when TI ſhall ſee thoſe fiery zealots 
co recting, in the ſame manner, their friends and 


familiar acquaintance, for the manifeſt ſins ang 
commit againſt the precepts of the goſpel; when 


Mall ſce them proſecute with fire and ſword the 


members 


— x. ent. — . — 2 — — 2 . — ——— — FP _ IT SE 5 2 
. r 07 0. eee n Ws r 22 . 


2 N r Fw 2 
* » bay FFF * 
3 Sa „ 
: EE To So EN 


rag 5 3 


rs 


3 
15 * 


A Letter concerning Toleration. "” 


members of their own communion that are tainte | 
with enormous vices, and, without amendment,. are 


in danger of eternal perdition-: and when I ſhall ſee 
them thus expreſs their love and deſire of the ſalva- 
tion of their fouls, by the infliction. of. torments, and 


exerciſe of all manner of cruelties. For if it be out 
of a principle of charity, as they pretend, and love to 


men's ſouls, that they deprive them of their Eſtates, ' 
maim them with- corporal puniſhments, ftarve and 

torment. them in noiſome priſons, and in the end 
even take away their lives; I fay, if all this be done 
merely to make men Chrittians, and procure their. 


ſalvation; why then do they ſuffer © whoredom,. fraud, 


| malice, and ſuch like enormities, Rom. i. (which, 


according to the apoſtle, manifeſtly reliſn of heathen- 


iſh corruption,) to predominate ſo much and abound 


amongſt: their flocks and people? "Theſe, and ſuch 
like things, are certainly more contrary to the glory 


of God; to the purity of the church, and to the ſal- 


vation of ſolfs,. than any conſcientious diſſent from 
eccleſiaſtical deciſions, or ſeparation from public 
worſhip, whilſt accompanied with innocency of life. 
Why, then, does this burning zeal for God, for the 


church, and for the ſalvation of fouls; burning, I 


ſay, literallv, with fire and. faggot, paſs by thoſe im- 


moralities and wickedneſſes, without any chaſtiſe- 


ment,. which are acknowledged by all men to be di- 
ametrically oppoſite to the profeſſion of Chriſtianity, 
and bend all its nerves either to the introducing of 
ceremonies, or to the eſtabliſhment of opinions; 
which, for the moſt part, are about nice and intricate 
matters,. that excced the capacity of ordinary under- 
ſtandings? Which of the parties contending about 
theſe things is in the right, which of them is guilty 


of ſchiſm or hereſy, whether thoſe that domineer or 


thoſe that ſuffer, will then at leait be manifeit, when 
DW ES 1 


4 * r 
th. : , nnn n . 


ee 


8 
25 

7 * c 
1 
* 
2 1 
5 
4 
2 
2 


— Ov: 


— — 


8 A Letter concerning Taleration. 


the cauſe of their ſeparation comes to be judged of. 
He certainly that follows Chriſt, embraces his doc- 


trine and bears his yoke, though he forſake both 


father and mother, ſeparate from the public afſembly 
and ceremonies of his country, or whomfoever, or 
whatſoever elſe he relinquiſhes, will not then be 


Judged an heretic. _ 


Now, though the diviſions that are amoneſt ſeas 


ſhould be allowed to be never fo obſtructive of the 
ſalvation of ſouls; yet, nevertheleſs, © adultery, for- 


< nication, uncleannefs, laſeiviouſneſs, idolatry, and 
£ ſuch like things, cannot be denied to be the works 
© of the fleſn; (Gal. v.) concerning which the Apoſ- 
tle has expreſly declared that they who do them 


© ſhall not inherit the kingdom of God.? Whoſo- 


ever therefore is ſincerely ſolicitous about the king- 


dom of God, and thinks it his duty to endeavour 


the enlargement of it amongſt men, onght to apply 
himſelf with no leſs care and induftry*W the rooting 


out of theſe immoralities, than to the extirpation of 
_ ſeas. But if any one do otherwiſe, and whilſt he is 


cruel and implacable towards thoſe that differ from 


him in opinion, he be indulgent to ſuch iniquities 
and immoralities as are unbecoming the name of a 
Chriſtian, let ſuch a one talk never ſo much of the 
church, he plainly demonſtrates 'by his actions, that 


it is another kingdom he aims at, and not the ad- 


vancement of the kingdom of God. 


That anv man ſhould think fit to cauſe another 
man, whoſe ſalvation he heartily deſires, to expire 
in torments, and that even in an uncoverted ſtate, 
would, I confeſs, ſeem very ſtrange to me; and, 1 
think, to any other alſo. But nobody, ſurely, will 
ever believe that ſuch a carriage can procced from 

| charity, 


— — — — 3 2 — —— 2 — rn N . 2 — » TIL e 
= — — — . 7 »» ID oo 31 Sos A Pts rl} ME / I-13; FRE * 


4 n r  FTGAR es — _ - 1 0 — : | 
£8385 r a 8 3 . Ne r n Ie * r 


29 


"0 


G K WV xs SR, 


IF Wo. WW. YT: Pu Y% Py. 0: 


nt mu —ꝛ 


n N fo WOE FEE n 2 


4 


A Letter concerning Toleration. RE 


charity, love, or good-will. If any one maintain, that 


men ought to be compelled by fire and ſword to pro- 


feſs certain doctrines, and conform to this or that 
exterior worſhip, without any regard had to their 
morals; if any one endeavour to convert thoſe that 


are erroneous unto the faith, by forcing them to pro- 


feſs things that they do not believe, and allowing 
them to practiſe things that the goſpel does not per- 


mit; it cannot be doubted indeed but fuch a one is 
deſirous to have a numerous aſſembly joined in the 


ſame profeſſion with himſelf: but that he principally 


intends by. thoſe means to compoſe a truly Chriſtian 
church, is altogether incredible. It is not therefore to 


be wondered at, if thoſe who do not really contend 
for the advancement of the true religion, and of the 


church, of: Chriſt, make uſe of arms that do not be- 
long to the Chriſtian warfare. If, like the Captain 
of our ſalvation, they ſincerely deſired the good of 

ſouls, they would tread in the ſteps, and follow the 
perfect example of that Prince of Peace, who ſent 


out his ſoldiers to the ſubduing of nations, and ga- 


thering them into his church, not armed with the 
ſword, or other inſtruments of force, but prepared 
Vith the goſpel of peace, and with the exemplary 
holineſs of their converſation. This was his method. 
_ "Though, if infidels were. to be converted by force, 
if thoſe that are either blind or obſtinate were to be 
drawn off from their errors by armed ſoldiers, we 


know very well. that it was much more eaſy for him 


to do it with armies of heavenly legions, than for 
any ſon of the church, how potent foever, with all 


his dragoons. 

The toleration of thoſe that differ from others in 
matters of religion, is ſo agreeable to the goſpel of 
Jeſus Chriſt, and to the genuine reaſon of mankind, 

8 B 3 | | that 


* 7 
« 3 
£ . 
| 1 
4 1 
4 
£ 7 

Fe 

: 


. — 


; 
. 


Jo 4 Letter concerning Toleration. 


that it ſeems monſtrous for men to be ſo blind as not 
to perceive the neceſſity and advantage of it in fo clear 
a light. I will not here tax the pride and ambition 


of ſome, the paſſion and uncharitable zeal of others. 


Theſe are faults from which human affairs can per- 
Haps ſcarce ever be perfectly freed, but yet ſuch as 


nobody will bear the plain imputation of, without 


covering them with ſome ſpecial colour; and ſo pre- 
tend to commendation, whilſt they are carried away 


by their own irregular paſſions. But however, that 


fome may not colour their ſpirit of perſecution and 
unchriſtian cruelty, with a pretence of care of the 


Public weal and obſervation of the laws; and that 
others, under pretence of religion, may not ſeek im- 
punity for their libertiniſm and licentiouſneſs: in a 


word, that none may impoſe either upon himſelf or 
others, by pretences of loyalty and obedience to the 


prince, or of tenderneſs and ſincerity in the worſhip _ 
of God; I eſteem it above all things neceffary to 


diſtinguiſh exactly the buſineſs of civil government 
from that of religion, and to ſettle the juſt bounds. 
that lie between the one and the other. If this be 


not done, there can be no end put to the controverſies 


that will be always ariſing between thoſe that have, 


or at leaſt pretend to have, on the one fide, a con- 


cernment for the intereſts of men's fouls, and on the 


other fide, a care of the commonwealth, 


The commonwealth ſeems to.me to-be a ſociety 
of men conſtituted only for the procuring, preſerving, 
and advancing of their own civil intereſts. 5 


Civil intereſts I call life, liberty, health, and in- 
dolency of body; and the poſſeſſion of outward: 
things, ſuch as money, lands, houſes, furniture, and 
the like. | 


HE 


* TY 440" v; DV 
3 eos 


n 
ESO IRENE. 


E 


that violate any other man's rights. 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 11 


It is the duty of the civil magiſtrate, by the im- 
partial execution of equal laws, ro ſecure unto all the 


people in general, and to every one of his ſubjects in 


particular, the juſt poſſeſſion of theſe things belong- 


ing to this life. If any one preſume to violate the 


laws of public juſtice and equity, eſtabliſhed for the 
_ preſervation of thefe things, his preſumption is to be 


checked by the fear of puniſhment, conſiſting in the 


_ deprivation. or diminution of thoſe civil intereſts, or 


8 which otherwiſe he might and ought to enjoy. 
ut ſeeing no man does willingly ſuffer himſelf to 


be puniſhed by the depri vation of any part of his 


goods, and much leſs of his liberty or life, therefore 
is the magiſtrate armed with the force and ſtrength of 
all his ſubjects, in order to the puniſhment of thoſe 


— 


Now, that the whole juriſdiction of the magiſtrate 
reaches only to theſe civil concernments ; and that 
all civil power, right, and dominion, is bounded and 
confined to the only care of promoting theſe things ; 


and that it neither can nor ought in any manner to 


be extended to the falvation of ſouls ; theſe following 
conſiderations ſeem unto me abundantly to demon- 
ftrate. | | hg pg | $2 | | 


Firſt, Becauſe the care of ſouls is not committed 


to the civil magiſtrate any more than to other men. 


It is not committed unto him, I fay, by God; be- 
_ cauſe it appears not that God has ever given any ſuch 


authority to one man over another, as to compel any 
one to his religion. Nor can any ſuch power be vefted 
in the magiſtrate by the © conſent of the people ;* be- 
cauſe no man can fo far abandon the care of his own 
ſalvation, as blindly to leave it to the choice of any 


other, whether prince or ſubject, to preſcribe to him 


what 


*% + 
— — \ » * — 
. ES; CS 4 PA 


TY Mn hs 


* 


I2 A Letter concerning Taleration, 


what faith or worſhip he ſhall embrace: for no man 


can, if he would, conform his faith to the dictates 


of another. All the life and power of true religion 
conſiſts in the inward and full perſuaſion of the mind; 
and faith is not faith without believing. Whatever 
profeſſion we make, to whatever outward worſhip we 
conform, if we are not fully ſatisfied in our mind that 
the one is'true, and the other well-pleafing unto God; 
ſuch profeſſion and ſuch practice, far from being any 
furtherance, are indeed great obſtacles to our ſalvation. 
For in this manner, inſtead of expiating other fins. by 


the exerciſe of religion; I ſay, in offering unto God 


almighty ſuch a worſhip as we eſteem to be diſpleaſing 


unto him, we add unto the number of our other ſins 


| thoſe alſo of hypocriſy, and contempt of his divine 


majeſty. 


In the ſecond place, The care of ſouls cannot be- 
long to the civil magiſtrate, becauſe his power conſiſts 
only in outward force : but true and ſaving religion 


conſiſts in the inward perſuaſion of the mind; with- 


out which nothing can be. acceptable to God. And 
ſuch is the nature of the undcritanding, that it cannot 


be compelled to the belief of any thing by outward 


force. Confiſcation of eſtate, impriſonment, tor- 


ments; nothing of that nature can have any ſuch ef- 
ficacy, as. to make men-ehange- the inward judgment. 


that they have framed of things. 


It may indeed be alleged, that the magiſtrate may 
make uſe of arguments, and thereby draw the hetero- 


dox into the way of truth, and procure their ſalvation. 
I- grant it: but this is common to.him with other 
men. In teaching, inſtructing, and redreſſing the er- 
roneous by reafon, he may certainly do what becomes 


any good man to do, Magiſtracy does not oblige him 
M's wy | 5 


„r e 


7 


the light of their own reaſon, to oppoſe the dictates 


A Letter concerning Toleration. , 


to put off either humanity or Chriſtianity. But it is 


one thing to perſuade, another to command: one thing 


to preſs with arguments, another with penalties. This 


the civil power alone has a right to do: to the other, 


good-will is authority enough. Every man has com- 
miſſion to admoniſh, exhort, and convince another of 
error; and by reaſoning to draw him into truth: but 


to give laws, receive obedience, and compel with the 


ſword, belongs to none but the magiſtrate. And upon 
this ground I affirm, that the magiſtrate's power ex- 
tends not to the eſtabliſhing of any articles of faith, or 
forms of worſhip, by the force of his laws. For laws 
are of no force at all without penalties, and penalties 
in this cafe are abſolutely impertinent, becauſe they are 
not proper to convince the mind Neither the profeſ- 


fion of any articles of faith, nor the conformity to any 


outward form of worſhip (as has already been faid) 
can be available to the ſalvation of fouls, unleſs the 
truth of the one, and the acceptableneſs of the other 
unto God, be . believed by thoſe that fo 
profeſs and practiſe. But penalties are no ways ca- 
pable to produce ſuch belief. It is only light and 
evidence that can work a change in men's opinions. 
And that light can in no manner proceed from cor- 


poral ſufferings, or any other outward penalties. 


In the third place, The care of the ſalvation of 


men's ſouls cannot belong to the magiſtrate ; becauſe, 


though the rigour of laws, and the force of penalties 


were capable to convince and change men's minds, 
3 Ay would not that help at all to the ſalvation of ſouls. 


For there being but one truth, one way to heaven; 


_ what hopes are there that more men would be led into 


it, if they had no other rule to follow but the religion 
of the court and were put under a neceſſity to quit 


— 


* 

* 
"* 
* 
4 


£ 
; 
2 
2 
1 
: 
7 
4 
A 
4 
_ 


— 


. —— — —— A — 


6-5 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


FP 


of their own conſciences, and blindly to reſign up 
themſelves to the will of their governors, and to the 
religion, which either ignorance, ambition, or ſuper- 


ſtition had chanced to eſtabliſh in the countries where 


they were born? In the variety and contradiction of 


opinions in religion, wherein the princes of the world 
J a ale intereſts, the 
narrow way would be much ſtraitened. One coun- 
try alone would be in the right, and all the reſt of 
the world would be put under an obligation of fol- 
lowing their princes in the ways that lead to deſtruc- 
tion. And that which heightens the abſurdity, and 


are as much divided as in their 


very ill ſuits the notion of a Deity, men would owe 


their eternal happineſs or miſery to the places of their 
nadvity. _ EI | | : {hy 


Theſe conſiderations, to omit many others that 


might have been urged to the ſame purpoſe, ſeem unto 
me ſufficient to conclude, that all the power of civil 
government relates only to men's civil intereſts ;. is 


confined to the care of the things of this world, and 


hath nothing to do-with the: world to come. 


Let us now conſider what a CHURCH is. A 


church then I take to be © A voluntary ſociety of men, 


joining themſelves together of their own accord, in 


order to the public worſhipping of God, in ſuch a 


© manner. as they judge acceptable to him, and effec- 


© tual to the ſalvation. of their ſouls.” 


I fay,itisa free and voluntary ſociety. Nobody is 


born a member of any church, otherwiſe the religion 


of parents would deſcend. unto children, by the ſame 


right of inheritance as their temporal eſtates, and 
every one would hold his faith by the fame tenure he 
goes his lands; than which nothing can be more ab- 


n 


2 8 


EI A Eto na 1-9 BC ROSIE ALTO 7 Loy FR REINER 
; 1 RRR 


r ET . _ 2 7 * og 
es, 9 PE ee RN I Re REST * 
e 4 Pn pe . 


3 N 
i) 
57 
2 
= 
F 
Fo 
X 


Ne Shes Lun cp Bt i I IE AE Pougea r 
8 r 


A Letter concerning Toleratias. 15 


ſurd. Thus, therefore, that matter ſtands. No man 
by nature is bound unto any particular church or ſect, 


but every one joins himſelf voluntarily to that ſociety, 


in which, he believes, he has found that profeſſion and 
worſhip which is truly acceptable unto God. The 


hopes of ſalvation, as it was the only cauſe of his 
entrance into that communion, fo it can be the only 
reaſon of his ſtay there: for if afterwards he diſcover 


any thing either erroneous in the doctrine, or incon- 


gruous in the worſhip of that ſociety to which he has 
Joined himſelf; why ſhould it not be as free for him 


to go out as it was to enter? No member of a reli- 
gious ſociety can be tied with any other bonds but 


what proceed from the certain expectation of eternal 


life. A church then is a ſociety of members volun- 
5 tarily uniting to this end. „ 3 


It follows now that we confider what is the power 


of this church, and unto what laws it is ſubject. 


Foraſmuch as no ſociety, how free ſo ever, or up- 


on whatſoever ſlight occaſion inſtituted, (whether of 
philoſophers for learning, of merchants for commerce, 


or of men of leiſure for mutual converſation and diſ- 
courſe,) no church or company, I ſay, can in the leaſt 


ſubſiſt and hold together, but will preſently diffolve 


and break to pieces, unleſs it be regulated by ſome 


laws, and the members all conſent to obſerve fome 
order: place and time of meeting muſt be agreed on; 

rules for admitting and excluding members muſt be 
eſtabliſhed; diſtinction of officers, putting things into 


a regular courſe, and ſuch like, cannot be omitted. 


But ſince the joining together of ſeveral members into 
this church- ſociety, as has already been demonſtrated, 


is abſolutely free and ſpontaneous, it neceſſarily fol- 


lows, that the right of making laws can belong to 


none 


1 PR _ . 


a * 
28 , 25 . " 
re — — . 


— bs tap 4, 4, WER} > 26 5 heal SARA 


IE ene Yr roy Ay. nr EE Er 
- G 8 6 2 7 
- = „ , g 3 


16 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


none but the ſocicty itſelf, or at leaſt (which is the 


ſame thing) to thoſe whom the ſociety by common 
conſent has authoriſed thereunto. i 


Some perhaps may object, that no ſuch ſociety 
can be faid to be a true church, unleſs it have in it a 


biſhop, or preſbyter, with ruling authority derived 
from the very apoſtles, and continued down unto the 


preſent times by an uninterrupted ſucceſſion. 


Jo theſe I anſwer, in the firſt place, Let them 
ſhew me the edict by which Chriſt has impoſed that 


law upon his church. And let not any man think me 
impertinent, if in a thing of this conſequence, I re- 


quire that the terms of that edict be very expreſs and 
poſitive; for the promiſe he has made us, that © where- 
© ſoever two or three are gathered together in his name, 
© he will be in the midſt of them, (Matt. xviii. 20.) 


| ſeems to imply the contrary. Whether ſuch an aſ- 
ſembly want any thing neceſſary to a true church, 
pray do you conſider. Certain I am, that nothing 
can be there wanting unto the ſalvation of ſouls ; 
which is ſufficient to our purpoſe. _ 


Next, Pray obſerve how great have always been 


the diviſions amongſt even thoſe who lay ſo much ſtreſs 
upon the divine inſtitution, and continued ſucceſſion 
of a certain order of rulers in the church. Now their 
very diſſention unavoidably puts us upon a neceſſity 


of deliberating, and conſequently allows a liberty of 


chooſing that which upon conſideration we prefer. 


And in the laſt place, J conſent that theſe men 


have a ruler of their church, eſtabliſhed by ſuch a long 
ſeries of ſucceſſion as they judge neceflary, provided 


I may have liberty at the ſame time to join myſelf 


to 


5 2 * AY oc. 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 1 7 


to that ſociety, in which I am perſuaded thoſe things 
are to be found which are neceffary to the ſalva- 
tion of my ſoul. In this manner eccleſiaſtical liber- 
ty will be preſerved on all fides, and no man will have 
a legiſlator impoſed upon him but whom himſelf has 


choſen. . 


But fince men are ſo ſolicitous about the true 
church, I would only afk them here by the way, if it he 
not more agreeable to the church of Chriſt, to make 
the conditions of her communion conſiſt in ſuch things, 
and fuch things only, as the holy Spirit has, in the 
holy ſcriptures, declared in expreſs words to be neceſ- 


ſary to ſalvation? I aſk, I fay, whether this be not 


more agreeable to the church of Chriſt, than for men 
to impoſe their own inventions and interpretations 
upon others, as if they were of divine authority, and to 
eſtabliſh, by eccleſiaſtical laws, as abſolutely necceffary 
to the profeſſion of Chriſtianity, ſuch things as the 
holy ſcriptures do either not mention, or at leaſt not 
expreſsly command? Whoſoever requires thoſe things 
in order to eceleſiaſtical communion, which Chriſt 
does not require in order to lite eternal, he may per- 
haps indeed conſtitute a ſociety accomodated to his 
own opinion, and his own advantage; but how that 
can be called the church of Chriſt, which is eftabliſh- 
ed upon laws that are not his, and which excludes 
ſuch perſons from its communion as he will one day 
receive into the kingdom of heaven, I underſtand 
not. But this being not a proper place to enquire 
into the marks of the true church, I will only mind 
2 «thoſe that contend ſo earneſtly for the decrees of their 
-own ſociety, and that cry out continually, © the church, 
© the church,” with as much noiſe, and perhaps upon 
the ſame principle, as the Epheſian filverſmiths did 


for their Diana: this, I ſay, I defire to mind them 


of 


+ wg oe beige Oo 


— — . 2 td oath ode - 
A » , 


18 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


of, that the goſpel freq wage declares that the truc 
_ diſciples of Chriſt muſt ſu 


force others by fire and ſword to embrace her faith 
and doctrine, I could never yet find in any of the 
books of the New Teſtament. 


The end of a religious ſociety (as has already been 
ſaid) 1s the public worſhip of God, and by means 


thereof the acquiſition of eternal life. All diſcipline 
_ ought therefore to tend to that end, and all ecclefiaſ- 


tical laws to be thereunto confined. Nothing ought 


nor can be tranſacted in this ſociety, relating to the 


poſſeſſion of civil and worldly goods. No force is 
here to be made uſe of upon any occaſion whatſoever ; 
for force belongs wholly to the civil magiſtrate, and 
and the poſſeſſion of all outward goods is ſubject to 
His juriſdiction. TE e e 


But it may be aſked, by int mens: chan ſhall 1 
eccleſiaſtical laws be eſtabliſhed, if they muſt be thus 


deſtitute of all compulſive power? I anſwer, they 
muſt be eſtabliſhed by means ſuitable to the nature of 
ſuch things, whereof the external profeſſion and ob- 
- ſervation, if not proceeding from a thorough convic- 


tion and approbation of the mind, is altogether uſeleſs * 
and unprofitable. The arms by which the members 
of this ſociety are to be kept within their duty, are 
exhortations, admonitions, and advices. If by theſe 

means the offenders will not be reclaimed, and the 
erroneous convinced, there remains nothing farther to 
be done, but that ſuch ſtubborn and obſtinate perſons, : 

who give no ground to hope for their reformation, | 

| ſhould be caſt out and ſeparated from the ſociety. !! 
This is the laſt and utmoſt force of eccleſiaſtical au- | 

thority. No other puniſhment can thereby be he : 

T | . 2 


er perſecution: but that 
the church of Chriſt ſhould perſecute others, and 


TP 


222 Us ME 


ww vw vY ts WS WW vw 


ww . VU. TD _ Oo * 


. 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 19 


ed, than that the relation ceaſing between the body 


and the member which is cut off, the perſon ſo con- 
demned ceaſes to be a part of that church. | 


| Theſe things being thus determined, let us en- 


quire, in the next place, how far the duty of tolera- 
tion extends, and what is required from every one by 


kt; * 


And firſt, I hold, That no chureh is bound, by 
the duty of toleration, to retain any ſuch perſon in 
her boſom, as, after admonition, continues obſtinate- 


ly to offend againſt the laws of the ſociety : for theſe 
being the condition of communion, and the bond 
of the ſociety ; if the breach of them were permitted 
without any animadverſion, the ſociety would imme- 
diately be thereby diſſolved. But nevertheleſs, in all 
ſuch caſes, care is to be taken that the ſentence of 
excommunication, and the execution thereof, carry 
with it no rough uſage of word or action, whereby 
the ejected perſon may anywiſe be damnified in body 
or eſtate. For all force (as has often been ſaid) be- 


-_ only to the magiſtrate; nor ought any private 
1 I 

defence againſt unjuſt violence. Excommunication 
neither does, nor can deprive the excommunicated per- 
ſon of any of thoſe civil goods that he formerly poſſeſ- 


ons, at any time, to uſe force, unleſs it be in ſelf- 


ſed, All thoſe things belong to the civil government, 


and are under the magiſtrate's protection. The whole 


force of excommunication conſiſts only in this, that 


the reſolution of the ſociety in that repect being de- 
clared, the union that was between the body and 
ſome member comes thereby to be diſſolved; and that 
relation ceaſing, the participation of ſome certain 
things, which the ſociety communicated to its mem- 
bers, and unto which no man has any civil right, 


6 | comes 


no 4 Letter concerning Toleration. 


comes alſo to ceaſe: for there is no civil injury done 
unto the excommunicated, by the church miniſ- 
ter's refuſing him that bread and wine, in the cele- 
bration of the Lord's ſupper, which was not bought 
with his, but other men's money. e 


Secondly, No private perſon has any right, in any 
manner, to prejudice another perſon in his civil en- 
joyments, becauſe he is of another church or religion. 
All the rights and franchiſes that belong to him as a 
man, or as a denizen, are inviolably to be preſerv- 
ed to him. Theſe are not the bufineſs of religion. 

No violence nor injury is to be offered him, whether 
he be chriſtian or pagan. Nay, we muſt not con- 
tent ourſelves with the narrow meaſures of bare 
zuſtice ; charity, bounty, and liberality muſt be added 
to it. I his the goſpel enjoins ; this reaſon directs ; 
and this that natural fellowſhip we are born into re- 
quires of us. If any man err from the right way, it 
is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor there- 
fore art thou to puniſh him in the things of this life, 
becauſe thou ſuppoſeſt he will be miſerable in that 


— 


which is to come. 


What I ſay concerning the mutual toleration of 
private perſons differing from one another in religion, 
1 underſtand alſo of particular churches, which ſtand 
as it were in the ſame relation to eaeh other as pri- 
vate perſons among themſelves; nor has any one of 
them any manner of juriſdiction over any other, no 
not even when the civil magiſtrate (as it ſometimes 
happens) comes to be of this or the other com- 
munion. For the civil government can give no new 
right to the church, nor the church to the civil go- 
vernment : fo that whether the magiſtrate join him- 
Telt to any church, or ſeparate from it, the church 
Oo 0 remains 


4 Letter concerning Taleration. 21 


remains always as it was before, a free and voluntary 
ſociety. It neither acquires the power of the ſword 
by the magiſtrate's coming to it, nor does it loſe the 
right of inſtruction and excommunication by his going 
from it. This is the fundamental and immutable 
right of a ſpontaneous ſociety, that it has power to 
remove any of its members who tranſgreſs the rules 
of its inſtitution; but it cannot, by the acceſſion of 
any new members, acquire any right of juriſdiction 
over thoſe that are not joined with it. And therefore 
peace, equity, and friendſhip, are always mutually 
to be obſerved by particular churches, in the fame 
manner as by private perſons, without any pretence 
of ſuperiority or juriſdiction over one another. 


That the thing may be made yet clearer by an ex- 
ample, let us ſuppoſe two churches, the one of Armi- 
nians, the other of Calviniſts, reſiding in the city of 
Conſtantinople: will any one ſay, that either of theſe 
churches has a right to deprive the members of the 
other of their eſtates and liberty, (as we ſee practiſed 
elſewhere) becauſe of their differing from it in ſome 
doctrines or ceremonies ; whilſt the Turks, in the mean 
while, filently ſtand by, and laugh to fee with what 
inhuman cruelty Chriftians thus rage againſt Chriſ- 
tians? But if one of theſe churches hath this power 
of treating the other ill, I aſk which of them it is to 
whom that power belongs, and by what right? It 
will be anſwered undoubtedly, that it is the orthodox 
church which has the right of authority over the er- 
roneous and heretical. This is, in great and ſpeci- 
ous words, to ſay juſt nothing at all: [ok every church 
is orthodox to itfelf ; to athers, erroneous or heretical. 
Whatſoever any church believes, it believes to be 
true, and the contrary thereto it pronounces to be 
error: ſo that the controverſy between theſe churches 
3 IE EE”, 8 5 about 


22 A Letter concerning Tolkralion. 


about the truth of their doctrines, and the purity ef 


their worſhip; is on both ſides equal; nor is there 


any judge, either at Conſtantinople, or elſewhere up- 
on the earth, by whoſe ſentence it can be determined. 


The deciſion of that queſtion belongs only to the ſu- 
preme Judge of all men, to whom alſo alone belongs 
the puniſhment of the erroneous. In the mean while, 
let thoſe men conſider how heincoufly they ſin, who, 


adding injuſtice, if not to their error, yet certainly 
to their pride, do raſhly and arrogantly take upon 
them to miſuſe the ſervants of another maſter, who 


are not at all accountable to them. 


Nay farther, if it could be manifeſt which of theſe 
two diflenting churches were in the right way, there 
would not accrue thereby to the orthodox any right of 
deſtroying the other ; for churches have neither any 
juriſdiction in worldly matters, nor are fire and ſword 


any proper inſtruments wherewith to convince men's 
minds of error, and inform them of the truth. Let us 


ſuppoſe, nevertheleſs, that the civil magiſtrate inclin- 


ed to favour one of them, and to put his ſword into 


their hands, that (by his confent) they might chaſtiſe 


the diſſenters as they pleaſed ; will any man ſay, that 
any right can be derived unto a Chriſtian church over 
its brethren, from a Turkiſh emperor? An infidel, 


who has himſelf no authority to puniſh Chriſtians for 


the articles of their faith, cannot confer ſuch an au- 
thority upon any ſociety of Chriſtians, nor give unto 


them a right which he has not himſelf. This would 


be the caſe at Conſtantinople ; and the reaſon of the : 
thing is the ſame in any Chriſtian kingdom. The 


civil power is the ſame in every place; nor can that 
power, in the hands of a Chriſtian prince, confer any 
greater authority upon the church, than in the hands 
of a heathen.z which is to ſay, juſt none at all. 


Nevertheleſs, _ 


4 Fetter concerning. Tolerution. N 23 


85 Nevertheleſs, it is worthy to be obſerved, and 


lamented, that the moſt violent of theſe defenders of 


the truth, the oppoſers of errors, the exclaimers a- 


gainſt fchiſm, do hardly ever let looſe this their zeal 
for God with which they are ſo warmed and inflam- 
ed, unleſs where they have the civil magiſtrate on 


their ſide: but ſo ſoon as ever court-favour has given 


them the better end of the ſtaff, and they begin to 
feel themſelves the ſtronger, then preſently peace and 
charity are to be laid aſide; otherwiſe, they are reli- 
giouſly to be obſerved. Where they have not power 
to carry on perſecution, and to become maſters, there 


they deſire to live upon fair terms, and preach up to- 


leration. When they are not ſtrengthened with the 
civil power, then they can bear moft patiently and 

unmovedly the contagion of idolatry, ſuperſtition, and 
| hereſy in their neighbourhood ; of which, on other 
occaſions, the intereſt of religion makes them to be 
extremely apprehenſive. They do not forwardly at- 
tack thoſe errors which are in faſhion at court, or are 
countenanced by the government. Here they can be 
content to ſpare their arguments; which yet (with 
their leave) is the only right method of propagating 
truth ; which has no ſuch way of prevailing, as when 


ſtrong arguments and good reaſon are joined with the 


| ſoftneſs of civility and good ufage. 


Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither fingle perſons . 


nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have 


any juſt title to invade the eivil rights and worldly 


goods of each other upon pretence of religion. "Thoſe 
that are of another opinion, would do well to conſi- 
der with themſelves how pernicious a ſeed of diſcord 


and war, how powerful a provocation to endleſs ha- 


treds, rapines, and flaughters, they thereby: furniſh 


unto mankind, - No peace and. ſecurity, no not ſo 
£27 5 5 ee much 


r 


. it PEEP Ee KR 


. - * 
. - 
G "Wh ctr id l 2 nel ** 4 
f 22 * 2 A 8+ % . Vo — — 


1 
6; 


— 
8 7 2 = PROT : 
— be 


L AAS <a », 


„ 


24 A Letter concerning Toleratiait. 


much as common friendſhip, can ever be eftabliſhed 
or preſerved amongſt men, ſo long as this opinion 


prevails, That dominion is founded in grace, and 
* that religion is to be propagated by force of arms.” 


In the third place, let us ſee what the duty of 


toleration requires from thoſe who are diſtinguiſhed ; 
from the reſt of mankind {from the Laity, as they 


pleaſe to call us) by ſome ecclefiaſtical character and 
office ; whether they be biſhops, prieſts, preſbyters, 


miniſters, or however dignified or diſtinguiſhed. It 


is not my buſineſs to enquire here into the original of 
the power or dignity of the clergy. This only I ſay, 
that whence ſoever their authority be ſprung, ſince it 


is eccleſiaſtical, it ought to be confined within the 
bounds of the church, nor can it in any manner be 


extended to civil affairs ; becauſe the church itſelf is 

a thing abſolutely ſeparate and diftin from the com- 
monwealth : the boundaries on both ſides are fixed 
and immoveable. He jumbles heaven and earth to- 
gether, the things moſt remote and oppoſite, who 
mixes theſe ſocieties, which are in their original, end, 
buſineſs, and in every thing, perfectly diſtinct, and 
infinitely different from each other. No man, there- 
fore, with whatſoever eceleſiaſtical office he be digni- 
fied, can deprive another man that is not of his 
church and faith, either of liberty, or of any part of 


his worldly goods, upon the account of that diffe- 


ence which is between them in religion: for whatever 
is not lawful to the whole church, cannot, by any 
eccleſiaſtical right, become lawful to any of its mem- 


But this is not all: it is not enough that eccleſi- 
aſtical men abſtain from violence and rapine, and all 
manner of perſecution. He that pretends to be a 

, 7 ſucceſſor 


A Letter concerning Toloration, 25 


ſaccefſor of the apoſtles, and takes upon him the of- 


fice of teaching, is obliged alſo to admoniſh his hear- 
ers of the duties of peace and good-will towards all 
men, as well towards the erroneous as the orthodox; 
towards thoſe that differ from them in faith and wor- 
ſhip, as well as towards thoſe that agree with them 


; therein. And he ouglit induſtriouſly to exhort all 


men, whether private perſons or magiſtrates, (if any 
ſuch there be in his church) to charity, meeknels, 
and toleration ; and dilligently endeavour to allay and 


' temper all that heat and unreaſonable averſeneſs of 
mind, which either any man's fiery zeal for his own 


ſect, or the craft of others, has kindled againſt diſ- 
ſenters. I will not undertake to repreſent how happy 
and how great would be the fruit, both in church and 
ſtate, if the pulpits every where ſounded with this 
_ doctrine of peace and toleration ; leſt I ſhould ſeem 
to reflect too ſeverely upon thoſe men whoſe dignity 


I! defire not to detract from, nor would have it dimi- 


niſhed either by others or themſelves : but this I ſay, 
that thus it ought to be. And if any one that pro- 
feſſes himſelf to be a miniſter of the word of God, 
a preacher of the goſpel of peace, teach otherwiſe, 
he either underſtands not, or neglects the buſineſs of 


bis calling, and ſhall one day give an account there- 


of unto the Prince of Peace. If Chriſtians are to be 
admoniſhed that they abſtain from all manner of re- 
venge, even after repeated provocations and multipli- 
ed injuries, how -much more ought they who ſuffer 
nothing, who have had no harm done them, forbear 
violence, and abſtain from all manner of ill uſage to- 
wards thoſe from whom they have received none ? 
This caution and temper they ought certainly to uſe 
towards thoſe who mind only their own buſineſs, and 
are ſolicitous for nothing but that (whatever men 
think of them) they may worſhip God in that man- 

oh | ner 


26 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


ner which they are perſuaded is acceptable to him, 


and in which they have the ſtrongeſt hopes of eternal 


ſalvation. In private domeſtic affairs, in the manage- 

ment of eſtates, in the conſervation of bodily health, 

every man may confider what ſuits his own conveni- 

ency, and follow what courſe he likes beſt. No man 
complains of the ill management of his neighbour's 
affairs. No man is angry with another” for an error 
committed in ſowing his land, or in marrying his 
danghter. Nobody corrects a ſpend-thrift for eonſum- 
ing his ſubſtance in taverns. Let any man pull down, 
or build, or make whatſoever expences he pleaſes, 
nobody murmurs, nobody controls him; he has his 


liberty: but if any man do not frequent the church, 


if he do not there conform his behaviour exactly to the 


accuſtomed ceremonies, or if he bring not his chil- 
dren to be initiated in the ſacred myſteries of this or 


the other congregation ; this immediately cauſes an 
uproar, and the neighbourhood is filled with noiſe 


and clamour, every one is ready to be the avenger of 


ſo great a crime ; and the zealots hardly have patience 
to refrain from violence and rapine ſo long till the 
cauſe be heard, and the poor man be, according to 
form, condemned to the loſs of liberty, goods, or 
life. Oh that our eccleſiaſtical orators, of every ſe, 


would apply themſelves with all the ſtrength of argu- 
ment that they are able, to the confounding of men's 
. _ _ errors, but let them ſpare their perſons. Let them 


not ſupply their want of reaſons with the inſtruments 
of force, which belong to another juriſdiction, and do 
ill become a churchman's hands. Let them not call 
in the magiſtrate's authority to the aid of their elo- 
quence or learning, leſt, perhaps, while they pretend 
only love for the truth, this their intemperate zeal, 
breathing nothing but fire and ſword, betray their 
ambition, and ſhew that what they deſire is temporal 
: ie ion: 


A Lelter concerning Toleration. 27 


dominion: for it will be very difficult to perſuade 
men of ſenſe, that he who with dry eyes, and ſatiſ- 
faction of mind, can deliver his brother unto the ex- 
ecutioner to be burnt alive, does ſincerely and hearti- 
ly concern himſelf to ſave that brother from the flames 
of hell in the world to come. Sie 


In the laſt place, let us now conſider what is the 
magiſtrate's duty in the buſineſs of toleration ; which 
certainly is very conſiderable. | 


Me have already proved, that the care of ſouls 
does not belong to the magiſtrate. Not a magiſterial 

care, I mean, (if I may ſo call it) which conſiſts in 
preſcribing by laws, and compelling by puniſhments : 
but a charitable care, which conſiſts in teaching, ad- 
moniſhing, and perſuading, cannot be denied unto 
any man. The care therefore of every man's ſoul 
belongs unto himſelf, and is to be left unto himſelf. 
But what if he neglect the care of his ſoul? I anſwer, 
what if he neglect the care of his health, or of his 
_ eſtate ; which things are nearlier related to the govern- 


ment of the magiſtrate than the other? Will the ma- 


giſtrate provide, by an expreſs law, that ſuch a one 
ſhall not become poor, or ſick? Laws provide, as 
much as is poſlible, that the goods and health of ſub- 
| Jes be not injured by the fraud or violence of others; 
they do not guard them from the negligence or ill 
-huſbandry of the poſſeſſors themſelves. No man can 
be forced to be rich or healthful whether he will or no. 
Nay, God himſelf will not ſave men againſt their 
wills. Let us ſuppoſe, however, that ſome prince 
was defirous to force his ſubjects to accumulate 
_ riches, or to preſerve the health and ſtrength of their 
bodies; ſhall it be provided by law, that they muſt 
cConſult none but Roman phyſicians? and ſhall every 

50 N one 


= A Letter concerning Tolerution. 


one be bound to live according to their preſcriptions ? 


What! ſhall no potion, no broth be taken, but what 


is prepared either in the Vatican, ſuppoſe, or in a 


Geneva ſhop? Or, to make theſe ſubjects rich, ſhall 


they all be obliged by law to hecome merchants, or mu- 


ſicians ? Or, ſhall every one turn victualler, or ſmith, 


becauſe there are ſome that maintain their families 
plentifully, and grow rich in thoſe profeſſions? But 

it may be faid, there are a thouſand: ways to wealth, 

but only one way to heaven. It is well ſaid indeed; 


eſpecially by thoſe that plead for compelling 'men in- 


to this or the other way; for if there were ſeveral 
ways that lead thither, there would not be ſo much 
as a pretence left for compulſion. But now, if I be 


marching on with my utmoſt vigour, in that way 


which, according to the ſacred geography, leads ſtraight 


to Jeruſalem; why am I beaten and ill uſed by 
others, becauſe, perhaps, I wear no buſkins ; becauſe 
my hair is not of the right cut ; becauſe, perhaps, I 


have not been dipt in the right faſhion ; becauſe I eat 

fleſh upon the road, or ſome other food which agrees 
with my ſtomach ; becauſe I avoid certain bye-ways, 
which ſeem unto: me to lead into briars or precipices ; 


becauſe, amongſt the ſeveral paths that are in the 
ſame road, I chuſe that to walk in which ſeems to 
be the ſtraighteſt and cleaneſt ; becauſ; I avoid to 
keep company with ſome travellers that are leſs grave, 
and others that are more ſour than they ought to be; 


or, in fine, becauſe I follow a guide that either is, or 
is not clothed in white, and crowned-with a mitre ? 
Certainly, if we conſider right, we ſhall find that, 
for the moſt part, they are ſuch frivolous things as 


theſe, that (without any prejudice to religion, -or the 
ſalvation of ſouls, if not accompanied with ſuperſti- 
tion or hypocriſy) might either be obſerved or omitted ; 
1 fay they are ſuch like Things as theſe, which breed 


implacable 


r , oe. os. . . . . os ̃⅛²˖ẽßrg ⅛˙—gegd ia . ̃—vt 7 -w-t; Ü . ²˙ mM 


A Letter concerning Taleration. 29 
implacable enmities amongſt chriſtian brethren, who 
are all agreed in the ſubſtantial and truly fundamental 
part of religion. | | 2 


But let us grant unto theſe zealots, who condemn 


all things that are not of their mode, that from theſe 


circumſtances ariſe different ends. What ſhall we 


conclude from thence? There is only one of theſe 


which is the true way to eternal happineſs. But in 
this great variety of ways that men follow, it is till 
doubted which is this right one. Now neither the 
care of the commonwealth, nor the right of enat- 
ing laws, does diſcover this way that leads to heaven 
more certainly to the magiſtrate, than every private 


man's ſearch and ſtudy diſcovers it unto himfelf. I 
have a weak body, ſunk under a languiſhing diſeaſe, 


for which (I ſuppoſe) there is one only remedy, but 


that unknown : does it therefore belong unto the ma- 


giſtrate to preſcribe to me a remedy, becauſe there is 
but one, and becauſe it is unknown ? Becauſe there 
is but one way for me to eſcape death, will it there- 
fore be ſafe for me to do whatſoever the magiſtrate 
ordains? 'Thoſe things that every man ought ſincere- 
ly to enquire into himſelf, and by meditation, ſtudy, 
ſearch, and his own endeavours, attain the knowledge 
of, cannot be looked upon as the peculiar poſſeſſion 


of any one ſort of men. Princes indeed are born 


| ſuperior unto other men in power, but in nature 
equal. Neither the right, nor the art of ruling, does 


neceſſarily carry along with it the certain knowledge 


of other things ; and leaſt of all of the true religion. 
For if it were ſo, how could it come to paſs that the 
lords of the earth ſhould differ ſo vaſtly as they do 
in religious matters ? But let us grant that it is pro- 
bable the way to eternal life may be better known 
by a prince than by his A or at leaſt, that in 
GE OR 0 5 +. his 


. 
- 
F Y 
"= 
F + 
k | 
7 4 
pl 
14 
* 1 - 
dy 7 
b a 
- £3 
* 
* 
. h 
* 
1. 
: 1 
1 
' 
P 


- 46. 0 ele 2. - ooo >.” k 
rn . 


4" 594,148 


S 


en Care arr ec 
N 


—— 
- 


80 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


this incertitude of things, the ſafeſt and moſt com- 
modious way for private perſons is to follow his dic- 


tates. You will ſay, what then? If he ſhould bid 
you follow merchandiſe for your livelihood, would 
you decline that.courſe for fear it ſhould not ſucceed ? 
i anſwer, I would turn merchant upon the prince's 


command, becauſe, in caſe I ſhould have ill ſucceſs 


in trade, he is abundantly able to make up my loſs 


ſome other way. If it be true, as he pretends, that 
ne defires I ſhould thrive and grow rich, he can ſet 


me up again when unſucceſsful voyages have broke 


me. But this is not the caſe in the things that regard 


the life to come. If there I take a wrong courſe, if 
in that reſpect I am once undone; it is not in the 
magiſtrate's power to repair my loſs, to eaſe my ſuf- 
fering, or to reſtore me in any meaſure, much leſs 


entirely, to a good eſtate. What ſecurity can be given 
tor the kingdom of heaven ? „„ 


Perhaps ſome will ſay, that they do not ſuppoſe 
this infallible judgement, that all men are bound to 


follow in the affairs of religion, to be in the civil 
magiſtrate, but in the church. What the church has 
determined, that the civil magiſtrate orders to be 


obſerved ; and he provides by his authority, that no- 
body ſhall either act or believe, in the buſineſs of 
religion, otherwiſe than the church teaches: fo 


that the judgment of thoſe things is in the church. 


The magiſtrate himſelf yields obedience thereunto, 
and requires the like obedience from others. I an- 
ſwer, who ſees not how frequently the name of the 
church, which was ſo venerable in the time of the 
apoſtles, has been made uſe of to throw duſt in peo- 
ple's eyes, in following ages? But, however, in the 
preſent caſe it helps us not. The one only narrow 
Way which leads to heaven is not better — 


J Wa as w-vz cc. cus yr es re ee Eo c ic 


as. Sr - Ma ; "et A * 


i SE. A * 


ever a jot the fafer for me to join either unto the one 


4 Teiler concerning Toleratioi. 3 


the magiſtrate than to private perſons; and therefore 


I cannot ſafely take him for my guide, who may pro- 
bably be as eee the way as myſelf, and who 
certainly is leſs concerned for my falvation than I my- 
ſelf am. Amongſt ſo many kings of the Jews, how 


many of them were there whom any Iſraelite, thus 
blindly following, had not fallen into idolatry, and 


thereby into deſtruction ? Yet nevertheleſs, you bid 


me be of good courage, and tell me that all is now fate 
and ſeeure, becauſe the magittrate does not now enjoin 


the obfervance of his own decrees in matteis of reli- 
gion, but only the decrees of the church. Of what 


church I befeech you? Of that certainly which likes 
him beſt. As if he that compels me by laws and 


penalties to enter into this or the other church, did 
not interpoſe his own judgment in the matter. What 


difference is there whether he lead me himſelf, or. 
deliver me over to be lead by others? I depend both 


ways upon his will, and it is he that determines both 
ways of my eternal ſtate. Would an Iſraelite, that 


had worſhipped Baal upon the command. of his king, 
have been in any better condition, becauſe ſomebody 


had told him that the king ordered nothing in religi- 


on upon his own-head, nor commanded any thing to 
be done by his ſubjects in divine worſhip, but what 


was approved by the counſel of prieſts, and declared 
to be of divine right by the doctors of their church 2 


If the religion of any church become therefore true 
and ſaving, becauſe the heads of that ſect, the pre- 


lates and prieſts, and thoſe: of that tribe, do all of 


them, with all their might, extol and praiſe it; what 


religion can ever be accounted erroneous, falſe and 
defiructive? I am doubtful concerning the doctrine 
of the Socinians, I am ſuſpicious of the way of wor- 
ſhip practiſed by the Papiſts, or Lutherans ; will it be 


B 


* 
4 
* 
Lt 
7 
25 
4 
0 
. 
* 
7 
. 
1 5 
5 
* 
s 
= 


— nt nn hat — — — —— —ͤ—ͤ— avi eee . 
Cov UNS "ae > et <p — => — —— - — — rt = a — A 4, af cet 8 
— GA N — * Nee e " 8 CT Ae — Fr 
i 8 1 4 y "OT Fe 4 : ; 


432 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


or the other of thoſe churches, upon the magiſtrate's 
command, "becauſe he commands nothing in religion 
but by the authority and counſel of the doctors of the 
But to ſpeak the truth, we muſt acknowledge that 
the church (if a convention of clergymen, — 
canons, muſt be called by that name) is for the moſ 
part more apt to be influenced by the court, than the 


court by the church. How the church was under the h 1 


vieiſſitude of orthodox and Arian emperors, is very 
well known. Or, if thoſe things be too remote, the 
Engliſnh hiſtory affords us freſher examples, in the 


reigns of Henry VIII. Edward VI. Mary, and Eliza- 


beth, how eafily and ſmoothly the clergy changed their. 
decrees, their articles of faith, their form of worthip, 
every thing, according to the inclination of thoſe _ 
Kings and queens, Yet were thoſe kings and queens 
of ſuch different minds, in point of religion, and. 
enjoined thereupon ſuch different things, that no man 
in his wits (J had almoſt ſaid none but an atheift) 
will preſume to ſay that any fincere and upright wor- 
ſhipper of God could; with a ſafe conſcience, obey 
their ſeveral decrees. To conclude, it is the fame 
thing whether a king that preſcribes laws to another 
man's religion, pretend to do it by his own. judg- 


ment, or by the eceleſiaſtical authority and advice of 


others. The deciſions. of. churchmen, whoſe diffe- 
rences and diſputes are ſufficiently known, cannot be 
any founder or ſafer, than his. Nor can all their 

roffrages Joined together add any new ſtrength unto 
the civil power. Though this alſo muſt be taken 
notice of, that princes ſeldom have any regard to the 
ſufirages of eccleſiaſtics that are not fayourers of their 
own faith and way of worſhip. _ I 


But 


* 


Letter concerning Toleratin. E 


But, after all, the principal conſideration, and 
which abſolutely determines this controverſy, is this; 
although the magiſtrate's opinion in religion be ſound, 
and the way that he appoints be truly evangelical, 


yet if I be not thoroughly perſuaded thereof in my 
own mind, there-will be no ſafety for me in follow- 


ing it. No way whatſoever that I ſhall walk in, a- 
gainſt the dictates of my conſcience, will ever bring 


me to the manſions: of the bleſſed. I may grow rich 


by an art that I take not delight in; I may be cured 
of ſome diſeaſe. by remedies that I have not faith 
in; but I cannot be ſaved by a religion that I diſ- 


truſt, and by a worſhip that I abhor. It is in vain for 
an unbeliever to take up the outward ſhew of ano- 


ther man's profeſſion. Faith only, and inward fin- 
cerity, are the things that procure acceptance with 


God. The moſt likely and moſt approved remedy 


can have no effect upon the patient, if his ſtomach ' 
reject it as ſoon as taken: and you will in vain cram 


a-medicine down a ſick man's throat, which his par- 
ticular conſtitution will be ſure to turn into poiſons 
In a word, whatſoever may be doubtful in religion, 


yet this at leaſt is certain, that no religion, which L. 
believe not to be true, can be either true, or profit- 
able unto me. In vain therefore do princes compel 


their ſubjects to come into their church-communion, 


under pretence of ſaving their ſouls. If they be- 
lieve, they will come of their own accord; if they 


belive not, their coming will nothing avail them. 
How great foever, in fine, may be the pretence of 


good-will and charity, and concern for the ſalvation 
of men's ſouls, men cannot be forced to be ſaved, 
whether they will or no. And therefore, when all is 


done, they mult be left to their own conſciences. 


— 


D 2 | Having | 


CNRS re de 


34 A Letter concerning Tolerabion. 


7. Having thus at length freed men from all domi- 
nion over one another. in matters of religion, let us 
now conſider what they are to do. All men know 
and acknowledge that God ought to be publicly 
worſhipped; why otherwiſe do they compel one 
another unto the publie aſſemblies? Men therefore, 
conſtituted in this liberty, are to enter into ſome re- 
ligious ſociety, that they may meet together, not 
only for mutual edification, but to on to the world 
that they worſhip God, and offer unto. his divine 
majeſty ſuch ſervice as they themſelves are not 
aſhamed of, and ſuch as they think not unworthy of 
him, nor unacceptable to him: and finally, that by. 
the purity of doctrine, holineſs of life, and decent 
form of worſhip, they may draw others unto the 
love of the true religion, and perform ſuch other. 
things in religion as cannot be done by each private 
man apart. fr rt tn Too” 


Theſe religious ſocieties J call - churches; and 
theſe, I. ſay, the magiſtrate ought to tolerate : for. 
the buſineſs of thefe aſſemblies of the people is no- 
thing but what is lawful for every man in parti- 
cular to take care of; I mean, the falvation of their. 
ſouls. Nor in this caſe is there any difference be- 
tween the national church and other ſeparated con- 
gregations. But as in every church there are two. 
things eſpecially to be conſidered, © the outward form 


and rites of public worſhip, and the doArines and 


«. articles of faith, theſe things muſt be handled each _ 
diſtinctly, that ſo the whole matter of toleration may 


the more clearly be underſtood. 


Concerning outward worſhip, I. fay, in the firſt 

place, that the magiſtrate has no power to enforce by 
law, either in his own church, or much leſs in ano- 

| | £ | . | | : ther, 


A Letter. concerning Toleraticn. 35 


cher, the uſe of any rites or ceremonies' whatſoever. 
in the worſhip of God. And this not only becauſe - 


theſe churches are free ſocieties, but becauſe whatſo- 


ever is practiſed in the worſhip of God, is only ſo 
far juſtifiable as it is believed by thoſe that practiſe 


it to be acceptable unto him. Whatſoever is not 


done with that aſſurance of faith, is neither well done 


in itſelf nor can it be acceptable to God. To impoſe 


ſuch things therefore upon any people, contrary to 


their own judgment, is in effect to command them 


to offend God; which, conſidering that the end of 
all religion is to pleaſe him, and that liberty is eſſen- 
tially neceſſary to that end, appears to be abſurd be- 


yond expreſſion ff 1, 


Hut, perhaps, it may be.concluded from hence, 
That I deny unto the magiſtrate all manner of 
© power about indifferent things; which, if it be not 


granted, the whole ſubject matter of law- making 


* is taken away.“ No; I readily grant that indiffe- 
rent things, and perhaps none but ſuch, are ſubject- 
ed to the legiſlative power. But it does not therefore 
follow, that the magiſtrate may ordain whatſoever. 
he pleaſes concerning any thing that is indifferent. 
The public good is the rule and meaſure of all law-. 
making. If a thing be not uſeful to the common 
wealth, though it be never ſo indifferent, it may not 


_ preſently be eſtabliſhed by law. 


But, further, things never ſo indifferent in their 
own nature, when they are brought into the church. 
and worſhip of God, are removed out of the reach 
of the magiſtrate's juriſdiction ; becauſe, in that uſe, _ 


they have no connexion at all with civil affairs. 
The only buſineſs of the church is the ſalvation of 
ſouls; and it no ways concerns the common- wealth, 


2 an 


, . : N N 2 N. „ 3 oe r ex. 2 22 
5 « 1 7 * ” — * 7 br Jo 1 pu - 
Ty. * * 83 — enn — , SFr x * . = e wiki 8 * 
* rere er" IIS r n - 


— 23 „ = . *** * 
> x 2 * A E Let 
4 2 . * a EBAY rr - 
” Wis, cob,» td 6 9 — one < : 7 Sc DA. end iy 
one * , n —— Bj ese 8 1 2 — - . - < N 
8 tones * n v - Wb N een LD Err SR CO Oe Sn OI DG. a UL et 42S 
on * 1 « 


2 PA 


0 a 


36; : A Letter concerning Tolerabion. 


or any member of it, that this or the other ceremo- 
ny be there made uſe of. Neither the uſe, nor the 
omiſſion of any ceremonies, in thoſe religious aſſem- 

blies, daes either advantage or prejudice the life, 


liberty, ot eſtate of any man. For example, let it 
be granted: that the waſhing of an infant with water 


is in itfelf an indifferent thing: let it be granted 
alſo, that if the magiſtrate underſtand ſuch waſhing 
to be profitable to the curing or preventing of any 
diſeaſe that the children are ſubje& unto, and eſteem 


the matter weighty enough to be taken care of by a 
law, in that caſe he may order it to be done. But 


will any one therefore fay, that a magiſtrate has the 
fame right to ordain, by law, that all children ſhall 
be baptized by prieſts, in the ſacred font, in order to 
the purification of their ſouls? The extreme dif- 


ference of theſe two caſes is viſible to every one at 


firſt fight. Or let us apply the laſt cafe to the child 


of a Jew, and the thing will ſpeak. itſelf ; for what 
hinders but a Chriſtian magiſtrate may have ſubjects 


that are Jews? Now, if we acknowledge that ſuch 
an injury may not be done. unto a Jew, as to compel 


him, againſt his own opinion, to practiſe in his reli- 
gion a thing that 1s in its nature indifferent ; how 


can we maintain that any thing of this kind may be 


done to a Chriſtian? 


Again, things in. their own nature indifferent 
cannot, by ary human authority, be made any part 
of the worſhip of God; for this very reaſon, be- 
cauſe they are indifferent; for ſince indifferent things 
are not capable, by any virtue of their own, to pro- 
pitiate the Deity, no human power or authority can 
confer on them ſo much dignity and excellency, as 


to enable them to do it. In the common affairs of 


life, that uſe of indifferent things which God has 
5 ah V 


Leier concerning Toleration. 37 


not forbidden, is free and lawful; and therefore in 
thoſe things human authority has. place. But it is 
not ſo in matters of religion. Things indifferent 
are not otherwiſe lawful in the worſhip, of God than 
as they are inſtituted by God himſelf; and as he, by 
ſome poſitive command, has ordained them to be 
made a part of that worſhip which he will vouchſafe 
to accept of at the hands of poor ſinful men: nor 
when an incenſed Deity ſhall aſk us, Who has re- 
quired theſe, or ſuch. like, things at your hands? 
Vill it be enough to anſwer him, that the magiſtrate 
_ eommanded them. If civil juriſdiction extended 
thus far, what might not lawfully be introduced into 
religion? What hodge-podge of ceremonies, what 
fuperſtitious inventions, built upon the magiſtrate's 
authority, might not (againſt conſcience) be impoſed. 
upon the - worſhippers of God? For the greateſt 
part of theſe ceremonies and ſuperſtitions conſiſts in 
the religious uſe of ſuch things as are in their own 
nature indifferent; nor are they finful upon any 
other account than becauſe God is not the author of 


them. The ſprinkling of water, and the uſe of of 
| bread and wine, are both in their own nature, and. 1 
in the ordinary occaſions of lite, altogether indif- 1 
ferent. Will any man therefore ſay, that theſe 1 


things could have been introduced into religion, and 
made a part of divine worſhip, if not by divine in- 


ſtitution? If any human authority or civil power 1 
could have done this, why might it not alſo enſoilRg ng 
the eating of fiſn, and drinking of ale, in the holy 4 


banquet, as a part of divine worſhip? Why not 
the ſprinkling of. the blood of beaſts in churches, 
and expiations by water or fire, and abundance more 
of this kind? But theſe things, how indifferent fo= — . 
ever they be in common uſes, when they come to be [1 
annexed unto divine worſhip, without divine au- 
ET Le CD thority 


A q * * 
. ren 7 O 4 * \ 


SS = 


—— — 
2 e 


1 Rs ry Ws v— 


HE ˙ — 


2. — FM I 


of 80-114 23 "at 
Wer 


4+ 
; 
i 
=D 
3 
* 
* 
13 
3 
271 
7 
n 


the nature and end of. worſhip. . 


2 OOO 
— = 


F . „ 4 4 od 880 CEN "0 
<a> ot ele S 4 1 Ih PII Wed gt; 4 8 why 2h — Benn — 2 : 
rn OE AS ner I get et br eG — — — . a a aw - « 2 
aw e 3 I: 


E RT INE SITY 
* re 

* r 

Lats 


38 4 Letter concerning Toleraſion. 


thority, they are as abominable to God as the ſacrĩ 


fice' of a dog. And why a dog ſo abominable? 


What difference is there between a dog and a goat, 


in reſpe& of the divine nature, equally and infinite- 


ly diſtant from all affinity with matter, unleſs it be 


that God required the uſe of the one in his worſhip, 


and not of the other? We ſee therefore that indiffe- 
rent things, how much ſoever they be under the power 
of the civil magiſtrate, yet cannot upon that pre- 
tence be introduced into religion, and impoſed uporr 
religious aſſemblies; becauſe, in the worthip of God 
they wholly ceaſe to be indifferent. He that wor- 
ſhips God, does it with a deſign to pleaſe him, and 


procure his favour; but that cannot be done by him, 
who, upon the command of another, offers unto 


God that which he knows will be diſpleaſing to 


him, becauſe not commanded by himſelf. This is 
not to pleaſe God, or appeaſe his wrath, but willing 
ty and knowingly. to provoke him, by a manifeſt 


contempt; which is a thing. abſolutely repugnant to 
But it will here be aſked; * If-nothing belonging 
© to divine worſhip be left to human diſcretion, how 


is it then that churches themſelves have the power 
©of ordering any thing about the time and place of 


© worſhip, and the like?“ To this T anſwer, that in 
religious worſhip we muſt diſtinguiſh between what 
is part of the worſhip itfelf; and what is but a cir- 


cumſtance. That is a part of the worſhip which is 


believed to be. appointed by God, and to be well- 
pleaſing to him, and therefore that is neceſſary. 
Circumſtances are ſuch things which, though in ge- 
neral they cannot be ſeparated from worſhip, yet the 


particular inſtances or modifications of them are not 
determined, and therefore they are different. Of 
| this 


* 


— "f Letter concerning Toleration. 39 


this ſort are the time and place of worſhip, the habit 


and poſture of him that worſhips. "Theſe are cir- 
cumſtances, and perfectly indifferent, where God 


has not given any expreſs command about them. 
For example, amongſt the Jews, the time and place 
of their worſhip, and the habits of thoſe that offici- 
ated in it, were not mere cireumſtances, but a part of 
the worſhip itſelf; in which, if any thing were defec- 


tive, or different from the inſtitution, they could not 


hope that it would be accepted by God. But theſe, to 
Chriſtians under the liberty of the goſpel, are mere 
circumſtances of worthip, which the prudence of 
every church may. bring into ſuch uſe as ſhall be 
Judged moſt ſubſervient to the end of order, decency, 
and edification. Though even under the goſpel 7 
thoſe who» believe the firſt or the ſeventh day to be 
ſet apart by God, and confecrated ſtill to his wor- 
ſhip, to them that portion of time is not a ſimple 
circumſtance, | but a real part of divine worſhip, 
which can neither be changed nor neglected. 


In the next place, as the magiſtrate has no pow- 


er to impoſe, by his laws, the uſe of any rites and 


ceremonies..in any church; ſo neither has he any 


power to forbid the uſe of ſuch rites and ceremonies 


as are already received, approved, and practiſed by 
any church.; becauſe, if he did fo, he would deſtroy 
the church itſelf; the end of whoſe inſtitution is 
only to worſhip God with freedom, after its own 


You will ſay, By this rule, if ſome congrega- 


< tions ſhould have a mind to ſacrifice infants, or 
(as the primitive chriſtians were falſely accuſed) 
< Juſtfully pollute themſelves in promiſcuous unclean- 
<.neſs, or practiſe any other ſuch heinous enormities, 


4 1 


* 
1 
1 3 

7 
* 
* 
13 
. 
1 
Y * 7 
"4 1 
3 
4 
1 
©: | 
S. „ 
„ 5 
L's 
"> 
15 
<2 
"2" 
: 1 
* 
4 % 
x 
”*: 
$1 
$71 
. 


r: „ - PIR — 
„ LY 


mw 
* 
AP ˖ — pornntny op 4 ron 


o — IVES * 1 
„ I. 
a 


— 


N. 
„„ 
—— APs" = 
. . ” _ 


wo nt We OT ras „eee * 
. . ES. IKE 
0 8 
— — 
Dr r 
* 9 > hob — * 


— 


40 4 Letter concerning Talerati 2 


is the magiſtrate obliged to tolerate them, becauſe 
© they are committed in a religious aſſembly ?? I an- 
ſwer, No. Theſe things are not lawful in the ordi- 
nary courſe of life, nor in any private houſe, and 
therefore neither are they ſo in the worſhip of God, 
or in any religious meeting. But indeed 1 any peo- 
ple, congregated upon account of religion, ſhould be 


deſirous to ſacrifice a calf, I deny that that ought to 
be prohibited by a law. Melibæus, whoſe calf it is, 


may lawfully kill his own calf at home, and burn 


any part of it that he thinks fit; for no injury is 


thereby done to any one, no prejudice to another 
man's goods: and for the ſame reaſon he may kill 
his calf alſo in a religious meeting. Whether the 


doing ſo be well-pleaſing to God, or no, it is their 


part to conſider that do it. The part of the ma- 


_ -giſtrate is only to take care that the commonwealth 
receive no prejudice, and that there be no injury 
done to any man, either in life or eſtate. And thus 


what may be ſpent on a feaſt, may be ſpent on a ſa- 


crifice. But if, peradventure, ſuch were the ſtate of 


things, that the intereſt of the commonwealth requi- 


red all ſlaughter of beaſts ſhould be forborn for ſome 


time, in order to the increaſing of the ſtock of cat- 


tle, that had been deſtroyed by ſome extraordinary 
murrain ; who ſees not that the magiſtrate, in ſuch a 
'caſe, may forbid all his ſubjects to kill any calves 
for any uſe whatſoever? Only it is to be obſerved, 


in this caſe, that the law is not made about a religi- 


ous, but a political matter; nor is the facrifice, but 
. The ſlaughter of calves thereby prohibited. 


By this we ſce what difference there is between 
the church and the commonwealth, Whatſoever is 


lawful in the commonwealth, cannot be prohibited 


by the magiſtrate in the church. Whatſoever is per- 
mitted unto any one of his ſubjects for their ordi- 
| nary 


A Litter concerning Taleration. — 


nary uſe, neither can, nor ought to be forbidden by 


him to any ſect of people for their religious uſes. If 


any man may lawfully take bread or wine, either ſit- 
ting or kneeling, in his own houſe, the law ought 
not to abridge him of the ſame liberty in his reli- 
gious worſhip ; though in the church the ufe of bread 
and wine be very different, and be there applied to 

the myſteries of faith, and rites of divine worſhip. 
But thoſe things that ate prejudicial to the common- 


cal of a people in their ordinary uſe, and are there- 


fore forbidden by laws, thoſe things ought not to be 
permitted to churches in their ſacred rites. Only the 
magiſtrate ought always to be very careful, that he do 
not miſuſe his authority, to the oppreſſion of any 
church, under pretence of public good. 


Tt may be ſaid, © What if a church be idolatrous, 
_ © is that alſo to be tolerated by the magiſtrate?” In 


anſwer, I aſk, What power can be given to the 


« magiſtrate for the ſuppreſſion of an idolatrous 
© church, which may not, in time and 'place, be 
© made uſe of to the ruin of an orthodox one?“ For 
ft muſt be remembered that the civil power is the 
ſame every where, and the religion of every prince 
is orthodox to himfelf. If therefore ſuch a power be 
granted unto the civil magiſtrate in ſpirituals, as that 
at Geneva (for example), he may extirpate, by vio- 
lence and blood, the religion, which ts there reputed 
idolatrous, by the fame rule another magiſtrate, in 
fome neighbouring country, may oppreſs the reform- 
cd religion, and, in India, the chriſtian. The civil 
power can either change every thing in religion, ac- 
_ cording to the prince's pleaſure, or it can change no- 
thing. Tf it be once permitted to introduce any 
thing into religion, by the means of laws and penal- 
ties, there can be no bounds put to it; but it will in 
: | the 


* „3 


— . IN EIN 


1 
- 
* 
£ 
$ 


e 


"+ 2 : 


9 
L329 
„ 


42 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


the ſame manner be lawful to alter every thing, ac- 
cording to that rule of truth which the magiſtrate has 
framed unto himfelf. No man whatſoever ought : 


therefore to be deprived of his terreſtrial enjoyments, 


upon account of his religion : not even Americans, 
ſubjected unto a Chriſtian prince, are to be puniſhed 


either in body or goods, for not embracing our faith 


and worſhip. If they are perſuaded that they pleaſe 


God in obſerving the rites of their own country, 


and that they ſhall obtain happineſs by that means, 


they are to be left unto God and themſelves. Let 


us trace this matter to the bottom. Thus it is. An 


inconſiderable and weak number of Chriſtians, deſti- 


tute of every thing, arrive in a Pagan country: theſe 
foreigners beſeech the inhabitants, by the bowels of 


humanity, that they would ſuccour them with the 


neceſſaries of life: thoſe neceſſaries are given them; 


habitations are granted; and they all join together, 
and grow up into one body of people. The Chriſ— 


tian religion, by this means, takes root in that coun- 
try, and ſpreads itſelf, but does not ſuddenly grow the 

ſtrongeſt. While things are in this condition, peace, 
friendſhip, - faith, and equal juſtice, are preſerved 
amongſt them. At length the magiſtrate becomes a 
Chriſtian, and by that means their party becomes 
the moſt powerful: then immediately all compacts 


are to be broken, all civil rights to be violated, that 


idolatry may be extirpated; and unleſs theſe innocent 


pagans, ſtrict obſervers. of the rules of equity, and 
of the law of nature, and no ways offending againſt 


the laws of the ſocicty ; I ſay, unleſs they will for- 


fake their ancient religion, and embrace a new and 


ſtrange one, they are to be turned out of the lands 
and poſſeſſions of their forefathers, and perhaps de- 
prived of life itſelf. Then at laſt it appears what 


zeal for the church, joined with the deſire of domi- 


nion 


A Letter concerning Toleration. " = 
nion is capable to produce; and how eaſily the pre- 
tence of religion, and of the care of ſouls, ſerves for 
à cloke to covetouſneſs, rapine, and ambition. 


Now, whoſoever maintains that idolatry is to be 


rooted out of any place by laws, puniſhments, fire, 


and ſword, may apply this ſtory to himſelf, For the 
reaſon of the thing is equal, both in America and 
Europe; and neither Pagans there, nor any diſſent- 
ing Chriſtians here, can, with any right, be deprived 
of their worldly goods, by the predominating faction 
of a court-church ; nor are any civil rights to be 


either changed or violated upon account of religion. 


in one place more than another. 


© But idolatry (ſay ſome) is a ſin, and therefore 


© not to be tolerated.' If they ſaid, it were therefore 
to be avoided, the inference were good. But it does 


not follow, that becauſe it is a fin, it ought therefore 
to be puniſhed by the magiſtrate. For it does not be- 


long unto the magiſtrate to make uſe of his ſword in 
puniſhing every thing, indifferently, that he takes to 
be a fin againſt God. Covetouſneſs, uncharitable- 
neſs, idleneſs, and many other things are ſins, by 
the conſent of all men, which yet no man ever faid 
were to be puniſhed by the magiſtrate : the reaſon is, 


becauſe they are not prejudicial to other men's rights, 


nor do they break the public peace of ſocieties. Nay, 
even the {ins of lying and perjury are no where puniſh- 
able by laws, unleſs in certain caſes, in which the real 
turpitude of the thing, and the offence againſt God, 
are not conſidered, but only the injury done unto 
men's neighbours, and to the commonwealth. And 
what if in another country, to a Mahometan or a Pa- 
gan prince, the Chriſtian religion ſeem falſe and offen- 
| e E 2 | five 


rt gb” 


wr IO Se —— *; 4 
I 6 OE ICE TO 
— LACS 2A Co CI DL ade ae a — 1 ee 


8 * * _ 9 — 1 N * „ 8 * — 2 — La l : —ů — 
— , ISR ITS Oo 1 ye ron . ? 2 : 
wy — 1 31 * 2 . ”—_— > g 
Wenn — * 4-6 « - 
ws - 


5 
0 
1 
x 


8 S 
CES — 


- Wh Soi AT WES OE? 8 

I a. l . 

8 * e 
A  Av7\ A yrem. ER: ew 


*. — — * 2 7 
F 
2 dk. A 
So EAI SN TSR $62 OS” . — 
r 1 oF EP 2 A — 
Tr.. ˙¹·.m WED I ET gs 
33 — & K 


44 4 Letter concerning Toleration. 


ſive to God , May not the Chriſtians, for the ſame rea- 


ſon, and after the fame manner be extirpated there? 


But it may be urged further, That by the law 
© of Moſes, idolaters were to be rooted out.“ True 
indeed, by the law of Mofes, but that is not obliga- 
tory to us Chriſtians. | No body pretends that every 
thing, generally enjoined by the law of Moſes, ought 
to be practiſed by Chriſtians. But there is nothing 
more frivolous than that common diſtinction of mo- 
ral, judicial, and ceremonial law, which men ordi- 
narily make uſe of: for no poſitive law whatſoe ver 


can oblige any people, but thoſe to whom it is given. 
Hear, O Ifrael!' ſufficiently reſtrains the obliga- 
tion of the law of Moſes only to that people. And 


this conſideration alone is anſwer enough unto thoſe 
that urge the authority of the law of Moſes, for the 
inflicting of capital puniſhments upon idolaters. But 


however, I will examine this argument a little more 
particularly. | | 


The caſe of idolaters, in reſpet of rhe Jewiſh 
commonwealth, falls under a double confideration. 
The firſt is of thoſe who, being initiated in the Mo- 
faical- rites, and made citizens. of that common- 


wealth, did afterwards apoſtatize from the worſhip 
of the God of Iſrael. Theſe were proceeded againſt 
as traitors and rebels, guilty of no leſs than high 


treaſon. - For the commonwealth of the Jews, diffe- 


rent in that from all others, was an abſolute theo- 


cracy; nor was there, nor could there be, any dif- 
terence between that commonwealth and the church. 
The laws eſtabliſhed there concerning the worſhip of 
one inviſible Deity, were the civil laws of that peo- 
ple, and a part of their political government; in 
which God himſelf was the legiſlator. Now if any 

one 


— 


4 Letter concerning Toleration. 45 


one can ſhew me where there is a commonwealth, 
at this time, conſtituted upon that foundation, I will 
acknowledge that the eccleſiaſtical laws do there un- 
avoidably become a part of the civil, and that the 


ſubjects of that government both may, and ought to 


be kept in ſtrict conformity with that church by the 
civil power. But there is abſolutely no ſuch thing, 
under. the goſpel, as a Chriſtian commonwealth. 
There are indeed many cities and kingdoms that 


have embraced the faith of Chriſt ; but they have 
retained their ancient form of government, with 
which the law of Chriſt hath not at all meddled. He 


indeed hath taught men how, by faith and good 
works, they may attain eternal life; but he inſtituted 


no commonwealth. He prefcribed unto his followers 


no new and peculiar form of government; nor put 


he the ſword into any magiſtrate's hand, with com- 


miſſion to make uſe of it in forcing men to forſake 
their former religion, and receive his. - 


Secondly, Foreigners, and ſuch as were * ſtrangers 
to the commonwealth of Iſrael,” were not compelled 
by force to obſerve the rites of the Moſaical law. 
But on the contrary, in the very fame place where 
it is ordered, that an Iſraelite that was an idolater, 
© ſhould be put to death.“ there it is provided, that 
« ſtrangers ſhould not be vexed nor oppreſſed,” Exod. 
XX11. 20, 21. I confeſs that the ſeven nations that 
poſſeſſed the land which was promiſed to the Iſrael- 
ites, were utterly to be cut off: but this was not 
| ſingly becauſe they were idolaters; for, if it had 
been the reaſon, why were the Moabites and the 


other nations to be foared ? No: the reaſon is this; 


God being in a peculiar manner the. king of the 


Jews, he could not ſuffer the adoration of any other 
_ deity, (which was properly an act of high treaſon 
| E 3 ä 


4 
* 
= 

Y 
=? 
x7 
1 
* 
I. 
0 
** 
* 
- 
"4 
1 
. 
4 
1 
- 
8 
2» 
2X; 
3 
a, - 
& 
* 
8 
. 
, 
3 
b 
1 
d 
8 
8 Et 
I, 
L "* 
- 
* 
18 
5 
4 
2 
I 
, 
* 
5 
1 £2. 
l 4 
* 
3 
1 
1 
= : 
4 
$7 4 
77 
10 
4 4 
13 
a5 
158 
8 { 
J g 
$] 
F 
1 
4 
$ 
. 
4 
1 
+1 
is, 


— q * 
4 is” NS" » ' 


3 
nr 
Wo —ů— WS» Porte, es 


996 
* 
1 
1 
N 
SL 
. 
35 
ix 


: a 
— 1 > Aer * R IIS — *. * . 9 
. — A 032 i wie hy bags” fs Be ue ae 
wa 3 nene rere . . + 12 5 2 2 


2 ve + 93 l bs F n > * 
AS — —— Tegeong N ee — _ 1 won 9 SF 2 " e, 8 Dr 
ä 8 a 0 ; . > . » ihe Fes £ . 5 * en - 7 n e L. N + 3 
e 74 822 0 n 1 ? * WO; 9 8 e Wo 88 Wu ERP Ix ”, T n K 
. „ - — — — - ow — — — = 2 * * = * ** e 
« —— ———— — — 


wo re Yes 


weak * 


1 N 
* gy 2 — « 
\ Low K 
ET RAND any KI Apts, IEEE > Settle ot tg” . OE 
; F. 19 ö 7 rr 2 ww —. et, — 8 * Rains r be WI 4 
e r >, \ eo ö E 9 9 WWW 
- 1 - % — 2 1 0 0 0 — ow _ * s * « 

* J . - * 


r. e bt 


7 9 : l => 
8 ry _ "- <4 
o 2 , 


46 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


againſt himſelf) in the land of Canaan, which was 


his kingdom: for ſuch a manifeſt revolt could no 


ways conſiſt with his dominion, which was perfectly 
political in that country. All idolatry was therefore 
to be rooted out of the bounds of his kingdom, be- 


cauſe it was an acknowledgement: of another God ; 


that is to ſay, another king, againſt the laws of em- 
pire. The inhabitants were alſo to be driven out, 
that the entire poſſeſſion of the land might be given 


to the Iſraelites. And for the like reaſon, the Emims 


and the Horims were driven out of their countries by 
the children of Eſau and Lot, (Deut. ii.) and their 
lands, upon the fame grounds, given by God to the 


invaders: But though all idolatry was thus rooted 


out of the land of Canaan, yet every idolater was 
not brought to execution. The whole family of 
Rahab, the whole nation of the Gibeonites, articled 
with Joſhua, and were allowed by treaty ; and there 
were many captives. amongſt the Jews who were 
idolaters. David and Solomon ſubdued many coun- 
tries without the confines of the land of promite, 
and carried their conqueſts as. far as. Euphiates. 
Amongſt ſo many captives taken, ſo many nations 
reduced under their obedience, we find not one man 


forced into the Jewiſh religion, and the worſhip of 


the true God, and puniſhed for idolatry, though alt 
of them were certainly guilty of it. If any one in- 


deed, becoming a proſelyte, defired to be made a 
denizen of their commonwealth, he was obliged to 


ſubmit unto their laws; that is, to embrace their re- 
ligion: but this he did willingly, on his own accord, 


not by conſtraint. He did not unwillingly ſubmit to 


ſhew his obedience, but he ſought and ſolicited for it 
as a privilege; and as ſoon as he was admitted, he 


decame ſubject to the laws of the commonwealth, by 
which all idolatry was forbidden within the borders. 


of. 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 47 


of the land of Canaan. But that law (as I have ſaid) 
did not reach to any of thoſe regions, however ſub- 


jected unto the Jews, that were ſituated without thoſe 
bounds. | 7-H 


Thus far coneerning outward worſhip. Let us 
now conſider articles of faith. _ = 


© The articles of religion are ſome of them practi- 
cal, and ſome ſpeculative. Now, though both forts 
conſiſt in the knowledge of truth, yet theſe terminate 
_ ſimply in the underſtanding ; thoſe influence the will 


and manners. Speculative opinions therefore, and 


articles of faith (as they are called) which are required 

only to be believed, cannot be impoſed on any church 
by the law of the land: for it is abſurd that things 

ſhould be enjoined by laws, which are not in men's 
power to perform. And to believe this or that to be 
true, does not depend upon our will. But of this 
enough has been ſaid already. But (will ſome ſay) 
let men at leaſt profeſs that they believe. A ſweet 
religion indeed, that obliges men to diſſemble, and 
tell lies both to God and man, for the ſalvation of 
their ſouls! If the magiſtrate thinks to ſave men 
thus, he ſeems to underſtand little of the way of ſal- 
vation: and if he does it not in order to ſave them, 


why is he ſo ſolicitous about the articles of faith as ta 


enact them by a law? | 


Further, the magiſtrate ought not to forbid the 
preaching or profeſſing of any ſpeculative opinions in 
any church, becauſe they have no manner of relation 


to the civil rights of the ſubjects. If a Roman ca- 
tholic believe that to be really the body of Chriſt, 


which another man calls bread, he does no injury 
thereby to his neighbour, If a Jew do not believe 


the. 


eo 


: 
E. 
7 
g 
3 
4 
$ 
* 


7 * Wen 4 r 1 


Nn 
. N 


48 4 Letter concerning Toleration. 
| the New Teſtament to be the word of God, he does. : 


not thereby alter any thing in men's civil rights. If 
a heathen doubt of both Teftaments, he is not there- 
fore to be puniſhed as a pernicious citizen. The. 
power of the magiſtrate, and the eſtates of the people, 
may be equally fecure, whether any man believe theſe 
things or no. I readily grant, that theſe opinions are 
falſe and abſurd : but the buſineſs of laws is not to 
provide for the truth of opinions, but for the ſafety 
and ſecurity of the commonwealth, and of every par- 
ticular man's goods and perſon. And fo it ought to be. 
35 For truth certainly would do well enough, if ſhe were 
wo once left to ſhift ſor herſelf. She ſeldom has received, 
_=- and I fear never will receive, much aſſiſtance from 
= the power of great men, to whom ſhe is but rarely 
= known, and more rarely welcome. She is not taught 
by laws, nor has ſhe any need of force to procure her 
entrance into the minds of men. Errors indeed pre- 
= vail by the aſſiſtance of foreign and borrowed ſuc- 
1 cours: but if truth makes not her way into the un- 
deerſtanding by her own light, ſhe will be but the 
weaker for any borrowed force violence can add to 
her. Thus much for ſpeculative opinions. Let us. 
now proceed to practical ones. | 


1 A good life, in which conſiſts not the leaſt part of 
| religion and true piety, concerns alſo the civil govern= _ 
| 8 une ag g 
ment; and in it lies the ſafety both of men's ſouls, and 
of the commonwealth. Moral actions belong there- 
fore to the juriſdiction both of the outward and in- 
ward court, both of the civil and domeſtie governor, 
I mean, both of the magiſtrate and conſcience Here 


— 


r 


e 2 ee S CITES 
5 — 2 IC 1 ; 
* * e e . r * : 44 A. mw P — — * — 
72 2 1 ei N 
* 1 . $4 * 
ES Foe 


| therefore is great danger, left one of theſe juriſdictions 
intrench upon the other, and diſcord ariſe between the 
1 keeper of the public peace, and the overſeers of ſouls. 
* But if what has been already ſaid concerning the — . 
5 | | EE 2 5 „5 


— ” 
477 
wr TS74 $04 $22: * * Tos MY ht 
& * N n b 
ominey & es. ODS ov; rao tt; on FF. 
n as 7 OO repo. . 
— r 2 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 49 


of both theſe governments be rightly conſidered, it 
will eaſily remove all difficulty in this matter. 


Every man has an immortal ſoul, eapable of eter- 
nal happineſs or miſery; whoſe happineſs depending 
upon his believing and doing thoſe things in this liſe, 
_ which are neceſſary to the obtaining of God's favour, 
and are preſcribed by God to that end: it follows 


from thence, firſt, that the obſervance of theſe things 


is the higheſt obligation that lies upon mankind, and 
that our utmoſt care, application, and diligence, ought 
to be exerciſed in the ſearch and performance of them; 
becauſe there is nothing in this world that is of any 
conſideration in compariſon with eternity. Secondly, 
that ſeeing one man does not violate the right of ano- 
ther, by his erroneous opinions, and undue manner of 
worſhip, nor is his perdition, any prejudice to another 
man's affairs; therefore the care of each man's ſalva- 
tion belongs only to himſelf. But I would not have 
this underſtood, as if I meant hereby to condemn all 


charitable admonitions, and affectionate endeavours to. 


reduce men from errors, which are indeed the greateſt 
duty of a Chriſtian. Any one may employ as many 
exhortations and arguments as he pleaſes, towards the 
promoting of another man's ſalvation ; but all force 
and compulſion are to be forborn. Nothing is to be 
done imperiouſly. No body is obliged in that matter 
to yield obedience unto. the admonitions or injunctions 
of another, further than he himſelf is perſuaded. Eve- 
ry man, in that, has the ſupreme and abſolute autho- 
rity of judging for himſelf. And the reaſon is, be- 
cauſe no body elſe is concerned in it, nor can receive 
any prejudice from his conduct therein. | 


But beſides their ſouls, which are immortal, men 


have allo their temporal lives here upon earth: the 
” ſtate 


F424 IS = 


* 


— rp STEP 1. 


50 4A Leiter concerning Toleration. 


ſtate whereof being frail and fleeting, and the duration 
uncertain, they have need of ſeveral outward con veni- 
ences to the ſupport thereof ; which are to be procured 
or preſerved by pains and induſtry. For thoſe things 
that are neceſſary to the comfortable ſupport of our 
lives, are not the ſpontaneous products of nature, nor 
do offer themſelves fit and prepared for our uſe. This 
part therefore draws on another care, and neceſſarily 
gives another employment. But the pravity of man- 
kind being ſuch, that they had rather injurioufly prey 
upon the fruits of other men's labours, than take pains 
to provide for themſelves ; the neceſſity of preſerving 
men in the poſſeſſion of what honeſt induſtry has al- 
ready acquired, and alſo of preſerving their liberty and 
ſtrength, whereby they may acquire what they further 
want, obliges men to enter into ſociety with one ano- 
ther; that by mutual aſſiſtance, and joint force, they 
may ſecure unto each other their properties in the 
things that contribute to the comfort and happineſs of 
this life, leaving in the mean while to every man the 
care of his own eternal happineſs ; the attainment. 
whereof can neither be facilitated by another man's 
induſtry, nor can the loſs of it turn to another man's. 
prejudice, nor the hope of it be forced from him by 
any external violence: but foraſmuch as men thus 
entering into ſocicties, grounded upon their mutual 
compacts of aſſiſtance, ſor the defence of their tempo- 
ral goods, may nevertheleſs be deprived of them, either 
by the rapine and fraud of their fellow-citizens, or by 
the hoſtile violence of foreigners ; the remedy of this 
evil conſiſts in arms, riches, and multitude of citi- 
Zens; the remedy of the other in laws; and the care 
of all things, relating both to the one and the other, 
is committed by the ſociety to the civil magiſtrate. 
This is the original, this is the uſe, and theſe are the 
bounds of the legiſlative (which is the ſupreme) power 
. | N Int 


fn 


AP Letter concerning Toleration. - 51 


in every commonwealth : I mean, that proviſion may 


be made for the ſecurity of each man's private poſſeſ- 
ſions; for the peace, riches, and public commodities of 


the whole people, and, as much as poſſible, for the in- 
creaſe of their inward ſtrength againſt foreign invaſions. 


Theſe things being thus explained, it is eaſy to un- 


derſtand to what end the = 67778 power ought to be 


directed, and by what meaſures regulated, and that is 
the temporal good and outward proſperity of the ſo- 
ciety, which is the ſole reaſon of men's entering into 
ſociety, and the only thing they ſeek and aim at in it, 
And it is alſo evident what liberty remains to men in 
reference to their eternal ſalvation, and that is, that 
every one ſhould do what he in his conſcience is per- 
ſuaded to be acceptable to the Almighty, on whoſe good 
pleaſure and acceptance depends his eternal happineſs. 

| For obedience 1s due in the firft place to God, and 


afterwards to the laws. 


| But ſome may aſk, What if the magiſtrate ſhould 
© enjoin any thing by his authority that appears un- 
_ © lawful to the conſcience of a private perſon ?* I an- 


ſwer, That if government be faithfully adminiſtered, 
and the counſels of the magiſtrate be indeed directed 


to the public good, this will ſeldom happen. But it 
perhaps it do ſo fall out; I ſay, that ſuch a private 


perſon is to abſtain from the action that he judges un- 


lawful, and he is to undergo the puniſhment, which it 
1s not unlawful for him to bear. For the private judg- 
ment of any perſon concerning a law enacted in po- 
litical matters for the public good, does not take away 
the obligation of that law, nor deſerve a diſpenſation : 
but if the law indeed be concerning things that lie not 


within the verge of the magiſtrate's authority, (as for 


example, that the people, or any party amongſt ey 
- | 9 ſhoul 


© tay 


52 A Letter concerning Toleration, 


ſhould be compelled to embrace a ſtrange religion, and 


join in the worſhip and ceremonies of another church) 
men are not in theſe caſes obliged by that law againſt 
their conſciences : for the political ſociety is inſtituted 


for no other end but only to ſecure every man's poſ- 


ſeſſion of the things of this life. The care of each 
man's ſoul, and of the things of heaven, which nei- 
ther does belong to the commonwealth, nor can be 
fubjected to it, is left entirely to every man's ſelf. 


Thus the ſafeguard of men's lives, and of the things 


that belong unto this life, is'the bufinefs of the com- 


monwealth ; and the preſerving of thoſe things unto _ 
their owners is the duty of the magiſtrate : and there- 


fore the magiſtrate cannot take away theſe worldly 


things from this man or party, and give them to that; 
nor change property amongſt fellow-ſubjects (no not 
even by a law) for a cauſe that has no relation to the 
end of civil government; I mean, for their religion; 
which, whether it be true or falſe, does no prejudice. 


to the worldly concerns of their fellow-ſubjeCts, which 


are the things that only belong unto the care of the 


commonwealth. 


© But what if the magiſtrate believe ſuch a law as 


©this to be for the public good?* I anſwer, As the 
private judgment of any particular perſon, if errone- 


ous, does not exempt him from the obligation of law; 
ſo the private judgment (as J may call it) of the ma- 
giſtrate, does not give him any new right of impoſing 


laws upon his ſubſects, which neither was in the con- 
ſtitution of the 1 granted him, nor ever was 
the people to grant; and leaſt of all, 


in the power 0 


if he make it his buſineſs to enrich and advance his 
followers and fellow-ſeEtaries with the fpoils of others. 
© But what if the magiſtrate believe that he has a 
* right to make ſuch laws, and that they are for the 

| | | public 


W CCC C 2 


— re A ns — —_ 


4 Letter concerning Toleration. 53 


« public good, and his ſubjects believe the contrary ? 

© Who ſhall. be judge between them?“ I anſwer, 
God alone. For there is no judge upon earth between 
the ſupreme magiſtrate and the people. God, I ſay, 
1s the only judge in this caſe, who will retribute unto 
every one at the laſt day, according to his deſerts ; 
that is, according to his ſincerity and uprightneſs, 
in endeavouring to promote piety, and the public 
weal and peace of mankind. *©* But what ſhall be 
done in the mean while?“ I anſwer, The principal 
and chief care of every one ought to be of his own 
ſoul firſt, and in the next place of the public peace 
though yet there are very few -will think it is peace 
there, where they ſee all laid waſte. 


There are two ſorts of conteſts amongſt men, the 
one managed by law, the other by force ; and theſe 
are of that nature, that where the one ends, the other 
always begins. But it is not my buſineſs to inquire 
into the power of the magiſtrate in the different con- 
ſtitutions of nations. I only know what uſually hap- 
pens where controverſies ariſe, without a judge to de- 
termine them. You will fay then, The magiſtrate 
being the ſtronger, will have. his will, and carry his 
point.“ Without doubt. But the queſtion is not 
here concerning the doubtfulneſs of the event, but 

the rule of right, 


But to come to particulars. I ſay, firſt, No opi- 
nions contrary to human ſociety, or to thoſe moral rules 
which are neceſſary to the preſervation of civil ſociety, 
are to be tolerated by the magiſtrate. But of theſe in- 

_ deed examples in any church are rare. For no ſet 
can eaſily arrive to ſuch a degree of madneſs, as that 
it ſhould think fit to teach, for doctrines of religion, 

ſuch things as manifeſtly undermine the foundations of 
So ſociety, 


54 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


ſociety, and are therefore condemned by the judgment 
of all mankind : becauſe their own intereſt, peace, re- 
putation, every thing, would be thereby endangered. 


Another more ſecret evil, but more dangerous to 
the commonwealth, is, when men arrogate to them 
ſelves, and to thoſe of their own ſect, ſome peculiar _ 
prerogative, covered over with a ſpecious ſhew of de- 


ccitful words, but in effect oppoſite to the civil right 


of the community. For example: we cannot find any 


- ſect that teaches expreſsly and openly, that men are not 
obliged to keep their promiſe ; that princes may be de- 
throned by thoſe that differ from them in religion ; or 
that the dominion of all things belongs only to them- 


ſelves: for theſe things, propoſed thus nakedly and 


plainly, would ſoon draw on them the eye and hand 
of the magiſtrate, and awaken all the care of the com- 


monwealth to a watchfulneſs againſt the ſpreading of 
fo dangerous an evil. But nevertheleſs, we find thoſe 
that ſay the ſame things, in other words What elſe _ 


do they mean, who teach that faith is not to be kept 


< with heretics ?* Their meaning, forſooth, is that the 
privilege of breaking faith belongs unto themſelves : 
or they declare all that are not of their communion 


to be hereties, or at leaſt may declare them ſo whenfo- 


ever they think fit. What can be the meaning of their 
aſſerting, that © kings excommunicated forfeit their 

© crowns and kingdoms?” It is evident that they there- 
by arrogate unto themſelves the power of depoſing 


kings: becauſe they challenge the power of excom- 
munication, as the peculiar right of their hierarchy. 

That «© dominion is founded in grace,“ is alſo an aſ- 
ſertion by which thoſe that maintain it do plainly lay 


claim to the poſſeſſion of all things: for they are not 


ſo wanting to themſelves as not to believe, or at leaft 
as not to profeſs, themſelves to be truly pious and 


faithful. 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 55 


faithful. Theſe therefore, and the like, who attribute 
unto the faithful, religious, and orthodox; that is, in 
plain terms, unto themſelves; any peculiar privilege 
or power above other mortals, in civil eoncernments; 
or who, upon pretence of religion, do challenge any 
manner of authority over ſuch as are not atTociated with 
them in their eccleſiaſtical communion : I ſay, theſe 
have no right to be tolerated by the magiltrate ; as 
neither thoſe that will not own and teach the duty of 
tolerating all men in matters of mere religion. For 
what do all theſe and the like doctrines ſignify, but 
that thoſe men may, and are ready upon any occaſion 
to ſeize the government, and poſſeſs themſelves of 
the eſtates and fortunes of their fellow- ſubjects; and 
that they only aſk leave to be tolerated by the ma- 
giſtrate ſo long, until they find themielves ſtrong e- 
nough to effect it. 85 TR 


Again, that church can have no right to be tole- 
rated by the magiſtrate, which is conſtituted upon ſuch 
a bottom, that all thoſe who enter into it, do thereby, 

15% facto, deliver themſelves up to the protection and 
ſervice of another prince. For by this means the ma- 
giſtrate would give way to the ſettling a foreign juriſ- 


diction in his own country, and ſuffer his own people 


to be liſted, as it it were, for ſoldiers againſt his own' 
government. Nor does the frivolous and fallacious 
diſtinction between the court and the church afford 
any remedy to this inconvenience ; eſpecially when 
both the one and the other are equally ſubject to the 
abſolute authority of the tame perſon, who has not 
only power to perſuade the members of his church to 
whatſoever he liſts, (either as purely religious or as 


in order thereunto) but can alſo enjoin it them on 


packs. (FJ FD [IN 


| 


pain of eternal fire. It is ridiculous for any one to 
profeſs himſelf to be a Mahometan only in his reli- 
"33 os FA — 


56 4 Letter concerning Toleration. 


gion, but in every thing elſe a faithful ſubject to a 


Chriſtan magiſtrate, whilſt at the ſame time he ac- 


Knowledges himſelf bound to yield blind obedience to 
the Mufti of Conſtantinople ; who himſelf is entirely 
obedient to the Ottoman Emperor, and frames the 
feigned oracles of that religion according to his plea- 
ſure. But this Mahometan living amongſt Chriſtians, 
would yet more apparently renounce their government, 
if he acknowledge the ſame perſon to be head of his 
church who is the ſupreme magiſtrate in the ſtate, 


Laſtly, Thoſe are not at all to be tolerated who 
deny the being of a God.“ Premiſes, covenants, and 
oaths, which are the bonds of human ſociety, can 
have no hold upon an atheiſt, The taking away of 
God, though but even in thought, diffolves all. Be- 
tides alſo, thoſe that by their atheiſm undermine and 
deſtroy all religion, can have no pretence of religion 
wheretpon to challenge the privilege of a toleration. 
As for other practical opinions, though not abſolutely 
free from all error, yet if they do not tend to eſtabliſn 
dominion over others, or civil impunity to the church 
in which they are taught, there can be no reaſon why 
they ſhould not be tolerated. 1 bs | 


It remains that I ſay ſomething concerning thoſe 
aſſemblies, which being vulgarly called, and perhaps 
having ſometimes been, conventicles, and nurſeries 
of factions and ſeditions, are thought to afford the 
ſtrongeſt matter of objection againſt this doctrine of 
toleration: but this has not happened by any thing 
peculiar unto the genius of ſuch aſſemblies, but by the 
unhappy circumſtances of an oppreſſed or ill-ſettled 
liberty. Thoſe accuſations would ſoon ceaſe, if the 
law of toleration were once ſo ſettled, that all churches 
were obliged to lay down toleration as the foundation 


of 


A Letter concerning Toleratian. 57 


of their own liberty, and teach, that liberty of con- 
ſcience is every man's natural right, equally belong- 
ing to diſſenters as to themſelves ; and that no body 
ought to be compelled in matters of religion, either 
by law or force. Theeſtabliſhment of this one thing 
would take away all ground of complaints and tu- 

mults upon account 2, conſcience. And theſe cauſes 
of difcontents and animoſities being once removed, 
there would remain nothing in theſe aſſemblies that 
were not more peaceable, and leſs apt to produce diſ- 
turbances of ſtate, than in any other meetings hat- 
ſoever. But let us examine particularly the heads of 
theſe accuſations. 3 | 


Tou will ſay, © That aſſemblies and meetings en- 
danger the public peace, and threaten the common- 
wealth.“ I anſwer, if this be ſo, why are there daily 
ſuch numerous meetings in markets and courts of 
judicature? Why are crowds upon the exchange, 
and a concourſe of people in cities ſuffered? You 
will reply, theſe are civil aſſemblies; but thoſe that 
we object againſt are eccleſiaſtical. I anſwer, it is a 
likely thing indeed, that ſuch aſſemblies as are alto- 
gether remote from civil affairs, ſhould be moſt apt 
to embroil them. O!] but civil aſſemblies are com- 
poſed of men that differ from one another in mat- 
ters of religion, but theſe eccleſiaſtical meetings are 
of perfons that are all of one opinion.“ As if an 
agreement in matters of religion, were in effect a 
conſpiracy againſt the commonwealth ; or as if men 
would not be ſo much the more warmly unanimous 
in religion, the leſs liberty they had of aſſembling. 
But it will be urged ſtill, © That civil aſſemblies are 
open and free for any one to enter into, whereas re- 
_© ligtous conventicles are more private, and thereby 
give opportunity to clandeſtine machinations.“ I 
e „ anſwer, 


58- A Letter concerning Teleration. 


anſwer, that this is not ſtrictly true, for many civil 
aſſemblies are not open to every one. And if ſome 
religious meetings be private, who are they (I beſeech 
you) that are to be blamed for it ? thoſe that deſire, or 
thoſe that forbid their being public? Again, you will 
fay, © That religious communion does exceedingly 
< unite men's minds and affections to one another, 
and is therefore the more dangerous.“ But if this 
be ſo, why is not the magiſtrate afraid of his own- 
church ? and why doth he not forbid their afſemblies. 
as. things dangerous to his government? You will 
fay, © Becauſe he himſelf is a part, and even the 
head of them.“ As if he were not alſo a part of the 
commonwealth, and the head of the whole people. 


Let us therefore deal plainly. The magiſtrate is. 
afraid of other churches, but not of his own; be-. 

cauſe he is kind and favourable to the one, but ſevere 
and cruel to the other. Theſe he treats like children, 
and indulges them even to wantonneſs: thoſe he uſes. 
as ſlaves: and how blameleſsly ſoever they demean 
themſelves, recompenſes them no otherwiſe than by 
gallies, priſons, confiſcations, and death. Theſe he 
cheriſhes and defends : thoſe he continually fcourges. 
and oppreſſes. Let him turn the tables, or let thoſe . 
diſſenters enjoy but the ſame privileges in civils as. 
his other ſubjects, and he will quickly find that 
theſe religious meetings will be no longer dangerous: 
for if men enter into ſeditious conſpiracies, it is not 
religion-that inſpires them to it in their meetings, but 
their ſufferings and oppreſſions that make them wil-. 
ling to eaſe themſelves. Juſt and moderate, govern- 
ments are every where quiet, every where ſafe: but 
oppreſſion raiſes ferments, and makes men ſtruggle 
to caſt off an uneaſy and tyrannical yoke. I know 
that ſeditions are very frequently raiſed upon pretence 


of: 


4 Letter concerning Toleratiom. 69 


of religion : but it is as true, that, for religion, ſub- 
jects are frequently ill treated, and live miſerably. 
Believe me, the ſtirs that are made, proceed not from 

any peculiar temper of this or that church or religious 
ſociety, but from the common diſpoſition of all man- 
kind, who, when they groan under any heavy bur- 
den, endeavour naturally to ſhake off the yoke that 
galls their necks. Suppoſe this buſineſs of religion 
were let alone, and that there were ſome other diſ- 
tinction made between men and men, upon account 
of their different complexions, ſhapes, and features ; 
ſo that thoſe who have black hair (for example) or 
grey eyes, ſhould not enjoy the ſame privileges as o- 
ther citizens, that they ſhould not be permitted either 
to buy or ſell, or live by their callings ; that parents. 
fhould not have the government and education of 
their own children ; that they ſhould. either be exclu- 
ded from the benefit of the laws, or meet with par- 
tial judges: can it be doubted but theſe perſons, thus. 
diſtinguiſhed from others by the colour of their hair 
and eyes, and united together by one common perſe- 
cution, would be as dangerous to the magiſtrate, as 
any others that had aſſociated themſelves merely up- 
on the account of religion? Some enter into com- 
any for trade and profit; others, for want of buſi- 
neſs, have their clubs for claret : neighbourhood joins 
fome, and religion others. But there is one only thing 
which gathers people into ſeditious commotions, and 
that is oppreſſion... | 


You will fay, © What! will you have people 
©-meet at divine fervice againſt the magiſtrate's will? 
J anſwer, Why, I pray, againſt his will? Is it not 
both lawful and neceſſary that they ſhould meet? 
Againſt his will, do you ſay? That is what I com- 
plain of. That is the very root of all the miſchief. 

Te” | Why. 


— 


bo A Letter concerning Toleration. 


Why are aſſemblies leſs ſufferable in a church than in 


a theatre or market? Thoſe that meet there are not 


either more vicious, or more turbulent, than thoſe that 
meet elſewhere. The buſineſs in that is, that they 
are ill uſed, and therefore they are not to be ſuffered. 
Take away the partiality that is uſed towards them 
in matters of common right ; change the laws ; take 
away the penalties unto which they are ſubjected, and 
all things will immediately become ſafe and peacea- 
ble. Nay, thoſe that are averſe to the religion of the 
magiſtrate will conſider themſelves fo much the more 
bound to maintain the peace of the commonwealth, 
as their condition is better in that place than elſe- 
where; and all the ſeveral ſeparate congregations, 
like ſo many guardians of the public peace, will watch 
one another, that nothing may be innovated or 
changed in the form of the government; becauſe they 
can hope for nothing better than what they already 
enjoy, that is, an equal condition with their fellow- 
ſubjects, under a juſt and moderate government. 
Now, if that church, which agrees in religion with 
the prince, be eſteemed the chief ſupport of any civil 

overnment, and that for no other reaſon {as has al- 
ready been ſhewn) than becauſe the prince is kind, 
and the laws are favourable to it; how much greater 
will be the ſecurity of a government, where all good 
ſubjects, of whatſoever church they be, without any 
diſtinction upon account of religion, enjoying - the 
ſame favour of the prince, and the ſame benefit of the 
laws, ſhall become the common ſupport and guard 
of it, and where none will have any occaſion to fear 
the ſeverity of the laws, but thoſe that do injuries to 
their neighbours, and offend againſt the civil, peace? 


That we may draw towards a concluſion, the ſum 
af all we drive at is, That every man may enjoy 
| the 


A Letter concerning Tolration. 6x 


© the ſame rights that are granted to others.“ Is it 
permitted to worſhip God in the Roman manner ? 
Let it be permitted to do it in the Geneva form allo. 
Is it permitted to ſpeak Latin in the market-place ? 
Let thoſe that have a mind to it, be permitted to do 
it alſo in the church. Is it lawful for any man, in 
his own houſe, to kneel, ſtand, fit, or uſe any other 
poſture, and to clothe himſelf in white or black, in 
ſhort or long garments? Let it not be made un- 
lawful to eat bread, drink wine, or waſh with water 
in the church. In a word, whatſoever things are 
left free by law in the common occaſions of lite, let 
them remain free unto every church in divine wor- 
ſhip. Let no man's life, or body, or houſe, or eſtate, 
fuffer any manner of prejudice upon theſe accounts, 
Can you allow of the preſbyterian diſcipline? Why 
mould not the Epiſcopal alſo have what they like? 

Eccleſiaſtical authority, whether it be adminiſtered by 
the hands of a ſingle perſon, or many, is every where 
the ſame; and neither has any jurifdiction in things 
civil, nor any manner of power of compulſion, nor 
any thing at all to do with riches and revenues. 


Eceleſiaſtical aſſemblies and ſermons are juſtified 
by daily experience, and public allowance: theſe are 
allowed to people of ſome one perſuaſion; why not 
to all? If any thing paſs in a religious meeting ſedi- 
tiouſly, and contrary to the public peace, it is to be 
puniſhed in the fame manner, and no otherwiſe, than 
as if it had happened in a fair or market. Theſe 
meetings ought not to be ſanctuaries for factious and 

flagitious fellows ; nor ought it to be leſs lawful for 
men to meet in churches than in halls ; nor are one 
part of the ſubjects to be eſteemed more blameable 
for their meetings than others. Every one is to be 
accountable for his own actions; and no man is to be 
ES 5 laid 


62 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


laid under a ſuſpicion, or odium, for the fault of ano- 
ther. Thoſe that are ſeditious, murdercrs, thieves, 
robbers, adulterers, ſlanderers, &c. of whatfoever 
church, whether national or not, ought to be puniſhed 
and ſuppreſſed : but thoſe whoſe doctrine is peaceable, 
and whoſe manners are pure and blameleſs, ought to 
be upon equal terms with their fellow- ſubjects. Thus 
if ſolemn aſſemblies, obſervations of feſtivals, public 
worthip, be permitted to any one fort of profeffors, 
all theſe things ought to be permitted to the Preſbyte- 
rians, independents, anabaptiſts, armenians, quakers, 
and others, with the ſame liberty. Nay, if we may 
openly ſpeak the truth, and as becomes one man to 
another, neither Pagan, nor Mahometan, nor Jew, 
ought to be excluded from the civil rights of the com- 
monwealth, becauſe of his religion. The goſpel com- 
mands no ſuch thing. The church, which *© judges 
not thoſe that are without, (r Cor. v. 12, 13.) wants 
it not. And the commonwealth, which embraces in- 
differently all men that are honeſt, peaceable, and in- 
duſtrious, requires it not. Shall we ſuffer a Pagan to 
deal and trade with us, and ſhall we not ſuffer him 
to pray unto and worſhip God? If we allow the Jews 
to have private houſes and dwellings amonſt us, why 
ſhould we not allow them to have ſynagogues? Is 
their doctrine more falſe, their worſhip more abomi- 
nable, or is the civil peace more endangered, by their 
meeting in public, than in their private houſes? But 
if theſe things may be granted to Jews and Pagans, 
ſurely the condition of any Chriſtians ought not to be 
worſe than theirs in a Chriſtian commonwealth. 


You will ſay, perhaps, Yes, it ought to be, be- 
© cauſe, they are more inclinable to factions, tumults, 
and civil wars.“ I anſwer, Is this the fault of the 
Chriitian religion? If it be fo, truly the Chriſtian 

ES... | | religion 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 63 


religion is the worſt of all religions, and ought nei- 
ther to be embraced by any particular perſon, nor to- 
lerated by any commonwealth. For if this be tlie 
genius, this the nature of the Chriſtian religion, to 
be turbulent, and deſtructive to the civil peace, that 
church itſelf which the magiſtrate indulges will not 
always be innocent But far be it from us to ſay any 
ſuch thing of that religion, which carries the greateſt 
oppoſition to covetouſneſs, ambition, diſcord, conten- 


tion, and all manner of inordinate deſires, and is the 


moſt modeſt and peaceable religion that ever was. 
We muſt therefore ſeek another cauſe of thoſe evils 
that are charged upon religion: and if we conſider 


8 right, we ſhall find it to confift wholly in the ſubject 


that I am treating of. It is not the diverſity of opi- 
nions, (which cannot be avoided) but the refuſal of 
toleration to thoſe that are of different opinions, 
(which might have been granted) that has produced 
all the buſtles and wars that have been in the Chriſ- 
tian world upon account of religion. The heads and 
leaders of the church, moved by avarice and inſatia- 
ble deſire of dominion, making uſe of the immo- 


derate ambition of magiſtrates, and the credulous 


ſuperſtition of the giddy multitude, have incenſed and 
animated them againſt thoſe that diſſent from them- 
ſelves, by preaching unto them contrary to the laws 
of the goſpel, and to the precepts of charity, that 
ſchiſmaties and heretics are to be rooted out of their 
poſſeſſions, and deſtroyed. And thus have they mix- 
ed together, and confounded two things that are in 
themſelves moſt different, the church and the com- 
monwealth. Now, as it is very difficult for men pa- 
tiently to ſuffer themſelves to be ſtript of the goods 
which they have got by their honeſt induſtry, and 
contrary to all the laws of equity, both human and 
divine, to be delivered up for a prey to other men's 
e N violence 


64. A Letter concerning Toleration, 


violence and rapine, eſpecially when they are other- 
wiſe altogether blameleſs, and that the occaſion for 
which they are thus treated, does not at all belong to 
the juriſdiction of the magiſtrate, but entirely to the 

conſcience of every particular man, for the conduct 
of which he is accountable to God only: what elſe 
can be expected, but that theſe men growing weary 
of the evils under which they labour, ſhould in 
the end think it lawful for them to reſiſt force with 
force, and to defend their natural rights (which are 
not forfeitable upon account of religion). with arms, 
as well as they can? That this has been hitherto the 
ordinary courſe of things, is abundantly evident in 
_ hiſtory: and that it will continue to be ſo hereafter, 
is but too apparent in reaſon, It cannot indeed be 
otherwiſe, ſo long as the principle of perſecution for 
religion ſhall prevail, as it has done hitherto, with 
magiſtrate and people, and ſo long as thoſe, that 


ought to be the preachers of peace and concord, ſhall 


continue with all their art and ſtrength, to excite men 
to arms, and ſound the trumpet of war. But that 
magiſtrates ſhould thus ſuffer theſe incendiaries, and 
diſturbers of the public peace, might juſtly be won- 
dered at, if it did not appear that they have been in- 
vited by them unto a participation of the ſpoil ; and 
have therefore thought ſit to make uſe of their covet- 
ouſneſs and pride, as means whereby to increaſe their 
own power. For who does not ſee, that theſe good 
men are indeed more miniſters of the government, 
than miniſters of the goſpel ; and that by flattering. 
the ambition, and favouring the dominion of princes 
and men in authority, they endeavour with all their 
might to promote that tyranny in the commonwealth, 
which otherwiſe they ſhould not be able to eſtabliſh 
in the church? This is the unhappy agreement that 
we ſee between the church and ftate, Whereas -q 
12 8. - 


4 Letter concerning Toleration. 65 


each of them would contain itſelf within its own 
bounds, the one attending to the worldly welfare of 
the commonwealth, the other to the ſalvation of 
ſouls, it is impoſſible that any diſcord ſhould ever 
have happened between them. Sed, pudet hac op- 
probria, &c. God almighty grant, I beſccch him, 
that the goſpel of peace may at length be preached ; 
and that civil magiſtrates growing more careful to 
conform their own conſciences to the law of God, 
and leſs ſolicitous about the binding of other men's 
conſciences by human laws, may, like fathers of 
their country, direct all their counſels and cndea- 
vours to promote univerſally the civil welfare of 
all their children, except only of ſuch as are arro- 
gant, ungovernable, and injurious to their brethren ; 
and that all eccleſiaſtical men, who boaſt themſelves 
to be the ſucceſſors of the apoſtles, walking peacea- 
bly and modeſtly in the apoſtles' ſteps, without inter- 
_ meddling with ſtate affairs, may apply themſelves 
_ wholly to promote the ſalvation of ſouls. | 


Faravell, 


G POSTSCRIPT» 


66 A Letter concerning Toleration. 


W ERHAPS it may not be amiſs to add a few things 
concerning hereſy and ſchiſm. A Turk is not, nor 
can be, either heretic or ſehiſmatie to a Chriſtian : 
and if any man fall off from the Chriſtian faith to 
Mahometaniſm, he does not thereby become a here- 
tic or ſchiſmatic, but an apoſtate and an infidel. 

This no hody doubts of. And by this it appears, 
that men of different religions cannot be heretics or 
ſchiſmaties to one another, 


We are to enquire | therefore, what men are of 
the ſame religion ? Concerning which, it 1s manifeſt, 
that thoſe who have one and the ſame rule of faith 
and worſhip, are of the ſame religion; and thoſe 
who have not the ſame rule of faith and worſhip, 
are of different religions: for ſince all things that be- 
long unto that religion are contained in that rule, it 
follows neceſſarily, that thoſe who agree in one rule, 
are of one and the fame religion, and vice verſa. 
Thus Turks and Chriſtians are of different religions, 
becauſe theſe take the holy ſcriptures to be the rule 
of their religion, and thoſe the Koran: and for the 
' ame reaſon there may be different religions alſo even 


amongſt Chriſtians. The TR and the Lutherans, _ 
though - 


A Letter concerning Toleration. 67 


though both of them profeſs faith in Chriſt, and are 


therefore called Chriſtians, yet are not both of the 


ſame religion; becauſe theſe acknowledge nothing 
but the holy ſeriptures to be the rule and foundation 
of their religion; thoſe take in alſo traditions and 
decrces of Popes, and of all theſe tagether make the 
rule of their religion. And thus the Chriſtians of 
St. John (as they are called) and the Chriſtians of 
Geneva, are of different religions; becauſe theſe alſo 
take only the ſeriptures, and thoſe I know not what 
traditions for the rule of their religion. 


This being ſettled, it follows, Firſt, that hereſy 
is a ſeparation made in eceleſiaſtical communion be- 
tween men of the ſame religion, for ſome opinions 
no way contained in the rule itſelf. And, ſecondly, 
that amongſt theſe who acknowledge nothing but the 
holy ſcriptures to be their rule of faith, hereſy is a 
ſeparation made in their Chriſtian communion, for 
opinions not contained in the expreſs words of ſerip- 
ture. Now, this ſeparation may be made in a two- 

told manner. 


1. When the greater part, or (by the magiſtrate's 
patronage) the ſtronger part of the church ſeparates 
itfelf from others, by excluding them out of her 


__ communion, becauſe they will not profeſs their be- 


lief of certain opinions which are not to be found 
in the expreſs words of ſcripture. For it is not the 
paucity of thoſe that are ſeparated, nor the authority 
of the magiſtrate, that can make any man guilty of 
hereſy : but he only is an heretic who divides the 
church into parts, introduces names and marks of 
diſtinction, and voluntarily makes a ſeparation be- 
cauſe of ſuch opinions. 


G2: 2. When 


7 | 
7 
8 
W | 
I; 

1 

7 

. 


68 4 Letter concerning Toleration: 


2, When any one ſeparates himſelf from the 


communion of a church, becauſe that church does 


not publicly profeſs ſome certain opinions which the 
holy ſcriptures do not expreſsly teach. | 


Both theſe are heretics, © becauſe they err in fun- 
©damentals, and they err obſtinately againſt know- 
edge: for when they have determined the holy 
{criptures to be the only foundation of faith, they 
neverthcleſs lay down certain propoſitions as funda- 
mental, which are not in the ſeripture; and becauſe 
others will not acknowledge theſe additional opinions 


of theirs, nor build upon them as if they were ne- 


ceilary and fundamental, they therefore make a ſepa- 
ration in the church, either by withdrawing them- 
ſelves from the others, or expelling the others from 
them. Nor does it ſignify any thing for them to ſay, 


that their confeſſions and ſymbols are agreeable to 


ſeripture, and to the analogy of faith; for if they be 
conceived in the expreſs words of ſcripture, there can 
be no queſtion. about them, becauſe thoſe are acknow- 
ledged by all Chriftians to be of divine inſpiration, 
and therefore fundamental. But if they ſay, That 
« the articles which they require to be profeſſed are 
© conſequences deduced from the ſcripture :' It is 
undoubtedly well done of them to believe and pro- 
feſs ſuch things as ſeem unto them ſo agreeable to 
the rule of faith; but it would be very ill done io 


obtrude thoſe things upon others, unto whom they 


do not ſeem to be the indubitable doctrines of the 
ſeripture; and to make a ſeparation for ſuch things 
as theſe, which neither are nor can be fundamental, 


is to become heretics. For I do not think there is 


any man arrived to that degree of madneſs, as that 
he dare give out his confequences and interpretations 
of ſcripture as divine inſpirations, and compare the 

” 1 articles 


4 Letter concerning Tolerabion. 69 


artieles of faith that he has framed according to his 
own fancy with the authority of the ſcripture. EF 
know there are ſome propofitions ſo evidently agree- 
able to ſcripture, that no body can deny them to be 
drawn from thence; but about thoſe, therefore, there 
can be no difference. This only J ſay, that however 
clearly we may think this or the other doctrine to be 

deduced from ſeripture, we ought not therefore to 
impoſe it upon others as a neceſſary article of faith, 
becauſe we believe it to be agreeable to the rule of 


faith; unleſs we would be content alſo that other 


doctrines ſhould be impoſed upon us in the ſame 
manner, and that we ſhould be compelled to receive 
and profeſs all the different and contradictory opini- 
ons of Lutherans, Calviniſts, Remonſtrants, Ana- 
baptiſts, and other ſects, which the contrivers of 
ſymbols, ſyſtems, and confeſſions are accuſtomed to 
deliver unto their followers, as genuine and neceſſary 
_ deductions from the holy ſcripture. I cannot but 
wonder at the extravagant arrogance of thoſe men, 
who think that they themſelves can explain things 
_ neceſſary to ſalvation more clearly than the Holy 
Ghoſt, the eternal and infinite wiſdom of God. 


Thus much concerning hereſy ; which word, in 
common uſe, is applied only to the doctrinal part of 
religion. Let us now conſider ſchiſm, which is a 
_ crime near akin to it: for both theſe words ſeem unto 
me to ſignify an ill- grounded ſeparation in ecclefi- 
* aſtical communion, made about things not neceſſa- 
ry.“ But ſince uſe, which is the ſupreme law in 
matter of language, has determined that hereſy re- 
lates to errors in faith, and ſchiſm to thoſe in worſhi 
or diſcipline, we muſt conſider them under that dif. 
tinction. 4121 ttt . DFO 240.8 | 


Schiſm 


jt o 4 ” $1. os — - 
„ N 5 : 2 4 v 


3 WY n. 


5 4 Tams concerning Thrall. 


Schiſm then, Gi the ſame afind that have al- 


ready been alledged, is nothing elſe but a ſeparation | 
made in the communion of the church, upon account 
of ſomething in. divine worſhip, or eceleſiaſtical dif- 
cipline, that is not any neceſſary part of it. Now, 


nothing in werthip or diſcipline can be neceſſary to 


Chriſtian communion, but what Chriſt our legiſſa- 
tor, or the apoſtles, by inſpiration of the Holy Spi- 


tit, have commanded in expreſs words. 


In a Gori he that denies not any thing that the 
holy ſeriptures teach in expreſs words, nor makes a 


ſeparation upon vecaſion of any thing that is not ma- 


nifeſtly contained in the facred text; however he 
may be nick- named by any ſect of Chriſtians, and 


declared by ſome or all of them to be utterly void of 
true Chriſtianity; yet indeed and in truth this man 


cannot be either a heretic or ſchiſmatie. 


ö Theſe things might have been explained more 


largely and more advantageouſly ; but it is enough to 
have hinted at them thus briefly, to a perſon of your 


parts, 


10 


FINI <6
