NATURAL  THEOLOGY. 


CHAPTER  L 

STATE  OF  THE  ARGUMENT. 

In  crossing  a  heath,  suppose  I  pitched  my  foot 
against  a  stonCj  and  were  asked  how  the  stone  came 
to  be  there  ;  I  might  possibly  answer,  that,  for  any 
thing  I  knew  to  the  contrary,  it  had  lain  there  for 
ever  :  nor  would  it  perhaps  be  very  easy  to  show  the 
absurdity  of  this  answer.  But  suppose  I  had  found 
a  watch  upon  the  ground,  and  it  should  be  inquired 
how  the  watch  happened  to  be  in  that  place ;  I 
should  hardly  think  of  the  answer  which  I  had  be-  \ 
fore  given,  that  for  any  thing  I  knew,  the  watch 
might  have  always  been  there.  Yet  why  should 
not  this  answer  serve  for  the  watch_as  well  as 
for  the  stone  ?  why  is  it  not  as  admissible  in  the 
second  case,  as  in  the  first  ?  For  this  reason,  and  for 
no  other,  viz.  that,  when  we  come  to  inspect  the 
watch,  we  perceive  (what  we  could  not  discover  in 
the  stone)  that  its  several  parts  are  framed  and  put 
together  for  a  purpose,  e.  g\  that  they  are  so  formed 
and  adjusted  as  to  produce  motion,  and  that  mo- 
tion so  regulated  as  to  point  out  the  hour  of  the 


\ 


/ 


10  STATE  OF 

day :  that,  if  the  different  parts  had  been  differently 
shaped  from  what  they  are,  of  a  different  size  from 
what  they  are,  or  placed  after  any  other  manner,  or 
in  any  other  order,  than  that  in  which  they  are  placed, 
either  no  motion  at  all  would  have  been  carried 
on  in  the  machine,  or  none  which  would  have  an- 
swered the  use  that  is  now  served  by  it.^  To  reckon 
up  a  few  of  the  plainest  of  these  parts,  and  of 
their  offices,  all  tending  to  one  result : — we  see  a 
cylindrical  box  containing  a  coiled  elastic  spring, 
which,  by  its  endeavour  to  relax  itself,  turns  round 
the  box.  We  next  observe  a  flexible  chain  (artificial- 
ly wrought  for  the  sake  of  flexure),  communicating 
the  action  of  the  spring  from  the  box  to  the  fusee. 
We  then  find  a  series  of  wheels,  the  teeth  of  which 
catch  in,  and  apply  to,  each  other,  conducting  the 
motion  from  the  fusee  to  the  balance,  and  from 
the  balance  to  the  pointer  ;  and  at  the  same  time,  by 
the  size  and  shape  of  those  wheels,  so  regulating  that 
motion,  as  to  terminate  in  causing  an  index,  by  an 
equable  and  measured  progression,  to  pass  over  a 
given  space  in  a  given  time.  We  take  notice  that  the 
wheels  are  made  of  brass  in  order  to  keep  them  from 
rust ;  the  springs  of  steel,  no  other  metal  being  so 
elastic ;  that  over  the  face  of  the  watch  there  is  placed 
a  glass,  a  material  employed  in  no  other  part  of 
the  work,  but  in  the  room  of  which,  if  there  had 
been  any  other  than  a  transparent  substance,  the 
hour  could  not  be  seen  without  opening  the  case. 
This  mechanism  being  observed  (it  requires  indeed 
an  examination  of  the  instrument,  and  perhaps  some 
previous  knowledge  of  the  subject,  to  perceive  and 


THE  ARGUMENT.  11 

understand  it ;  but  being  once,  as  we  have  said,  ob- 
served and  understood),  the  inference,  we  think,  is 
inevitable,  that  the  watch  must  have  had  a  maker : 
that  there  must  have  existed,  at  sorne  time,  and  at 
some  place  or  other,  an  artificer  or  artificers,  who 
formed  it  for  the  purpose  which  we  find  it  actually 
to  answer;  who  comprehended  its  construction, 
and  designed  its  use? 

I.  Nor  would  it,  I  apprehend,  weaken  the  con- 
clusion, that  we  had  never  seen  a  watch  made ;  that 
we  had  never  known  an  artist  capable  of  making 
one  ;  that  we  were  altogether  incapable  of  executing 
such  a  piece  of  workmanship  ourselves,  or  of  under- 
standing in  what  manner  it  was  performed  ;  all  this 
being  no  more  than  what  is  true  of  some  exquisite 
remains  of  ancient  art,  of  some  lost  arts,  and,  to  the 
generality  of  mankind,  of  the  more  curious  produc- 
tions of  modern  manufacture.  Does  one  man  in  a 
million  know  how  oval  frames  are  turned  ?  Igno- 
rance of  this  kind  exalts  our  opinion  of  the  unseen 
and  unknown  artist's  skill,  if  he  be  unseen  and  un- 
knov/n,  but  raises  no  doubt  in  our  minds  of  the  ex- 
istence and  agency  of  such  an  artist,  at  some  former 
time,  and  in  some  place  or  other.  Nor  can  I  per- 
ceive that  it  varies  at  all  the  inference,  whether  the 
question  arise  concerning  a  human  agent,  or  con- 
cerning an  agent  of  a  different  species,  or  an  agent 
possessing,  in  some  respects,  a  different  nature. 

II.  Neither,  secondly,  would  it  invalidate  our 
conclusion,  that  the  watch  sometimes  went  wrong, 
or  that  it  seldom  went  exactly  right.  The  purpose  of 
the  machinery,  the  design,  and  the  designer,  might 


1^  STATE  OF 

be  evident,  and  in  the  case  supposed  would  be  evi- 
dent, in  whatever  way  we  accounted  for  the  irregu- 
larity of  the  movement,  or  whether  we  could  account 
for  it  or  not.  It  is  not  necessary  that  a  machine  be 
perfect,  in  order  to  shew  with  what  design  it  was 
made :  still  less  necessary,  where  the  only  question 
is,  whether  it  were  made  with  any  design  at  all. 

III.  Nor,  thirdly,  would  it  bring  any  uncertainty 
into  the  argument,  if  there  were  a  few  parts  of  the 
watch,  concerning  which  we  could  not  discover,  or 
had  not  yet  discovered,  in  what  manner  they  con- 
duced to  the  general  effect ;  or  even  some  parts, 
concerning  which  we  could  not  ascertain,  whether 
they  conduced  to  that  effect  in  any  manner  what- 
ever. For,  as  to  the  first  branch  of  the  case  ;  if  by 
the  loss,  or  disorder,  or  decay  of  the  parts  in  ques- 
tion, the  movement  of  the  watch  were  found  in  fact 
to  be  stopped,  or  disturbed,  or  retarded,  no  doubt 
would  remain  in  our  minds  as  to  the  utility  or  inten- 
tion of  these  parts,  although  we  should  be  unable 
to  investigate  the  manner  according  to  which,  or 
the  connexion  by  which,  the  ultimate  effect  depend- 
ed  upon  their  action  or  assistance ;  and  the  more 
complex  is  the  machine,  the  more  likely  is  this  ob- 
scurity to  arise.  Then,  as  to  the  second  thing  sup- 
posed, namely,  that  there  were  parts  which  might 
be  spared,  without  prejudice  to  the  movement  of 
the  watch,  and  that  we  had  proved  this  by  experi- 
ment— these  superfluous  parts,  even  if  we  were 
completely  assured  that  they  were  such,  would  not 
vacate  the  reasoning  which  we  had  instituted  con- 
cerning other  parts.    The  indication  of  contrivance 


THE  ARGUMENT.  IS 

remained,  with  respect  to  them,  nearly  as  it  was 

before. 

IV.  Nor,  fourthly,  would  any  man  in  his  senses 
think  the  existence  of  the  watch,  with  its  various 
machinery,  accounted  for,  by  being  told  that  it  was 
one  out  of  possible  combinations  of  material  forms  ; 
that  whatever  he  had  found  in  the  place  where  he 
found  the  watch,  must  have  contained  some  inter- 
nal configuration  or  other ;  and  that  this  configura- 
tion might  be  the  structure  now  exhibited,  viz.  of 
the  works  of  a  watch,  as  well  as  a  different  structure. 

V.  Nor,  fifthly,  would  it  yield  his  inquiry  more 
satisfaction  to  be  answered,  that  there  existed  in 
things  a  principle  of  order,  which  had  disposed  the 
parts  of  the  watch  into  their  present  form  and  situa- 
tion. He  never  knew  a  watch  made  by  the  prin- 
ciple of  order  ;  nor  can  he  even  form  to  himself  an 
idea  of  what  is  meant  by  a  principle  of  order  dis- 
tinct from  the  intelligence  of  the  watch-maker. 

VI.  Sixthly,  he  would  be  surprised  to  hear  that 
the  mechanism  of  the  watch  was  no  proof  of  con- 
trivance, only  a  motive  to  induce  the  mind  to  think 
so. 

VII.  And  not  less  surprised  to  be  informed,  that 
the  watch  in  his  hand  was  nothing  niore  than  the 
result  of  the  laws  of  metallic  nature.     Ijt  i^s  a  pe^verr     ^ 
sion  of  language  to  assign  any  law,  as  the  efficient,  ^ 
operative  cause  of  any  thing.     A  law  presupposes  | 

an  agent;    ft)r  it  is  only  the  mode,   according  toj\ 
which  an  agent  proceeds  :   it  implies  a  power ;   for  ■ 
it  is  the  order,  according  to  which  that  power  acts. 
Without   this    agent,    without  tliis   power,    which 


14  STATE  OF  THE 

are  both  distinct  from  itself,  the  law  does  nothing ; 
is  nothing.  The  expression,  "  the  law  of  metallic 
nature,''  may  sound  strange  and  harsh  to  a  philoso- 
phic ear ;  but  it  seems  quite  as  justifiable  as  some 
others  which  are  more  familiar  to  him,  such  as 
*'  the  law  of  vegetable  nature,''  "  the  law  of  ani- 
mal nature,"  or  indeed  as  "  the  law  of  nature"  in 
general,  when  assigned  as  the  cause  of  phenomena, 
in  exclusion  of  agency  and  power ;  or  when  it  is 
substituted  into  the  place  of  these. 

VIII.  Neither,  lastly,  would  our  observer  be 
driven  out  of  his  conclusion,  or  from  his  confidence 
in  its  truth,  by  being  told  that  he  knew  nothing  at 
all  about  the  matter.  He  knows  enough  for  his 
argument :  he  knows  the  utility  of  the  end :  he 
knows  the  subserviency  and  adaptation  of  the 
means  to  the  end.  These  points  being  known,  his 
ignorance  of  other  points,  his  doubts  concerning 
other  points,  affect  not  the  certainty  of  his  reason- 
ing. The  consciousness  of  knowing  little,  need 
not  beget  a  distrust  of  that  which  he  .does  kixpw. 


CHAPTER  II. 

STATE  OF  THE  ARGUMENT  CONTINUED. 

Suppose,  in  the  next  place,  that  the  person  who 
found  the  watch,  should,  after  some  time,  discover 


ARGUMENT  CONTINUED,  15 

that,  in  addition  to  all  the  properties  which  he  had 
hitherto  observed  in  it,  it  possessed  the  unexpected 
property  of  producing,  in  the  course  of  its  move- 
ment, another  watch  like  itself  (the  thing  is  con- 
ceivable) ;  that  it  contained  within  it  a  mechanism, 
a  system  of  parts,  a  mould  for  instance,  or  a  com- 
plex adjustment  of  latlies,  files,  and  other  tools,  evi- 
dently and  separately  calculated  for  this  purpose ; 
let  us  inquire,  what  effect  ought  such  a  discovery 
to  have  upon  his  former  conclusion. 

I.  The  first  effect  would  be  to,increase  his  admi- 
ration of  the  contrivance,  and  his  conviction  of  the 
consummate ^kilL  of  tlie  contriver.  Whether  he  re- 
garded the  object  of  the  contrivance,  the  distinct 
apparatus,  the  intricate,  yet  in  many  parts  intelli- 
gible mechanism,  by  which  it  was  carried  on,  he 
would  perceive,  in  this  new  observation,  nothing  but 
an  additional  reason  for  doing  what  he  had  already 
done, — for  referring  the  construction  of  the  watch 
to  design,  and  to  suprerae  art.  If  that  construction 
without  this  property,  or  which  is  the  same  thing, 
before  this  property  had  been  noticed,  proved  in- 
tention and  art  to  have  been  employed  about  it ; 
still  more  strong  would  the  proof  appear,  when  he 
came  to  the  knowledge  of  this  further  property, 
the  crown  and  perfection  of  all  the  rest. 

II.  He  would  reflect,  that  though  the  watch  be- 
fore him  were,  in  some  sense,  the  maker  of  the  watch 
which  was  fabricated  in  the  course  of  its  move- 
ments, yet  it  was  in  a  very  different  sense  from  that 
in  which  a  carpenter,  for  instance,  is  the  maker  of 
a  chair  ;  the  author  of  its  contrivance,  the  cause  of 


16  STATE  OF  THE 

the  relation  of  its  parts  to  their  use.     With  respect 
to  these,  the  first  watch  was  no  cause  at  all  to  the 
second :  in  no  such  sense  as  this  was  it  the  author  of 
the  constitution  and  order,  either  of  the  parts  which 
the  new  watch  contained,  or  of  the  parts  by  the 
aid  and  instrumentality  of  which  it  was  produced. 
We  might  possibly  say,  but  with  great  latitude  of 
expression,  that  a  stream  of  water  ground  corn;  but 
no  latitude  of  expression  would  allow  us  to  say, 
no  stretch  of  conjecture  could  lead  us  to  think,  that 
the  stream  of  water  built  the  mill,  though  it  were 
too  ancient  for  us  to  know  who  the  builder  was. 
What  the  stream  of  water  does  in  the  affair,  is  nei- 
ther more  nor  less  than  this  ;  by  the  application  of 
an  unintelligent  impulse  to  a  mechanism  previously 
arranged,  arrangedindependentlyof  it,  andarranged 
by  intelligence,  an  effect  is  produced,  viz.  the  corn 
is  ground.    But  the  effect  results  from  the  arrange- 
ment.   The  force  of  the  stream  cannot  be  said  to  be 
the  cause  or  author  of  the  effect,  still  less  of  the 
arrangement.     Understanding  and  plan  in  the  for- 
mation of  the  mill  were  not  the  less  necessary,  for 
any  share  which  the  water  has  in  grinding  the  corn  ; 
yet  is  this  share  thfe  same  as  that  which  the  watch 
would  have  contributed  to  the  production  of  the 
new  watch,  upon  the  supposition  assumed  in  the 
last  section.     Therefore, 

III.  Though  it  be  now  no  longer  probable,  that 
the  individual  watch,  which  our  observer  had  found, 
was  made  immediately  by  the  hand  of  an  artificer, 
yet  doth  not  this  alteration  in  any -wise  affect  the 
inference,  that  an  artifice^  had  been^ri^  em- 


ARGUMENT  CONTINUED,  17 

plfiyed  and  concerned  in  _  the  production.  The 
argument  from  design  remains  as  it  was.  Marks  of 
design  and  contrivance  are  no  more  accounted  for 
now,  than  they  were  before.  In  the  same  thing,  we 
may  ask  for  the  cause  of  different  properties.  We 
may  ask  for  the  cause  of  the  colour  of  a  body,  of  its 
hardness,  of  its  heat ;  and  these  causes  may  be  all 
different.  We  are  now  asking  for  the  cause  of  that 
subserviency  to  a  use,  that  relation  to  an  end,  which 
we  have  remarked  in  the  watch  before  us.  No  answer 
is  given  to  this  question,  by  telling  us  that  a  preced-^ 
ing  watch  produced  it.  There  cannot  be  design 
without  a  designer;  contrivance,  without  a  contriver; 
order,,  without  choice ;  arrangement,  without  any 
thing  capable  of  arranging ;  subserviency  and  rela- 
tion to  a  purpose,  without  that  which  could  intend 
a  purpose ;  means  suitable  to  an  end,  and  execut- 
ing their  office,  in  accomplishing  that  end,  without 
the  end  ever  having  been  contemplated,  or  the 
means  accommodated  to  it.  A?r^^g^^^^t,  disposi- 
tion of  parts,  subserviency  of  means  to  an  end,  re- 
lation of  instruments  to  a  use,  imply  the  presence 
of  intelligence  and  mind.  No  one,  therefore,  can 
rationally  believe,  that  the  insensible,  inanimate 
watch,  from  which  the  watch  before  us  issued,  was 
the  proper  cause  of  the  mechanism  we  so  much 
admire  in  it ;— could  be  truly  said  to  have  con- 
structed the  instrument,  disposed  its  parts,  as- 
signed their  office,  determined  their^  order,  action, 
and  mutual  dependency,  combined  their  several 
motions  into  one  result,  and  that  also  a  result  con- 
nected  with   the   utilities    of  other   beings.     All 

B 


18  STATE  OF  THE 

these  properties,  therefore,  are  as  much  unaccount- 
ed for,  as  they  were  before. 

IV-  Nor  is  any  thing  gained  by  running  the. diffi- 
culty farther  back,  i.  e.  by  supposing  the  watch  be- 
fore us  to  have  been  produced  from  another  watch, 
that  from  a  former,  and  so  on  indefinitely.  Our  go- 
ing back  ever  so  far,  brings  us  no  nearer  to  the  least 
degree  of  satisfaction  upon  the  subject.  Contriv- 
ance is  still  unaccounted  for.  We  still  want  a  con- 
triver. A  designing  mind  is  neither  supplied  by  this 
supposition,  nor  dispensed  with.  If  the  difficulty  were 
diminished  the  farther  we  went  back,  by  going  back 
indefinitely  we  might  exhaust  it.  And  this  is  the 
only  case  to  which  this  sort  of  reasoning  applies. 
Where  there  is  a  tendency,  or,  as  we  increase  the 
number  of  terms,  a  continual  approach  towards  a 
limit,  there,  by  supposing  the  number  of  terms  to  be 
what  is  called  infinite,  we  may  conceive  the  limit  to 
be  attained :  but  where  there  is  no  such  tendency,  or 
approach,  nothing  is  effected  by  lengthening  the  se- 
ries. There  is  no  difference  as  to  the  point  in  question 
(whatever  there  may  be  as  to  many  points),  between 
one  series  and  another  ;  between  a  series  which  is  fi- 
nite, and  a  series  which  is  infinite.  A  chain,  composed 
of  an  infinite  number  of  links,  can  no  more  support 
itself,  than  a  chain  composed  of  a  finite  number  of 
links.  And  of  this  we  are  assured  (though  we  never 
can  have  tried  the  experiment),  because,  by  increas- 
ing the  number  of  links,  from  ten  for  instance  to  a 
hundred,  from  a  hundred  to  a  thousand,  &c.  we  make 
not  the  smallest  approacli,  we  observe  not  the  small- 
est tendency,  towards  self-support.    There  is  no  dif- 


ARGUMENT  CONTINUED.  19 

ference  in  this  respect  (yet  there  may  be  a  great  dif- 
ference in  several  respects)  between  a  chain  of  a  great- 
er or  less  length,  between  one  chain  and  another,  be- 
tween one  that  is  finite  and  one  that  is  infinite.  This 
very  much  resembles  the  case  before  us.  The  ma- 
chine which  we  are  inspecting,  demonstrates,  by  its 
construction,  contrivance  and  design.  Contrivance 
must  have  had  a  contriver;  design,  a  designer; 
whether  the  machine  immediately  proceeded  from 
another  machine  or  not.  That  circumstance  alters 
not  the  case.  That  other  machine  may,  in  like  man- 
ner, have  proceeded  from  a  former  machine:  nor  does 
that  alter  the  case ;  contrivance  must  have  had  a 
contriver.  That  former  one  from  one  preceding  it : 
no  alteration  still ;  a  contriver  is  still  necessary.  No 
tendency  is  perceived,  no  approach  towards  a  dimi- 
nution of  this  necessity.  It  is  the  same  with  any  and 
every  succession  of  these  machines  ;  a  succession  of 
ten,  of  a  hundred,  of  a  thousand ;  with  one  series 
as  with  another ;  a  series  which  is  finite,  as  with  a 
series  which  is  infinite.  In  whatever  other  respects 
they  may  differ,  in  this  they  do  not.  In  all,  equally, 
contrivance  and  design  are  unaccounted  for. 

The  question  is  not  simply.  How  came  the  first 
watch  into  existence  ?  which  question,,  it  may  be 
pretended,  is  done  away  by  supposing  the  series  of 
watches  thus  produced  from  one  another  to  have 
been  infinite,  and  consequently  to  have  had  no  such 
J?r5^  for  which  it  was  necessary  to  provide  a  cause. 
This,  perhaps,  would  have  been  nearly  the  state  of 
the  question,  if  nothing  hadbeenbefore  us  but  an  un* 
organized,  unmechanized  substance,  without  mark 


20  STATE  OF  THE 

or  indication  of  contrivance.  It  might  be  difficult 
to  show  that  such  substance  could  not  have  existed 
from  eternity,  either  in  succession  (if  it  were  possible, 
which  I  think  it  is  not,  for  unorganized  bodies  to 
spring  from  one  another),  or  by  individual  perpe- 
tuity. But  that  is  not  the  question  now.  To  sup- 
pose it  to  be  so,  is  to  suppose  that  it  made  no  differ- 
ence whether  he  had  found  a  watch  or  a  stone.  As 
it  is,  the  metaphysics  of  that  question  have  no  place; 
for,  in  the  watch  which  we  are  examining,  are  seen 
contrivance,  design ;  an  end,  a  purpose  ;  means  for 
the  end,  adaptation  to  the  purpose.  And  the  ques- 
tion which  irresistibly  presses  upon  our  thoughts,  is, 
whence  this  contrivance  and  design  ?  The  thing  re- 
quired is  the  intending  mind,  the  adapting  hand, 
the  intelligence  by  which  that  hand  was  directed. 
This  question,  this  demand,  is  not  shaken  off,  by  in- 
creasing a  number  or  succession  of  substances,  des- 
titute of  these  properties ;  nor  the  more,  by  in- 
creasing that  number  to  infinity.  If  it  be  said,  that, 
upon  the  supposition  of  one  watch  being  produced 
from  another  in  the  course  of  that  other*s  move- 
ments, and  by  means  of  the  mechanism  within  it, 
we  have  a  cause  for  the  watch  in  my  hand,  viz.  the 
watch  from  which  it  proceeded :  I  deny,  that  for 
the  design,  the  contrivance,  the  suitableness  of 
means  to  an  end,  the  adaptation  of  instruments  to  a 
use  (all  which  we  discover  in  the  watch),  we  have 
any  cause  whatever.  It  is  in  vain,  therefore,  to 
assign  a  series  of  such  causes,  or  to  allege  that  a 
series  may  be  carried  back  to  infinity ;  for  I  do  not 
admit  that  we  have  yet  any  cause  at  all  of  the  phe- 


ARGUMENT  CONTIIfUED.  21 

nomena,  still  less  any  series  of  causes  either  finite 
or  infinite.  Here  is  contrivance,  but  no  contriver ; 
proofs  of  design,  but  no  designer. 

V.  Our  observer  would  further  also  reflect,  that 
the  maker  of  the  watch  before  him,  was,  in  trutli 
and  reality,  the  maker  of  every  watch  produced 
from  it ;  there  being  no  difference  (except  that  the 
latter  manifests  a  more  exquisite  skill)  between 
the  making  of  another  watch  with  his  own  hands, 
by  the  mediation  of  files,  lathes,  chisels,  &c.  and 
the  disposing,  fixing,  and  inserting  of  these  instru- 
ments, or  of  others  equivalent  to  them,  in  the  body 
of  the  watch  already  made,  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
form  a  new  watch  in  the  course  of  the  movements 
which  he  had  given  to  the  old  one.  It  is  only 
working  by  one  set  of  tools  instead  of  another. 

The  conclusion  which  \he  first  examination  of    ! 
the  watch,  of  its  works,  construction,  and  move- 
ment, suggested,  was,  that  it  must  have  had,  for 
the  cause  and  author  of  that  construction,  an  arti-    | 
ficer,  who  understood  its  mechanism,  and  design-   I 
ed  its  use.     This  conclusion  is  invincible.     A  se-  ^ 
cond  examination   presents  us  with  a  new  disco- 
very.    The  watch  is  found,  in  the  course  of  its 
movement,  to  produce  another  watch,  similar  to  it- 
self; and  not  only  so,  but  we  perceive  in  it  a  sys- 
tem or  organization,  separately  calculated  for  that 
purpose.     What  effect  would  this  discovery  have, 
or  ought  it  to  have,  upon  our  former  inference  ? 
What,  as  hath  already  been  said,  but  to  increase, 
beyond  measure,  our  admiration  of  the  skill  which 
had  been  employed  in  the  formation  of  such  a  ma- 


22  APPLICATION  OF 

chine  ?  Or  shall  it,  instead  of  this,  all  at  once  turn 
us  round  to  an  opposite  conclusion,  viz.  that  no  art 
or  skill  whatever  has  been  concerned  in  the  busi- 
ness, although  all  other  evidences  of  art  and  skill 
remain  as  they  were,  and  this  last  and  supreme 
piece  of  art  be  now  added  to  the  rest  ?  Can  this 
be  maintained  without  absurdity?  Yet  this  is 
atheism. 


CHAPTER  IIL 

APPLICATION  OF  THE  ARGUMENT. 

This  is  atheism  t  for  everj  indicatipn  of  coatr^^ 
ance,  every  manifestation  of  design,  which  e^^^^ 
in  the  watch,  exists  in  the  works  of  nature  ;  with 
the  difference,  on  the  side  of  nature,  of  being  great- 
er and  more,  and  that  in  a  degree  which  exceeds 
all  computation.  I  mean,  that  the  contrivances  of 
nature  surpass  the  contrivances  of  art,  in  the  com- 
plexity, subtilty,  and  curiosity  of  the  mechanism  ; 
and  still  more,  if  possible,  do  they  go  beyond  them 
in  number  and  variety:  yet,  in  a  multitude  of 
cases,  are  not  less  evidently  mechanical,  not  less 
evidently  contrivances,  not  less  evidently  accom- 
modated to  their  end,  or  suited  to  their  office,  than 
are  the  most  perfect  productions  of  human  inge- 
nuity. 


THE  ARGUMENT.  23 

I  know  no  better  method  of  introducing  so  large 
a  subject,  than  that  of  comparing  a  single  thing 
with  a  single  thing  j  an  eye,  for  example^  with  a 
telescope.    As  far^  the  examj^^^^^  \ 

merit  goe^^^^^^ 

the  eye  was  ja§d^^^  the 

telescope  was  made  for  assisting  it.  They  are 
made  upon  the  same  principles  ;  Both  being  adjust- 
ed to  the  laws  by  which  the  transmission^  and^^^^^ 
fraction  of  rays  of  light  are  regulated.  I  speak  not 
of  the  origm  of  the  laws  themselves  ;  but  such  laws 
being  jfixed,  the  construction,  in  both  cases,  is 
adapted  to  them.  For  instance ;  these  laws  re- 
quire, in  order  to  produce  the  same  effect,  that  the 
rays  of  light,  in  passing  from  water  into  the  eye, 
should  be  refracted  by  a  more  convex  surface  than 
when  it  passes  out  of  air  into  the  eye.  According- 
ly we  find  that  the  eye  of  a  fish,  in  that  part  of  it 
called  the  crystalline  lens,  is  much  rounder  than 
the  eye  of  terrestrial  animals.  What  plainer  mani- 
festation of  design  can  there  be  than  this  diffe- 
rence ?  What  could  a  mathematical  instrument- 
maker  have  done  more,  to  show  his  knowledge  of 
his  principle,  his  application  of  that  knowledge, 
his  suiting  of  his  means  to  his  end ;  I  will  not  say 
to  display  the  compass  or  excellence  of  his  skill  and 
art,  for  in  these  all  comparison  is  indecorous,  but 
to  testify  counsel,  choice,  consideration,  purpose  ? 

To  some  it  may  appear  a  difference  sufficient  to 
destroy  all  similitude  between  the  eye  and  the  te- 
lescope, that  the  one  is  a  perceiving  organ,  the  other 
an  unperceiving  instrument.    The  fact  is,  that  they 


24  APPLICATION  OF 

are  both  instruments.  And,  as  to  the  mechanism, 
at  least  as  to  mechanism  being  employed,  and 
even  as  to  the  kind  of  it,  this  circumstance  varies 
not  the  analogy  at  all.  For,  observe  what  the  con- 
stitution of  the  eye  is.  It  is  necessary,  in  order  to 
produce  distinct  vision,  that  an  image  or  picture  of 
the  object  be  formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  eye. 
Whence  this  necessity  arises,  or  how  the  picture  is 
connected  with  the  sensation,  or  contributes  to  it, 
it  may  be  difficult,  nay  we  will  confess,  if  you 
please,  impossible  for  us  to  search  out.  But  the  pre- 
sent question  is  not  concerned  in  the  inquiry.  It 
may  be  true,  that,  in  this,  and  in  other  instances, 
we  trace  mechanical  contrivance  a  certain  way ;  and 
that  then  we  come  to  something  which  is  not  me- 
chanical, or  which  is  inscrutable.  But  this  aifects 
not  the  certainty  of  our  investigation,  as  far  as  we 
have  gone.  The  difference  between  an  animal  and 
^n  automatic  statue,  consists  in  this, — that,  in  the 
animal,  we  trace  the  mechanism  to  a  certain  point, 
and  then  we  are  stopped ;  either  the  mechanism  be- 
coming too  subtile  for  our  discernment,  or  some* 
thing  else  beside  the  known  laws  of  mechanism 
taking  place ;  whereas,  in  the  automaton,  for  the 
comparatively  few  motions  of  which  it  is  capable, 
we  trace  the  mechanism  throughout.  But,  up  to  the 
limit,  the  reasoning  is  as  clear  and  certain  in  the  one 
case  as  in  the  other.  In  the  example  before  us,  it  is 
a  matter  of  certainty,  because  it  is  a  matter  which 
experience  and  observation  demonstrate,  that  the 
formation  of  an  image  at  the  bottom  of  the  eye  is 
necessary  to  perfect  vision.     The  image  itself  can 


THE  ARGUMENT.  25 

be  shewn.  Whatever  affects  the  distinctness  of  the 
image,  affects  the  distinctness  of  the  vision.  The 
formation  then  of  such  an  image  being  necessary 
(no  matter  how)  to  the  sense  of  sight,  and  to  the 
exercise  of  that  sense,  the  apparatus  by  which  it  is 
formed  is  constructed  and  put  together,  not  only 
with  infinitely  more  art,  but  upon  the  self-same 
principles  of  art,  as  in  the  telescope  or  the  camera 
obscura.  The  perception  arising  from  the  image 
may  be  laid  out  of  the  question  ;  for  the  production 
of  the  image,  these  are  instruments  of  the  same 
kind.  The  end  is  the  same ;  the  means  are  the 
same.  The  purpose  in  both  is  alike  ;  the  contriv- 
ance for  accomplishing  that  purpose  is  in  both 
alike.  The  lenses  of  the  telescope,  and  the  hu- 
mours of  the  eye,  bear  a  complete  resemblance  to 
one  another,  in  their  figure,  their  position,  and  in 
their  power  over  the  rays  of  light,  viz.  in  bringing 
each  pencil  to  a  point  at  the  right  distance  from  the 
lens ;  namely,  in  the  eye,  at  the  exact  place  where 
the  membrane  is  spread  to  receive  it.  How  is  it 
possible,  under  circumstances  of  such  close  affini- 
ty, and  under  the  operation  of  equal  evidence,  to 
exclude  contrivance  from  the  one,  yet  to  acknow- 
ledge the  proof  of  contrivance  having  been  em- 
ployed, as  the  plainest  and  clearest  of  all  proposi- 
tions, in  the  other  ? 

The  resemblance  between  the  two  cases  is  still 
more  accurate,  and  obtains  in  more  points  than  we 
have  yet  represented,  or  than  we  are,  on  the  first 
view  of  the  subject,  aware  of.  In  dioptric  teles- 
copes, there  is  an  imperfection  of  this  nature.     Pen- 


26  APPLICATION  OF 

cils  of  light,  in  passing  through  glass  lenses,  are  se- 
parated into  different  colours,  thereby  tinging  the 
object,  especially  the  edges  of  it,  as  if  it  were  view- 
ed through  a  prism.  To  correct  this  inconvenience, 
had  been  long  a  desideratum  in  the  art.  At  last  it 
came  into  the  mind  of  a  sagacious  optician,  to  in- 
quire how  this  matter  was  managed  in  the  eye ;  in 
which,  there  was  exactly  the  same  difficulty  to  con- 
tend with,  as  in  the  telescope.  His  observation 
taught  him,  that,  in  the  eye,  the  evil  was  cured  by 
combining  lenses  composed  of  different  substances, 
i.  e.  of  substances  which  possessed  different  re- 
fracting powers.  Our  artist  borrowed  thence  his 
hint ;  and  produced  a  correction  of  the  defect  by 
imitating,  in  glasses  made  from  different  materials, 
the  effects  of  the  different  humours  through  which 
the  rays  of  light  pass  before  they  reach  the  bottom 
of  the  eye.  Could  this  be  in  the  eye  without 
purpose,  which  suggested  to  the  optician  the  only 
effectual  means  of  attaining  that  purpose  ? 

But  further  ;  there  are  other  points,  not  so  much 
perhaps  of  strict  resemblance  between  the  two,  as 
of  superiority  of  the  eye  over  the  telescope  ;  yet  of 
a  superiority  which,  being  founded  in  the  laws  that 
regulate  both,  may  furnish  topics  of  fair  and  just 
comparison.  Two  things  were  wanted  to  the  eye, 
which  were  not  wanted  (at  least  in  the  same  degree) 
to  the  telescope  :  and  these  were,  the  adaptation  of 
the  organ,  first,  to  different  degrees  of  light ;  and, 
secondly,  to  the  vast  diversity  of  distance  at  which 
objects  are  viewed  by  the  naked  eye,  viz.  from  a  few 
inches  to  as  many  miles.     These  difficulties  present 


THE  ARGUMENT.  27 

not  themselves  to  the  maker  of  the  telescope.  He 
wants  all  the  light  he  can  get ;  and  he  never  directs 
his  instrument  to  objects  near  at  hand.  In  the  eye, 
both  these  cases  were  to  be  provided  for ;  and  for 
the  purpose  of  providing  for  them,  a  subtile  and 
appropriate  mechanism  is  introduced : — 

I.  In  order  to  exclude  excess  of  light,  when  it  is 
excessive,  and  to  render  objects  visible  under  ob- 
scurer degrees  of  it,  when  no  more  can  be  had,  the 
hole  or  aperture  in  the  eye,  through  which  the  light 
enters,  is  so  formed,  as  to  contract  or  dilate  itself  for 
the  purpose  of  admitting  a  greater  or  less  number 
of  rays  at  the  same  time.  The  chamber  of  the  eye 
is  a  camera  obscura,  which,  when  the  light  is  too 
small,  can  enlarge  its  opening ;  when  too  strong, 
can  again  contract  it ;  and  that  without  any  other 
assistance  than  that  of  its  own  exquisite  machinery. 
It  is  further  also,  in  the  human  subject,  to  be  ob- 
served, that  this  hole  in  the  eye,  which  we  call  the 
pupil,  under  all  its  different  dimensions,  retains  its 
exact  circular  shape.  This  is  a  structure  extremely 
artificial.  Let  an  artist  only  try  to  execute  the 
same  ;  he  will  find  that  his  threads  and  strings  must 
be  disposed  with  great  consideration  and  contriv- 
ance, to  make  a  circle,  which  shall  continually 
change  its  diameter,  yet  preserve  its  form.  This 
is  done  in  the  eye  by  an  application  of  fibres,  i.  e. 
of  strings,  similar,  in  their  position  and  action,  to 
what  an  artist  would  and  must  employ,  if  he  had 
the  same  piece  of  workmanship  to  perform. 

II.  The  second  difficulty  which  has  been  stated, 
was  the  suiting  of  the  same  organ  to  the  perception 


2B  APPLICATION  OF 

of  objects  that  lie  near  at  hand,  within  a  few  inches, 
we  will  suppose,  of  the  eye,  and  of  objects  which 
are  placed  at  a  considerable  distance  from  it,  that, 
for  example,  of  as  many  furlongs  ;  (I  speak  in  both 
cases  of  the  distance  at  which  distinct  vision  can 
be  exercised).  Now  this,  according  to  the  princi- 
ples of  optics,  that  is,  according  to  the  laws  by 
which  the  transmission  of  light  is  regulated  (and 
these  laws  are  fixed),  could  not  be  done  without  the 
organ  itself  undergoing  an  alteration,  and  receiv- 
ing an  adjustment,  that  might  correspond  with  the 
exigency  of  the  case,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  different 
inclination  to  one  another  under  which  the  rays  of 
light  reached  it.  Rays  issuing  from  points  placed 
at  a  small  distance  from  the  eye,  and  which  conse- 
quently must  enter  the  eye  in  a  spreading  or  di- 
verging order,  cannot,  by  the  same  optical  instru- 
ment in  the  same  state,  be  brought  to  a  point,  i.  e. 
be  made  to  form  an  image,  in  the  same  place  with 
rays  proceeding  from  objects  situated  at  a  much 
greater  distance,  and  which  rays  arrive  at  the  eye  in 
directions  nearly  (and  physically  speaking)  parallel. 
It  requires  a  rounder  lens  to  do  it.  The  point  of 
concourse  behind  the  lens  must  fall  critically  upon 
the  retina,  or  the  vision  is  confused ;  yet,  other 
things  remaining  the  same,  this  point,  by  the  im- 
mutable properties  of  light,  is  carried  farther  back 
when  the  rays  proceed  from  a  near  object,  than 
when  they  are  sent  from  one  that  is  remote.  A 
person  who  was  using  an  optical  instrument,  would 
manage  this  matter  by  changing,  as  the  occasion 
required,  his  lens  or  his  telescope ;  or  by  adjusting 


THE  ARGUMENT.  29 

the  distance  of  his  glasses  with  his  hand  or  his 
screw  :  but  how  is  it  to  be  managed  in  the  eye  ? 
What  the  alteration  was,  or  in  what  part  of  the  eye 
it  took  place,  or  by  what  means  it  was  effected  (for 
if  the  known  laws  which  govern  the  refraction  of 
light  be  maintained,  some  alteration  in  the  state  of 
the  organ  there  must  be),  had  long  formed  a  sub- 
ject of  inquiry  and  conjecture.  The  change,  though 
sufficient  for  the  purpose,  is  so  minute  as  to  elude 
ordinary  observation.  Some  very  late  discoveries, 
deduced  from  a  laborious  and  most  accurate  inspec- 
tion of  the  structure  and  operation  of  the  organ, 
seem  at  length  to  have  ascertained  the  mechanical 
alteration  which  the  parts  of  the  eye  undergo.  It 
is  found,  that  by  the  action  of  certain  muscles, 
called  the  straight  muscles,  and  which  action  is  the 
most  advantageous  that  could  be  imagined  for  the 
purpose, — ^it  is  found,  I  say,  that  whenever  the  eye 
is  directed  to  a  near  object,  three  changes  are  pro- 
duced in  it  at  the  same  time,  all  severally  contribut- 
ing to  the  adjustment  required.  The  cornea,  or 
outermost  coat  of  the  eye,  is  rendered  more  round 
and  prominent ;  the  crystalline  lens  underneath  is 
pushed  forward  ;  and  the  axis  of  vision,  as  the  depth 
of  the  eye  is  called,  is  elongated.  These  changes 
in  the  eye  vary  its  power  over  the  rays  of  light  in 
such  a  manner  and  degree  as  to  produce  exactly 
the  effect  which  is  wanted,  viz.  the  formation  of  an 
image  upon  the  retina,  whether  the  rays  come  to  the 
eye  in  a  state  of  divergency,  which  is  the  case  when 
the  object  is  near  to  the  eye,  or  come  parallel  to 
one  another,  which  is  the  case  when  the  object  is 


so  APPLICATION  OF 

placed  at  a  distance.  Can  any  thing  be  more  de- 
cisive of  contrivance  than  this  is  ?  The  most  secret 
laws  of  optics  must  have  been  known  to  the  author 
of  a  structure  endowed  with  such  a  capacity  of 
change.  It  is  as  though  an  optician,  when  he  had 
a  nearer  object  to  view,  should  rectify  his  instru- 
ment by  putting  in  another  glass,  at  the  same  time 
drawing  out  also  his  tube  to  a  different  length. 

Observe  a  new-born  child  first  lifting  up  its  eye- 
lids. What  does  the  opening  of  the  curtain  dis- 
cover ?  The  anterior  part  of  two  pellucid  globes, 
which,  when  they  come  to  be  examined,  are  found 
to  be  constructed  upon  strict  optical  principles  ;  the 
self-same  principles  upon  which  we  ourselves  con- 
struct optical  instruments.  We  find  them  perfect 
for  the  purpose  of  forming  an  image  by  refraction  ; 
composed  of  parts  executing  different  offices  :  one 
part  having  fulfilled  its  office  upon  the  pencil  of 
light,  delivering  it  over  to  the  action  of  another 
part ;  that  to  a  third,  and  so  onward  :  the  progres- 
sive action  depending  for  its  success  upon  the  nicest 
and  minutest  adjustment  of  the  parts  concerned  ; 
yet,  these  parts  so  in  fact  adjusted,  as  to  produce, 
not  by  a  simple  action  or  effect,  but  by  a  combina- 
tion of  actions  and  effects,  the  result  which  is  ulti- 
mately wanted.  And  forasmuch  as  this  organ 
would  have  to  operate  under  different  circumstances, 
with  strong  degrees  of  light,  and  with  weak  degrees, 
upon  near  objects,  and  upon  remote  ones,  and  these 
differences  demanded,  according  to  the  laws  by 
which  the  transmission  of  light  is  regulated,  a  cor- 
responding  diversity  of  structure  ;  that  the  aperture, 


THE  ARGUMENT.  31 

for  example,  through  which  the  Ught  passes,  should 
be  larger  or  less  ;  the  lenses  rounder  or  flatter,  or 
that  their  distance  from  the  tablet,  upon  which  the 
picture  is  delineated,  should  be  shortened  or  length- 
ened ;  this,  I  say,  being  the  case,  and  the  difficulty 
to  which  the  eye  was  to  be  adapted,  we  find  its 
several  parts  capable  of  being  occasionally  changed, 
and  a  most  artificial  apparatus  provided  to  produce 
that  change.  This  is  far  beyond  the  common  regu- 
lator of  a  watch,  which  requires  the  touch  of  a  fo- 
reign hand  to  set  it ;  but  it  is  not  altogether  unlike 
Harrison^s  contrivance  for  making  a  watch  regulate 
itself,  by  inserting  within  it  a  machinery,  which,  by 
the  artful  use  of  the  different  expansion  of  metals, 
preserves  the  equability  of  the  motion  under  all  the 
various  temperatures  of  heat  and  cold  in  which  the 
instrument  may  happen  to  be  placed.  The  inge- 
nuity of  this  last  contrivance  has  been  justly 
praised.  Shall,  therefore,  a  structure  which  differs; 
from  it,  chiefly  by  surpassing  it,  be  accounted  no 
contrivance  at  all  ?  or,  if  it  be  a  contrivance,  that 
it  is  without  a  contriver ! 

But  this,  though  much,  is  not  the  whole  ;  by  dif- 
ferent species  of  animals  the  faculty  we  are  describ- 
ing is  possessed,  in  degrees  suited  to  the  different 
range  of  vision  which  their  mode  of  life,  and  of 
procuring  their  food,  requires.  Birds,  for  instance, 
in  general,  procure  their  food  by  means  of  their 
beak ;  and,  the  distance  between  the  eye  and  the 
point  of  the  beak  being  small,  it  becomes  necessary 
that  they  should  have  the  power  of  seeing  very  near 
objects  distinctly.     On  the  other  hand,  from  being 


32  APPLICATION  OF 

often  elevated  much  above  the  ground,  living  in 
air,  and  moving  through  it  with  great  velocity,  they 
require,  for  their  safety,  as  well  as  for  assisting 
them  in  descrying  their  prey,  a  power  of  seeing  at  a 
great  distance  ;  a  power  of  which,  in  birds  of  rapine, 
surprising  examples  are  given.  The  fact  accord- 
ingly is,  that  two  peculiarities  are  found  in  the  eyes 
of  birds,  both  tending  to  facilitate  the  change  upon 
which  the  adjustment  of  the  eye  to  different  distan- 
ces depends.  The  one  is  a  bony,  yet,  in  most  species, 
a  flexible  rim  or  hoop,  surrounding  the  broadest 
part  of  the  eye  ;  which,  confining  the  action  of  the 
muscles  to  that  part,  increases  the  effect  of  their 
lateral  pressure  upon  the  orb,  by  which  pressure  its 
axis  is  elongated  for  the  purpose  of  looking  at  very 
near  objects.  The  other  is  an  additional  muscle, 
called  the  marsupium,  to  draw,  on  occasion,  the 
crystalline  lens  back^  and  to  fit  the  same  eye  for  the 
viewing  of  very  distant  objects.  By  these  means, 
the  eyes  of  birds  can  pass  from  one  extreme  to 
another  of  their  scale  of  adjustment,  with  more  ease 
and  readiness  than  the  eyes  of  other  animals. 

The  eyes  oi  fishes  also,  compared  with  those  of 
terrestrial  animals,  exhibit  certain  distinctions  of 
structure  adapted  to  their  state  and  element.  We 
have  already  observed  upon  the  figure  of  the  crys- 
talline compensating  by  its  roundness  the  density 
of  the  medium  through  which  their  light  passes. 
To  which  we  have  to  add,  that  the  eyes  of  fish,  in 
their  natural  and  indolent  state,  appear  to  be  adjust- 
ed to  near  objects,  in  this  respect  differing  from 
the  human  eye,  as  well  as  those  of  quadrupeds  and 


THE  ARGUMENT. 


33 


birds*  The  ordinary  shape  of  the  fish's  eye  being 
in  a  much  higher  degree  convex  than  that  of  land 
animals,  a  corresponding  difference  attends  its  mus- 
cular conformation,  viz.  that  it  is  throughout  cal- 
culated for Jlattening  the  eye. 

The  iris  also  in  the  eyes  of  fish  does  not  admit  of 
contraction.  This  is  a  great  difference,  of  which 
the  probable  reason  is,  that  the  diminished  light  in 
water  is  never  too  strong  for  the  retina. 

In  the  eely  which  has  to  work  its  head  through 
sand  and  gravel,  the  roughest  and  harshest  sub- 
stances, there  is  placed  before  the  eye,  and  at  some 
distance  from  it,  a  transparent,  horny,  convex  case 
or  covering,  which,  without  obstructing  the  sight, 
defends  the  organ.  To  such  an  animal,  could  any 
thing  be  more  wanted,  or  more  useful  ? 

Thus,  in  comparing  the  eyes  of  different  kinds  of     | 
animals,  we  see,  in  their  resemblances  and  distinc-      | 
tions,  one  general  plan  laid  down,  and  that  plan 
varied  with  the  varying  exigencies  to  which  it  is  to      | 
be  applied. 

There  is  one  property,  however,  common  I  be- 
lieve to  all  eyes,  at  least  to  all  which  have  been  ex- 
amined,* namely,  that  the  optic  nerve  enters  the 
bottom  of  the  eye,  not  in  the  centre  or  middle,  but 
a  little  on  one  side :  not  in  the  point  where  the 
axis  of  the  eye  meets  the  retina,  but  between  that 
point  and  the  nose.  The  difference  which  this 
makes  is,  that  no  part  of  an  object  is  unperceived 
by  both  eyes  at  the  same  time. 

*  The  eye  of  the  seal  or  sea-calf,  I  understand,  is  an  exception ;  Mein. 
Acad.  Paris,  1701,  p.  123. 


34  APPLICATION  OF 

In  considering  vision  as  achieved  by  the  means  of 
an  image  formed  at  the  bottom  of  the  eye,  we  can 
never  reflect  without  wonder  upon  the  smallness, 
yet  correctness  of  the  picture,  the  subtilty  of  the 
touch,  the  fineness  of  the  lines.  A  landscape  of 
five  or  six  square  leagues  is  brought  into  a  space  of 
half  an  inch  diameter  ;  yet  the  multitude  of  objects 
which  it  contains,  are  all  preserved ;  are  all  discri- 
minated  in  their  magnitudes,  positions,  figures,  co- 
lours. The  prospect  from  Hampstead-hill  is  com- 
pressed into  the  compass  of  a  sixpence,  yet  circum- 
stantially represented.  A  stage-coach,  travelling 
at  its  ordinary  speed  for  half  an  hour,  passes,  in  the 
eye,  only  over  one-twelfth  of  an  inch,  yet  is  this 
change  of  place  in  the  image  distinctly  perceived 
throughout  its  whole  progress ;  for  it  is  only  by , 
means  of  that  perception  that  the  motion  of  the 
coach  itself  is  made  sensible  to  the  eye.  If*  any 
thing  can  abate  our  admiration  of  the  smallness  of 
the  visual  tablet  compared  with  the  extent  of  vi- 
vsion,  it  is  a  reflection,  which  the  view  of  nature 
leads  us,  every  hour,  to  make,  viz.  that,  in  the 
hands  of  the  Creator,  great  and  little  are  nothing. 

Sturmius  held,  that  the  examination  of  the  eye 
was  a  cure  for  atheism.  Besides  that  conformity  to 
optical  principles  which  its  internal  constitution 
displays,  and  which  alone  amounts  to  a  manifesta- 
tion of  intelligence  having  been  exerted  in  the  struc- 
ture ;  besides  this,  which  forms,  no  doubt,  the  lead- 
ing character  of  the  organ,  there  is  to  be  seen,  in  every 
thing  belonging  to  it  and  about  it,  an  extraordinary 
degree  of  care,  an  anxiety  for  its  preservation,  due. 


THE  ARGUMENT.  S5 

if  we  may  so  speak,  to  its  value  and  its  tenderness. 
It  is  lodged  in  a  strong,  deep,  bony  socket,  com- 
posed by  the  junction  of  seven  different  bones,* 
hollowed  out  at  their  edges.  In  some  few  species, 
as  that  of  the  coatimondi,t  the  orbit  is  not  bony 
throughout;  but  whenever  this  is  the  case,  the 
upper,  which  is  the  deficient  part,  is  supplied  by  a 
cartilaginous  ligament ;  a  substitution  which  shows 
the  same  care.  V/ithin  this  socket  it  is  imbedded 
in  fat,  of  all  animal  substances  the  best  adapted 
both  to  its  repose  and  motion.  It  is  sheltered  by 
the  eyebrows ;  an  arch  of  hair,  which,  like  a  thatched 
penthouse,  prevents  the  sweat  and  moisture  of  the 
forehead  from  running  down  into  it. 

But  it  is  still  better  protected  by  its  lid.  Of  the 
superficial  parts  of  the  animal  frame,  I  know  none 
which,  in  its  office  and  structure,  is  more  deserving 
of  attention  than  the  eyelid.  It  defends  the  eye ; 
it  wipes  it ;  it  closes  it  in  sleep.  Are  there,  in  any 
work  of  art  whatever,  purposes  more  evident  than 
those  which  this  organ  fulfils  ?  or  an  apparatus  for 
executing  those  purposes  more  intelligible,  more 
appropriate,  or  more  mechanical  ?  If  it  be  over- 
looked by  the  observer  of  nature,  it  can  only  be 
because  it  is  obvious  and  familiar.  This  is  a  ten- 
dency to  be  guarded  against.  We  pass  by  the 
plainest  instances,  whilst  we  are  exploring  those 
which  are  rare  and  curious ;  by  which  conduct  of 
the  understanding,  we  sometimes  neglect  the 
strongest  observations,  being  taken  up  with  others, 

*  Heister,  sect.  89.  f  Mem.  R.  Ac.  Paris,  p.  117. 


36  APPLICATION  OF 

which,  though  more  recondite  and  scientific,  are, 
as  soHd  arguments,  entitled  to  much  less  considera- 
tion. 

In  order  to  keep  the  eye  moist  and  clean  (which 
qualities  are  necessary  to  its  brightness  and  its  use), 
a  wash  is  constantly  supplied  by  a  secretion  for  the 
purpose ;  and  the  superfluous  brine  is  conveyed  to 
the  nose  through  a  perforation  in  the  bone  as  large 
as  a  goose-quill.  When  once  the  fluid  has  entered 
the  nose,  it  spreads  itself  upon  the  inside  of  the 
nostril,  and  is  evaporated  by  the  current  of  warm 
air,  which,  in  the  course  of  respiration,  is  continu- 
ally passing  over  it.  Can  any  pipe  or  outlet,  for 
carrying  off  the  w^aste  liquor  from  a  dye-house  or 
a  distillery,  be  more  mechanical  than  this  is  ?  It  is 
easily  perceived,  that  the  eye  must  want  moisture : 
but  could  the  want  of  the  eye  generate  the  gland 
which  produces  the  tear,  or  bore  the  hole  by  which 
it  is  discharged, — a  hole  through  a  bone  ? 

It  is  observable,  that  this  provision  is  not  found 
in  fish, — the  element  in  which  they  live  supplying 
a  constant  lotion  to  the  eye. 

It  were,  however,  injustice  to  dismiss  the  eye 
as  a  piece  of  mechanism,  without  noticing  that 
most  exquisite  of  all  contrivances,  the  nictitating 
membrane^  which  is  found  in  the  eyes  of  birds  and 
of  many  quadrupeds.  Its  use  is  to  sweep  the  eye, 
which  it  does  in  an  instant,  to  spread  over  it  the 
lachrymal  humour;  to  defend  it  also  from  sud- 
den injuries  ;  yet  not  totally,  when  drawn  upon  the 
pupil,  to  shut  out  the  light.  The  commodiousness 
with  which  it  lies  folded  up  in  the  upper  corner 


THE  ARGUMENT.  37 

of  the  eye,  ready  for  use  and  action,  and  the  quick- 
ness with  which  it  executes  its  purpose,  are  proper- 
ties known  and  obvious  to  every  observer:  but  what 
is  equally  admirable,  though  not  quite  so  obvious, 
is  the  combination  of  two  kinds  of  substance,  mus- 
cular and  elastic,  and  of  two  different  kinds  of 
action,  by  which  the  motion  of  this  membrane  is 
performed.  It  is  not,  as  in  ordinary  cases,  by  the 
action  of  two  antagonist  muscles,  one  pulling  for- 
ward and  the  other  backward,  that  a  reciprocal 
change  is  effected ;  but  it  is  thus  :  The  membrane 
itself  is  an  elastic  substance,  capable  of  being  drawn 
out  by  force  like  a  piece  of  elastic  gum,  and  by  its 
own  elasticity  returning,  when  the  force  is  removed, 
to  its  former  position.  Such  being  its  nature,  in 
order  to  fit  it  up  for  its  office,  it  is  connected  by  a 
tendon  or  thread  with  a  muscle  in  the  back  part  of 
the  eye  :  this  tendon  or  thread,  though  strong,  is  so 
fine,  as  not  to  obstruct  the  sight,  even  when  it  passes 
across  it;  and  the  muscle  itself,  being  placed  in 
the  back  part  of  the  eye,  derives  from  its  situation 
the  advantage,  not  only  of  being  secure,  but  of 
being  out  of  the  way ;  which  it  would  hardly  have 
been  in  any  position  that  could  be  assigned  to  it 
in  the  anterior  part  of  the  orb,  where  its  function 
lies.  When  the  muscle  behind  the  eye  contracts, 
the  membrane,  by  means  of  the  communicating 
thread,  is  instantly  drawn  over  the  fore-part  of  it. 
When  the  muscular  contraction  (which  is  a  positive, 
and,  most  probably,  a  voluntary  effort,)  ceases  to  be 
exerted,  the  elasticity  alone  of  the  membrane  brings 


38  APPLICATION  OF 

it  back  again  to  its  position.  ^  Does  not  this,  if  any 
thing  can  do  it,  bespeak  an  artist,  master  of  his  work, 
acquainted  with  his  materials?  "  Of  a  thousand 
other  things,'*  say  the  French  academicians,  "  we 
perceive  not  the  contrivance,  because  we  under- 
stand them  only  by  the  effects,  of  which  we  know 
not  the  causes :  but  we  here  treat  of  a  machine,  all 
the  parts  whereof  are  visible ;  and  which  need  only 
be  looked  upon,  to  discover  the  reasons  of  its  motion 
and  action/' t 

In  the  configuration  of  the  muscle  which,  though 
placed  behind  the  eye,  draws  the  nictitating  mem- 
brane over  the  eye,  there  is,  what  the  authors,  just 
now  quoted,  deservedly  call  a  marvellous  mecha- 
nism. I  suppose  this  structure  to  be  found  in  other 
animals ;  but,  in  the  memoirs  from  which  this  ac- 
count is  taken,  it  is  anatomically  demonstrated  only 
in  the  cassowary.  The  muscle  is  passed  through  a 
loopformed  by  another  muscle  ;  and  is  there  inflected, 
as  if  it  were  round  a  pulley.  This  is  a  peculiarity ; 
and  observe  the  advantage  of  it.  A  single  muscle 
with  a  straight  tendon,  which  is  the  common  mus- 
cular form,  would  have  been  sufficient,  if  it  had  had 
power  to  draw  far  enough.  But  the  contraction, 
necessary  to  draw  the  membrane  over  the  whole  eye, 
required  a  longer  muscle  than  could  lie  straight 
at  the  bottom  of  the  eye.  Therefore,  in  order  to 
have  a  greater  length  in  a  less  compass,  the  cord  of 

*   Phil.  Trans.  1796. 

t  ^Memoirs  for  a  Natural  History  of  Animals,  by  the  Royal  Academy  of 
Sciences  at  Paris,  done  into  English  by  order  of  the  Royal  Society,  J  701, 
page  249. 


THP  ARGUMENT.  39 

the  main  muscle  makes  an  angle.  This,  so  far, 
answers  the  end ;  but,  still  further,  it  makes  an 
angle,  not  round  a  fixed  pivot,  but  round  a  loop 
formed  by  another  muscle  ;  which  second  muscle, 
whenever  it  contracts,  of  course  twitches  the  first 
muscle  at  the  point  of  inflection,  and  thereby  assists 
the  action  designed  by  both. 

One  question  may  possibly  have  dwelt  in  the 
reader^s  mind  during  the  perusal  of  these  observa- 
tions, namely.  Why  should  not  the  Deity  have  given 
to  the  animal  the  faculty  of  vision  at  once  ?  Why 
this  circuitous  perception  ;  the  ministry  of  so  many 
means  ;  an  element  provided  for  the  purpose ;  re- 
flected from  opaque  substances,  refracted  through 
transparent  ones  ;  and  both  according  to  precise 
laws  ;  then,  a  complex  organ,  an  intricate  and  arti- 
ficial apparatus,  in  order,  by  the  operation  of  this 
element,  and  in  conformity  with  the  restrictions  of 
these  laws,  to  produce  an  image  upon  a  membrane 
communicating  with  the  brain  ?  Wherefore  all  this  ? 
Why  make  the  difficulty  in  order  to  surmount  it  ?  If 
to  perceive  objects  by  some  other  mode  than  that  of 
touch,  or  objects  which  lay  out  of  the  reach  of  that 
sense,  were  the  thing  proposed ;  could  not  a  simple 
volition  of  the  Creator  have  communicated  the  capa- 
city ?  Why  resort  to  contrivance,  where  power  is 
omnipotent  ?  (^ntriyancej,  by  its  very  definition  and 
nature,  is  the  refuge  of  imperfection.  To  have 
recourse  to  expedients,  implies  difficulty,  impedi- 
ment, restraint,  defect  of  power.  This  question 
belongs  to  the  other  senses,  as  well  as  to  sight ; 


40  APPLICATION  OF 

to  the  general  functions  of  animal  life,  as  nutri- 
tion, secretion,  respiration  ;  to  the  economy  of  vege- 
tables ;  and  indeed  to  almost  all  the  operations  of 
nature.  The  question,  therefore,  is  of  very  wide 
extent ;  and  amongst  other  answers  which  may  be 
given  to  it,  beside  reasons  of  which  probably  we 
are  ignorant,  one  answer  is  this :  It  is  only  by 
the  display  of  contrivance,  that  the  existence,  the 
agency,  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity,  could  be  testified 
to  his  rational  creatures.  This  is  the  scale  by  which 
we  ascend  to  all  the  knowledge  of  our  Creator 
which  we  possess,  so  far  as  it  depends  upon  the 
phenomena,  or  the  works  of  nature.  Take  away 
this,  and  you  take  away  from  us  every  subject  of 
observation,  and  ground  of  reasoning  ;  I  mean  as 
our  rational  faculties  are  formed  at  present.  What- 
ever is  done,  God  could  have  done  without  the 
intervention  of  instruments  or  means  :  but  it  is  in 
the  construction  of  instruments,  in  the  choice  and 
adaptation  of  means,  that  a  creative  intelligence  is 
seen.  It  is  this  which  constitutes  the  order  and 
beauty  of  the  universe.  God,  therefore,  has  been 
pleased  to  prescribe  limits  to  his  own  power,  and  to 
work  his  ends  within  those  limits.  The  general 
laws  of  matter  have  perhaps  the  nature  of  these 
limits ;  its  inertia,  its  re-action  ;  the  laws  which 
govern  the  communication  of  motion,  the  refraction 
and  reflection  of  light,  the  constitution  of  fluids 
non-elastic  and  elastic,  the  transmission  of  sound 
through  the  latter ;  the  laws  of  magnetism,  of 
electricity  ;  and  probably  others,  yet  undiscovered. 
These  are  general  laws  ;  and  when   a  particular 


THE  ARGUMENT.  41 

purpose  is  to  be  effected,  it  is  not  by  making  a  new 
law,  nor  by  the  suspension  of  the  old  ones,  nor  by 
making  them  wind,  and  bend,  and  yield  to  the  oc- 
casion (for  nature  with  great  steadiness  adheres  to 
and  supports  them)  ;  but  it  is,  as  we  have  seen  in 
the  eye,  by  the  interposition  of  an  apparatus,  cor- 
responding with  these  laws,  „and  suited  to  the  exi- 
gency which  results  from  them,  that  the  purpose  is 
at  length  attained.  As  we  have  said,  therefore, 
God  prescribes  limits  to  his  power,  that  he  may  let 
in  the  exercise,  and  thereby  exhibit  demonstrations 
of  his  wisdom.  For  then,  i.  e.  such  laws  and  limita- 
tions being  laid  down,  it  is  as  though  one  Being 
should  have  fixed  certain  rules  ;  and,  if  we  may  so 
speak,  provided  certain  materials ;  and,  afterwards, 
have  committed  to  another  Being,  out  of  these  ma- 
terials, and  in  subordination  to  these  rules,  the  task 
of  drawing  forth  a  creation  :  a  supposition  which 
evidently  leaves  room,  and  induces  indeed  a  ne- 
cessity for  contrivance.  Nay,  there  may  be  many 
such  agents,  and  many  ranks  of  these.  We  do  not 
advance  this  as  a  doctrine  either  of  philosophy  or 
of  religion  ;  but  we  say  that  the  subject  may  safely 
be  represented  under  this  view,  because  the  Deity, 
acting  himself  by  general  laws,  will  have  the  same 
consequences  upon  our  reasoning,  as  if  he  had  pre- 
scribed these  laws  to  another.  It  has  been  said, 
that  the  problem  of  creation  was,  "  attraction  and 
matter  being  given,  to  make  a  world  out  of  them  :'' 
and,  as  above  explained,  this  statement  perhaps 
does  not  convey  a  false  idea. 


42  APPLICATION  OF 

We  have  made  choice  of  the  eye  as  an  instance 
upon  which  to  rest  the  argument  of  this  chapter. 
Some  single  example  was  to  be  proposed  ;  and  the 
eye  offered  itself  under  the  advantage  of  admitting 
of  a  strict  comparison  with  optical  instruments. 
The  ear,  it  is  probable,  is  no  less  artificially  and 
mechanically  adapted  to  its  office,  than  the  eye. 
But  we  know  less  about  it :  we  do  not  so  well  un- 
derstand the  action,  the  use,  or  the  mutual  depend- 
ency of  its  internal  parts.  Its  general  form,  how- 
ever, both  external  and  internal,  is  sufficient  to 
show  that  it  is  an  instrument  adapted  to  the  recep- 
tion of  sound  ;  that  is  to  say,  already  knowing  that 
sound  consists  in  pulses  of  the  air,  we  perceive,  in 
the  structure  of  the  ear,  a  suitableness  to  receive 
impressions  from  this  species  of  action,  and  to  pro- 
pagate these  impressions  to  the  brain.  For  of  what 
does  this  structure  consist  ?  An  external  ear  (the 
concha),  calculated,  like  an  ear-trumpet,  to  catch 
and  collect  the  pulses  of  which  we  have  spoken  ;  in 
large  quadrupeds,  turning  to  the  sound,  and  pos- 
sessing a  configuration,  as  well  as  motion,  evidently 
fitted  for  the  office :  of  a  tube  which  leads  into  the 
head,  lying  at  the  root  of  this  outward  ear,  the 
folds  and  sinuses  therefore  tending  and  conducting 
the  air  towards  it :  of  a  thin  membrane,  like  the 
pelt  of  a  drum,  stretched  across  this  passage  upon 
a  bony  rim  :  of  a  chain  of  moveable,  and  infinitely 
curious,  bones,  forming  a  communication,  and  the 
only  communication  that  can  be  observed,  between 
the  membrane  last  mentioned  and  the  interior  chan- 
nels and  recesses  of  the  skull :  of  cavities,  similar 


THE  ARGUMENT.  43 

in  shape  and  form  to  wind  instruments  of  music, 
being  spiral  or  portions  of  circles  :  of  the  eustachian 
tube,  like  the  hole  in  a  drum,  to  let  the  air  pass 
freely  into  and  out  of  the  barrel  of  the  ear,  as  the 
covering  membrane  vibrates,  or  as  the  temperature 
may  be  altered :  the  whole  labyrinth  hewn  out  of  a 
rock ;  that  is,  wrought  into  the  substance  of  the 
hardest  bone  of  the  body.  This  assemblage  of 
connected  parts  constitutes  together  an  apparatus, 
plainly  enough  relative  to  the  transmission  of  sound, 
or  of  the  impulses  received  from  sound,  and  only 
to  be  lamented  in  not  being  better  understood. 

The  communication  within,  formed  by  the  small 
bones  of  the  ear,  is,  to  look  upon,  more  like  what 
we  are  accustomed  to  call  machinery,  than  any 
thing  I  am  acquainted  with  in  animal  bodies.  It 
seems  evidently  designed  to  continue  towards  the 
sensorium  the  tremulous  motions  which  are  excited 
in  the  membrane  of  the  tympanum,  or  what  is  bet- 
ter known  by  the  name  of  the  ''  drum  of  the  ear.'* 
The  compages  of  bones  consists  of  four,  which  are 
so  disposed,  and  so  hinge  upon  one  another,  as  that 
if  the  membrane,  the  drum  of  the  ear,  vibrate,  all 
the  four  are  put  in  motion  together ;  and,  by  the 
result  of  their  action,  work  the  base  of  that  which  is 
the  last  in  the  series,  upon  an  aperture  which  it  closes, 
and  upon  which  it  plays,  and  which  aperture  opens 
into  the  tortuous  canals  that  lead  to  the  brain. 
This  last  bone  of  the  four  is  called  the  stapes.  The 
office  of  the  drum  of  the  ear  is  to  spread  out  an  ex- 
tended surface,  capable  of  receiving  the  impressions 
of  sound,  and  of  being  put  by  them  into  a  state  of 


44  APPLICATION  OF 

vibration.     The  office  of  the  stapes  is  to  repeat  these 
vibrations.     It  is  a  repeating  frigate,  stationed  more 
within  the  Hne.     From  which  account  of  its  action 
may  be  understood,  how  the  sensation  of  sound  will 
be  excited  by  any  thing  which  communicates   a 
vibratory  motion  to  the  stapes,  though  not,  as  in 
all  ordinary  cases,  through  the  intervention  of  the 
membrana  tympani.     This  is  done  by  solid  bodies 
applied  to  the  bones  of  the  skull,  as  by  a  metal  bar 
holden  at  one  end  between  the  teeth,  and  touching 
at  the  other  end  a  tremulous  body.     It  likewise  ap- 
pears to  be  done,  in  a  considerable  degree,  by  the 
air  itself,  even  when  this  membrane,  the  drum  of 
the  ear,  is  greatly  damaged.     Either  in  the  natural 
or  preternatural  state  of  the  organ,  the  use  of  the 
chain  of  bones  is  to  propagate  the  impulse  in  a  di- 
rection towards  the  brain,  and  to  propagate  it  with 
the  advantage  of  a  lever ;  which  advantage  consists 
in  increasing  the  force  and  strength  of  the  vibration, 
and  at  the  same  time  diminishing  the  space  through 
which  it  oscillates ;  both  of  which  changes  may 
augment  or  facilitate  the  still  deeper  action  of  the 
auditory  nerves. 

The  benefit  of  the  eustachian  tube  to  the  organ, 
may  be  made  out  upon  known  pneumatic  principles. 
Behind  the  drum  of  the  ear  is  a  second  cavity,  or  bar- 
rel, called  the  tympanum.  The  eustachian  tube  is  a 
slender  pipe,  but  sufficient  for  the  passage  of  air, 
leading  from  this  cavity  into  the  back  part  of  the 
mouth.  Now,  it  would  not  have  done  to  have  had 
a  vacuum  in  this  cavity  ;  for,  in  that  case,  the  pres- 
sure of  the  atmosphere  from  without  would  have 


THE  ARGUMENT.  45 

burst  the  membrane  which  covered  it.  Nor  would 
it  have  done  to  have  filled  the  cavity  with  lymph 
or  any  other  secretion  ;  which  would  necessarily 
have  obstructed  both  the  vibration  of  the  mem- 
brane and  the  play  of  the  small  bones.  Nor,  last- 
ly, would  it  have  done  to  have  occupied  the  space 
with  confined  air,  because  the  expansion  of  that  air 
by  heat,  or  its  contraction  by  cold,  would  have  dis- 
tended or  relaxed  the  covering  membrane,  in  a  de- 
gree inconsistent  with  the  purpose  which  it  was 
assigned  to  execute.  The  only  remaining  expe- 
dient, and  that  for  which  the  eustachian  tube 
serves,  is  to  open  to  this  cavity  a  communication 
with  the  external  air.  In  one  word ;  it  exactly  an-  /) 
swers  the  purpose  of  the  hole  in  a  drum. 

The  membrana  tympani  itself  likewise,  deserves 
all  the  examination  which  can  be  made  of  it.  It 
is  not  found  in  the  ears  of  fish  ;  which  furnishes  an 
additional  proof  of  what  indeed  is  indicated  by 
every  thing  about  it,  that  it  is  appropriated  to  the 
action  of  air,  or  of  an  elastic  medium.  It  bears  an 
obvious  resemblance  to  the  pelt  or  head  of  a  drum, 
from  which  it  takes  its  name.  It  resembles  also  a 
drum-head  in  this  principal  property,  that  its  use 
depends  upon  its  tension.  Tension  is  the  state 
essential  to  it.  Now  we  know  that,  in  a  drum,  the 
pelt  is  carried  over  a  hoop,  and  braced  as  occasion 
requires,  by  the  means  of  strings  attached  to  its  cir- 
cumference. In  the  membrane  of  the  ear,  the  same 
purpose  is  provided  for,  more  simply,  but  not  less 
mechanically,  nor  less  successfully,  by  a  different 
expedient,  viz.  by  the  end  of  a  bone  (the  handle  of 


46  APPLICATION  OF 

the  malleus)  pressing  upon  its  centre.  It  is  only  in 
very  large  animals  that  the  texture  of  this  mem- 
brane can  be  discerned.  In  the  Philosophical 
Transactions  for  the  year  1800,  (vol.  i.)  Mr  Eve- 
rard  Home  has  given  some  curious  observations  up- 
on the  ear,  and  the  drum  of  the  ear  of  an  elephant 
He  discovered  in  it  what  he  calls  a  radiated 
muscle,  that  is,  straight  muscular  fibres,  passing 
along  the  membrane  from  the  circumference  to  the 
centre ;  from,  the  bony  rim  which  surrounds  it  to- 
wards the  handle  of  the  malleus  to  which  the  cen- 
tral part  is  attached.  This  muscle  he  supposes  to 
be  designed  to  bring  the  membrane  into  unison 
with  different  sounds :  but  then  he  also  discovered, 
that  this  muscle  itself  cannot  act,  unless  the  mem- 
brane be  drawn  to  a  stretch,  and  kept  in  a  due  state 
of  tightness,  by  what  may  be  called  a  foreign  force, 
viz.  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  malleus.  Sup- 
posing his  explanation  of  the  use  of  the  parts  to  be 
just,  our  author  is  well  founded  in  the  reflection 
which  he  makes  upon  it,  "  That  this  mode  of 
adapting  the  ear  to  different  sounds,  is  one  of  the 
most  beautiful  applications  of  muscles  in  the  body ; 
the  mechanism  is  so  simple^  and  the  variety  of  effects 
so  great.^^ 

In  another  volume  of  the  Transactions  above  re- 
ferred to,  and  of  the  same  year,  two  most  curious 
cases  are  related,  of  persons  who  retained  the  sense 
of  hearing,  not  in  a  perfect,  but  in  a  very  considera- 
ble degree,  notwithstanding  the  almost  total  loss  of 
the  membrane  we  have  been  describing.  In  one  of 
these  cases,  the  use  here  assigned  to  that  mem- 


THE  ARGUMENT.  47 

brane,  of  modifying  the  impressions  of  sound  by- 
change  of  tension,  was  attempted  to  be  supplied  by 
straining  the  muscles  of  the  outward  ear.  "  The 
external  ear/*  we  are  told,  "  had  acquired  a  distinct 
motion  upward  and  backward,  which  was  observ- 
able whenever  the  patient  listened  to  any  thing 
which  he  did  not  distijictly  hear ;  when  he  was  ad- 
dressed in  a  whisper,  the  ear  was  seen  immediately 
to  move ;  when  the  tone  of  voice  was  louder,  it 
then  remained  altogether  motionless.'* 

It  appears  probable,  from  both  these  cases,  that  a 
collateral,  if  not  principal,  use  of  the  membrane,  is 
to  cover  and  protect  the  barrel  of  the  ear  which  lies 
behind  it.  Both  the  patients  suffered  from  cold  : 
one,  "  a  great  increase  of  deafness  from  catching 
cold  ;**  the  other,  ^'  very  considerable  pain  from  ex- 
posure to  a  stream  of  cold  air.'*  Bad  effects  there- 
fore followed  from  this  cavity  being  left  open  to  the 
external  air  ;  yet,  had  the  Author  of  nature  shut  it 
up  by  any  other  cover,  than  what  was  capable,  by 
its  texture,  of  receiving  vibrations  from  sound,  and, 
by  its  connexion  with  the  interior  parts,  of  trans- 
mitting those  vibrations  to  the  brain,  the  use  of  the 
organ,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,  must  have  been  en- 
tirely obstructed. 


48  OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF 


CHAPTER  IV. 

OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF  PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS. 

The  generation  of  the  animal  no  more  accounts  for 
the  contrivance  of  the  eye  or  ear,  than,  upon  the 
supposition  stated  in  a  preceding  chapter,  the  pro- 
duction of  a  watch  by  the  motion  and  mechanism 
of  a  former  watch,  would  account  for  the  skill  and 
intention  evidenced  in  the  watch  so  produced ; 
than  it  would  account  for  the  disposition  of  the 
wheels,  the  catching  of  their  teeth,  the  relation  of 
the  several  parts  of  the  works  to  one  another,  and  to 
their  common  end ;  for  the  suitableness  of  their 
forms  and  places  to  their  offices,  for  their  connec- 
tion, their  operation,  and  the  useful  result  of  that 
operation.  I  do  insist  most  strenuously  upon  the 
/  correctness  of  this  comparison  ;  that  it  holds  as  to 
every  mode  of  specific  propagation  ;  and  that  what- 
ever was  true  of  the  watch,  under  the  hypothesis 
above-mentioned,  is  true  of  plants  and  animals. 

I.  To  begin  with  the  fructification  of  plants.  Can 
it  be  doubted  but  that  the  seed  contains  a  particular 
organization  ?  Whether  a  latent  plantule  with  the 
means  of  temporary  nutrition,  or  whatever  else  it  be, 
it  encloses  an  organization  suited  to  the  germina- 
tion of  a  new  plant.  Has  the  plant  which  produced 
the  seed  any  thing  more  to  do  with  that  organiza- 


PLANTS  AND  ANIMALS.  49 

tion,  than  the  watch  would  have  had  to  do  with  the 
structure  of  the  watch  which  was  produced  in  the 
course  of  its  mechanical  movement  ?  I  mean,  Has 
it  any  thing  at  all  to  do  with  the  contrivance  ?  The 
maker  and  contriver  of  one  watch,  when  he  insert- 
ed within  it  a  mechanism  suited  to  the  production 
of  another  watch,  was,  in  truth,  the  maker  and  con- 
triver of  that  other  watch.     All  the  properties  of 
the  new  watch  were  to  be  referred  to  his  agency : 
the  design  manifested  in  it,  to  his  intention :  the 
art,  to  him  as  the  artist :  the  collocation  of  each  part 
to  his  placing :  the  action,  effect,  and  use,  to  his 
counsel,  intelligence,  and  workmanship.     In  pro- 
ducing it  by  the  intervention  of  a  former  watch,  he 
was  only  working  by  one  set  of  tools  instead  of 
another.     So  it  is  with  the  plant,  and  the  seed  pro- 
duced by  it.     Can  any  distinction  be  assigned  be- 
tween the  two  cases  ;  between  the  producing  watch, 
and  the  producing  plant ;  both  passive,  unconscious 
substances ;  both  by  the  organization  which  was 
given  to  them,  producing  their  like,  without  under- 
standing or  design  ;  both,  that  is,  instruments  ? 

II.  From  plants  we  may  proceed  to  oviparous 
animals  ;  from  seeds  to  eggs.  Now,  I  say,  that  the 
bird  has  the  same  concern  in  the  formation  of  the 
egg  which  she  lays,  as  the  plant  has  in  that  of  the 
seed  which  it  drops ;  and  no  other,  nor  greater. 
The  internal  constitution  of  the  egg  is  as  much 
a  secret  to  the  hen,  as  if  the  hen  were  inanimate. 
Her  will  cannot  alter  it,  or  change  a  single  feather 
of  the  chick.  She  can  neither  foresee  nor  deter- 
mine of  which  sex  her  brood  shall  be,  or  how  many 


50  OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF 

of  either :  yet  the  thing  produced  shall  be,  from  the 
first,  very  different  in  its  make,  according  to  the 
sex  which  it  bears.  So  far,  therefore,  from  adapt- 
ing the  means,  she  is  not  beforehand  apprised  of 
the  effect.  If  there  be  concealed  within  that  smooth 
shell  a  provision  and  a  preparation  for  the  produc- 
tion and  nourishment  of  a  new  animal,  they  are  not 
of  her  providing  or  preparing :  if  there  be  contriv- 
ance, it  is  none  of  hers.  Although,  therefore,  therer 
be  the  difference  of  life  and  perceptivity  between 
the  animal  and  the  plant,  it  is  a  difference  which 
enters  not  into  the  account.  It  is  a  foreign  circum- 
stance. It  is  a  difference  of  properties  not  employed. 
The  animal  function  and  the  vegetable  function  are 
alike  destitute  of  any  design  which  can  operate 
upon  the  form  of  the  thing  produced.  The  plant 
has  no  design  in  producing  the  seed,  no  comprehend 
sion  of  the  nature  or  use  of  what  it  produces  ;  the 
■  bird,  with  respect  to  its  egg^  is  not  above  the  plant 
\  with  respect  to  its  seed.  Neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  bears  that  sort  of  relation  to  what  proceeds 
from  them,  which  a  joiner  does  to  the  chair  which 
lie  makes.  Now  a  cause,  which  bears  this  relation 
to  the  effect,  is  what  we  want,  in  order  to  account 
for  the  suitableness  of  means  to  an  end,  the  fitness 
and  fitting  of  one  thing  to  another ;  and  this  cause 
the  parent  plant  or  animal  does  not  supply. 

It  is  farther  observable  concerning  the  propaga- 
tion of  plants  and  animals,  that  the  apparatus  em- 
ployed exhibits  no  resemblance  to  the  thing  pro- 
duced ;  in  this  respect  holding  an  analogy  with  in- 
struments and  tools  of  art.    The  filaments,  antherse^ 


JPiANTS  AND  ANIMALS.  51 

and  stigmata  of  flowers,  bear  no  more  resemblance 
to  the  young  plant,  or  even  to  the  seed,  which  is 
formed  by  their  intervention,  than  a  chisel  or  a 
plane  does  to  a  table  or  chair.  What  then  are  the 
filaments,  antheras,  and  stigmata  of  plants,  but  in- 
struments strictly  so  called  ? 

III.  We  may  advance  from  animals  which  bring 
forth  eggs,  to  animals  which  bring  forth  their  young 
alive ;  and  of  this  latter  class,  from  the  lowest  to 
the  highest ;  from  irrational  to  rational  life,  from 
brutes  to  the  human  species ;  without  perceiving,  as 
we  proceed,  any  alteration  whatever  in  the  terms 
of  the  comparison.  The  rational  animal  does  not 
produce  its  offspring  with  more  certainty  or  succe^ 
than  the  irrational  animal ;  a  man  than  a  quadruped, 
a  quadruped  than  a  bird ;  nor  (for  we  may  follow 
the  gradation  through  its  whole  scale)  a  bird  than 
a  plant ;  nor  a  plant  than  a  watch,  a  piece  of  dead 
mechanism,  would  do,  upon  the  supposition  which 
has  already  so  often  been  repeated.  Rationality 
therefore  has  nothing  to  do  in  the  business.  If  an 
account  must  be  given  of  the  contrivance  which 
we  observe  ;  if  it  be  demanded,  whence  arose  either 
the  contrivance  by  which  the  young  animal  is  pro- 
duced, or  the  contrivance  manifested  in  the  young 
animal  itself,  it  is  not  from  the  reason  of  the  parent 
that  any  such  account  can  be  drawn.  He  is  the 
cause  of  his  offspring,  in  the  same  sense  as  that  in 
which  a  gardener  is  the  cause  of  the  tulip  which 
grows  upon  his  parterre,  and  in  no  other.  We  ad- 
mire the  flower  ;  we  examine  the  plant ;  we  perceive 
the  conduciveness  of  many  of  its  parts  to  their  end 


52  OF  THE  SUCCESSION,  &C. 

and  office ;  we  observe  a  provision  for  its  nourish- 
ment, growth,  protection,  and  fecundity ;  but  we 
never  think  of  the  gardener  in  all  this.  We  attri- 
bute nothing  of  this  to  his  agency  ;  yet  it  may  still 
be  true,  that  without  the  gardener,  we  should  not 
have  had  the  tulip  :  just  so  it  is  with  the  succession 
of  animals  even  of  the  highest  order.  For  the  con- 
trivance discovered  in  the  structure  of  the  thing 
produced,  we  want  a  contriver.  The  parent  is  not 
that  contriver.  His  consciousness  decides  that 
question.  He  is  in  total  ignorance  why  that  which 
is  produced  took  its  present  form  rather  than  any 
other.  It  is  for  him  only  to  be  astonished  by  the 
effect.  We  can  no  more  look  therefore  to  the  in- 
telligence of  the  parent  animal  for  what  we  are  in 
search  of,  a  cause  of  relation,  and  of  subserviency 
of  parts  to  their  use,  which  relation  and  subservi- 
ency we  see  in  the  procreated  body,  than  we  can 
refer  the  internal  confirmation  of  an  acorn  to  the  in- 
telligence of  the  oak  from  which  it  dropped,  or  the 
structure  of  the  watch  to  the  intelligence  of  the 
watch  which  produced  it;  there  being  no  difference, 
as  far  as  argument  is  concerned,  between  an  intelli- 
gence which  is  not  exerted,  and  an  intelligence 
which  does  not  exist. 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  55 


CHAPTER  V. 

APPLICATION  OF  THE  ARGUMENT  CONTINUED. 

Every  observation  which  was  made  in  our  first 
chapter,  concerning  the  watch,  may  be  repeated 
with  strict  propriety  concerning  the  eye  ;  concern- 
ing animals ;  concerning  plants  ;  concerning,  in- 
deed, all  the  organized  parts  of  the  works  of  na- 
ture.    As, 

I.  When  we  are  inquiring  simply  after  the  esisU 
ence  of  an  intelligent  Creator,  imperfection,  inaccu- 
racy, liability  to  disorder,  occasional  irregularities, 
may  subsist  in  a  considerable  degree,  without  in- 
ducing any  doubt  into  the  question  :  just  as  a  watch 
may  frequently  go  wrong,  seldom  perhaps  exactly 
right,  may  be  faulty  in  some  parts,   defective  in 
some,  without  the  smallest  ground  of  suspicion  from  / 
thence  arising  that  it  was  not  a  watch  ;  not  made  ; ' 
or  not  made  for  the  purpose  ascribed  to  it.     When , 
faults  are  pointed  out,  and  when  a  question  is  starts  | 
ed  concerning  the  skill  of  the  artist,  or  dexterity  \ 
with  which  the  work  is  executed,  then  indeed,  in  | 
order  to  defend  these  qualities  from  accusation,  I 
we  must  be  able,  either  to  expose  some  intractable-.  | 
ness  and  imperfection  in  the  materials,  or  point  out^ 
some  invincible  difficulty  in  the   execution,  into 
which  imperfection  and  difficulty  the  matter  of 


54  APPLICATION  CONTINUED, 

complaint  may  be  resolved ;  or  if  we  cannot  do  this, 
we  must  adduce  such  specimens  of  consummate  art 
and  contrivance,  proceeding  from  the  same  hand, 
as  may  convince  the  inquirer  of  the  existence,  in 
the  case  before  him,  of  impediments  like  those 
which  we  have  mentioned,  although,  what  from  the 
nature  of  the  case  is  very  likely  to  happen,  they  be 
unknown  and  unperceived  by  him.  This  we  must 
do  in  order  to  vindicate  the  artist's  skill,  or,  at  least, 
the  perfection  of  it;  as  we  must  also  judge  of  his 
intention,  and  of  the  provisions  employed  in  fulfill- 
ing that  intention,  not  from  an  instance  in  which 
they  fail,  but  from  the  great  plurality  of  instances 
in  which  they  succeed.  But,  after  all,  these  are 
different  questions  from  the  question  of  the  artist's 
existence  ;  or,  which  is  the  same,  whether  the  thing 
before  us  be  a  work  of  art  or  not :  and  the  questions 
ought  always  to  be  kept  separate  in  the  mind.  So 
likewise  it  is  in  the  works  of  nature.  Irregularities 
and  imperfections  are  of  little  or  no  weight  in  the 
consideration,  when  that  consideration  relates  simply 
to  the  existence  of  a  Creator.  When  the  argument 
respects  his  attributes,  they  are  of  weight ;  but  are 
then  to  be  taken  in  conjunction  (the  attention  is 
not  to  rest  upon  them,  but  they  are  to  be  taken  in 
conjunction)  with  the  unexceptionable  evidences 
which  we  possess,  of  skill,  power,  and  benevolence, 
displayed  in  other  instances  ;  vi^hich  evidences  may, 
in  strength,  number,  and  variety,  be  such,  and  may 
so  overpower  apparent  blemishes,  as  to  induce  us, 
upon  the  most  reasonable  ground,  to  believe,  that 
these  last  ought  to  be  referred  to  some  cause,  though 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  5S 

we  be  ignorant  of  it,  other  than  defect  of  knowledge 
or  of  benevolence  in  the  author, 

II.  There  maybe  also  parts  of  plants  and  animals^ 
as  there  were  supposed  to  be  of  the  watch,  of  which) 
in  some  instances,  the  operation,  in  others,  the  use, 
is  unknown.  These  form  different  cases  j  for  the 
operation  may  be  unknown,  yet  the  use  be  certain. 
Thus  it  is  with  the  lungs  of  animals.  It  does  not, 
I  think,  appear,  that  we  are  acquainted  with  the 
action  of  the  air  upon  the  blood,  or  in  what  manner 
that  action  is  communicated  by  the  lungs  ;  yet  we 
find  that  a  very  short  suspension  of  their  office  de- 
stroys the  life  of  the  animal.  In  this  case,  there- 
fore, we  may  be  said  to  know  the  use,  nay  we  ex-  \ 
perience  the  necessity,  of  the  organ,  though  we  be  j 
ignorant  of  its  operation.  Nearly  the  same  thing 
may  be  observed  of  what  is  called  the  lymphatic 
system.  We  suffer  grievous  inconveniencies  from 
its  disorder,  without  being  informed  of  the  office 
which  it  sustains  in  the  economy  of  our  bodies. 
There  may  possibly  also  be  some  few  examples  of 
the  second  class,  in  which  not  only  the  operation  is 
unknown,  but  in  which  experiments  may  seem  to 
prove  that  the  part  is  not  necessary  ;  or  may  leave 
a  doubt,  how  far  it  is  even  useful  to  the  plant  or 
animal  in  which  it  is  found.  This  is  said  to  be  the 
case  with  the  spleen  ;  which  has  been  extracted  from 
dogs,  without  any  sensible  injury  to  their  vital 
functions.  Instances  of  the  former  kind,  namely, 
in  which  we  cannot  explain  the  operation,  may  be 
numerous  ;  for  they  will  be  so  in  proportion  to  our 
ignorance.    They  will  be  more  or  fewer  to  difierent 


56  APPLICATION  CONTINUED. 

persons,  and  in  different  stages  of  science.  Every 
improvement  of  knowledge  diminishes  their  num- 
ber. There  is  hardly,  perhaps,  a  year  passes,  that 
does  not,  in  the  works  of  nature,  bring  some  ope- 
ration, or  some  mode  of  operation,  to  light,  which 
was  before  undiscovered, — ^probably  unsuspected. 
Instances  of  the  second  kind,  namely,  where  the 
part  appears  to  be  totally  useless,  I  believe  to  be 
extremely  rare;  compared  with  the  number  of  those 
of  which  the  use  is  evident,  they  are  beneath  any 
assignable  proportion  ;  and,  perhaps,  have  never 
been  submitted  to  atrial  and  examination  sufficiently 
accurate,  long  enough  continued,  or  often  enough 
repeated.  No  accounts  which  I  have  seen  are 
satisfactory.  The  mutilated  animal  may  live  and 
grow  fat  (as  was  the  case  of  the  dog  deprived  of  its 
spleen),  yet  may  be  defective  in  some  other  of  its 
functions  ;  which,  whether  they  can  all,  or  in  what 
degree  of  vigour  and  perfection,  be  performed,  or 
how  long  preserved,  without  the  extirpated  organ, 
does  not  seem  to  be  ascertained  by  experiment. 
But  to  this  case,  even  were  it  fully  made  out,  may 
be  applied  the  consideration  which  we  suggested 
concerning  the  watch,  viz.  that  these  superfluous 
parts  do  not  negative  the  reasoning  which  we  in- 
stituted concerning  those  parts  which  are  useful, 
and  of  which  we  know  the  use  :  the  indication  of 
contrivance,  with  respect  to  them,  remains  as  it 
was  before. 

III.  One  atheistic  way  of  replying  to  our  obser- 
vations upon  the  works  of  nature,  and  to  the  proofs 
of  a  Deity  which  we  think  that  we  perceive  in  them. 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  57 

is  to  tell  us,  that  all  which  we  see  must  necessarily 
have  had  some  form,  and  that  it  might  as  well  be  its 
present  form  as  any  other.  Let  us  now  apply  this 
answer  to  the  eye,  as  we  did  before  to  the  watch. 
Something  or  other  must  have  occupied  that  place 
in  the  animal's  head ;  must  have  filled  up,  we  will 
say,  that  socket :  w^e  will  say  also,  that  it  must  have 
been  of  that  sort  of  substance  which  we  call  animal 
substance,  as  flesh,  bone,  membrane,  cartilage,  &c. 
But  that  it  should  have  been  an  eye^  knowing  as  we 
Ao  what  an  eye  comprehends, — viz.  that  it  should 
have  consisted,  first,  of  a  series  of  transparent  lenses 
(very  different,  by  the  bye,  even  in  their  substance, 
from  the  opaque  materials  of  which  the  rest  of  the 
body  is,  in  general  at  least,  composed ;  and  with 
which  the  whole  of  its  surface,  this  single  portion  of 
it  excepted,  is  covered)  :  secondly,  of  a  black  cloth 
or  canvass  (the  only  membrane  of  the  body  which  is 
black)  spread  out  behind  these  lenses,  so  as  to  re^ 
ceive  the  image  formed  by  pencils  of  light  trans- 
mitted through  them ;  and  placed  at  the  precise 
geometrical  distance  at  which,  and  at  which  alone, 
a  distinct  image  could  be  formed,  namely,  at  the 
concourse  of  the  refracted  rays  :  thirdly,  of  a  large 
nerve  communicating  between  this  membrane  and 
the  brain  ;  without  which,  the  action  of  light  upon 
the  membrane,  however  modified  by  the  organ, 
would  be  lost  to  the  purposes  of  sensation  : — that 
this  fortunate  conformation  of  parts  should  have 
been  the  lot,  not  of  one  individual  out  of  many 
thousand  individuals,  hke  the  great  prize  in  a  lot- 
tery, or  hke  some  singularity  in  nature,  but  the 


58  APPLICATION  CONTINUED. 

happy  chance  of  a  whole  species ;  nor  of  one  species 
out  of  many  thousand  species,  with  which  we  are 
acquainted,  but  of  by  far  the  greatest  number  of  all 
that  exist ;  and  that  under  varieties,  not  casual  or 
capricious,  but  bearing  marks  of  being  suited  to 
their  respective  exigencies: — that  all  this  should 
have  taken  place,  merely  because  something  must 
have  occupied  those  points  in  every  animal's  fore- 
head ; — or,  that  all  this  should  be  thought  to  be  ac- 
counted for,  by  the  short  answer,  *^  that  whatever 
was  there,  must  have  had  some  form  or  other,'*  is 
too  absurd  to  be  made  more  so  by  any  augmentation. 
We  are  not  contented  with  this  answer ;  we  find  no 
satisfaction  in  it,  by  way  of  accounting  for  appear- 
ances of  organization  far  short  of  those  of  the  eye, 
such  as  we  observe  in  fossil  shells,  petrified  bones, 
or  other  substances  which  bear  the  vestiges  of  ani- 
mal or  vegetable  recrements,  but  which,  either 
in  respect  of  utility,  or  of  the  situation  in  which 
they  are  discovered,  may  seem  accidental  enough. 
It  is  no  way  of  accounting  even  for  these  things,  to 
say  that  the  stone,  for  instance,  which  is  shown  to 
us  (supposing  the  question  to  be  concerning  a  petri- 
fication), must  have  contained  some  internal  con- 
formation or  other.  Nor  does  it  mend  the  answer 
to  add,  with  respect  to  the  singularity  of  the  cour 
formation,  that,  after  the  event,  it  is  no  longer  to 
be  computed  what  the  chances  were  against  it. 
This  is  always  to  be  computed,  when  the  question 
is,  whether  a  useful  or  imitative  conformation  be 
the  produce  of  chance,  or  not :  I  desire  no  greater 
certainty  in  reasoning,  than  that  by  which  chance 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED*  59 

is  excluded  from  the  present  disposition  of  the  na- 
tural world.  Universal  experience  is  against  it. 
What  doe^  chance  ever  do  for  us  ?  In  the  human 
body,  for  instance,  chance,  i.  e.  the  operation  of 
causes  without  design,  may  produce  a  wen,  a  wart, 
a  mole,  a  pimple,  but  never  an  eye.  Amongst 
inanimate  substances,  a  clod,  a  pebble,  a  liquid 
drop  might  be ;  but  never  was  a  watch,  a  telescope, 
an  organized  body  of  any  kind,  answering  a  valuar 
ble  purpose  by  a  complicated  mechanism,  the  effect 
of  chance.  In  no  assignable  instance  hath  such  a 
thing  existed  without  intention  somewhere, 

IV.  There  is  another  answer,  which  has  the  same 
effect  as  the  resolving  of  things  into  chance  ;  which 
answer  would  persuade  us  to  believe,  that  the  eye, 
the  animal  to  which  it  belongs,  every  other  animal, 
every  plant,  indeed  every  organized  body  which  we 
see,  are  only  so  many  out  of  the  possible  varieties 
and  combinations  of  being,  which  the  lapse  of  in-- 
finite  ages  has  brought  into  existence  ;  that  the  pre- 
sent world  is  the  relict  of  that  variety ;  millions  of 
other  bodily  forms  and  other  species  having  perish- 
ed, being  by  the  defect  of  their  constitution  incapa- 
ble of  preservation,  or  of  continuance  by  generation. 
Now  there  is  no  foundation  whatever  for  this  con- 
jecture in  any  thing  which  we  observe  in  the  works  ^ 
of  nature ;  no  such  experiments  are  going  on  at 
present;  no  such  energy  operates,  as  that  which  |^ 
is  here  supposed,  and  which  should  be  constantly 
pushing  into  existence  new  varieties  of  beings.  Nor 
are  there  any  appearances  to  support  an  opinion, 
that  every  possible  combination  of  vegetable  or  ani- 


1 


60  APPLICATION  CONTINUED. 

mal  structure  has  formerly  been  tried.  Multitudes 
of  conformations,  both  of  vegetables  and  animals, 
may  be  conceived  capable  of  existence  and  succes- 
sion,  which  yet  do  not  exist.  Perhaps  almost  as 
many  forms  of  plants  might  have  been  found  in 
the  fields,  as  figures  of  plants  can  be  delineated 
upon  paper.  A  countless  variety  of  animals 
might  have  existed,  which  do  not  exist.  Upon 
the  supposition  here  stated,  we  should  see  unicorns 
and  mermaids,  sylphs  and  centaurs,  the  fancies 
of  painters,  and  the  fables  of  poets,  realized  by 
examples.  Or,  if  it  be  alleged  that  these  may 
transgress  the  limits  of  possible  life  and  propaga- 
tion, we  might,  at  least,  have  nations  of  human 
l)eings  without  nails  upon  their  fingers,  with  more 
or  fewer  fingers  and  toes  than  ten  ;  some  with  one 
eye,  others  with  one  ear,  with  one  nostril,  or  with^ 
out  the  sense  of  smelling  at  all.  All  these,  and 
a  thousand  other  imaginable  varieties,  might  live 
and  propagate.  We  may  modify  any  one  species 
many  different  ways,  all  consistent  with  life,  and 
with  the  actions  necessary  to  preservation,  although 
affording  different  degrees  of  conveniency  and  en- 
joyment to  the  animal.  And  if  we  carry  these 
modifications  through  the  different  species  which 
are  known  to  subsist,  their  number  would  be  in- 
calculable. No  reason  can  be  given  why,  if  these 
deperdits  ever  existed,  they  have  now  disappeared. 
Yet,  if  all  possible  existences  have  been  tried,  they 
must  have  formed  part  of  the  catalogue. 

But  moreover,   the  division   of  organized  sub- 
stances into  animals  and  vegetables,  and  the  dis- 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  6l 

tribution  and  the  sub-distribution  of  each  into  ge- 
nera and  species,  which  distribution  is  not  an  arbi- 
trary act  of  the  mind,  but  founded  in  the  order 
which  prevails  in  external  nature,  appear  to  me  to 
contradict  the  supposition  of  the  present  world  be- 
ing the  remains  of  an  indefinite  variety  of  exist- 
ences ;  of  a  variety  which  rejects  all  plan.  The 
hypothesis  teaches,  that  every  possible  variety  of 
being  hath,  at  one  time  or  other,  found  its  way  into 
existence  (by  what  cause  or  in  what  manner  is  not 
said),  and  that  those  which  were  badly  formed,  pe- 
rished ;  but  how  or  why  those  which  survived 
should  be  cast,  as  we  see  that  plants  and  animals 
are  cast,  into  regular  classes,  the  hypothesis  does 
not  explain  ;  or  rather,  the  hypothesis  is  inconsist- 
ent with  this  phenomenon. 

The  hypothesis,  indeed,  is  hardly  desemng  of 
the  consideration  which  we  have  given  to  it.  What 
should  we  think  of  a  man  who,  because  we  had 
never  ourselves  seen  watches,  telescopes,  stocking- 
mills,  steam-engines,  &c.  made,  knew  not  how  they 
were  made,  or  could  prove  by  testimony  when  they 
were  made,  or  by  whom, — ^would  have  us  believe 
that  these  machines,  instead  of  deriving  their  curi- 
ous structures  from  the  thought  and  design  of  their 
inventors  and  contrivers,  in  truth  derive  them  from 
no  other  origin  than  this,  viz.  that  a  mass  of  metals 
and  other  materials  having  run  when  melted  into 
all  possible  figures,  and  combined  themselves,  in  all 
possible  forms,  and  shapes,  and  proportions,  these 
things  which  we  see,  are  what  were  left  from  the 
accident,  as  best  worth  preserving  j  and,  as  such^ 


6S|  APPLICATION  CONTINUEli. 

are  become  the  remaining  stock  of  a  magazine^ 
which,  at  one  time  or  other,  has,  by  this  means, 
contained  every  mechanism,  useful  and  useless, 
convenient  and  inconvenient,  into  which  such  like 
materials  could  be  thrown?  I  cannot  distinguish 
the  hypothesis  as  applied  to  the  works  of  nature, 
from  this  solution,  which  no  one  would  accept,  as 
applied  to  a  collection  of  machines. 

V.  To  the  marks  of  contrivance  discoverable  in 
animal  bodies,  and  to  the  argument  deduced  from 
them,  in  proof  of  design,  and  of  a  designing  Crea- 
tor this  turn  is  sometimes  attempted  to  be  given, 
namely,  that  the  parts  were  not  intended  for  the 
use,  but  that  the  use  arose  out  of  the  parts.  This 
distinction  is  intelligible.  A  cabinet-maker  rubs 
his  mahogany  with  fish-skin ;  yet  it  would  be  too 
much  to  assert  that  the  skin  of  the  dog-fish  was 
made  rough  and  granulated  on  purpose  for  the  po- 
lishing of  wood,  and  the  use  of  cabinet-makers. 
Therefore  the  distinction  is  intelligible.  But  I 
think  that  there  is  very  little  place  for  it  in  the 
works  of  nature.  When  roundly  and  generally 
affirmed  of  them,  as  it  hath  sometimes  been,  it 
amounts  to  such  another  stretch  of  assertion,  as  it 
would  be  to  say,  that  all  the  implements  of  the  ca- 
binet-maker's work-shop,  as  well  as  his  fish-skin, 
were  substances  accidentally  configurated,  which 
he  had  picked  up,  and  converted  to  his  use ;  that 
his  af^zes,  saws,  planes,  and  gimlets,  were  not  made, 
as  we  suppose,  to  hew,  cut,  smooth,  shape  out, 
or  bore  wood  with ;  but  that,  these  things  being 
made,  no  matter  with  what  design,  or  whether  with 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  63 

any,  the  cabinet-maker  perceived  that  they  were 
applicable  to  his  purpose,  and  turned  them  to  ac- 
count. 

But,  again.     So  far  as  this  solution  is  attempted 
to  be  applied  to  those  parts  of  animals,  the  action 
of  which  does  not  depend  upon  the  will  of  the 
animal,  it  is  fraught  with  still  more  evident  ab- 
surdity.    Is  it  possible  to  believe  that  the  eye  was 
formed  w^ithout  any  regard  to  vision ;   that  it  was 
the  animal  itself  which  found    out,  that,  though 
formed  with  no  such  intention,  it  would  serve  to 
see  with ;  and  that  the  use  of  the  eye,  as  an  organ 
of  sight,    resulted  from  this   discovery,    and  the 
animaPs  application  of  it  ?    The  same  question  may 
be  asked  of  the  ear  ;  the  same  of  all  the  senses. 
None  of  the  senses  fundamentally  depend  upon 
the  election  of  the  animal ;  consequently,  neither 
Upon  his  sagacity,  nor  his  experience.     It  is  the 
impression  which  objects  make  upon  them,  that 
constitutes  their  use.     Under  that  impression,  he 
is  passive.     He  may  bring  objects  to  the  sense,  or 
within  its  reach  ;  he  may  select  these  objects :  but 
over  the  impression  itself  he  has  no  power,  or  very 
little  ;  and  that  properly  is  the  sense. 

Secondly,  There  are  many  parts  of  animal  bodies^^ 
which  seem  to  depend  upon  the  will  of  the  animal 
in  a  greater  degree  than  the  senses  do,  and  yet  with 
respect  to  which,  this  solution  is  equally  unsatisfac- 
tory. If  we  apply  the  solution  to  the  human  body, 
for  instance^  it  forms  itself  into  questions,  upon 
which  no  reasonable  mind  can  doubt ;  such  as^ 
whether  the  teeth  were  made  expressly  for  the  mas- 


64  APPLICATION  CONTINUED. 

tication  of  food,  the  feet  for  walking,  the  hands  for 
holding  ?  or  whether,  these  things  being  as  they  are, 
being  in  fact  in  the  animal's  possession,  his  own 
ingenuity  taught  him  that  they  were  convertible 
to  these  purposes,  though  no  such  purposes  were 
contemplated  in  their  formation  ? 

All  that  there  is  of  the  appearance  of  reason  in 
this  way  of  considering  the  subject  is,  that  in  some 
cases  the  organization  seems  to  determine  the  ha- 
bits of  the  animal,  and  its  choice,  to  a  particular 
mode  of  life  ;  which,  in  a  certain  sense,  may  be  cal- 
led ^'  the  use  arising  out  of  the  part/'  Now  to 
all  the  instances,  in  which  there  is  any  place  for 
this  suggestion,  it  may  be  replied,  that  the  organiza- 
tion determines  the  animal  to  habits  beneficial  and 
salutary  to  itself;  and  that  this  effect  would  not 
be  seen  so  regularly  to  follow,  if  the  several  orga- 
nizations did  not  bear  a  concerted  and  contrived 
relation  to  the  substance  by  which  the  animal  was 
surrounded.  They  would,  otherwise,  be  capacities 
without  objects  ;  powers  without  employment.  The 
web-foot  determines,  you  say,  the  duck  to  swim  ; 
but  what  would  that  avail,  if  there  were  no  water 
to  swim  in  ?  The  strong  hooked  bill,  and  sharp 
'  talons,  of  one  species  of  bird,  determine  it  to  prey 
upon  animals  ;  the  soft  straight  bill,  and  weak  claws, 
of  another  species,  determine  it  to  pick  up  seeds  : 
but  neither  determination  could  take  effect  in  pro- 
viding for  the  sustenance  of  the  birds,  if  animal 
bodies  and  vegetable  seeds  did  not  lie  within  their 
reach.  The  peculiar  conformation  of  the  bill,  and 
tongue,  ^nd  claws  of  the  woodpecker,  determines 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED* 


65 


that  bird  to  search  for  his  food  amongst  the  insects 
lodged  behind  the  bark,  or  in  the  wood,  of  decayed 
trees  :  but  what  would  this  profit  him,  if  there  were 
no  trees,  no  decayed  trees,  no  insects  lodged  under 
their  bark,  or  in  their  trunk^T"  The  proboscis  with 
which  the  bee  is  furnished,  determines  him  to  seek 
for  honey  :  but  what  would  that  signify,  if  flowers 
supplied  none4^  Faculties  thrown  down  upon  ani- 
mals at  random,  and  without  reference  to  the  objects .. 
amidst  which  they  are  placed,  would  not  produce 
to  them  the  services  and  benefits  which  we  see  ;  and 
if  there  be  that  reference,  then  there  is  intention. 

Lastly,  The  solution  fails  entirely  when  applied 
to  plants.     The  parts  of  plants  answer  their  uses^<^ 
without  any  concurrence  from  the  will  or  choice  of 
the  plant, 

VI.  Others  have  chosen  to  refer  every  thing  to 
a  principle  of  order  in  nature.  A  principle  of  order 
is  the  word :  but  what  is  meant  by  a  principle  of 
order,  as  different  from  an  intelligent  Creator,  has 
not  been  explained  either  by  definition  or  example ; 
and,  without  such  explanation,  it  should  seem  to  be 
a  mere  substitution  of  words  for  reasons,  names  for 
causes.  Order  itself  is  only  the  adaptation  of  4 
means  to  an  end :  a  principle  of  order  therefore  can 
only  signify  the  mind  and  intention  which  so  adapts 
them.  Or,  were  it  capable  of  being  explained  in 
any  other  sense,  is  there  any  experience,  any  ana- 
logy, to  sustain  it  ?  Was  a  watch  ever  produced  by 
a  principle  of  order  ?  and  why  might  not  a  watch 
be  so  produced,  as  well  as  an  eye  ? 

E 


66  APPLICATION  CONTINUED, 

Furthermore,  a  principle  of  order,  acting  blindly, 
and  without  choice,  is  negatived  by  the  observa- 
tion, that  order  is  not  universal ;  which  it  would  be, 
if  it  issued  from  a  constant  and  necessary  principle  : 
nor  indiscriminate,  which  it  would  be,  if  it  issued 
from  an  unintelligent  principle.  Where  order  is 
Wanted,  there  we  find  it ;  where  order  is  not  want- 
ed, i,  e.  where,  if  it  prevailed,  it  would  be  useless, 
there  we  do  not  find  it.  In  the  structure  of  the 
eye  (for  we  adhere  to  our  example),  in  the  figure 
and  position  of  its  several  parts,  the  most  exact  or- 
der is  maintained.  In  the  forms  of  rocks  and  moun- 
tains, in  the  lines  which  bound  the  coasts  of  conti- 
nents and  islands,  in  the  shape  of  bays  and  promon- 
tories, no  order  whatever  is  perceived,  because  it 
would  have  been  superfluous.  No  useful  purpose 
would  have  arisen  from  moulding  rocks  and  moun- 
tains into  regular  solids,  bounding  the  channel  of 
the  ocean  by  geometrical  curves  ;  or  from  the  map 
of  the  world  resembling  a  table  of  diagrams  in  Eu- 
clid's Elements,  or  Simpson's  Conic  Sections. 

VII.  Lastly,  The  confidence  which  we  place  in 
our  observations  upon  the  works  of  nature,  in  the 
marks  which  we  discover  of  contrivance,  choice, 
and  design,  and  in  our  reasoning  upon  the  proofs 
afforded  us,  ought  not  to  be  shaken,  as  it  is  some- 
times attempted  to  be  done,  by  bringing  forward  to 
our  view  our  own  ignorance,  or  rather  the  general 
imperfection  of  our  knowledge  of  nature.  Nor,  in 
many  cases,  ought  this  consideration  to  affect  us, 
even  when  it  respects  some  parts  of  the  subject  im- 


APPLICATION  CONTINUED.  67 

mediately  under  our  notice.     True  fortitude  of  un- 
derstanding consists  in  not  suffering  what  we  know, 
to  be  disturbed  by  what  we  do  not  know.     If  we 
perceive  a  useful  end,  and  means  adapted  to  that 
end,  we  perceive  enough  for  our  conclusion.     If 
these  things  be  clear,  no  matter  what  is  obscure. 
The  argument  is  finished.     For  instance;  if  the 
utility  of  vision  to  the  animal  which  enjoys  it,  and 
the  adaptation  of  the  eye  to  this  office,  be  evident 
and  certain,  (and  I  can  mention  nothing  w^hich  is 
more  so),  ought  it  to  prejudice  the  inference  which 
we  draw  from  these  premises,  that  we  cannot  ex^ 
plain  the  use  of  the  spleen  ?     Nay,  more  ;  if  there 
be  parts  of  the  eye,  "viz.  the  cornea,  the  crystalline, 
the  retina,  in  their  substance,  figure,  and  position, 
manifestly  suited  to  the  formation  of  an  image  by 
the  refraction  of  rays  of  light,  at  least,  as  manifestly 
as  the  glasses  and  tubes  of  a  dioptric  telescope  are 
suited  to  that  purpose ;  it  concerns  not  the  proof 
which  these  afford  of  design,  and  of  a  designer,  that 
there  may  perhaps  be  other  parts,  certain  muscles 
for  instance,  or  nerves   in  the  same  eye,  of  the 
agency  or  effect  of  which  we  can  give  no  account; 
any  more  than  we  should  be  inclined  to  doubt,  or 
ought  to  doubt,  about  the  construction  of  a  tele- 
scope, viz.  for  what  purpose  it  was  constructed,  or 
whether  it  were  constructed  at  all,  because  there 
belonged  to  it  certain  screws  and  pins,  the  use  or 
action  of  which  we  did  not  comprehend.    I  take  it 
to  be  a  general  way  of  infusing  doubts  and  scruples 
into  the  mind,   to  recur  to  its  own  ignorance,  its 
own  imbeciUty :  to  tell  us  that  upon  these  subjects 


68  APPLICATION  CONTINUED. 

we  know  little ;  that  little  imperfectly  ;  or  rather, 
that  we  know  nothing  properly  about  the  matter. 
These  suggestions  so  fall  in  with  our  consciousness, 
as  sometimes  to  produce  a  general  distrust  of  our 
faculties  and  our  conclusions.  But  this  is  an  un- 
founded jealousy.  The  uncertainty  of  one  thing 
does  not  necessarily  affect  the  certainty  of  another 
thing.  Our  ignorance  of  many  points  need  not 
suspend  our  assurance  of  a  few.  Before  we  yield, 
in  any  particular  instance,  to  the  scepticism  which 
this  sort  of  insinuation  would  induce,  we  ought  ac- 
curately to  ascertain,  whether  our  ignorance  or 
doubt  concern  those  precise  points  upon  which  our 
conclusion  rests.  Other  points  are  nothing.  Our 
ignorance  of  other  points  may  be  of  no  consequence 
to  these,  though  they  be  points,  in  various  respects, 
of  great  importance.  A  just  reasoner  removes  from 
his  consideration,  not  only  what  he  knows,  but  what 
he  does  not  know,  touching  matters  not  strictly 
connected  with  his  argument,  i.  e.  not  forming  the 
very  steps  of  his  deduction :  beyond  these,  his 
knowledge  and  his  ignorance  are  alike  relative* 


THE  ARGUMENT  CUMULATIVE.        69 


CHAPTER  VL 

THE  ARGUMENT  CUMULATIVE. 

Were  there  no  example  in  the  world,  of  contriv- 
ance, except  that  of  the  eye^  it  would  be  alone  suffi- 
cient to  support  the  conclusion  which  we  draw 
from  it,  as  to  the  necessity  of  an  intelligent  Crea- 
tor. It  could  never  be  got  rid  of;  because  it  could 
not  be  accounted  for  by  any  other  supposition, 
which  did  not  contradict  all  the  principles  we  pos- 
sess of  knowledge ;  the  principles,  according  to 
which,  things  do,  as  often  as  they  can  be  brought 
to  the  test  of  experience,  turn  out  to  be  true  or 
false.  Its  coats  and  humours,  constructed  as  the 
lenses  of  a  telescope  are  constructed,  for  the  refrac- 
tion of  rays  of  light  to  a  point,  which  forms  the  pro- 
per action  of  the  organ  :  the  provision  in  its  muscu- 
lar tendons  for  turning  its  pupil  to  the  object^  simi- 
lar to  that  which  is  given  to  the  telescope  by  screws, 
and  upon  which  power  of  direction  in  the  eye,  the 
exercise  of  its  office  as  an  optical  instrument  de- 
pends :  the  further  provision  for  its  defence,  for  its 
constant  lubricity  and  moisture,  which  we  see  in 
its  socket  and  its  lids,  in  its  gland  for  the  secretion 
of  the  matter  of  tears,  its  outlet  or  communication 
with  the  nose  for  carrying  off  the  liquid  after  the 
eye  is  washed  with  it ; — these  provisions  compose 


70         THE  ARGUMENT  CUMULATIVE. 

altogether  an  apparatus,  a  system  of  parts,  a  prepa- 
ration of  means,  so  manifest  in  their  design,  so  ex- 
quisite in  their  contrivance,  so  successful  in  their 
issue,  so  precious,  and  so  infinitely  beneficial  in 
their  use,  as,  in  my  opinion,  to  bear  down  all  doubt 
that  can  be  raised  upon  the  subject.     And  what  I 
wish,  under  the  title  of  the  present  chapter,  to  ob- 
serve is,  that  if  other  parts  of  nature  were  inaccessi- 
ble to  our  inquiries,  or  even  if  other  parts  of  nature 
presented  nothing  to  our  examination  but  disorder 
and  confusion,  the  validity  of  this  example  would 
remain  the  same.     If  there  were  but  one  watch  in 
the  world,  it  would  not  be  less  certain  that  it  had  a 
maker.     If  we  had  never  in  our  lives  seen  any  but 
one  single  kind  of  hydraulic  machine,  yet,  if  of  that 
one  kind  we  understood  the  mechanism  and  use, 
we  should  be  as  perfectly  assured  that  it  proceeded 
from  the  hand,  and  thought,  and  skill,  of  a  work* 
man,  as  if  we  visited  a  museum  of  the  arts,  and  saw 
collected  there  twenty  different  kinds  of  machines 
for  drawing  water,  or  a  thousand  different  kinds  for 
other  purposes.     Of  this  point,  each  machine  is  a 
proof,  independently  of  aU  the  rest.     So  it  is  with 
the  evidences  of  a  Divine  agency.     The  proof  is 
not  a  conclusion  which  lies  at  the  end  of  a  chain  of 
reasoning,  of  which  chain  each  instance  of  contriv- 
ance  is  only  a  link,  and  of  which,  if  one  link  fail, 
the  whole  falls ;  but  it  is  an  argument  separately 
supplied  by  every  separate  example.     An  error  in 
stating  an  example,  affects  only  that  example.     The 
argument  is  cumulative,  in  the  fullest  sense  of  that 
term.     The  eye  proves  it  without  the  ear ;  the  ear 


THE  ARGUMENT  CUMULATIVE,         71 

without  the  eye.  The  proof  in  each  example  is 
complete  ;  for  when  the  design  of  the  part,  and  the 
conduciveness  of  its  structure  to  that  design  is 
shown,  the  mind  may  set  itself  at  rest;  no  future 
consideration  can  detract  any  thing  from  the  force 
of  the  example. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OF  THE  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL  PARTS  AND 
FUNCTIONS  OF  ANIMALS  AND  VEGETABLES. 

It  is  not  that  exiery  part  of  an  animal  or  vegetable 
has  not  proceeded  from  a  contriving  mind ;  or  that 
every  part  is  not  constructed  with  a  view  to  its  pro- 
per end  and  purpose,  according  to  the  laws  belong- 
ing to,  and  governing  the  substance  or  the  action 
made  use  of  in  that  part  \  or  that  each  part  is  not 
so  constructed  as  to  effectuate  its  purpose  whilst  it 
operates  according  to  these  laws ;  but  it  is  because 
these  laws  themselves  are  not  in  all  cases  equally 
understood ;  or,  what  amounts  to  nearly  the  same 
thing,  are  not  equally  exemplified  in  more  simple 
processes,  and  more  simple  machines ;  that  we  lay 
down  the  distinction,  here  proposed,  between  the 
mechanical  parts  and  other  parts  of  animals  and  ve- 
getables. 


72  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL 

For  instance :  the  principle  of  muscular  motion, 
viz.  upon  what  cause  the  swelling  of  the  belly  of 
the  muscle,  and  consequent  contraction  of  its  ten- 
dons, either  by  an  act  of  the  will,  or  by  involuntary 
irritation,  depends,  is  wholly  unknown  to  us.     The 
substance  employed,   whether  it  be  fluid,  gaseous, 
elastic,  electrical,  or  none  of  these,  or  nothing  re- 
sembling these,  is  also  unknown  to  us :  of  course, 
the  laws  belonging  to  that  substance,  and  which 
regulate  its  action,  are  unknown  to  us.     We  see 
nothing  similar  to  this  contraction  in  any  machine 
which  we  can  make,  or  any  process  which  we  can 
execute.     So  far  (it  is  confessed)  we  are  in  igno- 
rance, but  no  farther.     This  power  and  principle, 
from  whatever  cause  it  proceeds,  being  assumed, 
the  collocation  of  the  fibres  to  receive  the  principle, 
the  disposition  of  the  muscles  for  the  use  and  appli- 
cation of  the  power,  is  mechanical ;  and  is  as  intel- 
ligible as  the  adjustment  of  the  wires  and  strings  by 
which  a  puppet  is  moved.     We  see,  therefore,  as 
far  as  respects  the  subject  before  us,  what  is  not 
mechanical  in  the  animal  frame,  and  what  is.    The 
nervous  influence  (for  we  are  often  obliged  to  give 
names  to  things  which  we  know  little  about) — I 
say  the  nervous  influence,  by  which  the  belly,  or  mid- 
dle of  the  muscle  is  swelled,  is  not  mechanical.  The 
utility  of  the  effect  we  perceive ;  the  means,  or  the 
preparation  of  means,  by  which  it  is  produced,  we 
do  not.     But  obscurity  as  to  the  origin  of  muscular 
motion  brings  no  doubtfulness  into  our  observations 
upon  the  sequel  of  the  process :    Which  observa^ 
tions  relate,  Ist^  To  the  constitution  of  the  muscle ; 


PARTS  OF  ANIMALS,  &C.  73 

in  consequence  of  which  constitution,  the  swelling 
of  the  belly  or  middle  part  is  necessarily  and  me- 
chanically followed  by  a  contraction  of  the  tendons  : 
2J^,  To  the  number  and  variety  of  the  muscles,  and 
the  corresponding  number  and  variety  of  useful 
powers  which  they  supply  to  the  animal ;  which  is 
astonishingly  great :  3dly^  To  the  judicious,  (if  we 
may  be  permitted  to  use  that  term,  in  speaking  of 
the  Author,  or  of  the  works  of  nature),  to  the  wise 
and  well-contrived  disposition  of  each  muscle  for 
its  specific  purpose  ;  for  moving  the  joint  this  way, 
and  that  way,  and  the  other  way  ;  for  pulling  and 
drawing  the  part  to  which  it  is  attached,  in  a  deter- 
minate and  particular  direction  ;  which  is  a  mecha- 
nical operation,  exemplified  in  a  multitude  of  in- 
stances.    To  mention  only  one :   The  tendon  of 
the  trochlear  muscle  of  the  eye,  to  the  end  that  it 
may  draw  in  the  line  required,  is  passed  through  a 
cartilaginous  ring,  at  which  it  is  reverted,  exactly 
in  the  same  manner  as  a  rope  in  a  ship  is  carried 
over  a  block  or  round  a  stay,  in  order  to  make  it 
pull  in  the  direction  which  is  wanted.     All  this,  as 
we  have  said,  is  mechanical ;  and  is  as  accessible  to 
inspection,  as  capable  of  being  ascertained,  as  the 
mechanism  of  the  automaton  in  the  Strand.     Sup- 
pose the  automaton  to  be  put  in  motion  by  a  mag- 
net (which  is  probable),  it  will  supply  us  with  a 
comparison  very  apt  for  our  present  purpose.     Of 
the  magnetic  effluvium,  we  know  perhaps  as  little 
as  we  do  of  the  nervous  fluid.     But,  magnetic  at- 
traction being  assumed  (it  signifies  nothing  from 
what  cause  it  proceeds),  we  can  trace,  or  there  can 


74  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL 

be  pointed  out  to  us,  with  perfect  clearness  and 
certainty,  the  mechanism,  viz.  the  steel  bars,  the 
wheels,  the  joints,  the  wires,  by  which  the  motion 
so  much  admired  is  communicated  to  the  fingers 
of  the  image  :  and  to  make  any  obscurity,  or  diffi- 
culty, or  controversy  in  the  doctrine  of  magnetism, 
an  objection  to  our  knowledge  or  our  certainty 
concerning  the  contrivance,  or  the  marks  of  con- 
trivance,  displayed  in  the  automaton,  would  be 
exactly  the  same  thing,  as  it  is  to  make  our  igno- 
rance (which  we  acknowledge)  of  the  cause  of  ner- 
vous  agency,  or  even  of  the  substance  and  structure 
of  the  nerves  themselves,  a  ground  of  question  or 
suspicion  as  to  the  reasoning  which  we  institute 
concerning  the  mechanical  part  of  our  frame.  That 
an  animal  is  a  machine,  is  a  proposition  neither  cor- 
rectly true  nor  wholly  false.  The  distinction  which 
we  have  been  discussing,  will  serve  to  show  how  far 
the  comparison,  which  this  expression  implies,  holds; 
and  wherein  it  fails.  And  whether  the  distinction 
be  thought  of  importance  or  not,  it  is  certainly  of 
importance  to  remember,  that  there  is  neither  truth 
nor  justice  in  endeavouring  to  bring  a  cloud  over 
our  understandings,  or  a  distrust  into  our  reasonings 
upon  this  subject,  by  suggesting  that  we  know 
nothing  of  voluntary  motion,  of  irritability,  of  the 
principle  of  life,  of  sensation,  of  animal  heat,  upon 
all  which  the  animal  functions  depend  ;  for,  our 
ignorance  of  these  parts  of  the  animal  frame  con- 
cerns not  at  all  our  knowledge  of  the  mechanical 
parts  of  the  same  frame.  I  contend,  therefore,  that 
there  is  mechanism  in  animals  ;  that  this  mechanism 


PARTS  OF  ANIMALS,  kc.  75 

is  as  properly  such,  as  it  is  in  machines  made  by- 
art  ;  that  this  mechanism  is  intelligible  and  certain  ; 
that  it  is  not  the  less  so,  because  it  often  begins  or 
terminates  with  something  which  is  not  mechanical ; 
that  whenever  it  is  intelligible  and  certain,  it  de- 
monstrates intention  and  contrivance,  as  well  in 
the'  works  of  nature  as  in  those  of  art ;  and  that  it  is 
the  best  demonstration  which  either  can  afford. 

But  whilst  I  contend  for  these  propositions,  I  do 
not  exclude  myself  from  asserting,  that  there  may 
be,  and  that  there  are,  other  cases,  in  which,  al- 
though we  cannot  exhibit  mechanism,  or  prove 
indeed  that  mechanism  is  employed,  we  want  not 
sufficient  evidence  to  conduct  us  to  the  same  con- 
clusion. 

There  is  what  may  be  called  the  cht/mical  part  of 
our  frame  ;  of  which,  by  reason  of  the  imperfection 
of  our  chymistry,  we  can  attain  to  no  distinct  know- 
ledge ;  I  mean,  not  to  a  knowledge,  either  in  de- 
gree or  kind,  similar  to  that  which  we  possess  of 
the  mechanical  part  of  our  frame.  It  does  not, 
therefore,  afford  the  same  species  of  argument  as 
that  which  mechanism  affords  ;  and  yet  it  may  afford 
an  argument  in  a  high  degree  satisfactory.  The 
gastric  juice,  or  the  liquor  which  digests  the  food 
in  the  stomachs  of  animals,  is  of  this  class.  Of  all 
menstrua,  it  is  the  most  active,  the  most  universal. 
In  the  human  stomach,  for  instance,  consider  what 
a  variety  of  strange  substances,  and  how  widely  dif- 
ferent  from  one  another,  it,  in  a  few  hours,  reduces 
to  an  uniform  pulp,  milk,  or  mucilage.  It  seizes 
upon  every  thing,  it  dissolves  the  texture  of  almost 


76  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL 

every  thing  that  comes  in  its  way.  The  flesh  of  per- 
haps all  animals ;  the  seeds  and  fruits  of  the  great- 
est number  of  plants ;  the  roots,  and  stalks,  and 
leaves  of  many,  hard  and  tough  as  they  are,  yield 
to  its  powerful  pervasion.  The  change  wrought  by 
it  is  different  from  any  chymical  solution  which  we 
can  produce,  or  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  in 
this  respect,  as  well  as  many  others,  that,  in  our 
chymistry,  particular  menstrua  act  only  upon  par- 
ticular substances.  Consider,  moreover,  that  this 
fluid,  stronger  in  its  operation  than  a  caustic  alkali 
or  mineral  acid,  than  red  precipitate,  or  aqua-fortis 
itself,  is  nevertheless  as  mild,  and  bland,  and  inof- 
fensive to  the  touch  or  taste,  as  saliva  or  gum- 
water,  which  it  much  resembles.  Consider,  I  say, 
these  several  properties  of  the  digestive  organ,  and 
of  the  juice  with  which  it  is  supplied,  or  rather  with 
which  it  is  made  to  supply  itself,  and  you  will  con- 
fess it  to  be  entitled  to  a  name,  which  it  has  some- 
times received,  that  of  "  the  chymical  wonder  of 
animal  nature.'* 

Still  we  are  ignorant  of  the  composition  of  this 
fluid,  and  of  the  mode  of  its  action ;  by  which  is 
meant,  that  we  are  not  capable,  as  we  are  in  the 
mechanical  part  of  our  frame,  of  collating  it  with 
the  operations  of  art.  And  this  I  call  the  imper- 
fection of  our  chymistry ;  for  should  the  time  ever 
arrive,  which  is  not  perhaps  to  be  despaired  of, 
when  we  can  compound  ingredients,  so  as  to  form 
a  solvent  which  will  aot  in  the  manner  in  which  the 
gastric  juice  acts,  we  may  be  able  to  ascertain  the 
chymical  principles  upon  which  its  efficacy  depends, 


PARTS  OF  ANIMALS,  &C.  77 

as  well  as  from  what  part,  and  by  what  concoction, 
in  the  human  body,  these  principles  are  generated 
and  derived. 

In  the  mean  time,  ought  that,  which  is  in  truth 
the  defect  of  our  chymistry,  to  hinder  us  from  ac- 
quiescing in  the  inference,  which  a  production  of 
nature,  by  its  place,  its  properties,  its  action,  its 
surprising  efficacy,  its  invaluable  use,  authorizes  us 
to  draw  in  respect  of  a  creative  design  ? 

Another  most  subtile  and  curious  function  of 
animal  bodies  is  secretion.  This  function  is  semi- 
chymical  and  semi-mechanical ;  exceedingly  impor- 
tant and  diversified  in  its  effects,  but  obscure  in  its 
process  and  in  its  apparatus.  The  importance  of 
the  secretory  organs  is  but  too  well  attested  by  the 
diseases,  which  an  excessive,  a  deficient,  or  a  vitiat- 
ed secretion  is  almost  sure  of  producing.  A  single 
secretion  being  wrong,  is  enough  to  make  life  mi- 
serable, or  sometimes  to  destroy  it.  Nor  is  the  va- 
riety less  than  the  importance.  From  one  and  the 
same  blood  (I  speak  of  the  human  body)  about 
twenty  difierent  fluids  are  separated ;  in  their  sensi- 
ble properties,  in  taste,  smell,  colour,  and  consist- 
ency, the  most  unlike  one  another  that  is  possible ; 
thick,  thin,  salt,  bitter,  sweet :  and,  if  from  our 
own  we  pas^to  other  species  of  animals,  we  find 
amongst  their  secretions  not  only  the  most  various, 
but  the  most  opposite  properties ;  the  most  nutriti- 
ous aliment,  the  deadliest  poison  ;  the  sweetest  per- 
fumes, the  most  foetid  odours.  Of  these  the  greater 
part,  as  the  gastric  juice,  the  saliva,  the  bile,  the 
slippery  mucilage  which  lubricates  the  joints,  the 


■:>v 


78  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL 

tears  which  moisten  the  eye,  the  wax  which  de- 
fends the  ear,  are,  after  they  are  secreted,  made 
use  of  in  the  animal  economy ;  are  evidently  sub- 
servient, and  are  actually  contributing  to  the  utili- 
ties of  the  animal  itself.     Other  fluids  seem  to  be 
separated  only  to  be  rejected.     That  this  also  is  ne- 
cessary (though  why  it  was  originally  necessary,  we 
cannot  tell)  is  shown  by  the  consequence  of  the  se- 
paration being  long  suspended ;  which  consequence 
is  disease  and  death.     Akin  to  secretion,  if  not  the 
same  thing,  is  assimilation,  by  which  one  and  the 
same  blood  is  converted  into  bone,  muscular  flesh, 
nerves,  membranes,  tendons  ;  things  as  diflferent  as 
the  wood  and  iron,  canvass  and  cordage,  of  which 
a  ship  with  its  furniture  is  composed.     We  have  no 
operation  of  art  wherewith  exactly  to  compare  all 
this,  for  no  other  reason  perhaps  than  that  all  ope- 
rations of  art  are  exceeded  by  it.     No  chymical 
election,  no  chymical  analysis  or  resolution  of  a 
substance  into  its  constituent  parts,  no  mechanical 
sifting  or  division,  that  we  are  acquainted  with,  in 
perfection  or  variety  come  up  to  animal  secretion. 
Nevertheless,  the  apparatus  and  process  are  ob- 
scure ;  not  to  say  absolutely  concealed  from  our 
inquiries.     In  a  few,  and  only  a  few  instances,  we 
can  discern  a  little  of  the  constitution  of  a  gland. 
In  the  kidneys  of  large  animals,  we  can  trace  the 
emulgent  artery  dividing  itself  into  an  infinite  num- 
ber  of  branches  ;  their  extremities  every-where  com- 
municating with  little  round  bodies,  in  the  sub- 
stance of  which  bodies  the  secret  of  the  machinery 
seems  to  reside,  for  there  the  change  is  made.    We 


PARTS  OF  ANIMALS,  &C-  79 

can  discern  pipes  laid  from  these  round  bodies  to- 
wards the  pelvis,  which  is  a  basin  within  the  solid 
of  the  kidney.  We  can  discern  these  pipes  join- 
ing and  collecting  together  into  larger  pipes  ;  and, 
when  so  collected,  ending  in  innumerable  papillae, 
through  which  the  secreted  fluid  is  continually  ooz- 
ing into  its  receptacle.  This  is  all  we  know  of  the 
mechanism  of  a  gland,  even  in  the  case  in  which 
it  seems  most  capable  of  being  investigated.  Yet  to 
pronounce  that  we  know  nothing  of  animal  secretion, 
or  nothing  satisfactorily,  and  with  that  concise  re- 
mark to  dismiss  the  article  from  our  argument,  would 
be  to  dispose  of  the  subject  very  hastily  and  very  ir- 
rationally. For  the  purpose  which  we  want,  that  of 
evincing  intention,  we  know  a  great  deal.  And  what 
we  know  is  this.  We  see  the  blood  carried  by  a  pipe, 
conduit,  or  duct,  to  the  gland.  We  see  an  organized 
apparatus,  be  its  construction  or  action  what  it 
will,  which  we  call  that  gland.  We  see  the  blood, 
or  part  of  the  blood,  after  it  has  passed  through 
and  undergone  the  action  of  the  gland,  commgfrom 
it  by  an  emulgent  vein  or  artery,  i.  e.  by  another  pipe 
or  conduit.  And  we  see  also  at  the  same  time  a 
new  and  specific  fluid  issuing  from  the  same  gland 
by  its  excretory  duct,  i.  e.  by  a  third  pipe  or  con- 
duit ;  which  new  fluid  is  in  some  cases  discharged 
out  of  the  body,  in  more  cases  retained  within  it, 
and  there  executing  some  important  and  intelligent 
office.  Now  supposing,  or  admitting,  that  we  know 
nothing  of  the  proper  internal  constitution  of  a  gland, 
or  of  the  mode  of  its  acting  upon  the  blood ;  then  our 
situation  is  precisely  Hke  that  of  an  unmechanical 


80  MECHANICAL  AND  IMMECHANICAL 

looker-on,  who  stands  by  a  stocking-loom,  a  corn- 
mill,  a  carding-machine,  or  a  threshing-machine,  at 
work,  the  fabric  and  mechanism  of  which,  as  well 
as  all  that  passes  within,  is  hidden  from  his  sight  by 
the  outside  case ;  or,  if  seen,  would  be  too  compli- 
cated for  his  uninformed,  uninstructed  understand- 
ing to  comprehend.  And  what  is  that  situation  ? 
This  spectator,  ignorant  as  he  is,  sees  at  one  end  a 
material  enter  the  machine,  as  unground  grain  the 
mill,  raw  cotton  the  carding-machine,  sheaves  of 
unthreshed  corn  the  threshing-machine  ;  and,  when 
he  casts  his  eye  to  the  other  end  of  the  apparatus, 
he  sees  the  material  issuing  from  it  in  a  new  state ; 
and,  what  is  more,  in  a  state  manifestly  adapted 
to  future  uses  ;  the  grain  in  meal  fit  for  the  making 
of  bread,  the  wool  in  rovings  ready  for  spinning 
into  threads,  the  sheaf  in  corn  dressed  for  the  mill. 
Is  it  necessary  that  this  man,  in  order  to  be  con- 
vinced that  design,  that  intention,  that  contriv- 
ance has  been  employed  about  the  machine,  should 
be  allowed  to  pull  it  to  pieces ;  should  be  ena- 
bled to  examine  the  parts  separately ;  explore 
their  action  upon  one  another,  or  their  operation, 
whether  simultaneous  or  successive,  upon  the  ma- 
terial which  is  presented  to  them  ?  He  may  long 
to  do  this  to  gratify  his  curiosity  ;  he  may  desire  to 
do  it  to  improve  his  theoretic  knowledge ;  or  he 
may  have  a  more  substantial  reason  for  requesting 
it,  if  he  happen,  instead  of  a  common  visitor,  to 
be  a  millwright  by  profession,  or  a  person  some- 
times called  in  to  repair  such-like  machines  when 
out  of  order  ;  but,  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining 


PARTS  OF  ANIMALS,  &C.  81 

the  existence  of  counsel  and  design  in  the  formation 
of  the  machine,  he  wants  no  such  intromission  or 
privity.  What  he  sees  is  sufficient.  The  effect 
upon  the  material,  the  change  produced  in  it,  the 
utility  of  that  change  for  future  applications, 
abundantly  testify,  be  the  concealed  part  of  the 
machine  or  of  its  construction  what  it  will,  the 
hand  and  agency  of  a  contriver; 

If  any  confirmation  were  wanting  to  the  evi- 
dence which  the  animal  secretions  afford  of  design, 
it  may  be  derived^  as  has  been  already  hinted,  from 
their  variety,  and  from  their  appropriation  to  their 
place  and  use.  They  all  come  from  the  same 
blood :  they  are  all  drawn  off  by  glands :  yet  the 
produce  is  very  different,  and  the  difference  exactly 
adapted  to  the  v/ork  which  is  to  be  done,  or  the 
end  to  be  answered.  No  account  can  be  given  of 
this,  without  resorting  to  appointment.  Why,  for 
instance,  is  the  saliva,  which  is  diffused  over  the 
seat  of  taste,  insipid,  whilst  So  many  others  of  the 
secretions,  the  urine,  the  tears,  and  the  sweat,  are 
salt  ?  Why  does  the  gland  within  the  ear  separate 
a  viscid  substance,  which  defends  that  passage  ; 
the  gland  in  the  upper  angle  of  the  eye,  a  thin  brine, 
which  washes  the  ball  ?  Why  is  the  synovia  of  the 
joints  mucilaginous ;  the  bile  bitter,  stimulating, 
and  soapy  ?  Why  does  the  juice,  which  flows  into 
the  stomach,  contain  powers,  which  make  that 
bowel  the  great  laboratory,  as  it  is  by  its  situation 
the  recipient,  of  the  materials  of  future  nutrition  ? 
These  are  all  fair  questions  ;  and  no  answer  can  be 


82        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

given  to  them,  but  what  calls  in  intelligence  and 
intention. 

My  object  in  the  present  chapter  has  been  to 
teach  three  things  :  first,  that  it  is  a  mistake  to  sup- 
pose that,  in  reasoning  from  the  appearances  of 
nature,  the  imperfection  of  our  knowledge  pro- 
portionably  affects  the  certainty  of  our  conclusion  ; 
for  in  many  cases  it  does  not  affect  it  at  all :  se- 
condly, that  the  different  parts  of  the  animal  frame 
may  be  classed  and  distributed,  according  to  the 
degree  of  exactness  with  which  we  can  compare 
them  with  works  of  art :  thirdly,  that  the  mechanical 
parts  of  our  frame,  or  those  in  which  this  comparison 
is  most  complete,  although  constituting,  probably, 
the  coarsest  portions  of  nature's  workmanship,  are 
the  most  proper  to  be  alleged  as  proofs  and  speci- 
mens of  design. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT  IN  THE 
HUMAN  FRAME. 

We  proceed,  therefore,  to  propose  certain  examples 
taken  out  of  this  class  ;  making  choice  of  such  as, 
amongst  those  which  have  come  to  our  knowledge, 
appear  to  be  the  most  striking,  and  the  best  under- 
stood ;  but  obliged,  perhaps,  to  postpone  both  these 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  83 

recommendations  to  a  third ;  that  of  the  example 
being  capable  of  explanation  without  plates,  or 
figures,  or  technical  language. 


OF  THE  BONES. 

I. — I  challenge  any  man  to  produce,  in  the  joints 
and  pivots  of  the  most  complicated  or  the  most 
flexible  machine  that  was  ever  contrived,  a  construc- 
tion more  artificial,  or  more  evidently  artificial, 
than  that  which  is  seen  in  the  vertebrae  of  the  human 
neck. — Two  things  were  to  be  done.  The  head 
was  to  have  the  power  of  bending  forward  and 
backward,  as  in  the  act  of  nodding,  stooping,  look-  \ 
ing  upward  or  downward ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  \ 
of  turning  itself  round  upon  the  body  to  a  certain 
extent,  the  quadrant  we  will  say,  or  rather,  perhaps, 
a  hundred  and  twenty  degrees  of  a  circle.  For 
these  two  purposes,  two  distinct  contrivances  are 
employed :  first,  the  head  rests  immediately  upon 
the  uppermost  of  the  vertebrae,  and  is  united  to  it  by 
a  hinge']om.i ;  upon  which  joint  the  head  plays  freely 
forward  and  backward,  as  far  either  way  as  is  ne- 
cessary, or  as  the  ligaments  allow;  which  was  the  first 
thing  required. — But  then  the  rotatory  motion  is  un- 
provided for.  Therefore,  secondly,  to  make  the  head 
capable  of  this,  a  farther  mechanism  is  introduced ; 
not  between  the  head  and  the  uppermost  bone  of 
the  neck,  where  the  hinge  is,  but  between  that 
bone,  and  the  bone  next  underneath  it.  It  is  a  me- 
chanism resembling  a  tejion  and  mortice.  This 
second,  or  uppermost  bone  but  one,  has  what  ana- 


84        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

tomists  call  a  process,  viz.  a  projection,  somewhat 
similar,  in  size  and  shape,  to  a  tooth  ;  which  tooth, 
entering  a  corresponding  hole  or  socket  in  the  bone 
above  it,  forms  a  pivot  or  axle,  upon  which  that 
upper  bone,  together  with  the  head  which  it  sup- 
ports, turns  freely  in  a  circle ;  and  as  far  in  the 
circle  as  the  attached  muscles  permit  the  head  to 
turn.  Thus  are  both  motions  perfect,  without  in-^ 
terfering  with  each  other.  When  we  nod  the  head, 
w^e  use  the  hinge-joint,  which  lies  between  the  head 
and  the  first  bone  of  the  neck.  When  we  turn  the 
head  round,  we  use  the  tenon  and  mortice,  which 
runs  between  the  first  bone  of  the  neck  and  the  se- 
cond. We  see  the  Same  contrivance,  and  the  same 
principle,  employed  in  the  frame  or  mounting  of  a 
telescope*  It  is  occasionally  requisite,  that  the  ob- 
ject-end of  the  instrument  be  moved  up  and  down, 
as  well  as  horizontally,  or  equatorially.  For  the 
vertical  motion,  there  is  a  hinge,  upon  which  the 
telescope  plays ;  for  the  horizontal  or  equatorial 
motion,  an  axis  upon  which  the  telescope  and  the 
hinge  turn  round  together.  And  this  is  exactly  the 
mechanism  which  is  applied  to  the  motion  of  the 
head  :  nor  will  any  one  here  doubt  of  the  existence 
of  counsel  and  design,  except  it  be  by  that  debility 
of  mind^  which  can  trust  to  its  own  reasonings  in 
nothing. 

We  may  add,  that  it  was,  on  another  account 
also,  expedient,  that  the  motion  of  the  head  back- 
ward and  forward  should  be  performed  upon  the 
upper  surface  of  the  first  vertebra :  for,  if  the  first 
vertebra  itself  had  bent  forward,  it  would  have 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME,  85 

brought  the  spinal  marrow,  at  the  very  beginning 
of  its  course,  upon  the  point  of  the  tooth. 

II. — Another  mechanical  contrivance,  not  un- 
like the  last  in  its  object,  but  different  and  original 
in  its  means,  is  seen  in  what  anatomists  call  th(^ 
fore-arm  ;  that  is,  in  the  arm  between  the  elbow  andii 
the  wrist.  Here,  for  the  perfect  use  of  the  limb,  two  \ 
motions  are  wanted  ;  a  motion  at  the  elbow  back-  - 
ward  and  forward,  which  is  called  a  reciprocal 
motion  5  and  a  rotatory  motion,  by  which  the  palm 
of  the  hand,  as  occasion  requires,  may  be  turned 
upward.  How  is  this  managed  ?  The  fore-arm,  it 
is  well  known,  consists  of  two  bones,  lying  along- 
side each  other,  but  touching  only  towards  the 
ends.  One,  and  only  one  of  these  bones,  is  joined 
to  the  cubit,  or  upper  part  of  the  arm,  at  the  elbow; 
the  other  alone,  to  the  hand  at  the  wrist.  The 
first,  by  means,  at  the  elbow,  of  a  hinge -joint  (which 
allows  only  of  motion  in  the  same  plane),  swings 
backward  and  forward,  carrying  along  with  it  the 
other  bone,  and  the  whole  fore-arm.  In  the  mean 
time,  as  often  as  there  is  occasion  to  turn  the  palm 
upward,  that  other  bone  to  which  the  hand  is  at- 
tached, rolls  upon  the  first,  by  the  help  of  a  groove 
or  hollow  near  each  end  of  one  bone,  to  which  is 
fitted  a  corresponding  prominence  in  the  other. 
If  both  bones  had  been  joined  to  the  cubit,  or  upper 
arm,  at  the  elbow,  or  both  to  the  hand  at  the  wrist, 
the  thing  could  not  have  been  done.  The  first 
was  to  be  at  liberty  at  one  end,  and  the  second  at 
the  other ;  by  which  means  the  two  actions  may 
be  performed  together.     The  great  bone  which 


86  OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

carries  the  fore-arm,  may  be  swinging  upon  its 
hinge  at  the  elbow,  at  the  very  time  that  the  lesser 
bone,  which  carries  the  hand,  may  be  turning  round 
it  in  the  grooves.  The  management  also  of  these 
grooves,  or  rather  of  the  tubercles  and  grooves,  is 
,  very  observable.  The  two  bones  are  called  the 
^.  radius  and  the  ulna.  Above,  L  e.  towards  the  el- 
"^  bow,  a  tubercle  of  the  radius  plays  into  a  socket  of 
the  ulna ;  whilst  below,  i.  e.  towards  the  wrist,  the 
radius  finds  the  socket,  and  the  ulna  the  tubercle. 
A  single  bone  in  the  fore-arm,  with  a  ball  and 
/socket  joint  at  the  elbow,  which  admits  of  motion 
in  all  directions,  might,  in  some  degree,  have  an- 
swered the  purpose  of  both  moving  the  arm  and 
turning  the  hand.  But  how  much  better  it  is  ac- 
complished by  the  present  mechanism,  any  person 
may  convince  himself,  who  puts  the  ease  and  quick- 
ness, with  which  he  can  shake  his  hand  at  the  wrist 
circulai^ly  (moving  likewise,  if  he  pleases,  his  arm 
at  the  elbow  at  the  same  time),  in  competition  with 
the  comparatively  slow  and  laborious  motion,  with 
which  his  arm  can  be  made  to  turn  round  at  the 
shoulder,  by  the  aid  of  a  ball  and  socket  joint. 

III. — The  spiney  or  back-bone,  is  a  chain  of 
joints  of  very  wonderful  construction.  Various, 
difficult,  and  almost  inconsistent  offices  were  to  be 
executed  by  the  same  instrument.  It  was  to  be 
firm,  yet  flexible,  (now  I  know  no  chain  made  by 
art,  which  is  both  these ;  for  by  firmness  I  mean, 
not  only  strength,  but  stability)  ;  Jtrm^  to  support 
the  erect  position  of  the  body  '^jleocihle^  to  allow  of  the 
bending  of  the  trunk  in  all  degrees  of  curvature. 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  Sf 

It  was  farther  also  (which  is  another,  and  quite  a 
distinct  purpose  from  the  rest)  to  become  a  pipe 
or  conduit  for  the  safe  conveyance  from  the  brain, 
of  the  most  important  fluid  of  the  animal  frame, 
that,  namely,  upon  which  all  voluntary  motion  de- 
pends, the  spinal  marrow ;  a  substance  not  only  of 
the  first  necessity  to  action,  if  not  to  life,  but  of  a 
nature  so  delicate  and  tender,  so  susceptible,  and 
so  impatient  of  injury,  as  that  any  unusual  pressure 
upon  it,  or  any  considerable  obstruction  of  its 
course,  is  followed  by  paralysis  or  death.  Now  the 
spine  was  not  only  to  furnish  the  main  trunk  for 
the  passage  of  the  medullary  substance  from  the 
brain,  but  to  give  out,  in  the  course  of  its  progress, 
small  pipes  therefrom,  which  being  afterwards 
indefinitely  subdivided,  might,  under  the  name  of 
nerves,  distribute  this  exquisite  supply  to  every 
part  of  the  body.  The  same  spine  was  also  to  serve 
another  use  not  less  wanted  than  the  preceding,  viz, 
to  afford  a  fulcrum,  stay,  or  basis,  (or,  more  proper- 
ly speaking,  a  series  of  these),  for  the  insertion  of 
the  muscles  which  are  spread  over  the  trunk  of  the 
body  ;  in  which  trunk  there  are  not,  as  in  the  limbs, 
cylindrical  bones,  to  which  they  can  be  fastened ; 
and,  likewise,  which  is  a  similar  use,  to  furnish  a 
support  for  the  ends  of  the  ribs  to  rest  upon. 

Bespeak  of  a  workman  a  piece  of  mechanism, 
which  shall  comprise  all  these  purposes,  and  let  him 
set  about  to  contrive  it ;  let  him  try  his  skill  upon     i 
it ;  let  him  feel  the  difficulty  of  accomplishing  the     i 
task,  before  he  be  told  how  the  same  thing  is  effect- 
ed in  the  animal  frame.     Nothing  will  enable  him 


88        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

to  judge  SO  well  of  the  wisdom  which  has  been 
employed ;  nothing  will  dispose  him  to  think  of  it 
so  truly. 

First,  for  the  firmness,  yet  flexibility,  of  the 
spine  ;  it  is  composed  of  a  great  number  of  bones 
(in  the  human  subject,  of  twenty-four)  joined  to 
one  another,  and  compacted  by  broad  bases.  The 
breadth  of  the  bases  upon  which  the  parts  severally 
rest,  and  the  closeness  of  the  junction,  give  to  the 
chain  its  firmness  and  stability  ;  the  number  of 
parts,  and  consequent  frequency  of  joints,  its  flexi- 
bility. Which  flexibility,  we  may  also  observe, 
varies  in  different  parts  of  the  chain  ;  is  least  in  the 
back,  where  strength,  more  than  flexure,  is  wanted  ; 
greater  in  the  loins,  which  it  was  necessary  should 
be  more  supple  than  the  back ;  and  greatest  of  all 
in  the  neck,  for  the  free  motion  of  the  head.  Then, 
secondly,  in  order  to  afford  a  passage  for  the  de- 
scent of  the  medullary  substance,  each  of  these 
bones  is  bored  through  the  middle  in  such  a 
manner,  as  that,  when  put  together,  the  hole  in 
one  bone  falls  into  a  line,  and  corresponds  with 
the  holes  in  the  two  bones  contiguous  to  it.  By 
which  means,  the  perforated  pieces,  when  joined, 
form  an  entire,  close,  uninterrupted  channel ;  at 
least,  whilst  the  spine  is  upright,  and  at  rest.  But, 
as  a  settled  posture  is  inconsistent  with  its  use,  a 
great  difficulty  still  remained,  which  was  to  prevent 
the  vertebrae  shifting  upon  one  another,  so  as  to 
break  the  line  of  the  canal  as  often  as  the  body 
moves  or  twists ;  or  the  joints  gaping  externally, 
whenever  the  body  is  bent  forward,  and  the  spine 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  89 

thereupon  m^de  to  take  the  form  of  a  bow.  These 
dangers,  which  are  mechanical,  are  mechanically 
provided  against.  The  vertebrae,  by  means  of  their 
processes  and  projections,  and  of  the  articulations 
which  some  of  these  form  with  one  another  at 
their  extremities,  are  so  locked  in  and  confined,  as 
to  maintain,  in  what  are  called  the  bodies,  or  broad 
surfaces  of  the  bones,  the  relative  position  nearly 
unaltered  ;  and  to  throw  the  change  and  the  pres- 
sure, produced  by  flexion,  almost  entirely  upon  the 
intervening  cartilages,  the  springiness  and  yielding 
nature  of  whose  substance  admits  of  all  the  motion 
which  is  necessary  to  be  performed  upon  them, 
without  any  chasm  being  produced  by  a  separation 
of  the  parts.  I  say,  of  all  the  motion  which  is  ne- 
cessary ;  for  although  we  bend  our  backs  to  every 
degree  almost  of  inclination,  the  motion  of  each 
vertebrae  is  very  small :  such  is  the  advantage 
we  receive  from  the  chain  being  composed  of  so 
many  links,  the  spine  of  so  many  bones.  Had 
it  consisted  of  three  or  four  bones  only ;  in  bend- 
ing the  body,  the  spinal  marrow  must  have  been 
bruised  at  every  angle.  The  reader  need  not  be 
told,  that  these  intervening  cartilages  are  gristles  ; 
and  he  may  see  them  in  perfection  in  a  loin  of  veal. 
Their  form  also  favours  the  same  intention.  They 
are  thicker  before  than  behind ;  so  that,  when  we 
stoop  forward,  the  compressible  substance  of  the 
cartilage,  yielding  in  its  thicker  and  anterior  part  to 
the  force  which  squeezes  it,  brings  the  surfaces  of 
the  adjoining  vertebrae  nearer  to  the  being  parallel 
with  one  another  than  they  were  before,  instead  of 


go  OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

increasing  the  inclination  of  their  planes,  which 
must  have  occasioned  a  fissure  or  opening  between 
them.  Thirdly,  for  the  medullary  canal  giving  out 
in  its  course,  and  in  a  convenient  order,  a  supply  of 
nerves  to  different  parts  of  the  body,  notches  are 
made  in  the  upper  and  lower  edge  of  every  verte- 
bra, two  on  each  edge,  equi-distant  on  each  side 
from  the  middle  line  of  the  back.  When  the  verte- 
brae are  put  together,  these  notches,  exactly  fitting, 
form  small  holes,  through  which  the  nerves,  at  each 
articulation,  issue  out  in  pairs,  in  order  to  send  their 
branches  to  every  part  of  the  body,  and  with  an 
equal  bounty  to  both  sides  of  the  body.  The  fourth 
purpose  assigned  to  the  same  instrument,  is  the  in- 
sertion of  the  bases  of  the  muscles,  and  the  support 
of  the  ends  of  the  ribs  ;  and  for  this  fourth  purpose, 
especially  the  former  part  of  it,  a  figure,  specifically 
suited  to  the  design,  and  unnecessary  for  the  other 
purposes,  is  given  to  the  constituent  bones.  Whilst 
they  are  plain,  and  round,  and  smooth,  towards  the 
front,  where  any  roughness  or  projection  might  have 
wounded  the  adjacent  viscera,  they  run  out  behind, 
and  on  each  side,  into  long  processes,  to  which  pro- 
cesses the  muscles  necessary  to  the  motions  of  the 
trunk  are  fixed ;  and  fixed  with  such  art,  that,  whilst 
the  vertebras  supply  a  basis  for  the  muscles,  the 
muscles  help  to  keep  these  bones  in  their  position, 
or  by  their  tendons  to  tie  them  together. 

That  most  important,  however,  and  general  pro- 
perty, viz.  the  strength  of  the  compages,  and  the 
security  against  luxation,  was  to  be  still  more  spe- 
cially consulted ;   for,  where  so  many  joints  were 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  Ql 

concerned,  and  where,  in  every  one,  derangement 
would  have  been  fatal,  it  became  a  subject  of  stu- 
dious precaution.  For  this  purpose,  the  vertebrae 
are  articulated,  that  is,  the  moveable  joints  between 
them  are  formed  by  means  of  those  projections  of 
their  substance,  which  we  have  mentioned  under 
the  name  of  processes  ;  and  these  so  lock  in  with, 
and  overwrap  one  another,  as  to  secure  the  body  of 
the  vertebra,  not  only  from  accidentally  slipping, 
but  even  from  being  pushed  out  of  its  place  by  any 
violence  short  of  that  which  would  break  the  bone. 
I  have  often  remarked  and  admired  this  structure 
in  the  chine  of  a  hare.  In  this,  as  in  many  instances, 
a  plain  observer  of  the  animal  economy  may  spare 
himself  the  disgust  of  being  present  at  human  dis- 
sections, and  yet  learn  enough  for  his  information 
and  satisfaction,  by  even  examining  the  bones  of 
the  animals  which  come  upon  his  table.  Let  him 
take,  for  example,  into  his  hands,  a  piece  of  the 
clean-picked  bone  of  a  hare's  back  ;  consisting,  we 
will  suppose,  of  three  vertebrse.  He  will  find  the 
middle  bone  of  the  three  so  implicated  by  means  of 
its  projections  or  processes,  with  the  bone  on  each 
side  of  it,  that  no  pressure  which  he  can  use,  will 
force  it  out  of  its  place  between  them.  It  will  give 
way  neither  forward,  nor  backward,  nor  on  either 
side.  In  whichever  direction  he  pushes,  he  perr 
ceives,  in  the  form,  or  junction,  or  overlapping  of 
the  bones,  an  impediment  opposed  to  his  attempt ; 
a  check  and  guard  against  dislocation.  In  one  part 
of  the  spine,  he  will  find  a  still  farther  fortifying 
expedient,  in  the  mode  according  to  which  the  ribs 


92        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

are  annexed  to  the  spine.  Each  rib  rests  upon  two 
vertebrae.  That  is  the  thing  to  be  remarked,  and 
anyone  may  remark  it  in  carving  a  neck  of  mutton. 
The  manner  of  it  is  this :  the  end  of  the  rib  is  di- 
vided by  a  middle  ridge  into  two  surfaces  ;  which 
surfaces  are  joined  to  the  bodies  of  two  contiguous 
vertebrae,  the  ridge  applying  itself  to  the  intervening 
cartilage.  Now  this  is  the  very  contrivance  which 
is  employed  in  the  famous  iron  bridge  at  my  door 
^t  Bishop-Wearmouth  ;  and  for  the  same  purpose  of 
stability  ;  viz.  the  cheeks  of  the  bars,  which  pass  be- 
tween the  arches,  ride  across  the  joints,  by  which  the 
pieces  composing  each  arch  are  united.  Each  cross- 
bar rests  upon  two  of  these  pieces  at  their  place  of 
junction ;  and  by  that  position  resists,  at  least  in  one 
direction,  any  tendency  in  either  piece  to  slip  out  of 
its  place.  Thus  perfectly,  by  one  means  or  the  other, 
is  the  danger  of  slipping  laterally,  or  of  being  drawn 
aside  out  of  the  line  of  the  back,  provided  against: 
and,  to  withstand  the  bones  being  pulled  asunder 
longitudinally,   or  in  the  direction  of  that  line,  a 

*'  strong  membrane  runs  from  one  end  of  the  chain 
to  the  other,  sufficient  to  resist  any  force  which  is 
ever  likely  to  act  in  the  direction  of  the  back,  or 
parallel  to  it,  and  consequently  to  secure  the  whole 
combination  in  their  places.  The  general  result  is, 
that  not  only  the  motions  of  the  human  body  ne- 
cessary for  the  ordinary  offices  of  life  are  performed 
with  safety,  but  that  it  is  an  accident  hardly  ever 
heard  of,  that  even  the  gesticulations  of  a  harlequin 

"distort  his  spine. 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  93 

Upon  the  whole,  and  as  a  guide  to  those  who 
may  be  inclined  to  carry  the  consideration  of  this 
subject  farther,  there  are  three  views  undfei*  which 
the  spine  ought  to  be  regarded,  iand  in  all  which 
it  cannot  fail  to  excite  our  admiration^  These  views 
relate  to  its  articulations,  its  ligaments,  and  its  per- 
foration ;  and  to  the  corresponding  advantages 
which  the  body  derives  from  it,  for  action,  for 
strength,  and  for  that  which  is  essential  to  every 
part,  a  secure  communication  with  the  brain. 

The  structure  of  the  spine  is  not  in  general  dif- 
ferent in  different  animals.  In  the  serpent  tribe, 
however,  it  is  considerably  varied ;  but  with  a  strict 
reference  to  the  conveniency  of  the  animal.  For, 
whereas  in  quadrupeds  the  number  of  vertebrae  is 
from  thirty  to  forty,  in  the  serpent  it  is  nearly  one 
hundred  and  fifty :  whereas  in  men  and  quadrupeds 
the  surfaces  of  the  bones  are  flat,  and  these  flat 
surfaces  laid  one  against  the  other,  and  bound  tight 
by  sinews  ;  in  the  serpent,  the  bones  play  one  with- 
in another  like  a  ball  and  socket,*  so  that  they  have 
a  free  motion  upon  one  another  in  every  direction  : 
that  is  to  say,  in  men  and  quadrupeds,  firmness  is 
more  consulted  ;  in  serpents,  pliancy;  Yet  even  pli- 
ancy is  not  obtained  at  the  expense  of  safety.  The 
back -bone  of  a  serpent,  for  coherence  and  flexibility, 
is  one  of  the  most  curious  pieces  of  animal  mecha- 
nism with  which  we  are  acquainted.  The  chain  of  a 
watch  (I  mean  the  chain  which  passes  between  the 
spring-barrel  and  the  fusee),  which  aims  at  the  same 

*  Dcr.  Phys.  Theol.  p,  S9G. 


94  OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

properties,  is  but  a  bungling  piece  of  workmanship 
in  comparison  with  that  of  which  we  speak. 

IV.  The  reciprocal  enlargement  and  contraction 
of  the  chest  to  allow  for  the  play  of  the  lungs,  de- 
pends upon  a  simple  yet  beautiful  mechanical  con- 
trivance,  referable  to  the  structure  of  the  bones 
which  enclose  it.  The  ribs  are  articulated  to  the 
back-bone,  or  rather  to  its  side  projections,  obliquely : 
that  is,  in  their  natural  position  they  bend  or  slope 
from  the  place  of  articulation  downwards.  But  the 
basis  upon  which  they  rest  at  this  end  being  fixed, 
the  consequence  of  the  obliquity,  or  the  inclination 
downwards,  is,  that,  when  they  come  to  move, 
whatever  pulls  the  ribs  upwards,  necessarily,  at 
the  same  time,  draws  them  out ;  and  that,  whilst 
the  ribs  are  brought  to  a  right  angle  with  the  spine 
behind,  the  sternum,  or  part  of  the  chest  to  which 
they  are  attached  in  front,  is  thrust  forward.  The 
simple  action,  therefore,  of  the  elevating  muscles 
does  the  business :  whereas,  if  the  ribs  had  been 
articulated  with  the  bodies  of  the  vertebrae  at  right 
angles,  the  cavity  of  the  thorax  could  never  have 
been  farther  enlarged  by  a  change  of  their  position. 
If  each  rib  had  been  a  rigid  bone,  articulated  at 
both  ends  to  fixed  bases,  the  whole  chest  had  been 
immoveable.  Keill  has  observed,  that  the  breast- 
bone, in  an  easy  inspiration,  is  thrust  out  one-tenth 
of  an  inch :  and  he  calculates  that  this,  added  to  what 
is  gained  to  the  space  within  the  chest  by  the  flat- 
tening or  descent  of  the  diaphragm,  leaves  room  for 
forty-two  cubic  inches  of  air  to  enter  at  every  drawing- 
in  of  the  breath.     Wlien  there  is  a  necessity  for  a 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME,  95 

deeper  and  more  laborious  inspiration,  the  enlarge- 
ment of  the  capacity  of  the  chest  may  be  so  in- 
creased by  effort,  as  that  the  lungs  may  be  distend- 
ed with  seventy  or  a  hundred  such  cubic  inches.* 
The  thorax,  says  Schelhammer,  forms  a  kind  of 
bellows,  such  as  never  have  been,  nor  probably 
will  be,  made  by  any  artificer. 

V.  The  patella^  or  knee-pan,  is  a  curious  little  1 
bone  ;  in  its  form  and  office,  unlike  any  other  bone  of 
the  body.  It  is  circular ;  the  size  of  a  crown-piece ; 
pretty  thick  ;  a  little  convex  on  both  sides,  and 
covered  with  a  smooth  cartilage.  It  lies  upon  the 
front  of  the  knee :  and  the  powerful  tendons,  by 
which  the  leg  is  brought  forward,  pass  through  it 
(or  rather  it  makes  a  part  of  their  continuation)^ 
from  their  origin  in  the  thigh  to  their  insertion  in 
the  tibia.  It  protects  both  the  tendon  and  thef 
joint  from  any  injury  which  either  might  suffer,  by 
the  rubbing  of  one  against  the  other,  or  by  the 
pressure  of  unequal  surfaces.  It  also  gives  to  the 
tendons  a  very  considerable  mechanical  advantage, 
by  altering  the  line  of  their  direction,  and  by 
advancing  it  farther  out  from  the  centre  of  mo- 
tion ;  and  this  upon  the  principles  of  the  resolu- 
tion of  force,  upon  which  principles  all  machinery 
is  founded.  These  are  its  uses.  But  what  is  most 
observable  in  it  is,  that  it  appears  to  be  supplemen- 
tal, as  it  were,  to  the  frame  ;  added,  as  it  should  al- 
most seem,  afterward;  not  quite  necessary,  but  very  ^ 
convenient.     It  is  separate  from  the  other  bones  j 

*  Anat.  p.  229. 

Oft 


96  OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

that  is,  it  is  not  connected  with  any  other  bones  hf 
the  common  mode  of  union.  It  is  soft,  or  hardly 
formed,  in  infancy ;  and  produced  by  an  ossifica- 
tion, of  the  inception  or  progress  of  which  no  ac-^ 
count  can  be  given  from  the  structure  or  exercise 
of  the  part. 

VI.  The  shouldeV'hlade  is,  in  some  material  re* 
spects,  a  very  singular  bone  ;  appearing  to  be  made 
so  expressly  for  its  own  purpose,  and  so  independ- 
ently of  every  other  reason.  In  such  quadrupeds 
as  have  no  collar-bones,  which  are  by  far  the  greater 
number^  the  shoulder-blade  has  no  bony  communis 
cation  with  the  trunk,  either  by  a  joint,  or  process, 
or  in  any  other  w^ay.  It  does  not  grow  to,  or  out 
of,  any  other  bone  of  the  trunk.  It  does  not  apply 
to  any  other  bone  of  the  trunk  (I  know  not  whe- 
ther this  be  true  of  any  second  bone  in  the  body, 
except  perhaps  the  os  hyoi'de?)  ;  in  strictness,  it 
Torms  no  part  of  the  skeleton.  It  is  bedded  in  the 
flesh  ;  attached  only  to  the  muscles.  It  is  no  other 
than  a  foundation  bone  ibr  the  arm,  laid  in,  sepa- 
rate, as  it  were,  and  distinct,  from  the  general  ossi- 
fication. The  lower  limbs  connect  themselves  at 
the  hip  with  bones  which  form  part  of  the  skeleton  : 
but  this  connexion,  in  the  upper  limbs,  being  want- 
ing, a  basis,  whereupon  the  arm  might  be  articu- 
lated, was  to  be  supplied  by  a  detached  ossification 
for  the  purpose. 

OF  THE  JOINTS. 

I.  The  above  are  a  few  examples  of  bones  made 
remarkable  by  their  configuration  :  but  to  almost  all 


IN  tHE  HUMAN  J'RAME.  97 

the  bones  belong  joints  ;  and  in  these,  still  more  I 
clearly  than  in  the  form  or  shape  of  the  bones  them- 
selves, are  seen  both  contrivance  and  contriving 
wisdom.  Every  joint  is  a  curiosity,  and  is  also 
strictly  mechanical.  There  is  the  hinge  joint,  and 
the  mortice  and  tenon  joint ;  each  as  manifestly 
such,  and  as  accurately  defined,  as  any  which  can 
be  produced  out  of  a  cabinet-maker's  shop ;  and  one 
or  the  other  prevails,  as  either  is  adapted  to  the 
motion  which  is  wanted :  e.  g.  a  mortice  and  tenon, 
or  ball  and  socket  joint,  is  not  required  at  the  knee, 
the  leg  standing  in  need  only  of  a  motion  backward 
and  forward  in  the  same  plane,  for  which  a  hinge 
joint  is  sufficient ;  a  mortice  and  tenon,  or  ball  and 
socket  joint,  is  wanted  at  the  hip,  that  not  only  the 
progressive  step  may  be  provided  for,  but  the  inter^ 
val  between  the  limbs  maybe  enlarged  or  contract-j 
ed  at  pleasure.  Now  observe  what  would  have  been 
the  iiiconveniency,  L  e.  both  the  superfluity  and 
the  defect  of  articulation,  if  the  case  had  been  in- 
verted ;  if  the  ball  and  socket  joint  had  been  at  the 
knee,  and  the  hinge  joint  at  the  hip*  The  thighs 
must  have  been  kept  constantly  together,  and. the 
legs  have  been  loose  and  straddling.  There  would 
have  been  no  use,  that  we  know  of,  in  being  able 
to  turn  the  calves  of  the  legs  before ;  and  there 
would  have  been  great  confinement  by  restraining 
the  motion  of  the  thighs  to  one  plane*  The  disad- 
vantage would  not  have  been  less,  if  the  joints  at 
the  hip  and  the  knee  had  been  both  of  the  same 
sort ;  both  balls  and  sockets,  or  both  hinges  :  yet 
why,  independently  of  utility,  and  of  a  Creator  who 


98        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

consulted  that  utility,  should  th^  same  bone  (the 
thigh-bone)  be  rounded  at  one  end,  and  channelled 
at  the  other  ? 

The  hinge  joint  is  not  formed  by  a  bolt  passing 
through  the  two  parts  of  the  hinge,  and  thus  keep- 
ing them  in  their  places ;  but  by  a  different  expedi- 
ent. A  strong,  tough,  parchment-like  membrane, 
rising  from  the  receiving  bones,  and  inserted  all 
round  the  received  bones  a  little  below  their  heads, 
encloses  the  joint  on  every  side.  This  membrane 
ties,  confines,  and  holds  the  ends  of  the  bones  to- 
gether; keeping  the  corresponding  parts  of  the 
joint,  i.  e.  the  relative  convexities  and  concavities, 
in  close  application  to  each  other. 

For  the  hall  and  socket  joints  beside  the  membrane 
already  described,  there  is  in  some  important  joints, 
as  an  additional  security,  a  short,  strong,  yet  flexi- 
ble ligament,  inserted  by  one  end  into  the  head  of 
the  ball,  by  the  other  into  the  bottom  of  the  cup ; 
which  ligament  keeps  the  two  parts  of  the  joint  so 
firmly  in  their  pldce,  that  none  of  the  motions  which 
the  limb  naturally  performs,  none  of  the  jerks  and 
twists  to  which  it  is  ordinarily  liable,  nothing  less 
indeed  than  the  utmost  and  the  most  unnatural  vio- 
lence, can  pull  them  asunder.  It  is  hardly  imagin- 
able, how  great  a  force  is  necessary,  even  to  stretch, 
still  more  to  break,  this  ligament ;  yet  so  flexible  is 
it,  as  to  oppose  no  impediment  to  the  suppleness  of 
the  joint.  By  its  situation  also,  it  is  inaccessible  to 
injury  from  sharp  edges.  As  it  cannot  be  ruptured 
(such  is  its  strength),  so  it  cannot  be  cut,  except 
by  an  accident  which  would  sever  the  limb.     If  I 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  99 

Bad  been  permitted  to  frame  a  proof  of  contrivance, 
such  as  might  satisfy  the  most  distrustful  inquirer, 
I  know  not  whether  I  could  have  chosen  an  ex- 
ample of  mechanism  more  unequivocal,  or  more 
free  from  objection,  than  this  ligament  Nothing] 
can  be  more  mechanical ;  nothing,  however  subser- 
vient to  the  safety,  less  capable  of  being  generated 
by  the  action  of  the  joint.  I  would  particularly 
solicit  the  reader's  attention  to  this  provision,  as 
it  is  found  in  the  head  of  the  thigh-hone ;  to  its 
strength,  its  structure,  and  its  use.  It  is  an  in- 
stance upon  which  I  lay  my  hand.  One  single  fact, 
weighed  by  a  mind  in  earnest,  leaves  oftentimes  the 
deepest  impression.  For  the  purpose  of  addressing 
different  understandings  and  different  apprehensions, 
— ^for  the  purpose  of  sentiment,  for  the  purpose  of 
exciting  admiration  of  the  Creator's  works,  we  di- 
versify our  views,  we  multiply  examples  ;  but  for 
the  purpose  of  strict  argument,  one  clear  instance 
is  sufficient ;  and  not  only  sufficient,  but  capable 
perhaps  of  generating  a  firmer  assurance  than  what^ 
can  arise  from  a  divided  attention. 

The  ginglymuSj  or  hinge  joint,  does  not,  it  is 
manifest,  admit  of  a  ligament  of  the  same  kind 
with  that  of  the  ball  and  socket  joint,  but  it  is  al- 
ways fortified  by  the  species  of  ligament  of  which 
it  does  admit.  The  strong,  firm,  investing  mem- 
brane, above  described,  accompanies  it  in  every 
part:  and  in  particular  joints,  this  membrane, 
which  is  properly  a  ligament,  is  considerably  strong- 
er on  the  sides  than  either  before  or  behind,  in 
order  that  the  convexities  may  play  true  in  their 


loo        OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

concavities^  and  not  be  subject  to  slip  sideways^ 
which  is  the  chief  danger ;  for  the  muscular  ten- 
dons generally  restrain  the  parts  from  going  farther 
than  they  ought  to  go  in  the  plane  of  their  mo- 
tion. In  the  knee,  which  is  a  joint  of  this  form, 
and  of  great  importance,  there  are  superadded 
to  the  common  provisions  for  the  stability  of  the 
joint,  two  strong  ligaments  which  cross  each  other ; 
and  cross  each  other  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  secure 
the  joint  from  being  displaced  in  any  assignable 
direction*  "  I  think,''  says  Cheselden,  "  that 
the  knee  cannot  be  completely  dislocated  without 
breaking  the  cross  ligaments/'*  We  can  hardly 
help  comparing  this  with  the  binding  up  of  a  frac- 
ture, where  the  fillet  is  almost  always  strapped 
across,  for  the  sake  of  giving  firmness  and  strength 
to  the  bandage. 

Another  no  less  important  joint,  and  that  also 
of  the  ginglymus  sort,  is  the  ankle  ;  yet  though  im- 
portant, (in  order,  perhaps,  to  preserve  the  symme- 
try and  lightness  of  the  limb),  smalU  and,  on  that 
account,  more  liable  to  injury.  Now  this  joint  is 
strengthened,  i.  e.  is  defended  from  dislocation,  by 
two  remarkable  processes  or  prolongations  of  the 
bones  of  the  leg :  which  processes  form  the  protu- 
berances that  we  call  the  inner  and  outer  ankle. 
It  is  part  of  each  bone  going  down  lower  than  the 
other  part,  and  thereby  overlapping  the  joint :  so 
that,  if  the  joint  be  in  danger  of  slipping  outward, 
it  is  curbed  by  the  inner  projection,  i.  e.  that  of 

*   Ches.  Anat.  p.  45.  ed,  7th.r 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  101 

the  tibia;  if  inward,  by  the  outer  projection,  i.  e, 
that  of  the  fibula.  Between  both,  it  is  locked  in 
its  position.  I  know  no  account  that  can  be  given 
of  this  structure,  except  its  utility.  Why  should 
the  tibia  terminate,  at  its  lower  extremity,  with  a 
double  end,  and  the  fibula  the  same, — but  to  barri- 
cade the  joint  on  both  sides  by  a  continuation  of 
part  of  the  thickest  of  the  bone  over  it?  The 
joint  at  the  sJioulder  compared  with  the  joint  at 
the  hip^  though  both  ball  and  socket  joints,  disco- 
vers a  difference  in  their  form  and  proportions,  well 
suited  to  the  different  offices  which  the  limbs  have 
to  execute.  The  cup  or  socket  at  the  shoulder  is 
much  shallower  and  flatter  than  it  is  at  the  hip,  and 
is  also  in  part  formed  of  cartilage  set  round  the 
rim  of  the  cup.  The  socket,  into  which  the  head 
of  the  thigh-bone  is  inserted,  is  deeper,  and  made  of 
more  solid  materials.  This  agrees  with  the  duties 
assigned  to  each  part.  The  arm  i^  an  instrument 
of  motion,  pi-incipally,  if  not  solely.  Accordingly 
the  shallowness  of  the  socket  at  the  shoulder,  and 
yieldingness  of  the  cartilaginous  substance  with 
which  its  edge  is  set  round,  and  which  in  fact  com- 
poses a  considerable  part  of  its  concavity,  are  ex- 
cellently adapted  for  the  allowance  of  a  free  mo^ 
tion  and  a  wide  range  ;  both  which  the  arm  wants. 
Whereas,  the  lower  limb,  forming  a  part  of  the 
column  of  the  body ;  having  to  support  the  body, 
as  well  as  to  be  the  means  of  its  locomotion  ;  firm- 
ness was  to  be  consulted,  as  well  as  action.  With] 
a  capacity  for  motion,  in  all  directions  indeed,  as 
at  the  shoulder,  but  not  in  any  direction  to  thq 


102       OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

same  extent  as  in  the  arm,  was  to  be  united  sta- 
bility, or  resistance  to  dislocation.  Hence  the 
deeper  excavation  of  the  socket ;  and  the  presence 
of  a  less  proportion  of  cartilage  upon  the  edge. 

The  suppleness  and  pliability  of  the  joints,  we 
every  moment  experience ;  and  thejlrmness  of  ani- 
mal articulation,  the  property  we  have  hitherto 
been  considering,  may  be  judged  of  from  this 
single  observation,  that,  at  any  given  moment  of 
time,  there  are  millions  of  animal  joints  in  com- 
plete  repair  and  use,  for  one  that  is  dislocated; 
and  this,  notwithstanding  the  contortions  and  wren- 
ches to  which  the  limbs  of  animals  are  continually 
subject. 

II.  The  jointSj  or  rather  the  ends  of  the  bones 
which  form  them,  display  also,  in  their  configura- 
tion, another  use.  The  nerves,  blood-vessels,  and 
tendons,  which  are  necessary  to  the  life,  or  for  the 
motion  of  the  limbs,  must,  it  is  evident,  in  their 
way  from  the  trunk  of  the  body  to  the  place  of 
their  destination,  travel  over  the  moveable  joints  ; 
and  it  is  no  less  evident,  that,  in  this  part  of  their 
course,  they  will  have,  from  sudden  motions  and 
from  abrupt  changes  of  curvature,  to  encounter 
the  danger  of  compression,  attrition,  or  laceration. 
To  guard  fibres  so  tender  against  consequences  so 
injurious,  their  path  is  in  those  parts  protected  with 
peculiar  care  ;  and  that  by  a  provision  in  the  figure 
of  the  bones  themselves.  The  nerves  which  sup- 
ply the  Jbre-arm,  especially  the  inferior  cubital 
nerves,  are,  at  the  elbow,  conducted,  by  a  kind  of 
covered  way,  between  the  condyls,  or  rather  under 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  103 

the  inner  extuberances  of  the  bone  which  com- 
poses the  upper  part  of  the  arm.  *  At  the  JcneCy 
the  extremity  of  the  thigh-bone  is  divided  by  a 
sinus  or  chfF  into  two  heads  or  protuberances ;  and 
these  heads  on  the  back  part  stand  out  beyond  the 
cylinder  of  the  boile.  Through  the  hollow,  which 
lies  between  the  hind  parts  of  these  two  heads, 
that  is  to  say,  under  the  ham,  between  the  ham- 
strings, and  within  the  concave  recess  of  the  bone 
formed  by  the  extuberances  on  each  side  ;  in  a 
word,  along  a  defile,  between  rocks,  pass  the  great 
vessels  and  nerves  which  go  to  the  leg.t  Who 
led  these  vessels  by  a  road  so  defended  and  secur- 
ed? In  the  joint  at  the  shoulder^  in  the  edge  of 
the  cup  which  receives  the  head  of  the  bone,  is  a 
notch,  which  is  joined  or  covered  at  the  top  with 
a  ligament.  Through  this  hole,  thus  guarded, 
the  blood-vessels  steal  to  their  destination  in  the 
arm,  instead  of  mounting  over  the  edge  of  the 
concavity.  ±  ^ 

IIL  In  all  joints,  the  ends  of  the  bones,  whicK\ 
work  against  each  other,  are  tipped  with  gristle. 
In  the  ball  and  socket  joint,  the  cup  is  lined,  and 
the  ball  capped  with  it.  The  smooth  surface,  the 
elastic  and  unfriable  nature  of  cartilage,  render  it 
of  all  substances  the  most  proper  for  the  place  and 
purpose.  I  should,  therefore,  have  pointed  this 
out  amongst  the  foremost  of  the  provisions  which 
have  been  made  in  the  joints  for  the  facilitating  of 
their  action,  had  it  not  been  alleged,  that  cartilage 

*  Ches,  Anat.  p.  255.  ed.  7.         f  Ibid.  p.  35.         |  Ibid.  p.  30. 


104  OF  MECHANICAJ.  ARRANGEMENT 

in  truth  is  only  nascent  or  imperfect  bone;  and 
that  the  bone  in  these  places  is  kept  soft  and  im- 
perfect,  in  consequence  of  a  more  complete  and 
rigid  ossification  being  prevented  from  taking  place 
by  the  continual  motion  and  rubbing  of  the  sur- 
faces: Which  being  so,  what  we  represent  as  a 
designed  advantage,  is  an  unavoidable  effect.  I 
am  far  from  being  convinced  that  this  is  a  true 
account  of  the  fact ;  or  that,  if  it  were  so,  it  an- 
swers the  argument.  To  me,  the  surmounting  of 
the  ends  of  the  bones  with  gristle,  looks  more  like 
a  plating  with  a  different  metal,  than  like  the  same 
metal  kept  in  a  different  state  by  the  action  to 
which  it  is  exposed.  At  all  events,  we  have  a  great 
particular  benefit,  though  arising  from  a  general 
constitution :  but  this  last  not  being  quite  what 
my  argument  requires,  lest  I  should  seem  by  ap- 
plying the  instance  to  overrate  its  value,  I  have 
thought  it  fair  to  state  the  question  which  attends 
it. 

IV.  In  some  joints,  very  particularly  in  the  knees, 
there  are  loose  cartilages  or  gristles  between  the 
bones,  and  within  the  joint,  so  that  the  ends  of  the 
bones,  instead  of  working  upon  one  another,  work 
upon  the  intermediate  cartilages.  Cheselden  has 
observed,  *  that  the  contrivance  of  a  loose  ring  is 
practised  by  mechanics,  where  the  friction  of  the 
joints  of  any  of  their  raachines  is  great ;  as  between 
the  parts  of  crook-hinges  of  large  gates,  or  under  the 
head  of  the  male  screw  of  large  vices.     The  cartir 

*  Ches.  An«t.  p,  1  J.  ed.  7. 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  105 

Ijages  of  which  we  speak,  have  very  much  of  the 
form  of  these  rings.  The  comparison  moreover 
shows  the  reason  why  we  find  them  in  the  knees 
rather  than  in  other  joints.  It  is  an  expedient, 
we  have  seen,  which  a  mechanic  resorts  to,  only 
when  some  strong  and  heavy  work  is  to  be  donq,.^ 
So  here  the  thigh-bone  has  to  achieve  its  motion  at 
the  knee,  with  the  whole  weight  of  the  body  press- 
ing upon  it,  and  often,  as  in  rising  from  our  seat,, 
with  the  whole  weight  of  the  body  to  lift.  It  should 
seem  also,  from  Cheselden's  account,  that  the  slip- 
ping and  sliding  of  the  loose  cartilages,  though  it  be 
probably  a  small  andT  obscure  change,  humoured 
the  motion  of  the  end  of  the  thigh-bone,  under  the 
particular  configuration  which  was  necessary  to  be 
given  to  it  for  the  commodious  action  of  the  ten- 
dons ;  (and  which  configuration  requires  what  he 
calls  a  variable  socket,  that  is,  a  concavity,  the 
lines  of  which  assume  a  different  curvature  in  dif- 
ferent inclinations  of  the  bones). 

V.  VYe  have  now  done  with  the  configuration : 
but  there  is  also  in  the  joints,  and  that  common  to 
them  all,  another  exquisite  provision,  manifestly 
adapted  to  their  use,  and  concerning  which  there 
can,  I  think,  be  no  dispute,  namely,  the  regular 
supply  of  a  mucilagey  more  emollient  and  slippery 
than  oil  itself,  which  is  constantly  softening  and 
lubricating  the  parts  that  rub  upon  each  other,  and 
thereby  diminishing  the  effect  of  attrition  in  the 
highest  possible  degree.  For  the  continual  secre- 
tion of  this  important  liniment,  and  for  the  feeding 
of  the  cavities  of  the  joint  with  it,  glands  are  fixed 


106  OF  MECHANICAL  ARRANGEMENT 

near  each  joint ;  the  excretory  ducts  of  which 
glands,  dripping  with  their  balsamic  contents,  hang 
loose  like  fringes  within  the  cavity  of  the  joints.  A 
late  improvement  in  what  are  called  friction- 
wheels,  which  consist  of  a  mechanism  so  ordered, 
as  to  be  regularly  dropping  oil  into  a  box,  which 
encloses  the  axis,  the  nave,  and  certain  balls  upon 
which  the  nave  revolves,  may  be  said,  in  some 
sort,  to  represent  the  contrivance  in  the  animal 
joint ;  with  this  superiority,  however,  on  the  part 
of  the  joint,  viz.  that  here,  the  oil  is  not  only  drop^ 
ped,  but  made. 

i  In  considering  the  joints,  there  is  nothing,  per- 
haps, which  ought  to  move  our  gratitude  more  than 
the  reflection,  how  "well  they  "wear.  A  limb  shall 
swing  upon  its  hinge,  or  play  in  its  socket,  many 
hundred  times  in  an  hour,  for  sixty  years  together, 
without  diminution  of  its  agility  :  which  is  a  long 
time  for  any  thing  to  last ;  for  any  thing  so  much 
worked  and  exercised  as  the  joints  are.  This  du- 
rability I  should  attribute,  in  part,  to  the  provision 
which  is  made  for  preventing  of  wear  and  tear,  first 
by  the  polish  of  the  cartilaginous  surfaces  ;  second- 
ly, by  the  healing  lubrication  of  the  mucilage ;  and, 
in  part,  to  that  astonishing  property  of  animal  con- 
stitutions, assimilation  ;  by  which,  in  every  portion 
of  the  body,  let  it  consist  of  what  it  will,  substance 
1    is  restored,  and  waste  repaired. 

Moveable  joints,  I  think,  compose  the  curiosity 
of  bones  ;  but  their  union,  even  where  no  motion  is 
intended  or  wanted,  carries  marks  of  mechanism 
and  of  mechanical  wisdom.     The  teeth,  especially 


IN  THE  HUMAN  FRAME.  107 

the  front  teeth,  are  one  bone  fixed  in  another,  like 
a  peg  driven  into  a  board.  The  sutures  of  the 
skull  are  like  the  edges  of  two  saws  clapped  toge- 
ther, in  such  a  manner  as  that  the  teeth  of  one  en- 
ter the  intervals  of  the  other.  We  have  sometimes 
one  bone  lapping  over  another,  and  planed  down  at 
the  edges ;  sometimes  also  the  thin  lamella  of  one 
bone  received  into  a  narrow  furrow  of  another.  In 
all  which  varieties,  we  seem  to  discover  the  same 
design,  viz.  firmness  of  juncture,  withqut  clumsi- 
ness in  the  seam. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


OF  THE  MUSCLES. 


Muscles,  with  their  tendons,  are  the  instruments' 
by  which  animal  motion  is  performed.  It  will  be 
our  business  to  point  out  instances  in  which,  and 
properties  with  respect  to  which,  the  disposition  of 
these  muscles  is  as  strictly  mechanical,  as  that  o£\ 
the  wires  and  strings  of  a  puppet. 

I.  We  may  observe,  what  I  believe  is  universal, 
an  exact  relation  between  the  joint  and  the  muscles 
which  move  it.  Whatever  motion  the  joint,  by  its 
mechanical  construction,  is  capable  of  performing. 


108  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

that  motion,  the  annexed  muscles,  by  their  position, 
are  capable  of  producing.  For  example  ;  if  there 
be,  as  at  the  knee  and  elbow,  a  hinge  joint,  capable 
of  motion  only  in  the  same  plane,  the  leaders,  as 
they  are  called,  L  e.  the  muscular  tendons,  are 
placed  in  directions  parallel  to  the  bone,  so  as,  by 
the  contraction  or  relaxation  of  the  muscles  to  which 
they  belong,  to  produce  that  motion  and  no  other. 
If  these  joints  were  capable  of  a  freer  motion,  there 
are  no  m.uscles  to  produce  it.  Whereas  at  the 
shoulder  and  the  hip,  where  the  ball  and  socket 
joint  allows  by  its  construction  of  a  rotatory  or 
sweeping  motion,  tendons  are  placed  in  such  a  po- 
sition, and  pull  in  such  a  direction,  as  to  produce 
the  motion  of  which  the  joint  admits.  For  instance, 
the  sartorius  or  tailor^s  muscle,  rising  from  the 
spine,  running  diagonally  across  the  thigh,  and 
taking  hold  of  the  inside  of  the  main  bone  of  the 
leg,  a  little  below  the  knee,  enables  us,  by  its  con- 
traction, to  throw  one  leg  and  thigh  over  the  other  ; 
giving  effect,  at  the  same  time,  to  the  ball  and 
socket  joint  at  the  hip,  and  the  hinge  joint  at  the 
knee.  There  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  specific  mecha- 
nism in  the  bones,  for  the  rotatory  motions  of  the 
head  and  hands ;  there  is,  also,  in  the  oblique  di- 
rection of  the  muscles  belonging  to  them,  a  specific 
provision  for  the  putting  of  this  mechanism  of  the 
bones  into  action.  And  mark  the  consent  of  uses. 
The  oblique  muscles  would  have  been  inefficient 
without  that  particular  articulation ;  that  particu- 
lar articulation  would  have  been  lost,  without  the 
pblique  muscles,     It  may  be  proper,  however,  to 


OP  TilE  MUSCLES.  109 

observe  with  respect  to  the  head,  although  I  think 
it  does  not  vary  the  case,  that  its  oblique  motions 
and  inclinations  are  often  motions  in  a  diagonal, 
produced  by  the  joint  action  of  muscles  lying  in 
straight  directions.  But  whether  the  pull  be  single 
or  combined,  the  articulation  is  always  such,  as  to 
be  capable  of  obeying  the  action  of  the  muscles. 
The  oblique  muscles  attached  to  the  head,  are  like- 
wise so  disposed,  as  to  be  capable  of  steadying  the 
globe,  as  well  as  of  moving  it.  The  head  of  a  new- 
bom  infant  is  often  obliged  to  be  filleted  up.  After 
death,  the  head  drops  and  rolls  in  every  direction. 
So  that  it  is  by  the  equilibre  of  the  muscles,  by  the 
aid  of  a  considerable  and  equipollent  muscular  force 
in  constant  exertion,  that  the  head  maintains  its 
erect  posture.  The  muscles  here  supply  what  would 
otherwise  be  a  great  defect  in  the  articulation ;  for 
the  joint  in  the  neck,  although  admirably  adapted 
to  the  motion  of  the  head,  is  insufficient  for  its  sup- 
port. It  is  not  only  by  the  means  of  a  most  curious 
structure  of  the  bones  that  a  man  turns  his  head, 
but  by  virtue  of  an  adjusted  muscular  power,  that  \ 
he  even  holds  it  up. 

As  another  example  of  what  we  are  illustrating, 
viz.  conformity  of  use  between  the  bones  and  the 
muscles,  it  has  been  observed  of  the  different  verte- 
brae, that  their  processes  are  exactly  proportioned 
to  the  quantity  of  motion  which  the  other  bones 
allow  of,  and  which  the  respective  muscles  are  ca-j 
pable  of  producing. 

II.  A  muscle  acts  only  by  contraction.    Its  force^^ 
is  exerted  in  no  other  way.     When  the  exertion 


110  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

ceases,  it  relaxes  itself,  that  is,  it  returns  by  relaxa- 
tion to  its  former  state ;  but  without  energy.  This 
is  the  nature  of  the  muscular  fibre:  and  being  so, 
it  is  evident  that  the  reciprocal  energetic  motion  of 
the  limbs,  by  which  we  mean  motion  mth  force  in 
opposite  directions,  can  only  be  produced  by  the 
instrumentality  of  opposite  or  antagonist  muscles ; 
of  flexors  and  extensors  answering  to  each  other. 
For  instance,  the  biceps  and  brachiaeus  internus 
muscles,  placed  in  the  front  part  of  the  upper  arm, 
by  their  contraction  bend  the  elbow;  and  with  such 
degree  of  force,  as  the  case  requires,  or  the  strength 
admits  of.  The  relaxation  of  these  muscles,  after 
the  effort,  would  merely  let  the  fore-arm  drop  down. 
For  the  hack  stroke j  therefore,  and  that  the  arm 
may  not  only  bend  at  the  elbow,  but  also  extend 
and  straighten  itself,  with  force,  other  muscles,  the 
longus  and  brevis  brachiaeus  externus  and  the  an^ 
conasus,  placed  on  the  hinder  part  of  the  arms,  by 
their  contractile  twitch  fetch  back  the  fore-arm  into 
a  straight  line  with  the  cubit,  with  no  less  force  than 
that  with  which  it  was  bent  out  of  it.  The  same 
thing  obtains  in  all  the  limbs,  and  in  every  move- 
able part  of  the  body.  A  finger  is  not  bent  and 
straightened,  without  the  contraction  of  two  muscles 
taking  place.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  ani- 
mal functions  require  that  particular  disposition  of 
the  muscles  which  we  describe  by  the  name  of  an- 
tagonist muscles.  And  they  are  accordingly  so  dis- 
posed. Every  muscle  is  provided  with  an  adversary. 
They  act,  like  two  sawyers  in  a  pit,  by  an  opposite 
pull;  and  nothing  surely  can  more  strongly  indicate 


OF  THE  MUSCLES.  Ill 

design  and  attention  to  an  end,  than  their  being 
thus  stationed,  than  this  collocation.  The  nature 
of  the  muscular  fibre  being  what  it  is,  the  purposes 
of  the  animal  could  be  answered  by  no  other.  And 
not  only  the  capacity  for  motion,  but  the  aspect  and 
symmetry  of  the  body,  is  preserved  by  the  muscles 
being  marshalled  according  to  this  order ;  e.  g.  the 
mouth  is  holden  in  the  middle  of  the  face,  and  its 
angles  kept  in  a  state  of  exact  correspondency,  by 
two  muscles  drawing  against,  and  balancing  each 
other.  In  a  hemiplegia,  when  the  muscle  on  one 
side  is  weakened,  the  muscle  on  the  other  side 
draws  the  mouth  awry. 

III.  Another  property  of  the  muscles,  which 
could  only  be  the  result  of  care,  is,  their  being  al- 
most universally  so  disposed,  as  not  to  obstruct  or 
interfere  with  one  another's  action.  I  know  but 
one  instance  in  which  this  impediment  is  perceived. 
We  cannot  easily  swallow  whilst  we  gape.  This,  I 
understand,  is  owing  to  the  muscles  employed  in 
the  act  of  deglutition  being  so  implicated  with  the 
muscles  of  the  lower  jaw,  that,  whilst  these  last  are 
contracted,  the  former  cannot  act  with  freedom. 
The  obstruction  is,  in  this  instance,  attended  with 
little  inconveniency ;  but  it  shows  what  the  effect  is 
where  it  does  exist ;  and  what  loss  of  faculty  there 
would  be  if  it  were  more  frequent.  Now,  when  we 
reflect  upon  the  number  of  muscles,  not  fewer  than 
four  hundred  and  forty-six  in  the  human  body^ 
known  and  named,  ^  how  contiguous  they  lie  to 


Keiirs  Anatomy,  p.  295.  ed.  3. 

2B 


112  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

each  other,  m  layers,  as  it  were,  over  one  another^ 
crossing  one  another,  sometimes  imbedded  in  one 
another,  sometimes  perforating  one  another ;  an 
arrangement,  which  leaves  to  each  its  liberty,  and 
its  full  play,  must  necessarily  require  meditation 
and  counsel. 

IV.  The  following  is  oftentimes  the  case  with  the 
muscles.  Their  action  is  wanted,  where  their  situ* 
ation  would  be  inconvenient.  In  which  case,  the 
body  of  the  muscle  is  placed  in  some  commodious 
position  at  a  distance,  and  made  to  communicate 
with  the  point  of  action,  by  slender  strings  or  wires. 
If  the  muscles  which  move  the  fingers,  had  been 
placed  in  the  palm  or  back  of  the  hand,  they  would 
have  swelled  that  part  to  an  awkward  and  clumsy 
thickness.  The  beauty,  the  proportions  of  the  part, 
would  have  been  destroyed.  They  are,  therefore, 
disposed  in  the  arm,  and  even  up  to  the  elbow ;  and 
act  by  long  tendons,  strapped  down  at  the  wrist, 
and  passing  under  the  ligaments  to  the  jfingers,  and 
to  the  joints  of  the  fingers,  which  they  are  severally 
to  move.  In  like  manner,  the  muscles  which  move 
the  toes,  and  many  of  the  joints  of  the  foot,  how 
gracefully  are  they  disposed  in  the  calf  of  the  leg, 
instead  of  forming  an  unwieldy  tumefaction  in  the 
foot  itself!  The  observation  may  be  repeated  of 
the  muscle  which  draws  the  nictitating  membrane 
over  the  eye.  Its  office  is  in  the  front  of  the  eye  ; 
but  its  body  is  lodged  in  the  back  part  of  the  globe, 
where  it  lies  safe,  and  where  it  encumbers  nothing* 

V.  The  great  mechanical  variety  in  the  figure  of 
the  muscles  may  be  thus  stated.    It  appears  to  be  a 


OF  THE  MUSCLES.  113 

fixed  law,  that  the  contraction  of  a  muscle  shall  be 
towards  its  centre.  Therefore,  the  subject  for  me- 
chanism on  each  occasion  is,  so  to  modify  the  figure, 
and  adjust  the  position  of  the  muscle,  as  to  produce 
the  motion  required,  agreeably  with  this  law.  This^ 
can  only  be  done  by  giving  to  different  muscles  a 
diversity  of  configuration,  suited  to  their  several 
offices,  and  to  their  situation  with  respect  to  the 
work  which  they  have  to  perform.  On  which  ac- 
count we  find  them  under  a  multiplicity  of  forms 
and  attitudes  ;  sometimes  with  double,  sometimes 
with  treble  tendons,  sometimes  with  none :  some- 
times one  tendon  to  several  muscles,  at  other  times 
one  muscle  to  several  tendons.  The  shape  of  the 
organ  is  susceptible  of  an  incalculable  variety,  whilst 
the  original  property  of  the  muscle,  the  law  and 
line  of  its  contraction,  remains  the  same,  and  is 
simple.  Herein  the  muscular  system  may  be  said 
to  bear  a  perfect  resemblance  to  our  works  of  art. 
An  artist  does  not  alter  the  native  quality  of  his 
materials,  or  their  laws  of  action.  He  takes  these 
as  he  finds  them.  His  skill  and  ingenuity  are  em- 
ployed in  turning  them,  such  as  they  are,  to  his 
account,  by  giving  to  the  parts  of  his  machine  a 
form  and  relation,  in  which  these  unalterable  pro- 
perties may  operate  to  the  production  of  the  effects 
intended.  . 

VI.  The  ejaculations  can  never  too  often  be  re- 
peated : — How  many  things  must  go  right  for  us  to 
be  an  hour  at  ease  !  how  many  more  for  us  to  be  vi- 
gorous and  active  !  Yet  vigour  and  activity  are,  in  a 
vastpluralityofinstances,preservedin  human  bodies, 

H 


114  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

notwithstanding  that  they  depend  upoii  so  great  a 
number  of  instruments  of  motion,  and  notwith- 
standing that  the  defect  or  disorder  sometimes  of  a 
very  small  instrument,  of  a  single  pair,  for  instance, 
out  of  the  four  hundred  and  forty-six  muscles  which 
are  employed,  may  be  attended  with  grievous  in- 
conveniency.  There  is  piety  and  good  sense  in  the 
following  observation,  taken  out  of  the  Religious 
Philosopher  :  ^'  With  much  compassion,''  says  this 
writer,  ^*  as  well  as  astonishment  at  the  goodness  of 
our  loving  Creator,  have  I  considered  the  sad  state 
of  a  certain  gentleman,  who,  as  to  the  rest,  was  in 
pretty  good  health,  but  only  wanted  the  use  of  these 
two  little  muscles  that  serve  to  lift  up  the  eyelids, 
and  so  had  almost  lost  the  use  of  his  sight,  being 
forced,  as  long  as  this  defect  lasted,  to  shove  up  his 
eyelids  every  moment  with  his  own  hands !'' — In 
general  we  may  remark,  in  how  small  a  degree  those 
who  enjoy  the  perfect  use  of  their  organs,  know  the 
comprehensiveness  of  the  blessing,  the  variety  of 
their  obligation.  They  perceive  a  result,  but  they 
think  little  of  the  multitude  of  concurrences  and 
rectitudes  which  go  to  form  it. 

Besides  these  observations,  which  belong  to  the 
muscular  organ  as  such,  we  may  notice  some  ad- 
vantages of  structure,  which  are  more  conspicuous 
in  muscles  of  a  certain  class  or  description  than  in 
others.     Thus : 

I.  The  variety,  quickness,  and  precision,  of 
which  muscular  motion  is  capable,  are  seen,  I  think, 
in  no  part  so  remarkably  as  in  the  tongue.  It  is 
worth  any  man's  while  to  watch  the  agility  of  his 


OF  THE  MUSCLES.  115 

tongue ;  the  wonderful  promptitude  with  which  it 
executes  changes  of  position,  and  the  perfect  exact- 
ness. Each  syllable  of  articulated  sound  requires 
for  its  utterance  a  specific  action  of  the  tongue,  and 
of  the  parts  adjacent  to  it.  The  disposition  and 
configuration  of  the  mouth,  appertaining  to  every 
letter  and  word,  is  not  only  peculiar,  but,  if  nicely 
and  accurately  attended  to,  perceptible  to  the  sight ; 
insomuch,  that  curious  persons  have  availed  them- 
selves of  this  circumstance  to  teach  the  deaf  to 
speak,  and  to  understand  what  is  said  by  others.  In 
the  same  person,  and  after  his  habit  of  speaking  is 
formed,  one,  and  only  one,  position  of  the  parts, 
will  produce  a  given  articulate  sound  correctly. 
How  instantaneously  are  these  positions  assumed 
and  dismissed !  how  numerous  are  the  permutations, 
how  various,  yet  how  infallible  !  Arbitrary  and  antic 
variety  is  not  the  thing  we  admire  ;  but  variety 
obeying  a  rule,  conducing  to  an  effect,  and  com- 
mensurate with  exigencies  infinitely  diversified.  I 
believe  also  that  the  anatomy  of  the  tongue  corres- 
ponds with  these  observations  upon  its  activity. 
The  muscles  of  the  tongue  are  so  numerous  and  so 
implicated  with  one  another,  that  they  cannot  be 
traced  by  the  nicest  dissection  ;  nevertheless  (which 
is  a  great  perfection  of  the  organ),  neither  the  num- 
ber, nor  the  complexity,  nor  what  might  seem  to 
be  the  entanglement  of  its  fibres,  in  any  wise  impede 
its  motion,  or  render  the  determination  or  success 
of  its  efforts  uncertain. 


116  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

I  HERE  entreat  the  reader's  permission  to  step  a 
little  out  of  my  way,  to  consider  the  parts  of  the 
mouthy  in  some  of  their  other  properties.  It  has 
been  said,  and  that  by  an  eminent  physiologist, 
that,  whenever  nature  attempts  to  work  two  or 
more  purposes  by  one  instrument,  she  does  both  or 
all  imperfectly.  Is  this  true  of  the  tongue,  regard- 
ed as  an  instrument  of  speech,  and  of  taste  ;  or  re- 
garded as  an  instrument  of  speech,  of  taste,  and  of 
deglutition  ?  So  much  otherwise,  that  many  persons, 
that  is  to  say,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  persons 
out  of  a  thousand,  by  the  instrumentality  of  this 
one  organ,  talk,  and  taste,  and  swallow,  very  well. 
In  fact,  the  constant  warmth  and  moisture  of  the 
tongue,  the  thinness  of  the  skin,  the  papillae  upon 
its  surface,  qualify  this  organ  for  its  office  of  tast- 
ing, as  much  as  its  inextricable  multiplicity  of  fibres 
do  for  the  rapid  movements  which  are  necessary  to 
speech.  Animals  which  feed  upon  grass,  have  their 
tongues  covered  with  a  perforated  skin,  so  as  to 
admit  the  dissolved  food  to  the  papillae  underneath, 
which,  in  the  mean  time,  remain  defended  from 
the  rough  action  of  the  unbruised  spiculae. 

There  are  brought  together  within  the  cavity  of 
the  mouth  more  distinct  uses,  and  parts  executing 
more  distinct  offices,  than  I  think  can  be  found  lying 
so  near  to  one  another,  or  within  the  same  com- 
pass, in  any  other  portion  of  the  body  :  viz.  teeth 
of  different  shape,  first  for  cutting  ;  secondly  for 
grinding :  muscles,  most  artificially  disponed  for 
carrying  on  the  compound  motion  of  the  lower  jaw, 
half  lateral  and  half  vertical,  by  which  the  mill  is 


OF  THE  MUSCLES.  11? 

worked :  fountains  of  saliva,  springing  up  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  cavity  for  the  moistening  of  the 
food,  whilst  the  mastication  is  going  on  :  glands,  to 
feed  the  fountains ;  a  muscular  constriction  of  a 
very  peculiar  kind  in  the  back  part  of  the  cavity, 
for  the  guiding  of  the  prepared  aliment  into  its  pas- 
sage towards  the  stomach,  and  in  many  cases  for 
carrying  it  along  that  passage  ;  for,  although  we  may 
imagine  this  to  be  done  simply  by  the  weight  of  the 
food  itself,  it  in  truth  is  not  so,  even  in  the  upright 
posture  of  the  human  neck  ;  and  most  evidently  is 
not  the  case  with  quadrupeds,  with  a  horse  for  in- 
stance, in  which,  when  pasturing,  the  food  is 
thrust  upward  by  muscular  strength,  instead  of 
descending  of  its  own  accord. 

In  the  mean  time,  and  within  the  same  cavity, 
is  going  on  another  business,  altogether  different 
from  what  is  here  described, — that  of  respiration 
and  speech.  In  addition  therefore  to  all  that  has 
been  mentioned,  we  have  a  passage  opened,  from 
this  cavity  to  the  lungs,  for  the  admission  of  air,  ex- 
clusively of  every  other  substance;  we  have  muscles, 
some  in  the  larynx,  and  without  number  in  the 
tongue,  for  the  purpose  of  modulating  that  air  in 
its  passage,  with  a  variety,  a  compass,  and  precision, 
of  which  no  other  musical  instrument  is  capable. 
And,  lastly,  which  in  my  opinion  crowns  the  whole 
as  a  piece  of  machinery,  we  have  a  specific  contriv- 
ance for  dividing  the  pneumatic  part  from  the  me- 
chanical, and  for  preventing  one  set  of  actions  in- 
terfering with  the  other.  Where  various  functions 
are  united,  the  difficulty  is  to  guard  against  the 


US  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

inconveniences  of  a  too  great  complexity.     In  no 
apparatus  put  together  by  art,  and  for  the  purposes 
of  art,  do  I  know  such  multifarious  uses  so  aptly 
combined,   as  in   the  natural  organization  of  the 
human  mouth ;  or,  where  the  structure,  compared 
with  the  uses,  is  so  simple.     The  mouth,  with  all 
these  intentions  to  serve,  is  a  single  cavity ;  is  one 
machine,  with  its  parts  neither  crowded  nor  confus- 
ed, and  each  unembarrassed  by  the  rest:  each  at  least 
at  liberty  in  a  degree  sufficient  for  the  end  to  be  at- 
tained.    If  we  cannot  eat  and  sing  at  the  same  mo- 
ment, we  can  eat  one  moment,  and  sing  the  next ; 
the  respiration  proceeding  freely  all  the  while. 
/  There  is  one  case  however  of  this  double  office, 
and  that  of  the  earliest  necessity,  which  the  mouth 
alone  could  not  perform  ;  and  that  is,  carrying  on 
together  the  two  actions  of  sucking  and  breathing. 
Another   route   therefore   is   opened   for  the  air, 
namely,  through  the  nose,  which  lets  the  breath 
pass  backward  and  forward,  whilst  the  lips,  in  the 
act  of  sucking,  are  necessarily  shut  close  upon  the 
body  from  which  the  nutriment  is  drawn.    This  is  a 
circumstance  which  always  appeared  to  me  worthy 
of  notice.     The  nose  would  have  been  necessary, 
although  it  had  not  been  the  organ  of  smelling. 
The  making  it  the  seat  of  a  sense,  was  superadding 
a  new  use  to  a  part  already  wanted ;  was  taking  a 
wise  advantage  of  an  antecedent  and  a  constitutional 
necessity. 

But  to  return  to  that  which  is  the  proper  subject 
of  the  present  section, — the  celerity  and  precision 


OF  THE  MUSCLES.  119 

of  muscular  motion.  These  qualities  may  be  parti- 
cularly  observed  in  the  execution  of  many  pieces  of 
instrumental  musky  in  which  the  changes  produced 
by  the  hand  of  the  musician  are  exceedingly  rapid ; 
are  exactly  measured,  even  when  most  minute  ;  and 
display,  on  the  part  of  the  muscles,  an  obedience 
of  action,  alike  wonderful  for  its  quickness  and  its 
correctness. 

Or  let  a  person  only  observe  his  own  hand  whilst 
he  is  writing ;  the  number  of  muscles  which  are 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  pen  ;  how  the  joint  and 
adjusted  operation  of  several  tendons  is  concerned 
in  every  stroke,  yet  that  five  hundred  such  strokes 
are  drawn  in  a  minute.  Not  a  letter  can  be  turned 
without  more  than  one,  or  two,  or  three  tendinous 
contractions,  definite,  both  as  to  the  choice  of  the 
tendon,  and  as  to  the  space  through  which  the  con- 
traction moves ;  yet  how  currently  does  the  work 
proceed !  and  when  we  look  at  it,  how  faithful  have 
the  muscles  been  to  their  duty,  how  true  to  the  order 
which  endeavour  or  habit  hath  inculcated!  For  let  it 
be  remembered,  that,  whilst  a  man's  handwriting  is 
the  same,  an  exactitude  of  order  is  preserved,  whether 
he  write  well,  or  ill.  These  two  instances,  of  music 
and  writing,  show  not  only  the  quickness  and  pre- 
cision of  muscular  action,  but  the  docility. 

II.  Regarding  the  particular  configuration  of 
muscles,  sphincter  or  circular  muscles  appear  to 
me  admirable  pieces  of  mechanism.  It  is  the  mus- 
cular power  most  happily  applied  ;  the  same  quality 
of  the  muscular  substance,  but  under  a  new  modi- 
fication.    The  circular  disposition  of  the  fibres  is 


120  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

strictly  mechanical ;  but,  though  the  most  mechani- 
cal, is  not  the  only  thing  in  sphincters  which  de- 
serves our  notice.  The  regulated  degree  of  con- 
tractile force  with  which  they  are  endowed,  suf- 
ficient for  retention,  yet  vincible  when  requisite, 
together  with  their  ordinary  state  of  actual  con- 
traction, by  means  of  which  their  dependence  upon 
the  will  is  not  constant,  but  occasional,  gives  to 
them  a  constitution,  of  which  the  conveniency  is 
inestimable.  This  their  semi-voluntary  character, 
is  exactly  such  as  suits  with  the  wants  and  func- 
tions of  the  animal. 

j  III.  We  may  also,  upon  the  subject  of  muscles, 
observe,  that  many  of  our  most  important  actions 
are  achieved  by  the  combined  help  of  different 
muscles.  Frequently,  a  diagonal  motion  is  pro- 
duced by  the  contraction  of  tendons  pulling  in  the 
direction  of  the  sides  of  the  parallelogram.  This 
is  the  case,  as  hath  been  already  noticed,  with 
some  of  the  oblique  nutations  of  the  head.  Some- 
times the  number  of  co-operating  muscles  is  very 
great.  Dr  Nieuentyt,  in  the  Leipsic  Transactions, 
reckons  up  a  hundred  muscles  that  are  employed 
every  time  we  breathe  ;  yet  we  take  in,  or  let  out, 
our  breath,  without  reflecting  what  a  work  is  there- 
by performed ;  what  an  apparatus  is  laid  in,  of 
instruments  for  the  service,  and  how  many  such 
contribute  their  assistance  to  the  effect!  Breath- 
ing with  ease,  is  a  blessing  of  every  moment ;  yet, 
of  all  others,  it  is  that  which  we  possess  with  the 
least  consciousness.  A  man  in  an  asthma  is  the 
pnly  man  who  knows  how  to  estimate  it. 


OP  THE  MUSCLES.  121 

IV.  Mr  Home  has  observed,*  that  the  most  im- 
portant  and  the  most  delicate  actions  are  performed  \ 
in  the  body  by  the  smallest  muscles ;  and  he  men- 
tions, as  his  examples,  the  muscles  which  have  been ; 
discovered  in  the  iris  of  the  eye,  and  the  drum  of  | 
the  ear.     The  tenuity  of  these  muscles  is  astonish- 
ing.    They  are  microscopic  hairs ;  must  be  mag- 
nified to  be  visible ;  yet  are  they  real,   effective 
muscles  :  and  not  only  such,  but  the  grandest  and 
most  precious  of  our  faculties,  sight  and  hearing, 
depend  upon  their  health  and  action. 

V.  The  muscles  act  in  the  limbs  with  what  is 
called  a  mechanical  disadvantage.  The  muscle  at 
the  shoulder,  by  which  the  arm  is  raised,  is  fixed 
nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  the  load  is  fixed  upon 
a  steelyard,  within  a  few  decimals,  we  will  say,  of 
an  inch,  from  the  centre  upon  which  the  steelyard 
turns.  In  this  situation,  we  find  that  a  very  heavy 
draught  is  no  more  than  sufficient  to  countervail 
the  force  of  a  small  lead  plummet,  placed  upon  the 
long  arm  of  the  steelyard,  at  the  distance  of  per- 
haps fifteen  or  twenty  inches  from  the  centre,  and 
on  the  other  side  of  it.  And  this  is  the  disad- 
vantage which  is  meant.  And  an  absolute  disad- 
vantage, no  doubt,  it  would  be,  if  the  object  were, 
to  spare  the  force  of  muscular  contraction.  But 
observe  how  conducive  is  this  constitution  to  ani- 
mal conveniency.  Mechanism  has  always  in  view\ 
one  or  other  of  these  two  purposes  ;  either  to  move 
a  great  weight  slowly,  and  through  a  small  space, 
or  to  move  a  light  weight  rapidly,  through  a  con- 

*   Phil.  Trans,  part  i.  1 800,  p.  8. 


122  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

^^siderable  sweep.  For  the  former  of  these  pur- 
poses, a  different  species  of  lever,  and  a  different 
collocation  of  the  muscles,  might  be  better  than 
the  present ;  but  for  the  second,  the  present  struc- 
ture is  the  true  one.  Now  so  it  happens,  that  the 
second,  and  not  the  first,  is  that  which  the  occasions 
of  animal  life  principally  call  for.  In  what  concerns 
the  human  body,  it  is  of  much  more  consequence 
to  any  man  to  be  able  to  carry  his  hand  to  his  head 
with  due  expedition,  than  it  would  be  to  have  the 
power  of  raising  from  the  ground  a  heavier  load 
(of  two  or  three  more  hundred  weight,  we  will 
suppose),  than  he  can  lift  at  present.  This  last  is 
a  faculty,  which  on  some  extraordinary  occasions 
he  may  desire  to  possess  ;  but  the  other  is  what  he 
wants,  and  uses  every  hour  or  minute.  In  like 
manner,  a  husbandman,  or  a  gardener,  will  do  more 
execution,  by  being  able  to  carry  his  scythe,  his 
rake,  or  his  flail,  with  a  sufficient  dispatch  through 
a  sufficient  space,  than  if,  with  greater  strength, 
his  motions  were  proportionably  more  confined 
and  slow.  It  is  the  same  with  a  mechanic  in  the 
use  of  his  tools.  It  is  the  same  also  with  other 
animals  in  the  use  of  their  limbs.  In  general,  the 
^vivacity  of  their  motions  would  be  ill  exchanged 
i  for  greater  force  under  a  clumsier  structure. 

We  have  offered  our  observations  upon  the  struc- 
ture of  muscles  in  general ;  we  have  also  noticed 
certain  species  of  muscles :  but  there  are  also 
single  muscles,  which  bear  marks  of  mechanical 
contrivance,    appropriate    as    well    as   particular. 


ii 


PF  THE  MUSCLES.  123 

•Out  of  many  instances  of  this  kind,  we  select  the 
following. 

I.  Of  muscular  actions,  even  of  those  which  are 
well  understood,  some  of  the  most  curious  are  in- 
capable of  popular  explanation ;  at  least,  without 
the  aid  of  plates  and  figures.     This  is  in  a  great 
measure  the  case,  with  a  very  familiar,  but,  at  the 
same  time,   a  very  complicated  motion, — that  of 
the  lower  jaw  ;  and  with  the  muscular  structure  by 
which  it  is  produced.     One  of  the  muscles  con- 
cerned may,  however,  be  described  in  such  a  man- 
ner, as  to  be,  I  think,  sufficiently  comprehended 
for  our  present  purpose.     The  problem  is  to  pull 
the  lower  jaw  down.     The  obvious  method  should 
seem  to  be,  to  place  a  straight  muscle,  viz.  to  fix 
a  string  from  the  chin  to  the  breast,  the  contraction 
of  which  would  open  the  mouth,  and  produce  the 
motion  required  at  once.     But  it  is  evident  that 
the  form  and  liberty  of  the  neck  forbid  a  muscle 
being  laid  in  such  a  position ;   and  that,  consist- 
ently with  the  preservation  of  this  form,  the  mo- 
tion, which  we  want,  must  be  effectuated  by  some 
muscular  mechanism  disposed  farther  back  in  the 
jaw.     The  mechanism  adopted  is  as  follows.     A 
certain  muscle  called  the  diagastric,  rises  on  the 
side  of  the  face,  considerably  above  the  insertion  of 
the  lower  jaw,  and  comes  down,  being  converted 
in  its  progress  into  a  round  tendon.     Now,  it  is 
manifest  that  the  tendon,  whilst  it  pursues  a  direc- 
tion descending  towards  the  jaw,  must,  by  its  con- 
traction, pull  the  jaw  up,  instead  of  down.     What 
then  was  to  be  done  ?  This,  we  find,  is  done  :  The 


124  OF  THE  MUSCLES* 

descending  tendon,  when  it  is  got  low  enough,  is 
passed  through  a  loop,  or  ring,  or  pulley,  in  the  os 
hyoides,  and  then  made  to  ascend  ;  and,  having 
thus  changed  its  line  of  direction,  is  inserted  into 
the  inner  part  of  the  chin :  by  which  device,  viz. 
the  turn  at  the  loop,  the  action  of  the  muscle 
(which  in  all  muscles  is  contraction)  that  before 
would  have  pulled  the  jaw  up,  now  as  necessarily 
draws  it  down.  "  The  mouth,*'  says  Heister,  *'  is 
opened  by  means  of  this  trochlea  in  a  most  wonder- 
ful and  elegant  manner.'' 

II.  What  contrivance  can  be  more  mechanical 
^than  the  following,  viz.  a  slit  in  one  tendon  to  let 
^^^another  tendon  pass  through  it  ?  This  structure  is 

found  in  the  tendons  which  move  the  toes  and 
fingers.  The  long  tendon,  as  it  is  called,  in  the 
foot,  which  bends  the  first  joint  of  the  toe,  passes 
through  the  short  tendon  which  bends  the  second 
joint ;  which  course  allows  to  the  sinew  more 
liberty,  and  a  more  commodious  action  than  it 
would  otherwise  have  been  capable  of  exerting.* 
There  is  nothing,  I  believe,  in  a  silk  or  cotton  mill, 
in  the  belts,  or  straps,  or  ropes,  by  which  motion  is 
communicated  from  one  part  of  the  machine  to  an- 
other, that  is  more  artificial,  or  more  evidently  so, 
than  this  perforation. 

III.  The  next  circumstance  which  I  shall  men- 
tion, under  this  head  of  muscular  arrangement,  is 
so  decisive  a  mark  of  intention,  that  it  always  ap- 
peared to  me  to  supersede,  in  some  measure,  the 

*   Ches.  Anat.  p.  119. 


OF  THE  MUSCLES,  125 

necessity  of  seeking  for  any  other  observation  upon 
the  subject ;  and  that  circumstance  is,  the  tendons, 
which  pass  from  the  leg  to  the  foot,  being  boundH 
down  by  a  Hgament  at  the  ankle.     The  foot  is 
placed  at  a  considerable  angle  with  the  leg.     It.1 
is  manifest,  therefore,  that  flexible  strings  passing 
along  the  interior  of  the  angle,  if  left  to  themselves, 
would,  when  stretched,  start  from  it.     The  obvious 
preventive  is  to  tie  them  down.     And  this  is  done 
in  fact.     Across  the  instep,  or  rather  just  above  it, 
the  anatomist  finds  a  strong  ligament,  under  which 
the  tendons  pass  to  the  foot.     The  effect  of  the 
ligament  as  a  bandage,  can  be  made  evident  to  the 
senses ;    for   if  it  be  cut,    the   tendons  start  up. 
The  simplicity,  yet  the  clearness  of  this  contriv- 
ance, its  exact  resemblance  to  established  resources 
of  art,  place  it  amongst  the  most  indubitable  mani- 
festations  of  design  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 
There  is  also  a  further  use  to  be  made  of  the 
present  example,  and  that  is,  as  it  precisely  contra- 
dicts the  opinion,  that  the  parts  of  animals  may 
have  been  all  formed  by  what  is  called  appetency^ 
i.  e.   endeavour,    perpetuated,    and   imperceptibly 
working  its  effect,  through  an  incalculable  series  of 
generations.     We  have  here  no  endeavour,  but  the 
reverse  of  it ;  a  constant  renitency  and  reluctance. 
The  endeavour  is  all  the  other  way.     The  pressure 
of  the  ligament  constrains  the  tendons  ;  the  tendons 
re-act  upon  the  pressure  of  the  ligament.     It  is  im- 1 
possible  that  the  ligament  should  ever  have  been 
generated  by  tbe  exercise  of  the  tendon,  or  in  the 
course  of  that  exercise,  forasmuch  as  the  force  of  | 


126  OF  THE  MUSCLES. 

the  tendon  perpendicularly  resists  the  fibre  which 
confines  it,  and  is  constantly  endeavouring,  not  to 
form,  but  to  rupture  and  displace,  the  threads  of 
which  the  ligament  is  composed, 

Keill  has  reckoned  up,  in  the  human  body,  four 
hundred  and  forty-six  muscles,  dissectible  and  de- 
scribable ;  and  hath  assigned  a  use  to  every  one  of 
the  number.     This  cannot  be  all  imagination. 

Bishop  Wilkins  hath  observed  from  Galen,  that 
there  are,  at  least,  ten  several  qualifications  ^to  be 
attended  to  in  each  particular  muscle  ;  viz.  its 
proper  figure  ;  its  just  magnitude  ;  its  fulcrum  ;  its 
point  of  action,  supposing  the  figure  to  be  fixed ; 
its^  collocation,  with  respect  to  its  two  ends,  the 
upper  and  the  lower ;  the  place  ;  the  position  of 
the  whole  muscle  ;  the  introduction  into  it  of  nerves, 
arteries,  veins.  How  are  things,  including  so  many 
adjustments,  to  be  made  ?  or,  when  made,  how  are 
they  to  be  put  together,  without  intelligence  ? 

I  have  sometimes  wondered,  why  we  are  not 
1^  struck  with  mechanism  in  animal  bodies,  as  readily 
and  as  strongly  as  we  are  struck  with  it,  at  first 
\  sight,  in  a  watch  or  a  mill.  One  reason  of  the  dif- 
ference may  be,  that  animal  bodies  are,  in  a  great 
measure,  made  up  of  soft,  flabby  substances,  such 
as  muscles  and  membranes  ;  whereas  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  trace  mechanism  in  sharp  lines,  in 
the  configuration  of  hard  materials,  in  the  moulding, 
chiseling,  and  filing  into  shapes,  of  such  articles  as 
metals  or  wood.  There  is  something  therefore  of 
habit  in  the  case  ;  but  it  is  sufficiently  evident,  that 


OF  THE  MUSCLES..  1^7 

there  can  be  no  proper  reason  for  any  distinction 
of  the  sort.  Mechanism  may  be  displayed  in  the 
one  kind  of  substance,  as  well  as  in  the  other. 

Although  the  few  instances  we  have  selected, 
even  as  they  stand  in  our  description,  are  nothing 
short  perhaps  of  logical  proofs  of  design,  yet  it  must 
not  be  forgotten,  that,  in  every  part  of  anatomy, 
description  is  a  poor  substitute  for  inspection.  It 
is  well  said  by  an  able  anatomist,  *  and  said  in  re- 
ference to  the  very  part  of  the  subject  which  we 
have  been  treating  of; — ^^  Imperfecta  hsec  muscu- 
lorum descriptio,  non  minus  arida  est  legentibus, 
quam  inspectantibus  fuerit  jucunda  eorundem 
praeparatio.  Elegantissima  enim  mechanices  artifi- 
cia,  creberrime  in  illis  obvia,  verbis  nonnisi  obscure 
exprimuntur :  carnium  autem  ductu,  tendinum 
colore,  insertionum  proportion  e,  et  trochlearium 
distributione,  oculis  exposita,  omnem  superant 
admirationem.'* 


CHAPTER  X. 

OF  THE  VESSELS  OF  ANIMAL  BODIES. 

The  circulation  of  the  blood,  through  the  bodies 
of  men  and  quadrupeds,  and  the  apparatus  by  which 

*    Steno,  in  Blai?.  Anat.  Animal,  p.  2.  c.  4>- 

47 


128  OF  THE  VESSELS 

it  is  carried  on,  compose  a  system,  and  testify  a 
contrivance,  perhaps  the  best  understood  of  any 
part  of  the  animal  frame.  The  lymphatic  system, 
or  the  nervous  system,  may  be  more  subtile  and  in- 
tricate ;  nay,  it  is  possible  that  in  their  structure 
they  may  be  even  more  artificial  than  the  sangui- 
ferous ;  but  we  do  not  know  so  much  about  them. 

The  utility  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  I  as- 
sume as  an  acknowledged  point.  One  grand  pur- 
pose is  plainly  answered  by  it ;  the  distributing  to 
every  part,  every  extremity,  every  nook  and  corner 
of  the  body,  the  nourishment  which  is  received  in- 
to it  by  one  aperture.  What  enters  at  the  mouth, 
finds  its  way  to  the  fingers'  ends.  A  more  difficult 
mechanical  problem  could  hardly  I  think  be  pro- 
posed, than  to  discover  a  method  of  constantly  re- 
pairing the  waste,  and  of  supplying  an  accession  of 
substance  to  every  part  of  a  complicated  machine, 
at  the  same  time. 

This  system  presents  itself  under  two  views : 
first,  the  disposition  of  the  blood-vessels,  L  e:  the 
laying  of  the  pipes  ;  and  secondly,  the  construction 
of  the  engine  at  the  centre,  viz.  the  heart,  for  driv- 
ing the  blood  through  them. 

I.  The  disposition  of  the  blood-vessels,  as  far  as 
regards  the  supply  of  the  body,  is  like  that  of  the 
water-pipes  in  a  city,  viz.  large  and  main  trunks 
branching  off  by  smaller  pipes  (and  these  again  by 
still  narrower  tubes)  in  every  direction,  and  towards 
every  part  in  which  the  fluid,  which  they  convey, 
^an  be  wanted.  So  far  the  water-pipes,  which  serve 
a  town,  may  represent  the  vessels  which  carry  the 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  129 

blood  from  the  heart.  But  there  is  another  thing 
necessary  to  the  blood,  which  is  not  wanted  for  the 
water ;  and  that  is,  the  carrying  of  it  back  again  to 
its  source.  For  this  office,  a  reversed  system  of  ves- 
sels is  prepared,  which,  uniting  at  their  extremities 
with  the  extremities  of  the  first  system,  collects  the 
divided  and  sub-divided  streamlets,  first,  by  capillary 
ramifications  into  larger  branches ;  secondly,  by 
these  branches  into  trunks ;  and  thus  returns  the 
blood  (almost  exactly  inverting  the  order  in  which 
it  went  out)  to  the  fountain  whence  its  motion  pro- 
ceeded.    All  which  is  evident  mechanism. 

The  body,  therefore,  contains  two  systems  of 
blood-vessels,  arteries  and  veins.  Between  the  con- 
stitution of  the  systems  there  are  also  two  differ- 
ences, suited  to  the  functions  which  the  systems 
have  to  execute.  The  blood,  in  going  out,  passing 
always  from  wider  into  narrower  tubes ;  and,  in 
coming  back,  from  narrower  into  wider ;  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  the  impulse  and  pressure  upon  the  sides 
of  the  blood-vessel,  will  be  much  greater  in  one  case 
than  the  other.  Accordingly,  the  arteries  whicR 
carry  out  the  blood,  are  formed  of  much  tougher 
and  stronger  coats,  than  the  veins  which  bring  it^ 
back.  That  is  one  difference  :  the  other  is  still  more 
artificial,  or,  if  I  may  so  speak,  indicates,  still  more 
clearly,  the  care  and  anxiety  of  the  artificer.  For- 
asmuch as  in  the  arteries,  by  reason  of  the  greater 
force  with  which  the  blood  is  urged  along  them, 
a  wound  or  rupture  would  be  more  dangerous  than 
in  the  veins,  these  vessels  are  defended  from  injury, 
not  only  by  their  texture,  but  by  their  situation  j 

I 


ISO  OF  THE  VESSELS 

and  by  every  advantage  of  situation  which  can  be 
given  to  them.  They  are  buried  in  sinuses,  or  they 
creep  along  grooves,  made  for  them  in  the  bones  ; 
for  instance,  the  under  edge  of  the  ribs  is  sloped 
and  furrowed  solely  for  the  passage  of  these  vessels* 
Sometimes  they  proceed  in  channels,  protected  by 
^tout  parapets  on  each  side  ;  which  last  description 
is  remarkable  in  the  bones  of  the  fingers,  these  being 
hollowed  out,  on  the  under  side,  like  a  scoop,  and 
with  such  a  concavity,  that  the  finger  may  be  tut 
across  to  the  bone,  without  hurting  the  artery  which 
runs  along  it.  At  other  times,  the  arteries  pass  in 
canals  wrought  in  the  substance,  and  in  the  very 
middle  of  the  substance  of  the  bone :  this  takes 
place  in  the  lower  jaw;  and  is  found  where  there 
would,  otherwise,  be  danger  of  compression  by  sud- 
den curvature.  All  this  care  is  wonderful,  yet  not 
more  than  what  the  importance  of  the  case  required. 
To  those  who  venture  their  lives  in  a  ship,  it  has 
been  often  said,  that  there  is  only  an  inch-board  be- 
tween them  and  death ;  but  in  the  body  itself^ 
especially  in  the  arterial  system,  there  is,  in  many 
parts,  only  a  membrane,  a  skin,  a  thread.  For 
which  reason,  this  system  lies  deep  under  the  in- 
teguments ;  whereas  the  veins,  in  which  the  mis- 
chief that  ensues  from  injuring  the  coats  is  much 
less,  lie  in  general  above  the  arteries ;  come  nearer 
to  the  surface  ;  are  more  exposed. 

It  may  be  farther  observed  concerning  the  two 
systems  taken  together,  that  though  the  arterial, 
with  its  trunk  and  branches  and  small  twigs,  may  be 
imagined  to  issue  or  proceed,  in  other  words,  to 


OP  ANIMAL  BODIES.  131 

grow  from  the  heart ;  Kke  a  plant  from  its  root,  or 
the  fibres  of  a  leaf  from  its  foot-stalk,  (which,  how- 
ever, were  it  so,  would  be  only  to  resolve  one  me- 
chanism into  another),  yet  the  venal,  the  returning 
system,  can  never  be  formed  in  this  mannen  The! 
arteries  might  go  on  shooting  out  from  their  extremi- 
ties,  i.  e.  lengthening  and  sub-dividing  indefinitely ; 
but  an  inverted  system,  continually  uniting  its 
streams,  instead  of  dividing,  and  thus  carrying  back 
what  the  other  system  carried  out,  could  not  be  re^) 
ferred  to  the  same  process. 

II.  The  next  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  engine 
which  works  this  machinery,  viz.  the  heart.  For 
our  purpose  it  is  unnecessary  to  ascertain  the  prin- 
ciple upon  which  the  heart  acts.  Whether  it  be 
irritation  excited  by  the  contact  of  the  blood,  by 
the  influx  of  the  nervous  fluid,  or  whatever  else  be 
the  cause  of  its  motion,  it  is  something  which  is  ca- 
pable of  producing,  in  a  living  muscular  fibre,  reci- 
procal contraction  and  relaxation.  This  is  the  power 
we  have  to  work  with  ;  and  the  inquiry  is,  how  this 
power  is  applied  in  the  instance  before  us.  There 
is  provided,  in  the  central  part  of  the  body,  a  hol- 
low muscle,  invested  with  spiral  fibres,  running  in 
both  directions,  the  layers  intersecting  one  another ; 
in  some  animals,  however,  appearing  to  be  semicir- 
cular rather  than  spiral.  By  the  contraction  of  these 
fibres,  the  sides  of  the  muscular  cavities  are  neces- 
sarily squeezed  together,  so  as  to  force  out  from 
them  any  fluid  which  they  may  at  that  time  contain  : 
by  the  relaxation  of  the  same  fibres,  the  cavities  are 


132  OF  THE  VESSELS 

in  their  turn  dilated,  and,  of  course,  prepared  to 
admit  every  jfluid  which  may  be  poured  into  them. 
Into  these  cavities  are  inserted  the  great  trunks, 
both  of  the  arteries  which  carry  out  the  blood,  and 
of  the  veins  which  bring  it  back.  This  is  a  general 
account  of  the  apparatus  ;  and  the  simplest  idea  of 
its  action  is,  that,  by  each  contraction,  a  portion  of 
blood  is  forced  by  a  syringe  into  the  arteries  ;  and, 
at  each  dilatation,  an  equal  portion  is  received  from 
the  veins.  This  produces,  at  each  pulse,  a  motion, 
and  change  in  the  mass  of  blood,  to  the  amount  of 
what  the  cavity  contains,  which,  in  a  full-grown  hu- 
man heart,  I  understand,  is  about  an  ounce,  or  two 
table-spoons  full.  How  quickly  these  changes  suc- 
ceed one  another,  and  by  this  succession  how  suffi- 
cient they  are  to  support  a  stream  or  circulation 
throughout  the  system,  may  be  understood  by  the 
following  computation,  abridged  from  KeilPs  Ana- 
tomy, p.  117.  ed.  3. :  ''  Each  ventricle  will  at  least 
contain  one  ounce  of  blood.  The  heart  contracts 
four  thousand  times  in  one  hour ;  from  which  it 
follows,  that  there  pass  through  the  heart,  every 
hour,  four  thousand  ounces,  or  three  hundred  and 
i^fty  pounds  of  blood.  Now  the  whole  mass  of 
blood  is  said  to  be  about  twenty-five  pounds ;  so 
that  a  qnantity  of  blood,  equal  to  the  whole  mass  of 
blood,  passes  through  the  heart  fourteen  times  in 
one  hour  ^  which  is  about  once  every  four  minutes.'' 
j  Consider  what  an  affair  this  is,  when  we  come  to 
^\^ery  large  animals.  The  aorta  of  a  whale  is  larger 
in  the  bore  than  the  main  pipe  of  the  water- works 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  133 

at  London-bridge  ;  and  the  water  roaring  in  its  pas- 
sage through  that  pipe  is  inferior  in  impetus  and 
velocity,  to  the  blood  gushing  from  the  whalers 
heart.  Hear  Dr  Hunter^s  account  of  the  dissection 
of  a  whale : — "  The  aorta  measured  a  foot  diameter'H 
Ten  or  fifteen  gallons  of  blood  are  thrown  out  of  the 
heart  at  a  stroke  with  an  immense  velocity,  through 
a  tube  of  a  foot  diameter.  The  whole  idea  fills  the  j 
mind  with  wonder.'^ ^ 

The  account  which  we  have  here  stated,  of  the 
injection  of  blood  into  the  arteries  by  the  contrac- 
tion, and  of  the  corresponding  reception  of  it  from 
the  veins  by  the  dilatation,  of  the  cavities  of  the 
heart,  and  of  the  circulation  being  thereby  main- 
tiiined  through  the  blood-vessels  of  the  body,  is  true, 
but  imperfect.  The  heart  performs  this  office,  but 
it  is  in  conjunction  with  another  of  equal  curiosity 
and  importance.  It  was  necessary  that  the  blood 
should  be  successively  brought  into  contact,  or  con- 
tiguity, or  proximity,  with  the  air.  I  do  not  know 
that  the  chymical  reason,  upon  which  this  necessity 
is  founded,  has  been  yet  sufficiently  explored.  It 
seems  to  be  made  appear,  that  the  atmosphere  which 
we  breathe  is  a  mixture  of  two  kinds  of  air  ;  one 
pure  and  vital,  the  other,  for  the  purposes  of  life, 
effete,  foul,  and  noxious  :  that  when  we  have  drawn 
in  our  breath,  the  blood  in  the  lungs  imbibes  from 
the  air,  thus  brought  into  contiguity  with  it,  a  por- 
tion of  its  pure  ingredient,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
gives  out  the  effete  or  corrupt  air  which  it  contaiuT^ 

*   Dr  Hunter's  Account  of  the  Dissection  of  a  Whale.     (Phil.  Trans.) 


134  OF  THE  VESSELS 

ed,  and  which  is  carried  away,  along  with  the  hali- 
tus,  every  time  we  expire.  At  least,  by  comparing 
the  air  which  is  breathed  from  the  lungs  with  the 
air  which  enters  the  lungs,  it  is  found  to  have  lost 
some  of  its  pure  part,  and  to  have  brought  away 
with  it  an  addition  of  its  impure  part.  Whether 
these  experiments  satisfy  the  question,  as  to  the 
need  which  the  blood  stands  in  of  being  visited  by 
continual  accesses  of  air,  is  not  for  us  to  inquire 
into,  nor  material  to  our  argument :  it  is  sufficient 
to  know,  that,  in  the  constitution  of  most  animals, 
such  a  necessity  exists,  and  that  the  air,  by  some 
means  or  other,  must  be  introduced  into  a  near 
communication  with  the  blood.  The  lungs  of  ani- 
mals are  constructed  for  this  purpose.  They  consist 
of  blood-vessels  and  air-vessels,  lying  close  to  each 
other ;  and  whenever  there  is  a  branch  of  the  trachea 
or  windpipe,  there  is  a  branch  accompanying  it  of 
the  vein  and  artery,  and  the  air-vessel  is  always  in 
the  middle  between  the  blood-vessels.^  The  inter- 
nal surface  of  these  vessels,  vipon  which  the  appli- 
cation of  the  air  to  the  blood  depends,  would,  if 
collected  and  expanded,  be,  in  a  man,  equal  to  a 
superficies  of  fifteen  feet  square.  Now,  in  order  to 
give  the  blood  in  its  course  the  benefit  of  this  orga- 
nization (and  this  is  the  part  of  the  subject  with 
which  we  are  chiefly  concerned),  the  following 
operation  takes  place.  As  soon  as  the  blood  is  re^ 
ceived  by  the  heart  from  the  veins  of  the  body,  and 
before  that  is  sent  out  again  into  its  arteries,  it  is 

*  Keill*s  Anatomy,  p.  121. 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  135 

carried  by  the  force  of  the  contraction  of  the  heart, 
and  by  means  of  a  separate  and  supplementary  ar-^i 
tery,  to  the  lungs,  and  made  to  enter  the  vessels  of  *' 
the  lungs ;  from  which,  after  it  has  undergone  the 
action,  whatever  it  be,  of  that  viscus,  it  is  brought 
back  by  a  large  vein  once  more  to  the  heart,  in 
order,  when  thus  concocted  and  prepared,  to  be 
thence   distributed   anew  into  the  system.     This 
assigns  to  the  heart  a  double  office.    The  pulmonary 
circulation  is  a  system  within  a  system ;  and  onej 
action  of  the  heart  is  the  origin  of  both. 

For  this  complicated  function,  four  cavities  be., 
come  necessary;  and  four  are  accordingly  provided: 
two,  called  ventricles,  which  send  out  the  blood, 
viz.  one  into  the  lungs,  in  the  first  instance ;  the 
other  into  the  mass,  after  it  has  returned  from  the 
lungs :  two  others  also,  called  auricles,  which  receive 
the  blood  from  the  veins  ;  viz.  one,  as  it  comes  imr 
mediately  from  the  body ;  the  other,  as  the  same 
blood  comes  a  second  time  after  its  circulation 
through  the  lungs.  So  that  there  are  two  receiving 
cavities,  and  two  forcing  cavities.  The  structure 
of  the  heart  has  reference  to  the  lungs  ;  for  without 
the  lungs,  one  of  each  would  have  been  sufficient. 
The  translation  of  the  blood  in  the  heart  itself  is 
after  this  manner.  The  receiving  cavities  respecr 
tively  communicate  with  the  forcing  cavities,  and, 
by  their  contraction,  unload  the  received  blood  into 
them.  The  forcing  cavities,  when  it  is  their  turn  1 
to  contract,  compel  the  same  blood  into  the  mouths/ 
of  the  arteries. 


136  OF  THE  VESSELS 

The  account  here  given  will  not  convey  to  a 
reader,  ignorant  of  anatomy,  any  thing  like  an  ac- 
curate notion  of  the  form,  action,  or  use  of  the  parts 
(nor  can  any  short  and  popular  account  do  this); 
but  it  is  abundantly  sufficient  to  testify  contrivance  ; 
and  although  imperfect,  being  true  as  far  as  it  goes, 
may  be  relied  upon  for  the  only  purpose  for  which 
we  offer  it,  the  purpose  of  this  conclusion. 

i  "  The  wisdom  of  the  Creator,'^  saith  Hamburgher, 
"is  in  nothing  seen  more  gloriously  than  in  the 

^eart.''  And  how  well  doth  it  execute  its  office ! 
An  anatomist,  who  understood  the  structure  of  the 
heart,  might  say  beforehand  that  it  would  play  ;^  but 
he  would  expect,  I  think,  from  the  complexity  of 
its  mechanism,  and  the  delicacy  of  many  of  its  parts, 
that  it  should  always  be  liable  to  derangement,  or 
that  it  would  soon  work  itself  out.  Yet  shall  this 
wonderful  machine  go,  night  and  day,  for  eighty 
years  together,  at  the  rate  of  a  hundred  thousand 
strokes  every  twenty-four  hours,  having,  at  every 
stroke,  a  great  resistance  to  overcome ;  and  shall 
continue  this  action  for  this  length  of  time,  without 
disorder  and  without  weariness  ! 

But  farther :  From  the  account  which  has  been 
given  of  the  mechanism  of  the  heart,  it  is  evident 
that  it  must  require  the  interposition  of  valves  ;  that 
the  success  indeed  of  its  action  must  depend  upon 
these ;  for  when  any  one  of  its  cavities  contracts, 
the  necessary  tendency  of  the  force  will  be  to  drive 
the  enclosed  blood,  not  only  into  the  mouth  of  the 
artery  where  it  ought  to  go,  but  also  back  again  in^ 
to  the  mouth  of  the  vein  from  wliich  it  flowed.    In 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  '  137 

like  manner,  when  by  the  relaxation  of  the  fibres 
the  same  cavity  is  dilated,  the  blood  would  not  only 
run  into  it  from  the  vein,  which  was  the  course  in- 
tended, but  back  from  the  artery,  through  which  it 
ought  to  be  moving  forward.  The  way  of  prevent- 
ing a  reflux  of  the  fluid,  in  both  these  cases,  is  to 
fix  valves,  which,  like  flood-gates,  may  open  a  way 
to  the  stream  in  one  direction,  and  shut  up  the  pas- 
sage against  it  in  another.  The  heart,  constituted 
as  it  is,  can  no  more  work  without  valves  than  a 
pump  can.  When  the  piston  descends  in  a  pump, 
if  it  were  not  for  the  stoppage  by  the  valve  beneath, 
the  motion  would  only  thrust  down  the  water  which 
it  had  before  drawn  up.  A  similar  consequence 
would  frustrate  the  action  of  the  heart.  Valves, 
therefore,  properly  disposed,  i.  e.  properly  with  re- 
spect to  the  course  of  the  blood  which  it  is  necessary 
to  promote,  are  essential  to  the  contrivance.  And 
'valves  so  disposed,  are  accordingly  provided.  A  valve 
is  placed  in  the  communication  between  each  auricle 
and  its  ventricle,  lest  when  the  ventricle  contracts, 
part  of  the  blood  should  get  back  again  into  the 
auricle,  instead  of  the  whole  entering,  as  it  ought 
to  do,  the  mouth  of  the  artery.  A  valve  is  also 
fixed  at  the  mouth  of  each  of  the  great  arteries 
which  take  the  blood  from  the  heart ;  leaving  the 
passage  free,  so  long  as  the  blood  holds  its  proper 
course  forward ;  closing  it,  whenever  the  blood,  in 
consequence  of  the  relaxation  of  the  ventricle,  would 
attempt  to  flow  back.  There  is  some  variety  in  the 
construction  of  these  valves,  though  all  the  valves 
of  the  body  act  nearly  upon  the  same  principle,  and 


138  OF  THE  VESSELS 

are  destined  to  the  same  use.  In  general  they  con- 
sist of  a  thin  membrane,  lying  close  to  the  side  of 
the  vessel,  and  consequently  allowing  an  open  pas- 
sage whilst  the  stream  runs  one  way,  but  thrust  out 
from  the  side  by  the  fluid  getting  behind  it,  and 
opposing  the  passage  of  the  blood,  when  it  would 
flow  the  other  way.  Where  more  than  one  mem- 
brane is  employed,  the  different  membranes  only 
compose  one  valve.  Their  joint  action  fulfils  the 
office  of  a  valve  :  For  instance  ;  over  the  entrance 
of  the  right  auricle  of  the  heart  into  the  right  ven- 
tricle, three  of  these  skins  or  membranes  are  fixed, 
of  a  triangular  figure,  the  bases  of  the  triangles  fas- 
tened to  the  flesh ;  the  sides  and  summits  loose ;  but, 
though  loose,  connected  by  threads  of  a  determinate 
length,  with  certain  small  fleshy  prominences  ad- 
joining. The  effect  of  this  construction  is,  that, 
when  the  ventricle  contracts,  the  blood  endeavour^ 
ing  to  escape  in  all  directions,  and  amongst  other 
directions  pressing  upwards,  gets  between  these 
membranes  and  the  sides  of  the  passage ;  and  there- 
by forces  them  up  into  such  a  position,  as  that,  to- 
gether, they  constitute,  when  raised,  a  hollow  cone 
(the  strings,  before  spoken  of,  hindering  them  from 
proceeding  or  separating  farther)  ;  which  cone,  en- 
tirely occupying  the  passage,  prevents  the  return 
of  the  blood  into  the  auricle.  A  shorter  account  of 
the  matter  may  be  this  :  So  long  as  the  blood  pro- 
ceeds in  its  proper  course,  the  membranes  which 
compose  the  valve  are  pressed  close  to  the  side  of 
the  vessel,  and  occasion  no  impediment  to  the  cir- 
culation :  when  the  blood  would  regurgitate,  they 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  159 

are  raised  from  the  side  of  the  vessel,  and,  meeting 
in  the  middle  of  its  cavity,  shut  up  the  channel. 
Can  any  one  doubt  of  contrivance  here ;  or  is  it 
possible  to  shut  our  eyes  against  the  proof  of  it  ? 

This  valve,  also,  is  not  more  curious  in  its  struc** 
ture,  than  it  is  important  in  its  office.  Upon  the 
play  of  the  valve,  even  upon  the  proportioned  length 
of  the  strings  or  fibres  which  check  the  ascent  of 
the  membranes,  depends,  as  it  should  seem,  nothing 
less  than  the  life  itself  of  the  animal.  We  may  here 
likewise  repeat,  what  we  before  observed  concern- 
ing some  of  the  ligaments  of  the  body,  that  they 
could  not  be  formed  by  any  action  of  the  parts 
themselves.  There  are  cases  in  which,  although 
good  uses  appear  to  arise  from  the  shape  or  configu- 
ration of  a  part,  yet  that  shape  or  configuration 
itself  may  seem  to  be  produced  by  the  action  of  the 
part,  or  by  the  action  or  pressure  of  adjoining  parts. 
Thus  the  bend,  and  the  internal  smooth  concavity  of 
the  ribs,  may  be  attributed  to  the  equal  pressure  of 
the  soft  bowels  ;  the  particular  shape  of  some  bones 
and  joints,  to  the  traction  of  the  annexed  muscles, 
or  to  the  position  of  contiguous  muscles.  But  ' 
valves  could  not  be  so  formed.  Action  and  pres- 
sure are  all  against  them.  The  blood,  in  its  proper 
course,  has  no  tendency  to  produce  such  things ; 
and,  in  its  improper  or  reflected  current,  has  a 
tendency  to  prevent  their  production.  Whilst  we  i 
see,  therefore,  the  use  and  necessity  of  this  machine 
ery,  we  can  look  to  no  other  account  of  its  origin  or 
formation  than  the  intending  mind  of  a  Creator,  J 
Nor  can  we  without  admiration  reflect,  that  such 


140  OF  THE  VESSELS 

thin  membranes,  such  weak  and  tender  instru- 
ments, as  these  valves  are,  should  be  able  to  hold 
out  for  seventy  or  eighty  years. 

Here  also  we  cannot  consider  but  with  grati- 
tude, how  happy  it  is  that  our  vital  motions  are 
involuntary.  We  should  have  enough  to  do,  if  we 
had  to  keep  our  hearts  beating,  and  our  stomachs 
at  work.  Did  these  things  depend,  we  will  not 
say  upon  our  effort,  but  upon  our  bidding,  our  care, 
or  our  attention,  they  would  leave  us  leisure  for 
nothing  else.  We  must  have  been  continually  up- 
on the  watch,  and  continually  in  fear ;  nor  would 
this  constitution  have  allowed  of  sleep. 

It  might  perhaps  be  expected,  that  an  organ  so 
precious,  of  such  central  and  primary  importance 
as  the  heart  is,  should  be  defended  by  a  case.  The 
fact  is,  that  a  membranous  purse  or  bag,  made  of 
strong,  tough  materials,  is  provided  for  it ;  holding 
the  heart  within  its  cavity ;  sitting  loosely  and 
easily  about  it;  guarding  its  substance,  without 
confining  its  motion  ;  and  containing  likewise  a 
spoonful  or  two  of  water,  just  sufficient  to  keep 
the  surface  of  the  heart  in  a  state  of  suppleness  and 
moisture.  How  should  such  a  loose  covering  be 
generated  by  the  action  of  the  heart?  Does  not 
the  enclosing  of  it  in  a  sack,  answering  no  other 
purpose  but  that  enclosure,  show  the  care  that  has 
been  taken  of  its  preservation  ? 

One  use  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  probably 
(amongst  other  uses)  is,  to  distribute  nourishment 
to  the  different  parts  of  the  body.  How  minute 
and  multiplied  the  ramifications  of  the  blooc^-ves- 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  141 

sels,  for  that  purpose,  are  ;  and  how  thickly  spread, 
over  at  least  the  superficies  of  the  body,  is  proved 
by  the  single  observation,  that  we  cannot  prick  the 
point  of  a  pin  into  the  flesh,  without  drawing  blood, 
i.  e.  without  finding  a  blood-vessel.  Nor,  internally, 
is  their  diffusion  less  universal.  Blood-vessels  run 
along  the  surface  of  membranes,  pervade  the  sub- 
stance of  muscles,  penetrate  the  bones.  Even  into 
every  tooth,  we  trace,  through  a  small  hole  in  the 
root,  an  artery  to  feed  the  bone,  as  well  as  a  vein  to 
bring  back  the  spare  blood  from  it ;  both  which, 
with  the  addition  of  an  accompanying  nerve,  form 
a  thread  only  a  little  thicker  than  a  horse-hair. 

Wherefore,  when  the  nourishment  taken  in  at 
the  mouth  has  once  reached,  and  mixed  itself  with 
the  blood,  every  part  of  the  body  is  in  the  way  of 
being  supplied  with  it.  And  this  introduces  an- 
other grand  topic,  namely,  the  manner  in  which 
the  aliment  gets  into  the  blood  ;  which  is  a  subject 
distinct  from  the  preceding,  and  brings  us  to  the 
consideration  of  another  entire  system  of  vessels. 

II.  For  this  necessary  part  of  the  animal  eco- 
nomy, an  apparatus  is  provided,  in  a  great  mea- 
sure capable  of  being  what  anatomists  call  demon- 
strated, that  is,  shown  in  the  dead  body  ; — and  a 
line  or  course  of  conveyance,  which  we  can  pursue 
by  our  examinations. 

First,  the  food  descends  by  a  wide  passage  into 
the  intestines,  undergoing  two  great  preparations 
on  its  way  ;  one,  in  the  mouth  by  mastication  and 
moisture, — (can  it  be  doubted  with  what  design  the 
teeth  were  placed  in  the  road  to  the  stomach,  or 


142  OP  THE  VESSELS 

that  there  was  choice  in  fixing  them  in  this  situa* 
tion  ?)  the  other,  by  digestion  in  the  stomach  it- 
self. Of  this  last  surprising  dissolution  I  say  no- 
thing ;  because  it  is  chymistry,  and  I  am  endea- 
vouring to  display  mechanism.  The  figiu^e  and 
position  of  the  stomach  (I  speak  all  along  with  a 
reference  to  the  human  organ)  are  calculated  for  de- 
taining the  food  long  enough  for  the  action  of  its 
digestive  juice.  It  has  the  shape  of  the  pouch  of 
a  bagpipe  ;  lies  across  the  body  ;  and  the  pylorus, 
or  passage  by  which  the  food  leaves  it,  is  some- 
what higher  in  the  body  than  the  cardia,  or  orifice 
by  which  it  enters  ;  so  that  it  is  by  the  contraction 
of  the  muscular  coat  of  the  stomach,  that  the  con- 
tents, after  having  undergone  the  application  of  the 
gastric  menstruum,  are  gradually  pressed  out.  Iii 
dogs  and  cats,  this  action  of  the  coats  of  the  sto- 
mach has  been  displayed  to  the  eye.  It  is  a  slow 
and  gentle  undulation,  propagated  from  one  orifice 
of  the  stomach  to  the  other.  For  the  same  reasori 
that  I  omitted,  for  the  present,  offering  any  obser- 
vation upon  the  digestive  fluid,  I  shall  say  nothing 
concerning  the  bile  or  the  pancreatic  juice,  farther 
than  to  observe  upon  the  mechanism,  viz.  that 
from  the  glands  in  which  these  secretions  are  ela- 
borated, pipes  are  laid  into  the  first  of  the  intes- 
tines, through  which  pipes  the  product  of  each 
gland  flows  into  that  bowel,  and  is  there  mixed 
with  the  aliment,  as  soon  almost  as  it  passes  the 
stomach  ;  adding  also  as  a  remark,  how  grievously 
this  same  bile  offends  the  stomach  itself,  yet  che- 
rishes the  vessel  that  lies  next  to  it. 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES,  143 

Secondly,  We  have  now  the  ahment  in  the  in- 
testines converted  into  pulp ;  and,  though  lately  con- 
sisting of  ten  different  viands,  reduced  to  nearly  a 
uniform  substance,  and  to  a  state  fitted  for  yielding 
its  essence,  which  is  called  chyle,  but  which  is  milk, 
or  more  nearly  resembling  milk  than  any  other  liquor 
with  which  it  can  be  compared.  For  the  straining 
off  this  fluid  from  the  digested  aliment  in  the  course 
of  its  long  progress  through  the  body,  myriads  of 
capillary  tubes,  L  e.  pipes  as  small  as  hairs,  open 
their  orifiqes  into  the  cavity  of  every  part  of  the 
intestines.  These  tubes,  which  are  so  fine  and 
slender  as  not  to  be  visible  unless  when  distended 
with  chyle,  soon  unite  into  larger  branches.  The 
pipes,  formed  by  this  union,  terminate  in  glands, 
from  which  other  pipes  of  a  still  larger  diameter 
arising,  carry  th^  chyle  from  all  parts,  into  a  com- 
mon reservoir  or  receptacle.  This  receptacle  is  a 
bag  of  size  enough  to  hold  about  two  table-spoons: 
full ;  and  from  this  vessel  a  duct  or  main  pipe  pro- 
ceeds, climbing  up  the  back  part  of  the  chest,  and 
afterwards  creeping  along  the  gullet  till  it  reach  the 
neck.  Here  it  meets  the  river :  here  it  discharges 
itself  into  a  large  vein,  which  soon  conveys  the 
chyle,  now  flowing  along  with  the  old  blood,  to  the 
heart.  This  whole  route  can  be  exhibited  to  the 
eye  ;  nothing  is  left  to  be  supplied  by  imagination 
or  conjecture.^  Now,  beside  the  subserviency  of 
this  structure,  collectively  considered,  to  a  manifest 
and  necessary  purpose,  we  may  remark  two  or  three 
separate  particulars  in  it,  which  show,  not  only  the 
contrivance,  but  the  perfection  of  it.     We  may 


144  OP  THE  VESSELS 

remark,  first,  the  length  of  the  intestines,  which,  in 
the  human  subject,  is  six  times  that  of  the  body* 
Simply  for  a  passage,  these  voluminous  bowels,  this 
prolixity  of  gut,  seems  in  no  ways  necessary  ;  but,  in 
order  to  allow  time  and  space  for  the  successive 
extraction  of  the  chyle  from  the  digested  aliment, 
namely,  that  the  chyle  which  escapes  the  lacteals 
of  one  part  of  the  guts,  may  be  taken  up  by  those 
of  some  other  part,  the  length  of  the  canal  is  of 
evident  use  and  conduciveness.  Secondly,  w^e  must 
also  remark  their  peristaltic  motion  ;  which  is  made 
of  contractions,  following  one  another  like  waves 
upon  the  surface  of  a  fluid,  and  not  unlike  what  we 
observe  in  the  body  of  an  earth-worm  crawling  along 
the  ground ;  and  which  is  effected  by  the  joint 
action  of  longitudinal  and  of  spiral,  or  rather  per- 
haps of  a  great  number  of  separate  semicircular 
fibres*  This  curious  action  pushes  forward  the 
grosser  part  of  the  aliment,  at  the  same  time  that 
the  more  subtile  parts,  which  we  call  chyle,  are,  by 
a  series  of  gentle  compressions,  squeezed  into  the 
narrow  orifices  of  the  lacteal  veins.  Thirdly,  it  was 
necessary  that  these  tubes,  which  we  denominate 
lacteals,  or  their  mouths  at  least,  should  be  as  nar- 
row as  possible,  in  order  to  deny  admission  into  the 
blood  to  any  particle  which  is  of  size  enough  to 
make  a  lodgment  afterwards  in  the  small  arteries^ 
and  thereby  to  obstruct  the  circulation  :  and  it  was 
also  necessary  that  this  extreme  tenuity  should  be 
compensated  by  multitude ;  for,  a  large  quantity 
of  chyle  (in  ordinary  constitutions,  not  less,  it  has 
been  computed,  than  two  or  three  quarts  in  a  day) 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  145 

is,  by  some  means  or  other,  to  be  passed  through 
them.  Accordingly,  we  find  the  number  of  the 
lacteals  exceeding  all  powers  of  computation  ;  and 
their  pipes  so  fine  and  slender,  as  not  to  be  visible, 
unless  filled,  to  the  naked  eye ;  and  their  orifices, 
which  open  into  the  intestines,  so  small,  as  not  to 
be  discernible  even  by  the  best  microscope. 
Fourthly,  the  main  pipe,  which  carries  the  chyle 
from  the  reservoir  to  the  blood,  viz.  the  thoracic 
duct,  being  fixed  in  an  almost  upright  position,  and 
wanting  that  advantage  of  propulsion  which  the 
arteries  possess,  is  furnished  with  a  succession  of 
valves  to  check  the  ascending  fluid,  when  once  it 
has  passed  them,  from  falling  back.  These  valves 
look  upward,  so  as  to  leave  the  ascent  free,  but  to 
prevent  the  return  of  the  chyle,  if,  for  want  of 
sufficient  force  to  push  it  on,  its  weight  should  at 
any  time  cause  it  to  descend.  Fifthly,  the  chyle 
enters  the  blood  in  an  odd  place,  but  perhaps  the 
most  commodious  place  possible,  viz.  at  a  large 
vein  in  the  neck,  so  situated  with  respect  to  the 
circulation,  as  speedily  to  bring  the  mixture  to  the 
heart.  And  this  seems  to  be  a  circumstance  of 
great  moment ;  for  had  the  chyle  entered  the  blood 
at  an  artery,  or  at  a  distant  vein,  the  fluid,  composed 
of  the  old  and  the  new  materials,  must  have  per- 
formed a  considerable  part  of  the  circulation,  before 
it  received  that  churning  in  the  lungs,  which  is 
probably  necessary  for  the  intimate  and  perfect 
union  of  the  old  blood  with  the  recent  chyle.  Who'^ 
could  have  dreamt  of  a  communication  between  the 
cavity  of  the  intestines  and  the  left  great  vein  of  the 

K 


146  OF  THE  VESSELS 

nech?  Who  could  have  suspected  that  this  com- 
munication should  be  the  medium  through  v^hich 
all  nourishment  is  derived  to  the  body  ?  or  this  the 
place,  where,  by  a  side-inlet,  the  important  junction 
is  formed  between  the  blood  and  the  material  which 
feeds  it  ? 

We  postponed  the  consideration  of  digestion^  lest 
it  should  interrupt  us  in  tracing  the  course  of  the 
food  to  the  blood ;  but,  in  treating  of  the  alimentary 
system,  so  principal  a  part  of  the  process  cannot  be 
omitted. 

Of  the  gastric  juice,  the  immediate  agent  by 
which  that  change  which  food  undergoes  in  our 
stomachs  is  effected,  we  shall  take  our  account  from 
the  numerous,  careful,  and  varied  experiments  of 
the  Abbe  Spallanzani. 

r  1.  It  is  not  a  simple  diluent,  but  a  real  solvent. 
A  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  beef  had  scarcely  touched 
the  stomach  of  a  crow,  when  the  solution  began. 

2.  It  has  not  the  nature  of  saliva ;  it  has  not 
the  nature  of  bile ;  but  is  distinct  from  both. 
By  experiments  out  of  the  body  it  appears,  that 
neither  of  these  secretions  acts  upon  alimentary 
substances,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  gastric  juice 
acts. 

3.  Digestion  is  not  putrefaction ;  for,  the  digest- 
ing  fluid  resists  putrefaction  most  pertinaciously ; 
nay,  not  only  checks  its  farther  progress,  but  re- 
stores putrid  substances. 

4.  It  is  not  '^fermentative  process  ;  for,  the  solu- 
tion begins  at  the  surface,  and  proceeds  towards 

47 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES-  147 

the  centre,  contrary  to  the  order  in  which  fermen- 
tation acts  and  spreads. 

5.  It  is  not  the  digestion  of  heat ;  for,  the  cold 
maw  of  a  cod  or  sturgeon  will  dissolve  the  shells 
of  crabs  or  lobsters,  harder  than  the  sides  of  the 
stomach  which  contains  them. 

In  a  word,  animal  digestion  carries  about  it  the 
marks  of  being  a  power  and  a  process  completely  sui 
generis  ;  distinct  from  every  other  ;  at  least  from 
every  chymical  process  with  which  we  are  acquaint- 
ed. And  the  most  wonderful  thing  about  it  is  its 
appropriation  ;  its  subserviency  to  the  particular 
economy  of  each  animal.  The  gastric  juice  of  an 
owl,  falcon,  or  kite,  will  not  touch  grain  ;  no,  not 
even  to  finish  the  macerated  and  half-digested  pulse 
which  is  left  in  the  crops  of  the  sparrows  that  the 
bird  devours.  In  poultry,  the  trituration  of  the 
gizzard,  and  the  gastric  juice,  conspire  in  the  work 
of  digestion.  The  gastric  juice  will  not  dissolve 
the  grain  whilst  it  is  whole.  Entire  grains  of  bar- 
ley, enclosed  in  tubes  or  spherules,  are  not  affected 
by  it.  But  if  the  same  grain  be  by  any  means 
broken  or  ground,  the  gastric  juice  immediately 
lays  hold  of  it.  Here  then  is  wanted,  and  here  we 
find,  a  combination  of  mechanism  and  chymistry. 
For  the  preparatory  grinding,  the  gizzard  lends  its 
mill.  And,  as  all  mill-work  should  be  strong,  its 
structure  is  so,  beyond  that  of  any  other  muscle  be- 
longing to  the  animal.  The  internal  coat  also,  or 
lining  of  the  gizzard,  is,  for  the  same  purpose, 
hard  and  cartilaginous.  But,  forasmuch  as  this  is 
not  the  sort  of  animal  substance  suited  for  the  re- 


148  OF  THE  VESSELS 

ception  of  glands,  or  for  secretion,  the  gastric  juice, 
in  this  family,  is  not  supplied,  as  in  membranous 
stomachs,  by  the  stomach  itself,  but  by  the  gullet, 
in  which  the  feeding  glands  are  placed,  and  from 
which  it  trickles  down  into  the  stomach. 

In  sheep,  the  gastric  fluid  has  no  effect  in  digest- 
ing plants,  unless  they  have  been  previously  mastic 
cated.  It  only  produces  a  slight  maceration  ;  nearly 
such  as  common  water  would  produce,  in  a  degree 
of  heat  somewhat  exceeding  the  medium  tempera- 
ture  of  the  atmosphere.  But  provided  that  the 
plant  has  been  reduced  to  pieces  by  chewing, 
the  gastric  juice  then  proceeds  with  it,  first  by 
softening  its  substance  ;  next,  by  destroying  its  na- 
tural  consistency ;  and,  lastly,  by  dissolving  it  so 
completely,  as  not  even  to  spare  the  toughest  and 
most  stringy  parts,  such  as  the  nerves  of  the  leaves. 

So  far  our  accurate  and  indefatigable  Abbe. — 
Dr  Stevens  of  Edinburgh,  in  17775  found,  by  ex- 
periments  tried  with  perforated  balls,  that  the  gas- 
tric juice  of  the  sheep  and  the  ox  speedily  dissolved 
vegetables,  but  made  no  impression  upon  beef,  mut- 
ton, and  other  animal  bodies.  Dr  Hunter  disco- 
vered a  property  of  this  fluid,  of  a  most  curious 
kind ;  viz.  that  in  the  stomachs  of  animals  which 
feed  upon  flesh,  irresistibly  as  this  fluid  acts  upon 
animal  substances,  it  is  only  upon  the  dead  sub- 
stance that  it  operates  at  all.  The  living  fibre  suf- 
fers no  injury  from  lying  in  contact  with  it.  Worms 
and  insects  are  found  alive  in  the  stomachs  of  such 
animals.  The  coats  of  the  human  stomach,  in  a 
healthy  state,  are  insensible  to  its  presence ;  yet,  in 


OF  ANIMAL  BODiES.  149 

cases  of  sudden  death  (wherein  the  gastric  juice, 
not  having  been  weakened  by  disease,  retains  its 
activity),  it  has  been  known  to  eat  a  hole  through 
the  bowel  which  contains  it.*  How  nice  is  this  dis- 
crimination of  action,  yet  how  necessary ! 

But  to  return  to  our  hydraulics. 

III.  The  gall-bladder  is  a  very  remarkable  con- 
trivance. It  is  the  reservoir  of  a  canal.  It  does 
not  form  the  channel  itself,  i.  e.  the  direct  commu- 
nication between  the  liver  and  the  intestine,  which 
is  by  another  passage,  viz.  the  ductus  hepaticus, 
continued  under  the  name  of  the  ductus  communis  ; 
but  it  lies  adjacent  to  this  channel,  joining  it  by  a 
duct  of  its  own,  the  ductus  cysticus ;  by  w^hich 
structure  it  is  enabled,  as  occasion  may  require,  to 
add  its  contents  to,  and  increase  the  flow  of  bile 
into  the  duodenum.  And  the  position  of  the  gall- 
bladder is  such  as  to  apply  this  structure  to  the 
best  advantage.  In  its  natural  situation,  it  touches 
the  exterior  surface  of  the  stomach,  and  consequently 
is  compressed  by  the  distension  of  that  vessel :  the 
effect  of  which  compression  is,  to  force  out  from 
the  bag,  and  send  into  the  duodenum,  an  extraor- 
dinary quantity  of  bile,  to  meet  the  extraordinary 
demand  which  the  repletion  of  the  stomach  by  food 
is  about  to  occasion,  t  Cheselden  describes  t  the 
gall-bladder  as  seated  against  the  duodenum,  and 
thereby  liable  to  have  its  fluid  pressed  out,  by  the 
passage  of  the  aliment  through  that  cavity ;  which 
likewise  will  have  tlie  effect  of  causing  it  to  be 

*  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  Ixii.  p.  447.         f  Koill's  Anat.  p.  64.         }  Anat.  p.  1G4. 


150  OF  THE  VESSELS 

received  into  the  intestine,  at  a  right  time,  and^  in 
a  due  proportion. 

There  may  be  other  purposes  answered  by  this 
contrivance  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  there  are.  The 
contents  of  tlie  gall-bladder  are  not  exactly  of  the 
same  kind  as  what  passes  from  the  liver  through 
the  direct  passage.^  It  is  possible  that  the  gall  may 
be  changed,  and  for  some  purposes  meliorated,  by 
keeping. 

The  entrance  of  the  gall-duct  into  the  duode- 
num, furnishes  another  observation.  Whenever 
either  smaller  tubes  are  inserted  into  larger  tubes, 
or  tubes  into  vessels  and  cavities,  such  receiving- 
tubes,  vessels,  or  cavities,  being  subject  to  muscu- 
lar constriction,  we  always  find  a  contrivance  to 
prevent  regurgitation.  In  some  cases,  valves  are 
used  ;  in  other  cases,  amongst  which  is  that  now 
before  us,  a  different  expedient  is  resorted  to ; 
which  may  be  thus  described :  The  gall-duct  en- 
ters the  duodenum  obliquely :  after  it  has  pierced 
the  first  coat,  it  runs  near  two  fingers'  breadth  be- 
fween  the  coats,  before  it  open  into  the  cavity  of 
the  intestine.t  The  same  contrivance  is  used  in 
another  part,  where  there  is  exactly  the  same  oc- 
casion for  it,  viz.  in  the  insertion  of  the  ureters  in 
the  bladder.  These  enter  the  bladder  near  its 
neck,  running  obliquely  for  the  space  of  an  inch 
between  its  coats,  t  It  is,  in  both  cases,  sufficient- 
ly evident,  that  this  structure  has  a  necessary  me- 
chanical tendency  to  resist  regurgitation  ;  for,  what- 

*   Keill  (from  Malpighius),  p.  63.  f   Keill's  Anat.   p.  62. 

\    Ches.  Anat.  p.  260. 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  1^1 

ever  force  acts  in  such  a  direction  as  to  urge  the 
fluid  back  into  the  orifices  of  the  tubes,  must,  at 
the  same  time,  stretch  the  coats  of  the  vessels, 
and  thereby  compress  that  part  of  the  tube  which 
is  included  between  them. 

IV.  Amongst  the  vessels  of  the  human  body,  the  -^ 
pipe  which  conveys  the  saliva  from  the  place  where 

it  is  made,  to  the  place  where  it  is  wanted,  deserves 
to  be  reckoned  amongst  the  most  intelligible  pieces 
of  mechanism  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  The-^ 
saliva,  we  all  know,  is  used  in  the  mouth :  but 
much  of  it  is  produced  on  the  outside  of  the  cheek, 
by  the  parotid  gland,  which  lies  between  the  ear 
and  the  angle  of  the  lower  jaw.  In  order  to  cany 
the  secreted  juice  to  its  destination,  there  is  laid 
from  the  gland,  on  the  outside,  a  pipe  about  the 
thickness  of  a  wheat  straw,  and  about  three  fingers' 
breadth  in  length  ;  which,  after  riding  over  the  mas- 
seter  muscle,  bores  for  itself  a  hole  through  the 
very  middle  of  the  cheek  ;  enters  by  that  hole, 
which  is  a  complete  perforation  of  the  buccinator 
muscle,  into  the  mouth ;  and  there  discharges  its 
fluid  very  copiously. 

V.  Another  exquisite  structure,  differing  indeed 
from  the  four  preceding  instances  in  that  it  does 
not  relate  to  the  conveyance  of  fluids,  but  still  be- 
longing, like  these,  to  the  class  of  pipes  or  con- 
duits of  the  body,  is  seen  in  the  laryiia:.  We  all 
know  that  there  go  down  the  throat  two  pipes,  one 
leading  to  the  stomach,  the  other  to  the  lungs ;  the 
one  being  the  passage  for  the  food,  the  other  for 
the  breath  and  voice  :  we  know  also  that  both  these 


152  OF  THE  VESSELS 

passages  open  into  the  bottom  of  the  mouth ;  the 
gullet,  necessarily,  for  the  conveyance  of  food  ;  and  - 
the  wind-pipe,  for  speech  and  the  modulation  of 
sound,  not  much  less  so :  therefore  the  difficulty 
was,  the  passages  being  so  contiguous,  to  prevent 
the  food,  especially  the  liquids  which  we  swallow 
into  the  stomach,  from  entering  the  wind-pipe,  i.  e. 
the  road  to  the  lungs ;  the  consequence  of  which 
error,  when  it  does  happen,  is  perceived  by  the  con- 
vulsive throes  that  are  instantly  produced.  This 
business,  which  is  very  nice,  is  managed  in  this 
manner.  The  gullet  (the  passage  for  food)  opens 
into  the  mouth  like  the  cone  or  upper  part  of  a 
funnel,  the  capacity  of  which  forms  indeed  the 
bottom  of  the  mouth.  Into  the  side  of  this  fun- 
nel,  at  the  part  which  lies  the  lowest,  enters  the 
wind-pipe,  by  a  chink  or  slit,  with  a  lid  or  flap, 
like  a  little  tongue,  accurately  fitted  to  the  orifice. 
The  solids  or  liquids  which  we  swallow,  pass  over 
this  lid  or  flap,  as  they  descend  by  the  funnel  into 
fthe  gullet.  Both  the  weight  of  the  food,  and  the 
action  of  the  muscles  concerned  in  swallowing,  con- 
tribute to  keep  the  lid  close  down  upon  the  aper- 
ture, whilst  any  thing  is  passing  ;  whereas,  by  means 
of  its  natural  cartilaginous  spring,  it  raises  itself  a 
little  as  soon  as  the  food  is  passed,  thereby  allowing 
1  a  free  inlet  and  outlet  for  the  respiration  of  air  by 
I  the  lungs.  Such  is  its  structure  :  And  Ve  may 
here  remark  the  almost  complete  success  of  the 
expedient,  viz.  how  seldom  it  fails  of  its  purpose, 
compared  with  the  number  of  instances  in  w^hich 
it  fulfils  it.     Reflect  how  frequently  we  swallow, 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  153 

how  constantly  we  breathe.  In  a  city-feast,  for 
example,  what  deglutition,  what  anhelation  !  yet 
does  this  little  cartilage,  the  epiglottis,  so  effectu- 
ally interpose  its  office,  so  securely  guard  the  en- 
trance of  the  wind-pipe,  that  whilst  morsel  after 
morsel,  draught  after  draught,  are  coursing  one 
another  over  it,  an  accident  of  a  crumb  or  a  drop 
slipping  into  this  passage  (which  nevertheless  must 
be  opened  for  the  breath  every  second  of  time), 
excites  in  the  whole  company,  not  only  alarm  by 
its  danger,  but  surprise  by  its  novelty.  Not  two 
guests  are  choked  in  a  century. 

There  is  no  room  for  pretending  that  the  action 
of  the  parts  may  have  gradually  formed  the  epi- 
glottis :  I  do  not  mean  in  the  same  individual,  but 
in  a  succession  of  generations.  Not  only  the  ac- 
tion of  the  parts  has  no  such  tendency,  but  the  ani- 
mal could  not  live,  nor  consequently  the  parts  act, 
either  without  it,  or  with  it  in  a  half-formed  statei 
The  species  was  not  to  wait  for  the  gradual  forma- 
tion or  expansion  of  a  part  which  was,  from  the  first, 
necessary  to  the  life  of  the  individual. 

Not  only  is  the  larynx  curious,  but  the  whole 
wind-pipe  possesses  a  structure  adapted  to  its  pe- 
culiar office.  It  is  made  up  (as  any  one  may  per- 
ceive by  putting  his  fingers  to  his  throat)  of  stout 
cartilaginous  ringlets,  placed  at  small  and  equal 
distances  from  one  another.  Now  this  is  not  the 
case  with  any  other  of  the  numerous  conduits  of 
the  body.  The  use  of  these  cartilages  is  to  keep 
the  passage  for  the  air  constantly  open  ;  which 
they  do  mechanically.     A  pipe   with   soft  mem- 


154  OF  THE  VESSELS 

branous  coats,  liable  to  collapse  and  close  when 
empty,  would  not  have  answered  here ;  although 
this  be  the  general  vascular  structure,  and  a  struc- 
ture which  serves  very  well  for  those  tubes  which 
are  kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  distension  by  the 
fluid  they  enclose,  or  which  afford  a  passage  to 
solid  and  protruding  substances. 

Nevertheless  (which  is  another  particularity  well 
worthy  of  notice),  these  rings  are  not  complete, 
that  is,  are  not  cartilaginous  and  stiff'  all  round ; 
but  their  hinder  part,  which  is  contiguous  to  the 
gullet,  is  membranous  and  soft,  easily  yielding  to 
the  distensions  of  that  organ  occasioned  by  the  de- 
scent of  solid  food.  The  same  rings  are  also  bevel- 
led off*  at  the  upper  and  lower  edges,  the  better  to 
close  upon  one  another,  when  the  trachea  is  com- 
pressed or  shortened. 

The  constitution  of  the  trachea  may  suggest 
likewise  another  reflection.  The  membrane  which 
lines  its  inside  is,  perhaps,  the  most  sensible,  irrita- 
ble membrane  of  the  body.  It  rejects  the  touch 
of  a  crumb  of  bread,  or  a  drop  of  water,  with  a 
spasm  which  convulses  the  whole  frame ;  yet,  left 
to  itself,  and  its  proper  office,  the  intromission  of 
air  alone,  nothing  can  be  so  quiet.  It  does  not 
even  make  itself  felt ;  a  man  does  not  know  that 
he  has  a  trachea.  This  capacity  of  perceiving 
with  such  acuteness,  this  impatience  of  offence,  yet 
perfect  rest  and  ease  when  let  alone,  are  properties, 
one  would  have  thought,  not  likely  to  reside  in  the 
same  subject.  It  is  to  the  junction,  however,  of 
these  almost  inconsistent  qualities,  in  this,  as  well 


•i 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  155 

as  in  some  other  delicate  parts  of  the  body,  that  we 
owe  our  safety  and  our  comfort ; — our  safety  to 
their  sensibiUty,  our  comfort  to  their  repose. 

The  larynx,  or  rather  the  whole  wind-pipe  taken 
together,  (for  the  larynx  is  only  the  upper  part  of 
the  wind-pipe),  besides  its  other  uses,  is  also  a 
musical  instrument,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  mechanism 
expressly  adapted  to  the  modulation  of  sound  ;  for 
it  has  been  found  upon  trial,  that,  by  relaxing  or 
tightening  the  tendinous  bands  at  the  extremity  of 
the  wind-pipe,  and  blowing  in  at  the  other  end, 
all  the  cries  and  notes  might  be  produced  of  which 
the  living  animal  was  capable.  It  can  be  sounded, 
just  as  a  pipe  or  flute  is  sounded. 

Birds,  says  Bonnet,  have,  at  the  lower  end  of  the 
wind-pipe,  a  conformation  like  the  reed  of  a  haut- 
boy, for  the  modulation  of  their  notes.  A  tuneful 
bird  is  a  ventriloquist.  The  seat  of  the  song  is  in 
the  breast. 

The  use  of  the  lungs  in  the  system  has  been  said 
to  be  obscure :  one  use  however  is  plain,  though, 
in  some  sense,  external  to  the  system,  and  that  is, 
the  formation,  in  conjunction  with  the  larynx,  of 
voice  and  speech.  They  are,  to  animal  utterance, 
what  the  bellows  are  to  the  organ. 

For  the  sake  of  method,  we  have  considered  ani-^^ 
mal  bodies  under  three  divisions :  their  bones, 
their  muscles,  and  their  vessels ;  and  we  have 
stated  our  observations  upon  these  parts  separately. 
But  this  is  to  diminish  the  strength  of  the  argu- 
ment.    The  wisdom  of  the  Creator  is  seen,  not  inj 


156  OF  THE  VESSELS 

their  separate  but  their  collective  action ;  in  their 
mutual  subserviency  and  dependence  ;  in  their  con- 
tributing together  to  one  effect,  and  one  use.  It 
has  been  said,  that  a  man  cannot  lift  his  hand  to  his 
head,  without  finding  enough  to  convince  him  of 
the  existence  of  a  God.  And  it  is  well  said ;  for  he 
has  only  to  reflect,  familiar  as  this  action  is,  and 
simple  as  it  seems  to  be,  how  many  things  are  requi- 
site for  the  performing  of  it :  how  many  things  which 
we  understand,  to  say  nothing  of  many  more,  pro- 
\bably,  which  we  do  not ;  viz.  first,  a  long,  hard, 
strong  cylinder,  in  order  to  give  to  the  arm  its  firm- 
ness and  tension ;  but  which,  being  rigid,  and  in 
its  substance  inflexible,  can  only  turn  upon  joints : 
secondly,  therefore,  joints  for  this  purpose,  one  at 
the  shoulder  to  raise  the  arm,  another  at  the  elbow 
to  bend  it ;  these  joints  continually  fed  with  a  soft 
mucilage  to  make  the  parts  slip  easily  upon  one 
another,  and  holden  together  by  strong  braces,  to 
keep  them  in  their  position  :  then,  thirdly,  strings 
and  wires,  i.  e.  muscles  and  tendons,  artificially  in- 
serted for  the  purpose  of  drawing  the  bones  in  the 
directions  in  which  the  joints  allow  them  to  move. 
Hitherto  we  seem  to  understand  the  mechanism 
pretty  well;  and,  understanding  this,  we  possess 
enough  for  our  conclusion  :  nevertheless,  we  have 
hitherto  only  a  machine  standing  still ;  a  dead  orga- 
nization— an  apparatus.  To  put  the  system  in  a 
state  of  activity,  to  set  it  at  work,  a  farther  provi- 
sion is  necessary,  viz.  a  communication  with  tlie 
brain  by  means  of  nerves.  We  know  the  existence 
of  this  communication,  because  we  can  see   the 


OF  ANIMAL  BODIES.  157 

communicating  threads,  and  can  trace  them  to  the 
brain :  its  necessity  we  also  know,  because  if  the 
thread  be  cut,  if  the  communication  be  intercept- 
ed, the  muscle  becomes  paralytic :  but  beyond  this 
we  know  little,  the  organization  being  too  minute 
and  subtile  for  our  inspection. 

To  what  has  been  enumerated,  as  officiating  in  \ 
the  single  act  of  a  man's  raising  his  hand  to  his 
head,  must  be  added  likewise,  all  that  is  necessary, 
and  all  that  contributes  to  the .  growth,   nourish- 
ment, and  sustentation  of  the  limb,  the  repair  of 
its  waste,  the  preservation  of  its  health :  such  as 
the  circulation  of  the  blood  through  every  part  of 
it;  its  lymphatics,   exhalants,  absorbents;  its  ex-  , 
cretions  and  integuments.     All  these  share  in  the 
result;  join  in  the  effect:  and  how  all  these,  or 
any  of  them,  come  together  without  a  designing,  * 
disposing  intelligence,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive*^ 


CHAPTER  XI. 

OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE  REGARDED  AS  A  MASS. 

Contemplating  an  animal  body  in  its  collective 
capacity,  we  cannot  forget  to  notice,  what  a  num- 
ber of  instruments  are  brought  together,  and  often 


158         OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

within  how  small  a  compass.  It  is  a  cluster  of  con- 
trivances. In  a  canary  bird,  for  instance,  and  in 
the  single  ounce  of  matter  which  composes  his  body 
(but  which  seems  to  be  all  employed),  we  have  in- 
struments for  eating,  for  digesting,  for  nourishment, 
for  breathing,  for  genei^ation,  for  running,  for  flying, 
for  seeing,  for  hearing,  for  smelling,  each  appro- 
priate,— each  entirely  different  from  all  the  rest. 

The  human,  or  indeed  the  animal  frame,  consi- 
dered as  a  mass  or  assemblage,  exhibits  in  its  com- 
position three  properties,  which  have  long  struck 
my  mind  as  indubitable  evidences,  not  only  of  de- 
sign, but  of  a  great  deal  of  attention  and  accuracy 
in  prosecutmg  the  design. 

1.  The  first  is,  the  exact  correspondency  of  the 
two  sides  of  the  same  animal ;  the  right  hand  an- 
swering to  the  left,  leg  to  leg,  eye  to  eye,  one  side 
of  the  countenance  to  the  other  ;  and  with  a  preci- 
sion, to  imitate  which  in  any  tolerable  degree  forms 
one  of  the  diflSculties  of  statuary,  and  requires,  on 
the  part  of  the  artist,  a  constant  attention  to  this 
property  of  his  work,  distinct  from  every  other. 

It  is  the  most  difficult  thing  that  can  be  to  get  a 
wig  made  even  ;  yet  how  seldom  is  the  Jace  awry  ! 
And  what  care  is  taken  th^  it  should  not  be  so,  the 
anatomy  of  its  bones  demonstrates.  The  upper 
part  of  the  face  is  composed  of  thirteen  bones,  six 
on  each  side,  answering  each  to  each,  and  the  thir- 
teenth, without  a  fellow,  in  the  middle  :  the  lower 
part  of  the  face  is  in  like  manner  composed  of  six 
bones,  three  on  each  side  respectively  correspond- 
ing, and  the  lower  jaw  in  the  centre.     In  building 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  159 

ail  arch,  could  more  be  done  in  order  to  make  the 
curve  true^  i.  e.  the  parts  equi-distant  from  the 
middle,  alike  in  figure  and  position  ? 

The  exact  resemblance  of  the  eyes^  considering 
liow  compounded  this  organ  is  in  its  structure,  how 
various  and  how  delicate  are  the  shades  of  colour 
with  which  its  iris  is  tinged ;  how  differently,  as  to 
effect  upon  appearance,  the  eye  may  be  mounted  in 
its  socket,  and  how  differently  in  different  heads 
eyes  actually  are  set, — is  a  property  of  animal  bo- 
dies much  to  be  admired.  Of  ten  thousand  eyes, 
I  do  not  know  that  it  would  be  possible  to  match 
one,  except  with  its  own  fellow  ;  or  to  distribute 
them  into  suitable  pairs  by  any  other  selection 
than  that  which  obtains. 

This  regularity  of  the  animal  structure  is  render- 
ed more  remarkable  by  the  three  following  conside- 
rations : — First,'the  limbs,  separately  taken,  have  not. 
this  correlation  of  parts,  but  the  contrary  of  it.  A 
knife  drawn  down  the  chine,  cuts  the  human  body  in- 
to two  parts,  externally  equal  and  alike  ;  you  cannot 
draw  a  straight  line  which  will  divide  a  hand,  a  foot, 
the  leg,  the  thigh,  the  cheek,  the  eye,  the  ear,  into 
two  parts  equal  and  alike.  Those  parts  which  are 
placed  upon  the  middle  or  partition  line  of  the  body, 
or  which  traverse  that  line,  as  the  nose,  the  tongue, 
the  lips,  may  be  so  divided,  or,  more  properly 
speaking,  are  double  organs  ;  but  other  parts  cannot. 
This  shows  that  the  correspondency  which  we  have 
been  describing,  does  not  arise  by  any  necessity  in 
the  nature  of  the  subject :  for,  if  necessary,  it  would 
be  universal ;  whereas  it  is  observed  only  in  the 


160         OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

system  or  assemblage :  it  is  not  true  of  the  separate 
parts  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  found  where  it  conduces  to 
beauty  or  utiHty  ;  it  is  not  found  where  it  would 
subsist  at  the  expense  of  both.  The  two  wings  of 
a  bird  always  correspond  :  the  two  sides  of  a  fea- 
ther frequently  do  not.  In  centipedes,  millepedes, 
and  that  whole  tribe  of  insects,  no  two  legs  on  the 
same  side  are  alike  ;  yet  there  is  the  most  exact 
parity  between  the  legs  opposite  to  one  another. 

2.  The  next  circumstance  to  be  remarked  is, 
that  whilst  the  cavities  of  the  body  are  so  configur- 
ated, as  ewteimally  to  exhibit  the  most  exact  corre- 
spondency of  the  opposite  sides,  the  contents  of 
these  cavities  have  no  such  correspondency.  A  line 
drawn  down  the  middle  of  the  breast,  divides  the 
thorax  into  two  sides  exactly  similar  ;  yet  these  two 
sides  enclose  very  different  contents.  The  heart 
lies  on  the  left  side  ;  a  lobe  of  the  lungs  on  the 
right ;  balancing  each  other  neither  in  size  nor 
shape.  The  same  thing  holds  of  the  abdomen.  The 
liver  lies  on  the  right  side,  without  any  similar 
viscus  opposed  to  it  on  the  left.  The  spleen  indeed 
is  situated  over  against  the  liver  ;  but  agreeing  with 
the  liver  neither  in  bulk  nor  form.  There  is  no 
equipoUency  between  these.  The  stomach  is  a 
vessel,  both  irregular  in  its  shape,  and  oblique  in 
its  position.  The  foldings  and  doublings  of  the 
intestines  do  not  present  a  parity  of  sides.  Yet 
that  symmetry  which  depends  upon  the  correlation 
of  the  sides,  is  externally  preserved  throughout 
the  whole  trunk  ;  and  is  the  more  remarkable  in 
the  lower  parts  of  it,  as  the  integuments  are  soft ; 


.^ 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  l6l 

and  the  shape,  consequently,  is  not,  as  the  thorax 
is  by  its  ribs,  reduced  by  natural  stays.  It  is  evi- 
dent, therefore,  that  the  external  proportion  does 
not  arise  from  any  equality  in  the  shape  or  pressure 
of  the  internal  contents.  What  is  it  indeed  but  a 
correction  of  inequalities?  an  adjustment,  by  mutual 
compensation,  of  anomalous  forms  into  a  regular 
congeries  ?  the  effect,  in  a  word,  of  artful,  and,  if 
we  might  be  permitted  so  to  speak,  of  studied  col- 
location ? 

3.  Similar  also  to  this,  is  the  third  observation ; 
that  an  internal  inequality  in  the  feeding  vessels 
is  so  managed,  as  to  produce  no  inequality  in  parts 
which  were  intended  to  correspond.  The  right  J 
arm  answers  accurately  to  the  left,  both  in  size  and 
shape  ;  but  the  arterial  branches,  which  supply  the 
two  arms,  do  not  go  off  from  their  trunk,  in  a  pair, 
in  the  same  manner,  at  the  same  place,  or  at  the 
same  angle.  Under  which  want  of  similitude,  it 
is  very  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  same  quantity 
of  blood  should  be  pushed  through  each  artery : 
yet  the  result  is  right ;  the  two  limbs,  which  are 
nourished  by  them,  perceive  no  difference  of  supply, 
no  effects  of  excess  or  deficiency. 

Concerning  the  difference  of  manner,  in  which 
the  subclavian  and  carotid  arteries,  upon  the  dif- 
ferent sides  of  the  body,  separate  themselves  from 
the  aorta,  Cheselden  seems  to  have  thought,  that 
the  advantage  which  the  left  gain  by  going  off  at 
an  angle  much  more  acute  than  the  right,  is  made 
up  to  the  right  by  their  going  off  together  in  one 

L 


162         OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

branch.  *  It  is  very  possible  that  this  may  be  the 
compensating  contrivance ;  and  if  it  be  so,  how 
curious,  how  hydrostatical ! 

V  II.  Another  perfection  of  the  animal  mass  is  the 
package.  I  know  nothing  which  is  so  surprising. 
Examine  the  contents  of  the  trunk  of  any  large 
j-animaL  Take  notice  how  soft,  how  tender,  how 
intricate  they  are ;  how  constantly  in  action,  how 
necessary  to  life !  Reflect  upon  the  danger  of  any 
injury  to  their  substance,  any  derangement  of  their 
position,  any  obstruction  to  their  office.  Observe 
the  heart  pumping  at  the  centre,  at  the  rate  of 
eighty  strokes  in  a  minute  :  one  set  of  pipes  carry- 
ing the  stream  away  from  it,  another  set  bringing, 
in  its  course,  the  fluid  back  to  it  again  ;  the  lungs 
performing  their  elaborate  office,  viz.  distending 
and  contracting  their  many  thousand  vesicles,  by  a 
reciprocation  which  cannot  cease  for  a  minute  ;  the 
stomach  exercising  its  powerful  chymistry ;  the 
bowels  silently  propelling  the  changed  aliment; 
collecting  from  it,  as  it  proceeds,  and  transmitting 
to  the  blood  an  incessant  supply  of  prepared  and 
assimilated  nourishment;  that  blood  pursuing  its 
course ;  the  liver,  the  kidneys,  the  pancreas,  the 
parotid,  with  many  other  known  and  distinguish- 
able glands,  drawing  off  from  it,  all  the  while, 
their  proper  secretions.  These  several  operations, 
together  with  others  more  subtile  but  less  capable 
of  being  investigated,  are  going  on  within  us,  at 
one  and  the  same  time.     Think  of  this  ;  and  then 

*  Ches,  Anat  p.  1 84.  ed.  7, 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  l63 

observe  how  the  body  itself,  the  case  which  holds 
this  machinery,  is  rolled,  and  jolted,  and  tossed 
about,  the  mechanism  remaining  unhurt,  and  with 
very  little  molestation,  even  of  its  nicest  motions. 
Observe  a  rope-dancer,  a  tumbler,  or  a  monkey ; 
the  sudden  inversions  and  contortions  which  the 
internal  parts  sustain  by  the  postures  into  which 
their  bodies  are  thrown ;  or  rather  observe  the 
shocks  which  these  parts,  even  in  ordinary  subjects, 
sometimes  receive  from  falls  and  bruises,  or  by 
abrupt  jerks  and  twists,  without  sensible,  or  with 
soon-recovered  damage.  Observe  this,  and  then 
reflect  how  firmly  every  part  must  be  secured,  how 
carefully  surrounded,  how  well  tied  down  and 
packed  together. 

This  property  of  animal  bodies  has  never,  I  think, 
been  considered  under  a  distinct  head,  or  so  fully 
as  it  deserves.  I  may  be  allowed,  therefore,  in  order 
to  verify  my  observation  concerning  it,  to  set  forth 
a  short  anatomical  detail,  though  it  oblige  me  to 
use  more  technical  language  than  I  should  wish 
to  introduce  into  a  work  of  this  kind.  ^ 

1.  The  heart  (such  care  is  taken  of  the  centre  of 
life)  is  placed  between  two  soft  lobes  of  the  lungs ; 
is  tied  to  the  mediastinum  and  to  the  pericardium  ; 
which  pericardium  is  not  only  itself  an  exceedingly 
strong  membrane,  but  adheres  firmly  to  the  du- 
plicature  of  the  mediastinum,  and,  by  its  point,  to 
the  middle  tendon  of  the  diaphragm.  The  heart 
is  also  sustained  in  its  place  by  the  great  bloodv 
vessels  which  issue  from  it.* 

♦  Keiirs  Anat.  p,  107.  ed.  3. 


164  OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

2.  The  lungs  are  tied  to  the  sternum  by  the  me- 
diastinum, before  ;  to  the  vertebrae  by  the  pleura, 
behind.  It  seems  indeed  to  be  the  very  use  of  the 
mediastinum  (which  is  a  membrane  that  goes 
straight  through  the  middle  of  the  thorax,  from 
the  breast  to  the  back)  to  keep  the  contents  of  the 
thorax  in  their  places ;  in  particular,  to  hinder  one 
lobe  of  the  lungs  from  incommoding  another,  or 
the  parts  of  the  lungs  from  pressing  upon  each 
other  when  we  lie  on  one  side.^ 

3.  The  liver  is  fastened  in  the  body  by  two 
ligaments ;  the  first,  which  is  large  and  strong, 
comes  from  the  covering  of  the  diaphragm,  and 
penetrates  the  substance  of  the  liver ;  the  second 
is  the  umbilical  vein,  w^hich,  after  birth,  degenerates 
into  a  ligament.  The  first,  which  is  the  principal, 
fixes  the  liver  in  its  situation,  whilst  the  body  holds 
an  erect  posture ;  the  second  prevents  it  from 
pressing  upon  the  diaphragm  when  we  lie  down ; 
and  both  together  sling  or  suspend  the  liver  when 
we  lie  upon  our  backs,  so  that  it  may  not  compress 
or  obstruct  the  ascending  vena  cava,t  to  which 
belongs  the  important  office  of  returning  the  blood 
from  the  body  to  the  heart. 

4.  The  bladder  is  tied  to  the  navel  bv  the  ura- 
chus,  transformed  into  a  ligament :  thus,  what  was 
a  passage  for  urine  to  the  foetus,  becomes,  after 
birth,  a  support  or  stay  to  the  bladder.  The  peri- 
tonaeum also  keeps  the  viscera  from  confounding 
themselves  with,  or  pressing  irregularly  upon,  the 

*   Keiirs  Anat.  p.  119.  ed.  3.  f   dies.  Anat.  p.  162, 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  l65 

bladder :  for  the  kidneys  and  bladder  are  contained 
in  a  distinct  duplicature  of  that  membrane,  being 
thereby  partitioned  off  from  the  other  contents  of 
the  abdomen. 

5.  The  kidneys  are  lodged  in  a  bed  of  fat. 

6.  The  pancreaSy  or  sweatbread,  is  strongly  tied 
to  the  peritonseum,  which  is  the  great  wrapping 
sheet,  that  encloses  all  the  bowels  contained  in  the 
lower  belly.^ 

7.  The  spleen  also  is  confined  to  its  place  by 
an  adhesion  to  the  peritonaeum  and  diaphragm, 
and  by  a  connexion  with  the  omentum.t  It  is 
possible,  in  my  opinion,  that  the  spleen  may  be 
merely  a  stuffing ,  a  soft  cushion  to  fill  up  a  vacancy 
or  hollow,  which,  unless  occupied,  would  leave  the 
package  loose  and  unsteady :  for,  supposing  that 
it  answers  no  other  purpose  than  this,  it  must  be 
vascular,  and  admit  of  a  circulation  through  it,  in 
order  to  be  kept  alive,  or  be  a  part  of  a  living  body. 

8.  The  omentum,  epiploon,  or  cawl,  is  an  apron 
tucked  up,  or  doubling  upon  itself,  at  its  lowest 
part.  The  upper  edge  is  tied  to  the  bottom  of  the 
stomach,  to  the  spleen,  as  hath  already  been  ob- 
served, and  to  part  of  the  duodenum.  The  reflected 
edge  also,  after  forming  the  doubling,  comes  up 
behind  the  front  flap,  and  is  tied  to  the  colon  and 
adjoining  viscera,  t 

9.  The  septa  of  the  brain  probably  prevent  one 
part  of  that  organ  from  pressing  with  too  great  a 
weight  upon  another  part.     The  processes  of  the 

*   Keill's  Anat.  p.  57.         f   Ches.  Anat.  p.  167.  \   Ches.  Anat.  p.  167> 


166  OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

dura  mater  divide  the  cavity  of  the  skull,  like  so 
many  inner  partition  walls,  and  thereby  confine 
each  hemisphere  andlobe  of  the  brain  to  the  chamber 
which  is  assigned  to  it,  without  its  being  liable  to 
rest  upon,  or  intermix  with  the  neighbouring  parts. 
The  great  art  and  caution  of  packing,  is  to  prevent 
one  thing  hurting  another.  This,  in  the  head,  the 
chest,  and  the  abdomen,  of  an  animal  body,  is, 
amongst  other  methods,  provided  for  by  membran- 
ous partitions  and  wrappings,  which  keep  the  parts 
separate. 

The  above  may  serve  as  a  short  account  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  principal  viscera  are  sustained 
in  their  places.  But  of  the  provisions  for  this 
purpose,  by  far,  in  my  opinion,  the  most  curious, 
and  where  also  such  a  provision  was  most  wanted, 
is  in  the  guts.  It  is  pretty  evident,  that  a  long 
narrow  tube  (in  man,  about  five  times  the  length 
of  the  body)  laid  from  side  to  side  in  folds  upon 
one  another,  winding  in  oblique  and  circuitous 
directions,  composed  also  of  a  soft  and  yielding 
substance,  must,  without  some  extraordinary  pre- 
caution for  its  safety,  be  continually  displaced  by 
the  various,  sudden,  and  abrupt  motions  of  the 
body  which  contains  it.  I  should  expect  that,  if 
not  bruised  or  wounded  by  every  fall,  or  leap,  or 
twist,  it  would  be  entangled,  or  be  involved  with 
itself;  or,  at  the  least,  slipped  and  shaken  out  of 
the  order  in  which  it  is  disposed,  and  which  order 
is  necessary  to  be  preserved  for  the  carrying  on  of 
the  important  functions  which  it  has  to  execute  in 
the  animal  economy.     Let  us  see,  therefore,  how 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  I67 

a  danger  so  serious,  and  yet  so  natural  to  the  length, 
narrowness,  and  tubular  form  of  the  part,  is  pro- 
vided against.     The  expedient  is  admirable ;  and 
it  is  this :  the  intestinal  canal,  throughout  its  whole 
process,  is  knit  to  the  edge  of  a  broad  fat  mem- 
brane called  the  mesentery.     It  forms  the  margin 
of  this  mesentery,  being  stitched  and  fastened  to  it 
like  the  edging  of  a  ruffle :  being  four  times  as  long 
as  the  mesentery  itself,  it  is  what  a  sempstress  would 
call  "  puckered  or  gathered  on  '^  to  it.     This  is 
the  nature  of  the  connexion  of  the  gut  with  the 
mesentery ;  and   being  thus  joined  to,   or  rather 
made  a  part  of  the  mesentery,  it  is  folded  and 
wrapped  up  together  with  it.    Now  the  mesentery, 
having  a  considerable  dimension  in  breadth,  being 
in  its  substance,  withal,  both  thick  and  suety,  is 
capable  of  a  close  and  safe  folding,  in  comparison 
of  what  the  intestinal  tube  would  admit  of,  if  it 
had  remained  loose.    The  mesentery,  likewise,  not 
only  keeps  the  intestinal  canal  in  its  proper  place 
and  position,   under  all  the  turns  and  windings 
of  its  course,  but  sustains  the  numberless  small 
vessels,  the  arteries,  the  veins,  the  lympheducts, 
and,  above  all,  the  lacteals,  which  lead  from  or  to 
almost  every  point  of  its  coats  and  cavity.     This 
membrane,  which  appears  to  be  the  great  support 
and  security  of  the  alimentary  apparatus,  is  itself 
strongly  tied  to  the  first  three  vertebrae  of  the  loins.* 
III.  A  third  general  property  of  animal  forms 
is  beauty.     I  do  not  mean  relative  beauty,  or  that 

*   Keiirs  Anat.  p.  45. 


168  OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTtTRE 

of  one  individual  above  another  of  the  same  species, 
or  of  one  species  compared  with  another  species; 
but  I  mean,  generally,  the  provision  which  is  made 
in  the  body  of  almost  every  animal,  to  adapt  its 
appearance  to  the  perception  of  the  animals  with 
which  it  converses.  In  our  own  species,  for  ex- 
fample,  only  consider  what  the  parts  and  materials 
are,  of  which  the  fairest  body  is  composed ;  and 
no  farther  observation  will  be  necessary  to  show, 
how  well  these  things  are  wrapped  up,  so  as  to 
form  a  mass,  which  shall  be  capable  of  symmetry 
in  its  proportion,  and  of  beauty  in  its  aspect; 
how  the  bones  are  covered,  the  bowels  concealed, 
the  roughnesses  of  the  muscle  smoothed  and  soft- 
ened ;  and  how  over  the  whole  is  drawn  an  inte- 
gument, which  converts  the  disgusting  materials 
of  a  dissecting-room  into  an  object  of  attraction  to 
the  sight,  or  one  upon  which  it  rests,  at  least,  with 
/jease  and  satisfaction.  Much  of  this  effect  is  to  be 
attributed  to  the  intervention  of  the  cellular  or  adi- 
pose membrane,  which  Hes  immediately  under  the 
skin  ;  is  a  kind  of  lining  to  it ;  is  moist,  soft,  slip- 
pery, and  compressible  ;  everywhere  filling  up  the 
interstices  of  the  muscles,  and  forming  thereby 
their  roundness  and  flowing  line,  as  well  as  the 
evenness  and  polish  of  the  whole  surface. 

All  which  seems  to  be  a  strong  indication  of 
design,  and  of  a  design  studiously  directed  to  this 
purpose.  And  it  being  once  allowed,  that  such  a 
purpose  existed  with  respect  to  any  of  the  produc- 
tions of  nature,  we  may  refer,  with  a  considerable 
degree  of  probability,  other  particulars  to  the  same 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  169 

intention ;  such  as  the  teints  of  flowers,  the  plu- 
mage of  birds,  the  furs  of  beasts,  the  bright  scales 
of  fishes,  the  painted  wings  of  butterflies  and  beetles, 
the  rich  colours  and  spotted  lustre  of  many  tribes 
of  insects. 

There  are  parts  also  of  animals  ornamental,  and 
the  properties  by  which  they  are  so,  not  subservient, 
that  we  know  of,  to  any  other  purpose.  The  irides^i 
of  most  animals  are  very  beautiful,  without  con- 
ducing at  all,  by  their  beauty,  to  the  perfection  of 
vision  ;  and  nature  could  in  no  part  have  employed 
her  pencil  to  so  much  advantage,  because  no  part 
presents  itself  so  conspicuously  to  the  observer,  or 
communicates  so  great  an  effect  to  the  whole  aspect. 

In  plants,  especially  in  the  flowers  of  plants,  the"'^ 
principle  of  beauty  holds  a  still  more  considerable 
place  in  their  composition ;  is  still  more  confessed 
than  in  animals.  Why,  for  one  instance  out  of  a 
thousand,  does  the  corolla  of  the  tulip,  when  ad- 
vanced to  its  size  and  maturity,  change  its  colour  ?^ 
The  purposes,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  of  vegetable 
nutrition,  might  have  been  carried  on  as  well  by  its 
continuing  green.  Or,  if  this  could  not  be,  con- 
sistently with  the  progress  of  vegetable  life,  why 
break  into  such  a  variety  of  colours  ?  This  is  no 
proper  effect  of  age,  or  of  declension  in  the  ascent 
of  the  sap  ;  for  that,  like  the  autumnal  teints,  would 
have  produced  one  colour  on  one  leaf,  with  marks 
of  fading  and  withering.  It  seems  a  lame  account 
to  call  it,  as  it  has  been  called,  a  disease  of  the 
plant.  Is  it  not  more  probable,  that  this  property, 
which  is  independent,   as  it  should  seem,  of  the 


lyO        OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

wants  and  utilities  of  the  plant,  was  calculated  for 
beauty,  intended  for  display  ? 

A  ground,  I  know,  of  objection,  has  been  taken 
against  the  whole  topic  of  argument,  namely,  that 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  beauty  at  all ;  in  other 
words,  that  whatever  is  useful  and  familiar,  comes 
of  course  to  be  thought  beautiful ;  and  that  things 
appear  to  be  so,  only  by  their  alliance  with  these 
qualities.     Our  idea  of  beauty  is  capable  of  being 
in  so  great  a  degree  modified  by  habit,  by  fashion, 
by  the  experience  of  advantage  or  pleasure,  and  by 
associations  arising  out  of  that  experience,  that  a 
question  has  been  made,  whether  it  be  not  altogether 
generated  by  these  causes,  or  would  have  any  pro- 
jper  existence  without  them.     It  seems,  however,  a 
carrying  of  the  conclusion  too  far,  to  deny  the  exist- 
ence of  the  principle,  viz.  a  native  capacity  of  per- 
ceiving  beauty,  on  account  of  an  influence,  or  of 
varieties  proceeding  from  that  influence,  to  which 
it  is  subject,  seeing  that  principles  the  most  ac- 
knowledged are  liable  to  be  affected  in  the  same 
manner.    I  should  rather  argue  thus.    The  question 
respects  objects  of  sight.     Now  every  other  sense 
hath  its  distinction  of  agreeable  and  disagreeable. 
Some  tastes  offend  the  palate,  others  gratify  it.    In 
brutes  and  insects,  this  distinction  is  stronger  and 
more  regular  than  in  man.    Every  horse,  ox,  sheep, 
swine,  when  at  liberty  to  choose,  and  when  in  a 
natural  state,  that  is,  when  not  vitiated  by  habits 
forced  upon  it,  eats  and  rejects  the  same  plants. 
Many  insects  which  feed  upon  particular  plants, 
will  rather  die  than  change  their  appropriate  leaf. 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  171 

All  this^  looks  like  a  determination  in  the  sense  it- 
self to  particular  tastes.  In  like  manner,  smells 
affect  the  nose  with  sensations  pleasurable  or  dis- 
gusting. Some  sounds,,  or  compositions  of  sound, 
delight  the  ear ;  others  torture  it.  Habit  can  do 
much  in  all  these  cases  (and  it  is  well  for  us  that  it 
can;  for  it  is  this  power  which  reconciles  us  to 
many  necessities) ;  but  has  the  distinction,  in  the 
mean  time,  of  agreeable  and  disagreeable,  no  foun- 
dation in  the  sense  itself?  What  is  true  of  the 
other  senses,  is  most  probably  true  of  the  eye  (the 
analogy  is  irresistible),  viz.  that  there  belongs  to  it . 
an  original  constitution,  fitted  to  receive  pleasure 
from  some  impressions,  and  pain  from  others. 

I  do  not  however  know,  that  the  argument  which 
alleges  beauty  as  a  final  cause,  rests  upon  this  con- 
cession. We  possess  a  sense  of  beauty,  however 
we  come  by  it.  It  in  fact  exists.  Things  are  not  | 
indifferent  to  this  sense  ;  all  objects  do  not  suit  it ; 
many,  which  we  see,  are  agreeable  to  it ;  many 
others  disagreeable.  It  is  certainly  not  the  effect 
of  habit  upon  the  particular  object,  because  the 
most  agreeable  objects  are  often  the  most  rare  jj 
many,  which  are  very  common,  continue  to  be  of- 
fensive. If  they  be  made  supportable  by  habit,  it 
is  all  which  habit  can  do  ;  they  never  become  agree- 
able. If  this  sense,  therefore,  be  acquired,  it  is  a 
result ;  the  produce  of  numerous  and  complicated 
actions  of  external  objects  upon  the  senses,  and  of 
the  mind  upon  its  sensations.  With  this  result^ 
there  must  be  a  certain  congruity  to  enable  any 
particular  object  to  please :  and  that  congruity,  we 


172         OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

contend,  is  consulted  in  the  aspect  which  is  given 
to  animal  and  vegetable  bodies. 

IV.  The  skin  and  covering  of  animals  is  that 
upon  which  their  appearance  chiefly  depends,  and 
it  is  that  part  which,  perhaps,  in  all  animals  is  most 
decorated,  and  most  free  from  impurities.  But 
were  beauty,  or  agreeableness  of  aspect,  entirely 
out  of  the  question,  there  is  another  purpose  an- 
swered by  this  integument,  and  by  the  collocation 
of  the  parts  of  the  body  beneath  it,  which  is  of  still 
greater  importance ;  and  that  purpose  is  conceal- 
ment. Were  it  possible  to  view  through  the  skin 
the  mechanism  of  our  bodies,  the  sight  would 
frighten  us  out  of  our  wits.  "  Durst  we  make  a 
single  movement,''  asks  a  lively  French  writer,  ^'  or 
stir  a  step  from  the  place  we  were  in,  if  we  saw  our 
blood  circulating,  the  tendons  pulling,  the  lungs 
blowing,  the  humours  filtrating,  and  all  the  incom- 
prehensible assemblage  of  fibres,  tubes,  pumps, 
valves,  currents,  pivots,  which  sustain  an  exist- 
ence at  once  so  frail,  and  so  presumptuous  ?'' 

V.  Of  animal  bodies,  considered  as  masses,  there 
is  another  property,  more  curious  than  it  is  gene- 
rally thought  to  be ;  which  is  the  faculty  of  standing  : 
and  it  is  more  remarkable  in  two-legged  animals 
than  in  quadrupeds,  and,  most  of  all,  as  being  the 
tallest,  and  resting  upon  the  smallest  base,  in  man. 
There  is  more,  I  think,  in  the  matter  than  we  are 
aware  of.  The  statue  of  a  man,  placed  loosely  upon 
its  pedestal,  would  not  be  secure  of  standing  half  an 
hour.  You  are  obliged  to  fix  its  feet  to  the  block 
by  bolts  and  solder ;  or  the  first  shake,  the  first  gust 


I 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  IT^^ 

of  wind,  is  sure  to  throw  it  down.     Yet  this  statue 
shall  express  all  the  mechanical  proportions  of  a 
living  model.     It  is  not,  therefore,  the  mere  figure, 
or  merely  placing  the  centre  of  gravity  within  the 
base,  that  is  sufficient.     Either  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion is  suspended  in  favour  of  living  substances,  or 
something  more  is  done  for  them,  in  order  to  enable 
them  to  uphold  their  posture.     There  is  no  reason 
whatever  to  doubt,  but  that  their  parts  descend  by 
gravitation  in  the  same  manner  as  those  of  dead 
matter.     The  gift,  therefore,  appears  to  me  to  con- 
sist in  a  faculty  of  perpetually  shifting  the  centre  of 
gravity,  by  a  set  of  obscure,  indeed,  but  of  quick- 
balancing  actions,  so  as  to  keep  the  line  of  direction, 
which   is  a  line  drawn  from  that  centre  to  the 
ground,  within  its  prescribed  limits.     Of  these  ac- 
tions it  may  be  observed,  first,  that  they  in  part 
constitute  what  we  call  strength.     The  dead  body 
drops  down.     The  mere  adjustment,  therefore,  of 
weight  and  pressure,  which  may  be  the  same  the 
moment  after  death  as  the  moment  before,  does  not 
support   the   column.     In  cases  also  of  extreme 
weakness,  the  patient  cannot  stand  upright.     Se- 
condly, that  these  actions  are  only  in  a  small  degree 
voluntary.     A  man  is  seldom  conscious  of  his  vo-  1 
luntary  powers  in  keeping  himself  upon  his  legs.  ' 
A  child  learning  to  walk  is  the  greatest  posture- 
master  in  the  world :  but  art,  if  it  may  be  so  called, 
sinks  into  habit ;  and  he  is  soon  able  to  poise  him- 
self in  a  great  variety  of  attitudes,  without  beingi, 
sensible  either  of  caution  or  effort.     But  still  there 
must  be  an  aptitude  of  parts,  upon  which  habit  can 


174  OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

thus  attach  ;  a  previous  capacity  of  motions  which 
the  animal  is  thus  taught  to  exercise  :  and  the  fa- 
cility with  which  this  exercise  is  acquired,  forms 
one  object  of  our  admiration.  What  parts  are  prin- 
cipally employed,  or  in  what  manner  each  contri- 
butes its  office,  is,  as  hath  already  been  confessed, 
difficult  to  explain.  Perhaps  the  obscure  motion  of 
the  bones  of  the  feet  may  have  their  share  in  this 
effect.  They  are  put  in  action  by  every  slip  or  va- 
cillation of  the  body,  and  seem  to  assist  in  restoring 
its  balance.  Certain  it  is,  that  this  circumstance  in 
the  structure  of  the  foot,  viz.  its  being  composed  of 
many  small  bones,  applied  to,  and  articulating  with 
one  another,  by  diversely  shaped  surfaces,  instead 
of  being  made  of  one  piece,  like  the  last  of  a  shoe, 
is  very  remarkable.  I  suppose  also,  that  it  would 
be  difficult  to  stand  firmly  upon  stilts  or  wooden 
legs,  though  their  base  exactly  imitated  the  figure 
and  dimensions  of  the  sole  of  the  foot.  The  alter- 
nation of  the  joints,  the  knee-joint  bending  back- 
ward, the  hip-joint  forward ;  the  flexibility,  in  every 
direction,  of  the  spine,  especially  in  the  loins  and 
neck,  appear  to  be  of  great  moment  in  preserving 
the  equilibrium  of  the  body.  With  respect  to  this 
last  circumstance,  it  is  observable,  that  the  vertebrae 
are  so  confined  by  ligaments,  as  to  allow  no  more 
slipping  upon  their  bases,  than  what  is  just  sufficient 
to  break  the  shock  which  any  violent  motion  may 
occasion  to  the  body.  A  certain  degree  also  of  ten- 
sion of  the  sinews  appears  to  be  essential  to  an  erect 
posture ;  for  it  is  by  the  loss  of  this,  that  the  dead 
or  paralytic  body  drops  down.    The  whole  is  a  won- 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  175 

derful  result  of  combined  powers,  and   of  very 
complicated  operations.     Indeed,  that  standing  is\ 
not  so  simple  a  business  as  we  imagine  it  to  be, 
is   evident   from   the   strange   gesticulations  of  a 
drunken  man,  who  has  lost  the  government  of  the^ 
centre  of  gravity. 

We  have  said  that  this  property  is  the  most  wor- 
thy of  observation  in  the  human  body  :  but  a  bird^ 
resting  upon  its  perch,  or  hopping  upon  a  spray, 
affords  no  mean  specimen  of  the  same  faculty.  A 
chicken  runs  oif  as  soon  as  it  is  hatched  from  the 
egg  ;  yet  a  chicken,  considered  geometrically,  and 
with  relation  to  its  centre  of  gravity,  its  line  of  di- 
rection, and  its  equilibrium,  is  a  very  irregular  solid. 
Is  this  gift,  therefore,  or  instruction  ?  May  it  not 
be  said  to  be  with  great  attention,  that  nature  hath 
balanced  the  body  upon  its  pivots  ? 

I  observe  also  in  the  same  bird  a  piece  of  use- 
ful mechanism  of  this  kind.  In  the  trussing  of  a 
fowl,  upon  bending  the  legs  and  thighs  up  towards 
the  body,  the  cook  finds  that  the  claws  close  of 
their  own  accord.  Now  let  it  be  remembered, 
that  this  is  the  position  of  the  limbs,  in  which  the 
bird  rests  upon  its  perch.  And  in  this  position  it 
sleeps  in  safety ;  for  the  claws  do  their  office  in 
keeping  hold  of  the  support,  not  by  any  exertion 
of  voluntary  power,  which  sleep  might  suspend, 
but  by  the  traction  of  the  tendons  in  consequence 
of  the  attitude  which  the  legs  and  thighs  take  by 
the  bird  sitting  down,  and  to  which  the  mere 
weight  of  the  body  gives  the  force  that  is  neces- 
sary. 


176         OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE 

VI.  Regarding  the  human  body  as  a  mass ; 
regarding  the  general  conformations  which  obtain 
in  it ;  regarding  also  particular  parts  in  respect  to 
those  conformations ;  we  shall  be  led  to  observe 
what  I  call  "  interrupted  analogies/'  The  follow- 
ing are  examples  of  what  I  mean  by  these  terms ; 
and  I  do  not  know  how  such  critical  deviations 
can,  by  any  possible  hypothesis,  be  accounted  for 
without  design. 

1 .  All  the  bones  of  the  body  are  covered  with  a 
periosteum  J  except  the  teeth  ;  where  it  ceases,  and 
an  enamel  of  ivory,  which  saws  and  files  will  hardly 
touch,  comes  into  its  place.  No  one  can  doubt  of 
the  use  and  propriety  of  this  difference ;  of  the 
*^  analogy''  being  thus  ^*  interrupted  j"  of  the  rule, 
which  belongs  to  the  conformation  of  the  bones, 
stopping  where  it  does  stop  :  for,  had  so  exquisitely 
sensible  a  membrane  as  the  periosteum  invested 
the  teeth,  as  it  invests  every  other  bone  of  the  body, 
their  action,  necessary  exposure,  and  irritation, 
would  have  subjected  the  animal  to  continual  pain. 
General  as  it  is,  it  was  not  the  sort  of  integument 
which  suited  the  teeth :  what  they  stood  in  need  of, 
was  a  strong,  hard,  insensible,  defensive  coat ;  and 
exactly  such  a  covering  is  given  to  them,  in  the 
ivory  enamel  which  adheres  to  their  surface. 
f"  2.  The  scarf-skin,  which  clothes  all  the  rest  of 
I  the  body,  gives  way,  at  the  extremities  of  the  toes 
and  fingers,  to  nails.  A  man  has  only  to  look  at 
his  hand,  to  observe  with  what  nicety  and  precision 
that  covering,  which  extends  over  every  other  part, 
is  here  superseded  by  a  different  substance,  and  a 


REGARDED  AS  A  MASS.  177 

different  texture.  Now,  if  either  the  rule  had  been 
necessary,  or  the  deviation  from  it  accidental,  this 
effect  would  not  be  seen.  When  I  speak  of  the  rule 
being  necessary,  I  mean  the  formation  of  the  skin 
upon  the  surface  being  produced  by  a  set  of  causes 
constituted  without  design,  and  acting,  as  all  igno- 
rant causes  must  act,  by  a  general  operation.  Were 
this  the  case,  no  account  could  be  given  of  the 
operation  being  suspended  at  the  fingers'  ends,  or 
on  the  back  part  of  the  fingers,  and  not  on  the  fore 
part.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  deviation  were  ac- 
cidental, an  error,  an  anomalism  ;  were  it  any  thing 
else  than  settled  by  intention  ;  we  should  meet  with 
nails  upon  other  parts  of  the  body.  They  would  be 
scattered  over  the  surface,  like  warts  or  pimples. 

3.  All  the  great  cavities  of  the  body  are  enclosed 
by  membranes,  except  the  skull.  Why  should  not 
the  brain  be  content  with  the  same  covering  as  that 
which  serves  for  the  other  principal  organs  of  the 
body  ?  The  heart,  the  lungs,  the  liver,  the  stomach, 
the  bowels,  have  all  soft  integuments,  and  nothing 
else.  The  muscular  coats  are  all  soft  and  mem- 
branous. I  can  see  a  reason  for  this  distinction  in 
the  final  cause,  but  in  no  other.  The  importance 
of  the  brain  to  life  (which  experience  proves  to  be 
immediate),  and  the  extreme  tenderness  of  its  sub- 
stance, make  a  solid  case  more  necessary  for  it  than 
for  any  other  part :  and  such  a  case  the  hardness  of 
the  skull  supplies.  When  the  smallest  portion  of 
this  natural  casket  is  lost,  how  carefully,  yet  how 
imperfectly,  is  it  replaced  by  a  plate  of  metal !  If 
an  anatomist  should  say,  that  this  bony  protectiou 

M 


1 78  OF  THE  ANIMAL  STRUCTURE,  &C. 

is  not  confined  to  the  brain,  but  is  extended  along 
the  course  of  the  spine,  I  answer,  that  he  adds 
strength  to  the  argument.  If  he  remark,  that  the 
chest  also  is  fortified  by  bones,  I  reply,  that  I  should 
have  alleged  this  instance  myself,  if  the  ribs  had 
not  appeared  subservient  to  the  purpose  of  motion 
as  well  as  of  defence.  What  distinguishes  the  skull 
from  every  other  cavity  is,  that  the  bony  covering 
completely  surrounds  its  contents,  and  is  calculated, 
not  for  motion,  but  solely  for  defence.  Those  hol- 
lows, likewise,  and  inequalities,  which  we  observe 
in  the  inside  of  the  skull,  and  which  exactly  fit  the 
folds  of  the  brain,  answer  the  important  design  of 
keeping  the  substance  of  the  brain  steady,  and  of 
guarding  it  against  concussions. 


CHAPTER  XIL 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 


Whenever  we  find  a  general  plan  pursued,  yet  with 
such  variations  in  it  as  are,  in  each  case,  required 
by  the  particular  exigency  of  the  subject  to  which 
it  is  applied,  we  possess,  in  such  plan  and  such 
adaptation,  the  strongest  evidence  that  can  be  af- 
forded  of  intelligence  and  design  ;   an    evidence 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY,  179 

which  most  completely  excludes  every  other  hypo- 
thesis.   If  the  general  plan  proceeded  from  any  fixed 
necessity  in  the  nature  of  things,  how  could  it  ac- 
commodate itself  to  the  various  wants  and  uses 
which  it  had  to  serve  under  different  circumstances, 
and  on  different  occasions  ?    Arkxvrighfs  mill  was 
invented  for  the  spinning  of  cotton.     We  see  it  em- 
ployed for  the  spinning  of  wool,  flax,  and  hemp, 
with  such  modifications  of  the  original  principle, 
such  variety  in  the  same  plan,  as  the  texture  of 
those  different  materials  rendered  necessary.     Of 
the  machine's  being  put  together  with  design,  if  it 
were  possible  to  doubt,  whilst  we  saw  it  only  under 
one  mode,  and  in  one  form  ;    when  we  came  to 
observe  it  in  its  different  applications,  with  such 
changes  of  structure,  such  additions  and  supple- 
ments, as  the  special  and  particular  use  in  each  case 
demanded,  we  could  not  refuse  any  longer  our  as- 
sent to  the  proposition,  ^'  that  intelligence,  properly 
and  strictly  so  called,  (including  under  that  name, 
foresight,  consideration,  reference  to  utility),  had 
been  employed,  as  well  in  the  primitive  plan,  as  in 
the  several  changes  and  accommodations  which  it  is 
made  to  undergo.'' 

Very  much  of  this  reasoning  is  applicable  to  what  ^ 
has  been  called  Comparative  Anatomy.  In  their 
general  economy,  in  the  outlines  of  the  plan,  in  the 
construction  as  well  as  offices  of  their  principal  parts, 
there  exists  between  all  large  terrestrial  animals  a 
close  resemblance.  In  all,  life  is  sustained,  and  the 
body  nourished  by  nearly  the  same  apparatus.  The 
heart,  the  lungs,  the  stomach,  the  liver,  the  kid- 


180  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

neys,  are  much  alike  in  all.  The  same  fluid  (for  no 
distinction  of  blood  has  been  observed)  circulates 
through  their  vessels,  and  nearly  in  the  same  order. 
The  same  cause,  therefore,  whatever  that  cause  was, 
has  been  concerned  in  the  origin,  has  governed  the 
production  of  these  different  animal  forms. 

When  we  pass  on  to  smaller  animals,  or  to  the 
inhabitants  of  a  different  element,  the  resemblance 
becomes  more  distant  and  more  obscure  ;  but  still 
the  plan  accompanies  us. 

And,  what  we  can  never  enough  commend,  and 
which  it  is  our  business  at  present  to  exemplify,  the 
plan  is  attended,  through  all  its  varieties  and  de- 
flections, by  subserviencies  to  special  occasions  and 
utilities. 

I.  The  covering  of  different  animals  (though 
whether  I  am  correct  in  classing  this  under  their 
anatomy,  I  do  not  know)  is  the  first  thing  which 
presents  itself  to  our  observation  ;  and  is,  in  truth, 
both  for  its  variety,  and  its  suitableness  to  their 
several  natures,  as  much  to  be  admired  as  any  part 
of  their  structure.  We  have  bristles,  hair,  wool, 
furs,  feathers,  quills,  prickles,  scales ;  yet  in  this 
diversity  both  of  material  and  form,  we  cannot 
change  one  animaPs  coat  for  another,  without  evi- 
dently changing  it  for  the  worse  ;  taking  care  how- 
ever to  remark,  that  these  coverings  are,  in  many 
cases,  armour  as  well  as  clothing;  intended  for 
protection  as  well  as  warmth. 
'  The  human  animal  is  the  only  one  which  is  naked, 
and  the  only  one  which  can  clothe  itself.  This  is 
one  of  the  properties  which  renders  him  an  animal 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  181 

of  all  climates,  and  of  all  seasons.  He  can  adapt , 
the  warmth  or  lightness  of  his  covering  to  the  tern-  i 
perature  of  his  habitation.  Had  he  been  born  with 
a  fleece  upon  his  back,  although  he  might  have 
been  comforted  by  its  warmth  in  high  latitudes,  it 
would  have  oppressed  him  by  its  weight  and  heat, 
as  the  species  spread  towards  the  equator. 

What  art,  however,  does  for  men,  nature  has,  in 
many  instances,  done  for  those  animals  which  are 
incapable  of  art.  Their  clothing,  of  its  own  accord, 
changes  with  their  necessities.  This  is  particularly 
the  case  with  that  large  tribe  of  quadrupeds  which 
are  covered  with  furs.  Every  dealer  in  hare-skins 
and  rabbit-skins,  knows  how  much  the  fur  is  thick- 
ened by  the  approach  of  winter.  It  seems  to  be 
a  part  of  the  same  constitution  and  the  same  de- 
sign,  that  wool,  in  hot  countries,  degenerates,  as  it 
is  called,  but  in  truth  (most  happily  for  the  ani- 
mals ease)  passes  into  hair  ;  whilst,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  hair,  on  the  dogs  of  the  polar  regions, 
is  turned  into  wool,  or  something  very  like  it.  To 
which  may  be  referred,  what  naturalists  have  re- 
marked,  that  bears,  wolves,  foxes,  hares,  which  do 
not  take  the  water,  have  the  fur  much  thicker  on 
the  back  than  the  belly  :  whereas  in  the  beaver  it 
is  the  thickest  upon  the  belly  ;  as  are  the  feathers 
on  water-fowl.  We  know  the  final  cause  of  all  this  ; 
and  we  know  no  other. 

The  covering  of  birds  cannot  escape  the  most  vul- 
gar observation.  Its  lightness,  its  smoothness,  its 
warmth  ; — the  disposition  of  the  feathers  all  inclined 
backward,  the  down  about  their  stem,  the  overlap- 


182  COMPARATIVE    ANATOMY. 

ping  of  their  tips,  their  different  configuration  in 
different  parts,  not  to  mention  the  variety  of  their 
colours,  constitute  a  vestment  for  the  body,  so 
beautiful,  and  so  appropriate  to  the  life  which  the 
animal  is  to  lead,  as  that,  I  think,  we  should  have 
had  no  conception  of  any  thing  equally  perfect,  if 
we  had  never  seen  it,  or  can  now  imagine  any  thing 
more  so.  Let  us  suppose  (what  is  possible  only  in 
supposition)  a  person  who  had  never  seen  a  bird,  to 
be  presented  with  a  plucked  pheasant,  and  bid  to 
set  his  wits  to  work,  how  to  contrive  for  it  a  cover- 
ing which  shall  unite  the  qualities  of  warmth,  levity, 
and  least  resistance  to  the  air,  and  the  highest  de- 
gree of  each  ;  giving  it  also  as  much  of  beauty  and 
ornament  as  he  could  afford  :  He  is  the  person  to 
behold  the  work  of  the  Deity,  in  this  part  of  his 
.  creation,  with  the  sentiments  which  are  due  to  it. 

The  commendation,  which  the  general  aspect 
of  the  feathered  world  seldom  fails  of  exciting,  will 
be  increased  by  farther  examination.  It  is  one  of 
those  cases  in  which  the  philosopher  has  more  to 
admire  than  the  common  observer,  ^voxy  feather 
is  a  mechanical  wonder.  If  we  look  at  the  quill, 
we  find  properties  not  easily  brought  together, — 
strength  and  lightness.  I  know  few  things 
more  remarkable  than  the  strength  and  lightness 
of  the  very  pen  with  which  I  am  writing.  If  we 
cast  our  eye  to  the  upper  part  of  the  stem,  we  see 
a  material,  made  for  the  purpose,  used  in  no  other 
class  of  animals,  and  in  no  other  part  of  birds  ; 
tough,  light,  pliant,  elastic.  The  pith,  also,  which 
feeds  the  feathers,  is,  amongst  animal  substances, 


J 


C031PARATIVE  ANATOMY.  183 

sui  generis ;  neither  bone,  flesh,  membrane,  nor 
tendon.* 

But  the  artificial  part  of  a  feather  is  the  heardj 
or,  as  it  is  sometimes  I  believe  called,  the  vane. 
By  the  beards  are  meant,  what  are  fastened  on 
each  side  of  the  stem,  and  what  constitute  the 
breadth  of  the  feather ;  what  we  usually  strip 
off  from  one  side  or  both,  when  we  make  a  pen. 
The  separate  pieces  or  laminag,  of  which  the  beard 
is  composed,  are  called  threads,  sometimes  filaments, 
or  rays.  Now  the  first  thing  which  an  attentive 
observer  will  remark  is,  how  much  stronger  the 
beard  of  the  feather  shows  itself  to  be,  when  press- 
ed in  a  direction  perpendicular  to  its  plane,  than 
when  rubbed,  either  up  or  down,  in  the  line  of  the 
stem ;  and  he  will  soon  discover  the  structure 
which  occasions  this  difference,  viz.  that  the  laminae 
whereof  these  beards  are  composed,  are  flat,  and 
placed  with  their  flat  sides  towards  each  other ;  by 
which  means,  whilst  they  easily  bend  for  the  ap- 
proaching of  each  other,  as  any  one  may  perceive 
by  drawing  his  finger  ever  so  lightly  upwards,  they 
are  much  harder  to  bend  out  of  their  plane,  which 
is  the  direction  in  which  they  have  to  encounter  the 
impulse  and  pressure  of  the  air,  and  in  which  their 
strength  is  wanted  and  put  to  the  trial. 

This  is  one  particularity  in  the  structure  of  a 
feather  ;  a  second  is  still  more  extraordinary.  Who- 

*  The  quill  part  of  a  feather  is  composed  of  circular  and  longitudinal 
fibres.  In  making  a  pen,  you  must  scrape  off  the  coat  of  circular  fibres,  or 
the  quill  will  split  in  a  ragged,  jagged  manner,  making  what  boys  call  cafs 
teeth. 


184  COMi^ARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

ever  examines  a  feather,  cannot  help  taking  notice^ 
fthat  the  threads  or  laminse,  of  which  we  have  been 
speaking,  in  their  natural  state  unite ;  that  their 
union  is  something  more  than  the  mere  apposition 
of  loose  surfaces  ;  that  they  are  not  parted  asunder 
without  some  degree  of  force;  that  nevertheless 
there  is  no  glutinous  cohesion  between  them ;  that, 
therefore,  by  some  mechanical  means  or  other,  they 
catch  or  clasp  among  themselves,  thereby  giving  to 
the  beard  or  vane  its  closeness  and  compactness  of 

/  texture.  Nor  is  this  all :  when  two  laminae,  which 
have  been  separated  by  accident  or  force,  are 
brought  together  again,  they  immediately  reclasp  ; 
the  connexion,  whatever  it  was,  is  perfectly  reco- 
vered,  and  the  beard  of  the  feather  becomes  as 

^  smooth  and  firm  as  if  nothing  had  happened  to  it. 
Draw  your  finger  down  the  feather,  which  is  against 
the  grain,  and  you  break  probably  the  junction  of 
some  of  the  contiguous  threads  ;  draw  your  finger 
up  the  feather,  and  you  restore  all  things  to  their 
former  state.  This  is  no  common  contrivance : 
and  now  for  the  mechanism  by  which  it  is  effected. 
The  threads  or  laminae  above  mentioned,  are  inter- 
laced with  one  another ;  and  the  interlacing  is  per- 
formed by  means  of  a  vast  number  of  fibres,  or  teeth, 
which  the  laminae  shoot  forth  on  each  side,  and 
which  hook  and  grapple  together.  A  friend  of 
mine  counted  fifty  of  these  fibres  in  one-twentieth 
of  an  inch.  These  fibres  are  crooked  ;  but  curved 
after  a  different  manner :  for  those  which  proceed 
from  the  thread  on  the  side  towards  the  extremity 
of  the  feather,  are  longer,  more  flexible,  and  bent 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  185 

downward ;  whereas  those  which  proceed  from  the 
side  towards  the  beginning,  or  quill-end  of  the  fea- 
ther, are  shorter,  firmer,  and  turn  upwards.  The 
process  then  which  takes  place  is  as  follows :  When 
two  laminae  are  pressed  together,  so  that  these  long 
fibres  are  forced  far  enough  over  the  short  ones, 
their  crooked  parts  fall  into  the  cavity  made  by  the 
crooked  parts  of  the  others ;  just  as  the  latch  that 
is  fastened  to  a  door  enters  into  the  cavity  of  the 
catch  fixed  to  the  door-post,  and  there  hooking 
itself,  fastens  the  door ;  for  it  is  properly  in  this 
manner,  that  one  thread  of  a  feather  is  fastened  to 
the  other. 

This  admirable  structure  of  the  feather,  which  it 
is  easy  to  see  with  the  microscope,  succeeds  per- 
fectly for  the  use  to  which  nature  has  designed  it ; 
which  use  was,  not  only  that  the  lamina  might  be 
united,  but  that  when  one  thread  or  lamina  has  been 
separated  from  another  by  some  external  violence, 
it  might  be  reclasped  with  sufficient  facility  and 
expedition.* 

In  the  ostrich,  this  apparatus  of  crotchets  and 
fibres,  of  hooks  and  teeth,  is  wanting :  and  we  see 
the  consequence  of  the  want.  The  filaments  hang 
loose  and  separate  from  one  another,  forming  only 
a  kind  of  down  ;  which  constitution  of  the  feathers, 
however  it  may  fit  them  for  the  flowing  honours  of 
a  lady's  head-dress,  may  be  reckoned  an  imperfec- 
tion in  the  bird,  inasmuch  as  wings,  composed  of 


*  The  above  account  is  taken  from   Memoirs  for  a  Natural  History  of 
Animals,  by  the  Royal  Academy  of  Paris,  published  in  1701,  p,  21 9. 


186  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

these  feathers,  although  they  may  greatly  assist  it 
in  running,  do  not  serve  for  flight. 

But  under  the  present  division  of  our  subject, 
our  business  with  feathers  is,  as  they  are  the  cover- 
ing of  the  bird.  And  herein  a  singular  circum- 
stance occurs.  In  the  small  order  of  birds  which 
winter  with  us,  from  a  snipe  downwards,  let  the 
external  colour  of  the  feathers  be  what  it  will,  their 

]  Creator  has  universally  given  them  a  bed  of  black 
down  next  their  bodies.     Black,  we  know,  is  the 

I  warmest  colour ;  and  the  purpose  here  is,  to  keep  in 
the  heat,  arising  from  the  heart  and  circulation  of 
the  blood.  It  is  farther  likewise  remarkable,  that 
this  is  not  found  in  larger  birds  ;  for  which  there  is 
also  a  reason  : — small  birds  are  much  more  exposed 
to  the  cold  than  large  ones ;  forasmuch  as  they 
present,  in  proportion  to  their  bulk,  a  much  larger 

'surface  to  the  air.  If  a  turkey  were  divided  into  a 
number  of  wrens  (supposing  the  shape  of  the  tur- 
key and  the  wren  to  be  similar),  the  surface  of  all 

w  the  wrens  would  exceed  the  surface  of  the  turkey, 
in  the  proportion  of  the  length,  breadth  (or,  of  any 
homologous  line),  of  a  turkey  to  thatof  a  wren  ; 
which  would  be,  perhaps,  a  proportion  of  ten  to 
one.  It  was  necessary,  therefore,  that  small  birds 
should  be  more  warmly  clad  than  large  ones :  and 
this  seems  to  be  the  expedient  by  which  that  exi- 
gency is  provided  for. 

II.  In  comparing  different  animals,  I  know  no 
part  of  their  structure  which  exhibits  greater  va- 
riety, or,  in  that  variety,  a  nicer  accommodation  to 
their  respective  conveniency,  than  that  which  is  seen 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  187 

in  the  different  formations  of  their  mouths.  Whether 
the  purpose  be  the  reception  of  aliment  merely,  or 
the  catching  of  prey,  the  picking  up  of  seeds,  the 
cropping  of  herbage,  the  extraction  of  juices,  the 
suction  of  liquids,  the  breaking  and  grinding  of 
food,  the  taste  of  that  food,  together  with  the  re- 
spiration of  air,  and,  in  conjunction  with  it,  the 
utterance  of  sound ;  these  various  offices  are  assign- 
ed to  this  one  part,  and,  in  different  species,  pro- 
vided for,  as  they  are  wanted,  by  its  different  con- 
stitution. In  the  human  species,  forasmuch  as"^ 
there  are  hands  to  convey  the  food  to  the  mouth, 
the  mouth  is  flat,  and  by  reason  of  its  flatness,  fit- 
ted only  for  reception  ;  whereas  the  projecting  jaws, 
the  wide  rictus,  the  pointed  teeth  of  the  dog  and 
his  affinities,  enable  them  to  apply  their  mouths  to 
snatch  and  seize  the  objects  of  their  pursuit.  The 
full  lips,  the  rough  tongue,  the  corrugated  cartilagi- 
nous palate,  the  broad  cutting  teeth  of  the  ox,  the 
deer,  the  horse,  and  the  sheep,  qualify  this  tribe 
for  browsing  upon  their  pasture ;  either  gathering 
large  mouthfuls  at  once,  where  the  grass  is  long, 
which  is  the  case  with  the  ox  in  particular ;  or  bit- 
ing close,  where  it  is  short,  which  the  horse  and 
the  sheep  are  able  to  do,  in  a  degree  that  one  could 
hardly  expect.  The  retired  under-jaw  of  a  swine 
works  in  the  ground,  after  the  protruding  snout, 
like  a  prong  or  ploughshare,  has  made  its  way  to 
the  roots  upon  which  it  feeds.  A  conformation  so 
happy,  was  not  the  gift  of  chance. 

In  bi7^dSj  this  organ  assumes  a  new  character;  new 
both  in  substance  and  in  form ;  but  in  both,  won- 


188  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

derfuUy  adapted  to  the  wants  and  uses  of  a  distinct 
,  mode  of  existence.  We  have  no  longer  the  fleshy 
lips,  the  teeth  of  enamelled  bone  ;  but  we  have,  in 
the  place  of  these  two  parts,  and  to  perform  the  of- 
fice of  both,  a  hard  substance  (of  the  same  nature 
with  that  which  composes  the  nails,  claws,  and  hoofs 
of  quadrupeds)  cut  out  into  proper  shapes,  and  me- 
chanically suited  to  the  actions  which  are  wanted. 
The  sharp  edge  and  tempered  point  of  the  sparrow^ s 
bill  picks  almost  every  kind  of  seed  from  its  con- 
cealment in  the  plant ;  and  not  only  so,  but  hulls 
the  grain,  breaks  and  shatters  the  coats  of  the  seed, 
in  order  to  get  at  the  kernel.  The  hooked  beak  of 
the  hawk  tribe  separates  the  flesh  from  the  bones  of 
the  animals  which  it  feeds  upon,  almost  with  the 
cleanness  and  precision  of  a  dissector's  knife.  The 
butcher-bird  transfixes  its  prey  upon  the  spike  of 
a  thorn,  whilst  it  picks  its  bones.  In  some  birds 
of  this  class,  we  have  the  cross-hill,  i.  e.  both 
the  upper  and  lower  bill  hooked,  and  their  tips 
crossing.  The  ^j^oo/z-bill  enables  the  goose  to 
graze,  to  collect  its  food  from  the  bottom  of 
pools,  or  to  seek  it  amidst  the  soft  or  liquid 
substances  with  which  it  is  mixed.  The  long 
tapering  bill  of  the  snipe  and  woodcock,  pe- 
netrates still  deeper  into  moist  earth,  which  is 
the  bed  in  which  the  food  of  that  species  is 
lodged.  This  is  exactly  the  instrument  which 
the  animal  wanted.  It  did  not  want  strength 
in  its  bill,  which  was  inconsistent  with  the  slen- 
der  form  of  the  animal's  neck,  as  well  as  unne- 
cessary for  the  kind   of  aliment  upon   which  it 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY,  189 

subsists ;    but  it  wanted  length  to  reach  its  ob- 
ject. 

But  the  species  of  bill  which  belongs  to  birds 
that  live  by  suction,  deserves  to  be  described  in 
its  relation  to  that  office.  They  are  what  natural- 
ists call  serrated  or  dentated  bills ;  the  inside  of 
them,  towards  the  edge,  being  thickly  set  with 
parallel  or  concentric  rows  of  short,  strong,  sharp- 
pointed  prickles.  These,  though  they  should  be 
called  teeth,  are  not  for  the  purpose  of  mastication, 
like  the  teeth  of  quadrupeds  ;  nor  yet,  as  in  fish,  for 
the  seizing  and  retaining  of  their  prey ;  but  for  a 
quite  different  use.  They  form  a  filter.  The  duck 
by  means  of  them  discusses  the  mud ;  examining 
with  great  accuracy  the  puddle,  the  brake,  every 
mixture  which  is  likely  to  contain  her  food.  The 
operation  is  thus  carried  on  : — The  liquid  or  semi- 
liquid  substances,  in  which  the  animal  has  plunged 
her  bill,  she  draws,  by  the  action  of  her  lungs, 
through  the  narrow  interstices  which  lie  between 
these  teeth ;  catching,  as  the  stream  passes  across  her 
beak,  whatever  it  may  happen  to  bring  along  with 
it,  that  proves  agreeable  to  her  choice,  and  easily 
dismissing  all  the  rest.  Now,  suppose  the  purpose 
to  have  been,  out  of  a  mass  of  confused  heterogene- 
ous substances,  to  separate  for  the  use  of  the  animal, 
or  rather  to  enable  the  anim.al  to  separate  for  its 
own,  those  few  particles  which  suited  its  taste  and 
digestion ;  what  more  artificial,  or  more  commodious 
instrument  of  selection,  could  have  been  given  to 
it,  than  this  natural  filter  ?  It  has  been  observed, 
also,  (what  must  enable  the  bird  to  choose  and  dis- 


190  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

tinguisli  with  greater  acuteness,  as  well,  probably, 
as  what  greatly  increases  its  luxury),  that  the  bills 
of  this  species  are  furnished  with  large  nerves, — 
that  they  are  covered  with  a  skin, — and  that  the 
nerves  run  down  to  the  very  extremity.  In  the 
curlew,  woodcock,  and  snipe,  there  are  three  pairs 
of  nerves,  equal  almost  to  the  optic  nerve  in  thick- 
ness, which  pass  first  along  the  roof  of  the  mouth, 
and  then  along  the  upper  chap  down  to  the  point 
of  the  bill,  long  as  the  bill  is. 

But  to  return  to  the  train  of  our  observations. — 
The  similitude  between  the  bills  of  birds  and  the 
mouths  of  quadrupeds,  is  exactly  such  as,  for  the 
sake  of  the  argument,  might  be  wishedfor.  It  is  near 
enough  to  show  the  continuation  of  the  same  plan  ; 
it  is  remote  enough  to  exclude  the  supposition  of 
the  difference  being  produced  by  action  or  use.  A 
more  prominent  contour,  or  a  wider  gap,  might  be 
resolved  into  the  effect  of  continued  efforts,  on  the 
part  of  the  species,  to  thrust  out  the  mouth,  or 
open  it  to  the  stretch.  But  by  what  course  of  ac- 
tion, or  exercise,  or  endeavour,  shall  we  get  rid  of 
the  lips,  the  gums,  the  teeth ;  and  acquire,  in  the 
place  of  them,  pincers  of  horn  ?  By  what  habit  shall 
we  so  completely  change,  not  only  the  shape  of  the 
part,  but  the  substance  of  which  it  is  composed? 
The  truth  is,  if  we  had  seen  no  other  than  the 
mouths  of  quadrupeds,  we  should  have  thought  no 
other  could  have  been  formed  :  little  could  we  have 
supposed,  that  all  the  purposes  of  a  mouth  fur- 
nished with  lips,  and  armed  with  teeth,  could  be 
answered  by  an  instrument  which  had  none  of  these ; 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  191 

could  be  supplied,  and  that  with  many  additional 
advantages,  by  the  hardness,  and  sharpness,  and 
figure  of  the  bills  of  birds.  Every  thing  about  the 
animal  mouth  is  mechanical.  The  teeth  of  fish  have 
their  points  turned  backward,  like  the  teeth  of  a 
wool  or  cotton  card.  The  teeth  of  lobsters  work 
one  against  another,  like  the  sides  of  a  pair  of  shears. 
In  many  insects,  the  mouth  is  converted  into  a^ 
pump  or  sucker,  fitted  at  the  end  sometimes  with  a 
wimble,  sometimes  with  a  forceps  ;  by  which  double 
provision,  viz.  of  the  tube  and  the  penetrating  form 
of  the  point,  the  insect  first  bores  through  the  inte- 
guments of  its  prey,  and  then  extracts  the  juices^ 
And,  what  is  most  extraordinary  of  all,  one  sort  of 
mouth,  as  the  occasion  requires,  shall  be  changed 
into  another  sort.  The  caterpillar  could  not  live 
without  teeth  ;  in  several  species,  the  butterfly  form- 
ed from  it  could  not  use  them.  The  old  teeth  there- 
fore are  cast  off  with  the  exuviae  of  the  grub  ;  a  new 
and  totally  different  apparatus  assumes  their  place 
in  the  fly.  Amid  these  novelties  of  form,  we  some- 
times forget  that  it  is,  all  the  while,  the  animaPs 
mouth  ;  that,  whether  it  be  lips,  or  teeth,  or  bill, 
or  beak,  or  shears,  or  pump,  it  is  the  same  part  di- 
versified :  and  it  is  also  remarkable,  that,  under  all 
the  varieties  of  configuration  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted, and  which  are  very  great,  the  organs  of 
taste  and  smelling  are  situated  near  each  other. 

III.  To  the  mouth  adjoins  the  gullet :  in  this 
part  also,  comparative  anatomy  discovers  a  differ- 
ence of  structure,  adapted  to  the  different  necessi- 
ties of  the  animal.     In  brutes,  because  the  posture 


192  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

of  their  neck  conduces  little  to  the  passage  of  the 
aliment,  the  fibres  of  the  gullet,  which  act  in  this 
business,  run  in  two  close  spiral  lines,  crossing  each 
other  :  in  men,  these  fibres  run  only  a  little  oblique- 
ly from  the  upper  end  of  the  oesophagus  to  the 
stomach,  into  which,  by  a  gentle  contraction,  they 
easily  transmit  the  descending  morsels  ;  that  is  to 
say,  for  the  more  laborious  deglutition  of  animals, 
which  thrust  their  food  up  instead  of  doxvu^  and  al- 
so through  a  longer  passage,  a  proportionably  more 
powerful  apparatus  of  muscles  is  provided  ;  more 
powerful,  not  merely  by  the  strength  of  the  fibres, 
which  might  be  attributed  to  the  greater  exercise 
of  their  force,  but  in  their  collocation,  which  is  a 
determinate  circumstance,  and  must  have  been  ori- 
ginal. 

IV.  The  gullet  leads  to  the  intestines :  here,  like- 
wise, as  before,  comparing  quadrupeds  with  man,  un- 
der a  general  similitude  we  meet  with  appropriate 
differences.  The  valvulce  conniventeSy  or,  as  they 
are  by  some  called,  the  semilunar  valves,  found  in 
the  human  intestine,  are  wanting  in  that  of  brutes. 
These  are  wrinkles  or  plaits  of  the  innermost  coat 
of  the  guts,  the  effect  of  which  is,  to  retard  the 
progress  of  the  food  through  the  alimentary  canal. 
It  is  easy  to  understand  how  much  more  necessary 
such  a  provision  may  be  to  the  body  of  an  animal 
of  an  erect  posture,  and  in  which,  consequently, 
the  weight  of  the  food  is  added  to  the  action  of 
the  intestine,  than  in  that  of  a  quadruped,  in  which 
the  course  of  the  food,  from  its  entrance  to  its  exit, 
is  nearly  horizontal :  but  it  is  impossible  to  assign 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  193 

any  cause,  except  the  final  cause,  for  this  distinc- 
tion actually  taking  place.  So  far  as  depends  upon 
the  action  of  the  part,  this  structure  was  more  to 
be  expected  in  a  quadruped  than  in  a  man.  In 
truth,  it  must  in  both  have  been  formed,  not  by 
action,  but  in  direct  opposition  to  action  and  to 
pressure ;  but  the  opposition  which  would  arise 
from  pressure,  is  greater  in  the  upright  trunk  than 
in  any  other.  That  theory  therefore  is  pointedly 
contradicted  by  the  example  before  us.  The  struc- 
ture is  found  where  its  generation,  according  to  the 
method  by  which  the  theorist  would  have  it  ge- 
nerated,  is  the  most  difficult ;  but  (observe J  it  is^^ 
found  where  its  effect  is  most  useful. 

The  different  length  of  the  intestines  in  carni- 
vorous and  herbivorous  animals,  has  been  noticed 
on  a  former  occasion.  The  shortest,  I  believe,  is 
that  of  some  birds  of  prey,  in  which  the  intestinal 
canal  is  little  more  than  a  straight  passage  from  the 
mouth  to  the  vent.  The  longest  is  in  the  deer-kind. 
The  intestines  of  a  Canadian  stag,  four  feet  high, 
measured  ninety-six  feet.*  The  intestine  of  a 
sheep,  unravelled,  measured  thirty  times  the  length 
of  the.  body.  The  intestine  of  a  wild  cat  is  only 
thpee  times  the  length  of  the  body.  Universally, 
where  the  substance  upon  which  the  animal  feeds 
is  of  slow  concoction,  or  yields  its  chyle  with  more 
difficulty,  there  the  passage  is  circuitous  and  dila- 
tory, that  time  and  space  may  be  allowed  for  the 
change  and  the  absorption  which  are  necessary, 

*   Mem,  Acad.  Paris,  1701,  p.  170. 

N 


194  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

Where  the  food  is  soon  dissolved,  or  already  half 
assimilated,  an  unnecessary,  or  perhaps  hurtful, 
detention  is  avoided,  by  giving  to  it  a  shorter  and 
a  readier  route. 

V.  In  comparing  the  bones  of  different  animals, 
^.  we  are  struck,  in  the  bones  of  birds,  with  di  pro- 
priety, which  could  only  proceed  from  the  wisdom 
,of  an  intelligent  and  designing  Creator.  In  the 
bones  of  an  animal  which  is  to  fly,  the  two  quali- 
ties required  are  strength  and  lightness.  Where- 
in, therefore,  do  the  bones  of  birds  (I  speak  of 
the  cylindrical  bones)  differ  in  these  respects  from 
the  bones  of  quadrupeds?  In  three  properties: 
first,  their  cavities  are  much  larger  in  proportion  to 
the  weight  of  the  bone  than  in  those  of  quadru- 
peds ;  secondly,  these  cavities  are  empty ;  thirdly, 
the  shell  is  of  a  firmer  texture  than  the  substance 
of  other  bones.  It  is  easy  to  observe  these  particu- 
lars, even  in  picking  the  wing  or  leg  of  a  chicken. 
Now,  the  weight  being  the  same,  the  diameter,  it 
is  evident,  will  be  greater  in  a  hollow  bone  than  in 
a  solid  one,  and  with  the  diameter,  as  every  mathe- 
matician can  prove,  is  increased,  cceteris  paribuSy 
the  strength  of  the  cylinder,  or  its  resistance  to 
breaking.  In  a  word,  a  bone  of  the  same  weight 
would  not  have  been  so  strong  in  any  other  form  ; 
and  to  have  made  it  heavier,  would  have  incom- 
moded the  animaPs  flight.  Yet  this  form  could 
not  be  acquired  by  use,  or  the  bone  become  hollow 
and  tubular  by  exercise.  What  appetency  could 
excavate  a  bone  ? 

VI.  The  hcngs  also  of  birds,  as  compared  with  the 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  195 

lungs  of  quadrupeds,  contain  in  them  a  provision, 
distinguishingly  calculated  for  this  same  purpose 
of  levitation ;  namely,  a  communication  (not 
found  in  other  kinds  of  animals)  between  the  air- 
vessels  of  the  lungs  and  the  cavities  of  the  body ; 
so  that  by  the  intromission  of  air  from  one  to 
the  other  (at  the  will,  as  it  should  seem,  of  the 
animal),  its  body  can  be  occasionally  puffed  out, 
and  its  tendency  to  descend  in  the  air,  or  its  specific 
gravity,  made  less.  The  bodies  of  birds  are  blown 
up  from  their  lungs  (which  no  other  animal  bodies 
are),  and  thus  rendered  buoyant. 

VII.  All  birds  are  oviparous.  This  likewise 
carries  on  the  work  of  gestation  with  as  little  in-> 
crease  as  possible  of  the  weight  of  the  body.  A 
gravid  uterus  would  have  been  a  troublesome 
burden  to  a  bird  in  its  flight.  The  advantage,  in 
this  respect,  of  an  oviparous  procreation  is,  that 
whilst  the  whole  brood  are  hatched  together,  the 
eggs  are  excluded  singly,  and  at  considerable  in- 
tervals. Ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  young  birds  may 
be  prodviced  in  one  cletch  or  covey,  yet  the  parent 
bird  have  never  been  encumbered  by  the  load  of 
more  than  one  full-grown  egg  at  one  time. 

VIII.  A  principal  topic  of  comparison  between 
animals,  is  in  their  instruments  of  motion.  These 
come  before  us  under  three  divisions  ;  feet,  wings, 
and  fins.  I  desire  any  man  to  say,  which  of  the 
three  is  best  fitted  for  its  use  ;  or  whether  the  same 
consummate  art  be  not  conspicuous  in  them  all. 
The  constitution  of  the  elements  in  which  the 
motion  is  to  be  performed,  is  very  different.     The 


196  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

animal  action  must  necessarily  follow  that  con- 
fstitution.  The  Creator,  therefore,  if  we  might  so 
speak,  had  to  prepare  for  different  situations,  for 
different  difficulties ;  yet  the  purpose  is  accomplished 
not  less  successfully  in  one  case  than  in  the  other ; 
and,  as  between  xmngs  and  the  corresponding  limbs 
of  quadrupeds,  it  is  accomplished  without  deserting 
^the  general  idea.  The  idea  is  modified,  not  de- 
serted. Strip  a  wing  of  its  feathers,  and  it  bears 
no  obscure  resemblance  to  the  fore-leg  of  a  quad- 
ruped. The  articulations  at  the  shoulder  and  the 
cubitus  are  much  alike  ;  and,  what  is  a  closer  cir- 
cumstance, in  both  cases  the  upper  part  of  the  limb 
consists  of  a  single  bone,  the  lower  part  of  two. 

But,  fitted  up  with  its  furniture  of  feathers  and 
quills,  it  becomes  a  wonderful  instrument,  more 
artificial  than  its  first  appearance  indicates,  though 
that  be  very  striking :  at  least,  the  use  which  the 
bird  makes  of  its  wings  in  flying  is  more  compli- 
cated, and  more  curious,  than  is  generally  known. 
One  thing  is  certain,  that  if  the  flapping  of  the 
wings  in  flight  were  no  more  than  the  reciprocal 
motion  of  the  same  surface  in  opposite  directions, 
either  upwards  and  downwards,  or  estimated  in  any 
oblique  line,  the  bird  would  lose  as  much  by  one 
motion  as  she  gained  by  another.  The  sky-lark 
could  never  ascend  by  such  an  action  as  this  ;  for, 
though  the  stroke  upon  the  air  by  the  under  side  of 
her  wing  would  carry  her  up,  the  stroke  from  the 
upper  side,  when  she  raised  her  wing  again,  would 
bring  her  down.  In  order,  tlierefore,  to  account 
for  the  advantage  which  the  bird  derives  from  her 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  197 

wing,  it  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  surface  of 
the  wing,  measured  upon  the  same  plane,  is  con- 
tracted whilst  the  wing  is  drawn  up  ;  and  let  out  to 
its  full  expansion,  when  it  descends  upon  the  air 
for  the  purpose  of  moving  the  body  by  the  reaction 
of  that  element.     Now,  the  form  and  structure  of^ 
the  wing,  its  external  convexity,  the  disposition, 
and  particularly  the  overlapping,  of  its  larger  fea- 
thers, the  action  of  the  muscles,  and  joints  of  the 
pinions,  are  all  adapted  to  this  alternate  adjustment 
of  its  shape  and  dimensions.     Such  a  twist,  for  im 
stance,  or  semirotatory  motion,  is  given  to  the  great 
feathers  of  the  wing,  that  they  strike  the  air  with 
their  flat  side,  but  rise  from  the  stroke  slantwise^ 
The  turning  of  the  oar  in  rowing,  whilst  the  rower 
advances  his  hand  for  a  new  stroke,  is  a  similar 
operation  to  that  of  the  feather,  and  takes  its  name 
from  the  resemblance.     I  believe  that  this  faculty 
is  not  found  in  the  great  feathers  of  the  tail.     This 
is  the  place  also  for  observing,  that  the  pinions  are 
so  set  upon  the  body  as  to  bring  down  the  wings, 
not  vertically,  but  in  a  direction  obliquely  tending 
towards  the  tail ;   which  motion,  by  virtue  of  the 
common  resolution  of  forces,  does  two  things  at  the 
same  time  ;  supports  the  body  in  the  air,  and  carries 
it  forward.     The  steerage  of  a  bird  in  its  flight  is 
effected  partly  by  the  wings,  but  in  a  principal  de- 
gree by  the  tail.     And  herein  we  meet  with  a  cir- 
cumstance not  a  little  remarkable.    Birds  with  long 
legs  have  short  tails,  and  in  their  flight  place  their 
legs  close  to  their  bodies,  at  the  same  time  stretch- 
ing them  out  backwards  as  far  as  they  can.     In 


198  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

this  position,  the  legs  extend  beyond  the  rump,  and 
become  the  rudder,  supplying  that  steerage  which 
the  tail  could  not. 

From  the  wings  of  birds,  the  transition  is  easy  to 
thejins  offish.  They  are  both,  to  their  respective 
tribes,  the  instruments  of  their  motion ;  but  in  the 
work  which  they  have  to  do,  there  is  a  considerable 
difference,  founded  in  this  circumstance.  Fish, 
unlike  birds,  have  very  nearly  the  same  specific  gra- 
vity with  the  element  in  which  they  move.  In  the 
case  of  fish,  therefore,  there  is  little  or  no  weight 
to  bear  up  ;  what  is  wanted,  is  only  an  impulse  suf- 
ficient to  carry  the  body  through  a  resisting  medium, 
or  to  maintain  the  posture,  or  to  support  or  restore 
^'the  balance  of  the  body,  which  is  always  the  most 
unsteady  where  there  is  no  weight  to  sink  it.  For 
these  offices  the  fins  are  as  large  as  necessary,  though 
much  smaller  than  wings,  their  action  mechanical, 
their  position,  and  the  muscles  by  which  they  are 
^  moved,  in  the  highest  degree  convenient.  The  fol- 
lowing short  account  of  some  experiments  upon 
fish,  made  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  use  of 
their  fins,  will  be  the  best  confirmation  of  what  we 
assert.  In  most  fish,  beside  the  great  fin,  the  tail, 
we  find  two  pairs  of  fins  upon  the  sides,  two  single 
fins  upon  the  back,  and  one  upon  the  belly,  or 
rather  between  the  belly  and  the  tail.  The  balancing 
use  of  these  organs  is  proved  in  this  manner.  Of 
the  large-headed  fish,  if  you  cut  off  the  pectoral  fins, 
i.  e.  the  pair  which  lies  close  behind  the  gills,  tlie 
head  falls  prone  to  the  bottom  ;  if  the  right  pectoral 
fin  only  be  cut  off,  the  fish  leans  to  that  side;  if  the 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY,  199 

ventral  fin  on  the  same  side  be  cut  away,  then  it 
loses  its  equilibrium  entirely ;  if  the  dorsal  and  ven- 
tral fins  be  cut  off,  the  fish  reels  to  the  right  and 
left.  When  the  fish  dies,  that  is,  when  the  fins 
cease  to  play,  the  belly  turns  upwards.  The  use 
of  the  same  parts  for  motion  is  seen  in  the  following 
observation  upon  them  when  put  in  action.  The 
pectoral,  and  more  particularly  the  ventral  fins, 
serve  to  raise  and  depress  the  fish :  when  the  fish 
desires  to  have  a  retrograde  motion,  a  stroke  forward 
with  the  pectoral  fin  effectually  produces  it ;  if  the 
fish  desire  to  turn  either  way,  a  single  blow  with  the 
tail  the  opposite  way,  sends  it  round  at  once  :  if  the 
tail  strike  both  ways,  the  motion  produced  by  the 
double  lash  is  progressive^  and  enables  the  fish  to 
dart  forwards  with  an  astonishing  velocity.^  The 
result  is  not  only  in  some  cases  the  most  rapid,  but 
in  all  cases  the  most  gentle,  pliant,  easy,  animal 
motion,  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  How- 
ever, when  the  tail  is  cut  off,  the  fish  loses  all  motion, 
and  gives  itself  up  to  where  the  water  impels  it. 
The  rest  of  the  fins,  therefore,  so  far  as  respects  mo- 
tion, seem  to  be  merely  subsidiary  to  this.  In  their 
mechanical  use,  the  anal  fin  may  be  reckoned  the 
keel ;  the  ventral  fins,  out-riggers ;  the  pectoral 
muscles,  the  oars :  and  if  there  be  any  similitude 
between  these  parts  of  a  boat  and  a  fish,  observe, 
that  it  is  not  the  resemblance  of  imitation,  but  the 
likeness  which  arises  from  applying  similar  mecha- 
nical means  to  the  same  purpose. 

*   Goldsmith's  Hist,  of  An.  Nat   vol.  vi.  p.  154. 


200  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

We  have  seen  that  the  tail  in  the  fish  is  the  great 
instrument  of  motion.  Now,  in  cetaceous  or  warm- 
blooded fish,  which  are  obliged  to  rise  every  two  or 
three  minutes  to  the  surface  to  take  breath,  the  tail^ 
unlike  what  is  in  other  fish,  is  horizontal ;  its  stroke 
consequently  perpendicular  to  the  horizon,  which 
is  the  right  direction  for  sending  the  fish  to  the  top,, 
or  carrying  it  down  to  the  bottom. 

Regarding  animals  in  their  instruments  of  motion, 
we  have  only  followed  the  comparison  through  the 
first  great  division  of  animals  into  beasts,  birds,  and 
fish.     If  it  were  our  intention  to  pursue  the  consi- 
deration farther,  I  should  take  in  that  generic  dis- 
tinction amongst  birds,  the  web-foot  of  water-fowl. 
It  is  an  instance  which  may  be  pointed  out  to  a 
^  child.     The  utility  of  the  web  to  water-fowl,  the 
inutility  to  land-fowl,  are  so  obvious,  that  it  seems 
impossible  to  notice  the  difference  without  acknow- 
ledging the  design.     I  am  at  a  loss  to  know,  how 
■If  those  who  deny  the  agency  of  an  intelligent  Creator 
dispose  of  this  example.     There  is  nothing  in  the 
action  of  swimming,  as  carried  on  by  a  bird  upon 
the  surface  of  the  water,  that  should  generate  a 
membrane  between  the  toes.    As  to  that  membrane, 
I  it  is  an  exercise  of  constant  resistance.     The  only 
f   supposition  I  can  think  of  is,  that  all  birds  have 
been  originally  water-fowl,  and  web-footed ;   that 
sparrows,  hawks,  linnets,  &c.  which  frequent  the 
land,  have  in  process  of  time,  and  in  the  course  of 
many  generations,  had  this  part  worn  away  by  tread- 
ling upon  hard  ground.     To  such  evasive  assump- 
tions must  atheism  always  have  recourse  !  and,  after 


COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY.  201 

all,  it  confesses  that  the  structure  of  the  feet  of 
birds,  in  their  original  form,  was  critically  adapted 
to  their  oris^inal  destination !  The  web-feet  of  am- 
phibious  quadrupeds,  seals,  otters,  &c.  fall  under 
the  same  observation. 

IX.  The  jive  senses  are  common  to  most  large 
animals :  nor  have  we  much  difference  to  remark 
in  their  constitution  ;  or  much,  however,  w^hich  is 
referable  to  mechanism. 

The  superior  sagacity  of  animals  which  hunt  their 
prey,  and  which,  consequently,  depend  for  their 
livelihood  upon  their  ^lose,  is  well  known,  in  its 
use  ;  but  not  at  all  known  in  the  organization  which 
produces  it. 

The  external  ears  of  beasts  of  prey,  of  lions,  ti- 
gers, wolves,  have  their  trumpet  part,  or  concavity, 
standing  forwards,  to  seize  the  sounds  which  are>- 
before  them,  viz.  the  sounds  of  the  animals  which 
they  pursue  or  watch.  The  ears  of  animals  of  flight 
are  turned  backward,  to  give  notice  of  the  approach 
of  their  enemy  from  behind,  whence  he  may  steal 
upon  them  unseen.  This  is  a  critical  distinction  j 
and  is  mechanical :  but  it  may  be  suggested,  and  I 
think  not  without  probability,  that  it  is  the  effect 
of  continual  habit. 

The  eyes  of  animals  which  follow  their  prey  by 
night,  as  cats,  owls,  &c.  possess  a  faculty  not  given 
to  those  of  other  species,  namely,  of  closing  the 
pupil  entirely.  The  final  cause  of  which  seems  to 
be  this  : — It  was  necessary  for  such  animals  to  be 
able  to  descry  objects  with  very  small  degrees  of 
light.     This  capacity  depended  upon  the  superior 


202  COMPARATIVE  ANATOMY. 

sensibility  of  the  retina ;  that  is,  upon  its  being  af- 
fected by  the  most  feeble  impulses.  But  that  ten- 
derness of  structure,  which  rendered  the  membrane 
thus  exquisitely  sensible,  rendered  it  also  liable  to 
be  offended  by  the  access  of  stronger  degrees  of 
light.  The  contractile  range,  therefore,  of  the  pu- 
pil is  increased  in  these  animals,  so  as  to  enable 
them  to  close  the  aperture  entirely :  which  includes 
the  power  of  diminishing  it  in  every  degree  ;  where, 
by  at  all  times  such  portions,  and  only  such  portions, 
of  light  are  admitted,  as  may  be  received  without 
injury  to  the  sense. 

There  appears  to  be  also  in  the  figure,  and  in 
some  properties  of  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  an  appro- 
priate relation  to  the  wants  of  different  animals. 
In  horses,  oxen,  goats,  sheep,  the  pupil  of  the  eye 
is  elliptical ;  the  transverse  axis  being  horizontal ; 
by  which  structure,  although  the  eye  be  placed  on 
the  side  of  the  head,  the  anterior  elongation  of  the 
pupil  catches  the  forward  rays,  or  those  which  come 
from  objects  immediately  in  front  of  the  animaPs 
face. 


I 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS.  S03 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 


I  BELIEVE  that  all  the  instances  which  I  shall  col- 
lect under  this  title,  might,  consistently  enough 
with  technical  language,  have  been  placed  under 
the  head  of  Comparative  Anatomy.  But  there  ap- 
pears to  me  an  impropriety  in  the  use  which  that 
term  hath  obtained  :  it  being,  in  some  sort,  absurd 
to  call  that  a  case  of  comparative  anatomy,  in  which 
there  is  nothing  to  *'  compare  ;''  in  which  a  confor- 
mation is  found  in  one  animal,  which  hath  nothing 
properly  answering  to  it  in  another.  Of  this  kind 
are  the  examples  which  I  have  to  propose  in  the 
present  chapter :  and  the  reader  will  see  that, 
though  some  of  them  be  the  strongest,  perhaps,  he 
will  meet  with  under  any  division  of  our  subject, 
they  must  necessarily  be  of  an  unconnected  and 
miscellaneous  nature.  To  dispose  them,  however, 
into  some  sort  of  order,  we  will  notice,  first,  parti- 
cularities of  structure  which  belong  to  quadrupeds, 
birds,  and  fish,  as  such,  or  to  many  of  the  kinds 
included  in  these  classes  of  animals  ;  and  then,  such 
particularities  as  are  confined  to  one  or  two  species. 
I.  Along  each  side  of  the  neck  of  large  quadru-^ 
pedSj  runs  a  stiff,  robust  cartilage,  which  butchers 


204  PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 

call  the  pax-wax.  No  person  can  carve  the  upper 
end  of  a  crop  of  beef  without  driving  his  knife 
against  it.  It  is  a  tough,  strong,  tendinous  sub- 
stance, braced  from  the  head  to  the  middle  of  the 
back  :  its  office  is  to  assist  in  supporting  the  weight 
of  the  head.  It  is  a  mechanical  provision,  of  which 
this  is  the  undisputed  use  ;  and  it  is  sufficient,  and 
not  more  than  sufficient,  for  the  purpose  which  it 
has  to  execute.  The  head  of  an  ox  or  a  horse  is  a 
heavy  weight,  acting  at  the  end  of  a  long  lever, 
(consequently  with  a  great  purchase),  and  in  a  di- 
rection nearly  perpendicular  to  the  joints  of  the 
supporting  neck.  From  such  a  force,  so  advantage- 
ously applied,  the  bones  of  the  neck  would  be  in 
constant  danger  of  dislocation,  if  they  w^ere  not  for- 
'Hfied  by  this  strong  tape.  No  such  organ  is  found 
in  the  human  subject,  because,  from  the  erect  posi- 
tion of  the  head,  (the  pressure  of  it  acting  nearly 
in  the  direction  of  the  spine),  the  junction  of  the  ver- 
tebrae appears  to  be  sufficiently  secure  without  it. 
This  cautionary  expedient,  therefore,  is  limited  to 
quadrupeds  :  the  care  of  the  Creator  is  seen  where 
t  is  wanted. 

II.  The  oil  with  which  birds  prune  their  feathers, 
and  the  organ  which  supplies  it,  is  a  specific  provi- 
sion for  the  winged  creation.  On  each  side  of  the 
rump  of  birds  is  observed  a  small  nipple,  yielding 
upon  pressure  a  butter-like  substance,  which  the 
bird  extracts  by  pinching  the  pap  with  its  bill.  With 
this  oil,  or  ointment,  thus  procured,  the  bird  dresses 
its  coat ;  and  repeats  the  action  as  often  as  its  own 
sensations  teacli  it  that  it  is  in  any  part  w^anted,  or  as 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS.  205 

the  excretion  may  be  sufficient  for  the  expense. 
The  gland,  the  pap,  the  nature  and  quality  of  the 
excreted  substance,  the  manner  of  obtaining  it  from 
its  lodgment  in  the  body,  the  application  of  it 
when  obtained,  form,  collectively,  an  evidence  of 
intention  which  it  is  not  easy  to  withstand.  Nothing 
similar  to  it  is  found  in  unfeathered  animals.  What 
blind  conatus  of  nature  should  produce  it  in  birds  ? 
should  not  produce  it  in  beasts  ? 

III.  The  air-bladder  also  of  ^Jish  affords  a  plain 
and  direct  instance,  not  only  of  contrivance,  but 
strictly  of  that  species  of  contrivance  which  we  de- 
nominate mechanical.  It  is  a  philosophical  appa- 
ratus in  the  body  of  an  animal.  The  principle  of 
the  contrivance  is  clear;  the  application  of  the 
principle  is  also  clear.  The  use  of  the  organ  td 
sustain,  and,  at  will,  also  to  elevate  the  body  of 
the  fish  in  the  water,  is  proved  by  observing,  what 
has  been  tried,  that  when  the  bladder  is  burst,  the 
fish  grovels  at  the  bottom  ;  and  also,  that  flounders, 
soles,  skates,  which  are  without  the  air-bladder, 
seldom  rise  in  the  water,  and  that  with  effort.  The? 
manner  in  which  the  purpose  is  attained,  and  the 
suitableness  of  the  means  to  the  end,  are  not  diffi- 
cult to  be  apprehended.  The  rising  and  sinking  of 
a  fish  in  water,  so  far  as  it  is  independent  of  the 
stroke  of  the  fins  and  tail,  can  only  be  regulated  by 
the  specific  gravity  of  the  body.  When  the  bladder 
contained  in  the  body  of  the  fish  is  contracted,  which 
the  fish  probably  possesses  a  muscular  power  of  do- 
ing, the  bulk  of  the  fish  is  contracted  along  with  it ; 
whereby^   since  the  absolute  weight  remains  the 


206  PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 

same,  the  specific  gravity,  which  is  the  sinking  force, 
is  increased,  and  the  fish  descends  :  on  the  contrary, 
when,  in  consequence  of  the  relaxation  of  the  mus- 
cles, the  elasticity  of  the  enclosed  and  now  com- 
pressed air  restores  the  dimensions  of  the  bladder, 
the  tendency  downwards  becomes  proportionably 
less  than  it  was  before,  or  is  turned  into  a  contrary 
tendency.  These  are  known  properties  of  bodies 
immersed  in  a  fluid.  The  enamelled  figures,  or 
little  glass  bubbles,  in  a  jar  of  water,  are  made  to 
rise  and  fall  by  the  same  artifice.  A  diving  machine 
might  be  made  to  ascend  and  descend,  upon  the 
like  principle  ;  namely,  by  introducing  into  the  in- 
side of  it  an  air-vessel,  which  by  its  contraction 
would  diminish,  and  by  its  distension  enlarge,  the 
bulk  of  the  machine  itself,  and  thus  render  it  spe- 
cifically heavier,  or  specifically  lighter,  than  the 
water  which  surrounds  it.  Suppose  this  to  be  done, 
and  the  artist  to  solicit  a  patent  for  his  invention  : 
fThe  inspectors  of  the  model,  whatever  they  might 
think  of  the  use  or  value  of  the  contrivance,  could 
by  no  possibility  entertain  a  question  in  their  minds, 
whether  it  were  a  contrivance  or  not.  No  reason 
has  ever  been  assigned, — no  reason  can  be  assigned, 
why  the  conclusion  is  not  as  certain  in  the  fish  as  it 
is  in  the  machine  ;  why  the  argument  is  not  as  firm 
in  one  case  as  the  other. 

It  would  be  very  worthy  of  inquiry,  if  it  were 
possible  to  discover  by  what  method  an  animal, 
which  lives  constantly  in  water,  is  able  to  supply  a 
repository  of  air.  The  expedient,  whatever  it  be, 
forms  part,  and  perhaps  the  most  curious  part,  of 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS.  207 

the  provision.  Nothing  similar  to  the  air-bladder  is 
found  in  land-animals  ;  and  a  life  in  the  water  has 
no  natural  tendency  to  produce  a  bag  of  air.  No- 
thing can  be  farther  from  an  acquired  organization 
than  this  is. 

These  examples  mark  the  attention  of  the  Creator 
to  the  three  great  kingdoms  of  his  animal  creation, 
and  to  their  constitution  as  such. — The  example 
which  stands  next  in  point  of  generality,  belonging 
to  a  large  tribe  of  animals,  or  rather  to  various 
species  of  that  tribe,  is  the  poisonous  tooth  of  ser- 
pents. 

I.  The  fang  of  a  viper  is  a  clear  and  curious  ex- 
ample of  mechanical  contrivance.  It  is  a  perforated 
tooth,  loose  at  the  root :  in  its  quiet  state,  lying 
down  flat  upon  the  jaw,  but  furnished  with  a  muscle, 
which  with  a  jerk,  and  by  the  pluck  as  it  were  of  a 
string,  suddenly  erects  it.  Under  the  tooth,  close 
to  its  root,  and  communicating  with  the  perforation, 
lies  a  small  bag  containing  the  venom.  When  the 
fang  is  raised,  the  closing  of  the  jaw  presses  its  root 
against  the  bag  underneath,  and  the  force  of  this 
compression  sends  out  the  fluid  with  a  considerable 
impetus  through  the  tube  in  the  middle  of  the  tooth. 
What  more  unequivocal,  or  effectual  apparatus 
could  be  devised,  for  the  double  purpose  of  at  once 
inflicting  the  wound  and  injecting  the  poison  ?  Yet, 
though  lodged  in  the  mouth,  it  is  so  constituted, 
as,  in  its  inoffensive  and  quiescent  state,  not  to  in- 
terfere with  the  animal's  ordinary  office  of  receiving 
its  food.  It  has  been  observed  also,  that  none  of 
the  harmless  serpents,  the  black  snake,  the  blind 


208  PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 

worm,  &c.  have  these  fangs,  but  teeth  of  an  equal 
size  ;  not  moveable,  as  this  is,  but  fixed  into  the 
jaw. 

II.  In  being  the  property  of  several  different 
species,  the  preceding  example  is  resembled  by 
that  which  I  shall  next  mention,  which  is  the  bag 
of  the  opossum.  This  is  a  mechanical  contrivance, 
most  properly  so  called.  The  simplicity  of  the 
expedient  renders  the  contrivance  more  obvious 
than  many  others,  and  by  no  means  less  certain. 
A  false  skin  under  the  belly  of  the  animal  forms  a 
pouch,  into  which  the  young  litter  are  received  at 
their  birth  ;  where  they  have  an  easy  and  constant 
access  to  the  teats  ;  in  which  they  are  transported 
by  the  dam  from  place  to  place  ;  where  they  are  at 
liberty  to  run  in  and  out ;  and  where  they  find  a 
refuge  from  surprise  and  danger.  It  is  their  cradle, 
their  asylum,  and  the  machine  for  their  conveyance. 
Can  the  use  of  this  structure  be  doubted  of?  Nor 
is  it  a  mere  doubling  of  the  skin  ;  but  it  is  a  new 
organ,  furnished  with  bones  and  muscles  of  its  own. 
Two  bones  are  placed  before  the  os  pubis,  and  joined 
to  that  bone  as  their  base.  These  support,  and 
give  a  fixture  to,  the  muscles  which  serve  to  open 
the  bag.  To  these  muscles  there  are  antagonists, 
which  serve  in  the  same  manner  to  shut  it ;  and 
this  office  they  perform  so  exactly,  that,  in  the 
living  animal,  the  opening  can  scarcely  be  discerned, 
except  when  the  sides  are  forcibly  drawn  asunder.  * 
Is  there  any  action  in  this  part  of  the  animal,  any 

*  Goldsmith's  Nat.  Hist.  vol.  iv.  p.  244. 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS.  209 

process  arising  from  that  action,   by  which  these 
members  could  be  formed  ?  any  account  to  be  given  > 
of  the  formation,  except  design  ? 

III.  As  a  particularity,  yet  appertaining  to  more 
species  than  one,  and  also  as  strictly  mechanical, 
we  may  notice  a  circumstance  in  the  structure  of 
the  claws  of  certain  birds.  The  middle  claw  of  the 
heron  and  cormorant  is  toothed  and  notched  like 
a  saw.  These  birds  are  great  fishers,  and  these 
notches  assist  them  in  holding  their  slippery  prey. 
The  use  is  evident ;  but  the  structure  such  as  can- 
not at  all  be  accounted  for  by  the  effort  of  the  ani- 
mal, or  the  exercise  of  the  part.  Some  other  fish- 
ing birds  have  these  notches  in  their  bills ;  and  for 
the  same  purpose.  The  gannet,  or  soland  goose, 
has  the  side  of  its  bill  irregularly  jagged,  that  it 
may  hold  its  prey  the  faster.  Nor  can  the  struc- 
ture in  this,  more  than  in  the  former  case,  arise 
from  the  manner  of  employing  the  part.  The 
smooth  surfaces,  and  soft  flesh  of  fish,  were  less 
likely  to  notch  the  bills  of  birds,  than  the  hard  bo- 
dies lipon  which  many  other  species  feed. 

We  now  come  to  particularities  strictly  so  called, 
as  being  limited  to  a  single  species  of  animal.  Of 
these  I  shall  take  one  from  a  quadruped  and  one 
from  a  bird. 

I.  The  stomach  of  the  camel  is  well  known  to  re- 
tain large  quantities  of  water,  and  to  retain  it  un- 
changed for  a  considerable  length  of  time.  This 
property  qualifies  it  for  living  in  the  desert.  Let 
us  see,  therefore,  what  is  the  internal  organization, 
upon  which  a  faculty  so  rare,   and  so  beneficial, 

o 


210  PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 

depends.  A  number  of  distinct  sacks  or  bags  (in 
a  dromedary  thirty  of  these  have  been  counted)  are 
observed  to  He  between  the  membranes  of  the  se- 
cond stomach,  and  to  open  into  the  stomach  near 
the  top  by  small  square  apertures.  Through  these 
orifices,  after  the  stomach  is  full,  the  annexed  bags 
are  filled  from  it ;  and  the  water  so  deposited  is,  in 
the  first  place,  not  liable  to  pass  into  the  intes- 
tines ;  in  the  second  place,  is  kept  separate  from 
the  solid  aliment ;  and,  in  the  third  place,  is  out  of 
the  reach  of  the  digestive  action  of  the  stomach,  or 
of  mixture  w^ith  the  gastric  juice.  It  appears  pro- 
bable, or  rather  certain,  that  the  animal,  by  the 
conformation  of  its  muscles,  possesses  the  power 
of  squeezing  back  this  water  from  the  adjacent 
bags  into  the  stomach,  vv^henever  thirst  excites  it  to 
put  this  power  in  action. 

II.  The  tongue  of  the  woodpecJcer  is  one  of  those 
singularities  which  nature  presents  us  with  when  a 
singular  purpose  is  to  be  answered.  It  is  a  parti- 
fcular  instrument  for  a  particular  use :  and  what, 
-^  .except  design,  ever  produces  such?  The  wood- 
pecker lives  chiefly  upon  insects,  lodged  in  the 
bodies  of  decayed  or  decaying  trees.  For  the  pur- 
pose of  boring  into  the  wood,  it  is  furnished  with 
a  bill,  straight,  hard,  angular,  and  sharp.  When, 
by  means  of  this  piercer,  it  has  reached  the  cells  of 
the  insects,  then  comes  the  office  of  its  tongue ; 
which  tongue  is,  first,  of  such  a  length  that  the 
bird  can  dart  it  out  three  or  four  inches  from  the 
bill, — in  this  respect  difiering  greatly  from  every 
other  species  of  bird ;    in  the  second  place,  it  is 


PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS.  211 

tipped  with  a  stiff,  sharp,  bony  thorn ;  and,  in  the 
third  place,  (which  appears  to  me  the  most  remark- 
able property  of  all),  this  tip  is  dentated  on  both 
sides,  like  the  beard  of  an  arrow  or  the  barb  of  a 
hook.  The  description  of  the  part  declares  its 
uses.  The  bird  having  exposed  the  retreats  of  the 
insects  by  the  assistance  of  its  bill,  with  a  motion 
inconceivably  quick,  launches  out  at  them  this 
long  tongue,  transfixes  them  upon  the  barbed 
needle  at  the  end  of  it,  and  thus  draws  its  prey 
within  its  mouth.  If  this  be  not  mechanism,  what 
is?  Should  it  be  said,  that,  by  continual  endea- 
vours to  shoot  out  the  tongue  to  the  stretch,  the 
woodpecker's  species  may  by  degrees  have  length- 
ened the  organ  itself  beyond  that  of  other  birds, 
what  account  can  be  given  of  its  form,  of  its  tip  ? 
how,  in  particular,  did  it  get  its  barb,  its  dental 
tion  ?  These  barbs,  in  my  opinion,  wherever  they 
occur,  are  decisive  proofs  of  mechanical  contriv- 
ance. ^"^ 
III.  I  shall  add  one  more  example,  for  the  sake 
of  its  novelty.  It  is  always  an  agreeable  disco- 
very, when,  having  remarked  in  an  animal  an  ex- 
traordinary structure,  we  come  at  length  to  find 
out  an  unexpected  use  for  it.  The  following  nar- 
rative furnishes  an  instance  of  this  kind.  The  ba- 
byrouessa,  or  Indian  hog,  a  species  of  wild  boar, 
found  in  the  East  Indies,  has  two  bent  teeth,  more 
than  half  a  yard  long,  growing  upwards,  and 
(which  is  the  singularity)  from  the  upper  jaw. 
These  instruments  are  not  wanted  for  offence; 
that  service  being  provided  for  by  two  tusks  issuing 


212  PECULIAR  ORGANIZATIONS. 

from  the  upper  jaw,  and  resembling  those  of  the 
common  boar;  nor  does  the  animal  use  them  for 
defence.  They  might  seem  therefore  to  be  both  a 
superfluity  and  an  encumbrance.  But  observe  the 
event : — the  animal  sleeps  standing  ;  and,  in  order 
to  support  its  head,  hooks  its  upper  tusks  upon  the 
branches  of  trees. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES. 

I  CAN  hardly  imagine  to  myself  a  more  distin- 
guishing  mark,  and  consequently  a  more  certain 
proof  of  design,  than  preparation j  i.  e.  the  providing 
of  things  beforehand  which  are  not  to  be  used  until 
a  considerable  time  afterwards :  for  this  implies  a 
Contemplation  of  the  future,  which  belongs  only  to 
[  intelligence. 

Of  these  prospective  contrivances,  the  bodies  of 
animals  furnish  various  examples. 
f  ~  I.  The  human  teeth  afford  an  instance,  not  only 
of  prospective  contrivance,  but  of  the  completion 
of  the  contrivance  being  designedly  suspended. 
They  are  formed  within  the  gums,  and  there  they 
stop ;  the  fact  being,  that  their  fartlier  advance  to 


PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES.  218 

maturity  would  not  only  be  useless  to  the  new-born 
animal,  but  extremely  in  its  way ;  as  it  is  evident 
that  the  act  of  sucking^  by  w^hich  it  is  for  some  time 
to  be  nourished,  will  be  performed  with  more  ease 
both  to  the  nurse  and  to  the  infant,  whilst  the 
inside  of  the  mouth,  and  edges  of  the  gums,  are 
smooth  and  soft,  than  if  set  with  hard  pointed  bones. 
By  the  time  they  are  wanted,  the  teeth  are  ready,  \ 
They  have  been  lodged  within  the  gums  for  some 
months  past,  but  detained  as  it  were  in  their  sock- 
ets, so  long  as  their  further  protrusion  would  inter- 
fere with  the  office  to  which  the  mouth  is  destined. 
Nature,  namely,  that  intelligence  which  was  employ-'^ 
ed  in  creation,  looked  beyond  the  first  year  of  the 
infant's  life  ;  yet,  whilst  she  was  providing  for  func- 
tions which  were  after  that  term  to  become  neces- 
sary, was  careful  not  to  incommode  those  which  pre-  J 
ceded  them.  What  renders  it  more  probable  that 
this  is  the  effect  of  design,  is,  that  the  teeth  are 
imperfect,  whilst  all  other  parts  of  the  mouth  are 
perfect.  The  lips  are  perfect,  the  tongue  is  per- 
fect ;  the  cheeks,  the  jaws,  the  palate,  the  pharynx, 
the  larynx,  are  all  perfect :  the  teeth  alone  are  not 
so.  This  is  the  fact  w^ith  respect  to  the  human 
mouth  :  the  fact  also  is,  that  the  parts  above  enume- 
rated are  called  into  use  from  the  beginning;  where- 
as the  teeth  would  be  only  so  many  obstacles  and 
annoyances,  if  they  were  there.  When  a  contrary 
order  is  necessary,  a  contrary  order  prevails.  In 
the  worm  of  the  beetle,  as  hatched  from  the  egg^^ 
the  teeth  are  the  first  things  which  arrive  at  per- 
fection.     The  insect  begins  to  gnaw  as  soon  as  it 


S14  PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES. 

escapes  from  the  shell,  though  its  other  parts  be 
only  gradually  advancing  to  their  maturity. 

What  has  been  observed  of  the  teeth,  is  true  of 
the  horns  of  animals,  and  for  the  same  reason.  The 
horn  of  a  calf  or  a  lamb  does  not  bud,  or  at  least 
does  not  sprout  to  any  considerable  length,  until 
the  animal  be  capable  of  browsing  upon  its  pas- 
ture ;  because  such  a  substance  upon  the  forehead 
of  the  young  animal,  would  very  much  incom- 
mode the  teat  of  the  dam  in  the  office  of  giving 
suck. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  teetlij — of  the  human 
teeth  at  least,  the  prospective  contrivance  looks 
still  farther.  A  succession  of  crops  is  provided, 
and  provided  from  the  beginning ;  a  second  tier 
being  originally  formed  beneath  the  first,  which  do 
not  come  into  use  till  several  years  afterwards.  And 
this  double  or  suppletory  provision  meets  a  difficul- 
ty in  the  mechanism  of  the  mouth,  which  would 
have  appeared  almost  insurmountable.  The  ex- 
pansion of  the  jaw  (the  consequence  of  the  propor- 
tionable growth  of  the  animal,  and  of  its  skull),  ne- 
cessarily separates  the  teeth  of  the  first  set,  however 
compactly  disposed,  to  a  distance  from  one  another, 
which  would  be  very  inconvenient.  In  due  time, 
therefore,  f.  e.  when  the  jaw  has  attained  a  great 
part  of  its  dimensions,  a  new  set  of  teeth  springs 
up  (loosening  and  pushing  out  the  old  ones  before 
them),  more  exactly  fitted  to  the  space  which  they 
are  to  occupy,  and  rising  also  in  such  close  ranks, 
as  to  allow  for  anv  extension   of  line  which  the 


PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES.  615 

subsequent  enlargement  of  the  head  may  occa- 
sion. 

IL  It  is  not  very  easy  to  conceive  a  more  evi- 
dently prospective  contrivance  than  that  which,  in 
all  viviparous  animals,  is  found  in  the  milk  of  the 
female  parent.  At  the  moment  the  young  animal 
enters  the  world,  there  is  its  maintenance  ready  for  f 
it.  The  particulars  to  be  remarked  in  this  economy 
are  neither  few  nor  slight.  We  have,  first,  the  nu- 
tritious quality  of  the  fluid,  unlike,  in  this  respect, 
every  other  excretion  of  the  body ;  and  in  which 
nature  hitherto  remains  unimitated,  neither  cookery 
nor  chymistry  having  been  able  to  make  milk  out  of 
gi'ass ;  we  have,  secondly,  the  organ  for  its  recep- 
tion and  retention ;  we  have,  thirdly,  the  excretory 
duct  annexed  to  that  organ ;  and  we  have,  lastly, 
the  determination  of  the  milk  to  the  breast,  at  the 
particular  juncture  when  it  is  about  to  be  wanted. 
We  have  all  these  properties  in  the  subject  before 
us ;  and  they  are  all  indications  of  design.  The 
last  circumstance  is  the  strongest  of  any.  If  I  had 
been  to  guess  beforehand,  I  should  have  conjec- 
tured, that  at  the  time  when  there  was  an  extraor- 
dinary demand  for  nourishment  in  one  part  of  the 
system,  there  would  be  the  least  likelihood  of  a  re- 
dundancy to  supply  another  part.  The  advanced 
pregnancy  of  the  female  has  no  intelligible  tendency 
to  fill  the  breasts  with  milk.  The  lacteal  system 
is  a  constant  wonder ;  and  it  adds  to  other  causes 
of  our  admiration,  that  the  number  of  the  teats  or 
paps  in  each  species  is  found  to  bear  a  proportion 
to  the  number  of  the  young.     In  tlie  sow,   the 


216  PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES. 

bitch,  the  rabbit,  the  cat,  the  rat,  which  have  nu- 
merous litters,  the  paps  are  numerous,  and  are 
disposed  along  the  whole  length  of  the  belly :  in 
the  cow  and  mare,  they  are  few.  The  most  sim- 
ple account  of  this,  is  to  refer  it  to  a  designing 
^Creator. 

But,  in  the  argument  before  us,  we  are  entitled 
to  consider  not  only  animal  bodies  when  framed, 
but  the  circumstances  under  which  they  are  fram- 
ed: and  in  this  view  of  the  subject,  the  constitu- 
tion of  many  of  their  parts  is  most  strictly  pros- 
pective. 

III.  The  eye  is  of  no  use  at  the  time  when  it  is 
forip^ed.  It  is  an  optical  instrument  made  in  a  dun- 
geon ;  constructed  for  the  refraction  of  light  to  a 
focus,  and  perfect  for  its  purpose,  before  a  ray  of 
light  has  had  access  to  it ;  geometrically  adapted 
to  the  properties  and  action  of  an  element  with 
which  it  has  no  communication.  It  is  about  indeed 
to  enter  into  that  communication  ;  and  this  is  pre- 
cisely the  thing  which  evidences  intention.  It  is 
providing  for  the  future  in  the  closest  sense  which 
can  be  given  to  these  terms ;  for  it  is  providing  for 
a  future  change,  not  for  the  then  subsisting  condi- 
tion of  the  animal,  nor  for  any  gradual  progress  or 
advance  in  that  same  condition,  but  for  a  new  state, 
the  consequence  of  a  great  and  sudden  alteration, 
which  the  animal  is  to  undergo  at  its  birth.  Is  it  to 
be  believed  that  the  eye  was  formed,  or,  which  is 
the  same  thing,  that  the  series  of  causes  was  fixed 
by  which  the  eye  is  formed,  without  a  view  to  this 


PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES.  217 

change ;  without  a  prospect  of  that  condition,  in 
which  its  fabric,  of  no  use  at  present,  is  about  to  be 
of  the  greatest ;  without  a  consideration  of  the  qua- 
lities of  that  element,  hitherto  entirely  excluded,  but 
with  which  it  was  hereafter  to  hold  so  intimate  a 
relation  ?  A  young  man  makes  a  pair  of  spectacles 
for  himself  against  he  grows  old ;  for  which  spec- 
tacles he  has  no  want  or  use  whatever  at  the  time 
he  makes  them.     Could  this  be  done  without  know- 
ing and  considering  the  defect  of  vision  to  which 
advanced  age  is  subject?     Would  not  the  precise 
suitableness  of  the  instrument  to  its  purpose,  of  the 
remedy  to  the  defect,  of  the  convex  lens  to  the  flat- 
tened eye,  establish  the  certainty  of  the  conclusion, 
that  the  case,  afterwards  to  arise,  had  been  consider- 
ed beforehand,  speculated  upon,  provided  for  ?  all 
which  are  exclusively  the  acts  of  a  reasoning  mind. 
The  eye  formed  in  one  state,  for  use  only  in  another 
state,  and  in  a  different  state,  affords  a  proof  no  less 
clear  of  destination  to  a  future  purpose,  and  a  proof 
proportionably  stronger,  as  the  machinery  is  more 
complicated,  and  the  adaptation  more  exact. 

IV.  What  has  been  said  of  the  eye,  holds  equallj'^ 
true  of  the  lungs.  Composed  of  air-vessels,  where 
there  is  no  air ;  elaborately  constructed  for  the  al- 
ternate admission  and  expulsion  of  an  elastic  fluid, 
where  no  such  fluid  exists ;  this  great  organ,  with 
the  whole  apparatus  belonging  to  it,  lies  collapsed 
in  the  foetal  tliorax,  yet  in  order,  and  in  readiness 
for  action,  the  first  moment  that  the  occasion  re-] 
quires  its  service.  This  is  having  a  machine  lock- 
ed up  in  store  for  future  use ;   wliich  incontestably 


21  S  PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES. 

proves,  that  the  case  was  expected  to  occur,  in 
which  this  use  might  be  experienced :  but  expecta- 
tion is  the  proper  act  of  intehigence.  Considering 
the  state  in  whicli  an  animal  exists  before  its  birth, 
I  should  look  for  nothing  less  in  its  body  than  a 
system  of  lungs.  It  is  like  finding  a  pair  of  bellows 
in  the  bottom  of  the  sea;  of  no  sort  of  use  in  the 
situation  in  wliich  they  are  found ;  formed  for  an 
action  which  was  impossible  to  be  exerted ;  hold- 
ing no  relation  or  fitness  to  the  element  which  sur- 
rounds them,  but  both  to  another  element  in  another 
place. 

As  part  and  parcel  of  the  same  plan,  ought  to  be 
mentioned,  in  speaking  of  the  lungs,  the  provisionary 
contrivances  of  iheforamen  ovale  and  ductus  artein- 
osus.  In  the  foetus,  pipes  are  laid  for  the  passage 
of  the  blood  through  the  lungs  ;  but,  until  the  lungs 
be  inflated  by  the  inspiration  of  air,  that  passage  is 
impervious,  or  in  a  great  degree  obstructed.  What 
then  is  to  be  done?  what  would  an  artist,  what 
w^ould  a  master  do  upon  the  occasion  ?  He  would 
endeavour,  most  probably,  to  provide  a  temporary 
passage,  which  might  carry  on  the  communication 
required,  until  the  other  was  open.  Now  this  is  the 
thing  which  is  actually  done  in  the  heart :  Instead 
of  the  circuitous  route  through  the  lungs,  which 
the  blood  afterwards  takes  before  it  get  from  one 
auricle  of  the  heart  to  the  other,  a  portion  of  the 
blood  passes  immediately  from  the  right  auricle  to 
the  left,  through  a  hole  placed  in  the  partition 
which  separates  these  cavities.  This  hole  anato- 
mists call  the  Jvrame?}  ovale.     Tliere  is  Hkewise  an- 


PROSPECTIVE  CONTRIVANCES.  219 

Other  cross  cut,  answering  the  same  purpose,  by 
what  is  called  the  ductus  arteriosus^  lyi^g  between 
the  pulmonary  artery  and  the  lorta.  But  both  ex- 
pedients are  so  strictly  temporary,  that  after  birth 
the  one  passage  is  closed,  and  the  tube  which  forms 
the  other  shrivelled  up  into  a  ligament.  If  this  be 
not  contrivance,  what  is  ? 

But,  forasmuch  as  the  action  of  the  air  upon  the 
blood  in  the  lungs  appears  to  be  necessary  to  the 
perfect  concoction  of  that  fluid,  /•  e.  to  the  life  and 
health  of  the  animal,  (otherwise  the  shortest  route 
might  still  be  the  best),  how  comes  it  to  pass  that 
the  Jcetus  lives,  and  grows,  and  thrives,  wdthout  it  ? 
The  answer  is,  that  the  blood  of  the  foetus  is  the 
mother's  ;  that  it  has  undergone  that  action  in  her 
habit ;  that  one  pair  of  lungs  serves  for  both.  When 
the  animals  are  separated,  a  new  necessity  arises  ; 
and  to  meet  this  necessity  as  soon  as  it  occurs,  an 
organization  is  prepared.  It  is  ready  for  its  pur- 
pose ;  it  only  waits  for  the  atmosphere  ;  it  begins 
to  play  the  moment  the  air  is  admitted  to  it. 


220  RELATIONS, 


CHAPTER  XV. 


RELATIONS. 


When  several  different  parts  contribute  to  one  ef- 
fect ;  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  when  an  effect 
is  produced  by  the  joint  action  of  different  instru- 
ments ;  the  fitness  of  such  parts  or  instruments 
to  one  another,  for  the  purpose  of  producing  by 
their  united  action  the  effect,  is  what  I  call  relation  ; 
and  w^herever  this  is  observed  in  the  w^orks  of  na- 
ture or  of  man,  it  appears  to  me  to  carry  along  with 
it  decisive  evidence  of*  understanding,  intention, 
art.  In  examining,  for  instance,  the  several  parts  of 
a  watchy  the  spring,  the  barrel,  the  chain,  the  fusee, 
the  balance,  the  wheels  of  various  sizes,  forms,  and 
positions,  what  is  it  which  would  take  an  observer's 
attention,  as  most  plainly  evincing  a  construction, 
directed  by  thought,  deliberation,  and  contrivance  ? 
It  is  the  suitableness  of  these  parts  to  one  another  ; 
first,  in  the  succession  and  order  in  which  they  act ; 
and,  secondly,  with  a  view^  to  the  effect  finally  pro- 
duced. Thus,  referring  the  spring  to  the  wheels, 
our  observer  sees  in  it  that  w^iich  originates  and  up- 
holds their  motion  ;  in  the  chain,  that  which  trans- 
mits the  motion  to  the  fusee  ;  in  the  fusee,  that 
which  communicates  it  to  the  w^heels  ;  in  the  conical 


RELATIONS.  221 

figure  of  the  fusee,  if  he  refer  to  the  spring,  he  sees 
that  which  corrects  the  inequahty  of  its  force.     Re- 
ferring the  wheels  to  one  another,  he  notices,  first, 
their  teeth,  which  would  have  been  without  use  or 
meaning,  if  there  had  been  only  one  wheel,  or  if 
the  wheels  had  had  no  connexion  between  them- 
selves, or  common  bearing  upon  some  joint  effect ; 
secondly,  the  correspondency  of  their  position,  so 
that  the  teeth  of  one  wheel  catch  into  the  teeth  of 
another;   thirdly,  the  proportion  observed  in  the 
number  of  teeth  of  each  wheel,  which  determines 
the  rate  of  going.     Referring  the  balance  to  the 
rest  of  the  works,  he  saw,  when  he  came  to  under- 
stand its  action,  that  which  rendered  their  motions 
equable.     Lastly,  in  looking  upon  the  index  and 
face  of  the  watch,  he  saw  the  use  and  conclusion  of 
the  mechanism,  viz.  marking  the  succession  of  mi- 
nutes and  hours ;  but  all  depending  upon  the  mo- 
tions within,  all  upon  the  system  of  intermediate 
actions  between  the  spring  and  the  pointer.     What 
thus  struck  his  attention  in  the  several  parts  of  the 
watch,  he  might  probably  designate  by  one  general 
name  of  ^*  relation  ;'"  and  observing  with  respect  to 
all  cases  whatever,  in  which  the  origin  and  formal 
tion  of  a  thing  could  be  ascertained  by  evidence, 
that  these  relations  were  found  in  things  produced 
by  art  and  design,  and  in  no  other  things,  he  would 
rightly  deem  of  them  as  characteristic  of  such  pro- 
ductions.— To  apply  the  reasoning  here  described 
to  the  works  of  nature.  ^*^^ 

The  animal  economy  is  full ;  is  made  up  of  thesi^ 
relations :  — 


222  RELATIONS. 

'^  I.  There  are,  lirst,  what  in  one  form  or  other  be. 
long  to  all  animals,  the  parts  and  powers  which  suc- 
cessively act  upon  their  Jood.  Compare  this  ac- 
tion with  the  process  of  a  manufactory.  In  men 
and  quadrupeds,  the  aliment  is  first  broken  and 
bruised  by  mechanical  instruments  of  mastication, 
viz.  sharp  spikes  or  hard  knobs,  pressing  against  or 
rubbing  upon  one  another :  thus  ground  and  com- 
minuted, it  is  carried  by  a  pipe  into  the  stomach, 
where  it  waits  to  undergo  a  great  chymical  action, 
which  we  call  digestion :  when  digested,  it  is  deli- 
vered through  an  orifice,  which  opens  and  shuts  as 
there  is  occasion,  into  the  first  intestine :  there, 
after  being  mixed  with  certain  proper  ingredients, 
poured  through  a  hole  in  the  side  of  the  vessel,  it 
is  farther  dissolved :  in  this  state,  the  milk,  chyle, 
or  part  which  is  wanted,  and  which  is  suited  for 
animal  nourishment,  is  strained  off  by  the  mouths 
of  very  small  tubes,  opening  into  the  cavity  of  the 
intestines :  thus  freed  from  its  grosser  parts,  the 
percolated  fluid  is  carried  by  a  long,  winding,  but 
traceable  course,  into  the  main  stream  of  the  old 
circulation ;  which  conveys  it,  in  its  progress,  to 
every  part  of  the  body.  Now  I  say  again,  com- 
pare this  with  the  process  of  a  manufactory ;  with 
the  making  of  cider,  for  example  ;  with  the  bruising 
of  the  apples  in  the  mill,  the  squeezing  of  them 
when  so  bruised  in  the  press,  the  fermentation  in 
the  vat,  the  bestowing  of  the  liquor  thus  fermented 
in  the  hogsheads,  the  drawing  off  into  bottles,  the 
pouring  out  for  use  into  the  glass.  Let  any  one 
show  me  any  difference  between  these  two  cases,  ai^ 


RELATIONS.  S2S 

to  the  point  of  contrivance.  That  which  is  at  pre- 
sent under  our  consideration,  the  ''relation''  of  the 
parts  successively  employed,  is  not  more  clear  in 
the  last  case  than  in  the  first.  The  aptness  of  th^ 
jaws  and  teeth  to  prepare  the  food  for  the  stomach, 
is,  at  least,  as  manifest,  as  that  of  the  cider-mill  to) 
crush  the  apples  for  the  press.  The  concoction  of 
the  food  in  the  stomach  is  as  necessary  for  its  future 
use,  as  the  fermentation  of  the  stum  in  the  vat  is 
to  the  perfection  of  the  liquor.  The  disposal  of 
the  aliment  afterwards ;  the  action  and  change 
which  it  undergoes  ;  the  route  which  it  is  made  to 
take,  in  order  that,  and  until  that,  it  arrive  at  its 
destination,  is  more  complex  indeed  and  intricate, 
but,  in  the  midst  of  complication  and  intricacy,  as 
evirlent  and  certain,  as  is  the  apparatus  of  cocks, 
pipes,  tunnels,  for  transferring  the  cider  from  one 
vessel  to  another ;  of  barrels  and  bottles  for  pre- 
serving it  till  fit  for  use,  or  of  cups  and  glasses  for 
bringing  it,  when  wanted,  to  the  lip  of  the  con- 
sumer. The  character  of  the  machinery  is  in  both 
cases  this  ;  that  one  part  answers  to  another  part, 
and  every  part  to  the  final  result. 

Tliis  parallel,  between  the  alimentary  operation 
and  some  of  the  processes  of  art,  might  be  carried 
farther  into  detail.  Spallanzani  has  remarked*  a 
circumstantial  resemblance  between  the  stomachs 
of  gallinaceous  fowls  and  the  structure  of  corn-mills. 
Whilst  the  two  sides  of  the  gizzard  perform  the 
office  of  the  mill-stones,  the  craw  or  crop  supplies 
the  place  of  the  hopper. 

*   Dis.  I.  Sect.  liv. 

47 


224  RELATIONS. 

When  our  fowls  are  abundantly  supplied  with 
meat,  they  soon  fill  their  craw^ :  but  it  does  not  im- 
mediately pass  thence  into  the  gizzard ;  it  always 
enters  in  very  small  quantities,  in  proportion  to  the 
progress  of  trituration  ;  in  like  manner  as,  in  a  mill, 
a  receiver  is  fixed  above  the  tw^o  large  stones  which 
serve  for  grinding  the  corn ;  which  receiver,  al- 
though the  corn  be  put  into  it  by  bushels,  allows 
the  grain  to  dribble  only  in  small  quantities,  into 
the  central  hole  in  tlue  upper  mill-stone. 
^  But  we  have  not  done  with  the  alimentary  history. 
There  subsists  a  general  relation  between  the  ex- 
ternal organs  of  an  animal  by  which  it  procures  its 
food,  and  the  internal  powders  by  which  it  digests  it. 
Birds  of  prey,  by  their  talons  and  beaks,  are  quali- 
fied to  seize  and  devour  many  species,  both  of  other 
birds  and  of  quadrupeds.  The  constitution  of  the 
stomach  agrees  exactly  with  the  form  of  the  mem- 
x^bers.  The  gastric  juice  of  a  bird  of  prey,  of  an  owl, 
a  falcon,  or  a  kite,  acts  upon  the  animal  fibre  alone  ; 
it  will  not  act  upon  seeds  or  grasses  at  all.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  conformation  of  the  mouth  of  the 
sheep  or  the  ox  is  suited  for  browsing  upon  herb- 
age. Nothing  about  these  animals  is  fitted  for  the 
pursuit  of  living  prey.  Accordingly  it  has  been 
found  by  experiments,  tried  not  many  years  ago, 
with  perforated  balls,  that  the  gastric  juice  of  ru- 
minating animals,  such  as  the  sheep  and  the  ox, 
speedily  dissolves  vegetables,  but  makes  no  impres- 
sion upon  animal  bodies.  This  accordancy  is  still 
more  particular.  The  gastric  juice,  even  of  grani- 
vorous  birds,  will  not  act  upon  the  grain  whilst 


RELATIONS.  225 

whole  and  entire.  In  performing  the  experiment 
of  digestion  with  the  gastric  juice  in  vessels,  the 
grain  must  be  crushed  and  bruised  before  it  be 
submitted  to  the  menstruum  ;  that  is  to  say,  must 
undergo  by  art  without  the  body,  the  preparatory 
action  which  the  gizzard  exerts  upon  it  within  the 
body  ;  or  no  digestion  will  take  place.  So  strict, 
in  this  case,  is  the  relation  between  the  offices  as- 
signed to  the  digestive  organ,  between  the  mecha- 
nical operation  and  the  chymical  process. 

II.  The  relation  of  the  kidneys  to  the  bladder, 
and  of  the  ureters  to  both,  i.  e.  of  the  secreting  or- 
gan to  the  vessel  receiving  the  secreted  liquor,  and 
the  pipe  laid  from  one  to  the  other,  for  the  purpose 
of  conveying  it  from  one  to  the  other,  is  as  mani- 
fest as  it  is  amongst  the  different  vessels  employed 
in  a  distillery,  or  in  the  communications  between 
them.  The  animal  structure  in  this  case  being 
simple,  and  the  parts  easily  separated,  it  forms  an 
instance  of  correlation  which  may  be  presented  by 
dissection  to  every  eye,  or  which  indeed,  with- 
out dissection,  is  capable  of  being  apprehended 
by  every  understanding.  This  correlation  of  instru- 
ments to  one  another  fixes  intention  somewhere  ; 
especially  when  every  other  solution  is  negatived 
by  the  conformation.  If  the  bladder  had  been 
merely  an  expansion  of  the  ureter,  produced  by  re- 
tention of  the  fluid,  there  ought  to  have  been  a  / 
bladder  for  each  ureter.  One  receptacle,  fed  by 
two  pipes,  issuing  from  different  sides  of  the  body, 
yet  from  both  conveying  the  same  fluid,  is  not  to 
be  accounted  for  by  any  such  supposition  as  this. 


226  RELATIONS. 

III.  Relation  of  parts  to  one  another  accompanies 
us  throughout  the  whole  animal  economy.  Can 
any  relation  be  more  simple,  yet  more  convincing, 
than  this,  that  the  eyes  are  so  placed  as  to  look  in 
the  direction  in  which  the  legs  move  and  the  hands 
work?  It  might  have  happened  very  differently  if 
it  had  been  left  to  chance.  There  were  at  least 
three  quarters  of  the  compass  out  of  four  to  have 
erred  in.  Any  considerable  alteration  in  the  posi- 
tion of  the  eye,  or  the  figure  of  the  joints,  would 
have  disturbed  the  line,  and  destroyed  the  alliance 
between  the  sense  and  the  limbs. 

IV.  But  relation  perhaps  is  never  so  striking  as 
when  it  subsists,  not  between  different  parts  of  the 
same  thing,  but  between  different  things.  The  re- 
lation between  a  lock  and  a  key  is  more  obvious 
than  it  is  between  different  parts  of  the  lock.  A 
bow  was  designed  for  an  arrow,  and  an  arrow  for 
a  bow :  and  the  design  is  more  evident  for  their 
being  separate  implements. 

"'  Nor  do  the  works  of  the  Deity  want  this  clearest 
species  of  relation.  The  sea:es  are  manifestly  made 
for  each  other.  They  form  the  grand  relation  of 
animated  nature  ;  universal,  organic,  mechanical : 
subsisting  like  the  clearest  relations  of  art,  in  dif- 
ferent individuals  ;  unequivocal,  inexplicable  with- 
out design. 

So  much  so,  that  were  every  other  proof  of  con- 
trivance in  nature  dubious  or  obscure,  this  alone 
would  be  sufficient.  The  example  is  complete. 
Nothing  is  wanting  to  the  argument.  I  see  no  way 
whatever  of  getting  over  it. 


RELATIONS.  227 

V.  The  teats  of  animals  which  give  suck,  bear 
a  relation  to  the  mouth  of  the  suckling  progeny ; 
particularly  to  the  lips  and  tongue.  Here  also,  as 
before,  is  a  correspondency  of  parts ;  which  parts 
subsist  in  different  individuals. 

These  are  general  relations,  or  the  relations  of 
parts  which  are  found,  either  in  all  animals,  or  in 
large  classes  and  descriptions  of  animals.  Parti- 
cular relations,  or  the  relations  which  subsist  be- 
tween the  particular  configuration  of  one  or  more 
parts  of  certain  species  of  animals,  and  the  par- 
ticular configuration  of  one  or  more  other  parts 
of  the  same  animal  (which  is  the  sort  of  relation 
that  is  perhaps  most  striking),  are  such  as  the 
following : 

I.  In  the  swan;  the  web-foot,  the  spoon-bill,  the 
long  neck,  the  thick  down,  the  graminivorous  sto- 
mach, bear  all  a  relation  to  one  another,  inasmuch 
as  they  all  concur  in  one  design,  that  of  supplying 
the  occasions  of  an  aquatic  fowl,  floating  upon  the 
surface  of  shallow  pools  of  water,  and  seeking  its 
food  at  the  bottom.  Begin  with  any  one  of  these 
particularities  of  structure,  and  observe  how  the  rest 
follow  it.  The  web-foot  qualifies  the  bird  for  swim- 
ming ;  the  spoon-bill  enables  it  to  graze.  But  how 
is  an  animal,  floating  upon  the  surface  of  pools  of 
water,  to  graze  at  the  bottom,  except  by  the  media- 
tion of  a  long  neck  ?  A  long  neck  accordingly  is 
given  to  it.  Again,  a  warm-blooded  animal,  which 
was  to  pass  its  life  upon  water,  required  a  defence 
against  the  coldness  of  that  element.  Such  a  defence 


228  RELATIONS. 

is  furnished  to  the  swan,  in  the  muff  in  which  its 
body  is  wrapped.  But  all  this  outward  apparatus 
would  have  been  in  vain,  if  the  intestinal  system  had 
not  been  suited  to  the  digestion  of  vegetable  sub- 
stances. I  say,  suited  to  the  digestion  of  vegetable 
substances  :  for  it  is  well  known,  that  there  are  two 
intestinal  systems  found  in  birds,  one  with  a  mem- 
branous stomach  and  a  gastric  juice,  capable  of  dis- 
solving animal  substances  alone  ;  the  other  with  a 
crop  and  gizzard,  calculated  for  the  moistening, 
bruising,  and  afterwards  digesting,  of  vegetable 
aliment. 

Or  set  off  with  any  other  distinctive  part  in  the 
body  of  the  swan  ;  for  instance,  with  the  long  neck. 
The  long  neck,  without  the  web-foot,  would  have 
been  an  encumbrance  to  the  bird ;  yet  there  is  no 
necessary  connexion  between  a  long  neck  and  a 
web-foot.  In  fact  they  do  not  usually  go  together. 
How  happens  it,  therefore,  that  they  meet  only 
when  a  particular  design  demands  the  aid  of  both  ? 

III.  This  mutual  relation,  arising  from  a  subser- 
viency to  a  common  purpose,  is  very  observable  also 
in  the  parts  of  a  mole.  The  strong  short  legs  of 
that  animal,  the  palmated  feet  armed  with  sharp 
nails,  the  pig-like  nose,  the  teeth,  the  velvet  coat, 
the  small  external  ear,  the  sagacious  smell,  the  sunk 
protected  eye,  all  conduce  to  the  utilities  or  to  the 
safety  of  its  under-ground  life.  It  is  a  special  pur- 
pose, specially  consulted  throughout.  The  form  of 
the  feet  fixes  the  character  of  the  animal.  They 
are  so  many  shovels ;  they  determine  its  action  to 
that  of  rooting  in  the  ground  j  and  every  thing  about 


RELATIONS.  229 

its  body  agrees  with  this  destination.  The  cylin- 
drical figure  of  the  mole,  as  well  as  the  compactness 
of  its  form,  arising  from  the  terseness  of  its  limbs, 
proportionablylessens  its  labour;  because,  according 
to  its  bulk,  it  thereby  requires  the  least  possible 
quantity  of  earth  to  be  removed  for  its  progress.  It 
has  nearly  the  same  structure  of  the  face  and  jaws 
as  a  swine,  and  the  same  office  for  them.  The  nose 
is  sharp,  slender,  tendinous,  strong ;  with  a  pair  of 
nerves  going  down  to  the  end  of  it.  The  plush 
covering,  which,  by  the  smoothness,  closeness,  and 
polish  of  the  short  piles  that  compose  it,  rejects  the 
adhesion  of  almost  every  species  of  earth,  defends 
the  animal  from  cold  and  wet,  and  from  the  impedi- 
ment which  it  would  experience  by  the  mould  stick- 
ing to  its  body.  From  soils  of  all  kinds  the  little 
pioneer  comes  forth  bright  and  clean.  Inhabiting 
dirt,  it  is,  of  all  animals,  the  neatest. 

But  what  I  have  always  most  admired  in  the  mole 
is  its  eyes.  This  animal  occasionally  visiting  the 
surface,  and  wanting,  for  its  safety  and  direction,  to 
be  informed  when  it  does  so,  or  when  it  approaches 
it,  a  perception  of  light  was  necessary.  I  do  not 
know  that  the  clearness  of  sight  depends  at  all  upon 
the  size  of  the  organ.  What  is  gained  by  the  large- 
ness or  prominence  of  the  globe  of  the  eye,  is  width 
in  the  field  of  vision.  Such  a  capacity  would  be  of  no 
use  to  an  animal  which  was  to  seek  its  food  in  the 
dark.  The  mole  did  not  want  to  look  about  it ;  nor 
would  a  large  advanced  eye  have  been  easily  de- 
fended from  the  annoyance  to  w^hich  the  life  of  the 
animal  must  constantly  expose  it.    How^  indeed  was 


230  RELATIONS. 

the  mole,  working  its  way  under  ground,  to  guard 
its  eyes  at  all  ?  In  order  to  meet  this  difficulty,  the 
eyes  are  made  scarcely  larger  than  the  head  of  a 
corking-pin  ;  and  these  minute  globules  are  sunk  so 
deeply  in  the  skull,  and  lie  so  sheltered  within  the 
velvet  of  its  covering,  as  that  any  contraction  of 
what  may  be  called  the  eye-brows,  not  only  closes 
up  the  apertures  which  lead  to  the  eyes,  but  presents 
a  cushion,  as  it  were,  to  any  sharp  or  protruding 
substance  which  might  push  against  them.  This 
aperture,  even  in  its  ordinary  state,  is  like  a  pin- 
hole in  a  piece  of  velvet,  scarcely  pervious  to  loose 
particles  of  earth. 

Observe  then,  in  this  structure,  that  which  we 
call  relation.  There  is  no  natural  connexion  be- 
tween a  small  sunk  eye  and  a  shovel  palmated  foot. 
Palmated  feet  might  have  been  joined  with  goggle 
eyes ;  or  small  eyes  might  have  been  joined  with 
feet  of  any  other  form.  What  was  it  therefore 
which  brought  them  together  in  the  mole  ?  That 
which  brought  together  the  barrel,  the  chain,  and 
the  fusee,  in  a  watch  ;  design :  and  design,  in  both 
cases,  inferred  from  the  relation  which  the  parts 
bear  to  one  another  in  the  prosecution  of  a  common 
purpose.  As  hath  already  been  observed,  there  are 
different  ways  of  stating  the  relation,  according  as 
we  set  out  from  a  different  part.  In  the  instance 
before  us,  we  may  either  consider  the  shape  of  the 
feet,  as  qualifying  the  animal  for  that  mode  of  life 
and  inhabitation  to  which  the  structure  of  its  eyes 
confines  it ;  or  we  may  consider  the  structure  of  the 
eye,  as  the  only  one  which  would  have  suited  with 


RELATIONS.  231 

the  action  to  which  the  feet  are  adapted.    The  rela- 
tion is  manifest,  whichever  of  the  parts  related  we 
place  first  in  the  order  of  our  consideration.     In  ^\ 
word ;  the  feet  of  the  mole  are  made  for  digging ; 
the  neck,  nose,  eyes,  ears,  and  skin,  are  peculiarly  :^,, 
adapted  to  an  under-ground  life ;  and  this  is  what  1/ 
call  relation. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


COMPENSATION. 


Compensation  is  a  species  of  relation.     It  is  rela-  \ 
tion  when  the  defects  of  one  part,  or  of  one  organ, 
are  supplied  by  the  structure  of  another  part,  or  of 
another  organ.     Thus, 

I.  The  short  unbending  neck  of  the  elephant  is 
compensated  by  the  length  and  flexibility  of  his  ^ro4 
boscis.  He  could  not  have  reached  the  ground  witK- 
out  it ;  or,  if  it  be  supposed  that  he  might  have  fed 
upon  the  fruit,  leaves,  or  branches  of  trees,  how  was 
he  to  drink  ?  Should  it  be  asked,  Why  is  the  ele- 
phant's neck  so  short  ?  it  may  be  answered,  that  the 
weight  of  a  head  so  heavy  could  not  have  been  sup- 
ported at  the  end  of  a  longer  lever.  To  a  form, 
therefore,  in  some  respects  necessary,  but  in  some 


232  COMPENSATION. 

respects  also  inadequate  to  the  occasions  of  the  ani- 
mal, a  supplement  is  added,  which  exactly  makes 
up  the  deficiency  under  which  he  laboured. 

If  it  be  suggested  that  this  proboscis  may  have 
been  produced,  in  a  long  course  of  generations,  by 
the  constant  endeavour  of  the  elephant  to  thrust 
out  his  nose  (which  is  the  general  hypothesis  by 
which  it  has  lately  been  attempted  to  account  for 
the  forms  of  animated  nature),  I  would  ask,  How 
was  the  animal  to  subsist  in  the  mean  time,  during 
the  process,  until  this  prolongation  of  snout  were 
completed  ?  What  was  to  become  of  the  individual, 
whilst  the  species  was  perfecting  ? 

Our  business  at  present  is,  simply  to  point  out 
the  relation  which  this  organ  bears  to  the  peculiar 
figure  of  the  animal  to  which  it  belongs.  And  here- 
in all  things  correspond.  The  necessity  of  the  ele- 
phant's proboscis  arises  from  the  shortness  of  his 
neck ;  the  shortness  of  the  neck  is  rendered  neces- 
sary by  the  weight  of  the  head.  Were  we  to  enter 
into  an  examination  of  the  structure  and  anatomy 
of  the  proboscis  itself,  we  should  see  in  it  one  of 
the  most  curious  of  all  examples  of  animal  mecha- 
nism. The  disposition  of  the  ringlets  and  fibres,  for 
the  purpose,  first,  of  forming  a  long  cartilaginous 
pipe  ;  secondly,  of  contracting  and  lengthening  that 
pipe  ;  thirdly,  of  turning  it  in  every  direction  at  the 
will  of  the  animal ;  with  the  superaddition  at  the 
end,  of  a  fleshy  production,  of  about  the  length  and 
thickness  of  a  finger,  and  performing  the  office  of 
a  finger,  so  as  to  pick  up  a  straw  from  the  ground ; 
these  properties  of  the  same  organ,  taken  together, 


COMPENSATION.  233 

exhibit  a  specimen,  not  only  of  design  (which  is  at- 
tested by  the  advantage),  but  of  consummate  art, 
and,  as  I  may  say,  of  elaborate  preparation,  in  ac- 
complishing that  design. 

II.  The  hook  in  the  wing  of  a  bat  is  strictly  a 
mechanical,  and  also  a  compensating  contrivance. 
At  the  angle  of  its  wing  there  is  a  bent  claw,  exactly 
in  the  form  of  a  hook,  by  which  the  bat  attaches 
itself  to  the  sides  of  rocks,  caves,  and  buildings, 
laying  hold  of  crevices,  joinings,  chinks,  and  rough- 
nesses. It  hooks  itself  by  this  claw;  remains  sus- 
pended by  this  hold ;  takes  its  flight  from  this  po- 
sition :  which  operations  compensate  for  the  decre- 
pitude of  its  legs  and  feet.  Without  her  hook,  the 
bat  would  be  the  most  helpless  of  all  animals.  She 
can  neither  run  upon  her  feet,  nor  raise  herself  from 
the  ground.  These  inabilities  are  made  up  to  her 
by  the  contrivance  in  her  wing :  and  in  placing  a 
claw  on  that  part,  the  Creator  has  deviated  from  the 
analogy  observed  in  winged  animals. — A  singular 
defect  required  a  singular  substitute. 

III.  The  crane  kind  are  to  live  and  seek  their  \ 
food  amongst  the  waters  ;  yet,  having  no  web-feet, 
are  incapable  of  swimming.  To  make  up  for  this  de- 
ficiency, they  are  furnished  with  long  legs  for  wad- 
ing, or  long  bills  for  groping  ;  or  usually  with  both. 
This  is  compensation.  But  I  think  the  true  reflec/ 
tion  upon  the  present  instance  is,  how  every  part  of 
nature  is  tenanted  by  appropriate  inhabitants.  Not 
only  is  the  surface  of  deep  waters  peopled  by  nu- 
merous tribes  of  birds  that  swim,  but  marshes  and 


Q34f  COMPENSATION. 

shallow  pools  are  furnished  with  hardly  less  nume- 
rous tribes  of  birds  that  wade. 

IV.  The  common  parrot  has,  in  the  structure  of 
its  beak,  both  an  inconveniency,  and  a  compensation 
for  it.  When  I  speak  of  an  inconveniency,  I  have 
a  view  to  a  dilemma  which  frequently  occurs  in  the 
works  of  nature,  viz.  that  the  peculiarity  of  structure 
by  which  an  organ  is  made  to  answer  one  purpose, 
necessarily  unfits  it  for  some  other  purpose.  This 
is  the  case  before  us.  The  upper  bill  of  the  parrot 
is  so  much  hooked,  and  so  much  overlaps  the  lower, 
that  if,  as  in  other  birds,  the  lower  chap  alone  had 
motion,  the  bird  could  scarcely  gape  wide  enough  to 
receive  its  food :  yet  this  hook  and  overlapping  of 
the  bill  could  not  be  spared,  for  it  forms  the  very  in- 
strument by  which  the  bird  climbs,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  use  which  it  makes  of  it  in  breaking  nuts  and 
the  hard  substances  upon  which  it  feeds.  How, 
therefore,  has  nature  provided  for  the  opening  of 
this  occluded  mouth  ?  By  making  the  upper  chap 
moveable,  as  well  as  the  lower.  In  most  birds,  the 
upper  chap  is  connected,  and  makes  but  one  piece 
with  the  skull ;  but  in  the  parrot,  the  upper  chap  is 
joined  to  the  bone  of  the  head  by  a  strong  mem- 
brane placed  on  each  side  of  it,  which  lifts  and  de- 
presses it  at  pleasure.  * 

V.  The  spider's  web  is  a  compensating  contrivance. 
The  spider  lives  upon  flies,  without  wings  to  pur- 
sue them  ;  a  case,  one  would  have  thought,  of  great 
difficulty,  yet  provided  for,  and  provided  for  by  a 

*   Goldsmith's  Nat.  Hist.  vol.  v.  p.  274. 


COMPENSATION.  235 

resource  which  no  stratagem,  no  effort  of  the  animal, 
could  have  produced,  had  not  both  its  external  and 
internal  structure  been  specifically  adapted  to  the 
operation. 

VI.  In  many  species  of  insects,  the  eye  is  fixed; 
and  consequently  without  the  power  of  turning  the 
pupil  to  the  object.  This  great  defect  is,  however, 
perfectly  compensated  ;  and  by  a  mechanism  which 
we  should  not  suspect.  The  eye  is  a  multiplying 
glass,  with  a  lens  looking  in  every  direction  and 
catching  every  object.  By  which  means,  although 
the  orb  of  the  eye  be  stationary,  the  field  of  vision 
is  as  ample  as  that  of  other  animals,  and  is  com- 
manded on  every  side.  When  this  lattice-work  was 
first  observed,  the  multiplicity  and  minuteness  of 
the  surfaces  must  have  added  to  the  surprise  of  the 
discovery.  Adams  tells  us,  that  fourteen  hundred 
of  these  reticulations  have  been  counted  in  the  two 
eyes  of  a  drone-bee. 

In  other  cases  the  compensation  is  effected  by  the 
number  and  position  of  the  eyes  themselves.  The 
spider  has  eight  eyes,  mounted  upon  different  parts 
of  the  head ;  two  in  front,  two  in  the  top  of  the 
head,  two  on  each  side*  These  eyes  are  without 
motion  ;  but,  by  their  situation,  suited  to  compre- 
hend every  view  which  the  wants  or  safety  of  the 
animal  render  it  necessary  for  it  to  take. 

VII.  The  Memoirs  for  the  Natural  History  of 
Animals,  published  by  the  French  Academy,  a.  d. 
1687,  furnish  us  with  some  curious  particulars  in 
the  eye  of  a  chameleon.  Instead  of  two  eyelids,  it 
is  covered  by  an  eyelid  with  a  hole  in  it.     This 


S36  COMPENSATION. 

singular  structure  appears  to  be  compensatory^  and 
to  answer  to  some  other  singularities  in  the  shape 
of  the  animal.  The  neck  of  the  chameleon  is  in- 
flexible. To  make  up  for  this,  the  eye  is  so  promi- 
nent, as  that  more  than  half  of  the  ball  stands  out 
of  the  head ;  by  means  of  which  extraordinary  pro- 
jection, the  pupil  of  the  eye  can  be  carried  by  the 
muscles  in  every  direction,  and  is  capable  of  being 
pointed  towards  every  object.  But  then,  so  un- 
usual an  exposure  of  the  globe  of  the  eye  requires, 
for  its  lubricity  and  defence,  a  more  than  ordinary 
protection  of  eyelid,  as  well  as  a  more  than  ordinary 
supply  of  moisture ;  yet  the  motion  of  an  eyelid, 
formed  according  to  the  common  construction, 
would  be  impeded,  as  it  should  seem,  by  the  con- 
vexity of  the  organ.  The  aperture  in  the  lid  meets 
this  difficulty.  It  enables  the  animal  to  keep  the 
principal  part  of  the  surface  of  the  eye  under  cover, 
and  to  preserve  it  in  a  due  state  of  humidity  without 
shutting  out  the  light ;  or  without  performing  every 
moment  a  nictitation,  which,  it  is  probable,  would 
be  more  laborious  to  this  animal  than  to  others. 

VIII.  In  another  animal,  and  in  another  part  of 
the  animal  economy,  the  same  Memoirs  describe  a 
most  remarkable  substitution.  The  reader  will  re- 
member what  we  have  already  observed  concerning 
the  intestinal  canal ;  that  its  length,  so  many  times 
exceeding  that  of  the  body,  promotes  the  extraction 
of  the  chyle  from  the  aliment,  by  giving  room  for 
the  lacteal  vessels  to  act  upon  it  through  a  greater 
space.  This  long  intestine,  wherever  it  occurs,  is 
in  other  animals  disposed  in  the  abdomen  from  side 


COMPENSATION.  237 

to  side  in  returning  folds.  But,  in  the  animal 
now  under  our  notice,  the  matter  is  managed 
otherwise.  The  same  intention  is  mechanically 
effectuated ;  but  by  a  mechanism  of  a  different  kind. 
The  animal  of  which  I  speak  is  an  amphibious 
quadruped,  which  our  authors  call  the  alopecias, 
or  sea-fox.  The  intestine  is  straight  from  one 
end  to  the  other :  but  in  this  straight,  and  conse- 
quently short  intestine,  is  a  winding,  corkscrew, 
spiral  passage,  through  which  the  food,  not  with- 
out several  circumvolutions,  and  in  fact  by  a  long 
route,  is  conducted  to  its  exit.  Here  the  short- 
ness of  the  gut  is  compensated  by  the  obliquity  of 
the  perforation. 

IX.  But  the  works  of  the  Deity  are  known  by 
expedients.     Where  we  should  look  for  absolute 
destitution ;  where  we  can  reckon  up  nothing  but 
wants  ;  some  contrivance  always  comes  in  to  supply 
the  privation.     A  snail^  without  wings,  feet,    or 
thread,  climbs  up  the  stalks  of  plants,  by  the  sole 
aid  of  a  viscid  humour  discharged  from  her  skin. 
She  adheres  to  the  stems,  leaves,  and  fruits  of  plants, 
by  means  of  a  sticking-plaster.     A  muscle^  which 
might  seem,  by  its  helplessness,  to  lie  at  the  mercy 
of  every  wave    that    went   over  it,  has  the  sin- 
gular power  of  spinning  strong  tendinous  threads, 
by  which  she  moors  her  shell  to  rocks  and  timbers. 
A  cockkj  on  the  contrary,  by  means  of  its  stiff 
tongue,  works  for  itself  a  shelter  in  the  sand.    The 
provisions  of  nature  extend  to  cases  the  most  des- 
perate.    A  lobster  has  in  its  constitution  a  difficulty 
so  great,  that  one  could  hardly  conjecture  before- 


238  COMPENSATION. 

hand  how  nature  would  dispose  of  it.     In  most 
animals,  the  skin  grows  with  their  growth.     If,  in- 
stead of  a  soft  skin,  there  be  a  shell,  still  it  admits 
of  a  gradual  enlargement.     If  the  shell,  as  in  the 
tortoise,  consists  of  several  pieces,  the  accession  of 
substance  is  made  at  the  sutures.     Bivalve  shells 
grow  bigger    by  receiving  an  accretion  at  their 
edge ;  it  is  the  same  with  spiral  shells  at  their  mouth. 
The  simplicity  of  their  form  admits  of  this.     But 
the  lobster*s  shell  being  applied  to  the  limbs  of  the 
body,  as  well  as  to  the  body  itself,  allows  not  of 
either  of  the  modes  of  growth  which  are  observed 
to  take  place  in  other  shells.     Its  hardness  resists 
expansion ;  and  its  complexity  renders  it  incapable 
of  increasing  its  size  by  addition  of  substance  to 
its  edge.     How  then  was  the  growth  of  the  lobster 
to  be  provided  for  ?  Was  room  to  be  made  for  it  in 
the  old  shell,  or  was  it  to  be  successively  fitted  with 
new  ones  ?  If  a  change  of  shell  became  necessary, 
how  was  the  lobster  to  extricate  himself  from  his 
present  confinement?  ho'w  was  he  to  uncase  his 
buckler,  or  draw  his  legs  out  of  his  boots  ?   The 
process,  which  fishermen  have  observed  to  take 
place,  is  as  follows :  At  certain  seasons,  the  shell  of 
the  lobster  grows  soft ;  the  animal  swells  its  body ; 
the  seams  open,  and  the  claws  burst  at  the  joints. 
When  the  shell  has  thus  become  loose  upon  the 
body,  the  animal  makes  a  second  effort,  and  by 
a  tremulous,  spasmodic  motion,  casts  it  off*.      In 
this  state,  the  liberated  but  defenceless  fish    re- 
tires into  holes  in  the  rock.     The  released  body 
now  suddenly  pushes  its  growth.     In  about  eight- 


COMPENSATION.  239 

and-forty  hours,  a  fresh  concretion  of  humour 
upon  the  surface,  i.  e.  a  new  shell,  is  formed, 
adapted  in  every  part  to  the  increased  dimensions 
of  the  animal.  This  wonderful  mutation  is  re- 
peated every  year. 

If  there  be  imputed  defects  without  compensa- 
tion, I  should  suspect  that  they  w^ere  defects  only 
in  appearance.  Thus,  the  body  of  the  sloth  has 
often  been  reproached  for  the  slowness  of  its  mo- 
tions, which  has  been  attributed  to  an  imperfec- 
tion in  the  formation  of  its  limbs.  But  it  ought 
to  be  observed,  that  it  is  this  slowness  which  alone 
suspends  the  voracity  of  the  animal.  He  fasts  dur- 
ing his  migration  from  one  tree  to  another ;  and 
this  fast  may  be  necessary  for  the  relief  of  his  over- 
charged vessels,  as  well  as  to  allow  time  for  the 
concoction  of  the  mass  of  coarse  and  hard  food  which 
he  has  taken  into  his  stomach.  The  tardiness  of 
his  pace  seems  to  have  reference  to  the  capacity  of 
his  organs,  and  to  his  propensities  with  respect  to 
food  ;  i.  e.  is  calculated  to  counteract  the  effects  of 
repletion. 

Or  there  may  be  cases  in  which  a  defect  is  arti- 
ficial, and  compensated  by  the  very  cause  which 
produces  it.  Thus  the  sheep^  in  the  domesticated 
state  in  which  we  see  it,  is  destitute  of  the  ordinary 
means  of  defence  or  escape  ;  is  incapable  either  of 
resistance  or  flight.  But  this  is  not  so  with  the 
wild  animal.  The  natural  sheep  is  swift  and  active ; 
and  if  it  lose  these  qualities  when  it  comes  under  the 
subjection  of  man,  the  loss  is  compensated  by  his 

protection.     Perhaps  there  is  no  species  of  quad- 

15 


940  COMPENSATICN. 

ruped  whatever,  which  suffers  so  little  as  this  does 
from  the  depredation  of  animals  of  prey. 

For  the  sake  of  making  our  meaning  better  un- 
derstood, we  have  considered  this  business  of  com- 
pensation under  certain  particularities  of  constitu- 
tion, in  which  it  appears  to  be  most  conspicuous. 
This  view  of  the  subject  necessarily  limits  the  in- 
stances to  single  species  of  animals.  But  there 
are  compensations,  perhaps  not  less  certain,  which 
extend  over  large  classes,  and  to  large  portions  of 
living  nature. 

I.  In  quadrupeds,  the  deficiency  of  teeth  is  usu- 
ally compensated  by  the  faculty  of  rumination. 
The  sheep,  deer,  and  ox  tribe,  are  without  fore- 
teeth in  the  upper  jaw.  These  ruminate.  The 
horse  and  ass  are  furnished  with  teeth  in  the  upper 
jaw,  and  do  not  ruminate.  In  the  former  class, 
the  grass  and  hay  descend  into  the  stomach  nearly 
in  the  state  in  which  they  are  cropped  from  the  pas- 
ture, or  gathered  from  the  bundle.  In  the  stomach, 
they  are  softened  by  the  gastric  juice,  which  in  these 
animals  is  unusually  copious.  Thus  softened  and 
rendered  tender,  they  are  returned  a  second  time 
to  the  action  of  the  mouth,  where  the  grinding 
teeth  complete  at  their  leisure  the  trituration  which 
is  necessary,  but  which  was  before  left  imperfect. 
I  say,  the  trituration  which  is  necessary  ;  for  it  ap- 
pears from  experiments,  that  the  gastric  fluid  of 
sheep,  for  example,  has  no  effect  in  digesting  plants, 
unless  they  have  been  previously  masticated  ;  that 
it  only  produces  a  slight  maceration,  nearly  as  com- 
mon water  would  do  in  a  like  degree  of  heat ;  but 


COMPENSATION.  241 

that  when  once  vegetables  are  reduced  to  pieces 
by  mastication,  the  fluid  then  exerts  upon  them  its 
specific  operation.  Its  first  effect  is  to  soften  them, 
and  to  destroy  their  natural  consistency;  it  then 
goes  on  to  dissolve  them ;  not  sparing  even  the 
toughest  parts,  such  as  the  nerves  of  the  leaves.  * 

I  think  it  very  probable,  that  the  gratification 
also  of  the  animal  is  renewed  and  prolonged  by 
this  faculty.  Sheep,  deef,  and  ox,en,  appear  to  be 
in  a  state  of  enjoyment  whilst  they  are  chewing  the 
cud.  It  is  then,  perhaps,  that  they  best  relish  their 
food. 

II.  In  birds,  the  compensation  is  still  more  strik- j 
ing.  They  have  no  teeth  at  all.  What  have  they^' 
then  to  make  up  for  this  severe  want  ?  I  speak  of 
granivorous  and  herbivorous  birds ;  such  as  com- 
mon fowls,  turkeys,  ducks,  geese,  pigeons,  &c.  for 
it  is  concerning  these  alone  that  the  question  need 
be  asked.  All  these  are  furnished  with  a  peculiar  • 
and  most  powerful  muscle,  called  the  gizzard;  the 
inner  coat  of  which  is  fitted  up  with  rough  plaits, 
which,  by  a  strong  friction  against  one  another, 
break  and  grind  the  hard  aliment  as  effectually,  and 
by  the  same  mechanical  action,  as  a  coffee-mill 
would  do.  It  has  been  proved  by  the  most  correct 
experiments,  that  the  gastric  juice  of  these  birds 
will  not  operate  upon  the  entire  grain ;  not  even 
when  softened  by  water  or  macerated  in  the  crop. 
Therefore,  without  a  grinding  machine  within  its 
body,    without  the  trituration  of  the    gizzard,  a 

*   Spall.  Dis.  iii.  sect.  cxl. 
Q 


242  COMPENSATION. 

chicken  would  have  starved  upon  a  heap  of  corn. 
Yet  why  should  a  bill  and  a  gizzard  go  together  ? 
Why  should  a  gizzard  never  be  found  where  there 
are  teeth  ? 

Nor  does  the  gizzard  belong  to  birds  as  such. 
A  gizzard  is  not  found  in  birds  of  prey.  Their  food 
requires  not  to  be  ground  down  in  a  mill.  The 
compensatory  contrivance  goes  no  farther  than  the 
necessity.  In  both  classes  of  birds,  however,  the 
digestive  organ  within  the  body  bears  a  strict  and 
mechanical  relation  to  the  external  instruments  for 
procuring  food.  The  soft  membranous  stomach 
accompanies  a  hooked,  notched  beak  ;  short,  mus- 
cular legs  ;  strong,  sharp,  crooked  talons  :  the  car- 
tilaginous stomach  attends  that  conformation  of  bill 
and  toes,  which  restrains  the  bird  to  the  picking  of 
seeds,  or  the  cropping  of  plants. 

III.  But  to  proceed  with  our  compensations. — A 
'  very  numerous  and  comprehensive  tribe  of  terres- 
trial animals  are  entirely  without  feet  j  yet  locomo- 
tive ;  and  in  a  very  considerable  degree  swift  in 
their  motion.  How  is  the  want  of  feet  compensat- 
ed ?  It  is  done  by  the  disposition  of  the  muscles 
and  fibres  of  the  trunk.  In  consequence  of  the  just 
collocation,  and  by  means  of  the  joint  action  of 
longitudinal  and  annular  fibres,  that  is  to  say,  of 
strings  and  rings,  the  body  and  train  of  reptiles  are 
capable  of  being  reciprocally  shortened  and  length- 
ened, drawn  up  and  stretched  out.  The  result  of 
this  action  is  a  progressive,  and,  in  some  cases,  a 
rapid  movement  of  the  whole  body,  in  any  direction 
to  which  the  will  of  the  animal  determines  it.    The 


COMPENSATION.  ^43 

meanest  creature  is  a  collection  of  wonders.  The 
play  of  the  rings  in  an  eartli-'uoorm^  as  it  crawls  ;  the 
undulatory  motion  propagated  along  the  body  ;  the 
beards  or  prickles  with  which  the  annuli  are  armed, 
and  which  the  animal  can  either  shut  up  close  to 
its  body,  or  let  out  to  lay  hold  of  the  roughness  of 
the  surface  upon  which  it  creeps  ;  and  the  power 
arising  from  all  these,  of  changing  its  place  and  po- 
sition, affords,  when  compared  with  the  provisions 
for  motion  in  other  animals,  proofs  of  new  and  ap- 
propriate mechanism.  Suppose  that  we  had  never 
seen  an  animal  move  upon  the  ground  without  feet, 
and  that  the  problem  was  ;  Muscular  action,  i.  e. 
reciprocal  contraction  and  relaxation  being  given, 
to  describe  how  such  an  animal  might  be  construct- 
ed, capable  of  voluntarily  changing  place.  Some- 
thing, perhaps,  like  the  organization  of  reptiles 
might  have  been  hit  upon  by  the  ingenuity  of  an 
artist ;  or  might  have  been  exhibited  in  an  automa- 
ton, by  the  combination  of  springs,  spiral  wires,  and 
ringlets  ;  but  to  the  solution  of  the  problem  would 
not  be  denied,  surely,  the  praise  of  invention  and  of 
successful  thought :  least  of  all  could  it  ever  be 
questioned,  whether  intelligence  had  been  employed 
about  it,  or  not. 


244  THE  RELATION  OF  ANIMATED  BODIES 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

THE    RELATION    OF    ANIMATED    BODIES  TO  INANIMATFi 

NATURE. 

We  have  already  considered  relatiorij  and  under  dif- 
ferent views  ;  but  it  was  the  relation  of  parts  to 
parts,  of  the  parts  of  an  animal  to  other  parts  of  the 
same  animal,  or  of  another  individual  of  the  same 
species. 

But  the  bodies  of  animals  hold,  in  their  consti- 
tution and  properties,  a  close  and  important  rela- 
tion to  natures  altogether  external  to  their  own  ;  to 
inanimate  substances,  and  to  the  specific  qualities 
of  these  ;  e.  g.  they  hold  a  strict  relation  to  the  ele- 
ments by  which  they  are  surrounded. 

I.  Can  it  be  doubted,  whether  the  wings  of  birds 
bear  a  relation  to  air,  and  the  Ji7is  ofjish  to  water  ? 
They  are  instruments  of  motion,  severally  suited  to 
the  properties  of  the  medium  in  which  the  motion 
is  to  be  performed  :  which  properties  are  different. 
Was  not  this  difference  contemplated,  when  the 
instruments  were  differently  constituted  ? 
(  II.  The  structure  of  the  animal  ear  depends  for 
its  use,  not  simply  upon  being  surrounded  by  a 
fluid,  but  upon  the  specific  nature  of  that  fluid. 
Every  fluid  would  not  serve  :  its  particles  must  re- 


TO  INANIMATE  NATURE.  245 

pel  one  another  ;  it  must  form  an  elastic  medium  : 
for  it  is  by  the  successive  pulses  of  such  a  medium, 
that  the  undulations  excited  by  the  surrounding 
body  are  carried  to  the  organ  ;  that  a  communica- 
tion is  formed  between  the  object  and  the  sense ; 
which  must  be  done  before  the  internal  machinery  ^ 
of  the  ear,  subtile  as  it  is,  can  act  at  all.  i 

III.  The  organs  of  voice  and  respiration  are,  no 
less  than  the  ear,  indebted  for  the  success  of  their 
operation  to  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  fluid  in 
which  the  animal  is  immersed.  They  therefore,  as 
well  as  the  ear,  are  constituted  upon  the  supposi- 
tion of  such  a  fluid,  L  e.  of  a  fluid  with  such  par- 
ticular properties,  being  always  present.  Change 
the  properties  of  the  fluid,  and  the  organ  cannot 
act ;  change  the  organ,  and  the  properties  of  the 
fluid  would  be  lost.  The  structure  therefore  of  ouf^ 
organs,  and  the  properties  of  our  atmosphere,  are/ 
made  for  one  another.  Nor  does  it  alter  the  rela- 
tion, whether  you  allege  the  organ  to  be  made  for 
the  element  (which  seems  the  most  natural  way  of 
considering  it),  or  the  element  as  prepared  for  the 
organ. 

IV.  But  there  is  another  fluid  with  which  we  have 
to  do  ;  with  properties  of  its  own  ;  with  laws  of  act- 
ing, and  of  being  acted  upon,  totally  different  from 
those  of  air  and  water  :  and  that  is  light.  To  this 
new,  this  singular  element ;  to  qualities  perfectly 
peculiar,  perfectly  distinct  and  remote  from  the 
qualities  of  any  other  substance  with  which  we  are 
acquainted,  an  organ  is  adapted,  an  instrument  is 
correctly  adjusted,  not  less  peculiar  amongst  the 


246  THE  RELATION  OF  ANIMATED  BODIES 

parts  of  the  body,  not  less  singular  in  its  form,  and 
in  the  substance  of  which  it  is  composed,  not  less' 
remote  from  the  materials,  the  model,  and  the  ana- 
logy of  any  other  part  of  the  animal  frame,  than  the 
element  to  which  it  relates  is  specific  amidst  the 
substances  with  which  we  converse.  If  this  does 
not  prove  appropriation,  I  desire  to  know  what 
would  prove  it. 

Yet  the  element  of  light  and  the  organ  of  vision, 
however  related  in  their  office  and  use,  have  no  con- 
nexion whatever  in  their  original.  The  action  of 
rays  of  light  upon  the  surfaces  of  animals,  has  no 
tendency  to  breed  eyes  in  their  heads.  The  sun 
might  shine  for  ever  upon  living  bodies,  without  the 
smallest  approach  towards  producing  the  sense  of 
sight.  On  the  other  hand  also,  the  animal  eye  does 
not  generate  or  emit  light. 

V.  Throughout  the  universe  there  is  a  wonderful 
proportioning  of  one  thing  to  another.  The  size  of 
animals,  of  the  human  animal  especially,  when  con- 
sidered with  respect  to  other  animals,  or  to  the  plants 
which  grow  around  him,  is  such,  as  a  regard  to  his 
conveniency  would  have  pointed  out.  A  giant  or  a 
pigmy  could  not  have  milked  goats,  reaped  corn, 
or  mowed  grass  ;  we  may  add,  could  not  have  rode 
a  horse,  trained  a  vine,  shorn  a  sheep,  with  the 
same  bodily  ease  as  we  do,  if  at  all.  A  pigmy 
would  have  been  lost  amongst  rushes,  or  carried  off 
by  birds  of  prey. 

It  may  be  mentioned  likewise,  that  the  model 
and  the  materials  of  the  human  body  being  what 
they  are,  a  much  greater  bulk  would  have  broken 


TO  INANIMATE  NATURE.  247 

down  by  its  own  weight.  The  persons  of  men  who 
much  exceed  the  ordinary  stature,'  betray  this  ten- 
dency. 

VI.  Again  (and  which  inckides  a  vast  variety  of 
particulars,  and  those  of  the  greatest  importance)  ; 
how  close  is  the  suitableness  of  the  earth  and  sea  to 
their  several  inhabitants  ;  and  of  these  inhabitants, 
to  the  places  of  their  appointed  residence ! 

Take  the  earth  as  it  is ;  and  consider  the  corres- 
pondency of  the  powers  of  its  inhabitants  with  the 
properties  and  condition  of  the  soil  which  they 
tread.  Take  the  inhabitants  as  they  are  ;  and  con- 
sider the  substances  which  the  earth  yields  for  their 
use.  They  can  scratch  its  surface,  and  its  surface 
supplies  all  which  they  want.  This  is  the  length 
of  their  faculties ;  and  such  is  the  constitution  of 
the  globe,  and  their  own,  that  this  is  sujfficient  for 
all  their  occasions. 

When  we  pass  from  the  earth  to  the  sea^  from 
land  to  water,  we  pass  through  a  great  change  ;  but 
an  adequate  change  accompanies  us,  of  animal 
forms  and  functions,  of  animal  capacities  and  wants ; 
so  that  correspondency  remains.  The  earth  in  its 
nature  is  very  different  from  the  sea,  and  the  sea 
from  the  earth ;  but  one  accords  with  its  inhabi- 
tants as  exactly  as  the  other. 

VII.  The  last  relation  of  this  kind  which  I  shall 
mention,  is  that  of  sleep  to  night ;  and  it  appears  to 
me  to  be  a  relation  which  was  expressly  intended. 
Two  points  are  manifest:  first,  that  the  animal 
frame  requires  sleep ;  secondly,  that  night  brings 
with  it  a  silence,  and  a  cessation  of  activity,  which 


24.8  THE  RELATION  OF  ANIMATED  BODIES 

allows  of  sleep  being  taken  without  interruption, 
and  without  loss.  Animal  existence  is  made  up  of 
action  and  slumber ;  nature  has  provided  a  season 
for  each.  An  animal  which  stood  not  in  need  of  rest, 
would  always  live  in  day-light.  An  animal  which, 
though  made  for  action,  and  delighting  in  action, 
must  have  its  strength  repaired  by  sleep,  meets  by 
its  constitution  the  returns  of  day  and  night.  In 
the  human  species,  for  instance,  were  the  bustle,  the 
labour,  the  motion  of  life,  upheld  by  the  constant 
presence  of  light,  sleep  could  not  be  enjoyed  with- 
out being  disturbed  by  noise,  and  without  expense 
of  that  time  which  the  eagerness  of  private  interest 
would  not  contentedly  resign.  It  is  happy  therefore 
for  this  part  of  the  creation,  I  mean  that  it  is  con- 
formable to  the  fram^e  and  wants  of  their  constitu- 
tion, that  nature,  by  the  very  disposition  of  her  ele- 
ments, has  commanded,  as  it  were,  and  imposed  up- 
on them,  at  moderate  intervals,  a  general  intermis- 
sion of  their  toils,  their  occupations,  and  pursuits. 

But  it  is  not  for  man,  either  solely  or  principally, 
that  night  is  made.  Inferior,  but  less  perverted 
natures,  taste  its  solace,  and  expect  its  return  with 
greater  exactness  and  advantage  than  he  does.  I 
have  often  observed,  and  never  observed  but  to  ad- 
mire, the  satisfaction,  no  less  than  the  regularity, 
with  which  the  greatest  part  of  the  irrational  world 
yield  to  this  soft  necessity,  this  grateful  vicissitude  : 
how  comfortably  the  birds  of  the  air,  for  example, 
address  themselves  to  the  repose  of  the  evening  ; 
with  what  alertness  they  resume  the  activity  of  the 
day! 


TO  INANIMATE  NATURE.  249 

Nor  does  it  disturb  our  argument  to  confess,  that 
certain  species  of  animals  are  in  motion  during  the 
night,  and  at  rest  in  the  day.  With  respect  even  to 
them,  it  is  still  true,  that  there  is  a  change  of  con- 
dition in  the  animal,  and  an  external  change  corres- 
ponding with  it.  There  is  still  the  relation,  though 
inverted.  The  fact  is,  that  the  repose  of  other  ani- 
mals sets  these  at  liberty,  and  invites  them  to  their 
food  or  their  sport. 

If  the  relation  of  sleep  to  nighty  and,  in  some  in- 
stances, its  converse,  be  real,  we  cannot  reflect  with- 
out amazement  upon  the  extent  to  which  it  carries 
us.  Day  and  night  are  things  close  to  us ;  the 
change  applies  immediately  to  our  sensations ;  of  all 
the  phenomena  of  nature,  it  is  the  most  obvious  and 
the  most  familiar  to  our  experience ;  but  in  its  cause, 
it  belongs  to  the  great  motions  which  are  passing  in 
the  heavens.  Whilst  the  earth  glides  round,  her 
axle,  she  ministers  to  the  alternate  necessities  of  the 
animals  dwelling  upon  her  surface,  at  the  same  time 
that  she  obeys  the  influence  of  those  attractions 
which  regulate  the  order  of  many  thousand  worlds. 
The  relation  therefore  of  sleep  to  night,  is  the  rela- 
tion  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  to  the  rotation 
of  their  globe  ;  probably  it  is  more  ;  it  is  a  relation 
to  the  system,  of  which  that  globe  is  a  part ;  and 
still  farther,  to  the  congregation  of  systems,  of  which 
theirs  is  only  one.  If  this  account  be  true,  it  con- 
nects the  meanest  individual  with  the  universe  itself; 
a  chicken  roosting  upon  its  perch,  with  the  spheres 
revolving  in  the  Armament. 


250  INSTINCTS. 

VIII.  But  if  any  one  object  to  our  representation, 
that  the  succession  of  day  and  night,  or  the  rotation 
of  the  earth  upon  which  it  depends,  is  not  resolvable 
into  central  attraction,  we  will  refer  him  to  that 
which  certainly  is, — to  the  change  of  the  seasons. 
Now  the  constitution  of  animals  susceptible  of  tor- 
por, bears  a  relation  to  winter,  similar  to  that  which 
sleep  bears  to  night.  Against  not  only  the  cold, 
but  the  want  of  food  which  the  approach  of  winter 
induces,  the  Preserver  of  the  world  has  provided  in 
many  animals  by  migration,  in  many  others  by  tor- 
por. As  one  example  out  of  a  thousand ;  the  bat, 
if  it  did  not  sleep  through  the  winter,  must  have 
starved,  as  the  moths  and  jflying  insects  upon  which 
it  feeds  disappear.  But  the  transition  from  summer 
to  winter  carries  us  into  the  very  midst  of  physical 
astronomy ;  that  is  to  say,  into  the  midst  of  those 
laws  which  govern  the  solar  system  at  least,  and 
probably  all  the  heavenly  bodies. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


INSTINCTS. 


The  order  may  not  be  very  obvious,  by  which  I 
place  instincts  next  to  relations.     But  I  consider 


INSTINCTS.  251 

them  as  a  species  of  relation.  They  contribute, 
along  with  the  animal  organization,  to  a  joint  effect, 
in  which  view  they  are  related  to  that  organization. 
In  many  cases,  they  refer  from  one  animal  to  ano- 
ther animal;  and,  when  this  is  the  case,  become 
strictly  relations  in  a  second  point  of  view. 

An  INSTINCT  is  a  propensity  prior  to  experience, 
and  independent  of  instruction.  We  contend,  thaf\ 
it  is  by  instinct  that  the  sexes  of  animals  seek  each 
other ;  that  animals  cherish  their  offspring ;  that  the 
young  quadruped  is  directed  to  the  teat  of  its  dam  ; 
that  birds  build  their  nests,  and  brood  with  so  much 
patience  upon  their  eggs  ;  that  insects  which  do  not 
sit  upon  their  eggs,  deposit  them  in  those  particu- 
lar situations,  in  which  the  young,  when  hatched, 
find  their  appropriate  food ;  that  it  is  instinct  which 
carries  the  salmon,  and  some  other  fish,  out  of  the 
sea  into  rivers,  for  the  purpose  of  shedding  their 
spawn  in  fresh  water. 

We  may  select  out  of  this  catalogue  the  incuba- 
tion  of  eggs.  I  entertain  no  doubt,  but  that  a 
couple  of  sparrows  hatched  in  an  oven,  and  kept 
separate  from  the  rest  of  their  species,  would  pro- 
ceed as  other  sparrows  do,  in  every  office  which 
related  to  the  production  and  preservation  of  their 
brood.  Assuming  this  fact,  the  thing  is  inexplicable 
upon  any  other  hypothesis  than  that  of  an  instinct 
impressed  upon  the  constitution  of  the  animal. 
For,  first,  what  should  induce  the  female  bird  to 
prepare  a  nest  before  she  lays  her  eggs?  It  is  in 
vain  to  suppose  her  to  be  possessed  of  the  faculty 
of  reasoning;  for  no  reasoning  will  reach  the  case. 


252  INSTINCTS. 

The  fulness  or  distension  which  she  might  feel  in 
a  particular  part  of  her  body,  from  the  growth  and 
solidity  of  the  egg  within  her,  could  not  possibly 
inform  her,  that  she  was  about  to  produce  some- 
thing, which,  when  produced,  was  to  be  preserved 
and  taken  care  of.  Prior  to  experience,  there  was 
nothing  to  lead  to  this  inference,  or  to  this  suspicion. 
The  analogy  was  all  against  it ;  for,  in  every  other 
instance,  what  issued  from  the  body,  was  cast  out 
and  rejected. 

But,  secondly,  let  us  suppose  the  egg  to  be  pro- 
duced into  day  ;  how  should  birds  know  that  their 
eggs  contain  their  young  ?  There  is  nothing,  either 
in  the  aspect  or  in  the  internal  composition  of  an 
eggj  which  could  lead  even  the  most  daring  imagi- 
nation to  conjecture,  that  it  was  hereafter  to  turn 
out  from  under  its  shell,  a  living,  perfect  bird.  The 
form  of  the  egg  bears  not  the  rudiments  of  a  resem- 
blance to  that  of  the  bird.  Inspecting  its  contents, 
we  find  still  less  reason,  if  possible,  to  look  for  the 
result  which  actually  takes  place.  If  we  should 
go  so  far,  as,  from  the  appearance  of  order  and 
distinction  in  the  disposition  of  the  liquid  substances 
which  we  noticed  in  the  egg,  to  guess  that  it  might 
be  designed  for  the  abode  and  nutriment  of  an  ani- 
mal (which  would  be  a  very  bold  hypothesis),  we 
should  expect  a  tadpole  dabbling  in  the  slime,  much 
rather  than  a  dry,  winged,  feathered  creature;  a  com- 
pound of  parts  and  properties  impossible  to  be  used 
in  a  state  of  confinement  in  the  egg,  and  bearing  no 
conceivable  relation,  either  in  quality  or  material, 
to  any  thing  observed  in  it.     From  the  white  of  an 


INSTINCTS*  253 

egg,  would  any  one  look  for  the  feather  of  a  gold- 
finch ?  or  expect  from  a  shnple  uniform  mucilage^ 
the  most  complicated  of  all  machines,  the  most  di- 
versified of  all  collections  of  substances  ?  Nor  would 
the  process  of  incubation,  for  some  time  at  least, 
lead  us  to  suspect  the  event.  Who  that  saw  red 
streaks  shooting  in  the  fine  membrane  which  divides 
the  white  from  the  yolk,  would  suppose  that  these 
were  about  to  become  bones  and  limbs  ?  Who,  that 
espied  two  discoloured  points  first  making  their 
appearance  in  the  cicatrix,  would  have  had  the 
courage  to  predict,  that  these  points  were  to  grow 
into  the  heart  and  head  of  a  bird  ?  It  is  difficult  to 
strip  the  mind  of  its  experience.  It  is  difficult  to 
resuscitate  surprise,  when  familiarity  has  once  laid 
the  sentiment  asleep.  But  could  we  forget  all  that 
we  know,  and  which  our  sparrows  never  knew, 
about  oviparous  generation ;  could  we  divest  our- 
selves of  every  information,  but  what  we  derived 
from  reasoning  upon  the  appearance  or  quality 
discovered  in  the  objects  presented  to  us,  I  am  con- 
vinced that  Harlequin  coming  out  of  an  egg  upon 
the  stage,  is  not  more  astonishing  to  a  child,  than 
the  hatching  of  a  chicken  both  would  be,  and  ought 
to  be,  to  a  philosopher. 

But  admit  the  sparrow  by  some  means  to  know, 
that  within  that  egg  was  concealed  the  principle 
of  a  future  bird ;  from  what  chymist  was  she  to ' 
learn,  that  warmth  was  necessary  to  bring  it  to  ma- 
turity, or  that  the  degree  of  warmth,  imparted  by 
the  temperature  of  her  own  body,  was  the  degree 
required  ? 


254  INSTINCTS. 

To  suppose,  therefore,  that  the  female  bird  acts 
in  this  process  from  a  sagacity  and  reason  of  her 
own,  is  to  suppose  her  to  arrive  at  conclusions 
which  there  are  no  premises  to  justify.  If  our  spar- 
row, sitting  upon  her  eggs,  expect  young  sparrows 
to  come  out  of  them,  she  forms,  I  will  venture  to 
say,  a  wild  and  extravagant  expectation,  in  opposi- 
tion to  present  appearances,  and  to  probability. 
She  must  have  penetrated  into  the  order  of  nature, 
farther  than  any  faculties  of  ours  will  carry  us  ;  and 
it  hath  been  well  observed,  that  this  deep  sagacity, 
if  it  be  sagacity,  subsists  in  conjunction  with  great 
stupidity,  even  in  relation  to  the  same  subject. 
"  A  chymical  operation,''  says  Addison,  "  could  not 
be  followed  with  greater  art  or  diligence,  than  is 
seen  in  hatching  a  chicken  ;  yet  is  the  process  car- 
ried on  without  the  least  glimmering  of  thought  or 
common  sense.  The  hen  will  mistake  a  piece  of 
chalk  for  an  egg ;  is  insensible  of  the  increase  or 
diminution  of  their  number ;  does  not  distinguish 
between  her  own  and  those  of  another  species ;  is 
frightened  when  her  supposititious  breed  of  duck- 
lings take  the  water.'' 

But  it  will  be  said,  that  what  reason  could  not 
do  for  the  bird,  observation,  or  instruction,  or  tradi- 
tion, might.  Now,  if  it  be  true,  that  a  couple  of 
sparrows,  brought  up  from  the  first  in  a  state  of 
separation  from  all  other  birds,  would  build  their 
nest,  and  brood  upon  their  eggs,  then  there  is  an 
end  of  this  solution.  What  can  be  the  traditionary 
knowledge  of  a  chicken  hatched  in  an  oven  ? 


INSTINCTS*  ^55 

Of  young  birds  taken  in  their  nests,  a  few  species 
breed  when  kept  in  cages ;  and  they  which  do  so, 
build  their  nests  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
the  wild  state,  and  sit  upon  their  eggs.  This  is  suf- 
ficient to  prove  an  instinct,  without  having  recourse 
to  experiments  upon  birds  hatched  by  artificial  heat, 
and  deprived  from  their  birth  of  all  communication 
with  their  species ;  for  we  can  hardly  bring  our- 
selves  to  believe,  that  the  parent  bird  informed  her 
unfledged  pupil  of  the  history  of  her  gestation,  her 
timely  preparation  of  her  nest,  her  exclusion  of  the 
eggs,  her  long  incubation,  and  of  the  joyful  eruption 
at  last  of  her  expected  oflfspring  ;  all  which  the 
bird  in  the  cage  must  have  learnt  in  her  infancy, 
if  we  resolve  her  conduct  into  institution. 

Unless  we  will  rather  suppose,  that  she  remembers 
her  own  escape  from  the  egg ;  had  attentively  ob- 
served the  conformation  of  the  nest  in  which  she 
was  nurtured ;  and  had  treasured  up  her  remarks 
for  future  imitation  :  which  is  not  only  extremely 
improbable,  (for  who,  that  sees  a  brood  of  callow 
birds  in  their  nest,  can  believe  that  they  are  taking 
a  plan  of  their  habitation  ?)  but  leaves  unaccounted 
for,  one  principal  part  of  the  difficulty,  "  the  pre- 
paration of  the  nest  before  the  laying  of  the  egg/' 
This  she  could  not  gain  from  observation  in  her 
infancy. 

It  is  remarkable  also,  that  the  hen  sits  upon  eggs 
which  she  has  laid  without  any  communication  with 
the  male,  and  which  are  therefore  necessarily  un- 
fruitful ;  that  secret  she  is  not  let  into.  Yet,  if  in- 
cubation had  been  a  subject  of  instruction  or  of 


S5o  INSTINCTS. 

tradition,  it  should  seem  that  this  distinction  would 
have  formed  part  of  the  lesson  :  whereas  the  in- 
stinct of  nature  is  calculated  for  a  state  of  nature  ; 
the  exception  here  alluded  to  taking  place  chiefly, 
if  not  solely,  amongst  domesticated  fowls,  in  which 
nature  is  forced  out  of  her  course. 

There  is  another  case  of  oviparous  economy, 
which  is  still  less  likely  to  be  the  effect  of  education 
than  it  is  even  in  birds,  namely  that  of  moths  and 
butterflieSy  which  deposit  their  eggs  in  the  precise 
substance,  that  of  a  cabbage  for  example,  from 
which,  not  the  butterfly  herself,  but  the  caterpillar 
which  is  to  issue  from  her  eggj  draws  its  appropri- 
ate food.  The  butterfly  cannot  taste  the  cabbage. 
Cabbage  is  no  food  for  her ;  yet  in  the  cabbage,  not 
by  chance,  but  studiously  and  electively,  she  lays 
her  eggs.  There  are,  amongst  many  other  kinds, 
the  willow-caterpillar  and  the  cabbage-caterpillar : 
but  we  never  find  upon  a  willow  the  caterpillar 
which  eats  the  cabbage ;  nor  the  converse.  This 
choice,  as  appears  to  me,  cannot  in  the  butterfly 
proceed  from  instruction.  She  had  no  teacher  in 
her  caterpillar  state.  She  never  knew  her  parent., 
I  do  not  see,  therefore,  how  knowledge,  acquired 
by  experience,  if  it  ever  were  such,  could  be  trans- 
mitted from  one  generation  to  another.  There  is 
no  opportunity  either  for  instruction  or  imitation. 
The  parent  race  is  gone,  before  the  new  brood  is 
hatched.  And  if  it  be  original  reasoning  in  the 
butterfly,  it  is  profound  reasoning  indeed.  She 
must  remember  her  caterpillar  state,  its  tastes  and 
habits  J  of  which  memory  she  shows  no  signs  what- 


INSTINCTS.  257 

ever.  She  must  conclude  from  analogy  (for  here 
her  recollection  cannot  serve  her),  that  the  little 
round  body  which  drops  from  her  abdomen,  will 
at  a  future  period  produce  a  living  creature,  not 
like  herself,  but  like  the  caterpillar  which  she  re- 
members herself  once  to  have  been.  Under  the 
influence  of  these  reflections,  she  goes  about  to 
make  provision  for  an  order  of  things,  which  she 
concludes  will,  some  time  or  other,  take  place.  And 
it  is  to  be  observed,  that  not  a  few  out  of  many, 
but  that  all  butterflies  argue  thus  j  all  draw  this  con- 
clusion ;  all  act  upon  it. 

But  suppose  the  address,  and  the  selection,  and 
the  plan,  which  we  perceive  in  the  preparations 
which  many  irrational  animals  make  for  their  young, 
to  be  traced  to  some  probable  origin ;  still  there  is 
left  to  be  accounted  for,  that  which  is  the  source 
and  foundation  of  these  phenomena,  that  which 
sets  the  whole  at  work,  the  (rro^yriy  the  parental  affec- 
tion, which  I  contend  to  be  inexplicable  upon  any 
other  hypothesis  than  that  of  instinct. 

For  we  shall  hardly,  I  imagine,  in  brutes,  refer 
their  conduct  towards  their  offspring  to  a  sense  of 
duty,  or  of  decency,  a  care  of  reputation,  a  com- 
pliance with  public  manners,  with  public  laws,  or 
with  rules  of  life  built  upon  a  long  experience  of 
their  utility.  And  all  attempts  to  account  for 
the  parental  affection  from  association,  I  think, 
fail.  With  what  is  it  associated  ?  Most  immediate- 
ly with  the  throes  of  parturition,  that  is,  with  pain, 
and  terror,  and  disease.  The  more  remote,  but  not 
less  strong  association,  that  which  depends  upon 

R 


258  INSTINCTS. 

analogy,  is  ail  against  it.  Every  thing  else  which 
proceeds  from  the  body,  is  cast  away  and  rejected. 
In  birds,  is  it  the  egg  which  the  hen  loves  ?  or  is  it 
the  expectation  which  she  cherishes  of  a  future  pro- 
geny, that  keeps  her  upon  her  nest  ?  What  cause 
has  she  to  expect  delight  from  her  progeny  ?  Can 
any  rational  answer  be  given  to  the  question,  why, 
prior  to  experience,  the  brooding  hen  should  look 
for  pleasure  from  her  chickens  ?  It  does  not,  I  think, 
appear,  that  the  cuckoo  ever  knows  her  young;  yet, 
in  her  way,  she  is  as  careful  in  making  provision 
for  them,  as  any  other  bird.  She  does  not  leave 
her  egg  in  every  hole. 

The  salmon  suffers  no  surmountable  obstacle  to  op- 
pose her  progress  up  the  stream  of  fresh  rivers.  And 
what  does  she  do  there  ?  She  sheds  a  spawn,  which 
she  immediately  quits,  in  order  to  return  to  the  sea ; 
and  this  issue  of  her  body  she  never  afterwards  re- 
cognizes in  any  shape  whatever.  Where  shall  we 
find  a  motive  for  her  efforts  and  her  perseverance  ? 
Shall  we  seek  it  in  argumentation,  or  in  instinct? 
The  violet  crab  of  Jamaica  performs  a  fatiguing 
march  of  some  months'  continuance,  from  the 
mountains  to  the  sea-side.  When  she  reaches  the 
coast,  she  casts  her  spawn  into  the  open  sea ;  and 
sets  out  upon  her  return  home. 

Moths  and  butterflies,  as  hath  already  been  ob- 
served, seek  out  for  their  eggs  those  precise  situa- 
tions and  substances  in  which  the  offspring  cater- 
pillar will  find  its  appropriate  food.  That  dear 
caterpillar  the  parent  butterfly  must  never  see. 
There  are  no  experiments  to  prove  that  she  would 


INSTINCTS.  259 

retain  any  knowledge  of  it,  if  she  did.  How  shall 
we  account  for  her  conduct  ?  I  do  not  mean  for  her 
art  and  judgment  in  selecting  and  securing  a  main- 
tenance for  her  young,  but  for  the  impulse  upon 
which  she  acts.  What  should  induce  her  to  exert 
any  art,  or  judgment,  or  choice,  about  the  matter? 
The  undisclosed  grub,  the  animal  which  she  is  des- 
tined  not  to  know,  can  hardly  be  the  object  of  a 
particular  affection,  if  we  deny  the  influence  of  in- 
stinct. There  is  nothing,  therefore,  left  to  her, 
but  that  of  which  her  nature  seems  incapable,  an 
abstract  anxiety  for  the  general  preservation  of  the 
species  ;  a  kind  of  patriotism  ;  a  solicitude  lest  the 
butterfly  race  should  cease  from  the  creation. 

Lastly ;  the  principle  of  association  will  not  ex- 
plain the  discontinuance  of  the  affection  when  the 
young  animal  is  grown  up.  Association,  operating 
in  its  usual  way,  would  rather  produce  a  contrary 
effect.  The  object  would  become  more  necessary 
by  habits  of  society :  whereas  birds  and  beasts,  after 
a  certain  time,  banish  their  offspring ;  disown  their 
acquaintance ;  seem  to  have  even  no  knowledge  of 
the  objects  which  so  lately  engrossed  the  attention 
of  their  minds,  and  occupied  the  industry  and 
labour  of  their  bodies.  This  change,  in  different 
animals,  takes  place  at  different  distances  of  time 
from  the  birth ;  but  the  time  always  corresponds 
with  the  ability  of  the  young  animal  to  maintain 
itself;  never  anticipates  it.  In  the  sparrow  tribe, 
when  it  is  perceived  that  the  young  brood  can  fly 
and  shift  for  themselves,  then  the  parents  forsake 
them  for  ever ;  and  though  they  continue  to  live 


260  INSTINCTS. 

together,  pay  them  no  more  attention  than  they 
do  to  other  birds  in  the  same  flock.*  I  beheve  the 
same  thing  is  true  of  all  gregarious  quadrupeds. 

In  this  part  of  the  case,  the  variety  of  resources, 
expedients,  and  materials,  which  animals  of  the  same 
species  are  said  to  have  recourse  to,  under  different 
circumstances,  and  when  differently  supplied,  makes 
nothing  against  the  doctrine  of  instincts.  The  thing 
which  we  want  to  account  for,  is  the  propensity. 
The  propensity  being  there,  it  is  probable  enough 
that  it  may  put  the  animal  upon  different  actions, 
according  to  different  exigencies.  And  this  adap- 
tation of  resources  may  look  like  the  effect  of  art 
and  consideration,  rather  than  of  instinct ;  but  still 
the  propensity  is  instinctive.  For  instance,  sup- 
pose what  is  related  of  the  woodpecker  to  be  true, 
that,  in  Europe,  she  deposits  her  eggs  in  cavities, 
which  she  scoops  out  in  the  trunks  of  soft  or  decayed 
trees,  and  in  which  cavities  the  eggs  lie  concealed 
from  the  eye,  and  in  some  sort  safe  from  the  hand 
of  man  ;  but  that,  in  the  forests  of  Guinea  and  the 
Brazils,  which  man  seldom  frequents,  the  same 
bird  bangs  her  nest  to  the  twigs  of  tall  trees  ;  there- 
by placing  them  out  of  the  reach  of  monkeys  and 
snakes ;  u  e.  that  in  each  situation  she  prepares 
against  the  danger  which  she  has  most  occasion  to 
apprehend)  suppose,  I  say,  this  to  be  true,  and  to 
be  alleged,  on  the  part  of  the  bird  that  builds  these 
nests,  as  evidence  of  a  reasoning  and  distinguishing 
precaution,  still  the  question  returns,  whence  the 
propensity  to  build  at  all  ? 

♦   Goldsmith's  Natural  History,  vol.  iv.  p.  244. 


INSTINCTS.  261 

Nor  does  parental  affection  accompany  generation 
by  any  universal  law  of  animal  organization,  if  such 
a  thing  were  intelligible.  Some  animals  cherish  their 
progeny  with  the  most  ardent  fondness,  and  the 
most  assiduous  attention ;  others  entirely  neglect 
them :  and  this  distinction  always  meets  the  con- 
stitution of  the  young  animal,  with  respect  to  its 
wants  and  capacities.  In  many,  the  parental  care 
extends  to  the  young  animal ;  in  others,  as  in  all 
oviparous  fish,  it  is  confined  to  the  egg,  and  even, 
as  to  that,  to  the  disposal  of  it  in  its  proper  element. 
Also,  as  there  is  generation  without  parental  affec- 
tion, so  is  there  parental  instinct,  or  what  exactly 
resembles  it,  without  generation.  In  the  bee  tribe, 
the  grub  is  nurtured  neither  by  the  father  nor  the 
mother,  but  by  the  neutral  bee.  Probably  the  case 
is  the  same  with  ants. 

I  am  not  ignorant  of  the  theory  which  resolves 
instinct  into  sensation  ;  which  asserts,  that  what 
appears  to  have  a  view  and  relation  to  the  future, 
is  the  result  only  of  the  present  disposition  of  the 
animaPs  body,  and  of  pleasure  or  pain  experienced. 
at  the  tifue.  Thus  the  incubation  of  eggs  is  ac-' 
counted  for  by  the  pleasure  which  the  bird  is  sup- 
posed to  receive  from  the  pressure  of  the  smooth 
convex  surface  of  the  shells  against  the  abdomen, 
or  by  the  relief  which  the  mild  temperature  of 
the  egg  may  afford  to  the  heat  of  the  lower  part 
of  the  body,  which  is  observed  at  this  time  to  be 
increased  beyond  its  usual  state.  This  present 
gratification  is  the  only  motive  with  the  hen  for  sit- 
ting upon  her  nest ;  the  hatching  of  the  chickens 


262  INSTINCTS. 

is,  with  respect  to  her,  an  accidental  consequence. 
The  affection  of  viviparous  animals  for  their  young 
is,  in  like  manner,  solved  by  the  relief,  and  perhaps 
the  pleasure,  which  they  receive  from  giving  suck. 
The  young  animal's  seeking,  in  so  many  instances, 
the  teat  of  its  dam,  is  explained  from  its  sense  of 
smell,  which  is  attracted  by  the  odour  of  milk. 
The  salmon's  urging  its  way  up  the  stream  of  fresh 
water  rivers,  is  attributed  to  some  gratification  or 
refreshment,  which,  in  this  particular  state  of  the 
fish's  body,  she  receives  from  the  change  of  ele- 
ment. Now  of  this  theory  it  may  be  said, 
/  First,  that  of  the  cases  which  require  solution, 
there  are  few  to  which  it  can  be  applied  with  tole- 
rable probability ;  that  there  are  none  to  which  it 
can  be  applied  without  strong  objections,  furnished 
by  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  The  attention 
of  the  cow  to  its  calf,  and  of  the  ewe  to  its  lamb, 
appear  to  be  prior  to  their  sucking.  The  attrac- 
tion of  the  calf  or  lamb  to  the  teat  of  the  dam, 
is  not  explained  by  simply  referring  it  to  the 
sense  of  smell.  What  made  the  scent  of  milk  so 
agreeable  to  the  lamb,  that  it  should  follow  it  up 
with  its  nose,  or  seek  with  its  mouth  the  place 
I  from  which  it  proceeded  ?  No  observation,  no  ex- 
perience, no  argument  could  teach  the  new  drop- 
ped animal,  that  the  substance  from  which  the 
scent  issued  was  the  material  of  its  food.  It  had 
never  tasted  milk  before  its  birth.  None  of  the 
animals,  which  are  not  designed  for  that  nourish- 
ment,  ever  offer  to  suck,  or  to  seek  out  any  such 
food.     What  is  the  conclusion,  but  that  the  suges- 


INSTINCTS,  263 

cent  parts  of  animals  are  fitted  for  their  use,  and 
the  knowledge  of  that  use  put  into  them  ? 

We  assert,  secondly,  that,  even  as  to  the  cases 
in  which  the  hypothesis  has  the  fairest  claim  to 
consideration,  it  does  not  at  all  lessen  the  force 
of  the  argument  for  intention  and  design.  The^l 
doctrine  of  instincts  is  that  of  appetencies,  super- 
added to  the  constitution  of  an  animal,  for  the  effec- 
tuating of  a  purpose  beneficial  to  the  species.  The 
above  stated  solution  would  derive  these  appetencies 
from  organization  ;  but  then  this  organization  is  not 
less  specifically,  not  less  precisely,  and,  therefore, 
not  less  evidently  adapted  to  the  same  ends,  than 
the  appetencies  themselves  would  be  upon  the 
old  hypothesis.  In  this  way  of  considering  the 
subject,  sensation  supplies  the  place  of  foresight : 
but  this  is  the  effect  of  contrivance  on  the  part 
of  the  Creator.  Let  it  be  allowed,  for  example,! 
that  the  hen  is  induced  to  brood  upon  her  eggs  by 
the  enjoyment  or  relief  which,  in  the  heated  state 
of  her  abdomen,  she  experiences  from  the  pres- 
sure of  round  smooth  surfaces,  or  from  the  applica- 
tion of  a  temperate  warmth :  How  comes  this  extra- 
ordinary heat  or  itching,  or  call  it  what  you  will, 
which  you  suppose  to  be  the  cause  of  the  bird's  in- 
clination, to  be  felt,  just  at  the  time  when  the  inclin- 
ation itself  is  wanted ;  when  it  tallies  so  exactly  with 
the  internal  constitution  of  the  egg^  and  with  the  help 
which  that  constitution  requires  in  order  to  bring 
it  to  maturity  ?  In  my  opinion,  this  solution,  if  it 
be  accepted  as  to  the  fact,  ought  to  increase,  rather 
than  otherwise,  our  admiration  of  the  contrivance. 


264  ^,  INSTINCTS. 

A  gardener  lighting  up  his  stoves,  just  when  he 
wants  to  force  his  fruit,  and  when  his  trees  require 
the  heat,  gives  not  a  more  certain  evidence  of  de- 
sign. So  again ;  when  a  male  and  female  spar- 
row come  together,  they  do  not  meet  to  con- 
fer upon  the  expediency  of  perpetuating  their 
species.  As  an  abstract  proposition,  they  care  not 
the  value  of  a  barley-corn,  whether  the  species  be 
perpetuated  or  not :  they  follow  their  sensations ; 
and  all  those  consequences  ensue,  which  the  wisest 
counsels  could  have  dictated,  which  the  most  soli- 
citous care  of  futurity,  which  the  most  anxious  con- 
cern for  the  sparrow  world  could  have  produced. 
But  how  do  these  consequences  ensue  ?  The  sen- 
sations, and  the  constitution  upon  which  they  de- 
pend, are  as  manifestly  directed  to  the  purpose 
which  we  see  fulfilled  by  them ;  and  the  train  of 
intermediate  effects,  as  manifestly  laid  and  planned 
with  a  view  to  that  purpose :  that  is  to  say,  design 
is  as  completely  evinced  by  the  phenomena,  as  it 
would  be,  even  if  we  suppose  the  operations  to  be- 
gin, or  to  be  carried  on,  from  what  some  will  allow 
to  be  alone  properly  called  instincts,  that  is,  from 
desires  directed  to  a  future  end,  and  having  no 
accomplishment  or  gratification  distinct  from  the 
attainment  of  that  end. 

In  a  word ;  I  should  say  to  the  patrons  of  this 
opinion.  Be  it  so :  be  it,  that  those  actions  of  ani- 
mals which  we  refer  to  instinct,  are  not  gone  about 
with  any  view  to  their  consequences,  but  that  they 
are  attended  in  the  animal  with  a  present  gratifica- 
tion, and  are  pursued  for  the  sake  of  that  gratifica- 


INSTINCTS.  Q65 

tion  alone ;  what  does  all  this  prove,  but  that  the 
prospectiofij  which  must  be  somewhere,  is  hot  in 
the  animal,  but  in  the  Creator  ?  ,^J 

In  treating  of  the  parental  affection  in  brutes, 
our  business  lies  rather  with  the  origin  of  the  prin- 
ciple, than  with  the  effects  and  expressions  of  it. 
Writers  recount  these  with  pleasure  and  admiration. 
The  conduct  of  many  kinds  of  animals  towards  their 
young,  has  escaped  no  observer,  no  historian  of 
nature.  *'  How  will  they  caress  them,''  says  Der- 
ham,  "  with  their  affectionate  notes  ;  lull  and  quiet 
them  with  their  tender  parental  voice ;  put  food 
into  their  mouths ;  cherish  and  keep  them  warm  ; 
teach  them  to  pick,  and  eat,  and  gather  food  for 
themselves  ;  and,  in  a  word,  perform  the  part  of  so 
many  nurses,  deputed  by  the  Sovereign  Lord  and 
Preserver  of  the  world,  to  help  such  young  and 
shiftless  creatures  V  Neither  ought  it,  under  this 
head,  to  be  forgotten,  how  much  the  instinct  costs 
the  animal  which  feels  it ;  how  much  a  bird,  for 
example,  gives  up,  by  sitting  upon  her  nest ;  how 
repugnant  it  is  to  her  organization,  her  habits,  and 
her  pleasures.  An  animal,  formed  for  liberty,  sub- 
mits to  confinement  in  the  very  season  when  every 
thing  invites  her  abroad :  what  is  more  ;  an  animal 
delighting  in  motion,  made  for  motion,  all  whose 
motions  are  so  easy  and  so  free,  hardly  a  moment, 
at  other  times,  at  rest,  is,  for  many  hours  of  many 
days  together,  fixed  to  her  nest,  as  close  as  if  her 
limbs  were  tied  down  by  pins  and  wires.  For  my  '• 
part,  I  never  see  a  bird  in  that  situation,  but  I  re- 
cognize an  invisible  hand,  detaining  the  contented 


266  INSTINCTS. 

prisoner  from  her  fields  and  groves,  for  the  purpose, 
as  the  event  proves,  the  most  worthy  of  the  sacrifice, 
the  most  important,  the  most  beneficial. 

But  the  loss  of  liberty  is  not  the  whole  of  what 
the  procreant  bird  suffers.  Harvey  tells  us,  that 
he  has  often  found  the  female  wasted  to  skin  and 
bone  by  sitting  upon  her  eggs. 

One  observation  more,  and  I  will  dismiss  the  sub- 
ject. The  pairing  of  birds,  and  the  non-pairing 
of  beasts,  forms  a  distinction  between  the  two 
classes,  which  shows,  that  the  conjugal  instinct  is 
modified  with  a  reference  to  utility  founded  on  the 
condition  of  the  offspring.  In  quadrupeds,  the 
young  animal  draws  its  nutriment  from  the  body 
of  the  dam.  The  male  parent  neither  does,  nor 
can  contribute  any  part  to  its  sustentation.  In  the 
winged  race,  the  young  bird  is  supplied  by  an  im- 
portation of  food,  to  procure  and  bring  home  which, 
in  a  sufficient  quantity  for  the  demand  of  a  numer- 
ous brood,  requires  the  industry  of  both  parents. 
In  this  difference,  we  see  a  reason  for  the  vagrant 
instinct  of  the  quadruped,  and  for  the  faithful  love 
of  the  feathered  mate. 


OF  INSECTS. 


267 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


OF  INSECTS. 


We  are  not  writing  a  system  of  natural  history ; 
therefore  we  have  not  attended  to  the  classes  into 
which  the  subjects  of  that  science  are  distributed. 
What  we  had  to  observe  concerning  different  spe- 
cies of  animals,  fell  easily,  for  the  most  part,  with- 
in the  divisions  which  the  course  of  our  argument 
led  us  to  adopt.  There  remain,  however,  som.e 
remarks  upon  the  insect  tribe,  which  could  not  pro- 
perly be  introduced  under  any  of  these  heads  ;  and 
which  therefore  we  have  collected  into  a  chapter 
by  themselves. 

The  structure,  and  the  use  of  the  parts  of  in- 
sects, are  less  understood  than  that  of  quadrupeds 
and  birds,  not  only  by  reason  of  their  minuteness, 
or  the  minuteness  of  their  parts  (for  that  minute- 
ness we  can  in  some  measure  follow  with  glasses), 
but  also  by  reason  of  the  remoteness  of  their  man- 
ners and  modes  of  life  from  those  of  larger  ani- 
mals. For  instance:  Insects,  under  all  their  va- 
rieties of  form,  are  endowed  with  antenncey  which 
is  the  name  given  to  those  long  feelers  that  rise 
from  each  side  of  the  head ;  but  to  what  common 
use  or  want  of  the  insect  kind,  a  provision  so  uni- 


268  OF  INSECTS* 

versal  is  subservient,  has  not  yet  been  ascertained : 
and  it  has  not  been  ascertained,  because  it  admits 
not  of  a  clear,  or  very  probable  comparison,  with 
any  organs  which  we  possess  ourselves,  or  with  the 
organs  of  animals  which  resemble  ourselves  in  their 
functions  and  faculties,  or  with  which  we  are  bet- 
ter acquainted  than  we  are  with  insects.  We  want 
a  ground  of  analogy.  This  difficulty  stands  in  our 
way  as  to  some  particulars  in  the  insect  constitution, 
which  we  might  wish  to  be  acquainted  with.  Never- 
theless, there  are  many  contrivances  in  the  bodies 
of  insects,  neither  dubious  in  their  use,  nor  obscure 
in  their  structure,  and  most  properly  mechanical. 
These  form  parts  of  our  argument. 

I.  The  elytra^  or  scaly  wings  of  the  genus  of 
scarabaeus  or  beetle,  furnish  an  example  of  this  kind. 
The  true  wing  of  the  animal  is  a  light  transparent 
membrane,  finer  than  the  finest  gauze,  and  not  un- 
like it.  It  is  also,  when  expanded,  in  proportion  to 
the  size  of  the  animal,  very  large.  In  order  to  pro- 
tect this  delicate  structure,  and  perhaps  also  to  pre- 
serve it  in  a  due  state  of  suppleness  and  humidity, 
a  strong  hard  case  is  given  to  it,  in  the  shape  of  the 
horny  wing  which  we  call  the  elytron.  When  the 
animal  is  at  rest,  the  gauze  wings  lie  folded  up 
under  this  impenetrable  shield.  When  the  beetle 
prepares  for  flying,  he  raises  the  integument,  and 
spreads  out  his  thin  membrane  to  the  air.  And  it 
cannot  be  observed  without  admiration,  what  a  tis- 
sue of  cordage,  i.  e.  of  muscular  tendons,  must  run 
in  various  and  complicated,  but  determinate  direc- 
tions, along  this  fine  surface,  in  order  to  enable  the 


OF  INSECTS.  269 

animal,  either  to  gather  it  up  into  a  certain  precise 
form,  whenever  it  desires  to  place  its  wings  under 
the  shelter  which  nature  hath  given  to  them  ;  or  to 
expand  again  their  folds,  when  wanted  for  action. 

In  some  insects,  the  elytra  cover  the  whole  body  ; 
in  others,  half;  in  others,  only  a  small  part  of  it ; 
but  in  all,  they  completely  hide  and  cover  the  true 
wings.     Also, 

Many  or  most  of  the  beetle  species  lodge  in  holes 
in  the  earth,  environed  by  hard  rough  substances, 
and  have  frequently  to  squeeze  their  way  through 
narrow  passages  ;  in  which  situation,  wings  so  ten- 
der, and  so  large,  could  scarcely  have  escaped  in- 
jury, without  both  a  firm  covering  to  defend  them, 
and  the  capacity  of  collecting  themselves  up  under 
its  protection. 

II.  Another  contrivance,  equally  mechanical 
and  equally  clear,  is  the  axvly  or  borer,  fixed  at  the 
tails  of  various  species  of  flies  ;  and  with  which  they 
pierce,  in  some  cases,  plants  ;  in  others,  wood ;  in 
others,  the  skin  and  flesh  of  animals  ;  in  others,  the 
coat  of  the  chrysalis  of  insects  of  a  diflferent  species 
from  their  own ;  and  in  others,  even  lime,  mortar, 
and  stone.  I  need  not  add,  that  having  pierced  the 
substance,  they  deposit  their  eggs  in  the  hole.  The 
descriptions  which  naturalists  give  of  this  organ, 
are  such  as  the  following :  It  is  a  sharp-pointed  in- 
strument, which,  in  its  inactive  state,  lies  concealed 
in  the  extremity  of  the  abdomen,  and  which  the 
animal  draws  out  at  pleasure,  for  the  purpose  of 
making  a  puncture  in  the  leaves,  stem,  or  bark,  of 
the  particular  plant  which  is  suited  to  the  nourish- 


270 


OF  INSECTS. 


ment  of  its  young.  In  a  sheath,  which  divides  and 
opens  whenever  the  organ  is  used,  there  is  enclosed 
a  compact,  solid,  dentated  stem,  along  which  runs 
a  gutter  or  groove^  by  which  groove,  after  the  pene- 
tration is  effected,  the  egg,  assisted  in  some  cases 
by  a  peristaltic  motion,  passes  to  its  destined  lodge- 
ment. In  the  oestrum  or  gad-fly,  the  wimble  dra*ws 
out  like  the  pieces  of  a  spy-glass ;  the  last  piece  is 
armed  with  three  hooks,  and  is  able  to  bore  through 
the  hide  of  an  ox.  Can  any  thing  more  be  neces- 
sary to  display  the  mechanism,  than  to  relate  the 
fact? 

III.  The  stings  of  insects,  though  for  a  different 
purpose,  are,  in  their  structure,  not  unlike  the  pier- 
cer. The  sharpness  to  which  the  point  in  all  of 
them  is  wrought ;  the  temper  and  firmness  of  the 
substance  of  which  it  is  composed  ;  the  strength  of 
the  muscles  by  which  it  is  darted  out,  compared 
with  the  smallness  and  weakness  of  the  insect,  and 
with  the  soft  and  friable  texture  of  the  rest  of  the 
body ;  are  properties  of  the  sting  to  be  noticed,  and 
not  a  little  to  be  admired.  The  sting  of  a  hee  will 
pierce  through  a  goat-skin  glove.  It  penetrates  the 
human  flesh  more  readily  than  the  finest  point  of  a 

f  needle.  The  action  of  the  sting  affords  an  example 
of  the  union  of  chymistry  and  mechanism,  such  as, 
if  it  be  not  a  proof  of  contrivance,  nothing  is.    First, 

ras  to  the  chymistry  ;  how  highly  concentrated  must 
be  the  venom,  which,  in  so  small  a  quantity,  can  pro- 
duce such  powerful  effects !  And  in  the  bee  we 
may  observe,  that  this  venom  is  made  from  honey, 
the  only  food  of  the  insect,  but  the  last  material 


OF  INSECTS.  271 

from  which  I  should  have  expected  that  an  exalted 
poison  could,  by  any  process  or  digestion  whatso- 
ever, have  been  prepared.  In  the  next  place,  with 
respect  to  the  mechanism,  the  sting  is  not  a  simple, 
but  a  compound  instrument.  The  visible  sting, 
though  drawn  to  a  point  exquisitely  sharp,  is,  in 
strictness,  only  a  sheath  ;  for,  near  to  the  extremity 
may  be  perceived,  by  the  microscope,  two  minute 
orifices,  from  which  orifices,  in  the  act  of  stinging, 
and,  as  it  should  seem,  after  the  point  of  the  main 
sting  has  buried  itself  in  the  flesh,  are  launched  out 
two  subtile  rays,  which  may  be  called  the  true  or 
proper  stings,  as  being  those  through  which  the  poi- 
son is  infused  into  the  puncture  already  made  by 
the  exterior  sting.  I  have  said,  that  chymistry  and 
mechanism  are  here  united :  by  which  observation 
I  meant,  that  all  this  machinery  would  have  been 
useless,  telum  imbelle,  if  a  supply  of  poison,  intense 
in  quality,  in  proportion  to  the  smallness  of  the 
drop,  had  not  been  furnished  to  it  by  the  chymi- 
cal  elaboration  which  was  carried  on  in  the  insect's 
body  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  poison,  the 
result  of  this  process,  could  not  have  attained  its 
effect,  or  reached  its  enemy,  if,  w^hen  it  was  col- 
lected at  the  extremity  of  the  abdomen,  it  had  not 
found  there  a  machinery,  fitted  to  conduct  it  to 
the  external  situations  in  which  it  was  to  operate, 
viz.  an  awl  to  bore  a  hole,  and  a  syringe  to  inject 
the  fluid.  Yet  these  attributes,  though  combined 
in  their  action,  are  independent  in  their  origin. 
The  venom  does  not  breed  the  sting ;  nor  does  the 
sting  concoct  the  venom. 


272  OF  INSECTS. 

IV.  The  proboscis^  with  which  many  insects 
are  endowed,  comes  next  in  order  to  be  considered. 
It  is  a  tube  attached  to  the  head  of  the  animal. 
In  the  bee,  it  is  composed  of  two  pieces  connect- 
ed by  a  joint :  for  if  it  were  constantly  extended, 
it  would  be  too  much  exposed  to  accidental  in- 
juries ;  therefore,  in  its  indolent  state,  it  is  doubled 
up  by  means  of  the  joint,  and  in  that  position  lies 
secure  under  a  scaly  penthouse.  In  many  species 
of  the  butterfly,  the  proboscis,  when  not  in  use,  is 
coiled  up  like  a  watch-spring.  In  the  same  bee, 
the  proboscis  serves  the  office  of  the  mouth,  the  in- 
sect having  no  other  :  and  how  much  better  adapted 
it  is,  than  a  mouth  would  be,  for  the  collecting  of 
the  proper  nourishment  of  the  animal,  is  sufficiently 
evident.  The  food  of  the  bee  is  the  nectar  of 
flowers  ;  a  drop  of  syrup,  lodged  deep  in  the  bot- 
tom of  the  coroUae,  in  the  recesses  of  the  petals,  or 
down  the  neck  of  a  monopetalous  glove.  Into  these 
cells  the  bee  thrusts  its  long  narrow  pump,  through 
the  cavity  of  which  it  sucks  up  this  precious  fluid, 
inaccessible  to  every  other  approach.  It  is  observ- 
able also,  that  the  plant  is  not  the  worse  for  what 
the  bee  does  to  it.  The  harmless  plunderer  rifles 
the  sweets,  but  leaves  the  flow^er  uninjured.  The 
ringlets  of  which  the  proboscis  of  the  bee  is  com- 
posed, the  muscles  by  which  it  is  extended  and  con- 
tracted, form  so  many  microscopical  wonders.  The 
agility  also  with  which  it  is  moved,  can  hardly  fail 
to  excite  admiration.  But  it  is  enough  for  our  pur- 
pose to  observe  in  general,  the  suitableness  of  the 
structure  to  the  use,  of  the  means  to  the  end,  and 


OF  INSECTS.  273 

especially  the  wisdom  by  which  nature  has  departed 
from  its  most  general  analogy  (for,  animals  being 
furnished  with  mouths  are  such),  when  the  purpose 
could  be  better  answered  by  the  deviation. 

In  some  insects,  the  proboscis,  or  tongue,  or  trunk, 
is  shut  up  in  a  sharp-pointed  sheath  ;  which  sheath, 
being  of  a  much  firmer  texture  than  the  proboscis 
itself,  as  well  as  sharpened  at  the  point,  pierces  the 
substance  which  contains  the  food,  and  then  opens 
mthin  the  wounds  to  allow  the  enclosed  tube,  through 
which  the  juice  is  extracted,  to  perform  its  office. 
Can  any  mechanism  be  plainer  than  this  is  ;  or  sur^ 
pass  this  ? 

V.  The  metamorphosis  of  insects  from  grubs  intd 
moths  and  flies,  is  an  astonishing  process.  A  hairy 
caterpillar  is  transformed  into  a  butterfly.  Observe 
the  change.  We  have  four  beautiful  wings,  where 
there  were  none  before  ;  a  tubular  proboscis,  in  the 
place  of  a  mouth  with  jaws  and  teeth  ;  six  long 
legs,  instead  of  fourteen  feet*  In  another  case,  we 
see  a  white,  smooth,  soft  worm,  turned  into  a  black, 
hard,  crustaceous  beetle,  with  gauze  wings.  These, 
as  I  said,  are  astonishing  processes,  and  must  re- 
quire, as  it  should  seem,  a  proportionably  artificial 
apparatus.  The  hypothesis  which  appears  to  me 
most  probable  is,  that,  in  the  grub,  there  exist  at 
the  same  time  three  animals,  one  within  another,  all 
nourished  by  the  same  digestion,  and  by  a  com- 
municating circulation  ;  but  in  different  stages  of 
maturity*  The  latest  discoveries  made  by  naturalists 
seem  to  favour  this  supposition.  The  insect  al- 
ready equipped  with  wings,  is  descried  under  the 


T/4f  OF  INSECTS. 

membranes  both  of  the  worm  and  nymph.  In  some 
species,  the  proboscis,  the  antennae,  the  hmbs  and 
wings  of  the  fly,  have  been  observed  to  be  folded 
up  within  the  body  of  the  caterpillar  ;  and  with  such 
nicety  as  to  occupy  a  small  space  only  under  the  two 
first  wings.  This  being  so,  the  outermost  animal, 
which,  besides  its  own  proper  character,  serves  as 
an  integument  to  the  other  two,  being  the  farthest 
advanced,  dies,  as  we  suppose,  and  drops  off  first. 
The  second,  the  pupa  or  chrysalis,  then  offers  itself 
to  observation.  This  also  in  its  turn  dies  ;  its  dead 
and  brittle  husk  falls  to  pieces,  and  makes  way  for 
the  appearance  of  the  fly  or  moth.  Now,  if  this  be 
the  case,  or  indeed  whatever  explication  be  adopted, 
we  have  a  prospective  contrivance  of  the  most  curi- 
ous kind ;  we  have  organizations  three  deep  ;  yet  a 
vascular  system,  which  supplies  nutrition,  growth, 
and  life,  to  all  of  them  together. 
/  VI.  Almost  all  insects  are  oviparous.  Nature 
keeps  her  butterflies,  moths,  and  caterpillars,  locked 
up  during  the  winter  in  their  egg  state ;  and  we 
have  to  admire  the  various  devices  to  which,  if  we 
may  so  speak,  the  same  nature  hath  resorted,  for  the 
security/  of  the  egg.  Many  insects  enclose  their  eggs 
in  a  silken  web  ;  others  cover  them  with  a  coat  of 
hair  torn  from  their  own  bodies  ;  some  glue  them 
together ;  and  others,  like  the  moth  of  the  silk- 
worm, glue  them  to  the  leaves  upon  which  they  are 
deposited,  that  they  may  not  be  shaken  off  by  the 
wind,  or  washed  away  by  rain  :  some  again  make 
incisions  into  leaves,  and  hide  an  egg  in  each  inci- 
sion ;  whilst  some  envelope  their  eggs  with  a  soft 


%•; 


OF  INSECTS.  275 

substance,  which  forms  the  first  aliment  of  the  young 
animal :  and  some  again  make  a  hole  in  the  earth, 
and  having  stored  it  with  a  quantity  of  proper  food, 
deposit  their  eggs  in  it.  In  all  which  we  are  to 
observe,  that  the  expedient  depends,  not  so  much 
upon  the  address  of  the  animal,  as  upon  the  phy- 
sical resources  of  his  constitution. 

The  art  also  with  which  the  young  insect  is  coiled 
up  in  the  egg,  presents,  where  it  can  be  examined, 
a  subject  of  great  curiosity.  The  insect,  furnished 
with  all  the  members  which  it  ought  to  have,  is  roll- 
ed up  into  a  form  which  seems  to  contract  it  into 
the  least  possible  space  ;  by  which  contraction,  not- 
withstanding the  smallness  of  the  egg,  it  has  room 
enough  in  its  apartment,  and  to  spare.  This  fold- 
ing of  the  limbs  appears  to  me  to  indicate  a  special 
direction,  for,  if  it  were  merely  the  effect  of  com- 
pression, the  collocation  of  the  parts  would  be  more 
various  than  it  is.  In  the  same  species,  I  believe, 
it  is  always  the  same. 

These  observations  belong  to  the  whole  insect 
tribe,  or  to  a  great  part  of  them.  Other  observa- 
tions are  limited  to  few^er  species;  but  not,  per- 
haps,  less  important  or  satisfactory. 

I.  The  organization  in  the  abdomen  of  the  silk- 
wormy  or  spider,  whereby  these  insects  form  their 
thread,  is  as  incontestably  mechanical  as  a  wire- 
drawer's  mill.  In  the  body  of  the  silk-worm  are  two 
bags,  remarkable  for  their  form,  position,  and  use. 
They  wind  round  the  intestine ;  when  drawn  out, 
they  are  ten  inches  in  length,  though  the  animal  it- 
self be  only  two.     Within  these  bags  is  collected  a 


27^  ^F  INSECTS, 

glue ;  and  communicating  with  the  bags^  are  two 
paps  or  outlets,  perforated,  like  a  grater,  by  a  num- 
ber of  small  holes*  The  glue  or  gum,  being  passed 
through  these  minute  apertures,  forms  hairs  of  al- 
most imperceptible  fineness  ;  and  these  hairs,  when 
joined,  compose  the  silk  which  we  wind  off  from 
the  cone,  in  which  the  silk-worm  has  wrapped  itself 
up:  in  the  spider,  the  web  is  formed  from  this 
thread.  In  both  cases,  the  extremity  of  the  thread, 
by  m^eans  of  its  adhesive  quality,  is  first  attached  by 
the  animal  to  some  external  hold ;  and  the  end  being 
now  fastened  to  a  point,  the  insect,  by  turning 
round  its  body,  or  by  receding  from  that  point, 
draws  out  the  thread  through  the  holes  above  de- 
scribed, by  an  operation,  as  hath  been  observed, 
exactly  similar  to  the  drawing  of 3vire,  The  thread, 
like  the  wire,  is  formed  by  the  hole  through  which 
it  passes.  In  one  respect  there  is  a  difference*  The 
wire  is  the  metal  unaltered,  except  in  figure.  In 
the  animal  process,  the  nature  of  the  substance  is 
somewhat  changed  as  well  as  the  form;  for,  as  it 
exists  within  the  insect,  it  is  a  soft  clammy  gum  or 
glue.  The  thread  acquires,  it  is  probable,  its  firm- 
ness and  tenacity  from  the  action  of  the  air  upon  its 
surface,  in  the  moment  of  exposure  ;  and  a  thread 
so  fine  is  almost  all  surface.  This  property,  how- 
ever, of  the  paste,  is  part  of  the  contrivance. 

The  mechanism  itself  consists  of  the  bags  or  re- 
servoirs into  which  the  glue  is  collected,  and  of  the 
external  holes  communicating  with  these  bags :  and 
the  action  of  the  machine  is  seen  in  the  forming  of 
a  thread,  as  wire  is  formed,  by  forcing  the  material 


OF  INSECTS.  277 

already  prepared  through  holes  of  proper  dimen- 
sions. The  secretion  is  an  act  too  subtile  for  our  dis- 
cernment, except  as  we  perceive  it  by  the  produce. 
But  one  thing  answers  to  another ;  the  secretory 
glands  to  the  quality  and  consistence  required  in  the 
secreted  substance ;  the  bag  to  its  reception :  the 
outlets  and  orifices  are  constructed,  not  merely  for 
relieving  the  reservoirs  of  their  burden,  but  for  ma- 
nufacturing the  contents  into  a  form  and  texture,  of 
great  external  use,  or  rather  indeed  of  future  neces- 
sity, to  the  life  and  functions  of  the  insect. 

11.  BeeSj  under  one  character  or  other,  have 
furnished  every  naturalist  with  a  set  of  observations. 
I  shall  in  this  place  confine  myself  to  one  ;  and  that 
is,  the  i^elation  which  obtains  between  the  wax  and 
the  honey.  No  person,  who  has  inspected  a  bee- 
hive, can  forbear  remarking  how  commodiously  the 
honey  is  bestowed  in  the  comb ;  and,  amongst 
other  advantages,  how  effectually  the  fermentation 
of  the  honey  is  prevented  by  distributing  it  into 
small  cells.  The  fact  is,  that  when  the  honey 
is  separated  from  the  comb,  and  put  into  jars,  it 
runs  into  fermentation  with  a  much  less  degree  of 
heat  than  what  takes  place  in  a  hive.  This  may  be 
reckoned  a  nicety;  but,  independently  of  any  nicety 
in  the  matter,  I  would  ask,  what  could  the  bee  do 
with  the  honey  if*  it  had  not  the  wax  ?  how,  at  least, 
could  it  store  it  up  for  winter  ?  The  wax,  there- 
fore, answers  a  purpose  with  respect  to  the  honey ; 
and  the  honey  constitutes  that  purpose  with  respect 
to  the  wax.  This  is  the  relation  between  them.  But 
the  two  substances,  though  together  of  the  greatest 


278  OF  INSECTS. 

use,  and  without  each  other  of  little,  come  from  a 
different  origin.  The  bee  finds  the  honey,  but 
makes  the  wax.  The  honey  is  lodged  in  the  nectaria 
of  flowers,  and  probably  undergoes  little  alteration  j 
is  merely  collected :  whereas  the  wax  is  a  ductile, 
tenacious  paste,  made  out  of  a  dry  powder,  not 
simply  by  kneading  it  with  a  liquid,  but  by  a  diges- 
tive process  in  the  body  of  the  bee.  What  account 
can  be  rendered  of  facts  so  circumstanced,  but  that 
the  animal,  being  intended  to  feed  upon  honey, 
was,  by  a  peculiar  external  configuration,  enabled 
to  procure  it  ?  That,  moreover,  wanting  the  honey 
when  it  could  not  be  procured  at  all,  it  was  farther 
endued  with  the  no  less  necessary  faculty  of  con- 
structing repositories  for  its  preservation?  Which 
faculty,  it  is  evident,  must  depend,  primarily,  upon 
the  capacity  of  providing  suitable  materials.  Two 
distinct  functions  go  to  make  up  the  ability.  First, 
the  power  in  the  bee,  with  respect  to  wax,  of  load- 
ing the  farina  of  flowers  upon  its  thighs.  Micro- 
scopic observers  speak  of  the  spoon-shaped  appen- 
dages with  which  the  thighs  of  bees  are  beset  for 
this  very  purpose  ;  but,  in  as  much  as  the  art  and 
will  of  the  bee  may  be  supposed  to  be  concerned  in 
this  operation,  there  is,  secondly,  that  which  doth 
not  rest  in  art  or  will,— a  digestive  faculty  which 
converts  the  loose  powder  into  a  stiff  substance. 

^  This  is  a  just  account  of  the  honey  and  the  honey- 
comb ;  and  this  account,  through  every  part,  carries 

I  a  creative  intelligence  along  with  it. 

The  sting  also  of  the  bee  has  this  relation  to  the 
honey,  that  it  is  necessary  for  the  protection  of  a 
treasure  which  invites  so  many  robbers. 


OF  INSECTS.  279 

III.  Our  business  is  with  mechanism.  In  the 
panorpa  tribe  of  insects,  there  is  a  forceps  in  the 
tail  of  the  male  insect,  with  which  he  catches  and 
holds  the  female.  Are  a  pair  of  pincers  more  me- 
chanical than  this  provision  in  its  structure  ?  or  is 
any  structure  more  clear  and  certain  in  its  design  ? 

IV.  St  Pierre  tells  us,  *  that  in  a  fly  with  six  feet 
(I  do  not  remember  that  he  describes  the  species), 
the  pair  next  the  head  and  the  pair  next  the  tail, 
have  brushes  at  their  extremities,  with  which  the  fly 
dresses,  as  there  may  be  occasion,  the  anterior  or 
the  posterior  part  of  its  body ;  but  that  the  middle 
pair  have  no  such  brushes,  the  situation  of  these  legs 
not  admitting  of  the  brushes,  if  they  w^ere  there, 
being  converted  to  the  same  use.  This  is  a  very 
exact  mechanical  distinction. 

V.  If  the  reader,  looking  to  our  distributions  of 
science,  wish  to  contemplate  the  chymistry,  as  well 
as  the  mechanism  of  nature,  the  insect  creation  will 
aiford  him  an  example.  I  refer  to  the  light  in  the 
tail  of  a  glow-worm.  Two  points  seem  to  be  agreed 
upon  by  naturalists  concerning  it :  first,  that  it  is 
phosphoric  ;  secondly,  that  its  use  is  to  attract  the 
male  insect.  The  only  thing  to  be  inquired  after, 
is  the  singularity,  if  any  such  there  be,  in  the  na- 
tural history  of  this  animal,  w^hich  should  render  a 
provision  of  this  kind  more  necessary  for  it  than  for 
other  insects.  That  singularity  seems  to  be  the  dif- 
ference which  subsists  between  the  male  and  the 
female ;  which  difference  is  greater  than  what  we 
find  in  any  other  species  of  animal  whatever.    The 

*    Vol.  i.  p.  342. 


280  OF  INSECTS. 

glow-worm  is  a  female  caterpillar;  the  male  of  which 
is  2ijly;  lively,  comparatively  small,  dissimilar  to 
the  female  in  appearance,  probably  also  as  distinr 
guished  from  her  in  habits,  pursuits,  and  manners, 
as  he  is  unlike  in  form  and  external  constitution. 
Here  then  is  the  adversity  of  the  case.  The  cater- 
pillar cannot  meet  her  companion  in  the  air.  The 
winged  rover  disdains  the  ground.  They  might 
never  therefore  be  brought  together,  did  not  this 
radiant  torch  direct  the  volatile  mate  to  his  seden- 
tary female. 

In  this  example,  we  also  see  the  resources  of  art 
anticipated.  One  grand  operation  of  chymistry  is 
the  making  of  phosphorus  :  and  it  was  thought  an 
ingenious  device,  to  make  phosphoric  matches  sup- 
ply the  place  of  lighted  tapers.  Now  this  very  thing 
is  done  in  the  body  of  the  glow-worm.  The  phos- 
phorus is  not  only  made,  but  kindled ;  and  caused 
to  emit  a  steady  and  genial  beam,  for  the  purpose 
which  is  here  stated,  and  which  I  believe  to  be  the 
true  one.  "^ 

VI.  Nor  is  the  last  the  only  instance  that  ento- 
mology affords,  in  which  our  discoveries,  or  rather 
our  projects,  turn  out  to  be  imitations  of  nature. 
Some  years  ago,  a  plan  was  suggested,  of  producing 
propulsion  by  reaction  in  this  way :  By  the  force  of 
a  steam-engine,  a  stream  of  water  was  to  be  shot 
out  of  the  stern  of  a  boat ;  the  impulse  of  which 
stream  upon  the  water  in  the  river,  was  to  push  the 
boat  itself  forward ;  it  is,  in  truth,  the  principle  by 
which  sky-rockets  ascend  in  the  air.  Of  the  use  or 
practicability  of  the  plan,  I  am  not  speaking ;  nor  is 


OF  INSECTS.  281 

it  my  concern  to  praise  its  ingenuity :  but  it  is  cer- 
tainly a  contrivance.  Now,  if  naturalists  are  to  be 
believed,  it  is  exactly  the  device  which  nature  has 
made  use  of,  for  the  motion  of  some  species  of 
aquatic  insects.  The  larva  of  the  dragon-jiy^  acr 
cording  to  Adams,  swims  by  ejecting  water  from  its 
tail ;  is  driven  forward  by  the  reaction  of  water  in 
the  pool  upon  the  current  issuing  in  a  direction 
backward  from  its  body. 

VII.  Again:  Europe  has  lately  been  surprised 
by  the  elevation  of  bodies  in  the  air  by  means  of  a 
balloon.  The  discovery  consisted  in  finding  out  a 
manageable  substance,  which  was,  bulk  for  bulk, 
lighter  than  air  ;  and  the  application  of  the  discovery 
was,  to  make  a  body  composed  of  this  substance 
bear  up,  along  with  its  own  weight,  some  heavier 
body  which  was  attached  to  it.  This  expedient,  so 
new  to  us,  proves  to  be  no  other  than  what  the  Au- 
thor of  nature  has  employed  in  the  gossamer  spider. 
We  frequently  see  this  spider's  thread  floating  in 
the  air,  and  extended  from  hedge  to  hedge,  across 
a  road  or  brook  of  four  or  five  yards  width.  The 
animal  which  forms  the  thread  has  no  wings  where- 
with to  fly  from  one  extremity  to  the  other  of  thi^ 
line ;  nor  muscles  to  enable  it  to  spring  or  dart  to 
so  great  a  distance  :  yet  its  Creator  hath  laid  for  it 
a  path  in  the  atmosphere ;  and  after  this  manner. 
Though  the  animal  itself  be  heavier  than  air,  the 
thread  which  it  spins  from  its  bowels  is  specifically 
lighter.  This  is  its  balloon.  The  spider,  left  to  it^ 
self,  would  drop  to  the  ground ;  but  being  tied  to 
its  thread,  both  are  supported.     We  have  here  a 


282  OF  INSECTS. 

very  peculiar  provision  :  and  to  a  contemplative  eye 
it  is  a  gratifying  spectacle,  to  see  this  insect  wafted 
on  her  thread,  sustained  by  a  levity  not  her  own, 
and  traversing  regions,  which,  if  we  examined  only 
the  body  of  the  animal,  might  seem  to  have  been 
forbidden  to  its  nature. 

I  MUST  now  crave  the  reader's  permission  to  in- 
troduce into  this  place,  for  want  of  a  better,  an 
observation  or  two  upon  the  tribe  of  animals,  whe- 
ther belonging  to  land  or  water,  which  ar€  covered 
by  shells. 

I.  The  shells  of  s^iails  are  a  wonderful,  a  mecha- 
nical, and,  if  one  might  so  speak  concerning  the 
works  of  nature,  an  original  contrivance.  Other 
animals  have  their  proper  retreats,  their  hybernacula 
also,  or  winter^quarters,  but  the  snail  carries  these 
about  with  him.  He  travels  with  his  tent;  and 
this  tent,  though,  as  was  necessary,  both  light  and 
thin,  is  completely  impervious  either  to  moisture  or 
air.  The  young  snail  comes  out  of  its  egg  with  the 
shell  upon  its  back  ;  and  the  gradual  enlargement 
which  the  shell  receives,  is  derived  from  the  slime 
excreted  by  the  animaPs  skin.  Now  the  aptness 
of  this  excretion  to  the  purpose,  its  property  of 
hardening  into  a  shell,  and  the  action,  whatever 
it  be,  of  the  animal,  whereby  it  avails  itself  of  its 
gift,  and  of  the  constitution  of  its  glands  (to  say 
nothing  of  the  work  being  commenced  before  the 
animal  is  born),  are  things  which  can,  with  no  pro- 
bability, be  referred  to  any  other  cause  than  to  ex- 
press design ;  and  that  not  on  the  part  of  the  ani-. 


OF  INSECTS.  "283 

niai  alone,  in  which  design,  though  it  might  build 
the  house,  could  not  have  supplied  the  material. 
The  will  of  the  animal  could  not  determine  the 
quality  of  the  excretion.  Add  to  which,  that  the 
shell  of  a  snail,  with  its  pillar  and  convolution,  is  a 
very  artificial  fabric ;  whilst  a  snail,  as  it  should 
seem,  is  the  most  numb  and  unprovided  of  all  arti- 
ficers. In  the  midst  of  variety,  there  is  likewise  a 
regularity,  which  would  hardly  be  expected.  In 
the  same  species  of  snail,  the  number  of  turns  is 
usually,  if  not  always,  the  same.  The  sealing  up 
of  the  mouth  of  the  shell  by  the  snail,  is  also  w^ell 
calculated  for  its  warmth  and  security ;  but  the 
cerate  is  not  of  the  same  substance  with  the  shell. 

II.  Much  of  what  has  been  observed  of  snails  be- 
longs to  shelUJish  and  their  shells^  particularly  to 
those  of  the  univalve  kind ;  with  the  addition  of 
two  remarks :  one  of  which  is  upon  the  great 
strength  and  hardness  of  most  of  these  shells.  I 
do  not  know  whether,  the  weight  being  given,  art 
can  produce  so  strong  a  case  as  are  some  of  these 
shells.  Which  defensive  strength  suits  well  with 
the  life  of  an  animal,  that  has  often  to  sustain  the 
dangers  of  a  stormy  element,  and  a  rocky  bottom, 
as  well  as  the  attacks  of  voracious  fish.  The  other 
remark  is,  upon  the  property,  in  the  animal  excre- 
tion, not  only  of  congealing,  but  of  congealing,  or, 
as  a  builder  would  call  it,  settings  in  water,  and  into 
a  cretaceous  substance,  firm  and  hard.  This  pro- 
perty is  much  more  extraordinary,  and,  chymically 
speaking,  more  specific,  than  that  of  hardening  in 
the  air ;  which  may  be  reckoned  a  kind  of  exsicca* 
tion,  like  the  drying  of  clay  into  bricks. 


284  OF  INSECTS. 

IIL  In  the  bivalve  order  of  shell-fish,  cockles, 
muscles,  oysters,  &c.  what  contrivance  can  be  so 
simple  or  so  clear,  as  the  insertion,  at  the  back,  of 
a  tough  tendinous  substance,  that  becomes  at  once 
the  ligament  which  binds  the  two  shells  together, 
and  the  hinge  upon  which  they  open  and  shut  ? 

IV.  The  shell  of  a  lobster's  tail,  in  its  articulations 
and  overlappings,  represents  the  jointed  part  of  a  ^ 
coat  of  mail ;  or  rather,  which  I  believe  to  be  the 
truth,  a  coat  of  mail  is  an  imitation  of  a  lobster's 
shell.  The  same  end  is  to  be  answered  by  both  ; 
the  same  properties,  therefore,  are  required  in  both, 
namely,  hardness  and  flexibility,  a  covering  which 
may  guard  the  part  without  obstructing  its  motion. 
For  this  double  purpose,  the  art  of  man,  expressly 
exercised  upon  the  subject,  has  not  been  able  to 
devise  any  thing  better  than  what  nature  presents 
to  his  observation.  Is  not  this,  therefore,  mechan- 
ism, which  the  mechanic,  having  a  similar  purpose 
in  view,  adopts  ?  Is  the  structure  of  a  coat  of  mail 
to  be  referred  to  art  ?  Is  the  same  structure  of  the 
lobster,  conducing  to  the  same  use,  to  be  referred  to 
any  thing  less  than  art  ? 

Some,  who  may  acknowledge  the  imitation,  and 
assent  to  the  inference  which  we  draw  from  it  in 
the  instance  before  us,  may  be  disposed,  possibly, 
to  ask,  why  such  imitations  are  not  more  frequent 
than  they  are,  if  it  be  true,  as  we  allege,  that  the 
Bame  principle  of  intelligence,  design,  and  mecha- 
nical contrivance,  was  exerted  in  the  formation  of 
natural  bodies,  as  we  employ  in  the  making  of  the 
various  instruments  by  which  our   purposes    are 


OF  INSECTS.  285 

served?  The  answers  to  this  question  are,  first, 
that  it  seldom  happens  that  precisely  the  same  pur- 
pose, and  no  other,  is  pursued  in  any  work  which 
we  compare,  of  nature  and  of  art ;  secondly,  that  it 
still  more  seldom  happens,  that  we  can  imitate  na- 
ture, if  we  would.  Our  materials  and  our  work- 
manship are  equally  deficient.  Springs  and  wires, 
and  cork  and  leather,  produce  a  poor  substitute  for 
an  arm  or  a  hand.  In  the  example  which  we  have 
selected,  I  mean  a  lobster's  shell  compared  with  a 
coat  of  mail,  these  difficulties  stand  less  in  the  way, 
than  in  almost  any  other  that  can  be  assigned :  and 
the  consequence  is,  as  we  have  seen,  that  art  gladly 
borrows  from  nature  her  contrivance,  and  imitates 
it  closely. 

But  to  return  to  insects.  I  think  it  is  in  this 
class  of  animals  above  all  others,  especially  when 
we  take  in  the  multitude  of  species  which  the  mi- 
croscope discovers,  that  we  are  struck  with  what 
Cicero  has  called  "  the  insatiable  variety  of  nature.'* 
There  are  said  to  be  six  thousand  species  of  flies ; 
seven  hundred  and  sixty  butterflies  ;  each  different 
from  all  the  rest.  (St  Pierre.)  The  same  writer 
tells  us,  from  his  own  observation,  that  thirty-seven 
species  of  winged  insects,  with  distinctions  well 
expressed,  visited  a  single  strawberry-plant  in  the 
course  of  three  weeks.*  Ray  observed,  within  the 
compass  of  a  mile  or  two  of  his  own  house,  two 
hundred  kinds  of  butterflies,  nocturnal  and  diurnaL 

*  Vol.1.  p.Sr 


286  OF  INSECT^. 

He  likewise  asserts,  but  I  think  witiiout  any  grounds 
of  exact  computation,  that  the  number  of  species  of 
insects,  reckoning  all  sorts  of  them^  may  not  be 
short  of  ten  thousand.^     And  in  this  vast  variety 
of  animal  forms  (for  the  observation  is  not  confined 
to  insects,  though  more  applicable  perhaps  to  them 
than  to  any  other  class),  we  are  sometimes  led  to 
take  notice  of  the  different  methods,  or  rather  of 
the  studiously  diversified  methods,  by  which  one 
and  the  same  purpose  is  attained.     In  the  article 
of  breathing,  for  example,  which  was  to  be  provided 
for  in  some  way  or  other,  besides  the  ordinary  varie- 
ties of  lungs,  gills,  and  breathing-holes  (for  insects 
in  general  respire,  not  by  the  mouth,  but  through 
holes  in  the  sides),  the  nymphs  of  gnats  have  an 
apparatus  to  raise  their  backs  to  the  top  of  the 
water,  and  so  take  breath.     The  hydrocanthari  do 
the  like  by  thrusting  their  tails  out  of  the  water .t 
The  maggot  of  the  eruca  labra  has  a  long  tally  one 
part  sheathed  within  another  (but  which  it  can 
draw  out  at  pleasure),  with  a  starry  tuft  at  the  end, 
by  which  tufty  when  expanded  upon  the  surface,  the 
insect  both  supports  itself  in  the  water,  and  draws  in 
the  air  which  is  necessary.    In  the  article  of  natural 
clothing,  we  have  the  skins  of  animals   invested 
with  scales,  hair,  feathers,  mucus,  froth  ;  or  itself 
turned  into  a  shell  or  crust :  in  the  no  less  necessary 
article  of  offence  and  defence,  we  have  teeth,  talons, 
beaks,  horns,  stings,  prickles,  with  (the  most  singu- 
lar expedient  for  the  same  purpose)  the  power  of 

*  Wisd.  of  God,  p.  23.  f  Derham,  p.  7. 


OP  INSECTS.  287 

giving  the  electric  shock,  and,  as  is  credibly  related 
of  some  animals,  of  driving  away  their  pursuers  by 
an  intolerable  foetor,  or  of  blackening  the  v^ater 
through  which  they  are  pursued.  The  considera- 
tion of  these  appearances  might  induce  us  to  be- 
lieve, that  variety  itself,  distinct  from  every  other 
reason,  was  a  motive  in  the  mind  of  the  Creator, 
or  with  the  agents  of  his  will. 

To  this  great  variety  in  organized  life,  the  Deity 
has  given,  or  perhaps  there  arises  out  of  it,  a  corres- 
ponding variety  of  animal  appetites.  For  the  final 
cause  of  this  we  have  not  far  to  seek.  Did  all  ani- 
mals covet  the  same  element,  retreat,  or  food,  it  is 
evident  how  much  fewer  could  be  supplied  and 
accommodated,  than  what  at  present  live  conve- 
niently together,  and  find  a  plentiful  subsistence. 
What  one  nature  rejects,  another  delights  in.  Food 
which  is  nauseous  to  one  tribe  of  animals,  becomes, 
by  that  very  property  which  makes  it  nauseous,  an 
alluring  dainty  to  another  tribe.  Carrion  is  a  treat 
to  dogs,  ravens,  vultures,  fish.  The  exhalations  of 
corrupted  substances  attract  flies  by  crowds.  Mag- 
gots revel  in  putrefaction. 

55 


288  OF  PLANTS. 


CHAPTER  XX. 


OP  PLANTS^ 


1  THINK  a  designed  and  studied  mechanism  to  be, 
in  general,  more  evident  in  animals  than  in  plants : 
and  it  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  a  weaker  argu- 
ment, where  a  stronger  is  at  hand.  There'  are, 
however,  a  few  observations  upon  the  vegetable 
kingdom,  which  lie  so  directly  in  our  way,  that  it 
would  be  improper  to  pass  by  them  without  notice. 
The  one  great  intention  of  nature  in  the  struc- 
ture of  plants,  seems  to  be  the  perfecting  of  the 
seed  ;  and,  what  is  part  of  the  same  intention,  the 
preserving  of  it  until  it  h^ perfected.  This  intention 
shows  itself,  in  the  first  place,  by  the  care  which 
appears  to  be  taken,  to  protect  and  ripen,  by  every 
advantage  which  can  be  given  to  them  of  situation 
in  the  plant,  those  parts  which  most  immediately 
contribute  to  fructification,  viz.  the  antherae,  the 
stamina,  and  the  stigmata.  These  parts  are  usually 
lodged  in  the  centre,  the  recesses,  or  the  labyrinths 
of  the  flower ;  during  their  tender  and  immature 
state,  are  shut  up  in  the  stalk,  or  sheltered  in  the 
bud :  as  soon  as  they  have  acquired  firmness  of  tex- 
ture sufficient  to  bear  exposure,  and  are  ready  to 


OF  PLANTS. 


289 


perform  the  important  office  which  is  assigned  to 
therri,  they  are  disclosed  to  the  light  and  air,  by  the 
bursting  of  the  stem,  or  the  expansion  of  the  petals; 
after  which,  they  have,  in  many  cases,  by  the  very 
form  of  the  flower  during  its  blow,  the  light  and 
warmth  reflected  upon  them  from  the  concave  side 
of  the  cup.    What  is  called  also  the  sleep  of  plants, 
is  the  leaves  or  petals  disposing  themselves  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  shelter  the  young  stems,  buds,  or 
fruit.     They  turn  up,  or  they  fall  down,  according 
as  this  purpose  renders  either  change  of  position  re- 
quisite.    In  the  growth  of  corn,  whenever  the  plant 
begins  to  shoot,  the  two  upper  leaves  of  the  stalk 
join  together,  embrace  the  ear,  and  protect  it  till 
the  pulp  has  acquired  a  certain  degree  of  consist- 
ency.    In  some  water-plants,    the  flowering   and 
fecundation  are  carried  on  within  the  stem,  which 
afterwards  opens  to  let  loose  the  impregnated  seed.  ^ 
The  pea  or  papilionaceous  tribe,  enclose  the  parts 
of  fructification  within  a  beautiful  folding  of  the 
internal  blossom,  sometimes  called,  from  its  shape, 
the  boat  or  keel ;  itself  also  protected  under  a  pent- 
house formed  by  the  external  petals.    This  structure 
is  very  artificial ;  and  what  adds  to  the  value  of  it^ 
though  it  may  diminish  the  curiosity,  very  general. 
It  has  also  this  further  advantage  (and  it  is  an  ad- 
vantage strictly  mechanical),  that  all  the  blossoms 
turn  their  backs  to  the  wind,  whenever  the  gale 
blow^s  strong  enough  to  endanger  the  delicate  parts 
upon  which  the  seed  depends.     I  have  observed 

*   Philos.  Transact,  part  ii.  1796;  p.  502. 
T 


290  OF  PLANTS. 

this  a  hundred  times  in  a  field  of  peas  in  blossom. 
It  is  an  aptitude  which  results  from  the  figure  of  the 
flower,  and,  as  we  have  said,  is  strictly  mechanical ; 
as  much  so  as  the  turning  of  a  weather-board  or  tin 
cap  upon  the  top  of  a  chimney.  Of  the  popp^^  and 
of  many  similar  species  of  flowers,  the  head,  while 
it  is  growing,  hangs  down,  a  rigid  curvature  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  stem  giving  to  it  that  position ; 
and  in  that  position  it  is  impenetrable  by  rain  or 
moisture.  When  the  head  has  acquired  its  size,  and 
is  ready  to  open,  the  stalk  erects  itself,  for  the  pur- 
pose, as  it  should  seem,  of  presenting  the  flower, 
and  with  the  flower,  the  instruments  of  fructifica- 
tion, to  the  genial  influence  of  the  sun*s  rays.  This 
always  struck  me  as  a  curious  property ;  and  speci- 
fically, as  well  as  originally,  provided  for  in  the  con- 
stitution of  the  plant :  for,  if  the  stem  be  only  bent 
by  the  weight  of  the  head,  how  comes  it  to  straighten 
itself  when  the  head  is  the  heaviest  ?  These  in- 
stances show  the  attention  of  nature  to  this  principal 
object,  the  safety  and  maturation  of  the  parts  upon 
which  the  seed  depends. 

In  trees,  especially  in  those  which  are  natives  of 
colder  climates,  this  point  is  taken  up  earlier.  Many 
of  these  trees  (observe  in  particular  the  ash  and  the 
horse-chesnut)  produce  the  embryos  of  the  leaves  and 
flowers  in  one  year,  and  bring  them  to  perfection 
the  following.  There  is  a  winter  therefore  to  be 
gotten  over.  Now  what  we  are  to  remark  is,  how 
nature  has  prepared  for  the  trials  and  severities  of 
that  season.  These  tender  embryos  are,  in  the  first 
place,  wrapped  up  with  a  compactness  which  no 


OF  PLANTS.  291 

art  can  imitate :  in  which  state  they  compose  what 
we  call  the  bud.  This  is  not  all.  The  bud  itself 
is  enclosed  in  scales ;  which  scales  are  formed  from 
the  remains  of  past  leaves,  and  the  rudiments  of 
future  ones.  Neither  is  this  the  whole.  In  the 
coldest  climates  a  third  preservative  is  added,  by 
the  bud  having  a  coat  of  gum  or  resin,  which, 
being  congealed,  resists  the  strongest  frosts.  On 
the  approach  of  warm  weather,  this  gum  is  softened, 
and  ceases  to  be  a  hinderance  to  the  expansion  of 
the  leaves  and  flowers.  All  this  care  is  part  of  that 
system  of  provisions,  which  has  for  its  object  and 
consummation  the  production  and  perfecting  of  the 
seeds. 

The  SEEDS  themselves  are  packed  up  in  a  capsule^ 
a  vessel  composed  of  coats,  which,  compared  with 
the  rest  of  the  flower,  are  strong  and  tough.  From 
this  vessel  projects  a  tube,  through  which  tube  the 
farina,  or  some  subtile  fecundating  effluvium  that 
issues  from  it,  is  admitted  to  the  seed.  And  here 
also  occurs  a  mechanical  variety,  accommodated  to 
the  different  circumstances  under  which  the  same 
purpose  is  to  be  accomplished.  In  flowers  which 
are  erect,  the  pistil  is  shorter  than  the  stamina;  and 
the  pollen,  shed  from  the  antherae  into  the  cup  of 
the  flower,  is  caught  in  its  descent  by  the  head  of 
the  pistil,  called  the  stigma.  But  how  is  this  ma- 
naged when  the  flowers  hang  down  (as  does  the 
crown-imperial  for  instance),  and  in  which  position 
the  farina,  in  its  fall,  would  be  carried  from  the 
stigma,  and  not  towards  it?  The  relative  length 
of  the  parts  is  now  inverted.     The  pistil  in  these 


2^2'  Of  PLANTS. 

flowers  is  usually  longer  instead  of  shorter  than  the 
stamina,  that  its  protruding  summit  may  receive 
the  pollen  a^  it  drops  to  the  ground.  In  some  cases 
(as  in  the  nigella\  where  the  shafts  of  the  pistils 
or  styles  are  disproportionably  long,  they  bend  down 
their  extremities  upon  the  antherae,  that  the  neces- 
sary approximation  may  be  effected. 

But  (to  pursue  this  great  work  in  its  progress) 
the  impregnation,  to  which  all  this  machinery  re- 
lates, being  completed,  the  other  parts  of  the  flower 
fade  and  drop  off",  whilst  the  gravid  seed-vessely  on 
the  contrary,  proceeds  to  increase  its  bulk,  always 
to  a  gteat,  and  in  some  species  (in  the  gourd,  for 
example,  and  melon,)  to  a  surprising  comparative 
size ;  assuming  in  different  plants  aii  incalculable 
variety  of  forms,  but  all  evidently  conducing  to  the 
security  of  the  seed.  By  virtue  of  this  process,  so 
necessary  but  so  diversified,  we  have  the  seed  at 
length,  in  stone-fruits  and  nuts,  incased  in  a  strong 
shell,  the  shell  itself  enclosed  in  a  pulp  or  husk,  by 
which  the  seed  within  is,  or  hath  been,  fed  ;  or, 
itiore  generally,  (as  in  grapes,  oranges,  and  the 
numerous  kinds  of  berries),  plunged  over-head  in  a 
glutinous  syrup,  contained  within  a  skin  or  bladder : 
at  other  times  (as  in  apples  and  pears)  embedded 
in  the  heart  of  a  firm  fleshy  substance ;  or  (as  in 
strawberries)  pricked  into  the  surface  of  a  soft 
pulp. 

These  and  many  more  varieties  exist  in  what  we 
C2ill  Jruits.^     In  pulse,  and  grain,  and  grasses ;  in 

*   From  the  conformation  of  fruits  alone,  one  might  be  led,  even  without 
experience,   to   suppose,   that   part   of  thh  provision  vi-as   destined   for  the 


OF  PLANTS.  293 

trees,  and  shrubs,  and  flowers ;  the  variety  of  the 
seed-vessels  is  incomputable.  We  have  the  seeds 
(as  in  the  peja  tribe)  regularly  disposed  in  parch- 
ment pods,  which,  though  soft  and  membranous, 
completely  exclude  the  wet  even  in  the  heaviest 
rains;  the  pod  also,  not  seldom  (as  in  the  bean)  lined 
with  a  fine  down ;  at  other  times  (as  in  the  senna) 
distended  like  a  blown  bladder :  or  we  have  the  seed 
enveloped  in  wool  (as  in  the  cotton  plant),  lodged 
.{as  in  pines)  between  the  hard  and  compact  scales 
of  a  cone,  or  barricadoed  (as  in  the  artichoke  and 
jthistle)  with  spikes  and  prickles;  in  mushrooms, 

utilities  of  animals.  As  limited  to  the  plant,  the  provision  itself  seems  to  go 
beyond  its  object.  The  flesh  of  an  apple,  ihe  pulp  of  an  orange,  the  meat  of 
a  plumb,  the  fatness  of  the  olive,  appear  to  be  7nore  than  sufficient  for  the 
nourishing  of  the  seed  or  kernel.  The  event  shows,  that  this  redundancy,  if  it 
he  one,  ministers  to  the  support  and  gratification  of  animal  natures ;  and  vshen 
sve  observe  a  provisipn  to  be  more  than  sufficient  for  one  purpose,  yet  wanted 
for  another  purpose,  it  is  not  unfair  to  conclude,  that  both  purposes  were 
contemplated  together.  It  favours  this  view  of  the  subject  to  remark,  that 
fruits  are  not  (which  they  miglit  have  been)  ready  all  together,  but  that  they 
ripen  in  succession  throughout  a  great  part  of  the  year;  some  in  summer; 
some  in  ^utumn ;  that  some  require  the  slow  maturation  of  the  winter,  and 
supply  the  spring;  also  that  the  coldest  fruits  grow  in  the  hottest  places.  Cu- 
.  numbers,  pine-apples,  melons,  are  the  natural  produce  of  warm  climates,  and 
contribute  greatly,  by  their  coolness,  to  the  refreshment  of  the  inhabitants  of 
those  countries. 

I  will  add  to  this  note  the  following  observation  communicated  to  me  by 
Mr  Brinkley. 

"  The  eatable  part  of  the  cherry  or  peach  first  serves  the  purposes  of  per- 
fecting the  seed  or  kernel,  by  means  of  vessels  passing  through  the  stone,  and 
which  are  very  visible  in  a  peach-stone.  After  the  kernel  is  perfected,  the 
stone  becomes  hard,  and  the  vessels  cease  their  functions.  But  the  substance 
surrounding  the  stone  is  not  then  thrown  away  as  useless.  That  which  was 
'  before  only  an  instrument  for  perfecting  the  kernel,  now  receives  and  retains 
.  to  itself  the  whole  of  the  sun's  influence,  and  thereby  becomes  a  grateful  food 
to  man.  Also,  what  an  evident  mark  of  design  is  the  stone  protecting  the 
kernel !  The  intervention  of  the  stone  prevents  the  second  use  from  interfering 
with  tlie  first." 


294  OF  PLANTS. 

placed  under  a  penthouse ;  in  ferns,  within  slits  in 
the  back  part  of  the  leaf:  or  (which  is  the  most 
general  organization  of  all)  we  find  them  covered 
by  strong,  close  tunicles,  and  attached  to  the  stem 
according  to  an  order  appropriated  to  each  plant, 
as  is  seen  in  the  several  kinds  of  grains  and  of 
grasses. 

In  which  enumeration,  what  we  have  first  to 
notice  is,  unity  of  purpose  under  variety  of  expe- 
dients. Nothing  can  be  more  single  than  the  de- 
sign ;  more  diversified  than  the  means.  Pellicles, 
shells,  pulps,  pods,  husks,  skin,  scales  armed  with 
thorns,  are  all  employed  in  prosecuting  the  same 
intention.  Secondly ;  we  may  observe,  that,  in  all 
these  cases,  the  purpose  is  fulfilled  within  a  just 
and  limited  degree.  We  can  perceive,  that  if  the 
seeds  of  plants  were  more  strongly  guarded  than 
they  are,  their  greater  security  would  interfere  with 
other  uses.  Many  species  of  animals  would  suffer, 
and  many  perish,  if  they  could  not  obtain  access  to 
them.  The  plant  would  overrun  the  soil ;  or  the  seed 
be  wasted  for  want  of  room  to  sow  itself.  It  is  some- 
times as  necessary  to  destroy  particular  species  of 
plants,  as  it  is  at  other  times  to  encourage  their  growth. 
Here,  as  in  many  cases,  a  balance  is  to  be  maintained 
between  opposite  uses.  The  provisions  for  the  pre- 
servation of  seeds  appear  to  be  directed,  chiefly, 
against  theinconstancy  of  the  elements,  or  the  sweep- 
ing destruction  of  inclement  seasons.  The  depre- 
dation of  animals,  and  the  injuries  of  accidental  vio- 
lence, are  allowed  for  in  the  abundance  of  the  in- 
crease.   The  result  is,  that  out  of  the  many  thousand 


OF  PLANTS.  ^95 

different  plants  which  cover  the  earth,  not  a  single 
species,  perhaps,  has  been  lost  since  the  creation. 

Wlien  nature  has  perfected  her  seeds,  her  next 
care  is  to  disperse  them.     The  seed  cannot  answer 
its  purpose  while  it  remains  confined  in  the  cap- 
sule.    After  the  seeds  therefore  are  ripened,  the 
pericarpium  opens  to  let  them  out :  and  the  open- 
ing is  not  like  an  accidental  bursting,  but,  for  the 
most  part,  is  according  to  a  certain  rule  in  each 
plant.     What  I  have  always  thought  very  extra- 
ordinary ;  nuts  and  shells,  which  we  can  hardly  crack 
with  our  teeth,  divide  and  make  way  for  the  little 
tender  sprout  which   proceeds   from   the  kernel. 
Handling  the  nut,  I  could  hardly  conceive  how  the 
plantule  was  ever  to  get  out  of  it.     There  are  cases, 
it  is  said,  in  which  the  seed-vessel  by  an  elastic  jerk, 
at  the  moment  of  its  explosion,  casts  the  seeds  to  a 
distance.     We  all  however  know,  that  many  seeds 
(those  of  most  composite  flowers,  as  of  the  thistle, 
dandelion,  &c.)  are  endowed  with  what  are  not  im- 
properly called  ^m^^-^;  that  is,  downy  appendages,  by 
which  they  are  enabled  to  float  in  the  air,  and  are 
carried  oftentimes  by  the  wind  to  great  distances 
from  the  plant  which  produces  them.      It  is  the 
swelling  also  of  this  downy  tuft  within  the  seed- 
vessel,  that  seems  to  overcome  the  resistance  of  its 
coats,  and  to  open  a  passage  for  the  seed  to  escape. 

But  the  constitution  of  seeds  is  still  more  admir- 
able than  either  their  preservation  or  their  disper- 
sion. In  the  body  of  the  seed  of  every  species  of 
plant,  or  nearly  of  every  one,  provision  is  made  for 
two  grand  purposes  :  first,  for  the  safety  of  the 
germ  ;  secondly,  for  the  temporary  support  of  the 


296  OF  PLANTS. 

future  plant.  The  sprout,  as  folded  up  in  the  seed, 
is  delicate  and  brittle  beyond  any  other  substance. 
It  cannot  be  touched  without  being  broken.  Yet, 
in  beans,  peas,  grass-seeds,  grain,  fruits,  it  is  so 
fenced  on  all  sides,  so  shut  up  and  protected,  that, 
whilst  the  seed  itself  is  rudely  handled,  tossed  into 
sacks,  shoveled  into  heaps,  the  sacred  particle,  the 
miniature  plant,  remains  unhurt.  It  is  wonderful 
^Iso,  how  long  many  kinds  of  seeds,  by  the  help  of 
their  integuments,  and  perhaps  of  their  oils,  stand 
Qut  against  decay.  A  grain  of  mustard  seed  has  been 
known  to  lie  in  the  earth  for  a  hundred  years  ;  and 
as  soon  as  it  had  acquired  a  favourable  situation, 
to  shoot  as  vigorously  as  if  just  gathered  from  the 
plant.  Then,  as  to  the  second  point,  the  temporary 
support  of  the  future  plant,  the  matter  stands  thus. 
In  grain,  and  pulse,  and  kernels,  and  pippins,  the 
germ  composes  a  very  small  part  of  the  seed.  The 
rest  consists  of  a  nutritious  substance,  from  which 
the  sprout  draws  its  aliment  for  some  considerable 
time  after  it  is  put  forth  ;  viz.  until  the  fibres,  shot 
out  from  the  other  end  of  the  seed,  are  able  to  imbibe 
juices  from  the  earth,  in  a  sufficient  quantity  for  its 
demand.  It  is  owing  to  this  constitution,  that  we  see 
seeds  sprout,  and  the  sprouts  make  a  considerable 
progress  without  any  earth  at  all.  It  is  an  economy 
also,  in  which  we  remark  a  close  analogy  between 
the  seeds  of  plants,  and  the  eggs  of  animals.  The 
same  point  is  provided  for,  in  the  same  manner,  in 
both.  In  the  egg,  the  residence  of  the  living  prin- 
ciple, the  cicatrix,  forms  a  very  minute  part  of  the 
contents.    The  white  and  the  white  only  is  expend- 


OF  PLANTS.  297 

ed  in  the  formation  of  the  chicken.  The  yolk, 
very  little  altered  or  diminished,  is  wrapped  up  in 
the  abdomen  of  the  young  bird  when  it  quits  the 
shell,  and  serves  for  its  nourishment,  till  it  have 
learnt  to  pick  its  own  food.  This  perfectly  resem- 
bles the  first  nutrition  of  a  plant.  In  the  plant,  as 
well  as  in  the  animal,  the  structure  has  every  cha- 
racter of  contrivance  belonging  to  it:  in  both,  it 
breaks  the  transition  from  prepared  to  unprepared 
aliment ;  in  both,  it  is  prospective  and  compensa- 
tory. In  animals  which  suck,  this  intermediate 
nourishment  is  supplied  by  a  different  source. 

In  all  subjects,  the  most  common  observations 
are  the  best,  when  it  is  their  truth  and  strength  which 
have  made  them  common.  There  are,  of  this  sort, 
two  concerning  plants,  which  it  falls  within  our  plan 
to  notice.  The  Jirst  relates  to  what  has  already 
been  touched  upon,  their  germination.  When  a 
grain  of  corn  is  cast  into  the  ground,  this  is  the 
change  which  takes  place.  From  one  end  of 
the  grain  issues  a  green  sprout;  from  the  other, 
a  number  of  white  fibrous  threads.  How  can  this 
be  explained  ?  Why  not  sprouts  from  both  ends  ? 
why  not  fibrous  threads  from  both  ends  ?  To  what 
is  the  difference  to  be  referred,  but  to  design  ; 
to  the  different  uses  which  the  parts  are  thereafter 
to  serve  ;  uses  which  discover  themselves  in  the 
•  sequel  of  the  process  ?  The  sprout,  or  plumule, 
.struggles  into  the  air  ;  and  becomes  the  plant,  of 
.which,  from  the  first,  it  contained  the  rudiments  : 
the  fibres  shoot  into  the  earth  ;  and  thereby  both 
fix  the  plant  to  the  ground,  and  collect  nourishment 


298  OF  PLANTS. 

from  the  soil  for  its  support.  Now,  what  is  not  a 
little  remarkable,  the  parts  issuing  from  the  seed 
take  their  respective  directions,  into  whatever  posi- 
tion the  seed  itself  happens  to  be  cast.  If  the  seed 
be  thrown  into  the  wrongest  possible  position, 
that  is,  if  the  ends  point  in  the  ground  the  reverse 
of  what  they  ought  to  do,  every  thing,  nevertheless, 
goes  on  right.  The  sprout,  after  being  pushed 
down  a  little  way,  makes  a  bend,  and  turns  up- 
wards ;  the  fibres,  on  the  contrary,  after  shooting 
at  first  upwards,  turn  down.  Of  this  extraordinary 
vegetable  fact,  an  account  has  lately  been  attempted 
to  be  given  :  ''  The  plumule  (it  is  said)  is  stimulated 
by  the  air  into  action,  and  elongates  itself  when 
it  is  thus  most  excited  ;  the  radicle  is  stimulated  by 
moisture^  and  elongates  itself  when  it  is  thus  most 
excited.  Whence  one  of  these  grows  upward  in 
quest  of  its  adapted  object,  and  the  other  down- 
ward.'^* Were  this  account  better  verified  by  ex- 
periment than  it  is,  it  only  shifts  the  contrivance. 
It  does  not  disprove  the  contrivance  ;  it  only  re- 
moves it  a  little  farther  back.  Who,  to  use  our  au- 
thor's own  language,  "  adapted  the  objects  ?"  Who 
gave  such  a  quality  to  these  connate  parts,  as  to  be 
susceptible  of  different  ^^  stimulation ;''  as  to  be 
^f  excited  ''  each  only  by  its  own  element,  and  pre- 
cisely by  that  which  the  success  of  the  vegetation 
requires  ?  I  say,  "  which  the  success  of  the  vegeta- 
tion requires :"  for  the  toil  of  the  husbandman  would 
have  been  in  vain ;  his  laborious  and  expensive  pre- 
paration of  the  ground  in  vain  j  if  the  event  must, 

*  Darwin's  Phytologia,  p.  144. 


OF  PLANTS*  299 

after  all,  depend  upon  the  position  in  which  the 
scattered  seed  was  sown.  Not  one  seed  out  of  a 
hundred  would  fall  in  a  right  direction. 

Our  second  observation  is  upon  a  general  pro- 
perty of  climbing  plants,  which  is  strictly  mechani- 
cal.    In  these  plants,  from  each  knot  or  joint,  or 
as  botanists  call  it,  axilla,  of  the  plant,  issue,  close 
to  each  other,  two  shoots  ;  one  bearing  the  flower 
and  fruit ;  the  other,  drawn  out  into  a  wire,  a  long, 
tapering,  spiral  tendril,  that  twists  itself  round  any 
thing  which  lies  within  its  reach.    Considering,  that 
in  this  class  two  purposes  are  to  be  provided  for 
(and  together),  fructification  and  support,  the  fruit- 
age of  the  plant,  and  the  sustentation  of  the  stalk, 
what  means  could  be  used  more  effectual,  or,  as 
I  have  said,  more  mechanical,  than  what  this  struc- 
ture presents  to  our  eyes  ?  Why,  or  how,  without  a 
view  to  this  double  purpose,  do  two  shoots,  of  such 
different  and  appropriate  forms,   spring  from  the 
same  joint,  from  contiguous  points  of  the  same  stalk? 
It  never  happens  thus  in  robust  plants,  or  in  trees* 
"  We  see  not  (says  Ray)  so  much  as  one  tree,  or 
shrub,  or  herb,  that  hath  a  firm  and  strong  stem, 
and  that  is  able  to  mount  up  and  stand  alone  with- 
out assistance,  furnished  "with  these  tendrils J^    Make 
only  so  simple  a  comparison  as  that  between  a  pea 
and  a  bean.     Why  does  the  pea  put  forth  tendrils, 
the  bean  not ;  but  because  the  stalk  of  the  pea  can- 
not support  itself,  the  stalk  of  the  bean  can  ?     We 
may  add  also,  as  a  circumstance  not  to  be  overlooked, 
that  in  the  pea  tribe  these  clasps  do  not  make  their 
appearance  till  they  are  wanted ;  till  the  plant  has 
grown  to  a  height  to  stand  in  need  of  support. 


300  OF  PLANTS. 

This  word  ^^  support''  suggests  to  us  a  reflection 
upon  a  property  of  grasses,  of  corn,  and  canes.  The 
hollow  stems  of  these  classes  of  plants  are  set,  at 
certain  intervals,  with  joints.  These  joints  are  not 
found  in  the  trunks  of  trees,  or  in  the  solid  stalks  of 
plants.  There  may  be  other  uses  of  these  joints ; 
but  the  fact  is,  and  it  appears  to  be  at  least  one 
purpose  designed  by  them,  that  they  corroborate 
the  stem;  which,  by  its  length  and  hoUowness, 
would  otherwise  be  too  liable  to  break  or  bend. 

Gy^asses  are  Nature's  care.  With  these  she  clothes 
the  earth ;  with  these  she  sustains  its  inhabitants. 
Cattle  feed  upon  their  leaves ;  birds  upon  their 
smaller  seeds  ;  men  upon  the  larger  ;  for  few  readers 
need  be  told,  that  the  plants  which  produce  our 
bread-corn,  belong  to  this  class.  In  those  tribes, 
which  are  more  generally  considered  as  grasses, 
their  extraordinary  means  and  powers  of  preserva- 
tion and  increase,  their  hardiness,  their  almost  un- 
conquerable disposition  to  spread,  their  faculties  of 
reviviscence,  coincide  with  the  intention  of  nature 
concerning  them.  They  thrive  under  a  treatment 
by  which  other  plants  are  destroyed.  The  more 
their  leaves  are  consumed,  the  more  their  roots  in- 
crease. The  more  they  are  trampled  upon,  the 
thicker  they  grow.  Many  of  the  seemingly  dry 
and  dead  leaves  of  grasses  revive,  and  renew  their 
verdure  in  the  spring.  In  lofty  mountains,  where 
the  summer  heats  are  not  sufficient  to  ripen  the 
^eeds,  grasses  abound,  which  are  viviparous,  and 
consequently  able  to  propagate  themselves  without 
seed.     It  is  an  observation,  likewise,  which  has 


OF  PLANTS.  301 

often  been  made,  that  herbivorous  animals  attach 
themselves  to  the  leaves  of  grasses;  and,  if  at  liberty 
in  their  pastures  to  range  and  choose,  leave  un- 
touched the  straws  which  support  the  flowers.* 

The  GENERAL  properties  of  vegetable  nature,  or 
properties  common  to  large  portions  of  that  king- 
dom, are  almost  all  which  the  compass  of  our  ar- 
gument allows  to  bring  forward.  It  is  impossible 
to  follow  plants  into  their  several  species.  We 
may  be  allowed,  however,  to  single  out  three  or  four 
of  these  species  as  worthy  of  a  particular  notice, 
either  by  some  singular  mechanism,  or  by  some 
peculiar  provision,  or  by  both. 

I.  In  Dr  Darwin's  Botanic  Garden  (1.  395,  note)^ 
is  the  following  account  of  the  vallisneria^  as  it  has 
been  observed  in  the  river  Rhone. — "  They  have 
roots  at  the  bottom  of  the  Rhone.  The  flowers  of 
the  female  plant  float  on  the  surface  of  the  water, 
and  are  furnished  with  an  elastic  spiral  stalky  which 
extends  or  contracts  as  the  water  rises  or  falls  ; 
this  rise  or  fall,  from  the  torrents  which  flow  into 
the  river,  often  amounting  to  many  feet  in  a  few 
hours.  The  flowers  of  the  male  pla7it  are  produced 
under  water ;  and  as  soon  as  the  fecundating  farina 
is  mature,  they  separate  themselves  from  the  plant, 
rise  to  the  surface,  and  are  wafted  by  the  air,  or 
borne  by  the  currents,  to  the  female  flowers.^'  Our 
attention  in  this  narrative  will  be  directed  to  two 
particulars ;  first  to  the  mechanism,  the  "  elastic 
spiral  stalk,''  which  lengthens  or  contracts  itself 

*  Withering,  Bot.  Arr.  vol.  i.  p.  28.  ed.  2(1» 


S02  OF  PLANTS. 

according  as  the  water  rises  or  falls  ;  secondly,  to 
the  provision  which  is  made  for  bringing  the  male 
flower,  which  is  produced  under  water,  to  the  fe- 
male flower  which  floats  upon  the  surface. 

II.  My  second  example  I  take  from  Withering's 
Arrangement,  vol.  ii.  p.  209.  ed.  3.  "  The  cuscuta 
europcea  is  a  parasitical  plant.  The  seed  opens, 
and  puts  forth  a  little  spiral  body,  which  does  not 
seek  the  earth  to  take  root,  but  climbs  in  a  spiral 
direction,  from  right  to  left,  up  other  plants,  from 
which,  by  means  of  vessels,  it  draws  its  nourishment.'* 
The  "  little  spiral  body''  proceeding  from  the  seed, 
is  to  be  compared  with  the  fibres  which  seeds  send 
out  in  ordinary  cases  ;  and  the  comparison  ought 
to  regard  both  the  form  of  the  threads  and  the  di- 
rection. They  are  straight ;  this  is  spiral.  They 
shoot  downwards  ;  this  points  upwards.  In  the 
rule,  and  in  the  exception,  we  equally  perceive 
design. 

III.  A  better  known  parasitical  plant  is  the  ever- 
green shrub,  called  the  mistletoe.  What  we  have  to 
remark  in  it,  is  a  singular  instance  of  compensation. 

No  art  hath  yet  made  these  plants  take  root  in 
the  earth.  Here  therefore  might  seem  to  be  a 
mortal  defect  in  their  constitution.  Let  us  examine 
how  this  defect  is  made  up  to  them.  The  seeds  are 
endued  with  an  adhesive  quality,  so  tenacious,  that, 
if  they  be  rubbed  upon  the  smooth  bark  of  al- 
most any  tree,  they  will  stick  to  it.  And  then 
what  follows?  Roots  springing  from  these  seeds, 
insinuate  their  fibres  into  the  woody  substance  of 
the  tree  j  and  the  event  is,  that  a  mistletoe  plant  is 


OF  PLANTS.  303 

produced  next  winter.*  Of  no  other  plant  do  the 
roots  refuse  to  shoot  in  the  ground ;  of  no  other 
plant  do  the  seeds  possess  this  adhesive,  generative 
quality,  when  applied  to  the  bark  of  trees. 

IV.  Another  instance  of  the  compensatory  system 
is  in  the  autumnal  crocus,  or  meadow  saifron  CcoU 
chicum  autumnalej.  I  have  pitied  this  poor  plant  a 
thousand  times.  Its  blossom  rises  out  of  the  ground 
in  the  most  forlorn  condition  possible ;  without  a 
sheath,  a  fence,  a  calyx,  or  even  a  leaf  to  protect 
it ;  and  that,  not  in  the  spring,  not  to  be  visited  by 
summer  suns,  but  under  all  the  disadvantages  of 
the  declining  year.  When  we  come,  however,  to 
look  more  closely  into  the  structure  of  this  plant, 
we  find  that,  instead  of  its  being  neglected.  Nature 
has  gone  out  of  her  course  to  provide  for  its  secu- 
rity, and  to  make  up  to  it  for  all  its  defects.  The 
seed-vessel,  which  in  other  plants  is  situated  within 
the  cup  of  ihe  flower,  or  just  beneath  it,  in  this 
plant  lies  buried  ten  or  twelve  inches  under  ground 
within  the  bulbous  root.  The  tube  of  the  flower, 
which  is  seldom  more  than  a  few  tenths  of  an 
inch  long,  in  this  plant  extends  down  to  the  root. 
The  stiles  in  all  cases  reach  the  seed-vessel ;  but  it 
is  in  this,  by  an  elongation  unknown  to  any  other 
plant.  All  these  singularities  contribute  to  one  end. 
"  As  this  plant  blossoms  late  in  the  year,  and  pro- 
bably would  not  have  time  to  ripen  its  seeds  before 
the  access  of  winter,  which  would  destroy  them. 
Providence  has  contrived  its  structure  such,  that 


Withering,  Bot.  Arr.  vol.  i.  p.  203.  ed.  2d. 


304  OF  PLANTS. 

this  important  office  may  be  performed  at  a  depth 
in  the  earth  out  of  reach  of  the  usual  effects  of 
frosL"  ^     That  is  to  say,  in  the  autumn  nothing  is 
done  above  ground  but  the  business  of  impregna- 
tion ;  which  is  an  affair  between  the  antherae  and 
the  stigmata,  and  is  probably  soon  over.     The  ma- 
turation of  the  impregnated  seed,  which  in  other 
jplants  proceeds  within  a  capsule,  exposed  together 
with  the  rest  of  the  flower  to  the  open  air,  is  here 
carried  on,  and  during  the  whole  winter,  within  the 
heart,  as  we  may  say,  of  the  earth,  that  is,  ^^  out  of 
the  reach  of  the  usual  effects  of  frost.''     But  then  a 
new  difficulty  presents  itself.     Seeds,  though  per- 
fected, are  known  not  to  vegetate  at  this  depth  in 
the  earth.     Our  seeds,  therefore,  though  so  safely 
lodged,  would,  after  all,  be  lost  to  the  purpose  for 
which  all  seeds  are  intended.     Lest  this  should  be 
the  case,  "  a  second  admirable  provision  is  made  to 
raise  them  above  the  surface  when  they  are  perfect- 
ed, and  to  sow  them  at  a  proper  distance  ;''  viz.  the 
germ  grows  up  in  the  spriiig^  upon  a  fruit-stalk,  ac- 
companied with  leaves.     The  seeds  now,  in  com- 
mon with  those  of  other  plants,  have  the  benefit  of 
the  summer,  and  are  sown  upon  the  surface.     The 
order  of  vegetation  externally  is  this  : — The  plant 
produces  its  flowers  in  September ;  its  leaves  and 
fruits  in  the  spring  following. 

V.  I  give  the  account  of  the  dioncea  miiscipula^  an 
extraordinary  American  plant,  as  some  late  authors 
have  related  it ;  but  whether  we  be  yet  enough 

*  Withering,  iibi  supra,  p.  360. 


OF  PLANTS.  O05 

acquainted  with  the  plant,  to  bring  every  part  of 
this  account  to  the  test  of  repeated  and  famiUar 
observation,  I  am  unable  to  say.  "  Its  leaves  are 
jointed,  and  furnished  with  two  rows  of  strong 
prickles ;  their  surfaces  covered  with  a  number  of 
minute  glands,  which  secrete  a  sweet  liquor  that 
allures  the  approach  of  flies.  When  these  parts  are 
touched  by  the  legs  of  flies,  the  two  lobes  of  the  leaf 
instantly  spring  up,  the  rows  of  prickles  lock  them- 
selves fast  together,  and  squeeze  the  unwary  animal 
to  death.'^*  Here,  under  a  new  model,  we  recog- 
nize the  ancient  plan  of  nature,  viz.  the  relation  of 
parts  and  provisions  to  one  another,  to  a  common 
office,  and  to  the  utility  of  the  organized  body  to 
which  they  belong.  The  attracting  syrup,  the  rows 
of  strong  prickles,  their  position  so  as  to  interlock 
the  joints  of  the  leaves  ;  and  what  is  more  than  the 
rest,  that  singular  irritability  of  their  surfaces,  by 
which  they  close  at  a  touch  ;  all  bear  a  contributory 
part  in  producing  an  effect,  connected  either  with 
the  defence  or  with  the  nutrition  of  the  plant. 

*   Smellie*s  Phil,  of  Nat.  Hist.  vol.  i.  p.  5- 


U 


306  THE  ELEMENTS. 


CHAPTER  XXL 


THE  ELEMENTS, 


When  we  come  to  the  elements,  we  take  leave  of 
our  mechanics  ;  because  we  come  to  those  things, 
of  the  organization  of  which,  if  they  be  organized, 
we  are  confessedly  ignorant.  This  ignorance  is 
implied  by  their  name.  To  say  the  truth,  our  in- 
vestigations are  stopped  long  before  we  arrive  at 
this  point.  But  then  it  is  for  our  comfort  to  find, 
that  a  knowledge  of  the  constitution  of  the  elements 
is  not  necessary  for  us.  For  instance,  as  Addison 
has  well  observed,  ''  we  know  water  sufficiently, 
when  we  know  how  to  boil,  how  to  freeze,  how  to 
evaporate,  how  to  make  it  fresh,  how  to  make  it  run 
or  spout  out  in  what  quantity  and  direction  we 
please,  without  knowing  what  water  is.*'  The  ob- 
servation of  this  excellent  writer  has  more  propriety 
in  it  now,  than  it  had  at  the  time  it  was  made  :  for 
the  constitution,  and  the  constituent  parts  of  water, 
appear  in  some  measure  to  have  been  lately  disco- 
vered ;  yet  it  does  not,  I  think,  appear,  that  we  can 
make  any  better  or  greater  use  of  water  since  the 
discovery,  than  we  did  before  it. 

We  can  never  think  of  the  elements,  without  re- 
flecting upon  tlie  number  of  distinct  uses  which  are 


THE  ELEMENTS.       .  307 

consolidated  in  the  same  substance.  The  air  sup- 
pHes  the  lungs,  supports  fire,  conveys  sound,  reflects 
light,  diffuses  smells,  gives  rain,  wafts  ships,  bears 
up  birds.  'E|  vSarog  ra  itcivrd  :  water ^  besides  main- 
taining its  own  inhabitants,  is  the  universal  nourisher 
of  plants,  and  through  them  of  terrestrial  animals  ; 
is  the  basis  of  their  juices  and  fluids ;  dilutes  their 
food;  quenches  their  thirst;  floats  their  burdens. 
Fire  warms,  dissolves,  enlightens ;  is  the  great  pro- 
moter of  vegetation  and  life,  if  not  necessary  to  the 
support  of  both. 

We  might  enlarge,  to  almost  any  length  we 
pleased,  upon  each  of  these  uses ;  but  it  appears  to 
me  almost  sufficient  to  state  them.  The  few  re- 
marks which  I  judge  it  necessary  to  add,  are  as 
follow : 

I.  Air  is  essentially  different  from  earth.  There 
appears  to  be  no  necessity  for  an  atmosphere's  in- 
vesting our  globe  ;  yet  it  does  invest  it :  and  we  see 
how  many,  how  various,  and  how  important  are  the 
purposes  which  it  answers  to  every  order  of  ani- 
mated, not  to  say  of  organized  beings,  which  are 
placed  upon  the  terrestrial  surface.  I  think  that 
every  one  of  these  uses  will  be  understood  upon  the 
first  mention  of  them,  except  it  be  that  of  rejlecting 
light,  which  may  be  explained  thus.  If  I  had  the 
power  of  seeing  only  by  means  of  rays  coming  di- 
rectly from  the  sun,  whenever  I  turn  my  back  upon 
the  luminary,  I  should  find  myself  in  darkness.  If 
I  had  the  power  of  seeing  by  reflected  light,  yet  by 
means  only  of  light  reflected  from  solid  masses, 
these  masses  would  shine,  indeed,  and  glisten,  but 


308  THE  ELEMENTS. 

it  would  be  in  the  dark.  The  hemisphere,  the  sky, 
the  world,  could  only  be  illuminated^  as  it  is  illumi- 
nated, by  the  light  of  the  sun  being  from  all  sides, 
and  in  every  direction,  reflected  to  the  eye  by  par- 
ticles, as  numerous,  as  thickly  scattered,  and  as 
widely  diffused,  as  are  those  of  the  air. 

Another  general  quality  of  the  atmosphere  is  the 
power  of  evaporating  fluids.  The  adjustment  of 
this  quality  to  our  use  is  seen  in  its  action  upon  the 
sea.  In  the  sea,  water  and  salt  are  mixed  together 
most  intimately ;  yet  the  atmosphere  raises  the 
water,  and  leaves  the  salt.  Pure  and  fresh  as  drops 
of  rain  descend,  they  are  collected  from  brine.  If 
evaporation  be  solution,  (which  seems  to  be  pro- 
bable), then  the  air  dissolves  the  water,  and  not  the 
salt.  Upon  whatever  it  be  founded,  the  distinction 
is  critical ;  so  much  so,  that  when  we  attempt  to 
imitate  the  process  by  art,  we  must  regulate  our 
distillation  with  great  care  and  nicety,  or,  together 
with  the  water,  we  get  the  bitterness,  or,  at  least, 
the  distastefulness,  of  the  marine  substance :  and, 
after  all,  it  is  owing  to  this  original  elective  power 
in  the  air,  that  we  can  effect  the  separation  which 
we  wish,  by  any  art  or  means  whatever. 

By  evaporation,  water  is  earned  up  into  the  air ; 
by  the  converse  of  evaporation,  it  falls  down  upon 
the  earth.  And  how  does  it  fall  ?  Not  by  the  clouds 
being  all  at  once  re-converted  into  water,  and  de- 
scending like  a  sheet ;  not  in  rushing  down  in  co- 
lumns from  a  spout ;  but  in  moderate  drops,  as  from 
a  colander.  Our  watering-pots  are  made  to  imitate 
showers   of  rain.     Yet,    a  priori,    I  should  have 


THE  ELEMENTS.  309 

thought  either  of  the  two  former  methods  more 
likely  to  have  taken  place  than  the  last. 

By  respiration,  flame,  putrefaction,  air  is  rendered 
unfit  for  the  support  of  animal  life.  By  the  con- 
stant operation  of  these  corrupting  principles,  the 
whole  atmosphere,  if  there  were  no  restoring  causes, 
would  come  at  length  to  be  deprived  of  its  necessary 
degree  of  purity.  Some  of  these  causes  seem  to 
have  been  discovered,  and  their  efficacy  ascertained 
by  experiment.  And  so  far  as  the  discovery  has 
proceeded,  it  opens  to  us  a  beautiful  and  a  wonder- 
ful economy.  Vegetation  proves  to  be  one  of  them. 
A  sprig  of  mint,  corked  up  with  a  small  portion  of 
foul  air  placed  in  the  light,  renders  it  again  capable 
of  supporting  life  or  flame.  Here,  therefore,  is  a 
constant  circulation  of  benefits  maintained  between 
the  two  great  provinces  of  organized  nature.  The 
plant  purifies  what  the  animal  has  poisoned ;  in  re- 
turn, the  contaminated  air  is  more  than  ordinarily  nu- 
tritious to  the  plant.  Agitation  with  water  turns  out 
to  be  another  of  these  restoratives.  The  foulest  air, 
shaken  in  a  bottle  with  water  for  a  sufficient  length 
of  time,  recovers  a  great  degree  of  its  purity.  Here 
then  again,  allowing  for  the  scale  upon  which  na- 
ture works,  we  see  the  salutary  effi3cts  of  storms  and 
tempests.  The  yesty  waves  which  confound  the 
heaven  and  the  sea,  are  doing  the  very  thing  which 
was  done  in  the  bottle.  Nothing  can  be  of  greater 
importance  to  the  living  creation,  than  the  salubrity 
of  their  atmosphere.  It  ought  to  reconcile  us, 
therefore,  to  these  agitations  of  the  elements,  of 
which  we  sometimes  deplore  the  consequences,  to 


310  THE  ELEMENTS. 

know,  that  they  tend  powerfully  to  restore  to  the 
air  that  purity,  which  so  many  causes  are  constantly 
impairing. 

II.  In  water,  what  ought  not  a  little  to  be  ad- 
mired, are  those  negative  qualities  which  constitute 
its  purity.  Had  it  been  vinous,  or  oleaginous,  or 
acid ;  had  the  sea  been  filled,  or  the  rivers  flowed, 
with  wine  or  milk ;  fish,  constituted  as  they  are, 
must  have  died ;  plants,  constituted  as  they  are, 
would  have  withered ;  the  lives  of  animals  which 
feed  upon  plants,  must  have  perished.  Its  very  in- 
sipidityj  which  is  one  of  those  negative  qualities, 
renders  it  the  best  of  all  menstrua.  Having  no 
taste  of  its  own,  it  becomes  the  sincere  vehicle  of 
every  other.  Had  there  been  a  taste  in  water,  be 
it  what  it  might,  it  would  have  infected  every  thing 
we  ate  or  drank,  with  an  importunate  repetition  of 
the  same  flavour. 

Another  thing  in  this  element,  not  less  to  be  ad- 
mired, is  the  constant  round  which  it  travels  ;  and 
by  which,  without  suffering  either  adulteration  or 
waste,  it  is  continually  offering  itself  to  the  wants  of 
the  habitable  globe.  From  the  sea  are  exhaled 
those  vapours  which  form  the  clouds :  these  clouds 
descend  in  showers,  which,  penetrating  into  the 
crevices  of  the  hills,  supply  springs  ;  which  springs 
flow  in  little  streams  into  the  valleys ;  and  there, 
uniting,  become  rivers  ;  which  rivers,  in  return, 
feed  the  ocean.  So  there  is  an  incessant  circula- 
tion of  the  same  fluid  ;  and  not  one  drop  probably 
more  or  less  now  than  there  was  at  the  creation. 
A  particle  of  water  takes  its  departure  from  the 


THE  ELEMENTS.  311 

surface  of  the  sea,  in  order  to  fulfil  certain  import- 
ant offices  to  the  earth  ;  and,  having  executed  the 
service  which  was  assigned  to  it,  returns  to  the 
bosom  which  it  left. 

Some  have  thought,  that  we  have  too  much  water 
upon  the  globe,  the  sea  occupying  above  three  quar- 
ters of  its  whole  surface.  But  the  expanse  of  ocean, 
immense  as  it  is,  may  be  no  more  than  sufficient  to 
fertilize  the  earth.  Or,  independently  of  this  rea- 
son, I  know  not  why  the  sea  may  not  have  as  good 
a  right  to  its  place  as  the  land.  It  may  proportion- 
ably  support  as  many  inhabitants  j  minister  to  as 
large  an  aggregate  of  enjoyment.  The  land  only 
affi)rds  a  habitable  surface  ;  the  sea  is  habitable  to 
a  great  depth. 

III.  Of  fire,  we  have  said  that  it  dissolves.  The 
only  idea  probably  which  this  term  raised  in  the 
reader's  mind,  was  that  of  fire  melting  metals,  re- 
sins, and  some  other  substances,  fluxing  ores,  run- 
ning glass,  and  assisting  us  in  many  of  our  opera- 
tions, chymical  or  culinary.  Now  these  are  only 
uses  of  an  occasional  kind,  and  give  us  a  very  im- 
perfect notion  of  what  fire  does  for  us.  The  grand 
importance  of  this  dissolving  power,  the  great  office 
indeed  of  fire  in  the  economy  of  nature,  is  keeping  * 
things  in  a  state  of  solution,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  state 
of  fluidity.  Were  it  not  for  the  presence  of  heat, 
or  of  a  certain  degree  of  it,  all  fluids  would  be  frozen. 
The  ocean  itself  would  be  a  quarry  of  ice  j  universal 
nature  stiff*  and  dead. 

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  elements  bear  not  only 
a  strict  relation  to  the  constitution  of  organized 


31^  THE  ELEMENTS. 

bodies,  but  a  relation  to  each  other.  Water  could 
not  perform  its  office  to  the  earth  without  air  ;  nor 
exist,  as  water,  without  fire. 

IV.  Of  light  (whether  we  regard  it  as  of  the 
same  substance  with  fire,  or  as  a  different  sub- 
stance), it  is  altogether  superfluous  to  expatiate  up- 
on the  use.  No  man  disputes  it.  The  observations, 
therefore,  which  I  shall  offer,  respect  that  little 
which  we  seem  to  know  of  its  constitution. 

Light  travels  from  the  sun  at  the  rate  of  twelve 
millions  of  miles  in  a  minute.  Urged  by  such  a 
velocity,  with  what  force  must  its  particles  drive 
against  (I  will  not  say  the  eye,  the  tenderest  of 
animal  substances,  but)  every  substance,  animate 
or  inanimate,  which  stands  in  its  way!  It  might 
seem  to  be  a  force  sufficient  to  shatter  to  atoms  the 
hardest  bodies. 

How  then  is  this  effect,  the  consequence  of  such 
prodigious  velocity,  guarded  against  ?  By  a  propor- 
tionable minuteness  of  the  particles  of  which  light  is 
composed.  It  is  impossible  for  the  human  mind  to 
imagine  to  itself  any  thing  so  small  as  a  particle  of 
light.  But  this  extreme  exility,  though  difficult  to 
conceive,  it  is  easy  to  prove^  A  drop  of  tallow  ex- 
pended in  the  wick  of  a  farthing  candle,  shall  send 
forth  rays  sufficient  to  fill  a  hemisphere  of  a  mile 
diameter ;  and  to  fill  it  so  full  of  these  rays,  that  an 
aperture  not  larger  than  the  pupil  of  an  eye,  where- 
ever  it  be  placed  within  the  hemisphere,  shall  be 
sure  to  receive  some  of  them.  What  floods  of  light 
are  continually  poured  from  the  sun,  we  cannot 
estimate  ;  but  the  immensity  of  the  sphere  which  is 


THE  ELEMENTS,  313 

filled  with  its  particles,  even  if  it  reached  no  farther 
than  the  orbit  of  the  earth,  we  can  in  some  sort 
compute ;  and  we  have  reason  to  believe,  that 
throughout  this  whole  region,  the  particles  of  light 
lie,  in  latitude  at  least,  near  to  one  another.  The 
spissitude  of  the  sun's  rays  at  the  earth  is  such,  that 
the  number  which  falls  upon  a  burning-glass  of  an 
inch  diameter,  is  sufficient,  when  concentrated,  to 
set  wood  on  fire. 

The  tenuity  and  the  velocity  of  particles  of  light, 
as  ascertained  by  separate  observations,  may  be  said 
to  be  proportioned  to  each  other ;  both  surpassing 
our  utmost  stretch  of  comprehension  ;  but  propor- 
tioned. And  it  is  this  proportion  alone  which 
converts  a  tremendous  element  into  a  welcome 
visitor. 

It  has  been  observed  to  me  by  a  learned  friend, 
as  having  often  struck  his  mind,  that  if  light  had 
been  made  by  a  common  artist,  it  would  have  been 
of  one  uniform  colour  ;  whereas,  by  its  present  com- 
position, we  have  that  variety  of  colours  which  is 
of  such  infinite  use  to  us  for  the  distinguishing  of 
objects ;  which  adds  so  much  to  the  beauty  of  the 
earth,  and  augments  the  stock  of  our  innocent 
pleasures. 

With  which  may  be  joined  another  reflection, 
viz.  that,  considering  light  as  compounded  of  rays 
of  seven  different  colours,  (of  which  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  because  it  can  be  resolved  into  these  rays  by 
simply  passing  it  through  a  prism),  the  constituent 
parts  must  be  well  mixed  and  blended  together,  to 
produce  a  fluid  so  clear  and  colourless  as  a  beam 
of  light  is,  when  received  from  the  sun. 


314  ASTRONOMY.' 


CHAPTER  XX IL 


ASTRONOMY. 


My  opinion  of  Astronomy  has  always  been,  that  it 
is  720t  the  best  medium  through  which  to  prove  the 
agency  of  an  intelligent  Creator;  but  that,  this 
being  proved,  it  shows,  beyond  all  other  sciences, 
the  magnificence  of  his  operations.  The  mind  which 
is  once  convinced,  it  raises  to  sublimer  views  of  the 
Deity  than  any  other  subject  affords  ;  but  it  is  not 
so  well  adapted,  as  some  other  subjects  are,  to  the 
purpose  of  argument.  We  are  destitute  of  the 
means  of  examining  the  constitution  of  the  heavenly 
bodies.  The  very  simplicity  of  their  appearance  is 
against  them.  We  see  nothing  but  bright  points, 
luminous  circles,  or  the  phases  of  spheres  reflecting 
the  light  which  falls  upon  them.  Now  we  deduce 
design  from  relation,  aptitude,  and  correspondence 
of  parts.  Some  degree  therefore  of  complea:ity  is 
necessary  to  render  a  subject  fit  for  this  species  of 
argument.     But  the  heavenly  bodies  do  not,  except 

*  For  the  articles  in  this  chapter  marked  with  an  asterisk,  I  am  indebted 
to  some  obliging  communications  received  (through  the  hands  of  the  Lord 
Bishop  of  Elphin)  from  the  Rev.  J.  Brinklcy,  M.  A.,  Andrew's  Professor 
of  Astronomy  in  the  University  of  Dublin. 


ASTRONOMY.    .  315 

perhaps  in  the  instance  of  Saturn's  ring,  present 
themselves  to  our  observation  as  compounded  of 
parts  at  alL  This,  which  may  be  a  perfection  in 
them,  is  a  disadvantage  to  us,  as  inquirers  after 
their  nature.  They  do  not  come  within  our  me- 
chanics. 

And  what  we  say  of  their  forms,  is  true  of  their 
motions.     Their  motions  are  carried  on  without  any 
sensible  intermediate  apparatus ;  whereby  we  are 
cut  off  from  one  principal  ground  of  argumentation 
' — analogy.     We  have  nothing  wherewith  to  com- 
pare them  ;  no  invention,  no  discovery,  no  operation 
or  resource  of  art,  which,  in  this  respect,  resembles 
them.    Even  those  things  which  are  made  to  imitate 
and  represent  them,  such  as  orreries,  planetaria, 
celestial  globes,  &c.  bear  no  affinity  to  them,  in  the 
cause  and  principle  by  which  their  motions  are  ac- 
tuated.    I  can  assign  for  this  difference  a  reason  of 
utility,   viz.  a  reason  why,  though  the  action  of 
terrestrial  bodies  upon  each  other  be,  in  almost  all 
cases,  through  the  intervention  of  solid  or  fluid 
substances,  yet  central  attraction  does  not  operate  in 
this  manner.     It  was  necessary  that  the  intervals 
between  the  planetary  orbs  should  be  devoid  of  any 
inert  matter  either  fluid  or  solid,  because  such  an 
intervening  substance  would,  by  its  resistance,  des- 
troy those  very  motions  which  attraction  is  employed 
to  preserve.     This  may  be  a  final  cause  of  the  dif- 
ference ;  but  still  the  difference  destroys  the  analogy. 

Our  ignorance,  moreover,  of  the  sensitive  natures 
by  which  other  planets  are  inhabited,  necessarily 
keeps  from  us  the  knowledge  of  numberless  utilities. 


316  ASTRONOMY. 

relations,  and  subserviencies,  which  we  perceive 
upon  our  own  globe. 

After  all ;  the  real  subject  of  admiration  is,  that 
we  understand  so  much  of  astronomy  as  we  do. 
That  an  animal  confined  to  the  surface  of  one  of 
the  planets  ;  bearing  a  less  proportion  to  it  than  the 
smallest  microscopic  insect  does  to  the  plant  it 
lives  upon  ;  that  this  little,  busy,  inquisitive  creature, 
by  the  use  of  senses  which  were  given  to  it  for  its 
domestic  necessities,  and  by  means  of  the  assistance 
of  those  senses  which  it  has  had  the  art  to  procure, 
should  have  been  enabled  to  observe  the  whole 
system  of  worlds  to  which  its  own  belongs ;  the 
changes  of  place  of  the  immense  globes  which  com- 
pose it ;  and  with  such  accuracy,  as  to  mark  out, 
beforehand,  the  situation  in  the  heavens  in  which 
they  will  be  found  at  any  future  point  of  time ; 
and  that  these  bodies,  after  sailing  through  regions 
of  void  and  trackless  space,  should  arrive  at  the 
place  where  they  were  expected,  not  within  a  mi- 
nute, but  within  a  few  seconds  of  a  minute,  of  the 
time  prefixed  and  predicted :  All  this  is  wonderful, 
whether  we  refer  our  admiration  to  the  constancy 
of  the  heavenly  motions  themselves,  or  to  the  per- 
spicacity and  precision  with  which  they  have  been 
noticed  by  mankind.  Nor  is  this  the  whole,  nor 
indeed  the  chief  part  of  what  astronomy  teaches. 
By  bringing  reason  to  bear  upon  observation  (the 
acutest  reasoning  upon  the  exactest  observation), 
the  astronomer  has  been  able,  out  of  the  '^  mystic 
dance,*'  and  the  confusion  (for  such  it  is)  under 
which  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  present 


ASTRONOMY.  317 

themselves  to  the  eye  of  a  mere  gazer  upon  the 
skies,  to  eUcit  their  order  and  their  real  paths. 

Our  knowledge,  therefore,  of  astronomy  is  admir- 
able, though  imperfect ;  and,  amidst  the  confessed 
desiderata  and  desideranda  which  impede  our  in- 
vestigation of  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity,  in  these 
the  grandest  of  his  works,  there  are  to  be  found, 
in  the  phenomena,  ascertained  circumstances  and 
laws,  sufficient  to  indicate  an  intellectual  agency  in 
three  of  its  principal  operations,  viz.  in  choosing, 
in  determining,  in  regulating :  in  choosing^  out  of 
a  boundless  variety  of  suppositions  which  were 
equally  possible,  that  which  is  beneficial ;  in  deter- 
mining  J  what,  left  to  itself,  had  a  thousand  chances 
against  conveniency,  for  one  in  its  favour  ;  in  re- 
gulating subjects,  as  to  quantity  and  degree,  which, 
by  their  nature,  were  unlimited  with  respect  to 
either.  It  will  be  our  business  to  offer,  under  each 
of  these  heads,  a  few  instances,  such  as  best  admit 
of  a  popular  explication. 

I.  Amongst  proofs  of  choice,  one  is,  fixing  the 
source  of  light  and  heat  in  the  centre  of  the  system. 
The  sun  is  ignited  and  luminous ;  the  planets, 
which  move  round  him,  cold  and  dark.  There 
seems  to  be  no  antecedent  necessity  for  this  order. 
The  sun  might  have  been  an  opaque  mass ;  some  one, 
or  two,  or  more,  or  any,  or  all  the  planets,  globes 
of  fire.  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  hea- 
venly bodies,  which  requires  that  those  which  are 
stationary  should  be  on  fire,  that  those  which  move 
should  be  cold  ;  for,  in  fact,  comets  are  bodies 
on  fire,  or  at  least   capable  of  the  most  intense 


318  ASTRONOMY. 

heat,  yet  revolve  round  a  centre:  nor  does  this 
order  obtain  between  the  primary  planets  and 
their  secondaries,  which  are  all  opaque.  When 
we  consider,  therefore,  that  the  sun  is  one ;  that 
the  planets  going  round  it  are  at  least  seven  ;  that 
it  is  indifferent  to  their  nature,  which  are  lumi- 
nous  and  which  are  opaque ;  and  also,  in  what 
order,  with  respect  to  each  other,  these  two  kinds 
of  bodies  are  disposed ;  we  may  judge  of  the  im- 
probability of  the  present  arrangement  taking  place 
by  chance. 

If,  by  way  of  accounting  for  the  state  in  which 
we  find  the  solar  system,  it  be  alleged  (and  this  is 
one  amongst  the  guesses  of  those  who  reject  an  in- 
telligent Creator),  that  the  planets  themselves  are 
only  cooled  or  cooling  masses,  and  were  once,  like 
the  sun,  many  thousand  times  hotter  than  red- 
hot  iron ;  then  it  follows,  that  the  sun  also  himself 
must  be  in  his  progress  towards  growing  cold ; 
which  puts  an  end  to  the  possibility  of  his  having 
existed,  as  he  is,  from  eternity.  This  consequence 
arises  out  of  the  hypothesis  with  still  more  certainty, 
if  we  make  a  part  of  it,  what  the  philosophers  who 
maintain  it  have  usually  taught,  that  the  planets 
were  originally  masses  of  matter,  struck  off  in  a 
state  of  fusion  from  the  body  of  the  sun  by  the 
percussion  of  a  comet,  or  by  a  shock  from  some 
other  cause,  with  which  we  are  not  acquainted : 
for,  if  these  masses,  partaking  of  the  nature  and 
substance  of  the  sun's  body,  have  in  process  of 
time  lost  their  heat,  that  body  itself,  in  time  like- 
wise,  no  matter  in  how  much  longer  time,  must 


ASTRONOMY.  319 

lose  its  heat  also,  and  therefore  be  incapable  of 
an  eternal  duration  in  the  state  in  which  we  see 
it,  either  for  the  time  to  come,  or  the  time  past. 

The  preference  of  the  present  to  any  other 
mode  of  distributing  luminous  and  opaque  bodies, 
I  take  to  be  evident.  It  requires  more  astronomy 
than  I  am  able  to  lay  before  the  reader,  to  show,  in 
its  particulars,  what  would  be  the  effect  to  the 
system,  of  a  dark  body  at  the  centre,  and  of  one  of 
the  planets  being  luminous  :  but  I  think  it  manifest, 
without  either  plates  or  calculation,  first,  that  sup- 
posing the  necessary  proportion  of  magnitude  be- 
tween the  central  and  the  revolving  bodies  to  be 
preserved,  the  ignited  planet  would  not  be  sufficient 
to  illuminate  and  warm  the  rest  of  the  system ; 
secondly,  that  its  light  and  heat  would  be  imparted 
to  the  other  planets  much  more  irregularly  than 
light  and  heat  are  now  received  from  the  sun. 

(*)  II.  Another  thing  in  which  a  choice  appears 
to  be  exercised,  and  in  which,  amongst  the  possi- 
bilities out  of  which  the  choice  was  to  be  made, 
the  number  of  those  which  were  wrong  bore  an  in- 
finite proportion  to  the  number  of  those  which  were 
right,  is  in  what  geometricians  call  the  aa^is  of  ro- 
tation. This  matter  I  will  endeavour  to  explain. 
The  earth,  it  is  well  known,  is  not  an  exact  globe, 
but  an  oblate  spheroid,  something  like  an  orange. 
Now  the  axes  of  rotation,  or  the  diameters  upon 
which  such  a  body  may  be  made  to  turn  round,  are 
as  many  as  can  be  drawn  through  its  centre  to  oppo- 
site points  upon  its  whole  surface  :  but  of  these  axes 
none  are  pervnanent,  except  either  its  shortest  dia- 

47 


320  ASTRONOMY. 

meter,  i.  e.  that  which  passes  through  the  heart  of 
the  orange  from  the  place  where  the  stalk  is  inserted 
into  it,  and  which  is  but  one;  or  its  longest  di- 
ameters, at  right  angles  with  the  former,  which  must 
all  terminate  in  the  single  circumference  which  goes 
round  the  thickest  part  of  the  orange.  The  shortest 
diameter  is  that  upon  which  in  fact  the  earth  turns  ; 
and  it  is,  as  the  reader  sees,  what  it  ought  to  be, 
a  permanent  axis ;  whereas,  had  blind  chance,  had 
a  casual  impulse,  had  a  stroke  or  push  at  random, 
set  the  earth  a-spinning,  the  odds  were  infinite, 
but  that  they  had  sent  it  round  upon  a  wrong  axis. 
And  what  would  have  been  the  consequence  ?  The 
difference  between  a  permanent  axis  and  another 
axis  is  this  :  When  a  spheroid  in  a  state  of  rotatory 
motion  gets  upon  a  permanent  axis,  it  keeps  there  ; 
it  remains  steady  and  faithful  to  its  position ;  its 
poles  preserve  their  direction  with  respect  to  the 
plane  and  to  the  centre  of  its  orbit :  but  whilst  it 
turns  upon  an  axis  which  is  not  permanent  (and  the 
number  of  those  we  have  seen  infinitely  exceeds  the 
number  of  the  other),  it  is  always  liable  to  shift  and 
vacillate  from  one  axis  to  another,  with  a  corres- 
ponding change  in  the  inclination  of  its  poles. 
Therefore,  if  a  planet  once  set  off  revolving  upon 
any  other  than  its  shortest,  or  one  of  its  longest 
axes,  the  poles  on  its  surface  would  keep  perpetually 
changing,  and  it  never  would  attain  a  permanent 
axis  of  rotation.  The  effect  of  this  unfixedness  and 
instability  would  be,  that  the  equatorial  parts  of  the 
earth  might  become  the  polar,  or  the  polar  the 
equatorial ;   to  the  utter  destruction  of  plants  and 


ASTRONOMY.  S21 

animals,  which  are  not  capable  of  interchanging 
their  ^tiiations,  but  are  respectively  adapted  to 
their  own.  As  to  ourselves,  instead  of  rejoicing  in 
our  temperate  zone,  and  annually  preparing  for  the 
moderate  vicissitude,  or  rather  the  agreeable  suc- 
cession of  seasons  which  we  experience  and  expect, 
we  might  come  to  be  locked  up  in  the  ice  and  dark- 
ness of  the  arctic  circle,  with  bodies  neither  inured 
to  its  rigours,  nor  provided  with  shelter  or  defence 
against  them.  Nor  would  it  be  much  better,  if  the 
trepidation  of  our  pole,  taking  an  opposite  course, 
should  place  us  under  the  heats  of  a  vertical  sun. 
But  if  it  would  fare  so  ill  with  the  human  inhabi- 
tant, who  can  live  under  greater  varieties  of  latitude 
than  any  other  animal ;  still  more  noxious  would 
this  translation  of  climate  have  proved  to  life  in  the 
rest  of  the  creation ;  and  most  perhaps  of  all,  in 
plants.  The  habitable  earth,  and  its  beautiful  va- 
riety, might  have  been  destroyed  by  a  simple  mis- 
chance in  the  axis  of  rotation. 

(*)  III.  All  this,  however,  proceeds  upon  a  sup- 
position of  the  earth  having  been  formed  at  first  an 
oblate  spheroid.  There  is  another  supposition; 
and  perhaps  our  limited  information  will  not  enable 
us  to  decide  between  them.  The  second  supposi- 
tion is,  that  the  earth,  being  a  mixed  mass  some- 
what fluid,  took,  as  it  might  do,  its  present  form, 
by  the  joint  action  of  the  mutual  gravitation  of  its 
parts  and  its  rotatory  motion.  This,  as  we  have 
said,  is  a  point  in  the  history  of  the  earth  which  our 
observations  are  not  sufficient  to  determine.  For  a 
very  small  depth  below  the  surface  (but  extremely 

X 


32^  ASTRONOMY. 

small,  less,  perhaps,  than  an  eight-thoUsandth  part, 
compared  with  the  depth  of  the  centre)  we  find 
vestiges  of  ancient  fluidity.  But  this  fluidity  must 
have  gone  down  many  hundred  times  farther  than 
we  can  penetrate,  to  enable  the  earth  to  take  its 
present  oblate  form  ;  and  whether  any  traces  of  this 
kind  exist  to  that  depth,  we  are  ignorant.  Calcula-* 
lions  were  made  a  few  years  ago,  of  the  mean  den- 
sity of  the  earth,  by  comparing  the  force  of  its  at- 
traction with  the  force  of  attraction  of  a  rock  of 
granite,  the  bulk  of  which  could  be  ascertained : 
and  the  upshot  of  the  calculation  was,  that  the  earth 
upon  an  average,  through  its  whole  sphere,  has 
twice  the  density  of  granite,  or  about  five  times  that 
of  water.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  a  hollow  shell,  as 
some  have  formerly  supposed ;  nor  can  its  internal 
parts  be  occupied  by  central  fire,  or  by  water.  The 
solid  parts  must  greatly  exceed  the  fluid  parts  :  and 
the  probability  is,  that  it  is  a  solid  mass  throughout, 
composed  of  substances  more  ponderous  the  deeper 
we  go.  Nevertheless,  we  may  conceive  the  present 
face  of  the  earth  to  have  originated  from  the  revo- 
lution of  a  sphere,  covered  by  a  surface  of  a  com- 
pound mixture ;  the  fluid  and  solid  parts  separating, 
as  the  surface  becomes  quiescent.  Here  then  comes 
in  the  moderating  hand  of  the  Creator.  If  the  water 
had  exceeded  its  present  proportion,  even  but  by  a 
trifling  quantity  compared  with  the  whole  globe,  all 
thQ  land  would  have  been  covered :  had  there  been 
much  less  than  there  is,  there  would  not  have  been 
enough  to  fertilize  the  continent.  Had  the  exsicca- 
tion been  progressive,  such  as  we  may  suppose  to 


ASTRONOMY.  323 

have  been  produced  by  an  evaporating  heat,  how 
came  it  to  stop  at  the  point  at  which  we  see  it  ? 
Why  did  it  not  stop  sooner?  why  at  all?  The 
mandate  of  the  Deity  will  account  for  this  ;  nothing 
else  will. 

IV.  Of  centripetal  forces.  By  virtue  of  the 
simplest  law  that  can  be  imagined,  viz.  that  a  body 
continues  in  the  state  in  which  it  is,  whether  of  mo- 
tion or  rest ;  and  if  in  motion,  goes  oil  in  the  line 
in  which  it  was  proceeding,  and  with  the  same  ve- 
locity, unless  there  be  some  cause  for  change :  by 
virtue,  I  say,  of  this  law,  it  comes  to  pass  (what 
may  appear  to  be  a  strange  consequence),  that  cases 
arise,  in  which  attraction,  incessantly  drawing  a 
body  towards  a  centre,  never  brings,  nor  ever  will 
bring,  the  body  to  that  centre,  but  keep  it  in  eter-* 
nal  circulation  round  it.  If  it  were  possible  to  fire 
off  a  cannon-ball  with  a  velocity  of  five  miles  in  a 
second,  and  the  resistance  of  the  air  could  be  taken 
away,  the  cannon-ball  would  for  ever  wheel  round 
the  earth,  instead  of  falling  down  upon  it.  This  is 
the  principle  which  sustains  the  heavenly  motions. 
The  Deity,  having  appointed  this  law  to  matter 
(than  which,  as  we  have  said  before,  no  law  could 
be  more  simple),  has  turned  it  to  a  wonderful  ac- 
count in  constructing  planetary  systems. 

The  actuating  cause  in  these  systems,  is  an  at- 
traction which  varies  reciprocally  as  the  square  of 
the  distance ;  that  is,  at  double  the  distance,  has  a 
quarter  of  the  force ;  at  half  the  distance,  four  times 
the  strength ;  and  so  on.  Now,  concerning  this 
law  of  variation,  we  have  three  things  to  observe : 


324.  ASTRONOMY. 

First ;  that  attraction,  for  any  thing  we  know  about 
it,  was  just  as  capable  of  one  law  of  variation  as  of 
another':  Secondly;  that  out  of  an  infinite  number 
of  possible  laws,  those  which  were  admissible  for 
the  purpose  of  supporting  the  heavenly  motions,  lay 
within  certain  narrow  limits  :  Thirdly ;  that  of  the 
admissible  laws,  or  those  which  come  within  the 
limits  prescribed,  the  law  that  actually  prevails  is 
the  most  beneficial.  So  far  as  these  propositions 
can  be  made  out,  we  may  be  said,  I  think,  to  prove 
choice  and  regulation  :  choice,  out  of  boundless  va- 
riety ;  and  regulation,  of  that  whi^h,  by  its  own 
nature,  was,  in  respect  of  the  property  regulated, 
indifferent  and  indefinite. 

I.  First  then,  attraction,  for  any  thing  we  know 
about  it,  was  originally  indifferent  to  all  laws  of 
variation  depending  upon  change  of  distance,  i.  e. 
just  as  susceptible  of  one  law  as  of  another.  It 
might  have  been  the  same  at  all  distances  ;  it  might 
have  increased  as  the  distance  increased :  or  it  might 
have  diminished  with  the  increase  of  the  distance, 
yet  in  ten  thousand  different  proportions  from  the 
present ;  it  might  have  followed  no  stated  law  at  all. 
If  attraction  be  what  Cotes,  with  many  other  New- 
tonians, thought  it  to  be,  a  primordial  property  of 
matter,  not  dependent  upon,  or  traceable  to,  any 
other  material  cause ;  then,  by  the  very  nature  and 
definition  of  a  primordial  property,  it  stood  indiffe- 
rent to  all  laws.  If  it  be  the  agency  of  something 
immaterial,  then  also,  for  any  thing  we  know  of  it^ 
it  was  indifferent  to  all  laws.  If  the  revolution 
of  bodies  round  a  centre  depend  upon  vortices^ 


ASTRONOMY.  3<25 

neither  are  these  Hmited  to  one  law  more  than 
another. 

There  is,  I  know,  an  account  given  of  attraction, 
which  should  seem,  in  its  very  cause,  to  assign  to  it 
the  law  which  we  find  it  to  observe ;  and  which, 
therefore,  makes  that  law,  a  law,  not  of  choice,  but 
of  necessity :  and  it  is  the  account,  which  ascribes 
attraction  to  an  emanation  from  the  attracting  body. 
It  is  probable,  that  the  influence  of  such  an  emana- 
tion will  be  proportioned  to  the  spissitude  of  the 
rays  of  which  it  is  composed ;  which  spissitude, 
supposing  the  rays  to  issue  in  right  Hues  on  all  sides 
from  a  point,  will  be  reciprocally  as  the  square  of 
the  distance.  The  mathematics  of  this  solution  we 
do  not  call  in  question:  the  question  with  us  is, 
whether  there  be  any  sufficient  reason  for  believing 
that  attraction  is  produced  by  an  emanation.  For 
my  part,  I  am  totally  at  a  loss  to  comprehend  how 
particles  streaming  from  a  centre  should  draw  a 
body  towards  it.  The  impulse,  if  impulse  it  be,  is 
all  the  other  way.  Nor  shall  we  find  less  difficulty 
in  conceiving  a  conflux  of  particles,  incessantly 
flowing  to  a  centre,  and  carrying  down  all  bodies 
along  with  it,  that  centre  also  itself  being  in  a  state 
of  rapid  motion  through  absolute  space ;  for  by 
what  source  is  the  stream  fed,  or  what  becomes  of 
the  accumulation  ?  Add  to  which,  that  it  seems  to 
imply  a  contrariety  of  properties,  to  suppose  an 
ethereal  fluid  to  acty  but  not  to  resist ;  powerful 
enough  to  carry  down  bodies  with  great  force  to- 
wards a  centre,  yet,  inconsistently  with  the  nature 
of  inert  matter,  powerless  and  perfectly  yielding 


326  ASTRONOMY. 

with  respect  to  the  motions  which  result  from  the 
projectile  impulse.  By  calculations  drawn  from 
ancient  notices  of  eclipses  of  the  moon,  we  can 
prove  that,  if  such  a  fluid  exist  at  all,  its  resistance 
has  had  no  sensible  effect  upon  the  moon's  motion 
for  two  thousand  five  hundred  years.  The  truth  is, 
that,  except  this  one  circumstance  of  the  variation 
of  the  attracting  force  at  different  distances  agree- 
ing with  the  variation  of  the  spissitude,  there  is  no 
reason  whatever  to  support  the  hypothesis  of  an 
emanation ;  and,  as  it  seems  to  me,  almost  insuper- 
able reasons  against  it. 

,,  (*)  II.  Our  second  proposition  is,  that  whilst  the 
possible  laws  of  variation  were  infinite,  the  admis- 
sible laws,  or  the  laws  compatible  with  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  system,  lie  within  narrow  limits.  If  the 
attracting  force  had  varied  according  to  any  direct 
law  of  the  distance,  let  it  have  been  what  it  would, 
great  destruction  and  confusion  would  have  taken 
place.  The  direct  simple  proportion  of  the  distance 
would,  it  is  true,  have  produced  an  ellipse :  but 
the  perturbing  forces  would  have  acted  with  so 
much  advantage,  as  to  be  continually  changing  the 
dimensions  of  the  ellipse,  in  a  manner  inconsistent 
with  our  terrestrial  creation.  For  instance  ;  if  the 
planet  Saturn,  so  large  and  so  remote,  had  attracted 
the  earth,  both  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of 
matter  contained  in  it,  which  it  does ;  and  also  in 
any  proportion  to  its  distance ;  i.  e.  if  it  had  pulled 
the  harder  for  being  the  farther  off  (instead  of  the 
reverse  of  it),  it  would  have  dragged  out  of  its 
course  the  globe  which  we  inhabit,  and  have  per- 


ASTRONOMY,  8^7 

plexed  its  motions,  to  a  degree  incompatible  with 
our  security,  our  enjoyments,  and  probably  out 
existence.  Of  the  inverse  laws,  if  the  centripetal 
force  had  changed  as  the  cube  of  the  distance,  or 
in  any  higher  proportion,  that  is  (for  I  speak  to  the 
unlearned),  if,  at  double  the  distance,  the  attractive 
force  had  been  diminished  to  an  eighth  part,  or  to 
less  than  that,  the  consequence  would  have  been, 
that  the  planets,  if  they  once  began  to  approach 
the  sun,  would  have  fallen  into  his  body ;  if  they 
once,  though  by  ever  so  little,  increased  their  dis- 
tance from  the  centre,  would  for  ever  have  receded 
from  it.  The  laws,  therefore,  of  attraction,  by  which 
a  system  of  revolving  bodies  could  be  upholden  in 
their  motions,  lie  within  narrow  limits,  compared 
with  the  possible  laws.  I  much  under-rate  the  re- 
striction, when  I  say  that,  in  a  scale  of  a  mile,  they 
are  confined  to  an  inch.  All  direct  ratios  of  the 
distance  are  excluded,  on  account  of  danger  from 
perturbing  forces  ;  all  reciprocal  ratios,  except  what 
lie  beneath  the  cube  of  the  distance,  by  the  demon- 
strable consequence,  that  every  the  least  change  of 
distance  would,  under  the  operation  of  such  laws, 
have  been  fatal  to  the  repose  and  order  of  the  sys- 
tem. We  do  not  know,  that  is,  we  seldom  reflect, 
how  interested  we  are  in  this  matter.  Small  irregu- 
larities may  be  endured ;  but  changes  within  these 
limits  being  allowed  for,  the  permanency  of  our 
ellipse  is  a  question  of  life  and  death  to  our  whole 
sensitive  world. 

(*)  III.  That  the  subsisting  law  of  attraction  fallis 
within  the  limits  which  utility  requires,  when  these 


328  ASTRONOMY^ 

limits  bear  so  small  a  proportion  to  the  range 
of  possibilities  upon  which  chance  might  equally 
have  cast  it,  is  not,  with  any  appearance  of  reason, 
to  be  accounted  for  by  any  other  cause  than  a 
regulation  proceeding  from  a  designing  mind.  But 
our  next  proposition  carries  the  matter  somewhat 
farther.  We  say,  in  the  third  place,  that,  out  of  the 
different  laws  which  lie  within  the  limits  of  admis- 
sible laws,  the  best  is  made  choice  of;  that  there  are 
advantages  in  this  particular  law  which  cannot  be 
demonstrated  to  belong  to  any  other  law ;  and,  con- 
cerning some  of  which,  it  can  be  demonstratecl  that 
they  do  not  belong  to  any  other. 

(^)  1.  Whilst  this  law  prevails  between  each  par- 
ticle of  matter,  the  united  attraction  of  a  sphere, 
composed  of  that  matter,  observes  the  same  law. 
This  property  of  the  law  is  necessary,  to  render  it 
applicable  to  a  system  composed  of  spheres,  but  it 
is  a  property  which  belongs  to  no  other  law  of  at- 
traction that  is  admissible.  The  law  of  variation  of 
the  united  attraction  is  in  no  other  case  the  same 
as  the  law  of  attraction  of  each  particle,  one  case 
excepted,  and  that  is  of  the  attraction  varying  di- 
rectly as  the  distance  ;  the  inconveniency  of  which 
law,  in  other  respects,  we  have  already  noticed. 

We  may  follow  this  regulation  somewhat  farther, 
and  still  more  strikingly  perceive  that  it  proceeded 
from  a  designing  mind.  A  law  both  admissible  and 
convenient  was  requisite.  In  what  way  is  the  law 
of  the  attracting  globes  obtained?  Astronomical 
observations  and  terrestrial  experiments  showj  that 
the  attraction  of  the  globes  of  the  system  is  made 


ASTRONOMY,  329 

up  of  the  attraction  of  their  parts ;  the  attraction 
of  each  globe  being  compounded  of  the  attractions 
of  its  parts.  Now,  the  admissible  and  convenient 
law  which  exists,  could  not  be  obtained  in  a  system 
of  bodies  gravitating  by  the  united  gravitation  of 
their  parts,  unless  each  particle  of  matter  were  at^ 
tracted  by  a  force  varying  by  one  particular  law, 
uz.  varying  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  ; 
for,  if  the  action  of  the  particles  be  according  to 
any  other  law  whatever,  the  admissible  and  con- 
venient law  which  is  adopted  could  not  be  obtained. 
Here  then  are  clearly  shown  regulation  and  design. 
A  law  both  admissible  and  convenient  was  to  be 
obtained :  the  mode  chosen  for  obtaining  that  law 
was  by  making  each  particle  of  matter  act.  After  this 
choice  was  made,  then  farther  attention  was  to  be 
given  to  each  particle  of  matter,  and  one,  and  one 
only  particular  law  of  action  to  be  assigned  to  it. 
No  other  law  would  have  answered  the  purpose 
intended. 

(*)  2.  All  systems  must  be  liable  to  perturba-- 
tions.  And  therefore,  to  guard  against  these  per- 
turbations, or  rather  to  guard  against  their  run- 
ning to  destructive  lengths,  is  perhaps  the  strongest 
evidence  of  care  and  foresight  that  can  be  given. 
Now  we  are  able  to  demonstrate  of  our  law  of  at- 
traction, what  can  be  demonstrated  of  no  other, 
and  what  qualifies  the  dangers  which  arise  from 
cross  but  unavoidable  influences,  that  the  action  of 
the  parts  of  our  system  upon  one  another  will  not 
cause  permanently  increasing  irregularities,  but 
merely  periodical  or  vibratory  ones;  that  is,  they 


330  ASTRONOMY. 

will  come  to  a  limit,  and  then  go  back  again.  This 
we  can  demonstrate  only  of  a  system,  in  which  the 
following  properties  concur,  viz.  that  the  force 
shall  be  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance ; 
the  masses  of  the  revolving  bodies  small,  compared 
with  that  of  the  body  at  the  centre  ;  the  orbits  not 
^uch  inclined  to  one  another ;  and  their  eccentricity 
little.  In  such  a  system  the  grand  points  are  secure. 
The  mean  distances  and  periodic  times,  upon  which 
depend  our  temperature  and  the  regularity  of  our 
year,  are  constant.  The  eccentricities,  it  is  true,  will 
still  vary,  but  so  slowly,  and  to  so  small  an  extent, 
as  to  produce  no  inconveniency  from  fluctuation  of 
temperature  and  season.  The  same  as  to  the  ob- 
liquity of  the  planes  of  the  orbits.  For  instance, 
the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  to  the  equator  will 
never  change  above  two  degrees  (out  of  ninety),  and 
that  will  require  many  thousand  years  in  performing. 

It  has  been  rightly  also  remarked,  that  if  the 
great  planets,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  had  moved  in 
lower  spheres,  their  influences  would  have  had 
much  more  eifect,  as  to  disturbing  the  planetary 
motions,  than  they  now  have.  While  they  revolve 
at  so  great  distances  from  the  rest,  they  act  almost 
equally  on  the  sun  and  on  the  inferior  planets ; 
which  has  nearly  the  same  consequence  as  not 
acting  at  all  upon  either. 

If  it  be  said,  that  the  planets  might  have  been 
sent  round  the  sun  in  exact  circles,  in  which  case, 
no  change  of  distance  from  the  centre  taking  place, 
the  law  of  variation  of  the  attracting  power  would 
have  never  come  in  question,  one  law  would  have 


ASTRONOMY.  331 

served  as  well  as  another ;  an  answer  to  the  scheme 
may  be  drawn  from  the  consideration  of  these  same 
perturbing  forces.  The  system  retaining  in  other 
respects  its  present  constitution,  though  the  planets 
had  been  at  first  sent  round  in  exact  circular  orbits, 
they  could  not  have  kept  them :  and  if  the  law  of 
attraction  had  not  been  what  it  is,  or  at  least,  if  the 
prevailing  law  had  transgressed  the  limits  above 
assigned,  every  evagation  would  have  been  fatal : 
the  planet  once  drawn,  as  drawn  it  necessarily  must 
have  been,  out  of  its  course,  would  have  wandered 
in  endless  error. 

(*)  V.  What  we  have  seen  in  the  law  of  the  centri- 
petal force,  viz.  a  choice  guided  by  views  of  utility, 
and  a  choice  of  one  law  out  of  thousands  which 
might  equally  have  taken  place,  we  see  no  less  in 
the  Jigures  of  the  planetary  orbits.  It  was  not 
enough  to  fix  the  law  of  the  centripetal  force,  though 
by  the  wisest  choice ;  for,  even  under  that  law,  it 
was  still  competent  to  the  planets  to  have  moved 
in  paths  possessing  so  great  a  degree  of  eccentricity, 
as,  in  the  course  of  every  revolution,  to  be  brought 
very  near  to  the  sun,  and  carried  away  to  immense 
distances  from  him.  The  comets  actually  move 
in  orbits  of  this  sort ;  and  had  the  planets  done  so, 
instead  of  going  round  in  orbits  nearly  circular,  the 
change  from  one  extremity  of  temperature  to  ano- 
ther must,  in  ours  at  least,  have  destroyed  every  ani- 
mal and  plant  upon  its  surface.  Now,  the  distance 
from  the  centre  at  which  a  planet  sets  off,  and  the 
absolute  force  of  attraction  at  that  distance,  being 
fixed,  the  figure  of  his  orbit,  its  being  a  circle,  or 


332  ASTRONOMY- 

nearer  to,  or  farther  off  from  a  circle,  'viz.  a  rounder 
or  a  longer  oval,  depends  upon  two  things,  the  ve- 
locity with  which,  and  the  direction  in  which,  the 
planet  is  projected.     And  these,  in  order  to  pro- 
duce a  right  result,  must  be  both  brought  within 
certain  narrow  limits.     One,  and  only  one,  velo- 
city, united  with  one,  and  only  one,  direction,  will 
produce  a  perfect  circle.     And  the  velocity  must 
be  near  to  this  velocity,    and  the  direction  also 
near  to  this  direction,  to  produce  orbits,  such  as 
the  planetary  orbits  are,  nearly  circular ;   that  is, 
ellipses  with  small  eccentricities.     The  velocity  and 
the  direction  must  both  be  right.     If  the  velocity 
be  wrong,  no  direction  will  cure  the  error ;  if  the 
direction  be  in  any  j::onsiderable  degree  oblique, 
MO  velocity  will  produce  the  orbit  required.     Take 
for  example  the  attraction  of  gravity  at  the  surface 
of  the  earth.     The  force  of  that  attraction  being 
what  it  is,  out  of  all  the  degrees  of  velocity,  swift 
and  slow,  with  which  a  ball  might  be  shot  off,  none 
would  answer  the  purpose  of  which  we  are  speaking, 
but  what  was  nearly  that  of  five  miles  in  a  second. 
If  it  were  less  than  that,  the  body  would  not  get 
round  at  all,  but  would  come  to  the  ground  ;  if  it 
were  in  any  considerable  degree  more  than  that,  the 
body  would  take  one  of  those  eccentric  courses, 
those  long  ellipses,  of  which  we  have  noticed  the 
inconveniency.     If  the  velocity  reached  the  rate  of 
seven  miles  in  a  second,  or  went  beyond  that,  the 
ball  would  fly  off  from  the  earth,  and  never  be 
heard  of  more.     In  like  manner  with  respect  to  the 
direction;  out  of  the  innumerable  angles  in  which 


ASTRONOMY-  333 

the  ball  might  be  sent  off  (I  mean  angles  formed 
with  a  line  drawn  to  the  centre),  none  would  serve 
but  what  was  nearly  a  right  one  ;  out  of  the  various 
directions  in  which  the  cannon  might  be  pointed, 
upwards  and  downwards,  every  one  would  fail,  but 
what  was  exactly  or  nearly  horizontal.  The  same 
thing  holds  true  of  the  planets  :  of  our  own  amongst 
the  rest.  We  are  entitled  therefore  to  ask,  and  to 
urge  the  question.  Why  did  the  projectile  velocity 
and  projectile  direction  of  the  earth  happen  to  be 
nearly  those  which  would  retain  it  in  a  circular  form  ? 
Why  not  one  of  the  infinite  number  of  velocities, 
one  of  the  infinite  number  of  directions,  which 
would  have  made  it  approach  much  nearer  to,  or 
recede  much  farther  from,  the  sun  ? 

The  planets  going  round,  all  in  the  same  direc-- 
tion,  and  all  nearly  in  the  same  plane,  afforded  to 
Buffon  a  ground  for  asserting,  that  they  had  all 
been  shivered  from  the  sun  by  the  same  stroke  of  ai 
comet,  and  by  that  Stroke  projected  into  their  pre- 
sent orbits.  Now,  besides  that  this  is  to  attribute 
to  chance  the  fortunate  concurrence  of  velocity  and 
direction  which  we  have  been  here  noticing,  the 
hypothesis,  as  I  apprehend,  is  inconsistent  with  the 
physical  laws  by  which  the  heavenly  motions  are 
governed.  If  the  planets  were  struck  off  from  the 
surface  of  the  sun,  they  would  return  to  the  surface 
of  the  sun  again.  Nor  will  this  difficulty  be  got  rid 
of,  by  supposing  that  the  same  violent  blow  which 
shattered  the  sun's  surface,  and  separated  large 
fragments  from  it,  pushed  the  sun  himself  out  of 
his  place ;  for  the  consequence  of  this  would  be. 


334  ASTRONOMY. 

that  the  sun  and  system  of  shattered  fragments 
would  have  a  progressive  motion,  which  indeed 
may  possibly  be  the  case  with  our  system  ;  but  then 
each  fragment  would,  in  every  revolution,  return 
to  the  surface  of  the  sun  again.  The  hypothesis  is 
also  contradicted  by  the  vast  difference  which  sub- 
sists between  the  diameters  of  the  planetary  orbitsx 
The  distance  of  Saturn  from  the  sun  (to  say  nothing 
of  the  Georgium  Sidus)  is  nearly  five-and-twenty 
times  that  of  Mercury ;  a  disparity,  which  it  seems 
impossible  to  reconcile  with  Buffon's  scheme.  Bo- 
dies starting  from  the  same  place,  with  whatever 
difference  of  direction  or  velocity  they  set  off,  could 
not  have  been  found,  at  these  different  distances 
from  the  centre,  still  retaining  their  nearly  circular 
orbits.  They  must  have  been  carried  to  their  pro- 
per distances  before  they  were  projected. t 

To  conclude :  In  astronomy,  the  great  thing  is 
to  raise  the  imagination  to  the  subject,  and  that 
oftentimes  in  opposition  to  the  impression  made 
upon  the  senses.  An  illusion,  for  example,  must 
be  gotten  over,  arising  from  the  distance  at  which 

f  "  If  we  suppose  the  matter  of  the  system  to  be  accumulated  in  the  centre 
by  its  gravity,  no  mechanical  principles,  with  the  assistance  of  this  power  of 
gravity,  could  separate  the  vast  mass  into  such  parts  as  the  sun  atid  planets; 
and  after  carrying  them  to  their  different  distances,  project  them  in  their  se- 
veral directions,  preserving  still  the  quality  of  action  and  reaction,  or  the  state 
of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  system.  Such  an  exquisite  Structure  of  things 
could  only  arise  from  the  contrivance  and  powerful  influences  of  an  intelligent, 
free,  and  most  potent  agent.  The  same  powers,  therefore,  which  at  present 
govern  the  material  universe,  and  conduct  its  various  motions,  are  very  different 
from  those  which  were  necessary  to  have  produced  it  from  nothing,  or  to  have 
disposed  it  in  the  admirable  form  in  which  it  now  proceeds.**— Jkfac/awnnV 
Account  of  Newton  s  Philos,  p.  407.  ed.  3. 


ASTRONOMY.  335 

we  view  the  heavenly  bodies,  'viz.  the  apparent 
sloW7iess  of  their  motions.  The  moon  shall  take 
some  hours  in  getting  half  a  yard  from  a  star  which 
it  touched,  A  motion  so  deliberate,  we  may  think 
easily  guided.  But  what  is  the  fact  ?  The  moon,  in 
fact,  is,  all  this  while,  driving  through  the  heavens, 
at  the  rate  of  considerably  more  than  two  thousand 
miles  in  an  hour ;  which  is  more  than  double  of 
that  with  which  a  ball  is  shot  off  from  the  mouth 
of  a  cannon.  Yet  is  this  prodigious  rapidity  as  much 
under  government,  as  if  the  planet  proceeded  ever 
so  slowly,  or  were  conducted  in  its  course  inch  by 
inch.  It  is  also  difficult  to  bring  the  imagination 
to  conceive  (what  yet,  to  judge  tolerably  of  the 
matter,  it  is  necessary  to  conceive)  how  loose,  if  we 
may  so  express  it,  the  heavenly  bodies  are.  Enor- 
mous globes,  held  by  nothing,  confined  by  nothing, 
are  turned  into  free  and  boundless  space,  each  to 
seek  its  course  by  the  virtue  of  an  invisible  princi- 
ple ;  but  a  principle,  one,  common,  and  the  same 
in  all ;  and  ascertainable.  To  preserve  such  bodies 
from  being  lost,  from  running  together  in  heaps, 
from  hindering  and  distracting  one  another's  mo- 
tions, in  a  degree  inconsistent  with  any  continuing 
order ;  i.  e.  to  cause  them  to  form  planetary  systems, 
systems  that,  when  formed,  can  be  upheld,  and 
more  especially,  systems  accommodated  to  the  or- 
ganized and  sensitive  natures  which  the  planets 
sustain,  as  we  know  to  be  the  case,  where  alone 
we  can  know  what  the  case  is,  upon  our  earth :  all 
this  requires  an  intelligent  interposition,  because  it 
can  be  demonstrated  concerning  it,  that  it  requires 

*8 


336  ASTRONOMY. 

an  adjustment  of  force,  distance,  direction,  and 
velocity,  out  of  the  reach  of  chance  to  have  pro- 
duced ;  an  adjustment,  in  its  view  to  utiUty,  similar 
to  that  which  we  see  in  ten  thousand  subjects  of 
nature  which  are  nearer  to  us,  but  in  power,  and 
in  extent  of  space  through  which  that  power  is  ex- 
erted, stupendous. 

But  many  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  as  the  sun  and 
fixed  stars,  are  stationary.  Their  rest  must  be  the 
effect  of  an  absence  or  of  an  equilibrium  of  attrac- 
tions. It  proves  also,  that  a  projectile  impulse  was 
originally  given  to  some  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and 
not  to  others.  But  farther ;  if  attraction  act  at  all 
distances,  there  can  be  only  one  quiescent  centre  of 
gravity  in  the  universe :  and  all  bodies  whatever 
must  be  approaching  this  centre,  or  revolving  round 
it.  According  to  the  first  of  these  suppositions,  if 
the  duration  of  the  world  had  been  long  enough  to 
allow  of  it,  all  its  parts,  all  the  great  bodies  of  which 
it  is  composed,  must  have  been  gathered  together 
in  a  heap  round  this  point.  No  changes,  however, 
which  have  been  observed,  afford  us  the  smallest 
reason  for  believing,  that  either  the  one  supposition 
or  the  other  is  true:  and  then  it  will  follow,  that 
attraction  itself  is  controlled  or  suspended  by  a  su- 
perior agent ;  that  there  is  a  power  above  the  high- 
est of  the  powers  of  material  nature  ;  a  will  which 
restrains  and  circumscribes  the  operations  of  the 
most  extensive.^ 

*  It  must  here  however  be  stated,  that  many  astronomers  deny  that  any 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  are  absolutely  stationary.  Some  of  the  brightest 
of  the  fixed  stars  have  certainly  small  motions;  and  of  the  rest  the  distance 


OF  THE  PERSONALITY,  &C.  337 


CHAPTER  XXIIL 


OF  THE  PERSONALITY  OF  THE  DEITY. 

Contrivance,  if  established,  appears  to  me  to  prove 
every  thing  which  we  wish  to  prove.  Amongst 
other  things,  it  proves  the  personality  of  the  Deity, 
as  distinguished  from  what  is  sometimes  called  na- 
ture, sometimes  called  a  principle  :  which  terms,  in 
the  mouths  of  those  who  use  them  philosophically, 
seem  to  be  intended,  to  admit  and  to  express  an 
efficacy,  but  to  exclude  and  to  deny  a  personal  agent 
Now  that  which  can  contrive,  which  can  design, 
must  be  a  person.  These  capacities  constitute  per- 
sonality, for  they  imply  consciousness  and  thought. 
They  require  that  which  can  perceive  an  end  or 
purpose ;  as  well  as  the  power  of  providing  means, 
and  of  directing  them  to  their  end.*     They  require 

is  too  great,  and  the  intervals  of  our  observation  too  short,  to  enable  us  to 
pronounce  w^ith  certainty  that  they  may  not  have  the  same.  The  motions 
in  the  fixed  stars  which  have  been  observed,  are  considered  either  as  proper 
to  each  of  them,  or  as  compounded  of  the  motion  of  our  system,  and  of 
motions  proper  to  each  star.  By  a  comparison  of  these  motions,  a  motion 
in  our  system  is  supposed  to  be  discovered.  By  continuing  this  analogy 
to  other,  and  to  all  systems,  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  attraction  is  un- 
limited, and  that  the  whole  material  universe  is  revolving  round  some  fixed 
point  within  its  containing  sphere  of  space. 

♦  Priestley *s  Letters  ta  a  Pbiloeophical  Unbeliever,  p.  1 53.  ed.  2, 

Y 


338  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

a  centre  in  which  perceptions  unite,  and  from  which 
voHtions  flow ;  which  is  mind.  The  acts  of  a  inind 
prove  the  existence  of  a  mind ;  and  in  whatever  a 
mind  resides,  is  a  person.  The  seat  of  intellect  is 
a  person.  We  have  no  authority  to  limit  the  pro- 
perties of  mind  to  any  particular  corporeal  form,  or 
to  any  particular  circumscription  of  space.  These 
properties  subsist  in  created  nature  under  a  great 
variety  of  sensible  forms.  Also  every  animated  be- 
ing has  its  sensorium;  that  is,  a  certain  portion  of 
space,  within  which,  perception  and  volition  are 
exerted.  This  sphere  may  be  enlarged  to  an  inde- 
finite extent ;  may  comprehend  the  universe  ;  and, 
being  so  imagined,  may  serve  to  furnish  us  with  as 
good  a  notion  as  we  are  capable  of  forming,  of  the 
immensity  of  the  Divine  Nature,  i.  e.  of  a  Being, 
infinite,  as  well  in  essence  as  in  power  j  yet  never- 
theless a  person. 

"  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time/*  And 
this,  I  believe,  makes  the  great  difficulty.  Now  it 
is  a  difficulty  which  chiefly  arises  from  our  not  duly 
estimating  the  state  of  oiu'  faculties.  The  Deity, 
it  is  true,  is  the  object  of  none  of  our  senses  :  but 
reflect  what  limited  capacities  animal  senses  are. 
Many  animals  seem  to  have  but  one  sense,  or  per- 
haps two  at  the  most ;  touch  and  taste.  Ought 
such  an  animal  to  conclude  against  the  existence  of 
odours,  sounds,  and  colours?  To  another  species 
is  given  the  sense  of  smelling.  This  i^  an  advance 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  powers  and  properties  of 
nature :  but,  if  this  favoured  animal  should  infer 
from  its  superiority  over  the  class  last  described. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  339 

that  it  perceived  every  thing  which  was  perceptible 
in  nature,  it  is  known  to  us,  though  perhaps  not 
suspected  by  the  animal  itself,  that  it  proceeded 
upon  a  false  and  presumptuous  estimate  of  its  facul- 
ties. To  another  is  added  the  sense  of  hearing ;  which 
lets  in  a  class  of  sensations  entirely  unconceived 
by  the  animal  before  spoken  of;  not  only  distinct, 
but  remote  from  any  which  f/had  ever  experienced, 
and  greatly  superior  to  them.  Yet  this  last  animal 
has  no  more  ground  for  believing,  that  its  senses 
comprehend  all  things,  and  all  properties  of  things, 
which  exist,  than  might  have  been  claimed  by  the 
tribes  of  animals  beneath  it ;  for  we  know  that  it  is 
still  possible  to  possess  another  sense,  that  of  sight, 
which  shall  disclose  to  the  percipient  a  new  world. 
This  fifth  sense  makes  the  animal  what  the  human 
animal  is :  but  to  infer,  that  possibility  stops  here ; 
that  either  this  fifth  sense  is  the  last  sense,  or  that 
the  five  comprehend  all  existence,  is  just  as  unwar- 
rantable a  conclusion,  as  that  which  might  have 
been  made  by  any  of  the  different  species  which 
possessed  fewer,  or  even  by  that,  if  such  there  be, 
which  possessed  only  one.  The  conclusion  of  the 
one-sense  animal,  and  the  conclusion  of  the  five- 
sense  animal,  stand  upon  the  Same  authority.  There 
inay  be  more  and  other  senses  than  those  which  we 
have.  There  may  be  senses  suited  to  the  percep- 
tion  of  the  powers,  properties,  and  substance  of  spi- 
rits. These  may  belong  to  higher  orders  of  rational 
agents  :  for  there  is  not  the  smallest  reason  for  sup- 
posing that  we  are  the  highest,  or  that  the  scale  of 
creation  stops  with  us. 


340  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

The  great  energies  of  nature  are  known  to  us 
only  by  their  effects.  The  substances  which  produce 
them,  are  as  much  concealed  from  our  senses  as  the 
Divine  Essence  itself.  Gravitation^  though  constant- 
ly present,  though  constantly  exerting  its  influence, 
though  everywhere  around  us,  near  us,  an.d  within 
us  ;  though  diffused  throughout  all  space,  and  pene- 
trating the  texture  of  all  bodies  with  which  we  are 
acquainted,  depends,  if  upon  a  fluid,  upon  a  fluid 
which,  though  both  powerful  and  universal  in  its 
operation,  is  no  object  of  sense  to  us;  if  upon  any 
other  kind  of  substance  or  action,  upon  a  substance 
and  action  from  which  we  receive  no  distinguishable 
impressions.  Is  it  tlien  to  be  wondered  at,  that  it 
should,  in  some  measure,,  be  the  same  with  the  Di- 
vine Nature  ? 

Of  this,  however,  we  are  certain,  that  whatever 
the  Deity  be,  neither  the  universe^  nor  any  part  of 
it  which  we  see,  can  be  He.  The  universe  itself  is 
merely  a  collective  name :  its  parts  are  all  which 
are  real ;  or  which  are  tilings.  Now  inert  matter  is 
out  of  the  question ;  and  organized  substances  in- 
clude marks  of  contrivance.  But  whatever  includes 
marks  of  contrivance,  whatever,  in  its  constitution, 
testifies  design,  necessarily  carries  us  to  something 
beyond  itself,  to  some  other  being,  to  a  designer 
prior  to,  and  out  of,  itself.  No  animal,  for  instance, 
can  have  contrived  its  own  limbs  and  senses ;  can 
have  been  the  author  to  itself  of  the  design  with 
which  they  were  constructed.  That  supposition 
involves  all  the  absurdity  of  self-creation,  i.  e.  of 


OF  THE  DEITY.  341 

acting  without  existing.  Nothing  can  be  God, 
which  is  ordered  by  a  wisdom  and  a  will  which  itself 
is  void  of ;  which  is  indebted  for  any  of  its  proper- 
ties to  contrivance  ab  ea:tra.  The  not  having  that 
in  his  nature  which  requires  the  exertion  of  another 
prior  being  (w^hich  property  is  sometimes  called 
self-sufficiency,  and  sometimes  self-comprehension), 
appertains  to  the  Deity,  as  his  essential  distinction, 
and  removes  his  nature  from  that  of  all  things  which 
we  see.  Which  consideration  contains  the  answer 
to  a  question  that  has  sometimes  been  asked,  name- 
ly. Why,  since  something  or  other  must  have  exist- 
ed from  eternity,  may  not  the  present  universe  be 
that  something?  The  contrivance  perceived  in  it 
proves  that  to  be  impossible.  Nothing  contrived 
can,  in  a  strict  and  proper  sense,  be  eternal,  foras- 
much as  the  contriver  must  have  existed  before 
the  contrivance. 

Wherever  we  see  marks  of  contrivance,  we  are 
led  for  its  cause  to  an  intelligent  author.  And  this 
transition  of  the  understanding  is  founded  upon 
uniform  experience.  We  see  intelligence  constant- 
ly contriving  ;  that  is,  we  see  intelligence  constant- 
ly producing  effects,  marked  and  distinguished  by 
certain  properties ;  not  certain  particular  properties, 
but  by  a  kind  and  class  of  properties,  such  as  re- 
lation to  an  end,  relation  of  parts  to  one  another, 
and  to  a  common  purpose.  We  see,  wherever  we 
are  witnesses  to  the  actual  formation  of  things,  no- 
thing except  intelligence  producing  effects  so  mark- 
ed and  distinguished.  Furnished  with  this  expe- 
rience,  \\^  view  the  productions  of  nature.     We 


342  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

observe  them  also  marked  and  distinguished  in  the 
same  manner.  We  wish  to  account  for  their  origin. 
Our  experience  suggests  a  cause  perfectly  adequate 
to  this  account.  No  experience,  no  single  instance 
or  example,  can  be  offered  in  favour  of  any  other. 
In  this  cause  therefore  we  ought  to  rest ;  in  this 
cause  the  common  sense  of  mankind  has,  in  fact, 
rested,  because  it  agrees  with  that,  which,  in  all 
cases,  is  the  foundation  of  knowledge, — the  un- 
deviating  course  of  their  experience.  The  reason- 
ing is  the  same  as  that  by  which  we  conclude  any 
ancient  appearances  to  have  been  the  effects  of 
volcanoes  or  inundations,  namely,  because  they 
resemble  the  effects  which  fire  and  water  produce 
before  our  eyes  ;  and  because  we  have  never  known 
these  effects  to  result  from  any  other  operation. 
And  this  resemblance  may  subsist  in  so  many  cir- 
cumstances, as  not  to  leave  us  under  the  smallest 
doubt  in  forming  our  opinion.  Men  are  not  de- 
ceived by  this  reasoning :  for  whenever  it  happens, 
as  it  sometimes  does  happen,  that  the  truth  comes 
to  be  known  by  direct  information,  it  turns  out  to 
be  what  was  expected.  In  like  manner,  and  upon  the 
same  foundation  (which  in  truth  is  that  of  experi- 
ence), we  conclude  that  the  works  of  nature  pro- 
ceed from  intelligence  and  design,  because,  in  the 
properties  of  relation  to  a  purpose,  subserviency  to 
a  use,  they  resemble  what  intelligence  and  design 
are  constantly  producing,  and  what  nothing  except 
intelligence  and  design  ever  produce  at  all.  Of 
every  lU'gument,  which  would  raise  a  question  as 
to  the  safety  of  this  reasoning,  it  may  be  observed. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  343 

that  if  such  argument  be  listened  to,  it  leads  to  the 
inference,  not  only  that  the  present  order  of  nature 
is  insufficient  to  prove  the  existence  of  an  intelli- 
gent Creator,  but  that  no  imaginable  order  would 
be  sufficient  to  prove  it ;  that  no  contrivance,  were 
it  ever  so  mechanical,  ever  so  precise,  ever  so  clear, 
ever  so  perfectly  like  those  which  we  ourselves 
employ,  would  support  this  conclusion.  A  doc- 
trine to  which,  I  conceive,  no  sound  mind  can 
assent. 

The  force,  however,  of  the  reasoning  is  sometimes 
sunk  by  our  taking  up  with  mere  names.  We 
have  already  noticed,*  and  we  must  here  notice 
again,  the  misapplication  of  the  term  "  law,''  and 
the  mistake  concerning  the  idea  which  that  term 
expresses  in  physics,  whenever  such  idea  is  made 
to  take  the  place  of  power,  and  still  more  of  an  in- 
telligent power,  and,  as  such,  to  be  assigned  for 
the  cause  of  any  thing,  or  of  any  property  of  any 
thing,  that  exists.  This  is  what  we  are  secretly 
apt  to  do,  when  we  speak  of  organized  bodies 
(plants  for  instance,  or  animals,)  owing  their  pro- 
duction, their  form,  their  growth,  their  qualities, 
their  beauty,  their  use,  to  any  law  or  laws  of  na- 
ture ;  and  when  we  are  contented  to  sit  down  with 
that  answer  to  our  inquiries  concerning  them.  I 
say  once  more,  that  it  is  a  perversion  of  language 
to  assign  any  law  as  the  efficient  operative  cause 
of  any  thing.  A  law  presupposes  an  agent,  for  it 
is  only  the  mode  according  to  which  an  agent  pro- 

'  Ch.  I.  stct.  vii. 


344  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

ceeds ;  it  implies  a  power,  for  it  is  the  order  ac- 
cording to  which  that  power  acts.  Without  this 
agent,  without  this  power,  which  are  both  distinct 
from  itself,  the  '^  law''  does  nothing;  is  nothing. 

What  has  been  said  concerning  "  law,'*  holds 
true  oi  mechanism.  Mechanism  is  not  itself  power. 
Mechanism,  without  power,  can  do  nothing.  Let 
a  watch  be  contrived  and  constructed  ever  so  in- 
geniously ;  be  its  parts  ever  so  many,  ever  so  com- 
plicated, ever  so  finely  wrought  or  artificially  put 
together,  it  cannot  go  without  a  weight  or  spring, 
i.  e.  without  a  force  independent  of,  and  ulterior  to, 
its  mechanism.  The  spring  acting  at  the  centre, 
will  produce  different  motions  and  different  results, 
according  to  the  variety  of  the  intermediate  me- 
chanism. One  and  the  self-same  spring,  acting  in 
one  and  the  same  manner,  viz.  by  simply  expand- 
ing itself,  may  be  the  cause  of  a  hundred  different, 
and  all  useful,  movements,  if  a  hundred  different 
and  well-devised  sets  of  wheels  be  placed  between 
it  and  the  final  effect;  e.  g.  may  point  out  the 
hour  of  the  day,  the  day  of  the  month,  the  age  of 
the  moon,  the  position  of  the  planets,  the  cycle  of 
the  years,  and  many  other  serviceable  notices  ;  and 
these  movements  may  fulfil  their  purposes  with 
more  or  less  perfection,  according  as  the  mechan- 
ism is  better  or  worse  contrived,  or  better  or  worse 
executed,  or  in  a  better  or  worse  state  of  repair ; 
but  in  all  cases,  it  is  necessary  that  the  spring  act 
at  the  centre.  The  course  of  our  reasoning  upon 
such  a  subject  would  be  this :  By  inspecting  the 
watch,  even  when  standing  stilly  we  get  a  proof  of 


OF  THE  DEITY.  345 

contrivance,  and  of  a  contriving  mind  having  been 
employed  about  it.  In  the  form  and  obvious  re- 
lation of  its  parts,  we  see  enough  to  convince  us 
of  this.  If  we  pull  the  works  in  pieces,  for  the 
purpose  of  a  closer  examination,  we  are  still  more 
fully  convinced.  But  when  we  see  the  watch  go- 
ingj  we  see  proof  of  another  point,  viz.  that  there 
is  a  power  somewhere,  and  somehow  or  other,  ap- 
plied to  it ;  a  power  in  action ; — that  there  is  more 
in  the  subject  than  the  mere  wheels  of  the  ma- 
chine ; — that  there  is  a  secret  spring,  or  a  gravitat- 
ing plummet ; — ^in  a  word,  that  there  is  force  and 
energy,  as  well  as  mechanism. 

So  then,  the  watch  in  motion  establishes  to  the 
c)bserver  two  conclusions  :  One  ;  that  thought,  con- 
trivance, and  design,  have  been  employed  in  the 
forming,  proportioning,  and  arranging  of  its  parts ; 
and  that  whoever  or  wherever  he  be,  or  were,  such 
a  contriver  there  is,  or  was  :  The  other ;  that  force 
or  power,  distinct  from  mechanism,  is  at  this  pre- 
sent time  acting  upon  it.  If  I  saw  a  hand-mill 
even  at  rest,  I  should  see  contrivance  :  but  if  I  saw 
it  grinding,  I  should  be  assured  that  a  hand  was  at 
the  windlass,  though  in  another  room.  It  is  the 
same  in  nature.  In  the  works  of  nature  we  trace 
mechanism ;  and  this  alone  proves  contrivance : 
but  living,  active,  moving,  productive  nature, 
proves  also  the  exertion  of  a  power  at  the  centre ; 
for,  wherever  the  power  resides  may  be  denominat- 
ed the  centre. 

\    The   intervention   and  disposition  of  what  are 
called  *'  second  cames^^  fall  under  the  same  obser- 


346  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

vation.  This  disposition  is  or  is  not  mechanism, 
according  as  we  can  or  cannot  trace  it  by  our 
senses  and  means  of  examination.  That  is  all  the 
difference  there  is ;  and  it  is  a  difference  which 
respects  our  faculties,  not  the  things  themselves. 
Now,  where  the  order  of  second  causes  is  mechani- 
cal, what  is  here  said  of  mechanism  strictly  applies 
to  it  But  it  would  be  always  mechanism  (na- 
tural chymistry,  for  instance,  would  be  mecha- 
nism), if  our  senses  were  acute  enough  to  descry 
it.  Neither  mechanism,  therefore,  in  the  works  of 
nature,  nor  the  intervention  of  what  are  called  se- 
cond  causes,  (for  I  think  that  they  are  the  same 
thing),  excuses  the  necessity  of  an  agent  distinct 
from  both. 

If,  in  tracing  these  causes,  it  be  said,  that  we 
find  certain  general  properties  of  matter  which  have 
nothing  in  them  that  bespeaks  intelligence,  I  an- 
swer,  that  still  the  managing  of  these  properties, 
the  pointing  and  directing  them  to  the  uses  which 
we  see  made  of  them,  demands  intelligence  in  the 
highest  degree.  For  example :  Suppose  animal 
secretions  to  be  elective  attractions,  and  that  such 
and  such  attractions  universally  belong  to  such  and 
such  substances ;  in  all  which  there  is  no  intellect 
concerned ;  still  the  choice  and  collocation  of  these 
substances,  the  fixing  upon  right  substances,  and 
disposing  them  in  right  places,  must  be  an  act  of 
intelligence.  What  mischief  would  follow,  were 
there  a  single  transposition  of  the  secretory  organs  ; 
a  single  mistake  in  arranging  the  glands  which  com- 
pose them ! 


OF  THE  DEITY.  347 

There  may  be  many  second  causes,  and  many 
courses  of  second  causes,  one  behind  another,  be- 
tween what  we  observe  of  nature  and  the  Deity : 
but  there  must  be  intelligence  somewhere ;  there 
must  be  more  in  nature  than  what  we  see ;  and, 
amongst  the  things  unseen,  there  must  be  an  in- 
telligent, designing  author.  The  philosopher  be- 
holds with  astonishment  the  production  of  things 
around  him.  Unconscious  particles  of  matter  take 
their  stations,  and  severally  arrange  themselves  in 
an  order,  so  as  to  become  collectively  plants  or 
animals,  L  e.  organized  bodies,  with  parts  bearing 
strict  and  evident  relation  to  one  another,  and  to 
the  utility  of  the  whole  :  and  it  should  seem  that 
these  particles  could  not  move  in  any  other  way 
than  as  they  do ;  for  they  testify  not  the  smallest 
sign  of  choice,  or  liberty,  or  discretion.  There 
may  be  particular  intelligent  beings  guiding  these 
motions  in  each  case  ;  or  they  may  be  the  result 
of  trains  of  mechanical  dispositions,  fixed  before- 
hand by  an  intelligent  appointment,  and  kept  in 
action  by  a  power  at  the  centre.  But,  in  either 
case,  there  must  be  intelligence. 

The  minds  of  most  men  are  fond  of  what  they 
call  a  principle^  and  of  the  appearance  of  simplicity,, 
in  accounting  for  phenomena.  Yet  this  principle, 
this  simplicity,  resides  merely  in  the  name  ;  which 
name,  after  all,  comprises  perhaps  under  it,  a  di- 
versified, multifarious,  or  progressive  operation,  dis- 
tinguishable into  parts.  The  power  in  organized 
bodies,  of  producing  bodies  like  themselves,  is  one 
of  these  principles.     Give  a  philosopher  this,  and 


348  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

he  can  get  on.  But  he  does  not  reflect,  what  this 
mode  of  production,  this  principle  (if  such  he  choose 
to  call  it)  requires  ;  how  much  it  presupposes  ;  what 
an  apparatus  of  instruments,  some  of  which  are 
strictly  mechanical,  is  necessary  to  its  success  ;  what 
a  train  it  includes  of  operations  and  changes,  one 
succeeding  another,  one  related  to  another,  one  mi- 
nistering to  another ;  all  advancing,  by  intermedi- 
ate, and  frequently,  by  sensible  steps,  to  their  ulti- 
mate result !  Yet,  because  the  whole  of  this  compli- 
cated action  is  wrapped  up  in  a  single  term,  genera- 
tioriy  we  are  to  set  it  down  as  an  elementary  princi- 
ple ;  and  to  suppose,  that  when  we  have  resolved  the 
things  which  we  see  into  this  principle,  we  have 
sufficiently  accounted  for  their  origin,  without  the 
necessity  of  a  designing,  intelligent  Creator.  The 
truth  is,  generation  is  not  a  principle,  but  a  process. 
We  might  as  well  call  the  casting  of  metals  a  prin- 
ciple ;  we  might,  so  far  as  appears  to  me,  as  well 
call  spinning  and  weaving  principles  :  and  then,  re- 
ferring the  texture  of  cloths,  the  fabric  of  muslins 
and  calicoes,  the  patterns  of  diapers  and  damasks, 
to  these,  as  principles,  pretend  to  dispense  with  in- 
tention, thought,  and  contrivance,  on  the  part  of 
the  artist ;  or  to  dispense,  indeed,  with  the  neces- 
sity of  any  artist  at  all,  either  in  the  manufacturing 
of  the  article,  or  in  the  fabrication  of  the  machinery 
by  which  the  manufacture  was  carried  on. 

And  after  all,  how,  or  in  what  sense,  is  it  true, 
that  animals  produce  their  like  ?  A  butterfly,  with 
a  proboscis  instead  of  a  mouth,  with  four  wings  and 
six  legs,  produces  a  hairy  caterpillar,  with  jaws  and 


OF  THE  DEITY.  349 

teeth,  and  fourteen  feet.     A  frog  produces  a  tad- 
pole.    A  black  beetle,  with  gauze  wings,  and  a 
crusty  covering,  produces  a  white,   smooth,   soft 
worm ;    an   ephemeron   fly,    a    cod-bait    maggot. 
These,   by  a  progress  through  different  stages  of 
life,  and  action,  and  enjoyment,  (and  in  each  state 
provided  with  implements  and  organs  appropriated 
to  the  temporary  nature  which  they  bear),  arrive  at 
last  at  the  form  and  fashion  of  the  parent  animal. 
But  all  this  is  process,  not  principle ;  and  proves, 
moreover,  that  the  property  of  animated  bodies,  of 
producing  their  like,  belongs  to  them,  not  as  a 
primordial  property,  not  by  any  blind  necessity  in 
the  nature  of  things,  but  as  the  effect  of  economy, 
wisdom,  and  design ;  because  the  property  itself 
assumes  diversities,  and  submits  to  deviations  dic- 
tated by  intelligible  utilities,  and  serving  distinct 
purposes  of  animal  happiness. 

The  opinion,  which  w^ould  consider  "  generation'' 
as  a  prmciple  in  nature ;  and  which  would  assign 
this  principle  as  a  cause,  or  endeavour  to  satisfy 
our  minds  with  such  a  cause,  of  the  existence  of 
organized  bodies,  is  confuted,  in  my  judgment, 
not  only  by  every  mark  of  contrivance  discoverable 
in  those  bodies,  for  which  it  gives  us  no  contriver, 
offers  no  account  whatever  ;  but  also  by  the  farther 
consideration,  that  things  generated  possess  a  clear 
relation  to  things  not  generated.  If  it  were  merely 
one  part  of  a  generated  body  bearing  a  relation 
to  another  part  of  the  same  body,  as  the  mouth 
of  an  animal  to  the  throat,  the  throat  to  the  sto- 
mach, the  stomach  to  the  intestines,  those  to  the 


350  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

recruiting  of  the  blood,  and  by  means  of  the  blood,  to 
the  nourishment  of  the  whole  frame  ;  or  if  it  were 
only  one  generated  bodybearing  a  relation  to  another 
generated  body,  as  the  sexes  of  the  same  species  to 
each  other,  animals  of  prey  to  their  prey,  herbivorous 
and  granivorous  animals  to  the  plants  or  seeds  upon 
which  they  feed,  it  might  be  contended,  that  the 
whole  of  this  correspondency  was  attributable  to 
generation,  the  common  origin  from  which  these 
substances  proceeded.     But  what  shall  we  say  to 
agreements  which  exist  between  things  generated 
and  things  not  generated?  Can  it  be  doubted,  was 
it  ever  doubted,  but  that  the  lungs  of  animals  bear 
a  relation  to  the  air^  as  a  permanently  elastic  fluid  ? 
They  act  in  it  and  by  it ;  they  cannot  act  without 
it.     Now,  if  generation  produced  the  animal,  it  did 
not  produce  the  air:  yet  their  properties  correspond. 
The  eye  is  made  for  lights  and  light  for  the  eye. 
The  eye  would  be  of  no  use  without  light,  and  light 
perhaps  of  little  without  eyes  :  yet  one  is  produced 
by  generation ;  the  other  not.     The  ear  depends 
upon  undulations  of  air.     Here  are  two  sets  of  mo- 
tions :  first,  of  the  pulses  of  the  air  ;  secondly,  of 
the  drum,  bones,  and  nerves  of  the  ear  ;  sets  of 
motions  bearing  an  evident  reference  to  each  other : 
yet  the  one,  and  the  apparatus  for  the  one,  pro- 
duced by  the  intervention  of  generation  ;  the  other 
altogether  independent  of  it. 

If  it  be  said,  that  the  air,  the  light,  the  elements, 
the  world  itself,  is  generated;  I  answer,  that  I  do 
not  comprehend  the  proposition.  If  the  term  mean 
any  thing  similar  to  what  it  means  when  applied  to 


OF  THE  DEITY.  351 

plants  or  animals,  the  proposition  is  certainly  with- 
out proof;  and^  I  think,  draws  as  near  to  absurdity 
as  any  proposition  can  do,  which  does  not  include 
a  contradiction  in  its  terms.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  con- 
ceive, how  the  formation  of  the  world  can  be  com- 
pared to  the  generation  of  an  animal.  If  the  term 
generation  signify  something  quite  different  from 
what  it  signifies  on  ordinary  occasions,  it  may,  by 
the  same  latitude,  signify  any  thing.  In  which 
case,  a  word  or  phrase  taken  from  the  language  of 
Otaheite,  would  convey  as  much  theory  concerning 
the  origin  of  the  universe,  as  it  does  to  talk  of  its 
being  generated. 

We  know  a  cause  (intelligence)  adequate  to  the 
appearances  which  we  wish  to  account  for :  we 
have  this  cause  continually  producing  similar  ap- 
pearances :  yet,  rejecting  this  cause,  the  sufficiency 
of  which  we  know,  and  the  action  of  which  is  con- 
stantly before  our  eyes,  we  are  invited  to  resort  to 
suppositions  destitute  of  a  single  fact  for  their  sup- 
port, and  confirmed  by  no  analogy  with  which  we 
are  acquainted.  Were  it  necessary  to  inquire  into 
the  motives  of  men's  opinions,  I  mean  their  motives 
separate  from  their  arguments,  I  should  almost 
suspect,  that,  because  the  proof  of  a  Deity  drawn 
from  the  constitution  of  nature  is  not  only  popular 
but  vulgar,  (which  may  arise  from  the  cogency  of 
the  proof,  and  be  indeed  its  highest  recommenda- 
tion), and  because  it  is  a  species  almost  of  puerility/ 
to  take  up  with  it ;  for  these  reasons,  minds,  which 
are  habitually  in  search  of  invention  and  originality^. 

feel  a  resistless  inclination  to  strike  ofi'  into  other 

90 


352  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

solutions  and  other  expositions.  The  truth  is,  that 
many  minds  are  not  so  indisposed  to  any  thing 
which  can  be  offered  to  them,  as  they  are  to  the 
Jiatness  of  being  content  with  common  reasons ; 
and,  what  is  most  to  be  lamented,  minds  conscious 
of  superiority  are  the  most  liable  to  this  repugnancy. 

The  ''  suppositions''  here  alluded  to,  all  agree  in 
one  character  :  they  all  endeavour  to  dispense  with 
the  necessity  in  nature,  of  a  particular,  personal 
intelligence ;  that  is  to  say,  with  the  exertion  of  an 
intending,  contriving  mind,  in  the  structure  and 
formation  of  the  organized  constitution  which  the 
world  contains.  They  would  resolve  all  produc- 
tions  into  unconscious  energies,  of  a  like  kind,  in 
that  respect,  with  attraction,  magnetism,  electri- 
city, &c.  without  any  thing  farther. 

In  this,  the  old  system  of  atheism  and  the  new 
agree.  And  I  much  doubt,  whether  the  new 
schemes  have  advanced  any  thing  upon  the  old,  or 
done  more  than  changed  the  terms  of  the  nomen- 
clature. For  instance,  I  could  never  see  the  diffe- 
rence between  the  antiquated  system  of  atoms,  and 
BufFon's  organic  molecules.  This  philosopher,  hav- 
ing made  a  planet  by  knocking  off  from  the  sun 
a  piece  of  melted  glass,  in  consequence  of  the 
stroke  of  a  comet ;  and  having  set  it  in  motion  by 
the  same  stroke,  both  round  its  own  axis  and  the 
sun,  finds  his  next  difficulty  to  be,  how  to  bring 
plants  and  animals  upon  it.  In  order  to  solve  this 
difficulty,  we  are  to  suppose  the  universe  replenished 
with  particles  endowed  with  life,  but  without  or- 
ganization or  senses  of  their  own ;  and  endowed 


OF  THE  DEITY.  353 

also  with  a  tendency  to  marshal  themselves  into 
organized  forms.  The  concourse  of  these  particles, 
by  virtue  of  this  tendency,  but  without  intelligence, 
will,  or  direction,  (for  I  do  not  find  that  any  of  these 
qualities  are  ascribed  to  them),  has  produced  the 
living  forms  which  we  now  see. 

Very  few  of  the  conjectures  which  philosophers 
hazard  upon  these  subjects,  have  more  of  preten- 
sion in  them,  than  the  challenging  you  to  show  the 
direct  impossibility  of  the  hypothesis.  In  the  pre- 
sent example,  there  seemed  to  be  a  positive  objec- 
tion to  the  whole  scheme  upon  the  very  face  of  it ; 
which  was  that,  if  the  case  were  as  here  represented, 
new  combinations  ought  to  be  perpetually  taking 
place  ;  new  plants  and  animals,  or  organized  bodies 
which  were  neither,  ought  to  be  starting  up  before 
our  eyes  every  day.  For  this,  however,  our  phi- 
losopher  has  an  answer.  Whilst  so  many  forms  of 
plants  and  animals  are  already  in  existence,  and, 
consequently,  so  many  **  internal  moulds,''  as  he 
calls  them,  are  prepared  and  at  hand,  the  organic 
particles  run  into  these  moulds,  and  are  employed 
in  supplying  an  accession  of  substance  to  them, 
as  well  for  their  growth,  as  for  their  propagation. 
By  which  means,  things  keep  their  ancient  course. 
But,  says  the  same  philosopher,  should  any  general 
loss  or  destruction  of  the  present  constitution  of 
organized  bodies  take  place,  the  particles,  for  want 
of  *^  moulds"  into  which  they  might  enter,  would 
run  into  different  combinations,  and  replenish  the 
waste  with  new  species  of  organized  substances'. 


354  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

Is  there  any  history  to  countenance  this  notion  ? 
Is  it  known,  that  any  destruction  has  been  so  re- 
paired ?  any  desert  thus  repeopled  ? 

So  far  as  I  remember,  the  only  natural  appear- 
ance mentioned  by  our  author,  by  way  of  fact 
whereon  to  build  his  hypothesis,  is  the  formation 
of  worms  in  the  intestines  of  animals,  which  is  here 
ascribed  to  the  coalition  of  superabundant  organic 
particles,  floating  about  in  the  first  passages  ;  and 
which  have  combined  themselves  into  these  simple 
animal  forms,  for  want  of  internal  moulds,  or  of 
vacancies  in  those  moulds,  into  which  they  might 
be  received.  The  thing  referred  to,  is  rather  a 
species  of  facts,  than  a  single  fact ;  as  some  other 
cases  may,  with  equal  reason,  be  included  under 
it.  But  to  make  it  a  fact  at  all,  or  in  any  sort 
applicable  to  the  question,  we  must  begin  with  as- 
serting an  equivocal  genev2i\xox\j  contrary  to  analogy, 
and  without  necessity:  contrary  to  an  analogy, 
which  accompanies  us  to  the  very  limits  of  our 
knowledge  or  inquiries  ;  for  wherever,  either  in 
plants  or  animals,  we  are  able  to  examine  the  sub- 
ject, we  find  procreation  from  a  parent  form  :  with- 
out necessity;  for  I  apprehend  that  it  is  seldom 
difficult  to  suggest  methods,  by  which  the  eggs,  or 
spawn,  or  yet  invisible  rudiments  of  these  vermin, 
may  have  obtained  a  passage  into  the  cavities  in 
which  they  are  found.*  Add  to  this,  that  their 
constancy  to  their  species^  which,  I  believe,  is  as 

*  I  trust  I  may  be  excused  for  not  citing,  as  another  fact  which  is  to  con- 
firm the  hypothesis,  a  grave  assertion  of  this  writer,  that  the  branches  of  trees, 
upon  which  the  stng  feeds,  break  out  again  in  his  horns.  Smzh  facts  merit  no 
discussion. 


OF  THE  DEITY. 


355 


regular  in  these  as  in  the  other  vermes,  decides 
the  question  against  our  philosopher,  if  in  truth 
any  question  remained  uiK)n  the  subject. 

Lastly ;  these  wonder-working  instruments,  these 
*^  internal  moulds,*'  what  are  they  after  all  ?  what, 
when  examined,  but  a  name  without  signification  ; 
unintelligible,  if  not  self-contradictory  ;  at  the  best, 
differing  in  nothing  from  the  '^  essential  forms'*  of 
the  Greek  philosophy  ?  One  short  sentence  of  Buf- 
fon's  w^ork  exhibits  his  scheme  as  follows  :  ''  Wiieri 
this  nutritious  and  prolific  matter,  which  is  diffused 
throughout  all  nature,  passes  through  the  internal 
mould  of  an  animal  or  vegetable,  and  finds  a  proper 
matrix,  or  receptacle,  it  gives  rise  to  an  animal  or 
vegetable  of  the  same  species.'*  Does  any  reader 
annex  a  meaning  to  the  expression  ''  internal 
mould,"  in  this  sentence  ?  Ought  it  then  to  be  said, 
that  though  we  have  little  notion  of  an  internal 
mould,  we  have  not  much  more  of  a  designing 
mind  ?  The  very  contrary  of  this  assertion  is  the 
truth.  When  we  speak  of  an  artificer  or  an  archi- 
tect, we  talk  of  what  is  comprehensible  to  our  under- 
standing, and  familiar  to  our  experience.  We  use 
no  other  terms,  than  what  refer  us  for  their 
meaning  to  our  consciousness  and  observation  ; 
what  express  the  constant  objects  of  both  :  whereas 
names,  like  that  we  have  mentioned,  refer  us  to 
nothing ;  excite  no  idea ;  convey  a  sound  to  the 
ear,  but  I  think  do  no  more. 

Another  system,  which  has  lately  been  brought 
forward,  and  with  much  ingenuity,  is  that  of  ap- 
petencies.     The  principle,  and  the  short  account  of 


356  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

the  theory,  is  this :  Pieces  of  soft,  ductile  matter, 
being  endued  with  propensities  or  appetencies  for 
particular  actions,  would,  by  continual  endeavours, 
carried  on  through  a  long  series  of  generations,  work 
themselves  gradually  into  suitable  forms ;  and  at 
length  acquire,  though  perhaps  by  obscure  and  al- 
most imperceptible  improvements,  an  organization 
fitted  to  the  action  which  their  respective  propensi- 
ties led  them  to  exert.  A  piece  of  animated  matter, 
for  example,  that  was  endued  with  a  propensity  to 
JIt/j  though  ever  so  shapeless,  though  no  other  we 
will  suppose  than  a  round  ball,  to  begin  with,  would, 
in  a  course  of  ages,  if  not  in  a  million  of  years,  per- 
haps in  a  hundred  millions  of  years  (for  our  theorists, 
having  eternity  to  dispose  of,  are  never  sparing  in 
time),  acquire  xvings.  The  same  tendency  to  loco- 
motion in  an  aquatic  animal,  or  rather  in  an  ani- 
mated lump  which  might  happen  to  be  surrounded 
by  water,  would  end  in  the  production  of  Jlns:  in  a 
living  substance,  confined  to  the  solid  earth,  would 
put  out  legs  ^nd  Jeet;  or,  if  it  took  a  different  turn, 
would  break  the  body  into  ringlets,  and  conclude 
by  crawling  upon  the  ground. 

Although  I  have  introduced  the  mention  of  this 
theory  into  this  place,  I  am  unwilling  to  give  to  it 
the  name  of  an  atheistic  scheme,  for  two  reasons : 
first,  because,  so  far  as  I  am  able  to  understand  it, 
the  original  propensities,  and  the  numberless  varie- 
ties of  them  (so  different,  in  this  respect,  from  the 
laws  of  mechanical  nature,  which  are  few  and  sim- 
ple), are,  in  the  plan  itself,  attributed  to  the  ordina- 
tion and  appointment  of  an  intelligent  and  design- 


OF  THE  DEITY-  357 

ing  Creator ;  secondly,  because,  likewise,  that  large 
postulatum,  which  is  all  along  assumed  and  presup- 
posed, the  faculty  in  living  bodies  of  producing 
other  bodies  organized  like  themselves,  seems  to  be 
referred  to  the  same  cause  ;  at  least  is  not  attempted 
to  be  accounted  for  by  any  other.  In  one  important 
respect,  however,  the  theory  before  us  coincides 
with  atheistic  systems,  viz.  in  that,  in  the  formation 
of  plants  and  animals,  in  the  structure  and  use  of 
their  parts,  it  does  away  final  causes.  Instead  of 
the  parts  of  a  plant  or  animal,  or  the  particular 
structure  of  the  parts,  having  been  intended  for  the 
action  or  the  use  to  which  we  see  them  applied,  ac- 
cording to  this  theory,  they  have  themselves  grown 
out  of  that  action,  sprung  from  that  use.  The 
theory  therefore  dispenses  with  that  which  we  insist 
upon,  the  necessity,  in  each  particular  case,  of  an  in-  • 
telligent,  designing  mind,  for  the  contriving  and  de- 
termining of  the  forms  which  organized  bodies  bear. 
Give  our  philosopher  these  appetencies  ;  give  him  a 
portion  of  living  irritable  matter  (a  nerve,  or  the 
clipping  of  a  nerve,)  to  work  upon  ;  give  also  to  his 
incipient  or  progressive  forms,  the  power,  in  every 
stage  of  their  alteration,  of  propagating  their  like  ; 
and,  if  he  is  to  be  believed,  he  could  replenish  the 
world  with  all  the  vegetable  and  animal  productions 
which  we  at  present  see  in  it. 

The  scheme  under  consideration  is  open  to  the 
same  objection  with  other  conjectures  of  a  similar 
tendency,  t;i^.atotal  defect  of  evidence.  No  changes, 
like  those  which  the  theory  requires,  have  ever  been 
observed.   All  the  changes  in  Ovid's  Metamorphoses^ 


358  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

might  have  been  effected  by  these  appetencies,  if 
the  theory  were  true  :  yet  not  an  example,  nor  the 
pretence  of  an  example,  is  offered  of  a  single  change 
being  known  to  have  taken  place.  Nor  is  the  order 
of  generation  obedient  to  the  principle  upon  which 
this  theory  is  built.  The  mammse*  of  the  male 
have  not  vanished  by  inusitation  ;  nee  eurtorum^  per 
multa  sceculUy  Judceorum  propagini  deest prceputium. 
It  is  easy  to  say,  and  it  has  been  said,  that  the  al- 
terative process  is  too  slow  to  be  perceived ;  that  it 
has  been  carried  on  through  tracts  of  immeasurable 
time  ;  and  that  the  present  order  of  things  is  the  re- 
sult of  a  gradation,  of  which  no  human  records  can 
trace  the  steps.  It  is  easy  to  say  this ;  and  yet  it 
is  still  true,  that  the  hypothesis  remains  destitute 
of  evidence. 

The  analogies  which  have  been  alleged,  are  of 
the  following  kind  :  The  bunch  of  a  camel  is  said  to 
be  no  other  than  the  effect  of  carrying  burdens ;  a 
service  in  which  the  species  has  been  employed 
from  the  most  ancient  times  of  the  world.  The  first 
race,  by  the  daily  loading  of  the  back,  would  pro- 
bably find  a  small  grumous  tumour  to  be  formed  in 
the  flesh  of  that  part.  The  next  progeny  would 
bring  this  tumour  into  the  world  with  them.  The 
life  to  which  they  were  destined  would  increase  it. 
The  cause  which  first  generated  the  tubercle  being 


*  I  confess  myself  totally  at  a  loss  to  guess  at  the  reason,  either  final  or 
efficient,  for  this  part  of  the  animal  frame,  unless  there  be  some  foundation 
for  an  opinion,  of  which  I  draw  the  hint  from  a  paper  of  Mr  Everard  Home, 
(Phil.  Transact.  1799,  p.  2.)  viz.  that  the  mammae  of  the  foetus  may  be  form-^ 
ed  before  the  sex  is  determined. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  359^ 

continued,  it  would  go  on,  through  every  succes- 
sion, to  augment  its  size,  till  it  attained  the  form 
and  the  bulk  under  which  it  now  appears.  This 
may  serve  for  one  instance  :  another,  and  that  also 
of  the  passive  sort,  is  taken  from  certain  species  of 
birds.  Birds  of  the  crane  kind,  as  the  crane  itself, 
the  heron,  bittern,  stork,  have,  in  general,  their 
thighs  bare  of  feathers.  This  privation  is  accounted 
for  from  the  habit  of  wading  in  water,  and  from  the 
effect  of  that  element  to  check  the  growth  of  feathers 
upon  these  parts ;  in  consequence  of  which,  the  health 
and  vegetation  of  the  feathers  declined  through  each 
generation  of  the  animal;  the  tender  down,  exposed 
to  cold  and  wetness,  became  w^eak,  and  thin,  and 
rare,  till  the  deterioration  ended  in  the  result  which 
we  see,  of  absolute  nakedness.  I  will  mention  a 
third  instance,  because  it  is  drawn  from  an  active 
habit,  as  the  two  last  were  from  passive  habits  ;  and 
thatis  the^oz/c/2  of  the  pelican.  The  description  which 
naturalists  give  of  this  organ,  is  as  follows  :  "  From 
the  lower  edges  of  the  under  chap  hangs  a  bag, 
reaching  from  the  whole  length  of  the  bill  to  the 
neck,  which  is  said  to  be  capable  of  containing  fif- 
teen quarts  of  water.  This  bag  the  bird  has  a  power 
of  wrinkling  up  into  the  hollow  of  the  under  chap. 
When  the  bag  is  empty,  it  is  not  seen ;  but  when 
the  bird  has  fished  with  success,  it  is  incredible  to 
what  an  extent  it  is  often  dilated.  The  first  thing 
the  pelican  does  in  fishing,  is  to  fill  the  bag ;  and 
then  it  returns  to  digest  its  burden  at  leisure.  The 
bird  preys  upon  the  large  fishes,  and  hides  them  by 
dozens  in  its  pouch.     When  the  bill  is  opened  to  its, 


360  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

widest  extent,  a  person  may  run  his  head  into  the 
bird's  mouth,  and  conceal  it  in  this  monstrous  pouch, 
thus  adapted  for  very  singular  purposes/'*  Now 
this  extraordinary  conformation  is  nothing  more, 
say  our  philosophers,  than  the  result  of  habit ;  not 
of  the  habit  or  effort  of  a  single  pelican,  or  of  a 
single  race  of  pelicans,  but  of  a  habit  perpetuated 
through  a  long  series  of  generations.  The  pelican 
soon  found  the  conveniency  of  reserving  in  its  mouth, 
when  its  appetite  was  glutted,  the  remainder  of  its 
prey,  which  is  fish.  The  fulness  produced  by  this 
attempt,  of  course  stretched  the  skin  which  lies  be- 
tween the  under  chaps,  as  being  the  most  yielding 
part  of  the  mouth.  Every  distension  increased  the 
cavity.  The  original  bird,  and  many  generations 
w^hich  succeeded  him,  might  find  difficulty  enough 
in  making  the  pouch  answer  this  purpose ;  but  fu- 
ture pelicans,  entering  upon  life  with  a  pouch  de- 
rived from  their  progenitors,  of  considerable  capa- 
city, would  more  readily  accelerate  its  advance  to 
perfection,  by  frequently  pressing  down  the  sack 
with  the  weight  of  fish  which  it  might  now  be  made 
to  contain. 

These,  or  of  this  kind,  are  the  analogies  relied 
upon.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  the  instances  them- 
selves are  unauthenticated  by  testimony ;  and,  in 
theory,  to  say  the  least  of  them,  open  to  great  ob- 
jections. Who  ever  read  of  camels  without  bunches, 
or  with  bunches  less  than  those  with  which  they 
are  at  present  usually  formed?  A  bunch,  not  un- 

*    Goldsmith,  vol,  vi.  p.  52. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  S6l 

like  the  camePs,  is  found  between  the  shoulders  of 
the  buffalo  ;  of  the  origin  of  which  it  is  impossible 
to  give  the  account  here  given.  In  the  second  ex- 
ample ;  Why  should  the  application  of  water,  which 
appears  to  promote  and  thicken  the  growth  of 
feathers  upon  the  bodies  and  breasts  of  geese  and 
swans,  and  other  water-fowls,  have  divested  of  this 
covering  the  thighs  of  cranes  ?  The  third  instance, 
which  appears  to  me  as  plausible  as  any  that  can 
be  produced,  has  this  against  it,  that  it  is  a  singu- 
larity restricted  to  the  species ;  whereas,  if  it  had 
its  commencement  in  the  cause  and  manner  which 
have  been  assigned,  the  like  conformation  might 
be  expected  to  take  place  in  other  birds  which  feed 
upon  fish.  How  comes  it  to  pass,  that  the  pelican 
alone  was  the  inventress,  and  her  descendants  the 
only  inheritors,  of  this  curious  resource  ? 

But  it  is  the  less  necessary  to  controvert  the  in- 
tances  themselves,  as  it  is  a  straining  of  analogy 
beyond  all  limits  of  reason  and  credibility,  to  assert 
that  birds,  and  beasts,  and  fish,  with  all  their  va- 
riety and  complexity  of  organization,  have  been 
brought  into  their  forms,  and  distinguished  into 
their  several  kinds  and  natures,  by  the  same  process 
(even  if  that  process  could  be  demonstrated,  or  had 
it  ever  been  actually  noticed,)  as  might  seem  to  serve 
for  the  gradual  generation  of  a  camePs  bunch,  or  a 
pelican's  pouch. 

The  solution,  when  applied  to  the  works  of  nature 
generally^  is  contradicted  by  many  of  the  pheno- 
mena, and  totally  inadequate  to  others.  The  liga- 
ments or  strictures,  by  which  the  tendons  are  tied 


362  OF  THE  PERSONALITY 

down  at  the  angles  of  the  joints,  could  by  no  possi- 
bility be  formed  by  the  motion  or  exercise  of  the 
tendons  themselves ;  by  any  appetency  exciting 
these  parts  into  action ;  or  by  any  tendency  aris- 
ing therefrom.  The  tendency  is  all  the  other  way ; 
the  conatus  in  constant  opposition  to  them.  Length 
of  time  does  not  help  the  case  at  all,  but  the  re- 
verse. The  valves  also  in  the  blood-vessels,  could 
never  be  formed  in  the  manner  which  our  theorist 
proposes.  The  blood,  in  its  right  and  natural 
course,  has  no  tendency  to  form  them.  When  ob- 
structed or  refluent,  it  has  the  contrary.  These 
parts  could  not  grow  out  of  their  use,  though  they 
had  eternity  to  grow  in. 

The  senses  of  animals  appear  to  me  altogether 
incapable  of  receiving  the  explanation  of  their  ori- 
gin which  this  theory  affords.  Including  under 
the  word  "  sense' ^  the  organ  and  the  perception, 
we  have  no  account  of  either.  How  will  our  philo- 
sopher get  at  vision^  or  make  an  eye  ?  How  should 
the  blind  animal  affect  sight,  of  which  blind  animals, 
we  know,  have  neither  conception  nor  desire  ?  Af- 
fecting it,  by  what  operation  of  its  will,  by  what 
endeavour  to  see,  could  it  so  determine  the  fluids  of 
its  body,  as  to  inchoate  the  formation  of  an  eye  ?  or 
suppose  the  eye  formed,  would  the  perception  follow? 
The  same  of  the  other  senses.  And  this  objection 
holds  its  force,  ascribe  what  you  will  to  the  hand  of 
time,  to  the  power  of  habit,  to  changes  too  slow  to  be 
observed  by  man,  or  brought  within  any  compari- 
son  which  he  is  able  to  make  of  past  things  with 
the  present:  concede  what  you  please  to  these 


OF  THE  DEITY.  363 

arbitrary  and  unattested  suppositions,  how  will 
they  help  you  ?  Here  is  no  inception.  No  laws, 
no  course,  no  powers  of  nature  which  prevail  at 
present,  nor  any  analogous  to  these,  would  give 
commencement  to  a  new  sense.  And  it  is  in  vain 
to  inquire  how  that  might  proceed,  which  could 
never  begin. 

I  think  the  senses  to  be  the  most  inconsistent 
with  the  hypothesis  before  us,  of  any  part  of  the 
animal  frame.  But  other  parts  are  sufficiently  so. 
The  solution  does  not  apply  to  the  parts  of  animals 
which  have  little  in  them  of  motion.  If  we  could 
suppose  joints  and  muscles  to  be  gradually  formed 
by  action  and  exercise,  what  action  or  exercise 
could  form  a  skull,  or  fill  it  with  brains  ?  No  effort 
of  the  animal  could  determine  the  clothing  of  its 
skin.  What  conatus  could  give  prickles  to  the 
porcupine  or  hedgehog,  or  to  the  sheep  its  fleece  ? 

In  the  last  place :  What  do  these  appetencies 
mean  when  applied  to  plants  ?  I  am  not  able  to 
give  a  signification  to  the  term,  which  can  be  trans- 
ferred from  animals  to  plants ;  or  which  is  com- 
mon to  both.  Yet  a  no  less  successful  organi- 
zation is  found  in  plants,  than  what  obtains  in  ani- 
mals. A  solution  is  wanted  for  one  as  well  as  the 
other. 

Upon  the  whole  ;  after  all  the  schemes  and 
struggles  of  a  reluctant  philosophy,  the  necessary 
resort  is  to  a  Deity.  The  marks  of  design  are  too 
strong  to  be  gotten  over.  Design  must  have  had  a 
designer.  That  designer  must  have  been  a  person. 
That  perjson  is  God. 


364  OF  THE  NATURAL  ATTRIBUTES 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

OP  THE  NATURAL  ATTRIBUTES  OF  THE  DEITY. 

It  is  an  immense  conclusion,  that  there  is  a  God  ; 
a  perceiving,  intelUgent,  designing  Being ;  at  the 
head  of  creation,  and  from  whose  will  it  proceed- 
ed. The  attributes  of  such  a  Being,  suppose  his 
reality  to  be  proved,  must  be  adequate  to  the  mag- 
nitude, extent,  and  multiplicity  of  his  operations : 
which  are  not  only  vast  beyond  comparison  with 
those  performed  by  any  other  power,  but,  so  far  as 
respects  our  conceptions  of  them,  infinite,  because 
they  are  unlimited  on  all  sides. 

Yet  the  contemplation  of  a  nature  so  exalted, 
however  surely  we  arrive  at  the  proof  of  its  exist- 
ence,  overwhelms  our  faculties.  The  mind  feels 
its  powers  sink  under  the  subject.  One  conse- 
quence of  which  is,  that  from  painful  abstraction 
the  thoughts  seek  relief  in  sensible  images.  Whence 
may  be  deduced  the  ancient,  and  almost  universal 
propensity  to  idolatrous  substitutions.  They  are 
the  resources  of  a  labouring  imagination.  False 
religions  usually  fall  in  with  the  natural  propensity; 
true  religions,  or  such  as  have  derived  themselves 
from  the  true,  resist  it. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  365 

It  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  the  revelations 
which  we   acknowledge,    that   whilst  they  reject 
idolatry  with  its  many  pernicious  accompaniments, 
they  introduce  the  Deity  to  human  apprehension, 
under  an  idea  more  personal,   more  determinate, 
more  within  its  compass,  than  the  theology  of  na- 
ture can  do.    And  this  they  do  by  representing  him 
exclusively  under  the  relation  in  which  he  stands 
to  ourselves ;  and,  for  the  most  part,  under  some 
precise  character,  resulting  from  that  relation,  or 
from  the  history  of  his  providences.     Which  me- 
thod suits  the  span  of  our  intellects  much  better 
than  the  universality  which  enters  into  the  idea  of 
God,  as  deduced  from  the  views  of  nature.    When, 
therefore,  these  representations  are  well  founded  in 
point  of  authority  (for  all  depends  upon  that),  they 
afford  a  condescension  to  the  state  of  our  faculties, 
of  which,  they  who  have  most  reflected  on  the  sub- 
ject, will  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  the  want  and 
the  value. 

Nevertheless,  if  we  be  careful  to  imitate  the 
documents  of  our  religion,  by  confining  our  ex- 
planations to  what  concerns  ourselves,  and  do  not 
affect  more  precision  in  our  ideas  than  the  subject 
allows  of,  the  several  terms  which  are  employed  to 
denote  the  attributes  of  the  Deity,  may  be  made, 
even  in  natural  religion,  to  bear  a  sense  consistent 
with  truth  and  reason,  and  not  surpassing  our  com- 
prehension. 

These  terms  are  ;  Omnipotence,  omniscience, 
omnipresence,  eternity,  self-existence,  necessary  ex- 
istence, spirituality. 


366  OF  THE  NATURAL  ATTRIBUTES 

*'  Omnipotence/*  "  omniscience/*  "  infinite  '* 
power,  ^*  infinite  '*  knowledge,  are  superlatives ; 
expressing  our  conception  of  these  attributes  in 
the  strongest  and  most  elevated  terms  which  lan- 
guage supplies.  We  ascribe  power  to  the  Deity 
under  the  name  of  "  omnipotence,**  the  strict  and 
correct  conclusion  being,  that  a  power  which  could 
create  such  a  world  as  this  is,  must  be,  beyond  all 
comparison,  greater  than  any  which  we  experience 
in  ourselves,  than  any  which  we  observe  in  other 
visible  agents ;  greater  also  than  any  which  we  can 
want,  for  our  individual  protection  and  preserva- 
tion, in  the  Being  upon  whom  we  depend.  It  is  a 
power,  likewise,  to  which  we  are  not  authorized,  by 
our  observation  or  knowledge,  to  assign  any  limits 
of  space  or  duration. 

Very  much  of  the  same  sort  of  remark  is  appli- 
cable to  the  term  "  omniscience,**  infinite  know- 
ledge, or  infinite  wisdom.  In  strictness  of  language, 
there  is  a  difference  between  knowledge  and  wis- 
dom ;  wisdom  always  supposing  action,  and  action 
directed  by  it.  With  respect  to  the  first,  viz.  know- 
ledgey  the  Creator  must  know,  intimately,  the  con- 
stitution and  properties  of  the  things  which  he  cre- 
ated ;  which  seems  also  to  imply  a  foreknowledge  of 
their  action  upon  one  another,  and  of  their  changes; 
at  least,  so  far  as  the  same  result  from  trains  of 
physical  and  necessary  causes.  His  omniscience 
also,  as  far  as  respects  things  present,  is  deducible 
from  his  nature,  as  an  intelligent  behig,  joined  with 
the  extent,  or  rather  the  universality,  of  his  opera- 
tions.    Where  he  acts,  he  is ;  and  where  he  is,  he 


OF  THE  DEITY.  367 

perceives.  The  msdom  of  the  Deity,  as  testified  in 
the  works  of  creation,  surpasses  all  idea  we  have  of 
wisdom,  drawn  from  the  highest  intellectual  opera- 
tions of  the  highest  class  of  intelligent  beings  with 
whom  we  are  acquainted ;  and,  which  is  of  the 
chief  importance  to  us,  whatever  be  its  compass  or 
extent,  which  it  is  evidently  impossible  that  we 
should  be  able  to  determine,  it  must  be  adequate  to 
the  conduct  of  that  order  of  things  under  which 
we  live.  And  this  is  enough.  It  is  of  very  inferior 
consequence,  by  what  terms  we  express  our  notion, 
or  rather  our  admiration,  of  this  attribute.  The 
terms,  which  the  piety  and  the  usage  of  language 
have  rendered  habitual  to  us,  may  be  as  proper  as  any 
other.  We  can  trace  this  attribute  much  beyond 
what  is  necessary  for  any  conclusion  to  which  we 
have  occasion  to  apply  it.  The  degree  of  know- 
ledge and  power,  requisite  for  the  formation  of 
created  nature,  cannot,  with  respect  to  us,  be  dis- 
tinguished from  infinite. 

The  Divine  "  omnipresence''  stands,  in  natural 
theology,  upon  this  foundation : — In  every  part 
and  place  of  the  universe  with  which  we  are  ac- 
quainted, we  perceive  the  exertion  of  a  power, 
which  we  believe,  mediately  or  immediately,  to  pro- 
ceed from  the  Deity.  For  instance  :  In  what  part 
or  point  of  space,  that  has  ever  been  explored,  do 
we  not  discover  attraction  ?  In  what  regions  do  we 
not  find  light  ?  In  what  accessible  portion  of  our 
globe  do  we  not  meet  with  gravity,  magnetism, 
electricity  ?  together  with  the  properties  also  and 
powers  of  organized  substances,  of  vegetable  or  of 


368  OF  THE  NATURAL  ATTRIBUTES 

animated  nature  ?  Nay,  farther,  we  may  ask.  What 
kingdom  is  there  of  nature,  what  corner  of  space, 
in  which  there  is  any  thing  that  can  be  examined 
by  us,  where  we  do  not  fall  upon  contrivance  and 
design  ?  The  only  reflection  perhaps  which  arises  in 
our  minds  from  this  view  of  the  world  around  us  is, 
that  the  laws  of  nature  every- where  prevail ;  that 
they  are  uniform  and  universal.     But  what  do  we 
mean  by  the  laws  of  nature,  or  by  any  law  ?  Effects 
are  produced  by  power,  not  by  laws.     A  law  can- 
not execute  itself.     A  law  refers  us  to  an  agent. 
Now  an  agency  so  general,  as  that  we  cannot  dis- 
cover its  absence,  or  assign  the  place  in  which  some 
effect  of  its  continued  energy  is  not  found,  may,  in 
popular  language  at  least,  and,  perhaps,  without 
much  deviation  from  philosophical  strictness,  be 
called  universal :  and,  witli  not  quite  the  same,  but 
with  no  inconsiderable  propriety,  the  Person,  or 
Being,  in  whom  that  power  resides,  or  from  whom 
it  is  derived,  may  be  taken  to  be  omnipresent.     He 
who  upholds  all  things  by  his  power,  may  be  said 
to  be  every- where  present. 

This  is  called  a  virtual  presence.  There  is  also 
what  metaphysicians  denominate  an  essential  ubi- 
quity ;  and  which  idea  the  language  of  Scripture 
seems  to  favour  :  but  the  former,  I  think,  goes  as 
far  as  natural  theology  carries  us. 

^^  Eternity''  is  a  negative  idea,  clothed  with  a 
positive  name.  It  supposes,  in  that  to  which  it  is 
applied,  a  present  existence  ;  and  is  the  negation  of 
a  beginning  or  an  end  of  that  existence.  As  ap- 
plied to  the  Deity,  it  has  not  been  controverted  by 


OF  THE  DEITY.  369 

those  who  acknowledge  a  Deity  at  alL  Most  as- 
suredly, there  never  was  a  time  in  which  nothing 
existed,  because  that  condition  must  have  con- 
tinued. The  universal  blank  must  have  remained ; 
nothing  could  rise  up  out  of  it ;  nothing  could  ever 
have  existed  since ;  nothing  could  exist  now.  In 
strictness,  however,  we  have  no  concern  with  dura- 
tion prior  to  that  of  the  visible  world.  Upon  this 
article,  therefore,  of  theology,  it  is  sufficient  to 
know,  that  the  contriver  necessarily  existed  before 
the  contrivance. 

"  Self-existence"  is  another  negative  idea,  'viz. 
the  negation  of  a  preceding  cause,  as  of  a  progeni- 
tor, a  maker,  an  author,  a  creator. 

"  Necessary  existence''  means  demonstrable  ex- 
istence. 

"  Spirituality '*  expresses  an  idea,  made  up  of  a 
negative  part,  and  of  a  positive  part.  The  negative 
part  consists  in  the  exclusion  of  some  of  the  known 
properties  of  matter,  especially  of  solidity,  of  the 
vis  inertice,  and  of  gravitation.  The  positive  part 
comprises  perception,  thought,  will,  power,  action; 
by  which  last  term  is  meant,  the  origination  of  mo- 
tion ;  the  quality,  perhaps,  in  which  resides  the  es- 
sential superiority  of  spirit  over  matter,  "  which 
cannot  move,  unless  it  be  moved ;  and  cannot  but 
move,  when  impelled  by  another.''^  I  apprehend 
that  there  can  be  no  difficulty  in  applying  to  the 
Deity  both  parts  of  this  idea. 

*  Bishop  Wilkins*s  Principles  of  Natural  Religion,  p.  106* 

Aa 


370  THE  UNITY 


CHAPTER  XXV- 


THE  UNITY  OF  THE  DEITY* 


Of  the  "  Unity  of  the  Deity/'  the  proof  is,  the 
uniformity  of  plan  observable  in  the  universe.  The 
universe  itself  is  a  system  ;  each  part  either  depend- 
ing upon  other  parts,  or  being  connected  with  other 
parts  by  some  common  law  of  motion^,  or  by  the 
presence  of  some  common  substance.  One  prin- 
ciple of  gravitation  causes  a  stone  to  drop  towards^ 
the  earthy  and  the  moon  to  wheel  round  it.  One 
law  of  attrax^tion  carries  all  the  different  planets? 
about  the  sun.  This  philosophers  demonstrate.. 
There  are  also  other  points  of  agreement  amongst 
them,  which  may  be  considered  as  marks  of  the 
identity  of  their  origin,  and  of  their  intelligent  au- 
thor. In  all  are  found  the  conveniency  and  stabi- 
lity derived  from  gravitation.  They  all  experience 
vicissitudes  of  days  and  nights,  and  changes  of  sea- 
son. They  all,  at  least  Jupiter,  Mars,  and  Venus, 
have  the  same  advantages  from  their  atmosphere  as 
we  have.  In  all  the  planets,  the  axes  of  rotation  are- 
permanent.  Nothing  is  more  probable,  than  that 
the  same  attracting  influence,  acting  according  to 
the  same  rule,  reaches  to  the  fixed  stars  :  but,  if  this 
be  only  probable,  another  thing  is  certain,  viz.  that 


OF  THE  DEITY.  371 

the  same  element  of  light  does.  The  light  from  a 
fixdd  star  affects  our  eyes  in  the  same  manner,  is 
refracted  and  reflected  according  to  the  same  laws, 
as  the  light  of  a  candle.  The  velocity  of  the  light 
of  the  fixed  stars  is  also  the  same  as  the  velocity  of 
the  light  of  the  sun,  reflected  from  the  satellites  of 
Jupiter.  The  heat  of  the  sun,  in  kind,  differs 
nothing  from  the  heat  of  a  coal  fire. 

In  our  own  globe,  the  case  is  clearer.  New 
countries  are  continually  discovered,  but  the  old 
laws  of  nature  are  always  found  in  them :  new  plants 
perhaps,  or  animals,  but  always  in  company  with 
plants  and  animals  which  we  already  know ;  and 
always  possessing  many  of  the  same  general  pro- 
perties. We  never  get  amongst  such  original,  or 
totally  different,  modes  of  existence,  as  to  indicate, 
that  we  are  come  into  the  province  of  a  different 
Creator,  or  under  the  direction  of  a  different  will. 
In  truth,  the  same  order  of  things  attends  us  where- 
ever  we  go.  The  elements  act  upon  one  another, 
electricity  operates,  the  tides  rise  and  fall,  the  mag- 
netic needle  elects  its  position  in  one  region  of  the 
earth  and  sea  as  well  as  in  another.  One  atmos- 
phere invests  all  parts  of  the  globe,  and  connects 
all ;  one  sun  illuminates,  one  moon  exerts  its  spe- 
cific attraction  upon  all  parts.  If  there  be  a  variety 
in  natural  effects,  as,  e.  g.  in  the  tides  of  different 
seas,  that  very  variety  is  the  result  of  the  same 
cause,  acting  under  different  circumstances.  In 
many  cases  this  is  proved ;  in  all,  is  probable. 

The  inspection  and  comparison  of  living  forms, 
add  to  this  argument  examples  without  number. 


372  THE  UNITY 

Of  all  large  terrestrial  animals,  the  structure  is  very 
much  ahke ;  their  senses  nearly  the  same ;  their 
natural  functions  and   passions  nearly  the  same ; 
their  viscera  nearly  the  same,  both  in  substance^ 
shape,  and  office :  digestion,  nutrition,  circulation, 
secretion,  go  on,  in  a  similar  manner,  in  all :  the 
great  circulating  fluid  is  the  same ;  for,  I  think,  no 
difference  has  been  discovered  in  the  properties  of 
Uoodj  from  whatever  animal  it  be   drawn.     The 
experiment  of  transfusion  proves,  that  the  blood  of 
one  animal  will  serve  for  another.     The  skeletons 
also  of  the  larger  terrestrial  animals,  show  particular 
varieties,  but  still  under  a  great  general  affinity. 
The  resemblance  is  somewhat  less,  yet  sufficiently 
evident,  between  quadrupeds  and  birds.     They  are 
all  alike  in  five  re&pects,  for  one  in  which  they  differ. 
In  Jishy  which  belong  to  another  department,  as 
it  were,  of  nature,  the  points  of  comparison  become 
fewer.     But  we  never  lose  sight  of  our  analogy, 
e.  g.  we  still  meet  with  a  stomach,  a  liver,  a  spine  ; 
with  bile  and  blood ;  with  teeth ;  with  eyes,  (which 
<eyes  are  only  slightly  varied  from  our  own,  and 
which  variation,  in  truth,  demonstrates,  not  an  inter- 
ruption, but  a  continuance  of  the  same  exquisite 
plan ;   for  it  is  the  adaptation  of  the  organ  to  the 
element,   viz.  to  the  different  refraction  of  light 
passing  into  the  eye  out  of  a  denser  medium).    The 
provinces,  also,  themselves  of  water  and  earth,  are 
connected  by  the  species  of  animals  which  inhabit 
both ;  and  also  by  a  large  tribe  of  aquatic  animals, 
which  closely  resemble  the  terrestrial  in  their  in- 
ternal structure  ;  I  mean  the  cetaceous  tribe,  which , 


OF  THE  DEITY*  373 

have  hot  blood,  respiring  lungs,  bowels,  and  other 
essential  parts,  like  those  of  land  animals.  This 
similitude,  surely,  bespeaks  the  same  creation  and 
the  same  Creator. 

Insects  and  shell-fish  appear  to  me  to  differ  from 
other  classes  of  animals  the  most  widely  of  any. 
Yet  even  here,  beside  many  points  of  particular 
resemblance,  there  exists  a  general  relation  of  a 
peculiar  kind.  It  is  the  relation  of  inversion  ;  the 
law  of  contrariety :  namely,  that  whereas,  in  other 
animals,  the  bones  to  which  the  muscles  are  attached 
lie  xmthin  the  body ;  in  insects  and  shell-fish  they 
lie  on  the  outside  of  it.  The  shell  of  a  lobster  per- 
forms to  the  animal  the  office  of  a  honey  by  furnish- 
ing to  the  tendons  that  fixed  basis  or  immoveable 
fulcrum,  without  which,  mechanically,  they  could 
not  act.  The  crust  of  an  insect  is  its  shell,  and 
answers  the  like  purpose.  The  shell  also  of  an 
oyster  stands  in  the  place  of  a  bone ;  the  basis  of 
the  muscles  being  fixed  to  it,  in  the  same  manner 
as,  in  other  animals,  they  are  fixed  to  the  bones. 
All  which  (under  wonderful  varieties,  indeed,  and 
adaptations  of  form)  confesses  an  imitation,  a  re- 
membrance, a  carrying  on,  of  the  same  plan. 

The  observations  here  made  are  equally  applicable 
to  plants  ;  but,  I  think,  unnecessary  to  be  pursued. 
It  is  a  very  striking  circumstance,  and  alone  suf- 
ficient to  prove  all  which  we  contend  for,  that  in 
this  part  likewise  of  organized  nature,  we  perceive 
a  continuation  of  the  sexual  system. 

Certain  however  it  is,  that  the  whole  argument 
for  the  divine  unity,  goes  no  farther  than  to  a  unity 
of  counsel. 


374f  THE  GOODNESS 

It  may  likewise  be  acknowledged,  that  no  argu- 
ments  which  we  are  in  possession  of,  exclude  the 
ministry  of  subordinate  agents.  If  such  there  be, 
they  act  under  a  presiding,  a  controUing  will ;  be- 
cause they  act  according  to  certain  general  restric- 
tions, by  certain  common  rules,  and,  as  it  should 
seem,  upon  a  general  plan :  but  still  such  agents, 
and  different  ranks,  and  classes,  and  degrees  of  them^ 
may  be  employed. 


CHAPTER  XXVL 


THE  GOODNESS  OF  THE  DEITY. 

The  proof  of  the  divine  goodness  rests  upon  two 
propositions ;  each,  as  we  contend,  capable  of  being 
made  out  by  observations  drawn  from  the  appear- 
ances of  nature. 

The  first  is,  "  that  in  a  vast  plurality  of  instances 
in  which  contrivance  is  perceived,  the  design  of  the 
contrivance  is  beneficial.'' 

The  second,  "  that  the  Deity  has  superadded 
pleasure  to  animal  sensations,  beyond  what  was 
necessary  for  any  other  purpose,  or  when  the  pur^ 


OF  THE  DEITY.  375 

pose,  SO  far  as  it  was  necessary,  might  have  been 
effected  by  the  operation  of  pain/' 

First,  "  in  a  vast  plurality  of  instances  in  which 
contrivance  is  perceived,  the  design  of  the  contriv- 
ance is  heneficiaV^ 

No  productions  of  nature  display  contrivance  so 
manifestly  as  the  parts  of  animals  ;  and  the  parts 
of  animals  have  all  of  them,  I  believe,  a  real,  and, 
with  very  few  exceptions,  all  of  them  a  known  and 
intelligible,  subserviency  to  the  use  of  the  animal. 
Now,  when  the  multitude  of  animals  is  considered, 
the  number  of  parts  in  each,  their  figure  and  fitness, 
the  faculties  depending  upon  them,  the  variety  of 
species,  the  complexity  of  structure,  the  success, 
in  so  many  cases,  and  felicity  of  the  result,  we 
can  never  reflect,  without  the  profoundest  adora- 
tion, upon  the  character  of  that  Being  from  whom 
all  these  things  have  proceeded :  we  cannot  help 
acknowledging,  w^hat  an  exertion  of  benevolence 
creation  was ;  of  a  benevolence  how  minute  in  its 
care,  how  vast  in  its  comprehension ! 

When  we  appeal  to  the  parts  and  faculties  of  ani- 
mals, and  to  the  limbs  and  senses  of  animals  in  par- 
ticular, we  state,  I  conceive,  the  proper  medium 
of  proof  for  the  conclusion  which  we  wish  to  esta- 
blish. I  will  not  say  that  the  insensible  parts  of 
nature  are  made  solely  for  the  sensitive  parts :  but 
this  I  say,  that,  when  we  consider  the  benevolence 
of  the  Deity,  we  can  only  consider  it  in  relation  to 
sensitive  being.  Without  this  reference,  or  referred 
to  any  thing  else,  the  attribute  has  no  object ;  the 
term  has  no  meaning.     Dead  matter  is  nothing. 


376  THE  GOODNESS 

The  parts,  therefore,  especially  the  limbs  and  senses 
of  animals,  although  they  constitute,  in  mass  and 
quantity,  a  small  portion  of  the  material  creation, 
yet,  since  they  alone  are  instruments  of  perception, 
they  compose  what  may  be  called  the  whole  of  visible 
nature,  estimated  with  a  view  to  the  disposition  of 
its  Author.  Consequently,  it  is  in  these  that  we  are 
to  seek  his  character.  It  is  by  these  that  we  are  to 
prove,  that  the  world  was  made  with  a  benevolent 
design. 

Nor  is  the  design  abortive.  It  is  a  happy  world 
after  all.  The  air,  the  earth,  the  water.,  teem  with 
delighted  existence*  In  a  spring  noon,  or  a  sum- 
mer evening,  on  whichever  side  I  turn  my  eyes, 
myriads  of  happy  beings  crowd  upon  my  view. 
"  The  insect  youth  are  on  the  wing.''  Swarms  of 
new-born  Jltes  are  trying  their  pinions  in  the  air. 
Their  sportive  motions,  their  wanton  mazes,  their 
gratuitous  activity,  their  continual  change  of  place 
without  use  or  purpose,  testify  their  joy,  and  the 
exultation  which  they  feel  in  their  lately  discovered 
faculties.  A  bee  amongst  the  flowers  in  spring,  is 
one  of  the  most  cheerful  objects  that  can  be  looked 
upon.  Its  life  appears  to  be  all  enjoyment ;  so  busy, 
and  so  pleased :  yet  it  is  only  a  specimen  of  insect 
life,  with  which,  by  reason  of  the  animal  being  half 
domesticated,  we  happen  to  be  better  acquainted 
than  we  are  with  that  of  others.  The  xvhole  winged 
insect  tribe,  it  is  probable,  are  equally  intent  upon 
their  proper  employments,  and,  under  every  variety 
of  constitution,  gratified,  and  perhaps  equally  grati- 
fied, by  the  offices  which  the  Author  of  their  nature 


OF  THE  DEITY.  377 

has  assigned  to  them.  But  the  atmosphere  is  not 
the  only  scene  of  enjoyment  for  the  insect  race. 
Plants  are  covered  with  aphides,  greedily  sucking , 
their  juices,  and  constantly,  as  it  should  seem,  in 
the  act  of  sucking.  It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that 
this  is  a  state  of  gratification.  What  else  should  fix 
them  so  close  to  the  operation,  and  so  long  ?  Other 
species  are  running  about,  with  an  alacrity  in  their 
motions,  which  carries  with  it  every  mark  of  plea- 
sure. Large  patches,  of  ground  are  sometimes  half 
covered  with  these  brisk  and  sprightly  natures.  If 
we  look  to  what  the  waters  produce,  shoals  of  the 
fry  of  fish  frequent  the  margins  of  rivers,  of  lakes, 
and  of  the  sea  itself.  These  are  so  happy,  that  they 
know  not  what  to  do  with  themselves.  Their  atti- 
tudes, their  vivacity,  their  leaps  out  of  the  water, 
their  frolics  in  it  (which  I  have  noticed  a  thousand 
times  with  equal  attention  and  amusement),  all  con- 
duce to  show  their  excess  of  spirits,  and  are  simply 
the  effects  of  that  excess.  Walking  by  the  sea-side, 
in  a  calm  evening,  upon  a  sandy  shore,  and  with  an 
ebbing  tide,  I  have  frequently  remarked  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  dark  cloud,  or  rather,  very  thick  mist, 
hanging  over  the  edge  of  the  w^ater,  to  the  height, 
perhaps,  of  half  a  yard,  and  of  the  breadth  of  two  or 
three  yards,  stretching  along  the  coast  as  far  as  the 
eye  could  reach,  and  always  retiring  with  the  water. 
When  this  cloud  came  to  be  examined,  it  proved  to 
be  nothing  else  than  so  much  space,  filled  with 
young  shrimps,  in  the  act  of  bounding  into  the  air 
from  the  shallow  margin  of  the  water,  or  from  the 
wet  sand.     If  any  motion  of  a  mute  animal  could 


378  THE  GOODNESS 

express  delight,  it  was  this :  if  they  had  meant  to 
make  signs  of  their  happiness,  they  could  not  have 
done  it  more  intelligibly.  Suppose  then,  what  I 
have  no  doubt  of,  each  individual  of  this  number 
to  be  in  a  state  of  positive  enjoyment ;  what  a  sum, 
collectively,  of  gratification  and  pleasure  have  we 
here  before  our  view ! 

The  young  of  all  animals  appear  to  me  to  receive 
pleasure  simply  from  the  exercise  of  their  limbs  and 
bodily  faculties,  without  reference  to  any  end  to  be 
attained,  or  any  use  to  be  answered  by  the  exertion. 
A  child,  without  knowing  any  thing  of  the  use  of 
language,  is  in  a  high  degree  delighted  with  being 
able  to  speak.  Its  incessant  repetition  of  a  few  arti- 
culate sounds,  or  perhaps  of  the  single  word  which 
it  has  learned  to  pronounce,  proves  this  point  clear- 
ly. Nor  is  it  less  pleased  with  its  first  successful 
endeavours  to  walk,  or  rather  to  run  (which  pre- 
cedes walking),  although  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
importance  of  the  attainment  to  its  future  life, 
and  even  without  applying  it  to  any  present  pur- 
pose. A  child  is  delighted  with  speaking,  without 
having  any  thing  to  say ;  and  with  walking,  without 
knowing  where  to  go.  And,  prior  to  both  these, 
I  am  disposed  to  believe,  that  the  waking  hours  of 
infancy  are  agreeably  taken  up  with  the  exercise  of 
vision,  or  perhaps,  more  properly  speaking,  with 
learning  to  see. 

But  it  is  not  for  youth  alone  that  the  great  Pa- 
rent of  creation  hath  provided.  Happiness  is  found 
with  the  purring  cat,  no  less  than  with  the  play- 
ful kitten ;  in  the  arm-chair  of  dozing  age,  as  well 


OF  THE  DEITY.  379 

as  in  either  the  sprightliness  of  the  dance,  or  the 
animation  of  the  chase.  To  novelty,  to  acuteness 
of  sensation,  to  hope,  to  ardour  of  pursuit,  suc- 
ceeds what  is,  in  no  inconsiderable  degree,  an 
equivalent  for  them  all,  "  perception  of  ease.'* 
Herein  is  the  exact  diiference  between  the  young 
and  the  old.  The  young  are  not  happy,  but  when 
enjoying  pleasure ;  the  old  are  happy,  when  free 
from  pain.  And  this  constitution  suits  with  the 
degrees  of  animal  power  which  they  respectively 
possess.  The  vigour  of  youth  wa3  to  be  stimulated 
to  action  by  impatience  of  rest ;  whilst  to  the  im- 
becility of  age,  quietness  and  repose  become  posi- 
tive gratifications.  In  one  important  respect  the 
advantage  is  with  the  old.  A  state  of  ease  is,  ge- 
nerally speaking,  more  attainable  than  a  state  of 
pleasure.  A  constitution  therefore  which  can 
enjoy  ease,  is  preferable  to  that  which  can  taste 
only  pleasure.  This  same  perception  of  ease 
oftentimes  renders  old  age  a  condition  of  great 
comfort;  especially  when  riding  at  its  anchor 
after  a  busy  or  tempestuous  life.  It  is  well  de- 
scribed by  Rousseau,  to  be  the  interval  of  repose 
and  enjoyment,  between  the  hurry  and  the  end  of 
life.  How  far  the  same  cause  extends  to  other 
animal  natures,  cannot  be  judged  of  with  certain- 
ty. The  appearance  of  satisfaction,  with  which 
most  animals,  as  their  activity  subsides,  seek  and 
enjoy  rest,  affords  reason  to  believe,  that  this 
source  of  gratification  is  appointed  to  advanced  life, 
under  all,  or  most,  of  its  various  forms.  In  the 
species  with  which  we  are  best  acquainted,  namely, 


380  THE  GOODNESS 

our  own,  I  am  far,  even  as  an  observer  of  human 
life,  from  thinking  that  youth  is  its  happiest  season, 
much  less  the  only  happy  one :  as  a  Christian,  I 
am  willing  to  believe  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
truth  in  the  following  representation,  given  by 
a  very  pious  writer,  as  well  as  an  excellent  man  :^ 
*^  To  the  intelligent  and  virtuous,  old  age  presents 
a  scene  of  tranquil  enjoyments,  of  obedient  ap- 
petite, of  well-regulated  affections,  of  maturity  in 
knowledge,  and  of  calm  preparation  for  immorta- 
lity. In  this  serene  and  dignified  state,  placed  as 
it  were  on  the  confines  of  two  worlds,  the  mind  of 
a  good  man  reviews  what  is  past  with  the  compla- 
cency of  an  approving  conscience  ;  and  looks  for- 
ward with  humble  confidence  in  the  mercy  of  God, 
and  with  devout  aspirations  towards  his  eternal  and 
ever-increasing  favour.'* 

What  is  seen  in  different  stages  of  the  same  life, 
is  still  more  exemplified  in  the  lives  of  different 
animals.  Animal  enjoyments  are  infinitely  diver- 
rifled.  The  modes  of  life  to  which  the  organi- 
zation of  different  animals  respectively  determines 
them,  are  not  only  of  various  but  of  opposite  kinds. 
Yet  each  is  happy  in  its  own.  For  instance  ;  ani- 
mals of  prey  live  much  alone ;  animals  of  a  milder 
constitution,  in  society.  Yet  the  herring,  which 
lives  in  shoals,  and  the  sheep,  which  lives  in  flocks, 
are  not  more  happy  in  a  crowd,  or  more  content- 
ed amongst  their  companions,  than  is  the  pike,  or 

*  Father's  Instructions;  by  Dr  Percival  of  Manchester,  p.  317. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  381 

the  lion,  with  the  deep  solitudes  of  the  pool,  or  the 
forest. 

But  it  will  be  said,  that  the  instances  which  we 
have  here  brought  forward,  whether  of  vivacity  or 
repose,   or  of  apparent   enjoyment  derived  from 
either,  are  picked  and  favourable  instances.     We 
answer,  first,  that  they  are  instances,  nevertheless, 
which  comprise  large  provinces  of  sensitive  exist- 
ence ;  that  every  case  which  we  have  described,  is 
the  case  of  millions.     At  this  moment,  in  every 
given  moment  of  time,  how  many  myriads  of  ani- 
mals are  eating  their  food,  gratifying  their  appe- 
tites, ruminating  in  thek  holes,  accomplishing  their 
wishes,  pursuing  their  pleasures,  taking  their  pas* 
times !    In  each  individual,  how  many  things  must 
go  right  for  it  to  be  at  ease  ;  yet  how  large  a  pro- 
portion out  of  every  species  is  so  in  every  assign- 
able instant !    Secondly,  we  contend,  in  the  terms 
of  our  original  proposition,  that  throughout  the 
whole  of  life,  as  it  is  diffused  in  nature,  and  as  far 
as  we  are  acquainted  with  it,  looking  to  the  average 
of  sensations,  the  plurality  and  the  preponderancy 
is  in  favour  of  happiness  by  a  vast  excess.     In  our 
own  species,  in  which  perhaps  the  assertion  may 
be  more  questionable  than  in  any  other,  the  pre- 
pollency  of  good  over  evil,  of  health,  for  example, 
and  ease,  over  pain  and  distress,  is  evinced  by  the 
very  notice  which   calamities   excite.     What  in- 
quiries does  the  sickness  of  our  friends  produce ! 
what  conversation  their  misfortunes!    This  shows 
that  the  common  course  of  things  is  in  favour  of 
happiness ;  that  happiness  is  the  rule,  misery  the 


382  THE  GOODNESS 

exception.  Were  the  order  reversed,  our  attention 
would  be  called  to  examples  of  health  and  compe- 
tency, instead  of  disease  and  want. 

One  great  cause  of  our  insensibility  to  the  good- 
ness of  the  Creator,  is  the  very  ea^tensiveness  of  his 
bounty.  We  prize  but  little  what  we  share  only  in 
common  with  the  rest,  or  with  the  generality  of 
our  species.  When  we  hear  of  blessings,  we  think 
forthwith  of  successes,  of  prosperous  fortunes,  of 
honours,  riches,  preferments  ;  i.  e.  of  those  advan- 
tages and  superiorities  over  others,  which  we  hap- 
pen either  to  possess,  or  to  be  in  pursuit  of,  or  to 
covet.  The  common  benefits  of  our  nature  entirely 
escape  us.  Yet  these  are  the  great  things.  These 
constitute  what  most  properly  ought  to  be  accounted 
blessings  of  Providence  ;  what  alone,  if  we  might 
so  speak,  are  worthy  of  its  care.  Nightly  rest  and 
daily  bread,  the  ordinary  use  of  our  limbs,  and 
senses,  and  understandings,  are  gifts  which  admit 
of  no  comparison  with  any  other.  Yet,  because 
almost  every  man  we  meet  with  possesses  these,  we 
leave  them  out  of  our  enumeration.  They  raise 
no  sentiment :  they  move  no  gratitude.  Now  here- 
in is  our  judgment  perverted  by  our  selfishness. 
A  blessing  ought  in  truth  to  be  the  more  satisfactory, 
the  bounty  at  least  of  the  donor  is  rendered  more 
conspicuous,  by  its  very  diffusion,  its  commonness, 
its  cheapness  ;  by  its  falling  to  the  lot,  and  forming 
the  happiness,  of  the  great  bulk  and  body  of  our 
species,  as  well  as  of  ourselves.  Nay,  even  when 
we  do  not  possess  it,  it  ought  to  be  matter  of  thank- 
fulness that  others  do.     But  we  have  a  different 


OF  THE  DEITY.  883 

way  of  thinking.  We  court  distinction.  That  is 
not  the  worst :  we  see  nothing  but  what  has  distinc- 
tion to  recommend  it^  This  necessarily  contracts 
our  views  of  the  Creator'^  beneficence  within  a  nar- 
row compass  ;  and  most  unjustly.  It  is  in  those 
things  which  are  so  common  as  to  be  no  distinction^ 
that  the  amplitude  of  the  divine  benignity  is  per- 
ceived. 

But  pain,  no  doubt,  and  privations  exist,  in  num- 
erous instances,  and  to  a  degree  which,  coUectivelyy 
would  be  very  great,  if  they  were  compared  with 
any  other  thing  than  with  the  mass  of  animal  frui- 
tion. For  the  application,  therefore,  of  our  propo- 
sition to  that  mia:ed  state  of  things  which  these  ex- 
ceptions induce,  two  rules  are  necessary,  and  both^ 
I  think,  just  and  fair  rules.  One  is,  that  we  regard 
those  effects  alone  which  are  accompanied  with 
proofs  of  intention  :  The  other,  that  when  we  can- 
not resolve  all  appearances  into  benevolence  of 
design,  we  make  the  few  give  place  to  the  many ; 
the  little  to  the  great ;  that  we  take  our  judgment 
from  a  large  and  decided  preponderancy,  if  there 
be  one. 

I  crave  leave  to  transcribe  into  this  place,  what 
I  have  said  upon  this  subject  in  my  Moral  Philoso- 
phy :-^ 

**  When  God  created  the  human  species,  either 
he  wished  their  happiness,  or  he  wished  their  misery, 
or  he  was  indifferent  and  unconcerned  about  either. 

"  If  he  had  wished  our  misery,  he  might  have  made 
sure  of  his  purpose,  by  forming  our  senses  to  be  so 
many  sores  and  pains  to  us,  as  they  are  now  instru- 


S84i  THE  GOODNESS 

ments  of  gratification  and  enjoyment :  or  by  placing 
us  amidst  objects  so  ill  suited  to  our  perceptions, 
as  to  have  continually  offended  us,  instead  of  minis- 
tering to  our  refreshment  and  delight.  He  might 
have  made,  for  example,  every  thing  we  tasted, 
bitter ;  every  thing  we  saw,  loathsome  ;  every  thing 
we  touched,  a  sting  ;  every  smell,  a  stench  ;  and 
every  sound,  a  discord. 

"  If  he  had  been  indifferent  about  our  happiness 
or  misery,  we  must  impute  to  our  good  fortune  (as 
all  design  by  this  supposition  is  excluded)  both  the 
capacity  of  our  senses  to  receive  pleasure,  and  the 
supply  of  external  objects  fitted  to  produce  it. 

"  But  either  of  these,  and  still  more  both  of  them, 
being  too  much  to  be  attributed  to  accident,  nothing 
remains  but  the  first  supposition,  that  God,  when 
he  created  the  human  species,  wished  their  happi- 
ness ;  and  made  for  them  the  provision  which  he 
has  made,  with  that  view  and  for  that  purpose. 

"  The  same  argument  may  be  proposed  in  differ- 
ent terms  ;  thus  :  Contrivance  proves  design  :  and 
the  predominant  tendency  of  the  contrivance  indi- 
cates the  disposition  of  the  designer.  The  world 
abounds  with  contrivances  :  and  all  the  contrivances 
which  we  are  acquainted  with,  are  directed  to 
beneficial  purposes.  Evil,  no  doubt,  exists  ;  but  is 
never,  that  we  can  perceive,  the  object  of  contriv- 
ance. Teeth  are  contrived  to  eat,  not  to  ache ;  their 
aching  now  and  then  is  incidental  to  the  contriv- 
ance, perhaps  inseparable  from  it :  or  even,  if  you 
will,  let  it  be  called  a  defect  in  the  contrivance  ; 
but  it  is  not  the  object  of  it.     This  is  a  distinction 


OF  THE  DEITY.  385 

which  well  deserves  to  be  attended  to.  In  describ- 
ing implements  of  husbandry,  you  would  hardly  say 
of  the  sickle,  that  it  is  made  to  cut  the  reaper's 
hand  ;  though,  from  the  construction  of  the  instru- 
ment, and  the  manner  of  using  it,  this  mischief 
often  follows.  But  if  you  had  occasion  to  describe 
instruments  of  torture  or  execution  :  this  engine, 
you  would  say,  is  to  extend  the  sinews  ;  this  to  dis- 
locate the  joints  ;  this  to  break  the  bones  ;  this  to 
scorch  the  soles  of  the  feet.  Here  pain  and  misery 
are  the  very  objects  of  the  contrivance.  Now,  no- 
thing of  this  sort  is  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  na- 
ture. We  never  discover  a  train  of  contrivance  to 
bring  about  an  evil  purpose.  No  anatomist  ever 
discovered  a  system  of  organization  calculated  to 
produce  pain  and  disease  ;  or,  in  explaining  the 
parts  of  the  human  body,  ever  said,  this  is  to  irritate ; 
this  to  inflame  ;  this  duct  is  to  convey  the  gravel  to 
the  kidneys ;  this  gland  to  secrete  the  humour  which 
forms  the  gout :  if  by  chance  he  come  at  a  part  of 
which  he  knows  not  the  use,  the  most  he  can  say 
is,  that  it  is  useless ;  no  one  ever  suspects  that 
it  is  put  there  to  incommode,  to  annoy,  or  to  tor- 
ment.'' 

The  TWO  CASES  which  appear  to  me  to  have  the 
most  of  difficulty  in  them,  as  forming  the  most  of 
the  appearance  of  exception  to  the  representation 
here  given,  are  those  of  venomous  animals,  and  of 
animals  preying  upon  one  another.  These  proper- 
ties  of  animals,  wherever  they  are  found,  must,  I 
think,  be  referred  to  design ;  because  there  is,  in 
all  cases  of  the  first,  and  in  most  cases  of  the  se- 

Bb 


386  THE  GOODNESS 

cond,  an  express  and  distinct  organization  provided 
for  the  producing  of  them.  Under  the  first  head, 
the  fangs  of  vipers,  the  stings  of  wasps  and  scor- 
pions, are  as  clearly  intended  for  their  purpose,  as 
any  animal  structure  is  for  any  purpose  the  most  in- 
contestably  beneficial.  And  the  same  thing  must, 
under  the  second  head,  be  acknowledged  of  the 
talons  and  beaks  of  birds,  of  the  tusks,  teeth,  and 
claws  of  beasts  of  prey,  of  the  shark's  mouth,  of  the 
spider's  web,  and  of  numberless  weapons  of  offence 
belonging  to  different  tribes  of  voracious  insects. 
We  cannot,  therefore,  avoid  the  difficulty  by  saying, 
that  the  effect  was  not  intended.  The  only  question 
open  to  us  is,  whether  it  be  ultimately  evil.  From 
the  confessed  and  felt  imperfection  of  our  know- 
ledge, we  ought  to  presume,  that  there  may  be  con- 
sequences  of  this  economy  which  are  hidden  from 
us :  from  the  benevolence  which  pervades  the  ge- 
neral designs  of  nature,  we  ought  also  to  presume, 
that  these  consequences,  if  they  could  enter  into 
our  calculation,  would  turn  the  balance  on  the 
favourable  side.  Both  these  I  contend  to  be  reason- 
able presumptions.  Not  reasonable  presumptions, 
if  these  two  cases  were  the  only  cases  which  nature 
presented  to  our  observation  ;  but  reasonable  pre- 
sumptions under  the  reflection,  that  the  cases  in 
question  are  combined  with  a  multitude  of  inten- 
tions, all  proceeding  from  the  same  author,  and  all, 
except  these,  directed  to  ends  of  undisputed  utility. 
Of  the  vindications,  however,  of  this  economy, 
which  we  are  able  to  assign,  such  as  most  extenuate 
the  difficulty  are  the  following. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  387 

With  respect  to  venomous  bites  and  stings,  it  may 
be  observed, — 

1.  That  the  animal  itself  being  regarded,  the 
faculty  complained  of  is  good:  being  conducive,  in 
all  cases,  to  the  defence  of  the  animal ;  in  some 
cases,  to  the  subduing  of  its  prey ;  and  in  some, 
probably,  to  the  killing  of  it,  when  caught,  by  a 
mortal  wound,  inflicted  in  the  passage  to  the  sto- 
mach, which  may  be  no  less  merciful  to  the  victim 
than  salutary  to  the  devourer.  In  the  viper,  for 
instance,  the  poisonous  fang  may  do  that  which, 
in  other  animals  of  prey,  is  done  by  the  crush  of 
the  teeth.  Frogs  and  mice  might  be  swallowed 
alive  without  it. 

2.  But  it  will  be  said,  that  this  provision,  when 
it  comes  to  the  case  of  bites,  deadly  even  to  human 
bodies  and  to  those  of  large  quadrupeds,  is  greatly 
overdone;  that  it  might  have  fulfilled  its  use,  and 
yet  have  been  much  less  deleterious  than  it  is. 
Now  I  believe  the  case  of  bites,  which  produce 
death  in  large  animals  (of  stings  I  think  there  are 
none),  to  be  very  few.  The  experiments  of  the 
Abbe  Fontana,  which  were  numerous,  go  strongly 
to  the  proof  of  this  point.  He  found  that  it  required 
the  action  of  five  exasperated  vipers  to  kill  a  dog  of 
a. moderate  size  ;  but  that,  to  the  killing  of  a  mouse 
or  a  frog,  a  single  bite  was  sufficient ;  which  agrees 
with  the  use  which  we  assign  to  the  faculty.  The 
Abbe  seemed  to  be  of  opinion,  that  the  bite  even  of 
the  rattle-snake  would  not  usually  be  mortal ;  allow- 
ing, however,  that  in  certain  particularly  unfortu- 
nate cases,  as  when  the  puncture  had  touched  some 


388  THE  GOODNESS 

very  tender  part,  pricked  a  principal  nerve  for  in- 
stance, or,  as  it  is  said,  some  more  considerable 
lymphatic  vessel,  death  might  speedily  ensue. 

3.  It  has  been,  I  think,  very  justly  remarked, 
concerning  serpents,  that,  whilst  only  a  few  species 
possess  the  venomous  property,  that  property  guards 
the  whole  tribe.  The  most  innocuous  snake  is 
avoided  with  as  much  care  as  a  viper.  Now  the 
terror  with  which  large  animals  regard  this  class  of 
reptiles,  is  its  protection  ;  and  this  terror  is  founded 
in  the  formidable  revenge,  which  a  few  of  tbe  num- 
ber, compared  with  the  whole,  are  capable  of  tajking. 
The  species  of  serpents,  described  by  Linnaeus, 
amount  to  two  hundred  and  eighteen,  of  which 
thirty-two  only  are  poisonous. 

4.  It  seems  to  me,  that  animal  constitutions  are 
provided,  not  only  for  each  element,  but  for  each 
state  of  the  elements,  i.  e.  for  every  climate,  and 
for  every  temperature ;  and  that  part  of  the  mischief 
complained  of,  arises  from  animals  (the  human  ani- 
mal most  especially)  occupying  situations  upon  the 
earth  which  do  not  belong  to  them,  nor  were  ever 
intended  for  their  habitation.  The  folly  and  wick- 
edness of  mankind,  and  necessities  proceeding  from 
these  causes,  have  driven  multitudes  of  the  species 
to  seek  a  refuge  amongst  burning  sands,  whilst 
countries,  blessed  with  hospitable  skies,  and  with 
the  most  fertile  soils,  remain  almost  without  a  hu- 
man tenant.  We  invade  the  territories  of  wild 
beasts  and  venomous  reptiles,  and  then  complain 
that  w^e  are  infested  by  their  bites  and  stings.  8ome 
accounts  of  Africa  place  this  observation  in  a  strong 


OF  THE  DEITY.  389 

point  of  view.  ''  The  deserts/'  says  Adanson, 
"  are  entirely  barren,  except  where  they  are  found 
to  produce  serpents  ;  and  in  such  quantities,  that 
some  extensive  plains  are  almost  entirely  covered 
with  them.'*  These  are  the  natures  appropriated 
to  the  situation.  Let  them  enjoy  their  existence  ; 
let  them  have  their  country.  Surface  enough  will 
be  left  to  man,  though  his  numbers  were  increased 
a  hundred-fold,  and  left  to  him,  where  he  might 
live  exempt  from  these  annoyances. 

The  SECOND  CASE,  viz*  that  of  animals  devouring 
one  another,  furnishes  a  consideration  of  much 
larger  extent.  To  judge  whether,  as  a  general 
provision,  this  can  be  deemed  an  evily  even  so  far 
as  we  understand  its  consequences,  which,  proba- 
bly, is  a  partial  understanding,  the  following  reflec- 
tions are  fit  to  be  attended  to. 

1.  Inunortality  upon  this  earth  is  out  of  the 
question.  Without  death  there  could  be  no  gene- 
ration, no  sexes,  no  parental  relation,  i.  e.  as  things 
are  constituted,  no  animal  happiness.  The  parti- 
cular duration  of  life,  assigned  to  different  animals, 
can  form  no  part  of  the  objection  ;  because,  what- 
ever that  duration  be,  whilst  it  remains  finite  and 
limited,  it  may  always  be  asked,  why  it  is  no  longer. 
The  natural  age  of  different  animals  varies,  from  a 
single  day  to  a  century  of  years.  No  account  can 
be  given  of  this  ;  nor  could  any  be  given,  whatever 
other  proportion  of  life  had  obtained  amongst  them. 

The  term  then  of  life  in  different  animals  being 
the  same  as  it  is,  the  question  is,  what  mode  of  tak- 
ing it  away  is  the  best  even  for  the  animal  itself? 


390  THE  GOODNESS 

Now,  according  to  the  established  order  of  nature 
(which  we  must  suppose  to  prevail,  or  we  cannot 
reason  at  all  upon  the  subject),  the  three  methods 
by  which  life  is  usually  put  an  end  to,  are  acute 
diseases,  decay,  and  violence.  The  simple  and  na- 
tural life  of  brutes^  is  not  often  visited  by  acute  dis- 
tempers ;  nor  could  it  be  deemed  an  improvement 
of  their  lot,  if  they  were.  Let  it  be  considered, 
therefore,  in  what  a  condition  of  suffering  and  mi- 
sery a  brute  animal  is  placed,  which  is  left  to  perish 
by  decay.  In  human  sickness  or  infirmity,  there 
is  the  assistance  of  man's  rational  fellow-creatures, 
if  not  to  alleviate  his  pains,  at  least  to  minister  to 
his  necessities,  and  to  supply  the  place  of  his  own 
activity.  A  brute,  in  his  wild  and  natural  state, 
does  every  thing  for  himself.  When  his  strength, 
therefore,  or  his  speed,  or  his  limbs,  or  his  senses 
fail  him,  he  is  delivered  over,  either  to  absolute 
famine,  or  to  the  protracted  wretchedness  of  a  life 
slowly  wasted  by  the  scarcity  of  food.  Is  it  then 
to  see  the  world  filled  with  drooping,  superannuat- 
ed, half-starved,  helpless,  and  unhelped  animals, 
that  you  would  alter  the  present  system  of  pursuit 
and  prey  ? 

2.  Which  system  is  also  to  them  the  spring  of 
motion  and  activity  on  both  sides.  The  pursuit  of 
its  prey  forms  the  employment,  and  appears  to  con- 
stitute the  pleasure,  of  a  considerable  part  of  the 
animal  creation.  The  using  of  the  means  of  defence, 
or  flight,  or  precaution,  forms  also  the  business  of 
another  part.  And  even  of  this  latter  tribe,  we 
have  no  reason  to  suppose,  that  their  happiness  is 


OF  THE  DEITY.  391 

much  molested  by  their  fears.  Their  danger  exists 
continually ;  and  in  some  cases  they  seem  to  be  so 
far  sensible  of  it,  as  to  provide  in  the  best  manner 
they  can  against  it ;  but  it  is  only  when  the  attack 
is  actually  made  upon  them,  that  they  appear  to 
suffer  from  it.  To  contemplate  the  insecurity 
of  their  condition  with  anxiety  and  dread,  re- 
quires a  degree  of  reflection,  which  (happily  for 
themselves)  they  do  not  possess.  A  hare^  notwith- 
standing the  number  of  its  dangers  and  its  enemies, 
is  as  playful  an  animal  as  any  other. 

S.  But,  to  do  justice  to  the  question,  the  system 
of  animal  destruction  ought  always  to  be  considered 
in  strict  connexion  with  another  property  of  animal 
nature,  viz.  superfecundity.  They  are  countervailing 
qualities.  One  subsists  by  the  correction  of  the 
other.  In  treating,  therefore,  of  the  subject  under 
this  view,  (which  is,  I  believe,  the  true  one),  our 
business  will  be,  first,  to  point  out  the  advantages 
which  are  gained  by  the  powers  in  nature  of  a  su- 
perabundant multiplication ;  and  then  to  show, 
that  these  advantages  are  so  many  reasons  for  ap- 
pointing that  system  of  national  hostilities,  which 
we  are  endeavouring  to  account  for. 

In  almost  all  cases,  nature  produces  her  supplies 
with  profusion.  A  single  cod-fish  spawns,  in  one 
season,  a  greater  number  of  eggs  than  all  the  in- 
habitants of  England  amount  to.  A  thousand 
other  instances  of  prolific  generation  might  be  stat- 
ed, which,  though  not  equal  to  this,  would  carry 
on  the  increase  of  the  species  with  a  rapidity  which 
outruns  calculation,  and  to  an  immeasurable  ex- 


392  THE  GOODNESS 

tent.     The  advantages  of  such  a  constitution  are 
two :  first,  that  it  tends  to  keep  the  world  always 
full ;  whilst,  secondly,  it  allows  the  proportion  be- 
tween the  several  species  of  animals  to  be  differ- 
ently modified,  as  different  purposes  require,  or  as 
different  situations  may  afford  for  them  room  and 
food.     Where   this   vast  fecundity  meets  with  a 
vacancy  fitted  to  receive  the  species,  there  it  ope- 
rates with  its  whole  effect ;  there  it  pours  in  its 
numbers,  and  replenishes  the  waste.    We  complain 
of  what  we  call  the  exorbitant  multiplication  of 
some   troublesome    insects ;    not    reflecting,    that 
large  portions  of  nature  might  be  left  void  without 
it.     If  the  accounts  of  travellers  may  be  depended 
upon,  immense  tracts  of  forest  in  North  America 
would  be  nearly  lost  to  sensitive  existence,  if  it 
were  not  for  gnats.     "  In  the  thinly  inhabited  re- 
gions of  America,   in  which  the  waters  stagnate 
and  the  climate  is  warm,   the  whole  air  is  filled 
with  crowds  of  these  insects.'*     Thus  it  is,  that 
where  we  looked  for  solitude  and  death-like  si- 
lence, we  meet  with  animation,  activity,  enjoyment; 
with  a  busy,  a  happy,  and  a  peopled  world.    Again  ; 
hosts  of  mice  are  reckoned  amongst  the  plagues  of 
the  north-east  part  of  Europe  ;  whereas  vast  plains 
in  Siberia,  as  we  learn  from  good  authority,  would 
be  lifeless  without  them.     The  Caspian  deserts  are 
converted  by  their  presence  into  crowded  warrens. 
Between  the  Volga  and  the  Yaik,  and  in  the  coun- 
try of  Hyrcania,  the  ground,  says  Pallas,  is  in  many 
places  covered  with  little  hills,  raised  by  the  earth 
cast  out  in  forming  the  burrows.     Do  we  so  envy 


OF  THE  DEITY.  393 

these  blissful  abodes,  as  to  pronounce  the  fecun- 
dity by  which  they  are  supplied  wkh  inhabitants, 
to  be  an  evil ;  a  subject  of  complaint,  and  not  of 
praise  ?  Farther  ;  by  virtue  of  this  same  super- 
fecundity,  what  we  term  destruction,  becomes  al- 
most instantly  the  parent  of  life.  What  we  call 
blights,  are  oftentimes  legions  of  animated  beings, 
claiming  their  portion  in  the  bounty  of  nature. 
What  corrupts  the  produce  of  the  earth  to  us, 
prepares  it  for  them.  And  it  is  by  means  of  their 
rapid  multiplication,  that  they  take  possession  of 
their  pasture  ;  a  slow  propagation  would  not  meet 
the  opportunity. 

But  in  conjunction  with  the  occasional  use  of 
this  fruitfulness,  we  observe,  also,  that  it  allows 
the  proportion  between  the  several  species  of  ani- 
mals to  be  differently  modified,  as  different  pur- 
poses of  utility  may  require.  When  the  forests 
of  America  come  to  be  cleared,  and  the  swamps 
drained,  our  gnats  will  give  place  to  other  inhabi- 
tants. If  the  population  of  Europe  should  spread 
to  the  north  and  the  east,  the  mice  will  retire  be- 
fore the  husbandman  and  the  shepherd,  and  yield 
their  station  to  herds  and  flocks.  In  what  con- 
cerns the  human  species,  it  may  be  a  part  of  the 
scheme  of  Providence,  that  the  earth  should  be 
inhabited  by  a  shifting,  or  perhaps  a  circulating 
population.  In  this  economy,  it  is  possible  that 
there  may  be  the  following  advantages  :  When  old 
countries  are  become  exceedingly  corrupt,  simpler 
modes  of  life,  purer  morals,  and  better  institutions, 
may  rise  up  in  new  ones,  whilst  fresh  soils  reward 


394  THE  GOODNESS 

the  cultivator  with  more  plentiful  returns.  Thus 
the  different  portions  of  the  globe  come  into  use 
in  succession  as  the  residence  of  man  ;  and,  in  his 
absence,  entertain  other  guests,  which,  by  their 
sudden  multiplication,  fill  the  chasm.  In  domes- 
ticated animals,  we  find  the  effect  of  their  fecundity 
to  be,  that  we  can  always  command  numbers  ;  we 
can  always  have  as  many  of  any  particular  species 
as  we  please,  or  as  we  can  support.  Nor  do  we 
complain  of  its  excess  ;  it  being  much  more  easy 
to  regulate  abundance,  than  to  supply  scarcity. 

But  then  this  superfecundity^  though  of  great  oc- 
casional use  and  importance,  exceeds  the  ordinary 
capacity  of  nature  to  receive  or  support  its  progeny. 
All  superabundance  supposes  destruction,  or  must 
destroy  itself.  Perhaps  there  is  no  species  of  ter- 
restrial animals  whatever,  which  would  not  overrun 
the  earth,  if  it  were  permitted  to  multiply  in  perfect 
safety  ;  or  of  fish,  which  would  not  fill  the  ocean  : 
at  least,  if  any  single  species  were  left  to  their  natu- 
ral increase  without  disturbance  or  restraint,  the 
food  of  other  species  would  be  exhausted  by  their 
maintenance.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  the 
effects  of  such  prolific  faculties  be  curtailed.  In 
conjunction  with  other  checks  and  limits,  all  subser- 
vient to  the  same  purpose,  are  the  thinnings  which 
take  place  among  animals,  by  their  action  upon  one 
another.  In  some  instances  we  ourselves  experi- 
ence, very  directly,  the  use  of  these  hostilities.  One 
species  of  insects  rids  us  of  another  species  ;  or  re- 
duces their  ranks.  A  third  species,  perhaps,  keeps 
the  second  within  bounds  ;  and  birds  or  lizards  are 


OF  THE  DEITY.  395 

a  fence  against  the  inordinate  increase  by  which 
even  these  last  might  infest  us.  In  other  more  nu- 
merous, and  possibly  more  important  instances,  this 
disposition  of  things,  although  less  necessary  or  use- 
ful to  us,  and  of  course  less  observed  by  us,  may  be 
necessary  and  useful  to  certain  other  species ;  or 
even  for  the  preventing  of  the  loss  of  certain  species 
from  the  universe :  a  misfortune  which  seems  to  be 
studiously  guarded  against.  Though  there  may  be 
the  appearance  of  failure  in  some  of  the  details  of 
Nature's  w^orks,  in  her  great  purposes  there  never 
are.  Her  species  never  fail.  The  provision  which 
was  originally  made  for  continuing  the  replenish- 
ment of  the  world,  has  proved  itself  to  be  effectual 
through  a  long  succession  of  ages. 

What  farther  shows,  that  the  system  of  destruc- 
tion amongst  animals  holds  an  express  relation  to 
the  system  of  fecundity ;  that  they  are  parts  indeed 
of  one  compensatory  scheme  ;  is,  that  in  each  spe- 
cies the  fecundity  bears  a  proportion  to  the  small- 
ness  of  the  animal,  to  the  weakness,  to  the  shortness 
of  its  natural  term  of  life,  and  to  the  dangers  and 
enemies  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  An  elephant 
produces  but  one  calf ;  a  butterfly  lays  six  hundred 
eggs.  Birds  of  prey  seldom  produce  more  than  two 
eggs :  the  sparrow  tribe,  and  the  duck  tribe,  fre- 
quently sit  upon  a  dozen.  In  the  rivers,  we  meet 
with  a  thousand  minnows  for  one  pike  ;  in  the  sea, 
a  million  of  herrings  for  a  single  shark.  Compen- 
sation obtains  throughout.  Defencelessness  and 
devastation  are  repaired  by  fecundity. 


396  THE  GOODNESS 

We  have  dwelt  the  longer  on  these  considera- 
tions, because  the  subject  to  which  they  apply, 
namely,  that  of  animals  devouring  one  another, 
forms  the  chief,  if  not  the  only  instance,  in  the 
works  of  the  Deity,  of  an  economy,  stamped  by 
marks  of  design,  in  which  the  character  of  utility 
can  be  called  in  question.  The  case  of  venomous 
animals  is  of  much  inferior  consequence  to  the  case 
of  prey,  and  in  some  degree  is  also  included  under 
it.  To  both  cases,  it  is  probable  that  many  more 
reasons  belong,  than  those  of  which  we  are  in  pos- 
session. 

Our  FIRST  PROPOSITION,  and  that  which  we  have 
hitherto  been  defending,  was,  "  that,  in  a  vast  plu- 
rality of  instances  in  which  contrivance  is  perceived, 
the  design  of  the  contrivance  is  beneficial.'* 

Our  SECOND  PROPOSITION  is,  ^'  that  the  Deity  has 
added  pleasure  to  animal  sensations,  beyond  what 
was  necessary  for  any  other  purpose,  or  when  the 
purpose,  so  far  as  it  was  necessary,  might  have 
been  effected  by  the  operation  of  pain." 

This  proposition  may  be  thus  explained :  The 
capacities,  which,  according  to  the  established 
course  of  nature,  are  necessary  to  the  support  or 
preservation  of  an  animal,  however  manifestly  they 
may  be  the  result  of  an  organization  contrived  for 
the  purpose,  can  only  be  deemed  an  act  or  a  part  qf 
the  same  will,  as  that  which  decreed  the  existence 
of  the  animal  itself;  because,  whether  the  creation 
proceeded  from  a  benevolent  or  a  malevolent  being, 
these  capacities  must  have  been  given,  if  the  animal 
existed  at  all.     Animal  properties,  therefore,  which 


OF  THE  DEITY.  397 

fall  under  this  description,  do  not  strictly  prove 
the  goodness  of  God :  they  may  prove  the  existence 
of  the  Deity;  they  may  prove  a  high  degree  of 
power  and  intelligence :  but  they  do  not  prove  his 
goodness  ;  forasmuch  as  they  must  have  been  found 
in  any  creation  which  was  capable  of  continuance, 
although  it  is  possible  to  suppose,  that  such  a  crea- 
tion might  have  been  produced  by  a  being  whose 
views  rested  upon  misery. 

But  there  is  a  class  of  properties,  which  may  be 
said  to  be  superadded  from  an  intention  expressly 
directed  to  happiness  ;  an  intention  to  give  a  happy 
existence  distinct  from  the  general  intention  of  pro- 
viding the  means  of  existence  ;  and  that  is,  of  ca- 
pacities for  pleasure,  in  cases  wherein,  so  far  as  the 
conservation  of  the  individual  or  of  the  species  is 
concerned,  they  were  not  wanted,  or  wherein  the 
purpose  might  have  been  secured  by  the  operation 
of  pain.  The  provision  which  is  made  of  a  variety 
of  objects,  not  necessary  to  life,  and  ministering 
only  to  our  pleasures ;  and  the  properties  given  to 
the  necessaries  of  life  themselves,  by  which  they 
contribute  to  pleasure  as  well  as  preservation  ;  show 
a  farther  design  than  that  of  giving  existence.* 

A  single  instance  will  make  all  this  clear.  As- 
suming the  necessity  of  food  for  the  support  of  ani- 
mal life  ;  it  is  requisite,  that  the  animal  be  provided 


*  See  this  topic  considered  in  Dr  Balguy*s  Treati«e  upon  the  Divine 
Benevolence.  This  excellent  author,  first,  1  think,  proposed  it;  and  nearly 
in  the  terms  in  which  it  is  here  stated.  Some  other  observations  also  under 
tliis  head  are  taken  from  that  treatise. 


398  THE  GOODNESS 

with  organs,  fitted  for  the  procuring,  receiving,  and 
digesting  of  its  food.  It  may  also  be  necessary, 
that  the  animal  be  impelled  by  its  sensations  to 
exert  its  organs.  But  the  pain  of  hunger  would  do 
all  this.  Why  add  pleasure  to  the  act  of  eating ; 
sweetness  and  relish  to  food?  why  a  new  and  ap- 
propriate sense  for  the  perception  of  the  pleasure  ? 
Why  should  the  juice  of  a  peach,  applied  to  the 
palate,  affect  the  part  so  differently  from  what  it 
does  when  rubbed  upon  the  palm  of  the  hand  ?  This 
is  a  constitution  which,  so  far  as  appears  to  me,  can 
be  resolved  into  nothing  but  the  pure  benevolence 
of  the  Creator.  Eating  is  necessary  ;  but  the  plea- 
sure attending  it  is  not  necessary :  and  that  this  plea- 
sure depends,  not  only  upon  our  being  in  possession 
of  the  sense  of  taste,  which  is  different  from  every 
other,  but  upon  a  particular  state  of  the  organ  in 
which  it  resides,  a  felicitous  adaptation  of  the  organ 
to  the  object,  will  be  confessed  by  any  one,  who 
may  happen  to  have  experienced  that  vitiation  of 
taste  which  frequently  occurs  in  fevers,  when  every 
taste  is  irregular,  and  every  one  bad. 

In  mentioning  the  gratifications  of  the  palate,  it 
may  be  said,  that  we  have  made  choice  of  a  trifling 
example.  I  am  not  of  that  opinion.  They  afford 
a  share  of  enjoyment  to  man  ;  but  to  brutes,  I  be- 
lieve that  they  are  of  very  great  importance.  A 
horse  at  liberty  passes  a  great  part  of  his  waking 
hours  in  eating.  To  the  ox,  the  sheep,  the  deer, 
and  other  ruminating  animals,  the  pleasure  is 
doubled.  Their  whole  time  almost  is  divided  be- 
tween browsing  upon  their  pasture  and  chewing 


OF  THE  DEITY.  399 

their  cud.  Whatever  the  pleasure  be,  it  is  spread 
over  a  large  portion  of  their  existence.  If  there  be 
animals,  such  as  the  lupous  fish,  which  swallow  their 
prey  whole,  and  at  once,  without  any  time,  as  it 
should  seem,  for  either  drawing  out,  or  relishing  the 
taste  in  the  mouth,  is  it  an  improbable  conjecture, 
that  the  seat  of  taste  with  them  is  in  the  stomach  ? 
or,  at  least,  that  a  sense  of  pleasure,  whether  it  be 
taste  or  not,  accompanies  the  dissolution  of  the  food 
in  that  receptacle,  which  dissolution  in  general  is 
carried  on  very  slowly  ?  If  this  opinion  be  right, 
they  are  more  than  repaid  for  the  defect  of  palate. 
The  feast  lasts  as  long  as  the  digestion. 

In  seeking  for  argument,  we  need  not  stay  to 
insist  upon  the  comparative  importance  of  our 
example ;  for  the  observation  holds  equally  of  all, 
or  of  three  at  least,  of  the  other  senses.  The  neces- 
sary purposes  of  hearing  might  have  been  answered 
without  harmony  ;  of  smell,  without  fragrance ;  of 
vision,  without  beauty.  Now,  **  if  the  Deity  had 
been  indifferent  about  our  happiness  or  misery,  we 
must  impute  to  our  good  fortune  (as  all  design  by 
this  supposition  is  excluded),  both  the  capacity  of 
our  senses  to  receive  pleasure,  and  the  supply  of 
external  objects  fitted  to  excite  it.*'  I  allege  these 
as  two  felicities,  for  they  are  different  things,  yet 
both  necessary  :  the  sense  being  formed,  the  ob- 
jects which  were  applied  to  it  might  not  have  suited 
it;  the  objects  being  fixed,  the  sense  might  not 
have  agreed  with  them.  A  coincidence  is  here  re- 
quired, which  no  accident  can  account  for.  There 
are  three  possible  suppositions  upon  the  subject,  and 

47 


400  THE  GOODNESS 

no  more.     The  first ;  that  the  sense,  by  its  original 
constitution,   was  made  to  suit  the  object:    The 
second ;  that  the  object,  by  its  original  constitution, 
was  made  to  suit  the  sense :  The  third ;  that  the 
sense  is  so  constituted,  as  to  be  able,  either  univer- 
sally, or  within  certain  limits,  by  habit  and  famili- 
arity, to  render  every  object  pleasant.     Whichever 
of  these  suppositions  we  adopt,  the  effect  evinces, 
on  the  part  of  the  Author  of  Nature,  a  studious 
benevolence.    If  the  pleasures  which  we  derive  from 
any  of  our  senses  depend  upon  an  original  congruity 
between  the  sense  and  the  properties  perceived  by 
it,  we  know  by  experience,  that  the  adjustment  de- 
manded, with  respect  to  the  qualities  which  were 
conferred  upon  the  objects  that  surround  us,  not 
only  choice  and  selection,  out  of  a  boundless  variety 
of  possible  qualities  with  which  these  objects  might 
have  been  endued,  but  a  proportioning  also  of  de- 
greCj  because  an  excess  or  defect  of  intensity  spoils 
the  perception,  as  much  almost  as  an  error  in  the 
kind  and  nature  of  the  quality.     Likewise  the  de- 
gree of  dulness  or  acuteness  in  the   sense  itself, 
is  no  arbitrary  thing,  but,  in  order  to  preserve  the 
congruity  here  spoken  of,  requires  to  be  in  an  exact 
or  near  correspondency  with  the  strength  of  the 
impression.     The  dulness  of  the  senses  forms  the 
complaint  of  old  age.     Persons  in  fevers,  and,  I 
believe,  in  most  maniacal  cases,  experience  great 
torment  from  their  preternatural  acuteness.      An 
increased,  no  less  than  an  impaired  sensibility,  in- 
duces a  state  of  disease  and  suffering. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  401 

The  doctrine  of  a  specific  congruity  between  ani- 
mal senses  and  their  objects,  is  strongly  favoured  by 
what  is  observed  of  insects  in  the  selection  of  their 
food.  Some  of  these  will  feed  upon  one  kind  of 
plant  or  animal,  and  upon  no  other :  some  cater- 
pillars upon  the  cabbage  alone ;  some  upon  the  black 
currant  alone.  The  species  of  caterpillar  which  eats 
the  vine,  will  starve  upon  the  elder  ;  nor  will  that 
which  we  find  upon  fennel,  touch  the  rose-bush. 
Some  insects  confine  themselves  to  two  or  three 
kinds  of  plants  or  animals.  Some  again  show  so 
strong  a  preference,  as  to  afford  reason  to  believe, 
that,  though  they  may  be  driven  by  hunger  to 
others,  they  are  led  by  the  pleasure  of  taste  to  a 
few  particular  plants  alone  :  and  all  this,  as  it  should 
seem,  independently  of  habit  or  imitation. 

But  should  we  accept  the  third  hypothesis,  and 
even  carry  it  so  far,  as  to  ascribe  every  thing  which 
concerns  the  question  to  habit  (as  in  certain  species, 
the  human  species  most  particularly,  there  is  reason 
to  attribute  something),  we  have  then  before  us  an 
animal  capacity,  not  less  perhaps  to  be  admired 
than  the  native  congruities  which  the  other  scheme 
adopts.  It  cannot  be  shown  to  result  from  any  fixed 
necessity  in  nature,  that  what  is  frequently  applied 
to  the  senses  should  of  course  become  agreeable  to 
them.  It  is,  so  far  as  it  subsists,  a  power  of  accom- 
modation provided  in  these  senses  by  the  Author 
of  their  structure,  and  forms  a  part  of  their  perfec- 
tion. 

In  whichever  way  we  regard  the  senses,  they 
appear  to  be  specific  gifts,  ministering,  not  only  to 

c  G 


402  THE  GOODNESS 

preservation,  but  to  pleasure.  But  what  we  usual- 
ly call  the  senses^  are  probably  themselves  far  from 
being  the  only  vehicles  of  enjoyment,  or  the  whole 
of  our  constitution  which  is  calculated  for  the  same 
purpose.  We  have  many  internal  sensations  of  the 
most  agreeable  kind,  hardly  referable  to  any  of  the 
five  senses.  Some  physiologists  have  holden,  that 
all  secretion  is  pleasurable ;  and  that  the  compla- 
cency which  in  health,  without  any  external  assign- 
able object  to  excite  it,  we  derive  from  life  itself, 
is  the  effect  of  our  secretions  going  on  well  within 
us.  All  this  may  be  true  :  but  if  true,  what  reason 
can  be  assigned  for  it,  except  the  will  of  the  Creator  ? 
It  may  reasonably  be  asked.  Why  is  any  thing  a 
pleasure  ?  and  I  know  no  answer  which  can  be  re- 
turned to  the  question,  but  that  which  refers  it  to 
appointment. 

We  can  give  no  account  whatever  of  our  pleasures 
in  the  simple  and  original  perception ;  and,  even 
when  physical  sensations  are  assumed,  we  can  sel- 
dom account  for  them  in  the  secondary  and  com- 
plicated shapes  in  which  they  take  the  name  of 
diversions.  I  never  yet  met  with  a  sportsman,  who 
could  tell  me  in  what  the  sport  consisted ;  who 
could  resolve  it  into  its  principle,  and  state  that 
principle.  I  have  been  a  great  follower  of  fishing 
myself,  and  in  its  cheerful  solitude  have  passed  some 
of  the  happiest  hours  of  a  sufficiently  happy  life  ; 
but,  to  this  moment,  I  could  never  trace  out  the 
source  of  the  pleasure  which  it  afforded  me. 

The  "  quantum  in  rebus  inane  !'*  whether  applied 
to  our  amusements  or  to  our  graver  pursuits,  (to 


OF  THE  DEITY.  403 

which  in  truth  it  sometimes  equally  belongs),  is 
always  an  unjust  complaint.  If  trifles  engage,  and 
if  trifles  make  us  happy,  the  true  reflection  sug- 
gested by  the  experiment,  is  upon  the  tendency  of 
nature  to  gratification  and  enjoyment ;  which  is,  in 
other  words,  the  goodness  of  its  Author  towards 
his  sensitive  creation. 

Rational  natures  also,  as  such,  exhibit  qualities 
which  help  to  confirm  the  truth  of  our  position. 
The  degree  of  understanding  found  in  mankind,  is 
usually  much  greater  than  what  is  necessary  for 
mere  preservation.  The  pleasure  of  choosing  for 
themselves,  and  of  prosecuting  the  object  of  their 
choice,  should  seem  to  be  an  original  source  of  en- 
joyment. The  pleasures  received  from  things, 
great,  beautiful,  or  new,  from  imitation,  or  from  the 
liberal  arts,  are  in  some  measure  not  only  super- 
added, but  unmixed,  gratifications,  having  no  pains 
to  balance  them.* 

I  do  not  know  whether  our  attachment  to  pro- 
perty be  not  something  more  than  the  mere  dictate 
of  reason,  or  even  than  the  mere  effect  of  associa- 
tion. Property  communicates  a  charm  to  whatever 
is  the  object  of  it.  It  is  the  first  of  our  abstract 
ideas ;  it  cleaves  to  us  the  closest  and  the  longest. 
It  endears  to  the  child  its  plaything,  to  the  peasant 
his  cottage,  to  the  landholder  his  estate.  It  supplies 
the  place  of  prospect  and  scenery.  Instead  of  covet- 
ing the  beauty  of  distant  situations,  it  teaches  every 
man  to  find  it  in  his  own.     It  gives  boldness  and 

*   Balgiiy  on  the  Divine  Benevolence. 


404  THE  GOODNESS 

grandeur  to  plains  and  fens,  tinge  and  colouring  to 
clays  and  fallows. 

All  these  considerations  come  in  aid  of  our  second 
proposition.  The  reader  will  now  bear  in  mind  what 
our  two  propositions  were.  They  were,  firstly,  that 
in  a  vast  plurality  of  instances  in  which  contrivance 
is  perceived,  the  design  of  the  contrivance  is  bene- 
ficial :  secondly,  that  the  Deity  has  added  pleasure 
to  animal  sensations  beyond  what  was  necessary  for 
any  other  purpose ;  or  when  the  purpose,  so  far  as 
it  was  necessary,  might  have  been  effected  by  the 
operation  of  pain. 

Whilst  these  propositions  can  be  maintained,  we 
are  authorized  to  ascribe  to  the  Deity  the  character 
of  benevolence :  and  what  is  benevolence  at  all, 
must  in  him  be  infinite  benevolence,  by  reason  of 
the  infinite,  that  is  to  say,  the  incalculably  great, 
number  of  objects  upon  which  it  is  exercised. 

Of  the  origin  of  evil,  no  universal  solution  has 
been  discovered ;  I  mean,  no  solution  which  reaches 
to  all  cases  of  complaint.  The  most  comprehensive 
is  that  which  arises  from  the  consideration  of 
general  rules.  We  may,  I  think,  without  much 
difficulty,  be  brought  to  admit  the  four  following 
points :  first,  that  important  advantages  may  ac- 
crue to  the  universe  from  the  order  of  nature 
proceeding  according  to  general  laws :  secondly, 
that  general  laws,  however  well  set  and  consti- 
tuted, often  thwart  and  cross  one  another :  thirdly, 
that  from  these  thwartings  and  crossings,  frequent 
particular  inconveniencies  will  arise :  and,  fourthly. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  405 

that  it  agrees  with  our  observation  to  suppose,  that 
some  degree  of  these  inconveniencies  takes  place 
in  the  works  of  nature.  These  points  may  be 
allowed;  and  it  may  also  be  asserted,  that  the 
general  laws  with  which  we  are  acquainted,  are 
directed  to  beneficial  ends.  On  the  other  hand, 
with  many  of  these  laws  we  are  not  acquainted  at 
all,  or  we  are  totally  unable  to  trace  them  in  their 
branches,  and  in  their  operation ;  the  effect  of  which 
ignorance  is,  that  they  cannot  be  of  importance  to 
us  as  measures  by  which  to  regulate  our  conduct. 
The  conservation  of  them  may  be  of  importance 
in  other  respects,  or  to  other  beings,  but  we  are  un- 
informed of  their  value  or  use ;  uninformed,  conse- 
quently, when,  and  how  far,  they  may  or  may  not  be 
suspended,  or  their  effects  turned  aside,  by  a  presid- 
ing and  benevolent  will,  without  incurring  greater 
evils  than  those  which  would  be  avoided.  The  con- 
sideration, therefore,  of  general  laws,  although  it 
may  concern  the  question  of  the  origin  of  evil  very 
nearly  (which  I  think  it  does),  rests  in  views  dispro- 
portionate to  our  faculties,  and  in  a  knowledge 
which  we  do  not  possess.  It  serves  rather  to  ac- 
count for  the  obscurity  of  the  subject,  than  to  sup- 
ply us  with  distinct  answers  to  our  difficulties. 
However,  whilst  we  assent  to  the  above-stated  pro- 
positions as  principles,  whatever  uncertainty  we  may 
find  in  the  application,  we  lay  a  ground  for  believ- 
ing, that  cases  of  apparent  evil,  for  which  *we  can 
suggest  no  particular  reason,  are  governed  by 
reasons,  which  are  more  general,  which  lie  deeper 
in  the  order  of  second  causes,  and  which  on  that 
account  are  removed  to  a  greater  distance  from  us. 


406  THE  GOODNESS 

The  doctrine  of  imperfections^  or,  as  it  is  called, 
of  evils  of  imperfection,  furnishes  an  account, 
founded,  like  the  former,  in  views  of  universal  na- 
ture. The  doctrine  is  briefly  this  : — It  is  probable, 
that  creation  may  be  better  replenished  by  sensi- 
tive beings  of  different  sorts,  than  by  sensitive 
beings  all  of  one  sort.  It  is  likewise  probable,  that 
it  may  be  better  replenished  by  different  orders  of 
beings  rising  one  above  another  in  gradation,  than 
by  beings  possessed  of  equal  degrees  of  perfection. 
Now,  a  gradation  of  such  beings,  implies  a  grada- 
tion of  imperfections.  No  class  can  justly  com- 
plain of  the  imperfections  which  belong  to  its  place 
in  the  scale,  unless  it  were  allowable  for  it  to  com- 
plain, that  a  scale  of  being  was  appointed  in  nature  ; 
for  which  appointment  there  appear  to  be  reasons 
of  wisdom  and  goodness. 

In  like  manner,  Jiniteness^  or  what  is  resolvable 
into  finiteness,  in  inanimate  subjects,  can  never  be 
a  just  subject  of  complaint,  because  if  it  were  ever 
so,  it  would  be  always  so  :  we  mean,  that  we  can 
never  reasonably  demand  that  things  should  be 
larger  or  more,  when  the  same  demand  might  be 
made,  whatever  the  quantity  or  number  was. 

And  to  me  it  seems,  that  the  sense  of  mankind 
has  so  far  acquiesced  in  these  reasons,  as  that  we 
seldom  complain  of  evils  of  this  class,  when  we 
clearly  perceive  them  to  be  such.  What  I  have  to 
add,  therefore,  is,  that  we  ought  not  to  complain  of 
some  other  evils  which  stand  upon  the  same  foot 
of  vindication  as  evils  of  confessed  imperfection. 
We  never  complain,  that  the  globe  of  our  earth  is 


OF  THE  DEITY.  407 

too  small ;  nor  should  we  complain,  if  it  were  even 
much  smaller.  But  where  is  the  difference  to  us, 
between  a  less  globe,  and  part  of  the  present  being 
uninhabitable  ?  The  inhabitants  of  an  island  may  be 
apt  enough  to  murmur  at  the  sterility  of  some  parts 
of  it,  against  its  rocks,  or  sands,  or  swamps ;  but 
no  one  thinks  himself  authorized  to  murmur,  simply 
because  the  island  is  not  larger  than  it  is.  Yet 
these  are  the  same  griefs. 

The  above  are  the  two  metaphysical  answers 
which  have  been  given  to  this  great  question. 
They  are  not  the  worse  for  being  metaphysical,  pro- 
vided they  be  founded  (which  I  think  they  are)  in 
right  reasoning :  but  they  are  of  a  nature  too  wide 
to  be  brought  under  our  survey,  and  it  is  often 
difficult  to  apply  them  in  the  detail.  Our  specula- 
tions, therefore,  are  perhaps  better  employed  when 
they  confine  themselves  within  a  narrower  circle. 

The  observations  which  follow,  are  of  this  more 
limited,  but  more  determinate,  kind. 

Of  hodily  pain,  the  principal  observation,  no 
doubt,  is  that  which  we  have  already  made,  and 
already  dwelt  upon,  viz.  "  that  it  is  seldom  the 
object  of  contrivance  ;  that  when  it  is  so,  the  con- 
trivance rests  ultimately  in  good.^' 

To  which,  however,  may  be  added,  that  the  an- 
nexing of  pain  to  the  means  of  destruction  is  a 
salutary  provision  ;  inasmuch  as  it  teaches  vigilance 
and  caution  ;  both  gives  notice  of  danger,  and  ex- 
cites' those  endeavours  which  may  be  necessary 
to  preservation.  The  evil  consequence  which 
sometimes  arises  from  the  want  of  that  timely  in- 


408  THE  GOODNESS 

timation  of  danger  which  pain  gives,  is  known  to 
the  inhabitants  of  cold  countries  by  the  example  of 
frost-bitten  limbs.  I  have  conversed  with  patients 
who  have  lost  toes  and  fingers  by  this  cause.  They 
have  in  general  told  me,  that  they  were  totally  un- 
conscious of  any  local  uneasiness  at  the  time.  Some 
I  have  heard  declare,  that  whilst  they  were  about 
their  employment,  neither  their  situation,  nor  the 
state  of  the  air  was  unpleasant. ,  They  felt  no  pain  ; 
they  suspected  no  mischief;  till,  by  the  application 
of  warmth,  they  discovered,  too  late,  the  fatal  in- 
jury which  some  of  their  extremities  had  suffered. 
I  say  that  this  shows  the  use  of  pain,  and  that  we 
stand  in  need  of  such  a  monitor.  I  believe  also, 
that  the  use  extends  farther  than  we  suppose,  or 
can  now  trace  ;  that  to  disagreeable  sensations  we, 
and  all  animals,  owe,  or  have  owed,  many  habits  of 
action  which  are  salutary,  but  which  are  become  so 
familiar,  as  not  easily  to  be  referred  to  their  origin. 

Pain  also  itself  is  not  without  its  alleviations.  It 
may  be  violent  and  frequent ;  but  it  is  seldom  both 
violent  and  long-continued :  and  its  pauses  and  in- 
termissions become  positive  pleasures.  It  has  the 
power  of  shedding  a  satisfaction  over  intervals  of 
ease,  which  I  believe  few  enjoyments  exceed.  A 
man  resting  from  a  fit  of  the  stone  or  gout,  is,  for 
the  time,  in  possession  of  feelings  which  undisturbed 
health  cannot  impart.  They  may  be  dearly  bought, 
but  still  they  are  to  be  set  against  the  price.  And 
indeed  it  depends  upon  the  duration  and  urgency 
of  the  pain,  whether  they  be  dearly  bought  or  not. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  409 

I  am  far  from  being  sure,  that  a  man  is  not  a  gainer 
by  suffering  a  moderate  interruption  of  bodily  ease 
for  a  couple  of  hours  out  of  the  four-and-twenty. 
Two  very  common  observations  favour  this  opinion  : 
one  is,  that  remissions  of  pain  call  forth,  from  those 
who  experience  them,  stronger  expressions  of  satis- 
faction and  of  gratitude  towards  both  the  author 
and  the  instruments  of  their  relief,  than  are  excited 
by  advantages  of  any  other  kind :  the  second  is, 
that  the  spirits  of  sick  men  do  not  sink  in  proportion 
to  the  acuteness  of  their  sufferings  ;  but  rather  ap- 
pear to  be  roused  and  supported,  not  by  pain,  but 
by  the  high  degree  of  comfort  which  they  derive 
from  its  cessation,  or  even  its  subsidency,  whenever 
that  occurs  ;  and  which  they  taste  with  a  relish  that 
diffuses  some  portion  of  mental  complacency  over 
the  whole  of  that  mixed  state  of  sensations  in  which 
disease  has  placed  them. 

In  connexion  with  bodily  pain  may  be  considered 
bodily  disease^  whether  painful  or  not.  Few  diseases 
are  fatal.  I  have  before  me  the  account  of  a  dis- 
pensary in  the  neighbourhood,  which  states  six 
years'  experience  as  follows  : 

Admitted   6420 

Cured     5476 

Dead 234 

And  this  I  suppose  nearly  to  agree  with  what  other 
similar  institutions  exhibit.  Now,  in  all  these  cases, 
some  disorder  must  have  been  felt,  or  the  patients 
would  not  have  applied  for  a  remedy ;  yet  we  see 
how  large  a  proportion  of  the  maladies  which  were 
brought  forward,   have  either  yielded   to  proper 


410  THE  GOODNESS 

treatment,  or,  what  is  more  probable,  ceased  of 
their  own  accord.  We  owe  these  frequent  recove- 
ries, and  where  recovery  does  not  take  place,  this 
patience  of  the  human  constitution  under  many  of 
the  distempers  by  which  it  is  visited,  to  two  bene- 
factions of  our  nature.  One  is,  that  she  works 
within  certain  limits ;  allows  of  a  certain  latitude 
within  which  health  may  be  preserved,  and  within 
the  confines  of  which  it  only  suffers  a  graduated  di- 
minution. Different  quantities  of  food,  different  de- 
grees of  exercise,  different  portions  of  sleep,  different 
states  of  the  atmosphere,  are  compatible  with  the 
possession  of  health.  So  likewise  it  is  with  the  se- 
cretions and  excretions,  with  many  internal  functions 
of  the  body,  and  with  the  state,  probably,  of  most  of 
its  internal  organs.  They  may  vary  considerably,  not 
only  without  destroying  life,  but  without  occasion- 
ing any  high  degree  of  inconveniency.  The  other 
property  of  our  nature,  to  which  we  are  still  more 
beholden,  is  its  constant  endeavour  to  restore  itself, 
when  disordered,  to  its  regular  course.  The  fluids 
of  the  body  appear  to  possess  a  power  of  separating 
and  expelling  any  noxious  substance  which  may  have 
mixed  itself  with  them.  This  they  do  in  eruptive 
fevers,  by  a  kind  of  despumation,  as  Sydenham  calls 
it,  analogous  in  some  measure  to  the  intestine  action 
by  which  fermenting  liquors  work  the  yest  to  the 
surface.  The  solids,  on  their  part,  when  their  ac- 
tion is  obstructed,  not  only  resume  that  action  as 
soon  as  the  obstruction  is  removed,  but  they  struggle 
with  the  impediment.  They  take  an  action  as  near 
to  the  true  one,  as  the  difficulty  and  the  disor- 


OF  THE  DEITY.  411 

ganization,  with  which  they  have  to  contend,  will 
allow  of. 

Of  mortal  diseases,  the  great  use  is  to  reconcile 
us  to  death.  The  horror  of  death  proves  the  value 
of  life.  But  it  is  in  the  power  of  disease  to  abate, 
or  even  extinguish,  this  horror  ;  which  it  does  in 
a  wonderful  manner,  and  oftentimes  by  a  mild  and 
imperceptible  gradation.  Every  man  who  has 
been  placed  in  a  situation  to  observe  it,  is  surprised 
with  the  change  which  has  been  wrought  in  him- 
self, w^hen  he  compares  the  view  which  he  enter- 
tains of  death  upon  a  sick-bed,  with  the  heart-sink- 
ing dismay  with  which  he  should  some  time  ago 
have  met  it  in  health.  There  is  no  similitude  be- 
tween the  Sensations  of  a  man  led  to  execution, 
and  the  calm  expiring  of  a  patient  at  the  close  of 
his  disease.  Death  to  him  is  only  the  last  of  a  long 
train  of  changes  ;  in  his  progress  through  which,  it 
is  possible  that  he  may  experience  no  shocks  or 
sudden  transitions. 

Death  itself,  as  a  mode  of  removal  and  of  suc- 
cession, is  so  connected  with  the  whole  order  of 
our  animal  world,  that  almost  every  thing  in  that 
world  must  be  changed,  to  be  able  to  do  without 
it.  It  may  seem  likewise  impossible  to  separate 
the  fear  of  death  from  the  enjoyment  of  life,  or 
the  perception  of  that  fear  from  rational  natures. 
Brutes  are,  in  a  great  measure,  delivered  from  all 
anxiety  on  this  account  by  the  inferiority  of  their 
faculties  ;  or  rather,  they  seem  to  be  armed  with  the 
apprehension  of  death  just  sufficiently  to  put  them 
upon  the  means  of  preservation,  and  no  farther. 


412  TliE  GOODNESS 

But  would  a  human  being  wish  to  purchase  this 
immunity,  at  the  expense  of  those  mental  powers 
which  enable  him  to  look  forward  to  the  future  ? 

Death  implies  separation :  and  the  loss  of  those 
whom  we  love,  must  necessarily,  so  far  as  we  can 
conceive,  be  accompanied  with  pain.  To  the  brute 
creation,  nature  seems  to  have  stepped  in  with 
some  secret  provision  for  their  relief,  under  the 
rupture  of  their  attachments.  In  their  instincts 
towards  their  offspring,  and  of  their  offspring  to 
them,  I  have  often  been  surprised  to  observe  how 
ardently  they  love,  and  how  soon  they  forget.  The 
pertinacity  of  human  sorrow  (upon  which,  time  also, 
at  length,  lays  its  softening  hand)  is  probably, 
therefore,  in  some  manner  connected  with  the  qua- 
lities of  our  rational  or  moral  nature.  One  thing 
however  is  clear,  viz.  that  it  is  better  that  we  should 
possess  affections,  the  sources  of  so  many  virtues, 
and  so  many  joys,  although  they  be  exposed  to 
the  incidents  of  life,  as  well  as  the  interruptions  of 
mortality,  than,  by  the  want  of  them,  be  reduced 
to  a  state  of  selfishness,  apathy,  and  quietism. 

Of  other  external  evils  (still  confining  ourselves 
to  what  are  called  physical  or  natural  evils),  a  con- 
siderable part  come  within  the  scope  of  the  follow- 
ing observation  : — The  great  principle  of  human 
satisfaction  is  engagement.  It  is  a  most  just  dis- 
tinction, which  the  late  Mr  Tucker  has  dwelt  upon 
so  largely  in  his  works,  between  pleasures  in  which 
we  are  passive,  and  pleasures  in  which  we  are  ac- 
tive. And,  I  believe,  every  attentive  observer  of 
human  life  will  assent  to  his  position,  that  however 


OF  THE  DEITY*  413 

grateful  the  sensations  may  occasionally  be  in  which 
we  are  passive,  it  is  not  these,  but  the  latter  class 
of   our    pleasures,    which  constitute  satisfaction ; 
which  supply  that  regular  stream  of  moderate  and 
miscellaneous  enjoyments,  in  which  happiness,  as 
distinguished  from  voluptuousness,  consists.     Now 
for  rational  occupation,  which  is,  in  other  words, 
for  the  very  material  of  contented  existence,  there 
would  be  no  place  left,  if  either  the  things  with 
which  we  had  to  do  were  absolutely  impracticable  to. 
our  endeavours,  or  if  they  were  too  obedient  to  our 
uses.     A  world,  furnished  with  advantages  on  one 
side,  and  beset  with  difficulties,  wants,  and  incon- 
veniencies  on  the  other,  is  the  proper  abode  of  free, 
rational,  and  active  natures,  being  the  fittest  to 
stimulate  and  exercise  their  faculties.     The  very 
refractoriness  of  the  objects  they  have  to  deal  with, 
contributes  to  this  purpose.     A  world,  in  which 
nothing  depended  upon  ourselves,  however  it  might 
have  suited  an  imaginary  race  of  beings,  would  not 
have  suited  mankind.    Their  skill,  prudence,  indus- 
try ;  their  various  arts,  and  their  best  attainments, 
from  the  application  of  which  they  draw,  if  not 
their  highest,  their  most  permanent  gratifications, 
would  be  insignificant,   if  things  could  be  either 
moulded  by  our  volitions,  or,  of  their  own  accord, 
conformed  themselves  to  our  views   and  wishes. 
Now  it  is  in  this  refractoriness  that  we  discern  the 
seed  and  principle  o^  physical  evil,  as  far  as  it  arises 
from  that  which  is  external  to  us. 

Civil  evils,  or  the  evils  of  civil  life,  are  much  more 
easily  disposed  of  than  physical  evils  ;  because  they 


414  THE  GOODNESS 

are,  in  truth,  of  much  less  magnitude,  and  also  be- 
cause they  result,  by  a  kind  of  necessity,  not  only 
from  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  but  from  apart 
of  that  constitution  which  no  one  would  wish  to 
see  altered.     The  case  is  this :    Mankind  will  in 
every  country  breed  up  to  a  certain  point  of  distress. 
That  point  may  be  different  in  different  countries  or 
ages,  according  to  the  established  usages  of  life  in 
each.     It  will  also  shift  upon  the  scale,  so  as  to 
admit  of  a  greater  or  less  number  of  inhabitants, 
according  as  the  quantity  of  provision,   which  is 
either  produced  in  the  country,  on  supplied  to  it 
from  other  countries,  may  happen  to  vary.     But 
there  must  always  be  such  a  point,  and  the  species 
will  always  breed  up  to  it.     The  order  of  genera- 
tion proceeds  by  something  like  a  geometrical  pro- 
gression.    The  increase  of  provision  under  circum- 
stances even  the  most  advantageous,  can  only  as- 
sume the  form  of  an  arithmetic  series.     Whence  it 
follows,  that  the  population  will  always  overtake  the 
provision,  will  pass  beyond  the  line  of  plenty,  and 
will  continue  to  increase  till  checked  by  the  difficul- 
ty of  procuring  subsistence.^    Such  difficulty  there- 
fore, along  with  its  attendant  circumstances,  must 
be  found  in  every  old  country :  and  these  circum- 
stances constitute  what  v/e  call  poverty,  which  ne- 
cessarily imposes  labour,  servitude,  restraint. 

It  seems  impossible  to  people  a  country  with  in- 
habitants who  shall  be  all  easy  in  circumstances. 
For  suppose  the  thing  to  be  done,  there  would  be 

^  See  a  statement  of  this  subject,  iu  a  late  treatise  upon  population. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  415 

such  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage  amongst 
them,  as  would  in  a  few  years  change  the  face  of 
aifairs  entirely ;  i.  e.  as  would  increase  the  consump- 
tion of  those  articles,  which  supplied  the  natural  or 
habitual  wants  of  the  country,  to  such  a  degree  of 
scarcity,  as  must  leave  the  greatest  part  of  the  in- 
habitants unable  to  procure  them  without  toilsome 
endeavours,  or,  out  of  the  different  kinds  of  these 
articles,  to  procure  any  kind  except  that  which  was 
most  easily  produced.  And  this,  in  fact,  describes 
the  condition  of  the  mass  of  the  community  in  all 
countries :  a  condition  unavoidably,  as  it  should 
seem,  resulting  from  the  provision  which  is  made 
in  the  human,  in  common  with  all  animal  constitu- 
tions, for  the  perpetuity  and  multiplication  of  the 
species. 

It  need  not  however  dishearten  any  endeavours 
for  the  public  service,  to  know  that  population 
naturally  treads  upon  the  heels  of  improvement. 
If  the  condition  of  a  people  be  meliorated,  the 
consequence  will  be,  either  that  the  mean  happiness 
will  be  increased,  or  a  greater  number  partake  of 
it ;  or,  which  is  most  likely  to  happen,  that  both  ef- 
fects will  take  place  together.  There  may  be  limits 
fixed  by  nature  to  both,  but  they  are  limits  not  yet 
attained,  nor  even  approached,  in  any  country  of 
the  world. 

And  when  we  speak  of  limits  at  all,  we  have  re- 
spect only  to  provisions  for  animal  wants.  There 
are  sources,  and  means,  and  auxiliaries,  and  aug- 
mentations of  human  happiness,  communicable 
without  restriction  of  numbers ;  as  capable  of  being 


416  THE  GOODNESS 

possessed  by  a  thousand  persons  as  by  one.  Such 
are  those  which  flow  from  a  mild,  contrasted  with  a 
tyrannic  government,  whether  civil  or  domestic; 
those  which  spring  from  religion  ;  those  which  grow 
out  of  a  sense  of  security;  those  which  depend 
upon  habits  of  virtue,  sobriety,  moderation,  order ; 
those,  lastly,  which  are  found  in  the  possession  of 
well-directed  tastes  and  desires,  compared  with  the 
dominion  of  tormenting,  pernicious,  contradictory, 
unsatisfied,  and  unsatisfiable  passions. 

The  distinctions  of  civil  life  are  apt  enough  to  be 
regarded  as  evils,  by  those  who  sit  under  them ;  but, 
in  my  opinion,  with  very  little  reason. 

In  the  first  place,  the  advantages  which  the 
higher  conditions  of  life  are  supposed  to  confer, 
bear  no  proportion  in  value  to  the  advantages 
which  are  bestowed  by  nature.  The  gifts  of  nature 
always  surpass  the  gifts  of  fortune.  .  How  much, 
for  example,  is  activity  better  than  attendance ; 
beauty  than  dress  ;  appetite,  digestion,  and  tranquil 
bowels,  than  all  the  studies  of  cookery,  or  than  the 
most  costly  compilation  of  forced,  or  far-fetched 
dainties ! 

Nature  has  a  strong  tendency  to  equalization. 
Habit,  the  instrument  of  nature,  is  a  great  leveller  ; 
the  familiarity  which  it  induces,  taking  off  the  edge 
both  of  our  pleasures  and  our  sufferings.  Indul- 
gences which  are  habitual,  keep  us  in  ease,  and 
cannot  be  carried  much  farther.  So  that,  with 
respect  to  the  gratifications  of  which  the  senses  are 
capable,  the  difference  is  by  no  means  proportion- 
able to  the  apparatus.     Nay,  so  far  as  superfluity 


OF  THE  DEITY.  417 

generates  fastidiousness,   the  difference  is  on  the 
wrong  side. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  contend,  that  the  advantages 
derived  from  wealth  are  none  (under  due  regulations 
they  are  certainly  considerable),  but  that  they  are 
not  greater  than  they  ought  to  be.  Money  is  the 
sweetener  of  human  toil;  the  substitute  for  coercion ; 
the  reconciler  of  labour  with  liberty.  It  is,  more- 
over, the  stimulant  of  enterprise  in  all  projects  and 
undertakings,  as  well  as  of  diligence  in  the  most 
beneficial  arts  and  employments.  Now  did  affluence, 
when  possessed,  contribute  nothing  to  happiness, 
or  nothing  beyond  the  mere  supply  of  necessaries  ; 
and  the  secret  should  come  to  be  discovered ;  we 
might  be  in  danger  of  losing  great  part  of  the  uses 
which  are  at  present  derived  to  us  through  this  im- 
portant medium.  Not  only  would  the  tranquillity  of 
social  life  be  put  in  peril,  by  the  want  of  a  motive 
to  attach  men  to  their  private  concerns ;  but  the 
satisfaction  which  all  men  receive  from  success  in 
their  respective  occupations,  which  collectively 
constitutes  the  great  mass  of  human  comfort,  would 
be  done  away  in  its  very  principle. 

With  respect  to  station^  as  it  is  distinguished  from 
riches,  whether  it  confer  authority  over  others,  or 
be  invested  with  honours  which  apply  solely  to 
sentiment  and  imagination,  the  truth  is,  that  what 
is  gained  by  rising  through  the  ranks  of  life,  is  not 
more  than  sufficient  to  draw  forth  the  exertions  of 
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  pursuits  which  lead 
to  advancement,  and  which  in  general  are  such  as 
ought  to  be  encouraged.     Distinctions  of  this  sort 

Dd 


418  THE  QOODNESS 

are  subjects  much  more  of  competition  than  of  en- 
joyment :  and  in  that  competition  their  use  consists. 
It  is  not,  as  hath  been  rightly  observed,  by  what 
the  Lord  Mayor  feels  in  his  coach,  but  by  what  the 
apprentice  feels  who  gazes  at  him,  that  the  public  is 
served. 

As  we  approach  the  summits  of  human  greatness, 
the  comparison  of  good  and  evil,  with  respect  to 
personal  comfort,  becomes  still  more  problematical ; 
even  allowing  to  ambition  all  its  pleasures.  The 
poet  asks,  *^  What  is  grandeur,  what  is  power?** 
The  philosopher  answers,  "  Constraint  and  plague :: 
et  in  maxima  qudque  fortunci  minimum  licere.  **  One 
very  common  error  misleads  the  opinion  of  mankind 
on  this  head,  viz.  that,  universally,  authority  is 
pleasant,  submission  painful.  In  the  general  course 
of  human  affairs,  the  very  reverse  of  this  is  nearer 
to  the  truth.  Command  is  anxiety,  obedience^ 
ease. 

Artificial  distinctions  sometimes  promote  real; 
equality.  Whether  they  be  hereditary,  or  be  the 
homage  paid  to  office,  or  the  respect  attached  by 
public  opinion  to  particular  professions,  they  serve 
to  confront  that  grand  and  unavoidable  distinctiort 
which  arises  from  property,  and  which  is  most  over-^ 
bearing  where  there  is  no  other.  It  is  of  the  nature 
of  property,  not  only  to  be  irregularly  distributed, 
but  to  run  into  large  masses.  Public  laws  should 
be  so  constructed  as  to  favour  its  diffusion  as  much 
as  they  can.  But  all  that  can  be  done  by  laws, 
consistently  with  that  degree  of  government  of  his 
property  which  ought  to  be  left  to  the  subject,  will 


OF  THE  DEITY.  419 

not  be  sufficient  to  counteract  this  tendency.  There 
must  always  therefore  be  the  difference  between 
rich  and  poor ;  and  this  difference  will  be  the  more 
grinding,  when  no  pretension  is  allowed  to  be  set 
up  against  it. 

So  that  the  evils,  if  evils  they  must  be  called, 
which  spring  either  from  the  necessary  subordina- 
tions of  civil  life,  or  from  the  distinctions  which 
have,  naturally,  though  not  necessarily,  grown  up 
in  most  societies,  so  long  as  they  are  unaccompanied 
by  privileges  injurious  or  oppressive  to  the  rest  of 
the  community,  are  such  as  may,  even  by  the  most 
depressed  ranks,  be  endured  with  very  little  preju- 
dice to  their  comfort. 

The  mischiefs  of  which  mankind  are  the  occasion 
to  one  another,  by  their  private  wickednesses  and 
cruelties ;  by  tyrannical  exercises  of  power ;  by  re- 
bellions against  just  authority ;  by  wars,  by  national 
jealousies  and  competitions  operating  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  third  countries  ;  or  by  other  instances  of  mis- 
conduct either  in  individuals  or  societies,  are  all  to 
be  resolved  into  the  character  of  man  as  2.  free  agent. 
Free  agency  in  its  very  essence  contains  liability  to 
abuse.  Yet,  if  you  deprive  man  of  his  free  agency, 
you  subvert  his  nature.  You  may  have  order  from 
him  and  regularity,  as  you  may  from  the  tides  or 
the  trade-winds,  but  you  put  an  end  to  his  moral 
character,  to  virtue,  to  merit,  to  accountableness, 
to  the  use  indeed  of  reason.  To  which  must  be 
added  the  observation,  that  even  the  bad  qualities 
of  mankind  have  an  origin  in  their  good  ones. 
The  case  is  this :  human  passions  are  either  neces- 


420  THE  GOODNESS 

sary  to  human  welfare,  or  capable  of  being  tnade^ 
and,  in  a  great  majority  of  instances,  in  fact  made, 
conducive  to  its  happiness.     These  passions  are 
strong  and  general ;  and  perhaps  would  not  answer 
their  purpose  unless  they  were  so.     But  strength 
and  generality,  w^hen  it  is  expedient  that  particu- 
lar circumstances  should  be  respected,  become,  if 
left  to  themselves,  excess  and  misdirection.     From 
which  excess  and  misdirection,  the  vices  of  man- 
kind (the  causes  no  doubt  of  much  misery)  appear 
to  spring.     This  account,  whilst  it  shews  us  the 
principle  of  vice,  shows  us,  at  the  same  time,  the  pro- 
vince of  reason  and  of  self-government ;  the  want 
also  of  every  support  which  can  be  procured  to 
either  from  the  aids  of  religion  ;  and  it  shows  this, 
without  having  recourse  to  any  native  gratuitous 
malignity  in  the  human  constitution.     Mr  Hume, 
in  his  posthumous  dialogues,  asserts  indeed  of  idle- 
nesSy  or  aversion  to  labour  (which  he  states  to  lie  at 
the  root  of  a  considerable  part  of  the  evils  which 
mankind  suffer),  that  it  is  simply  and  merely  bad. 
But  how  does  he  distinguish  idleness  from  the  love 
of  ease  ?  or  is  he  sure,  that  the  love  of  ease  in  indi- 
viduals is  not  the  chief  foundation  of  social  tranquil- 
lity ?   It  will  be  found,  I  believe,  to  be  true,  that  in 
every  community  there  is  a  large  class  of  its  members, 
whose  idleness  is  the  best  quality  about  them,  being 
the  corrective  of  other  bad  ones.     If  it  were  pos- 
sible, in  every  instance,  to  give  a  right  determina- 
tion to  industry,  we  could  never  have  too  much  of 
it.     But  this  is  not  possible,  if  men  are  to  be  free. 
And  without  this,  nothing  would  be  so  dangerous^ 


OF  THE  DEITY.  421. 

as  an  incessant,  universal,  indefatigable  activity. 
In  the  civil  world,  as  well  as  in  the  material,  it  is 
the  vis  inerttce  which  keeps  things  in  their  places. 

Natural  Theology  has  ever  been  pressed  with 
this  question :  Why,  under  the  regency  of  a  su- 
preme and  benevolent  Will,  should  there  be,  in  the 
world,  so  much  as  there  is  of  the  appearance  of 
chance ? 

The  question  in  its  whole  compass  lies  beyond 
our  reach :  but  there  are  not  wanting,  as  in  the 
origin  of  evil,  answers  which  seem  to  have  con- 
siderable weight  in  particular  cases,  and  also  to 
embrace  a  considerable  number  of  cases. 

I.  There  must  be  chance  in  the  midst  of  design  : 
by  which  we  mean,  that  events  which  are  not  de- 
signed, necessarily  arise  from  the  pursuit  of  events 
which  are  designed.  One  man  travelling  to  York, 
meets  another  man  travelling  to  London.  Their 
meeting  ks  by  chance,  is  accidental,  and  so  would 
be  called  and  reckoned,  though  the  journeys  which 
produced  the  meeting  were,  both  of  them,  under- 
taken with  design  and  from  deliberation.  The 
meeting,  though  accidental,  was  nevertheless  hypo- 
tlietically  necessary  (which  is  the  only  sort  of  neces- 
sity that  is  intelligible) :  for,  if  the  two  journeys 
were  commenced  at  the  time,  pursued  in  the  direc- 
tion, and  with  the  speed,  in  which  and  with  which 
they  were  in  fact  begun  and  performed,  the  meet- 
ing could  not  be  avoided.  There  was  not,  there- 
fore, the  less  necessity  in  it  for  its  being  by  chance. 
Again,  the  rencounter  might  be  most  unfortunate, 


422  THE  GOODNESS 

though  the  errands,  upon  which  each  party  set  out 
upon  his  journey,  were  the  most  innocent  or  the 
most  laudable.  The  bye  effect  may  be  unfavour- 
able,  without  impeachment  of  the  proper  purpose, 
for  the  sake  of  which  the  train,  from  the  operation 
of  which  these  consequences  ensued,  was  put  in 
motion.  Although  no  cause  acts  without  a  good 
purpose ;  accidental  consequences,  like  these,  may 
be  either  good  or  bad. 

II.  The  appearance  of  chance  will  always  bear  a 
proportion  to  the  ignorance  of  the  observer.  The 
cast  of  a  die  as  regularly  follows  the  laws  of  motion, 
as  the  going  of  a  watch ;  yet,  because  we  can  trace 
the  operation  of  those  laws  through  the  works  and 
movements  of  the  watch,  and  cannot  trace  them  in 
the  shaking  and  throwing  of  the  die  (though  the  laws 
be  the  same,  and  prevail  equally  in  both  cases),  we 
call  the  turning  up  of  the  number  of  the  die  chance, 
the  pointing  of  the  index  of  the  watch,  machinery, 
order,  or  by  some  name  which  excludes  chance. 
It  is  the  same  in  those  events  which  depend  upon 
the  will  of  a  free  and  rational  agent.  The  verdict 
of  a  jury,  the  sentence  of  a  judge,  the  resolution  of 
an  assembly,  the  issue  of  a  contested  election,  will 
have  more  or  less  of  the  appearance  of  chance, 
might  be  more  or  less  the  subject  of  a  wager,  ac- 
cording as  we  were  less  or  more  acquainted  with 
the  reasons  which  influenced  the  deliberation.  The 
difference  resides  in  the  information  of  the  observer, 
and  not  in  the  thing  itself;  which,  in  all  the  cases 
proposed,  proceeds  from  inteUigence,  from  mind, 
from  counsel,  from  design. 


OF  THE  DEITY.  423 

Now  when  this  one  cause  of  the  appearance  of 
chance,  viz.  the  ignorance  of  the  observer,  comes  to 
be  applied  to  the  operations  of  the  Deity,  it  is  easy 
to  foresee  how  fruitful  it  must  prove  of  difficulties, 
and  of  seeming  confusion.  It  is  only  to  think  of 
the  Deity,  to  perceive  what  variety  of  objects,  what 
distance  of  time,  what  extent  of  space  and  action, 
his  counsels  may,  or  rather  must,  comprehend. 
Can  it  be  wondered  at,  that,  of  the  purposes  which 
dwell  in  such  a  mind  as  this,  so  small  a  part  should 
be  known  to  us  ?  It  is  only  necessary,  therefore, 
to  bear  in  our  thought,  that  in  proportion  to  the 
inadequateness  of  our  information,  will  be  the  quan- 
tity, in  the  world,  of  apparent  chance. 

III.  In  a  great  variety  of  cases,  and  of  cases 
comprehending  numerous  subdivisions,  it  appears, 
for  many  reasons,  to  be  better  that  events  rise  up  by 
chance^  or,  more  properly  speaking,  with  the  ap- 
pearance of  chance,  than  according  to  any  obser- 
vable rule  whatever.  This  is  not  seldom  the  case 
even  in  human  arrangements.  Each  person's  place 
and  precedency,  in  a  public  meeting,  may  be  deter- 
mined by  lot.  Work  and  labour  may  be  allotted* 
Tasks  and  burdens  mav  be  allotted : — 

V 

Operumque  laborem 
Partibus  cequabat  justis,  aut  sorte  trahebat. 

Military  service  and  station  may  be  allotted.  The 
distribution  of  provision  may  be  made  by  lot,  as  it 
is  in  a  sailor's  mess ;  in  some  cases  also,  the  distri- 
bution of  favours  may  be  made  by  lot.  In  all  these 
cases,  it  seems  to  be  acknowledged,  that  there  are 


424  THE  GOODNESS 

advantages  in  permitting  events  to  chance,  supe- 
rior to  those  which  would  or  could  arise  from  re- 
gulation. In  all  these  cases,  also,  though  events 
rise  up  in  the  way  of  chance,  it  is  by  appointment 
that  they  do  so. 

In  other  events,  and  such  as  are  independent  of 
human  will,  the  reasons  for  this  preference  of  un- 
certainty to  rule,  appear  to  be  still  stronger.  For 
example,  it  seems  to  be  expedient  that  the  period 
of  human  life  should  be  uncertain.  Did  mortality 
follow  any  fixed  rule,  it  would  produce  a  security 
in  those  that  were  at  a  distance  from  it,  which 
would  lead  to  the  greatest  disorders  ;  and  a  horror 
in  those  who  approached  it,  similar  to  that  which 
a  condemned  prisoner  feels  on  the  night  before  his 
execution.  But,  that  death  be  uncertain,  the  young 
must  sometimes  die,  as  well  as  the  old.  Also,  were 
deaths  never  sudden,  they  who  are  in  health  would 
be  too  confident  of  life.  The  strong  and  the  active, 
who  want  most  to  be  warned  and  checked,  would 
live  without  apprehension  or  restraint.  On  the 
other  hand,  were  sudden  deaths  very  frequent,  the 
sense  of  constant  jeopardy  would  interfere  too  much 
with  the  degree  of  ease  and  enjoyment  intended  for 
us ;  and  human  life  be  too  precarious  for  the  busi- 
ness and  interests  which  belong  to  it.  There  could 
not  be  dependence  either  upon  our  own  lives,  or 
the  lives  of  those  with  whom  we  are  connected,  suf- 
ficient to  carry  on  the  regular  offices  of  human  so- 
ciety. The  manner,  therefore,  in  which  death  is 
made  to  occur,  conduces  to  the  purposes  of  admo- 


OF  THE  DEITY.  425 

nition,  without  overthrowing  the  necessary  stabihty 
of  human  affairs. 

Disease  being  the  forerunner  of  death,  there  is 
the  same  reason  for  its  attacks  coming  upon  us 
under  the  appearance  of  chance,  as  there  is  for 
uncertainty  in  the  time  of  death  itself. 

The  seasons  are  a  mixture  of  regularity  and  chance. 
They  are  regular  enough  to  authorize  expectation, 
whilst  their  being  in  a  considerable  degree  irregu- 
lar, induces,  on  the  part  of  the  cultivators  of  the 
soil,  a  necessity  for  personal  attendance,  for  activity, 
vigilance,  precaution.     It  is  this  necessity  which 
creates  farmers  ;  which  divides  the  profit  of  the  soil 
between  the  owner  and  the  occupier  ;  which,  by  re- 
quiring expedients,  by  increasing  employment,  and 
by  rewarding  expenditure,   promotes  agricultural 
arts  and  agricultural  life,  of  all  modes  of  life  the 
best,  being  the  most  conducive  to  health,  to  virtue, 
to  enjoyment.     I  believe  it  to  be  found  in  fact,  that 
where  the  soil  is  the  most  fruitful,  and  the  seasons 
the  most  constant,  there  the  condition  of  the  cul- 
tivators of  the  earth  is  the  most  depressed.    Uncer- 
tainty, therefore,  has  its  use,  even  to  those  who 
sometimes  complain  of  it  the  most.     Seasons  of 
scarcity  themselves  are  not  without  their  advan- 
tages.    They  call  forth  new  exertions ;   they  set 
contrivance  and  ingenuity  at  work  ;  they  give  birth 
to  improvements  in  agriculture  and  economy  ;  they 
promote  the  investigation  and  management  of  pub- 
lic resources. 

Again  ;  there  are  strong  intelligible  reasons,  why 
there  should  exist  in  human  society  great  disparity 


426  THE  GOODNESS 

of  wealth  and  station;  not  only  as  these  things  are 
acquired  in  different  degrees,  but  at  the  first  setting 
out  of  life.  In  order,  for  instance,  to  answer  the 
various  demands  of  civil  life,  there  ought  to  be 
amongst  the  members  of  every  civil  society  a  di- 
versity  of  education,  which  can  only  belong  to  an 
original  diversity  of  circumstances.  As  this  sort  of 
disparity,  which  ought  to  take  place  from  the  be- 
ginning of  life,  must,  ex  hypothesis  be  previous  to 
the  merit  or  demerit  of  the  persons  upon  whom  it 
falls,  can  it  be  better  disposed  of  than  by  chance  ? 
Parentage  is  that  sort  of  chance:  yet  it  is  the 
commanding  circumstance  which  in  general  fixes 
each  man's  place  in  civil  life,  along  with  every  thing 
which  appertains  to  its  distinctions.  It  may  be  the 
result  of  a  beneficial  rule,  that  the  fortunes  or  ho- 
nours of  the  father  devolve  upon  the  son ;  and,  as  it 
should  seem,  of  a  still  more  necessary  rule,  that  the 
low  or  laborious  condition  of  the  parent  be  com- 
municated to  his  family ;  but  with  respect  to  the 
successor  himself,  it  is  the  drawing  of  a  ticket  in 
a  lottery.  Inequalities  therefore  of  fortune,  at  least 
the  greatest  part  of  them,  viz.  those  which  attend 
us  from  our  birth,  and  depend  upon  our  birth,  may 
be  left,  as  they  are  left,  to  chance ^  without  any  just 
cause  for  questioning  the  regency  of  a  supreme 
Disposer  of  events. 

But  not  only  the  donation,  when  by  the  neces- 
sity of  the  case  they  must  be  gifts,  but  even  the 
acquirability  of  civil  advantages,  ought  perhaps, 
in  a  considerable  degree,  to  lie  at  the  mercy  of 
chance.     Some  would  have  all  the  virtuous  rich, 


OF  THE  DEITY,  427 

or  at  least  removed  from  the  evils  of  poverty,  with- 
out perceiving,  I  suppose,  the  consequence,  that 
all  the  poor  must  be  wicked.  And  how  such  a 
society  could  be  kept  in  subjection  to  government, 
has  not  been  shown :  for  the  poor,  that  is,  they 
who  seek  their  subsistence  by  constant  manual 
labour,  must  still  form  the  mass  of  the  community ; 
otherwise  the  necessary  labour  of  life  could  not  be 
carried  on  ;  the  work  would  not  be  done,  which 
the  wants  of  mankind,  in  a  state  of  civilization, 
and  still  more  in  a  state  of  refinement,  require  to 
be  done. 

It  appears  to  be  also  true,  that  the  exigencies  of 
social  life  call  not  only  for  an  original  diversity  of 
external  circumstances,  but  for  a  mixture  of  differ- 
ent faculties,  tastes,  and  tempers.  Activity  and 
contemplation,  restlessness  and  quiet  courage  and 
timidity,  ambition  and  contentedness,  not  to  say 
even  indolence  and  dulness,  are  all  wanted  in  the 
world,  all  conduce  to  the  well  going  on  of  human 
affairs ;  just  as  the  rudder,  the  sails,  and  the  ballast 
of  a  ship,  all  perform  their  part  in  the  navigation. 
Now,  since  these  characters  require  for  their  foun- 
dation different  original  talents,  different  disposi- 
tions, perhaps  also  different  bodily  constitutions ; 
and  since,  likewise,  it  is  apparently  expedient,  that 
they  be  promiscuously  scattered  amongst  the  dif- 
ferent classes  of  society ;  can  the  distribution  of 
talents,  dispositions,  and  the  constitutions  upon 
which  they  depend,  be  better  made  than  by  chance  ? 

The  opposites  of  apparent  chance  are,  constancy 
and  sensible  interposition ;  every  degree  of  secret 


428  THE  GOODNESS 

direction  being  consistent  with  it.  Now,  of  con^ 
stancy^  or  of  fixed  and  known  rules,  we  have  seen 
in  some  cases  the  inapplicabiUty ;  and  inconveni- 
encies  which  we  do  not  see,  might  attend  their 
appHcation  in  other  cases. 

Of  sensible  interposition  we  may  be  permitted 
to  remark,  that  a  Providence,  always  and  certainly 
distinguishable,  would  be  neither  more  nor  less  than 
miracles  rendered  frequent  and  common.  It  is  dif- 
ficult to  judge  of  the  state  into  which  this  would 
throw  us.  It  is  enough  to  say,  that  it  would  cast 
us  upon  a  quite  different  dispensation  from  that 
under  which  we  live.  It  would  be  a  total  and  radi- 
cal change.  And  the  change  would  deeply  affect, 
or  perhaps  subvert,  the  whole  conduct  of  human 
affairs.  I  can  readily  believe,  that,  other  circum- 
stances being  adapted  to  it,  such  a  state  might  be 
better  than  our  present  state.  It  may  be  the  state 
of  other  beings ;  it  may  be  ours  hereafter.  But 
the  question  with  which  we  are  now  concerned  is, 
how  far  it  would  be  consistent  with  our  condition, 
supposing  it  in  other  respects  to  remain  as  it  is  ? 
And  in  this  question  there  seems  to  be  reasons  of 
great  moment  on  the  negative  side.  For  instance, 
so  long  as  bodily  labour  continues,  on  so  many  ac- 
counts, to  be  necessary  for  the  bulk  of  mankind, 
any  dependency  upon  a  supernatural  aid,  by  unfix- 
ing those  motives  which  promote  exertion,  or  by 
relaxing  those  habits  which  engender  patient  in- 
dustry, might  introduce  negligence,  inactivity,  and 
disorder,  into  the  most  useful  occupations  of  hu- 


OF  THE  DEITY.  429 

man  life  ;  and  thereby  deteriorate  the  condition  of 
human  Hfe  itself. 

As  moral  agents,  we  should  experience  a  still 
greater  alteration  ;  of  which,  more  will  be  said 
under  the  next  article. 

Although  therefore  the  Deity,  who  possesses 
the  power  of  winding  and  turning,  as  he  pleases, 
the  course  of  causes  which  issue  from  himself, 
do  in  fact  interpose  to  alter  or  intercept  effects, 
which  without  such  interposition  would  have  ta- 
ken place ;  yet  it  is  by  no  means  incredible,  that 
his  Providence,  which  always  rests  upon  final  good, 
may  have  made  a  reserve  with  respect  to  the  mani- 
festation of  his  interference,  a  part  of  the  very  plan 
which  he  has  appointed  for  our  terrestrial  existence, 
and  a  part  conformable  with,  or  in  some  sort  re- 
quired by,  other  parts  of  the  same  plan.  It  is  at 
any  rate  evident,  that  a  large  and  ample  province 
remains  for  the  exercise  of  Providence,  without  its 
being  naturally  perceptible  by  us  ;  because  obscu- 
rity, when  applied  to  the  interruption  of  laws,  bears 
a  necessary  proportion  to  the  imperfection  of  our 
knowledge  when  applied  to  the  laws  themselves,  or 
rather  to  the  effects  which  these  laws,  under  their 
various  and  incalculable  combinations,  would  of 
their  own  accord  produce.  And  if  it  be  said,  that 
the  doctrine  of  Divine  Providence,  by  reason  of  the 
ambiguity  under  which  its  exertions  present  them- 
selves, can  be  attended  with  no  practical  influence 
upon  our  conduct;  that,  although  we  believe  ever  so 
firmly  that  there  is  a  Providence,  we  must  prepare, 
and  provide,  and  act,  as  if  there  were  none  j  I  an- 


430  .  THE  GOODNESS 

swer,  that  this  is  admitted;  and  that  we  further 
allege,  that  so  to  prepare,  and  so  to  provide,  is  con- 
sistent with  the  most  perfect  assurance  of  the  reali- 
ty of  a  Providence  :  and  not  only  so,  but  that  it  is 
probably  one  advantage  of  the  present  state  of  our 
information,  that  our  provisions  and  preparations 
are  not  disturbed  by  it  Or  if  it  be  still  asked,  Of 
what  use  at  all  then  is  the  doctrine,  if  it  neither 
alter  our  measures  nor  regulate  our  conduct?  I 
answer  again,  that  it  is  of  the  greatest  use,  but  that 
it  is  a  doctrine  of  sentiment  and  piety,  not  (imme- 
diately at  least)  of  action  or  conduct ;  that  it  ap- 
plies to  the  consolation  of  men's  minds,  to  their 
devotions,  to  the  excitement  of  gratitude,  the  sup- 
port of  patience,  the  keeping  alive  and  the  strength- 
ening of  every  motive  for  endeavouring  to  please 
our  Maker ;  and  that  these  are  great  uses. 

Of  all  views  under  which  human  life  has  ever 
been  considered,  the  most  reasonable,  in  my  judg- 
ment, is  that  which  regards  it  as  a  state  of  probation. 
If  the  course  of  the  world  was  separated  from  the 
contrivances  of  nature,  I  do  not  know  that  it  would 
be  necessary  to  look  for  any  other  account  of  it 
than  what,  if  it  may  be  called  an  account,  is  con- 
tained in  the  answer,  that  events  rise  up  by  chance. 
But  since  the  contrivances  of  nature  decidedly 
evince  intention;  and  since  the  course  of  the  world 
and  the  contrivances  of  nature  have  the  same  au- 
thor ;  we  are,  by  the  force  of  this  connexion,  led 
to  believe,  that  the  appearance  under  which  events 
take  place,  is  reconcileable  with  the  supposition  of 
design  on  the  part  of  the  Deity.    It  is  enough  that 


OF  THE  DEITY.  431 

they  be  reconcileable  with  this  supposition ;  and  it  is 
undoubtedly  true,  that  they  may  be  reconcileable^ 
though  we   cannot  reconcile   them.     The   mindy 
however,  which  contemplates  the  works  of  Nature, 
and  in  those  works  sees  so  much  of  means  directed 
to  ends,  of  beneficial  effects  brought  about  by  wise 
expedients,  of  concerted  trains  of  causes  terminat- 
ing in  the  happiest  results  ;  so  much,  in  a  word,  of 
counsel,  intention,   and  benevolence ;   a  mind,   I 
say,  drawn  into  the  habit  of  thought  which  these 
observations  excite,  can  hardly  turn  its  view  to  the 
condition  of  our  own  species,  without  endeavouring 
to  suggest  to  itself  some  purpose,  some  design,  for 
which  the  state  in  which  we  are  placed  is  fitted,^  and 
which  it  is  made  to  serve.     Now  we  assert  the  most 
probable  supposition  to  be,  that  it  is  a  state  of  moral 
probation  ;  and  that  many  things  in  it  suit  with  this 
hypothesis,  which  suit  no  other.     It  is  not  a  state 
of  unmixed  happiness,  or  of  happiness  simply :  it  is 
not  a  state  of  designed  misery,  or  of  misery  simply : 
it  is  not  a  state  of  retribution  :  it  is  not  a  state  of 
punishment.     It  suits  with  none  of  these  supposi- 
tions.    It  accords  much  better  with  the  idea  of  its 
being  a  condition  calculated  for  the  production, 
exercise,  and  improvement  of  moral  qualities,  with 
a  view  tO'  a  future  state,  in  which  these  quali- 
ties, after  being  so  produced,  exercised,  and  im- 
proved, may,  by  a  new  and  more  favouring  consti- 
tution of  things,  receive  their  reward,  or  become 
their  own.     If  it  be  said,  that  this  is  to  enter  upon 
a  religious  rather  than  a  philosophical  consideration^ 
I  answer,  that  the  name  of  Religion  ought  to  form; 

56 


432  THE  GOODNESS 

no  objection,  if  it  shall  turn  out  to  be  the  case,  that 
the  more  religious  our  views  are,  the  more  proba- 
bility they  contain.  The  degree  of  beneficence,  of 
benevolent  intention,  and  of  power,  exercised  in 
the  construction  of  sensitive  beings,  goes  strongly 
in  favour,  not  only  of  a  creative,  but  of  a  continu- 
ing care,  that  is,  of  a  ruling  Providence.  The 
degree  of  chance  which  appears  to  prevail  in  the 
world,  requires  to  be  reconciled  with  this  hypothesis. 
Now  it  is  one  thing  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of 
Providence  along  with  that  of  a  future  state,  and 
another  thing  without  it.  In  my  opinion,  the  two 
doctrines  must  stand  or  fall  together.  For  although 
more  of  this  apparent  chance  may  perhaps,  upon 
other  principles,  be  accounted  for,  than  is  general- 
ly supposed,  yet  a  future  state  alone  rectifies  all 
disorders  :  and  if  it  can  be  shown,  that  the  appear- 
ance of  disorder  is  consistent  with  the  uses  of  life 
as  a  preparatory  state,  or  that  in  some  respects  it 
promotes  these  uses,  then,  so  far  as  this  hypothesis 
may  be  accepted,  the  ground  of  the  difficulty  is 
done  away. 

In  the  wide  scale  of  human  condition,  there  is 
not  perhaps  one  of  its  manifold  diversities  which 
does  not  bear  upon  the  design  here  suggested. 
Virtue  is  infinitely  various.  There  is  no  situation 
in  which  a  rational  being  is  placed,  from  that  of 
the  best  instructed  Christian  down  to  the  condition 
of  the  rudest  barbarian,  which  affords  not  room  for 
moral  agency  j  for  the  acquisition,  exercise,  and  dis- 
play of  voluntary  qualities,  good  and  bad.  Health 
and  sickness,  enjoyment  and  suffering,  riches  and 


OF  THE  DEITY.  433 

poverty,    knowledge   and  ignorance,    power  and 
subjection,  liberty  and  bondage,  civilization  and 
barbarity,  have  all  their  offices  and  duties,  all  serve 
for  ihe  formation  of  character :  for  when  we  speak 
of  a  state  of  trial,  it  must  be  remembered,  that 
characters  are  not  only  tried,  or  proved,  or  detect- 
ed, but  that  they  are  generated  also,  and  formed^ 
by  circumstances.     The  best  dispositions  may  sub- 
sist under  the  most  depressed,  the  most  afflicted 
fortunes.     A  West  Indian  slave,  who,  amidst  his 
wrongs,  retains  his  benevolence,   I,  for  my  part, 
look  upon  as  amongst  the  foremost  of  human  can- 
didates for  the  rewards  of  virtue.    The  kind  master 
of  such  a  slave,  that  is,  he  who,  in  the  exercise  of 
an  inordinate  authority,  postpones  in  any  degree 
his  own  interest  to  his  slave's  comfort,  is  likewise  a 
meritorious  character :  but  still  he  is  inferior  to  his 
slave.     All  however  which  I  contend  for  is,  that 
these  destinies,  opposite  as  they  may  be  in  every 
other  view,  are  both  trials;  and  equally  such.    The 
observation  may  be  applied  to  every  other  condition ; 
to  the  whole  range  of  the  scale,  not  excepting  even 
its  lowest  extremity.    Savages  appear  to  us  all  alike ; 
but  it  is  owing  to  the  distance  at  which  we  view 
savage  life,  that  we  perceive  in  it  no  discrimination 
of  character.     I  make  no  doubt,  but  that  moral 
qualities,  both  good  and  bad,  are  called  into  action 
as  much,  and  that  they  subsist  in  as  great  variety 
in  these  inartificial  societies,  as  they  are,  or  do,  in 
polished  life.     Certain  at  least  it  is,  that  the  good 
and  ill  treatment  which  each  individual  meets  with, 
depends  more  upon  the  choice  and  voluntary  con- 
duct of  those  about  him,  than  it  does,  or  ought  to 

E  e 


434  THE  GOODNESS 

do,  under  regular  civil  institutions,  and  the  coercion 
of  public  laws.  So  again,  to  turn  our  eyes  to  the 
other  end  of  the  scale,  namely,  that  part  of  it  which 
is  occupied  by  mankind  enjoying  the  benefits  of 
learning,  together  with  the  lights  of  revelation, 
there  also,  the  advantage  is  all  along  probationary. 
Christianity  itself,  I  mean  the  revelation  of  Chris- 
tianity, is  not  only  a  blessing,  but  a  trial.  It  is  one 
of  the  diversified  means  by  which  the  character  is 
exercised :  and  they  who  require  of  Christianity, 
that  the  revelation  of  it  should  be  universal,  may 
possibly  be  found  to  require,  that  one  species  of 
probation  should  be  adopted,  if  not  to  the  exclusion 
of  others,  at  least  to  the  narrowing  of  that  variety 
which  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity  hath  appointed  to 
this  part  of  his  moral  economy.  * 

Now  if  this  supposition  be  well  founded ;  that  is, 
if  it  be  true  that  our  ultimate,  or  our  most  perma- 
nent happiness  will  depend,  not  upon  the  temporary 
condition  into  which  we  are  cast,  but  upon  our 
behaviour  in  it ;  then  is  it  a  much  more  fit  subject 
of  chance  than  we  usually  allow  or  apprehend  it  to 
be,  in  what  manner  the  variety  of  external  circum- 
stances which  subsist  in  the  human  world,  is  dis- 
tributed amongst  the  individuals  of  the  species. 
*^  This  life  being  a  state  of  probation,  it  is  immate- 
rial,** says  Rousseau,  '^  what  kind  of  trials  we  ex- 

*  The  reader  will  observe,  that  I  speak  of  the  revelation  of  Christianity  as 
distinct  from  Christianity  itself.  The  dispensation  may  already  be  universal. 
That  part  of  mankind  which  never  heard  of  Christ's  name,  may  nevertheless 
be  redeemed ;  that  is,  be  placed  in  a  better  condition,  with  respect  to  their 
future  state,  by  his  intervention ;  may  be  the  objects  of  his  benignity  and  inter- 
cession, as  well  as  of  the  propitiatory  virtue  of  his  passion.  But  this  is  not 
**  natural  theology;"  therefore  I  will  not  dwell  longer  upon  it. 


:,!& 


OF  THE  DEITY.  435 

.perience  in  it,  provided  they  produce  their  effects/* 
Of  two  agents  who  stand  indifferent  to  the  moral 
Governor  of  the  universe,  one  may  be  exercised 
by  riches,  the  other  by  poverty.  The  treatment  of 
these  two  shall  appear  to  be  very  opposite,  whilst  in 
truth  it  is  the  same :  for  though,  in  many  respects, 
there  be  great  disparity  between  the  conditions  as- 
signed, in  one  main  article  there  may  be  none,  viz. 
in  that  they  are  alike  trials  ;  have  both  their  duties 
and  temptations,  not  less  arduous  or  less  dangerous 
in  one  case  than  the  other ;  so  that  if  the  final 
award  follow  the  character,  the  original  distribution 
of  the  circumstances  under  which  that  character  is 
formed,  may  be  defended  upon  principles  not  only 
of  justice  but  of  equality.  What  hinders,  therefore, 
but  that  mankind  may  draw  lots  for  their  condition  ? 
They  take  their  portion  of  faculties  and  opportuni- 
ties, as  any  unknown  cause,  or  concourse  of  causes, 
or  as  causes  acting  for  other  purposes,  may  happen 
to  set  them  out ;  but  the  event  is  governed  by  that 
which  depends  upon  themselves,  the  application  of 
what  they  have  received.  In  dividing  the  talents, 
no  rule  was  observed ;  none  was  necessary :  in  re- 
warding the  use  of  them,  that  of  the  most  correct 
justice.  The  chief  difference  at  last  appears  to  be, 
that  the  right  use  of  more  talents,  L  e.  of  a  greater 
trust,  will  be  more  highly  rewarded,  than  the  right 
use  of  fewer  talents,  i.  e.  of  a  less  trust.  And  since, 
for  other  purposes,  it  is  expedient  that  there  be  an 
inequality  of  concredited  talents  here,  as  well,  pro- 
bably, as  an  inequality  of  conditions  hereafter, 
though  all  remuneratory ;  can  any  rule,  adapted  to 


4)36  THE  GOODNESS 

that  inequality,  be  more  agreeable,  even  to  our  ap^ 
prehensions  of  distributive  justice,  than  this  is  ? 

We  have  said  that  the  appearance  of  casualty^ 
which  attends  the  occurrences  and  events  of  life, 
not  only  does  not  interfere  with  its  uses,  as  a  state 
of  probation,  but  that  it  promotes  these  uses* 

Passive  virtues,  of  all  others  the  severest  and 
the  most  sublime ;  of  all  others,  perhaps,  the  most 
acceptable  to  the  Deity ;  would,  it  is  evident,  be 
excluded  from  a  constitution,  in  which  happiness 
and  misery  regularly  followed  virtue  and  vice. 
Patience  and  composure  under  distress,  afflictioUj 
and  pain ;  a  steadfast  keeping  up  of  our  confidence  in 
God,  and  of  our  reliance  upon  his  final  goodness,  at 
the  time  when  every  thing  present  is  adverse  and 
discouraging ;  and  (what  is  no  less  difficult  to  re- 
tain) a  cordial  desire  for  the  happiness  of  others, 
even  when  we  are  deprived  of  our  own:  these  dispo- 
sitions, which  constitvite,  perhaps,  the  perfection  of 
our  moral  nature,  would  not  have  found  their  pro- 
per office  and  object  in  a  state  of  avowed  retribu- 
tion ;  and  in  which,  consequently,  endurance  of  evil 
would  be  only  submission  to  punishment. 

Again :  One  man's  sufferings  may  be  another 
man's  trial.  The  family  of  a  sick  parent  is  a  school 
of  filial  piety.  The  charities  of  domestic  life,  and 
not  only  these,  but  all  the  social  virtues,  are  called 
out  by  distress.  But  then,  misery,  to  be  the  proper 
object  of  mitigation,  or  of  that  benevolence  which 
endeavours  to  relieve,  must  be  really  or  apparently 
casuaL  It  is  upon  such  sufferings  alone  that  bene- 
volence can  operate.  For  were  there  no  evils  in  the 
world,  but  what  were  punishments,  properly  and 


OF  THE  DEITY.  437 

intelligibly  sueh,  benevolence  would  only  stand  in 
the  way  of  justice.  Such  evils,  consistently  with 
the  administration  of  moral  government,  could  not 
be  prevented  or  alleviated,  that  is  to  say,  could  not 
be  remitted  in  whole  or  in  part,  except  by  the  autho- 
rity which  inflicted  them,  or  by  an  appellate  qr 
superior  authority.  This  consideration,  which  is 
founded  in  our  most  acknowledged  apprehensions 
of  the  nature  of  penal  justice,  may  possess  its  weight 
in  the  Divine  counsels.  Virtue  perhaps  is  the  great- 
est of  all  ends.  In  human  beings,  relative  virtues 
form  a  large  part  of  the  whole.  Now  relative  vir- 
tue presupposes,  not  only  the  existence  of  evil, 
without  which  it  could  have  no  object,  no  material 
to  work  upon,  but  that  evils  be,  apparently  at  least, 
misfortunes;  that  is,  the  effects  of  apparent  chance. 
It  may  be  in  pursuance,  therefore,  and  in  further- 
ance of  the  same  scheme  of  probation,  that  the  evils 
of  life  are  made  so  to  present  themselves. 

I  have  already  observed,  that,  when  we  let  in 
religious  considerations,  we  often  let  in  light  upon 
the  difficulties  of  nature.  So  in  the  fact  now  to  be 
accounted  for,  the  degree  of  happiness  which  we 
usually  enjoy  in  this  life,  may  be  better  suited  to  a 
state  of  trial  and  probation,  than  a  greater  degree 
would  be.  The  truth  is,  we  are  rather  too  much 
delighted  with  the  world,  than  too  little.  Imperfect, 
broken,  and  precarious  as  our  pleasures  are,  they  are 
more  than  sufficient  to  attach  us  to  the  eager  pur- 
suit of  them.  A  regard  to  2i  future  state  can  hardly 
keep  its  place  as  it  is.  If  we  were  designed,  there- 
fore, to  be  influenced  by  that  regard,  might  not  a 
more  indulgent  system,  a  higher,  or  more  uninter- 


458  CONCLUSION, 

rupted  state  of  gratification,  have  interfered  with 
the  design  ?  At  least  it  seems  expedient,  that  man- 
kind should  be  susceptible  of  this  influence,  when 
presented  to  them  :  that  the  condition  of  the  world 
should  not  be  such  as  to  exclude  its  operation,  or 
even  to  weaken  it  more  than  it  does.  In  a  religious 
view  (however  we  may  complain  of  them  in  every 
other),  privation,  disappointment,  and  satiety,  are 
not  without  the  most  salutary  tendencies. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 


CONCLUSION. 


In  all  cases,  wherein  the  mind  feels  itself  in  danger 
of  being  confounded  by  variety,  it  is  sure  to  rest 
upon  a  few  strong  points,  or  perhaps  upon  a  single 
instance.  Amongst  a  multitude  of  proofs,  it  is  one 
that  does  the  business.  If  we  observe  in  any  argu- 
ment, that  hardly  two  minds  fix  upon  the  same  in- 
stance, the  diversity  of  choice  shows  the  strength  of 
the  argument,  because  it  shows  the  number  and 
competition  of  the  examples.  There  is  no  subject 
in  which  the  tendency  to  dwell  upon  select  or  single 
topics  is  so  usual,  because  there  is  no  subject,  of 
which,  in  its  full  extent,  the  latitude  is  so  great,  as 
that  of  natural  history  applied  to  the  proof  of  an 
intelligent  Creator.     For  my  part,  I  take  my  stand 


CONCLUSION.  439 

in  human  anatomy ;  and  the  examples  of  mechan- 
ism I  should  be  apt  to  draw  out  from  the  copious 
catalogue  which  it  supplies,  are  the  pivot  upon 
which  the  head  turns,  the  ligament  within  the  soc- 
ket of  the  hip-joint,  the  pulley  or  trochlear  muscles 
of  the  eye,  the  epiglottis,  the  bandages  which  tie 
down  the  tendons  of  the  wrist  and  instep,  the  slit 
or  perforated  muscles  at  the  hands  and  feet,  the 
knitting  of  the  intestines  to  the  mesentery,  the 
course  of  the  chyle  into  the  blood,  and  the  consti- 
tution of  the  sexes  as  extended  throughout  the 
whole  of  the  animal  creation.  To  these  instances 
the  reader's  memory  will  go  back,  as  they  are  seve- 
rally set  forth  in  their  places  :  there  is  not  one  of 
the  number  which  I  do  not  think  decisive  ;  not  one 
which  is  not  strictly  mechanical ;  nor  have  I  read  or 
heard  of  any  solution  of  these  appearances,  which, 
in  the  smallest  degree,  shakes  the  conclusion  that 
we  build  upon  them. 

But,  of  the  greatest  part  of  those,  who,  either  in 
this  book  or  any  other,  read  arguments  to  prove  the 
existence  of  a  God,  it  will  be  said,  that  they  leave 
off  only  where  they  began  ;  that  they  were  never 
ignorant  of  this  great  truth,  never  doubted  of  it ; 
that  it  does  not,  therefore,  appear  what  is  gained  by 
researches  from  which  no  new  opinion  is  learned, 
and  upon  the  subject  of  which  no  proofs  were  want- 
ed. Now  I  answer,  that,^y  investigation^  the  fol- 
lowing points  are  always  gained,  in  favour  of  doc- 
trines even  the  most  generally  acknowledged  (sup- 
posing them  to  be  true),  viz.  stability  and  impres- 
sion. Occasions  will  arise  to  try  the  firmness  of 
our  most  habitual  opinions.    And  upon  these  occa- 


440^  CONCLUSION. 

sions,  it  is  a  matter  of  incalculable  use  to  feel  our 
foundation  j  to  find  a  support  in  argument  for  what 
we  had  taken  up  upon  authority,  f  In  the  present 
case,  the  arguments  upon  which  the  conclusion 
rests,  are  exactly  such,  as  a  truth  of  universal  con- 
cern ought  to  rest  upon./ "  They  are  sufficiently 
open  to  the  views  and  capacities  of  the  unlearned^ 
at  the  same  time  that  they  acquire  new  strength  and 
lustre  from  the  discoveries  of  the  learned/'  /  If  they 
had  been  altogether  abstruse  and  recondite,  they 
would  not  have  found  their  way  to  the  understand- 
ings of  the  mass  of  mankind ;  if  they  had  been 
merely  popular,  they  might  have  wanted  solidity.^ 
But,  secondly,  what  is  gained  by  research  in  tne 
stability  of  our  conclusion,  is  also  gained  from  it  in 
fmpression.  Physicians  tell  us,  that  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  difference  between  taking  a  medicine,  and 
the  medicine  getting  into  the  constitution.  A  dif- 
ference not  unlike  which,  obtains  with  respect  to- 
those  great  moral  propositions,  which  ought  to  form 
the  directing  principles  of  human  conduct.  It  is 
one  thing  to  assent  to  a  proposition  of  this  sort ;, 
another,  and  a  very  different  thing,  to  have  properly 
imbibed  its  influence.  I  take  the  case  to  be  this  : 
Perhaps  almost  every  man  living  has  a  particular 
train  of  thought,  into  which  his  mind  glides  and 
falls,  when  at  leisure  from  the  impressions  and  ideas 
that  occasionally  excite  it ;  perhaps,  also,  the  train 
of  thought  here  spoken  of,  more  than  any  other 
thing,  determines  the  character.  It  is  of  the  ut- 
most consequence,  therefore,  that  this  property  of 
our  constitution  be  well  regulated.  Now  it  is  by 
frequent  or  continued  meditation  upon  a  subject,  by 


CONCLUSION.  441/ 

placing  a  subject  in  different  points  of  view,  by  in^. 
duction  of  particulars,  by  variety  of  examples,  by 
applying  principles  to  the  solution  of  phenomena, 
by  dwelling  upon  proofs  and  consequences,  that 
mental  exercise  is  drawn  into  any  particular  chan-  , 
nelyv  It  IS  by  these  means,  at  least,  that  we  naw^t^/iiOec^/ 
any  power   over  it.     The   train   of   spontaneous 
thought,  and  the  choice  of  that  train,  may  be  di- 
rected to  different  ends,  and  may  appear  to  be  more 
or  less  judiciously  fixed,  according  to  the  purpose, 
in  respect  of  which  we  consider  it :  but,  in  a  moral 
viexVy  I  shall  not,  I  believe,  be  contradicted  when  I 
say,  that,  if  one  train  of  thinking  be  more  desirable 
than  another,  it  is  that  which  regards  the  phenome- 
na of  nature  with  a  constant  reference  to  a  supreme 
intelligent  Author,     To  have  made  this  the  ruling, 
the  habitual  sentiment  of  our  minds,  is  to  have  laid 
the  foundation  of  every  thing  which  is  religious. 
The  world  thenceforth  becomes  a  temple,  and  life 
itself  one  continued  act  of  adoration.   /The  change 
is  no  less  than  this  ;  that  whereas  formerly  God  was 
seldom  in  our  thoughts,  we  can  now  scarcely  look 
upon  any  thing  without  perceiving  its  relation  to 
him.     Every  organized  natural  body,  in  the  provi- 
sions which  it  contains  for  its  sustentation  and  pro- 
pagation, testifies  a  care,  on  the  part  of  the  Creator, 
expressly  directed  to  these  purposes.  /We  are  on 
all  sides  surrounded  by  such  bodies ;  examined  in 
their  parts,  wonderfully  curious ;   compared  with 
one- another,  no  less  wonderfully  diversified.     So 
that  the  mind,  as  well  as  the  eye,  may  either  expa- 
tiate in  variety  and  multitude,  or  fix  itself  down  to 
the  investigation  of  particular  divisions  of  the  sci- 


/       442^  CONCLUSION. 

^-etice.     And  in  either  case  it  will  rise  up  from  its 
occupation,  possessed  by  the  subject,  in  a  very  dif- 
ferent manner,  and  with  a  very  diiferent  degree  of 
influence,  from  what  a  mere  assent  to  any  verbal 
proposition  which  can  be  formed  concerning  the 
existence  of  the  Deity,  at  least  that  merely  comply- 
ing assent  with  which  those  about  us  are  satisfied, 
and  with  which  we  are  too  apt  to  satisfy  ourselves, 
will  or  can   produce  upon  the  thoughts.     More 
especially  may  this  difference  be  perceived,  in  the 
degree  of  admiration  and  of  awe  with  which  the 
Divinity  is  regarded,  when  represented  to  the  un- 
derstanding by  its  own  remarks,  its  own  reflections, 
and  its  own  reasonings,  compared  with  what  is  ex- 
cited by  any  language  that  can  be  used  by  others. 
?The  works  of  nature  want  only  to  be  contemplated. 
When  contemplated,  they  have  every  thing  in  them 
which  can  astonish  by  their  greatness  :  for,  of  the 
vast  scale  of  operation  through  which  our  disco- 
veries carry  us,  at  one  end  we  see  an  intelligent 
Power  arranging  planetary  systems,  fixing,  for  in- 
stance, the  trajectory  of  Saturn^  or  constructing  a 
ring  of  two  hundred  thousand  miles  diameter  to 
surround  his  body,  and  be  suspended  like  a  magni- 
ficent arch  over  the  heads  of  his  inhabitants  ;  and, 
at  the  other,  bending  a  hooked  tooth,  concerting 
and  providing  an  appropriate  mechanism,  for  the 
clasping  and  reclasping  of  the  filaments  of  the 
feather  of  the  humming-^bird.     We  have  proof,  not 
only  of  both  these  works  proceeding  from  an  in- 
telligent agent,  but  of  their  proceeding  from  the 
same  agent :  for,  in  the  first  place,  we  can  trace 
an  identity  of  plan,  a  connexion  of  system,  from 


coNCLusioisr.  44^ 

Saturn  to  our  own  globe  ;  and  wh^n  arrived  upon 
our  globe,  we  can,  in  the  second  place,  pursue  the 
connexion  through  all  the  organized,  especially 
the  animated,  bodies  which  it  supports.  We  can 
observe  marks  of  a  common  relation,  as  well  to 
one  another,  as  to  the  elements  of  which  their 
habitation  is  composed.  Therefore  one  mind  hath 
planned,  or  at  least  hath  prescribed,  a  general  plan 
for  all  these  productions.  One  Being  has  been 
concerned  in  allVJ 

Under  this  stupendous  Being  we  live.  Our 
happiness,  our  existence,  is  in  his  hands.  All  we 
expect  must  come  from  him.  Nor  ought  we  to 
feel  our  situation  insecure.  In  every  nature,  and 
in  every  portion  of  nature,  which  we  can  descry, 
we  find  attention  bestowed  upon  even  the  minutest 
parts.  The  hinges  in  the  wings  of  an  earmg,  and 
the  joints  of  its  antennae,  are  as  highly  wrought, 
as  if  the  Creator  had  nothing  else  to  finish.  We 
see  no  signs  of  diminution  of  care  by  multiplicity 
of  objects,  or  of  distraction  of  thought  by  variety. 
We  have  no  reason  to  fear,  therefore,  our  being  for- 
gotten, or  overlooked,  or  neglected. 

The  existence  and  character  of  the  Deity,  is,  in 
every  view,  the  most  interesting  of  all  human  spe- 
culations. In  nolle,  however,  is  it  more  so,  than 
as  it  facilitates  the  belief  of  the  fundamental  arti- 
cles of  Revelation.  It  is  a  step  to  have  it  proved, 
that  there  must  be  something  in  the  world  more 
than  what  we  see.  It  is  a  farther  step  to  know, 
that,  amongst  the  invisible  things  of  nature,  there 
must  be  an  intelligent  mind,  concerned  in  its  pro- 
duction, order,  and  support.     These  points  being 


444  CONCLUSION^ 

assured  to  us  by  Natural  Theology j^e  may  well 
leave  to  Revelation  the  disclosure  of  many  parti- 
culars, which  our  researches  cannot  reach,  respect- 
ing either  the  nature  of  this  Being  as  the  original 
cause  of  all  things,  or  his  character  and  designs  as 
a  moral  governor  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  the  more 
full  confirmation  of  other  particulars,  of  which, 
though  they  do  not  lie  altogether  beyond  our  rea- 
sonings and  our  probabilities,  the  certainty  is  by  no 
means  equal  to  the  importance^  The  true  theist 
will  be  the  first  to  listen  to  any  credible  communi- 
cation of  Divine  knowledge.  Nothing  which  he 
has  learned  from  Natural  Theology,  will  diminish 
his  desire  of  farther  instruction,  or  his  disposition 
to  receive  it  with  humility  and  thankfulness*  He 
wishes  for  light :  he  rejoices  in  light-  His  inward 
veneration  of  this  great  Being,  will  incline  him  to 
attend  with  the  utmost  seriousness,  not  only  to  all 
that  can  be  discovered  concerning  him  by  researches 
into  nature,  but  to  all  that  is  taught  by  a  revelation, 
which  gives  reasonable  proof  of  having  proceeded 
from  him. 

But  above  every  other  article  of  revealed  religion, 
does  the  anterior  belief  of  a  Deity  bear  with  the 
strongest  force  upon  that  grand  point,  which  gives 
indeed  interest  and  importance*  to  all  the  rest, — > 
the  resurrection  of  the  human  dead.  The  thing 
might  appear  hopeless,  did  we  not  see  a  power  at 
work  adequate  to  the  effect,  a  power  under  the 
guidance  of  an  intelligent  will,  and  a  power  pene* 
trating  the  inmost  recesses  of  all  substance,  ( I  am 
far  from  justifying  the  opinion  of  those,  who 
^^  thought  it  a  thing  incredible  that  God  should 


CONCLUSION.  445 

raise  the  dead:"  but  I  admit,  that  it  is  first  neces- 
sary to  be  persuaded,  that  there  is  a  God  to  do  so. 
This  being  thoroughly  settled  in  our  minds,  there 
seems  to  be  nothing  in  this  process  (concealed  as 
we  confess  it  to  be)  which  need  to  shock  our  belie£\, 
They  who  have  taken  up  the  opinion,  that  the  acts 
of  the  human  mind  depend  upon  organization^  that 
the  mind  itself  indeed  consists  in  organization,  are 
supposed  to  find  a  greater  difliculty  than  others  do, 
in  admitting  a  transition  by  death  to  a  new  state  of 
sentient  existence,  because  the  old  organization 
is  apparently  dissolved.  But  I  do  not  see  that  any 
impracticability  need  be  apprehended  even  by  these ; 
or  that  the  change,  even  upon  their  hypothesis,  is 
far  removed  from  the  analogy  of  some  other  opera- 
tions, which  we  know  with  certainty  that  the  Deity 
is  carrying  on.  In  the  ordinary  derivation  of  plants 
and  animals  from  one  another,  a  particle,  in  many 
cases,  minuter  than  all  assignable,  all  conceivable 
dimension  ;  an  aura,  an  effluvium,  an  infinitesimal ; 
determines  the  organization  of  a  future  body  :  does 
no  less  than  fix,  whether  that  which  is  about  to  be 
produced  shall  be  a  vegetable,  a  merely  sentient,  or 
a  rational  being ;  an  oak,  a  frog,  or  a  philosopher  j 
makes  all  these  differences  ;  gives  to  the  future  body 
its  qualities,  and  nature,  and  species.  And  thi^ 
particle,  from  which  springs,  and  by  which  is  deter- 
mined a  whole  future  nature,  itself  proceeds  from, 
and  owes  its  constitution  to,  a  prior  body :  never- 
theless, which  is  seen  in  plants  most  decisively,  the 
incepted  organization,  though  formed  within,  and 
through,  and  by  a  preceding  organization,  is  not 
corrupted  by  its  corruption,  or  destroyed  by  its 


446  CONCLUSION. 

dissolution ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  is  sometimes  ex- 
tricated and  developed  by  those  very  causes ;  sur- 
vives and  comes  into  action,  when  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  prepared  requires  its  use.     Now  an 
economy  which  nature  has  adopted,  when  the  pur- 
pose was  to  transfer  an  organization  from  one  in- 
dividual to  another,  may  have  something  analo- 
gous to  it,   when  the  purpose  is  to  transmit   an 
organization    from    one   state   of   being   to   ano- 
ther state :   and  they  who  found  thought  in  or- 
ganization,   may  see    something   in    this   analogy 
applicable  to  their  difficulties ;  for,  whatever  can 
transmit  a  similarity  of  organization  will  answer 
their  purpose,  because,  according  even  to  their  own 
theory,  it  may  be  the  vehicle  of  consciousness ;  and 
because  consciousness  carries  identity  and  indivi- 
duality along  with  it  through  all  changes  of  form  or 
of  visible  qualities.     In  the  most  general  case,  that, 
as  we  have  said,   of  the  derivation  of  plants  and 
animals  from  one  another,  the  latent  organization  is 
either  itself  similar  to  the  old  organization,  or  has 
the  power  of  communicating  to  new  matter  the 
old  organic  form.     But  it  is  not  restricted  to  this 
rule.     There  are  other  cases,  especially  in  the  pro- 
gress of  insect  life,  in  which  the  dormant  organiza- 
tion does  not  much  resemble  that  which  encloses 
it,  and  still  less  suits  with  the  situation  in  which  the 
enclosing  body  is  placed,  but  suits  with  a  different 
situation  to  which  it  is  destined.     In  the  larva  of  the 
libellula,  which  lives  constantly,  and  has  still  long 
to  live,  under  water,  are  descried  the  wings  of  a  fly, 
which  two  years  afterwards  is  to  mount  into  the 


CONCLUSION.  447 

air.     Is  there  nothing  in  this  analogy  ? — It  serves 
at  least  to  show,  that  even  in  the  observable  course 
of  nature,  organizations  are  formed  one  beneath  an- 
other; and,  amongst  a  thousand  other  instances, 
it  shows  completely,  that  the  Deity  can  mould  and 
fashion  the  parts  of  material  nature,  so  as  to  fulfil 
any  purpose  whatever  which  he  is  pleased  to  appoint. 
^They  who  refer  the  operations  of  mind  to  a  sub- 
stance totally  and  essentially  different  from  matter, 
(as  most  certainly  these  operations,  though  affected 
by  material  causes,  hold  very  little  affinity  to  any 
properties  of  matter  with  which  w^e  are  acquainted), 
adopt  perhaps  a  juster  reasoning  and  a  better  phi- 
losophy ;  and  by  these  the  considerations  above  sug- 
gested are  not  wanted,  at  least  in  the  same  degree. 
But  to  such  as  find,  which  some  persons  do  find, 
an  insuperable  difficulty  in  shaking  off  an  adherence 
to  those  analogies  which   the  corporeal  world   is 
continually  suggesting  to  their  thoughts ;  to  such, 
I  say,  every  consideration  will  be  a  relief,  which 
manifests  the  extent  of  that  intelligent  power  which 
is  acting  in  nature,  the  fruitfulness  of  its  resources, 
the  variety,  and  aptness,  and  success  of  its  means ; 
most  especially  every  consideration  which  tends  to 
show,  that,  in  the  translation  of  a  conscious  exist-- 
ence,  there  is  not,  even  in  their  own  way  of  regard- 
ing it,  any  thing  greatly  beyond,  or  totally  unlike, 
what  takes  place  in  such  parts   (probably  small 
parts)  of  the  order  of  nature,  as  are  accessible  to 
our  observation./ 

Again ;  if  there  be  those  who  think,  that  the 
contractedness  and  debiUty  of  the  human  faculties 
in  our  present  state,  seem  ill  to  accord  with  the  high 


448  CONCLUSION. 

destinies  which  the  expectations  of  religion  point 
out  to  us,  I  would  only  ask  them,  whether  any  one, 
who  saw  a  child  two  hours  after  its  birth,  could  sup- 
pose that  it  would  ever  cometonnderstandJtua:ion$F* 
or  who  then  shall  say,  what  farther  amplification  of 
intellectual  powers,  what  accession  of  knowledge, 
what  advance  and  improvement,  the  rational  faculty, 
be  its  constitution  what  it  will,  may  not  admit  of, 
when  placed  amidst  new  objects,  and  endowed  with 
a  sensorium  adapted,  as  it  undoubtedly  will  be, 
and  as  our  present  senses  are,  to  the  perception  of 
those  substances,  and  of  those  properties  of  things, 
with  which  our  concern  may  lie. 
5:^Upon  the  whole  ;  in  every  thing  which  respects 
this  awful,  but,  as  we  trust,  glorious  change,  we 
have  a  wise  and  powerful  Being  (the  author,  in 
nature,  of  infinitely  various  expedients,  for  infinitely 
various  ends)  upon  whom  to  rely  for  the  choice 
and  appointment  of  means,  adequate  to  the  execu- 
tion of  any  plan  which  his  goodness  or  his  justice 
Hiay  have  formed,  for  the  moral  and  accountable 
part  of  his  terrestrial  creation.  That  great  office 
rests  with  him :  be  it  ours  to  hope  and  to  prepare, 
under  a  firm  and  settled  persuasion,  that,  living  and 
dying,  we  are  his  ;  that  life  is  passed  in  his  constant 
presence,  that  death  resigns  us  to  his  merciful  dis- 
posal. 

*  See  Search's  Light  of  Nature,  jyassim* 
FINIS. 


Printed  by  Walker  8i  Greig, 
Edinburgh. 


>plll 


^ 


¥«miimiiiiiiini 


3  1i97""KS{5'''9fif 


^4r^ 


iS<i 


ou^ 


I 


'^^ao7  Vo 


""^QU, 


"'^^rsity