CONTENTS. 



BOOK I. 



PRBLIMIITAItY CON8IDKRATION8. 

Obap. Page 

1. Definition and Use of Science - - 21 

2. JThe Law of Honour 21 

3. The Law of the Land .... 22 

4. The Scriptures 23- 

6. The Moral Sense 26 

6. Human Happiness ..... 82 

7. Vfftue 44 



BOOK II. 



MORAL OBLIGATION. 

1. The Question, Why am I obliged to keep my 

Word? considered - - ^ - 52 

2. What we mean when we say a Man is obliged 

to do a thing - - - - - - 68 

3. The Question, Why am I obliged to keep my 

Word? resomed ----- 64 

4. Th«WiUofGod 6^ 



» 



t 



• •• 



VUI CONTSJITf. 

Chap. Pafe 

6. The Divine Benevolence - - - - 68 

6. Utility --61 

7. The necessity of General Rules - - - 68 

8. The Consideration of General Conse<{uenceB 

pursued- .... ^ . 66 

9. Of Right - 68 

10. The Division of Rights - - . .69 

11. The General Rights of Mankind- - - 74 



BOOK III. 

RELATIVC DUTIES. 

PART I. 

or RELTIVK DUTIES WHICH ARE DBTERMIITATB. 

1. Of Property - - - - - - 80 

2. The Use of the Institution of Property - 81 

3. The History of Property - - - - 88 

4. In what the Right of Property is founded - 85 

5. Promises .......90 

6. Contracts - - - - - . -101 

7. Contracts of Sale - - - - .101 

8. Contracts of Hazard - -^ - - .105 

9. Contracts of Lending of inconsumable Pro- 

perty - - 106 

10. Contracts concerning the Lending of Money - 108 

11. Contracts of Labour — Service - - - 113 

12. Contracts of Labours-Commissions - - 116 

13. Contracts of Labour — Partnership - 119 

14. Contracts of Labour — Offices - - «. ISO 



cohtsnts. jx 

Chap. Pag* 

15. Lies ..... - . 128 

16. Oaths - w 126 

17. Oaths in Evidence ..... 182 

18. Oath of Allegiance . . . . .188 

19. Oath against Bribery in the Election of Mem. 

hers of Parliament - .... 136 

20. Oath against Simony ..... 187 

21. Oaths to observe Local Stattites ... 189 

22. Subscription to Articles of Religion - .141 

23. Wais . . - 142 

PART II. 

OF BSI4ATIVE DUTIES WHICH ARE IITDETEBHI- 
HATE, AND OF THE CRIMES OPPOSif E TO THESE. 

1. Charity - 148 

2. Charity — ^The Treatment of our Domestics 

and Dependents ..... 149 

8. Slavery 150 

4. Charity — Professional Assistance - - 158 

6. Charity— Pecuniary Bounty - - .156 

6. Resentment . . . . - -164 

7. Anger 164 

8. Revenge -.--..- 166 

9. Duelling 170 

10. Litigation - - 178 

11. Gratitude 176 

12. Slander ..... . - 177 



CpMTBNTi. 



PART III. 



OF RBLATIYX DUTIES WHICH RBSTTliT FROM THiE 
CONITITVTION OF THB fSXES, AND OF THE 
CRIMES OPPOSED TO THESE. 

1. Of the Public Use of Marriage InstHutions - 180 

2. Fornication .----- 181 

3. Seduction . - - - - .- 186 

4. Adultery 188 

5. Incest IW 

6. Polygamy - - - - - - - 194 

7. Divorce ------- 188 

8. Marriage 206 

9. Of the Duty ef Parents . - - - - 208 
10. The Rights of Parents - - - - 221 
H. The Duty of Children - - - 223 



PREFACE. 



In the treatises that I have met with upon the sobject d^ 
morali, I appear to myself to have remarked the following^ 
imperfections ;— either that the principle was erroneoin» 
or that it was indistinctly explained, or that the mlei 
deduced from it were not sufficiently adapted to real life 
and to actual situations. The writings of Orotius, and tho 
larger work of Puffendorff, are of too forentie a cast, too 
much mixed up with the civil law and with the jurispru- 
dence of Germany, to answer precisely the design of a sys- 
tem of ethics,-— the direction of private consciences in the 
general conduct of human life. Perhaps, indeed, they are 
not to be regarded as institutes of morality calculated to in- 
rtruct an individual in his duty, so much as a species of law 
books and law authorities, suited to the practice of those 
courts of justice, whose decisions are regulated by general 
principles of natural equity, in conjunction with the max- 
ims of the Roman code ; of which kind, I underetand, there 
are many upon the Continent. To which may be added, 
concerning both these authors, that they are more occupied 
in describing the rights and usages of independent communi- 
ties than is necessary in a work which professes not to ad- 
just the correspondence of nations, but to delineate the of- 
fices of domestic life. The profusion also of classical quo- 
tations with which many of their pages abound, seems to 
me a &ult from which it will not be easy to excuse them.* 
If these extracts be intended as decorations of style, the 
composition is overloaded with ornaments of one kind. To 
any thing more than ornament they can make no claim. 
To propose them as serious argwnentsy gravely to attempt 
to establish or fortify a moral duty by the testimony of a 
Greek or Roman poet, is to trifle with the attention of the 



XU PREFACE. 

reader, or rather to lake it off from all just principles of rea- 
soning in morals. 

Of our own writers in this branch of philosophy, I find 
none that 1 think perfectly free fi*om the three objections 
which I have stated. There is likewise a fourth property 
obsenrable almost in all of them, namely, that they divide 
too much the law of Nature from the precepts of Revelation ; 
some authors industriously declining the mention of Scripture 
authorities, as belonging to a different province ; and others 
reserving them for a separate volume : which appears to me 
much the same defect^ as if a commentator on the laws of 
England should content himself with stating upon each 
bead the conmion law of the land, without taking any notice 
of acts of parliament; or should choose to give his readers 
the common law in one book, and the statute law in another. 
" When the obligations of morality are taught," says a pi- 
ous and celebrated writer, " let the sanctions of Christianity 
never be forgotten : by which it will be shown that they give 
strength and lustre to each other : religion will appear to be 
the voice of reason, and morality will be the will of God."* 

The manner alao which modern writers have treated of 
subjects of morality is, in my judgment, liable to much 
exception. It has become of late a fashion to deliver moral 
institutes in strings or series of detached propositions, with- 
out subjoining a continued argument or regular dissertation 
to any of them. This sententious apophthegmatizing style, 
by crowding propositions and paragraphs too fast upon the 
mind, and by carrying the eye of the reader from subject to 
subject in too quick a succession^ gains not a sufficient hold 
upon the attention, to leave either the memory fiirnished or 
the understanding satisfied. However useful a syllabus of 
topics or a series of propositions may be in the hands of a 
lecturer, or as a guide to a student, who is supposed to con- 
sult other books, or to institute upon each subject research- 
es of his own, the method is by no means convenient for ordi- 
" ••• » ■■ .1 ipii- II ^.1— ^— — .»i^ 

* Prefact to •* The Preceptor,** by Dr. J«hiMoa. 



pmwACB. xiii 

yanty rettdtra; b«taifM ftw rfltitara are tuch fAmJfccrf as to 
want oldy a hist to iet thefar thougfati aft work opoa ; or audi 
as will patwe and tarry at cfv^ry propontion, till thej hare 
traced out Ha dependency, proof, relation, and eonsequencei, 
before they permit themaelvea to atep on to another. A res* 
pectable writer of this class* has comprised his doctrine of 
slavery in the three following propositions : — 

<* No one is bom a slave ; because every one is born with 
all his original rights. 

'* No one can become a slave ; because no one from being 
a person can, in the language of the Roman law, become a 
thing, or subject of property. 

** The supposed property of the master in the slave, there- 
fore, is matter of usurpation, not of right.*' 

It may be possible to deduce, from these few adages , such 
a theory of the primitive rights of human nature as will evince 
the illegidity of slavery : but surely an author requires too 
much of his reader, when he expects him to make these de- 
ductions for himself; or to supply, perhaps from some re- 
mote chapter of the same treatise, the several prooft and ex- 
planations which are necessary to render the meaning and 
truth of these assertions intelligible. 

There is a fault, the opposite of this, which some moralists 
who have adopted a different and, I think, a better plan of 
composition, have not always been careful to avoid ; namely, 
the dwelling upon verbal and elementary distinctions, with a 
labour and prolixity proportioned much more to the subtlety 
of the question, than to its value and importance in the pro- 
secution of the subject. A writer upon the law of nature,t 
whose explications in every part of philosophy, though al- 
ways diffuse, are oflen very successful, has employed three 
long sections in endeavouring to prove that ** permissions 
are not laws.'* The discussion of this controversy, how- 
ever essential it might be to dialectic precision, was certain- 



* Vti FerguMD, sutbor of « IntKutei of Moral PhUosophy." 1767. 
f IH-. Rtttherfortk, author of uiiutituei of Ns(W«l Law.'* 



VOL. I. 



Xiv PAXFACB. 

\y not ntcbaaarj to the pogress of a work deiigiied to da- 
•cribe the duties and obB^ioiia of civil life. The reader 
beceines impatient when he is detained by diaquintiona which 
have no other object than the settling of terms and phrases; 
and, what is worse> they for whose use such books are chiei^ 
ly intended will not be persuaded to read them at all. 

I am led to propose these strictures, not by any propensity 
to depreciate the labours of my predecessor, much less to 
invite a comparison between the merits of their'performances 
and my own ; but solely by the consideration, that when a 
writer offers a book to the public, upon a sul^ect on which 
the public are already in possession of many others, he is 
bound by a kind of literary justice to inform his readers, dis- 
tinctly and specifically, what it is he professes to supply, and 
what he expects to improve. The imperfections above enu- 
merated are those which I have endeavoured to avoid or 
remedy. Of the execution Uie reader must judge ; but this 
was the design. 

Concerning the principle of morals it would be premature 
to speak : but concerning the manner of unfolding and ex- 
plaining that principle, I have somewhat which I wish to be 
remarked. An experience of nine years in the office of a 
public tutor in one of the universities, and in that department 
of education to which these chapters relate, afforded me fre- 
quent occasion to observe that, in discoursing to young minds 
upon topics of morality, it required much more pains to make 
them perceive the difficulty than to understand the solution : 
that, unless the subject was so drawn up to a point, as to 
exhibit the full force of an objection, or the exact place of a 
doubt, before any explamition was entered upon, — ^in other 
words, unless some curiosity was excited before it was at- 
tempted to be satisfied, the labour of the teacher was lost. 
When information was not desired, it was seldom, I found, 
retained. I have made this observation my guide in the fol- 
lowing work : that is, upon each occasion I have endeavour- 
ed, befoo I suffered myself to proceed in the disquisition, 
to put the reader in complete possession of the question ; 



PREFACX: XV 

and to do it in the way that 1 thought most likely to ftir up 

his own doubts and solicitude about it. 

In punraing the principle of morale through the detail of 

casM to which it is applicable, I have had in view to accom- 
nodate both the choice of the subjects and the manner of 
handling them to the situations which arise in the life of an 
inhabitant of this country in these times. This is the thing 
that I think to be principally wanting in former treatises; 
and perhaps the chief advantage which wiU be found in mine. 
I have examined no doubts, I have discussed no obscurities, 
I have encountered no errors, I have adverted to no contro- 
versies, but what I have seen actually to exist. If some of 
the questions treated of appear to a more instructed reader 
minttte or puerile, I desire such reader to be assured, that I 
have found them occasions of difficulty to young minds ; and 
what I have observed in young minds, I should expect to 
meet with in all who approach these subjects for the first 
time. Upon each article of human duty, I have combined 
with the condusions of reason the declarations of Scripture, 
when they are to be had, as of coordinate authority, and as 
both terminating in the same sanctions. 

In the manner of the work, I have endeavoured so to at- 
temper the opposite plans above animadverted upon, as that 
the reader may not acouse me, either of too mudi haste er 
too much delay. I have bestowed upon each subject enough 
of dissertation to give a body and substance to the chi^tter 
in which it is treated of, as well as coherence and perspicui- 
ty : on the other hand, I have seldom, I hope, exeroised the 
patience of the reader by the length and prolixity of my es- 
says, or disappointed that patience at last by the tenuity and 
unimportance of the conclusion. * 

There are two particulars in the following work, for which 
it may be thought necessary diat I should offer some excuse. 
The first of which is, that I have scarcely ever referred to 
any other book ; or mentioned the name of the author whose 
thoo^ts, and sometimes, possibly, whose very expressions, 
I have adopted. My method of writing Itts constantly been 
ibis ; to extract what I could from my own stores and my 



ZVl PRSrACE. . 

own refl«ctioo8 in the first plac« ; to put down thftt, woA itf- 
terwards to consult upon each subject such readings as fell 
in my way : which order, I am conYinced, is the only one 
whereby any person can keep his thoughts from sliding into 
other men's trains. The effect of such a plan upon the pro- 
duction itself will be, that, whilst some parts in matter or 
manner may be new, others will be littte else than a repeti- 
tion of the old. I make no pretensions to perfect originality : 
I claim to be something more than a mere compiler. Mach» 
BO doubt, is borrowed ; but the fact is, that the notes Cor this 
work having been prepared for some years, and such things 
having been from time to time inserted in them as appear- 
ed to me worth preserving, and such insertions made comr 
monly without the name of the author from whom they were 
taken, I should, at this time, have found a diffieulty in re- 
covering those names with sufficient exactness to be able to 
render to every man his own. Nor, to speak the truth, did 
it appear to me worth while to repeat the search merely for 
this purpose. When authorities are relied upon, names 
must be produced ; when a discovery has been mad^ in sci- 
ence, it may be unjust to borrow the invention without ac- 
knowledging the author. But in an argumentative, treatise, 
and upon a subject which allows no place for discovery or 
invention, properly so called ; and in which all that can be- 
long to a writer is his mode of reasoning or his judgment of 
probabilities ; I should have thought it superfluous, had it 
been easier to me than it was, to have interrupted my text, 
or crowded my margin,, with references to every author 
whose sentiments I have made use of. There is, however, 
one work to which I owe so much that it would be ungrate- 
ful not to confer the obligation : I mean the writings of the 
late Abraham Tucker, Esq. part of which were published 
by himself, and the remainder since his death, under the 
title of " The Light of Nature pursued, by Edward Search^ 
£09.'* I have found in this writer more original th'mking 
and observation, upon the several subjects that he has taken 
in hand, than in any other, not to say, than in all others put 
together. His talent also for illustration is unrivalled. But 



PRBFACB* ZVll 

Kis thottghtft are diffuted through a lonf, Tttiouf, and irrtga- 
lar work. I ahall aeoouat it no mean praiee, if I have been 
•ometimei able to dispoee into OMthod, to collect into heada 
and, articles, or to exhibit in more compact and tangible 
naaaesj what, in that otherwiie excellent performance, is 
■juread over too mnch aarftce. 

The next ciroumatance, for whidi eome apology may be 
expected, it the joining of moral and political philosophy to- 
gether, or the addition of a book of politics to a system of 
ethics. Against this objection, if it be made one, I might 
defend myself by the example of many approved writers, who 
have treated de officii* hommu et cwU, or, as some choose 
to express it,' *' of the ri^ts and obligatioos of man, in h'ti 
individual and social capacity,*' in the same book. I might 
allege also, that the part a member of the commonwealth 
shall take in political contentions, the vote he shall give, the 
counsels he shall approve, the support he shall afford, or the 
opposition he shall make, to any system of public measures, 
— ^is as much a question of personal duty, as much con- 
cerns the conscience of the individual who deliberates, as the 
determination of any doubt which relates to the conduct of 
private life ; that consequently political philosophy is, pro- 
perly speaking, a continuation of moral philosophy ; or rather 
indeed a part of it, supposing moral philosophy to have for 
'its aim the information of the human conscience in every 
deliberation that is likely to come before it. I might avtil 
myself of these excuses, if I wanted them ; but the vindica- 
tion upon which I rely is the ibllowing : In stating the prin- 
ciple of morals, the reader will observe that I have employ- 
ed some industry in explaining the thecHj, and diowing the 
necessity of general rules; without the full and constant 
consideration ' of which, I am persuaded that no system of 
moral philosophy can be satisfactory or consistent. This 
foundation being laid, or rather this habit being formed, the 
discussion of political subjects, to which, more than to al- 
most any other, general rules are applicable, became clear 
and easy. Whereas had these topics been assigned to a 
distinct work, it would have been necessary to have repeated 

VOL. I, 2 ♦ 



kviii PREFACE. 

ftltt Umt rttdiriients, to have Mtablialied over a^aiti ihe 
ptiuiip\M, aa theae which we have already exemplified attd 
rendered fraiiUar to the reader, in the former parts <^ thie. 
1)1 a word, if there appear to any one too great a diversity, 
or too wide a distance, between the subjects treated of in the 
course of the present volume, let him be reminded, that- 
the doctrine of general rules pervades and connects the 
wHole. 

It may not be improper, however, to admonish the reader^ 
that, under the name of polUie$, he is not to look for those 
occasional controversies, which the occurrences of the present 
day, or any temporary situation of public affairs, may ex-- 
cite ; and most of which, if not beneath the dignity, it is be- 
side the purpose, of a philosophical institution to advert to. 
He will perceive, that the several disquisitions are framed 
with a reference to the condition of this country, and of thia 
government ; but it seemed to me to belong to the design of 
a work like the following, not so much to discuss each aU 
tercated point with the particularity of a political pamphlet 
upon the subject, as to deliver those universal principles, and 
to exhibit that mode and train of reasoning in politics, by the 
due lipplication of which every man might be enabled to at- 
tain to just conclusions of his own. I am not ignorant of 
an objection that has been advanced against all abstract 
speculations concerning the origin, principle, or limitation 
ef civil authority ; namely, that such speculations possess 
little or no influence upon the conduct either of the state or 
of the subject, of the governors or the governed ; nor ard 
attended with any useful consequences to either; that ia 
times of tranquillity they are not wanted ; in times of con- 
fusion they are never heard. This representation, however, 
in my opinion/ is not just. Times of tumult, it is true, are 
not the times to learn ; but the choice which men make of 
their nde and party; in the most critical occasions of the 
commonwealth, may nevertheless depend upon the lesson* 
they have received, the books they have read, and the opin- 
ions they have imlnbed, in seasons of leisure and quietneai. 
0ome judicipui persons, who wero proseat At Qonort dtirwr 



PSBFACK. BS 

th« troubles which lately conYvleed tliat city, thoufht they 
pereeited, in tile cententioae there carrjmg on, the epera* 
tidn of that political theory^ wimh the writings of RouMoav, 
and the iinbouiuled eeteem in which theee writing! are hot* 
den by his countrynen, had difueed amonget the people. 
Throoghoiit die political disptttes that have within theee fiiw 
years taken ^lace in Great Britain, in her sister kingdom, 
and in her foreign dependencies, it was impossible not to ob« 
serve, in the language of party, in the resolutions of public 
meetings, in debate, in conversation, in the general strain of 
those fogitive and diurnal addresses to the public which such 
ocoasiolis call forth> the prevalency of those ideas of civil 
authority which are displayed in the works of Mr. Locke. 
The credit of that great name,- the courage and liberality of 
his principles, the skill and clearness with which his argu- 
ments are proposed, no less than the weight of the arguments 
themselveSjhave given a reputation and currency to his opin- 
ionsj of which I am persuaded, in any unsettled state of 
public affairs, the influence would be felt. As this is not a 
place for examining the truth or tendency of these doctrines, 
I would not be understood, by what I have said, to express 
any judgment concerning either. I mean only to remark, 
that such doctrines are not without effect ; and that it is o£ 
praetieal importance to have the principles from which the 
obligations of social union, and the extent of civil obedience, 
are derived, rightly explained, and well understood. Indeed, 
as far as I have observed, in political, beyond all other sub> 
jects, where men are without some fundamental and scien- 
tific principles to resort to, they are liable to hare their un- 
derstandings played upon by cant phrases and unmeaning 
terms, in which every party- in every country possesses a 
vocabulary. We appear astonished when we see the multi- 
tude led away by sounds ; but we should remember that, if 
sounds' work miracles, it is always upon ignorance. The 
influence of names is in exact proportion to the .want of 
knowledge. 

These are the observations with which I have judged it 
fspedi«nt to prepare the attention of my reader. Conoem- 



Inr 



PRSrXCB. 



itig the penonft! motives which engaged me in the jfbliowinf 
attempt, it is not necessary that I say much : the nature of 
my academical 8ituati<ni, a great deal of leisure since my 
retirement from it, the recommendation of an honoured and 
eieellent friend, the authority of the venerable prelate to whom 
these labours are inscribed, the not perceiving in what way I 
could employ my time or talents better, aad my dis^»proba- 
tion, in literary men, of that fastidious indolence which sits 
still because it disdains to do Uttle, were the considerations 
that directed fliy thoughts to this design. Nor have I repent- 
ed of the undertaking. Whatever be the ftte or reception 
of this work, it owes its author nothillg. In sickness and in 
health I have found in it that which can alone alleviate 
the one or give enjoyment to the other,— -occupation and 
enffaflement. 



m^mAm ^imiL^s^^psnr. 



BOOK I. 

PKELIiaiNAKT CONSIDERATIONS. 



CHAPTER I. 

J>SFINITION AND VSK OF THE 8CIXNCX. 

BfoRAi. Philosophy, Morality, Ethics, Casni&ii/, 
Natural Law, mean all the same thing; namely. That 
Science which teaches men their duty, and the 
reasons of it 

The use of such a study depends upon this, that, 
without it, the rules of life, by which men are ordina- 
rily governed, oftentimes mislead them, through a de- 
fect either in the rule or in the application. 

These rules are, the Law of Honour, the Law of 
the Land, and the Scriptures. 



CHAPTER II. 



THE LAW OF HONOUR. 



The Law of Honour is a system of rules construct- 
ed by people of fashion, and calculated to facilitate 
their intercourse with one another; aii^ for no other 
purpose. 



22 LAW OF THEiLAND. 

Consequently, nothing is adverted to by the Law 
of Honour, bat what tends to incommode this inter- 
course. 

Hence this law only prescribes and regulates the 
duties betwixt equals; omitting such as relate to the 
Supreme Being, as weU as those which we owe to our 
inferiors. 

For which reason, profaneness, neglect of public 
worship or private devotion, cruelty to servants, rigo- 
rous treatment of tenants or other dependants, want of 
charity to the poor, injuries done to tradesmen by in- 
solvency or delay of payment, with numberless exam- 
ples of the same kind, are accounted no breaches of 
honour; because a man is not a less agreeable com- 
panion for these vices, nor the worse to deal with in 
those concerns which are usually transacted between 
one gentleman and another. 

Again; the Law of Honour, being constituted by 
men occupied in the pursuit of pleasure, and for the 
mutual conveniency of such men, will be found, as 
might be expected from the character and design of 
the law-makers, to be, in most instances, favourable 
to the licentious indulgence of the natural passions. 

Thus it allows of fornication, adultery, drunkenness* 
prodigality, duelling, and of revenge in the extreme, 
and lays no stress upon the virtues opposite to these. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE LAW OF THE LAND. 



That part of mankind who are beneath the Law 
of Honour often make the Law of the Land their 
rule of life; that is, they are satisfied with themselves, 
80 long as they do or omit nothing, for the doing or 
omitting of which the Law can punish them. 

Whereas every system of human Laws, considered 
as a rule of life, labours under the two following de- 
fects: — 

1. Human Laws omit many duties, as not objects 



THE SCRIPTURSf. 2S 

of oompulaion; sdch as piety to God, bounty to the 
poor, forgiveness of injuries, educatioQ of children, 
grmtitude to benefactors. 

The law never speaks but to command, nor com- 
mands but where it can compel ; consequently those 
duties, which by their nature must be volufUaryy are 
left out of the statute-book, as lying beyond the reach 
of its operation and authority. 

2. Human laws permit, or, which is the same thing, 
suffer to go unpunished, ■ many crimes, because they 
are incapable of being defined by any previous des- 
cription. — Of which nature are luxury, prodigality, par- 
tiality in voting at those elections in which the qualifi- 
cations of the candidate ought to determine the suc- 
cess, caprice in the disposition of men's fortunes at 
their death, disrespect to parents, and a multitude 
of similar examples. 

For, this is the alternative: either the law must de- 
fine beforehand and with precision the oflfences which 
it punishes; or it must be left to the discretion of the 
magistrate to determine upon each particular accusa^ 
tion, whether it constitute that offence which the law 
designed to punish, or not; which is, in effect, leaving 
to the magistrate to punish or not to punish, at hS 
pleasure, the individual who is brought before him; 
which is just so much tjrranny. Where, therefore, as 
in the instances above mentioned, the distinction be- 
tween right and wrong is of too subtile or of too secret a 
nature to be ascertained by any preconcerted language, 
the law of most countries, especially of free states, 
rather than commit the liberty of the subject to the 
discretion of the magistrate, leaves men in such cases 
to themselves. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE SCRIPTURES. 



Whoever expects to find in the Scriptures a spe- 
cific direction for every moral doubt that arises looka 



24 TBX SCBIPTVftSf. 

for Bioie than ha will nMet wHh. And to what maf- 
nhude each a detail of particular precepts would have 
enlarged the sacred volume, maj be partly understood 
from the following consideration: — ^The laws of this 
country, including the acts of the legislature, ^nd the 
decisions of our supreme courts of justice, are not con- 
tained in fewer than fifty folio volumes; and yet it is 
not once in ten attempts that you can find the case 
you look for, in any law-book whatever; to say noth- 
ing of those numerous points of conduct, concerning 
which the law professes not to prescribe or determine 
any thing. Had then the same particularity, which 
obtains in human laws so far as they go, been attempt- 
ed in the Scriptures, throughout the whole extent of 
inorality, it is manifest they would have been by much 
too buliiy to be either read or circulated; or rather, 
as St. John says, " even the world itself could not 
contain the books that should be written.** 

Morality is taught in scripture in this wise. — General 
rules are laid down of piety, justice, benevolence, and 
purity; such as, worshipping God in spirit and in truth; 
doing as we would be done by; loving our neighbour 
as ourselves; forgiving others, as we expect forgiveness 
from God; that mercy is better than sacrifice ; that 
not that which entereth into a man (nor, by parity of 
reason, any ceremonial pollutions,) but that which 
proceedeth from the heart, defileth him. These rules 
are occasionally illustrated, either by fictitious exam" 
pies, as in the parable of the good Samaritan; and of 
the cruel servant, who refused to his fellow servant 
that indulgence and compasnon which his master bad 
shewn to him; or in instances tohieh actually prC" 
sented themselves, as in Christ's reproof of his disci- 
ples at the Samaritan village; his praise of the poor 
widow, who cast in her last mite; his censure of the 
Pharisees who chose out the chief rooms, — and of the 
tradition, whereby they evaded the command to sus- 
tain their indigent parents: / , .\ Hy, in the solution 
of questions, which those , *A nere about our Sa- 
viour proposed to him ; as n - i- swer to the young 
man who asked him, " What 1 : . et ?'• and to the 
honest scribe, who had founcl out, even in that age 



and country, that <* to love God and his iileighbour, 
was more than all whole burnt-offerings and sacri- 
fice." 

And this is in truth the way in which ^11. practical 
fidences are taught, as Arithmetic, Grammar, Navi- 
gation, and the hke. — Rules are laid down, and exam- 
ples are subjoined: not that these examples are the 
cases, much less all the cases, which will actually oc- 
cur; but by way only of explaining the principle of the 
rule, and as so many specimens of the method of ap- 
plying it. The chief difference is, that the examples 
in Scripture are not annexed to the rules with the didac- 
tic regularity to which we are now-a-days accustomed, 
but delivered dispersedly, as particular occasions sug- 
gested them; which gave them, however, (especially 
to those who heard them, and were present on the oc- 
casions which produced them,) an energy and per- 
suasion, much beyond what the same or any instances 
would have appeared with, in their places in a sys- 
tem. /• ; 

Beside this, the Scriptures commonly presuppose, 
in the persons to whom they speak, a knowledge of 
the principles of natural justice; and are employed 
not so much to teach new rules of morality, as to en- 
force the practice of it by new sanctions, and by a 
greater certainty ; which last seems to be the pro- 
per business of a revelation from God, and what was 
most wanted. 

Thus the " unjust, covenant-breakers, and extortion- 
ers,*' are condemned in Scripture, supposing it known, 
or leaving it, where it admits of doubt, to moralists to 
determine what injustice, extortion, or breach of cove- 
nant are. 

The above considerations are intended to prove that 
the Scriptures do not supercede the use of the science 
of whi<m we profess to treat, and at the same time to 
acquit them of any charge of imperfection or intufii- 
ciency on that account. 8 

VOL. I. 



96 MORAL SSKSX. 



CHAPTER V. 



THE MOBAI. SENSE. 



"The father of Caius Toranius had been pro*'' 
scribed by the triumvirate. — Caius Toraniua, com^ 
ing over'to the interests of that party, discovered to 
the officers, who were in pursuit of his father's life, 
the place where he concealed himself, and gave them 
withal a description, by which they might distinguish 
his person, when they found him. The old man, more 
anxious for the safety and fortunes of his son than 
about the little that might remain of his own life, be-- 
i^an immediately to inquire of the officers who seized 
him, whether his son was well; whether he had done 
his duty to the satisfaction of his generals ? * That son 
(replied one of the officers,) so dear to thy aflfectioiis^ 
betrayed thee to us; by his information thou art ap- 
prehended, and diest.' The officer with this, struck 
a poinard to his heart, and the unhappy parent fell, 
not so much affected by his fate as by the mefcns to 
which he owed it.*'* 

Now the question is, whether, if this story were re- 
lated tb the wild boy caught some years ago in the 
' woods of Hanover, or to a savage without experience, 
and without instruction, cut off in his infancy from all 
intercourse with his species, and, consequently, tmder 
no possible influence of example, authority, education, 
sympathy, or habit ; whether, I say, such a olafe would 
feel, upon the relation, any degree of that sentimerU 



* " Caius Toranius triumTirfim partes secutus, proscripti 
patris 8ui prietorii et ornati viri latebras, eetatetn, notasque 
corporis, quibus agnosci posset, centurionibus edidit, qui eum 
persecttti sunt. Senex de filii magis viik et incrementis 
qualim de reliquo apiritu suo soUcitus, an incolumis esset, et 
an imperatoribus satisfaceret, interrogare eos coepit. £ qui* 
bus uuus : * Ab illo,' inquit, ' quern tantoper^ diligis, demon- 
stratus nostro ministerio, filii indicio occideris:' protinusque 
pectus ejus gladio trajecit. CoUapsus itaque es^nfeUx, 
auctore ccedis, qu^m ipsSi ccedo, miserior." — Valer. Max. 
lib. ix. cap. 11. . 



MORAI. SENSE. 27 

0/ dkapprohation of Toramus*a conduct which we 
feel, or not ? 

They who maintain the existence of a moral sense; 
of innate maxims; of a natural conscience; that the 
love of virtue and hatred of vice are instinctive, or the 
perception of right and wrong intuitive (all which are 
only difierent ways of expressing the same opinion,) 
affirm that he would. 

They who deny the existence of a moral sense, &c. 
affirm that he would not. 

And, upon this, issue is joined. 

As the experiment has never been made, and from 
the difficulty of procuring a subject (not to mention 
the impossibility of proposing the question to him, if 
we had one,) is never likely to be made, what would 
be the event can only be judged of from probable 
reasons. 

They who contend for t|ie affirmative observe, that 
we approve examples of generosity, gratitude, fidelity, 
&c. and condemn the contrary, instantly, without de- 
liberation, without having any interest of our own 
concerned in them, ofttimes without being conscious 
of, or able to give any reason for, our approbation: 
that this approbation is uniform and universal, the 
same sorts of conduct being approved or disapproved 
in all ages and countries of the world; — circumstances, 
say they, which strongly indicate the operation of an 
instinct or moral sense. 

On the other hand, answers have been given to most 
of these arguments, by the patrons of the opposite 
system; and, 

First, as to the uniformity above alleged, they con- 
trovert the fact. They remark, from authentic- ac- 
counts of historians and travellers, that there is scarce- 
ly a single vice which, in some age or country of the 
world, has not been countenanced by public opinion: 
that, in one country it is esteemed an office of piety in 
children to sustain their aged parents; in another, to 
despatch them out of the way: that suicide, in one age 
of the world, has been heroism, is in another felony: 
that theft, which is punished by most laws, by the laws 
of BfuttL was not unfrequently rewarded: th^t the 



28 MOAAL S^NBE. 

promiscuous commerce of the sexes, although con- 
demned by the regulations and censure of all civilized 
nations, is practised by the savages of the tropical 
.regions without reserve, compunction or disgrace: 
that crimes, of which it is no longer permitted us even 
to speak, have had their advocates amongst the sages 
'of very renowned times: that, if an inhabitant of the 
polished nations of Europe be delighted with the ap- 
pearance, wherever he meets with it, of happiness, 
tranquillity, and comfort, a wild American is ^o less 
diverted with the writhings and contortions of a victim 
at the stake: that even amongst ourselves, and in the 
present improved state of moral knowledge, we are 
far from a perfect consent in our opinions or feelings: 
that you shall hear duelling alternately reprobated and 
applauded, according to the sex, a^, or station of the 
person you converse with: that the forgiveness of in- 
juries and insults is accounted by one sort of people 
magnanimity, by another meanness: that in the above 
instances, and perhaps in most others, moral approba- 
tion follows the fashions and institutions of the coun- 
try we live in; which fashions also and institutions 
themselves have grown out of the exigencies, the cli> 
mate, sifuation, or local circumstances of the country; 
or have been set up by the authority of an arbitrary 
chieftain, or the unaccountable caprice of the multi- 
tude: — all which, they observe, looks very little like 
the steady hand and indelible characters of Nature. 
But, 

Secondly, Because, after these exceptions and abate- 
ments, it cannot be denied but that some sorts of 
actions command and receive the esteem of mankind 
more than others; and that the approbation of them 
is general though not universal: as to this they say, 
that the general approbation of virtue, even in instances 
where we have no interest of our own to induce us to 
it, may be accounted for, without the assistance of a 
moral sense; thus: 

'* Having experienced, in some instance, a particu- 
lar conduct to be beneficial to ourselves, or observed 
that it would be so, a sentunent of approbation rises 
up in our minds; which sentiment afterwards accom- 



MORAL SCirBS. 20 

panies the idea or mention of the same conduct,, al- 
though the private advantage which first excited it no 
longer exist." 

And this continuance Of the passion, after the rea« 
son of it has ceased, is nothing more, say they, than 
what happens in other cases; especially in the love of 
money, which is in no person so eager as it is ofien^ 
times found to be in a rich old miser, withdut family 
to provide for, or friend to oblige by it, and to whom 
consequently it is no longer (and he may be sensible 
of it too)' of any real use or value; yet is this man as 
much overjoyed with gain, and mortified by losses, as 
he was the first day he opened his shop, and when his 
very subsistence depended upon his success in it. 

By these means the custom of approving certain 
actions commenced: and when once such a custom 
hath got footing in the world, it is no difficult thing to 
explain how it is transmitted and continued; for then 
the greatest part of those who approve of virtue ap- 
prove of it from authority, by imitation, and from a 
habit of approving such and such actions, inculcated 
in early youth, and "feceiving, as men grow up, con- 
tinual accessions of strength and vigour, from censure 
and encouragement, from the books they read, the 
conversations they hear, the current application of 
epithets, the general turn of language, and the various 
other causes by which it universally comes to pass, that 
a society of men, touched in the feeblest degree with 
the same passion, soon communicate to one another a 
great degree of it.* This is the case with most of us 



* From instances of popblar tumults, seditions, factions, 
panics, and of all passions which are shared with a multitude» 
we may learn the influence of society, in excitine and sup- 
porting any emotion ; while the most ungovernable disorders 
are raised, ^e find, by that means, from the slightest and 
most frivolous occasions. He must be more or less than 
man who kindles not in the common blaze. What wonder 
then^ that moral sentiments are found of such influence in 
life, though springing fi'om principles which may appear, at 
first sight, somewhat' small and delicate."— 'filtm«*« Hftquiry 
9one§rmng the Prtnciples of MoriiU, Sect. ix. p. 896. 

3* 



IQ MOXAI. tBlTBE. 

at prnent; tnd is the cause also, that the proceu of 
asioeieMon, described in the last paragraph but one, 
is little now either perceived or wanted. 

Amongst the causes assigned for the continuance 
and diffusion of the same moral sentiments amongst 
mankind, we have mentioned imitation. The efficacy 
of this principle is most observable in children: in- 
deed, if there be any thing in them which deserves 
the name of an inatinct, it is their propensity/ to imi- 
tation. Now there is nothing which children imitate 
or apply more readily than expressions of affection and 
aversion, of approbation, hatred, resentment, snd the 
like; and when these passions and expressions are 
once connected, which they soon will be by the samo 
association which unites words with theif ideas, the 
passion will follow the expression, and attach upon 
the object to which the child has been accustomed to 
apply the epithet. In a word, when almost every 
thing else is learned by itnitationt can we wonder to 
find the same cause concerned in the generation of 
our moral sentiments ? 

Another considerable objection to the system of 
moral instincts is this, that there are no maxims in 
the science which can well be deemed innate, as none 
perhaps can be assigned which are absolutely and 
universally true; in other words, which do not bend to 
circumstances. Veracity, which seems, if any be, a 
natural duty, is excused in many cases towards an 
enemv, a thief, or a madman. The obligation of 
promises, which is a first principle in morality, de- 
pends upon the circumstances under which they were 
made: they may have been unlawful; or become so 
since, or inconsistent with former promises, or errone- 
ous, or extorted; under all which cases, instances may 
be suggested, where the obligation to perform the 
promise would be very dubious: and so of most other 
general rules, when they come to be actualW applied. 

An areument has been also proposed on the same 
side of the question, of this kina. Together with the 
instinct, there must have been implanted, it is said, a 
clear and precise' idea of the object .upon which it was 
to attach. Tho instinct and the id«ft of the object aro 



MO&AL BBirtB. tX 

insepantble «veii in imagination, and m neeeiMaril^ 
accompany each other as any corelative ideas what- 
ever: that is, in plainer terms, if we be prompted by 
nature to the approbation of particular actions, we 
must have received also from nature a distinct ccmeep- 
tion of the action we are thus prompted to approve ; 
which we certainly have not received^ 

But as this argument bears alike against all in* 
stincta, and against their existence in brutes as well 
as in men, it will hardly, I suppose, produce convic- 
tion, though it may be difficult to find an answer to it. 

Upon the whole, it seems lb me, either that there 
exist no such instincts as compose what is called the 
moral sense, or that they are not now to be distin- 
vgliished from prejudices and habits; on which account 
they cannot be depended upon in moral reasoning: I 
mean, that it is not a safe way of arguing, to assume 
certain principles as so many dictates, impulses^ and 
instincts of nature, and then to draw conclusions from 
these principles, as to the rectitude or wrongness of 
actions, independent of the tendency of such actions, 
or of any other consideration whatever. 

Aristotle lays down, as a fundamental and self-^vi* 
dent maxim, that nature .intended barbarians to bo 
slaves; and proceeds to deduce from this maxim a 
train of conclusions, calculated to justify the policy 
which then prevailed. And I question vvhetlier the 
same maxim be not still self-evident to the company 
of merchants trading to the coast of Africa. 

Nothing is so soon made as a maxim ; and it appears 
from the example of Aristotle, that authority and con- 
venience, education, prejudice, and general practico 
have no small share in the making of them; and that 
the laws of custom are very^apt to be mistaken for the 
order of nature. 

For which reason, I suspect, that a system of roo« 
rality, built upon instincts, will only find out reasont 
and excuses for opinions and practices already estab- 
lished, -—will seldom correct or reform either. 

But further, suppose we admit the existence of these 
instincts; what, it may be aaked, is thehr authority? 
No man, you say, caa act m deKberate oppotitioii to 



9% RVMAK BAPPIirE08. 

them, without » tecret lemone of coiiici«ioe. But 
this remorse may be borne with: and if the sinner 
choose to bear with it, for the sake of the pleasure or 
the profit which he expects from his wickedness; or 
finds the pleasure of the sin to exceed the remorse of 
conscience, of which he alone is the judge, and con- 
cerning wUch, when he feels them both together, he 
can hardly be mistaken, the moral instinct man, so far 
as I pan understand, has nothing more to ofSn. 

For if he allege that these instincts are so many indi* 
cations of the will of God, and consequently presages 
of what we are to look* for hereafter; this, I answer, 
is to resort to a rule and a motive ulterior to the in- 
stincts themseves, and at which rule and motive we 
shall by and by arrive by a surer road: — ^I say surery 
so long as tliere remains a controversy whether there 
be any instinctive maxims at all; or any difficulty in 
ascertaining what maxims are instinctive. 

This celebrated question therefore becomes in our 
sjTstem a question of pure curiosity; and as such, we 
dismiss it to the determination of those who are more 
inquisitive, than we are concerned to be, about thena^ 
tural history and constitution of the human species. 



CHAPTER VI. 



HUMAN HAPPINESS. 



The word happy is a relaXive term: that is, when 
we call a man happy, we mean that he is happier than 
some others, with whom we compare him; than the 
generality of others; or than ho himself was in some 
other situation: — ^thus, speaking of one who has just 
compassed the object of a long pursuit, ** Now," we 
say, " he is happy;" and in a like comparative sense, 
compared, that is, with the general lot of mankhid, 
we call a man happy who possesses health and com- 
petency. 

In strictness, any condition may be denominated 
hitppy> in which the smount or aggregate of pleasure 



nUMAlf HAPP1NS89. 



^t 



exceeds that of pain; and the degree of happmess de- 
pends upon the quantity of this excess. 

And the greatest quantity of it ordinarily attainable 
iti human life is what we mean by happiness, when 
we inquire or pronounce what human happiness con- 
sists in.* 

In which inquiry I will omit much usual declama- 
tion on the dignity and capacity of our nature; the 
superiority of the soul to the body, of the rational to 
the animal part of our constitution; upon the worthi- 
ness, refinement, and delicacy of some satisfactions, 
or the meanness, grossness, and sensuality of others; 
because I hold that pleasures differ in nothing but in 



* If any poritive signification, distinct from what we mean 
by pleasure, can be affixed to the term *' happiness," Ishookl 
take it to denote a certain state of the nervous system in 
that part of the human frame in which we feel joy and ^rief, 
passions and affections. Whether this part be the heart, 
which the turn of most languages would lead us to believe, 
or the diaphragm, as Buffon, or the upper orifice of the sto- 
mach, as Van Halmont thought; or rather be a kind of fine 
net-work, lining the whole region of the praecordia, as others 
have imagined; it is possible, not only that each painful sen- 
sation may violently shake and disturb the fibres at the time, 
but that a series of such may at length so derange the tex- 
ture of the system as to produce a perpetual irritation, which 
will show itself by fretfulness, impatience, and restlessness. 
It is possible also, on the other hand, that a succession of 
pleasurable sensations may have such an efiect upon this sub- 
tile organization as to cause the fibres to relax, and return in- 
to their place and order, and thereby to recover, or, if not 
lost, to preserve that harmonious confirmation which gives to 
the mind its sense of complacency and satisfaction. This 
state may denominated happiness, and is so far distinguisha- 
ble from pleasure, that it does not refer to any partictiular 
object of enjoyment, or consist, like pleasure, in the gratifi- 
cation of one or more of the senses, but is rather the secon- 
dary effect which such objects and gratifications produce up- 
on the nervous system, or the state in which they leave it. 
These conjectures belong not, however, to our province. 
The comparative sense, in which we have explained the term 
ttappiness, is more popular, and is suiScient for the purpose 
ef the present chapter. 



84 HVMAN KAPPINCSfk 

ccmtmuance and iatrniaity: from a just corapatatioa of 
irhich, confirmed by what we observe of the apparent 
cheerfuhiess, tranquillity, and contentment of men of 
different tastes, tempers, stations, and pursuits every 
question concerning human iiappiness must receive its 
decision. 

It will be our business to show, if we can, 

1. What Human Happiness does not consist in: 

2. What it does consist in. 

First, then, Happiness does not consist in the 
pleasures of sense, in whatever profusion or variety 
they be enjoyed. By the pleasures of sense, I mean, 
as well as the animal gratifications of eating, drinking, 
and that by which the species is continued, as the 
more refined pleasures of music, painting, architectmre, 
gardening, splendid shows, theatric exhibitions; and 
the pleasures, lastly, of active sports, as of hunting, 
shooting, fishing, &c. For, 

l$t. These pleasures continue but a little while at 
a time. This is true of them all, especially of the 
grosser sort of them. Laying aside the preparation 
and the expectation, and computing strictly the actual 
sensation, we shall be surprised to find how inconside- 
rable a portion of our time they occupy, how few 
hours in the four and twenty they are able to fill up. 

2dly, These pleasiu^s, by repetition, lose their 
relish. It is a property of the machine, for which we 
know no remedy, that ,the organs by which we per- 
ceive pleasure are blunted and benumbed by being 
frequently exercised in the same way. There is hard- 
ly any one who has not found the difierence between 
a gratification, when new, and when familiar; or ai^y 

Pleasure which does not become indifierent as it grows 
abitual. 
Sdiy, The eagerness for high and intense delights 
takes away the relish from all others; and as such 
delights fail rarely in our way, the greater part of our 
time becomes, from this cause, empty and uneasy. 

There is hardly any delusion by which men are 
greater sufferers m their happiness than by their ex- 
pecting too much from what is called pleasure; that 
ifi, from those intense delights which vulgarly engroas 



tiVMAN HAPPINEt» 89 

the name of pleasure. The rery expectation spoils 
them. When they do come, we are oAen engaged in 
taking pains to persuade ourselves how much we are 
pleased, rather than enjoying any pleasure which 
springs naturally out of the objecL And whenever 
we depend upon being vastly delighted, we always go 
home secretly grieved at missing our aim. Likewise, 
as has been observed just now, when this humour of 
being prodigiously delighted has once taken .hold of 
the imagination, it hinders us from providing for, or 
Cicquiescing in, those gently soothing engagements, 
the due variety and succession of which are the only 
things that supply a vein or continued stream of hap- 
piness. 

What I have been able to obserye of that part of 
mankind, whose professed pursuit is pleasure, and who 
are withheld in the pursuit by no restraints of fortune, 
or scruples of consciences, corresponds sufficiently with 
this account. I have commonly remarked in such 
men a restless and inextinguishable passion for va- 
riety; a great part of their time to be vacant, and so 
much of it irksome; and that, with whatever eager- 
ness and expectation they set out, they become, by 
degrees, fastidious in their choice of pleasures, lan- 
guid in the enjoyment, yet miserable under the want 
of it. 

The truth seems to be, that there is a limit at which 
these pleasures soon arrive, and from which they ever 
afterwards decline. They are by necessity of .'short 
duration, as the organs cannot hold on their emotions 
beyond a Certain length of time; and if you endea- 
vour to compensate for this imperfection in their na- 
ture by the frequency with which you repeat them, 
you sufier more than you gain, by the fatigue of the 
faculties, and the diminution of sensibility. 

We have said nothing in this account, of the loss of 
opportunities or the decay of faculties, which, when- 
ever they happen, leave the voluptuary destitute and 
desperate; teased by desires that can never be grati- 
fied, and the memory of pleasures which must return 
no more. 

It will also be allowed by those who have cxpeu> 



M imMAir HAPPtlfBM. 

•need il, and perhaps by those alone, that pleawiv 
which is purchased by the encumbrance of our fortune, 
is purchased too dear; the pleasure never compen« 
sating for the perpetual irritation of embarrassed cir« 
cumstances. 

These pleasures, after all, have their value; and 
as the young are always loo eager in their pursuit of 
them, the old are sometimes too remiss, that is, to9 
■tudious of their ease, to be at the pains for them 
which they really deserve. 

Secondly; Neither does happiness consist in an 
exemption from pain, labour, care, business, suspense, 
molestation, and ** those evils which are without;" 
such a state being usually attended, not with ease, but 
with depression of spirits, a tastelessness in all our 
ideas, imaginary' anxieties, and the whole train of 
hypochondriacal affections. 

For which reason, the expectations of those who 
retire from their shops and countinghouses, to enjoy 
the remainder of their da}s in leisure and tranquillity, 
are seldom ans\\ered by the eflect; much less of such 
as, in a fit of chagrin, shut themselves up in cloisters 
and hennitages, or quit the world, and their stations 
in it, for ^^olitude and repose. 

Where there exists a known external cause of un- 
easiness, the cause may be removed, and the uneasi- 
ness, will cease. But those imaginary disti^sses which 
men feel for want of real ones (and which are equal- 
ly tormenting, and so far equally,) as they depend 
upon no single or assignable subject of uneasiness, 
admit oftentimes of no application of relief. 

Hence a moderate pain, upon which the attention 
may fasten and spend itself, is to many a refreshment: 
as a fit of the gout will sometimes cure the spleen. 
And the same of any less violent agitation of the 
mind, as a literary controversy, a lawsuit, a contested 
election, and, above all, gaming; the passion for which, 
in men of fortune and liberal minds, is only to be ac- 
counted for on this principle. 

Trirdlt; Neither does happiness consist ii^ great- 
ness, rank, or elevated station. 

Were it true that all superiority afforded pleasure. 



HITMAlf HAPPINBB8. 87 

it would follow, that by how much we were the greater, 
that is, the more persons we were superior to, in the 
same proportion, so far as depended upon this cause, 
we should be the happier; but so it is, that no 'supe- 
riority jrields any satisfaction, save that which we 
possess or obtain over those with whom we immedi- 
ately compare ourselves. The shepherd perceives no 
pleasure in his superiority over hjs dog; the farmer, 
in his superiority over the shepherd; the lord, in his 
superiority over the farmer; nor the king, lastly, in 
his superiority over the lord. Superiority, where 
there is no competition, is seldom contemplated; what 
most men are quite unconscious of. 

But if the same shepherd can run, fight, or wrestle, 
better than the peasants of his village; if the farmer 
can show better cattle, if he keep a better horse, or be 
supposed to have a longer purse, than any farmer in 
the hundred; if the lord have more interest in an 
election, greater favour at court, a better house, or 
larger estate than any nobleman in the country; if 
the king possess a more extensive territory, a more 
powerful Aeet or army, a more splendid establishment, 
more loyal subjects, or more weight and authority in 
adjusting the affairs of nations, than any prince in 
Europe; — in all these cases, the parties feel an actual 
satisfaction in their superiority. 

Now the conclusion that follows from hence is this; 
thiU the pleasures of ambition, which afe supposed to 
be peculiar to high stations, are in reklity common to 
mil conditions. The farrier who shoes a horse better, 
and who is in greater request for his skill than any 
man within ten miles of him, possesses, for all that I 
can see, the delight of distinction and of ezcelhng, as 
truly and substantially as the statesman, the soldier, 
and the scholar, who have filled Europe with the 
reputation of their wisdom, their valour, or their 
knowledge. 

No superiority appears to be of any account, but 
superiority over a rival. This, it is manifest, may 
exist wherever rivalships do; and rivalships fall out 
amongst men of all ranks and degrees. The object 
of emulation, the dignity or magnitude of thip object 

voii. I. 4 



38 bi;ma2* happiitk^s. 

makes no difierence; as it is not what either potf* 
jiesses that constitutes the pleasure, b<lt what one pos» 
eesses more than the other. 

Philosophy smiles at the contempt with which the 
rich and ^eat speak of the petty strifes and compe- 
titions of the poor; not reflecting that these strifes and 
competitions are just as reasonable as their own\ and 
the pleasures which success affords, the same. 

Our position is, that happiness does not consist in 
greatness. And this position we make out by show- 
ing, that even what are supposed to be the peculiar 
advantages of greatness, the pleasures of ambition 
and superiority, are in reality common to all condi- 
tions. But whether the pursuits of ambition be ever 
wise, whether they contribute more to the happiness 
or misery of the pursuers, is a difierent question; and 
a question concerning which we may be allowed to 
entertain great doubt. The pleasure of success is 
exquisite; so also is the anxiety of the pursuit, and 
the pain of disappointment; — and what is the worst 
part of the account, the pleasure is shortlived. We 
soon cease to look back upon those whom we have 
left behind; new contests are engaged in, new pros- 
pects unfold themselves; a succession of struggles is 
kept up, whilst there is a rival left within the com- 
pass of our views and profession; and when there is 
none, the pleasure with the pursuit is at an eifd. 

II. We nave seen what happiness does not consist 
in. We are nelt to consider in what it does consist. 

In the conduct of life the great matter is to know 
beforehand what will please us, and what* pleasuie 
will hold out. So far as we know this, our choice 
will be justified by the event. And this knowledge is 
more scarce and difficult than at first sight it may 
seem to be: for sometimes pleasures, which are won- 
clerfully alluring and flattering in the prospect, turn 
out in the possession extremely insipid; or (fQ not 
hold out as we expected: at other times pleasures 
etart up which never entered into our calculation; 
and which we misht have missed of by not foresee- 
ing: whence we have reason to believe, that we ac- 
tually dip miss of many pleasures from the tame cause. 



HUMAN HAPPINESa. 19 

I say to know " beforehand;" for, afler the ezpwi- 
ment is tried, it is commonly impracticable to retreat 
• or change; beside that shifting and changing is apt 
to generate a habit of restlessness, which is destructive 
of the. happiness of every, condition. 

By ihe reason of the original diversity of taste, 
capacity, and constitution, observable in the human 
species, and the still gereater variety which habit and 
fashion have introduced in these particulars, it is 
impossible to propose any plan of happiness which . 
will succeed to all, or any method of life which is 
universaUy eligible or practicable. 

All that can be said is, that there remains a pre- 
smnption in favour of those conditions of life, in which 
men generally appear most cheerful and contented. 
For though tlie apparent happiness of mankind be 
not always a true measure of their real happiness, it 
IB the best measure we have. 

Taking this for my guide, I am inclined to believo 
that happiness consists, 

1. In the exercise of the social affections. 

Those persons commonly possess good spirits who 
have about them many objects of affection and en- 
dearment, as wife, children, kindled, friends. And 
to the want of these may be imputed the peevishness 
of monks, and of such as lead^ monastic life. 

Of the same nature with the indulgence of our ^r 
mestic affections, and equally refreshing to the spirits,^ 
is the pleasure which results from acts of bounty and 
beneficence, exercised either in giving money, or in 
imparting, to those who want it,, the assistance of our 
skill and profession. 

Another main article of human happiness is, 

2. The exercise of our faculties, either of body or 
mind, in the pursuit of some engaging end. 

It seems to be true, that no plenitude of present 
gratifications can make the possessor happy for a con- 
tinuance, unless he have something in reserve — some- 
thing to hope for, and look forward to.. This I conr 
elude to be the case, from comparing the alacrity and 
flpirits of men who are engaged in any pursuit which 
ioteresta tfaem^ with the dejection and ennui of almost 



40 HUMAN HAPPINB8S. 

al), who are either bom to so much that they want 
nothmg more, or who have tued up their satisfactions 
too soon, and drained the sources of them. 

It is this intolerable vacuity of mind which carries 
the rich and great to the horse course and the gaming 
table; and oflen engages them in contests and pur- 
suits, of which the success bears no proportion to the 
solicitude and expense with which it is sought. An 
election for a disputed borough shall cost the parties 
twenty or thirty thousand pounds each, — ^to say no- 
thing of the anxiety, humiliation, and fatigue of the 
canvass; when a seat in the house of commons, of 
exactly the same value, may be had for a tenth part 
of the money, and with no trouble. I do not mention 
this to blame the rich and great (perhaps they cannot 
do better,) but in confirmation of what I have ad- 
vanced. 

Hope, which thus appears to be of so much im- 
portance to our happiness, is of two kinds; — ^where 
there is something to be done towards attaining the 
object of our hope, and where there is nothing to be 
done. The first alone is of any value; the latter 
being apt to corrupt into impatience, having no 
power but to sit still and wait, which soon grows 
tiresome. 

The doctrine delivered under this head may be 
readily admitted; but how to provide ourselves with 
a succession of pleasurable engagements is the diffi- 
culty. This requires two things: judgment in the 
choice of ends adapted to our opportunities; and a 
command of imagination, so as to be able, when the 
judgment has made choice of an end, to transfer a 
pleasure to the means : after which, the end may be 
forgotten as soon as we will. 

Hence those pleasures are most valuable, not which 
are most exquisite in the fruition, but which are most 
productive of engagement and activity in the pursuit. 

A nian who is in earnest in his endeavours after 
the happiness of a future state has, in this respect, an 
advantage over all the world; for he has constantly 
before his eyes an object of supreme importance, pro* 
ductive of perpetual engagement and activity, and of 



RtrlCAN RAprnrsti. 41 



% 



whioh the purrait (which can be said of no punoit 
besides) lasts him to his life's end. Yet eyen he must 
have many ends, besides the far end ; but then they 
will conduct to that, be subordinate, and in some waj 
or other capable of being referred to that, and deriver 
their satisfaction, oc-an addition of satisfaction,. fh>m 
that. 

Engagement is every thing: the, more significant, 
however, bur engagements are, the better; such as the 
planning of laws, institutions, manufactures, charities, 
improvements, public works; and the endeavouring, 
by our interest, address, solicitations, and activity, to 
carry them into e^ct: or, upon a smaller scale, tho' 
procuring of a maintainance and fortune for our fami- 
lies by a course of industry and application to our 
callings, which forms and gives motion to the com- 
mon occupations of life; training up a child; prose- 
cuting a scheme for his futiure establishment; mak- 
ing ourselves masters of a language or a science; im- 
proving or managing an estate; labouring after a 
piece of preferment ; and lastly, any engagement which 
is innocent is better than none ; as the writing of a 
book, the building of a house, the laying out pf a gar- 
den, the digging of a fishpond, — even the raising of & 
cucumber or a tulip. 

Whilst our minds are taken up with the objects or 
business bafore us we are commonly happy, whatever 
the objector business be; when the mind is absent 
and the thoughts are wandering to something else 
than what is passing in the place in which we are, 
we are oflen miserable. 

S. Happiness depends upon the prudent consti- 
tution of the habits. 

The art in which the secret of human happiness in 
a great measure consists, is* to set the habits in such a 
manner, that every change may be a change for the 
better. The habits themselves are much the same; 
for whatever is made habitual becomes smooth, and 
easy, and nearly indifferent. The return to an old 
habit is likewise easy, whatever the habit be. There- 
fore the advantage is with those habits which allow 
of an indulgence in the deviation fironvthem. Tho 

4* 



4% BVMAir HArFiirc«9. 

hizuioiifl rdiC6ive&d|rreaterpiea8i]re& from tteir ^tiiw 
ties than the peto&nt does from lus biead and cheese; 
faut the peasant, whenever he goes abroad, finds a 
feast; whereas the epicure must be well entertained 
to escape disgust. Thosfe who spend every day at 
cards, and those who go every day to plough, pass 
their time much alike; intent upon what they are 
about, wanting nothing, regretting nothing, they are 
both for the time in a state of ease: but then, what- 
ever suspends the occupation of the cardplayer dis- 
tresses him; whereas to the labourer every interrup- 
tion is a refreshment: and this appears in the difier- 
ent efibcts that Sunday producefii upon the twoj which 
proves a day of Irecreation to the one, but a lamenta- 
ble burden to the other. The man who has learned 
to live alone feels his spirits enlivened whenever he 
enters into company, and takes his leave without 
regret; another, who has long been accustomed to a 
crowd, or continual succession of company, ezperi-' 
ences in company no elevation of spirits, nor any 
greater satisfaction than what the man of a retired 
life finds in his chimney comer. So far their condi- 
tions are equal: but let a change of pla«e, fortune, 
or situation separate the companion from his circle, 
his visitors, his club, common room, or cofieehouse; 
and the difference and advantage in the choice and 
constitution of the two habits will show itself. Soli- 
tude comes to the one clothed with melancholy; to 
the other it brings liberty and quiet. You will see 
the one fretful and restless, at a loss how to dispose 
of his time • till the hour come round when he may 
forget himself in bed: the other, easy and satisfied, 
taking up his book or his pipe as soon as he finds 
himself alone; ready to admit any little amusement 
that casts up, or to turn his hands and attention to 
the first business that presents itself; or content, with- 
out either, to sit still, and let his train of thought glider 
indolently through his brain, without much use, per- 
haps, or pleasure, but without hankering after any 
thmif better, or without nrritation. — ^A reader, who 
has mured himself to books of science and argumen- 
tUktion, if a novel, a yreU written pamphlet* an article 



^UMAN KAnMNKIi. 48 

dfnewB, a narrative of a cioioiiB veyage, «r a joUKal 
•f a traveller fall in hie way, nts down to the repast 
with relish; enjoys his entertainment while it lasts* 
and can return, when it is over, to his ^aver reading 
without distaste. Another, with whom nothing wifl 
go down but works of hnmour and pleasantry, or 
whoee curiosity must be interested by perpetual no- 
velty, will consume a bookseller's window in half- a 
forenoon; during which time he is rather in search of 
diversion than diverted; and as books to his taste are 
few and short, and rapidly read over, the stock is 
soon exhausted, when he is left without resource from 
this principal supply of harmless amusement. 

So far as circumstances of fortune conduce to hap- 
piness, it is not tile income which any man possesses, 
but the increase of income that afibrds the pleasure. 
Two persons, of whom one begins with a hundred, 
and advances his inc<Mne to a thousand pounds, a 
year, and the other sets off with a thousand, and dwin- 
dles down to a hundred, may, in the course of their 
time, have the receipt and spending of the same sum 
of money; yet their satisfaction, so far as fortune is 
concerned in it, will be very different: the series and 
sum total of their incomes being the same, it maks a 
wide difference at which enA they begin. 

4. Happiness consists in health. 

By heaith I understand, as well freedom from bo- 
dily distempers, as that tranquillity, firmness, and 
alacrity of mind, which we call good spirits; and 
which may properly enough be included in our notion 
of health, as depending commonly upon the same 
causes, and yielding to the same management, as our 
bodily constitution. 

Health, in this sense, is the one thing needful. 
Therefore no pains, expense, self-denial, or restraint 
to which we subject ourselves for the sake of health, 
is too much. Whether it require us to relinquish 
lucrative situations, to abstain from favourite indul- 
gences, to control intemperate passions, or undergo 
tedious regimens; whatever difficulties it lays us 
under, a man, who pursues his luippiness rationally 
ftnd re0olutelyt will be content to submit. 



44 TtBTUS. 

When we* are in perfect health and spintB, we feeL 
in ouraelves a happinesa independent of any partica- 
lar outward gratification whatever, and of which we 
can give no account. This is an enjoyment which 
the Deity has annexed to life; and it probably oon- 
Btitates, in a great measure, the happiness of infants 
and brutes, especially of the lower and sedentanr or- 
ders of animids, as of oysters^ periwinkles, and tha 
like ; for which I have sometimes been at a loss to 
find out amusement. 

The above account of human, happiness will justify 
the two following conclusions, ^vhich, although found 
in most books of morality, have seldom, I think, been 
supported by any sufficient reason: — 

First, That happiness is pretty equally distributed 
amongst the different orders of civil society: 

Secondly, That vice has no advantage over virtue^ 
even with respect to this world's happiness. 



CHAPTER VII. 



VIRTUE. 



Virtue is *' the doing good to mankind, in obe- 
dience to t?ie fjoUl of God, and for the sake of ever- 
tasting happiness.^* 

According to which definition, *' the good of man- 
kind," is the subject; the '* will of God,*' the rule; 
and " everlasting happiness," the motive, of human 
virtue. 

Virtue has been divided by some moralists into 
benevolence, prudence, fortitude, and temperance. 
Senenolence proposes good ends; prudence suggests 
the best means of attaining them; fortitude enables 
us to encounter the difficulties, dangers, and discou- 
ragements which stand in our way in pursuit of these 
ends; temperance repels and overcomes the passions 
that obstruct it. Benevolence, for instance, prompts 
us to undertake the cause of an oppressed orphan; 
prudence suggests the best means of going about it; 



▼IRTUX. 4S 

fartituAe enables vm to confront the danger, aiid bear 
up against the loa9» disgrace, or repulse that may 
attend our undertaking; and temperance keeps under 
the love of money, of ease, or amusement which might 
diyert us from it. 

Virtue is distinguished by others into two branches 
chiyy prudence and benevolence : prudence^ attentive 
to our own interest; benevolence, to that of our fellow 
creatures: both directed to the same end, the increase 
of happiness in nature; and taking equal oonoem in 
the future as in the present. 

The four c ardiital virtaeaajre prudence, fortUttde, 
temperance, and justice* 

But the division of virtue, to which we are in mo- 
dem times most accustomed, is into duties:^- 

Towards Chfd; as piety, reverence, resignation, 
gratitude, Scc, 

Towards other men (or relative duties;) as justice, 
charity, fidelity, loyalty, &c. 

Towards ourselves ; as chastity, sobriety, tempe- 
rance, preservation of life, care of health, &c. 

More of these distinctions have been proposed, 
which it is not worth while to set down. 



I shall proceed te state a few observations, which 
relate to the general regulation of human conduct;, 
unconnected indeed with each other, but very wor- 
thy of attention; and which fall as properly under the 
title of this chapter as of any future one. 

1. Mankind act more from habit than reflection. 

It is on few only and great occasions that men de- 
liberate at all; on fewer still, that they institute any 
thing like a regular inquiry into the moral rectitude 
or depravity of what they are about to do; or wait for 
the result of it. We are for the most part determined 
at once; and by an impulse, which is the effect and 
energy of preestablished habits. And this constitu- 
tion seems well adapted to the exigencies of human 
life, and to the imbecility of our moral principle. In 
the current occasions and rapid opportunities of life, 
there is oftentimes little leisure^^or reflection; and 



46 TiRTirx. 

were there more, a man, who has to reason about hit 
duty, when the temptation to transgress it is upon 
him, is almost sure to reason himself into an error. 

If we are in so great a degree passive under our 
habits, Where, it is asked, is the exercise of virtue, 
the guilt of vice, or any use of moral and religious 
knowledge ? I answer, In the forming and contracting 
of these habits. 

And hence results a rule of life of considerable im- 
portance, m'f. that many things are to be done and 
abstained from, solely for the sake of habit. We will 
explain ourselves by an example or two. — ^A beggar, 
with the appearance ofextreme distress, asks our cha- 
rity. If we come to argue the matter, whether the 
distress be real, whether it be not brought upon him- 
self, whether it be of public advantage to admit such 
application, whether it be not to encourage idleness 
and vagrancy, whether it may not invite impostors to 
our doors, whether the money can be well spared, or 
might not be better applied; when these considera- 
tions are put together, it may appear very doubtful, 
whether we ought or ought not to give any thing. 
But when we reflect, that the misery before our eyes 
excites our pity, whether we will or not;^ that it is of 
the utmost consequence to us to cultivate this tender- 
ness of mind: that it is a quality cherished by indul- 
gence, and soon stiiSed by opposition; — when this, I 
say is considered, a wise man will do that for his own 
sake which he would have hesitated to do for the pe- 
titioner's; he will give way to his compassion ratner 
than offer violence to a habit of so much general use. 

A man of confirmed good habits will act in the same 
manner, without any consideration at all. 

This may serve for one instance: another is the fol- 
lowing: — ^A man has been brought up horn his in- 
fancy with a dread of lying. An occasion presents 
itself where, at the expense of a little veracity , he may 
divert his company, set off his own wit with advan- 
tage, attract the notice and engage the partiality of 
all about him. This is not a small temptation. And 
when he looks at the other side of the question, he 
sees no mischief that can ensue from this liberty, no 



vi&TVC. 47 

alftnder of any man'iii reputation, no prejudice likely 
to arise to any man's interest. Were there nothing 
further to be considered, it would be difficult to show 
why a man under such circumstances might not in- 
dulge his humour. But when he reflects that his 
scruples about lying have hitherto preserved him free 
from this vice; that occasions like the present will 
return, where the inducement will be equally strong, 
but the indulgence much less innocent; that his 
scruples will wear away by a few transgressions, and 
leave him subject to one of the meanest and most 
pernicious of all bad habits, — a habit of lying, when- 
ever it will serve his ttirn: when all this, I say, is con- 
sidered, a wise man will forego the present, or a much 
greater pleasure, rather than lay the foundation of a 
c^iaracter so vicious and contemptible. 

From what has been said may be explained also 
the nature of hdbitual virtue. By the definition of 
virtue, placed at the beginning of this chapter, it ap- 
pears, that the good of mankind is the subject, the 
will of God the rule, and everlasting happiness the 
motive and end of all virtue. Yet, in fact, a man 
shall perform many an act of virtue, without having 
either the good of mankind, the will of God, or ever- 
lasting happiness in his thought. How is this to be 
understood ? In the same manner as that a man may 
be a very good servant, without being conscious, at 
every turn of a particular regard to his master's will, 
or of an express attention to his master's interest; in- 
deed, your best old servants are of this sort: but then 
he must have served for a length of time under the 
actual direction of these motives to bring it to this; in 
which service his merit and virtue consist. 

There are habits ^ not only of drinking, swearing, 
and lying, and of some other things, which are com- 
monly acknowledged to be habits, and called so; but 
of every modificiition of action, speech, and thought: 
Man is a bundle of habits. 

There are habits of industry, attention, vigilance, 
advertency; of a prompt obedience to the jiKlgment 
occurring, or of yielding to the first impulse of pas- 
sion; of extending our views to the future, or of rest- 



48 TIRTJOS* 

ing upon the present; of apprehending, methodisan^, 
reasoning; of indolence and dilatoriness; of vanity, 
self-conceit, melancholy, partiality; of fretfiilness, 
suspicion, captiousness, censoriousness; of pride, ambi- 
tion, covetousness; of overreaching, intriguing, pro- 
jecting; in a word, there is not a quality or function, 
either of body or mind, which does not feel the infttt- 
ence of this great law of animated nature. 

2. The Christian Religion hath not ascertained the 
precise quantity pf virtue necessary to salvation. 

This has been made an objection to Christianity; 
but without reason. For, as all revelation, however 
imparted originally, must be transmitted by the ordi- 
nary* vehicle of language, it behoves those who make 
the obiection to show, that any form of words could 
be devised, that might express this quantity; or that 
it is possible to constitute a standard of moral attain- 
ments, accommodated to the almost infinite diversity 
which subsists in the capacities and opportunities ojf 
different men. 

It seenis most agreeable to our conceptions of jus- 
tice, and is consonant enough to the language ' of 
Scripture,* to suppose, that there are prepared for us 
rewards and punishments, of all possible degrees, 
from the most exalted happiness down to extreme 
misery: so that ** our labour is never in vain:*' what- 



* ** He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly ; 
and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifUly*'* 
2 Cor. iz. 6. — " And that servant which knew his Lord's 
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to hia 
will, shall be beaten with many stripes ; but he that knew 
not shall be beaten with few stripes." Luke zii. 47, 48.-— 
*' Whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my 
name, because ye beloi^ to Christ; verily I say unto you 
he shall not lose his reward ;" to wit, intimating that thore 
is in reserve a proportionable reward for even Uie smallest 
act of virtue. Mark ix. 41. — See also the parable of the 
pounds, Luke xix 16, &c. ; where he whose pound had gain- 
ed ten pounds, was placed over ten cities ; and he ^ose 
pound had gained five pounds, was placed over five cities. 



. VIRTUE* 49 

tver AdTaJfteemeflt we make in virtue, we procure a 
proportionable accesnon of future happiness; as, on 
the other hand, every accumulation of vice is the 
** treasuring up so much Mrrath against the day of 
wrath." It has been said, that it can never be a just 
economy of Providence, to admit one part of mankind 
into heaven, and condemn the other to hell; since 
there nnist be very little to choose, between the worst 
man who is received into heaven, and the best who is 
excluded. And how know we, it might be answered, 
but that there may be as little to choose in the con-^ 
ditions ? 

Without entering into a detail of Scripture morality, 
which would anticipate our subject, the following gen- 
eral positions may be advanced, I think, with safety. 

•1. That a state of happiness is not to be expected 
by those who are conscious of no moral or religious 
rule: I mean those who cannot with truth say, that 
they have been prompted to one action, or withholden 
from one gratification, by any regard to virtue or re- 
ligion, either immediate or habitual. 

There needs no other proof of this, than the consi- 
deration that a brute would be as proper an object of 
reward as such a man, and that, if the case were so, 
the penal sanctions of religion could have no place. 
For, whom would you punish, if you make such a one 
as this happy ? — or rather, indeed, religion itself, both 
natural and revealed, would cease to have either use 
or authority. 

2." That a state of happiness is not to be expected 
by those who reserve to themselves the habitual prac- 
tice' of any one sin, or neglect of one known duty; 

Because no obedience can proceed upon proper 
motives, which is not universal, that is, whi'ch is not 
directed to every command of God alike, scs they all 
stand upon the same authority; 

Because such an allowance would, in effect amount 
to a toleration Of every vice in the world; 

And because the strain of Scripture language ex- 
cludes any such hope. When our duties are recited, 
they are put coileetively, that is, as all and every of 
them required in the Christian character. ** Add to 

VOL. I. 5 



60 VIRTUE. 

your fajth virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to 
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, 
and to patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly 
kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity."* On 
the other hand, when vices are enumerated, they are 
put disjunctively, that is, as separately and severally 
ezcludmg the sinner from heaven. ^ JVeither forni- 
cators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor efieminate, 
lior abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, 
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extor- 
tioners shall inherit the kingdom of heaven."! 

Those texts of Scripture which seem to lean a con- 
trary way, as that *' charity shall cover the multitude 
of'sins;"^ that **he which con verteth a sinner from 
the error of his way shall hide a miiltitude of 8ins;"§ 
cannot, I think for the reasons abovementioned, be 
extended to sins deliberately, habitually, and obsti- 
nately persisted in. 

3. That a state ef mere unprofitableness will not go 
unpunished. 

This is expressly laid down by Christ, in the parable 
of the talents, which supersedes all further reasoning 
upon the subject. ** Then he which had received one 
talent came, and said. Lord,' I knew thee that thou lat 
an austere man, reaping where thou hast not sown, 
and gathering where thou hast hot strawed: and I 
was afraid, and hid thy talent in the earth; lo, there 
thou hast that is thine. His lord answered and said 
unto him. Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou 
knewest (or knewest thou?) that I reap where I sow- 
ed not, and gather where I have not strawed; thou 
oughtest therefore to have put my money to the ex- 
changers, and then, at my coming, I should have receiv- 
ed mine own with usury. Take therefore the talent 
from him, and ^ve it unto him which hath ten talents; 
for unto every one that hath shall be given, and he 
shall have abundance; but from him that hath not 
shall be taken away even that which he hath: and 

* 2 Pet. i. 6, 6, 7. t Cor. vi. 9, 10. 

1 1 Pet. iv. 8. § James, v. 20* 



VIRTUE. 51 

east ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness; 
there shall he weeping and gnashing of teeth.*** 

3. In every question of conduct, where one side is 
doubtful, and the other side safe, we are bound to take 
the safe side. 

This is best explained by an instance; and I know 
of none more to our purpose than that of suicide. 
Suppose, for examples sake, that it appear doubtful to 
a reasoner upon the subject, whether he may lawfully 
destroy himiBelf: He can have no doubt, that it is law- 
ful for him to let it alone. Here therefore is a case, 
in which one side is doubtful, and the other side safe. 
By virtue, therefore, of our rule, he is bound to pur- 
sue the safe side, that is, to forbear from ofiering vio- 
lence to himself, whilst a doubt remains upon his 
mind concerning the lawfulness of suicide. 

It is prudent, you allow, to take the safe side. But 
our observation means something more. We assert 
that the action concerning which we doubt, whatever 
it may be in itself, or to another, would, in us, whilst 
this doubt remains upon our minds, be certainly sinful. 
The case is expressly so adjudged by St. Paul, with 
whose authority we will for the present rest contented. 
— •** I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that 
there is nothing unclean of itself; but to him that 
esteemeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is un- 
elean, Happy is he that condemneth not himself in 
that thing which he alloweth; and he that doubteth is 
damned {condemned) if he eat, for whatsoever is not 
of faith (t. e. not done with a full persuasion of the 
lawfulness of it) is sin."t 



• Mat. XXV. 24, &c. f Rom. xiv. 14, 22, 23. 

i 



BOOK II. 

moHal obligation. 



\ 



CHAPTER I. 



THB QtTKSTlOW, <* WHT AM I OBLIGED TO KEEP 
MY WORD?*' CONSIDERED. 

Why am I obliged to keep my word ? 

Because it is right says one. — Because it is agree- 
able to the fitness of things, says another. — Because 
it is conformable to reason and nature, says a third— 
Because it is conformable to truth, sajrs a fourth. — 
Because it promotes the public good, says a fifth. — 
Because it is required by the will of God, concludes a 
sixth. 

Upon which different accounts two things are ob- 
servable)— 

First, that they all ultimately coincide. 

The fitness of things means their fitness to produce 
happiness: the nature of things means that actual 
constitution of the world, by which some things, as 
such and such actions, for example, produce happi- 
ness, and others misery: Reason is the principle by 
which we discover or judge of this constitution: truth 
IS this judgment expressed or drawn out into propor- 
tions. So that it necessarily comes to pass, that what 
promotes the public happiness, or happiness on the 
whole, is agreeable to the fitness of things, to nature, 
to reason, and to truth: and such (as will appear by 
and by) is the divine character, that what promotes 
the general happiness is required by the will of God ; 
and what has all the above properties must needs be 
right; for right means no more than conformity to 
the rule we go by, whatever that rule be. 



MORAL OBLIOATtON. 5S 



p 



And this is the reason that moralists from whatever 
different principles they set out, commonly meet in 
their conclusions; that is, they enjoin the same c(Hi» 
daot, prescribe the same rules of duty, and, with a few 
exceptions, deliver upon dubious cases the same de- 
temunations. 

SscoNDiiT, It is to be observed, that these answers 
all leave the matter short; for the inquirer may tunf 
round upon his teacher with a second question, in 
which he will expect to be satisfied, namely. Why 
am I obliged to do what is right ; to act agreeably to 
the fitness of things; to conform to reason, nature, or 
truth; to promote the public good, or to obey the 
will of God ? 

The proper method of conducting the inquiry is, 
FIRST, to examine what we mean when we say a man 
is obliged to do any thing; and thsn to show why he 
is obliged to do the thing which we have proposea as 
an example, namely, *' to keep his word." 



CHAPTER U. 

what we mean when we say a man ib 

" obliged'* to do a thing. 

A MAN is said to be obliged, ** when he is urged by 
a violent motive, resulting from the command of an- 
other.** 

First, " The motive must be violent." If a per- 
son, who has done me some little service, or has a 
small place in his disposal, ask me, upon some occasion 
for my vote, I may possibly give it him from a motive 
of gratitude or expectation: but I should hardly say 
that I was obliged to give it him; because the induce- 
ment does not rise high enough. Whereas if a father 
or a master, any great benefactor, or one on whom my 
fortune depends, require my vote, I give it him of 
course: and my answer to aU who ask me why I voted 
so and so is, that my father or my master obliged me; 
that I had received so many favours from, or had so 

VOL I. '6* 



64 MOBAL OBLIGATION-. 

great a dependence upon each a one, that I was ohHg" 
ed to vote as he direct me. 

Sbcondt, " It must result from the command of 
another. " Offer a man a gratuity for doing any thing, 
for seizing, for example, an offender; he is not obliged 
by your o^r to do it, nor would he say he is; though 
he may be inducedy persuaded^ prevailed upon^ 
tempted. If a magistrate or the man's immediate su- 
perior command it, he considers himself, as obUged to 
comply, though possilbly he would lose less by a refur- 
sal in this case than in the former. 

I will not undertake to say that the words obhgaiion 
and obliged are used uniformly in this sense, or always 
with this distinction; nor is it possible to tie down 
popular phrases to any constant signification: but 
wherever the motive is violent enough, and coupled 
with the idea of command, authority, law, or the will 
of a superior, there, T take it, we always reckon our- 
selves to be obliged. 

And from this account of obligation it follows, that 
we can be obliged to nothing but what we ourselves 
are to gain or lose something by; for nothing else 
can be a '' violent motive" to us. As we should not 
be obUged to obey the laws of the magistrate, unless 
rewards or punishments, pleasure or pain, somehow 
or other, depended upon our obedience; so neither 
should we, without the same reason, be obliged to do 
what is right, to practise virtue, or to obey the com- 
mands of God. 



CHAPTER m. 

THE QUESTION, *' WHY AM I OBLIGED TO KEEP 
MY WORD?" RESUMED. 

Let it be remembered, that to be obliged is ** to 
be urged by a violent motive, resulting from the com- 
mand of another." 

And then let it be asked. Why am I obliged to keep 
nnr word ? and the answer will be. Because I am *' ur^ 
ed to do 60 by a violent motive" (namely, the ex- 



MOBAZ* OBLIOATIOir. 6S 

peetation of being after this life reworded, if I do, 
or punished for it, if I do not,) « resulting from the 
command 6f another" (namely, of God.) 

This solution goes to the bottom of the subject, as 
no further question can reasonably be asked. 

Therefore, private happiness is our motive, and the 
will of God our rule. 

When I first turned my thoughts to moral specula- 
tions, an airpf mystery seemed to hang over the 
whole subject; which arose, I believe, from hence, — 
that I supposed, with many authors whom I had read, 
that to be obliged to do a thing was very different 
from being induced only to do it; and that the oblijea^ 
tion to practise virtue, to do what is right, just, &c. 
was quite another thing, and of another kmd, than 
the obligation which a soldier is under to obey his 
officer, a servant his master, or any of the civil and 
ordinary obligations of human life. Whereas from 
what has been said, it appears that moral obligation 
is like all other obligations; and that obligation is 
nothing more than an inducement of sufficient strength, 
and resulting, in some way, from the comn^and of 
another. 

There is always understood to be a difference be- 
tween an act of prudence and an act of duty. Thus, 
if I distrusted a man who owed me a sum of money, I 
should reckon it an act of prudence to get another 
person bound with him; but I should hardly call it 
an act of duty. On the other hand, it would be 
thought a very unusual and looise kind of language, 
to say, that, as I had made such a promise, it was 
prudent to perform it; or that, as my friend, when he 
went abroad, placed a box of jewels in my hands, it 
would be prudent in me to preserve it for him till he 
returned. 

Now, in what, you will ask, does the difference 
consist ? inasmuch as, according to our account of the 
matter, both in the one case and the other, in acts of 
duty as well as acts of prudence, we consider solely 
what we ourselves shall gam or lose by the act. 

The difference, and the only difference, is this; 
that, in the one case^ we consider what we shall gain 



66 WILL OP OOD. 

or loie in the present world; in the other case, we 
connder also what we shall gain or lose in the world 
to come. 

They who would establish a system of morality, in- 
dependent of a future state, must look out for some 
dimrent idea of moral obligation; unless they can 
show that virtue conducts the possessor to certain hap* 
piness in this life, or to a much greater share of it 
than he could attain by a different behaviour. 

To us there are two great questions: 

1. Will there be after this life any distribution of 
rewards and punishments at all ? 

2. If there be, what actions Will be rewarded, and 
what will be punished ? 

The first question comprises the credibility of the 
Christian Religion, together with the presumptive 
proofs of a future retribution from the light of nature. 
The second question comprises the province of morali- 
ty. Both questions are too much for one work. 
The affirmative therefore of the first, although we 
confess that it is the foundation upon which the whole 
fabric rests, must in this treatise be taken for granted. 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE WILL OF GOD. 



As the will of God is our rule; to inquire what is 
our duty» or what we are obliged to do, in any instance, 
is, in OTOCt, to inquire what is the will of Gk>d in that 
instance ? which consequently becomes the whole bu- 
siness of morality. 

Now there are two methods of coming at the will 
of God on any point: 

1. By his express declarations, when they are to be 
had, and which must be sought for in Scripture. 

2. By what we can discover of his designs and dis- 
positions from his works; or, as we usually call it, the 
light of nature. 



WILL or GOO. 67 

And here we may observe the absurdity of separat- 
ing natural and revealed religion from each other. 
The object of both is the same— to discover the will 
of God; — and, provided we do but discover it, it mat- 
ters nothing by what means. 

An ambassador, judging by what he knows of his 
sovereign's disposition, and arguing from what he has 
observed of his conduct, or is ae<][uainted with of his 
designs, may take his measures in many cases with 
safety, and presume with great probability how his 
master would have him act on most occasions that 
arise: but if he have his commission and instructions 
in his pocket, it would be strange not to look into 
them. He will be directed by both rules: when his 
instructions are clear and positive, there is an end to 
all further deliberation (unless indeed he suspect their 
authenticity:) where his instructions are silent or 
dubious, he will endeavour to supply or explain them» 
by what he has been able to couect from other quar- 
ters of his master's general inclination or intentions. 

Mr. Hume, in his fourth Appendix to his Principles 
of Morals, has been pleased to complain of the mod- 
em scheme of uniting Ethics with tne Christian The- 
ology. They who find themselves disposed to join 
in this complaint will do well to observe what Mr. 
Hume himself has been able to make of morality 
without this union. And for that purpose let them 
read the second part of the ninth section of the above 
essay; which part contains the practical application 
of the whole treatise, — a treatise which Mr. Hume 
declares to be " incomparably the best he overwrote." 
When they have read it over, let them consider, whe- 
ther any motives there proposed are likely to be found 
sufficient to withhold men from the gratification of lust, 
revenge, envy, ambition, avarice; or to prevent the 
existence of these passions. Unless they rise up from 
this celebrated essay vnth stronger impressions upon 
their minds than it ever left upon mine, they will ac- 
knowledge the necessity of admtional sanctions. But 
the necessity of these sanctions is not now the ques- 
tion. If they be in fact estdblishedy if the rewards 
And punishments held forth in the gospel will actually 



58 DIVINE BENEVOLENCE. —^ 

come to pass, they must ^ considered. Such as 
reject the Christian religion are to make the best shift 
they can to build up a system, and lay the foundation 
of morality, without it. But it appears to me a great 
inconsistency in those who' receive Christianity, and 
expect something to come of it, to endeavour to keep 
all such expectations oM of sight in their reasonings 
concerning human duty. 

The method of coming at the will of God, concern- 
ing any action, by the light of nature, is to inquire 
into " the tendency of the action to promote or dimi- 
nish the general happiness.'* This rule proceeds upon 
the presumption, that God Almighty wills and wishes 
the happiness of his creatures; and, consequently, that 
those actions which promote that will and wish must 
be agreeable to him; and the contrary. 

As this presumption is the foundation of our whole 
system, it becomes necessary to explain the reasons 
upon which it rests. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE DIVINE BENEVOLENCE. 

When €rod created the human species, either he 
wished tLeir happiness, or he wished their misery, or 
he was indifferent and unconcerned about both. . 

If he had wished our misery, he might have made 
-sure of his purpose, by forming our senses to be so. 
many sores and pains to us, as they are now instru- 
ments of gratification and enjoyfnent: or by placing 
lis amidst objects so ill suited to our perceptions, as to 
have continually offended us, instead of ministering to 
our refreshment and delight. He might have made» 
for example, every thing we tasted bitter; every 
thing we saw loathsome; every thing we touched a 
sting; every smell a stench; and every sound a dis- 
cord. 

If he had been indifferent about our happiness or 
misery, we must impute to our good fortune (as all 



SIVIKK aCNEVOi^ENCE. 59 



\ 



design by this supposition is excluded) both the capa- 
city of our senses to receive pleasure, and the supply 
of external objects fitted to produce it. But either of 
these (and stili more both of them) being too much to 
be attributed to accident, nothing remains but the first 
supposition, that God, v^hen lie created the human 
species, wished their happiness; and made for them 
the provision which he has made, with that view, 
and for that purpose. 

The same argument may be proposed in different 
terms,, thus: Contrivance proves design; and the 
predominant tendency of the contrivance indicates 
the disposition of the designer. The world abounds 
with contrivances; and all the contrivances which we 
are acquainted with are directed to beneficial pur- 
poses. Evil, no doubt, exists; but is never, that we 
can perceive, the object of coi^trivance. Teeth are 
contrived to eat, not to ache; their aching now and 
then is incidental to the contrivance, perhaps insepa- 
rable from it; or even, if you will, let it be called a 
defect in the contrivance; but it is not the object of it. 
This is a distinction which well deserves to be attend- 
ed to. In describing implements of husbandry, you 
would hardly say of the sickle, that it is made to cut 
the reaper's fingers, though, from the construction of 
the instrument, and the manner of using it, this mis- 
chief often happens. But if you had occasion to 
describe instruments of torture or execution. This 
engine, you would say, is ta extend the sinews; this 
to dislocate the joints; this to break the bones; this 
to scorch the soles of the feet. Here pain and misery 
are the very objects of the contrivance. Now, noth- 
ing of this sari is to be found in the works of nature. 
We never diSfOMrer a train of contrivance to bring about 
an evil purpose. No anatomist ever discovered a 
ff^st^ of organization calculated to produce pain and 
Ssiflsj^i or, in explaining the parts of ^he human 
body, ever said. This is to irritate; this to inflame; 
this duct is to convey the gravel to the kidneys; this 
gland to secrete the humour which forms the gout: if 
by chance he come at a part of which he knows not 
the use, the most he can say is, that it is useless; no 



60 SIVINK BENXVOLENCX. 

one ever suspects that it is put there to incommode, to 
annoy, or to tornient. Since thdn God hath called 
forth his consummate wisdom to contrive and provide 
for our happiness, and the world appears to have 
been constituted with this design at first; so long as 
this constitution is upholden by him, we must in reit- 
son suppose the same design to continue. 

The contemplation of universal nature rather be- 
wilders the mind than affects it. There is always a 
bright spot in the prospect, upon which the eye rests; 
a single example, perhaps, by which each man finds 
himself more convinced than by all others put toge- 
ther. I seem, for my own part, to see the Benevolence 
of the Deity more clearly in the pleasures of very 
young children, than in any thing in the world. The 
pleasures of grown persons may be reckoned partly of 
their own procuring; especially if there. has been any 
industry or contrivance or pursuit to come at them; 
or if they are founded, like music, painting, &c. upon 
any qualification of their own acquiring. But the 
pleasures of a healthy infant are so manifestly pro- 
vided for it by anothery and the benevolence of the 
provision is so unquestionable that every child I see 
at its sport affords to my mind a kind of sensible 
evidence of the finger of God, and of the disposition 
which directs it. 

JBut the example which strikes each man most 
strongly is the. true example for him: and hardly two 
minds hit upon the same; which shows the abun- 
dance of such examples about us. 

We conclude, therefore, that God wills and wishes 
the happiness of his creatures. And this conclusion 
being once established, we are at liberty to go on with 
the rule built upon it, namely, " that the method of 
coming at the will of God concerning any action, by 
the light of nature, is to inquire into the tendency of 
that action to promote or diminish the general hap- 
piness.*' • 



VTIIsVTY. $1 



CHAPTER VL 

UTILITY. 

- So then actions are to be estimated by their ten- 
dency.* ' Whatever is expedient is right. It is the 
utility of any moral rule alone, which constitutes the 
obligation oiit. . 

But to all this there seems a plain objection, oiz. 
that many actions are useful, which no man in his 
senses will allow to be right. There are occasions in 
which the hand of the assassin would be very useful. 
The present, possessor of some great estate employs 
his ii^uence and fortune, to annoy, corrupt, or oppress 
aU about him. His estate woi^d devolve, by his 
death, to a successor of an opposite character. It is 
useful, therefore, to despatch such a one as soon as 
possible out of the way; as the nighbourhood ^vill ex- 
change thereby a pernicious tyrant for a wise and 
generous benefactor. It might be useful to rob a 
miser, and 'give the money to the poor; as the money y 
no doubt, would produce more happiness by being 
faiid out in food and clothing for half a dozen distress- 
ed families, than by continuing locked up in a miser's 
chest. It may be useful to get possession of a place, 
a piece of preferment, or of a seat in Parliament, by 
bribery or false swearing: as by means of them we 
may serve the public more effectually than in our 
private station. What then shall we say ? Must we 
admit these actions to be right, which would be to 



* Actions in the abstract are right or wrong, accordine to 
their tendency i the a^nt is virtuous or vicious, according 
to his design. Thus, if the question be. Whether relieving 
common beggars be right or wrong 1 we inquire into the 
tendency of sach a conduct to the public advantage or in- 
convenience. If the question be. Whether a man remarka- 
ble for this sort of bounty is to be esteemed Virtuous for that 
reason 1 we inquire into his design, whether his liberality 
sprang frcMn charity or ifrom ostentation 1 It is evident that 
our concern is with actions in the abstract. 

VOL. I. • 6 



62 



vAhlTY. 



justify assassination, plunder, and perjury; or must 
we give up our principle, that the criterion of right is 
utility? 

It is not necessary to do either. 

The true answer is this; that these actions, after 
all, are not useful, and for that reason, and that alone, 
are not right. 

To see this point perfectly, it must be bbserred, 
that the bad consequences of actions are twofold, par- 
tictilar and general. 

The particular bad consequences of an action is 
the mischief which that single action directly and 
immediately occasions. 

The general bad consequence is the .violation -of 
some necessary or useful general rule. 

Thus, the particular bad consequence of the assas- 
Fination above described is the fright and pain whick 
the deceased underwent; the loss he suffered of life, 
which is as valuable to a bad man as to a good one, 
or more so; the prejudice and affliction of which his 
death was the occasion, to his family, friends, and 
dependants. 

The general bad consequence is the violation of 
this necessary general rule, that no man be put to 
death for his crimes but by public authority. 

Although, therefore, such an action have no parti- 
cular bad consequences, or greater particular good 
consequences yet it is not useful, by reason of tl\e 
general consequence, which is of more importance, 
and which is evil. . And the same of the other two 
instances, and of a million more which might be 
mentioned. 

But as this solution supposes that the moral govern- 
ment of the world must proceed by general roles, it 
remains that we show the necessity of this. 



NECK88ITT OF GENERAL RULE9. 6S 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE NECE88ITT OF GENERAL RULES. 

Yotr cannot permit one action and forbid another 
without showing a difference between them. Conse- 
quently, the same sort of actions must be generally 
permitted or generally forbidden. Where» therefore, 
the general permission of them would be pernicious, 
it becomes necessary to lay down and support the rule 
which generally forbids them. 

Thus, to return once more to the case of the assas- 
sin. The assassin knocked the rich villain on the 
head, because he thought him better out of the way 
than in it. If you allow this excuse in the present 
instance, you must allow it to all who act in the same 
manner and frpm the same motive; that is, yOu must 
allow every man ^o kill any one he meeta whom he 
thinks noxious or useless; which, in the event, would 
be to commit every man's life and safety to the 
spleen, fury, and fanaticism . of his neighbour; — a 
disposition of affairs which would soon fill the world 
with misery and confusion; and ere long put an end 
to human society, if not to the human species. 

The necessity of general rules in human govern- 
ment is apparent: but whether the same necessity 
subsist in the Divine economy, in that distribution of 
rewards, and punishments to which a moralist looks 
forward, may be doubted. 

I answer, that general rules are necessary to every 
moral government: and by moral government I mean 
any dispensation whose object is to influence the con- 
duct of reasonable creatures. 

For if, of two actions perfectly similar, one be 
punished, and the other be rewarded or forgiven, 
which 18 the consequence of rejecting general rules, 
the subjects of such a dispensation would no longer 
know either what to expect or how to act. Rewards 
and punishments would cease to be such — would be- 
come accidents. Like the stroke of a thunderbolt, 
or the discovery of a mine, like a blank or a benefit 



64 NXCSflSITT OF GSNBRAL RVX«SS. 

ticket in a lottery, they would occasion pain or plea- 
sure when they happened; but, following in no known 
order, from any particular course of action, they 
could have no previous influence or efi^ct upon the 
conduct. 

An attention to general rules, therefore, is included 
in the very idea of reward and punishment. Con- 
sequently, whatever reason there is to expect future 
reward and punishment at the hand of God, there ^ 
the same reason to believe that he will proceed in the 
distribution of it by gipneral rules.' 



Before we prosecute the consideratiDn of general 
consequences any further, it may be proper to antici- 
pate a reflection, which will be apt enough to suggest 
itself in the progress of our argument. 

.As the general consequence of an action, upon 
which so much of the guUt of a bad action depends, 
consists in the example;, it should^ seem that if the 
action be done with |)erfect secrecy, so as to lurmsh 
no bad example, that part of the guilt drops off. In 
the case of suicide, for instance, if a man can so 
manage matters, as to take away his own life without 
being known or 'suspected to have done so, he is not 
chargeable with any mischief from the eiMmaple; nor 
does his punishment seem necessary, in order to save 
the authority of any general rule. 

In the first place, those who reason in this manner 
do not observe that they are setting up a, general 
rule, of all others the least to be endured; namely, 
that secrecy, whenever secrecy is practicable, will 
justify any action. 

Were such a rule admitted, for instance in the case 
above produced; is there not reason to fear that peo- 
ple would be dUappearing perpetually ? . 

In the next place, I would wish them to be well 
satisfied about the points proposed in the following 
queries: 

1. Whether the Scriptures do not teach us to ex- 



OXirXRAL COKffXQtrZNCIff. 65 

pect that, at the general judgment of the world, the 
most secret actions will be brought to light ?* 

2. For what purpose can this be, but to make them 
the objects of reward and punishment ? 

3. Whether, being so brought to light, they wiU 
not fall under the operation of those equal and impar* 
tial rules, by which God will deal with his creatures ? 

They will then become examples, whatever they be 
now; and require the same treatment from the judge 
and governor of the moral world, as if they had been 
detected from the first. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

TBS CONSIOBBATION* Of* OKNKRAI. COHSEQVBN- 

CS8 PITRSUED. 

The general consequence of any action may be esti- 
mated, by askine what would be the consequence, if 
the same sort of actions were generally permitted. — 
But suppose they were, and a thousand such actions 
perpetrated under this permission; is it just to charge 
a single action with the collected cuilt and mischief 
of the whole thousand ? I answer, uiat the reason for 
prohibiting and punishing an action (and this reason 
may be called the guilt of the action, if you please) 
will always be in proportion to the whole mischief 
that would arise from the general impunity and tole- 
ration of actions of the same sort. 

"Whatever is expedient is right.'* But then it 
must be expedient on the whole, at the long run, in 
all its efifocts collateral and remote, as well as in those 



* *' In 'the day when God shall judce the secrets of men 
by Jesus Christ.^' Rom. zi. 16. — ** Judge nothing before 
the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the 
liidden things of darkness, and wiH make manifest the coun- 
sels of the heart." 1 Cor. iv. 5. 

VOL. I. 6 ♦ 



M 09NBmAI« CONfB^UBirCBS. 

which areuBinediate and direct; as it is obvious^ that, 
in computing consequences, it makes no ditference in 
what way or at what distance they ensue. 

To impress this doctrine on the minds of young 
traders, and to teach them to extend their views be- 
yond the immediate mischief of a crime, I shall here 
subjoin a string of instances, in which the particular 
consequences is comparatively insignificant; and where 
the malignity of the crime, and the severity with 
which human laws pursue it, is almost entirely found- 
ed upon the general consequence. 

The particular consequence of coining is the loss 
of a guinea or of half a guinea to the person who 
receives the counterfeit money: the general conse- 
quence (by which I mean the consequence that would 
ensue, if the same practice were generally permitted) 
is to abolish the use of money. 

The particular consequence of forgery is a damage 
of twenty or thirty pounds to the man who accepts 
the forged bill: the general consequence is the stop- 
page of paper currency. 

The particular consequence of sheep-stealing, or 
horse-stealing is a loss to the owner, to the amount 
of the value of the sheep or horse stolen: the general 
consequence is that the land could not be occupied, 
nor the market sijpplied with this kind of stock. 

The particular consequence of breaking into a 
hoiise empty of inhabitants is the loss of a pair of 
silver candlesticks or a few spoons: the general con- 
sequence is that nobody could leave their house 
empty. 

The particular consequence of smuggling may be a 
deduction from the national fund too minute for com- 
putation: the general consequence is the destruction 
of one entire branch of public revenue; a propor- 
tionable increase of the burden upon other branches; 
and the ruin of all fair and open trade in the article 
smuggled. 

^ The particular consequence of an ofIicer*s breaking 
his parole is the loss of a prisoner, who was possibly 
not worth keeping: the general consequence Is that 



this initiation of captivity wovdd be refuted to all 
others. 

And what proves incontestably the superior impor- 
tance of general conseauences is that crimes are the 
same» and treated in the same manner, though the 
particular eonsequence be very di£^rent« The crime 
and fate of the house-breaker is the same, whether 
his booty be five pounds or fifty. And the reason it 
that the general consequence is the same. 

The want of this distinction between particular and 
general * consequences, or rather, the not sufficiently 
attending to the latter, is the cause of that perplexity 
which we meet with in ancient moralists. On the 
one hand, they were sensible of the absurdity of pro- 
nouncing actions good or evil, without regard to the 
good or evil they produced. On the other hand, 
they were startled at the conclusion to which a steady 
adherence to cpnsequences seemed sometimes to con- 
duct them. To relieve this difficulty they contrived 
the TO yrffgror or the honestum, by which terms they 
meant to constitute a measure of right, distinct from 
utility. Whilst the utile served them, that is, whilst 
it corresponded with their habitual notions of the 
rectitude of actions, they went by it When they 
fell in with such cases as those mentioned in the 
sixth chapter, they took leave of their guide, and 
resorted to the honestum. The only account they 
OTuld give of the matter was, that these actions might 
be useful; but, because they were not at the same 
time honestOy they were by no means to be deemed 
just or right. 

From the principles delivered in this and the two 
preceding chapters, a maxim may be explained, which 
IS in every man's mouth, and in most men's without 
meaning, viz. ** not to do evil, that good mity come)'* 
that is, let us not violate a general rule for the sak« 
of any particular good consequence we may expect: 
which is for the most part a salutary caution, the ad- 
▼antage seldom compensating for the violation of tht 
rule. Strictly speakmg, that cannot be ** evil'* from 
which ** good comes;" but in this way, and with » 



M or RIGHT. 

view to the distinotion between particular and general 
consequences, it may. 

We will conclude this subject of consequences with 
the following reflection. A man may imagine, that 
any action of his, with respect to the public, must be 
inconsiderable: so also is the agent. If his crime 
.produce but a small effect upon the tmi«er«a/ interest, 
his punishment or destruction bears a small propor- 
tion .to the sum of happiness and misery in the crea- 
tion. 



CHAPTER IX. 



OF RIOHT. 



Right and obligation are reciprocal; that is, where- 
ever there is a right in one person, there is a corres- 
ponding obligation upon others. If one man has a 
'* right'* to an estate; others are « obliged'* to abstain 
from It: — If parents have a ** right*' to reverence from 
their children; children are "obliged" to reverence 
their parents; — and so in all other instances. 

Now, because moral obligaHon depends as we have 
seen, upon the will of God; right y which is correla 
tive to it, must depend upon the same. Right there- 
fore signifies consisteTUy with the will of God. 

3ut if the Divine will determine the distinction of 
right and wrong, what else is it but an identical pro- 
position, to say of God, that he acts right? or how 
is it possible to conceive even that he should act 
fjorongl Yet these ajssertions are intelligible and sig- 
nificant. The case is this; By virtue of the two 
principles, that God wills the happiness of his crea- 
tures, and that the will of God is the measure of right 
and wrong, we arrive at certain conclusions; which 
conclusions become rules; and we soon learn to pro- 
nounce actions right or wrong, according as they 
agree or disagree with our rules, without looking any 
further: and when the habit is once established of 
•topping at the rules, we can go back and compare 



DIVISION or RIGHTS. 6^ 

With tl;iesc rules even the Divine conduct itself;, and 
yet 4t may be true (only not observed by us at the 
time) that the rules themselves are 'deduced from the 
Divine will. 

^ Right is a quality of persons or of actions. 

0( persons; asi when we say,, such a one has a 
"right" to this estate; parents have a "right" to 
reverence from their children; the king to allegiance 
from his subjects; masters have a " right" to their 
servants' labour; a man has not a " right" over his 
own life. 

Of actions; as in such expressions as. the following: 
it is " right" to punish murder with death; iiis be- 
haviour on that occ^on was " right ;" it is not *.* right*' 
to send an unfortunate debtor to gaol; he did or 
acted <^ right," who ^ave up his place, rather than 
vote against his judgment. 

In this latter set of expressions, you may substitute 
the definition of right above given for the term itBelf; 
t. g, it is ** consistent with the'will of God" to pimish 
murder with death; — ^his behaviour on that occasion 
was " consistent with the will of 6od;"-^it is not 
« consistent with the will of Grod" to send an unfor- 
tunate debtor to gaol; — he did, or acted, ** consis- 
tently with the will of God," who gave up his place 
rather than vote against his judgment. 

In the former set, you must vary the construction a 
little, when you introduce the definition instead of the 
term. Such a one has a " right" to this estate; that 
is, it is ".consistent with the will of God" that such a 
one should have it; — parents have a " right" to reve- 
rence from their children; that is, it* is "consistent 
with the will of God" that children should reverence 
their parents; — and the same of the rest. 



CHAPTER X^ 

THB DIVISION OF RIGHTS. 

Rights, when applied to persons, are 
Naturiil or adventitious: 



70 DIVISION or RIGHTS. 

Alienable or unalienable: 
Perfect or imperfect. 

1. Bights are natural or adventitious. 

Natural rights lure such as would belong to m^, 
although there subsisted in the world no civil govem- 
ment whatever. 

Adventitious rights are sdch as would not. 

JVatural rights are a man's right io his life, limbs, 
and liberty; his right to the produce qf his personal 
labour; to the use, in common with others, of air, 
light, water. If a thousand different persons, from a 
thousand difibrent comers of the world, were past 
together upon a desert island, they woiUd from the 
first be every one entitled to these rights. 

Jtdventitious rights are th$ right of a king over 
his subjects; of a general over hirf soldiers; of a judge 
over the life and'liberty of a prisoner; a right to elect 
or appoint lAagistrates, to impose taxes, decide dis- 
putes, direct the descent or disposition of property; a 
right, in a word, in any one man, or particular body 
of men, to make laws and regulations for the rest. 
For none of these rights would exist in the newly in- 
habited island. 

And here it will be asked, how adventitious rights 
are created; or, which is the same thing, how any 
new rights can accrue from the establishment of civil 
society? as rights of all kinds, we remember, depend 
upon the will of God, and civil society is but the or- 
dinance and institution of man. For the solution of 
this difficulty, we must return to our first principles. 
God wills the happiness of mankind; ilnd the exist- 
ence of civil society, as conducive to that happiness. 
Consequently, many things, which are useful for the 
support of civil society in general, or for the conduct 
and conservation of particular societies already esta- 
blished, are, for that reason, *' consistent with the will 
of God," or " right," whiph, without that reason, t. e. 
without the establishment of civil society, would not 
have been so. 

From whence alqp it- appears, that adventitious 
rights, though immediately derived from human ap- 
pointment, are not, for that reason^ less sacred than 



DIVISION OF BIGHTS. 71 

natural rights, nor the obligation to respect them less 
cogent. They' both ultimately rely upon the same 
authority — ^the will of God. Such a man claims a 
right to a particular estate. He can show, it is true, 
nothing for his right, but a rule of the civil commu- 
nity to which he belongs; and this rule may be arbi- 
trary, capricious, and absurd. Notwithstanding all 
this, there would be the same sin in dispossessing the 
man of his estate by craft or violence, as if it had 
been assigned to him^ like the partition of the country 
amongst the twelve tribes, by the immediate designa- 
tion and appointment of Heaven. 

2. Rights are alienable or unalienable. « 
Which terms explain themselves. 

The right we have to most of those things which we 
call property, as houses, lands, money, &c. is alienable. 

The right of a prince over his people, of a husband 
over his wife, of a master over his servant, is gene- 
rally and naturally unalienable. 

The distinction depends upon the mode of acquir- 
ing the right. If the right originate from a contract, 
and be limited to the person by the express terms of 
the contract, or by the -common interpretation of sueh 
contracts (which is equivalent to an express stipula- 
tion,) or by a personal condition annexed to the right; 
thenit is unalienable, jbi all other cases it is aliena- 
ble. 

The right to civil liberty is .alienable; though in 
the vehemence of men's zeal for it , and the language 
of some political remonstrances, it has often been pro- 
nounced to be an unalienable right. The true reason 
why mankind hold in detestation the memory of those 
who have sold their liberty ^to a tyrant is, that, toge** 
ther with their own, they sold commonly, or endan- 
gered, the liberty of others; which certainly they had 
no right to dispose of 

3. Rights are perfect or imperfect. 

Perfect rights may be asserted by force, or, what in 
civil society comes into the place of private force, by 
couraa of law. 

Imperfect rights may not. 

Examples of perfect rights. — ^A man's right to his 



. 72 DIVISION or ]|IGKT9« 

life, pdtson, hoiue; for, if these be attacked, he ipsj 
repel the attack by instant violence, or punish the 
aggressorby law: a man's right to his estate, fumi- 
ti^, clothes, money, and to all ordinary articles of 
property; for, if they be injuriously taken from him, 
ne may compel the author of the injuiy to make resti*' 
ttition or satisfaction'. 

Examples of imperfect rights. — ^In elections or ap- 
pointments to offices, where the qualifications are pre- 
scribed, the best qualified candidate has a right to 
success; yet, if he be rejected, he has no ronedy. 
He can neidier seize the office by force, nor obtain 
redress at law: his right therefi)re is imperfect. A 
poor neighbour has a right to relief; yet if it be 
refused hun, he must not extort it. A benefactor has 
a right to returns of gratitude from 'the jierson he has 
obliged; yet, if he meet with none, he must acquiesce. 
Children have a right to affection and education from 
their parents; and parents, on their, part, to duty and 
reverence from their children: yet if these rights be 
on either side withholden, there is no compulsion by 
which they can be enforced. * 

It mty be at first view difficult to apprehend how a 
peil^on should have a right to a thing, and yet have 
BO right to use the means necessary to obtain it. This 
difficulty, like 'inost others i^ morality, is resolvable 
into the necessity df general rules. The reader recol- 
lects, that a person is said to have a ** right" to a 
thing, when it is .** consistent with the. will <^ Qod** 
that he should possess it. So that the question is 
reduced to this: JEiow it comes to pass that it should 
be consistent with the will of God that a person should 
{Possess a thing, and yet not be consistent with the 
same will that he should use force to obtain it ? The 
answer is, that by reason. of the indeterminateness, 
either of the object, or of the circumstances of the 
right, the permission of force in this case would, in its 
consequence, lead to the permission of force in other 
cases, where there existed no right at all. The can- 
didate above described has, no doubt, a right to suc- 
cess; but his right depends upon his qualifications^ 
fn instaace, upon his comparative virtue, leamiikg* 



DIVISION or miOBTk TS 

Itc: there must be somebody therefore to comparo 
them. The existence, degree, and respective import- 
ance of these qualifications are ail indeterminate: 
there must be somebody therefore to determine them. 
To allow the candidate to demand success by force is 
to make him the judge of his own qualifications. You 
cannot do this but you must make all other candidates 
the same; which would open a door to demands with- 
out number, reason, or right. In like manner, a poor 
man has a right to relief from the rich; but the mode* 
season, and quantum of that relief, who shall con- 
tribute to it, or how much, are not ascertained. Yet 
these points must be ascertained, before a claun to 
relief can be prosecuted by force. For, to allow the 
poor to ascertain them for themselves would be to 
expose property to so many of these claims, that it 
would lose its value, or rather its nature ; that is, cease 
indeed to be property. The «ame observatioiv holds 
of all other cases of imperfect rights; not to mention 
that, in the instances of gratitude j afifection, reverence, 
and the like, force is excluded by the very idea of the 
duty, which must be voluntary, or cannot exist at all. 

Wherever the ri^t is imperfect, the corresponding 
obligation is so too. I am obliged to prefer the best 
candidate, to relieve the poor, be grateful to my bene- 
factors, take care of my children, and reverence my 
parents; but in all these cases my obligation, like 
their right, is imperfect. 

I ccU these obligations '* imperfect," in conformity 
to the established language of writers upon the sub- 
ject. The term, however, seems ill chosen, on this 
account, that it leads many to imagine that there is 
less guilt in the violation of an imperfect obligation 
than of a perfect one; which is a groundless notion. 
For an obligation being perfect or imperfect, deter- 
mines only whether violence may or may not be em- 
ployed to enforce it; and determines nothing else. 
The degree of guilt incurred by violating the obliga- 
tion is a different thing, and is determined by circum- 
stances altogether independent of this distinction. A 
man who by a partial, prejudiced, or corrupt vote, dis- 
appoints a worthy candidate of a station in life, upon 
vol- I. 7 



74 GXNSltAL mOHTS OP MAlTKINll^ 

which hJB hopes, possibly, or livelihood, dependecf, 
and who thereby grievously discourages merit and 
emulation in others, commits, I am persuaded, a much 
greater crime than if he filched a book out of a library, 
t)r picked a pocket of a handkerchief; though in the 
one case he violates only an imperfect right, in the 
other a, perfect one. 

As positive precepts are oflen indeterminate in their 
extent, and as the indeterminateness of an obligation 
is that which makes it imperfect; it comes to pass, 
that positive precepts commonly produce an imperfect 
obligation. 

Negative precepts or prohibitions, being generally 
precise, constitute accordingly perfect obligations. 

The fifth commandment is positive, and the duty 
which results from it is imperfect. 

The sixth commandment is negative, and imposes 
a perfect obligation. 

Religion and virtue find their principal exercise 
among the imperfect obligations; the laws of civil 
•ciety taking pretty good care of the rest. 



CHAPTER XI. 

THX OXVERAL RIGHTS OF MANKIND. 

Bt the General Rights of Mankind, I mean tha 
lights which belong to the species collectively; the 
original stock, as I may say, which they have sinoe 
distributed among themselves. 

These are, 

1. A right to the. fruits or vegetable produce of the 
earth. 

The insensible parts of the creation are incafMible 
of injury; and it is nugatory to inquire into the rights 
where the use can be attended with no injury. But it 
may be worth observing, for the sake of an inference 
which will appear below, that as God had created us 
with a want and desire of food, and provided things 
suited by their nature to sustain and, satisfy us» we 



OKNimAI* KIGHT* OF MAHKiKH^ 76 

may fairly imsiime, that he mtended we should apply 
these things to that purpose. 

2. A right to the flesh of animals. 

This is- a very different claim from the former. 
Some excuse seems necessary for the pain and loss 
mrhich we occasion to brutes, by restraining them of 
their liberty, mutilating their bodies, and, at last, 
putting an end to their lives (which we suppose to be 
the whole of their existence,) for our pleasure or con- 
veniency. 

The reasons alleged in vindication of/ this practice 
are the following: that the several species of brutes 
being created to prey upon one another, affords a kind 
of analogy to prove that the human species were in- 
tended to feed upon them; that, if let alone, they 
would overrun the earth, and exclude mankind from 
the occupation of it; that they are requited for what 
they BuS^r at our hands, by our care and protection. 

Upon which reasons I would observe, that the 
analogy contended for is extremely lame; since brutes 
have no power to support life by any other means, 
and smce we have; for the whole human species 
might subsist entirely upon fruit, pulse, herbs, and 
roots, as many tribes of Hindoos actually do. The 
two other reasons may be valid reasons, as far as they 
go; for, no doubt, if man had been supported entirely 
by vegetable food, a great part of those animals which 
die to furnish his table would never have lived: but 
they by no means justify our right over the lives of 
brutes to the extent in which we exercise it. What 
danger is there, for instance, of fish interfering with 
us, in t\ke occupation of their element ? or what do we 
contribute to their support or preservation ? 

It seem to me, that it would be difficult to defend 
this right by any arguments which the light and order 
of nature afibrd; and that we are beholden for it to 
the permission recorded in Scripture, Gen. ix. I, 2, 3. 
<* And God blessed Noah and hia sons, and said unto 
them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the 
earth: and the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall 
be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl 
of the air» and upon all that moveth upon the earth. 



76 esarsBAx. rxorts or maitkind. 

and upon all the fishes of the sea; into yma hand are 
they delivered; every movmg thing shall be meat for 
you; even as the green herb, have I given you all 
things.'* To Adam and his posterity had been grant- 
ed, at the creation, "every green herb for meat,^' and 
nothing more. In the last clause of the passage now 
produced, the old grant is recited, and extended to the 
flesh of animals; ** even as the green herb, have I 
given you all things." But this was not till after the 
flood; the inhabitants of the antediluvian world had 
therefore no such permission, that we know of. Whe- 
ther they actually refrained from the flesh of animals, 
is another question. Abel,* we read, was a keeper of 
sheep; and for what purpose he kept them, except few- 
food, is difficult to say (unless ^it were sacrifices:) 
might not, however, some of the stricter sects among 
the antediluvians be scrupulous as to this point ? and 
might not Noah and his family be of this description ? 
for it is not probable that God would publish a per- 
mission to authorize a practice which had never been 
disputed. 

Wanton, and, what is worse, studied emelty to 
brutes is certainly wrong, as coming within none of 
these reasons. 



From reason then, or revelation, or from both toge^ 
ther, it appears to be God Almighty's intention, that 
the productions of the earth should be applied to the 
sustentation of human life. Consequently all waste 
and misapplication of these productions is contrary to 
the Divine intention and will; and therefore wrong, 
for the same reason that any other crime is so: Such 
as, what is related of,..WiUiam the Conqueror, the con- 
verting of twenty manors into a forest for hunting; 
or, which is not much better, suflering them to con- 
tinue in that state; or, the letting of large tracts of 
land lie barren, because the owner cannot cultivate 
them, nor will part with them to those who can; or 
destroying, or suflering to perish, great part of an 
article of human provision, m order to enhance the 
price of the remainder (which is said to have been. 



•BirSRAI. HIQHT* Or MANKIND* 7f 



till Ist^y, the. case with fish caught upon the 
coast;) or dimmishing the breed of animals, by & 
wanton or hnprovident consumption of the young, as 
of the spawn of shell fish, or the fiy of salmon, by the 
use of unlawful nets, or at improper seasons. To this 
head may also be referred what is the same evil in a 
amaller way, the expending of human food on super- 
fluous dogs or horses; and lastly, the reducing of th« 
quantity, in order to alter the quality, and to alter it 
generally for the worse; as the distillation of spirits 
irom bread corn, the boiling down of solid meat for 
sauces, essences, &c. 

This seems to be the lesson which our Saviour, 
after his manner, inculcates, when he bids his disci- 
ples ** gather up the fragments, that nothing be lost.'* 
And it opens indeed a new field of duty. Schemes of 
wealth or profit prompt the active part of mankind to 
cast about, how they may convert their property t» 
the most advantage; and their own advantage, and 
that of the public, commonly concur. But it has not 
as yet entered into the minds of mankind to reflect, 
that it is a duty, to add what we can to the commune 
■tock of provision j by extracting out of our estates th^ 
most they will yield; or that it is any sin to neglect 
this. 

From the same intention of God Almighty, we also 
deduce another conclusion, namely, *' that nothings 
ought to be made exclusive property, which can bo 
conveniently enjoyed in common." 

It is the general intention of God Almighty, that 
the produce of the earth be applied to the use of man. 
This appears from the constitution of nature, or, if voir 
will, from his express declaration; and this is all tliat 
appears at first. Under this general donation, one 
man has the same right as another. You pluck an 
apple from a 'tree, or take a lamb from a flock, for 
your immediate use and nourishment, and I do the 
same; and we both plead for what we do, the general 
intention of the Supreme Proprietor. So far all is 
right: but you cannot claim the whole tree or ths 
whole flock, and exclude me from any share of them, 
and plead this general intention ibr what- you dok. 

TOI* I. 7* 



7S GSirxilAL AIOBTB OF MAJUMlInf*. 

Tke pfea will not seire yon; you most Aaw mum^ 
tiling more. Yon must show, by probable aigimeatey 
ftt least, that it is Ood*s intention that these things 
should be parcelled out to individuals; and that the 
•stablished distribution, under which you claim, 
should be upholden. Show me this, and I am satis- 
fied. But until this be shown, the general intentiont 
which has been made to appear, and whidi is all that 
does appear, must prerail; and, under that, ray title 
, is as good as yours. Now there is no argument to 
induce such a presumption, but one; that the thing 
cannot be enjoyed at all, or enjoyed with the same, or 
with nearly the same advantage, while it continues in 
eommon as when appropriated. This is true, where 
there is not enough for all, or where the article in 
question requires care or labour in the production or 
preservation; but where no such reason obtains, and 
the thing is in its nature capable of being enjoyed by 
as many as will, it seems an arbitrary usurpation upon 
the rights of mankind, to confine the use of it to any. 

If a medicinal spring were discovered in a piece of 
grivund which was private ' property, copious enough 
for every purpose to which it could be applied, I woidd 
award a compensation to the owner of the field, and a 
liberal profit to the author of the discovery, especially 
if he had bestowed pains or expense upon the search: 
but I question whether any human laws would be 
justified, or would justify the o^vner, in prohibiting 
mankind from the use of the water, or setting such a 
price upon it as would almost amount to a prohibitiim. 

If there be fisheries which are inexhaustible, as the 
cod fishery upon the Banks of Newfoundland, and the 
herring fishery in the British seas, are said to be; then 
all those conventions, by which one or two nations 
claim to themselves, and guarantee to each other, the 
exclusive enjoyment of these fisheries, are so many en- 
croachments upon the general rights of mankind. 

Upon the same principle may be determined a 
question, •which makes a great figure in books of 
. natural law, utrum mare Hi liberum7 that is, aa I 
understand it, whether the exdusive right of navi- 
fating paticular seas, or a control over the naviga> 
tion of these seas» can be claimed, consistently with 



OBHKRAL mOHTB Or ICAlTKIirO 7§ 

the law of nature, by any nation ? What is necessaiy 
for' each nation's safety, we allow; as their own bays, 
creeks, and harbours, the sea contiguous to, that is, 
within cannon-shot, or three leagues, of their coast; 
uid upon this principle of safety (if upon any prin- 
ciple) must be defended the claim of the Venetian 
State to the Adriatic, of Denmark to the Baltic Sea, 
and/'of Great Britain to t]ie seas which invest the 
island. But when Spain asserts a right to th6 Pacific 
'Ocean, or Portugal to the Indian Seas, or when any 
nation extends its pretentions much beyond the limits 
of its own territories, they erect a claim which inter- 
feres with the benevolent designs of Providence, and 
which no human authority can justify. 

3. Anothey right, which may be called a general 
right, as it is incidental to every man who is in a 
situation to claim it, is the right of extreme neces- 
sity; by which is meant, a right to use or destroy 
another's property, when it is necessary for our own 
preservation to do so; as a right to take, without or 
against the owner's leave, the first food, clothes, or 
shelter we meet with, when we are in danger of perish- 
ing through want of them; a right to throw goods 
overboard, to save the ship; or to pull down a house, 
in order to stop the progress of a fire ; and a few other 
instances of the same lund. Of which right the foun- 
dation seems to be this: that when property was first 
instituted, the institution was not intended to operate 
to the destruction of any; therefore, when such con- 
sequences would follow, all regard to it is superseded. 
Or rather, perhaps, these are the few cases, where 
the particular consequence exceeds the general conse- 
quence; where the remote mischief resulting from 
the violation of the general rule is overbalanced by 
the immediate advantage. 

Restitation however is due, when in our power: 
because the laws of property are to be adhered to, so 
far as consists with safety; and because restitution, 
which is one of those laws, supposes the danger to be 
over. But what is to be restored ? Not the nill value 
of the property destroyed, but what it was worth at 
the time of destroying it; which, considering the 
danger it was in of perishing, might be very little. 



BOOK III. 

RBLATITE DUTIES. 



PART I. 

or BSLATIVB DUTIES WHICH ABE DBTBBMtlTATB. 



CHAPTER I. 



OF PBOPBHTT. 



If you should see a flock of pigeons in a field of 
com; and if (instead of each picking where and what 
it liked, taking just as much as it wanted, and no more) 
you should see ninety-nine of them gathering all they 
got into a heap; reserving nothing for themselves but 
the chaff and the refuse; keeping this heap for one, 
and that the weakest, perhaps worst, pigeon of the 
flock; sitting round, and looking on, all the winter, 
whilst this one was devouring, throwing about, and 
wasteing it; and if a pigeon, more, hardy or hungry 
than the rest, touched a grain of the hoard, all the 
others instantly flying upon it, and tearing it to 
pieces; — ^if you should see this, you would see no- 
thing more than what is every day. practised and 
established among men. Among men, you see the 
ninety and nine toiling and scraping together a heap 
of superfluities for one (and this one too, oftentimes, 



titsTiTVTioir or pmorsmTT. 81 

the feeblest and wont of the whole eet— « ehild, ai 
woman, a madman, or a fool;) getting nothing for 
themselves all the while, but a little of the coarsest of 
the provision which their own industry produces; 
lookmg qtiietly on, while they see the fruits of all 
their labour spent or spoiled; and if one of the nvDi- 
ber take or touch a particle of the hoard, the others 
joining against him, and hanging him for the theft. 



CHAPTER 11. 

THS USB OF THE INSTITUTION OF FROPXaTT. 

Thsrk must be some very important advantages to 
account for an institution, which, in the view of it 
above given, is so paradoxical and unnatural. 

The principal of these advantages are the follow- 
ing: 

1. It increases the produce of the earth. 

The earth, in climates like ours, produces little 
without cultivation: and none would be found willing 
to cultivate the ground, if others were to be admitted 
to an equal share of the produce. The same is true 
of the care of flocks and herds of tame animals. 

Crabs and acorns, red deer, rabbits, game, and fish 
are all which we should have to subsist upon in this 
country, if we trusted to the spontaneous productions 
of the soil; and it fares not much better with' other 
countries. A nation of North American savages, con- 
nsting of two or three hundred, will take up, and be 
half starved upon a tract of land which, in Europe, 
and with European management, would be sufficient 
for the maintainance of as many thousands. 

In some fertile soils, together with great abundance 
of fish upon their coasts, and in regions where clothes 
are unnecessary, a considerable degree of population 
majr aubsist without property in land, which is the 
ease in the islands of Otaheite: but in less favoured 
9it«ations, as in the country of New Zealand, though 



82 IVtTITITTIOK OF PROPS ATT. 

thm sort of property obtain in a small degree, the in- 
habitants, for want of a more secure and regular esta- 
blishment of it, are driven oftentimes by the scarcity 
of provision to devour one another. 

2. It preserves the produce of the earth to matu- 
rity. 

We may judge what would be the effects of a com- 
munity of right to the productions of the earth, from 
the trifling specimens which we see of it at present. 
A cherry tree in a hedgerow, nuts in a wood, the grass 
of an unstinted pasture, are seldom of much advan- 
tage to any body, because' people do not wait for the 
proper season of reaping them. Com, if any were 
sown, would never ripen; lambs and calves would 
never grow up to sheep and cows, because the first 
person that met them would reflect that he had better 
take them as they are, than leave them for another. 
8. It prevents contests. 

War and waste, tumult and confusion, must be un- 
avoidable and eternal, where there is not enough for 
all, and where there are no rules to adjust the division. 
4. It improves the conveniency of living. 
This it does two ways. It enables mankind to 
divide themselves into distinct professions; which is 
impossible, unless a man can exchange the produc- 
tions of his own art for What he wants from others ; 
and exchange implies property. Much of the advan- 
tage of civilized over savage life depends upon this. 
When a man is from necessity his own tailor, tent- 
maker, carpenter, cook, huntsman, and fisherman, it 
is not probable that he will be expert at any of his 
callings. Hence the rude habitations, furniture, cloth- 
ing, and implements of savages; and the tedious 
length of time which all their operations require. 

It likewise encourages those arts by which the ac- 
commodations of human life are supplied, by appro- 
priating to the artist the benefit of his discoveries snd 
miprovements; without which appropriation ingenuity 
.will never be exerted with eflbct. 

Upon these several accounts we may venture, with 
a few exceptions, to pronounce that even the poorest 
and the worst provided, in oi^tries where property 



HISTORY or PAOPSSTT. $t 

uid the consequences of property prevail, are in a 
better sitnation, with respect to food, raiment, houses, 
and what are called the necessaries of life, than any 
are in places where most things remain in common. 

The balance, therefore, upon the whole, must pre- 
ponderate in favour of property with a manifest and 
great excess. 

Inequality of property, in the degree in which it 
exists in most countries of Europe, abstractedly con- 
sidered, is an evil; but it is an evil which flows from 
those rules concerning the acquisition and disposal of 
property, by' which men are incited to industry, and 
oy which the object of their industry is rendered se- 
cure and valuable. If there be any great inequality 
unconnected with this origin, it ought to be corrected. 



CHAPTER ra. 

THE HISTORY OP PROPSRTY. 

Ths first objects of property were the fruits which 
a man gathered, and the wild animals he caught; next 
to these, the tents or houses which he built, the tools 
he made use of to catch or prepare his food; and 
afterwards weapons of war and ofience. Many of 
the savage tribes in North America have advanced 
no further than this yet; for they are said to reap their 
harvest, and return the produce of their market with 
foreigners, into the common hoard or treasury of the 
tribe. Flocks and herds of tame animals soon became 
property: Abel, the second from Adam, was a keeper 
of sheep; sheep and oxen, camels and asses, com- 
posed the wealth of the Jewish patriarchs, as they do 
still of the modem Arabs. As the world was first 
peopled in the East, where there existed a great 
scarcity of water, wells probably were next made 
property; as we learn from the frequent and serious 
mention of them in the Old Testament; the contea- 



94 HISTORY or PROPSmTT. 

tions and treaties about them;* and from its betng 
recorded, among the most memorable achievements 
of very eminent men, that they dug or discovered a 
well. Land, which is now so important, a part of 
property, which alone our laws call real property, and 
regard upon all occasions with such peculiar atten- 
tion, was probably not made property in any country, 
till long after the institution of many other species of 
property, that is, till the country became populous, 
and tillage began to be thought of. The first parti- 
tion of an estate which we read of was that which 
took place between Abram and Lot, and was one of 
the 'simplest imaginable: "If thou wilt take the left 
hand, then I wiU go to the right; or if thou depart 
to the right hand, £en I will go to the left." There 
are no traces of property in land in CaBsar's account 
of Britain; little of it in the history of the Jewish 
patriarchs; none of it found amongst the nations of 
North Amarica; the Scythians are expressly said to 
have appropriated their cattle and houses, but to have 
left their land in common. 

Property in immovablei^ continued at first no longer 
than the occupation ;*that is, so long as a man's family 
continued in possession of a cave, or whillBt his flocks 
depastured upon a neighbouring hill, no one atteiiq>t- 
ed, or thought he had a right, to disturb or drive them 
out; but when the man quitted his cave, or changed 
his pasture, the first who found them unocciqHed en- 
tered upon thera, by the same title as his predecessors; 
and made way in his turn for any one that happened 
to succeed him. All more permanent property in land 
was probably posterior to civil government and to 
laws; and therefore settled by these, or according to 
the will of the reigning chief. 



^ * Genesis, zxi. 25; zivi. 18. 



♦ 



AI6BT or FAOPSATY. tt 

CHAPTER IV. 

Vm WHAT THS RIOHT OV PROPBBTT If 

rOUlTDSD. 

We now speak of Property in Land: and there is a 
difficulty in explaining the origin of this property 
consiBtently witn the law of nature; for the lana wae 
ohee, no doubt, common; and the question is, how 
any particular part of it could justly be taken out of 
the common, and so appropriated to the first owner, 
as to give him a better right to it than others; and, 
what is more, a right to exclude all others from it. 

Moralists have given many different accounts of 
this matter: which diversity alone, perhaps, is a proof 
that none of them are satisfactory. 

One tells us that mankind, when they sufiered a 
particular person to occupy a piece of ground, by 
tacit consent relinquished their right io it; and as 
the piece of ground, they say, belonged to mankind 
collectively, and mankind thus gave up their right to 
the first peaceable occupier, it thenceforward beoame 
his property, and no one afterwards had a right to 
molest him in it. 

The objection to this Account is, that consent can 
never be presumed from silence, where the person 
whose consent is required, knows nothing about the 
matter; which must have been the case with all maa^ 
kind, except the neighbourhood of the place where 
the appropriation was made. • And to suppose that 
the piece of ground previouly belonged to the neigh- 
bouraood, and that they had a just power of confeiv 
xmg a right to it upon whom they pleased, is to sup- 
pose the question resolved, and a partition <^f land to 
nave already taken place. 

Another says, that each man's limbs and labour are 
his own exclusively; that, by occupying a piece of 
ground, a man inseparably mixes lus labour with it; 
by which means the piece of ground becon^s thence- 
Ibrward his own, as you cannot takct it from him witU- 

VOL. I. 8 



M BIORT OF PBOPSBTT. 

out depriving him at the same time of something 
which 18 iadisputably his. 

This is Mr. Locke's solution; and seems indeed a 
fair reason, where the value of. the labour bears a 
considerable proportion to the value of the thing; or 
whfere the thing derives its chief use and value from 
the labour. Thus game and fish, though they be 
common whilst at large in the woods or water, iostanly 
become the property of the person that catches them; 
because an animal when caught is much more valua- 
ble than when at liberty: and this increase of value, 
which is inseparable from and makes a great part of 
the whole value, is strictly the property of the fowler 
or fisherman, being the produce of his personal labour. 
For the same reason, wood or iron, manufactured into 
utensils, becomes the property of the manufacturer; 
because the value of the workmanship far exceeds that 
of the materials. And upon a similar pnnciple, a 
parcel of unappropriated groimd, which a man should 
pare, bum, plough, harrow, and sow, for the produc- 
tion of com, would jastly enoug]|;» be thereby made his 
own. But this will hardly hold, in the manner it has 
been applied, of taking a ceremonious possession of a 
tract of land, as navigators do of* new discovered 
islands, by erecting a standard, engraving an inscrip* 
tion, or publishing a proclamation to the birds and 
beasts; or df turning your cattle into a piece of 
ground, setting up a landmark, digging a ditch,, or 
planting a hedge round it. Nor will even the clear- 
mgt manuring, and ploughing of a field give the first 
occupier a right to it in perpetuity, and after this cul- 
tivation and all eflfects of it are ceased. 

Another and, in my opinion, a better account of 
the first right of ownership is the following: That, 
as God has provided these things for the use of all, 
he has of consequence given each leave to take of them 
what he wants: by virtue, therefore, of this leave, a 
man may appropriate what he stands in need of to his 
own use, without asking or waiting for the consent of 
bthers; in like manner as, when an entertainment is 

Erovided for the freeholders of a county, each free- 
older goes, and eats and drinks what he wants or 



RIGHT or PROPERTY. 8T 

cho066fl» without haying or waiting for the coiatent of 
the other guests. . 

But then this reason justifies property, as far as 
necessaries alone, or, at the most, as far as a compe- 
tent provision for our natural exigences. For, in the 
entertainment we speak of (allowing the comparison 
to hold in all points,) although every particular free- 
holder may sit down and eat till he be satisfied, with- 
out any other leave than that of the master of the 
feast, or any other proof of that leave than the gene- 
ral ■ invitatioh, or the manifest design with which the 
entertainment is provided ; yet you would hardly per- 
mit any one to fill his pockets or his wallet, or to cany 
away with him a quantity of provision to be hoarded 
up, or wasted, or given to his dogs, or stewed down 
into sauces, or converted into articles of superfluous 
luxury; especially if, by so doing, he pinched the 
guests at the lower end of the table. 

These are the accounts that have been given of the 
matter by the best writers upon the subject; but, were 
these accounts perfectly unexceptionable, they would 
none of them, I fear, avail us in vindicating our pre- 
sent claims of property in land, unless it were more 
probable than it is, that our estates were actually 
acquired, at first, in some of the ways which these 
accounts suppose ; and that a regular regard had been 
paid to justice, in every successive transmission of 
them since; for, if one link in the chain fail, every 
title posterior to it falls to the ground. 

The real foundation of our right is thx law or 

THX LAKD. 

It is the intention of God that the produce of the 
earth be applied to the use of man: this intention 
cannot be fulfilled without establishing property: it 
is consistent therefore with his will that property be 
establii^ed. The land cannot be divided into sepa* 
rate property, without leaving it 'to the law of the 
country to regulate that division: it is consistent 
therefore with the same will, that the law should 
regulate the division; and« consequently, « consistent 
with the will of God,** or '' ri^ht,*' that I should pos- 
sess that share which these regulations assign me. 



M mOBT or P&OFBJLTTt 

BjT wKfttever cHreaitdttB tnuB of ntoMomg yon •i* 
tem|rt to derive this right, it must terminate ot last m 
Ike will of God; the 8traighteBt» therefore^ aod abort* 
est way of aniving at tius will is the best. 

Henee it appears, that my right to aa estate does 
not at all depend upon the BMoaeff or justice of tka 
original acquisition ; nor upon the justiee 9£ aaeh sub- 
sequent change of possession. It is not, fcur instaDco* 
the less, nor ought it to be impeachedy bocause tho 
estate was taken possession of at first by a family of 
aboriginal Britons, who happened to be stronger thaa 
their neighbours, nor because the British posBeesor 
was turned out by a Roman, or the Roman by a 
Saxon invader; nor because it was seized, withool 
colour of right or reason, by a follower of the Nennea 
adventurer; from whom, after msay interruptions of 
fraud and violence, it has at length devolved to me. 

Nor does the owner's right depend upon the edope- 
dieney of the law which gives it to him. On- one side 
of a brook an estate descends to the eldest son; on tho 
other side, to all the children alike. The right of the 
claimants under both laws of inheritaaee is equal; 
though the expediency of sueh opposite rules musl 
necessarily be oififerent. 

The principles wo luure laid down upon this 8ub» 
ject apparently tend to a conclurion of which a bad 
use is apt to be made. As the right of propertv def> 
pends upon the law of the land, it seems to uillow 
that a man has a right to keep and take every thingr 
which the law will allow him to keep and take; which 
in many cases will authorize the most flagitious chi« 
caneiy. If a creditor upon a simple contract neglect 
to demand his debt for six years, the debtor may ro» 
fuse to pay it: would it be rigM therefore to do so» 
where he is conscious of the justice of the debt ? If a 
person who is under twenty-one years of age contract 
a bargain (other than for necessaries,) he may void it 
bv pteading his minority: but would this be a fair 
plea, where the bargain was originally just ? — ^The 
distinction to be taken in such cases is this: With 
the law, we acknowledge, resides the disposal of pro* 
perty; so long, therefore, as we keep within the d«- 



•ign and' intention of a law, that law will justify va, 
as well in foro conscienHa, vain foro humano, what- 
ever be the equity or expediency of the law itself. 
But when we convert to one purpose a rule or ex- 
pression of law which is intended for another purpose, 
then we plead in our justification,, not the intention of 
the law, but the words: that is, we plead a dead letter, 
which can signify nothing; for words without mean- 
ing or intention have no force or effect in justice; 
much less words taken contrary to the meaning and 
intention of the speaker or writer. To apply this dis- 
tinction to the examples just now proposed: — In order 
to protect .men against antiquated demands, from 
which it is not probable they shoud have preserved 
the evidence of their discharge, the law prescribes a 
limited time to certain species of private i»caitties, 
beyond which it will not enforce them, or lend its 
assistance to the recovery of the debt. ' If a man be 
ignorant or dubious of the justice of the demand made 
upon him, he may conscientiously plead this limita- 
tion; because he applies the rule of law to the pur^ 
pose for whith it was intended. But when he refuses 
to pay a debt, of the reality of which he is conscious, 
he cannot, as before, plead the intention of the sta- 
tute, and the supreme authority of law; unless he 
could show, that the law intended to interpose its su- 
preme authority, to acquit men of debts, of the exist- 
ence and justice of which ihey were themselves sensi- 
ble. Again, to preserve youth from the practices and 
impositions to which their inexperience exposes them, 
the law compels the pa3rment of no debts incurred 
within a certain age, nor the performance of any en- 
gagements, except for such necessaries as are suited 
to their condition and fortunes. If a young person 
therefore perceixie^ that he has been practised or im- 
posed upon, he may honestly ti^vail himself of the pri- 
vilege of his nonage, to defeat the circumvention. 
But if he shelter himself under this privilege, to avoid 
a fair obligation, or an equitable contract, he extends 
the privilege to a case in which it is not allowed by 
intention of law, and in which consequently it does 
not, in natural., justice, exist. 

VOL. I. 8 ♦ 



N PROMMSB. 

As pnfettf wtjbe principal eubjeet of jii$tice» or ef 
'* the determinate relative duties,*' we ha?e piit4owB 
wbat we had to aay upon U in the 6r9t place: we now 
proceed to stale these duties in the best order we can. 



CHAPTER V. 

pnomsBs. 

1 . JFVom whence the obligation to perform fromiset 

arises. 
% In what sense promises are to he interpreted^ 
8. Iny^hat cases promises are not binding. 

1. *fff^nl^ wkenee the obligation to perform promises 
arises. 

They who' argue from innate moral principles sup- 
pose a sense of the obligation of promises to be one of 
them; but, without assuming this, or any thing else» 
without preof, the obligation to perform promises may 
be deduced from the necessity of such a conduct to 
the well-being, or the existence, indeed, of humaa 
.- society. 

Men act from expectation. Expectation is in most 
cases determined by the assurances and engagements 
Vhich wo receive from others^ If no dependanoe 
could be placed upon these assurances, it would be 
impossible to know what judgment to form of many 
future events, or how to regulate our eonduct with 
respect to them. Confidence, therefore, in promises 
is essential to the intercourse of human life; because, 
without it, the greatest part of our conduct would 
proceed upon chance. But there could be no confi- 
dence in promises if men were not obliged to perform 
them: the obligation therefore to perform promises is 
essential to the same ends, and in the same degree. 

Some may imagine, that if this obligation were 
suspended, a general caution and mutual distrust 
would ensue, which might do as well: but this is 
imagined, without considering how, every hour of 
our lives, we trust to and depend upon others ; tod 



PROMIIB*. 11 

kaw imponible it is to stir %. stop, or, wkat is wMio» 
to sit stiU ajuoment, without sucdi trust sad d^pond- 
an6e. I am now writing at my oase» aot doubtmg 
(or ratiier never distrusting, and therefore never thinks 
ing about it,) that the butcher will send in the joint 
of meat which I ordered; that his servant will bring 
it; that my cook will dress it; that my footman will 
serve it up; and that I shall find it upon table at ono 
o'clock. Ifet have I nothing for all this but the 'pro- 
mise of the butcher, and the unified promise of his 
servant and mine. And the same holds of the most 
important as well as the most famUiar occurrences of 
social life. In the one the intervention of promises is 
formal, and is seen and .acknowledged: our instance, 
therefore, is intended to show it in the other, where 
it is not so distinctly observed. 

2. In what sense promises are to be interpreted. 

Where the terms o£ promise admit of more senses 
than one, the promise is to be performed ** in that 
sense in which the promisor apprehended, at the time, 
that the promisee received it." 

It is not the sense in which the promisor actually 
intended it that always governs the interpretation of 
an equivocal promise; because, at that rate, you 
might excite expectations which you never meant, nor 
would be obliged to satisfy. Much less is it the sense 
in which the promisee actually received the promise; 
for, according to that rule, you might be drawn into 
engagements which you never designed to undertake. 
It must therefore be the sense (for there is no other 
i^naining) in which the promise believed that the 
promisee accepted his promise. 

This will not differ from the actual intention of the 
promisor, where the promise is given without collusiou 
or reserve: but we put the rule in the above form, to 
oxclude evasion in cases in which the popular mean- 
ing of a phrase, and the strict grammatical signifies^ 
tion of the words differ; or, in general, wherever the 
promisor attempts to make his escape through some 
ambiguity in the expressions which he used. 

Temures promised the garrison of Sebaatia, that if 
they would surrender, no blood should be shed. The 



guvifon ninvAdered; and Temures buried them til 
aliye. Now Temures fulfilled the promise in one 
sense, uid in the sense too in which he intended it at 
the time; but not in the sense in which the garrison of 
Sebastia actually received it, nor in the sense in 
which Temures himself knew that the garrison re- 
ceived it: which last sense, according to our rule, 
was the sense in which he was in conscience bound 
to have performed it. 

From the account we have given of the obligation 
of promises, it is evident that this obligation depends 
upon the expectations which we knowingly and vol- 
mitaril^ excite. Consequently, any action or conduct 
towards another, which we ase sensible excites expec- 
tations in that other, is as much a promise, and creates 
as strict an obligation as the most express assurances. 
Taking, f<9r instance, a kinsman's child, and educating 
him for a liberal profession, or in a manner suitable 
only for the heir of a large fortune, as much obliges 
us to place him in that profession, or to leave him 
such a fortune, as if we had given him a promise to 
do so under our hands and seals. In like manner, a 
great man, who encourages an indigent retainer; or 
a ministejr of state, who distinguishes and caresses at 
his levee one who is in a situation to be obliged by his 
patronage; engages, by such behaviour, to provide 
for him. — ^This is the foundation of tacit promises. 

You may either simply declare your present inten- 
tion, or you may accompany your declaration with an 
engagement to abide by it, which constitutes a com- 
plete promise. In the first case, the duty is satisfied 
if you were sincere at the time; that is, if you enter- 
tained at the time, the intention you expressed, how- 
ever soon, or for whatever reason, you afterwards 
change it. In the latter case, you have parted vrith 
the liberty of changing. All this is plain: but it 
must be observed, that most of those forms of speech, 
which, strictly taken, amount to no more than de- 
clarations of present intention, do yet, in the usual 
way of understanding them, excite the expectation, 
and therefore carry with them the force of absolute 
promises. Such as, «I intend you this place'*—" I 



PROMI0X9. tS 

design to leave you thie eetate" — " I fmrpeie giving 
•you my vote*' — ** I meau to eerve you.'* In which, 
although the " intention,'* the ** design,** the " pur- 
pose,*' the " meaning,** be expressed in words of the 
present time, yet you cannot afterwards recede from 
them without a breach of good faith. If you choose 
therefore to make known your present intention, and 
yet to reserve to yourself the liberty of changing it, 
you must guard your expressions by an additional 
clause, as *< I intend a^ preaent,**^^" If I do not al- 
itr,** — or the like. And after all, as there can be no 
xeason for communicating your intention, but to 
excite some degree of expectation or other, a wanton 
change of an intention wnich is once disclosed, always 
disappoints somebody; and is always for that reason 
wrong. 

There is, in some men, an infirmity with regaid to 
TComises, which often betray them into great mstress. 
From the conftision, or hesitation, or obscurity, with 
which they express themselves, especiaUy When over- 
awed or taken by surprise, they sometimes encourage 
expectations, and brmg upon themselves dessandi, 
which, possibly, they never dreamed of. This is a 
want, not so mu«^ of mtegrity as of presence of nmid. 

8. In what em$e8 pronmes are not binding. 

1. Promises are not binding where the pemimance 
JB impossible. 

But observe, that the promiser is guilty of a fraud, 
if he be secretly aware of the impossibility at the 
time of making the promise. , For, when any one 
promises a thing, he asserts his belief, at least, of the 
possibility of performing it; as no one ean 'accept or 
understand a promise under any other su{^sition. 
Instances of this sort are the following: The minister 
promises a place, which he knows to be engaged, or 
not at his disposal ^->A father, in settling marriage 
articles, promises to leave his daughter an estate^ 
which he knows to be entailed upon the heir male of 
his family^— A merchant promises a ship, ot share of 
a ship, which he is privately advised is lost at sear: 
—An incumbent promises to resign a living, being 
previously assnied that his msigaatiea will not be 



94 p&oMifBi. 

accepted' by the biriiop. The promiser, as in these 
cases, with knowledge of the impossibility^ is justly 
answerable in an eqinvalent; bat otherwise not. 

When the promiser himself occasions the impossi- 
bility, it is neither more nor less than a direct breach 
of the promise; as when a soldier maims or a servant 
disables himself, to get rid of his engagements. 

2. Promises are not binding when the performance 
is uniawfui. 

There' are two cases of this: one, where the unlaw- 
fulness is known to the parties at the time of making 
the promise; as, where an assassin promises his 
employer to despatch his rival or his enemy; a ser- 
vant to betray his master; a pimp to procure a mis- 
tress; or a friend to give his assistance in a scheme 
of seduction. The parties in these cases are not 
obliged to perform what the promise requires, heeause 
they were under a prior obligation to the contrary. 
From which prior obligation what is there to dis- 
chaige them ? Their promise — ^their own act and 
deed. But an obligation, from which a man can dis- 
charge himself by his own act, is no obligation at all. 
The ginlt therefore of such promises lies in the 
making, not in the breaking of them; and if, in the 
interval betwixt the promise and the performance, a 
man so far recover his reflection as to repent of his 
engagements, he ought certainly to break through 
them. 

The other case is, where the unlawfulness did not 
exist, or was not known, at the time of making the 
promise; as where a merchant promises his corres- 
pondent abroad, to send him a ship load of com at a 
time appointed, and before the time arrive an embargo 
is laid upon the exportation of corn:»-A woman gives 
a promise of marriage; before the marriage, she dis- 
covers that her intended husband is too nearly related 
to her, or that he has a wife yet living. In all such 
cases, where the contrary does not appear, it must be 
presumed that the parties supposed what they pro- 
mised to be lawful, and that the promise proceeded 
ABtirely upon this supposition. The lawfulness there- 
fora becomes a condition of the promise; which con- 



^tion failing, the ob%atipn ceases. Of the same 
nature was Herod*s prolnise to his daughter-in-law, 
<' that he would give her it^hatever she asked, even to 
the half of his kingdom." - Tl^e promise was not 
unlawful in the terms in which Herod delivered it; 
and when it became* so by the daughter's choice, bjr 
her demanding *< John the Baptist's head," Herod 
was discharged from the obligation of it, for the rea- 
son now laid down, as well as for that given in the 
I'ast paragraph. • 

'This rule, ** that promises are void, where the per- 
formance is unlawful," extends also to imperfect obli- 
gations;^ for the reason of the rule holds of all obliga- 
tions. Thus, if you promise a man a place or your 
vote, and he afterwai^ render himself unfit to receive 
either, you are absolved from the obligation of your 
promise ; or, if a bett^er candidate appear, and if it be 
a case in which you are bound by oath, or otherwise, 
to goyem yourself by the qualification, the promise 
must be broken through. 

And here I would recommend, to young persons 
especially, a caution, from the neglect of which many 
involve themselves in embarrassment and disgrace; 
and that is, ** never to give a pnmiise, which may 
interfere in the event with their duty;" for, if it do 
so interfere, their duty must be discharged, though 
at the expense of their promise, and not . unusually of 
their good name. 

The specific performance of promises is reckoned a 
perfect obligation. And many casuists have laid 
down, in opposition to what has been here asserted, 
that, where a .perfect and an imperfect obligation 
dash, the perfect obligation is to.be preferred. For 
vrhich opinion, however, there seems to be no reason, 
but what arises from the terms ** perfect" and *' im- 
perfect," the impropriety of which has been remarked 
mbove. The truth is, of two contradictory obligations 
that .ought to prevail which is prior in point of time. 

It is the performance being unlawful, and not any 
unlawfulness in the subject or motive of the promise, 
which destroys its validity: therefore a bribe, after . 
the vote is given; the wages of prostitution; the 



#< vno^iaxt. 



«f aay cnaM, ^fter the crime it eeiamittedj 
ought, if promised, to be paid. For the ein and mid- 
chief, by this supposition, |Lre over; and wiU be nei- 
ther more nor less for the performance of the promise. 

In like manner, a promise does not lose its obligi^ 
tion merely because tt proceeded from an unlawfiU 
moiwe* A certain person, in the lifetime of his wife, 
who was then sick, had paid his addresses and pro- 
mised -marriage to another woman ;r*-the wife died; 
and the woman demanded performance of the pro- 
mise. The man, who, it seems, had changed his 
mind, either felt or pretended doubts conceniing the 
obligation of such a promise, and referred his jcaae to 
Bishop Sanderson, the most eminent, in this kind of 
knowledge, of his time. Bishop Sanderson, after 
writing a cUssertation upon the question, adjudged the 
piomise to be void: in which, however, upon our 
principles, he was wrong; for, however criminal the 
auction might be which induced the promise, the 
performance, when it was demanded, was lawful; 
which is the only lawfulness required. 

A promise cannot^ be deemed unlawful^ where it 
produces, when performed, no efifeict beyend what 
would have taken place had the promise never been 
made. And this is the single case, in whic^ the obli- 
gation of a promise will justify a conduct which, 
unless it had bemi promised, would be unjusL A 
captive may lawfully recover his liberty, by « proBuee 
of neutrahty ; for his conqueror takes nothing by the 
promise, which he might not have secured by hie 
death or oon&iemeBt; and neutrality would be inno- 
cent in him, although criminal in another. . It is 
manifest, however, that promises, which come inte 
the place of coercion, can extend no further than to 
passive compliances; for coercion itself could comfiel 
no more. Upon the same principle, promisee of 
seorecy ought not to be violated, although the publie 
would derive advantage fiom the discovery. . Sach 
ixoniises contain no unlawfulness in them to deotroy 
their obligation; for as the infbitnation would not 
have been nnparted upon any other oond^a, the 



p&OMitsc. 97 

Cablie loM nothinf by tlie promiM, whicii tliey would 
ave gained without it. 

8. Promiae^ are net binding, where they contradict. 
a former promise ; 

Because the perfarmanoe is then unlawful; which 
resolves this case into the last. 

4. Promises are not binding before acceptance; 
that is, before notice 'given to the promisee; for, 
where the. protaise is beneficial, if notice be giyen, 
acceptance may be presumed. Until the promise be 
communicated to the promisee, it is the same, only as 
a resolution in the mind of the promisor, which may 
be altered at pleasure. For no expectation has been 
excited, therefore none can be disappointed. 

But suppose I declare my intention to a third per- 
son, who, without any authority from me, conveys my 
declaration to the promisee; is that such a notice as 
will be binding upon me? It certainly is not: fori 
have not done that which constitutes the essence of a 
pronuse — ^I have not voluntarily excited expectation. 

6. Promises are not binding which are released by 
the promisee. 

Jhis is evident; but it may be sometimes doubted 
who the promisee is. If I give a promise to A, of a 
place to vote for B; as to a father for his son; to an 
uncle for his nephew; to a friend of mine for a rela* 
tion or friend of his; then A is the promisee, whose 
consent I must obtain, to be released from the en- 
gagement. 

If I promise a place or vote to B by A, that is, if A 
be a messenger td convey the promise, as if I should 
say, ** You may tell B that he shall have this place, 
or may depend upon my vote;" or if A be employed 
to introduce B's request, and I answer in any terms 
which amount to a compliance with it; then B is the 
promisee. 

Promises to one person, for the benefit of another, 

are not released by the death of the promisee; for 

his death neither makes the performance impractical 

'/^' ble, nor implies any consent to release the promiser 

from it. 

VOL. I. 9 



96 ]>ROMISSf* 

6. JSrraruoui promises are not binding in cerUin 

cases; as, 

1. Where the error proceeds from the mistake or 
misrepresentation of the promisee. 

Because a promise evidently supposes the truth of 
the account, which the promisee relates in order to 
obtain it. A beggar solicits your charity by a story 
of the most pitiable distress; jou promise to relieve 
him, if he will call again: — ^In the interval you dis- 
cover his story to be made up of lie8;^-this disco veiy, 
no doubt, releases you from your promise. One who 
wants your service describes the business or office for 
which he would engage you; — ^yeu promise to under* 
take it: when you come to enter upon it, you find 
the profits less, the labour more, or some material 
circumstance dMerent from the account he gave you: 
— ^In such case, you are not bound by your promise. 

2. When the promise is understood by the pro* 
misee to proceed upon a certain supposition, or when 
the promisor apprehended it to be so understood; and 
that supposition turns out to be false; then the pro- 
mise is not binding. 

This intricate rule will be best explained by an 
example. A father receives an account from abroad, 
of the death of his only son; — soon after which, he 
promises his fortune to his nephew. The' account 
turns out to be false. The father, we say, is released 
from his promise; not merely because he never would 
have made it, had he known the truth of the case-'^ 
for that alone will not do; — but because the nephew 
also himself understood the promise to proceed upon 
this supposition of his cousin's death; or, at least his 
uncle thought he so understood it, and could not think 
otherwise. The promise proceeded upon this suppo- 
sition in the promisor's own apprehension, and, as he 
beUeved, in the apprehension of both parties; and 
this belief of' his is the precise circumstance which 
sets him free. The foundation of the rule is plainly 
this: a man is bound only to satisfy the expectation 
which he intended to excite; whatever condition 
therefore he intended to subject that expectation to* 
becomes an ewential condition of the promise* 



pRoiffifX*. 99 

Enon» which come not whhin this description, do 
not annul the obligation of a promise. I promise a 
candidate my vote; — ^presently another candidate ap- 

Eears, for whom i certi|inly would hare reserved it, 
ad I been acquainted with his design. Here there- 
fore, as ^fore, my promise proceeded from an error; 
|uid I never should have given such a promise, had I 
been aware of the truth of the case, as it has turned 
out.^-'But the promisee did not know this; — he did 
not receive the promise subject to any such condition, 
or ai^ proceeding from any such supposition; nor did 
J at the time imagine he so received it. This error, 
therefore, of mine, must fall -upon my own head, and 
the promise be observed notwithstanding. A father 
l^romises a certain fortune with his daughter, sup- 
posing himself- to be worth so much — ^his circum- 
stances turn out, upon examination, worse tlian he 
was aware of. Here again the promise was errone- 
ous, but, for the reason assigned in the last case, will 
nevertheless be obligatory. 

The case of erroneous promises is attended with 
some difficulty: for, to allow every mistake, or change 
of circumstances^ to dissolve the obbgation of a pro- 
mise, would be to allow a latitude, which might 
evacuate the force of almost all promises: and, on the 
other hand, to gird the obligation so tight, as to make 
BO allowances for manifest and fundamental errors, 
would, in many instances, be productive of great 
hardship and absurdity. 



It has long been controverted amongst moralists, 
whether promises be binding which are extorted by 
violence or fear. The obligation of all promises 
results, we have seen, from the necessity or the use of 
that confidence which mankind repose in them. The 
question, therefore, whether these promises are bind- 
ing, will depend upon this; whether mankind, upon 
the whole, are benefited by the confidence placed on 
such promises ? — A highwayman attacks you — and 
being disappointed of his booty, threatens or prepares 
lo murder you; — you promise, with many solenm 



100 PA01fl9BS. 

* 

assevermtioiui, that if he wiU spare your Kfe, he shall 
find a puree of money left for him at a plaee appoint- 
ed: — ^upon the faith of this promise, he forbears 
from further violence. Now, your life was sared by 
the confidence reposed in a promise extorted by fear; 
and the lives of many others may, be saved by the 
same. This is a -good consequence. On the other 
hand, confidence in promise like these, greatly facili« 
tates the perpetration of robberies: theymaybeniade 
the instruments of almost unlimited extortion. This 
is a bad consequence: and in the question between 
the importance of these opposite consequences, re- 
sides the doubt concerning the obligation of such 
promises. 

There are other cases which are plainer; as where 
a magistrate confines a disturber of the public peace 
in gaol, till he promise to behave better; or a prisoner 
of war promises, if set at liberty, to return within a 
certain time. These promises, say moralists, are 
binding, because the violence or duress is just; but the 
truth is, because there is the same use of confidence 
in these promises, as of confidence in the promises of 
« person at perfect liberty. 



Vows are promises to God. The obligation cannot 
be made out upon the same principle as that of other 
promises. The violation of them, nevertheless, im- 
plies a want of reverence to the supreme Being; 
which is enough to make it sinful. 

There appears no command or encouragement in 
the Christian Scriptures to make vows; much less 
any authority to break through them when they are 
made. The few instances* of vows which we read 
of in the ^ew Testament were religiously observed. 

The rules we have laid down concemmg promises, 
are applicable to vows. Thus Jephtha's vow, taken 
in the sense in which that transaction is commonly 
miderstood, was not binding; because the performanoe« 
m that contingency, became unlawful. 

* Actg, xviii. 18 ; xxi. 28. 



COITTRACT*. fol 



CHAPTER VI. 

CONTRACTf. 

A coiTTRACT is ft mutual promiBe. The obligation 
therefore of contracts, the sense in which they are to 
be interpreted, and the case where they are not bind* 
ing, will be the same as of promises. 

From the principle established in the last chapter, 
** that the obligation of promises is to be measured by 
the expectation which the promisor any how volunta- 
rily and knowingly excites,** results a rule which 
governs the construction of all contracts, and is capa» 
ble, from its simplicity, of being applied with great 
ease and certainty, viz. That 

Whatever U expected by one nde^ and known to 
he so expected by the other, u to he deemed a part or 
condition of the contract. 

The several kinds of contracts, and the order in 
which we propose to consider them, may be exhibited 
at one view, thus: 
Sale. 
Hazard. 



Ck>ntract9 of 



f ^«j:«* ^c ^ Inconsumable property. 
Lendmg of J ^^^^^ V *- 



Labour . 



{Service. 
Commissions. 
Partnership. 
Offices. 



CHAPTER Vn. 



COHT&ACTB OF BALX. 



Ths rule of justice which wants with most anxiety 
to be inculcated in the making of bargains, is, that 
the seller is bound in conscience to disclose the faults 
of what he offers to.sale. Amongst other methods of 
proving this, one may be the following:^.. 

voi#. I. - 9* 



19% ctnrrvtACTw* 

I gu pp oae it will be allowed, that to advance a 
direct tusehood in rec6mmeiidat36n of our wares, by 
ascribing to them some quality which we know that 
they have not, is dic(honest. Now compare with this 
tile dengned concealmeni of some fault,- whidi we 
know that they have. The motives and the eflects of 
actions are the only points of companson, in which 
their moral quality can dififor; but the motive intfaestf 
two cases is this same, «w. to procure a- higher price 
than we expect otherwise to obtain: the efiect, that 
is, the prejudice to the buyer, is also the same; for he- 
finds himself equally out of pocket by his bargain, 
whether the commodity, when he gets home with it^ 
torn out worse than he had supposed, by the want of 
some quality which he ezpected,^ or the discovery 
of some fault which he did not expect. If there- 
fore actions be the same as to all moral purposes, 
which proceed from the same motives and produce the 
same effects; it is making a distinctibn without a dif- 
ference, to esteem it a cheat to magnify beyond the 
truth the virtues of what we have to sell, but none to 
conceal its faults 

It adds to the value of this kind of honesty, that the 
faults of many things are of a nature not to be known 
by any, but by the persons who have used them; so 
that the buyer has no security from imposition, but in 
the ingenuousness and integrity of the seller. 

There is one exception, nowever, to this rule; 
namely, where the silence of the seller implies some 
fault in the thing to be sold, and where the buyer 
has a compensation in the price for the risk which he 
rons; as where a horse, in a London repository, is 
sold by public auction, without warranty; the want 
of warranty is notice of some unsoundness, and pro- 
duces a proportiontible abatement in the price. 

To thk of concealing the faults of what we want to 
put off, may be referred the practice of passing bad 
money. Tms practice we sometimes hear defended 
by a vulgar excuse, that we have taken the money 
for good, and inust therefore get rid of it. Which 
dxcuse is much the same as if one who had been rob-- 
bed upon the highway should allege, that he had a 



cbff'n£jLX*r9. lot 

fS^ht to r^ittbCM/^Ainifl^lf out of tW]M«k«t Of ^MBTfiMt 
traveller be' ih^t: tM jii^c^ of v^ch'r^itodiliii]^ th# 
traveller possibly may not c6m][»i^hend. 

Where there' eidsts no monopoly oi' contbiiu^A, 
the market price' is dways' a fdr pirice; b^bauMf i^ 
Will always be proportionabW to th^ liis^'And sitiardty 
of the aitide. Hence, there rieed be lio scruple about! 
demanding &t takiiij^' the market jitie^; an^ all thoMT 
<|zpreBsiona» <^ proviiiions are oztravagantly dear,'*' 
** com bears an unreasonable price," and the lil^, iiiir' 
port no unfairness or uni^easonableness hr the seller. 

If your tailor or your draper charge, or e veil ask of 
you, more for a suit of clothes than the market prii^, 
you complain that you ai^ imposed upoii'; you pro- 
nounce the tradesman who makes such a charge, dis-' 
honest; although, as the man's goods we're his oWn,* 
and he had a right, to prescribi^ th^ terms- u^h which* 
be would consent to part with them, it may ber ques^ 
tioned what dishonesty there can b^ in the case, or 
wherein the imposition consists. Whoever op^ns a' 
tfiop, or in any manner exposes goods to public sale, 
virtually engages to deal with hi? customers dt a mar-' 
ket price; because it is upon the faith and opinion of 
such an engagement, that any one comes within his 
shop doors, or oilers to treat with him. This is expect- 
ed by ;^the buyer; is known to be so expected by the' 
eeller; which is enough, according' to the rule deli-' 
vered above, to make it a part of tl^e contract betWeeii 
them, though not a syllable- bO' said about it. The' 
breach of this implied contract constitutes the fraud- 
inquired after. 

Hence, if you disclaim any such engagement, you- 
may set what value you please upon your property. 
If, upon being asked to sell a house, you answer that 
the house suits your fancy or conveniency, and that 
you will not turn yoiu«elf out of it under such a price; 
the price fixed may be double of what the house cost, 
or would fetch at a public 9ale, without any imputa- ' 
tion of injustice or extortion upon you. 

If the thing sold be damaged^ or perish betwef}n 
the sale and the delivery, ought the buyer to bear thd 
loss or the seller ? This wiU depend upon the pialitictt* 



104 CONTRACTS*^ 

lar confftruction of the contract. If the seller, either 
^zpresBly or by implication or by custom, engage to 
deliver the goods; as if I buy a set of china, and the 
chinaman ask me to' what place he shall bring or 
send them, and they be broken in the conveyance, 
the seller must abide by the loss. If the thing sold 
remain with the seller, at the instance or for the con« 
veniency of the buyer, then the buyer undertakes the 
risk; as if I buy a horse, and mention, that I will 
fiend for it on such a day (which is in efiect desiring 
that it may continue with the seller till I do send for 
it,) then, whatever misfortune befalls the horse in the 
mean time, must be at my cost. 

And here, once for all, I would observe, that innu- 
merable q'uestions of this sort are detenmned solely 
by tustom; not that custom possesses any proper 
authority to alter or ascertain the nature of right and 
wrong; but because the contracting parties are pre- 
sumed to include in their stipulation all the conditions 
which custom has annexed to contracts of the same 
sort: and when the usage is notorious, and no ex- 
ception made to it, this presumption is generally 
agreeable to the fact.* 

If I order a pipe of port from a wine merchant 
abroad; at what period the property passes from the 
merchant to me; whether upon delivery of the wine at 
the merchant's warehouse; upon its being put on 
shipboard at Oporto; upon the arrival of the ship in 
England, at its destined port; or not till the wine be 
(M>mmitted to my servants or deposited in my cellar; 
are all questions which admit of no decision, but what 
custom points out. Whence, in justice, as ^woU as 
law, what is called the custom of merchants regulates 
the construction of mercantile concerns. 

* It happens here, as in many cases, that what the parties 
ought to do, and what a Judge or arbitrator would award to 
be done, may be very diflwrent. What the parties ought to 
do, by virtue of their contract, depends upon their conscious- 
pen at the time of making it : whereas a third person finds 
it necessary to found his judgment upon presumptions, which 

E resumptions may be fiUse, although the most probable that 
• could proceed by. 



*' 



cemrRACTs. 19S 



CHAPTER vin: 

COITTRACTi OT HAZARD. 

Br Contracts of Ha2ard, I mean gaming and insn- 
ranoe. 

What say some of this * kind of contracts, ** that 
one side ought not to have any advantage over the 
other,** is neither practicable nor true. It is not prac- 
ticable; for that perfect equality of skill and judg- 
ment which this rule requires is seldom to be met 
with. I might hot have it in my power to play with 
fairness a game at cards, billiards, or tennis; lay a 
wager at a horse race; or underwrite a policy of in- 
snranee, once in a twelvemonth, if I must wait till I 
meet with a person whose art, skill, and judgment in 
these matters is neither greater nor less than my own. 
Nor is this equality requisite to the justice of the 
contract. One party may give to the other the whole 
of the stake, if he please, and the other party may 
Justly accept it, if it be given him; much more there- 
fore may one give to the other a part of the stake ; or, 
what is- exactly the same thing, an advantage in the 
chance of winning the whole. 

The proper restriction ill, that neither side have an 
advantage by means of which the other is not aware; 
for this is an advantage taken without being given. 
Although the event be still an uncertainty, your ad- 
vantage in the chai^ce has a certain value; and so 
much of the stake as that value amounts to is taken 
from your adversary without his knotvledge, and 
therefore without his consent. If t sit down to a 
game at whist, and have an advantage over the ad- 
versary, by means of a better memory, closer atten- 
tion, or a superior knowledge of the rules and chances 
of the game, the advantage is fair; because it is ob- 
tamed by means of which the adversary is aware; 
for he is aware wh^n he sits down with me that I 
•hall exert the skill that I possess to the utmost. But 
if I gain an advantage by packing the cards, glafldng 
my eye into the adversary's hands, or by concerted 



106 COHTRACTI or LENDIirC OF 

signals with my piurtner, it is a dishonest adrantage; 
because it depends upon means which the advenaiy 
never suspects that I make use of. 

The same distinction holds of aH contracts into 
which chance enters. If I lay a wager at a hone 
race, founded upon the conjecture I form from the 
appearance and character and breed of the horses, I 
am justly entitled to any advantage which my judg- 
ment gives me: but, if f carry on a clandestine cor- 
respondence with the jockeys, and find out from them, 
that a trial has been actually made, or that it is set- 
tled beforehand which horse shall win the race; all 
such information is so much fraud, because derived 
from sources which the other did not suspect, when 
he proposed or accepted the wager. 

In speculations in trade or in the stocks, if I exer- 
cise my judgment upon the general aspect and pros- 
pect of public afiairs, and deal with a person who 
conducts himself by die same sort of judgment^ the 
contract has all the equality in it which is necessary; 
but if I have access to secrets of state at home, or 
private advice of some decisive measure or event 
abroad, I cannot avail myself of these advantages 
with justice, because they are excluded by the con- 
tract, which proceeded upon the supposition that I 
had no such advantage. 

In insurances, in which the underwriter computes 
his risk entirely from the account given by the person 
insured, it is absolutely necessary to the justice and 
validity of the contract, that this account be exact 
and complete. 



CHAPTER IX. 

CONTRACTS OF liBNDING OF INCOirsVMABI«B 

FROPXRTT. 

Whxn the identical loan is to be returned, as a book, 
it horse, a harpsichord, it is called incontumt^e ; in 



INCONBUMABLS PROPBRTT» 107 

oppoution to eorn, wine, money^ and -those things 
m^ich perish, or are parted with, in the use, and can 
therefore onlj be restored in kind. 

The questions under this head are few and simple. 
The first is, if the thing lent be lost or damaged, who 
ought to bear the loss or damage ? If it be damaged 
bj the use, or by accident in the use, for which it was 
lent, the lender ought to bear it; as if I hire a job- 
coach, the wear, tear, Jind soiling of the coach must 
belong to the lender; or a horse to go a particular 
journey, and in going the propsed journey the horse 
die or be lamed, the loss must be the lender's: on 
the contrary, if the damage be occasioned by the 
fault of the borrower, or by accident in some use for 
which it was not lent, then the borrower must make 
it good; as if the coach be overturned or broken to 
pieces by the carelessness of your coachman; or the 
horse be hired Co take a morning's ride upon, and you 
go a hunting with him, or leap him over hedges, or 
put him into your cart or carriage, and he be strained, 
or staked, or galled, or accidentally hurt, or drop 
down dead whilst you are thus using him, you must 
make satisfaction to the owner. 

The two cases are distinguished by this circum- 
stance: that in one case the owner foresees the damage 
or risk, and therefore consents to undertake it; in the 
other case he does not. 

It is possible that an estate or a house may, during 
the term of a lease, be so increased or diminished in 
its value, as to become worth much more or much 
less than the rent agreed to be paid for it. In some 
of which cases it may be doubted to whom, of natural 
right, the advantage or disadvantage belongs. The 
rule of justice seems to be this: If the alteration 
might he expected by the parties, the hirer must take 
the consequence; if it could not, the owner. An or- 
chard, or a vineyard, or a mine, or a fishery, or a de- 
coy may this year yield nothing, or next to nothing, 
yet the tenant shall pay his rent ; and if the nezt year 
produce tenfold the usual profit, no more shall be de- 
manded; because the produce is in its nature preca- 
rious, and this variation might be expected. If an 



tO& amn AcrB co^cxhkibto thv 

estate in the fens of LiAcoInshire, or the Isle of tfy, 
be overflowed with water so as tp be incapable of 
occupation, the tenant, notwithstanding, is bound by 
his lease; because he entered into it witn% knowledge 
and foresight of the danger. On the other hand, if, 
by the irruption of the sea into a country where it 
was never known to have come before, by the change 
of the course of a river, the fall of a rock, the breaks 
ing out of a volcano, the bursting of a moss, the in* 
eursions of an enemy , or by a mortal contagion 
amongst the cattle; if, by means like these, an estate 
change or lose its valiie^ the loss shall fall upon the 
owner; that is, the tenant shall either be discharged 
from his agreement r or be entitled to an abatement 
ef rent. A house in London, by the building of a 
bridge, the opening of a new road or street, may be^ 
come of ten times its former value; and, by contrary 
causes, may be as much reduced in value: here also, 
as before, the owner, not the hirer, shall be affected 
by the alteration. The reason upon which our deter- 
mination proceeds is this; that changes such as these^ 
being neither foreseen nor provided for by the con- 
tracting parties, from no part or condition of the con-^ 
tract; and therefore ought to have the same efiect a» 
if >no contract at aH had been made (for none was 
made with respect to themy) that is> ought to hit 
upon the owner. 



CHAPTER X. 

COITTRAGTS CONCXRIflirG THB JLBNOIirO OF 

MOKXT. 

Thkrx exists no reason in the law of nature why m 
man should not be paid for the lending of his moneys 
as well as of any other property into which the money 
an^ht be converted. 

The seniples that have been entertained uiio» ihm 



x.BV]>xvG or MOlTBy lOi 

)«a4» and upon the foundation of which the reettving 
of interest or usury (for they former^ meant the same 
thing,) was once prohibited in almost all Christian 
countries,* arose from a passage in the law of Mosxs^ 
Deuteronomy zxiii. 19, 20. **Thoa shalt not lend 
upon usury to thy brother; usiuy of money, usury 
of victuals, U9ury of any thing that is lent upon 
usury r unto a stranger thou maydst lend upon usuiy; 
but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury.'* 

This prohibition is how generally understood to 
have been intended for the Jews alone, as part of the 
civil or political law of that nation, and calculated to 
preserve amongst themselves that distribution of pro-* 
perty, to which many of their institutions were sub-* 
servient: as the marriage of an heiress within her 
own tribe; of a widow who was kft childless to her 
husband *s brother; the year of jubilee, when aliens 
ated estates reverted to the family of the original 
proprietor: — ^regulations which were never thought to 
be binding upon ai^ but the commonwealth of Israel. 

Thii interpretation is confirmed, I think, beyond 
all controversy, by the distinction , made in the law 
between a Jew and a foreigner; — ** unto a stranger 
thou mayest lend upon usury, but unto thy brother 
thou mayest not lend upon usury;" a distinction 
which could hardly have been admitted into a law« 
which the Divine Author intended to be of moral and 
of universal obligation. 

The rate of interest has in most countries been 
regulated by lai^. The Roman law allowed of twelve 
pounds per cent, which Justinian reduced at ono 
stroke to four pounds. A statute of the thirteenth 
year of Queen Elizabeth, which was the ficst. that 
tolerated the receiving of interest in England at all, 
restrained it to ten pounds per cent. ; a statute of James 



* By a statute of James the First, interest above eight 
pounds per cent, was prohibited (and consequently under 
that rate allowed,) with this sage provision, Tmi thi» 
ntahtte $hall not be construed or expounded to allow the' 
practice ofuBury in point of religion or eonteience* 

vol/. I. lO . ^ 



119 CONTRACTi CONCSRyilTG THE 

the Pint to eight pounds; of Charles ^he Second to 
nx pounds: of Queen Anne to five pounds, on pain 
of forfeiture «f treble the value of the money lent: at 
which rate and penalty the matter now stands. The 
policy of these regulations is, to check the power of 
accumulating wealth without industry; to give en- 
couragement, to trade, by enabling adventurers in it 
to borrow money at a moderate prices and, of late 
years, to enable the state to borrow the subject's mo- 
ney itself. 

Compound interest, though forbidden by the law 
of England, is agreeable enough to natural equity; 
for interest detained -aft^r it is due becomes, to all 
intents and purpose^ part of the sum lent. 

It is a question which sometimes occurs, how mo- 
ney borrowed in one country ought to be paid in 
another, where the relative value of the precious 
metals is not the same. For example, suppose I bor- 
row a hundred guineas in London, where each guinea 
is worth one-and-twenty shillings, and meet my cre- 
ditor in the East Indies, where a guinea is worth no 
more perhaps than nineteen; is it a satisfaction of 
tile debt to return a hundred guineas, or must I make 
up 80' many times one and twenty shillings? I should 
think the latter; for it must be presumed that my 
creditor, had he not lent me his guineas, woidd have 
disposed of them in such a manner as to have now 
had, in the place of them, so many one and twenty 
shillings; and the question supposes that he neither 
intended, nor ought to be a suiierer, by parting with 
the possession of his money to me. 

When the relative value of coin is altered by an 
act of the state, if the alteration would have extended 
to the identical pieces which were lent, it is enough 
to return an equal number of pieces of the same deno- 
mination, or their present value in any other. As, if 
guineas were reduced by act of parliament to twenty 
shillings, so many twenty shilings as I borrowed 
guineas would be a just repayment. It would be 
otherwise if the reduction was owing to a debasement 
of the coin ; for then respect ought to be had to the 
comparative value of the old guinea and the new« 




LSNOIltG or MONBT. 

Whoever borrows money » bound in 
to repay it. This every man can see; but ^very-man 
Gonnot see, or does not however reflect, that he is, in 
consequence, also bound to use the means necessary 
to enable himself to repay it. ** If he pay the money 
when he has it, or' has it to spare, he does all that 
an honest man can do," and all, he imagines, that is 
required of him; whilst the previous measures, which 
are necessary to furnish him with that money, he 
makes no part of his care, nor observes to be as much 
his duty as the other; such as selling a family seat 
or a family estate,, contracting his plan of expense, 
laying down his equipage, rraucing the number of 
his servants, or any of those humiliating sacrifices, 
which justice requires of a man in debt» the moment 
he perceives that he has no reasonable prospect of 
pajrmg his debts without them. An expectation which 
depends upon the .continuance of his own life, will 
not satisfy an honest man, if a better provision be in 
his power; for it is a breach of faith to subject a cre- 
ditor, when we can help it,- to the risk of our life, be 
the event what it will; that not being the security to 
which credit was given. 

I know few subjects which have been more misun- 
derstood than the law whrch authorizes the imprisoi^ 
ment of insolvent debtors. It has been represented 
as a gratuitous cruelty which contribiAed nothing to 
the reparation of the creditor's loss, or to the advan- 
tage of the community. This prejudice arises prin« 
cipally from considering the sending of a debtor to 
ffaol, as an act of private satisfaction to the creditor, 
mstead of a public punishment. As an act of satisfac- 
tion or revenge, it is always wrong in the motive, and 
often intemperate and undistinguishing in the exer- 
cise. Consider it as a public punishment, founded 
upon the same reason, and subject to the same rules 
as other punishments; and the justice of it, together 
with the degree to which it should be extended, and 
the objects upon whom it may be inflicted, will be 
apparent. There are frauds relating to insolvency* 
against which it is as riboessarv to provide punislv 
ment as for any public crimes whatever: as where % 



.7 




:..r 



112 CONTBACT* COirCBBjriirO THB 

mmn geU your monej into hii poflMMioii, and forth^ 
^ vwith runs. away with it; or, what is. little better, 
squanders it in vicious expenses; or stakes it at the 
gamingtable; in the Alley; or upon wild adyen- 
tures in trade; or is condous, at the time he borrows 
it, that he can never repay it; or wilfully puts it out 
of his power by profuse living{ or conceals his efiects, 
or transfers them by collusion to another: not to men- 
ion the obstinacy of some debtors, who had rather 

t in a gaol than deliver up their estates; ibr, to say 
truth, the first absurdity is in the law itself, which 
eaves it m a debtor's power to withold any part of 
his property from the claim of his creditors. The 
only question is, whether the punishment be properly 
placed in the hands of an exasperated creditor; for 
which it may be said, that these frauds are so subtle 
and jrersatile, that nothing but a discretionary power 
can overtake them: and that no discretion is likely 
to be so well informed, so vigilant, or so active as that 
of the creditor. 

It must be remembered, however, that the confine- 
ment of a debtor in gaol is a pufdshment ;. and that 
every punishment supposes a crime. To pursue, 
therefore, with the extremity of legal rifour, a sufferer, 
whom the fraud or failure of others, his own want of 
capacity, or the disappointments and miscarriages to 
which all hufnan afiaurs are subject, have reduced to 
ruin, merely because we are provoked by our loss, 
and seek to relieve the pain we feel by that which we 
infiict, is repugnant not only to humanity but to jus- 
tice: for it is' to pervert a provision of law, designed 
for a diflbrent and a satutarjr purpose, to the gratSica- 
tion of private spleen and resentment. Any altera^ 
tion in these laws which could distinguish the de- 
grees of guilt, or convert the service of the insolvent 
debtor to some public profit, might be an improve- 
ment ; but any considerable mitigation of their rigour, 
mder colour of relieving the poor, would increase 
their hardships. For whatever deprives the creditor 
of his power of coercion, deprives him of his secu- 
rity; and as this must add 'greatly to the difficulty of 
obtaining credit, the poor, especially the lower sori 



LSMDIKS OF MONET. lit 

of tndMDMii, are the first who would suffer by such 
m reijpilation. As tradesmen must buy before they 
■ell, yon would exclude from trade two-thirds of those 
who now carry it on, if none were enabled to enter 
into it without a capital sufficient for prompt pay- 
ments. An advocate, therefore, for tj^e interleats of 
this important class of tSe community will deem it 
more eligible, that one out of a thousand should be 
sent to gaol by his creditors, than that the nine hun- 
dred and ninety-nine should be straightened and em* 
barrassed* and many of them lie idle, by the want of 
cndit. 



CHAPTER XL 

CONTRACTS OF LABOUR. 
SSKVICB. 

SxRTiCB in this country is, as it ought to be, toIubn 
tary, and by contract; and the master's authority 
•xtends no further than the terms or equitable con- 
struction of the contract will justify. . 

The treatment of servants as to diet, discipline, and 
accommodation, the kind and quantity of work to be 
required of them, the intennission, liberty, and indul- 
l^nce to be allowed them, must be determined ill a 
great measure by custom; for where the contract in-* 
volves so many particulars^ the contracting parties 
express a few perhaps of the principal, and, by mu- 
tual understanding, refer the rest to the known cus- 
tom of the country in like cases. 

A servant is not bound to obey the unlawful com- 
mands of his master; to minister, for instance, to his 
unlawful pleasures; or to- assist him by unlawful prac* 
tices in his profession; as in smuggling or adulterat* 
ing the articles in which he deals. For the servant 
is bound by nothing but his own promise; Rod tfa» 

TOL. X. 10* 



114r MBVICS. 

ebliMtlon of a promiM extendi not to thingi an* 

lawtuL 

For the same reason, the Buwter'a authority is no 
just^eatian of the servant in doing wrong; for the 
servant's own promise, apon which that authority is 
founded, would be none. 

Clerks and apprentices ought to be employed en- 
tirely in the profession or trade which they are intended 
to learn. Instruction is their hire; and to deprive 
them of the opportunities of instruction, by taking up 
their time with occupations foreign to their business^ 
is to defraud them of their wages. 

The master is responsible for what a servant does 
in the ordinary course of his employment; for it is 
done under a general authority committed to him, 
which is in justice equivalent to a specific direction. 
Thus, if I pay money to a banker's clerk, the banker 
18 accountable, but not if I had paid it to his butler 
or his footman, whose business it is not to receive mo* 
ney. Upon the same principle, if I on9e send a ser- 
vant to take up goods upon credit, whatever goods he 
afterwards takes up at the same shop, so long as he 
continues in my service, are justly chargeable to my 
account. 

The law of this countiy goes great lengths in in- 
tending a kind of concurrence jn the master, so as to 
charge him with the consequences of his servant's 
conduct. If an innkeeper's servant rob his guests, 
the innkeeper must make restitution; if a farrier's 
servant lame a horse, the farrier must answer for the 
damage; and still further, if your coachman or carter 
drive over a passenger in the road, the passenger may 
recover from you a satisfaction for the hurt he suffers. 
But these determinations stand, I think, rather upon 
the authority of the law, than any principle of natural 
justice. 

There is a carelessness and facility in " giving cha- 
xacters," as it is called, of servants, especially when 
given in writing, or according to some established 
form, which, to speak plainly of it, is a cheat upon 
thoao who accept them. They are given with so little 
reserve and veracity, <* that I should as soon depend,'* 



•a&TICE. 110 

•ays the autlior of the Rambler, *< upon $n aeqtdttal 
at the Old Bailej, by way of reoommendation of a 
aenrant *8 honesty, as upon one of these characters. * ' Jt 
is sometimes carelessness; and sometimes also to is^et 
rid of a bad servant without the mieasiness of a die* 
pute; for which nothing can be pleaded but the most 
ungenerous of all excuses, that the person whom we 
deceive is a stranger. 

There is a conduct the reverse of this, but more in- 
jurious, because the injury falls where there is nb 
remedy; I mean the obstructing of a servant's ad- 
vancement because you are unwilling to spare hiir 
aervice. To stand in the way of your servant *s inter- 
est is a poor return for his fidelity; and affords slen- 
der encouragement for good behaviour in this nume- 
rous and therefore important part of the community. 
It is a piece of injustice which, if practised towards 
an equal, the law of honour would lay hold of: as it 
is, it is neither uncommon nor disreputable. 

A master of a family is culpable if he permit any 
▼ices amon|f his domestics which he might restrain 
by due discipline, and a pro^r interference. This 
results from the general obligation to prevent misery 
when in our power; and the assurance which we have 
that vice and miseiy at the long run go together. 
Care to maintain in his family a sense of virtue and 
religion received the divine approbation in the person 
of Abraham, Gen. xviii. 19. — ** I know him, that 
he will oonunand his children, and hu household after 
him; and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to 
do justice and judgment." And indeed no authority 
seems so well adapted to this purpose, as that of 
masters of families; because none operates upon the 
subjects of it with an influence so immediate and 
constant. 

What the Christian Scriptures have delivered con- 
cerning the relation and reciprocal duties of masters 
and servants, breathes, a spirit of liberality very little 
known in ages when servitude was slavery; and 
which flowed from a habit of contemplating mankind 
under the common relation in whidi they stand to 
their Creator, and with respect to their interest in 



Hi COMMtMIOVS. 

•Botlier eiBtence:* ** Sarmats, be obedimt to tbem 
that «ie your masters, acoording to the flesh, with fear 
and tiemblmg; in shaglenesB of yoor heart, as onto 
Christ; not with eye-serrice, as men pleasers, hot as 
the serrants of Christ, doing the will of CSod from 
the heart; vfith good willf doing semiee as to the 
Lordf and not men ; knowing that whatsoeyer good 
thing any man doeth, the same shall he receive of the 
Lord, whether he be bond or free. And ye masters^ 
do the same thing unto them, forbearing threatening; 
knowing that your Master also is m heoBen ; neither 
is there respect of persons with him." The idea of 
referring their service to God, of considering him as 
having appointed them their task, that they were 
doing his will, and were to look to him for their re* 
ward was new; and affords a greater security to th« 
master than any inferior principle, because it tends to 
produoe a steady and coidial obedience, in the plaoe 
of that constrained service, which can never be 
trusted out of sight, and which is justly enough called 
eye-service. The exhortation to masters, to keep ia 
view their own subjection and accoontableneas, was 
no leas seasonable. 



CHAPTER Xn. 

con TRACTS OF LABOVS. 
COMMIBBIOirS. 

Whobtsr undertakes another man's business make* 
it his own, that is, pipmises to employ upon it the 
same care, attention, and diligence that he would do 
if it were actually his own : for he knows that the 
business was committed to him with that expectation. 
And he promises nothing more than this. Therefore 
an agent is not obliged to wait, inquire, solicit, ride 
about the country, toil, or study, whilst there remains 
a possibility of benefiting his employer. If he exert 

• Eph. vi. 5—8. 



COMlflSSIONft. IVr 

go mudi of hsB ACtivitj, and use sach teution, u tln» 
value of the buaineto, in his judgment, deserres; that 
is, as he would have thought sufficient if the same 
interest of his own had been at stake, he has dis> 
charged his duty, although it should afterwards turn 
out, that by more activity and longer perseverance he 
might have concluded the business with greater ad- 
vantage. 

This rule defines the duty of factors, stewards, at- 
torneys, and advocates. 

One of the chief difficulties of an agent's situation 
is, to know how far he may depart from his instmo- 
tions, when, from some change or discovery in the 
circumstances of his commission, he sees reason to 
believe that his employer, if he were present, would 
alter his intention. The latitude allowed to agents 
in this respect will be different, according as the com- 
oommission was confidential or ministerial ; and ac- 
cording as the general rule and nature of the service 
require a prompt and precise obedience to orders, ot 
not. An attorney, sent to teeat for an estate, if he 
found out a fiiiw in the title, would desist from pro^ 
posing the prioe he was directed to propose; and 
very properly. On the other hand, if the commander 
in chief of an army detach an officer under him upon 
ft particular service, which service turns out more diA 
ficult or less expedient than was supposed, insomuch 
that the officer is convinced that his commander, if he 
were acquainted with the true state in which the affiiir 
is found, would recall his ordeis; yet must this officer; 
if he cannot wait for fresh directions without preju- 
dice to the expedition he is sent upon, pursue, at all 
hazards, those which he brought out with him. 

What is trusted to an agent may be lost or damaged 
in his hands by mUfortuTie. An agent who acta 
without pay is clearly not answerable for the ioasi 
for, if he give his labour for nothing, it cannot be 
presumed that he gave also security for the success 
of it. If the agent be hired to the business, the ques- 
tion will depend upon the apprehension of the parties 
at the time of making the contract: which apprehen- 
iiOD of theim must be collected cl^iefiy from custom. 



118 coMMiiiiom. 

Dy wfaieh probably it was guided. Whether a public 
carrier ought to account for goods sent by him; the 
owner or master of a ship for the cargo; the post- 
office for letters, or bills enclosed in letters, where the 
loss is not imputed to any fault or neglect of theirs; 
are questions of this sort. Any expression which by 
implication amounts to a promise, will be binding 
upon the agent, without custom; as where the pro- 
prietors of a stage coach advertise that they will not 
be accountable for money, plate, or jewels, this makes 
them accountable for every thing else; or where the 
price is too much for the labour, part of it may be 
considered as a premium for insurance. On the other 
hand, any caution on the part of the owner to guard 
against danger is evidence that he considers the risk 
to be his; as cutting a bank bill in two, to send by 
the post at different times. 

Universally, unless a pr&mise,- either express or 
tacit, can be proved against the agent, the loss must 
fall upon the owner. 

The agent may be a sufferer in his own person or 
property by the business which he undertakes; as 
where one goes a journey for another, and lames his 
horse, or is hurt himself by a fall tipon the road; can 
the agent in such case claim a compensation for the 
misfortune ? Unless the same be provided for by ex- 
press stipulation, the agent is not entitled to any com* 
pensation from his employer on that account; for 
where the danger is net foreseen, there can be no 
reason to believe that the employer engaged to hidem* 
niiy the agent against it: still less where it is fore-> 
Been; for whoever knowingly undertakes a danger- 
ous employment, in common construction, takes upon 
himself the danger and the consequendes; as where 
a fireman undertakes for a reward to rescue a box of 
writings from the flames; or a sailor to bring off 
piunenger fVom a ship in a storm. 



PARTNBRSltl^. Ill 



CHAPTER Xin. 

CONTRACTS OF LABOUR. 
PARTNERSHIP. 

I K^ow notbing upon the subject of partnership 
that requires explanation, but in what manner the pro* 
fits are to be divided, where one partner contributes 
money and the other labour; which is a common case. 

Rule. From the stock of the partnership deduct 
the sum advanced, and divide the remainder between 
the monied partner and the labouring partner, in the 
proportion of the interest of the money to the wages 
of the labourer, allowing such a rate of interest as 
money might be borrowed for upon the same security, 
and such wages as a journeyman would require for 
the same labour and trust. 

Example, A advances a thousand pounds, but 
knows nothing of the business; B produces no money, 
but has been brought up to. the business, and under- 
takes to conduct it. At the end of the year the stock 
and the effects of the partnership amount to twelve 
hundred pounds; consequently there are two hun- 
dred pounds to bo divided. Now, nobody would lend 
money upon the event of the business succeeding, 
which Is A's security, under six per cent; — therefore 
A must be allowed sixty pounds for the interest of his 
money. B, bi^fore he engaged in the partnership, 
earned thirty pounds a year in the same employment; 
his labour, therefore, ought to be valued at thirty 
pounds: and the two hundred pounds most be di- 
vided between the partners in the proportion of sixty 
to. thirty; that is, A must receive one hundred and 
thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight pence, and 
B sixty-six pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence. 

if there be nothing gained, A loses his interest and 
B his labour; which is right. If the original stock 
be diminished, by this rule B loses only his labour, as 
before; whereas A loses his interest and part of the 
principal ; for which eventual disadvantage A is com- 
pensated, by having the interest of his money com- 



190 orricMf. 

puted at six per cent, in the division of the pM&ta, 
when there are any. 

It is true, that the division of the prt^t is seldom 
forffotten in the constitution of the partnership, and 
is therefore commonly settled by express agreements: 
but these agreements, to be equitable, should pursuo 
the principle of the rule here laid down. 

All the partners are bound to what any one of 
them does in the course of the business; for, qiLoad 
hoe each partner is considered as an authorized agent 
for the rest. 



CHAPTER XTV. 

GOVTBACTS OF LABOUR* 
OFFICKS. 

Iw many offices, as schools, fellowships of colleges^ 
professorships of universities, and the like, there is » 
twofold contract; one with the founder, the other 
with the electors. 

The contract with the founder obliges the incum- 
bent of the office to discharge every duty appointed 
by the charter, statutes, deed of gift, or will of the 
founder; because the endowment was given, and con- 
sequently accepted, for that purpose, and upon those 
conditions. 

The contract with the electors extends this obliga- 
tion to all duties that have been eiutomctrily connect- 
ed with and reckoned a part of the office, though not 
prescribed by the founder; for the electors expect 
from the person they choose all the duties which his 
predecessors have discharged; and as the person 
elected cannot be ignorant of their expectation, if h« 
meant to have refused this condition, he ought to have 
apprised them of his objection. 

And here let it be observed, that the electors can 
excuse the conscience of the person elected, from this 
last class of duties alone; because this class results 
from a contract to which the electors and the person 



otrtc^ft. lit 

•ioctttd &f« the duly P&HiM* Th6 otli«r class of 
duties results £roin a diilsrent contvsct. 

It is a qaestiost of some magnitude and difficulty^ 
wliat offices m»y be- conscientiously supplied hy a d&-> 
puty. 

We will state the several objections to the substi^ 
tutiott of a deputy; and then it will be understood,, 
that a deputy may be allowed in all cases to which, 
these objections do not apply. 

An office may not be <&scharged by deputy, 

1. Where a [Articular confidence is reposed in the* 
judgment and conduct of the person appointed to it; 
as the office of a steward, guardian, judge, com^ 
mander in chief by land or sea. 

2. Where the custom hinders; as in the case o€ 
sichoolmasters, tutors, and of commissions in the army 
or navy. 

8. Where the duty cannot, from its nature, be so 
well performed by, a deputy; as the deputy governor 
of a province may not possess the legal authority, or 
the actual influence of his principal. 

4. When some inconveniency would result to the 
service in general from the permission of deputies in 
auch cases: ibr example, it is probable that military 
merit would be souch discouraged, if the duties be- 
longing to commissions in the army were generally 
allowed to be executed by substitutes. 

The nonresidenoe of the parochial clergy who sup- 
ply the duty of their benefices by curates, m worthy 
of a more distinct consideration. And in order to 
draw the question upon tlus case to a point we will 
suppose the- officiating curate to discharge every duty 
which his principal, were he present, w<Mild be bound 
to discharge, and in a manner equally beneficial to 
the parish: under whi(^ circumstances, the only ob- 
jection to the absence of the principal, at least the 
only one of the foregoing objections, is the last. 
*> And, in my judgment, the force of this objection 
will be much diminisbed, if the absent rector or vicar 
be, in the mean time, engaged in any function or em- 
plojrment of equ^l or of greater importance to the 
general interest of religion. For the whole revenue 

VOIi. I 11 



rt2 o#riCB«. 

of the national church may prooerly enough be con- 
ndeied as a common fond for tKe support of the na- 
tional religion; and if a clergyman be servuig the 
cause of Christianity and Protestantism, itjan make 
littfe difference, out of what V^l''^^%^''^^''?lr^ 
fund, that is, by the tithes and glebe of what pwticii. 
lar parish, his serrice be requited; any more than it 
can prejudice the king's service, that an oifcerj^ 
has pi^alized his merit in America should be re- 
warded with the government of a fort or castle ^Ire- 
hind, which he never saw; but for the ciwtody of 
which, proper provision is made and caie tp«f- 

Upon the principle thus explained, this, indulgence 
is due to none more than to those who are occupied 
in cultivating and communicating religious knowledge 
or the eciences subsidiary to religion. «k„,.^i. 

This way of considering the revenues erf the church 
as a common fund for the same purpose is the more 
equitable, as the value of particular preferments bean 
no portion to the particular charge or labour. 

But when a man draws upon this fund, whose stu- 
dies and employments bears no relation to the object 
of it, and who is no further a minister of the Ghnstian 
religion than as a cockide makes a spldier, it seems a 
misapplication little better than a robbery. 

And to those who have the management of such 
matters I submit this question, whether the impover- 
ishment of the fund, by converting the best share of 
it into anntdHes for the gay and iUiterate youth of 
great families, threatens not to starve and stifle the 
Ettle clerical merit that is lea amongst us ? 

All legal dispensations from residence proceed upon 
the supposition, that the absentee is detained from his 
living by some engagement of equal or of greater 
public importance. Therefore, if, in a case where 
no such reason can with truth be pleaded, it be said 
that this question regards a right of property, and 
that aU right of property awaits the disposition of 
law; that, therefore, if the law, which gives a man 
the emoluments of a living, excuse hhn from residing 
upon it, he is excused in conscience; we answer, that 
the law does not excuse him by intenHoni and that 
all other excuses are fraudulent. 



List. m 



CHAPTER XV. 

LIES. 

A LIS 18 a breach of promise: for whoever 8erioii»- 
\y addresses his discotlrse to another, tacitly promises 
to speak the truth, because he knows that the truth 
is expected. 

Or the obligation of veracity may be made out 
from the direct ill cqnsequences of lying to social 
happiness. Which consequences consist, either in 
some specific injury to particular individuals, or in 
the destruction of that confidence which is essential 
to the intercourse of human life;, for which latt^ 
reason, a lie may be pernicious -in its general tenden- 
cy, and therefore criminal, though it produce no par- 
ticular or ^ible mischief to any one. 

There are falsehoods which are not lies; that is, 
which are not criminal: as, 

1. Where no one is deceived; which, is the case 
in parables, fables, novels, jests, tales to create mirth, 
ludicrous embellishments of a 8tory» where the de- 
clared design of the speaker is not to inform but to 
divert; compliments in t)jiB subscription of a letter, 
a servant's denying his master, a prisoner's pleading 
not guilty, an advocate asserting the justice, or his 
belief of the justice, of his client's cause. In such in- 
stances no confidence is destroyed, because none was 
reposed; no promise to speak the truth is violated, 
because none was given, or understood to be given. 

2. Where the person to whom you speak has no 
right to know the truth, or, more properly, where lit- 
tle or no inconveniency results from the want of con- 
fidence in such cases; as where you tell a falsehood 
to a madman for his own advantage; to a robber to 
conceal your property; to an assassin to defeat or 
divert him from his purpose. The particulaur conse- 
quence is by the supposition beneficial; and as to the 
general consequence, the worst that can happen is, 
that the madman, the robber, the assassin will not 
trust you again; which (beside that the first is inca- 
pable of deducing regular conclusions from having 



124 i«rEfl. 

been once deceived, and the last two not likely to 
come a second time in your Way) is sufficiently com- 
pensated by the immediate benefit which you propose 
by the falsehood. 

It is upon this principle that, by the laws of war, it 
is allowed to deceive an enemy by feints, false co» 
Jours,* spies, false intelligence, and the like; but by 
no means in treaties, truces, eignals of capitulation or 
surrender: and the difference is that the former sup- 
pose hostilities to continue, the latter are calculated 
to terminate or suspend them. In the conduct of war, 
and whilst the war continues there is no use* or rathr- 
er no place for. confidence^ betwixt the contending par- 
ties; but in what^ver relates to the tenmnation of 
war, the most religious fidelity is expected, because 
without it wars could not cease nor the victors be 
secure, but by the entire destruction of the vanquished. 

Many people indulge, in serious .discourse, a habit 
of fiction and exaggeration in the accounts they give 
of themselves, of their acquaintance,, or of the extra- 
ordinary things which they have seen or heard: and 
so long as the facts they relate are indifferent, and 
their narratives, though false, are .inoffensive, it may 
seem a superstitious regard to truth to censure them 
merely for truth's sake. . 

In the first place, it is almost impossible to pro- 
nounce beforehand with certainty, concerning any 
lie, that it is inoffensive. Volat irrevocdbile ; and 
collects sometimes accretions in its flight, which en- 
tirely change its nature. It may owe possibly its 
mischief to the officiousness or misrepresentation of 
those who circulate it; but the mischief is, neverthe- 



'*^ There have been two or three instances of late, of £iig« 
lish ships decoyinff au enemy into their power, by counter- 
feiting signals of distress ; an artifice which ought to be re- 
probated by the common indignation of mankind ! for, a lew 
examples of captures effected Ir^ this stratagem wouU put an 
end to that promptitude in amirdiag assistance to ships in 
distress, which b the best virtue in a seaiarin^ character^ 
and by which the perils of- navigation are diminished to alU 
— A.D. 1776. 



E.IB8. Its 

leoB, in flome degree chaTgeable apon the original 
editor. 

In the next place, thia liberty in conveiBation de- 
feats its own end. Much of the pleasure and all the 
benefit of convorsation depends upon our opinion of 
the speaker's veracity: for which this rule leaves no 
foundation. The faith indeed of a hearer must be 
extremely perplexed who considers the speaker, or be- 
lieves that the speaker considers himself, as under no 
obligation to adhere to truth, but according to the 
particular importance of what he relates. 

But beside and above both these reasons, white lies 
always introduce others of a darker complexion. I 
have seldom known any one who deserted truth in 
trifles, that could be trusted in matters of importance. 
Nice distinctions are out of the question, upon occa- 
sions which, like those of speech, return every hour. 
The habit, therefore, of lying, when once formed, is 
easily extended to serve the designs of malice or in- 
terest; — like all habits, it spreads indeed of itself. 

Piotu frauds, as they are improperly enough called, 
pretended inspirations, forged books, counterieit minu 
des, are impositions of a more serious nature. It is 
possible that they may sometimes, though seldom, 
have been set up and encouraged with a design to do 
good; but the good they aim at requires that the be- 
Uef of them should be perpetual, which is hardly pos- 
sible; and the detection of the fraud is sure to dis- 
parage the credit of all pretensions of the same nature. 
Christianity has suffered more injury from this cause 
than from all other causes put together. 

As there may be falsehoods which are not lies, so 
there may be lies without literal or direct falsehood. 
An opening is always left for this species of prevari- 
cation, when the literal and grammatical significa- 
tion of a sentence is different from the popular and 
customary meaning. It is the wilful deceit that 
makes the lie; and we wilfully deceive when- our ex- 
pressions are not true in the sense in which we believe 
the hearer to apprehend them: besides that it is ab- 
surd to contend for any sense of words in opposition 

VOL. I. ^ 11 * 



'»' 



12f OATHt. 

to usage; for til senees of nil wordi are founded upon 
usage, and upon nothing else. 

Or a man may tut a lie; as by pointing his finger in 
a wrong direetion when a trareller inquires of him 
his road; or when a tradesman shuts up his windows 
to induce his creditors to believe that he is abroad: 
for to all moral purposes, and therefore as to veracity, 
speech and action are the same; speech being only a 
mode of action. 

Or, lastly, there may be lies of omitnan. A writer 
of English history, who, in his account of the reign of 
Charles the First, should wilfully suppress any evi- 
dence of that prince's despotic measures and designs,, 
might be said to lie; for, by entitling his book a His^ 
t&ry of England^ he engages to relate the whole truth 
of the history, or, at least, all that he knows of if. 



CHAPTER XVI 

OATHS. 

1. F<nrtM of Oath$. 

2. SignifieaHon, 
S. LawfuUuaB. 

4. Obligation* 

5. What Oath$ do not bind. 

6. In what sense Oaths are to he interpreted- 

1. The forms of oaths, like other religious ceremo- 
nies, have in all ages been various; consisting how- 
ever, for the most part of some bodily action,* and of 
a prescribed form of words. Amongst the Jews, the 



* It is commonly thouffht that oaths are denominated eoT' 
poral oaths from the bodily action which accompanies them» 
of laying the right hand upon a book containing the tour 
Gospels. This opinion, however, appears to be a mistake $ 
for the term is borrowed from the ancient usage of touohing^ 
on these occasions^ the corporate or cloth which covered 
the consecrated elements. f 



OATH*. 187 

juror held up his right hand towards heaven, which 
explaiiis a passage in the 144th Psalm; ** Whose 
mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a 
right hand of falsehood. ' * The same form is retained 
in Scotland still. Amongst the same -Jews an oath 
of fidelity was taken, by the servant's putting his 
hand under the thigh of his lord, as Eliezer did to 
Abmham, Gen. xxiv. 2; from whence, with no great 
variation, is derived perhaps the form of doing homage 
at this day, by putting the hands between the knees, 
and within the hands of the liese. 

Amongst the Greeks and Romans the form varied 
with the subject and occasion of the oath. In private 
contracts the parties took hold of each other's hand, 
whilst they swore to the performance; or they touch- 
ed the altar of the god by whose divinity they swore. 
Upon more solemn occasions it was the custom to 
slay a victim; and the beast being $truck down 
with certain ceremonies and invocations, gave birth 
to the expressions rtfAvw c^iuf ferire pactum ; and 
to our English phrase translated from these, of « strik- 
ing a bargain." 

The forms of oaths in Christian countries are also 
Tery difierent; but in no country in the world, I be- 
lieve, worse contrived either fo convey the meaning or 
impress the obligation of an oath, than in our own. 
The juror with us, after repeating the promise or 
affirmation which the oath is intended to confirm, 
adds, ** So help me God:" or more frequently the 
substance of the oath is repeated to the juror by the 
officer or magistrate who administers it, adding in 
the conclusion, " So help you God." The energy of 
the sentence resides in the particle so ; sOt that is, 
hae leg€i upon condition of my speaking the truth or 
performing this promise, and not otherwise, may God 
help me. The juror, whilst he hears or repeats the 
words of the oath, holds his right hand upon a Bible 
or other book containing the four Gospels. The con- 
clusion of the oath sometimes runs, *< Ita me Deus 
adjuvet, et hoec sancta evangelia," or <* So help me 
God, and the contents of this book;" which last 
clause forms a connexion between the words and 



.12S dATKf. 

action of the juror, that before was wanting. Th« 
juror then kisses the book: the kiss, however) seems 
father an act of reverence to the contents of the book 
(as, in the popish ritual, the priest kisses the Gospel 
before he reads it,) than any part of the oath. 

This obscure and elliptical form, together with the 
levity and frequency with which it is administered, 
has brought about a general inadvertency tp the Obli- 
gation of oaths; which, both in a religious and poli- 
tical view, is much to be lamented: and it merits 
public consideration, whether the requiring of oaths 
on so many frivolous occasions, especially in the Cus- 
toms, and in the qualification for petty offices, has 
any other effect than to make them cheap in the 
minds of the people. A pound of tea cannot travel 
regularly from the ship to the consumer, without 
coslting half a dozen oaths at the least; and the same 
security for the due discharge of their office, namely, 
that of an oath, is required from a churchwarden and 
an archbishop, from a petty constable and the chief- 
justice of England. Let the law continue its own 
sanctions, if they be thought requisite; but let it spare 
the solemnity of an ^ath. And where, from the want 
of something better to depend upon, it ij3 necessary to 
accept men*s own word or own account, let it annex 
to prevarication, penalties proportioned to the public 
mischief <^ the ofience. 

2. But whatever be the form of an oath, the ng- 
nifieaHon is the same. It is the " calling upon God 
to witness, i, e. to take notice of what we say;'* and 
it is " invoking his vengeance or renouncing his 
favour, if what we say be false, or what we promise 
be not performed." 

3. Quakers and Moravians refuse to swear upon 
any occasion; founding their scruples concerning the 
lawfulness of oaths upon our Saviour's prohibition. 
Matt. V. 84. "I say unto you. Swear not alW? 

The answer which we give to this objection cannot 
be understood, without first stating the whole pas- 
sage: " Ye have heard that it hath been said by them 
of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shaft 
perform unto, the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto 



OATH*. 189 

yoQ, Swear not at all; neitlier by heaten* for it is God's 
throne; nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nei- 
ther by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. 
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou 
canst not make one hair white or black. But let 
your communication be. Yea, yea; Nay; nay: for 
whatsoetrer is more than these, oometh of evil." 

To reconcile with this passage of Scripture the 
practice of swearing or of taking oaths when requir- 
ed by law, the* following observations must be attend- 
ed to: — 

1. It does not appear, that swearing *'.by heaven,*' 
** by the earth," " by Jerusalem," or ** by their own 
head," was a form of swearing ever made use of 
amongst the Jews in judicial oaths: and consequently, 
it is not probable that they were judicial oaths which 
Christ had in his mind when he mentioned these 
instances. 

2. As to the seeming universality of the prohibi- 
tion, ** Swear not at all," the emphatic clause " not at 
all" ia to be read in connexion with what follows; 
** not at all," i e, neither *' by the heaven," nor " by 
the earth," nor *< by Jerusalem," nor ** by thy head:" 
** not at alV* does not mean upon no occasion, but 
by none of these forms. Our Saviour's argument 
fleems to suppose, that the people to whom he spake 
made a distinction between swearing directly by the 
** name of God," and swearing by those inferior ob- 
jects of veneration, ** the heavens," " the earth," 
'* Jerusalem," or '* their own head." In opposition 
to which distinction he tells them, that on account of 
the relation which these things bore to the Supreme 
Being, to swear by any of them was in effect and 
substance to swear by him ; "by heaven, for it is his 
throne; by the earth, for it is his footstool; by Jeru- 
salem, for it is the city of the great King; by thy head, 
for it is hi$ workmanship, not thinet — thou canst not 
make one hair white or black:" for which reason he 
says, « Sweaur not at all,*' that is, neither directly by 
God, nor indirectly by any thing related to him. This 
interpretation is greatly confirmed by a passage in 
.the twenty-third chapter of the same Gospel, where 



180 OATRS. 

a similar distinction, made by the Scribes and Pha- 
risees, is replied to in the same manner. 

8. Our Saviour himself being <' adjured by the 
living God,** to declare whether he was the Christ, 
the Son of God, or not, condescended to answer the 
high-priesf , without making any objection to the oath 
(for such it was) upon which he examined him. — 
' ** God-is nw. ivitnessy" says St. Paul to the Romans, 
** that^^itCoiit ceasing I make mention of you in my 
. prayers:'* and to the Corinthians still 'more strongly, 
*< / call God for a record upon my $oul, that to 
s^are you, I came not as yet to Corinth." Both 
these expressions contain the nature of oaths. The 
Epistle to the Hebrews speaks of the custom of swear- 
ing judicially, without any .mark of censure or disap- 
probation: " Men verily swear by the greater; and 
an oath, for confirmation, is to them an end of -all 
strife.'* 

Upon the strength of these reasons, we explain oar 
Saviour's words to relate, not to judicial oaths, but to 
the practice of vain, wanton, and unauthorized swear- 
ing in common discourse. St. James's words, chap. 
V. 12. are not so strong as our Saviour's, and there- 
fore admit the same explanation with more ease. 

IV. Oaths are nugatory, that is, carry with them 
no proper force of obligation, unless we believe that 
God will punish false swearing with more severity 
than a simple lie or breach of promise; for which 
belief there are the following reasons: — 

1. Perjury is a sin of greater deliberation. The 
juror has the thought of God and of religion upon 
his mind at the time; at least, there are very few 
who can shake them off entirely. He offends, there- 
fore, if he do offend, with a high hand; in the face, 
that is, and in defiance of the sanctions of religion. 
His offence implies a disbelief or contempt of God's 
knowledge, power, and justice; which cannot be said 
of a lie, where there is nothing to carry thQ'4nind to 
any reflection upon the Deity or the Divine'^ttributes 
at all. 

2. Peijury violates a superior confidence. Man- 
kind must trust to one another; and they have i^othin^ 



0ATK8. 181 

i 

better to tnut to than one another's oath. Hence 
legal' adjadicatioBs, which govern and afiect every 
right and interest on this side of the grave, of necessity 
proceed and depend upon oaths. Perjury, therefore, 
m its general consequence, strikes at the security^of 
reputation, property, and even of life itielf. A lie 
cannot do the same mischief, because the same credit 
is not given to it.* . < ,. • 

3. God directed the Israelites to £w.^M|y his 
name;t and was .pleaded, '*iu order to show the im-^ 
mutability of his own counsel ;'*f to confirm his cove* 
nant with that people by an oath: neither of which 
it is probable he would have done, had he not intend- 
ed to represent oaths as having some meaning and efiect 
beyond the obligation of a bare promise; which efiect 
must be owing to the severer punishment with which 
he will vindicate the authority of oaths. ^ 

v. Promissory oaths are not binding where the pro- 
mise itself would not be so: for the several cases of 
which, see the Chapter of Promises. 

VI. As oaths are designed for the security of the 
imposer, it is manifest that they must be interpreted 
and performed in the sense in which the imposer in- 
tends them; otherwise, they afford no security to Mm. 
And this is the meaning and reason of the rule, *' ju- 
rare in animum imponentis;*' which rule the reader is 
desired to carry along with him, whilst we proceed to 
conaider certain particular oaths, which are either of 
greater importance, or more likely to fall in our way, 
than others. 



* Except, indeed, where a Quaker's or Moravian's affir- 
mation is accepted in the place of an oath ; in which ease, a 
tie partakes, so far as this reason extends, of the nature and 
guilt of perjury. 

t Deut. vi. 13 ; X. 20. t Heb. vi. 17. 



189 OATH IM SVIOBNCE. 



CHAPTER XVIV 

OATH IN KVIDBlfCK. 

The witoess swears " to speak thp truth, the whole 
truth, and.npthing but the truth, touching the matter 
in question.*' - . 

Upon which it may be observed, that the designed 
concealment of any truth, which relates to tl» matter 
in agitation, is as much a violation of the oath as to 
testify a positive falsehood; and this, whether the wit- 
ness be interrogated as to that particular point or not. 
For when the person to be examined is sworn upon a 
«otr iire^ that is, in order to inquire whether he ought 
to be admitted to give evidence in the cause stall, the 
form runs thus: " Ypu shall true answer make to all 
such questions as shall he asked you:" but wheni ha 
comes to be sworn in chief, he swears " to speak the 
whole truth,** without restraining it, as before, to the 
questions that shall be asked: wMch difference shows 
that the law intends, in this latter case.Ho require of 
the witness, that he give a complete and unreserved 
account of what he knows of the subject of the trial, 
whether the questions proposed to hun reach the ex- 
tent of his knowledge or not.. So that if it be inquir- 
ed of the witness i^erwards, why he did not inform 
the court so and so, it is not a sufficient, though a 
very eommon answer, to say* ** because it was never 
asked me." 

I know but one exception to this rule; which is, 
when a full discovery of the truth tends to accuse the 
witness himself of some legal crime. The law of 
England constrains no man to become his own ao« 
cuser; consequently imposes the oath of testimony 
with this tacit reservation. But the exception musi 
be confined to legal crimes. A point of honour, of 
delicacy, or of reputation, may make a witness back-^ 
ward to disclose some circumstance with which he is 
acquainted; but will in no wise justify his c^^nceal- 
ment of the truth, unless it could be shown! that the 
law which imposes the oath intended to all^ this 



OATH or ALLEOIANCC. 181 

liidi:^Aoe to such motives. The exception of which 
we are speaking is also withdrawn by a compact be** 
tween the magistrate and the witness, when an ac- 
complice is admitted to give evidence against the 
partnen of his crime. 

Tenderness to the prisoner, although a specious 
apology for -concealment, is no just excused for if this 
plea 1^ thought sufficient, it takes the administration 
of penal justice out of the hands of judges and juried, 
and makes it depend upon the temper of prosecutors 
and witnesses. 

Questions may be asked, which are inelative to the 
cause, which afifect the witness himself, or some third 
person; in which, and in all cases where the witness 
doutafts of the pertinency and propriety of the question, 
he ought to refer his doubts to the court. The an- 
swer of the court, in relaxation of the oath, is autho- 
rity enough to the witness; for the law which im- 
poses the oath may remit what it will of the obliga- 
tion; and it belongs to the court to declare' what Die 
mind of the law is. Nevertheless, it cannot be said 
universally, that the answer of the court is conclusive 
upon the conscience of the witness; for his obligation 
depends upon what he apprehended, at the time of 
taking the oath, to be the design of the law in im- 
posing it, and no after requisition or explanation by 
the court can carry the obligation heyond that. 



CHAPTER XVm. 

OATH OF ALLEGIANCE. 



«« 



I DO shicerely promise and swear, that I will be 
faithful, and bear true allegiance to his Majesty King 
GcoROz.*' Formerly the oath of allegiance ran 
thus: '* I do promise to be true and faithful to the king 
and his heirs, and truth and faith to bear, 6f life and 
iimb, and terrene honour; and not to know or hear of 
any ill or damage intended him, without defending him 
therefrom;*' and was altered at the Revolution to the 
vol* I. 12 



1(84 OATH or ALLEOIANCa* 

prewnt fonn. So that the present oath is a relaxation 
of the old one. And as the oath was intended to 
ascertain, not so much the extent of the subject's obe- 
dience, as the person to whom it was due, the legisla* 
ture seems to have wrapped up its'meaiiing upon the 
former point, in a word purposely made choice of for 
its general and indetermmate signification. 

It will be most convenient to consider, first, what 
the oath excludes- as inconsistent with it; secondly, 
what it permits. 

1. The oath excludes all intention to support the 
claim or pretentions of any other person or persons to 
the crown and government, than the reigning sove- 
reign. A Jacobite, who is persuaded of the Preten- 
der's right to the crown, and who moreover designs 
to join with the adherents to that cause to assert this 
right, whenever a proper opportunity with a reasona- 
ble prospect of success presents itself, cannot take 
the oath of allegiance; or, if he could, the oath of 
abjuration follows, which contains an express renun- 
ciation of all opinions in favour of the claim of the 
exiled family. 

2. The oath excludes all design, at the time, of 
attempting to depose the reigning prince, for any rea- 
son whatever. Let the justice of the Revolution be 
what it would, no honest man could have taken even 
the present oath of allegiance to James the Second, 
who entertained, at the time of taking it, a design of 
joining in the measures which were entered into to 
dethrone him. 

3. The oath forbids the taking up of arms against 
the reigning prince, with views of private advance- 
ment, or from motives of personal resentment or dis- 
like. It is possible to happen in this, what frequently 
happens in despotic governments, that an ambitious 
general, at the head of the military force of the nation, 
might, by a conjecture of fortunate circumstances, 
and a great ascendency over the minds of the soldieiy, 
depose the prince upon the throne, and make way to 
it for himself, or for some creature of his own. A 
person in this situation would be withholden from 
enich an attempt by the oath of allegiance, if he paid 



OATH OP.ALLX6IA9CE. IB$ 

regard to it. If there were any who engaged in the 
rebellion of the year forty-five, with the expectation of 
titles, estates, or preferment; or because they were 
disappointed, and thought themselves neglected and 
ill used at court; or because they entertained a family 
animosity, or personal resentpient, against the king» 
the favourite, or the minister; — ^ifany were induced 
to take up arms by these motives, they added to the 
many crimes of an unprovoked rebellion, that of wilful 
and corrupt perjury. If, in the iate American war, 
the same motives determined others to connect them- 
selves with that opposition, their part in it was charge- 
able with perfidy and falsehood to their oath, what- 
ever was the justice of the opposition itself, or how- 
ever well founded their own complaints might be of 
private injury. 

We are next to consider what the oath of allegi- 
ance permits, or does not require. 

1. It permits resistance to the king, when his ill 
behaviour or imbecility is such as to make resistance 
beneficial to the community. It may fairly be pre- 
sumed that the Convention Parliament, which intro- 
duced the oath in its present form, did not intend, by 
imposing it, to exclude all resistance, since the mem- 
bers of that legislature had many of them recently 
t^en up arms against James the Second, and the 
very authority by which they sat together was itself 
the efiect of a successful opposition to an acknow- 
ledged sovereign. Some resistance, therefore, was 
meant to be allowed; and, if any, it must be that 
which has the public interest for its object. 

2. The oath does not require obedience to such 
commands of the king as are unauthorized by law. 
No such obedience is implied by the terms of the 
o&th: the JideKty there promised is intended of fide- 
lity in opposition to his enemies, and not in opposition 
to taw; and allegiance, at the utmost, can only sig^ 
nify obedience to lawful commands. Therefore, if 
the king should issue a proclamation, .levying money, 
or imposing any service or restraint upon the subject* 
beyond what the crown is empowered by law to en- 
join, there would exist no sort of obligation to obey 



1|6 OATH AGAINST BAIBBET. 

such a proclamatioB, in consequence <^ having tdien 
the oath of allegiance. 

3. . The oath does not require that we . shoolil cim- 
tinue our allegiance to the king, alter 'he is actually 
and absolutely deposed, driven into exile, carried away 
captive, or otherwise rendered incapable of exerciang 
the regal office, whether by his fault or without it. 
The promise of allegiance implies, and is understood 
by all parties, to suppose that the person to whom the 
promise is made, continues king;>^continue8, that is, 
to exercise the power, and afford the protection, which 
belongs to the office of king: £br it is the possession 
•f this power which makes such a particular person 
the object of the oath; without it, why should I Swear 
allegiance to this man, rather than to any man in the 
kingdom ? Besides which, the contraiy doctrine is 
burthened with this consequence, that every conquest, 
revolution of government, or disaster which befalls the 
person of the prinee, must be followed by perpetual 
and irremediable anarchy. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

OATH AGAINST BRIBBRT IN THE ELECTION OP 
BCSMBERS OF PARLIAMENT. 

" I DO swear I have not received, or had, by my- 
self, or any person whatsoever in trust for me, or for my 
use and benefit, directly or indirectly, any sum or 
sums of money, office, place, or employment, gif^, or 
reward, or any promise or security ibr any money, 
office, employment, or gift, in order to give my vote 
at this election.*' 

The several contrivances to evade this oath, such as 
the electors accepting money under colour of borrow- 
ing it, and giving a promissory note, or other security 
for it, which is cancelled after the election; receiving 
vaon^y from a stranger, or a person in disguise, or out 
of a drawer, or purse, left open for the purpose; or 
promises of money to be paid after the election; or 



•OATH AOAltAT flBfONT^ 187 

stipulating for a place, living, or other private adTan* 
tage of any kind — ^if they escape the legal penalties 
of perjury, incur the moral guilt: for tliSyare niani« 
festly within the mischief and design of the statute 
which imposes the oath, and within the terms indeed 
of the oath itself; for the word ** indirectly" is insert* 
ed on purpose to comprehend such cases as these. 



CHAPTER XX. 



OATH AGAINST SIMONT. 



FnoM an imaginary resemblance between the pur- 
chase of a benefice, and Simon Magus's attempt to 
purchase the gift of the Holy Ghost (Acts viii. 19,) 
the obtaining of ecclesiastical preferment by pecuni- 
ary considerations has been termed Simony, 

The sale of advowsons is inseparable from the aU 
lowance of private patronage; as patronage would 
otherwise devolve to the most indigent, and for that 
reason the most hnproper hands it could be placed in. 
Nor did the law ever intend to prohibit the passing of 
advowsons from one patron to another; but to restrain 
the patron, who possesses the right of presenting at 
the vacancy, from being influenced, in the choice of 
his presentee, by a bril:^ or benefit to himself. It is 
the same distinction with that which obtains in a 
freeholder's vote for his representative in parliament. 
The right of voting, that is, the freehold to which the 
right pertains, may be bought and sold as freely as 
any other property; but the exercise of that right, the 
vote itself, may not be purchased, or influenced by 
money. 

For this purpose, the law imposes upon the pre- 
sentee, who is generally concerned in the simony, if 
there be any, the following oath: *' I do swear, that 
I have made no rimomacal payment, contract, or pro- 
mise, directly or indirectly, by myself, or by any 
other to my knowledge, or with my consent, to any 
pexBon or persons wlMtsoever, for or concerning the 

vol.. I. 12 • 



IB oe uiii ^ aaid obltaiiBg of thii •eclMustiefll pl«e»» 
Ac; nor will, at any tint hereafter, perfoim, of sa* 
tkfy anj each kind of imyiMiity eofatract, or promiae, 
made hj any other without my knowledge or eonaeat: 
So help me God, through Jesue Christ!*' 

It ii eztraontinary that Biahop Gibaon should hare 
thoi^ht this oath to be agafaiat all promises whatao* 
ever, when the terms of the oath expressly restram it 
to sUnoniacdl promises; and the law alone must pro- 
nounce what promises, as well as what payments and 
contracts, are simoniacal, and consequently come 
within the oath; and what do not so. 

Now the law adjudges to be simony,— 

1. All payments, contracts, or promises, made by 
any person for a benefice already vacant. The ad- 
Yowson of a void turn, by law, cannot be transferred 
from one patron to another; therefore, if the void 
turn be procured by money, it must be by a pecu- 
niary influence upon the then subsisting patron in the 
choice of his presentee, which is the veiy practice the 
law condemns. ' 

2. A clergyman's purchasing of the next turn of a 
benefice for himeelf, " directly or indirectly," that ia, 
by himself, or by another person with his money. It 
does not appear that the law prohibits a clergyman 
from purchasing the perpetuity of a patronage, more 
than any other person: but purchasing the perpetuity, 
and forthwith selling it again with a reservation of the 
next turn, and with no other design than to posseas 
himself of the next turn, is infraudem legUt and in- 
consistent with the oath. 

3. The procuring of a piece of preferment, by 
ceding to the patron any rights, or probable rights, 
belonging to it. This is simony of the worst kind; 
for it is not only buying preferment, but robbing the 
succession to pay for it. 

4. Promises to the patron of a portion of the profit, 
of a remission * of tithes or dues, or other advantage 
out of the produce of the benefice; which kind of 
compact is a pernicious condescension in the clergy, 
independent of the oath; for it tends to introduce a 
practice, which may very soon become general, of 



1.0GA>L STATVTB*. IM 

fiviDg i\m tepnsMt 6f drarehat to- the Uy pttrons, And 
Mq>f lying the* duty by indigent stipendiaries. 

6. G^ersI bonds of vesigBation, that is, bonds tn 
resign apen demand. 

I doubt not bfit that the oath against simony li 
binding upon the consciences of those who take it, 
though I question much the expediency of requiring 
it. It is very fit to debar public patrons, such as th« 
kmg, the lord ehancellor, bishops, ecclesiastical cor- 
porations, and the like, from thos.kind of traffic; be- 
cause from them may be expected some regard to the 
qualifications of the persons who they promote. But 
the oath lays a snare for the integrity of the clergy; 
and I do not perceive, that the requirmg of it in cases 
of private patronage produces any good efiect, suffi-* 
eient to compensate for this danger. 

Where advowsons are holden along with maiv>rs, or 
other principal estates, it would be an easy regulation 
to forbid that they should ever hereafter be separated; 
and would, at least, keep churdi preferment out of 
the hands of brokers. 



CHAPTER XXl. 



OATHS TO OBS JIMWL LOCAI* STATUTES. 



MxMBSiis of colleges in the Universities, and of 
other ancient foundations, are required to swear to the 
observance of their respective statutes; which obser* 
vance is become in some cases unlawful, in others im.* 
practicable, in others useless, in others inconvenient. 

Unlawful directions are countermanded by the att« 
thority which made them unlawful. 

Impracticable directions are dispensed with by th« 
necessity of the case. 

The only question is, how far the members of these 
societies may take upon themselves to Judge of the m- 
eonvenieneif of any particular direction, and make 
that a reason for laying aside the observation of it. 



140 I.OCAL 8TATUTS0. 

The animus tntponentii, which is the measnie of 
the juror's duty, seems to .be satisfied, when nothing 
is omitted, but what, from some change inthecircimi- 
stances -nnder which it was prescribed^ it may fairly 
be presumed that the founder himself would have dis- 
pensed with. 

To bring a case within this ruie^ the ineonvenieney 
must — 

1. Be manlifest ; concerning which tbere is no doubt. 

2. It must arise fVom some change in the circnm* 
stances of the institution; for, let the inconveniencj 
be what it will, if it existed at the time of the fcmnda- 
tion, it must be presnuned that the founder did not 
deem the avoiding of it of sufficient importance ta 
alter his pj||^> 

S. The'i&ection of the statute must not only be in- 
conveiltent in the general (for so may the institution 
itself be,) but prejudicial to the particular end pro- 
po)6ed by the institution: for it is this last circum- 
stance which provei^that the founder would have dis- 
pensed with it in pursuance of his own purpose. 

The statutes of some colleges forbid the speakings of 
any language but Latin within the walls of the col- 
lege ; direct that a certain number, and not fewer than 
that number, be allowed the use of an apartment 
amongst them; that so many hours of each day be em- 
ployed in public exercises, lectures, or disputations; 
and some other articles of djiisipline adapted to the 
tender years of the studentl^i^o in former times re- 
sorted to universities. Were colleges to retain such 
rules, nobody nowadays would come near them. They 
are laid aside therefore, though parts of the statutes, 
and as such included within the oath, not merely be- 
C|tU?e they are inconvenient, but because there is suf^ 
ifcient reason to believe, that the founders themselves 
would have dispensed with them, as subversive of their 
own designs. 



flUBtCRIPTION TO ARTICLSS OF RELIGION, 141 



CHAPTER XXII. 

SUBSCRIPTION TO ARTICLES OF RELIGION^ 

fitTBscRiPTioN to articles of religion, though not 
more than a declaration of the subscriber *d assent^ 
may properly enough be considered in connexion with 
the subject of 'oaths, because it is governed by the 
frame rule of interpretation: 

Which rule is the animus imponentis. 

The inquiry, therefore, concerning subscription, will 
be, qui» in^osuity et quo ammo? 

The bishop who receives the subticription is not the 
imposer) any more than the crier of a court, who ad- 
ministers the oath to the jury and witnessesfis the per- 
son that imposes it; nor, consequently, is the private 
opmion or interpretation qf the bishop of any signifi- 
cation to the subscriber, one way or other. 

The compilers of the Thirty-n^e Articles are not 
to be considered as the imposers of subscription, any 
more than the framer or drawer up of a law is the per- 
son that enacts it. 

The legislature of the 13th Eliz. is the imposer, 
whose intention the subscriber is bound to satisfy. 

They who contend that nothing less can justify sub- 
scription to the Thirty-nine Articles, than the actual 
belief of each and every separate proposition con- 
tained in them, must suppose that the legislature 
expected the consent of ten thousand men, and that 
in perpetual succession, not to one controverted pro- 
position, but to many hundreds. It is difficult to coo- 
oeive how this could be expected by aqy who observed 
the incurable divenfRy of human opinion upon all sub- 
jects short of demonstration. 

If the authors of the law did not intend this, what 
did they intend ? ' 

They intended to excluded from offices ia the church, 

1. All abettors of Popery: 

2. Anabaptists; who were at that time a powerful 
party on the Continent. 

8. The Paritaas; who were hostile to an episooptl 
constitution: and, in general, the members of such 



142 wn.iA 



sects or foreign esUbliaiiiiienfa as thfettened 
to overthrow our own. 

Whoever finds himself comprehended within these 
descriptions, ought not to subecribe. Nor can a sub- 
scriber to the Articles take advantage of any latitnds 
which our rule may seem to allow, who is not first 
convinced that he is truly and substantially satisfying 
the intention of the legislature. 

Daring the present state of ecclesiastical patronage, 
in which private inifividuals are permitted to impose 
teachers upon parishes with which they are often Uttle 
or not at all connected, some limitation of the patron's 
choice may be necessary to prevent unedifying con- 
tentions between neighbouring teachers, or between 
the teachers and their respective congregations. Bat 
this danger, if it exist, may be provi<ted against witb« 
equal effect, by converting the articles of faith into 
articles of peace. 



CHAPTER XXffl. 



WILI,8. 



The fundamental question upon this subject is, whe- 
ther Wills are of natural or of adventitious rig^ht ? 
that is, whether the nght of directing the dispositioB 
of property after his death belongs to a man in a state 
of nature, and by the law of nature, or whether it be 
given him entirely by the positive regulations of the 
country he lives in ? 

The immediate produce of f ach man's personal 
labour, as the tools, weapons, and utensils which he 
manufactures, the tent or hut that he builds, and per- 
haps the flocks and herdS which he breeds and rear8» 
are as much his o^ni as the labour was which he em- 
ployed upon them, that is, are his property naturally 
and absolutely; and cotisequently he may give or 
leave them to whom he pleases, there being nothing 
to limit the continuance of his right, or to restraiii the 
afiemition of it, 



But every, otber species of property, especially pro- 
perty in land, stands upon a different foundation* 

We have seen, in the Chapter upon Property, that» 
in a state of nature, a man's right to a particular spot 
of ground arises from his using it, and his wanting it; 
consequently ceases with the use and want: so that at 
his death the estate reverts to the community^ without 
any regard to the last owner's wiU» or even any pre-* 
ference of his family, further than as they become the 
first occupiers, after him, and succeed to the same 
want and use. 

Moreover, as natural rights cannot, like rights 
created by act of parliament, expire at the end of a 
certain number of years; if the testator have a rights 
by the layr of nature, to dispose of his property one 
moment after his death, he has the same right to di- 
rect the disposition of it for a million of ages after 
him; which is absurd. 

The ancient apprehensions of mankind upon the 
8ubject> were conformable to tins account of it: for 
wills have been introduced into most* countries by a 
positive act of the state; as by the Laws of Solon 
mto Greece; by the Twelve Tables into Rome; and 
that not till after a considerable progress had been 
made in legislation, and in the economy of civil life. 
Tacitus relates, that amongst the Germans they were 
disallowed; and what is more remarkable, in this 
country since the Conquest, lands could not be de-> 
vised by will, till within little more than two hundred 
years ago, when this privilege was restored, to the 
subject, by an act of Parliament, in the latter end of 
the reign of Henry, the Eighth. 

No doubt, man» beneficial purposes ore attained 
by extending the'owner's power over his property 
beyond his life, and beyond his natural right. It 
invites to industry; it encourages marriage; it secures 
the dutifulness and dependency of children: but a li- 
mit must be assigned to the duration of this power. 
The utmost extent to which, in any case, entails are 
allowed by the laws of England to operate, is during^ 
the lives in e:i^stence at the death of the testator, and 



/ 



1 44 WiL&s. 

one-and-twenty y«an9 beyond these; aAer wluefa^tlierB 
are ways and means of setting them aside. 

From the <!on6ideration that, wills are the oreatvres 
of the municipal law which gives them their efficacy, 
Inay be deduced a determination of the qnestiony 
whether the intention of the testator in an informai 
Irill be binding upon the conscience of those who« 
by operation of law, succeed to his estate. By an 
informal will, I mean a will void in law for want of 
some requisite formality, though no doubt be enter* 
tained of its meaning and authenticity: as, suppose a 
man make his will, devising his freehold estate to his 
sister's son, and the will be attested by two ooly^ 
instead of three subscribing witnesses; would l£e 
brother's son, who is heir at law to the testator, \m 
bound in conscience to resign his claim to the estate, 
Aut ef deference to his uncle's intention ? or, on the 
contrary, would not the devisee under the will be 
bound upon discovery of this flaw in it, to surrender 
the estate, suppose he had gained possession of it, te 
the heir^-at-law ? 

Generaly speaking, the heir-at-law is not bound 
by the intention of the testatot*: for the intention can 
signify nothing, unless the person intending have a 
right to govern the descent of the estate, "niat is the 
first question. Now, this right the testator can only 
derive from the law of the kind: but the law oonlen 
the right upon certain conditions, with which condi- 
tions he has not complied; therefore the testator can 
lay no daim to the power which he {R^tends to exer- 
cise, as he hath not entitled himself to the benefit of 
that law, by virtue of which alone ihe estate ought to 
attend his disposal. Consequently the devisee under 
the will, who, by concealing thil flaw in it, keeps 
possession of the estate, is in the situation of any 
other person who avails himself of his neighbour's 
ignorance to detain from him his property. The will 
is so much waste paper, from the defect of right in 
the person who made it. Nor is this catching at an 
expression of law to pervert the substantial design of 
it: for I apprehend it to bo the deliberate mind ef 
the legislature, that no will should take effect upon 



WILLI. 141 

real estatw, unless authenticated in the precise man* 
ner which the statute describes. . Had testamentary 
dispositions been founded in any natural right, in- 
dependent of positive constitutions, I should have 
thought difierently of this question: for then I should 
have considered the law rather as refusing its asisist- 
ance to enforce the right of the devisee, than as 
extinguishing, or working any alteration in the right 
itself. 

And after all, I should choose to propose a case, 
where no consideration of pity to distress, of duty to 
a parent, or of gratitude to a benefactor^ interfered 
with the general rule of justice. 

The regard due to kindred in the disposal of our 
fortune (except the case of lineal kindred, which is 
difier^nt,) arises either from the respect we owe to the 
precrumed intention of the ancestor from whom we 
received our fortunes, or from the expectations which 
we have encouraged. The intention of the ancestor 
is presumed with greater certainty, as well as entitled 
to more respect, the fewer degrees he is removed from 
us; which makes the di^rence in the different de- 
grees of kindred. For instance, it may be presumed 
to be a father's intention and desire, that the inherit- 
ance which he leaves, after it has served the turn and 
generation of one son, should remain a provision for 
the families of his other children, equally related and 
dear to him as the oldest. Whoever, therefore, vrith- 
out cause, gives away his patrimony from his brother's 
or sister's ^ family, is guilty not so much of an injury 
to them as of ingratitude to his parent. The deference 
due from the possessor of a fortune to the presumed 
desire of his ancestor will also vary with this circum- 
stance; whether the ancestor earned the fortune by 
his personal industry, acquired it by accidental sue-- 
cesses, or only transmitted the inheritance which he 
received. 

Where a man's fortune is acquired by himself, and 
he has done nothing to excite expectation, but rather 
has refrained from those particular attentions which 
tend to cherish expectation, he is perfectly disengaged 
from the force of the above Masons, and at libc^y to 

VOL. I. 13 



14i wiix*. 

hmf hm fortans to hk Inends, to chuitsblo or pu^ 
lie pnrposeSf or to whom he will: the same blood* 
proxjmitj of blood, and the like, are merely modes of 
■pieech, implying nothing real, nor any obligatkHi of 

. themselves. 

} There is always, howeyer, a reason for providing 
lor our poor relations in preference to others who may 
be equally necessitoas, which is, that if we do not, 
■o one else will; mankhid, by an established consent, 
leaving the reduced branchn of good families to the 
bounty of their wealthy allienccs. 
' The not "**lt'"g a will is a very culpable omission, 
where it is attended with the following eflbcts; Where 
it leaves daughters, or 3rounger children, at the mercy 
of the oldest sou; where it distributes a personaJ 
fortune equally amongst the children, although there 
be no eqittUty in their exigencies or situation; where 
it leaves an opening for litigation; or lastly, and 
vrindpally, where it defrauds creditors; for, by a 
defect in our laws, which has been long and strwigely 
overlooked, real estates are not subject to the payment 
of debts by simple contract, unless made so by will; 
although credit is, in fact, generally given to the pos^ 
session of such estates: he therefore, who neglects to 
make the necessary appointments for the payment of 
his debts, as far as his effects extend, sins, as it has 
been justly said, in his grave; and if he omits this on 
purpose to defeat the demands of his creditors, hef 
dies with a deliberate fraud in his heart. 

i Anciently, when any one died without a will, the 
bishop of the diocess took possession of his personal 
fbrtnne, in order to dispose of it for the benefit of his 
soul, that is, to pious or charitable uses. It became 
necessary, therefore, that the bishop should be satisfi- 
ed of the authenticity of the will, when there was any, 
before he resigned the right which he had to take 

' possession of the dead man's fortune in case of intes- 
tacy. In this way, wills, and controversies relating 
to wills, came within the cognizaqce of the ecdesias* 
tical courts'; under the jurisdiction of which, wills of 
personals (the only wills that were made formerly) 
still continue, though in truth no more nowadays 



wiLz^t. 147 

connected with religion, than any other instruments of 
conveyance. This is a peculiarity in the Enfflish law. 

Succession to intestates must be regulated by posir 
tive rules of law, there being no principle of natural 
justice whereby to ascertain the proportion of the dif- 
ferent claimants; not to mention that the claim itself, 
especially of collateral kindred, seems to have little 
foundation in the law of nature. 

These regulations should be guided by the duty 
and presumed inclination of the deceased, so far as 
these considerations can be consulted by general rules. 
The statutes of Charles the Second, commonly called 
the Statutes of Distribution, which adopt the rule of 
the Roman law in the distribution of personals, are 
sufficiently equitable. They assign one-third to the 
widow, and two^thirds to the children; in case of no 
children, one-half to the widow, and the other half to 
the next of kin; where neither widow nor lineal de- 
scendants survive, the whole to the next of kin, and 
to be equally divided amongst kindred of equal degree, 
without distmction of whole blood and half blood, or 
of consanguinity by the father's or mother's side. The 
descent of real estates, of houses, that is, and land, 
having been settled in more remote and in mder 
times, is less reasonable. There never can be much 
to complain of in a rule which every person may avoid, 
by so easy a provision as that of making his will: oth- 
erwise our law in this respect is chargeable with some 
flagrant absurdities; such as, that an estate shall in 
no wise go to the brother or sister of the half blood> 
though it came to the deceased from the common 
parent; that it shall go to the remotest relation the 
mtestate has in the world, rather than to his own 
father or mother; or even be forfeited for want of an 
heir, though both parents survive ; that the most dis- 
tant paternal relation shall be preferred to an uncle, 
or own cousin, by the mother's side, notwithstanding 
the estate was purchased and acquired by the intes- 
tate himself. 

Land not being so divisible as money, may be a 
reason for making a dififorence in tlie course of inhe- 
ritance; but there ought to be no difference but what is 
founded upon that reason. The Roman law made none. 



BOOK III. 

PART II. 

01* RILAtirB DUTIES WHICH ARE IHDETZRKIHATB. 



CHAPTER I. 



CHARITY. 



I USB the term Charity neither in the common sense 
of bounty to the poor, nor in St. Paul's sense of be^ 
nevolence to all mankind; but I apply it, at present* 
in a sense more commodious to my purpose, toagpify 
the promoting the happinesa of our inferiors. 

Charity, in this sense, I take to be the principal 
province of virtue and religion; for, whilst worldly 
prudence will direct our behaviour towards our supe- 
riors and politeness towards our equals, there is little 
beside the consideration of duty, or an habitual hu- 
manity which comes into the place of consideration, 
to produce a proper conduct towards those who are 
beneath us, and dependent upon us. 

There are three principal methods of promoting the 
happiness of our inferiors: — 

1. By the treatment of our domestics and depei^ 
dants. 

2. By professional assistance. 

3. By pecuniary bounty. 



TMKATMXNT or OVA OOMSSTICi. 14f 



CHAPTER n. 

CHARITY. 

TBI TmBATM ENT OF OUA OOMXSTICl AVD 

DXPXNDAlfTS. 

A PARTY of friends Bettinjp out toother upon a 
joamey soon find it to be the best for all sides, that, 
while they are upon the road, one of the company 
•hould wait upon the rest; another ride forward to 
4Mek out lodgtn; and entertainment; a third cany, the 
portmanteau; a fourth take charge of the horses; a 
fifth bear the purse, conduct and <£rect the route; bot 
forgetting, however, that as they were equal and in* 
dependent when they set out, so they are all to return 
to a level again at their journey's end. The same 
regard and respect; the same forbearance, lenity, and' 
reserve in using their service; the same mildness m 
delivering commancis; the same study to make their 
journey comfortable and pleasant, which he whose lot 
it was to direct the rest, would in common decency 
think himself bound to observe towards them; ought 
we to show to those who, in the casting of the partr 
of human society, happen to be placed within- our. 
power, or to depend upon us. 

Another reflection of a like tendency with thefbr* 
mer is, that our obligation to them is much greater 
than theirs to us. It is a mistake to. suppose, that the 
rich man maintains his servants, tradesmen, tenants, 
and labourers : the truth is, they maintain him. It is 
their industry which supplies his table, furnishes his 
wardrobe, builds his houses, adorns his equipage, pny* 
vides his amusements. It is not the estate, but the 
labour employed upon it, that pays his rent. All that 
he does is to distribute what oUiers produce; whidi 
is the least part of the business. . 

Nor do I perceive any foundation for anophuon, 
which is often handed round in genteel ccmpany, that 
good usage is thrown away i^n low ana ordinary 
minds; tlut they are inMiuablo of kin d ne ss, and in- 

roL. I, 18 • 



9 

capable of gratitude. If by '* low and ordinaiy mindi* ' 
are meant the minds oilmen in low and ordinary flta>- 
tiona, they seem to be affected by benefits in the same 
way that all others are, and to be no less ready to 
requite them: and it would be a very unaccountable 
law of nature if it were otherwise. 

Whatever uneasiness we occasion to our domestics, 
which neither promotes our service nor answers the 
just Olds of punishment, is manifestly wrong; were 
it only upon the general principle of dinunisUttg the 
•am of human happiness. 

By wliich rule we are forbidden,^ 

1. To enjoin unnecessary labour or confinement 
firom the mere love and wantonness of domination: 

2. To insult our servants by harsh, scornful, or op* 
probrious language; 

8. To refuse them any harmless pleasures; 

And, by the same principle, are also forbidden 
causeless or immoderate anger, habitual peeviidiiiefliy 
and groundless suspicion. 



CHAPTER in. 



SLAVEBT. 



Ths prohibitions of the last chapter extend to the 
treatment of slaves, being founded upon a principle 
independent of the contract between masters and 
servants. 

I define slavery to be << an obligation to labour for 
the benefit of the master, without the contract or con- 
sent of the servant.'* 

This obligation may arise, consistently with the law 
of nature, &om three .causes: 

1. From crimes. • 

8. From captivity. 

S. From debt. 

In the ft«t case, the continuMiee of the ilaTery, as 
«f M^y other ptuiishment, ought to b^ pvoportloMNd t» 



tlM ctioM; in the seeond tod third caMf» H ought to 
cease, as soon as the demand of the injured nation, 
or prirate creditor, is satisfied. 

The slave-trade upon the coast of .^ifriea is not 
excused by these principles. When slares in that 
country are brought to market, no (]|uestions, I belicTe, 
nre asked about the origin or justice of the vender's 
title. It may be presumed, therefore, that this title 
is not always, if it be ever, founded in any of the 
causes above assigned. 

But defect of right in the first purchase is the least 
crime vnth which this traffic is chargeable. The na- 
tives are excited to war and mutual depredation, for 
the sake of supplying their contracts, or furnishing 
their market with slaves. With this the wickedness 
begins. The slaves, torn away fjfom parents, wives, 
chudren, from their friends and companions, their 
fields and flocks, their home and country, are trans- 
ported to the European settlements in America, with 
no other accommodation on shipboard than what is 
provided for brutes. This is the second stage of 
<arueity; from which the miserable exiles are deli- 
vered, only to be placed, and that for life, in subjec- 
tion to a dominion and system of laws, the most mer- 
ciless and tyrannical that ever were tolerated upon 
the face of the earth; and from all that can be learned 
by the accounts of the people upon the spot, the inor- 
dmate authority which the plantation laws confer 
upon the slave holder is exercised, by the English 
sfave holder especially, with rigour and brutality. 

But necessity is pretended; the name under which 
every enormity is attempted to be justified. And, 
after all, what is the necessity ? It has never been 
proved tiiat the land could not be cultivated there, 
as it is here, by hired servants. It is said that it could 
not be cultivated with quite the same convenien<nr 
and cheapness, as by the labour of slaves; by which 
means a pound of sugar, which the planter now sells 
for sixpence, could not be afforded under sixpence* 
halfpenny;— «nd this is the necessity ! 

Tne great revolution which has taken place in litfi 
Western World may probably conduce (and who 



knows but that it wu designed ?) to aecelerate tii« 
fall of this abominable tyranny; and now that this 
contest, and the passions which attend it are no more, 
there may 'succeed perhi^ a season for reflecting, 
whether a leipslature which had so long lent its as- 
sistance to the support of an institution replete with 
human misery,, was fit to be trusted with an empire 
the most eztensire that ever obtained in any age or 
quarter of the world. 

Slavery was a part of the civil constitution of most 
countries when Christianity appeared ; yet no passage 
is to be found in the Christian Scriptures by which it 
is condemned or prohibited. This is true; for Chris- 
tianity, soliciting admission into all nations of the 
world, abstained, as it behoved it, from intermeddling 
with the civil institutions of any. But does it follow, 
from the silence of Scripture concerning them, that 
all the civil institutions which then prevailed were 
right ? or that the bad should not be exchanged for 
better ? 

Besides this, the discharging of slaves from all obli- 
gation to obey their masters, which is the consequence 
of pronouncing slavery to be unlawful, would have 
had no better efiect, than to let loose one half of man- 
kind upon the other. Slaves would have been tempted 
to embrace a religion which asserted their right to 
freedom; masters would hardly have been persuaded 
to consent to claims founded upon such authority; 
the most calamitous of all contests, a helium servile, 
might probably have ensued, to the reproach, if not 
the extmction, of the Christian name. 

The truth is, the emancipation of slaves should be 
gradual, and be carried on by provisions of law, and 
under the protection of civil government. Christiani- 
ty can only 'operate as an ^temative. By the mild 
<ufibsion of its light and influence, the min<fe of men 
are insensibly prepared to perceive and correct the 
enormities, which folly, or wickedness, or accident, 
have introduced into their public establishments. In 
this way the Greek and Roman slavery, and since 
these the feudal tyranny, has declined before it. And 



PmorSStXONAL AtSITAirCB. ICS 

we trust that, as the knowledge and authority of the 
same religion advance in the world, they wiU banish 
what remains of this odious institution. 



CHAPTER IV. 

CHARITY. 
PR0FC88I0NAL ASSISTANCE. 

This kind of beneficence is chiefly to be Azpected 
from members of the legislature, magistrates, medical, 
legal, and sacerdotal professions. 

1. The care of the poor ought to be the principal 
object of all laws; for this plain reason, that the rich 
are able to take care of themselves. 

Much has been, and more might be done by the 
laws of this country, towards the relief of the impo- 
tent, and the protection and encouragement of the in- 
jdustrious poor. Whoever applies ^mself to collect 
observations upon the state and operation of the poor 
laws, and 4o contrive remedies for the imperfections 
and abuses which he observes, and digests these reme- 
dies into acts of parliament; and conducts them, by 
argument or influence, through the two branches of 
the legislature, or communicates his ideas to those 
who are more likely to carry them into effect ; deserves 
well of a class of the community so numerous, that 
their happiness forms a principal part of the whole. 
The study and activity thus employed is charity, in 
the most meritorious sense of the word. 

2. The application of parochial reUef is intrusted, 
in the first instance, to overseers and contractors, who 
have an interest in opposition to that of the poor, in- 
asmuch as whatever they allow them comes in part 
out of their own pocket. For this reason, the law 
has deposited with justices of the peace a power of 
superintendence and control: and the judicious inter- 
position of this power is a most useful exertion of cha- 
rity , and oiltimes within the sbilty of those who have 



164 FROPK88IONAL ASSISTANCE. 

BO Other way of serrinf their generation. A country 

Sentleman of very mo&rate education^ and who has 
ttle to spare from his fortune, by learning so'mueh 
of the poor law as is to be found in Dr. Bum's Jus- 
tice, and by furnishing himself with a knowledge of 
the prices of labour and provision, so as to be able 
to estimate the exigencies of a family, and what is to 
be expected from their industry, may, in this way, 
place out the one talent coomiitted to him to great 
account 

8. Of all priyate professions, that of medicine puts 
it in a man's power to do the most good at the least 
expense. Health, which is precious to all, is to the 
poor inyaluable^ and their complaints, as agues, rheu- 
matisms, &c. are often such as yield to medicine. 
And, with respect to the expense, drugs at first hand 
cost little, and advice costs nothing, where it is only 
bestowed upon those who could not afford to pay 
for it. 

4. The rights of the poor are not so hnportant or 
intricate as their contentions are violent and ruinous. 
A lawjrer or attorney, of tolerable knowledge in his 
pofession^ lutf conmionly judgment enough to adjust 
these disputes, with all the effect, and without the ex- 
pense of a lawsuit; and he may be said to ^ve a poor 
man twenty pounds who prevents his throwmg it away 
upon law. A legal man, whether of the profession 
or not, who, together with a spirit of conciliation, 
possesses the coiSdence of his neighbourhood, will be 
much resorted to for this purpose, especially since the 
groat increase of costs has produced a general dread 
of going to law. t 

Nor is this line of beneficence confined to arbUra" 
turn. Seasonable counsel, coming with the weight 
which the reputation of the adviser gives it, will often 
keep or extricate the rash and uninformed out of great 
difificulties. 

Lastly, I know not a more exalted charity than that 
which presents a shield against the rapacity or pezae- 
cntion of a tyrant. 

6. Betwixt argument and authority (I mean that 
authority which flows from voluntary respect, and at- 






PSCirirtART BOUNTY. 166 

i^nds upon sanctity and disinterestedness of charac- 
ter,) something may be done, amongst the lower orders 
of mankind, towards the regulation of their conduct » 
and the satisfaction of their thoughts. This office 
belongs to the ministers of religion; or rather, who- 
ever undertakes it, becomes a minister of religion. 
The inferior clergy, who are nearly upon a level with 
the conmion sort of their parishioners, and who on 
that account gain an easier admission to their socie^ 
and confidence, have in this respect more in their 
power than their superiors: the discreet use of this 
power constitutes one of the most respectable func- 
tions of human nature. 



CHAPTER V. 

CHAKITT. 
PBCUNIART BOUNTY. 



1. The obligation to bestow relief upon the poor, 

2. The manner of bestowing it. 

3. The pretences by which men excuse themselves 

from it. 



I. The obligation to bestow relief upon the poor. 

Thby who rank pity amongst the original impulses 
of our nature, rightly contend, that when this princi- 
ple prompts us to the relief of human misery , it indi- 
cates the Divine intention, and our doty. Indeed, 
the same conclusion is deducible from the existence 
of the passion, whatever account be given of its ori- 
gin. Whether it be an instinct or a habit, it is in 
fact a property of our nature, which Ood appointed; 
and the final cause for which it was appointed is to 
aiTord to the miserable, in the compassion of their fel- 
low creatures, a remedy for those inequalities and dis- 
tresses which God foresaw that many must be ex- 
posed to, under %very general rule for the distribution 
of property. 



166 PECUNFARY BOUNTY. 

Beside this, the poor have a claim founded in the 
law of nature, which may be thus explained: — A.U 
things were originally common. No one being able 
to produce a charter from Heaven, had any better 
title to a particular possession than his next neigh- 
bour. ThM« were reasons for makind's agreeing 
upon a separation of this common fund ; and God for 
these reasons is presumed to have ratified it. But 
this separation was made and consented to, upon the 
ejEpectation and condition that every one should have 
left a sufficiency for his subsistence, or the means of 
procuring it ; and as no fixed laws for the regulation 
of property can be so contrived as to provide for the 
relief of every case and distress which may arise, these 
cases and distresses, when their right and share in 
the common stock were given up or taken from them, 
were supposed to be left to the voluntary bounty of 
those who might be acquainted with the exigencies 
of their situation, and in the way of afibrding assist- 
ance. And, therefore, when the partition of property 
is rigidly maintained against the claims of iudigence 
and distress, it is maintained in opposition to the in- 
tention of those who made it, and to His, who is the 
Supreme Propietor of every thing, and who has filled 
the world with plenteousness, for the sustentation and 
comfort of all whom he sends into it. 

The Christian Scriptures are more copious and ex- 
plicit upon this duty than upon almost any other. 
The description which Christ hath left us of the pro- 
ceedings of the last day establishes the obligation of 
bounty beyond controversy ^~-" When the Son of Man 
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with 
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, 
and before him shall be gathered all nations: And he 
shall separate them one from another. — ^Then shall 
the King say unto them on his right hand. Come, ye 
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world: For I was 
an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty « 
and ye gave me druik: I was a stranger, and ye took 
me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick^ and 
ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.-^ 



t^CCtTMIART BOUNTY. 157 

AdA intiatiiuch as yo have done it to one of the least 
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."* It 
is not necessazy to understand this passage as a lite- 
ral account of what will actually pass on that day. 
Supposing it only a scenical description of the rules 
and principles by which the Supreme Arbiter of our 
destiny will regulate his decisions, it conveys the same 
lesson to us; it equally demonstrates of how great 
value and importance tnese duties in the sight of God 
are, and what stress will be laid upon them. The 
apostles also describe this virtue as propitiating the 
Divine favour in an emiuent degree. And these re- 
conunendations have produced their efiect. It does 
not appear that, before the times of Christianity, an 
infirmary, hospital, or public charity of any kind, ex- 
isted in the world; whereas most countries in Chris- 
tendom have long abounded with these institutions. 
To which may be added, that a spirit of private libe- 
rality seems to flourish amidst the decay of many 
other virtues; not to mention the legal provision for 
the poor, which obtains in this country, and which 
was unknown and unthought of by the most human- 
ized nations of antiquity. 

St. Paul adds upon the subject an excellent direc- 
tion, and which is practicable by all who have any 
thing to give:—*' Upon the first day of the week (or 
any other stated time,) let every one of you lay by in 
store, as God hath prospered him." By which I un- 
derstand St. Paul to recommend what is the very thing 
wanting with most men, the being charitable upon a 
plan ; that is, upon a deliberate comparison of our 
fortunes with the reasonable expenses and expecta- 
tions of oju: families, to compute what we can spare, 
and to lay by so much for charitable purposes in some 
mode or other. The mode will be a consideration af> 
terwards. 

The effect which Christianity produced upon some 
of its first converts was such as might be looked for 
from a divine religion, coming with full force and nii- 



* Matthew uv. 81. 
V0J4» I. 14 



15S PXGUNIARY BOUNTY. 

raculous evidence upon the consciences of ttULUkimf. 
It overwhelmed all wordly considerations in the ex- 
pectations of a more important existence: — *' And the 
miiltitade of them that believed were of one heart and 
of one soul; neither said any of them that aught of 
the things which he possessed was his own; but thej 
had all things in common. — ^Neither was there any 
among them that lacked; for as many as were pos- 
sessors of lands or houses, sold them, and brought the 
prices of the things that were sold, and laid them 
down at the apostle 's feet ; and distribution was made un- 
to every man according as he had need." Acts, iv. 32. 

Nevertheless, this community of goods, however it 
manifested the sincere aseal of the primitive Chistians, 
is no precedent for our imitation. It was confined to 
the Church at Jerusalem; continued not long there; 
was never enjoined upon any, (Acts, v. 4.;) and, al- 
though it might suit with the particular circumstances 
of a small and select society, is altogether impractica- 
ble in a large and mixed community. 

The conduct of the apostles upon the occasion de- 
serves to be noticed. Their followers laid down their 
fortunes at their feet; but so far were they from tak- 
ing advantage of this unlimited confidence, to Zurich 
themselves, or to establish their own authority, that 
they soon after got rid of this business, as inconsistent 
with the main object of their mission, and transferred 
the custody and management of the public fund to 
deacons elected to that office by the people at large. 
Acts, vi. 

2. The manner of bestoujing bounty; or the differ^ 
ent kinds of charity. 

Every question between the different kinds of chan» 
ty supposes the sum bestowed to be the same. 

There are three kinds of diarity which prefer a 
claim to attention. 

The first, and in my judgment one of the best, is 
to give stated and considerable sums, by way of pen- 
sion or annuity, to individuals or families, with whose 
behaviour and distress we ourselves are acquainted. 
When I speak of eonnderable sums, I mean only that 
five pounds, or any other sum, given at once or di- 



PSCUKIAET BOUlfTT. 15t 

vided amonnt five or fewer families, will do mom 
good than tne same sum distributed amongst a greater 
nmnber in shillings or half-crowns; and that, ^cause 
it is more likely to be properly applied by the persons 
who receive it. A poor fellow, who can find no bet- 
ter use for a shilling than to drink his benefactor's 
health, and purchase half an hour's recreation for him- 
self, would hardly break into a guinea for any such 
purpose, or be so improvident as not to lay it by for 
an occasion of importance, «. g. for his rent, his cloth- 
ing, fuel, or stock of winter's provision. It is a still 
greater recommendation of this kind of charity, that 
pensions and annuities, which are paid regularly, and 
can be expected at the time, are the only way by 
which we can prevent one part of a poor man's suffer- 
ings — the dread of want. 

2. But as this kind of charity supposes that pro- 
per objects of such expensive benefactions fall within 
our private knowledge and observation, which does 
not happen to all, a second method of doing good, 
which IS in every one's power who has the money to 
spare, is by subscription to public charities* Public 
charities admit of this argument in their favour, that 
your money goes farther towards attaining the end 
for which it is given, than it can do by any private 
and separate beneficence. A guinea, for example, 
contributed to an infirmary, becomes the means of 
providing one patient at least with a physician, sur- 
geon, apothecary, with medicine, diet, lodging, and 
suitable attendence; which is not the tenth part of 
what the same assistance, if it could be procured at 
all, would cost to a sick person or family in any other 
situation. 

3. The last, and, compared with the former, the low- 
est exertion of benevolence is in the relief of beggars. 
Nevertheless, I by no means approve the indiscrimi- 
nate rejection of all who implore our alms in this way. 
Some may perish by such a conduct,. Men are some- 
times overtaken by distress, for which all other relief 
would come too late. Beside which, resolutions of 
this kind compel us to ofier such violence to our hu- 
manity, as may go near, in a little while, to tufibcate 



IM PSCViriART BOVNTTt 

tli« principle itoelf; which ia a Teiy cerious eonade^ 
ration. A good man, if he do not surrender himself 
to his feelii^ without reserve, will at least lend aa 
ear to importunities which come accompanied with 
outward attestations of distress; and after a patient 
audience of the complaint, will direct himself, not so 
much by any previous resolution which he may have 
formed upon the subject, as by the circumstances and 
credulity of the account that he receives. 

There are other species of charity well contrived 
to make the money expended ^o far; such as keep — 
ing down the price of fuel or provision, in case of mc^ 
nopoly or temporary scarcity, by purchasing the arti- 
cles at the best market, and retailing them at prime 
cost, or at a small loss; or the adding of a bounty to 
particular species of labour, when tbe price is aeci- 
jlentally depressed. 

The proprietors of large estates have it in their 
power to facilitate the maintenance, and thereby t« 
encourage the establishment of families (which is 
one of the noblest purposes to which the rich and 
great can convert their endeavours,) by building cot- 
tars, splitting farms, erecting manufactories, culti- 
vating wastes, embanking the sea, draining marshes, 
and other expedients, which the situation of each 
estate points out. If the profits of these undertak- 
ings do not repay the expense, let the authors of 
them place the di&erence to the account of charity. 
It is true of almost all such projects, that the public 
is a gainer by them, what ever the owner be. And 
where the loss can be spared, this consideration is 
sufficient. 

It is become a question of some importance, under 
what circumstances works of charity ought to be done 
in private, and when they may be, made public with- 
out detracting from the merit of the action, if indeed 
they ever may; the Author of our religion having de- 
livered a rule upon this subject which seems to enjoin 
universal secrecy: — ** Wh^ thou doest alms, let not 
thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth; that 
thy alms may be in secret, and thy Father, which 
fMth in secret, himself shall reward thee openly.*' 



PSCUNIASY BOUNTY. 161 

(Matt. vi. 8, 4.) From the preamble to this prohibi- 
tioii I think H, however, plain that our Saviour's sole 
design was to forbid ostentation, and all publishing 
of good works which proceeds from that motive :~- 
*' Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to 
be seen of them ; otherwise ye have no reward of your 
Father which is in heaven: therefore, when thou 
doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, 
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the 
streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I 
say unto you, they have their reward." — Ver. 1, 2. 
There are motives for the doing our alms in public, 
beside those of ostentation, with which therefore our 
Saviour's rule has no concern: such as, to testify our 
approbation of some particular species of charity, and 
to recommend it to others; to take off the prejudice 
which the want, or, which is the same thing, the sup- 
pression, of our name in the list of contributors might 
excite against the charity, or against ourselves. And, 
so long as these motives are free from any mixture of 
vanity, they are in no danger of invading our Saviour's 
prohibition; they rather seem to comply with another- 
direction which he has left us: ** Let your light so 
shine before men, that they may see your good works, 
and glorify your Father .which is in heaven." If it 
be necessary to propose a precise distinction upon the 
subject, I can think of none better than the following: 
When our bounty is beyond our fortune and station, 
that is, when it is more than could be expected from 
us, our charity should be private, if privacy be prac- 
ticable: when it is not more than might be expected, 
it may be public; for we cannot hope to influence 
others to the imitation of extraordinary generosity, 
and therefore want, in the former case, the only justi- 
fiable reason for making it public. 

Having thus descril^d several different exertions 
of charity, it may not be improper to take notice of a 
species of liberality, which is not cAart^y, in any sense, 
of the word: I mean the giving of entertainments or 
liquor, for the sake of popularity; or the rewardmg, 
treating, and maintaining the companions of our 
diversions, as hunters, shooters, fishers, and the like; 



162 PSCUNtAHT BOUNTY. 

I do not say that this is criminal^ I only say that it 
in not charity; and that we are not to suppose, be- 
eanse we give, and give to the poor, that it will stand 
in the place, or supersede the obligation of more me^ 
ritorious and disinterested bounty. 

3. The pretences by which men extuse themselves 
from giving to the poor, 

1. *< That they have nothing to spare,'* t. e, nothing 
for which they have not provided some other use; 
nothing which their plan of expense, together with 
the savings they have resolved to lay by, will not ex- 
haust: never reflecting whether it be in their j^ou^er^ 
or that it is their duty to retrench their expenses, and 
contract their plan, " that they may have to give to 
them that need:" or rather, that this ought to hare 
been part of their plan originally. 

2. " That they have farailies of their own, and that 
charity begins at home." The extent of this plea wilt 
be considered, when we come to explain the duty of 
parents. 

3. *' That charity does not consist in giving money , 
but in benevolence, philanthropy, love to all mankind, 
goodness of heart," &c. Hear St. James: <* If a bro- 
ther or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, 
and one of you say unto them. Depart in peace; be 
ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye gtv« them 
not those things which are needful to the body ; what 
doth it profit ?" (James, ii. 16, 16.) 

4. ** That giving to the' poor is not mentioned in 
St. Paul's description of charity, in the thirteenth 
chapter of his First Epistle to the Corinthians. " This 
is not a description of charity, but of good nature; and 
it is not neccessary that every duty be mentioned in 
every place. 

6. "That they pay the poor rates." They might 
as well allege that they pay their debts: for the poor 
have the same right to that portion of a man's property 
which the laws assign to them, that the man himself 
has to the remainder. 

6. " That they employ many poor persons !"•— for 
their own sake, not the poor's;— otherwise it is a good 
plea< • 



PECUNIARY BOUNTY. 16S 

7. "That the poor do not suffer so much as we 
imagine; that education and habit have reconcOed 
them to the evils of their condition, and make them 
easy under it." Habit can never reconcile human 
nature to the extremities of cold, hunger, and thirst, 
any more than it can reconcile the hand to the touch 
of a red hot iron: besides, the question is not, how 
unhappy any one is, but how much more happy we 
can make him. 

8. " That these people, give them .what yon will, 
will never thank you or think of you for it.'* In the 
first place, that is not true: in the second place, it 
was not for the sake of their thanks that you relieved 
them. 

9. « That we are liable to be imposed upon." If a 
due inquiry be made, our merit is the same: beside 
that the distress is generally real, although the cause 
be untruly stated. 

10. " That they should apply to their parishes." 
This is not always practicable: to which we may 
add, that there are many requisites to a comfortable 
subsistence, which parish relief does not supply; and 
that there are some who would suffer almost as much 
from receiving parish relief as by the want of it; and 
lastly, that there are many modes of charity to which 
this answer does not relate at all. 

11. « That giving money encourages idleness and 
vagrancy." This is true only of injudicious and indis- 
crimmate generosity. 

12. " That we have too many objects of charity at 
home to bestow any thing upon strangers; or, that 
there are other charitios, which are more useful, or 
stand in greater need." The value of this excuse 
depends entirely upon the fact, whether we actually 
relieve those neighbouring objects, and contribute to 
those other charities. 

Beside all these excuses, pride or prudery or deli* 
cacy or love of ease keep one half of the world out of 
the way of observing what the other half suffer. 



IIU REVSlTTltSXT. 



CHAPTER VI. 

RSflENTlfENT. 

Rbsbnthent may be distinguished into anger 
and revenge. 

By anger, I mean the pain we suffer upon the re- 
ceipt of an injury or affront, vrith the usual efiects of 
that pain upon ourselves. 

By revenge', the inflicting of pain iqnin the person 
who has injured or ofifended us, further than the just 
ends of punishment or reparation require. 

Anger prompts to revenge; but it is possible to 
suspend the effect, when we cannot altogether quell 
the principle. We are bound also to endeavour to 

Sualify and correct the principle itself. So that our 
uty requires two diflferent applications of the mind; 
and, for that reason, anger and revenge may be con- 
sidered separately. 



CHAPTER Vn. 

<* Be ye angry, and sin not;" therefore all anger w 
not sinful: I suppose, because some degree of it, and 
upon some occasions, is inevitable. 

It becomes sinful, or contradicts, however, the rule 
of Scripture, when it ia conceived upon slight and in- 
adequate provocations, and when it continues long. 

1. When it is conceived upon slight provocations: for. 
** charity suffereth -long, is not easily provoked." — 
" Let every man be slow to anger." Peace, long- 
suflfering, gentleness, meekness are enumerated among 
the fruits of the spirit, Gal. v. 22. and compose the 
true Christian temper, as to this article of duty. 

2. When it continues long: for, ** let not the sun 
go down upon your wrath." 

These precepts, and all reasoning indeed on the 
•ubject, suppose the passion of anger to bo within our 



▲ircaB. 165 

power: and this power consists not so much in any 
faculty we possess of appeasing our wrath at the time 
(for we are passive under the smart which an injury 
or afiront occasions, and all we can then do is to pre*- 
vent its breaking out into action,) as in so mollifying 
our minds by habits of just reflection, as to be less 
irritated by impressions of injuiy, and to be- sooner 
liacified. 

Reflections proper for this purpose, and which may 
be called the sedaHves of anger, are the following: 
The possibility of mistaking the motives from which 
the conduct that ofiends us proceeded; how often eur 
ofiences have been the efiect of inadvertency, when 
they were construed into indications of malice; the 
inducement which prompted our adversary to act as 
he did, and ho# powerfully the same inducement 
has, at one time or other, operated upon ourselves; 
that he is suflering perhaps under a contrition, which 
he is ashained, or wants an opportunity^ to confess; 
and how ungenerous it is to triumph by coldness or 
insult over a spirit already humbled in secret; that 
the returns of kindness are sweet, and that there is 
neither honour nor virtue nor use in resisting them; 
-—for some persons think themselves bounds to cherish 
and keep alive their indignation, when they find it 
dying away of itself. We may remember that othere 
have their passions, their prejudices, their favourite 
aims, their fears, their cautions, their interests, their 
sudden impulses, their varieties of apprehension, as 
well as we: we may recollect what hath sometimes 
passed in* our minds, when we have gotten on the 
wrong side of a quarrel, and imagine the same to be 
passing in our adversary's mind now; when we be- 
came sensible of our misbehaviour, what palliations 
we perceived in it, and expected others to perceive; 
how we were afiected by the kindness, and felt the 
superiority of a generous reception and ready forgive- 
ness; how persecution revived our spirits with our 
enmity, ana seemed to justify the conduct in our- 
selves which we before blamed. Add to this, the 
indecency of extravagant anger; how it renders us, 
whilst it lasts, the scorn and sport of all about us, of 



166 RCTEltOK. 

whidi it leaves vm, when it ceuee, senaible and 
aahamed; the inconveniences and irretrievable mis- 
conduct into which our irascibility has sometimes 
betrayed us; the friendships it has lost us; the dis- 
tresses and embarrassments in which we have been 
involved by it; and the sore repentance which, on 
one account or other, it always costs us. 

But the reflection calculated above all others to 
mUay the hai:^tine8s of temper which is ever finding 
out provocations, and which renders anger so impe* 
tuous, is that which the gospel proposes; namely, 
that we ourselves are, or shortly shall be, suppliants 
for mercy and pardon at the juidgment-seat of God. 
Imagine eur secret sins disclosed and brought to 
light; imagine us thus humbled and exposed; trem- 
bling under the hand of God; caiSting ourselves on 
Jiis compassion; crying out for mercy >— imagine such 
a creatuie to talk of satisfaction and revenge; refus- 
ing to be entreated, disdaining to forgive; extreme to 
mark and to resent what is done amiss: — ^imagine, I 
say, this, and you can hardly frame to yourself an in- 
fltance of more impious and unnatural arrogance. 

The point is, to habituate ourselves to these reflec- 
tions, till they rise up of their own accord when they 
an wanted, that is, mstantly upon the receipt of an 
injury or affiront, and with such force and colouring, 
•s both to mitigate the paroxysms of our anger at the 
time, and at length to produce an alteration in the 
temper and disposition itself. 



CHAPTER Vm. 

REVENGE. 



All pain occasioned to another in consequence of 
an ofifence or injury received from him, further than 
what is calculated to procure reparation or promote 
the just ends of punishment, is so much revenge. 

There can be no difficulty in knowing when we o^ 
casion pain to another; nor much in distinguishing* 



mmtMMQM, 167 

whether we de lo with a Tiew only to the endi of 
ptmishment, or from revenge: for, in the one case we 
proceed with reluctance, in the other with pleasure. 

It IB highly prohahlt from the light of nature, that 
a passion, which seeks its gratification immediately 
and expressly in giving^pain, is disagreeable to the 
benevolent vnll and counsels of the Creator. Other 
' passions and pleasures may, and often do, produce 
pain to some one; but then pain is not, as it is here, 
the object of the passion, and the direct cause of the 
pleasure. This probability is converted into certainty, 
if we give credit to the Authority which dictated the 
several passages of the Christian Scriptures that con- 
demn revenge, or, what is the same thing, which en« 
join forgiveness. 

We will set down the principal of these passages: 
and endeavour to collect from them, what conduct 
upon the whole is allowed towards an enemy, and 
what is forbidden. 

** If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly 
Father will also forgive you: but if ye forgive not 
men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive 
your trespasses." — ** And his lord was worth, and 
delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all 
that was due unto him; so likewise shall my hea- 
venly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts 
forgive not every one his brother their trespasses." — 
** Put on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of 
mind, meekness, long-suflTering; forbearing one ano^ 
ther, forgiving one another, if any man have a quar- 
rel against any: even as Christ rorgave you, so also 
do ye." — ** Be patient towards all men; see that none 
render evil for evil to any man." — ^* Avenge not your- 
selves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is 
written. Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the 
Lord. Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed him; 
if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou 
shalt heap coals of fire on his head. Be not over- 
come of evil, but overcome evil with good."* 

«Matt. vi. 14, 15; xviii. 84, 35. Col. ui, 12, 18. 1 
Thess. v. 14, 15. Rom. xii. 19, 20, 21. 



1€8 ASTSlfOX. 

I think it evident, from some of theae ptatfofl 
taken leparately, and still more so from all of them 
together* that revenget as described in the beginning 
of this chapter, is forbidden in every degree, under 
all forms, and upon every occasion. ^We are likewise 
forbidden to refuse to an enemy even the most imper- 
fect right; ^* if he hunger, feed him; if he thirst, 
give Imn drink;"* which are eiamples of imperfect 
rights. If one who has offended us solicit from us 
a vote to which his qualifications entitle him, we may 
not refuse it from motives of resentment, or the re- 
membrance of what we have suffered at his hands. 
His right, and our obligation which follows the riglit, 
are not altered by his enmity to us, or by ours to him. 

On the other hand, I do not conceive that these 
prohibitions were intended to interfere with the pun- 
ishment or prosecution of public ofienders. In the 
eighteenth chapter of St. Matthew, our Saviour tells 
his disciples; " If thy brother who has trespassed 
against thee neglect to hear the church, let him be 
unto thee as a heathen man, and a publican." Im- 
mediately after this, when St. Peter asked him, " How 
od shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him ? 
till seven times?" Christ replied, "I say not unto 
thee until seven times, but until seventy times seven;" 
that is, as often as he repeats the offence. From 
these two adjoining passages, compared together, 
we are authorized to conclude, that the forgiveness of 
an enemy is not inconsistent with the proceeding 
against him as a public oflfender; and that the dis- 
cipline established in religious or civil societies for 
the restraint or punishment of criminals ought to be 
upholden. 

If the magistrate be not tied down with these pro- 
hibitions from the execution of his office, neither is the 
prosecutor; for the office of the prosecutor is as neces- 
sary as that of the magistrate. 

* See also flzodus, zziii. 4. "If thou meet thine enemy's 
ox, or his a«, going astray, thou shalt surely briQff it back to 
him Kgain : if thou see the ass of him that hateth thee, ly- 
ing under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thwi 
Shalt surely help with him." 



Nor, by parity of reason, are privaie penons with- 
holden fiom the correction of vice, when it is in their 
power to exercise it; provided they be assured that it 
IB the guilt which fMTovokes them, and not the injury; 
and that their motives are pure firom all mixture and 
every particle of that spirit which delights and tri« 
wnphs in the humiliation of an adversary. 

Thus, it, is no breach of Christian charity to with- 
draw oUr oempany or civility when the same tends to 
discountenance any vicious practice. This is one 
branch of that extrajudicial discipline, which s|ippiies 
the defects and the remissness of law; and is ex- 
pressly authorized by St. Paul (1 Cor. v. 11:) " But 
now I have written unto you not to keep company, if 
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or 
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or 
an extortioner; with such an one, no not to eat." 
The use of this association against vice continues to 
be experienced in one remarkable instance, and might 
be extended with good efieot to others. The con- 
federacy amongst women of character, to exclude from 
their society kept-mistresses and prostitutes, contri- 
butes more perhaps to discourage that condition of 
life, an4^revents greater numbers from entering into 
it, than all the considerations of prudence and religion 
put together. 

We are likewise allowed to practise so much cau- 
tion, as not to put oivselves in the way of injury, or 
invite the repetition of it. If a servant or tradesman 
has cheated us, we are not bound to trust him again: 
fbr this is to encourage him in his dishonest practices, 
which is doing him much harm. 

Where a benefit can be conferred only upon one or 
lew, and the choice of the person upon whom it is con- 
ferred is a proper object of favour, we are at liberty 
to prefer those who have not ofiended us to those who 
have; the contrary being no where required. 

Christy who» as hat£ been well demonstrated,* 



* See a View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian 
BehgioB. 
. VOL, I. 15 



Mtimftted vtrtuei bj their lolid utility, and not by 
their fashion or popularity, prefers this of the foi|^Te- 
ness of injuries to every other. He enjoins it oflenAc ; 
with more earnestness; under a greater variety of 
forms; and with this weighty and peculiar circcm^ 
stance, that the forgiveness of others is the condition 
upon which alone we are to expect, or even ask, iron 
Ood, forgiveness for ourselves. And this preference 
is justified by the superior importance of the virtue 
itself. The feuds ana animosities in families, and be« 
tween neighbours, which disturb the intercoune of 
human life, and collectively compose half the miaeiy 
of it, have their foundation in the want of a forgiving 
temper; and can never cease, but by the exercise of 
this virtue, on one side, or on both. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Dvxi.x.iiro. 



Duelling as a punishment is absurd; because it is 
an equal chance, whether the punishment fall upon 
the offender, or the person offended. Nor is it much 
better as a reparation; it being difficult to explain in 
what the seUisfaetion consists, or how it tends to 
undo the injury, or to afford a compensation for the 
damage already sustained. 

The truth is* it is not considered as either. A law 
of honour having annexed the imputation of cowardioe 
. to patience under an afiront, challenges are given and 
accepted with no other design than to prevent or wipe 
off this suspicion; without malice agamst the adver- 
sary, generally without a wish to destroy him, or any 
other concern than to preserve the duellist's own re- 
.putation and reception in the world. 

The unreasonableness of this rule of manners is one 
consideration; the duty and conduct of individuals, 
while such a^rule exists, is another. 

As to which, the proper and single question is 



.BirBi.t.iNa. 171 

Ihk; wluBther a regard for our own reputation is, or 
is not, sufficient to justify the taking away the life of 
another ? 

Murder is forbidden; and wherever .human life is 
deliberately taken away, otherwise than by public 
authority, there is murder. The value and security 
of human life make this rule necessary; for I do not 
see what other idea or definition of murder can be 
admitted, which will not let in so much private vio- 
lence, as to render society a scene of peril and blood* 
•hed. 

If unauthorized laws of honour be allowed to create 
exceptions to Divine prohibitions, there is an end of 
all morality, as founded in the will of the Deity; and 
the obligation of every duty may, at one time or oth- 
er, be Sscharged by the caprice and fluctuations of 
fashion. 

<* But a sense of shame is so much torture; and no 
relief presents itself otherwise than by an attempt 
upon the life of our adversary." What then ? The 
distress which men suffer by the want of money is 
oftentimes extreme, and no resource can be discover- 
ed but that of removing a life which stands between 
the distressed person and his inheritanoe. The mo-^ 
tive in this case is as urgent, and the means much the 
iame as in the former: yet this case finds no advocate. 

Take away the circumstance of the duellist's ex* 
posing his own life, and it becomes assassination; 
Add this circumstance, and what difierence does it 
make ? None but this, that fewer perhaps vnll imitate 
the example, and human life virill be somewhat more 
safe, when it cannot be attacked writhout equal danger 
to the aggressor's own. Experience, however, proves 
that there is fortitude enough in most men to under- 
take this hazard; and were it otherwise, the defence, 
at best, would be only that which a highwayman or 
housebreaker might plead, whose attempt had been so 
daring and desperate, that few were likely to repeat 
the same. 

In expostulating with the duellist, I all along sup- 
pose his adversary to fall. Which supposition I am 



ITS OVBLLIKO. 

at liberty to nuJce, became, if he have no right to kill 
bis advenaiy, he has none to attempt it. 

In return, I forbear from applying to the case of 
duelling the Christian prmciple of the forgiveness of 
injuries; because it is possible to suppose the injury 
to be forgiven, and the duellist to act entirely from a 
concern for his own reputation: where this is not the 
esse, the guilt of duelling is manifest, and is greater. 

In this view it seems unnecessaiy to distinguish be- 
tween him who gives, and him who accepts, a chal- 
lenge: for, on the one hand, they incur an equal 
haard of destroying life; and on the other* both act 
upon the same persuasion, that what they do is neces- 
sary, in order to recover or preserve the good opinion 
of the world. 

Public opinion Is not easily controlled by civil insti- 
tutions: for which reason I question whether any reg- 
ulations can be contrived, of sufficient force to sup- 
ptress or change the rule of honour, which stigma- 
tises all scruples about duelling with the reproach of 
cowardice. 

The insufficiency of th^ redress which the law of 
the land afibrds, for those injuries which chiefly ailect 
a man in his sensibility and reputation, tempts many 
to redress themselves. Prosecutions for such ofiences, 
by the triffing damages that are recovered, serve only 
to make the sufierer more rediculous. — This ought to 
be remedied. 

For the army, where the point of honour is culti- 
vated with exquisite attention and refinement, I would 
establish a Court of Honour ^ with a power of awards 
ing those submissions and acknowledgments, which 
it is generally the purpose of a challenge to obtain; 
and it might grow into a fashion, with persons of rank 
of all pro&ssions, to refer their quarrels to this tribunal. 

Duelling, as the law now stands, can seldom be 
overtaken by legal punishment. The challenge, ap- 
pointment, and other previous circumstances which 
mdicate the intention with which the combatants met, 
being suppressed, nothing appears to a court of justice 
bat the actual rencounter; and if a person be alain 
when actually fighting with his adversary, the law 
deems his death nothing more than manslaughter. 



LtTlOATIOK. 171 



CHAPTER X. 

^ LITIGATION. 

** If it be possible, Ihre peaceably with all men;*' 
which precept contains an indirect confession that this 
is not always possible. 

The instances* in the fifth chapter of St. Matthew 
arc rather to be understood as proverbial methods of 
describing the general duties of forgiveness and bene- 
volence, and the temper which we ought to aim at 
acquiring, than as directions to be specifically ob- 
served, or of themselves of any great importance to be 
observed. The first of these is, " If thine enemy smite 
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also;^* 
yet, when one of the officers strucit Jesus with the 
palm of his hand, we find Jesus rebuking him for the 
outrage with becoming indignation: '* If I have 
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why 
smitest thou me ?" (John, xviii. 23.) It may be ob- 
served, likewise, that the several examples are drawn 
from instances of small and tolerable injuries. A rule 
which forbade all opposition to injury, or defence 
against it, could have no other effect than to put the 
good in subjection to the bad, and deliver one half of 
mankind to the depredation of the other half; which 
must be the case, so long as some considered them- 
selves as bound by such a rule, whilst others despised 
it. St. Paul, though no one inculcated forgiveness 
and forbearance with a deeper sense of the value and 
obligation of these virtues, did not interpret either of 
them to require an unresisting submission to every 
contumely, or a neglect of the means of safety and 
self-de/ence. He took refuge in the laws of his coun- 
try, and in the privileges of a Roman citizen, from the 
conspiracy of the Jews (Acts, xxv. 11;) and from the 



*** Whoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to 
him the other also ; and if any man will sue thee at the law, 
and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also ; and 
whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain." 

VOL. I. 15 * 



» 



m LITIOATIOlf. 

r 

clandestinfl violence of the chief captain (Acts, xzii. 
26.) And yet this is the same apostle who reprored 
the litigiousnesB of his Corinthian converts with so 
much severity. *' No#, therefore, there is utterly a 
fault among you, because ye go to law one with ano- 
ther. Why do ye not rather take wrong ? why.do ye 
not rather suffer yourselves' to be defrauded?" 

On the other hand, therefore, Christianity excludes 
all vindictive motives, and all frivolous causes of pro- 
secution; so that where the injury is small, where no 
good purpose of public example is answered, where 
forbearance is not likely to invite a repetition of the 
injury, or where the expense of an action becomes a 
punishment too severe for the offence; there the 
Christian is withholden by the authority of his reli- 
gion from going to law. 

On the other hand, a lawsuit is inconsistent with 
no rule of the gospel, when it is instituted, — 

1. For the establishing of some important right. 

.2. For the procuring a compensation for some con- 
siderable damage. 

S. For the preventing of future injury. 

fint, since it is supposed to be undertaken simply 
with a view to the ends of justice lind safety, the pro- 
secutor of the action is bound to confine himself to 
the cheapest process which will accomplish these ends, 
as well as to consent to any peaceable expedient for 
the same purpose; as to a reference, in which the 
arbitrators can do what the law cannot, divide the 
damage when the fault is mutual; or to a compound' 
ing of the dipute, by accepting a compensation in the 
gross, without entering into 'articles and items, which 
it is often very difficult to adjust separately. 

As to the rest, the duty of the contending parties 
may be expressed in the following directions: 

Not by appeals to prolong a suit against your own 
conviction. 

Not to undertake or defend a suit against a poor 
adversary, or render it more dilatoir or expensive thaa 
Booessaiy, with the hope of intimidating or wearying: 
him oat by the expense. 



Not to inflaenee evidence by authoiity -or especta^ 
tion; 

Nor to< stifle, any in yoiur potaemon, although it 
make against you. ^ 

Hitherto we have treated of civil actions* In criaa** 
nal prosecutions, the private injury should be foi^t- 
ten, and the prosecutor proceed with the. same temper* 
and upon the same motives as the magistrate: the one 
being a necessary minister of justice as well as the 
other, and both bound to direct their conduct by a 
dispassionate care of the public welfare. 

In whatever degree the punishment of an offender 
is conducive, or his escape dangerous, to the interest 
of the community, in the same degree is the party 
against whom the crime was committed bound to 
proisecute, because such prosecutions must in their 
nature originate from the sufferer. 

Therefore great public crimes, as robberies, forge- 
ries, and the like, ought not to be spared, from an ap- 
prehension of trouble or expense in carrying on the 
prosecution, from false shame, or misplaced compas- 
sion. 

There are many ofiences, such as nuisances, neglect 
of public roads, foiestalling, engrossing, smuggling, 
sabbath-breaking, profaneness, drunkenness, prostitu- 
tion, the keeping of lewd or disorderly houses, the writ- 
ing, publishing, or exposing to sale lascivious books 
or pictures, with some others, the prosecution of which, 
being of equal concern to the whole neighbourhood, 
cannot be charged as a peculiar obligation upon any. 

Nevertheless, there is great merit in the person who 
undertakes such prosecutions upon proper motives^ 
which amounts to the same thing. 

The character of an informer is in ^is country un- 
deservedly odious. But where any public advantage- 
is likely to be attained by information, or other acti^ 
vity in promoting the executajl^ of the laws, a good 
man will despise a prejudice founded in no just reason, 
or will acquit himself of the imputation of interested 
designs by giving away his share of the penalty. 

On the other hand, prosecutions for the sake of the 
reward, or for the gratification of private enmity. 



176 GRATITVD2. 

where the offence produces no public mischief^ or 
where it arises from ignorance or inadvertency, are 
reprobated under the general description of applying 
a rule of law to a pwl^osefor which it was not tn- 
tended. Under which description may be ranlsed an 
officious revival of the laws against popish priests and 
dissenting teachers 



CHAPTER XI. 



GRATITUDE. 



Examples of ingratitude check and discoura^ 
voluntary beneficence : and in this the mischief of in- 
gratitude consists. Nor is the mischief small; for af* 
ter all is done that can be done, towards providing for 
the public happiness, by prescribing rules of justice* 
and enforcing the observation of them by penalties »r 
compulsion, much must be left to those offices of kind- 
ness which men remain at liberty to exert or withhold. 
No IV not only the choice of the ot^cts, but.the quan- 
tity, and even the existence of this sort of kindness in 
the world, depends, in a great measure, upon the re- 
turn which it receives: and this is a consideration of 
general importance. 

A second reason for cultivating a, grateful temper 
in ourselves is the following: The same principle 
v/bich is touched with the kindness of a human bene- 
factor is capable of being afiected by the Divine good- 
ness, and of becoming, under the influence of that 
affection, a source of the purest and most exalted vir- 
tue. The love of God is the sublimest gratitude. It 
is a mistake, therefore, to imagine, that this virtue is 
omitted in the Chr^tian Scriptures; for every precept 
which conunands us ** to love God, because he first 
loved us,** presupposes the principle of gratitude, and 
directs it to its proper object. 

It is impossible to particularize the several exprea- 
sions of gratitude, inasmuch as they vary with the 
character and situation of the benefactor, and with the 



■I.AHDBR. 177 

Opportunities of the pefwm obliged; whieh vatiety 
acmiits of no bouadi. 

It may bo observed^ however, that gratittide ea& 
never oblige a man to do what is wrong, and what by 
consequence he ia previously obliged not to do* It ia 
no ingratitude to refuse to do what we cannot recen-, 
cile to a^y apprehensions of our duty; but it is ingra- 
titude and hypocrisy together, to pretend this reason, 
when it is not the real one: and the frequency of such 
pretences has brought this apology for non-compliance 
with the will of a benefactor into unmerited disgrace. 

It has Jong been accounted a violation Of dehcacy 
and generosity to upbraid men with the favours they 
have received: but it argues a total destitution of both 
these qualities, as well as of moral probity, to take 
advantag|e of that ascendency which the conferring of . 
benefits justly creates, to d^aw or drive those whom 
we have obliged into mean or dishonest oomplianoes. 



CHAPTER XII. * ^ 

SLANDEK. 

Spxajcing is acting, both in philosophical strict- 
ness, and as to all moral purposes: for if the mischief 
and motive of our conduct be the same, the means 
which we use make no difference. 

And this is in effect what our Saviour declares. 
Matt. zii. 87>->" By thy words thou shalt be justified, 
and by thy words thou shalt be condemned:" by thy 
words, as well, that is, as by thy actions; the one 
ahall be taken into the account as well as the other, 
for they both possess the same property of voluntarily 
producing good or evil. 

Slander may be distinguished into two kinds: ma» 
Ueitnu slander, and ineonHderate slander. 

MaHeiauB slander is the relating of either truth or 
falsehood, for the purpose of creating misery. ^ 

1 acknowledge that the truth or falsehood of -what 



198 BltAHOXR. 

M leUted TarMB the degree of guilt coniiderably; and 
that slander, in the orcUnaiy acceptation of the term, 
i^gnifiee the circulation of inischie¥OU8/a/«e&oa<if .* but 
truth may be made instrumental to the sucoew €€ 
malicious designs as well as falsehood; and if the 
end be bad» the means cannot be innoc^oit. 

I think the idea of slander ought to be confined to 
the production of gratuitous misdiief. When we have 
an end or interest of our own to serve, if we attempt 
to compass it by falsehood, it is fraud ; if by a pub- 
lication of the truth, it is not, without some additional 
circumstance of breach of promise, betraying of con- 
fidence, or the like, to be deemed criminal. 

Sometimes the pain is intended for the person to 
whom we are speaking: at other times, an enmity is 
to be gratified by the prejudice dr disquiet or a tliiid 
person. To infiise suspicions, to kindle ot contimw 
disputes, to avert the favour and esteem of benefactors 
from their dependants, to render some one whom we 
dislike contemptable or obnoxious in the public opi* 
nion, are all offices of slander; of which the guilt must 
be measured by the intensity and extent of the misery 
produced. 

The disguises under which slander is conveyed, 
whether in a whisper, with injunctions of secrecy, by 
way of caution, or with afiected reluctance, are all so 
many aggravations of the ofienoe, as they indicate 
more deliberation and design. 

Inconsiderate slander is a difierent offence, although 
the same mischief actually follow, and although the' 
mischief might have been foreseen. The not bein^ 
conscious of that design which we have hitherto at- 
tributed to the slanderer, makes the difference. 

The guilt here consists in the want of that le^rd 
to the consequences of our conduct, which a just afiec- 
tion for human happiness, and concern wt our daty, 
would not have failed to have produced in us. And 
it is no answer to this crimination to say, that we en- 
tertained no evil design, A servant may be a very 
bad servant, and yet seldom or never design to act in 
/>pposition to his master's interest or will:|ftnd hk 
master may justly punish such servant tbr^a'^lhot^gliC* 



IttMneM and ne^ect nearly as prejadiciAt an. deliberate 
disobedience. I accuse you not, he may say, of ai^ 
express intention to hurt me; but had not the ftar bf 
my displeasure, the can of my interest, and indeed all 
the qualities which constitute the merit of a good 
senrant, been wanting in you, they would not only 
have excluded every direct purpose of giving me un* 
easiness, but have been so far present to your thoughts 
as to have checked that unguarded licentiousness by 
which I have suffered so much, and inspired you in 
its place with an habitual solicitude about the efiects 
and tendency of what you did or said. — ^This very 
much resembles the case of all sins of inconsideration; 
and, amongst the foremost of these, that of inconsi- 
derate slander* 

Information communicated for the real purpose of 
warning, or cautioning, is not slander. 

Indisariminate praise is the opposite of slander, 'but 
it is the opposite extreme; and, however it may ofleet 
to be thought excess of candour, is commonly the 
eiAunon of a frivolous understanding, or proceeds from 
a settled contempt of all moral distinctions. 



BOOK III. 



pAB?r m. 

or Rsx«ATiTa nuTixs which RK8t;i.T ri^oM tnm 

CONBTITTTTION OF THE SBXES. 

Thb constitution ot the sexes is the foundation of 
marriage* 

Collateral to the subject of marriage are fomiea- 
tion, sedvetion, adulteiy, incest, polygamy, diroree. 



'ISO ICAAAIAOS INtTITUTIOir. 

CmiMqaeMial to uiacritM w the relation and reci- 
procal duty of peunent and cniid. 

' We will treat of these subjects in the ibllowing 
«rder: first, of the public use of marriage institutions; 
eecondly, of the subjects coUateral to marriage, in the 
order in which we have here proposed them; thirdly, 
of marriage itself; and, lastly, of the relation and 
leciprocal duties of parents and children. 



J 



CHAPTER I. 

OF TKE PUBLIC USX OF MAKBIAOX 
IirSTITUTIOWS. 

Thb pid)lie use of marriage institutions consists in 
their promoting the following beneficial e£fects. 

1. The private comfort of individuals, especially of 
the female sex. It may be true, that all are not inter- 
ested in this reason; nevertheless, it is a reason to all 
for abstaining from any conduct which tends in its 
l^eneral consequence to obstruct marriage; for what- 
ever promotes the happiness of the majority is binding 
upon the whole. 

2. The production of the greatest number of heal- 
thy children, their better education, and the making 
of due provision for th^ settlement in life. 

8. The peace of human society, in cutting oil a 
principal source of contention, by assigning one o. 
jnore women to one man, and protecting his exclusive 
right by sanctions of morality and law. 

4. The better government of society, by distributing 
the community into separate families, and appointing 
over each the authority of a master of a family, which 
has more actual influence than all civil authority put 
together. « 

6. The same end, in the additional security which 
the state receives for the good behaviour of its citizens, 
from the solicitude ihey feel for the welfare of their 



f* 



>* 



f-omifioATioir. 181 

diiUb«ii, and from their being confined to permanent 
habitations. 

6. The enoonragement of industry. 

Some ancient nations appear to have been more 
sensible of the importance of marriage institutions than 
wo are. The Spartans obliged their citizens to marry 
by penalties, and the Romans encouraged theirs by 
the JUS trium liberorum, A man who had no child 
was entitled, by the Roman law, only to one half of 
any legacy that should be left him, that is, at the most, 
could only receive one half of the testator's fortune. 



CHAPTER U. 

rORKICATlOzr. 

Thx first and great mischief, and by consequence 
the guilt, of promiscuous concubinage, consists in its 
tendency to diminish marriages, and thereby to defeat 
the several beneficial purposes enumerated in the pre> 
ceding chapter. 

Promiscuous concubinage discourages marriage, by 
abating the chief temptation to it. The male part of 
the species will not undertake the incumbrance, ex- 
penect and restraint of married life, if they can gi:atify 
their passions at a cheaper price; and they will under> 
take any thing, rather than not gratify them. 

The reader will learn to comprehend the magnitude 
•f this mischief, by attending to the importance and 
variety of the uses to which marriage is subservient; 
and by recollecting withal, that the malignity and 
moral quality of each crime is not to be estimated by 
the particular efiect of one oiTence, or of one person's 
ofiending, but by the general tendency and conse* 
quence of crimes of the same nature. The libertine 
may not be conscious that tiiese irregularities hinder 
his own marriage, from which he is deterred, he may 
allege, by difierent considerations; much less does ha 
perceive how his indulgences can hinder other men 

VOL, I. 16 



109 FOSNICATtOir» 

from manymg; bat what nirill he say would be ih» 
consequence, if the same licenciousness were uniTer- 
sal ? or what should hinder it becomiDg univenal, if 
it be innocent or allowable in him ? 

2. Fornication supposes prostitution; and prosti- 
tution brings and leaves the victims of it to almost 
certain misery. It is no small quantity of misery in 
the aggregate, which, between want, disease, and 
insult, is suffered by those outcasts of human society 
who infest populous cities; the whole of which is a 
general consequence of fornication, and to the in-, 
crease and continuance of which every act and in- 
stance of fornication contributes. 

8. Fornication* produces habits of ungovemable 
lewdness, which introduce the more aggravated crimes 
of seduction, adultery, violation, &c. Likewise, how- 
ever it be accounted for, the criminal commerce of 
the sexes corrupts and depraves the mind and moral 
character more than any single species of vice what- 
soever. That ready perception of guilt, that prompt 
and decisive resolution against it, which constitutes a 
virtuous character, is seldom found in persons addicted 
to these indulgences. They prepare an easy admis- 
sion for every sin that seeks it; are, in low life, usu- 
ally the first stage in men's progress to the most des- 
perate villanies; and, in high life, to that lamented 
dissoluteness of principle which manifests itself in a 
profligacy of public conduct, and a contempt of the 
obligations of religion and of moral probity. Add to 
this, that habits of libertinism incapacitate and indis- 
pose the mind for all intellectual, moral, and reli- 
gious pleasures; which is a great loss to any man*s 
happiness. 

4. Fornication perpetuates a disease, which may be 
accounted one of the sorest maladies of human na- 



* Of this passion it has been truly Bud,thai ** irregularity 
has no limits ; that one excess draws on another ; tnat the 
most easy, therefore, as well as the most excellent way of 
being virtnous, is to be so entirely." Ogdea, Sermon zvi. 



roRNICATION. 18S 

ture; and the efiects of which are said to visit the 
constitution of even distant generations. 

The passion being natural, proves that it was in- 
tended to be gratified; but under what restrictions » 
or whether without any, must be collected from dif- 
ferent considerations. 

The Christian Scriptures condemn fornication ab- 
solutely and peremtorily. " Out of the heart," says 
our Saviour, ** proceed evil thoughts, murders, adul- 
teries, /ornteafion, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; 
these are the things which defile a man.'* These are 
Christ's own words: and one word from him upon 
the subject is final. It may be observed with what 
society fornication is classed; with murders, thefts, 
false witness, blasphemies. I do not mean that these 
crimes are all equal, because they are all mentioned 
together; but it proves that they are all crimes. The 
apostles are more full upon this topic. One well 
known passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews may 
stand in the place of all others; because, admitting 
the authority by which the apostles of Christ spake 
and wrote, it is decisive: " Marriage, and the bed 
midefiled, is honourable amongst all men; but whore- 
mongers and adulterers God will judge;" which was 
a great deal to say, at a time when it was not agreed, 
even amongst philosophers themselves, that fornica- 
tion was a crime. 

The Scriptures give no sanction to those austerities 
which have been since imposed upon the world under 
the name of Christ's religion; as the celibacy of the 
clergy, the praise of perpetual virginity, the prohiHtio 
eoneubittu enm gravida uxore; but, with a just 
knowledge of and regard to the condition and interest 
of the human species, have provided, in the marriage 
of one man with one woman, an adequate gratifica- 
tion for the propensities of their nature, and have 
restrteted them to that gratification. 

The avowed toleration, an^ in some countries the 
licencing, taxing, and regulating of public brothels haa 
appeared to the people an authorizing of fornication; 
and has contributed, with other causes, so far to vitiate 
the public opinion, that there is no practice of which 



184 FORNICATION. 

the immorality is so little thought of or acknowledged, 
akhough there are few in which it can more plunly 
be made out. The legislators who have patronized 
receptacles of prostitution ought to have foreseen this 
effect, as well as considered, that whatever facilitates 
fornication, diminishes marriages. And, as to the 
usual apology for this relaxed discipline, the danger 
of greater enormities, if access to prostitutes ¥wre too 
strictly watched and prohibited, it will be time enough 
to look to that, when the laws and the magistrates 
have done their utmost. The greatest vigilance of 
both will do no more than oppose itome bounds and 
some difficulties to this intercourse. And, after all, 
these pretended feara are without foundation in expe- 
rience. The men are in all respects the most virtuous, 
in countries where the woman are most chaste. 

There is a species of cohabitation, distinguishable, 
no doubt, from vagrant concubinage, and which, by 
reason of its resemblance to muriage, may be thought 
to participate of the sanctity and innocence of that 
estate; I mean the case of kept-miatreateSt under the 
favourable circumstance of mutual fidelity. This 
case I have heard defended by some such apology as 
the following: — 

** That the marriage-^rite being difl^rent in difl^rent 
countries, and in the same country amongst difierent 
sects, and with some scarce any thing; and, more- 
over, not being prescribed, or even mentioned in 
Scripture, can be accounted for only as of a form and 
ceremony of human invention: that, consequently, if 
a man and tvoman betroth and confine themselves to 
each other, their intercourse must be the same, as to 
all moral purposes, as if they were legally married; 
for the addition or omission of that which is a mere 
form and ceremony can make no. difference in the 
sight of God, or in the actual nature of right and 
wrong.** 

To all which it may be'repUed, 

1. If the situation of the parties be the same thing 
as marriage, why do they not marry ? 

2. If the man choose to have it in his power to dis- 
miss the woman at his pleasure, or to retain her in a 



FOBMXCATIOir. 188 

state of humiMajtMn and dependence, inooBaetent witb 
the rights which marriage would coiibr upon her, it 
h not the same thing. 

It is not» at any rate, the same thing to the chil- 
dren. 

Again, as to the marriage-rite being a mere form, 
and that also variable, the same may be said of sign* 
ing and sealing of bonds, wills, deeds of conveyance, 
and the like, which yet make a great difference in the 
rights and obligations of the parties concerned in them. 

And with respect to the rite not being appointed iir 
Scripture — ^the Scriptures forbid fornication, that is, ' 
cohabitation without marriage, leaving it to the law 
of each country to pronounce what is, or what makes 
a marriage ; in like manner as they forbid thefts, that 
is, the taking away of another's property, leaving it 
to the municipal law to fix what makes the thing pro- 
perty, or whose it is; which also, as well as marriage, 
depend upon arbitrary and mutable forms. 

Laying aside the injunctions of Scripture, the plain 
account of the question seems to be this: It is immo* 
ral, because it is pernicious, that men and women 
should cohabit, without undertaking certain irrevoca- 
ble obligations, and mutually conferring certain civil 
rights; if, therefore, the law has annexed these rights. 
and obligations to certain forms, so that they cannot 
be secured or undertaken by any Other means, which^ 
is the case here (for whatever the parties may promise 
to each other, nothing but the marriage ceremony can 
make their promise irrevocable,) it becomes in the- 
same degree immoral, that men and women should, 
cohabit without the interposition of these forms.. 

Ir fornication be criminal, all those incentives which- 
lead to it are accessaries to the crime;, as lascivious 
conversation, whether expressed in obscene or dis- 
guised mider modest phrases; alsa wanton songs, 
fnctures, books; the writing,, publishing, and circu- 
ating of which, whether out of frolic,, or for some pi- 
tiful profit, is productive of so^ extensive a mischief^, 
from so mean a temptation, that few crimes, within 

TOIi. X.. 16^ 



IM 8X0ircTioir. 



tht raaeh of private wickedneM, have mom to ananvr 
for, or less to |leacl in their, excuse. 

Indecent conversation and, by parity of reaeon, all 
the rest ara forbidden by St» Paul, Eph. iv. 29. « Let 
no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth;*' 
and again, Col. iii. 8. ** Put off— filthy conununica- 
tion out of your mouth." 

The invitation, or voluntaiy admission, of impure 
thou|;hts, or the su^nng them to get poaseesion of 
the nnagination, falls withhi the same description, ^ 
and i^ oondemned by Christ, Matt. v. 28. " IVlioeo- 
ever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath oom« 
raiited adulteiy with her already in his heart."— 
Christ, by thus enjoining a regulation of the thoughts, 
strikes at the root of the evil. 



CHAPTER m. 



SSDUCTION. 



Thx iedueer practises the same stratagems to draw 
a woman's person into his power, that a avfindler does 
to get possession of your goodaor money; yet the law 
of honour, which abhors deceit, applauds the address 
of a successful intrigue: so much is this capricioas 
rule guided by names, and with such facility does it 
accommodate itself to the pleasures and convenimicy 
of higher life! 

Seduction is seldom accomplished without fraud; 
and the fraud is by so much more criminal than other 
frauds, as the injury efiected by it is greater, continues 
longer, and less admits reparation. 

This injury is threefold: to the woman, to her fa- 
mily, and to the*jpublic. 

1. The injury to the woman is made np of the pain 
she suffers from shame, or the loss she sustains in her 
reputation and prospects of marriage, and of the de- 
jpravoHon of her moral principle* 

1. This pain must be extreme, if we may judge of 
it from those barbarow endeavootB to conceal th«v 



SBBUCTMir. X9t 

dkgntoe, to which wenien, mtder such CMrcmwrttncw, 

sometimes have reooune; oomparing also this barba- 
rity with their passionate fondness for their ofibpring 
in other cases. Nothing but an agony of mina the 
most insupportable can induce a woman to forget her 
nature, and the pity which even a stranger would 
show to a helpless and imploring infant. It is true, 
that all are not. urged to this extremity; but if any 
are, it affords an indication of how much all suffer 
#from the same cause. What shall we say to the au- 
thors of such mischief? 

2. The loss which a woman sustains by the rmn.of 
her reputation almost exceeds computation. Eveiy 
person's happiness depends in part upon< the respect 
and reception which they meet with in the world; 
and it is no inconsiderable mortification even to the 
firmest tempers, to be rejected from the society of their 
equals, or received there with neglect and disdain. 
But this is not all, nor the worst. By a rule of life, 
which it is not easy to blame, and which it is impos- 
sible to alter, a woman loses with her chastity the 
chance of marrying at all, or in any manner equal to 
the hopes she had been .accustomed to entertain. Now 
marriage, whatever it be to a man, is that from which 
every woman expects her chief happiness. And this is 
still more true in low life, of which condition the wo- 
men are who are most exposed to solicitations of this 
sort. Add to this, that where a woman's mainte- 
nance depends upon her character (as it does, in a 
great measure, with those who are to support them- 
selves by service,) little sometimes is left to the for- 
saken sui!erer, but to starv^ for want of employment, 
or to have recourse to prostitution for food and rai- 
ment. 

8. As a woman collects her virtue into this point, 
the loss of her chastity is generally the destruction of 
her moral principle ; and this consequence is to be 
apprehended, whether the criminal intercourse be dis- 
covered or not. 

2. The injury to the family may be understood by 
the application of that infallible rule, "of doing to 
others what we wimld that others should do Unto us.'* 



188 ADtrLTSBY. 

Let a father or a brother eay, for what eonsideratioii 
they would suiTer this mjury to a daughter or a sister, 
and whether any, or even a total loss of fortune, could 
create equal affliction and distress. And when they 
reflect upon this, let them distinguish, if they can, be- 
tween a robbery committed upon their property by 
fraud or forgery, and the ruin of their happmess bytlM 
treachery of a seducer. 

3. The public at large lose the benefit of the wo- 
man's service in her proper place and destination, 
as a wife and parent. This, to the whole community, 
may be little; but it is often more than all the good 
which the seducer does to the commimity can recom- 
pense. Moreover, prostitution is supplied by seduc- 
tion; and in proportion to the danger there is of the 
woman's betaking herself, after her first sacrifice, to a 
life of public lew^ess, the seducer is answerable for 
the multiplied evils to which bis crime gives birth. 

Upon the whole if we pursue the efifects of seduo- 
tion through the complicated misery which it occa- 
sions, and if it be right to estimate crimes by the mis- 
chief they knowingly produce, it will appear some- 
thing more than mere invective to assert, that not 
one half of the brimes for which men sufier death by 
the laws of England are so flagitious as this.* 



CHAPTER IV. 



ADULTEBY. 



A NEW sufferer is introduced,^— the injured husband, 
who receives a wound in his sensibility and afiections, 
the most painful and incurable that human nature 

* Yet the law has provided no punishment for this offence 
beyond a pecuniary satisfaction to the injured family ; and 
this can only be come at by one of the quaintest fictions in 
the world — -by the father's bringing his action apinst the 
seducer, for the loss of his daughter's service, during her 
pregnancy and nurturing. 



knows. In all other raepects.-ftdoltory, on the part of 
the man who solicta the chastity of a manied woman, 
includes the crime of seduction, and is attended with 
the samo mischief. 

The infidelity of the woman is aggravated by cruelty 
to her children, who are' generally involved in their 
parents' shame, and always made unhappy by their 
quarrel. 

If it be said that these consequences are charge- 
able not so mu^h upon the crime as the discovery; 
we answer, first, that the crime could not be disco- 
vered unless it were committed, and that the commis- 
sion is never secure from discovery; and secondly, 
that if we excuse adulterous connexions, whenever 
they can hope to escape detection, which is the con- 
clusion to which this argument conducts us, we leave 
the husband no other security for his wife's chastitv 
than in her want of opportunity or temptation; which 
would probably either deter men from marrying, or 
lender mamage a state of such jealousy and alarm to 
the husband, as must end in the slavery and confiiie- 
ment of the>wife. 

The vow, by which married persons mutually en- 
gSLge their fidelity, '< is witnessed before God," and 
accompanied wiUi circumstances of solemnity and re- 
ligion, which approach the nature of an oath. The 
married offender therefore incurs a crime little short 
of perjury, and the seduction of a married woman is 
little less than subornation of perjury; — and this 
guilt is independent of the discovery. 

All behaviour which is designed, or which know- 
ingly tends to captivate the auction of a married wo- 
man, is a barbarous hitrusion upon the peace and vir- 
tue of a family, though it fall snort of adultery. 

The usual and only apology for adultery is the prior 
transgression of the other party. There are degrees, 
no doubt, in this, as in other crimes; and so far as 
the bad efi^cts of adultery are anticipated by the 
conduct of the husband or wife who ofiends first, the 
gmit of the second offender is less. But this falls 
very far short of a justification; unless it could bo 
shown that the obligation of tho marriage vow de- 



190 AOULTBRT. 

pends upon the condition of reciprocal fidelity; for 
which construction there appears no foundation either 
in expediency, or in the terms of the promise, or ia 
the design of the legislature which prescribed the 
marriage rite. Moreover, the rule contended for by 
this plea has a manifest tendency to multiply the of- 
fence, but none to reclaim the ofiender. 

The way of considering the oflfence of one party as 
' provocation to the other, and the other as only re- 
taltating the injury by repeating the crime, is a child- 
ish trifling with words. 

"Thou shalt not commit adultery,^* was an inter- 
dict delivered by Gk>d himself. By the Jewish law, 
adultery was capital to both parties in the crime: 
** Even he that committeth adultery with his neigh- 
hour's wife, the adulterer and adulteress shall sorely 
be put to death." Levit. zz.10. Which passages 
prove that the Divine Legislator placed a great dif- 
ference between adultery and fornication. And with 
this agree the Christian Scriptures; for, in almost all 
the catalogues they have left us of crimes and crimi- 
nals, they enumerate ** fornication, adultery, whore* 
mongers, adulterers*' (Matthew, xv. 19. 1 Cor. vi. 9. 
Gal. V. 9. Heb. ziii. 4;) by which mention of both, 
they show that they did not consider them as the 
same; but that the crime of adultery was, in their ap- 
prehension, distinct from and accumulated upon that 
of fornication. 

The history of the woman taken in adultery, re- 
corded in the eighth chapter of St. John's Gospely 
has been thought by some to give countenance to 
that crime. As Christ told the woman, " Neither do 
I condemn thee," we must believe, it Is said, that he 
deemed her conduct either not criminal, or not a 
crime, however, of the heinous nature which we re- 
present it to be. A more attentive examination of 
the case will, I think, convince us, tha.t from it no- 
thing can be concluded as to Christ's epinion concern- 
ing adultery, either one way or other. This transac- 
tion is thus related: "Early in the morning Jesus 
came again into the temple, and all the people came 
iinto him: and he sat down and taught them. And 



ADtTLTfRY. 191 

the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman 
taken in adultery; and when they ha 4 eet her in the 
midst, they say unto him, Master, this woman was 
taken in adultery, in the very act: now Moses, in 
the law, conmianded that such should be stoned; but 
what sayest thou ? This they said tempting him, that 
they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped 
down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as 
though he heard them not. So when they continued 
asking him, he lift up himself, and said unto them. 
He that is without sin amongst you, let him first cast 
a stone at her; and again he stooped down, and wrote 
en the ground: and they which heard it, being con- 
victed by their own conscience, went out one by one, 
beginning at the eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus 
was led alone, and the woman standing in the midst. 
When Jesus had lift up himself, and saw none but the 
woman, he said unto her. Woman, where are those 
thine accusers ? hath no man condemned thee ? She 
said unto him. No man, Lord. And ho said unto her, 
JVeitker do I condemn thee ; go, and sin no more." 

" This they said tempting him, that they might have 
to accuse him;" to draw him, that is, into an exercise 
of judicial authority, that they might have to accuse 
him before the Roman governor, of usurping or inter- 
meddling with the civil government. This was their 
design; and Christ's behaviour throughout the whole 
affiiir proceeded from a knowledge of this design, and 
a determination to defeat it. He gives them at first a 
cold and sullen reception, well suited to the insidious 
intention with which they came: ** He stooped down, 
and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he 
heard them not." "When ihay continued asking 
him," when they teased him to speak, he dismissed 
them with a rebuke, which the impertinent ihalice of 
their errand, as well as the sacred character of many of 
them, deserved: " He -that is without sin (that is, 
this sin) among you, let him first cast a stone at her." 
This had its effect. Stung with the reproof, and disap- 
pointed of their aim, they stole away one by one, and 
Jefl Jesus and the woman alone. And then follows the 
conversation which is the part of the narrative most 



192 INCK8T. 

material to our preseot subject. " Jesus said unto her. 
Woman, where are those thine accusers ? hath no 
man condemned thee ? She said. No man. Lord. And 
Jesus said unto her. Neither do I condemn thee; go, 
and sin no more." Now when Christ asked the wo« 
man, " Hath no man condemned thee ?" he certain- 
ly spoke, and was understood by the woman to speak 
of a legal and judicial condemnation; otherwise, her 
answer, '* No man, Lord," was not true. In every 
other sense of condemnation, as blame, censure, re- 
proof, private judgment, and the like, many had oon- 
demnea her; all those indeed who brought her to 
Jesus. If then a judicial sentence was what Christ 
meant by condemning in the question, the common 
vme of language requires us to suppose that he meant 
the same in his reply; " Neither do I condemn thee,*' 
t. e. I pretend to no judicial character or authority 
over thee; it is no office or business of mine to pro** 
nounoe or execute the sentence of the law. 

When Christ adds, " Go, and sin no more," he in 
eflfect tells her, that she had sinned alresdy: but as 
to the degree or qualitjp^ of the sin, or Christ's opinion 
concerning it, nothing is declared, or can be inferred, 
either way. 

Adultery, #hich was punished with death daring 
the Usurpation, is now regarded by the law of Eng^ 
land only as a civil injury; for which the imperfect 
satisfaction that money can affiird may be recovered 
by the husband. 



CHAPTER V. 

INCXST. 



In order to preserve chastity in families, and be- 
tween persons of different sexes » brought up and living 
together in a state of unreserved intimacy, it is neces- 
sary by every method possible to inculcate an abhor- 
rence of .incestuous conjunctions; which abhorrence 



tNCEBT. 19$ 

ttn only be upholden by the absolute reprobation of all 
commerce of the sexes between near relations. Upon 
this principle, the marricLge as well as other cohabi- 
tations of brothers and sisters, of lineal kindred, and 
of all who usually live in the same family, may be 
■aid to be forbidden by the law of nature. 

Restrictions which extend to remoter degrees of 
kindred than what this reason makes it necessary to 
prohibit from intermarriage, are founded in the autho^ 
rity of the positive law which ordains them, and can 
only be justified by their tendency to difiiise wealth, 
to connect iamilies^ or to promote some political ad- 
vantage. 

The Levitical law, which is received in this coun- 
ty, and from which the rule of the Roman law dif- 
fers veiy little, prohibits* marriage between relations, 
within three degrees of kindred; computing the ge- 
nerations, not from, but through the common ances- 
tor, and accounting affinity tlie same as consangui- 
nity. The issue, however, of such marriages are not 
bastardized, unless the parents be divorced during 
their lifetime. 

The Egyptians are said to have allowed of "the mar- 
riage of brothers and sisters. Amongst the Athe- 
nians a very singular regulation prevailed; brothers 
and sisters of the half-blood, if related by the father's 
side, might marry; if by the mother's side, they were 
prohibited from marrying^ The same custoih also 
probably obtained in Chaloea so early as the age in 
which Abraham left it; for he and Sarah his wife 
stood in this relation to each other: ** And yet, in- 
deed, she is my sister; she is the daughter of my fa- 
ther, but not of my mother; and she became my wife." 
Gen. XX. 12. 

* The Roman law continued the prohibition to the desoen- 
dants of brothers and sisters without limits. In the Leviti- 
cal and English law there is nothing to hinder a man from 
marrying lus greof-neice. 

vbL. I. 17 



194 POLTOAICT. 



. CHAPTER VI. 

POI.TGAMT. 

ft 

Thx equality* in the number of maleft and females 
born into the world, intimates the intention of God, 
that one woman should be assigned to one man; for, 
if to one man be allowed exclusive right to five or 
more women, four or more men must be deprived of 
the exclusive possessioaof any; which could never be 
the order intended. 

It seems also a significant indication of the Divine 
will, that he at first created only one woman to one 
man. Had God intended polygamy for the species, 
it is probable he would have begun with it; especial- 
ly as, by giving to Adam more wives than one, the 
multiplication of the human race would have proceed- 
ed with a quicker progress. 

Polygamy not only violates the constitution of na- 
ture, and the apparent design of the Deity, but pro- 
duces to the parties themselves, and to the public, the 
following bad effects: contests and jealousies amongst 
the wives of the same husband; distracted afiections, 
or the loss of all affection, in the husband himself: a 
voluptuousness in the rich which dissolves the vigour 
of their intellectual as well as active faculties, pro- 
ducing that indolence and imbecility both of mind 
and body, which have long characterized the nations 
of the EaA; the abasement of one half of the human 
species, who, in countries where polygamy obtains, 
are degraded into mere instruments of physical plea- 
sure to the other half; neglect of children; and the 
manifold and sometimes unnatural mischiefs which 
arise from a scarcity of women. To compensate for 
these evils, polygamy does not ofier a single advan- 



* This equality is not exact. The number of male infiuta 
exceeds that of females in the proportion of nineteen to,eigh- 
teen, or thereahouts ; which excess provides for the greater 
eonsumption of males by war, seafaring, and other dangerous 
or unhealthy occupations. 



POLTGAMT. 195 

tmge. In the article of population, which it has been 
thought to promote, the community gain nothing:* 
for the question is not, whether one man will have 
more children by five or more wives than by one; 
but whether these five wives would not bear the 
same or a greater number of children to five separate 
husbands. And as to the care of the children when 
produced, and the sending of them into the world in 
situations in which they may be likely to form and 
bring up families of their own, upon which the in- 
crease and succession of the human species in a great 
degree depend;- this is less provided for, and less 
practicable, where twenty or thirty children are to be 
supported by the attention and fortunes of one father, 
than if they were divided into five or six families, to 
each of which were assigned the industry and inherit- 
ance of two parents. 

Whether simultaneous polygamy was permitted by 
the law of Moses, seems doubtful :t but whether per- 
mitted or not, it was certainly practised by the Jewish 
patriarchs, both before that law, and under it. The 
permission, if there was anyi^ might be like that of 



* Nothing, I mean, com par ed with a state in which mar- 
riage is nearly universal. Where marriages are less general, 
and many women unfruitful from the want of husbancb, poly- 
gamy might at first add a little to population ; and but a lit- 
tle : for, as a variety of wives would be sought chiefly fi'om 
temptations of voluptuousness, it would rather increase the 
demand for female beauty, than for the sex at large« And 
this little would soon be made less by many deductions. For, 
first, as none but the opulent can maintian a plurality of 
wives, where polygamy obtains, the rich indulge in it, while 
the rest take up with a va^ue and barren incontinency» 
And, secondly, women would grow less jealous' of their vir- 
tue, when they had nothing ror which to reserve it but a 
chamber in the haram ; when their chastity was no longer 
to be rewarded with the rights and happiness of a wife, as 
•enjoyed under the marriage of one woman to one man. 
These considerations may be added to what is mentioned in 
the text, concerning the easy and early settlement of cj||j^ 
dren in the world. ^.^ 

t See Deut. xvii. 17 ; xxi. 15. 



196 POLT6AMT. 

divorce, *' for the hardness of their heart;" in conde- 
Bcennon to their established indulgences, rather than 
from the general rectitade or propriety of the thing 
itself. The state of manners in Judea had probably 
undergone it reformation in this respect before the 
time of Christ, for in the New Testament we meet 
with no trace or mention of any such practice being 
tolerated. 

For which reason, ^nd because it was likewise forbid- 
den amongst the Greeks and Romans, we cannot ex- 
pect to find any express law upon the subject in the 
Christian code. The words of Christ* (Matt. xdx. 9) 
may be construed by an easy implication to prohibit 
polygamy; for, if " whoever putteth away his wife 
and marrieth another, conmiitteth adultery," he who 
marrieth another without putting away the first, is no 
less guilty of adultery: because the adulteiy does 
not consist in the repudiation of the first wife (for, 
however unjust or cruel that may be, it is not adul- 
tery,) but in entering into a second marriage during 
the legal existence and obligation of the iret. The 
several passages in St. Paid's writings,- which speak 
of marriage, alwajrs suppose it to signify the union of 
one man with one woman. Upon this supposition he 
argues, Rom. vii. 1, 2, 3: ** Know ye not, brethren 
(for I speak to them that know the law,) how that the 
law hath dominion over a man, as long as he liveth ? 
For the woman which hath a husband, is bound by 
the law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if 
the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of 
her husband: so then, if while her husband liveth 
she be married to another man, she shall be called an 
adulteress." When the same apostle permits mar- 
riage to his Corinthian converts (which, '< for the pre- 
sent . distress," he judges to be inconvenient,) he 
restrains the permission to the marriage of one hus- 
band with one wife: — " It is good for a man not to 
touch a woman: nevertheless, to avoid fornication. 



* ** I say unto you. Whosoever shall put away his wife, 
except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, con- 
milteth adultery/' 



POLTGAMT. 197 

let every man have his own wife, and let eveiy woman 
have her own husband." 

The manners of different countries have varied in 
nothing more than in their domestic constitutions. 
Less polished and more luxurious nations have either 
not perceived the bad eflfects of polygamy, or, if they 
did perceive them, they who, in such countries, pos- 
sessed the power of reforming the laws have been 
unwilling to resign their own gratifications. Poly- 
gamy is retained at this day among the Turks, and 
throughout every part of Asia in which Christianity 
is not professed. In Christian countries it is univer- 
sally prohibited. In Sweden it iff punished with death. 
In England, besides the nullity of the second mar- 
riage, it subjects the offender to transportation or im- 
prisonment and branding, for the first offence, and 
to capital punishment for the second. And whatever 
may be said in behalf of polygamy when it is autho- 
rized by the law of the land, the marriage of a second 
wife during the lifetime of the first, in countries where 
such a second marriage is void, must be ranked with 
the most dangerous and cruel of those frauds, by 
which a woman is cheated out of her fortune, her 
person, and her happiness. 

The ancient Medes compelled their citizens, in one 
canton, to take seven wives; in another, each woman 
to receive five husbands: according as war had made, 
in one quarter of their country, an extraordinary 
havock among the men, or the women had been car- 
ried away by an enemy from another. This regula- 
tion, so far as it was adapted to the proportion which 
subsisted between the number of males and females, 
was founded in the reason upon which the most im- 
proved nations of Europe proceed at present. 

Caesar found amongst the inhabitants of this island 
a species of polygamy, if it may be so called, which 
was perfectly singular. Uxores, asLja he, habent dem 
duodenique inter se communes ; et maxime fratres 
cum fratribus parentesque cum Hberis : sed st qui 
sint ex his nati, eorum habentur liberie quo primum 
virgo qutBque dedueta est, 

yoh. I, 17 ♦ 



*" 



Its BITORCS. 



CHAPTER VII. 



DIVORCE. 



Bt ditwtt, I mean the diflsolatioii of the iharriago 
contract, hy the act, and at the will, of the hushaiid. 

This power was allowed to the husband, among the 
Jews, the Greeks, and latter Romans; and is at this- 
day exercised by the Turks and Persians. 

The congruity of such a right with the law of na^ 
ture is the question before us. 

And, in the first place, it is manifestly inooasistent 
with the duty which the parents owe to their children^ 
which duty can never be so well fulfilled as by their 
cohabitation and united care. It is also incompatible- 
with the right which the mother possesses, as well a» 
the father, to the gratitude of her children and the 
comfort of their society; of both which she is almost 
necessarily deprived, by her dismission from her hus- 
band's family. 

Where this objection does not interfere, I know of 
no principle of the law of nature applicable to the 
question, beside that of general expediency. 

For, if we say that arbitrary divorces are excluded 
by the terms of the marriage contract, it may be an- 
swered, that the contract might be so framed as ta 
admit of this condition. 

If we argue, with some moralists, thut the obliga^ 
tion of a contract naturally continues, so long as the 
purpose which the contracting parties had in view re» 
quires its continuance; it will be difficult to show 
what purpose of the contract (the care of^ children 
excepted) should confine a man to a woman, firom 
whom he seeks to be loose. 

If we contend, with others, that a contract cannot, 
by the law of nature, be dissolved, unless the parties 
be replaced in the situation which each possessed 
before the contract was entered into; we shall be 
called upon to prove this to be a universal or india- 
pensable property of contracts. 

I confess myself unable to assign any circuroatance 



DIYORCl!. 19t 

m the mtrriage contract, which esientially diitiii- 
guiBhes it from other oontracte, or which proves that 
it contains, what many have ascribed to it, a natural 
incapacity of being dissolved by the consent of the 
parties, at the option of one of them, or either of then. 
But if we trace the effects of soch a rule upon the 
general happiness of married life, we shall perceive 
reasons of expediency, that abundantly justify the 
policy of those laws which refuse to the husband the 
power of divorce, or restrain it to a few extreme and 
specific provocations: and our* principles teach us to 
prononnce that to be contrary to the law of nature, 
which caa-be proved to be detrimental to the common 
happiness of the human species. 

A lawgiver, whose counsels are directed by views 
of general utility, and obstructed by no local impedi- 
ment, would make the marriage contract indissoluble 
during the jdint lives of the parties, for the sake of 
the following advantages >- 

1. Because this tends to preserve peace and con- 
cord between inarried persons, by perpetuating their 
conmion interest, and by inducing a necessity of mu- 
tual compliance. 

There is great weight and substance in both these 
considerations. An earlier termination of the union 
would produce a separate interest. The wife would 
naturally look forward to the dissolution of the part- 
nership, and endeavour to draw to herself a fund 
against the time when she was no longer to have 
aiccess to the same resources. This would beget pe- 
cfilati<»] on one side, and mistrust on the other; evils 
which at present very little disturb the confidence of 
a married life. The second effect of making the 
union determinable only by death, is not less bene- 
ficial. It necessarily happens that adverse tempers, 
habits, and tastes oftentimes meet in marriage. In 
which case, each party must take pains to give up 
what offends, and practise what may gratify thef other. 
A man and woman in love with each other do this 
insensibly: but love is neither general nor durable;- 
and where that is wanting, no lessons of duty, no 
delicacy of sentiment will go half so far with tkm 



fOO DITORCS. 

gUMmlity of mankind «nd womnnkind, as this on« 
intelligible reflection, that they must each make the 
best of their bargain; and that seeing they must 
either both be miserable, or both share in the same 
happiness, neither can find their own comfort, but in 
promoting the pleasure of the other. These compli- 
ances, though at first extorted by necessity, become 
in time easy and mutual; and, though less endearing 
than assiduities which take their rise from afiection, 
generally procure to the married pair a repose and 
satisfaction sufficient for their happiness. 

2. Becase new objects of desire would be conti^ 
nually sought after, if men could, at will, be released 
from their subsisting engagements. Suppose the hus- 
band to hare once preferred his wife to all other wo- 
men, the duration of this preference cannot be trusted 
to. Possession makes a great difference: and there 
is no other security against the invitations of novelty,, 
than the known impossibility of obtaining the object. 
Did the cause which brings the sexes together, hold 
them together by the same force with which it first 
attracted them to each other; or could the woman be 
restored to her personal integrity, and to all the ad- 
vantages of her virgin estate; the power of divorce 
might be deposited in the hands of the husband, with 
less danger of abuse or inconveniency. But consti- 
tuted as mankind are, and injured ai^ the repudiated 
wife generally must be, it is necessary to aad a sta- 
bility to the condition of married women, more secure 
than the continuance of their husbands' afiection; and 
to supply to both sides, by a sense of duty and of ob- 
ligation, what satiety has impaired of passion and of 
personal attachment. Upon the whole, the power of 
divorce is evidently and greatly to the disadvantage 
of the woman: and the only question appears to be> 
whether the real and permanent happiness of one half 
of the species should be surrendered to the caprice 
and voluptuousness of the other ? 

We have considered divorces as depending upon 
the will of the husband, because that is the way in 
which they have actually obtained in many parts of 
the world; but the same objections apply, in a gieat 



DITORCS. 801 

degree, to diyoroes by mutual eonsent; especiaUv 
when we consider the indelicate situation and small 
IHrospect pf happiness, which remains to the party 
who opposed his or her dissent to the hberty and de- 
sire of the 'Other. 

The law of nature admits of an exception in favour 
of the injured party, in cases of adultery, of obstinate 
desertion, of attempts upon life, of outrageous cruelty, 
of incurable madness, and perhaps of personal imbe- 
cility; but by no means indulges the same privilege 
to mere dislike, to opposition of hmnours and inclina- 
tions, to contrariety of taste and temper, to complaints 
of coldness, neglect, severity, peevishness, jealousy: 
not that these reasons are trivial, but because such ob« 
jections may always be alleged, and are impossible by 
testimony to be ascertained; so that to allow implicit 
credit to them, and to dissolve marriages, whenever 
•ither party thought fit to pretend them, would lead 
in its efiect to all the lioentiouanesa of arbitraiy di» 
Torces. 

Milton's story is well known. Upon a qu vrel with 
his wife, he paid his addresses to another woman, and 
■et forth a public vindication of his conduct, by at* 
tempting to prove, that confirmed dislike was as just 
a foundation for dissolving the marriage contract, as 
Adultery; to which position, and to all the arguments 
by which it can be supported, the above consideration 
lAbrds a sufficient answer. And if a married pair, 
in actual and irreconcileable discord, complain that 
their happiness would be better consulted, by per- 
mitting them to determine a connexion which is be- 
come odious to both, it may be told them, that the 
same permission, as a general rule, would produce 
libertinism, dissension, and misery amongst thousands 
who are now virtuous, and quiet, and happy, in their 
condition: and it ought to satisfy them to reflect, 
that when their happiness is sacrificed to the operation 
of an unlrelenting nue, it is sacrificed to the happiness 
of the community. 

The scriptures seem to have dra^^ the obligation 
tighter than the law of nature left it. •* Whosoever,' ' 
•aith Christ, ** shall put away his wife, except it be 



20i DIVORCX. 

for fornication, and shall marry another, comnntteth 
adultery; and whoso marrieth her which is put away, 
doth commit adultery." Matt. xix. 9. The law of 
Moses, for reasons of local expediency, permitted the 
Jewish husband to put away his wife; but whether 
for every cause, or for what causes, appears to have 
been controverted amongst the interpreters of those 
times. Christ, the precepts of whose religion were 
calculated for more general use and observation, re- 
-vokes the permission (as given to the Jews '* for the 
hardness of their hearts,**) and promuJges a law which 
was thenceforward to confine divorces to the sin^e 
case of adultery in the wife. Aiid I see no sufficient 
reason to depart from the plain and strict meaning of 
Christ's words. The rule was new. It both sur- 
prised and ofi^nded his disciples; yet Christ added 
nothing to relax or explain it. 

inferior causes may justify the separation of hus- 
band and wife, although they will not authorize such 
a dissolution of the marriage contract, as would leave 
either party at liberty to marry again: for it is that 
liberty, in which the danger and mischief of divorces 
principally consist. If the care of children does not 
require that they should live together, and it is be- 
come, in the serious judgment of both, necessary for 
their mutual happiness that they should separate, let 
them separate by consent. Nevertheless, this neces- 
sity can hardly exist, without guilt and misconduct on 
one side or on both. Moreover, cruelty, ill usage, 
extreme violence or moroseness of temper, or other 
great and continued provocations, make it lawful for 
the party aggrieved J.o withdraw from the society of 
the offender without his or her consent. The law 
which imposes the marriage vow, whereby the parties 
promise to *< keep to each other," or in other words, 
to live together, must be understood to impose it with 
a silent reservation of these cases; because the same 
law has constituted a judicial relief from the t3nranny 
of the husband, by the divorce a mensa et toro, and 
by the provision which it makes for the separate main- 
tenance of the injured wife. St. Paul likewise distiii- 
tfttishes between a wile's merely separating herself 



DIVOACC. 20$ 

from the family of her husband, and her mtjrying 
again: — ** Let not the wife depart from her' husband; 
but and if she do depart, let her remain, unmarried.*' 
The law of this country, in conformity to our Sa- 
viour's ii^unction, confines the dissolution of the mar- 
riage contract to the single case of adultery in the 
wife; and a divorce even in that case .can only be 
brought about by the operation of an act of parlia- 
ment, founded upon a previous sentence in the eccle- 
siastical court, and a verdict against the adulterer at 
common law: which proceedings taken together com- 
pose as complete an investigation of the complaint as 
a cause can receive. It has lately been proposed to 
the legislature to annex a clause to these acts, re- 
straining the offending party from marrying with the 
companion of her crime, who, by the course of pro- 
ceeding, is always known and convicted: for there is 
reason to fear, that adulterous connexions are often 
formed with the prospect of bringing them to this 
conclusion; at least, when the seducer has once cap- 
tivated the affection of a married woman, he may avail 
himself of this tempting argument to subdue her 
scruples, and complete his victory; and the legisla- 
ture, as the business is managed at present, assists by 
its interposition the criminal design of the oflfenders, 
and confers a privilege where it ought to inflict a 
punishment. The proposal deserved an experiment: 
but something more penal will, I apprehend, be found 
necessary to check the progress of this alarming de- 
pravity. Whether a law might not be framed, dxrect- 
nf the fortune of the adulteress to descend as in ease 
cfher natural death ; reserving, however, a certain 
firoportion of the produce of it, by way of annuity, 
for her subsistance (such annuity, in no case, to ex- 
ceed a fixed sum,) and also so far suspending the es- 
tate in the hands of the heir as to preserve the in- 
heritance to any children she might bear to a second 
marriage, in case there was none to succeed in the 
place of their mother by the first; whether, I say, such 
a law would not render female virtue in higher life less 
vincible, as well as the seducers of that virtue less 
urgent in their suit, we recommend to the deliberation 



904 DtVORCM. 

of thoM who are willing to attempt the Mfoiiiui* 
tion of this important, but most incorrigible dam 
of the eommunitj. A pasaitm for splendour, for ex- 
pensive amusements and distinctions, is commonly 
found in that description of women who would become 
the objects of such a law, not less inordinate than 
their other appetites. A severity of the kind we pro- 
pose, applies munediately to that passion. And there 
IS no room for any complaint of injustice, since the 
provisions above stated, with others which might be 
contrived, confine the punishment, so far as it is pos- 
sible, to the person of the offender; suffering the es- 
tate to remain to the heir, or within the family, of the 
ancestor from whom it came» or to attend the appoint- 
ments of his will. 

Sentences of the ecclesiastical courts, which release 
the parties a uincuio matrim&nU by reason of impu- 
berty, frigidity, consanguinity within the prohibited 
degrees, prior marriage, or want of the requisite con- 
sent of parents and guardians, are not dissolutions of 
the marriage contract, but judicial declarations that 
there never was any marriage; such impediment sub- 
sisting at the time, as rendered the celebration of tb^ 
marriage rite a mere nullity. And the rite itself coi^ 
tains an exception of these impediments. The man 
and woman to be married are charged, ** if they know 
any impediment .why they may not be lawfully joined 
together, to confess it;" and assured, ** that so many 
as are coupled together,, otherwise than God's wwk 
doth allow, are not joined together by God, neither is 
their matrim<my lawful;" all which is intended hf 
way of solemn notice to the parties, that the vow tlAy 
are about to make will bind their consciences and atti> 
thorize their cohabitation, only upon the suppoeition 
that no legal impediment ezistsi 



MARRIAOK. 205 



CHAPTER VIU. 



MARRIAGX. 



Whether it hath grown out of some tradition of 
the Divine appointment of marriage in the persons of 
our first parents, or merely from a design to impress 
the obligation of the marriage contract with a solem- 
nity suited to its importance, the marriage rite, in al- 
most all countries of the world, has been made a reli- 
gious ceremony;* although marriage, in its own na- 
ture, and abstriacted from the rules and declarations 
which the Jewish and Christian Scriptures djeliver 
concerning it, be properly a civil contract, and noth- 
ing more. 

With respect to one main article in matrimonial 
alliances, a total alteration has taken place in the 
fashion of the world: the wife now brings money to 
her husband, whereas anciently the husband paid 
money to the family of the wife; as was the case 
among the Jewish patriarchs, the Greeks, and the 
old inhabitants of Germany. \ This alteration has 
proved of no small advantage to the female sex' for 
their importance in point of fortune procures to them, 
in modem times, that assiduity and respect, which 
are always wanted to compensate for the inferiority of 
their strength but which their personal attractions 
would not aways secure. 

Our business is with marriage as it is established in 



* It was not, however, in Christian contries required that 
marriages should be celebrated in churches, till the thir- 
teenth century of the Christian era. Marriages in Engiand, 
during die ITsuiPpation, were solemnized before justices of 
the peace : but for what purpose this novelty was introduc- 
ed, except to degrade the clergy, dq^ not appear. 

t The ancient Assyrians sold their beauties by an an- 
nual auction. The prices were applied by way of portions 
to the more homely. By this contrivance, all of both sorts 
were disposed of- in marriage. 

VOL. I. 18 



306 MAARIAGX. 

thii eountty. And in treating thereof, it will be ne* 
ceawry to state the terms of the marriage vow, in 
order to discover, — 

1. What duties this vow creates. 

2. What situation of mind, at the time, is incon- 
sistent with it. 

3. By what subsequent behaviour it is violated. 

The husband promises, on his part, " to love, com- 
fort, honour, and keep his wife;" the wife on hers, 
*'to obey, serve, love, honour, and keep her haa- 
band;" in eveiy variety of health, fortune, and con- 
dition: and both stipulate ** to forsake all others, and 
to keep only unto one another, so long as they both 
shall live." This promise is called the marriage vow; 
is witnessed before God and the congregation; ac- 
companied with prayers to Almi^ty God for his 
blessing upon it; and attended with such circmn- 
stances of devotion and solemnity as place the obliga- 
tion of it, and the guilt of violating it, nearly upon the 
same foundation with that of oaths. 

The parties by this vow engage their personal fide- 
lity expressly and specifically; they engage likewise 
to consult and promote each other's happiness: the 
wife, moreover, promises obedience to her husband* 
Nature may have made and left the sexes of the hu- 
man species nearly equal in their faculties, and per- 
fectly so in their rights; but to guard against those 
competitions which equality, or a contested superi- 
ority, is almost sure to produce, the Christian Scrip- 
tures enjoin upon the wife that obedience which she 
here promises, and in terms so peremptory and abso- 
lute, that it seems to extend to every thing not crimi- 
nal, or not entirely inconsistent with the woman's 
happiness. ** Let the wife,*' says St. Paul, ** be 
subject to her own husband in. every thing." — ** The 
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit," says the same 
apostle, speaking of the duty of wives, '* is, in the 
sight of God, of great price." No words ever ex- 
pressed the true merit 6f the female character so well 
as these. 

The condition of human life will not permit us to 
say, that no one can conscientiously marry who does 



MARRIAGE. SfOT 

not prefer the person at the altar to al) other men or 
women in the world; but we can have no difficulty in 
pronouncing^ (whether w^ respect the end of the insti- 
tution, or the plain terms in which the contract is 
conceived,) that whoever is conscious, at the time of 
his marriage, of such a dislike to the woman he is 
about to marry, or of such a subsisting attachment to 
some other woman, that he cannot reasonably, nor 
does in fact, expect ever to entertain an affection for 
his future wife, is guilty, when he pronounces the 
marriage vow, of a direct and deliberate prevarica- 
tion; and that, too, aggravated by the presence of 
those ideas of religion, and of the Supreme Being, 
which the place, the ritual, and the solemnity of the 
occasion, cannot fail of bringing to his thoughts. The 
same likewise of the woman. This charge must be 
imputed to all who, from, mercenary motives, marry 
the objects of their aversion and disgust; and like- 
wise to those who desert, from*ilny motive whatever « 
the object of their affection, and, whithont being able 
to subdue that afiection, marry another. 

The crime of falsehood is also incurred by the man 
who intends, at the time of his marriage, to com- 
mence, renew, or continue, a personal commerce with 
any other woman. And the parity of reason, if a wife 
be capable of so much guilt, extends to her. 

The marriage vow is violated, 

}. By adultery. 

2. By any behaviour which knowingly, renders the 
life of the other miserable; as desertion, neglect, pro- 
digality, drunkenness, peevishness, penuriousness, jea- 
lousy, or any levity of conduct which administers 
occasion of jealousy. 

A late regulation in the law of marriages, in this 
country, has made the consent of the father, if he be 
living, of the mother, if she survive the father, and 
remain unmarried, or of guardians, if both parents 
be dead, necessary to the marriage of a person under 
twenty-one years of age. By the Roman law, the 
consent et avi et pairis was required so long as they 
lived. In France, the consent of parents is necessar}' 
to the marriage of sons, until they attain to thirty 



MS DVTT VP PARBITTI. 

yem of age; of dangfaten, until twenty-fivo. In 
HoUand, for aona till twenty-five; for daughters, till 
twenty. And this distinetion between the sexes ap- 
pears to be w^ founded; for a woman is usually as 
properiy qualified for the dcMnestic and inferior duties 
of a wife or mother at eighteen, as a man is for the 
bonness of the world, and the more arduous care of 
providing for a family, at twenty-one. 

The constitution also of the human species indicates 
the iame distinction.* 



CHAPTEK IX. 

OP THX DITTT OP PAEENT8. 

That Tirtue whi^ confines its beneficenise 
the walls of a man's own house, we have been aoettl- 
tomed to consider as little better than a more refined 
selfirimess; and yet it will be confessed, that the sob- 
ject and matter of this class of duties are infiirior to 
none in utility and importance: and where, it may be 
asked, is virtue the most valuable, but where it does 
the most good ? What duty is the most obligatory, but 
that on which the most depends ? And where have 
we happiness and misery so much in our power, or 
liable to be so afleeted by our conduct, as in our own 
families? It will also be acknowledged, that the 
good order and happiness of the world are better np- 
nolden whilst each man applies himself to his own 
concerns, and the care of his own family, to which he 
is present, than if eve^y man, from an excess of mis- 
taken generosity, should leave his own business to 
undertake his neighbour's, which he must always 
manage with less knowledge, cbnveniency, and sae- 



* Cum vis prolem procreandi diatius hwreat in mare qufim 
in laMiuii&, populi nomerus nequaquam ninuetur, si seri«s 
venerem colere incaperint viri. 



DVTT or PARSNTf. 209 

MM. If therefore, the low ettimatioii of these vir* 
tues be well founded, it must be owing, not to their 
inferior importance, but to some defect or impurity in 
the motive. And indeed it cannot be denied, that it 
is in the power of eusoeiationBO to unite our children's 
interest with our own, as that we shall often pursue 
both from the same motive, place both in the same 
object, and with as little sense of duty in one pursuit 
as in the other. Where this is the case, the judg- 
ment above stated is not far from the truth. And so 
often as we find a solicitous care of a man's own 
family, in a total absence or extreme penury of every 
other virtue, or interfering with other duties, or direct- 
ing its operation solely to the temporal happiness of 
the children, placing that happiness in amusement 
and indulgence whilst they are young, or in advance^ 
ment of fortune when they grow up, there is reason to 
believe that this is the case. In this way, the com> 
mon opinion concerning these duties may be account- 
ed for and defended. If we look to the subject of 
them, we perceive them to be indispensable: If we 
regard the motive, we find them often not very merito- 
rious. Wherefore, although a man seldom rises high 
in our esteem Who has nothing to recommend him be- 
side the care of his own family, yet we always con- 
demn the neglect of this duty with the utmost seve- 
rity; both by reason of the manifest and immediate 
mischief which we see arising from this neglect, and 
because it argues a want not only of parental affec- 
tion, but of those moral principles which ought to 
come in aid of that affection where it is wanting. 
And if, on the other hand, our praise and esteem of 
these duties be not proportioned to the good they 
produce, or to the indignation with which we resent 
the absence of them, it is for this reason, that virtue 
J8 the most valuable, not where it produces the most 
<good, but where it is the most wanted: which is not 
the case here; because its place is often supplied by 
Instincts, or involuntary associations. Nevertheless, 
the offices of a parent may be discharged from a con- 
0ciou8neia of their obligation, as well as other duties; 
and a sense of this obligation is sometimes necessary 
VOL. I. 18 ♦ 



SIO DOTT OF PAMBMTS. 



to taiifll the fiUniiilii* of parental afibction; mpecially 
in stations of Itfe in whicii the wants of a family can- 
not be supplied without the continual hard labour of 
the father, and without his refraining from many indul- 
gences and recreations which unmarried men of like 
condition are able to purchase. Where the parental 
afiection is sufficiently strong, or has fewer diffioultiea 
to surmount, a principle of duty may still be wanted to 
direct and regulate its exertions: for otherwise it is apt 
to spend and waste itself in a womanish fon^ieas 
for the person of the child; an improvident attention 
to his presentease and gratification; a pernicious fa- 
cility and compliance with his humours; an excessive 
and superfluous care to provide the externals of hap- 
piness, with little or no attention to the internal sources 
of virtue and satisfaction. Universally, wherever a 
parent's conduct is prompted or directed by a sense 
of duty, there is so much virtue. 

Having premised thus much concerning the place 
which parental duties hold in the scale of human vir- 
tues, we proceed to state and explain the duties them- 
selves. 

When moralists tell us, that parents are bound to 
do all they can for their children, they tell us more 
than is true; for, at that rate, every expense which 
might have been spared, and every profit omitted 
which might have been made, would be criminaL 

The duty of parents has its limits, like other du- 
ties; and admits, if not of perfect precision^ at least 
of rules definite enough for application. 

These rules may be explained under the several 
heads of maintenance, education, and a reasonable 
pronUion for the chUd*s Ju^pmess in respect of out' 
ward condition. 

1. Maintenance, 

The wants of children make it necessary that some 
person maintain them; and, as no one has a right to 
burden others by his act, it follows, that the parents 
toe bound to undertake this charge themselves. Be- 
side this plain inference, the afiection of parents to 
their children, if it be instinctive, and the provision 
which nature has prepared in the person of the mo* 



DVTY or »A&MTfl. 211 

tlier for Uie mistentation of the v^utt^ ooiie«iiuiig th^ 
existence and design of which thete can be no doobt»^ 
are manifest indications of the Divine will. 

Hence we learn the guilt of those who ran awAjr 
from their families, or (what is much the same,) in 
consequence of idleness or drunkenness, throw then 
upon a parish; or who leave them destitute at thek 
death, when, by diligence and frugality, they might 
have laid up a provision for their support: also of 
those who refuse or neglect the care of their bastard 
offspring, abandoning them to a condition in which 
they must either perish or become burdensome to 
others: for the duty of maintenance, like the reason 
upon which it is founded, extends to bastards as well 
as to legitimate children. 

The Christian Scriptures, although they concern 
themselves little with maxims of prudence or economy* 
and much less authorize worldlimindedness or ava^ 
rice, have yet declared in explicit terms their judg- 
ment of the obligation of this duty: — " If any provide 
not for his own, especially for those of his own house- 
hold, he hath denied the faith , and is worse than an 
infidel,*' (1 Tim. v. 8;) he hath disgraced the Chris- 
tian profession, and fallen short in a. duty which even 
infidels acknowledge. 

2. Education. 

Education, in the most extensive sense of the word, 
may comprehend every preparation that is made in 
our youth for the sequel of our lives; and in this sense 

I use it. 

Some such preparation is necessary for children of 
all conditions, because without it they must be mise- 
rable, and probably will be vicious, when they grow 
up, either from want of the means of subsistence, or 
from want of rational and inofiensive occupation. In 
civilized life every thing is effected by art and skill. 
Whence a person who is provided with neither (and 
neither can be acquired without exercise and instruc- 
tion) will be useless; and he that is useless will ge- 
nerally be at the same time mischievous to the com- 
munity. So that to send an uneducated child mto 
the world is injurious to the rest of mankind; it is 



21S AVTT-or TAUMnr*. 

littie better than to tnrn oat a mad dog era wildbeaa^ 
into the streets. 

In the mferior classes of the comovmity , this prin- 
ciple condemns the neglect of parents, who do not 
inure their children betimes to labour and restraint, 
by proyiding them with apprenticeships, services, or 
other regular employment, but who si^r them to 
waste their youth in idleness and vagrancy, or to be- 
take themselves to some lazy, trifling, and precarious 
calling: for the consequence of having thus tasted 
the sweets of natural hberty, at an age when their 
passion and relish for it are at the highest, is that they 
become incapable, for the remainder of their lives, of 
continued industry, or of persevering attention to any 
thing: spend their time in a miserable struggle be- 
tween the importunity of want and the irksomeness 
of regular application; and are prepared to embrace 
every expedient which presents a hope of supplying 
their necessities without confining them to the plough, 
the loom, the shop, or the counting house. 

In the middle orders of society those parents are 
roost reprehensible, who neither qualify their children 
for a profession, nor enable them to live without one;* 
and those in the highest, who, from indolence, indul- 

gence, or avarice, omit to procure their children those 
beral attainments which are necessary to make them 
useful in the stations to which they are destined. A 
man of fortune, who permits his son to consume the 
season of education in hunting, shooting, or in fre- 
quenting horse races, assemblies, or other unedifying, 
if not vicious diversions, defrauds the community of 
a benefactor, and bequeaths them a nuisance. 

Some, though not the same preparation for the 
sequel of their lives, is necessary for youth of every 
description; and therefore for bastards, as well as for 
children of better expectations. Consequently, they 
yrho leave the education of their bastards to chance^ 



* Amongst the Atheniana, if the parent did not put his 
child into a way of getting a livelihood, the child was not 
bound to make provision for the parent when old and necea* 
sitous. 



DUTY OF PARBMTS. 218 

Contenting theDitelves with making provision for thoir 
subsistence, desert half their duty. 

8. A reasonable provision for the happiness of a 
child, in respect of outward condition, requires three 
things : a situation suited to his habits and reasona- 
ble expectation; a competent provision for the exi- 
gencies of that situation; and a probable security for 
his virtue. 

The first two articles will vary with the condition 
of the parent. A situation somewhat approaching in 
rank and condition to the parent's own; or, where that 
is not practicable, similar to what other parents of 
like condition provide for their children; bounds the 
reasonable, as well as (generally speaking) the actual 
expectations of the child, and therefore contains the 
extent of the parent's obligation. 

Hence, a peasant satis&s his duty who sends out 
his children^ properly instructed for their occupation^ 
to husbandly or to any branch of manufacture. Cler- 
gymen, lawyers, physicians, officers in the army or 
navy, gentlemen possessing moderate fortunes of in- 
heritance, or exercising trade in a large or liberal way^ 
ftre required by the same rule to provide their sons 
with learned professions, commissions in the army or 
navy, places in public offices, or reputable branches 
of merchandise. Providing a child with a situation 
includes a competent supply for the expenses of that 
situation, until the profits of it enable the child to 
support himself. Noblemen and gentlemen of high 
rank and fortune may be bound to transmit an inhe- 
ritance to the representatives of their family, sufficient 
for their support without the aid of a trade or profes- 
sion, to which there is little hope that a youth, who 
has been flattered with other expectations, will apply 
himself with diligence or success. In these parts of 
the world, public opinion has assorted the members 
of the community into four or five general classes, 
each class comprising a great variety of employments 
and professions, the choice of which must be commit- 
ted to the private discretion of the parent.* All that 

* The health and virtue of a child's ftiture life are consid- 
erations so superior to all others, that whatever is likely to 



214 DITTY OF PARBKTi. 

can be expected from parents as a duty, and iheteioPs 
the only rule which a moralist can deliver upon tbe 
subject is, that they endeavour to preserve their chil- 
dren in the eletst in which they are bom, that is to 
say, in which others of similar expectations are ac- 
customed to be placed; and that they be careful to 
confine their hopes and habits of indulgence to objects 
which will continue to be attainable. 

It is an ill judged thrift, in some rich parents, to 
bring up their sons to mean employments, for the 
sake of saving the charge of a more expensive edu- 
cation: for these sons, when they become masters of 
their liberty and fortune, will hardly continue in oc- 



have the smallest influence upon these, deserves the parent^ 
afttentioD. In respect of health, agriculture, and all the ac- 
tive, rural, and out of door employments are to be preferred 
to manufactures and sedentary occupations. In respect of 
virtue, a course of dealings in which the advantage is mutu- 
al, in which the profit on one side is connected with the 
benefit of the other (which is tbe case in trade, and all ser- 
viceable art or labour,) is more favourable to the moral cha- 
racter than callings in which one man's gain is atiother ma&'a 
loss ; in which what you acquire is acquired without equi- 
valent, and parted with in distress : as in gaming, and what- 
ever partakes of gan^ng, and in the predatory profits of war. 
The following distinctions also deserve notice : — A business, 
like a retail trade, in which the profits are small and fi-equent, 
and accruing from the employment, furnishes a moderate and 
constant engagement to the mind, and, so far, suits better 
with the general disposition of mankind than professions 
which are supported by fixed salaries, as stations in the 
chureh, army, navy, revenue, public offices, &c. or wherein 
the profits are made in large sums, by a few great concerns, 
or fortunate adventures ; as in msuiy branches of wholesale 
and foreign merchandise, in which the occupation is neither 
so constant, nor the activity so kept alive by immediate en- 
couragement. For security, manual arts exceed merchan- 
dise, and such as supply the wants of mankind are better 
thaii those which minister to their pleasure. Situations 
which promise an early settlement in • marriage are on 
many accounts to be chosen before those which require a laa- 
ger waiting for a larger establishment. 



DUTY or PARSITTS. 215 

«iipatioii8 by which they think themselves degraded, 
and are seldom qualified for any thing better. 

An attention, in the first place, to the exigencies of 
the children's respective conditions in the world; and 
a regard, in tlvB second place, to their reasonable ex- 
pectations, always postponing the expectations to the 
exigencies, when both cannot be satifitfied; ought to 
guide parents in the disposal of their fortunes after 
their death. And these exigencies and expectations 
must be measured by the standard which custom has 
established: for there is a certain appearance, attend- 
ance, establishment, and mode of living, which custom 
has annexed to the several ranks and orders of civil 
life (and which compose what is called decency,) to- 
gether with a certain society, and particular pleasures, 
belonging to each class: and a young person who is 
withheld from sharing in these for want of fortune, 
can scarcely be said to have a fair chance for happi- 
ness; the indignity and mortification of such a seclu- 
sion being what few tempers can bear, or bear with 
contentment. And as to the second consideration, of 
what a child may reasonably expect from his parent, 
he will expect what he sees all or most others m simi- 
lar circumstances receive; and we can hardly call 
expectations unreasonable, which it is impossible to 
suppress. 

By virtue of this rule, a parent is justified in mak- 
ing a difference between his children, according as 
they stand in greater or less need of the assistance of 
his fortune, in consequence -of the difierence of their 
age or sex, or of the situations in which they are 
placed, or the various success which they have mc^ 
with. . 

On account of the few lucrative employments which 
are left to the female sex, and by consequence the 
little opportunity they have of adding to their income, 
daughters ought to be the particular objects of a pa- 
rent's care and foresight; and as an option of mar- 
riage, from which they can reasonably expect happi- 
ness, is not presented to every woman who deserves 
it, especially in times in which a licentious celibacy 
is in fashion with the men, a father should endeavour 



216 ttvpY ow rAtLKitra, 

to enable hit daug-hten to bad a aiDgfo KA wiA m» 
dependence and decorum, even though he snteraol 
more for that parpoee from the portions of hie tone 
than is tgreeable to modern usaAe, or than they erpeeH* 
. But when the exigencies of tneir aeveralf situation* 
are provided for, and not before, a parent ought tai> 
admit the second consideration, the satisfitction of hie 
children's expectations; and upon that prineifle, to 
prefer the eldest son to the rest, and sons to daogii- 
ters; which constitutes the right, and the wboloriglM:; 
of primogeniture, as well as the only reasoD for the 
preference of one sex to the other. The ptefereneo, 
indeed, of the first-bora has one public good efiect, 
that if the estate were divided equally amonget the 
sons, it would probably make them all idle; whereasy 
by the present rule of descent, it makes only one so; 
which is the less evil of the two. And it must further 
be observed on the part of the sons, that if the rest of 
the community make it a rule to prefer sons to daugfli' 
ters, an individual of that community ought to guide 
himself by the same rule, upon principles of nier» 
equality. For, as the son sufiers by the rule, in the 
fortune he may expect in marriage, it is but leason^^ 
ble that he should receive the wlvantage of it in hie 
own inheritance. Indeed, whatever the rule be, aa to 
the preference of one sex to the other, marriage re» 
stores the equality. And as money is genwally mcwe 
convertible to prcrfit, and more likely to promote in* 
dustry, in the bands of men than of women, the oos* 
torn of this country may properly be complied with 
when it does not interfere with the weightier reaaoB 
explained in the last paragraph. 

The point of the children's actual expectations, to- 
gether with the expediency of subjecting the illidt 
commerce of the sexes to every discouragement whieh 
it can receive, makes the diflbrence between the daime 
of legitimate children and of bastards. But neither 
reason will in any case justify the leaving of bastards 
to the world without provision, education, or profes- 
aion; or, what is more cruel, without the means of 
continuing -in the situation to which the parent has 



mXTT or PARCXTTS. 217 

Introduced them; which last is, to leave them to in- 
evitable misery. 

After the Bret requisite, namely, a provision for the 
exigencies of his situation, is satisfied, a parent may 
diimnish a child's portion, in order to punish any ila* 
grant crime, or to punish contumacy and want of 
filial duty in instances not otherwise criminal: for a 
child who is conscious of bad behaviour, or of con- 
tempt of his parent's will and happiness, cannot rea- 
sonably expect the same instances of his munificence. 

A child's vices may be of that sort, and his vieious 
habits so incorrigible, as to afibrd much the same 
reason for believing that he will waste or misemploy 
the fortune put into his power, as if he were mad or 
idiotish; in which case a parent may treat him as a 
madman or an idiot; that is, may deem it sufficient 
to provide for his support, by an annuity equal to his 
wants and innocent enjoyments, and which he may 
be restrained from alienating. This seems to be tho 
only case in which a disinherison, nearly absolute, is 
justifiable. 

Let not a father hope to excuse an inofficious dis- 
position of his fortune, by alleging, that ** every man 
may do what he will with his- own." All the truth 
which this expression contains is, that his discretion 
is under no control of law; and that his will, however 
capricious, will be valid. This by no means absolves 
his conscience from the obligations of a parent, or im- 
ports that he may neglect, without injustice, the seve- 
ral wants and expectations of his family, in order to 
gratify a whim or pique, or indulge a preference 
founded in no reasonable cUstinction of merit or situa- 
tion. Although in his intercourse with his family, 
and in the lesser endearments of domestic life, a pa- 
rent may not always resist his partiality to a favourite 
child (which, however, should be both avoided and 
concealed, as oflentimes productive of lasting jea- 
lousies and discontents;) yet, when he sits down to 
make^ his will, these tendernesses must give place to 
more manly deliberations. 

A father of a family is bound to adjust his economy 
with a view to these demands upon his fortune; and 

VOL. I. 19 



21S DVtl or PARENTi.' 

until a Bufficiency for these ends is required, or ill 
due time probably will be acquired (for, in human af^ 
fairs, probability ought to content us,) frugality and 
exertions of industry are duties. He is also justified 
in the declining expensive liberality; for, to take from 
those who want, in order to give to those who want, 
adds nothing to the stock of public happines. Thus 
far, therefore, and no father, the plea of " children," 
of " large families," " charity begins at home,'* &e. 
is an excuse for parsimony, and an answer to those 
who solicit our bounty. Beyond this point, as the 
use of riches becomes less, the desire of laying up 
should abate proportionably. The truth is, our chil- 
dren gain not so much as we imagine, in the chance 
of this world's happiness, or even of its external pros- 
perity, by setting out in it with large capitals. Of 
those who have died rich, a great part began with 
little. And, in respect of enjojrment, there is no com- 
parison between a fortune which a man acquires by 
well applied industry, or by a series of successes in 
his business, and one found in his possession, or re- 
ceived from another. 

A principal part of a parent's duty is still behind, 
i]tz. the using of proper precautions and expedients, 
in order to form and preserve his children's virtue. 

To us, who believe that, in one stage or other of 
our existence, virtue will conduct to happiness, and 
vice terminate in misery; and who observe withal, 
that men's virtues and vices are, to a certain degree, 
produced or affected by the management of their 
youth, and the situations in which they are placed; to 
all who attend to these reasons, the obligation to con* 
suit a child's virtue will appear to di&r in nothftig 
from that by which the parent is bound to provide for 
his maintenance or fortune. The . child's interest is 
concerned in the one means of happiness as well as in 
the other; and both means are equally, and almost 
exclusively, in the parent's power. 

For this purpose, the first point to be endeavoured 
after, is to impress upon children the idea of account" 
ublenessy that is, to accustom them to look forward to 
the consequences of their actions in another world; 



9UTY OF PA.BBNTi. 21^ 

whieh can only be brouffbt about by tbe parents visibly 
acting with a view to these consequences themselves. 
Parents, to do them justice> are seldom sparing of 
lessons of virtue and religion; in admonitions which 
cost Uttle, and which profit less; whilst their Example 
exhibits a continual contradiction of what they teach. 
A father, for instance, will, with much solemnity and 
apparent earnestness, warn his son against idleness, 
ezeess in drinking, debauchery, and extravagance^ 
who himself loiters about all day without employment; 
comes home every night drunk; is made infamous in 
hia neighbourhood by some profligate connexion; and 
wastes the fortune which should support, or remain a 
provision for his family, in riot, or luxury, or ostenta- 
tion. Or he will discourse gravely before his chil- 
dren of the obligation and importance of revealed 
leligion, whilst, ihey see the most frivolous and often- 
times feigned excuses detain him from its reasonable 
and solemn ordinances* Or he will set before them, 
perhaps, the supreme and tremendous authority of 
Almignty Grod; that such a Being ought not to be 
named, or even thought upon, without sentiments of 
piofound awe and veneration. This may be the lec- 
ture he delivers to bis family one hour; when the 
next, if an occasion arise to excite his anger, his mirth, 
or his surprise, they will hear him treat the name of 
the Deity with the most irreverent profanation, and 
«port with the terms and denunciations of the Christian 
religion, as if they were the language of some ridicu- 
lous and long exploded superstition. Now, even a 
child is not to be imposed upon by such mockery. He 
sees through the grimace of this counterfeited concern 
for virtue. He discovers that his parent is acting a 
part; and receives his admonitions as he would hear 
the same m«i^im« &i^m the mouth of a player. And 
when once this opinion has taken possession of the 
child's mind, it has a fatal effect upon the parent's 
influence in all subjects; even those, in wnich he 
himself may be sincere and convinced. Whereas a 
nlent, but observable regard to the duties of religioii> 
in the parent's own behaviour, will take a sure and 
gradual hold of the child's disposition, much beyond 



120 DtTTT OF PAKKlTTt. 

fonnal TOpfoo& a&d chidingB, whi^h, bmng genenliyr 
prompted by some present proyocation, diflcover note 
of anger than of principle, and are always received 
with a temporary alienation and diegnst. 

A good parent's first care is to be virtuous himself; 
his second, to make his virtues as easy and engaging 
to those about him as their nature will admit. Yirtne 
itself oflfends, when coupled with forbidding mannei& 
And some virtues may be urged to such excess, or 
brought forward so unseasonably, as to discourage and 
repel those who observe and who are acted upon by 
them, instead of exciting an inclination to imitate ana 
adopt them. Young minds are particularly liable to 
these unfortunate impressions. For instance, if a 
father's economy degenerate into a minute and teasing 
parsimony, it is odds but that the son, who has soflfered 
under it, sets out a sworn enemy to all rules of order 
and frugality. If a father's piety be morose, rigoroiB, 
and tinged with mehmcholy, perpetually breaking in 
upon the recreation of his fkmily, and scurfeiting them 
with the language of religion on all occasions, there 
is danger lest the son carry from home with him a 
settled prejudice against seriousness and religion, aa 
inconsistent with every plan of a pleasuraUe life; 
and turn out, when he mixes with the wotM, a chaf 
racter of levity or dissoluteness. 

Something likewise may be d(me towards the cor- 
recting or improving of those early inclinations which 
children discover, by disposing them into otuatioaa 
the least dangerous to their particular characters. 
Thus, I would make choice of a retired life for yvmg 
persons addicted to licentious pleasures; of privato 
fitations for the proud and passionate; of libeial pro* 
fessions, and a town-lifo, for the mercenary and sottiab* 
and not, according to the general practice of parenta, 
send dissolute youths 4nto the army; penurious tem- 
pers to trade; or make a crafty lad an attorney; or 
flatter a vain and haughty temper with elevated names, 
or situations, or callmgs, to which the fashion of the 
world^ has annexed precedency and distinction, but 
in which his disposition, without at all. promotin^f faia 
vnccess, will serve both to multiply, and exasperate his 



IlIGHTS or PAKBHT*. )S21 

^littiipomtnieiits. In the Bame way, that is, with a 
view to the particular frame and tendency of the pupil's 
chameter, I would make choice of a public or private 
education. The reserved, thnid, and indolent will 
have their faculties called forth, and their nerves in* 
Tigorated by a public education. Youths of strong 
•pints and passions will be safer in a private educa- 
tion. At our public schools, as far as I have ob- 
served, more literature is acquired, and more vice; 
quick parts are cultivated, slow ones are neglected. 
Under private tuition, a moderate proficiency in juve- 
nile learning is seldom exceeded, but with more cer- 
tainty attained. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE RIGHTS OF PARENTS. 

The rights of parents result from their duties. If 
it be the duty of a parent to educate his children, to 
form them for a life of usefulness and virtue, to pro- 
vide for them situations needful for their subsistence 
and suited to their circumstances, and to prepare them 
for those situations; he has a right to such authority, 
and in support of that authority to exercise such dis- 
cipline as may be neocssary for these purposes. The 
law of nature acknowledges no other foundation of a 
parent's right over his children, besides his duty to- 
wards them (I speak now of such rights as may be 
enforced by coercion.) This relation confers no pro- 
perty in their persons, or natural dominion over them, 
as is commonly supposed. 

Since it is, in general, necessary to determine the 
destination of children, before they are capable of 
judging of their own happiness, parents have a right 
to elect professions for them. 

As the mother herself owes obedience to the father. 
Tier authority must submit to his. In a competition, 
therefore, of commands, the father is to be obeyed* 

VOL I. 19* 



flit miasTt or vARiNTf. 

Ja 0ue of the death of either, the authority, as well wi 
duty, of both parents, devolves upon the survivw. 

These rig^hts, always following the duty, belong 
likewise to guardians; and so much of them as is 
delegated by the parents or guardians belongs to 
tutors, schoolmasters, &c. 

From this principle, " that the rights of parents 
result from their duty,*' it follows that parents have 
no natural right over the lives of their children, as was 
absurdly allowed to Roman fathers; nor any to exer- 
cise unpitofitable severities; nor to command the com- 
mission of crimes: for these rights can never be 
wanted for the purpose of a parent's duty. 

Nor, for the same reason, have parents any right to 
sell their children into slavery. Upon which, by the 
way, we may observe, that the children of slaves are 
not, by the law of nature, bom slaves; for, as the 
master's right is derived to him through the parent, 
it can never be greater than the parent's own. 

Hence also it appears, that parents not only pervert, 
^6ut exceed, their just authority, when they cousuH 
their own ambition, interest, or prejudice, at the mani- 
fest expense of their children's happiness. Of which 
abuse of parental power, the following are instances: 
The shuttmg up of daughters and younger sons in nun- 
neries and monasteries, in order to preserve entire the 
estate and dignity of the family; or the using of any 
arts, either of kindness or unkindness, to induce them 
to make choice of this way of hfe themselves; or, in 
countries where the clergy are prohibited from mar- 
riage, putting sons into the church for the same end, 
who are never likely either to do or receive any good 
in it, sufficient to compensate for this sacrifice; the 
urging of children to marriages from which they are 
averse, with the view of exalting or enriching the 
family, or for the sake of connecting estates, parties, 
or interests; or the opposing of a marriage, in which 
the child would probably find his happiness, from a 
motive of pride, or avarice, or family hostility, or per- 
sonal pique. 



BUTT or CKILDKSSr. MS 

CHAPTER XL 

THE DUTY or CHILDKEN. 

^ 

The 1>uty of Children may be considered, 

1. During childhood. 

2. After thej have attained to manhood, but con- 
tinue in their father's iamily. 

8. After they have attained to manhood, and have 
left their father's family. 

1. During childhQod, 

Children must be supposed to have attained to some 
degree of discretion before they are capable of any 
duty. Thoro is an interval of eight or nine years 
betMreen the dawning and the maturity of reason, in 
which it is necessary to subject the inclination of chil- 
dren to many restraints, and direct their application 
to many employments, of the tendency and use of 
which they cannot judge; for which cause, the sub- 
mission of children during this period must be ready 
and implicit, with an exception, however, of any ma- 
nijfest crime which may be commanded them. 

2. After they have attained ta manhood, but con- 
Unue in their father* s family. 

If children, when they are grown up, voluntarily 
continue members of their father's family, they are 
bound, beside the general duty of gratitude to their 
parents, to observe such regulations of the family as 
the father shall appoint; contribute their labour to 
its support, if required; and confine themselves to 
such expenses as he shall allow. The obligation 
would be the same, if they were admitted into any 
other family, or received support from any other hand. 

8. After they haioe attained to manhood^ and have 
left their father^s family* 

In this state of the relation, the duty to parents is 
simply the duty of gratitude; not different in kind, 
from that which we owe to any other benefator; m 
degree, just so much exceeding other obligations, by 
how much a parent has been a greater beneSictor than 
any other friend. The services and attentions, by 



tt4 mXTV OF CHIXtlHKSK* 

which filial gratitude may be testified, can be compns- 
ed within no enumeration. It will show itself in com- 
pliances with the will of the parents, howeyer contra- 
ry to the child's own taste or judgment, provided it be 
neither criminal, nor totally inconsistent with his hap- 
piness: in a constant endeavour to promote their en- 
joyments, prevent their wishes, and soften their anxie- 
ties, in small matt^n as well as m great; in assisting 
them in their business; in contributing to then- sup- 
port, ease, or better accommodation, when their cir- 
cumstances require it; in affi>rding them our company, 
in perference to more amusing engagements; in wait- 
ing upon their sickness or decrepitude ; in bearing with 
the infirmities of their health or temper, with the 
peevishness and complaints, the unfashionable, negli- 
gent, austere manners, and ofiensive habits, which 
often attend upon advanced years: for where must 
old age find indulgence, if it do not meet with it in the 
piety and partiality of diildren ? 

The most serious contentions between parents and 
their children, are those commonly which relate te 
marriage, or to the choice of a profession. 

A parent has, in no case, a right to destroy his 
child's happiness. If it bo true, therefcnre, that there 
exist such personal and exclusive attachments between 
indviduals of difierent sexes, that the possession of a 
particular man or woman in marriage be really neces- 
sary for the child's happiness; or if it be true, that an 
aversion to a particular profession may be involuntary 
and unconquerable; then it will follow, that parents, 
where this is the case, ought not to urge their autho- 
rity, and that the child is not bound to obey it. 

The point is, to discover how far, in any particular 
instance, this is the case. Whether the fondneatf of 
lovers ever continues with such intensity, and so long, 
that the success of their desires constitutes, or th^ dis^ 
appointment afiects, any considerable portion of their 
happiness, compared with that of theur whole lifii, if 
is difficult to determine: but there can be no difficulty 
in pronouncmg, that not one half of those attachments, 
which young people conceive with so much haste and 
passion, are of this sort. I believe it also to be tnK>, 



wrtr or chilarbit. t2$ 

tliat there ere few averrimw ta a profenien, whieh 
teaolvtion, peneveranee, activity in going about the 
duty of it, and, above all, despair of changing, will 
not subdue; yet there are some such. Wherefore, a 
child who respects his parent's judgment, and is, as he 
ought to be, tender of their happiness, owes, at least, 
so much deference to their will, as to try fairly and 
faithfully, in one case, whether time and absence witt 
not cool an aflfoction which they disapprove; and in 
the other, whether a longer continuance in the pro- 
fession which they have chosen for him may not 
reconcile him to it. The whole depends upon the 
experiment being made on the child's part with sin- 
cerity, and not merely with a design of eempasBing 
his purpose at last, by means of a sitaulated and tem- 

Soratry compliance. It is the nature of love and 
atied, and of all violent affections, to delude the mind 
with a persuasion that we shall alwajrs continue to 
feel them as we feel them at present; we cannot con • 
ceive that thc^ will either change or cease. Expe- 
rience of similar or greater changes in ourselves, or a 
habit of givinff credit to what our parents, or tutors, 
or boolM» teach us, may control this persuasion, other- 
wise H renders youth very untractable: for they see 
clearly and truly, that it is impossible they should be 
happy under the circumstances proposed to them, in 
their present state of mind. After a sincere but in- 
efiectual endeavour, by the dnld, to accommodate hie 
inclination to his parent's pleasure, he ought not to 
suffer in his parent's affection, or in his fortunes. The 
parent, when he has reasonable proof of this, should 
acquiesce: at all events, the child is then at liberty to 
provide for his own happmess. 

Parents have no right to urge their children upon 
marriagee to which they are averse; nor ought, in 
any dbape, to resent the diildren's disobedience to 
euch commands. This is a different case from oppos- 
ii^ a match of inclination, because the child's misery 
is a much more probable consequence; it being easier 
to live without a person that we love, than vdth one 
whom we hate. Add to this, that compulsion in 
maniafe neceHarily leads to prevarication; as the 



316 DUTY or CHILDBIir. 

r«l«ctaiit party pronises an aflection, whieli nefUior 
exifltB, nor is expected to take plaoe; and paronui. 
like all human authority, ceases at the point where 
obedience becomes criminal. 

In the abovementioned, and in all contests between 
parents and children, it is the parent's duty to repi^ 
■ent to the child the consequences of his conduot^ 
and it will be found his best policy to represent tfaem 
with fidelity. It is usual for parents to exaggerate 
these descriptions beyond probability, and by exag*- 
geration to lose all credit with their children; thus, in 
a great measure, defeating their own end. 

Parents are forbidden to interfere, where a trust is 
reposed personally in the son; and where, conse- 
quently, the son was expected, and by virtue of that 
expectation is obliged, to pursue his own Judgment, 
and not that of any other: as is the case with judi- 
cial magistrates in the execution of their office; with 
members of the legislature in their votes; with ele<s 
tors, jwhere preference is to be given to certain ]»!»• 
scribed ^qualifications. The son may assist his own 
judgment by the advice of his father, or of any on* 
whom he chooses to consult; but his own judgment^ 
whether it proceed upon knowledge or au&ority, 
ought finally to determine his conduct. 

The duty of children to their parents was thought 
worthy to be made the subiect of one of the Ten Com- 
mandments; and, as sudb, is recognized by Christy 
together with the rest of the moni*precepts of the 
Decalogue, in variousplaces of the GrospeL 

The same Divine l^aclMr's sentiments conoraning 
the relief of indigent parents appear sufficiently firom 
that manly and deserved indignation witD which he 
reprehended the wretched casuistry of the Jewish ex- 
positors, who, under the name of a tradition, had con- ; 
trived a method of evading this duty, by converting, 
or pretending to convert, to the treasury of the temple, 
00 much of their property as their dvtressed parent 
might be entitled by their law to demand. 

Agreeably to this law of Nature and Christianity, 
children are, hy the law of England, bound to siq>- 
port» as well their immediate parents, as their grand- 



DVTT or CHII<OREK. 227 

fafther and grandmother, or remoter ancestors, who 
stand in need of support. 

Obedienee to parents is enjoined by St. Paul to the 
Ephesians, " Children, obey your parents in the Lord, 
iw this is right;*' and to the Colossians, "Children, 
obey your parents in ^11 things, for this is well pleas* 
ing unto the Lord.'** 

By the Jewish law, disobedience to parents was in 
some extreme cases capital. Deut. xxi. 18. 



* Upon which two phraaes, " this is right," and, ** for thia 
is well pleasing unto the Lord," being uaed by St. Paul in 
a aenae perfecuy parallel, we may observe, that moral recti* 
tude and conformity to the Divine will were, in his appro 
hension, the same. 



I 



f