INQUIRY 


INTO 


THE    HUMAN    MIND, 


ON  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF 


COMMON    SENSE. 


BY 

THOMAS  REID,  D.D. 

PROFESSOR  OF  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW. 


The  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  them  understanding. — Jab. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  THOMAS  TEGG,  CHEAPSIDE; 

(i.  AND  J.  ROBINSON;   G.  OFFOR  ;    AND  J.  EVANS  AM)  CO.  I    ALSO, 
R.  GRIFFIN  AND  CO.  GLASGOW;   AND  J.  CUMMING,  UL'BLIN. 

1823. 


.  CUStttingt)am,  College  I?ou0e, 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA 
gANTA  BARBARA 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Sect.  P»g« 

1.  THE  Importance  of  the  Subject,  and  the  Means 

of  prosecuting  it        1 

2.  The  Impediments  to  our  Knowledge  of  the  Mind .       3 

3.  The  present  State  of  this  Part  of  Philosophy.    Of 

Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and  Locke  ...       7 

4.  Apology  for  those  Philosophers 10 

5.  Of  Bishop   Berkeley — the  Treatise   of  Human 

Nature — and  of  Scepticism 12 

6.  Of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature 14 

7.  The  System  of  all  these  Authors  is  the  same,  and 

leads  to  Scepticism 16 

8.  We  ought  not  to  despair  of  a  better 17 

CHAP.  II. 

OF   SMELLING. 

1.  The  Order  of  Proceeding.     Of  the  Medium  and 

Organ  of  Smell 19 

2.  The  Sensation  considered  abstractly       ....     20 

3.  Sensation  and  Remembrance  natural  Principles  of 

Belief    .     .  22 


iv  CONTENTS. 

.Sect.  Page 

4.  Judgment  and  Belief  in  some  Cases  precede  sim- 

ple Apprehension 24 

5.  Two  Theories  of  the  Nature  of  Belief  refuted. 

Conclusions  from  what  hath  been  said  ...     25 

6.  Apology  for  metaphysical  Absurdities.     Sensa- 

tions without  a  Sentient,  a  Consequence  of 
the  Theory  of  Ideas.  Consequences  of  this 
strange  Opinion  28 

7.  The  Conception  and  Belief  of  a  sentient  Being,  or 

Mind,  is  suggested  by  our  Constitution.  The 
Notion  of  Relations  not  always  got  by  com- 
paring the  related  Ideas 33 

8.  There  is  a  Quality  or  Virtue  in  Bodies,  which  we 

call  their  Smell.  How  this  is  connected  in 
the  Imagination  with  the  Sensation  ....  36 

O 

9.  That  there  is  a  Principle  in  Human  Nature,  from 

which  the  Notion  of  this,  as  well  as  all  other 
natural  Virtues  or  Causes,  is  derived    ...     38 
10.  Whether   in   Sensation  the   Mind  is   active   or 

passive? 43 


CHAP.  III. 

OF  TASTING 45 

CHAP.  IV. 

OF   HEARING. 

1.  Variety  of  Sounds.     Their  Place  and  Distance 

learned  by  Custom,  without  Reasoning     .     .     49 

2.  Of  natural  Language 51 


CONTENTS.  V 

CHAP.  V. 

OF  TOUCH. 

Sect.  >    Page 

1.  Of  Heat  and  Cold .  55 

2.  Of  Hardness  and  Softness        57 

3.  Of  Natural  Signs 61 

4.  Of  Hardness  and  other  primary  Qualities    ...  64 

5.  Of  Extension 66 

6.  Of  Extension 69 

J7.  Of  the  Existence  of  a  material  World     ....  72 

8.  Of  the  Systems  of  Philosophers  concerning  the 

Senses 79 

CHAP.  VI. 

OF  SEEING. 

1.  The  Excellence  and  Dignity  of  this  Faculty  .     .     84 

2.  Sight  discovers  almost  nothing  which  the  Blind 

may  not  comprehend.     The  Reason  of  this    .     86 

3.  Of  the  visible  Appearance  of  Objects  ....     91 

4.  That  Colour  is  a  Quality  of  Bodies,  not  a  Sensa- 

tion of  the  Mind        94 

5.  An  Inference  from  the  preceding 97 

6.  That  none  of  our  Sensations  are  Resemblances  of 

any  of  the  Qualities  of  Bodies 101 

7.  Of  visible  Figure  and  Extension 107 

8.  Some    Queries    concerning    visible    Figure    an- 

swered   Ill 

•    9.  Of  the  Geometry  of  Visibles 117 

10.  Of  the  parallel  Motion  of  the  Eyes        ....  128 

11.  Of  our  seeing  Objects  erect  by  inverted  Images  .  132 

12.  The  same  Subject  continued 138 

A2 


VI  CONTENTS. 

Sect.  pgge 

13.  Of  seeing  Objects  single  with  Two  Eyes  .     .     .  153 

14.  Of  the  Laws  of  Vision  in  brute  Animals   .     .     .161 
1-5.  Squinting  considered  hypothetically       ....  164 

1 6.  Facts  relating  to  Squinting 175 

17.  Of  the  Effect  of  Custom  in  seeing  Objects  single  178 

18.  Of  Dr.  Porterfield's  Account  of  single  and  double 

Vision 185 

19.  Of  Dr.  Briggs's  Theory,  and  Sir  Isaac  Newton's 

Conjecture  on  this  Subject 189 

20.  Of  Perception  in  general 199- 

•21.  Of  the  Process  of  Nature  in  Perception    .     .     .  207 

22.  Of  the  Signs  by  which  we  learn  to  perceive  Dis- 

tance from  the  Eye 213 

23.  Of  the  Signs  used  in  other  acquired  Perceptions  224 

24.  Of  the  Analogy   between  Perception  and   the 

Credit  we  give  to  Human  Testimony    .     .     .  227 

CHAP.  VII. 

CONCLUSION. 

Containing  Reflections  upon  the  Opinions  of  Philo- 
sophers on  this  Subject 244 


TO 
THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE 

JAMES, 
EARL  OF  FINDLATER  AND  SEAFIELD, 

CHANCELLOR  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OLD  ABERDEEN. 

MY  LORD, 

THOUGH  I  apprehend  that  there  are  things  new,  and 
of  some  importance,  in  the  following  Inquiry,  it  is  not 
without  timidity  that  I  have  consented  to  the  publica- 
tion of  it.  The  subject  has  been  canvased  by  men  of 
very  great  penetration  and  genius :  for  who  does  not 
acknowledge  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  Locke,  Berke- 
ley, and  Hume,  to  be  such  ?  A  view  of  the  human 
understanding,  so  different  from  that  which  they  have 
exhibited,  will,  no  doubt,  be  condemned  by  many 
without  examination,  as  proceeding  from  temerity  and 
vanity. 

But  I  hope  the  candid  and  discerning  Few,  who  are 
capable  of  attending  to  the  operations  of  their  own 
minds,  will  weigh  deliberately  what  is  here  advanced, 


Vlll  DEDICATION. 

before  they  pass  sentence  upon  it.  To  such  I  appeal, 
as  the  only  competent  judges.  If  they  disapprove,  I 
am  probably  in  the  wrong,  and  shall  be  ready  to  change 
my  opinion  upon  conviction.  If  they  approve,  the 
Many  will  at  least  yield  to  their  authority,  as  they 
always  do. 

However  contrary  my  notions  are  to  those  of  the 
writers  I  have  mentioned,  their  speculations  have  been 
of  great  use  to  me,  and  seem  even  to  point  out  the 
road  which  I  have  taken :  and  your  Lordship  knows, 
that  the  merit  of  useful  discoveries  is  sometimes  not 
more  justly  due  to  those  that  have  hit  upon  them,  than 
to  others  that  have  ripened  them,  and  brought  them  to 
the  birth. 

I  acknowledge,  my  Lord,  that  I  never  thought  of 
calling  in  question  the  principles  commonly  received 
with  regard  to  the  human  understanding,  until  the 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature  was  published  in  the  year 
1739.  The  ingenious  author  of  that  treatise,  upon  the 
principles  of  Locke,  who  was  no  sceptic,  hath  built  a 
system  of  scepticism,  which  leaves  no  ground  to  be- 
lieve any  one  thing  rather  than  its  contrary.  His  rea- 
soning appears  to  me  to  be  just :  there  "was  therefore  a 
necessity  to  call  in  question  the  principles  upon  which 
it  was  founded,  or  to  admit  the  conclusion. 

But  can  any  ingenuous  mind  admit  this  sceptical 
system  without  reluctance?  I  truly  could  not,  my 
Lord:  for  I  am  persuaded,  that  absolute  scepticism  is 
not  more  destructive  of  the  faith  of  a  Christian  than  of 


DEDICATION.  IX 

the  science  of  a  philosopher,  and  of  the  prudence  of  a 
man  of  common  understanding.  I  am  persuaded  that 
the  unjust  live  by  faith  as  well  as  the  just ;  that,  if  all 
belief  could  be  laid  aside,  piety,  patriotism,  friendship, 
parental  affection,  and  private  virtue,  would  appear  as 
ridiculous  as  knight-errantry ;  and  that  the  pursuits  of 
pleasure,  of  ambition,  and  of  avarice,  must  be  grounded 
upon  belief,  as  well  as  those  that  are  honourable  or  vir- 
tuous. 

The  day-labourer  toils  at  his  work,  in  the  belief  that 
he  shall  receive  his  wages  at  night ;  and  if  he  had  not 
this  belief,  he  would  not  toil.  We  may  venture  to  say, 
that  even  the  author  of  this  sceptical  system  wrote  it  in 
the  belief  that  it  should  be  read  and  regarded.  I  hope 
he  wrote  it  in  the  belief  also,  that  it  would  be  useful  to 
mankind  :  and  perhaps  it  may  prove  so  at  last.  For  I 
conceive  the  sceptical  writers  to  be  a  set  of  men,  whose 
business  it  is  to  pick  holes  in.  the  fabric  of  knowledge 
wherever  it  is  weak  and  faulty ;  and  when  these  places 
are  properly  repaired,  the  whole  building  becomes  more 
firm  and  solid  than  it  was  formerly. 

For  my  own  satisfaction,  1  entered  into  a  serious 
examination  of  the  principles  upon  which  this  sceptical 
system  is  built;  and  was  not  a  little  surprised  to  find 
that  it  leans  with  its  whole  weight  upon  an  hypothesis 
which  is  ancient  indeed,  and  hath  been  very  generally 
received  by  philosophers,  but  of  which  I  could  find  no 
solid  proof.  The  hypothesis  I  mean  is,  That  nothing 
is  perceived  but  what  is  in  the  mind  which  perceives 
it :  That  we  do  not  really  perceive  things  that  are 


X  DEDICATION. 

external,  but  only  certain  images  and  pictures  of  them 
imprinted  upon  the  mind,  which  are  called  impressions 
and  ideas. 

If  this  be  true;  supposing  certain  impressions  and 
ideas  to  exist  in  my  mind,  I  cannot,  from  their  existence, 
infer  the  existence  of  any  thing  else :  my  impressions 
and  ideas  are  the  only  existences  of  which  I  can  have 
any  knowledge  or  conception  ;  and  they  are  such  fleet- 
ing and  transitory  beings  that  they  can  have  no  ex- 
istence at  all,  any  longer  than  I  am  conscious  of  them. 
So  that,  upon  this  hypothesis,  the  whole  universe  about 
me,  bodies  and  spirits,  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  earth, 
friends  and  relations,  all  things  without  exception, 
which  I  imagined  to  have  a  permanent  existence,  whe- 
ther I  thought  of  them  or  not,  vanish  at  once ; 

And,  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision, 
Leave  not  a  track  behind. 

I  thought  it  unreasonable,  my  Lord,  upon  the  autho- 
rity of  philosophers,  to  admit  an  hypothesis  which,  in 
my  opinion,  overturns  all  philosophy,  all  religion  and 
virtue,  and  all  common  sense  :  and  finding  that  all  the 
systems  concerning  the  human  understanding  which  I 
•was  acquainted  with,  were  built  upon  this  hypothesis, 
I  resolved  to  inquire  into  this  subject  anew,  without 
regard  to  any  hypothesis. 

What  I  now  humbly  present  to  your  Lordship  is 
the  fruit  of  this  inquiry,  so  far  only  as  it  regards  the 
Five  Senses;  in  which  I  claim  no  other  merit  than 


DEDICATION.  XI 

that  of  having  given  great  attention  to  the  operations 
of  my  own  mind,  and  of  having  expressed,  with  all  the 
perspicuity  I  was  able,  what  I  conceive  every  man, 
who  gives  the  same  attention,  will  feel  and  perceive. 
The  productions  of  imagination  require  a  genius  which 
soars  above  the  common  rank ;  but  the  treasures  of 
knowledge  are  commonly  buried  deep,  and  may  be 
reached  by  those  drudges  who  can  dig  with  labour  and 
patience,  though  they  have  not  wings  to  fly.  The  ex- 
periments that  were  to  be  made  in  this  investigation 
suited  me,  as  they  required  no  other  expense  but  that 
of  time  and  attention,  which  I  could  bestow.  The 
leisure  of  an  academical  life,  disengaged  from  the  pur- 
suits of  interest  and  ambition ;  the  duty  of  my  profes- 
sion, which  obliged  me  to  give  prelections  on  these 
subjects  to  the  youth;  and  an  early  inclination  to 
speculations  of  this  kind, — have  enabled  me,  as  I  flatter 
myself,  to  give  a  more  minute  attention  to  the  subject 
of  this  Inquiry,  than  has  been  given  before. 

My  thoughts  upon  this  subject  were,  a  good  many 
years  ago,  put  together  in  another  form,  for  the  use  of 
my  pupils,  and  afterwards  were  submitted  to  the  judg- 
ment of  a  private  philosophical  society,  of  which  I 
have  the  honour  to  be  a  member.  A  great  part  of  this 
Inquiry  was  honoured  even  by  your  Lordship's  perusal. 
And  the  encouragement  which  you,  my  Lord,  and 
others,  whose  friendship  is  my  boast,  and  whose  judg- 
ment I  reverence,  were  pleased  to  give  me,  counter- 
balanced my  timidity  and  diffidence,  and  determined  me 
to  offer  it  to  the  public. 


Xll  DEDICATION. 

If  it  appears  to  your  Lordship  to  justify  the  com- 
mon sense  and  reason  of  mankind,  against  the  sceptical 
subtilties  which,  in  this  age,  have  endeavoured  to  put 
them  out  of  countenance;  if  it  appears  to  throw  any 
new  light  upon  one  of  the  noblest  parts  of  the  divine 
workmanship  ;  your  Lordship's  respect  for  the  arts  and 
sciences,  and  your  attention  to  every  thing  which  tends 
to  the  improvement  of  them,  as  well  as  to  every  thing- 
else  that  contributes  to  the  felicity  of  your  country, 
leave  me  no  room  to  doubt  of  your  favourable  accep- 
tance of  this  essay,  as  the  fruit  of  my  industry  in  a  pro- 
fession wherein  I  was  accountable  to  your  Lordship ; 
and  as  a  testimony  of  the  great  esteem  and  respect 
wherewith  I  have  the  honour  to  be, 

MY  LORD, 
your  Lordship's  most  obliged, 

and  most  devoted  servant, 

THO.  REID. 


AN 

INQUIRY 

INTO 

THE   HUMAN   MIND. 


CHAP.  I. 
INTRODUCTION. 


SECT.  L 

The  Importance  of  the  Subject,  and  the  Means  of 
Prosecuting  it. 

THE  fabric  of  the  human  Mind  is  curious  and  wonderful, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  human  body.  The  faculties  of  the 
one  are  with  no  less  wisdom  adapted  to  their  several  ends 
than  the  organs  of  the  other.  Nay  it  is  reasonable  to 
think,  that  as  the  mind  is  a  nobler  work,  and  of  a  higher 
order  than  the  body,  even  more  of  the  wisdom  and  skill  of 
the  Divine  Architect  hath  been  employed  in  its  structure. 
It  is  therefore  a  subject  highly  worthy  of  inquiry  on  its 
own  account,  but  still  more  worthy  on  account  of  the  ex- 
tensive influence  which  the  knowledge  of  it  hath  over 
every  other  branch  of  science. 

In  the  arts  and  sciences  which  have  least  connexion 
with  the  mind,  its  faculties  are  the  engines  which  we  must 
employ ;  and  the  better  we  understand  their  nature  and 
use,  their  defects  and  disorders,  the  more  skilfully  we  shall 

B 


2  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

apply  them,  and  with  the  greater  success.  But  in  the 
noblest  arts,  the  mind  is  also  the  subject  upon  which  we 
operate.  The  painter,  the  poet,  the  actor,  the  orator,  the 
moralist,  and  the  statesman  attempt  to  operate  upon  the 
mind  in  different  ways  and  for  different  ends ;  and  they 
succeed  according  as  they  touch  properly  the  strings  of 
the  human  frame.  Nor  can  their  several  arts  ever  stand 
on  a  solid  foundation,  or  rise  to  the  dignity  of  science, 
until  they  are  built  on  the  principles  of  the  human  consti- 
tution. 

Wise  men  now  agree,  or  ought  to  agree  in  this,  that 
there  is  but  one  way  to  the  knowledge  of  Nature's  works  ; 
the  way  of  observation  and  experiment.  By  our  consti- 
tution, we  have  a  strong  propensity  to  trace  particular  facts 
and  observations  to  general  rules,  and  to  apply  such  general 
rules  to  account  for  other  effects,  or  to  direct  us  in  the 
production  of  them.  This  procedure  of  the  understanding- 
is  familiar  to  every  human  creature  in  the  common  affairs 
of  life,  and  it  is  the  only  one  by  which  any  real  discovery 
in  philosophy  can  be  made. 

The  man  who  first  discovered  that  cold  freezes  water, 
and  that  heat  turns  it  into  vapour,  proceeded  on  the  same 
general  principles,  and  in  the  same  method,  by  which 
Newton  discovered  the  law  of  gravitation  and  the  pro- 
perties of  light.  His  regulce  philosophandi  are  maxims 
of  common  sense,  and  are  practised  every  day  in  common 
life;  and  he  who  philosophizes  by  other  rules,  either  con- 
cerning the  material  system  or  concerning  the  mind,  mis- 
takes his  aim. 

Conjectures  and  theories  are  the  creatures  of  men,  and 
will  always  be  found  very  unlike  the  creatures  of  God. 
If  we  would  know  the  works  of  God,  we  must  consult 
themselves  with  attention  and  humility,  without  daring  to 
add  any  thing  of  ours  to  what  they  declare.  A  just  in- 
terpretation of  nature  is  the  only  sound  and  orthodox  phi- 
losophy :  whatever  we  add  of  our  own  is  apocryphal  and 
of  no  authority. 

All  our  curious  theories  of  the  formation  of  the  earth, 
of  the  generation  of  animals,  of  the  origin  of  natural  and 


SECT.  I.]  INTRODUCTION.  3 

moral  evil,  so  far  as  they  go  beyond  a  just  induction  from 
facts,  are  vanity  and  folly,  no  less  than  the  vortices  of 
Des  Cartes,  or  the  Archaeus  of  Paracelsus.  Perhaps 
the  philosophy  of  the  mind  hath  been  no  less  adulterated 
by  theories  than  that  of  the  material  system.  The  theory 
of  ideas  is  indeed  very  ancient,  and  hath  been  very  uni- 
versally received ;  but  as  neither  of  these  titles  can  give  it 
authenticity,  they  ought  not  to  screen  it  from  a  free  and 
candid  examination;  especially  in  this  age,  when  it  hath 
produced  a  system  of  scepticism,  that  seems  to  triumph 
over  all  science,  and  even  over  the  dictates  of  common 
sense. 

Ail  that  we  know  of  the  body  is  owing  to  anatomical 
dissection  and  observation,  and  it  must  be  by  an  anatomy 
of  the  mind  that  we  can  discover  its  powers  and  principles. 


SECT.  II. 

The  Impediments  to  our  Knowledge  of  the  Mind. 

BUT  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  this  kind  of  anatomy 
is  much  more  difficult  than  the  other ;  and  therefore  it 
needs  not  seem  strange,  that  mankind  have  made  less 
progress  in  it.  To  attend  accurately  to  the  operations  of 
our  minds,  and  make  them  an  object  of  thought,  is  no  easy 
matter,  even  to  the  contemplative,  and  to  the  bulk  of  man- 
kind is  next  to  impossible. 

An  anatomist  who  hath  happy  opportunities,  may  have 
access  to  examine  with  his  own  eyes,  and  with  equal 
accuracy,  bodies  of  all  different  ages,  sexes,  and  condi- 
tions ;  so  that  what  is  defective,  obscure,  or  preternatural 
in  one  "may  be  discerned  clearly,  and  in  its  most  perfect 
state,  in  another.  But  the  anatomist  of  the  mind  cannot 
have  the  same  advantage.  It  is  his  own  mind  only  that 
he  can  examine  with  any  degree  of  accuracy  and  distinct- 
ness. This  is  the  only  subject  he  can  look  into.  He 
may,  from  outward  signs,  collect  the  operations  of  other 
minds ;  but  these  signs  are  for  the  most  part  ambiguous, 

B2 


4  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I, 

and  must  be  interpreted  by  what  he  perceives  within 
himself. 

So  that  if  a  philosopher  could  delineate  to  us,  distinctly 
and  methodically,  all  the  operations  of  the  thinking  prin- 
ciple within  him,  which  no  man  was  ever  able  to  do,  this 
would  be  only  the  anatomy  of  one  particular  subject; 
which  would  be  both  deficient  and  erroneous,  if  applied  to 
human  nature  in  general.  For,  a  little  reflection  may 
satisfy  us,  that  the  difference  of  minds  is  greater  than  that 
of  any  other  beings  which  we  consider  as  of  the  same 
species. 

Of  the  various  powers  and  faculties  we  possess,  there 
are  some  which  nature  seems  both  to  have  planted  and 
reared,  so  as  to  have  left  nothing  to  human  industry. 
Such  are  the  powers  which  we  have  in  common  with  the 
brutes,  and  which  are  necessary  to  the  preservation  of  the 
individual  or  the  continuance  of  the  kind.  There  are 
other  powers,  of  which  nature  hath  only  planted  the  seeds 
in  our  minds,  but  hath  left  the  rearing  of  them  to  human 
culture.  It  is  by  the  proper  culture  of  these  that  we  are 
capable  of  all  those  improvements  in  intellectuals,  in  taste, 
and  in  morals,  which  exalt  and  dignify  human  nature ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  neglect  or  perversion  of  them 
makes  it  degeneracy  and  corruption. 

The  two-legged  animal  that  eats  of  nature's  dainties 
what  his  taste  or  appetite  craves,  and  satisfies  his  thirst  at 
the  crystal  fountain,  who  propagates  his  kind  as  occasion 
and  lust  prompt,  repels  injuries,  and  takes  alternate  labour 
and  repose,  is,  like  a  tree  in  the  forest,  purely  of  nature's 
growth.  But  this  same  savage  hath  within  him  the  seeds 
of  the  logician,  the  man  of  taste  and  breeding,  the  orator, 
the  statesman,  the  man  of  virtue,  and  the  saint;  which 
seeds,  though  planted  in  his  mind  by  nature,  yet,  through 
want  of  culture  and  exercise,  must  lie  for  ever  buried,  and 
be  hardly  perceivable  by  himself  or  by  others. 

The  lowest  degree  of  social  life  will  bring  to  light  some 
of  those  principles  which  lay  hid  in  the  savage  state :  and 
according  to  his  training,  and  company,  and  manner  of  life, 
some  of  them,  either  by  their  native  vigour  or  by  the  force 


SECT.  II.]  INTRODUCTION.  5 

of  culture,  will  thrive  and  grow  up  to  great  perfection ; 
others  will  be  strangely  perverted  from  their  natural  form ; 
and  others  checked,  or  perhaps  quite  eradicated. 

This  makes  human  nature  so  various  and  multiform  in 
the  individuals  that  partake  of  it,  that,  in  point  of  morals 
and  intellectual  endowments,  it  fills  up  all  that  gap  which 
we  conceive  to  be  between  brutes  and  devils  below  and 
the  celestial  orders  above ;  and  such  a  prodigious  diversity 
of  minds  must  make  it  extremely  difficult  to  discover  the 
common  principles  of  the  species. 

The  language  of  philosophers,  with  regard  to  the  original 
faculties  of  the  mind,  is  so  adapted  to  the  prevailing  sys- 
tem that  it  cannot  fit  any  other ;  like  a  coat  that  fits  the 
man  for  whom  it  was  made,  and  shows  him  to  advantage, 
which  yet  will  sit  very  awkward  upon  one  of  a  different 
make,  although  perhaps  as  handsome  and  as  well  propor- 
tioned. It  is  hardly  possible  to  make  any  innovation  in 
our  philosophy  concerning  the  mind  and  its  operations, 
without  using  new  words  and  phrases,  or  giving  a  different 
meaning  to  those  that  are  received ;  a  liberty  which,  even 
when  necessary,  creates  prejudice  and  misconstruction, 
and  which  must  wait  the  sanction  of  time  to  authorize  it. 
For,  innovations  in  language,  like  those  in  religion  and 
government,  are  always  suspected  and  disliked  by  the 
many,  till  use  hath  made  them  familiar  and  prescription 
have  given  them  a  title. 

If  the  original  perceptions  and  motions  of  the  mind 
were  to  make  their  appearance  single  and  unmixed,  as  we 
first  received  them  from  the  hand  of  nature,  one  accus- 
tomed to  reflection  would  have  less  difficulty  in  tracing 
them  ;  but  before  we  are  capable  of  reflection,  they  are  so 
mixed,  compounded,  and  decompounded  by  habits,  asso- 
ciations, and  abstractions,  that  it  is  hard  to  know  what 
they  were  originally.  The  mind  may  in  this  respect  be 
compared  to  an  apothecary  or  a  chemist,  whose  materials 
indeed  are  furnished  by  nature;  but  for  the  purposes  of 
his  art,  he  mixes,  compounds,  dissolves,  evaporates,  and 
sublimes  them,  till  they  put  on  a  quite  different  appear- 
ance ;  so  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  know  what  they  were 


6  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

at  first,  and  much  more  to  bring  them  back  to  their  original 
and  natural  form.  And  this  work  of  the  mind  is  not 
carried  on  by  deliberate  acts  of  mature  reason,  which  we 
might  recollect,  but  by  means  of  instincts,  habits,  associa- 
tions, and  other  principles,  which  operate  before  we  come 
to  the  use  of  reason ;  so  that  it  is  extremely  difficult  for 
the  mind  to  return  upon  its  own  footsteps,  and  trace  back 
those  operations  which  have  employed  it  since  it  first 
began  to  think  and  to  act. 

Could  we  obtain  a  distinct  and  full  history  of  all  that 
hath  passed  in  the  mind  of  a  child,  from  the  beginning  of 
life  and  sensation,  till  it  grows  up  to  the  use  of  reason; 
how  its  infant  faculties  began  to  work,  and  how  they 
brought  forth  and  ripened  all  the  various  notions,  opinions, 
and  sentiments  which  we  find  in  ourselves  when  we  come 
to  be  capable  of  reflection ;  this  would  be  a  treasure  of 
natural  history,  which  would  probably  give  more  light  into 
the  human  faculties  than  all  the  systems  of  philosophers 
about  them  since  the  beginning  of  the  world.  But  it  is  in 
vain  to  wish  for  what  nature  has  not  put  within  the  reach 
of  our  power.  Reflection,  the  only  instrument  by  which 
we  can  discern  the  powers  of  the  mind,  comes  too  late  to 
observe  the  progress  of  nature,  in  raising  them  from  their 
infancy  to  perfection. 

It  must,  therefore,  require  great  caution  and  great  ap- 
plication of  mind,  for  a  man  that  is  grown  up  in  all  the 
prejudices  of  education,  fashion,  and  philosophy,  to  un- 
ravel his  notions  and  opinions,  till  he  finds  out  the  simple 
and  original  principles  of  his  constitution,  of  which  no 
account  can  be  given  but  the  will  of  our  maker.  This 
may  be  truly  called  an  analysis  of  the  human  faculties ; 
and  till  this  is  performed,  it  is  in  vain  we  expect  any  just 
system  of  the  mind ;  that  is,  an  enumeration  of  the  original 
powers  and  laws  of  our  constitution,  and  an  explication 
from  them  of  the  various  phenomena  of  human  nature. 

Success,  in  an  inquiry  of  this  kind,  it  is  not  in  human 
power  to  command ;  but  perhaps  it  is  possible,  by  caution 
and  humility,  to  avoid  error  and  delusion.  The  labyrinth 
may  be  too  intricate,  and  the  thread  too  fine,  to  be  traced 


SECT.  II.]  INTRODUCTION.  7 

through  all  its  windings;  but  jf  we  stop  where  we  can 
trace  it  no  further,  and  secure  the  ground  we  have  gained, 
there  is  no  harm  done ;  a  quicker  eye  may  in  time  trace  it 
further. 

It  is  genius,  and  not  the  want  of  it,  that  adulterates 
philosophy,  and  tills  it  with  error  and  false  theory.  A 
creative  imagination  disdains  the  mean  offices  of  digging 
for  a  foundation,  of  removing  rubbish,  and  carrying  mate- 
rials :  leaving  these  servile  employments  to  the  drudges  in 
science,  it  plans  a  design  and  raises  a  fabric.  Invention 
supplies  materials  where  they  are  wanting,  and  fancy 
adds  colouring  and  every  befitting  ornament.  The  work 
pleases  the  eye,  and  wants  nothing  but  solidity  and  a 
good  foundation.  It  seems  even  to  vie  with  the  works  of 
nature;  till  some  succeeding  architect  blows  it  into  rub- 
bish, and  builds  as  goodly  a  fabric  of  his  own  in  its  place. 
Happily  for  the  present  age,  the  castle-builders  employ 
themselves  more  in  romance  than  in  philosophy.  That  is 
undoubtedly  their  province,  and  in  those  regions  the  off- 
spring of  fancy  is  legitimate ;  but  in  philosophy  it  is  all 
spurious. 


SECT.  III. 

The  present  State  of  this  Part  of  Philosophy. —  Of 
Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and  Locke. 

THAT  our  philosophy  concerning  the  mind  and  its  facul- 
ties is  but  in  a  very  low  state,  may  be  reasonably  conjec- 
tured, even  by  those  who  never  have  narrowly  examined 
it.  Are  there  any  principles,  with  regard  to  the  mind, 
settled  with  that  perspicuity  and  evidence  which  attends 
the  principles  of  mechanics,  astronomy,  and  optics? — 
These  are  really  sciences  built  upon  laws  of  nature  which 
universally  obtain.  What  is  discovered  in  them  is  no 
longer  matter  of  dispute :  future  ages  may  add  to  it,  but, 
till  the  course  of  nature  be  changed,  what  is  already 
established  can  never  be  overturned".  But  when  we  turn 
our  attention  inward,  and  consider  the  phenomena  of 


8  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

human  thoughts,  opinions,  and  perceptions,  and  endeavour 
to  trace  them  to  the  general  laws  and  the  first  principles 
of  our  constitution,  we  are  immediately  involved  in  dark- 
ness and  perplexity. — And  if  common  sense  or  the  prin- 
ciples of  education  happen  not  to  be  stubborn,  it  is  odds 
but  we  end  in  absolute  scepticism. 

Des  Cartes  finding  nothing  established  in  this  part  of 
philosophy,  in  order  to  lay  the  foundation  of  it  deep, 
resolved  not  to  believe  his  own  existence  till  he  should  be 
able  to  give  a  good  reason  for  it.  He  was,  perhaps,  the 
first  that  took  up  such  a  resolution :  but  if  he  could  in- 
deed have  effected  his  purpose,  and  really  become  diffi- 
dent of  his  existence,  his  case  would  have  been  deplorable, 
and  without  any  remedy  from  reason  or  philosophy.  A 
man  that  disbelieves  his  own  existence  is  surely  as  unfit 
to  be  reasoned  with  as  a  man  that  believes  he  is  made  of 
glass.  There  may  be  disorders  in  the  human  frame  that 
may  produce  such  extravagancies ;  but  they  will  never  be 
cured  by  reasoning.  Des  Cartes  indeed  would  make  us 
believe,  that  he  got  out  of  this  delirium  by  this  logical 
argument,  Cogito,  ergo  sum.  But  it  is  evident  he  was  in 
his  senses  all  the  time,  and  never  seriously  doubted  his 
existence.  For  he  takes  it  for  granted  in  this  argument, 
and  proves  nothing  at  all.  I  am  thinking,  says  he,  there- 
fore I  am:  and  is  it  not  as  good  reasoning  to  say,  I  am 
sleeping,  therefore  I  am  ?  or,  I  am  doing  nothing,  there- 
fore I  am  ?  If  a  body  moves  it  must  exist  no  doubt ;  but  if 
it  is  at  rest,  it  must  exist  likewise. 

Perhaps  Des  Cartes  meant  not  to  assume  his  own 
existence  in  this  enthymeme,  but  the  existence  of  thought ; 
and  to  infer  from  that  the  existence  of  a  mind  or  subject 
of  thought.  But  why  did  he  not  prove  the  existence  of 
his  thought?  Consciousness,  it  may  be  said,  vouches 
that.  But  who  is  voucher  of  consciousness  ?  Can  any 
man  prove  that  his  consciousness  may  not  deceive  him  ? 
No  man  can :  nor  can  we  give  a  better  reason  for  trusting 
to  it  than  that  every  man,  while  his  mind  is  sound,  is 
determined  by  the  constitution  of  his  nature,  to  give  im- 
plicit belief  to  it,  and  to  laugh  at  or  to  pity  the  man  who 


SECT.  III.]  INTRODUCTION.  9 

doubts  its  testimony.  And  is  not  every  man  in  his  wits, 
as  much  determined  to  take  his  existence  upon  trust  as  his 
consciousness  ? 

The  other  proposition  assumed  in  this  argument,  That 
thought  cannot  be  without  a  mind  or  subject,  is  liable  to 
the  same  objection :  not  that  it  wants  evidence ;  but  that 
its  evidence  is  no  clearer  nor  more  immediate  than  that 
of  the  proposition  to  be  proved  by  it.  And  taking  all 
these  propositions  together, — I  think, — I  am  conscious, — 
Every  thing  that  thinks  exists, — I  exist, — would  not  every 
sober  man  form  the  same  opinion  of  the  man  who  seri- 
ously doubted  any  one  of  them  ?  And  if  he  was  his  friend, 
would  he  not  hope  for  his  cure  from  physic  and  good 
regimen,  rather  than  from  metaphysic  and  logic  ? 

But  supposing  it  proved,  that  my  thought  and  my  con- 
sciousness must  have  a  subject,  and  consequently  that  I 
exist,  how  do  I  know  that  all  that  train  and  succession  of 
thought  which  I  remember  belong  to  one  subject,  and 
that  the  I  of  this  moment  is  the  very  individual  I  of  yes- 
terday and  of  times  past  ? 

Des  Cartes  did  not  think  proper  to  start  this  doubt :  but 
Locke  has  done  it;  and,  in  order  to  resolve  it,  gravely 
determines  that  personal  identity  consists  in  conscious- 
ness; that  is,  if  you  are  conscious  that  you  did  such  a 
thing  a  twelvemonth  ago,  this  consciousness  makes  you  to 
be  the  very  person  that  did  it.  Now,  consciousness  of 
what  is  past  can  signify  nothing  else  but  a  remembrance 
that  I  did  it.  So  that  Locke's  principle  must  be,  That 
identity  consists  in  remembrance ;  and  consequently  a  man 
must  lose  his  personal  identity  with  regard  to  every  thing 
he  forgets. 

Nor  are  these  the  only  instances  whereby  our  philoso- 
phy concerning  the  mind  appears  to  be  very  fruitful  in  cre- 
ating doubts,  but  very  unhappy  in  resolving  them. 

Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and  Locke  have  all  em- 
ployed their  genius  and  skill  to  prove  the  existence  of  a 
material  world;  and  with  very  bad  success.  Poor  un- 
taught mortals  believe,  undoubtedly,  that  there  is  a  sun, 
moon,  and  stars;  an  earth,  which  we  inhabit;  country, 

B3 


10  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

friends,  and  relations,  which  we  enjoy;  land,  houses,  and 
moveables,  which  we  possess.  But  philosophers,  pitying 
the  credulity  of  the  vulgar,  resolve  to  have  no  faith  but 
what  is  founded  upon  reason.  They  apply  to  philosophy 
to  furnish  them  with  reason  for  the  belief  of  those  things, 
which  all  mankind  have  believed,  without  being  able  to 
give  any  reason  for  it.  And  surely  one  would  expect, 
that,  in  matters  of  such  importance,  the  proof  would  not  be 
difficult:  but  it  is  the  most  difficult  thing  in  the  world. 
For  these  three  great  men,  with  the  best  good  will,  have 
not  been  able,  from  all  the  treasures  of  philosophy,  to  draw 
one  argument,  that  is  fit  to  convince  a  man  that  can  reason, 
of  the  existence  of  any  one  thing  without  him.  Admired 
Philosophy !  daughter  of  light !  parent  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge !  if  thou  art  she  !  surely  thou  hast  not  yet  arisen 
upon  the  human  mind,  nor  blessed  us  with  more  of  thy 
rays  than  are  sufficient  to  shed  a  "  darkness  visible" 
upon  the  human  faculties,  and  to  disturb  that  repose  and 
security  which  happier  mortals  enjoy,  who  never  ap- 
proached thine  altar  nor  felt  thine  influence !  But  if 
indeed  thou  hast  not  power  to  dispel  those  clouds  and 
phantoms  which  thou  hast  discovered  or  created,  withdraw 
this  penurious  and  malignant  ray :  I  despise  Philosophy 
and  renounce  its  guidance :  let  my  soul  dwell  with  Com- 
mon Sense. 


SECT.  IV. 

Apology  for  those  Philosophers. 

BUT  instead  of  despising  the  dawn  of  light,  we  ought 
rather  to  hope  for  its  increase :  instead  of  blaming  the  phi- 
losophers I  have  mentioned,  for  the  defects  and  blemishes 
of  their  system,  we  ought  rather  to  honour  their  memories, 
as  the  first  discoverers  of  a  region  in  philosophy  formerly 
unknown;  and,  however  lame  and  imperfect  the  system 
may  be,  they  have  opened  the  way  to  future  discoveries, 
and  are  justly  entitled  to  a  great  share  in  the  merit  of 
them.  They  have  removed  an  infinite  deal  of  rust  and 


SECT.  IV.]  INTRODUCTION.  11 

rubbish,  collected  in  the  ages  of  scholastic  sophistry,  which 
had  obstructed  the  way.  They  have  put  us  in  the  right 
road,  that  of  experience  and  accurate  reflection.  They 
have  taught  us  to  avoid  the  snares  of  ambiguous  and  ill 
defined  words,  and  have  spoken  and  thought  upon  this 
subject  with  a  distinctness  and  perspicuity  formerly  un- 
known. They  have  made  many  openings  that  will  lead  to 
the  discovery  of  truths  which  they  did  not  reach,  or  to  the 
detection  of  errors  in  which  they  were  involuntarily  en- 
tangled. 

It  may  be  observed,  that  the  defects  and  blemishes  in 
the  received  philosophy  concerning  the  mind,  which  have 
most  exposed  it  to  the  contempt  and  ridicule  of  sensible 
men,  have  chiefly  been  owing  to  this ; — that  the  votaries 
of  this  philosophy,  from  a  natural  prejudice  in  her  favour, 
have  endeavoured  to  extend  her  jurisdiction  beyond  its 
just  limits,  and  to  call  to  hef  bar  the  dictates  of  Common 
Sense.  But  these  decline  this  jurisdiction ;  they  disdain 
the  trial  of  reasoning,  and  disown  its  authority ;  they  nei- 
ther claim  its  aid  nor  dread  its  attacks. 

In  this  unequal  contest  betwixt  Common  Sense  and 
Philosophy,  the  latter  will  always  come  off  both  with  dis- 
honour and  loss ;  nor  can  she  ever  thrive  till  this  rivalship 
is  dropped,  these  encroachments  given  up,  and  a  cordial 
friendship  restored :  for,  in  reality,  Common  Sense  holds 
nothing  of  Philosophy,  nor  needs  her  aid.  But  on  the 
other  hand,  Philosophy  (if  I  may  be  permitted  to  change 
the  metaphor)  has  no  other  root  but  the  principles  of 
Common  Sense;  it  grows  out  of  them,  and  draws  its 
nourishment  from  them  :  severed  from  this  root,  its  honours 
wither,  its  sap  is  dried  up,  it  dies  and  rots. 

The  philosophers  of  the  last  age,  whom  I  have  men- 
tioned, did  not  attend  to  the  preserving  this  union  and 
subordination  so  carefully  as  the  honour  and  interest  of 
philosophy  required ;  but  those  of  the  present  have  waged 
open  war  with  Common  Sense,  and  hope  to  make  a  com- 
plete conquest  of  it  by  the  subtilties  of  Philosophy;  an 
attempt  no  less  audacious  and  vain  than  that  of  the  giants 
to  dethrone  almighty  Jove. 


OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 


SECT.  V. 

Of  Bishop  Berkeley — the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature — 
and  of  Scepticism. 

THE  present  age,  I  apprehend,  has  not  produced  two 
more  acute  or  more  practised  in  this  part  of  philosophy, 
than  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  and  the  author  of  the  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature.  The  first  was  no  friend  to  scepticism, 
but  had  that  warm  concern  for  religious  and  moral  prin- 
ciples which  became  his  order :  yet  the  result  of  his  in- 
quiry was  a  serious  conviction,  that  there  was  no  such 
thing  as  a  material  world ;  nothing  in  nature  but  spirits 
and  ideas ;  and  that  the  belief  of  material  substances,  and 
of  abstract  ideas,  are  the  chief  causes  of  all  our  errors  in 
philosophy,  and  of  alltufidelbjjty  and  heresy  in  religion. 
His  arguments  are  founded  upon  the  principles  which 
were  formerly  laid  down  by  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and 
Locke,  and  which  have  been  very  generally  received. 

And  the  opinion  of  the  ablest  judges  seems  to  be,  that 
they  neither  have  been  nor  can  be  confuted ;  and  that  he 
hath  proved,  by  unanswerable  arguments,  what  no  man  in 
his  senses  can  believe. 

The  second  proceeds  upon  the  same  principles,  but 
carries  them  to  their  full  length ;  and  as  the  Bishop  undid 
the  whole  material  world,  this  author,  upon  the  same 
grounds,  undoes  the  world  of  spirits,  and  leaves  nothing 
in  nature  but  ideas  and  impressions,  without  any  subject 
on  which  they  may  be  impressed. 

It  seems  to  be  a  peculiar  strain  of  humour  in  this  author, 
to  set  out  in  his  introduction,  by  promising,  with  a  grave 
face,  no  less  than  a  complete  system  of  the  sciences,  upon 
a  foundation  entirely  new,  to  wit,  that  of  human  nature ; 
when  the  intention  of  the  whole  work  is  to  show  that 
there  is  neither  human  nature  nor  science  in  the  world. 
It  may  perhaps  be  unreasonable  to  complain  of  this  con- 
duct in  an  author,  who  neither  believes  his  own  existence 
nor  that  of  his  reader;  and  therefore  could  not  mean  to 


SECT.  V.]  INTRODUCTION.  13 

disappoint  him  or  to  laugh  at  his  credulity.  Yet  I  cannot 
imagine,  that  the  author  of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Na- 
ture is  so  sceptical  as  to  plead  this  apology.  He  be- 
lieved, against  his  principles,  that  he  should  be  read,  and 
that  he  should  retain  his  personal  identity  till  he  reaped 
the  honour  and  reputation  justly  due  to  his  metaphysical 
acumen.  Indeed,  he  ingenuously  acknowledges,  that  it 
was  only  in  solitude  and  retirement  that  he  could  yield 
any  assent  to  his  own  philosophy ;  society,  like  daylight, 
dispelled  the  darkness  and  fogs  of  scepticism,  and  made 
him  yield  to  the  dominion  of  Common  Sense.  Nor  did  I 
ever  hear  him  charged  with  doing  any  thing,  even  in  soli- 
tude, that  argued  such  a  degree  of  scepticism  as  his  prin- 
ciples maintained.  Surely  if  his  friends  apprehended  this, 
they  would  have  the  charity  never  to  leave  him  alone. 

Pyrrho  the  Elean,  the  father  of  this  philosophy,  seems 
to  have  carried  it  to  greater  perfection  than  any  of  his  suc- 
cessors :  for  if  we  may  believe  Antigonus  the  Carystian, 
quoted  by  Diogenes  Laertius,  his  life  corresponded  to  his 
doctrine.  And,  therefore,  if  a  cart  run  against  him,  or  a 
dog  attacked  him,  or  if  he  came  upon  a  precipice,  he 
would  not  stir  a  foot  to  avoid  the  danger,  giving  no  credit 
to  his  senses.  But  his  attendants,  who,  happily  for  him, 
were  not  so  great  sceptics,  took  care  to  keep  him  out  of 
harm's  way,  so  that  he  lived  till  he  was  ninety  years  of 
age.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  this  author's  friends 
would  have  been  equally  careful  to  keep  him  from  harm, 
if  ever  his  principles  had  taken  too  strong  a  hold  of  lum. 

It  is  probable  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  was  not 
written  in  company ;  yet  it  contains  manifest  indications, 
that  the  author  every  now  and  then  relapsed  into  the  faith 
of  the  vulgar,  and  could  hardly,  for  half  a  dozen  pages, 
keep  up  the  sceptical  character. 

In  like  manner,  the  great  Pyrrho  himself,  forgot  his 
principles  on  some  occasions;  and  is  said  once  to  have 
been  in  such  a  passion  with  his  cook,  who  probably  had 
not  roasted  lu's  dinner  to  his  mind,  that,  with  the  spit  in  his 
hand,  and  the  meat  upon  it,  he  pursued  him  even  into  the 
market-plaoe. 


14  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

It  is  a  bold  philosophy  that  rejects,  without  ceremony, 
principles  which  irresistibly  govern  the  belief  and  the  con- 
duct of  all  mankind  in  the  common  concerns  of  life ;  and 
to  which  the  philosopher  himself  must  yield,  after  he  ima- 
gines he  hath  confuted  them.  Such  principles  are  older 
and  of  more  authority  than  Philosophy:  she  rests  upon 
them  as  her  basis,  not  they  upon  her.  If  she  could  over- 
turn them,  she  must  be  buried  in  their  ruins ;  but  all  the 
engines  of  philosophical  subtilty  are  too  weak  for  this  pur- 
pose ;  and  the  attempt  is  no  less  ridiculous  than  if  a  me- 
chanic should  contrive  an  axis  in  peritrochio  to  remove 
the  earth  out  of  its  place ;  or  if  a  mathematician  should 
pretend  to  demonstrate,  that  things  equal  to  the  same 
thing  are  not  equal  to  one  another. 

Zeno  endeavoured  to  demonstrate  the  impossibility  of 
motion;  Hobbes,  that  there  was  no  difference  between 
right  and  wrong ;  and  this  author,  that  no  credit  is  to  be 
given  to  our  senses,  to  our  memory,  or  even  to  demon- 
stration. Such  philosophy  is  justly  ridiculous,  even  to 
those  who  cannot  detect  the  fallacy  of  it.  It  can  have  no 
other  tendency  than  to  show  the  acuteness  of  the  sophist, 
at  the  expense  of  disgracing  reason  and  human  nature,  and 
inakina:  mankind  Yahoos. 


SECT.  VI. 

Of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature. 

THERE  are  other  prejudices  against  this  system  of  human 
nature,  which,  even  upon  a  general  view,  may  make  one 
diffident  of  it. 

Des  Cartes,  Hobbes,  and  this  author  have  each  of 
them  given  us  a  system  of  human  nature ;  an  undertaking 
too  vast  for  any  one  man,  how  great  soever  his  genius  and 
abilities  may  be.  There  must  surely  be  reason  to  appre- 
hend, that  many  parts  of  human  nature  never  came  under 
their  observation ;  and  that  others  have  been  stretched  and 
distorted,  to  fill  up  blanks  and  complete  the  system. 


SECT.  VI.]  INTRODUCTION.  15 

Christopher  Columbus,  or  Sebastian  Cabot,  might  almost 
as  reasonably  have  undertaken  to  give  us  a  complete  map 
of  America. 

There  is  a  certain  character  and  style  in  Nature's 
works,  which  is  never  attained  in  the  most  perfect  imita- 
tion of  them.  This  seems  to  be  wanting  in  the  systems  of 
human  nature  I  have  mentioned,  and  particularly  in  the 
last.  One  may  see  a  puppet  make  variety  of  motions 
and  gesticulations,  which  strike  much  at  first  view ;  but 
when  it  is  accurately  observed,  and  taken  to  pieces,  our 
admiration  ceases ;  we  comprehend  the  whole  art  of  the 
maker.  How  unlike  is  it  to  that  which  it  represents ! 
what  a  poor  piece  of  work  compared  with  the  body  of  a 
man,  whose  structure  the  more  we  know,  the  more  won- 
ders we  discover  in  it,  and  the  more  sensible  we  are  of  our 
ignorance !  Is  the  mechanism  of  the  mind  so  easily  compre- 
hended, when  that  of  the  body  is  so  difficult  ?  Yet,  by  this 
system,  three  laws  of  association,  joined  to  a  few  original 
t'eelings,  explain  the  whole  mechanism  of  sense,  imagina- 
tion, memory,  belief,  and  of  all  the  actions  and  passions  of 
the  mind,  is  this  the  man  that  nature  made  ?  I  suspect  it 
is  not  so  easy  to  look  behind  the  scenes  in  Nature's  work. 
This  is  a  puppet,  surely,  contrived  by  too  bold  an  appren- 
tice of  Nature,  to  mimic  her  work.  It  shows  tolerably  by 
candlelight,  but  brought  into  clear  day,  and  taken  to  pieces, 
it  will  appear  to  be  a  man  made  with  mortar  and  trowel. 
The  more  we  know  of  other  parts  of  nature,  the  more  we 
like  and  approve  them.  The  little  I  know  of  the  planetary 
system  ;  of  the  earth  which  we  inhabit;  of  minerals,  vege- 
tables, and  animals;  of  my  o\vn  body,  and  of  the  laws 
which  obtain  in  these  parts  of  nature ;  opens  to  my  mind 
grand  and  beautiful  scenes,  and  contributes  equally  to  my 
happiness  and  power.  But  when  I  look  within,  and  con- 
sider the  Mind  itself,  which  makes  me  capable  of  all  these 
prospects  and  enjoyments ;  if  it  is  indeed  what  the  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature  makes  it,  I  find  I  have  been  only  in  an 
enchanted  castle,  imposed  upon  by  spectres  and  appari- 
tions. I  blush  inwardly  to  think  how  I  have  been  de- 
luded ;  I  am  ashamed  of  my  frame,  and  can  hardly  forbear 


16  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

expostulating  with  my  destiny?  Is  this  thy  pastime,  O 
Nature,  to  put  such  tricks  upon  a  silly  creature,  and  then 
to  take  off  the  mask,  and  show  him  how  he  hath  been  be- 
fooled ?  If  this  is  the  philosophy  of  human  nature,  my  soul 
enter  thou  not  into  her  secrets.  It  is  surely  the  forbidden 
Tree  of  Knowledge ;  I  no  sooner  taste  of  it  than  I  perceive 
myself  naked  and  stript  of  all  things,  yea,  even  of  my  very 
self.  I  see  myself  and  the  whole  frame  of  Nature  shrink 
into  fleeting  ideas,  which,  like  Epicurus's  atoms,  dance 
about  in  emptiness. 


SECT.  VII. 

Tlie  System  of  all  these  Authors  is  the  same,  and  leads  to 
Scepticism. 

BUT  what  if  these  profound  disquisitions  into  the  first 
principles  of  human  nature,  do  naturally  and  necessarily 
plunge  a  man  into  the  abyss  of  scepticism  ?  May  we  not 
reasonably  judge  from  what  hath  happened  ?  Des  Cartes 
no  sooner  began  to  dig  in  this  mine  than  scepticism  was 
ready  to  break  in  upon  him.  He  did  what  he  could  to 
shut  it  out.  Malebranche  and  Locke,  who  dug  deeper, 
found  the  difficulty  of  keeping  out  this  enemy  still  to  in- 
crease ;  but  they  laboured  honestly  in  the  design.  Then 
Berkeley,  who  carried  on  the  work,  despairing  of  securing 
all,  bethought  himself  of  an  expedient:  by  giving  up  the 
material  world,  which  he  thought  might  be  spared  without 
loss,  and  even  with  advantage,  he  hoped,  by  an  impreg- 
nable partition,  to  secure  the  world  of  spirits.  But,  alas  ! 
the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  wantonly  sapped  the  foun- 
dation of  this  partition,  and  drowned  all  in  one  universal 
deluge. 

These  facts,  which  are  undeniable,  do  indeed  give  reason 
to  apprehend,  that  Des  Cartes's  system  of  the  human  un- 
derstanding, which  I  shall  beg  leave  to  call  the  ideal  sys- 
tem,  and  which,  with  some  improvements  made  by  later 
writers,  is  now  generally  received,  hath  some  original  de- 


SECT.  VII.]  INTRODUCTION.  17 

feet ;  that  this  scepticism  is  inlaid  in  it,  and  reared  along 
with  it;  and,  therefore,  that  we  must  lay  it  open  to  the 
foundation,  and  examine  the  materials,  before  we  can  ex- 
pect to  raise  any  solid  and  useful  fabric  of  knowledge  on 
this  subject. 


SECT.  VIII. 

We  ought  not  to  despair  of  a  better. 

BUT  is  this  to  be  despaired  of,  because  Des  Cartes  and 
his  followers  have  failed?  By  no  means.  This  pusilla- 
nimity would  be  injurious  to  ourselves  and  injurious  to 
truth.  Useful  discoveries  are  sometimes  indeed  the  effect 
of  superior  genius,  but  more  frequently  they  are  the  birth 
of  time  and  of  accidents.  A  traveller  of  good  judgment 
may  mistake  his  way,  and  be  unawares  led  into  a  wrong 
track;  and  while  the  road  is  fair  before  him,  he  may  go  on 
without  suspicion  and  be  followed  by  others ;  but  when  it 
ends  in  a  coal-pit,  it  requires  no  great  judgment  to  know 
that  he  hath  gone  wrong,  nor  perhaps  to  find  out  what 
misled  him. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  unprosperous  state  of  this  part  of 
philosophy  had  produced  an  effect,  somewhat  discouraging 
indeed  to  any  attempt  of  this  nature,  but  an  effect  which 
might  be  expected,  and  which  time  only  and  better  success 
can  remedy.  Sensible  men,  who  never  will  be  sceptics  in 
matters  of  common  life,  are  apt  to  treat  with  sovereign 
contempt  every  thing  that  hath  been  said  or  is  to  be  said 
upon  this  subject. — It  is  metaphysic,  say  they :  who 
minds  it?  Let  scholastic  sophisters  entangle  themselves  in 
their  own  cobwebs ;  I  am  resolved  to  take  my  own  ex- 
istence, and  existence  of  other  things,  upon  trust;  and  to 
believe  that  snow  is  cold,  and  honey  sweet,  whatever  they 
may  say  to  the  contrary.  He  must  either  be  a  fool,  or 
want  to  make  a  fool  of  me,  that  would  reason  me  out  of 
my  reason  and  senses. 

I  confess  I  know  not  what  a  sceptic  can  answer  to  this, 


18  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  I. 

nor  by  what  good  argument  he  can  plead  even  for  a  hear- 
ing; for  either  his  reasoning  is  sophistry,  and  so  deserves 
contempt;  or  there  is  no  truth  in  the  human  faculties,  and 
then  why  should  we  reason  ? 

If  therefore  a  man  find  himself  entangled  in  these  meta- 
physical toils,  and  can  find  no  other  way  to  escape,  let  him 
bravely  cut  the  knot  which  he  cannot  loose,  curse  meta- 
physic,  and  dissuade  eveiy  man  from  meddling  with  it. 
For  if  I  have  been  led  into  bogs  and  quagmires,  by  follow- 
ing an  ignis  fatuus,  what  can  I  do  better  than  to  warn 
others  to  beware  of  it  ?  If  Philosophy  contradicts  herself, 
befools  her  votaries,  and  deprives  them  of  every  object 
worthy  to  be  pursued  or  enjoyed,  let  her  be  sent  back  to 
the  infernal  regions  from  which  she  must  have  had  her 
original. 

But  is  it  absolutely  certain  that  this  fair  lady  is  of  the 
party?  Is  it  not  possible  she  may  have  been  misrepre- 
sented ?  Have  not  men  of  genius  in  former  ages  often 
made  their  own  dreams  to  pass  for  her  oracles  ?  Ought  she 
then  to  be  condemned  without  any  farther  hearing  ?  This 
would  be  unreasonable.  I  have  found  her  in  all  other 
matters  an  agreeable  companion,  a  faithful  counsellor,  a 
friend  to  Common  Sense,  and  to  the  happiness  of  man- 
kind. This  justly  entitles  her  to  my  correspondence  and 
confidence,  till  I  find  infallible  proofs  of  her  infidelity. 


19 


CHAP.  II. 
OF  SMELLING. 


SECT.  I. 

The  Order  of  Proceeding.     Of  the  Medium  and  Organ 
of  Smell. 

IT  is  so  difficult  to  unravel  the  operations  of  the  human 
understanding,  and  to  reduce  them  to  their  first  principles, 
that  we  cannot  expect  to  succeed  in  the  attempt,  but  by 
beginning  with  the  simplest,  and  proceeding,  by  very  cau- 
tious steps,  to  the  more  complex.  The  five  external 
senses  may,  for  this  reason,  claim  to  be  first  considered  in 
an  analysis  of  the  human  faculties.  And  the  same  reason 
ought  to  determine  us  to  make  a  choice  even  among  the 
senses,  and  to  give  the  precedence,  not  to  the  noblest,  or 
most  useful,  but  to  the  simplest,  and  that  whose  objects 
are  least  in  danger  of  being  mistaken  for  other  things. 

In  this  view,  an  analysis  of  our  sensations  may  be  car- 
ried on,  perhaps  with  most  ease  and  distinctness,  by  taking 
them  in  this  order :  Smelling,  Tasting,  Hearing,  Touch, 
and,  last  of  all,  Seeing. 

Natural  philosophy  informs  us,  that  all  animal  and  ve- 
getable bodies,  and  probably  all  or  most  other  bodies, 
while  exposed  to  the  air,  are  continually  sending  forth 
effluvia  of  vast  subtilty,  not  only  in  their  state  of  life  and 
growth,  but  in  the  states  of  fermentation  and  putrefaction. 
These  volatile  particles  do  probably  repel  each  other,  and 
so  scatter  themselves  in  the  air,  until  they  meet  with  other 
bodies  to  which  they  have  some  chemical  affinity,  and 
with  which  they  unite  and  form  new  concretes.  All  the 
smell  of  plants  and  of  other  bodies  is  caused  by  these  vo- 
latile parts,  and  is  smelled  wherever  they  are  scattered  in 
tho  air:  and  the  acuteness  of  smell  in  some  animals, 


20  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

shows  us,  that  these  effluvia  spread  far,  and  must  be  in- 
conceivably subtile. 

Whether,  as  some  chemists  conceive,  every  species  of 
bodies  hath  a  spiritus  rectus,  a  kind  of  soul,  which  causes 
the  smell  and  all  the  specific  virtues  of  that  body,  and 
which,  being  extremely  volatile,  flies  about  in  the  air  in 
quest  of  a  proper  receptacle,  I  do  not  inquire.  This,  like 
most  other  theories,  is  perhaps  rather  the  product  of  ima- 
gination than  of  just  induction.  But  that  all  bodies  are 
smelled  by  means  of  effluvia  which  they  emit,  and  which 
are  drawn  into  the  nostrils  along  with  the  air,  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt.  So  that  there  is  manifest  appearance  of 
design  in  placing  the  organ  of  smell  in  the  inside  of  that 
canal,  through  which  the  air  is  continually  passing  in  in- 
spiration and  expiration. 

Anatomy  informs  us,  that  the  membrana  pituitaria, 
and  the  olfactory  nerves,  which  are  distributed  to  the 
vilious  parts  of  this  membrane,  are  the  organs  destined  by 
the  wisdom  of  nature  to  this  sense ;  so  that  when  a  body 
emits  no  effluvia,  or  when  they  do  not  enter  into  the  nose, 
or  when  the  pituitary  membrane  or  olfactory  nerves  are 
rendered  unfit  to  perform  their  office,  it  cannot  be  smelled. 

Yet  notwithstanding  this,  it  is  evident  that  neither  the 
organs  of  smell,  nor  the  medium,  nor  any  motions  we  can 
conceive  excited  in  the  membrane  above  mentioned,  or  in 
the  nerve  or  animal  spirits,  do  in  the  least  resemble  the 
sensation  of  smelling;  nor  could  that  sensation  of  itself 
ever  have  led  us  to  think  of  nerves,  animal  spirits,  or  ef- 
fluvia. 


SECT.  II. 

The  Sensation  considered  abstractly. 

HAVING  premised  these  things,  with  regard  to  the  me- 
dium and  organ  of  this  sense,  let  us  now  attend  carefully 
to  what  the  mind  is  conscious  of  when  we  smell  a  rose  or 
a  lily ;  and  since  our  language  affords  no  other  name  for 


SECT.  II.]  OF  SMELLING.  21 

this  sensation,  we  shall  call  it  a  smell  or  odour,  carefully 
excluding  from  the  meaning  of  those  names  every  thing 
but  the  sensation  itself,  at  least  till  we  have  examined  it. 

Suppose  a  person  who  never  had  this  sense  before,  to 
receive  it  all  at  once,  and  to  smell  a  rose ;  can  he  perceive 
any  similitude  or  agreement  between  the  smell  and  the 
rose  ?  or  indeed  between  it  and  any  other  object  whatso- 
ever? Certainly  he  cannot.  He  finds  himself  affected  in 
a  new  way,  he  knows  not  why  or  from  what  cause.  Like 
a  man  that  feels  some  pain  or  pleasure  formerly  unknown  to 
him,  he  is  conscious  that  he  is  not  the  cause  of  it  himself; 
but  cannot,  from  the  nature  of  the  thing,  determine  whe- 
ther it  is  caused  by  body  or  spirit,  by  something  near  or 
by  something  at  a  distance.  It  has  no  similitude  to  any- 
thing else,  so  as  to  admit  of  a  comparison  ;  and  therefore 
he  can  conclude  nothing  from  it,  unless  perhaps  that  there 
must  be  some  unknown  cause  of  it. 

It  is  evidently  ridiculous,  to  ascribe  to  it  figure,  colour, 
extension,  or  any  other  quality  of  bodies.  He  cannot  give 
it  a  place,  any  more  than  he  can  give  a  place  to  melan- 
choly or  joy  :  nor  can  he  conceive  it  to  have  any  existence 
but  when  it  is  smelled.  So  that  it  appears  to  be  a  simple 
and  original  affection  or  feeling  of  the  mind,  altogether  in- 
explicable and  unaccountable.  It  is  indeed  impossible 
that  it  can  be  any  body :  It  is  a  sensation ;  and  a  sensation 
can  only  be  in  a  sentient  thing. 

The  various  odours  have  each  their  different  degrees  of 
strength  or  weakness.  Most  of  them  are  agreeable  or  dis- 
agreeable ;  and  frequently  those  that  are  agreeable  when 
weak,  are  disagreeable  when  stronger.  When  we  com- 
pare different  smells  together,  we  can  perceive  very  few 
resemblances  or  contrarieties,  or  indeed  relations  of  any 
kind  between  them.  They  are  all  so  simple  in  themselves, 
and  so  different  from  each  other,  that  it  is  hardly  possible 
to  divide  them  into  genera  and  species.  Most  of  the  names 
we  give  them  are  particular;  as  the  smell  of  a  rose,  of  a 
jessamine,  and  the  like.  Yet  there  are  some  general 
names;  as  sweet,  stinking,  musty,  putrid,  cadaverous, 
aromatic.  Some  of  them  seem  to  refresh  and  animate  the 
mind,  others  to  deaden  and  depress  it. 


22  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 


SECT.  III. 

Sensation    and   Remembrance,    Natural   Principles   of 
Belief. 

So  far  we  have  considered  this  sensation  abstractly.  Let 
us  next  compare  it  with  other  things  to  which  it  bears  some 
relation.  And  first  I  shall  compare  this  sensation  with 
the  remembrance  and  the'  imagination  of  it. 

I  can  think  of  the  smell  of  a  rose  when  I  do  not  smell 
it ;  and  it  is  possible  that  when  I  think  of  it,  there  is  neither 
rose  nor  smell  any  where  existing.  But  when  I  smell  it, 
I  am  necessarily  determined  to  believe  that  the  sensation 
really  exists.  This  is  common  to  all  sensations,  that  as 
they  cannot  exist  but  in  being  perceived ;  so  they  cannot 
be  perceived  but  they  must  exist.  I  could  as  easily  doubt 
of  my  own  existence,  as  of  the  existence  of  my  sensations. 
Even  those  profound  philosophers  who  have  endeavoured 
to  disprove  their  own  existence,  have  yet  left  their  sensa- 
tions to  stand  upon  their  own  bottom,  stript  of  a  subject, 
rather  than  call  in  question  the  reality  of  their  existence. 

Here  then  a  sensation,  a  smell  for  instance,  may  be  pre- 
sented to  the  mind  three  different  ways :  it  may  be  smelled, 
it  may  be  remembered,  it  may  be  imagined  or  thought  of. 
In  the  first  case,  it  is  necessarily  accompanied  with  a  be- 
lief of  its  present  existence ;  in  the  second,  it  is  necessarily 
accompanied  with  a  belief  of  its  past  existence ;  and  in  the 
last,  it  is  not  accompanied  with  belief  at  all,  but  is  what 
the  logicians  call  a  simple  apprehension. 

Why  sensation  should  compel  our  belief  of  the  present 
existence  of  the  thing,  memory  a  belief  of  its  past  existence, 
and  imagination  no  belief  at  all,  I  believe  no  philosopher 
can  give  a  shadow  of  reason,  but  that  such  is  the  nature 
of  these  operations :  They  are  all  simple  and  original,  and 
therefore  inexplicable  acts  of  the  mind. 

Suppose  that  once,  and  only  once,  I  smelled  a  tuberose 
in  a  certain  room  where  it  grew  in  a  pot,  and  gave  a  very 
grateful  perfume.  Next  day  I  relate  what  I  saw  and 
smelled.  When  I  attend  as  carefully  as  I  can  to  what 


SECT.  III.]  OF  SMELLING.  23 

passes  in  my  mind  in  this  case,  it  appears  evident,  that  the 
very  thing:  I  saw  yesterday,  and  the  fragrance  I  smelled, 
are  now  the  immediate  objects  of  my  mind  when  I  remem- 
ber it.  Further,  I  can  imagine  this  pot  and  flower  trans- 
ported to  the  room  where  I  now  sit,  and  yielding  the  same 
perfume.  Here  likewise  it  appears,  that  the  individual 
thing  which  I  saw  and  smelled,  is  the  object  of  my  imagi- 
nation. 

Philosophers  indeed  tell  me,  that  the  immediate  object 
of  my  memory  and  imagination  in  this  case,  is  not  the  past 
sensation,  but  an  idea  of  it,  an  image,  phantasm,  or  species 
of  the  odour  I  smelled :  that  this  idea  now  exists  in  my 
mind  or  in  my  sensorium ;  and  the  mind,  contemplating 
this  present  idea,  finds  it  a  representation  of  what  is  past, 
or  of  what  may  exist;  and  accordingly  calls  it  memory  or 
imagination.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  ideal  philosophy ; 
which  we  shall  not  now  examine,  that  we  may  not  inter- 
rupt the  thread  of  the  present  investigation.  Upon  the 
strictest  attention,  memory  appears  to  me  to  have  things 
that  are  past,  and  not  present  ideas,  for  its  object.  We 
shall  afterwards  examine  this  system  of  ideas,  and  endea- 
vour to  make  it  appear,  that  no  solid  proof  has  ever  been 
advanced  of  the  existence  of  ideas ;  that  they  are  a  mere 
fiction  and  hypothesis,  contrived  to  solve  the  phenomena 
of  the  human  understanding ;  that  they  do  not  at  all  an- 
swer this  end ;  and  that  this  hypothesis  of  ideas  or  images 
of  things  in  the  mind,  or  in  the  sensorium,  is  the  parent  of 
those  many  paradoxes  so  shocking  to  common  sense,  and 
of  that  scepticism,  which  disgrace  our  philosophy  of  the 
mind,  and  have  brought  upon  it  the  ridicule  and  contempt 
of  sensible  men. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  beg  leave  to  think  with  the  vulgar, 
that  when  I  remember  the  smell  of  the  tuberose,  that  very 
sensation  which  I  had  yesterday,  and  which  has  now  no 
more  any  existence,  is  the  immediate  object  of  my  me- 
mory; and  when  I  imagine  it  present,  the  sensation  itself, 
and  not  any  idea  of  it,  is  the  object  of  my  imagination. 
But  though  the  object  of  my  sensation,  memory,  and  ima- 
gination be  in  this  case  the  same,  yet  these  acts  or  opera- 


24  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

tions  of  the  mind  are  as  different  and  as  easily  distin- 
guishable as  smell,  taste,  and  sound.  I  am  conscious  of 
a  difference  in  kind  between  sensation  and  memory,  and 
between  both  and  imagination.  I  find  this  also,  that  the 
sensation  compels  my  belief  of  the  present  existence  of 
the  smell,  and  memory  my  belief  of  its  past  existence. 
There  is  a  smell,  is  the  immediate  testimony  of  sense ; 
there  was  a  smell,  is  the  immediate  testimony  of  memory. 
If  you  ask  me,  why  I  believe  that  the  smell  exists  ?  I  can 
give  no  other  reason,  nor  shall  ever  be  able  to  give  any 
other,  than  that  I  smell  it.  If  you  ask,  why  I  believe 
that  it  existed  yesterday  ?  I  can  give  no  other  reason  but 
that  I  remember  it. 

Sensation  and  memory  therefore  are  simple,  original, 
and  perfectly  distinct  operations  of  the  mind,  and  both  of 
them  are  original  principles  of  belief.  Imagination  is  dis- 
tinct from  both,  but  is  no  principle  of  belief.  Sensation 
implies  the  present  existence  of  its  object;  memory  its 
past  existence ;  but  imagination  views  its  object  naked,  and 
without  any  belief  of  its  existence  or  nonexistence,  and  is 
therefore  what  the  schools  call  simple  apprehension. 


SECT.  IV. 

Judgment  and  Belief  in  some  Cases  precede  simple 
Apprehension. 

BUT  here  again  the  ideal  System  comes  in  our  way ;  it 
teaches  us,  that  the  first  operation  of  the  mind  about  its 
ideas  is  simple  apprehension;  that  is,  the  bare  concep- 
tion of  a  thing,  without  any  belief  about  it ;  and  that  after 
we  have  got  simple  apprehensions,  by  comparing  them 
together,  we  perceive  agreements  or  disagreements  between 
them ;  and  that  this  perception  of  the  agreement  or  dis- 
agreement of  ideas  is  all  that  we  call  belief,  judgment,  or 
knowledge.  Now  this  appears  to  me  to  be  all  fiction, 
without  any  foundation  in  nature  :  for  it  is  acknowledged 
by  all,  that  sensation  must  go  before  memory  and  imagina- 


SECT.  IV.]  OF  SMELLING.  25 

tion;  and  hence  it  necessarily  follows,  that  apprehension, 
accompanied  with  belief  and  knowledge,  must  go  before 
simple  apprehension,  at  least  in  the  matters  we  are  now 
speaking  of.  So  that  here,  instead  of  saying  that  the 
belief  or  knowledge  is  got  by  putting  together  and  com- 
paring the  simple  apprehensions,  we  ought  rather  to  say 
that  the  simple  apprehension  is  performed  by  resolving 
and  analysing  a  natural  and  original  judgment.  And  it  is 
with  the  operations  of  the  mind,  in  this  case,  as  with  natu- 
ral bodies,  which  are  indeed  compounded  of  simple  prin- 
ciples or  elements.  Nature  does  not  exhibit  these  elements 
separate,  to  be  compounded  by  us;  she  exhibits  them 
mixed  and  compounded  in  concrete  bodies,  and  it  is  only 
by  art  and  chemical  analysis  that  they  can  be  separated. 


SECT.  V. 

Two  Theories  of  the  Nature  of  Belief  refuted.     Concltt* 
sionsfrom  what  hath  been  said. 

BUT  what  is  this  belief  or  knowledge  which  accompanies 
sensation  and  memory?  Every  man  knows  what  it  is,  but 
no  man  can  define  it.  Does  any  man  pretend  to  define 
sensation,  or  to  define  consciousness  ?  It  is  happy  indeed 
that  no  man  does.  And  if  no  philosopher  had  attempted 
to  define  and  explain  belief,  some  paradoxes  in  philosophy, 
more  incredible  than  ever  were  brought  forth  by  the  most 
abject  superstition  or  the  most  frantic  enthusiasm,  had 
never  seen  the  light.  Of  this  kind  surely  is  that  modern 
discovery  of  the  ideal  philosophy,  that  sensation,  memory, 
belief,  and  imagination,  when  they  have  the  same  object, 
are  only  different  degrees  of  strength  and  vivacity  in  the 
idea.  Suppose  the  idea  to  be  that  of  a  future  state  after 
death;  one  man  believes  it  firmly;  this  means  no  more 
than  that  he  hath  a  strong  and  lively  idea  of  it :  Another 
neither  believes  nor  disbelieves;  that  is,  he  has  a  weak 
and  faint  idea.  Suppose  now  a  third  person  believes 
firmly  that  there  is  no  such  thing;  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know 


o 


2G  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  If. 

whether  his  idea  be  faint  or  lively :  if  it  is  faint,  then  there 
may  be  a  firm  belief,  where  the  idea  is  faint ;  if  the  idea 
is  lively,  then  the  belief  of  a  future  state  and  the  belief  of 
no  future  state  must  be  one  and  the  same.  The  same 
arguments  that  are  used  to  prove  that  belief  implies  only  a 
stronger  idea  of  the  object  than  simple  apprehension  might 
as  well  be  used  to  prove  that  love  implies  only  a  stronger 
idea  of  the  object  than  indifference.  And  then  what  shall 
we  say  of  hatred,  which  must,  upon  this  hypothesis,  be  a 
degree  of  love  or  a  degree  of  indifference  ?  If  it  should  be 
said,  that  in  love  there  is  something  more  than  an  idea,  to 
wit,  an  affection  of  the  mind;  may  it  not  be  said  with 
equal  reason,  that  in  belief  there  is  something  more  than  an 
idea,  to  wit,  an  assent  or  persuasion  of  the  mind. 

But  perhaps  it  may  be  thought  as  ridiculous  to  argue 
against  this  strange  opinion  as  to  maintain  it.  Indeed,  if 
a  man  should  maintain,  that  a  circle,  a  square,  and  a  tri- 
angle differ  only  in  magnitude,  and  not  in  figure,  I  believe 
he  would  find  nobody  disposed  either  to  believe  him  or 
argue  against  him ;  and  yet  I  do  not  think  it  less  shocking 
to  common  sense,  to  maintain,  that  sensation,  memory, 
and  imagination  differ  only  in  degree,  and  not  in  kind.  I 
know  it  is  said,  that  in  a  delirium,  or  in  dreaming,  men  are 
apt  to  mistake  one  for  the  other.  But  does  it  follow  from 
this,  that  men  who  are  neither  dreaming  nor  in  a  delirium 
cannot  distinguish  them  ?  But  how  does  a  man  know  that 
he  is  not  in  a  delirium  ?  I  cannot  tell :  neither  can  I  tell 
how  a  man  knows  that  he  exists  :  but  if  any  man  seriously 
doubts  whether  he  is  in  a  delirium,  I  think  it  highly  pro- 
bable that  he  is,  and  that  it  is  time  to  seek  for  a  cure, 
which  I  am  persuaded  he  will  not  find  in  the  whole  system 
of  logic. 

I  mentioned  before  Locke's  notion  of  belief  or  know- 
ledge: he  holds  that  it  consists  in  a  perception  of  the 
agreement  or  disagreement  of  ideas ;  and  this  he  values 
himself  upon  as  a  very  important  discovery. 

We  shall  have  occasion  afterwards  to  examine  more 
particularly  this  grand  principle  of  Locke's  philosophy, 
and  to  show  that  it  is  one  of  the  main  pillars  of  modern 


SECT.  V.]  OF  SMELLING.  27 

scepticism,  although  he  had  no  intention  to  make  that  use 
of  it.  At  present  let  us  only  consider  how  it  agrees  with 
the  instances  of  belief  now  under  consideration ;  and  whe- 
ther it  gives  any  light  to  them.  I  believe  that  the  sensa- 
tion I  have  exists;  and  that  the  sensation  I  remember, 
does  not  now  exist,  but  did  exist  yesterday.  Here,  ac- 
cording to  Locke's  system,  I  compare  the  idea  of  a  sensa- 
tion with  the  ideas  of  past  and  present  existence :  at  one 
time  that  this  idea  agrees  with  that  of  present  existence, 
but  disagrees  with  that  of  past  existence ;  but  at  another 
time  it  agrees  with  the  idea  of  past  existence,  and  dig- 
agrees  with  that  of  present  existence.  Truly  these  ideas 
seem  to  be  very  capricious  in  their  agreements  and  dis- 
agreements.— Besides,  I  cannot  from  my  heart  conceive 
what  is  meant  by  either.  I  say  a  sensation  exists,  and  I 
think  I  understand  clearly  what  I  mean.  But  you  want 
to  make  the  thing  clearer,  and  for  that  end  tell  me,  that 
there  is  an  agreement  between  the  idea  of  that  sensation 
and  the  idea  of  existence.  To  speak  freely,  this  conveys 
to  me  no  light,  but  darkness ;  I  can  conceive  no  otherwise 
of  it  than  as  an  odd  and  obscure  circumlocution.  I  con- 
clude, then,  that  the  belief  which  accompanies  sensation 
and  memory  is  a  simple  act  of  the  mind,  which  cannot 
be  defined.  It  is  in  this  respect  like  seeing  and  hearing, 
which  can  never  be  so  defined  as  to  be  understood  by 
those  who  have  not  these  faculties :  and  to  such  as  have 
them,  no  definition  can  make  these  operations  more  clear 
than  they  are  already.  In  like  manner,  every  man  that 
has  any  belief,  and  he  must  be  a  curiosity  that  has  none, 
knows  perfectly  what  belief  is,  but  can  never  define  nor 
explain  it.  I  conclude  also,  that  sensation,  memory,  and 
imagination,  even  where  they  have  the  same  object,  are 
operations  of  a  quite  different  nature,  and  perfectly  distin- 
guishable by  those  who  are  sound  and  sober.  A  man 
that  is  in  danger  of  confounding  them  is  indeed  to  be 
pitied ;  but  whatever  relief  he  may  find  from  another  art, 
he  can  find  none  from  logic  or  metaphysic.  I  conclude 
further,  that  it  is  no  less  a  part  of  the  human  constitution, 
to  believe  the  present  existence  of  our  sensations,  and  to 

C2 


28  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

believe  the  past  existence  of  what  we  remember,  than 
it  is  to  believe  that  twice  two  make  four.  The  evidence 
of  sense,  the  evidence  of  memory,  and  the  evidence  of  the 
necessary  relations  of  things,  are  all  distinct  and  original 
kinds  of  evidence,  equally  grounded  on  our  constitution : 
none  of  them  depends  upon,  or  can  be  resolved  into  an- 
other. To  reason  against  any  of  these  kinds  of  evidence 
is  absurd ;  nay,  to  reason  for  them  is  absurd.  They  are 
first  principles;  and  such  fall  not  within  the  province  of 
Reason,  but  of  Common  Sense. 


SECT.  VI. 

Apology  for  Metaphysical  Absurdities.  Sensation  with- 
out a  Sentient,  a  Consequence  of  the  Theory  of  Ideas. 
Consequences  of  this  strange  Opinion. 

HAVING  considered  the  relation  which  the  sensation  of 
smelling  bears  to  the  remembrance  and  imagination  of  it, 
I  proceed  to  consider,  what  relation  it  bears  to  a  mind,  or 
sentient  principle.  It  is  certain,  no  man  can  conceive  or 
believe  smelling  to  exist  of  itself,  without  a  mind,  or 
something  that  has  the  power  of  smelling,  of  which  it  is 
called  a  sensation,  an  operation,  or  feeling.  Yet  if  any 
man  should  demand  a  proof,  that  sensation  cannot  be  with- 
out a  mind  or  sentient  being,  I  confess  that  I  can  give 
none ;  and  that  to  pretend  to  prove  it  seems  to  be  almost 
as  absurd  as  to  deny  it. 

This  might  have  been  said  without  any  apology  before 
the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  appeared  in  the  world. 
For  till  that  time,  no  man,  as  far  as  I  know,  ever  thought 
either  of  calling  in  question  that  principle,  or  of  giving  a 
reason  for  his  belief  of  it.  Whether  thinking  beings  were 
of  an  ethereal  or  igneous  nature,  whether  material  or  im- 
material, was  variously  disputed ;  but  that  thinking  is  an 
operation  of  some  kind  of  being  or  other  was  always  taken 
for  granted,  as  a  principle  that  could  not  possibly  admit  of 
doubt. 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SMELLING.  29 

However,  since  the  author  above  mentioned,  who  is 
undoubtedly  one  of  the  most  acute  metaphysicians  that 
this  or  any  age  hath  produced,  hath  treated  it  as  a  vulgar 
prejudice,  and  maintained  that  the  mind  is  only  a  suc- 
cession of  ideas  and  impressions  without  any  subject ;  his 
opinion,  however  contrary  to  the  common  apprehensions 
of  mankind,  deserves  respect.  I  beg,  therefore,  once  for 
all,  that  no  offence  may  be  taken  at  charging  this  or  other 
metaphysical  notions  with  absurdity,  or  with  being  con- 
trary to  the  common  sense  of  mankind.  No  disparage- 
ment is  meant  to  the  understandings  of  the  authors  or 
maintainers  of  such  opinions.  Indeed,  they  commonly 
proceed,  not  from  defect  of  understanding,  but  from  an 
excess  of  refinement:  the  reasoning  that  leads  to  them 
often  gives  new  light  to  the  subject,  and  shows  real  genius 
and  deep  penetration  in  the  author;  and  the  premises  do 
more  than  atone  for  the  conclusion. 

If  tliere  are  certain  principles,  as  I  think  there  are, 
which  the  constitution  of  our  nature  leads  us  to  believe, 
and  which  we  are  under  a  necessity  to  take  for  granted  in 
the  common  concerns  of  life,  without  being  able  to  give  a 
reason  for  them ;  these  are  what  we  call  the  principles  of 
common  sense ;  and  what  is  manifestly  contrary  to  them 
is  what  we  call  absurd. 

Indeed  if  it  is  true,  and  to  be  received  as  a  principle  of 
philosophy,  That  sensation  and  thought  may  be  without  a 
thinking  being;  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  the  most 
wonderful  discovery  that  this  or  any  other  age  hath  pro- 
duced. The  received  doctrine  of  ideas  is  the  principle 
from  which  it  is  deduced,  and  of  which  indeed  it  seems  to 
be  a  just  and  natural  consequence.  And  it  is  probable, 
that  it  would  not  have  been  so  late  a  discovery,  but  that 
it  is  so  shocking  and  repugnant  to  the  common  apprehen- 
sions of  mankind  that  it  required  an  uncommon  degree  of 
philosophical  intrepidity  to  usher  it  into  the  world.  It  is 
a  fundamental  principle  of  the  ideal  system,  That  every 
object  of  thought  must  be  an  impression,  or  an  idea,  that 
is,  a  faint  copy  of  some  preceding  impression.  This  is  a 
principle  so  commonly  received  that  the  author  above 


30  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

mentioned,  although  his  whole  system  is  built  upon  it, 
never  offers  the  least  proof  of  it.  It  is  upon  this  principle, 
as  a  fixed  point,  that  he  erects  his  metaphysical  engines, 
to  overturn  heaven  and  earth,  body  and  spirit.  And  in- 
deed, in  my  apprehension,  it  is  altogether  sufficient  for  the 
purpose.  For  if  impressions  and  ideas  are  the  only  objects 
of  thought,  then  heaven  and  earth,  and  body  and  spirit, 
and  every  thing  you  please,  must  signify  only  impressions 
and  ideas,  or  they  must  be  words  without  any  meaning. 
It  seems,  therefore,  that  this  notion,  however  strange,  is 
closely  connected  with  the  received  doctrine  of  ideas,  and 
we  must  either  admit  the  conclusion,  or  call  in  question 
the  premises. 

Ideas  seem  to  have  something  in  their  nature  unfriendly 
to  other  existences.     They  were  first  introduced  into  phi- 
losophy in  the  humble  character  of  images  or  representa- 
tives of  things ;  and  in  this  character  they  seemed  not  only 
to  be  inoffensive,  but  to  serve  admirably  well  for  explain- 
ing the  operations  of  the  human  understanding.     But  since 
men  began  to  reason  clearly  and  distinctly  about  them, 
they  have  by  degrees  supplanted  their  constituents,  and 
undermined  the  existence  of  every  thing  but  themselves. 
First,  they  discarded  all  secondary  qualities  of  bodies; 
and  it  was  found  out  by  their  means,  that  fire  is  not  hot, 
nor  snow  cold,  nor  honey  sweet :  and  in  a  word,  that  heat 
and  cold,  sound,  colour,  taste,  and  smell  are  nothing  but 
ideas  or  impressions.     Bishop  Berkeley  advanced  them  a 
step  higher,  and  found  out,  by  just  reasoning,  from  the 
same  principles,  that  extension,  solidity,  space,  figure,  and 
body  are  ideas,  and  that  there  is  nothing  in  nature  but 
ideas  and  spirits.      But  the  triumph  of  ideas  was  com- 
pleted by  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  which  discards 
spirits  also,  and  leaves  ideas  and  impressions  as  the  sole 
existences  in  the  universe.     What  if,  at  last,  having  no- 
thing else  to  contend  with,  they  should  fall  foul  of  one 
another,  and  leave  no  existence  in  nature  at  all?     This 
would  surely  bring  philosophy  into  danger ;  for  what  should 
we  have  left  to  talk  or  to  dispute  about  ? 

However,  hitherto  these  philosophers  acknowledge  the 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SMELLING.  31 

existence  of  impressions  and  ideas;  they  acknowledge 
certain  laws  of  attraction,  or  rules  of  precedence,  accord- 
ing to  which  ideas  and  impressions  range  themselves  in 
various  forms,  and  succeed  one  another :  but  that  they 
should  belong  to  a  mind,  as  its  proper  goods  and  chattels, 
this  they  have  found  to  be  a  vulgar  error.  These  ideas 
are  as  free  and  independent  as  the  birds  of  the  air,  or  as 
Epicurus's  atoms  when  they  pursued  their  journey  in  the 
vast  inane.  Shall  we  conceive  them  like  the  films  of  things 
in  the  Epicurean  system. 

Principio  hoc  dico,  rerum  simulacra  vagari, 
Multa  modis  multis,  in  cunctas  undique  parteis 
Tenuia,  quce  facile  inter  sejunguntur  in  auris, 
Obvia  cum  veniunt. — LucR. 

Or  do  they  rather  resemble  Aristotle's  intelligible  species 
after  they  are  shot  forth  from  the  object,  and  before  they 
have  yet  struck  upon  the  passive  intellect?  But  why 
should  we  seek  to  compare  them  with  any  thing,  since 
there  is  nothing  in  nature  but  themselves  ?  They  make  the 
whole  furniture  of  the  universe ;  starting  into  existence,  or 
out  of  it,  without  any  cause ;  combining  into  parcels,  which 
the  vulgar  call  minds;  and  succeeding  one  another  by  fixed 
laws,  without  time,  place,  or  author  of  those  laws. 

Yet,  after  all,  these  self-existent  and  independent  ideas 
look  pitifully  naked  and  destitute  when  left  thus  alone  in 
the  universe,  and  seem,  upon  the  whole,  to  be  in  a  worse 
condition  than  they  were,  before.  Des  Cartes,  Male- 
branche,  and  Locke,  as  they  made  much  use  of  ideas, 
treated  them  handsomely,  and  provided  them  in  decent 
accommodation;  lodging  them  either  in  the  pineal  gland, 
or  in  the  pure  intellect,  or  even  in  the  divine  mind.  They 
moreover  clothed  them  with  a  commission,  and  made  them 
representatives  of  things,  which  gave  them  some  dignity 
and  character.  But  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature, 
though  no  less  indebted  to  them,  seems  to  have  made  but 
a  bad  return,  by  bestowing  upon  them  this  independent 
existence ;  since  thereby  they  are  turned  out  of  house  and 


32  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

home,  and  set  adrift  in  the  world,  without  friend  or  con- 
nection, without  a  rag  to  cover  their  nakedness ;  and  who 
knows  but  the  whole  system  of  ideas  may  perish  by  the 
indiscreet  zeal  of  their  friends  to  exalt  them  ? 

However  this  may  be,  it  is  certainly  a  most  amazing 
discovery,  that  thought  and  ideas  may  be  without  any 
thinking  being : — a  discovery  big  with  consequences  which 
cannot  easily  be  traced  by  those  deluded  mortals  who 
think  and  reason  in  the  common  track.  We  were  always 
apt  to  imagine,  that  thought  supposed  a  thinker,  and  love 
a  lover,  and  treason  a  traitor :  but  this,  it  seems,  was  all  a 
mistake ;  and  it  is  found  out,  that  there  may  be  treason 
without  a  traitor,  and  love  without  a  lover,  laws  without  a 
legislator,  and  punishment  without  a  sufferer,  succession 
without  time,  and  motion  without  any  thing  moved,  or 
space  in  which  it  may  move :  or  if,  in  these  cases,  ideas 
are  the  lover,  the  sufferer,  the  traitor,  it  were  to  be  wished 
that  the  author  of  this  discovery  had  further  condescended 
to  acquaint  us,  whether  ideas  can  converse  together,  and 
be  under  obligations  of  duty  or  gratitude  to  each  other; 
whether  they  can  make  promises,  and  enter  into  leagues 
and  covenants,  and  fulfil  or  break  them,  and  be  punished 
for  the  breach  ?  If  one  set  of  ideas  make  a  covenant,  an- 
other breaks  it,  and  a  third  is  punished  for  it,  there  is 
reason  to  think  that  justice  is  no  natural  virtue  in  this 
system. 

It  seemed  very  natural  to  think  that  the  Treatise  of 
Human  Nature  required  an  Author,  and  a  very  ingenious 
one  too ;  but  now  we  learn  that  it  is  only  a  set  of  ideas 
which  came  together,  and  arranged  themselves  by  certain 
associations  and  attractions. 

After  all,  this  curious  system  appears  not  to  be  fitted 
to  the  present  state  of  human  nature.  How  far  it  may 
suit  some  choice  spirits,  who  are  refined  from  the  dregs  of 
common  sense,  I  cannot  say.  It  is  acknowledged,  I 
think,  that  even  these  can  enter  into  this  system  only  in 
their  most  speculative  hours,  when  they  soar  so  high  in 
pursuit  of  those  self-existent  ideas  as  to  lose  sight  of  all 
other  things.  But  when  they  condescend  to  mingle  again 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SMELLING.  33 

with  the  human  race,  and  to  converse  with  a  friend,  a  com- 
panion, or  a  fellow  citizen,  the  ideal  system  vanishes ;  com- 
mon sense,  like  an  irresistible  torrent,  carries  them  along ; 
and,  in  spite  of  all  their  reasoning  and  philosophy,  they 
believe  their  own  existence,  and  the  existence  of  other 
things. 

Indeed,  it  is  happy  they  do  so ;  for  if  they  should  carry 
their  closet  belief  into  the  world,  the  rest  of  mankind 
would  consider  them  as  diseased,  and  send  them  to  an 
infirmary.  Therefore,  as  Plato  required  certain  previous 
qualifications  of  those  who  entered  his  school,  I  think  it 
would  be  prudent  for  the  doctors  of  this  ideal  philosophy 
to  do  the  same,  and  to  refuse  admittance  to  every  man 
who  is  so  weak  as  to  imagine  that  he  ought  to  have  the 
same  belief  in  solitude  and  in  company,  or  that  his  prin- 
ciples ought  to  have  any  influence  upon  his  practice :  for 
this  philosophy  is  like  a  hobby-horse,  which  a  man  in  bad 
health  may  ride  in  his  closet,  without  hurting  his  reputa- 
tion ;  but  if  he  should  take  him  abroad"  with  him  to  church, 
or  to  the  exchange,  or  to  the  playhouse,  his  heir  would 
immediately  call  a  jury  and  seize  his  estate. 


SECT.  VII. 

The  Conception  and  Belief  of  a  Sentient  Being,  or 
Mind,  is  suggested  by  our  Constitution.  The  Notion 
of  Relations  not  always  got  by  comparing  the  related 
Ideas. 

LEAVING  this  philosophy,  therefore,  to  those  who  have 
occasion  for  it,  and  can  use  it  discreetly  as  a  chamber 
exercise,  we  may  still  inquire,  how  the  rest  of  mankind, 
and  even  the  adepts  themselves,  except  in  some  solitary 
moments,  have  got  so  strong  and  irresistible  a  belief,  that 
thought  must  have  a  subject,  and  be  the  act  of  some  think- 
ing being :  how  every  man  believes  himself  to  be  some- 
thing distinct  from  his  ideas  and  impressions ;  something 
which  continues  the  same  identical  self  when  all  his  ideas 

c3 


34  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

and  impressions  are  changed.  It  is  impossible  to  trace 
the  origin  of  this  opinion  in  history  :  for  all  languages  have 
it  interwoven  in  their  original  construction.  All  nations 
have  always  believed  it.  The  constitution  of  all  laws  and 
governments,  as  well  as  the  common  transactions  of  life, 
suppose  it. 

It  is  no  less  impossible  for  any  man  to  recollect  when  he 
himself  came  by  this  notion ;  for,  as  far  back  as  we  can 
remember,  we  were  already  in  possession  of  it,  and  as 
fully  persuaded  of  our  own  existence,  and  the  existence  of 
other  things,  as  that  one  and  one  make  two.  It  seems 
therefore,  that  this  opinion  preceded  all  reasoning,  and  ex- 
perience, and  instruction ;  and  this  is  the  more  probable, 
because  we  could  not  get  it  by  any  of  these  means.  It 
appears  then  to  be  an  undeniable  fact,  that  from  thought  or 
sensation,  all  mankind,  constantly  and  invariably,  from  the 
first  dawning  of  reflection,  do  infer  a  power  or  faculty  of 
thinking,  and  a  permanent  being  or  mind  to  which  that 
faculty  belongs ;  and  that  we  as  invariably  ascribe  all  the 
various  kinds  of  sensation  and  thought  we  are  conscious 
of  to  one  individual  mind  or  self. 

But  by  what  rules  of  logic  we  make  these  inferences  it 
is  impossible  to  show ;  nay,  it  is  impossible  to  show  how 
our  sensations  and  thoughts  can  give  us  the  very  notion 
and  conception  either  of  a  mind  or  of  a  faculty.  The 
faculty  of  smelling  is  something  very  different  from  the 
actual  sensation  of  smelling ;  for  the  faculty  may  remain 
when  we  have  no  sensation.  And  the  mind  is  no  less 
different  from  the  faculty ;  for  it  continues  the  same  indi- 
vidual being  when  that  faculty  is  lost.  Yet  this  sensation 
suggests  to  us  both  a  faculty  and  a  mind ;  and  not  only 
suggests  the  notion  of  them,  but  creates  a  belief  of  their 
existence ;  although  it  is  impossible  to  discover,  by  reason, 
any  tie  or  connection  between  one  and  the  other. 

What  shall  we  say,  then?  Either  those  inferences 
which  we  draw  from  our  sensations,  namely,  the  existence 
of  a  mind,  and  of  powers  or  faculties  belonging  to  it,  are 
prejudices  of  philosophy  or  education,  mere  fictions  of  the 
mind,  which  a  wise  man  should  throw  off  as  he  does  the 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  SMELLING.  3o 

belief  of  fairies ;  or  they  are  judgments  of  nature,  judg- 
ments not  got  by  comparing  ideas,  and  perceiving  agree- 
ments and  disagreements,  but  immediately  inspired  by  our 
constitution. 

If  this  last  is  the  case,  as  I  apprehend  it  is,  it  will  be 
impossible  to  shake  off  those  opinions,  and  we  must  yield 
to  them  at  last,  though  we  struggle  hard  to  get  rid  of  them. 
And  if  we  could,  by  a  determined  obstinacy,  shake  off  the 
principles  of  our  nature,  this  is  not  to  act  the  philosopher, 
but  the  fool  or  the  madman.  It  is  incumbent  upon  those 
who  think  that  these  are  not  natural  principles,  to  show,  in 
the  first  place,  how  we  can  otherwise  get  the  notion  of  a 
mind  and  its  faculties ;  and  then  to  show,  how  we  come  to 
deceive  ourselves  into  the  opinion  that  sensation  cannot  be 
without  a  sentient  being. 

It  is  the  received  doctrine  of  philosophers,  that  our 
notions  of  relations  can  only  be  got  by  comparing  the 
related  ideas :  but,  in  the  present  case,  there  seems  to  be 
an  instance  to  the  contrary.  It  is  not  by  having  first  the 
notions  of  mind  and  sensation,  and  then  comparing  them 
together,  that  we  perceive  the  one  to  have  the  relation  of  a 
subject  or  substratum,  and  the  other  that  of  an  act  or 
operation ;  on  the  contrary,  one  of  the  related  things,  to 
wit,  sensation,  suggests  to  us  both  the  corelate  and  the 
relation. 

I  beg  leave  to  make  use  of  the  word  suggestion,  be- 
cause I  know  not  one  more  proper  to  express  a  poMrer  of 
the  mind,  which  seems  entirely  to  have  escaped  the  notice 
of  philosophers,  and  to  which  we  owe  many  of  our  simple 
notions  which  are  neither  impressions  nor  ideas,  as  well  as 
many  original  principles  of  belief.  I  shall  endeavour  to 
illustrate,  by  an  example,  what  I  understand  by  this  word. 
We  all  know,  that  a  certain  kind  of  sound  suggests  imme- 
diately to  the  mind  a  coach  passing  in  the  street ;  and  not 
only  produces  the  imagination,  but  the  belief,  that  a  coach 
is  passing.  Yet  there  is  here  no  comparing  of  ideas,  no 
perception  of  agreements  or  disagreements,  to  produce  this 
belief;  nor  is  there  the  least  similitude  between  the  sound 


36  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

we  hear  and  the  coach  we  imagine  and  believe  to  be 
passing. 

It  is  true  that  this  suggestion  is  not  natural  and  original ; 
it  is  the  result  of  experience  and  habit.  But  I  think  it 
appears,  from  what  hath  been  said,  that  there  are  natural 
suggestions ;  particularly,  that  sensation  suggests  the  no- 
tion of  present  existence,  and  the  belief  that  what  we  per- 
ceive or  feel  does  now  exist;  that  memory  suggests  the 
notion  of  past  existence,  and  the  belief  that  what  we  re- 
member did  exist  in  time, past;  and  that  our  sensations 
and  thoughts  do  also  suggest  the  notion  of  a  mind,  and  the 
belief  of  its  existence,  and  of  its  relation  to  our  thoughts. 
By  a  like  natural  principle  it  is,  that  a  beginning  of  exist- 
ence, or  any  change  in  nature,  suggests  to  us  the  notion  of 
a  cause,  and  compels  our  belief  of  its  existence.  And  in 
like  manner,  as  shall  be  shown  when  we  come  to  the  sense 
of  touch,  certain  sensations  of  touch,  by  the  constitution 
of  our  nature,  suggest  to  us  extension,  solidity,  and  mo- 
tion, which  are  nowise  like  to  sensations,  although  they 
have  been  hitherto  confounded  with  them. 


SECT.  VIII. 

There  is  a  Quality  or  Virtue  in  Bodies,  which  we  call 
their  Smell.  How  this  is  connected  in  the  Imagina- 
tion with  the  Sensation. 


have  considered  smell  as  signifying  a  sensation,  feel- 
ing, or  impression  upon  the  mind;  and,  in  this  sense,  it 
can  only  be  in  a  mind,  or  sentient  being  :  but  it  is  evident, 
that  mankind  give  the  name  of  smell  much  more  frequently 
to  something  which  they  conceive  to  be  external,  and  to 
be  a  quality  of  body  :  they  understand  something  by 
which  it  does  not  at  all  infer  a  mind  ;  and  have  not  the 
least  difficulty  in  conceiving  the  air  perfumed  with  aro- 
matic odours  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia,  or  in  some  unin- 
habited island,  where  the  human  foot  never  trod.  Every 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  SMELLING.  37 

sensible  day-labourer  hath  as  clear  a  notion  of  this,  and  as 
full  a  conviction  of  the  possibility  of  it,  as  he  hath  of  his 
own  existence ;  and  can  no  more  doubt  of  the  one  than  of 
the  other. 

Suppose  that  such  a  man  meets  with  a  modern  philoso- 
pher, and  wants  to  be  informed,  what  smell  in  plants  is. 
The  philosopher  tells  him,  that  there  is  no  smell  in  plants, 
nor  in  any  thing  but  in  the  mind;  that  it  is  impossible 
there  can  be  smell  but  in  a  mind ;  and  that  all  this  hath 
been  demonstrated  by  modern  philosophy.  The  plain 
man  will,  no  doubt,  be  apt  to  think  him  merry  :  but  if  he 
finds  that  he  is  serious,  his  next  conclusion  will  be,  that  he 
Li  mad ;  or  that  philosophy,  like  magic,  puts  men  into  a 
new  world,  and  gives  them  different  faculties  from  com- 
mon men  :  and  thus  philosophy  and  common  sense  are  set 
at  variance.  But  who  is  to  blame  for  it  ?  In  my  opinion 
the  philosopher  is  to  blame.  For  if  he  means  by  smell 
what  the  rest  of  mankind  most  commonly  mean,  he  is  cer- 
tainly mad.  But  if  he  puts  a  different  meaning  upon  the 
word,  without  observing  it  himself  or  giving  warning  to 
others,  he  abuses  language,  and  disgraces  philosophy, 
without  doing  any  service  to  truth :  as  if  a  man  should 
exchange  the  meaning  of  the  words  daughter  and  cow, 
and  then  endeavour  to  prove  to  his  plain  neighbour,  that 
his  cow  is  his  daughter,  and  his  daughter  his  cow. 

.1  believe  there  is  not  much  more  wisdom  in  many  of 
those  paradoxes  of  the  ideal  philosophy,  which  to  plain 
sensible  men  appear  to  be  palpable  absurdities,  but  with 
the  adepts  pass  for  profound  discoveries.  I  resolve,  for 
my  own  part,  always  to  pay  a  great  regard  to  the  dictates 
of  common  sense,  and  not  to  depart  from  them  without 
absolute  necessity ;  and  therefore  I  am  apt  to  think,  that 
there  is  really  something  in  the  rose  or  lily,  which  is  by 
the  vulgar  called  smell,  and  which  continues  to  exist  when 
it  is  not  smelled :  and  shall  proceed  to  inquire  what  this  is ; 
how  we  come  by  the  notion  of  it ;  and  what  relation  this 
quality  or  virtue  of  smell  hath  to  the  sensation,  which  we 
have  been  obliged  to  call  by  the  same  name,  for  want  of 
another. 


38  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

Let  us  therefore  suppose,  as  before,  a  person  beginning 
to  exercise  the  sense  of  smelling :  a  little  experience  will 
discover  to  him,  that  the  nose  is  the  organ  of  this  sense, 
and  that  the  air,  or  something  in  the  air,  is  a  medium  of  it. 
And  rinding  by  further  experience,  that  when  a  rose  is 
near,  he  has  a  certain  sensation ;  when  it  is  removed,  the 
sensation  is  gone ;  he  finds  a  connection  in  nature  betwixt 
the  rose  and  this  sensation.  The  rose  is  considered  as  a 
cause,  occasion,  or  antecedent  of  the  sensation ;  the  sen- 
sation as  an  effect  or  consequent  of  the  presence  of  the 
rose;  they  are  associated  in  the  mind,  and  constantly 
found  conjoined  in  the  imagination. 

But  here  it  deserves  our  notice,  that  although  the  sensa- 
tion may  seem  more  closely  related  to  the  mind  its  subject, 
or  to  the  nose  its  organ ;  yet  neither  of  these  connections 
operate  so  powerfully  upon  the  imagination,  as  its  connec- 
tion with  the  rose  its  concomitant.  The  reason  of  this 
seems  to  be,  that  its  connection  with  the  mind  is  more 
general,  and  no  way  distinguisheth  it  from  other  smells,  or 
even  from  tastes,  sounds,  and  other  kinds  of  sensations. 
The  relation  it  hath  to  the  organ  is  likewise  general, 
and  doth  not  distinguish  it  from  other  smells:  but  the 
connection  it  hath  with  the  rose  is  special  and  constant ; 
by  which  means  they  become  almost  inseparable  in  the 
imagination,  in  like  manner  as  thunder  and  lightning, 
freezing  and  cold. 


SECT.  IX. 

That  there  is  a  Principle  in  Human  Nature,  from 
which  the  Notion  of  this,  as  well  as  all  other  Natural 
Virtues  or  Causes,  is  derived. 

IN  order  to  illustrate  further  how  we  come  to  conceive  a 
quality  or  virtue  in  the  rose,  which  we  call  smell,  and 
what  this  smell  is,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  the  mind 
begins  very  early  to  thirst  after  principles  which  may 
direct  it  in  the  exertion  of  its  powers.  The  smell  of  a 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SMELLING.  39 

rose  is  a  certain  affection  or  feeling  of  the  mind ;  and  as  it 
is  not  constant,  but  comes  and  goes,  we  want  to  know 
when  and  where  we  may  expect  it,  and  are  uneasy  till  we 
find  something,  which,  being  present,  brings  this  feeling 
along  with  it,  and  being  removed,  removes  it.  This, 
when  found,  we  call  the  cause  of  it;  not  in  a  strict  and 
philosophical  sense :  as  if  the  feeling  were  really  effected 
or  produced  by  that  cause,  but  in  a  popular  sense :  for  the 
mind  is  satisfied,  if  there  is  a  constant  conjunction  be- 
tween them ;  and  such  causes  are  in  reality  nothing  else 
but  laws  of  nature.  Having  found  the  smell  thus  con- 
stantly conjoined  with  the  rose,  the  mind  is  at  rest,  with- 
out inquiring  whether  this  conjunction  is  owing  to  a  real 
efficiency  or  not;  that  being  a  philosophical  inquiry,  which 
does  not  concern  human  life.  But  every  discovery  of 
such  a  constant  conjunction  is  of  real  importance  in  life, 
and  makes  a  strong  impression  upon  the  mind. 

So  ardently  do  we  desire  to  find  every  thing  that  hap- 
pens within  our  observation  thus  connected  with  some- 
thing else,  as  its  cause  or  occasion,  that  we  are  apt  to 
fancy  connections  upon  the  slightest  grounds:  and  this 
weakness  is  most  remarkable  in  the  ignorant,  who  know 
least  of  the  real  connections  established  in  nature.  A 
man  meets  with  an  unlucky  accident  on  a  certain  day  of 
the  year ;  and  knowing  no  other  cause  of  his  misfortune, 
he  is  apt  to  conceive  something  unlucky  in  that  day  of  the 
calendar;  and  if  he  finds  the  same  connection  hold  a 
second  time,  is  strongly  confirmed  in  his  superstition.  I 
remember,  many  years  ago,  a  white  ox  was  brought  into 
this  country,  of  so  enormous  a  size  that  people  came 
many  miles  to  see  him.  There  happened,  some  months 
after,  an  uncommon  fatality  among  women  in  child-bear- 
ing. Two  such  uncommon  events  following  one  another 
gave  a  suspicion  of  their  connection,  and  occasioned  a 
common  opinion  among  the  country  people,  that  the  white 
ox  was  the  cause  of  this  fatality. 

However  silly  and  ridiculous  this  opinion  was,  it  sprung 
from  the  same  root  in  human  nature  on  which  all  natural 
philosophy  grows;  namely,  an  eager  desire  to  find  out 


40  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [cHAP.  II. 

connections  in  things,  and  a  natural,  original,  and  unac- 
countable propensity  to  believe,  that  the  connections  which 
we  have  observed  in  times  past  will  continue  in  time  to 
come.  Omens,  portents,  good  and  bad  luck,  palmistry, 
astrology,  all  the  numerous  arts  of  divination,  and  of  inter- 
preting: dreams,  false  hypotheses  and  systems,  and  true 
principles  in  the  philosophy  of  nature,  are  all  built  upon 
the  same  foundation  in  the  human  constitution;  and  are 
distinguished  only  according  as  we  conclude  rashly  from 
too  few  instances,  or  cautiously  from  a  sufficient  induction. 

As  it  is  experience  only  that  discovers  these  connec- 
tions between  natural  causes  and  their  effects;  without 
inquiring  further,  we  attribute  to  the  cause  some  vague 
and  indistinct  notion  of  power  or  virtue  to  produce  the 
effect.  And  in  many  cases,  the  purposes  of  life  do  not 
make  it  necessary  to  give  distinct  names  to  the  cause  and 
the  effect.  Whence  it  happens,  that  being  closely  con- 
nected in  the  imagination,  although  very  unlike  to  each 
other,  one  name  serves  for  both;  and,  in  common  dis- 
course, is  most  frequently  applied  to  that  which,  of  the 
two,  is  most  the  object  of  our  attention.  This  occasions 
an  ambiguity  in  many  words,  which  having  the  same 
causes  in  all  languages,  is  common  to  all,  and  is  apt  to 
be  overlooked  even  by  philosophers.' — Some  instances  will 
serve  both  to  illustrate  and  confirm  what  we  have  said. 

Magnetism  signifies  both  the  tendency  of  the  iron 
towards  the  magnet,  and  the  power  of  the  magnet  to  pro- 
duce that  tendency  :  and  if  it  was  asked,  whether  it  is  a 
quality  of  the  iron  or  of  the  magnet?  one  would  perhaps 
be  puzzled  at  first;  but  a  little  attention  would  discover, 
that  we  conceive  a  power  or  virtue  in  the  magnet  as  the 
cause,  and  a  motion  in  the  iron  as  the  effect;  and  although 
these  are  things  quite  unlike,  they  are  so  united  in  the 
imagination,  that  we  give  the  common  name  of  magnetism 
to  both.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  gravitation, 
which  sometimes  signifies  the  tendency  of  bodies  towards 
the  earth,  sometimes  the  attractive  power  of  the  earth, 
which  we  conceive  as  the  cause  of  that  tendency.  We 
may  observe  the  same  ambiguity  in  some  of  Sir  Isaac 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SMELLING.  41 

Newton's  definitions ;  and  that  even  in  words  of  his  own 
making.  In  three  of  his  definitions,  he  explains  very  dis- 
tinctly what  he  understands  by  the  absolute  quantity,  and 
what  by  the  accelerative  quantity,  and  what  by  the  motive 
quantity  of  a  centripetal  force.  In  the  first  of  these  three 
definitions,  centripetal  force  is  put  for  the  cause,  which 
we  conceive  to  be  some  power  or  virtue  in  the  centre  or 
central  body  :  in  the  two  last,  the  same  word  is  put  for  the 
effect  of  this  cause,  in  producing  velocity,  or  in  producing 
motion  towards  that  centre. 

Heat  signifies  a  sensation,  and  cold  a  contrary  one. 
But  heat  likewise  signifies  a  quality  or  state  of  bodies, 
which  hath  no  contrary,  but  different  degrees.  When  a 
man  feels  the  same  water  hot  to  one  hand,  and  cold  to  the 
other,  this  gives  him  occasion  to  distinguish  between  the 
feeling,  and  the  heat  of  the  body  ;  and  although  he  knows 
that  the  sensations  are  contrary,  he  does  not  imagine  that 
the  body  can  have  contrary  qualities  at  the  same  time. 
And  when  he  finds  a  different  taste  in  the  same  body  in 
sickness  and  in  health,  he  is  easily  convinced,  that  the 
quality  in  the  body  called  taste,  is  the  same  as  before, 
although  the  sensations  he  has  from  it  are  perhaps  oppo- 
site. 

The  vulgar  are  commonly  charged  by  philosophers 
with  the  absurdity  of  imagining  the  smell  in  the  rose  to  be 
something  like  to  the  sensation  of  smelling :  but  I  think 
unjustly ;  for  they  neither  give  the  same  epithets  to  both, 
nor  do  they  reason  in  the  same  manner  from  them.  What 
is  smell  in  the  rose  ?  It  is  a  quality  or  virtue  of  the  rose, 
or  of  something  proceeding  from  it,  which  we  perceive  by 
the  sense  of  smelling;  and  this  is  all  we  know  of  the 
matter.  But  what  is  smelling?  It  is  an  act  of  the  mind, 
but  is  never  imagined  to  be  a  quality  of  the  mind.  Again, 
the  sensation  of  smelling  is  conceived  to  infer  necessarily 
a  mind  or  sentient  being ;  but  smell  in  the  rose  infers  no 
such  thing'.  We  say,  This  body  smells  sweet;  that 
stinks ;  but  we  do  not  say,  This  mind  smells  sweet,  and 
that  stinks.  Therefore  smell  in  the  rose,  and  the  sensa- 
tion which  it  causes,  are  not  conceived,  even  by  the  vul- 


42  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

gar,  to  be  things  of  the  same  kind,  although  they  have  the 
same  name. 

From  what  hath  been  said,  we  may  learn,  that  the 
smell  of  a  rose  signifies  two  things.  First,  A  sensation, 
which  can  have  no  existence  but  when  it  is  perceived,  and 
can  only  be  in  a  sentient  being  or  mind.  Secondly,  It 
siaiiifies  some  power,  quality,  or  virtue,  in  the  rose,  or  in 
the  effluvia  proceeding  from  it,  which  hath  a  permanent 
existence,  independent  of  the  mind,  and  which  by  the  con- 
stitution of  nature  produces  the  sensation  in  us.  By  the 
original  constitution  of  our  nature,  we  are  both  led  to 
believe,  that  there  is  a  permanent  cause  of  the  sensation, 
and  prompted  to  seek  after  it ;  and  experience  determines 
us  to  place  it  in  the  rose.  The  names  of  all  smells,  tastes, 
sounds,  as  well  as  heat  and  cold,  have  a  like  ambiguity  in 
all  languages ;  but  it  deserves  our  attention,  that  these 
names  are  but  rarely,  in  common  language,  used  to  signify 
the  sensations;  for  the  most  part  they  signify  the  exter- 
nal qualities  which  are  indicated  by  the  sensations.  The 
cause  of  which  phenomena  I  take  to  be  this :  Our  sensa- 
tions have  very  different  degrees  of  strength.  Some  of 
them  are  so  quick  and  lively  as  to  give  us  a  great  deal 
either  of  pleasure  or  of  uneasiness  :  When  this  is  the  case, 
we  are  compelled  to  attend  to  the  sensation  itself,  and  to 
make  it  an  object  of  thought  and  discourse ;  we  give  it  a 
name,  which  signifies  nothing  but  the  sensation;  and  in 
this  case  we  readily  acknowledge,  that  the  thing  meant  by 
that  name  is  in  the  mind  only,  and  not  in  any  thing  exter- 
nal. Such  are  the  various  kinds  of  pain,  sickness,  and 
the  sensations  of  hunger  and  other  appetites.  But  where 
the  sensation  is  not  so  interesting  as  to  require  to  be  made 
an  object  of  thought,  our  constitution  leads  us  to  consider 
it  as  a  sign  of  something  external,  which  hath  a  constant 
conjunction  with  it;  and  having  found  what  it  indicates, 
we  give  a  name  to  that :  the  sensation,  having  no  proper 
name,  falls  in  as  accessory  to  the  thing  signified  by  it,  and 
is  confounded  under  the  same  name.  So  that  the  name 
may  indeed  be  applied  to  the  sensation,  but  most  properly 
and  commonly  is  applied  to  the  thing  indicated  by  that 


SECT.  X.]  OF  SMELLING.  43 

sensation.  The  sensations  of  smell,  taste,  sound  and  co- 
lour, are  of  infinitely  more  importance  as  signs  or  indica- 
tions than  they  are  upon  their  own  account;  like  the 
words  of  a  language,  wherein  we  do  not  attend  to  the 
sound,  but  to  the  sense. 


SECT.  X. 

Whether  in  Sensation  the  Mind  is  active  or  passive  ? 

THERE  is  one  inquiry  remains,  Whether,  in  smelling,  and 
in  other  sensations,  the  mind  is  active  or  passive?  This 
possibly  may  seem  to  be  a  question  about  words,  or  at 
least  of  very  small  importance ;  however,  if  it  lead  us  to 
attend  more  accurately  to  the  operations  of  our  minds  than 
we  are  accustomed  to  do,  it  is  upon  that  very  account  not 
altogether  unprofitable.  I  think  the  opinion  of  modern 
philosophers  is,  that  in  sensation  the  mind  is  altogether 
passive.  And  this  undoubtedly  is  so  far  true,  that  we 
cannot  raise  any  sensation  in  our  minds  by  willing  it ;  and, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  seems  hardly  possible  to  avoid  having 
the  sensation  when  the  object  is  presented.  Yet  it  seems 
likewise  to  be  true,  that  in  proportion  as  the  attention  is 
more  or  less  turned  to  a  sensation,  or  diverted  from  it, 
that  sensation  is  more  or  less  perceived  and  remembered. 
Every  one  knows,  that  very  intense  pain  may  be  diverted 
by  a  suq>rise,  or  by  any  thing  that  entirely  occupies  the 
mind.  When  we  are  engaged  in  earnest  conversation, 
the  clock  may  strike  by  us  without  being  heard ;  at  least 
we  remember  not  the  next  moment  that  we  did  hear  it. 
The  noise  and  tumult  of  a  great  trading  city  is  not  heard 
by  them  who  have  lived  in  it  all  their  days ;  but  it  stuns 
those  strangers  who  have  lived  in  the  peaceful  retirement 
of  the  country.  Whether,  therefore,  there  can  be  any 
sensation  where  the  mind  is  purely  passive,  I  will  not  say  j 
but  I  think  we  are  conscious  of  having  given  some  atten- 
tion to  every  sensation  which  we  remember,  though 
so  recent. 


44  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  II. 

No  doubt,  where  the  impulse  is  strong  and  uncommon, 
it  is  as  difficult  to  withhold  attention,  as  it  is  to  forbear 
crying  out  in  racking  pain,  or  starting  in  a  sudden  fright : 
but  how  far  both  might  be  attained  by  strong  resolution 
and  practice  is  not  easy  to  determine.  So  that,  although 
the  Peripatetics  had  no  good  reason  to  suppose  an  active 
and  a  passive  intellect,  since  attention  may  be  well  enough 
accounted  an  act  of  the  will;  yet  I  think  they  came 
nearer  to  the  truth,  in  holding  the  mind  to  be  in  sensation 
partly  passive  and  partly  active,  than  the  moderns,  in 
affirming  it  to  be  purely  passive.  Sensation,  imagination, 
memory,  and  judgment  have,  by  the  vulgar,  in  all  ages, 
been  considered  as  acts  of  the  mind.  The  manner  in 
which  they  are  expressed,  in  all  languages,  shows  this. 
When  the  mind  is  much  employed  in  them,  we  say  it  is 
very  active ;  whereas,  if  they  were  impressions  only,  as 
the  ideal  philosophy  would  lead  us  to  conceive,  we  ought 
in  such  a  case  rather  to  say,  that  the  mind  is  very  pas- 
sive :  for  I  suppose  no  man  would  attribute  great  activity 
to  the  paper  I  write  upon,  because  it  receives  variety  of 
characters. 

The  relation  which  the  sensation  of  smell  bears  to  the 
memory  and  imagination  of  it,  and  to  a  mind  or  subject,  is 
common  to  all  our  sensations,  and  indeed  to  all  the  opera- 
tions of  the  mind :  the  relation  it  bears  to  the  will  is  com- 
mon to  it  with  all  the  powers  of  understanding  :  and  the 
relation  it  bears  to  that  quality  or  virtue  of  bodies  which 
it  indicates  is  common  to  it  with  the  sensations  of  taste, 
hearing,  colour,  heat,  and  cold :  so  that  what  hath  been 
said  of  this  sense  may  easily  be  applied  to  several  of  our 
senses,  and  to  other  operations  of  the  mind;  and  this,  I 
hope,  will  apologize  for  our  insisting  so  long  upon  it. 


45 


CHAP.  III. 
OF  TASTING. 


A  GREAT  part  of  what  hath  been  said  of  the  sense  of 
smelling  is  so  easily  applied  to  those  of  tasting  and  hear- 
ing, that  we  shall  leave  the  application  entirely  to  the 
reader's  judgment,  and  save  ourselves  the  trouble  of  a 
tedious  repetition. 

It  is  probable  that  every  thing  that  affects  the  taste  is 
in  some  degree  soluble  in  the  saliva.  It  is  not  conceiv- 
able how  any  thing  should  enter  readily,  and  of  its  own 
accord,  as  it  were,  into  the  pores  of  the  tongue,  palate, 
and  fauces,  unless  it  had  some  chemical  affinity  to  that 
liquor  with  which  these  pores  are  always  replete.  It  is 
therefore  an  admirable  contrivance  of  nature,  that  the 
organs  of  taste  should  always  be  moist  with  a  liquor 
which  is  so  universal  a  menstruum,  and  which  deserves  to 
be  examined  more  than  it  hath  been  hitherto,  both  in 
that  capacity,  and  as  a  medical  unguent.  Nature  teaches 
dogs  and  other  animals  to  use  it  in  this  last  way;  and 
its  subserviency  both  to  taste  and  digestion  shows  its 
efficacy  in  the  former. 

It  is  with  manifest  design  and  propriety,  that  the  organ 
of  this  sense  guards  the  entrance  of  the  alimentary  canal, 
as  that  of  smell  the  entrance  of  the  canal  for  respiration. 
And  from  these  organs  being  placed  in  such  manner,  that 
every  thing  that  enters  into  the  stomach  must  undergo  the 
scrutiny  of  both  senses,  it  is  plain,  that  they  were  intended 
by  nature  to  distinguish  wholesome  food  from  that  which 
is  noxious.  The  brutes  have  no  other  means  of  choosing 
their  food ;  nor  would  mankind,  in  the  savage  state.  And 
it  is  very  probable,  that  the  smell  and  taste,  no  way 
vitiated  by  luxury  or  bad  habits,  would  rarely,  if  ever, 


46  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  III. 

lead  us  to  a  wrong  choice  of  food  among  the  productions 
of  nature ;  although  the  artificial  compositions  of  a  refined 
and  luxurious  cookery,  or  of  chemistry  and  pharmacy, 
may  often  impose  upon  both,  and  produce  things  agree- 
able to  the  taste  and  smell,  which  are  noxious  to  health. 
And  it  is  probable,  that  both  smell  and  taste  are  vitiated, 
and  rendered  less  fit  to  perform  their  natural  offices,  by 
the  unnatural  kind  of  life  men  commonly  lead  in  society. 

These  senses  are  likewise  of  great  use  to  distinguish 
bodies  that  cannot  be  distinguished  by  our  .other  senses, 
and  to  discern  the  changes  which  the  same  body  under- 
goes, which  in  many  cases  are  sooner  perceived  by  taste 
and  smell  than  by  any  other  means.  How  many  things 
are  there  hi  the  market,  the  eating-house,  and  the  tavern, 
as  well  as  in  the  apothecary  and  chemist's  shops,  which 
are  known  to  be  what  they  are  given  out  to  be,  and  are 
perceived  to  be  good  or  bad  hi  then-  kind,  only  by  taste  or 
smell  ?  And  how  far  our  judgment  of  things,  by  means 
of  our  senses,  might  be  improved  by  accurate  attention  to 
the  small  differences  of  taste  and  smell,  and  other  sensible 
qualities,  is  not  easy  to  determine.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  by 
a  noble  effort  of  his  great  genius,  attempted,  from  the 
colour  of  opaque  bodies,  to  discover  the  magnitude  of  the 
minute  pellucid  parts  of  which  they  are  compounded :  and 
who  knows  what  new  lights  natural  philosophy  may  yet 
receive  from  other  secondary  qualities  duly  examined  ? 

Some  tastes  and  smells  stimulate  the  nerves  and  raise 
the  spirits ;  but  such  an  artificial  elevation  of  the  spirits  is, 
by  the  laws  of  nature,  followed  by  a  depression,  which 
can  only  be  relieved  by  time,  or  by  the  repeated  use  of  the 
like  stimulus.  By  the  use  of  such  things  we  create  an 
appetite  for  them,  which  very  much  resembles,  and  hath 
all  the  force  of  a  natural  one.  It  is  in  this  manner  that 
men  acquire  an  appetite  for  snuff,  tobacco,  strong  liquors, 
laudanum,  and  the  like. 

Nature  indeed  seems  studiously  to  have  set  bounds  to 
the  pleasures  and  pains  we  have  by  these  two  senses,  and 
to  have  confined  them  within  very  narrow  limits,  that  we 
might  not  place  any  part  of  our  happiness  in  them ;  there 


OF  TASTING.  47 

being  hardly  any  smell  or  taste  so  disagreeable  that  use 
will  not  make  it  tolerable,  and  at  last  perhaps  agreeable ; 
nor  any  so  agreeable  as  not  to  lose  its  relish  by  constant 
use.  Neither  is  there  any  pleasure  or  pain  of  these  senses 
which  is  not  introduced,  or  followed,  by  some  degree  of 
its  contrary,  which  nearly  balances  it.  So  that  we  may 
here  apply  the  beautiful  allegory  of  the  divine  Socrates ; 
that  although  pleasure  and  pain  are  contrary  in  their  na- 
ture, and  their  faces  look  different  ways,  yet  Jupiter  hath 
tied  them  so  together,  that  he  that  lays  hold  of  the  one, 
draws  the  other  along  with  it. 

As  there  is  a  great  variety  of  smells,  seemingly  simple 
and  uncompounded,  not  only  altogether  unlike,  but  some 
of  them  contrary  to  others ;  and  as  the  same  thing  may  be 
said  of  tastes ;  it  would  seem  that  one  taste  is  not  less 
different  from  another  than  it  is  from  a  smell :  and  there- 
fore, it  may  be  a  question,  how  all  smells  come  to  be  con- 
sidered as  one  genus,  and  all  tastes  as  another  ?  What 
is  the  generical  distinction  ?  Is  it  only  that  the  nose  is  the 
organ  of  the  one,  and  the  palate  of  the  other  ?  or,  abstrac- 
ing  from  the  organ,  is  there  not  in  the  sensations  them- 
selves something  common  to  smells,  and  something  else 
common  to  tastes,  whereby  the  one  is  distinguished  from 
the  other  ?  It  seems  most  probable  that  the  latter  is  the 
case ;  and  that,  under  the  appearance  of  the  greatest  sim- 
plicity, there  is  still  in  these  sensations  something  of  com- 
position. 

If  one  considers  the  matter  abstractly,  it  would  seem, 
that  a  number  of  sensations,  or  indeed  of  any  other  indi- 
vidual things,  which  are  perfectly  simple  and  uncom- 
pounded, are  incapable  of  being  reduced  into  genera  and 
species;  because  individuals  which  belong  to  a  species 
must  have  something  peculiar  to  each,  by  which  they  are 
distinguished,  and  something  common  to  the  whole  species. 
And  the  same  may  be  said  of  species  which  belong  to  one 
genus.  And  whether  this  does  not  imply  some  kind  of 
composition,  we  shall  leave  to  metaphysicians  to  deter- 
mine. 

The  sensations  both  of  smell  and  taste  do  undoubtedly 


48  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  lit. 

admit  of  an  immense  variety  of  modifications,  which  no 
language  can  express.  If  a  man  was  to  examine  five  hun- 
dred different  wines,  he  would  hardly  find  two  of  them 
that  had  precisely  the  same  taste :  the  same  thing  holds  in 
cheese,  and  in  many  other  things.  Yet  of  five  hundred 
different  tastes  in  cheese  or  wine,  we  can  hardly  describe 
twenty,  so  as  to  give  a  distinct  notion  of  them  to  one  who 
had  not  tasted  them. 

Dr.  Nehemiah  Grew,  a  most  judicious  and  laborious 
naturalist,  in  a  discourse  read  before  the  Royal  Society, 
anno  1675,  hath  endeavoured  to  show  that  there  are  at 
least  sixteen  different  simple  tastes,  which  he  enumerates. 
How  many  compound  ones  may  be  made  out  of  all  the 
various  combinations  of  two,  three,  four,  or  more  of  these 
simple  ones,  they  who  are  acquainted  with  the  theory  of 
combinations  will  easily  perceive.  All  these  have  various 
degrees  of  intenseness  and  weakness.  Many  of  them 
have  other  varieties :  in  some  the  taste  is  more  quickly 
perceived  upon  the  application  of  the  sapid  body,  in  others 
more  slowly ;  in  some  the  sensation  is  more  permanent,  in 
others  more  transient;  in  some  it  seems  to  undulate,  or 
return  after  certain  intervals,  in  others  it  is  constant: 
the  various  parts  of  the  organ,  as  the  lips,  the  tip  of  the 
tongue,  the  root  of  the  tongue,  the  fauces,  the  uvula,  and 
the  throat  are  some  of  them  chiefly  affected  by  one  sapid 
body,  and  others  by  another.  All  these,  and  other  varie- 
ties of  tastes,  that  accurate  writer  illustrates  by  a  number 
of  examples.  Nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  but  smells,  if 
examined  with  the  same  accuracy,  would  appear  to  have 
as  great  variety. 


49 


CHAP.  IV. 
OF  HEARING. 


SECT.  I. 

Variety  of  Sounds.     Their  Place  and  Distance  learned 
by  Custom,  without  Reasoning. 

SOUNDS  have  probably  no  less  variety  of  modifications 
than  either  tastes  or  odours.  For,  first,  sounds  differ  in 
tone.  The  ear  is  capable  of  perceiving  four  or  five  hun- 
dred variations  of  tone  in  sound,  and  probably  as  many 
different  degrees  of  strength;  by  combining  these,  we 
have  above  twenty  thousand  simple  sounds,  that  differ 
either  in  tone  or  strength;  supposing  every  tone  to  be 
perfect.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  to  make  a  perfect 
tone,  a  great  many  undulations  of  elastic  air  are  required, 
which  must  all  be  of  equal  duration  and  extent,  and  follow 
one  another  with  perfect  regularity ;  and  each  undulation 
must  be  made  up  of  the  advance  and  recoil  of  innumerable 
particles  of  elastic  air,  whose  motions  are  all  uniform  in 
direction,  force,  and  time.  Hence  we  may  easily  con- 
ceive a  prodigious  variety  in  the  same  tone,  arising  from 
irregularities  of  it,  occasioned  by  the  constitution,  figure, 
situation,  or  manner  of  striking  the  sonorous  body :  from 
the  constitution  of  the  elastic  medium,  or  its  being  dis- 
turbed by  other  motions ;  and  from  the  constitution  of  the 
ear  itself,  upon  which  the  impression  is  made. 

A  flute,  a  violin,  a  hautboy,  and  a  French  horn  may 
all  sound  the  same  tone,  and  be  easily  distinguishable. 
Nay,  if  twenty  human  voices  sound  the  same  note,  and 
with  equal  strength,  there  will  still  be  some  difference. 
The  same  voice,  while  it  retains  its  proper  distinctions, 
may  yet  be  varied  many  ways,  by  sickness  or  health,  youth 
or  age,  leanness  or  fatness,  good  or  bad  humour.  The 

D 


50  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  IV. 

same  words  spoken  by  foreigners  and  natives,  nay,  by 
persons  of  different  provinces  of  the  same  nation,  may  be 
distinguished. 

Such  an  immense  variety  of  sensations  of  smell,  taste, 
and  sound,  surely  was  not  given  us  in  vain.  They  are 
signs  by  which  we  know  and  distinguish  things  without 
us ;  and  it  was  fit  that  the  variety  of  the  sisms  should,  in 

•/ 

some  degree,  correspond  with  the  variety  of  things  signi- 
fied by  them. 

It  seems  to  be  by  custom,  that  we  learn  to  distinguish 
both  the  place  of  things,  and  their  nature,  by  means  of 
their  sound.  That  such  a  noise  is  in  the  street,  such  ano- 
ther in  the  room  above  me ;  that  this  is  a  knock  at  my 
door,  that  a  person  walking  up  stairs ;  is  probably  learnt 
by  experience.  I  remember,  that  once  lying  a-bed,  and 
having  been  put  into  a  fright,  I  heard  my  own  heart  beat ; 
but  I  took  it  to  be  one  knocking  at  the  door,  and  arose 
and  opened  the  door  oftener  than  once,  before  I  discovered 
the  sound  was  in  my  own  breast.  It  is  probable,  that 
previous  to  all  experience,  we  should  as  little  know,  whe- 
ther a  sound  came  from  the  right  or  left,  from  above  or 
below,  from  a  great  or  a  small  distance,  as  we  should  know 
whether  it  was  the  sound  of  a  drum,  or  a  bell,  or  a  cat. 
Nature  is  frugal  in  her  operations,  and  will  not  be  at  the 
expense  of  a  particular  instinct,  to  give  us  that  knowledge 
which  experience  will  soon  produce,  by  means  of  a  general 
principle  of  human  nature. 

For  a  little  experience,  by  the  constitution  of  human 
nature,  ties  together,  not  only  in  our  imagination,  but  in 
our  belief,  those  things  which  were  in  their  nature  uncon- 
nected. When  I  hear  a  certain  sound,  I  conclude  imme- 
diately, without  reasoning,  that  a  coach  passes  by.  There 
are  no  premises  from  which  this  conclusion  is  inferred  by 
any  rules  of  logic.  It  is  the  effect  of  a  principle  of  our 
nature,  common  to  us  with  the  brutes. 

Although  it  is  by  hearing  that  we  are  capable  of  the 
perception  of  harmony  and  melody,  and  of  all  charms  of 
music;  yet  it  would  seem,  that  these  require  a  higher 
faculty,  which  we  call  a  musical  ear.  This  seems  to  be 

ii 


SECT.  II.]  OF  HEARING.  51 

in  very  different  degrees,  in  those  who  have  the  bare 
fiiculty  of  hearing  equally  perfect ;  and  therefore  ought  not 
to  be  classed  with  the  external  senses,  but  in  a  higher 
order. 


SECT.  II. 
Of  Natural  Language. 

ONE  of  the  noblest  purposes  of  sound  undoubtedly  is  lan- 
guage ;  without  which  mankind  would  hardly  be  able  to 
attain  any  degree  of  improvement  above  the  brutes.  Lan- 
guage is  commonly  considered  as  purely  an  invention  of  men, 
who  by  nature  are  no  less  mute  than  the  brutes,  but  having 
a  superior  degree  of  invention  and  reason,  have  been  able 
to  contrive  artificial  signs  of  their  thoughts  and  purposes, 
and  to  establish  them  by  common  consent.  But  the  origin 
of  language  deserves  to  be  more  carefully  inquired  into, 
not  only  as  this  inquiry  may  be  of  importance  for  the  im- 
provement of  language,  but  as  it  is  related  to  the  present 
subject,  and  tends  to  lay  open  some  of  the  first  principles 
of  human  nature.  I  shall  therefore  offer  some  thoughts 
upon  this  subject. 

By  language,  I  understand  all  those  signs  which  man- 
kind use  in  order  to  communicate  to  others  their  thoughts 
and  intentions,  their  purposes  and  desires.  And  such 
sinus  may  be  conceived  to  be  of  two  kinds :  First,  such 
as  have  no  meaning,  but  what  is  affixed  to  them  by  com- 
pact or  agreement  among  those  who  use  them ;  these,  are 
artificial  signs :  Secondly,  such  as,  previous  to  all  compact 
or  agreement,  have  a  meaning  which  every  man  under- 
stands by  the  principles  of  his  nature.  Language,  so  far 
as  it  consists  of  artificial  signs,  may  be  called  artificial ; 
so  far'as  it  consists  of  natural  signs,  I  call  it  natural. 

Having  premised  these  definitions,  I  think  it  is  demon- 
strable, that  if  mankind  had  not  a  natural  language,  they 
could  never  have  invented  an  artificial  one  by  their  reason 
and  ingenuity.  For  all  artificial  language  supposes  some 
compact  or  agreement  to  affix  a  certain  meaning  to  certain 

D  2 


52  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  IV, 

signs;  therefore  there  must  be  compacts  or  agreements 
before  the  use  of  artificial  signs ;  but  there  can  be  no  com- 
pact or  agreement  without  signs,  nor  without  language ; 
and  therefore  there  must  be  a  natural  language  before  any 
artificial  language  can  be  invented :  which  was  to  be  de- 
monstrated. 

Had  language  in  general  been  a  human  invention,  as 
much  as  writing  or  printing,  we  should  find  whole  nations 
as  mute  as  the  brutes.  Indeed  even  the  brutes  have  some 
natural  signs  by  which  they  express  their  own  thoughts, 
affections,  and  desires,  and  understand  those  of  others.  A 
chick,  as  soon  as  hatched,  understands  the  different  sounds 
whereby  its  dam  calls  it  to  food,  or  gives  the  alarm  of 
danger.  A  dog  or  a  horse  understands,  by  nature,  when 
the  human  voice  caresses,  and  when  it  threatens  him. 
But  brutes,  as  far  as  we  know,  have  no  notion  of  contracts 
or  covenants,  or  of  moral  obligation  to  perform  them.  If  na- 
ture had  given  them  these  notions  she  would  probably  have 
given  them  natural  signs  to  express  them.  And  where  na- 
ture has  denied  these  notions,  it  is  as  impossible  to  acquire 
them  by  art,  as  it  is  for  a  blind  man  to  acquire  the  notion 
of  colours.  Some  brutes  are  sensible  of  honour  or  dis- 
grace ;  they  have  resentment  and  gratitude ;  but  none  of 
them,  as  far  as  we  know,  can  make  a  promise,  or  plight 
their  faith,  having  no  such  notions  from  their  constitution. 
And  if  mankind  had  not  these  notions  by  nature,  and  natu- 
ral signs  to  express  them  by,  with  all  their  wit  and  inge- 
nuity they  could  never  have  invented  language. 

The  elements  of  this  natural  language  of  mankind,  or  the 
signs  that  are  naturally  expressive  of  our  thoughts,  may, 
I  think,  be  reduced  to  these  three  kinds ;  modulations 
of  the  voice,  gestures,  and  features.  By  means  of  these, 
two  savages  who  have  no  common  artificial  language,  can 
converse  together;  can  communicate  their  thoughts  iu 
some  tolerable  manner;  can  ask  and  refuse,  affirm  and 
deny,  threaten  and  supplicate ;  can  traffic,  enter  into  cove- 
nants, and  plight  their  faith.  This  might  be  confirmed  by 
historical  facts  of  undoubted  credit,  if  it  were  necessary. 

Mankind  having  thus  a  common  language  by  nature, 


SECT.  II.]  OF  HEARING.  53 

though  a  scanty  one,  adapted  only  to  the  necessities  of 
nature,  there  is  no  great  ingenuity  required  in  improving 
it  by  the  addition  of  artificial  signs  to  supply  the  defi- 
ciency of  the  natural.  These  artificial  signs  must  mul- 
tiply with  the  arts  of  life  and  the  improvements  of  know- 
ledge. The  articulations  of  the  voice,  seem  to  be,  of  all 
signs,  the  most  proper  for  artificial  language ;  and  as  man- 
kind have  universally  used  them  for  that  purpose,  we  may 
reasonably  judge  that  nature  intended  them  for  it.  But 
nature  probably  does  not  intend  that  we  should  lay  aside 
the  use  of  the  natural  signs ;  it  is  enough  that  we  supply 
their  defects  by  artificial  ones.  A  man  that  rides  always 
in  a  chariot,  by  degrees  loses  the  use  of  his  legs ;  and  one 
who  uses  artificial  signs  only,  loses  both  the  knowledge 
and  use  of  the  natural.  Dumb  people  retain  much  more 
of  the  natural  language  than  others,  because  necessity 
obliges  them  to  use  it.  And  for  the  same  reason  savages 
have  much  more  of  it  than  civilized  nations.  It  is  by 
natural  signs  chiefly  that  we  give  force  and  energy  to  lan- 
guage ;  and  the  less  language  has  of  them,  it  is  the  less 
expressive  and  persuasive.  Thus,  writing  is  less  expres- 
sive than  reading,  and  reading  less  expressive  than  speak- 
ing without  book :  speaking  without  the  proper  and  natural 
modulations,  force,  and  variations  of  the  voice,  is  a  frigid 
and  dead  language,  compared  with  that  which  is  attended 
with  them ;  it  is  still  more  expressive  when  we  add  the 
language  of  the  eyes  and  features ;  and  is  then  only  in  its 
perfect  and  natural  state,  and  attended  with  its  proper 
energy,  when  to  all  these  we  superadd  the  force  of  action. 

Where  speech  is  natural,  it  will  be  an  exercise,  not  of 
the  voice  and  lungs  only,  but  of  all  the  muscles  of  the 
body ;  like  that  of  dumb  people  and  savages,  whose  lan- 
guage, as  it  has  more  of  nature,  is  more  expressive,  and 
is  more  easily  learned. 

Is  it  not  pity  that  the  refinements  of  civilized  life,  in- 
stead of  supplying  the  defects  of  natural  language,  should 
root  it  out,  and  plant  in  its  stead  dull  and  lifeless  articula- 
tions of  unmeaning  sounds,  or  the  scrawling  of  insignificant 
characters?  The  perfection  of  language  is  commonly 


54  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  IV. 

thought  to  be,  to  express  human  thoughts  and  sentiments 
distinctly  by  these  dull  signs ;  but  if  this  is  the  perfection 
of  artificial  language,  it  is  surely  the  corruption  of  the 
natural. 

Artificial  signs  signify,  but  they  do  not  express ;  they 
speak  to  the  understanding,  as  algebraical  characters  may 
do,  but  the  passions,  the  affections,  and  the  will  hear 
them  not:  these  continue  dormant  and  inactive,  till  we 
speak  to  them  in  the  language  of  nature,  to  which  they 
are  all  attention  and  obedience. 

It  were  easy  to  show,  that  the  fine  arts  of  the  musi- 
cian, the  painter,  the  actor,  and  the  orator,  so  far  as  they 
are  expressive ;  although  the  knowledge  of  them  requires 
in  us  a  delicate  taste,  a  nice  judgment,  and  much  study 
and  practice ;  yet  they  are  nothing  else  but  the  language 
of  nature,  which  we  brought  into  the  world  with  us,  but 
have  unlearned  by  disuse,  and  so  find  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty in  recovering  it. 

Abolish  the  use  of  articulate  sounds  and  writing  among 
mankind  for  a  century,  and  every  man  would  be  a  painter, 
an  actor,  and  an  orator.  We  mean  not  to  affirm  that  such 
an  expedient  is  practicable ;  or,  if  it  were,  that  the  advan- 
tage would  counterbalance  the  loss ;  but  that,  as  men  are 
led  by  nature  and  necessity  to  converse  together,  they  will 
use  every  mean  in  their  power  to  make  themselves  under- 
stood ;  and  where  they  cannot  do  this  by  artificial  signs, 
they  will  do  it,  as  far  as  possible,  by  natural  ones ;  and  he 
that  understands  perfectly  the  use  of  natural  signs  must 
be  the  best  judge  in  all  the  expressive  arts. 


55 


CHAP.  V. 
OF   TOUCH. 


SECT.  I. 

Of  Heat  and  Cold. 

THE  senses  which  we  have  hitherto  considered,  are  very 
simple  and  uniform,  each  of  them  exhibiting  only  one  kind 
of  sensation,  and  thereby  indicating  only  one  quality  of 
bodies.  By  the  ear  we  perceive  sounds,  and  nothing 
else ;  by  the  palate,  tastes ;  and  by  the  nose,  odours : 
these  qualities  are  all  likewise  of  one  order,  being  all 
secondary  qualities :  whereas  by  touch  we  perceive  not 
one  quality  only,  but  many,  and  those  of  very  different 
kinds.  The  chief  of  them  are  heat  and  cold,  hardness 
and  softness,  roughness  and  smoothness,  figure,  solidity, 
motion,  and  extension.  We  shall  consider  these  in  order. 

As  to  heat  and  cold,  it  will  easily  be  allowed  that  they 
are  secondary  qualities,  of  the  same  order  with  smell, 
taste,  and  sound.  And,  therefore,  what  hath  been  already 
said  of  smell  is  easily  applicable  to  them;  that  is,  that 
the  words  heat  and  cold  have  each  of  them  two  significa- 
tions ;  they  sometimes  signify  certain  sensations  of  the 
mind,  which  can  have  no  existence  when  they  are  not  felt, 
nor  can  exist  any  where  but  in  a  mind  or  sentient  being ; 
but  more  frequently  they  signify  a  quality  in  bodies,  which, 
by  the  laws  of  nature;  occasions  the  sensations  of  heat 
and  cold  in  us :  a  quality,  which,  though  connected  by 
custom  so  closely  with  the  sensation,  that  we  cannot  with- 
out difficulty  separate  them ;  yet  hath  not  the  least  resem- 
blance to  it,  and  may  continue  to  exist  when  there  is  no 
sensation  at  all. 

The  sensations  of  heat  and  cold  are  perfectly  known ; 
for  they  neither  are  nor  can  be  any  thing  else  than  what 


56  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. . 

we  feel  them  to  be ;  but  the  qualities  in  bodies  which  we 
call  heat  and  cold  are  unknown.  They  are  only  conceived 
by  us,  as  unknown  causes  or  occasions  of  the  sensations  to 
which  we  give  the  same  names.  But  though  common 
sense  says  nothing  of  the  nature  of  these  qualities,  it 
plainly  dictates  the  existence  of  them ;  and  to  deny  that 
there  can  be  heat  and  cold  when  they  are  not  felt  is  an 
absurdity  too  gross  to  merit  confutation.  For  what  could 
be  more  absurd  than  to  say,  that  the  thermometer  cannot 
rise  or  fall  unless  some  person  be  present,  or  that  the  coast 
of  Guinea  would  be  as  cold  as  Nova  Zembla,  if  it  had  no 
inhabitants  ? 

It  is  the  business  of  philosophers  to  investigate,  by 
proper  experiments  and  induction,  what  heat  and  cold  are 
in  bodies.  And  whether  they  make  heat  a  particular  ele- 
ment diffused  through  nature,  and  accumulated  in  the 
heated  body,  or  whether  they  make  it  a  certain  vibration 
of  the  parts  of  the  heated  body ;  whether  they  determine 
that  heat  and  cold  are  contrary  qualities,  as  the  sensations 
undoubtedly  are  contrary,  or  that  heat  only  is  a  quality 
and  cold  is  privation:  these  questions  are  within  the 
province  of  philosophy;  for  common  sense  says  nothing 
on  the  one  side  or  the  other. 

But  whatever  be  the  nature  of  that  quality  in  bodies 
which  we  call  heat,  we  certainly  know  this,  that  it  cannot 
iu  the  least  resemble  the  sensation  of  heat.  It  is  no  less 
absurd  to  suppose  a  likeness  between  the  sensation  and  the 
quality  than  it  would  be  to  suppose  that  the  pain  of  the 
gout  resembles  a  square  or  a  triangle.  The  simplest  man 
that  hath  common  sense  does  not  imagine  the  sensation  of 
heat,  or  any  thing  that  resembles  that  sensation,  to  be  in 
the  fire.  He  only  imagines,  that  there  is  something  in  the 
fire  which  makes  him  and  other  sentient  beings  feel  heat. 
Yet  as  the  name  of  heat,  in  common  language,  more  fre- 
quently and  more  properly  signifies  this  unknown  some- 
thing in  the  fire  than  the  sensation  occasioned  by  it,  he 
justly,  laughs  at  the  philosopher  who  denies  that  there  is 
any  heat  in  the  fire,  and  thinks  that  he  speaks  contrary  to 
common  sense. 


SECT.   II.]  OP  TOUCH.  57 


SECT.  II. 

Of  Hardness  and  Softness. 

LET  us  next  consider  hardness  and  softness;  by  which 
words  we  always  understand  real  properties  or  qualities  of 
bodies  of  which  we  have  a  distinct  conception. 

When  the  parts  of  a  body  adhere  so  firmly  that  it  cannot 
easily  be  made  to  change  its  figure,  we  call  it  hard;  when 
its  parts  are  easily  displaced,  we  call  it  soft.  This  is  the 
notion  which  all  mankind  have  of  hardness  and  softness : 
they  are  neither  sensations,  nor  like  any  sensation;  they 
were  real  qualities  before  they  were  perceived  by  touch, 
and  continue  to  be  so  when  they  are  not  perceived :  for  if 
any  man  will  affirm  that  diamonds  were  not  hard  till  they 
were  handled,  who  would  reason  with  him  ? 

There  is,  no  doubt,  a  sensation  by  which  we  perceive  a 
body  to  be  hard  or  soft.  This  sensation  of  hardness  may 
easily  be  had,  by  pressing  one's  hand  against  the  table, 
and  attending  to  the  feeling  that  ensues,  setting  aside,  as 
much  as  possible,  all  thought  of  the  table  and  its  qualities, 
or  of  any  external  thing.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  have  the 
sensation,  and  another  to  attend  to  it,  and  make  it  a  dis- 
tinct object  of  reflection.  The  first  is  very  easy ;  the  last, 
in  most  cases,  extremely  difficult. 

We  are  so  accustomed  to  use  the  sensation  as  a  sign,  and 
to  pass  immediately  to  the  hardness  signified,  that,  as  far 
as  appears,  it  was  never  made  an  object  of  thought,  either 
by  the  vulgar  or  by  philosophers  ;  nor  has  it  a  name  in  any 
language.  There  is  no  sensation  more  distinct  or  more 
frequent ;  yet  it  is  never  attended  to,  but  passes  through 
the  mind  instantaneously,  and  serves  only  to  introduce  that 
quality  in  bodies  which,  by  a  law  of  our  constitution,  it 
suggests. 

There  are  indeed  some  cases,  wherein  it  is  no  difficult 
matter  to  attend  to  the  sensation  occasioned  by  the  hard- 
ness of  a  body  ;  for  instance,  when  it  is  so  violent  as  to  oc- 
casion considerable  pain :  then  nature  calls  upon  us  to  at- 

D  3 


58  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

tend  to  it,  and  then  we  acknowledge  that  it  is  a  mere 
sensation,  and  can  only  be  in  a  sentient  being.  If  a  man 
runs  his  head  with  violence  'against  a  pillar,  I  appeal  to 
him,  whether  the  pain  he  feels  resembles  the  hardness  of 
the  stone ;  or  if  he  can  conceive  any  thing  like  what  he 
feels,  to  be  an  inanimate  piece  of  matter. 

The  attention  of  the  mind  is  here  entirely  turned  towards 
the  painful  feeling ;  and,  to  speak  in  the  common  language 
of  mankind,  he  feels  nothing  in  the  stone,  but  feels  a  violent 
pain  in  his  head.  It  is  quite  otherwise  when  he  leans  his 
head  gently  against  the  pillar ;  for  then  he  will  tell  you 
that  he  feels  nothing  in  his  head,  but  feels  hardness  in  the 
stone.  Hath  he  not  a  sensation  in  this  case  as  well  as  in 
the  other?  Undoubtedly  he  hath:  but  it  is  a  sensation 
which  nature  intended  only  as  a  sign  of  something  in  the 
stone;  and,  accordingly,  he  instantly  fixes  his  attention 
upon  the  thing  signified ;  and  cannot,  without  great  diffi- 
culty, attend  so  much  to  the  sensation  as  to  be  persuaded 
that  there  is  any  such  thing  distinct  from  the  hardness  it 
signifies. 

But  however  difficult  it  may  be  to  attend  to  this  fugitive 
sensation,  to  stop  its  rapid  progress,  and  to  disjoin  it  from 
the  external  quality  of  hardness,  in  whose  shadow  it  is 
apt  immediately  to  hide  itself;  this  is  what  a  philosopher 
by  pains  and  practice  must  attain,  otherwise  it  will  be  im- 
possible for  him  to  reason  justly  upon  this  subject,  or  even  to 
understand  what  is  here  advanced.  For  the  last  appeal, 
in  subjects  of  this  nature,  must  be  to  what  a  man  feels  and 
perceives  in  his  own  mind. 

It  is  indeed  strange  that  a  sensation  which  we  have 
every  time  we  feel  a  body  hard,  and  which,  consequently, 
we  can  command  as  often,  and  continue  as  long  as  wo 
please,  a  sensation  as  distinct  and  determinate  as  any 
other,  should  yet  be  so  much  unknown,  as  never  to  have 
been  made  an  object  of  thought  and  reflection,  nor  to  have 
been  honoured  with  a  name  in  any  language ;  that  philoso- 
phers, as  well  as  the  vulgar,  should  have  entirely  over- 
looked it,  or  confounded  it  with  that  quality  of  bodies 
which  we  call  hardness,  to  which  it  hath  not  the  least 


SECT.  II.]  OF  TOUCH.  59 

similitude.  May  we  not  hence  conclude,  that  the  know- 
ledge of  the  human  faculties  is  but  in  its  infancy  ?  That  we 
have  not  yet  learned  to  attend  to  those  operations  of  the 
mind,  of  which  we  are  conscious  every  hour  of  our  lives  ? 
That  there  are  habits  of  inattention  acquired  very  early, 
which  are  as  hard  to  be  overcome  as  other  habits  ?  For  I 
think  it  is  probable,  that  the  novelty  of  this  sensation  will 
procure  some  attention  to  it  in  children  at  first ;  but  being 
in  nowise  interesting  in  itself,  as  soon  as  it  becomes  fa- 
miliar, it  is  overlooked,  and  the  attention  turned  solely  to 
that  which  it  signifies. — Thus,  when  one  is  learning  a  lan- 
guage, he  attends  to  the  sounds ;  but  when  he  is  master  of 
it,  he  attends  only  to  the  sense  of  what  he  would  express. 
If  this  is  the  case,  we  must  become  as  little  children  again, 
if  we  will  be  philosophers :  we  must  overcome  this  habit 
of  inattention  which  has  been  gathering  strength  ever  since 
we  began  to  think;  a  habit,  the  usefulness  of  which,  in 
common  life,  atones  for  the  difficulty  it  creates  to  the  phi- 
losopher, in  discovering  the  first  principles  of  the  human 
mind. 

The  firm  cohesion  of  the  parts  of  a  body  is  no  more  like 
that  sensation  by  which  I  perceive  it  to  be  hard  than  the 
vibration  of  a  sonorous  body  is  like  the  sound  I  hear :  nor 
can  I  possibly  perceive,  by  my  reason,  any  connexion  be- 
tween the  one  and  the  other.  No  man  can  give  a  reason, 
why  the  vibration  of  a  body  might  not  have  given  the  sen- 
sation of  smelling,  and  the  effluvia  of  bodies  affected  our 
hearing,  if  it  had  so  pleased  our  Maker.  In  like  manner 
no  man  can  give  a  reason,  why  the  sensation  of  smell,  or 
taste,  or  sound  might  not  have  indicated  hardness,  as  well 
as  that  sensation,  which,  by  our  constitution,  does  indicate 
it.  Indeed  no  man  can  conceive  any  sensation  to  re- 
semble any  known  quality  of  bodies.  Nor  can  any  man 
show,  by  any  good  argument,  that  all  our  sensations  might 
not  have  been  as  they  are,  though  no  body  nor  quality  of 
body  had  over  existed. 

Here,  then,  is  a  phenomenon  of  human  nature,  which 
comes  to  be  resolved.  •  Hardness  of  bodies  is  a  thing  that 
we  conceive  as  distinctly,  and  believe  as  firmly,  as  any 


60  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

thing  in  nature.  We  have  no  way  of  coming  to  this  con- 
ception and  belief,  but  by  means  of  a  certain  sensation  of 
touch,  to  which  hardness  hath  not  the  least  similitude ;  nor 
can  we,  by  any  rules  of  reasoning,  infer  the  one  from  the 
other.  The  question  is,  How  we  come  by  this  conception 
and  belief? 

First,  as  to  the  conception :  shall  we  call  it  an  idea  of 
sensation  or  of  reflection  ?  The  last  will  not  be  affirmed ; 
and  as  little  can  the  first,  unless  we  call  that  an  idea  of 
sensation  which  hath  no  resemblance  to  any  sensation. 
So  that  the  origin  of  this  idea  of  hardness,  one  of  the  most 
common  and  most  distinct  we  have,  is  not  to  be  found  in 
all  our  systems  of  the  mind :  not  even  in  those  which  have 
so  copiously  endeavoured  to  deduce  all  our  notions  from 
sensations  and  reflection. 

But,  secondly,  supposing  we  have  got  the  conception  of 
hardness,  how  come  we  by  the  belief  of  it  ?  It  is  self-evi- 
dent, from  comparing  the  ideas,  that  such  a  sensation  could 
not  be  felt,  unless  such  a  quality  of  bodies  existed  ?  No. 
Can  it  be  proved  by  probable  or  certain  arguments  ?  No, 
it  cannot.  Have  we  got  this  belief,  then,  by  tradition,  by 
education,  or  by  experience  ?  No ;  it  is  not  got  in  any  of 
these  ways.  Shall  we  then  throw  off  this  belief,  as  having 
no  foundation  in  reason  ?  Alas  !  it  is  not  in  our  power ;  it 
triumphs  over  reason,  and  laughs  at  all  the  arguments  of 
a  philosopher.  Even  the  author  of  the  Treatise  of  Hu- 
man Nature,  though  he  saw  no  reason  for  this  belief,  but 
many  against  it,  could  hardly  conquer  it  in  his  speculative 
and  solitary  moments  ;  at  other  times  he  fairly  yielded  to 
it,  and  confesses  that  he  found  himself  under  a  necessity  to 
do  so. 

What  shall  we  say  then  of  this  conception,  and  this 
belief,  which  are  so  unaccountable  and  un tractable  ?  I  see 
nothing  left  but  to  conclude,  that,  by  an  original  principle 
of  our  constitution,  a  certain  sensation  of  touch  both  sug- 
gests to  the  mind  the  conception  of  hardness  and  creates 
the  belief  of  it :  or,  in  other  words,  that  this  sensation  is  a 
natural  sign  of  hardness.  And  this  I  shall  endeavour 
more  fully  to  explain. 


OF  TOUCH.  61 

SECT.  III. 

Of  Natural  Signs. 

As  in  artificial  signs  there  is  often  neither  similitude  be- 
tween the  sign  and  thing  signified,  nor  any  connexion  that 
arises  necessarily  from  the  nature  of  the  things ;  so  it  is 
also  in  natural  signs.  The  word  gold  has  no  similitude  to 
the  substance  signified  by  it;  nor  is  it  in  its  own  nature 
more  fit  to  signify  this  than  any  other  substance :  yet,  by 
habit  and  custom,  it  suggests  this  and  no  other.  In  like 
manner,  a  sensation  of  touch  suggests  hardness,  although 
it  hath  neither  similitude  to  hardness,  nor,  as  far  as  we  can 
perceive,  any  necessary  connexion  with  it.  The  difference 
betwixt  these  two  signs  lies  only  in  this,  that,  in  the  first, 
the  suggestion  is  the  effect  of  habit  and  custom ;  in  the 
second,  it  is  not  the  effect  of  habit,  but  of  the  original  con- 
stitution of  our  minds. 

It  appears  evident  from  what  hath  been  said  on  the  sub- 
ject of  language,  that  there  are  natural  signs,  as  well  as 
artificial ;  and  particularly,  That  the  thoughts,  purposes, 
and  dispositions  of  the  mind  have  their  natural  signs  in 
the  features  of  the  face,  the  modulation  of  the  voice,  and 
the  motion  and  attitude  of  the  body :  That,  without  a  na- 
tural knowledge  of  the  connexion  between  these  signs  and 
the  things  signified  by  them,  language  could  never  have 
been  invented  and  established  among  men :  and,  That  the 
fine  arts  are  all  founded  upon  this  connexion,  which  we 
may  call  the  natural  language  of  mankind.  It  is  now 
proper  to  observe,  that  there  are  different  orders  of  natural 
signs,  and  to  point  out  the  different  classes  into  which  they 
may  be  distinguished,  that  we  may  more  distinctly  con- 
ceive the  relation  between  our  sensations  and  the  things 
they  suggest,  and  what  we  mean  by  calling  sensations 
signs  of  external  things. 

The  first  class  of  natural  signs  comprehends  those 
whose  connexion  with  the  thing  signified  is  established  by 
nature,  but  discovered  only  by  experience.  The  whole  of 


62  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

genuine  philosophy  consists  in  discovering  such  connexions, 
and  reducing  them  to  general  rules.     The  great  Lord  Ve- 
rulam  had  a  perfect  comprehension  of  this,  when  he  called 
it  an  interpretation  of  nature.     No  man  ever  more  dis- 
tinctly understood,  or  happily  expressed,  the  nature  and 
foundation  of  the  philosophic  art.     What  is  all  we  know 
of  mechanics,    astronomy,    and    optics,   but   connexions 
established  by  nature,  and  discovered  by  experience  or 
observation,  and  consequences  deduced  from  them  ?   All 
the  knowledge  we  have  in  agriculture,  gardening,   che- 
mistry, and  medicine,  is  built  upon  the  same  foundation. 
And  if  ever  our  philosophy  concerning  the  human  mind  is 
carried  so  far  as  to  deserve  the  name  of  science,  which 
ought  never  to  be  despaired  of,  it  must  be  by  observing 
facts,  reducing  them  to  general  rules,  and  drawing  just 
conclusions  from  them.     What  we  commonly  call  natural 
causes  might,  with  more  propriety,  be  called  natural  signs, 
and   what   we  call   effects,    the   things   signified.     The 
causes  have  no  proper  efficiency  or  casualty,  as  far  as 
we  know ;  and  all  we  can  certainly  affirm  is,  that  nature 
hath  established  a  constant  conjunction  between  them  and 
the  things  called  their  effects ;  and  hath  given  to  mankin^ 
a  disposition  to  observe  those  connexions,  to  confide  in 
their  continuance,  and  to  make  use  of  them  for  the  im- 
provement of  our  knowledge,  and  increase  of  our  power. 

A  second  class  is  that  wherein  the  connexion  between 
the  sign  and  thing  signified  is  not  only  established  by 
nature,  but  discovered  to  us  by  a  natural  principle,  without 
reasoning  or  experience.  Of  this  kind  are  the  natural 
signs  of  human  thoughts,  purposes,  and  desires,  which 
have  been  already  mentioned  as  the  natural  language  of 
mankind.  An  infant  may  be  put  into  a  fright  by  an  angry 
countenance,  and  soothed  again  by  smiles  and  blandish- 
ments. A  child  that  has  a  good  musical  ear  may  be  put 
to  sleep  or  to  dance,  may  be  made  merry  or  sorrowful,  by 
the  modulation  of  musical  sounds.  The  principles  of  all 
the  fine  arts,  and  of  what  we  call  a  fine  taste,  may  be  re- 
solved into  connexions  of  this  kind.  A  fine  taste  may  be 
improved  by  reasoning  and  experience;  but  if  the  first 


SECT.  III.]  OF  TOUCH.  C3 

principles  of  it  were  not  planted  in  our  minds  by  nature, 
it  could  never  be  acquired.  Nay,  we  have  already  made 
it  appear,  that  a  great  part  of  this  knowledge,  which  we 
have  by  nature,  is  lost  by  the  disuse  of  natural  signs,  and 
the  substitution  of  artificial  in  their  place. 

A  third  class  of  natural  signs  comprehends  those  which, 
though  we  never  before  had  any  notion  or  conception  oi. 
the  things  signified,  do  suggest  it,  or  conjure  it  up,  as  it 
were,  by  a  natural  kind  of  magic,  and  at  once  give  us  a 
conception,  and  create  a  belief  of  it.  I  showed  formerly, 
that  our  sensations  suggest  to  us  a  sentient  being  or  mind 
to  which  they  belong:  a  being  which  hath  a  permanent 
existence,  although  the  sensations  are  transient  and  of 
short  duration :  a  being  which  is  still  the  same,  while  its 
sensations  and  other  operations  are  varied  ten  thousand 
ways :  a  being  which  hath  the  same  relation  to  all  that  in- 
finite variety  of  thoughts,  purposes,  actions,  affections,  en- 
joyments, and  sufferings,  which  we  are  conscious  of,  or 
can  remember.  The  conception  of  a  mind  is  neither  an 
idea  of  sensation  nor  of  reflection ;  for  it  is  neither  like 
any  of  our  sensations,  nor  like  any  thing  we  are  conscious 
of.  The  first  conception  of  it,  as  well  as  the  belief  of  it, 
and  of  the  common  relation  it  bears  to  all  that  we  are  con- 
scious of,  or  remember,  is  suggested  to  every  thinking 
being,  we  do  not  know  how. 

The  notion  of  hardness  in  bodies,  as  well  as  the  belief 
of  it,  are  got  in  a  similar  manner;  being,  by  an  original 
principle  of  our  nature,  annexed  to  that  sensation  which 
we  have  when  we  feel  a  hard  body.  And  so  naturally  and 
necessarily  does  the  sensation  convey  the  notion  and  be- 
lief of  hardness,  that  hitherto  they  have  been  confounded 
by  the  most  acute  inquirers  into  the  principles  of  human 
nature,  although  they  appear,  upon  accurate  reflection,  not 
only  to  be  different  things,  but  as  unlike  as  pain  is  to  the 
point  of  a  sword. 

It  may  be  observed,  that  as  the  first  class  of  natural 
signs  I  have  mentioned  is  the  foundation  of  true  philo- 
sophy, and  the  second,  the  foundation  of  the  fine  aits,  or 
of  taste ;  so  the  last  is  the  foundation  of  common  sense ; 
a  part  of  human  nature  which  hath  never  been  explained. 


G4  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

I  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  notion  of  hardness,  and 
the  belief  of  it,  is  first  got  by  means  of  that  particular  sen- 
sation which,  as  far  back  as  we  can  remember,  does  in- 
variably suggest  it ;  and  that  if  we  had  never  had  such  a 
feeling,  we  should  never  have  had  any  notion  of  hardness. 
I  think  it  is  evident,  that  we  cannot,  by  reasoning  from  our 
sensations,  collect  the  existence  of  bodies  at  all,  far  less 
any  of  their  qualities.  This  hath  been  proved  by  unan- 
swerable arguments  by  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  and  by  the 
author  of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  It  appears  as 
evident,  that  this  connexion  between  our  sensations  and 
the  conception  and  belief  of  external  existences,  cannot  be 
produced  by  habit,  experience,  education,  or  any  principle 
of  human  nature  that  hath  been  admitted  by  philosophers. 
At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  fact,  that  such  sensations  are  in- 
variably connected  with  the  conception  and  belief  of  exter- 
nal existences.  Hence,  by  all  rules  of  just  reasoning,  we 
must  conclude,  that  this  connexion  is  the  effect  of  our  con- 
stitution, and  ought  to  be  considered  as  an  original  prin- 
ciple of  human  nature,  till  we  find  some  more  general  prin- 
ciple into  which  it  may  be  resolved. 


SECT.  IV. 

Of  Hardness,  and  other  Primary  Qualities. 

FURTHER  I  observe,  that  hardness  is  a  quality,  of  which 
we  have  as  clear  and  distinct  a  conception  as  of  any  thing 
whatsoever.  The  cohesion  of  the  parts  of  a  body  with 
more  or  less  force  is  perfectly  understood,  though  its 
cause  is  not :  we  know  what  it  is,  as  well  as  how  it  affects 
the  touch.  It  is  therefore  a  quality  of  a  quite  different 
order  from  those  secondary  qualities  we  have  already  taken 
notice  of,  whereof  we  know  no  more  naturally,  than  that 
they  are  adapted  to  raise  certain  sensations  in  us.  If 
hardness  were  a  quality  of  the  same  kind,  it  would  be  a 
proper  inquiry  for  philosophers,  What  hardness  in  bodies 
is  ?  and  we  should  have  had  various  hypotheses  about  it, 
as  well  as  about  colour  and  heat.  But  it  is  evident  that 


SECT.  IV.]  OF  TOUCH.  Co 

any  such  hypothesis  would  be  ridiculous.  If  any  man 
should  say,  that  hardness  in  bodies  is  a  certain  vibration 
of  their  parts,  or  that  it  is  certain  effluvia  emitted  by  them 
which  affect  our  touch  in  the  manner  we  feel ;  such  hypo- 
thesis would  shock  common  sense  ?  because  we  all  know, 
that  if  the  parts  of  a  body  adhere  strongly,  it  is  hard,  al- 
though it  should  neither  emit  effluvia,  nor  vibrate.  Yet  at 
the  same  time,  no  man  can  say,  but  that  effluvia,  or  the 
vibration  of  the  parts  of  a  body,  might  have  affected  our 
touch  in  the  same  manner  that  hardness  now  does,  if  it 
had  so  pleased  the  Author  of  our  nature :  and  if  either  of 
these  hypotheses  is  applied  to  explain  a  secondary  quality, 
such  as  smell,  or  taste,  or  sound,  or  colour,  or  heat,  there 
appears  no  manifest  absurdity  in  the  supposition. 

The  distinction  betwixt  primary  and  secondary  qualities 
hath  had  several  revolutions.  Democritus  and  Epicurus, 
and  their  followers,  maintained  it.  Aristotle  and  the  Pe- 
ripatetics abolished  it.  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and 
Locke,  revived  it,  and  were  thought  to  have  put  it  in  a 
very  clear  light.  But  Bishop  Berkeley  again  discarded 
this  distinction,  by  such  proofs  as  must  be  convincing  to 
those  that  hold  the  received  doctrine  of  ideas.  Yet,  after 
all,  there  appears  to  be  a  real  foundation  for  it  in  the  prin- 
ciples of  our  nature. 

What  hath  been  said  of  hardness  is  so  easily  applicable, 
not  only  to  its  opposite,  softness,  but  likewise  to  roughness 
and  smoothness,  to  figure  and  motion,  that  we  may  be  ex- 
cused from  making  the  application,  which  would  only  be 
a  repetition  of  what  hath  been  said.  All  these,  by  means 
of  certain  corresponding  sensations  of  touch,  are  presented 
to  the  mind  as  real  external  qualities ;  the  conception  and 
the  belief  of  them  are  invariably  connected  with  the  cor- 
responding sensations,  by  an  original  principle  of  humau 
nature.  Their  sensations  have  no  name  in  any  language  ; 
they  have  not  only  been  overlooked  by  the  vulgar,  but  by 
philosophers ;  or  if  they  have  been  at  all  taken  notice  of, 
they  have  been  confounded  with  the  external  qualities 
which  they  suggest. 


66  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

SECT.  V. 

Of  Extension. 

IT  is  further  to  be  observed,  that  hardness  and  softness, 
roughness  and  smoothness,  figure  and  motion,  do  all  sup- 
pose extension,  and  cannot  be  conceived  without  it;  yet  I 
think  it  must,  on  the  other  hand,  be  allowed,  that  if  we 
had  never  felt  any  thing  hard  or  soft,  rough  or  smooth, 
figured  or  moved,  we  should  never  have  had  a  conception 
of  extension :  so  that,  as  there  is  good  ground  to  believe  that 
the  notion  of  extension  could  not  be  prior  to  that  of  other 
primary  qualities :  so  it  is  certain  that  it  could  not  be 
posterior  to  the  notion  of  any  of  them,  being  necessarily 
implied  in  them  all. 

Extension,  therefore,  seems  to  be  a  quality  suggested 
to  us,  by  the  very  same  sensations  which  suggest  the 
other  qualities  abovementioned.  When  I  grasp  a  ball  in 
my  hand,  I  perceive  it  at  once  hard,  figured,  and  extended. 
The  feeling  is  very  simple,  and  hath  not  the  least  resem- 
blance to  any  quality  of  body.  Yet  it  suggests  to  us 
three  primary  qualities  perfectly  distinct  from  one  another, 
as  well  as  from  the  sensation  which  indicates  them. 
When  I  move  my  hand  along  the  table,  the  feeling  is  so 
simple,  that  I  find  it  difficult  to  distinguish  it  into  things 
of  different  natures ;  yet  it  immediately  suggests  hardness, 
smoothness,  extension,  and  motion,  things  of  very  dif- 
ferent natures,  and  all  of  them  as  distinctly  understood  as 
the  feeling  which  suggests  them. 

We  are  commonly  told  by  philosophers,  that  we  get 
the  idea  of  extension  by  feeling  along  the  extremities  of  a 
body,  as  if  there  was  no  manner  of  difficulty  in  the  matter. 
I  have  sought,  with  great  pains,  I  confess,  to  find  out  how 
this  idea  can  be  got  by  feeling,  but  I  have  sought  in  vain. 
Yet  it  is  one  of  the  clearest  and  most  distinct  notions  we 
have ;  nor  is  there  any  thing  whatsoever,  about  which  the 
human  understanding  can  carry  on  so  many  long  and  de- 
monstrated trams  of  reasoning. 


SECT.  V.]  OF  TOUCH.  67 

The  notion  of  extension  is  so  familiar  to  us  from  infancy, 
and  constantly  obtruded  by  every  thing  we  see  and  feel, 
that  we  are  apt  to  think  it  obvious  how  it  comes  into  the 
mind ;  but  upon  a  narrower  examination  we  shall  find  it 
utterly  inexplicable.  It  is  true  we  have  feelings  of  touch, 
which  every  moment  present  extension  to  the  mind ;  but 
how  they  come  to  do  so,  is  the  question  ;  for  those  feelings 
do  no  more  resemble  extension  than  they  resemble  justice 
or  courage :  nor  can  the  existence  of  extended  things  be 
inferred  from  those  feelings  by  any  rules  of  reasoning  :  so 
that  the  feelings  we  have  by  touch  can  neither  explain 
how  we  get  the  notion,  nor  how  we  come  by  the  belief  of 
extended  things. 

What  hath  imposed  upon  philosophers  in  this  matter 
is,  that  the  feelings  of  touch,  which  suggest  primary  qua- 
lities, have  no  names,  nor  are  they  ever  reflected  upon. 
They  pass  through  the  mind  instantaneously,  and  serve 
only  to  introduce  the  notion  and  belief  of  external  things, 
which  by  our  constitution  are  connected  with  them.    They 
are  natural  signs,  and  the  mind  immediately  passes  to  the 
thing  signified,  without  making  the  least  reflection  upon 
the  sign,  or  observing  that  there  was   any    such   thing. 
Hence  it  hath  always  been  taken  for  granted,  that  the 
ideas  of  extension,  figure,  and  motion  are  ideas  of  sensa- 
tion, which  enter  into  the  mind  by  the  sense  of  touch,  in 
the  same  manner  as  the  sensations  of  sound  and  smell  do 
by  the  ear  and  nose.     The  sensations  of  touch  are  so  con- 
nected, by  our  constitution,  with  the  notions  of  extension, 
figure,  and  motion,  that  philosophers  have  mistaken  the 
one  for  the  other,  and  never  have  been  able  to  discern 
that  they  were  not  only  distinct  things,  but  altogether  un- 
like.    However,   if  we  will  reason  distinctly  upon   this 
subject,  we  ought  to  give  names  to  those  feelings  of  touch ; 
we  must  accustom  ourselves  to  attend  to  them,  and  to  re- 
flect upon  them,  that  we  may  be  able  to  disjoin  them 
from,  and  to  compare  them  with,  the  qualities  signified 
or  suggested  by  them. 

The  habit  of  doing  this  is  not  to  be  attained  without 
pains  and  practice;   and  till  a  man  hath  acquired  this 


08  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

habit,  it  will  be  impossible  for  him  to  think  distinctly,  or 
to  judge  right,  upon  this  subject. 

Let  a  man  press  his  hand  against  the  table :  he  feels  it 
hard.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  the  meaning  un- 
doubtedly is,  that  he  hath  a  certain  feeling  of  touch,  from 
which  he  concludes,  without  any  reasoning  or  comparing 
ideas,  that  there  is  something  external  really  existing, 
whose  parts  stick  so  firmly  together,  that  they  cannot  be 
displaced  without  considerable  force. 

There  is  here  a  feeling,  and  a  conclusion  drawn  from  it, 
or  some  way  suggested  by  it.  In  order  to  compare  these, 
we  must  view  them  separately,  and  then  consider  by  what 
tie  they  are  connected,  and  wherein  they  resemble  one 
another.  The  hardness  of  the  table  is  the  conclusion,  the 
feeling  is  the  medium  by  which  we  are  led  to  that  conclu- 
sion. Let  a  man  attend  distinctly  to  this  medium,  and  to 
the  conclusion,  and  he  will  perceive  them  to  be  as  unlike 
as  any  two  things  in  nature.  The  one  is  a  sensation  of 
the  mind,  which  can  have  no  existence  but  in  a  sentient 
being ;  nor  can  it  exist  one  moment  longer  than  it  is  felt ; 
the  other  is  in  the  table,  and  we  conclude,  without  any 
difficulty,  that  it  was  in  the  table  before  it  was  felt,  and 
continues  after,  the  feeling  is  over.  The  one  implies  no 
kind  of  extension,  nor  parts,  nor  cohesion ;  the  other  im- 
plies all  these.  Both  indeed  admit  of  degrees ;  and  the 
feeling,  beyond  a  certain  degree,  is  a  species  of  pain ;  but 
adamantine  hardness  does  not  imply  the  least  pain. 

And  as  the  feeling  hath  no  similitude  to  hardness,  so 
neither  can  our  reason  perceive  the  least  tie  or  connexion 
between  them ;  nor  will  the  logician  ever  be  able  to  show 
a  reason  why  we  should  conclude  hardness  from  this  feel- 
in!  rather  than  softness,  or  any  other  quality  whatsoever. 
But  in  reality  all  mankind  are  led  by  their  constitution  to 
conclude  hardness  from  this  feeling. 

The  sensation  of  heat,  and  the  sensation  we  have  by 
pressing  a  hard  body,  are  equally  feelings ;  nor  can  we 
by  reason  draw  any  conclusion  from  the  one,  but  what 
may  be  drawn  from  the  other :  but,  by  our  constitution, 
ye  conclude  from  the  first  an  obscure  or  occult  quality, 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  TOUCH.  69 

of  which  we  have  only  this  relative  conception,  that  it  is 
something  adapted  to  raise  in  us  the  sensation  of  heat; 
from  the  second,  we  conclude  a  quality  of  which  we  have 
a  clear  and  distinct  conception,  to  wit,  the  hardness  of  the 
body. 


SECT.  VI. 

Of  Extension. 

To  put  this  matter  in  another  light,  it  may  be  proper  to 
try,  whether  from  sensation  alone  we  can  collect  any  no- 
tion of  extension,  figure,  motion,  and  space.  I  take  it  for 
granted,  that  a  blind  man  hath  the  same  notions  of  exten- 
sion, figure,  and  motion,  as  a  man  that  sees ;  that  Dr. 
Saunderson  had  the  same  notion  of  a  cone,  a  cylinder, 
and  a  sphere,  and  of  the  motions  and  distances  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  as  Sir  Isaac  Newton. 

As  sight,  therefore,  is  not  necessary  for  our  acquiring 
those  notions,  we  shall  leave  it  out  altogether  in  our  in- 
quiry into  the  first  origin  of  them;  and  shall  suppose  a 
blind  man,  by  some  strange  distemper,  to  have  lost  all  the 
experience  and  habits  and  notions  he  had  got  by  touch ; 
nor  to^iave  the  least  conception  of  the  existence,  figure, 
dimensions,  or  extension,  either  of  his  own  body  or  of 
any  other ;  but  to  have  all  his  knowledge  of  external  things 
to  acquire  anew,  by  means  of  sensation,  and  the  power  of 
reason,  which  we  suppose  to  remain  entire. 

We  shall,  first,  suppose  his  body  fixed  immovable  in 
one  place,  and  that  he  can  only  have  the  feelings  of  touch, 
by  the  application  of  other  bodies  to  it.  Suppose  him 
first  to  be  pricked  with  a  pin ;  this  will,  no  doubt,  give  a 
smart  sensation :  he  feels  pain ;  but  what  can  he  infer 
from  it?  Nothing  surely  with  regard  to  the  existence  or 
figure  of  a  pin.  He  can  infer  nothing  from  this  species  of 
pain,  which  he  may  not  as  well  infer  from  the  gout  or 
sciatica.  Common  sense  may  lead  him  to  think  that  this 


70  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

pain  has  a  cause :  but  whether  this  cause  is  body  or  spirit, 
extended  or  unextended,  figured  or  not  figured,  he  cannot 
possibly,  from  any  principles  he  is  supposed  to  have,  form 
the  least  conjecture.  Having  had  formerly  no  notion  of 
body  or  of  extension,  the  prick  of  a  pin  can  give  him  none. 

Suppose,  next,  a  body  not  pointed,  but  blunt,  is  applied 
to  his  body  with  a  force  gradually  increased  until  it  bruises 
him.  What  has  he  got  by  this,  but  another  sensation,  or 
train  of  sensations,  from  which  he  is  able  to  conclude  as 
little  as  from  the  former  ?  A  scirrhous  tumour  in  any  in- 
ward part  of  the  body,  by  pressing  upon  the  adjacent 
parts,  may  give  the  same  kind  of  sensation  as  the  pres- 
sure of  an  external  body,  without  conveying  any  notion 
but  that  of  pain,  which  surely  hath  no  resemblance  to 
extension. 

Suppose,  thirdly,  that  the  body  applied  to  him  touches 
a  larger  or  a  lesser  part  of  his  body.  Can  this  give  him 
any  notion  of  its  extension  or  dimensions  ?  To  me  it  seems 
impossible  that  it  should,  unless  he  had  some  previous  no- 
tion of  the  dimensions  and  figure  of  his  own  body,  to  serve 
him  as  a  measure.  When  my  two  hands  touch  the  ex- 
tremities of  a  body ;  if  I  know  them  to  be  a  foot  asunder, 
I  easily  collect  that  the  body  is  a  foot  long;  and  if  I 
know  them  to  be  five  feet  asunder,  that  it  is  five  feet  long; 
but  if  I  know  not  what  the  distance  of  my  hand^  is,  I 
cannot  know  the  length  of  the  object  they  grasp ;  and  if  I 
have  no  previous  notion  of  hands  at  all,  or  of  distance 
between  them,  I  can  never  get  that  notion  by  their  being 
touched. 

Suppose,  again,  that  a  body  is  drawn  along  his  hands 
or  face,  while  they  are  at  rest:  Can  this  give  him  any 
notion  of  space  or  motion  ?  It  no  doubt  gives  a  new  feel- 
ing ;  but  how  it  should  convey  a  notion  of  space  or  motion, 
to  one  who  had  none  before,  I  cannot  conceive.  The 
blood  moves  along  the  arteries  and  veins,  and  this  motion, 
when  violent,  is  felt :  but  I  imagine  no  man,  by  this  feel- 
ing, could  get  the  conception  of  space  or  motion,  if  he  had 
it  not  before.  Such  a  motion  may  give  a  certain  succes- 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  TOUCH.  71 

sion  of  feelings,  as  the^colic  may  do ;  but  no  feelings,  nor 
any  combination  of  feelings,  can  ever  resemble  space  or 
motion. 

Let  us  next  suppose,  that  he  makes  some  instinctive 
effort  to  move  his  head  or  his  hand ;  but  that  no  motion 
follows,  either  on  account  of  external  resistance  or  of  palsy. 
Can  this  effort  convey  the  notion  of  space  and  motion  to 
one  who  never  had  it  before  ?  Surely  it  cannot. 

Last  of  all,  let  us  suppose,  that  he  moves  a  limb  by 
instinct,  without  having  had  any  previous  notion  of  space  or 
motion.  He  has  here  a  new  sensation,  which  accompanies 
the  flexure  of  joints,  and  the  swelling  of  muscles.  But 
how  this  sensation  can  convey  into  his  mind  the  idea  of 
space  and  motion  is  still  altogether  mysterious  and  unin- 
telligible. The  motions  of  the  heart  and  lungs  are  all  per- 
formed by  the  contraction  of  muscles,  yet  give  no  concep- 
tion of  space  or  motion.  An  embryo  in  the  womb  has 
many  such  motions,  and  probably  the  feelings  that  accom- 
pany them,  without  any  idea  of  space  or  motion. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  appears,  that  our  philosophers  have 
imposed  upon  themselves  and  upon  us,  in  pretending  to 
deduce  from  sensation  the  first  origin  of  our  notions  of 
external  existences,  of  space,  motion,  and  extension,  and 
all  the  primary  qualities  of  body,  that  is,  the  qualities 
whereof  we  have  the  most  clear  and  distinct  conception. 
These  qualities  do  not  at  all  tally  with  any  system  of  the 
human  faculties  that  hath  been  advanced.  They  have  no 
resemblance  to  any  sensation  or  to  any  operation  of  our 
minds ;  and  therefore  they  cannot  be  ideas  either  of  sen- 
sation or  of  reflection.  The  very  conception  of  them  is  ir- 
reconcilable to  the  principles  of  all  our  philosophic  systems 
of  the  understanding.  The  belief  of  them  is  no  less  so. 


72  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

SECT.  VII. 

Of  the  Existence  of  a  Material  World. 

IT  is  beyond  our  power  to  say,  when  or  in  what  order  we 
came  by  our  notions  of  these  qualities.  When  we  trace 
the  operations  of  our  minds  as  far  back  as  memory  and 
reflection  can  carry  us,  we  find  them  already  in  possr 
of  our  imagination  and  belief,  and  quite  familiar  to  the 
mind;  but  how  they  came  first  into  its  acquaintance,  or 
what  has  given  them  so  strong  a  hold  of  our  belief,  and 
what  regard  they  deserve,  are  no  doubt  very  import  :int 
questions  in  the  philosophy  of  human  nature. 

Shall  we,  with  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  serve  them  with  0 
Quo  warranto,  and  have  them  tried  at  the  bar  of  philoso- 
phy, upon  the  statute  of  the  ideal  system  ?  Indeed,  in  this 
trial  they  seem  to  have  come  off  very  pitifully.  For 
although  they  had  very  able  counsel,  learned  in  the  law, 
viz.  Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and  Locke,  who  said  every 
thing  they  could  for  their  clients;  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  be- 
lieving them  to  be  aiders  and  abettors  of  heresy  and  schism, 
prosecuted  them  with  great  vigour,  fully  answered  all  that 
had  been  pleaded  in  their  defence,  and  silenced  their  ablest 
advocates,  who  seem  for  half  a  century  past  to  decline  the 
argument,  and  to  trust  to  the  favour  of  the  jury  rather  than 
to  the  strength  of  their  pleadings. 

Thus,  the  wisdom  of  philosophy  is  set  in  opposition  to 
the  common  sense  of  mankind.  The  first  pretends  to  de- 
monstrate, a  priori,  that  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a 
material  world;  that  sun,  moon,  stars,  and  earth,  vegeta- 
ble and  animal  bodies,  are,  and  can  be  nothing  else  but 
sensations  in  the  mind,  or  images  of  those  sensations  in 
the  memory  and  imagination;  that,  like  pain  and  joy,  they 
can  have  no  existence  when  they  are  not  thought  of.  The 
last  can  conceive  no  otherwise  of  this  opinion  than  as  a 
kind  of  metaphysical  lunacy;  and  concludes,  that  too 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  TOUCH.  73 

much  learning;  is  apt  to  make  men  mad ;  and  that  the  man 
who  seriously  entertains  this  belief,  though  in  other  re- 
spects he  may  be  a  very  good  man,  as  a  man  may  be  who 
believes  that  he  is  made  of  glass ;  yet  surely  he  hath  a 
soft  place  in  his  understanding,  and  hath  been  hurt  by 
much  thinking. 

This  opposition  betwixt  philosophy  and  common  sense, 
is  apt  to  have  a  very  unhappy  influence  upon  the  philoso- 
pher himself.  He  sees  human  nature  in  an  odd,  unami- 
able,  and  mortifying  light.  He  considers  himself,  and  the 
rest  of  his  species,  as  born  under  a  necessity  of  believing 
ten  thousand  absurdities  and  contradictions,  and  endowed 
with  such  a  pittance  of  reason  as  is  just  sufficient  to  make 
this  unhappy  discovery :  and  this  is  all  the  fruit  of  his  pro- 
found speculations.  Such  notions  of  human  nature  tend  to 
slacken  every  nerve  of  the  soul,  to  put  every  noble  purpose 
end  sentiment  out  of  countenance,  and  spread  a  melancholy 
gloom  over  the  whole  face  of  things. 

If  this  is  wisdom,  let  me  be  deluded  with  the  vulgar. 
1  iind  something  within  me  that  recoils  against  it,  and  in- 
spires more  reverent  sentiments  of  the  human  kind  and  of 
the  universal  administration.  Common  sense  and  reason 
have  both  one  author;  that  almighty  Author,  in  all  whose 
other  works  we  observe  a  consistency,  uniformity,  and 
beauty,  which  charm  and  delight  the  understanding;  there 
must  therefore  be  some  order  and  consistency  in  the  human 
faculties,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  his  workmanship.  A 
man  that  thinks  reverently  of  his  own  kind,  and  esteems 
true  wisdom  and  philosophy,  will  not  be  fond,  nay,  will  be 
veiy  suspicious,  of  such  strange  and  paradoxical  opinions. 
If  they  are  false,  they  disgrace  philosophy ;  and  if  they 
are  true,  they  degrade  the  human  species,  and  make  us 
justly  ashamed  of  our  frame. 

To  what  purpose  is  it  for  philosophy  to  decide  against 
common  sense  in  this  or  any  other  matter?  The  belief  of 
a  material  world  is  older,  and  of  more  authority,  than  any 
principles  of  philosophy.  It  declines  the  tribunal  of  rea- 
son, and  laughs  at  all  the  artillery  of  the  logician.  It 
retains  its  sovereign  authority  in  spite  of  all  the  edicts  of 

E 


t4  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND*  [CHAP.  V. 

philosophy,  and  reason  itself  must  stoop  to  its  orders.  Even 
those  philosophers  who  have  disowned  the  authority  of  our 
notions  of  an  external  material  world,  confess,  that  they 
find  themselves  under  a  necessity  of  submitting  to  their 
power. 

Methinks,  therefore,  it  were  better  to  make  a  virtue  of 
necessity;  and,  since  we  cannot  get  rid  of  the  vulgar 
notion  and  belief  of  an  extenial  world,  to  reconcile  our 
reason  to  it  as  well  as  we  can :  for  if  Reason  should 
stomach  and  fret  ever  so  much  at  this  yoke,  she  cannot 
throw  it  off;  if  she  will  not  be  the  servant  of  Common 
Sense,  she  must  be  her  slave. 

In  order,  therefore,  to  reconcile  reason  to  common  sense 
in  this  matter,  I  beg  leave  to  offer  to  the  consideration  of 
philosophers  these  two  observations.  First,  That  in  all 
this  debate  about  the  existence  of  a  material  world,  it  hath 
been  taken  for  granted  on  both  sides,  that  this  same  mate- 
rial world,  if  any  such  there  be,  must  be  the  express 
image  of  our  sensations ;  that  we  can  have  no  conception 
of  any  material  thing  which  is  not  like  some  sensation  in 
our  minds ;  and  particularly,  that  the  sensations  of  touch 
are  images  of  extension,  hardness,  figure,  and  motion. 
Every  argument  brought  against  the  existence  of  a  mate- 
rial world,  either  by  the  Bishop  of  Cloyne  or  by  the  author 
of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature,  supposeth  this.  If 
this  is  true,  their  arguments  are  conclusive  and  unanswer- 
able :  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  it  is  not  true,  there  is  no 
shadow  of  argument  left.  Have  those  philosophers,  then, 
given  any  solid  proof  of  this  hypothesis,  upon  which  the 
whole  weight  of  so  strange  a  system  rests?  No.  They 
have  not  so  much  as  attempted  to  do  it.  But,  because 
ancient  and  modern  philosophers  have  agreed  in  this 
opinion,  they  have  taken  it  for  granted.  But  let  us,  as 
becomes  philosophers,  lay  aside  authority;  we  need  not 
surely  consult  Aristotle  or  Locke,  to  know  whether  pain 
be  like  the  point  of  a  sword.  I  have  as  clear  a  concep- 
tion of  extension,  hardness,  and  motion,  as  I  have  of  the 
point  of  a  sword;  and,  with  some  pains  and  practice,  I 
can  form  as  clear  a  notion  of  the  other  sensations  of 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  TOUCH.  75 

touch,  as  1  have  of  pain.  When  I  do  so,  and  compare 
them  together,  it  appears  to  me  clear  as  daylight,  that  the 
former  are  not  of  kin  to  the  latter,  nor  resemble  them  in 
any  one  feature.  They  are  as  unlike,  yea,  as  certainly 
and  manifestly  unlike  as  pain  is  to  the  point  of  a  sword. 
It  may  be  true,  that  those  sensations  first  introduced  the 
material  world  to  our  acquaintance ;  it  may  be  true,  that 
it  seldom  or  never  appears  without  their  company ;  but, 
for  all  that,  they  are  as  unlike  as  the  passion  of  anger  is  to 
those  features  of  the  countenance  which  attend  it. 

So  that,  in  the  sentence  those  philosophers  have  passed 
against  the  material  world,  there  is  an  error  persona?. 
Their  proof  touches  not  matter,  or  any  of  its  qualities ;  but 
strikes  directly  against  an  idol  of  their  own  imagination,  a 
material  world  made  of  ideas  and  sensations,  which  never 
had  nor  can  have  an  existence. 

Secondly,  The  very  existence  of  our  conceptions,  of 
extension,  figure,  and  motion,  since  they  are  neither  ideas 
of  sensation  nor  reflection,  overturns  the  whole  ideal  sys- 
tem, by  which  the  material  world  hath  been  tried  and  con- 
demned :  so  that  there  hath  been  likewise  in  this  sentence 
an  error  juris. 

It  is  a  very  fine  and  a  just  observation  of  Locke,  That 
as  no  human  art  can  create  a  single  particle  of  matter,  and 
the  whole  extent  of  our  power  over  the  material  world 
consists  in  compounding,  combining,  and  disjoining  the 
matter  made  to  our  hands ;  so  in  the  world  of  thought,  the 
materials  are  all  made  by  nature,  and  can  only  be  vari- 
ously combined  and  disjoined  by  us.  So  that  it  is  impos- 
sible for  reason  or  prejudice,  true  or  false  philosophy,  to 
produce  one  simple  notion  or  conception,  which  is  not  the 
work  of  nature,  and  the  result  of  our  constitution.  The 
conception  of  extension,  motion,  and  the  other  attributes 
of  matter  cannot  be  the  effect  of  error  or  prejudice ;  it 
must  be  the  work  of  nature.  And  the  power  or  faculty, 
by  which  we  acquire  those  conceptions,  must  be  some- 
thing different  from  any  power  of  the  human  mind  that 
hath  been  explained,  since  it  is  neither  sensation  nor 
reflection. 

E2 


76  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

Thus  I  would  therefore  humbly  propose  as  an  cxperi- 
mentum  crucis,  by  which  the  ideal  system  must  stand  or 
fall;  and  it  brings  the  matter  to  a  short  issue :  Extension, 
figure,  motion,  may,  any  one  or  all  of  them,  be  taken  for 
the  subject  of  this  experiment.  Either  they  are  ideas  of 
sensation  or  they  are  not.  If  any  one  of  them  can  be 
shown  to  be  an  idea  of  sensation,  or  to  have  the  least 
resemblance  to  any  sensation,  I  lay  my  hand  upon  my 
mouth,  and  give  up  all  pretence  to  reconcile  reason  to 
common  sense  in  this  matter,  and  must  suffer  the  ideal 
scepticism  to  triumph.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
are  not  ideas  of  sensation,  nor  like  any  sensation,  then  the 
ideal  system  is  a  rope  of  sand,  and  all  the  laboured  argu- 
ments of  the  sceptical  philosophy  against  a  material  world, 
and  against  the  existence  of  every  thing  but  impressions 
and  ideas,  proceed  upon  a  false  hypothesis. 

If  our  philosophy  concerning  the  mind  be  so  lame  with 
regard  to  the  origin  of  our  notions  of  the  clearest,  most 
simple,  and  most  familiar  objects  of  thought,  and  the 
powers  from  which  they  are  derived,  can  we  expect  that 
it  should  be  more  perfect  in  the  account  it  gives  of  the 
origin  of  our  opinions  and  belief?  We  have  seen  already 
some  instances  of  its  imperfection  in  this  respect:  and 
perhaps  that  same  nature  which  hath  given  us  the  power 
to  conceive  things  altogether  unlike  to  any  of  our  sensa- 
tions, or  to  any  operation  of  our  minds,  hath  likewise  pro- 
vided for  our  belief  of  them  by  some  part  of  our  constitu- 
tion hitherto  not  explained. 

Bishop  Berkeley  hath  proved,  beyond  the  possibility  of 
reply,  that  we  cannot  by  reasoning  infer  the  existence  of 
matter  from  our  sensations :  and  the  author  of  the  Trea- 
tise of  Human  Nature  hath  proved  no  less  clearly,  that 
we  cannot  by  reasoning  infer  the  existence  of  our  own  or 
other  minds  from  our  sensations.  But  are  we  to  admit 
nothing  but  what  can  be  proved  by  reasoning  ?  Then  wo 
must  be  sceptics  indeed,  and  believe  nothing  at  all.  The 
author  of  the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  appears  to  me 
to  be  but  a  half  sceptic.  He  hath  not  followed  his  prin- 
ciples so  far  as  they  lead  him :  but  after  having,  with  un- 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  TOUCH.  77 

paralleled  intrepidity  and  success,  combated  vulgar  preju- 
dices ;  when  he  had  but  one  blow  to  strike,  his  courage 
fails  him,  he  fairly  lays  down  his  arms,  and  yields  himself 
a  captive  to  the  most  common  of  all  vulgar  prejudices,  I 
mean  the  belief  of  the  existence  of  his  own  impressions 
and  ideas. 

I  beg,  therefore,  to  have  the  honour  of  making  an  addi- 
tion to  the  sceptical  system,  without  which,  I  conceive,  it 
cannot  hang  together.  I  affirm,  that  the  belief  of  the  ex- 
istence of  impressions  and  ideas  is  as  little  supported  by 
reason  as  that  of  the  existence  of  minds  and  bodies.  No 
man  ever  did  or  could  offer  any  reason  for  this  belief. 
Des  Cartes  took  it  for  granted  that  he  thought,  and  had 
sensations  and  ideas ;  so  have  all  his  followers  done. 
Even  the  hero  of  scepticism  hath  yielded  this  point,  I 
crave  leave  to  say,  weakly  and  imprudently.  I  say  so, 
because  I  am  persuaded  that  there  is  no  principle  of  his 
philosophy  that  obliged  him  to  make  this  concession. 
And  what  is  there  in  impressions  and  ideas  so  formidable 
that  this  all  conquering  philosophy,  after  triumphing  ovei 
every  other  existence,  should  pay  homage  to  him?  Be- 
sides, the  concession  is  dangerous  :  for  belief  is  of  such  a 
nature,  that  if  you  leave  any  root  it  will  spread,  and  you 
may  more  easily  pull  it  up  altogether,  than  say,  Hitherto 
shalt  thou  go  and  no  farther :  the  existence  of  impressions 
and  ideas  I  give  up  to  thee ;  but  see  thou  pretend  to 
nothing  more.  A  thorough  and  consistent  sceptic  will 
never,  therefore,  yield  this  point;  and  while  he  holds  it, 
you  can  never  oblige  him  to  yield  any  thing  else. 

To  such  a  sceptic  I  have  nothing  to  say ;  but  of  the 
semi-sceptics,  I  should  beg  leave  to  know,  why  they 
believe  the  existence  of  their  impressions  and  ideas.  Tho 
true  reason  I  take  to  be,  because  they  cannot  help  it;  and 
the  same  reason  will  lead  them  to  believe  many  other 
things. 

All  reasoning  must  be  from  first  principles;  and  for 
first  principles  no  other  reason  can  be  given  but  this,  that, 
by  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  we  are  under  a  neces- 
sity of  assenting  to  them.  Such  principles  are  parts  of 


78  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

our  constitution,  no  less  than  the  power  of  thinking :  rea- 
son can  neither  make  nor  destroy  them ;  nor  can  it  do  any 
tiling  without  them :  it  is  like  a  telescope,  which  may  help 
a  man  to  see  farther,  who  hath  eyes ;  but  without  eyes  a 
telescope  shows  nothing  at  all.  A  mathematician  cannot 
prove  the  truth  of  his  axioms,  nor  can  he  prove  any  thing, 
unless  he  takes  them  for  granted.  We  cannot  prove  the 
existence  of  our  minds,  nor  even  of  our  thoughts  and  sen- 
sations. An  historian  or  a  witness  can  prove  nothing, 
unless  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  memory  and  senses 
may  be  trusted.  A  natural  philosopher  can  prove  nothing, 
unless  it  is  taken  for  granted  that  the  course  of  nature  is 
steady  and  uniform. 

How  or  when  I  got  such  first  principles,  upon  which  I 
build  all  my  reasoning,  I  know  not ;  for  I  had  them  before 
I  can  remember :  but  I  am  sure  they  are  parts  of  my  con- 
stitution, and  that  I  cannot  throw  them  off.  That  our 
thoughts  and  sensations  must  have  a  subject,  which  we 
call  ourself,  is  not  therefore  an  opinion  got  by  reasoning, 
but  a  natural  principle.  That  our  sensations  of  touch  indi- 
cate something  external,  extended,  figured,  hard,  or  soft, 
is  not  a  deduction  of  reason,  but  a  natural  principle.  The 
belief  of  it  and  the  very  conception  of  it  are  equally  parts 
of  our  constitution.  If  we  are  deceived  in  it,  we  are  de- 
ceived by  Him  that  made  us,  and  there  is  no  remedy. 

I  do  not  mean  to  affirm,  that  the  sensations  of  touch  do 
from  the  very  first  suggest  the  same  notions  of  body  and 
its  qualities  which  they  do  when  we  are  grown  up.  Per- 
haps nature  is  frugal  in  this,  as  in  her  other  operations. 
The  passion  of  love,  with  all  its  concomitant  sentiments 
and  desires,  is  naturally  suggested  by  the  perception  of 
beauty  in  the  other  sex.  Yet  the  same  perception  does 
not  suggest  the  tender  passion,  till  a  certain  period  of  life. 
A  blow  given  to  an  infant  raises  grief  and  lamentation ; 
but  when  he  grows  up,  it  as  naturally  stirs  resentment,  and 
prompts  him  to  resistance.  Perhaps  a  child  in  the  womb, 
or  for  some  short  period  of  its  existence,  is  merely  a  sen- 
tient being :  the  faculties,  by  which  it  perceives  an  exter- 
nal world,  by  which  it  reflects  on  its  own  thoughts  and 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  TOUCH.  79 

existence,  and  relation  to  other  things,  as  well  as  its  rea- 
soning and  moral  faculties,  unfold  themselves  by  degrees : 
so  that  it  is  inspired  with  the  various  principles  of  common 
sense,  as  with  the  passions  of  love  and  resentment,  when 
it  has  occasion  for  them. 


SECT.  VIII. 

Of  the  Systems  of  Philosophers  concerning  the  Senses. 

ALL  the  systems  of  philosophers  about  our  senses  and 
their  objects  have  split  upon  this  rock,  of  not  distinguish- 
ing properly  sensations,  which  can  have  no  existence  but 
when  they  are  felt,  from  the  tlu'ngs  suggested  by  them. 
Aristotle,  with  as  distinguishing  a  head  as  ever  applied  to 
philosophical  disquisitions,  confounds  these  two;  and 
makes  every  sensation  to  be  the  form,  without  the  matter, 
of  the  thing  perceived  by  it :  as  the  impression  of  a  seal 
upon  wax  has  the  form  of  the  seal,  but  nothing  of  the 
matter  of  it ;  so  he  conceived  our  sensations  to  be  impres- 
sions upon  the  mind,  which  bear  the  image,  likeness,  or 
form  of  the  external  thing  perceived,  without  the  matter  of 
it.  Colour,  sound,  and  smell,  as  well  as  extension,  figure, 
and  hardness,  are,  according  to  him,  various  forms  of 
matter :  our  sensations  are  the  same  forms  imprinted  on 
the  mind,  and  perceived  in  its  own  intellect.  It  is  evident 
from  this,  that  Aristotle  made  no  distinction  between 
primary  and  secondary  qualities  of  bodies,  although  that 
distinction  was  made  by  Democritus,  Epicurus,  and  others 
of  the  ancients. 

Des  Cartes,  Malebranche,  and  Locke  revived  the  dis- 
tinction between  primary  and  secondary  qualities.  But 
they  made  the  secondaiy  qualities  mere  sensations,  and 
the  primary  ones  resemblances  of  our  sensations.  They 
maintained,  that  colour,  sound,  and  heat  are  not  any 
thing  in  bodies,  but  sensations  of  the  mind :  at  the  same 
time  they  acknowledged  some -particular  texture  or  modi- 


80  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

fication  of  the  body  to  be  the  cause  or  occasion  of  those 
sensations;  but  to  this  modification  they  gave  no  name. 
Whereas,  by  the  vulgar,  the  names  of  colour,  heat,  and 
sound  are  but  rarely  applied  to  the  sensations,  and  most 
commonly  to  those  unknown  causes  of  them ;  as  hath 
been  already  explained.  The  constitution  of  our  nature 
leads  us  rather  to  attend  to  the  things  signified  by  the 
sensation  than  to  the  sensation  itself,  and  to  give  a  name 
to  the  former  rather  than  to  the  latter.  Thus  we  see,  that 
with  regard  to  secondary  qualities,  these  philosophers 
thought  with  the  vulgar,  and  with  common  sense.  Their 
paradoxes  were  only  an  abuse  of  words.  For  when  they 
maintain,  as  an  important  modern  discovery,  that  there  is 
no  heat  in  the  fire,  they  mean  no  more,  than  that  the  fire 
does  not  feel  heat,  which  every  one  knew  before. 

With  regard  to  primary  qualities,  these  philosophers 
erred  most  grossly  :  they  indeed  believed  the  existence  of 
those  qualities ;  but  they  did  not  at  all  attend  to  the  sen- 
sations that  suggest  them,  which  have  no  names,  having 
been  as  little  considered  as  if  they  had  no  existence. 
They  were  aware,  that  figure,  extension,  and  hardness  are 
perceived  by  means  of  sensations  of  touch;  whence  they 
rashly  concluded,  that  these  sensations  must  be  images 
and  resemblances  of  figure,  extension,  and  hardness. 

The  received  hypothesis  of  ideas  naturally  led  them  to 
this  conclusion ;  and  indeed  cannot  exist  with  any  other ; 
for,  according  to  that  hypothesis,  external  things  must  be 
perceived  by  means  of  images  of  them  in  the  mind ;  and 
what  can  those  images  of  external  things  in  the  mind  be, 
but  the  sensations  by  which  we  perceive  them  ? 

This,  however,  was  to  draw  a  conclusion  from  an  hypo- 
thesis against  fact.  We  need  not  have  recourse  to  any 
hypothesis  to  know  what  our  sensations  are,  or  what  they 
are  like.  By  a  proper  degree  of  reflection  and  attention, 
we  may  understand  them  perfectly,  and  be  as  certain  that 
they  are  not  like  any  quality  of  body  as  we  can  be  that 
the  toothach  is  not  like  a  triangle.  How  a  sensation 
should  instantly  make  us  conceive  and  believe  the  ex- 
istence of  an  external  thing  altogether  unlike  to  it,  I  do 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  TOUCH.  81 

not  pretend  to  know ;  and  when  I  say  that  the  one  sug- 
uc.sts  the  other,  I  mean  not  to  explain  the  manner  of  their 
<  onnection,  but  to  express  a  fact,  which  every  one  may 
be  conscious  of;  namely,  that,  by  a  law  of  our  nature, 
-iich  a  conception  and  belief  constantly  and  immediately 
follow  the  sensation. 

Bishop  Berkeley  gave  new  light  to  this  subject,  by 
showing,  that  the  qualities  of  an  inanimate  thing,  such  as 
matter  is  conceived  to  be,  cannot  resemble  any  sensation ; 
that  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  any  thing  like  the  sensa- 
tions of  our  minds,  but  the  'sensations  of  other  minds. 
Kvery  one  that  attends  properly  to  these  sensations  must 
assent  to  this ;  yet  it  had  escaped  all  the  philosophers  that 
came  before  Berkeley ;  it  had  escaped,  even  the  ingenious 
Locke,  who  had  so  much  practised  reflection  on  the  opera- 
tions of  his  own  mind.  So  difficult  is  it  to  attend  pro- 
perly even  to  our  own  feelings.  They  are  so  accustomed  to 
pass  through  the  mind  unobserved,  and  instantly  to  make 
way  for  that  which  nature  intended  them  to  signify,  that  it 
is  extremely  difficult  to  stop  and  survey  them ;  and  when 
we  think  we  have  acquired  this  power,  perhaps  the  mind 
still  fluctuates  between  the  sensation  and  its  associated 
quality,  so  that  they  mix  together,  find  present  something 
to  the  imagination  that  is  compounded  of  both.  Thus  i:i 
a  globe  or  cylinder,  whose  opposite  sides  are  quite  unlike 
in  colour,  if  you  turn  it  slowly,  the  colours  are  perfectly 
distinguishable,  and  their  dissimilitude  is  manifest;  but  if 
it  is  turned  fast,  they  lose  their  distinction,  and  seem  to  be 
of  one  and  the  same  colour. 

No  succession  can  be  more  quick  than  that  of  tangible 
qualities  to  the  sensations  with  which  nature  has  asso- 
ciated them :  But  when  one  has  once  acquired  the  art  of 
making  them  separate  and  distinct  objects  of  thought,  he 
will  then  clearly  perceive,  that  the  maxim  of  Bishop 
Berkeley  above  mentioned  is  self-evident;  and  that  the 
features  of  the  face  are  not  more  unlike  to  a  passion  of  the 
mind  which  they  indicate  than  the  sensations  of  touch  are 
to  the  primary  qualities  of  body. 

But  let  us  observe  what  use  the  Bishop  makes  of  this 

E3 


82  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  V. 

important  discovery:  Why,  he  concludes,  that  we  can 
have  no  conception  of  an  inanimate  substance,  such  as 
matter  is  conceived  to  be,  or  of  any  of  its  qualities ;  and 
that  there  is  the  strongest  ground  to  believe  that  there  is 
no  existence  in  nature  but  minds,  sensations,  and  ideas : 
If  there  is  any  other  kind  of  existence,  it  must  be  what  we 
neither  have  nor  can  have  any  conception  of.  But  how 
does  this  follow  ?  Why  thus :  We  can  have  no  concep- 
tion of  any  thing  but  what  resembles  some  sensation  or 
idea  in  our  minds;  but  the  sensations  and  ideas  in  our 
minds  can  resemble  nothing  but  the  sensations  and  ideas 
in  other  minds ;  therefore,  the  conclusion  is  evident.  This 
argument,  we  see,  leans  upon  two  propositions.  The  last 
of  them  the  ingenious  author  hath  indeed  made  evident  to 
all  that  understand  his  reasoning,  and  can  attend  to  their 
own  sensations  :  but  the  first  proposition  he  never  attempts 
to  prove;  it  is  taken  from  the  doctrine  of  ideas,  which 
hath  been  so  universally  received  by  philosophers,  that  it 
was  thought  to  need  no  proof. 

We  may  here  again  observe,  that  this  acute  writer 
argues  from  an  hypothesis  against  fact,  and  against  the 
common  sense  of  mankind.  That  we  can  have  no  con- 
ception of  any  thing,  unless  there  is  some  impression,  sen- 
sation, or  idea,  in  our  minds  which  resembles  it,  is  indeed 
an  opinion  which  hath  been  very  generally  receiv  ed  among 
philosophers;  but  it  is  neither  self-evident  nor  hath  it 
been  clearly  proved :  and  therefore  it  had  been  more  rea- 
sonable to  call  in  question  this  doctrine  of  philosophers 
than  to  discard  the  material  world,  and  by  that  means 
expose  philosophy  to  the  ridicule  of  all  men  who  will  not 
offer  up  common  sense  as  a  sacrifice  to  metaphysics. 

We  ought,  however,  to  do  this  justice  both  to  the 
Bishop  of  Cloyne,  and  to  the  author  of  the  Treatise  of 
Human  Nature,  to  acknowledge,  that  their  conclusions 
are  justly  drawn  from  the  doctrine  of  ideas,  which  has 
been  so  universally  received.  On  the  other  hand,  from 
the  character  of  Bishop  Berkeley,  and  of  his  predecessors 
Des  Cartes,  Locke,  and  Malefranche,  we  may  venture  to 
say,  that  if  they  had  seen  all  the  consequences  of  this  doc- 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  TOUCH.  83 

trine  as  clearly  as  the  author  before  mentioned  did,  they 
would  have  suspected  it  vehemently,  and  examined  it  more 
carefully  than  they  appear  to  have  done. 

The  theory  of  ideas,  like  the  Trojan  horse,  had  a  speci- 
ous appearance  both  of  innocence  and  beauty;  but  if 
those  philosophers  had  known  that  it  carried  in  its  belly 
death  and  destruction  to  all  science  and  common  sense, 
they  would  not  have  broken  down  their  walls  to  give  it 
admittance. 

That  we  have  clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of  exten- 
sion, figure,  motion,  and  other  attributes  of  body,  which 
are  neither  sensations  nor  like  any  sensation,  is  a  fact  of 
which  we  may  be  certain,  as  that  we  have  sensations. 
And  that  all  mankind  have  a  fixed  belief  of  an  external 
material  world,  a  belief  which  is  neither  got  by  reasoning 
nor  education,  and  a  belief  which  we  cannot  shake  off, 
even  when  we  seem  to  have  strong  arguments  against  it, 
and  no  shadow  of  argument  for  it,  is  likewise  a  fact,  for 
which  we  have  all  the  evidence  that  the  nature  of  the 
thing  admits.  These  facts  are  phenomena  of  human 
nature,  from  which  we  may  justly  argue  against  any  hypo- 
thesis, however  generally  received.  But  to  argue-from  an 
hypothesis  against  facts  is  contrary  to  the  rules  of  true 
philosophy. 


OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

CHAP.  VI. 
OF   SEEING. 


SECT.  I. 

The  Excellence  and  Dignity  of  this  Faculty. 

THE  advances  made  in  the  knowledge  of  optics  in  the 
last  age  and  in  the  present,  and  chiefly  the  discoveries  of 
Sir  Isaac  Newton,  do  honour  not  to  philosophy  only,  but 
to  human  nature.  Such  discoveries  ought  for  ever  to  put 
to  shame  the  ignoble  attempts  of  our  modern  sceptics  to 
depreciate  the  human  understanding,  and  to  dispirit  men  in 
the  search  of  truth,  by  representing  the  human  faculties  as 
fit  for  nothing  but  to  lead  us  into  absurdities  and  contra- 
dictions. 

Of  the  faculties  called  the  Jive  senses,  sight  is  without 
doubt  the  noblest.  The  rays  of  light  which  minister  to 
Ihis  sense,  and  of  which,  without  it,  we  could  never  have 
had  the  least  conception,  are  the  most  wonderful  and 
astonishing  part  of  the  inanimate  creation.  We  must  be 
satisfied  of  this,  if  we  consider  their  extreme  minuteness, 
their  inconceivable  velocity,  the  regular  variety  of  colours 
which  they  exhibit,  the  invariable  laws  according  to  which 
they  are  acted  upon  by  other  bodies,  in  their  reflections, 
inflections,  and  refractions,  without  the  least  change  of 
their  original  properties,  and  the  facility  with  which  they 
pervade  bodies  of  great  density  and  of  the  closest  texture, 
without  resistance,  without  crowding  or  disturbing  one 
another,  without  giving  the  least  sensible  impulse  to  the 
lightest  bodies. 

The  structure  of  the  eye,  and  of  all  its  appurtenances, 
the  admirable  contrivances  of  nature  for  performing  all  its 
various  external  and  internal  motions,  and  the  variety  in 


SECT.  I.]  OF  SEEING.  80 

the  eyes  of  different  animals,  suited  to  their  several  natures 
and  ways  of  life,  clearly  demonstrate  this  organ  to  be  a 
masterpiece  of  Nature's  work.  And  he  must  be  very 
ignorant  of  what  hath  been  discovered  about  it,  or  have  a 
\  i TV  strange  cast  of  understanding,  who  can  seriously 
doubt,  whether  or  not  the  rays  of  light  and  the  eye  were 
made  for  one  another,  with  consummate  wisdom,  and  per- 
fect skill  in  optics. 

If  we  shall  suppose  an  order  of  beings,  endued  with 
every  human  faculty  but  that  of  sight,  how  incredible 
would  it  appear  to  such  beings,  accustomed  only  to  the 
-low  information  of  touch,  that,  by  the  addition  of  an 
organ,  consisting  of  a  ball  and  socket  of  an  inch  diameter, 
they  might  be  enabled,  in  an  instant  of  time,  without 
changing  their  place,  to  perceive  the  disposition  of  a 
whole  army,  or  the  order  of  a  battle,  the  figure  of  a  mag- 
nificent palace,  or  all  the  variety  of  a  landscape?  If  a 
man  were  by  feeling  to  find  out  the  figure  of  the  Peak  of 
Teneriffe,  or  even  of  St.  Peter's  Church  at  Rome,  it  would 
be  the  work  of  a  lifetime. 

It  would  appear  still  more  incredible  to  such  beings  as 
we  have  supposed,  if  they  were  informed  of  the  disco- 
veries which  may  be  made  by  this  little  organ  in  things  far 
beyond  the  reach  of  any  other  sense :  That  by  means  of 
\\  we  can  find  our  way  in  the  pathless  ocean;  that  we 
can  traverse  the  globe  of  the  earth,  determine  its  figure 
and  dimensions,  and  delineate  every  region  of  it:  yea, 
that  we  can  measure  the  planetary  orbs,  and  make  disco- 
veries in  the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars. 

Would  it  not  appear  still  more  astonishing  to  such 
beings,  if  they  should  be  farther  informed,  That,  by  means 
of  this  same  organ,  we  can  perceive  the  tempers  and  dis- 
positions, the  passions  and  affections  of  our  fellow  crea- 
tures, even  when  they  want  most  to  conceal  them  ?  That 
when  the  tongue  is  taught  most  artfully  to  lie  and  dissem- 
ble, the  hypocrisy  should  appear  in  the  countenance  to  a 
discerning  eye  ?  A  nd  that  by  this  organ  we  can  often  per- 
ceive what  is  straight  and  what  is  crooked  in  the  mind  as 
well  as  in  the  body  ?  How  many  mysterious  things  must  a 


86  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

blind  man  believe,  if  he  will  give  credit  to  the  relations  of 
those  that  see  ?  Surely  he  needs  as  strong  a  faith  as  is 
required  of  a  good  Christian. 

It  is  not  therefore  without  reason,  that  the  faculty  of 
seeing  is  looked  upon,  not  only  as  more  noble  than  the 
other  senses,  but  as  having  something  in  it  of  a  nature 
superior  to  sensation.  The  evidence  of  reason  is  called 
seeing,  not  feeling,  smelling,  or  tasting.  Yea,  we  are 
wont  to  express  the  manner  of  the  divine  knowledge  by 
seeing,  as  that  kind  of  knowledge  which  is  most  perfect 
iu  us. 


SECT.  II. 

Sight  discovers  almost  Nothing  which  the  Blind  may  not 
comprehend.     The  Reason  of  this. 

NOTWITHSTANDING  what  hath  been  said  of  the  dignity 
and  superior  nature  of  this  faculty,  it  is  worthy  of  our 
observation,  that  there  is  very  little  of  the  knowledge 
acquired  by  sight,  that  may  not  be  communicated  to  a 
man  born  blind.  One  who  never  saw  the  light  may  be 
learned  and  knowing  in  every  science,  even  in  optics  ;  and 
may  make  discoveries  in  every  branch  of  philosophy.  He 
may  understand  as  much  as  another  man,  not  only  of  the 
order,  distances,  and  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  but 
of  the  nature  of  light,  and  of  the  laws  of  the  reflection  and 
refraction  of  its  rays.  He  may  understand  distinctly, 
how  those  laws  produce  the  phenomena  of  the  rainbow, 
the  prism,  the  camera  obscura,  and  the  magic  lantern,  and 
all  the  powers  of  the  microscope  and  telescope.  This  is  a 
fact  sufficiently  attested  by  experience. 

In  order  to  perceive  the  reason  of  it,  we  must  distinguish 
the  appearance  that  objects  make  to  the  eye,  from  the 
things  suggested  by  that  appearance:  and  again,  in  the 
visible  appearance  of  objects,  we  must  distinguish  the 
appearance  of  colour  from  the  appearance  of  extension, 
figure,  and  motion.  First,  then,  as  to  the  visible  appear- 


SECT.  II.]  OF  SEEING.  87 

ance  of  the  figure,  and  motion,  and  extension  of  bodies,  I 
conceive  that  a  man  born  blind  may  have  a  distinct  notion, 
if  not  of  the  very  things,  at  least  of  something  extremely 
like  to  them.  May  not  a  blind  man  be  made  to  conceive, 
that  a  body  moving  directly  from  the  eye,  or  directly 
towards  it,  may  appear  to  be  at  rest;  and  that  the  same 
motion  may  appear  quicker  or  slower,  according  as  it  is 
nearer  to  the  eye  or  farther  off,  more  direct  or  more 
oblique?  May  he  not  be  made  to  conceive  that  a  plain 
surface,  in  a  certain  position,  may  appear  as  a  straight 
line,  and  vary  its  visible  figure  as  its  position  or  the  posi- 
tion of  the  eye  is  varied  ?  That  a  circle  seen  obliquely  will 
appear  an  ellipse :  and  a  square,  a  rhombus  or  an  oblong 
rectangle?  Dr.  Saunderson  understood  the  projection  of 
the  sphere,  and  the  common  rules  of  perspective ;  and  if 
he  did,  he  must  have  understood  all  that  I  have  mentioned. 
If  there  were  any  doubt  of  Dr.  Saunderson's  understand- 
ing these  things,  I  could  mention  my  having  heard  him 
say  in  conversation,  that  he  found  great  difficulty  in  under- 
standing Dr.  Halley's  demonstration  of  that  proposition, 
That  the  angles  made  by  the  circles  of  the  sphere,  are 
equal  to  the  angles  made  by  their  representatives  in  the 
stereographic  projection :  But,  said  he,  when  I  laid  aside 
that  demonstration,  and  considered  the  proposition  in  my 
own  way,  I  saw  clearly,  that  it  must  be  true.  Another 
gentleman,  of  undoubted  credit  and  judgment  in  these 
matters,  who  had  part  in  this  conversation,  remembers  it 
distinctly. 

As  to  the  appearance  of  colour,  a  blind  man  must  be 
more  at  a  loss ;  because  he  hath  no  perception  that  resem- 
bles it.  Yet  he  may,  by  a  kind  of  analogy,  in  part  sup- 
ply this  defect.  To  those  who  see,  a  scarlet  colour  sig- 
nifies an  unknown  quality  in  bodies,  that  makes  to  the  eye 
an  appearance  which  they  are  well  acquainted  with,  and 
have  often  observed:  to  a  blind  man,  it  signifies  an  un- 
known quality,  that  makes  to  the  eye  an  appearance  which 
he  is  unacquainted  with.  But  he  can  conceive  the  eye  to 
be  variously  affected  by  different  colours,  as  the  nose  is  by 
different  smells,  or  the  ear  by  different  sounds.  Thus  he 


88  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

can  conceive  scarlet  to  differ  from  blue,  as  the  sound  of  a 
trumpet  does  from  that  of  a  drum ;  or  as  the  smell  of  aiv 
orange  differs  from  that  of  an  apple.  It  is  impossible  to 
know  whether  a  scarlet  colour  has  the  same  appearance  to 
me  which  it  hath  to  another  man ;  and  if  the  appearances 
of  it  to  different  persons  differed  as  much  as  colour  does 
from  sound,  they  might  never  be  able  to  discover  this  dif- 
ference. Hence  it  appears  obvious,  that  a  blind  man 
might  talk  long  about  colours  distinctly  and  pertinently : 
and  if  you  were  to  examine  him  in  the  dark  about  the 
nature,  composition,  and  beauty  of  them,  he  might  be  able 
to  answer  so  as  not  to  betray  his  defect. 

We  have  seen  how  far  a  blind  man  may  go  in  the  know- 
ledge of  the  appearances  which  things  make  to  the  eye. 
As  to  the  things  which  are  suggested  by  them,  or  inferred 
from  them,  although  he  could  never  discover  them  of  him- 
self, yet  he  may  understand  them  perfectly  by  the  infor- 
mation of  others.  And  every  thing  of  this  kind  that  enters 
into  our  minds  by  the  eye  may  enter  into  his  by  the  ear. 
Thus,  for  instance,  he  could  never,  if  left  to  the  direction  of 
his  own  faculties,  have  dreamed  of  any  such  thing  as  light ; 
but  he  can  be  informed  of  every  thing  we  know  about  it. 
He  can  conceive,  as  distinctly  as  we,  the  minuteness  and 
velocity  of  its  rays,  their  various  degrees  of  refrangibility 
and  reflexibility,  and  all  the  magical  powers  and  virtues  of 
that  wonderful  element.  He  could  never  of  himself  have 
found  out,  that  there  are  such  bodies  as  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars ;  but  he  may  be  informed  of  all  the  noble  disco- 
veries of  astronomers  about  their  motions,  and  the  laws  of 
nature  by  which  they  are  regulated.  Thus  it  appears,  that 
there  is  very  little  knowledge  got  by  the  eye,  which  may 
not  be  communicated  by  language  to  those  who  have  no 
eyes. 

If  we  should  suppose,  that  it  were  as  uncommon  for 
men  to  see,  as  it  is  to  be  born  blind ;  would  not  the  few 
who  had  this  rare  gift  appear  as  prophets  and  inspired 
teachers  to  the  many  ?  We  conceive  inspiration  to  give  a 
man  no  new  faculty,  but  to  communicate  to  him  in  a  new 
yray,  and  by  extraordinary  means,  \vhat  the  faculties  com- 


SECT.  II.]  OF  SEEING.  89 

raon  to  mankind  can  apprehend,  and  what  he  can  commu- 
nicate to  others  by  ordinary  means.  On  the  supposition 
we  have  made,  sight  would  appear  to  the  blind  very  simi- 
lar to  this ;  for  the  few  who  had  this  gift  would  communi- 
cate the  knowledge  acquired  by  it  to  those  who  had  it  not. 
They  could  not  indeed  convey  to  the  blind  any  distinct 
notion  of  the  manner  in  which  they  acquired  this  know- 
ledge. A  ball  and  socket  would  seem,  to  a  blind  man,  in 
this  case,  as  improper  an  instrument  for  acquiring  such  a 
variety  and  extent  of  knowledge  as  a  dream  or  a  vision. 
The  manner  iu  which  a  man  who  sees  discerns  so  many 
things  by  means  of  the  eye  is  as  unintelligible  to  the 
blind  as  the  manner  in  which  a  man  may  be  inspired  with 
knowledge  by  the  Almighty  is  to  us.  Ought  the  blind 
man,  therefore,  without  examination,  to  treat  all  pretences 
to  the  gift  of  seeing  as  imposture?  Might  he  not,  if  he 
were  candid  and  tractable,  find  reasonable  evidence  of  the 
reality  of  this  gift  in  others,  and  draw  great  advantages 
from  it  to  himself? 

The  distinction  we  have  made  between  the  visible  ap- 
pearances of  the  objects  of  sight,  and  things  suggested  by 
them,  is  necessary  to  give  us  a  just  notion  of  the  intention 
of  nature  in  giving  us  eye.s.  If  we  attend  duly  to  the 
operation  of  our  mind  in  the  use  of  this  faculty,  we  shall 
perceive,  that  the  visible  appearance  of  objects  is  hardly 
ever  regarded  by  us.  It  is  not  at  all  made  an  object  of 
thought  or  reflection,  but  serves  only  as  a  sign  to  intro- 
duce to  the  mind  something  else,  which  may  be  distinctly 
conceived  by  those  who  never  saw. 

Thus,  the  visible  appearance  of  things  in  my  room 
varies  almost  every  hour,  according  as  the  day  is  clear  or 
cloudy,  as  the  sun  is  in  the  east,  or  south,  or  west,  and  as 
my  eye  is  in  one  part  of  the  room  or  in  another :  but  I 
never  think  of  these  variations,  otherwise  than  as  signs  of 
morning,  noon,  or  night,  of  a  clear  or  cloudy  sky.  A 
book  or  a  chair  has  a  different  appearance  to  the  eye,  in 
every  different  distance  or  position ;  yet  we  conceive  it  to 
be  still  the  same;  and,  overlooking  the  appearance,  we 
immediately  conceive  the  real  figure,  distance,  and  posi- 


90  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

tion  of  the  body,  of  which  its  visible  or  perspective  appear- 
ance is  a  sign  and  indication. 

When  I  see  a  man  at  the  distance  of  ten  yards,  and 
afterwards  see  him  at  the  distance  of  a  hundred  yards,  his 
visible  appearance  in  its  length,  breadth,  and  all  its  linear 
proportions,  is  ten  times  less  in  the  last  case  than  it  is  in 
the  first :  yet  I  do  not  conceive  him  one  inch  diminished 
by  this  diminution  of  his  visible  figure.  Nay,  I  do  not  in 
the  least  attend  to  this  diminution,  even  when  I  draw  from 
it  the  conclusion  of  his  being  at  a  greater  distance.  For 
such  is  the  subtlety  of  the  mind's  operation  in  this  case 
that  we  draw  the  conclusion  without  perceiving  that  ever 
the  premises  entered  into  the  mind.  A  thousand  such 
instances  might  be  produced,  in  order  to  show  that  the 
visible  appearances  of  objects  are  intended  by  nature  only 
as  signs  or  indications  ;  and  that  the  mind  passes  instantly 
to  the  things  signified,  without  making  the  least  reflection 
upon  the  sign,  or  even  perceiving  that  there  is  any  such 
thing.  It  is  in  a  way  somewhat  similar,  that  the  sounds 
of  a  language,  after  it  is  become  familiar,  are  overlooked, 
and  we  attend  only  to  the  things  signified  by  them. 

It  is  therefore  a  just  and  important  observation  of  the 
Bishop  of  Cloyne,  That  the  visible  appearance  of  objects 
is  a  kind  of  language  used  by  nature,  to  inform  us  of  their 
distance,  magnitude,  and  figure.  And  this  observation 
hath  been  very  happily  applied,  by  that  ingenious  writer, 
to  the  solution  of  some  phenomena  in  optics  which  had 
before  perplexed  the  greatest  masters  in  that  science.  The 
same  observation  is  further  improved  by  the  judicious 
Dr.  Smith,  in  his  optics,  for  explaining  the  apparent  figure 
of  the  heavens,  and  the  apparent  distances  and  magnitudes 
of  objects  seen  with  glasses  or  by  the  naked  eye. 

Avoiding  as  much  as  possible  the  repetition  of  what 
hath  been  said  by  these  excellent  writers,  we  shall  avail 
ourselves  of  the  distinction  between  the  signs  that  nature 
useth  in  this  visual  language,  and  the  things  signified  by 
them;  and,  in  what  remains  to  be  said  of  sight,  shall  first 
make  some  observations  upon  the  signs. 


OF  SEEING.  91 

SECT.  III. 

Of  the  Visible.  Appearances  of  Objects. 

IN  this  section  we  must  speak  of  things  which  are  never 
made  the  object  of  reflection,  though  almost  every  moment 
presented  to  the  mind.  Nature  intended  them  only  for 
signs ;  and  in  the  whole  course  of  life  they  are  put  to  no 
other  use.  The  mind  has  acquired  a  confirmed  and  in- 
veterate habit  of  inattention  to  them ;  for  they  no  sooner 
appear  than,  quick  as  lightning,  the  thing  signified  suc- 
ceeds, and  engrosses  all  our  regard.  They  have  no  name 
in  language ;  and  although  we  are  conscious  of  them  when 
they  pass  through  the  mind,  yet  their  passage  is  so  quick 
and  so  familiar  that  it  is  absolutely  unheeded;  nor  do 
they  leave  any  footsteps  of  themselves,  either  in  the  me- 
mory or  imagination.  That  this  is  the  case  with  regard  to 
the  sensations  of  touch  hath  been  shown  in  the  last  chap- 
ter; and  it  holds  no  less  with  regard  to  the  visible  ap- 
pearances of  objects. 

I  cannot  therefore  entertain  the  hope  of  being  intelli- 
gible to  those  readers  who  have  not,  by  pains  and  practice, 
acquired  the  habit  of  distinguishing  the  appearance  of 
objects  to  the  eye,  from  the  judgment  which  we  form  by 
sight,  of  their  colour,  distance,  magnitude,  and  figure. 
The  only  profession  in  life  wherein  it  is  necessary  to  make 
this  distinction  is  that  of  painting.  The  painter  hath 
occasion  for  an  abstraction,  with  regard  to  visible  objects, 
somewhat  similar  to  that  which  we  here  require :  and  this 
indeed  is  the  most  difficult  part  of  his  art.  For  it  is  evi- 
dent, that  if  he  could  fix  in  his  imagination  the  visible 
appearance  of  objects,  without  confounding  it  with  the 
things  signified  by  that  appearance,  it  would  be  as  easy  for 
him  to  paint  from  the  life,  and  to  give  every  figure  its  pro- 
per shading  and  relief,  and  its  perspective  proportions,  as 
it  is  to  paint  from  a  copy.  Perspective,  shading,  giving 
relief,  and  colouring,  are  nothing  else  but  copying  the 
appearance  which  things  make  to  the  eye.  We  may 


02  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

therefore  borrow  some  light  on  the  subject  of  visible  ap- 
pearance from  this  art. 

Let  one  look  upon  any  familiar  object,  such  as  a  book, 
at  different  distances  and  different  positions :  is  he  not 
able  to  affirm  upon  the  testimony  of  his  sight,  that  it  is  the 
same  book,  the  same  object,  whether  seen  at  the  distance 
of  one  foot  or  of  ten,  whether  in  one  position  or  another ; 
that  the  colour  is  the  same,  the  dimensions  the  same,  and 
the  figure  the  same,  as  far  as  the  eye  can  judge?  This 
surely  must  be  acknowledged.  The  same  individual  ob- 
ject is  presented  to  the  mind,  only  placed  at  different  dis- 
tances and  in  different  positions.  Let  me  ask,  in  the 
next  place,  Whether  this  object  has  the  same  appearance 
to  the  eye  in  these  different  distances  ?  Infallibly  it  hath 
not,  For, 

First,  However  certain  our  judgment  may  be,  that  the 
colour  is  the  same,  it  is  as  certain  that  it  hath  not  the 
same  appearance  at  different  distances.  There  is  a  cer- 
•  tain  degradation  of  the  colour,  and  a  certain  confusion  and 
indistinctness  of  the  minute  parts,  which  is  the  natural 
consequence  of  the  removal  of  the  object  to  a  greater  dis- 
tance. Those  that  are  not  painters  or  critics  in  painting- 
overlook  this ;  and  cannot  easily  be  persuaded,  that  the 
colour  of  the  same  object  hath  a  different  appearance  at 
the  distance  of  one  foot  and  of  ten,  in  the  shade  and  in  the 
light.  But  the  masters  in  painting  know  how,  by  the  de- 
gradation of  the  colour  and  the  confusion  of  the  minute 
parts,  figures,  which  are  upon  the  same  canvass  and  at  the 
same  distance  from  the  eye,  may  be  made  to  represent 
objects  which  are  at  the  most  unequal  distances.  They 
know  how  to  make  the  objects  appear  to  be  of  the  same 
colour,  by  making  their  pictures  really  of  different  colours, 
according  to  their  distances  or  shades. 

Secondly,  Every  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  rules 
of  perspective  knows  that  the  appearance  of  the  figure  of 
the  book  must  vary  in  every  different  position  ;  yet  if  you 
ask  a  man  that  has  no  notion  of  perspective,  whether  the 
figure  of  it  does  not  appear  to  his  eye  to  be  the  same  in 
all  its  different  positions  ?  he  can  with  a  good  conscience 


SECT.  III.]  OF  SEEING.  03 

affirm,  that  it  does.  He  hath  learned  to  make  allow- 
ance for  the  variety  of  visible  figure  arising  from  the  dif- 
ference of  position,  and  to  draw  the  proper  conclusions 
from  it.  But  he  draws  these  conclusions  so  readily  and 
habitually  as  to  lose  sight  of  the  premises ;  and,  therefore, 
where  he  hath  made  the  same  conclusion,  he  conceives  the 
visible  appearance  must  have  been  the  same. 

Thirdly,  Let  us  consider  the  apparent  magnitude  or  di- 
mensions of  the  book.  Whether  I  view  it  at  the  distance 
of  one  foot  or  of  ten  feet,  it  seems  to  be  about  seven  inches 
long,  five  broad,  and  one  thick.  I  can  judge  of  these  di- 
mensions very  nearly  by  the  eye,  and  I  judge  them  to  be 
the  same  at  both  distances.  But  yet  it  is  certain  that  at 
the  distance  of  one  foot,  its  visible  length  and  breadth  is 
about  ten  times  as  great  as  at  the  distance  of  ten  feet ;  and 
consequently  its  surface  is  about  a  hundred  times  as  great. 
This  great  change  of  apparent  magnitude  is  altogether 
overlooked,  and  every  man  is  apt  to  imagine,  that  it  ap- 
pears to  the  eye  of  the  same  size  at  both  distances.  Fur- 
ther, when  I  look  at  the  book,  it  seems  plainly  to  have 
three  dimensions,  of  length,  breadth,  and  thickness :  but 
it  is  certain  that  the  visible  appearance  hath  no  more  than 
two,  and  can  be  exactly  represented  upon  a  canvass  which 
hath  only  length  and  breadth. 

In  the  last  place,  Does  not  every  man,  by  sight,  per- 
ceive the  distance  of  the  book  from  his  eye  ?  Can  he  not 
affirm  with  certainty,  that  in  one  case  it  is  not  above  one 
foot  distant,  that  in  another  it  is  ten  ?  Nevertheless  it  ap- 
pears certain,  that  distance  from  the  eye  is  no  immediate 
object  of  sight.  There  are  certain  things  in  the  visible 
appearance,  which  are  signs  of  distance  from  the  eye,  and 
from  which,  as  we  shall  afterwards  show,  we  learn  by 
experience  to  judge  of  that  distance  within  certain  limits; 
but  it  seems  beyond  doubt,  that  a  man  born  blind,  and 
suddenly  made  to  see,  could  form  no  judgment  at  first  of 
the  distance  of  the  objects  which  he  saw.  The  young 
man  couched  by  Cheselden  thought,  at  first,  that  every 
thing  he  saw  touched  his  eye,  and  learned  only  by  expe- 
rience to  judge  of  the  distance  of  visible  objects. 

I  have  entered  into  this  long  detail,  in  order  to  show, 


94  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

that  the  visible  appearance  of  an  object  is  extremely  dif- 
ferent from  the  notion  of  it  which  experience  teaches  us  to 
form  by  sight ;  and  to  enable  the  reader  to  attend  to  the 
visible  appearance  of  colour,  figure,  and  extension,  in 
visible  things,  which  is  no  common  object  of  thought,  but 
must  be  carefully  attended  to  by  those  who  would  enter 
into  the  philosophy  of  this  sense,  or  would  comprehend 
what  shall  be  said  upon  it.  To  a  man  newly  made  to  see, 
the  visible  appearance  of  objects  would  be  the  same  as  to 
us ;  but  he  would  see  nothing  at  all  of  their  real  dimen- 
sions, as  we  do.  He  could  form  no  conjecture,  by  means 
of  his  sight  only,  how  many  inches  or  feet  they  were  in 
length,  breadth,  or  thickness.  He  could  perceive  little  or 
nothing  of  their  real  figure ;  nor  could  he  discern  that  this 
was  a  cube,  that  a  sphere :  that  this  was  a  cone,  and  that 
a  cylinder.  His  eye  could  not  inform  him,  that  this  ob- 
ject was  near,  and  that  more  remote.  The  habit  of  a  man 
or  of  a  woman,  which  appeared  to  us  of  one  uniform 
colour  variously  folded  and  shaded,  would  present  to  his 
eye  neither  fold  nor  shade,  but  variety  of  colour.  In  a 
word,  his  eyes,  though  ever  so  perfect,  would  at  first  give 
him  almost  no  information  of  things  without  him.  They 
would  indeed  present  the  same  appearances  to  him  as  they 
do  to  us,  and  speak  the  same  language ;  but  to  him  it  is 
an  unknown  language,  and  therefore  he  would  attend  only 
to  the  signs,  without  knowing  the  signification  of  them : 
whereas  to  us  it  is  a  language  perfectly  familiar;  and 
therefore  we  take  no  notice  of  the  signs,  but  attend  only  to 
.  the  thing  signified  by  them. 


SECT.  IV. 

That  Colour  is  a  Quality  of  Bodies,  not  a  Sensation  of 
the  Mind. 

BY  colour,  all  men,  who  have  not  been  tutored  by  modern 
philosophy,  understand,  not  a  sensation  of  the  mind,  which 
can  have  no  existence  when  it  is  not  perceived,  but  a  qua- 
lity or  modification  of  bodies,  which  continues  to  be  the 


SECT.  IV.]  OF  SEEING.  G5 

same,  whether  it  is  seen  or  not.  The  scarlet  rose,  which 
is  before  me,  is  still  a  scarlet  rose  when  I  shut  my  eyes, 
and  was  so  at  midnight  when  no  eye  saw  it.  The  colour 
remains  when  the  appearance  ceases :  it  remains  the  same 
when  the  appearance  changes.  For  when  I  view  this 
scarlet  rose  through  a  pair  of  green  spectacles,  the  ap- 
pearance is  changed,  but  I  do  not  conceive  the  colour  of 
the  rose  changed.  To  a  person  in  the  jaundice,  it  has 
still  another  appearance ;  but  he  is  easily  convinced,  that 
the  change  is  in  his  eye,  and  not  in  the  colour  of  the  ob- 
ject. Eveiy  different  degree  of  light  makes  it  have  a  dif- 
ferent appearance,  and  total  darkness  takes  away  all  ap- 
pearance, but  makes  not  the  least  change  in  the  colour  of 
the  body.  We  may,  by  a  variety  of  optical  experiments, 
change  the  appearance  of  figure  and  magnitude  in  a  body, 
as  well  as  that  of  colour ;  we  may  make  one  body  appear 
to  be  ten.  But  all  men  believe,  that  as  a  multiplying 
glass  does  not  really  produce  ten  guineas  out  of  one,  nor  a 
microscope  turn  a  guinea  into  a  ten  pound  piece ;  so  nei- 
ther does  a  coloured  glass  change  the  real  colour  of  the 
object  seen  through  it,  when  it  changes  the  appearance  of 
that  colour. 

The  common  language  of  mankind  shows  evidently, 
that  we  ought  to  distinguish  between  the  colour  of  a  body, 
which  is  conceived  to  be  a  fixed  and  permanent  quality  in 
the  body,  and  the  appearance  of  that  colour  to  the  eye, 
which  may  be  varied  a  thousand  ways,  by  a  variation  of 
the  light,  of  the  medium,  or  of  the  eye  itself.  The  perma- 
nent colour  of  the  body  is  the  cause,  which,  by  the  media- 
tion of  various  kinds  or  degrees  of  light,  and  of  various 
transparent  bodies  interposed,  produces  all  this  variety  of 
appearances.  When  a  coloured  body  is  presented,  there 
is  a  certain  apparition  to  the  eye,  or  to  the  mind,  which  we 
have  called  the  appearance  of  colour.  Mr.  Locke  calls 
it  an  idea;  and  indeed  it  may  be  called  so  with  the 
greatest  propriety.  This  idea  can  have  no  existence  but 
when  it  is  perceived.  It  is  a  kind  of  thought,  and  can 
only  be  the  act  of  a  percipient  or  thinking  being.  By  the 
constitution  of  our  nature,  we  are  led  to  conceive  this  idea 


96  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI, 

as  a  sign  of  something  external,  and  are  impatient  till  we 
learn  its  meaning.  A  thousand  experiments  for  this  pur- 
pose are  made  every  day  by  children,  even  before  they 
come  to  the  use  of  reason.  They  look  at  things,  they 
handle  them,  they  put  them  in  various  positions,  at  dif- 
ferent distances,  and  in  different  lights. — The  ideas  of 
sight,  by  these  means,  come  to  be  associated  with,  and 
readily  to  suggest,  things  external,  and  altogether  unlike 
them.  In  particular,  that  idea  which  we  have  called  the 
appearance  of  colour  suggests  the  conception  and  belief 
of  some  unknown  quality  in  the  body,  which  occasions  the 
idea;  and  it  is  to  this  quality,  and  not  to  the  idea,  that  we 
give  the  name  of  colour.  The  various  colours,  although 
in  their  nature  equally  unknown,  are  easily  distinguished 
when  we  think  or  speak  of  them,  by  being  associated  with 
the  ideas  which  they  excite.  In  like  manner,  gravity, 
magnetism,  and  electricity,  although  all  unknown  qualities, 
are  distinguished  by  their  different  effects.  As  we  grow 
up,  the  mind  acquires  a  habit  of  passing  so  rapidly  from 
the  ideas  of  sight  to  the  external  things  suggested  by  them 
that  the  ideas  are  not  in  the  least  attended  to,  nor  have 
they  names  given  them  in  common  language. 

When  we  think  or  speak  of  any  particular  colour,  how- 
ever simple  the  notion  may  seem  to  be  which  is  presented 
to  the  imagination,  it  is  really  in  some  sort  compounded. 
It  involves  an  unknown  cause  and  a  known  effect.  The 
name  of  colour  belongs  indeed  to  the  cause  only,  and  not 
to  the  effect.  But  as  the  cause  is  unknown,  we  can  form 
no  distinct  conception  of  it,  but  by  its  relation  to  the 
known  effect.  And  therefore,  both  go  together  in  the 
imagination,  and  are  so  closely  united  that  they  are  mis- 
taken for  one  simple  object  of  thought.  When  I  would 
conceive  those  colours  of  bodies  which  we  call  scarlet  and 
blue;  if  I.  conceived  them  only  as  unknown  qualities,  I 
could  perceive  no  distinction  between  the  one  and  the 
other.  I  must  therefore,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  join 
to  each  of  them,  in  my  imagination,  some  effect  or  some 
relation  that  is  peculiar.  And  the  most  obvious  distinction 
is,  the  appearance  which  one  and  the  other  makes  to  the 


SECT.  IV.]  OF  SEEING.  9? 

eye.  Hence  the  appearance  is,  in  the  imagination,  so 
closely  united  with  the  quality  called  a  scarlet  colour 
that  they  are  apt  to  be  mistaken  for  one  and  the  same 
thing,  although  they  are  in  reality  so  different  and  so  un- 
like that  one  is  an  idea  in  the  mind,  the  other  is  a  quality 
of  body. 

I  conclude,  then,  that  colour  is  not  a  sensation,  but  a 
secondary  quality  of  bodies,  in  the  sense  we  have  already 
explained ;  that  it  is  a  certain  power  or  virtue  in  bodies, 
that  in  fair  daylight  exhibits  to  the  eye  an  appearance 
which  is  very  familiar  to  us,  although  it  hath  no  name. 
Colour  differs  from  other  secondary  qualities  in  this,  that 
.whereas  the  name  of  the  quality  is  sometimes  given  to  the 
sensation  which  indicates  it,  and  is  occasioned  by  it,  we 
never,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  give  the  name  of  colour  to 
the  sensation  but  to  the  quality  only.  Perhaps  the  reason 
of  this  may  be,  that  the  appearances  of  the  same  colour 
are  so  various  and  changeable,  according  to  the  different 
modifications  of  the  light,  of  the  medium,  and  of  the  eye, 
that  language  could  not  afford  names  for  them.  And  in- 
deed they  are  so  little  interesting  that  they  are  never  at- 
tended to,  but  serve  only  as  signs  to  introduce  the  things 
signified  by  them.  Nor  ought  it  to  appear  incredible, 
that  appearances  so  frequent  and  so  familiar  should  have 
no  names,  nor  be  made  objects  of  thought :  since  we  have 
before  shown,  that  this  is  true  of  many  sensations  of  touch, 
which  are  no  less  frequent,  nor  less  familiar. 


SECT.  V. 

An  Inference  from  the  preceding . 

FROM  what  hath  been  said  about  colour,  we  may  infer 
two  things.  The  first  is,  that  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
paradoxes  of  modern  philosophy,  which  hath  been  univer- 
sally esteemed  as  a  great  discovery,  is,  in  reality,  when 
examined  to  the  bottom,  nothing  else  but  an  abuse  of 
words.  The  paradox  I  mean  is,  That  colour  is  not  a 

F 


98  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

quality  of  bodies,  but  only  an  idea  in  the  mind.  We  have 
shown  that  the  word  colour,  as  used  by  the  vulgar,  cannot 
signify  an  idea  in  the  mind,  but  a  permanent  quality  of  body. 
We  have  shown  that  there  is  really  a  permanent  quality  of 
body,  to  which  the  common  use  of  this  word  exactly  agrees. 
Can  any  stronger  proof  be  desired,  that  this  quality  is  that 
to  which  the  vulgar  give  the  name  of  colour  ?  If  it  should 
be  said,  that  this  quality,  to  which  we  give  the  name  of 
colour,  is  unknown  to  the  vulgar,  and  therefore  can  have 
no  name  among  them ;  I  answer,  it  is  indeed  known  only 
by  its  effects ;  that  is,  by  its  exciting  a  certain  idea  in  us  : 
but  are  there  not  numberless  qualities  of  bodies,  which  are 
known  only  by  their  effects,  to  which,  notwithstanding, 
we  find  it  necessary  to  give  names  ?  Medicine  alone  might 
furnish  us  with  a  hundred  instances  of  this  kind.  Do  not 
the  words  astringent,  narcotic,  cpispastic,  caustic,  and 
innumerable  others,  signify  qualities  of  bodies,  which  are 
known  only  by  their  effects  upon  animal  bodies  ?  Why 
then  should  not  the  vulgar  give  a  name  to  a  quality,  whose 
effects  are  every  moment  perceived  by  their  eyes  ?  We 
have  all  the  reason,  therefore,  that  the  nature  of  the  thing 
admits,  to  think  that  the  vulgar  apply  the  name  of  colour 
to  that  quality  of  bodies,  which  excites  in  us  what  the 
philosophers  call  the  idea  of  colour.  And  that  there  is 
such  a  quality  in  bodies,  all  philosophers  allow,  who 
allow  that  there  is  any  such  thing  as  body.  Philosophers 
have  thought  fit  to  leave  that  quality  of  bodies,  which  the 
vulgar  call  colour,  without  a  name,  and  to  give  the  name 
of  colour  to  the  idea  or  appearance,  to  which,  as  we  have 
shown,  the  vulgar  give  no  name,  because  they  never  make 
it  an  object  of  thought  or  reflection.  Hence  it  appears, 
that  when  philosophers  affirm  that  colour  is  not  in  bodies, 
but  in  the  mind ;  and  the  vulgar  affirm,  that  colour  is  not 
in  the  mind,  but  is  a  quality  of  bodies,  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  them  about  things,  but  only  about  the 
meaning  of  a  word. 

The  vulgar  have  undoubted  right  to  give  names  to 
things  which  they  are  daily  conversant  about;  and  phi- 
losophers seem  justly  chargeable  with  an  abuse  of  Ian- 


SECT.  V.]  OF  SEEING.  99 

guage,  when  they  change  the  meaning  of  a  common  word, 
without  giving  warning. 

If  it  is  a  good  rule,  to  think  with  philosophers  and  speak 
with  the  vulgar,  it  must  be  right  to  speak  with  the  vulgar 
when  we  think  with  them,  and  not  to  shock  them  by  phi- 
losophical paradoxes,  which,  when  put  into  common  lan- 
guage, express  only  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

If  you  ask  a  man  that  is  no  philosopher,  what  colour  is  ? 
or,  what  makes  one  body  appear  white,  another  scarlet? 
He  cannot  tell.  He  leaves  that  inquiry  to  philosophers, 
and  can  embrace  any  hypothesis  about  it,  except  that  of 
our  modern  philosophers,  who  affirm  that  colour  is  not  in 
body,  but  only  in  the  mind. 

Nothing  appears  more  shocking  to  his  apprehension 
than  that  visible  objects  should  have  no  colour,  and  that 
colour  should  be  in  that  which  he  conceives  to  be  invi- 
sible. Yet  this  strange  paradox  is  not  only  universally 
received,  but  considered  as  one  of  the  noblest  discoveries 
of  modern  philosophy.  The  ingenious  Addison,  in  the 
Spectator,  No.  413,  speaks  thus  of  it :  "I  have  here  sup- 
posed, that  my  reader  is  acquainted  with  that  great  mo- 
dern discoveiy,  which  is  at  present  universally  acknow- 
ledged by  all  the  inquirers  into  natural  philosophy,  namely, 
that  light  and  colours,  as  apprehended  by  the  imagination, 
are  only  ideas  in  the  mind,  and  not  qualities  that  have  any 
existence  in  matter.  As  this  is  a  truth,  which  has  been 
proved  incontestably  by  many  modern  philosophers,  and  is 
indeed  one  of  the  finest  speculations  in  that  science,  if  the 
English  reader  would  see  the  notion  explained  at  large,  he 
may  find  it  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  second  book  of 
Locke's  Essay  on  Human  Understanding  " 

Mr.  Locke  and  Mr.  Addison  are  writers  who  have  de- 
served so  well  of  mankind  that  one  must  feel  some  un- 
easiness in  differing  from  them,  and  would  wish  to  ascribe 
all  the  merit  that  is  due  to  a  discovery  upon  which  they 
put  so  high  a  value.  And  indeed  it  is  just  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  Locke,  and  other  modern  philosophers  on  the 
subject  of  secondary  qualities,  have  the  merit  of  distin- 
guishing more  accurately  than  those  that  went  before 

F2 


100  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

them,  between  the  sensation  in  the  mind  and  that  consti- 
tution or  quality  of  bodies  which  gives  occasion  to  the 
sensation.  They  have  shown  clearly  that  these  two  things 
are  not  only  distinct,  but  altogether  unlike :  that  there  is 
no  similitude  between  the  effluvia  of  an  odorous  body  and 
the  sensation  of  smell,  or  between  the  vibrations  of  a 
sounding  body  and  the  sensation  of  sound :  that  there  can 
be  no  resemblance  between  the  feeling  of  heat  and  the 
constitution  of  the  heated  body  which  occasions  it ;  or  be- 
tween the  appearance  which  a  coloured  body  makes  to  the 
eye  and  the  texture  of  the  body  which  causes  that  ap- 
pearance. 

Nor  was  the  merit  small  of  distinguishing  these  things 
accurately ;  because,  however  different  and  unlike  in  their 
nature,  they  have  been  always  so  associated  in  the  imagi- 
nation as  to  coalesce  as  it  were  into  one  two-faced  form, 
which,  from  its  amphibious  nature,  could  not  justly  be 
appropriated  either  to  body  or  mind;  and,  until  it  was 
properly  distinguished  into  its  different  constituent  parts, 
it  was  impossible  to  assign  to  either  their  just  shares  in  it. 
None  of  the  ancient  philosophers  had  made  this  distinc- 
tion. The  followers  of  Democritus  and  Epicurus  con- 
ceived the  forms  of  the  heat,  and  sound,  and  colour,  to  be 
in  the  mind  only,  but  that  our  senses  fallaciously  repre- 
sented them  as  being  in  bodies.  The  Peripatetics  ima- 
gined, that  those  forms  are  really  in  bodies  ?  and  that  the 
images  of  them  are  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  our  senses. 

The  one  system  made  the  senses  naturally  fallacious  and 
deceitful ;  the  other  made  the  qualities  of  body  to  resemble 
the  sensations  of  the  mind.  Now  was  it  possible  to  find 
a  third  without  making  the  distinction  we  have  mentioned ; 
by  which  indeed  the  errors  of  both  these  ancient  systems 
are  avoided,  and  we  are  not  left  under  the  hard  necessity 
of  believing,  either,  on  the  one  hand,  that  our  sensations 
are  like  to  the  qualities  of  body,  or  on  the  other,  that  God 
hath  given  us  one  faculty  to  deceive  us,  and  another  to 
detect  the  cheat. 

We  desire,  therefore,  with  pleasure,  to  do  justice  to  the 
doctrine  of  Locke  and  other  modern  philosophers,  with 


SECT.  V.]  OF  SEEING.  101 

regard  to  colour  and  other  secondary  qualities,  and  to 
ascribe  to  it  its  due  merit,  while  we  beg  leave  to  censure 
the  language  in  which  they  have  expressed  their  doctrine. 
When  they  had  explained  and  established  the  distinction 
between  the  appearance  which  colour  makes  to  the  eye, 
and  the  modification  of  the  coloured  body,  which,  by  the 
laws  of  Nature,  causes  that  appearance;  the  question 
was,  whether  to  give  the  name  of  colour  to  the  cause,  or 
to  the  effect?  By  giving  it,  as  they  have  done,  to  the 
effect,  they  set  philosophy  apparently  in  opposition  to 
common  sense,  and  expose  it  to  the  ridicule  of  the  vulgar. 
But,  had  they  given  the  name  of  colour  to  the  cause  as 
they  ought  to  have  done,  they  must  then  have  affirmed, 
with  the  vulgar,  that  colour  is  a  quality  of  bodies ;  and 
that  there  is  neither  colour,  nor  any  thing  like  it,  in  the 
mind.  Their  language,  as  well  as  their  sentiments,  would 
have  been  perfectly  agreeable  to  the  common  apprehen- 
sions of  mankind,  and  true  philosophy  would  have  joined 
hands  with  Common  Sense.  As  Locke  was  no  enemy  to 
common  sense,  it  may  be  presumed,  that,  in  this  instance, 
as  in  some  others,  he  was  seduced  by  some  received  hy- 
pothesis :  and,  that  this  was  actually  the  case,  will  appear 
in  the  following:  section. 


SECT.  VI. 

That  none  of  our  Sensations  are  Resemblances  of  any  of 
the  Qualities  of  Bodies. 

A  SECOND  inference  is,  That  although  colour  is  really  a 
quality  of  body,  yet  it  is  not  represented  to  the  mind  by  an 
idea  or  sensation  that  resembles  it ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
suggested  by  an  idea  which  does  not  in  the  least  resemble 
it. — And  this  inference  is  applicable,  not  to  colour  only, 
but  to  all  the  qualities  of  body  which  we  have  examined. 

It  deserves  to  be  remarked,  that  in  the  analysis  we  have 
hitherto  given  of  the  operations  of  the  five  senses,  and  of 
the  qualities  of  bodies  discovered  by  them,  no  instance 
hath  occurred,  either  of  any  sensation  which  resembles  any 


102  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

quality  of  body,  or  of  any  quality  of  body  whose  image  or 
resemblance  is  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  means  of  the 
senses. 

There  is  no  phenomenon  in  nature  more  unaccountable 
than  the  intercourse  that  is  carried  on  between  the  mind 
and  the  external  world;  there  is  no  phenomenon  which 
philosophical  spirits  have  shown  greater  avidity  to  pry  into 
and  to  resolve.  It  is  agreed  by  all,  that  this  intercourse 
is  carried  on  by  means  of  the  senses ;  and  this  satisfies 
the  vulgar  curiosity,  but  not  the  philosophic.  Philoso- 
phers must  have  some  system,  some  hypothesis,  that  shows 
the  manner  in  which  our  senses  make  us  acquainted  with 
external  things.  All  the  fertility  of  human  invention  seems 
to  have  produced  only  one  hypothesis  for  this  purpose, 
which  therefore  hath  been  universally  received ;  and  that  is, 
that  the  mind,  like  the  mirror,  receives  the  images  of  things 
from  without,  by  means  of  the  senses ;  so  that  their  use 
must  be  to  convey  these  images  into  the  mind. 

Whether  to  these  images  of  external  things  in  the  mind, 
we  give  the  name  of  sensible  forms  or  sensible  pieces,  with 
the  Peripatetics,  or  the  name  of  ideas  of  sensation,  with 
Locke ;  or  whether,  with  later  philosophers,  we  distinguish 
sensations,  which  are  immediately  conveyed  by  the  senses, 
from  ideas  of  sensation,  which  are  faint  copies  of  our  sen- 
sations retained  in  the  memory  and  imagination ;  these  are 
only  differences  about  words.  The  hypothesis  I  have 
mentioned  is  common  to  all  these  different  systems. 

The  necessary  and  allowed  consequence  of  this  hypo- 
thesis is,  That  no  material  thing,  nor  any  quality  of  mate- 
rial things,  can  be  conceived  by  us,  or  made  an  object  of 
thought,  until  its  image  is  conveyed  to  the  mind  by  means 
of  the  senses.  We  shall  examine  this  hypothesis  particu- 
larly afterwards,  and  at  this  time  only  observe,  that,  in 
consequence  of  it,  one  would  naturally  expect,  that  to  every 
quality  or  attribute  of  body  we  know  or  can  conceive,  there 
should  be  a  sensation  corresponding,  which  is  the  image 
and  resemblance  of  that  quality ;  and  that  the  sensations 
which  have  no  similitude  or  resemblance  to  body  or  to 
any  of  its  qualities  should  give  us  no  conception  of  a  ma- 
terial world,  or  of  any  thing  belonging  to  it.  These  things 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SEEING.  103 

might  be  expected  as  the  natural  consequence  of  the  hy- 
pothesis we  have  mentioned. 

Now,  we  have  considered,  in  this  and  the  preceding 
chapters,  extension,  figure,  solidity,  motion,  hardness, 
roughness,  as  well  as  colour,  heat  and  cold,  sound,  taste, 
and  smell.  We  have  endeavoured  to  show,  that  our  na- 
ture and  constitution  lead  us  to  conceive  these  as  qualities 
of  body,  as  all  mankind  have  always  conceived  them  to 
be.  We  have  likewise  examined,  with  great  attention, 
the  various  sensations  we  have  by  means  of  the  five  senses, 
and  are  not  able  to  find  among  them  all  one  single  image 
of  body  or  of  any  of  its  qualities.  From  whence  then 
come  those  images  of  body  and  of  its  qualities  into  the 
mind  ?  Let  philosophers  resolve  this  question.  All  I  can 
say  is,  that  they  come  not  by  the  senses.  I  am  sure,  that, 
by  proper  attention  and  care,  I  may  know  my  sensations, 
and  be  able  to  affirm  with  certainty  what  they  resemble, 
and  what  they  do  not  resemble.  I  have  examined  them 
one  by  one,  and  compared  them  with  matter  and  its  qua- 
lities ;  and  I  cannot  find  one  of  them  that  confesses  a  re- 
sembling feature. 

A  truth  so  evident  as  this,  That  our  sensations  are  not 
images  of  matter,  or  of  any  of  its  qualities,  ought  not  to 
yield  to  an  hypothesis  such  as  that  abovementioned,  how- 
ever ancient,  or  however  universally  received  by  philoso- 
phers ;  nor  can  there  be  any  amicable  union  between  the 
two.  This  will  appear  by  some  reflections  upon  the  spirit 
of  the  ancient  and  modern  philosophy  concerning  sen- 
sation. 

During  the  reign  of  the  Peripatetic  philosophy,  our  sen- 
sations were  not  mutually  or  accurately  examined.  The 
attention  of  philosophers,  as  well  as  of  the  vulgar,  was 
turned  to  the  things  signified  by  them :  therefore,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  common  hypothesis,  it  was  taken  for  granted, 
that  all  the  sensations  we  have  from  external  things  are  the 
forms  or  images  of  these  external  things.  And  thus  the 
truth  we  have  mentioned  yielded  entirely  to  the  hypothesis, 
and  was  altogether  suppressed  by  it. 

Des  Cartes  gave  a  noble  example  of  turning  our  atten- 


104  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

tion  inward,  and  scrutinizing  our  sensations ;  and  this 
example  hath  been  very  worthily  followed  by  modern  phi- 
losophers, particularly  by  Malebranche,  Locke,  Berkeley, 
and  Hume.  The  effect  of  this  scrutiny  hath  been  a  gra- 
dual discoveiy  of  the  truth  abovementioned,  to  wit,  the 
dissimilitude  between  the  sensations  of  our  minds  and  the 
qualities  or  attributes  of  an  insentient  inert  substance, 
such  as  we  conceive  matter  to  be.  But  this  valuable  and 
useful  discovery,  in  its  different  stages,  hath  still  been 
unhappily  united  to  the  ancient  hypothesis ;  and,  from  this 
inauspicious  match  of  opinions,  so  unfriendly  and  discor- 
dant in  their  natures,  have  arisen  those  monsters  of  para- 
dox and  scepticism  with  which  the  modern  philosophy  is 
too  justly  chargeable. 

Locke  saw  clearly,  and  proved  incontestably,  that  the 
sensations  we  have  by  taste,  smell,  and  hearing,  as  well 
as  the  sensations  of  colour,  heat,  and  cold,  are  not  resem- 
blances of  any  thing  in  bodies ;  and  in  this  he  agrees  with 
Des  Cartes  and  Malebranche.  Joining  this  opinion  with 
the  hypothesis,  it  follows  necessarily,  that  three  senses  of 
the  five  are  cut  off  from  giving  us  any  intelligence  of  the 
material  world,  as  being  altogether  inept  for  that  office. 
Smell  and  taste  and  sound,  as  well  as  colour  and  heat, 
can  have  no  more  relation  to  body  than  anger  or  gratitude ; 
nor  ought  the  former  to  be  called  qualities  of  body,  whe- 
ther primary  or  secondary,  any  more  than  the  latter.  For 
it  was  natural  and  obvious  to  argue  thus  from  that  hypo- 
thesis :  if  heat  and  colour  and  sound  are  real  qualities  of 
body,  the  sensations,  by  which  we  perceive  them,  must 
be  resemblances  of  those  qualities ;  but  these  sensations 
are  not  resemblances ;  therefore  those  are  not  real  quali- 
ties of  body. 

We  see  then,  that  Locke,  having  found  that  the  ideas 
of  secondaiy  qualities  are  no  resemblances,  was  compelled, 
by  an  hypothesis  common  to  all  philosophers,  to  deny  that 
they  are  real  qualities  of  body.  It  is  more  difficult  to 
assign  a  reason,  why,  after  this  he  should  call  them  secon- 
dary qualities ;  for  this  name,  if  I  mistake  not,  was  of  his 
invention.  Surely  he  did  not  mean  that  they  were  secon- 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SEEING.  lOo 

dary  qualities  of  the  mind ;  and  I  do  not  see  with  what 
propriety,  or  even  by  what  tolerable  licence,  he  could  call 
them  secondary  qualities  of  body,  after  finding  that  they 
were  no  qualities  of  body  at  all.  In  this  he  seems  to  have 
sacrificed  to  Common  Sense,  and  to  have  been  led  by  her 
authority,  even  in  opposition  to  his  hypothesis.  The  same 
sovereign  mistress  of  our  opinions  that  led  this  philosopher 
to  call  those  things  secondary  qualities  of  body,  which, 
according  to  his  principles  and  reasonings,  were  no  qua- 
lities of  body  at  all,  hath  led,  not  the  vulgar  of  all  ages 
only,  but  philosophers  also,  and  even  the  disciples  of 
Locke,  to  believe  them  to  be  real  qualities  of  body :  she 
hath  led  them  to  investigate,  by  experiments,  the  nature  of 
colour,  and  sound,  and  heat  in  bodies.  Nor  hath  this 
investigation  been  fruitless,  as  it  must  have  been  if  there 
had  been  no  such  thing  in  bodies :  on  the  contrary,  it  hath 
produced  very  noble  and  useful  discoveries,  which  make 
a  very  considerable  part  of  natural  philosophy.  If  then 
natural  philosophy  be  not  a  dream,  there  is  something  in 
bodies,  which  we  call  colour,  and  heat,  and  sound.  And 
if  this  be  so,  the  hypothesis  from  which  the  contrary  is 
concluded  must  be  false :  for  the  argument,  leading  to  a 
false  conclusion,  recoils  against  the  hypothesis  from  which 
it  was  drawn,  and  thus  directs  its  force  backward.  If  the 
qualities  of  body  were  known  to  us  only  by  sensations  that, 
resemble  them,  then  colour,  and  sound,  and  heat,  could  be 
no  qualities  of  body ;  but  these  are  real  qualities  of  body, 
and  therefore  the  qualities  of  body  are  not  known  only  by 
means  of  sensations  that  resemble  them. 

But  to  proceed :  what  Locke  had  proved  with  regard  to 
the  sensations  we  have  by  smell,  taste,  and  hearing,  Bishop 
Berkeley  proved  no  less  unanswerably  with  regard  to  all 
our  other  sensations ;  to  wit,  that  none  of  them  can  in 
the  least  resemble  the  qualities  of  a  lifeless  and  insentient 
being,  such  as  matter  is  conceived  to  be.  Mr.  Hume 
hath  confirmed  this  by  his  authority  and  reasoning.  This 
opinion  surely  looks  with  a  very  malian  aspect  upon  the 
old  hypothesis ;  yet  that  hypothesis  hath  still  been  retained, 

F3 


106  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

and  conjoined  with  it.  And  what  a  brood  of  monsters 
hath  this  produced ! 

The  firstborn  of  this  union,  and  perhaps  the  most  harm- 
less was,  that  the  secondary  qualities  of  body  were  mere 
sensations  of  the  mind.  To  pass  by  Malebranche's  notion 
of  seeing  all  things  in  the  ideas  of  the  divine  mind,  as  a 
foreigner  never  naturalized  in  this  island;  the  next  was 
Berkeley's  system,  that  extension,  and  figure,  and  hard- 
ness, and  motion ;  that  land,  and  sea,  and  houses,  and  our 
own  bodies,  as  well  as  those  of  our  wives,  and  children, 
and  friends,  are  nothing  but  ideas  of  the  mind ;  and  that 
there  is  nothing  existing  in  nature  but  minds  and  ideas. 

The  progeny  that  followed  is  still  more  frightful;  so 
that  it  is  surprising  that  one  could  be  found  who  had  the 
courage  to  act  the  midwife,  to  rear  it  up,  and  to  usher  it 
into  the  world.  No  causes  nor  effects ;  no  substances, 
material  or  spiritual;  no  evidence  even  in  mathematical 
demonstration ;  no  liberty  nor  active  power ;  nothing  ex- 
isting in  nature,  but  impressions  and  ideas  following  each 
other,  without  time,  place,  or  subject.  Surely  no  age 
ever  produced  such  a  system  of  opinions,  justly  deduced 
with  great  acuteness,  perspicuity,  and  elegance,  from  a 
principle  universally  received.  The  hypothesis  we  have 
mentioned  is  the  father  of  them  all.  The  dissimilitude  of 
our  sensations  and  feelings  to  external  things  is  the  inno- 
cent mother  of  most  of  them. 

As  it  happens  sometimes  in  an  arithmetical  operation, 
that  two  errors  balance  one  another,  so  that  the  conclu- 
sion is  little  or  nothing  affected  by  them ;  but  when  one  of 
them  is  corrected,  and  the  other  left,  we  are  led  farther 
from  the  truth  than  by  both  together ;  so  it  seems  to  have 
happened  in  the  Peripatetic  philosophy  of  sensation  com- 
pared with  the  modern.  The  Peripatetics  adopted  two 
errors ;  but  the  last  served  as  a  corrective  to  the  first,  and 
rendered  it  mild  and  gentle ;  so  that  then:  system  had  no 
tendency  to  scepticism.  The  moderns  have  retained  the 
first  of  those  errors,  but  have  gradually  detected  and  cor- 
rected the  last.  The  consequence  hath  been,  that  the 


SECT.  VI.]  OF  SEEING.  107 

light  we  have  struck  out  hath  created  darkness,  and  scep- 
ticism hath  advanced  hand  in  hand  with  knowledge,  spread- 
ing its  melancholy  gloom,  first  over  the  material  world,  and 
at  last  over  the  whole  face  of  nature.  Such  a  phenomenon 
as  this  is  apt  to  stagger  even  the  lovers  of  light  and  know- 
ledge, while  its  cause  is  latent ;  but  when  that  is  detected 
it  may  give  hopes  that  this  darkness  shall  not  be  everlast- 
ing, but  that  it  shall  be  succeeded  by  a  more  permanent 
light. 


SECT.  VII. 

Of  Visible  Figure  and  Extension. 

ALTHOUGH  there  is  no  resemblance,  nor,  as  far  as  we 
know,  any  necessary  connexion  between  that  quality  in  a 
body  which  we  call  its  colour,  and  the  appearance  which 
that  colour  makes  to  the  eye ;  it  is  quite  otherwise  with 
regard  to  its  figure  and  magnitude.     There  is  certainly  a 
resemblance,   and  a  necessary  connexion,   between   the 
visible   figure   and  magnitude  of  a  body,   and   its   real 
figure  and  magnitude ;  no  man  can  give  a  reason  why  a 
scarlet  colour  affects  the  eye  in  the  manner  it  does ;  no 
man  can  be  sure  that  it  affects  his  eye  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  it  affects  the  eye  of  another,  and  that  it  has  the 
same  appearance  to  him  as  it  has  to  another  man ;  but  we 
can  assign  a  reason  why  a  circle  placed  obliquely  to  the 
eye  should  appear  in  the  form  of  an  ellipse.     The  visible 
figure,  magnitude,  and  position  may,  by  mathematical  rea- 
soning, be  deduced  from  the  real ;  and  it  may  be  demon- 
strated, that  every  eye  that  sees  distinctly  and  perfectly, 
must,  in  the  same  situation,  see  it  under  this  form  and  no 
other.     Nay,  we  may  venture  to  affirm,  that  a  man  born 
blind,  if  he  were  instnicted  in  mathematics,  would  be  able 
to  determine  the  visible  figure  of  a  body,  when  its  reaJ 
figure,  distance,  and  position,  are  given.     Dr.  Saunderson 
understood  the  projection  of  the  sphere  and  perspective. 
Now,  I  require  no  more  knowledge  in  a  blind  man,  in 
order  to  his  being  able  to  determine  the  visible  figure  ot' 


108  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

bodies,  than  that  he  can  project  the  outline  of  a  given  body, 
upon  the  surface  of  a  hollow  sphere,  whose  centre  is  in 
the  eye.  This  projection  is  the  visible  figure  he  wants ; 
for  it  is  the  same  figure  with  that  which  is  projected  upon 
the  tunica  retina  in  vision. 

A  blind  man  can  conceive  lines  drawn  from  every  point 
of  the  object  to  the  centre  of  the  eye,  making  angles.  He 
can  conceive,  that  the  length  of  the  object  will  appear 
greater  or  less,  in  proportion  to  the  angle  which  it  sub- 
tends at  the  eye  ;  and  that,  in  like  manner,  the  breadth,  and 
in  general  the  distance  of  any  one  point  of  the  object  from 
any  other  point,  will  appear  greater  or  less,  in  proportion 
to  the  angles  which  those  distances  subtend.  He  can 
easily  be  made  to  conceive,  that  the  visible  appearance 
has  no  thickness,  any  more  than  a  projection  of  the  sphere, 
or  a  perspective  draught.  He  may  be  informed  that  the 
eye,  until  it  is  aided  by  experience,  does  not  represent  one 
object  as  nearer  or  more  remote  than  another.  Indeed  he 
would  probably  conjecture  this  of  himself,  and  be  made 
apt  to  think  that  the  rays  of  light  must  make  the  same  im- 
pression upon  the  eye,  whether  they  come  from  a  greater 
or  a  less  distance. 

These  are  all  the  principles  which  we  suppose  our  blind 
mathematician  to  have ;  and  these  he  may  certainly  acquire 
by  information  and  reflection.  It  is  no  less  certain,  that 
from  these  principles,  having  given  the  real  figure  and 
magnitude  of  a  body,  and  its  position  and  distance  with 
regard  to  the  eye,  he  can  find  out  its  visible  figure  and 
magnitude.  He  can  demonstrate  in  general,  from  these 
principles,  that  the  visible  figure  of  all  bodies  will  be  the 
same  with  that  of  their  projection  upon  the  surface  of  a 
hollow  sphere,  when  the  eye  is  placed  in  the  centre.  And 
he  can  demonstrate,  that  their  visible  magnitude  will  be 
greater  or  less,  according  as  their  projection  occupies  a 
greater  or  less  part  of  the  surface  of  this  sphere. 

To  set  this  matter  in  another  light,  let  us  distinguish 
betwixt  the  position  of  objects  with  regard  to  the  eye,  and 
their  distance  from  it.  Objects  that  lie  in  the  same  right 
line  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  eye,  have  the  same  posi- 


SECT.  VII.]  OF  SEEING.  100 

tion,  however  different  their  distances  from  the  eye  may 
be :  but  objects  which  lie  in  different  right  lines  drawn 
from  the  eye's  centre,  have  a  different  position ;  and  this 
difference  of  position  is  greater  or  less,  in  proportion  to  the 
angle  made  at  the  eye  by  the  right  lines  mentioned.  Hav- 
ing thus  defined  what  we  mean  by  the  position  of  objects 
with  regard  to  the  eye,  it  is  evident,  that  as  the  real  figure 

'  a  body  consists  in  the  situation  of  its  several  parts  with 
regard  to  one  another,  so  its  visible  figure  consists  in  the 
position  of  its  several  parts  with  regard  to  the  eye ;  and  as 
he  that  hath  a  distinct  conception  of  the  sitoation  of  the 
parts  of  the  body  with  regard  to  one  another  must  have  a 
distinct  conception  of  its  real  figure ;  so  he  that  conceives 
distinctly  the  position  of  its  several  parts  with  regard  to 
the  eye,  must  have  a  distinct  conception  of  its  visible  figure. 
Xow,  there  is  nothing  surely  to  hinder  a  blind  man  from 
Conceiving  the  position  of  the  several  parts  of  a  body  with 
regard  to  the  eye,  any  more  than  from  conceiving  their 

(.nation  with  regard  to  one  another;  and  therefore  I  con- 

nde,  that  a  blind  man  may  attain  a  distinct  conception  of 
'lie  visible  figure  of  bodies. 

Although  we  think  the  arguments  that  have  been  offered 
are  sufficient  to  prove  that  a  blind  man  may  conceive  the 
visible  extension  and  figure  of  bodies;  yet,  in  order  to 
remove  some  prejudices  against  this  truth,  it  will  be  of  use 

•  compare  the  notion  which  a  blind  mathematician  might 
form  to  himself  of  visible  figure,  with  that  which  is  pre- 
sented to  the  eye  in  vision,  and  to  observe  wherein  they 
differ. 

First,  Visible  figure  is  never  presented  to  the  eye  but  in 
'  onjunction  with  colour;  and  although  there  be  no  con- 
nexion between  them  from  the  nature  of  the  things,  yet, 

:iving  so  invariably  kept  company  together,  we  are  hardly 

ble  to  disjoin  them  even  in  our  imagination.  What 
mightily  increases  this  difficulty  is,  that  we  have  never 
been  accustomed  to  make  visible  figure  an  object  of 
thought.  It  is  only  used  as  a  sign,  and,  having  served 
this  purpose,  passes  away  without  leaving  a  trace  behind. 
The  drawer  or  designer,  whose  business  it  is  to  hunt  this 


110  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

fugitive  form,  and  to  take  a  copy  of  it,  finds  how  difficult 
his  task  is,  after  many  years  labour  and  practice.  Happy  ! 
if  at  last  he  can  acquire  the  art  of  arresting  it  in  his  imagi- 
nation, until  he  can  delineate  it.  For  then  it  is  evident, 
that  he  must  be  able  to  draw  as  accurately  from  the  life  as 
from  a  copy.  But  how  few  of  the  professed  masters  of 
designing  are  ever  able  to  arrive  at  this  degree  of  perfec- 
tion ?  it  is  no  wonder,  then,  that  we  should  find  so  great 
difficulty  in  conceiving  this  form  apart  from  its  constant 
associate,  when  it  is  so  difficult  to  conceive  it  at  all.  But 
our  blind  man's  notion  of  visible  figure  will  not  be  asso- 
ciated with  colour,  of  which  he  hath  no  conception ;  but  it 
will  perhaps  be  associated  with  hardness  or  smoothness, 
with  which  he  is  acquainted  by  touch.  These  different 
associations  are  apt  to  impose  upon  us,  and  to  make  things 
seem  different,  which  in  reality  are  the  same. 

Secondly,  The  blind  man  forms  the  notion  of  visible 
figure  to  himself  by  thought,  and  by  mathematical  rea- 
soning from  principles ;  whereas  the  man  that  sees  has  it 
presented  to  his  eye  at  once,  without  any  labour,  without 
any  reasoning,  by  a  kind  of  inspiration.  A  man  may  form 
to  himself  the  notion  of  a  parabola,  or  a  cycloid,  from  the 
mathematical  definition  of  those  figures/although  he  had 
never  seen  them  drawn  or  delineated.  Another,  who 
knows  nothing  of  the  mathematical  definition  of  the  figures 
may  see  them  delineated  on  paper,  or  feel  them  cut  out  in 
wood.  Each  may  have  a  distinct  conception  of  the  figures, 
one  by  mathematical  reasoning,  the  other  by  sense.  Now, 
the  blind  man  forms  his  notion  of  visible  figure  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  first  of  these  formed  his  notion  of  a  parabola 
or  a  cycloid,  which  he  never  saw. 

Third,  Visible  figure  leads  the  man  that  sees,  directly 
to  the  conception  of  the  real  figure,  of  which  it  is  a  sign. 
But  the  blind  man's  thoughts  move  in  a  contrary  direction. 
For  he  must  first  know  the  real  figure,  distance,  and  situa- 
tion of  the  body,  and  from  thence  he  slowly  traces  out  the 
visible  figure  by  mathematical  reasoning.  Nor  does  his 
nature  lead  him  to  conceive  this  visible  figure  as  a  sign ;  it 
is  a  creature  of  his  own  reason  and  imagination. 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  SEEING.  Ill 

SECT.  VIII. 

Some  Queries  concerning  Visible  Figure  answered. 

IT  may  be  asked,  What  kind  of  thing  is  this  visible  figure  ? 
Is  it  a  sensation  or  an  idea?  If  it  is  an  idea,  from  what 
sensation  is  it  copied  ?  These  questions  may  seem  trivial 
or  impertinent  to  one  who  does  not  know  that  there  is  a 
tribunal  of  inquisition  erected  by  certain  modern  philoso- 
phers, before  which  every  thing  in  nature  must  answer. 
The  articles  of  inquisition  are  few  indeed,  but  very  dreadful 
in  their  consequences.  They  are  only  these :  Is  the  pri- 
soner an  impression  or  an  idea  ?  If  an  idea,  from  what 
impression  copied  ?  Now,  if  it  appears  that  the  prisoner  is 
neither  an  impression  nor  an  idea  copied  from  some  im- 
pression, immediately,  without  being  allowed  to  offer  any 
thing  in  arrest  of  judgment,  he  is  sentenced  to  pass  out  of 
existence,  and  to  be,  in  all  time  to  come,  an  empty  un- 
meaning sound,  or  the  ghost  of  a  departed  entity. 

Before  this  dreadful  tribunal,  cause  and  effect,  time  and 
place,  matter  and  spirit,  have  been  tried  and  cast :  how 
then  shall  such  a  poor  flimsy  form  as  visible  figure  stand 
before  it  ?  It  must  even  plead  guilty,  and  confess  that  it 
is  neither  an  impression  nor  an  idea.  For  alas !  It  is  no- 
torious, that  it  is  extended  in  length  and  breadth ;  it  may 
be  long  or  short,  broad  or  narrow,  triangular,  quadrangular, 
or  circular :  and  therefore,  unless  ideas  and  impressions  are 
extended  and  figured  it  cannot  belong  to  that  category. 

If  it  should  still  be  asked,  To  what  category  of  beings 
does  visible  figure  then  belong  ?  I  can  only,  in.  answer,  give 
some  token,  by  which  those  who  are  better  acquainted 
with  the  categories  may  chance  to  find  its  place.  It  is, 
as  we  have  said,  the  position  of  the  several  parts  of  a 
figured  body,  with  regard  to  the  eye.  The  different  posi- 
tions of  the  several  parts  of  the  body  with  regard  to  the 
eye,  when  put  together,  make  a  real  figure,  which  is  truly 
extended  in  length  and  breadth,  and  which  represents  a 


112  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

figure  that  is  extended  in  length,  breadth,  and  thickness. 
In  like  manner  the  projection  of  the  sphere  is  a  real  figure, 
and  hath  length  and  breadth,  but  represents  the  sphere 
which  hath  three  dimensions.  A  projection  of  the  sphere, 
or  a  perspective  view  of  a  palace,  is  a  representative  in 
the  very  same  sense  as  visible  figure  is,  and  wherever  they 
have  their  lodgings  in  the  categories,  this  will  be  found  to 
dwell  next  door  to  them. 

It  may  farther  be  asked,  Whether  there  be  any  sensa- 
tion proper  to  visible  figure,  by  which  it  is  suggested  in 
vision  ?  Or  by  what  means  is  it  presented  to  the  mind  ? 
This  is  a  question  of  some  importance,  in  order  to  our 
having  a  distinct  notion  of  the  faculty  of  seeing :  and  to 
give  all  the  light  to  it  we  can,  it  is  necessaiy  to  compare 
this  sense  with  other  senses,  and  to  make  some  supposi- 
tions, by  which  we  may  be  enabled  to  distinguish  things 
that  are  apt  to  be  confounded,  although  they  are  totally 
different. 

There  are  three  of  our  senses  which  give  us  intelligence 
of  things  at  a  distance :  smell,  hearing,  and  sight.  In 
smelling  and  in  hearing  we  have  a  sensation  or  impression 
upon  the  mind,  which,  by  our  constitution,  we  conceive  to 
be  a  sign  of  something  external :  but  the  position  of  this 
external  thing,  with  regard  to  the  organ  of  sense,  is  not 
presented  to  the  mind  along  with  the  sensation.  When  I 
hear  the  sound  of  a  coach,  I  could  not,  previous  to  expe- 
rience, determine  whether  the  sounding  body  was  above 
or  below,  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  So  that  the 
sensation  suggests  to  me  some  external  object  as  the  cause 
or  occasion  of  it ;  but  it  suggests  not  the  position  of  that 
object,  whether  it  lies  in  this  direction  or  in  that.  The 
same  thing  may  be  said  with  regard  to  smelling.  But  the 
case  is  quite  different  with  regard  to  seeing.  When  I  see 
an  object,  the  appearance  which  the  colour  of  it  makes, 
may  be  called  the  sensation,  which  suggests  to  me  some 
external  thing  as  its  cause ;  but  it  suggests  likewise  the 
individual  direction  and  position  of  this  cause  with  regard 
to  the  eye.  I  know  it  is  precisely  in  such  a  direction,  and 
in  no  other.  At  the  same  time,  I  am  not  conscious  of 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  SEEING.  113 

any  thing  that  can  be  called  sensation,  but  the  sensation 
of  colour.  The  position  of  the  coloured  thing  is  no  sen- 
sation, but  it  is  by  the  laws  of  iny  constitution  presented 
to  the  mind  along  with  the  colour,  without  any  additional 
sensation. 

Let  us  suppose,  that  the  eye  were  so  constituted  that 
the  rays  coming  from  any  one  point  of  the  object  were 
not,  as  they  are  in  our  eyes,  collected  in  one  point  of  the 
retina,  but  diffused  over  the  whole :  it  is  evident  to  those 
who  understand  the  structure  of  the  eye,  that  such  an  eye 
as  we  have  supposed,  would  show  the  colour  of  a  body 
as  our  eyes  do,  but  that  it  would  neither  show  figure  nor 
position.  The  operation  of  such  an  eye  would  be  precisely 
similar  to  that  of  hearing  and  smell ;  it  would  give  no  per- 
ception of  figure  or  extension,  but  merely  of  colour.  Xor 
is  the  supposition  we  have  made  altogether  imaginary  :  for 
it  is  nearly  the  case  of  most  people  who  have  cataracts, 
whose  crystalline,  as  Mr.  Cheselden  observes,  does  not 
altogether  exclude  the  rays  of  light,  but  diffuses  them  over 
the  retina,  so  that  such  persons  see  things  as  one  does 
through  a  glass  of  broken  jelly  :  they  perceive  the  colour, 
but  nothing  of  the  figure  or  magnitude  of  objects. 

Again,  if  we  should  suppose,  that  smell  and  sound  were 
conveyed  in  right  lines  from  the  objects,  and  that  every 
sensation  of  hearing  and  smell  suggested  the  precise  direc- 
tion or  position  of  its  object;  in  this  case,  the  operations 
of  hearing  and  smelling  would  be  similar  to  that  of  seeing; 
we  should  smell  and  hear  the  figure  of  objects,  in  the  same 
sense  as  we  now  see  it ;  and  every  smell  and  sound  would 
be  associated  with  some  figure  in  the  imagination,  as  colour 
is  in  our  present  state. 

We  have  reason  to  believe,  that  the  rays  of  light  make 
some  impression  upon  the  retina ;  but  we  are  not  consci- 
ous of  this  impression;  nor  have  anatomists  or  philoso- 
phers been  able  to  discover  the  nature  and  effects  of  it ; 
whether  it  produces  a  vibration  in  the  nerve,  or  the  motion 
of  some  subtile  fluid  contained  in  the  nerve,  or  something 
different  from  either,  to  which  we  cannot  give  a  name. 
Whatever  it  is,  we  shall  call  it  the  material  impression ; 


114  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

remembering  carefully,  that  it  is  not  an  impression  upon 
the  mind,  but  upon  the  body;  and  that  it  is  no  sensation, 
nor  can  resemble  sensation  any  more  than  figure  or  motion 
can  resemble  thought.  Now,  this  material  impression, 
made  upon  a  particular  point  of  the  retina,  by  the  laws  of 
our  constitution,  suggests  two  things  to  the  mind,  namely, 
the  colour  and  the  position  of  some  external  object.  No 
man  can  give  a  reason  why  the  same  material  impression 
might  not  have  suggested  sound  or  smell,  or  either  of  these, 
along  with  the  position  of  the  object.  That  it  should  sug- 
gest colour  and  position,  and  nothing  else,  we  can  resolve 
only  into  our  constitution,  or  the  will  of  our  Maker.  And 
since  there  is  no  necessary  connexion  between  these  two 
things  suggested  by  this  material  impression,  it  might,  if  it 
had  so  pleased  our  Creator,  have  suggested  one  of  them 
without  the  other.  Let  us  suppose,  therefore,  since  it 
plainly  appears  to  be  possible  that  our  eyes  had  been  so 
framed  as  to  suggest  to  us  the  position  of  the  object,  without 
suggesting  colour  or  any  other  quality :  what  is  the  con- 
sequence of  this  supposition  ?  It  is  evidently  this,  that  the 
person  endued  with  such  an  eye,  would  perceive  the  visible 
figure  of  bodies,  without  having  any  sensation  or  impre&- 
sion  made  upon  his  mind.  The  figure  he  perceives  is  alto- 
gether external ;  and  therefore  cannot  be  called  an  impres- 
sion upon  the  mind,  without  the  grossest  abuse  of  language. 
If  it  should  be  said,  that  it  is  impossible  to  perceive  a 
figure,  unless  there  be  some  impression  of  it  upon  the  mind ; 
I  beg  leave  not  to  admit  the  impossibility  of  this,  without 
some  proof:  and  I  can  find  none.  Neither  can  I  conceive 
what  is  meant  by  an  impression  of  figure  upon  the  mind. 
I  can  conceive  an  impression  of  figure  upon  wax,  or  upon 
any  body  that  is  fit  to  receive  it ;  but  an  impression  of  it 
upon  the  mind  is  to  me  quite  unintelligible ;  and  although 
I  form  the  most  distinct  conception  of  figure,  I  cannot, 
upon  the  strictest  examination,  find  any  impression  of  it 
upon  my  mind. 

If  we  suppose,  last  of  all,  that  the  eye  hath  the  power 
restored  of  perceiving  colour,  I  apprehend  that  it  will  be 
allowed,  that  now  it  perceives  figure  in  the  very  same 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  SEEING.  115 

manner  as- before,  with  this  difference  only,  that  colour  is 
always  joined  with  it. 

In  answer  therefore  to  the  question  proposed,  there 
seems  to  be  no  sensation  that  is  appropriated  to  visible 
figure,  or  whose  office  it  is  to  suggest  it.  It  seems  to  be 
suggested  immediately  by  the  material  impression  upon 
the  organ  of  Avhich  we  are  not  conscious :  and  why  may 
not  a  material  impression  upon  the  retina  suggest  visible 
figure,  as  well  as  the  material  impression  made  upon  the 
hand,  when  we  grasp  a  ball,  suggests  real  figure  ?  In  the 
one  case,  one  and  the  same  material  impression  suggests 
both  colour  and  visible  figure ;  and  in  the  other  case,  one 
and  the  same  material  impression  suggests  hardness,  heat, 
or  cold,  and  real  figure,  all  at  the  same  time.  • 

We  shall  conclude  this  section  with  another  question 
upon  this  subject.  Since  the  visible  figure  of  bodies  is  a 
real  and  external  object  to  the  eye,  as  their  tangible  figure 
is  to  the  touch ;  it  may  be  asked,  whence  arises  the  diffi- 
culty of  attending  to  the  first  and  the  facility  of  attending 
to  the  last?  It  is  certain,  that  the  first  is  more  frequently 
presented  to  the  eye  than  the  last  is  to  the  touch ;  the 
first  is  as  distinct  and  determinate  an  object  as  the  last, 
and  seems  in  its  own  nature  as  proper  for  speculation.  Yet 
so  little  hath  it  been  attended  to  that  it  never  had  a  name 
in  any  language,  until  Bishop  Berkeley  gave  it  that  which 
we  have  used  after  his  example,  to  distinguish  it  from  the 
figure  which  is  the  object  of  touch. 

The  difficulty  of  attending  to  the  visible  figure  of  bodies, 
and  making  it  an  object  of  thought,  appears  so  similar  to 
that  which  we  find  in  attending  to  our  sensations  that 
both  have  probably  like  causes.  Nature  intended  the 
visible  figure  as  a  sign  of  the  tangible  figure  and  situation 
of  bodies,  and  hath  taught  us  by  a  kind  of  instinct  to  put 
it  always  to  this  use.  Hence  it  happens,  that  the  mind 
passes  over  it  with  a  rapid  motion,  to  attend  to  the  things 
signified  by  it.  It  is  as  unnatural  to  the  mind  to  stop  at 
the  visible  figure,  and  attend  to  it,  as  it  is  to  a  spherical 
body  to  stop  upon  an  inclined  plane.  There  is  an  inward 


116  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

principle  which  constantly  carries  it  forward,  and  which 
cannot  be  overcome  but  by  a  contrary  force. 

There  are  other  external  things  which  nature  intended 
for  signs ;  and  we  find  this  common  to  them  all,  that  the 
mind  is  disposed  to  overlook  them,  and  to  attend  only  to 
the  things  signified  by  them.  Thus,  there  are  certain  mo- 
difications of  the  human  face,  which  are  natural  signs  of 
the  present  disposition  of  the  mind.  Every  man  under- 
stands the  meaning  of  these  signs,  but  not  one  of  a  hundred 
ever  attended  to  the  signs  themselves,  or  knows  any  thing 
about  them.  Hence  you  may  find  many  an  excellent 
practical  physiognomist,  who  knows  nothing  of  the  propor- 
tions of  a  face,  nor  can  delineate  or  describe  the  expres- 
sion of  any  one  passion. 

An  excellent  painter  or  statuary  can  tell,  not  only  what 
are  the  proportions  of  a  good  face,  but  what  changes  every 
passion  makes  in  it.  This,  however,  is  one  of  the  chief 
mysteries  of  his  art,  to  the  acquisition  of  which  infinite 
labour  and  attention,  as  well  as  a  happy  genius,  are  required. 
But  when  he  puts  his  art  in  practice,  and  happily  expresses 
a  passion  by  its  proper  signs,  every  one  understands  the 
meaning  of  these  signs  without  art  and  without  reflection. 

What  has  been  said  of  painting  might  easily  be  applied 
to  all  the  fine  arts.  The  difficulty  in  them  all  consists  in 
knowing  and  attending  to  those  natural  signs,  whereof  every 
man  understands  the  meaning. 

We  pass  from  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified  with  ease 
and  by  natural  impulse ;  but  to  go  backward  from  the  thing 
signified  to  the  sign  is  a  work  of  labour  and  difficulty. 
Visible  figure,  therefore,  being  intended  by  nature  to  be  a 
sign,  we  pass  on  immediately  to  the  thing  signified,  and 
cannot  easily  return  to  give  any  attention  to  the  sign. 

Nothing  shows  more  clearly  our  indisposition  to  attend 
to  visible  figure  and  visible  extension  than  this,  that 
although  mathematical  reasoning  is  no  less  applicable  to 
them  than  to  tangible  figure  and  extension,  yet  they  have 
entirely  escaped  the  notice  of  mathematicians.  While  that 
figure  and  that  extension  which  are  objects  of  touch  have 


SECT.  VIII.]  OF  SEEING.  117 

been  tortured  ten  thousand  ways  for  twenty  centuries,  and 
a  very  noble  system  of  science  has  been  drawn  out  of 
them ;  not  a  single  proposition  do  we  find  with  regard  to 
the  figure  and  extension  which  are  the  immediate  objects 
of  sight ! 

When  the  geometrician  draws  a  diagram  with  the  most 
perfect  accuracy;  when  he  keeps  his  eye  fixed  upon  it, 
while  he  goes  through  a  long  process  of  reasoning,  and 
demonstrates  the  relations  of  the  several  parts  of  his  figure ; 
he  does  not  consider  that  the  visible  figure  presented  to 
his  eye  is  only  the  representative  of  a  tangible  figure,  upon 
which  all  his  attention  is  fixed ;  he  does  not  consider  that 
these  two  figures  have  really  different  properties ;  and  that 
what  he  demonstrates  to  be  true  of  the  one  is  not  true  of 
the  other. 

This  perhaps  will  seem  so  great  a  paradox,  even  to 
mathematicians,  as  to  require  demonstration  before  it  can 
be  believed.  Nor  is  the  demonstration  at  all  difficult,  if 
the  reader  will  have  patience  to  enter  but  a  little  into  the 
mathematical  consideration  of  visible  figure,  which  we  shall 
call  the  geometry  ofvisibles. 


SECT.  IX. 

Of  the  Geometry  of  Visibles. 

1 N  this  geometry,  the  definitions  of  a  point  of  a  line,  whe- 
ther straight  or  curve;  of  an  angle,  whether  acute,  or  right, 
or  obtuse ;  and  of  a  circle,  are  the  same  as  in  common 
geometry.  The  mathematical  reader  will  easily  enter  into 
the  whole  mystery  of  this  geometry,  if  he  attends  duly  to 
these  few  evident  principles. 

1.  Supposing  the  eye  placed  in  the  centre  of  a  sphere, 
every  great  circle  of  the  sphere  will  have  the  same  appear- 
ance to  the  eye  as  if  it  was  a  straight  line.  For  the  cur- 
viture  of  the  circle  being  turned  directly  toward  the  eye,  is 
not  perceived  by  it.  And  for  the  same  reason,  any  line 
which  is  drawn  in  the  plane  of  a  great  circle  of  the  sphere, 


118  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

whether  it  be  in  reality  straight  or  curve,  \vill  appear  straight 
to  the  eye. 

2.  Every  visible  right  line  will  appear  to  coincide  with 
some  great  circle  of  the  sphere ;  and  the  circumference  of 
that  great  circle,  even  when  it  is  produced  until  it  returns 
into  itself,  will  appear  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  same 
visible  right  line,  all  the  parts  of  it  being  visibly  in  direc- 
turn.     For  the  eye,  perceiving  only  the  position  of  objects 
with  regard  to  itself,  and  not  their  distance,  will  see  those 
points  in  the  same  visible  place  which  have  the  same  po- 
sition with  regard  to  the  eye,  how  different  soever  their 
distances  from  it  may  be.     Now,  since  a  plane  passing 
through  the  eye  and  a  given  visible  right  line  will  be  the 
plane  of  some  great  circle  of  the  sphere,  every  point  of  the 
visible  right  line  will  have  the  same  position  as  some  point 
of  the  great  circle ;  therefore  they  will  both  have  the  same 
visible  place,  and  coincide  to  the  eye :  and  the  whole  cir- 
cumference of  the  great  circle,  continued  even  until  it  re- 
turns into  itself,  will  appear  to  be  a  continuation  of  the 
same  visible  right  line. 

Hence  it  follows : 

3.  That  every  visible  right  line,  when  it  is  continued  in 
directum,  as  far  as  it  may  be  continued,  will  be  represented 
by  a  great  circle  of  a  sphere,  in  whose  centre  the  eye  is 
placed.     It  follows, 

4.  That  the  visible   angle   comprehended  under  two 
visible  right  lines  is  equal  to  the  spherical  angle  compre- 
hended under  the  two  great  circles  which  are  the  represen- 
tatives of  these  visible  lines.      For,  since  the  visible  lines 
appear  to  coincide  with  the  great  circles,  the  visible  angle 
comprehended  under  the  former  must  be  equal  to  the  visi- 
ble angle  comprehended  under  the  latter.     But  the  visible 
angle  comprehended  under  the  two  great  circles,  when 
seen  from  the  centre,  is  of  the  same  magnitude  with  the 
spherical  angle  which  they  really  comprehend,  as  mathe- 
maticians know ;  therefore  the  visible  angle  made  by  any 
two  visible  lines  is  equal  to  the  spherical  angle  made  by 
the  two  great  circles  of  the  sphere  which  are  their  repre- 
sentatives. 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SEEING.  119 

5.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  every  visible  right-lined 
triangle  will  coincide  in  all  its  parts  with  some  spherical 
triangle.  The  sides  of  the  one  will  appear  equal  to  the 
sides  of  the  other,  and  the  angles  of  the  one  to  the  angles 
of  the  other,  each  to  each ;  and  therefore  the  whole  of  the 
one  triangle  will  appear  equal  to  the  whole  of  the  other. 
In  a  word,  to  the  eye  they  will  be  one  and  the  same,  and 
have  the  same  mathematical  properties.  The  properties, 
therefore,  of  visible  right-lined  triangles,  are  not  the  same 
with  the  properties  of  plain  triangles,  but  are  the  same  with 
those  of  spherical  triangles. 

0.  Every  lesser  circle  of  the  sphere  will  appear  a  circle 
to  the  eye,  placed,  as  we  have  supposed  all  along,  in  the 
centre  of  the  sphere.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  every  visi- 
ble circle  will  appear  to  coincide  with  some  lesser  circle 
of  the  sphere. 

7.  Moreover,  the  whole  surface  of  the  sphere  will  re- 
present the  whole  of  visible  space :  for  since  every  visible 
point  coincides  with  some  point  of  the  surface  of  the  sphere, 
and  has  the  same  visible  place,  it  follows,  that  all  the  parts 
of  the  spherical  surface  taken  together  will  represent  all 
possible  visible  places,  that  is,  the  whole  of  visible  space. 
And  from  this  it  follows,  in  the  last  place, 

8.  That  every  visible  figure  will  be  represented  by  that 
part  of  the  surface  of  the  sphere,  on  which  it  might  be 
projected,  the  eye  being  in  the  centre.     And  every  such 
visible  figure  will  bear  the  same  ratio  to  the  whole  of 
visible  space,  as  the  part  of  the  spherical  surface  which 
represents  it  bears  to  the  whole  spherical  surface. 

The  mathematical  reader,  I  hope,  will  enter  into  these 
principles  with  perfect  facility,  and  will  as  easily  perceive, 
that  the  following  propositions  with  regard  to  visible  figure 
and  space,  which  we  offer  only  as  a  specimen,  may  be 
mathematically  demonstrated  from  them,  and  are  not  less 
true  nor  less  evident  than  the  propositions  of  Euclid,  with 
regard  to  tangible  figures. 

Prop.  1.  Every  right  line  being  produced  will  at  last 
return  into  itself. 

2.  A  right  line  returning  into  itself  is  the  longest  possi- 


120  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

ble  right  line;  and  all  other  right  lines  bear  a  finite  ratio 
to  it. 

3.  A  right  line  returning  into  itself  divides  the  whole 
of  visible  space  into  two  equal  parts,  which  will  both  be 
comprehended  under  this  right  line. 

4.  The  whole  of  visible  space  bears  a  finite  ratio  to 
any  part  of  it. 

5.  Any  two  right  lines  being  produced  will  meet  in  two 
points,  and  mutually  bisect  each  other. 

6.  If  two  lines  be  parallel,  that  is,  every  where  equa 
distant  from  each  other,  they  cannot  both  be  straight. 

7.  Any  right  line  being  given,  a  point  may  be  found, 
which  is  at  the  same  distance  from  all  the  points  of  tti- 
given  right  line. 

8.  A  circle  may  be  parallel  to  a  right  line,  that  is,  m; 
be  equally  distant  from  it  in  all  its  parts. 

9.  Right-lined  triangles  that  are  similar  are  right  angle*. 

10.  Of  every  right-lined  triangle,  the  three  angles  taken 
together  are  greater  than  two  right  angles. 

11.  The  angles  of  a  right-lined  triangle  may  all  be  right 
angles  or  all  obtuse  angles. 

12.  Unequal  circles  are  not  as  the  squares  of  their  dia- 
meters, nor  are  their  circumferences  in  the  ratio  of  their 
diameters. 

This  small  specimen  of  the  geometry  of  visibles  is  in- 
tended to  lead  the  reader  to  a  clear  and  distinct  conception 
of  the  figure  and  extension  which  is  presented  to  the  mind 
by  vision ;  and  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  what  we  hav 
affirmed  above,  namely,  That  those  figures  and  that  exten 
sion  which  are  the  immediate  objects  of  sight  are  not  the 
figures  and  the  extension  about  which  common  geometry 
is  employed ;  that  the  geometrician,  while  he  looks  at  his 
diagram,  and  demonstrates  a  proposition,  hath  a  figure 
presented  to  his  eye,  which  is  only  a  sign  and  represen- 
tative of  a  tangible  figure;  that  he  gives  not  the  least 
attention  to  the  first,  but  attends  only  to  the  last ;  and  that 
these  two  figures  have  different  properties,  so  that  what  he 
demonstrates  of  the  one  is  not  true  of  the  other. 

It  deserves,  however,  to  be  remarked,  that  as  a  small 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SEEING.  121 

part  of  a  spherical  surface  differs  not  sensibly  from  a  plain 
surface ;  so  a  small  part  of  visible  extension  differs  very  little 
from  that  extension  in  length  and  breadth,  which  is  the 
object  of  touch.  And  it  is  likewise  to  be  observed,  that 
the  human  eye  is  so  formed,  that  an  object  which  is  seen 
distinctly  and  at  one  view,  can  occupy  but  a  small  part  of 
visible  space;  for  we  never  see  distinctly  what  is  at  a 

)iisiderable  distance  from  the  axis  of  the  eye ;  and,  there- 
when  we  would  see  a  large  object  at  one  view,  the 

. •(•  must  be  at  so  great  a  distance  that  the  object  occu- 
pies but  a  small  part  of  visible  space.  From  these  two 

nervations  it  follows,  that  plain  figures  which  are  seen 
at  one  view,  when  their  planes  are  not  oblique,  but  direct 
ti>  the  eye,  differ  little  from  the  visible  figures  which  they 
present  to  the  eye.  The  several  lines  in  the  tangible  figure 
I  we  very  nearly  the  same  proportion  to  each  other  as  in 
lie  visible;  and  the  angles  of  the  one  are  very  nearly, 
although  not  strictly  and  mathematically,  equal  to  those 
of  the  other.  Although,  therefore,  we  have  found  many 
instances  of  natural  signs  which  have  no  similitude  to  the 

ings  signified,  this  is  not  the  case  with  regard  to  visible 

.jure.  It  hath  in  all  cases  such  a  similitude  to  the  thing 
signified  by  it,  as  a  plan  or  profile  hath  to  that  which  it 
represents ;  and  in  some  cases  the  sign  and  thing  signified 
have  to  all  sense  the  same  figure  and  the  same  proportions. 
If  we  could  find  a  being  endued  with  sight  only,  without 
any  other  external  sense,  and  capable  of  reflecting  and 
reasoning  upon  what  he  sees,  the  notions  and  philosophical 
speculations  of  such  a  being,  might  assist  us  in  the  diffi- 
cult task  of  distinguishing  the  perceptions  which  we  have 
purely  by  sight,  from  those  which  derive  their  origin  from 
other  senses.  Let  us  suppose  such  a  being,  and  conceive, 
as  well  as  we  can,  what  notion  he  would  have  of  visible 
objects,  and  what  conclusions  he  would  deduce  from  them. 
AVe  must  not  conceive  him  disposed  by  his  constitution, 
as  we  are,  to  consider  the  visible  appearance  as  a  sign  of 
something  else :  it  is  no  sign  to  him,  because  there  is  no- 
thing signified  by  it ;  and  therefore  we  must  suppose  him 
as  much  disposed  to  attend  to  the  visible  figure  and  exten- 

G 


122  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

sion  of  bodies,  as  we  are  disposed  to  attend  to  their  tangible 
fig-ure  and  extension. 

If  various  figures  are  presented  to  his  sense,  he  might, 
without  doubt,  as  they  grow  familiar,  compare  them  toge- 
ther, and  perceive  wherein  they  agree  and  wherein  they 
differ.  He  might  perceive  visible  objects  to  have  length 
and  breadth,  but  could  have  no  notion  of  a  third  dimen- 
sion any  more  than  we  can  have  of  a  fourth.  All  visible 
objects  would  appear  to  be  terminated  by  lines,  straight 
or  curve ;  and  objects  terminated  by  the  same  visible  lines, 
would  occupy  the  same  place,  and  fill  the  same  part  of 
visible  space.  It  would  not  be  possible  for  him  to  con- 
ceive one  object  to  be  behind  another,  or  one  to  be  nearer, 
another  more  distant. 

To  us,  who  conceive  three  dimensions,  a  line  may  be 
conceived  straight;  or  it  may  be  conceived  incurvated  in 
one  dimension,  and  straight  in  another;  or,  lastly,  it  may 
be  incurvated  in  two  dimensions.  Suppose  a  line  to  be 
drawn  upwards  and  downwards,  its  length  makes  one  di- 
mension, which  we  shall  call  upivards  and  downwards ; 
and  there  are  two  dimensions  remaining,  according  to 
which  it  may  be  straight  or  curve.  It  may  be  bent  to  the 
right  or  to  the  left ;  and  if  it  has  no  bending  either  to  the 
right  or  left,  it  is  straight  in  this  dimension.  But  suppos- 
ing it  straight  in  this  dimension  of  right  and  left,  there  is 
still  another  dimension  remaining,  in  which  it  may  be 
curve.;  for  it  may  be  bent  backwards  or  forwards.  When 
we  conceive  a  tangible  straight  line,  we  exclude  curvature 
in  either  of  these  two  dimensions :  and  as  what  is  con- 
ceived to  be  excluded  must  be  conceived,  as  well  as  what 
is  conceived  to  be  included,  it  follows,  that  all  the  three 
dimensions  enter  into  our  conception  of  a  straight  line. 
Its  length  is  one  dimension,  its  straightness  in  two  other 
dimensions  is  included,  or  curvature  in  these  two  dimen- 
sions excluded,  in  the  conception  of  it. 

The  being  we  have  supposed,  having  no  conception  of 
more  than  two  dimensions,  of  which  the  length  of  a  line  is 
one,  cannot  possibly  conceive  it  either  straight  or  curve  in 
more  than  one  dimension :  so  that  in  his  conception  of  a 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SEEING.  123 

right  line,  curvature  to  the  right  hand  or  left  is  excluded ; 
but  curvature  backwards  or  forwards  cannot  be  excluded, 
because  he  neither  hath,  nor  can  have,  any  conception  of 
such  curvature.  Hence  we  see  the  reason  that  a  line, 
which  is  straight  to  the  eye,  may  return  into  itself:  for  its 
being  straight  to  the  eye,  implies  only  straightness  in  one 
dimension ;  and  a  line  which  is  straight  in  one  dimension 
may  notwithstanding  be  curve  in  anotter  dimension,  and 
so  may  return  into  itself. 

To  us,  who  conceive  three  dimensions,  a  surface  is  that 
which  hath  length  and  breadth,  excluding  thickness  :  and 
a  surface  may  be  either  plain  in  this  third  dimension,  or  it 
may  be  incurvated :  so  that  the  notion  of  a  third  dimen- 
sion enters  into  our  conception  of  a  surface ;  for  it  is  only 
by  means  of  this  third  dimension,  that  we  can  distinguish 
surfaces  into  plain  and  curve  surfaces ;  and  neither  one 
nor  the  other  can  be  conceived,  without  conceiving  a  third 
dimension. 

The  being  we  have  supposed  having  no  conception  of  a 
third  dimension,  his  visible  figures  have  length  and  breadth 
indeed;  but  thickness  is  neither  included  nor  excluded, 
being  a  thing  of  which  he  has  no  conception.  And  there- 
fore visible  figures,  although  they  have  length  and  breadth, 
as  surfaces  have,  yet  they  are  neither  plain  surfaces  nor 
curve  surfaces.  For  a  curve  surface  implies  curvature  in 
a.  third  dimension,  and  a  plain  surface  implies  the  want  of 
curvature  in  a  third  dimension ;  and  such  a  being  can  con- 
ceive neither  of  these,  because  he  has  no  conception  of  a 
third  dimension.  Moreover,  although  he  hath  a  distinct 
conception  of  the  inclination  of  two  lines  which  make  an 
angle,  yet  he  can  neither  conceive  a  plane  angle  nor  a 
spherical  angle.  Even  his  notion  of  a  point  is  somewhat 
.  less  determined  than  ours.  In  the  notion  of  a  point,  we 
exclude  length,  breadth,  and  thickness ;  he  excludes  length 
and  breadth,  but  cannot  either  exclude  or  include  thick- 
ness, because  he  hath  no  conception  of  it. 

Having  thus  settled  the  notions  which  such  a  being  as 
we  have  supposed  might  form  of  mathematical  points, 
lines,  angles,  and  figures,  it  is  easy  to  see,  that  by  com- 

G  2  • 


124  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VL 

paring  these  together,  and  reasoning  about  them,  he  might 
discover  their  relations,  and  form  geometrical  conclusions, 
built  upon  self-evident  principles.  He  might  likewise, 
without  doubt,  have  the  same  notion  of  numbers  as  we 
have,  and  form  a  system  of  arithmetic.  It  is  not  material 
to  say  in  what  order  he  might  proceed  in  such  discoveries, 
or  how  much  time  and  pains  he  might  employ  about  them ; 
but  what  such  beins,  by  reason  and  ingenuity,  without  any 
materials  of  sensation  but  those  of  sight  only,  might 
discover. 

As  it  is  more  difficult  to  attend  to  a  detail  of  possibili- 
ties than  of  facts  even  of  slender  authority,  I  shall  beg 
leave  to  give  an  extract  from  the  travels  of  Johannes  Ru- 
dolphus  Anepigraphus,  a  Rosicrucian  philosopher,  who 
having,  by  deep  study  of  the  occult  sciences,  acquired  the 
art  of  transporting  himself  to  various  sublunary  region^, 
and  of  conversing  with  various  orders  of  intelligences,  in 
the  course  of  his  adventures,  became  acquainted  with  an 
order  of  beings  exactly  such  as  I  have  supposed. 

How  they  communicate  their  sentiments  to  one  another, 
and  by  what  means  he  became  acquainted  with  their  lan- 
guage, and  was  initiated  into  their  philosophy,  as  well  as 
of  many  other  particulars,  which  might  have  gratified  the 
curiosity  of  his  readers,  and  perhaps  added  credibility  to 
his  relation,  he  hath  not  thought  fit  to  inform  us;  these 
being  matters  proper  for  adepts  only  to  know. 

His  account  of  their  philosophy  is  as  follows  : 

"  The  Idomenians."  saith  he,  "  are  many  of  them  very 
ingenious,  and  much  given  to  contemplation.  In  arith- 
metic, geometry,  metaphysics,  and  physics,  they  have 
most  elaborate  systems.  In  the  two  latter  indeed  they 
have  had  many  disputes,  carried  on  with  great  subtilty, 
and  are  divided  into  various  sects :  yet  La  the  two  former 
there  hath  been  no  less  unanimity  than  among  the  human 
species.  Their  principles  relating  to  numbers  and  arith- 
metic, making  allowance  for  their  notation,  differ  in  nothing 
from  ours ;  but  their  geometry  differs  very  considerably." 

As  our  author's  account  of  the  geometry  of  the  Ido- 
monians  agrees  in  every  thing  with  the  geometry  of  visi- 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SEEING.  125 

bles,  of  which  we  have  already  given  a  specimen,  we  shall 
pass  over  it.  He  goes  on  thus  :  "  Colour,  extension,  and 
figure,  are  conceived  to  be  the  essential  properties  of 
body.  A  very  considerable  sect  maintains,  that  colour  is 
the  essence  of  body.  If  there  had  been  no  colour,  say 
they,  there  had  been  no  perception  or  sensation.  Colour 
is  all  that  we  perceive  or  can  conceive,  that  is  peculiar  to 
body ;  extension  and  figure  being  modes  common  to  body 
and  to  empty  space.  And  if  we  should  suppose  a  body 
to  be  annihilated,  colour  is  the  only  thing  in  it  that  can 
be  annihilated ;  for  its  place,  and  consequently  the  figure 
and  extension  of  that  place,  must  remain,  and  cannot  be 
imagined  not  to  exist.  These  philosophers  hold  space  to 
be  the  place  of  all  bodies,  immovable  and  indestructible, 
without  figure,  and  similar  in  all  its  parts,  incapable  of 
increase  or  diminution,  yet  not  immeasurable :  for  every 
the  least  part  of  space  bears  a  finite  ratio  to  the  whole. 
So  that  with  them  the  whole  extent  of  space  is  the  com- 
mon and  natural  measure  of  every  thing  that  hath  length 
and  breadth,  and  the  magnitude  of  every  body  and  of 
every  figure  is  expressed  by  its  being  such  a  part  of  the 
universe.  In  like  manner  the  common  and  natural  mea- 
sure of  length,  is  an  infinite  right  line,  which,  as  hath  been 
before  observed,  returns  into  itself,  and  hath  no  limits,  but 
bears  a  finite  ratio  to  every  other  line. 

"  As  to  their  natural  philosophy,  it  is  now  acknow- 
ledged by  the  wisest  of  them  to  have  been  for  many  ages 
in  a  very  low  state.  The  philosophers  observing,  that  one 
body  can  differ  from  another  only  in  colour,  figure,  or 
magnitude,  it  was  taken  for  granted,  that  all  their  par- 
ticular qualities  must  arise  from  the  various  combinations 
of  these  their  essential  attributes.  And  therefore  it  was 
looked  upon  as  the  end  of  natural  philosophy,  to  show 
how  the  various  combinations  of  these  three  qualities  in 
different  bodies  produced  all  the  phenomena  of  nature.  It 
were  endless  to  enumerate  the  various  systems  that  were 
invented  with  this  view,  and  the  disputes  that  were  car- 
ried on  for  ages ;  the  followers  of  every  system  exposing 
the  weak  sides  of  other  systems,  and  palliating  those  of 
their  own  with  great  art. 


126  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

"At  last,  some  free  and  facetious  spirits,  wearied  with 
eternal  disputation,  and  the  labour  of  patching  and  prop- 
ping weak  systems,  began  to  complain  of  the  subtilty  of 
nature;  of  the  infinite  changes  that  bodies  undergo  in 
figure,  colour,  and  magnitude;  and  of  the  difficulty  of 
accounting  for  these  appearances  ;  making  this  a  pretence 
for  giving  up  all  inquiries  into  the  causes  of  things,  as  vain 
and  fruitless. 

"  These  wits  had  ample  matter  of  mirth  and  ridicule  in 
the  systems  of  philosophers ;  and  finding  it  an  easier  task 
to  pull  down  than  to  build  or  support,  and  that  every  sect 
furnished  them  with  arms  and  auxiliaries  to  destroy  an- 
other, they  began  to  spread  mightily,  and  went  on  with 
great  success.  Thus  philosophy  gave  way  to  scepticism 
and  irony,  and  those  systems  which  had  been  the  work  of 
ages  and  the  admiration  of  the  learned  became  the  jest  of 
the  vulgar:  for  even  the  vulgar  readily  took  part  in  the 
triumph  over  a  kind  of  learning  which  they  had  long  sus- 
pected, because  it  produced  nothing  but  wrangling  and 
altercation.  The  wits  having  now  acquired  great  reputa- 
tion, and  being  flushed  with  success,  began  to  think  the 
triumph  incomplete,  until  every  pretence  to  knowledge 
was  overturned;  and  accordingly  began  their  attacks  upon 
arithmetic,  geometry,  and  even  upon  the  common  notions 
of  untaught  Idomenians.  So  difficult  it  hath  always 
been  (says  our  author)  for  great  conquerors  to  know  where 
to  stop. 

"  In  the  mean  time,  natural  philosophy  began  to  rise 
from  its  ashes,  under  the  direction  of  a  person  of  great 
genius,  who  is  looked  upon  as  having  had  something  in 
him  above  Idomenian  nature.  He  observed,  that  the  Ido- 
menian  faculties  were  certainly  intended  for  contemplation, 
and  that  the  works  of  nature  were  a  nobler  subject  to 
exercise  them  upon  than  the  follies  of  systems,  or  the 
errors  of  the  learned ;  and  being  sensible  of  the  difficulty 
of  finding  out  the  causes  of  natural  things,  he  proposed, 
by  accurate  observation  of  the  phenomena  of  nature,  to 
find  out  the  rules  according  to  which  they  happen,  with- 
out inquiring  into  the  causes  of  those  rules.  In  this  he 
made  considerable  progress  himself,  and  planned  out  much 


SECT.  IX.]  OF  SEEING.  127 

work  for  his  followers,  who  call  themselves  inductive 
philosophers.  The  sceptics  look  with  envy  upon  this 
rising  sect,  as  eclipsing  their  reputation,  and  threatening 
to  limit  their  empire ;  but  they  are  at  a  loss  on  what  hand 
to  attack  it.  The  vulgar  begin  to  reverence  itf,  as  pro- 
ducing useful  discoveries. 

"  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  every  Idomenian  firmly 
believes,  that  two  or  more  bodies  may  exist  in  the  same 
place.  For  this  they  have  the  testimony  of  sense,  and 
they  can  no  more  doubt  of  it  than  they  can  doubt  whether 
they  have  any  perception  at  all.  They  often  see  two 
bodies  meet,  and  coincide  in  the  same  place,  and  separate 
again,  without  having  undergone  any  change  in  their  sen- 
sible qualities  by  this  penetration.  When  two  bodies 
meet  and  occupy  the  same  place,  commonly  one  only 
appears  in  that  place,  and  the  other  disappears.  That 
which  continues  to  appear  is  said  to  overcome,  the  other 
to  be  overcome." 

To  this  quality  of  bodies  they  gave  a  name,  which  our 
author  tells  us  hath  no  word  answering  to  it  in  any  human 
language.  And  therefore,  after  making  a  long  apology, 
which  I  omit,  he  begs  leave  to  call  it  the  overcoming 
quality  of  bodies.  He  assures  us,  that  "  the  specula- 
tions which  had  been  raised  about  this  single  quality  of 
bodies  and  the  hypotheses  contrived  to  account  for  it 
were  sufficient  to  fill  many  volumes.  Nor  have  there  been 
fewer  hypotheses  invented  by  their  philosophers,  to  ac- 
count for  the  changes  of  magnitude  and  figure ;  which,  in 
most  bodies  that  move,  they  perceive  to  be  in  a  continual 
fluctuation.  The  founder  of  the  inductive  sect,  believing 
it  to  be  above  the  reach  of  Idomenian  faculties  to  dis- 
cover the  real  causes  of  these  phenomena,  applied  himself 
to  find,  from  observation,  by  what  laws  they  are  connected 
together;  and  discovered  many  mathematical  ratios  and 
relations  concerning  the  motions,  magnitudes,  figures,  and 
overcoming  quality  of  bodies,  which  constant  experience 
confirms.  But  the  opposers  of  this  sect  choose  rather  to 
content  themselves  with  feigned  causes  of  these  pheno- 
mena, than  to  acknowledge  the  real  laws  whereby  they 


128  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

are  governed,  which  humble  their  pride,  by  being  confess- 
edly unaccountable." 

Thus  far  Johannes  Rudolphus  Anepigraphus.  Whe- 
ther this  Anepigraphus  be  the  same  who  is  recorded  among 
the  Greek  alchemistical  writers  not  yet  published,  by  Bor- 
richius,  Faricius,  and  others,  I  do  not  pretend  to  deter- 
mine. The  identity  of  their  name,  and  the  similitude  of 
their  studies,  although  no  slight  arguments,  yet  are  not 
absolutely  conclusive.  Nor  will  I  take  upon  me  to  judge 
of  the  narrative  of  this  learned  traveller  by  the  external 
marks  of  his  credibility ;  I  shall  confine  myself  to  those 
which  the  critics  call  internal.  It  would  even  be  of  small 
importance  to  inquire  whether  the  Idomenians  have  a  real 
or  only  an  ideal  existence;  since  this  is  disputed  among 
the  learned  with  regard  to  things  with  which  we  are  more 
nearly  connected.  The  important  question  is,  Whether 
the  account  above  given  is  a  just  account  of  their  geome- 
try and  philosophy.  We  have  all  the  faculties  which 
they  have,  with  the  addition  of  others  which  they  have 
not;  we  may  therefore  form  some  judgment  of  their  philo- 
sophy and  geometry,  by  separating  from  all  others  the 
perceptions  we  have  by  sight  and  reasoning  upon  them. 
As  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge  in  this  way,  after  a  careful 
examination,  their  geometry  must  be  such  as  Anepigra- 
phus hath  described.  Nor  does  his  account  of  their  phi- 
losophy appear  to  contain  any  evident  marks  of  imposture  i 
although  here,  no  doubt,  proper  allowance  is  to  be  made 
for  liberties  which  travellers  take,  as  well  as  for  involun- 
tary mistakes  which  they  are  apt  to  fall  into. 


SECT.  X. 
Of  the  Parallel  Motion  of  the  Eyes. 

HAVING  explained,  as  distinctly  as  we  can,  visible  figure, 
and  shown  its  connexion  with  the  things  signified  by  it,  it 
will  be  proper  to  consider  next  some  phenomena  of  the 
eyes  and  of  vision,  which  have  commonly  been  referred  to 


SECT.  X.]  OF  SEEING.  12D 

custom,  to  anatomical  or  to  mechanical  causes;  but  which, 
as  I  conceive,  must  be  resolved  into  original  powers  and 
principles  of  the  human  mind;  and  therefore  belong  pro- 
perly to  the  subject  of  this  inquiry. 

The  first  is,  the  parallel  motion  of  the  eyes;  by  which, 
when  one  eye  is  turned  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  upwards 
or  downwards,  or  straight  forwards,  the  other  always  goes 
along  with  it  in  the  same  direction.  We  see  plainly,  when 
both  eyes  are  open,  that  they  are  always  turned  the  samo 
way,  as  if  both  were  acted  upon  by  the  same  motive  force  : 
and  if  one  eye  is  shut  and  the  hand  laid  upon  it,  while  the 
other  turns  various  ways,  we  feel  the  eye  that  is  shut  turn 
at  the  same  time,  and  that  whether  we  will  or  not.  What 
makes  this  phenomenon  surprising  is,  that  it  is  acknow- 
ledged by  all  anatomists,  that  the  muscles  which,  move  the 
two  eyes,  and  the  nerves  which  serve  these  muscles,  are 
entirely  distinct  and  unconnected.  It  would  be  thought 
very  surprising  and  unaccountable,  to  see  a  man,  who, 
from  his  birth,  never  moved  one  arm  without  moving  the 
other  precisely  in  the  same  manner,  so  as  to  keep  them 
always  parallel :  yet  it  would  not  be  more  difficult  to  find 
the  physical  cause  of  such  motion  of  the  arms  than  it  is  to 
find  the  cause  of  the  parallel  motion  of  the  eyes,  which  is 
perfectly  similar. 

The  only  cause  that  hath  been  assigned  of  this  parallel 
motion  of  the  eyes  is  custom.  We  find  by  experience,  it 
is  said,  when  we  begin  to  look  at  objects,  that,  in  order  to 
have  distinct  vision,  it  is  necessary  to  turn  both  eyes  the 
same  way ;  therefore  we  soon  acquire  the  habit  of  doing  it 
constantly,  and  by  degrees  lose  the  power  of  doing  other- 
wise. 

This  account  of  the  matter  seems  to  be  insufficient;  be- 
cause habits  are  not  got  at  once ;  it  takes  time  to  acquire 
and  confirm  them ;  and  if  this  motion  of  the  eyes  were  got 
by  habit,  we  should  see  children  when  they  are  born,  turn 
their  eyes  different  ways,  and  move  one  without  the  other, 
as  they  do  their  hands  or  legs.  I  know  some  have 
affirmed  that  they  are  apt  to  do  so.  But  I  have  never 
found  k  true  from  mv  own  observation,  although  I  have 

G  3 


130  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

taken  pains  to  make  observations  of  this  kind,  and  have 
had  good  opportunities.  I  have  likewise  consulted  expe- 
rienced midwives,  mothers,  and  nurses,  and  found  them 
agree,  that  they  had  never  observed  distortions  of  this 
kind  in  the  eyes  of  children,  but  when  they  had  reason  to 
suspect  convulsions  or  some  preternatural  cause. 

It  seems  therefore  to  be  extremely  probable,  that,  pre- 
vious to  custom,  there  is  something  in  the  constitution, 
some  natural  instinct,  which  directs  us  to  move  both  eyes 
always  the  same  way. 

We  know  not  how  the  mind  acts  upon  the  body,  nor  by 
what  power  the  muscles  are  contracted  and  relaxed ;  but 
we  see  that  in  some  of  the  voluntary,  as  well  as  in  some  of 
the  involuntary  motions,  this  power  is  so  'directed  that 
many  muscles  which  have  no  material  tie  or  connexion, 
act  in  concert,  each  of  them  being  taught  to  play  its  part 
in  exact  time  and  measure.  Nor  doth  a  company  of 
expert  players  in  a  theatrical  performance,  or  of  excellent 
musicians  in  a  concert,  or  of  good  dancers  in  a  country 
dance,  with  more  regularity  and  order,  conspire  and  con- 
tribute their  several  parts,  to  produce  one  uniform  eftect, 
than  a  number  of  muscles  do,  in  many  of  the  animal  func- 
tions, and  in  many  voluntary  actions.  Yet  we  see  such 
actions  no  less  skilfully  and  regularly  performed  in  chil- 
dren, and  in  those  who  know  not  that  they  have  such  mus- 
cles, than  in  the  most  skilful  anatomist  and  physiologist. 

Who  taught  all  the  muscles  that  are  concerned  in  suck- 
ing, in  swallowing  our  food,  in  breathing,  and  in  the  seve- 
ral natural  expulsions,  to  act  their  part  in  such  regular 
order  and  exact  measure  ?  It  was  not  custom  surely.  It 
was  that  same  powerful  and  wise  Being  who  made  the 
fabric  of  the  human  body,  and  fixed  the  laws  by  which 
the  mind  operates  upon  every  part  of  it,  so  that  they  may 
answer  the  purposes  intended  by  them.  And  when  we 
see,  in  so  many  other  instances,  a  system  of  unconnected 
muscles  conspiring  so  wonderfully  in  their  several  func- 
tions, without  the  aid  of  habit,  it  needs  not  be  thought 
strange  that  the  muscles  of  the  eye  should,  without  this 
aid,  conspire  to  give  that  direction  to  the  eyes,  without 
which  they  could  not  answer  their  end. 


SECT.  X.]  OF  SEKING.  131 

We  see  a  like  conspiring  action  in  the  muscles  which 
contract  the  pupils  of  the  two  eyes ;  and  in  those  muscles, 
whatever  they  be,  by  which  the  conformation  of  the  eye  is 
varied,  according  to  the  distance  of  objects. 

It  ought  however  to  be  observed,  that  although  it  ap- 
pears to  be  by  natural  instinct  that  both  eyes  are  always 
turned  the  same  way,  there  is  still  some  latitude  left  for 
custom. 

What  we  have  said  of  the  parallel  motion  of  the  eyes, 
is  not  to  be  understood  so  strictly  as  if  nature  directed  us 
to  keep  their  axes  always  precisely  and  mathematically 
parallel  to  each  other.  Indeed,  although  they  are  always 
nearly  parallel,  they  hardly  ever  are  exactly  so.  When 
we  look  at  an  object,  the  axes  of  the  eyes  meet  in  that 
object ;  and  therefore  make  an  angle,  which  is  always 
small,  but  will  be  greater  or  less,  according  as  the  object 
is  nearer  or  more  remote.  Nature  hath  very  wisely  left  us 
the  power  of  varying  the  parallelism  of  our  eyes  a  little,  so 
that  we  can  direct  them  to  the  same  point,  whether  remote 
or  near.  This,  no  doubt,  is  learned  by  custom ;  and  ac- 
cordingly we  see,  that  it  is  a  long  time  before  children  get 
this  habit  in  perfection. 

The  power  of  varying  the  parallelism  of  the  eyes  is 
naturally  no  more  than  is  sufficient  for  the  purpose  intended 
by  it;  but  by  much  practice  and  straining,  it  may  be  in- 
creased. Accordingly  we  see,  that  some  have  acquired 
the  power  of  distorting  their  eyes  into  unnatural  directions, 
as  others  have  acquired  the  power  of  distorting  their  bodies 
into  unnatural  postures. 

Those  who  have  lost  the  sight  of  an  eye,  commonly  lose 
what  they  had  got  by  custom  in  the  direction  of  their  eyes, 
but  retain  what  they  had  by  nature ;  that  is,  although  their 
f  yes  turn  and  move  always  together,  yet  when  they  look 
upon  an  object,  the  blind  eye  will  often  have  a  very  small 
deviation  from  it ;  which  is  not  perceived  by  a  slight  ob- 
server, but  may  be  discerned  by  one  accustomed  to  make 
exact  observations  in  these  matters. 


132  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

SECT.  XL 

Of  our  Seeing  Objects  erect  by  inverted  Images. 

ANOTHER  phenomenon  which  hath  perplexed  philoso- 
phers, is  our  seeing  objects  erect,  when  it  is  well  known 
that  their  images  or  pictures  upon  the  tunica  retina  of  the 
eye  are  inverted. 

The  sagacious  Kepler  first  made  the  noble  discovery, 
That  distinct  but  inverted  pictures  of  visible  objects  are 
formed  upon  the  retina  by  the  rays  of  light  coming  from 
the  object.  The  same  great  philosopher  demonstrated, 
from  the  principles  of  optics,  how  these  pictures  are  form- 
ed, to  wit,  That  the  rays  coming  from  any  one  point  of  the 
object,  and  falling  upon  the  various  parts  of  the  pupil,  are, 
by  the  cornea  and  crystalline,  refracted  so  as  to  meet  again 
in  one  point  of  the  retina,  and  there  paint  the  colour  of 
that  point  of  the  object  from  which  they  come.  As  the 
rays  from  different  points  of  the  object  cross  each  other 
before  they  come  to  the  retina,  the  picture  they  form  must 
be  inverted;  the  upper  part  of  the  object  being  painted 
upon  the  lower  part  of  the  retina,  the  right  side  of  the  ob- 
ject upon  the  left  of  the  retina  and  so  of  the  other  parts. 

This  philosopher  thought  that  we  see  objects  erect  by 
means  of  these  inverted  pictures,  for  this  reason,  That  as 
the  rays  from  different  points  of  the  object  cross  each  other, 
before  they  fall  upon  the  retina,  we  conclude  that  the 
impulse  which  we  feel  upon  the  lower  part  of  the  retina, 
comes  from  above ;  and  that  the  impulse  which  we  feel 
upon  the  higher  part,  comes  from  below. 

Des  Cartes  afterwards  gave  the  same  solution  of  this 
phenomenon,  and  illustrated  it  by  the  judgment  which  we 
form  of  the  position  of  objects  which  we  feel  with  our  arms 
crossed,  or  with  two  sticks  that  cross  each  other. 

But  we  cannot  acquiesce  in  this  solution.  First,  Be- 
cause itsupposes  our  seeing  things  erect  to  be  a  deduc- 
tion of  reason,  drawn  from  certain  premises :  whereas  it 
seems  to  be  an  immediate  perception.  And  secondly, 


SECT.  XI.]  OF  SEEING.  133 

Because  the  premises  from  which  all  mankind  are  sup- 
posed to  draw  this  conclusion,  never  entered  into  the 
minds  of  the  far  greater  part,  but  are  absolutely  unknown 
to  them.  We  have  no  feeling  or  perception  of  the  pic- 
tures upon  the  retina,  and  as  little  surely  of  the  position  of 
them.  In  order  to  see  objects  erect,  according  to  the 
principles  of  Kepler  or  Des  Cartes,  we  must  previously 
know,  that  the  rays  of  light  come  from  the  object  to  the 
eye  in  straight  lines;  we  must  know,  that  the  rays  from 
different  points  of  the  object  cross  one  another  before  they 
form  the  pictures  upon  the  retina ;  and  lastly,  we  must 
know,  that  these  pictures  are  really  inverted.  Now, 
although  all  these  things  are  true,  and  known  to  philoso-* 
phers,  yet  they  are  absolutely  unknown  to  the  far  greatest 
part  of  mankind :  nor  is  it  possible  that  they  who  are 
absolutely  ignorant  of  them  should  reason  from  them,  and 
build  conclusions  upon  them.  Since  therefore  visible  ob- 
jects appear  erect  to  the  ignorant  as  well  as  to  the  learned, 
this  cannot  be  a  conclusion  drawn  from  premises  which 
never  entered  into  the  minds  of  the  ignorant.  We  have 
indeed  had  occasion  to  observe  many  instances  of  conclu- 
sions drawn,  either  by  means  of  original  principles  or  by 
habit,  from  premises  which  pass  through  the  mind  very 
quickly,  and  which  are  never  made  the  objects  of  reflec- 
tion;  but  surely  no  man  will  conceive  it  possible  to  draw 
conclusions  from  premises  which  never  entered  into  the 
mind  at  all. 

Bishop  Berkeley,  having  justly  rejected  this  solution, 
iiives  one  founded  upon  his  own  principles;  wherein  he  is 
followed  by  the  judicious  Dr.  Smith  in  his  Optics ;  and 
this  we  shall  next  explain  and  examine. 

The  ingenious  writer  conceives  the  ideas  of  sight  to  be 
altogether  unlike  those  of  touch.  And  since  the  notions 
we  have  of  an  object  by  these  different  senses  have  no 
similitude,  we  can  learn  only  by  experience  how  one  sense 
will  be  affected  by  what,  in  a  certain  manner,  affects  the 
other.  Figure,  position,  and  even  number,  in  tangible? 
objects,  are  ideas  of  touch;  and  although  there  is  no 
-iuiilitude  between  these  and  the  ideas  of  sight,  yet  we, 


134  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

learn  by  experience,  that  a  triangle  affects  the  sight  in 
such  a  manner,  and  that  a  square  affects  it  in  such  another 
manner :  hence  we  judge  that  which  affects  it  in  the  first 
manner  to  be  a  triangle,  and  that  which  affects  it  in  the 
second  to  be  a  square.  In  the  same  way,  finding  from 
experience,  that  an  object  in  an  erect  position  affects  the 
eye  in  one  manner,  and  the  same  object  in  an  inverted 
position  affects  it  in  another,  we  learn  to  judge,  by  the 
manner  in  which  the  eye  is  affected,  whether  the  object  is 
erect  or  inverted.  In  a  word,  visible  ideas,  according  to 
this  author,  are  signs  of  the  tangible ;  and  the  mind  passeth 
from  the  sign  to  the  thing  signified,  not  by  means  of  any 
similitude  between  the  one  and  the  other,  nor  by  any  natu- 
ral principle ;  but  by  having  found  them  constantly  con- 
joined in  experience,  as  the  sounds  of  a  language  are  with 
the  things  they  signify.  So  that  if  the  images  upon  the 
retina  had  been  always  erect,  they  would  have  shown  the 
objects  erect,  in  the  manner  that  they  do  now  that  they 
are  inverted :  nay,  if  the  visible  idea  which  we  now  have 
from  an  inverted  object  had  been  associated  from  the 
beginning  with  the  erect  position  of  that  object,  it  would 
have  signified  an  erect  position  as  readily  as  it  now  signi- 
fies an  inverted  one.  And  if  the  visible  appearance  of  two 
shillings  had  been  found  connected  from  the  beginning  with 
the  tangible  idea  of  one  shilling,  that  appearance  would  as 
naturally  and  readily  have  signified  the  unity  of  the  object, 
as  now  it  signifies  its  duplicity. 

This  opinion  is  undoubtedly  very  ingenious ;  and,  if  it  is 
just,  serves  to  resolve,  not  only  the  phenomenon  now  under 
consideration,  but  likewise  that  which  we  shall  next  con- 
sider, our  seeing  objects  single  with  two  eyes. 

It  is  evident,  that  in  this  solution  it  is  supposed,  that 
we  do  not  originally,  and  previous  to  acquired  habits,  see 
things  either  erect  or  inverted,  of  one  figure  or  another, 
single  or  double,  but  learn  from  experience  to  judge  of 
their  tangible  position,  figure,  and  number,  by  certain 
visible  signs. 

Indeed,  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  extremely  diffi- 
cult to  distinguish  the  immediate  and  natural  objects  of 


SECT.  XI.]  OF  SEEING. 

sight,  from  the  conclusions  which  we  have  been  accus- 
tomed from  infancy  to  draw  from  them.  Bishop  Berkeley 
was  the  first  that  attempted  to  distinguish  the  one  from 
the  other,  and  to  trace  out  the  boundary  that  divides  them. 
And  if,  in  doing  so,  he  hath  gone  a  little  to  the  right  hand 
or  to  the  left,  this  might  be  expected  in  a  subject  alto- 
gether new,  and  of  the  greatest  subtilty.  The  nature  of 
vision  hath  received  great  light  from  this  distinction ;  and 
many  phenomena  in  optics,  which  before  appeared  alto- 
gether unaccountable,  have  been  clearly  and  distinctly 
resolved  by  it.  It  is  natural  and  almost  unavoidable  to 
one  who  hath  made  an  important  discovery  in  philosophy, 
to  carry  it  a  little  beyond  its  sphere,  and  to  apply  it  to  the 
resolution  of  phenomena  which  do  not  fall  within  its  pro- 
vince. Even  the  great  Newton,  when  he  had  discovered 
the  universal  law  of  gravitation,  and  observed  how  many 
of  the  phenomena  of  nature  depend  upon  this,  and  other 
laws  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  could  not  help  expressing 
his  conjecture,  that  all  the  phenomena  of  the  material 
world  depend  upon  attracting  and  repelling  forces  in  the 
particles  of  matter.  And  I  suspect  that  the  ingenious 
Bishop  of  Cloyne,  having  found  so  many  phenomena  of 
vision  reducible  to  the  constant  association  of  the  ideas  of 
sight  and  touch,  carried  this  principle  a  little  beyond  its 
just  limits. 

In  order  to  judge,  as  well  as  we  can,  whether  it  is  so, 
let  us  suppose  such  a  blind  man  as  Dr.  Saunderson,  having 
all  the  knowledge  and  abilities  which  a  blind  man  may 
have,  suddenly  made  to  see  perfectly.  Let  us  suppose 
him  kept  from  all  opportunities  of  associating  his  ideas  of 
sight  with  those  of  touch,  until  the  former  become  a  little 
familiar ;  and  the  first  surprise,  occasioned  by  objects  so 
new,  being  abated,  he  has  time  to  canvass  them,  and  to 
compare  them,  in  his  mind,  with  the  notions  which  he  for- 
merly had  by  touch,  and  in  particular  to  compare  in  his 
mind  that  visible  extension  which  his  eyes  present,  with 
the  extension  in  length  and  breadth  with  which  he  was 
before  acquainted. 

We  have  endeavoured  to  prove  that  a  blind  man  may 
form  a  notion  of  the  visible  extension  and  figure  of  bodies, 


136  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

from  the  relation  which  it  bears  to  their  tangible  extension 
and  figure.  Much  more,  when  this  visible  extension  and 
figure  are  presented  to  his  eye,  will  he  be  able  to  com- 
pare them  with  tangible  extension  and  figure,  and  to  per- 
ceive, that  the  one  has  length  and  breadth  as  well  as  the 
other ;  that  the  one  may  be  bounded  by  lines,  either  straight 
or  curve,  as  well  as  the  other.  And  therefore,  he  will 
perceive,  that  there  may  be  visible  as  well  as  tangible 
circles,  triangles,  quadrilateral  and  multilateral  figures. 
And  although  the  visible  figure  is  coloured,  and  the  tan- 
gible is  not,  they  may,  notwithstanding,  have  the  same 
figure ;  as  two  objects  of  touch  may  have  the  same  figure, 
although  one  is  hot  and  the  other  cold. 

We  have  demonstrated,  that  the  properties  of  visible 
figures  differ  from  those  of  the  plain  figures  which  they 
represent:  but  it  was  observed  at  the  same  time,  that 
when  the  object  is  so  small  as  to  be  seen  distinctly  at  one 
view,  and  is  placed  directly  before  the  eye,  the  difference 
between  the  visible  and  the  tangible  figure  is  too  small  to 
be  perceived  by  the  senses.  Thus,  it  is  true,  that  of  every 
visible  triangle,  the  three  angles  are  greater  than  two  right 
angles ;  whereas,  in  a  plain  triangle,  the  three  angles  are 
equal  to  two  right  angles :  but,  when  the  visible  triangle 
is  small,  its  three  angles  will  be  so  nearly  equal  to  two 
right  angles,  that  the  sense  cannot  discern  the  difference. 
In  like  manner,  the  circumferences  of  unequal  visible 
circles  are  not,  but  those  of  plain  circles  are,  in  the  ratio 
of  their  diameters ;  yet  in  small  visible  circles  the  circum- 
ferences are  very  nearly  in  the  ratio  of  their  diameters  ^ 
and  the  diameter  bears  the  same  ratio  to  the  circumference, 
as  in  a  plain  circle,  very  nearly. 

Hence  it  appears,  that  small  visible  figures  (and  such 
only  can  be  seen  distinctly  at  one  view),  have  not  only  a 
resemblance  to  the  plain  tangible  figures  which  have  the 
same  name,  but  are  to  all  sense  the  same.  So  that  if 
Dr.  Saunderson  had  been  made  to  see,  and  had  attentively 
viewed  the  figures  of  the  first  book  of  Euclid,  he  might,  by 
thought  and  consideration,  without  touching  them,  have 
found  out  that  they  were  the  very  figures  he  was  before  so 
well  acquainted  with  by  touch. 


SECT.  XI.]  OF  SEEING.  13? 

When  plain  figures  are  seen  obliquely,  their  visible 
figure  differs  more  than  the  tangible;  and  the  representa- 
tion which  is  made  to  the  eye,  of  solid  figures,  is  still  more 
imperfect;  because  visible  extension  hath  not  three,  but 
two  dimensions  only.  Yet,  as  it  cannot  be  said  that  an 
exact  picture  of  a  man  hath  no  resemblance  of  the  man, 
or  that  a  perspective  view  of  a  house  hath  no  resemblance 
of  the  house ;  so  it  cannot  be  said,  with  any  propriety,  that 
the  visible  figure  of  a  man,  or  of  a  house,  hath  no  resem- 
blance of  the  objects  which  they  represent. 

Bishop  Berkeley  therefore  proceeds  upon  a  capital 
mistake,  in  supposing  that  there  is  no  resemblance  be- 
twixt the  extension,  figure,  and  position  which  we  see,  and 
that  which  we  perceive  by  touch. 

We  may  further  observe,  that  Bishop  Berkeley's  system, 
with  regard  to  material  things,  must  have  made  him  see  this 
question,  of  the  erect  appearance  of  objects,  in  a  very  dif- 
ferent light  from  that  in  which  it  appears  to  those  who  do 
not  adopt  his  system. 

In  his  theory  of  vision,  he  seems  indeed  to  allow,  that 
there  is  an  external  material  world :  but  he  believed  that 
this  external  world  is  tangible  only,  and  not  visible;  and 
that  the  visible  world,  the  proper  object  of  sight,  is  not 
external  but  in  the  mind.  If  this  is  supposed,  he  that 
affirms  that  he  sees  things  erect  and  not  inverted,  affirms 
that  there  is  a  top  and  a  bottom,  a  right  and  a  left  in  the 
mind.  Now  I  confess  I  am  not  so  well  acquainted  with 
the  topography  of  the  mind  as  to  be  able  to  affix  a  mean- 
ing to  these  words  when  applied  to  it. 

We  shall  therefore  allow,  that  if  visible  objects  were 
not  external,  but  existed  only  in  the  mind,  they  could  have 
no  figure,  or  position,  or  extension;  and! that  it  would  be 
absurd  to  affirm,  that  they  are  seen  either  erect  or  in- 
verted; or  that  there  is  any  resemblance  between  them 
and  the  objects  of  touch.  But  when  we  propose  the 
question,  Why  objects  are  seen  erect  and  not  inverted? 
we  take  it  for  granted,  that  we  are  not  in  Bishop  Berkeley's 
ideal  world,  but  in  that  world  which  men,  who  yield  to  the 
dictates  of  common  sense,  believe  themselves  to  inhabit. 


OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

We  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  objects  both  of  sight  and 
touch,  are  external,  and  have  a  certain  figure,  and  a  cer- 
tain position  with  regard  to  one  another,  and  with  regard 
to  our  bodies,  whether  we  perceive  it  or  not. 

When  I  hold  my  walking-cane  upright  in  my  hand,  and 
look  at  it,  I  take  it  for  granted  that  I  see  and  handle  the 
same  individual  object. — When  I  say  that  I  feel  it  erect, 
my  meaning  is,  that  I  feel  the  head  directed  from  the  ho- 
rizon, and  the  point  directed  towards  it:  and  when  I  say 
that  I  see  it  erect,  I  mean  that  I  see  it  with  the  head  di- 
rected from  the  horizon,  and  the  point  towards  it.  I  con- 
ceive the  horizon  as  a  fixed  object  both  of  sight  and  touch, 
with  relation  to  which,  objects  are  said  to  be  high  or  low, 
erect  or  inverted :  and  when  the  question  is  asked,  Why 
I  see  the  object  erect,  and  not  inverted  ?  it  is  the  same  as 
if  you  should  ask,  Why  I  see  it  in  that  position  which  it 
really  hath  ?  or,  Why  the  eye  shows  the  real  position  of 
objects,  and  doth  not  show  them  in  an  inverted  position, 
as  they  are  seen  by  a  common  astronomical  telescope,  or 
as  their  pictures  are  seen  upon  the  retina  of  an  eye  when 
it  is  dissected  ? 


SECT.  XII. 

The  same  Subject  continued. 

IT  is  impossible  to  give  a  satisfactory  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion, otherwise  than  by  pointing  out  the  laws  of  nature 
which  take  place  in  vision;  for  by  these  the  phenomena 
of  vision  must  be  regulated. 

Therefore  I  answer,  First,  That  by  a  law  of  nature  the 
rays  of  light  proceed  from  every  point  of  the  object  to  the 
pupil  of  the  eye  in  straight  lines.  Secondly,  That  by  the 
laws  of  nature,  the  rays  coming  from  any  one  point  of  the 
object  to  the  various  parts  of  the  pupil  are  so  refracted 
as  to  meet  again  in  one  point  of  the  retina ;  and  the  rays 
from  ditferent  points  of  the  object,  first  crossing  each 
other,  and  then  proceeding  to  as  many  different  points  of 
the  retina,  form  an  inverted  picture  of  the  object. 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  139 

So  far  the  principles  of  optics  carry  us ;  and  experience 
further  assures  us,  that  if  there  is  no  such  picture  upon  the 
retina,  there  is  no  vision ;  and  that  such  as  the  picture 
on  the  retina  is,  such  is  the  appearance  of  the  object  in 
colour  and  figure,  distinctness  or  indistinctness,  brightness 
or  faintness. 

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  pictures  upon  the  retina 
are,  by  the  laws  of  nature,  a  mean  of  vision:  but  in  what 
way  they  accomplish  their  end,  we  are  totally  ignorant. 
Philosophers  conceive,  that  the  impression  made  on  the 
retina  by  the  rays  of  light  is  communicated  to  the  optic 
nerve,  and  by  the  optic  nerve  conveyed  to  some  part  of 
the  brain,  by  them  called  the  sensorium ;  and  that  the  im- 
pression thus  conveyed  to  the  sensorium  is  immediately 
perceived  by  the  mind,  which  is  supposed  to  reside  there. 
But  we  know  nothing  of  the  seat  of  the  soul :  and  we  are 
so  far  from  perceiving  immediately  what  is  transacted  in 
the  brain,  that  of  all  parts  of  the  human  body  we  know 
least  about  it.  It  is  indeed  very  probable  that  the  optic 
nerve  is  an  instrument  of  vision  no  less  necessary  than  the 
retina ;  and  that  some  impression  is  made  upon  it,  by 
means  of  the  pictures  on  the  retina.  But  of  what  kind 
the  impression  is,  we  know  nothing. 

There  is  not  the  least  probability  that  there  is  any  pic- 
ture or  image  of  the  object  either  in  the  optic  nerve  or 
brain.  The  pictures  on  the  retina  are  formed  by  the  rays 
of  light ;  and  whether  we  suppose,  with  some,  that  their 
impulse  upon  the  retina  causes  some  vibration  of  the  fibres 
of  the  optic  nerve ;  or,  with  others,  that  it  gives  motion  to 
some  subtile  fluid  contained  in  the  nerve ;  neither  that  vi- 
bration nor  this  motion  can  resemble  the  visible  object 
which  is  presented  to  the  mind.  Nor  is  there  any  proba- 
bility that  the  mind  perceives  the  pictures  upon  the  retina. 
These  pictures  are  no  more  objects  of  our  perception  than 
the  brain  is,  or  the  optic  nerve.  No  man  ever  saw  the 
pictures  in  his  own  eye,  nor  indeed  the  pictures  in  the  eye 
of  another,  until  it  was  taken  out  of  the  head,  and  duly- 
prepared. 

It  is  very  strange,  that  philosophers  of  all  ages  should 


140  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

have  agreed  in  this  notion,  That  the  images  of  external 
objects  are  conveyed  by  the  organs  of  sense  to  the  brain, 
and  are  there  perceived  by  the  mind.  Nothing  can  be 
more  unphilosophical.  For,  first,  This  notion  hath  no 
foundation  in  fact  and  observation.  Of  all  the  organs  of 
sense,  the  eye  only,  as  far  as  we  can  discover,  forms  any 
kind  of  image  of  its  object;  and  the  images  formed  by  the 
eye  are  not  in  the  brain,  but  only  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye ; 
nor  are  they  at  all  perceived  or  felt  by  the  mind.  Se- 
condly, It  is  as  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  mind  per- 
ceives images  on  the  brain,  as  how  it  perceives  things 
more  distant.  If  any  man  will  show  how  the  mind  may 
perceive  images  in  the  brain,  I  will  undertake  to  show  how 
it  may  perceive  the  most  distant  objects :  for  if  we  give 
eyes  to  the  mind,  to  perceive  what  is  transacted  at  home 
in  its  dark  chamber,  why  may  we  not  make  these  eyes  a 
little  longer  sighted  ?  and  then  we  shall  have  no  occasion 
for  that  unphilosophical  fiction  of  images  in  the  brain.  In 
a  word,  the  manner  and  mechanism  of  the  brain's  percep- 
tion is  quite  beyond  our  comprehension :  and  this  way  of 
explaining  it  by  images  in  the  brain  seems  to  be  founded 
upon  very  gross  notions  of  the  mind  and  its  operations; 
as  if  the  supposed  images  in  the  brain,  by  a  kind  of  contact, 
formed  similar  impressions  or  images  of  objects  upon  the 
mind,  of  which  impressions  it  is  supposed  to  be  conscious. 

We  have  endeavoured  to  show,  throughout  the  course 
of  this  inquiry,  that  the  impressions  made  upon  the  mind, 
by  means  of  the  five  senses,  have  not  the  least  resemblance 
to  the  objects  of  sense :  and  therefore,  as  we  see  no  sha- 
dow of  evidence  that  there  are  any  such  images  in  the 
brain,  so  we  see  no  purpose,  in  philosophy,  that  the  sup- 
position of  them  can  answer.  Since  the  picture  upon  the 
retina,  therefore,  is  neither  itself  seen  by  the  mind,  nor 
produces  any  impression  upon  the  brain  or  sensorium, 
which  is  seen  by  the  mind,  nor  makes  any  impression  upon 
the  mind  that  resembles  the  object,  it  may  still  be  asked, 
How  this  picture  upon  the  retina  causes  vision  ? 

Before  we  answer  this  question,  it  is  proper  to  observe, 
that  in  the  operations  of  the  mind,  as  well  as  in  those  of 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  141 

bodies,  we  must  often  be  satisfied  with  knowing  that  cer- 
tain things  are  connected,  and  invariably  follow  one  an- 
other, without  being  able  to  discover  the  chain  that  goes 
between  them.  It  is  to  such  connexions  that  we  give  the 
name  of  latcs  of  nature  ;  and  when  we  say  that  one  thing 
produces  another  by  a  law  of  nature,  this  signifies  no  more, 
but  that  one  thing,  which  we  call  in  popular  language,  the 
cause,  is  constantly  and  invariably  followed  by  another, 
which  we  call  the  effect ;  and  that  we  know  not  how  they 
are  connected.  Thus,  we  see  it  is  a  fact,  that  bodies  gra- 
vitate towards  bodies ;  and  that  this  gravitation  is  regu- 
lated by  certain  mathematical  proportions,  according  to 
the  distance  of  the  bodies  from  each  other,  and  their  quan- 
tities of  matter.  Being  unable  to  discover  the  cause  of  this 
gravitation,  and  presuming  that  it  is  the  immediate  opera- 
tion, either  of  the  Author  of  nature,  or  of  some  subordi- 
nate cause  which  we  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  reach, 
we  call  it  a  law  of  nature.  If  any  philosopher  should 
hereafter  be  so  happy  as  to  discover  the  cause  of  gravita- 
tion, this  can  only  be  done  by  discovering  some  more  ge- 
neral law  of  nature,  of  which  the  gravitation  of  bodies  is  a 
necessary  consequence.  In  every  chain  of  natural  causes, 
the  highest  link  is  the  primary  law  of  nature,  and  the 
highest  link  which  we  can  trace  by  just  induction  is  either 
this  primary  law  of  nature,  or  a  necessary  consequence  of 
it.  To  trace  out  the  laws  of  nature,  by  induction  from 
the  phenomena  of  nature,  is  all  that  true  philosophy  aims 
at,  and  all  that  it  can  ever  reach. 

There  are  laws  of  nature  by  which  the  operations  of  the 
mind  are  regulated;  there  are  also  laws  of  nature  that 
govern  the  material  system :  and  as  the  latter  are  the  ulti- 
mate conclusions  which  the  human  faculties  can  reach  in 
the  philosophy  of  bodies,  so  the  former  are  the  ultimate 
conclusions  we  can  reach  in  the  philosophy  of  minds. 

To  return,  therefore,  to  the  question  above  proposed, 
we  may  see,  from  what  hath  been  just  now  observed,  that 
it  amounts  to  this:  By  what  law  of  nature  is  a  picture  upon 
the  retina  the  mean  or  occasion  of  my  seeing  an  external 
object  of  the  same  figure  and  colour,  in  a  contrary  position, 
and  in  a  certain  direction  from  the  eye  ? 


142  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

It  will,  without  doubt,  be  allowed,  that  I  see  the  whole 
object  in  the  same  manner  and  by  the  same  law  by  which 
I  see  any  one  point  of  it.  Now,  I  know  it  to  be  a  fact, 
that,  in  direct  vision,  I  see  every  point  of  the  object  in  the 
direction  of  the  right  line  that  passeth  from  the  centre  of 
the  eye  to  that  point  of  the  object:  and  I  know  likewise, 
from  optics,  that  the  ray  of  light  that  comes  to  the  centre 
of  my  eye  passes  on  to  the  retina  in  the  same  direction. 
Hence  it  appears  to  be  a  fact,  that  every  point  of  the  ob- 
ject is  seen  in  the  direction  of  a  right  line  passing  from  the 
picture  of  that  point  on  the  retina  through  the  centre  of  the 
eye.  As  this  is  a  fact  that  holds  universally  and  inva- 
riably, it  must  either  be  a  law  of  nature,  or  the  necessary 
consequence  of  some  more  general  law  of  nature.  And 
according  to  the  just  rules  of  philosophizing,  we  may  hold 
it  for  a  law  of  nature,  until  some  more  general  law  be  dis- 
covered, whereof  it  is  a  necessary  consequence,  which  I 
suspect  can  never  be  done. 

Thus  we  see,  that  the  phenomena  of  vision  lead  us  by  the 
hand  to  a  law  of  nature,  or  a  law  of  our  constitution,  of 
which  law  our  seeing  objects  erect  by  inverted  images  is  a 
necessary  consequence.  For  it  necessarily  follows,  from 
the  law  we  have  mentioned,  that  the  object  whose  picture  is 
lowest  on  the  retina  must  be  seen  in  the  highest  direction 
from  the  eye ;  and  that  the  object  whose  picture  is  on  the 
right  of  the  retina  must  be  seen  on  the  left ;  so  that  if  the 
pictures  had  been  erect  in  the  retina,  we  should  have  seen 
the  object  inverted.  My  chief  intention  in  handling  this 
question  was  to  point  out  this  law  of  nature;  which,  as  it 
is  a  part  of  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  belongs  pro- 
perly to  the  subject  of  this  inquiry.  For  this  reason  I  shall 
make  some  further  remarks  upon  it,  after  doing  justice  to  the 
ingenious  Dr.  Porterfield,  who,  long  ago,  in  the  Medical 
Essays,  or  more  lately,  in  his  Treatise  of  the  Eye,  pointed 
out  as  a  primary  law  of  our  nature,  That  a  visible  object 
appears  in  the  direction  of  a  right  line  perpendicular  to  the 
retina  at  that  point  where  its  image  is  painted.  If  lines  drawn 
from  the  centre  of  the  eye  to  all  parts  of  the  retina  be  per- 
pendicular to  it,  as  they  must  be  very  nearly,  this  coincides 
with  the  law  we  have  mentioned,  and  is  the  same  in  other 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  14:} 

words.  In  order,  therefore,  that  we  may  have  a  more  distinct 
notion  of  this  law  of  our  constitution,  we  may  observe, 

1.  That  we  can  give  no  reason  why  the  retina  is,  of  all 
parts  of  the  body,  the  only  one  on  which  pictures  made  by 
the  rays  of  light  cause  vision ;  and  therefore  we  must  re- 
solve this  solely  into  a  law  of  our  constitution.  We  may 
form  such  pictures  by  means  of  optical  glasses  upon  the 
hand,  or  upon  any  other  part  of  the  body;  but  they  are 
not  felt,  nor  do  they  produce  any  thing  like  vision.  A 
picture  upon  the  retina  is  as  little  felt  as  one  upon  the 
hand ;  but  it  produces  vision ;  for  no  other  reason  that  we 
know,  but  because  it  is  destined  by  the  wisdom  of  nature 
to  this  purpose.  The  vibrations  of  the  air  strike  upon  the 
eye,  the  palate,  and  the  olfactory  membrane,  with  the 
same  force  as  upon  the  membrana  tympani  of  the  ear : 
the  impression  they  make  upon  the  last  produces  the  sen- 
sation of  sound ;  but  their  impression  upon  any  of  the 
former  produces  no  sensation  at  all.  This  may  be  ex- 
tended to  all  the  senses,  whereof  each  hath  its  peculiar 
laws,  according  to  which,  the  impressions  made  upon  the 
organ  of  that  sense  produce  sensations  or  perceptions  in 
the  mind  that  cannot  be  produced  by  impressions  made 
upon  any  other  organ. 

2.  We  may  observe,  that  the  laws  of  perception,  by  the 
different  senses,  are  very  different,  not  only  in  respect  of 
the  nature  of  the  objects  perceived  by  them,  but  likewise 
in  respect  of  the  notices  they  give  us  of  the  distance  and 
situation  of  the  object.  In  all  of  them  the  object  is  con- 
ceived to  be  external,  and  to  have  real  existence,  inde- 
pendent of  our  perception :  but  in  one,  the  distance,  figure, 
and  situation  of  the  object,  are  all  presented  to  the  mind ; 
in  another,  the  figure  and  situation,  but  not  the  distance; 
and  in  others,  neither  figure,  situation,  nor  distance.  In 
vain  do  we  attempt  to  account  for  these  varieties  in  the 
manner  of  perception  by  the  different  senses,  from  prin- 
ciples of  anatomy  or  natural  philosophy.  They  must  at 
last  be  resolved  into  the  will  of  our  Maker,  who  intended 
that  our  powers  of  perception  should  have  certain  limits, 
and  adapted  the  organs  of  perception,  and  the  laws  of  na- 
ture by  which  they  operate,  to  his  wise  purposes. 


144  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  Vl. 

When  we  hear  an  unusual  sound,  the  sensation  indeed 
is  in  the  mind,  but  we  know  that  there  is  something  ex- 
ternal that  produced  this  sound.  At  the  same  time,  our 
hearing  does  not  inform  us,  whether  the  sounding  body  is 
near  or  at  a  distance,  in  this  direction  or  that ;  and  there- 
fore we  look  round  to  discover  it. 

If  any  new  phenomenon  appears  in  the  heavens,  we  sec 
exactly  its  colour,  its  apparent  place,  magnitude,  and 
figure,  but  we  see  not  its  distance.  It  may  be  in  the  at- 
mosphere, it  may  be  among  the  planets,  or  it  may  be  ii< 
the  sphere  of  the  fixed  stars,  for  any  thing  the  eye  can  de- 
termine. 

The  testimony  of  the  sense  of  touch  reaches  only  to  ob- 
jects that  are  contiguous  to  the  organ,  but  with  regard  to 
them,  is  more  precise  and  determinate.  When  we  feel  a 
body  with  our  hand,  we  know  the  figure,  distance,  and  po- 
sition of  it,  as  well  as  whether  it  is  rough  or  smooth,  hard 
or  soft,  hot  or  cold. 

The  sensations  of  touch,  of  seeing,  and  hearing,  are  all 
in  the  mind,  and  can  have  no  existence  but  when  they  are 
perceived.  How  do  they  all  constantly  and  invariably 
suggest  the  conception  and  belief  of  external  objects, 
which  exist  whether  they  are  perceived  or  not  ?  No  philo- 
sopher can  give  any  other  answer  to  this,  but  that  such  is 
the  constitution  of  our  nature.  How  do  we  know,  that 
the  object  of  touch  is  at  the  fingers  end,  and  no  where 
else  ?  That  the  object  of  sight  is  in  such  a  direction  from 
the  eye,  and  in  no  other,  but  may  be  at  any  distance?  and 
that  the  object  of  hearing  may  be  at  any  distance,  and 
in  any  direction  ?  Not  by  custom  surely ;  not  by  reason- 
ing, or  comparing  ideas,  but  by  the  constitution  of  our  na- 
ture. How  do  we  perceive  visible  objects  in  the  direction 
of  right  lines  perpendicular  to  that  part  of  the  retina  on 
which  the  rays  strike,  while  we  do  not  perceive  the  ob- 
jects of  hearing  in  lines  perpendicular  to  the  membrana 
tympani,  upon  which  the  vibrations  of  the  air  strike  ?  Be- 
cause such  are  the  laws  of  our  nature.  How  do  we  know 
the  parts  of  our  bodies  affected  by  particular  pains  ?  Not 
by  experience  or  by  reasoning,  but  by  the  constitution  of 
nature.  The  sensation  of  pain  is,  no  doubt,  in  the  mind, 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  145 

and  cannot  be  said  to  have  any  relation,  from  its  own  na- 
ture, to  any  part  of  the  body :  but  this  sensation,  by  our 
constitution,  gives  a  perception  of  some  particular  part  of 
the  body,  whose  disorder  causes  the  uneasy  sensation.  If 
it  were  not  so,  a  man  who  never  before  felt  either  the  gout 
or  the  toothach,  when  he  is  first  seized  with  the  gout  in 
his  toe,  might  mistake  it  for  the  toothach. 

Every  sense,  therefore,  hath  its  peculiar  laws  and  limits, 
by  the  constitution  of  our  nature :  and  one  of  the  laws  of 
siffht  is,  that  we  always  see  an  object  in  the  direction  of  the 
right  line  passing  from  its  image  on  the  retina  through  the 
centre  of  the  eye. 

3.  Perhaps  some  readers  will  imagine,  that  it  is  easier, 
and  will  answer  the  purpose  as  well,  to  conceive  a  law  of 
nature,  by  which  we  shall  always  see  objects  in  the  place 
in  which  they  are,  and  in  their  true  position,  without  having 
recourse  to  images  on  the  retina,  or  to  the  optical  centre 
of  the  eye. 

To  this  I  answer,  that  nothing  can  be  a  law  of  nature 
which  is  contrary  to  fact.  The  laws  of  nature  are  the 
most  general  facts  we  can  discover  in  the  operations  of 
nature.  Like  other  facts,  they  are  not  to  be  hit  upon  by 
a  happy  conjecture,  but  justly  deduced  from  observation  : 
Like  other  general  facts,  they  are  not  to  be  drawn  from  a 
few  particulars,  but  from  a  copious,  patient,  and  cautious 
induction.  That  we  see  things  always  in  their  true  place 
and  position  is  not  fact ;  and  therefore  it  can  be  no  law  of 
nature.  In  a  plain  mirror,  I  see  myself,  and  other  things, 
in  places  very  different  from  those  they  really  occupy. 
And  so  it  happens  in  every  instance,  wherein  the  rays 
coming  from  the  object  are  either  reflected  or  refracted 
before  falling  upon  the  eye.  Those  who  know  any  thing 
of  optics  know  that,  in  all  such  cases,  the  object  is  seen 
in  the  direction  of  a  line  passing  from  the  centre  of  the  eye 
to  the  point  where  the  rays  were  last  reflected  or  refracted ; 
and  that  upon  this  all  the  powers  of  the  telescope  and  mi- 
croscope depend. 

Shall  we  say,  then,  that  it  is  a  law  of  nature,  that  the 

H 


146  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

object  is  seen  in  the  direction  which  the  rays  have  when 
they  fall  on  the  eye,  or  rather  in  the  direction  contrary  to 
that  of  the  rays  when  they  fall  upon  the  eye  ?  No.  This  is 
not  true,  and  therefore  it  is  no  law  of  nature.  For  the  rays, 
from  any  one  point  of  the  object,  come  to  all  parts  of  the 
pupil;  and  therefore  must  have  different  directions:  but 
we  see  the  object  only  in  one  of  these  directions,  to  wit, 
in  the  direction  of  the  rays  that  come  to  the  centre  of  the 
eye.  And  this  holds  true,  even  when  the  rays  that  should 
pass  through  the  centre  are  stopped,  and  the  object  is  seen 
by  rays  that  pass  at  a  distance  from  the  centre. 

Perhaps  it  may  still  be  imagined,  that  although  we  are 
not  made  so  as  to  see  objects  always  in  their  true  place, 
nor  so  as  to  see  them  precisely  in  the  direction  of  the  rays 
when  they  fall  upon  the  cornea ;  yet  we  may  be  so  made 
as  to  see  the  object  in  the  direction  which  the  rays  have 
when  they  fall  upon  the  retina,  after  they  have  undergone 
all  their  refractions  in  the  eye,  that  is,  in  the  direction 
in  which  the  rays  pass  from  the  crystalline  to  the  retina. 
But  neither  is  this  true ;  and  consequently  it  is  no  law  of 
our  constitution.  In  order  to  see  that  it  is  not  true,  we 
must  conceive  all  the  rays  that  pass  from  the  crystalline  to 
one  point  of  the  retina,  as  forming  a  small  cone,  whose 
base  is  upon  the  back  of  the  crystalline,  and  whose  vertex 
is  a  point  of  the  retina.  It  is  evident,  that  the  rays  which 
form  the  picture  in  this  point  have  various  directions,  even 
after  they  pass  the  crystalline;  yet  the  object  is  seen  only 
in  one  of  these  directions,  to  wit,  hi  the  direction  of  the 
rays  that  come  from  the  centre  of  the  eye.  Nor  is  this 
owing  to  any  particular  virtue  in  the  central  rays,  or  in  the 
centre  itself;  for  the  central  rays  may  be  stopped.  When 
they  are  stopped,  the  image  will  be  formed  upon  the  same 
point  of  the  retina  as  before,  by  rays  that  are  not  central, 
nor  have  the  same  direction  which  the  central  rays  had : 
and,  in  this  case,  the  object  is  seen  in  the  same  direction 
as  before,  although  there  are  now  no  rays  coming  in  that 
direction. 

From  this  induction  we  conclude,  That  our  seeing  an  ob- 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  147 

ject  in  that  particular  direction  in  which  we  do  see  it  is  not 
owing  to  any  law  of  nature  by  which  we  are  made  to  see 
it  in  the  direction  of  the  rays,  either  before  their  refractions 
in  the  eye,  or  after,  but  to  a  law  of  our  nature,  by  which 
we  see  the  object  in  the  direction  of  the  right  line  that 
passeth  from  the  picture  of  the  object  upon  the  retina  to 
the  centre  of  the  eye. 

The  facts  upon  which  I  ground  this  induction  are  taken 
from  some  curious  experiments  of  Scheiner,  in  his  Funda- 
ment. Optic,  quoted  by  Dr.  Porterfield,  and  confirmed 
by  his  experience.  I  have  also  repeated  these  experi- 
ments, and  found  them  to  answer.  As  they  are  easily 
made,  and  tend  to  illustrate  and  confirm  the  law  of  nature 
I  have  mentioned,  I  shall  recite  them  as  briefly  and  dis- 
tinctly as  I  can. 

Experiment  1.  Let  a  very  small  object,  such  as  the 
head  of  a  pin,  well  illuminated,  be  fixed  at  such  a  distance 
from  the  eye,  as  to  be  beyond  the  nearest  limit,  and  within 
the  farthest  limit  of  distinct  vision :  For  a  young  eye,  not 
near-sighted,  the  object  may  be  placed  at  the  distance  of 
eighteen  inches.  Let  the  eye  be  kept  steadily  in  one  place, 
and  take  a  distinct  view  of  the  object.  We  know  from 
the  principles  of  optics,  that  the  rays  from  any  one  point  of 
this  object,  whether  they  pass  through  the  centre  of  the 
eye,  or  at  any  distance  from  the  centre  which  the  breadth 
of  the  pupil  will  permit,  do  all  unite  again  in  one  point  of 
the  retina.  We  know  also,  that  these  rays  have  different 
directions,  both  before  they  fall  upon  the  eye,  and  after 
they  pass  through  the  crystalline. 

Now,  we  can  see  the  object  by  any  one  small  parcel  of 
these  rays,  excluding  the  rest,  by  looking  through  a  small 
pin-hole  in  a  card.  Moving  this  pin-hole  over  the  various 
parts  of  the  pupil,  we  can  see  the  object,  first  by  the  rays 
that  pass  above  the  centre  of  the  eye,  then  by  the  central 
rays,  then  by  the  rays  that  pass  below  the  centre,  and  in 
like  manner  by  the  rays  that  pass  on  the  right  and  left  of 
the  centre.  Thus,  we  view  this  object  successively,  by 
rays  that  are  central,  and  by  rays  that  are  not  central ;  by 
rays  that  have  different  directions,  and  are  variously  in- 

H2 


148  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [cHAP.  VI. 

clined  to  each  other,  both  when  they  fall  upon  the  cornea, 
and  when  they  fall  upon  the  retina;  but  always  by  rays 
which  fall  upon  the  same  point  of  the  retina.  And  what 
is  the  event?  It  is  this,  that  the  object  is  seen  in  the 
same  individual  direction,  whether  seen  by  all  these  rays 
together,  or  by  any  one  parcel  of  them. 

Experiment  2.  Let  the  object  above  mentioned  be  now 
placed  within  the  nearest  limit  of  distinct  vision,  that  is, 
for  an  eye  that  is  not  near-sighted,  at  the  distance  of  four 
or  five  inches.  We  know,  that  in  this  case,  the  rays 
coming  from  one  point  of  the  object,  do  not  meet  in  one 
point  of  the  retina,  but  spread  over  a  small  circular  spot 
of  it ;  the  central  rays  occupying  the  centre  of  this  circle, 
the  rays  that  pass  above  the  centre  occupying  the  upper 
part  of  the  circular  spot,  and  so  of  the  rest.  And  we 
know  that  the  object  is  in  this  case  seen  confused,  eveiy 
point  of  it  being  seen,  not  in  one,  but  in  various  directions. 
To  remedy  this  confusion,  we  look  at  the  object  through 
the  pin  hole,  and  while  we  move  the  pin-hole  over  the 
various  parts  of  the  pupil,  the  object  does  not  keep  its 
place,  but  seems  to  move  in  a  contrary  direction. 

It  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  when  the  pin-hole  is  car- 
ried upwards  over  the  pupil,  the  picture  of  the  object  is 
carried  upwards  upon  the  retina,  and  the  object  at  the 
same  time  seems  to  move  downwards,  so  as  to  be  always 
in  the  right  line  passing  from  the  picture  through  the 
centre  of  the  eye.  It  is  likewise  to  be  observed,  that  the 
rays  which  form  the  upper  and  the  lower  pictures  upon  the 
retina,  do  not  cross  each  other  as  in  ordinary  vision;  yet 
still  the  higher  picture  shows  the  object  lower,  and  the 
lower  picture  shows  the  object  higher,  in  the  same  manner 
as  when  the  rays  cross  each  other.  Whence  we  may 
observe,  by  the  way,  that  this  phenomenon  of  our  seeing 
objects  in  a  position  contrary  to  that  of  their  pictures  upon 
the  retina  does  not  depend  upon  the  crossing  of  the  rays, 
as  Kepler  and  Des  Cartes  conceived. 

Experiment  3.  Other  things  remaining  as  in  the  last 
experiment;  make  three  pin-holes  in  a  straight  line,  so  near 
that  the  rays  coming  from  the  object  through  all  the  holes 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  149 

may  enter  the  pupil  at  the  same  time.  In  this  case  we 
have  a  very  curious  phenomenon ;  for  the  object  is  seen 
triple  with  one  eye.  And  if  you  make  more  holes  within 
the  breadth  of  the  pupil,  you  will  see  as  many  objects  as 
there  are  holes.  However,  we  shall  suppose  them  only 
three ;  one  on  the  right,  one  in  the  middle,  and  one  on  the 
left;  in  which  case,  you  see  three  objects  standing  in  a 
line  from  right  to  left. 

It  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  there  are  three  pictures 
on  the  retina ;  that  on  the  left  being  formed  by  the  rays 
which  pass  on  the  left  of  the  eye's  centre;  the  middle 
picture  being  formed  by  the  central  rays,  and  the  right 
hand  picture  by  the  rays  which  pass  on  the  right  of  the 
eye's  centre.  It  is  farther  to  be  observed,  that  the  object 
which  appears  on  the  right  is  not  that  which  is  seen 
through  the  hole  on  the  right,  but  that  which  is  seen 
through  the  hole  on  the  left;  and  in  like  manner,  the  left 
hand  object  is  seen  through  the  hole  on  the  right,  as  is 
easily  proved  by  covering  the  holes  successively.  So 
that  whatever  is  the  direction  of  the  rays  which  form  the 
right  hand  and  left  hand  pictures,  still  the  right  hand  pic- 
ture shows  a  left  hand  object,  and  the  left  hand  picture 
shows  a  right  hand  object. 

Experiment  4.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  two  last  expe- 
riments may  be  varied,  by  placing  the  object  beyond  the 
farthest  limit  of  distinct  vision.  In  order  to  make  this 
experiment,  I  looked  at  a  candle  at  the  distance  of  ten 
feet,  and  put  the  eye  of  my  spectacles  behind  the  card, 
that  the  rays  from  the  same  point  of  the  object  might  meet, 
and  cross  each  other  before  they  reached  the  retina.  In 
this  case,  as  in  the  former,  the  candle  was  seen  triple 
through  the  three  pin-holes ;  but  the  candle  on  the  right 
was  seen  through  the  hole  on  the  right;  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, the  left  hand  candle  was  seen  through  the  hole  on 
the  left.  In  this  experiment,  it  is  evident  from  the  princi- 
ples of  optics,  that  the  rays  forming  the  several  pictures  on 
the  retina  cross  each  other  a  little  before  they  reach  the 
retina ;  and  therefore  the  left  hand  picture  is  formed  by 
the  rays  which  pass  through  the  hole  on  the  right ;  so  that 


150  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  Vf* 

the  position  of  the  pictures  is  contrary  to  that  of  the  holes 
by  which  they  are  formed ;  and  therefore  is  also  contrary 
to  that  of  their  objects,  as  we  have  found  it  to  be  in  the 
former  experiments. 

These  experiments  exhibit  several  uncommon  pheno- 
mena, that  regard  the  apparent  place,  and  the  direction  of 
visible  objects  from  the  eye ;  phenomena  that  seem  to  be 
most  contrary  to  the  common  rules  of  vision.  When  we 
look  at  the  same  time  through  three  holes  that  are  in  a  right 
line,  and  at  certain  distances  from  each  other,  we  expect 
that  the  objects  seen  through  them  should  really  be,  and 
should  appear  to  be,  at  a  distance  from  each  other :  Yet, 
by  the  first  experiment  we  may,  through  three  such  holes, 
see  the  same  object  and  the  same  point  of  that  object;  and 
through  all  the  three  it  appears  in  the  same  individual 
place  and  direction. 

When  the  rays  of  light  come  from  the  object  in  right 
lines  to  the  eye,  without  any  reflection,  inflection,  or 
refraction,  we  expect  that  the  object  should  appear  in  its 
real  and  proper  direction  from  the  eye;  and  so  it  com- 
monly does :  but  in  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  experi- 
ments, we  see  the  object  in  a  direction  which  is  not  its 
true  and  real  direction  from  the  eye,  although  the  rays 
come  from  the  object  to  the  eye,  without  any  inflection, 
reflection,  or  refraction. 

When  both  the  object  and  the  eye  are  fixed  without  the 
least  motion,  and  the  medium  unchanged,  we  expect  that 
the  object  should  appear  to  rest,  and  keep  the  same  place  : 
Yet  in  the  second  and  fourth  experiments,  when  both  the 
eye  and  the  object  are  at  rest,  and  the  medium  unchanged, 
we  make  the  object  appear  to  move  upwards  or  down- 
wards, or  in  any  direction  we  please. 

When  we  look  at  the  same  time,  and  with  the  same  eye, 
through  holes  that  stand  in  a  line  from  right  to  left,  we 
expect  that  the  object  seen  through  the  left  hand  hole 
should  appear  on  the  left,  and  the  object  seen  through  the 
right  hand  hole  should  appear  on  the  right :  Yet,  in  the 
third  experiment,  we  find  the  direct  contrary. 

Although   many  instances   occur  in  seeing  the  same 


SECT.  XII.]  OF  SEEING.  151 

object  double  with  two  eyes,  we  always  expect  that  it 
should  appear  single  when  seen  only  by  one  eye :  Yet  in 
the  second  and  fourth  experiments,  we  have  instances 
wherein  the  same  object  may  appear  double,  triple,  or 
quadruple  to  one  eye,  without  the  help  of  a  polyhedron  or 
multiplying  glass. 

All  these  extraordinary  phenomena,  regarding  the  di- 
rection of  visible  objects  from  the  eye,  as  well  as  those 
that  are  common  and  ordinary,  lead  us  to  that  law  of 
nature  which  I  have  mentioned,  and  are  the  necessary  con- 
sequences of  it.  And,  as  there  is  no  probability  that  we 
shall  ever  be  able  to  give  a  reason  why  pictures  upon  the 
retina  make  us  see  external  objects  any  more  than  pictures 
upon  the  hand  or  upon  the  cheek ;  or,  that  we  shall  ever 
be  able  to  give  a  reason  why  we  see  the  object  in  the 
direction  of  a  line  passing  from  its  picture  through  the 
centre  of  the  eye,  rather  than  in  any  other  direction :  I  am 
therefore  apt  to  look  upon  this  law  as  a  primary  law  of 
our  constitution. 

To  prevent  being  misunderstood,  I  beg  the  reader  to 
observe,  that  I  do  not  mean  to  affirm,  that  the  picture 
upon  the  retina  will  make  us  see  an  object  in  the  direction 
mentioned,  or  in  any  direction,  unless  the  optic  nerve  and 
the  other  more  immediate  instruments  of  vision  be  sound, 
and  perform  their  function.  We  know  not  well  what  is 
the  office  of  the  optic  nerve,  nor  in  what  manner  it  per- 
forms that  office ;  but  that  it  hath  some  part  in  the  faculty 
of  seeing  seems  to  be  certain ;  because  in  an  amaurosis, 
which  is  believed  to  be  a  disorder  of  the  optic  nerve,  the 
pictures  on  the  retina  are  clear  and  distinct,  and  yet  there 
is  no  vision. 

We  know  still  less  of  the  use  and  function  of  the  chorid 
membrane;  but  it  seems  likewise  to  be  necessary  to 
vision :  for  it  is  well  known,  that  pictures  upon  that  part 
of  the  retina  where  it  is  not  covered  by  the  chorid,  I 
mean  at  the  entrance  of  the  optic  nerve,  produce  no  vision, 
any  more  than  a  picture  upon  the  hand.  We  acknow- 
ledge, therefore,  that  the  retina  is  not  the  last  and  most 
immediate  instrument  of  the  mind  in  vision.  There  are 


152  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

other  material  organs,  whose  operation  is  necessary  to 
seeing,  even  after  the  pictures  upon  the  retina  are  formed. 
If  ever  we  come  to  know  the  structure  and  use  of  the 
chorid  membrane,  the  optic  nerve,  and  the  brain,  and 
what  impressions  are  made  upon  them  by  means  of  the 
pictures  on  the  retina,  some  more  links  of  the  chain  may 
be  brought  within  our  view,  and  a  more  general  law  of 
vision  discovered :  but  while  we  know  so  little  of  the 
nature  and  office  of  these  more  immediate  instruments  of 
vision,  it  seems  to  be  impossible  to  trace  its  laws  beyond 
the  pictures  upon  the  retina. 

Neither  do  I  pretend  to  say,  that  there  may  not  be  dis- 
eases of  the  eye,  or  accidents,  which  may  occasion  our 
seeing  objects  in  a  direction  somewhat  different  from  that 
mentioned  above.  I  shall  beg  leave  to  mention  one  in- 
stance of  this  kind  that  concerns  myself. 

In  May,  1761,  being  occupied  in  making  an  exact 
meridian,  in  order  to  observe  the  transit  of  Venus,  I  rashly 
directed  to  the  sun,  by  my  right  eye,  the  cross  hairs  of  a 
small  telescope.  I  had  often  done  the  like  in  my  younger 
days  with  impunity;  but  I  suffered  by  it  at  last,  which  I 
mention  as  a  warning  to  others. 

I  soon  observed  a  remarkable  dimness  in  that  eye ;  and 
for  many  weeks,  when  I  was  in  the  dark,  or  shut  my  eyes, 
there  appeared  before  the  right  eye  a  lucid  spot,  which 
trembled  much  like  the  image  of  the  sun  seen  by  reflection 
from  water.  This  appearance  grew  fainter  and  less  fre- 
quent by  degrees;  so  that  now  there  are  seldom  any 
remains  of  it.  But  some  other  very  sensible  effects  of 
this  hurt  still  remain.  For,  first,  The  sight  of  the  right 
eye  continues  to  be  more  dim  than  that  of  the  left.  Se- 
condly, The  nearest  limit  of  distinct  vision  is  more  remote 
in  the  right  eye  than  in  the  other;  although,  before  the 
time  mentioned,  they  were  equal  in  both  these  respects,  as 
I  had  found  by  many  trials.  But,  thirdly,  what  I  chiefly 
intended  to  mention,  is,  That  a  straight  line,  in  some  cir- 
cumstances, appears  to  the  right  eye  to  have  a  curvature 
in  it.  Thus,  when  I  look  upon  a  music  book,  and,  shut- 
ting up  my  left  eye,  direct  the  right  to  a  point  of  the  middle 


SECT.  XII.]  OP  SEEING. 

line  of  the  five  which  compose  the  staff  of  music ;  the  mid- 
dle line  appears  dim,  indeed,  at  the  point  to  which  the  eye 
is  directed,  but  straight;  at  the  same  time  the  two  lines 
above  it,  and  the  two  below  it,  appear  to  be  bent  out- 
wards, and  to  be  more  distant  from  each  other,  and  from 
the  middle  line,  than  at  other  parts  of  the  staff,  to  which  the 
eye  is  not  directed.  Fourthly,  Although  I  have  repeated 
this  experiment  times  innumerable,  within  these  sixteen 
months,  I  do  not  find  that  custom  and  experience  takes 
away  this  appearance  of  curvature  in  straight  lines. 
Lastly,  This  appearance  of  curvature  is  perceptible  when 
I  look  with  the  right  eye  only,  but  not  when  I  look  with 
both  eyes ;  yet  I  see  better  with  both  eyes  together  than 
even  with  the  left  eye  alone. 

I  have  related  this  fact  minutely  as  it  is,  without  regard 
to  any  hypothesis  ;  because  I  think  such  uncommon  facts 
deserve  to  be  recorded.  I  shall  leave  it  to  others  to  con- 
jecture the  cause  of  this  appearance.  To  me  it  seems 
most  probable,  that  a  small  part  of  the  retina  towards  the 
centre  is  shrunk,  and  that  thereby  the  contiguous  parts  are 
drawn  nearer  to  the  centre,  and  to  one  another,  than  they 
were  before ;  and  that  objects  whose  images  fall  on  these 
parts  appear  at  that  distance  from  each  other  which  cor- 
responds, not  to  the  interval  of  the  parts  in  their  present 
preternatural  contraction,  but  to  their  interval  in  their  na- 
tural and  sound  state. 


SECT.  XIII. 

Of  seeing  Objects  single  icith  two  Eyes. 

ANOTHER  phenomenon  of  vision  which  deserves  atten- 
tion is  our  seeing  objects  single  with  two  eyes.  There 
are  two  pictures  of  the  object,  one  on  each  retina ;  and 
each  picture  by  itself  makes  us  see  an  object  in  a  certain 
direction  from  the  eye ;  yet  both  together  commonly  make 
us  see  only  one  object.  All  the  accounts  or  solutions  of 
this  phenomenon,  given  by  anatomists  and  philosophers, 
seem  to  be  unsatisfactory.  I  shall  pass  over  tjhe  opinions 

H  3 


154  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

of  Galen,  of  Gassendus,  of  Baptista  Porta,  and  of  Ro- 
hault.     The  reader  may  see  these  examined  and  refuted 
by  Dr.  Porterfield.      I   shall  examine  Dr.  Porterfield's 
own  opinion,  Bishop  Berkeley's,  and  some  others.     But 
it  will  be  necessary  first  to  ascertain  the  facts ;  for  if  we 
mistake  the  phenomena  of  single  and  double  vision,  it  is 
ten  to  one  but  this  mistake  will  lead  us  wrong  in  assigning 
the  causes.     This  likewise  we  ought  carefully  to  attend  to, 
which  is  acknowledged  in  theory  by  all  who  have  jany 
tine  judgment  or  just  taste  in  inquiries  of  this  nature,  but 
is  very  often  overlooked  in  practice,  namely,  That  in  the 
solution  of  natural  phenomena,  all  the  length  that  the  hu- 
man faculties  can  carry  us  is  only  this,  that  from  par- 
ticular phenomena  we  may,  by  induction,  trace  out  gene- 
ral phenomena,  of  which  all  the  particular  ones  are  neces- 
sary consequences.     And  when  we  have  arrived  at  the 
most  general  phenomena  we  can  reach,  there  we  must 
stop.    If  it  is  asked,  Why  such  a  body  gravitates  towards 
the  earth?  all  the  answer  that  can  be  given  is,  Because 
all  bodies  gravitate  towards  the  earth.     This  is  resolving 
a  particular  phenomenon  into  a  general  one.     If  it  should 
again  be  asked,  Why  do  all  bodies  gravitate  towards  the 
earth  ?  we  can  give  no  other  solution  of  this  phenomena, 
but  that  all  bodies  whatsoever  gravitate  towards  each 
other.     This  is  resolving  a  general  phenomenon  into  a 
more  general  one.     If  it  should  be  asked,  Why  all  bodies 
gravitate  to  one  another?  we  cannot  tell;  but-if  we  could 
tell,  it  could  only  be  by  resolving  this  universal  gravitation 
of  bodies  into  some  other  phenomenon  still  more  general, 
and  of  which  the  gravitation  of  all  bodies  is  a  particular 
instance.      The  most  general  phenomena  we  can  reach 
are  what  we  call  laws  of  nature.     So  that  the  laws  of 
nature  are  nothing  else  but  the  most  general  facts  relating 
to  the  operations  of  nature,  which  include  a  great  many 
particular  facts  under  them.    And  if  in  any  case  we  should 
give  the  name  of  a  law  of  nature  to  a  general  phenomenon, 
which  human  industry  shall  afterwards  trace  to  one  more 
general,  there  is  no  great  harm  done.     The  most  general 
assumes  the  name  of  a  law  of  nature  when  it  is  discovered ; 


SECT.  XIII.]  OF  SEEING.  15o 

and  the  less  general  is  contained  and  comprehended  in  it. 
Having  premised  these  things,  we  proceed  to  consider  the 
phenomena  of  single  and  double  vision,  in  order  to  dis- 
cover some  general  principle  to  which  they  all  lead,  and  of 
which  they  are  the  necessary  consequences.  If  we  can 
discover  any  such  general  principle,  it  must  either  be  a 
law  of  nature,  or  the  necessary  consequence  of  some  law 
of  nature ;  and  its  authority  will  be  equal,  whether  it  is  the 
first  or  the  last. 

1.  We  find,  that  when  the  eyes  are  sound  and  perfect, 
and  the  axes  of  both  directed  to  one  point,  an  object 
placed  in  that  point  is  seen  single ;  and  here  we  observe, 
that  in  this  case  the  two  pictures  which  show  the  object 
single  are  in  the  centres  of  the  retina.     When  two  pic- 
tures of  a  small  object  are  formed  upon  points  of  the  retina, 
if  they  show  the  object  single,  we  shall,  for  the  sake  of 
perspicuity,  call  such  two  points  of  the  retina,  corres- 
ponding points;  and  where  the  object  is  seen  double,  we 
shall  call  the  points  of  the  retina  on  which  the  pictures  are 
formed,  points  that  do  not  correspond.    Now,  in  this  first 
phenomenon,  it  is  evident  that  the  two  centres  of  the  retina 
are  corresponding  points. 

2.  Supposing  the  same  things  as  in  the  last  phenome- 
non ;  other  objects  at  the  same  distance  from  the  eyes  as 
that  to  which  their  axes  are  directed  do  also  appear  sin- 
gle.    Thus,  if  I  direct  my  eyes  to  a  candle  placed  at  the 
distance  of  ten  feet ;  and,  while  I  look  at  this  candle,  an- 
other stand  at  the  same  distance  from  my  eyes,  within  the 
field  of  vision;   I  can,  while  I  look  at  the  first  candle, 
attend  to  the  appearance  which  the  second  makes  to  the 
eye ;  and  I  find  that  in  this  case  it  always  appears  single. 
It  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  the  pictures  of  the  second 
candle  do  not  fall  upon  the  centres  of  the  retina;,  but  they 
both  fall  upon  the  same  side  of  the  centres,  that  is,  both 
to  the  right,  or  both  to  the  left,  and  both  are  at  the  same 
distance  from  the  centres.     This  might  easily  be  demon- 
strated from  the  principles  of  optics.     Hence  it  appear^ 
that  in  this  second  phenomenon  of  single  vision,  the  cor- 
responding points  are  points  of  the  two  retince,  which  are 


156  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND;  [CHAP.  VI. 

similarly  situate  with  respect  to  the  two  centres,  being 
both  upon  the  same  side  of  the  centre,  and  at  the  same 
distance  from  it.  It  appears  likewise  from  this  phenome- 
non, that  every  point  in  one  retina  corresponds  with  that 
which  is  similarly  situate  in  the  other. 

3.  Supposing  still  the  same  things,  objects  which  are 
much  nearer  to  the  eyes,  or  much  more  distant  from  them, 
than  that   to   which  the  two  eyes   are   directed,   appear 
double.     Thus,  if  the  candle  is  placed  at  the  distance  of 
ten  feet,  and  I  hold  my  ringer  at  arm's  length  between  my 
eyes  and  the  candle ;  when  I  look  at  the  candle,  I  see  my 
finger  double ;  and  when  I  look  at  my  finger,  I  see  the 
candle  double :  and  the  same  thing  happens  with  regard 
to  all  other  objects  at  like  distances,  which  fall  within  the 
sphere  of  vision.      In  this  phenomenon,  it  is  evident  to 
those  who  understand  the  principles  of  optics,  that  the 
pictures  of  the  objects  which  are  seen  double  do  not  fall 
upon  points  of  the  retinae  which  are  similarly  situate,  but 
that  the  pictures  of  the  object  seen  single  do  fall  upon 
points   similarly  situate.      Whence  we  infer,  that  as  the 
points  of  the  two  retinae,  which  are  similarly  situate  with 
regard  to  the  centres,  do  correspond,  so  those  which  are 
dissimilarly  situate  do  not  correspond. 

4.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  although,  in  such  cases  as 
are  mentioned  in  the  last  phenomenon,  we  have  been  ac- 
customed from  infancy  to  see  objects  double  which  we 
know  to  be  single;   yet  custom  and  experience  of  the 
unity  of  the  object,  never  take  away  this  appearance  of 
duplicity. 

5.  It  may  however  be  remarked,  that  the  custom  of  at- 
tending to  visible  appearances  has  a  considerable  effect, 
and  makes  the  phenomenon  of  double  vision  to  be  more  or 
less  observed  and  remembered.     Thus  you  may  find  a 
man  that  can  say  with  a  good  conscience,  that  he  never 
saw  things  double  all  his  life ;  yet  this  very  man,  put  in 
the  situation  above  mentioned,  with  his  finger  between  him 
and  the  candle,  and  desired  to  attend  to  the  appearance  of 
the  object  which  he  does  not  look  at,  will,  upon  the  first 
trial,  see  the  candle  double  when  he  looks  at  his  finger ; 


SECT.  XIII.]  OF  SEEING.  157 

and  his  finger  double  when  he  looks  at  the  candle.  Does 
he  now  see  otherwise  than  he  saw  before?  No,  surely; 
but  he  now  attends  to  what  he  never  attended  to  before. 
The  same  double  appearance  of  an  object  hath  been  a 

liousand  times  presented  to  his  eye  before  now;  but  he 
did  not  attend  to  it ;  and  so  it  is  as  little  an  object  of  his 

•ejection  and  memory  as  if  it  had  never  happened. 

When  we  look  at  an  object,  the  circumjacent  objects 
may  be  seen  at  the  same  time,  although  more  obscurely 
and  indistinctly :  for  the  eye  hath  a  considerable  field  of 
vision,  which  it  takes  in  at  once.  But  we  attend  only  to 

he  object  we  look  at.  The  other  objects  which  fall  within 
the  field  of  vision  are  not  attended  to ;  and  therefore  are 
as  if  they  were  not  seen.  If  any  of  them  draws  our  atten- 
tion, it  naturally  draws  the  eyes  at  the  same  time;  for,  in 
the  common  course  of  life,  the  eyes  always  follow  the  at- 
tention :  or  if,  at  any  time,  in  a  reverie,  they  are  separated 
from  it,  we  hardly  at  that  time  see  what  is  directly  before 
us.  Hence  we  may  see  the  reason,  why  the  man  we  are 
speaking  of  thinks  that  he  never  before  saw  an  object 

louble.  When  he  looks  at  any  object  he  sees  it  single,  and 
takes  no  notice  of  other  visible  objects  at  that  time,  whe- 
ther they  appear  single  or  double.  If  any  of  them  draws  his 
attention,  it  draws  his  eyes  at  the  same  time;  and  as  soon 
as  the  eyes  are  turned  towards  it  it  appears  single.  But 
in  order  to  see  things  double,  at  least  in  order  to  have  any 
reflection  or  remembrance  that  he  did  so,  it  is  necessary 
that  he  should  look  at  one  object,  and  at  the  same  time 
attend  to  the  faint  appearance  of  other  objects  which  are 
within  the  field  of  vision.  This  is  a  practice  which  per- 
haps he  never  used  nor  attempted;  and,  therefore,  he  does 
not  recollect  that  ever  he  saw  an  object  double.  But  when 
lie  is  put  upon  giving  this  attention,  he  immediately  sees  ob- 
jects double  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  the  very  same 
circumstances  as  they  who  have  been  accustomed,  for  the 
greatest  part  of  their  lives,  to  give  this  attention. 

There  are  many  phenomena  of  a  similar  nature  which 
show  that  the  mind  may  not  attend  to,  and  thereby,  in 
some  sort,  not  perceive  objects  that  strike  the  senses.  I 


158  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

had  occasion  to  mention  several  instances  of  this  hi  the 
second  chapter;  and  I  have  been  assured,  by  persons  of 
the  best  skill  in  music,  that  in  hearing  a  tune  upon  the 
harpsichord,  when  they  give  attention  to  the  treble,  they 
do  not  hear  the  bass ;  and  when  they  attend  to  the  bass, 
they  do  not  perceive  the  air  of  the  treble.  Some  persons 
are  so  near  sighted  that,  in  reading,  they  hold  the  book 
to  one  eye,  while  the  other  is  directed  to  other  objects. 
Such  persons  acquire  the  habit  of  attending  in  this  case  to 
the  objects  of  one  eye,  while  they  give  no  attention  to  those 
of  the  other. 

6.  It  is  observable,  that  in  all  cases  wherein  we  see  an 
object  double,  the  two  appearances  have  a  certain  position 
with  regard  to  one  another,  and  a  certain  apparent  or  an- 
gular distance.     This  apparent  distance  is  greater  or  less 
in  different  circumstances ;  but  in  the  same  circumstances 
it  is  always  the  same,  not  only  to  the  same,  but  to  different 
persons. 

Thus,  in  the  experiment  above  mentioned,  if  twenty  dif- 
ferent persons,  who  see  perfectly  with  both  eyes,  shall 
place  their  ringer  and  the  candle  at  the  distances  above 
expressed,  and  hold  their  heads  upright;  looking;  at  the 
finger,  they  will  see  two  candles,  one  on  the  right,  another 
on  the  left.  That  which  is  seen  on  the  right,  is  seen  by 
the  right  eye,  and  that  which  is  seen  on  the  left,  by  the 
left  eye ;  and  they  will  see  them  at  the  same  apparent  dis- 
tance from  each  other.  If  again  they  look  at  the  candle, 
they  will  see  two  fingers,  one  on  the  right  and  the  other  on 
the  left ;  and  all  will  see  them  at  the  same  apparent  dis- 
tance ;  the  finger  towards  the  left  being  seen  with  the  right 
eye,  and  the  other  by  the  left.  If  the  head  is  laid  horizon- 
tally to  one  side,  other  circumstances  remaining  the  same, 
one  appearance  of  the  object  seen  double  will  be  directly 
above  the  other.  In  a  word,  vary  the  circumstances  as 
you  please,  and  the  appearances  are  varied  to  all  the  spec- 
tators in  one  and  the  same  manner. 

7.  Having  made  many  experiments  in  order  to  ascer- 
tain the  apparent  distance  of  the  two  appearances  of  an 
object  seen  double,  I  have  found  that  in  all  cases  this  ap- 


SECT.  XIII.]  OF  SEEING.  159 

parent  distance  is  proportioned  to  the  distance  between  the 
point  of  the  retina,  where  the  picture  is  made  in  one  eye, 
and  the  point  which  is  situated  similarly  to  that  on  which 
the  picture  is  made  on  the  other  eye.  So  that  as  the 
apparent  distance  of  two  objects  seen  with  one  eye  is  pro- 
portioned to  the  arch  of  the  retina  which  lies  between 
their  pictures  :  in  like  manner,  when  an  object  is  seen  dou- 
ble with  the  two  eyes,  the  apparent  distance  of  the  two 
appearances  is  proportioned  to  the  arch  of  either  retina 
which  lies  between  the  picture  in  that  retina,  and  the  point 
corresponding  to  that  of  the  picture  in  the  other  retina, 

8.  As  in  certain  circumstances  we  invariably  see  one 
object  appear  double,  so  in  others  we  as  invariably  see 
two  objects  unite  into  one ;  and,  in  appearance,  lose  their 
duplicity.     This  is  evident  in  the  appearance  of  the  bino- 
cular telescope.     And  the  same  thing  happens  when  any 
two  similar  tubes  are  applied  to  the  two  eyes  in  a  parallel 
direction ;  for  in  this  case  we  see  only  one  tube.     And  if 
two  shillings  are  placed  at  the  extremities  of  the  two  tubes, 
one  exactly  in  the  axis  of  one  eye,  and  the  other  at  the 
axis  of  the  other  eye,  we  shall  see  but  one  shilling.    Tf  two 
pieces  of  coin,  or  other  bodies,  of  different  colour,  and  of 
different  figure,  be  properly  placed  in  the  two  axes  of  the 
eyes,  and  at  the  extremities  of  the  tubes,  we  shall  see  both 
the  bodies  in  one  and  the  same  place,  each  as  it  were  spread 
over  the  other,  without  hiding  it ;  and  the  colour  will  be 
that  which  is  compounded  of  the  two  colours. 

9.  From  these  phenomena,  and  from  all  the  trials  I  have 
been  able  to  make,  it  appears  evident,  that  in  perfect  hu- 
man eyes,  the  centres  of  the  two  retinae  correspond  and 
harmonize  with  one  another;  and  that  every  other  point  in 
one  retina  doth  correspond  and  harmonize  with  the  point 
which  is  similarly  situate  in  the  other;   in  such  manner 
that  pictures  falling  on  the  corresponding  points  of  the  two 
retince  show  only  one  object,  even  when  there  are  really 
two :  and  pictures  falling  upon  points  of  the  retina:  which 
do   not  correspond    show   us   two   visible   appearances, 
although  there  be  but  one  object.     So  that  pictures,  upon 
corresponding  points  of  the  two  retinae  present  the  same 


160  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

appearance  to  the  mind  as  if  they  had  both  fallen  upon  the 
same  point  of  one  retina ;  and  pictures  upon  points  of  the 
two  retinae,  which  do  not  correspond,  present  to  the  mind 
the  same  apparent  distance  and  position  of  two  objects,  as 
if  one  of  those  pictures  was  carried  to  the  point  corres- 
ponding to  it  in  the  other  retina.  This  relation  and  sym- 
pathy between  corresponding  points  of  the  two  retinae,  I 
do  not  advance  as  an  hypothesis,  but  as  a  general  fact  or 
phenomenon  of  vision.  All  the  phenomena  before  men- 
tioned of  single  or  double  vision  lead  to  it,  and  are  neces- 
sary consequences  of  it.  It  holds  true  invariably  in  all 
perfect  human  eyes,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  collect  from 
innumerable  trials  of  various  kinds  made  upon  my  own 
eyes,  and  many  made  by  others  at  my  desire.  Most  of 
the  hypotheses  that  have  been  contrived  to  resolve  the 
phenomena  of  single  and  double  vision  suppose  this  gene- 
ral fact,  while  their  authors  were  not  aware  of  it.  Sir 
Isaac  Newton,  who  was  too  judicious  a  philosopher  and 
too  accurate  an  observer  to  have  offered  even  a  conjecture 
which  did  not  tally  with  the  facts  that  had  fallen  under  his 
observation,  proposes  a  query  with  respect  to  the  cause  of 
it,  Optics,  guer.  15.  The  judicious  Dr.  Smith,  in  his 
Optics,  lib.  1,  §  137,  hath  confirmed  the  truth  of  this  ge- 
neral phenomenon  from  his  own  experience,  not  only  as  to 
the  apparent  unity  of  objects  whose  pictures  fall  upon  the 
corresponding  points  of  the  retinae,  but  also  as  to  the  appa- 
rent distance  of  the  two  appearances  of  the  same  object 
when  seen  double. 

This  general  phenomenon  appears  therefore  to  be  founded 
upon  a  very  full  induction,  which  is  all  the  evidence  we 
can  have  for  a  fact  of  this  nature.  Before  we  make  an 
end  of  this  subject,  it  will  be  proper  to  inquire,  first,  Whe- 
ther those  animals,  whose  eyes  have  an  adverse  position 
in  their  heads,  and  look  contrary  ways,  have  such  corres- 
ponding points  in  their  retinas?  Secondly,  What  is  the 
position  of  the  corresponding  points  in  imperfect  human 
eyes,  I  mean  in  those  that  squint?  And,  in  the  last  place, 
Whether  this  harmony  of  the  corresponding  points  in  the 
retinae  be  natural  and  original,  or  the  effects  of  custom  ? 


SECT.  XIII.]  OF  SEEING.  161 

And  if  it  is  original,  Whether  it  can  be  accounted  for  by  any 
of  the  laws  of  nature  already  discovered  ?  or  whether  it  is 
itself  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  law  of  nature,  and  a  part  of 
the  human  constitution  ? 


SECT.  XIV. 

Of  the  Laws  of  Vision  in  Brute  Animals. 

IT  is  the  intention  of  nature,  in  giving  eyes  to  animals, 
that  they  may  perceive  the  situation  of  visible  objects,  or 
the  direction  in  which  they  are  placed :  it  is  probable, 
therefore,  that,  in  ordinaiy  cases,  every  animal,  whether  it 
has  many  eyes  or  few,  whether  of  one  structure  or  of  an- 
other, sees  objects  single,  and  in  their  true  and  proper 
direction.  And  since  there  is  a  prodigious  variety  in  the 
structure,  the  motions,  and  the  number  of  eyes  hi  different 
animals  and  instincts,  it  is  probable  that  the  laws  by  which 
vision  is  regulated  are  not  the  same  in  all,  but  various, 
adapted  to  the  eyes  which  nature  hath  given  them. 

Mankind  naturally  turn  their  eyes  always  the  same  way, 
so  that  the  axes  of  the  two  eyes  meet  in  one  point.  They 
naturally  attend  to  or  look  at  that  object  only  which  is 
placed  in  the  point  where  the  axes  meet.  And  whether 
the  object  be  more  or  less  distant,  the  configuration  of  the 
eye  is  adapted  to  the  distance  of  the  object,  so  as  to  form 
a  distinct  picture  of  it. 

When  we  use  our  eyes  in  this  natural  way,  the  two  pic- 
tures of  the  object  we  look  at  are  formed  upon  the  centres 
of  the  two  retina ;  and  the  two  pictures  of  any  contiguous 
object  are  formed  upon  the  points  of  the  retina  winch  are 
similarly  situate  with  regard  to  the  centres.  Therefore,  in 
order  to  our  seeing  objects  single,  and  in  their  proper 
direction,  with  two  eyes,  it  is  sufficient  that  we  be  so  con- 
stituted that  objects  whose  pictures  are  formed  upon  the 
centres  of  the  two  retina,  or  upon  points  similarly  situated 
with  regard  to  these  centres,  shall  be  seen  hi  the  same  vU 


162  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

sible  place.  And  this  is  the  constitution  which  nature  hath 
actually  given  to  human  eyes. 

When  we  distort  our  eyes  from  their  parallel  direction, 
which  is  an  unnatural  motion,  but  may  be  learned  by  prac- 
tice ;  or  when  we  direct  the  axes  of  the  two  eyes  to  one 
point,  and  at  the  same  time  direct  our  attention  to  some 
visible  object  much  nearer  or  much  more  distant  than  that 
point,  which  is  also  unnatural,  yet  may  be  learned;  in 
these  cases,  and  in  these  only,  we  see  one  object  double, 
or  two  objects  confounded  in  one.  In  these  cases,  the  two 
pictures  of  the  same  object  are  formed  upon  points  of  the 
retina,  which  are  not  similarly  situate,  and  so  the  object  is 
seen  double ;  or  the  two  pictures  of  different  objects  are 
formed  upon  points  of  the  retinas,  which  are  similarly  situ- 
ate, and  so  the  two  objects  are  seen  confounded  in  one 
place. 

Thus  it  appears,  that  the  laws  of  vision  in  the  human 
constitution  are  wisely  adapted  to  the  natural  use  of  human 
eyes,  but  not  to  that  use  of  them  which  is  unnatural.  We 
see  objects  truly  when  we  use  our  eyes  in  the  natural 
way;  but  have  false  appearances  presented  to  us  when 
we  use  them  in  a  way  that  is  unnatural.  We  may  reason- 
ably think,  that  the  case  is  the  same  with  other  animals. 
But  is  it  not  unreasonable  to  think,  that  those  animals 
which  naturally  turn  one  eye  towards  one  object,  and  an- 
other eye  towards  another  object,  must  thereby  have  such 
false  appearances  presented  to  them,  as  we  have  when  we 
do  so  against  nature  ? 

Many  animals  have  their  eyes  by  nature  placed  adverse 
and  immovable,  the  axes  of  the  two  eyes  being  always 
directed  to  opposite  points.  Do  objects  painted  on  the 
centres  of  the  two  retina  appear  to  such  animals  as  they 
do  to  human  eyes,  in  one  and  the  same  visible  place  ?  I 
think  it  is  highly  probable  that  they  do  not ;  and  that  they 
appear,  as  they  really  are,  in  opposite  places. 

If  we  judge  from  analogy  in  this  case,  it  will  lead  us  to 
think  that  there  is  a  certain  correspondence  between  points 
of  the  two  retina  in  such  animals,  but  of  a  different  kind 


SECT.  XIV.]         OF  SEEING.  163 

from  that  which  we  have  found  in  human  eyes..  The  cen- 
tre of  one  retina  will  correspond  with  the  centre  of  the 
other,  in  such  manner,  that  the  objects  whose  pictures  are 
formed  upon  these  corresponding  points,  shall  appear  not 
to  be  in  the  same  place,  as  in  human  eyes,  but  in  opposite 
places.  And  in  the  same  manner  will  the  superior  part  of 
one  retina  correspond  with  the  inferior  part  of  4he  other, 
and  the  anterior  part  of  one  with  the  posterior  part  of  the 
other. 

Some  animals,  by  nature,  turn  their  eyes  with  equal 
facility,  either  the  same  way  or  different  ways,  as  we  turn 
our  hands  and  arms.  Have  such  animals  corresponding 
points  in  their  retinte,  and  points  which  do  not  correspond, 
as  the  humankind  has?  I  think  it  is  probable  that  they 
have  not ;  because  such  a  constitution  in  them  could  serve 
no  other  purpose  but  to  exhibit  false  appearances. 

If  we  judge  from  analogy,  it  will  lead  us  to  think,  that 
as  such  animals  move  their  eyes  in  a  manner  similar  to 
that  in  which  we  move  our  arms,  they  have  an  immediate 
and  natural  perception  of  the  direction  they  give  to  their 
eyes,  as  we  have  of  the  direction  we  give  to  our  arms ; 
and  perceive  the  situation  of  visible  objects  by  their  eyes, 
in  a  manner  similar  to  that  in  which  we  perceive  the  situ- 
ation of  tangible  objects  with  our  hands. 

We  cannot  teach  brute  animals  to  use  their  eyes  in  any 
other  way  than  in  that  which  nature  hath  taught  them ;  nor 
can  we  teach  them  to  communicate  to  us  the  appearances 
which  visible  objects  make  to  them,  either  in  ordinary  or 
in  extraordinary  cases.  We  have  not  therefore  the  same 
means  of  discovering  the  laws  of  vision  in  them  as  in  our 
own  kind,  but  must  satisfy  ourselves  with  probable  con- 
jectures :  and  what  we  have  said  upon  this  subject  is 
chiefly  intended  to  show  that  animals,  to  which  nature 
hath  given  eyes  differing  in  their  number,  in  their  position, 
and  in  their  natural  motions,  may  very  probably  be  sub- 
jected to  different  laws  of  vision,  adapted  to  the  peculiari- 
ties of  their  organs  of  vision. 


164  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

SECT.  XV. 

Squinting  considered  hypotheticalty. 

WHETHER  there  be  corresponding  points  in  the  retinae  of 
those  whe  have  an  involuntary  squint?  and  if  there  are, 
whether  they  be  situate  in  the  same  manner  as  in  those 
who  have  no  squint?  are  not  questions  of  mere  curiosity. 
They  are  of  real  importance  to  the  physician  who  attempts 
the  cure  of  a  squint,  and  to  the  patient  who  submits  to  the 
cure.  After  so  much  has  been  said  of  the  strabismus,  or 
squint,  both  by  medical  and  by  optical  writers,  one  might 
expect  to  find  abundance  of  facts  for  determining  these 
questions.  Yet  I  confess  I  have  been  disappointed  in 
this  expectation,  after  taking  some  pains  both  to  make 
observations,  and  to  collect  those  which  have  been  made 
by  others. 

Nor  will  this  appear  very  strange,  if  we  consider,  that, 
to  make  the  observations  which  are  necessary  for  deter- 
mining these  questions,  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  op- 
tics, and  of  the  laws  of  vision  must  concur  with  opportu- 
nities rarely  to  be  met  with. 

Of  those  who  squint,  the  far  greater  part  have  no  dis- 
tinct vision  with  one  eye.  When  this  is  the  case,  it  is 
impossible,  and  indeed  of  no  importance,  to  determine  the 
situation  of  the  corresponding  points.  When  both  eyes 
are  good,  they  commonly  differ  so  much  in  their  direction, 
that  the  same  object  cannot  be  seen  by  both  at  the  same 
time ;  and  in  this  case  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  determine 
the  situation  of  the  corresponding  points ;  for  such  persons 
will  probably  attend  only  to  the  objects  of  one  eye,  and 
the  objects  of  the  other  will  be  as  little  regarded  as  if  they 
were  not  seen. 

We  have  before  observed,  that  when  we  look  at  a  near 
object  and  attend  to  it,  we  do  not  perceive  the  double  ap- 
pearance of  more  distant  objects,  even  when  they  are  in 
the  same  direction  and  are  presented  to  the  eye  at  the 
same  time.  It  is  probable  that  a  squinting  person,  when 


SECT.  XV.3  OF  SEEING.  165 

he  attends  to  the  objects  of  one  eye,  will,  in  like  manner, 
have  his  attention  totally  diverted  from  the  objects  of  the 
other ;  and  that  he  will  perceive  them  as  little  as  we  per- 
ceive the  double  appearances  of  objects  when  we  use  our 
eyes  in  the  natural  way.  Such  a  person,  therefore,  unless 
he  is  so  much  a  philosopher  as  to  have  acquired  the  habit 
of  attending  very  accurately  to  the  visible  appearances  of 
objects,  and  even  of  objects  which  he  does  not  look  at, 
will  not  be  able  to  give  any  light  to  the  questions  now 
under  consideration. 

It  is  very  probable  that  hares,  rabbits,  birds,  and  fishes, 
whose  eyes  are  fixed  in  an  adverse  position,  have  the  na- 
tural faculty  of  attending  at  the  same  time  to  visible  objects 
placed  in  different,  and  even  in  contrary  directions;  be- 
cause, without  this  faculty,  they  could  not  have  those 
advantages  from  the  contrary  direction  of  their  eyes,  which 
nature  seems  to  have  intended.  But  it  is  not  probable 
that  those  who  squint  have  any  such  natural  faculty;  be- 
cause we  find  no  such  faculty  in  the  rest  of  the  species. 
We  naturally  attend  to  objects  placed  in  the  point  where 
the  axes  of  the  two  eyes  meet,  and  to  them  only.  To  give 
attention  to  an  object  in  a  different  direction  is  unnatural, 
and  not  to  be  learned  without  pains  and  practice. 

A  very  convincing  proof  of  this  may  be  drawn  from  a 
fact  now  well  known  to  philosophers :  when  one  eye  is 
shut,  there  is  a  certain  space  within  the  field  of  vision, 
where  we  can  see  nothing  at  all ;  the  space  which  is  di- 
rectly opposed  to  that  part  of  the  bottom  of  the  eye  where 
the  optic  nerve  enters.  This  defect  of  sight,  in  one  part 
of  the  eye,  is  common  to  all  human  eyes,  and  hath  been 
so  from  the  beginning  of  the  world ;  yet  it  was  never 
known  until  the  sagacity  of  the  Abb6  Mariotte  discovered 
it  in  the  last  century.  And  now  when  it  is  known,  it  can- 
not be  perceived,  but  by  means  of  some  particular  expe- 
riments, which  require  care  and  attention  to  make  them 
succeed. 

What  is  the  reason  that  so  remarkable  a  defect  of  sight, 
so  common  to  all  mankind,  was  so  long  unknown,  and  is 
now  perceived  with  so  much  difficulty?  It  is  surely  this, 


166  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

That  the  defect  is  at  some  distance  from  the  axis  of  the  eye, 
and  consequently  in  a  part  of  the  field  of  vision  to  which 
we  never  attend  naturally,  and  to  which  we  cannot  attend 
at  all  without  the  aid  of  some  particular  circumstances. 

From  what  we  have  said,  it  appears,  that,  to  determine 
the  situation  of  the  corresponding  points  in  the  eyes  of 
those  who  squint  is  impossible  if  they  do  not  see  distinctly 
with  both  eyes ;  and  that  it  will  be  very  difficult  unless 
the  two  eyes  differ  so  little  in  their  direction  that  the  same 
object  may  be  seen  with  both  at  the  same  time.  Such 
patients  I  apprehend  are  rare ;  at  least  there  are  veiy  few 
of  them  with  whom  I  have  had  the  fortune  to  meet :  and 
therefore,  for  the  assistance  of  those  who  may  have  hap- 
pier opportunities  and  inclination  to  make  the  proper  use 
of  them,  we  shall  consider  the  case  of  squinting  hypothc- 
tically,  pointing  out  the  proper  articles  of  inquiry,  the  ob- 
servations that  are  wanted,  and  the  conclusions  that  may 
be  drawn  from  them. 

1.  It  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether  the  squinting  per- 
son sees  equally  well  with  both  eyes  ?  and,  if  there  be  a 
defect  in  one,  the  nature  and  degree  of  that  defect  ought 
to  be  remarked.     The  experiments  by  which  this  may  be 
done  are  so  obvious  that  I  need  not  mention  them.     But 
I  would  advise  the  observer  to  make  the  proper  experi- 
ments, and  not  to  rely  upon  the  testimony  of  the  patient ; 
because  I  have  found  many  instances,  both  of  persons  that 
squinted  and  others,  who  were  found,  upon  trial,  to  have 
a  great  defect  in  the  sight  of  one  eye,  although  they  were 
never  aware  of  it  before.     In  all  the  following  articles,  it 
is  supposed  that  the  patient  sees  with  both  eyes  so  well  as 
to  be  able  to  read  with  either  when  the  other  is  covered. 

2.  It  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether,  when  one  eye  is 
covered,  the  other  is  turned  directly  to  the  object?    This 
ought  to  be  tried  in  both  eyes  successively.      By  this 
observation,  as  a  touchstone,  we  may  try  the  hypothesis 
concerning  squinting,   invented  by  M.  de  la  Hire,  and 
adopted  by  Boerhaave,  and  many  others  of  the  medical 
faculty. 

The  hypothesis  is,  That  in  one  eye  of  a  squinting  per- 


SECT.  XV.]  OF  SEEING.  167 

son,  the  greatest  sensibility  and  the  most  distinct  vision  is 
not,  as  in  other  men,  in  the  centre  of  the  retina,  but  upon 
one  side  of  the  centre ;  and  that  he  turns  the  axis  of  this 
eye  aside  from  the  object,  in  order  that  the  picture  of  the 
object  may  fall  upon  the  most  sensible  part  of  the  retina, 
and  thereby  give  the  most  distinct  vision.  If  this  is  the 
cause  of  squinting,  the  squinting  eye  will  be  turned  aside 
from  the  object,  when  the  other  eye  is  covered,  as  well  as 
when  it  is  not. 

A  trial  so  easy  to  be  made  never  was  made  for  more 
than  forty  years ;  but  the  hypothesis  was  very  generally 
received.  So  prone  are  men  to  invent  hypotheses,  and  so 
backward  to  examine  them  by  facts.  At  last  Dr.  Jurin, 
having  made  the  trial,  found  that  persons  who  squint  turn 
the  axis  of  the  squinting  eye  directly  to  the  object,  when 
the  other  eye  is  covered.  This  fact  is  confirmed  by  Dr. 
Porterfield ;  and  I  have  found  it  verified  in  all  the  instances 
that  have  fallen  under  my  observation. 

3.  It  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether  the  axes  of  the  two 
eyes  follow  one  another,  so  as  to  have  always  the  same 
inclination,  or  make  the  same  angle,  when  the   person 
looks  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  upward  or  downward,  or 
straight  forward.      By  this  observation  we  may  judge, 
whether  a  squint  is  owing  to  any  defect  in  the  muscles 
which  move  the  eye,  as  some  have  supposed.     In  the  fol- 
lowing articles  we  suppose  that  the  inclination  of  the  axes 
of  the  eyes  is  found  to  be  always  the  same. 

4.  It  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether  the  person  that 
squints  sees  an  object  single  or  double  ? 

If  he  sees  the  object  double ;  and  if  the  two  appear- 
ances have  an  angular  distance  equal  to  the  angle  which 
the  axes  of  his  eyes  make  with  each  other,  it  may  be  con- 
cluded that  he  hath  corresponding  points  in  the  retince  of 
his  eyes,  and  that  they  have  the  same  situations  as  in 
those  who  have  no  squint.  If  the  two  appearances  should 
have  an  angular  distance  which  is  always  the  same,  but 
manifestly  greater  or  less  than  the  angle  contained  under 
the  optic  axes,  this  would  indicate  corresponding  points  in 
the  retina-,  whose  situation  is  not  the  same  as  in  those  who 


168  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI 

have  no  squint;  but  it  is  difficult  to  judge  accurately 
the  angle  which  the  optic  axes  make. 

A  squint  too  small  to  be  perceived  may  occasion  double 
vision  of  objects :  for  if  we  speak  strictly,  every  persi 
squints  more  or  less,  whose  optic  axes  do  not  meet  exact 
in  the  object  which  he  looks  at.     Thus,  if  a  man  can  on 
bring  the  axes  of  his  eyes  to  be  parallel,  but  cannot  mal 
them  converge  in  the  least,  he  must  have  a  small  squint 
looking  at  near  objects,  and  will  see  them  double,  while 
sees  very  distant  objects  single.     Again,  if  the  optic  ax 
always  converge,  so  as  to  meet  eight  or  ten  feet  before  t 
face  at  farthest,  such  person  will  see  near  objects  singl   . 
but  when  he  looks  at  very  distant  objects,  he  will  squin 
little  and  see  them  double. 

An  instance  of  this  kind  is  related  by  Aguilonius  in  1 
Optics ;  who  says,  that  he  had  seen  a  young  man  to  wh< 
near  objects  appeared  single,  but  distant  objects  appeal 
double. 

Dr.  Briggs,  in  his  Nova  Visionis  Theoria,  having  c 
lected  from  authors  several  instances  of  double  visit 
quotes  this  from  Aguilonius,  as  the  most  wonderful  a 
unaccountable  of  all,  in  so  much  that  he  suspects  so 
imposition  on  the  part  of  the  young  man :  but  to  th< 
who  understand  the  laws  by  which  single  and  double  visi 
are  regulated,  it  appears  to  be  the  natural  effect  of  a  \< 
small  squint. 

Double  vision  may  always  be  owing  to  a  small  squi 
when  the  two  appearances  are  seen  at  a  small  angular  * 
tance,  although  no  squint  was  observed  :  and  I  do  not 
member  any  instances  of  double  vision  recorded  by  authc 
wherein  any  account  is  given  of  the  angular  distance  of 
appearances. 

In  almost  all  the  instances  of  double  vision,  there 
reason  to  suspect  a  squint  or  distortion  of  the  eyes,  fr 
the  concomitant  circumstances,  which  we  find  to  be  on^ 
or  other  of  the  following:  the  approach  of  death,  or  of  n 
deliquium,  excessive  drinking  or  other  intemperance,  vio- 
lent headach,  blistering  the  head,  smoking  tobacco,  bio 
or  wounds  in  the  head.     In  all  these  cases  it  is  reas< 


SECT.  XV.]  OF  SEEING.  169 

to  suspect  a  distortion  of  the  eyes,  either  from  spasm  or 
paralysis  in  the  muscles  that  move  them.  But  although 
it  be  probable  that  there  is  always  a  squint,  greater  or  less, 
where  there  is  double  vision ;  yet  it  is  certain  that  there  is 
not  double  vision  always  where  there  is  a  squint.  I  know 
no  instance  of  double  vision  that  continued  for  life,  or  even 
for  a  great  number  of  years.  We  shall  therefore  suppose, 
in  the  following  articles,  that  the  squinting  person  sees  ob- 
jects single. 

5.  The  next  inquiry  then  ought  to  be,  Whether  the  ob- 
ject is  seen  with  both  eyes  at  the  same  time,  or  only  with 
the  eye  whose  axis  is  directed  to  it?  It  hath  been  taken 
for  granted,  by  the  writers  upon  the  strabismus,  before 
Dr.  J 11  rin,  that  those  who  squint  commonly  see  objects 
single  with  both  eyes  at  the  same  time ;  but  I  know  not 
one  fact  advanced  by  any  writer  which  proves  it.     Dr.  Jurin 
is  of  a  contrary  opinion ;  and  as  it  is  of  consequence,  so  it 
is  very  easy  to  determine  this  point  in  particular  instances, 
by  this  obvious  experiment.    While  the  person  that  squints 
looks  steadily  at  an  object,  let  the  observer  carefully  re- 
mark the  direction  of  both  his  eyes,  and  observe  their  mo- 
tions; and  let  an  opaque  body  be  interposed  between  the 
object  and  the  two  eyes  successively.     If  the  patient,  not- 
withstanding this  interposition,  and  without  changing  the 
direction  of  the  eyes,  continues  to  see  the  object  all  the  time, 
it  may  be  concluded  that  he  saw  it  with  both  eyes  at  once. 
But  if  the  interposition  of  the  body  between  one  eye  and 
the  object  makes  it  disappear,  then  we  may  be  certain, 
that  it  was  seen  by  that  eye  only.     In  the  two  following 
articles,  we  shall  suppose  the  first  to  happen,  according  to 
the  common  hypothesis. 

6.  Upon  this  supposition  it  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether 
the  patient  sees  an  object  double  in  those  circumstances 
wherein  it  appears  double  to  them  who  have  no  squint? 
Let  him,  for  instance,  place  a  candle  at  the  distance  of  ten 
feet;  and  holding  his  finger  at  arm's  length  between  him 
and  the  candle,  let  him  observe,  when  he  looks  at  the 
candle,  whether  he  'sees  his  finger  with  both  eyes,  and 
whether  he  sees  it  single  or  double ;  and  when  he  looks  at 

I 


170  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

his  finger,  let  him  observe  whether  he  sees  the  candle  with 
both  eyes,  and  whether  single  or  double. 

By  this  observation  it  may  be  determined,  whether  to 
this  patient  the  phenomena  of  double  as  well  as  of  single 
vision  are  the  same  as  to  them  who  have  no  squint.  If 
they  are  not  the  same ;  if  he  sees  objects  single  with  two 
eyes,  not  only  in  the  cases  wherein  they  appear  single,  but 
in  those  also  wherein  they  appear  double  to  other  men ;  the 
conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  supposition  is,  that  his 
single  vision  does  not  arise  from  corresponding  points  in 
the  retina  of  his  eyes ;  and  that  the  laws  of  vision  are  not 
the  same  in  him  as  in  the  rest  of  mankind. 

7.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  sees  objects  double  in  those 
cases  wherein  they  appear  double  to  others,  the  conclu- 
sion must  be,  that  he  hath  corresponding  points  in  the 
the  retina  of  his  eyes,  but  unnaturally  situate ;  and  their 
situation  may  be  thus  determined. 

When  he  looks  at  an  object,  having  the  axis  of  one  eye 
directed  to  it,  and  the  axis  of  the  other  turned  aside  from 
it;  let  us  suppose  a  right  line  to  pass  from  the  object 
through  the  centre  of  the  diverging  eye.  We  shall,  for 
the  sake  of  perspicuity,  call  this  right  line  the  natural  axis 
of  the  eye :  and  it  will  make  an  angle  with  the  real  axis, 
greater  or  less,  according  as  his  squint  is  greater  or  less. 
We  shall  also  call  that  point  of  the  retina  in  which  the 
natural  axis  cuts  it,  the  natural  centre  of  the  retina ; 
which  will  be  more  or  less  distant  from  the  real  centre, 
according  as  the  squint  is  greater  or  less. 

Having  premised  these  definitions,  it  will  be  evident  to 
those  who  understand  the  principles  of  optics,  that  in' this 
person  the  natural  centre  of  one  retina  corresponds  with 
theTeal  centre  of  the  other,  in  the  veiy  same  manner  as 
the  two  real  centres  correspond  in  perfect  eyes ;  and  that 
the  points  similarly  situate  with  regard  to  the  real  centre 
in  one  retina,  and  the  natural  centre  in  the  other,  do  like- 
wise correspond  in  the  very  same  manner  as  the  points  sfc 
milarly  situate  with  regard  to  the  two  real  centres  corre- 
spond in  perfect  eyes. 

If  it  is  true,  as  has  been  commonly  affirmed,  that  one 


SECT.  XV.]  OF  SEEING.  171 

who  squints  sees  an  object  with  both  eyes  at  the  same 
time,  and  yet  sees  it  single,  the  squint  will  most  probably 
be  such  as  we  have  described  in  this  article.  And  we 
may  further  conclude,  that  if  a  person  affected  with  such 
a  squint  as  we  have  supposed  could  be  brought  to  the 
habit  of  looking  straight,  his  sight  would  thereby  be  greatly 
hurt.  For  he  would  then  see  every  thing  double  which 
he  saw  with  both  eyes  at  the  same  time ;  and  objects  dis- 
tant from  one  another  would  appear  to  be  confounded 
together.  His  eyes  are  made  for  squinting,  as  much  as 
those  of  other  men  are  made  for  looking  straight ;  and  his 
sight  would  be  no  less  injured  by  looking  straight  than 
that  of  another  man  by  squinting.  He  can  never  see  per- 
fectly when  he  does  not  squint,  unless  the  corresponding 
points  of  his  eyes  should  by  custom  change  their  place ; 
but  how  small  the  probability  of  this  is  will  appear  in  the 
17th  section. 

Those  of  the  medical  faculty  who  attempt  the  cure  of  a 
squint  would  do  well  to  consider  whether  it  is  attended  with 
such  symptoms  as  are  above  described.  If  it  is,  the  cure 
would  be  worse  than  the  malady :  for  every  one  will  readily 
acknowledge,  that  it  is  better  to  put  up  with  the  deformity 
of  a  squint  than  to  purchase  the  cure  by  the  loss  of  per- 
fect and  distinct  vision. 

8.  We  shall  now  return  to  Dr.  Jurin's  hypothesis,  and 
suppose,  that  our  patient  when  he  saw  objects  single,  not- 
withstanding his  squint,  was  found,  upon  trial,  to  have 
seen  them  only  with  one  eye. 

We  should  advise  such  a  patient  to  endeavour,  by  re- 
peated efforts,  to  lessen  his  squint,  and  to  bring  the  axes 
of  his  eyes  nearer  to  a  parallel  direction.  We  have  natu- 
rally the  power  of  making  small  variations  in  the  inclina- 
tions of  the  optic  axes ;  and  this  power  may  be  greatly  in- 
creased by  exercise. 

In  the  ordinary  and  natural  use  of  our  eyes,  we  can 
direct  their  axes  to  a  fixed  star ;  in  this  case  they  must  be 
parallel :  we  can  direct  them  also  to  an  object  six  inches 
distant  from  the  eye ;  and  in  this  case  the  axes  must  make 

I  2 


172  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

an  angle  of  fifteen  or  twenty  degrees.  We  see  young  people 
in  their  frolics  learn  to  squint,  making  their  eyes  either 
converge  or  diverge,  when  they  will,  to  a  very  consider- 
able degree.  Why  should  it  be  more  difficult  for  a  squint- 
ing person  to  learn  to  look  straight  when  he  pleases  ?  If 
once,  by  an  effort  of  his  will,  he  can  but  lessen  his  squint, 
frequent  practice  will  make  it  easy  to  lessen  it,  and  will 
daily  increase  his  power.  So  that  if  he  begins  this  prac- 
tice in  youth,  and  perseveres  in  it,  he  may  probably,  after 
some  time,  learn  to  direct  both  his  eyes  to  one  object. 

When  he  hath  acquired  this  power,  it  will  be  no  difficult 
matter  to  determine,  by  proper  observations,  whether  the 
centres  of  the  retina;,  and  other  points  similarly  situate 
with  regard  to  the  centres  correspond  as  in  other  men. 

9.  Let  us  now  suppose  that  he  finds  this  to  be  the  case ; 
and  that  he  sees  an  object  single  with  both  eyes,  when  the 
axes  of  both  are  directed  to  it.     It  will  then  concern  him 
to  acquire  the  habit  of  looking  straight,  as  he  hath  got  the 
power,  because  he  will  thereby  not  only  remove  a  defor- 
mity, but  improve  his  sight :  and  I  conceive  this  habit,  like 
all  others,  may  be  got  by  frequent  exercise.     He  may 
practise  before  a  mirror  when  alone,  and  in  company  he 
ought  to  have  those  about  him,  who  will  observe  and  ad- 
monish him  when  he  squints. 

10.  What  is  supposed  in  the  9th  article  is  not  merely 
imaginary ;  it  is  really  the  case  in  some  squinting  persons, 
as  will  appear  in  the  next  section.     Therefore,  it  ought 
farther  to  be  inquired,  How  it  comes  to  pass,  that  such  a 
person  sees  an  object  which  he  looks  at,  only  with  one 
eye,  when  both  are  open  ?  In  order  to  answer  this  question 
it  may  be  observed,  first,  Whether,  when  he  looks  at  an 
object,  the  diverging  eye  is  not  drawn  so  close  to  the  nose, 
that  it  can  have  no  distinct  images  ?  Or,  secondly,  Whe- 
ther the  pupil  of  the  diverging  eye  is  not  covered  wholly, 
or  in  part,  by  the  upper  eyelid?  Dr.  Jurin  observed  in- 
stances of  these  cases  in  persons  that  squinted,  and  as- 
signs them  as  causes  of  their  seeing  the  object  only  with 
one  eye.     Thirdly,  it  may  be  observed,  Whether  the  di- 


SECT.  XV.]  OF  SEEING.  173 

verging  eye  is  not  so  directed  that  the  picture  of  the  object 
falls  upon  that  part  of  the  retina  where  the  optic  nerve 
enters,  and  where  there  is  no  vision?  This  will  probably 
happen  in  a  squint  wherein  the  axes  of  the  eyes  converge, 
so  as  to  meet  about  six  inches  before  the  nose. 

11.  In  the  last  place,  it  ought  to  be  inquired,  Whether 
such  a  person  hath  any  distinct  vision  at  all  with  the  di- 
verging eye,  at  the  time  he  is  looking  at  an  object  with  the 
other? 

It  may  seem  very  improbable,  that  he  should  be  able  to 
read  with  the  diverging  eye  when  the  other  is  covered,  and 
yet,  when  both  are  open,  have  no  distinct  vision  with  it  at 
all.  But  this  perhaps  will  not  appear  so  improbable,  if 
the  following  considerations  are  duly  attended  to. 

Let  us  suppose  that  one  who  saw  perfectly  gets,  by  a 
blow  on  the  head,  or  some  other  accident,  a  permanent  and 
involuntary  squint.  According  to  the  laws  of  vision,  he 
will  see  objects  double,  and  will  see  objects  distant  from 
one  another  confounded  together :  but  such  vision  being 
very  disagreeable,  as  well  as  inconvenient,  he  will  do  every 
thing  in  his  power  to  remedy  it.  For  alleviating  such  dis- 
tresses, nature  often  teaches  men  wonderful  experiments, 
which  the  sagacity  of  a  philosopher  would  be  unable  to 
discover.  Every  accidental  motion,  every  direction  or 
conformation  of  his  eyes,  which  lessens  the  evil,  will  be 
agreeable ;  it  will  be  repeated  until  it  be  learned  to  per- 
fection, and  become  habitual,  even  without  thought  or  de- 
sign. Now,  in  this  case,  what  disturbs  the  sight  of  one 
eye  is  the  sight  of  the  other ;  and  all  the  disagreeable  ap- 
pearances in  vision  would  cease,  if  the  light  of  one  eye 
was  extinct :  the  sight  of  one  eye  will  become  more  dis- 
tinct and  more  agreeable,  in  the  same  proportion  as  that  of 
the  other  becomes  faint  and  indistinct.  It  may  therefore 
be  expected,  that  every  habit  will,  by  degrees,  be  ac- 
quired, which  tends  to  destroy  distinct  vision  in  one  eye, 
while  it  is  preserved  in  the  other.  These  habits  will  be 
greatly  facilitated,  if  one  eye  was  at  first  better  than  the 
other;  for  in  that  case,  the  best  eye  will  always  be  di- 


174  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP,  VI. 

rected  to  the  object  which  he  intends  to  look  at,  and  every 
habit  will  be  acquired  which  tends  to  hinder  his  seeing  at 
all,  or  seeing  it  distinctly  by  the  other  at  the  same  time. 

I  shall  mention  one  or  two  habits  that  may  probably  be 
acquired  in  such  a  case ;  perhaps  there  are  others  which 
we  cannot  so  easily  conjecture.  First,  By  a  small  in- 
crease or  diminution  of  his  squint,  he  may  bring  it  to  cor- 
respond with  one  or  other  of  the  cases  mentioned  in  the 
last  article.  Secondly,  The  diverging  eye  may  be  brought 
to  such  a  conformation  as  to  be  extremely  short  sighted, 
and  consequently  to  have  no  distinct  vision  of  objects  at 
a  distance.  I  knew  this  to  be  the  case  of  one  person  that 
squinted;  but  cannot  say  whether  the  short  sightedness.of 
the  diverging  eye  was  original  or  acquired  by  habit. 

We  see,  therefore,  that  one  who  squints,  and  originally 
saw  objects  double  by  reason  of  that  squint,  may  acquire 
such  habits  that,  when  he  looks  at  an  object,  he  shall  see 
it  only  with  one  eye :  nay,  he  may  acquire  such  habits 
that,  when  he  looks  at  an  object  with  his  best  eye,  he  shall 
have  no  distinct  vision  with  the  other  at  all.  Whether 
this  is  really  the  case,  being  unable  to  determine  in  the 
instances  that  have  fallen  under  my  observation,  I  shall 
leave  to  future  inquiry. 

I  have  endeavoured,  in  the  foregoing  articles,  to  de- 
lineate such  a  process  as  is  proper  in  observing  the  phe- 
nomena of  squinting.  I  know  well  by  experience,  that 
this  process  appears  more  easy  in  theory  than  it  will  be 
found  to  be  in  practice;  and  that,  in  order  to  carry  it 
on  with  success,  some  qualifications  of  mind  are  necessary 
in  the  patient,  which  are  not  always  to  be  met  with.  But 
if  those  who  have  proper  opportunities  and  inclination  to 
observe  such  phenomena  attend  duly  to  this  process,  they 
may  be  able  to  furnish  facts  less  vague  and  uninstructive 
than  those  we  meet  with,  even  in  authors  of  reputation. 
By  such  facts  vain  theories  may  be  exploded,  and  our 
knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature  which  regard  the  noblest 
of  our  senses  enlarged. 


OF  SEEING.  175 

SECT.  XVI. 

Facts  relating  to  Squinting. 

HAVING  considered  the  phenomena  of  squinting  hypo- 
thetically,  and  their  connexion  with  corresponding  points 
in  the  retinae,  I  shall  now  mention  the  facts  I  have  had 
occasion  to  observe  myself,  or  have  met  with  in  authors, 
that  can  give  any  light  to  this  subject. 

Having  examined  above  twenty  persons  that  squinted, 
I  found  in  all  of  them  a  defect  in  the  sight  of  one  eye. 
Four  only  had  so  much  of  distinct  vision  in  the  weak  eye 
as  to  be  able  to  read  with  it  when  the  other  was  covered. 
The  rest  saw  nothing  at  all  distinctly  with  one  eye. 

Dr.  Porterfield  says,  that  this  is  generally  the  case  of 
people  that  squint :  and  I  suspect  it  is  so  more  generally 
than  is  commonly  imagined.  Dr.  Jurin,  in  a  very  judicious 
dissertation  upon  squinting,  printed  in  Dr.  Smith's  Optics, 
observes,  that  those  who  squint,  and  see  objects  with  both 
eyes,  never  see  the  same  object  with  both  at  the  same 
time;  that  when  one  eye  is  directed  straight  forward  to 
an  object,  the  other  is  drawn  so  close  to  the  nose  that  the 
object  cannot  at  all  be  seen  by  it,  the  images  being  too 
oblique  and  too  indistinct  to  affect  the  eye.  In  some 
squinting  persons  he  observed  the  diverging  eye  drawn 
under  the  upper  eyelid,  while  the  other  was  directed  to  the 
object.  From  these  observations  he  concludes,  that  "  the 
eye  is  thus  distorted,  not  for  the  sake  of  seeing  better  with 
it,  but  rather  to  avoid  seeing  at  all  with  it  as  much' as  pos- 
sible." From  all  the  observations  he  had  made,  he  was 
satisfied,  that  there  is  nothing  peculiar  in  the  structure  of 
a  squinting  eye ;  that  the  fault  is  only  in  its  wrong  direc- 
tion; and  that  this  wrong  direction  is  got  by  habit. 
Therefore  he  proposes  that  method  of  cure  which  we  have 
described  in  the  8th  and  9th  articles  of  the  hist  section. 
He  tells  us,  that  he  had  attempted  a  cure  after  this  method, 
upon  a  young  gentleman,  with  promising  hopes  of  success ; 


176  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

but  was  interrupted  by  his  falling  ill  of  the  small  pox,  of 
which  he  died. 

It  were  to  be  wished  that  Dr.  Jurin  had  acquainted  us 
whether  he  ever  brought  the  young  man  to  direct  the  axes 
of  both  eyes  to  the  same  object,  and  whether,  in  that  case, 
he  saw  the  object  single,  and  saw  it  with  both  eyes ;  and 
that  he  had  likewise  acquainted  us,  whether  he  saw  ob- 
jects double  when  his  squint  was  diminished.  But  as  to 
these  facts  he  is  silent. 

I  wished  long  for  an  opportunity  of  trying  Dr.  Jurin's 
method  of  curing  a  squint,  without  finding  one;  having 
always,  upon  examination,  discovered  so  great  a  defect  in 
the  sight  of  one  eye  of  the  patient  as  discouraged  the  at- 
tempt. 

But  I  have  already  found  three  young  gentlemen,  with 
whom  I  am  hopeful  this  method  may  have  success,  if  they 
have  patience,  and  perseverance  in  using  it.  Two  of  them 
are  brothers,  and,  before  I  had  access  to  examine  them, 
had  been  practising  this  method  by  the  direction  of  their 
tutor,  with  such  success  that  the  elder  looks  straight 
when  he  is  upon  his  guard :  the  younger  can  direct  both 
his  eyes  to  one  object;  but  they  soon  return  to  their  usual 
squint. 

A  third  young  gentleman,  who  had  never  heard  of  this 
method  before,  by  a  few  days  practice  was  able  to  direct 
both  his  eyes  to  one  object,  but  could  not  keep  them  long 
in  that  direction.  All  the  three  agree  in  this,  that  when 
both  eyes  are  directed  to  one  object,  they  see  it  and  the 
adjacent  objects  single;  but  when  they  squint  they  see 
objects  sometimes  single  and  sometimes  double.  I  ob- 
served of  all  the  three,  that  when  they  squinted  most,  that 
is,  in  the  way  they  had  been  accustomed  to,  the  axes  of 
their  eyes  converged,  so  as  to  meet  five  or  six  inches  be- 
fore the  nose.  It  is  probable  that  in  this  case  the  picture 
of  the  object  in  the  diverging  eye  must  fall  upon  that  part 
of  the  retina  where  the  optic  nerve  enters ;  and  therefore 
the  object  could  not  be  seen  by  that  eye. 

All  the  three  have  some  defect  in  the  sight  of  one  eye, 
which  none  of  them  knew  until  I  put  them  upon  making 


SECT.  XVI.]  OF  SEEING.  177 

trials ;  and  when  they  squint,  the  best  eye  is  always  di- 
rected to  the  object,  and  the  weak  eye  is  that  which 
diverges  from  it.  But  when  the  best  eye  is  covered,  the 
weak  eye  is  turned  directly  to  the  object.  Whether  this 
defect  of  sight  in  one  eye  be  the  effect  of  its  having  been 
long  disused,  as  it  must  have  been  when  they  squinted ; 
or  whether  some  original  defects  in  one  eye  might  be  the 
occasion  of  their  squinting,  time  may  discover.  The  two 
brothers  have  found  the  sight  of  the  weak  eye  even  im- 
proved by  using  to  read  with  it  while  the  other  is  covered. 
The  elder  can  read  an  ordinary  print  with  the  weak  eye  ; 
the  other,  as  well  as  the  third  gentleman,  can  only  read  a 
large  print  with  the  weak  eye.  I  have  met  with  one  other 
person  only  who  squinted,  and  yet  could  read  a  large 
print  with  the  weak  eye.  He  is  a  young  man,  whose 
eyes  are  both  tender  and  weak  sighted,  but  the  left  much 
weaker  than  the  right.  When  he  looks  at  any  object,  he 
always  directs  the  right  eye  to  it,  and  then  the  left  is 
turned  towards  the  nose  so  much  that  it  is  impossible  for 
him  to  see  the  same  object  with  both  eyes  at  the  same 
time.  When  the  right  eye  is  covered,  he  turns  the  left 
directly  to  the  object;  but  he  sees  it  indistinctly,  and  as  if 
it  had  a  mist  about  it. 

I  made  several  experiments,  some  of  them  in  the  com- 
pany and  with  the  assistance  of  an  ingenious  physician, 
in  order  to  discover  whether  objects  that  were  in  the  axes 
of  the  two  eyes  were  seen  in  one  place  confounded  toge- 
ther, as  in  those  who  have  no  involuntary  squint.  The 
object  placed  in  the  axis  of  the  weak  eye  was  a  lighted 
candle  at  the  distance  of  eight  or  ten  feet.  Before  the 
other  eye  was  placed  a  printed  book,  at  such  a  distance  as 
that  he  could  read  upon  it.  He  said,  that  while  he  read 
upon  the  book,  he  saw  the  candle  but  very  faintly.  And 
from  what  we  could  learn,  these  two  objects  did  not  ap- 
pear in  one  place,  but  had  all  that  angular  distance  in 
appearance  which  they  had  in  reality. 

If  this  was  really  the  case,  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn 
from  it  is,  that  the  corresponding  points  in  his  eyes  are  not 
situate  in  the  same  manner  as  in  other  men ;  and  that  if  he 

I  3 


178  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

could  be  brought  to  direct  both  eyes  to  one  object,  he 
would  see  it  double.  But  considering  that  the  young  man 
had  never  been  accustomed  to  observations  of  this  kind, 
and  that  the  sight  of  one  eye  was  so  imperfect,  I  do  not 
pretend  to  draw  this  conclusion  with  certainty  from  this 
single  instance. 

All  that  can  be  inferred  from  these  facts  is,  that  of  four 
persons  who  squint,  three  appear  to  have  nothing  preterna- 
tural in  the  structure  of  their  eyes.  The  centres  of  the 
retina,  and  the  points  similarly  situate  with  regard  to  the 
centres,  do  certainly  correspond  in  the  same  manner  as  in 
other  men.  So  that  if  they  can  be  brought  to  the  habit  of 
directing  their  eyes  right  to  an  object,  they  will  not  only 
remove  a  deformity,  but  improve  their  sight.  With  regard 
to  the  fourth,  the  case  is  dubious,  with  some  probability  of 
a  deviation  from  the  usual  course  of  nature  in  the  situation 
of  the  corresponding  points  of  his  eyes. 


SECT.  XVII. 

Of  the  Effect  of  Custom  in  seeing  Objects  Single. 

IT  appears  from  the  phenomena  of  single  and  double 
vision,  recited  in  Sect.  13,  that  our  seeing  an  object 
single  with  two  eyes  depends  upon  these  two  things — 
First,  Upon  that  mutual  correspondence  of  certain  points 
of  the  retina  which  we  have  often  described.  Secondly, 
Upon  the  two  eyes  being  directed  to  the  object  so  accu- 
rately that  the  two  images  of  it  fall  upon  corresponding 
points.  These  two  things  must  concur  in  order  to  our 
seeing  an  object  single  with  two  eyes ;  and  as  far  as  they 
depend  upon  custom,  so  far  only  can  single  vision  depend 
upon  custom. 

With  regard  to  the  second,  that  is,  the  accurate  direc- 
tion of  both  eyes  to  the  object,  I  think  it  must  be  acknow- 
ledged that  this  is  only  learned  by  custom.  Nature  hath 
wisely  ordained  the  eyes  to  move  in  such  a  manner  that 
their  axes  shall  always  be  nearly  parallel ;  but  hath  left  it 


SECT.  XVII.]  OP  SEEING.  179 

in  our  power  to  vary  their  inclination  a  little  according  to 
the  distance  of  the  object  we  look  at.  Without  this 
power,  objects  would  appear  single  at  one  particular  dis- 
tance only ;  and,  at  distances  much  less  or  much  greater, 
would  always  appear  double.  The  wisdom  of  nature  is 
conspicuous  hi  giving  us  this  power,  and  no  less  conspicu- 
ous in  making  the  extent  of  it  exactly  adequate  to  the  end. 
The  parallelism  of  the  eyes,  in  general,  is  therefore  the 
work  of  nature;  but  that  precise  and  accurate  direction, 
which  must  be  varied  according  to  the  distance  of  the 
object,  is  the  effect  of  custom.  The  power  which  nature 
hath  left  us  of  varying  the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes  a 
little  is  turned  into  a  habit  of  giving  them  always  that  in- 
clination which  is  adapted  to  the  distance  of  the  object. 

But  it  may  be  asked,  What  gives  rise  to  this  habit? 
The  only  answer  that  can  be  given  to  this  question  is,  that 
it  is  found  necessary  to  perfect  and  distinct  vision.     A 
man  who  hath  lost  the  sight  of  one  eye  very  often  loses 
the  habit  of  directing  it  exactly  to  the  object  he  looks  at, 
because  that  habit  is  no  longer  of  use  to  him.     And  if  he 
should  recover  the  sight  of  his  eye,  he  would  recover  this 
habit,  by  finding  it  useful.     No  part  of  the  human  consti- 
tution is  more  admirable  than  that  whereby  we  acquire 
habits  which  are  found  useful,  without  any  design  or  inten- 
tion.    Children  must  see  imperfectly  at  first ;  but  by  using 
their  eyes  they  learn  to  use  them  in  the  best  manner,  and 
acquire,  without  intending  it,  the  habits  necessary  for  that 
purpose.     Every  man  becomes  most  expert  in  that  kind  of 
vision  which  is  most  useful  to  him  in  his  particular  profes- 
sion and  manner  of  life.     A  miniature  painter  or  an  en- 
graver sees  very  near  objects  better  than  a  sailor;  but  the 
sailor  sees  very  distant  objects  much  better  than  they.     A 
person  that  is  short-sighted,  in  looking  at  distant  objects, 
gets  the  habit  of  contracting  the  aperture  of  his  eyes,  by 
almost  closing  his  eyelids.    Why?     For  no  other  reason, 
but  because  this  makes  him  see  the  object  more  distinct. 
In  like  manner,  the  reason  why  every  man  acquires  the 
habit  of  directing  both  eyes  accurately  to  the  object  must 
be,  because  thereby  he  sees  it  more  perfectly  and  dis- 
tinctly. 


180  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

It  remains  to  be  considered,  whether  that  corres- 
pondence between  certain  points  of  the  retinae,  which  is 
likewise  necessary  to  single  vision,  be  the  effect  of  cus- 
tom, or  an  original  property  of  human  eyes. 

A  strong  argument  for  its  being  an  original  property 
may  be  drawn  from  the  habit  just  now  mentioned,  of 
directing  the  eyes  accurately  to  an  object.     This  habit  is 
got  by  our  finding  it  necessary  to  perfect  and  distinct 
vision.     But  why  is  it  necessary  ?     For  no  other  reason 
but  this,  because  thereby  the  two  images  of  the  object 
falling  upon  corresponding  points,  the  eyes  assist  each 
other  in  vision,  and  the  object  is  seen  better  by  both  to- 
gether than  it  could  be  by  one ;   but  when  the  eyes  are 
not  accurately  directed,  the  two  images  of  an  object  fall 
upon  points  that  do  not  correspond,  whereby  the  sight  of 
one  eye  disturbs  the  sight  of  the  other,  and  the  object  is 
seen  more  indistinctly  with  both  eyes  than  it  would  be 
with  one.     Whence  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  this 
correspondence  of  certain  points  of  the  retina  is  prior  to 
the  habits  we  acquire  in  vision,  and  consequently  is  natu- 
ral  and  original.      We  have  all  acquired  the  habit  of 
directing  our  eyes  always  in  a  particular  manner,  which 
causes  single  vision.     Now,  if  nature  hath  ordained  that 
we  should  have  single  vision  only,  when  our  eyes  are 
thus  directed,  there  is  an  obvious  reason  why  all  mankind 
should  agree  in  the  habit  of  directing  them  in  this  manner. 
But  if  single  vision  is  the  effect  of  custom,  any  other  habit 
of  directing  the  eyes  would  have  answered  the  purpose ; 
and  no  account  can  be  given  why  this  particular  habit 
should  be  so  universal ;  and  it  must  appear  very  strange, 
that  no  one  instance  hath  been  found  of  a  person  who  had 
acquired  the  habit  of  seeing  objects  single  with  both  eyes, 
while  they  were  directed  in  any  other  manner. 

The  judicious  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  excellent  System  of 
Optics,  maintains  the  contrary  opinion,  and  offers  some 
reasonings  and  facts  in  proof  of  it.  He  agrees  with 
Bishop  Berkeley  in  attributing  it  entirely  to  custom,  that 
we  see  objects  single  with  two  eyes,  as  well  as  that  we  see 
objects  erect  by  inverted  images.  Having  considered 
Bishop  Berkeley's  reasonings  hi  the  llth  Section,  we 


SECT.  XVII.]  OF  SEEING.  181 

shall  now  beg  leave  to  make  some  remarks  on  what 
Dr.  Smith  hath  said  upon  this  subject,  with  the  respect 
due  to  an  author  to  whom  the  world  owes  not  only  many 
valuable  discoveries  of  his  own,  but  those  of  the  brightest 
mathematical  genius  of  this  age,  which,  with  great  labour 
he  generously  redeemed  from  oblivion. 

He  observes,  that  the  question,  Why  we  see  objects 
single  with  two  eyes  ?  is  of  the  same  sort  with  this,  Why 
we  hear  sounds  single  with  two  ears  ?  and  that  the  same 
answer  must  serve  both.  The  inference  intended  to  be 
drawn  from  this  observation  is,  that  as  the  second  of  these 
phenomena  is  the  effect  of  custom,  so  likewise  is  the  first. 

Now,  I  humbly  conceive  that  the  questions  are  not  so 
much  of  the  same  sort  that  the  same  answer  may  serve 
for  both ;  and  moreover,  that  our  hearing  single  with  two 
ears  is  not  the  effect  of  custom. 

Two  or  more  visible  objects,  although  perfectly  similar, 
and  seen  at  the  very  same  time,  may  be  distinguished  by 
their  visible  places ;  but  two  sounds  perfectly  similar,  and 
heard  at  the  same  time,  cannot  be  distinguished;  for, 
from  the  nature  of  sound,  the  sensations  they  occasion 
must  coalesce  into  one,  and  lose  all  distinction.  If  there- 
fore it  is  asked,  Why  we  hear  sounds  single  with  two 
ears  ?  I  answer,  Not  from  custom ;  but  because  two 
sounds  which  are  perfectly  like  and  synchronous,  have 
nothing  by  which  they  can  be  distinguished.  But  will  this 
answer  fit  the  other  question  ?  I  think  not. 

The  object  makes  an  appearance  to  each  eye,  as  the 
sound  makes  an  impression  upon  each  ear  :  so  far  the  two 
senses  agree.  But  the  visible  appearances  may  be  distin- 
guished by  place,  when  perfectly  like  in  other  respects  : 
the  sounds  cannot  be  thus  distinguished;  and  herein  the 
two  senses  differ.  Indeed,  if  the  two  appearances  have 
the  same  visible  place,  they  are,  in  that  case,  as  incapable 
of  distinction  as  the  sounds  were,  and  we  see  the  object 
single.  But  when  they  have  not  the  same  visible  place, 
they  are  perfectly  distinguishable,  and  we  see  the  object 
double.  We  see  the  object  single  only  when  the  eye*  are 
directed  in  one  particular  manner;  while  there  are  many 


182  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

other  ways  of  directing  them  within  the  sphere  of  our 
power,  by  which  we  see  the  object  double. 

Dr.  Smith  justly  attributes  to  custom  that  well  known 
fallacy  in  feeling,  whereby  a  button  pressed  with  two  op- 
posite sides  of  two  contiguous  fingers  laid  across  is  felt 
double.  I  agree  with  him,  that  the  cause  of  this  appear- 
ance is,  that  those  opposite  sides  of  the  fingers  have  never 
been  used  to  feel  the  same  object,  but  two  different  ob- 
jects, at  the  same  time.  And  I  beg  leave  to  add,  that  as 
custom  produces  this  phenomenon,  so  a  contrary  custom 
destroys  it :  for  if  a  man  frequently  accustoms  himself  to 
feel  the  button  with  his  fingers  across,  it  will  at  last  be  felt 
single ;  as  I  have  found  by  experience. 

It  may  be  taken  for  a  general  rule,  That  things  which 
are  produced  by  custom  may  be  undone  or  changed  by 
disuse  or  by  contrary  custom.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is 
a  strong  argument  that  an  effect  is  not  owing  to  custom, 
but  to  the  constitution  of  nature,  when  a  contrary  custom, 
long  continued,  is  found  neither  to  change  nor  weaken  it. 
I  take  this  to  be  the  best  rule  by  which  we  can  determine 
the  question  presently  under  consideration.  I  shall  there- 
fore mention  two  facts  brought  by  Dr.  Smith,  to  prove 
that  the  corresponding  points  of  the  retince  have  been 
changed  by  custom ;  and  then  I  shall  mention  some  facts 
tending  to  prove  that  there  are  corresponding  points  of  the 
retina  of  the  eyes  originally,  and  that  custom  produces  no 
change  in  them. 

"  One  fact  is  related  upon  the  authority  of  Martin 
Folkes,  Esq.  who  was  informed  by  Dr.  Hepburn  of  Lynn, 
that  the  Reverend  Mr.  Foster  of  Clinchwarton,  in  that 
neighbourhood,  having  been  blind  for  some  years  of  a 
gutta  serena,  was  restored  to  sight  by  salivation :  and 
that  upon  his  first  beginning  to  see,  all  objects  appeared 
to  him  double;  but  afterwards  the  two  appearances  ap- 
proaching by  degrees,  he  came  at  last  to  see  single,  and  as 
distinctly  as  he  did  before  he  was  blind." 

Upon  this  case  I  observe,  first,  That  it  does  not  prove 
any  change  of  the  corresponding  points  of  the  eyes,  unless 
we  suppose  what  is  not  affirmed,  that  Mr.  Foster  directed 


SECT.  XVII.]  OF  SEEING.  183 

his  eyes  to  the  object  at  first,  when  he  saw  double,  with 
the  same  accuracy  and  in  the  same  manner  that  he  did 
afterwards,  when  he  saw  single.  Secondly,  If  we  should 
suppose  this,  no  account  can  be  given,  why  at  first  the 
two  appearances  should  be  seen  at  one  certain  angular 
distance  rather  than  another ;  or  why  this  angular  distance 
should  gradually  decrease,  until  at  last  the  appearances 
coincided.  How  could  this  effect  be  produced  by  cus- 
tom? But,  thirdly,  Every  circumstance  of  this  case  may 
be  accounted  for,  on  the  supposition  that  Mr.  Foster  had 
corresponding  points  on  the  retinae  of  his  eyes  from  the 
time  he  began  to  see,  and  that  custom  made  no  change 
with  regard  to  them.  We  need  only  further  suppose, 
what  is  common  in  such  cases,  that  by  some  years  blind- 
ness he  had  lost  the  habit  of  directing  his  eyes  accurately 
to  an  object,  and  that  he  gradually  recovered  this  habit 
when  he  came  to  see. 

The  second  fact  mentioned  by  Dr.  Smith  is  taken  from 
Mr.  Cheselden's  Anatomy ;  and  is  this :  "  A  gentleman 
who,  from  a  blow  on  the  head,  had  one  eye  distorted, 
found  every  object  appear  double ;  but  by  degrees  the 
most  familiar  ones  became  single ;  and  in  time  all  objects 
became  so,  without  any  amendment  of  the  distortion." 

I  observe  here,  that  it  is  not  said  that  the  two  appear- 
ances gradually  approached,  and  at  last  united,  without 
any  amendment  of  the  distortion.  This  would  indeed  have 
been  a  decisive  proof  of  a  change  in  the  corresponding 
points  of  the  retinae ;  and  yet  of  such  a  change  as  could 
not  be  accounted  for  from  custom.  But  this  is  not  said ; 
and  if  it  had  been  observed,  a  circumstance  so  remarkable 
would  have  been  mentioned  by  Mr.  Cheselden,  as  i' 
in  the  other  case  by  Dr.  Hepburn.  We  may  therefore 
take  it  for  granted  that  one  of  the  appearances  vanished 
by  degrees,  without  approaching  to  the  other.  And  this  I 
conceive  might  happen  several  ways.  First,  The  sight  of 
the  distorted  eye  might  gradually  decay  by  the  hurt ;  so 
the  appearances  presented  by  that  eye  would  gradually 
vanish.  Secondly,  A  small  and  unperceived  change  in 
the  manner  of  directing  the  eyes  might  occasion  his  not 


184  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

seeing  the  object  with  the  distorted  eye,  as  appears  from 
Sect.  15.  Art.  10.  Thirdly,  By  acquiring  the  habit  of 
directing  one  and  the  same  eye  always  to  the  object,  the 
faint  and  oblique  appearance,  presented  by  the  other  eye, 
might  be  so  little  attended  to  when  it  became  familiar,  as 
not  to  be  perceived.  One  of  these  causes,  or  more  of 
them  concurring,  might  produce  the  effect  mentioned,  with- 
out any  change  of  the  corresponding  points  of  the  eyes. 

For  these  reasons,  the  facts  mentioned  by  Dr.  Smith, 
although  curious,  seem  not  to  be  decisive. 

The  following  facts  ought  to  be  put  in  the  opposite 
scale.  First,  In  the  famous  case  of  the  young  gentleman 
couched  by  Mr.  Cheselden,  after  having  had  cataracts  on 
both  eyes  until  he  was  thirteen  years  of  age,  it  appears, 
that  he  saw  objects  single  from  the  time  he  began  to  see 
with  both  eyes.  Mr.  Cheselden's  words  are :  "  And 
now  being  lately  couched  of  his  other  eye,  he  says,  that 
objects  at  first  appeared  large  to  this  eye,  but  not  so  large 
as  they  did  at  first  to  the  other ;  and  looking  upon  the 
same  object  with  both  eyes,  he  thought  it  looked  about 
twice  as  large  as  with  the  first  couched  eye  only,  but  not 
double  that  we  can  anywise  discover." 

Secondly,  The  three  young  gentlemen  mentioned  in  the 
last  section,  who  had  squinted,  as  far  as  I  know,  from 
infancy,  as  they  learned  to  direct  both  eyes  to  an  object, 
saw  it  single.  In  these  four  cases,  it  appears  evident  that 
the  centres  of  the  retince  corresponded  originally,  and 
before  custom  could  produce  any  such  effect :  for  Mr.  Che- 
selden's young  gentleman  had  never  been  accustomed  to 
see  at  all  before  he  was  couched  ;  and  the  other  three  had 
never  been  accustomed  to  direct  the  axes  of  both  eyes  to 
the  object. 

Thirdly,  From  the  facts  recited  in  Sect.  13,  it  appears, 
That  from  the  time  we  are  capable  of  observing  the  pheno- 
mena of  single  and  double  vision,  custom  makes  no  change 
in  them. 

I  have  amused  myself  with  such  observations  for  more 
than  thirty  years;  and  in  every  case  wherein  I  saw  the 
object  double  at  first,  I  see  it  so  to  this  day,  notwithstand- 


SECT.  XVII.]  OF  SEEING.  185 

ing  the  constant  experience  of  its  being  single.  In  other 
cases  where  I  know  there  are  two  objects,  there  appears 
only  one,  after  thousands  of  experiments. 

Let  a  man  look  at  a  familiar  object  through  a  polyhe- 
dron or  multiplyingglass  every  hour  of  his  life,  the  number 
of  visible  appearances  will  be  the  same  at  last  as  at  first : 
nor  does  any  number  of  experiments,  or  length  of  time, 
make  the  least  change. 

Effects  produced  by  habit  must  vary  according  as  the 
acts  by  which  the  habit  is  acquired  are  more  or  less  fre- 
quent :  but  the  phenomena  of  single  and  double  vision  are 
so  invariable  and  uniform  in  all  men,  are  so  exactly  regu- 
lated by  mathematical  rules,  that  I  think  we  have  good 
reason  to  conclude,  that  they  are  not  the  effect  of  custom, 
but  of  fixed  and  immutable  laws  of  nature. 


SECT.  XVIII. 

Of  Dr.  PorterfieltTs  Account  of  Single  and  Double 
Vision. 

BISHOP  BERKELEY  and  Dr.  Smith  seem  to  attribute  too 
much  to  custom  in  vision  ;  Dr.  Porterfield  too  little. 

This  ingenious  writer  thinks,  that  by  an  original  law  of 
our  nature,  antecedent  to  custom  and  experience,  we  per- 
ceive visible  objects  in  their  true  place,  not  only  as  to 
their  direction,  but  likewise  as  to  their  distance  from  the 
eye :  and  therefore  he  accounts  for  our  seeing  objects 
single  with  two  eyes  in  this  manner.  Having  the  faculty 
of  perceiving  the  object  with  each  eye  in  its  true  place, 
we  must  perceive  it  with  both  eyes  in  the  same  place ; 
and  consequently  must  perceive  it  single. 

He  is  aware  that  this  principle,  although  it  accounts 
for  our  seeing  objects  single  with  two  eyes,  yet  does  not  at 
all  account  for  our  seeing  objects  double :  and  whereas 
other  writers  oil  this  subject  take  it  to  be  a  sufficient  cause 
for  double  vision  that  we  have  two  eyes,  and  only  find  it 
difficult  to  assign  a  cause  for  single  vision ;  on  the  con- 


186  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

trary,  Dr.  Porterfield's  principle  throws  all  the  difficulty 
on  the  other  side. 

Therefore,  in  order  to  account  for  the  phenomena  of 
double  vision,  he  advances  another  principle,  without  sig- 
nifying whether  he  conceives  it  to  be  an  original  law  of 
our  nature,  or  the  effect  of  custom.  It  is,  That  our  natu- 
ral perception  of  the  distance  of  objects  from  the  eye  is 
not  extended  to  all  the  objects  that  fall  within  the  field  of 
vision,  but  limited  to  that  which  we  directly  look  at ;  and 
that  the  circumjacent  objects,  whatever  be  their  real  dis- 
tance, are  seen  at  the  same  distance  with  the  object  we 
look  at;  as  if  they  were  all  in  the  surface  of  a  sphere 
whereof  the  eye  is  the  centre. 

Thus,  single  vision  is  accounted  for  by  our  seeing  the 
true  distance  of  an  object  which  we  look  at;  and  double 
vision,  by  a  false  appearance  of  distance  in  objects  which 
we  do  not  directly  look  at. 

We  agree  with  this  learned  and  ingenious  author,  that 
it  is  by  a  natural  and  original  principle  that  we  see  visible 
objects  in  a  certain  direction  from  the  eye,  and  honour  him 
as  the  author  of  this  discovery :  but  we  cannot  assent  to 
either  of  those  principles  by  which  he  explains  single  and 
double  vision,  for  the  following  reasons : 

1.  Our  having  a  natural  and  original  perception  of  the 
distance  of  objects  from  the  eye  appears  contrary  to   a 
well  attested  fact:  for  the  young  gentleman  couched  by 
Mr.  Cheselden  imagined,  at  first,  that  whatever  he  saw 
touched  his  eye,  as  what  he  felt  touched  his  hand. 

2.  The  perception  we  have  of  the  distance  of  objects 
from  the  eye,  whether  it  be  from  nature  or  custom,  is  not 
so  accurate  and  determinate  as  is  necessary  to  produce 
single  vision.     A  mistake  of  the  twentieth  or  thirtieth  part 
of  the  distance  of  a  small  object,  such  as  a  pin,  ought, 
according  to  Dr.  Porterfield's  hypothesis,  to  make  it  ap- 
pear double.     Very  few  can  judge  of  the  distance  of  a 
visible  object  with  such  accuracy.     Yet  we  never  find 
double  vision  produced  by  mistaking  the  distance  of  the 
object.     There  are  many  cases  in  vision,  even  with  the 
naked  eye,  wherein  we  mistake  the  distance  of  an  object 


SECT.  XVIII.]  OF  SEEING.  187 

by  one  half  or  more :  why  do  we  see  such  objects  single  ? 
When  I  move  my  spectacles  from  my  eyes  towards  a 
small  object,  two  or  three  feet  distant,  the  object  seems  to 
approach  so  as  to  be  seen  at  last  at  about  half  its  real 
distance ;  but  it  is  seen  single  at  that  apparent  distance,  as 
well  as  when  we  see  it  with  the  naked  eye  at  its  real  dis- 
tance. And  when  we  look  at  an  object  with  a  binocular 
telescope,  properly  fitted  to  the  eyes,  we  see  it  single, 
while  it  appears  fifteen  or  twenty  times  nearer  than  it  is. 
There  are  then  few  cases  wherein  the  distance  of  an  object 
from  the  eye  is  seen  so  accurately  as  is  necessary  for  single 
vision,  upon  this  hypothesis :  This  seems  to  be  a  conclu- 
sive argument  against  the  account  given  of  single  vision. 
We  find,  likewise,  that  false  judgments  or  fallacious  ap- 
pearances of  the  distance  of  an  object  do  not  produce 
double  vision.  This  seems  to  be  a  conclusive  argument 
against  the  account  given  of  double  vision. 

3.  The  perception  we  have  of  the  linear  distance  ef 
objects,  seems  to  be  wholly  the  effect  of  experience.   This 
I  think  hath  been  proved  by  Bishop  Berkeley  and  by 
Dr.  Smith ;  and  when  we  come  to  point  out  the  means  of 
judging  of  distance  by  sight,  it  will  appear  that  they  are 
all  furnished  by  experience. 

4.  Supposing  that,  by  a  law  of  our  nature,  the  distance 
of  objects  from  the  eye  were  perceived  most  accurately, 
as  well  as  their  direction,  it  will  not  follow  that  we  must 
see  the  object  single.     Let  us  consider  what  means  such 
a  law  of  nature  would  furnish  for  resolving  the  question, 
Whether  the  objects  of  the  two  eyes  are  in  one  and  the 
same  place,  and  consequently  are  not  two,  but  one  ? 

Suppose  then  two  right  lines,  one  drawn  from  the  centre 
of  one  eye  to  its  object,  the  other  drawn  in  like  manner 
from  the  centre  of  the  other  eye  to  its  object :  The  law  of 
nature  gives  us  the  direction  or  position  of  each  of  these 
right  lines,  and  the  length  of  each ;  and  this  is  all  that  it 
gives.  These  are  geometrical  data,  and  we  may  learn 
from  geometry  what  is  determined  by  their  means.  It  is 
then  determined  by  these  data,  Whether  the  two  risht 
lines  terminate  in  one  and  the  same  point,  or  not?  No 
truly.  In  order  to  determine  this,  we  must  have  three 


188  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

other  data.  \Ve  must  know  whether  the  two  right  lines 
are  in  one  plane :  we  must  know  what  angle  they  make, 
and  we  must  know  the  distance  between  the  centres  of  the 
eyes.  And,  when  these  things  are  known,  we  must  apply 
the  rules  of  trigonometry,  before  we  can  resolve  the  ques- 
tion, Whether  the  objects  of  the  two  eyes  are  in  one  and 
the  same  place ;  and  consequently  whether  they  are  two 
or  one  ? 

5.  That  false  appearance  of  distance  into  which  double 
vision  is  resolved  cannot  be  the  effect  of  custom,  for  con- 
stant experience  contradicts  it:  neither  hath  it  the  fea- 
tures of  a  law  of  nature ;  because  it  does  not  answer  any 
good  purpose,  nor  indeed  any  purpose  at  all  but  to  de- 
ceive us.  But  why  should  we  seek  for  arguments,  in  a 
question  concerning  what  appears  to  us,  or  does  not  ap- 
pear? The  question  is,  At  what  distance  do  the  objects 
now  in  my  eye  appear  ?  Do  they  all  appear  at  one  dis- 
tance, as  if  placed  in  the  concave  surface  of  a  sphere,  the 
eye  being  in  the  centre?  Every  man  surely  may  know 
this  with  certainty;  and,  if  he  will  but  give  attention  to 
the  testimony  of  his  eyes,  needs  not  ask  a  philosopher, 
how  visible  objects  appear  to  him.  Now,  it  is  very  true, 
that  if  I  look  up  to  a  star  in  the  heavens,  the  other  stars 
that  appear  at  the  same  time  do  appear  in  this  manner : 
yet  this  phenomenon  does  not  favour  Dr.  Porterfield's 
hypothesis  ;  for  the  stars  and  heavenly  bodies  do  not  ap- 
pear at  their  true  distances  when  we  look  directly  to  them, 
any  more  than  when  they  are  seen  obliquely :  and  if  this 
phenomenon  be  an  argument  for  Dr.  Porterfield's  second 
principle,  it  must  destroy  the  first. 

The  true  cause  of  this  phenomenon  will  be  given  after- 
wards; therefore,  setting  it  aside  for  the  present,  let  us 
put  another  case.  I  sit  in  my  room,  and  direct  my  eyes 
to  the  door,  which  appears  to  be  about  sixteen  feet  dis- 
tant: at  the  same  time  I  see  many  other  objects  faintly 
and  obliquely ;  the  floor,  floor  cloth,  the  table  which  I 
write  upon,  papers,  standish,  candle,  &c.  Now,  do  all 
these  objects  appear  at  the  same  distance  of  sixteen  feet  ? 
Upon  the  closest  attention,  I  find  they  do  not. 


OF  SEEING.  189 


SECT.  XIX. 

Of  Dr.  Briggs's  Theory,  and  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  Con- 
jecture on  this  Subject. 

I  AM  afraid  the  reader,  as  well  as  the  writer,  is  already 
tired  of  the  subject  of  single  and  double  vision.  The 
multitude  of  theories  advanced  by  authors  of  great  name, 
and  the  multitude  of  facts  observed  without  sufficient  skill 
in  optics,  or  related  without  attention  to  the  most  material 
and  decisive  circumstances,  have  equally  contributed  to 
perplex  it. 

In  order  to  bring  it  to  some  issue,  I  have,  in  the  13th 
Section,  given  a  more  full  and  regular  deduction  than  had 
been  given  heretofore  of  the  phenomena  of  single  and 
double  vision  in  those  whose  sight  is  perfect ;  and  have 
traced  them  up  to  one  general  principle,  which  appears  to 
be  a  law  of  vision  in  human  eyes  that  are  perfect  and  in 
their  natural  state. 

In  the  14th  Section  I  have  made  it  appear  that  this  law 
of  vision,  although  excellently  adapted  to  the  fabric  of 
human  eyes,  cannot  answer  the  purposes  of  vision  in  some 
other  animals ;  and  therefore,  very  probably,  is  not  com- 
mon to  all  animals.  The  purpose  of  the  15th  and  16th 
Sections  is,  to  inquire,  whether  there  be  any  deviation 
from  this  law  of  vision  in  those  who  squint?  a  question 
which  is  of  real  importance  in  the  medical  art,  as  well  as 
in  the  philosophy  of  vision ;  but  which,  after  all  that  hath 
been  observed  and  written  on  the  subject,  seems  not  to  be 
ripe  for  a  determination,  for  want  of  proper  observations. 
Those  who  have  had  skill  to  make  proper  observations 
have  wanted  opportunities ;  and  those  who  have  had  oppor- 
tunities have  wanted  skill  or  attention.  I  have  therefore 
thought  it  worth  while  to  give  a  distinct  account  of  the 
observations  necessary  for  the  determination  of  this  ques- 
tion, and  what  conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  the  facts 
observed.  I  have  likewise  collected  and  set  in  one  view 
the  most  conclusive  facts  that  have  occurred  in  authors,  or 
have  fallen  under  my  own  observation. 


190  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

It  must  be  confessed,  that  these  facts,  when  applied  to 
the  question  in  hand,  make  a  very  poor  figure :  and  the 
gentlemen  of  the  medical  faculty  are  called  upon  for  the 
honour  of  their  profession,  and  for  the  benefit  of  mankind, 
to  add  to  them. 

All  the  medical  and  all  the  optical  writers  upon  the 
strabismus,  that  I  have  met  with,  except  Dr.  Jurin,  either 
affirm,  or  take  it  for  granted  that  squinting  persons  see  the 
object  with  both  eyes,  and  yet  see  it  single.  Dr.  Jurin 
affirms  that  squinting  persons  never  see  the  object  with 
both  eyes ;  and  that  if  they  did,  they  would  see  it  double. 
If  the  common  opinion  be  true,  the  cure  of  a  squint  would 
be  as  pernicious  to  the  sight  of  the  patient,  as  the  causing  of 
a  permanent  squint  would  be  to  one  who  naturally  had  no 
squint :  and  therefore  no  physician  ought  to  attempt  such 
a  cure ;  no  patient  ought  to  submit  to  it.  But  if  Dr.  Jurin 's 
opinion  be  true,  most  young  people  that  squint  may  cure 
themselves,  by  taking  some  pains ;  and  may  not  only  re- 
move the  deformity,  but  at  the  same  time  improve  their 
sight.  If  the  common  opinion  be  true,  the  centres  and 
other  parts  of  the  two  retina  in  squinting  persons  do  not 
correspond  as  in  other  men,  and  nature  in  them  deviates 
from  her  common  rule.  But  if  Dr.  Jurin's  opinion  be  true, 
there  is  reason  to  think,  that  the  same  general  laws  of 
vision  which  we  have  found  hi  perfect  human  eyes  extends 
also  to  those  which  squint. 

It  is  impossible  to  determine,  by  reasoning,  which  of 
these  opinions  is  true ;  or  whether  one  may  not  be  found 
true  in  some  patients,  and  the  other  in  others.  Here  expe- 
rience and  observation  are  our  only  guides ;  and  a  deduc- 
tion of  instances  is  the  only  rational  argument.  It  might 
therefore  have  been  expected,  that  the  patrons  of  the  con- 
trary opinions  should  have  given  instances  in  support  of 
them  that  are  clear  and  indisputable :  but  I  have  not  found 
one  such  instance  on  either  side  of  the  question,  in  all  the 
authours  I  have  met  with.  I  have  given  three  instances 
from  my  own  observation,  in  confirmation  of  Dr.  Jurin's 
opinion,  which  admit  of  no  doubt ;  and  one,  which  leans 
rather  to  the  other  opinion,  but  is  dubious.  And  here  I 
must  leave  the  matter  to  further  observation. 


SECT.  XIX.]  OF  SEEING.  191 

In  the  17th  Section,  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that 
the  correspondence  and  sympathy  of  certain  points  of  the 
two  retinae,  into  which  we  have  resolved  all  the  pheno- 
mena of  single  and  double  vision,  is  not,  as  Dr.  Smith  con- 
ceived, the  effect  of  custom,  nor  can  be  changed  by  cus- 
tom, but  is  a  natural  and  original  property  of  human  eyes : 
and  in  the  last  section,  that  it  is  not  owing  to  an  original 
and  natural  perception  of  the  true  distance  of  objects  from 
the  eye,  as  Dr.  Porterfield  imagined.  After  this  recapi- 
tulation, which  is  intended  to  relieve  the  attention  of  the 
reader,  shall  we  enter  into  more  theories  upon  this  subject? 

That  of  Dr.  Briggs,  first  published  in  English,  in  the 
Philosophical  Transactions,  afterwards  in  Latin,  under  the 
title  of  Nova  Visionis  Theoria,  with  a  prefatory  epistle  of 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  to  the  author,  amounts  to  this,  That  the 
fibres  of  the  optic  nerves  passing  from  corresponding  points 
of  the  retina,  to  the  thalami  nervorum  opticorum,  having 
the  same  length,  the  same  tension,  and  a  similar  situation, 
will  have  the  same  tone ;  and  therefore  their  vibrations, 
excited  by  the  impression  of  the  rays  of  light,  will  be  like 
unisons  in  music,  and  will  present  one  and  the  same  image 
to  the  mind  ;  but  the  fibres  passing  from  parts  of  the  retinae 
wliich  do  not  correspond,  having  different  tensions  and 
tones,  will  have  discordant  vibrations ;  and  therefore  pre- 
sent different  images  to  the  mind. 

I  shall  not  enter  upon  a  particular  examination  of  this 
theory.  It  is  enough  to  observe  in  general,  that  it  is  a 
system  of  conjectures  concerning  things  of  which  we  are 
entirely  ignorant ;  and  that  all  such  theories  in  philosophy 
deserve  rather  to  be  laughed  at  than  to  be  seriously  re- 
futed. 

From  the  first  dawn  of  philosophy  to  this  day,  it  hath 
been  believed  that  the  optic  nerves  are  intended  to  carry 
the  images  of  visible  objects  from  the  bottom  of  the  eye  to 
the  mind ;  and  that  the  nerves  belonging  to  the  organs  of 
the  other  senses  have  a  like  office.  But  how  do  we  know 
this  ?  We  conjecture  it :  and  taking  this  conjecture  for  a 
truth,  we  consider  how  the  nerves  may  best  answer  this 
purpose.  The  system  of  the  nerves  for  many  ages  was 


192  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

taken  to  be  an  hydraulic  engine,  consisting  of  a  bundle  of 
pipes,  which  carry  to  and  fro  a  liquor  called  animal  spirits 
About  the  tune  of  Dr.  Briggs,  it  was  thought  rather  to  be 
a  stringed  instrument,  composed  of  vibrating  chords,  each 
of  which  had  its  proper  tension  and  tone.  But  some,  with 
great  probability,  conceived  it  to  be  a  wind  instrument, 
which  played  its  part  by  the  vibrations  of  an  elastic  t  :  -t -; 
in  the  nervous  fibrils. 

These,  I  think,  are  all  the  engines  into  which  the  ner- 
vous system  hath  been  moulded  by  philosophers,  for  con- 
veying the  images  of  sensible  things  from  the  organ  to  th- 
sensorium.     And  for  all  that  we  know  of  the  ma 
every  man  may  freely  choose  which  he  thinks  fittest  tm 
the  purpose;  for,  from  fact  and  experiment,  no  on       , 
them  can  claim  preference  to  another.     Indeed,  th< 
seem  so  unhandy  engines  for  carrying  images,  that  a  man 
would  be  tempted  to  invent  a  new  one. 

Since,  therefore,  a  blind  man  may  guess  as  well  in  thi 
dark  as  one  that  sees,  I  beg  leave  to  offer  another  conjecture 
touching  the  nervous  system,  which  I  hope  will  answer 
the  purpose  as  well  as  those  we  have  mentioned,  and 
which  recommends  itself  by  its  simplicity.  Why  may  not 
the  optic  nerves,  for  instance,  be  made  up  of  empty  tubes, 
opening  their  mouths  wide  enough  to  receive  the  rays  of 
light  which  form  the  image  upon  the  retina,  and  gently 
conveying  them  safe,  and  in  their  proper  order,  to  the 
very  seat  of  the  soul,  until  they  flash  in  her  face?  It  is 
easy  for  an  ingenious  philosopher  to  fit  the  calibre  of  tht  M 
empty  tubes  to  the  diameter  of  the  particles  of  light,  so  as 
they  shall  receive  no  grosser  kind  of  matter.  And  if  t 
rays  should  be  in  danger  of  mistaking  their  way,  an  expe- 
dient may  also  be  found  to  prevent  this.  For  it  requires 
no  more  than  to  bestow  upon  the  tubes  of  the  nervous  sys- 
tem, a  peristaltic  motion,  like  that  of  the  alimentary  tube. 

It  is  a  peculiar  advantage  of  this  hypothesis,  that  although 
all  philosophers  believe  that  the  species  or  images  of 
things  are  conveyed  by  the  nerves  to  the  soul,  yet  none  of 
their  hypotheses  show  how  this  may  be  done.  For  how 
can  images  of  sound,  taste,  smell,  colour,  figure,  and  all 


SECT.  XIX.]  OF  SEEING.  193 

sensible  qualities,  be  made  out  of  the  vibrations  of  musical 
chords,  or  the  undulations  of  animal  spirits,  or  of  ether? 
We  ought  not  to  suppose  means  inadequate  to  the  end. 
Is  it  not  as  philosophical,  and  more  intelligible,  to  con- 
ceive, that  as  the  stomach  receives  its  food,  so  the  soul 
receives  her  images  by  a  kind  of  nervous  deglutition? 
I  might  add,  that  we  need  only  "continue  this  peristaltic 
motion  of  the  nervous  tubes  from  the  sensorium  to  the 
extremities  of  the  nerves  that  serve  the  muscles,  in  order 
to  account  for  muscular  motion. 

Thus  nature  will  be  consonant  to  herself;  and 'as  sen- 
sation will  be  the  conveyance  of  the  ideal  aliment  to  the 
mind,  so  muscular  motion  will  be  the  expulsion  of  the  re- 
crementitious  part  of  it.  For  who  can  deny,  that  the 
images  of  things  conveyed  by  sensation  may,  after  due 
concoction,  become  fit  to  be  thrown  off  by  muscular  mo- 
tion? I  only  give  hints  of  these  things  to  the  ingenious, 
hoping  that  in  time  this  hypothesis  may  be  wrought  up  into 
a  system  as  truly  philosophical  as  that  of  animal  spirits, 
or  the  vibration  of  nervous  fibres. 

To  be  serious :  In  the  operations  of  nature,  I  hold  the 
theories  of  a  philosopher,  which  are  unsupported  by  fact, 
in  the  same  estimation  with  the  dreams  of  a  man  asleep, 
or  the  ravings  of  a  madman.  We  laugh  at  the  Indian 
philosopher,  who,  to  account  for  the  support  of  the  earth, 
contrived  the  hypothesis  of  a  huge  elephant,  and  to  sup- 
port the  elephant  a  huge  tortoise.  If  we  will  candidly 
confess  the  truth,  we  know  as  little  of  the  operations  of  the 
nerves  as  he  did  of  the  manner  in  which  the  earth  is  sup- 
ported; and  our  hypotheses  about  animal  spirits,  or  about 
the  tension  and  vibrations  of  the  nerves,  are  as  like  to  be 
true  as  his  about  the  support  of  the  earth.  His  elephant 
was  an  hypothesis,  and  our  hypotheses  are  elephants. 
Every  theory  in  philosophy,  which  is  built  on  pure  con- 
jecture, is  an  elephant ;  and  every  theory  that  is  supported 
partly  by  fact  and  partly  by  conjecture  is  like  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's image,  whose  feet  were  partly  of  iron  and  partly 
of  clay. 

The  great  Newton  first  gave  an  example  to  philoso- 

K 


194  OP  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

phers,  which  always  ought  to  be,  but  rarely  hath  been  fol- 
lowed, by  distinguishing  his  conjectures  from  his  conclu- 
sions, and  putting  the  former  by  themselves,  in  the  modest 
form  of  queries.  This  is  fair  and  legal ;  but  all  other  phi- 
losophical traffic  in  conjecture  ought  to  be  held  contraband 
and  illicit.  Indeed  his  conjectures  have  commonly  more 
foundation  in  fact,  and  more  verisimilitude,  than  the  dog- 
matical theories  of  most  other  philosophers;  and  there- 
fore we  ought  not  to  omit  that  which  he  hath  offered  con- 
cerning the  cause  of  our  seeiqg  objects  single  with  two 
eyes,  in  the  15th  query  annexed  to  his  Optics. 

"  Are  not  the  species  of  objects  seen  with  both  eyes 
united  where  the  optic  nerves  meet,  before  they  come  into 
the  brain,  the  fibres  on  the  right  side  of  both  nerves 
uniting  there,  and  after  union  going  thence  into  the  brain 
in  the  nerve  which  is  on  the  right  side  of  the  head;  and 
the  fibres  on  the  left  side  of  both  nerves  uniting  in  the 
same  place,  and  after  union  going  into  the  brain  in  the 
nerve  which  is  on  the  left  side  of  the  head ;  and  these  two 
nerves  meeting  in  the  brain  in  such  a  manner  that  their 
fibres  make  but  one  entire  species  or  picture,  half  of  which 
on  the  right  side  of  the  sensorium  comes  from  the  right  side 
of  both  eyes  through  the  right  side  of  both  optic  nerves,  to 
the  place  where  the  nerves  meet,  and  from  thence  to  the 
right  side  of  the  head  into  the  brain,  and  the  other  half  on 
the  left  side  of  the  sensorium  comes,  in  like  manner,  from 
the  left  side  of  both  eyes  ?  For  the  optic  nerves  of  such 
animals  as  look  the  same  way  with  both  eyes  (as  men, 
dogs,  sheep,  oxen,  &c.),  meet  before  they  come  into  the 
brain ;  but  the  optic  nerves  of  such  animals  as  do  not  look 
the  same  way  with  both  eyes  (as  of  fishes  and  of  the  cha- 
meleon) do  not  meet,  if  I  am  rightly  informed." 

I  beg  leave  to  distinguish  this  query  into  two,  which 
are  of  very  different  natures ;  one  being  purely  anatomical, 
the  other  relating  to  the  carrying  species  or  pictures  of 
visible  objects  to  the  sensorium. 

The  first  question  is,  Whether  the  fibres  coming  from 
corresponding  points  of  the  two  retinae  do  not  unite  at  the 
place  where  the  optic  nerves  meet,  and  continue  united 


SECT.  XIX.]  OF  SEEING.  195 

from  thence  to  the  brain;  so  that  the  right  optic  nerve, 
after  the  meeting  of  the  two  nerves,  is  composed  of  the 
fibres  coming  from  the  right  side  of  both  retina;  and  the 
left,  of  the  fibres  coming  from  the  left  side  of  both  retince  ? 

This  is  undoubtedly  a  curious  and  rational  question  ; 
because,  if  we  could  find  ground  from  anatomy  to  answer 
it  in  the  affirmative,  it  would  lead  us  a  step  forward  in  dis- 
covering the  cause  of  the  correspondence  and  sympathy 
which  there  is  between  certain  points  of  the  two  retince. 
For  although  we  know  not  what  is  the  particular  function 
of  the  optic  nerves,  yet  it  is  probable  that  some  impression 
made  upon  them,  and  communicated  along  their  fibres,  is 
necessary  to  vision :  and  whatever  be  the  nature  of  this 
impression,  if  two  fibres  are  united  into  one,  an  impression 
made  upon  one  of  them,  or  upon  both,  may  probably  pro- 
duce the  same  effect.  Anatomists  think  it  a  sufficient 
account  of  a  sympathy  between  two  parts  of  the  body, 
when  they  are  served  by  branches  of  the  same  nerve  :  we 
should  therefore  look  upon  it  as  an  important  discovery  in 
anatomy,  if  it  were  found  that  the  same  nerve  sent  branches 
to  the  corresponding  points  of  the  retinae. 

But  hath  any  such  discovery  been  made  ?  No,  not  so 
much  as  in  one  subject,  as  far  as  I  can  learn.  But  in 
several  subjects,  the  contrary  seems  to  have  been  dis- 
covered. Dr.  Porterfield  hath  given  us  two  cases  at 
length  from  Vesalius,  and  one  from  Caesalpinus,  wherein 
the  optic  nerves,  after  touching  one  another  as  usual,  ap- 
peared to  be  reflected  back  to  the  same  side  whence  they 
came,  without  any  mixture  of  their  fibres.  Each  of  these 
persons  had  lost  an  eye  some  time  before  his  death,  and 
the  optic  nerve  belonging  to  that  eye  was  shrunk,  so  that 
it  could  be  distinguished  from  the  other  at  the  place  where 
they  met.  Another  case,  which  the  same  author  gives  from 
Vesalius,  is  still  more  remarkable ;  for  in  it  the  optic  nerves 
did  not  touch  at  all ;  and  yet,  upon  inquiry,  those  who 
were  most  familiar  with  the  person  in  his  lifetime  declared, 
that  he  never  complained  of  any  defect  of  sight,  or  of  his 
seeing  objects  double.  Diemerbroeck  tells  us,  that  Aqua- 

K2 


196  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

pendens  and  Valverda  likewise  affirm,  that  they  have  met 
with  subjects  wherein  the  optic  nerves  did  not  touch. 

As  these  observations  were  made  before  Sir  Isaac  New- 
ton put  this  query,  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  was  ignorant 
of  them,  or  whether  he  suspected  some  inaccuracy  in  them, 
and  desired  that  the  matter  might  be  more  carefully  exa- 
mined. But  from  the  following  passage  of  the  most  accu- 
rate Winslow,  it  does  not  appear  that  later  observations 
have  been  more  favourable  to  his  conjecture.  "  The  union 
of  these  [optic]  nerves,  by  the  small  curvatures  of  their 
cornua,  is  very  difficult  to  be  unfolded  in  human  bodies. 
This  union  is  commonly  found  to  be  very  close,  but  in 
some  subjects  it  seems  to  be  no  more  than  a  strong  adhe- 
sion, in  others  to  be  partly  made  by  an  intersection  or 
crossing  of  fibres.  They  have  been  found  quite  separate ; 
and  in  other  subjects,  one  of  them  has  been  found  to  be 
very  much  altered  both  in  size  and  colour,  through  its 
whole  passage,  the  other  remaining  in  its  natural  state." 

Whe»  we  consider  this  conjecture  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton 
by  itself,  it  appears  more  ingenious,  and  to  have  more 
verisimilitude,  than  any  thing  that  has  been  offered  upon 
the  subject;  and  we  admire  the  caution  and  modesty  of 
the  author,  in  proposing  it  only  as  a  subject  of  inquiry ; 
but  when  we  compare  it  with  the  observations  of  anato- 
mists which  contradict  it,  we  are  naturally  led  to  this  re- 
flection, That  if  we  trust  to  the  conjectures  of  men  of  the 
greatest  genius  in  the  operations  of  nature,  we  have  only 
the  chance  of  going  wrong  in  an  ingenious  manner. 

The  second  part  of  the  query  is,  Whether  the  two  spe- 
cies of  objects  from  the  two  eyes  are  not,  at  the  place 
where  the  optic  nerves  meet,  united  into  one  species  or 
picture,  half  of  which  is  carried  thence  to  the  sensoriiim  in 
the  right  optic  nerve,  and  the  other  half  in  the  left?  and 
whether  these  two  halves  are  not  so  put  together  again  at 
the  sensoriiim  as  to  make  one  species  or  picture  ? 

Here  it  seems  natural  to  put  the  previous  question, 
What  reason  have  we  to  believe  that  pictures  of  ob- 
jects are  at  all  carried  to  the  sensorium,  either  by  the  optic 


SECT.  XIX.]  OF  SEEING.  Wi 

nerves,  or  by  any  other  nerves  ?  Is  it  not  possible,  that 
this  great  philosopher,  as  well  as  many  of  a  lower  form, 
having  been  led  into  this  opinion  at  first  by  education, 
may  have  continued  in  it,  because  he  never  thought  of 
calling  it  in  question  ?  I  confess  this  was  my  own  case  for 
a  considerable  part  of  my  life.  But  since  I  was  led  by 
accident  to  think  seriously  what  reason  I  had  to  believe  it, 
I  could  find  none  at  all.  It  seems  to  be  a  mere  hypo- 
thesis, as  much  as  the  Indian  philosopher's  elephant.  I 
am  not  conscious  of  any  pictures  of  external  objects  in  my 
sensorium,  any  more  than  in  my  stomach:  the  things 
which  I  perceive  by  my  senses  appear  to  be  external,  and 
not  in  any  part  of  the  brain  ;  and  my  sensations,  properly 
so  called,  have  no  resemblance  of  external  objects. 

The  conclusion  from  all  that  hath  been  said,  in  no  less 
than  seven  sections,  upon  our  seeing  objects  single  with 
two  eyes,  is  this,  That  by  an  original  property  of  human 
eyes,  objects  painted  upon  the  centres  of  the  two  retlncc, 
or  upon  points  similarly  situate  with  regard  to  the'centres, 
appear  in  the  same  visible  place ;  that  the  most  plausible 
attempts  to  account  for  this  property  of  the  eyes  have 
been  unsuccessful ;  and  therefore,  that  it  must  be  either  a 
primary  law  of  our  constitution,  or  the  consequence  of  some 
more  general  law  which  is  not  yet  discovered. 

We  have  now  finished  what  we  intended  to  say,  both  of 
the  visible  appearances  of  things  to  the  eye,  and  of  the 
laws  of  our  constitution  by  which  those  appearances  are 
exhibited.  But  it  was  observed  in  the  beginning  of  this 
chapter,  that  the  visible  appearances  of  objects  serve  only 
as  signs  of  their  distance,  magnitude,  figure,  and  other 
1an«ible  qualities.  The  visible  appearance  is  that  which 
is  presented  to  the  mind  by  nature,  according  to  those 
laws  of  our  constitution  which  have  been  explained.  But 
the  thing  signified  by  that  appearance  is  that  which  is  pre- 
sented to  the  mind  by  custom. 

When  one  speaks  to  us  in  a  language  that  is  familiar, 
we  hear  certain  sounds,  and  this  is  all  the  effect  that  his 
discourse  has  upon  us  by  nature :  but  by  custom  we  under- 
stand the  meaning  of  these  sounds ;  and  therefore  we  fix 


198  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

our  attention  not  upon  the  sounds,  but  upon  the  thing  sig- 
nified by  them.  In  like  manner,  we  see  only  the  visible 
appearance  of  objects  by  nature ;  but  we  learn  by  custom 
to  interpret  these  appearances,  and  to  understand  their 
meaning.  And  when  this  visual  language  is  learned,  and 
becomes  familiar,  we  attend  only  to  the  things  signified ; 
and  cannot,  without  great  difficulty,  attend  to  the  signs  by 
which  they  are  presented.  The  mind  passes  from  one  to 
the  other  so  rapidly  and  so  familiarly  that  no  trace  of  the 
sign  is  left  in  the  memory,  and  we  seem  immediately,  and 
without  the  intervention  of  any  sign,  to  perceive  the  thing 
signified. 

When  I  look  at  the  apple  tree  which  stands  before  my 
window,  I  perceive  at  the  first  glance  its  distance  and 
magnitude,  the  roughness  of  its  trunk,  the  disposition  of 
its  branches,  the  figure  of  its  leaves  and  fruit — I  seem  to 
perceive  all  these  things  immediately.  The  visible  appear- 
ance which  presented  them  all  to  the  mind  has  entirely- 
escaped  me  ;  I  cannot,  without  great  difficulty  and  painful 
abstraction,  attend  to  it  even  when  it  stands  before  me. 
Yet  it  is  certain  that  this  visible  appearance  only  is  pre- 
sented to  my  eye  by  nature,  and  that  I  learned  by  custom 
to  collect  all  the  rest  from  it.  If  I  had  never  seen  before 
now,  I  should  not  perceive  either  the  distance  or  tangible 
figure  of  the  tree,  and  it  would  have  required  the  practice 
of  seeing  for  many  months,  to  change  that  original  per- 
ception which  nature  gave  me  by  my  eyes  into  that  which 
I  now  have  by  "custom. 

The  objects  which  we  see  naturally  and  originally,  as 
hath  been  before  observed,  have  length  and  breadth,  but  no 
thickness  nor  distance  from  the  eye.  Custom,  by  a  kind  of 
legerdemain,  withdraws  gradually  these  original  and  pro- 
per objects  of  sight,  and  substitutes  in  their  place  objects 
of  touch,  which  have  length,  breadth,  and  thickness,  and 
a  determinate  distance  from  the  eye.  By  what  means 
this  change  is  brought  about,  and  what  principles  of  the 
human  mind  concur  in  it,  we  are  next  to  inquire. 


OF  SEEING.  190 

SECT.  XX. 

Of  Perception  in  general. 

SENSATION  and  the  perception  of  external  objects  by  the 
senses,  though  very  different  in  their  nature,  have  com- 
monly been  considered  as  one  and  the  same  thing.  The 
purposes  of  common  life  do  not  make  it  necessary  to  dis- 
tinguish them,  and  the  received  opinions  of  philosophers 
tend  rather  to  confound  them ;  but  without  attending  care- 
fully to  this  distinction,  it  is  impossible  to  have  any  just 
conception  of  the  operations  of  our  senses.  The  most 
simple  operations  of  the  mind  admit  not  of  a  logical  defini- 
tion :  all  we  can  do  is  to  describe  them,  so  as  to  lead  those 
who  are  conscious  of  them  in  themselves  to  attend  to 
them,  and  reflect  upon  them :  and  it  is  often  very  difficult 
to  describe  them  so  as  to  answer  this  intention. 

The  same  mode  of  expression  is  used  to  denote  sensa- 
tion and  perception ;  and  therefore  we  are  apt  to  look  upon 
them  as  things  of  the  same  nature.  Thus,  I  feel  a  pain;  I 
see  a  tree :  the  first  denoteth  a  sensation,  the  last  a  percep- 
tion.— The  grammatical  analysis  of  both  expressions  is 
the  same  :  for  both  consist  of  an  active  verb  and  an  object. 
But  if  we  attend  to  the  things  signified  by  these  expres- 
sions, we  shall  find  that  in  the  first  the  distinction  between 
the  act  and  the  object  is  not  real  but  grammatical ;  in  the 
second,  the  distinction  is  not  only  grammatical  but  real. 

The  form  of  the  expression,  I  feel  pain,  might  seem  to 
imply  that  the  feeling  is  something  distinct  from  the  pain 
felt ;  yet,  in  reality,  there  is  no  distinction.  As  thinking 
a  thought  is  an  expression  which  could  signify  no  more 
than  thinking,  so  feeling  a  pain  signifies  no  more  than 
being  pained.  What  we  have  said  of  pain  is  applicable 
to  every  other  mere  sensation.  It  is  difficult  to  give  in- 
stances, very  few  of  our  sensations  having  names;  and 
where  they  have,  the  name  being  common  to  the  sensation 
and  to  something  else  which  is  associated  with  it.  But 


200  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

when  we  attend  to  the  sensation  by  itself,  and  separate  it 
from  other  things  which  are  conjoined  with  it  in  the  imagi- 
nation, it  appears  to  be  something  which  can  have  no 
existence  but  in  a  sentient  mind,  no  distinction  from  the 
act  of  the  mind  by  which  it  is  felt. 

Perception,  as  we  here  understand  it,  hath  always  an 
object  distinct  from  the  act  by  which  it  is  perceived ;  an 
object  which  may  exist  whether  it  be  perceived  or  not.  I 
perceive  a  tree  that  grows  before  my  window;  there  is 
here  an  object  which  is  perceived ;  and  an  act  of  the  mind 
by  which  it  is  perceived ;  and  these  two  are  not  only  distin- 
guishable, but  they  are  extremely  unlike  in  their  natures. 
The  object  is  made  up  of  a  trunk,  branches,  and  leaves ; 
but  the  act  of  the  mind  by  which  it  is  perceived  hath 
neither  trunk,  branches,  nor  leaves.  I  am  conscious  of 
this  act  of  my  mind,  and  I  can  reflect  upon  it ;  but  it  is 
too  simple  to  admit  of  an  analysis,  and  I  cannot  find  proper 
words  to  describe  it.  I  find  nothing  that  resembles  it  so 
much  as  the  remembrance  of  the  tree,  or  the  imagination 
of  it.  Yet  both  these  differ  essentially  from  perception ; 
they  differ  likewise  one  from  another.  It  is  in  vain  that 
a  philosopher  assures  me  that  the  imagination  of  the  tree, 
the  remembrance  of  it,  and  the  perception  of  it,  are  all  one, 
and  differ  only  in  degree  of  vivacity.  I  know  the  con- 
trary ;  for  I  am  as  well  acquainted  with  all  the  three  as  I 
am  with  the  apartments  of  my  own  house.  I  know  this 
also,  that  the  perception  of  an  object  implies  both  a  con- 
ception of  its  form  and  a  belief  of  its  present  existence. 
I  know,  moreover,  that  this  belief  is  not  the  effect  of  argu- 
mentation and  reasoning ;  it  is  the  immediate  effect  of  my 
constitution. 

I  am  aware  that  this  belief  which  I  have  in  percep- 
tion stands  exposed  to  the  strongest  batteries  of  scepticism. 
But  they  make  no  great  impression  upon  it.  The  sceptic 
asks  me,  Why  do  you  believe  the  existence  of  the  external 
object  which  you  perceive  ?  This  belief,  sir,  is  none  of  my 
manufacture ;  it  came  from  the  mint  of  nature ;  it  bears 
her  image  and  superscription ;  and,  if  it  is  not  right,  the 
fault  is  not  mine :  I  even  took  it  upon  trust,  and  without 


SECT.  XX.]  OF  SEEING.  201 

suspicion.  Reason,  says  the  sceptic,  is  the  only  judge 
of  truth,  and  you  ought  to  throw  off  every  opinion  and 
every  belief  that  is  not  grounded  on  reason.  Why,  sir, 
should  I  believe  the  faculty  of  reason  more  than  that  of 
perception ;  they  came  both  out  of  the  same  shop,  and 
were  made  by  the  same  artist ;  and  if  he  puts  one  piece  of 
false  ware  into  my  hands,  what  should  hinder  him  from 
putting  another? 

Perhaps  the  sceptic  will  agree  to  distrust  reason  rather 
than  give  any  credit  to  perception.  For,  says  he,  since, 
by  your  own  concession,  the  object  which  you  perceive 
and  that  act  of  your  mind  by  which  you  perceive  it  are 
quite  different  things,  the  one  may  exist  without  the  other ; 
and  as  the  object  may  exist  without  being  perceived,  so  the 
perception  may  exist  without  an  object.  There  is  nothing 
so  shameful  in  a  philosopher  as  to  be  deceived  and  de- 
luded; and  therefore  you  ought  to  resolve  firmly  to  with- 
hold assent,  and  throw  off  this  belief  of  external  objects, 
which  may  be  all  delusion.  For  my  part,  I  will  never 
attempt  to  throw  it  off;  and  although  the  sober  part  of 
mankind  will  not  be  very  anxious  to  know  my  reasons,  yet 
if  they  can  be  of  use  to  any  sceptic,  they  are  these. 

First,  Because  it  is  not  in  my  power :  why  then  should 
I  make  a  vain  attempt  ?  It  would  be  agreeable  to  fly  to 
the  moon,  and  to  make  a  visit  to  Jupiter  and  Saturn  ;  but 
when  I  know  that  nature  has  bound  me  down  by  the  law 
of  gravitation  to  this  planet  which  I  inhabit,  I  rest  con- 
tented and  quietly  suffer  myself  to  be  carried  along  in  its 
orbit.  My  belief  is  carried  along  by  perception  as  irre- 
sistibly as  my  body  by  the  earth ;  and  the  greatest  sceptic 
will  find  himself  to  be  in  the  same  condition.  He  may 
struggle  hard  to  disbelieve  the  informations  of  his  senses, 
as  a  man  does  to  swim  against  a  torrent ;  but  ah !  it  is  in 
vain.  It  is  in  vain  that  he  strains  every  nerve,  and  wres- 
tles with  nature  and  with  every  object  that  strikes  upon 
his  senses.  For  after  all,  when  his  strength  is  spent  in  the 
fruitless  attempt,  he  will  be  carried  down  the  torrent  with 
the  common  herd  of  believers. 

Secondly,  I  think  it  would  not  be  prudent  to  throw  off 

K  3 


202  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

this  belief,  if  it  were  in  my  power.  If  nature  intended  to 
deceive  me  and  impose  upon  me  by  false  appearances,  and 
I,  by  my  great  cunning  and  profound  logic  have  discovered 
the  imposture;  prudence  would  dictate  to  me  in  this  case, 
even  to  put  up  with  this  indignity  done  me  as  quietly  as  I 
could,  and  not  to  call  her  an  impostor  to  her  face,  lest  she 
should  be  even  with  me  in  another  way.  For  what  do  I 
gain  by  resenting  this  injury  ?  You  ought  at  least  not  to 
believe  what  she  says.  This  indeed  seems  reasonable,  if 
she  intends  to  impose  upon  me.  But  what  is  the  conse- 
quence ?  I  resolve  not  to  believe  my  senses.  1  break  my 
nose  against  a  post  that  comes  in  my  way  :  I  step  into  a 
dirty  kennel;  and,  after  twenty  such  wise  and  rational 
actions,  am  taken  up  and  clapped  into  a  madhouse.  Now, 
I  confess  I  would  rather  make  one  of  the  credulous  fools 
whom  nature  imposes  upon  than  of  those  wise  and  rational 
philosophers  who  resolve  to  withhold  assent  at  all  this  ex- 
pense. If  a  man  pretends  to  be  a  sceptic  with  regard  to 
the  informations  of  sense,  and  yet  prudently  keeps  out  of 
harm's  way  as  other  men  do,  he  must  excuse  my  suspicion 
that  he  either  acts  the  hypocrite  or  imposes  upon  himself. 
For  if  the  scale  of  his  belief  were  so  evenly  poised  as  to 
lean  no  more  on  one  side  than  to  the  contrary,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  his  actions  could  be  directed  by  any  rules  of 
common  prudence. 

Thirdly,  Although  the  two  reasons  already  mentioned 
are  perhaps  two  more  than  enough,  I  shall  offer  a  third. 
I  gave  implicit  belief  to  the  informations  of  nature  by  my 
senses,  for  a  considerable  part  of  my  life,  before  I  had 
learned  so  much  logic  as  to  be  able  to  start  a  doubt  con- 
cerning them.  And  now,  when  I  reflect  upon  what  is 
passed,  I  do  not  find  that  I  have  been  imposed  upon  by 
this  belief.  I  find  that  without  it  I  must  have  perished 
by  a  thousand  accidents.  I  find  that  without  it  I  should 
have  been  no  wiser  now  than  when  I  was  born. — I  should 
not  even  have  been  able  to  acquire  that  logic  which  sug- 
gests these  sceptical  doubts  with  regard  to  my  senses. 
Therefore  I  consider  this  instinctive  belief  as  one  of  the 
best  gifts  of  nature.  I  thank  the  Author  of  my  being  who 


SECT.  XX.]  OF  SEEING.  203 

bestowed  it  upon  me  before  the  eyes  of  my  reason  were 
opened,  and  still  bestows  it  upon  me  to  be  my  guide,  where 
reason  leaves  me  in  the  dark.  And  now  I  yield  to  the 
direction  of  my  senses,  not  from  instinct  only,  but  from 
confidence  and  trust  in  a  faithful  and  beneficent  Monitor, 
grounded  upon  the  experience  of  his  paternal  care  ami 
goodness. 

In  all  this  I  deal  with  the  Author  of  my  being  no  other- 
wise than  I  thought  it  reasonable  to  deal  with  my  parents 
and  tutors.  I  believed  by  instinct  whatever  they  told  me, 
long  before  I  had  the  idea  of  a  lie,  or  thought  of  the  pos- 
sibility of  their  deceiving  me.  Afterwards,  upon  reflec- 
tion, I  found  they  had  acted  like  fair  and  honest  people 
who  wished  me  well.  I  found,  that  if  I  had  not  believed 
what  they  told  me,  before  I  could  give  a  reason  of  my 
belief,  I  had  to  this  day  been  little  better  than  a  change- 
ling. And  although  this  natural  credulity  hath  sometimes 
occasioned  my  being  imposed  upon  by  deceivers,  yet  it 
hath  been  of  infinite  advantage  to  me  upon  the  whole; 
therefore  I  consider  it  as  another  good  gift  of  nature.  And 
I  continue  to  give  that  credit,  from  reflection,  to  those  of 
whose  integrity  and  veracity  I  have  had  experience  which 
before  I  gave  from  instinct. 

There  is  a  much  greater  similitude  than  is  commonly 
imagined  between  the  testimony  of  nature  given  by  our 
senses,  and  the  testimony  of  men  given  by  language.  The 
credit  we  give  to  both  is  at  first  the  effect  of  instinct  only. 
\Vhen  we  grow  up  and  begin  to  reason  about  them,  the 
credit  given  to  human  testimony  is  restrained  and  weakened 
by  the  experience  we  have  of  deceit.  But  the  credit  given 
to  the  testimony  of  our  senses  is  established  .and  confirmed 
by  the  uniformity  and  constancy  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

Our  perceptions  are  of  two  kinds ;  some  are  natural  and 
original,  others  acquired,  and  the  fruit  of  experience. 
When  1  perceive  that  this  is  the  taste  of  cider,  that  of 
brandy;  and  this  is  the  smell  of  an  apple,  that  of  an 
orange ;  that  this  is  the  noise  of  thunder,  that  the  ringing 
of  bells ;  this  the  sound  of  a  coach  passing,  that  the  voice 
of  such  a  friend;  these  perceptions,  and  others  of  the  same 
kind  are  not  original,  they  are  acquired.  But  the  percep-  - 


204  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

tion  which  I  have  by  touch,  of  the  hardness  and  softness  of 
bodies,  of  their  extension,  figure,  and  motion,  is  not  ac- 
quired; it  is  original. 

In  all  our  senses  the  acquired  perceptions  are  many 
more  than  the  original,  especially  in  sight.  By  this  sense 
\ve  perceive  originally  the  visible  figure  and  colour  of  bodies 
only,  and  their  visible  place :  but  we  learn  to  perceive  by 
the  eye  almost  every  thing  which  we  can  perceive  by 
touch.  The  original  perceptions  of  this  sense  serve  only 
as  signs  to  introduce  the  acquired. 

The  signs  by  which  objects  are  presented  to  us  in  per- 
ception are  the  language  of  nature  to  man;  and  as,  in 
many  respects,  it  hath  great  affinity  with  the  language  of 
man  to  man;  so  particularly  in  this,  that  both  are  partly 
natural  and  original,  partly  acquired  by  custom.  Our 
original  or  natural  perceptions  are  analogous  to  the  na- 
tural language  of  man  to  man,  of  which  we  took  notice  in 
the  4th  Chapter ;  and  our  acquired  perceptions  are  analo- 
gous to  artificial  language,  which,  in  our  mother  tongue,  is 
got  very  much  in  the  same  manner  with  our  acquired  per- 
ceptions, as  we  shall  afterwards  more  fully  explain. 

Not  only  men,  but  children,  idiots,  and  brutes,  acquire 
by  habit  many  perceptions  which  they  had  not  originally. 
Almost  every  employment  in  life  hath  perceptions  of  this 
kind  that  are  peculiar  to  it.  The  shepherd  knows  every 
sheep  of  his  flock,  as  we  do  our  acquaintance,  and  can 
pick  them  out  of  another  flock  one  by  one.  The  butcher 
knows  by  sight  the  weight  and  quality  of  his  beeves  and 
sheep  before  they  are  killed.  The  farmer  perceives  by 
his  eye,  very  nearly,  the  quantity  of  hay  in  a  rick,  or  of 
corn  in  a  heap.  The  sailor  sees  the  burden,  the  build,  and 
the  distance  of  a  ship  at  sea,  while  she  is  a  great  way  oft. 
Every  man  accustomed  to  writing  distinguishes  his  ac- 
quaintance by  their  hand-writing  as  he  does  by  their  faces. 
And  the  painter  distinguishes,  in  the  works  of  his  art,  the 
style  of  all  the  great  masters.  In  a  word,  acquired  per- 
ception is  very  different  in  different  persons  according  to 
the  diversity  of  objects  about  which  they  are  employed, 
and  the  application  they  bestow  in  observing  them. 

Perception  ought  not  only  to  be  distinguished  from  sen- 


SECT.  XX.]  OF  SEEING.  205 

sation,  but  likewise  from  that  knowledge  of  the  objects  of 
sense  which  is  got  by  reasoning.  There  is  no  reasoning 
in  perception,  as  hath  been  observed.  The  belief  which  is 
implied  in  it  is  the  effect  of  instinct.  But  there  are  many 
things,  with  regard  to  sensible  objects,  which  we  can  infer 
from  what  we  perceive ;  and  such  conclusions  of  reason 
ought  to  be  distinguished  from  what  is  merely  perceived. 
When  I  look  at  the  moon,  I  perceive  her  to  be  sometimes 
circular,  sometimes  horned,  and  sometimes  gibbous.  This 
is  simple  perception,  and  is  the  same  in  the  philosopher 
and  in  the  clown :  but  from  these  various  appearances  of 
her  enlightened  part,  I  infer  that  she  is  really  of  a  spheri- 
cal figure.  This  conclusion  is  not  obtained  by  simple  per- 
ception, but  by  reasoning.  Simple  perception  has  the 
same  relation  to  the  conclusions  of  reason  drawn  from  our 
perceptions,  as  the  axioms  in  mathematics  have  to  the  pro- 
positions. I  cannot  demonstrate  that  two  quantities  which 
are  equal  to  the  same  quantity  are  equal  to  each  other; 
neither  can  I  demonstrate,  that  the  tree  which  I  perceive 
exists.  But,  by  the  constitution  of  my  nature,  my  belief 
is  irresistibly  carried  along  by  my  apprehension  of  the 
axiom ;  and,  by  the  constitution  of  my  nature,  my  belief  is 
no  less  irresistibly  carried  along  by  my  perception  of  the 
tree.  All  reasoning  is  from  principles.  The  first  prin- 
ciples of  mathematical  reasoning  are  mathematical  axioms 
and  definitions ;  and  the  first  principles  of  all  our  reasoning 
about  existences  are  our  perceptions.  The  first  principles 
of  every  kind  of  reasoning  are  given  us  by  nature,  and  are 
of  equal  authority  with  the  faculty  of  reason  itself,  which 
is  also  the  gift  of  nature.  The  conclusions  of  reason  are 
all  built  upon  first  principles,  and  can  have  no  other  foun- 
dation. Most  justly,  therefore,  do  such  principles  disdain 
to  be  tried  by  reason,  and  laugh  at  all  the  artillery  of  the 
logician,  when  it  is  directed  against  them. 

When  a  long  train  of  reaso?iing  is  necessary  in  demon- 
strating a  mathematical  proposition,  it  is  easily  distinguished 
from  an  axiom,  and  they  seem  to  be  things  of  a  very  dif- 
ferent nature.  But  there  are  some  propositions  which  lie 
so  near  to  axioms  that  it  is  difficult  to  say,  whether  they 


206  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

ought  to  be  held  as  axioms,  or  demonstrated  as  proposi- 
tions. The  same  thing  holds  with  regard  to  perception, 
and  the  conclusions  drawn  from  it.  Some  of  these  conclu- 
sions follow  our  perceptions  so  easily,  and  are  so  imme- 
diately connected  with  them,  that  it  is  difficult  to  fix  the 
limit  which  divides  the  one  from  the  other. 

Perception,  whether  original  or  acquired,  implies  no  ex- 
ercise of  reason ;  and  is  common  to  men,  children,  idiots, 
and  brutes.  The  more  obvious  conclusions  drawn  from 
our  perceptions,  by  reason,  make  what  we  call  common 
understanding ;  by  which  men  conduct  themselves  in  the 
common  affairs  of  life,  and  by  which  they  are  distinguished 
from  idiots.  The  more  remote  conclusions  which  are 
drawn  from  our  perceptions,  by  reason,  make  what  wt 
commonly  call  science  in  the  various  parts  of  nature,  whe- 
ther in  agriculture,  medicine,  mechanics,  or  in  any  part  of 
natural  philosophy.  When  I  see  a  garden  in  good  order, 
containing  a  great  variety  of  things  of  the  best  kinds,  and 
in  the  most  flourishing  condition,  I  immediately  conclude 
from  these  signs  the  skill  and  industry  of  the  gardener.  A 
farmer,  when  he  rises  in  the  morning,  and  perceives  that 
the  neighbouring  brook  overflows  his  field,  concludes  that 
a  great  deal  of  rain  hath  fallen  in  the  night.  Perceiving 
his  fence  broken  and  his  corn  trodden  down,  he  concludes 
that  some  of  his  own  or  his  neighbours  cattle  have  broken 
loose.  Perceiving  that  his  stable-door  is  broken  open, 
and  some  of  his  horses  gone,  he  concludes  that  a  thief  has 
carried  them  off.  He  traces  the  prints  of  his  horses'  feet 
in  the  soft  ground,  and  by  them  discovers  which  road  the 
thief  hath  taken.  These  are  instances  of  common  under- 
standing, which  dwells  so  near  to  perception  that  it  is  dif- 
ficult to  trace  the  line  which  divides  the  one  from  the 
other.  In  like  manner  the  science  of  nature  dwells  so 
near  to  common  understanding  that  we  cannot  discern 
where  the  latter  ends  and  the  former  begins.  I  perceive 
that  bodies  lighter'  than  water  swim  in  water,  and  that 
those  which  are  heavier  sink.  Hence  I  conclude,  that  it 
a  body  remains  wherever  it  is  put  under  water,  whether  at 
the  top  or  bottom,  it  is  precisely  of  the  same  weight  with 


SECT.  XX.]  OF  SEEING.  207 

water.  If  it  will  rest  only  when  part  of  it  is  above  water, 
it  is  lighter  than  water.  And  the  greater  the  part  above 
water  is,  compared  with  the  whole,  the  lighter  is  the  body. 
If  it  had  no  gravity  at  all,  it  would  make  no  impression 
upon  the  water,  but  stand  wholly  above  it.  Thus,  every 
man,  by  common  understanding,  has  a  rule  by  which  he 
judges  of  the  specific  gravity  of  bodies  which  swim  in 
water :  and  a  step  or  two  more  leads  him  into  the  science 
of  hydrostatics. 

All  that  we  know  of  nature  or  of  existences  may  be 
compared  to  a  tree  which  hath  its  root,  trunk,  and  branches. 
In  this  tree  of  knowledge  perception  is  the  root,  common 
understanding  is  the  trunk,  and  the  sciences  are  the 
branches. 


SECT.  XXI. 

Of  the  Process  of  Nature  in  Perception. 

ALTHOUGH  there  is  no  reasoning  in  perception,  yet  there 
are  certain  means  and  instruments,  which,  by  the  appoint- 
ment of  nature,  must  intervene  between  the  object  and  our 
perception  of  it ;  and  by  these  our  perceptions  are  limited 
and  regulated.  First,  if  the  object  is  not  in  contact  with 
the  organ  of  sense,  there  must  be  some  medium  which 
passes  between  them.  Thus,  in  vision,  the  rays  of  light ; 
in  bearing,  the  vibrations  of  elastic  air;  in  smelling,  the 
elHuvia  of  the  body  smelled  must  pass  from  the  object  to 
the  organ;  otherwise  we  have  no  perception.  Secondly, 
There  must  be  some  action  or  impression  upon  the  organ 
of  sense,  either  by  the  immediate  application  of  the  object, 
or  by  the  medium  that  goes  between  them.  Tliirdly,  Th< 
nerves  which  go  from  the  brain  to  the  organ  must  receiv* 
some  impression  by  means  of  that  which  was  made  upon 
the  organ ;  and  probably,  by  mean:-;  of  the  nerves,  some 
impression  must  be  made  upon  the  brain.  Fourthly,  Thi- 
impression  made  upon  the  organ,  nerves,  and  brain,  is  fol- 
lowed by  a  sensation.  And,  last  of  all.  This  sensation  is 
followed  by  the  perception  of  the  object. 


208  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

Thus  our  perception  of  objects  is  the  result  of  a  train  of 
operations ;  some  of  which  affect  the  body  only,  others 
affect  the  mind.  We  know  very  little  of  the  nature  of 
some  of  these  operations ;  we  know  not  at  all  how  the  y 
are  connected  together,  or  in  what  way  they  contribute  to 
that  perception  which  is  the  result  of  the  whole :  but,  by 
the  laws  of  our  constitution,  we  perceive  objects  in  this 
and  in  no  other  way. 

There  may  be  other  beings  who  can  perceive  external 
objects  without  rays  of  light,  or  vibrations  of  air,  or  effluvia 
of  bodies,  without  impressions  on  bodily  organs,  or  even 
without  sensations :  but  we  are  so  framed  by  the  Author 
of  nature,  that  even  when  we  are  surrounded  by  external 
objects,  we  may  perceive  none  of  them.  Our  faculty  of 
perceiving  an  object  lies  dormant  until  it  is  roused  and  sti- 
mulated by  a  certain  corresponding  sensation.  Nor  is 
this  sensation  always  at  hand  to  perform  its  office;  for  it 
enters  into  the  mind  only  in  consequence  of  a  certain  cor- 
responding impression  made  on  the  organ  of  sense  by  the 
object. 

Let  us  trace  this  correspondence  of  impressions,  sensa- 
tions, and  perceptions  as  far  as  we  can ;  beginning  with 
that  which  is  first  in  order,  the  impression  made  upon  the 
bodily  organ. — But  alas !  we  know  not  of  what  nature 
these  impressions  are,  far  less  how  they  excite  sensations 
in  the  mind. 

We  know  that  one  body  may  act  upon  another  by  pres- 
sure, by  percussion,  by  attraction,  by  repulsion,  and  pro- 
bably in  many  other  ways,  which  we  neither  know  nor 
have  names  to  express.  But  in  which  of  these  ways  ob- 
jects, when  perceived  by  us,  act  upon  the  organs  of  sense, 
these  organs  upon  the  nerves,  and  the  nerves  upon  the 
brain,  we  know  not.  Can  any  man  tell  me  how,  in  vision, 
the  rays  of  light  act  upon  the  retina,  how  the  retina  acts 
upon  the  optic  nerve,  and  how  the  optic  nerve  acts  upon 
the  brain  ?  Xo  man  can.  When  I  feel  the  pain  of  the 
gout  in  my  toe,  I  know  that  there  is  some  unusual  im- 
pression made  upon  that  part  of  the  body.  But  of  what 
kind  is  it?  Are  the  small  vessels  distended  with  some  re- 


SECT.  XXI.]  OF  SEEING.  209 

dundant  elastic  or  unelastic  fluid?  Are  the  fibres  un- 
usually stretched  ?  Are  they  torn  asunder  by  force,  or 
gnawed  .and  corroded  by  some  acrid  humour?  I  can  an- 
swer none  of  these  questions.  All  that  1  feel  is  pain, 
which  is  not  an  impression  upon  the  body,  but  upon  the 
mind;  and  all  that  I  perceive  by  this  sensation  is,  that 
some  distemper  in  my  toe  occasions  this  pain.  But  as  I 
know  not  the  natural  temper  and  texture  of  my  toe  when  it 
is  at  ease,  I  know  as  little  what  change  or  disorder  of  its 
parts  occasions  this  uneasy  sensation.  In  like  manner,  in 
every  other  sensation,  there  is,  without  doubt,  some  im- 
pression made  upon  the  organ  of  sense ;  but  an  impression 
of  which  we  know  not  the  nature.  It  is  too  subtile  to  be 
discovered  by  our  senses,  and  we  may  make  a  thousand 
conjectures  without  coming  near  the  truth.  If  we  under- 
stood the  structure  of  our  organs  of  sense  so  minutely  as  to 
discover  what  effects  are  produced  upon  them  by  external 
objects,  this  knowledge  would  contribute  nothing  to  our 
perception  of  the  object;  for  they  perceive  as  distinctly 
who  know  least  about  the  manner  of  perception  as  the 
greatest  adepts.  It  is  necessary  that  the  impression  be 
made  upon  our  organs,  but  not  that  it  be  known.  Nature 
carries  on  this  part  of  the  process  of  perception  without  our 
consciousness  or  concurrence. 

But  we  cannot  be  unconscious  of  the  next  step  in  this 
process,  the  sensation  of  the  mind,  which  always  imme- 
diately follows  the  impression  made  upon  the  body.  It  is 
essential  to  a  sensation  to  be  felt,  and  it  can  be  nothing 
more  than  we  feel  it  to  be.  If  we  can  only  acquire  the 
habit  of  attending  to  our  sensations,  we  may  know  them 
perfectly.  But  how  are  the  sensations  of  the  mind  pro- 
duced by  impressions  upon  the  body  ?  Of  this  we  are  ab- 
solutely ignorant,  having  no  means  of  knowing  how  the 
body  acts  upon  the  mind,  or  the  mind  upon  the  body. 
When  we  consider  the  nature  and  attributes  of  both,  they 
seem  to  be  so  different  and  so  unlike  that  we  can  rind  no 
handle  by  which  the  one  may  lay  hold  of  the  other.  There 
is  a  deep  and  dark  gulf  between  them,  which  our  under- 


210  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

standing  cannot  pass ;    and  the  manner  of  their  corre- 
spondence and  intercourse  is  absolutely  unknown. 

Experience  teaches  us,  that  certain  impressions  upon 
the  body  are  constantly  followed  by  certain  sensations  of 
the  mind ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  certain  determina- 
tions of  the  mind  are  constantly  followed  by  certain  mo- 
tions in  the  body  ;  but  we  see  not  the  chain  that  ties  these 
things  together.  Who  knows  but  their  connexion  may  be 
arbitrary,  and  owing  to  the  will  of  our  Maker?  Perhaps 
the  same'  sensations  might  have  been  connected  with  other 
impressions  or  other  bodily  organs.  Perhaps  we  might 
have  been  so  made  as  to  taste  with  our  fingers,  to  smell 
with  our  ea?s,  and  to  hear  by  the  nose.  Perhaps  we 
might  have  been  so  made  as  to  have  all  the  sensations  and 
perceptions  which  we  have,  without  any  impression  made 
upon  our  bodily  organs  at  all. 

However  these  things  may  be,  if  nature  had  given  us 
nothing  more  than  impressions  made  upon  the  body,  and 
sensations  in  our  minds  corresponding  to  them,  we  should 
in  that  case  have  been  merely  sentient,  but  not  percipient 
beings.  We  should  never  have  been  able  to  form  a  con- 
ception of  any  external  object,  far  less  a  belief  of  its  ex- 
istence. Our  sensations  have  no  resemblance  to  external 
objects;  nor  can  we  discover,  by  our  reason,  any  neces- 
sary connexion  between  the  existence  of  the  former  and 
that  of  the  latter. 

We  might  perhaps  have  been  made  of  such  a  constitu- 
tion as  to  have  our  present  perceptions  connected  with 
other  sensations.  We  might  perhaps  have  had  the  per- 
ception of  external  objects,  without  either  impressions  upon 
the  organs  of  sense  or  sensations.  Or,  lastly,  The  per- 
ceptions we  have  might  have  been  immediately  connected 
with  the  impressions  upon  our  organs  without  any  inter- 
vention of  sensations.  This  last  seems  really  to  be  the 
case  in  one  instance,  to  wit,  in  our  perception  of  the  visible 
figure  of  bodies,  as  was  observed  in  the  8th  Section  of 
this  Chapter. 

The  process  of  nature  in  perception  by  the  senses  may 


SECT.  XXI.]  OF  SEEING.  211 

therefore  be  conceived  as  a  kind  of  drama,  wherein  some 
things  are  performed  behind  the  scenes,  others  are  repre- 
sented to  the  mind  in  different  scenes,  one  succeeding 
another.  The  impression  made  by  the  object  upon  the 
organ,  either  by  immediate  contact,  or  by  some  inter- 
vening medium,  as  well  as  the  impression  made  upon  the 
nerves  and  brain,  is  performed  behind  the  scenes,  and  the 
mind  sees  nothing  of  it.  But  every  such  impression,  by 
the  laws  of  the  drama,  is  followed  by  a  sensation,  which  is 
the  first  scene  exhibited  to  the  mind;  and  this  scene  is 
quickly  succeeded  by  another,  which  is  the  perception  of 
the  object. 

In  this  drama  nature  is  the  actor,  we  are  the  spectators. 
We  know  nothing  of  the  machinery  by  means  of  which 
every  different  impression  upon  the  organ,  nerves,  and 
brain,  exhibits  its  corresponding  sensation ;  or  of  the  ma- 
chinery by  means  of  which  each  sensation  exhibits  its  cor- 
responding perception.  We  are  inspired  with  the  sensa- 
tion, and  we  are  inspired  with  the  corresponding  percep- 
tion, by  means  unknown.  And  because  the  mind  passes 
immediately  from  the  sensation  to  that  conception  and 
belief  of  the  object  which  we  have  in  perception,  in  the 
same  manner  as  it  passes  from  signs  to  the  things  signified 
by  them,  we  have  therefore  called  our  sensations  signs  of 
external  objects ;  finding  no  word  more  proper  to  express 
the  function  which  nature  hath  assigned  them  in  percep- 
tion, and  the  relation  which  they  bear  to  their  corre- 
sponding objects. 

There  is  no  necessity  of  a  resemblance  between  the 
sign  and  the  thing  signified :  and  indeed  no  sensation  can 
resemble  any  external  object.  But  there  are  two  things 
necessary  to  our  knowing  things  by  means  of  signs.  First, 
That  a  real  connexion  between  the  sign  and  the  thing  sig- 
nified be  established,  either  by  the  course  of  nature  or  by 
the  will  and  appointment  of  men.  When  they  are  con- 
nected by  the  course  of  nature,  it  is  a  natural  sign;  when 
by  human  appointment,  it  is  an  artificial  sign.  Thus,  smoke 
is  a  natural  sign  of  fire;  certain  features  are  natural  si^ns 
of  anger:  but  our  words,  whether  expressed  by  articulate 


212  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

sounds  or  by  writing,  are  artificial  signs  of  our  thoughts 
and  purposes. 

Another  requisite  to  our  knowing  things  by  signs  is,  that 
the  appearance  of  the  sign  to  the  mind  be  followed  by  the 
conception  and  belief  of  the  thing  signified.  Without  this 
the  sign  is  not  understood  or  interpreted;  and  therefore 
is  no  sign  to  us,  however  fit  in  its  own  nature  for  that 
purpose. 

Now,  there  are  three  ways  in  which  the  mind  passes 
from  the  appearance  of  a  natural  sign  to  the  conception 
and  belief  of  the  thing  signified ;  by  original  principles  of 
our  constitution,  by  custom,  and  by  reasoning. 

Our  original  perceptions  are  got  in  the  first  of  these 
ways,  our  acquired  perceptions  in  the  second,  and  all  that 
reason  discovers  of  the  course  of  nature  in  the  third.  In 
the  first  of  these  ways  nature,  by  means  of  the  sensations 
of  touch,  informs  us  of  the  hardness  and  softness  of  bodies ; 
of  their  extension,  figure,  and  motion ;  and  of  that  space 
in  which  they  move  and  are  placed,  as  hath  been  already 
explained  in  the  fifth  Chapter  of  this  inquiry.  And  in  the 
second  of  these  ways  she  informs  us,  by  means  of  our  eyes, 
of  almost  all  the  same  tilings  which  originally  we  could 
perceive  only  by  touch. 

In  order,  therefore,  to  understand  more  particularly 
how  we  learn  to  perceive  so  many  things  by  the  eye, 
which  originally  could  be  perceived  only  by  touch,  it  will 
be  proper,  first,  To  point  out  the  signs  by  which  those 
things  are  exhibited  to  the  eye,  and  their  connexion  with 
the  things  signified  by  them ;  and,  secondly,  To  consider 
how  the  experience  of  this  connexion  produces  that  habit 
by  which  the  mind,  without  any  reasoning  or  reflection, 
passes  from  the  sign  to  the  conception  and  belief  of  the 
thing  signified. 

Of  all  the  acquired  perceptions  which  we  have  by  sight, 
the  most  remarkable  is  the  perception  of  the  distance  of 
objects  from  the  eye ;  we  shall  therefore  particularly  con- 
sider the  signs  by  which  this  perception  is  exhibited,  and 
only  make  some  general  remarks  with  regard  to  the  signs 
which  are  used  in  other  acquired  perceptions. 


OF  SEEING.  213 

SECT.  XXII. 

Df  the  Signs  by  which  we  learn  to  perceive  Distance 
from  the  Eye. 

IT  was  before  observed  in  general,  That  the  original  per- 
ceptions of  sight  are  signs  which  serve  to  introduce  those 
that  are  acquired :  but  this  is  not  to  be  understood  as  if 
no  other  signs  were  employed  for  that  purpose.  There 
are  several  motions  of  the  eyes,  which,  in  order  to  distinct 
vision,  must  be  varied,  according  as  the  object  is  more  or 
less  distant ;  and  such  motions  being  by  habit  connected 
with  the  corresponding  distances  of  the  object,  become 
signs  of  those  distances.  These  motions  were  at  first  vo- 
luntary and  unconfined;  but  as  the  intention  of  nature  was 
to  produce  perfect  and  distinct  vision  by  their  means,  we 
soon  learn  by  experience  to  regulate  them  according  to 
that  intention  only,  without  the  least  reflection. 

A  ship  requires  a  different  trim  for  every  variation  of 
the  direction  and  strength  of  the  wind  :  and,  if  we  may  be 
allowed  to  borrow  that  word,  the  eyes  require  a  different 
trim  for  every  degree  of  light,  and  for  every  variation  of 
the  distance  of  the  object  while  it  is  within  certain  limits. 
The  eyes  are  trimmed  for  a  particular  object,  by  contracting 
certain  muscles,  and  relaxing  others ;  as  the  ship  is  trim- 
med for  a  particular  wind,  by  drawing  certain  ropes  and 
slackening  others.  The  sailor  learns  the  trim  of  his  ship, 
as  we  learn  the  trim  of  our  eyes,  by  experience.  A  ship, 
although  the  noblest  machine  that  human  art  can  boast,  is 
far  inferior  to  the  eye  in  this  respect,  that  it  requires  art 
and  ingenuity  to  navigate  her;  and  a  sailor  must  know 
what  ropes  he  must  pull  and  what  he  must  slacken  to  fit 
her  to  a  particular  wind :  but  with  such  superior  wisdom 
is  the  fabric  of  the  eye  and  the  principles  of  its  motion 
contrived,  that  it  requires  no  art  or  ingenuity  to  see  by  it. 
Even  that  part  of  vision  which  is  got  by  experience  is  at- 
tained by  idiots.  We  need  not  know  what  muscles  we 
are  to  contract,  and  what  we  are  to  relax,  in  order  to  fit 
the  eye  to  a  particular  distance  of  the  object. 


214  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

But  although  we  are  not  conscious  of  the  motions  we 
perform  in  order  to  fit  the  eyes  to  the  distance  of  the  ob- 
ject, we  are  conscious  of  the  effort  employed  in  producing 
these  motions ;  and  probably  have  some  sensation  which 
accompanies  them,  to  which  we  give  as  little  attention  as 
to  other  sensations.  And  thus  an  effort  consciously  ex- 
erted, or  a  sensation  consequent  upon  that  effort,  comes 
to  be  conjoined  with  the  distance  of  the  object  which  gave 
occasion  to  it,  and  by  this  conjunction  becomes  a  sign  of 
that  distance.  Some  instances  of  this  will  appear  in  con- 
sidering the  means  or  signs  by  which  we  learn  to  see  the 
distance  of  objects  from  the  eye.  In  the  enumeration  of 
these  we  agree  with  Dr.  Porterfield,  notwithstanding  that 
distance  from  the  eye,  in  his  opinion,  is  perceived  origi- 
nally, but,  in  our  opinion,  by  experience  only. 

In  general,  when  a  near  object  affects  the  eye  in  one 
manner,  and  the  same  object,  placed  at  a  greater  distance, 
affects  it  in  a  different  manner ;  these  various  affections  of 
the  eye  become  signs  of  the  corresponding  distances.  The 
means  of  perceiving  distance  by  the  eye  will  therefore  be 
explained,  by  showing,  in  what  various  ways  objects  af- 
fect the  eye  differently,  according  to  their  proximity  or 
distance. 

1.  It  is  well  known,  that  to  see  objects  distinctly  at 
various  distances,  the  form  of  the  eye  must  undergo  some 
change.  And  nature  hath  given  us  the  power  of  adapting 
it  to  near  objects,  by  the  contraction  of  certain  muscles, 
and  to  distant  objects  by  the  contraction  of  other  muscles. 
As  to  the  manner  in  which  this  is  done,  and  the  muscular 
parts  employed,  anatomists  do  not  altogether  agree.  The 
ingenious  Dr.  Jurin,  in  his  excellent  essay  on  distinct  and 
indistinct  vision,  seems  to  have  given  the  most  probable 
account  of  this  matter ;  and  to  him  I  refer  the  reader. 

But  whatever  be  the  manner  in  which  this  change  of  the 
form  of  the  eye  is  effected,  it  is  certain  that  young  people 
have  commonly  the  power  of  adapting  their  eyes  to  all  the 
distances  of  the  object,  from  six  or  seven  inches  to  fifteen 
or  sixteen  feet;  so  as  to  have  perfect  and  distinct  vision 
at  any  distance  within  these  limits.  From  this  it  follows, 
that  the  effect  we  consciously  employ  to  adapt  the  eye  to 


SECT.  XXII.]  OF  SEEING.  215 

any  particular  distance  of  objects  within  these  limits,  will 
be  connected  and  associated  with  that  distance,  and  will 
become  a  sign  of  it.  When  the  object  is  removed  beyond 
the  farthest  limit  of  distinct  vision  it  will  be  seen  indis- 
tinctly ;  but  more  or  less  so  according  as  its  distance  is 
greater  or  less  :  so  that  the  degrees  of  indistinctness  of  the 
object  may  become  the  signs  of  distances  considerably  be- 
yond the  farthest  limit  of  distinct  vision. 

If  we  had  no  other  mean  but  this  of  perceiving  distance 
of  visible  objects,  the  most  distant  would  not  appear  to  be 
above  twenty  or  thirty  feet  from  the  eye,  and  the  tops  of 
houses  and  trees  would  seem  to  touch  the  clouds ;  for  in 
that  case  the  signs  of  all  greater  distances  being  the  same, 
they  have  the  same  signification,  and  give  the  same  per- 
ception of  distance. 

But  it  is  of  more  importance  to  observe,  that  because 
the  nearest  limit  of  distinct  vision  in  the  time  of  youth, 
when  we  learn  to  perceive  distance  by  the  eye,  is  about 
six  or  seven  inches,  no  object  seen  distinctly  ever  appears 
to  be  nearer  than  six  or  seven  inches  from  the  eye.  We 
can  by  art  make  a  small  object  appear  distinct,  when  it  is 
in  reality  not  above  half  an  inch  from  the  eye ;  either  by 
using  a  single  microscope  or  by  looking  through  a  small 
pin-hole  in  a  card.  When  by  either  of  these  means  an 
object  is  made  to  appear  distinct,  however  small  its  dis- 
tance is  in  reality,  it  seems  to  be  removed  at  least  to  the 
distance  of  six  or  seven  inches,  that  is,  within  the  limits  of 
distinct  vision. 

This  observation  is  the  more  important  because  it  af- 
fords the  only  reason  we  can  give  why  an  object  is  mag- 
nified either  by  a  single  microscope,  or  by  being  seen 
through  a  pin-hole ;  and  the  only  mean  by  which  we  can 
ascertain  the  degree  in  which  the  object  will  be  magnified 
by  either.  Thus,  if  the  object  is  really  half  an  inch  dis- 
tant from  the  eye,  and  appears  to  be  seven  inches  distant, 
its  diameter  will  seem  to  be  enlarged  in  the  same  propor- 
tion as  its  distance,  that  is,  fourteen  times. 

2.  In  order  to  direct  both  eyes  to  an  object  the  optic 
axes  must  have  a  greater  or  less  inclination,  according  as 


216  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI, 

the  object  is  nearer  or  more  distant.  And  although  we 
are  not  conscious  of  this  inclination,  yet  we  are  conscious 
of  the  effort  employed  in  it.  By  this  mean  we  perceive 
small  distances  more  accurately  than  we  could  do  by  the 
conformation  of  the  eye  only.  And  therefore,  we  find, 
that  those  who  have  lost  the  sight  of  one  eye  are  apt,  even 
within  arm's  length,  to  make  mistakes  in  the  distance  of 
objects,  which  are  easily  avoided  by  those  who  see  with 
both  eyes.  Such  mistakes  are  often  discovered  in  snuffina 
a  candle,  in  threading  a  needle,  or  in  filling  a  teacup. 

When  a  picture  is  seen  with  both  eyes  and  at  no  great 
distance,  the  representation  appears  not  so  natural  as  when 
it  is  seen  only  with  one.  The  intention  of  painting  being 
to  deceive  the  eye  and  to  make  things  appear  at  different 
distances,  which  in  reality  are  upon  the  same  piece  of 
canvass,  this  deception  is  not  so  easily  put  upon  both  eyt  - 
as  upon  one ;  because  we  perceive  the  distance  of  visible 
objects  more  exactly  and  determinately  with  two  eyes 
than  with  one.  If  the  shading  and  relief  be  executed  in 
the  best  manner,  the  picture  may  have  almost  the  same 
appearance  to  one  eye  as  the  objects  themselves  would 
have,  but  it  cannot  have  the  same  appearance  to  both. 
This  is  not  the  fault  of  the  artist,  but  an  unavoidable  im- 
perfection in  the  art.  And  it  is  owing  to  what  we  just 
now  observed,  that  the  perception  we  have  of  the  distance 
of  objects  by  one  eye  is  more  uncertain  and  more  liable  to 
deception  than  that  which  we  have  by  both. 

The  great  impediment,  and  I  think  the  only  invincible 
impediment,  to  that  agreeable  deception  of  the  eye  which 
the  painter  aims  at,  is  the  perception  which  we  have  of 
the  distance  of  visible  objects  from  the  eye,  partly  by 
means  of  the  conformation  of  the  eye,  but  chiefly  by  means 
of  the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes.  If  this  perception 
could  be  removed,  I  see  no  reason  why  a  picture  might 
not  be  made  so  perfect  as  to  deceive  the  eye  in  reality  and 
to  be  mistaken  for  the  original  object.  Therefore,  in  order 
to  judge  of  the  merit  of  a  picture,  we  ought,  as  much  as 
possible,  to  exclude  these  two  means  of  perceiving  tin 
distance  of  the  several  parts  of  it. 


SECT.  XXII.]  OF  SEEING.  217 

In  order  to  remove  this  perception  of  distance,  the  con- 
noisseurs in  painting  use  a  method  which  is  very  proper. 
They  look  at  the  picture  with  one  eye,  through  a  tube 
which  excludes  the  view  of  all  other  objects.  By  this 
method,  the  principal  mean  whereby  we  perceive  the  dis- 
tance of  the  object,  to  wit,  the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes 
is  entirely  excluded.  I  would  humbly  propose,  as  an  im- 
provement of  this  method  of  viewing  pictures,  that  the 
aperture  of  the  tube  next  to  the  eye  should  be  very  small. 
If  it  is  as  small  as  a  pin-hole,  BO  much  the  better,  pro- 
viding there  may  be  light  enough  to  see  the  picture  clearly. 
The  reason  of  this  proposal  is,  that  when  we  look  at  an 
object  through  a  small  aperture,  it  will  be  seen  distinctly, 
whether  the  conformation  of  the  eye  be  adapted  to  its  dis- 
tance or  not,  and  we  have  no  means  left  to  judge  of  the 
distance,  but  the  light  and  colouring,  which  are  in  the 
painter's  power.  If,  therefore,  the  artist  performs  his  part 
properly,  the  picture  will  by  this  method  affect  the  eye  in 
the  same  manner  that  the  object  represented  would  do; 
which  is  the  perfection  of  this  art. 

Although  this  second  mean  of  perceiving  the  distance 
of  visible  objects  be  more  determinate  and  exact  than  the 
first,  yet  it  hath  its  limits,  beyond  which  it  can  be  of  no 
use.  For  when  the  optic  axes  directed  to  an  object  are  so 
nearly  parallel  that,  in  directing  them  to  an  object  yet  more 
distant,  we  are  not  conscious  of  any  new  effort,  nor  have 
any  different  sensation;  there  our  perception  of  distance 
stops ;  and  as  all  more  distant  objects  affect  the  eye  in  the 
same  manner,  we  perceive  them  to  be  at  the  same  distance. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  sun,  moon,  planets,  and  fixed 
stars,  when  seen  not  near  the  horizon,  appear  to  be  all  at 
the  same  distance,  as  if  they  touched  the  concave  surfacn 
of  a  great  sphere.  The  surface  of  this  celestial  sphere  is 
at  that  distance  beyond  which  all  objects  affect  the  eye  in 
the  same  manner.  Why  this  celestial  vault  appears  more 
distant  towards  the  horizon  than  towards  the  zenith  will 
afterwards  appear. 

3.  The  colours  of  objects,  according  as  they  are  more 
distant,  become  more  faint  and  languid,  and  are  tinged 

L 


218  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

more  with  the  azure  of  the  intervening  atmosphere :  to  this 
we  may  add,  that  their  minute  parts  become  more  indis- 
tinct, and  their  outline  less  accurately  defined.  It  is  by 
these  means  chiefly  that  painters  can  represent  objects  at 
very  different  distances  upon  the  same  canvass.  And  the 
diminution  of  the  magnitude  of  an  object  would  not  have 
the  effect  of  making  it  appear  to  be  at  a  great  distance 
without  this  degradation  of  colour,  and  indistinctness  of 
the  outline  and  of  the  minute  parts.  If  a  painter  should 
make  a  human  figure  ten  times  less  than  other  human 
figures  that  are  in  the  same  piece,  having  the  colours  as 
bright,  and  the  outline  and  minute  parts  as  accurately  de- 
fined, it  would  not  have  the  appearance  of  a  man  at  a  great 
distance,  but  of  a  pigmy  or  Lilliputian. 

When  an  object  hath  a  known  variety  of  colours,  its 
distance  is  more  clearly  indicated  by  the  gradual  dilution 
of  the  colours  into  one  another  than  when  it  is  of  one  uni- 
form colour.  In  the  steeple  which  stands  before  me  at  a 
small  distance,  the  joinings  of  the  stones  are  clearly  per- 
ceptible ;  the  gray  colour  of  the  stone  and  the  white  cement 
are  distinctly  limited :  when  I  see  it  at  a  greater  distance, 
the  joinings  of  the  stones  are  less  distinct,  and  the  colours 
of  the  stone  and  of  the  cement  begin  to  dilute  into  one 
another;  at  a  distance  still  greater  the  joinings  disappear 
altogether,  and  the  variety  of  colour  vanishes. 

In  an  apple  tree,  which  stands  at  the  distance  of  about 
twelve  feet,  covered  with  flowers,  I  can  perceive  the  figure 
and  the  colour  of  the  leaves  and  petals ;  pieces  of  branches, 
some  larger,  others  smaller,  peeping  through  the  interval 
of  the  leaves,  some  of  them  enlightened  by  the  sun's  rays, 
others  shaded ;  and  some  openings  of  the  sky  are  perceived 
through  the  whole.  When  I  gradually  remove  from  this 
tree,  the  appearance,  even  as  to  colour,  changes  every 
minute.  First,  the  smaller  parts  and  the  larger  are  gra- 
dually confounded  and  mixed.  The  colours  of  leaves, 
petals,  branches,  and  sky,  are  gradually  diluted  into  each 
other,  and  the  colour  of  the  whole  becomes  more  and  more 
uniform.  This  change  of  appearance,  corresponding  to  the 
several  distances,  marks  the  distance  more  exactly  than  if 
the  whole  object  had  been  of  one  colour. 


SECT.  XXII.]  OF  SEEING.  219 

Dr.  Smith,  in  his  Optics,  gives  us  a  very  curious  ob- 
servation made  by  Bishop  Berkeley  in  his  travels  through 
Italy  and  Sicily.  He  observed,  That,  in  those  countries, 
cities  and  palaces  seen  at  a  great  distance  appeared 
nearer  to  him  by  several  miles  than  they  really  Avere :  and 
he  veiy  judiciously  imputed  it  to  this  cause,  that  the  purity 
of  the  Italian  and  Sicilian  air  gave  to  very  distant  objects 
that  degree  of  brightness  and  distinctness  which,  in  the 
grosser  air  of  his  own  country,  was  to  be  seen  only  in 
those  that  are  near.  The  purity  of  the  Italian  air  has 
been  assigned  as  the  reason  why  the  Italian  painters  com- 
monly give  a  more  lively  colour  to  the  sky  than  the 
Flemish.  Ought  they  not,  for  the  same  reason,  to  give 
less  degradation  of  the  colours,  and  less  indistinctness  of 
the  minute  parts,  in  the  representation  of  very  distant 
objects  ? 

It  is  very  certain,  that  as,  in  air  uncommonly  pure,  we 
are  apt  to  think  visible  objects  nearer  and  less  than  they 
really  are ;  so,  in  air  uncommonly  foggy,  we  are  apt  to 
think  them  more  distant  and  larger  than  the  truth.  Walk- 
ing by  the  seaside  in  a  thick  fog,  I  see  an  object  which 
seems  to  me  to  be  a  man  on  horseback,  and  at  the  dis- 
tance of  about  half  a  mile.  My  companion,  who  has  bet- 
ter eyes,  or  is  more  accustomed  to  see  such  objects  in 
such  circumstances,  assures  me,  that  it  is  a  seagull,  and 
not  a  man  on  horseback.  Upon  a  second  view,  I  imme- 
diately assent  to  his  opinion ;  and  now  it  appears  to  me  to 
be  a  seagull,  and  at  the  distance  only  of  seventy  or  eighty 
yards.  The  mistake  made  on  this  occasion,  and  the  cor- 
rection of  it,  are  both  so  sudden  that  we  are  at  a  loss 
whether  to  call  them  by  the  name  of  judgment  or  by  that 
of  simple  perception. 

It  is  not  worth  while  to  dispute  about  names ;  but  it  is 
evident  that  my  belief,  both  first  and  last,  was  produced 
rather  by  signs  than  by  arguments;  and  that  the  mind 
proceeded  to  the  conclusion  in  both  cases  by  habit,  and 
not  by  ratiocination.  And  the  process  of  the  mind  seems 
to  have  been  this :  First,  not  knowing  or  not  minding  the 
effect  of  a  foggy  air  on  the  visible  appearance  of  objects, 

L2 


220  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

the  object  seems  to  me  to  have  that  degradation  of  colour, 
and  that  indistinctness  of  the  outline,  which  objects  have 
at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile ;  therefore,  from  the  visible 
appearance  as  a  sign,  I  immediately  proceed  to  the  belief, 
that  the  object  is  half  a  mile  distant.  Then  this  distance, 
together  with  the  visible  magnitude,  signify  to  me  the  real 
magnitude,  which,  supposing  the  distance  to  be  half  a 
mile,  must  be  equal  to  that  of  a  man  on  horseback.  Thus 
the  deception  is  brought  about.  But  when  I  am  assured 
that  it  is  a  seagull,  the  real  magnitude  of  a  seagull,  toge- 
ther with  the  visible  magnitude  presented  to  the  eye,  im- 
mediately suggest  the  distance,  which  in  this  case  cannot 
be  above  seventy  or  eighty  yards  :  the  indistinctness  of  the 
figure  likewise  suggests  the  fogginess  of  the  air  as  its 
cause :  and  now  the  whole  chain  of  signs,  and  things  sig- 
nified, seems  stronger  and  better  connected  than  it  was 
before ;  the  half  mile  vanishes  to  eighty  yards ;  the  man 
on  horseback  dwindles  to  a  seagull ;  I  get  a  new  percep- 
tion, and  wTonder  how  I  got  the  former,  or  what  is  be- 
come of  it;  for  it  is  now  so  entirely  gone  that  I  cannot 
recover  it. 

It  ought  to  be  observed,  that  in  order  to  produce  such 
deceptions  from  the  clearness  or  fogginess  of  the  air,  it 
must  be  uncommonly  clear,  or  uncommonly  foggy ;  for  we 
learn  from  experience  to  make  allowance  for  that  variety 
of  constitutions  of  the  air  which  we  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  observe,  and  of  which  we  are  aware.  Bishop 
Berkeley  therefore  committed  a  mistake,  when  he  attri- 
buted the  large  appearance  of  the  horizontal  moon  to  the 
faintness  of  her  light,  occasioned  by  its  passing  through  a 
larger  tract  of  atmosphere  :  for  we  are  so  much  accus- 
tomed to  see  the  moon  in  all  degrees  of  faintness  and 
brightness,  from  the  greatest  to  the  least,  that  we  learn  to 
make  allowance  for  it ;  and  do  not  imagine  her  magnitude 
increased  by  the  faintness  of  her  appearance.  Besides,  it 
is  certain  that  the  horizontal  moon,  seen  through  a  tube 
which  cuts  off  the  view  of  the  interjacent  ground,  and  of 
all  terrestrial  objects,  loses  all  that  unusual  appearance  of 
magnitude. 


SECT.  XXII.]  OF  SEEING.  221 

4.  We  frequently  perceive  the  distance  of  objects  by 
means  of  intervening  or  contiguous  objects,  whose  dis- 
tance or  magnitude  is  otherwise  known.  When  I  per- 
ceive certain  fields  or  tracts  of  ground  to  lie  between  me 
and  an  object,  it  is  evident  that  these  may  become  signs 
of  its  distance.  And  although  we  have  no  particular  in- 
formation of  the  dimensions  of  such  fields  or  tracts,  yet 
their  similitude  to  others  which  we  know,  suggests  their 
dimensions. 

We  are  so  much  accustomed  to  measure  with  our  eye 
the  ground  which  we  travel,  and  to  compare  the  judg- 
ments of  distances  formed  by  sight  with  our  experience  or 
information,  that  we  learn  by  degrees,  in  this  way,  to  form 
a  more  accurate  judgment  of  the  distance  of  terrestrial 
objects,  than  we  could  do  by  any  of  the  means  before 
mentioned.  An  object  placed  upon  the  top  of  a  high 
building  appears  much  less  than  when  placed  upon  the 
ground  at  the  same  distance.  When  it  stands  upon  the 
ground,  the  intervening  tract  of  ground  serves  as  a  sign  of 
its  distance;  and  the  distance,  together  with  the  visible 
magnitude,  serves  as  a  sign  of  its  real  magnitude.  But 
when  the  object  is  placed  on  high,  this  sign  of  its  distance 
is  taken  away :  the  remaining  signs  lead  us  to  place  it  at 
a  less  distance  ;  and  this  less  distance,  together  with  the 
visible  magnitude,  becomes  a  sign  of  a  less  real  magni- 
tude. 

The  two  first  means  we  have  mentioned  would  never  of 
themselves  make  a  visible  object  appear  above  a  hun- 
dred and  fifty  or  two  hundred  feet  distant ;  because,  be- 
yond that  there  is  no  sensible  change,  either  of  the  con- 
formation of  the  eyes  or  the  inclination  of  their  axes.  The 
third  mean  is  but  a  vague  and  undeterminate  sign  when 
applied  to  distances  above  two  or  three  hundred  feet, 
unless  we  know  the  real  colour  and  figure  of  the  object ; 
and  the  fifth  mean,  to  be  afterwards  mentioned,  can  only 
be  applied  to  objects  which  are  familiar,  or  whose  real 
magnitude  is  known.  Hence  it  follows,  that  when  un- 
known objects,  upon  or  near  the  surface  of  the  earth,  are 
perceived  to  be  at  the  distance  of  some  miles,  it  is  always 
by  this  fourth  mean  that  we  are  led  to  that  conclusion, 


222  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

Dr.  Smith  hath  observed,  very  justly,  that  the  known 
distance  of  the  terrestrial  objects,  which  terminate  our 
view,  makes  that  part  of  the  sky  which  is  towards  the 
horizon  appear  more  distant  than  that  which  is  towards 
the  zenith.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  the  apparent 
figure  of  the  sky  is  not  that  of  a  hemisphere,  but  rather  a 
less  segment  of  a  sphere.  And  hence  likewise  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  the  diameter  of  the  sun  or  moon,  or  the  dis- 
tance between  two  fixed  stars,  seen  contiguous  to  a  hill,  or 
to  any  distant  terrestrial  object,  appears  much  greater  than 
when  no  such  object  strikes  the  eye  at  the  same  time. 

These  observations  have  been  sufficiently  examined  and 
confirmed  by  Dr.  Smith.  I  beg  leave  to  add,  that  when 
the  visible  horizon  is  terminated  by  very  distant  objects, 
the  celestial  vault  seems  to  be  enlarged  in  all  its  dimen- 
sions. When  I  view  it  from  a  confined  street  or  lane,  it 
bears  some  proportion  to  the  buildings  that  surround  me  : 
but  when  I  view  it  from  a  large  plain,  terminated  on  all 
hands  by  hills  which  rise  one  above  another,  to  the  dis- 
tance of  twenty  miles  from  the  eye,  methinks  I  see  a  new 
heaven,  whose  magnificence  declares  the  greatness  of  its 
Author,  and  puts  every  human  edifice  out  of  countenance ; 
for  now  the  lofty  spires  and  the  gorgeous  palaces  shrink 
into  nothing  before  it,  and  bear  no  more  proportion  to  the 
celestial  dome  than  their  makers  bear  to  its  Maker. 

5.  There  remains  another  mean  by  which  we  perceive 
the  distance  of  visible  objects,  and  that  is,  the  diminution 
of  their  visible  or  apparent  magnitude.  By  experience  I 
know  what  figure  a  man,  or  any  other  known  object  makes 
to  my  eye,  at  the  distance  of  ten  feet :  I  perceive  the  gra- 
dual and  proportional  diminution  of  this  visible  figure,  at 
the  distance  of  twenty,  forty,  a  hundred  feet,  and  at  greater 
distances,  until  it  vanish  altogether.  Hence  a  certain  visi- 
ble magnitude  of  a  known  object  becomes  the  sign  of  a 
certain  determinate  distance,  and  carries  along  with  it  the 
conception  and  belief  of  that  distance. 

In  this  process  of  the  mind  the  sign  is  not  a  sensation ; 
it  is  an  original  perception.  We  perceive  the  visible  figure 
and  visible  magnitude  of  the  object  by  the  original  powers 
of  vision ;  but  the  visible  figure  is  used  only  as  a  sign  of 


SECT.  XXII.]  OF  SEEING.  223 

the  real  figure,  and  the  visible  magnitude  is  used  only  as  a 
sign  either  of  the  distance,  or  of  the  real  magnitude  of  the 
object;  and  therefore  these  original  perceptions,  like  other 
mere  signs,  pass  through  the  mind  without  any  attention  or 
reflection. 

This  last  mean  of  perceiving  the  distance  of  known  ob- 
jects serves  to  explain  some  very  remarkable  phenomena 
in  optics,  which  would  otherwise  appear  very  mysterious. 
When  we  view  objects  of  known  dimensions  through  opti- 
cal glasses,  there  is  no  other  mean  left  of  determining  their 
distance  but  this  fifth.  Hence  it  follows,  that  known  objects, 
seen  through  glasses,  must  seem  to  be  brought  nearer  in 
proportion  to  the  magnifying  power  of  the  glass,  or  to  be 
removed  to  a  greater  distance,  improportion  to  the  diminish- 
ing power  of  the  glass. 

If  a  man  who  had  never  before  seen  objects  through  a 
telescope  were  told,  that  the  telescope  which  he  is  about 
to  use  magnifies  the  diameter  of  the  object  ten  times ; 
when  he  looks  through  this  telescope  at  a  man  six  feet 
high,  what  would  he  expect  to  see  ?  Surely  he  would  very 
naturally  expect  to  see  a  giant  sixty  feet  high.  But  he 
sees  no  such  thing.  The  man  appears  no  more  than  six 
feet  high,  and  consequently  no  bigger  than  he  really  is ; 
but  he  appears  ten  times  nearer  than  he  is.  The  telescope 
indeed  magnifies  the  image  of  this  man  upon  the  retina  ten 
times  in  diameter,  and  must  therefore  magnify  his  visible 
figure  in  the  same  proportion;  and  as  we  have  been  ac- 
customed to  see  him  of  this  visible  magnitude,  when  he  was 
ten  times  nearer  than  he  is  presently,  and  in  no  other  case; 
this  visible  magnitude,  therefore,  suggests  the  conception 
and  belief  of  that  distance  of  the  object  with  which  it  hath 
been  always  connected.  We  have  been  accustomed  to 
conceive  this  amplification  of  the  visible  figure  of  a  known 
object  only  as  the  effect  or  sign  of  its  being  brought  nearer  : 
and  we  have  annexed  a  certain  determinate  distance  to 
every  degree  of  visible  magnitude  of  the  object;  and 
therefore,  any  particular  degree  of  visible  magnitude,  whe- 
ther seen  by  the  naked  eye  or  by  glasses,  brings  along 
with  it  the  conception  and  belief  of  the  distance  which  cor- 


224  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

responds  to  it.  This  is  the  reason  why  a  telescope  seems 
not  to  magnify  known  objects,  but  to  bring  them  nearer  to 
the  eye. 

When  we  look  through  a  pin-hole,  or  a  single  micros- 
cope, at  an  object  which  is  half  an  inch  from  the  eye, 
the  picture  of  the  object  upon  the  retina  is  not  enlarged, 
but  only  rendered  distinct;  neither  is  the  visible  figure 
enlarged :  yet  the  object  appears  to  the  eye  twelve  or 
fourteen  times  more  distant,  and  as  many  times  larger  in 
diameter  than  it  really  is.  Such  a  telescope  as  we  have 
mentioned,  amplifies  the  image  on  the  retina,  and  the 
visible  figure  of  the  object,  ten  times  in  diameter,  and  yet 
it  makes  it  seem  no  bigger,  but  only  ten  times  nearer. 
These  appearances  had  been  long  observed  by  the  writers 
on  optics ;  they  tortured  their  invention  to  find  the  causes 
of  them  from  optical  principles ;  but  in  vain :  they  must 
be  resolved  into  habits  of  perception,  which  are  acquired 
by  custom,  but  are  apt  to  be  mistaken  for  original  percep- 
tions. The  Bishop  of  Cloyne  first  furnished  the  world 
with  the  proper  key  for  opening  up  these  mysterious  ap- 
pearances; but  he  made  considerable  mistakes  in  the 
application  of  it.  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  elaborate  and  judici- 
ous treatise  of  Optics,  hath  applied  it  to  the  apparent  dis- 
tance of  objects  seen  with  glasses,  and  to  the  apparent 
figure  of  the  heavens,  with  such  happy  success,  that  there 
can  be  no  more  doubt  about  the  cause  of  these  phe- 
nomena. 


SECT.  XXIII. 

Of  the  Signs  used  in  other  acquired  Perceptions. 

THE  distance  of  objects  from  the  eye  is  the  most  impor- 
tant lesson  in  vision.  Many  others  are  easily  learned  in 
consequence  of  it.  The  distance  of  the  object,  joined  with 
its  visible  magnitude,  is  a  sign  of  its  real  magnitude :  and 
the  distance  of  the  several  parts  of  an  object,  joined  with 
its  visible  figure,  becomes  a  sign  of  its  real  figure.  Thus, 


SECT.  XXIII.]  OF  SEEING.  225 

when  I  look  at  a  globe,  which  stands  before  me,  by  the 
original  powers  of  sight,  I  perceive  only  something  of  a 
circular  form,  variously  coloured.  The  visible  figure  hath 
uo  distance  from  the  eye,  no  convexity,  nor  hath  it  three 
dimensions ;  even  its  length  and  breadth  are  incapable  of 
being  measured  by  inches,  feet,  or  other  linear  measures. 
But  when  I  have  learned  to  perceive  the  distance  of  every 
part  of  this  object  from  the  eye,  this  perception  gives  it 
convexity,  and  a  spherical  figure ;  and  adds  a  third  dimen- 
sion to  that  which  had  but  two  before.  The  distance  of 
the  whole  object  makes  me  likewise  perceive  the  real  mag- 
nitude :  for  being  accustomed  to  observe  how  an  inch  or 
a  foot  of  length  affects  the  eye  at  that  distance,  I  plainly 
perceive  by  my  eye  the  linear  dimensions  of  the  globe,  and 
can  affirm  with  certainty  that  its  diameter  is  about  one  foot 
and  three  inches. 

It  was  shown  in  the  seventh  Section  of  this  Chapter, 
that  the  visible  figure  of  a  body  may,  by  mathematical 
reasoning,  be  inferred  from  its  real  figure,  distance,  and 
position,  with  regard  to  the  eye :  in  like  manner  we  may, 
by  mathematical  reasoning,  from  the  visible  figure,  toge- 
ther with  the  distance  of  the  several  parts  of  it  from  the 
eye,  infer  the  real  figure  and  position.  But  this  last  infe- 
rence is  not  commonly  made  by  mathematical  reasoning-, 
nor  indeed  by  reasoning  of  any  kind,  but  by  custom. 

The  original  appearance  which  the  colour  of  an  object 
makes  to  the  eye  is  a  sensation  for  which  we  have  no 
name,  because  it  is  used  merely  as  a  sign,  and  is  never 
made  an  object  of  attention  in  common  life :  but  this  ap- 
pearance, according-  to  the  different  circumstances,  signi- 
fies various  things.  If  a  piece  of  cloth  of  one  uniform 
colour,  is  laid  so  that  part  of  it  is  in  the  sun,  and  part  in 
the  shade ;  the  appearance  of  colour  in  these  different  parts 
is  very  different:  yet  we  perceive  the  colour  to  be  the 
same ;  we  interpret  the  variety  of  appearance  as  a  sign  of 
light  and  shade,  and  not  as  a  sign  of  real  difference  in  co- 
lour. But  if  the  eye  could  be  so  far  deceived,  as  not  to 
perceive  the  difference  of  light  in  the  two  parts  of  the 
cloth,  we  should  in  that  case  interpret  the  variety  of  ap- 

L3 


226  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

pearance  to  signify  a  variety  of  colour  in  the  parts  of  the 
cloth. 

Again,  if  we  suppose  a  piece  of  cloth  placed  as  before, 
but  having  the  shaded  part  so  much  brighter  in  the  colour, 
that  it  gives  the  same  appearance  to  the  eye  as  the  more 
enlightened  part ;  the  sameness  of  appearance  will  here  be 
interpreted  to  signify  a  variety  of  colour,  because  we  shall 
make  allowance  for  the  effect  of  light  and  shade. 

When  the  real  colour  of  an  object  is  known,  the  ap- 
pearance of  it  indicates,  in  some  circumstances,  the  degree 
of  light  or  shade ;  in  others,  the  colour  of  the  circumam- 
bient bodies,  whose  rays  are  reflected  by  it;  and  in  other 
circumstances,  it  indicates  the  distance  or  proximity  of  the 
object,  as  was  observed  in  the  last  section ;  and  by  means 
of  these  many  other  things  are  suggested  to  the  mind. 
Thus,  an  unusual  appearance  in  the  colour  of  familiar  ob- 
jects may  be  the  diagnostic  of  a  disease  in  the  spectator. 
The  appearance  of  things  in  my  room  may  indicate  sun- 
shine or  cloudy  weather,  the  earth  covered  with  snow,  or 
blackened  with  rain.  It  hath  been  observed,  that  the 
colour  of  the  sky,  in  a  piece  of  painting,  may  indicate  the 
country  of  the  painter,  because  the  Italian  sky  is  really  of 
a  different  colour  from  the  Flemish. 

It  was  already  observed,  that  the  original  and  acquired 
perceptions  which  we  have  by  our  senses  are  the  language 
of  nature  to  man,  which,  in  many  respects,  hath  a  great 
affinity  to  human  languages.  The  instances  which  we 
have  given  of  acquired  perceptions  suggest  this  affinity, 
that  as,  in  human  languages,  ambiguities  are  often  found, 
so  this  language  of  nature  in  our  acquired  perceptions  is 
not  exempted  from  them.  We  have  seen,  in  vision  par- 
ticularly, that  the  same  appearance  to  the  eye  may,  in 
different  circumstances,  indicate  different  things.  There- 
fore, when  the  circumstances  are  unknown  upon  which  the 
interpretation  of  the  signs  depend,  their  meaning  must  be 
ambiguous ;  and  when  the  circumstances  are  mistaken,  the 
meaning  of  the  signs  must  also  be  mistaken. 

This  is  the  case  in  all  the  phenomena  which  we  call 
fallacies  of  the  senses;  and  particularly  m  those  which 


SECT.  XXIII.]  OF  SEEING.  257 

are  called  fallacies  in  vision.  The  appearance  of  things 
to  the  eye  always  corresponds  to  the  fixed  laws  of  nature ; 
therefore,  if  we  speak  properly,  there  is  no  fallacy  in  the 
senses.  Nature  always  speaketh  the  same  language,  and 
useth  the  same  signs  in  the  same  circumstances :  but  we 
sometimes  mistake  the  meaning  of  the  signs,  either  through 
ignorance  of  the  laws  of  nature,  or  through  ignorance  of  the 
circumstances  which  attend  the  signs. 

To  a  man  unacquainted  with  the  principles  of  optics, 
almost  every  experiment  that  is  made  with  the  prism,  with 
the  magic  lantern,  with  the  telescope,  with  the  microscope, 
seems  to  produce  some  fallacy  in  vision.  Even  the  ap- 
pearance of  a  common  mirror,  to  one  altogether  unac- 
quainted with  the  effects  of  it,  would  seem  most  remark- 
ably fallacious.  For  how  can  a  man  be  more  imposed 
upon  than  in  seeing  that  before  him  which  is  really  behind 
him?  How  can  he  be  more  imposed  upon  than  in  being 
made  to  see  himself  several  yards  removed  from  himself? 
Yet  children,  even  before  they  can  speak  their  mother 
tongue,  learn  not  to  be  deceived  by  these  appearances. 
These,  as  well  as  all  the  other  surprising  appearances  pro- 
duced by  optical  glasses,  are  a  part  of  the  visual  lan- 
guage ;  and,  to  those  who  understand  the  laws  of  nature 
concerning  light  and  colours,  are  in  no  wise  fallacious,  but 
have  a  distinct  and  true  meaning. 


SECT.  XXIV. 

Of  the  Analogy  between  Perception,  and  the  Credit  we 
give  to  Human  Testimony. 

THE  objects  of  human  knowledge  are  innumerable,  but  the 
channels  by  which  it  is  conveyed  to  the  mind  are  few. 
Among  these,  the  perception  of  external  things  by  our 
senses,  and  the  informations  which  we  receive  upon  human 
testimony,  are  not  the  least  considerable :  and  so  remark- 
able is  the  analogy  between  these  two,  and  the  analogy 
between  the  principles  of  the  mind,  which  are  subservient 
to  the  one,  and  those  which  are  subservient  to  the  other, 


228  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

that,  without  further  apology,  we  shall  consider  them  to- 
gether. 

In  the  testimony  of  nature  given  by  the  senses,  as  well 
as  in  human  testimony  given  by  language,  things  are  sig- 
nified to  us  by  signs :  and  in  one,  as  well  as  the  other,  the 
mind,  either  by  original  principles,  or  by  custom,  passes 
from  the  sign  to  the  conception  and  belief  of  the  things 
signified. 

We  have  distinguished  our  perceptions  into  original  and 
acquired  ;  and  language,  into  natural  and  artificial.  Be- 
tween acquired  perception  and  artificial  language  there  is 
a  great  analogy ;  but  still  a  greater  between  original  per- 
ception and  natural  language. 

The  signs  in  original  perception  are  sensations  of  which 
nature  hath  given  us  a  great  variety,  suited  to  the  variety 
of  the  things  signified  by  them.  Nature  hath  established 
a  real  connexion  between  the  signs  and  the  things  signified; 
and  Nature  hath  also  taught  us  the  interpretation  of  the 
signs ;  so  that,  previous  to  experience,  the  sign  suggests 
the  thing  signified,  and  creates  the  belief  of  it. 

The  signs  in  natural  language  are  features  of  the  face, 
gestures  of  the  body,  and  modulations  of  the  voice ;  the 
variety  of  which  is  suited  to  the  variety  of  the  things  sig- 
nified by  them.  Nature  hath  established  a  real  connexion 
between  these  signs  and  the  thoughts  and  dispositions  of 
the  mind  which  are  signified  by  them;  and  nature  hath 
taught  us  the  interpretation  of  these  signs ;  so  that,  pre- 
vious to  experience,  the  signs  suggest  the  thing  signified, 
and  create  the  belief  of  it. 

A  man  in  company,  without  doing  good  or  evil,  with- 
out uttering  an  articulate  sound,  may  behave  himself 
gracefully,  civilly,  politely;  or,  on  the  contrary,  meanly, 
rudely,  and  impertinently.  We  see  the  dispositions  of  his 
mind  by  their  natural  signs  in  his  countenance  and  beha- 
viour, in  the  same  manner  as  we  perceive  the  figure  and 
other  qualities  of  bodies  by  the  sensations  which  naturt 
hath  connected  with  them. 

The  signs  in  the  natural  language  of  the  human  counte 
nance  and  behaviour  as  well  as  the  signs  in  our  original 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  229 

<  options,  have  the  same  signification  in  all  climates,  and 
in  all  nations ;  and  the  skill  of  interpreting  them  is  not  ac- 
quired, but  innate. 

In  acquired  perception,  the  signs  are  either  sensations, 
or  things  which  we  perceive  by  means  of  sensations.    The 
xion  between  the  sign   and  the  thing  signified   is 
•blished  by  nature:  and  we  discover  this  connexion  by 
perience;  but  not  without  the  aid  of  our  original  per- 
ptions,  or  of  those  which  we  have  'already  acquired. 
After  this  connexion  is  discovered,  the  sign,  in  like  man- 
ner as  in  original  perception,  always  suggests  the  thing 
:iiified,  and  creates  the  belief  of  it. 

In  artificial  language,  the  signs  are  articulate  sounds, 

whose   connexion  with  the   things  signified  by  them  is 

(^tablishcd  by  the  will  of  men:  and  in  learning  our  nio- 

cr  tongue,  we  discover  this  connexion  by  experience ; 

;t  not  without  the  aid  of  natural  language,  or  of  what  we 

(1  before  attained  of  artificial  language.     And  after  this 

•nnexion  is  discovered,  the  sign,  as  in  natural  language, 

always  suggests  the  thing  signified,  and  creates  the  belief 

ol'  it. 

Our  original  perceptions  are  few,  compared  with  the 

•tcquired;  but  without  the  former  we  could  not  possibly 

ain    the  latter.      In  like  manner  natural  language  is 

scanty,  compared  with  artificial ;    but  without  the  former 

we  could  not  possibly  attain  the  latter. 

Our  original  perceptions,  as  well  as  the  natural  lan- 

uage  of  human  features  and  gestures,  must  be  resolved 

0  particular  principles  of  the  human  constitution.    Thus. 

is  by  one  particular  principle  of  our  constitution,  that 

ritain  features  express  anger;  and  by  another  particular 

principle,  that  certain  features  express  benevolence.    It  is, 

i  like  manner,  by  one  particular  principle  of  our  constitu- 

that  a  certain  sensation  signifies  hardness  in  the  body 

ii  I  handle;  and  it  is  by  another  particular  principle, 

that  a  certain  sensation  signifies  motion  in  that  body. 

But  our  acquired  perceptions,  and  the  information  we 

eceive  by  means  of  artificial  language,  must  be  resolved 

•  general  principles  of  the  human  constitution.     When 


OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

a  painter  perceives  that  this  picture  is  the  work  of  Ra- 
phael, that  the  work  of  Titian;  a  jeweller,  that  this  is  a 
true  diamond,  that  a  counterfeit;  a  sailor,  that  this  is  a 
ship  of  five  hundred  tons,  that  of  four  hundred;  these 
different  acquired  perceptions  are  produced  by  the  same 
general  principles  of  the  human  mind  which  have  a  dif- 
ferent operation  in  the  same  person,  according  as  they  are 
variously  applied,  and  in  different  persons  according  to  the 
diversity  of  their  education  and  manner  of  life.  In  like 
manner,  when  certain  articulate  sounds  convey  to  my 
mind  the  knowledge  of  the  battle  of  Pharsalia ;  and  others, 
the  knowledge  of  the  battle  of  Pultowa  ;  when  a  French- 
man and  an  Englishman  receive  the  same  information  by 
different  articulate  sounds ;  the  signs  used  in  these  differ- 
ent cases  produce  the  knowledge  and  belief  of  the  thing 
signified,  by  means  of  the  same  general  principles  of  the 
human  constitution. 

Now,  if  we  compare  the  general  principles  of  our  con- 
stitution, which  fit  us  for  receiving  information  from  our 
fellow  creatures  by  language,  with  the  general  principles 
which  fit  us  for  acquiring  the  perception  of  things  by  our 
senses,  we  shall  find  them  to  be  very  similar  in  their  na- 
ture and  manner  of  operation. 

When  we  begin  to  learn  our  mother  tongue  we  perceive, 
by  the  help  of  natural  language,  that  they  who  speak  to 
us  use  certain  sounds  to  express  certain  things :  we  imi- 
tate the  same  sounds  when  we  would  express  the  same 
things,  and  find  that  we  are  understood. 

But  here  a  difficulty  occurs  which  merits  our  attention, 
because  the  solution  of  it  leads  to  some  original  principles 
of  the  human  mind,  which  are  of  great  importance,  and  of 
very  extensive  influence.  We  know  by  experience  that 
men  have  used  such  words  to  express  such  things.  But 
all  experience  is  of  the  past,  and  can  of  itself  give  no 
notion  or  belief  of  what  is  future.  How  come  we  then  to 
believe  and  to  rely  upon  it  with  assurance,  that  men  who 
have  it  in  their  power  to  do  otherwise  will  continue  to  use 
the  same  words  when  they  think  the  same  things  ?  Whence 
comes  this  knowledge  and  belief,  this  foresight  we  ought 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  231 

rather  to  call  it,  of  the  future  and  voluntary  actions  of  our 
fellow  creatures  ?  Have  they  promised  that  they  will  never 
impose  upon  us  by  equivocation  or  falsehood?  No,  they 
have  not.  And,  if  they  had,  this  would  not  solve  the  dif- 
ficulty :  for  such  promise  must  be  expressed  by  words,  or 
by  other  signs ;  and,  before  we  can  rely  upon  it,  we  must 
be  assured  that  they  put  the  usual  meaning  upon  the  signs 
which  express  that  promise.  No  man  of  common  sense 
ever  thought  of  taking  a  man's  own  word  for  his  honesty ; 
and  it  is  evident  that  we  take  his  veracity  for  granted, 
when  we  lay  any  stress  upon  his  word  or  promise.  I 
might  add,  that  this  reliance  upon  the  declarations  and  tes- 
timony of  men  is  found  in  children  long  before  they  know 
what  a  promise  is. 

There  is,  therefore,  in  the  human  mind  an  early  anticipa- 
tion, neither  derived  from  experience,  nor  from  reason,  nor 
from  any  compact  or  promise,  that  our  fellow  creatures  will 
use  the  same  signs  in  language  when  they  have  the  same 
sentiments. 

This  is,  in  reality,  a  kind  of  prescience  of  human  ac- 
tions ;  and  it  seems  to  me  to  be  an  original  principle  of  the 
human  constitution,  without  which  it  would  be  incapable  of 
language,  and  consequently  incapable  of  instruction. 

The  wise  and  beneficent  Author  of  nature,  who  intend- 
ed that  we  should  be  social  creatures,  and  that  we  should 
receive  the  greatest  and  most  important  part  of  our  know- 
ledge by  the  information  of  others,  hath,  for  these  pur- 
poses, implanted  in  our  natures  two  principles  that  tally 
with  each  other. 

The  first  of  these  principles  is,  a  propensity  to  speak 
truth,  and  to  use  the  signs  of  language,  so  as  to  convey 
our  real  sentiments.  This  principle  has  a  powerful  opera- 
tion even  in  the  greatest  liars ;  for,  where  they  lie  once 
they  speak  truth  a  hundred  times.  Truth  is  always  upper- 
most, and  is  the  natural  issue  of  the  mind.  It  requires  no 
art  or  training,  no  inducement  or  temptation,  but  only  that 
we  yield  to  a  natural  impulse.  Lying,  on  the  contrary,  is 
doing  violence  to  our  nature;  and  is  never  practised,  even 
by  the  worst  men,  without  some  temptation.  Speaking 
truth  is  like  using  our  natural  food,  which  we  would  do 


232  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

from  appetite,  although  it  answered  no  end;  but  lying  is 
like  taking  physic,  which  is  nauseous  to  the  taste,  and 
which  no  man  takes  but  for  some  end  wliich  he  cannot 
otherwise  attain. 

If  it  should  be  objected,  That  men  may  be  influenced 
by  moral  or  political  considerations  to  speak  truth,  and 
therefore,  that  their  doing  so  is  no  proof  of  such  an  origi- 
nal principle  as  we  have  mentioned :  I  answer,  first,  That 
moral  or  political  considerations  can  have  no  influence 
until  we  arrive  at  years  of  understanding  and  reflection : 
and  it  is  certain  from  experience  that  children  keep  to 
truth  invariably,  before  they  are  capable  of  being  influ- 
enced by  such  considerations.  Secondly,  When  we  are 
influenced  by  moral  or  political  considerations,  we  must  be 
conscious  of  that  influence,  and  capable  of  perceiving  it 
upon  reflection.  Now,  when  I  reflect  upon  my  actions 
most  attentively,  I  am  not  conscious  that  in  speaking 
truth  I  am  influenced  on  ordinary  occasions  by  any  motive 
moral  or  political.  I  find  that  truth  is  always  at  the 
door  of  my  lips,  and  goes  forth  spontaneously,  if  not  held 
back.  It  requires  neither  good  nor  bad  intention  to  bring 
it  forth,  but  only  that  I  be  artless  and  undesigning.  There 
may,  indeed,  be  temptations  to  falsehood,  which  would  be 
too  strong  for  the  natural  principle  of  veracity,  unaided  by 
principles  of  honour  or  virtue ;  but  where  there  is  no  such 
temptation,  we  speak  truth  by  instinct;  and  this  instinct  is 
the  principle  I  have  been  explaining. 

By  this  instinct,  a  real  connexion  is  formed  between  our 
words  and  our  thoughts,  and  thereby  the  former  become  fit 
to  be  signs  of  the  latter,  which  they  could  not  otherwise 
be.  And  although  this  connexion  is  broken  in  every  in- 
stance of  lying  and  equivocation,  yet  these  instances  being 
comparatively  few,  the  authority  of  human  testimony  is 
only  weakened  by  them,  but  not  destroyed. 

Another  original  principle  implanted  in  us  by  the  Su- 
preme Being,  is  a  disposition  to  confide  in  the  veracity  of 
others,  and  to  believe  what  they  tell  us.  This  is  the  coun- 
ter part  to  the  former ;  and  as  that  may  be  called  the  prin- 
ciple of  veracity,  we  shall,  for  want  of  a  more  proper 
name,  call  this  the  principle  of  credulity.  It  is  unlimited 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  233 

ia  children,  until  they  meet  with  instances  of  deceit  and 
falsehood :  and  it  retains  a  very  considerable  degree  of 
strength  through  life. 

If  nature  had  left  the  mind  of  the  speaker  in  equilibria, 
without  any  inclination  to  the  side  of  truth  more  than  to 
that  of  falsehood ;  children  would  lie  as  often  as  they  speak 
truth,  until  reason  was  so  far  ripened  as  to  suggest  the 
imprudence  of  lying,  or  conscience,  as  to  suggest  its  immo- 
rality. And,  if  nature  had  left  the  mind  of  the  hearer  in 
equilibria,  without  any  inclination  to  the  side  of  belief  more 
than  to  that  of  disbelief,  we  should  take  no  man's  word  until 
we  had  positive  evidence  that  he  spoke  truth.  His  testi- 
mony would,  in  this  case,  have  no  more  authority  than  his 
dreams;  which  may  be  true  or  false,  but  no  man  is  dis- 
posed to  believe  them,  on  this  account,  that  they  were 
dreamed.  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  matter  of  testimony, 
the  balance  of  human  judgment  is  by  nature  inclined  to  the 
side  of  belief;  and  turns  to  that  side  of  itself,  when  there 
is  nothing  put  into  the  opposite  scale.  If  it  was  not  so, 
no  proposition  that  is  uttered  in  discourse  would  be  be- 
lieved until  it  was  examined  and  tried  by  reason ;  and 
most  men  would  be  unable  to  find  reasons  for  believing  the 
thousandth  part  of  what  is  told  them.  Such  distrust  and 
incredulity  would  deprive  us  of  the  greatest  benefits  of 
society,  and  place  us  in  a  worse  condition  than  that  of 
savages. 

Children,  on  this  supposition,  would  be  absolutely  in- 
credulous ;  and  therefore  absolutely  incapable  of  instruc- 
tion :  those  who  had  little  knowledge  of  human  life,  and  of 
the  manners  and  characters  of  men,  would  be  in  the  next 
degree  incredulous ;  and  the  most  credulous  men  would 
be  those  of  greatest  experience,  and  of  the  greatest  pene- 
tration ;  because,  in  many  cases,  they  would  be  able  to 
rind  good  reasons  for  believing  testimony  which  the  weak 
and  the  ignorant  could  not  discover. 

In  a  word,  if  credulity  were  the  effect  of  reasoning  and 
experience,  it  must  grow  up  and  gather  strength  in  the 
same  proportion  as  reason  and  experience  do.  But,  if  it 
is  the  gift  of  nature,  it  will  be  strongest  in  childhood,  and 


234  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

limited  and  restrained  by  experience ;  and  the  most  super- 
ficial view  of  human  life  shows,  that  the  last  is  really  the 
case,  and  not  the  first. 

It  is  the  intention  of  nature  that  we  should  be  carried 
in  arms  before  we  are  able  to  walk  upon  our  less ;  and  it 
is  likewise  the  intention  of  nature  that  our  belief  should 
be  guided  by  the  authority  and  reason  of  others,  before  it 
can  be  guided  by  our  own  reason.  The  weakness  of  the 
infant  and  the  natural  affection  of  the  mother  plainly  in- 
dicate the  former ;  and  the  natural  credulity  of  youth  and 
authority  of  age  as  plainly  indicate  the  latter.  The  infant, 
by  proper  nursing  and  care,  acquires  strength  to  walk 
without  support.  Reason  hath  likewise  her  infancy  when 
she  must  be  carried  in  arms :  when  she  leans  entirely  upon 
authority,  by  natural  instinct,  as  if  she  was  conscious  of 
her  own  weakness ;  and  without  this  support  she  becomes 
vertiginous.  When  brought  to  maturity  by  proper  culture, 
she  begins  to  feel  her  own  strength,  and  leans  less  upon 
the  reason  of  others ;  she  learns  to  suspect  testimony  in 
some  cases,  and  to  disbelieve  it  in  others ;  and  sets  bounds 
to  that  authority  to  which  she  was  at  first  entirely  subject. 
But  still,  to  the  end  of  life,  she  finds  a  necessity  of  bor- 
rowing light  from  testimony,  where  sho  has  none  within 
herself,  and  of  leaning  in  some  degree  upon  the  reason  of 
others,  where  she  is  conscious  of  her  own  imbecility. 

And  as  in  many  instances,  Reason,  even  in  her  matu- 
rity, borrows  aid  from  testimony ;  so  in  others,  she  mutu- 
ally gives  aid  to  it,  and  strengthens  its  authority.  For  as 
we  find  good  reason  to  reject  testimony  in  some  cases,  so 
in  others  we  find  good  reason  to  rely  upon  it  with  perfect 
security,  in  our  most  important  concerns.  The  character, 
the  number,  and  the  disinterestedness  of  witnesses,  the 
impossibility  of  collusion,  and  the  incredibility  of  their 
concurring  in  their  testimony  without  collusion,  may  give 
an  irresistible  strength  to  testimony,  compared  to  which  its 
native  and  intrinsic  authority  is  very  inconsiderable. 

Having  now  considered  the  general  principles  of  the 
human  mind  which  fit  us  for  receiving  information  fixfcn 
our  fellow  creatures  by  the  means  of  language;  let  us 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  235 

next  consider  the  general  principles  which  tit  us  for  re- 
ceiving the  information  of  nature  by  our  acquired  percep- 
tions. 

It  is  undeniable,  and  indeed  is  acknowledged  by  all, 
that  when  we  have  found  two  things  to  have  been  con- 
stantly conjoined  in  the  course  of  nature,  the  appearance 
of  one  of  them  is  immediately  followed  by  the  conception 
and  belief  of  the  other.  The  former  becomes  a  natural 
sign  of  the  latter;  and  the  knowledge  of  their  constant 
conjunction  in  time  past,  whether  got  by  experience  or 
otherwise,  is  sufficient  to  make  us  rely  with  assurance 
upon  the  continuance  of  that  conjunction. 

This  process  of  the  human  mind  is  so  familiar  that  we 
never  think  of  inquiring  into  the  principles  upon  which  it 
is  founded.  We  are  apt  to  conceive  it  as  a  self-evident 
truth,  that  what  is  to  come  must  be  similar  to  what  is  past. 
Thus,  if  a  certain  degree  of  cold  freezes  water  to  day,  and 
has  been  known  to  do  so  in  all  time  past,  we  have  no 
doubt  but  the  same  degree  of  cold  will  freeze  water  to- 
morrow, or  a  year  hence.  That  this  is  a  truth  which  all 
men  believe  as  soon  as  they  understand  it,  I  readily  ad- 
mit ;  but  the  question  is,  Whence  does  its  evidence  arise  ? 
Not  from  comparing  the  ideas,  surely.  For  when  I  com- 
pare the  idea  of  cold  with  that  of  water  hardened  into  a 
transparent  solid  body,  I  can  perceive  no  connexion  be- 
tween them :  no  man  can  show  the  one  to  be  the  neces- 
sary effect  of  the  other:  no  man  can  give  a  shadow  of 
reason  why  nature  hath  conjoined  them.  But  do  we  not 
learn  their  conjunction  from  experience?  True;  expe- 
rience informs  us  that  they  have  been  conjoined  in  time 
past;  but  no  man  ever  had  any  experience  of  what  is 
future:  and  this  is  the  very  question  to  be  resolved, 
How  we  come  to  believe  that  the  future  will  be  like  the 
past?  Hath  the  Author  of  Nature  promised  this?  Or, 
were  we  admitted  to  his  council  when  he  established  the 
present  laws  of  nature,  and  determined  the  time  of  their 
continuance?  No,  surely,  Indeed,  if  we  believe  that 
there  is  a  wise  and  good  Author  of  Nature,  we  may  see  a 
good  reason  why  he  should  continue  the  same  laws  of 


236  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

nature,  and  the  same  connexions  of  things  for  a  long  time  : 
because,  if  he  did  otherwise,  we  could  learn  nothing  from 
what  is  past,  and  all  our  experience  would  be  of  no  use  to 
us.  But  though  this  consideration,  when  we  come  to  the 
use  of  reason,  may  confirm  our  belief  of  the  continuance 
of  the  present  course  of  nature,  it  is  certain  that  it  did  not 
give  rise  to  this  belief;  for  children  and  idiots  have  this 
belief  as  soon  as  they  know  that  fire  will  burn  them.  It 
must  therefore  be  the  effect  of  instinct,  not  of  reason. 

The  wise  Author  of  our  nature  intended,  that  a  great 
and  necessary  part  of  our  knowledge  should  be  derived 
from  experience,  before  we  are  capable  of  reasoning,  and 
he  hath  provided  means  perfectly  adequate  to  this  inten- 
tion. For,  first,  He  governs  nature  by  fixed  laws,  so 
that  we  find  innumerable  connexions  of  things  which  con- 
tinue from  age  to  age.  Without  this  stability  of  the  course 
of  nature,  there  could  be  no  experience;  or,  it  would  be 
a  false  guide,  and  lead  us  into  error  and  mischief.  If 
there  were  not  a  principle  of  veracity  in  the  human  mind, 
men's  words  would  not  be  signs  of  their  thoughts :  and  if 
there  were  no  regularity  in  the  course  of  nature,  no  one 
thing  could  be  a  natural  sign  of  another.  Secondly,  He 
hath  implanted  in  human  minds  an  original  principle  by 
which  we  believe  and  expect  the  continuance  of  the  course 
of  nature,  and  the  continuance  of  those  connexions  which 
we  have  observed  in  time  past.  It  is  by  this  general 
principle  of  our  nature,  that  when  two  things  have  been 
found  connected  in  time  past,  the  appearance  of  the  one 
produces  the  belief  of  the  other. 

I  think  the  ingenious  author  of  the  Treatise  of  Human 
Nature  first  observed,  that  our  belief  of  the  continuance 
of  the  laws  of  nature  cannot  be  founded  either  upon  know- 
ledge or  probability :  but,  far  from  conceiving  it  to  be  an 
original  principle  of  the  mind,  he  endeavours  to  account 
for  it  from  his  favourite  hypothesis,  That  belief  is  nothing 
but  a  certain  degree  of  vivacity  in  the  idea  of  the  thing  be- 
lieved. I  made  a  remark  upon  this  curious  hypothesis  in 
the  second  Chapter,  and  shall  now  make  another. 

The  belief  which  we  have  in  perception  is  a  belief  of 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  237 

the  present  existence  of  the  object ;  that  which  we  have 
in  memory  is  a  belief  of  its  past  existence ;  the  belief  of 
which  we  are  now  speaking  is  a  belief  of  its  future  ex- 
existence,  and  in  imagination  there  is  no  belief  at  all. 
Now,  I  would  gladly  know  of  this  author,  how  one  de- 
gree of  vivacity  fixes  the  existence  of  the  object  to  the 
present  moment;  another  carries  it  back  to  time  past;  a 
third,  taking  a  contrary  direction,  carries  it  into  futurity ; 
and  a  fourth  carries  it  out  of  existence  altogether.  Sup- 
pose, for  instance,  that  I  see  the  sun  rising  out  of  the  sea ; 
I  remember  to  have  seen  him  rise  yesterday ;  I  believe  he 
will  rise  to-morrow  near  the  same  place;  I  can  likewise 
imagine  him  rising  in  that  place  without  any  belief  at  all. 
Xo\v,  according  to  this  sceptical  hypothesis,  this  percep- 
tion, this  memory,  this  foreknowledge,  and  this  imagina- 
tion, are  all  the  same  idea,  diversified  only  by  different 
degTees  of  vivacity.  The  perception  of  the  sun  rising  is 
the  most  lively  idea ;  the  memory  of  his  rising  yesterday  is 
the  same  idea  a  little  more  faint;  the  belief  of  his  rising  to- 
morrow is  the  same  idea,  yet  fainter ;  and  the  imagination 
of  his  rising  is  still  the  same  idea,  but  faintest  of  all.  One  is 
apt  to  think,  that  this  idea  might  gradually  pass  through  all 
possible  degrees  of  vivacity,  without  stirring  out  of  its  place. 
But  if  we  think  so,  we  deceive  ourselves ;  for  no  sooner 
does  it  begin  to  grow  languid  than  it  moves  backward 
into  time  past.  Supposing  this  to  be  granted,  we  expect 
at  least  that  as  it  moves  backward  by  the  decay  of  its 
vivacity,  the  more  that  vivacity  decays,  it  will  go  back  the 
farther,  until  it  remove  quite  out  of  sight.  But  here  we 
are  deceived  again ;  for  there  is  a  certain  period  of  this 
declining  vivacity,  when,  as  if  it  had  met  an  elastic  obsta- 
cle in  its  motion  backward,  it  suddenly  rebounds  from  the 
past  to  the  future,  without  taking  the  present  in  its  way. 
And  now  having  got  into  the  regions  of  futurity,  we  are 
apt  to  think  that  it  has  room  enough  to  spend  all  its  re- 
maining vigour :  but  still  we  are  deceived ;  for,  by  an- 
other sprightly  bound,  it  mounts  up  into  the  airy  region  of 
imagination.  So  that  ideas,  in  the  gradual  declension  of 
their  vivacity,  seem  to  imitate  the  inflection  of  verbs  in 


238  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  [CHAP.  VI. 

grammar.  They  begin  with  the  present,  and  proceed  in 
order  to  the  preterite,  the  future,  and  the  indefinite.  This 
article  of  the  sceptical  creed  is  indeed  so  full  of  mystery, 
on  whatever  side  we  view  it,  that  they  who  hold  that 
creed,  are  very  injuriously  charged  with  incredulity  :  for 
to  me  it  appears  to  require  as  much  faith  as  that  of  St. 
Athanasius. 

However,  we  agree  with  the  author  of  the  Treatise  of 
Human  Nature  in  this,  That  our  belief  of  the  continuance 
of  nature's  laws  is  not  derived  from  reason.  It  is  an  in- 
stinctive prescience  of  the  operations  of  nature,  very  like 
to  that  prescience  of  human  actions  which  makes  us  rely 
upon  the  testimony  of  our  fellow  creatures ;  and  as,  with- 
out the  latter,  we  should  be  incapable  of  receiving  infor- 
mation from  men  by  language;  so,  without  the  former, 
we  should  be  incapable  of  receiving  the  information  of 
nature  by  means  of  experience. 

All  our  knowledge  of  nature  beyond  our  original  per- 
ceptions is  got  by  experience,  and  consists  in  the  interpre- 
tation of  natural  signs.  The  constancy  of  nature's  laws 
connects  the  sign  with  the  thing  signified,  and,  by  the. 
natural  principle  just  now  explained,  we  rely  upon  the  con- 
tinuance of  the  connections  which  experience  hath  dis- 
covered ;  and  thus  the  appearance  of  the  sign  is  followed 
by  the  belief  of  the  thing  signified. 

Upon  this  principle  of  our  constitution,  not  only  ac- 
quired perception,  but  all  inductive  reasoning,  and  all  our 
reasoning  from  analogy,  is  grounded;  and  therefore,  for 
want  of  another  name,  we  shall  beg  leave  to  call  it  the  in- 
ductive principle.  It  is  from  the  force  of  this  principle 
that  we  immediately  assent  to  that  axiom  upon  which  all 
our  knowledge  of  nature  is  built,  That  effects  of  the  same 
kind  must  have  the  same  cause.  For  effects  and  causes, 
in  the  operations  of  nature,  mean  nothing  but  signs  and 
the  things  signified  by  them.  We  perceive  no  proper 
casualty  or  efficiency  in  any  natural  cause;  but  only  a 
connection  established  by  the  course  of  nature  between  it 
and  what  is  called  its  effect.  Antecedently  to  all  rea- 
soning, we  have,  by  our  constitution,  an  anticipation,  that 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  239 

there  is  a  fixed  and  steady  course  of  nature :  and  we  have 
an  eager  desire  to  discover  this  course  of  nature.  We 
attend  to  every  conjunction  of  things  which  presents  itself, 
and  expect  the  continuance  of  that  conjunction.  And 
when  such  a  conjunction  has  been  often  observed,  we  con- 
ceive the  things  to  be  naturally  connected,  and  the  ap- 
pearance of  one,  without  any  reasoning  or  reflection,  car- 
ries along  with  it  the  belief  of  the  other. 

If  any  reader  should  imagine  that  the  inductive  prin- 
ciple may  be  resolved  into  what  philosophers  usually  call 
the  association  of  ideas,  let  him  observe,  that,  by  this 
principle,  natural  signs  are  not  associated  with  the  idea 
only,  but  with  the  belief  of  the  things  signified.  Now, 
this  can  with  no  propriety  be  called  an  association  of  ideas, 
unless  ideas  and  belief  be  one  and  the  same  thing.  A 
child  has  found  the  prick  of  a  pin  conjoined  with  pain ; 
hence  he  believes  and  knows  that  these  things  are  natu- 
rally connected ;  he  knows  that  the  one  will  always  follow 
the  other.  If  any  man  will  call  this  only  an  association  of 
ideas,  I  dispute  not  about  words,  but  I  think  he  speaks 
very  improperly.  For  if  we  express  it  in  plain  English,  it 
is  a  prescience,  that  things  which  he  hath  found  conjoined 
in  time  past,  will  be  conjoined  in  time  to  come.  And  this 
prescience  is  not  the  effect  of  reasoning,  but  of  an  original 
principle  of  human  nature,  which  I  have  called  the  induc- 
tive principle. 

This  principle,  like  that  of  credulity,  is  unlimited  in  in- 
fancy, and  gradually  restrained  and  regulated  as  we  grow 
up.  It  leads  us  often  into  mistakes,  but  is  of  infinite  ad- 
vantage upon  the  whole.  By  it  the  child  once  burnt  shuns 
the  fire ;  by  it,  he  likewise  runs  away  from  the  surgeon 
by  whom  he  was  inoculated.  It  is  better  that  he  should 
do  the  last  than  that  he  should  not  do  the  first. 

But  the  mistakes  we  are  led  into  by  these  two  natural 
principles  are  of  a  different  kind.  Men  sometimes  lead  us 
into  mistakes  when  we  perfectly  understand  their  lan- 
guage, by  speaking  lies.  But  nature  never  misleads  us 
in  this  way :  her  language  is  always  true ;  and  it  is  only 
by  misinterpreting  it  that  we  fall  into  error.  There  must 


240  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

be  many  accidental  conjunctions  of  things,  as  well  as  na- 
tural connexions ;  and  the  former  are  apt  to  be  mistaken 
for  the  latter.  Thus,  in  the  instance  abovementioned,  the 
child  connected  the  pain  of  inoculation  "with  the  surgeon ; 
whereas  it  was  really  connected  with  the  incision  only. 
Philosophers  and  men  of  science  are  not  exempted  from 
such  mistakes ;  indeed  all  false  reasoning  in  philosophy  is 
owing  to  them :  it  is  drawn  from  experience  and  analogy, 
as  well  as  just  reasoning,  otherwise  it  could  have  no  veri- 
similitude :  but  the  one  is  an  unskilful  and  rash,  the  other 
a  just  and  legitimate  interpretation  of  natural  signs.  If  a 
child,  or  a  man  of  common  understanding,  were  put  to  in- 
terpret a  book  of  science  wrote  in  his  mother  tongue,  .how 
many  blunders  and  mistakes  wrould  he  be  apt  to  fall  into  ? 
Yet  he  knows  as  much  of  this  language  as  is  necessary  for 
his  manner  of  life. 

The  language  of  nature  is  the  universal  study ;  and  the 
students  are  of  different  classes.  Brutes,  idiots,  and  chil- 
dren, employ  themselves  in  this  study,  and  owe  to  it  all 
their  acquired  perceptions.  Men  of  common  understand- 
ing make  a  greater  progress,  and  learn,  by  a  small  degree 
of  reflection,  many  things  of  which  children  are  ignorant. 

Philosophers  fill  up  the  highest  form  in  this  school,  and 
are  critics  in  the  language  of  nature.  All  these  different 
classes  have  one  teacher,  Experience,  enlightened  by  the 
inductive  principle.  Take  away  the  light  of  this  inductive 
principle,  and  Experience  is  as  blind  as  a  mole :  she  may 
indeed  feel  what  is  present,  and  what  immediately  touches 
her :  but  she  sees  nothing  that  is  either  before  or  behind, 
upon  the  right  hand  or  upon  the  left,  future  or  past. 

The  rules  of  inductive  reasoning,  or  of  a  just  interpreta- 
tion of  nature,  as  well  as  the  fallacies  by  which  we  are  apt 
to  misinterpret  her  language,  have  been,  with  wonderful  sa- 
gacity, delineated  by  the  great  genius  of  Lord  Bacon  :  so 
that  his  Novum  Organum  may  justly  be  called  a  grammar 
of  the  language  of  nature.  It  adds  greatly  to  the  merit 
of  this  work,  and  atones  for  its  defects,  that  at  the  time  it 
was  written,  the  wrorld  had  not  seen  any  tolerable  model 
of  inductive  reasoning,  from  which  the  rules  of  it  might  be 


SECT.  XXIV.]  OF  SEEING.  241 

copied.  The  arts  of  poetry  and  eloquence  were  grown  up 
to  perfection  when  Aristotle  described  them;  but  the  art 
of  interpreting  nature  was  yet  in  embryo  when  Bacon  de- 
lineated its  manly  features  and  proportions.  Aristotle 
drew  his  rules  from  the  best  models  of  those  arts  that  have 
yet  appeared ;  but  the  best  models  of  inductive  reasoning 
that  have  yet  appeared,  which  I  take  to  be  the  third  book 
of  the  Principia  and  the  Optics  of  Newton,  were  drawn 
from  Bacon's  rules.  The  purpose  of  all  those  rules  is  to 
teach  us  to  distinguish  seeming  or  apparent  connexions  of 
things  in  the  course  of  nature  from  such  as  are  real. 

They  that  are  unskilful  in  inductive  reasoning  are  more 
apt  to  fall  into  error  in  their  reasonings  from  the  pheno- 
mena of  nature  than  in  their  acquired  perceptions ;  be- 
cause we  often  reason  from  a  few  instances,  and  thereby 
are  apt  to  mistake  accidental  conjunctions  of  things  for 
natural  connexions:  but  that  habit  of  passing,  without 
reasoning,  from  the  sign  to  the  things  signified,  which 
constitutes  acquired  perception,  must  be  learned  by  many 
instances  or  experiments;  and  the  number  of  experiments 
serves  to  disjoin  those  things  which  have  been  accidentally 
conjoined,  as  well  as  to  confirm  our  belief  of  natural  con- 
nexions. 

From  the  time  that  children  begin  to  use  their  hands, 
nature  directs  them  to  handle  every  thing  over  and  over, 
to  look  at  it  while  they  handle  it,  and  to  put  it  in  various 
positions,  and  at  various  distances  from  the  eye.  We  are 
apt  to  excuse  this  as  a  childish  diversion,  because  they 
must  be  doing  something,  and  have  not  reason  to  entertain 
themselves  in  a  more  manly  way.  But  if  we  think  more 
justly,  we  shall  find  that  they  are  engaged  hi  the  most  se- 
rious and  important  study ;  and  if  they  had  all  the  reason 
of  a  philosopher,  they  could  not  be  more  properly  em- 
ployed. For  it  is  this  childish  employment  that  enables 
them  to  make  the  proper  use  of  their  eyes.  They  are 
thereby  every  day  acquiring  habits  of  perception,  which 
are  of  greater  importance  than  any  thing  we  can  teach 
them.  The  original  perceptions  which  nature  gave  them 
are  few,  and  insufficient  for  the  purposes  of  life ;  and  there- 
of 


242  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.          [CHAP.  VI. 

fore  she  made  them  capable  of  acquiring  many  more  per- 
ceptions by  habit.  And  to  complete  her  work,  she  hath 
given  them  an  unwearied  assiduity  in  applying  to  the  ex- 
ercises by  which  those  perceptions  are  acquired. 

This  is  the  education  which  nature  gives  to  her  children. 
And  since  we  have  fallen  upon  this  subject,  we  may  add, 
that  another  part  of  nature's  education  is,  That,  by  the 
course  of  things,  children  must  often  exert  all  their  mus- 
cular force,  and  employ  all  their  ingenuity,  in  order  to 
gratify  their  curiosity  and  satisfy  their  little  appetites. 
What  they  desire  is  only  to  be  obtained  at  the  expense  of 
labour  and  patience,  and  many  disappointments.  By  the 
exercise  of  body  and  mind  necessary  for  satisfying  their 
desires,  they  acquire  agility,  strength,  and  dexterity  in 
their  motions,  as  well  as  health  and  vigour  to  their  consti- 
tutions ;  they  learn  patience  and  perseverance ;  they  learn 
to  bear  pain  without  dejection,  and  disappointment  without 
despondence.  The  education  of  nature  is  most  perfect  in 
savages,  who  have  no  other  tutor ;  and  we  see,  that,  in  the 
quickness  of  all  their  senses,  in  the  agility  of  their  motions, 
in  the  hardiness  of  their  constitutions,  and  in  the  strength 
of  their  minds  to  bear  hunger,  thirst,  pain,  and  disappoint- 
ment, they  commonly  far  exceed  the  civilized.  A  most 
ingenious  writer,  on  this  account,  seems  to  prefer  the  sa- 
vage life  to  that  of  society.  But  the  education  of  nature 
could  never  of  itself  produce  a  Rousseau.  It  is  the  inten- 
tion of  nature,  that  human  education  should  be  joined  to 
her  institution,  in  order  to  form  the  man.  And  she  hath 
fitted  us  for  human  education  by  the  natural  principles  of 
imitation  and  credulity,  which  discover  themselves  almost 
hi  infancy,  as  well  as  by  others  which  are  of  later  growth. 

When  the  education  which  we  receive  from  men  does 
not  give  scope  to  the  education  of  nature,  it  is  wrong  di- 
rected; it  tends  to  hurt  our  faculties  of  perception,  and  to 
enervate  both  the  body  and  mind.  Nature  hath  her  way 
of  rearing  men,  as  she  hath  of  curing  their  diseases.  The 
art  of  medicine  is  to  follow  nature,  to  imitate  and  to  assist 
her  in  the  cure  of  diseases ;  and  the  art  of  education  is  to 
follow  nature,  to  assist  and  to  imitate  her  in  her  way  of 


SECT.  XXIV.]     .  OF  SEEING.  243 

rearing  men.  The  ancient  inhabitants  of  the  Baleares  fol- 
lowed nature  in  the  manner  of  teaching  their  children  to  be 
good  archers,  when  they  hung  their  dinner  aloft  by  a 
thread,  and  left  the  younkers  to  bring  it  down  by  their 
skill  in  archery. 

The  education  of  nature,  without  any  more  human  care 
than  is  necessary  to  preserve  life,  makes  a  perfect  savage. 
Human  education,  joined  to  that  of  nature,  may  make  a 
good  citizen,  a  skilful  artisan,  or  a  well  bred  man.  But 
Reason  and  Reflection  must  superadd  their  tutory,  in 
order  to  produce  a  Rousseau,  a  Bacon,  or  a  Newton. 

Notwithstanding  the  innumerable  errors  committed  in 
human  education,  there  is  hardly  any  education  so  bad  as 
to  be  worse  than  none.  And  I  apprehend,  that  if  even 
Rousseau  were  to  choose  whether  to  educate  a  son  among 
the  French,  the  Italians,  the  Chinese,  or  among  the  Esqui- 
maux, he  would  not  give  the  preference  to  the  last. 

When  Reason  is  properly  employed,  she  will  confirm 
the  documents  of  nature,  which  are  always  true  and  whole- 
some; she  will  distinguish,  in  the  documents  of  human 
education,  the  good  from  the  bad,  rejecting  the  last  with 
modesty,  and  adhering  to  the  first  with  reverence. 

Most  men  continue  all  their  days  to  be  just  what  nature 
and  human  education  made  them.  Their  manners,  their 
opinions,  their  virtues,  and  their  vices  are  all  got  by  habit, 
imitation,  and  instruction;  and  Reason  has  little  or  no 
share  in  forming  them. 


M2 


244  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

CHAP.  VII. 
CONCLUSION. 


Containing  Reflections  upon  the  Opinions  of  Philoso- 
phers on  this  Subject. 

THERE  are  two  ways  in  which  men  may  form  their  notions 
and  opinions  concerning  the  mind,  and  concerning  its 
powers  and  operations.  The  first  is  the  only  way  that 
leads  to  truth ;  but  it  is  narrow  and  rugged,  and  few  have 
entered  upon  it.  The  second  is  broad  and  smooth,  and 
hath  been  much  beaten,  not  only  by  the  vulgar,  but  even 
by  philosophers;  it  is  sufficient  for  common  life,  and  is 
well  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  the  poet  and  orator :  but,  in 
philosophical  disquisitions  concerning  the  mind,  it  leads  to 
error  and  delusion. 

We  may  call  the  first  of  these  wrays,  the  way  of  reflec- 
tion. When  the  operations  of  the  mind  are  exerted  we 
are  conscious  of  them ;  and  it  is  in  our  power  to  attend  to 
them,  and  to  reflect  upon  them,  until  they  become  familiar 
objects  of  thought. 

This  is  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  form  just  and  ac- 
curate notions  of  those  operations.  But  this  attention  and 
reflection  is  so  difficult  to  man,  surrounded  on  all  hands 
by  external  objects  which  constantly  solicit  his  attention, 
that  it  has  been  very  little  practised,  even  by  philosophers. 
In  the  course  of  this  Inquiry  we  have  had  many  occasions 
to  show  how  little  attention  hath  been  given  to  the  most  fa- 
miliar operations  of  the  senses. 

The  second,  and  the  most  common  way  in  which  men 
form  their  opinions  concerning  the  mind  and  its  operations, 
we  may  call  the  way  of  analogy.  There  is  nothing  in  the 
course  of  nature  so  singular,  but  we  can  find  some  resem- 
blance, or  at  least  some  analogy,  between  it  and  other 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  245 

things  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  The  mind  natu- 
rally delights  in  hunting  after  such  analogies,  and  attends 
to  them  with  pleasure.  From  them  poetry  and  wit  derive 
a  great  part  of  their  charms ;  and  eloquence  not  a  little  of 
its  persuasive  force. 

Besides  the  pleasure  we  receive  from  analogies,  they 
are  of  very  considerable  use,  both  to  facilitate  the  concep- 
tion of  things  when  they  are  not  easily  apprehended  without 
such  a  handle,  and  to  lead  us  to  probable  conjectures 
about  their  nature  and  qualities,  when  we  want  the  means 
of  more  direct  and  immediate  knowledge.  When  I  con- 
sider that  the  planet  Jupiter,  in  like  manner  as  the  earth, 
rolls  round  his  own  axis,  and  revolves  round  the  sun,  and 
that  he  is  enlightened  by  several  secondary  planets,  as  the 
earth  is  enlightened  by  the  moon ;  I  am  apt  to  conjecture, 
from  analogy,  that  as  the  earth  by  these  means  is  fitted  to 
be  the  habitation  of  various  orders  of  animals,  so  the  planet 
Jupiter  is,  by  the  like  means,  fitted  for  the  same  purpose : 
and  having  no  argument  more  direct  and  conclusive  to  de- 
termine me  in  this  point,  I  yield  to  this  analogical  reason- 
ing a  degree  of  assent  proportioned  to  its  strength.  When 
I  observe  that  the  potatoe  plant  very  much  resembles  the 
solanum  in  its  flower  and  fructification,  and  am  informed 
that  the  last  is  poisonous,  I  am  apt  from  analogy  to  have 
some  suspicion  of  the  former :  but  in  this  case  I  have  ac- 
cess to  more  direct  and  certain  evidence ;  and  therefore 
ought  not  to  trust  to  analogy,  which  would  lead  me  into 
an  error. 

Arguments  from  analogy  are  always  at  hand,  and  grow 
up  spontaneously  in  a  fruitful  imagination,  while  arguments 
that  are  more  direct  and  more  conclusive  often  require 
painful  attention  and  application :  and  therefore  mankind 
in  general  have  been  very  much  disposed  to  trust  to  the 
former.  If  one  attentively  examines  the  systems  of  the 
ancient  philosophers,  either  concerning  the  material  world, 
or  concerning  the  mind,  he  will  find  them  to  be  built  solely 
upon  the  foundation  of  analogy.  Lord  Bacon  first  de- 
lineated the  strict  and  severe  method  of  induction ;  since 
his  time  it  has  been  applied  with  very  happy  success  in 


246  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

some  parts  of  natural  philosophy;  and  hardly  in  any  thing 
else.  But  there  is  no  subject  in  which  mankind  are  so 
much  disposed  to  trust  to  the  analogical  way  of  thinking 
and  reasoning,  as  in  what  concerns  the  mind  and  its  ope- 
rations; because,  to  form  clear  and  distinct  notions  of 
those  operations  in  the  direct  and  proper  way,  and  to 
reason  about  them,  requires  a  habit  of  attentive  reflection, 
of  which  few  are  capable,  and  which,  even  by  those  few, 
cannot  be  attained  without  much  pains  and  labour. 

Every  man  is  apt  to  form  his  notions  of  things  difficult 
to  be  apprehended,  or  less  familiar,  from  their  analogy  to 
things  which  are  more  familiar.  Thus,  if  a  man  bred  to 
the  seafaring  life,  and  accustomed  to  think  and  talk  only 
of  matters  relating  to  navigation,  enters  into  discourse  upon 
any  other  subject;  it  is  well  known  that  the  language  and 
the  notions  proper  to  his  own  profession  are  infused  into 
every  subject,  and  all  things  are  measured  by  the  rules  of 
navigation :  and  if  he  should  take  it  into  his  head  to  phi- 
losophize concerning  the  faculties  of  the  mind,  it  cannot  be 
doubted  but  he  would  draw  his  notions  from  the  fabric  of 
his  ship,  and  would  find  in  the  mind,  sails,  masts,  rudder, 
and  compass. 

Sensible  objects  of  one  kind  or  other  do  no  less  occupy 
and  engross  the  rest  of  mankind  than  things  relating  to  na- 
vigation the  seafaring  man.  For  a  considerable  part  of 
life  we  can  think  of  nothing  but  the  objects  of  sense;  and 
to  attend  to  objects  of  another  nature,  so  as  to  form  clear 
and  distinct  notions  of  them,  is  no  easy  matter,  even  after 
we  come  to  years  of  reflection.  The  condition  of  man- 
kind, therefore,  affords  good  reason  to  apprehend,  that 
their  language  and  their  common  notions  concerning  the 
mind  and  its  operations  will  be  analogical,  and  derived 
from  the  objects  of  sense ;  and  that  these  analogies  will 
be  apt  to  impose  upon  philosophers  as  well  as  upon  the 
vulgar,  and  to  lead  them  to  materialize  the  mind  and  its 
faculties ;  and  experience  abundantly  confirms  the  truth  of 
this. 

How  generally  men  of  all  nations  and  in  all  ages  of  the 
world  have  conceived  the  soul,  or  thinking  principle  in 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  247 

man,  to  be  some  subtile  matter,  like  breath  or  wind,  the 
names  given  to  it  in  almost  all  languages  sufficiently  testify. 
We  have  words  which  are  proper,  and  not  analogical,  to 
express  the  various  ways  in  which  we  perceive  external 
objects  by  the  senses;  such  as  feeling  ^  sight,  taste:  but 
we  are  often  obliged  to  use  these  words  analogically,  to 
express  other  powers  of  the  mind  which  are  of  a  very  dif- 
ferent nature.  And  the  powers  which  imply  some  degree 
of  reflection  have  generally  no  names  but  such  as  are  ana- 
logical. The  objects  of  thought  are  said  to  be  in  the 
mind,  to  be  apprehended,  comprehended,  conceived,  ima- 
gined, retained,  weighed,  ruminated. 

It  does  not  appear  that  the  notions  of  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers, with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  soul,  were  much 
more  refined  than  those  of  the  vulgar,  or  that  they  were 
formed  in  any  other  way.  We  shall  distinguish  the  phi- 
losophy that  regards  our  subject  into  the  old  and  the  new. 
The  old  reached  down  to  Des  Cartes,  who  gave  it  a  fatal 
blow,  of  which  it  has  been  gradually  expiring  ever  since, 
and  is  now  almost  extinct.  Des  Cartes  is  the  father  of 
the  new  philosophy  that  relates  to  this  subject ;  but  it  hath 
been  gradually  improving  since  his  time  upon  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  by  him.  The  old  philosophy  seems  to 
have  been  purely  analogical :  the  new  is  more  derived 
from  reflection,  but  still  with  a  very  considerable  mixture 
of  the  old  analogical  notions. 

Because  the  objects  of  sense  consist  of  matter  and 
form,  the  ancient  philosophers  conceived  every  thing  to 
belong  to  one  of  these,  or  to  be  made  up  of  both.  Some 
therefore  thought  that  the  soul  is  a  particular  kind  of 
subtile  matter  separable  from  our  gross  bodies;  others 
thought  that  it  is  only  a  particular  form  of  the  body,  and 
inseparable  from  it.  For  there  seem  to  have  been  some 
among  the  ancients  as  well  as  among  the  moderns,  who 
conceived  that  a  certain  structure  or  organization  of  the 
body  is  all  that  is  necessary  to  render  it  sensible  and  in- 
telligent. The  different  powers  of  the  mind  were,  accord- 
ingly, by  the  last  sect  of  philosophers,  conceived  to  be- 
long to  different  parts  of  the  body,  as  the  heart,  the  brain, 
the  liver,  the  stomach,  the  blood. 


218  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

They  who  thought  that  the  soul  is  a  subtile  matter,  se- 
parable from  the  body,  disputed  to  which  of  the  four  ele- 
ments it  belongs,  whether  to  earth,  water,  air,  or  fire.  Of 
the  three  last  each  had  its  particular  advocates.  But  some 
were  of  opinion  that  it  partakes  of  all  the  "elements ;  that 
it  must  have  something  in  its  composition  similar  to  every 
thing  we  perceive ;  and  that  we  perceive  earth  by  the  earthly 
part ;  water  by  the  watery  part ;  and  fire  by  the  fiery  part  of 
the  soul.  Some  philosophers,  not  satisfied  with  determin- 
ing of  what  kind  of  matter  the  soul  is  made,  inquired  like- 
wise into  its  figure,  which  they  determined  to  be  spherical, 
that  it  might  be  the  more  fit  for  motion.  The  most  spiri- 
tual and  sublime  notion  concerning  the  nature  of  the  soul, 
to  be  met  with  among  the  ancient  philosophers,  I  conceive 
to  be  that  of  the  Platonists,  who  held  that  it  is  made  of 
that  celestial  and  incorruptible  matter  of  which  the  fixed 
stars  were  made,  and  therefore  has  a  natural  tendency  to 
rejoin  its  proper  element.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  say  in  which 
of  these  classes  of  philosophers  Aristotle  ought  to  be 
placed.  He  defines  the  soul  to  be,  The  first  evreKe^etct 
of  a  natural  body  which  has  potential  life.  I  beg  to  be 
excused  from  translating  the  Greek  word,  because  I  know 
not  the  meaning  of  it. 

The  notions  of  the  ancient  philosophers  with  regard  to 
the  operations  of  the  mind,  particularly  with  regard  to  per- 
ceptions and  ideas,  seem  likewise  to  have  been  formed  by 
the  same  kind  of  analogy. 

Plato,  of  the  writers  that  are  extant,  first  introduced 
the  word  idea  into  philosophy ;  but  his  doctrine  upon  this 
subject  had  somewhat  peculiar.  He  agreed  with  the  rest 
of  the  ancient  philosophers  in  this,  that  all  things  consist 
of  matter  and  form;  and  that  the  matter  of  which  all 
things  were  made  existed  from  eternity  without  form; 
but  he  likewise  believed  that  there  are  eternal  forms  of 
all  possible  things  which  exist  without  matter;  and  to 
these  eternal  and  immaterial  forms  he  gave  the  name  of 
ideas ;  maintaining  that  they  are  the  only  object  of  true 
knowledge.  It  is  of  no  great  moment  to  us  whether  he 
borrowed  these  notions  from  Parnienides,  or  whether  they 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  249 

were  the  issue  of  his  own  creative  imagination.  The  latter 
Platonists  seem  to  have  improved  upon  them,  in  conceiving 
those  ideas,  or  eternal  forms  of  things  to  exist,  not  of  them- 
selves, but  in  the  Divine  Mind,  and  to  be  the  models  and 
patterns  according  to  which  all  things  were  made : 

Then  lived  the  Eternal  One,  then,  deep  retired 
In  his  unfathom'd  essence,  viewed  at  large 
The  uncreated  images  of  things. 

To  these  Platonic  notions,  that  of  Malebranche  is  very 
nearly  allied.  This  author  seems  more  than  any  other  to 
have  been  aware  of  the  difficulties  attending  the  common 
hypothesis  concerning  ideas,  to  wit,  That  ideas  of  all  ob- 
jects of  thought  are  in  the  human  mind ;  and  therefore,  in 
order  to  avoid  those  difficulties,  makes  the  ideas  which  are 
the  immediate  objects  of  human  thought  to  be  the  ideas  of 
things  in  the  Divine  Mind ;  who  being  intimately  present 
to  every  human  mind,  may  discover  his  ideas  to  it,  as  far 
as  pleaseth  him. 

The  Platonists  and  Malebranche  excepted,  all  other 
philosophers,  as  far  as  I  know,  have  conceived  that  there 
are  ideas  or  images  of  every  object  of  thought  in  the  human 
mind,  or  at  least  in  some  part  of  the  brain,  where  the  mind 
is  supposed  to  have  its  residence. 

Aristotle  had  no  good  affection  to  the  word  idea,  and 
seldom  or  ne-er  uses  it  but  hi  refuting  Plato's  notions 
about  ideas.  He  thought  that  matter  may  exist  with- 
out form ;  but  that  form  cannot  exist  without  matter.  But 
at  the  same  time  he  taught,  That  there  can  be  no  sensa- 
tion, no  imagination,  nor  intellection,  without  forms,  phan- 
tasms, or  species  in  the  mind ;  and  that  things  sensible  are 
perceived  by  sensible  species,  and  things  intelligible  by 
intelligible  species.  His  followers  taught  more  explicitly, 
that  those  sensible  and  intelligible  species  are  sent  forth  by 
the  objects,  and  make  their  impressions  upon  the  passive 
intellect;  and  that  the  active  intellect  perceives  them  in 
the  passive  intellect.  And  this  seems  to  have  been  the 
common  opinion  while  the  Peripatetic  philosophy  retained 
its  authority. 

M  3  % 


250  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

The  Epicurean  doctrine,  as  explained  by  Lucretius, 
though  widely  different  from  the  Peripatetic  in  many 
things,  is  almost  the  same  in  this.  He  affirms  that  slen- 
der films  or  ghosts  (tenuia  rerum  simulacra)  are  still 
going  off  from  all  things  and  flying  about ;  and  that  these 
being  extremely  subtile,  easily  penetrate  our  gross  bodies, 
and  striking  upon  the  mind,  cause  thought  and  imagi- 
nation. 

After  the  Peripatetic  system  had  reigned  above  a  thou- 
sand years  in  the  schools  of  Europe,  almost  without  a 
rival,  it  sunk  before  that  of  Des  Cartes ;  the  perspicuity 
of  whose  writings  and  notions,  contrasted  with  the  obscu- 
rity of  Aristotle  and  his  commentators,  created  a  strong 
prejudice  in  favour  of  this  new  philosophy.  The  charac- 
teristic of  Plato's  genius  was  sublimity,  that  of  Aristotle's 
subtlety :  but  Des  Cartes  far  excelled  both  in  perspicuity, 
and  bequeathed  this  spirit  to  his  successors.  The  system 
which  is  now  generally  received,  with  regard  to  the  mind 
and  its  operations,  derives  not  only  its  spirit  from  Des 
Cartes,  but  its  fundamental  principles ;  and  after  all  the 
improvements  made  by  Malebranche,  Locke,  Berkeley, 
and  Hume,  may  still  be  called  the  Cartesian  system :  we 
shall  therefore  make  some  remarks  upon  its  spirit  and  ten- 
dency in  general,  and  upon  its  doctrine  concerning  ideas  in 
particular. 

It  may  be  observed,  That  the  method  which  Des  Cartes 
pursued,  naturally  led  him  to  attend  more  to  the  operations 
of  the  mind  by  accurate  reflection,  and  to  trust  less  to  ana- 
logical reasoning  upon  this  subject,  than  any  philosopher 
had  done  before  him.  Intending  to  build  a  system  upon 
a  new  foundation,  he  began  with  a  resolution  to  admit 
nothing  but  what  was  absolutely  certain  and  evident.  He 
supposed  that  his  senses,  his  memoiy,  his  reason,  and 
every  other  faculty  to  which  we  trust  in  common  life, 
might  be  fallacious ;  and  resolved  to  disbelieve  every 
thing  until  he  was  compelled  by  irresistible  evidence  to 
yield  assent. 

In  this  method  of  proceeding,  what  appeared  to  him 
first  of  all  certain  and  evident,  was,  That  he  thought,  that 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  251 

he  doubted,  that  he  deliberated.  In  a  word,  the  operations 
of  his  own  mind,  of  which  he  was  conscious,  must  be  real, 
and  no  delusion;  and  though  all  his  other  faculties  should 
deceive  him,  his  consciousness  could  not.  This  therefore 
he  looked  upon  as  the  first  of  all  truths.  This  was  the 
first  firm  ground  upon  which  he  set  his  foot  after  being- 
tossed  in  the  ocean  of  scepticism ;  and  he  resolved  to  build 
all  knowledge  upon  it,  without  seeking  after  any  more  first 
principles. 

As  every  other  truth,  therefore,  and  particularly  the 
existence  of  the  objects  of  sense,  was  to  be  deduced  by  a 
train  of  strict  argumentation  from  what  he  knew  by  consci- 
ousness, he  was  naturally  led  to  give  attention  to  the  ope- 
rations of  which  he  was  conscious,  without  borrowing  his 
notions  of  them  from  external  things. 

It  was  not  in  the  way  of  analogy,  but  of  attentive  reflec- 
tion, that  he  was  led  to  observe,  That  thought,  volition, 
remembrance,  and  the  other  attributes  of  the  mind,  are 
altogether  unlike  to  extension,  to  figure,  and  to  all  the 
attributes  of  body ;  that  we  have  no  reason,  therefore,  to 
conceive  thinking  substances  to  have  any  resemblance  to 
extended  substances ;  and  that,  as  the  attributes  of  the 
thinking  substance  are  things  of  which  we  are  conscious  we 
may  have  a  more  certain  and  immediate  knowledge  of 
them  by  reflection,  than  we  can  have  of  external  objects 
by  our  senses. 

These  observations,  as  far  as  I  know,  were  first  made 
by  Des  Cartes,  and  they  are  of  more  importance,  and 
throw  more  light  upon  the  subject  than  all  that  had  been 
said  upon  it  before.  They  ought  to  make  us  diffident 
and  jealous  of  every  notion  concerning  the  mind  and  its 
"Operations,  which  is  drawn  from  sensible  objects  in  the 
way  of  analogy,  and  to  make  us  rely  only  upon  accurate 
reflection,  as  the  source  of  all  real  knowledge  upon  this 
subject. 

2.  I  observe,  that  as  the  Peripatetic  system  has  a  ten- 
dency to  materialize  the  mind  and  its  operations ;  so  the 
Cartesian  has  a  tendency  to  spiritualize  body  and  its  qua- 
lities. One  error,  common  to  both  systems,  leads  to  the 
first  of  these  extremes  in  the  way  of  analogy,  and  to  the 


252  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

last  in  the  way  of  reflection.  The  error  I  mean  is,  That 
we  can  know  nothing  about  body,  or  its  qualities,  but  as 
far  as  we  have  sensations  which  resemble  those  qualities. 
Both  systems  agreed  in  this :  but  according  to  their  dif- 
ferent methods  of  reasoning,  they  drew  very  different  con- 
clusions from  it;  the  Peripatetic  drawing  his  notions  of 
sensation  from  the  qualities  of  body ;  the  Cartesian,  on  the 
contrary,  drawing  his  notions  of  the  qualities  of  body  from 
his  sensations. 

The  Peripatetic,  taking  it  for  granted  that  bodies  and 
their  qualities  do  really  exist,  and  are  such  as  we  com- 
monly take  them  to  be,  inferred  from  them-the  nature  of 
his  sensations,  and  reasoned  in  this  manner :  our  sensa- 
tions are  the  impressions  which  sensible  objects  make  upon 
the  mind,  and  may  be  compared  to  the  impression  of  a 
seal  upon  wax ;  the  impression  is  the  image  or  form  of  the 
seal,  without  the  matter  of  it:  in  like  manner,  every  sen- 
sation is  the  image  or  form  of  some  sensible  quality  of  the 
object.  This  is  the  reasoning  of  Aristotle,  and  it  has  an 
evident  tendency  to  materialize  the  mind  and  its  sensa- 
tions. 

The  Cartesian,  on  the  contrary,  thinks  that  the  existence 
of  body,  or  of  any  of  its  qualities,  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a 
first  principle :  and  that  we"  ought  to  admit  nothing  con- 
cerning it,  but  what,  by  just  reasoning,  can  be  deduced 
from  our  sensations ;  and  he  knows  that,  by  reflection,  we 
can  form 'clear  and  distinct  notions  of  our  sensations,  with- 
out borrowing  our  notions  of  them  by  analogy  from  the 
objects  of  sense.     The  Cartesians,  therefore,  beginning  to 
give  attention  to  their  sensations,  first  discovered  that  the 
sensations  corresponding  to  secondary   qualities  cannot 
resemble  any  quality  of  body.     Hence  Des  Cartes  and 
Locke  inferred,  that  sound,  taste,  smell,  colour,  heat,  and 
cold,  which'the  vulgar  took  to  be  qualities  of  body,  were 
not  qualities  of  body,  but  mere  sensations  of  the  mind. 
Afterwards    the    ingenious    Berkeley,  considering   more 
attentively  the  nature  of  sensation  in  general,  discovered 
and  demonstrated,  that  no  sensation  whatever  could  pos- 
sibly resemble  any  quality  of  an  insentient  being,  such  as 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  2o3 

body  is  supposed  to  be :  and  hence  he  inferred,  very  justly, 
that  there  is  the  same  reason  to  hold  extension,  figure,  and 
all  the  primary  qualities,  to  be  mere  sensations,  as  there  is 
to  hold  the  secondary  qualities  to  be  mere  sensations. 
Thus,  by  just  reasoning  upon  the  Cartesian  principles, 
matter  was  stripped  of  all  its  qualities ;  the  new  system,  by 
a  kind  of  metaphysical  sublimation,  converted  all  the  qua- 
lities of  matter  into  sensations,  and  spiritualized  body,  as 
the  old  had  materialized  spirit. 

The  way  to  avoid  both  these  extremes  is,  to  admit  the 
existence  of  what  we  see  and  feel  as  a  first  princip'n 
well  as  the  existence  of  things  whereof  we  are  consci- 
ous ;  and  to  take  our  notions  of  the  qualities  of  body,  from 
the  testimony  of  our  senses  with  the  Peripatetics ;  and  our 
notions  of  our  sensations,  from  the  testimony  of  conscious- 
ness, with  the  Cartesians. 

3.  I  observe,  That  the  modern  scepticism  is  the  natural 
issue  of  the  new  system ;  and  that,  although  it  did  not 
bring  forth  this  monster  until  the  year  1739,  it  may  be  said 
to  have  carried  it  in  its  womb  from  the  beginning. 

The  old  system  admitted  all  the  principles  of  common 
sense  as  first  principles,  without  requiring  any  proof  of 
them;  and  therefore,  though  its  reasoning  was  commonly 
vague,  analogical,  and  dark,  yet  it  was  built  upon  a  broad 
foundation,  and  had  no  tendency  to  scepticism.  We  do 
not  find  that  any  Peripatetic  thought  it,  incumbent  upon 
him  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  material  world ;  but  every 
writer  upon  the  Cartesian  system  attempted  this  until 
Berkeley  clearly  demonstrated  the  futility  of  their  argu- 
ments; and  thence  concluded,  that  there  was  no  such 
thing  as  a  material  world ;  and  that  the  belief  of  it  ou°-ht 
to  be  rejected  as  a  vulgar  error. 

The  new  system  admits  only  one  of  the  principles  of 
common  sense  as  a  first  principle;  and  pretends,  by  strict 
argumentation,  to  deduce  all  the  rest  from  it.  That  our 
thoughts,  our  sensations,  and  every  thing  of  which  we  are 
conscious,  hath  a  real  existence,  is  admitted  in  this  system 
as  a  first  principle;  but  every  thing  else  must  be  made 
evident  by  the  light  of  reason.  Reason  must  rear  the 


254  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

whole  fabric  of  knowledge  upon  this  single  principle  of 
consciousness. 

There  is  a  disposition  in  human  nature  to  reduce  things 
to  as  few  principles  as  possible ;  and  this,  without  doubt, 
adds  to  the  beauty  of  a  system,  if  the  principles  are  able 
to  support  what  rests  upon  them.  The  mathematicians 
glory,  very  justly,  in  having  raised  so  noble  and  magnifi- 
cent a  system  of  science,  upon  the  foundation  of  a  few 
axioms  and  definitions.  This  love  of  simplicity  of  redu- 
cing things  to  few  principles,  hath  produced  many  a  false 
system;  but  there  never  was  any  system  in  which  it  ap- 
pears so  remarkably  as  that  of  Des  Cartes.  His  whole 
system  concerning  matter  and  spirit  is  built  upon  one 
axiom,  expressed  in  one  word,  Cogito.  Upon  the  foun- 
dation of  conscious  thought,  with  ideas  for  his  materials, 
he  builds  his  system  of  the  human  understanding,  and 
attempts  to  account  for  all  its  phenomena :  and  having,  as 
he  imagined  from  his  consciousness,  proved  the  existence 
of  matter,  and  of  a  certain  quantity  of  motion  originally 
impressed  upon  it,  he  builds  his  system  of  the  material 
world,  and  attempts  to  account  for  all  its  phenomena. 

These  principles  with  regard  to  the  material  system  have 
been  found  insufficient;  and  it  has  been  made  evident, 
that  besides  matter  and  motion  we  must  admit  gravitation , 
cohesion,  corpuscular  attraction,  magnetism,  and  other 
centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces,  by  which  the  particles 
of  matter  attract  and  repel  each  other.  Newton  having 
discovered  this,  and  demonstrated  that  these  principles 
cannot  be  resolved  into  matter  and  motion,  was  led  by 
analogy  and  the  love  of  simplicity  to  conjecture,  but  with 
a  modesty  and  caution  peculiar  to  him,  that  all  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  material  world  depended  upon  attracting 
and  repelling  forces  in  the  particles  of  matter.  But  we 
may  now  venture  to  say,  that  this  conjecture  fell  short  of 
the  mark.  For  even  in  the  unorganized  kingdom,  the  powers 
by  which  salts,  crystal,  spars,  and  many  other  bodies  con- 
crete into  regular  forms,  can  never  be  accounted  for  by 
attracting  and  repelling  forces  in  the  particles  of  matter. 
And  in  the  vegetable  and  animal  kino-doms  there  are 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  25 '» 

strong  indications  of  powers  of  a  different  nature  from  all 
the  powers  of  unorganized  bodies.  We  see  then,  that 
although  in  the  structure  of  the  material  world  there  is 
without  doubt,  all  the  beautiful  simplicity  consistent  with 
the  purposes  for  which  it  was  made,  it  is  not  so  simple  as 
the  great  Des  Cartes  determined  it  to  be :  nay,  it  is  not  so 
simple  as  the  greater  Newton  modestly  conjectured  it  to 
be.  Both  were  misled  by  analogy,  and  the  love  of  sim- 
plicity. One  hath  been  much  conversant  about  extension, 
figure,  and  motion ;  the  other  had  enlarged  his  views  to 
attracting  and  repelling  forces ;  and  both  formed  their  no- 
tions of  the  unknown  parts  of  nature  from  those  with  which 
they  were  acquainted,  as  the  shepherd  Tityrus  formed  IIH 
notion  of  the  city  of  Rome  from  his  country  village : 

Urbem,  quam  dicunt  Romam,  Melibcee,  putavi 
Stultus  ego  hide  nostrce  similem,  quo  scepe  solemus 
Pastores  ovium  teneros  dcpellere  foetus. 
Sic  -canibus  catulos  similes,  sic  matribus  hcedos 
Noram :  sic  parvis  componere  magna  solebam. 

This  is  a  just  picture  of  the  analogical  way  of  thinking. 

But  to  come  to  the  system  of  Des  Cartes  concerning  the 
human  understanding:  it'was  built,  as  we  have  observed, 
upon  consciousness  as  its  sole  foundation,  and  with  ideas 
as  its  materials ;  and  all  his  followers  have  built  upon  the 
same  foundation,  and  with  the  same  materials.  They  ac- 
knowledge that  nature  hath  given  us  various  simple  ideas  : 
these  are  analogous  to  the  matter  of  Des  Cartes's  physical 
system.  They  acknowledge  likewise  a  natural  power  by 
which  ideas  are  compounded,  disjoined,  associated,  com- 
pared :  this  is  analogous  to  the  original  quantity  of  motion 
in  Des  Cartes's  physical  system.  From  these  principle 
they  attempt  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  the  human  un- 
derstanding, just  as  in  the  physical  system  the  phenomena 
of  nature  were  to  be  explained  by  matter  and  motion.  It 
must  indeed  be  acknowledged  that  there  is  great  simpli- 
city in  this  system  as  well  as  in  the  other.  There  is  such 
a  similitude  between  the  two,  as  may  be  expected  between 
children  of  the  same  father :  but  as  the  one  has  been  found 


256  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

to  be  the  child  of  Des  Cartes,  and  not  of  Nature,  there  is 
ground  to  think  that  the  other  is  so  likewise. 

That  the  natural  issue  of  this  system  is  scepticism  with 
regard  to  every  thing  except  the  existence  of  our  ideas, 
and  of  their  necessary  relations  which  appear  upon  com- 
paring them,  is  evident:  for  ideas  being  the  only  objects 
of  thought,  and  having  no  existence  but  when  we  are  con- 
scious of  them,  it  necessarily  follows,  that  there  is  no  ob- 
ject of  our  thought  which  can  have  a  continued  and  per- 
manent existence.  Body  and  spirit,  cause  and  effect, 
time  and  space,  to  which  we  were  wont  to  ascribe  an  ex- 
istence independent  of  our  thought,  are  all  turned  out  of 
existence  by  this  short  dilemma:  either  these  things  are 
ideas  of  sensation  or  reflection,  or  they  are  not :  if  they 
are  ideas  of  sensation  or  reflection,  they  can  have  no  exist- 
ence but  when  we  are  conscious  of  them ;  if  they  are  not 
ideas  of  sensation  or  reflection,  they  are  words  without  any 
meaning. 

Neither  Des  Cartes  nor  Locke  perceived  this  conse- 
quence of  their  system  concerning  ideas.  Bishop  Berke- 
ley was  the  first  who  discovered  it.  And  what  followed 
upon  this  discovery  ?  Why,  with  regard  to  the  material 
world,  and  with  regard  to  space  and  time,  he  admits  the 
consequence — That  these  things  are  mere  ideas,  and  have 
no  existence  but  in  our  minds  :  but  with  regard  to  the  ex- 
istence of  spirits  or  minds,  he  does  not  admit  the  conse- 
quence ;  and  if  he  had  admitted  it,  he  must  have  been  an 
absolute  sceptic.  But  how  does  he  evade  this  conse- 
quence with  regard  to  the  existence  of  spirits  ?  The  expe- 
dient which  the  good  bishop  uses  on  this  occasion  is  veiy 
remarkable,  and  shows  his  great  aversion  to  scepticism. 
He  maintains  that  we  have  no  ideas  of  spirits ;  and  that 
we  can  think,  and  speak,  and  reason  about  them,  and  about 
their  attributes,  without  having  any  ideas  of  them.  If  this 
is  so,  my  lord,  what  should  hinder  us  from  thinking  and 
reasoning  about  bodies  and  their  qualities,  without  having 
ideas  of  them?  The  bishop  either  did  not  think  of  this 
question,  or  did  not  think  fit  to  give  any  answer  to  it. 
However,  we  may  observe,  that  in  order  to  avoid  seep- 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  2-37 

ticism,  he  fairly  starts  out  of  the  Cartesian  system,  without 
giving  any  reason  why  he  did  so  in  this  instance,  and  in 
no  other.  This  indeed  is  the  only  instance  of  a  deviation 
from  Cartesian  principles  which  I  have  met  with  in  the 
successors  of  Des  Cartes ;  and  it  seems  to  have  been  only  a 
sudden  start,  occasioned  by  the  terror  of  scepticism ;  for 
in  all  other  things  Berkeley's  system  is  founded  upon  Car- 
tesian principles. 

Thus  we  see,  that  Des  Cartes  and  Locke  take  the  road 
that  leads  to  scepticism,  without  knowing  the  end  of  it ; 
but  they  stop  short  for  want  of  light  to  carry  them  farther. 
Berkeley,  frighted  at  the  appearance  of  the  dreadful  abyss, 
starts  aside,  and  avoids  it.  But  the  author  of  the  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature,  more  daring  and  intrepid,  without 
turning  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  like  Virgil's 
Alecto,  shoots  directly  into  the  gulf: 

Hie  specus  horrendum,  et  soevi  spiracula  Ditis 
Monstrantur:  ruptoque  ingens  Acheronte  voraga 
Pestiferas  aper it  fauces. 

4.  We  may  observe,  That  the  account  given  by  the 
new  system  of  that  furniture  of  the  human  understanding 
which  is  the  gift  of  nature,  and  not  the  acquisition  of  our 
own  reasoning  faculty,  is  extremely  lame  and  imperfect. 

The  natural  furniture  of  the  human  understanding  is  of 
two  kinds:  First,  The  notions  or  simple  apprehensions 
which  we  have  of  things:  and,  Secondly,  The  judgments 
or  the  belief  which  we  have  concerning  them.  As  to  our 
notions,  the  new  system  reduces  them  to  two  classes ;  ideas 
of  sensation  and  ideas  of  reflection:  the  first  are  conceived 
to  be  copies  of  our  sensations  retained  in  the  memory  or  ima- 
gination ;  the  second  to  be  copies  of  the  operations  of  our 
minds,  whereof  we  are  conscious,  in  like  manner  retained  in 
the  memory  or  imagination :  and  we  are  taught,  that  these 
two  comprehend  all  the  materials  about  which  the  human 
understanding  is  or  can  be  employed.  As  to  our  judg- 
ment of  things,  or  the  belief  which  we  have  concerning 
them,  the  new  system  allows  no  part  of  it  to  be  the  gift  of 
nature,  but  holds  it  to  be  the  acquisition  of  reason,  and  to 
be  got  by  comparing  our  ideas,  and  perceiving  their  agree- 


258  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

ments  or  disagreements.  Now,  I  take  this  account,  both 
of  our  notions  and  of  our  judgments  or  belief,  to  be  ex- 
tremely imperfect ;  and  I  shall  briefly  point  out  some  of 
its  capital  defects. 

The  division  of  our  notions  into  ideas  of  sensation  and 
ideas  of  reflection  is  contrary  to  all  rules  of  logic;  be- 
cause the  second  member  of  the  division  includes  the  first. 
For  can  we  form  clear  and  just  notions  of  our  sensations 
any  other  way  than  by  reflection?  Surely  we  cannot. — 
Sensation  is  an  operation  of  the  mind  of  which  we  are 
conscious ;  and  we  get  the  notion  of  sensation  by  reflect- 
ing upon  that  which  we  are  conscious  of.  In  like  manner, 
doubting  and  believing  are  operations  of  the  mind  whereof 
we  are  conscious  ?  and  we  get  the  notion  of  them  by  re- 
flecting upon  what  we  are  conscious  of.  The  ideas  of  sensa- 
tion, therefore,  are  ideas  of  reflection,  as  much  as  the  ideas 
of  doubting  or  believing,  or  any  other  ideas  whatsoever. 

But  to  pass  over  the  inaccuracy  of  this  division,  it  is 
extremely  incomplete.  For  since  sensation  is  an  opera- 
tion of  the  mind,  as  well  as  all  the  other  things  of  which 
we  form  our  notions  by  reflection;  when  it  is  asserted, 
that  all  our  notions  are  either  ideas  of  sensation  or  ideas 
of  reflection,  the  plain  English  of  this  is,  That  mankind 
neither  do,  nor  can  think  of  any  thing  but  of  the  operations 
of  their  own  minds.  Nothing  can  be  more  contrary  to 
truth,  or  more  contrary  to  the  experience  of  mankind.  I 
know  that  Locke,  while  he  maintained  this  doctrine,  be- 
lieved the  notions  which  we  have  of  body  and  of  its  qua- 
lities, and  the  notions  which  we  have  of  motion  and  of 
space,  to  be  ideas  of  sensation.  But  why  did  he  believe 
this  ?  Because  he  believed  those  notions  to  be  nothing  else 
but  images  of  our  sensations.  If  therefore  the  notions  of 
body  and  its  qualities,  of  motion  and  space,  be  not  images 
of  our  sensations,  will  it  not  follow  that  those  notions  are 
not  ideas  of  sensation?  Most  certainly. 

There  is  no  doctrine  in  the  new  system  which  more  di- 
rectly leads  to  scepticism  than  this.  And  the  author  of 
the  Treatise  of  Human  Nature  knew  very  well  how  to 
use  it  for  that  purpose :  for  if  you  maintain  that  there  is 
any  such  existence  as  body  or  spirit,  time  or  place,  cause 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  259 

or  effect,  he  immediately  catches  you  between  the  horn3 
of  this  dilemma;  your  notions  of  these  existences  are 
either  ideas  of  sensation  or  ideas  of  reflection ;  if  of  sen- 
sation, from  what  sensation  are  they  copied?  if  of  reflec- 
tion, from  what  operations  of  the  mind  are  they  copied? 

It  is  indeed  to  be  wished,  that  those  who  have  written 
much  about  sensation,  and  about  the  other  operations  of 
the  mind,  had  likewise  thought  and  reflected  much,  and 
with  great  care,  upon  those  operations :  but  is  it  not  very 
strange,  that  they  will  not  allow  it  to  be  possible  for  man- 
kind to  think  of  any  thing  else  ? 

The  account  which  this  system  gives  of  our  judgment 
and  belief  concerning  things  is  as  far  from  the  truth  as  the 
account  it  gives  of  our  notions  or  simple  apprehensions. 
It  represents  our  senses  as  having  no  other  office  but  that 
of  furnishing  the  mind  with  notions  or  simple  apprehen- 
sions of  things ;  and  makes  our  judgment  and  belief  con- 
cerning those  things  to  be  acquired  by  comparing  our  no- 
tions together,  and  perceiving  their  agreements  or  disagree- 
ments. 

We  have  shown,  on  the  contrary,  that  every  operation 
of  the  senses,  in  its  very  nature,  implies  judgment  or  be- 
lief as  well  as  simple  apprehension.  Thus,  when  I  feel 
the  pain  of  the  gout  in  my  toe,  I  have  not  only  a  notion  of 
pain,  but  a  belief  of  its  existence,  and  a  belief  of  some 
disorder  in  my  toe  which  occasions  it;  and  this  belief  is 
not  produced  by  comparing  ideas,  and  perceiving  their 
agreements  and  disagreements ;  it  is  included  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  sensation.  When  I  perceive  a  tree  before 
me,  my  faculty  of  seeing  gives  *me  not  only  a  notion  or 
simple  apprehension  of  the  tree,  but  a  belief  of  its  existence, 
and  of  its  figure,  distance,  and  magnitude ;  and  this  judg- 
ment or  belief  is  not  got  by  comparing  ideas,  it  is  included 
in  the  very  nature  of  the  perception.  We  have  taken 
notice  of  several  original  principles  of  belief  in  the  course 
of  this  inquiry ;  and  when  other  faculties  of  the  mind  are 
examined,  we  shall  find  more,  which  have  not  occurred  in 
the  examination  of  the  five  senses. 

Such  original  and  natural  judgments  are  therefore  a  part 


260  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

of  that  furniture  which  nature  hath  given  to  the  human  un- 
derstanding. They  are  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty, 
no  less  than  our  notions  or  simple  apprehensions.  They 
serve  to  direct  us  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  where  our 
reasoning  faculty  would  leave  us  in  the  dark.  They  are  a 
part  of  our  constitution,  and  all  the  discoveries  of  our 
reason  are  grounded  upon  them.  They  make  up  what  is 
called  the  common  sense  of  mankind;  and  what  is  mani- 
festly contrary  to  any  of  those  first  principles  is  what  we 
call  absurd.  The  strength  of  them  is  good  sense,  which 
is  often  found  in  those  who  are  not  acute  in  reasoning. 
A  remarkable  deviation  from  them,  arising  from  a  disorder 
in  the  constitution,  is  what  we  call  lunacy ;  as  when  a  man 
believes  that  he  is  made  of  glass.  When  a  man  suffers 
himself  to  be  reasoned  out  of  the  principles  of  common 
sense,  by  metaphysical  arguments,  we  may  call  this  me- 
taphysical lunacy ;  which  differs  from  the  other  species  of 
the  distemper  in  this,  that  it  is  not  continued,  but  inter- 
mittent: it  is  apt  to  seize  the  patient  in  solitary  and  spe- 
culative moments;  but  when  he  enters  into  society,  Com- 
mon Sense  recovers  her  authority.  A  clear  explication 
and  enumeration  of  the  principles  of  common  sense  is  one 
of  the  chief  desiderata  in  logic.  We  have  only  considered 
such  of  them  as  occurred  in  the  examination  of  the  five 
senses. 

5.  The  last  observation  that  I  shall  make  upon  the  new 
system  is,  That,  although  it  professes  to  set  out  in  the  way 
of  reflection,  and  not  of  analogy,  it  hath  retained  some  of 
the  old  analogical  notions  concerning  the  operations  of  the 
mind;  particularly,  That  things  which  do  not  now  exist  in 
the  mind  itself  can  only  be  perceived,  remembered,  or  ima- 
gined, by  means  of  ideas  or  images  of  them  in  the  mind, 
which  are  the  immediate  objects  of  perception,  remem- 
brance, and  imagination.  This  doctrine  appears  evidently 
to  be  boiTowed  from  the  old  system;  which  taught  that 
external  things  make  impressions  upon  the  mind  like  the 
impression  of  a  seal  upon  wax:  that  it  is  by  means  of 
those  impressions  that  we  perceive,  remember,  or  imagine 
them ;  and  that  those  impressions  must  resemble  the  things 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  261 

from  which  they  are  taken.  When  we  form  our  notions 
of  the  operations  of  the  mind  by  analogy,  this  way  of  con- 
ceiving them  seems  to  be  very  natural,  and  offers  itself  to 
our  thoughts :  for  as  every  thing  which  is  felt  must  make 
some  impression  upon  the  body,  we  are  apt  to  think,  that 
every  thing  which  is  understood  must  make  some  impres- 
sion upon  the  mind. 

From  such  analogical  reasoning,  this  opinion  of  the  ex- 
istence of  ideas  or  images  of  things  in  the  mind  seems  to 
have  taken  its  rise,  and  to  have  been  so  universally  re- 
ceived among  philosophers.  It  was  observed  already, 
that  Berkeley,  in  one  instance,  apostatizes  from  this  prin- 
ciple of  the  new  system,  by  affirming  that  we  have  no 
ideas  of  spirits,  and  that  we  can  think  of  them  immediately 
without  ideas.  But  I  know  not  whether  in  this  he  has 
had*  any  followers.  There  is  some  difference  likewise 
among  modern  philosophers,  with  regard  to  the  ideas  or 
images  by  which  we  perceive,  remember,  or  imagine  sen- 
sible things.  For  though  all  agree  in  the  existence  of 
such  images,  they  differ  about  their  place;  some  placing 
them  in  a  particular  part  of  the  brain,  where  the  soul  is 
thought  to  have  her  residence,  and  others  placing  them  in 
the  mind  itself.  Des  Cartes  held  the  first  of  these  opi- 
nions ;  to  which  Newton  seems  likewise  to  have  inclined ; 
for  he  proposes  this  query  in  his  Optics :  "  Annon  senso- 
rium  animalium  est  locus  cui  substantia  sentiens  adest,  et 
in  quern  sensibiles  rerum  species  per  nervos  et  cerebrum 
deferunter,  ut  ibi,  praesentes  a  praesente  sentire  possint?" 
But  Locke  seems  to  place  the  idea  of  sensible  things  in 
the  mind  :  and  that  Berkeley,  and  the  author  of  the  Trea- 
tise of  Human  Nature,  were  of  the  same  opinion,  is  evi- 
dent. The  last  makes  a  very  curious  application  of  this 
doctrine,  by  endeavouring  to  prove  from  it,  That  the  mind 
either  is  no  substance,  or  that  it  is  an  extended  and  divi- 
sible substance ;  because  the  ideas  of  extension  cannot  be 
in  a  subject  which  is  indivisible  and  unextended. 

I  confess  I  think  his  reasoning  in  this,  as  in  most  cases, 
is  clear  and  strong.  For  whether  the  idea  of  extension  be 
only  another  name  for  extension  itself,  as  Berkeley  and  his 


262  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND. 

author  assert;  or  whether  the  idea  of  extension  be  an 
image  and  resemblance  of  extension,  as  Locke  conceived; 
I  appeal  to  any  man  of  common  sense,  whether  extension, 
or  any  image  of  extension,  can  be  in  an  unextended  and 
indivisible  subject.  But  while  I  agree  with  him  in  his 
reasoning,  I  would  make  a  different  application  of  it.  He 
takes  it  for  granted,  that  there  are  ideas  of  extension  in  the 
mind ;  and  hence  infers,  that  if  it  is  at  all  a  substance,  it 
must  be  an  extended  and  divisible  substance.  On  the 
contrary,  I  take  it  for  granted,  upon  the  testimony  of  com- 
mon sense,  that  my  mind  is  a  substance,  that  is,  a  perma- 
nent subject  of  thought;  and  my  reason  convinces  me 
that  it  is  an  unextended  and  indivisible  substance;  and 
hence  I  infer,  that  there  cannot  be  in  it  any  thing  that  re- 
sembles extension.  If  this  reasoning  had  occurred  to 
Berkeley,  it  would  probably  have  led  him  to  acknowledge, 
that  we  may  think  and  reason  concerning  bodies,  without 
having  ideas  of  them  hi  the  mind  as  well  as  concerning 
spirits. 

I  intended  to  have  examined  more  particularly  and  fully 
this  doctrine  of  the  existence  of  ideas  or  images  of  things 
in  the  mind,  and  likewise  another  doctrine,  which  is  founded 
upon  it,  to  wit,  That  judgment  or  belief  is  nothing  but  a 
perception  of  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas  : 
but  having  already  shown,  through  the  course  of  this  in- 
quiry, that  the  operations  of  the  mind  which  we  have  ex- 
amined give  no  countenance  to  either  of  these  doctrines, 
and  in  many  things  contradict  them,  I  have  thought  it 
proper  to  drop  this  part  of  my  design.  It  may  be  exe- 
cuted with  more  advantage  if  it  is  at  all  necessary,  after 
inquiring  into  some  other  powers  of  the  human  under- 
standing. 

Although  we  have  examined  only  the  five  senses,  and 
the  principles  of  the  human  mind  which  are  employed 
about  them,  or  such  as  have  fallen  in  our  way  in  the 
course  of  this  examination ;  we  shall  leave  the  further 
prosecution  of  this  inquiry  to  future  deliberation.  The 
powers  of  memory,  of  imagination,  of  taste,  of  reasoning, 
of  moral  perception,  the  will,  the  passions,  the  affections, 


CHAP.  VII.]  CONCLUSION.  2G3 

and  all  the  active  powers  of  the  soul,  present  a  vast  and 
boundless  field  of  philosophical  disquisition,  which  the 
author  of  this  inquiry  is  far  from  thinking  himself  able  to 
survey  with  accuracy.  Many  authors  of  ingenuity,  an- 
cient and  modern,  have  made  excursions  into  this  vast  ter- 
ritory, and  have  communicated  useful  observations :  but 
there  is  reason  to  believe,  that  those  who  have  pretended  to 
give  us  a  map  of  the  whole,  have  satisfied  themselves  with 
a  very  inaccurate  and  incomplete  survey.  If  Galileo  had 
attempted  a  complete  system  of  natural  philosophy,  he 
had,  probably,  done  little  service  to  mankind :  but  b^ 
confining  himself  to  what  was  within  his  comprehension, 
he  laid  the  foundation  of  a  system  of  knowledge,  which 
rises  by  degrees,  and  does  honour  to  the  human  under- 
standing. Newton,  building  upon  this  foundation,  and  in 
like  manner  confining  his  inquiries  to  the  law  of  gravita- 
tion and  the  properties  of  light,  performed  wonders.  If 
he  had  attempted  a  great  deal  more,  he  had  done  a  great 
deal  less,  and  perhaps  nothing  at  all.  Ambitious  of  fol- 
lowing such  great  examples,  with  unequal  steps,  alas !  and 
unequal  force,  we  have  attempted  an  inquiry  only  into  one 
little  corner  of  the  human  mind ;  that  corner  which  seems 
to  be  most  exposed  to  vulgar  observation,  and  to  be  most 
easily  comprehended ;  and  yet,  if  we  have  delineated  it 
justly,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the  accounts  hereto- 
fore given  of  it  were  very  lame,  and  wide  of  the  truth. 


THE  END. 


(.'.  \Vliittinghiira,  College  House,  Chiswick, 


B 


-E3? 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


OCTQ6  1991 
Biomedical  Library 

JUL  1  7  1997 
RECEIVED 


1  2  J998 


JAN  1  ;  2006 


Series  9482 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A     000  877  438     2
