3aha  ^bams 


N  THE  CUSTODY  Or  ThE 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


SHELF    N° 


\r. 


ELEMENTS 


PHILOSOPHY 


HUMAN     MIND. 


f^"  For  fuch  of  the  Purchafen  of  this  First  Volume  as  chufe 
to  have  It  bound  in  Tivo  Parts^  a  Title  for  the  Second  Part  is 
printed,  which  is  intended  to  begin  at  Chapter  V .  page  277. 

The  Second  Volume  of  The  Elements  of  the  Philofophy  of  the  Human 
Mind  has  been  lately  publi/loed  in  Quarto. 


Stnhan  and  Prefton, 
Printers-Street,  London. 


ELEMENTS 


OF    THE 


PHILOSOPHY 


OF    THK 


HUMAN    MIND 


By  DUGALD   STEWART, 

PROFESSOR    OF    MORAL    PHILOSOPHY    IN   THE  UNIVERSITY,    AND   FELLOVf 

OF     THE    ROYAL    SOCIETY,    OF    EDINBURGH  ; 

HONORARY    MEMBER  OF    THE    IMPERIAL  ACADEMY    OF    SCIENCES 

AT    ST.  PETEUSBURGH  ; 

AND    MEMBER    OF    THE  AMERICAN    PHILOSOPHICAL    SOCIETY 

HELD    AT    PHILADELPHIA. 


VOL.  L 
THE  FIFTH  EDITION. 

LONDON. 

PRIKTED   FOR    T.  CADELL    AND    W.  DAVIESj    IN    THE   STRAND  ; 

AND    W.  CREECH,   EDINBURGH. 

1814. 


-^^   ADAMS  S  t'^.t 

AT  J 


TO 
THE    REVEREND 

THOMAS  REID,   D.  D. 

PROFESSOR    OF    MORAL    PHILOSOPHY 
IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  GLASGOW, 

THIS   WORK 

IS    INSCRIBED, 

IN    TESTIMONY    OF 

THE     RESPECT    AND     AFFECTION 

OF 

THE  AUTHOR. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

[N  various  parts  of  the  following  Work, 
references  are  made  to  subsequent  specu-* 
lations,  which  are  not  contained  in  it.  These 
speculations  it  is  my  intention  to  resume  at 
some  fiiture  period  :  but  when  I  consider  the 
extent  of  my  subject,  and  the  many  accidents 
which  may  divert  me  from  the  prosecution 
of  it,  I  cannot  venture  so  far  as  to  an- 
nounce, in  the  title-page  of  this  volume,  any 
promise  of  a  future  publication. 

Some  additional  chapters  are  still  wanting, 
to  complete  the  Analysis  of  the  Intellectual 
Powers.  After  finishing  this,  the  course  of 
my  inquiries  would  lead  me  to  treat,  in  the 
second  place,  of  Man  considered  as  an  Ac- 
tive and  Moral  being ;  and,  thirdly,  of  Man 
considered  as  the  member  of  a  Political 
Society, 


COLLEGE    OF    EDINBURGH, 

March  13,   171)2. 


a  2 


CONTENTS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

PART   I. 

OF  the  Nature  and  Objeft  of  the  Philofophy  of  the  Hu- 
man Mind  .  -  _  Page  i 

PART   II. 

Sect.  I. — Of  the  Utility  of  the  Philofophy  of  the  Human 

Mind  -  -  -  -     17 

II.  — Continuation  of  the  fame  Subject       -  -    44 


CHAP.  I. 
Oftht  Poivers  of  External  Perception. 

Sect.  I.— Of  the  Theories  which  have  been  formed  by  Phi" 
lofophers,  to  explain  the  Manner  in  which  the 
Mind  perceives  external  Objefts  -  -     63 

II. —  Of  certain  natural  Prejudices,  which  feem  to 
have  given  rife  to  the  common  Theories  of 
Perception  -  •  -  "7^ 

III. — Of  Dr.  Reid's    Speculations  on  the   Subjeft  of 

Perception  -  -  -  -     87 

IV.  — Of  the  Origin  of  our  Knowledge  -  *     94 

CHAP.  11. 

Of  AttetUim         -  -  -  loj 


i  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.  III. 

Of  Conception         -  -  "133 

CHAP.  IV. 
Of  AhJlra8ion. 

Sect.  I.  —  General    Obfervations    on    this    Faculty   of  the 

Mind  ...  -  IJ2 

II.. —  Of  the  Objcfts  of  our  Thoughts,  when  we  em- 
ploy general  Terms  -  -  -   i6o 
III.  —  Remarks  on  the  Opinions  of  fome  modern  Phi- 
lofophers    on    the    Subjeft    of   the   foregoing 
Section            -                 .                 -  -  J82 
IV. — Continuation   of  the   fame    Subjetl. — Inferences 
with   refpefl  to  the  Ufe  of  Language  as  an 
Inftrument  of    Thought,    and   the   Errors   in 
Reafoning  to  which  it  occafionally  gives  rife    -  107 
v.— Of  the  Purpofes  to  which  the  Powers  of  Ab- 

ftraftion  and  Generalifation  are  fubfervient       -  204 
VI.  —  Of  the  Errors  to  which  we  are  liable  in  Specu- 
lation,   and    in    the   Conduft    of  Affairs,    in 
confequence  of  a  rafh  Application  of  general 
Principles        -  -  •  -  215 

VII. — Continuation  of  the  fame  Subjeft. — Differences 
in  the  intelledtual  Charadlers  of  Individuals 
arifing  from  their  different  Habits  of  Abilrac- 
tion  and  Generalifation  _  .  -  224 

VIII. —Continuation   of    the    fame    Subjeft. — Ufc    and 

Abufe  of  general  Principles  in  Politics  -  234. 


CHAP.  V. 

Of  the  AJociation  of  Ideas 

-  277 

II 

PART 

CONTENTS.  xi 

PART  I. 

Of  the   Influence   of  AJfociation   in   regulating  the   Succejfion   of  our 
Thoughts. 

Sect.  I. — General  Obfervations  on  this  Part  of  our  Conftitu- 
tion,  and  on  the  Language  of  Philofophers  with 
refpeft  to  it  -  -  -  -   277 

II.  —  Of  the  Principles  of  AfTociation  among  our  Ideas  288 

III.  —  Of  the  Power  which  the  Mind  has  over  the  Train 

of  its  Thoughts  _  _  -  -  295 

IV.  —  lUuftrations  of  tlie  Doftrine  flated  in  the  preceding 

Seftion  .  -  -  -  -   ^01 

1.  Of  Wit  -  -  -  ibid. 

2.  Of  Rhyme         -  -  -  -  ^06 

3.  Of  Poetical  Fancy  -  .  -  312 

4.  Of  Invention  in  the  Arts  and  Sciences     -317 
V. — Application  of  the  Principles  ftated  in  the  fore- 
going Se£lions  of  this  Chapter,  to  explain  the 
Phenomena  of  Dreaming  -  -  327 

PART   II. 

Of  the  Influence  of  Affociation  on   the  IntelleSual  and  on  the  AStvf 

Powers. 

Sect,  I.  —  Of  the  Influence  of  cafual  Aflbciations  on  our 

fpeculative  Conclufions  -  .  -  ^^g 

II.  —  Of  the  Influence  of  the  AfTociation  of  'Ideas  on 

our  Judgments  in  Matters  of  Taflie      -  -  369 

III.— Of   the  Influence   of  Affociation   on  our  aflive 

Principles  and  on  our  moral  Judgments  -  38(5 

IV.  — General  Remarks  on  the  Subjefts  treated  in  the 

foregoing  Seftions  of  this  Chapter      -  -  397 

CHAP.  VI. 

Of  Memory, 

Sect.  I.  —  General  Obfervations  on  Memory  -  -403 

II. — Of  the  Varieties   of  Memory  in  different  Indi- 
viduals -  -  -  ,  -  416 

III.— Of 


xii  CONTENTS. 

III. —Of  the  Improvement  of  Memory. — Analyfis  of 
the  Principles  on  which  the  Culture  of  Me- 
mory depends  .  _  .  ^jrt 

IV.  — Continuation  of  the  fame  Subjed. — Of  the  Aid 
which  the  Memory  derives  from  Philofophical 
Arrangement  -  .  -  ^^^ 

V. — Continuation  of  the  fame  SubjeA. — EfFefts  pro- 
duced on  the  Memory  by  committing  to  Writ- 
ing our  acquired  Knowledge  -  -  446 

VI. — Continuation  of  the  fame  Subjed. — Of  Artificial 

Memory  -  -  .  -  4^;^ 

VII.  —  Continuation  of  the  fame  Subjeft. — Importance 
of  making  a  proper  Selection  among  the  Ob- 
jefts  of  our  Knowledge,  in  order  to  derive 
Advantage  from  the  Acquifitions  of  Memory  -  461 
VIII.  — Of  the  Connexion  between  Memory  and  Philofo- 
phical Genius  -  -  -471 

CHAP.  VII. 
Of  Imagination. 

Sect.  I.— 'Analyfis  of  Imagination  -  -  -481 

II.  —  Of  Imagination  confidered  in  its  Relation  to  fome 

of  the  Fine  Arts  -  _  -  489 

III,— Continuation  of  the  fame   SubjeiSt. — Relation  of 

Imagination  and  of  Tafte  to  Genius  -  506 

IV.  —  Of  the  Influence  of  Imagination  on  Human  Cha- 
racter and  Happincfs        .  -  -  ^09 
V.  —  Continuation   of    the    fame    Subjedl. — Inconve- 
niences  refulting   from   an   ill-regulated  Ima- 
gination           -                 -                 -  -5^7 

VI.— Continuation  of  the  fame  Subjeft. — Important 
Ufes  to  which  the  Power  of  Imagination  is 
fubfervient  -  .  -  529 


Notes  and  Illustrations  -  "  '  535 

ELEMENTS 


ELEMENTS 

OF    THE 

PHILOSOPHY 

OF    THE 

HUMAN    MIND, 


INTRODUCTION. 

PART    FIRST. 

Of  the  Nature  ami  ObjeB  of  the  Phtlofophy  of  the  Human  Mind. 

THE  prejudice  which  is  commonly  entertained 
againjd  metaphyfical  fpeculations,  feems  to  arife 
chiefly  from  two  caufes :  Firft,  from  an  apprehenfion 
that  the  fubjedis  about  which  they  are  employed 
are  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties ; 
and,  fecondly,  from  a  belief  that  thefe  fubjeds  have 
no  relation  to  the  bufmefs  of  life. 

The  frivolous  and  abfurd  difcuflions  which  abound 
in  the  writings  of  moil  Metaphyfical  authors,  afford 
but  too  many  arguments  in  juftification  of  thefe  opi- 
nions ;  and  if  fuch  difcuffions  were  to  be  admitted  as 
a  fair  fpecimen  of  what  the  human  mind  is  able  to 
accomplifh  in  this  department  of  fcience,  the  contempt, 
into  which  it  has  fallen  of  late,  might  with  juftice  be 

B  regarded. 


a  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

regarded,  as  no  inconfiderable  evidence  of  the  progrefs 
which  true  philofophy  has  made  in  the  prefent  age. 
Among  the  various  fubje^ts  of  inquiry,  however, 
which,  in  confequence  of  the  vague  ufe  of  language* 
are  comprehended  under  the  general  title  of  Metaphy- 
(ics,  there  are  fome,  which  are  effentially  diftinguifhed 
from  the  reft,  both  by  the  degree  of  evidence  which 
accompanies  their  principles,  and  by  the  relation 
which  they  bear  to  the  ufeful  fciences  and  arts  :  and  it 
has  unfortunately  happened,  that  thefe  have  ihared  in 
that  general  difcredit,  into  which  the  other  branches  of 
metaphyfics  have  juftly  fallen.  To  this  circumftance 
is  probably  to  be  afcribed,  the  little  progrefs  which 
has  hitherto  been  made  in  the  philosophy  of  thb 
HUMAN  MIND ;  a  fcience,  fo  interefting  in  its  nature, 
and  fo  important  in  its  applications,  that  it  could 
fcarcely  have  failed,  in  thefe  inquifitive  and  enlightened 
times,  to  have  excited  a  very  general  attention,  if  it 
had  not  accidentally  been  claffed,  in  the  public  opinion, 
with  the  vain  and  unprofitable  difquifitions  of  the 
fchool-men. 

In  order  to  obviate    thefe    mifapprehenfions   with 
refped  to  the  fubjeft  of  the  following  work,  I  have 

/  thought  it  proper,  in  this  preliminary  chapter,  firft,  to 
explain  the  Nature  of  the  truths  which  I  propofe  to 

<^  inveftigate ;  and,  fecondly,  to  point  out  fome  of  the 
more  important  Applications  of  which  they  are  fufcep- 
tible.  In  ftating  thefe  preliminary  obfervations,  I  may 
perhaps  appear  to  fome  to  be  minute  and  tedious  ;  but 
this  fault,  I  am  confident,  will  be  readily  pardoned  by 
thofe,  who  have  ftudied  with  care  the  principles  of  that 
fcience  of  w  hich  I  am  to  treat :  and  who  are  anxious 

tQ 


Part  I.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  ^ 

to  remove  the  prejudices  which  have,  in  a  great  mea- 
fure,  excluded  it  from  the  modern  fyftems  of  educa- 
tion. In  the  progrefs  of  my  work,  I  flatter  myfelf 
that  I  fhall  not  often  have  occafion  to  folicit  the  indul. 
gence  of  my  readers,  for  an  unneceflary  diffufenefs. 

The  notions  we  annex  to  the  words.  Matter,  and 
Mind,  as  is  well  remarked  by  Dr.  Reid*,  are  merely 
relative.  If  I  am  alked,  what  I  mean  by  Matter  ?  I 
can  only  explain  myfelf  by  faying,  it  is  that  which  is 
extended,  figured,  coloured,  moveable,  hard  or  foft, 
rough  or  fmooth,  hot  or  cold  ; — that  is,  I  can  define  it 
in  no  other  way  than  by  enumerating  its  fenfible  qua- 
lities. It  is  not  matter,  or  body,  which  I  perceive  by 
my  fenfes;  but  only  extenfion,  figure,  colour,  and 
certain  other  qualities,  which  the  conftitution  of  my 
nature  leads  me  to  refer  to  fomething,  which  is  ex- 
tended, figured,  and  coloured.  The  cafe  is  precifely 
fimilar  with  refpeft  to  Mind.  We  are  not  immediately 
confcious  of  its  exiftence,  but  we  are  confcious  of  fen- 
fation,  thought,  and  volition  ;  operations,  which  imply 
the  exiftence  of  fomething  which  feels,  thinks,  and 
wills.  Every  man  too  is  impreffed  with  an  irrefiftible 
convidion,  that  all  thefe  fenfations,  thoughts,  and 
volitions,  belong  to  one  and  the  fame  being ;  to  that 
being,  which  he  calls  himfelf\  a  being,  which  he  is 
led,  by  the  conftitution  of  his  nature,  to  confider  as 
fomething  diftin6:  from  his  body,  and  as  not  liable  to 
be  impaired  by  the  lofs  or  mutilation  of  any  of  his 
organs. 

From  thefe  confiderations,  it  appears,  that  we  have 
the  fame  evidence  for  the  exiftence  of  mind,  that  we 
*  Effays  on  the  AAive  Powers  of  Man^  p.  8,  9. 

B  2  have 


4  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Tntrod, 

have  for  the  exiftence  of  body  ;  nay,  if  there  be  any 
difference  between  the  two  cafes,  that  we  have  flronger 
evidence  for  it ;  inafmuch  as  the  one  is  fuggefled  to 
us  by  the  fubjefts  of  our  own  confcioufnefs,  and  the 
other  merely  by  the  objeds  of  our  perceptions :  and 
in  this  Hght,  undoubtedly,  the  facl  would  appear  to 
every  perfon,  were  it  not,  that,  from  our  earliefl  years, 
the  attention  is  engroffed  with  the  qualities  and  laws 
of  matter,  an  acquaintance  with  which  is  abfolutely 
neceifary  for  the  prefervation  of  our  animal  exiftence. 
Hence  it  is,  that  thefe  phenomena  occupy  our  thoughts 
more  than  thofe  of  niind  ;  that  we  are  perpetually 
tempted  to  explain  the  latter  by  the  analogy  of  the 
former,  and  even  to  endeavour  to  refer  them  to  the 
fame  general  laws ;  and  that  we  acquire  habits  of  in- 
attention to  the  fubjefts  of  our  confcioufnefs,  too  ftrong 
to  be  afterwards  furmounted,  without  the  moft  perfe- 
vering  induftry. 

If  the  foregoing  obfervations  be  well  founded,  they 
eftablifh  the  diftinction  between  mind  and  matter, 
without  any  long  procefs  of  metaphyseal  reafoning  * : 
for  if  our  notions  of  both  are  merely  relative ;  if  we 
tnow  the  one,  only  by  fuch  fenfible  qualities  as  ex- 
tenfion,  figure,  and  folidity ;  and  the  other,  by  fuch 
operations  as  fenfation,  thought,  and  volition ;  we 
are  certainly  entitled  to  fay,  that  matter  and  mind, 
confidered  as  objeds  of  human  ftudy,  are  effentially 
.  different ;  the  fcience  of  the  former  refting  ultimately 
on  the  phenomena  exhibited  to  our  fenfes  ;  that  of  the 
latter,  on  the  phenomena  of  which  we  are  confcious. 
Ijiftead,  therefore,  of  objecting  to  the  fcheme  of  mate-» 
*  See  Note  [A],  at  the  end  of  the  volume. 

rialifm. 


part  r.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  5 

rialifm,  that  Its  conclufions  are  falfe,  it  w^oulJ  be  more 
accurate  to  fay,  that  its  aim  is  unphilofophical.  It 
proceeds  on  a  milapprehenfion  of  the  proper  object  of 
fcience ;  the  difficulty  which  it  profefles  to  remove 
being  manifeflly  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  our  fa- 
culties.  Surely,  when  we  attempt  to  explain  the 
nature  of  that  principle  which  feels  and  thinks  and 
wills,  by  faying,  that  it  is  a  material  fubflance,  or  that 
it  is  the  refult  of  material  organization,  we  impofe  on 
ourfelves  by  words  ;  forgetting,  that  matter  as  well  as 
mind  is  known  to  us  by  its  qualities  and  attributes 
alone,  and  that  we  are  totally  ignorant  of  the  effence 
of  either  *. 

As  all  our  knowledge  of  the  material  world  is  de- 
rived from  the  information  of  our  fenfes.  Natural  phi- 
lofophers  have,  in  modern  times,  wifely  abandoned  to 
Metaphyficians,  all  fpeculatioas  concerning  the  nature 
of  that  fubflance  of  which  it  is  eompofed  ;  concerning 
the  poffibility  or  impoffibility  of  its  being  created  ; 
concerning  the  efficient  caufes  of  the  changes  which 
take  place  in  it ;  and  even  concerning  the  reality  of  its 
exiftence,  independent  of  that  of  percipient  beings: 
and  have  confined  themfelves  to  the  humbler  province 
of  obferving  the  phenomena  it  exhibits,  and  of  afcer- 

*  Some  Metaphyficians,  who  appear  to  admit  the  truth  of  the 
foregoing  reafoning,  have  farther  urged,  that  for  any  thing  we  can 
prove  to  the  contrary,  it  is  poffible,  that  the  unknown  fubftance 
which  has  the  qualities  of  extenfion,  figure,  and  colour,  may  be  the 
fame  with  the  unknown  fubftance  which  has  the  attributes  of  feel- 
ing, thinking,  and  willing.  But  befides  that  this  is  only  an  hypo- 
thefis,  which  amounts  to  nothing  more  than  a  mere  poffibihty, 
even  if  it  were  true,  it  would  no  more  be  proper  to  fay  of  mind, 
that  it  is  material,  than  to  fay  of  body,  that  it  is  fpiritual. 

B  3  taining 


6"  ELEMEN'TS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

taining  their  general  laws.  By  purfuing  this  plan 
fteadily,  they  have,  in  the  courfe  of  the  two  laft  cen- 
turies, formed  a  body  of  fcience,  which  not  only  does 
honour  to  the  human  underllanding,  but  has  had  a 
mod  important  influence  on  the  pra6tical  arts  of  life. — 
This  experimental  philofophy,  no  one  now  is  in  danger 
of  confounding  with  the  metaphyfical  fpeculations 
already  mentioned.  Of  the  importance  of  thefe,  as  a 
feparate  branch  of  ftudy,  it  is  poiTible  that  fome  may 
think  more  favourably  than  others  ;  but  they  are  ob- 
vioufly  different  in  their  nature,  from  the  inveftigations 
of  phyfics  ;  and  it  is  of  the  utmoft  confequence  to  the 
evidence  of  this  laft  fcience,  that  its  principles  fhould 
not  be  blended  with  thofe  of  the  former. 

A    fimilar    diftindtion     takes    place    among    the 
queftions  which  may  be  ftated  relative  to  the  human 
mind. — Whether   it    be  extended    or    unextended ; 
whether  or  not  it  has  any  relation  to  place  ;  and  (if  it 
has)  whether  it  refides  in  the  brain,  or  be  fpread  over 
the  body,  by  diffufion  ;  are  queftions  perfectly  analo- 
gous to  thofe  which  Metaphyficians  have  ftarted  on 
the  fubjed  of  matter.     It  is  unnecelfary  to  enquire,  at 
prefent,  whether  or  not  they  admit  of  anfwer.     It  is 
fufficient  for  my  purpofe  to  remark,  that  they  are  as 
widely  and  obvioufly  different  from  the  view,  which  I 
propofe  to  take,  of  the  human  mind  in  the  following 
work,  as  the  reveries  of  Berkeley  concerning  the  non- 
cxiftence  of  the  material  world,  are  from  the  conclu- 
fions  of  Newton,  and  his  followers. — It  is  farther  evi- 
dent,  that  the  metaphyfical  opinions,  which  we  may 
happen  to  have  formed  concerning  the  nature  either 
of  body  or  of  mind,  and  the  efficient  caufes  by  which 

their 


Part  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  7 

their  phenomena  are  produced,  have  no  neceffary  con- 
nedlion  with  our  inquiries  concerning  the  laws,  accord- 
ing to  which  thefe  phenomena  take  place. — Whether 
(for  example)  the  caufe  of  gravitation  be  material  or  im- 
material, is  a  point  about  which  two  Newtonians  may 
differ,  while  they  agree  perfectly  in  their  phyfical  opi- 
nions. It  is  fufficient,  if  both  admit  the  general  fa6l,  that 
bodies  tend  to  approach  each  other,  with  a  force  vary- 
ing with  their  mutual  diflance,  according  to  a  certain 
law.     In  like  manner,  in  the  fludy  of  the  human  mind, 
the  conclufions  to  which  we  are  led,  by  a  careful  ex- 
amination of  the  phenomena  it  exhibits,  have  no  necef- 
fary connexion  with  our  opinions  concerning  its  nature 
and  effence. — That  when  two  fubjed:s    of  thought, 
for  inftance,    have  been  repeatedly  prefented  to  the 
mind  in  conjunction,  the  one  has  a  tendency  to  fuggeft 
the  other,   is  a  fa6t  of  which  I  can  no  more  doubt, 
than  of  any  thing  for  which  I  have  the  evidence  of  my 
fenfes ;    and  it  is  plainly  a  fad  totally  unconneded 
with  any  hypothefis  concerning  the  nature  of  the  foul, 
and  which  will  be  as  readily  admitted  by  the  materialift 
as  by  the  Berkeleian. 

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  reality  and  im- 
portance of  this  diftindion,  it  has  not  hitherto  been 
fufficiently  attended  to,  by  the  philofophers  who  have 
treated  of  the  human  mind.  Dr.  Reid  is  perhaps  the 
only  one  who  has  perceived  it  clearly,  or  at  leafl  who 
has  kept  it  fteadily  in  view,  in  all  his  inquiries.  In  the 
writings,  indeed,  of  feveral  other  modern  Metaphyfi- 
cians,  we  meet  with  a  variety  of  important  and  well- 
afcertained  fads ;  but,  in  general,  thefe  fads  are 
blended   with   fpeculations    upon  fubjeds  which  are 

B  4  placed 


8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   rHILOSOPHY  Tntrod, 

placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties.— 
It  is  this  mixture  of  fa£t,  and  of  hypothecs,  which  has 
brought  the  philofophy  of  mind  into  fome  degree  of 
difcredit ;  nor  will  ever  its  real  value  be  generally 
acknowledged,  till  the  diftindcion  I  have  endeavoured 
to  illufhrate,  be  underftood,  and  attended  to,  by  thofe 
who  fpeculate  on  the  fubjeft.  By  confining  their 
attention  to  the  fenfible  qualities  of  body,  and  to  the 
fenfible  phenomena  it  exhibits,  we  know  what  dif- 
coveries  natural  philofophers  have  made  :  and  if  the 
labours  of  Metaphyficians  fhall  ever  be  rewarded  with 
fimilar  fuccefs,  it  can  only  be,  by  attentive  and  pa- 
tient reflexion  on  the  fubjefts  of  their  own  con- 
fcioufnefs. 

I  cannot  help  taking  this  opportunity  of  remark- 
ing, on  the  other  hand,  that  if  phyfical  inquirers  fhould 
think  of  again  employing  themfelves  in  fpeculations 
about  the  nature  of  matter,  inflead  of  attempting  to 
afcertain  its  fenfible  properties  and  laws,  (and  of  late 
there  feems  to  be  fuch  a  tendency  among  fome  of  the 
followers  of  Bofcovich),  they  will  foon  involve  them- 
felves in  an  inextricable  labyrinth,  and  the  firfl  prin- 
ciples of  phyfics  will  be  rendered  as  myfterious  and 
chimerical,  as  the  pneumatology  of  the  fchool-men. 

The  little  progrefs  which  has  hitherto  been  made 
in  the  philofophy  of  mind,  will  not  appear  furprifing 
to  thofe  who  have  attended  to  the  hiftory  of  natural 
knowledge.  It  is  only  fince  the  time  of  Lord  Bacon,  that 
the  ftudy  of  it  has  been  profecuted  with  any  degree  of 
fuccefs,  or  that  the  proper  method  of  conducting  it  has 
been  generally  underftood.  There  is  even  fome  reafon 
for  doubting,  from  the  crude  fpeculations  on  medical 

and 


Part  T.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ■  g 

and  chemical  fubjefts  which  are  daily  offered  to  the 
public,  whether  it  be  yet  underflood  fo  completely  as 
is  commonly  imagined  ;  and  whether  a  fuller  illuftra- 
tion  of  the  rules  of  philofophifing,  than  Bacon  or  his 
followers  have  given,  might  not  be  ufeful,  even  to 
phyfical  inquirers. 

When  we  refleft,  in  this  manner,  on  the  fhortnefs 
of  the  period  during  which  natural  philofophy  has  been 
fuccefsfully  cultivated  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  confider 
how  open  to  our  examination  the  laws  of  matter  are, 
in  comparifon  of  thcfe  which  regulate  the  phenomena 
of  thought,  we  fhall  neither  be  difpofed  to  wonder, 
that  the  philofophy  of  mind  fhould  (till  remain  in  its 
infancy,  nor  be  difcouraged  in  our  hopes  concerning 
its  future  progrefs.  The  excellent  models  of  this  fpe- 
cies  of  inveftigation,  which  the  writings  of  Dr.  Reid 
exhibit,  give  us  ground  to  expeft  that  the  time  is  not 
far  diftant,  when  it  fliall  aiTume  that  rank  which  it  is 
entitled  to  hold  among  the  fciences. 

It  would  probably  contribute  much  to  accelerate 
the  progrefs  of  the  philofophy  of  mind,  if  a  diflift<3: 
explanation  were  given  of  its  nature  and  objed ;  and 
if  fome  general  rules  were  laid  down,  with  refpeft  to 
the  proper  method  of  conducting  the  (ludy  of  it.  To 
this  fubjeft,  however,  which  is  of  fufficient  extent  to 
furnifti  matter  for  a  feparate  work,  I  cannot  attempt 
to  do  juftice  at  prefent ;  and  {hall  therefore  confine 
myfelf  to  the  illuftration  of  a  few  fundamental  princi- 
ples, which  it  will  be  of  effential  importance  for  us  to 
keep  in  view  in  the  following  inquiries. 

Upon  a  flight  attention  to  the  operations  of  our  own 
minds,  they  appear  to  be  fo  complicated,  and  fo  infinitely 

diverfified, 


10  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

diverfified,  that  it  feems  to  be  impofiible  to  reduce 
them  to  any  general  laws.  In  confequence,  however, 
of  a  more  accurate  examination,  the  profpect  clears 
up ;  and  the  phenomena,  which  appeared,  at  firfl,  to 
be  too  various  for  our  comprehenfion,  are  found  to  be 
the  refult  of  a  comparatively  fmall  number  of  fimple 
and  uncompounded  faculties,  or  of  fimple  and  uncom- 
pounded  principles  of  adion.  Thefe  faculties  and 
principles  are  the  general  laws  of  our  conftitution,  and 
hold  the  fame  place  in  the  philofophy  of  mind,  that 
the  general  laws  we  invefligate  in  phyfics,  hold  in  that 
branch  of  fcience.  In  both  cafes,  the  laws  which 
nature  has  eftabliihed,  are  to  be  inveftigated  only  by 
an  examination  of  fads ;  and  in  both  cafes,  a  know- 
ledge of  thefe  laws  leads  to  an  explanation  of  an 
infinite  number  of  phenomena. 

In  the  inveftigation  of  phyfical  laws,  it  is  well 
known,  that  our  inquiries  muft  always  terminate  in 
fome  general  fa£t,  of  which  no  account  can  be  given, 
but  that  fuch  is  the  conftitution  of  nature.  After  we 
have  eftabliftied,  for  example,  from  the  aftronomical 
phenomena,  the  univerfality  of  the  law  of  gravitation, 
it  may  ftill  be  afked,  whether  this  law  implies  the  con- 
ftant  agency  of  mind  ;  and  (upon  the  fuppofition  that 
it  does)  whether  it  be  probable  that  the  Deity  always 
operates  immediately,  or  by  means  of  fubordinate  in- 
ftruments?  But  thefe  queftions,  however  curious,  do 
not  fall  under  the  province  of  the  natural  philofopher. 
It  is  fufficient  for  his  purpofe,  if  the  univerfality  of  the 
faft  be  admitted. 

The  cafe  is  exactly  the  fame  in  the  philofophy  of 
mind.      When  we  have  once  afcertained  a  general 

fed; 


Part  I.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  i  r 

fa6t ;  fuch  as,  the  various  laws  which  regulate  the 
affociation  of  ideas,  or  the  dependence  of  memory  on 
that  effort  of  the  mind  which  we  call,  Attention  ;  it  is 
all  we  ought  to  aim  at,  in  this  branch  of  fcience.  If 
we  proceed  no  farther  than  fads  for  which  we  have 
the  evidence  of  our  own  confcioufnefs,  our  conclufions 
will  be  no  lefs  certain,  than  thofe  in  phyfics :  but  if 
our  curiofity  leads  us  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  the 
affociation  of  ideas,  by  certain  fuppofed  vibrations,  or 
other  changes,  in  the  ftate  of  the  brain  ;  or  to  explain 
memory,  by  means  of  fuppofed  impreffions  and  traces 
in  the  fenforium  ;  we  evidently  blend  a  colleftion  of 
important  and  well-afcertained  truths,  with  principles 
which  reft  wholly  on  conjedure  *. 

The 

*  There  is  indeed  one  view  of  the  connexion  between  Mind  and 
Matter,  which  is  perfeftly  agreeable  to  the  juft  rules  of  philofophy. 
The  objeA  of  this  is,  to  afcertain  the  laws  which  regulate  their 
union,  without  attempting  to  explain  in  what  manner  they  are 
united. 

Lord  Bacon  was,  I  believe,  the  firft  who  gave  a  dillinft  idea  of 
this  fort  of  fpeculation  ;  and  I  do  not  know  that  much  progrefs 
has  yet  been  made  in  it.  In  his  books  de  jiugmentls  Sclentiarum,  a 
variety  of  fubjefts  are  enumerated,  in  order  to  illuftrate  its  nature  ; 
and,  undoubtedly,  mod  of  thefe  are  in  a  high  degree  curious  and 
important.  The  following  lift  comprehends  the  chief  of  thofe  he 
has  mentioned  ;  with  the  addition  of  feveral  others,  recommended 
to  the  confideration  of  Philofophers  and  of  Medical  Inquirers,  by 
the  late  Dr.  Gregory.  See  his  Ledures  on  the  Duties  and  Qua- 
lifications of  a  Phyfician. 

1.  The  doArine  of  the  prefervation  and  improvement  of  the  dif- 
ferent fenfes. 

2.  The  hiftory  of  the  power  and  influence  of  imagination. 

3.  The  hiftory  of  the  feveral  fpecies  of  enthufiafm. 

4.  The  hiftory  of  the  various  circumftances  ir.  parents,  that  hav« 

an 


12  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

The  obfervations  which  have  been  now  dated,  with 
refpeft  to  the  proper  limits  of  philofophical  curiofity, 
have  too  frequently  efcaped  the  attention  of  fpeculative 
men,  in  all  the  different  departments  of  fcience.  In 
none  of  thefe,  however,  has  this  inattention  produced 
fuch  a  variety  of  errors  and  abfurdities,  as  in  the  fcience 
of  mind ;  a  fubjeft  to  which,  till  of  late,  it  does  not 
feem  to  have  been  fufpefted,  that  the  general  rules  of 
philofophifmg  are  applicable.  The  flrange  mixture 
of  fact  and  hypothefis,  which  the  greater  part  of  me- 
taphyfical  inquiries  exhibit,  had  led  almoft  univerfally 


an  influence  on  conception,  and  the  conftitution  and  charafters  of 
their  children.  , 

5.  The  hiftory  of  dreams. 

6.  The  hiftory  of  the  laws  of  cuftom  and  habit. 

7.  The  hiftory  of  the  effedls  of  miific,  and  of  fuch  other  things 
as  operate  on  the  mind  and  body^  in  confequence  of  impreftions 
made  on  the  fenfes. 

8.  The  hiftory  of  natural  figns  and  language,  comprehending 
the  doctrine  of  phyfiognomy  and  of  outward  gefturc. 

9.  The  hiftoi'y  of  the  power  and  laws  of  the  principle  of  imi- 
tation. 

To  this  lift  various  other  fubjefts  might  be  added  ;  particularly, 
the  hiftory  of  the  laws  of  memory,  in  fo  far  as  they  appear  to  be 
conne6ted  with  the  ftate  of  the  body;  and  the  hiftory  of  the 
different  fpecies  of  madnefs. 

This  view  of  the  connexion  between  Mind  and  Matter  does 
not  fall  properly  under  the  plan  of  the  following  work  ;  in  which 
my  leading  obje6l  is  to  afcertain  the  principles  of  our  nature^  in  fo 
far  as  they  can  be  difcovercd  by  attention  to  the  fubjeds  of  our 
own  confcioufnefs  ;  and  to  apply  thefe  principles  to  explain  the 
phenomena  arifing  from  them.  Various  incidental  remarks,  how- 
ever, will  occur  in  the  courfe  of  our  inquiries,  tending  to  illuftrate 
fome  of  the  fubjefts  comprehended  in  the  foregoing  enumeration. 

13  to 


Partf.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  1 3 

to  a  belief,  that  it  is  only  a  very  faint  and  doubtful 
light,  which  human  reafon  can  ever  exped  to  throw 
on  this  dark,  but  interefting,  field  of  fpeculation. 

Befide  this  inattention  to  the  proper  limits  of  phi- 
lofophical  inquiry,  other  fources  of  error,  from  which 
the  fcience  of  phyfics  is  entirely  exempted,  have  con- 
tributed to  retard  the  progrefs  of  the  philofophy  of 
mind.  Ofthefe,  the  mod  important  proceed  from 
that  difpofition  which  is  fo  natural  to  every  perfon  at 
the  commencement  of  his  philofophical  purfuits,  to 
explain  intelledual  and  moral  phenomena  by  the  ana- 
logy of  the  material  world. 

I  before  took  notice  of  thofe  habits  of  inattention 
to  the  fubjeds  of  our  confcioufnefs,  which  take  their 
rife  in  that  period  of  our  lives  when  we  are  neceifarily 
employed  in  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  properties 
and  laws  of  matter.  In  confequence  of  this  early 
familiarity  with  the  phenomena  of  the  material 
world,  they  appear  to  us  lefs  myfterious  than  thofe 
of  mind ;  and  we  are  apt  to  think  that  we  have 
advanced  one  ftep  in  explaining  the  latter,  when  we 
can  point  out  fome  analogy  between  them  and  the 
former.  It  is  owing  to  the  fame  circumftance,  that 
we  have  fcarcely  any  appropriated  language  with 
refpeft  to  mind,  and  that  the  words  which  exprefs 
its  different  operations,  are  almoft  all  borrowed  from 
the  obje£ls  of  our  fenfes.  It  mufl,  however,  appear 
manifeft,  upon  a  very  little  reflection,  that  as  the 
two  fubjeds  are  effentially  diftindl:,  and  as  each  of 
them  has  its  peculiar  laws,  the  analogies  we  are 
pleafed  to  fancy  between  them,  can  be  of  no  ufe  in 
illuflrating  either ;  and  that  it  is  no  lefs   unphilofo- 

phical 


14  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

phical  to  attempt  an  explanation  of  perception,  or 
of  the  aflbciation  of  ideas,  upon  mechanical  prin- 
ciples ;  than  it  would  be  to  explain  the  phenomena 
of  gravitation,  by  fuppofmg,  as  fome  of  the  ancients 
did,  the  particles  of  matter  to  be  animated  with 
principles  of  motion ;  or  to  explain  the  chemical 
phenomena  of  eledive  attradions,  by  fuppofmg  the 
fubftances  among  which  they  are  obferved,  to  be 
endowed  with  thought  and  volition. — The  analogy 
of  matter,  therefore,  can  be  of  no  ufe  in  the  in- 
quiries which  form  the  objeft  of  the  following  work ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  is  to  be  guarded  againfl,  as 
one  of  the  principal  fources  of  the  errors  to  which 
we  are  liable. 

Among  the  different  philofophers  who  have  fpe- 
culated  concerning  the  human  mind,  very  few  indeed 
can  be  mentioned,  who  have  at  all  times  been  able 
to  guard  againfl  analogical  theories.  At  the  fame 
time,  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  that  fmce  the  pub- 
lication of  Des  Cartes*  writings,  there  has  been  a 
gradual,  and,  on  the  whole,  a  very  remarkable  im- 
provement in  this  branch  of  fcience.  One  ftriking 
proof  of  this  is,  the  contrail  between  the  metaphy- 
seal fpeculations  of  fome  of  the  moll  eminent  phi- 
lofophers in  England  at  the  end  of  the  laft  century, 
and  thofe  which  we  find  in  the  fyflems,  however 
imperfed,  of  the  prefent  age.  Would  any  writer 
now  offer  to  the  world,  fuch  conclufions  with  refped 
to  the  mind,  as  are  contained  in  the  two  following 
paffages  from  Locke  and  Newton  ?  "  Habits," 
(fays  Locke,)  '*  feem  to  be  but  trains  of  motion,  in 
*'  the  animal  fpirits,  which,  once  fet  a-going,  continue 
i6  "  iij 


Parti.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  t^ 

"  in  the  fame  fteps  they  had  been  ufed  to,  which, 
"  by  often  treading,  are  worn  into  a  fmooth  path.'* 
And  Newton  himfelf  has  propofed  the  following 
query,  concerning  the  manner  in  which  the  mind 
perceives  external  objefts.  "  Is  not,"  (fays  he,) 
"  the  fenforium  of  animals  the  place  where  the  fen- 
"  tient  fubftance  is  prefent,  and  to  which  the  fen- 
"  fible  fpecies  of  things  are  brought,  through  the 
"  nerves  and  brain,  that  they  may  be  perceived  by 
"  the  mind  prefent  in  that  place  ?" — In  the  courfe 
of  the  following  Eifays,  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  quote 
various  other  paffages  from  later  writers,  in  which 
an  attempt  is  made  to  explain  the  other  phenomena 
of  mind,  upon  fimilar  principles. 

It  is  however  much  to  be  regretted,  that  even 
fmce  the  period  when  philofophers  began  to  adopt 
a  more  rational  plan  of  inquiry  with  refpeft  to  fuch 
fubjedts,  they  have  been  obliged  to  fpend  fo  much 
of  their  time  in  clearing  away  the  rubbiih  collected 
by  their  predeceifors.  This  indeed  was  a  prelimi- 
nary ftep,  which  the  ftate  of  the  fcience,  and  the 
conclufions  to  which  it  had  led,  rendered  abfolutely 
neceflary  ;  for,  however,  important  the  pofitive  ad- 
vantages may  be,  which  are  to  be  expected  from  its 
future  progrefs,  they  are  by  no  means  fo  effential  to 
human  improvement  and  happinefs,  as  a  fatisfadory 
refutation  of  that  fceptical  philofophy,  which  had 
ftruck  at  the  root  of  all  knowledge,  and  all  belief. 
Such  a  refutation  feems  to  have  been  the  principal 
object  which  Dr.  Reid  propofed  to  himfelf  in  his  me- 
taphyseal inquiries;  and  to  this  objeft  his  labours 
have  been   directed   with  fo  much  ability,  candour, 

and 


1 6  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

and  perfeverance,  that  unlefs  future  fceptics  fhould 
occupy  a  ground  very  different  from  that  of  their 
predeceffors,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  controverfy  will 
ever  be  renewed.  The  rubbilh  being  now  removed, 
and  the  foundations  laid,  it  is  time  to  begin  the  fuper- 
ftrudure.  The  progrefs  which  I  have  made  in  it 
is,  I  am  fenfible,  very  inconfiderable  ;  yet  I  flatter 
myfelf,  that  the  little  I  have  done,  will  be  fufficient 
to  illuftrate  the  importance  of  the  fludy,  and  to  re- 
commend the  fubje6ts  of  which  I  anl  to  treat,  to  the 
attention  of  others. 

After  the  remarks  which  I  have  now  made,  the 
reader  will  not  be  furprifed  to  find,  that  I  have  flu- 
dioufly  avoided  the  confideration  of  thofe  queftions 
which  have  been  agitated  in  the  prefent  age,  be- 
tween the  patrons  of  the  fceptical  philofophy,  and 
their  opponents.  Thefe  controverfies  have,  in  truth, 
no  peculiar  connexion  with  the  inquiries  on  which  I 
am  to  enter.  It  is  indeed  only  by  an  examination 
of  the  principles  of  our  nature,  that  they  can  be 
brought  to  a  fatisfaftory  conclufion  ;  but  fuppofmg 
them  to  remain  undecided,  our  fceptical  doubts  con- 
cerning the  certainty  of  human  knowledge,  would  no 
more  affedt  the  philofophy  of  mind,  than  they  would 
affeQ:  any  of  the  branches  of  phyfics  ;  nor  would  our 
doubts  concerning  even  the  exillence  of  mind,  affedl 
this  branch  of  fcience,  any  more  than  the  doubts  of 
the  Berkeleian,  concerning  the  exiftence  of  matter, 
affefl:  his  opinions  in  natural  philofophy. 

To  what  purpofes  the  philofophy  of  the  human 
mind,  according  to  the  view  which  I  propofe  to  take 
of  it,  is  fubfervient,  I  fliall  endeavour  to  explain,  at 
feme  length,  in  the  following  fettion. 


Fart II.  ^  r.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  1 7 


PART    SECOND. 

SECTION    I. 
Of  the  Ul'iUty  of  the  Philofophy  of  the  Human  Mind. 

IT  has  been  often  remarked,  that  there  is  a  mutual 
connexion  between  the  different  arts  and  fciences ; 
and  that  the  improvements  which  are  made  in  one 
branch  of  human  knowledge,  frequently  throw  light 
on  others,  to  which  it  has  apparently  a  very  remote 
relation.  The  modern  difcoveries  in  aftronomy,  and 
in  pure  mathematics,  have  contributed  to  bring  the 
art  of  navigation  to  a  degree  of  perfection  formerly 
unknown.  The  rapid  progrefs  which  has  been  lately 
made  in  aftronomy,  anatomy,  and  botany,  has  been 
chiefly  owing  to  the  aid  which  thefe  fciences  have 
received  from  the  art  of  the  optician. 

Although,  however,  the  different  departments 
of  fcience  and  of  art  mutually  refled  light  on  each 
other,  it  is  not  always  neceffary  either  for  the  philo- 
fopher  or  the  artift  to  aim  at  the  acquifition  of  general 
knowledge.  Both  of  them  may  fafely  take  many 
principles  for  granted,  without  being  able  to  demon- 
ftrate  their  truth.  A  feaman,  though  ignorant .  of 
mathematics,  may  apply,  with  corred:nefs  and  dex- 
terity, the  rules  for  finding  the  longitude :  An  aftro- 
nomer,  or  a  botanift,  though  ignorant  of  optics, 
may  avail  himfelf  of  the  ufe  of  the  telefcope,  or  the 
microfcope. 

C  Thefe 


l8  ELEMENTS  OF  TttE  PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

Thefe  obfervations  are  daily  exemplified  in  the 
cafe  of  the  artiil ;  who  has  feldom  either  incHnation 
or  leifure  to  fpeculate  concerning  the  principles  of 
his  art.  It  is  rarely,  however,  we  meet  with  a  man 
of  fcience,  who  has  confined  his  (Indies  wholly  to 
one  branch  of  knowledge.  That  curiofity,  which 
he  has  been  accuflomed  to  indulge  in  the  courfe  of 
his  favourite  purfuit,  will  naturally  extend  itfelf  to 
every  remarkable  objed:  which  falls  under  his  obfer- 
vation ;  and  can  fcarcely  fail  to  be  a  fource  of  per- 
petual dilfatisfaftion  to  his  mind,  till  it  has  been  fo  far 
gratified  as  to  enable  him  to  explain  all  the  various 
phenomena,  which  his  profefTional  habits  are  every 
day  prefenting  to  his  view. 

As  every  particular  fcience  is  in  this  manner  con- 
nefled  with  others,  to  which  it  naturally  direds  the 
attention,  fo  all  the  purfuits  of  life,  whether  they 
terminate  in  fpeculation  or  adion,  are  conneded 
with  that  general  fcience,  which  has  the  human  mind 
for  its  objeft.  The  powers  of  the  underflanding 
are  jnflruments  which  all  men  employ ;  and  his 
curiofity  mull  be  fmall  indeed,  who  pafTes  through 
life  in  a  total  ignorance  of  faculties,  which  his  wants 
and  neceffities  force  him  habitually  to  exercife,  and 
which  fo  remarkably  diflinguifh  man  from  the  lower 
animals.  The  aftive  principles  of  our  nature, 
which,  by  their  various  modifications  and  combina- 
tions, give  rife  to  all  the  moral  differences  among 
men,  are  fitted,  in  a  ftill  higher  degree,  if  pofTible, 
to  interefl  thofe,  who  are  either  difpofed  to  refleft 
on  their  ouii  characters,  or  to  obferve,  with  atten- 
tion, the  characters  of  others.     The  phenomena  re- 

fulting 


Part  II.  ^  I.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  tg 

fulting  from  thefe  faculties  and  principles  of  the 
mind,  are  every  moment  foliciting  our  notice ;  and 
open  to  our  examination,  a  field  of  difcovery,  as 
Inexhauftible  as  the  phenomena  of  the  material 
world ;  and  exhibiting  not  lefs  ftrildng  marks  of 
divine  wifdom. 

While  all  the  fciences,  and  all  the  purfuits  of 
life,  have  this  common  tendency  to  lead  our  in- 
quiries to  the  philofophy  of  human  nature,  this  lafl 
branch  of  knowledge  borrows  its  principles  from  no 
other  fcience  whatever.  Hence  there  is  fomething 
in  the  fludy  of  it,  which  is  peculiarly  gratifying  to  a 
reflecting  and  inquifitive  mind ;  and  fomething  in 
the  conclufions  to  which  it  leads,  on  Vv^hich  the 
mind  rellB  with  peculiar  fatisfaftion.  Till  once  our 
opinions  are  in  fome  degree  fixed  with  refpedi:  to  it, 
we  abandon  ourfelves,  with  reluctance,  to  particular 
fcientific  inveftigations ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  a 
general  knowledge  of  fuch  of  its  principles  as  are 
moft  fitted  to  excite  the  curiofity,  not  only  prepares 
us  for  engaging  in  other  purfuits  with  more  liberal 
and  comprehenfive  views,  but  leaves  us  at  liberty  to 
profecute  them  with  a  more  undivided  and  concen- 
trated attention. 

It  is  not,  however,  merely  as  a  fubjeft  of  fpecu- 
lative  curiofity,  that  the  principles  of  the  human 
mind  deferve  a  careful  examination.  The  advan- 
tages to  be  expected  from  a  fuccefsful  anaiyfis  of  it 
are  various ;  and  fome  of  them  of  fuch  importance, 
as  to  render  it  aftonifhing,  that,  amidll  all  the  luc- 
cefs  with  which  the  fubordinate  fciences  have  been 
cultivated,    this,    which    comprehends  the  principles 

C  2  of 


iO  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

of  all  of  them,  fhould  be  flill  fuffered  to  remain  in  its 
infancy. 

I  fhall  endeavour  to  illuftrate  a  few  of  thefe 
advantages,  beginning  with  what  appears  to  me  to 
be  the  moft  important  of  any ;  the  Hght,  which  a 
philofophical  analyfis  of  the  principles  of  the  mind 
would  neceflarily  throw,  on  the  fubjeds  of  intellec- 
tual and  moral  education. 

The  mofl  eflential  objefls  of  education  are  the 
two  following :  Firfl,  to  cultivate  all  the  various 
principles  of  our  nature,  both  fpeculative  and  aftive, 
in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  bring  them  to  the  greateft 
perfedlion  of  which  they  are  fufceptible ;  and. 
Secondly,  by  watching  over  the  impreflions  and 
aflbciations  which  the  mind  receives  in  early  life,  to 
fecure  it  againft  the  influence  of  prevailing  errors ; 
and,  as  far  as  pofl^ble,  to  engage  its  prepoiTeffions  on 
the  fide  of  truth.  It  is  only  upon  a  philofophical 
analyfis  of  the  mind,  that  a  fyflematical  plan  can  be 
founded,  for  the  accomplifhment  of  either  of  thefe 
purpofes. 

There  are  few  individuals,  whofe  education  has 
been  conduced  in  every  refpeft  with  attention  and 
judgment.  Almoft  every  man  of  refledlion  is  con- 
fcious,  when  he  arrives  at  maturity,  of  many  defeds 
in  his  mental  powers ;  and  of  many  inconvenient 
habits,  which  might  have  been  prevented  or  reme- 
died in  his  infancy  or  youth.  Such  a  confcioufnefs 
is  the  firfl  flep  towards  improvement ;  and  the  per- 
fon  who  feels  it,  if  he  is  pofTefTed  of  refolution  and 
fleadinefs,  will  not  fcruple  to  begin,  even  in  ad- 
vanced years,   a  new  courfe   of  education  for  him- 

felf. 


Part  II.  ^  I.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  21 

{elf.  The  degree  of  refle6lion  and  obfervation,  in- 
deed, which  is  neceflary  for  this  purpofe,  cannot  be 
expeded  from  any  one  at  a  very  early  period  of 
life,  as  thefe  are  the  lafl  powers  of  the  mind  which 
unfold  themfelves ;  but  it  is  never  too  late  to  think 
of  the  improvement  of  our  faculties ;  and  much, 
progrefs  may  be  made,  in  the  art  of  applying  them 
fuccefsfully  to  their  proper  objeds,  or  in  obviating 
the  inconveniences  refulting  from  their  imperfedlion, 
not  only  in  manhood,  but  in  old  age. 

It  is  not,    however,   to  the  miftakes  of  our  early 
inftrudors,  that  all  our  intelledual  defects  are  to  be 
afcribed.      There  is  no  profeffion  or  purfuit  which 
has  not  habits  peculiar  to  itfelf ;  and  which  does  not 
leave  fome  powers  of  the   mind  dormant,    while  it 
exercifes  and  improves  the  reft.      If  we  wilh,    there- 
fore, to  cultivate  the  mind  to  the  extent  of  its  ca- 
pacity, we  mult  not  reft  fatisfied  with  that  employ- 
ment which  its  faculties  receive  from  our  particular 
fituation  in  life.     It  is  not  in  the  awkward  and  pro- 
fellional  form  of  a  mechanic,  who  has  ftrengthened 
particular  mufcles  of  his  body  by  the  habits  of  his 
trade,  that  we  are  to  look  for  the  perfection  of  our 
animal  nature :  neither  is  it  among  men  of  confined 
purfuits,  whether  fpeculative  or  active,    that  we  are 
to  expe£t  to  find  the  human  mind  in  its  higheft  ftate 
of  culdvation.       A  variety  of  exercifes  is  neceflary 
.  to  preferve  the  animal  frame  in  vigour  and  beauty ;  I 
and  a  variety  of  thofe  occupations  which  literature    j 
and  fcience   afford,    added   to   a  promifcuous  inter.   ; 
courfe  with  the  world,  in  the  habits  of  converfation 
and  bufinefs,    is  no  lefs  neceffary  for  the  improve- 

C  3  ment 


2  2  ELF.MENTS    OF   THE    rHILOSOPIIY  Introd. 

ment  of  the  underftanding.  I  acknowledge,  that 
there  are  fome  profcfllons,  in  which  a  man  of  very 
confined  acquifitions  may  arrive  at  the  firft  eminence  j 
and  in  which  he  will  perhaps  be  the  more  likely  to  ex- 
cel, the  more  he  has  concentrated  the  w^hole  force  of 
his  mind  to  one  particular  object.  But  fuch  a  perfon, 
however  diftinguifhed  in  his  own  fphere,  is  educated 
merely  to  be  a  literary  artifan  ;  and  neither  attains  the 
perfedion,  nor  the  happinefs,  of  his  nature.  "  That 
*'  education  only  can  be  confidered  as  complete  and 
**  generous,  which"  (in  the  language  of  Milton)  *'  fits  a 
*'  man  to  perform  juftly,  fkilfully,  and  magnanimoufly, 
*'  all  the  offices,  both  private  and  public,  of  peace,  and 
*'  of  war*.'* 

I  hope  it  will  not  be  fuppofed,  from  the  foregoing 
obfervations,  that  they  are  meant  to  recommend  an 
indifcriminate  attention  to  all  the  objects  of  fpeculation 
and  of  aftion.     Nothing  can  be  more  evident,  than 
the  neceflity  of  limiting  the  field  of  our  exertion,  if  we 
wifh  to  benefit  fociety  by  our  labours.     But  it  is  per- 
fectly confiftent  with  the  moft  intenfe  application  to  our 
favourite  purfuit,  to  cultivate  that  general  acquaintance 
with  letters  and  with  the  world,  w^hich  may  be  fuffi- 
cient  to  enlarge  the  mind,  and  to  preferve  it  from  any 
danger  of  contrading  the  pedantry  of  a  particular  pro- 
feflion.      In  many  cafes,  (as  was  already  remarked), 
the  fciences  reflect  light  on  each  other  ;  and  the  gene- 
ral acquifitions  which  we  have  made  in  other  purfuits, 
may  furnilh  us  with  ufeful  helps  for  the  farther  profe- 
cudon  of  our  own.  But  even  in  thofe  inflcUices  in  which 
the  cafe  is  otherwife,  and  in  which  thefe  liberal  accom- 

*  Tra£latc  of  Education. 

plifhments 


Part  II.  ^  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  23 

plifhments  mufl  be  purchafed  by  the  facrifice  of  a  part 
of  our  profeflional  eminence,  the  acquifition  of  them 
will  amply  repay  any  lofs  we  may  fuftain.  It  ought 
not  to  be  the  leading  objed  of  any  one,  to  become  an 
eminent  metaphyfician,  mathematician,  or  poet ;  but 
to  render  himfeif  happy  as  an  individual,  and  an  agree- 
able, a  refpeftable,  and  an  ufeful  member  of  fociety. 
A  man  who  lofes  his  fight,  improves  the  fenfibility  of 
his  touch  :  but  who  would  confent,  for  fuch  a  recom- 
pence,  to  part  with  the  pleafures  which  he  receives 
from  the  eye  ? 

It  is  almoll  unneceflary  for  me  to  remark,  how 
much  individuals  would  be  affifted  in  the  proper  and 
liberal  culture  of  the  mind,  if  they  were  previoufly  led 
to  take  a  comprehenfive  furvey  of  human  nature  in  all 
its  parts  ;  of  its  various  faculties,  and  powers,  and 
fources  of  enjoyment ;  and  of  the  efFefts  which  are 
produced  on  thefe  principles  by  particular  fituations. 
It  is  fuch  a  knowledge  alone  of  the  capacities  of  the 
mind,  that  can  enable  a  perfon  to  judge  of  his  own  ac- 
quifitions ;  and  to  employ  the  mofl  effectual  means  for 
fupplying  his  defeds,  and  removing  his  inconvenient 
habits.  Without  fome  degree  of  it,  every  man  is  in 
danger  of  contracting  bad  habits,  before  he  is  aware  ; 
and  of  fufFering  fome  of  his  powers  to  go  to  decay,  for 
want  of  proper  exercife. 

If  the  bufmefs  of  early  education  were  more 
thoroughly,  and  more  generally,  underflood,  it  would 
be  lefs  neceifary  for  individuals,  when  they  arrive  at 
maturity,  to  form  plans  of  improvement  for  themfelves. 
But  education  never  can  be  fyftematically  direded  to 
its  proper  objeds,  till  we  have  obtained,  not  only  an 

C  4  accurate 


24  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

accurate  analyfis  of  the  general  principles  of  our  nature, 
and  an  account  of  the  moft  important  laws  which  re- 
gulate their  operation ;  but  an  explanation  of  the  va- 
rious modifications  and  combinations  of  thefe  prin- 
ciples, which  produce  that  diverfity  of  talents,  genius, 
and  character,  we  obferve  among  men.  To  inftru£t 
youth  in  the  languages,  and  in  the  fciences,  is  com- 
paratively of  little  importance,  if  we  are  inattentive  to 
the  habits  they  acquire  ;  and  are  not  careful  in  giving, 
to  all  their  different  faculties,  and  all  their  different 
principles  of  attion,  a  proper  degree  of  employment. 
Abflrading  entirely  from  the  culture  of  their  moral 
powers,  how  extenfive  and  difficult  is  the  bufmefs  of 
conducing  their  intelleftual  improvement !  To  watch 
over  the  affociations  which  they  form  in  their  tender 
years  ;  to  give  them  early  habits  of  mental  adivity ; 
to  roufe  their  curiofity,  and  to  diredt  it  to  proper 
objects  ;  to  exercife  their  ingenuity  and  invention  ;  to 
cultivate  in  their  minds  a  turn  for  fpeculation,  and  at 
the  fame  time  preferve  their  attention  alive  to  the  ob- 
jeds  around  them  ;  to  awaken  their  fenfibilities  to  the 
beauties  of  nature,  and  to  infpire  them  with  a  relifh  for 
intelleftual  enjoyment ; — thefe  form  but  a  part  of  the 
bufmefs  of  education  ;  and  yet  the  execution  even  of 
this  part  requires  an  acquaintance  with  the  general 
principles  of  our  nature,  which  feldom  falls  to  the  fhare 
of  thofe  to  whom  the  inflruction  of  youth  is  commonly 

intruded. Nor  will  fuch  a  theoretical  knowledge 

of  the  human  mind,  as  I  have  now  defcribed,  be  al- 
ways fufficient  in  practice.  An  uncommon  degree  of 
fagacity  is  frequently  requifite,  in  order  to  accommo- 
date general  rules  to  particular  tempers,  and  charac- 
ters. 


Part II.  ^  I.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  25 

ters. — In  whatever  way  we  chufe  to  account  for  it, 
whether  by  original  organifation,  or  by  the  operation 
of  moral  caufes,  in  very  early  infancy  ;  no  fad  can  be 
more  undeniable,  than  that  there  are  important  differ, 
ences  difcernible  in  the  minds  of  children,  previous  to 
that  period  at  which,  in  general,  their  intelleftual  edu- 
cation commences.  There  is,  too,  a  certain  hereditary 
character  (whether  refulting  from  phyfical  conftitution, 
or  caught  from  imitation  and  the  influence  of  fituation), 
which  appears  remarkably  in  particular  families.  One 
race,  for  a  fucceffion  of  generations,  is  diftinguifhed  by 
a  genius  for  the  abftract  fciences,  while  it  is  deficient  in 
vivacity,  in  imagination,  and  in  tafte :  another  is  no 
lefs  diftinguifhed  for  wit,  and  gaiety,  and  fancy;  while 
it  appears  incapable  of  patient  attention,  or  of  profound 
refearch.  The  fyftem  of  education  which  is  proper  to 
be  adopted  in  particular  cafes,  ought,  undoubtedly, 
to  have  fome  reference  to  thefe  circumftances  ;  and  to 
be  calculated,  as  much  as  pofTible,  to  develope  and  to 
cherifh  thofe  intelle6lual  and  active  principles,  in 
which  a  natural  deficiency  is  moft  to  be  apprehended. 
Montefquieu,  and  other  fpeculative  politicians,  have 
infifted  much  on  the  reference  which  education  and 
laws  fhould  have  to  climate.  I  fhall  not  take  upon 
me  to  fay,  how  far  their  conclufions  on  this  fubjedt 
are  juft ;  but  I  am  fully  perfuaded,  that  there  is  a 
foundation  in  philofophy,  and  good  fenfe,  for  accom- 
modating, at  a  very  early  period  of  life,  the  education 
of  individuals  to  thofe  particular  turns  of  mind,  to 
which,  from  hereditary  propenfities,  or  from  moral 
fituation,  they  may  be  prefumed  to  have  a  natural 
tendency. 

There 


26  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

There  are  few  fubjecls  more  hackneyed  than  that 
of  education ;  and  yet  there  is  none,  upon  which  the 
opinions  of  the  world  are  ftill  more  divided.  Nor  is 
this  furprifmg  ;  for  mofl  of  thofe  who  have  fpeculated 
concerning  it,  have  confined  their  attention  chiefly  to 
incidental  quellions  about  the  comparative  advantages 
of  public  or  private  inftruclion,  or  the  utility  of  par- 
ticular languages  or  fciences ;  without  attempting  a 
previous  examination  of  thofe  faculties  and  principles 
of  the  mind,  which  it  is  the  great  objecl  of  education 
to  improve.  Many  excellent  detached  obfervations, 
indeed,  both  on  the  intellectual  and  moral  powers,  are 
to  be  collefted  from  the  writings  of  ancient  and  mo- 
dern authors ;  but  I  do  not  know,  that  in  any  lan- 
guage an  attempt  has  been  made  to  analyfe  and  illuf- 
trate  the  principles  of  human  nature,  in  order  to  lay 
a  philofophical  foundation  for  their  proper  culture. 

I  have  even  heard  fome  very  ingenious  and  intel- 
ligent men  difpute  the  propriety  of  fo  fyflematical  a 
plan  of  inftruftion.  The  mod  fuccefsful  and  fplendid 
exertions,  both  in  the  fciences  and  arts,  (it  has  been 
frequently  remarked),  have  been  made  by  individuals, 
in  whofe  minds  the  feeds  of  genius  were  allowed  to 
fhoot  up,  wild  and  free ;  while,  from  the  mofl  care- 
ful and  fkilful  tuition,  feldom  any  thing  refults  above 
mediocrity.  I  fhall  not,  at  prefent,  enter  into  any 
difcuffions  with  refpeft  to  the  certainty  of  the  hO:  on 
which  this  opinion  is  founded.  Suppofmg  the  fad  to 
be  completely  eflablifhed,  it  mufl  flill  be  remembered, 
that  originality  of  genius  does  not  always  imply  vigour 
and  comprehenfivenefs,  and  liberality  of  mind  ;  and 
that  it  is  defirable  only,  in  fo  far  as  it  is  compatible 

with 


Part  II.  §1.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  27 

with  thefe  more  valuable  qualities.  I  already  hinted, 
that  there  are  fome  purfuits,  in  which,  as  they  require 
the  exertion  only  of  a  fmall  number  of  our  faculties, 
an  individual,  who  has  a  natural  turn  for  them,  will 
be  more  likely  to  diftinguilh  himfelf,  by  being  fuffered 
to  follow  his  original  bias,  than  if  his  attention  were 
diftraded  by  a  more  liberal  courfe  of  ftudy.  But 
wherever  fuch  men  are  to  be  found,  they  mufl  be 
confidered,  on  the  molt  favourable  fuppofition,  as 
having  facrificed,  to  a  certain  degree,  the  perfection 
and  the  happinefs  of  their  nature,  to  the  amufement 
or  inflrudion  of  others.  It  is,  too,  in  times  of  gene- 
ral darknefs  and  barbarifm,  that  what  is  commonly 
called  originality  of  genius  mod  frequently  appears : 
and  furely  the  great  aim  of  an  enlightened  and  bene- 
volent philofophy,  is  not  to  rear  a  fmall  number  of 
individuals,  who  may  be  regarded  as  prodigies  in  an 
ignorant  and  admiring  age,  but  to  diffufe,  as  widely 
as  pofTible,  that  degree  of  cultivation  which  may  en- 
able the  bulk  of  a  people  to  poflefs  all  the  intelleftual 
and  moral  improvement  of  which  their  nature  is  fuf- 
ceptible.  "  Original  genius"  (fays  Voltaire)  **  oc- 
"  curs  but  feldom  in  a  nation  where  the  literary 
"  tafte  is  formed.  The  number  of  cultivated  minds 
*'  which  there  abound,  like  the  trees  in  a  thick  and 
*'  flouriftiing  foreft,  prevent  any  fmgle  individual  from 
"  rearing  his  head  far  above  the  reft.  Where  trade 
"  is  in  few  hands,  we  meet  with  a  fmall  number  of 
*'  over-grown  fortunes  in  the  midft  of  a  general  po- 
«  verty :  in  proportion  as  it  extends,  opulence  be- 
**  comes  general,  and  great  fortunes  rare.  It  is,  pre- 
"  cifely,  bccaufe  there  is  at  prefent  much  light,  and 

*'  much 


28  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    rHTLOSOPHY  Introd. 

"  much  cultivation,  in  France,  that  we  are  led  to  com- 
"  plain  of  the  want  of  fuperior  genius." 

To  what  purpofe,  indeed,  it  may  be  faid,  all  this 
labour  ?  Is  not  the  importance  of  every  thing  to  man, 
to  be  ultimately  eftimated  by  its  tendency  to  promote 
his  happinefs  ?  And  is  not  our  daily  experience  fuffi- 
cient  to  convince  us,  that  this  is,  in  general,  by  no 
means  proportioned  to  the  culture  which  his  nature 
has  received  ? — Nay,  is  there  not  fome  ground  for  fuf- 
pefting,  that  the  lower  orders  of  men  enjoy,  on  the 
whole,  a  more  enviable  condition,  than  their  more 
enlightened  and  refined  fuperiors  ? 

The  truth,  I  apprehend,  is,  that  happinefs,  in  fo  far 
iis  it  arifes  from  the  mind  itfelf,  will  be  always  propor- 
tioned to  the  degree  of  perfeftion  which  its  powers 
have  attained ;  but  that,  in  cultivating  thefe  powers, 
with  a  view  to  this  mofl  important  of  all  objeds,  it  is 
effentially  necelfary  that  fuch  a  degree  of  attention  be 
bellowed  on  all  of  them,  as  may  preferve  them  in  that 
ftate  of  relative  ftrength,  which  appears  to  be  agree- 
able to  the  intentions  of  nature.  In  confequence  of  an 
exclufive  attention  to  the  culture  of  the  imagination, 
the  tafte,  the  reafoning  faculty,  or  any  of  the  adive 
principles,  it  is  poffible  that  the  pleafures  of  human 
life  may  be  diminiflied,  or  its  pains  increafed  ;  but  the 
inconveniences  which  are  experienced  in  fuch  cafes, 
are  not  to  be  afcribed  to  educati.  n,  but  to  a  partial  and 
injudicious  education.  In  fuch  cafes,  it  is  poffible,  that 
the  poet,  the  metaphyfician,  or  the  man  of  tafte  and  re- 
finement, may  appear  to  difadvantage,  when  compared 
with  the  vulgar ;  for  fuch  is  the  benevolent  appointment 
of  Providence  with  refped  to  the  lower  orders,  that, 

although 


Part  II.  §  I.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  29 

although  not  one  principle  of  their  nature  be  com- 
pletely unfolded,  the  whole  of  thefe  principles  preferve 
among  themfelves,  that  balance  which  is  favourable 
to  the  tranquillity  of  their  minds,  and  to  a  prudent 
and  fteady  condu6t  in  the  limited  fphere  which  is 
affigned  to  them,  far  more  completely,  than  in  thofe  of 
their  fuperiors,  whofe  education  has  been  conduced 
on  an  erroneous  or  imperfect  fyftem  :  but  all  this,  far 
from  weakening  the  force  of  the  foregoing  obferva- 
tions,  only  ferves  to  demonftrate  how  impoffible  it 
always  will  be,  to  form  a  rational  plan  for  the  im- 
provement of  the  mind,  without  an  accurate  and  com- 
prehenfive  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  the  human 
conftitution. 

The  remarks  which  have  been  already  made,  are 
fufficient  to  illullrate  the  dangerous  confequences 
which  are  likely  to  refult  from  a  partial  and  injudi- 
cious cultivation  of  the  mind  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time, 
to  point  out  the  utility  of  the  intelleftual  philofophy,  , 
in  enabling  us  to  preferve  a  proper  balance  among  all  f 
its  various  faculties,  principles  of  action,  and  capa- 
cities of  enjoyment.  Many  additional  obfervations 
might  be  offered,  on  the  tendency  which  an  accurate 
analyfis  of  its  powers  might  probably  have,  to  fuggeft 
rules  for  their  farther  improvement,  and  for  a  more 
fuccefsful  application  of  them  to  their  proper  purpofes : 
but  this  fubjed  I  Ihall  not  profecute  at  prefent,  as  the 
illuftration  of  it  is  one  of  the  leading  objeds  of  the 
following  work. — That  the  memory,  the  imagination, 
or  the  reafoning  faculty,  are  to  be  inftantly  flrength- 
ened  in  confequence  of  our  fpeculadons  concerning 
their  nature,  it  would  be  abfurd  to  fuppofe  j  but  it  is 
54  furely 


30  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

furely  far  from  being  unreafonable  to  think,  that  an 
acquaintance  with  the  laws  which  regulate  thefe 
powers,  may  fuggeft  fome  ufeful  rules  for  their  gra- 
dual cultivation  ;  for  remedying  their  defeds,  in  the 
cafe  of  individuals,  and  even  for  extending  thofe 
limits,  which  nature  feems,  at  lirft  view,  to  have 
afligned  them. 

To  how  great  a  degree  of  perfection  the  intelleclrual 
and  moral  nature  of  man  is  capable  of  being  raifed  by 
cultivation,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive.  The  effeds  of 
early,  continued,  and  fyflematical  education,  in  the 
cafe  of  thofe  children  who  are  trained,  for  the  fake  of 
gain,  to  feats  of  ftrength  and  agility,  juftify,  perhaps, 
the  moll  fanguine  views  which  it  is  poffible  for  a  phi- 
lofopher  to  form,  with  refped  to  the  improvement  of 
the  fpecies. 

1  now  proceed  to  confider,  how  far  the  philofophy 
of  mind  may  be  ufeful  in  accomplilhing  the  fecond 
obje£l  of  education ;  by  aflifting  us  in  the  manage- 
ment of  early  impreffions  and  alfociations. 

By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  opinions  on  which  we 
ad  in  life,  are  not  the  refult  of  our  own  inveftigations; 
but  are  adopted  implicitly,  in  infancy  and  youth, 
upon  the  authority  of  others.  Even  the  great  prin- 
ciples of  morality,  although  implanted  in  every  heart, 
are  commonly  aided  and  cheriflied,  at  leail  to  a  cer- 
tain degree,  by  the  care  of  our  inllructors. — All  this 
is  undoubtedly  agreeable  to  the  intentions  of  nature ; 
and,  indeed,  were  the  cafe  otherwife,  fociety  could 
not  fubfilt ;  for  nothing  can  be  more  evident,  than 
that  the  bulk  of  mankind,  condemned  as  they  are  to 
laborious  occupations,  which  are  incompatible  with 
1 2  intellectual 


Part  II.  §  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  -^1 

intelleftual  improvement,  are  perfeftly  incapable  of 
forming  their  own  opinions  on  fome  of  the  m.olt  im- 
portant fubjefts  that  can  employ  the  human  mind.  It 
is  evident,  at  the  fame  time,  that  as  no  fyftem  of  edu- 
cation is  perfeft,  a  variety  of  prejudices  muft,  in  this 
way,  take  an  early  hold  of  our  belief;  fo  as  to  acquire 
over  it  an  influence  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  mofl  in- 
controvertible truths.  When  a  child  hears,  either  a 
fpeculative  abfurdity,  or  an  erroneous  principle  of  ac- 
tion, recommended  and  enforced  daily,  by  the  fame 
voice  which  firfl  conveyed  to  it  thofe  fimple  and  fub- 
lime  leflbns  of  morality  and  religion  which  are  conge- 
nial to  its  nature,  is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that,  in  fu- 
ture life,  it  Ihould  find  it  fo  difficult  to  eradicate  pre- 
judices which  have  twined  their  roots  with  all  the 

eifential  principles  of  the  human  frame? If  fuch, 

however,  be  the  obvious  intentions  of  nature,  with  re- 
fpeft  to  thofe  orders  of  men  who  are  employed  in 
bodily  labour,  it  is  equally  clear,  that  fhe  meant  to 
impofe  it  as  a  double  obligation  on  thofe  who  receive 
the  advantages  of  a  liberal  education,  to  examine,  with 
the  mofl  fcrupulous  care,  the  foundation  of  ^  all  thofe 
received  opinions,  which  have  any  connexion  with 
morality,  or  with  human  happinefs.  If  the  m^ultitude 
muft  be  led,  it  is  of  confequence,  fu  rely,  that  it  fhould 
be  led  by  enlightened  conductors ;  by  men  who  are 
able  to  diftinguifh  truth  from  error ;  and  to  draw  the 
line  between  thofe  prejudices  which  are  innocent  or 
falutary,  (if  indeed  there  are  any  prejudices  which  are 
really  falutary,)  and  thofe  which  are  hoflile  to  the  in- 
terefts  of  virtue  and  of  mankind. 

In 


32  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPIIY  Introd. 

In  fuch  a  ftate  of  foclety  as  that  in  which  we  live, 
the  prejudices  of  a  moral,  a  political,  and  a  religious 
nature,  which  we  imbibe  in  early  life,  are  fo  various, 
and  at  the  fame  time  fo  intimately  blended  with  the 
belief  we  entertain  of  the  moft  facred  and  important 
truths,  that  a  great  part  of  the  Hfe  of  a  philofopher 
muft  neceffarily  be  devoted,  not  fo  much  to  the  ac- 
quifition  of  new  knowledge,  as  to  unlearn  the  errors 
to  which  he  had  been  .taught  to  give  an  implicit  affent, 
before  the  dawn  of  reafon  and  reflexion.  And  unlefs 
he  fubmit  in  this  manner  to  bring  all  his  opinions  to 
the  tell  of  a  fevere  examination,  his  ingenuity,  and 
his  learning,  inftead  of  enlightening  the  world,  will 
only  enable  him  to  give  an  additional  currency,  and 
an  additional  authority,  to  eftablilhed  errors.  To  at- 
tempt fuch  a  ftruggle  againft  early  prejudices,  is,  in- 
deed, the  profefled  aim  of  all  philofophers ;  but  how 
few  are  to  be  found  who  have  force  of  mind  fufficient 
for  accomplifhing  their  objeft ;  and  who,  in  freeing 
themfelves  from  one  fet  of  errors,  do  not  allow 
themfelves  to  be  carried  away  with  another  ?  To  fuc- 
ceed  in  it  completely,  Lord  Bacon  feems  to  have 
thought,  (in  one  of  the  mod  remarkable  pafTages  of 
his  writings,)  to  be  more  than  can  well  be  expelled 
from  human  frailty.  "  Nemo  adhuc  tanta  mentis 
*'  conftantia  inventus  eft,  ut  decreverit,  et  fibi  im- 
"  pofuerit,  theorias  et  notiones  communes  penitus 
"  abolere,  et  intelledum  abrafum  et  asquum  ad  parti- 
"  cularia,  de  integro,  applicare.  Itaque  ilia  ratio 
"  humana,  quam  habemus,  ex  multa  fide,  et  multo 
*'  etiam  cafu,  nee  non  ex  puerilibus,  quas  primo 
*«  haufmius,  notionibus,  farrago  qusedam  eft,  et  con- 

"  geries, 


Part  II.  §  I.  OP    THE   HUMAN    MIND.  23 

"  geries.  Quod  fiquis,  astate  matura,  et  fenfibus  in- 
"  tegris,  et  mente  repurgata,  fe  ad  experientiam,  et 
"  ad  particularia  de  integro  applicet,  de  eo  melius 
"  fperandum  eft/* 

Nor  is  it  merely  in  order  to  free  the  mind  from  the 
influence  of  error,  that  it  is  ufeful  to  examine  the 
foundation  of  eftablilhed  opinions.  It  is  fuch  an  exa- 
mination alone,  that,  in  an  inquifitive  age  like  the 
prefent,  can  fecure  a  philofopher  from  the  danger  of 
unlimited  fcepticifm.  To  this  extreme,  indeed,  the 
complexion  of  the  times  is  more  likely  to  give  him  a 
tendency,  than  to  implicit  credulity.  In  the  former 
ages  of  ignorance  and  fuperftition,  the  intimate  alTo- 
ciation  which  had  been  formed,  in  the  prevailing  fyf- 
tems  of  education,  between  truth  and  error,  had  given 
to  the  latter,  an  afcendant  over  the  minds  of  men, 
which  it  could  never  have  acquired,  if  divefted  of 
fuch  an  alliance.  The  cafe  has,  of  late  years,  been 
moft  remarkably  reverfed  :  the  common  fenfe  of  man- 
kind, in  confequence  of  the  growth  of  a  more  liberal 
fpirit  of  inquiry,  has  revolted  againft  many  of  thofe 
abfurdities,  which  had  fo  long  held  human  reafon  in 
captivity  ;  and  it  was,  perhaps,  more  than  could  rea- 
fonably  have  been  expeded,  that,  in  the  firft  moments 
of  their  emancipation,  philofophers  fliould  have  Hop- 
ped iliort,  at  the  precife  boundary,  which  cooler  re- 
flection, and  more  moderate  views,  would  have  pre- 
fcribed.  The  faft  is,  that  they  have  pafied  far  beyond 
it ;  and  that,  in  their  zeal  to  deftroy  prejudices,  thty 
have  attempted  to  tear  up  by  the  roots,  many  of  the 
beft  and  happieft  and  moft  efl^ential  principles  of  our 
nature.     Having  remarked  the  powerful  influence  of 

D  educadou 


^4  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY  Introd, 

education  over  the  mind,  they  have  concluded,  that 
man  is  wholly  a  factitious  being ;  not  recollefting, 
that  this  very  fufceptibility  of  education  prefuppofes 
certain  original  principles,  which  are  common  to  the 
whole  fpecies  ;  and  that,  as  error  can  only  take  a  per- 
manent hold  of  a  candid  mind  by  being  grafted  on 
truths,  which  it  is  unwilling  or  unable  to  eradicate ;, 
even  the  influence,  which  falfe  and  abfurd  opinions 
occafionally  acquire  over  the  belief,  inflead  of  being 
an  argument  for  univerfal  fcepticifm,  is  the  mod  deci- 
five  argument  againfl  it ;  inafmuch  as  it  fhews,  that 
there  are  fome  truths  fo  incorporated  and  identified 
with  our  nature,  that  they  can  reconcile  us  even  to 
the  abfurdities  and  contradictions  with  which  we  fup- 
pofe  them  to  be  infeparably  connected.  The  fceptical 
philofophers,  for  example,  of  the  prefent  age,  have 
frequently  attempted  to  hold  up  to  ridicule,  thofe  con- 
temptible and  puerile  fuperftitions,  which  have  dif- 
graced  the  creeds  of  fome  of  the  mod  enlightened  na- 
tions ;  and  which  have  not  only  commanded  the  affent, 
but  the  reverence,  of  men  of  the  mod  ac^ompliflied 
underflandings.  But  thefe  hiftories  of  human  imbe- 
cility are,  in  truth,  the  flrongefl  teflimonies  which 
can  be  produced,  to  prove,  how  wonderful  is  the  in- 
fluence of  the  fundamental  principles  of  morality  over 
the  belief;  when  they  are  able  to  fanctify,  in  the  ap- 
prehenfions  of  mankind,  every  extravagant  opinion, 
and  every  unmeaning  ceremony,  which  early  educa- 
tion has  taught  us  to  alfociate  with  them. 

That  implicit  credulity  is  a  mark  of  a  feeble  mind, 
vill  not  be  difputed ;  but  it  may  not  perhaps  be  as 
generally  acknowledged,  that  the  cafe  is  the  fame  with 

unlimited 


Part  II.   §1.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  J5 

unlimited  fcepticifm :  on  the  contrary,  we  are  fometimes 
apt  to  afcribe  this  difpofition  to  a  more  than  ordinary 
vigour  of  intelleft.  Such  a  prejudice  was  by  no 
means  unnatural  at  that  period  in  the  hiltory  of  mo- 
dern Europe,  when  reafon  firft  began  to  throw  off  the 
yoke  of  authority ;  and  when  it  unqueftionably  re- 
quired a  fuperiority  of  underftanding,  as  well  as  of  in- 
trepidity, for  an  individual  to  refift  the  contagion  of 
prevailing  fuperftition.  But  in  the  prefent  age,  in 
which  the  tendency  of  fafhionable  opinions  is  diredly 
oppofite  to  thofe  of  the  vulgar  ;  the  philofophical 
creed,  or  the  philofophical  fcepticifm  of  by  far  the 
greater  number  of  thofe  who  value  themfelves  on  an 
emancipation  from  popular  errors,  arifes  from  the 
very  fame  weaknefs  with  the  credulity  of  the  multi- 
tude :  nor  is  it  going  too  far  to  fay,  with  Rouffeau, 
that  "  He,  who,  in  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
*'  has  brought  himfelf  to  abandon  all  his  early  prin- 
*'  ciples  without  difcrimination,  would  probably  have 
"  been  a  bigot  in  the  days  of  the  League."  In  the 
midfl  of  thefe  contrary  impulfes,  of  fafliionable  and 
of  vulgar  prejudices,  he  alone  evinces  the  fuperiority 
and  the  flrength  of  his  mind,  who  is  able  to  difen- 
tangle  truth  from  error  ;  and  to  oppofe  the  clear  con- 
clufions  of  his  own  unbiaifed  faculties,  to  the  united 
clamours  of  fuperftition,  and  of  falfe  philofophy. — 
Such  are  the  men,  whom  nature  marks  out  to  be  the 
lights  of  the  world ;  to  fix  the  wavering  opinions  of 
the  multitude,  and  to  imprefs  their  ovra  charaders  on 
that  of  their  age. 

For  fecuring  the  mind  completely  from  the  weak- 
nelfes  I  have  now  been  defcribing,  and  enabling  it  to 

D  2  fnaintaii^ 


^6  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

maintain  a  fteady  courfe  of  inquiry,  between  implicit 

credulity,  and  unlimited  fcepticifm,  the  mofl  impor- 

>  tant  of  all  qualities  is  a  fincere  and   devoted  attach- 

-ment  to  truth  ;  which  feldom  fails  to  be  accompanied 

I  with  a  manly  confidence  in  the  clear  conclufions  of 

♦    human  reafon.     It  is  fuch  a  confidence,  united  (as  it 

(generally  is)  with  perfonal  intrepidity,  which  forrm; 
what  the  French  writers  call  force  of  character  ;  one 
,  of  the  rarefl  endowments,  it  muft  be  confefled,  of 
our  fpecies ;  but  which,  of  all  endowments,  is  the 
mofl  effential  for  rendering  a  philofopher  happy  ia 
himfelf,  and  a  bleffing  to  mankind. 

There  is,  I  think,  good  reafon  for  hoping,  that  the 
fceptical  tendency  of  the  prefent  age,  will  be  only 
a  temporary  evil.     While  it  continues,  however,  it  is 
an  evil  of  the  moil  alarming  nature ;  and,   as  it  ex- 
tends, in  general,  not  only  to  religion  and  morality, 
but,  in  fome  meafure,  alfo  to  politics,  and  the  con- 
duct of  life,  it  is  equally  fatal  to  the  comfort  of  the 
individual,  and  to  the  improvement  of  fociety.     Even 
in  its  mofl  inoffenfive  form,   when  it  happens  to  be 
united  with  a  peaceable  difpofition  and  a  benevolent 
heart,  it  cannot  fail  to  have  the  effeft  of  damping  every 
active  and  patriotic  exertion.     Convinced  that  truth  is 
placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties  ;  and 
doubtful  how  far  the  prejudices  we  defpife  may  not 
be  eflential  to  the  well-being  of  fociety,  v/e  refolve  to 
abandon  completely  all  fpeculative  inquiries ;  and  fuf- 
fering  ourfelves   to  be  carried  quietly  along  with  the 
llream  of  popular  opinions,   and  of  fafliionable  man- 
ners, determine  to  amufe  ourfelves,  the  befl  way  we 
c<gj,  with  bufinefs  or  pleafure,  during  our  fhort  pafTage 

through 


Tart  II.   §  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN   MIND.  -^f 

through  this  fcene  of  illufions.  But  he  who  thmks 
more  favourably  of  the  human  powers,  and  who  be- 
lieves that  reafon  was  given  to  man  to  dire£t  him  to 
his  duty  and  his  happinefs,  will  defpife  the  fuggeftions 
of  this  timid  philofophy  ;  and  while  he  is  confcious 
that  he  is  guided  in  his  inquiries  only  by  the  love  of 
truth,  will  reft  aflured  that  their  refult  will  be  equally 
favourable  to  his  own  comfort,  and  to  the  befl  inte- 
refls  of  mankind.  What,  indeed,  will  be  the  parti- 
cular effedls  in  the  firft  inflance,  of  that  general  dif- 
fufion  of  knowledge,  which  the  art  of  printing  mufl 
fooner  or  later  produce,  and  of  that  fpirit  of  reforma- 
tion with  which  it  camiot  fail  to  be  accompanied,  it  is 
beyond  the  reach  of  human  fagacity  to  conjecture  j 
but  unlefs  we  chufe  to  abandon  ourfelves  entirely  to  a 
defponding  fcepticifm,  we  mufl  hope  and  believe,  that 
the  progrefs  of  human  reafon  can  never  be  a  fource  of 
permanent  diforder  to  the  world  ;  and  that  they  alone 
have  caufe  to  apprehend  the  confequences,  who  are 
led,  by  the  imperfedion  of  our  prefent  inftitutions,  to 
feel  themfelves  interefted  in  perpetuating  the  preju- 
dices, and  follies,  of  their  fpecies. 

From  the  obfervations  which  have  been  made,  it 
fufficiently  appears,  that  in  order  to  fecure  the  mind, 
on  the  one  hand,  from  the  influence  of  prejudice; 
and  on  the  other,  from  a  tendency  to  unlimited  fcep- 
ticifm ;  it  is  necelTary  that  it  fhould  be  able  to  diftin- 
guifh  the  original  and  univerfal  principles  and  laws  of 
human  nature,  from  the  adventitious  effedbs  of  local 
fituation.  But  if,  in  the  cafe  of  an  individual,  who 
has  received  an  imperfect  or  erroneous  education,  fuch 
a  knowledge  puts  it  in  his  power  to  correct,  to  a  cer- 

D  3  tain 


38  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

tain  degree,  his  own  bad  habits,  and  to  furmount  his 
own  fpeculative  errors ;  it  enables  him  to  be  ufeful,  in 
a  much  higher  degree,   to  thofe  whofe  education  he 
has  an  opportunity  of  fuperintending  from  early  in- 
fancy.    Such,  and  fo  permanent,  is  the  effect  of  firft 
imprefTions,   on  the  charafter,  that  although  a  philo- 
fopher  may  fucceed,  by  perfeverance,  in  freeing  his 
reafon  from  the  prejudices  with  which  it  was  entan- 
gled, they  will  dill  retain  fome  hold  of  his  imagination, 
and  his  affeftions  :  and,  therefore,  however  enlightened 
his  underftanding  may  be  in  his  hours  of  fpeculation, 
his  philofophical  opinions  will  frequently  lofe  their  in- 
fluence over  his  mind,  in  thofe  very  fituations  in  which 
their  practical  afliftance  is  moft  required  :  —  when  his 
temper  is  foured  by  misfortune  ;  or  when  he  engages 
in  the  purfuits  of  life,  and  expofes  himfelf  to  the  con- 
tagion of  popular  errors.     His  opinions  are  fupported 
merely  by  fpeculative  arguments  ;    and,    inflead    of 
being  connected  with  any  of  the  adive  principles  of  his 
nature,  are  counteracted  and  thwarted  by  fome  of  the 
moft  powerful  of  them.    How  different  would  the  cafe 
be,  if  education  were  conducted  from  the  beginning 
with  attention  and  judgment?   Were  the  fame  pains 
taken,  to  imprefs  truth  on  the  mind  in  early  infancy, 
that  is  often  taken  to  inculcate  error,  the  great  prin- 
ciples of  our  conduct  would  not  only  be  jufter  than 
they  are ;   but,  in  confequence  of  the  aid  which  they 
would   receive   from  the  imagination  and   the  heart, 
trained  to  confpire  with  them  in  the  fame  direction, 
they  would  render  us  happier  in  ourfelves,  and  would 
influence  our    practice    more    powerfully  and    more 
habitually.     There  is  furely  nothing  in  error,  which  is 

more 


Part  IL   §  1.  OP   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  39 

more  congenial  to  the  mind  than  truth.  On  the  con- 
trary, when  exhibited  feparately,  and  alone  to  the  un- 
derftanding.  It  ihocks  our  reafon,  and  provokes  our 
ridicule ;  and  it  is  only,  (as  I  had  occafion  already  to 
remark,)  by  an  alliance  with  truths,  which  we  find  it 
difficult  to  renounce,  that  it  can  obtain  our  afTent,  or 
command  our  reverence.  What  advantages,  then, 
might  be  derived  from  a  proper  attention  to  early  im- 
preffions  and  affociations,  in  giving  fupport  to  thofe 
principles  which  are  connected  with  human  happinefs  ? 
The  long  reign  of  error  in  the  world,  and  the  in- 
fluence it  maintains,  even  in  an  age  of  liberal  Inquiry  ; 
far  from  being  favourable  to  the  fuppofition,  that  hu- 
man reafon  is  deftined  to  be  for  ever  the  fport  of  pre- 
judice and  abfurdity,  demonftrates  the  tendency  which 
there  is  to  permanence  in  eftablifhed  opinions,  and  In 
eflablifhed  inilitutions  ;  and  promifes  an  eternal  {labi- 
lity to  true  philofophy,  when  it  Ihall  once  have  ac- 
quired the  afcendant ;  and  when  proper  means  fliall  be 
employed  to  fupport  it,  by  a  more  perfect  fyllem  of 
education. 

Let  us  fuppofe,  for  a  moment,  that  this  happy  sera 
were  arrived,  and  that  all  the  prepofleffions  of  child- 
hood and  youth  were  directed  to  fupport  the  pure  and 
fubllme  truths  of  an  enlightened  morality.  With  what 
ardour,  and  with  what  tranfport,  would  the  under- 
ftanding,  when  arrived  at  maturity,  proceed  in  the 
fearch  of  truth  ;  when,  mflead  of  being  obliged  to 
ftruggle,  at  every  ftep,  with  early  prejudices,  its  office 
was  merely  to  add  the  force  of  philofophical  convic- 
tion, to  Imprellions,  which  ai'e  equally  deUghtful  to 
the  imagination,  and  dear  to  the  heart !  The  prepof- 

D  4  fefliouv^ 


40  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

felTions  of  childhood  would,  through  the  whole  of  life, 
be  gradually  acquiring  ftrength  from  the  enlargement 
of  our  knowledge  ;  and,  in  their  turn,  would  fortify 
the  conclufions  of  our  reafon,  againfl  the  fceptical 
fuggeftions  of  difappointment  or  melancholy. 

Our  daily  experience  may  convince  us,  how  fuf- 
ceptible  the  tender  mind  is  of  deep  impreflions  ;  and 
what  important  and  permanent  effeds  are  produced 
on  the  characters,  and  the  happinefs  of  individuals,  by 
the  cafual  alfociations  formed  in  childhood  among  the 
various  ideas,  feelings,  and  affedions,  with  which 
they  were  habitually  occupied.  It  is  the  bufinefs  of 
education  not  to  counteraft  this  conftitution  of  nature, 
but  to  give  it  a  proper  direftion :  and  the  miferable 
confequences  to  which  it  leads,  when  under  an  im- 
proper regulation,  only  fnew,  what  an  important  in- 
flrument  of  hu.i:an  improvement  it  might  be  rendered, 
in  more  flvilful  hands.  If  it  be  poffible  to  interefl  the 
imagination  and  the  heart  in  favour  of  error,  it  is,  at 
leaft,  no  lefs  poffible  to  intereft  them  in  favour  of 
truth.  If  it  be  poffible  to  extinguifli  all  the  moft  ge- 
nerous and  heroic  feelings  of  our  nature,  by  teaching 
us  to  connect  the  idea  of  them  with  thofe  of  guilt  and 
impiety  ;  it  is  furely  equally  poffible  to  cheriih  and 
ftrengthen  theiji,  by  eflablilhing  the  natural  alliance 
between  our  duty  and  our  happinefs.  If  it  be  poffible 
for  the  influence  of  fafliion  to  veil  the  native  deformity 
of  vice,  and  to  give  to  low  and  criminal  indulgences 
the  appearance  of  fpirit,  of  elegance,  and  of  gaiety ; 
can  we  doubt  of  the  poffibility  of  connecting,  in  the 
tender  mind,  thefe  pleafmg  affociations,  with  purfuits 

that  are  truly  worthy  and  honourable  ? There  are 

few 


Partir.  ^l.  OF  THE    HUMAN    MIND.  41 

few  men  to  be  found,  among  thofe  who  have  received 
the  advantages  of  a  hberal  education,  who  do  not  re- 
tain, through  life,  that  admiration  of  the  heroic  ages 
of  Greece  and  Rome,  with  which  the  clailical  authors 
once  infpired  them.  It  is,  in  truth,  a  fortunate  pre- 
polfeflion,  on  the  whole,  and  one,  of  which  I  Ihould 
be  forry  to  counteract  the  influence.  But  are  there 
not  others  of  equal  importance  to  morality  and  to 
happinefs,  with  which  the  mind  might,  at  the  fame 
period  of  life,  be  infpired  ?  If  the  firft  conceptions, 
for  example,  which  an  infant  formed  of  the  Deity, 
and  its  firft  moral  perceptions,  were  affbciated  with 
the  early  imprelTions  produced  on  the  heart  by  the 
beauties  of  nature,  or  the  charms  of  poetical  defcrip- 
tion,  thofe  ferious  thoughts  which  are  reforted  to,  by 
moft  men,  merely  as  a  fource  of  confolation  in  adver- 
fity,  and  which,  en  that  very  account,  are  frequently 
tinftured  with  fome  degree  of  gloom,  would  recur 
fpontaneoufly  to  the  mind,  in  its  beft  and  happieft 
hours  ;  and  Vv^ould  infenfibly  blend  themfelves  with  all 
its  pureft  and  moft  refined  enjoyments. 

In  thofe  parts  of  Europe,  v^here  the  prevailing  opi- 
nions involve  the  greatefl  variety  of  errors  and  corrup- 
tions, it  is,  I  believe,  a  common  idea  with  many  refpect- 
able  and  enlightened  men,  that,  in  every  country,  it  is 
moft  prudent  to  conduct  the  religious  in(tru6tion  of 
youth  upon  the  plan  which  is  prefcribed  by  the  na- 
tional  eftablifhment ;  in  order  that  the  pupil,  accord- 
ing to  the  vigour  or  feeblenefs  of  his  mind,  may  either 
fhake  off,  in  future  life,  the  prejudices  of  the  nurfery, 
or  die  in  the  popular  perfuafion.  This  idea,  I  own, 
appears  to  me  to  be  equally  ill-founded  and  dangerous. 

13  If 


42  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    THILOSOPHY  Introd. 

If  religious  opinions  have,  as  will  not  be  difputed,  a 
powerful  influence  on  the  happinefs,  and  on  the  con- 
duct of  mankind,  does  not  humanity  require  of  us,  to 
refcue  as  many  victims  as  poflible  from  the  hands  of 
bigotry ;  and  to  fave  them  from  the  cruel  alternative, 
of  remaining  under  the  gloom  of  a  depreffmg  fuperfli- 
tion,  or  of  being  diftracted  by  a  perpetual  conflicl  be- 
tween the  heart  and  the  underftanding  ? It  is  an 

enlightened  education  alone,  that,  in  mofl  countries  of 
Europe,  can  fave  the  young  philofopher  from  that 
anxiety  and  defpondence,  which  every  man  of  fenfibi- 
lity,  who,  in  his  childhood,  has  imbibed  the  popular 
opinions,  mud  neceflarily  experience,  when  he  firft 
begins  to  examine  their  foundation ;  and,  what  is  of 
flill  greater  importance,  which  can  fave  him,  during 
life,  from  that  occafional  fcepticifm,  to  which  all  men 
are  liable,  whofe  fyilems  fluduate  with  the  inequalities 
of  their  fpirits,  and  the  variations  of  the  atmofphere. 

I  fhall  conclude  this  fubjeft  with  remarking,  that, 
although  in  all  moral  and  religious  fyftems,  there  is  a 
great  mixture  of  important  truth ;  and  although  it  is, 
in  confequence  of  this  alliance,  that  errors  and  abfur- 
dities  are  enabled  to  preferve  their  hold  of  the  belief, 
yet  it  is  commonly  found,  that,  in  proportion  as  an 
eftablifhed  creed  is  complicated  in  its  dogmas  and  in 
its  ceremonies,  and  in  proportion  to  the  number  of 
acceflbry  ideas  which  it  has  grafted  upon  the  truth,  the 
more  difficult  is  it,  for  thofe  who  have  adopted  it  in 
childhood,  to  emancipate  themfelves  completely  from 
its  influence  ;  and,  in  thofe  cafes  in  which  they  at  lafl; 
fucceed,  the  greater  is  their  danger  of  abandoning, 
along  with  their  errors,  all  the  truths  which  they  had 

lo*  been 


Part  II.  §  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  43 

been  taught  to  conneft  with  them.  The  Roman  ca- 
tholic fyftem  is  Ihaken  off  with  much  greater  difEcuhy, 
than  thofe  which  are  taught  in  the  reformed  churches; 
but  when  it  lofes  its  hold  of  the  mind,  it  much  more 
frequently  prepares  the  way  for  unlimited  fcepticifm. 
The  caufes  of  this  I  may  perhaps  have  an  opportunity 
of  pointing  out,  in  treating  of  the  alTociation  of  ideas. 
I  have  now  finifhed  all  that  I  think  neceflary  to 
offer  at  prefent,  on  the  application  of  the  philofophy  of 
mind  to  the  fubjed  of  education.  To  fome  readers,  I 
am  afraid,  that  what  I  have  advanced  on  the  fubjed:, 
will  appear  to  border  upon  enthufiafm  ;  and  I  will  not 
attempt  to  juftify  myfelf  againft  the  charge.  I  am 
well  aware  of  the  tendency,  which  fpeculative  men 
fometimes  have,  to  magnify  the  etfeds  of  education, 
as  well  as  to  entertain  too  fanguine  views  of  the  im- 
provement of  the  world  ;  and  I  am  ready  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  there  are  inftances  of  individuals,  whofe 
vigour  of  mind  is  fufficient  to  overcome  every  thing 
that  is  pernicious  in  their  early  habits  :  but  I  am  fully 
perfuaded,  that  thefe  inftances  are  rare ;  and  that,  by 
far  the  greater  part  of  mankind  continue,  through  life, 
to  purfue  the  fame  track  into  which  they  have  been 
thrown,  by  the  accidental  circumftances  of  fttuation, 
inftrudion,  and  example. 


44  ELEMENTS   OF   TM£   PHllOSOPHT 


PART   SECOND. 

SECTION  II. 
Continuation  of  the  fame  SubjeSi. 

THE  remarks  which  have  been  hitherto  made,  on 
the  utility  of  the  philofophy  of  the  human  mind, 
are  of  a  very  general  nature,  and  apply  equally  to  all 
defcriptions  of  men.  Befides,  however,  thefe  more 
obvious  advantages  of  the  Iludy,  there  are  others, 
which,  though  lefs  Ihiking,  and  lefs  extenfive  in  their 
application,  are  neverthelefs,  to  fome  particular  clafles- 
of  individuals,  of  the  higheft  importance.  Without 
pretending  to  exhauft  the  fubjed,  I  fhall  offer  a  few 
detached  obfervations  upon  it,  in  this  feclion. 

I  already  took  notice,  in  general  terms,  of  the  com- 
mon relation  which  all  the  different  branches  of  our 
knowledge  bear  to  the  philofophy  of  the  human  mind. 
In  confequence  of  this  relation,  it  not  only  forms  an 
interefling  object  of  curiofity  to  literary  men  of  every 
denomination  ;  but,  if  fuccefsfully  profecuted,  it  can- 
not fail  to  furnifh  ufeful  lights  for  diredling  their  in- 
quiries ;  whatever  the  nature  of  the  fubjeds  may  be, 
which  happen  to  engage  their  attention. 

In  order  to  be  fatislied  of  the  juflnefs  of  this  obfer- 
vation,  it  is  fufficient  to  recoiled,  that  to  the  philofo- 
phy of  the  mind  are  to  be  referred,  all  our  inquiries 
concerning  the  divifions  and  the  claffifications  of  the 
objeds  of  human  knowledge  ;  and  alfo,  all  the 
various  rules,  both  for  the  inveftigation,  and  the  com- 
munication. 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  45, 

munication,  of  truth.  Thefe  general  views  of  fclence, 
and  thefe  general  rules  of  method,  ought  to  form  the 
fubjeds  of  a  rational  and  ufeful  logic  -,  a  ftudy,  un- 
doubtedly, in  itfelf  of  the  greateft  importance  and 
dignity,  but  in  which  lefs  progrefs  has  hitherto  been 
made  than  is  commonly  imagined. 

I  fhall  endeavour  to  illuftrate,  very  briefly,  a  few  of 
the  advantages  which  might  be  expected  to  refult  from 
fuch  a  fyftem  of  logic,  if  properly  executed. 

I.  And,  in  the  firft  place,  it  is  evident  that  it  would 
be  of  the  higheft  importance  in  all  the  fciences,  (in 
fome  of  them,  indeed,  much  more  than  in  others,)  to 
exhibit  a  precife  and  fleady  idea  of  the  objefts  which 
they  prefent  to  our  inquiry. ^-What  was  the  prin- 
cipal circumflance  which  contributed  to  miflead  the 
ancients,  in  their  phyfical  refearches?  Was  it  not 
their  confufed  and  wavering  notions  about  the  parti- 
cular clafs  of  truths,  which  it  was  their  bufmefs  to 
iuveftigate  ?  It  was  owing  to  this  that  they  were  led 
to  negled  the  obvious  phenomena  and  laws  of  moving 
bodies  ;  and  to  indulge  themfelves  in  conjectures  about 
the  efficient  caufes  of  motion,  and  the  nature  of  thofe 
minds,  by  which  they  conceived  the  particles  of  mat- 
ter to  be  animated  ;  and  that  they  fo  often  blended  the 
hiflory  of  fa£ts,  with  their  metaphyfical  fpeculations. 
In  the  prefent  (late  of  fcience,  indeed,  we  are  not 
liable  to  fuch  miftakes  in  natural  philofophy ;  but  it 
would  be  difficult  to  mention  any  other  branch  of 
knowledge,  which  is  entirely  exempted  from  them. 
In  metaphyfics,  I  might  almoft  fay,  they  are  at  the 
bottom  of  all  our  controverfies.  In  tlie  celebrated 
difpute,  for  example,  which  has  been  fg  long  carried 

on, 


46  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

on,  about  the  explanation  given  by  the  ideal  theory  of 
the  phenomena  of  perception,  the  whole  difficulty  arofe 
from  this,  that  philofophers  had  no  precife  notion  of 
the  point  they  wifhed  to  afcertain ;  and  now,  that  the 
controverfy  has  been  brought  to  a  conclufion,  (as  I 
think  all  men  of  candour  mufl  confefs  it  to  have  been 
by  Dr.  Reid,)  it  will  be  found,  that  his  doftrine  on 
the  fubjeft  throws  no  light  whatever,  on  what  was 
generally  underftood  to  be  the  great  object  of  inquiry  ; 
I  mean,  on  the  mode  of  communication  between  the 
mind  and  the  material  world  :  and,  in  truth,  amounts 
only  to  a  precife  defcription  of  the  faft,  flripped  of  all 
hypothefis,  and  dated  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  give  us 
a  diftind  view  of  the  infurmountable  limits  which 
nature  has  in  this  inftance  prefcribed  to  our  curiofity. 
The  fame  obfervation  may  be  made,  on  the  reafonings 
of  this  profound  and  original  author,  with  refpe£t  to 
fome  metaphyseal  queftions  that  had  been  darted  on 
the  fubje£t  of  vifion ;  in  particular,  concerning  the 
caufe  of  our  feeing  objects  fmgle  with  two  eyes,  and 
our  feeing  objeds  eredt,  by  means  of  inverted  images 
on  the  retina. 

If  we  were  to  examine,  in  like  manner,  the  prefent 
ftate  of  morals,  of  jurifprudence,  of  politics,  and  of 
philofophical  criticifm ;  I  believe,  we  Ihould  find,  that 
the  principal  circumftance  which  retards  their  pro- 
grefs,  is  the  vague  and  indiftin6t  idea,  which  thofe 
who  apply  to  the  lludy  of  them  have  formed  to  them- 
felves  of  the  objeds  of  their  refearches.  Were  thefe 
objeds  once  clearly  defined,  and  the  proper  plan  of 
inquiry  for  attaining  them  illuflrated  by  a  few  unex- 
ceptionable models,  writers  of  inferior  genius  would 

be 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  47 

be  enabled  to  employ  their  induftry  to  much  more 
advantage ;  and  would  be  prevented  from  adding  to 
that  rubbilh,  which,  in  confequence  of  the  ill-direfted 
ingenuity  of  our  predeceflbrs,  obftruds  our  progrefs 
in  the  purfuit  of  truth. 

As  a  philofophical  fyftem  of  logic  would  affifl  us  in 
our    particular    fcientific    inveftigations,    by   keeping 
fteadily  in  our  view  the  attainable  objeds  of  human, 
curiofity  ;  fo,  by  exhibiting  to  us  the  relation  in  which 
they  all  fland  to  each  other,  and  the  relation  which 
they  all  bear  to  what  ought  to  be  their  common  airti, 
the  advancement  of  human  happinefs,  it  would  have  a 
tendency  to  confine  induflry  and  genius  to  inquiries 
which  are  of  real  praftical  utility  ;  and  would  com- 
municate a  dignity  to  the  moft  fubordinate  purfuits, 
which  are  in  any  refpeft  fubfervient  to  fo  important  a 
purpofe.     When  our  views  are  limited  to  one  particu- 
lar fcience,  to  which  we  have  been  led  to  devote  our- 
felves  by  talle  or  by  accident,  the  courfe  of  our  fludies 
refembles  the  progrefs  of  a  traveller  through  an  un- 
explored country  ;  whofe  wanderings,  from  plao^  to 
place,  are  determined  merely  by  the  impulfe  of  occa- 
fional  curiofity  ;  and  whofe  opportunities  of  informa- 
tion  muft  neceflarily  be  limited  to  the  objeds  which 
accidentally  prefent  themfelves  to  his  notice.     It  is  the 
philofophy  of  the  mind  alone,  which,  by  furnifhing 
us  with  a  general  map  of  the  field   of  human  loiow- 
ledge,  can  enable  us  to  proceed  with  fteadinefs,  and  in 
an  ufeful  direction  ;  and  whije  it  gratifies  our  curiofity, 
and  animates  our  exertions,  by  exhibiting  to  us  all  the 
various  bearings  of  our  journey,  can  condud  us  to 
thofe  eminences  from  whence  the  eye  may  wander 

over 


48  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

over  the  vaft  and  unexplored  regions  of  fcience.  Lord 
Bacon  was  the  firfl  perfon  who  took  this  comprehen- 
five  view  of  the  different  departments  of  ftudy ;  and 
who  pointed  out,  to  all  the  claifes  of  literary  men,  the 
great  end  to  which  their  labours  fhould  confpire  ;  the 
multiplication  of  the  fources  of  human  enjoyment,  and 
the  extenfion  of  man's  dominion  over  nature.  Had 
this  objed  been  kept  fteadily  in  view  by  his  followers, 
their  difcoveries,  numerous  and  important  as  they 
have  been,  would  have  advanced  with  ftill  greater 
japidity,  and  would  have  had  a  much  more  extenfive 
influence  on  the  pradical  arts  of  life  *. 

From  fuch  a  fyflem  of  logic,  too,  important  affifl- 
ance  might  be  expeded,  for  reforming  the  eflabhflied 
plan  of  public  or  academical  education.  It  is  melan- 
choly to  refleft  on  the  manner  in  which  this  is  carried 
on,  in  moll,  perhaps,  I  might  fay,  in  all  the  countries 
of  Europe  ;  and  that,  in  an  age  of  comparative  light 
and  liberality,  the  intelledfual  and  moral  characters  of 
youth  fhould  continue  to  be  formed  on  a  plan  devifed 
i)y  men  who  were  not  only  ftrangers  to  the  bufmefs  of 
the  worltf,  but  who  felt  themfelves  interefted  in  op- 
pofmg  the  progrefs  of  ufeful  knowledge. 

*  Omnium  autem  gravillimus  error  in  deviatione  ab  ultimo  doc- 
trinarum  fine  confiftit.  Appetunt  enim  liomincs  fcientiam,  alii  ex 
infita  curiofitate  et  irrequieta  :  alii  animi  caufa  tt  deleftationis,  alii 
pxiftimationis  gratia  ;  alii  contentionis  ergo,  atque  ut  in  differcndo 
fuperiores  iint :  pier' que  propter  lucrum  et  vidlum  :  pauciflimi,  ut 
donum  ratio  IS,  divinitus  datum,  in  ufushumani  generis  iaipendant. 
■Hoc  enim  illud  ell,  quod  revera  dodlrinim  aique  artes  tondc- 
coraret,  et  actollcret,  fi  contcir.platio,  et  adio,  arftiore  quam  ad- 
huc  vinculo  copularentur.     Dc  Aug.  Scient.  lib.  i. 

For 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^^ 

For  accomplifhing  a  reformation  in  the  plan  of  aca- 
demical fludy,  on  rational  and  fyftematical  principles, 
it  is  neceflary,  in  the  firft  place,  to  confider  the  rela- 
tion in  which  the  different  branches  of  literature,  and 
the  different  arts  and  fciences,  ftand  to  each  other,  and 
to  the  practical  purpofes  of  life  :  and  fecondly,  to 
confider  them  in  relation  to  the  human  mind,  in  order 
to  determine  the  arrangem.ent,  beft  fitted  for  unfold- 
ing and  maturing  its  faculties.  Many  valuable  hints 
towards  fuch  a  work  may  be  colleded  from  Lord 
Bacon's  writings. 

II.  Another  very  important  branch  of  a  rational 
fyftem  of  logic  (as  I  had  occafion  already  to  obferve) 
ought  to  be  ;  to  lay  down  the  rules  of  invefligation 
which  it  is  proper  to  follow  in  the  different  fciences. 
In  all  of  thefe,  the  faculties  of  the  underftanding  are 
the  inftruments  with  which  we  operate  ;  and  without 
a  previous  knowledge  of  their  nature,  it  is  impoflible 
to  employ  them  to  the  beft  advantage.  In  every  ex- 
ercife  of  our  reafoning  and  of  our  inventive  powers, 
there  are  general  laws  which  regulate  the  progrefs  of 
the  mind  ;  and  when  once  thefe  laws  are  afcertained, 
they  enable  us  to  fpeculate  and  to  invent,  for  the  fu- 
ture, with  more  fyftem,  and  v/ith  a  greater  certainty 
of  fuccefs. — In  the  mechanical  arts,  it  is  well  known, 
how  much  time  and  ingenuity  are  mifapplied,  by  thofe 
who  acquire  their  pradical  Ikill,  by  their  own  trials, 
undirected  by  the  precepts  or  example  of  others. 
What  we  call  the  rules  of  an  art,  are  merely  a  collec- 
tion of  general  obfervations,  fuggefted  by  long  expe- 
rience, with  refpecl  to  the  moft  compendious  and  ef- 
fectual means  of  performing  every  different  ftep  of  the 

E  procelfes 


50  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Intrad. 

proceffes  which  the  art  involves.  In  confeqcience  of 
fuch  rules,  the  artifl  is  enabled  to  command  the  fame 
fuccefs  in  all  his  operations,  for  which  the  unfkilled 
workman  mufl  trufl  to  a  happy  combination  of  acci- 
dental circumftances  ;  the  mifapplications,  too,  of  the 
labour  of  one  race  are  faved  to  the  next ;  and  the  ac- 
quiiition  of  pradical  addrefs  is  facilitated,  by  confining 

its  exertions  to  one  direction. The  analogy  is  per- 

fed,  in  thofe  proceffes  which  are  purely  intelleftual ; 
and  to  regulate  which,  is  the  great  object  of  logic.  In 
the  cafe  of  individuals,  who  have  no  other  guide  to 
direct  them  in  their  inquiries  than  their  own  natural 
fagacity,  much  time  and  ingenuity  muft  inevitably  be 
thrown  away,  in  every  exertion  of  the  inventive 
powers.  In  proportion,  however,  to  the  degree  of 
their  experience  and  obfervation,  the  number  of  thefe 
mifi'.pplications  will  diminifh  ;  and  the  power  of  inven- 
tion will  be  enabled  to  proceed  with  more  certainty 
and  fleadinefs  to  its  objeft.  The  misfortune  is,  that  as 
the  aids»  which  the  underftanding  derives  from  ex- 
perience, are  feldom  recorded  in  writing,  or  even  de- 
fcribed  in  words,  every  fucceeding  inquirer  finds  him- 
felf,  at  the  commencement  of  his  philofophical  pur- 
fuits,  obliged  to  flruggle  with  the  fame  difadvantages 
which  had  retarded  the  progrefs  of  his  predecefTors. 
If  the  more  important  pradical  rules,  which  habits  of 
inveftigation  fuggeft  to  individuals,  were  diligently 
preferved,  each  generation  would  be  placed  in  circum- 
ftances more  favourable  to  invention  than  the  preced- 
ing ;  and  the  progrefs  of  knowledge,  inflead  of  cramp- 
ing original  genius,  would  afiifl  and  dired  its  exer- 
tions.    In  the  infancy  of  hterature,  indeed,  its  range 

mav 


Part  II.  §2.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  ^1 

may  be  more  unbounded,  and  its  accidental  excurfions 
may  excite  more  aftonifhment,  than  in  a  cultivated 
and  enlightened  age  ;  but  it  is  only  in  fuch  an  age, 
that  inventive  genius  can  be  trained  by  rules  founded 
on  the  experience  of  our  predeceflbrs,  in  fuch  a  man- 
ner as  to  infure  the  gradual  and  regular  improvement 
of  fcience.  So  juft  is  the  remark  of  Lord  Bacon  : 
"  Certo  fciant  homines,  artes  inveniendi  folidas  et 
"  veras  adolefcere  et  incrementa  fumere  cum  ipfis 
"  inventls." 

The  analogy  between  the  mechanical  arts,  and  the 
operations  of  fcientific  invention,  might  perhaps  be 
carried  further.  In  the  former,  we  know  how  much 
the  natural  powers  of  man  have  been  affifted,  by  the 
ufe  of  tools  and  inflruments.  Is  it  not  poflible  to  de- 
vife,  in  like  manner,  certain  aids  to  our  intelledtual 
faculties  ? 

That  fuch  a  query  is  not  altogether  chimerical,  ap- 
pears from  the  wonderful  effedls  of  algebra  (which  is 
precifely  fuch  an  inflrument  of  thought,  as  I  have 
been  now  alluding  to)  in  facilitating  the  inquiries  of 
modern  mathematicians.  Whether  it  might  not  be 
poflible  to  realife  a  projed  which  Leibnitz  has  fome- 
where  mentioned,  of  introducing  a  fimilar  contrivance 
into  other  branches  of  knowledge,  I  Ihall  not  take 
upon  me  to  determine ;  but  that  this  idea  has  at  leafl: 
fome  plaufibility,  muft,  I  think,  be  evident  to  thofe 
who  have  refleded  on  the  nature  of  the  general  terms 
which  abound  more  or  lefs  in  every  cultivated  lan- 
guage ;  and  which  may  be  confidered  as  one  fpecies 
of  inftrumental  aid,  which  art  has  difcovered  to  our 
intelledual  powers.     From  the  obfervations  which  I 

E  2  am 


52  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

am  afterwards  to  make,  it  will  appear,  that,  without 
general  terms,  all  our  reafonings  muft  neceffarily  have 
been  limited  to  particulars  ;    and,   confequently,  it  is 
owing  to  the  ufe  of  thefe,  that  the  philofopher  is  en- 
abled to  fpeculate  concerning  claffes  of  objefts,  with 
the  fame  facility  with  which  the  favage  or  the  peafant 
fpeculates  concerning  the  individuals   of  which  they 
are  compofed.     The  technical  terms,  in  the  different 
fciences,  render  the  appropriate  language  of  philofo- 
phy  a   flill  more   convenient  inflrument   of  thought, 
than  thofe  languages  which  have  originated  from  po- 
pular ufe ;  and  in  proportion  as  thefe  technical  terms 
•improve  in  point  of  precifion  and  comprehenfivenefs, 
they  will  contribute  to  render  our  intelleftual  progrefs 
more  certain  and  more   rapid.     "  While  engaged  '* 
(fays  Mr.  Lavoifier)  "  in  the  compofition  of  my  Ele- 
"  ments  of  Chemiftry,  I  perceived,  better  than  I  had 
"  ever  done  before,    the  truth  of  an  obfervation  of 
*'  Condillac,  that  we  think  only  through  the  medium 
"  of  words ;    and  that   languages  are  true  analytical 
"  methods.      Algebra,  which,  of  all  our  modes  of 
*'  expreffion,  is  the  mofl  fmiple,  the  moft  exa6l,  and 
"  the  bed  adapted  to  its  purpofe,  is,  at  the  fame  time, 
"  a  language  and  an  analytical   method.      The  art 
"  of  reafoning  is  nothing  more  than  a  language  well 
*'  arr^^lged."      The  influence  which  thefe  very  en- 
lightened and  philofophical  views   have  already  had 
on  the  doctrines  of  chemiftry,  cannot  fail  to  be  known 
to  moft  of  my  readers. 

The  foregoing  remarks,  in  fo  far  as  they  relate  to 
the  pollibility  of  aflifting  our   reafoning  and  inventive 
powers,  by  new  inftrumental  aids,  may  perhaps  ap- 
pear 


Part  II.    §  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    iAIIND.  53 

pear  to  be  founded  too  much  upon  theory  ;  but  this 
objeftlon  cannot  be  made  to  the  reafonings  1  have  of- 
fered on  the  importance  of  the  fludy  of  method. — To 
the  juflnefs  of  thefe,  the  whole  hiftory  of  fcience  bears 
teflimony  ;  but  more  efpecially,  the  hiftories  of  Phyfics 
and  of  pure  Geometry;  which  afford  fo  remarkable  an 
illuflration  of  the  general  doftrine,  as  can  fcarcely  fail 
to  be  fatisfadory,  even  to  thofe  who  are  the  mofl  dif- 
pofed  to  doubt  the  efficacy  of  art  in  directing  the  exer- 
tions of  genius. 

With  refpeft  to  the  former,  it  is  fufficient  to  men- 
tion the  wonderful  effefts  which  the  writings  of  Lord 
Bacon  have  produced,  in  accelerating  its  progrefs. 
The  philofophers,  who  flourifhed  before  his  time,  . 
were,  undoubtedly,  not  inferior  to  their  fuccelTors, 
either  in  genius  or  induftry  :  but  their  plan  of  invefti- 
gation  was  erroneous  ;  and  their  labours  have  pro- 
duced only  a  chaos  of  fictions  and  abfurdities.  The 
illuftrations  which  his  works  contain,  of  the  method 
of  induction,  general  as  the  terms  are,  in  which  they 
are  expreffed,  have  gradually  turned  the  attention  of 
the  moderns  to  the  rules  of  philofophifmg  ;  and  have 
led  the  way  to  thofe  important  and  fublime  difcoveries 
in  phyfics,  which  refled  fo  much  honour  on  the  pre- 
fent  age. 

The  rules  of  philofophifing,  however,  even  in  phy- 
fics, have  never  yet  been  laid  down  with  a  fufficient 
degree  of  precifion,  minutenefs,  or  method  ;  nor  have 
they  ever  been  ftated  and  illuftrated  in  fo  clear  and 
popular  a  manner,  as  to  render  them  intelligible  to  the 
generality  of  readers.  The  truth,  perhaps,  is  ;  that 
the  greater  part  of  phyfical  inquirers  have  derived  what 

E  3  know^ 


54  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

knowledge  of  them  they  poflefs,  rather  from  an  atten- 
tion to  the  excellent  models  of  inveftigation,  which  the 
writings  of  Newton  exhibit,  than  from  any  of  the  fpe- 
culations  of  Lord  Bacon,  or  his  commentators  :  and, 
indeed,  fuch  is  the  incapacity  of  mod  people  for  ab- 
ftradl  reafoning,  that  I  am  inclined  to  think,  even  if  the 
rules  of  inquiry  were  delivered  in  a  perfedly  complete 
and  unexceptionable  form,  it  might  ftill  be  expedient 
to  teach  them  to  the  majority  of  ftudents,  rather  by 
examples,  than  in  the  form  of  general  principles.  But 
it  does  not  therefore  follow,  that  an  attempt  to  illuf- 
tratc  and  to  methodize  thefe  rules,  would  be  ufelefs ; 
for  it  mull  be  remembered,  that,  although  an  original 
and  inventive  genius,  like  that  of  Newton,  be  fufficient 
to  eflablifh  a  ftandard  for  the  imitation  of  his  age,  yet, 
that  the  genius  of  Newton  himfelf  was  encouraged  and 
led  by  the  light  of  Bacon's  philofophy. 

The  ufe  which  the  ancient  Greek  geometers  made 
of  their  amdvfis,  aflbrds  an  additional  illuftration  of 
the  utility  of  method  in  guiding  fcientific  invention. 
To  facilitate  the  fludy  of  this  fpecies  of  inveftigation, 
they  v/rote  no  lefs  than  thirty -three  preparatory  books ; 
and  they  confidered  an  addrefs,  in  the  praftice  of  it, 
(or,  as  Makixus  calls  it,  a  S-jva.fj.n;  oiuxXvTuin)  as  of 
much  more  value,  than  an  extenfive  acquaintance  with 
the  principles  of  the  fcience  *.  Indeed,  it  is  well 
known,  to  every  one  who  is  at  all  converfant  with 
geometrical  inveftigations,  that  although  it  may  be 
poffible  for  a  perfon,  without  the  alTiftance  of  the  me- 
thod of  analyfis,  to  flumble  accidentally  on  a  folution, 

Mi^C^'A  £)-*  TO   oi-.a-A-.v  U';x7.VT,Kr.-j  Kir.c-u^^xi,    Tov  wsXXarf    «7rij£.|:-(? 
•-        >) 

or 


Part  IL   §  2.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  55 

or  on  a  demonftration  ;  yet  It  is  impoffible  for  him  to 
poiTefs  a  jufl  confidence  in  his  own  powers,  or  to  carry- 
on  a  regular  plan  of  invention  and  .difcovery.  It  is 
well  known,  too,  that  an  acquaintance  with  this  method 
brings  geometers  much  more  nearly  upon  a  level 
with  each  other,  than  they  would  be  otherwife :  not 
that  it  is  poffible,  by  any  rules,  to  fuperfede,  entirely, 
ingenuity  and  addrefs ;  but,  becaufe,  in  confequence 
of  the  uniformity  of  the  plan  on  which  the  method 
proceeds,  experience  communicates  a  certain  dexterity 
in  the  ufe  of  it ;  which  mufl  in  time  give  to  a  very 
ordinary  degree  of  fagacity,  a  fuperiority,  on  the 
whole,  to  the  greatefl  natural  ingenmty,  unafTifted  by 
rule  *. 

To  thefe  obfervations,  I  believe,  I  may  add,  that 
after  all  that  was  done  by  the  Greek  philofophers  to 
facilitate  mathematical  invention,  many  rules  flill  re- 
main to  be  fuggefted,  which  might  be  of  important 
ufe,  even  in  pure  geometry.  A  variety  of  fuch  occur 
to  every  experienced  mathematician,  in  the  courfe  of 

*  **  Mathematica  multi  fciunt,  mathefin  pauci.  Aliud  eft  enim 
noffe  propofitiones  aliquot,  et  nonnullas  ex  iis  obvias  elicere,  cafu 
potius  quam  carta  aliqua  difcurrendi  norma,  aliud  fcientiae  ipfius 
naturam  ac  indolem  perfpeclam  habere,  in  ejus  fe  adyta  penetrare, 
et  ab  univerfalibus  inftruftum  efie  praeceptis,  quibus  theoremata  ac 
problemata  innumera  excogitandi,  eademque  demonftrandi  facilitas 
comparetur.  Ut  enim  piAorum  vulgus  prototypon  faepe  faepius 
exprimendo,  quendam  pingendi  ufum,  nuUam  vero  piftoriae  artis 
quam  optica  fuggerit  fcientiam  adquirit,  ita  multi,  leftis  Euclidis 
et  aliorum  geometrarum  libris,  eorum  imitatione  fingere  propofi- 
tiones aliquas  ac  demonftrare  folent,  ipfam  tamen  fecretifllmam  dif- 
ficiliorum  theorematum  ac  problcmatum  folvendi  methodum  prorfus 
ignorant." — Joannis  de  la  Faille  Theoremata  de  Centre  Gravitatis, 
in  praefat. — Antwerpiae,  1632. 

E  4  his 


|6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd, 

his  inquiries,  although,  perliaps,  he  may  not  be  at 
the  trouble  to  flate  them  to  himfelf  in  words ;  and  it 
would  plainly  have  faved  him  much  expence  of  time 
and  thought,  befide  enabling  him  to  conduct  his  re- 
fearches  on  a  more  regular  plan,  if  he  had  been  taught 
them  fyflematically  at  the  commencement  of  his  ftudies. 
The  more  varied,  abftrufe,  and  general  inveftigations 
of  the  moderns,  (land  in  need,  in  a  much  greater 
degree,  of  the  guidance  of  philofophical  principles  ;  not 
only  for  enabling  us  to  conduct,  with  ikill,  our  parti- 
cular refearches,  but  for  directing  us  to  the  different 
methods  of  reafoning,  to  which  we  ought  to  have 
recourfe  on  different  occafions.  A  collection  of  fuch 
rules  would  form,  what  might  be  called  with  pro- 
priety, the  logic  of  mathematics  ;  and  would  probably 
contribute  greatly  to  the  advancement  of  all  thofe 
branches  of  knowledge,  to  which  mathematical  learn- 
ing is  fubfervient. 

The  obfervations  which  have  been  now  made,  on 
the  importance  of  method  in  conducting  phyfical  and 
mathematical  refearches,  particularly  thofe  which  re- 
late to  the  lall  of  thefe  fubjeCts,  will  not  apply  literally 
to  our  inquiries  in  metaphyfics,  morals,  or  politics ; 
becaufe,  in  thefe  fciences,  our  reafonings  always  con- 
fift  of  a  comparatively  fmall  number  of  intermediate 
fteps ;  and  the  obflacles  which  retard  our  progrefs,  do 
not,  as  in  mathematics,  arife  from  the  difficulty  of 
finding  media  of  comparifon  among  our  ideas.  Not, 
that  thefe  obflacles  are  lefs  real,  or  more  eafily  fur- 
mounted  :  on  the  contrary,  it  feems  to  require  a  ftill 
rarer  combination  of  talents  to  furmount  them ;  for 
how  fmall  is   the   number   of  individuals,  who   are 

qualified 


Part  II.  f  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^j 

qualified  to  think  juftly  on  metaphyfical,  moral,  or 
political  fubjedts  ;  in  comparifon  of  thofe,  who  may 
be  trained  by  pradice  to  follow  the  longell  procefles 
of  mathematical  reafoning.  From  what  thefe  obftacles 
arife,  I  fhall  not  inquire  particularly  at  prefent.  Some 
of  the  more  important  of  them  may  be  referred  to  the 
imperfections  of  language  ;  to  the  difficulty  of  annex- 
ing precife  and  Heady  ideas  to  our  words ;  to  the  dif- 
ficulty, in  fome  cafes,  of  conceiving  the  fubjeds  of 
our  reafoning ;  and,  in  others,  of  difcovering,  and 
keeping  in  view,  all  the  various  circumftances  upon 
which  our  judgment  ought  to  proceed  ;  and  above  all, 
to  the  prejudices  which  early  impreffions  and  aflbcia- 
tions  create,  to  warp  our  opinions. — To  illuftrate 
thefe  fources  of  error,  in  the  different  fciences  which 
are  liable  to  be  affeded  by  them,  and  to  point  out  the 
mod  effectual  means  for  guarding  againfl;  them,  would 
form  another  very  interefting  article,  in  a  philofophical 
fyftem  of  logic. 

The  method  of  communicating  to  others,  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  different  fciences,  has  been  as  much  ne- 
glected by  the  writers  on  logic,  as  the  rules  of  invefti- 
gation  and  dii'covery ;  and  yet,  there  is  certainly  no 
undertaking  whatever,  in  which  their  affiftance  is  more 
indifpenfably  requifite.  The  firft  principles  of  all  the 
fciences  are  intimately  connected  with  the  philofophy 
of  the  human  mind  ;  and  it  is  the  province  of  the  lo- 
gician, to  ftate  thefe  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  to  lay  a 
folid  foundation  for  the  fuperftruCtures  which  others 
are  to  rear. — It  is  in  ftating  fuch  principles,  accord- 
ingly, that  elementary  writers  are  chiefly  apt  to  fail. 
How  unfatisfaCtory,  for  example,  are  the  introductory 

chapters 


\ 


58  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PTIILOSOPHY  Introd. 

chapters  in  mod  fyftems  of  natural  philofophy  ;  not  in 
confequence  of  any  defect  of  phyfical  or  of  mathema- 
tical knowledge  in  their  authors,  but  in  confequence 
of  a  want  of  attention  to  the  laws  of  human  thought, 
and  to  the  general  rules  of  jufl  reafoning  !  The  fame 
remark  may  be  extended  to  the  form,  in  which  the 
elementary  principles  of  many  of  the  other  fciences  are 
commonly  exhibited  ;  and,  if  I  am  not  miflaken,  this 
want  of  order,  among  the  firft  ideas  which  they  pre- 
fent  to  the  mind,  is  a  more  powerful  obftacle  to  the 
progrefs  of  knowledge,  than  is  generally  imagined. 

I  fhall  only  obferve  farther,  with  refpeft  to  the  uti- 
lity of  the  philofophy  of  mind,  that  as  there  are  fome 
arts,  in  which  we  not  only  employ  the  intellectual  fa- 
culties as  inftruments,  but  operate  on  the  mind  as  a 
fubjedt ;  fo,  to  thofe  individuals  who  aim  at  excellence 
in  fuch  purfuits,  the  ftudies  I  have  now  been  recom- 
mending are,  in  a  more  peculiar  manner,  interefting 
and  important.  In  poetry,  in  painting,  in  eloquence, 
and  in  all  the  other  fine  arts,  our  fuccefs  depends  on 
the  fkill  with  which  we  are  able  to  adapt  the  efforts  of 
our  genius  to  the  human  frame ;  and  it  is  only  on  a 
philofophical  analyfis  of  the  mind,  that  a  folid  founda- 
tion can  be  laid  for  their  farther  improvement.  Man, 
too,  is  the  fubjeft  on  which  the  practical  moralifl  and 
the  enlightened  ftatefman  have  to  operate.  Of  the 
former,  it  is  the  profeffed  object  to  engage  the  attention 
of  individuals  to  their  own  beft  interefl  :  and  to 
allure  them  to  virtue  and  happinefs,  by  every  con- 
fideration  that  can  influence  the  underftanding,  the 
imagination,  or  the  heart.  To  the  latter  is  afligned 
the  fublimer  office  of  feconding  the  benevolent  inten- 
*  1 1  tions 


Part  II.  §  a.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  59 

tions  of  Providence  in  the  adminiftration  of  human 
affairs ;  to  diffufe  as  widely  and  equally  as  poflible, 
among  his  fellow-citizens,  the  advantages  of  the  fecial 
union  ;  and,  by  a  careful  ftudy  of  the  conftitutlon  of 
man,  and  of  the  circumftances  in  which  he  is  placed, 
to  modify  the  political  order,  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
may  allow  free  fcope  and  operation  to  thofe  principles 
of  intellectual  and  moral  improvement,  which  nature 
has  implanted  in  our  fpecies. 

In  all  thefe  cafes,  I  am  very  fenfible,  that  the  uti- 
hty  of  fyftematical  rules  has  been  called  in  queftion  by 
philofophers  of  note ;  and  that  many  plaufible  argu- 
ments in  fupport  of  their  opinion,  may  be  derived 
from  the  fmall  number  of  individuals  who  have  been 
regularly  trained  to  eminence  in  the  arts,  in  compari- 
fon  of  thofe  who  have  been  guided  merely  by  un- 
tutored genius,  and  the  example  of  their  predeceflbrs. 
I  know,  too,  that  it  may  be  urged  with  truth,  that 
rules  have,  in  fome  cafes,  done  more  harm  than  good  ; 
and  have  mifled,  inftead  of  direding,  the  natural  ex- 
ertions of  the  mind.  But,  in  all  fuch  inftances,  in 
which  philofophical  principles  have  failed  in  producing 
their  intended  effeft,  I  will  venture  to  affert,  that  they 
have  done  fo,  either  in  confequence  of  errors,  which 
were  accidentally  blended  with  them ;  or,  in  confe- 
quence of  their  polfeffing  only  that  flight  and  partial 
influence  over  the  genius,  which  enabled  them  to  de- 
range its  previoufly  acquired  habits  ;  without  regulat- 
ing its  operations,  upon  a  fyfliematlcal  plan,  with 
ftieadlnefs  and  efficacy.  In  all  the  arts  of  life,  whether 
trifling  or  important,  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  fl:iil, 
which  may  be  attained  by  our  untutored  powers,  aided 

by 


So  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Introd. 

by  imitation  ;  and  this  fkill,  inftead  of  being  perfeded 
by  rules,  may,  by  means  of  them,  be  diminifhed  or 
deftroyed,  if  thefe  rules  are  partially  and  imperfedly 
apprehended  ;  or  even  if  they  are  not  lo  familiarized 
to  the  underilanding,  as  to  influence  its  exertions  uni- 
formly and  habitually.  In  the  cafe  of  a  mufical  per- 
former, who  has  learnt  his  art  merely  by  the  ear, 
the  firft  effects  of  fyftematical  inftrudlion  are,  I  believe, 
always  unfavourable.  The  effeft  is  the  fame,  of  the 
rules  of  elocution,  when  firft  communicated  to  one 
who  has  attained,  by  his  natural  tafte  and  good  fenfe, 
a  tolerable  propriety  in  the  art  of  reading.  But  it  does 
not  follow  from  this,  that,  in  either  of  thefe  arts,  rules 
are  ufelefs.  It  only  follows,  that,  in  order  to  unite  eafe 
and  grace  with  correftnefs,  and  to  preferve  the  felicities 
of  original  genius,  amidft  thofe  reftraints  which  may 
give  them  an  ufeful  diredion,  it  is  neceffary  that  the 
acquifitions  of  education  fhould,  by  long  and  early 
habits,  be  rendered,  in  fome  meafure,  a  fecond  nature. 

The  fame  obfervations  will  be  found  to  apply, 

with  very  flight  alterations,  to  arts  of  more  ferious  im- 
portance, —  In  the  art  of  legillation,  for  example,  there 
is  a  certain  degree  of  fkill,  which  may  be  acquired 
merely  from  the  routine  of  bufinefs  ;  and  when  once 
a  politician  has  been  formed,  in  this  manner,  among 
the  details  of  office,  a  partial  ftudy  of  general  prin- 
ciples will  be  much  more  likely  to  lead  him  aftray, 
than  to  enlighten  his  conduct.  But  there  is  neverthe- 
lefs  a  fcience  of  legiflation,  which  the  details  of  office, 
and  the  intrigues  of  popular  affemblies,  will  never 
communicate  ;  a  fcience,  of  which  the  principles  muft 
be  fought  for  in  the  conflitution  of  human  nature,  and 

in 


Part  II.  $2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  gj 

in  the  general  laws  which  regulate  the  courfe  of  hu- 
man affairs ;  and  which,  if  ever,  in  confequence  of 
the  progrefs  of  reafon,  philofophy  fhould  be  enabled 
to  affume  that  afcendant  in  the  government  of  the 
world,  which  has  hitherto  been  maintained  by  acci- 
dent, combined  with  the  paflions  and  caprices  of  a 
few  leading  individuals,  may,  perhaps,  produce  more 
perfect  and  happy  forms  of  fociety,  than  have  yet  been 
realized  in  the  hiftory  of  mankind. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  point  out,  and  illuftrate, 
a  few  of  the  mod  important  purpofes  to  which  the 
philofophy  of  the  human  mind  is  fubfervient.  It  will 
not,  however,  I  flatter  myfelf,  be  fuppofed  by  any  of 
my  readers,  that  I  mean  to  attempt  a  fyftematical 
work,  on  all,  or  any  of  the  fubjecls  I  have  now  men- 
tioned ;  the  mofh  limited  of  which,  would  furnifh 
matter  for  many  volumes.  What  I  have  aimed  at,  \ ' 
has  been,  to  give,  in  the  firfl  place,  as  diflin£l  and 
complete  an  analyiis  as  I  could,  of  the  principles,  both  ; 
intellectual  and  active,  of  our  nature  ;  and,  in  the  ] 
fecond  place,  to  illuftrate,  as  I  proceed,  the  applica-  f 
tion  of  thefe  general  laws  of  the  human  conftltution, 
to  the  different  claffes  of  phenomena  which  refultfrom 
them.  In  the  feleftion  of  thefe  phenomena,  although 
I  have  fometimes  been  guided  chiefly  by  the  curiofity 
of  the  moment,  or  the  accidental  courfe  of  my  own 
ftudies  ;  yet,  I  have  had  it  in  view,  to  vary,  as  far  as 
poffible,  the  nature  of  my  fpeculations,  in  order  to 
fhow  how  numerous  and  different  the  applications  are, 
of  which  this  philofophy  is  fufceptible.  It  will  not, 
therefore,  I  hope,  be  objected  to  me,  that  I  have  been 
guilty  of  a  blameable  violation  of  unity  in  the  plan  of 
15  my 


62  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY,  &C.        Introd. 

my  work,  till  it  be  confidered  how  far  fuch  a  violation 
was  ufeful  for  accomplifhing  the  purpofes  for  which  I 
write.  One  fpecies  of  unity,  I  am  willing  to  believe, 
an  attentive  reader  will  be  able  to  trace  in  it :  I  mean, 
that  uniformity  of  thought  and  defign,  "  which  "  (as 
Butler  well  remarks,)  "  we  may  always  expeft  to 
"  meet  with  in  the  compofitions  of  the  fame  author,. 
"  when  he  writes  with  fimplicity,  and  in  earneft." 


C   63    ] 
ELEMENTS 

OF    THE 

PHILOSOPHY 

OF    THE 

HUMAN    MIND, 


CHAPTER   riRST. 
Of  the  Powers  of  External  Perception. 

SECTION    I. 

Of  the  Theories  which  have  been  formed  by  Philofophers,  to  ex- 
plain the  Manner  in  -which  the  MiND  perceives  external 
OljeSs. 

AMONG  the  various  phenomena  which  the  hu- 
man mind  prefents  to  our  view,  there  is  none 
more  calculated  to  excite  our  curiofity  and  our  won- 
der, than  the  communication  which  is  carried  on  be- 
tween the  fentient,  thinking,  and  active  principle 
within  us,  and  the  material  objects  with  which  we 
are  furrounded.  How  little  foever  the  bulk  of  man- 
kind 


64  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  I. 

kind  may  be  difpofed  to  attend  to  fuch  inquiries, 
there  is  fcarcely  a  perfon  to  be  found,  who  has  not 
occafionally  turned  his  thoughts  to  that  myflerious 
influence,  which  the  will  poflefles  over  the  members 
of  the  body  ;  and  to  thofe  powers  of  perception, 
which  feem  to  inform  us,  by  a  fort  of  infpiration,  of 
the  various  changes  which  take  place  in  the  external 
univerfe.  Of  thofe  who  receive  the  advantages  of  a 
liberal  education,  there  are  perhaps  few,  who  pafs  the 
period  of  childhood,  without  feeling  their  curiofity 
excited  by  this  incomprehenfible  communication  be- 
tween mind  and  matter.  For  my  own  part,  at  lead, 
I  cannot  recoiled  the  date  of  my  earliefl  fpeculations 
on  the  fubjed. 

It  is  to  the  phenomena  of  perception  alone,  that  I 
am  to  confine  myfelf  in  the  following  effay  ;  and  even 
with  refped  to  thefe,  all  that  I  propofe  is,  to  offer  a 
few  general  remarks  on  fuch  of  the  common  miftakes 
concerning  them,  as  may  be  moft  likely  to  miflead 
us  in  our  future  inquiries.  Such  of  my  readers  as 
wifli  to  confider  them  more  in  detail,  will  find  ample 
fatisfaftion  in  the  writings  of  Dr.  Reid. 

In  confidering  the  phenomena  of  perception,  it  is 
natural  to  fuppofe,  that  the  attention  of  philofophers 
would  be  direfted,  in  the  firft  inflance,  to  the  fenfe 
of  feeing.  The  variety  of  information  and  of  enjoy- 
ment we  receive  by  it ;  the  rapidity  with  which  this 
information  and  enjoyment  are  conveyed  to  us ;  and 
above  all,  the  intercourfe  it  enables  us  to  maintain 
with  the  more  diilant  part  of  the  univerfe,  cannot  fail 
to  give  it,  even  in  the  apprehenfion  of  the  moft  care- 
lefs  obferver,  a  pre-eminence  over  all  our  other  per- 
ceptive 


,Sea.   I.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MnSTD.  6^ 

ceptive  faculties.  Hence  it  is,  that  the  various  theo- 
ries, which  have  been  formed  to  explain  the  opera- 
tions of  our  fenfes,  have  a  more  immediate  reference 
to  that  of  feeing;  and  that  the  greater  part  of  the 
metaphyseal  language,  concerning  perception  in  ge- 
neral, appears  evidently,  from  its  etymology,  to  have 
been  fuggefted  by  the  phenomena  of  vifion.  Even 
when  applied  to  this  fenfe,  indeed,  it  can  at  moft 
amufe  the  fancy,  without  conveying  any  precife  know- 
ledge ;  but,  when  applied  to  the  other  fenfes,  it  is 
altogether  abfurd  and  unintelligible. 

It  would  be  tedious  and  ufelefs,  to  confider  parti- 
cularly, the  different  hypothefes  which  have  been  ad^ 
vanced  upon  this  fubjeft.  To  all  of  them,  I  appre- 
hend, the  two  following  remarks  will  be  found  appli- 
cable :  Firft,  that,  in  the  formation  of  them,  their 
authors  have  been  influenced  by  fome  general  max- 
ims of  philofophifmg,  borrowed  from  phyfics ;  and 
fecondly,  that  they  have  been  influenced  by  an  in- 
difl:in<5t,  but  deep-rooted,  convidion,  of  the  immate- 
riality of  the  foul ;  which  although  not  precife  enough 
to  point  out  to  them  the  abfurdity  of  attempting  to- 
illufl:rate  its  operations  by  the  analogy  of  matter,  was 
yet  fufiiciently  flirong,  to  induce  them  to  keep  the  ab- 
furdity of  their  theories  as  far  as  pofllble  out  of  view, 
by  allufions  to  thofe  phyfical  fafts,  in  which  the  dif- 
tinftive  properties  of  matter  are  the  leafl:  grofsly  and 
palpably  expofed  to  our  obfervation.  To  the  former 
of  thefe  circumflances,  is  to  be  afcribed,  the  general 
principle,  upon  which  all  the  known  theories  of  per- 
ception proceed ;  that,  in  order  to  explain  the  inters 
courfe  between  the  mind  and  diftaiit  objedj,  it  is  ne- 

F  ceifary 


SS  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

ceflary  to  fuppofe  the  exiflence  of  fomething  inter- 
mediate, by  which  its  perceptions  are  produced  ;  to 
the  latter,  the  various  metaphorical  expreflions  of 
idens,  /pedes,  forrns,  Jhadows,  phantafms,  imagesi  ; 
which,  while  they  amufed  the  fancy  with  fome  re- 
mote analogies  to  the  objefts  of  our  fenfes,  did  not 
direftly  revolt  our  reafon,  by  prefenting  to  us  any  of 
the  tangible  qualities  of  body. 

"  It  was  the   doctrine  of  Aristotle,    (fays  Dr. 
"  Reid),  that  as  our  fenfes  cannot  receive  external 
*'  material  objedls  themfelves,  they  receive  their  fpe- 
"  cies ;    that  is,  their  images  or  forms,  without  the 
*'  matter  ;  as  wax  receives  the  form  of  the  feal,  with- 
**  out  any  of  the  matter  of  it.    Thefe  images  or  forms, 
*'  impreffed  upon  the  fenfes,  are  c2X\eA  fejifible /pedes  ; 
*'  and  are  the  objefts  only   of  the  fenfitive  part  of 
*'  the  mind :  but  by  various,  internal  powers,  they 
*'  are  retained,  refined,  and  fpiritualized,  fo  as  to  be- 
"  come  objects  of  memory  and  imagination  j   and, 
"  at  laft,  of  pure  intelledion.     When  they  are  ob- 
*'  jects  of  memory  and  of  imagination,  they  get  the 
"  name  oi  phanta/ns.     When,  by  farther  refinement, 
**  and  being  ftripped  of  their  particularities,  they  be- 
"  come  objects  of  fcience,  they  are  called  intelligible 
**  /pedes  :  fo  that  every  immediate  object,  whether  of 
**  fenfe,  of  memory,  of  imagination,  or  of  reafoning, 
**  muft  be  fome  phantafm,   or  fpecies,  in  the  mind 
«  itfelf. 

*'  The  followers  of  Ariftotle,  efpecially  the  fchooi.. 

*'  men,  made  great  additions  to  this  theory  j  which 

"  the  author  himfelf  mentions  very  briefly,  and  with 

"  an  appearance  of  refer ve.     They  entered  into  large 

1 6  "  difqui- 


Sea.  I.  OP   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^j\ 

"  difquiritions  with  regard  to  the  fenfible  fpecies, 
*<  what  kind  of  things  they  are  ;  how  they  are  fent 
*'  forth  by  the  objeft,  and  enter  by  the  organs  of  the 
*'  fenfes ;  how  they  are  preferved,  and  refined  by 
*'  various  agents,  called  internal  fenfes,  concerning 
"  the  number  and  offices  of  which  they  had  many 
"  controverfies  *." 

The  Platonifts,  too,  although  they  denied  the  great 
dodrine  of  the  PeripateticvS,  that  all  the  objeds  of 
human  underftanding  enter  at  firll  by  the  fenfes  ;, 
and  maintained,  that  there  exifl  eternal  and  immu- 
table ideas,  which  were  prior  to  the  objeds  of  fenfe, 
and  about  which  all  fcience  was  employed  ;  yet  ap- 
pear to  have  agreed  with  them  in  their  notions  con- 
cerning the  mode  in  which  external  objeds  are  per- 
ceived. This,  Dr.  Reid  infers,  partly  from  the  filence 
of  Ariflotle  about  any  difference  between  himfelf  and 
his  mailer  upon  this  point ;  and  partly  from  a  paifage 
in  the  feventh  book  of  Plato's  Republic  ;  in  which  he 
compares  the  procefs  of  the  mind  in  perception,  to 
that  of  a  perfon  in  a  cave,  who  fees  not  external 
objefts  themfelves,  but  only  their  Ihadows  t. 

"  Two  thoufand  years  after  Plato,  (continues  Dr. 
"  Reid,)  Mr.  Locke,  who  ftudied  the  operations  of 
*'  the  human  mind  fo  much,  and  with  fo  great  fuc- 
"  cefs,  reprefents  our  manner  of  perceiving  external 
**  objeds,  by  a  fimilitude  very  much  refembling  that 
"  of  the  cave.  —  "  Methinks,"  fays  he,  "  the  under- 
'*  {landing  is  not  much  unlike  a  clofet,  wholly  (hut 

*  Effays  on  the  Intelleftual  Powers  of  Man,  p.  25. 
t  Ibid.  p.  99. 

F  2  "  from 


68  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  T. 

**  from  light,  with  only  feme  little  opening  left,  to" 
"  let  in  external  vifible  refemblances  or  ideas  of  things 
"  without.  Would  the  pictures  coming  into  fuch  a 
**  dark  room  but  flay  there,  and  lie  fo  orderly  as  to 
"  be  found  upon  occafion,  it  would  very  much  re- 
"  femble  the  underftanding  of  a  man,  in  reference  to 
"  all  objefts  of  fight,  and  the  ideas  of  them  *.'* 

"  Plato's  fubterranean  cave,  and  Mr.  Locke's  dark 

<'  clofet,  may  be  applied  v/ith  eafe  to  all  the  fyftems 

"  of  perceptions  that  have  been  invented  :  for  they 

"  all  fuppofe,  that  we  perceive  not  external  objefts 

"  immediately  ;    and  that  the  immediate  objefts  of 

"  perception,  are  only  certain  fhadows  of  the  external 

"  objects.     Thofe  fhadows,  or  images,  which  we  im- 

"  mediately  perceive,  were  by  the  ancients  called  ^^- 

"  ciesj   fonns,   phantafms.     Since  the  time   of   Des 

"  Cartes,  they  have  commonly  been  called  ideas  t ; 

*'  and  by  Mr.  Hume,  imprcjjions.     But  all    philofo- 

*'  phers,   from  Plato  to  Mr.  Hume,    agree   in   this, 

**  that  we  do   not  perceive  external  objedls   imme- 

**  diately ;  and  that  the  immediate  objeft  of  percep- 

"  tion  mufl  be  fome  image  prefent  to  the  mind."  On 

the  whole,  Dr.  Reid  remarks,  "  that  in   their  fenti- 

"  ments  concerning  perception,  there  appears  an  uni- 

"  formity,  which  rarely  occurs  upon  fubjefts  of  fo 

**  abflrufe  a  nature  t." 

The  very  fhort  and  imperfect  view  we  have  now 
taken,  of  the  common  theories  of  perception,  is  al- 
mofl  fufficient,  without  any  commentary,  to  eflabliOi 

•  Locke  on  Human  Underftanding,  book  ii,  chap.  ii.  ^  17. 
t  See  Note  {B}.  %  Reid,  p.  1 16, 117. 

*Ji  the 


Seft.  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MmD.  69 

the  truth  of  the  two  general  obfervations  formerly- 
made;  for  they  all  evidently  proceed  on  a  iuppofi- 
tion,  fuggefted  by  the  phenomena  of  phyfics,  that 
there  mufl  of  neceflity  exift  fome  medium  of  com- 
munication between  the  objedls  of  perception  and  the 
percipient  mind  ;  and  they  all  indicate  a  fecret  con- 
vidion  in  their  authors,  of  the  eflential  diftindiou  be- 
tween mind  and  matter ;  which,  although  not  ren- 
dered, by  refledion,  fufficiently  precife  and  fatisfac- 
tory,  to  fhew  them  the  abfurdity  of  attempting  to 
explain  the  mode  of  their  communication ;  had  yet 
fuch  a  degree  of  influence  on  their  fpeculations,  as 
to  induce  khem  to  exhibit  their  fuppofed  medium 
under  as  myfterious  and  ambiguous  a  form  as  poffi- 
ble,  in  order  that  it  might  remain  doubtful,  to  which 
of  the  two  predicaments,  of  body  or  mind,  they  meant 
that  it  fhould  be  referred.  By  refining  away  the 
grofler  qualities  of  matter  ;  and  by  allufions  to  fome 
of  the  moft  aerial  and  magical  appearances  it  affumes, 
they  endeavoured,  as  it  were,  to  fpiritualize  the  nature 
of  their  medium  ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  all  their 
language  concerning  it,  implied  fuch  a  reference  to 
matter,  as  was  neceflary  for  furnifhing  a  plaufible 
foundation,  for  applying  to  it  the  received  maxims  of 
natural  philofophy. 

Another  obfervation,  too,  which  was  formerly 
hinted  at,  is  confirmed  by  the  fame  hiftorical  review  j 
that,  in  the  order. of  inquiry,  the  phenomena  of  vi- 
fion  had  firfl  engaged  the  attention  of  philofophers , 
and  had  fuggefted  to  them  the  greater  part  of  their 
language,  with  refpeO;  to  perception  in  general  j  and 
that,  in  confequence  of  this  circumftance,  the  com- 
F  3  nwn 


70  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

men  modes  of  expreflion  on  the  fubjecl,  unphilo- 
fophical  and  fanciful  at  beft,  even  when  applied  to  the 
fenfe  of  feeing,  are,  in  the  cafe  of  all  the  other  fenfes, 
obvioufly  unintelligible  and  felf-contradi6lory.  —  "  As 
"  to  objects  of  fight,*'  fays  Dr.  Reid,  *'  I  underftand 
"  what  is  meant  by  an  image  of  their  figure  in  the 
*'  brain :  but  how  fhall  we  conceive  an  image  of 
*'  their  colour,  where  there  is  abfolute  darknefs? 
"  And,  as  to  all  other  objeds  of  fenfe,  except  figure 
"  and  colour,  I  am  unable  to  conceive  what  is  meant 
*'  by  an  image  of  them.  Let  any  man  fay,  what  he 
*'  means  by  an  image  of  heat  and  cold,  an  image  of 
"  hardnefs  or  foftnefs,  an  image  of  found  or  fmell, 
**  or  tafte.  The  word  image^  when  applied  to  thefe 
"  objects  of  fenfe,  has  abfolutely  no  meaning.'* — '• 
This  palpable  imperfection  in  the  ideal  theory,  has 
plainly  taken  rife  from  the  natural  order  in  which  the 
phenomena  of  perception  prefent  themfelves  to  the 
curiofity. 

The  miflakes,  which  'have  been  fo  long  current  in 
the  world,  about  this  part  of  the  human  conftitution, 
will,  I  hope,  juftify  me  for  profecuting  the  fubjedt  a 
little  farther  ;  in  particular,  for  illuflrating  at  fome 
length,  the  firft  of  the  two  general  remarks  already 
referred  to.  This  fpeculation  I  enter  upon  the  more 
^*e  willingly,   that  it  affords  me  an  opportunity  of  ftating 

fome  important  principles  with  refpeft  to  the  object, 
and  the  limits,  of  philofophical  inquiry  ;  to  which  I 
fhall  frequently  have  occafion  to  refer,  in  the  courfe 
of  the  following  difquifitions. 


Sea,  3.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^% 


SECTION  II. 

Of  certain  natural   Prejudices,   which  feem   to    ha've  given  rife  to- 
the  common  Theories    of  Perception. 

IT  feems  now  to  be  pretty  generally  agreed  among 
philofophers,  that  there  is  no  inftance  in  which 
we  are  able  to  perceive  a  neceffary  connexion  be- 
tween two  fucceffive  events ;  or  to  comprehend  in 
what  manner  the  one  proceeds  from  the  other,  as  its 
caufe.  From  experience  indeed  we  learn,  that  there 
are  many  events,  which  are  conftantly  conjoined,  fo 
that  the  one  invariably  follows  the  other :  biit  it  is 
poffible,  for  any  thing  we  know  to  the  contrary,  that 
this  connexion,  though  a  conftant  one,  as  far  as  our 
obfervation  has  reached,  may  not  be  a  neceffary  con- 
nexion ;  nay,  it  is  poffible,  that  there  may  be  no  ne- 
ceffary connexions  among  any  of  the  phenomena  we 
fee  :  and,  if  there  are  any  fuch  connexions  exifting, 
we  may  reft  affured  that  we  fiiall  never  be  able  to 
difcover  them  *. 

I  ffiall  endeavour  to  fhew,  in  another  part  of  this 
work,  that  the  doftrine  I  have  now^  ftated  does  not 
lead  to  thefe  fceptical  conclufions,  concerning  the  ex- 
iftence  of  a  Firft  Caufe,  which  an  author  of  great 
ingenuity  has  attempted  to  deduce  from  it.  —  At  pre- 
fent,  it  is  fufficient  for  my  purpofe  to  remark,  that 
the  word  caufe  is  ufed,  both  by  philofophers  and  the 

.•  ■         '  .  *  See  Note  [C]. 

/ . .  F  4  vulgai*. 


72  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  I. 

vulgar,  in  two  fenfes,  which  are  widely  different.  — 
When  it  is  faid  that  every  change  in  nature  indicates 
the  operation  of  a  caufe,  the  word  caufe  expreffes 
fomething  which  is  fuppofed  to  be  neceffarily  con- 
ne£led  with  the  change ;  and  without  which  it  could 
not  have  happened.  This  may  be  called  the  meta- 
•phyfical  meaning  of  the  word  ;  and  fuch  caufes  may 
be  called  metaphyfical  or  efficient  caufes. — In  natural 
philofophy,  however,  when  we  fpeak  of  one  thing 
being  the  caufe  of  another,  all  that  we  mean  is,  that 
the  two  are  conftantly  conjoined  ;  fo  that  when  w^e 
fee  the  one,  we  may  expedl  the  other.  Thefe  con- 
jund:ions  we  learn  from  experience  alone  ;  and  with- 
out an  acquaintance  with  them,  we  could  not  accom- 
modate our  conduct  to  the  eftabliihed  courfe  of  na- 
ture.— The  caufes  which  are  the  obje£ls  of  our  in- 
vefligation  in  natural  philofophy,  may,  for  the  fake 
of  diflinction,  be  called  pbyfical  caufes. 

I  am  very  ready  to  acknowledge,  that  this  doctrine, 
concerning  the  obje6l  of  natural  philofophy,  is  not 
altogether  agreeable  to  popular  prejudices.  When  a 
man,  unaccuftomed  to  metaphyfical  fpeculations,  is 
told,  for  the  firft  time,  that  the  fcience  of  phyfics 
gives  us  no  information  concerning  the  efficient  caufes 
of  the  phenomena  about  which  it  is  employed,  he 
feels  fome  degree  of  furprize  and  mortification.  The 
natural  bias  of  the  mind  is  furely  to  conceive  phyfi- 
cal  events  as  fomehow  linked  together  ;  and  material 
fubflances,  as  poffeffed  of  certain  powers  and  virtues, 
which  fit  them  to  produce  particular  effefts.  That 
we  have  no  reafon  to  believe  this  to  be  the  cafe,  has 
been  fhewn  in  a  very    particuliar   manner   by   Mr. 

Hume, 


Sea.  J.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  yt 

Hume,  and  by  other  writers ;  and  muft,  indeed,  ap- 
pear evident  to  every  perfon,  on  a  moment's  reflec- 
tion. It  is  a  curious  (jueftion,  what  gives  rife  to  the 
prejudice  ? 

In  ftating  the  argument  for  the  exiftence  of  the 
Deity,  feveral  modern  philofophers  have  been  at 
pains  to  illuflrate  that  law  of  our  nature,  which  leads 
us  to  refer  every  change  we  perceive  in  the  univerfe, 
to  the  operation  of  an  efficient  caufe  *. — This  refer- 
ence is  not  the  refult  of  reafoning,  but  neceflarily 
accompanies  the  perception,  fo  as  to  render  it  impof- 
fible  for  us  to  fee  the  change,  without  feeling  a  con- 
viction of  the  operation  of  fome  caufe  by  which  it 
was  produced ;  much  in  the  fame  manner  in  which 
we  find  it  to  be  impoffible  to  conceive  a  fenfation, 
without  being  impreffed  with  a  belief  of  the  exiftence 
of  a  fentient  being.  Hence,  I  apprehend,  it  is  that 
when  we  fee  two  events  conftantly  conjoined,  we  are 
led  to  alTociate  the  idea  of  caufation  or  efficiency, 
with  the  former,  and  to  refer  to  it  that  power  or 
energy  by  which  the  change  was  produced  ;  in  con- 
fequence  of  which  affiaciation,  we  come  to  confider 
philofophy  as  the  knowledge  of  efficient  caufes  j  and 
lofe  fight  of  the  operation  of  mind,  in  producing  the 
phenomena  of  nature.  —  It  is  by  an  alfociation  fome- 
what  fimilar,  that  we  conned  our  fenfations  of  colour, 
with  the  primary  qualities  of  body.  A  moment's  re- 
flection muft  fatisfy  any  one,  that  the  fenfation  of  co- 
lour can  only  refide  in  a  mind ;  and  yet  our  natural 
bias  is  furely  to  conned  colour  with  extenfion  and 

*  See,  in  particular.  Dr.  Reid's  Effays  on  the  Intclle6tual 
Powers  of  Man. 

figure, 


74  ELEMENTS   OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  t. 

figure,  and  to  conceive,  zubite^  blue,  and  yellow,  as 
fomethlng  fpread  over  the  furfaces  of  bodies.  In  the 
feme  way,  we  are  led  to  aflbciate  with  inanimate  mat- 
ter, the  ideas  of  power,  force,  energy,  and  caufation ; 
which  are  all  attributes  of  mind,  and  can  exift  in  a 
mind  only. 

The  bias  of  our  nature  is  ftrengthened  by  another 
affociation.  Our  language,  with  refpeft  to  caufe  and 
effect,  is  borrowed  by  analogy  from  material  objedls. 
Some  of  thefe  we  fee  fcattered  about  us,  without  any 
connedion  between  them ;  fo  that  one  of  them  may 
be  removed  from  its  place,  without  difturbing  the  reft. 
We  can,  however,  by  means  of  fome  material  vincu- 
lum, connect  two  or  more  objects  together ;  fo  that 
whenever  the  one  is  moved,  the  others  fhall  follow. 
In  like  manner,  we  fee  fome  events,  which  occafionally 
follow  one  another,  and  which  are  occafionally  dif- 
joined  ;  we  fee  others,  where  the  fucceffion  is  conftant 
and  invariable.  The  former  we  conceive  to  be  ana- 
logous to  objects  which  are  loofe,  and  unconnefted 
with  each  other,  and  whofe  contiguity  in  place,  is  ow- 
ing merely  to  accidental  pofition  ;  the  others  to  ob- 
jects which  are  tied  together  by  a  material  vinculum. 
Hence  we  transfer  to  fuch  events,  the  fame  language 
which  we  apply  to  connected  objects.  We  fpeak  of 
a  connexion  between  two  events,  and  of  a  chain  of 
caufes  and  effefts  *. 

That  this  language  is  merely  analogical,  and  that 
we  know  nothing  of  phyfical  events,  but  the  laws 
which  regulate  their  fucceffion,  muft,  I  think,  appear 

*  See  Note  [D], 

very 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE   HUMAN    MIND.  y^ 

very  obvious  to  every  perfon  who  takes  the  trouble  to 
refled:  on  the  fubjett :  and  yet  It  is  certain,  that  it  has 
mifled  the  greater  part  of  philofophers  ;  and  has  had  a 
furprifing  influence  on  the  fyftems,  which  they  have 
formed  in  very  different  departments  of  fcience. 

A  few  remarks,  on  fome  of  the  miflaken  conclu- 
fions,  to  which  the  vulgar  notions  concerning  the  con- 
nexions among  phyfical  events  have  given  rife,  in  na- 
tural philofophy,  will  illuftrate  clearly  the  origin  of 
the  common  theories  of  perception ;  and  will,  at 
the  fame  time,  fatisfy  the  reader,  with  refpeft  to  the 
train  of  thought,  which  fuggefted  the  foregoing  obfer- 
vations. 

The  maxim,  that  nothing  can  aft  but  where  it  is 
and  when  it  is,  has  always  been  admitted,  with  re- 
fpedt  to  metaphyseal  or  efficient  caufes.  "  What- 
*'  ever  objefts,"  fays  Mr.  Hume,  "  are  confidered  as 
"  caufes  or  effedts,  are  contiguous  ;  and  nothing  can 
*'  operate  in  a  time  or  place,  which  is  ever  fo  little 
"  removed  from  thofe  of  its  exiftence.'*  "  We  may 
*'  therefore  (he  adds)  confider  the  relation  of  conti- 
^*  guity  as  eifential  to  that  of  caufation.'* — But  al- 
though this  maxim  fhould  be  admitted,  with  refpeft: 
to  caufes  which  are  efficient,  and  which,  as  fuch,  are 
neceffarily  connefted  with  their  effi^ds,  there  is  furely 
no  good  reafon  for  extending  it  to  phyfical  caufes,  of 
which  we  know  nothing,  but  that  they  are  the  con- 
ilant  forerunners  and  figns  of  certain  natural  events. 
It  may,  indeed,  be  improper,  according  to  this  doc- 
trine, to  retain  the  expreffions,  caufe  and  effecl,  in  na- 
tural philofophy  ;  but,  as  long  as  the  prefent  language 
»pon  the  fubject  continues  in  ufe,  the  propriety  of  its 

appli- 


76  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  I. 

application,  in  any  particular  inflance,  does  not  de- 
pend on  the  contiguity  of  the  two  events  in  place  or 
time,  but  folely  on  this  queftion,  whether  the  one 
event  be  the  conftant  and  invariable  forerunner  of  the 
other,  fo  that  it  may  be  confidered  as  its  infallible 
fign  ? — Notwithftanding,  however,  the  evidence  of 
this  conclufion,  philofophers  have  in  general  pro- 
ceeded upon  a  contrary  fuppofition ;  and  have  difco- 
vered  an  unwillingnefs,  even  in  phyfics,  to  call  one 
event  the  caufe  of  another,  if  the  fmalleft  interval  of 
fpace  or  time  exifted  between  them.  In  the  cafe  of 
motion,  communicated  by  impulfe,  they  have  no  fcru- 
ple  to  call  the  impulfe  the  caufe  of  the  motion ;  but 
they  will  not  admit  that  one  body  can  be  the  caufe  of 
motion  in  another,  placed  at  a  diflance  from  it,  un- 
lefs  a  connexion  is  carried  on  between  them,  by  means 
of  fome  intervening  medium. 

It  is  unneceffary  for  me,  after  what  has  already  been 
faid,  to  employ  any  arguments  to  prove,  that  the  com- 
munication of  motion  by  impulfe,  is  as  unaccountable 
as  any  other  phenomenon  in  nature.  Thofe  philo- 
fophers who  have  attended  at  all  to  the  fubjed,  even 
they  who  have  been  the  lead  fceptical  with  refpecl  to 
caufe  and  effed,  and  who  have  admitted  a  necelfary 
connexion  among  phyfical  events,  have  been  forced 
to  acknowledge,  that  they  could  not  difcover  any 
necelfary  connexion  between  impulfe  and  motion. 
Hence,  fome  of  them  have  been  led  to  conclude, 
that  the  impulfe  only  roufes  the  adlivity  of  the  body, 
and  that  the  fubfequent  motion  is  the  effed  of  this 
activity,  conftantly  exerted.  "  Motion,"  fays  one 
writer,  "  is  adion  j  and  a  continued  motion  implies  a 

"  conti- 


5g^_  2.  OT"   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  'J'J 

"  continued  adion."  "  The  impulfe  is  only  the  caufe 
*'  of  the  beginning  of  the  motion  :  its  continuance  mufl 
**  be  the  eftecl  of  fome  other  caufe,  which  continues 
*'  to  a6;  as  long  as  the  body  continues  to  move."— 
The  attempt  which  another  writer  of  great  learning 
"has  made,  to  revive  the  ancient  theory  of  mind,  has 
arifen  from  a  fmiilar  view  of  the  fubje£t  before  us. 
He  could  difcover  no  neceflary  connexion  betweai  im- 
pulfe and  motion  ;  and  concluded,  that  the  impulfe 
was  only  the  occafion  of  the  motion,  the  beginning 
and  continuance  of  which  he  afcribed  to  the  conti- 
nued agency  of  the  mind  with  which  the  body  is 
animated. 

Although,  however,  it  be  obvious,  on  a  moment's 
confideration,  that  we  are  as  ignorant  of  the  con- 
nexion between  impulfe  and  motion,  as  of  the  con- 
nexion between  fire  and  any  of  the  eifefts  we  fee  it 
produce,  philofophers,  in  every  age,  feem  to  have  con- 
fidered  the  production  of  motion  by  impulfe,  as  al- 
moft  the  only  phyfical  fa6:  which  flood  in  need  of  no 
explanation.  When  we  fee  one  body  attrad  another 
at  a  diflance,  our  curioiity  is  roufed,  and  we  inquire 
how  the  connexion  is  carried  on  between  them.  But 
when  we  fee  a  body  begin  to  move  in  confequence  of 
an  impulfe  which  another  has  given  it,  we  inquire  no 
farther :  on  the  contrary,  we  think  a  fact  fuflicientl/ 
accounted  for,  if  it  can  be  fhewn  to  be  a  cafe  of  im- 
pulfe. This  diflindion,  between  motion  produced 
by  impulfe,  and  the  other  phenomena  of  nature,  we 
are  led,  in  a  great  meafure,  to  make,  by  confound- 
ing together  efficient  and  phyfical  caufes  j  and  by  ap- 
.plying  to  the  latter,  maxims,  which  have  properly  a  re- 
ference 


78  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  I. 

ference  only  to  the  former.  —  Another  circumflance, 
likewife,  has  probably  confiderable  influence  :  that, 
as  it  is  by  means  of  impulfe  alone,  that  we  ourfelves 
have  a  power  of  moving  external  objeds  ;  this  fadt  is 
more  familiar  to  us  from  our  infancy  than  any  other  ; 
and  ftrikes  us  as  a  fa6l  which  is  neceflary,  and  which 
could  not  have  happened  otherwife.  Some  writers 
have  even  gone  fo  far  as  to  pretend  that,  although  the 
experiment  had  never  been  made,  the  communication 
of  motion  by  impulfe,  might  have  been  predicted  by 
reafoning  a  priori  *. 

From  the  following  paflage,  in  one  of  Sir  Ifaac 
Newton's  letters  to  Dr.  Bentley,  it  appears,  that  he 
fuppofed  the  communication  of  motion  by  impulfe,  to 
be  a  phenomenon  much  more  explicable,  than  that  a 
connexion  fliould  fubfift  between  two  bodies  placed  at 
a  diftance  from  each  other,  without  any  intervening 
medium.  *'  It  is  inconceivable,"  fays  he,  "  thatin- 
^'  animate  brute  matter  fhould,  without  the  mediation 
of  fomething  elfe  which  is  not  material,  operate 
upon,  and  affeft  other  matter,  without  mutual  con- 
tact ;  as  it  muff  do,  if  gravitation,  in  the  fenfe  of 
Epicurus,  be  eifential  and  inherent  in  it.  And  this 
is  one  reafon  why  I  defired  that  you  would  not 
afcribe  innate  gravity  to  me.  That  gravity  fliould 
'•  be  innate,  inherent,  and  eifential  to  matter,  fo  that 
one  body  may  aft  on  another,  through  a  vacuum, 
without  the  mediation  of  any  thing  elfe,  by  and 
through  which  their  action  and  force  may  be  con- 

*  See  an  Anfwer  to  Lord  Kairaes's  Effay  on  Motion  ;  by  John 
Stewart,  M.  D. 

"  veyed 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  7^ 

"  veyed  from  one  to  another,  is  to  me  fo  great  an 
"  abfurdity,  that  I  believe  no  man  who  has,  in  phi- 
*'  lofophical  matters,  a  competent  faculty  of  thinking, 
*'  can  ever  fall  into  it." 

With  this  pafTage  I  fo  far  agree,  as  to  allow  that  it 
is  impoffible  to  conceive,  in  what  manner  one  body 
adts  on  another  at  a  diftance,  through  a  vacuum. 
But  I  cannot  admit  that  it  removes  the  difficulty 
to  fuppofe,  that  the  two  bodies  are  in  aftual  contad. 
That  one  body  may  be  the  efficient  caufe  of  the  mo- 
tion of  another  body  placed  at  a  diftance  from  it,  I 
do  by  no  means  aflert ;  but  only,  that  we  have  as 
good  reafon  to  believe  that  this  may  be  poffible,  as  to 
believe  that  any  one  natural  event  is  the  efficient  caufe 
of  another. 

I  have  been  led  into  this  very  long  difqulfition, 
concerning  efficient  and  phyfical  caufes,  in  order  to 
point  out  the  origin  of  the  common  theories  of  per- 
ception ;  all  of  which  appear  to  me,  to  have  taken 
rife  from  the  fame  prejudice,  which  I  have  already 
remarked  to  have  had  fo  extenfive  an  influence  upon 
the  fpeculations  of  natural  philofophers. 
'  That,  in  the  cafe  of  the  perception  of  diftant  ob- 
jects, we  are  naturally  inclined  to  fufpe£t,  either 
fomething  to  be  emitted  from  the  objeft  to  the  organ 
of  fenfe,  or  fome  medium  to  intervene  between  the 
object  and  organ,  by  means  of  which  the  former 
may  communicate  an  impulfe  to  the  latter ;  appears 
from  the  common  modes  of  expreffion  on  the  fubjeft, 
which  are  to  be  found  in  all  languages.  In  our  own, 
for  example,  we  frequently  hear  the  vulgar  fpeak, 
of  light  ftriking  the  eye ,  not  in  confequence  of  any 

philofo- 


80  ELEMENTS    OF    TltE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  1. 

philofophfcal  theory  they  have  been  taught,  but  of 
their  own  crude  and  undirected  fpeculations.  Per- 
haps there  are  few  men  among  thofe  who  have  at- 
tended at  all  to  the  hiftory  of  their  own  thoughts, 
who  will  not  recollect  the  influence  of  thefe  ideas, 
at  a  period  of  life  long  prior  to  the  date  of  their  phi- 
lofophical  fludies.  Nothing,  indeed,  can  be  con- 
ceived more  fimple  and  natural  than  their  origin. 
When  an  object  is  placed  in  a  certain  fituation  with 
refped  to  a  particular  organ  of  the  body,  a  perception 
arifes  in  the  mind :  when  the  object  is  removed,  the 
perception  ceafes.  *  Hence  we  are  led  to  apprehend 
fome  connexion  between  the  object  and  the  percep- 
tion ;  and  as  we  are  accuftomed  to  believe,  that 
matter  produces  its  effedts  by  impulfe,  we  conclude 
that  there  mud  be  fome  material  medium  intervening 
between  the  objeO:  and  organ,  by  means  of  which  the 
impulfe  is  communicated  from  the  one  to  the  other. 
— That  this  is  really  the  cafe,  I  do  not  mean  to  dif- 
pute.  I  think,  however,  it  is  evident,  that  the  ex- 
iftence  of  fuch  a  medium  does  not  in  any  cafe  appear 
a  priori ;  and  yet  the  natural  prejudices  of  men  have 
given  rife  to  an  univerfal  belief  of  it,  long  before  they 
were  able  to  produce  any  good  arguments  in  fupport 
of  their  opinion. 

*  Turn  porro  varios  rerum  fentimus  odores. 

Nee  tamen  ad  nareis  venienteis  ccrnlmus  uiiquara : 
Nee  calidos  seflus  tuimur,  nee  frigora  quimus 
Ufurpare  oculis,  nee  voces  cernere  fuemus  ; 
QuK  tamen  omnia  corporea  conftare  nccefTe  'ft 
Natura  ;  quoniam  fenfus  impelleie  pofTunt. 

LuCRET.  lib.  i.  p.  299. 

Nor 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  8  I 

Nor  Is  it  only  to  account  for  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  object  and  the  organ  of  fenfe,  that  philofo- 
phers  have    had  recourfe   to  the  theory  of  impulfe. 
They  have  imagined  that  the  impreffion  on  the  organ 
of  fenfe  is  communicated  to  the  mind,  in  a  fmiilar 
manner.     As  one  body  produces  a  change  in  the  flate 
of  another  by  impulfe,  fo  it  has  been  fuppofed,  that 
the  external  obje6t  produces  perception,  (which  is  a 
change  in  the  Hate  of  the  mind,)  firft,  by  fome  material 
impreffion  made  on  the  organ  of  fenfe ;    and,  fecondly, 
by  fome  material  impreffion  communicated  from  the 
organ  to  the  mind  along  the  nerves  and  brain.     Thefe 
fuppofitions,  indeed,  as  I  had  occafion  already  to  hint, 
were,    in  the  ancient  theories  of  perception,    rather 
implied  than  expreffed  ;  but  by  modern  philofophers, 
they  have  been  flated  in  the  form  of  explicit  propo- 
fitions.     "  As  to  the  manner,"  fays  Mr.  Locke,  "  in 
"  which  bodies  produce  ideas  in  us  j  it  is  manifeftly 
"  by  impulfe,  the  only  way  which  we   can  conceive 
"  bodies  operate  in  *."     And  Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  al- 
though he  does  not  fpeak  of  an  impulfe  made  on  the 
mind,    plainly   proceeded  on   the   principle  that,   as 
matter  can  only  move  matter  by  impulfe,  fo  no  con- 
nexion could  be  carried  on  between  matter  and  mind, 
unlefs  the  mind  were  prefent  (as  he  expreifes  it)  to 
the  matter  from  which  the  lafl  impreffion  is  commu- 
nicated.     "  Is  not'*    (fays  he)    "  the  fenforium  of 
"  animals,  the  place  where  the  fentient  fubflance  is 
*'  prefent ;  and  to  which  the  fenfible  fpecies  of  things 
"  are  brought,  through  the  nerves  and  brain,    that 
"  there  they  may  be  perceived  by  the  mind  prefent 

*  EfTay  on  Human  Underftanding,  bookii.  chap.  viii.   jj  li. 

G  *'  in 


82  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

"  in  that  place  ?"  Dr.  Clarke  has  expreffed  the  fame 
idea  ftill   more  confidently,  in  the  following  paffage 
of  one  of  his  letters  to  Leibnitz.     "  Without  being 
"  prefent  *  to  the  images  of  the  things  perceived,  the 
«  fouPcould  not   poffibly  perceive  them.     A  living 
"  fubftance  can  only  there  perceive,  where  it  is  pre- 
"  fent.     Nothing  can  any  more  act,  or  be  acted  upon, 
"  where  it  is  not  prefent,  than  it  can  when  it  is  not.'" 
"  How  body  a6:s  upon  mind,  or  mind  upon  body," 
(fays    Dr.  Porterfield  t,)  "   I  know  not  ;  but  this  I 
"  am  very  certain  of,  that  nothing   can  act,    or  be 
"  a£ted   upon,  where  it  is  not;    and  therefore   our 
"  mind  can    never  perceive    any  thing  but  its  own 
"  proper  modifications,  and  the  various  flates  of  the 
•"  fenforium,  to  which  it  is  prefent :  fo  that  it  is  not 
"  the    external    fun    and  moon,    which  are  in  the 
*'  heavens,  which  our  mind  perceives,  but  only  their 

*  This  phrafe  of  *'  the  foul  le'ing  prefmt  to  the  images  of  ex- 
ternal objefts,"  has  been  ufed  by  many  philofophers,  fince  the 
time  of  Des  Cartes  ;  evidently  from  a  defire  to  avoid  the  abfurdity 
of  fuppofing,  that  images  of  extenfion  and  figure  can  exift  in  an 
unextended  mind, 

«  Ouffiris,"  (fays  Des  Cartes  himfelf,  in  replying  to  the  ob- 
jeftions  of  one  of  his  antagonifts,)  «'  quomodo  exiftimem  in  me 
'<'  fubjetlo  inextenfo  recipi  poffe  fpeciem,  ideamve  corporis  quod 
«  extenfum  eft.  Refpondeo  nuUam  fpeciem  corpoream  in  mente 
"  recipi,  fed  puram  intelleaionem  ^am  rei  corporete  quam  mcor- 
"  pores  fieri  abfque  ulla  fpecie  corporea  ;  ad  imaginationem  vero, 
«  quae  non  nifi  de  rebus  corporeis  effe  poteft,  opus  quidem  effe 
"  fpecie  qu£c  fit  verum  corpus,  et  ad  quatn  mens  fe  applket,  fed  non 

«  quse  in  mente  recipiatur." It  appears,  therefore,   that  this 

philofopher   fuppofed  his  images,  or  ideas,  to   exift  in  the  brain, 
and  not  in  the  mind.     Mr.  Locke's  expreffions  fometiraes  imply 
the  one  fuppofition,  and  fometiraes  the  other. 
f  See  his  Treatife  on  the  Eye,  vol.  ii.  p-  356. 

"  image 


Seft.  2,  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  8^ 

"  image  or  reprefentation,  imprefled  upon  the  fen- 
"  forium.  How  the  foul  of  a  feeing  man  fees  thefe 
*'  images,  or  how  it  receives  thofe  ideas,  from  fuch 
"  agitations  in  the  fenforium,  I  know  not ;  but  I  am 
"  fure  it  can  never  perceive  the  external  bodies  them- 
"  felves,  to  which  it  is  not  prefent." 

*  The  fame  train  of  thinking,  which  had  led  thefe 
philofophers  to  fuppofe,  that  external  obje£ls  are 
perceived  by  means  of  fpecies  proceeding  from  the 
objeft  to  the  mind,  or  by  means  of  fome  material 
impreflion  made  on  the  mind  by  the  brain,  has  fug- 
gefted  to  a  late  writer  a  very  different  theory  :  that 
the  mind,  when  it  perceives  an  external  object,  quits 
the  body,  and  is  prefent  to  the  objeft  of  perception. 
"  The  mind,"  (fays  the  learned  author  of  Antient 
Metaphyfics,)  "  is  not  where  the  body  is,  when  it 
"  perceives  what  is  diftant  from  the  body,  either  in 
"  time  or  place,  becaufe  nothing  can  a£t,  but  when, 
"  and  where,  it  is.  Now,  the  mind  ads  when  it 
*'  perceives.  The  mind,  therefore,  of  every  animal 
"  who  has  memory  or  imagination,  ads,  and  by  con- 
"  fequence  exifls,  when  and  where  the  body  is  not ; 

*  <*  The  flighteft  philofophy"  (fays  Mr.  Hume)  '*  teaches  us, 
*''  that  nothing  can  ever  be  prefent  to  the  mind,  but  an  image,  or 
"  perception  ;  and  that  the  fenfes  are  only  the  inlets,  through 
"  which  thefe  images  are  conveyed  ;  without  being  able  to  pro- 
*'  duce  any  immediate  intercourfe  between  the  mind  and  the 
"  obje£l.  The  table,  which  we  fee,  feems  to  diminifh,  as  we  re- 
*■'  move  farther  from  it :  but  the  real  table,  which  exifts  indepen- 
"  dent  of  us,  fuffers  no  alteration  :  it  was,  therefore,  nothing  but 
•'  its  image  which  was  prefent  to  the  mind.  Thefe  "  (he  adds) 
"  are  the  obvious  dictates  of  reaion." 

EsiSAY  on  the  Academical  er  Sceptical  Philosophy. 

G  2  "  for 


84  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

"  for  it  perceives  objefts  diflant  from  the  body  both 
'*  in  time  and  place  *."  Indeed,  if  we  take  for 
granted,  that  in  perception  the  mind  afts  upon  the 
objed,  or  the  objed  upon  the  mind,  and,  at  the  fame 
time,  admit  the  truth  of  the  maxim,  that  *'  nothing 
*'  can  act  but  where  it  is,"  we  mufl,  of  neceflity, 
conclude,  either  that  objeds  are  perceived  in  a  way 
fnnilar  to  what  is  fuppofed  in  the  ideal  theory,  or 
that,  in  every  ad  of  perception,  the  foul  quits  the 
body,  and  is  prefent  to  the  objed  perceived.  And 
accordingly,  this  alternative  is  exprefsly  ftated  by 
Malebranche ;  who  differs,  however,  from  the  writer 
laft  quoted,  in  the  choice  which  he  makes  of  his  hy- 
pothecs ;  and  even  reds  his  proof  of  its  truth  on  the 
improbability  of  the  other  opinion.  "  I  fuppofe,** 
fays  he,  "  that  every  one  will  grant,  that  we  perceive 
"  not  external  objeds  immediately,  and  of  them- 
"  felves.  We  fee  the  fun,  the  ftars,  and  an  infinity 
"  of  objeds  without  us ;  and  it  is  not  at  all  likely 
^'  that,  upon  fuch  occafions,  the  foul  fallies  out  of  the 
"  body,  in  order  to  be  prefent  to  the  objects  per- 
"  ceived.  She  fees  them  not  therefore  by  themfelves  ; 
**  and  the  immediate  objed  of  the  mind  is  not  the 
"  thing  perceived,  but  fomething  which  is  intimately 
"  united  to  the  foul ;  and  it  is  that  which  I  call  an 
*'  idea :  fo  that  by  the  word  idea,  I  underfhand  no- 
*'  thing  elfe  here  but  that  which  is  nearefl  to  the 

"  mind  when  we  perceive  any  obje£t. It  ought  to 

*'  be  carefully  obferved,  that,  in  order  to  the  mind's 
"  perceiving  any  objed,  it  is  abfolutely  neceffary  that 
"  the  idea  of  that  objed  be  adlually  prefent  to  it.    Of 

*  Ant.  Met.  vol.  ii.  p.  306. 

"  this 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  85 

"  this  it  is  not  poffible  to  doubt.  The  things  which 
"  the  foul  perceives,  are  of  two  kinds.  They  are 
"  either  in  the  foul,  or  they  are  without  the  foul. 
"  Thofe  that  are  in  the  foul,  are  its  own  thoughts ; 
"  that  is  to  fay,  all  its  different  modifications.  The 
"  foul  has  no  need  of  ideas  for  perceiving  thefe  things. 
"  But  with  regard  to  things  without  the  foul,  we  can- 
"  not  perceive  them  but  by  means  of  ideas." 

To  thefe  quotations,  I  fhall  add  another,  which 
contains  the  opinion  of  BufFon  upon  the  fubje6l.  As 
I  do  not  underftand  it  fo  completely,  as  to  be  able  to 
tranflate  it  in  a  manner  intelligible  to  myfelf,  I  fliall 
tranfcribe  it  in  the  words  of  the  author. 

"  L'ame  s*unlt  intimement  a  tel  objet  qu*il  lui  plait, 
"  la  diftance,  la  grandeur,  la  figure,  rien  ne  pent  nuire 
"  a  cette  union  lorfque  Tame  la  veut :  elle  fe  fait  et  fe 
"  fait  et  un  inftant  ....  la  volonte  n'eft  elle  done  cm^ 
"  qu'un  mouvement  corporel,  et  la  contemplation  un 
"  fimple  attouchement  ?  Comment  cet  attouchement 
"  pourroit-il  fe  faire  fur  un  objet  eloigne,  fur  un  fujet 
"  abftrait  ?  Comment  pourroit-il  s'operer  en  un  inftant 
"  indivifible?  A-t-on  jamais  congu  du  mouvement, 
"  fans  qu'il  y  eut  de  I'efpace  et  du  tems  ?  La  volonte, 
"  fi  c*eft  un  mouvement,  n'eft  done  pas  un  mouve- 
"  ment  materiel,  et  fi  Tunion  de  l'ame  a  fon  objet  eft 
"  un  attouchement,  un  contad,  cet  attouchement  ne 
"  fe  fait-il  pas  au  loin  ?  ce  contad  n'eft  il  pas  une 
"  penetration?'* 

All  thefe  theories  appear  to  me  to  have  taken  their 
rife,  fir  ft,  from  an  inattention  to  the  proper  objed  of 
philofophy,  and  an  application  of  the  fame  general 
maxims  to  phyfical  and  to  efficient  caufes ;  and,  fe- 

G  3  condly, 


86  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  I. 

condly,  from  an  apprchenfion,  that  we  underftand  the 
connexion  between  impulfe  and  motion,  better  than 
any  other  phyfical  fad.  From  the  detail  which  I  have 
given,  it  appears  how  extenfive  an  influence  this  pre- 
judice has  had  on  the  inquiries  both  of  natural  philo- 
fophers  and  of  metaphyficians. 

In  the  foregoing  reafonings,  I  have  taken  for  granted, 
that  motion  may  be  produced  by  impulfe  ;  and  have 
contented  myfelf  with  aflferting,  that  this  fact  is  not 
more  explicable,  than  the  motions  which  the  Newton- 
ians refer  to  gravitation  ;  or  than  the  intercourfe  which 
is  carried  on  between  the  mind  and  external  objefts  in 
the  cafe  of  perception.  The  truth,  however,  is,  that 
fome  of  the  ablefl;  philofophers  in  Europe  are  now 
fatisfied,  not  only  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  motion 
being  in  any  cafe  produced  by  the  aftual  contaQ:  of 
two  bodies ;  but  that  very  ftrong  proofs  may  be 
given,  of  the  abfolute  impoifibility  of  fuch  a  fuppofi- 
tion :  and  hence  they  have  been  led  to  conclude,  that 
all  the  effeds  which  are  commonly  referred  to  impulfe, 
arife  from  a  power  of  repulfion,  extending  to  a  fmall 
and  imperceptible  diftance  round  every  element  of 
matter.  If  this  doftrine  fliall  be  confirmed  by  future 
fpeculations  in  phyfics,  it  muft  appear  to  be  a  curious 
circumftance  in  the  hiftory  of  fcience,  that  philofophers 
have  been  fo  long  occupied  in  attempting  to  trace  all 
the  phenomena  of  matter,  and  even  fome  of  the  phe- 
nomena of  mind,  to  a  general  fa6l,  which,  upon  an 
accurate  examination,  is  found  to  have  no  exiftence. 

1  do  not  make  this  obfervation  with  a  View  to 

depreciate  the  labours  of  thefe  philofophers ;  for,  al- 
though the  fyftem  of  Bofcovich  were  completely  efta- 

*  I  o  blilhed, 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  87 

bliflied,  It  would  not  diminifh,  in  the  fmalleft  degree, 
the  value  of  thofe  phyfical  inquiries,  which  have  pro- 
ceeded on  the  common  hypothefis,  with  refpecl  to 
impulfe.  The  laws  which  regulate  the  communication 
of  motion,  in  the  cafe  of  apparent  conta£l,  are  the 
moil  general  fads  we  obferve  among  the  terreftrial 
phenomena  ;  and  they  are,  of  all  phyfical  events,  thofe 
which  are  the  mofl  familiar  to  us,  from  our  earliell  in- 
fancy. It  was  therefore  not  only  natural  but  proper, 
that  philofophers  fhould  begin  their  phyfical  inquiries, 
with  attempting  to  refer  to  thefe,  (which  are  the  mofl 
general  laws  of  nature,  expofed  to  the  examination  of 
our  fenfes,)  the  particular  appearances  they  wilhed  to 
explain.  And  if  ever  the  theory  of  Bofcovich  fhould 
be  completely  eftabliflied,  it  will  have  no  other  effect, 
than  to  refolve  thefe  laws  into  fome  principle  ftili  more 
general,  without  affedting  the  folidity  of  the  common 
doctrine,  fo  far  as  it  goes. 


SECTION    III. 

Of  Dr.  Reid\  Speculations  on  the  SuhjeB  of  Perception. 

IT  was  chiefly  in  confequence  of  the  fceptical  con- 
clufions  which  Bifhop  Berkeley  and  Mr.  Hume 
had  deduced  from  the  ancient  theories  of  per- 
ception, that  Dr.  Reid  was  led  to  call  them  in  quef- 
tion  ;  and  he  appears  to  me  to  have  fhewn,  in  the 
mofl  fatisfactory  manner,  not  only  that  they  are  per- 
fe£lly  hypothetical,  but  that  the  fuppofitions  they  in- 
volve, are  abfurd  and  impolfible.  His  reafonings,  on 
this  part  of  our  conftitution,  undoubtedly  form  the 

G  4  niofl 


88  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

moft  important  acceffion  which  the  philofophy  of  the 
human  mind  has  received  fmce  the  time  of  Mr.  Locke. 
But  although  Dr.  Reid  has  been   at  much  pains  to 
overturn  the  old  ideal  fyftem,  he  has  not  ventured  to 
fubftitute  any  hypothecs  of  his  own  in  its  place.    And, 
indeed,  he  was  too  well  acquainted  with    the  limits 
prefcribed  to   our  philofophical  inquiries,  to  think  of 
indulging  his  curiofity,  in  fuch  unprofitable  fpecula- 
tions.     All,  therefore,  that  he  is  to  be  underflood  as 
aiming  at,  in  his  inquiries    concerning  our  perceptive 
powers,  is  to  give  a  precife  ftate  of  the  hOi,  divefted  of 
all  theoretical  expreflions ;  in  order  to  prevent   phi- 
lofophers  from  impofmg  on   themfelves  any  longer, 
by  words  without  meaning  ;  and  to  extort  from  them 
an  acknowledgment,  that,  with  refped:  to  the  procefs 
of  nature  in  perception,  they  are  no  lefs  ignorant  than 
the  vulgar. 

According  to  this  view  of  Dr.  Reid's  reafonings,  on 
the  fubjed  of  perception,  the  purpofe  to  which  they 
are  fubfervient  may  appear  to  fome  to  be  of  no  very 
J  confiderable  importance  ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  one  of 
V  the  mofl  valuable  effeds  of  genuine  philofophy,  is  to 
I  remind  us  of  the  limited  powers  of  the  human  under- 
^  ftanding  ;  and  to  revive  thofe  natural  feelings  of  won- 
der and  admiration,  at  the  fpeclacle  of  the  univerfe, 
which  are  apt  to  languifli,  in  confequence  of  long  fa- 
miliarity.    The  moft  profound  difcoveries  which  are 
placed  within  the  reach  of  our  refearches  lead  to  a 
confeflion  of  human  ignorance  ;  for,  while  they  flatter 
the  pride  of  man,  and  increafe  his  power,  by  enabling 
him  to  trace  the  fmiple  and  beautiful  laws  by  which 
phyfical  events  are  regulated,  they  call  his  attention, 
14  at 


Sea.  3.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  8g 

at  the  fame  time  to  thofe  general  and  ultimate  fa6lg 
which  bound  the  narrow  circle  of  his  knowledge  ;  and 
which,  by  evincing  to  him  the  operation  of  powers, 
whofe  nature  mull  for  ever  remain  unknown,  ferve  to 
remind  him   of  the   infufficiency  of  his  faculties   to 
penetrate  the  fecrets  of  the  univerfe.     Wherever  we 
direft  our    inquiries  ;    whether  to  the  anatomy  and 
phyfiology  of  animals,  to  the  growth  of  vegetables,  to 
the  chemical  attraftions  and  repulfions,  or  to  the  mo- 
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies  ;  we  perpetually  perceive 
the  effefts  of  powers  which  cannot  belong  to  matter. 
To  a  certain   length  we  are  able  to  procee<l ;  but  in 
every  refearch  we  meet  with  a  line,  which  no  induf- 
try  nor  ingenuity  can  pafs.     It  is  a  line   too,  which 
is  marked  with   fufficient  diftindnefs ;  and  which  no 
man  now  thinks  of  palling,  who  has  jufl  views  of  the 
nature  and  objedt  of  philofophy.     It  forms  the  repara- 
tion between  that  field  which  falls  under  the  furvey  of 
the  phyfical  inquirer,  and  that  unknown  region,  of 
which,  though  it  was  neceflary  that  we  fhould  be  af- 
fured  of  the  exiftence,  in  order  to  lay  a  foundation  for 
tlTe  dodtrines  of  natural  theology,  it  hath  not  pleafed 
the  Author  of  the  univerfe  to  reveal  to  us  the  wonders, 
in  this  infant    ftate  of   our  being.     It  was,  in  fad, 
chiefly  by  tracing  out  this  line,  that  Lord  Bacon  did 
fo  much  fervice  to  fcience. 

Befide  this  effed,  which  is  common  to  all  our  phi- 
lofophical  purfuits,  of  imprefling  the  mind  with  a  fenfe 
of  that  myfterious  agency,  or  efficiency,  into  which 
general  laws  muft  be  refolved ;  they  have  a  tendency, 
in  many  cafes,  to  counteract  the  influence  of  habit,  in 
weakening  thofe  emotions  of  wonder  and  of  curiofity, 

which 


90  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

which  the  appearances  of  nature  are  fo  admirably  fitted 
to  excite.  For  this  purpofe,  it  is  neceflary,  either  to 
lead  the  attention  to  facls  which  are  calculated  to 
ftrike  by  their  novelty,  or  to  prefent  faniihar  appear- 
ances in  a  new  light :  and  fuch  are  the  obvious  effects 
of  philofophical  inquiries ;  fometimes  extending  our 
views  to  objeds  which  are  removed  from  vulgar  ob- 
fervation ;  and  fometimes  corredling  our  firfl  appre- 

henfions  with    refpecl   to  ordinary  events. The 

communication  of  motion  by  impulfe,  (as  I  already 
hinted,)  is  as  unaccountable  as  any  phenomenon  we 
know ;  and  yet,  mod  men  are  difpofed  to  confider  it, 
as  a  faft  which  does  not  refult  from  will,  but  from 
necellity.  To  fuch  men,  it  may  be  ufeful  to  direct 
their  attention  to  the  univerfal  law  of  gravitation  ; 
which,  although  not  more  wonderful  in  itfelf,  than  the 
common  effects  of  impulfe,  is  more  fitted,  by  its 
novelty,  to  awaken  their  attention,  and  to  excite  their 
curiofity.  If  the  theory  of  Bofcovich  fliould  ever  be 
eflablifhed  on  a  fatisfactory  foundation,  it  would  have 
this  tendency  in  a  ftiil  more  remarkable  degree,  by 
teaching  us  that  the  communication  of  modon  by  im- 
pulfe, (which  we  are  apt  to  confider  as  a  neceffary 
truth,)  has  no  exiftence  whatever  ;  and  that  every  cafe 
in  which  it  appears  to  our  fenfes  to  take  place,  is  a 
phenomenon  no  lefs  inexplicable,  than  that  principle 
of  attradion  which  binds  together  the  moft  remote 
parts  of  the  univerfe. 

If  fuch,  however,  be  the  effefts  of  our  philofophical 
purfuits  when  fuccefsfully  conducted,  it  muft  be  con- 
feffed  that  the  tendency  of  imperfed  or  erroneous 
theories  is  widely  different.     By  a  fpecious  folution  of 

infuperable 


Sea.  3-  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  9 1 

infuperable  difficulties,  they  fo  dazzle  and  bewilder 
the  underftanding,  as,  at  once,  to  prevent  us  from  ad- 
vancing, with  fteadinefs,  tov^ards  the  limit  of  human 
knowledge ;  and  from  perceiving  the  exiftence  of  a 
region  beyond  it,  into  which  philofophy  is  not  per- 
mitted to  enter.  In  fuch  cafes,  it  is  the  bufmefs  of 
genuine  fcience  to  unmafk  the  impoflure,  and  to  point 
out  clearly,  both  to  the  learned  and  to  the  vulgar, 
what  reafon  can,  and  what  llie  cannot,  accomplilh. 
This,  I  apprehend,  has  been  done,  with  refpeft  to 
the  hiftory  of  our  perceptions,  in  the  moft  fatisfaftory 

manner,  by  Dr.  Reid. When  a  perfon  little  accuf- 

tomed  to  metaphyfical  fpeculations  is  told,  that,  in  the 
cafe  of  volition,  there  are  certain  invifible  fluids,  pro- 
pagated from  the  mind  to  the  organ  which  is  moved  ; 
and  that  in  the  cafe  of  perception,  the  exiftence  and 
qualities  of  the  external  objeft  are  made  known  to  us 
by  means  of  fpecies,  or  phantafms,  or  images,  which 
are  prefent  to  the  mind  in  the  fenforium  ;  he  is  apt  to 
conclude  that  the  intercourfe  between  mind  and  mat- 
ter is  much  lefs  myfterious  than  he  had  fuppofed  ;  and 
that,  although  thefe  expreffions  may  not  convey  to 
him  any  very  diftinft  meaning,  their  import  is  perfe6:ly 
underftood  by  philofophers.  It  is  now,  I  think,  pretty  ^ 
generally  acknowledged  by  phyfiologifts,  that  the  in- 
fluence of  the  will  over  the  body,  is  a  myftery  which 
has  never  yet  been  unfolded  ;  but,  fmgular  as  it  may  i 
appear.  Dr.  Reid  was  the  firft  perfon  who  had  courage 
to  lay  completely  afide  all  the  common  hypothetical 
language  concerning  perception,  and  to  exhibit  the 
difficulty  in  all  its  magnitude,  by  a  plain  ftatement  of 
the  fad.     To  what  then,  it  may  be  afked,  does  this 

ftatement 


92  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  I. 

ftatement  amount  ?  —  Merely  to  this  ;  that  the  mind  is 
fo  formed,  that  certain  impreffions  produced  on  our 
organs  of  fenfe  by  external  objefts,  are  followed  by 
correfpondent  fenfations ;  and  that  thefe  fenfations, 
(which  have  no  more  refemblance  to  the  qualities  of 
matter,  than  the  words  of  a  language  have  to  the 
things  they  denote,)  are  followed  by  a  perception  of 
the  exigence  and  qualities  of  the  bodies  by  which  the 
impreffions  are  made  ;  that  all  the  fteps  of  this  procefs 
are  equally  incomprehenfible  ;  and  that  for  any  thing 
we  can  prove  to  the  contrary,  the  connexion  between 
the  fenfation  and  the  perception,  as  well  as  that  be- 
tween the  impreffion  and  the  fenfation,  may  be  both 
arbitrary  :  that  it  is  therefore  by  no  means  impoflible, 
that  our  fenfations  may  be  merely  the  occafions  on 
which  the  correfpondent  perceptions  are  excited  ;  and 
that,  at  any  rate,  the  confideration  of  thefe  fenfations, 
which  are  attributes  of  mind,  can  throw  no  light  on 
the  manner  in  which  we  acquire  our  knowledge  of  the 
,  exiflence  and  qualities  of  body.  From  this  view  of 
the  fubjeft,  it  follows,  that  it  is  the  external  objefts 
themfelves,  and  not  any  fpecies  or  images  of  thefe 
■objects,  that  the  mind  perceives ;  and  that,  although, 
by  the  conftitution  of  our  nature,  certain  fenfations  are 
rendered  the  conftant  antecedents  of  our  perceptions, 
yet  it  is  jufl  as  difficult  to  explain  how  our  perceptions 
are  obtained  by  their  means,  as  it  would  be,  upon 
the  fuppofition,  that  the  mind  were  all  at  once  in- 
fpired  with  them,  without  any  concomitant  fenfations 
whatever. 

Thefe  remarks  are  general,  and   apply  to  all  our 
various  perceptions ;  and  they  evidently  ftrike  at  the 

root 


Sed.  3.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  g^ 

root  of  all  the  common  theories  upon  the  fubjeft. 
The  laws,  however,  which  regulate  thefe  perceptions, 
are  different  in  the  cafe  of  the  different  fenfes,  and 
form  a  very  curious  objed:  of  philofophical  inquiry. — 
Thofe,  in  particular,  which  regulate  the  acquired  per- 
ceptions of  fight,  lead  to  fome  very  interefting  and 
important  fpeculations  ;  and,  I  think,  have  never  yet 
been  explained  in  a  manner  completely  fatisfadory. 
To  treat  of  them  in  detail,  does  not  fall  under  the 
plan  of  this  work :  but  I  fhall  have  occafion  to  make 
a  few  remarks  on  them,  in  the  chapter  on  Con- 
ception. 

In  oppofition  to  what  I  have  here  obferved  on  the 
importance  of  Dr.  Reid's  fpeculations  concerning  our 
perceptive  powers,  I  am  fenfible  it  may  be  urged,  that 
they  amount  merely  to  a  negative  difcovery  ;  and  it  is 
pofTible,  that  fome  may  even  be  forward  to  remark, 
that  it  was  unneceiTary  to  employ  fo  much  labour  and 
ingenuity  as  he  has  done,  to  overthrow  an  hypothefis 
of  which  a  plain  account  would  have  been  a  fufficient 
refutation. — To  fuch  perfons,  I  would  beg  leave  to 
fuggeft,  that,  although,  in  confequence  of  the  jufter 
views  in  pneumatology,  which  now  begin  to  prevail, 
(chiefly,  I  believe,  in  confequence  of  Dr.  Reid's  writ- 
ings,) the  ideal  fyftem  may  appear  to  many  readers  un- 
philofophical  and  puerile ;  yet  the  cafe  was  very  dif- 
ferent when  this  author  entered  upon  his  inquiries  : 
and  I  may  even  venture  to  add,  that  few  pofitive  dif- 
coveries,  in  the  whole  hiflory  of  fcience,  can  be  men- 
tioned, which  found  a  jufter  claim  to  literary  reputa- 
tion, than  to  have  detected,  fo  clearly  and  unanfwer- 
ably,    the   fallacy  of  an  hypothefis,  which    has    de- 

fcended 


94  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOniY         Chap.  I- 

fcended  to  us  from  the  earlieft  ages  of  philofophy ; 
and  which,  in  modern  times,  has  not  only  ferved  to 
Berkeley  and  Hume  as  the  bafis  of  their  fceptical 
fyftems,  but  was  adopted  as  an  indifputable  truth  by 
Locke,  by  Clarke,  and  by  Newton. 


SECTION    IV. 

Of  the  Origin  of  our   Knowledge. 

THE  philofophers  who  endeavoured  to  explain  the 
operations  of  the  human  mind  by  the  theory  of 
ideas,  and  who  took  for  granted,  that  in  every  exer- 
tion of  thought  there  exifls  in  the  mind  fome  objeft 
diflinft  from  the  thinking  fubflance,  were  naturally 
led  to  inquire  whence  thefe  ideas  derive  their  origin  ; 
in  particular,  whether  they  are  conveyed  to  the  mind 
from  without  by  means  of  the  fenfes,  or  form  part  of 
its  original  furniture  ? 

With  refped  to  this  queflion,  the  opinions  of  the 
ancients  were  various ;  but  as  the  influence  of  thefe 
opinions  on  the  prevailing  fyftems  of  the  prefent  age 
is  not  very  confiderable,  it  is  not  neceflary,  for  any  of 
the  purpofes  I  have  in  view  in  this  work,  to  confider 
them  particularly.  The  moderns,  too,  have  been 
much  divided  on  the  fubjed: ;  fome  holding  v^dth  Des 
Cartes,  that  the  mind  is  furnilhed  with  certain  innate 
ideas  j  others,  with  Mr.  Locke,  that  all  our  ideas 
may  be  traced  from  fenfation  and  reflection  j  and 
many,  (efpecially  among  the  later  metaphyficians  in 
France,)  that  they  may  be  all  traced  from  fenfation 
alone. 

Of 


Se6l.  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  g^ 

Of  thefe  theories,  that  of  Mr.  Locke  deferves  more 
particularly  our  attention  ;  as  it  has  ferved  as  the  bafis 
.  of  mod  of  the  metaphyfical  fyftems  which  have  ap- 
peared fince  his  time ;  and  as  the  difference  between 
it  and  the  theory  which  derives  all  our  ideas  from 
fenfation  alone,  is  rather  apparent  than  real. 

In  order  to  convey  a  jufl  notion  of  Mr.  Locke's 
doftrine  concerning  the  origin  of  our  ideas,  it  is  necef- 
fary  to   remark,  that  he   refers  to  fenfation,  all   the 
ideas  which  we  are  fuppofed  to  receive  by  the  external 
fenfes ;  our  ideas,  for  example,  of  colours,  of  founds, 
of  hardnefs,  of  extenfion,  of  motion  ;  and,  in  ftiort,  of 
all  the  qualities  and  modes  of  matter  ;  to  refledlion, 
the  ideas  of  our  own  mental  operations  which  we  de- 
rive from  confcioufnefs  ;  our  ideas,  for  example,  of 
memory,  of  imagination,  of  volition,  of  pleafure,  and 
of  pain.     Thefe  two  fources,  according  to  him,  fur- 
nifh  us  with  all  our  fimple  ideas,  and  the  only  power 
which  the  mind  poifefles  over  them,  is  to  perform  cer- 
tain operations,  in  the  way  of  compofition,  abftradion, 
generalifation,  &c.  on  the  materials  which  it  thus  col- 
leds  in  the  courfe  of  its  experience.     The  laudable 
defire  of  Mr.  Locke,  to  introduce  precilion  and  per- 
fpicuity  into  metaphyfical  fpeculations,  and  his  anxiety 
to  guard  the  mind  againfl  error  in  general,  naturally 
prepoffeifed  him  in  favour  of  a  doftrine,  which,  when 
compared  with  thole  of  his  predeceffors,  was  intelligi- 
ble and  fimple ;  and  which,  by  fuggefting  a  method, 
apparently  eafy  and  palpable,  of  analyfing  our  know- 
ledge into  its  elementary  principles,  feemed  to  furnifli 
an  antidote  againfl  thofe  prejudices  which  had  been 
favoured  by  the  hypothefis  of  innate  ideas.     It  is  now 

a  con- 


^6  EtElTENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Cliap.  I, 

a  confiderable  time  fmce  this  fundamental  principle  of 
Mr.  Locke's  fyftem  began  to  lofe  its  authority  in  Eng- 
land ;  and  the  fceptical  conclufions,  which  it  had  been 
employed  to  fupport  by  fome  later  writers,  furnifhed 
its  opponents  with  very  plaufible  arguments  againft  it. 
The  late  learned  Mr.  Harris,  in  particular,  frequently 
mentions  this   doftrine  of  Mr.  Locke,  and  always  in 
terms  of  high  indignation.     "  Mark,"  (fays  he,  in  one 
paflage,)  "  the  order  of  things,  according  to  the  account 
"  of  our  later  metaphyficians.     Firft,  comes  that  huge 
"  body,  the  fenfible  world.     Then  this,  and  its  attri- 
"  butes  beget  fenfible  ideas.     Then,  out  of  fenfible 
"  ideas,  by  a  kind  of  lopping  and  pruning,  are  made 
"  ideas  intelligible,  whether  fpecific  or  general.    Thus, 
"  fhould  they  admit  that  mind  was  coeval  with  body  ; 
"  yet,  till  the  body  gave  it  ideas,  and  awakened  its  dor- 
"  mant  powers,  it  could  at  bed  have  been  nothing 
"  more  than  a  fort  of  dead  capacity  ;  for  innate  ideas 
"  it  could  not  poffibly  have    any."     And,   in  ano- 
ther paflage ;     "  For    my  own    part,    when    I  read 
"  the  detail  about  fenfation  and  refleftion,  and  am 
"  taught  the  procefs  at  large  how  my  ideas  are  all 
"  generated,  I  feem  to  view  the  human  foul,  in  the 
*'  light  of  a  crucible,  vi^here  truths  are  produced  by  a 
*'  kind  of  logical  chemiflry.'* 

If  Dr.  Reid's  reafonings  on  the  fubjedt  of  ideas  be 
admitted,  all  thefe  fpeculations  with  refped  to  their 
origin  fall  to  the  ground  ;  and  the  quellion  to  which 
they  relate  is  reduced  merely  to  a  quellion  of  fad  ; 
concerning  the  occafions  on  which  the  mind  is  firlt 
led  to  form  thofe  fimple  notions  into  which  our 
thoughts  may  be  analyfed,  and  which  may  be  con- 

fidered 


Se<a.4-  ^^   '^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  97 

fidered  as  the  principles  or  elements  of  human  know- 
ledge. With  refpe£l  to  many  of  thefe  notions,  this 
inquiry  involves  no  difficulty.  No  one,  for  example, 
can  be  at  a  lofs  to  afcertain  the  occalions  on  which 
the  notions  of  colours  and  founds  are  firft  formed  by 
tl^e  mind  :  for  thefe  notions  are  confined  to  individuals 
who  are  polTefled  of  particular  fenfes,  and  cannot,  by 
any  combination  of  words,  be  conveyed  to  thofe  who 
never  enjoyed  the  ufe  of  them.  The  hiftory  of  our 
notions  of  extenfion  and  figure,  (which  may  be  fug- 
gefted  to  the  mind  by  the  exercife  either  of  fight  or  of 
touch,)  is  not  altogether  fo  obvious ;  and  accordingly 
it  has  been  the  fubjed:  of  various  controverfies.  To 
trace  the  origin  of  thefe,  and  of  our  other  fimple  no- 
tions with  refpeft  to  the  qualities  of  matter ;  or,  in 
other  words,  to  defcribe  the  occafions  on  which,  by 
the  laws  of  our  nature,  they  are  fuggefted  to  the 
mind,  is  one  of  the  leading  objeds  of  Dr.Reid's  in- 
quiry, in  his  analyfis  of  our  external  fenfes  ;  in  which 
he  carefully  avoids  every  hypothefis  with  refpe£t  to  the 
inexplicable  phenomena  of  perception  and  of  thought, 
and  confines  himfelf  fcrupuloufly  to  a  literal  llatement 
of  fads. — Similar  inquiries  to  thefe,  maybe  propofed, 
concerning  the  occafions  on  which  we  form  the  no- 
tions of  thne,  of  motion,  of  nu?nber,  of  caufatioriy  and 
an  infinite  variety  of  others.  Thus,  it  has  been  ob- 
ferved  by  different  authors,  that  every  perception  of 
change  fuggefts  to  the  mind  the  notion  of  a  caufe, 
without  which  that  change  could  not  have  happened. 
Dr.  Reid  remarks,  that,  without  the  faculty  of  me- 
mory, our  perceptive  powers  could  never  have  led  us 
to  form  the  idea  of  motion.     I  Ihall  afterwards  ihew, 

H  in 


9$  ELEIkTENTS    OF    THE   PVTILOSOPHY         Clfap.I. 

in  the  fequel  of  this  work,  that  without  the  fame  fa- 
culty of  memory,  we  never  could  have  formed  the  no^ 
tion  of  time ;  and  that  without  the  faculty  of  abftrac- 
tion,  we  could  not  have  formed  the  notion  of  number. 
—  Such  inquiries,  with  refped:  to  the  origin  of  our 
knowledge,  are  curious  and  important ;  and  if  con- 
duced with  judgment,  they  may  lead  to  the  mod  cer- 
tain conclufions  ;  as  they  aim  at  nothing  more  than  to 
afcertain  fadls,  which,  although  not  obvious  to  fuper- 
ficial  obfervers,  may  yet  be  difcovered  by  patient  in* 
veftigation. 

From  the  remarks  which  have  been  juft  made  on 
our  notions  of  time,  of  motion,  and  of  number,  it  is 
evident,  that  the  inquiry  concerning  the  origin  of  hu* 
man  knowledge  cannot  poflibly  be  difcuifed  at  the 
Commencement  of  fuch  a  work  as  this  ;  but  that  it 
muft  be  refumed  in  different  parts  of  it,  as  thofe  fa- 
culties of  the  mind  come  under  our  view,  with  which 
the  formation  of  our  different  fimple  notions  is  con- 
nected. 

With  refped:  to  the  general  queflion.  Whether  all 
our  knowledge  may  be  ultimately  traced  from  our 
fenfations  ?  I  fhall  only  obferve  at  prefent,  that  the 
opinion  we  form  concerning  it,  is  of  much  lefs  confe- 
quence  than  is  commonly  fuppofed.  That  the  mind 
.cannot,  without  the  groffefl  abfurdity,  be  confidered 
in  the  light  of  a  receptacle  which  is  gradually  furnifhed 
from  without,  by  materials  introduced  by  the  channel 
of  the  fenfes ;  nor  in  that  of  a  tabula  rafa,  upon  which 
copies  or  refemblances  of  things  external  are  imprint- 
ed; I  have  already  (hewn  at  fufEcient  length.  Al- 
though, therefore,  we  Ihould  acq.uierc&  in  the  con- 
13,  clufion, 


Sea.  4*  ^^    ^^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  ^n 

clufion,  that,  without  our  organs  of  fenfe,  the  mind 
mult  have  remained  deflitute  of  knowledge,  this  con- 
ceffion  could  have  no  tendency  whatever  to  favour  the 
principles  of  materialifni ;  as  it  implies  nothing  more 
than  that  the  impreffions  made  on  our  fenfes  by  ex- 
ternal objeds,  furnilh  the  occafions  on  which  the 
mind,  by  the  laws  of  its  conftitutlon,  is  led  to  per- 
ceive the  qualities  of  the  material  world,  and  to  exert 
all  the  different  modifications  of  thought  of  which  it 
is  capable. 

From  the  very  flight  view  of  the  fubjed:,  however, 
which  has  been  already  given,  it  is  fufficiently  evident, 
that  this  doftrine,  which  refers  the  origin  of  all  our 
knowledge  to  the  occafions  furnilhed  by  fenfe,  mufl 
be  received  with  many  limitations.  That  thofe  ideas, 
which  Mr.  Locke  calls  ideas  of  refledion,  (or,  in  other 
words,  the  notions  which  we  form  of  the  fubjefts  of 
our  own  confcioufnefs,)  are  not  fuggefled  to  the  mind 
immediately  by  the  fenfations  arifing  from  the  ufe  of 
our  organs  of  perception,  is  granted  on  all  hands ; 
and,  therefore,  the  amount  of  the  dodlrine  now  men- 
tioned, is  nothing  more  than  this ;  that  the  firfl  oc- 
cafions on  which  our  various  intelledual  faculties  are 
exercifed,  are  furnifhed  by  the  impreffions  made  on 
our  organs  of  fenfe ;  and  confequently,  that,  without 
thefe  impreffions,  it  would  have  been  impoffible  for 
us  to  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  our  faculdes.  Agree- 
ably to  this  explanation  of  the  dodrine,  it  may  un- 
doubtedly be  faid  with  plaufibility,  (and,  I  am  in- 
clined to  believe,  with  truth,)  that  the  occafions  on 
which  all  our  notions  are  formed,  are  furniflied  either 
immediately  or  ultimately  by  fenfe  ;  but,  if  I  am  not 

H  2  much 


lOO  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I. 

much  miftaken,  this  is  not  the  meaning  which  is  com- 
monly annexed  to  the  dodrine,  either  by  its  advo- 
cates or  their  opponents.  One  thing  at  leaft  is 
obvious,  that,  in  this  fenfe,  it  does  not  lead  to  thofe 
confequences  which  have  intcrefted  one  party  of  phi- 
lofophers  in  its  defence,  and  another  in  its  refu- 
tation. 

There  is  another  very  important  confideration  which 
defer ves  our  attention  in  this  argument :  that,  even 
on  the  fuppofition    that   certain  impreffions   on  our 
organs  of  fenfe  are  neceflary  to  awaken  the  mind  to  a 
confcioufnefs  of  its  own  exiflence,  and  to  give  rife  to 
the  exercife  of  its  various  faculties  ;  yet  all  this  might 
have  happened  without    our   having  any  knowledge 
of  the  qualities,  or  even  of  the  exiflence,  of  the  ma-, 
terial  world.     To  facilitate  the  admiffion  of  this  pro- 
pofition,  let  us  fuppofe  a  being  formed  in  every  other 
refped  like  man  ;  but  polfeffed  of  no  fenfes,  except- 
ing thofe  of  hearing  and  fmelling.     I  make  choice  of 
thefe  two  fenfes,  becaufe  it  is  obvious,  that  by  means 
of  them  alone  we  never  could  have  arrived  at  the 
knowledge  of  the  primary  qualities  of  matter,  or  even 
of  the  exilflence  of   things    external.     All    that   we 
could    poffibly   have    inferred    from  our    occafional 
fenfations  of  fmell  and  found,  would  have  been  that 
there  exifted  fome  unknown  caufe  by  which  they  were 
produced. 

Let  us  fuppofe  then  a  particular  fenfation  to  be  ex- 
cited in  the  mind  of  fuch  a  being.  The  moment  this 
happens,  he  mufl  neceflarily  acquire  the  knowledge 
of  two  fads  at  once :  that  of  the  exiflence  of  the  fen- 
fation'^ and  that  of  his  own  exijience^  as  a  fentient 

15  being. 


Se«ft.  4'  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  loi 

being.  After  the  fenfation  is  at  an  end,  he  can  re- 
member he  felt  it ;  he  can  conceive  that  he  feels  it 
again.  If  he  has  felt  a  variety  of  different  fenfations, 
he  can  compare  them  together  in  refpeft  of  the  plea- 
fure  or  the  pain  they  have  afforded  him  ;  and  will  na- 
turally defire  the  return  of  the  agreeable  fenfations, 
and  be  afraid  of  the  return  of  thofe  which  were  pain- 
ful. If  the  fenfations  of  fmell  and  found  are  both  ex- 
cited in  his  mind  at  the  fame  time,  he  can  attend  to 
either  of  them  he  chufes,  and  withdraw  his  attention 
from  the  other  ;  or  he  can  withdraw  his  attention 
from  both,  and  fix  it  on  fome  fenfation  he  has  felt 
formerly.  In  this  manner,  he  might  be  led,  merely 
by  fenfations  exifling  in  his  mind,  and  conveying  to 
him  no  information  concerning  matter,  to  exercife 
many  of  his  moft  important  faculties ;  and  amidfl  all 
thefe  different  modifications  and  operations  of  his 
mind,  he  would  feel,  with  irrefiftible  convidion,  that 
they  all  belong  to  one  and  the  fame  fentient  and  in- 
telligent being  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  they  are  all 
modifications  and  operations  of  himfelf.  —  I  fay  no- 
thing, at  prefent,  of  the  various  fimple  notions,  (or 
fimple  ideas,  as  they  are  commonly  called,)  which 
would  arife  in  his  mind  ;  for  example,  the  ideas  of 
number^  of  duration^  of  caufe  and  effect^  of  perfonal 
identity,  all  of  which,  though  perfectly  unlike  his 
fenfations,  could  not  fail  to  be  fuggefled  by  means  of 
them.  Such  a  being,  then,  might  know  all  that  we 
know  of  mind  at  prefent ;  and  as  his  language  would 
be  appropriated  to  mind  folely,  and  not  borrowed  by 
analogy  from  material    phenomena,  he  would  even 

H  3  pofTefs 


I02  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  I, 

polTefs  important  advantages  over  us  in  conducing  the 
fludy  of  pneumatology. 

From  thefe  obfervations  it  fufficiently  appears,  what 
is  the  real  amount  of  the  celebrated  do£trine,  which 
refers  the  origin  of  all  our  knowledge  to  our  fen- 
fations  ;  and  that,  even  granting  it  to  be  true,  (which, 
for  my  own  part,  I  am  difpofed  to  do,  in  the  fenfe  in 
which  I  have  now  explained  it,)  it  would  by  no  means 
follow  from  it,  that  our  notions  of  the  operations  of 
mind,  nor  even  many  of  thofe  notions  which  are  com- 
monly fuggefted  to  us,  in  thejirji  injlaiice,  by  the  per- 
ception of  external  objects,  2X^necejfarily  fuhfequent  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  qualities,  or  even  of  the  exiflence, 
of  matter. 

The  remarks  which  I  have  offered  on  this  doftrine, 
will  not  appear  fuperfluous  to  thofe  who  recollect 
that,  although  it  has,  for  many  years  paft,  been  a 
fubje£l  of  controverfy  in  England,  it  continues  ftill  to 
be  implicitly  adopted  by  the  beft  philofophical  writers 
in  France  ;  and  that  it  has  been  employed  by  fome  of 
them  to  fupport  the  fyftem  of  materialifm ;  and  by 
others  to  fhew,  that  the  intelleftual  diflinctions  be- 
tween man  and  brutes,  arife  entirely  from  the  differ- 
ences in  their  animal  organization,  and  in  their  powers 
of  external  perception. 


Chap.  II.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  I03 


CHAPTER     SECOND. 
Of  Attention. 

WHEN  we  are  deeply  engaged  in  converfation,  or 
occupied  with  any  fpeculation  that  is  interefling 
to  the  mind,  the  furrounding  objefts  either  do  not 
produce  in  us  the  perceptions  they  are  fitted  to  excite  ; 
or  thefe  perceptions  are  inftantly  forgotten.  A  clock,  ^^ 
for  example,  may  flrike  in  the  fame  room  with  us, 
without  our  being  able,  next  moment,  to  recolle(5t 
whether  we  heard  it  or  not. 

In  thefe,  and  firailar  cafes,  I  believe,  it  is  com- 
monly taken  for  granted,  that  we  really  do  not  per- 
ceive the  external  objed.  From  fome  analogous  fads, 
however,  I  am  inclined  to  fufped;  that  this  opinion  is 
not  well-founded.  A  perfon  who  fails  afieep  at 
church,  and  is  fuddenly  awaked,  is  unable  to  recoUedl 
the  laft  words  fpoken  by  the  preacher  ;  or  even  to 
recoiled  that  he  was  fpeaking  at  all.  And  yet,  that 
fleep  does  not  fufpend  entirely  the  powers  of  percep- 
tion, may  be  inferred  from  this,  that  if  the  preacher 
were  to  make  a  fudden  paufe  in  his  difcourfe,  every 
perfon  in  the  congregation  who  was  afieep,  would 
inftantly  awake.  In  this  cafe,  therefore,  it  appears,  \ 
that  a  perfon  may  be  confcious  of  a  perception,  with-  \ 
out  being  able  afterwards  to  recoiled  it. 

Many  other  inftances  of  the  fame  general  fad  might 
be  produced.     When  we  read  a  book,  (efpecially  in     --^ 

H  4  a  Ian- 


I04  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  11. 

a  language  which  is  not  perfectly  familiar  to  us,)  we 
muft  perceive  fucceffively  every  different  letter,  and 
muft  afterwards  combine  thefe  letters  into  fyllables 
and  words,  before  we  comprehend  the  meaning  of  a 
fentence.  This  procefs,  however,  pafTes  through  the 
mind,  without  leaving  any  trace  in  the  memory. 

It  has  been  proved  by  optical  writers,  that,  in  per- 
ceiving the  diftances  of  vifible  objects  from  the  eye, 
there  is  a  judgment  of  the  under jftanding  antecedent  to 
the  perception.  In  fome  cafes  this  judgment  is  founded 
on  a  variety  of  circumftances  combined  together  ;  the 
conformation  of  the  organ  necelTary  for  diftinft  vifion  ; 
the  inclination  of  the  optic  axes  ;  the  diflindnefs  or 
indiftindnefs  of  the  minute  parts  of  the  object ;  the 
diftances  of  the  intervening  objeds  from  each  other, 
and  from  the  eye ;  and,  perhaps,  on  other  circum- 
ftances befides  thefe  :  and  yet,  in  confequence  of  our 
familiarity  with  fuch  proceffes  from  our  earlieft  in- 
fancy, the  perception  feems  to  be  inftantaneous ;  and 
\t  requires  much  reafoning,  to  convince  perfons  unac- 
cuftomed  to  philofophical  fpeculations,  that  the  fad  is 
otherwife. 

Another  inftance  of  a  ftill  more  familiar  nature, 
may  be  of  ufe  for  the  farther  illuftration  of  the  fame 
fubjeft.  It  is  well  known,  that  our  thoughts  do  not 
fucceed  each  other  at  random,  but  according  to  cer- 
tain laws  of  aflbciation,  which  modern  philofophers 
have  been  at  much  pains  to  inveftigate.  It  frequently, 
however,  happens,  particularly  when  the  mind  is 
animated  by  converfation,  that  it  makes  a  fudden 
tranfition  from  one  fubjed  to  another,  which,  at  firft 
view,  appears  to  be  very  remote  from  it ;  and  that  it 

requires 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  I05 

requires  a  confiderable  degree  of  reflexion,  to  enable 
the  perfon  himfelf  by  whom  the  tranfition  was  made, 
to  afcertain  what  were  the  intermediate  ideas.  A 
curious  inftance  of  fuch  a  fudden  tranfition  is  men- 
tioned by  Hobbes    in  his  Leviathan.      "  In  a  com- 

*  pany, "  (fays  he,)  "  in  which  the  converfation 
'  turned  on  the  civil  war,  what  could  be  conceived 

*  more  impertinent,  than  for  a  perfon  to  afk  abruptly, 

*  What  was  the  value  of  a  Roman  denarius  ?  On  a 
little  refledion,  however,  I  was  eafily  able  to  trace 

*  the  train  of  thought  which  fuggefted  the  queftion  : 
'  for  the  original  fubjeft  of  difcourfe  naturally  intro- 
'  duced  the  hiftory  of  the  King,  and  of  the  treachery 
'  of  thofe  who  furrendered  his  perfon  to  his  enemies ; 
'  this  again  introduced  the  treachery  of  Judas  Ifcariot, 

*  and  the  fum  of  money  which  he  received  for  his 

*  reward.  —  And  all  this  train  of  ideas,"  fays  Hobbes, 

*  paffed  through  the  mind  of  the  fpeaker  in  a  twink- 

*  ling,  in  confequence  of  the  velocity  of  thought." 
It  is  by  no  means  improbable,  that  if  the  fpeaker 
himfelf  had  been  interrogated  about  the  connexion  of 
ideas,  which  led  him  afide  from  the  original  topic  of 
difcourfe,  he  would  have  found  himfelf,  at  firft,  at  a 
lofs  for  an  anfwer. 

In  the  inftances  which  have  been  lafl  mentioned 
we  have  alfo  a  proof,  that  a  perception,  or  an  idea, 
which  paffes  through  the  mind,  without  leaving  any 
trace  in  the  memory,  may  yet  ferve  to  introduce  other 
ideas  connected  with  it  by  the  laws  of  aflbciation. 
Other  proofs  of  this  important  fad  Ihall  be  mentioned 

afterwards. 

When 


10&  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHlLOSOrHY         Chap.  if. 

When  a  perception  or  an  idea  pafles  through  the  mind, 
without  our  being  able  to  recoUedt  it  next  moment,  the 
vulgar  themfelves  afcribe  our  want  of  memory  to  awant 
of  attention.  Thus,  in  the  inftance  already  mentioned, 
of  the  clock,  a  perfon,  upon  obferving  that  the  mi- 
nute hand  had  jufl  pafled  twelve,  would  naturally 
fay,  that  he  did  not  attend  to  the  clock  when  it  was 
ftriking.  There  feems,  therefore,  to  be  a  certain 
effort  of  mind  upon  which,  even  in  the  judgment  of 
the  vulgar,  memory  in  fome  meafure  depends ;  and 
which  they  diflinguifh  by  the  name  of  attention. 

The  connexion  between  attention  and  memory  has 
been  remarked  by  many  authors.  *'  Nee  dubium 
*'  eft,"  (fays  Quinctilian,  fpeaking  of  memory,) 
"  quin  plurimum  in  hac  parte  valeat  mentis  intentio, 
^*  et  velut  acies  luminum  a  profpeftu  rerum  quas  in- 
*'  tuetur  non  averfa.'*  The  fame  obfervation  has  been 
made  by  Locke  *,  and  by  moft  of  the  writers  on  the 
fubjecl  of  education. 

But  although  the  connexion  between  attention  and 
memory  has  been  frequently  remarked  in  general 
terms,  I  do  not  recoiled  that  the  power  of  attention 
has  been  mentioned  by  any  of  the  writers  on  pneu- 
matology,  in  their  enumeration  of  the  faculties  of  the 
mind  t ;    nor  has  it  been  confidered  by  any  one,  fo 

far 

*  "  Memory  depends  much  on  attention  and  repetition." 
Locke's  EfTay,  b.  i.  chap.  x. 

■j-  Some  important  obfervations  on  the  fubjeft  of  attention  occur 
in  different  parts  of  Dr.  Reid's  writings  ;  particularly  in  his  Effays 
on  the  Intclleftual  Powers  of  Man,  p.  62.  ;  and  in  his  Effays  on 
the  Aftivc  Powers  of  Man,  p.  78^  et  feq.  —  To  this  ingenious 

author 


Chap.  n.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  iqj 

far  as  I  know,  as  of  fufficient  importance  to  deferve 
a  particular  examination.  Helvetius,  indeed,  in  his 
very  ingenious  work,  De  rEfp7-it^  has  intitled  one  of 
his  chapters,  De  rinegale  capacite  d^  Attention ;  but 
what  he  confiders  under  this  article,  is  chiefly  that 
capacity  of  patient  inquiry,  (or  as  he  calls  it,  une 
attention  fuivie,^  upon  which  philofophical  genius 
feems  in  a  great  meafure  to  depend.  He  has  alfo 
remarked  *,  with  the  writers  already  mentioned,  that 
the  impreflion  which  any  thing  makes  on  the  me- 
mory, depends  much  on  the  degree  of  attention  we 
give  to  it ;  but  he  has  taken  no  notice  of  that  effort 
which  is  abfolutely  effential  to  the  loweft  degree  of 
memory.  It  is  this  effort  that  I  propofe  to  confider  at  \ 
prefent  ;  —  not  thofe  different  degrees  of  attention 
which  imprint  things  more  or  lefs  deeply  on  the  mind, 
but  that  a6l  or  effort  without  which  we  have  no  re- 
collection or  memory  whatever. 


author  we  are  indebted  for  the  remark,  that  attention  to  things 
external,  is  properly  called  obfervatioji  ;  and  attention  to  the  fub- 
jedts  of  our  confcioufnefs,  refleSion.  He  has  alfo  explained  the 
caufes  of  the  peculiar  difficulties  which  accompany  this  laft  exertion 
of  the  mind,  and  which  form  the  chief  obftacles  to  the  progress  of 
pneumatology.  I  (hall  have  occafion,  in  another  part  of  this 
work,  to  treat  of  habits  of  inattention  in  general,  and  to  fuggell  ; 
fome  pra£lical  hints  with  refpecl.  to  the  culture  both  of  the  powers  ] 
of  obfervaticn  and  refleftion.  The  view  which  I  propofe  to  take 
of  attention  at  prefent,  is  extremely  hmited ;  and  is  intended 
merely  to  comprehend  fuch  general  principles  as  are  neceffary  to 
prepare  the  reader  for  the  chapters  which  are  to  follow. 

*  "  C'eft  I'attcntion,  plus  ou  moins  grande,  qui  grave  plus  ou 
*'  moins  profondement  Ics  objets  dans  la  memoire." 

With 


lo8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  II, 

With  refped  to  the  nature  of  this  effort,  it  is  per- 
haps impofTible  for  us  to  obtain  much  fatisfaftion. 
We  often  fpeak  of  greater  and  lefs  degrees  of  atten- 
tion ;  and,  I  beheve,  in  thefe  cafes,  conceive  the 
mind  (if  I  may  ufe  the  expreifion)  to  exert  itfelf  with 
different  degrees  of  energy.  I  am  doubtful,  however, 
if  this  expreffion  conveys  any  diftind:  meaning.  For 
my  own  part,  I  am  inclined  to  fuppofe,  (though  I 
would  by  no  means  be  underflood  to  fpeak  Math  con- 
fidence), that  it  is  effential  to  memory,  that  the  per- 
ception or  the  idea  that  we  would  wifh  to  remember, 
fhould  remain  in  the  mind  for  a  certain  fpace  of  time, 
and  fhould  be  contemplated  by  it  exclufively  of  every 
thing  elfe ;  and  that  attention  confifls  partly  (perhaps 
entirely)  in  the  effort  of  the  mind,  to  detain  the  idea 
or  the  perception,  and  to  exclude  the  other  objeds 
that  folicit  its  notice. 

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  difficulty  of  afcer- 
taining,  in  what  this  ad  of  the  mind  confifts,  every 
perfon  muft  be  fatisfied  of  its  reality  from  his  own 
confcioufnefs ;  and  of  its  effential  connexion  with  the 
power  of  memory.  I  have  already  mentioned  feveral 
inftances  of  ideas  paffing  through  the  mind,  without 
our  being  able  to  recoiled:  them  next  moment. 
Thefe  inftances  were  produced,  merely  to  illuftrate 
the  meaning  I  annex  to  the  word  attention ;  and  to 
recall  to  the  recolledion  of  the  reader,  a  few  ftriking 
cafes,  in  which  the  poffibility  of  our  carrying  on  a 
procefs  of  thought,  which  we  are  unable  to  attend  to 
at  the  time,  or  to  remember  afterwards,  is  acknow- 
ledged in  the  received  fyftems  of  philofophy.  I  fhall 
now  mention  fome  other  phenomena,  which  appear 

to 


Chap.  II.  ^F   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  1 09 

to  me  to  be  very  fimilar  to  thefe,  and  to  be  expli- 
cable in  the  fame  manner  ;  although  they  have  com- 
monly been  referred  to  very  different  principles. 

The  wonderful  effe6t  of  practice  in  the  formation 
of  habits,  has  been  often,  and  juflly  taken  notice 
of,  as  one  of  the  moll  curious  circumftances  in  the 
human  conftitution.  A  mechanical  operation,  for 
example,  which  we  at  firft  performed  with  the  utmoft 
difficulty,  comes,  in  time,  to  be  fo  familiar  to  us, 
that  we  are  able  to  perform  it  without  the  fmalleft 
danger  of  miftake  ;  even  while  the  attention  appears 
to  be  completely  engaged  with  other  fubjedls.  The 
truth  feems  to  be,  that  in  confequence  of  the  affocia- 
tion  of  ideas,  the  different  fteps  of  the  procefs  prefent 
themfelves  fucceflively  to  the  thoughts,  without  any 
recolleftion  on  our  part,  and  with  a  degree  of  rapidity 
proportioned  to  the  length  of  our  experience  ;  fo  as 
to  fave  us  entirely  the  trouble  of  hefitation  and  re- 
flexion, by  giving  us  every  moment  a  precife  and  fteady 
notion  of  the  effed  to  be  produced  *. 

In  the  cafe  of  fome  operations  which  are  very  fa- 
miliar to  us,  we  find  ourfelves  unable  to  attend  to,  or 
to  recoiled,  the  acts  of  the  will  by  which  they  were 
preceded ;  and  accordingly,  fome  philofophers  of 
greaL  eminence  have  called  in  queftion  the  exiftence 

*  I  do  not  mean  by  this  obfervation,  to  call  in  queftion  the 
cfFecls  which  the  pradice  of  the  mechanical  arts  has  on  the  mufcles 
of  the  body.  Thefe  are  as  indifputable  as  its  efFefts  on  the  mind. 
A  man  who  has  been  accuftomed  to  write  with  his  right  hand,  can 
write  better  with  his  left  hand,  than  another  who  never  praftifed 
the  art  at  all ;  but  lie  cannot  write  fo  well  with  his  left  hand  as 
with  his  right.  —  Theeffefts  of  pradlice,  therefore,  it  fliould  feem, 
are  produced  partly  on  the  mind,  and  partly  on  the  body. 

of 


no  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  II. 

of  fuch  volitions  ;  and  have  reprefented  our  habitual 
aftions  as  involuntary  and  mechanical.  But  furely 
the  circumflance  of  our  inability  to  recolleft  our  vo- 
litions, does  not  authorife  us  to  difpute  their  poffi- 
bility  ;  any  more  than  our  inability  to  attend  to  the 
procefs  of  the  mind,  in  ellimating  the  diftance  of  an 
object  from  the  eye,  authorifes  us  to  affirm  that  the 
perception  is  inftantaneous.  Nor  does  it  add  any 
force  to  the  objection  to  urge,  that  there  are  inftances 
in  which  we  find  it  difficult,  or  perhaps  impoffible,  to 
check  our  habitual  actions  by  a  contrary  volition. 
For  it  mud  be  remembered,  that  this  contrary  volition 
does  not  remain  with  us  fteadily  during  the  whole 
operation  ;  but  is  merely  a  general  intention  or  refolu- 
tion,  which  is  baniflied  from  the  mind,  as  foon  as 
the  occafion  prefents  itfelf  with  which  the  habitual 
train  of  our  thoughts  and  volitions  is  affociated  *. 

It  may  indeed  be  faid,  that  thefe  obfervations  only 
prove  the  poffibility  that  our  habitual  adions  may  be 


*  The  folution  of  this  difficulty,  which  is  given  by  Dr.  Porter- 
fieldj  is  fomewhat  curious, 

"  Such  is  the  power  of  cuftoni  and  habit,  that  many  adtions, 
"  which  are  no  doubt  voluntary,  and  proceed  from  our  mind,  are 
"  in  certain  circumllances  rendered  neceffary,  fo  as  to  appear  alto- 
"  gether  mechanical,  and  independent  of  our  wills  ;  but  it  does  not 
**  from  thence  follow,  that  our  mind  is  not  concerned  in  fiicli  mo- 
"  tions,  but  only  that  it  has  impofed  upon  itfelf  a  law,  whereby 
"  it  regulates  and  governs  them  to  the  greateft  advantage.  In  all 
**  this,  there  is  nothing  of  intrinfical  iieceffity  ;  the  mind  is  at  ab- 
**  folute  liberty  to  atlas  it  pleafe*;  but  being  a  wife  agent,  it  can- 
"  not  chufc  but  to  adl  in  conformity  to  this  law,  by  reafon  of  the 
"  utility  afld  advantage  that  arifes  from  this  way  of  afting." 

Tbeatise  on  thkEyE)  vol.  ii.  p.  17. 

volufitary. 


foph 
coui 


con 
atte 
jnec 


Cliapr"     'A       ..  y         "•       ^'^MAN  MIND.  m 

voluf^*^  ^  ^^^.  )e  admitted,  nothing  more 

can  ^  furely,  if  thefe  phenomena 

are  n  the  known  and  acknow- 

ledgj  mind,  it  would  be  unphilo- 

principle,  on  purpofe  to  ac- 
lodlrine,  therefore,  which  I 
hav(  \di  to  the  nature  of  habits,  is 

by  I  hypothefis,  as  has  been  ob- 

je6t|  3f  my  friends  ;   but,  on  the 

lypothelis  falls  on  thofe  who 
1,    by   faying  that  they   are 
a  dodtrine  which,  if  it  is  at 
all  I  underflood  as  implying  the 

exil  *  f  our  conftitution,  which  has 

bee  ed  by  philofophers ;   and  to 

whi  be  difficult  to  find  any  thing 

an;  jtion. 

I  rvations,  I  have  had  in  view  a 

fa\  'r.  Hartley's ;  which  has  been 

maintained  alfo  of  late  by.  a  much  higher  authority,  I 
mean  Dr.  Reid. 

"  Habit*"  (fays  this  ingeaious  author)  "  differs 
"  from  inflind:,  not  in  its  nature,  but  in  its  origin ; 
"  the  laft  being  natural,  the  firfl  acquired.  Both 
"  operate  without  will  or  intention,  without  thought, 
"  and  therefore  may  be  called  mechanical  principles.'* 
In  another  paflage  t,  he  expreffes  himfelf  thus  :  "  I 
*'  conceive  it  to  be  a  part  of  our  conftitution,  that 
"  what  we  have  been  accuftomed  to  do,  we  acquire^ 
"  not  only  a  facility  but  a  pronenefs  to  do  on  like  oc- 

*  Eflays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  Man,  p.  128. 
f  Ibid.  p.  130. 

"  cafions  J 


no 

of  fuch 
aclior 
the  ci 
litionf 
bility 
proce    • 
object 
percej 
force 
in  whi 
check 
For  it 
does   I 
operati 
tion,  V 
the  oc< 
train  oi 
It  m; 
prove  t 


ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPIiy        Chap.  II. 

volitions  ;  and  have  reprefented  our  habitual 

\  ;    d  mechanical.     But  furely 

ability  to  recolledl  our  vo- 

I  us  to  difpute  their   pofli- 

inability  to  attend  to  the 

[mating  the  diflance  of  an 

fes  us  to  affirm  that   the 

.     Nor   does  it   add    any 

^e,  that  there  are  inflances 

or  perhaps  impoffible,  to 

by   a   contrary    volition. 

that  this  contrary  volition 

fteadily  during  the  whole 

[eneral  intention  or  refolu- 

pi  the  mind,  as   foon  as 

with  which  the  habitual 

»litions  is  aflbciated  *. 

t  thefe  obfervations  only 

habitual  adions  may  be 


*  The  *.«t.Liuii  oi  Liiib  uimcuity,  which  is  given  by  Dr.  Porter- 
field,  is  fomewhat  curious, 

"  Such  is  the  power  of  cuftom  and  habit,  that  many  aftions, 
"  which  are  no  doubt  voluntary,  and  proceed  from  our  mind,  are 
''  in  certain  circumftances  rendered  neceffary,  fo  as  to  appear  alto- 
"  gether  mechanical,  and  independent  of  our  wills  ;  but  it.  docs  not 
"  from  thence  follow,  that  our  mind  is  not  concerned  in  fuch  mo- 
"  tions,  but  only  that  it  has  impofed  upon  itfelf  a  law,  whereby 
"  it  regulates  and  governs  them  to  the  greateft  advantage.  In  all 
'*  this,  there  is  nothing  of  intrinfical  neceffity  ;  the  mind  is  at  ab- 
*'  folute  liberty  to  ad  as  it  pleafe*;  but  being  a  wife  agent,  it  can- 
"  not  chufc  but  to  adl  in  conformity  to  this  law,  by  reafon  of  the 
"  utility  ^d  advantage  that  arifes  from  this  way  of  afting.'* 

Tbeatise  on  thkEye,  vol.  ii.  p.  17. 

voluntary. 


Cliap.  II.  OF  THi:    HITMAN  MIND.  m 

voluntary.  But  if  this  be  admitted,  nothing  more 
can  well  be  required  :  for  furely,  if  thefe  phenomena 
are  clearly  explicable  from  the  known  and  acknow- 
ledged laws  of  the  human  mind,  it  would  be  unphilo- 
fophical  to  devife  a  new  principle,  on  purpofe  to  ac- 
count for  them.  The  doftrine,  therefore,  which  I 
have  laid  down  with  refpedl  to  the  nature  of  habits,  is 
by  no  means  founded  on  hypothefis,  as  has  been  ob- 
jeded  to  me  by  fome  of  my  friends  ;  but,  on  the 
contrary,  the  charge  of  hypothefis  falls  on  thofe  who 
attempt  to  explain  them,  by  faying  that  they  are 
Jtiechanical  or  automatic ;  a  dodlrine  which,  if  it  is  at 
all  intelligible,  mufl  be  underflood  as  implying  the 
exiflence  of  fome  law  of  our  conftitution,  which  has 
been  hitherto  unobferved  by  philofophers  ;  and  to 
which,  I  believe,  it  will  be  difficult  to  find  any  thing 
analogous  in  our  conftitution. 

In  the  foregoing  obfervations,  I  have  had  in  view  a 
favourite  dodrine  of  Dr.  Hartley's ;  which  has  been 
maintained  alfo  of  late  by,  a  much  higher  authority,  I 
mean  Dr.  Reid. 

"  Habit  * "  (fays  this  ingenious  author)  "  differs 
"  from  inftind,  not  in  its  nature,  but  in  its  origin ; 
"  the  laft  being  natural,  the  firft  acquired.  Both 
"  operate  without  will  or  intention,  without  thought, 
"  and  therefore  may  be  called  mechanical  principles," 
In  another  paflage  t,  he  exprefles  himfelf  thus  :  "I 
*'  conceive  it  to  be  a  paxt  of  our  conftitution,  that 
"  what  we  have  been  accuftomed  to  do,  we  acquire 
"  not  only  a  facility  but  a  pronenefs  to  do  on  like  oc- 

*  Effays  on  the  Active  Powers  of  Man,  p,  128. 
f  Ibid.  p.  130. 

"  cafions  J 


112  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHT         Chap.  II. 

**  cafions  ;  fo  that  it  requires  a  particular  will  or  effort 
*'  to  forbear  it,  but  to  do  it  requires,  very  often,  no 
"  will  at  all.'* 

The  fame  dodrine  is  laid  down  ftill  more  explicitly 
by  Dr.  Hartley. 

*'  Suppofe,"  (fays  he,)  "  a  perfon  who  has  a  per- 
*'  feftly  voluntary  command  over  his  fingers,  to  begin 
"  to  learn  to  play  on  the  harpfichord.  The  firft  ftep 
*'  is  to  move  his  fingers  from  key  to  key,  with  a  flow 
"  motion,  looking  at  the  notes,  and  exerting  an  ex- 
"  prefs  aft  of  volition  in  every  motion.  By  degrees 
"  the  motions  cling  to  one  another,  and  to  the  im- 
"  preffions  of  the  notes,  in  the  way  of  affociation,  fo 
"  often  mentioned,  the  acts  of  volition  growing  lefs 
"  and  lefs  exprefs  all  the  time,  till  at  laft  they  become 
"  evanefcent  and  imperceptible.  For  an  expert  per- 
**  former  will  play  from  notes,  or  ideas  laid  up  in  the 
•*  memory,  and  at  the  fame  time  carry  on  a  quite 
*'  different  train  of  thoughts  in  his  mind  ;  or  even 
"  hold  a  converfation  with  another.  Whence  we 
"  may  conclude,  that  there  is  no  intervention  of  the 
♦*  idea,  or  ftate  of  mind,  called  Will  *."  Cafes  of 
this  fort.  Hartley  calls,  "  tranfitions  of  voluntary 
"  actions  into  automatic  ones." 

I  cannot  help  thinking  it  more  philofophical  to  fup- 
pofe,  that  thofe  anions  which  are  originally  voluntary, 
always  continue  fo ;  although  in  the  cafe  of  opera- 
tions which  are  become  habitual  in  confequence  of 
long  practice,  we  may  not  be  able  to  recollect  every 
different  volition.     Thus,  in  the  cafe  of  a  performer 

*  Vol.i.  p.  108,  109. 

on 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  II3 

on  the  harpfichord,  I  apprehend,  that  there  is  an  aft 
of  the  will  preceding  every  motion  of  every  finger, 
although  he  may  not  be  able  to  recolle6l  thefe  vo- 
litions afterwards ;  and  although  he  may,  during  the 
time  of  his  performance,  be  employed  in  carrying  on 
a  feparate  train  of  thought.  For,  it  muft  be  re- 
marked, that  the  mofl  rapid  performer  can,  when  he 
pleafes,  play  fo  flowly,  as  to  be  able  to  attend  to,  and 
to  recoiled,  every  feparate  a6:  of  his  will  in  the  vari- 
ous movements  of  his  fingers ;  and  he  can  gradually 
accelerate  the  rate  of  his  execution,  till  he  is  unable 
to  recoiled  thefe  ads.  Now,  in  this  inftance,  one 
of  two  fuppofitions  muft  be  made  ;  the  one  is,  that 
the  operations  in  the  two  cafes  are  carried  on  precifely 
in  the  fame  manner,  and  differ  only  in  the  degree  of 
rapidity  ;  and  that  when  this  rapidity  exceeds  a  cer- 
tain rate,  the  ads  of  the  will  are  too  momentary  to 
leave  any  impreffion  on  the  memory. — The  other  is, 
that  when  the  rapidity  exceeds  a  certain  rate,  the 
operation  is  taken  entirely  out  of  our  hands  ;  and 
is  carried  on  by  fome  unknown  power,  of  the 
nature  of  which  we  are  as  ignorant,  as  of  the 
caufe  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  or  of  the  mo- 
tion of  the  inteflines  *.     The  laft  fuppofition  feems  to 

me 

*  This  feems  to  have  been  the  opinion  of  Bifliop  Berkeley ,  whofe 
doftrine  concerning  the  nature  of  our  habitual  aftions,  coincides 
with  that  of  the  two  philofophers  already  quoted.  "  It  muft  be 
*'  owned,  we  are  not  confcious  of  the  fyftole  and  diaftole  of  the 
*'  heart,  or  the  motion  of  the  diaphragm.  It  may  not,  neverthe- 
"  lefs,  be  thence  inferred,  that  unknowing  nature  can  a6t  regu- 
"*  larly  as  well  as  ourfelves.     The  true  inference  is,  that  the  ielf- 

1  "  thinking 


I  14  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  li. 

me  to  be  fomewhat  fimilar  to  that  of  a  man  who 
fliould  mjiintain,  that,  although  a  body  projected 
with  a  moderate  velocity,  is  feen  to  pafs  through  all 
the  intermediate  fpaces  in  moving  from  one  place  to 
another,  yet  we  are  not  entitled  to  conclude,  that  this 
happens  when  the  body  moves  fo  quickly  as  to  be- 
come invifible  to  the  eye.  The  former  fuppofition  is 
fupported  by  the  analogy  of  many  other  fatls  in  our 
conflitution.  Of  fome  of  thefe,  I  have  already  taken 
notice ;  and  it  would  be  eafy  to  add  to  the  number. 

An   expert  accountant,    for  example,  can  fum 

up,  almofl  with  a  fmgle  glance  of  his  eye,  a  long 
column  of  figures.  He  can  tell  the  fum,  with  un- 
erring certainty  ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  he  is  un- 
able to  recolleft  any  one  of  the  figures  of  which  that 
fum  is  compofed :  and  yet  nobody  doubts,  that  each 
of  thefe  figures  has  paffed  through  his  mind,  or  fup- 
pofes,  that  when  the  rapidity  of  the  procefs  becomes 
fo  great  that  he  is  unable  to  recolle£l  the  various  fleps 
of  it,  he  obtains  the  refult  by  a  fort  of  infpiration.  This 


"  thinking  individual,  oi*  human  perfon,  is  not  the  real  author  of 
"  thofe  natural  motions.  And,  in  faft,  no  man  blames  himfelf,  if 
"  they  are  wrong,  or  values  himfelf,  if  they  are  right.  The  fame 
*'  may  be  faid  of  the  fingers  of  a  mufician,  which  fome  object 
*'  to  be  moved  by  habit,  which  underftands  not ;  it  being  evident 
•'  that  what  is  done  by  rule,  muft  proceed  from  fomething  that 
"  underftands  the  rule  ;  therefore,  if  not  from  the  mufician  him- 
"  felf,  from  fome  other  aftive  intelligence  ;  the  fame,  perhaps, 
*'  which  governs  bees  andfpiders,  and  moves  the  limbs  of  thofe  who 
*'  walk  in  tlieirfleep."— —See  a  Treatife,  entitled,  Siris,  p.  123. 
2d  edit. 

laft 


Chap.  II.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  I  j  r 

laft  fuppofition  would  be  perfeftly  analogous  to  Dr. 
Hartley's  doftrine  concerning  the  nature  of  our  habi- 
tual exertions. 

The  only  plaufible  objection  which,  I  think,  can 
be  offered  to  the  principles  I  have  endeavoured  to 
eftablifli  on  this  fubjeft,  is  founded  on  the  aftonifhing, 
and  almoft  incredible  rapidity,  they  necefTarily  fuppofe 
in  our  intellectual  operations. — VvThen  a  perfon,  for 
example,  reads  aloud ;  there  muft,  according  to  this 
doctrine,  be  a  feparate  volition  preceding  the  articula- 
tion of  every  letter  ;  and  it  has  been  found,  by  adual 
trial  *,  that  it  is  poffible  to  pronounce  about  two 
thoufand  letters  in  a  minute.  Is  it  reafonable  to 
fuppofe,  that  the  mind  is  capable  of  fo  many 
different  a£ts  in  an  interval  of  time  fo  very  incon- 
fiderable  ? 

With  refped  to  this  objection,  it  may  be  obferved, 
in  the  firft  place,  that  all  arguments  againfl  the  fore- 
going doctrine  with  refpedt  to  our  habitual  exertions, 
in  fo  far  as  they  are  founded  on  the  inconceivable  ra- 
pidity which  they  fuppofe  in  our  intelledual  opera- 
tions, apply  equally  to  the  common  doftrine  con^ 
cerning  our  perception  of  diftance  by  the  eye.  But 
this  is  not  all.     To  what  does  the  fuppofition  amount, 

*  Incredibili  velocitate  peraguntur  et  repetuntur  mufculorum 
contra£tiones.  Decent  curfus,  praefertim  quadrupedum  j  vel 
lingua,  quae  quadringinta  vocabula,  forte  bis  mille  literas,  expri- 
mit,  fpatio  temporis  quod  winntum  vocare  folemus,  quamvis  ad 
multas  literas  exprimendas  plures  mufculorum  contradliones  re- 
quirantur. 

ConfpeSius  Medkina  Theoret'ico'y  AiiR.  Jac,  Gregory .- 
Ed'tt.  altera,  p.  171. 

I  2  which 


Il6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  11. 

which  is  confidered  as  fo  incredible  ?  Only  to  this, 
that  the  mind  is  fo  formed,  as  to  be  able  to  carry  on 
certain  intellectual  proceffes,  in  intervals  of  time  too 
fliort  to  be  eftimated  by  our  faculties  ;  a  fuppofition 
which,  fo  far  from  being  extravagant,    is  fupported 
by  the  analogy  of   many  of  our  moft  certain  con- 
clufions  in  natural  philofophy.     The  difcoveries  made 
by  the  microfcope,    have  laid  open   to  our  fenfes  a 
world  of  wonders,  the  exiflence  of  which  hardly  any 
man  would    have  admitted    upon  inferior  evidence  j 
and  have  gradually  prepared  the  way  for  thofe  phy- 
fical  fpeculations,    which  explain  fome  of   the  moft 
extraordinary  phenomena  of  nature,  by  means  of  mo- 
difications of  matter  far  too  fubtile  for  the  examination 
of  our  organs.     Why  then  fhould  it  be  confidered  as 
unphilofophical,    after    having  demonftrated  the  ex- 
iftence  of  various  intelleftual  procefles  which  efcape 
our  attention  in  confequence  of  their  rapidity,  to  carry 
the  fuppofition  a  little  farther,  in  order  to  bring  under 
the  known  laws  of  the  human  conftitution,  a  clafs  of 
mental  operations,  which  muft  otherwife  remain  per- 
fedly  inexplicable?    Surely,  our    ideas  of  time  are 
merely  relative,  as  well  as  our  ideas  of  extenfion  ;  nor 
is  there  any  good  reafon   for  doubting,  that,  if  our 
powers  of  attention  and  memory  were  more  perfeft 
than  they  are,  fo  as  to  give  us  the  fame  advantage  in 
examining  rapid  events,  which  the  microfcope  gives 
for    examining    minute  portions    of  extenfion,  they 
would  enlarge  our  views  with  refpeft    to  the   intel- 
lectual world,  no  lefs  than  that  inftrument  has  with 
refpeft  to  the  material. 

It 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  II7 

It  may  contribute  to  remove,  ftill  more  completely, 
fome  of  the  fcruples  which  are  naturally  fuggefted  by 
the  foregoing  doftrine,  to  remark,  that,  as  the  great 
ufe  of  attention  and  memory  is  to  enable  us  to  treafure 
up  the  refults  of  our  experience  and  reflexion  for  the 
future  regulation  of  our  conduft,  it  would  have  an- 
fwered  no  purpofe  for  the  author  of  our  nature  to  have 
extended  their  province  to  thofe  intervals  of  time, 
which  we  have  no  occafion  to  eflimate  in  the  common 
bufmefs  of  life.  All  the  intellectual  procelfes  I  have 
mentioned  are  fubfervient  to  fome  particular  end, 
either  of  perception  or  of  aftion ;  and  it  would  have 
been  perfedly  fuperfluous,  if,  after  this  end  were 
gained,  the  fteps  which  are  inftrumental  in  bringing  it 
about,  were  all  treafured  up  in  the  memory.  Such 
a  conflitution  of  our  nature  would  have  had  no  other 
efFe£l  but  to  ftore  the  mind  with  a  variety  of  ufelefs 
particulars. 

After  all  I  have  faid,  it  will  perhaps  be  ftill  thought, 
that  fome  of  the  reafonings  1  have  offered  are  too  hy- 
pothetical ;  and  it  is  even  pofTible,  that  fome  may  be 
difpofed  rather  to  difpute  the  common  theory  of 
vifipn,  than  admit  the  conclufions  I  have  endeavoured 
to  eftabhfh.  To  iuch  readers  the  following  confider- 
ations  may  be  of  ufe,  as  they  afford  a  more  palpable 
inftance,  than  any  I  have  yet  mentioned,  of  the 
rapidity  with  which  the  thoughts  may  be  trained  by 
practice,  to  fhift  from  one  thing  to  another. 

When  an  equilibrift  balances  a  rod  upon  his  finger, 
not  only  the  attention  of  his  mind,  but  the  obfervation 
of  his  eye,  is  conftantly  requifite. — It  is  evident  that 
the  part  of  his  body  which  fupports   the    object  is 

I  3  never 


<^~' 


Il8  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  H. 

never  wholly  at  reft ;  otherwife  the  object  would 
no  more  ftand  upon  it,  than  if  placed  in  the  fame 
pofition  upon  a  table.  The  equilibrift,  therefore, 
mufl  watch,  in  the  very  beginning,  every  inclina- 
tion of  the  object  from  the  proper  pofition,  in 
order  to  counteract  this  inclination  by  a  con- 
ti-ary  movement.  In  this  manner,  the  objedt  has 
never  time  to  fall  in  any  one  direction,  and  is  fup- 
ported  in  a  way  fomewhat  analogous  to  that  in  which 
a  top  is  fupported  on  a  pivot,  by  being  made  to  fpin 
upon  an  axis. — That  a  perfon  fhould  be  able  to 
do  this  in  the  cafe  of  a  fnigle  object,  is  curious  ;  but 
that  he  fhould  be  able  to  balance  in  the  fame  way, 
two,  or  three,  upon  different  parts  of  his  body,  and 
at  the  fame  time  balance  himfelf  on  a  fmall  cord  or 
wire,  is  indeed  wonderful.  Nor  is  it  pofTible  to  con- 
ceive that,  in  fuch  an  inflance,  the  mind,  at  one  and 
the  fame  moment,  attends  to  thefe  different  equilibri- 
ums ;  for  it  is  not  merely  the  attention  which  is  re- 
quifite,  but  the  eye.  We  mufl  therefore  conclude, 
that  both  of  thefe  are  directed  fucceffively  to  the  dif- 
ferent equilibriums,  but  change  from  one  object  to 
another  with  fuch  velocity,  that  the  effed,  with  refpedt 
to  the  experiment,  is  the  fame  as  if  they  were  directed 
to  all  the  objefts  conflantly. 

It  is  worth  while  to  remark  farther,  with  refpect  to 
this  laff  illuflration,  that  it  affords  diredt  evidence  of 
the  poffibility  of  our  exertmg  ads  of  the  will,  which 
we  are  unable  to  recollect ;  for  the  movements  of  the 
equiUbrifl  do  not  fucceed  each  other  in  a  regular  order, 
like  thofe  of  the  harpfichord  player,  in  performing  a 
piece  of  mufic  ;  but  mufl  in  every  inflance  be  regu- 
lated 


Chap.  II.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  Iig 

lated  by  accidents,  which  may  vary  in  numberlefs 
refpefts,  and  which  indeed  mufl  vary  in  numberlefs 
refpeds,  every  time  he  repeats  the  experiment :  and 
therefore,  although,  in  the  former  cafe,  we  fhould 
fuppofe,  with  Hartley,  "  that  the  motions  cling  to 
"  one  another,  and  to  the  impreffions  of  the  notes, 
"  in  the  way  of  aifociation,  without  any  intervention 
"  of  the  ftate  of  mind  called  will,"  yet,  in  this 
inftance,  even  the  poffibility  of  fuch  a  fuppofition  is 
direftly  contradicted  by  the  fadt. 

The  dexterity  of  jugglers  (which,  by  the  wav, 
merits  a  greater  degree  of  attention  from  philofophers, 
than  it  has  yet  attraded,)  affords  many  curious  illuf- 
trations  of  the  fame  doctrine.  The  whole  of  this  art 
feems  to  me  to  be  founded  on  this  principle  ;  that  it 
is  poiTible  for  a  perfon,  by  long  pradice,  to  acquire  a 
power,  not  only  of  carrying  on  certain  intelledual 
proceffes  more  quickly  than  other  men,  (for  ail  the 
feats  of  legerdemain  fuppofe  the  exercife  of  obferva- 
tion,  thought,  and  volition,)  but  of  performing  a 
variety  of  movements  with  the  hand,  before  the  eyes 
of  a  company,  in  an  interval  of  time  too  fhort  to  en- 
able the  fpedators  to  exert  that  degree  of  attention 
which  is  neceifary  to  lay  a  foundation  for  memory  *. 

As  fome  philofophers  have  difputed  the  influence 
of  the  will  in  the  cafe  of  habits,  fo  others  (particu- 
larly Stahl  and  his  followers)  have  gone  into  the  op- 
pofite  extreme,  by  referring  to  the  will  all  the  vital 
motions.  If  it  be  admitted,  (fay  thefe  philofophers,) 
that  there  are  inftances  in  which  we  will  an  effed, 
without:  being  able  to  make  it  an  objed  of  attention, 

*  See  Note  [E]. 

I  4  is 


t20  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  Il- 

l's it  not  poflible  that,  what  we  commonly  call  the 
vital  and  involuntary  motions,  may  be  the  confe- 
quences  of  our  own  thought  and  volition?  But 
there  is  furely  a  wide  difference  between  thofe  cafes, 
in  which  the  mind  was  at  firft  confcious  of  thought 
and  volition,  and  gradually  loft  the  power  of  attend- 
ing to  them,  from  the  growing  rapidity  of  the  intel- 
letlual  procefs  ;  and  a  cafe  in  which  the  effed  itfelf  is 
perfectly  unknown  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,  even  after 
they  arrive  at  maturity,  and  in  which  this  effeQ:  has 
continued  to  take  place  with  the  moft  perfedl  regula- 
rity, from  the  very  beginning  of  their  animal  ejdftence, 
and  long  before  the  firft  dawn  of  either  reflexion  or 
experience. 

Some  of  the  followers  of  Stahl  have  ftated  the  fadl 
rather  inaccurately,  even  with  refpedt  to  our  habitual 
exertions.  Thus  Dr.  Porterfield,  in  his  Treatife  on 
the  Eye,  is  at  pains  to  prove,  that  the  foul  may  think 
and  will  without  knowledge  or  confcioufnefs.  But 
this,  I  own,  is  to  me  inconceivable.  The  true  ftate 
of  the  fa6t,  I  apprehend,  is,  that  the  mind  may  think 
and  will,  without  attending  to  its  thoughts  and  voli- 
tions, fo  as  to  be  able  afterwards  to  recollect  them. — 
Nor  is  this  merely  a  verbal  criticifm  ;  for  there  is  an 
important  difference  between  confcioufnefs  and  atten- 
tion, which  it  is  very  necefl'ary  to  keep  in  view,  in  or- 
der to  think  upon  this  fubjed:  with  any  degree  of 
precifion.     *  The  one  is  an  involuntary  ftate  of  the 

mind  ; 

*  The  diftin£lion  between  attention  and  confcioufnefs  is  pointed 
3Ut  by  Dr.  Reid,  in  his  Eflays  on  the  Intellcftual  Powers  of 
Man,  p.  60.  "  Attention  is  a  voluntary  a£t  ;  it  requires  an  ac- 
*'  tive  exertion  to  begin  and  to  continue   it;  and  it  may  be  con- 

*'  tinued 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  121 

mind  ;  the  other  is  a  voluntary  a6t :  the  one  has  no 
immediate  connexion  with  memory  ;  but  the  other  is 
fo  eflentially  fubfervient  to  it,  that,  without  fome 
degree  of  it,  the  ideas  and  perceptions  which  pafs 
through  the  mind,  feem  to  leave  no  trace  behind 
them. 

When  two  perfons  are  fpeaking  to  us  at  once,  we 
can  attend  to  either  of  them  at  pleafure,  without  be- 
ing much  diflurbed  by  the  other.  If  we  attempt  to 
liften  to  both,  we  can  underftand  neither.  The  faft 
feems  to  be,  that  when  we  attended  conflantly  to  one 
of  the  fpeakers,  the  v/ords  fpoken  by  the  other  make 
no  impreflion  on  the  memory,  in  confequence  of  our 
not  attending  to  them  j  and  affeft  us  as  little  as  if 
they  had  not  been  uttered.  This  power,  however, 
of  the  mind  to  attend  to  either  fpeaker  at  pleafure, 
fuppofes  that  it  is,  at  one  and  the  fame  time,  con- 
fcious  of  the  fenfations  which  both  produce. 

Another  well-known  fad  may  be  of  ufe  in  illuf- 
trating  the  fame  diftindion.  A  perfon  who  accident- 
ally lofes  his  fight,  never  fails  to  improve  gradually 
in  the  fenfibihty  of  his  touch.  = —  Nov/,  there  are  only 
two  ways  of  explaining  this.  The  one  is,  that,  in 
confequence  of  the  lofs  of  the  one  fenfe,  fome  change 
takes  place  in  the  phyfical  conftitution  of  the  body, 
fo  as  to  improve  a  difterent  organ  of  perception.  The 
other,  that  the  mind  gradually  acquires  a  power  of 

"  tinued  as  long  as  we  will ;  but  confcioufnefs  is  involuntary,  and 
"  of  no  contivniance,  changing  with  every  thought."  The  fame 
author  has  remarked,  that  thefe  two  operations  of  the  mind  have 
been  frequently  confounded  by  philofophvrg,  and  particularly  by 
Mr.  Locke. 

attend- 


122  ELEMENTS    OF    TPIE    PHILOSOPHY       Chdp.  II. 

attending  to  and  remembering  thofe  flighter  fenfa- 
tions  of  which  it  was  formerly  confcions,  but  which, 
from  our  habits  of  inattention,  made  no  impreflion 
whatever  on  the  memory.  No  one,  furely,  can  he- 
fitate  for  a  moment,  in  pronouncing  which  of  thefe 
two  fuppofitions  is  the  more  philofophical. 

Having  treated,  at  confiderable  length,  of  thofe 
habits  in  which  both  mind  and  body  are  corcerned, 
I  proceed  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  fome  pheno- 
mena which  are  purely  intelleclual ;  and  which,  I 
think,  are  explicable  on  the  fame  principles  with  thofe 
which  have  been  now  under  our  revie\v. 

Every  perfon  who  has  fludied  the  elements  of  geo- 
metry, muft  have  obferved  many  cafes  in  which  the 
truth  of  a  theorem  flruck  him  the  moment  he  heard 
the  enunciation.  I  do  not  allude  to  thofe  theorems 
the  truth  of  v/hich  is  obvious  almofl:  to  fenfe ;  fucTi 
as,  that  any  two  fides  of  a  triangle  are  greater  than 
the  third  fide ;  or  that  one  circle  cannot  cut  another 
circle  in  more  than  two  points  ;  but  to  fome  propofi- 
tions  with  refpedt  to  quantity,  confidered  abftradly, 
(to  fome,  for  example,  in  the  fifth  book  of  Euclid,) 
which  almofl  every  ftudent  would  be  ready  to  admit 
without  a  demonflration.  Thefe  propofitions,  how- 
ever, do  by  no  m.eans  belong  to  the  clafs  of  axioms  ; 
for  their  evidence  does  not  ftrike  every  perfon  equally, 
but  requires  a  certain  degree  of  quicknefs  to  per- 
ceive it.  At  the  fame  time,  it  frequently  happens, 
that,  although  we  are  convinced  the  propofition  is 
true,  we  cannot  flate  immediately  to  others  upon  what 
our  conviftion  is  founded.  In  fuch  cafes,  I  think  it 
highly  probable,  that  before  we  give  our  affent  to  the 
1 3  theorem, 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  127 

theorem,  a  procefs  of  thought  *  has  paffed  through 
the  mind,  but  has  pafled  through  it  fo  quickly,  that 
we  cannot,  without  difficulty,  arreft  our  ideas  in  their 
rapid  fucceffion,  and  ftate  them  to  others  in  their 
proper  and  logical  order.  It  is  fome  confirmation  of 
this  theory,  that  there  are  no  propofitions  of  which 
it  is  more  difficult  to  give  a  legitimate  proof  from  lirft 
principles,  than  of  thofe  which  are  only  removed  a 
few  fteps  from  the  clafs  of  axioms ;  and  that  thole 
men  who  are  the  mod  remarkable  for  their  quick  per- 
ception of  mathematical  truth,  are  feldom  clear  and 
methodical  in  communicating  their  knowledge  to 
others.  —  A  man  of  a  moderate  degree  of  quicknefs, 
the  very  firll  time  he  is  made  acquainted  with  the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  method  of  fluxions,  or 
of  the  method  of  prime  and  ultimate  ratios,  is  almoft 
inftantaneoufly  fatisfied  of  their  truth  ;  yet  how  diffi- 
cult is  it  to  demonftrate  thefe  principles  rigoroully  ! 

What  I  have  nov/  faid  with  refpe£l  to  mathema- 
tics, may  be  applied  in  a  great  meafure  to  the  other 
branches  of  knowledge.  How  many  quellions  daily 
occur  to  us,  in  morals,  in  politics,  and  in  common 
life ;  in  confidering  which,  we  almofl  inftantaneoufly 
fee  where  the  truth  lies,  although  we  are  not  in  a 
condition,  all  at  once,  to  explain  the  grounds  of  our 
convidlion !  Indeed,  I  apprehend,  there  are  few,  even 
among  thofe  who  have  devoted  themfelves  to  ftudy, 
but  who  have  not  been   habituated  to  communicate 

*  Of  the  nature  of  thefe  proceffes  of  thought,  I  (hall  treat 
^ully  in  another  part  of  my  workj  under  the  article  of  Reafon- 
ing.  I  have  expreffed  myfelf  concerning  them  in  this  chapter, 
in  as  general  terms  as  poflible. 

their 


124  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IL 

their  knowledge  to  others,  who  are  able  to  exhibit,  in 
their  natural  order,  the  different  fteps  of  any  invefli- 
gation  by  which  they  have  been  led  to  form  a  par- 
ticular conclufion.  The  common  obfervation,  there- 
fore, that  an  obfcure  elocution  always  indicates  an 
imperfeft  knowledge  of  the  fubjeft  ;  although  it  may 
perhaps  be  true  with  refpeft  to  men  who  have  culti- 
vated the  art  of  fpeaking,  is  by  no  means  to  be  relied 
on  as  a  general  rule,  in  judging  of  the  talents  of 
thofe  whofe  fpeculations  have  been  carried  on  with  a 
view  merely  to  their  own  private  fatisfaftion. 

In  the  courfe  of  my  own  experience,  I  have  heard 
of  more  than  one  inftance,  of  men  who,  without 
any  mathematical  education,  were  able,  on  a  little  re- 
flexion, to  give  a  folution  of  any  fimple  algebraical 
problem ;  and  who,  at  the  fame  time,  were  perfeclly 
incapable  of  explaining  by  what  fteps  they  obtained 
the  refult.  In  thefc  cafes,  we  have  a  diredt  proof  of 
the  polTibility  of  invefligating  even  truths  which  are 
pretty  remote,  by  an  intelleftual  procefs,  which,  as 
foon  as  it  is  jfinifhed,  vanifhes  almoft  entirely  from  the 
memory.  —  It  is  probable,  that  fomething  of  the  fame 
kind  takes  place  much  more  frequently  in  the  other 
branches  of  knowledge,  in"  which  our  reafonings  con- 
lift  commonly  but  of  a  few  fteps.  Indeed,  I  am  in- 
clined to  think,  that  it  is  in  this  way  that  by  far 
the  greater  part  of  our  fpeculative  conclufions  are 
formed. 

There  is  no  talent,  I  apprehend,  fo  elfential  to  a 
public  fpeaker,  as  to  be  able  to  ftate  clearly  every 
different  ftep  of  thofe  trains  of  thought  by  which  he 
himfelf  was  led  to  the  conclufions  he  wifhes  to  efta- 

blifh. 


Chap.  11.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  1 25 

blifh.  Much  may  be  here  done  by  ftudy  and  expe- 
rience. Even  in  thofe  cafes  in  which  the  truth  of  a 
propofition  feems  to  ftrike  us  inftantaneoufly,  although 
we  may  not  be  able,  at  firft,  to  difcover  the  media  of 
proof,  we  feldom  fail  in  the  difcovery  by  perfever- 
ance.  —  Nothing  contributes  fo  much  to  form  this 
talent  as  the  ftudy  of  metaphyfics ;  not  the  abfurd 
metaphyfics  of  the  fchools,  but  that  ftudy  which  has 
the  operations  of  the  mind  for  its  objed:.  By  habi- 
tuating us  to  reflect  on  the  fubjeds  of  our  confciouf- 
nefs,  it  enables  us  to  retard,  in  a  confiderable  de- 
gree, the  current  of  thought ;  to  ai'reft  many  of  thofe 
ideas,  which  would  otherwife  efcape  our  notice  ;  and 
to  render  the  arguments  which  we  employ  for  the 
conviftion  of  others,  an  exad  tranfcript  of  thofe  trains 
of  inquiry  and  reafoning,  which  originally  led  us  to 
form  our  opinions. 

Thefe  obfervations  lead  me  to  take  notice  of  an 
important  diftindion  between  the  intelleftual  habits  of 
men  of  fpeculation  and  of  adlion.  The  latter,  who 
are  under  a  neceflity  of  thinking  and  deciding  on  the 
fpur  of  the  occafion,  are  led  to  cultivate,  as  much  as 
poflible,  a  quicknefs  in  their  mental  operations  ;  and 
fometimes  acquire  it  in  fo  great  a  degree,  that  their 
judgments  feem  to  be  almoft  intuitive.  To  thofe,  on 
the  other  hand,  who  have  not  merely  to  form  opi- 
nions for  themfelves,  but  to  communicate  them  to 
others,  it  is  neceffary  to  retard  the  train  of  thought 
as  it  paiTes  in  the  mind,  fo  as  to  be  able  afterwards  to 
recoiled  every  different  ftep  of  the  procefs ;  a  habit,, 
which,  in  fome  cafes,  has  fuch  an  influence  on  the 
intelledual  powers,  that  there  are  meji,  who,  even  in 

their 


126  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  II. 

their  private  fpeculations,  not  only  make  ufe  of  words 
as  an  inflrument  of  thought,  but  form  thefe  words 
into  regular  fentences. 

It  may  perhaps  appear,  at  firft,  a  paradoxical  ob- 
fervation,  that  one  great  employment  of  philofophers, 
in  a  refined  age,  is  to  bring  to  light,  and  arrange, 
thofe  rapid  and  confufed  trains  of  thought,  which  ap- 
pear from  the  ftrudure  of  languages,  and  from  the 
monuments  of  ancient  laws  and  governments,  to  have 
paiTed  through  the  minds  of  men  in  the  moft  remote 
and  unenlightened  periods.  In  proof,  however,  of 
this,  it  is  fufficient  to  mention,  the  fyflematical  ana- 
logy which  we  find,  to  a  certain  degree,  running 
through  the  ftrufture  of  the  moil  imperfedt  tongues, 
(for  example,  in  the  formation  of  the  different  parts 
of  the  verbs,)  and  thofe  general  principles,  which  the 
philofophical  lawyer  traces  amidft  an  apparent  chaos 
of  precedents  and  flatutes.  In  the  language,  too,  of 
the  rudeft  tribe,  we  find  words  transferred  from  one 
fubjeft  to  another,  which  indicate,  in  the  mind  of  the 
individual  who  firfl  made  the  transference,  fome  per- 
ception of  refemblance  or  of  analogy.  Such  tranf- 
ferences  can  hardly  be  afcribed  to  accident,  but  may 
be  confidered  as  proofs  that  the  analogies  which  the 
philofopher  afterwards  points  out  between  the  objeds 
which  are  diftinguifhed  by  the  fame  name,  had  been 
perceived  by  the  inventors  of  language,  although  it 
is  more  than  probable  that  they  never  exprefled  them 
in  words,  nor  could  even  have  explained  them  if  they 
had  been  queflioned  on  the  fubjeft. 

Nor  will  this  appear  a  bold  or  incredible  fuppofi- 
tion,  if  we  reflect  on  the  fagacity  and  ingenuity  which 

favages. 


Chap.  II.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIxND.  1 27 

lavages,  and  even  peafants,  difcover,  in  overcoming 
the  difficulties  which  occur  in  their  fituation.  They 
do  not,  indeed,  engage  in  long  procefles  of  abftradl 
reafoning,  for  which  they  have  no  inclination,  and 
vi^hich  it  is  impoffible  to  carry  on  without  the  ufe  of 
a  cultivated  and  a  copious  language ;  but,  when 
prelTed  by  prefent  circumftances,  they  combine  means 
to  accomplifh  pardcular  ends,  in  a  manner  which  in- 
dicates the  exercife  both  of  invendon  and  of  reafon- 
ing. It  is  probable  that  fuch  proceffes  are  carried  on 
in  their  minds,  with  much  lefs  alliftance  from  lan- 
guage, than  a  philofopher  would  derive  on  a  limilar 
occafion ;  and  it  is  almoft  certain,  that  they  would 
find  themfelves  perfe£lly  capable  of  communicating 
to  others  the  fleps  by  which  they  were  led  to  their 
conclufions.  In  confequence  of  thefe  circumibmces, 
the  attainments  of  the  human  mind,  in  its  ruder  ftate, 
perifli  with  the  individual,  without  being  recorded  in 
wridng,  or  perhaps  exprefled  in  words ;  and  we  are 
left  to  infer  them  indirectly  from  the  ftruclure  of  lan- 
guage, or  from  the  monuments  of  ancient  cuftoms  and 
inftitutions. 

When  a  train  of  thought  leads  to  any  interefting 
conclufion,  or  excites  any  pleafant  feeling,  it  becomes 
peculiarly  difficult  to  arrefl  our  fleeting  ideas;  be- 
caufe  the  mind,  when  once  it  has  felt  the  pleafure, 
has  little  inclination  to  retrace  the  fteps  by  which  it 
arrived  at  it.  This  is  one  great  caufe  of  the  difficulty 
attending  philofophical  cridcifm.  When  a  critic  ex- 
plains to  us,  why  we  are  pleafed  with  any  particular 
beauty,  or  oflFended  with  any  defed,  it  is  evident, 
that  if  his  theory  be   juft,  the  circumftances  which 

he 


128  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Cliap.  IL 

he  points  out  as  the  foundation  of  our  pleafure  or  un- 
eafinefs,  muft  have  occurred  to  our  minds  before  we 
were  pleafed  with  the  beauty,  or  offended  with  the  de- 
feat. In  fuch  cafes,  it  fometimes  happens,  when  a 
critic  has  been  fortunate  in  his  theory,  that  we  recog- 
nize at  firft  fight  our  old  ideas,  and,  without  any  far- 
ther confideration,  are  ready  to  bear  teftimony  to  the 
truth,  from  our  own  confcioufnefs.  So  very  diffi- 
cult, however,  is  it  to  attend  to  the  ideas  which  ex- 
cite fuch  feelings,  that  it  often  appears  to  be  doubt- 
ful, whether  a  theory  be  right  or  wrong  ;  and  that 
where  there  is  every  reafon  to  believe  that  the  plea- 
fure is  produced  in  all  men  in  the  fame  way,  different 
critics  adopt  different  theories  with  refpeft  to  its  caufe. 
It  is  long  praftice  alone,  joined  to  what  is  commonly 
called  a  metaphyseal  turn  of  mind,  (by  which  I  think 
is  chiefly  to  be  underftood,  a  capacity  of  refleding  on 
the  fubjedts  of  our  confcioufnefs,)  that  can  render 
fuch  efforts  of  attention  eafy.  Exquifite  fenfibility, 
fo  far  from  being  ufeful  in  this  fpecies  of  criticifm, 
both  gives  a  difrelifh  for  the  fludy,  and  difqualifies  for 
purfuing  it. 

Before  we  leave  the  fubjeft  of  attention,  it  is  pro- 
per to  take  notice  of  a  queftion  which  has  been  Hated 
with  refpedl  to  it ;  whether  we  have  the  power  of  at- 
tending to  more  than  one  thing  at  one  and  the  fame 
inftant  j  or,  in  other  words,  whether  we  can  attend 
at  one  and  the  fame  inflant,  to  objefts  which  we  can 
attend  to  feparately  *  ?  This  queftion  has,  if  I  am 
not  miftaken,  been  already  decided  by  feveral  philo- 

*  I  have  added  this  explanatkjn  to  obviate  the  queftion,  what 
is  meant  by  one  object  ? 

fophers 


Chap.  II.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  I20 

fophers  in  the  negative ;  and  I  acknowledge,  for  my 
own  part,  that  although  their  opinion  has  not  only- 
been  called  in  queftion  by  others,  but  even  treated 
with  fome  degree  of  contempt  as  altogether  hypothe- 
tical, it  appears  to  me  to  be  the  mod  reafonable  and 
philofophical  that  we  can  form  on  the  fubjeft. 

There  is  indeed  a  great  variety  of  cafes,  in  which 
the  mind  apparently  exerts  different  a£ls  of  attention 
at  once ;  but  from  the  inflances  which  have  already 
been  mentioned,  of  the  aftoniihing  rapidity  of  thought, 
it  is  obvious,  that  all  this  may  be  explained,  without 
fuppofing  thefe  afts  to  be  co-exiflent ;  and  I  may  even 
venture  to  add,  it  may  all  be  explained  in  the  mofl 
fatisfadory  manner,  without  afcribing  to  our  intellec- 
tual operations,  a  greater  degree  of  rapidity  than  that 
with  which  we  know  from  the  fad  that  they  are 
fometimes  carried  on.  The  effedt  of  practice  in  in- 
creafmg  this  capacity  of  apparently  attending  to  dif- 
ferent things  at  once,  renders  this  explanation  of  the 
phenomenon  in  queftion,  more  probable  than  any 
other. 

The  cafe  of  the  equilibrift  and  rope-dancer  already 
mentioned,  is  particularly  favourable  to  this  explana- 
tion ;  as  it  affords  direct  evidence  of  the  poflibility  of 
the  mind's  exerting  different  fucceffive  a£ls  in  an  in- 
terval of  time  fo  Ihort,  as  to  produce  the  fame  fen- 
fible  effed,  as  if  they  had  been  exerted  at  one  and 
the  fame  moment.  In  this  cafe,  indeed,  the  rapidity 
of  thought  is  fo  remarkable,  that  if  the  different  ads 
of  the  mind  were  not  all  neceffarily  accompanied 
with  different  movements  of  the  eye,  there  can  be  no 
K  reafon 


I3«  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Cl.ap.  If. 

reafon  for  doubting,  that  the  philofopher:^;,  whofe  doc- 
trine I  am  now  controverting,  would  have  afferted, 
that  they  are  all  mathematically  co-exiftent. 

Upon  a  queflion,  however,  of  this  fort,  which  does 
not  admit  of  a  perfectly  direct  appeal  to  the  fact,  I 
would  by  no  means  be  underftood  to  decide  with  con- 
fidence ;  and  therefore  I  fhould  wifh  the  conclufions 
I  am  now  to  ftate,  to  be  received  as  only  condition- 
ally eftablifhed.  They  are  neceflary  and  obvious  con- 
fequences  of  the  general  principle,  "  that  the  mind 
**  can  only  attend  to  one  thing  at  once  ;'*  but  mud 
(land  or  fall  with  the  truth  of  that  fuppofition. 

it  is  commonly  underftood,  I  believe,  that,  in  a 
concert  of  mufic,  a  good  ear  can  attend  to  the  dif- 
ferent parts  of  the  mufic  feparately,  or  can  attend  to 
them  all  at  once,  and  feel  the  full  effect  of  the  har- 
mony. If  the  doctrine,  however,  which  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  eftablifh,  be  admitted,  it  will  follow, 
that,  in  the  latter  cafe,  the  mind  is  conftantly  vary- 
ing its  attention  from  the  one  part  of  the  mufic  to 
the  other,  and  that  its  operations  are  fo  rapid,  as  to 
give  us  no  perception  of  an  interval  of  time. 

The  fame  dodrine  leads  to  fome  curious  conclu- 
fions with  refpect  to  vifion.  Suppofe  the  eye  to  be 
fixed  in  a  particular  pofition,  and  the  picture  of  an 
obje£t  to  be  painted  on  the  retina.  Does  the  mind 
perceive  the  complete  figure  of  the  objett  at  once, 
or  is  this  perception  the  refult  of  the  various  per- 
ceptions we  have  of  the  different  points  in  the  out- 
line ?  With  refpect  to  this  queftion,  the  principles 
already   ftated   lead  me   to  conclude,  that  the  mind 

does 


Chap.  II.  OF    THE    HUMAN     MIND.  13 1 

does  at  one  and  the  fame  time  perceive  every  point 
in  the  outline  of  the  object,  (provided  the  whole  of 
it  be  painted  on  the  retina  at  the  fame  inftant,)  for 
perception,  hke  confcioufnefs,  is  an  involuntary  ope- 
ration. As  no  two  points,  however,  of  the  outline 
are  in  the  fame  direftion,  every  point,  by  itfelf,  con- 
ftitutes  juft  as  diflind  an  objed  of  attention  to  the 
mind,  as  if  it  were  feparated  by  an  interval  of  empty 
fpace  from  all  the  refl.  If  the  dodrine  therefore  for- 
merly flated  be  juft,  it  is  impoffible  for  the  mind  to 
attend  to  more  than  one  of  thefe  points  at  once  ; 
and  as  the  perception  of  the  figure  of  the  objeft,  im- 
plies a  knowledge  of  the  relative  fituation  of  the  dif- 
ferent points  with  refpetl  to  each  other,  we  muft 
conclude,  that  the  percepdon  of  figure  by  the  eye, 
is  the  refult  of  a  number  of  different  afts  of  atten- 
tion. Thefe  acls  of  attention,  however,  are  per- 
formed with  fuch  rapidity,  that  the  effed,  v/ith  re- 
fped  to  us,  is  the  fame  as  if  the  perception  were  in- 
llantaneous. 

In  farther  confirmation  of  this  reafoning,  it  may 
be  remarked,  that  if  the  perception  of  vifible  figure 
were  an  immediate  confequence  of  the  pi£lure  on  the 
retina,  we  fiiould  have,  at  the  firfl  glance,  as  diilin6l 
an  idea  of  a  figure  of  a  thoufand  fides,  as  of  a  tri- 
angle or  a  fquare.  The  truth  is,  that  when  the  figure 
is  very  fimple,  the  procefs  of  the  mind  is  fo  rapid, 
that  the  perception  feems  to  be  inftantaneous  ;  but 
when  the  fides  are  multiplied  beyond  a  certain  num- 
ber, the  interval  of  time  neccffary  for  thefe  different 
afts  of  attention  becomes  perceptible, 

K  2  It 


132  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  II. 

It  may  perhaps  be  alked,  what  I  mean  by  a  point 
in  the  outhne  of  a  figure,  and  what  it  is  that  confti- 
tutes  this  point  one  objeft  of  attention  ?  The  anfwer, 
I  apprehend,  is,  that  this  point  is  the  minimum  vifibile. 
If  the  point  be  lefs,  we  cannot  perceive  it  :  if  it  be 
greater,  it  is  not  all  feen  in  one  diredion. 

If  thefe  obfervations  be  admitted,  it  will  follow, 
that,  without  the  faculty  of  memory,  we  could  have 
had  no  perception  of  vifible  figure. 


Chap.  III.  OF    THE   HUMAN   MIND.  133 


CHAPTER    THIRD. 
Of  Conception. 

BY  Conception,  I  mean  that  power  of  the  mind,  |- 
which  enables  it  to  form  a  notion  of  an  abfent  \ 
objeft  of  perception ;  or  of  a  fenfation  which  it  has  " 
formerly  felt.  I  do  not  contend  that  this  is  exclu-  _j 
fively  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word,  but  I  think 
that  the  faculty  which  I  have  now  defined,  deferves 
to  be  diflinguiihed  by  an  appropriated  name. 

Conception  is  often  confounded  with  other  powers. 
When  a  painter  makes  a  picture  of  a  friend,  who  is  .., 
abfent  or  dead,  he  is  commonly  faid  to  paint  from 
memory :  and  the  expreffion  is  fufficiently  correct  for 
common  converfation.  But  in  an  analyfis  of  the  - 
mind,  there  is  ground  for  a  diftindion.  The  power 
of  conception  enables  him  to  make  the  features  of 
his  friend  an  obje6l  of  thought,  fo  as  to  copy  the  re- 
femblance ;  the  power  of  memory  recognifes  thefe 
features  as  a  former  object  of  perception.  Every  adt 
of  memory  includes  an  idea  of  the  part  j  conception 
implies  no  idea  of  time  whatever  *. 

*  Shakefpeare  calls  this  power  "  the  mind's  eye." 

Hamlet. — "  My  father  !   Methinks  I  fee  my  father. 
Horatio. — "  Where,  my  Lord? 
Hamlet,  — ""  In  my  mind's  eye,  Horatio." 

A&.  I.  Scene  4. 

K  3  Accordint;' 


134  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPH?       Chap.  III. 

According  to  this  view  of"  the  matter,  the  word  con- 
ception  correfponds  to  what  was  called  by  the  fchool- 
men  funple  apprehenfion  ;  with  this  difference  only, 
that  they  included,  under  this  name,  our  .apprehen- 
fion  of  general  propofitions ;  whereas  I  fhould  wifti 
to  limit  the  application  of  the  word  conception  to  our 
fenfations,  and  the  objects  of  our  perceptions.  Dr. 
Reid,  in  his  Inquiry,  fubftitutes  the  word  conception 
inftead  of  the  fmiple  apprehenfion  of  the  fchools,  and 
employs  it  in  the  fame  extenfive  fignification.  I 
think  it  may  contribute  to  make  our  ideas  more  dif- 
tind,  to  reflrid  its  meaning :  —  and  for  fuch  a  re- 
ftri^lion,  we  have  the  authority  of  philofophers  in 
a  cafe  perfectly  analogous.  —  In  ordinary  language, 
we  apply  the  fame  word  perception^  to  the  knowledge 
which  we  have  by  our  fenfes  of  external  obje6ts,  and 
to  our  knowledge  of  fpeculative  truth  :  and  yet  an 
author  would  be  juftly  cenfured,  who  fhould  treat  of 
thefe  two  operations  of  the  mind  under  the  fame 
article  of  perception.  I  apprehend  there  is  as  wide 
a  difference  between  the  conception  of  a  truth,  and 
the  conception  of  an  abfent  objedt  of  fenfe,  as  be- 
tween the  perception  of  a  tree,  and  the  perception  of 
a  mathematical  theorem. —  I  have  therefore  taken  the 
liberty  to  diflinguifh  alfo  the  two  former  operations  o^ 
the  mind :  and  under  the  article  of  conception^  fhall 
confine  myfelf  to  that  faculty  whofe  province  it  is  to 
enable  us  to  form  a  notion  of  our  paft  fenfations,  or 
of  the  objeds  of  fenfe  that  we  have  formerly  per- 
ceived. 

Conception  is  frequently  ufed  as  fynonymous  with 
imagination.     Dr.  Reid  fays,  that  "  imagination,  in 

II  "its 


Chap.  III.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  135 

**  its  proper  fenfe,  fignifies  a  ilvely  conception  of  ob- 
**  jefts  of  fight.'*  "  This  is  a  talent"  (he  remarks) 
^'  of  importance  to  poets  and  orators ;  and  deferves  a 
*'  proper  name,  on  account  of  its  connexion  with 
*'  their  arts."  He  adds,  that  "  imagination  is  dif- 
"  tinguifhed  from  conception!,  as  a  part  from  a 
"  whole." 

I  fhall  not  inquire,  at  prefent,  into  the  proper 
Englifh  meaning  of  the  words  conception  and  imagi- 
nation.  In  a  lludy  fuch  as  this,  fo  far  removed  from 
the  common  purpofes  of  fpeech,  fome  latitude  may 
perhaps  be  allowed  in  the  ufe  of  words  ;  provided 
only  we  define  accurately  thofe  we  employ,  and  ad- 
here to  our  own  definitions. 

The  bufinefs  of  conception,  according  to  the  ac-  t 
count  I  have  given  of  it,  is  to  prefent  us  with  an  exact 
tranfcript  of  what  we  have  felt  or  perceived.  But 
we  have,  moreover,  a  power  of  modifying  our  con- 
ceptions, by  combining  the  parts  of  different  ones 
together,  fo  as  to  form  new  wholes  of  our  own  crea- 
tion. I  fliall  employ  the  word  imagination  to  exprefs  - 
this  power  ;  and,  I  apprehend,  that  this  is  the  proper 
fenfe  of  the  word  ;  if  imagination  be  the  power  which 
gives  birth  to  the  produftions  of  the  poet  and  the 
painter.  This  is  not  a  fimple  faculty  of  the  mind. 
It  prefuppofes  abftraction,  to  feparate  from  each  other 
qualities  and  circumftances  which  have  been  perceived 
in  conjunction  ;  and  alfo  judgment  and  tafte  to  dired: 
us  in  forming  the  combinations.  If  they  are  made 
wholly  at  random,  they  are  proofs  of  infanity  *. 

The 

*  In  common  difcourfe,  we  often  ufe  the  phrafe  of  tbhiking  upon 
an  ohje3y  to  exprefs  what  I  here  call,  the  conception  of  it.— —In 

K4  the 


136  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  III. 

The  firfl  remarkable  fa6l  which  flrikes  us  with  re- 
fpeQ:  to  conception  is,  that  we  can  conceive  the  ob- 
jeds  of  fome  fenfes  much  more  eafily  than  thofe  of 
others.  Thus  we  can  coiiceive  an  abfent  vifible 
object,  fuch  as  a  building  that  is  familiar  to  us,  much 
more  eafily  than  a  particular  found,  a  particular  tafte, 
or  a  particular  pain,  which  we  have  formerly  felt.  It 
Is  probable,  however,  that  this  power  might  be  im- 
proved in  the  cafe  of  fome  of  our  fenfes.  Few  people, 
I  believe,  are  able  to  form  a  very  diftin6[  conception 
of  founds  ;  and  yet  it  is  certain,  that,  by  practice,  a 
perfon  may  acquire  a  power  of  amufmg  himfelf  with 
reading  written  mufic.  And  in  the  cafe  of  poetical 
numbers,  it  is  univerfally  known,  that  a  reader  may 
enjoy  the  harmony  of  the  verfe,  without  articulating 
the  words,  even  in  a  whifper.  In  fuch  cafes,  I  take 
for  granted,  that  our  pleafure  arifes  from  a  very 
ftrong  conception  of  the  founds  which  we  have  been 
accullomed  to  alTociate  with  particular  written  cha- 
rafters. 


the  following  paffage,  Shakefpeare  ufes  the  former  of  thefe 
plirafes,  and  the  words  tmaginaiion  and  apprehenjion  as  fynonymoxis 
with  each  other. 

——Who  can  hold  a  fire  in  his  hand. 

By  thinking  on  the  frofty  Caucafus  ? 

Or  cloy  the  hungry  edge  of  appetite. 

By  bare  imagination  of  a  feaft  ? 

Or  wallow  naked  in  December's  fnow. 

By  thinking  on  fantaftic  fummer's  heat  ? 

Oh  no  !   the  apprehenfion  of  the  good 

Gives  but  the  greater  feeling  to  the  worfe. 

K.  Richard  II.  Aft  1.  Scene  6. 

The 


Chap.  II r.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  137 

The  peculiarity  in  the  cafe  of  vifible  objects,  feems 
to  arife  from  this ;  that  when  we  think  of  a  found  or 
of  a  taftc,  the  objed  of  our  conception  is  one  fmgle 
detached  fenfation ;  whereas  every  vifible  objed  is 
complex  J  and  the  conception  which  we  form  of  it  as 
a  whole,  is  aided  by  the  alfociation  of  ideas.  To 
perceive  the  force  of  this  obfervation,  it  is  necelTary  to 
recoiled:  what  was  formerly  faid  on  the  fubje£l  of 
attention.  As  we  cannot  at  one  inftant  attend  to 
every  point  of  the  pidure  of  an  objed  on  the  retina, 
fo,  I  apprehend,  we  cannot  at  one  inftant  form  a 
conception  of  the  whole  of  any  vifible  objed ;  but 
that  our  conception  of  the  objed  as  a  whole,  is  the 
refult  of  many  conceptions.  The  alfociation  of  ideas 
conneds  the  different  parts  together,  and  prefents 
them  to  the  mind  in  their  proper  arrangement;  and 
the  various  relations  which  thefe  parts  bear  to  one 
another  in  point  of  lituation,  contribute  greatly  to 
flrengthen  the  alfociations.  It  is  fome  confirmation  of 
this  theory,  that  it  is  more  eafy  to  remember  a  fuc- 
ceiTion  of  founds,  than  any  particular  found  which  we 
have  heard  detached  and  unconneded. 

The  power  of  conceiving  vifible  objeds,  like  all 
other  powers  that  depend  on  the  alfociation  of  ideas, 
may  be  wonderfully  improved  by  habit.  A  perfon 
accuflomed  to  drawing,  retains  a  much  more  perfed 
notion  of  a  building  or  of  a  landfcape  which  he  has 
feen,  than  one  who  has  never  pradifed  that  art. 
A  portrait  painter  traces  the  form  of  the  human  body 
from  memory,  with  as  little  exertion  of  attention, 
as  he  employs  in  writing  the  letters  which  compofc 
his  name. 

In 


^3^  ELEMENTS  or  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  III. 

In  the  power  of  conceiving  colours,  too,  there 
are  ftriking  differences  among  individuals :  and,  in- 
deed, I  am  inclined  to  fufpecl,  that,  in  the  greater 
number  of  iuilances,  the  fuppofed  defects  of  fight  in 
this  refpecl,  ought  to  be  afcribed  rather  to  a  defect  in 
the  power  of  conception.  One  thing  is  certain,  that 
we  often  fee  men  who  are  perfectly  fenfible  of  the  dif- 
ference between  two  colours  when  they  are  prefented 
to  them,  who  cannot  give  names  to  thefe  colours, 
with  confidence,  when  they  fee  them  apart ;  and  are 
perhaps  apt  to  confound  the  one  with  the  other. 
Such  men,  it  fliould  feem,  feel  the  fenfation  of  colour 
like  other  men,  when  the  object  Is  prefent,  but  are 
incapable  (probably  in  confequence  of  fome  early  habit 
of  inattention)  to  conceive  the  fenfation  diftindly 
"when  the  object  is  removed.  Without  this  power  of 
conception,  it  is  evidently  impoffible  for  them,  how- 
ever lively  their  fenfations  may  be,  to  give  a  name  to 
any  colour ;  for  the  application  of  the  name  fuppofes 
not  only  a  capacity  of  receiving  the  fenfation,  but  a 
power  of  comparing  it  with  one  formerly  felt.  iVt 
the  fame  time,  I  would  not  be  underflood  by  thefe 
obfervations  to  deny,  that  there  are  cafes,  in  which 
there  is  a  natural  defeat  of  the  organ  in  the  per- 
ception of  colour.  In  fome  cafes,  perhaps,  the  fenfa- 
tion is  not  felt  at  all ;  and  in  others,  the  faintnefs  of 
the  fenfation  may  be  one  caufe  of  thofe  habits  of  in- 
attention, from  which  the  incapacity  of  conception  has 
arifcn. 
/  A  talent  for  lively  defcription,  at  leafl  in  the  cafe 
\  of  fenfible  objeds,  depends  chiefly  on  the  degree  in 
'  which  the  defcriber  poflefles  the  power  of  conception. 

We 


chap.  III.  OF   THE    HUMAJI    MIND.  135 

We  may  remark,  even   in  common  converfation,  a 
ftriking  difference  among  individuals  in  this  refped. 
One  man,   in  attempting  to  convey  a  notion  of  any 
objedt  he  has  feen,  feems  to  place  it  before  him,  and 
to  paint   from  actual  perception :  another,  although 
not  deficient  in   a  ready  elocution,  finds  himfelf  in 
fuch  a  fituation  confufed  and  embarraffed  among  a 
number  of  particulars  imperfectly  apprehended,  which 
crowd  into  his  mind  without  any  jufl  order  and  con- 
nedtion.    Nor  is  it  merely  to  the  accuracy  of  our  de- 
fcriptions  that  this  power  is  fubfervient :  it  contributes 
more  than  any  thing  elfe  to  render  them  ftriking  and 
expreffive  to  others,  by  guiding  us  to  a  feledlion  of 
fuch  circumftances  as  are  moft  prominent  and  charac- 
teriftical ;  infomuch  that  I  think  it  may  reafonably  be 
doubted,  if  a  perfon  would  not  write  a  happier  de- 
fcription  of  an  objedt  from  the  conception  than  from 
the  aftual   perception  of  it.     It   has  been  often  re-  "i 
marked,  that  the  perfeftion  of  defcription  does  not  I 
confift  in  a  minute  fpecification  of  circumftances,  but  I 
in  a  judicious  feleclion  of  them ;  and  that  the   befl  I. 
rule  for  making  the  feleftion  is,  to  attend  to  the  par-  | 
ticulars  that  make  the  deepeft  impreflion  on  our  own  \ 
minds.     When  the  objeft  is  adually  before  us,  it  is*^ 
extremely  difHcult  to  compare  the  imprelTions  which 
different  circumftances  produce  ;  and  the  very  thought 
of  writing  a  defcription,  would  prevent   the   impref- 
lions  which  would  otherwife   take  place.     When  we 
afterwards  conceive  the  obje£t,  the  reprefentation  of 
it  we  form  to  ourfelves,  however  lively,  is  merely  an 
outline ;  and  is  made  up  of  thofe  circumftances,  which 
really  ftruck  us  moft  at  the  moment  j  while  others  of 


I40  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  III. 

lefs  importance  are  obliterated.  The  impreflion,  in- 
deed, which  a  circumflance  makes  on  the  mind,  will 
vary  confiderably  with  the  degree  of  a  perfon's  tafte ; 
but  I  am  incl'v.ed  to  think,  that  a  man  of  lively  con- 
ceptions, who  paints  from  thefe,  while  his  mind  is  yet 
warm  from  the  original  fcene,  can  hardly  fail  to  fuc- 
ceed  in  defcriptive  compofition. 

The  facts  and  obfervations  which  I  have  now  men- 
tioned, are  applicable  to  conception,  as  diflinguifhed 
from  imagination.  The  two  powers,  however,  are 
very  nearly  allied  ;  and  are  frequently  fo  blended, 
that  it  is  difficult  to  fay,  to  which  of  the  two,  fome 
particular  operations  of  the  mind  are  to  be  referred. 
There  are  alfo  many  general  fads  which  hold  equally 
with  refpe£l  to  both.  The  obfervations  which  follow. 
If  they  are  well  founded,  are  of  this  number,  and 
might  have  been  introduced  with  equal  propriety  un- 
der either  article.  I  mention  them  here,  as  I  fliall 
have  occafion  to  refer  to  them  in  the  courfe  of  the 
following  work,  in  treating  of  fome  fubjefts,  which 
will  naturally  occur  to  our  examination,  before  we 
have  another  opportunity  of  confidering  this  part  of 
our  conflitution. 

It  is  a  common,  I  believe  I  may  fay  an  univerfal, 
doftrine  among  logicians,  that  conception  (or  ima- 
gination, which  is  often  ufed  as  fynonymous  with  it) 
is  attended  with  no  belief  of  the  exiflence  of  its  objed:. 
"  Perception,"  fays  Dr.  Reid,  *'  is  attended  with  a 
"  belief  of  the  prefent  exiftence  of  its  objed ;  me- 
"  mory,  with  a  belief  of  its  paft  exiflence ;  but  ima- 
"  gination  is  attended  with  no  belief  at  all ;  and  was 
"  therefore  called  by  the  fchool-men,  apprehenfio 
"  Jtmplex.^* 

i^  It 


Chap.  III.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  I4I 

It  is  with  great  diffidence,  that  I  prefume  to  call  in. 
queftion  a  principle,  which  has  been  fo  generally  re- 
ceived ;  yet  there  are  feveral  circumftances  which  lead 
me  to  doubt  of  it.  If  it  were  a  fpecifical  diftindion 
between  perception  and  imagination,  that  the  former 
is  always  attended  with  belief,  and  the  latter  with 
none ;  then  the  more  lively  our  imagination  were  of 
any  objedl,  and  the  more  completely  that  objeft  oc- 
cupied the  attention,  the  lefs  would  we  be  apt  to  be- 
lieve its  exiftence ;  for  it  is  reafonable  to  think,  that 
when  any  of  our  powers  is  employed  feparately  from 
the  reft,  and  there  is  nothing  to  withdraw  the  attention 
from  it,  the  laws  which  regulate  its  operation  will  be 
moft  obvious  to  our  obfervation,  and  will  be  moft 
completely  difcriminated  from  thofe  which  are  charac- 
teriftical  of  the  other  powers  of  the  mind.  So  very 
different  however  is  the  faft,  that  it  is  matter  of  com- 
mon remark,  that  when  imagination  is  very  lively,  we 
are  apt  to  afcribe  to  its  objects  a  real  exiftence,  as  in 
the  cafe  of  dreaming  or  of  madnefs ;  and  we  may  add, 
in  the  cafe  of  thofe  who,  in  fpite  of  their  own  general 
belief  of  the  abfurdity  of  the  vulgar  ftories  of  appari- 
tions, dare  not  truft  themfelves  alone  with  their  own 
imaginations  in  the  dark.  That  imagination  is  in  thefe 
inftances  attended  with  belief,  we  have  all  the  evidence 
that  the  nature  of  the  thing  admits  of;  for  we  feel 
and  aO:  in  the  fame  manner  as  we  ihould  do,  if  we 
believed  that  the  objeds  of  our  attention  were  real  j 
which  is  the  only  proof  that  metaphyficians  produce, 
or  can  produce,  of  the  belief  which  accompanies  per- 
ception. 


142  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOrHY         Chap.  III. 

In  thefe  cafes,  the  fact  that  I  wifh  to  eftablifh  is  fo 
ftriking,  that  it  has  never  been  called  in  queftion  ;  but 
in  moil  cafes,  the  imprclfion  which  the  objects  of  ima- 
gination make  on  the  mind  is  fo  momentary,  and  is  fo 
immediately  corrected  by  the  furrounding  objeds  of 
perception,  that  it  has  not  time  to  influence  our  con- 
duct. Hence  we  are  apt  to  conclude  on  a  fuperficial 
view,  that  imagination  is  attended  with  no  belief ;  and 
the  conclufion  is  furely  jufl  in  mod  cafes,  if  by  belief 
we  mean  a  permanent  conviction  which  influences  our 
conduct.  But  if  the  word  be  ufed  in  the  flrict  logical 
fenfe,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  after  the  mofl:  careful 
attention  to  what  I  experience  in  myfelf,  that  the  ex- 
ercife  both  of  conception  and  imagination  is  always 
accompanied  with  a  belief,  that  their  obje6ts  exift*. 

When 

•  As  the  foregoing  reafoning,  though  fatisfaAory  to  myfelf, 
has  not  appeared  equally  fo  to  fome  of  my  friends  ;  I  fhould  wifh 
the  reader  to  confider  the  remarks  which  I  now  offer,  as  amount- 
ing rather  to  a  querv,  than  to  a  decided  opinion. 

May  I  take  the  liberty  of  adding,  that  one  of  the  arguments 
which  I  have  Hated,  in  oppof.tion  to  the  common  doftrine  con- 
cerning imagination,  appears  to  me  to  be  authorifed,  in  fome 
meafure,  by  the  following  reafoning  of  Dr.  Reid's  on  a  different 
fubjeft  ?  In  conlidering  thofe  fudden  burfls  of  paffion,  which  lead 
us  to  wreak  our  vengeance  upon  inanimate  objefts,  he  endeavourg 
to  fliew,  that  we  have,  in  fuch  cafes,  a  momentary  belief  that  the 
objeft  is  alive,  "  I  confefs,"  fays  he,  "  it  feems  to  be  impof- 
"  fible,  that  there  fliould  be  refentment  againft  a  thing,  which,  at 
"  that  very  moment,  is  confidered  as  inanimate  ;  and  confequenlly 
"  incapable  either  of  intending  hurt,  or  of  being  punillied. — , 
"  There  mufl,  therefore,  I  conceive,  be  fome  momentary  notion 
««  or  conception,  that  the  objcd  of  our  refentment  is  capable  of 
**  punidiment." 

In 


Chap.  ni.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  I4J 

When  a  painter  conceives  the  face  and  figure  of  an 
abfent  friend,  in  order  to  draw  his  pidure,  he  believes 
for  the  moment  that  his  friend  is  before  him.  The 
belief,  indeed,  is  only  momentary  ;  for  it  is  extremely 
difficult,  in  our  waldng  hours,  to  keep  up  a  fleady 
and  undivided  attention  to  any  objed:  we  conceive 
or  imagine ;  and,  as  foon  as  the  conception  or  the 
imagination  is  over,  the  belief  which  attended  it  is  at  an 
end.     We  find  that  we  can  recai  and  difmifs  the  ob- 


In  another  paflage,  the  fame  author  remarks,  that  "■  men  may 
**  be  governed,  in  their  pra6tice,  by  a  belief,  which,  in  fpeculation, 
"  they  reje6t." 

"  I  knew  a  man"  (fays  he,)  ''  who  was  as  much  convinced  as 
'*  any  man,  of  the  folly  of  the  popular  belief  of  apparitions  in  the 
*♦  dark  :  yet  he  could  not  fleep  in  a  room  alone,  nor  go  alone  into 
"  a  room  in  the  dark.  Can  it  be  faid,  that  his  fear  did  not  imply 
*'  a  belief  of  danger  ?  This  is  impoffible.  Yet  his  philofophy 
'*  convinced  him,  that  he  was  in  no  more  danger  in  the  dark  when 
*♦  alone,  than  with  company.  Here  an  unreafonable  belief,  which 
*■'  was  merely  a  prejudice  of  the  nurfery,  ftuck  fo  faft  as  to  govern 
*'  his  condudt,  in  oppoiition  to  his  fpeculative  belief  as  a  philofo- 
'*  pher,  and  a  man  of  fenfe.'' 

*'  There  are  few  perfons  who  can  look  down  from  the  battlement 
"  of  a  very  high  tower  without  fear  ;  while  their  reafon  convinces 
"  them,  that  they  are  in  no  more  danger  than  when  ftanding  upon 
"  the  ground." 

Thefe  fa6ts  are  eafily  explicable,  on  the  fuppofition,  that  when* 
ever  the  objedls  of  imagination  engrofs  the  attention  wholly, 
(which  they  may  do,  in  oppofition  to  any  fpeculative  opinion  with 
refpedt  to  their  non-exillence,)  they  produce  a  temporary  belief  of 
their  reality. —  Indeed,  in  the  laft  paffage,  Dr.  Keid  feems  to  admit 
this  to  be  the  cafe  ;  for,  to  fay  that  a  man  who  has  a  dread  of  ap- 
paritions, believes  himfelf  to  be  in  danger  when  left  alone  in.  the 
dark,  is  to  fay,  in  other  words,  that  he  believes  (for  the  time) 
that  the  objefts  of  his  imagination  are  real. 

ieds 


144  ELEMENTS  OF  tHE  PHILOSOPHY       Cl.ap.  III. 

je6ls  of  thefe  powers  at  pleafure ;  and  therefore  we 
learn  to  confider  them  as  creations  of  the  mind,  which 
have  no  feparate  and  independent  exiftence. 

The  compatibility  of  fuch  a  fpeculative  difbelief,  as 
I  have  here  fuppofed,  of  the  exiftence  of  an  objed, 
with  a  contrary  momentary  belief,  may  perhaps  be 
more  readily  admitted,  if  the  following  expeiiment 
be  confidered  with  attention. 

Suppofe  a  lighted  candle  to  be  fo  placed  before  a 
concave  mirror,  that  the  image  of  the  flame  may  be 
feen  between  the  mirror  and  the  eye  of  the  oblerver. 
In  this  cafe,  a  perfon  who  is  acquainted  with  the  prin- 
ciples of  optics,  or  who  has  feen  the  experiment  made 
before,  has  fo  flrong  a  fpeculative  convidion  of  the 
non-exiftence  of  the  objeft  in  that  place  where  he  fees 
its  image,  that  he  would  not  hefitate  to  put  his  finger 
to  the  apparent  flame,  without  any  apprehenfion  of 
injury. 

Suppofe,  however,  that  in  fuch  a  cafe  it  were  pof- 
fible  for  the  obferver  to  banifh  completely  from  his 
thoughts  all  the  circumflances  of  the  experiment, 
and  to  confine  his  attention  wholly  to  his  perception  ; 
would  he  not  believe  the  image  to  be  a  reality  ;  and 
would  he  not  exped  the  fame  confequences  from 
touching  it,  as  from  touching  a  real  body  in  a  ftate 
of  inflammation  ?  If  thefe  queftions  be  anfwered  in 
the  affirmative,  it  will  follow ;  that  the  effedi  of  the 
perception,  while  it  engages  the  attention  completely 
to  itfelf,  is  to  produce  belief;  and  that  the  fpeculative 
difbelief,  according  to  which  our  condu£t  in  ordinary 
cafes  is  regulated,  is  the  refult  of  a  recolledion  of  the 

various 


Chap.  III.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  I^^ 

various   circumftances  with  which   the  experiment  is 
accompanied. 

If,  in  fuch  a  cafe  as  I  have  noW  fuppofed,  the  ap- 
Dearance  exhibited  to  us  is  of  fuch  a  nature,  as   to 
threaten  us  with  any  immediate  danger,  the  efFe<5l   is 
the  fame  as  if  we  were  to  banifh   from  our  thoughts 
the  circumftances  of  the  experiment,  and  to  limit  our 
attention  folely  to  what  we  perceive  :  for  here  the  be- 
lief, which  is  the  firft   effe6l   of  the  perception,  alarms 
our  fears,  and  influences  our  conduft,  before  refleftion 
has  time  to  operate.     In  a  very  ingenious   optical  de- 
ception, which  was  lately   exhibited  in   this  city,   the 
image  of  a  flower  was  prefented  to  the  fpedlator  ;  and 
when  he  was  about  to  lay  hold  of  it  with  his  hand,  a 
ftroke  was  aimed  at  him  by  the  image  of  a  dagger.     If 
a  perfon  who  has  feen  this  experiment  is  afl^ed,  in  his 
cooler  moments,  whether  or  not  he  believes  the  dag- 
ger which  he  faw  to  be  real,  he  will  readily  anfwer  in 
the  negative ;  and  yet  the  accurate  ftatement  of  the 
fad  undoubtedly  is,  that  the  firft  and  the  proper  effe£t 
of  the  perception  is  belief ;  and  that  the  diflbelief  he 
feels,  is  the  effect  of  fubfequent  reflexion. 

The  fpeculative  difbeiief  which  we  feel  with  refpecl 
to  the  illuflons  of  imagination,  I  conceive  to  be  analo- 
gous to  our  fpeculative  difbehef  of  the  exiftence  of 
the  object  exhibited  to  the  eye  in  this  optical  decep- 
tion ;  as  our  belief  that  the  illufions  of  imagination 
are  real,  v.hile  that  faculty  occupies  the  mind  exclu- 
fively,  is  analogous  to  the  belief  produced  by  the  op- 
tical deception  while  the  attention  is   limited  to  our 

L  perception, 


246  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  III.  ■ 

perception,  and  Is  withdrawn  from  the  circumftances 
in  which  the  experiment  is  made  *. 

Thefe  obfervations  lead  me  to  take  notice  of  a  cir- 
cumftance  with  refpect  to  the  belief  accompanying 
perception,  which  it  appears  to  me  neceffary  to  (late, 
in  order  to  render  Dr.  Reid's  doftrine  on  that  fubjeft 
completely  fatisfaftory.  He  has  fhewn,  that  certain 
fenfations  are,  by  a  law  of  our  nature,  accompanied 
with  an  irrefiftible  belief  of  the  exiflence  of  certain  qua- 
Hties  of  external  objects.  But  this  law  extends  no 
farther  than  to  the  prefent  exiftence  of  the  quality ; 
that  is,  to  its  exiftence  while  we  feel  the  correfponding 
fenfation.  Whence  is  it  then,  that  we  afcribe  to  the 
quality,  an  exiftence  independent  of  our  perception  ? 
I  apprehend  we  learn  to  do  this  by  experience  alone. 
We  find  that  we  cannot,  as  in  the  cafe  of  imagination, 
difmifs  or  recal  the  perception  of  an  external  objeft. 
If  I  open  my  eyes,  I  cannot  prevent  myfelf  from  fee- 
ing the  profpect  which  is  before  me.  I  learn,  there- 
fore, to  afcribe  to  the  objects  of  my  fenfes,  not  only 
an  exiftence  at  the  time  I  perceive  them,  but  an  in- 
dependent and  a  permanent  exiftence. 

It  is  a  ftrong  confirmation  of  this  doctrine,  that  in 
fleep,  when  (as  I  ftiall  endeavour  afterwards  to  fhew) 
the  influence  of  the  will  over  the  train  of  our  thoughts, 
is  fufpended,  and  when,   of  confequence,  the  time  of 

*  It  may  appear  to  I'ome  readers  n^.tlier  trifling  to  add,  and  yet 
to  others  the  remark  may  not  be  altogether  fiiperfluous,  that  it  is 
not  my  intention  to  infiniiate  by  the  foregoing  illuftrations,  that 
the  relation  between  perception  and  imagination  has  the  moft  dif- 
tant  analogy  to  that  between  the  perception  of  the  object,  and  the 
perception  of  its  optical  image. 

their 


Chap.  III.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  I47 

their  continuance  in  the  mind  is  not  regulated  by  us, 
we  afcribe  to  the  objeds  of  imagination  an  independent 
and  permanent  exiftence,  as  we  do  when  awake  to 
the  objefts  of  perception.  The  fame  thing  happens 
in  thofe  kinds  of  madnefs,  in  which  a  particular  idea 
takes  poflellion  of  the  attention,  and  occupies  it  to 
the  exclufion  of  every  thing  elfe.  Indeed,  madnefs 
feems  in  many  cafes  to  arife  entirely  from  a  fufpenfion 
of  the  influence  of  the  will  over  the  fucceflion  of 
our  thoughts  ;  in  confequence  of  which,  the  objeds  of 
imagination  appear  to  have  an  exifcence  independent  of 
our  volition  ;  and  are  therefore,  agreeably  to  the  fore- 
going doftrine,  millaken  for  realities. 

Numberlefs  other  illuflrations  of  the  fame  general 
fact  occur  to  me  ;  but  the  following  is,  I  think,  one 
of  the  mod  ftriking.  I  mention  it,  in  preference  to 
the  reft,  as  it  appears  to  me  to  connedt  the  dodrine 
in  queftion  with  fome  principles  which  are  now  uni- 
verfally  admitted  among  philofophers. 

The  diftindion  between  the  original  and  the  acquired 
perceptions  of  fight,  is  familiarly  known  to  every  one 
who  has  the  fllghteil  acquaintance  with  the  elements 
of  optics.  That  this  fenfe,  prior  to  experience,  con- 
veys to  us  the  notion  of  extenfion  in  two  dimenfions 
only,  and  that  it  gives  us  no  information  concerning 
the  diftances  at  which  objects  are  placed  from  the  eye, 
are  proportions  which  nobody,  I  prelume,  in  the  pre- 
fent  ftata  of  fcience,  will  be  difpofed  to  controvert. 
In  what  manner  we  are  enabled,  by  a  comparifon  bc« 
tween  the  perceptions  of  light  and  thofe  of  touch,  to 
extend  the  province  of  the  former  fenfe  to  a  variety  of 
qualities  originally  perceived  by  the  latter  fenfe  only, 

L  2  opticai 


148  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  III. 

optical  writers  have  explained  at  great  length  ;  but  it 
is  not  neceflary  for  my  prefent  purpofe  to  enter  into 
any  particular  details  M'ith  refped:  to  their  reafonings 
on  the  fubjecl.  It  is  fufficient  for  me  to  remark,  that, 
according  to  the  received  dodrine,  the  original  per- 
ceptions of  fight  become,  in  confequence  of  experience, 
figns  of  the  tangible  qualities  of  external  objects,  and 
of  the  diftances  at  which  they  are  placed  from  the  or- 
(v^an  ;  and  that,  although  the  knowledge  we  obtain, 
in  this  manner,  of  thefe  qualities  and  diftances,  feems, 
from  early  and  conftant  habits,  to  be  an  inftantaneous 
perception  ;  yet,  in  many  cafes,  it  implies  an  exercife 
of  the  judgment,  being  founded  on  a  comparifon  of 
a  variety  of  different  circumftances. 

From  thefe  principles,  it  is  an  obvious  confequence, 
that  the  knowledge  we  obtain,  by  the  eye,  of  the  tan- 
gible qualities  of  bodies,  involves  the  exercife  of  con- 
ception, according  to  the  definition  of  that  power 
which  has  already  been  given.  In  ordinary  difcourfe, 
indeed,  we  afcribe  this  knowledge,  on  account  of  the 
inflantaneoufnefs  with  which  it  is  obtained,  to  the 
power  of  perception  ;  but  if  the  common  dodrine  on 
the  fubjeft  be  jufl,  it  is  the  refult  of  a  complex  opera- 
tion of  the  mind  ;  comprehending,  firfl,  the  percep- 
tion of  thofe  qualities,  which  are  the  proper  and  ori- 
ginal obje£ts  of  fight  -,  and,  fecondly,  the  conception 
of  thofe  tangible  qualities  of  which  the  original  per- 
ceptions of  fight  are  found  from  experience  to  be  the 
figns.  The  notions,  therefore,  we  form,  by  means 
of  the  eye,  of  the  tangible  qualities  of  bodies,  and  of 
the  diftances  of  thefe  objefts  from  tl>e  organ,  are  mere 
conceptions ;  flrongly,  and   indeed  indilfolubly,  aflb- 

ciated, 


Chap.  III.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  14^ 

dated,  by  early  and  conftant  habit,  with  the  original 
perceptions  of  fight. 

When  we  open  our  eyes  on  a  magnificent  profpeft, 
the  various  diftances  at  which  all  its  different  parts  are 
placed  from  the  eye,  and  the  immenfe  extent  of  the 
whole  fcene  before  us,  feem  to  be  perceived  as  imme- 
diately, and  as  inftantaneoufly,  by  the  mind,  as  the 
coloured  furface  which  is  painted  on  the  retina.  The 
truth,  however,  unquefiiionably  is,  that  this  variety  of 
diflance,  and  this  immenfity  of  extent,  are  not  objeds 
of  fenfe  but  of  conception  ;  and  the  notions  we  form 
of  them  when  our  eyes  are  open,  differ  from  thofe 
we  fhould  form  of  them  with  our  eyes  fhut,  only  in 
this,  that  they  are  kept  fleadily  in  the  view  of  the 
mind,  by  being  flrongly  aflbciated  with  the  fenfations 
of  colour,  and  with  the  original  perceptions  of  fight. 
— This  obfervation  will  be  the  more  readily  admitted, 
if  it  be  confidered,  that,  by  a  fldlful  imitation  of  a  na- 
tural landfcape,  in  a  common  fliew-box,  the  mind 
may  be  led  to  form  the  fame  notions  of  variety  of  dif- 
tance,  and  even  of  immenfe  extent,  as  if  the  original 
fcene  w^ere  prefented  to  our  fenfes :  and  that,  al- 
though, in  this  cafe,  we  have  a  fpeculative  conviction 
that  the  fphere  of  our  vifion  only  extends  to  a  few 
inches ;  yet  fo  ftrong  is  the  afibciation  between  the 
original  perceptions  of  fight,  and  the  conceptions 
which  they  habitually  produce,  that  it  is  not  poflible 
for  us,  by  any  effort  of  our  will,  to  prevent  thefe 
conceptions  from  taking  place. 

From  thefe  cbfervations  it  appears,  that  when  the 
conceptions  of  the  mind  are  rendered  fteady  and  per- 
manent, by  being  (Irongly  affociated  with  any  fenfible 

L  3  impreffion, 


150  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  lit. 

impreflion,  they  command  our  belief  no  lefs  than  our 
adlual  perceptions ;  and,  therefore,  if  it  were  polTible 
for  us,  with  our  eyes  fhut,  to  keep  up,  for  a  length 
of  time,  the  conception  of  any  fenfible  object,  we 
fliould,  as  long  as  this  effort  continued,  beheve  that 
the  object  was  prefent  to  our  fenfes. 

It  appears  to  me  to  be  no  flight   confirmation  of 
thefe  remarks,  that  although,  in  the  dark,   the  illu- 
fions  of  imagination  are  much  more  liable  to  be  mif- 
taken  for  realities,  than  when  their  momentary  effects 
on  the  belief  are  continually  checked  and  corrected 
by  the  objeds  which  the  light  of  day  prefents  to  our 
perceptions  ;  yet,  even  total  darknefs  is  not  fo  alarm- 
ing to  a  perfon  impreffed  with  the  vulgar  fiories  of 
apparitions,  as  a  faint  and  doubtful   twilight,  which 
affords  to  the  conceptions  an   opportunity  of  fixing 
and  prolonging  their    exiftence,    by  attaching  them- 
felves  to  fomething  which  is  obfcurely  exhibited  to  the 
eye.  —  In  like  manner,  when  we  look  through  a  fog, 
we  are  frequently  apt  to  miftake  a  crow  for  a  man ; 
and  the  conception  we  have,  upon  fuch  an  occafion, 
of  the  human  figure,  is  much  more  diftin£t  and  much 
more  fleady,  than  it  would  be  poiTible  for  us  to  form, 
if  we  had  no  fenfible  object  before  us  ;  infomuch  that 
when,  on  a    more    attentive    obfervation,    the  crow 
fhrinks  to  its  own  dimenfions,  we  find  it  impofTible, 
by  any   effort,  to   conjure  up  the  phantom  which  a 
moment  before  we  feemed  to  perceive. 

If  thefe  obfervations  are  admitted,  the  efFeds  which 
exhibitions  of  fictitious  dillrefs  produce  on   the  mind, 
will  appear  lefs  wonderful,  than  they  are  fuppofed  to 
be.     During  the  reprefentation    of  a  tragedy,  I  ac- 
knowledge, 


Chap.  III.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  i^I 

knowledge,  that  we  have  a  general  convi**tion  that 
the  whole  is  a  fid:ion ;  but,  I  believe,  it  will  be 
found,  that  the  violent  emotions  which  are  fometimes 
produced  by  the  diftrefles  of  the  ftage,  take  their  rife, 
in  moil  cafes,  from  a  momentary  belief,  that  the  dif- 
treifes  are  real.  I  fay,  in  moil:  cafes ;  becaule,  1  ac- 
knowledge, that,  independently  of  any  fuch  belief, 
there  is  fomething  contagious  in  a  faithful  expreifion 
of  any  of  the  paffions. 

The  emotions  produced  by  tragedy  are,  upon  this 
fuppofition,  fomewhat  analogous  to  the  dread  we 
feel  when  we  look  down  from  the  battlement  of  a 
tower  *.  In  both  cafes,  we  have  a  general  conviction, 
that  there  is  no  ground  for  the  feelings  we  experience  ; 
but  the  momentary  influences  of  imagination  are  fo 
powerful  as  to  produce  thefe  feelings,  before  reflexion 
has  time  to  come  to  our  relief. 

*  With  refpeft  to  the  dread  which  we  feel  in  looking  down 
from  the  battlement  of  a  tower,  it  is  curious  to  remark  the  effeds 
uf  habit  in  gradually  deftroying  it.  The  manner  in  which  habit 
operates  in  this  cafe,  fcems  to  be  by  giving  us  a  command  over  our 
thoughts,  fo  as  to  enable  us  to  withdraw  our  attention  from  the 
precipice  before  us,  and  direft  it  to  any  other  objeft  at  pleafure. 
It  is  thus  that  the  mafon  and  the  failor  not  only  can  take  precau- 
tions for  their  own  fafety,  but  remain  completely  mailers  of  them- 
felves  in  fituations  where  other  men,  engroffed  with  their  imagi- 
nai-y  danger,  would  experience  a  total  fufpenfion  of  their  faculties. 
Any  ftrongpaffion  which  occupies  the  mind  produces,  for  the  mo- 
ment, the  fame  cffe£l  with  habit.  A  perfon  alarmed  with  the  apr 
prehenfion  of  fire,  has  been  known  to  efcape  from  the  top  of  a  houfe 
by  a  path,  which,  at  another  time,  he  would  have  confidered  as 
impradlicable  ;  and  foldiers,  in  mounting  a  breach,  are  faid  to  have 
fometimes  found  their  way  to  the  enemy,  by  a  route  which  ap« 
peared  inacceflible  after  their  violent  paflions  had  fubfided. 

L4 


152  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.IV. 

CHAPTER    FOURTH. 
Of  Abftraclion. 


SECTION!. 

diner  al  Obferiatlons  on  this  Faculty  of  the  Mind. 

THE  origin  of  appellatives,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
origin  of  ihofe  claffes  of  objects  which,  in  the 
fchools,  are  called  genera,  and  fpecies,  has  been  con- 
fidered  by  fome  philofophers  as  one  of  the  mofl  dif- 
ficult problems  in  metaphyfics.  The  account  of  it 
which  is  given  by  Mr.  Smith,  in  his  Diflertation  on 
the  Origin  of  Languages,  appears  to  me  to  be  equally 
limple  and  fatisfaftory. 

"  The  affignation"  (fays  he)  "  of  particular  names, 
"  to  denote  particular  objefts ;  that  is,  the  inflitu- 
"  tion  of  nouns  fubftantive ;  would  probably  be  one 
"  of  the  fir  If  fteps  towards  the  formation  of  Language. 
"  The  particular  cave,  whofe  covering  fheltered  the 
"  favage  from  the  weather  ;  the  particular  tree,  whofe 
"  fruit  relieved  his  hunger ;  the  particular  fountain, 
"  whofe  water  allayed  his  thirfl ;  would  firfl  be  de- 
"  nominated  by  the  words,  cave,  tree,  fountain ;  or 
*'  by  whatever  other  appellations  he  might  think 
"  proper,  in  that  primitive  jargon,  to  mark  them. 
"  Afterwards,  when  the  more  enlarged  experience  of 

"  this 


Sed.  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  jr^ 

this  favage  had  led  him  to  obferve,  and  his  neceflary 
occafions  obliged  him  to  make  mention  of,  other 
caves,  and  other  trees,  and  other  fountains ;  he 
would  naturally  beftow  upon  each  of  thofe  new  ob- 
jects, the  fame  name  by  which  he  had  been  ac- 
cuftomed  to  exprefs  the  fimilar  objeQ:  he  was  firfl 
acquainted  with.  And  thus,  thofe  words,  which 
were  originally  the  proper  names  of  individuals, 
would  each  of  them  infenfiby  become  the  common 
name  of  a  multitude  *." 

"  It  is  this  application"  (he  continues)  "  of  the 
name  of  an  individual  to  a  great  number  of  objefts, 
whofe  refemblance  naturally  recalls  the  idea  of  that 
individual,  and  of  the  name  which  expreffes  it, 
that  feems  originally  to  have  given  occafion  to  the 
formation  of  thofe  clafles,  and  aflbrtments,  which, 
in  the  fchools,  are  called  genera  and  fpecics  ;  and  of 
which  the  ingenious  and  eloquent  Rouffeau  finds 
himfelf  fo  much  at  a  lofs  to  account  for  the  origin. 
What  conftitutes  a  fpeciesy  is  merely  a  number  of 
obje^ls,  bearing  a  certain  degree  of  refemblance  to 
one  another ;  and,  on  that  account,  denominated 
by  a  fmgle  appellation,  which  may  be  applied  to 
exprefs  any  one  of  them  t." 

*  The  fame  account  of  the  progrefs  of  the  mind  in  the  forma- 
tion of  gtnera,  is  given  by  the  Abbe  de  Condillac. 

"  Un  enfant  appelle  du  nom  A'  Arbre  le  premier  arbre  que  nous 
*'  lui  montrons.  Un  fecond  arbre  quil  voit  enfuite  lui  rapelle  la 
*'  meme  idee  ;  il  lui  donne  le  meme  nom  ;  de  meme  a  un  troiiieme, 
*'  "a  un  quatrieme,  et  voila  le  mot  ^ Arbre  donne  d'abc^rd  a  un 
"  individu,  qui  devient  pour  lui  un  nom  de  claffe  ou  de  genre,  une 
"  idee  abiiraite  qui  comprend  tous  les  arbres  en  general.'' 

f  Diflertation  on  the  Origin  of  Languages,  annexed  to  Mr. 
Smith'i  Tlieorv  of  Moral  Sentiments. 

This 


154  ELEMENTS    OP    THE    rHlLOSOPHY  Chap.  IV. 

This  view  of  the  natural  progrefs  of  the  mind,  in 
forming    clafiifications    of   external    objects,   receives 
fome  illuftration   from  a   facl  mentioned  by   Captain 
Cook  in  his  accomit  of  a  fmall  illand  called  Wateeoo, 
which  he    vifited  in   failing    from  New  Zealand  to 
the  Friendly    Iflands.      *'  The  inhabitants,"  favy    he, 
*'  were  afraid  to  come  near  our  cows  and  horfes,  nor 
"  did  they  form  the  leaft  conception  of  their  nature. 
*'  But  the  fheep  and  goats  did  not  furpafs  the  limits  of 
**  their  ideas ;  for  they  gave  us  to   underftand   that 
*'  they  knew  them  to  be  birds.     It  will  appear,"  he 
adds,   *'  rather  incredible,  that  human  ignorance  could 
*'  ever  make  fo  ftrange  a  miftake,  there  not  being  the 
*'  moft  diftant    fimilitude    between  a  fheep  or  goat, 
"  and  any  winged  animal.     But  thefe  people  feemed 
*'  to  know  nothing  of  the  exiftence  of  any  other  land 
"  animals,  befides  hogs,  dogs,  and  birds.     Our  fheep 
*'  and  goats,    they  could    fee,    w^ere    very    different 
"  creatures  from  the  two  firfl,  and  therefore  they  in- 
*'  ferred  that  they  mufl  belong  to  the  latter  clafs,  in 
"  which  they  knew  that  there  is  a  confiderable  variety 
*'  of  fpecies." — I  would  add  to  Cook's  very  judicious 
remarks,  that  the  miffake  of  thefe  iflanders  probably 
did  not  arife  from  their  confidering  a  fheep  or  a  goat  as 
bearing  a  more  flriking  refemblance  to  a  bird,  than  to 
the  two  clalTes  of  quadrupeds  with  which  they   were 
acquainted  ;  but  to  the   want  of  a  generic  word,  fuch 
as    quadruped,    comprehending    thefe    two    fpecies ; 
which  men  in  their  fituation  would  no  more  be  led  to 
form,  than  a  perfon  who  had  only  feen  one  individual 
of  each  fpecies,  would  think  of  an  appellative  to  ex- 
prefs  both,  inflead  of  applying  a  proper  name  to  each. 

In 


Sea.  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN     MIXD.  I^^ 

In    confequence    of  the  variety  of  birds,    it  appears 
that  they  had   a  generic  name   comprehending  all   of 
them,  to  which  it  was  not  unnatural  for  them  to  refer 
any  new  animal  they  met  with. 

The  claiTification  of  different  objefls  fuppofes  a 
power  of  attending  to  fome  of  their  qualities  or  at- 
tributes, without  attendmg  to  the  reil ;  for  no  two 
objeds  are  to  be  found  without  fome  fpecific  dif- 
ference ;  and  no  affortment  or  arrangement  can  be^ 
formed  among  things  not  perfedly  alike,  but  by 
lofmg  fight  of  their  diflinguifhing  peculiarities,  and 
limiting  the  attention  to  thofe  attributes  which  belong 
to  them  in  common.  Indeed,  without  this  power  of 
attending  feparately  to  things  which  our  fenfes  prefent 
to  us  in  a  ftate  of  union,  we  never  could  have  had 
any  idea  of  number',  for,  before  we  can  confider 
different  objefts  as  forming  a  multitude,  it  is  neceffary 
that  we  fhould  be  able  to  apply  to  all  of  them  one 
common  name  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  we  fhould 
reduce  them  all  to  the  fame  genus.  The  various  ob- 
jeds,  for  example,  animate  and  inanimate,  which  are, 
at  this  moment,  before  me,  I  may  clafs  and  number 
in  a  variety  of  different  ways,  according  to  the  view 
of  them  that  I  chufe  to  take.  I  may  reckon  fuc.» 
ceffively  the  number  of  fheep,  of  cows,  of  horfes,  of 
elms,  of  oaks,  of  beeches ;  or  I  may  firft  reckon 
the  number  of  animals,  and  then  the  number  of 
trees ;  or  I  may  at  once  reckon  the  number  of  all 
the  organifed  fubflances  which  my  fenfes  prefent  to 
me.  But  whatever  be  the  principle  on  which  my 
claffification  proceeds,  it  is  evident  that  the  objefts 
numbered  together,  mufl  be  confidered  in  thofe  re- 

fpeds 


156  ELEMENTS    OF    JHE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

fpe£ls  only  in  which  they  agree  with  each  other  ;  and 
that,  if  I  had  no  power  of  feparating  the  combinations 
offenfe,  I  never  could  have  conceived  them  as  form- 
ing a  plurality. 

This  power   of  confidering  certain   qualities  or  at- 
tributes of  an  object   apart    from  the  reft ;  or,  as   I 
would  rather  chufe  to  define  it,  the  power  which   the 
underftanding   has,    of   feparating    the    combinations 
which  are  prefented  to  it,  is  diftinguiflied  by  logicians 
by  the  \]2.m.Q  oi abjira^l'wn.     It   has  been  fuppofed,  by 
fome  philofophers,  (with  what  probability  I  fhall  not 
now  inquire,)  to  form  the  charaderiftical  attribute  of  a 
rational  nature.     That  it  is  one  of  the  moft  important 
of  all  our  faculties,    and  very  intimately  connefted 
with  the  exercife  of  our  reafoning  powers,  is  beyond 
j    difpute.     And,  I   flatter  myfelf,  it   will  appear  from 
I    the  fequel  of  this  chapter,  how  much  the  proper  ma- 
I    nagement  of  it  conduces,  to  the  fuccefs  of  our  philofo- 
\    phical  purfuits,  and  of  our  general  conduct  in  life. 

The  fubferviency  of  Abflraftion  to  the  power  of 
Reafoning,  and  alfo,  its  fubferviency  to  the  exertions 
of  a  Poetical  or  Creative  Imagination,  fhall  be  after- 
wards fully  illuftrated.  At  prefent,  it  is  fufficient  for 
my  purpofe  to  remark,  that  as  abftraftion  is  the 
ground-work  of  claflificadon,  without  this  faculty  of 
the  mind  we  fliould  have  been  perfectly  incapable  of 
general  fpeculation,  and  all  our  knowledge  muft  ne- 
celfarily  have  been  limited  to  individuals  ;  and  that 
fome  of  the  moft  ufeful  branches  of  fcience,  particu- 
larly the  different  branches  of  mathemadcs,  in  which 
the  very  fubjefts  of  our  reafoning  are  abftraftions  of 
the  underftanding,  could  never  have  poflibly  had  an 
1 6  exiftence. 


3ea,  I.  OP   THE     HUMAN    MIND.  1 57 

exigence.  With  refpe£l  to  the  fubferviency  of  this 
faculty  to  poetical  imagination,  it  is  no  lefs  obvious, 
that,  as  the  poet  is  fupplied  with  all  his  materials  by 
experience ;  and  as  his  province  is  limited  to  combine 
and  modify  things  which  really  exift,  fo  as  to  produce 
new  wholes  of  his  own  ;  fo  every  exertion  which  he 
thus  makes  of  his  powers,  prefuppofes  the  exercife  of 
abftraftion  in  decompofing  and  feparating  adlual  com- 
binations. And  it  was  on  this  account  that,  in  the 
chapter  on  Conception,  I  was  led  to  make  a  dillinftion 
between  that  faculty,  which  is  evidently  fimple  and 
uncompounded,  and  the  power  of  Imagination,  which 
(at  lead  in  the  fenfe  in  which  I  employ  the  word  in 
thefe  inquiries)  is  the  refult  of  a  combination  of  va- 
rious other  powers. 

I  have  introduced  thefe  remarks,  in  order  to  point 
out  a  difference  between  the  abftradions  which  are 
fubfervient  to  reafoning,  and  thofe  which  are  fubfer- 
vient  to  imagination.  And,  if  I  am  not  miftaken,  it 
is  a  diftindion  which  has  not  been  fufficiently  attended 
to  by  fome  writers  of  eminence.  In  every  inftance  in 
which  imagination  is  employed  in  forming  new  wholes, 
by  decompounding  and  combining  the  perceptions  of 
fenfe,  it  is  evidently  neceffary  that  the  poet  or  the 
painter  fhould  be  able  to  ftate  to  himfelf  the  circum- 
ftances  abflrafted,  as  feparate  objects  of  conception. 
But  this  is  by  no  means  requifite  in  every  cafe  in  which 
abftradtion  is  fubfervient  to  the  power  of  reafoning ; 
for  it  frequently  happens,  that  we  can  reafon  con- 
cerning one  quahty  or  property  of  an  objed  abftradied 
from  the  reft,  while,  at  the  fame  time,  we  find  it 
impoflible  to  conceive  it  feparately.  Thus,  I  can  rea- 
fon 


I5S  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    THILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

fon  concerning  extcnfion  and  figure,  without  any  re- 
ference to  colour ;  although  it  may  be  doubted,  if  a 
perfon  pofTeffed  of  fight  can  make  extenfion  and  figure 
fieady  obje(3:s  of  conception,  without  connecting  with 
them  one  colour  or  another.  Nor  is  this  always 
ov/ing  (as  it  is  in  the  inflance  now  mentioned)  merely 
to  the  affociation  of  ideas  ;  for  there  are  cafes,  in 
which  we  can  reafon  concerning  things  feparately, 
which  it  is  impoffible  for  us  to  fuppofe  any  being  fo 
conftituted  as  to  conceive  apart.  Thus,  we  can  rea- 
fon concerning  length,  abflracted  from  any  other 
dimenfion  ;  although,  furely,  no  underftanding  can 
make  length,  without  breadth,  an  object  of  concep- 
tion. And,  by  the  way,  this  leads  me  to  take  notice 
of  an  error,  which  mathematical  teachers  are  apt  to 
commit,  in  explaining  the  firll  principles  of  geometry. 
By  dwelling  long  on  Euclid's  firft  definitions,  they 
lead  the  fludent  to  fuppofe  that  they  relate  to  notions 
which  are  extremely  myfterious  ;  and  to  drain  his 
powers  in  fruitlefs  attempts  to  conceive,  what  cannot 
poflibly  be  made  an  object  of  conception.  If  thefe 
definitions  were  omitted,  or  very  (lightly  touched 
upon,  and  the  attention  at  once  directed  to  geome- 
trical reafonings,  the  itudent  would  immediately  per- 
ceive, that  although  the  lines  in  the  diagrams  are 
really  extended  in  two  dimenfions,  yet  that  the  de- 
monllrations  relate  only  to  one  of  them  ;  and  that  the 
human  underftanding  has  the  faculty  of  reafoning 
concerning  things  feparately,  which  are  always  pre- 
fented  to  us,  both  by  our  powers  of  perception  and 
conception,  in  a  ftate  of  union.  Such  abftraftions,  in 
truth,  are  familiar  to  the  mod  illiterate  of  mankind  j 

and 


Se^_  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  irg 

and  it  is  in  this  very  way  that  they  are  infenfibly 
formed.  When  a  tradefman  fpeaks  of  the  length  of  a 
room,  in  contradiftinction  to  its  breadth  ;  or  when 
he  fpeaks  of  the  diftance  between  any  two  objeQ:s ; 
he  forms  exadly  the  fame  abftradion,  which  is  re- 
ferred to  by  Euclid  in  his  fecond  definition  ;  and 
which  mod  of  his  commentators  have  thought  it 
necefl'ai'y  to  illuftrate  by  prolix  metaphyfical  difquifi- 
tions. 

I  {hall  only  obferve  farther,  with  refpecl  to  the  na- 
ture and   province  of  this  faculty  of  the  mind,  that 
notwithftanding  its  eflential  fubferviency  to  every  ad 
of  claffification,  yet  it  might  have  been  exercifed,  al- 
though we   had  only  been  acquainted  with  one  indi- 
vidual objed.     Although,  for  example,  we  had  never 
feen  but  one  rofe,  we  might  ftill  have  been  able  to 
attend   to  its  colour,  without  thinking    of  its  other 
properties.     This   has  led  fome  philofophers  to  fup- 
pofe,    that    another    faculty   befides   abftradion,    to 
which  they  have  given  the  name  of  generalifation, 
is  neceil'ary  to  account  for  the  formation  of  genera  and 
fpecies  ;  and  they  have  endeavoured  to   Ihew,   that 
although  generalifation  without  abftraftion  is  impof- 
iible  ;  yet  that  we  might  have  been  fo  formed,  as  to  be 
able  to  abilract,  without  being  capable  of  generalifmg. 
The  grounds  of  this  opinion,  it  is  not  neceifary  for  me 
to  examine,  for  any  of  the  purpofes  which  I  have  at 
prefent  in  view. 


SECTION 


.^ 


1 60  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV* 


SECTION    II. 
Of  the  OljeSli  of  cur  Thoughts^  ivhcn  ive  employ  general  Terms. 

}7^ROM  the  account  which  was  given  in  a  former 
chapter,  of  the  common  theories  of  perception, 
it  appears  to  have  been  a  prevailing  opinion  among 
philofophers,  that  the  qualities  of  external  objects  are 
perceived,  by  means  of  images  or  fpecies  tranfmitted 
to  the  mind  by  the  organs  of  fenfe :  an  opinion  of 
which  I  already  endeavoured  to  trace  the  origin,  from 
certain  natural  prejudices  fuggefled  by  the  phenomena 
of  the  material  world.  The  fame  train  of  thinking 
has  led  them  to  fuppofe  that,  in  the  cafe  of  all  our 
other  intellectual  operations,  there  exift  in  the  mind 
certain  ideas  diftinft  from  the  mind  itfelf ;  and  that 
thefe  ideas  are  the  objects  about  which  our  thoughts 
are  employed.  When  I  recollect,  for  example,  the 
appearance  of  an  abfent  friend,  it  is  fuppofed  that 
the  immediate  object  of  my  thoughts  is  an  idea  of  my 
friend  ;  which  I  at  firft  received  by  my  fenfes,  and 
which  I  have  been  enabled  to  retain  in  the  mind  by 
the  faculty  of  memory.  When  I  form  to  myfelf  any 
imaginary  combination  by  an  effort  of  poetical  inven- 
tion, it  is  fuppofed,  in  like  manner,  that  the  parts 
which  I  combine,  exilled  previoufly  in  the  mind  j  and 
furnifh  the  materials  on  which  it  is  the  province  of 
imagination  to  operate.  It  is  to  Dr.  Reid  we  owe 
the  important  remark,  that  all  thefe  notions  are 
wholly  hypothetical ;  that  it  is  impoffible  to  produce 

a  (hadow 


Sea.  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  l6l 

a  fhadow  of  evidence  in  fupport  of  them  ;  and  that, 
even  akhough  we  were  to  admit  their  truth,  they 
would  not  render  the  phenomena  in  queftion  more 
intelhgible.  According  to  his  principles,  therefore, 
we  have  no  ground  for  fuppofmg,  that,  in  any  one 
operation  of  the  mind,  there  exifls  in  it  an  objed;  dif- 
tindt  from  the  mind  itfelf ;  and  all  the  common  ex- 
preffions  which  involve  fuch  a  fuppofition,  are  to  be 
confidered  as  unmeaning  circumlocutions,  which  ferve 
only  to  difguife  from  us  the  real  hiftory  of  the  intel- 
ledual  phenomena  *. 

"  We 

*  In  order  to  prevent  mifapprehenfions  of  Dr.  Reid's  meaning 
in  his  reafonings  againll  the  ideal  theory,  it  may  be  neceffary  to 
explain,  a  little  more  fully  than  I  have  done  in  the  text,  in  what 
fenfe  he  calls  in  queftion  the  exiftence  of  ideas :  for  the  meaning 
which  this  word  is  employed  to  convey  in  popular  difcourfe,  differs 
widely  from  that  which  is  annexed  to  it  by  the  philofophers  whofe 
opinion  he  controverts.  This  explanation  I  fhall  give  in  his  own 
words  : 

"  In  popular  language,  idea  fignifies  the  fame  thing  as  concep- 
*'  tion,  apprehenfion,  notion.  To  have  an  idea  of  any  thing,  is 
*'  to  conceive  it.  To  h  ive  a  diftinA  idea,  is  to  conceive  it  dif- 
"  tinftly.  To  have  no  idea  of  it,  is  not  to  conceive  it  at  all. — 
•'  When  the  word  idea  is  taken  in  this  popular  fenfe,  no  man  can 
*'  pofTibly  doubt  wh-^ther  he  has  ideas," 

"  According  to  the  philofophical  meaning  of  the  word  idea,  it 
<'  does  not  fignify  that  aft  of  the  mind  which  we  call  thought,  or 
*'  conception,  but  fome  ol'jea  of  thought.  Of  thefe  objefts  of 
"  thought  called  ideas,  different  feds  of  philofophers  have  given 
<f  very  different  accounts." 

'*  Some  have  held  them  to  be  felf-exiftent ;  others  to  be  in  the 
"  divine  mind  ;  others  in  our  own  minds  ;  and  others  in  the  brain, 
"  or  fenforium."  p.  2  1  5. 

"  The  Pcripatetick  fyftem  of  fpecies  and  phantafms,  as  well  as 
"  the  PlatoRick  fyftem  of  ideas,  is  grounded  upon  this  principlej^ 

M  «  that 


l62  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

*'  We  are  at  a  lofs  to  know,"  (fays  this  excellent 
philofopher,)  "  how  we  perceive  diftant  objects  ; 
"  how  we  remember  things  pafl; ;  how  we  imagine 
"  things  that  have  no  exiflence.  Ideas  in  the  mind 
"  feem  to  account  for  all  thefe  operations ;  they  are 
"  all  by  the  means  of  ideas  reduced  to  one  operation ; 
"  to  a  kind  of  feeling,  or  immediate  perception  of 
"  things  prefent,  and  in  contact  with  the  percipient ; 
"  and  feeling   is  an  operation   fo  familiar,    that   we 


**  that  in  every  kind  of  thought,  there  muft  be  fome  objeft  that 
''  really  exifts  ;  in  every  operation  of  the  mind,  fomething  to  work 
"  upon.  Whether  this  immediate  object  be  called  an  idea  with 
'^  Plato,  or  a  phantafm  or  fpecies  with  Ariitotle  ;  whether  it  be 
*'  eternal  and  uncreated,  or  produced  by  the  imp refiions  of  external 
"  objefts,  is  of  no  confequence  in  the  prefent  argument.*'  Ibid, 
p.  388. 

*'  So  much  is  this  opinion  fixed  in  the  minds  of  philofophers, 
*'  that,  I  doubt  not  but  it  will  appear  to  moft,  a  very  ftrange  pa- 
*'  radox,  or  rather  a  contradiction,  that  men  fhould  think  without 
"  ideas.  But  this  appearance  of  contradiftion  arifes  from  the 
*'  ambiguity  of  the  word  idea.  If  the  idea  of  a  thing  means  only 
*'  the  thought  of  it,  which  is  the  mofl  common  meaning  of  the 
"  word,  to  think  without  ideas,  is  to  think  without  thought  j 
"  which  is  undoubtedly  a  contradidlion.  But  an  idea,  according 
"  to  the  definition  given  of  it  by  philofophers,  is  not  thought,  but 
"  an  objcftof  thought,  which  really  exifls,  and  is  perceived,  &c." 
Ibid.  p.  390. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that  when,  in  this  work,  I  make  ufe  of  the 
word  idea  in  ftating  my  own  opinions,  I  employ  it  uniformly  in 
the  popular  fenfe,  and  not  in  the  philofophical  fenfe,  as  now  ex- 
plained ;  it  would  be  better,  perhaps,  to  avoid  it  altogether  ;  but 
I  have  found  it  difficult  to  do  fo,  without  adopting  unufual  modes 
ofexprefiion.  I  flatter  myfelf  that  I  have  ufed  it  with  due  cau- 
tion. 

*'  think 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  l5^ 

*'  think  it  needs  no  explanation,  but  may  ferveto  ex- 
*'  plain  other  operations." 

"  But  this  feeling,  or  immediate  perception,  is  as 
"  difficult  to  be  comprehended,  as  the  things  which 
*'  we  pretend  to  explain  by  it.  Two  things  may  be 
*'  in  contad:,  without  any  feeling  or  perception  ;  there 
"  mufl  therefore  be  in  the  percipient,  a  power  to  feel, 
"  or  to  perceive.  How  this  power  is  produced,  and 
"  how  it  operates,  is  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  our 
*'  knowledge.  As  little  can  we  know,  whether  this 
'  power  mufl  be  limited  to  things  prefent,  and  in 
"  contaft  with  us.  Neither  can  any  man  pretend 
"  to  prove,  that  the  Being  who  gave  us  the  power  to 
*'  perceive  things  prefent,  may  not  give  us  the  power 
*'  to  perceive  things  diilant,  to  remember  things  palt, 
"  and  to  conceive  things  that  never  exifted  *." 

In  another  part  of  this  work,  Dr.  Reid  has  occafion 
to  trace  the  origin  of  the  prejudice  which  has  led  phi- 
lofophers  to  fuppofe,  that,  in  all  the  operations  of  the 
miderftanding,  there  mufl  be  an  object  of  thought, 
which  really  exifls  while  we  think  of  it.  His  remarks 
on  this  fubje£l,  which  are  highly  ingenious  and  fatis- 
fadlory,  are  contained  in  his  account  of  the  different 
theories  concerning  conception  t. 

As  in  all  the  ancient  metaphyfical  fyflems  it  was  ta- 
ken for  granted,  (probably  from  the  analogy  of  our  ex- 
ternal perceptions,)  that  every  exertion  of  thought 
implies  the  exillence  of  an  obje6l  diftincl  from  the 
thinking  being  ;  it  naturally  occurred,  as  a  very  cu- 
rious queftion,  What  is  the  immediate  objed  of  our 

*.E{ray3L0n  the  intelleilual  Powers,  p.  214.     f  Ibid.  p.  37B. 

M  2  attention, 


164  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

attention,  when  we  are  engaged  in  any  general  fpecu- 
lation  ;  or,  in  other  words,  what  is  the  nature  of  the 
idea  correfponding  to  a  general  term  ?  When  I  think 
of  any  particular  object  which  I  have  formerly  per- 
ceived, fuch  as  a  particular  friend,  a  particular  tree, 
or  a  particular  mountain,  I  can  comprehend  what  is 
meant  by  a  picture  or  reprefentation  of  fuch  objects  : 
and  therefore  the  explanation  given  by  the  ideal 
theory  of  that  a6t  of  the  mind  which  we  formerly 
called  Conception,  if  not  perfectly  fatisfaftory,  is  at 
lead  not  wholly  unintelligible.  But  what  account 
fhall  we  give,  upon  the  principles  of  this  theory,  of 
the  objeds  of  my  thoughts,  when  I  employ  the  words, 
friend,  tree,  mountain,  as  generic  terms?  For,  that 
all  the  things  I  have  ever  perceived  are  individuals  ; 
and  confequently,  that  the  ideas  denoted  by  general 
words,  (if  fuch  ideas  exift,)  are  not  copied  from  any 
originals  that  have  fallen  under  my  obfervation  ;  is  not 
only  felf-evident,  but  almofl  an  identical  propofition. 

In  anfwer  to  this  queftion,  the  Platonifts,  and,  at  a 
ftill  earlier  period,  the  Pythagoreans,  taught,  that,  al- 
though thefe  univerfal  ideas  are  not  copied  from  any 
objeds  perceivable  by  fenfe,  yet  that  they  have  an 
exiftence  independent  of  the  human  mind,  and  are  no 
more  to  be  confounded  with  the  underftanding,  of 
which  they  are  the  proper  objects,  than  material  things 
are  to  be  confounded  with  our  powers  of  external 
perception  ;  that  as  all  the  individuals  which  compofe 
a  genus,  mud  poifefs  fomething  in  common ;  and  as 
it  is  in  confequence  of  this,  that  they  belong  to  that 
genus,  and  are  diftinguilhable  by  the  fame  name,  this 
commoa  thing  forms  the  eflfence  of  each  j  and  is  the 
10*  objed 


Seft.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  1 65 

objed  of  the  underftanding,  when  we  reafon  concern- 
ing the  genus.  They  maintained  alfo,  that  this  com- 
mon effence  *,  notwithflanding  its  infeparable  union 
with  a  multitude  of  different  individuals,  is  in  itfelf 
one,  and  indivifible. 

On  mofl  of  thefe  points,  the  philofophy  of  Ariftotle 
feems  to  have  coincided  very  nearly  with  that  of  Plato. 
The  language,  however,  which  thefe  philofophers  em- 
ployed on  this  fubjedl  was  different,  and  gave  to  their 
dodrines  the  appearance  of  a  wider  diverfity  than 
probably  exifled  between  their  opinions.  While  Plato 
was  led,  by  his  paffion  for  the  marvellous  and  the 
myfterious,  to  infifl  on  the  incomprehenfible  union  of 
the  fame  idea  or  effence,  with  a  number  of  individuals, 
without  multiplication  or  divifion  t ;  Ariftotle,  more 
cautious,  and  aiming  at  greater  perfpicuity,  contented 
himfelf  with  faying,  that  all  individuals  are  compofed 

*  In  this  very  imperfeft  flcetch  of  the  opinions  of  the  ancients 
concerning  univerfals,  I  have  fubftituted,  inftead  of  the  word 
idea,  the  word  ejfence,  as  better  fitted  to  convey  to  a  modern 
reader  the  true  import  of  Plato's  expreffions.  The  word  ejfentia  is 
faid  to  have  been  firft  employed  by  Cicero  ;  and  it  was  afterwards 
adopted  by  the  fchoolmen,  in  the  fame  fenfe  in  which  the  Plato- 
nifts  ufed  the  word  idea.  See  Dr.  Reid's  EfTays  on  the  Intel- 
leftual  Powers,  p.  473. 

t  "  The  idea  of  a  thing,"  (fays  Plato,)  "■  is  that  which  makes 
*'  one  of  the  many  ;  which,  preferving  the  unity  and  integrity  of 
"its  own  nature,  runs  through  and  mixes  with  things  infinite  in 
"  number  ;  and  yet,  however  multiform  it  may  appear,  is  always 
**  the  fame  :  fo  that  by  it  we  find  out  and  difcriminate  the  thing, 
**  whatever  fhapes  it  may  aflume,  and  under  whatever  difguife  it 
*'  may  conceal  itfelf." —  Plato  in  Philebo  ;  (quoted  by  the 
Author  of  the  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Language^  vol.  i.  p.  loo. 
2d  edit.) 

M3  of 


1 66  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

of  matter  and  form  ;  and  that  it  is  in  confequence  of 
pofleffing  a  common  form,  that  different  individuals 
belong  to  the  fame  genus.  But  they  both  agreed, 
that,  as  the  matter,  or  the  individual  natures  of  objedls 
were  perceived  by  fenfe ;  fo  the  general  idea,  or  ef- 
fence,  or  form,  was  perceived  by  the  intelleft  ;  and 
that,  as  the  attention  of  the  vulgar  was  chiefly  en- 
groffed  with  the  former,  fo  the  latter  furnifhed  to  the 
philofopher  the  materials  of  his  fpeculations. 

The  chief  difference  between  the  opinions  of  Plato 
and  Ariflotle  on  the  fubjeft  of  ideas,  related  to  the 
mode  of  their  exiftence.  That  the  matter  of  which 
all  things  are  made,  exifted  from  eternity,  was 
a  principle  which  both  admitted  ;  but  Plato  farther 
taught,  that,  of  every  fpecies  of  things,  there  is  an 
idea  of  form  which  alfo  exifted  from  eternity  ;  and 
that  this  idea  is  the  exemplar  or  model  according  to 
which  the  individuals  of  the  fpecies  were  made  ;  where- 
as Ariftotle  held,  that,  although  matter  may  exift 
without  form,  yet  that  forms  could  not  exift  without 
matter  *. 

The 

*  In  this  account  of  the  difference  between  Plato  and  Ariflotle 
on  the  fubject  of  ideas,  I  have  chiefly  followed  Brucker,  whofe 
very  laborious  refearchcs  with  refpect  to  this  article  of  the  hiftory 
of  philofophy  are  well  known.  In  flating  the  diftinction,  how- 
ever, I  have  confined  myfelf  to  as  general  terms  as  polTible  ;  as 
the  fiibjeiSl  is  involved  in  much  obfcurity,  and  has  divided  the 
opinions  of  very  eminent  writers.  The  reader  will  find  the  refult 
of  Brucker"  s  inquiries,  in  his  own  words,  in  Note  (F). 

The  authority  of  Brucker,  in  this  inftancc,  has  the  more  weight 
with  me,  as  it  coincides  in   the  mofl  material  refpects  with  that  of 
Dr.  Reid.     See  his  Effays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,  and    , 
the  conclufion  of  his  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind. 

A  very 


Sea.  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  1 67 

The  dodrine  of  the  Stoics  concerning  univerfals, 
differed  widely  from  thofe  both  of  Plato  and  Ariflotle, 
and  feems  to  have  approached  to  a  fpeculation  which 
is  commonly  fuppofed  to  be  of  a  more  recent  origin, 
and  which  an  eminent  philofopher  of  the  prefent  jge 
has  ranked  among  the  difcoveries  which  do  the  great- 
eft  honour  to  modern  genius*. 

Whether  this  doctrine  of  the  Stoics  coincided  en- 
tirely with  that  of  the  Nominalifts,  (whofe  opinions  I 
fhall  afterwards  endeavour  to  explain,)  or  whether  it 
did  not  refemble  more,  a  doftrine  maintained  by  an- 
other fed:  of  fchoolmen  called  Conceptualifts,  I  fhall 
not  inquire.  The  determination  of  this  queftion  is 
interefting  only  to  men  of  erudition ;  for  the  know- 
ledge we  poffefs  of  this  part  of  the  Stoical  philofophy, 
is  too  imperfect  to  aflift  us  in  the  farther  profecution 
of  the  argument,  or  even  to  diminifh  the  merit  of  thofe 

A  very  different  account  of  Ariftotle's  doctrine,  in  thofe  par- 
ticulars in  which  it  is  commonly  fuppofed  to  differ  from  that  of 
PlatOj  is  given  by  two  modern  writers  of  great  learning,  whofe 
opinions  are  juftly  entitled  to  mucli  refpect,  from  their  familiar  ac- 
quaintance with  Ariftotle's  latter  Commentators  of  the  Alexan- 
drian School.  —  See  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  Language,  vol,  i.,  and 
Harris's  Hermes. 

It  is  of  no  confequence,  for  any  of  the  purpofes  which  I  have 
at  prefent  in  view,  what  opinion  we  form  on  this  much  contro- 
verted point  of  philofophical  hifhory.  In  10  far  as  the  ideal  theory 
was  an  attempt  to  explain  the  manner  in  which  our  general  fpecu- 
lations  are  carried  on,  it  is  agreed  on  all  hands,  that  the  doctrines 
of  Plato  and  Ariflotle  were  effcntially  the  fame  ;  and  accordingly, 
what  I  have  faid  on  that  fubject,  coincides  entirely  with  a  paffage 
which  the  reader  will  find  in  "  Origin  and  Progrefs  of  L.an« 
guage,"  vol.  i,  p.  38.  2d  edit. 

*  Treatife  of  Human  Nature,  book  i.  part  i.  feet.  7. 

M  4  philofophers 


l68  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

philofophers  who  have,  in  modern  times,  been  led  to 
fimilar  conclufions*. 

As  it  is  not  my  object,  in  this  work,  to  enter  into 
hiftorical  details,  any  farther  than  is  neceflary  for  il- 
luftrating  the  fubjedls  of  which  I  treat,  I  (hall  pafs 
over  the  various  attempts  which  were  made  by  the 
Ecledic  philofophers,  (a  fed  which  arofe  at  Alexandria 
about  the  beginning  of  the  third  century,)  to  reconcile 
the  doftrines  of  Plato  and  Ariftotle  concerning  ideas. 
The  endlefs  difficulties,  it  would  appear,  to  which  their 
fpeculations  led,  induced,  at  laft,  the  more  cautious 
and  modell  inquirers  to  banifh  them  entirely  from  Dia- 
leftics,  and  to  content  themfelves  with  ftudying  the 
arrangements  or  claffifications  of  univerfals,  which  the 
antient  philofophers  had  made,  without  engaging  in 
any  metaphyfical  difquifitions  concerning  their  nature. 
Porphyry,  in  particular,  although  he  tells  us,  that  he 
has  fpeculated  much  on  this  fubjeft  ;  yet,  in  his  In- 
trodudtion  to  Ariftotle's  Categories,  waves  the  confi- 
deration  of  it  as  obfcure  and  intricate.  On  fuch 
queflions  as  thefe  ;  '*  Whether  genera  and  fpecies  exift 
*'  in  nature,  or  are  only  conceptions  of  the  Human 
*'  Mind ;  and  (on  the  fuppofition  that  they  exift  in 
*'  nature)  whether  they  are  inherent  in  the  objects  of 
*'  fenfe,  or  disjoined  from  them  ?"  he  declines  giving 
any  determination. 

This  palTage  in  Porphyry's  Introdu6lion  is  an  ob- 
ject of  curiofity  ;  as,  by  a  fingular  concurrence  of  cir- 
cumftances,  it  ferved  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  a 
controverfy  from  which  it  was  the  author's  intention 
to  divert  the  inquiries  of  his  readers.     Amidft   the 

*  See  Note  [G]. 

diforders 


Sea.  2.  ^^  THE  fiUMAN  MIND.  1 69 

diforders  produced  by  the  irruptions  of  the  Barbarians, 
the  knowledge  of  the  Greek  tongue  was  almofl  en- 
tirely loft  ;  and  the  ftudies  of  philofophers  were  con- 
fined to  Latin  verfions  of  Ariftotle's  Dialedics,  and  of 
Porphyry's  Introdudion   concerning    the  Categories. 
With  men  who  had  a  relifh  for  fuch  difquifitions,  it 
is  probable  that  the  palTage  already  quoted  from  Por- 
phyry, would  have  a  tendency  rather  to  excite  than  to 
damp  curiofity ;  and  accordingly,  we  have  reafon  to 
believe,  that  the  controverfy  to  which  it  relates  con- 
tinued, during    the  daik    ages,    to  form  a  favourite 
fubjed  of  difcuflion.     The  opinion  which  was  preva- 
lent was,  (to  ufe  the  fcholaftic  language  of  the  times,) 
that   univerfals  do   not  exift  before  things,  nor   after 
things,  but  in  things  ;  that  is,  (if  I  may  be  allowed  to 
attempt  a  commentary  upon  expreffions  to  which  I  do 
not  pretend  to  be  able  to  annex  very  precife  notions,) 
univerfal  ideas  have  not  (as  Plato  thought)  an  exift- 
ence  feparable  from   individual  objeds  ;    and  there- 
fore, they  could  not  have  exifted  prior  to  them  in  the 
order  of  time ;  nor  yet,  (according  to  the  doftrine  of 
the  Stoics,)  are  they  mere  conceptions  of  the  mind, 
formed  in  confequence  of  an  examination  and  com- 
parifon  of  particulars  ;  but  thefe  ideas  or  forms  are 
from  eternity  united  infeparably  with   that  matter  of 
which  things  confift ;  or,  as  the  Ariftotelians   fome- 
times  exprefs  themfelves,  the  forms  of  things  are  from 
eternity  immerfed  in    matter. — The    reader    will,    I 
hope,  forgive  me  for  entering  into  thefe  details,  not 
only  on  account  of  their  connexion  with  the  obfer- 
vations  which  are  to  follow ;  but  as  they  relate  to  a 
controverfy  which,  for  many  ages,  employed  all  the 

ingenuity 


X 


1 70  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

ingenuity  and  learning  in  Europe ;  and  which,  there- . 
fore,  however  frivolous  in  itfelf,  deferves  the  attention 
of  philofophers,  as  one  of  the  mofl  curious  events 
which  occurs  in  the  hiflory  of  the  Human  Mind. 

Such  appears  to  have  been  the  prevailing  opinion 
concerning  the  nature  of  univerfals,  till  the  eleventh 
century ;  when  a  new  do£lrine,  or  (as  fome  authors 
think)  a  doctrine  borrowed  from  the  fchool  of  Zeno, 
was  propofed  by  RofceHnus*  ;  and  foon  after  very, 
widely  propagated  over  Europe  by  the  abilities  and 
eloquence  of  one  of  his  fcholars,  the  celebrated  Peter 
Abelard.  According  to  thefe  philofophers,  there  are 
no  exiftences  in  nature  correfponding  to  general  terms ; 
and  the  objeds  of  our  attention  in  all  our  general  fpe- 
culations  are  not  ideas,  but  words. 

In  confequence  of  this  new  dodrine,  the  fchool- 
men  gradually  formed  themfelves  into  two  feds  :  one 
of  which  attached  itfelf  to  the  opinions  of  Rofcelinus 
and  Abelard ;  while  the  other  adhered  to  the  prin- 
ciples of  Ariftotle.     Of  thefe  feds,  the   former  are 
knovm  in  literary  hiftory  by  the  name  of  the  Nomi- 
nalifts ;  the  latter  by  that  of  the  Realifts. 
^      As  it  is  with  the  dodrine  of  the  Nominalifls  that 
my  own  opinion  on  this  fubjed  coincides  ;  and  as  I 
propofe  to  deduce  from  it  fome  confequences,  which 
appear  to  me  important,  I  Ihall  endeavour  to  ftate  it 
as  clearly  and  precifely  as  I  am  able,  purfuing,  how- 
,    ever,  rather  the   train  of   my   own   thoughts,    than 
',    guided  by  the  reafons  of  any  particular  author. 

I  formerly  explained  in  what  manner  the  words, 
which,  in  the  infancy  of  language,  were  proper  names, 

*  See  Note  [H]. 

became 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    WIND.  171 

became  gradually  appellatives ;  in  confequence  of 
which  extenlion  of  their  fignification,  they  would  ex- 
prefs,  when  applied  to  individuals,  thofe  qualities  only 
which  are  common  to  the  whole  genus.  Now,  it  is 
evident,  that,  with  refped:  to  individuals  of  the  fame 
genus,  there  are  two  claffes  of  truths  ;  the  one,  par- 
ticular truths  relating  to  each  individual  apart,  and 
deduced  from  a  confideration  of  its  peculiar  and 
diftinguifliing  properties  ;  the  other,  general  truths, 
deduced  from  a  confideration  of  their  common  qua- 
lities ;  and  equally  applicable  to  all  of  them.  Such 
truths  may  be  conveniently  expreffed,  by  means  of 
general  terms  ;  fo  as  to  form  proportions,  compre- 
hending under  them  as  many  particular  truths,  as 
there  are  individuals  comprehended  under  the  general 
terms.  It  is  farther  evident,  that  there  are  two  ways 
in  which  fuch  general  truths  may  be  obtained  ;  either 
by  fixing  the  attention  on  one  individual,  in  fuch  a 
manner  that  our  reafoning  may  involve  no  circum- 
flances  but  thofe  which  are  common  to  the  whole 
genus  ;  or,  (laying  afide  entirely  the  confideration  of 
things,)  by  means  of  the  general  terms  with  which 
language  fupplies  us.  In  either  of  thefe  cafes,  our 
inveftigations  mufl  necefTarily  lead  us  to  general  con- 
clufions.  In  the  firft  cafe  ;  our  attention  being  li- 
mited to  thofe  circumflances,  in  which  the  fubjed  of 
our  reafoning  refembles  all  other  individuals  of  the 
fame  genus,  whatever  we  demonftrate  with  refpecl  to 
this  fubjecl  mufl  be  true  of  every  other  to  which  the 
fame  attributes  belong.  In  the  fecond  cafe  -,  the  fub- 
jeQ;  of  our  reafoning  being  expreffed  by  a  generic 
word,  which  applies  in  common  to  a  number  of  in- 
dividuals, 


172  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    rlllLOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

dividuals,  the  conclufion  we  form  muft  be  as  exten- 
five  in  its  application,  as  the  name  of  the  fubjeft  is 
in  its  meaning.  The  former  procefs  is  analogous  to 
the  practice  of  geometers,  who,  in  their  mofi:  general 
reafonings,  dire£t  the  attention  to  a  particular  dia- 
gram :  the  latter,  to  that  of  algebraifts,  who  carry  on 
their  invefligations  by  means  of  fymbols  *.  In  cafes 
of  this  lafl  fort,  it  may  frequently  happen,  from  the 
affociation  of  ideas,  that  a  general  word  may  recal 
fome  one  individual  to  which  it  is  applicable  ;  but 
this  is  fo  far  from  being  neceffary  to  the  accuracy  of 
our  reafoning,  that,  excepting  in  fome  cafes,  in  which 
it  may  be  ufeful  to  check  us  in  the  abufe  of  general 
terms,  it  always  has  a  tendency,  more  or  lefs,  to 
miflead  us  from  the  truth.  As  the  decifion  of  a  judge 
muft  neceflarily  be  impartial,  when  he  is  only  ac- 
quainted with  the  relations  in  which  the  parties  ftand 
to  each  other,  and  when  their  names  are  fupplied  by 
letters  of  the  alphabet,  or  by  the  fictitious  names  of 
Titius,  Caius,  and  Sempronius  ;  fo,  in  every  procefs 
of  reafoning,  the  conclufion  we  form  is  moft  likely 
to  be  logically  juft,  when  the  attention  is  confined 

*  Thefe  two  methods  of  obtaining  general  truths  proceed  on 
the  fame  principles  ;  and  are,  in  fad,  much  lefs  different  from 
each  other,  than  they  appear  to  be  at  fn-ft  view.  When  we  carry- 
on  a  procefs  of  general  reafoning,  by  fixing  our  attention  on  a 
particular  individual  of  a  genus,  this  individual  is  to  be  confidered 
merely  as  a  fign  or  reprefentative  ;  and  differs  from  any  other  fign 
only  in  this,  that  it  bears  a  certain  refemblance  to  the  things  it  de- 
notes.— The  ftraight  lines  which  are  employed  in  the  fifth  book 
of  Euclid  to  reprefent  magnitudes  in  general,  differ  from  the  alge- 
braical exprcffions  of  thefe  magnitudes,  in  the  fame  refpefts  in 
which  pidure-writing  differs  from  arbitrary  charadera. 

folely 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  173 

folely  to  figns ;  and  when  the  imagination  does  not  \ 
prefent  to  it  thofe  individual  objects  which  may  warp  ; 
the  judgment  by  calual  affociations. 

To  thefe  remarks,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  add, 
that,  although  in  our  fpeculations  concerning  indi- 
viduals, it  is  polTible  to  carry  on  procelTes  of  reafon- 
ing,  by  fixing  our  attention  on  the  objects  themfelves, 
without  the  ufe  of  language ;  yet  it  is  alfo  in  our 
power  to  accomplifli  the  fame  end,  by  fubflituting  for 
thefe  objeds,  words,  or  other  arbitrary  figns.  The 
difference  between  the  employment  of  language  in 
fuch  cafes,  and  in  our  fpeculations  concerning  claffes 
or  genera,  is  ;  that  in  the  former  cafe  the  ufe  of  words 
is,  in  a  great  meafure,  optional ;  whereas,  in  the  latter, 
it  is  effentially  neceffary.  This  obfervation  deferves 
our  attention  the  more,  that,  if  I  am  not  miflaken,  it 
has  contributed  to  miflead  fome  of  the  Realifls ;  by 
giving  rife  to  an  idea,  that  the  ufe  of  language,  in 
thinking  about  univerfals,  however  convenient,  is  not 
more  neceffary  than  in  thinking  about  individuals. 

According  to  this  view  of  the  procefs  of  the  mind, 
in  carrying  on  general  fpeculations,  that  idEx\  which 
the  antient  philofophers  confidered  as  the  effence  of 
an  individual,  is  nothing  more  than  the  particular 
quality  or  qualities  in  which  it  refembles  other  indi- 
viduals of  the  fame  clafs ;  and  in  confequence  of 
which,  a  generic  name  is  applied  to  it.  It  is  the  pof- 
fefTion  of  this  quality,  that  entitles  the  individual  to 
the  generic  appelladon ;  and  which,  therefore,  may 
be  faid  to  be  effential  to  its  claflification  with  that  par- 
ticular genus  ;  but  as  all  claffifications  are  to  a  certain 
degree  arbitrary,    it  does  not  necelTarily  follow,  that 

it 


1 74  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

it  is  more  eflential  to  its  exiftence  as  an  individual,  than 
various  other  qualities  which  we  are  accuftomed  to  re- 
gard as  accidental.  In  other  words,  (if  I  may  borrow 
the  language  of  modern  philofophy,)  this  quality  forms 
its  nominal,  but  not  its  real  eifence. 

Thefe  obfervations  will,  I  truft,  be  fufficient  for  the 
fatisfaclion  of  fuch  of  my  readers  as  are  at  all  conver- 
fant  with  philofophical  inquiries.  For  the  fake  of  others, 
to  whom  this  difquifition  may  be  new,  I  have  added 
the  following  illuftrations. 

I  fhall  have  occafion  to  examine,  in  another  part 
of  my  work,  how  far  it  is  true,  (as  is  commonly  be- 
lieved,) that  every  procefs  of  reafoning  may  be  re- 
folved  into  a  feries  of  fyllogifms ;  and  to  point  out 
P  fome  hmitations,  with  which,  I  apprehend,  it  is  necef- 
I  fary  that  this  opinion  fliould  be  received.  As  it 
^  would  lead  me,  however,  too  far  from  my  prefent 
fubjecl,  to  anticipate  any  part  of  the  dodrine  which  I 
am  then  to  propofe,  I  fliall,  in  the  following  remarks, 
proceed  on  the  fuppofition,  that  the  fyllogiftic  theory 
is  well-founded  ;  a  fuppofition  which,  although  not 
ftri6tly  agreeable  to  truth,  is  yet  fufficiently  accurate  for 
the  ufe  which  I  am  now  to  make  of  it.  Take  then,  any 
ifep  of  one  of  Euclid's  demonftrations  ;  for  example, 
the  firfl  ftep  of  his  firfl  propofition,  and  (late  it  in  the 
form  of  a  fyllogifm.  —  "  All  flraight  lines,  drawn  from 
*'  the  centre  of  i  circle  to  the  circumference,  are  equal 
"  to  one  another."  "  But  A  B,  and  C  D,  are  flraight 
**  lines,  drawn  from  the  centre  of  a  circle  to  the  cir- 
""  cumference.  Therefore,  A  B  is  equal  to  C  D." — 
It  is  perfeaiy  manifeft,  that,  in  order  to  feel  the  force 
of  this  conclufion,  it  is  by  no  means  neceflary,  that  I 

J  4  fhould 


Sea.  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  17^ 

fhould  annex  any  particular  notions  to  the  letters  A  B, 
or  C  D,  or  that  I  fhould  comprehend  what  is  meant 
by  equality^  or  by  a  circle,  its  centre,  and  its   circum- 
ference.    Every    perfon   muft   be  fatisfied,    that   the 
truth  of   the   conclufion    is    neceflarily    implied    in 
that  of  the  two    premifes  ;    whatever    the   particular 
things  may  be  to  which   thefe  premifes  may  relate. 
In  the  following  fyllogifm,   too :  —  "  All   men  muft 
"  die  ;  —  Peter  is  a  man  ; —  therefore  Peter  muft  die ;" 
— the  evidence  of  the  conclufion  does  not  in  the  leaft 
depend  on  the  particular  notions  I  annex  to  the  words 
man,  and  Peter  ;  but  would  be  equally  complete,  if 
we  were  to  fubftitute  inftead  of  them,  two  letters  of 
the  alphabet,  or  any  other  infignificant  charafters. — 
"  All  X's  muft  die ; —  Z  is  an  X  ;   therefore  Z  muft 
"  die ;" —  is  a  fyllogifm  which    forces  the   alfent  no 
lefs  than  the  former.     It  is  farther  obvious,  that  this 
fyllogifm  would  be  equally  conclufive,  if,   inftead   of 
the  word  die,  I  were  to  fubftitute  any  other  verb  that 
the  language  contains  ;  and,  that,  in  order  to  perceive 
the  juftnefs  of  the  inference,  it  is  not  even  neceffary 
that  I  ftiould  underftand  its  meaning. 

In  general,  it  might  be  eafily   fliewn,   that  all  the    | 
rules  of  logic,  with  refpeft  to  fyllogifms,  might  be  de-   j 
monftrated,  without  having  recourfe  to  any  thing  but   f 
letters  of  the  alphabet ;  in  the  fame  manner,  (and  I  I 
may  add,  on  the  very  fame  principles,)  on  which  the" 
algebraift  demonftrates,   by  means    of   thefe   letters, 
the   various    rules  for  tranfpofmg   the   terms   of  an 
equation. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  follows,  that  the  aflent 
-we  give  to  the  conclufion  of  a  fyllogifm  does  not  re- 

fult 


176  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

fult  from  any  examination  of  the  notions  exprelTed  by 
the  different  proportions  of  which  it  is  compofed,  but 
is  an  immediate  confequence  of  the  relations  in  which 
the  words  fland  to  each  other.  The  truth  is,  that 
in  every  fyllogifm,  the  inference  is  only  a  particular 
inflance  of  the  general  axiom,  that  whatever  is  true 
univerfally  of  any  fign,  mufl  alfo  be  true  of  every  in- 
dividual which  that  fign  can  be  employed  to  exprefs. 
Admitting,  therefore,  that  every  procefs  of  reafoning 
may  be  refolved  into  a  feries  of  fyllogifms,  it  follows, 
that  this  operation  of  the  mind  furnifhes  no  proof  of 
the  exiflence  of  any  thing  correfponding  to  general 
terms,  diftinft  from  the  individuals  to  which  thefe 
terms  are  applicable. 

Thefe  remarks,  I  am  very  fenfible,  do,  by  no  means, 
exhauft  the  fubjecl ;  for  there  are  various  modes  of 
reafoning,  to  which  the  fyllogiftic  theory  does  not 
apply.  But,  in  all  of  them,  without  exception,  it  will 
be  found,  on  examination,  that  the  evidence  of  our 
conclufions  appears  immediately  from  the  confidera- 
tion  of  the  words  in  which  the  premifes  are  exprefled  ; 
without  any  reference  to  the  things  which  they  de- 
note. The  imperfedl  account  which  is  given  ot  de- 
dudive  evidence,  in  the  received  fyftcms  of  logic, 
makes  it  impoflible  for  me,  in  this  place,  to  profecute 
the  fubjeft  any  farther. 

After  all  that  1  have  faid  on  the  ufe  of  language  as 
an  inflrument  of  reafoning,  I  can  eafily  forelee  a  va- 
riety of  objedions,  which  may  occur  to  the  ductrine  I 
have  been  endeavouring  to  eftablifh.  But,  without 
entering  into  a  particular  examination  of  ihefe  objec- 
tions, I  believe  I  may  venture  to  affirm,  that  moft,  if 

not 


Sod.   2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  1 77 

not  all,  of  them  take  their  rife  from  confounding 
reafoning,  or  dedudlion,  properly  fo  called,  with  cer- 
tain other  intelleftual  proceifes,  which  it  is  neceffary 
for  us  to  employ  in  the  inveftigation  of  truth.  That 
it  is  frequently  of  effential  importance  to  us,  in  our 
fpeculations,  to  withdraw  our  attention  from  words, 
and  to  dired  it  to  the  things  they  denote,  I  am  very 
ready  to  acknowledge.  All  that  I  affert  is,  that,  in 
fo  far  as  our  fpeculations  confift  of  that  procefs  of  the 
mind  which  is  properly  called  reafoning,  they  may 
be  carried  on  by  words  alone ;  or,  which  comes  to 
the  fame  thing,  that  every  procefs  of  reafoning  is  per- 
fectly analogous  to  an  algebraical  operation.  What 
I  mean  by  "  the  other  intelle6lual  proceifes  diftinft 
"  from  reafoning,  which  it  is  neceffary  for  us  fom^e- 
"  times  to  employ  in  the  inveftigation  of  truth,"  will, 
I  hope,  appear  clearly  from  the  following  remarks. 

In  algebraical  inveftigations,  it  is  well  known,  that 
the  pradical  application  of  a  general  expreffion,  is  fre- 
quently hmited  by  the  conditions  which  the  hypo- 
thefis  involves  ;  and  that,  in  confequence  of  a  want ' 
of  attention  to  this  circumftance,  fome  mathematicians 
of  the  firft  eminence  have  been  led  to  adopt  the  moft 
paradoxical  and  abfurd  conclufions.  Without  this 
cautious  exercife  of  the  judgment,  in  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  algebraical  language,  no  dexterity  in  the 
ufe  of  the  calculus  will  be  fufficient  to  preferve  us 
from  error.  Even  in  algebra,  therefore,  there  is  an 
application  of  the  intelledual  powers  perfedly  dif- 
tindt  from  any  procefs  of  reafoning  ;  and  which  is 
abfolutely  neceffary  for  condu(5);ing  us  to  the 
truth. 

N  In 


178  ELEMENTS   OF  THE   PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

In  geometry,  we  are  not  liable  to  adopt  the  fame 
paradoxical  conclufions,  as  in  algebra  ;  becaufe  the 
diagrams,  to  which  our  attention  is  direfted,  ferve  as 
a  continual  check  on  our  reafoning  powers.  Thefe 
diagrams  exhibit  to  our  very  fenfes,  a  variety  of  rela- 
tions among  the  quantities  under  confideration,  which 
the  language  of  algebra  is  too  general  to  exprefs ;  in 
confequence  of  which,  we  are  not  confcious  of  any 
effort  of  the  judgment  diftin£l  from  a  procefs  of  rea- 
foning. As  every  geometrical  invefligation,  however, 
may  be  expreffed  algebraically,  it  is  manifeft,  that  in 
geometry,  as  well  as  in  algebra,  there  is  an  exercife  of 
the  intellectual  powers,  diftinft  from  the  logical  pro- 
cefs ;  although,  in  the  former  fcience,  it  is  rendered 
fo  eafy,  by  the  ufe  of  diagrams,  as  to  efcape  our  at- 
tention. 

The  fame  fource  of  error  and  of  abfurdity,  which 
exifts  in  algebra,  is  to  be  found,  in  a  much  greater 
degree,  in  the  other  branches  of  knowledge.  Ab- 
ftrading  entirely  from  the  ambiguity  of  language  ; 
and  fuppofing  alfo  our  reafonings  to  be  logically  ac- 
curate, it  would  (till  be  neceffary  for  us,  from  time 
to  time,  in  all  our  fpeculations,  to  lay  afide  the  ufe  of 
words,  and  to  have  recourfe  to  particular  examples, 
or  illuftrations,  in  order  to  correQ:  and  to  limit  our 
general  conclufions.  —  To  a  want  of  attention  to  this 
circumftance,  a  number  of  the  fpeculative  abfurdities 
which  are  current  in  the  world,  might,  I  am  perfuaded, 
be  eafily  traced. 

Befides,  however,  this  fource  of  error,  which  is  in 

fome  degree  common  to  all  the  fciences,  there  is  a 

great  variety  of  others,  from  which  mathematics  are 

1 2  entirely 


Sea.  2.  OT   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  1 79 

entirely  exempted  ;  and  which  perpetually  tend  to  lead 
us  aft  ray  in  our  philofophical  inquiries.  Of  thefe,  the 
moft  important  is,  that  ambiguity  in  the  fignification 
of  words,  which  renders  it  fo  difficult  to  avoid  cm- 
ploying  the  fame  expreffions  in  different  fenfes,  in  the 
courfe  of  the  fame  procefs  of  reafoning.  This  fource 
of  miftake,  indeed,  is  apt,  in  a  much  greater  degree, 
to  affetl  our  conclufions  in  metaphyfics,  morals,  and 
politics,  than  in  the  different  branches  of  natural  phi- 
lofophy  ;  but,  if  we  except  mathematics,  there  is  no 
fcience  whatever,  in  which  it  has  not  a  very  fenfible 
influence.  In  algebra,  we  may  proceed  with  perfedl 
fafety  through  the  longeft  inveftigations,  without  car- 
rying our  attention  beyond  the  figns,  till  we  arrive  at 
the  laft  refult.  But  in  the  other  fciences,  excepting 
in  thofe  cafes  in  which  we  have  fixed  the  meaning  of 
all  our  terms  by  accurate  definitions,  and  have  ren- 
dered the  ufe  of  thefe  terms  perfeiSlly  familiar  to  us 
by  very  long  habit,  it  is  but  feldom  that  we  can  pro- 
ceed in  this  manner  without  danger  of  error.  In 
many  cafes,  it  is  neceffary  for  us  to  keep  up,  during 
the  whole  of  our  inveftigations,  a  fcrupulous  and  con- 
ftant  attention  to  the  fignification  of  our  expreffions  ; 
and,  in  moft  cafes,  this  caution  in  the  ufe  of  words, 
is  a  much  more  difficult  effort  of  the  mind,  than  the 
logical  procefs.  But  ftill  this  furnilhes  no  exception 
to  the  general  doftrine  already  delivered  ;  for  the  at- 
tention we  find  it  neceffary  to  give  to  the  import  of 
our  words,  arifes  only  from  the  accidental  circum- 
ftance  of  their  ambiguity,  and  has  no  effential  con- 
nexion with  that  procefs  of  the  mind,  which  is  pro- 
perly called  reafoning  ;  and  which  confifts  in  the  in- 
N  2  ference 


^\ 


1 80  ELEMEXTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

ference  of  a  conclufion  from  premifes.  In  all  the 
fciences,  this  procefs  of  the  mind  is  pcrfedly  analogous 
to  an  algebraical  operation  ;  or,  in  other  words,  (whea 
the  meaning  of  our  expreflions  is  once  fixed  by  defi- 
nitions,) it  may  be  carried  on  intirely  by  the  ufe  of 
figns,  without  attending,  during  the  time  of  the  pro- 
cefs,  to  the  things  fignihed. 

The  conclufion  to  which  the  foregoing  obfervations 
lead,  appears  to  me  to  be  decifive  of  the  queflion, 
with  refpecl  to  the  objects  of  our  thoughts  when  we 
employ  general  terms  ;  for  if  it  be  granted,  that 
words,  even  when  employed  without  any  reference  to 
their  particular  fignification,  form  an  inftrument  of 
thought  fufficient  for  all  the  purpofes  of  reafoning  ; 
the  only  fhadow  of  an  argument  in  proof  of  the  com- 
mon dodrine  on  the  fubjeft,  (I  mean  that  which  is 
founded  on  the  impoffibility  of  explaining  this  procefs 
of  the  mind  on  any  other  hypothefis,)  falls  to  the 
ground.  Nothing  lefs,  furely,  than  a  convi£tion  of 
this  impoffibility,  could  have  fo  long  reconciled  philo- 
fophers  to  an  hypothefis  unfupported  by  any  direct 
evidence;  and  acknowledged  even  by  its  warmefl 
defenders,  to  involve  much  difficulty  and  myf- 
tery. 

It  does  not  fall  within  my  plan,  to  enter,  in  this  part 
of  my  work,  into  a  particular  confideration  of  the 
practical  confequences  which  follow  from  the  fore- 
going dodtrine.  I  cannot,  however,  help  remarking 
the  importance  of  cultivating,  on  the  one  hand,  a  ta- 
lent for  ready  and  various  illuflration  ;  and,  on  the 
other,  a  habit  of  reafoning  by  means  of  general  terms. 
The  former  talent  is  neceffary,  not  only  for  correding 
1 4  and 


Sea    2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  l8l 

and  limiting  our  general  conclulions,  but  for  enabling  \ 
lis  to  apply  our  knowledge,  when  occafion  requires,     I 
to  its  real  practical  ufe.     The  latter  ferves  the  double    1 
purpofe,  of  preventing  our   attention  from  being  dif- 
trafted  during  the  courfe  of  our  reafonings,  by  ideas 
which  are  foreign  to  the  point  in  queftion ;  and  of 
diverting  the  attention  from  thofe  conceptions  of  par- 
ticular objects  and  particular  events  which  might  dif- 
turb  the  judgment,  by  the  ideas  and  feelings  which 
are  apt  to  be  alTociated  with  them,  in  confequence  of 
our  own  cafual  experience. 

This  lafl  obfervation  points  out  to  us,    alfo,    one  j 
principal  foundation  of  the  art  of  the  orator.     As  his   | 
objett  is  not  fo  much  to  inform  and  to  fatisfy  the  un-    | 
derftandings  of  his  hearers,  as  to  force  their  imme- 
diate aflent ;  it  is  frequently  of  ufe  to  him  to  clothe     J 
his  reafonings  in  that  fpecific  and  figurative  language,     I 
which   may    either   awaken    in    their    minds   affocia-    | 
tions  favourable  to  his  purpofe,  or  may   divert  their   f 
attention  from  a  logical  examination  of  his  argument,  j 
A  procefs  of  reafoning  fo  exprefled,  affords  at  once  an  ' 
exercife  to  the  judgment,  to  the  imagination,  and  to 
the  paflions ;  and  is  apt,  even  when  loofe   and  in- 
confequential,    to    impofe    on   the   beft    underftand- 
ings. 

It  appears  farther,  from  the  remarks  which  have  ; 
been  made,  that  the  perfedion  of  philofophical  Ian-  ( 
guage,  confidered  either  as  an  inflrument  of  thought,  \ 
or  as  a  medium  of  communication  with  others,  con-  \ 
fifts  in  the  ufe  of  expreflions,  which,  from  their  gene-  \ 
rality,  have  no  tendency  to  awaken  the  powers  of  con- 
ception and  imagination  ;  or,  in  other  words,  it  con-  ' 
N3  fifts 


1 82  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

fifts  in  its  approaching,  as  nearly  as  poffible,  in  its 
nature,  to  the  language  of  algebra.  And  hence  the 
effefts  which  long  habits  of  philofophical  fpeculation 
have,  in  weakening,  by  difufe,  thofe  faculties  of  the 
mind,  which  are  neceffary  for  the  exertions  of  the 
poet  and  the  orator  ;  and  of  gradually  forming  a  ftyle 
of  compofition,  which  they  who  read  merely  for 
amufement,  are  apt  to  cenfure  for  a  want  of  vivacity 
and  of  ornament. 


SECTION    III. 

Remarks    on    the    Opinions    of  fame   modern    Ph'tlofophers    on    the 
Subject    of  the  foregoing   SeSion. 

A  FTER  the  death  of  Abelard,  through  whofe  abi- 
lities  and  eloquence  the  feci  of  Nominalifts  had 
enjoyed,  for  a  few  years,  a  very  fplendid  triumph,  the 
fyftem  of  the  Realifhs  began  to  revive  ;  and  it  was 
foon  fo  completely  re-eftablifhed  in  the  fchools,  as  to 
prevail,  with  little  or  no  oppofition,  till  the  fourteenth 
century.  What  the  circumftances  were,  which  led 
philofophers  to  abandon  a  doftrine,  which  feems  fo 
ftrongly  to  recommend  itfelf  by  its  fimplicity,  it  is  not 
very  eafy  to  conceive.  Probably  the  heretical  opi- 
nions, which  had  fubjected  both  Abelard  and  Rofce- 
linus  to  the  cenfure  of  the  church,  might  create  a  pre- 
judice alfo  againft  their  philofophical  principles ;  and 
probably  too,  the  manner  in  which  thefe  principles 
were  flated  and  defended,  was  not  the  cleared,  nor  the 

mofl 


Seft.  5.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  183 

moft  fatisfaftory  *.  The  principal  caufe,  however,  I 
am  difpofed  to  think,  of  the  decline  of  the  fe£t  off 
Nominalifls,  was  their  want  of  fome  palpable  exam- 
ple, by  means  of  which  they  might  illuftrate  their  doc- 
trine. It  is  by  the  ufe  which  algebraifts  make  of  the 
letters  of  the  alphabet  in  carrying  on  their  operations, 
that  Leibnitz  and  Berkeley  have  been  moll  fuccefsful 
in  explaining  the  ufe  of  language  as  an  inftrument  of 
thought :  and,  as  in  the  twelfth  century,  the  algebrai- 
cal art  was  entirely  unknown,  Rofcelinus  and  Abelard 
muft  have  been  reduced  to  the  neceffity  of  conveying 
their  leading  idea  by  general  circumlocutions ;  and 
mull  have  found  confiderable  difficulty  in  dating 
it  in  a  manner  fatisfadory  to  themfelves:  a  con- 
fideration,  which,  if  it  accounts  for  the  flow  pro- 
grefs  which  this  doftrine  made  in  the  world,  places 
in  the  more  llriking  light,  the  genius  of  thofe  men 
whofe  fagacity  led  them,  under  fo  great  difadvantages, 
to  approach  to  a  conclulion  fo  jufl  and  philofophical 
in  itfelf,  and  fo  oppofite  to  the  prevaiUng  opinions  of 
their  age. 

In  the  fourteenth  century,  this  fe£l  feems  to  have 
been  almofl  completely  extin6t ;  their  dottrine  being 
equally  reprobated  by  the  two  great  parties  which 
then  divided  the  fchools,  the  followers  of  Duns  Scotus 
and  of  Thomas  Aquinas.  Thefe,  although  they  dif- 
fered  in  their  manner  of  explaining  the  nature  of  uni- 
verfals,  and  oppofed  each  other's  opinions  with  much 
afperity,  yet  united  in  rejecting  the  doctrine  of  the 

*  The  great  argument  which  the  Nominahfts  employed  againft 
the  exiftence  of  univerfals  was  ;  "  Entia  noii  funt  multiplicanda 
"  prseter  neceflitatem," 

N  4  Nominaliilffj 


184  ELEMEKTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

Noniinalifts,  not  only  as  abfurd,  but  as  leading  to  the 
mofl  dangerous  confequences.  At  lafl,  William 
Occam,  a  native  of  England,  and  a  fcholar  of  Duns 
Scotus,  revived  the  ancient  controverfy :  and  with 
equal  ability  and  fuccefs  vindicated  the  long-abandoned 
philofophy  of  Rofcelinus.  From  this  time  the  difpute 
was  carried  on  with  great  warmth,  in  the  univerfities 
of  France,  of  Germany,  and  of  England  ;  more  par- 
ticularly in  the  two  former  countries,  where  the  fo- 
vereigns  were  led,  by  fome  political  views,  to  interefl 
themfelves  deeply  in  the  contefl ;  and  even  to  employ 
the  civil  power  in  fupporting  their  favourite  opinions. 
The  emperor  Lewis  of  Bavaria,  in  return  for  the  af- 
fiflance  which,  in  his  difputes  with  the  Pope  *,  Occam 
had  given  to  him  by  his  writings,  fided  vidth  the 
Nominalifts.  Lewis  the  Eleventh  of  France,  on  the 
other  hand,  attached  himfelf  to  the  Realifls,  and  made 
their  antagonifls  the  objects  of  a  cruel  perfecution  t. 

The  Proteftant  Reformation,  at  length,  involved 
men  of  learning  in  difcuffions  of  a  more  interefting. 
nature ;  but  even  the  zeal  of  theological  controverfy 
could  hardly  exceed  that  with  which  the  Nominalifts 
and  Realifls  had  for  fome  time  before  maintained  their 
refpedive  dodlrines.  "  Clamores  primum  ad  ravim,'* 
(fays  an  author  who  had  himfelf  been  an  eye-witnefs 
of  thefe  literary  difputes,)  "  hinc  improbitas,  fannas, 
"  minae,  convitia,  dum  lu£lantur,  et  uterque  alterum 
"  tentat   proflernere :    confumtis    verbis    veiiitur  ad 

*  Occam,  we  are  told,  was  accuftomed  to  fay  to  the  Emperor  : 
"  Tu  me  defendas  gladio,  et  ego  te  defendam  calamo."  Bruckeh, 
▼ol.  iii.  p.  848. 

t  Mosiieim's  Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory. 

<*  pugnos, 


Sea.  3-  ^^    "^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  1 85 

"  pugnos,  ad  veram  leftam  ex  fida  ei  fimulata, 
"  Qum  etiam,  quse  contingunt  In  palaeftra,  illic  non 
"  defunt,  colaphi,  alap£e,  confputio,  calces,  morfus, 
'*  etiam  qusejam  fupra  leges  palasftr^e,  fuftes,  ferrum, 
'*  faucii  multi,  nonnunquam  occifi  *.'*  That  this  ac- 
count is  not  exaggerated,  we  have  the  teftimony  of 
no  lefs  an  author  than  Erafmus,  who  mentions  it  as  a 
common  occurrence  :  "  Eos  ufque  ad  pallorem,  ufque 
"  ad  convitia,  ufque  ad  fputa,  nonnunquam  et  ufque 
"  ad  pugnos  invicem  digladiari,  alios  ut  Nominates, 
"  alios  ut  Reales,  loqui  t.'* 

The  difpute  to  which  the  foregoing  obfervations  re- 
late, although  for  fome  time  after  the  Reformation, 
interrupted  by  theological  difquifitions,  has  been  fmce 
occafionally  revived  by  different  writers  ;  and,  fmgular 
as  it  may  appear,  it  has  not  yet  been  brought  to  a  con- 
clufion  in  which  all  parties  are  agreed.  The  names, 
indeed,  of  Nominalifls  and  Realifts  exift  no  longer  ; 
but  the  point  in  difpute  between  thefe  two  celebrated 
fefts,  coincides  precifely  with  a  queflion  which  has 
been  agitated  in  our  own  times,  and  which  has  led  to 
one  of  the  mofl  beautiful  fpeculations  of  modern  phi- 
lofophy. 

Of  the  advocates  who  have  appeared  for  the  doc- 

*  LUDOVICUS  ViVES. 

f  The  Nominalifts  procured  the  death  of  John  Hufs,  who  was 
a  Realift  ;  and  in  their  Letter  to  Lewis  King  of  France,  do  not 
pretend  to  deny  that  he  fell  a  vidlim  to  the  refentment  of  their  fe6t. 
The  Realifts,  on  the  other  hand,  obtained,  in  the  year  1479,  the 
condemnation  of  John  de  Wefalia,  who  was  attached  to  the  party 
of  the  Nominalifts.  Thefe  contending  feds  carried  their  fury  fo 
far  as  to  charge  each  other  with  "  the  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghoft." 

Mosheim's  Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory. 
trine 


1 86  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

trine  of  the  Nominalifls,  fince  the  revival  of  letters, 
the  moft  diftingui/hed  are,  Hobbes,  Berkeley,  and 
Hume.  The  firfl  has,  in  various  parts  of  his  works, 
reprobated  the  hypothefis  of  the  Realifts  ;  and  has 
ftated  the  opinions  of  their  antagonifts  with  that  acute- 
nefs,  fimplicity,  and  precifion,  which  diftinguifli  all 
his  writings  *.  The  fecond,  confidering  (and,  in  my 
opinion,  juflly)  the  dodrines  of  the  antients  concern- 
ing univerfals,  in  fupport  of  which  fo  much  ingenuity 
had  been  employed  by  the  Realifts,  as  the  great  fource 
of  myftery  and  error  in  the  abftract  fciences,  was  at 
pains  to  overthrow  it  completely,  by  fome  very 
ingenious    and   original    fpeculations    of    his    own, 

*  **■  The  univerfality  of  one  name  to  many  things,  hath  been  the 
**  caufe  that  men  think  the  things  themfelves  are  univerfal ;  and  fo 
"  ferioufly  contend,  that  befides  Peter  and  John,  and  all  the  reft 
*'  of  the  men  that  are,  have  been,  or  (hall  be,  in  the  world,  there  is 
'*  yet  fomething  elfe,  that  we  call  Man,  viz.  Man  in  general  ;  de- 
*'  ceiving  themfelves,  by  taking  the  univerfal,  or  general  appella- 
"■  tion,  for  the  thing  it  fignifieth  :  For  if  one  fliould  defire  the 
*'  painter  to  make  him  the  picture  of  a  man,  which  is  as  much  as 
*'  to  fay,  of  a  man  in  general ;  he  meaneth  no  more,  but  that  the 
**  painter  fhould  chufe  what  man  he  pleafeth  to  draw,  which  muft 
"  needs  be  fome  of  them  that  are,  or  have  been,  or  may  be  :  none 
*'  of  which  are  univerfal.  But  when  he  would  have  him  to  draw 
"  the  pifture  of  the  king,  or  any  particular  perfon,  he  limiteth  the 
*'  painter  to  that  one  perfon  he  chufeth.  It  is  plain,  therefore, 
"  that  there  is  nothing  univerfal  but  names  ;  which  are  therefore 
"  called  indefinite,  becaufe  v^e  limit  them  not  ourf elves,  but  leave 
'*  them  to  be  applied  by  the  hearer :  whereas  a  Angular  name  is 
"  limited  and  rcftraincd  to  one  of  the  many  things  it  fignifieth  ;  as 
**  when  we  fay,  this  man,  pointing  to  him,  or  giving  him  his  pro- 
**  per  name,  or  by  fome  fuch  other  way." 

HoBBEs's  Tripos,  chap,  v,  §  6. 
Mr. 


Sea.  3*  ^^   '^^^   HUMAN     MIND.  1 87 

Mr.  Hume's  *  view  of  the  fubjeO:,  as  he  himfelf  ac- 
knowledges, does  not  differ  materially  from  that  of 
Berkeley  ;  whom,  by  the  way,  he  feems  to  have  re- 
garded as  the  author  of  an  opinion,  of  which  he  was 
only  an  expofitor  and  defender ;  and  which,  fmce  the 
days  of  Rofcelinus  and  Abelard,  has  been  familiarly 
known  in  all  the  univerfities  of  Europe  t. 

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  great  merit  of  thefe 
writers,  in  defending  and  illuftrating  the  fyftem  of  the 
NominaUfts,  none  of  them  feem  to  me  to  have  been 
fully  aware  of  the  important  confequences  to  which  it 

*  "  A  very  material  queftion  has  been  ftarted  concerning  ab- 
"  ftradl  or  general  ideas  :  Whether  they  be  general  or  particular 
"^  in  the  mind's  conception  of  them  ?  A  great  philofopher  has  dif- 
•'  puted  the  received  opinion  in  this  particular  ;  and  has  aflertedj 
''  that  all  general  ideas  are  nothing  but  particular  ones  annexed  to 
*'  a  certain  term,  which  gives  them  a  more  extenfive  (ignification, 
"  and  makes  them  recal,  upon  occafion,  other  individuals,  which 
"  are  fimilar  to  them.  As  I  look  upon  this  to  be  one  of  the 
*'  greatell  and  moft  valuable  difeoveries  that  have  been  made  of  ^),  t^  ^"f  JJ 
*'  late  years  in  the  repubhc  of  letters,  I  (hall  here  endeavour  to 
*'  confirm  it  by  fome  arguments,  which,  I  hope,  will  put  it  beyond 
"  all  doubt  and  controverfy.'* 

Treatife  of  Human  Nature,  book  i.  part  i.  feft,  7, 

\  Leibnitz,  too,  has  declared  himfelf  a  partifan  of  this  fe6t,  in  a 
differtation  "  De  Stilo  Philofophico  Marii  Nizolii."  This  Nizo- 
lius  pubUftied  a  book  at  Parma,  in  the  year  1553,  entitled,  "De 
*'  Veris  Principiis  et  vera  Ratione  Philofophandi ;"  in  which  he 
oppofed  feveral  of  the  doftrines  of  Ariftotle,  particularly  his 
opinion  concerning  univerfals.  An  edition  of  this  Avork,  with  a 
Preface  and  Notes,  was  pubHftied  by  Leibnitz  at  Frankfort,  in 
the  year  1670.  The  Preface  and  Notes  are  to  be  found  in  the  fourth 
volume  of  his  works,  by  Dutens.  (Geneva,  1768.)  I  have  in- 
ferted  a  (hort  extract  firom  the  former,  in  Note  (I),  at  the  end  of 
the  volume. 

Jeads. 


l88  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  IV, 

leads.  The  Abbe'  de  Condillac  was,  I  believe,  the 
firft  (if  we  except,  perhaps,  Leibnitz)  who  perceived 
that,  if  this  fyftem  be  true,  a  talent  for  reafoning  mud 
confift,  in  a  great  meafure,  in  a  fkiiful  ufe  of  language 
as  an  inflrument  of  thought.  The  moft  valuable  of 
*  his  remarks  on  this  fubject  are  contained  in  a  treatife 
De  r  Art  de  Peiifer,  which  forms  the  fourth  volume  of 
his  "  Cours  d'Etude.'* 

Dr.  Campbell,  too,  in  his  Philofophy  of  Rhetoric, 
has  founded,  on  the  principles  of  Berkeley  and  Hume, 
a  very  curious  and  interefting  fpeculaticn,  of  which  I 
fhall  have  occafion  afterwards  to  take  notice. 

The  explanation  which  the  doctrines  of  thefe  wri- 
ters afford,  of  the  procefs  of  the  mind  in  general  rea- 
foning, is  fo  fimple,  and  at  the  fame  time,  in  my  ap- 
prehenfion,  fo  fatisfadory,  that,  I  own,  it  is  with  fome 
degree  of  furprife  I  have  read  the  attempts  which  have 
lately  been  made  to  revive  the  fyftem  of  the  Realifls. 
One  of  the  ablefl  of  thefe  attempts  is  by  Dr.  Price  ; 
who,  in  his  very  valuable  Treatife  on  Morals,  has  not 
only  employed  his  ingenuity  in  fupport  of  fome  of  the 
old  tenets  of  the  Platonic  fchool,  but  has  even  gone  fo 
far  as  to  follow  Plato's  example,  in  connecting  this 
fpeculation  about  univerfals,  with  the  fublime  queftions 
of  natural  theology.  The  obfervations  which  he  has 
oifered  in  fupport  of  thefe  opinions,  I  have  repeatedly 
perufed  with  all  the  attention  in  my  power  ;  but  with- 
out being  able  to  enter  into  his  views,  or  even  to 
comprehend  fully  his  meaning.  Indeed,  I  mufl  ac- 
knowledge, that  it  appears  to  me  to  afford  no  flight 
prefumption  againfl  the  principles  on  which  he  pro- 
ceeds, when  1  obferve,  that  an  author,  remarkable,  on 

moft 


Seft.  3'  °^  '^^^^  HUMAN  MIND.  I  89 

raofl  occafions,  for  precifion  of  ideas,  and  for  per- 
fpicuity  of  ftyle,  never  fails  to  lofe  himfelf  in  obfcurity 
^nd  myftery,  when  he  enters  on  thefe  difquifitions. 

Dr.  Price's  reafonings  in  proof  of  the  exiflence  of 
univerfals,  are  the  more  curious,  as  he  acquiefces  in 
fome  of  Dr.  Reid's  conclufions  with  refpeft  to  the 
ideal  theory  of  perception.  That  there  are  in  the 
mind,  images  or  refemblaijces  of  things  external,  he 
grants  to  be  impoffible ;  but  ftill  he  feems  to  fuppofe, 
that  in  every  exertion  of  thought,  there  is  fomethhig 
immediately  prefent  to  the  mind,  which  is  the  object 
of  its  attention.  "  When  abftrad  truth  is  contem- 
**  plated,  is  not"  (fays  he)  "  the  very  objed  itfelf 
"  prefent  to  the  mind  ?  When  millions  of  intelleds 
"  contemplate  the  equality  of  every  angle  of  a  femi- 
"  circle  to  a  right  angle,  have  they  not  all  the  fame 
*'  objeft  in  view  ?  Is  this  obje£l  nothing  ?  or  is  it  only 
"  an  image,  or  kind  of  fhadow  ?  Thefe  inquiries,"  he 
adds,  "  carry  our  thoughts  high  */* 

The 

*  The  whole  pafiage  is  as  follows  :  "  The  word  idea  is  fome- 
"  times  ufed  to  fignify  the  immediate  object  of  the  mind  in  think- 
"  ing,  confidered  as  fomething  in  the  mind,  which  reprefents  the 
««  real  object,  but  is  different  from  it.  This  fenfe  of  an  idea  is 
"  derived  from  the  notion,  that  when  we  think  of  any  external 
"  exiftence,  there  is  fomething  immediately  prefent  to  the  mind, 
"  which  it  contemplates  diftind  from  the  objeft  itfelf,  that  being  at 
*•'  a  diftance.  But  what  is  this  ?  It  is  bad  language  to  call  it  an  image 
•'<  in  the  mind  of  the  objeft.  Shall  we  fay  then,  that  there  is  indeed 
*'  no  fuch  thing  ?  But  would  not  this  be  the  fame  as  to  fay  that, 
"  when  the  mind  is  employed  in  viewing  and  examining  any  ob- 
**  jeft,  which  is  either  not  prefent  to  it,  or  does  not  exift,  it  is 
*'  employed  in  viewing  and  examining  nothing,  and  therefore  does 
*'  not  then  think  at  all? — When  abftrad  truth  is  contemplated,  is 

"  not 


1 90  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

The  difficulty  which  has  appeared  fo  puzzling  to 
this  ingenious  writer,  is,  in  truth,  more  apparent  than 
real.  In  the  cafe  of  Perception,  Imagination,  and 
Memory,  it  has  been  already  fully  fhewn,  that  we  have 
no  reafon  to  believe  the  exiflence  of  any  thing  in  the 
mind  diftind  from  the  mind  itfelf;  and  that,  even 
upon  the  fuppofition  that  the  h&.  were  otherwife,  our 
intelleftual  operations  would  be  jufl  as  inexplicable  as 
they  are  at  prefent.  Why  then  fhould  we  fuppofe, 
that  in  our  general  fpeculations,  there  muil  exift  in 
the  mind  fome  objeft  of  its  thoughts,  when  it  appears 
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  exiflence  of  any  fuch 
obje£t,  even  when  the  mind  is  employed  about  in- 
dividuals ? 

Still,  however,  it  may  be  urged,  that,  although,  in 
fuch  cafes,  there  fhould  be  no  objedt  of  thought  in  the 
mind,  there  mufl  exill  fomething  or  other  to  which  its 
attention  is  directed.  To  this  difficulty  I  have  no 
anfwer  to  make,  but  by  repeating  the  faft  which  I  have 
already  endeavoured  to  eftablifh ;  that  there  are  only 
two  ways  in  which  we  can  poffibly  fpeculate  about 
clafTes  of  objefts ;  the  one,  by  means  of  a  word  or 
generic  term  ;  the  other,  by  means  of  one  particular 
individual  of  the  clafs  which  we  confider  as  the  repre- 
fentative  of  the  refl ;  and  that  thefe  two  methods  of 
carrying  on  our  general  fpeculations,  are  at  bottom  fo 
much  the  fame,  as  to  authorize  us  to  to  lay  down  as  a 

"  not  the  very  object  itfelf  prefent  to  the  mind  ?  When  millions  of 
*'  intellects  contemplate  the  equality  of  every  angle  in  a  feraicircle 
"  to  a  right  angle,  have  they  not  all  the  fame  object  in  view  ?  Is 
"  this  object  nothing  ?  or  is  it  only  an  image  or  kind  of  (hadow  ? 
"  — Thefe  inquiries  carry  our  thoughts  high." 

principle, 


Seft.  3.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  igi 

principle,  that,  without  the  ufe  of  figns,  all  our  /- 
thoughts  mufl  have  related  to  individuals.  When  we  >■ 
reafon,  therefore,  concerning  claffes  or  genera,  the  ob- 
jeds  of  our  attention  are  merely  figns ;  or  if,  in  any  in- 
ftance,  the  generic  word  (hould  recal  fome  individual, 
this  circumftance  is  to  be  regarded  only  as  the  confe- 
quence  of  an  accidental  aifociation,  which  has  rather  a 
tendency  to  difturb,  than  to  alTift  us  in  our  rea- 
foning. 

Whether  It  might  not  have  been  poflible  for  the  / 
Deity  to  have  fo  formed  us,  that  we  might  have  been  \ 
capable  of    reafoning,  concerning  claffes  of  objects,  \ 
without  the  ufe  of  figns,  I  fhall  not  take  upon  me  \ 
to  determine.     But  this  we  may  venture  to  affirm  with  | 
confidence,  that  man  is  not  fuch  a  being.     And,  in-  } 
deed,  even  if  he  were,  it  would  not  therefore  neceffarlly 
follow,  that  there  exifts  any  thing  in  a  genus,  diftind 
from  the  indi\'iduals  of  which  it  is  compofed  ;  for  we 
know  that  the  power  which  we  have  of  thinking  of 
particular  objeds  without  the  medium  of  figns,  does 
not  in  the  leall  depend  on  their  exiflence  or  non- 
exiftence  at  the  moment  we  think  of  them. 

It  would  be  vain,  however,  for  us,  in  inquiries  of 
this  nature,  to  indulge  ourfelves  in  fpeculating  about 
poflibilities.  It  is  of  more  confequence  to  remark  the 
advantages  which  we  derive  from  our  adual  conftitu- 
tion,  and  which,  in  the  prefent  inflance,  appear  to  me 
to  be  important  and  admirable ;  inafmuch  as  it  fits 
mankind  for  an  eafy  interchange  of  their  intellectual 
acquifitions ;  by  impofing  on  them  the  neceiTity  of 
employing,  in  their  folitary  fpeculations,  the  fame  in- 
ilrument  of  thought,  which  forms  the  ellablifhed 
medium  of  their  communications  with  each  other. 

In 


192  ELEMENTS    OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  IV. 

In  the  very  flight  fketch  which  I  have  given  of  the 
controverfy  between  the  Nominalifts  and  the  ReaUfts 
about  the  exiftence  of  univerfals,  I  have  taken  no  no- 
tice of  an  intermediate  fe6t  called  Conceptualifts ; 
whofe  diftinguifhing  tenet  is  faid  to  have  been,  that 
the  mind  has  a  power  of  forming  general  concep- 
tions *.  From  the  indiftin£lnefs  and  inaccuracy  of 
their  language  on  the  fubjeft,  it  is  not  a  very  eafy 
matter  to  afcertain  precifely  what  was  their  opinion 
on  the  point  in  quellion  ;  but,  on  the  v/hole,  I  am  in- 
clined to  think,  that  it  amounted  to  the  two  following 
propofiiions :  firfl,  that  we  have  no  reafon  to  believe 
the  exiftence  of  any  elTences,  or  univerfal  ideas,  cor- 
refponding  to  general  terms ;  and  fecondly,  that  the 
mind  has  the  power  of  reafoning  concerning  genera, 
or  claiTes  of  individuals,  ^without  the  ?nediafwn  of  lan- 
guage. Indeed,  I  cannot  think  of  any  other  hypothefis 
which  it .  is  poffible  to  form  on  the  fubject,  diftind 

*  *^'  Nominales,  deferta  paulo  Abelardl  hypothefi,  univerfalia  in 
*'  notionibus  atque  conceptibus  mentis  ex  rebus  fingularibiis  ab- 
"  ftraftione  formatis  confiftere  ftatuebant,  iinde  conceptuales  difti 
'(  funt."  Brucker,  vol.  iii.  p.  908.  (Lipf.  1766.) 

"  NominaUum  tres  erant  familiae.  Aliqui  ut  Rocelinus,  univer- 
•'  falia  meras  effe  voces  docuerunt.  Alii  iteriim  in  folo  intellectu 
"  pofuerunt,  atque  meros  animi  conceptus  cfle  autumarunt;,  quos 
"  conceptuales  aliqui  vocant,  et  a  nominalibus  dillinguunt  quan- 
"  quam  alii  etiam  confundant.  Alii  fuerunt,  qui  univerfalia  quae 
"  fiverunt,  non  cam  in  vocibus,  quam  in  fei-monibus  integris,  quod 
*'  Job.  Sarifberienfis  adfcribit  Pet.  Abelardo  ;  quo  quid  intelligat 
''  ille,  mihi  non  fatis  liquet."  —  Mokhof.  Polyhiftor.  Tom.  Sec. 
lib.  i.  cap.  xiii.  §  2. 

I  have  taken  no  notice  of  the  laft  clafs  of  NominaUfts  here 
mentioned ;  as  I  find  myfelf  unable  to  comprehend  their  doc- 
trine, 

from 


Sea.".  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  10^ 

from  thofe  of  the  two  celebrated  feds  already  men- 
tioned. In  denying  the  exiftence  of  univerfals,  we 
know  that  the  Conceptualifts  agreed  with  the  Nomi- 
nalifts.  In  what,  then,  can  we  fuppofe  that  they 
differed  from  them,  but  about  the  neceflity  of  language 
as  an  inflrument  of  thought,  in  carrying  on  our  ge- 
neral fpeculations  ? 

With  this  fed  of  Conceptualifts,  Dr.  Reid  is  dif- 
pofed  to  rank  Mr.  Locke  ;  and  I  agree  with  him  fo 
far  as  to  think,  that,  if  Locke  had  any  decided  opi- 
nion on  the  point  in  difpute,  it  did  not  differ  mate- 
rially from  what  I  have  endeavoured  to  exprefs  in  the 
two  general  propofitions  which  I  have  juft  now  ftated. 
The  apparent  inconfiftencies  which  occur  in  that  part 
of  his  Effay  in  which  the  queftion  is  difcuffed,  have 
led  fubfequent  authors  to  reprefent  his  fentiments  in 
different  lights  ;  but  as  thefe  inconfiftencies  plainly 
fliew,  that  he  was  neither  fatisfied  with  the  fyftem  of 
the  Reahfts,  nor  with  that  of  the  Nominalifts  ;  they 
appear  to  me  to  demonftrate  that  he  leaned  to  the 
intermediate  hypothefis  already  mentioned,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  inaccurate  and  paradoxical  manner  in 
which  he  has  expreffed  it  ^. 

May  I  take  the  liberty  of  adding,  that  Dr.  Reid's 
own  opinion  feems  to  me  alfo  to  coincide  nearly  with 
that  of  the  Conceptualifts ;  or,  at  leaft,  to  coincide  with 
the  two  propofitions  which  I  have  already  fuppofed  to 
contain  a  fummary  of  their  doctrine  ?  The  abfurdity 
of  the  ancient  opinion  concerning  univerfals,  as  main- 
tained both  by  Plato  and  Ariftotle,  he  has  expofed 

*  See  Note[Kl» 

O  by 


1 94  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY     Chap.  IV. 

by  the  cleareft  and  mofl  decifive  arguments ;  not  to 
mention,  that,  by  his  own  very  original  and  important 
fpeculations  concerning  the  ideal  theory,  he  has  com- 
pletely deftroyed  that  natural  prejudice  from  which  the 
whole  fyftem  of  univerfal  ideas  gradually  took  rife.  If, 
even  in  the  cafe  of  individuals,  we  have  no  reafon  to 
believe  the  exiftence  of  any  objed  of  thought  in  the 
mind,  diftin6t  from  the  mind  itfelf,  we  are  at  once 
relieved  from  all  the  difficulties  in  which  philofophers 
have  involved  themfelves,  by  attempting  to  explain, 
in  confiftency  with  that  antient  hypothefis,  the  procefs 
of  the  mind  in  its  general  fpeculations. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no  lefs  clear,  from  Dr. 
Reid's  criticifms  on  Berkeley  and  Hume,  that  his  opi- 
nion does  not  coincide  with  that  of  the  Nominalifts  ; 
and  that  the  power  which  the  mind  polfefles  of  rea- 
foning  concerning  clafles  of  objeds,  appears  to  him  to 
imply  fome  faculty,  of  which  no  notice  is  taken  in  the 
fyftems  of  thefe  philofophers. 

The  long  experience  I  have  had  of  the  candour  of 
this  excellent  author,  encourages  me  to  add,  that,  in 
ftating  his  opinion  on  the  fubjed  of  univerfals,  he  has 
not  exprefled  himfelf  in  a  manner  fo  completely  fatis- 
factory  to  my  mind,  as  on  mofl  other  occafions.  That 
language  is  not  an  eifential  inflrument  of  thought  in 
our  general  reafonings,  he  has  no  where  pofitively 
aflerted.  At  the  fame  time,  as  he  has  not  affirmed 
the  contrary,  and  as  he  has  declared  himfelf  diflatisfied 
with  the  doctrines  of  Berkeley  and  Hume,  Tiis  readers 
are  naturally  led  to  conclude,  that  this  is  his  real  opi- 
nion on  the  fubjed.  His  filence  on  this  point  is  the 
more  to  be  regretted,  as  it  is  the  only  point  about 
1 3  which 


Seft.  3.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  jg^ 

which  there  can  be  any  reafonable  controverfy  among 
thofe  who  allow  his  refutation  of  the  ideal  hypothefis 
to  be  fatisfactory.  In  confequence  of  that  refutation, 
the  whole  difpute  between  the  Realifts  and  the  Con- 
ceptualifls  falls  at  once  to  the  ground  ;  but  the  dif- 
pute between  the  Conceptualifls  and  the  Nominalifls 
(which  involves  the  great  queflion  concerning  the  ufe 
of  figns  in  general  fpeculation)  remains  on  the  fame 
footing  as  before. 

In  order  to  juftify  his  own  expreflions  concerning 
univerfals ;  and  in  oppofition  to  the  language  of 
Berkeley  and  Hume,  Dr.  Reid  is  at  pains  to  illuflrate 
a  diftinftion  between  conception  and  imagination, 
which,  he  thinks,  has  not  been  fufficiently  attended  to 
by  philofophers.  "  An  univerfal,"  fays  he,  "  is  not 
an  objed:  of  any  external  fenfe,  and  therefore  can- 
not be  imagined  ;  but  it  may  be  diflinclly  conceived. 
When  Mr.  Pope  fays,  "  The  proper  ftudy  of 
mankind  is  man  ;"  I  conceive  his  meaning  dif- 
tin£tly;  although  I  neither  imagine  a  black  or  a 
white,  a  crooked  or  a  flraight  man.  I  can  conceive 
a  thing  that  is  impoflible ;  but  I  cannot  diftinftly 
imagine  a  thing  that  is  impoffible.  I  can  conceive 
a  proportion  or  a  demonftration,  but  I  cannot  ima- 
gine either.  I  can  conceive  underftanding  and  will, 
virtue  and  vice,  and  other  attributes  of  the  mind  ; 
but  I  cannot  imagine  them.  In  like  manner,  I  can 
diftinftly  conceive  univerfals ;  but  I  cannot  imagine 
them*." 

It  appears  from  this  palTage,  that,  by  conceiving 
univerfals,  Dr.  Reid  means  nothing  more  than  under- 
*  P.  482. 
O  2  (landing 


19^  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

ftandlng  the  meaning  of  propofitions  involving  general 
terms.  But  the  obfervations  he  has  made  (admitting 
them  in  their  full  extent)  do  not  in  the  leafl  affeft  the 
queftion  about  the  neceflity  of  figns,  to  enable  us  to 
fpeculate  about  fueh  propofitions.  The  vague  ufe 
which  metaphyseal  writers  have  made  of  the  word 
concepimii  (of  which  I  had  occafion  to  take  notice  in 
a  former  chapter,)  has  contributed  in  part  to  embarrafs 
this  fubjedt.  That  we  cannot  conceive  univerfals  in  a 
way  at  all  analogous  to  that  in  which  we  conceive  an 
abfent  obje6t  of  fenfe,  is  granted  on  both  fides.  Why 
then  fhould  we  employ  the  fame  word  conception,  to 
exprefs  two  operations  of  the  mind  which  are  effen- 
tially  different  ?  When  we  fpeak  of  conceiving  or  un- 
derftanding  a  general  proportion,  we  mean  nothing 
more  than  that  we  have  a  conviction,  (founded  on 
our  previons  ufe  of  the  words  in  which  it  is  exprefled,) 
that  we  have  it  in  our  jx)wer,  at  pleafure,  to  fubftitute, 
inftead  of  the  general  terms,  fome  one  of  the  indivi- 
duals comprehended  under  them.  When  we  hear  a 
proportion  announced,  of  which  the  terms  are  not 
familiar  to  us  ;  we  naturally  defire  to  have  it  exempli- 
fied, or  illuftrated,  by  means  of  fome  particular  in- 
ftance  ;  and  when  we  are  once  fatisfied  by  fuch  an 
application,  that  we  have  the  interpretation  of  the  pro- 
pofition^  at  all  times  in  our  power,  we  make  no  fcruple 
to  fay,  that  we  conceive  or  underlland  its  meaning ; 
although  we  fhould  not  extend  our  views  beyond  the 
words  in  which  it  is  announced,  or  even  although  no 
particular  exemplification  of  it  fhould  occur  to  us  at 
the  moment.  It  is  in  this  fenfe  only,  that  the  terms 
©f  any  general  propofition  can  poflibly  be  underftood  : 

and 


Sea.  3»  ^^   'T^^^    HUMAl^    MIND.  197 

and  therefore  Dr.  Reid's  argument  does  not,  in  the 
leaft,  invalidate  the  dodrine  of  the  NominaUfls,  that, 
without  the  ufe  of  language,  (under  which  term  I 
comprehend  every  fpecies  of  figns,)  we  fliould  never 
have  been  able  to  extend  our  fpeculations  beyond 
individuals. 

That,  in  many  cafes,  we  may  fafely  employ  in  our 
reafonings,  general  terms,  the  meaning  of  which  we 
are  not  even  able  to  interpret  in  this  way,  and  confe- 
quently,  which  are  to  us  wholly  infignificant,  I  had 
occafion  already  to  demonflrate,  in  a  former  part  of 
this  fedion. 


SECTION  IV. 

Continuation  of  the  fame  SubjeB. — Infennces  ivlth  refpeB  to  the  Ufe 
of  Language  as  an  Inflrument  of  Thought,  and  the  Errors  In  Rea- 
fonlng  to  ivhUh  It  occafionally  gives  rife. 

IN  the  lafl:  Sedion,  I  mentioned  Dr.  Campbell,  as 
an  ingenious  defender  of  the  fyftem  of  the  Nomi- 
nalifls  ;  and  I  alluded  to  a  particular  application  which 
he  has  made  of  their  doctrine.  The  reafonings  which 
I  had  then  in  view,  are  to  be  found  in  the  feventh 
chapter  of  the  fecond  book  of  his  Philofophy  of  Rhe- 
toric ;  in  which  chapter  he  propofes  to  explain  how 
it  happens,  "  that  nonfenfe  fo  often  efcapes  being 
*'  deteded,  both  by  the  writer  and  the  reader." 
The  title  is  fomewhat  ludicrous  in  a  grave  philo- 
fophical  work  ;  but  the  difquifition  to  which  it  is 
prefixed,  contains  many  acute  and  profound  remarks 

O  3  oa 


tgS  ELEIMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV- 

on  the  nature  and  power  of  figns,  both  as  a  me- 
dium of  communication,  and  as  an  inftrument  of 
thought. 

Dr.  Campbell's  fpeculations  with  refpect  to  lan- 
guage as  an  inftrument  of  thought,  feem  to  have  been 
fuggefted  by  the  following  paffage  in  Mr.  Hume*s 
Treatife  of  Human  Nature.  "  I  believe,  every  one 
*'  who  examines  the  fituation  of  his  mind  in  reafon- 
*'  ing,  will  agree  with  me,  that  we  do  not  annex  dif- 
*'  tind:  and  complete  ideas  to  every  term  we  make  ufe 
"  of;  and  that  in  talking  of  Government,  Church, 
"  Negotiation,  Conqueft,  we  feldom  fpread  out  in  our 
**  minds  all  the  fimple  ideas  of  which  thefe  complex 
*'  ones  are  compofed.  It  is,  however,  obfervable,  that 
"  notwithftanding  this  imperfeftion,  we  may  avoid 
"  talking  nonfenfe  on  thefe  fubjeds ;  and  may  per- 
"  ceive  any  repugnance  among  the  ideas,  as  well  as 
"  if  we  had  a  full  comprehenfion  of  them.  Thus  if, 
"  inftead  of  faying,  that,  in  war,  the  weaker  have 
*'  always  recourfe  to  negotiation,  we  fhould  fay,  that 
"  they  have  always  recourfe  to  conqueft  ;  the  cuftom 
"  which  we  have  acquired,  of  attributing  certain 
"  relations  to  ideas,  ftill  follows  the  words,  and  makes 
"  us  immediately  perceive  the  abfurdity  of  that  pro- 
"  pofition.'* 

In  the  remarks  which  Dr.  Campbell  has  made  on 
this  paflage,  he  has  endeavoured  to  explain  in  what 
manner  our  habits  of  thinking  and  fpeaking,  gradually 
cftablilh  in  the  mind  fuch  relations  among  the  words 
we  employ,  as  enable  us  to  carry  on  procefles  of  rea- 
foning  by  means  of  them,  without  attending  in  every 
inftance  to  their  particular  fignification.    With  moft 

of 


Sect.  4-  °^    ^^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  19^ 

of  his  remarks  on  this  fubjeft  I  perfectly  agree  ;  but 
the  illuftrations  he  gives  of  them,  are  of  too  great 
extent  to  be  introduced  here  ;  and  I  would  not  wifli 
to  run  the  rifk  of  impairing  their  perfpicuity,  by  at- 
tempting to  abridge  them.  I  mud  therefore  refer 
fuch  of  my  readers  as  wifh  to  profecute  the  fpecu- 
lation,  to  his  very  ingenious  and  philofophical 
treatife. 

*'  In  confequence  of  thefe  circumjR:ances,"  (fays 
Dr.  Campbell,)  "  it  happens  that,  in  matters  which 
"  are  perfedly  familiar  to  us,  we  are  able  to  reafon 
"  by  means  of  words,  without  examining,  in  every 
**  inftance,  their  fignification.  Almoft  all  the  poffible 
"  applications  of  the  terms  (in  other  words,  all  the 
"  acquired  relations  of  the  figns)  have  become  cuf- 
"  tomary  to  us.  The  confequence  is,  that  an  unufual 
"  application  of  any  term  is  inftantly  detected ;  this 
"  detection  breeds  doubt,  and  this  doubt  occafions  an 
"  immediate  recourfe  to  ideas.  The  recourfe  of  the 
"  mind,  when  in  any  degree  puzzled  with  the  figns, 
"  to  the  knowledge  it  has  of  the  things  fignified,  is 
**  natural,  and  on  fuch  fubjefts  perfectly  eafy.  And 
*'  of  this  recourfe  the  difcovery  of  the  meaning,  or  of 
"  the  unmeaningnefs  of  what  is  faid,  is  the  immediate 
*'  effed.  But  in  matters  that  are  by  no  means  fami- 
"  liar,  or  are  treated  in  an  uncommon  manner,  and  in 
"  fuch  as  are  of  an  abftrufe  and  intricate  nature,  the 
*'  cafe  is  widely  different.*'  The  inftances  in  which 
we  are  chiefly  liable  to  be  impofed  on  by  words  without 
meaning  are,  (according  to  Dr.  Campbell,)  the  three 
following : 

Firft,  Where  there  is  an  exuberance  of  metaphor. 
O  4  Secondly,. 


200  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

Secondly,  When  the  terms  mofl  frequently  occur- 
ring, denote  things  which  are  of  a  complicated  nature, 
and  to  which  the  mind  is  not  fufficiently  familiarifed. 
Such  are  the  words,  Government,  Church,  State, 
Conftitution,  Polity,  Power,  Commerce,  Legiflature, 
Jurifdiclion,  Proportion,  Symmetry,  Elegance. 

Thirdly,  When  the  terms  employed  are  very  ab- 
ftract,  and  confequently  of  very  extenfive  fignifica- 
tion  *.  For  an  illuflration  of  thefe  remarks,  I  muft 
refer  the  reader  to  the  ingenious  work  which  I  jufl 
now  quoted. 

To  the  obfervations  of  thefe  eminent  writers,  I  fhall 
take  the  liberty  of  adding,  that  we  are  doubly  liable 
to  the  miftakes  they  mention,  when  we  make  ufe  of  a 
language  which  is  not  perfectly  familiar  to  us.  No- 
thing, indeed,  I  apprehend,  can  (hew  more  clearly  the 
ufe  we  make  of  words  in  reafoning  than  this,  that  an 
obfervation  which,  when  expreifed  in  our  own  lan- 
guage, feems  trite  or  frivolous,  often  acquires  the  ap- 
pearance of  depth  and  originality,  by  being  tranflated 
into  another.     For  my  own  part,  at  leaft,  I  am  con- 

*  "  The  more  general  any  word  is  in  its  fignification,  it  is  the 
"  more  liable  to  be  abufed  by  an  improper  or  unmeaning  applica- 
*'  tion.  A  very  general  term  is  applicable  alike  to  a  multitude  of 
"  different  individuals,  a  particular  term  is  applicable  but  to  a  few. 
*'  When  the  rightful  applications  of  a  word  are  extremely  nume- 
"  rous,  they  cannot  all  be  fo  llrongly  fixed  by  habit,  but  that, 
"  for  greater  fecurity,  we  mufl  perpetually  recur  in  our  minds 
"  from  the  fign  to  the  notion  we  have  of  the  thing  fignified  ;  and, 
**  for  the  reafon  aforementioned,  it  is  in  fuch  inftances  difficult 
*'  prccifcly  to  afcertain  this  notion.  Thus  the  latitude  of  a  word, 
«  though  different  from  its  ambiguity,  hath  often  a  fimilar  efFeft." 
— Philofophy  of  Rhetoric,  vol.  ii.  p.  122. 

1 1  fcious 


Sea.  4-  ^^    '^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  201 

fcious  of  having  been  frequently  led,  in  this  way,  to 
form  an  exaggerated  idea  of  the  merits  of  antient  and 
of  foreign  authors  ;  and  it  has  happened  to  me  more 
than  once,  that  a  fentence,  which  feemed  at  firfl  to 
contain  fomething  highly  ingenious  and  profound, 
when  tranflated  into  words  familiar  to  me,  appeared 
obvioufly  to  be  a  trite  or  a  nugatory  proportion. 

The  effeft  produced  by  an  artificial  and  inverted 
flyle  in  our  own  language,  is  fmiilar  to  what  we  ex- 
perience when  we  read  a  compofition  in  a  foreign  one. 
The  eye  is  too  much  dazzled  to  fee  diftin6tly.  *'  Aliud 
"  ftyli  genus,"  (fays  Bacon,)  *'  totum  in  eo  eft,  ut 
"  verba  fmt  aculeata,  fententise  concifas,  oratio  denique 
"  potius  verfa  quam  fufa,  quo  fit,  ut  omnia,  per  hu- 
"  jufmodi  artificium,  magis  ingeniofa  videantur  quam 
"  re  vera  fmt.  Tale  invenitur  in  Seneca  effufms,  in 
*'  Tacito  et  Plinio  fecundo  moderatius.'* 

The  deranged  collocation  of  the  words  in  Latin 
compofition,  aids  powerfully  the  impofition  we  have 
now  been  confidering,  and  renders  that  language  an 
inconvenient  medium  of  philofophical  communication  ; 
as  well  as  an  inconvenient  inftrument  of  accurate 
thought.  Indeed,  in  all  languages  in  which  this  la- 
titude in  the  arrangement  of  words  is  admitted,  the 
affociations  among  words  muft  be  loofer,  than  where 
one  invariable  order  is  followed  ;  and  of  confequence, 
on  the  principles  of  Hume  and  Campbell,  the  miftakes 
which  are  committed  in  reafonings  expreffed  in  fuch 
languages,  will  not  be  fo  readily  detected. 

The  errors  in  reafoning,  to  which  we  are  expofed 
in  confequence  of  the  ufe  of  words  as  an  inftrument  of 
thought,  will  appear  the  lefs  furprifmg,  when  we  con- 

fider 


202  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY     Chap.  IV. 

fider  that  all  the  languages  which  have  hitherto  ex- 
ifted  in  the  world,   have  derived  their  origin  from 
popular  ufe  ;   and  that  their  application  to   philofo- 
phical  purpofes,  was  altogether  out  of  the  view  of 
thofe  men  who   firft  employed  them.     Whether  it 
might  not  be  poffible  to  invent  a  language,  which 
would  at  once  facilitate  philofophical  communication, 
and  form  a  more  convenient  inflrument  of  reafoning 
and  of  invention,  than  thofe  we  polTefs  at  prefent,  is 
a  queftion  of  very  difficult  difcufiion  ;  and  upon  which 
I  ihall  not  prefume  to  offer  an  opinion.     The  failure 
of  Wilkins's  very  ingenious  attempt  towards  a  real 
character,  and  a  philofophical  language,   is  not  per- 
haps decifive  againft  fuch   a  projed ;    for,    not   to 
mention  fome  radical  defects  in  his  plan,  the  views 
of  that  very  eminent  philofopher  do  not  feem  to  have 
extended  much  farther  than  to  promote  and  extend 
the    literary    intercourfe    among    diiferent    nations. 
Leibnitz,  fo  far  as  I  know,   is  the  only  author  who 
has  hitherto  conceived  the  poiTibility  of  aiding   the 
powers  of  invention  and  of  reafoning,   by  the  ufe  of 
a  more  convenient  inftrument  of  thought ;  but  he  has 
no  where  explained  his  ideas  on  this  very  interefting 
fubjeft.    It  is  only  from  a  converfation  of  his  with  Mr. 
Boyle  and  Mr.  Oldenburgh,  when  he  was  in  England 
in  1673,  and  from  fome  imperfect  hints  in  different 
parts  of  his  works  *,  that  we  find  it  had  engaged  his 
attention.     In  the  courfe  of  this  converfation  he  ob- 
ferved,    that   Wilkins    had   miftaken    the   true    end 
of  a  real  charafter,   which  was  not  merely  to  enable 
different  nations  to  correfpond    eafily  together,   but 

*  See  Note  [L]. 

to 


Sea.  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  203 

to  alllft  the  reafon,  the  invention,  and  the  memory.  In 
his  writings,  too,  he  fomewhere  fpeaks  of  an  alphabet 
of  human  thoughts,  which  he  had  been  employed  in 
forming,  and  which,  probably,  (as  Fontenelle  has  re- 
marked,) had  fome  relation  to  his  univerfal  language*. 
The  new  nomenclature  which  has  been  introduced 
into  chymiflry,  feems  to  me  to  furnifh  a  ftriking 
illuftration  of  the  effect  of  appropriated  and  well- 
defined  exprellions,  in  aiding  the  intellectual  powers  ; 
and  the  period  is  probably  not  far  diftant,  when  fimi- 
lar  innovations  will  be  attempted  in  fome  of  the  other 
fciences. 

*  "  M.  Leibnitz  avoit  con§u  le  projet  dune  langue  pliilofo- 
"  phique  et  univerfelle.  Wilkins  Eveqiie  de  Cheilcr,  et  Dalo-arno, 
"  y  avoient  travaille ;  luais  des  le  terns  qu'il  etoit  en  Angleterre, 
"  il  avoit  dit  a  Meffieurs  Boyle  et  d'Oldenbourg  qu'il  ne  croyoit 
*'  pas  que  ces  grands  hommes  euffent  encore  frappe  au  but.  lis 
"  pouvoient  bien  faire  que  des  nations  qui  ne  s'enteudoient  pas 
"  euffont  aifemenc  commerce,  mais  ils  n'avoient  pas  attrappe  les 
'*  veritables  carafteres  reels,  qui  etoient  I'inftrument  le  plus  fin 
"  dont  I'efprit  humain  fe  put  fervir,  et  qui  devoieiit  extremement 
"  faciliter  et  le  raifonnement,  et  la  memoire,  et  linvention  des 
"  chofes.  lis  devoient  reffembler,  autant  qu'il  etuit  poflible,  aux 
**  caradleres  d'algebre,  qui  en  effet  font  tres  iimples,  et  tres  ex- 
"  preffifs,  qui  n'ont  jamais  ni  fuperfluite,  ni  equivoque,  et  dont 
"  toutes  les  varietes  font  raifonnees.  II  a  parle  en  quelque  endroit, 
"  d'un  alphabet  des  penfees  humaines,  qu'il  mcditoit.  Selon  toutes 
"  les  apparences,  cet  alphabet  avoit  rapport  a  fa  langue  univer- 
**  felk."  Eloge  di  M.  Leibnitz  par  M.  de  Fontenelle. 


204  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Cfiap.  IV. 


SECTION   V. 

Of  ihe   Purpofes  to  ivhich    the   Powers  of  Ahflr action   and    Cent' 
ral'ifathn  are  fubfervicnt. 

T  has  been  alreaxiy  Ihewn,  that,  without  tlie  ufc 
of  figns,  all  our  knowledge  mull  neceflarily  haye 
been  limited  to  individuals,  and  that  we  Ihould  have 
been  perfectly  incapable  both  of  clafTification  and 
o-cneral  reafoning.  Some  authors  have  maintained, 
that  without  the  power  of  generalifation,  (which  I 
have  endeavoured  to  {hew,  means  nothing  more 
than  the  capacity  of  employing  general  terms,)  it 
would  have  been  impofiible  for  us  to  have  carried  on 
any  fpecies  of  reafoning  whatever.  But  I  cannot 
help  thinking  that  this  opinion  is  erroneous  ;  or,  at 
leaft,  that  it  is  very  imperfectly  dated.  The  truth  is, 
it  appears  to  me  to  be  jull  in  one  fenfe  of  the  word 
reafoning,  but  falfe  in  another  ;  and  I  even  fufpcdt  it 
is  falfe  in  that  fenfe  of  the  word  in  which  it  is  mod 
commonly  employed.  Before,  therefore,  it  is  laid 
down  as  a  general  propofition,  the  meaning  we  are  to 
annex  to  this  very  vague  and  ambiguous  term,  fliould 
be  afcertained  with  precifion. 

It  has  been  remarked  by  feveral  writers,  that  the 
cxpedation  which  we  feel  of  the  continuance  of  the 
laws  of  nature,  is  not  founded  upon  reafoning ;  and 
different  theories  have  of  late  been  propofed  to  ac- 
count for  its  origin.  Mr.  Hume  refolves  it  into  the 
affociation  of  ideas.     Dr.  Reid,  on  the  other  hand, 

maintains. 


Seft.  5-  ^^  '^^^    HUMAN   MIND.  20? 

maintains,  that  it  is  an  original  principle  of  our  con- 
flitution,  which  does  not  admit  of  any  explanation  ; 
and  which,  therefore,  is  to  be  ranked  among  thofe 
general  and  ultimate  fa£ls,  beyond  which,  philofophy 
is  unable  to  proceed  *.  Without  this  principle  of 
expedation,  it  would  be  impoffible  for  us  to  accom- 
modate our  condu6l  to  the  eflablilhed  courfe  of  na- 
ture ;  and,  accordingly,  we  find  that  it  is  a  principle 
coeval  with  our  very  exiftence  ;  and,  in  fome  meafure, 
common  to  man  with  the  lower  animals. 

*  In  inquiries  of  this  nature,  fo  far  removed  from  the  common 
courfe  of  literary  purfuits,  it  always  gives  me  pleafure  to  remark 
a  coincidence  of  opinion  among  different  philofophers  ;  particu- 
larly among  men  of  original  genius,  and  who  have  been  educated 
in  different  philofophical  fyftems.  The  follovping  pafTage,  in 
which  M.  de  Condorcet  gives  an  account  of  fome  of  the  meta- 
phydcal  opinions  of  the  late  Mr.  Turgot,  approaches  very  nearly 
to  Dr.  Reid's  doflrines, 

"■  La  memoire  de  nos  fenfations,  et  la  faculte  que  nous  avons 
*'  de  reflechir  fur  ces  fenfations  paffces  et  de  les  combiner,  font 
"  le  feul  principe  de  nos  connoiffances.  La  fuppofition  qu'il 
*'  exifle  des  loix  conllantes  auxquelles  tons  les  phenomenes  obferves 
**  font  affujettis  de  maniere  a  reparoitre  dans  tous  les  temps,  dans 
"  toutes  les  circonftances,  tels  qu'ils  font  determines  par  ces  loix, 
'*  efl  le  feul  fondement  de  la  certitude  de  ces  connoiffances. 

"  Nous  avons  la  confcience  d'avoir  obferve  cette  conftance,  et 
**■  un  Icntiment  involontaire  nous  force  de  croire  qu'elle  continuera 
"  de  fubiifter.  Laprobabilitc  qui  en  refulte,  quelque  grande  qu'elle 
"■  foit,  n'eft  pas  une  certitude.  Aucune  relation  neceffaire  ne  lie 
"  pour  nous  le  paffe  a  I'avenir,  ni  la  conflance  de  ce  que  j'ai  vu  a 
"  celle  de  ce  que  j'aurois  continue  d'obferver  fi  j'etois  reile  dans 
"  des  circonflances  femblables  ;  mais  I'impreflion  qui  me  porte  a 
"  regarder  comme  exiftant,  comme  reel  ce  qui  m'a  prefente  ce  carac- 
*'  tere  de  conftance  eft  in-efiflible." — /^;f^ Turcot,  partieii.  p.  56. 

'*  Ouand  un  Francois  et  un  Anglois  penfent  de  meme,  (fays 
"  Voltaire,)  il  faut  bien  qu'ils  aient  raifon." 

It 


2o6  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

It  is  an  obvious  confequence  of  this  doctrine,  that, 
although  philofophers  be  accuftomed  to  flate  what 
are  commonly  called  the  laws  of  nature,  in  the  form 
of  general  propohtions,  it  is  by  no  means  neceffary 
for  the  practical  purpofes  of  life,  that  we  fhould  ex- 
prefs  them  in  this  manner ;  or  even  that  we  fhould 
exprefs  them  in  words  at  all.  The  philofopher,  for 
example,  may  flate  it  as  a  law  of  nature,  that  "  fire 
fcorches ;"  or  that  *'  heavy  bodies,  when  unfupport- 
ed,  fall  downwards  :"  but,  long  before  the  ufe  of 
artificial  figns,  and  even  before  the  dawn  of  reafon, 
a  child  learns  to  aft  upon  both  of  thefe  fuppofitions. 
In  doing  fo,  it  is  influenced  merely  by  the  inflindive 
principle  which  has  now  been  mentioned,  dire£ted 
in  its  operation  (as  is  the  cafe  with  many  other  in- 
ftinds)  by  the  experience  of  the  individual.  If  man, 
therefore,  had  been  deflined  for  no  other  pur- 
pofes, than  to  acquire  fuch  an  acquaintance  with 
the  courfe  of  nature,  as  is  neceffary  for  the  pre- 
fervation  of  his  animal  exiftence ;  he  might  have 
fulfilled  all  the  ends  of  his  being  without  the  ufe 
of  language. 

As  we  are  enabled,  by  our  infUnftive  anticipation 
of  phyfical  events,  to  accommodate  our  conduct  to 
what  we  forefee  is  to  happen,  fo  we  are  enabled,  in 
many  cafes,  to  increafe  our  power,  by  employing  phy- 
fical caufes  as  inftruments  for  the  accomplifhment  of 
our  purpofes  j  nay,  we  can  employ  a  feries  of  fuch 
caufes,  fo  as  to  accomplifh  very  remote  eifeds.  We 
can  employ  the  agency  of  air,  to  increafe  the  heat  of 
a  furnace  ;  the  furnace,  to  render  iron  malleable  ; 
and  the  iron  to  all  the  various  purpofes  of  the  mecha- 
nical 


Sea,  5.  <>F  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  207 

nical  arts.  Now,  it  appears  to  me,  that  all  this  may 
be  conceived  and  done  without  the  aid  of  language : 
and  yet,  afluredly,  to  difcover  a  feries  of  means  fub- 
lervient  to  a  particular  end  ;  or,  in  other  words,  an 
effort  of  mechanical  invention ;  implies,  according  to 
the  common  dodrines  of  philofophers,  the  exercife  of 
our  reafoning  powers.  In  this  fenfe,  therefore,  of  the 
word  reafoning,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  it  is  not 
efientially  connected  with  the  faculty  of  generalifation, 
or  with  the  ufe  of  figns. 

It  is  fome  confirmation  of  this  conclufion,  that 
favages,  whofe  minds  are  almofl  wholly  occupied  with 
particulars,  and  who  have  neither  inclination  nor  ca- 
pacity for  general  fpeculations,  are  yet  occafionally 
obferved  to  employ  a  long  train  of  means  for  accom- 
plifhing  a  particular  purpofe.  Even  fomething  of  this 
kind,  but  in  a  very  inferior  degree,  may,  I  think,  be 
remarked  in  the  other  animals ;  and  that  they  do 
not  carry  it  farther,  is  probably  not  the  efFeft  of  their 
want  of  generalifation,  but  of  the  imperfection  of 
fome  of  thofe  faculties  which  are  common  to  them 
with  our  fpecies ;  particularly  of  their  powers  of  at- 
tention and  recoUedion.  The  inftances  which  are 
commonly  produced,  to  prove  that  they  are  not 
deftitute  of  the  power  of  reafoning,  are  all  examples 
of  that  fpecies  of  contrivance  which  has  been  men- 
tioned ;  and  are  perfedly  diflinft  from  thofe  intel- 
lectual procelTes  to  which  the  ufe  of  figns  is  effentially 
fubfervient  *. 

'  Whether 

*  One  of  the  beft  attefled  inflances  which  I  have  met  with,  of 
fagacity  in  the  lower  animals,  is  mentioned  by  M.  Bailly,  in  his 
Lettrefur  ks  Avimanx,  addrefTed  to  M,  Le  Roy  : 

'«  Un 


2o8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  I V^ 

Whether  that  particular  fpecies  of  mechanical  con- 
trivance which  has  now  been  mentioned,  and  which 
confifts  merely  in  employing  a  feries  of  phyfical 
caufes  to  accomplifh  an  effect  which  we  cannot  produce 
immediately,  fhould  or  fliould  not  be  dignified  with 
the  name  of  reafoning,  I  ftiall  not  now  inquire.  It  is 
fufficient  for  my  prefent  purpofe  to  remark,  that  it  is 
elfentially  different  from  thofe  intellectual  procefTes 
to  which  the  ufe  of  figns  is  indifpenfably  neceffary. 

*'  Un  de  mes  amis,  homme  d'efprit  et  digne  de  confiance,  m'a 
*'  racontfe  deux  faits  dont  il  a  ete  temoin.  II  avoit  un  finge  tres 
*<  intellisrent  ;  il  s'amufoit  a  lui  donner  des  noix  dont  I'animal  etoit 
*'  tres  friand ;  mais  il  les  pla^oit  affez  loin,  pour  que  retenu  par  fa 
**  chaine,  le  finge  ne  put  pas  les  atteindre  :  apres  bien  des  efforts 
««  inutiles  qui  ne  fervent  qu'a  preparer  I'invention,  le  finge,  voyant 
"  paffer  un  domellique  portant  un  ferviette  fous  le  bras,  fe  faifit 
•*  de  cette  ferviette,  et  s'en  fervit  pour  atteindre  k  la  noix  et 
'f  I'amener  jufqu'a  lui.  La  maniere  de  caffer  la  noix  exigea  une 
*'  nouvelle  invention  ;  il  en  vint  a  bout,  en  pla9ant  la  noix  a  terre» 
*'  en  y  faifant  tomber  de  haut  une  pierre  ou  un  caillou  pour  la 
**  brifer.  Vous  voyez,  Monfieur,  que  fans  avoir  connu,  comme 
"  Gallilee,  les  loix  de  la  chute  des  corps,  le  finge  avoit  bien 
*'  rcmarque  la  force  que  ces  corps  acquierent  par  la  chute.  Ce 
**  moyen  cependant  fe  trouva  en  defaut.  Un  jour  qu'il  avoit  plu, 
<*  la  terre  etoit  molle,  la  noix  enfongoit,  et  la  pierre  n'avoit  plus 
"  d'aftion  pour  la  brifer.  Que  fit  le  finge  ?  II  alia  chercher  un 
"  tuileau,  pla9a  la  noix  deffus,   et  en  laiflant  tomber  la  pierre  il 

"  brifa  la  noix  qui  n'enfon9oit  plus." Difcours  et  memoires  par 

VAulexir  de  V Hijlo'tre  de  I' Aflronomu.  A  Paris,  1790,  tome  ii.  p.  126. 

Admitting  thefe  fatts  to  be  accurately  ftated„  they  ftill  leave 
an  effcntial  diflinction  between  man  and  brutes  ;  for  in  none  of 
the  contrivances  here  mentioned,  is  there  any  thing  analogous  to 
thofe  intellectual  procefTes  which  lead  the  mind  to  general  conclu- 
fions,  and  which  (according  to  the  foregoing  doctrine)  imply  the 
ufe  of  general  terms.  Thofe  powers,  therefore,  which  enable  us 
to  claffify  objects,  and  to  employ  figns  as  an  inflrument  of  thought, 
are,  as  far  as  we  can  judcce.  peculiar  to  the  human  fpecies. 

At 


Sea.  5,  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  209 

At  the  fame  time,  I  am  ready  to  acknowledge, 
that  what  I  have  now  faid,  is  not  flriftly  applicable 
to  thofe  more  complicated  mechanical  inventions, 
in  which  a  variety  of  powers  are  made  to  confpire 
at  once  to  produce  a  particular  effeft.  Such  con- 
trivances, perhaps,  may  be  found  to  involve  procefles 
of  the  mind  which  cannot  be  carried  on  without 
figns.  But  thefe  queftions  will  fall  more  properly 
under  our  confideration  when  we  enter  on  the  fubjeft 
of  reafoning. 

In  general,  it  may  be  remarked,  that,  in  fo  far  as 
our  thoughts  relate  merely  to  individual  objeds,  or  to 
individual  events,  which  we  have  aftually  perceived, 
and  of  which  we  retain   a  diftind  remembrance  *, 

*  I  have  thought  it  proper  to  add  this  limitation  of  the  general 
propofition  ;  becaufe  individual  objefts,  and  individual  events, 
which  have  not  fallen  under  the  examination  of  our  fenfes,  cannot 
poflibly  be  made  the  fubjefts  of  our  confideration,  but  by  means 
of  language.  The  manner  in  which  we  think  of  fuch  objefts 
and  events,  is  accurately  defcribed  in  the  following  paflage  of 
Wollallon  ;  however  unphilofophical  the  conclufion  may  be  which 
he  deduces  from  his  reafoning. 

"  A  man  is  not  known  ever  the  more  to  pofterity,  becaufe  his 
"  name  is  tranfmitted  to  them  ;  he  doth  not  live,  becaufe  his 
"  name  does.  When  it  is  said,  Julius  Caefar  fubdued  Gaul,  beat 
**  Pompey,  changed  the  Roman  commonwealth  into  a  monarchy, 
"  &c.  it  is  the  fame  thing  as  to  fay  the  conqueror  of  Pompey 
"  was  Caefar  ;  that  is,  Caefar,  and  the  conqueror  of  Pompey,  are 
"  the  fame  thing  ;  and  Caefar  is  as  much  known  by  the  one  diftinc- 
**  tion  as  the  other.  The  amount  then  is  only  this :  that  the 
*'  conqueror  of  Pompey  conquered  Pompey  ;  or  fomebody  con» 
**  quered  Pompey  ;  or  rather,  fince  Pompey  is  as  little  known 
*'  now  as  Caifar,  fomebody  conquered  fomebody.  Such  a  poor 
"  bufinefs  is  this  boafted  immortality  ;  and  fuch,  as  has  been 
'*  here  defcribed,  is  the  thing  called  glory  among  us  i" 

Religion  of  Nax.  DeJ..  p.  uy* 

P  we 


2IO  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY     Chap.  IV, 

we  are  not  under  the  neceflity  of  employing  words. 
It  frequently,  however,  happens,  that  when  the  fub- 
jefts  of  our  confideration  are  particular,  our  reafon- 
ing  with  refpeft  to  them  may  involve  very  general 
notions  ;  and,  in  fuch  cafes,  although  we  may  conceive, 
without  the  ufe  of  words,  the  things  about  which  we 
reafon,  yet  we  muft  neceifarily  have  recourfe  to  lan- 
guage in  carrying  on  our  fpeculations  concerning 
them.  If  the  fubjeds  of  our  reafoning  be  general 
(under  which  defcription  I  include  all  our  reafonings, 
whether  more  or  lefs  comprehenfive,  which  do  not 
relate  merely  to  individuals,)  words  are  the  fole 
objeds  about  which  our  thoughts  are  employed. 
According  as  thefe  words  are  comprehenfive  or 
limited  in  their  fignification,  the  conclufions  we  form 
will  be  more  or  lefs  general ;  but  this  accidental  cir- 
cumftance  does  not  in  the  leaft  affect  the  nature  of 
the  intelledlual  procefs ;  fo  that  it  may  be  laid  down 
as  a  proportion  which  holds  without  any  exception, 
that,  in  every  cafe  in  which  we  extend  our  fpecu- 
lations beyond  individuals,  language  is  not  only  an 
ufeful  auxiliary,  but  is  the  fole  inflrument  by  which 
they  are  carried  on. 

Thefe  remarks  naturally  lead  me  to  take  notice  of 
what  forms  the  charafteriftical  diftindion  between  the 
fpeculations  of  the  philofopher  and  of  the  vulgar. 
It  is  not,  that  the  former  is  accuftomed  to  carry  on 
his  procefies  of  reafoning  to  a  greater  extent  than  the 
latter  ;  but  that  the  conclufions  he  is  accuftomed  to 
form,  are  far  more  comprehenfive,  in  confequence 
of  the  habitual  employment  of  more  comprehenfive 
terms.  Among  the  moft  unenlightened  of  mankind, 
we   often    meet    with    individuals    who    poffefs   the 

reafoning 


S^a.  5-  ^^    ^^^    HUMxlN    MIND.  211 

reafoning  faculty  in  a  very  eminent  degree ;  but  as 
this  faculty  is  employed  merely  about  particulars,  it 
never  can  condudl  them  to  general  truths ;  and,  of 
confequence,  whether  their  purfuits  in  life  lead  them 
to  fpeculation  or  to  aftion,  it  can  only  fit  them  for 
diftinguifliing  themfelves  in  fome  very  limited  and 
fubordinate  fphere.  The  philofopher,  whofe  mind 
has  been  familiarifed  by  education,  and  by  his  own 
reflexions,  to  the  corre£l  ufe  of  more  comprehenfive 
terms,  is  enabled,  without  perhaps  a  greater  degree 
of  intellectual  exertion  than  is  necelTary  for  managing 
the  details  of  ordinary  bufmefs,  to  arrive  at  general 
theorems  ;  which,  when  illuftrated  to  the  lower  clafles 
of  men,  in  their  particular  applications,  feem  to 
indicate  a  fertility  of  invention,  little  fhort  of  fuper- 
natural  *. 

The  analogy  of  the  algebraical  art  may  be  of  ufe 
in  illuftrating  thefe  obfervations.  The  difference, 
in  fad,  between  the  inveftigations  we  carry  on  by 
its  afTiftance,  and  other  proceffes  of  reafoning,  is 
more  inconfiderable  than  is  commonly  imagined ; 
and,  if   I    am  not    miftaken,    amounts  only  to  this, 

*  *•  General  reafonings  feem  intricate,  merely  becaufe  they  are 
"  general ;  nor  is  it  eafy  for  the  bulk  of  mankind  to  diftinguifii,  in 
"  a  great  number  of  particulars,  that  common  circumftauce  in 
"  which  they  all  agree,  or  to  extraft  it,  pure  and  unmixt,  from 
"  the  other  fuperfluous  circumllances.  Every  judgment  or 
"^  conclufion  with  them  is  particidar.  They  cannot  enlarge  their 
"  view  to  thofe  univerfal  propolitions,  which  comprehend  under 
"  them  an  infinite  number  of  individuals,  and  include  a  whole 
"  fcience  in  a  fingle  theorem.  Their  eye  is  confounded  with 
"  fuch  an  extenfive  profpedl ;  and  the  conclufions  derived  from 
"  it,  even  though  clearly  exprefTed,  feem  intricate  and  obfcure." 

Hume's  Political  Difcourfes. 
P  2  that 


212  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

that  the  former  are  expreffed  in  an  appropriated 
language,  with  ^which  we  are  not  accuftomed  to 
aflbciate  particular  notions.  Hence  they  exhibit  the 
efficacy  of  figns  as  an  inftrument  of  thought  in  a 
more  diflincl  and  palpable  manner,  than  the  fpecu- 
lations  we  carry  on  by  words,  which  are  continu- 
ally awakening  the  power  of  Conception. 

When    the    celebrated    Vieta    fhewed    algebraifts 
that,    by   fubftituting  in    their    inveftigations    letters 
of  the  alphabet,    inilead  of  known  quantities,  they 
might  render  the  folution  of  every  problem  fubfer- 
vient    to  the   difcovery  of  a    general  truth,  he  did 
not  increafe  the  difficulty  of  algebraical  reafonings : 
he  only  enlarged   the    fignification  of  the  terms  of 
which  they   were   expreffed.     And   if,    in   teaching 
that   fcience,  it  is  found  expedient  to  accuflom  ftu- 
dents  to  folve  problems  by  means  of  the  particular 
numbers  which  are  given,  before  they  are  made  ac- 
quainted  with   hteral   or   fpecious   arithmetic,    it   is 
not  becaufe   the  former    proceffes   are  lefs  intricate 
than  the  latter,  but  becaufe  their  fcope  and  utility 
are   more  obvious,    and  becaufe  it  is  more  eafy  to 
illullrate,  by  examples   than   by   words,   the   differ- 
ence between  a  particular  conclufion  and  a  general 
theorem. 

The  difference  between  the  iotelledual  proceffes 
of  the  vulgar  and  of  the  philofopher,  is  perfedly 
analogous  to  that  between  the  two  Hates  of  the  al- 
gebraical art  before  and  after  the  time  of  Vieta  j 
the  general  terms  which  are  ufed  in  the  various 
fciences,  giving  to  thofe  who  can  employ  them  with 
Qorre^nefs  and  dexterity,  the  fame  fort  of  advan- 

14  tage. 


Setl:.5'  ^^     TI^E    HUMAN    MIND.  21^ 

tage  over  the  uncultivated  fagacity  of  the  bulk  of 
mankind,  which  the  expert  algebraifl  poffeffes  over 
the  arithmetical  accomptant. 

If  the  foregoing  dodrine  be  admitted  as  jufl,  it 
exhibits  a  view  of  the  utility  of  language,  which 
appears  to  me  to  be  peculiarly  ftriking  and  beau- 
tiful ;  as  it  fhews  that  the  fame  faculties  which, 
without  the  ufe  of  figns,  mull  neceflarily  have  been 
limited  to  the  confideration  of  individual  obje£ls 
and  particular  events,  are,  by  means  of  figns,  fitted 
to  embrace,  without  effort,  thofe  comprehenfive 
theorems,  to  the  difcovery  of  which,  in  detail,  the 
united  efforts  of  the  whole  human  race  would  have 
been  unequal.  The  advantage  our  animal  ftrength 
acquires  by  the  ufe  of  mechanical  engines,  exhi- 
bits but  a  faint  image  of  that  increafe  of  our  in- 
tellectual capacity  which  we  owe  to  language.  —  It 
is  this  increafe  of  our  natural  powers  of  compre- 
henfion,  which  feems  to  be  the  principal  foundation 
of  the  pleafure  we  receive  from  the  difcovery  of 
general  theorems.  Such  a  difcovery  gives  us  at 
once  the  command  of  an  infinite  variety  of  parti- 
cular truths,  and  communicates  to  the  mind  a  fen- 
timent  of  its  own  power,  not  unlike  to  what  we 
feel  when  we  contemplate  the  magnitude  of  thofe 
phyfical  effeds,  of  which  we  have  acquired  the 
command  by  our  mechanical  contrivances. 

It  may  perhaps  appear,  at  firft,  to  be  a  farther 
confequence  of  the  principles  I  have  been  endea- 
vouring to  eflablifh,  that  the  difficulty  of  philofo- 
phical  difcoveries  is  much  lefs  than  is  commonly 
imagined  ;     but    the  truth  is,    it  only  follows  from 

P  3  them. 


214  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

them,  that  this  difficulty  is  of  a  different  nature 
from  what  we  are  apt  to  fuppofe,  on  a  fuperficial 
view  of  the  fubject.  To  employ,  with  fkill,  the 
very  delicate  inftrument  which  nature  has  made 
effentially  fubfervient  to  general  reafoning,  and  to 
guard  againft  the  errors  which  refult  from  an  inju- 
dicious ufe  of  it,  require  an  uncommon  capacity  of 
patient  attention,  and  a  cautious  circumfpeclion  in 
conducing  our  various  intellectual  proceffes,  which 
can  only  be  acquired  by  early  habits  of  philofo- 
phical  refleftion.  To  affifl  and  direct  us  in  making 
this  acquifition  ought  to  form  the  moft  important 
branch  of  a  rational  logic  ;  a  fcience  of  far  more 
i  extenfive  utility,  and  of  which  the  principles  lie  much 
*f  deeper  in  the  philofophy  of  the  human  mind,  than 
I  the  trifling  art  which  is  commonly  dignified  with 
f  that  name.  The  branch  in  particular  to  which  the 
*^  foregoing  obfervations  more  immediately  relate,  muft 
for  ever  remain  in  its  infancy,  till  a  mod  difficult  and 
important  defideratum  in  the  hillory  of  the  mind 
is  fupplied,  by  an  explanation  of  the  gradual  fleps 
by  which  it  acquires  the  ufe  of  the  various  claflTes 
of  words  which  compofe  the  language  of  a  culti- 
vated and  enlightened  people.  Of  fome  of  the 
errors  of  reafoning  to  which  we  are  expofed  by  an 
incautious  ufe  of  words,  I  took  notice  in  the  pre- 
ceding Sedion ;  and  I  fhall  have  occafion  afterwards 
to  treat  the  fame  fubject  more  in  detail  in  a  fubfe- 
quent  part  of  my  work. 


Sect.  6.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  2 1  $ 


SECTION    VI. 

Of  the  Errors  to  ivhich  ittt  are  liable  in  Speculation,  and  in  (he 
conduB  of  Affairs,  in  confeqitence  of  a  rajlo  Application  of  gC' 
neral   Principles. 

IT  appears  fufficiently  from  the  reafonings  which 
I  offered  in  the  preceding  Section,  how  import- 
ant are  the  advantages  which  the  philofopher  ac- 
quires, by  quitting  the  ftudy  of  particulars,  and  di- 
recting his  attention  to  general  principles.  I  flatter 
myfelf  it  appears  farther,  from  the  fame  reafonings, 
that  it  is  in  confequence  of  the  ufe  of  language  alone 
that  the  human  mind  is  rendered  capable  of  thefe 
comprehenfive  fpeculations. 

In  order,  however,   to  proceed  with  fafety  in  the 
ufe  of  general  principles,  much   caution  and  addrefs 
are  neceffary,    both    in  eftablifhing  their  truth,    and 
in    applying    them  to    practice.     Without  a  proper  \ 
attention  to    the    circumftances    by  which  their  ap-  ;' 
phcation  to   particular  cafes  muft  be  modified,    they  / 
will  be  a  perpetual  fource  of  miflake,  and    of  difap-  \ 
pointment,    in  the    conduct    of  affairs,   however   ri-  \ 
gidly  juft  they  may  be  in   themfelves,  and  however 
accurately  we  may  reafon  from   them.     If  our  ge- 
neral principles   happen  to  be   falfe,    they    will   in-  \ 
volve  us  in  errors,  not   only  of  conduft  but  of  fpe- 
culation  ;  and  our    errors  will  be  the   more  nume- 

P  4  reus. 


2l6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

reus,  the  more  comprehenfive   the  prmciples  are  on 
which  we   proceed. 

To  illuflrate  thefe  obfervatlons  fully,  would  lead 
to  a  minutenefs  of  difquifition  inconfiftent  with  ray 
general  plan ;  and  I  fhall  therefore,  at  prefent,  con- 
fine myfelf  to  fuch  remarks  as  appear  to  be  of  mofl 
effential  importance. 

And,  in  the  firft  place,  it  is  evidently  impoffible 
to  eflablilh  folid  general  principles,  without  the  pre- 
vious fludy  of  particulars  :  in  other  words,  it  is  ne- 
celfary  to  begin  with  the  examination  of  individual 
objeds,  and  individual  events ;  in  order  to  lay  a 
ground-work  for  accurate  clalTification,  and  for  a 
juft  inveftigation  of  the  laws  of  nature.  It  is  in 
this  way  only  that  we  can  expect  to  arrive  at  ge- 
neral principles,  which  may  be  fafely  relied  on,  as 
guides  to  the  knowledge  of  particular  truths  :  and 
unlefs  our  principles  admit  of  fuch  a  practical  ap- 
plication, however  beautiful  they  may  appear  to  be 
in  theory,  they  are  of  far  lefs  value  than  the  li- 
mited acquifitions  of  the  vulgar.  The  truth  of 
thefe  remarks  is  now  fo  univerfally  admitted,  and 
is  indeed  fo  obvious  in  itfelf,  that  it  would  be  fu- 
perfluous  to  multiply  words  in  fupporting  them ; 
and  I  fhould  fcarcely  have  thought  of  dating  them 
in  this  Chapter,  if  fome  of  the  mod  celebrated  phi- 
lofophers  of  antiquity  had  not  been  led  to  difpute 
them,  in  confequence  of  the  millaken  opinions 
which  they  entertained  concerning  the  nature  of 
univerfals.  Forgetting  that  genera  and  /j>ecies  are 
mere  arbitrary  creations  which  the  human  mind 
forms,  by  withdrawing   the  attention  from   the   dif- 

tinguifhing 


Seft.  6.  OP    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  21 7 

tinguifhing  qualities  of  objefts,  and  giving  a  com- 
mon name  to  their  refembling  qualities,  they  con- 
ceive univerfals  to  be  real  exiflences,  or  (as  they 
exprefTed  it)  to  be  the  eflences  of  individuals  ;  and 
flattered  themfelves  with  the  belief,  that  by  diredl- 
ing  their  attention  to  thefe  elTences  in  the  firfl  in- 
ftance,  they  might  be  enabled  to  penetrate  the  fecrets 
of  the  univerfe,  without  fubmitting  to  the  ftudy  of 
nature  in  detail.  Thefe  errors,  which  were  common 
to  the  Platoniits  and  the  Peripatetics,  and  which  both 
of  them  feem  to  have  adopted  from  the  Pythago- 
rean fchool,  contributed,  perhaps  more  than  any 
thing  elfe,  to  retard  the  progrefs  of  the  antients  in 
phyfical  knowledge.  The  late  learned  Mr.  Harris  is 
almoft  the  only  author  of  the  prefent  age  who  has 
ventured  to  defend  this  plan  of  philofophifing,  in  op- 
pofition  to  that  which  has  been  fo  fuccefsfully  fol- 
lowed by  the  difciples  of  lord  Bacon. 

"  The  Platonifts,"  fays  he,  "  confidering  fcience  as 
"  fomething  afcertained,  definite,  and  fleady,  would 
*'  admit  nothing  to  be  its  objeft  which  was  vague,  in- 
"  definite,  and  pafTmg.  For  this  reafon  they  excluded 
"  all  individuals  or  objeds  of  fenfe,  and  (as  Ammo- 
**  nius  exprelTes  it)  raifed  themfelves  in  their  con- 
•*  templations  from  beings  particular  to  beings  uni- 
**  verfal,  and  which,  from  their  own  nature,  were 
"  eternal  and  definite."  —  "  Confonant  to  this  was 
**  the  advice  of  Plato,  with  refpe6l  to  the  progrefs 
**  of  our  fpeculations  and  inquiries,  to  defcend  from 
"  thofe  higher  genera,  which  include  many  fubordi- 
"  nate  fpecies,  down  to  the  loweft  rank  of  fpecies, 

"  thofe  which  include  only  individuals.     But  here  it 

"  was 


21 8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

"  was  his  opinion,  that  our  inquiries  fhould  flop, 
"  and,  as  to  individuals,  let  them  wholly  alone  ;  be- 
"  caufe  of  thefe  there  could  not  pofTibly  be  any 
"  fclence*.'* 

*'  Such,"  continues  this  author,  "  was  the  method 
"  of  antient  philofophy.  The  fafbion,  at  prefent,  ap- 
<'  pears  to  be  fomewhat  altered,  and  the  bufmefs  of 
"  philofophers  to  be  little  elfe,  than  the  collecting 
"  from  every  quarter,  into  voluminous  records,  an 
*'  infinite  number  of  fenfible,  particular,  and  uncon- 
"  nefted  fafts,  the  chief  effed  of  which  is  to  excite 
"  our  admiration."  —  In  another  part  of  his  works  the 
fame  author  obferves,  that  "  the  mind,  truly  wife, 
*'  quitting  the  fludy  of  particulars,  as  knowing  their 
"  multitude  to  be  infinite  and  incomprehenfible,  turns 
«  its  intellectual  eye  to  what  is  general  and  com- 
"  prehenfive,  and  through  generals  learns  to  fee,  and 
"  recognife  whatever  exiflst." 

If  we  abftrad  from  thefe  obvious  errors  of  the  an- 
tient philofophers,  with  refpeft  to  the  proper  order  to 
be  obferved  in  our  inquiries,  and  only  fuppofe  them  to 
end  where  the  Platonifts  faid  that  they  fhould  begin, 
the  magnificent  encomiums  they  beflowed  on  the  uti- 
lity of  thofe  comprehenfive  truths  which  form  the  ob. 
\qQ.  of  fcience  (making  allowance  for  the  obfcure  and 
myflerious  terms  in  which  they  expreffed  them)  can 
fcarcely  be  regarded  as  extravagant.  It  is  probable 
that  from  a  few  accidental  inflances  of  fuccefsful  in. 
veftigadon,  they  had  been  flruck  with  the  wonderful 

*  Harris's  Three  Treatifes,  pages  341,  342. 
t  ibid,  page  227. 

efFed 


Sea.  6.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  21  g 

effect  of  general  principles  in  increafing  the  intellec- 
tual power  of  the  human  mind ;  and,  mifled  by  that 
impatience  in  the  ftudy  of  particulars  which  is  fo  often 
connefted  with  the  confcioufnefs  of  fuperior  ability, 
they  laboured  to  perfuade  themfelves,  that,  by  a  life 
devoted  to  abftract  meditation,  fuch  principles  might 
be  rendered  as  immediate  objefts  of  intellectual  per- 
ception, as  the  individuals  which  compofe  the  mate- 
rial world  are  of  our  external  fenfes.  By  connecting 
this  opinion  with  their  other  dodrines  concerning  uni- 
verfals,  they  were  unfortunately  enabled  to  exhibit  it 
in  fo  myfterious  a  form,  as  not  only  to  impofe  on 
themfelves,  but  to  perplex  the  underflandings  of  all 
the  learned  in  Europe,  for  a  long  fucceffion  of 
ages. 

The  conclufion  to  which  we  are  led  by  the  fore-  \ 
going  obfervations  is,  that  the  foundation  of  all  hu- 
man knowledge  muft  be  laid  in  the  examination  of 
particular  objeds  and  particular  fadts ;  and  that  it  is 
only  as  far  as  our  general  principles  are  refolvable 
into  thefe  primary  elements,  that  they  polfefs  either 
truth  or  utility.  It  muft  not,  however,  be  underftood 
to  be  implied  in  this  conclufion,  that  all  our  know-"^. 
ledge  muft  ultimately  reft  on  our  own  proper  experi- 
ence. If  this  were  the  cafe,  the  progrefs  of  fcience, 
and  the  progrefs  of  human  improvement,  muft  have 
been  wonderfully  retarded ;  for,  if  it  had  been  ne- 
celfary  for  each  individual  to  form  a  claffification  of 
objects,  in  confequence  of  obfervations  and  abftrac- 
tions  of  his  own,  and  to  infer  from  the  adual  exami- 
nation of  particular  fads,  the  general  truths  on  which 
his  conduct  proceeds  j  human  affairs  would  at   this 

lo*  day 


220  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

day  remain  nearly  in  the  fame  ftate  to  which  they 
were  brought  by  the  experience  of  the  firft  gene- 
ration. In  fad,  this  is  very  nearly  the  fituation  of 
the  fpecies  in  all  thofe  parts  of  the  world,  in  which 
the  exiftence  of  the  race  depends  on  the  feparate 
efforts  which  each  individual  makes,  in  procuring 
for  himfelf  the  neceffaries  of  life ;  and  in  which,  of 
confequence,  the  habits  and  acquirements  of  each 
individual  muil  be  the  refult  of  his  own  perfonal  ex- 
perience. In  a  cultivated  fociety,  one  of  the  firfl 
acquifitions  which  children  make,  is  the  ufe  of  lan- 
guage ;  by  which  means  they  are  familiarifed,  from 
their  earlieft  years,  to  the  confideration  of  claffes  of 
objefts,  and  of  general  truths ;  and  before  that  time 
of  life  at  which  the  favage  is  poffeffed  of  the  know- 
ledge neceffary  for  his  own  prefervation,  are  enabled 
to  appropriate  to  themfelves  the  accumulated  difco- 
veries  of  ages. 

Notwithllanding,  however,  the  ftationary  condition 
in  which  the  race  mufl,  of  necelTity,  continue,  prior 
to  the  feparation  of  arts  and  profeffions  ;  the  natural 
difpofition  of  the  mind  to  afcend  from  particular 
truths  to  general  conclufions,  could  not  fail  to  lead 
individuals,  even  in  the  rudeft  ftate  of  fociety,  to 
colled  the  refults  of  their  experience,  for  their 
own  inftruftion  and  that  of  others.  But,  without 
the  ufe  of  general  terms,  the  only  poflible  way  of 
communicating  fuch  conclufions,  would  be  by  means 
of  fome  particular  example,  of  which  the  general 
applicadon  was  ftriking  and  obvious.  In  other 
words,  the  wifdom  of  fuch  ages  will  neceffarily  be 
expreffed  in  the  form  of  fables  or  parables,  or  in  the 

ftill 


f)ea..6.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  221 

ftill  fimpler  form  of  proverbial  Inftances  ;  and  not 
in  the  fcientific  form  of  general  maxims.  In  this 
way,  undoubtedly,  much  ufeful  inflrudion,  both  of 
a  prudential  and  moral  kind,  might  be  conveyed : 
at  the  fame  time,  it  is  obvious,  that,  while  general 
truths  continue  to  be  exprefled  merely  by  particular 
exemplifications,  they  would  afford  little  or  no 
opportunity  to  one  generation  to  improve  on  the 
fpeculatioris  of  another ;  as  no  effort  of  the  un- 
derflanding  could  combine  them  together,  or  employ 
them  as  premifes,  in  order  to  obtain  other  conclufions 
more  remote  and  comprehenfive.  For  this  purpofe, 
it  is  abfolutely  neceffary  that  the  fcope  or  moral 
of  the  fable  fhould  be  feparated  entirely  from  its  ac- 
cefTary  circumftances,  and  ftated  in  the  form  of  a 
general  proportion. 

From  what  has  now  been  faid,  it  appears,  how 
much  the  progrefs  of  human  reafon,  which  necef- 
farily  accompanies  the  progrefs  of  fociety,  is  owing 
to  the  introduftion  of  general  terms,  and  to  the 
ufe  of  general  proportions.  In  confequence  of 
the  gradual  improvements  which  take  place  in  lan- 
guage as  an  inflrument  of  thought,  the  clalTifications 
both  of  things  and  fafts  with  which  the  infant 
faculties  of  each  fuccefTive  race  are  converfant,  are 
more  juft  and  more  comprehenfive  than  thofe  of 
their  predeceffors :  the  difcoveries  which,  in  one  age, 
were  confined  to  the  fludious  and  enlightened  few, 
becoming  in  the  next,  the  eflablifhed  creed  of  the 
learned  ;  and  in  the  third,  forming  part  of  the  ele- 
mentary principles  of  education.  Indeed,  among 
thofe,  who  enjoy  the  advantages  of  early  inftrudion, 
fome  of  the  molt  remote  and  wonderful  conclufions 

of 


2  22  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    rilll.OSOrilY        Chap.  IV. 

of  the  human  intellecl,  are,  even  in  infancy,  as  com- 
pletely familiarifed  to  the  mind,  as  the  moll  obvious 
phenomena  which  the  material  world  exhibits  to  their 
fenfes. 

If  thefe  remarks  be  juft,  they  open  an  unbounded 
profpect  of  intelle£lual  improvement  to  future  ages ; 
as  they  point  out  a  provifion  made  by  nature  to 
facilitate  and  abridge,  more  and  more,  the  procefs 
of  fludy,  in  proportion  as  the  truths  to  be  acquired 
increafe  in  number.  Nor  is  this  profpeft  derived 
from  theory  alone.  It  is  encouraged  by  the  pafl 
hiflory  of  all  the  fciences ;  in  a  more  particular  man- 
ner, by  that  of  mathematics  and  phyfics,  in  which 
the  ftate  of  difcovery,  and  the  prevailing  methods  of 
inftruction,  may,  at  all  times,  be  eafdy  compared  to- 
gether. In  this  laft  obfervation  I  have  been  anticipated 
by  a  late  eminent  mathematician,  whofe  eloquent  and 
philofophical  flatement  of  the  argument  cannot  . 
fail  to  carry  conviftion  to  thofe,  who  are  qualified 
to  judge  of  the  fads  on  which  his  conclufion  is 
founded  : 

*'  To  fuch  of  my  readers  as  may  be  flow  in  admit- 
"  ting  the  poffibility  of  this  progreflive  improvement 
"  in  the  human  race,  allow  me  to  fhate,  as  an  example, 
"  the  hiftory  of  that  fcience  in  which  the  advances 
"  of  difcovery  are  the  moft  certain,  and  in  which 
"  they  may  be  meafured  with  the  greatefl  precifion. 
"  Thofe  elementary  truths  of  geometry  and  of  aftro- 
"  nomy,  which,  in  India  and  Egypt,  formed  an  occult 
"  fcience,  upon  which  an  ambitious  priefthood 
"  founded  its  influence,  were  become,  in  the  times 
**  of  Archimedes  and  Hipparchus,  the  fubjefts  of 
"  common  education  in  the  pubhc  fchools  of  Greece. 

"  In 


Sed.  6  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  223 

"  In  the  laft  century,  a  few  years  of  fludy  were  fuf- 

"  ficient  for  comprehending  all  that  Archimedes  and 

"  Hipparchus    knew ;     and,    at    prefent,    two    years 

"  employed  under  an  able  teacher,  carry  the  fludent 

"  beyond   thofe  conclufions,    which   Hmited  the  in- 

"  quiries    of  Leibnitz    and    of  Newton.     Let    any 

*'  perfon   reflect  on  thefe  fa^ls :  let  him   follow  the 

"  immenfe    chain    which    conneds  the   inquiries  of 

"  Euler  with  thofe  of  a  Priefl  of  Memphis  ;  let  him 

*'  obferve,  at  each  epoch,  how  genius  outftrips  the 

"  prefent  age,  and   how  it  is  overtaken  by  medio- 

"  crity  in  the  next ;  he  will  perceive,  that  nature  has 

"  furnifhed    us   with    the    means   of   abridging    and 

"  facilitating     our     intelleftual     labour,     and    that 

"  there  is  no  reafon  for  apprehending  that  fuch  fim- 

"  plifications  can  ever  have  an  end.     He  will  per- 

"  ceive,  that  at   the  moment   when  a  multitude  of 

*'  particular  folutions,  and    of  infulated  fadts,  begin 

"  to  diflrad  the  attention,  and   to  overcharge   the 

"  memory,  the  former  gradually  lofe  themfelves  in 

*'  one  general  method,  and  the  latter  unite  in  one 

"  general  law ;   and   that  thefe  generalifations  con- 

"  tinually  fucceeding  one  to  another,  like  the  fuc- 

**  ceflive  multiplications  of  a  number  by  itfelf,  have 

"  no  other  limit,  than  that  infinity  which  the  human 

"  faculties  are  unable  to  comprehend  *." 

*  See  Note  [M]. 


224  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  I V. 


SECTION     VII. 

Continuation  of  the  fame  SuhjeS. — Differences  in  the  Intellectual 
CharaBers  of  Individuals,  arijing  from  their  different  Habits 
of  AbflraSion  and  Gcneralifation. 

IN  mentioning  as  one  of  the  principal  effects  of 
civilifation,  its  tendency  to  familiarife  the  mind 
to  general  terms  and  to  general  propofitions,  I  did 
not  mean  to  fay,  that  this  influence  extends  equally 
to  all  the  claifes  of  men  in  fociety.  On  the  contrary, 
it  is  evidently  confined,  in  a  great  meafure,  to  thofe 
who  receive  a  liberal  education;  while  the  minds  of 
the  lower  orders,  like  thofe  of  favages,  are  fo  habi- 
tually occupied  about  particular  objefts  and  parti- 
cular events,  that,  although  they  are  fometimes 
led,  from  imitation,  to  employ  general  expreflions, 
the  ufe  which  they  make  of  them  is  much  more 
the  refult  of  memory  than  judgment ;  and  it  is 
but  feldom  that  they  are  able  to  comprehend 
fully,  any  procefs  of  reafoning  in  which  they  are 
involved. 

It  is  hardly  neceffary  for  me  to  remark,  that  this 
obfervation,  with  refpedl  to  the  incapacity  of  the 
vulgar  for  general  fpeculations,  (like  all  obfervations 
of  a  fimilar  nature,)  mull  be  received  with  fome  re- 
flridlions.  In  fuch  a  ftate  of  fociety  as  that  in  which 
we  live,  there  is  hardly  any  individual  to  be  found 
to  whom  fome  general  terms,  and  fome  general  truths, 
are  not  perfeftly  familiar  j  and,  therefore,  the  fore- 
going 


Sea.  7.  <^F    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  225 

going  conclufions  are  to  be  confidered  as  defcriptive 
of  thofe  habits  of  thought  alone,  which  are  mofl 
prevalent  in  their  mind.  To  abridge  the  labour  of 
reafoning,  and  of  memory,  by  directing  the  attention 
to  general  principles,  inflead  of  particular  truths,  is 
the  profefTed  aim  of  all  philofophy  ;  and  according 
as  individuals  have  more  or  lefs  of  the  philofophic 
fpirit,  their  habitual  fpeculations  (whatever  the  nature 
of  their  purfuits  may  be)  will  relate  to  the  former, 
or  to  the  latter,  of  thefe  objefts. 

There  are,  therefore,  among  the  men  who  are  \ 
accuftomed  to  the  exercife  of  their  intelledlual  \ 
powers,  two  clafTes,  whofe  habits  of  thought  are 
remarkably  diflinguiflied  from  each  other  5  the  one 
clafs  comprehending  what  we  commonly  call  men 
of  bufmefs,  or,  more  properly,  men  of  detail ;  the 
other,  men  of  abflradion ;  or,  in  other  words,  phi- 
lofophers. 

The  advantages  which,  in  certain  refpeds,  the 
latter  of  thefe  poflfefs  over  the  former,  have  been 
already  pointed  out ;  but  it  mufl:  not  be  fuppofed, 
that  thefe  advantages  are  always  purchafed  without 
fome  inconvenience.  As  the  folidity  of  our  general 
principles  depends  on  the  accuracy  of  the  particular 
obfervations  into  which  they  are  ultimately  refolvable, 
fo  their  utility  is  to  be  eflimated  by  the  pradical 
applications  of  which  they  admit :  and  it  unfortunately  f 
happens,  that  the  fame  turn  of  mind  which  is  favour-  ^ 
able  to  philofophical  purfuits,  unlefs  it  be  kept  under 
proper  regulation,  is  extremely  apt  to  difqualify  us' 
for  applying  our  knowledge  to  ufe,  in  the  exercife  of 
the  arts,  and  in  the  conduct  of  affairs. 

Q  la 


226  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

In  order  to  perceive  the  truth  of  thefe  remarks,  it 
is  almoft  fuiRcient  to  recolleci:,  that  as  claflification, 
and,  of  confequence,  general  reafoning,  prefuppofe 
the  exercife  of  abftraftion ;  a  natural  difpofition  to 
indulge  in  them,  cannot  fail  to  lead  the  mind  to  over- 
look the  fpecific  differences  of  things,  in  attending  to 
their  common  qualities.  To  fucceed,  however,  in 
pradice,  a  familiar  and  circumflantial  acquaintance 
with  the  particular  objedls  which  fall  under  our  obfer- 
vation,  is  indifpenfably  necelfary. 

But,  farther:  As  all  general  principles  are  founded 
on  claffifications  which  imply  the  exercife  of  ab- 
ftraftion;  it  is  necelfary  to  regard  them,  in  their 
practical  applications,  merely  as  approximations  to 
the  truth  ;  the  defers  of  which,  muft  be  fupplied  by 
habits  acquired  by  perfonal  experience.  In  con- 
fidering,  for  example,  the  theory  of  the  mechanical 
powers ;  it  is  ufual  to  fimplify  the  objefts  of  our 
conception,  by  abftracling  from  fridtion,  and  from  the 
weight  of  the  different  parts  of  which  they  are 
compofed.  Levers  are  confidered  as  mathematical 
lines,  perfectly  inflexible  ;  and  ropes,  as  mathematical 
lines,  perfeftly  flexible ;  —  and  by  means  of  thefe, 
and  fimilar  abftradtions,  a  fubjeft,  which  is  in  itfelf 
extremely  complicated,  is  brought  within  the  reach 
of  elementary  geometry.  In  the  theory  of  politics, 
we  find  it  necelfary  to  abftraft  from  many  of  the 
peculiarities  which  diftinguifli  different  forms  of 
government  from  each  other,  and  to  reduce  them  to 
certain  general  claffes,  according  to  their  prevailing 
tendency.  Although  all  the  governments  we  have 
ever  fecn,  have  had  more  or  lefs  of  mixture  in  their 

compo- 


3ea.  7.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  227 

compofition,  we  reafon  concerning  pure  monarchies, 
pure  ariftocracies,  and  pure  democracies,  as  if  there 
really  exifted  political  eftablilhments  correfponding 
to  our  definitions.  Without  fuch  a  claffification,  it 
would  be  impoflible  for  us  to  fix  our  attention, 
amidft  the  multiplicity  of  particulars  which  the  fub- 
jed  prefents  to  us,  or  to  arrive  at  any  general 
principles,  which  might  ferve  to  guide  our  enquiries 
in  comparing  different  inftitutions  together. 

It  is  for  a  fimilar  reafon,  that  the  fpeculative 
farmer  reduces  the  infinite  variety  of  foils  to  a 
few  general  defcriptions ;  the  phyfician,  the  infinite 
variety  of  bodily  conflitutions  to  a  few  temperaments  ; 
and  the  moralifl,  the  infinite  variety  of  human  cha- 
racters to  a  few  of  the  ruling  principles  of  adtion. 

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  obvious  advantages 
we  derive  from  thefe  claffifications,  and  the  general 
conclufions  to  which  they  lead ;  it  is  evidently  im- 
poffible,  that  principles,  which  derived  their  origin 
from  efforts  of  abflraclion,  fhould  apply  literally  to 
praftice ;  or,  indeed,  that  they  fhould  afford  us  any 
confiderable  affiftance  in  conduft,  without  a  certain 
degree  of  practical  and  experimental  fkill.  Hence 
it  is,  that  the  mere  theorift  fo  frequently  expofes 
himfelf,  in  real  life,  to  the  ridicule  of  men  whom 
he  defpifes ;  and  in  the  general  eftimation  of  the 
world,  falls  below  the  level  of  the  common  drudges 
in  bufinefs  and  the  arts.  The  walk,  indeed,  of  thefe 
unenlightened  practitioners,  muft  neceffarily  be  li- 
mited by  their  accidental  opportunities  of  experience ; 
but,  fo  far  as  they  go,  they  operate  with  facility  and 
fuccefsj  while  the  merely  fpeculative  philofopher, 
Q  2  although 


228  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap,  IV. 

although  pofleiTed  of  principles  which  enable  him 
to  approximate  to  the  truth,  in  an  infinite  variety  of 
untried  cafes,  and  although  he  fees,  with  pity,  the 
narrow  views  of  the  multitude,  and  the  ludicrous 
pretenfions  with  which  they  frequently  oppofe  their 
trifling  fucceifes  to  his  theoretical  fpeculations,  finds 
himfelf  perfectly  at  a  lofs,  when  he  is  called  upon,  by 
the  fimpleft  occurrences  of  ordinary  life,  to  carry  his 
principles  into  execution.  Hence  the  origin  of  that 
maxim,  "  which"  (as  Mr.  Hume  remarks)  "  has  been 
*'  fo  induflrioufly  propagated  by  the  dunces  of  every 
"  age,  that  a  man  of  genius  is  unfit  for  bufmefs." 

In  what  confifts  practical  or  experimental  fkill,  it 

is  not  eafy  to  explain  completely ;  but,  among  other 

things,  it  obvioufly  implies,  a  talent  for  minute  and 

comprehenfive    and    rapid  obfervation ;    a   memory, 

at  once  attentive  and  ready ;  in  order  to  prefent  to 

us  accurately,  and  without  refledion,  our  theoretical 

knowledge :    a    prefence    of   mind,    not   to   be  dif- 

concerted  by  unexpefted  occurrences  ;  and,  in  fome 

cafes,    an   uncommon    degree    of    perfection  in  the 

external   fenfes,  and  in  the  mechanical  capacities  of 

the  body.     All  thefe  elements  of  practical  fkill,  it  is 

obvious,  are  to  be  acquired  only  by  habits  of  ad:ive 

exertion,    and  by  a  famihar   acquaintance  with  real 

occurrences ;  for,  as    all   the    practical  principles  of 

our  nature,    both   intellectual    and  animal,    have    a 

I     reference  to  particulars,  and  not  to  generals,    fo  it  is  in 

\     the  aftive  fcenes  of  life  alone,  and  amidft  the  details 

;    of  bufmefs,  that  they  can  be  cultivated  and  improved. 

The  remarks,  which  have  been  already  made,  are 

fufficient    to   illuitrate    the  impofTibility  of  acquiring 

a  talent 


Sea.  7.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  220 

a  talent  for  bufinefs,  or  for  any  of  the  pradical  arts  ., 
of  life,  without  actual  experience.  They  fhew  alfo, 
that  mere  experience,  without  theory,  may  qualify 
a  man,  in  certain  cafes,  for  diftinguifhing  himfelf  in 
both.  It  is  not,  however,  ^to  be  imagined,  that  in 
this  way  individuals  are  to  be  formed  for  the  un- 
common, or  for  the  important  fituations  of  fociety, 
or  even  for  enriching  the  arts  by  new  inventions ;  for 
as  their  addrefs  and  dexterity  are  founded  entirely 
on  imitation,  or  derived  from  the  leflbns  which 
experience  has  fuggefted  to  them,  they  cannot  poffibly 
extend  to  new  combinations  of  circumflances.  Mere  \, 
experience,  therefore,  can,  at  bell:,  prepare  the  mind 
for  the  fubordinate  departments  of  life  ;  for  conducing 
the  eftablilhed  routine  of  bufmefs,  or  for  a  fervile  re- 
petition in  the  arts  of  common  operations.  J 

In  the  character  of  Mr.  George  Grenville,  which 
Mr.  Burke  introduced  in  his  celebrated  Speech  on 
American  Taxation,  a  lively  pifture  is  drawn  of  the 
infufficiency  of  mere  experience  to  qualify  a  man  for 
new  and  untried  fituations  in  the  adminiftration  of 
government.  The  obfervations  he  makes  on  this 
fubjedt,  are  expreifed  with  his  ufual  beauty  and  felicity 
of  language  ;  and  are  of  fo  general  a  nature,  that, 
with  fome  trifling  alterations,  they  may  be  extended  to 
all  the  practical  purfuits  of  life. 

"  Mr.  Grenville  was  bred  to  the  law,  which 
"  is,  in  my  opinion,  one  of  the  firfl  and  nobleft  of 
**  human  fciences  ;  a  fcience  which  does  more  to 
"  quicken  and  invigorate  the  underftanding,  than 
"  all  the  other  kinds  of  learning  put  together ;  but 
"  it  is  not  apt,  except  in  perfons  very  happily  born, 
O  7.  "to 


230  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV 

to  open  and  to  liberalife  the  niind  exadiy  in  the 
fame  proportion.  PafTing  from  that  fludy,  he  did 
not  go  very  largely  into  the  world,  but  plmiged 
into  bufmefs ;  I  mean,  into  the  bufmefs  of  office, 
and  the  limited  and  fixed  methods  and  forms 
eftablifiied  there.  Much  knowledge  is  to  be  had, 
undoubtedly,  in  that  line  ;  and  there  is  no  know- 
ledge which  is  not  valuable.  But  it  may  be  truly 
faid,  that  men  too  much  converfant  in  office,  are 
rarely  minds  of  remarkable  enlargement.  Their 
habits  of  office  are  apt  to  give  them  a  turn  to  think 
the  fubflance  of  bufinefs  not  to  be  much  more 
important,  than  the  forms  in  which  it  is  con- 
duded.  Thefe  forms  are  adapted  to  ordinary 
occafions ;  and,  therefore,  perfons  who  are  nurtured 
in  office,  do  admirably  well,  as  long  as  things  go 
on  in  their  common  order  j  but  when  the  high 
roads  are  broken  up,  and  the  waters  out,  when  a 
new  and  troubled  fcene  is  opened,  and  the  file 
affords  no  precedent,  then  it  is  that  a  greater 
knowledge  of  mankind,  and  a  far  more  extenfive 
comprehenfion  of  things,  is  requifite,  than  ever 
office  gave,  or  than  office  can  ever  give." 
Nor  is  it  in  new  combinations  of  circumflances 
alone,  that  general  principles  affifl  us  in  the  conduct 
of  affairs  ;  they  render  the  application  of  our  pradical 
Ikill  more  unerring,  and  more  perfect.  For  as  gene- 
ral principles  limit  the  utihty  of  pradlical  fkill  to 
fupply  the  imperfections  of  theory,  they  diminifh 
the  number  of  cafes  in  which  this  fkill  is  to  be  em- 
ployed ;  and  thus,  at  once,  facilitate  its  improvement, 
wherever  it    is   requifite  j    and  leffen    the    errors  to 

1 4  which 


Sea.  7.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  2II 

which  it  is  liable,  by  contrading  the  field  within  which 
it  is  poflible  to  commit  them. 

It  would  appear  then,  that  there  are  two  oppofite  ~\ 
extremes  into  which  men  are  apt  to  fall,  in  preparing 
themfelves  for  the  duties  of  a6live  life.  The  one  arifes 
from  habits  of  abflradion  and  generalifation  carried 
to  an  excefs ;  the  other  from  a  minute,  an  exclufive, 
and  an  unenlightened  attention  to  the  objeds  and 
events  which  happen  to  fall  under  their  adual  ex- 
perience. 

In  a  perfect  fyflem  of  education,  care  fliould  be  taken 
to  guard  againfl  both  extremes,  and  to  unite  habits  of 
abftradion  with  habits  of  bufniefs,  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
to  enable  men  to  confider  things,  either  in  general,  or 
in  detail,  as  the  occafion  may  require.  Whichever  of 
thefe  habits  may  happen  to  gain  an  undue  afcendant 
over  the  mind,  it  will  neceffarily  produce  a  charader 
limited  in  its  powers,  and  fitted  only  for  particular  ex- 
ertions. Hence  fome  of  the  apparent  inconfiflencies 
which  we  may  frequently  remark  in  the  intelledual 
capacities  of  the  fame  perfon.  One  man,  from  an  early 
indulgence  in  abftrad  fpeculation,  pofTefTes  a  know- 
ledge of  general  principles,  and  a  talent  for  general 
reafoning,  united  with  a  fluency  and  eloquence  in  the 
ufe  of  general  terms,  which  feem,  to  the  vulgar,  to 
announce  abilities-  fitted  for  any  given  fituation  in 
life :  while,  in  the  condud  of  the  fimplefl  affairs,  he 
exhibits  every  mark  of  irrefolution  and  incapacity. 
Another,  not  only  ads  with  propriety,  and  fkill,  in 
circumflances  which  require  a  minute  attention  to 
details,  but  poffefTes  an  acutenefs  of  reafoning,  and  a 
facility  of  exprefTion  on  all  fubjeds,  in  which  nothing 

Q4  but 


232  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Cliap.  IV- 

but  what  is  particular  is  involved  ;  while,  on  general 
topics,  he  is  perfedly  unable  either  to  reafon,  or  to 
judge.  It  is  this  lafl  turn  of  mind,  which  I  think 
we  have,  in  mod  inftances,  in  view,  when  we  fpeak 
of  good  fenfe,  or  common  fenfe,  in  oppofition  to 
fciencc  and  philofophy.  Both  philofophy  and  good 
fenfe,  imply  the  exercife  of  our  reafoning  powers ; 
and  they  differ  from  each  other  only,  according  as 
thefe  powers  are  applied  to  particulars  or  to  generals. 
It  is  on  good  fenfe  (in  the  acceptation  in  which  I 
have  now  explained  the  term)  that  the  fuccefs  of  men 
in  the  inferior  walks  of  life  chiefly  depends  ;  but,  that 
it  does  not  always  indicate  a  capacity  for  abftradt 
fcience,  or  for  general  fpeculation,  or  for  able  conduct 
in  fituations  which  require  comprehenfive  views,  is 
matter  even  of  vulgar  remark. 

Although,  however,  each  of  thefe   defeds   has   a 
tendency    to    limit   the  utility  of    the   individuals  in 
"whom  it  is  to  be  found,  to  certain  ftations  in  fociety ; 
no  comparifon  can    be   made,    in    point    of  original 
value,  between  the  intelleftual  capacities  of  the  two 
claffes  of  men  to  which  they  charafteriflically  belong. 
The  one  is  the  defe£t  of  a  vigorous,  an  ambitious, 
and  a  comprehenfive  genius,  improperly  diredled  ;  the 
other,  of  an  underflanding,  minute  and  circumfcribed 
in  its  views,  timid   in   its  exertions,  and   formed  for 
ffervile  imitation.     Nor  is  the  former  defeft,  (however 
difficult  it  may  be  to  remove  it  when   confirmed   by 
long  habit,)  by  any  means  fo  incurable  as  the  latter  j 
for  it  arifes,  not  from   original  conftitution,  but  from 
fome  fault  in  early  education  ;  while  every  tendency 
to  the  oppofite  extreme  is  more  or  lefs  charafleriftical 
.    13  of 


Seft.  7-  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  23-5 

of  a  mind,  ufeful,  indeed,  in  a  high  degree,  when 
confined  to  its  proper  fphere,  but  deflined,  by  the 
hand  that  formed  it,  to  borrow  its  lights  from 
another. 

As  an  additional  proof  of  the  natural  fuperiority 
which  men  of  general  views  poflefs  over  the  common 
drudges  in  bufmefs,  it  may  be  farther  obferved,  that 
the  habits  of  inattention  incident  to  the  former  arife 
in  part  from  the  little  intereft  which  they  take  in 
particular  objefts  and  particular  occurrences,  and 
are  not  wholly  to  be  afcribed  to  an  incapacity  of 
attention.  When  the  mind  has  been  long  ac- 
cuftomed  to  the  confideration  of  clafles  of  obje6ls 
and  of  comprehenfive  theorems,  it  cannot,  without 
fome  degree  of  effort,  defcend  to  that  humble  walk 
of  experience,  or  of  adion,  in  which  the  meanefl  of 
mankind  are  on  a  level  with  the  greateft.  In  im- 
portant fituations,  accordingly,  men  of  the  moft  gene- 
ral views,  are  found  not  to  be  inferior  to  the  vulgar 
in  their  attention  to  details ;  becaufe  the  objeds  and 
occurrences  which  fuch  fituations  prefent,  roufe  their 
paffions,  and  intereft  their  curiofity,  from  the  magni- 
tude of  the  confequences  to  which  they  lead. 

When  theoretical  knowledge  and  practical  Ikill  are 
happily  combined  in  the  fame  perfon,  the  intelledual 
power  of  man  appears  in  its  full  perfeftion  ;  and  fits 
him  equally  to  condudl,  with  a  maflerly  hand,  the 
details  of  ordinary  bufmefs,  and  to  contend  fuccefsfully 
with  the  untried  difficulties  of  new  and  hazardous 
fituations.  In  conducing  the  former,  mere  ex- 
perience may  frequently  be  a  fuflicient  guide,  but 
experience  and  fpeculation  mud  be  combined  to- 
gether 


234  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

gether  to  prepare  us  for  the  latter.  "  Expert  men," 
fays  Lord  Bacon,  "can  execute  and  judge  of  par- 
*'  ticulars  one  by  one ;  but  the  general  counfels, 
*'  and  the  plots,  and  the  marfhalling  of  affairs,  come 
*'  beft  from  thofe  that  are  learned.** 


SECTION    VIII. 

Continuation    of   the   fame    Subjed.  —  life    and  Abufe   of  general 
Principles  in  Politics  *. 

THE  foregoing  remarks,  on  the  dangers  to  be 
apprehended  from  a  rafh  application  of  general 
principles,  hold  equally  with  refpeft  to  moft  of  the 
practical  arts.  Among  thefe,  however,  there  is  one 
of  far  fuperior  dignity  to  the  reft  j  which,  partly  on 

*  The  events  which  have  happened  fince  the  publication  of 
the  firft  edition  of  this  volume  in  1792,  might  have  enabled 
me  to  confirm  many  of  the  obfervations  in  this  Seftion,  by  an 
appeal  to  fafts  ftill  frefh  in  the  recoiled  ion  of  my  Readers  ;  and 
in  one  or  two  inftances,  by  flight  verbal  correftions,  to  guard  againft 
the  poffibility  of  uncandid  mifinterpretation  :  but,  for  various 
reafons,  which  it  is  unnecefTary  to  ftate  at  prefent,  I  feel  it  to  be  a 
duty  which  I  owe  to  myfelf,  to  fend  the  whole  difcuflion  again 
to  the  prefs  in  its  original  form.  That  the  dodlrine  it  inculcates 
is  favourable  to  the  good  order  and  tranquillity  of  fociety,  cannot 
be  difputed ;  and,  as  far  as  I  myfelf  am  perfonally  interefted,  I 
have  no  wifh  to  vitiate  the  record  which  it  exhibits  of  my  opi* 
nions. 

On  fome  points  which  are  touched  upon  very  flightly  here,  I 
have  explained  myfelf  more  fully,  in  the  fourth  Sedion  of  my 
Biographical  Account  of  Mr.  Smith,  read  before  the  Royal 
Society  of  Edinburgh  in  1793,  and  publiflied  in  the  third  Volume 
of  their  Tranfaftions.  —  {Second  Edition,   1 802,) 

account 


Sea.  S-  <5^    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  235 

account  of  its  importance,  and  partly  on  account  of 
fome  peculiarities  in  its  nature,  feems  to  be  entitled 
to  a  more  particular  confideration.  The  art  I  allude 
to,  is  that  of  Legiflation  ;  an  art  which  differs  from 
all  others  in  fome  very  effential  refpeds,  and  to  which, 
the  reafonings  in  the  lafl  Sedion  muft  be  applied 
with  many  reftridtions. 

Before  proceeding  farther,  it  is  neceflary  for  me 
to  premife,  that  it  is  chiefly  in  compliance  with 
common  language  and  common  prejudices,  that  I 
am  fometimes  led,  in  the  following  obfervations,  to 
contraft  theory  with  experience.  In  the  proper 
fenfe  of  the  word  Theory,  it  is  fo  far  from  (land- 
ing in  oppofition  to  Experience,  that  it  implies  a 
knowledge  of  principles,  of  which  the  mofl  ex- 
tenfive  experience  alone  could  put  us  in  poffeffion. 
Prior  to  the  time  of  Lord  Bacon,  indeed,  an  ac- 
quaintance with  fads  was  not  confidered  as  effential 
to  the  formation  of  theories  ;  and  from  thefe  ages, 
has  defcended  to  us,  an  indifcriminate  prejudice 
againfl  general  principles,  even  in  thofe  cafes  in 
which  they  have  been  fairly  obtained  in  the  way  of 
induction. 

But  not  to  difpute  about  words :  there  are 
plainly  two  fets  of  political  reafoners  ;  one  of 
which  confider  the  adual  inftitutions  of  mankind 
as  the  only  fafe  foundation  for  our  conclufions, 
and  think  every  plan  of  legiflation  chimerical,  which 
is  not  copied  from  one  which  has  already  been 
realifed ;  while  the  other  apprehend  that,  in  many 
cafes,  we  may  reafon  fafely  a  priori  from  the 
known    principles    of     human    nature    combined 

with 


236  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  IV. 

with  the  particular  circumflances  of  the  times. 
The  former  are  commonly  underftood  as  contend- 
ing for  experience  in  oppofition  to  theory ;  the 
latter  are  accufed  of  trufting  to  theory  unfupported 
by  experience ;  but  it  ought  to  be  remembered, 
that  the  political  theorift,  if  he  proceeds  cautioufly 
and  philofophically,  founds  his  conclufions  ulti- 
mately on  experience,  no  lefs  than  the  political 
empiric  ;  —  as  the  aftronomer,  who  predicts  an  eclipfe 
from  his  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  the  fcience, 
refls  his  expectation  of  the  event,  on  fa£ts  which  have 
been  previoufly  afcertained  by  obfervation,  no  lefs 
than  if  he  inferred  it,  without  any  reafoning,  from 
his  knowledge  of  a  cycle. 

There  is,  indeed,  a  certain  degree  of  pradical  fkill 
which  habits  of  bufmefs  alone  can  give,  and  without 
which  the  moil  enlightened  politician  mufl  always 
appear  to  difadvantage  when  he  attempts  to  carry  his 
plans  into  execution.  And  as  this  fkill  is  often  (in 
confequence  of  the  ambiguity  of  language)  denoted 
by  the  word  Experience  ;  while  it  is  feldom  poiTefTed 
by  thofe  men,  who  have  moft  carefully  ftudied 
the  theory  of  legiflation ;  it  has  been  very  generally 
concluded,  that  politics  is  merely  a  matter  of  routine, 
in  which  philofophy  is  rather  an  obftacle  to  fuccefs. 
The  ftatefman,  who  has  been  formed  among  official 
details,  is  compared  to  the  pradical  engineer  ;  the 
fpeculative  legiflator,  to  the  theoretical  mechanician 
who  has  pafled  his  life  among  books  and  dia- 
grams. —  In  order  to  afcertain  how  far  this  opinion 
is  juft,  it  may  be  of  ufe  to  compare  the  art  of  le- 
giflation with  thofe  pradical  applications  of  mecha- 
nical 


Sea.  8.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  237 

nical  principles,  by  which  the  oppofers  of  political 
theories  have  fo  often  endeavoured  to  illuftrate  their 
reafonings. 

I.  In  the  firfl  place,  then,  it  may  be  remarked,  that 
the  errors  to  which  we  are  liable,  in  the  ufe  of  general 
mechanical  principles,  are  owing,  in  mofl  inftances, 
to  the  efFed:  which  habits  of  abftradion  are  apt  to 
have,  in  withdrawing  the  attention  from  thofe  appli- 
cations of  our  knowledge,  by  which  alone  we  can 
learn  to  correct  the  imperfeftions  of  theory.  Such 
errors,  therefore,  are,  in  a  peculiar  degree,  incident 
to  men  who  have  been  led  by  natural  tafle,  or  by 
early  habits,  to  prefer  the  fpeculations  of  the  clofet, 
to  the  buftle  of  adive  life,  and  to  the  fatigue  of  mi- 
nute and  circumftantial  obfervation. 

In  pohtics,  too,  one  fpecies  of  principles  is  often 
mifapplied  from  an  inattention  to  circumftances ; 
thofe  which  are  deduced  from  a  few  examples  of  par- 
ticular governments,  and  which  are  occafionally 
quoted  as  univerfal  political  axioms,  which  every 
wife  legiflator  ought  to  aflume  as  the  ground-work 
of  his  reafonings.  But  this  abufe  of  general  prin- 
ciples fhould  by  no  means  be  afcribed,  like  the 
abfurdities  of  the  fpeculative  mechanician,  to  over- 
refinement,  and  the  love  of  theory ;  for  it  arifes 
from  weakneffes,  which  philofophy  alone  can  re- 
medy ;  an  unenlightened  veneration  for  maxims 
which  are  fuppofed  to  have  the  fandion  of  time  in 
their  favour,  and  a  paffive  acquiefcence  in  received 
opinions. 

There  is  another  clafs  of  principles,    from  which 
political  conclufions  have  fometimes  been  deduced ; 

and 


238  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    THILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

and  which,  notwithftanding  the  common  prejudice 
againfi:  them,  are  a  much  furer  fomidation  for  our 
reafonings :  I  allude,  at  prefent,  to  thofe  principles 
which  we  obtain  from  an  examination  of  the  human 
conftitution,  and  of  the  general  laws  which  regulate 
the  courfe  of  human  affairs ;  principles,  which  are 
certainly  the  refult  of  a  much  more  extenfive  induc- 
tion, than  any  of  the  inferences  that  can  be  drawn 
from  the  hiftory  of  aftual  eftablifliments. 

In  applying,  indeed,  fuch  principles  to  practice,  it  is 
neceflary  (as  well  as  in  mechanics)  to  pay  attention  to 
the  peculiarities  of  the  cafe ;  but  it  is  by  no  means 
neceifary  to  pay  the  fame  fcrupulous  attention  to 
minute  circumftances,  which  is  eflfential  in  the  me- 
chanical arts,  or  in  the  management  of  private  bufi- 
nefs.  There  is  even  a  danger  of  dwelling  too  much 
on  details,  and  of  rendering  the  mind  incapable  of 
thofe  abftrad:  and  comprehenfive  views  of  human 
affairs,  which  can  alone  furnifh  the  ftatefman  with 
fixed  and  certain  maxims  for  the  regulation  of  his 
conduct.  "  When  a  man  (fays  Mr.  Hume)  de- 
"  liberates  concerning  his  condud:  in  any  particular 
"  affair,  and  forms  fchemes  in  politics,  trade,  ceconomy, 
"  or  any  bufmefs  in  life,  he  never  ought  to  draw  his 
"  arguments  too  fine,  or  conneft  too  long  a  chain  of 
"  confequences  together.  Something  is  fure  to  hap- 
"  pen,  that  will  difconcert  his  reafoning,  and  produce 
"  an  event  different  from  what  he  expected.  But 
"  when  we  reafon  upon  general  fubjefts,  one  may 
*'  juftly  alSrm,  that  our  fpeculations  can  fcarce  ever 
"  be  too  fine,  provided  they  are  juft  ;  and  that  the 
"  difference  betwixt  a  common  man  and  a  man  of 

"  genius, 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  239 

"  genius,  is  chiefly  feen  in  the  fhallownefs  or  depth 
"  of  the  principles  upon  which  they  proceed.  —  'Tis 
"  certain  that  general  principles,  however  intricate 
*'  they  may  feem,  muft  always,  if  they  are  jufl  and 
"  found,  prevail  in  the  general  courfe  of  things, 
*'  though  they  may  fail  in  particular  cafes  ;  and  it  is 
"  the  chief  bufinefs  of  philofophers  to  regard  the 
"  general  courfe  of  things.  I  may  add,  that  it  is  alfo 
*'  the  chief  bufmefs  of  politicians ;  efpecially  in  the 
"  domeflic  government  of  the  ftate,  where  the  public 
*'  good,  which  is,  or  ought  to  be,  their  object,  depends 
"  on  the  concurrence  of  a  multitude  of  cafes,  not,  as 
"  in  foreign  politics,  upon  accidents,  and  chances,  and 
"  the  caprices  of  a  few  perfons*." 

II.  The  difficulties  which,  in  the  mechanical  arts, 
limit  the  application  of  general  principles,  remain  in- 
variably the  fame  from  age  to  age :  and  whatever 
obfervations  we  have  made  on  them  in  the  courfe  of 
our  paft  experience,  lay  a  fure  foundation  for  future 
pradical  (kill ;  and  fupply,  in  fo  far  as  they  reach, 
the  defedls  of  our  theories.  In  the  art  of  government, 
however,  the  pratlical  difficulties  which  occur,  are  of 
a  very  diiferent  nature.  They  do  not  prefent  to  the 
ftatefman,  the  fame  fteady  fubjed  of  examination, 
which  the  effeds  of  fridion  do  to  the  engineer.  They 
arife  chiefly  from  the  paflions  and  opinions  of  men, 
which  are  in  a  ftate  of  perpetual  change  :  and,  there- 
fore, the  addrefs  which  is  neceflary  to  overcome  them, 
depends  lefs  on  the  accuracy  of  our  obfervations  with 
refpeO;  to  the  paft,  than  on  the  fagacity  of  our  con- 
jeftures  with   refped  to  the  future.     In  the  prefent 

*  Political  Dlfcourfes. 

age 


240  ELEMENTS    OF    TPfE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

age,  more  particularly,  when  the  rapid  communica- 
tion, and  the  univerfal  difFufion  of  knowledge,  by- 
means  of  the  prefs,  render  the  fituation  of  political 
focieties  effentially  different  from  what  it  ever  was 
formerly,  and  fecure  infallibly,  againft  every  accident, 
the  progrefs  of  human  reafon  ;  we  may  venture  to  pre- 
dict, that  they  are  to  be  the  mofl  fuccefsful  ftatefmen, 
who,  paying  all  due  regard  to  pail  experience,  fearch 
for  the  rules  of  their  conduct  chiefly  in  the  peculiar 
circumftances  of  their  own  times,  and  in  an  en- 
lightened anticipation  of  the  future  hiftory  of  man- 
kind. 

III.  In  the  mechanical  arts,  if,  at  any  time,  we  are 
at  a  lofs  about  the  certainty  of  a  particular  faft,  we 
have  it  always  in  our  power  to  bring  it  to  the  teft  of 
experiment.  But  it  is  very  feldom  that  we  can  obtain 
in  this  way  any  ufeful  conclufion  in  politics  :  not  only 
becaufe  it  is  difficult  to  find  two  cafes  in  which  the 
combinations  of  circumftances  are  precifely  the  fame, 
but  becaufe  our  acquaintance  with  the  poHtical  expe- 
rience of  mankind  is  much  more  imperfe£l  than  is 
commonly  imagined.  By  far  the  greater  part  of  what 
is  called  matter  of  fad  in  politics,  is  nothing  elfe  than 
theory ;  and,  very  frequently,  in  this  fcience,  when 
we  think  we  are  oppofmg  experience  to  fpeculation, 
we  are  only  oppofmg  one  theory  to  another. 

To  be  fatisfied  of  the  truth  of  this  obfervation,  it  is 
almoft  fufficient  to  recoiled  how  extremely  difficult 
it  is  to  convey,  by  a  general  defcription,  a  juft  idea  ot 
the  adual  ftate  of  any  government.  That  every  fuch 
defcription  muft  neceflarily  be  more  or  lefs  theoretical, 
will  appear  from  the  following  remarks. 

1.  Of 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  241 

1.  Of  the  governments  which  have  hitherto  ap- 
peared in  the  hiflory  of  mankind,  few  or  none  have 
taken  their  rife  from  poHtical  wifdom,  but  have  been 
the  gradual  refiilt  of  time  and  experience,  of  circum- 
ftances  and  emergencies.  In  procefs  of  time,  indeed, 
every  government  acquires  a  fyflematical  appearance  : 
for,  although  its  different  parts  arofe  from  circum- 
ftances  which  may  be  regarded  as  accidental  and 
irregular  ;  yet  there  mull  exift,  among  thefe  parts, 
a  certain  degree  of  confiflency  and  analogy.  Where- 
ever  a  government  has  exifted  for  ages,  and  men  have 
enjoyed  tranquillity  under  it,  it  is  a  proof  that  its 
principles  are  not  eflentially  at  variance  with  each 
gther.  Every  new  inflitudon  which  was  introduced, 
mud  have  had  a  certain  reference  to  the  laws  and 
ufages  exifling  before,  otherwife  it  could  not  have 
been  permanent  in  its  operation.  If  any  one,  con- 
trary to  the  fpirit  of  the  reft,  fhould  have  occafionally 
mingled  with  them,  it  muft  foon  have  fallen  into  de- 
fuetude  and  oblivion;  and  thofe  alone  would  remain, 
which  accorded  in  their  general  tendency.  "  Quae 
*'  ufu  obtinuere,"  fays  Lord  Bacon,  '*  fi  non  bona,  at 
"  faltem  apta  inter  fe  funt." 

The  neceffity  of  ftudying  particular  conftitutions  of 
government,  by  the  help  of  fyftemadcal  defcripdons 
of  them,  (fuch  defcriptions,  for  example,  as  are  given 
of  that  of  England  by  Montefquieu  and  Blackftone,) 
arifes  from  the  fame  circumftances,  which  render  it 
expedient,  in  moft  inftances,  to  ftudy  particular  lan- 
guages, by  confuldng  the  writings  of  grammarians. 
In  both  cafes,  the  knowledge  we  wifh  to  acquire,  com- 
prehends an  infinite  number  of  particulars,  the  confi- 

R  deration 


242  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   rHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV- 

deration  of  which,  in  detail,  would  di(lra6t  the  atten- 
tion, and  overload  the  memory.  The  fyflematical 
defcriptions  of  politicians,  like  the  general  rules  of 
grammarians,  are  in  a  higher  degree  ufeful,  for  arrang- 
ing, and  fimplifying,  the  objects  of  our  fludy  ;  but  in 
both  cafes,  we  muft  remember,  that  the  knowledge 
we  acquire  in  this  manner,  is  to  be  received  with 
great  limitations,  and  that  it  is  no  more  poflible 
to  convey,  in  a  fyflematical  form,  a  jufl  and  com- 
plete idea  of  a  particular  government,  than  it  is 
to  teach  a  language  completely  by  means  of  general 
rules,  without  any  practical  afTiftance  from  reading 
or  converfation. 

2.  The  nature  and  fpirit  of  a  government,  as 
it  is  actually  exercifed  at  a  particular  period,  can- 
not always  be  collected ;  perhaps  it  can  feldom 
be  colleded  from  an  examination  of  written  laws, 
or  of  the  eftablifhed  forms  of  a  conftitution. 
Thefe  may  continue  the  fame  for  a  long  courfe 
of  ages,  while  the  government  may  be  modified 
in  its  exercife,  to  a  great  extent,  by  gradual  and 
undefcribable  alterations  in  the  ideas,  manners,  and 
charafter,  of  the  people ;  or  by  a  change  in  the 
relations  which  different  orders  of  the  community 
bear  to  each  other.  In  every  country  whatever, 
befide  the  ellabliflicd  laws,  the  political  flate  of 
the  people  is  affeded  by  an  infinite  variety  of  cir- 
cumftances,  of  which  no  words  can  convey  a  con- 
ception, and  v/hich  are  to  be  collected  only  from 
adual  obfervation.  Even  m  this  way,  it  is  not 
cafy  for  a  perfon  who  has  received  his  education 
in  one  country,  to  fludy  the  government  of 
anothej  j     on    account   of    the   difficulty  which    he 

mufl 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  24^ 

mufl:  neceflarlly  experience,  in  entering  into  the  aflb- 
ciations  which  influence  the  mind  under  a  different 
fyftem  of  manners,  and  in  afcertaining  (efpecially  upon 
political  fubjefts)  the  complex  ideas  conveyed  by  a 
foreign  language. 

In  confequence  of  the  caufes  which  have  now  been 
mentioned,  it  fometimes  happens,  that  there  are  effen- 
tial  circumflances  in  the  attual  ftate  of  a  government, 
about  which  the  conftitutional  laws  are  not  only  fdent, 
but  which  are  direclly  contrary  to  all  the  written  laws, 
and  to  the  fpirit  of  the  conflitution  as  delineated  by 
theoretical  writers. 

IV.  The  art  of  government  difl:ers  from  the  me- 
chanical arts  in  this,  that,  in  the  former,  it  is 
much  more  difficult  to  refer  effefts  to  their  caufes, 
than  in  the  latter  ;  and,  of  confequence,  it  rarely 
happens,  even  when  we  have  an  opportunity  of 
feeing  a  political  experiment  made,  that  we  can 
draw  from  it  any  certain  inference,  with  refpe<5t 
to  the  juftnefs  of  the  principles  by  which  it  was 
fuggelled.  In  thofe  complicated  machines,  to  which 
the  ftrufture  of  civil  fociety  has  been  frequently 
compared,  as  all  the  different  parts  of  which  they 
are  compofed  are  fubjected  to  phyfical  laws,  the 
errors  of  the  artift  muff  neceffarily  become  appa- 
rent in  the  laft  refult  ;  but  in  the  political  fyftem, 
as  well  as  in  the .  animal  body,  where  the  general 
conftitution  is  found  and  healthy,  there  is  a  fort 
of  vis  mcdicatriXf  which  is  fufficient  for  the  cure 
of  partial  diforders  ;  and  in  the  one  cafe,  as  well 
as  in  the  other,  the  errors  of  human  art  are  fre- 
quently   CDrrecl:ed    and   concealed   by    the    wifdom 

R  2  of 


244  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    THILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

of  nature.     Among  the  many  falfe  eftimates   which 
we   daily  make  of  human   ability,  there   is  perhaps 
V  none    more    groundlefs  than    the   exaggerated  con- 
ceptions we  are  apt  to  form   of  that  fpecies  of  poli- 
Itical  wifdom,  which   is  fuppofed    to    be  the  fruit  of 
C  long  experience  and  of  profeffional  habits.     "  Go  ;'* 
i'^faid  the  chancellor  Oxenftiern  to    his  fon,  when   he 
was    fending    him    to     a    congrefs     of  ambafladors, 
and  when  the  young   man    was  expreffing   his    dif- 
fidence   of  his   own    abilities    for  fuch   an    employ- 
ment ;)  "  Go,  and   fee  with  your   own  eyes,  Ouam 
"  parva  fapientia    regitur  mundus  !'*  The    truth    is, 
(however  paradoxical    the    remark    may    appear    at 
firft   view,)  that  the   fpeculative  errors   of  ftatefmen 
are   frequently    lefs  fenfible   in  their  eifeds,  and,  of 
confequence,   more  likely    to  efcape  without   detec- 
tion, than  thofe   of  individuals  who  occupy  inferior 
ftations    in    fociety.     The   effects  of  mifconduft    in 
private  life,  are  eafily  traced  to  their  proper  fource, 
and  therefore    the    world    is    feldom    far   wrong  in 
the    judgments  which   it  forms  of  the  prudence  or 
of  the   imprudence   of    private    charafters.     But  in 
confidering    the    affairs    of  a  great  nation,    it  is    fo 
difficult  to  trace  events  to  their  proper    caufes,  and 
to    diflinguifli    the  effefts  of  political  wifdom,    from 
thofe  which  are  the   natural    refult   of  the  fituation 
of  the  people,  that  it   is  fcarcely  poffible,  excepting 
in  the  cafe  of   a  very    long    adminiflration,  to   ap- 
preciate the  talents  of  a  ftatefman  from  the    fuccefs 
or  the  failure  of  his  meafures.     In  every  fociety,  too, 
which,    in    confequence    of  the  general  fpirit  of  its 
government,  enjoys  the  bleffings   of  tranquillity  and 

liberty, 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  245 

liberty,  a  great  part  of  the  political  order  which 
we  are  apt  to  afcribe  to  legiflative  fagacity,  is  the 
natural  refult  of  the  felfilh  purfuits  of  individuals  ; 
nay,  in  every  fuch  fociety,  (as  I  already  hinted,) 
the  natural  tendency  to  improvement  is  fo  flrong,  as  to 
overcome  many  powerful  obftacles,  which  the  imper- 
fedtion  of  human  inftitutions  oppofes  to  its  progrefs. 

From  thefe  remarks,  it  feems  to  follow,  that, 
although  in  the  mechanical  arts,  the  errors  of 
theory  may  frequently  be  correfted  by  repeated 
trials,  without  having  recourfe  to  general  prin- 
ciples ;  yet,  in  the  machine  of  governm.ent,  there 
is  fo  great  a  variety  of  pov/ers  at  work,  befide  the 
influence  of  the  ftatefman,  that  it  is  vain  to  expert 
the  art  of  legiflation  fhould  be  carried  to  its 
greateft  pofTible  perfection  by  experience  alone. 

Still,  however,  it  may  be  faid,  that  in  the  mofl 
imperfect  governments  of  modern  Europe,  we  have 
an  experimental  proof,  that  they  fecure,  to  a  very 
great  degree,  the  principal  objefts  of  the  focial 
union.  Why  hazard  thefe  certain  advantages,  fov 
the  uncertain  effects  of  changes,  fuggefted  by  mere 
theory ;  and  not  reft  fatisfied  with  a  meafure  of 
political  happinefs,  which  appears,  from  the  hiftory 
of  the  world,  to  be  greater  than  has  ccanmonly  fallen 
to  the  lot  of  nations  ? 

With  thofe  who  would  carry  their  zeal  againft 
reformation  fo  far,  it  is  impoflible  to  argue ;  and 
it  only  remains  for  us  to  regret,  that  the  number 
of  fuch  reafoners  has,  in  all  ages  of  the  world, 
been  fo  great,   and  theu-  influence  on  human  aftairs 

fo  extenfive. 

R  3  «  There 


246  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

"  There  are  fome  men,"  (fays  Dr.  Johnfon,) 
of  narrow  views,  and  grovelling  conceptions, 
who,  without  the  infligation  of  perfonal  malice, 
treat  every  new  attempt  as  wild  and  chimerical ; 
and  look  upon  every  endeavour  to  depart  from 
the  beaten  trad,  as  the  rafh  effort  of  a  warm 
imagination,  or  the  glittering  fpeculation  of  an 
exalted  mind,  that  may  pleafe  and  dazzle  for  a 
time,  but  can  produce  no  real  or  lading  ad- 
vantage. 

"  Thefe  men  value  themfelves  upon  a  perpetual 
fcepticifm ;  upon  believing  nothing  but  their  own 
fenfes ;  upon  calling  for  demonftration  where  it 
cannot  poflibly  be  obtained ;  and,  fometimes, 
upon  holding  out  againft  it  when  it  is  laid  before 
them  ;  upon  inventing  arguments  againfl  the  fuccefs 
of  any  new  undertaking  ;  and,  where  arguments 
cannot  be  found,  upon  treating  it  with  contempt 
and  ridicule. 

"  Such  have  been  the  moft  formidable  enemies 
of  the  great  benefactors  of  the  world ;  for  their 
notions  and  difcourfe  are  fo  agreeable  to  the  lazy, 
the  envious,  and  the  timorous,  that  they  feldom 
fail  of  becoming  popular,  and  direfting  the  opinions 
of  mankind  *.'* 
With  refped:  to  this  fceptical  difpofition,  as  ap- 
plicable to  the  prefent  ftate  of  fociety,  it  is  of 
importance  to  add,  that,  in  every  government,  the 
{lability  and  the  influence  of  eftablifhed  authority 
mufl:  depend  on  the  coincidence  between  its  mea- 
fures  and  the  tide  of  public  opinion  ;  and  that,  in 
*  Life  of  Drakk,  by  Dr.  Johnson*. 

1 1  modern 


Sea.  a.  OF  THE  KUxMAN  MIND.  247 

modern  Europe,  in  confequence  of  the  invention  of 
printing,  and   the    liberty   of  the  prefs,    public  opi- 
nion  has  acquired   an    afcendant    in    human   affairs, 
which    it    never  pofieffed   in    thofe    ftates    of    anti- 
quity from  which    moft    of  our    political    examples 
are  drawn.     The  danger,  indeed,  of  fudden  and  ralli 
innovations  cannot  be  too  flrongly  inculcated  ;  and 
the  views   of  thofe    men  who    are    forward   to  pro- 
mote them,    cannot  be    reprobated  with    too    great 
feverity.     But  it  is  poilible  alfo  to  fall  into  the  oppo- 
fite  extreme  ;   and  to  bring  upon  fociety  the  very  evils 
we  are  anxious  to  prevent,  by  an  obflinate  oppofitioii 
to   thofe  gradual    and    neceflary  reformations  which 
the   genius    of  the    times    demands.      The   violent 
revolutions  which,    at   different    periods,    have    con- 
vulfed    modern    Europe,    have   arifen,    not    from   a 
fpirit  of  innovation  in  fovereigns  and  ftatefmen  ;   but 
from  their   bigotted  attachment  to  antiquated  forms, 
and    to    principles    borrowed    from    lefs    enlightened 
ages.     It  is   this  reverence    for    abufes  which  have 
been  fanclioned   by  time,    accompanied   with   an  in- 
attention   to    the  progrefs  of  public  opinion,    wJiich 
has,  in  moft  inftances,  blinded  the  rulers  of  mankind, 
till  government  has   loft   all    its   efficiency  ;  and  till 
the  rage  of  innovadon   has  become  too  general  and 
too    violent,   to    be  fatisfted    with    changes,    which, 
if  propofed  at  an  earlier  period,  would  have   united, 
in  the  fupport  of  eftabliftied  inftitutions,  every  friend 
to  order,  and  to  the  profperity  of  his  country. 

Thefe  obfervadons  I  ftate  with  the  greater  con- 
fidence, that  the  fubftance  of  them  is  contained 
in  the  following  aphorifms  of  Lord  Bacon  ;  a  phi- 

R  4  lofopher 


248  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap,  IV* 

lofopher  who  (if  we  except,  perhaps,  the  late  Mr. 
Turgot)  feems,  more  than  any  other,  to  have  formed 
enlightened  views  with  refpe£l  to  the  pofTible  at- 
tainments of  mankind  ;  and  whofe  fame  cannot  fail 
to  increafe  as  the  v/orld  grows  older,  by  being  at- 
tached, not  to  a  particular  fyflem  of  variable  opinions, 
but  to  the  general  and  infallible  progrefs  of  human 
reafon. 

"  Ouis  novator  tempus  imitatur,  quod  novationes 
-''  ita  infmuat,  ut  fenfus  faliant  ? 

"    Novator  maximus    tempus  ;   quidni  igitur  tem- 
"  pus  imitemur  ? 

**  Morofa  morum  retentio,  res  turbulenta  eft,  asque 
*'  ac  novitas. 

*'  Cum  per  fe  res  mutentur   in  deterius,  i\  confilio 
*'  in  mehus  non  mutentur,  quis  finis  erit  mali  ?" 

The  general   conclufion   to    which    thefe  obferva- 
tions  lead,  is  fufficiently    obvious;   that    the   perfec- 
tion   of    political    wifdom     does    not  confift    in    an 
indifcriminate  zeal  againft  reformers,  but  in  a  gradual 
and  prudent    accommodation    of  eftablillied    inftitu- 
tions   to  the  varying  opinions,   manners,  and  circum- 
ftances    of    mankind.      In    the    actual    application, 
however,  of   this  principle,    many  difficulties   occur, 
which  it  requires  a  very  rare  combination  of  talents 
to  furmount :  more  particularly  in  the  prefent  age ; 
when    the    prefs    has,     to    fo    wonderful    a   degree, 
emancipated     human    reafon    from    the    tyranny    of 
andent   prejudices  ;  and   has  roufed   a    fpirit  of  free 
difcuffion,  unexampled  in  the  hiftory  of  former  times. 

That    this    fudden    change   in   the    ftate    of  the 
world,  fhould  be  accompanied  with  fome  temporary 

diforders. 


Sea.  8.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  249 

diforders,  is  by  no  means  furprifing.  While  the 
multitude  continue  imperfedly  enlightened,  they 
will  be  occafionally  mifled  by  the  ardiices  of  dema- 
gogues ;  and  even  good  men,  intoxicated  with 
ideas  of  theoretical  perfection,  may  be  expected, 
fometimes  to  facrifice,  unintentionally,  the  tranquil- 
lity of  their  cotemporaries,  to  an  over-ardent  zeal 
for  the  good  of  pofterity.  Notwithftanding,  how- 
ever, thefe  evils,  which  every  friend  to  humanity 
mufli  lament,  I  would  willingly  believe,  that  the 
final  effeds  refulting  from  this  fpirit  of  reformation, 
cannot  fail  to  be  favourable  to  human  happinefs ; 
and  there  are  fome  peculiarities  in  the  prefent  con- 
dition of  mankind,  which  appear  to  me  to  juftify  more 
fanguine  hopes  upon  the  fubjefl,  than  it  would 
have  been  reafonable  for  a  philofopher  to  indulge 
at  any  former  period.  An  attendon  to  thefe  pecu- 
liarities is  abfolutely  neceflary  to  enable  us  to  form 
a  competent  judgment  on  the  queftion  to  which 
the  foregoing  obfervations  relate  ;  and  it  leads  to  the 
illuftradon  of  a  doftrine  to  which  I  have  frequently 
referred  in  this  work  ;  the  gradual  improvement  in 
the  condition  of  the  fpecies,  which  may  be  expected 
from  the  progrefs  of  reafon  and  the  diffufion  of  know- 
ledge. 

Among  the  many  circumftances  favourable  to 
human  happinefs  in  the  prefent  flate  of  the  world, 
the  mod  important,  perhaps,  is,  that  the  fame 
events  which  have  contributed  to  loofea  the  founda- 
tions of  the  antient  fabrics  of  defpotifm,  have  made  it 
practicable,  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  it  ever 
was  formerly,  to  reduce  the  principles  of  legifladon 
to  a  fcience,  and  to  anticipate   the  probable  courfe 

of 


250  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PMILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

of  popular  opinions.  It  is  eafy  for  the  flatefman 
to  form  to  himfelf  a  diflind  and  fteady  idea  of  the 
ultimate  objects  at  which  a  wife  legiflator  ought  to 
aim,  and  to  forefee  that  modification  of  the  focial 
order,  to  which  human  affairs  have,  of  themfelves,  a 
tendency  to  approach ;  and,  therefore,  his  practical 
fagacity  and  addrefs  are  Hmited  to  the  care  of  accom- 
pHfhing  the  important  ends  which  he  has  in  view,  as 
effeftually  and  as  rapidly  as  is  confiflent  with  the 
quiet  of  individuals,  and  with  the  rights  arifmg  from 
aftual  eflabUfhments. 

In  order  to  lay  a  foHd  foundation  for  the  fcience  of 
politics,  the  firfl  flep  ought  to  be,  to  afcertain  that 
form  of  fociety  which  is  perfeftly  agreeable  to  nature 
and  to  juflice ;  and  what  are  the  principles  of 
legiflation  necefl'ary  for  maintaining  it.  Nor  is  the 
inquiry  fo  difficult  as  might  at  firft  be  apprehended  ; 
for  it  might  be  eafily  fhewn,  that  the  greater  part  of 
the  political  diforders  which  exift  among  mankind, 
do  not  arife  from  a  want  of  forefight  in  politicians, 
which  has  rendered  their  laws  too  general,  but  from 
their  having  trufled  too  little  to  the  operation  of 
thofe  fmiple  inflitutions  which  nature  and  juflice 
tecommend  ;  and,  of  conlequence,  that,  as  fociety 
advances  to  its  perfedion,  the  number  of  laws 
may  be  expeded  to  diminifli,  inflead  of  increafmg, 
and  the  fcience  of  legiflation  to  be  gradually  fmi- 
plified. 

The  Economical  fyflem  which,  about  thirty  years 
ago,  employed  the  fpeculations  of  fome  ingenious 
men  in  France,  feems  to  me  to  have  been  the  firfl  at- 
tempt to  afcertain  this  ideal  perfection  of  the  focial 
order;    and   the  light  which,  fince  that  period,  has 

been 


Seft.  8.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  25I 

been  thrown  on  the  fubjed,  in  different  parts  of  Eu- 
rope, is  a  proof  of  what  the  human  mind  is  able  to 
accomplifh  in  fuch  inquiries,  when  it  has  once  re- 
ceived a  proper  direftion.  To  all  the  various  tenets 
of  thefe  writers,  I  would,  by  no  means,  be  under- 
ftood  to  fubfcribe ;  nor  do  I  confider  their  fyflem  as 
fo  perfect  in  every  different  part,  as  fome  of  its  more 
fanguine  admirers  have  reprefented  it  to  be.  A  few 
of  the  mofl  important  principles  of  political  eco- 
nomy, they  have  undoubtedly  eflablifhed  with  de- 
monftrative  evidence  ;  but  what  the  world  is  chiefly 
indebted  to  them  for,  is,  the  commencement  which 
they  have  given  to  a  new  branch  of  fcience,  and  the 
plan  of  invefligation  which  they  have  exhibited  to 
their  fucceffors.  A  (hort  account  of  what  I  conceive 
to  be  the  fcope  of  their  fpeculations,  will  juftify  thefe 
remarks,  and  will  comprehend  every  thing  which  I 
have  to  offer  at  prefent,  in  anfwer  to  the  queflion  by 
which  they  were  fuggefted.  Such  an  account  I  at- 
tempt with  the  greater  fatisfadion,  that  the  leading 
views  of  the  earlieft  and  moft  enlightened  patrons  of 
the  economical  fyflem  have,  in  my  opinion,  been 
not  more  mifreprefented  by  its  opponents,  than  mif- 
apprehended  by  fome  who  have  adopted  its  con- 
clufions*. 

In  the  firfl  place,  then,  I  think  it  of  importance  to 
remark,  that  the  object  of  the  economical  fyflem 
ought  by  no  means  to  be  confounded  (as  I  believe  it 
commonly  is  in  this  country)  with  that  of  the  Uto- 
pian plans  of  government,  which  have,  at  different 
times,  been  offered  to  the  world ;  and  which  have  fo 
*  See  Note  [N]. 

often 


252  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

often  excited  the  juft  ridicule  of  the  more  fober  and 
reafonable  inquirers.  Of  thefe  plans,  by  far  the 
greater  number  proceed  on  the  fuppofition,  that  the 
focial  order  is  entirely  the  effect  of  hum.an  art ;  and 
that  wherever  this  order  is  imperfeft,  the  evil  may  be 
traced  to  fome  want  of  forefight  on  the  part  of  the 
legiflator  ;  or  to  fome  inattention  of  the  magiftrate  to 
the  complicated  ftrudure  of  that  machine  of  which 
he  regulates  the  movements.  The  projedls  of  re- 
form, therefore,  which  fuch  plans  involve,  are,  in  ge- 
neral, well  entitled  to  all  the  ridicule  and  contempt 
they  have  m^et  with;  inafmuch  as  they  imply  an  arro- 
gant and  prefumptuous  belief  in  their  authors,  of  the 
fuperiority  of  their  own  political  fagacity,  to  the  ac- 
cumulated wifdom  of  former  ages.  The  cafe  is  very 
different  with  the  economical  fyftem ;  of  which  the 
leading  views  (fo  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge)  proceed 
on  the  two  following  fuppofitions :  Firfl,  that  the  fo- 
cial order  is,  in  the  mofl  elTential  refpecls,  the  refult 
of  the  wifdom  of  nature,  and  not  of  human  con- 
trivance ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  proper  bufinefs  of 
the  polidcian,  is  not  to  divide  his  attention  among  all 
the  different  parts  of  a  m.achine,  which  is  by  far  too 
complicated  for  his  comprehenfion ;  but  by  protect- 
ing the  rights  of  individuals,  and  by  allowing  to  each, 
as  complete  a  liberty  as  is  compatible  with  the  perfect 
fecurity  of  the  rights  of  his  fellow-citizens ;  to  re- 
move every  obflacle  which  the  prejudices  and  vices  of 
men  have  oppofed  to  the  eftablifhment  of  that  order 
which  fociety  has  a  tendency  to  affume.  Secondly  ; 
that,  in  proportion  to  the  progrefs  and  the  diftufion 
of  knowledge,  thofe  prejudices,  on  a  Ikilful  manage- 
ment of  which,  all  the  old  fyilems  of  policy  proceed- 
ed, 


Sea.  8.  ^F   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  255 

ed,  muft  gradually  difappear ;  and,  confequently,  that 
(whatever  may  be  his  prediledion  for  antient  ufages) 
the  inevitable  courfe  of  events  impofes  on  the  politi- 
cian the  neceffity  of  forming  his  meafures  on  more 
folid  and  permanent  principles,  than  thofe  by  which 
the  world  has  hitherto  been  governed.  Both  of  thefe 
fuppofitions  are  of  modern  origin.  The  former,  fo 
far  as  I  know,  was  firft  dated  and  illuflrated  by  the 
French  Economifts.  The  latter  has  been  obviou/ly 
fuggefled  by  that  rapid  improvement  which  has  ac- 
tually taken  place  in  every  country  of  Europe  where 
the  prefs  has  enjoyed  a  moderate  degree  of  liberty. 

It  may  be  farther  remarked,  with  refped:  to  the 
greater  part  of  the  plans  propofed  by  Utopian  pro- 
jectors, that  they  proceed  on  the  fuppofition  of  a 
miraculous  reformation  in  the  moral  charadler  of  a 
people,  to  be  effefted  by  fome  new  fyftem  of  educa- 
tion. Ail  fuch  plans  (as  Mr.  Hume  has  juflly  ob- 
ferved)  may  be  fafely  abandoned  as  imprafticable  and 
vifionary.  But  this  objection  does  not  apply  to  the 
economical  fyflem  ;  the  chief  expedient  of  which, 
for  promoting  moral  improvement,  is  not  that  educa- 
tion which  depends  on  the  attention  and  care  of  our 
inftructors  ;  but  an  education  which  neceffarily  refults 
from  the  political  order  of  fociety.  "  How  ineffec- 
**  tual"  (faid  the  Roman  poet)  "  are  the  wifeft:  laws, 
*'  if  they  be  not  fupported  by  good  morals  !"  How 
inefFedtual  (fay  the  Economifts)  are  all  our  efforts  to 
preferve  the  morals  of  a  people,  if  the  laws  which 
regulate  the  political  order,  doom  the  one  half  of 
mankind  to  indigence,  to  fraud,  to  fervility,  to  igno- 
rance, to  fuperftition  ;  and  the  other  half  to  be  the 
flaves  of  all  the  follies  and  vices  which  refult  from 

th  e 


f  54  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  IV. 

the  infolence  of  rank,  and  the  felfifhnefs  of  opulence  ? 
Suppofe  for  a  moment,  that  the  inordinate  accumula- 
tion of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  individuals,  which  we 
every  where  meet  with  in  modern  Europe,  were  gra- 
dually diminifhed  by  abolifhing  the  law  of  entails^ 
and  by  eftablilhing  a  perfect  freedom  of  commerce 
and  of  induflry ;  it  is  almofl  felf-evident,  that  this 
fmiple  alteration  in  the  order  of  fociety  ;  an  altera- 
tion which  has  been  often  demonftrated  to  be  the 
moft  effedual  and  the  mod  infallible  meafure  for  pro- 
moting the  wealth  and  population  of  a  country  j 
would  contribute,  more  than  all  the  labours  of  mo- 
ralifts,  to  fecure  the  virtue  and  the  happinefs  of  all 
the  claffes  of  mankind.  It  is  worthy  too  of  remark, 
that  fuch  a  plan  of  reformation  does  not  require,  for 
its  accomplifhment,  any  new  and  complicated  inftitu- 
tions  ;  and  therefore  does  not  proceed  upon  any  ex- 
aggerated conception  of  the  efficacy  of  human  policy. 
On  the  contrary,  it  requires  only  (like  moll  of  the 
other  expedients  propofed  by  this  fyflem)  the  gradual 
abolition  of  thofe  arbitrary  and  unjufl  arrangements, 
by  which  the  order  of  nature  is  diflurbed. 

Another  miftaken  idea  concerning  the  economical 
fyftem  is,  that  it  is  founded  entirely  upon  theory,  and 
unfupported  by  fads.  That  this  may  be  the  cafe 
with,  refped  to  fome  of  its  dodrines,  I  fhall  not  dif- 
pute  :  but,  in  general,  it  may  be  fafely  affirmed,  that 
they  reft  on  a  broader  bafis  of  fads,  than  any  other 
political  fpeculations  which  have  been  yet  offered  to 
the  world ;  for  they  are  founded,  not  on  a  few  exam- 
ples colleded  from  the  fmall  number  of  governments 
of  which  we  poffefs  an  accurate  knowledge  ;  but  on 
thofe  laws  of  human  nature,  and  thofe  maxims  of 

common 


Seft.S.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  25? 

common  fenfe,  which  are  daily  verified  In  the  Inter- 
courfe  of  private  life. 

Of  thofe  who  have  fpeculated  on  the  fubject  of 
legiflation,  by  far  the  greater  part  feem  to  have  con- 
fidered  It  as  a  fcience  /ui  generis  ;  the  firfl:  principles 
of  which  can  be  obtained  in  no  other  way,  than  by 
an  examination  of  the  conduct  of  mankind  in  their 
political  capacity.  The  Economlils,  on  the  con- 
trary, have  fearched  for  the  caufes  of  national  pro- 
fperity,  and  national  improvement,  In  thofe  arrange- 
ments, which  our  daily  obfervations  fhew  to  be  fa- 
vourable to  the  profperity  and  to  the  Improvement  of 
individuals.  The  former  refemble  thofe  philofophers 
of  antiquity,  who,  affirming  that  the  phenomena  of 
the  heavens  are  regulated  by  laws  peculiar  to  them- 
felves,  difcouraged  every  attempt  to  inveftigate  their 
phyfical  caufes,  which  was  founded  upon  fads  col- 
lected from  common  experience.  The  latter  have 
aimed  at  accomplifhing  a  reformation  in  politics, 
fimilar  to  what  Kepler  and  Newton  accompliflied  in 
aftronomy  ;  and,  by  fubjecling  to  that  common  fenfe, 
which  guides  mankind  in  their  private  concerns,  thofe 
quefllons,  of  which  none  were  fuppofed  to  be  compe- 
tent judges,  but  men  initiated  in  the  myfteries  of  go- 
vernment, have  given  a  beginning  to  a  fcience  which 
has  already  extended  very  widely  our  political  pro- 
fpeds  ;  and  which,  in  its  progrefs,  may  probably  af- 
ford an  illuflration,  not  lefs  ftriking  than  that  which 
phyfical  aftronomy  exhibits,  of  the  fimplicity  of  thofe 
laws  by  which  the  univerfe  Is  governed. 

When  a  political  writer,  In  order  to  expofe  the 
folly  of  thofe  commercial  regulations  which  aim  at 
the  encouragement  of  domeftic  iiiduilry  by  reftraints 

on 


25^  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

on  importation,  appeals  to  the  maxims  upon  which 
men  acl  in  private  life  ;  when  he  remarks,  that  the 
taylor  does  not  attempt  to  make  his  own  fhoes,  but 
buys  them  of  the  flioemaker  ;  that  the  fhoemaker 
does  not  attempt  to  make  his  own  clothes,  but  em- 
ploys a  taylor  ;  and  when  he  concludes,  that  what  is 
prudence  in  the  conduct  of  every  private  family,  can 
fcarcely  be  folly  in  that  of  a  great  kingdom  *  ;  he 
may  undoubtedly  be  faid,  in  one  fenfe,  to  indulge  in 
theory ;  as  he  calls  in  queftion  the  utility  of  inflitu- 
tions  which  appear,  from  the  fad,  to  be  not  incom- 
patible with  a  certain  degree  of  political  profperity. 
But,  in  another  fenfe,  and  in  a  much  more  philofo- 
phical  one,  he  may  be  faid  to  oppofe  to  the  falfe  the- 
ories of  flatefmen,  the  common  fenfe  of  mankind ; 
and  thofe  maxims  of  expediency,  of  which  every 
man  may  verify  the  truth  by  his  own  daily  ob- 
fervation. 

There  is  yet  another  miftake,  (of  (till  greater  con- 
fequence,  perhaps,  than  any  of  thofe  I  have  mention- 
ed,) which  has  mifled  moft  of  the  opponents,  and 
even  fome  of  the  friends,  of  the  economical  fyftem  ; 
an  idea  that  it  was  meant  to  exhibit  a  poHtical  order, 
which  is  really  attainable  in  the  prefent  flate  of  Eu- 
rope. So  different  from  this  were  the  views  of  its 
mofl  enlightened  advocates,  that  they  have  uniformly 
reded  their  only  hopes  of  its  gradual  eflablilhment  in 
the  world,  on  that  influence  in  the  conduct  of  hu- 
man affairs,  which  philofophy  may  be  expedted  gra- 
dually to  acquire,  in  confequence  of  the  progrefs  of 
reafon  and  civilifadon.     To  fuppofe  that  a  period  is 

*  See  Mr.  Smith's  profound  and  original  "  Inquiry  into  the 
"  Nature  and  Caufe»  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations." 

1 6  ever 


Sect.  8.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  257 

ever  to  arrive,  when  it  fhall  be  realifed  in  its  full  ex- 
tent, would  be  the  height  of  enthufiafm  and  abfur- 
dity ;  but  it  is  furely  neither  enthufiafm  nor  abfurdity 
to  affirm,  that  governments  are  more  or  lefs  perfect, 
in  proportion  to  the  greater  or  fmaller  number  of  in- 
dividuals to  whom  they  atFord  the  means  of  cul- 
tivating their  intellectual  and  moral  powers,  and 
whom  they  admit  to  live  together  on  a  liberal  footing 
of  equality  ;  —  or  even  to  expeft,  that,  in  proportion 
to  the  progrefs  of  reafon,  governments  will  adually 
approach  nearer  and  nearer  to  this  defcription. 

To  delineate  that  flate  of  political  fociety  to  which 
governments  may  be  cxpe6ted  to  approach  nearer  and 
nearer  as  the  triumphs  of  philofophy  extend,  was,  I 
apprehend,  the  leading  objed  of  the  earlieft  and  mod 
enlightened  patrons  of  the  economical  fyftem.  It  is 
a  flate  of  fociety,  which  they  by  no  means  intended 
to  recommend  to  particular  communities,  as  the  mod 
eligible  they  could  adopt  at  prefent ;  but  as  an  ideal 
order  of  things,  to  which  they  have  a  tendency  of 
themfelves  to  approach,  and  to  which  it  ought  to  be 
the  aim  of  the  legiflator  to  facilitate  their  progrefs. 
In  the  language  of  mathematicians,  it  forms  a  I'unii 
to  the  progreflive  improvement  of  the  political  order  ; 
and,  in  the  mean  time,  it  exhibits  a  ftandard  of  com- 
parifon,  by  which  the  excellence  of  particular  inditu- 
tions  may  be  edimated. 

According  to  the  view  which  has  now  been  given 
of  the  economical  fydem,  its  principles  appear  highly 
favourable  to  the  tranquillity  of  fociety  ;  inafmuch  as, 
by  infpiring  us  with  a  confidence  in  the  triumph 
which  truth  and  liberty  mud  infallibly  gain  in  the 
end  over  error  and  injudice,  it  has  a  tendency  to  dif- 

S  courage:: 


258  ELEMENTS   OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  IV. 

courage  every  plan  of  innovation  which  is  to  be  fup- 
ported  by  violence  and  bloodfhcd.  And,  accord- 
ingly, fuch  has  always  been  the  language  of  thofe 
who  were  befl  acquainted  with  the  views  of  its  au- 
thors. "  If  we  attack  opprefTors,  before  we  have 
"  taught  the  oppreffed,"  (fays  one  of  the  ableft  of  its 
prefent  fupporters  *,)  "we  fhall  rilk  the  lofs  of  liberty, 
*'  and  roufe  them  to  oppofe  the  progrefs  of  reafon. 
"  Hiftory  affords  proofs  of  this  truth.  How  often,  in 
"  fpite  of  the  efforts  of  the  friends  of  freedom,  has  the 
"  event  of  a  fmgle  battle  reduced  nations  to  the  flavery 
"  of  ages ! 

*'  And  what  is  the  kind  of  liberty  enjoyed  by  thofe 
"  nations,  which  have  recovered  it  by  force  of  arms, 
"  and  not  by  the  influence  of  philofophy  ?  Have  not 
"  mofl  of  them  confounded  the  forms  of  republican- 
"  ifm  with  the  enjoyment  of  right,  and  the  defpotifm 
"  of  numbers  with  liberty  ?  How  many  laws,  contrary 
**  to  the  rights  of  nature,  have  difhonoured  the  code 
*'  of  every  people  which  has  recovered  its  freedom, 
"  during  thofe  ages  in  which  reafon  was  flill  in  its 
"  infancy  !" 

*'  Why  not  profit  by  this  fatal  experience,  and 
"  wifely  wait  the  progrefs  of  knowledge,  in  order  to 
"  obtain  freedom  more  effedual,  more  fubflantial, 
"  and  more  peaceful  ?  Why  purfue  it  by  blood  and 
"  inevitable  confufion,  and  trufl  that  to  chance, 
"  which  time  muft  certainly,  and  without  bloodfhed, 
*'  beflow?  A  fortunate  ftruggle  may,  indeed,  relieve 
"  us  of  many  grievances  under  which  we  labour  at 
*'  prefent,  but  if  we  wifh  to  fecure  the  perfeftion,  and 
"  the  permanence  of  freedom,  we  muft  patiently  wait 

*   M.  CONDORCET. 

14'  "  the 


Sect.  8.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  259 

"  the  period  when  men,  emancipated  from  their  pre- 
*'  judices,  and  guided  by  philofophy,  fliall  be  rendered 
"  worthy  of  liberty,  by  comprehending  its  claims  *." 

Nor  is  it  the  employment  of  violent  and  fanguinary 
means  alone,  in  order  to  accomplifli  political  innova- 
tions, that  this  enlightened  and  humane  philofophy 
has  a  tendency  to  difcourage.  By  extending  our 
views  to  the  whole  plan  of  civil  fociety,  and  (hewing 
us  the  mutual  relations  and  dependencies  of  its  mofl 
diftant  parts,  it  cannot  fail  to  check  that  indifcrimi- 
nate  zeal  againfl  ellabliflied  inllitutions,  which  arifes 
from  partial  views  of  the  focial  fyflem  ;  as  well  as  to 
produce  a  certain  degree  of  fcepticifm  with  refpcct  to 
every  change,  the  fuccefs  of  which  is  not  infured  by 
the  prevailing  ideas  and  manners  of  the  age.  San- 
guine and  inconfiderate  projeds  of  reformation  are 
frequently  the  offspring  of  clear  and  argumentative 
and  fyflematical  underflandings  ;  but  rarely  of  com- 
prehenfive  minds.  For  checking  them,  indeed,  no- 
thing is  fo  feffeftual,  as  a  general  furvey  of  the  com- 
plicated ftrufture  of  fociety.  Even  although  fuch  a 
furvey  fhould  be  fuperficial,  provided  it  be  conducted 
on  an  extenfive  fcale,  it  is  more  ufeful,  at  leaft,  for 
this  purpofe,  than  the  moil  minute  and  fuccefsful  in- 
quiries, which  are  circumfcribed  within  a  narrow  circle. 
If  it   fiiould  teach  us  nothing    elfe,    it    will    at  leaft 

*  To  fome  of  my  readers  it  may  appear  trifling  to  remark,  that, 
in  availing  myfelf  of  an  occafional  coincidence  of  fentiment  with  a 
Contemporary  Author,  I  wouM  not  be  underftood  to  become  re- 
fponfible  for  the  confiftency  of  his  perfonal  conduct  with  his  phi- 
lofophical  principles,  nor  to  fubfcribe  to  any  one  of  his  opinions, 
but  thofe  to  which  I  have  exprefTed  my  afTent  by  -incorporating 
them  with  my  own  compofition.     [Note  to  Second  Edition.'] 

S  2  fatisfy 


26o  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

fatisfy  us  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of  predicting,  with 
confidence,  the  remote  efFe£ts  of  new  arrangements  ; 
and  that  the  perfedlion  of  poHtical  wifdom  confifls  not 
in  incumbering  the  machine  of  government  with  new 
contrivances  to  obviate  every  partial  inconvenience, 
but  in  removing  gradually,  and  imperceptibly,  the 
obftacles  which  diflurb  the  order  of  nature,  and  (as 
Mr.  Addifon  fomewhere  expreffes  it)  "in  grafting 
upon  her  inftitutions." 

When  the  economical  fyflem,  indeed,  is  firft 
prefented  to  the  mind,  and  when  we  compare  the 
perfection  which  it  exhibits,  with  the  actual  (late 
of  human  affairs,  it  is  by  no  means  unnatural,  that 
it  fhould  fuggeil  plans  of  reformation  too  violent 
and  fudden  to  be  practicable.  A  more  complete 
acquaintance,  however,  with  the  fubject,  will  effec- 
tually cure  thefe  firft  impreffions,  by  pointing  out 
to  us  the  mifchiefs  to  be  apprehended  from  an  inju- 
dicious combination  of  theoretical  perfection  with 
our  eftablifhed  laws,  prejudices,  and  manners.  As 
the  various  unnatural  modes  and  habits  of  living, 
to  which  the  bodily  conftitution  is  gradually  recon- 
ciled by  a  courfe  of  luxurious  indulgences,  have 
fuch  a  tendency  to  correct  each  other's  effeCts,  as 
to  render  a  partial  return  to  a  more  fimple  regi- 
men, a  dangerous,  and,  fometimes,  a  fatal  experi- 
ment ;  fo  it  is  poffible,  that  many  of  our  imperfeCl 
political  inftitutions  may  be  fo  accommodated  to  each 
other,  that  a  partial  execution  of  the  moft  plaufible 
and  equitable  plans  of  reformation,  might  tend, 
in  the  firft  inftance,  to  fruftrate  thofe  important 
purpofes  which  we  are  anxious  to  promote.     Is  it  not 

poflible. 


[tiii 


^^^msiSMA^^'^S 


.  [- 


■: 


V 


R^wVHolman.  W^    'iM^MMl    ^^    M'^^^'^ O  I.  H.  Silsby. 

Located  at  the  tennination  of  the  Norwich,  Worcester,  and  Western  Railroad  Corner  of 
Kingston,  Beach  and  Lincoln  Streets. 


i/o.  c/^U'^e^ 


To  UNITED  STATES  HOTEL DR 


^ 


z 


Sett.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  26 1 

poffible,  for  example,  that  the  influence  which 
is  founded  on  a  refped:  for  hereditary  rank,  may 
have  its  ufe  in  counteracting  that  ariftocracy  which 
arifes  from  inequahty  of  wealth  ;  and  which  fo  many 
laws  and  prejudices  confpire  to  fupport?  That  the 
former  fpecies  of  influence  is  rapidly  declining  of 
itfelf,  in  confequence  of  the  progrefs  which  com- 
merce and  philofophy  have  already  made,  is  fuf- 
ficiently  obvious ;  and,  I  think,  it  may  reafonably  be 
doubted,  whether  a  v>rell-wiflier  to  mankind  would  be 
difpofed  to  accelerate  its  deflrudion,  till  the  true  prin- 
ciples of  pohtical  economy  are  completely  undorftood 
and  acknowledged  by  the  world. 

Various  other  examples  might  be  produced,  to 
illuflirate  the  dangers  to  be  apprehended  from  the 
partial  influence  of  general  principles  in  politics ; 
or,  in  other  words,  from  an  exclufive  attention  to 
particular  circumftances  in  the  pohtical  order,  with- 
out comprehenfive  views  of  the  fubjeft.  It  is  only 
upon  a  limited  mind,  therefore,  that  fuch  fludies 
will  produce  a  pafllon  for  violent  innovations.  In 
more  comprehenfive  and  enlightened  underftandings, 
their  natural  effetSt  is  caudon  and  diflidence  with 
refped  to  the  iflTue  of  every  experiment,  of  which 
we  do  not  perceive  diftin£lly  all  the  remote  con- 
fequences.  Nor  is  this  caution  at  all.  inconfiftent 
with  a  firm  confidence  in  the  certainty  of  that 
triumph  which  truth  and  liberty  mufl  infallibly 
gain  in  the  end  over  error  and  injuftice.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  a  natural  and  obvious  confequence 
of  fuch  a  conviftion ;  inafmuch  as  the  fame  argu- 
ments on  which  this  conviction  is  founded,  prove 
to  us,    that  the  progrefs  of  mankind    towards   the 

S  3  perfection 


262  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOniY        Chap.  IV. 

perfeclion  of  the  focial  order,  muft  neceflarily,  in 
every  cafe,  be  gradual ;  and  that  it  muft  be  diverfified 
in  the  courfc  it  takes,  according  to  the  fituations  and 
characters  of  nations.  To  dired,  and,  as  far  as  pof- 
fible,  to  accelerate,  tiiis  progrefs,  ought  to  be  the 
great  aim  of  the  enlightened  ftatefman,  and,  indeed, 
of  every  man  who  wiflies  well  to  his  fpecies ;  but 
it  is  neceffary  for  him  always  to  remember,  that 
confiderable  alterations  in  the  eftabliflied  order,  are 
very  feldom  to  be  effeded  immediately  and  directly 
by  political  regulations ;  and  that  they  are,  in  all 
cafes,  mod  fuccefsful  and  moft  permanent,  when 
they  are  accompliihed  gradually  by  natural  caufes, 
freed  from  thofe  reftraints  which  had  formerly 
checked  their  operation.  In  the  governments,  indeed, 
of  modern  Europe,  it  is  much  more  neceflary  to 
abolifh  old  inftitutions,  than  to  introduce  new  ones  ; 
and  if  this  reformation  be  kept  fteadily  in  view,  and 
not  pulhed  farther  at  any  time  than  circumftances 
render  expedient,  or  the  ideas  of  the  times  recom- 
mend, the  eifential  principles  of  a  more  perfect  order 
of  things,  will  gradually  eftablilh  themfelves,  without 
any  convuifion. 

According  to  this  view  of  the  fubjeft,  the  fpecu- 
lation  concerning  the  perfect  order  of  fociety,  is 
to  be  regarded  merely  as  a  defcription  of  the  ulti- 
mate objects  at  which  the  ftatefman  ought  to  aim. 
The  tranquillity  of  his  adminiftration,  and  the  imme- 
diate fuccefs  of  his  meafures,  depend  on  his  good 
fenfe,  and  his  practical  fkill.  And  his  theoretical 
principles  only  enable  him  to  direct  his  meafures 
fteadily  and  wifely,  to  promote  the  improvement  and 
happinefs  of  mankind  j  and  prevent  him  from  being 

ever 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  263 

ever  led  aflray  from  thefe  important  objects,  by  more 
limited  views  of  temporary  expedience*. 

Before 

*  The  foregoing  obfervations  on  the  general  aim  of  the  Eco- 
nomical Syftem  refer  folely  (as  mull  appear  evident  to  thofe  who 
have  perufed  them  -with  attention)  to  the  do6trines  it  contains 
on  the  article  of  Political  Economy.  The  Theory  of  Governmenl 
which  it  inculcates,  is  of  the  moft  dangerous  tendency  ;  recom- 
mending, in  ftrong  and  unqualified  terms,  an  unmixed  defpotifm  ; 
and  reprobating  all  conftitutional  checks  on  the  fovereign  autho- 
rity. Many  Englifh  writers,  indeed,  with  an  almoft  incredible 
ignorance  of  the  works  which  they  have  prefumed  to  cenfure, 
have  fpoken  of  them,  as  if  they  encouraged  political  principles  of 
a  very  different  complexion  ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  the  difciples  of 
Quefnay  (without  a  fingle  exception)  carried  their  zeal  for  the  power 
of  the  monarch,  and  what  they  called  the  Unity  of  Legijlation,  to 
fo  extravagant  a  length,  as  to  treat  with  contempt,  thofe  mixed 
eflablifliments  which  allow  any  (hare  whatever  of  legiflative  influ- 
ence to  the  reprefentatives  of  the  people.  On  the  one  hand,  the 
evidence  of  this  fyftem  appeared  to  its  partifans  fo  complete  and 
irrefiftible,  that  they  flattered  themfelves,  monarchs  would  foon 
fee,  with  an  intuitive  conviction,  the  identity  of  their  own  interefls 
with  thofe  of  the  nations  they  are  called  to  govern  ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  contended,  that  it  is  only  under  the  ftrong  and 
fteady  government  of  a  race  of  hereditai-y  princes,  undiftrafted  by 
the  prejudices  and  local  interefts  which  warp  the  deliberations  of 
popular  afTemblies,  that  a  gradual  and  fyftematical  approach  can 
be  made  to  the  perfeftion  of  law  and  policy.  The  very  firft  of 
Quefnay^i.  maxims  ftates,  as  a  fundamental  principle,  that  the  fo- 
vereign authority,  unrefti-ained  by  any  conftitutional  checks  or 
balances,  fhould  be  lodged  in  the  hands  of  a  fingle  perfon  ;  and 
the  fame  doftrine  is  maintained  zealoufly  by  all  his  followers  ;  — by 
none  of  them  more  explicitly  than  by  Mercier  cle  la  Riviere,  whofe 
treatife  on  "  the  natural  and  eflential  order  of  political  focieties," 
might  have  been  expefted  to  attraft  fome  notice  in  this  country, 
from  the  praife  which  Mr.  Smith  has  beftowed  on  the  perfpicuity 
of  his  ftyle,  and  the  diftin£lnefs  of  his  arrangement. 

If  fome  individuals  who  formerly  profefTed  an  enthufiaftic  at- 
tachment to  the  doftrines  of  this  fed,  have^  at  a  later  period  of 

S  4  their 


264  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV- 

Before  clofing  this  difquifition,  it  may  be  proper 
for  me  to  attempt  to  obviate  a  little  more  fully  than 
I  have  done,  an  objedion  which  has  been  frequently 
drawn  from  the  paft  experience  of  mankind,  againfl 
that  fuppofition  of  their  progreflive  improvement 
on  which  all  the  foregoing  reafonings  proceed.  How 
mournful  are  the  viciflitudes  which  hiftory  exhibits  to 
us,  in  the  courfe  of  human  affairs ;  and  how  little 
foundation  do  they  afford  to  our  fanguine  profpeds 
concerning  futurity  !  If,  in  thofe  parts  of  the  earth 
which  were  formerly  inhabited  by  barbarians,  we  now 
fee  the  moft  fplendid  exertions  of  genius,  and  the 
happieft  forms  of  civil  policy,  we  behold  others 
which,  in  ancient  times,  were  the  feats  of  fcience, 
of  civilifation,  and  of  liberty,  at  prefent  immerfed 
in  fuperftidon,  and  laid  wafte  by  defpotifm.  After 
a  fhort  period  of  civil,  of  military,  and  of  literary 
glory,  the  profped  has  changed  at  once  :  the  ca- 
reer of  degeneracy  has  begun,  and  has  proceeded 
till  it  could  advance  no  farther  ;  or  fome  unfore- 
feen  calamity  has  occurred,  which  has  obliterated, 
for  a  dme,  all  memory  of  former  improvements, 
and  has  condemned  mankind  to  re-trace,  ftep 
by  ftep,  the  fame  path  by  which  their  forefathers 
had  rifen  to  greatnefs.  In  a  word  ;  on  fuch  a  re- 
trofpedive  view    of   human  affairs,    man  appears  to 


their  lives,  diftinguifhed  themfelves  by  an  enthufiafm  no  lefs  ar- 
dent in  oppofition  to  the  principles  advanced  in  their  writings,  the 
fail  only  affords  an  additional  illuftration  of  a  truth  verified  by 
daily  experience,  that  the  moft  folid  foundation  for  political  con- 
fiftency  is  a  fpirit  of  moderation,  and  that  the  moft  natural  andeafy 
of  all  tranfitions  is  from  the  violence  and  intolerance  of  one  ex- 
treme to  thofe  of  another,      [^Note  to  Second  EclU'ion.^ 

be 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  265 

be  the  mere  fport  of  fortune  and  of  accident ;  or 
rather,  he  appears  to  be  doomed,  by  the  condition 
of  his  nature,  to  run  alternately  the  career  of  im- 
provement and  of  degeneracy ;  and  to  realife  the 
beautiful,  but  melancholy  fable  of  Sifyphus,  by  an 
eternal  renovation  of  hope  and  of  difappointment. 

In  oppofition   to   thefe  difcouraging  views  of  the 
flate  and  profpefts   of  man  ;    it    may   be   remarked 
in  general,  that  in  the  courfe  of  thefe  latter  ages,  a 
variety    of   events    have   happened  in  the  hiftory  of 
the  world,  which  render  the  condition  of  the  human 
race  eifentially  different  from  what  it  ever  was  among 
the  nations  of  antiquity  ;  and  which,  of  confequence, 
render    all    our    reafonings    concerning  their   future 
fortunes,   in  fo  far  as  they  are   founded   merely   on 
their  pajfl  experience,    unphilofophical  and  inconclu- 
five.     The  alterations  which  have  taken  place  in  the 
art  of  war,  in  confequence  of  the  invention  of  fire- 
arms, and  of  the  modern  fcience  of  fortification,  have 
given  to  civilifed  nations  a  fecurity  againft  the  irrup- 
tions of  barbarians,  which  they  never  before  poffeifed. 
The  more  extended,    and    the  more  conftant  inter- 
courfe,  which  the  improvements  in  commerce  and  in 
the  art  of  navigation  have  opened,  among  the  diftant 
quarters  of  the  globe,  cannot  fail  to  operate  in  un- 
dermining local  and  national  prejudices,    and  in  im- 
parting to  the  whole  fpecies  the  intellectual  acquifi- 
tions  of  each  particular  community.      The  accumu- 
lated  experience    of   ages    has    already    taught    the 
rulers  of  manldnd,    that  the   mofl   fruitful  and  the 
mofl  permanent  fources  of  revenue,  are  to  be  derived, 
not   from   conquered   and  tributary    provinces,    but 

from 


266  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV. 

from  the  internal  profperity  and  wealth  of  their  own 
fubjefts :  —  and  the  fame  experience  now  begins 
to  teach  nations,  that  the  increafe  of  their  own 
wealth,  fo  far  from  depending  on  the  poverty  and 
depreffion  of  their  neighbours,  is  intimately  con- 
nefted  with  their  induflry  and  opulence  ;  and  confe- 
quently,  that  thofe  commercial  jealoufies,  which  have 
hitherto  been  fo  fertile  a  fource  of  animofity  among 
different  dates,  are  founded  entirely  on  ignorance 
and  prejudice.  Among  all  the  circumllances,  how- 
ever, which  diftinguifh  the  prefent  ftate  of  mankind 
from  that  of  ancient  nations,  the  invention  of  print- 
ing is  by  far  the  mofl  important ;  and,  indeed,  this 
fingle  event,  independently  of  every  other,  is  fuffi- 
cient  to  change  the  whole  courfe  of  human  affairs. 

The  influence  which  printing  is  likely  to  have  on 
the  future  hifhory  of  the  world,  has  not,  I  think, 
been  hitherto  examined,  by  philofophers,  with  the 
attention  which  the  importance  of  the  fubjeft  de- 
ferves.  One  reafon  for  this  may,  probably,  have 
been,  that,  as  the  invention  has  never  been  made  but 
once,  it  has  been  confidered  rather  as  the  effect  of  a 
fortunate  accident,  than  as  the  refult  of  thofe  general 
caufes  on  which  the  progrefs  of  fociety  feems  to  de- 
pend. But  it  may  be  reafonably  queflioned,  how  far 
this  idea  be  jufl.  For,  although  it  (hould  be  allow- 
ed, that  the  invention  of  printing  was  accidental, 
with  refped  to  the  individual  who  made  it,  it  may, 
with  truth,  be  confidered  as  the  natural  refult  of  a 
ftate  of  the  world,  when  a  number  of  great  and  con- 
tiguous nations  are  all  engaged  in  the  ftudy  of  lite- 
rature, in  the  purfuit  of  fcience,  and  in  the  pra(5i:ice 

of 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^^^ 

of  the  arts  :  infomuch,  that  I  do  not  think  it  extra- 
vagant to  affirm,  that,  if  this  invention  had  not  been 
made  by  the  particular  perfon  to  whom  it  is  afcribed, 
the  fame  art,  or  fome  analogous  art,  anfwering  a 
fimilar  purpofe,  would  have  infallibly  been  invented 
by  fome  other  perfon,  and  at  no  very  diftant  period. 
The  art  of  printing,  therefore,  is  intitled  to  be  con- 
fidered  as  a  ftep  in  the  natural  hiftory  of  man,  no 
lefs  than  the  art  of  writing  ;  and  they  who  are  fcep- 
tical  about  the  future  progrefs  of  the  race,  merely  in 
confequence  of  its  paft  hiflory,  reafon  as  unphilofo- 
phically,  as  the  member  of  a  favage  tribe,  who, 
deriving  his  own  acquaintance  with  former  times 
from  oral  tradition  only,  fliould  affeft  to  call  in  quef- 
tion  the  efficacy  of  written  records,  in  accelerating 
the  progrefs  of  knowledge  and  of  civilifation. 

What  will  be  the  particular  effects  of  this  inven- 
tion, (which  has  been,  hitherto,  much  checked  in 
its  operation,  by  the  reflraints  on  the  liberty  of  the 
prefs  in  the  greater  part  of  Europe,)  it  is  beyond 
the  reach  of  human  fagacity  to  conjedure ;  but,  in 
general,  we  may  venture  to  predict  with  confidence, 
that,  in  every  country,  it  will  gradually  operate  to 
widen  the  circle  of  fcience  and  civilifation ;  to  dif- 
tribute  more  equally,  among  all  the  members  of  the 
community,  the  advantages  of  the  political  union ; 
and  to  enlarge  the  bafis  of  equitable  governments, 
by  increafmg  the  number  of  thofe  who  underftand 
their  value,  and  are  interefled  to  defend  them.  The 
fcience  of  legifladon,  too,  with  all  the  other  branches 
of  knowledge  which  are  connected  with  human 
improvement,  may  be  expected  to  advance  with  ra- 
pidity J 


268  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  IV. 

pidity ;  and,  in  proportion  as  the  opinions  and  infli- 
tutions  of  men  approach  to  truth  and  to  juftice,  they 
will  be  fecured  againfl  thofe  revolutions  to  which  hu- 
man affairs  have  always  been  hitherto  fubjeft.  Opinio- 
num  enim  comment  a  dclet  dies,  natum  judicia  conjirmat. 

The  revolutions  incident  to  the  democratical  ftates 
of  antiquity  furnifh  no   folid  objeftion  to  the  fore- 
going obfervations  ;  for  none  of  thefe  ftates   enjoyed 
the  advantages  which  modern  times  derive  from  the 
dift'ufion,  and  from  the  rapid  circulation  of  knowledge. 
In  thefe  ftates,  moft  of  the  revolutions   which  hap- 
pened, arofe  from  the  ftruggles  of  demagogues,  who 
employed   the   paffions  of  the  multitude,    in   fubfer- 
viency  to  their  own  intereft  and  ambition ;   and  to 
all  of  them,    the  ingenious   and   ftriking  remark  of 
Hobbes  will  be  found  applicable  ;  that  "  Democracy 
"  is  nothing  but  an  ariftocracy  of  orators,  interrupted 
"  fometimes    by    the    temporary    monarchy    of    a 
"  fmgle  orator."     While  this  continued   to  be   the 
cafe,   democratical   conftitutions   were,    undoubtedly, 
the  moft  unfavourable  of  any  to  the  tranquillity  of 
mankind  ;  and  the  only  way  to  prefer ve  the  order  of 
fociety  was,  by  fldlfully  balancing  againft  each  other; 
the    prejudices,    and    the    feparate    interefts,    of   dif- 
ferent orders  of  citizens.     That  fuch  balances,  how- 
ever, will  every  day  become  lefs  neceffary  for  check- 
ing the  turbulence  of  the  democratical  fpirit  in  free 
governments,     appears     probable     from     this ;     that 
among  the  various  advantages  to  be  expedled  from 
the   liberty  of  the   prefs,    one    of   the    greateft   is, 
the  effeft  which  it   muft  neceffarily   have  in  dimi- 
nifhing   the   influence   of  popular   eloquence;    both 

by 


Sea.  8.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  269 

by  curing  men  of  thofe  prejudices  upon  which 
it  operates,  and  by  fubjcfting  it  to  the  irrefiftible 
control  of  enlightened  opinions.  In  the  republican 
ftates  of  antiquity,  the  eloquence  of  demagogues 
was  indeed  a  dangerous  engine  of  faftion,  while 
it  afpired  to  govern  nations  by  its  unlimited  fway  in 
direfting  popular  councils.  But,  now,  when  the 
effufions  of  the  orator  are,  by  means  of  the  prefs,  fub- 
jefted  to  the  immediate  tribunal  of  an  inquifitive  age, 
the  eloquence  of  legillative  alTemblies  is  forced  to 
borrow  its  tone  from  the  fpirit  of  the  times  ;  and  if 
it  retain  its  afcendant  in  human  affairs,  it  can  only  be, 
by  lending  its  aid  to  the  prevailing  caufe,  and  to  the 
permanent  interefts  of  truth  and  of  freedom. 

Of  the  progrefs  which  may  yet  be  made  in  the 
different  branches  of  moral  and  political  philofophy, 
we  may  form  fome  idea,  from  what  has  already 
happened  in  phyfics,  fince  the  time  that  Lord  Bacon 
united,  in  one  ufeful  diredion,  the  labours  of  thofe 
who  cultivate  that  fcience.  At  the  period  when 
he  wrote,  phyfics  was  certainly  in  a  more  hopelefs 
ftate,  than  that  of  moral  and  political  philofophy 
in  the  prefent  age.  A  perpetual  fucceffion  of  chi- 
merical theories  had,  till  then,  amufed  the  world  ; 
and  the  prevailing  opinion  was,  that  the  cafe  would 
continue  to  be  the  fame  for  ever.  Why  then  Ihould 
we  defpair  of  the  competency  of  the  human  facul- 
ties to  eftablifh  folid  and  permanent  fyflems,  upon 
other  fubjefts,  which  are  of  ftill  more  ferious  im- 
portance ?  Phyfics,  it  is  true,  is  free  from  many  dif- 
ficulties which  obflruft  our  progrefs  in  moral  and 
political  inquiries  ;  but,  perhaps,  this  advantage  may 
be  more  than  counterbalanced,  by  the  tendency  they 

have 


270  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

have  to  engage  a  more  univerfal,  and  a  more  earned 
attention,  in  conlequence  of  their  coming  home  more 
immediately  to  our  "  bufmefs  and  our  bofoms." 
When  thefe  fciences  too  begin  to  be  profecuted  on  a 
regular  and  fyftematical  plan,  their  improvement  will 
go  on  with  an  accelerated  velocity  ;  not  only  as  the 
number  of  fpeculative  ininds  will  be  every  day  in- 
creafed  by  the  diffufion  of  knowledge,  but  as  an  ac- 
quaintance with  the  juil  rules  of  inquiry,  will  more 
and  more  place  important  difcoveries  within  the  reach 
of  ordinary  underftandings.  "  Such  rules,"  (fays 
Lord  Bacon,)  "  do,  in  fome  fort,  equal  men*s  wits, 
*'  and  leave  no  great  advantage  or  pre-eminence  to 
"  the  perfect  and  excellent  motions  of  the  fpirit.  To 
"  draw  a  ftraight  line,  or  to  defcribe  a  circle,  by  aim 
*«  of  hand  only,  there  muft  be  a  great  difference  be- 
"  tween  an  unfteady  and  an  unpraftifed  hand,  and  a 
"  fleady  and  pradifed  ;  but,  to  do  it  by  rule  or  com- 
"  pafs,  it  is  much  alike." 

Nor  muft  we  omit  to  mention  the  value  which  the 
art  of  printing  communicates  to  the  moft  limited  exer- 
tions of  literary  induftry,  by  treafuring  them  up  as 
materials  for  the  future  examination  of  more  en- 
lightened inquirers,  hi  this  refpeft  the  prefs  beftows 
upon  the  fciences,  an  advantage  fomewhat  analogous 
to  that  which  the  mechanical  arts  derive  from  the  di- 
vifion  of  labour.  As  in  thefe  arts,  the  exertions  of 
an  uninformed  multitude,  are  united  by  the  compre- 
henfive  fkill  of  the  artift,  in  the  accomplifhment  of 
effeds  aftonifliing  by  their  magnitude,  and  by  the 
complicared  ingenuity  they  difplay  ;  fo,  in  the  fciences, 
the  obfervations  and  conjedures  of  obfcure  individuals 

on 


Seta.?.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  271 

on  thofe  fubjefts  which  are  level  to  their  capacities, 
and  which  fall  under  their  own  immediate  notice,  ac- 
cumulate for  a  courfe  of  years  ;  till  at  laft,  fome  phi- 
lofopher  arifes,  who  combines  thefe  fcattered  materials, 
and  exhibits,  in  his  fyflem,  not  merely  the  force  of  a 
fingle  mind,  but  the  intellectual  power  of  the  age  in 
which  he  lives. 

It  is  upon  thefe  lafl  confiderations,  much  more  than 
on  the  efforts  of  original  genius,  that  I  would  reft  my 
hopes  of  the  progrefs  of  the  race.  What  genius  alone 
could  accomplilh  in  fcience,  the  world  has  already 
feen :  and  I  am  ready  to  fubfcribe  to  the  opinion  of 
thofe  who  think,  that  the  fplendor  of  its  paft  exertions 
is  not  likely  to  be  obfcured  by  the  fame  of  future  phi- 
lofophers.  But  the  experiment  yet  remains  to  be 
tried,  what  lights  may  be  thrown  on  the  moft  import- 
ant of  all  fubjedls,  by  the  free  difcuffions  of  inquifi- 
tive  nations,  unfettered  by  prejudice,  and  ftimulated 
in  their  inquiries  by  every  motive  that  can  awaken 
whatever  is  either  generous  or  felfiih  in  human  nature. 
How  trifling  are  the  effedts  which  the  bodily  ftrength 
of  an  individual  is  able  to  produce,  (however  great 
may  be  his  natural  endowments,)  when  compared 
with  thofe  which  have  been  accompliftied  by  the  con. 
fpiring  force  of  an  ordinary  multitude  ?  It  was  not 
the  fmgle  arm  of  a  Thefeus,  or  a  Hercules,  but  the 
hands  of  fuch  men  as  ourfelves,  that,  in  antient 
Egypt,  raifed  thofe  monuments  of  architefture,  which 
remain  from  age  to  age,  to  atteft  the  wonders  of  com- 
bined and  of  perfevering  induftry ;  and,  while  they 
humble  the  importance  of  the  individual,  to  exalt  the 
dignity,  and  to  animate  the  labours,  of  the  fpecies. 

Thefe 


272  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  IV. 

Thefe  views  with  refpect  to  the  probable  improve- 
ment of  the  world,  are  fo  conducive  to  the  comfort 
of  thofe  who  entertain  them,  that  even,  although  they 
were  founded  in  delufion,  a  wife  man  would  be  difpofed 
to  chcrifh  them.  What  fhould  have  induced  fome  re- 
fpedable  writers  to  controvert  them,  with  fo  great  an 
afperity  of  expreffion,  it  is  not  eafy  to  conjecture  ;  for 
whatever  may  be  thought  of  their  truth,  their  prac- 
tical tendency  is  furely  favourable  to  human  happinefs  ; 
nor  can  that  temper  of  mind,  which  difpofes  a  man  to 
give  them  a  welcome  reception,  be  candidly  fufpecled 
of  defigns  hoflile  to  the  interefls  of  humanity.  One 
thing  is  certain,  that  the  greateft  of  all  obftacles  to  the 
improvement  of  the  world,  is  that  prevailing  belief  of 
its  improbability,  which  damps  the  exertions  of  fo 
many  individuals  ;  and  that  in  proportion  as  the  con. 
trary  opinion  becomes  general,  it  realifes  the  event 
which  it  leads  us  to  anticipate.  Surely,  if  any  thing 
can  have  a  tendency  to  call  forth  in  the  public  fervice 
the  exertions  of  individuals,  it  muft  be  an  idea  of  the 
magnitude  of  that  work  in  which  they  are  confpiring, 
and  a  belief  of  the  permanence  of  thofe  benefits,  which 
they  confer  on  mankind  by  every  attempt  to  inform 
and  to  enlighten  them.  As  in  antient  Rome,  there- 
fore, it  was  regarded  as  the  mark  of  a  good  citizen, 
never  to  defpair  of  the  fortunes  of  the  republic  ;  —  fo 
the  good  citizen  of  the  world,  whatever  may  be  the 
polidcal  afpect  of  his  own  times,  will  never  defpair  of 
the  fortunes  of  the  human  race  ;  but  will  ad  upon  the 
conviclion,  that  prejudice,  llavery,  and  corruption,  muft 
gradually  give  way  to  truth,  liberty,  and  virtue ;  and 
that,  in  the  moral  world,  as  well  as  in  the  material, 

the 


S€(ft.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  273 

the  farther  our  obfervations  extend,  and  the  longer 
they  are  continued,  the  more  we  fhall  perceive  of 
order  and  of  benevolent  defign  in  the  univerfe. 

Nor  is  this  change  in  the  condition  of  Man,  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  progrefs  of  reafon,  by  any  means  con- 
trary to  the  general  analogy  of  his  natural  hiflory. 
In  the  infancy  of  the  individual,  his  exiftence  is  pre- 
ferved  by  inflinfts,  which  difappear  afterwards,  when, 
they  are  no  longer  neceflary.  In  the  favage  flate  of 
our  fpecies,  there  are  niftinds  which  feem  to  form  a 
part  of  the  human  conftitution  j  and  of  which  no 
traces  remain  in  thofe  periods  of  fociety  in  which  their 
ufe  is  fuperfeded  by  a  more  enlarged  experience.  Why 
then  fhould  we  deny  the  probability  of  fomething 
fimilar  to  this,  in  the  hiflory  of  mankind  confidered 
in  their  political  capacity  ?  I  have  already  had  occafion 
to  obferve,  that  the  governments  which  the  world  has 
hitherto  feen,  have  feldom  or  never  taken  their  rife  from 
deep-laid  fchemes  of  human  policy.  In  every  ftate  of 
fociety  which  has  yet  exifted,  the  multitude  has,  in 
general,  aded  from  the  immediate  impulfe  of  paflion, 
or  from  the  preffure  of  their  wants  and  neceffities ; 
and,  therefore,  what  we  commonly  call  the  political 
order,  is,  at  leaft  in  a  great  meafure,  the  refult  of 
the  pafTions  and  wants  of  man,  combined  with  the 
circumflances  of  his  fituation ;  or,  in  other  words,  it 
is  chiefly  the  refult  of  the  wifdom  of  nature.  So 
beautifully,  indeed,  do  thefe  paflions  and  circumflances 
adl  in  fubferviency  to  her  defigns,  and  fo  invariably 
have  they  been  found,  in  the  hiftory  of  pafl  ages,  to 
condud:  him  in  time  to  certain  beneficial  arrangements, 
that  we  can  hardly  bring  ourfelves  to  believe,  that  the 

T  end 


274  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  IV, 

end  was  not  forefeen  by  thofe  who  were  engaged  in 
the  purfuit.  Even  in  thofe  rude  periods  of  fociety, 
when,  like  the  lower  animals,  he  follows  blindly  his 
inftindive  principles  of  adion,  he  is  led  by  an  invifible 
hand,  and  contributes  his  Ihare  to  the  execution  of  a 
plan,  of  the  nature  and  advantages  of  which  he  has 
no  conception.  The  operations  of  the  bee,  when  it 
begins,  for  the  firft  time,  to  form  its  cell,  conveys  to 
us  a  ftriking  image  of  the  efforts  of  unenlightened 
Man,  in  conducting  the  operations  of  an  infant  govern- 
ment. 

A  great  variety  of  prejudices  might  be  mentioned, 
which  are  found  to  prevail  univerfally  among  our  fpe- 
cies  in  certain  periods  of  fociety,  and  which  feem  to 
be  eifentially  neceflary  for  maintaining  its  order,  in 
ages  when  men  are  unable  to  comprehend  the  pur- 
pofes  for  which  governments  are  inftituted.  As  fociety 
advances,  thefe  prejudices  gradually  lofe  their  influ- 
ence on  the  higher  clafles,  and  would  probably  foon 
difappear  altogether,  if  it  were  not  found  expedient  to 
prolong  their  exiftence,  as  a  fource  of  authority  over 
the  multitude.  In  an  age,  however,  of  univerfal  and 
of  unreftrained  difcuffion,  it  is  impoffible  that  they 
can  long  maintain  their  empire ;  nor  ought  we  to  re- 
gret their  decline,  if  the  important  ends  to  which  they 
have  been  fubfervient  in  the  pad  experience  of  man- 
kind, are  found  to  be  accomplifhed  by  the  growing 
light  of  philofophy.  On  this  fuppofition,  a  hiftory  of 
human  prejudices,  as  far  as  they  have  fupplied  the 
place  of  more  enlarged  political  views,  may,  at  fome 
future  period,  furnifh  to  the  philofopher  a  fubjed  of 
fpeculation,  no  lefs  pleafmg  and  inftrudive,  than  that 
1 4  beneficent 


S'^i.  8.  <)^    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  275 

beneficent  wifdom  of  nature,  which  guides  the  opera- 
tions of  the  lower  animals  ;  and  w^hich,  even  in  our 
own  fpecies,  takes  upon  itfelf  the  care  of  the  in- 
dividual in  the  infancy  of  human  reafon. 

I  have  only  to  obferve  farther,  that,  in  proportion 
as  thefe  profpefts,  with  refpe£l  to  the  progrefs  of  rea- 
fon, the  diffufion  of  knowledge,  and  the  confequent 
improvement  of  mankind,  fhall  be  realifed  ;  the  poli- 
tical hiftory  of  the  world  will  be  regulated  by  fteady 
and  uniform  caufts,  and  the  philofopher  will  be  en- 
abled to  form,  probable  conjectures  with  refped:  to  the 
future  courfe  of  human  affairs. 

It  is  juftly  remarked  by  Mr.  Hume,  that  "  what 
"  depends  on  a  few  perfons  is,  in  a  great  meafure,  to 
"  be  afcribed  to  chance,  or  fecret  and  unknown 
"  caufes  :  v/hat  arifes  from  a  great  number,  may  often 
*'  be  accounted  for  by  determinate  and  known  caufes." 
**  To  judge  by  this  rule,"  (he  continues,)  "  the  do- 
*'  meftic  and  the  gradual  revolutions  of  a  ftate  mufl 
"  be  a  more  proper  objeQ;  of  reafoning  and  obferva- 
"  tion,  than  the  foreign  and  the  violent,  which  are 
*'  commonly  produced  by  fmgle  perfons,  and  are  more 
*'  influenced  by  whim,  folly,  or  caprice,  than  by 
"  general  paffions  and  interefts.  The  depreffion  of 
"  the  Lords,  and  rife  of  the  Commons,  in  England, 
*'  after  the  ftatutes  of  alienation  and  the  increafe  of 
"  trade  and  induftry,  are  more  eafily  accounted  for 
*'  by  general  principles,  than  the  depreffion  of  the 
"  Spanifh,  and  rife  of  the  French  monarchy,  after  the 
"  death  of  Charles  the  Fifth.  Had  Harry  the  Fourth, 
**  Cardinal  Richlieu,  and  Louis  the  Fourteenth,  been 
"  Spaniards ;  and  Philip  the  Second,  Third,  and 
*'  Fourth,  and  Charles  the  Second,  been  Frenchmen  ; 
T  2  "  the 


276  ELEMENTS   OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  IV. 

'*  the  hiftory  of  thefe  nations  had  been  entirely  re- 
"  verfed." 

From  thefe  principles,  it  would  feem  to  be  a  necef- 
fary  confequence,  that,  in  proportion  as  the  circum- 
ftances  fhall  operate  which  I  have  been  endeavouring 
to  illuftrate,  the  whole  fyflem  of  human  affairs,  in- 
cluding both  the  domeftic  order  of  fociety  in  parti- 
cular dates,  and  the  relations  which  exift  among  differ- 
ent communities,  in  confequence  of  war  and  nego- 
tiation, will  be  fubjefted  to  the  influence  of  caufes 
which  are  "  known  and  determinate."  Thofe  domef- 
tic affairs,  which,  according  to  Mr.  Hume,  are  already 
proper  fubjeds  of  reafoning  and  obfervation,  in  con- 
fequence of  their  dependence  on  general  interefts  and 
paffions,  will  become  fo,  more  and  more,  daily,  as 
prejudices  fhall  decline,  and  knowledge  fhall  be  dif- 
fufed  among  the  lower  orders  ;  while  the  relations 
among  different  Hates,  which  have  depended  hitherto, 
in  a  great  meafure,  on  the  **  whim,  folly,  and  ca- 
**  price,"  of  fmgle  perfons,  will  be  gradually  more  and 
more  regulated  by  the  general  interefts  of  the  in- 
dividuals who  compofe  them,  and  by  the  popular  opi- 
nions of  more  enlightened  times.  Already,  during 
the  very  fliort  interval  which  has  elapfed  fmce  the 
publication  of  Mr.  Hume's  writings,  an  aflonifhing 
change  has  taken  place  in  Europe.  The  mylleries  of 
courts  have  been  laid  open ;  the  influence  of  fecret 
negotiation  on  the  relative  fituation  of  ftates  has  de- 
clined J  and  the  ftudies  of  thofe  men  whofe  public 
fpirit  or  ambition  devotes  them  to  the  fervice  of  their 
country,  have  been  diverted  from  the  intrigues  of  ca- 
binets, and  the  details  of  the  diplomatic  code,  to  the 
liberal  and  manly  purfuits  of  political  philofophy. 


Chap.  V.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  277 

CHAPTER    FIFTH, 
Of  the  Aflbciation  of  Ideas. 

THE  fubje£t  on  which  I  am  now  to  enter,  natu- 
rally divides  itfelf  into  two  Parts.  The  Firft, 
relates  to  the  influence  of  AlTociation,  in  regulating 
the  fucceflion  of  our  thoughts;  the  Second,  to  its 
influence  on  the  intelle6:ual  powers,  and  on  the  mo- 
ral charader,  by  the  more  intimate  and  indiflToluble 
tombinations  which  it  leads  us  to  form  in  infancy 
and  in  early  youth.  The  two  inquiries,  indeed,  run 
into  each  other  ;  but  it  will  contribute  much  to  the 
order  of  our  fpeculations,  to  keep  the  foregoing^ 
arrangement  in  view. 

PART    FIRST. 

Of  the  Influence    of   Afl^ociation    in    regulating  the 
Succeflionof  our  Thoughts. 

SECTION    i 

General  Obfervailom  on    this  Part   of  our  Conjiitulion,  and  on 
the  Language  of  Philofophers  'with  refped  to  it. 

THAT  one  thought  is  often  fuggefl:ed  to  the  mind 
by  another  ;  and  that  the  fight  of  an  external 
objedt  often  recals  former  occurrences,  and  revives 
former  feelings,  are  fafts  which  are  perfedly  familiar, 

T  3  even 


2/8  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

even  to  thofe  who  are  the  leafl  difpofed  to  fpeculate 
concerning  the  principles  of  their  nature.  In  palling 
along  a  road  which  we  have  formerly  travelled  in  the 
company  of  a  friend,  the  particulars  of  the  conver- 
fation  in  which  we  were  then  engaged,  are  frequently 
fuggefled  to  us  by  the  objects  we  meet  with.  In  fuch 
a  fcene,  we  recollect  that  a  particular  fubjecl  was 
ftarted  ;  and,  in  pafTmg  the  different  houfes,  and  plant- 
ations, and  rivers,  the  arguments  we  were  difcuffing 
when  we  laft  faw  them,  recur  fpontaneoufly  to  the 
memory.  The  connexion  which  is  formed  in  the 
mind  between  the  words  of  a  language  and  the  ideas 
they  denote  ;  the  connexion  which  is  formed  between 
the  different  words  of  a  difcourfe  we  have  committed 
to  memory  ;  the  connexion  between  the  different  notes 
of  a  piece  of  mufic  in  the  mind  of  the  mufician,  are 
all  obvious  inflances  of  the  fame  general  law  of  our 
nature. 

The  influence  of  perceptible  objefts  in  reviving 
former  thoughts  and  former  feelings,  is  more  parti- 
cularly remarkable.  After  time  has,  in  fome  degree, 
reconciled  us  to  the  death  of  a  friend,  how  wonder- 
fully are  we  affefted  the  firft  time  we  enter  the  houfe 
where  he  lived  !  Every  thing  we  fee  ;  the  apartment 
where  he  fludied  ;  the  chair  upon  which  he  fat,  recal 
to  us  the  happinefs  we  have  enjoyed  together  ;  and  we 
fhould  feel  it  a  fort  of  violation  of  that  refpeO;  we  owe 
to  his  memory,  to  engage  in  any  light  or  indifferent 
difcourfe  when  fuch  objects  are  before  us.  In  the  cafe, 
too,  of  thofe  remarkable  fcenes  which  interefl  the  cu- 
riofity,  from  the  memorable  perfons  or  tranfaftions 
which  we  have  been  accuflomed  to  conned  with  them  . 

in 


Part  I.  §  I.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  270 

in  the  courfe  of  our  ftudies,  the  fancy  is  more  awak- 
ened by  the  adlual  perception  of  the  fcene  itfelf,  than 
by  the  mere  conception  or  imagination  of  it.  Hence 
the  pleafure  we  enjoy  in  vifiting  claffical  ground  j  in 
beholding  the  retreats  which  infpired  the  genius  of 
our  favourite  authors,  or  the  fields  which  have  been 
dignified  by  exertions  of  heroic  virtue.  How  feeble 
are  the  emotions  produced  by  the  liveliell  conception 
of  modern  Italy,  to  what  the  poet  felt,  when,  amidft 
the  ruins  of  Rome, 

"  He  drew  th'   infpiring  breath  of  antient  arts, 

"  And  trod  the  facred  walks 

*'  Whercj  at  each  ftep,  imagination  burns  *  !" 

The  well-known  effed  of  a  particular  tune  on 
Swifs  regiments  when  at  a  diftance  from  home,  fur- 
nifhesavery  ftriking  illuftration  of  the  peculiar  power 
of  a  perception,  or  of  an  impreffion  on  the  fenfes,  to 
awaken  alTociated  thoughts  and  feelings  ;  and  num- 
berlefs  fa£ls  of  a  fimilar  nature  mufl  have  occurred  to 
every  perfon  of  moderate  fenfibility,  in  the  courfe  of 
his  own  experience. 

*'  Whilft  we  were  at  dinner,"  (fays  Captain 
King,)  "in  this  miferable  hut,  on  the  banks  of  the 
"  river  Awatika  ;  the  guefls  of  a  people  with  whofe 
"  exiftence  we  had  before  been  fcarce  acquainted,  and 
"  at  the  extremity  of  the  habitable  globe  ;  a  folitary, 
"  half- worn  pewter  fpoon,  whofe  fhape  was  familiar 
"  to  us,  attracted  our  attention  ;  and,  on  examina- 
"  tion,  we  found  it  Itamped  on  the  back  with  the 

•"  Quacunque  ingredimur,"  (fays  Cicero,  fpeaking  of  Athens,) 
"  in  aliquam  hiftoriam  veftigium  ponimus." 

T4  *'  word 


28o  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  V. 

"  word  London.  I  cannot  pafs  over  this  circumjdance 
*'  in  filence,  out  of  gratitude  for  the  many  pleafant 
**  thoughts,  the  anxious  hopes,  and  tender  remem- 
"  brances,  it  excited  in  us.  Thofe  who  have  expe- 
*'  rienced  the  effects  that  long  abfence,  and  extreme 
"  diftance  from  their  native  country,  produce  on  the 
*'  mind,  will  readily  conceive  the  pleafure  fuch  a 
*'  trifling  incident  can  give." 

The  difference  between  the  effect  of  a  perception 
and  an  idea,  in  awakening  affociated  thoughts  and 
feelings,  is  finely  defcribed  in  the  introduction  to  the 
fifth  book  Dejinibus. 

"  We  agreed,"  (fays  Cicero,)  "  that  we  fhould 
"  take  our  afternoon's  walk  in  the  academy,  as  at 
"  that  time  of  the  day  it  was  a  place  where  there  was 
"  no  refort  of  company.  Accordingly,  at  the  hour 
"  appointed,  we  went  to  Pifo's.  We  paffed  the  time 
"  in  converfmg  on  different  matters  during  our  fhort 
"  walk  from  the  double  gate,  till  we  came  to  the 
"  academy,  that  juflly  celebrated  fpot ;  which,  as  we 
"  wiflied,  we  found  a  perfed  folitude."  "  I  know  not," 
(faid  Pifo,)  "  whether  it  be  a  natural  feeling,  or  an 
*'  illufion  of  the  imagination  founded  on  habit,  that 
"  we  are  more  powerfully  affected  by  the  fight  of 
"  thofe  places  which  have  been  much  frequented  by 
"  illuftrious  men,  than  when  we  either  liften  to  the 
"  recital,  or  read  the  detail,  of  their  great  aftions. 
"  At  this  moment,  I  feel  flrongly  that  emotion  which 
"  I  fpeak  of.  I  fee  before  me,  the  perfedt  form  of 
"  Plato,  who  was  wont  to  difpute  in  this  very  place  : 
"  thefe  gardens  not  only  recal  him  to  my  memory, 
"  but  prefent  his  very  perfon  to  my  fenfes.     I  fancy 

♦*  to 


Parti.  §  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  281 

"  to  myfelf,  that  here  flood  Speufippus  ;  there  Xeno- 
"  crates,  and  here,  on  this  bench,  fat  his  difciple  Po- 
"  lemo.  To  me,  our  ancient  fenate-houfe  feems  peo- 
**  pled  with  the  Hke  vifionary  forms ;  for,  often,  when 
*'  I  enter  it,  the  fhades  of  Scipio,  of  Cato,  and  of 
"  Lselius,  and,  in  particular,  of  my  venerable  grand- 
"  father,  rife  to  my  imagination.  In  fhort,  fuch  is 
*'  the  eifeft  of  local  fituation  in  recalling  affociated 
"  ideas  to  the  mind,  that  it  is  not  without  reafon,  fonie 
"  philofophers  have  founded  on  this  principle  a  fpecies 
"  of  artificial  memory." 

This  influence  of  perceptible  objects,  in  awaken- 
ing alTociated  thoughts  and  aflbciated  feelings,  feems 
to  arife,  in  a  great  meafure,  from  their  permanent 
operation  as  exciting  or  fuggefting  caufes.  When  a 
train  of  thought  takes  its  rife  from  an  idea  or  con- 
ception, the  firfl  idea  foon  difappears,  and  a  feries  of 
others  fucceeds,  which  are  gradually  lefs  and  lefs  re- 
lated to  that  with  which  the  train  commenced  ;  but, 
in  the  cafe  of  perception,  the  exciting  caufe  remains 
fleadily  before  us ;  and  all  the  thoughts  and  feelings 
which  have  any  relation  to  it,  crowd  into  the  mind  in 
rapid  fucceffion  j  ftrengthening  each  other's  effeds, 
and  all  confpiring  in  the  fame  general  impreflion. 

I  already  obferved,  that  the  connexions  which 
exift  among  our  thoughts,  have  been  long  familiarly 
known  to  the  vulgar,  as  well  as  to  philofophers.  It 
is,  indeed,  only  of  late,  that  we  have  been  pofTeiTed 
of  an  appropriated  phrafe  to  exprefs  them ;  but  that 
the  general  fad  is  not  a  recent  difcovery,  may  be  in- 
ferred from  many  of  the  common  maxims  of  pru- 
dence and  of  propriety,  which  have  plainly  been  fug- 

gefled 


282  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  V, 

gefted  by  an  attention  to  this  part  of  our  conflitution. 
When  we  lay  it  down,  for  example,  as  a  general  rule, 
to  avoid  in  converfation  all  expreflions,  and  all  topics 
of  difcourfe,  which  have   any  relation,  however    re- 
mote, to  ideas  of  an   unpleafant  nature,  we   plainly 
L  proceed  on  the  fuppofition  that  there  are  certain  con- 
nexions  among  our  thoughts,  which  have   an  influ- 
ence over  the  order  of  their  fucceflion.     It  is   unne- 
I    ceflary   to   remark,    how   much   of  the  comfort  and 
good-humour  of  focial  life  depends  on  an  attention  to 
this  confideration.     Such  attentions  are  more  parti- 
\    cularly   elTential  in   our  intercourfe  with  men  of  the 
I    world  ;  for  the  commerce  of  fociety  has  a  wonderful 
I    efFe£t  in  increafmg  the  quicknefs  and  the  facility  with 
I    which  we  alTociate  all  ideas  which  have  any  reference 
1^  to   life  and  manners  *  ;  and,  of  confequence,  it  mufl 
render   the   fenfibility   alive  to  many   circumflances 
which,  from  the  remotenefs  of  their  relation  to  the 
fituation  and  hiflory  of  the  parties,  would  otherwife 
have  paffed  unnoticed. 

When  an  idea,  however,  is  thus  fuggefled  by  af- 
fociation,  it  produces  a  flighter  impreffion,  or,  at  leaft, 
it  produces  its  impreffion  more  gradually,  than  if  it 
were  prefented  more  directly  and  immediately  to  the 

*  The  fuperiority  which  the  man  of  the  world  poflefTes  over  the 
reclufe  ftudent,  in  his  knowledge  of  mankind,  is  partly  the  refult 
of  this  quicknefs  and  facility  of  affociation.  Thofe  trifling  cir- 
cumflances in  converfation  and  behaviour,  which,  to  the  latter, 
convey  only  their  moft  obvious  and  avowed  meaning,  lay  open  to 
the  former,  many  of  the  trains  of  thought  which  are  connefted 
vrith  them,  and  frequently  give  him  a  diftinft  view  of  a  charadter, 
on  that  very  fide  where  it  is  fuppofed  to  be  moft  concealed  from 
his  obfervation. 

mind. 


Part  I.    (J   I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    IMIND.  283 

mind.  And  hence,  when  we  are  under  a  nccelTity  of 
communicating  any  difagreeable  information  to  an- 
other, delicacy  leads  us,  inflead  of  mentioning  the 
thing  itfelf,  to  mention  fomething  elfe  from  which  our 
meaning  may  be  underftood.  In  this  manner,  we  pre- 
pare our  heai'ers  for  the  unwelcome  intelligence. 

The  diftindlion  between  grofs  and  delicate  flattery, 
is  founded  upon  the  fame  principle.  As  nothing  is 
more  offenfive  than  flattery  which  is  direct  and  point- 
ed, praife  is  confidered  as  happy  and  elegant,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  flightnefs  of  the  aifociations  by  which  it 
is  conveyed. 

To  this  tendency  which  one  thought  has  to  intro- 
duce another,  philofophers  have  given  the  name  of  the 
AJfociation  of  Ideas  ;  and,  as  I  would  not  wifh,  ex- 
cepting in  a  cafe  of  necellity,  to  depart  from  common 
language,  or  to  expofe  myfelf  to  the  charge  of  deli- 
vering old  do6lrines  in  a  new  form,  I  fhall  continue  to 
make  ufe  of  the  fame  expreffion.  I  am  fenfible,  in- 
deed, that  the  expreffion  is  by  no  means  unexception- 
able ;  and  that,  if  it  be  ufed  (as  it  frequently  has 
been)  to  comprehend  thofe  laws  by  which  the  fuc- 
ceffion  of  all  our  thoughts  and  of  all  our  mental  ope- 
rations is  regulated,  the  word  idea  mufl  be  underflood 
in  a  fenfe  much  more  extenfive  than  it  is  commonly 
employed  in.  It  is  very  juflly  remarked  by  Dr.  Reid, 
that  "  memory,  judgment,  reafoning,  paflions,  affec- 
"  tions,  and  purpofes  ;  in  a  word,  every  operation  of 
<'  the  mind,  excepting  thofe  of  fenfe,  is  excited  oc- 
*'  cafionally  in  the  train  of  our  thoughts  :  fo  that,  if 
"  we  make  the  train  of  our  thoughts  to  be  only  a 
"  train  of  ideas,  the  word  idea  mufl  be  underflood 

"  to 


284  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Cliap.  V. 

**  to  denote  all  thefe  operations."  In  continuing-, 
therefore,  to  employ,  upon  this  fubjecl,  that  lan- 
guage, which  has  been  confecrated  by  the  pradice  of 
our  befl  philofophical  writers  in  England,  I  would 
not  be  underftood  to  difpute  the  advantages  which 
might  be  derived  from  the  introdudion  of  a  new 
phrafe,  more  precife  and  more  applicable  to  the 
fad. 

The  ingenious  author  whom  I  laft  quoted,  feems  to 
think  that  the  ajfociation  of  ideas  has  no  claim  to  be 
confidered  as  an  original  principle,  or  as  an  ultimate 
fa£t  in  our  nature.  *'  I  believe,'*  (fays  he,)  "  that  the 
*'  original  principles  of  the  mind,  of  which  we  can 
"  give  no  account,  but  that  fuch  is  our  conflitution, 
*'  are  more  in  number  than  is  commonly  thought. 
"  But  we  ought  not  to  multiply  them  without  necef- 
"  lity.  That  trains  of  thinking,  which  by  frequent 
"  repetition  have  become  familiar,  fhould  fpontaneoufly 
"  offer  themfelves  to  our  fancy,  feems  to  require  no 
"  other  original  quality  but  the  power  of  habit.'* 

With  this  obfervation  I  cannot  agree ;  becaufe  I 
think  it  more  philofophical  to  refolve  the  power  of 
habit  into  the  aifociation  of  ideas,  than  to  refolve  the 
aflbciation  of  ideas  into  habit. 

The  word  habits  in  the  fenfe  in  which  it  is  com- 
monly employed,  expreffes  that  facility  which  the 
mind  acquires,  in  all  its  exertions,  both  animal  and 
intelledual,  in  confequence  of  practice.  We  apply  it 
to  the  dexterity  of  the  workman  ;  to  the  extemporary 
fluency  of  the  orator  ;  to  the  rapidity  of  the  arithme- 
tical accountant.  That  this  facility  is  the  effed  of 
pradice,  we  know  from  experience  to  be  a  fad  ;  but 

it 


Parti.  ^  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  285 

it  does  not  feem  to  be  an  ultimate  fad,  nor  incapable 
of  analyfis. 

In  the  Eflay  on  Attention,  I  (hewed  that  the  effed:s 
of  praftice  are  produced  partly  on  the  body,  and  partly 
on  the  mind.  The  mufcles  which  we  employ  in  me- 
chanical operations,  become  ftronger,  and  become 
more  obedient  to  the  will.  This  is  a  fad,  of  which  it 
is  probable  that  philofophy  will  never  be  able  to  give 
any  explanation. 

But  even  in  mechanical  operations,  the  effeds  of 
practice  are  produced  partly  on  die  mind  ;  and,  as  far 
as  this  is  the  cafe,  they  are  refolvable  into  what  phi- 
lofophers  call  the  afjociation  of  ideas  ;  or  into  that 
ofeneral  fact,  which  Dr.  Reid  himfelf  has  dated,  "  that 
"  trains  of  thinking,  which,  by  frequent  repetition, 
"  have  become  familiar,  fpontaneoufly  oiFer  themfelves 
"  to  the  mind."  In  the  cafe  of  habits  which  are  purely 
intelledual,  the  effeds  of  pradice  refolve  themfelves 
completely  into  this  principle :  and  it  appears  to  me 
more  precife  and  more  fatisfadory,  to  ftate  the  prin- 
ciple itfelf  as  a  law  of  our  conftitution,  than  to  flur  it 
over  under  the  concife  appellation  of  habits  which  we 
apply  in  common  to  mind  and  to  body. 

The  tendency  in  the  human  mind  to  affociate  or 
conned  its  thoughts  together,  is  fometimes  called  (but 
very  improperly)  the  imagination.  Between  thefe  two 
parts  of  our  conftitution,  there  is  indeed  a  very  inti- 
mate relation ;  and  it  is  probably  owing  to  this  rela- 
tion, that  they  have  been  fo  generally  confounded 
under  the  fame  name.  When  the  mind  is  occu- 
pied about  abfent  objeds  of  fenfe,  (which,  I  be- 
lieve, it  is  habitually  in  the  great  majority  of  man- 
kind,) 


286  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

kind,)  its  train  of  thought  is  merely  a  feries  of  con- 
ceptions;  or,  in  common  language,  of  imaginations*. 
In  the  cafe,  too,  of  poetical  imagination,  it  is  the  aflb- 
ciation  of  ideas  that  fupplies  the  materials  out  of  which 
its  combinations  are  formed  ;  and  when  fuch  an  imagi- 
nary combination  is  become  familiar  to  the  mind,  it  is 
the  affociation  of  ideas  that  connects  its  different  parts 
together,  and  unites  them  into  one  whole.  The  affo- 
ciation of  ideas,  therefore,  although  perfectly  diilindl 
from  the  power  of  imagination,  is  immediately  and 
effentially  fubfervient  to  all  its  exertions. 

The  laft  obfervation  feems  to  me  to  point  out,  alfo, 
the  circumftance  which  has  led  the  greater  part  of 
Engliffi  writers,  to  ufe  the  words  Imagination  and 
Fancy  as  fynonymous.  It  is  obvious  that  a  creative 
imagination,  when  a  perfon  poffeffes  it  fo  habitually 
that  it  may  be  regarded  as  forming  one  of  the  charac- 
teriflics  of  his  genius,  implies  a  power  of  fummoning 
up,  at  pleafure,  a  particular  clafs  of  ideas ;  and  of 
ideas  related  to  each  other  in  a  particular  rhanner  j 
which  power  can  be  the  refult  only,  of  certain  habits 
of  affociation,  which  the  individual  has  acquired.  It 
is  to  this  power  of  the  mind,  which  is  evidently  a  par- 
ticular turn  of  thought,  and  not  one  of  the  common 
principles  of  our  nature,  that  our  befl  writers  (fo  far 
as  I  am  able  to  judge)  refer,  in  general,  when  they 
make  ufe  of  the  word  fancy  :  I  fay,  in  general ;  for  in 
difquifitions  of  this  fort,  in  which  the  beft  writers  are 

*  Accordingly,  Hobbes  calls  the  train  of  thouglit  in  the  mind, 
**  Confequentia  live  feries  imaginationum."  "  Per  feriem  imagi- 
"  nationum  intelligo  fuccefiionem  uniiis  cogitatiouis  ad  aliairu"  — 
LEVIATHAN,  cap.  iii, 

feldom 


Part  I.  ^   I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  287 

feldom  precife  and  fteady  in  the  employment  of  words, 
it  is  only  to  their  prevailing  practice  that  we  can  ap- 
peal as  an  authority.  What  the  particular  relations 
are,  by  which  thofe  ideas  are  conneded  that  are  fub- 
fervient  to  poetical  imagination,  I  fhall  not  inquire  at 
prefent.  I  think  they  are  chiefly  thofe  of  refemblance 
and  analogy.  But  whatever  they  may  be,  the  power 
of  fummoning  up  at  pleafure  the  ideas  fo  related,  as  it 
is  the  ground-work  of  poetical  genius,  is  of  fufficient 
importance  in  the  human  conftitution  to  deferve  an 
appropriated  name ;  and,  for  this  purpofe,  the  word 
fancy  would  appear  to  be  the  moft  convenient  that  our 
language  affords. 

Dr.  Reid  has  fomewhere  obferved,  that  *'  the  part 
"  of  our  conftitution  on  which  the  affociation  of  ideas 
*'  depends,  was  called,  by  the  older  Englifh  writers, 
"  the  fantafy  or  fancy  ;"  an  ufe  of  the  word,  we  may 
remark,  which  coincides,  in  many  inftances,  with  that 
which  I  propofe  to  make  of  it.  It  differs  from  it  only 
in  this,  that  thefe  writers  applied  it  to  the  affocia- 
tion of  ideas  in  general,  whereas  I  reft  rid  its  appli- 
cation to  that  habit  of  affociation,  which  is  fubfervient 
to  poetical  imagination. 

According  to  the  explanation  which  has  now  been 
given  of  the  word  Fancy,  the  office  of  this  power  is 
to  colledt  materials  for  the  Imagination ;  and  there- 
fore the  latter  power  prefuppofes  the  former,  while 
the  former  does  not  neceffarily  fuppofe  the  latter.  A 
man  whofe  habits  of  affociation  prefent  to  him,  for 
illuftrating  or  embeUiffiing  a  fubjecl,  a  number  of  re- 
fembling  or  of  analogous  ideas,  we  call  a  man  of 
fancy  j    but   for    an    effort   of  imagination,    various 

other 


288  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap,  V: 

Other  powers  are  neceflary,  particularly  the  powers  of 
tafle  and  of  judgment;  without  which,  we  can  hope 
to  produce  nothing  that  will  be  a  fource  of  pleafure 
to  others.  It  is  the  power  of  fancy  which  fupplies 
the  poet  with  metaphorical  language,  and  with  all  the 
analogies  which  are  the  foundation  of  his  allufions  ; 
but  it  is  the  power  of  imagination  that  creates  the 
complex  fcenes  he  defcribes,  and  the  fiditious  cha- 
racters he  delineates.  To  fancy,  we  apply  the  epithets 
of  rich  or  luxuriant;  to  imagination,  thofe  of  beau- 
tiful or  fublime. 


SECTION  II. 

Of  the  Principles  of  AJfociation  among  our  Ideas. 

THE  fafts  v/hich  I  dated  in  the  former  fedion,  to 
illuftrate  the  tendency  of  a  perception,  or  of  an 
idea,  to  fuggefl  ideas  related  to  it,  are  fo  obvious  as 
to  be  matter  of  common  remark.  But  the  relations 
which  connecb  all  our  thoughts  together,  and  the 
laws  which  regulate  their  fuccellion,  were  but  little 
attended  to  before  the  publication  of  Mr.  Hume's 
writings. 

It  is  well  known  to  thofe  who  are  in  the  leafl:  con- 
verfant  with  the  prefent  ftate  of  metaphyseal  fcience, 
that  this  eminent  writer  has  attempted  to  reduce  all 
the  principles  of  affociation  among  our  ideas  to  three : 
Refemblance,  Contiguity  in  time  and  place,  and 
Caufe  and  EfFed.  The  attempt  was  great,  and  wor- 
thy of  his  genius  j  but  it  has  been  (hewn  by  feveral 
1 3  writers 


Parti.  §2.  OF   THE  HUMAN   MIND.  289 

writers  fince  his  time  *,  that  his  enumeration  Is  not 
only  incomplete,  but  that  it  is  even  indiflind:,  fo  far 
as  it  goes. 

It  is  not  neceffary  for  my  prefent  purpofe,  that  I 
fhould  enter  into  a  critical  examination  of  this  part  of 
Mr.  Hume's  fyflem  ;  or  that  I  fhould  attempt  to  fpe- 
cify  thofe  principles  of  aflbciation  which  he  has  omit- 
ted. Indeed,,  it  does  not  feem  to  me,  that  the  pro- 
blem admits  of  a  fatisfaftory  folution ;  for  there  is 
no  polTible  relation  among  the  objects  of  our  know- 
ledge, which  may  not  ferve  to  conneft  them  together 
in  the  mind  :  and,  therefore,  although  one  enume- 
ration may  be  more  comprehenfive  than  another,  a 
perfedly  complete  enumeration  is  fcarcely  to  be  ex- 
pected. 

Nor  Is  it  merely  in  confequence  of  the  relations 
among  things,  that  our  notions  of  them  are  affociated  : 

*  See,  in  particular.  Lord  Kaimes's  Elements  of  Criticifm, 
and  Dr.  Gerard's  Effay  on  Genius.  See  alfo  Dr.  Campbell's 
Philofophy  of  Rhetoric,  vol.  i.  p.  197, 

It  is  obferved  by  Dr,  Beattie,  that  fomething  like  an  attempt 
to  enumerate  the  laws  of  aflbciation  is  to  be  found  in  Ariftotle  j 
who,  in  fpeaking  of  RecoUedlion,  infmuates,  with  his  ufual  bre- 
vity, that  "  the  relations,  by  which  we  are  led  from  one  thought 
"  to  another,  in  tracing  out,  or  hunting  after,"  (as  he  calls  it,) 
"  any  particular  thought  which  does  not  immediately  occur,  are 
"  chiefly  three  ;   Refemblance,   Contrariety,  and  Contiguity." 

See  D'tjfertatiom ,  Moral  and  Critical y  p.  9.     Alio  p.  1 45. 

The  paflage  to  which  Dr.  Beattie  refers  is  as  follows  : 

«7ro  TS  vvff    ri  a;^^a   Tivrr,   y.i'A    ap'   o«,;it',    v;    siaiTii^,    >3  ra   avvsyyvi;.       Air* 
Aristot.  (k  Mfm;r.  et  Rfnunifc.   vol.  i.  p.  (jill.   Edit.Du  Val. 

U  they 


290  ELEMENTS    OP   THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

they  are  frequently  coupled  together  by  means  of  re- 
lations among  the  words  which  denote  them  ;  fuch  as 
a  fimilarity  of  found,  or  other  circumftances  ftill  more 
trifling.  The  alliteration  which  is  fo  common  in  po- 
etry, and  in  proverbial  fayings,  feems  to  arife,  partly 
at  leaft,  from  affociations  of  ideas  founded  on  the  ac- 
cidental circumftance,  of  the  two  words  which  exprefs 
them  beginning  with  the  fame  letter. 

•<  But  thoufands  die,  without  or  this  or  that, 
"  Die ;  and  endow  a  College,  or  a  Cat." 

Pope's  Ep.  to  Lord  Bathurst. 

«  Ward  tried,  on  Puppies,  and  the  Poor,  his  drop." 

Id.  Imitat.  of  HoRACEt 

*'  Puffs,  powders,  patches  ;   Bibles,  billets-doux." 

Rape  of  the  Lock. 

This  indeed  pleafes  only  on  flight  occafions,  when  it 
may  be  fuppofed  that  the  mind  is  in  fome  degree  play- 
ful, and  under  the  influence  of  thofe  principles  of 
aflbciation  which  commonly  take  place  when  we  are 
carelefs  and  difengaged.  Every  perfon  mufl;  be  of- 
fended with  the  fecond  line  of  the  following  couplet, 
v/hich  forms  part  of  a  very  fublime  defcription  of  the 
Divine  power  : 

*'  Breathes  in  our  foul,  informs  our  mortal  part, 
"  As  full,  as  perfe£l,  in  a  Hair  as  Heart." 

Essay  on  Man,  Ep.  i. 

To  thefe  obfervations,  it  may  be  added,  that  things 
which  have  no  known  relation  to  each  other  are  often 
aflbciated,  in  confequence  of  their  producing  fimilar 
eflfeds  on  the  mind.     Some  of  the  finelt  poetical  al- 

lufions 


Parti,  f  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  jjgi 

lufions  are  founded  on  this  principle  ;  and  accord- 
ingly, if  the  reader  is  not  pofleffed  of  fenfibility  conge- 
nial to  that  of  the  poet,  he  will  be  apt  to  overlook, 
their  meaning,  or  to  cenfure  them  as  abfurd.  To 
fuch  a  critic  it  would  not  be  eafy  to  vindicate  the 
beauty  of  the  following  ftanza,  in  an  Ode  addrefled 
to  a  Lady  by  the  Author  of  the  Seafons  : 

Oh  thou,  whofe  tender,  ferious  eye 

Expreffive  fpeaks  the  foul  I  love  j 
The  gentle  azure  of  the  ilcy. 

The  peniive  fhadows  of  the  grove. 

I  have  already  faid,   that  the  view  of  the  fubjeft 
which  I  propofe  to  take,  does  not  require  a  complete 
enumeration  of  our  principles  of  affociation.     There 
is,   however,    an  important  diftindion  among   them, 
to  which  I  fhall  have  occafion  frequently  to  refer  ; 
and  which,   as  far  as  I  know,    has  not  hitherto  at- 
tracted   the  notice  of  philofophers.      The   relations 
upon  which  fome  of  them  are  founded,  are  perfedly 
obvious  to  the  mind  ;  thofe  which  are  the  foundation 
of  others,   are  difcovered  only  in  confequence  of  par- 
ticular efforts  of  attention.     Of  the  former  kind,  are 
the  relations  of  Refemblance  and  Analogy,   of  Con- 
trariety,   of  Vicinity  in   time   and   place,    and   thofe 
which  arife  from  accidental  coincidences  in  the  found 
of  different  words.     Thefe,  in  general,   connect  our 
thoughts  together,    when  they  are  fuffered    to   take 
their  natural  courfe,  and  when  we  are  confcious  of 
little  or  no  adive  exertion.     Of  the  latter  kind,  are 
the  relations  of  Caufe  and  Effed,  of  Means  and  End, 
of  Premifes  and  Conclufion  ;  and  thofe  others,  which 
regulate  the  train  of  thought  in  the  mind  of  the  philo- 

U  2  fopher. 


292  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

fopher,  when  he  is  engaged  in  a  particular  invefti- 
gation. 

It  is  owing  to  this  diftinction,  that  tranfitions, 
which  would  be  highly  ofFenfive  in  philofophical 
writing,  are  the  moll  pleafmg  of  any  in  poetry.  In 
the  former  fpecies  of  compofition,  we  expect  to  fee  an 
Author  lay  down  a  diftind  plan  or  method,  and  ob- 
ferve  it  rigoroully;  without  allowing  himfelf  to  ramble 
into  digrelTions,  fuggefted  by  the  accidental  ideas  or 
expreffions,  which  may  occur  to  him  in  his  progrefs. 
In  that  flate  of  mind  in  which  Poetry  is  read,  fuch 
digrefiions  are  not  only  agreeable,  but  neceifary  to  the 
effeft  ;  and  an  arrangement  founded  on  the  fponta- 
neous  and  feemingly  cafual  order  of  our  thoughts, 
pleafes  more  than  one  fuggefted  by  an  accurate  ana- 
lyfis  of  the  fubje£l. 

How  abfurd  would  the  long  digreflion  in  praife  of 
Induftry,  in  Thomfon's  Autumn,  appear,  if  it  oc- 
curred in  a  profe  eflay !  —  a  digreflion,  however, 
which,  in  that  beautiful  poem,  arifes  naturally  and 
infenfibly  from  the  view  of  a  luxuriant  hiarveft ;  and 
which  as  naturally  leads  the  Poet  back  to  the  point 
where  his  excurfion  began  : 

All  is  the  gift  of  Induftry  ;  whate'cr 

Exalts,  embelliflies,  and  renders  life 

Delightful.     Penfive  Winter,  cheer'd  by  him. 

Sits  at  the  fecial  fircj  and  happy  hears 

Th'  excluded  tempcll  idly  rave  along  ; 

His  harden'd  fnigers  deck  the  gaudy  Spring ; 

Without  him  Summer  were  an  arid  walle  ; 

Nor  to  th'  Autumnal  months  could  thus  tranfmit 

Thofe  full,  mature,  immeafiirable  ftores. 

That  waving  round,  rccal  my  wandring  Song, 

fa 


Part  I.  §  2.  OT    THE    HUMAN    MIND,  293 

In  Goldfmith's  Traveller,  the  tranfitions  are  ma- 
naged with  confummate  fkill ;  and  yet,  how  different 
from  that  logical  method  which  would  be  fuited  to  a 
philofophical  difcourfe  on  the  ftate  of  fociety  in  the 
different  parts  of  Europe  !  Some  of  the  fined  are 
fuggefted  by  the  aflbciating  principle  of  Contraft.  Thus, 
after  defcribing  the  effeminate  and  debafed  Romans, 
the  Poet  proceeds  to  the  Swifs  : 

My  foul,  turn  from  them  —  turn  we  to  furvey 
Where  rougher  cHmes  a  nobler  race  difplay. 

And,  after  painting  fome  defeds  in  the  manners  of 
this  gallant  but  unrefined  people,  his  thoughts  are  led 
to  thofe  of  the  French  : 

To  kinder  llcies,  where  gentler  manners  reign, 
I  turn  —  and  France  difplays  her  bright  domaiiu 

The  tranfition  which  occurs  in  the  following  lines, 
feems  to  be  fuggefted  by  the  accidental  mention  of  a 
word ;  and  is  certainly  one  of  the  happieft  in  our 
language : 

Heavens  !  how  unlike  their  Belgic  Sires  of  old  ! 
Rough,  poor,  content,  ungovernably  bold  ; 
War  in  each  breaft,  and  freedom  on  each  brow. 
How  much  unhke  the  fons  of  Britain  now  !  — 
—  Fir'd  at  the  found,  my  Genius  fpreads  her  wing. 
And  flies,  where  Britain  courts  the  weftern  fpring. 

Numberlefs  illuftrations  of  the  fame  remark  might 
be  collected  from  the  antient  Poets,  more  particu- 
larly from  the  Georgics  of  Virgil,  where  the  fingular 
felicity  of  the  tranfitions  has  attracted  the  notice  even 
of  thofe,  who  have  been  the  leaft  difpofed  to  indulge 

U  3  themfelyes 


294  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.V. 

themfelves  in  philofophical  refinements  concerning 
the  principles  of  criticifm.  A  celebrated  inftance  of 
this  kind  occurs  in  the  end  of  the  firfl  Book  ; — the 
confideration  of  the  weather  and  of  its  common 
pfognoftics  leading  the  fancy,  in  the  firft  place,  to 
thofe  more  extraordinary  phenomena  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  fuperflitious  belief  of  the  vulgar,  are  the 
forerunners  of  pohtical  Revolutions  ;  and,  afterwards, 
to  the  Death  of  Csefar,  and  the  battles  of  Pharfalia 
and  Philippi.  The  manner  in  which  the  Poet  returns 
to  his  original  fubjedl,  difplays  that  exquifite  art  which 
IS  tobe  derived  only  from  the  diligent  and  enlightened 
fludy  of  nature. 

Scilicet  et  tempus  veniet,  cum  finibus  illis 
Agricola^  incurvo  tcrram  molitus  aratro, 
Exefa  inveniet  fcabra  rubigine  pila  ; 
Aut  gravibus  raftris  galeas  pulfabit  inanes, 
Grandiaque  effoflis  mirabitur  ofTa  fcpulchris. 

^  *The  facility  with  which  ideas  are  alTociated  in  the 
mind;  is  very  different  in  different  individuals :  a  cir- 
cumftance  which,  as  I  fhall  afterwards  Oiew,  lays  the 
foundation  of  remarkable  varieties  among  men,  both 
in  refped:  of  genius  and  of  charafter.  I  am  inclined, 
too,  to  think  that,  in  the  other  fex  (probably  in  con- 
fequence  of  early  education)  ideas  are  more  eafily 
affociated  together,  than  in  the  minds  of  men.  Hence 
the  livelinefs  of  their  fancy,  and  the  fuperiority  they 
poffefs  in  epiftolary  writing,  and  in  thofe  kinds  of 
poetry,  in  which  the  principal  recommendations  are, 
eafe  of  thought  and  expreffion.  Hence,  too,  the  fa- 
cility with  which  they  contrad  or  lofe  habits,  and  ac- 
commodate their    minds   to  new    fstuations ;    and,  I 

may 


Part  I.  §  3.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  295 

may  add,  the  difpofition  they  have  to  that  fpecies  of 
fuperftition  which  is  founded  on  accidental  combina- 
tions of  circumftances.  The  influence  which  this  fa- 
cility of  afTociation  has  on  the  power  of  Tafle,  lliall 
be  afterwards  confidered. 


SECTION  III. 

Of  the  Poiuer  ivhkh  the  Mind  has  over   the  Train  of  Us  Thoughts.- 

BY  means  of  the  AfTociation  of  Ideas,  a  conftant 
current  of  thoughts,  if  I  may  ufe  the  expreflion, 
is  made  to  pafs  through  the  mind  while  we  are  awake. 
Sometimes  the  current  is  interrupted,  and  the  thoughts 
diverted  into  a  new  channel,  in  confequence  of  the 
ideas  fuggefted  by  other  men,  or  of  the  objects  of 
perception  with  which  we  are  furrounded.  So  com- 
pletely, however,  is  the  mind  in  this  particular  fub- 
jeded  to  phyfical  laws,  that  it  has  been  juftly  ob- 
ferved  *,  we  cannot,  by  an  effort  of  our  v/ill,  call  up 
any  one  thought ;  and  that  the  train  of  our  ideas  de- 
pends on  caufes  which  operate  in  a  manner  inexpli- 
cable by  us. 

This  obfervation,  although  it  has  been  cenfured  as 
paradoxical,  is  almoft  felf-evident ;  for,  to  call  up  a 
particular  thought,  fuppofes  it  to  be  already  in  the 
mind.  As  I  fliall  have  frequent  occafion,  however,  to 
refer  to  the  obfervation  afterwards,  I  fhall  endeavour 
to  obviate  the  only  objection  which,  I  think,  can 
reafonably  be  urged  againfl  it ;  and  which  is  founded 

*  By  Lord  Kaoies  and  others. 

U4  on 


296  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  V. 

on  that  operation  of  the  mind  which  is  commonly 
called  recolle6lion  or  intentional  memory. 

It  is  evident,  that  before  we  attempt  to  recolle£b 
the  particular  circumflances  of  any  event,  that  event 
in  general  mufl  have  been  an  objed:  of  our  attention. 
We  remember  the  outlines  of  the  flory,  but  cannot 
at  firfl:  give  a  complete  account  of  it.  If  we  wifh  to 
recal  thefe  circumflances,  there  are  only  two  ways  in 
which  we  can  proceed.  We  mufl  either  form  dif- 
ferent fuppofitions,  and  then  confider  which  of  thefe 
tallies  befl  with  the  other  circumflances  of  the  event ; 
or,  by  revolving  in  our  mind  the  circumflances  we 
remember,  we  mufl  endeavour  to  excite  the  recollec- 
tion of  the  other  circumflances  affociated  with  them. 
The  firfl  of  thefe  procefTes  is,  properly  fpeaking,  an 
inference  of  reafon,  and  plainly  furniflies  no  excep- 
tion to  the  dodlrine  already  delivered.  We  have  an 
inflance  of  the  other  mode  of  recolleftion,  when  we 
are  at  a  lofs  for  the  beginning  of  a  fentence  in  recit- 
ing a  compofition  that  we  do  not  perfectly  remem- 
ber ;  in  which  cafe  we  naturally  repeat  over,  two  or 
three  times,  the  concluding  words  of  the  preceding 
fentence,  in  order  to  call  up  the  other  words  which 
ufed  to  be  conneded  with  them  in  the  memory.  In 
this  inflance,  it  is  evident,  that  the  circumflances  we 
defire  to  remember,  are  not  recalled  to  the  mind  in 
immediate  confequence  of  an  exertion  of  volition, 
but  are  fuggefted  by  fome  other  circumflances  with 
which  they  are  connefted,  independently  of  our  willf 
by  the  laws  of  our  conflitution. 

Notwithflanding,  however,  the  immediate  depend- 
ence of  the    train  of  our  thoughts  on  the  laws  of 

affociation. 


Part  I.  §  3.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  297 

aflbciation,  it  mufl  not  be  imagined  that  the  will 
poireifes  no  influence  over  it.  This  influence,  indeed, 
is  not  exercifed  direftly  and  immediately,  as  we 
are  apt  to  fuppofe,  on  a  fuperficial  view  of  the  fub- 
je£t :  but  it  is,  neverthelefs,  very  extenfive  in  its 
effefts  ;  and  the  different  degrees  in  which  it  is  pof- 
fefled  by  different  individuals,  confl:itute  fome  of  the 
moft  fliriking  inequalities  among  men,  in  point  of  intel- 
lectual capacity. 

Of  the  powers  which  the  mind  poflTefles  over  the 
train  of  its  thoughts,  the  mofl:  obvious  is  its  power 
of  fmgling  out  any  one  of  them  at  pleafure ;  of  de- 
taining it ;  and  of  making  it  a  particular  object  of 
attention.  By  doing  fo,  we  not  only  fl:op  the  fuc- 
ceflion  that  would  otherwife  take  place ;  but,  in 
confequence  of  our  bringing  to  view  the  lefs  ob- 
vious relations  among  our  ideas,  we  frequently 
divert  the  current  of  our  thoughts  into  a  new  chan- 
nel. If,  for  example,  when  I  am  indolent  and  in- 
adlive,  the  name  of  Sir  Ifaac  Newton  accidentally 
occur  to  me,  it  will  perhaps  fuggeft:,  one  after 
another,  the  names  of  fome  other  eminent  mathemati- 
cians and  afl:ronomers,  or  of  fome  of  his  illuflirious 
contemporaries  and  friends :  and  a  number  of  them 
may  pafs  in  review  before  me,  without  engaging 
my  curiofity  in  any  confiderable  degree.  In  a  dif- 
ferent fl:ate  of  mind,  the  name  of  Newton  will  lead 
my  thoughts  to  the  principal  incidents  of  his  life, 
and  the  more  flriking  features  of  his  charadter : 
or,  if  my  mind  be  ardent  and  vigorous,  will  lead 
my  attention  to  the  fublime.  difcoveries  he  made  j 
and  gradually  engage  me  in  fome  philofophical  in- 

vefliigadon. 


29^  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap,  V. 

veftigation.  To  every  objeft,  there  are  others  which 
bear  obvious  and  ftriking  relations;  and  others,  alfo, 
whofe  relation  to  it  does  not  readily  occur  to  us,  unlefs 
we  dwell  upon  it  for  fome  time,  and  place  it  before  us 
in  different  points  of  view. 

But  the  principal  power  we  poffefs  over  the 
train  of  our  ideas,  is  founded  on  the  influence  which 
our  habits  of  thinking  have  on  the  laws  of  Affociation  ; 
an  influence  which  is  fo  great,  that  we  may  often 
form  a  pretty  fhrewd  judgment  concerning  a  man's 
prevailing  turn  of  thought,  from  the  tranfitions  he 
makes  in  converfation  or  in  writing.  It  is  well  known, 
too,  that  by  means  of  habit,  a  particular  afibciating 
principle  may  be  ftrengthened  to  fuch  a  degree^ 
as  to  give  us  a  command  of  all  the  different  ideas 
in  our  mind,  which  have  a  certain  relation  to  each 
other ;  fo  that  when  any  one  of  the  clafs  occurs 
to  us,  we  have  almoft  a  certainty  that  it  will  fuggeft 
the  reft.  What  confidence  in  his  own  powers 
muft  a  fpeaker  poffefs,  when  he  rifes  without  pre- 
meditation, in  a  popular  afl'embly,  to  amufe  his 
audience  with  a  lively  or  an  humorous  fpeech  !  Such  a 
confidence,  it  is  evident,  can  only  arife  from  a  long 
experience  of  the  ftrength  of  particular  affociating 
principles. 

To  how  great  a  degree  this  part  of  our  conftitution 
may  be  influenced  by  habit,  appears  from  fads  which 
are  familiar  to  every  one.  A  man  who  has  an  ambi- 
tion to  become  a  punller,  feldom  or  never  fails  in 
the  attainment  of  his  object ;  that  is,  he  feldom  or 
never  fails  in  acquiring  a  power  which  other  men 
have  not,  of  fummoning  up,  on  a  particular  occafion, 

a  num. 


Part  I.  §  3-  OF    THE     HUMAN    MIND.  299 

a  number  of  words  different  from  each  other  in/i 
meaning,  and  refembling  each  other,  more  or  lefs,  t 
in  found.  I  am  incHned  to  think  that  even  genuine  -* 
wit  is  a  habit  acquired  in  a  fimilar  way  ;  and  that, 
tilthough  fome  individuals  may,  from  natural  con- 
ftitution,  be  more  fitted  than  others  to  acquire  this 
habit;  it  is  founded  in  every  cafe  on  a  peculiarly 
ilrong  alfociation  among  certain  claffes  of  our  ideas, 
which  gives  the  perfon  who  poifeifes  it,  a  command 
over  thofe  ideas  which  is  denied  to  ordinary  men. 
But  there  is  no  inftance  in  which  the  effect  of  habits 
of  alfociation  is  more  remarkable,  than  in  thofe  men 
who  polfefs  a  facility  of  rhyming.  That  a  man 
fhould  be  able  to  exprefs  his  thoughts  perfpicuoufly 
and  elegantly,  under  the  reftraints  which  rhyme 
impofes,  would  appear  to  be  incredible,  if  we  did 
not  know  it  to  be  fad:.  Such  a  power  implies  a 
wonderful  command  both  of  ideas  and  of  expreffions  ; 
and  yet  daily  experience  fhews  that  it  may  be 
gained  with  very  little  practice.  Pope  tells  us  with 
refpeft  to  himfelf,  that  he  could  exprefs  himfelf  not 
only  more  concifely,  but  more  eafily,  in  rhyme  than 
in  profe  *. 

Nor  is  it  only  in  thefe  trifling  accomplifhments 
that  we  may  trace  the  influence  of  habits  of  aflbcia- 
tion.     In  every  inftance  of  invention,   either  in  the 

*  "  When  habit  is  once  gained,  nothing  fo  eafy  as  praftice. 
"  Cicero  writes,  that  Antipater  the  Sidonian  could  pour  forth 
"  hexameters  extempoie ;  and  that,  whenever  he  chofe  to  verfify, 
*•'  words  followed  him  of  courfe.  We  may  add  to  Antipater, 
"  the  antient  rhapfodiilp  of  the  Greeks,  and  the  modern  impro- 
"  vifatori  of  the  Italians.''  HaukisV  Phil.  Inq.  108,  1 10. 

fine 


300  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.V. 

fine  arts,  in  the  mechanical  arts,  or  in  the  fciences, 
there  is  fome  new  idea,  or  fome  new  combination 
of  ideas,  brought  to  hght  by  the  inventor.  This, 
undoubtedly,  may  often  happen  in  a  way  which  he  is 
unable  to  explain ;  tliat  is,  his  invention  may  be 
fuggefled  to  him  by  fome  lucky  thought,  the  origin  of 
which  he  is  unable  to  trace.  But  when  a  man  pof- 
fefles  a  habitual  fertility  of  invention  in  any  particular 
art  or  fcience,  and  can  rely,  with  confidence,  on  his 
inventive  powers,  whenever  he  is  called  upon  to  exert 
them,  he  mufl  have  acquired,  by  previous  habits  of 
fludy,  a  command  over  certain  claffes  of  his  ideas, 
which  enables  him,  at  pleafure,  to  bring  them  under 
his  review.  The  illuftration  of  thefe  fubjeds  may 
throw  light  on  fome  proceiTes  of,  the  mind,  which  are 
not  in  general  well  underllood :  and  I  Ihall  accord- 
ingly, in  the  follovdng  Sedion,  offer  a  few  hints  with 
refped  to  thofe  habits  of  affociation  which  are  the 
foundatictfi  of  wit ;  of  the  power  of  rhyming  ;  of 
poetical  fancy ;  and  of  invention  in  matters  of  fcience. 


SEC- 


Part  r.  §  4.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  30I 


SECTION    IV. 

Illuftrations  of  the  Do8rine  Jlated  in  the  preceding  Seillon. 

I.  Of  Wit. 

ACCORDING  to  Locke,  Wit  confifts,  "  in  the 
"  aflemblage  of  ideas ;  and  putting  thofe  toge- 
"  ther  with  quicknefs  and  variety,  wherein  can  be 
"  found  any  refemblance  or  congruity  *.'*  I  would 
add  to  this  definition,  (rather  by  way  of  comment 
than  of  amendment,)  that  wit  implies  a  power  of  call- 
ing up  at  pleafure  the  ideas  which  it  combines  :  and 
I  am  inclined  to  believe,  that  the  entertainment  which 
it  gives  to  the  hearer,  is  founded,  in  a  confiderable 
degree,  on  his  furprife,  at  the  command  which  the 
man  of  wit  has  acquired  over  a  part  of  the  conflitu- 
tion,  which  is  fo  little  fubjeft  to  the  will. 

That  the  effect  of  wit  depends  partly,  at  leaft,  on 
the  circumftance  now  mentioned,  appears  evidently 
from  this,  that  we  are  more  pleafed  with  a  ban  ??iof, 
which  occurs  in  converfation,  than  with  one  in  print ; 
and  that  we  never  fail  to  receive  difgufl  from  wit, 
when  we  fufped  it  to  be  premeditated.  The  pleafure, 
too,  we  receive  from  wit,  is  heightened,  when  the 
original  idea  is  flarted  by  one  perfon,  and  the  related 
idea  by  another.  Dr.  Campbell  has  remarked,  that 
*'  a  witty  repartee  is  infinitely  more  pleafing,  than  a 
**  witty  attack  ;  and  that  an  allufion  will  appear  ex- 

*  EfTay  on  Human  Underftanding,  book  ii.  chap.  11. 

"  cellent 


302  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

*'  cellent  when  thrown  out  extempore  in  converfa- 
*'  tion,  which  would  be  deemed  execrable  in  print." 
In  all  thefe  cafes,  the  wit  confidered  abfolutely  is  the 
fame.  The  relations  which  are  difcovered  between 
the  compared  ideas  are  equally  new  :  and  yet,  as 
foon  as  we  fufpe£t  that  the  wit  was  premeditated, 
the  pleafure  we  receive  from  it  is  infinitely  diminifhed. 
Inftances  indeed  may  be  mentioned,  in  which  we  are 
pleafed  with  contemplating  an  unexpeded  relation 
between  ideas,  without  any  reference  to  the  habits  of 
aflbciation  in  the  mind  of  the  perfon  who  difcovered 
it.  A  bon  juot  produced  at  the  game  of  crofs-pur- 
pofes,  would  not  fail  to  create  amufement ;  but  in 
fuch  cafes,  our  pleafure  feems  chiefly  to  arife  from 
the  furprife  we  feel  at  fo  extraordinary  a  coinci- 
dence between  a  queftion  and  an  anfwer  coming  from 
perfons  who  had  no  direct  communication  with  each 
other. 

Of  the  efFeft  added  to  wit  by  the  promptitude 
with  which  its  combinations  are  formed,  Fuller  ap- 
pears to  have  had  a  very  juil  idea,  from  what  he  has 
recorded  of  the  focial  hours  of  our  two  great  Eng- 
lifh  Dramatifts.  *'  Johnfon's  parts  were  not  fo  ready 
**  to  run  of  themfelves,  as  able  to  anfwer  the  fpur  ; 
"  fo  that  it  may  be  truly  faid  of  him,  that  he  had 
"  an  elaborate  wit,  wrought  out  by  his  own  induftry. 
♦*  —  Many  were  the  wit  combats  between  him  and 
**  Shakefpeare,  which  two  I  behold  like  a  Spanifh 
*'  great  galleon,  and  an  Engliih  man  of  war.  John- 
*'  fon  (like  the  former)  was  built  far  higher  in  learn- 
*'  ing  ;  folid,  but  flow  in  his  performances.  Shake- 
"  fpeare,  with  the  Englifli  man  of  war,  lefler  in  bulk, 
13  "  but 


Part  I.  §  4.  OF    THE   HUMAN   MIND.  303 

"  but  lighter  in  failing,  could  turn  with  all  tides,  tack 
*'  about  and  take  advantage  of  all  winds,  by  the  quick- 
"  nefs  of  his  wit  and  invention  *." 

I  before  obferved,  that  the  pleafure  we  receive  from 
wit  is  increafed,  when  the  two  ideas  between  which 
the  relation  is  difcovered,  are  fuggefted  by  different 
perfons.  In  the  cafe  of  a  boii  ?not  occurring  in  con- 
verfation,  the  reafon  of  this  is  abundantly  obvious ; 
becaufe,  when  the  related  ideas  are  fuggefted  by  dif- 
ferent perfons,  we  have  a  proof  that  the  wit  was 
not  premeditated.  But  even  in  a  written  compo- 
fition,  we  are  much  more  delighted  when  the  fub- 
je£t  was  furniihed  to  the  author  by  another  perfon, 
than  when  he  chufes  the  topic  on  which  he  is  to  dif- 
play  his  wit.  How  much  would  the  pleafure  we  re- 
ceive from  the  Key  to  the  Lock  be  diminifhed,  if  we 
fufpeded  that  the  author  had  the  key  in  view  when  he 
wrote  that  poem  ;  and  that  he  introduced  feme  ex- 
preffions,  in  order  to  furnifli  a  fubjeft  for  the  wit  of 
the  commentator  ?  How  totally  would  it  deftroy  the 
pleafure  we  receive  from  a  parody  on  a  poem,  if  we 
fufpefted  that  both  were  produ6lions  of  the  fame 
author  ?  The  truth  feems  to  be,  that  when  both  the 
related  ideas  are  fuggefted  by  the  fame  perfon,  we 
have  not  a  very  fatisfaftory  proof  of  any  thing  un- 
common in  the  intellectual  habits  of  the  author.  We 
may  fufped  that  both  ideas  occurred  to  him  at  the 
fame  time  ;  and  we  know  that  in  the  dulleft  and  moft 
phlegmatic  minds,  fuch  extraordinary  aflbciations  will 
fomedmes  take  place.     But  when  the  fubjed  of  the 

*  Hiftory  of  the  Worthies  of  England.     London,  1662. 

wit 


304  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  V. 

wit  is  furnifhed  by  one  perfon,  and  the  wit  fuggefted 
by  another,  we  have  a  proof,  not  only  that  the  au- 
thor's mind  abounds  with  fuch  fingular  aflbciations, 
but  that  he  has  his  wit  perfedly  at  command. 

As  an  additional  confirmation  of  thefe  obfervations, 
we  may  remark,  that  the  more  an  autlior  is  Hmited 
by  his  fubje£t,  the  more  we  are  pleafed  with  his 
wit.  And,  therefore,  the  effedl  of  wit  does  not  arife 
folely  from  the  unexpefted  relations  which  it  prefents 
to  the  mind,  but  arifes,  in  part,  from  the  furprife  it 
excites  at  thofe  intelleftual  habits  which  give  it 
birth.  It  is  evident,  that  the  more  the  author  is  cir- 
cumfcribed  in  the  choice  of  his  materials,  the  greater 
muft  be  the  command  which  he  has  acquired  over 
thofe  aflbciating  principles  on  which  wit  depends,  and 
of  confequence,  according  to  the  foregoing  do£lrine 
the  greater  muff  be  the  furprife  and  the  pleafure 
which  his  wit  produces.  In  Addifon's  celebrated 
verfes  to  Sir  Godfrey  Kneller  on  his  pifture  of 
George  the  Firft,  in  which  he  compares  the  painter  to 
Phidias,  and  the  fubjeds  of  his  pencil  to  the  Grecian 
Deities,  the  range  of  the  Poet's  wit  was  neceflarily 
confined  within  very  narrow  bounds ;  and  what  prin- 
cipally delights  us  in  that  performance  is,  the  furpri- 
fing  eafe  and  felicity  with  which  he  runs  the  parallel 
between  the  Englilh  hiftory  and  the  Greek  mythology. 
Of  all  the  allufions  which  the  following  paffage 
contains,  there  is  not  one,  taken  fingly,  of  very  extra- 
ordinary merit ;  and  yet  the  effeft  of  the  whole  is 
uncommonly  great,  from  the  fingular  power  of  com- 
bination, which  fo  long  and  fo  difficult  an  exertion 
difcovers. 

11  *<  Wife 


Parti.  ^4-  ^^    '^^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  305 

*'  Wife  Phidias  thus,  his  flcill  to  prove, 
**■  Thro'  many  a  god  advanced  to  Jove, 
"  And  taught  the  poHfh'd  rocks  to  fhine 
.  .  •'  With  airs  and  lineaments  divine, 

"  Till  Greece  amaz'd  and  half  afraid, 
**  Th'  affembled  Deities  furvey'd. 

"  Great  Pan,  who  wont  to  chafe  the  fair, 
*'  And  lov'd  the  fpreading  oak,  was  there  ; 
"  Old  Saturn,  too,  with  up-caft  eyes, 
*'  Beheld  his  abdicated  flcies  ; 
*''  And  mighty  Mars,  for  war  renown'd, 
"  In  adamantine  armour  frown'd  ; 
**  By  him  the  childlefs  Goddefs  rofe, 
*'  Minerva,  iludious  to  compofe 
"  Her  twifted  threads  ;  the  web  fhe  flrungs 
"  And  o'er  a  loom  of  marble  hung  ; 
"  Thetis,  the  troubled  ocean's  queen, 
**  Match' d  with  a  mortal  next  was  feen, 
**  Reclining  on  a  funeral  urn, 
"  Her  fhort-liv'd  darhng  fon  to  mourn  ; 
"  The  laft  was  he,  whofe  thunder  flew 
*'  The  Titan  race,  a  rebel  crew, 
"  That  from  a  hundred  hills  ally'd, 
"  In  impious  league  their  King  defy'd." 

According  to  the  view  which  I  have  given  of  the 
nature  of  Wit,  the  pleafure  we  derive  from  that  af- 
femblage  of  ideas  which  it  prefents,  is  greatly  height- 
ened and  enlivened  by  our  furprife  at  the  command 
difplayed  over  a  part  of  the  conftltution,  which,  in 
our  own  cafe,  we  find  to  be  fo  little  fubjed  to  the 
will.  We  confider  Wit  as  a  fort  of  feat  or  trick  of 
intellectual  dexterity,  analogous,  in  fome  refpefts,  to 
the  extraordinary  performances  of  jugglers  and  rope- 
dancers  ;  and,  in  both  cafes,  the  pleafure  we  receive 
from  the  exhibition,  is  explicable  m  part,  (I,  by  no 
means,  fay  entirely^  on  the  fame  principles. 

X  If 


3o6  ELEMENTS    OF  THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

If  thefe  remarks  be  juft,  it  feems  to  follow  as  a 
confequence,  that  thofe  men  who  are  moil  deficient 
in  the  power  of  prompt  combination,  will  be  moft 
poignantly  affeded  by  it,  when  exerted  at  the  will 
of  another  :  and  therefore,  the  charge  of  jealoufy 
and  envy  brought  againft  rival  Wits,  when  difpofed 
to  look  grave  at  each  other's  jefts,  may  perhaps  be 
obviated  in  a  way  lefs  injurious  to  their  charafter. 

The  fame  remarks  fuggefl  a  limitation,  or  rather 
an  explanation,  of  an  affertion  of  Lord  Chefterfield*s, 
that  "  genuine  wit  never  made  any  man  laugh  fmce 
"  the  creation  of  the  world.'*  The  obfervation,  I 
believe,  to  be  juft,  if  by  genuine  wit,  we  mean  wit 
wholly  divefled  of  every  mixture  of  humour  :  and  if 
by  laughter,  we  mean  that  convulfive  and  noify 
agitation  which  is  excited  by  the  ludicrous.  But 
there  is  unqueftionably  a  f?nile  appropriated  to  the 
flaflies  of  wit ;  —  a  fmile  of  furprife  and  wonder  ;  — 
not  altogether  unlike  the  efFe£l  produced  on  the  mind 
and  the  countenance,  by  a  feat  of  legerdemain  when 
executed  with  uncommon  fuccefs. 

II.    Of  Rhyme. 

The  pleafure  we  receive  from  rhyme,  feems  alfo 
to  arife,  partly,  from  our  furprife  at  the  command 
which  the  Poet  mult  have  acquired  over  the  train 
of  his  ideas,  in  order  to  be  able  to  exprefs  himfelf 
with  elegance,  and  the  appearance  of  eafe,  under 
the  reftraint  which  rhyme  impofes.  In  witty  or  in 
humorous  performances,  this  furprife  ferves  to  en- 
liven that  which  the  wit  or  the  humour  produces, 
1 4  and 


Parti,  ji  4-  ^^   "T'^^    HUMAN    MIND.  ^^oy 

and  renders  its  effeds  more  fenfible.  How  flat  do 
the  livelieft  and  mod  ludicrous  thoughts  appear  in 
blank  verle  ?  And  how  wonderfully  is  the  wit  of  Pope 
heightened,  by  the  eafy  and  happy  rhymes  in  which 
it  is  exprelTed  ? 

It  mufl  not,  however,  be  imagined,  either  in 
the  cafe  of  wit  or  of  rhyme,  that  the  pleafure  arifes 
folely  from  our  furprife  at  the  uncommon  habits 
of  affociation  which  the  author  difcovers.  In  the 
former  cafe,  there  mufl  be  prefented  to  the  mind,  an 
unexpected  analogy  or  relation  between  different 
ideas :  and  perhaps  other  circumflances  mufl  con- 
cur to  render  the  wit  perfect.  If  the  combination 
has  no  other  merit  than  that  of  bringing  together 
two  ideas  which  never  met  before,  we  may  be  furprifed 
at  its  oddity,  but  we  do  not  confider  it  as  a  proof 
of  wit.  On  the  contrary,  the  want  of  any  analogy 
or  relation  between  the  combined  ideas,  leads  us 
to  fufpe6t,  that  the  one  did  not  fuggefl  the  other, 
in  confequence  of  any  habits  of  affociation;  but 
that  the  two  were  brought  together  by  ftudy,  or 
by  mere  accident.  All  that  I  affirm  is,  that  when 
the^  analogy  or  relation  is  pleafmg  in  itfelf,  our 
pleafure  is  heightened  by  our  furprife  at  the  author's 
habits  of  affociation  when  compared  with  our  own. 
In  the  cafe  of  Rhyme,  too,  there  is  undoubtedly  a 
certain  degree  of  pleafure  arifmg  i'rom  the  recur- 
rence of  the  fame  found.  We  frequently  obferve 
children  amufe  themfelves  with  repeating  over  (in- 
gle, words  which  rhyme  together  :  and  the  lower 
people,  who  derive  little  pleafure  from  poetry,  ex- 
cepting in  fo  far  as  it  affeds  the  ear,  are  fo  pleafed  with 

X  2  tlie 


308  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

the  echo  of  the  rhymes,  that  when  they  read  verfes 
where  it  is  not  perfed,  they  are  apt  to  fupply  the 
the  Poet's  defects,  by  violating  the  common  rules  of 
pronunciation.  This  pleafure,  however,  is  height- 
ened by  our  admiration  at  the  miraculous  powers 
which  the  Poet  muft  have  acquired  over  the  train  of 
his  ideas,  and  over  all  the  various  modes  of  ex- 
prellion  which  the  language  affords,  in  order  to 
convey  inftruclion  and  entertainment,  without  tranf- 
greffing  the  eftablifhed  laws  of  regular  verfification. 
In  fome  of  the  lower  kinds  of  poetry  ;  for  example, 
in  acroflics,  and  in  the  lines  which  are  adapted  to 
bouts-rimes,  the  merit  lies  entirely  in  this  command 
of  thought  and  expreffion  ;  or,  in  other  words,  in 
a  command  of  ideas  founded  on  extraordinary  ha- 
bits of  affociation.  Even  fome  authors  of  a  fuperior 
clafs,  occafionally  fhew  an  inclination  to  difplay  their 
knack  at  rhyming,  by  introducing,  at  the  end  of 
the  firft  line  of  a  couplet,  fome  word  to  which  the 
language  hardly  affords  a  correfponding  found. 
Swift,  in  his  more  trifling  pieces,  abounds  with  in- 
ftances  of  this ;  and  in  Hudibras,  when  the  author 
ufes  his  double  and  triple  rhymes,  many  couplets 
have  no  merit  whatever  but  what  arifes  from  diffi- 
culty of  execution. 

The  pleafure  we  receive  from  rhyme  in  ferious 
compofitions,  arifes  from  a  combination  of  different 
circumftances  which  my  prefent  fubjed  does  not 
lead   me    to   inveltigate    particularly  *.      I   am   per- 

fuaded, 

*  In  Elegiac  poetry,  the  recurrence  of  the  fame  found,  and 
the  uniformity  iu  the  ftrudure  of  the  verfification  v/hich  this 

necef- 


part  I.  §  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  3C9 

fuaded,  however,    that  it  arifes,    in    part,    from  our 
furprife    at    the  Poet's    habits  of   aflbciation,    which 
enable    him    to  convey  his   thoughts  with   eafe  and 
beauty,    notwithflanding    the    narrow    hmits    within 
which    his  choice  of   expreflion  is  confined.       One 
proof  of  this  is,    that  if   there  appear  any  mark  ol" 
conflraint,    either  in  the  ideas  or  in  the  expreflion, 
our    pleafure    is    proportionally    diminiflied.       The 
thoughts  muft  feem  to  fuggeft  each  other,   and  the 
rhymes  to  be  only  an  accidental  circumflance.     The 
fame  remark  may  be  made  on  the  meafure  of   the 
verfe.     When  in  its  greatefl:  perfedion,  it  does  not 
appear  to  be  the  refult  of  labour,  but  to  be  dictated 
by  nature,   or  prompted  by  infpiration.       In  Pope's 
beft  verfes,  the  idea  is  exprefTed  with  as  little  inver- 
fion  of  flyle,    and  with  as   much   concifenefs,    pre- 
cifion,  and  propriety,   as  the  author  could  have  at- 
tained, had  he  been  writing  profe :  without  any  appa- 
rent exertion  on  his  part,  the  words  feem  fpontaneoufly 
to  arrange  themfelves  in  the  moft  mufical  numbers. 

neceflarily  occafions,  are  peculiarly  fuited  to  the  inaftivity  of  the 
mind,  and  to  the  flow  and  equable  fucceflion  of  its  ideas,  when 
under  the  influence  of  tender  or  melancholy  paflions  and  ac- 
cordingly, in  fuch  cafes,  even  the  Latin  poets^  though  the  genius 
of  their  language  be  very  ill  fitted  for  compofitions  in  rhyme, 
occafionally  indulge  themfelves  in  fomething  very  nearly  approach- 
ing to  it : 

"  Memnona  fi  mater,  mater  ploravit  Achillem, 

"  Et  tangant  magnas  triftia  fata  Deas  ;. 

"  Flebilis  ?adignos  Elegeia  folve  capillos, 

"  Ah  nimis  ex  vero  nunc  tibi  nomen  erit." 

Many  other  inftances  of  the  fame  kind  might  be  produced  from  the 
Elegiac  verfes  of  Ovid  and  TibuUus. 

X  3  «  While 


3IO  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

"  While  ftill  a  child,  nor  yet  a  fool  to  fame, 
«'  I  lifp'd  in  numbers,  for  the  numbers  came." 

This  facility  of  verfiiication,  it  is  true,  may  be,  and 
probably  is,  in  mod  cafes,  only  apparent  :  and  it 
is  reafonable  to  think,  that  in  the  mod  perfect 
poetical  productions,  not  only  the  choice  of  words, 
but  the  choice  of  ideas,  is  influenced  by  the  rhymes. 
In  a  profe  compofition,  the  author  holds  on  in  a  dl- 
re£t  courfe,  according  to  the  plan  he  has  previoufly 
formed ;  but  in  a  poem,  the  rhymes  which  occur  to 
him  are  perpetually  diverting  him  to  the  right  hand  or 
to  the  left,  by  fuggefling  ideas  which  do  not  naturally 
rife  out  of  his  fubjeft.  This,  I  prefume,  is  Butler's 
jneaning  in  the  following  couplet : 

"   Rhymes  the  rudder  are  of  verfes 

"  With  which,  like  fliips,  they  fleer  their  courfes." 

But  although  this  may  be  the  cafe  in  faft,  the  Poet 
mufl  employ  all  his  art  to  conceal  it :  infomuch  that 
if  he  finds  himfelf  under  a  neceffity  to  introduce,  on 
account  of  the  rhymes,  a  fuperfluous  idea,  or  an 
awkward  expreffion,  he  mufl  place  it  in  the  firfl  line 
of  the  couplet,  and  not  in  the  fecond  ;  for  the  reader, 
naturally  prefuming  that  the  lines  were  compofed  in 
the  order  in  which  the  author  arranges  them,  is  more 
apt  to  fufpeft  the  fecond  line  to  be  accommodated  to 
the  firft,  than  the  firft  to  the  fecond.  And  this  flight 
artifice  is,  in  general,  fufficient  to  impofe  on  that  de- 
gree of  attention  with  which  poetry  is  read.  Who 
can  doubt  that,  in  the  following  lines,  Pope  wrote  the 
firfl:  for  the  fake  of  the  fecond  f 

*'  A  wit's 


Parti.  ^4.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  31! 

"  A  wit's  a  feather,  and  a  chief  a  rod  ; 

"  An  honeil  man  's  the  nobleft  work  of  God." 

Were  the  firfl  of  thefe  lines,  or  a  line  equally  un- 
meaning, placed  laft,  the  couplet  would  have  appeared 
execrable  to  a  perfon  of  the  mofl  moderate  tafte. 

It  affords  a  flrong  confirmation  of  the  foregoing 
obfervations,  that  the  Poets  of  fome  nations  have  de- 
lighted in  the  practice  of  alliteration,  as  well  as  of 
rhyme  ;  and  have  even  confidered  it  as  an  effential  cir- 
cumflance  in  verfification.  Dr.  Beattie  obferves,  that 
*'  fome  antient  Englifh  poems  are  more  dillinguifhed 
"  by  aUiteration,  than  by  any  other  poetical  contri- 
"  vance.  In  the  works  of  Langland,  even  when  no 
"  regard  is  had  to  rhyme,  and  but  little  to  a  rude 
"  fort  of  anapeflic  meafure,  it  feems  to  have  been  a 
"  rule,  that  three  words,  at  leaft,  of  each  line  fhould 
"  begin  with  the  fame  letter.'*  A  late  author  informs 
us,  that,  in  the  Icelandic  poetry,  alliteration  is'  con- 
fidered as  a  circumflance  no  lefs  effential  than  rhyme*. 
He  mentions  alfo  feveral  other  reftraints,  which  mufl 
add  wonderfully  to  the  difficulty  of  verfification ;  and 
which  appear  to  us  to  be  perfedly  arbitrary  and  ca- 
pricious. If  that  really  be  the  cafe,  the  whole  plea- 
fure  of  the  reader  or  hearer  arifes  from  his  furprife  at 
the  facility  of  the  Poet's  compofition  under  thefe  com- 

*  '*  The  Icelandic  poetry  requires  two  things  ;  viz.  words 
"  with  the  fame  initial  letters,  and  words  of  the  fame  found.  It 
''  was  divided  into  ftanzas,  each  of  which  confifted  of  four 
"  couplets ;  and  each  of  thefe  couplets  was  again  compofed  of 
"  two  hemifticks^  of  which  every  one  contained  fix  fyllables  ; 
"  and  it  was  not  allowed  to  augment  this  number,  except  in 
"  cafes  of  the  grcatell  neceffity."  See  Van  Troil's  Letters  on 
Iceland,  p.  208. 

X  4  plicated 


312  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

plicated  reflraints  ;  that  is,  from  his  furprife  at  the 
command  which  the  Poet  has  acquired  over  his 
thoughts  and  expreflions.  In  our  rhyme,  I  acknow- 
ledge, that  the  coincidence  of  found  is  agreeable  in 
itfelf ;  and  only  affirm,  that  the  pleafure  which  the 
ear  receives  from  it,  is  heightened  by  the  other  con- 
fideration. 

III.  Of  Poetical  Fancy. 
There  is  another  habit  of  affociation,  which,  in 
fome  men,  is  very  remarkable  ;  that  which  is  the 
foundation  of  Poetical  Fancy  :  a  talent  which  agrees 
with  Wit  in  fome  circumftances,  but  which  differs 
from  it  elfentially  in  others. 

The  pleafure  we  receive  from  Wit,  agrees  in  one 
particular  with  the  pleafure  which  arifes  from  poetical 
allufions ;  that  in  both  cafes  we  are  pleafed  with  con- 
templating an  analogy  between  two  different  fubjeds. 
But  they  differ  in  this,  that  the  man  of  Wit  has  no 
other  aim  than  to  combine  analogous  ideas  *  ;  where- 
as no  allufion  can,  with  propriety,  have  a  place  in 
ferious  poetry,  unlefs  it  either  illuftrate  or  adorn  the 
principal  fubjeft.  If  it  has  both  thefe  recommenda- 
tions, the  allufion  is  perfect.  If  it  has  neither,  as  is 
often  the  cafe  with  the  allufions  of  Cowley  and 
of  Young,  the  Fancy  of  the  Poet  degenerates  into 
Wit. 
!  If  thefe  obfervations  be  well-founded,  they  fugged 
I  a  rule  with  refped  to  poetical  allufions,  which  has 
I    not  always  been  fufficiently  attended  to.    It  frequently 

*  I  fpeak  here  of  pure  and  unmixed  wit ;    and  not  of  wit, 
blended,  as  it  is  moll  commonly,  with  fome  degree  of  humour. 

happens. 


Parti.  5^4-  ^^    '^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  31^ 

happens,  that  two  fubjeds  bear  an  analogy  to  each 
other  in  more  refpeds  than  one  ;  and  where  iuch  can 
be  found,  they  undoubtedly  furnifh  the  mofl  favour- 
aWe  of  all  occafions  for  the  difplay  of  Wit.  But,  in 
ferious  poetry,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  however 
flriking  thefe  analogies  may  be  ;  and  although  each 
of  them  might,  with  propriety,  be  made  the  founda- 
tion of  a  feparate  allufion  ;  it  is  improper,  in  the 
courfe  of  the  fame  allufion,  to  include  more  than  one 
of  them  ;  as,  by  doing  fo,  an  author  difcovers  an 
affectation  of  Wit,  or  a  defire  of  tracing  analogies, 
inftead  of  illuflrating  or  adorning  the  fubjed  of  his 
compofition. 

I  formerly  defined  Fancy  to  be  a  power  of  afToci- 
ating  ideas  according  to  relations  of  refemblance  and 
analogy.  This  definition  will  probably  be  thought 
too  general ;  and  to  approach  too  near  to  that  given 
of  Wit.  In  order  to  difcover  the  neceffary  limitations, 
we  fhall  confider  what  the  circumflances  are,  which 
pleafe  us  in  poetical  allufions.  As  thefe  allufions  are 
fuggefled  by  Fancy,  and  are  the  moll  flriking  inftances 
in  which  it  difplays  itfelf,  the  received  rules  of  Cri- 
tics with  refped;  to  them,  may  throw  fome  light  on 
the  mental  power  which  gives  them  birth. 

I.  An    allufion    pleafes,    by  illuflrating  a  fubjedl 
comparatively  obfcure.     Hence,  I  apprehend,  it  will   | 
be  found,  that  allufions  from  the  intelledual  world   \ 
to  the  material,    are  more  pleafing,    than  from  the  | 
material  world  to  the  intellectual.     Mafon,  in  his  Ode  f 
to  Memory,  compares  the  influence  of   that  faculty 
over  our  ideas,  to  the  authority  of  a  general  over  his 
troops  : 

. '*  thou, 


314  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.V, 

■"  thou,  whofe  fway 
*'  The  throng' d  ideal  hofts  obey  j 
"  Who  bidit  their  ranks  now  vanifh,  now  appear ; 
*'  Flame  in  the  van,  or  darken  in  the  rear." 

Would  the  allulion  have  been  equally  pleafing,  from 
a  general  marfhalling  his  foldiers,  to  Memory  and  the 
fucceffion  of  ideas  ? 

The  effeft  of  a  literal  and  fpiritlefs  tranflation  of  a 
work  of  genius,  has  been  compared  to  that  of  the 
figures  which  we  fee,  when  we  look  at  the  wrong  fide 
of  a  beautiful  piece  of  tapeflry.  The  allufion  is  in- 
genious and  happy ;  but  the  pleafure  which  we  re- 
ceive from  it  arifes,  not  merely  from  the  analogy 
which  it  prefents  to  us,  but  from  the  illuftration 
which  it  affords  of  the  author's  idea.  No  one,  fure- 
ly,  in  fpeaking  of  a  piece  of  tapeftry,  would  think 
of  comparing  the  difference  between  its  fides,  to  that 
between  an  original  compofition  and  a  literal  tranfla- 
tion ! 

Cicero,  and  after  him  Mr.  Locke,  in  illuflrating 
the  difficulty  of  attending  to  the  fubjecls  of  our  con- 
fcioufnefs,  have  compared  the  Mind  to  the  Eye,  which 
fees  every  object  around  it,  but  is  invifible  to  itfelf. 
To  have  compared  the  Eye,  in  this  refpedt,  to  the 
Mind,  would  have  been  abfurd. 

Mr.  Pope's  comparifon  of  the  progrefs  of  youthful 
curiofity,  in  the  purfuits  of  fcience,  to  that  of  a  tra- 
veller among  the  Alps,  has  been  much,  and  juflly, 
admired.  How  would  the  beauty  of  the  allufion  have 
been  diminifhed,  if  the  Alps  had  furniflied  the  origi- 
nal fubject,  and  not  the  illuftration ! 

But 


Parti.  ^4'  ^^    '^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  ^ir 

But  although  this  rule  holds,  in  general,  I  acknow- 
ledge, that  inflances  may  be  produced,  from  our  mod 
celebrated  poetical  performances,    of  allufions   from 
material  objects,  both  to  the  intelleftual  and  the  mo- 
ral worlds.     Thefe,  however,  are  comparatively  few 
in  number,  and  are  not  to  be  found  in  defcriptive  or 
in  didactic  works  ;  but  in  compofitions  written  under 
the  influence  of  fome  particular  paffion,  or  which  are 
meant  to  exprefs  fome  peculiarity  in  the  mind  of  the 
author.      Thus,    a    melancholy  man,  who  has   met 
with  many  misfortunes  in  life,  will  be  apt  to  moralize 
on  every  phyfical  event,   and  every  appearance  of  na- 
ture ;  becaufe  his  attention  dwells  more  habitually  on 
human  life  and  conduct,  than  on  the  material  objefts 
around    him.      This   is   the  cafe   with   the  baniflied 
Duke,  in  Shakefpeare's  As  yon  like  it ;  who,  in  the 
language  of  that  Poet, 

"  Finds  tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brooks, 
*'  Sermons  in  ftones,  and  good  in  every  thing." 

But  this  is  plainly  a  diftempered  ftate  of  the  mind ; 
and  the  allufions  pleafe,  not  fo  much  by  the  analo- 
gies they  prefent,  as  by  the  pidlure  they  give  of  the 
character  of  the  perfon  to  whom  they  have  oc- 
curred. 

2.  An  allufion  pleafes,  by  prefenting  a  new  and 
beautiful  image  to  the  mind.  The  analogy  or  the  re- 
femblance  between  this  image  and  the  principal  fub- 
jecl,  is  agreeable  of  itfelf,  and  is  indeed  neceffary,  to 
furnilh  an  apology  for  the  tranfition  which  the  writer 
makes,  but  the  pleafure  is  wonderfully  heightened, 
when  the  new  image  thus  prefented  is  a  beautiful  one. 

The 


3l6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

The  following  allufion,  in  one  of  Mr.  Home's  trage- 
dies, appears  to  me  to  unite  almoft  every  excellence : 

"  Hope  and  fear,  alternate,  fway'd  his  breaft  ; 

**  Like  light  and  fhade  upon  a  waving  field, 
"  Courfing  each  other,  when  the  flying  clouds 
*'  Now  hide,  and  now  reveal,  the  Sun." 

Here  the  analogy  is  remarkably  perfect ;  not  only 
between  light  and  hope,  and  between  darknefs  and 
fear  ;  but  between  the  rapid  fucceflion  of  light  and 
Ihade,  and  the  momentary  influences  of  thefe  oppo- 
fite  emotions :  while,  at  the  fame  time,  the  new  image 
which  is  prefented  to  us,  recals  one  of  the  moft  pleaf- 
ing  and  impreflive  incidents  in  rural  fcenery. 

The  foregoing  obfervations  fuggeft  a  reafon  why 
the  principal  (lores  of  Fancy  are  commonly  fuppofed 
to  be  borrowed  from  the  material  world.     Wit  has  a 
more  extenfive  province,   and  delights  to  difplay  it's 
power  of  prompt  and  unexpected  combination  over 
all  the  various  claifes  of  our  ideas  :   but  the  favourite 
excurfions  of  Fancy,  are  from  intelledual  and  moral 
fubje6ts  to  the  appearances  with  which  our  fenfes  are 
converfant.     The  truth  is,  that  fuch  allufions  pleafe 
more  than   any  others  in  poetry.     According  to  this 
limited  idea  of  Fancy,  it  prefuppofes,  where  it  is  pof- 
fefled  in  an  eminent  degree,  an  extenfive  obfervation  of 
natural  objeds,  and  a  mind  fufceptible  of  ftrong  im- 
preflions  from  them.     It  is  thus    only  that  a  flock  of 
images  can  be  acquired  ;  and  that  thefe  images  will  be 
ready  to  prefent  themfelves,  whenever  any  analogous 
fubjecl  occurs.    And  hence  probably  it  is,  that  poeti- 
cal  genius  is  ahnofl  always  united  with  an  exquifite 
fenfibility  to  the  beaudes  of  nature. 

Before 


Parti.  §4-  ^^  "^^^   HUMAN   MIND.  317 

Before  leaving  the  fubjedl  of  Fancy,  it  may  not  be 
improper  to  remark,  that  its  two  qualities  are,  liveli- 
nefs  and  luxuriancy.  The  word  lively  refers  to  the 
quicknefs  of  the  alTociation.  The  word  rich  or  luxu- 
riant, to  the  variety  of  aflbciated  ideas. 

IV.   Of  Invention  in  the  Arts  and  Sciences. 

To  thefe  powers  of  Wit  and  Fancy,  that  of  Inven- 
tion in  the  Arts  and  Sciences  has  a  flriking  refem- 
blance.  Like  them  it  impHes  a  command  over  cer- 
tain clafTes  of  ideas,  which,  in  ordinary  men,  are  not 
equally  fubjedl  to  the  will :  and  like  them,  too,  it  is 
the  refult  of  acquired  habits  j  and  not  the  original  gift 
of  nature. 

Of  the  procefs  of  the  mind  in  fcientific  invention, 
I  propofe  afterwards  to  treat  fully,  under  the  article 
of  Reafoning ;  and  I  fhall  therefore  confine  myfelf 
at  prefent  to  a  few  detached  remarks  upon  fome  views 
of  the  fubjed  which  are  fuggefted  by  the  foregoing 
inquiries. 

Before  we  proceed,  it  may  be  proper  to  take  no- 
tice of  the  diftinftion  between  Invention  and  Difco- 
very.  The  object  of  the  former,  as  has  been  frequent- 
ly remarked,  is  to  produce  fomething  which  had  no 
exiftence  before  ;  that  of  the  latter,  to  bring  to  light 
fomething  which  did  exifl,  but  which  was  concealed 
from  common  obfervation.  Thus  we  fay.  Otto 
Guerricke  invented  the  air-pump  ;  Sandorius  invent- 
ed the  thermometer  ;  Newton  and  Gregory  invented 
the  refleding  telefcope ;  Galileo  difcovered  the  folar 
%ots  J  and  Harvey  difcovered  the  circulation  of  the 

1 3  blood. 


3l8  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.V. 

blood.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  improvements  in 
the  Arts  are  properly  called  inventions  ;  and  that  facts 
brought  to  light  by  means  of  obfervation,  are  properly 
called  difcoveries. 

Agreeable  to  this  analogy,  is  the  ufe  which  we 
make  of  thefe  words,  when  we  apply  them  to  fub- 
jefts  purely  intellectual.  As  truth  is  eternal  and 
immutable,  and  has  no  dependence  on  our  belief  or 
difbelief  of  it,  a  perfon  who  brings  to  light  a  truth 
formerly  unknown,  is  faid  to  make  a  difcovery.  A  per- 
fon, on  the  other  hand,  who  contrives  a  new  method 
of  difcovering  truth,  is  called  an  inventor.  Pytha- 
goras, we  fay,  difcovered  the  forty-feventh  propofi- 
tion  [of  Euclid's  firft  book ;  Newton  difcovered  the 
binomial  theorem  :  but  he  invented  the  method  of 
prime  and  ultimate  ratios ;  and  he  invented  the  method 
of  fluxions. 

In  general,  every  advancement  in  knowledge  is 
confidered  as  a  difcovery ;  every  contrivance  by 
which  we  produce  an  effeft,  or  accomplifh  an  end,  is 
confidered  as  an  invention.  Difcoveries  in  fcience, 
therefore,  unlefs  they  are  made  by  accident,  imply 
the  exercife  of  invention  ;  and  accordingly,  the  vv^ord 
invention  is  commonly  ufed  to  exprefs  originality  of 
genius  in  the  Sciences,  as  well  as  in  the  Arts.  It  is 
in  this  general  fenfe  that  I  employ  it  in  the  follov/ing 
obfervations. 

It  was  before  remarked,  that  in  every  inftance  of 
invention,  there  is  fome  new  idea,  or  fome  new  com- 
bination of  ideas,  which  is  brought  to  light  by  the 
inventor ;  and  that,  although  this  may  fometimes 
happen,  in  a  way  which  he  is  unable  to  explain,  yet 

when 


Part  I.  §  4.  ^F   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  3 1 9 

when  a  man  pofleffes  an  habitual  fertility  of  inven- 
tion in  any  particular  Art  or  Science,  and  can  rely, 
with  confidence,  on  his  inventive  powers,  whenever 
he  is  called  upon  to  exert  them  ;  he  muft  have  ac- 
quired, by  previous  habits  of  ftudy,  a  command  over 
thofe  clafles  of  his  ideas,  which  are  fubfervient  to  the 
particular  effort  that  he  wiflies  to  make.  In  what 
manner  this  command  is  acquired,  it  is  not  poflible, 
perhaps,  to  explain  completely  ;  but  it  appears  to  me 
to  be  chiefly  in  the  two  following  ways.  In  the  firfl 
place,  by  his  habits  of  fpeculation,  he  may  have 
arranged  his  knowledge  in  fuch  a  manner  as  may  ren- 
der it  eafy  for  him  to  combine,  at  pleafure,  all  the 
various  ideas  in  his  mind,  which  have  any  relation  to 
the  fubjeft  about  which  he  is  occupied  :  or,  fecondly, 
he  may  have  learned  by  experience,  certain  general 
rules,  by  means  of  which,  he  can  direft  the  train  of 
his  thoughts  into  thofe  channels  in  which  the  ideas  he 
is  in  queft  of  may  be  mofl  likely  to  occur  to  him. 

I.  The  former  of  thefe  obfervations,  I  fhall  not 
ftop  to  illuftrate  particularly,  at  prefent ;  as  the  fame 
fubjeft  will  occur  afterwards,  under  the  article  of 
Memory.  It  is  fufficient  for  my  purpofe,  in  this 
chap"3r,  to  remark,  that  as  habits  of  fpeculation  have 
a  tendency  to  clalTify  our  ideas,  by  leading  us  to  refer 
particular  fadls  and  particular  truths  to  general  prin- 
ciples ;  and  as  it  is  from  an  approximation  and  com- 
parifon  of  related  ideas,  that  new  difcoveries  in  moft 
inftances  refult ;  the  knowledge  of  the  philofopher, 
even  fuppofmg  that  it  is  not  more  extenfive,  is  ar- 
ranged in  a  manner  much  more  favourable  to  inven- 
tion, than  in  a  mind  unaccuflomed  to  fyftem. 

How 


^20  ELEMENTS    OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V, 

How  much  invention  depends  on  a  proper  combi- 
nation of  the  materials  of  our  knowledge,  appears 
from  the  refources  which  occur  to  men  of  the  loweft 
degree  of  ingenuity,  when  they  are  preffed  by  any 
alarming  difficulty  and  danger  ;  and  from  the  unex- 
pefted  exertions  made  by  very  ordinary  charaders, 
when  called  to  fituations  which  roufe  their  latent 
powers.  In  fuch  cafes,  I  take  for  granted,  that  ne- 
ceflity  operates  in  producing  invention,  chiefly  by 
concentrating  the  attention  of  the  mind  to  one  fet  of 
ideas  ;  by  leading  us  to  view  thefe  in  every  light,  and 
to  combine  them  varioufly  with  each  other.  As  the 
fame  idea  may  be  connefted  with  an  infinite  variety  of 
others  by  different  relations ;  it  may,  according  to 
circumflances,  at  one  time,  fuggefl  one  of  thefe 
ideas,  and,  at  another  time,  a  different  one.  When 
we  dwell  long  on  the  fame  idea,  we  obtain  all  the 
others  to  which  it  is  any  way  related  ;  and  thus  are 
furnifhed  with  materials  on  which  our  powers  of 
judgment  and  reafoning  may  be  employed.  The  ef- 
fect of  the  divifion  of  labour,  in  multiplying  mecha- 
nical contrivances,  is  to  be  explained  partly  on  the 
fame  principle.  It  limits  the  attention  to  a  parti- 
cular fubjea,  and  familiarifes  to  the  mind  all  the 
polTible  combinations  of  ideas  which  have  any  rela- 
tion to  it. 

Thefe  obfervations  fuggefl  a  remarkable  difference 
between  Invention  and  Wit.  The  former  depends,  in 
mofl  inflances,  on  a  combination  of  thofe  ideas, 
which  are  connefted  by  the  lefs  obvious  principles  of 
affociation ;  and  it  may  be  called  forth  in  almofl  any 
mind  by  the  preffure  of  external  circumflances.     The 

ideas 


Parti.  ^4-  ^^     ^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  32 1 

ideas  which  muft  be  combined,  in  order  to  produce 
the  latter,  are  chiefly  fuch  as  are  affociated  by  thofe 
{lighter  connexions  which  take  place  when  the  mind 
is  carelefs  and  difengaged.  "  If  you  have  real  wit," 
fays  Lord  Cheflerfield,  "  it  will  flow  fpontaneoufly, 
"  and  you  need  not  aim  at  it ;  for  in  that  cafe,  the 
*'  rule  of  the  gofpel  is  reverfed  ;  and  it  will  prove, 
"  feek  and  you  fliall  not  find.'*  Agreeably  to  this 
obfervation,  wit  is  promoted  by  a  certain  degree  of 
intoxication,  which  prevents  the  exercife  of  that  at- 
tention, which  is  neceflTary  for  invention  in  matters  of 
Science.  Hence  too  it  is,  that  thofe  who  have  the 
reputation  of  Wits,  are  commonly  men  confident  in 
their  own  powers,  who  allow  the  train  of  their  ideas 
to  follow,  in  a  great  meafure,  its  natural  courfe ;  and 
hazard,  in  company,  every  thing,  good  or  bad,  that 
occurs  to  them.  Men  of  modefl:y  and  tafte  feldom 
attempt  wit  in  a  promifcuous  fociety  ;  or  if  they  are 
forced  to  make  fuch  an  exertion,  they  are  feldom  fuc- 
cefsful.  Such  men,  however,  in  the  circle  of  their 
friends,  to  whom  they  can  unbofom  themfelves  with- 
out refe:  ve,  are  frequently  the  mofb  amufmg  and  the 
mod  interefting  of  companions  ;  as  the  vivacity  of 
their  wit  is  tempered  by  a  correft  judgment,  and  re- 
fined manners  ;  and  as  its  eff'eft  is  heightened  by  that 
fenfibility  and  delicacy,  with  which  we  fo  rarely  find 
it  accompanied  in  the  common  intercourfe  of  life. 

When  a  man  of  wit  makes  an  exertion  to  diftin- 
guifh  himfelf,  his  fallies  are  commonly  too  far  fetched 
to  pleafe.  He  brings  his  mind  into  a  ftate  approach- 
ing to  that  of  the  inventor,  and  becomes  rather  inge- 
nious than  witty.  This  is  often  the  cafe  with  the  wri- 

Y  ters 


322  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

ters  whom  Johnfon  dillinguifhes  by  the  name  of  the 
Metaphyfical  Poets. 

Thofe  powers  of  invention,  which  neceflity  occa- 
fionally  calls  forth  in  uncultivated  minds,  fome  indi- 
viduals poflefs  habitually.  The  related  ideas  which, 
in  the  cafe  of  the  former,  are  brought  together  by 
the  flow  efforts  of  attention  and  recolleclion,  prefent 
themfelves  to  the  latter,  in  confequence  of  a  more 
fyflematical  arrangement  of  their  knowledge.  The 
inftantaneoufnefs  with  which  fuch  remote  combina- 
tions are  effected,  fometimes  appear  fo  wonderful,  that 
we  are  apt  to  afcribe  it  to  fomething  like  infpiration  ; 
but  it  muft  be  remembered,  that  when  any  fubje6t 
(Irongly  and  habitually  occupies  the  thoughts,  it  gives 
us  an  intereft  in  the  obfervation  of  the  moft  trivial 
circumftance  which  we  fufpeft  to  have  any  relation  to 
it,  however  diftant ;  and  by  thus  rendering  the  com- 
mon objects  and  occurrences  which  the  accidents  of 
life  prefent  to  us,  fubfervient  to  one  particular  em- 
ployment of  the  intelledual  powers,  .ellablifhes  in  the 
memory  a  connexion  between  our  favourite  purfuit, 
and  all  the  materials  with  which  experience  and  re- 
fledion  have  fupplied  us  for  the  farther  profecution 
of  it. 

II.  I  obferved,  in  the  fecond  place,  that  invention 
may  be  facilitated  by  general  rules,  which  enable  the 
inventor  to  direct  the  train  of  his  thoughts  into  parti- 
cular channels.  Thefe  rules  (to  afcertain  which, 
ought  to  be  one  principal  objeft  of  the  logician)  will 
afterwards  fall  under  my  confideration,  when  I  come 
to  examine  thofe  intelleftual  proceffes  which  are  fub- 
fervient to  the  difcovery  of  truth.  At  prefent,  I  fliall 
14  confine 


Parti.  H-  ^^    "^^^    HUMAN     MIND.  323 

confine  myfelf  to  a  few  general  remarks  ;  in  dating 
which  I  have  no  other  aim  than  to  fhew,  to  how  great 
a  degree  invention  depends  on  cultivation  and  habit, 
even  in  thofe  fciences  in  which  it  is  generally  fuppofed 
that  every  thing  depends  on  natural  genius. 

When  we  confider  the  geometrical  difcoveries  of 
the  antients,  in  the  form  in  which  they  are  exhibited 
in  the  greater  part  of  the  works  which  have  furvived 
to  our  times,  it  is  feldom  polTible  for  us  to  trace  the 
fteps  by  which  they  were  led  to  their  conclufions  : 
and,  indeed,  the  objeds  of  this  fcience  are  fo  unlike 
thofe  of  all  others,  that  it  is  not  unnatural  for  a  per- 
fon  when  he  enters  on  the  ftudy,  to  be  dazzled  by  its 
novelty,  and  to  form  an  exaggerated  conception  of 
the  genius  of  thofe  men  who  firft  brought  to  light 
fuch  a  variety  of  truths,  fo  profound  and  fo  remote 
from  the  ordinary  courfe  of  our  fpeculations.  We 
find,  however,  that  even  at  the  time  when  the  antient 
analyfis  was  unknown  to  the  moderns  ;  fuch  mathe- 
maticians as  had  attended  to  the  progrefs  of  the 
mind  in  the  difcovery  of  truth,  concluded  a  priori^ 
that  the  difcoveries  of  the  Greek  geometers  did  not, 
at  firft,  occur  to  them  in  the  order  in  which  they  are 
dated  in  their  writings.  The  prevailing  opinion  was, 
that  they  had  pofleffed  fome  fecret  method  of  in- 
veftigation,  which  they  carefully  concealed  from  the 
world  ;  and  that  they  publifhed  the  refult  of  their 
labours  in  fuch  a  form,  as  they  thought  would  be 
moil  likely  to  excite  the  admiration  of  their  readers. 
"  O  quam  bene  foret,"  fays  Petrus  Nonius^  "  fi  qui 
"  in  fcientiis  mathematicis  fcripferint  authores,  fcripta 
"  reliquilTent   inventa   fua   ead^m  methodo,    et   per 

y  2  "  eofdem 


•324  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.V. 

**  eofdem  difcurfus,  quibus  ipfi  in  ea  primum  incide- 
*'  runt ;  et  non,  ut  in  mechanica  loquitur  Ariftoteles 
'*  de  artificibus,  qui  nobis  foris  oftendunt  fuas  quas 
"  fecerint  machinas,  fed  artificium  abfcondunt,  ut 
"  magis  appareant  admirabiles.  Eft  utique  inventio 
"  in  arte  qualibet  diverfa  multum  a  traditione  :  neque 
"  putandum  eft  plurimas  Euclidis  et  Archimedis  pro- 
"  pofitiones  fuiffe  ab  illis  ea  via  inventas  qua  nobis 
"  illi  ipfas  tradiderunt  *.'*  The  revival  of  the  antient 
analyfis,  by  fome  late  mathameticians  in  this  country, 
has,  in  part,  juftified  thefe  remarks,  by  fliewing  to 
how  great  a  degree  the  inventive  povv^ers  of  the  Greek 
geometers  were  aided  by  that  method  of  inveftiga- 
tion  ;  and  by  exhibiting  fome  ftriking  fpecimens  of 
addrefs  in  the  practical  application  of  it. 

The  folution  of  problems,  indeed,  it  may  be  faid, 
is  but  one  mode  in  which  mathematical  invention  may 
be  difplayed.  The  difcovery  of  new  truths  is  what 
we  chiefly  admire  in  an  original  genius ;  and  the  me- 
thod of  analyfis  gives  us  no  fatisfadion  with  refped:  to 
the  procefs  by  which  they  are  obtained. 

To  remove  this  difficulty  completely,  by  explain- 
ing all  the  various  ways  in  which  new  theorems  may 
be  brought  to  light,  would  lead  to  inquiries  foreign 
to  this  work.  In  order,  however,  to  render  the  pro- 
cefs of  the  mind,  on  fuch  occafions,  a  little  lefs  myf- 
terious  than  it  is  commonly  fuppofed  to  be ;  it  may 
be  proper  to  remark,  that  the  moft  copious  fource  of 
difcoveries  is    the   inveftigation  of  problems  5  which 

*  See  fome  other  paflages  to  the  fame  purpofe,  quoted  from  dif- 
ferent writers,  by  Dr.  Simfon,  in  the  preface  to  his  Reftoration  of 
the  Loci  Plani  of  AppoUonius  Pergxus,  Glafg.  i749- 

feldom 


Parti.  §4-  ®^   "^^^    HUMAN   MIND.  025 

feldom  fails  (even  although  we  fhould  not  fucceed  in 
the  attainment  of  the  objed:  which  we  have  in  veiw) 
to  exhibit  to  us  fome  relations  formerly  unobferved 
among  the  quantities  which  are  under  confideration. 
Of  fo  great  importance  is  it  to  concentrate  the  atten- 
tion to  a  particular  fubjeft,  and  to  check  that  wan- 
dering and  diffipated  habit  of  thought,  which,  in  the 
cafe  of  moil  perfons,  renders  their  fpeculations  barren 
of  any  profit  either  to  themfelves  or  to  others.  Many 
theorems,  too,  have  been  fuggefted  by  analogy ; 
many  have  been  inveftigated  from  truths  formerly 
known  by  altering  or  by  generalifmg  the  hypothefis  ; 
and  many  have  been  obtained  by  a  fpecies  of  in- 
duction. An  illuftration  of  thefe  various  procefles 
of  the  mind  would  not  only  lead  to  new  and  cu- 
rious remarks.,  but  would  contribute  to  diminifh 
that  blind  admiration  of  original  genius,  which  is 
one  of  the  chief  obflacles  to  the  improvement  of 
fcience. 

The  hiftory  of  natural  philofophy,  before  and  after 
the  time  of  Lord  Bacon,  affords  another  proof,  how 
much  the  powers  of  invention  and  difcovery  may  be 
affifted  by  the  fludy  of  method :  and  in  all  the 
fciences,  without  exception,  whoever  employs  his 
genius  with  a  regular  and  habitual  fuccefs,  plainly 
Ihews,  that  it  is  by  means  of  general  rules  that  his 
inquiries  are  conduced.  Of  thefe  rules,  there  may 
be  many  which  the  inventor  never  ftated  to  himfelf 
in  words  ;  and,  perhaps,  he  may  even  be  uncon- 
fcious  of  the  afTiftance  which  he  derives  from  them  ; 
but  their  influence  on  his  genius  appears  unqueftion- 
ably  from  the   uniformity  with  which  it   proceeds;. 

y  3  and_ 


326  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPIiY        Chap.  V. 

and  in  proportion  as  they  can  be  afcertained  by 
his  own  fpeculations,  or  collected  by  the  logician 
from  an  examination  of  his  refearches,  fimilar 
powers  of  invention  will  be  placed  within  the  reach 
of  other  men,  who  apply  themfelves  to  the  fame 
ftudy. 

The  following  remarks,  which  a  truly  philofophi- 
cal  artifl  has  applied  to  painting,  may  be  extended, 
with  fome  trifling  alterations,  to  all  the  different  em- 
ployments of  our  intelledual  powers. 

"  What  we  now  call  genius,  begins,  not  where 
rules,  abflradedly  taken,  end ;  but  where  known, 
vulgar,  and  trite  rules  have  no  longer  any  place.  It 
muft  of  neceffity  be,  that  works  of  genius,  as  well 
as  every  other  effect,  as  it  mufl  have  its  caufe, 
muft  likewife  have  its  rules ;  it  cannot  be  by 
chance,  that  excellencies  are  produced  with  any 
conftancy,  or  any  certainty,  for  this  is  not  the  na- 
ture of  chance  ;  but  the  rules  by  which  men  of 
extraordinary  parts,  and  fuch  as  are  called  men  of 
genius,  work,  are  either  fuch  as  they  difcover  by 
their  own  peculiar  obfervation,  or  of  fuch  a  nice 
texture  as  not  eafily  to  admit  handling  or  exprefling 
in  words. 

**  Unfubftantial,  however,  as  thefe  rules  may  feem, 
and  difficult  as  it  may  be  to  convey  them  in  writ- 
ing, they  are  ftill  feen  and  felt  in  the  mind  of  the 
artift  ;  and  he  works  from  them  with  as  much  cer- 
tainty, as  if  they  were  embodied,  as  I  may  fay, 
upon  paper.  It  is  true,  thefe  refined  principles 
cannot  be  always  made  palpable,  like  the  more 
grofs  rules  of  art ;  yet  it  does  not  follow,  but  that 

"  the 


part  I.  §  5.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  o^J 

"  the  mind  may  be  put  in  fuch  a  train,  that  it  fhall 
*'  perceive,  by  a  Idnd  of  fcientific  fenfe,  that  propriety, 
**  which  words  can  but  very  feebly  fuggefl  *." 


SECTION    V. 

^ppUcation   of  the  Principles  Jlated    in    the  foregoing    Se&iom    of 
this  Chapter,  to  explain  the  Phenomena  of  Dreaming. 

WITH  refpeft  to  the  Phenomena  of  Dreaming, 
three  different  queftions  may  be  propofed. 
Firft ;  What  is  the  ftate  of  the  mind  in  fleep  ?  or,  in 
other  words,  what  faculties  then  continue  to  operate, 
and  what  faculties  are  then  fufpended  ?  Secondly ; 
how  far  do  our  dreams  appear  to  be  influenced  by  our 
bodily  fenfations ;  and  in  what  refpe£ts  do  they  vary, 
according  to  the  different  conditions  of  the  body  in 
health,  and  in  ficknefs  ?  Thirdly  j  what  is  the  change 
which  fleep  produces  on  thofe  parts  of  the  body^  with 
which  our  mental  operations  are  more  immediately 
connected ;  and  how  does  this  change  operate,  in  di- 
verfifying,  fo  remarkably,  the  phenomena  which  our 
minds  then  exhibit,  from  thofe  of  which  we  are  con- 
fcious  in  our  waking  hours  ?  Of  thefe  three  quef- 
tions, the  firft  belongs  to  the  Philofophy  of  the  Hu- 
man Mind ;  and  it  is  to  this  queftion  that  the  follow- 
ing enquiry  is  almofl  entirely  confined.  The  fecond  is 
more  particularly  interefliing  to  the  medical  inquirer, 
and  does  not  properly  fall  under  the  plan  of  this  work. 
The  third  feems  to  me  to  relate  to  a  fubjedt,  which 
is  placed  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties. 

*  Difcourfes  by  Sir  Jofhua  Reynolds. 

Y4  It 


328  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

It  will  be  granted,  that,  if  we  could  afcertain  the 
ftate  of  the  mind  in  fleep,  fo  as  to  be  able  to  refolve 
the  various  phenomena  of  dreaming  into  a  fmaller 
number  of  general  principles ;  and  ftill  more,  if  we 
could  refolve  them  into  one  general  fact  ;  we  fhould 
be  advanced  a  very  important  flep  in  our  inquiries 
upon  this  fubjeci: ;  even  although  we  fhould  find  it 
impoflible  to  Ihew,  in  what  manner  this  change  in 
the  ftate  of  the  mind  rcfults  from  the  change 
■which  fleep  produces  in  the  ftate  of  the  body.  Such 
a  ftep  would  at  leaft  gratify,  to  a  certain  extent,  that 
difpofition  of  our  nature  which  prompts  us  to  afcend 
from  particular  fadts  to  general  laws  ;  and  which  is 
the  foundation  of  all  our  philofophical  refearches  ; 
and,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  I  am  inclined  to  think, 
that  it  carries  us  as  far  as  our  imperfed  faculties  en- 
able us  to  proceed. 

In  conducing  this  inquiry  with  refpeft  to  the  ftate 
of  the  mind  in  fleep,  it  feems  reafonable  to  expect, 
that  fome  light  may  be  obtained  from  an  examination 
of  the  circumftances  which  accelerate  or  retard  its 
approach  ;  for  when  we  are  difpofed  to  reft,  it  is 
natural  to  imagine,  that  the  ftate  of  the  mind  ap- 
proaches to  its  ftate  in  fleep,  more  nearly,  than  when 
we  feel  ourfelves  alive  and  a<5live,  and  capable  of 
applying  all  our  various  faculties  to  their  proper 
purpofes. 

In  general,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the  approach 
of  fleep  is  accelerated  by  every  circumftance  which  dimi- 
nifties  or  fufpends  the  exercife  of  the  mental  powers  ; 
and  is  retarded  by  every  thing  which  has  a  contrary 
tendency.     When   we  wifli   for    fleep,  we   naturally 

endeavour 


Part  I.  §  5.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^20 

endeavour  to  withhold,  as  much  as  poffible,  all  the 
adive  exertions  of  the  mind,  by  difengaging  our 
attention  from  every  interefting  fubje£l  of  thought. 
When  we  are  difpofed  to  keep  awake,  we  naturally 
fix  our  attention  on  fome  fubject  which  is  calculated 
to  afford  employment  to  our  intellectual  powers,  or 
to  roufe  and  exercife  the  active  principles  of  our 
nature. 

It  is  well  known,  that  there  is  a  particular  clafs 
of  founds  which  compofe  us  to  fleep.  The  hum  of 
bees ;  the  murmur  of  a  fountain  ;  the  reading  of  an 
uninterefting  difcourfe  ;  have  this  tendency  in  a  re- 
markable degree.  If  we  examine  this  clafs  of  founds, 
we  fhall  find  that  it  confifts  wholly  of  fuch  as  'are 
fitted  to  withdraw  the  attention  of  the  mind  from 
its  own  thoughts ;  and  are,  at  the  fame  time,  not 
fufficiently  interefting  to  engage  its  attention  to  them- 
felves. 

It  is  alfo  matter  of  common  obfervation,  that  chil- 
dren and  perfons  of  little  reflexion,  who  are  chiefly 
occupied  about  fenfible  objeds,  and  whofe  mental 
activity  is,  in  a  great  meafure,  fufpended,  as  foon 
as  their  perceptive  powers  are  unemployed  ;  find  it 
extremely  difficult  to  continue  awake,  when  they 
are  deprived  of  their  ufual  engagements.  The  fame 
thing  has  been  remarked  of  favages,  whofe  time, 
like  that  of  the  lower  animals,  is  almoft  com- 
pletely divided  between  fleep  and  their  bodily  ex- 
ertions*. 

From 

*  "  The  exiftence  of  the  Negro  flaves  in  America,  appears  to 
"  participate  more  of  fenfation  than  reflexion.  To  this  mufl  be 
"  afcribed;,  their  difpofition  to  fleep  when  abftrafted  from  their 

"  diverfions. 


3/ja  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V, 

From  a  confideratlon  of  thefe  facts,  it  feems  reafon- 
able  to  conclude,  that  in  fleep  thofe  operations  of  the 
mind  are  fufpended,  which  depend  on  our  vohtion ;  for 
if  it  be  certain,  that  before  we  fall  alleep,  we  muft  with- 
hold, as  much  as  we  are  able,  the  exercife  of  all  our 
different  powers ;  it  is  fcarcely  to  be  imagined,  that, 
as  foon  as  fleep  commences,  thefe  powers  fliould  again 
begin  to  be  exerted.  The  more  probable  conclufion 
is,  that  when  we  are  defirous  to  procure  fleep,  we 
bring  both  mind  and  body,  as  nearly  as  we  can,  into 
that  flate  in  which  they  are  to  continue  after  fleep 
commences.  The  difference,  therefore,  between  the 
flate  of  the  mind  when  we  are  inviting  fleep,  and 
when  we  are  adually  afleep,  is  this ;  that  in  the  for- 
mer cafe,  although  its  active  exertions  be  fufpended, 
we  can  renew  them,  if  we  pleafe.  In  the  other  cafe, 
the  will  lofes  its  influence  over  all  our  powers  both 
of  mind  and  body  ;  in  confequence  of  fome  phyfical 
alteration  in  the  fyfl:em,  which  we  fliall  never,  probably, 
be  able  to  explain. 

In  order  to  illufl:rate  this  conclufion  a  little  farther, 
it  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  if  the  fufpenfion  of 
our  voluntary  operations  in  fleep  be  admitted  as  a  fad, 
there  are  only  two  fuppofitions  which  can  be  formed 
concerning  its  caufe.  The  one  is,  that  the  power  of 
volition  is  fufpended  ;  the  other,  that  the  will  lofes  its 
influence  over  thofe  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  thofe 
members  of  the  body,    which,   during  our   waking 


"  diverfions,  and  unemployed  in  their  labour.  An  animal  whofe 
«  body  is  at  reft,  and  who  does  not  reflcft,  muft  be  difpofed  to 
*'  fleep  of  courfe."  Notes  on  Firginia,  by  Mr.  JefFERSON,  p.  225. 

hours, 


Part  I.  §  5.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  3^1 

hours,  are  fubjeded  to  its  authority.  If  it  caii  be 
fhewn,  then,  that  the  former  fuppofition  is  not  agree- 
able to  fad,  the  truth  of  the  latter  feems  to  follow  as 
a  neceffary  confequence. 

I.  That  the  power  of  volition  is  not  fufpended 
during  fleep,  appears  from  the  efforts  which  we  are 
confcious  of  making  while  in  that  fituation.  We 
dream,  for  example,  that  we  are  in  danger ;  and  we 
attempt  to  call  out  for  affiftance.  The  attempt,  in- 
deed, is,  in  general,  unfuccefsful ;  and  the  founds 
which  we  emit,  are  feeble  and  indiilintl ;  but  this  only 
confirms,  or,  rather,  is  a  neceffary  confequence  of  the 
fuppofition,  that,  in  fleep,  the  connexion  between  the 
will  and  our  voluntary  operations,  is.  diflurbed,  or 
interrupted.  The  continuance  of  the  power  of  vo- 
lition is  demonilrated  by  the  effort,  however  Inef- 
fectual. 

In  like  manner,  in  the  courfe  of  an  alarming  dream, 
we  are  fomedmes  confcious  of  making  an  exerdon  to 
fave  ourfelves,  by  flight,  from  an  apprehended  danger ; 
but  in  fpite  of  all  our  efforts,  we  continue  in  bed.  In 
fuch  cafes,  we  commonly  dream,  that  we  are  attempt- 
ing to  efcape,  and  are  prevented  by  fome  external  ob- 
ftacle ;  but  the  fad  feems  to  be,  that  the  body  is,  at 
that  dme,  not  fubjecl  to  the  will.  During  the  difturbed 
reft  W'hich  we  fometimes  have  when  the  body  is  indif- 
pofed,  the  mind  appears  to  retain  fome  power  over  it  j 
but  as,  even  in  thefe  cafes,  the  motions  which  are 
made,  confift  rather  of  a  general  agitation  of  the  whole 
fyftem,  than  of  the  regular  exertion  of  a  pardcular  mem- 
ber of  it,  with  a  view  to  produce  a  certain  effed ;  it  is 
reafonable  to  conclude,  that,  in  perfedly  found  ileep, 

the 


332  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V- 

the  mind,  although  it  retains  the  power  of  vohtion^ 
retains  no  influence  whatever  over  the  bodily  organs. 

In  that  particular  condition  of  the  fyflem,  which 
is  known  by  the  name  of  incubus,  we  arc  confcious 
of  a  total  want  of  power  over  the  body  :  and,  I 
believe,  the  common  opinion  is,  that  it  is  this  wanJ 
of  power  which  diftinguiihes  the  incubus  from  all  the 
other  modifications  of  fleep.  But  the  more  probable 
fuppofition  feems  to  be,  that  every  fpecies  of  fleep  is 
accompanied  with  a  fufpenfion  of  the  faculty  of  vo- 
luntary motion  ;  and  that  the  incubus  has  nothing  pe- 
culiar in  it  but  this,  that  the  uneafy  fenfations  which 
are  produced  by  the  accidental  pofl:ure  of  the  body, 
and  which  we  find  it  impoflible  to  remove  by  our  own 
efforts,  render  us  dift:in£tly  confcious  of  our  incapa- 
city to  move.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  the  inftant 
of  our  awaking,  and  of  our  recovering  the  command 
of  our  bodily  organs,  is  one  and  the  fame. 

2.  The  fame  conclufion  is  confirmed  by  a  different 
view  of  the  fubjeft.  It  is  probable,  as  was  already 
obferved,  that  when  we  are  anxious  to  procure  fleep, 
the  ftate  into  which  we  naturally  bring  the  mind,  ap- 
proaches to  its  ftate  after  fleep  commences.  Now  it 
is  manifefl,  that  the  means  which  nature  directs  us  to 
employ  on  fuch  occafions,  is  not  to  fufpend  the  power 
of  volition,  but  to  fufpend  the  exertion  of  thofe 
powers  whofe  exercife  depends  on  volition.  If  it 
were  neceflfary  that  volition  fhould  be  fufpended  be- 
fore we  fall  afleep,  it  would  be  impoffible  for  us,  by 
our  own  efforts,  to  haften  the  moment  of  reft.  The 
very  fuppofition  of  fuch  eflTorts  is  abfurd ;  for  it  im.- 
plies  a  continued  will  to  fufpend  the  ads  of  the  will. 

According 


Parti.   §5-  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^^9 

According  to  the  foregoing  doftrine  with  refpe£l  to 
the  flate  of  the  mind  in  fleep,  the  effeft  which  is  pro- 
duced on  our  mental  operations,  is  ftrikingly  analo- 
gous to  that  which  is  produced  on  our  bodily  powers. 
From  the  obfervations  which  have  been  already  made, 
it  is  manifefl  that  in  fleep,  the  body  is,  in  a  very  in- 
confiderable  degree,  if  at  all,  fubjed:  to  our  com- 
mand. The  vital  and  involuntary  motions,  however, 
fuffer  no  interruption,  but  go  on  as  when  we  are 
awake,  in  confequence  of  the  operation  offomecaufe 
unknown  to  us.  In  Hke  manner,  it  would  appear, 
that  thofe  operations  of  the  mind  which  depend  on 
our  volition  are  fufpended  ;  while  certain  other  ope- 
rations are,  at  leaft,  occafionally,  carried  on.  This 
analogy  naturally  fuggefts  the  idea,  that  all  our  men- 
tal operations,  which  are  independent  of  our  will, 
may  continue  during  fleep  ;  and  that  the  phenomena 
of  dream.ing  may,  perhaps,  be  produced  by  thefe,  di- 
verlified  in  their  apparent  effects,  in  confequence  of 
the  fufpenfion  of  our  voluntary  powers. 

If  the  appearances  which  the  mind  exhibits  during 
fleep,  are  found  to  be  explicable  on  this  general  prin- 
ciple, it  will  poflefs  all  the  evidence  which  the  nature 
of  the  fubjed  admits  of. 

It  was  formerly  fliewn,  that  the  train  of  thought  in 
the  mind  does  not  depend  hmnediately  on  our  will, 
but  is  regulated  by  certain  general  laws  of  aflbciation. 
At  the  fame  time,  it  appeared-,  that  among  the  vari- 
ous fubjefts  which  thus  fpontaneoufly  prefent  them- 
felves  to  our  notice,  we  have  the  power  of  fmgling 
out  any  one  that  we  chufe  to  confider,  and  of  making 
it  a  particular  objed  of  attention  ;  and  that  by  domg 

fo. 


^24  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

fo,  we  not  only  can  flop  the  train  that  would  other- 
wife  have  fucceeded,  but  frequently  can  divert  the 
current  of  our  thoughts  into  a  new  channel.  It  alfo 
appeared,  that  we  have  a  power  (which  may  be 
much  improved  by  exercife)  of  recalling  pafh  occur- 
rences to  the  memory,  by  a  voluntary  eflbrt  of  recol- 
leQion. 

The  indirect  influence  which  the  mind  thus  pofleffes 
over  the  train  of  its  thoughts  is  fo  great,  that  during  the 
whole  time  we  are  awake,  excepting  in  thofe  cafes  in 
which  we  fall  into  what  is  called  a  reverie,  and  fulfer 
our  thoughts  to  follow  their  natural  courfe,  the  order 
of  their  fucceffion  is  always  regulated  more  or  lefs  by 
the  v.ill.  The  will,  indeed,  in  regulating  the  train 
of  thought,  can  operate  only  (as  I  already  fhewed) 
by  availing  itfelf  of  the  eflabhfhed  laws  of  alTociation  ; 
but  flill  it  has  the  power  of  rendering  this  train  very 
different  from  what  it  would  have  been,  if  thefe  laws 
had  taken  place  without  its  interference. 

From  thefe  principles,  combined  with  the  general 
faft  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  eflablifli,  with  re- 
fpedb  to  the  flate  of  the  mind  in  fleep,  two  obvious 
confequences  follow  :  Firil,  That  when  we  are  in  this 
fituation,  the  fucceflion  of  our  thoughts,  in  fo  far  as 
it  depends  on  the  laws  of  affociation,  may  be  carried 
on  by  the  operation  of  the  fame  unknown  caufes  by 
which  it  is  produced  while  we  are  awake  ;  and,  Se- 
condly, that  the  order  of  our  thoughts,  in  thefe  two 
ftates  of  the  mind,  mufl  be  very  different ;  inafmuch 
as,  in  the  one,  it  depends  folely  on  the  laws  of  affo- 
ciation ;  and  in  the  other,  on  thefe  laws  combined 
with  our  own  voluntary  exertions. 

In 


Parti.  §5*  ^^    ^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  335 

In  order  to  afcertain  how  far  thefe  conclufions  are 
agreeable  to  truth,  it  is  neceflfary  to  compare  them 
with  the  known  phenomena  of  dreaming.  For  which 
purpofe,  I  Ihall  endeavour  to  fhew,  Firfl,  That  the 
fucceffion  of  our  thoughts  in  fleep,  is  regulated  by 
the  fame  general  laws  of  alTociation,  to  which  it  is 
fubjeded  while  we  are  awake  ;  and,  Secondly,  That 
the  circumftances  which  difcriminate  dreaming  from 
our  waking  thoughts,  are  fuch  as  mud  neceffarily 
arife  from  the  fufpenfion  of  the  influence  of  the 
will. 

I.  That  the  fucceffion  of  our  thoughts  in  fleep,  is 
regulated  by  the  fame  general  laws  of  aflfociation, 
which  influence  the  mind  while  we  are  awake,  appears 
from  the  following  confiderations. 

1.  Our  dreams  are  frequently  fuggefted  to  us  by 
bodily  fenfations ;  and  with  thefe  it  is  well  known, 
from  what  we  experience  while  awake,  that  particular 
ideas  are  frequently  very  ftrongly  aflbciated.  I  have 
been  told  by  a  friend,  that  having  occafion,  in  confe- 
quence  of  an  indifpofition,  to  apply  a  bottle  of  hot 
water  to  his  feet  when  he  went  to  bed,  he  dreamed 
that  he  was  making  a  journey  to  the  top  of  Mount 
Mtn2L,  and  that  he  found  the  heat  of  the  ground  al- 
mofl  infupportable.  Another  perfon,  having  a  blifl;er 
applied  to  his  head,  dreamed  that  he  was  fcalped  by 
a  party  of  Indians.  I  believe  every  one  who  is  in  the 
habit  of  dreaming,  will  recoUecl  inftances,  in  his  own 
cafe,  of  a  fimilar  nature. 

2.  Our    dreams  are   influenced  by  the  prevailing 
temper  of  the  mind ;  and  vary,  in  their  complexion, 
according  as  our  habitual  difpofition,  at  the  time,  in- 
clines 


33^  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

clines  us  to  cheerfiilnefs  or  to  melancholy.  Not  that 
this  obfervation  holds  without  exception  ;  but  it  holds 
fo  generally,  as  muft  convince  us,  that  the  ftate  of 
our  fpirits  has  fome  efFecl  on  our  dreams,  as  well  as 
on  our  waking  thoughts.  Indeed,  in  the  latter  cafe, 
no  lefs  than  in  the  former,  this  effeft  may  be  counter- 
afted,  or  modified  by  various  other  circumllanccs. 

After  having  made  a  narrow  efcape  from  any  alarm- 
ing danger,  we  are  apt  to  awake,  in  the  courfe  of  our 
fleep,  with  fudden  ftartings  ;  imagining  that  we  are 
drowning,  or  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice.  A  fevere 
misfortune,  which  has  affefted  the  mind  deeply,  in- 
fluences our  dreams  in  a  fmiilar  way ;  and  fuggefts 
to  us  a  variety  of  adventures,  analogous,  in  fome 
meafure,  to  that  event  from  which  our  diflrefs  arifes. 
Such,  according  to  Virgil,  were  the  dreams  of  the  for- 
faken  Dido. 

*'  Agit  ipfe  furentem. 


"  In  fomnis  ferus  ^neas  ;  femperque  relinqui, 
"  Sola  fibi  ;  femper  longam  incomitata  videtur, 
'*  Ire  viam,  et  Tyrios  deferta  quiercre  terra." 

3.  Our  dreams  are  influenced  by  our  prevailing 
habits  of  aflbciation  while  awake. 

In  a  former  part  of  t^liis  work,  I  confidered  the 
extent  of  that  power  which  the  mind  may  acquire 
over  the  train  of  its  thoughts  ;  and  I  obferved,  that 
thofe  intellectual  diverfities  among  men,  which  we 
commonly  refer  to  peculiarities  of  genius,  are,  at 
leafl:  in  a  great  meafure,  refolvable  into  diff'erences  in 
their  habits  of  aflbciation.  One  man  pofl^efles  a  rich 
and  beautiful  fancy,  which  is  at  all  times  obedient  to 
13  his 


Part  I.  ^"  5.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  337 

his  will.  Another  pofleffes  a  quicknefs  of  recollec- 
tion, which  enables  him,  at  a  moment's  warning,  to 
bring  together  all  the  refults  of  his  paft  experience, 
and  of  his  paft  refleftions,  which  can  be  of  ufe  for 
illuftrating  any  propofed  fubjedt.  A  third  can,  \vith- 
out  effort,  colled  his  attention  to  the  mofl  abftract 
queftions  in  philofophy  ;  can  perceive,  at  a  glance, 
the  fhortefl  and  the  mofl  effectual  procefs  for  arriving 
at  the  truth  ;  and  can  banifh  from  his  mind  every  ex- 
traneous idea,  which  fancy  or  cafual  affociation  may 
fuggefl,  to  diftract  his  thoughts,  or  to  miflead  his 
judgment.  A  fourth  unites  all  thefe  powers  in  a  ca- 
pacity of  perceiving  truth  with  an  almofl  intuitive 
rapidity ;  and  in  an  eloquence  which  enables  him  to 
command,  at  pleafure,  whatever  his  memory  and  his 
fancy  can  fupply,  to  illuflrate  and  to  adorn  it.  The 
occafional  exercife  which  fuch  men  make  of  their 
powers,  may  undoubtedly  be  faid,  in  one  fenfe,  to 
be  unpremeditated  or  unfludied  ;  but  they  all  indi- 
cate previous  habits  of  meditation  or  fludy,  as  un- 
queftionably,  as  the  dexterity  of  the  expert  ac- 
countant, or  the  rapid  execution  of  the  profeffional 
mufician. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  it  is  evident,  that  a  train 
of  thought  which,  in  one  man,  would  require  a  pain- 
ful effort  of  ftudy,  may,  in  another,  be  almofl  fpon- 
taneous  :  nor  is  it  to  be  doubted,  that  the  reveries  of 
fludious  men,  even  when  they  allow,  as  much  as  they 
can,  their  thoughts  to  follow  their  own  courfe,  are 
more  or  lefs  connected  together  by  thofe  principles  of 
affociation,  which  their  favourite  purfuits  tend  more 
particularly  to  flrengthen. 

Z  The 


338  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

The  influence  of  the  fame  habits  may  be  traced 
diftindlly  in  fleep.  There  are  probably  few  mathema- 
ticians, who  have  not  dreamed  of  an  interefling 
problem,  and  who  have  not  even  fancied  that  they 
were  profecuting  the  inveftigation  of  it  with  much 
fuccefs.  They  whofe  ambition  leads  them  to  the 
fludy  of  eloquence,  are  frequently  confcious,  during 
fleep,  of  a  renewal  of  their  daily  occupations ;  and 
fometimes  feel  themfelves  poflefled  of  a  fluency  of 
fpeech,  which  they  never  experienced  before.  The 
Poet,  in  his  dreams,  is  tranfported  into  Elyfmm,  and 
leaves  the  vulgar  and  unfatisfadory  enjoyments  of  hu- 
manity, to  dwell  in  thofe  regions  of  enchantment  and 
rapture,  which  have  been  created  by  the  divine  imagi- 
nations of  Virgil  and  of  Taflfo. 

"  And  hither  Morpheus  fent  his  kindeft  dreams, 
"  Raifing  a  world  of  gayer  tinft  and  grace  ; 
"  O'er  which  were  fhadowy  call  Elyfian  gleams, 
**  That  play'd,  in  waving  lights,  from  place  to  place, 
*♦  And  fhed  a  rofeate  fmile  on  Nature's  face. 
"  Not  Titian's  pencil  e'er  could  fo  array, 
"  So  fleece  with  clouds  the  pure  etherial  fpace  ; 
'*  Ne  could  it  e'er  fuch  melting  forms  difplay, 
*'  As  loofe  on  flowery  beds  all  languifliingly  lay. 

**  No,  fair  illufions  !  artful  phantoms,  no  5 

"  My  mufe  will  not  attempt  your  fairy  land  : 

"  She  has  no  colours,  that  like  your's  can  glow  ; 

"  To  catch  your  vivid  fcenes,  too  grofs  her  hand*." 

As  a   farther    proof  that    the   fucceflion    of  our 
thoughts  in  dreaming,  is  influenced  by  our  prevailing 

♦  Caftle  of  Indolence. 

habits 


Parti.  §5*  ^^    ^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  339 

habits  of  aflbciation  ;  it  may  be  remarked,  that  the 
fcenes  and  occurrences  which  moft  frequently  prefent 
themfelves  to  the  mind  while  we  are  alleep,  are  the 
fcenes  and  occurrences  of  childhood  and  early  youth. 
The  facility  of  aflbciation  is  then  much  greater  than 
in  more  advanced  years  ;  and  although,  during  the 
day,  the  memory  of  the  events  thus  aflbciated,  may 
be  baniflied  by  the  objeds  and  purfuits  which  prefs 
upon  our  fenfes,  it  retains  a  more  permanent  hold 
of  the  mind  than  any  of  our  fubfequent  acquifitions  : 
and,  like  the  knowledge  which  we  poflefs  of  our  mo- 
ther tongue,  is,  as  it  were,  interwoven  and  incorpo- 
rated with  all  its  mod  elfential  habits.  Accordingly, 
in  old  men,  whofe  thoughts  are,  in  a  great  meafure, 
difengaged  from  the  world,  the  tranfadlions  of  their 
middle  age,  which  once  feemed  fo  important,  are  of- 
ten obliterated  ;  while  the  mind  dwells,  as  in  a  dream, 
on  the  fports  and  the  companions  of  their  infancy. 

I  fhall  only  obferve  farther,  on  this  head,  that  in 
our  dreams,  as  well  as  when  awake,  we  occafionally 
make  ufe  of  words  as  an  inflrument  of  thought.  Such 
dreams,  however,  do  not  affect  the  mind  with  fuch 
emotions  ofpleafure  and  of  pain,  asthofe  in  which  the 
imagination  is  occupied  with  particular  objeds  of  fenfe. 
The  eff"ect  of  philofophical  ftudies,  in  habituating  the 
mind  to  the  almoft  conftant  employment  of  this  inflru- 
ment, and,  of  confequence,  its  effeft  in  weakening  the 
imagination,  was  formerly  remarked.  If  I  am  not 
miflaken,  the  influence  of  thefe  circumftances  may  alfo 
be  traced  in  the  hiftory  of  our  dreams  ;  which,  in  youth 
commonly  involve,  in  a  much  greater  degree,  the  ex- 
ercife  of  imagination  j  and  afFed  the  mind  with  much 
Z  2  more 


340  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Clap.  V. 

more  powerful  emotions,  than  when  we  begin  to  em- 
ploy our  maturer  faculties  in  more  general  and  abftrad 
fpeculations. 

II.  From  thefe  different  obfervations,  we  are  autho- 
rifed  to  conclude,  that  the  fame  laws  of  affociation  which 
regulate  the  train  of  our  thoughts  while  we  are  awake, 
continue  to  operate  during  fleep.  I  now  proceed  to 
confider,  how  far  the  circumftances  which  difcriminate 
dreaming  from  our  waking  thoughts,  correfpond  with 
thofe  which  might  be  expeded  to  refult  from  the  fuf- 
-penfion  of  the  influence  of  the  will. 

I.  If  the  influence  of  the  will  be  fufpended  during 
fleep,  all  our  voluntary  operations,  fuch  as  recollection, 
reafoning,  &c.  mufl:  alfo  be  fufpended. 

That  this  really  is  the  cafe,  the  extravagance  and  in- 
confifliency  of  our  dreams  are  fufficient  proofs.  We 
frequently  confound  together  times  and  places  the  mofl: 
remote  from  each  other  ;  and,  in  the  courfe  of  the  fame 
dream,  conceive  the  fame  perfon  as  exifl:ing  in  different 
parts  of  the  world.  Sometimes  we  imagine  ourfelves 
converfmg  with  a  dead  friend,  without  remembering 
the  circumfliance  of  his  death,  although,  perhaps,  it 
happened  but  a  few  days  before,  and  affefted  us  deeply* 
All  this  proves  clearly,  that  the  fubjects  which  then 
occupy  our  thoughts,  are  fuch  as  prefent  themfelves  to 
the  mind  fpontaneoufly  ;  and  that  we  have  no  power 
of  employing  our  reafon  in  comparing  together  the 
different  parts  of  our  dreams  ;  or  even  of  exerting  an 
aO:  of  recollection,  in  order  to  afcertain  how  far  they 
are  confifl:ent  and  poffible. 

The  proceffes  of  reafoning  in  which  we  fometimes 
fancy  ourfelves  to  be  engaged  during  fleep,  furnifli  no 

exception 


Parti.  §5.  OF  THE    HUMAN    MIND.  34 1 

exception  to  the  foregoing  obfervation  ;  for  although 
every  fuch  procefs,  the  firfl:  time  we  form  it,  implies, 
volition  ;  and,  in  particular,  implies  a  recolledion  of 
the  premifes,  till  we  arrive  at  the  conclufion  ;  yet 
when  a  number  of  truths  have  been  often  prefented  to 
us  as  neceflarily  connected  with  each  other,  this  feries 
may  afterwards  pafs  through  the  mind,  according  to 
the  laws  of  alTociation,  without  any  more  activity  on 
our  part,  than  in  thofe  trains  of  thought  which  are  the 
moft  loofe  and  incoherent.  Nor  is  this  mere  theory. 
I  may  venture  to  appeal  to  the  confcioufnefs  of  every 
man  accullomed  to  dream,  whether  his  reafonings 
during  Ileep  do  not  feem  to  be  carried  on  without  any 
exertion  of  his  will  ;  and  with  a  degree  of  facility,  of 
which  he  was  never  confcious  while  awake.  Mr, 
Addifon,  in  one  of  his  Spectators,  has  made  this  ob- 
fervation ;  and  his  teftimony,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  is 
of  the  greater  weight,  that  he  had  no  particular  theory 
on  the  fubjed  to  fupport.  "  There  is  not,"  (fays  he,) 
*'  a  more  painful  action  of  the  mind  than  invention, 
"  yet  in  dreams  it  works  with  that  eafe  and  adlivity, 
"  that  we  are  not  fenfible  when  the  faculty  is  employ- 
"  ed.  For  inflance,  I  believe  every  one,  fome  time 
*'  or  other,  dreams  that  he  is  reading  papers,  books, 
**  or  letters  ;  in  which  cafe  the  invention  prompts  fo 
"  readily,  that  the  mind  is  impofed  on,  and  mif- 
*'  takes  its  own  fuggeftions  for  the  compofition  of 
*'  another*." 

2.  If  the  influence  of  the  will  during  fleep  be  fuf- 
pended,  the  mind  will  remain  as  paflive,  while  its 
thoughts  change  from  one  fubjecl  to  another,  as  it  does 

♦  N»487. 
Z  3  during 


342  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

during  our  waking  hours,  while  different  perceptible 
objedls  are  prefented  to  our  fenfes. 

Of  this  paflive  ftate  of  the  mind  in  our  dreams,  it  is 
unneceffary  to  multiply  proofs  ;  as  it  has  always  been 
confidered  as  one  of  the  moft  extraordinary  circum- 
ftances  with  which  they  are  accompanied.  If  our 
dreams,  as  well  as  our  waking  thoughts,  were  fubjecl 
to  the  will,  is  it  not  natural  to  conclude,  that  in  the  one 
cafe,  as  well  as  in  the  other,  we  would  endeavour  to 
banilh,  as  much  as  we  could,  every  idea  which  had  a 
tendency  to  diflurb  us  ;  and  detain  thofe  only  which 
we  found  to  be  agreeable  ?  So  far,  however,  is  this 
power  over  our  thoughts  from  being  exercifed,  that 
we  are  frequently  oppreiTed,  in  fpite  of  all  our  efforts 
to  the  contrary,  with  dreams  which  affect  us  with  the 
moft  painful  emotions.  And,  indeed,  it  is  matter  of 
vulgar  remark,  that  our  dreams  are,  in  every  cafe,  in- 
voluntary on  our  part ;  and  that  they  appear  to  be 
obtruded  on  us  by  fome  external  caufe.  This  fadl  ap- 
peared fo  unaccountable  to  the  late  Mr.  Baxter,  that 
it  gave  rife  to  his  very  whimfical  theory,  in  which  he 
afcribes  dreams  to  the  immediate  influence  of  feparate 
fpirits  on  the  mind. 

3.  If  the  influence  of  the  will  be  fufpended  during 
fleep,  the  conceptions  which  we  then  form  of  fenfible 
objeds,  will  be  attended  with  a  belief  of  their  real  ex- 
iftence,  as  much  as  the  perception  of  the  fame  objects 
is  while  we  are  awake. 

In  treating  of  the  power  of  Conception,  I  formerly 
obferved,  that  our  belief  of  the  feparate  and  indepen- 
dent exiftence  of  the  objeds  of  our  perceptions,  is  the 
relult  of  experience  j  which  teaches  us  that  thefe  per- 
ceptions 


Parti.  ^ J-  ^'   ^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  343 

ceptions  do  not  depend  on  our  will.  If  I  open  my 
eyes,  I  cannot  prevent  myfelf  from  feeing  the  profpeft 
before  me.  The  cafe  is  different  with  refpect  to  our 
conceptions.  While  they  occupy  the  mind,  to  the 
exclufion  of  every  thing  elfe,  I  endeavoured  to  fhew, 
that  they  are  always  accompanied  with  belief  j  but  as 
we  can  banifli  them  from  the  mind,  during  our  waking 
hours,  at  pleafure  ;  and  as  the  momentary  belief  which 
they  produce,  is  continually  checked  by  the  furround- 
ing  objedls  of  our  perceptions,  we  learn  to  confider 
them  as  fictions  of  our  own  creation  ;  and,  except- 
ing in  fome  accidental  cafes,  pay  no  regard  to  them  in 
the  condu6t  of  life.  If  thedodrine,  however,  formerly 
flated  with  refpect  to  conception  be  juft,  and  if,  at  the 
fame  time  it  be  allowed,  that  lleep  fufpends  the  in- 
fluence of  the  will  over  the  train  of  our  thoughts,  we 
fhould  naturally  be  led  to  expeft,  that  the  fame  belief 
which  accompanies  perception  while  we  are  awake, 
fhould  accompany  the  conceptions  which  occur  to  us 
in  our  dreams.  It  is  fcarcely  neceflary  for  me  to  re- 
mark, how  ftrikingly  this  conclufion  coincides  with 
acknowledged  fads. 

May  it  not  be  confidered  as  fome  confirmation  of 
the  foregoing  doftrine,  that  when  opium  fails  in  pro- 
ducing complete  fleep,  it  commonly  produces  one  of" 
the  effefts  of  fleep,  by  fufpending  the  adivity  of  the 
mind,  and  throwing  it  into  a  reverie  ;  and  that  while 
we  are  in  this  fl;ate,  our  conceptions  frequently  affeft 
us  nearly  in  the  fame  manner,  as  if  the  objeds  conceived 
were  prefent  to  our  fenfes  *  ? 

*  See  the  Baron  de  Tott's  Account  of  the  Opium-takers  at 
Conftantinople. 

Z  4  Another 


344  ELEMENTS   OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  V. 

Another  circumflance  with  refpeft  to  our  concep- 
tions during  fleep,  deferves  our  notice.     As  the  fub- 
jefts  which  we  then  think  upon,  occupy  the  mind  ex- 
clufively  ;   and  as  the  attention  is  not  diverted  by  the 
objeds  of  our  external  fenfes,  our  conceptions  muft  be 
proportionably  lively  and  fteady.    Every  perfon  knows 
how  faint  the  conception  is  which  we  form  of  any 
thing,  with  our  eyes  open,  in  comparifon  of  what  we 
can  form  with  our  eyes  fhut :  and  that  in  proportion 
as  we  can  fufpend  the  exercife  of  all  our  other  fenfes, 
the  livelinefs  of  our  conception  increafes.      To  this 
caufe  is  to  be  afcribed,  in  part,   the  effect  which  the 
dread  of  fpirits  in  the  dark,  has  on  fome  perfons,  who 
are  fully  convinced  in  fpeculation,  that  their  apprehen- 
fions  are  groundlefs  ;   and  to  this  alio  is  owing,  the 
eifeft  of  any  accidental  perception  in  giving  them  a 
momentary  relief  from  their  terrors.     Hence  the  re- 
medy which  nature  points  out  to  us,  when  we  find 
ourfelves  overpowered  by  imagination.    If  every  thing 
around  us  be  filcnt,   we  endeavour  to  create  a  noife, 
by  fpeaking  aloud,   or  beating  with  our  feet ;  that  is, 
we  flrive  to  divert  the  attention  from  the  fubjefts  of 
our    imagination,    by   prefenting    an    object    to    our 
powers  of  perception.     The  conclufion  which  I  draw 
from  thefe  obfervations  is,  that,  as  there  is  no  flate  of 
the  body  in  which  our  perceptive  powers  ai*e  fo  totally 
unemployed  as  in  fleep,   it  is  natural  to  think,  that 
the  objefts  which  we  conceive  or  imagine,  mufl  then 
make  an  imprefTion  on  the  mind,    beyond  compari- 
fon greater,  than  any  thing  of  which  we  can  have  ex- 
perience while  awake. 

From 


Part  I.  §  5.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  -^^r 

From  thefe  principles  may  be  derived  a  fimple,  and, 
I  think,  a  fatistaftory  explanation  of  what  fome  writers 
have  reprefented  asthemoft  myfteriousofall  the  circum- 
ftances  connected  with  dreaming  ;  the  inaccurate  efti- 
mates  we  are  apt  to  form  of  Time,  while  we  are  thus 
employed ;  —  an  inaccuracy  which  fometimes  extends 
fo  far,  as  to  give  to  a  fmgle  inftant,  the  appearance 
of  hours,  or  perhaps  of  days.  A  fudden  noife,  for  ex- 
ample, fuggefts  a  dream  connefted  with  that  percep- 
tion ;  and,  the  moment  afterwards,  this  noife  has  the 
effedl  of  awaking  us  ;  and  yet,  during  that  momentary 
interval,  a  long  feries  of  circumftances  has  pafTed  be- 
fore the  imagination.  The  ftory  quoted  by  Mr.  Ad- 
difon*  from  the  Turkifli  Tales,  of  the  miracle  wrought 
by  a  Mahometan  Doftor,  to  convince  an  infidel  Sul- 
tan, is,  in  fuch  cafes,  nearly  verified. 

The  fa£ls  I  allude  to  at  prefent  are  gener?.Ily  ex- 
plained by  fuppofmg,  that,  in  our  dreams,  the  rapidity 
of  thought  is  greater  than  while  we  are  awake  :  —  but 
there  is  no  neceffity  for  having  recourfe  to  fuch  a  fup- 
pofition.  The  rapidity  of  thought  is,  at  all  times, 
fuch,  that  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  a  crowd  of  ideas 
may  pafs  before  us,  to  which  it  would  require  a  long 
difcourfe  to  give  utterance  ;  and  tranfa6tions  may  be 
conceived,  which  it  would  require  days  to  realize. 
But,  in  ileep,  the  conceptions  of  the  mind  are  mif- 
taken  for  realities;  and  therefore,  our  eftimates  of 
Time  will  be  formed,  not  according  to  our  experi- 
ence of  the  rapidity  of  thought,  but  according  to 
our  experience  of  the  time  requifite  for  realizing  what 
we  conceive.  Something  perfectly  analogous  to  this 
*  Spectator,  No. 94. 

may 


34^  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

may  be  remarked  in  the  perceptions  we  obtain  by  the 
fenfe  of  fight.  When  I  look  into  a  fhew-box,  where 
the  deception  is  imperfect,  I  fee  only  a  fet  of  paltry 
dawbings  of  a  few  inches  diameter  ;  but,  if  the  repre- 
fentation  be  executed  with  fo  much  Ikill,  as  to  convey 
to  me  the  idea  of  a  diftant  profpecl,  every  object  be- 
fore me  fwells  in  its  dimenfions,  in  proportion  to  the 
extent  of  fpace  which  I  conceive  it  to  occupy  ;  and 
what  feemed  before  to  be  fhut  up  within  the  limits 
of  a  fmall  wooden  frame,  is  magnified,  in  my  appre- 
henfion,  to  an  immenfe  landfcape  of  woods,  rivers,  and 
mountains. 

The  phenomena  which  we  have  hitherto  explained, 
take  place  when  lleep  feems  to  be  complete  ;  that  is, 
when  the  mind  lofes  its  influence  over  all  thofe  powers 
whofe  exercife  depends  on  its  will.  There  are,  how- 
ever, many  cafes  in  which  fleep  feems  to  be  partial ; 
that  is,  when  the  mind  lofes  its  influence  over  fome 
powers,  and  retains  it  over  others.  In  the  cafe  of  the 
fo7nna7nbulii  it  retains  its  power  over  the  limbs,  but  it  pof- 
feflfes  no  influence  over  its  own  thoughts,  and  fcarcely 
any  over  the  body  ;  excepting  thofe  particular  members 
of  it  which  are  employed  in  walking.  In  madnefs,  the 
powers  of  the  will  over  the  body  remains  undiminilhed, 
while  its  influence  in  regulating  the  train  of  thought 
is  in  a  great  meafure  fufpended  ;  either  in  confequence 
of  a  particular  idea,  which  engroflfes  the  attention,  to 
the  exclufion  of  every  thing  elfe,  and  which  we  find 
it  impofllble  to  banifh  by  our  eflx)rts  ;  or  in  confequence 
of  our  thoughts  fucceeding  each  other  with  fuch  ra- 
pidity, that  we  are  unable  to  flop  the  train.  In  both 
of  thefe  kinds  of  madnefs,  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that 

the 


Part  I.  §  5.  OF    THE    HUMAN   MIND.  347 

the  conceptions  or  imaginations  of  the  mind  becoming 
independent  of  our  will,  they  are  apt  to  be  millaken 
Tor  actual  perceptions,  and  to  affed  us  in  the  fame 
manner. 

By  means  of  this  fuppofition  of  a  partial  fleep,  any 
apparent  exceptions  which  the  hiflory  of  dreams  may 
afford  to  the  general  principles  already  dated,  admit 
of  an  eafy  explanation. 

Upon  reviewing  the  foregoing  obfervations,  it  does 
not  occur  to  me,  that  I  have  in  any  inftance  tranf- 
greffed  thofe  rules  of  philofophifmg,  which,  fince  the 
time  of  Newton,  are  commonly  appealed  to,  as  the 
tefts  of  found  inveftigation.  For,  in  the  firfl  place,  I 
have  not  fuppofed  any  caufes  which  are  not  known  to 
exift  ;  and  fecondly,  I  have  fhewn,  that  the  phenoijiena 
under  our  confi deration  are  neceifary  confequences  of 
the  caufes  to  which  I  have  referred  them.  I  have  not 
fuppofed  that  the  mind  acquires  in  fleep,  any  new  fa- 
culty of  which  we  are  not  confcious  while  awake  ; 
but  only  (what  we  know  to  be  a  fad)  that  it  retains 
fome  of  its  powers,  while  the  exercife  of  others  is  fuf- 
pended  :  and  I  have  deduced  fynthetically,  the  known 
phenomena  of  dreaming,  from  the  operation  of  a  par- 
ticular clafs  of  our  faculties,  uncorrefted  by  the  opera- 
tion of  another.  I  flatter  myfelf,  therefore,  that  this 
inquiry  will  not  only  throw  fome  light  on  the  fliate  of 
the  mind  in  fleep  ;  but  that  it  will  have  a  tendency  to 
illufl:rate  the  mutual  adaptation  and  fubferviency  which 
exifl:s  among  the  different  parts  of  our  conflitution, 
when  we  are  in  complete  poffeffion  of  all  the  faculties 
and  principles  which  belong  to  our  nature  *. 

*  See  Note  [O.] 


34^  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 


CHAPTER    FIFTH. 


PART    SECOND. 

Of  the  Influence  of  Aflbciation  on  the  Inteiledual  and 
on  the  Adive  Powers. 


SECTION    I. 

OJ  the  Injlucnce  of  caj'ual  JJfociations  on  our  fpectdative 
Conclufions. 

nr^HE  Aflbciation  of  ideas  has  a  tendency  to  warp 
-^  our  fpeculative  opinions  chiefly  in  the  three  fol- 
lowing ways : 

Firll,  by  blending  together  in  our  apprehenfions, 
things  which  are  really  difliind  in  their  nature  ;  fo  as 
to  introduce  perplexity  and  error  into  every  procefs  of 
reafoning  in  which  they  are  involved. 

Secondly,  by  mifleading  us  in  thofe  anticipations 
of  the  future  from  the  pafl:,  which  our  conilitution 
difpofes  us  to  form,  and  which  are  the  great  foundation 
of  our  conduft  in  life. 

Thirdly,  by  connecting  in  the  mind  erroneous 
opinions,  with  truths  which  irrefiflibly  command  our 
aflent,  and  which  we  feel  to  be  of  importance  to  hu- 
man happinefs. 

A  fliort  illufliration  of  thefe  remarks,  will  throw  light 
on  the  origin  of  various  prejudices  ;  and  may,  perhaps, 

fuggeft 


Part  II.  §  I-  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  340 

fuggefl  fome  praftical  hints  with  refpedt  to  the  conduft 
of  the  underftanding. 

I.  I  formerly  had  occafion  to  mention  feveral  in- 
ftances  of  very  intimate  aflbciations  formed  between  two 
ideas  which  have  no  necelfary  connexion  with  each 
other.  One  of  the  mofl  remarkable  is,  that  which 
exifls  in  every  perfon's  mind  between  the  notions  of 
colour  and  of  extenftoii.  The  former  of  thefe  words 
expreffes  (at  lead  in  the  fenfe  in  which  we  commonly 
employ  it)  a  fenfation  in  the  mind ;  the  latter  denotes 
a  quality  of  an  external  objeO: ;  fo  that  there  is,  in  fa6t, 
no  more  connexion  between  the  two  notions  than  be- 
tween thofe  of  pain  and  of  folidity*  ;  and  yet,  in  con- 
fequence  of  our  always  perceiving  extenfion,  at  the 
fame  time  at  which  the  fenfation  of  colour  is  excited  in 
the  mind,  we  find  it  impoflible  to  think  of  that  fenfa- 
tion, without  conceiving  extenfion  along  with  it. 

Another  intimate  aflbciation  is  formed  in  every 
mind  between  the  ideas  oi  fpace  and  of  time.  When 
we  think  of  an  interval  of  duration,  we  always  conceive 
it  as  fomething  analogous  to  a  line,  and  we  apply  the 
fame  language  to  both  fubjetts.  We  fpeak  of  a  long 
2iYidiJhort  time,  as  well  as  of  a  long  znd  Jljort  dijlance  j 
and  we  are  not  confcious  of  any  metaphor  in  doing  fo. 
Nay,  fo  very  perfed  does  the  analogy  appear  to  us, 
that  Bofcovich  mentions  it  as  a  curious  circumftance, 
that  extenfion  fhould  have  three  dimenfions,  and  dura- 
tion only  one. 

This  apprehended  analogy  feems  to  be  founded 
wholly  on  an  affociation  between  the  ideas  of  fpace  and 

*  See  Note  [PT. 

of 


350  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V- 

of  time,  arifing  from  our  always  meafuring  the  one  of 
thefe  quantities  by  the  other.  We  meafure  time  by 
motion,  and  motion  by  extenfion.  In  an  hour,  the 
hand  of  the  clock  moves  over  a  certain  fpace  ;  in  two 
hours,  over  double  the  fpace  ;  and  fo  on.  Hence  the 
ideas  of  fpace  and  of  time  become  very  intimately 
united,  and  we  apply  to  the  latter  the  words  loiig  and 
Jhort,  before  and  after,  in  the  fame  manner  as  to  the 
former. 

The  apprehended  analogy  between  the  relation 
which  the  different  notes  in  the  fcale  of  mufic  bear  to 
each  other,  and  the  relation  of  fuperiority  and  inferio- 
rity, in  refpeft  of  pofition,  among  material  objefts, 
arifes  alfo  from  an  accidental  alTociation  of  ideas. 

What  this  aflbciation  is  founded  upon,  I  fhall  not 
take  upon  me  to  determine  ;  but  that  it  is  the  effeft 
of  accident,  appears  clearly  from  this,  that  it  has  not 
only  been  confined  to  particular  ages  and  nations ; 
but  is  the  very  reverfe  of  an  aflbciation  which  was 
once  equally  prevalent.  It  is  obferved  by  Dr.  Gregory, 
in  the  preface  to  his  edition  of  Euclid's  works,  that  the 
more  antient  of  the  Greek  writers  looked  upon  grave 
■^  founds  as  high,  and  acute  ones  as  low ;  and  that  the 
prefent  mode  of  expreflion  on  that  fubjed:,  was  an 
innovation  introduced  at  a  later  period  *. 

In  the  inflances  which  have  now  been  mentioned, 
our  habits  of  combining  the  notions  of  two  things, 
become  fo  ftrong,  that  we  find  it  impoflible  to  think 
of  the  one,  without  thinking  at  the  fame  time  of  the 
other.     Various  other  examples  of  the  fame  fpecies 

*  See  Note  [Q]. 

of 


Part  II,  §  I.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  3^1 

of  combination,  although,  perhaps,  not  altogether  fo 
ftriking  in  degree,  might  eafily  be  collefted  from  the 
fubjecls  about    which  our    metaphyfical  fpeculations 
are   employed.     The  fenfations,    for    inftance,  which 
are  excited  in  the  mind  by  external  objetts,  and  the 
perceptions    of  material    qualities  which  follow  thefe 
fenfations,  are  to    be  diflinguifhed   from   each    other 
only    by  long    habits  of  patient  reflexion.     A  clear 
conception  of  this  diftindion  may  be  regarded  as  the 
key  to  all  Dr.  Reid's  reafonings  concerning  the  pro- 
cefs  of  nature  in  perception ;  and,  till   it    has   once 
been  rendered  familiar  to  the  reader,  a  great  part  of 
his  writings  muft  appear  unfatisfadory  and  obfcure.  — 
In  truth,  our  progrefs  in  the  philofophy  of  the  hu-  ■ 
man  mind  depends  much  more  on  that  fevere  and 
difcriminating  judgment,  which  enables  us  to  feparate    - 
ideas  which  nature  or  habit  have  immediately  com-    ; 
bined,  than  on  acutenefs  of  reafoning  or  fertility  of  | 
invention.     And  hence  it  is,  that  metaphyfical  ftudies  4 
are  the  bell  of  all  preparations  for  thofe  philofophicai   ' 
purfuits  which  relate  to  the  condud  of  life.     In  none 
of  thefe  do  we  meet  with  cafual  combinations  fo  in- 
timate and  indiflbluble  as  thofe  which  occur  in  me- 
taphyfics ;  and  he  who  has  been  accuftomed  to  fuch 
difcriminations  as  this  fcience  requires,  will  not  eafily 
be  impofed  on  by  that  confufion  of  ideas,  which  warps 
the  judgments  of  the  multitude  in  moral,  religious, 
and  political  inquiries. 

From  the  fadts  which  have  now  been  ftated,  it  is 

eafy   to  conceive  the  manner  in  which  the  aflbciation 

of  ideas  has  a  tendency  to  miflead  the  judgment,  in 

the  firfl  of  the  three  cafes  already  enumerated.     When 

10*  two 


352  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.V. 

two  fubjefts  of  thought  are  fo  intimately  connected 
together  in  the  mind,  that  we  find  it  fcarcely  poflible 
to  confider  them  apart ;  it  muft  require  no  common 
efforts  of  attention,  to  conduft  any  procefs  of  reafon- 
ing  which  relates  to  either.  I  formerly  took  notice 
of  the  errors  to  which  we  are  expofed  in  confequence 
of  the  ambiguity  of  words  ;  and  of  the  neceffity  of 
frequently  checking  'and  correding  our  general  rea- 
fonings  by  means  of  particular  examples  ;  but  in  the 
cafes  to  which  I  allude  at  prefent,  there  is  (if  I  may 
ufe  the  expreflion)  an  ambiguity  of  things  ;  fo  that 
even  when  the  mind  is  occupied  about  particulars, 
it  finds  it  difficult  to  feparate  the  proper  objeds  of 
its  attention  from  others  with  which  it  has  been  long 
accuftomed  to  blend  them.  The  cafes,  indeed,  in 
which  fuch  obflinate  and  invincible  aflbciations  are 
formed  among  different  fubjefts  of  thought,  are  not 
very  numerous,  and  occur  chiefly  in  our  metaphy- 
fical  refearches  ;  but  in  every  mind,  cafual  combina- 
tions of  an  inferior  degree  of  flrength,  have  an  ha- 
bitual effedl  in  diflurbing  the  intelledual  powers,  and 
are  not  to  be  conquered  without  perfevering  exer- 
tions, of  which  few  men  are  capable.  The  obvious 
effeds  which  this  tendency  to  combination  produces 
on  the  judgment,  in  confounding  together  thofe  ideas 
which  it  is  the  province  of  the  metaphyfician  to  dif- 
tinguifh,  fufficiently  illuftrate  the  mode  of  its  opera- 
tion in  thofe  numerous  inftances,  in  which  its  influ- 
ence, though  not  fo  complete  and  ftriking,  is  equally 
real,  and  far  more  dangerous. 

II.  The  alTociation  of  ideas  is  a  fource  of  fpecula- 

tiv€  error,  by  mifleading  us  in  thofe  anticipations  of 

13  the 


Pavtll.  $1.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  35J 

the  future  from  the  pad,  which  are  the  foundation  of 
pur  condu6l  in  Hfe. 

The  great  objedl  of  philofophy,  as  I  have  ah-eady 
remarked  more  than  once,  is  to  afcertain  the  laws 
which  regulate  the  fucceflion  of  events,  both  in  the 
phyfical  and  moral  worlds ;  in  order  that,  when 
called  upon  to  acl  in  any  particular  combination  of 
circumftances,  we  may  be  enabled  to  anticipate  the 
probable  courfe  of  nature  from  our  pad  experience, 
and  to  regulate  our  conduct  accordingly.  ' 

As  a  knowledge  of  the  eftabhihed  connexions 
among  events,  is  the  foundation  of  fagacity  and  of 
fkill,  both  in  the  practical  arts,  and  in  the  conduft 
of  life,  nature  has  not  only  given  to  all  men  a  ftrong 
difpofition  to  remark,  with  attention  and  curiofity, 
thofe  phenomena  which  have  been  obferved  to  hap- 
pen nearly  at  the  fame  time ;  but  has  beautifully 
adapted  to  the  uniformity  of  her  own  operations,  the 
laws  of  affociation  in  the  human  mind.  By  rendering 
contiguity  in  time  one  of  the  ftrongeft  of  our  alfociating 
principles,  llie  has  conjoined  together  in  our  thoughts, 
the  fame  events  which  we  have  found  conjoined  in 
our  experience,  and  has  thus  accommodated  (without 
any  effort  on  our  part)  the  order  of  our  ideas  to  that 
fcene  in  which  we  are  deftined  to  ad. 

The  degree  of  experience  which  Is  neceffary  for 
the  prefervation  of  our  animal  exiftence,  is  acquired 
by  all  men  without  any  particular  efforts  of  ftudy. 
The  laws  of  nature,  which  it  is  moft  material  for  us 
to  know,  are  expofed  to  the  immediate  obfervation  of 
our  fenfes  ;  and  eftablilh,  by  means  of  the  principle 
of  affociation,  a  correfponding  order  in  our  thoughts, 

A  a  loni^ 


354  ELEMENTS   OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

long  before  the  dawn  of  reafon  and  reflexion ;  or  at 
leaft  long  before  that  period  of  childhood,  to  which' 
our  recollection  afterwards  extends. 

This  tendency  of  the  mind  to  affociate  together 
events  which  have  been  prefented  to  it  nearly  at  the 
fame  time;  although,  on  the  whole,  it  is  attended 
with  infinite  advantages,  yet,  like  many  other  prin- 
ciples of  our  nature,  may  occafionally  be  a  fource  of 
inconvenience,  unlefs  we  avail  ourfelves  of  our  reafon 
and  of  our  experience  in  keeping  it  under  proper  re- 
gulation. Among  the  various  phenomena  which  are 
continually  paffing  before  us,  there  is  a  great  pro- 
portion, whofe  vicinity  in  time  does  not  indicate  a 
conftancy  of  conjunction ;  and  unlefs  we  be  careful 
to  make  the  diftinction  between  thefe  two  clafles  of 
connexions,  the  order  of  our  ideas  will  be  apt  to  cor- 
refpond  with  the  one  as  well  as  with  the  other  ;  and 
our  unenlightened  experience  of  the  paft,  will  fill  the 
mind,  in  numberlefs  inftances,  with  vain  expeda- 
tions,  or  with  groundlefs  alarms,  concerning  the  fu- 
ture. This  difpofition  to  confound  together  accidental 
and  permanent  connexions,  is  one  great  fource  of 
popular  fuperftitions.  Hence  the  regard  which  is 
paid  to  unlucky  days ;  to  unlucky  colours  ;  and  to 
the  influence  of  the  planets  ;  apprehenfions,  which 
render  human  life,  to  many,  a  continued  feries  of 
abfurd  terrors.  Lucretius  compares  them  to  thofe 
which  children  feel,  from  dji  idea  of  the  exiftence  of 
fpirits  in  the  dark. 

"  Ac  reluti  pueri  trepidant,  atque  omnia  caeds 
*'  In  tenebris  metuunt,  fie  nos  in  luce  tiinemus, 
**  Interdum  niUilo  qus  fiint  metuenda  magis." 

Such 


Part  II.  §  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  35^ 

Such  fpe£tres  can  be  difpelled  by  the  hght  of  phi- 
lofophy  only  ;  which,  by  accuftoming  us  to  trace  efta- 
blifhed  connexions,  teaches  us  to  defpife  thofe  which 
are  cafual  j  and,  by  giving  a  proper  direction  to  that 
bias  of  the  mind  which  is  the  foundation  of  fuperfti- 
tion,  prevents  it  from  leading  us  aftray. 

In  the  inftances  which  we  have  now  been  confi- 
dering,  events  come  to  be  combined  together  in  the 
mind,  merely  from  the  accidental  circumflance  of 
their  contiguity  in  time,  at  the  moment  when  we 
perceived  them.  Such  combinations  are  confined,  in 
a  great  meafure,  to  uncultivated  and  unenlightened 
minds ;  or  to  thofe  individuals  who,  from  nature  or 
education,  have  a  more  than  ordinary  facility  of  af- 
fociation.  But  there  are  other  accidental  combina- 
tions, which  are  apt  to  lay  hold  of  the  moft  vigorous 
underflandings  ;  and  from  which,  as  they  are  the  na- 
tural and  neceffary  refult  of  a  limited  experience,  no 
fuperiority  of  intelled  is  fufficient  to  preferve  a  philo- 
fopher,  in  the  infancy  of  phyfical  fcience. 

As  the  connexions  among  phyfical  events  are  dif- 
covered  to  us  by  experience  alone,  it  is  evident,  that 
when  we  fee  a  phenomenon  preceded  by  a  number  of 
different  circumftances,  it  is  impoflible  for  us  to  de- 
termine, by  any  reafoning  a  priori^  which  of  thefe 
circumftances  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  conjiant^  and 
which  as  the  accidentaly  antecedents  of  the  effedt.  If, 
in  the  courfe  of  our  experience,  the  fame  combina- 
tion of  circumftances  is  always  exhibited  to  us  with- 
out any  alteration,  and  is  invariably  followed  by  the 
fame  refult,  we  muft  for  ever  remain  ignorant,  whe- 
ther this  refult  be  conneded  \\ith  the  whole  combi- 
A  a  2  nation, 


35^  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

nation,  or  with  one  or  more  of  the  circumflances 
combined  ;  and  therefore,  if  we  are  anxious,  upon 
any  occafion,  to  produce  a  fimilar  effed,  the  only 
rule  that  we  can  follow  with  perfed:  fecurity,  is  to 
imitate  in  every  particular  circumftance  the  combina- 
tion which  we  have  feen.  It  is  only  where  we  have 
an  opportunity  of  feparating  fuch  circumflances  from 
each  other ;  of  combining  them  varioufly  together ; 
and  of  obferving  the  effeds  which  refult  from  thefe 
different  experiments,  that  we  can  afcertain  with  pre- 
cifion,  the  general  laws  of  nature,  and  flrip  phyli- 
cal  caufes  of  their  accidental  and  uneffential  conco- 
mitants. 

To  illuflrate  this  by  an  example.  Let  us  fuppofe 
that  a  favage,  who,  in  a  particular  inftance,  had 
found  himfelf  relieved  of  fome  bodily  indifpofition  by 
a  draught  of  cold  water,  is  a  fecond  time  afflicted 
with  a  fmiilar  diforder,  and  is  defirous  to  repeat  the 
fame  remedy.  With  a  limited  degree  of  experience 
which  we  have  here  fuppofed  him  to  polTefs,  it 
would  be  impofTible  for  the  acutefl  philofopher,  in 
his  fituation,  to  determine,  whether  the  cure  was 
owing  to  the  water  which  was  drunk,  to  the  cup  in 
which  it  was  contained,  to  the  fountain  from  which 
it  was  taken,  to  the  particular  day  of  the  month,  or 
to  the  particular  age  of  the  moon.  In  order,  there- 
fore, to  enfure  the  fuccefs  of  the  remedy,  he  will 
very  naturally,  and  very  wifely,  copy,  as  far  as  he 
can  recollect,  every  circumftance  which  accompanied 
the  firll  application  of  it.  He  will  make  ufe  of  the 
fame  cup,  draw  the  water  from  the  fame  fountain, 
hold  his  body  in  the  fame  pofture,  and  turn  his  face 

14  in 


Partll.  §1.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  35J 

in  the  fame  direftion ;  and  thus  all  the  accidental  cir- 
cumftances  in  which  the  firft  experiment  was  made, 
will  come  to  be  aflbciated  equally  in  his  mind  with 
the  effed;  produced.  The  fountain  from  which  the 
water  was  drawn,  will  be  confidered  as  poffefled  of 
particular  virtues  ;  and  the  cup  from  which  it  was 
drunk,  will  be  fet  apart  from  vulgar  ufes,  for  the 
fake  of  thofe  who  may  afterwards  have  occafion  to 
apply  the  remedy.  It  is  the  enlargement  of  experi- 
ence alone,  and  not  any  progrefs  in  the  art  of  reafon- 
ing,  which  can  cure  the  mind  of  thefe  alTociations, 
and  free  the  praftice  of  medicine  from  thofe  fuper- 
ftitious  obfervances  with  which  we  always  find  it  in- 
cumbered among  rude  nations. 

Many  inftances  of  this  fpecies  of  fuperftition  might 
be  produced  from  the  works  of  philofophers  who 
have  flourifhed  in  more  enlightened  ages.  In  par- 
ticular, many  might  be  produced  from  the  writings  of 
thofe  phyfical  inquirers  who  immediately  fucceeded  to 
Lord  Bacon ;  and  who,  convinced  by  his  arguments, 
of  the  folly  of  all  reafonings  a  priori^  concerning  the 
laws  of  nature,  were  frequently  apt  to  run  into  the 
oppofite  extreme,  by  recording  every  circumftance, 
even  the  mod  ludicrous,  and  the  moft  obvioufly  in- 
eifential,  which  attended  their  experiments  *. 

*  The  reader  will  fcarcely  believe,  that  the  following  cure  for  a 
dyfentery  is  copied  ■verbatim  from  the  works  of  Mr.  Boyle  : 

"  Take  the  thigh-bone  of  a  hanged  man,  (perhaps  another  may 
*'  ferve,  but  this  was  ftill  made  ufe  of, )  calcine  it  to  whitenefs,  and 
"  having  purged  the  patient  with  an  antimonial  medicine,  give  him 
*'  one  drachm  of  this  white  powder  for  one  dofe,  in  fome  good 
*'  cordialj  whether  conferve  or  liquor." 

A  a  3  The 


358  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

The  obfervations  which  have  been  hitherto  made, 
relate  entirely  to  aflbciations  founded  on  cafual  com- 
binations of  material  objecls,  or  of  phyfical  events. 
The  effefts  which  thefe  aflbciations  produce  on  the 
underftanding,  and  which  are  fo  palpable,  that  they 
cannot  fail  to  ftrike  the  mod  carelefs  obferver,  will 
prepare  the  reader  for  the  remarks  I  am  now  to  make, 
on  fome  analogous  prejudices  which  warp  our  opi- 
nions on  ftill  more  important  fubjecls. 

As  the  eftablifhed  laws  of  the  material  world, 
which  have  been  exhibited  to  our  fenfes  from  our  in- 
fancy, gradually  accommodate  to  themfelves  the  or- 
der of  our  thoughts ;  fo  the  moil  arbitrary  and  ca- 
pricious inflitutions  and  cufloms,  by  a  long  and  con- 
flant  and  exclufive  operation  on  the  mind,  acquire 
fuch  an  influence  in  forming  the  intellectual  habits, 
that  every  deviation  from  them  not  only  produces 
furprife,  but  is  apt  to  excite  fentiments  of  contempt 
and  of  ridicule.  A  perfon  who  has  never  extended 
his  views  beyond  that  fociety  of  which  he  himfelf  is 
a  member,  is  apt  to  confider  many  peculiarities  in  the 
manners  and  cuftoms  of  his  countrymen  as  founded 
on  the  univerfal  principles  of  the  human  confhitution ; 
and  when  he  hears  of  other  nations,  whofe  pradices 
in  fimilar  cafes  are  different,  he  is  apt  to  cenfure  them 
as  unnatural,  and  to  defpife  them  as  abfurd.  There 
are  two  clafles  of  men  who  have  more  particularly 
been  charged  with  this  weaknefs ;  thofe  who  are 
placed  at  the  bottom,  and  thofe  who  have  reach- 
ed the  fummit  of  the  fcale  of  refinement  ;  the 
former  from  ignorance,  and  the  latter  from  national 
vanity. 

1 1  For 


Partll.  §1^  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  359 

For  curing  this  clafs  of  prejudices,  the  obvious  ex- 
pedient which  nature  points  out  to  us,  is  to  extend  our 
acquaintance  with  human  affairs,  either  by  means  of 
books,  or  of  perfonal  obfervation.  The  effecls  of  tra- 
velling, in  enlarging  and  in  enlightening  the  mind,  are 
obvious  to  our  daily  experience  ;  and  fimilar  advan- 
tages may  be  derived  (although,  perhaps,  not  in  an 
equal  degree)  from  a  careful  ftudy  of  the  manners  of 
paft  ages  or  of  diflant  nations,  as  they  are  defcribed  by 
the  hiftorian.  In  making,  however,  thefe  attempts 
for  our  intelleftual  improvement,  it  is  of  the  utmoil 
confequence  to  us  to  vary,  to  a  confiderable  degree, 
the  objeds  of  our  attention  j  in  order  to  prevent  any 
danger  of  our  acquiring  an  exclufive  preference  for 
the  caprices  of  any  one  people,  whofe  political  fituation, 
or  whofe  moral  character,  may  attach  us  to  them  as 
faultlefs  models  for  our  imitation.  The  fame  weak- 
nefs  and  verfatility  of  mind  ;  the  fame  facility  of  affo- 
ciation,  which,  in  the  cafe  of  a  perfon  who  has  never 
extended  his  views  beyond  his  own  community,  is  a 
fource  of  national  prejudice  and  of  national  bigotry, 
renders  the  mind,  when  forced  into  new  fituations, 
eafily  fufceptible  of  other  prejudices  no  lefs  capricious  ; 
and  frequently  prevents  the  time,  which  is  devoted  to 
travelling,  or  to  ftudy,  from  being  fubfervient  to  any 
better  purpofe,  than  an  importation  of  foreign  fa- 
fliions,  or  a  ftill  more  ludicrous  imitation  of  antient 
follies. 

The  philofopher  whofe  thoughts  dwell  habitually, 
not  merely  upon  what  is,  or  what  has  been,  but  upon 
what  is  beft  and  moft  expedient  for  mankind ;  who, 
to  the  ftudy  of  books,  and  the  obfervation  of  manners, 

A  a  4  has 


360  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

has  added  a  careful  examination  of  the  principles  of 
the  human  conftitution,  and  of  thofe  which  ought  to 
regulate  the  focial  order  ;  is  the  only  perfon  who  is 
effeclually  fecured  againft  both  the  weakneffes  which 
Si  I  have  defcribed.  By  learning  to  feparate  what  is  effen- 
tial  to  morality  and  to  happinefs,  from  thofe  adventi- 
tious trifles  which  it  is  the  province  of  fafhion  to 
dire£l,  he  is  equally  guarded  againft  the  follies  of  na- 
tional prejudice,  and  a  weak  deviation,  in  matters  of 
indiflTerence,  from  eftabliftied  ideas.  Upon  his  mind, 
thus  occupied  with  important  fubjefts  of  reflexion,  the 
fluftuating  caprices  and  fafhions  of  the  times  lofe  their 
influence  ;  while  accuftomed  to  avoid  the  flavery  of 
local  and  arbitrary  habits,  he  poflfefl^es,  in  his  own 
genuine  fimplicity  of  charadler,  the  fame  power  of  ac- 
commodation to  external  circumftances,  which  men  of 
the  world  derive  from  the  pliability  of  their  tafte,  and 
the  verfadlity  of  their  manners.  As  the  order,  too,  of 
his  ideas  is  accommodated,  not  to  what  is  cafually  pre- 
fented  from  without,  but  to  his  own  fyftemadcal  prin- 
ciples, his  affociations  are  fubjeft  only  to  thofe  flow  and 
pleafmg  changes  which  arife  from  his  growing  light 
and  improving  reafon ;  and,  in  fuch  a  period  of  the 
world  as  the  prefent,  when  the  prefs  not  only  excludes 
the  pofllbility  of  a  permanent  retrogradation  in  human 
aflfairs,  but  operates  with  an  irrefiftible  though  gradual 
progrefs,  in  undermining  prejudices  and  in  extending 
the  triumphs  of  philofophy,  he  may  reafonably  indulge 
the  hope,  that  fociety  will  every  day  approach  nearer 
and  nearer  to  what  he  wilhes  it  to  be.  A  man  of  fuch 
a  charader,  inftead  of  looking  back  on  the  paft  with 
regret,  finds  himfelf  (if  I  may  ufe  the  expreilion)  more 

at 


Part  II.  §  I.  <5F   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  ^^I 

at  home  in  the  world,  and  more  fatisfied  with  its  order 
the  longer  he  lives  in  it.  The  melancholy  contrafts 
which  old  men  are  fometimes  difpofed  to  ftate,  between 
its  condition,  when  they  are  about  to  leave  it,  and  that 
in  which  they  found  it  at  the  commencement  of  their 
career,  arifes,  in  mod  cafes,  from  the  unlimited  influ- 
ence which  in  their  early  years  they  had  allowed  to  the 
fafhions  of  the  times,  in  the  formation  of  their  charac- 
ters. How  different  from  thofe  fentiments  and  profpefts 
which  dignified  the  retreat  of  Turgot,  and  brightened 
the  declining  years  of  Franklin  ! 

The  querulous  temper,  however,  which  is  incident  to 
old  men,  although  it  renders  their  manners  difagreeable 
in  the  intercourfe  of  focial  life,  is  by  no  means  the 
mofl  contemptible  form  in  which  the  prejudices  I  have 
now  been  defcribing  may  difplay  their  influence.  Such 
a  temper  indicates  at  leaft  a  certain  degree  of  obferva- 
tion,  in  marking  the  viciflitudes  of  human  affairs,  and 
a  certain  degree  of  fenfibility  in  early  life,  which  has 
conne£led  pleafing  ideas  with  the  fcenes  of  infancy  and 
youth.  A  very  great  proportion  of  manldnd  are,  in  a 
great  meafure,  incapable  either  of  the  one  or  of  the 
other  ;  and,  fuffering  themfelves  to  be  carried  quietly 
along  with  the  ftream  of  fafliion,  and  finding  their 
opinions  and  their  feelings  always  in  the  fame  rela- 
tive fituation  to  the  fleeting  objeds  around  them,  are 
perfedly  unconfcious  of  any  progrefs  in  their  own 
ideas,  or  of  any  change  in  the  manners  of  their  age. 
In  vain  the  philofopher  reminds  them  of  the  opi- 
nions they  yefterday  held ;  and  forewarns  them, 
from  the  fpirit  of  the  times,  of  thofe  which  they  are 
to  hold  to-morrow.  The  opinions  of  the  prefent  mo- 
ment 


362  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

ment  feem  to  them  to  be  infeparable  from  their  con- 
llitution  ;  and  when  the  profpe6ts  are  realifed,  which 
they  lately  treated  as  chimerical,  their  minds  are  fo 
gradually  prepared  for  the  event,  that  they  behold  it 
■without  any  emotions  of  wonder  or  curiofity  ;  and  it 
is  to  the  philofopher  alone,  by  whom  it  was  predicted, 
that  it  appears  to  furnifh  a  fubject  worthy  of  future 
reflexion. 

The  prejudices  to  which  the  laft  obfervations  relate, 
have  their  origin  in  that  difpofition  of  our  nature,  which 
accommodates  the  order  of  our  ideas,  and  our  various 
intelledual  habits,  to  whatever  appearances  have  been 
long  and  familiarly  prefented  to  the  mind.  But  there 
are  other  prejudices,  which,  by  being  intimately  affo- 
ciated  with  the  eflential  principles  of  our  conftitution, 
or  with  the  original  and  univerfal  laws  of  our  belief, 
are  incomparably  more  inveterate  in  their  nature,  and 
have  a  far  more  extenfive  influence  on  human  cha- 
rafter  and  happinefs. 

III.  The  manner  in  which  the  afTociatlon  of  ideas 
operates  in  producing  this  third  clafs  of  our  fpeculative 
errors,  may  be  conceived,  in  part,  from  what  was  for- 
merly faid,  concerning  the  fuperftitious  obfervances, 
which  are  mixed  with  the  practice  of  medicine  among 
rude  nations.  As  all  the  different  circumftances  which 
accompanied  the  firfl  adminiftration  of  a  remedy,  come 
to  be  confidered  as  eflential  to  its  future  fuccefs,  and 
are  blended  together  in  our  conceptions,  without  any 
difcrimination  of  their  relative  importance  ;  fo,  what- 
ever tenets  and  ceremonies  we  have  been  taught  to 
connect  with  the  religious  creed  of  our  infancy,  be- 
come almoft  a  part  of  our  conftitution,  by  being  indif- 

folubly 


Fart  11.  §  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^S^ 

folubly  united  with  truths  which  are  eflential  to  hap- 
pinefs,  and  which  we  are  led  to  reverence  and  to  love, 
by  all  the  bed  difpofitions  of  the  heart.  The  aftonifh- 
ment  which  the  pealant  feels,  when  he  fees  the  rites  of 
a  religion  different  from  his  own,  is  not  lefs  great  than 
if  he  faw  fonie  flagrant  breach  of  the  moral  duties,  or 
fome  direct  a6t  of  impiety  to  God  ;  nor  is  it  eafy  for 
him  to  conceive,  that  there  can  be  any  thing  worthy  in 
a  mind  which  treats  with  indifference,  what  awakens 
in  his  own  bread,  all  its  befl  and  fublimeft  emodons. 
**  Is  it  poffible,"  (fays  the  old  and  expiring  Bramin,  in 
one  of  Marmontel's  tales,  to  the  young  EngHfh  offi- 
cer who  had  faved  the  life  of  his  daughter,)  *'  is  it  pof- 
"  fible,  that  he  to  whofe  compaffion  I  owe  the  prefer- 
♦*  vation  of  my  child,  and  who  now  foothes  my  laft 
**  moments  with  the  confolations  of  piety,  fhould  not 
"  believe  in  the  god  Vijinou^  and  his  nine  metamor- 
"  phofes  !" 

What  has  now  been  faid  on  the  nature  of  religious 
fuperflition,  may  be  applied  to  many  other  fubjects. 
In  particular,  it  may  be  applied  to  thofe  political  pre- 
judices which  bias  the  judgment  even  of  enlightened 
men  in  all  countries  of  the  world. 

How  deeply  rooted  in  the  human  frame  are  thofe 
important  principles,  which  intereft  the  good  man  in 
the  profperity  of  the  world  ;  and  more  efpecially  in  the 
profperity  of  that  beloved  community  to  which  he  be- 
longs !  How  fmall,  at  the  fame  time,  is  the  number  of 
individuals  who,  accuftomed  to  contemplate  one  modi- 
fication alone  of  the  focial  order,  are  able  to  diftinguifh 
the  circumftances  which  are  effential  to  human  happi- 
nefs,  from  thofe  which'  are  indifferent  or  hurtful !    In 

fuch 


364  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V, 

fuch  a  fituation,  how  natural  is  it  for  a  man  of  benevo- 
lence, to  acquire  an  indifcriminate  and  fuperflitious 
veneration  for  all  the  inflitutions  under  which  he  has 
been  educated  ;  as  thefe  inflitutions,  however  capricious 
and  abfurd  in  themfelves,  are  not  only  familiarifed  by 
habit  to  all  his  thoughts  and  feelings,  but  are  confe- 
crated  in  his  mind  by  an  indiffoluble  aflbciation  with 
duties  which  nature  recommends  to  his  affedions,  and 
which  reafon  commands  him  to  fulfil.  It  is  on  thefe  ac- 
counts that  a  fuperflitious  zeal  againfl  innovation,  both 
in  religion  and  politics,  where  it  is  evidently  grafted  on 
piety  to  God,  and  good-will  to  mankind,  however  it 
may  excite  the  forrow  of  the  more  enlightened  philo- 
fopher,  is  juflly  entitled,  not  only  to  his  indulgence, 
but  to  his  efteem  and  affection. 

The  remarks  which  have  been  already  made,  are 
fufficient  to  fiiew,  how  neceflary  it  is  for  us,  in  the  for- 
mation of  our  philofophical  principles,  to  examine  with 
care  all  thofe  opinions  which,  in  our  early  years,  we  have 
imbibed  from  our  inflru6lors  ;  or  which  are  conneft- 
ed  with  our  own  local  fituation.  Nor  does  the  uni- 
verfality  of  an  opinion  among  men  who  have  received 
a  fimilar  education,  afford  any  prefumption  in  its  fa- 
vour ;  for  however  great  the  deference  is,  which  a  wife 
man  will  always  pay  to  common  belief,  upon  thofe 
fubjeds  which  have  employed  the  unbiaffed  reafon  of 
mankind,  he  certainly  owes  it  no  refped,  in  fo  far  as 
he  fufpeds  it  to  be  influenced  by  faihion  or  authority. 
Nothing  can  be  more  jufl  than  the  obfervation  of  Fon- 
tenelle,  that  "  the  number  of  thofe  who  believe  in  a 
*'  fyftem  already  eflablifhed  in  the  world,  does  not, 
"  in   the  leafl,  add  to  its  credibility  j  but  that   the 

"  number 


Partll.  §1.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  365 

"  number  oT  thofe  who  doubt  of  it,  has  a  tendency  to 
"  diminifh  it/' 

The  fame  remarks  lead,  upon  the  other  hand,  to 
another  conclufion  of  ftill  greater  importance ;  that, 
notwithftanding  the  various  faife  opinions  which  are 
current  in  the  world,  there  are  fome  truths,  which  are 
infeparable  from  the  human  underflanding,  and  by 
means  of  which,  the  errors  of  education,  in  moft  in- 
ftances,  are  enabled  to  take  hold  of  our  belief. 

A    weak    mind,    unaccuftomed  to  reflexion,  and 
which  has  pallively  derived  its   moft  important   opi- 
nions from  habits  or  from  authority,  when,  in  con- 
fequence    of  a  more  enlarged    intercourfe  with   the 
world,  it  finds,  that  ideas  which  it   had  been  taught 
to  regard  as  facred,  are  treated  by  enlightened  and 
worthy  men  with  ridicule,  is  apt  to  lofe  its  reverence 
for  the  fundamental  and  eternal  truths  on  which  thefe 
accefTory  ideas  are  grafted,  and  eafily  falls  a  prey  to 
that  fceptical  philofophy  which  teaches,  that  all  the 
opinions,  and  all  the   principles  of  adion  by  which 
mankind  are  governed,  may  be  traced  to  the  influ- 
ence of  education  and  example.     Amidft  the  infinite 
variety  of  forms,  however,  which    our  verfatile  na- 
ture afTumes,  it  cannot  fail  to  ftrike  an  attentive  ob- 
ferver,  that  there  are  certain  indelible  features  com- 
mon to  them  all.     In  one  fituation,    we  find  good 
men  attached  to  a  republican  form  of  government ; 
in  another,  to  a  monarchy ;  but  in  all  fituations,  we 
find  them  devoted  to  the  fervice  of  their  country  and 
of  mankind,  and  difpofed  to  regard,  with  reverence 
and  love,  the  moft  abfurd  and  capricious  inftitutions 
which  cuftom  has  led  them  to  connect  with  the  order 

of 


366  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOniY  Chap.V. 

of  fociety.  The  different  appearances,  therefore, 
which  the  political  opinions  and  the  political  conduct 
of  men  exhibit,  while  they  demonftrate  to  what  a 
wonderful  degree  human  nature  may  be  influenced  by 
fituation  and  by  early  inftruftion,  evince  the  exiftence 
of  fome  common  and  original  principles,  which  fit  it 
for  the  political  union,  and  illuflrate  the  uniform 
operation  of  thofe  laws  of  alTociation,  to  which,  in  all 
the  flages  of  fociety,  it  is  equally  fubjeft. 

Similar  obfervations  are  applicable,  and,  indeed,  in 
a  dill  more  flriking  degree,  to  the  opinions  of  man- 
kind on  the  important  queftions  of  religion  and  mo- 
rality. The  variety  of  fyftems  which  they  have  formed 
to  themfelves  concerning  thefe  fubjefts,  has  often  ex- 
cited the  ridicule  of  the  fceptic  and  the  libertine  ; 
but  if,  on  the  one  hand,  this  variety  fhews  the  folly 
of  bigotry,  and  the  reafonablenefs  of  mutual  indul- 
gence ;  the  curiofity  which  has  led  men  in  every  fitu- 
ation to  fuch  fpeculations,  and  the  influence  which 
their  conclufions,  hov/ever  abfurd,  have  had  on  their 
charader  and  their  happinefs,  prove,  no  lefs  clearly, 
on  the  other,  that  there  mufl  be  fome  principles  from 
which  they  all  derive  their  origin  ;  and  invite  the  phi- 
lofopher  to  afcertain  what  are  thefe  original  and  im- 
mutable laws  of  the  human  mind. 

"  Examine"  (fays  Mr. Hume)  "  the  religious- 
"  principles  which  have  prevailed  in  the  world.  You 
"  will  fcarcely  be  perfuaded,  that  they  are  any  thing 
*'  but  fick  men's  dreams  ;  or,  perhaps,  will  regard 
"  them  more  as  the  playfome  whimfies  of  monkeys 
"  in  human  fliape,  than  the  ferious,  pofitive,  dog- 
**  matical  affeverations  of  a  being,  who  dignifies  him- 

*'  felf 


Part  II.  $  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  367 

«  felf  with  the  name  of  rationai." "  To   oppofe 

"  the  torrent  of  fcholaftic  religion  by  fuch  feeble 
"  maxims  as  thefe,  that  it  is  impoHible  for  the  fame 
*'  thing  to  be  and  not  to  be  ;  that  the  whole  is 
"  greater  than  a  part ;  that  two  and  three  make  five  ; 
**  is  pretending  to  flop  the  ocean  with  a  bulrufh.'* 
But  what  is  the  inference  to  which  we  are  led  by 
thefe  obfervations  ?  Is  it,  (to  ufe  the  words  of  this 
ingenious  writer,)  "  that  the  whole  is  a  riddle,  an 
*'  senigma,  an.  inexplicable  my  fiery  ;  and  that  doubt, 
**  uncertainty,  and  fufpenfe,  appear  the  only  refult  of 
"  our  mofl  accurate  fcrutiny  concerning  this  fubjedl  ?" 
Or  Ihould  not  rather  the  melancholy  hiflories  which 
he  has  exhibited  of  the  follies  and  caprices  of  fuper- 
flition,  dired:  our  attention  to  thofe  facred  and  inde- 
lible characters  on  the  human  mind,  which  all  thefe 
perverfions  of  reafon  are  unable  to  obliterate ;  like 
that  image  of  himfelf,  which  Phidias  wifhed  to  per- 
petuate, by  flamping  it  fo  deeply  on  the  buckler  of 
his  Minerva  ;  "  ut  nemo  delere  poiTet  aut  divellere, 
"  qui  totam  flatuam  non  imminueret  *."  In  truth, 
the  more  flrange  the  contradidions,  and  the  more 
ludicrous  the  ceremonies  to  which  the  pride  of  human 
reafon  has  thus  been  reconciled ;  the  ftronger  is  our 
evidence  that  religion  has  a  foundation  in  the  nature 
of  man.  When  the  greatefl  of  modern  philofophers 
declares,  that  "  he  would  rather  believe  all  the  fables 
*'  in  the  Legend,  and  the  Talmud,  and  the  Alcoran, 
"  than  that  this  univerfal  frame  is  without  mind  t;'* 

*  Select    DiTcourrjs   by    JoH^^   Smitjj.  v>.  1 19.  Cambridge, 
f  Lord  Bacox,  in  his  EfTavs. 

he 


358  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

he  has  expreffed  the  fame  feeling,  which,  in  all 
ages  and  nations,  has  led  good  men,  unaccuftom- 
ed  to  reafoning,  to  an  implicit  faith  in  the  creed 
of  their  infancy  ;  —  a  feeling  which  affords  an  evi- 
dence of  the  exiftence  of  the  Deity,  incomparably 
more  ftriking,  than  if,  unmixed  with  error  and  un- 
debafed  by  fuperflition,  this  moft  important  of  all 
principles  had  commanded  the  univerfal  affent  of 
mankind.  Where  are  the  other  truths,  in  the  whole 
circle  of  the  fciences,  which  are  fo  effential  to  human 
happinefs,  as  to  procure  an  eafy  accefs,  not  only  for 
themfelves,  but  for  whatever  opinions  may  happen  to 
be  blended  with  them  ?  Where  are  the  truths  fo  ve- 
nerable and  commanding,  as  to  impart  their  own  fub- 
limity  to  every  trifling  memorial  which  recals  them 
to  our  remembrance ;  to  beftow  folemnity  and  eleva- 
tion on  every  mode  of  expreftion  by  which  they  are 
conveyed ;  and  which,  in  whatever  fcene  they  have 
habitually  occupied  the  thoughts,  confecrate  every  ob- 
ject which  it  prefents  to  our  fenfes,  and  the  very 
ground  we  have  been  accuflomed  to  tread  ?  To  at- 
tempt to  weaken  the  authority  of  fuch  impreflions, 
by  a  detail  of  the  endlefa  variety  of  forms,  which 
they  derive  from  cafual  afl'ociations,  is  furely  an  em- 
ployment unfuitable  to  the  dignity  of  philofophy.  To 
the  vulgar,  it  may  be  umufmg,  in  this,  as  in  other 
inftances,  to  indulge  their  wonder  at  what  is  new  or 
uncommon  ;  but  to  the  philofopher  it  belongs  to  per- 
ceive, under  all  thefe  various  difguifes,  the  workings 
of  the  fame  common  nature;  and  in  the  fuperfti- 
tions  of  Egypt,  no  lefs  than  in  the  lofty  vifions  of 
Plato,  to  recognize  the  exiftence  of  thofe  moral  ties 

which 


Part  II.  ?  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  360 

which  unite  the  heart  of  man  to  the  Author  of  his 
being. 


SECTION    II. 

Influence  of  the  JJfociation   of  Ideas  on  our  Judgments  in 
Matters  of  Tap. 

THE  very  general  obfervations  which  I  am  to  make 
in  this  Section,  do  not  prefuppofe  any  particular 
theory  concerning  the  nature  of  Tafle.  It  is  fufficient 
for  my  purpofe  to  remark,  that  Tafle  is  not  a  fimple 
and  original  faculty,  but  a  power  gradually  formed 
by  experience  and  obfervation.  It  impHes,  indeed, 
as  its  ground-work,  a  certain  degree  of  natural  fenfi- 
bihty ;  but  it  implies  alfo  the  exercife  of  the  judg- 
ment ;  and  is  the  flow  refult  of  an  attentive  examina- 
tion and  comparifon  of  the  agreeable  or  difagreeable 
effefts  produced  on  the  mind  by  external  objeds. 

Such  of  my  readers  as  are  acquainted  with  "  An 
"  EfTay  on  the  Nature  and  Principles  of  Tafle,"  lately 
publifhed  by  Mr.  Alifon,  will  not  be  furprifed  that  I 
decline  the  difcufTion  of  a  fubjedl  which  he  has  treated 
with  fo  much  ingenuity  and  elegance. 

The  view  which  was  formerly  given  of  the  procefs 
by  which  the  general  laws  of  the  material  world  are 
invefligated,  and  which  I  endeavoured  to  illuflrate  by 
the  ftate  of  medicine  among  rude  nations,  is  flridly 
applicable  to  the  hiftory  of  Tafle.  That  certain  ob- 
je£ls  are  fitted  to  give  pleafure,  and  others  difgufl,  to 
the  mind,  we  know  from  experience  alone ;  and  it  is 

B  b  impof- 


37©  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

impolTible  for  us,  by  any  reafoning  a  priori^  to  ex* 
plain,  how  the  pleafure  or  the  pain  is  produced.     In 
the  works   of   nature  we    find,    in    many  inftances, 
Beauty  and  Sublimity  involved  among  circumflances, 
which   are  either  indifferent,   or  which  obflruct  the 
general   effed :  and  it  is  only  by  a  train  of  experi- 
ments, that  we  can  feparate  thofe  circumflances  from 
the  reft,  and  afcertain  with  what  particular  qualities 
the  pleafing  effed   is    connefted.     Accordingly,  the 
inexperienced  artift,  when  he  copies  Nature,  will  copy 
her  fervilely,  that  he  may  be  certain  of  fecuring  the 
pleafing  effed  ;  and  the  beauties  of  his  performances 
will  be  encumbered  with  a  number  of  fuperfluous  or 
of  difagreeable  concomitants.      Experience   and  ob- 
fervation  alone  can  enable  him  to  make  this  difcri- 
mination ;    to   exhibit  the  principles  of  beauty  pure 
and  unadulterated,  and  to  form  a  creation  of  his  own, 
more  faultlefs  than  ever  fell  under  the  obfervation  of 
his  fenfes. 

This  analogy  between  the  progrefs  of  Tafte  from 

rudenefs  to  refinement ;  and  the  progrefs  of  phyfical 

knowledge  from  the  fuperflitions  of  a  favage  tribe,  to 

the  inveftigation  of  the  laws  of  nature,  proceeds  on 

the  fuppofition,  that,  as  in  the  material  world  there 

are  general  fads,  beyond  which  philofophy  is  unable 

to  proceed  ;  fo,  in  the  conflitution  of  man,  there  is  an 

inexplicable  adaptation  of  the  mind   to   the  objeds 

with  which  thefe  _  faculties  are  converfant ;  in  confe- 

quence  of  which,  thefe  objeds  are  fitted  to  produce 

agreeable  or  difagreeable   emotions.     In  both   caf«, 

reafoning  may  be  employed  with  propriety  to  refer 

particular  phenomena  to  general  principles}   but  in 

i<i  both 


Part  II.  §2.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  371 

both  cafes,  we  mull  at  lafl  arrive  at  principles  of  which 
no  account  call  be  given,  but  that  fuch  is  the  will  of 
our  Maker. 

A  great  part,  too,  of  the  remarks  which  were 
made  in  the  laft  Section  on  the  origin  of  popular  pre- 
judices, may  be  applied  to  explain  the  influence  of 
cafual  alTociations  on  Tafle ;  but  thefe  remarks  do 
not  fo  completely  exhaufl  the  fubjed,  as  to  fuperfede 
the  neceiTity  of  farther  illuflration.  In  matters  of 
Tafte,  the  effeds  which  we  confider,  are  produced  on 
the  Mind  itfelf;  and  are  accompanied  either  with 
pleafure  or  with  pain.  Hence  the  tendency  to  cafual 
aflbciation,  is  much  flronger  than  it  commonly  is, 
with  refpe£t  to  phyfical  events  j  and  when  fuch  affo- 
ciations  are  once  formed,  as  they  do  not  lead  to  any 
important  inconvenience,  fmiilar  to  thofe  which  refult 
from  phyfical  miftakes,  they  are  not  fo  likely  to  be 
corrected  by  mere  experience,  unafTifled  by  lludy. 
To  this  it  is  owing,  that  the  influence  of  aflbciation 
on  our  judgments  concerning  beauty  and  deformity, 
is  flill  more  remarkable  than  on  our  fpeculative  con- 
clufions ;  a  circumftance  which  has  led  fome  philofo- 
phers  to  fuppofe,  that  aflTociation  is  fufficient  to  ac- 
count for  the  origin  of  thefe  notions ;  and  that  there 
is  no  fuch  thing  as  a  ftandard  of  Tafte,  founded  on 
the  principles  of  the  human  conftitution.  But  this  is 
undoubtedly  pufliing  the  theory  a  great  deal  too  far. 
The  affociation  of  ideas  can  never  account  for  the 
origin  of  a  new  notion ;  or  of  a  pleafure  efltntially 
different  from  all  the  others  which  we  know.  It  may, 
indeed,  enable  us  to  conceive  how  a  thing  indifl'erent 
in  itfelf,  may  become  a  fource  of  pleafure,  by  being 

B  b  2  con- 


372  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Cliap.V. 

conneded  in  the  mind  with  fomething  elfe  which  is 
naturally  agreeable  ;  but  it  prefuppofes,  in  every  in- 
ftance,  the  exiflence  of  thofe  notions  and  thofe  feel- 
ings which  it  is  its  province  to  combine :  infomuch 
that,  I  apprehend,  it  will  be  found,  wherever  aflbcia- 
tion  produces  a  change  in  our  judgments  on  mat- 
ters of  Tafte,  it  does  fo,  by  co-operating  with 
fome  natural  principle  of  the  mind,  and  implies  the 
exiflence  of  certain  original  fources  of  pleafure  and 
uneafmefs. 

A  mode  of  drefs,  which  at  fir  ft  appeared  awkward, 
acquires,  In  a  few  weeks  or  months,  the  appearance 
of  elegance.  By  being  accuftomed  to  fee  it  worn  by 
thofe  whom  we  confider  as  models  of  Tafte,  it  be- 
comes aifociated  with  the  agreeable  impreftions  which 
we  receive  from  the  eafe  and  grace  and  refinement  of 
their  manners.  When  it  pleafes  by  itfelf,  the  effed  is 
to  be  afcribed,  not  to  the  object  actually  before  us, 
but  to  the  imprelTions  with  which  it  has  been 
generally  connected,  and  which  it  naturally  recalls 
to  the  mind. 

This  obfervation  points  out  the  caufe  of  the  perpe- 
tual vicifiitudes  in  drefs,  and  in  every  thing  whofe 
chief  recommendation  arifes  from  fafliion.  It  is  evi- 
vident  that,  as  far  as  the  agreeable  effect  of  an  orna- 
ment arifes  from  affociation,  the  effect  will  continue 
only  while  it  is  confined  to  the  higher  orders.  When 
it  is  adopted  by  the  multitude,  it  not  only  ceafes  to 
be  affociated  with  ideas  of  tafte  and  refinement,  but  it 
•is  affociated  with  ideas  of  affectation,  abfurd  imita- 
tion, and  vulgarity.  It  is  accordingly  laid  afide  by 
the  higher  orders,  who   ftudioufly  avoid  every   cir- 

cumftance 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  373 

cumftance  in  external  appearance,  which  Is  debafed 
by  low  and  common  ufe ;  and  they  are  led  to  exer- 
cife  their  invention,  in  the  introdudtion  of  fome 
new  peculiarities,  which  firfl  become  fafhionable, 
then  common,  and  laft  of  all,  are  abandoned  as 
vulgar. 

It  has  been  often  remarked,  that  after  a  certain 
period  in  the  progrefs  of  fociety,  the  public  Tafte  be- 
comes corrupted  ^  and  the  different  produftions  of  the 
fine  arts  begin  to  degenerate  from  that  fimplicity, 
which  they  had  attained  in  their  flate  of  greatefl  per- 
feftion.  One  reafon  of  this  decline  is  fuggefted  by 
the  foregoing  obfervations. 

From  the  account  which  has  been  given  of  the 
natural  progrefs  of  Tafte,  in  feparadng  the  genuine 
principles  of  beauty  from  fuperfluous  and  from  offen- 
live  concomitants,  it  is  evident,  that  there  is  a  limit, 
beyond  which  the  love  of  fimplicity  cannot  be  car- 
ried. No  bounds,  indeed,  can  be  fet  to  the  creations 
of  genius ;  but  as  this  quality  occurs  feldom  in  an 
eminent  degree,  it  commonly  happens,  that  after  a 
period  of  great  refinement  of  Tafte,  men  begin  to 
gratify  their  love  of  variety,  by  adding  fuperfluous 
circumftances  to  the  finifhed  models  exhibited  by 
their  predeceiTors,  or  by  making  other  trifling  altera- 
tions on  them,  with  a  view  merely  of  diverfifying  the 
effeft.  Thefe  additions  and  alterations,  indifferent, 
perhaps,  or  even  in  fome  degree  offenfive  in  them- 
felves,  acquire  foon  a  borrowed  beauty,  from  the  con- 
nexion in  which  we  fee  them,  or  from  the  influence 
of  faftiion  :  the  fame  caufe  which  at  firft  produced 
them,  continues  perpetually  to  increafe  their  number  ; 

B  b  3  and 


374  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

and  Tafte  returns  to  barbarifm,  by  almofl  the  fame 
fteps  which  conducted  it  to  perfeftion. 

The  truth  of  thefe  remarks  will  appear  ftill  more 
ftriking  to  thofe  who  confider  the  wonderful  effed 
which  a  writer  of  fplendid  genius,  but  of  incorredl 
tafte,  has  in  mifleading  the  public  judgment.  The 
peculiarities  of  fuch  an  author  are  confecrated  by  the 
connexion  in  which  we  fee  them,  and  even  pleafe,  to 
a  certain  degree,  when  detached  from  the  excellencies 
of  his  compofition,  by  recalling  to  us  the  agreeable 
impreflions  with  which  they  have  been  form.erly  affo- 
ciated.  How  many  imitations  have  we  feen,  of  the 
affectations  of  Sterne,  by  men  who  were  unable  to 
copy  his  beauties  ?  And  yet  thefe  imitations  of  his 
defeds  ;  of  his  abrupt  manner  ;  of  his  minute  fpeci- 
fication  of  circumftances ;  and  even  of  his  dafties, 
produce,  at  firft,  fome  effed  on  readers  of  fenfibility, 
but  of  uncultivated  tafte,  in  confequence  of  the  ex- 
quifite  ftrokes  of  the  pathetic,  and  the  fmgular  vein  of 
humour,  with  which  they  are  united  in  the  original. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  it  is  obvious,  that  the 
circumftances  which  pleafe,  in  the  objects  of  Tafte, 
are  of  two  kinds :  Firft,  thofe  which  are  fitted  to 
pleafe  by  nature,  or  by  affociations  which  all  mankind 
are  led  to  form  by  their  common  condition ;  and 
Secondly,  thofe  which  pleafe  in  confequence  of  affo- 
ciations arifmg  from  local  and  accidental  circum- 
ftances. Hence,  there  are  two  kinds  of  Tafte :  the 
one  enabling  us  to  judge  of  thofe  beauties  which  have 
a  foundation  in  the  human  conftitution ;  the  other, 
of  fuch  objefts  as  derive  their  principal  recommenda- 
tion from  the  influence  of  faftiion. 

Thefe 


Part  II.  ^  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  375 

Thefe  two  kinds  of  Tafte  are  not  always  united  in 
the  fame  perfon :  indeed,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  that 
they  are  united  but  rarely.  The  perfection  of  the  one, 
depends  much  upon  the  degree  in  which  we  are  able 
to  free  the  mind  from  the  influence  of  cafual  affocia- 
tions  J  that  of  the  other,  on  the  contrary,  depends  on 
a  facility  of  aiTociation,  which  enables  us  to  fall  in,  at 
once,  with  all  the  turns  of  the  falhion,  and  (as  Shake- 
fpeare  expreffes  it)  *'  to  catch  the  tune  of  the  times.'* 

I  fhall  endeavour  to  illuftrate  fome  of  the  foregoing 
remarks,  by  applying  them  to  the  fubjeft  of  language, 
which  affords  numberlefs  inftances  to  exemplify  the 
influence  which  the  aiTociation  of  ideas  has  on  our 
judgments  in  matters  of  Tafte. 

In  the  fame  manner  in  which  an  article  of  drefs 
acquired  an  appearance  of  elegance  or  of  vulgarity 
from  the  perfons  by  whom  it  is  habitually  worn  ;  fo  a 
particular  mode  of  pronunciation  acquires  an  air  of 
fafliion  or  of  rufticity,  from  the  perfons  by  whom  it  is 
habitually  employed.  The  Scotch  accent  is  furely  in 
itfelf  as  good  as  the  Englifli ;  and  with  a  few  excep- 
tions, is  as  agreeable  to  the  ear  :  and  yet  how  offenfive 
does  it  appear,  even  to  us,  who  have  been  accuftomed 
to  hear  it  from  our  infancy,  when  compared  with  that 
which  is  ufed  by  our  fouthern  neighbours !  — No  reafon 
can  be  given  for  this,  but  that  the  capital  of  Scotland 
is  now  become  a  provincial  town,  and  London  is  the 
feat  of  our  court. 

The  diftinftion  which  is  to  be  found,  in  the  languages 
of  all  civilifed  nation^,  between  low  and  polite  modes  of 
expreflion,  arifes  from  fimilar  caufes.  It  is,  indeed, 
amufmg  to  remark,  the  folicitude  with  which  the  higher 

B  b  4  orders. 


376  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  V. 

orders,  in  the  monarchies  of  modern  Europe,  avoid 
every  circumflance  in  their  exterior  appearance  and 
manner,  which,  by  the  moil  remote  aflbciation,  may,  in 
the  minds  of  others,  connect  them  with  the  idea  of  the 
multitude.  Their  whole  drefs  and  deportment  and 
converfation  are  ftudioufly  arranged  to  convey  an  im- 
pofmg  notion  of  their  confequence  ;  and  to  recal  to  the 
fpeclator,  by  numberlefs  flight  and  apparently  uninten- 
tional hints,  the  agreeable  impreffions  which  are  alfo- 
ciated  with  the  advantages  of  fortune. 

To  this  influence  of  aflbciation  on  language,  it  is 
neceflfary  for  every  writer  to  attend  carefully,  who 
wiflies  to  exprefs  himfelf  with  elegance.  For  the  attain- 
ment of  correftnefs  and  purity  in  the  ufe  of  words,  the 
rules  of  grammarians  and  of  critics  may  be  a  fufficient 
guide  ;  but  it  is  not  in  the  works  of  this  clafs  of  authors, 
that  the  higher  beauties  of  flyle  are  to  be  ftudied.  As 
the  air  and  manner  of  a  gentleman  can  be  acquired  only 
by  living  habitually  in  the  befl:  fociety,  fo  grace  in  com- 
pofition  muft  be  attained  by  an  habitual  acquaintance 
with  clafl^ical  writers.  It  is  indeed  neceflary  for  our 
information,  that  we  fhould  perufe  occafionally,  many 
books  which  have  no  merit  in  point  of  expreflion  ;  but 
I  believe  it  to  be  extremely  ufeful  to  all  literary  men, 
to  counteraft  the  effeft  of  this  mifcellaneous  reading, 
by  maintaining  a  confl:ant  and  familiar  acquaintance 
with  a  few  of  the  mofl;  faultlefs  models  which  the  lan- 
guage affx)rds.  For  want  of  fome  fl:andard  of  this  fort, 
we  frequently  fee  an  author's  taflie  in  writing  alter  much 
to  the  worfe  in  the  courfe  of  his  life ;  and  his  later 
produdions  fall  below  the  level  of  his  early  efl^ays. 
D'Alembcrt  tells  us,    that  Voltaire   had  always   lying 

on 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  377 

on  his  table,  the  Petit  Careme  of  MafTiUon,  and  the 
tragedies  of  Racine ;  the  former  to  fix  his  tafte  in  profe 
compofition,  and  the  latter  in  poetry. 

In  avoiding,  however,  exprefTions  which  are  debafed 
by  vulgar  ufe,  there  is  a  danger  of  running  into   the 
other  extreme,  inqueflof  fafliionable  words  and  phrafes. 
Such  an  afFeftation  may,  for  a  few  years,  gratify  the 
vanity  of  an  author,  by  giving  him  the  air  of  a  man  of 
the  world  ;  but  the  reputation  it  beftows,  is  of  a  very 
tranfitory    nature.     The    works    which    continue   to  d 
pleafe  from  age  to  age,  are  written  with  perfeft  fimpli-    \\ 
city  ;  while  thofe  which  captivate  the  multitude  by  a 
difplay  of  meretricious  ornaments,  if,  by  chance,  they 
fhould  furvive  the  fafhions  to  which  they   are  accom- 
modated, remain  only  to  furnifh  a  fubjed:  of  ridicule    I 
to  poiterity.     The  portrait  of  a  beautiful  woman,  in  the  -^^ 
falhionable  drefs  of  the  day,  may  pleafe  at  the  moment 
it  is  painted  ;  nay,  may  perhaps  pleafe  more  than  in  any 
that  the  fancy  of  the  artift  could  have  fuggefled  ;  but 
it  is  only  in  the  plaineft  and  fimpleft  drapery,  that  the 
moft  perfed:  form  can  be  tranfmitted  with  advantage 
to  future  times. 

The  exceptions  which  the  hiftory  of  literature  feems 
to  furnifh  to  thefe  obfervations,  are  only  apparent. 
That,  in  the  works  of  our  beft  authors,  there  are  many 
beauties  which  have  long  and  generally  been  admired, 
and  which  yet  owe  their  whole  effeft  to  affociation, 
cannot  be  difputed  ;  but  in  fuch  cafes,  it  will  always 
be  found,  that  the  aflbciations  which  are  the  founda- 
tion of  our  pleafure,  have,  in  confequence  of  fome  pe- 
culiar combination  of  circumflances,  been  more  widely 
diffufed,  and  more  permanently  eftablifhed  among  man- 
kind. 


378  ELE^JENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.V. 

kind,  than  thofe  which  date  their  origin  from  the  ca- 
prices of  our  own  age  are  ever  Hkely  to  be.     An   ad- 
miration for  the  claflical  remains  of  antiquity  is,  at 
prefent,  not  lefs  general  in  Europe,  than  the  advantages 
of  a  liberal  education :  and  fuch  is  the  effect  of  this 
admiration,  that  there  are  certain  caprices  ofTafle, 
i    from  which  no  man  who  is  well  educated  is  entirely  free. 
A  compofition  in  a  modern  language,  which  fhould 
fometimes  depart  from  the  ordinary  modes  of  expref- 
fion,  from  an  affeftation  of  the  idioms  which  are  con- 
fecrated  in  the  claffics,  would  pleafe  a  very  wide  circle 
of  readers,  in  confequence  of  the  prevalence  of  claflical 
affociations ;  and,  therefore,  fuch  affedtations,  however 
abfurd,  when  carried  to  a  degree  of  fmgularity,  are  of 
a  far  fuperior  clafs  to  thofe  which  are  adapted  to  the 
falhions  of  the  day.   But  flill  the  general  principle  holds 
true,  That  whatever  beauties  derive  their  original  merely 
from  cafual  aflbciation,  mud  appear  capricious  to  thofe 
to  whom  the  affociation  does  not  extend  ;  and  that  the 
fimplefl  flyle  is  that  which  continues  longefl  to  pleafe, 
f  and  which  pleafes  mod  univerfally.     In  the  writings  of 
j    Mr.  Harris,  there  is  a  certain  claflical  air,  which  will 
j    always  have  many  admirers,  while  antient  learning  con- 
\    tinues  to  be  cultivated  ;  but  which,  to  a  mere  Englifh 
i    reader,  appears  fomewhat  unnatural   and  ungraceful, 
when  compared  with  the  compofition  of  Swift  or  of 
Addifon. 

The  analogy  of  the  arts  of  ftatuary  and  paint- 
ing, may  be  of  ufe  in  illufl:rating  thefe  remarks. 
The  influence  of  antient  times  has  extended  to  thefe, 
as  well  as  to  the  art  of  writing  ;  and  in  this  cafe,  no 
lefs  than   in  the  other,    the  tranfcendent   power   of 

genius 


Part  II.  §2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^79 

genius  has  efliabliflied  a  propriety  of  choice  in  mat- 
ters of  indifference,  and  has,  perhaps,  confecrated, 
in  the  opinion  of  mankind,  fome  of  its  own  ca- 
prices. 

*<  Many  of  the  ornaments  of  art,"  (fays  Sir  Jolhua 
Reynolds,)  "  thofe  at  lead  for  which  no  reafon  can  be 
*'  given,  are  tranfmitted  to  us,  are  adopted,  and  ac- 
"  quire  their  confequence,  from  the  company  in  which 
*'  we  have  been  ufed  to  fee  them.  As  Greece  and 
*'  Rome  are  the  fountains  from  whence  have  flowed 
"  all  kinds  of  excellence,  to  that  veneration  which  they 
"  have  a  right  to  claim  for  the  pleafure  and  knowledge 
*'  which  they  have  afforded  us,  we  voluntarily  add  our 
*'  approbation  of  every  ornament  and  every  cuftom 
*'  that  belonged  to  them,  even  to  the  fafhion  of  their 
"  dreis.  For  it  may  be  obferved,  that,  not  fatisfied 
*'  with  them  in  their  own  place,  we  make  no  difficulty 
"  of  drefling  flatues  of  modern  heroes  or  fenators 
*'  in  the  fafhion  of  the  Roman  armour,  or  peaceful 
"  robe  J  and  even  go  fo  far  as  hardly  to  bear  a  ftatue 
*'  in  any  other  drapery. 

"  The  figures  of  the  great  men  of  thofe  nations 
*'  have  come  down  to  us  in  fculpture.  In  fculpture 
*'  remain  almoft  all  the  excellent  fpecimeiis  of  antient 
*'  art.  We  have  fo  fai'  aiTociated  perfonal  dignity  to 
"  the  perfons  thus  reprefented,  and  the  truth  of  art 
*'  to  their  manner  of  reprefentation,  that  it  is  not  in 
"  our  power  any  longer  to  feparate  them.  This  is  not 
"  fo  in  painting  :  becaufe,  having  no  excellent  antient 
*'  portraits,  that  connection  was  never  formed.  In- 
**  deed,  we  could  no  more  venture  to  paint  a  general 
•'•'  officer  in  a  Roman  military  habit,  than  we  could 

"  make 


380  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

"  make  a  ftatue  in  the  prefent  uniform.  But  fmce  we 
"  have  no  antient  portraits,  to  fhew  how  ready  we  are 
"  to  adopt  thofe  kind  of  prejudices,  we  make  the  befl 
"  authority  among  the  moderns  ferve  the  fame  pur- 
"  pofe.  The  great  variety  of  excellent  portraits  with 
"  which  Vandyke  has  enriched  this  nation,  we  are 
*'  not  content  to  admire  for  their  real  excellence,  but 
"  extend  our  approbation  even  to  the  drefs  which  hap- 
*'  pened  to  be  the  fafhion  of  that  age.  By  this  means, 
"  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  very  ordinary  pictures  ac- 
"  quired  fomething  of  the  air  and  effect  of  the  works 
*'  of  Vandyke,  and  appeared  therefore,  at  firft  fight, 
"  better  pidures  than  they  really  were.  They  ap- 
"  peared  fo,  however,  to  thofe  only  who  had  the 
"  means  of  making  this  aifociation  *." 

The  influence  of  aflbciation  on  our  notions  concern- 
ing language,  is  ftill  more  ftrongly  exemplified  in  poetry 
than  in  profe.  As  it  is  one  great  objeO;  of  the  poet, 
in  his  ferious  productions,  to  elevate  the  imagination  of 
his  readers  above  the  groifnefs  of  fenfible  objedls,  and 
the  vulgarity  of  common  life,  it  becomes  peculiarly  ne- 
ceifary  for  him  to  rejeO:  the  ufe  of  all  words  and  phrafes 
which  are  trivial  and  hackneyed.  Among  thofe  which 
are  equally  pure  and  equally  perfpicuous,  he,  in  general, 
finds  it  expedient  to  adopt  that  which  is  the  leaft  com- 
mon. Milton  prefers  the  words  Rhene  and  Danaw,  to 
the  more  common  words  Rhine  and  Danube : 

"  A  multitude,  like  which  the  populous  North 
"  Pour'd  never  from  his  frozen  loins,  to  pafs 
"  Rhene  or  the  Danaw  !•" 

*   Reynolds's  Difcourfes,  p.  313,  et  feq. 
t   Paradifc  Loft,  book  i.  1.  351. 

In 


Part  II.  §  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  38 1 

In  the  following  line, 

"  Things  unattempted  yet  in  profe  or  rhyme," 

how  much  more  fuitable  to  the  poetical  ftyle  does  the 
expreffion  appear,  than  if  the  author  had  faid, 

''  Things  unattempted  yet  in  profe  orverfe." 

In  another  paffage,  where,  for  the  fake  of  variety,  he 
has  made  ufe  of  the  laft  phrafe,  he  adds  an  epithet,  to 
remove  it  a  little  from  the  familiarity  of  ordinary  dif- 
courfe, 

"  in  profe  or  numerous  verfe  *." 

In  confequence  of  this  circumftance,  there  arifes 
gradually  in  every  language  a  poetical  diftion,  which 
differs  widely  from  the  common  didion  of  profe.  It  is 
much  lefs  fubject  to  the  vicifTitudes  of  fafliion,  than 
the  polite  modes  of  expreffion  in  familiar  converfation  j 
becaufe^  when  it  has  once  been  adopted  by  the  poet, 
it  is  avoided  by  good  profe-writers,  as  being  too  ele- 
vated for  that  fpecies  of  compofition.  It  may  there- 
fore retain  its  charm,  as  long  as  the  language  exifls  ; 
nay,  the  charm  may  increafe,  as  the  language  grows 
older, 

Indeed,  the  charm  of  poetical  didlion  muft  increafe 
to  a  certain  degree,  as  polite  literature  advances.  For 
when  once  a  fet  of  words  has  been  confecrated  to 
poetry,  the  very  found  of  them,  independently  of  the 
ideas  they  convey,  awakens,  every  time  we  hear  it,  the 
agreeable  impreffions  which  were  conneded  with  it 
when  we  met  with  them  in  the  performances  of  our  fa- 
vourite authors.  Even  whenftrung  together  in  fentences 

*  Paradife  Lofl,  book  i.  1. 150,     See  Newton's  Edit. 

which 


382  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

which  convey  no  meaning,  they  produce  fome  effedt 
on  the  mind  of  a  reader  of  fenfibility  :  an  efteft,  at 
leaft,  extremely  different  from  that  of  an  unmeaning 
fentence  in  profe. 

Languages  differ  from  each  other  widely  in  the  co- 
pioufnefs  of  their  poetical  diction.  Our  own  pofTefTes, 
in  this  refpe£t,  important  advantages  over  the  French  : 
not  that,  in  this  language,  there  are  no  words  appro- 
priated to  poetry,  but  becaufe  their  number  is,  compa- 
ratively fpeaking,  extremely  limited. 

The  fcantinefs  of  the  French  poetical  diftion  is,  pro- 
bably, attended  with  the  lefs  inconvenience,  that  the 
phrafes  which  occur  in  good  profe-writing  are  lefs  de- 
graded by  vulgar  application  than  in  Englifh,  in  con- 
fequence  of  the  line  being  more  diflinflly  and  more 
ftrongly  drawn  between  polite  and  low  expreflions  in 
that  language  than  in  ours.  Our  poets,  indeed,  by 
having  a  language  appropriated  to  their  own  purpofes, 
not  only  can  preferve  dignity  of  exprelTion,  but  can 
connedt  viith  the  perufal  of  their  compofitions,  the 
plealing  impreffions  which  have  been  produced  by 
thofe  of  their  predeceffors.  And  hence,  in  the  higher 
forts  of  poetry,  where  their  objeft  is  to  kindle,  as  much 
as  pofTible,  the  enthufiafm  of  their  readers,  they  not 
only  avoid,  ftudioufly,  all  expreffions  which  are  vulgar, 
but  all  fuch  as  are  borrowed  from  fafhionablc  life. 
This  certainly  cannot  be  done  in  an  equal  degree  by  a 
poet  who  writes  in  the  French  language. 

In  Englifh,  the  poetical  diftion  is  fo  extremely  co- 
pious, that  it  is  liable  to  be  abufed  ;  as  it  puts  it  in  the 
power  of  authors  of  no  genius,  merely  by  ringing 
changes  on  the  poetical  vocabulary,  to  give  a  certain 

decree 

o 


Part  II.  §2.  OF   THE   HUMAN     MIND.  383 

degree  of  currency  to  the  moft  unmeaning  compofitions. 
In  Pope's  Song  by  a  Per/on  of  Quality^  the  incoherence 
of  ideas  is  fcarcely  greater  than  what  is  to  be  found  in 
fome  admired  paflages  of  our  fafhionable  poetry. 

Nor  is  it  merely  by  a  difference  of  words,  that  the 
language  of  poetry  is  diflinguilhed  from  that  of  profe. 
When  a  poetical  arrangement  of  words  has  once  been 
eftabliflied  by  authors  of  reputation,  the  moft  common 
exprellions,  by  being  prefented  in  thisconfecrated  order, 
may  ferve  to  excite  poetical  aifociations. 

On  the  other  hand,  nothing  more  completely  de- 
ftroys  the  charm  of  poetry,  than  a  ftring  of  words  which 
the  cuftom  of  ordinary  difcourfe  has  arranged  in  fo  in- 
variable an  order,  that  the  whole  phrafe  may  be  anti- 
cipated from  hearing  its  commencement.  A  fingle 
word  frequently  ftrikes  us  as  flat  and  profaic,  in  con- 
fequence  of  its  familiarity  ;  but  two  fuch  words  coupled 
together  in  the  order  of  converfation,  can  fcarcely  be 
introduced  into  ferious  poetry  without  appearing  ludi- 
crous. 

No  poet  in  our  language  has  fhewn  fo  ftrikingly  as 
Milton,  the  wonderful  elevation  which  ftyle  may  derive 
from  an  arrangement  of  words,  which,  while  it  is  per- 
fectly intelligible,  departs  widely  from  that  to  which  we 
are  in  general  accuftomed.  Many  of  his  moft  fublime 
periods,  when  the  order  of  the  words  is  altered,  are 
reduced  nearly  to  the  level  of  profe.  *«- 

To  copy  this  artifice  with  fuccefs,  is  a  much  more 
difficult  attainment  than  is  commonly  imagined  ;  and, 
of  confequence,  when  it  is  acquired,  it  fecures  an  au- 
thor, to  a  great  degree,  from  that  crowd  of  imitators 
who  fpoil  the  effed  of  whatever  is  not  beyond  their 

reach. 


384  ELExMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

reach.  To  the  poet  who  ufes  blank  verfe,  it  is  an 
acquifition  of  ftill  more  eflfential  confequence  than  to 
him  who  expreffes  himfelf  in  rhyme  ;  for  the  more 
that  the  ftruclure  of  the  verfe  approaches  to  profe,  the 
more  it  is  neceflary  to  give  novelty  and  dignity  to  the 
compofition.  And  accordingly,  among  our  magazine 
poets,  ten  thoufand  catch  the  ftruclure  of  Pope's  ver- 
fification,  for  one  who  approaches  to  the  manner  of 
Milton,  or  of  Thomfon. 

The  facility,  however,  of  this  imitation,  like  every 
other,  increafes  with  the  number  of  thofe  who  have 
ftudied  it  with  fuccefs ;  for  the  more  numerous  the 
authors  who  have  employed  their  genius  in  any  one 
direftion,  the  more  copious  are  the  materials  out  of 
which  mediocrity  may  feledl  and  combine,  fo  as  to 
efcape  the  charge  of  plagiarifm.  And,  in  fad,  in  our 
own  language,  this,  as  well  as  the  other  great  re- 
fource  of  poetical  expreflion,  the  employment  of  ap- 
propriated words,  has  had  its  effed  fo  much  impaired 
by  the  abufe  which  has  been  made  of  it,  that  a  few 
of  our  beft  poets  of  late  have  endeavoured  to  ftrike 
out  a  new  path  for  themfelves,  by  refting  the  elevation 
for  their  compofition  chiefly  on  a  fmgular,  and,  to  an 
ordinary  writer,  an  unattainable  union  of  harmonious 
verfification,  with  a  natural  arrangement  of  words,  and 
a  fimple  elegance  of  expreflion.  It  is  this  union 
which  feems  to  form  the  diftinguifhing  charm  of  the 
poetry  of  Goldfmith. 

From  the  remarks  which  have  been  made  on  the 
influence  of  the  alTociation  of  ideas  on  our  judgments 
in  matters  of  tafte,  it  is  obvious  how  much  the  opi- 
nions of  a  nation  with    refped  to  merit  in  the  fine 

1 6  arts, 


Part  If.   §2.  OF    THE    HUMAM    MIND.  385 

arts,  are  likely  to  be  influenced  by  the  form  of  their 
government,  and  the  date  of  their  manners.  Vol- 
taire, in  his  difcourfe  pronounced  at  his  reception  into 
the  French  academy,  gives  feveral  reafons  why  the 
poets  of  that  country  have  not  fucceeded  in  defcrib- 
ing  rural  fcenes  and  employments.  The  principal  one 
is,  the  ideas  of  meannefs,  and  poverty,  and  wretch- 
ednefe,  v/hich  the  French  are  accuftomed  to  aflbciate 
with  the  profeffion  of  hufbandry.  The  fame  thing- 
is  alluded  to  by  the  Abbe  de  Lille,  in  the  preliminary 
difcourfe  prefixed  to  his  tranflation  of  the  Georgics. 
**  A  tranflation,"  fays  he,  "  of  this  poem,  if  it  had 
"  been  undertaken  by  an  author  of  genius,  would 
"  have  been  better  calculated  than  any  other  work, 
"for  adding  to  the  riches  of  our  language.  A  ver- 
"  fion  of  the  iEneid  itfelf,  however  well  executed, 
"  v/ould,  in  this  refpetl:,  be  of  lefs  utility  ;  inafmuch 
"  as  the  genius  of  our  tongue  accommodates  kieli 
*'  more  eafily  to  the  defcription  of  heroic  atchieve- 
"  ments,  than  to  the  details  of  natural  phenomena, 
*'  and  of  the  operations  of  hufbandry.  To  force  it 
"  to  exprefs  thefe  with  fuitable  dignity,  would  have 
*•'  been  a  real  conquefl  over  that  falfe  delicacy, 
"  which  it  has  contracted,  from  our  unfortunate  pre- 
"  judices." 

How  different  mufl  have  been  the  emotions  Vfith 
v/hiich  this  divine  performance  of  Virgil  was  read  by 
an  antient  Roman,  while  he  recolleded  that  period- 
In  -the  hiflory  of  his  country,  when  dictators  were 
called  from  the  plough  to  the  defence  of  the  ftate, 
and  after  having  led  monarchs  in  triumph,  returned 
again  to  the  fame  happy  and  independent  occupation. 

C  c  A  flate 


386  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V 

A  ftate  of  manners  to  which  a  Roman  author  of  a 
later  age  looked  back  with  fuch  enthufiafm,  that  he 
afcribes,  by  a  bold  poetical  figure,  the  flourifhing  flate 
of  agriculture  under  the  republic,  to  the  grateful  re- 
turns which  the  earth  then  made  to  the  illuftrious 
hands  by  which  fhe  was  cultivated.  *'  Gaudente 
"  terra  vomere  laureato,  et  triumphali  aratore  *.*' 


SECTION    III. 

OJ  the  Injiuence  of  Jljfoc'iation   on  our  ad'tve  Principles,  and  on  cur 
moral  Judgments. 

IN  order  to  illuftrate  a  little  farther,  the  influence 
of  the  Aflbciation  of  Ideas  on  the  human  mind,  I 
{hall  add  a  few  remarks  on  fome  of  its  effefts  on  our 
adive  and  moral  principles.  In  ftating  thefe  remarks, 
I  fhall  endeavour  to  avoid,  as  much  as  pofTible,  every 
occafion  of  controverfy,  by  confining  myfelf  to  fuch 
general  views  of  the  fubjeft,  as  do  not  prefuppofe  any 
particular  enumeration  of  our  original  principles  of 
action,  or  any  particular  fyftem  concerning  the  nature 
of  the  moral  faculty.  If  my  health  and  leifure  enable 
me  to  carry  my  plans  into  execution,  I  propofe,  in 
the  fequel  of  this  work,  to  refume  thefe  inquiries,  and 
to  examine  the  various  opinions  to  which  they  have 
given  rife. 

The  manner  in  which  the  aifociation  of  ideas  ope- 
rates in  producing  new  principles  of  action,  has  been 
explained  very  diflindly  by  different  writers.     What- 

*  Pun.  Nat.  Hift.  xviii.  4, 

ever 


Part  II.   §3.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  387 

ever  conduces  to  the  gratification  of  any  natural  ap- 
petite, or  of  any  natural  defire,  is  itfelf  defired  on 
account  of  the  end  to  which  it  is  fubfervient ;  and  by 
being  thus  habitually  aflbciated  in  our  apprehenfion 
with  agreeable  objects,  it  frequently  comes,  in  procefs 
of  time,  to  be  regarded  as  valuable  in  itfelf,  inde- 
pendently of  its  utility.  It  is  thus  that  wealth  be- 
comes, with  many,  an  ultimate  object  of  purfuit ; 
although,  at  firft,  it  is  undoubtedly  valued,  merely 
on  account  of  its  fubferviency  to  the  attainment  of 
other  objefts.  In  like  manner,  men  are  led  to  defire 
drefs,  equipage,  retinue,  furniture,  on  account  of  the 
eflimation  in  which  they  are  fuppofed  to  be  held  by 
the  public.  Such  defires  are  called  by  Dr.  Hutche- 
fon  *  fecondary  defires  :  and  their  origin  is  explained 
by  him  in  the  way  which  I  have  mentioned.  "  Since 
we  are  capable,"  fays  he,  "  of  refledlion,  memory, 
obfervation,  and  reafoning  about  the  diftant  tend- 
encies of  objeds  and  adions,  and  not  confined  to 
things  prefent,  there  muft  arife,  in  confequence 
of  our  original  defires,  fecondary  defires  of  every 
thing  imagined  ufeful  to  gratify  any  of  the  primary 
defires  ;  and  that  with  fi:rength  proportioned  to  the 
feveral  original  defires,  and  imagined  ufefulnefs  or 
neceflity  of  the  advantageous  object."  "  Thus," 
he  continues,  "  as  foon  as  we  come  to  apprehend  the 
ufe  of  wealth  or  power  to  gratify  any  of  our  ori- 
ginal defires,  we  muft  alfo  defire  them  ;  and  hence 
arifes  the  univerfality  of  thefe  defires  of  wealth  and 
power,  fince  they  are  the  means  of  gratifying  all 

*  See  his  Effay  on  the  Nature  and  Condu6t  of  the  Paflions. 
C  c  2  "  Other 


388  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V^ 

"  Other  defires.'*  The  only  thing  that  appears  to 
me  exceptionable  in  the  foregoing  pail'age  is,  that  the 
author  clafles  the  defue  of  power  with  that  of  wealth  ; 
whereas  I  apprehend  it  to  be  clear,  (for  reafons  which 
I  ihall  flate  in  another  part  of  this  work,)  that  the 
former  is  a  primary  defire,  and  the  latter  a  fecondary 
one. 

Our  moral  judgments,  too,  may  be  modified,  and 
even  perverted,  to  a  certain  degree,  in  confequence  of 
the  operation  of  the  fame  principle.  In  the  fame 
manner  in  which  a  perfon  who  is  regarded  as  a  model 
of  tafle  may  introduce,  by  his  example,  an  abfurd 
or  fantaftical  drefs  ;  fo  a  man  of  fplendid  virtues  may 
attraft  fome  efteem  alfo  to  his  imperfedions  ;  and, 
if  placed  in  a  confpicuous  fituation,  may  render  his 
vices  and  follies  objeds  of  general  imitation  among  the 
multitude. 

**  In  the  reign  of  Charles  II."  fays  Mr.  Smith  *, 
"  a  degree  of  licentioufnefs  was  deemed  the  charac- 
*'  teriflic  of  a  liberal  education.  It  was  connected, 
*'  according  to  the  notions  of  thofe  times,  with  gene- 
*'  rofity,  fmcerity,  magnanimity,  loyalty  ;  and  proved 
"  that  the  perfon  who  aded  in  this  manner,  was  a 
*'  gentleman,  and  not  a  puritan.  Severity  of  man- 
"  ners,  and  regularity  of  conduct,  on  the  other  hand, 
"  were  altogether  unfafiiionable,  and  were  connected, 
"  in  the  imagination  of  that  age,  with  cant,  cunning, 
*'  hypocrify,  and  lov/  manners.  To  fuperficial  minds, 
*'  the  vices  of  the  great  feem  at  all  tunes  agreeable. 
*'  They  conned  them,,  not  only  with  the  fplendour  of 
'*  fortune,  but  vvdth  many  fuperior  virtues  which  they 

*  Theoi-y  of  Mural  Sentiments, 

"  afcribe 


Part ri.  1^3-  ^^   "^^^    HUMAN   MIND.  389 

**  arcribe  to  their  faperlors  ;  with  the  fpirit  of  free- 
**  doin  and  independency  ;  with  franknefs,  generofity, 
**  humanity,  and  politenefs.  The  virtues  of  the  in- 
*'  ferior  ranks  of  people,  on  the  contrary,  their  par- 
"  fimonious  frugality,  their  painful  induftry,  and  rigid 
*'  adherence  to  rules,  feem  to  them  mean  and  difa- 
"  greeable.  They  conned  them  both  with  the  mean- 
"^'  nefs  of  the  ftation  to  which  thefe  qualities  com- 
"  monly  belong,  and  with  many  great  vices  which 
"  they  fuppofe  ufually  accompany  them ;  fuch  as 
*'  an  abjeft,  cowardly,  ill-natured,  lying,  pilfering 
"  difpofition." 

The  theory  which,  in  the  foregoing  paflages  from 
Hutchefon  and  Smith,  is  employed  fo  juflly  and  phi- 
lofophicaliy  to  explain  the  origin  of  our  fecondary 
defires,  and  to  account  for  fome  perverfions  of  our 
moral  judgments,  has  been  thought  fufficient,  by 
fome  later  wTiters,  to  account  for  the  origin  of  all 
our  a<^ive  principles  without  exception.  The  firft 
of  thefe  attempts  to  extend  fo  very  far  the  application 
of  the  doclrine  of  AiTociation  was  made  by  the  Reve- 
rend Mr.  Gay,  in  a  diflertation  "  concerning  the  fun- 
"  damental  Principle  of  Virtue,"  which  is  prefixed 
by  Dr.  Law  to  his  tranflation  of  Archbilhop  King's 
EfTay  "  on  the  Origin  of  Evil.'*  In  this  diflertation, 
the  author  endeavours  to  fliew,  "  that  our  approba- 
*'  tion  of  morality,  and  all  affedions  whatfoever,  are 
*'  finally  refolvable  into  reafon,  pointing  out  private 
"  happinefs,  and  are  converfant  only  about  things  ap- 
*'  prehended  to  be  means  tending  to  this  end ;  and 
*■'  that  wherever  this  end  is  not  perceived,  they  are  to 
'■'■  be  accounted  for  from  the  aflbciation  of  ideas,  and 
C  c  3  "  may 


39°  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  V. 

*'  may  properly  be  called  habits."  The  fame  princi- 
ples have  been  fince  pufhed  to  a  much  greater  length 
by  Dr.  Hartley,  whofe  fyftem  (as  he  himfelf  informs 
us)  took  rife  from  his  accidentally  hearing  it  men- 
tioned as  an  opinion  of  Mr.  Gay,  "  that  the  affocia- 
"  tion  of  ideas  was  fufficient  to  account  for  all  our 
"  intellectual  pleafures  and  pains  *." 

It  muft,  I  think,  in  juflice,  be  acknowledged,  that 
this  theory,  concerning  the  origin  of  our  affedions, 
and  of  the  moral  fenfe,  is  a  mod  ingenious  refinement 
upon  the  felfifh  fyftem,  as  it  was  formerly  taught ; 
and  that,  by  means  of  it,  the  force  of  many  of  the 
common  reafonings  againft  that  fyftem  is  eluded. 
Among  thefe  reafonings,  particular  ftrefs  has  always 
l)een  laid  on  the  inftantaneoufnefs  with  which  our 
affeftions  operate,  and  the  moral  fenfe  approves  or 
condemns ;  and  on  our  total  want  of  confcioufnefs, 
in  fuch  cafes,  of  any  reference  to  our  own  happinefs. 
The  modern  advocates  for  the  felfifti  fyftem  admit  the 
fad  to  be  as  it  is  ftated  by  their  opponents ;  and 
grant,  that  after  the  moral  fenfe  and  our  various  af- 
fe6tions  are  formed,  their  exercife,  in  particular  cafes, 
may  become  completely  difmterefted  j  but  ftill  they 
contend,  that  it  is  upon  a  regard  to  our  own  hap- 
pinefs that  all  thefe  principles  are  originally  grafted. 

*  Mr.  Hume  too,  who,  in  my  opinion,  has  carried  this  principle 
t)f  the  Affociation  of  Ideas  a  great  deal  too  far,  has  compared  the 
univerfality  of  its  appHcations  in  the  philofophy  of  mind,  to  that  of 
the  principle  of  attradion  in  phyfics.  ''  Here,"  fays  he,  "  is  a 
"  kind  of  attraftion,  which  in  the  mental  world  will  be  found  to 
*'  have  as  extraordinary  cfFefts  as  in  the  natural,  and  to  ftiew  itfelf 
'*  in  as  many  and  as  various  forms."  Treat,  of  Hum.  Nat.  vol.  i. 
p.  30. 

The 


Part  II.  §3-  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  391 

The  analogy  of  avarice  will  ferve  to  illuftrate  the 
fcope  of  this  theory.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  this 
principle  of  adion  is  artificial.  It  is  on  account  of 
the  enjoyments  which  it  enables  us  to  purchafe,  that 
money  is  originally  defired  ;  and  yet,  in  procefs  of 
time,  by  means  of  the  agreeable  impreffions  which  are 
aflbciated  with  it,  it  comes  to  be  defired  for  its  own 
fake  ;  and  even  continues  to  be  an  object  of  our  pur- 
fuit,  long  after  we  have  lofl:  all  relifh  for  thofe  enjoy- 
ments which  it  enables  us  to  command. 

Without  meaning  to  engage  in  any  controverfy  on 
the  fubject,  I  fhall  content  myfelf  with  obferving,  in 
general,  that  there  muft  be  fome  limit,  beyond  which 
the  theory  of  aflbciation  cannot  poflibly  be  carried  ; 
for  the  explanation  which  it  gives,  of  the  formation  of 
new  principles  of  action,  proceeds  on  the  fuppofition 
that  there  are  other  principles  previoufly  exifling  in  the 
mind.  The  great  queftion  then  is,  when  we  are  arrived 
at  this  limit ;  or,  in  other  words,  when  we  are  arrived 
at  the  fimple  and  original  laws  of  our  conftitution. 

In  conducting  this  inquiry,  philofophers  have  been 
apt  to  go  into  extremes.  Lord  Kaimes,  and  fome 
other  authors,  have  been  cenfured,  and  perhaps  juftly, 
for  a  difpofition  to  multiply  original  principles  to  an 
unnecelTary  degree.  It  may  be  queftioned,  whether 
Dr.  Hartley,  and  his  followers,  have  not  fometimes 
been  mifled  by  too  eager  a  defire  of  abridging  their 
number. 

Of  thefe  two  errors,  the  former  is  the  leaft  com- 
mon, and  the  leaft  dangerous.     It  is  the  leaft  com- 
mon, becaufe  it  is  not  fo  flattering  as  the  other  to  the 
vanity  of  a  theorift  ;  and  it  is  the  leaft  dangerous,  be- 
C  c  4  caufe 


392  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    nilLOSOPHY  Cliap.  V. 

caufe  it  has  no  tendency,  like  the  other,  to  give  rife  to 
a  fupprefiion,  or  to  a  mifreprefentation  of  facts  ;  or  to 
retard  the  progrefs  of  the  fcience,  by  beftowing  upon 
it  an  appearance  of  fyflematical  perfection,  to  which, 
in  its  prefent  ftate,  it  is  not  entitled. 

Abflrading,  however,  from  thefe  inconveniences, 
which  mull  always  refult  from  a  precipitate  reference 
of  phenomena  to  general  principles,  it  does  not  feem 
to  me,  that  the  theory  in  queftion  has  any  tendency 
to  weaken  the  foundation  of  morals.  It  has,  indeed, 
fome  tendency,  in  comxmon  with  the  philofophy  of 
Hobbes  and  of  Mandeville,  to  degrade  the  dignity  of 
human  nature  ;  but  it  leads  to  no  fceptical  conclufions 
concerning  the  rule  of  life.  For,  although  we  were 
to  grant,  that  all  our  principles  of  adion  are  acquired  ; 
fo  flriking  a  difference  among  them  muff  ftill  be  ad- 
mitted, as  is  fufficient  to  diftinguifli  clearly  thofe 
univerfal  laws  which  were  intended  to  regulate  hu- 
man conduct,  from  the  local  habits  which  are  formed 
by  education  and  fafhion.  It  mull  flill  be  admitted, 
that  while  fome  active  principles  are  confined  to  par- 
ticular individuals,  or  to  particular  tribes  of  men, 
there  are  others,  which,  arifing  from  circumftances  in 
which  all  the  fituations  of  mankind  muft  agree,  are 
common  to  the  whole  fpecies.  Such  active  principles 
as  fall  under  this  laft  defcription,  at  whatever  period 
of  life  they  may  appear,  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  part 
of  human  nature,  no  lefs  than  the  inftinft  of  fuftion  ; 
in  the  fame  manner  as  the  acquired  perception  of 
diftance  by  the  eye,  is  to  be  ranked  among  the  per- 
ceptive powers  of  man,  no  lefs  than  the  original  per- 
ceptions of  any  of  our  other  fenfes. 

I !  Leaving, 


Part  II.  ^3-  ^^    "^^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  393 

Leaving,  therefore,  the  queftion  concerning  the 
origin  of  our  aftive  principles,  and  of  the  moral  facul- 
ty, to  be  the  fubjeft  of  future  difcuffion,  I  (hall  conclude 
this  Se6lion  with  a  few  remarks  of  a  more  praftical 
nature. 

It  has  been  fhewn  by  difl'erent  writers,  how  much 
of  the  beauty  and  fublimity  of  material  objects  arife 
from  the  ideas  and  feelings  which  we  have  been  taught 
to  aflbciate  with  them.  The  impreflion  produced  on  the 
external  fenfes  of  a  poet,  by  the  mod  ftriking  fcene  in 
nature,  is  precifely  the  fame  with  what  is  produced  on 
the  fenfes  of  a  peafant  or  a  tradefman  :  yet  how  differ- 
ent is  the  degree  of  pleafure  refulting  from  this  im- 
preiTion  !  A  great  part  of  this  difference  is  undoubt- 
edly to  be  afcribed,  to  the  ideas  and  feelings  which  the 
habitual  fludies  and  amufements  of  the  poet  have  alTo- 
ciated  with  his  organical  perceptions. 

A  fmiilar  obfervation  may  be  applied  to  all  the  va- 
rious objects  of  our  purfuit  in  life.  Hardly  any  one 
of  them  is  appreciated  by  any  two  men  in  the  fame 
manner ;  and  frequently  what  one  man  confiders  as 
effential  to  his  happinefs,  is  regarded  with  indifference 
or  diflike  by  another.  Of  thefe  differences  of  opinion, 
much  is,  no  doubt,  to  be  afcribed  to  a  diverfity  of  con- 
flitution,  which  renders  a  particular  employment  of  the 
intelledual  or  aftive  powers  agreeable  to  one  man, 
which  is  not  equally  fo  to  another.  But  much  is  alfo 
to  be  afcribed  to  the  effeft  of  affociation  ;  which,  prior 
to  any  experience  of  human  life,  conneds  pleafing 
ideas  and  pleafmg  feeluigs  with  different  objeds,  in 
the  minds  of  different  perfons. 

In 


394  ELEMENTS    OP    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

,  In  confequence  of  thefe  afTociations,  every  man  apr 
pears  to  his  neighbour  to  purfue  the  objed  of  his  wifhes, 
with  a  zeal  difproportioned  to  its  intrinfic  value  ;  and 
the  philofopher  (vi^hofe  principal  enjoyment  arifes  from 
fpeculation)  is  frequently  apt  to  fmile  at  the  ardour 
■with  which  the  active  part  of  mankind  purfue,  what 
appear  to  him  to  be  mere  ihadows.  This  view  of  hu- 
man affairs,  fome  writers  have  carried  fo  far,  as  to  re- 
prefent  life  as  a  fcene  of  mere  illufions,  where  the  mind 
refers  to  the  objects  around  it,  a  colouring  which 
exifts  only  in  itfelf ;  and  where,  as  the  Poet  expreifes  it, 

"  Opinion  gilds  with  varying  rays, 

**  Thofe  painted  clouds  which  beautify  our  days." 

It  may  be  queftioned,  if  thefe  reprefentations  of  hu- 
man life  be  ufeful  or  juft.  That  the  cafual  afTociations 
which  the  mind  forms  in  childhood,  and  in  early  youth, 
axe  frequently  a  fource  of  inconvenience  and  of  mif- 
condud,  is  fufficiently  obvious  ;  but  that  this  tendency 
of  our  nature  increafes,  on  the  whole,  the  fum  of  human 
enjoyment,  appears  to  me  to  be  indifputable  ;  and  the 
inflances  in  which  it  mifleads  us  from  our  duty  and  our 
happinefs,  only  prove,  to  what  important  ends  it  might 
be  fubfervient,  if  it  were  kept  under  proper  regulation. 

Nor  do  thefe  reprefentations  of  life  (admitting  them 
in  their  full  extent)  juflify  the  pradical  inferences  which 
have  been  often  deduced  from  them,  with  refpeft  to 
the  vanity  of  our  purfuits.  In  every  cafe,  indeed,  in 
which  our  enjoyment  depends  upon  alTociation,  it  may 
be  faid,  in  one  fenfe,  that  it  arifes  from  the  mind  itfelf ; 
but  it  does  not  therefore  follow,  that  the  external  objed: 
which  cuflom  has  rendered  the  caufe  or  the  occafion 

of 


Part  II.  %  3*  ^^    '^^^  HUMAN   MIND.  39  j; 

of  agreeable  emotions,  is  indifferent  to  our  happinefs. 
The  effed  which  the  beauties  of  nature  produce  on  the 
mind  of  the  poet,  is  wonderfully  heightened  by  affoci- 
ation  ;  but  his  enjoyment  is  not,  on  that  account,  the 
lefs  exquifite :  nor  are  the  objefts  of  his  admiration  of 
the  lefs  value  to  his  happinefs,  that  they  derive  their 
principal  chai'ms  from  the  embellifhments  of  his  fancy. 

It  is  the  bufmefs  of  education,  not  to  counteracl,  in 
any  inftance,  the  eftablilhed  laws  of  our  conflitution, 
but  to  diredl  them  to  their  proper  purpofes.  That  the 
influence  of  early  aflbciations  on  the  mind  might  be 
employed,  in  the  moft  effedual  manner,  to  aid  our 
moral  principles,  appears  evidently  from  the  effects 
which  we  daily  fee  it  produce,  in  reconciling  men  to  a 
courfe  of  adtion  which  their  reafon  forces  them  to  con- 
demn ;  and  it  is  no  lefs  obvious  that,  by  means  of  it,  the 
happinefs  of  human  life  might  be  increafed,  and  its  pains 
diminifhed,  if  the  agreeable  ideas  and  feelings  which 
children  are  fo  apt  to  connect  with  events  and  with 
fituations  which  depend  on  the  caprice  of  fortune,  were 
firmly  affociated  in  their  apprehenfions  with  the  duties 
of  their  ftations,  with  the  purfuits  of  fcience,  and  with 
thofe  beauties  of  nature  which  are  open  to  all. 

Thefe  obfervations  coincide  nearly  with  the  ancient 
ftoical  dodrine  concerning^the  influence  of  imagination* 
on  morals ;  a  fubjedl,  on  which  many  important  re- 
marks, (though  expreflfed  in  a  form  different  from  that 
which  modern  philofophers  have  introduced,  and, 
perhaps,  not  altogether  fo  precife  and  accurate,)  are 

*  According  to  the  ufe  which  I  make  of  the  words  Imagination 
and  Aflbciation,  in  this  work,  their  effefts  are  obvioufly  diftinguifh- 
able.  I  have  thought  it  proper,  however,  to  illuftrate  the  difference 
between  them  a  little  more  fully  in  Note  [R]. 

to 


39^  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V. 

to  be  found  in  the  Difcourfes  of  Epidetus,  and  in  the 
Meditations  of  Antoninus*.  This  dodrine  of  the 
Stoical  fchool,  Dr.  Akenfide  has  in  view  in  the  fol- 
lowing paflage  : 

*'  A(5lion  treads  the  path 
*'  In  which  Opinion  fays  he  follows  good, 
*'  Or  flies  from  evil ;   and  Opinion  gives 
"  Report  of  good  or  evil,  as  tlie  fcene 
*'  Was  drawn  by  fancy^  lovely  or  deform'd : 
**  Thus  her  report  can  never  there  be  true, 
**  Where  fancy  cheats  the  intelledlual  eye 
**  With  glaring  colours  and  diftorted  lines. 
"  Is  there  a  man,  w^ho  at  the  found  of  death 
"  Sees  ghaftly  fliapes  of  terror  conjur'd  up, 
*'  And  black  before  him  :  nought  but  death-bed  groans 
"  And  fearful  prayers,  and  plunging  from  the  brink 
'*  Of  light  and  being,  down  the  gloomy  air, 
*'  An  unknown  depth  ?     Alas  !   in  fuch  a  mind, 
**  If  no  bright  forms  of  excellence  attend 
"  The  image  of  his  country  ;  nor  the  pomp 
*'  Of  facred  fenates,  nor  the  guardian  voice 
"  Of  juftice  on  her  throne,  nor  aught  that  wakes 
"  The  confcious  bofom  with  a  patriot's  flame  : 
"  Will  not  Opinion  tell  him,  that  to  die, 
"  Or  fliand  the  hazard,  is  a  greater  ill 
*'  Than  to  betray  his  country  ?  And  in  aft 
"  Will  he  not  chufe  to  be  a  wretch  and  live  ? 
'^  Here  vice  begins  then  f." 

*  See  what  Epiftetus  has  remarked  on  the  xjvio-k  ota  ^^r  <pa»T«- 

i7ifc)i.  (Arrian,  1,  i.  C.  12.)  'Oia  av  ■TroMaxi?  (patTucrQr.c,  toiccvt-/i  crot 
Eorai  '/j  ^laco.a.  ^WJimoth  ya^  vno  rwj  (puvruinuv  t)  ^vx^r},  Bxttti  h^ 
avTr,>,    rri   ffvn^nx    tuv    T^MiTuv  ^a.v7uaniiV)   &C.    &C.      Anton.   1.   v, 

c.  16. 

\  Pleafures  of  Imagination,  b.  iii. 


Psrt  II.  §  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND,  397 


SECTION    IV. 

General  Remarls  on  the  SuhjeSs  treated  in  the  foregoing 
SeP.lons  of  this  Chapter. 

IN  perufing  the  foregoing  Sections  of  this  Chapter, 
I  am  aware,  that  fome  of  my  readers  may  be  apt 
to  think  that  many  of  the  obfervations  which  I  have 
made,  might  eafily  be  refoived  into  more  general 
principles.  I  am  alfo  aware,  that,  to  the  followers 
of  Dr.  Hartley,  a  fimilar  objection  will  occur  againfl 
all  the  other  parts  of  this  work  ;  and  that  it  will  ap- 
pear to  them  the  effed;  of  inexcufable  prejudice,  that 
I  (hould  flop  fhort  fo  frequently  in  the  explanation 
of  phenomena ;  when  he  has  accounted  in  fo  fatis- 
fadtory  a  manner,  by  means  of  the  afTociation  of 
ideas,  for  all  the  appearances  which  human  nature 
exhibits. 

To  this  objection,  I  fliall  not  feel  myfelf  much  in- 
terefled  to  reply,  provided  it  be  granted  that  my  ob- 
fervations are  candidly  and'  accurately  dated,  fo  far 
as  they  reach.  Suppofing  that  in  fome  cafes  I  may 
have  Hopped  (hort  too  foon,  my  fpeculations,  al- 
though they  may  be  cenfured  as  imperfect,  cannot  be 
confidered  as  Handing  in  oppoution  to  the  conclufions 
of  more  fuccefsful  inquirers. 

May  I  be  allowed  farther  to  obferve,  that  fuch 
views  of  the  human  mind  as  are  contained  in  this 
work,    (even    luppofing    the   objection    to   be   well 

founded,) 


398  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

founded,)  are,  in  my  opinion,  indifpenfably  neceflary* 
in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  thofe  very  general 
and  comprehenfive  theories  concerning  it,  which  fome 
eminent  writers  of  the  prefent  age  have  been  ambitious 
to  form  ? 

Concerning  the  merit  of  thefe  theories,  I  fhall  not 
prefume  to  give  any  judgment.  I  fhall  only  remark, 
that,  in  all  the  other  fciences,  the  progrefs  of  difco- 
very  has  been  gradual,  from  the  lefs  general  to  the 
more  general  laws  of  nature ;  and  that  it  would  be 
Angular,  indeed,  if,  in  the  Philofophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  a  fcience,  which  but  a  few  years  ago  was  con- 
fefledly  in  its  infancy,  and  which  certainly  labours 
under  many  difadvantages  peculiar  to  itfelf,  a  flep 
Ihould,  all  at  once,  be  made  to  a  (ingle  principle 
comprehending  all  the  particular  phenomena  which 
we  know. 

Suppofmg  fuch  a  theory  to  be  completely  eftabliflied, 
it  would  ftill  be  proper  to  lead  the  minds  of  ftu- 
dents  to  it  by  gradual  fteps.  One  of  the  moll  im- 
portant ufes  of  theory,  is  to  give  the  memory  a  per- 
manent hold,  and  a  prompt  command,  of  the  parti- 
cular fafts  which  we  were  previoufly  acquainted 
with  ;  and  no  theory  can  be  completely  underftood, 
unlefs  the  mind  be  led  to  it  nearly  in  the  order  of 
inveftigation. 

It  is  more  particularly  ufeful,  in  conducing  the 
ftudies  of  others,  to  familiarife  their  minds,  as  com- 
pletely as  poffible,  with  thofe  laws  of  nature  for 
which  we  have  the  dired  evidence  of  fenfe,  or  of 
confcioufnefs,  before  direding  their  inquiries  to  the 
more  abftrufe  and  refined  generalizations  of  fpecula- 
16  tive 


Part  II.  §  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  39^ 

tive  curiofity.  In  natural  philofophy,  fuppofmg  the 
theory  of  Bofcovich  to  be  true,  it  would  flill  be  pro- 
per, or  rather  indeed  abfolutely  neceflary,  to  accuf- 
tom  fludents,  in  the  firft  ftage  of  their  phyfical  edu- 
cation, to  dwell  on  thofe  general  phyfical  facts  which 
fall  under  our  aflual  obfervation,  and  about  which 
all  the  practical  arts  of  life  are  converfant.  In  like 
manner,  in  the  philofophy  of  mind,  there  are  many 
general  fafts  for  which  we  have  the  dire6l  evidence 

o 

of  confcioufnefs.  The  words.  Attention,  Concep- 
tion, Memory,  Abftraftion,  Imagination,  Curiofity, 
Ambition,  Compailion,  Refentment,  exprefs  powers 
and  principles  of  our  nature,  which  every  man  may 
ftudy  by  reflefting  on  his  own  internal  operations. 
Words  correfponding  to  thefe,  are  to  be  found  in  all 
languages,  and  may  be  confidered  as  forming  the  firft 
attempt  towards  a  philofophical  clallification  of  intel- 
leftual  and  moral  phenomena.  Such  a  claflification 
however  imperfeQ:  and  indiftind,  we  may  be  affured, 
muft  have  fome  foundation  in  nature ;  and  it  is  at 
leaft  prudent,  for  a  philofopher  to  keep  it  in  view  as 
the  ground-work  of  his  own  arrangement.  It  not  only 
directs  our  attention  to  thofe  facts  in  the  human  con- 
ftitution,  on  which  every  folid  theory  in  this  branch 
of  fcience  muft  be  founded ;  but  to  the  fafts, 
which,  in  all  ages,  have  appeared,  to  the  common 
fenfe  of  mankind,  to  be  the  moft  ftriking  and  im- 
portant ;  and  of  which  it  ought  to  be  the  great  objeft 
oftheorifts,  not  to  fuperfede,  but  to  facilitate  the 
ftudy. 

There  is  indeed  good  reafon  for  believing,  that  many 
of  the  fads  which  our  confcioufnefs  would  lead  us  to 

confider, 


400  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  V^ 

confider,  upon  a  fupcrficial  view,  as  ultimate  facts  are 
refolvable  into  other  principles  flill  more  general. 
*'  Long  before  we  are  capable  of  reflection,"  (fays  Dr. 
Reid,)  "  the  original  perceptions  and  notions  of  the 
"  mind  are  fo  mixed,  compounded,  and  decompound- 
"  ed,  by  habits,  alTociations,  and  abftraclions,  that  it 
"  is  extremely  difficult  for  the  mind  to  return  upon 
"  its  own  footlleps,  and  trace  back  thofe  operations 
"  which  have  employed  it  fmce  it  firfl  began  to  think 
**  and  to  act."  The  fame  author  remarks,  that,  "  if 
*'  we  could  obtain  a  diflind;  and  full  hiflory  of  all  that 
*'  hath  paifed  in  the  mind  of  a  child,  from  the  begin- 
"  ning  of  life  and  fenfation,  till  it  grows  up  to  the  ufe 
•'  of  reafon;  how  its  infant  faculties  began  to  work,  and 
"  how  they  brought  forth  and  ripened  all  the  various 
♦'  notions,  opinions,  and  fentiments,  which  we  find  in 
*'  ourfelves  when  we  come  to  be  capable  of  reflection  ; 
*'  this  would  be  a  treafure  of  Natural  Hiflory,  which 
*'  would  probably  give  more  light  into  the  human 
"  faculties  than  all  the  fyflems  of  philofophers  about 
*'  them,  fmce  the  beginning  of  the  world."  To  ac- 
complifh  an  analyfis  of  thefe  complicated  phenomena 
into  the  fimple  and  original  principles  of  our  conftitu- 
tion,  is  the  great  objed  of  this  branch  of  philofophy  ; 
but,  in  order  to  fucceed,  it  is  neceflTary  to  afcertain  fa6ts , 
before  we  begin  to  reafon,  and  to  avoid  generalizing,. 
in  any  inftance,  till  we  have  completely  fecured  the 
ground  that  v/e  have  gained.  Such  a  caution,  which- 
is  neceifary  in  all  the  fciences,  is,  in  a  m^ore  peculiar" 
manner,  neceflTary  here,  u'here  the  very  fads  from 
which  all  our  inferences  mufl  be  drawn,  are  to  be  af- 
certained  only  by  the  moft  patient  attention ;   and, 

where 


Part  II.  #4*  ^^   ^^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  40I 

where  alniofl  all  of  them  are,  to  a  great  degree,  dif- 
guifed  ;  partly  by  the  inaccuracies  of  popular  hui- 
guage,  and  partly  by  the  miftaken  theories  of  philo- 
fophers. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that,  although  I  have  retained 
the  phrafe  of  the  AlTociation  of  Ideas,  in  compliance 
with  common  language,  I  am  far  from  being  com- 
pletely fatisfied  with  this  mode  of  exprefTion.  I  have 
retained  it,  chiefly  that  I  might  not  expofe  myfelf 
to  the  cenfure  of  delivering  old  doctrines  in  a  new 
form. 

As  I  have  endeavoured  to  employ  it  with  caution,  I 
hope  that  it  has  not  often  mifled  me  in  my  reafonings. 
At  the  fame  time,  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  of  the 
advantages  to  be  derived  from  a  reformation  of  the 
common  language,  in  mod  of  the  branches  of  fcience. 
How  much  fuch  a  reformation  has  effected  in  Chemiftry 
is  well  known  ;  and  it  is  evidently  much  more  necelfary  ' 
in  the   Philofophy   of  Mind,    where    the    prevailing 
language  adds  to  the  common  inaccuracies  of  popu-  , 
lar  expreffions,  the  peculiar  difadvantage  of  being  all   ' 
fuggefted  by  the  analogy  of  matter.     Often,  in    the 
compofition   of  this  work,    have  I   recolleded    the 
advice  of  Bergman  to  Morveau  *  :    "In  reforming  the 
"  nomenclature  of  chemiftry,  fpare  no  word  which 
"  is  improper.      They  who    underftand   the  fubjedl 

*  "  Le  favant  Profeffeur  d'Upfal,  M.  Bergman,  ecrivoit  a  M. 
*'  de  Morveau  dans  les  derniers  temps  de  fa  vie,  ne  faites  graces 
"  a  aucune  denomination  impropre.  Ceux  qui  favent  deja,  enten- 
"  dront  toujours  ;  ceux  qui  ne  favent  pas  encore,  entendront 
"  plutot."  Methode  de  Nomenclat.  C/:anique,  par  MAI.  Morveav, 
Lavoisier,  Sec. 

D  d  "  already, 


402  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  V. 

"  already,  will  fuffer  no  inconvenience ;  and  they 
*'  to  whom  the  fubject  is  new,  will  comprehend  it 
"  with  the  greater  facility."  But  it  belongs  to  fuch 
authors  alone,  as  have  extended  the  boundaries  of 
fcience  by  their  own  difcoveries,  to  introduce  inno- 
vations in  language  with  any  hopes  of  fuccefs. 


Sea.  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  403 

CHAPTER   SIXTH. 
Of  Memory. 

SECTION    I. 

General  Obfervations  on  Memory. 

AMONG  the  various  powers  of  the  underllanding, 
there  is  none  which  has  been  fo  attentively  exa- 
mined by  philofophers,  or  concerning  which  fo  many 
important  fa,cls  and  obfervations  have  been  collected,  as 
the  faculty  of  Memory.  This  is  partly  to  be  afcribed 
to  its  nature,  which  renders  it  eafily  diflinguifliable 
from  all  the  other  principles  of  our  conftitution,  even 
by  thofe  who  have  not  been  accuflomed  to  metaphy- 
fical  inveftigations ;  and  partly  to  its  immediate  fub- 
ferviency,  not  only  to  the  purfuits  of  fcience,  but  to  the 
ordinary  bufmefs  of  life ;  in  confequence  of  which, 
many  of  its  moft  curious  laws  had  been  obferved,  long 
before  any  analyfis  was  attempted  of  the  other  powers 
of  the  mind  ;  and  have,  for  many  ages,  formed  a  part 
of  the  common  maxims  which  are  to  be  found  in  every 
treatife  of  education.  Some  important  remarks  on  the 
fubject  may,  in  pardcular,  be  collefted  from  the 
writings  of  the  ancient  rhetoricians. 

The  word  Memory  is  not  employed  uniformly  iii 
the  fame  precife  fenfe  ;  but  it  always  exoreifes  fome  m.o- 
dification  of  that  faculty,  which  enables  us  to  treafure 
up,  and  preferve  for  future  ufe,  the  knowledge  we  ac- 

D  d  2  quire  ; 


404  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

quire  ;  a  faculty  which  is  obvioufly  the  great  foundation 
of  all  intellectual  improvement,  and  without  which,  no 
advantage  could  be  derived  from  the  mod  enlarged 
experience.  This  faculty  implies  two  things  :  a  capa- 
city of  retaining  knowledge  ;  and  a  power  of  recalling 
it  to  our  thoughts  when  we  have  occafion  to  apply  it 
to  ufe.  The  word  Memory  is  fometimes  employed  to 
exprefs  the  capacity,  and  fometimes  the  power.  When 
we  fpeak  of  a  retentive  memory,  we  ufe  it  in  the  former 
fenfe  ;  when,  of  a  ready  memory,  in  the  latter. 

The  various  particulars  which  compofe  our  flock  of 
knowledge  are,  from  time  to  time,  recalled  to  our 
thoughts,  in  one  of  two  ways :  fometimes  they  recur 
to  us  fpontaneoufly,  or  at  leaft,  without  any  interference 
on  our  part ;  in  other  cafes,  they  are  recalled,  in  confe- 
quence  of  an  effort  of  our  will.  For  the  former  opera- 
tion of  the  mind,  we  have  no  appropriated  name  in  our 
language,  diftin6l  from  Memory.  The  latter,  too,  is 
often  called  by  the  fame  name,  but  is  more  properly 
diflinguifhed  by  the  word  Recolleftion. 

There  are,  I  believe,  fome  other  acceptations  befides 
thefe,  in  which  the  word  Memory  has  been  occafionally 
employed ;  but  as  its  ambiguities  are  not  of  fuch  a 
nature  as  to  miflead  us  in  our  prefent  inquiries,  I  fliall 
not  dwell  any  longer  on  the  illuflration  of  diflinftions, 
which  to  the  greater  part  of  readers  might  appear  un- 
interefling  and  minute.  One  diftinftion  only,  relative 
to  this  fubject,  occurs  to  me,  as  deferving  particular 
attention. 

The  operations  of  Memory  relate  either  to  things 
and  their  relations,  or  to  events.  In  the  former  cafe, 
thoughts  which  have  been  previoufly  in  the  mind,  may 

lo*  recur 


Sea.  I.  ^>F    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  405 

recur  to  us,  without  fuggeiling  the  idea  of  the  paft,  or 
of  any  modification  of  time  whatever  ;  as  when  I  re- 
peat over  a  poem  which  I  have  got  by  heart,  or  when 
I  think  of  the  features  of  an  abfent  friend.  In  this  lafl 
inflance,  indeed,  philofophers  diftinguiih  the  ad  of  the 
mind  by  the  name  of  Conception  ;  but  in  ordinary  dif- 
courfe,  and  frequently  even  in  philofophical  writing, 
it  is  confidered  as  an  exertion  of  Memory.  In  thefe 
and  fmiilar  cafes,  it  is  obvious,  that  the  operations  of 
this  faculty  do  not  neceflarily  involve  the  idea  of  the 
paft. 

The  cafe  is  different  with  refpecl  to  the  memory  of 
events.  When  I  think  of  thefe,  I  not  only  recal  to  the 
mind  the  former  objects  of  its  thoughts,  but  I  refer 
the  event  to  a  particular  point  of  time  ;  fo  that,  of 
every  fuch  act  of  memory,  the  idea  of  the  pail  is  a 
neceffary  concomitant. 

I  have  been  led  to  take  notice  of  this  diftinction,  in 
order  to  obviate  an  objection  which  fome  of  the  phe- 
nomena of  Memory  feem  to  prefent,  againit  a  doctrine 
which  I  formerly  ftated,  when  treating  of  the  powers 
of  Conception  and  Imagination. 

It  is  evident,  that  when  I  think  of  an  event,  in  which 
any  objed  of  fenfe  was  concerned,  my  recollection  of 
the  event  muil  neceflarily  involve  an  a£t  of  Conception. 
Thus,  when  I  think  of  a  dramatic  reprefentation  which 
I  have  recently  feen,  my  recoliedion  of  what  I  faw, 
neceffarily  involves  a  conception  of  the  different  adors 
by  whom  it  was  performed.  But  every  ad  of  recol- 
lettion  which  relates  to  events,  is  accompanied  with  a 
beUef  of  their  paft  exiftence.  How  then  are  we  to 
reconcile  this  conclufion  with  the  ^odrine  formerly 
D  d  3  main- 


4o6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

maintained  concerning  Conception,  according  to  which 
every  exertion  of  that  power  is  accompanied  with 
a  belief,  that  its  objeft  exifts  before  us  at  the  prefent 
moment  ? 

The  only  way  that  occurs  to  me  of  removing  this  dif- 
ficulty, is  by  fuppofmg,  that  the  remembrance  of  a  paft 
event  is  not  a  fimple  aft  of  the  mind  ;  but  that  the  mind 
firll  forms  a  conception  of  the  event,  and  then  judges 
from  circumftances,  of  the  period  of  time  to  which  it 
is  to  be  referred  :  a  fuppofition  which  is  by  no  means  a 
gratuitous  one,  invented  to  anfwer  a  particular  purpofe; 
but  which,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  is  agreeable  to 
faft  :  for  if  we  have  the  power,  as  will  not  be  difputed, 
of  conceiving  a  paft  event  without  any  reference  to 
time,  it  follows,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  ideas  or 
notions  which  Memory  prefents  to  us,  which  is  necef- 
farily  accompanied  with  a  belief  of  paft  exiftence,  in  a 
way  analogous  to  that  in  which  our  perceptions  are 
accompanied  with  a  belief  of  the  prefent  exiftence  of 
their  objects  ;  and  therefore,  that  the  reference  of  the 
event  to  the  particular  period  at  which  it  happened,  is 
a  judgment  founded  on  concomitant  circumftances. 
So  long  as  we  are  occupied  with  the  conception  of  any 
particular  objed:  connected  with  the  event,  we  believe 
the  prefent  exiftence  of  the  objeft  ;  but  this  belief, 
which,  in  moft  cafes,  is  only  momentary,  is  inftantly 
correfted  by  habits  of  judging  acquired  by  experience  ; 
and  as  foon  as  the  mind  is  difengaged  from  fuch  a 
belief,  it  is  left  at  liberty  to  refer  the  event  to  the  period 
at  wnich  it  adtually  happened.  Nor  will  the  apparent 
inftantaneoufnefs  of  fuch  judgments  be  confidered  as 
an  unfurmountable  ob;ection  to  the  dodrine  now  ad- 
12  ^  vanced. 


Sea.  I.  OF    THE   HUMAN    MIND.  407 

vanced,  by  thofe  who  have  reflefted  on  the  perception 
of  diftance  obtained  by  fight,  which,  although  it  feems 
to  be  as  immediate  as  any  perception  of  touch,  has 
been  fhewn  by  philofophers  to  be  the  refult  of  a  judg- 
ment founded  on  experience  and  obfervation.  The 
reference  we  make  of  pafl  events  to  the  particular 
points  of  time  at  which  they  took  place,  will,  I  am 
inclined  to  think,  the  more  we  confider  the  fubjed,  be 
found  the  more  flrikingly  analogous  to  the  eftimates 
of  diftance  we  learn  to  form  by  the  eye. 

Although,  however,  I  am,  myfelf,  fatisfied  with  the 
conclufion  to  which  the  foregoing  reafonings  lead,  I 
am  far  from  expeding  that  the  cafe  will  be  the  fame 
with  all  my  readers.  Some  of  their  objections,  which 
I  can  eafily  anticipate,  might,  I  believe,  be  obviated  by 
a  little  farther  difcuilion  ;  but  as  the  queftion  is  merely 
a  matter  of  curiofity,  and  has  no  neceffary  connexion 
with  the  obfervations  I  am  to  make  in  this  Chapter,  I 
fhall  not  profecute  the  fubjeft  at  prefent.  The  opi- 
nion, indeed,  we  form  concerning  it,  has  no  reference 
to  any  of  the  do6trines  maintained  in  this  work, 
excepting  to  a  particular  fpeculation  concerning  the 
belief  accompanying  conception,  which  I  ventured 
to  ftate,  in  treating  of  that  fubjed,  and  which,  as  it 
appears  to  be  extremely  doubtful  to  fome  whofe  opi- 
nions I  refpecl,  I  propofed  with  a  degree  of  diffidence 
fuitable  to  the  difficulty  of  fuch  an  inquiry.  The 
remaining  obfervations  which  I  am  to  make  on  the 
power  of  memory,  whatever  opinion  may  be  formed 
of  their  importance,  will  furnifh  but  little  room  for  a 
diverfity  of  judgment  concerning  their  truth. 

D  d  4  In 


4o8  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap,  VI. 

In  confidering  this  part  of  our  conftitution,  one  of 
the  mofl  obvious  and  ftriking  queftions  that  occurs,  is, 
what  the  circumftances  are  which  determine  the  me- 
mory to  retain  fome  things  in  preference  to  others  ? 
Among  the  fubjecls  which  fucceffively  occupy  our 
thouglits,  by  far  the  greater  number  vanifh,  without 
leaving  a  trace  behind  them  ;  while  others  become, 
as  it  were,  a  part  of  ourfelves,  and,  by  their  accu- 
mulations, lay  a  foundation  for  our  perpetual  pro- 
grefs  in  knowledge.  Without  pretending  to  exhauft 
the  fubjecl,  I  fhall  content  myfelf  at  prefent  with  a 
partial  folution  of  this  difficulty,  by  illuflrating  the 
dependence  of  memory  upon  two  principles  of  our 
nature,  with  which  it  is  plainly  very  intimately  con- 
nected ;  attention,  and  the  affociation  of  ideas. 

I  endeavoured  in  a  former  Chapter  to  fhew,  that 
there  is  a  certain  a£l  of  the  mind,  (diftinguiflied, 
both  by  philofophers  and  the  vulgar,  by  the  name  of 
attention,)  without  which  even  the  objeds  of  our  per- 
ceptions make  no  imprelTion  on  the  memory.  It  is 
alfo  matter  of  common  remark,  that  the  permanence 
of  the  impreffion  which  any  thing  leaves  in  the  me- 
mory, is  proportioned  to  the  degree  of  attention 
which  was  originally  given  to  it.  The  obfervation 
has  been  fo  often  repeated,  and  is  fo  manifeftly 
true,  that  it  is  unnecefTary  to  offer  any  illuftration 
of  it  *. 

I  have 

*  It  feems  to  be  owing   to  this  dependence  of  memory  on  at- 
tention, that  it  is  eafier  to  get  by  heart  a  compofition,  after  a  very 
,  few  readings,  with  an  attempt  to  repeat  it  at  the  end  of  each,  than 
;  after  a  hundred  readings  without  fuch  an  effort.    The  effort  roufes 
the  attention  from  that  languid  ftate  in  which  it  remains,  while  the 

mind 


Sea.  I;  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  409 

I  have  only  to  obferve  farther,  with  refpect  to  at- 
tention, confidered  in  the  relation  in  which  it  (lands 
to  memory,  that  although  it  be  a  voluntary  act,  it 
requires  experience  to  have  it  always  under  command, 
in  the  cafe  of  objects  to  which  we  have  been  taught 
to  attend  at  an  early  period  of  life,  or  which  are  cal- 
culated to  roufe  the  curiofity,  or  to  affect  any  of  our 
paffions,  the  attention  fixes  itfeif  upon  them,  as  it 
were  fpontaneoully,  and  without  any  effort  on  our 
part,  of  which  we  are  confcious.  How  perfectly  do 
we  remember,  and  even  retain,  for  a  long  courfe  of 
years,  the  faces  and  the  hand-writings  of  our  ac- 
quaintances, although  we  never  took  any  particular 
pains  to  fix  them  in  the  memory  ?  On  the  other 
hand,  if  an  object  does  not  intereft  fome  principle  of 
our  nature,  we  may  examine  it  again  and  again,  with 
a  wilh  to  treafure  up  the  knowledge  of  it  in  the 
mind,  without  our  being  able  to  command  that  de- 
gree of  attention  which  may  lead  us  to  recognize  it 
the  next  time  we  fee  it.  A  perfon,  for  example,  who 
has  not  been  accuftomed  to  attend  particularly  to 
horfes  or  to  cattle,  may  ftudy  for  a  confiderable  time 
the  appearance  of  a  horfe  or  of  a  bullock,  without 


mind  is  giving  a  pafllve  reception  to  foreign  ideas.  The  facl  is 
remarked  by  lord  Bacon,  and  is  explained  by  liim  on  the  fame 
principle  to  vvliich  I  have  referred  it. 

"  Quae  expe£tantur  et  attentionem  excitant,  melius  haerent 
**  quam  qu:E  prstervolant.  Itaque  fi  fcriptum  aliquod  vicies  per- 
"  legeris,  non  tarn  facile  illud  memoriter  difces,  quam  fi  illud  legas 
"  decies,  tentando  interim  illud  recitare^,  et  ubi  deficit  memoria, 
"  infpiciendo  librura." 

Bacon,  Nov.  Org.  lib.  ii,  aph.  26. 

being 


41 0  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

being  able  a  few  days  afterwards  to  pronounce  on 
his  identity  ;  while  a  horfe-dealer  or  a  grazier  recol- 
lects many  hundreds  of  that  clafs  of  animals  with 
which  he  is  converfant,  as  perfectly  as  he  does  the 
faces  of  his  acquaintances.  In  order  to  account  for 
this,  I  would  remark,  that  although  attention  be  a 
voluntary  act,  and  although  we  are  always  able, 
when  we  choofe,  to  make  a  momentary  exertion  of 
it ;  yet,  unlefs  the  object  to  which  it  is  directed  be 
really  interefting,  in  fome  degree,  to  the  curiofity, 
the  train  of  our  ideas  goes  on,  and  we  immediately 
forget  our  purpofe.  When  we  are  employed,  there- 
fore, in  ftudying  fuch  an  object,  it  is  not  an  exclu- 
five  and  fleady  attention  that  we  give  to  it,  but  we 
are  lofmg  fight  of  it,  and  recurring  to  it  every  in- 
ftant ;  and  the  painful  efforts  of  which  we  are  con- 
fcious,  are  not  (as  we  are  apt  to  fuppofe  them  to  be) 
efforts  of  uncommon  attention,  but  unfuccefsful  at- 
tempts to  keep  the  mind  fleady  to  its  object,  and  to 
exclude  the  extraneous  ideas,  which  are  from  time  to 
time  foliciting  its  notice. 

If  thefe  obfervations  be  well  founded,  they  afford 
an  explanation  of  a  fact  which  has  been  often  re- 
marked, that  objects  are  eafily  remembered  which 
affect  any  of  the  pafTions  *.  The  paffion  affifls  the 
memory,  not  in  confequence  of  any  immediate  con- 

*  "  SI  quas  res  in  vita  videmus  parvas,  ufitatas,  quotidianas, 
"  cas  meminiffe  non  folemus  ;  propterea  quod  nulla  nifi  nova  aut 
"  admirabili  re  commovetur  animus.  At  fi  quid  videmus  aut 
"  audimus  cgregie  turpe,  aut  honeftum,  inufitatum,  magnum,  m. 
"  credibile,  ridiculum,  id  diu  meminifTe  confuevimus." 

Ad  Herenn.  lib.  3. 

nexion 


Sea.  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4II 

nexion  between  them,  but  as  it  prefents,  during  the 
time  it  continues,  a  fleady  and  exclufive  object  to  the 
attention. 

The  connexion  between  memory  and  the  aflbcia- 
tion  of  ideas  is  fo  ftriking,  that  it  has  been  fuppofed 
by  fome,  that  the  whole  of  its  phenomena  might  be  re- 
folved  into  this  principle.  But  this  is  evidently  not 
the  cafe.  The  aifociation  of  ideas  connects  our  vari- 
ous thoughts  with  each  other,  fo  as  to  prefent  them 
to  the  mind  in  a  certain  order  ;  but  it  prefuppofes  the 
exiflence  of  thefe  thoughts  in  the  mind ;  or,  in  other 
words,  it  prefuppofes  a  faculty  of  retaining  the  know- 
ledge which  we  acquire.  It  involves  alfo  a  power  of 
recognizing,  as  former  objects  of  attention,  the 
thoughts  that  from  time  to  tim.e  occur  to  us  ;  a  power 
which  is  not  implied  in  that  law  of  our  nature  M'hich 
is  called  the  aifociation  of  ideas.  It  is  poffible,  furely, 
that  our  thoughts  might  have  fucceeded  each  other, 
according  to  the  fame  laws  as  at  prefent,  without  fug- 
gefting  to  us  at  all  the  idea  of  the  pafl ;  and,  in 
fact,  this  fuppofition  is  realifed  to  a  certain  degree 
in  the  cafe  of  fome  old  men,  who  retain  pretty  ex- 
actly the  information  which  they  receive,  but  are 
fometimes  unable  to  recollect  in  what  manner  the 
particulars  which  they  find  connected  together  in  their 
thoughts,  at  firil  came  into  the  mind  j  whether  they 
occurred  to  them  in  a  dream,  or  were  communicated 
to  them  in  converfation. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  evident,  that  without  the 
affociating  principle,  the  powers  of  retaim'ng  our 
thoughts,  and  of  recognizing  them  when  they  occur 
to  us,  would  have  been  of  little  ufe ;  for  the  moft 

import- 


412  ELEMENTS   OF   THE    rHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

important  articles  of  our  knowledge  might  have  re- 
mained latent  in  the  mind,  even  when  thofe  occa- 
fions  prefented  themfelves  to  which  they  are  immedi- 
ately applicable.  In  confequence  of  this  law  of  our 
nature,  not  only  are  all  our  various  ideas  made  to 
pafs,  from  time  to  time,  in  review  before  us,  and  to 
offer  themfelves  to  our  choice  as  fubjects  of  medita- 
tion, but  when  an  occafion  occurs  which  calls  for  the 
aid  of  our  pail  experience,  the  occafion  itfelf  recalls 
to  us  all  the  information  upon  the  fubject  which  that 
experience  has  accumulated. 

The  foregoing  obfervations  comprehend  an  analyfis 
of  memory  fufficiently  accurate  for  my  prefent  pur- 
pofe  :  fome  other  remarks,  tending  to  illuftrate  the 
fame  fubject  more  completely,  will  occur  in  the  re- 
maining Sections  of  this  Chapter. 

It  is  hardly  neceffary  for  me  to  add,  that  when  we 
have  proceeded  fo  far  in  our  inquiries  concerning  Me- 
mory, as  to  obtain  an  analyfis  of  that  power,  and 
to  afcertain  the  relation  in  which  it  (lands  to  the 
other  principles  of  our  conflitution,  we  have  advanced 
as  far  towards  an  explanation  of  it  as  the  nature  of 
the  fubject  permits.  The  various  theories  which  have 
attempted  to  account  for  it  by  traces  or  impreilions 
in  the  fenforium,  are  obvioufly  too  unphilofophical  to 
deferve  a  particular  refutation  *.  Such,  indeed,  is 
the  poverty  of  language,  that  we  camiot  fpeak  on  the 
fubjed  without  employing  expreflions  which  fuggeft 
one  theory  or  another ;  but  it  is  of  importance  for  us 
always  to  recollect,  that  thefe  expreflions  are  entirely 
figurative,  and   afford  no  explanadon  of  the  pheno- 

*  See  Note  [SJ. 

mena 


SqA.u  of  the  human  mind.  4I0 

mena  to  which  they  refer.     It  is  partly  with  a  view  to 
remind  my  readers  of  this  confideration,  that,  find- 
ing it  impoffible  to  lay  afide   completely  metaphorical 
or  analogical  words,  I  have  ftudied  to  avoid  fuch  an 
uniformity  in  the  employment  of  them,   as   might  in- 
dicate a  preference  to  one  theory  rather  than  another  ; 
and,  by   doing  fo,  have  perhaps  fometimes  been  led 
to   vary    the   metaphor   ofcener  and  more  fuddenly, 
than  would  be  proper  in  a  compofition  which  aimed 
at  any  degree  of  elegance.     This  caution  in  the  ufe 
of   the   common   language    concerning  memory,    it 
feemed  to  me  the  more  neceffary  to  attend  to,  that 
the  general  difpofition  which  every  perfon  feels  at  the 
commencement  of  his  philofophical  purfuits,   to  ex- 
plain the  phenomena  of  thought  by  the  laws  of  mat- 
ter,  is,  in  the  cafe  of  this  particular  faculty,  encou- 
raged  by  a  variety  of  peculiar  circumflances.     The 
analogy  between  committing  a  thing  to  memory  that 
we  wifh  to  remember,  and  engraving  on  a  tablet  a 
fad  that  we  wifh  to  record,  is  fo  flriking  as  to  pre- 
fent  itfelf  even  to  the  vulgar  ;  nor  is  it  perhaps  lefs 
natural  to  indulge  the  fancy  in  confidering  memory 
as  a  fort  of  repofitory,  in  which  we  arrange  and  pre- 
ferve  for  future  ufe  the  materials  of  our  information. 
The  immediate   dependence,  too,   of  this  faculty  on 
the   ftate    of  the  body,   which    is   more    remarkable 
than  that  of  any  other  faculty  whatever,   (as  appears 
from  the  effefts  produced  on  it  by  old  age,  difeafe, 
and  intoxication,)    is   apt   to  flrike  thofe   who  have 
not  been  much  converfant  with  thefe  inquiries,  as  be- 
ftowing  fome  plaufibility  on  the  theory  which  attempts 
to  explain  its  phenomena  on  mechanical  principles. 

I  cannot 


414  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

V.I  cannot  help  taking  this  opportunity  of  exprefling 
a  wifli,  that  medical  writers  would  be  at  more  pains 
than  they  have  been  at  hitherto,  to  afcertain  the  va- 
rious efFecls  which  are  produced  on  the  memory  by 
difeafe  and  old  age.  Thefe  effects  are  widely  diverfi- 
fied  in  different  cafes.  In  fome  it  would  feem  that 
the  memory  is  impaired,  in  confequence  of  a  diminu- 
tion of  the  power  of  attention  ;  in  others,  that  the 
power  of  recollection  is  difturbed,  in  confequence  of 
a  derangement  of  that  part  of  the  conilitution  on 
which  the  affociation  of  ideas  depends.  The  decay 
of  memory,  which  is  the  common  effect  of  age,  feems 
to  arife  from  the  former  of  thefe  caufes.  It  is  pro- 
bable, that,  as  we  advance  in  years,  the  capacity  of 
attention  is  weakened  by  fome  phyfical  change  in 
the  conftitution  ;  but  it  is  alfo  reafonable  to  think, 
that  it  lofes  its  vigour  partly  from  the  effect  which  the 
decay  of  our  fenfibility,  and  the  extindtion  of  our  paf- 
fions,  have,  in  diminifliing  the  intereft  which  we  feel 
-in  the  common  occurrences  of  life.  That  no  de- 
.rangement  takes  place,  in  ordinary  cafes,  in  that 
part  of  the  conftitution  on  which  the  affociation  of 
ideas  depends,  appears  from  the  dillind:  and  circum- 
ftantial  recollection  which  old  men  retain  of  the  tranf- 
actions  of  their  youth  *.     In  fome  difeafes,  this  part 

of 

*  Swift  fomewhere  exprefTes  his  furprife,  that  old  men  fhould 
remember  their  anecdotes  fo  diltindily,  and  fhould,  notwithlland- 
ing,  have  fo  Httle  memory  as  to  tell  the  fame  ftory  twice  in  the 
courfe  of  the  fame  converfation  ;  and  a  fnnilar  remark  is  m.ade  by 
Montaigne,  in  one  of  his  Effays  :  "  Surtout  les  Vieillards  font 
**  dangereux,  a  qui  la  fouvenance  des  chofes  pafTees  demeure,  et 
"'  ont  perdu  la  fouvenance  de  leurs  redites." 

Liv.  i.  cap.  ix.   (Des  Menteurs.) 
The 


Seft.  1.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  41^ 

of  the  conflitution  is  evidently  afteded.  A  ftroke  of 
the  palfy  has  been  known,  (while  it  did  not  deftroy 
the  power  of  fpeech,)  to  render  the  patient  incapable 
of  recolIe£ling  the  names  of  the  mofl  familiar  objeds. 
What  is  ftill  more  remarkable,  the  name  of  an  objeft 
has  been  known  to  fuggeft  the  idea  of  it  as  formerly, 
although  the  fight  of  the  objedt  ceafed  to  fuggeft  the 
name. 

In  fo  far  as  this  decay  of  memory  which  old  age 
brings  along  with  it,  is  a  necelfary  confequence  of  a 
phyfical  change  in  the  conftitution,  or  a  necelfary 
confequence  of  a  diminution  of  fenfibility,  it  is  the 
part  of  a  wife  man  to  fubmit  cheerfully  to  the  lot  of 
his  nature.  But  it  is  not  unreafonable  to  think,  that 
fomething  may  be  done  by  our  own  efforts,  to  ob- 
viate the  inconveniences  which  commonly  refult  from 
it.  If  individuals,  who,  in  the  early  part  of  life, 
have  weak  memories,  are  fometimes  able  to  remedy 
this  defe£t,  by  a  greater  attention  to  arrangement  in 
their  tranfactions,  and  to  claffification  amono:  their 
ideas,  than  is  necelfary  to  the  bulk  of  mankind, 
might  it  not  be  poiTible,  in  the  fame  way,  to  ward  off, 
at  leaft  to  a  certain  degree,  the  encroachments  which 
time  makes  on  this  faculty  ?  The  few  old  men 
who  continue  in  the  active  fcenes  of  life  to  the  laft 
moment,  it  has  been  often  remarked,  complain,  in 
general,  much  lefs  of  a  want  of  recolledion,    than 


The  faCl  feems  to  be,  that  all  their  old  ideas  remain  in  the  mind, 
connefted  as  formerly  by  the  different  afibciating  principles  ;  but 
that  the  power  of  attention  to  new  ideas  and  new  occurrences  is 
impaired, 

their 


41 6  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

their  cotemporaries.  This  is  undoubtedly  owing 
partly  to  the  effect  which  the  purfuits  of  bufinefs  mull 
necefl'arily  have,  in  keeping  alive  the  power  of  at- 
tention. But  it  is  probably  owing  alfo  to  new  habits 
of  arrangement,  which  the  mind  gradually  and  in- 
fenfibly  forms,  from  the  experience  of  its  growing  in- 
firmities. The  apparent  revival  of  memory  in  old 
men,  after  a  temporary  decline,  (which  is  a  cafe  that 
happens  not  unfrequently,)  feems  to  favour  this  fup- 
polition. 

One  old  man,  I  have,  myfelf,  had  the  good  fortune 
to  know,  who,  after  a  long,  an  adlive,  and  an  honour- 
able life,  having  begun  to  feel  fome  of  the  ufual 
effects  of  advanced  years,  has  been  able  to  find  re- 
fources  in  his  own  fagacity,  againft  mofl  of  the  in- 
conveniences with  which  they  are  commonly  attended  ; 
and  who,  by  watching  his  gradual  decline  with  the 
cool  eye  of  an  indifferent  obferver,  and  employing  his 
ingenuity  to  retard  its  progrefs,  has  converted  even 
the  infirmities  of  age  into  a  fource  of  philofophical 
amufement. 


SECTION    II. 

Of  the  Varieties  of  Memory  in  different  Individuals. 

TT  is  generally  fuppofed,  that,  of  all  our  faculties, 
-^  Memory  is  that  which  nature  has  beflowed  in  the 
mofl  unequal  degrees  on  different  individuals ;  and  it 
is  far  from  being  impoffible  that  this  opinion  may  be 
well  founded.     If,  however,  we  confider,  that  there 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  417 

is  fcarcely  any  man  who  has  not  memory  fufficient  to 
learn  the  ufe  of  language,  and  to  learn  to  recognize, 
at  the  firft  glance,  the  appearances  of  an  infinite 
number  of  familiar  obje(Els ;  befides  acquiring  fuch  an 
acquaintance  with  the  laws  of  nature,  and  the  ordinary 
courfe  of  human  affairs,  as  is  neceffary  for  direfting 
his  condudl  in  life ;  we  fhall  be  fatisfied  that  the 
original  difparities  among  men,  in  this  refpeft,  are 
by  no  means  fo  immenfe  as  they  feem  to  be  at  firft 
view ;  and  that  much  is  to  be  afcribed  to  different 
habits  of  attention,  and  to  a  difference  of  feleclion 
among  the  various  objefts  and  events  prefented  to 
their  curiofity. 

As  the  great  purpofe  to  which  this  faculty  is  fub- 
fervient,  is  to  enable  us  to  colled,  and  to  retain,  for 
the  future  regulation  of  our  condudl,  the  refults  of 
our  pafl:  experience  ;  it  is  evident  that  the  degree  of 
perfed:ion  which  it  attains  in  the  cafe  of  different  per- 
fons,  muft  vary  j  firft,  with  the  facility  of  making 
the  original  acquifition  ;  fecondly,  with  the  perma- 
nence of  the  acquifition  ;  and  thirdly,  with  the  quick- 
nefs  or  readinefs  with  which  the  individual  is  able,  on 
particular  occafions,  to  apply  it  to  ufe.  The  qualities,  / 
therefore,  of  a  good  memory  are,  in  the  firft  place,  to  v^ 
be  fufceptible  ;  fecondly,  to  be  retentive  j  and  thirdly, 
to  be  ready. 

It  is  but  rarely  that  thefe  three  qualities  are  united 
in  the  fame  perfon.  We  often,  indeed,  meet  with  a 
memory  which  is  at  once  fufceptible  and  ready  ;  but 
I  doubt  much,  if  fuch  memories  be  commonly  very 
retentive :  for,  fufcepdbility  and  readinefs  are  both 
conneded  with  a  facility  of  affociating  ideas,  accord- 

E  e  ing 


41 8  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap,  VI. 

ing  to  their  more  obvious  relations ;  whereas  reten- 
tivenefs,  or  tenacioufnefs  of  memory,  depends  prin- 
cipally on  what  is  feldom  united  with  this  facility,  a 
difpofition  to  fyftem  and  to  philofophical  arrangement. 
Thefe  obfervations  it  will  be  neceflary  to  illuftrate  more 
particularly. 

I  have  already  remarked,  in  treating  of  a  different 
fubjed,  that  the  bulk  of  mankind,  being  but  little 
accuftomed  to  reflect  and  to  generaHfe,  affociate  their 
ideas  chiefly  according  to  their  more  obvious  rela- 
tions ;  thofe,  for  example,  of  refemblance  and  of 
analogy ;  and  above  all,  according  to  the  cafual  re- 
lations arifmg  from  contiguity  in  time  and  place : 
whereas,  in  the  mind  of  a  philofopher,  ideas  are  com- 
monly aflfociated  according  to  thofe  relations  which 
are  brought  to  light  in  confequence  of  particular  ef- 
forts of  attention  ;  fuch  as  the  relations  of  Caufe  and 
Effeft,  or  of  Premifes  and  Conclufion.  This  differ- 
ence in  the  modes  of  aflbciation  of  thefe  tw^o  claffes 
of  men,  is  the  foundation  of  fome  very  flriking  di- 
verfides  between  them  in  refpeft  of  intellectual  cha- 
racter. 

In  the  firft  place,  in  confequence  of  the  nature  of 
the  relations  which  connect  ideas  together  in  the  mind 
of  the  philofopher,  it  muft  neceflfarily  happen,  that 
when  he  has  occafion  to  apply  to  ufe  his  acquired 
knowledge,  time  and  reflexion  will  be  requifite  to 
enable  him  to  recoiled  it.  In  the  cafe  of  thofe,  on 
the  other  hand,  who  have  not  been  accuftomed  to 
fcientific  purfuits  ;  as  their  ideas  are  connected  toge- 
ther according  to  the  moft  obvious  relations ;  when 
any  one  idea  of  a  clafs  is  prefented  to  the  mind,  it 

is 


3ea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4ig 

is  immediately  followed  by  the  others,  which  fucceed 
each  other  fpontaneoufly  according  to  the  laws  of  affo- 
ciation.  In  managing,  therefore,  the  little  details  of 
fome  fubaltern  employment,  in  which  all  that  is  re- 
quired, is  a  knowledge  of  forms,  and  a  difpofition  to 
obferve  them,  the  want  of  a  fyfteniatical  genius  is  an 
important  advantage  ;  becaufe  this  want  renders  the 
mind  peculiarly  fufceptible  of  habits,  and  allows  the 
train  of  its  ideas  to  accommodate  itfelf  perfectly  to  the 
daily  and  hourly  occurrences  of  its  fituation.  But  if, 
in  this  refpeft,  men  of  no  general  principles  have  an 
advantage  over  the  philofopher,  they  fall  greatly  below 
him  in  another  point  of  view  ;  inafmuch  as  all  the  in- 
formation which  they  poffefs,  muft  necelTarily  be  li- 
mited by  their  own  proper  experience  ;  whereas  the 
philofopher,  who  is  accuftomed  to  refer  every  thing 
to  general  principles,  is  not  only  enabled,  by  means  of 
thefe,  to  arrange  the  facls  which  experience  has  taught 
him,  but  by  reafoning  from  his  principles  fynthetically, 
has  it  often  in  his  power  to  determine  fads  a  priori^ 
which  he  has  no  opportunity  of  afcertaining  by  obfer- 
vation. 

It  follows  farther,  from  the  foregoing  principles,  that 
the  intelledual  defeds  of  the  philofopher,  are  of  a 
much  more  corrigible  nature,  than  thofe  of  the  mere 
man  of  detail.  If  the  former  is  thrown  by  accident  into 
a  fcene  of  bufmefs,  more  time  will  perhaps  be  neceflary 
to  qualify  him  for  it,  than  would  be  requifite  for  the 
generality  of  mankind  ;  but  time  and  experience  will 
infallibly,  fooner  or  later,  familiarife  his  mind  com- 
pletely with  his  fituation.  A  capacity  for  fyftem 
and  for  philofophical  arrangement,  unlefs  it  has  been 

E  e  2  carefully 


420  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHTLOSOPHr        Chap.  V I. 

carefully  cultivated  in  early  life,  is  an  acquilition 
which  can  fcarcely  ever  be  made  afterwards  ;  and, 
I  therefore,  the  defefts  which  I  already  mentioned,  as 
'■  connected  with  early  and  conftant  habits  of  bufmefs, 
adopted  from  imitation,  and  undirected  by  theory ; 
may,  when  once  thefe  habits  are  confirmed,  be  pro- 
nounced to  be  incurable. 

I  am  alfo  inclined  to  beUeve,  both  from  a  theoretical 
view  of  the  fubjeft,  and  from  my  own  obfervations  as 
far  as  they  have  reached,  that  if  we  wilh  to  fix  the  par- 
ticulars of  our  knowledge  very  permanently  in  the  me- 
mory, the  moft  effectual  way  of  doing  it,  is  to  refer  them 
to  general  principles.     Ideas  which  are  connected  to- 
'"'gether  merely  by  cafual  relations,  prefent  themfelves 
with  readinefs  to  the  mind,  fo  long  as  we  are  forced  by 
the  habits  of  our  fituation  to  apply  them  daily  to  ufe  ; 
but  when  a  change  of  circumftances  leads  us  to  vary 
the  objects  of  our  attention,  we  find  our  old  ideas 
gradually  to  efcape  from  the  recollection  :  and  if  it 
fhould  happen  that  they  efcape  from  it  altogether,  the 
only  method  of  recovering  them,  is  by  renewing  thofe 
ftudies  by  which  they  were  at  firft  acquired.   The  cafe 
is  very  different  with  a  man  whofe  ideas,  prefented  to 
him  at  firft  by  accident,  have  been  afterwards  philofo- 
phically  arranged  and  referred  to  general  principles. 
When  he  wifhes  to  recolleCt  them,  fome  time  and 
reflexion  will,  frequently,  be  neceffary  to  enable  him  to 
do  fo ;  but  the  information  which  he  has  once  com- 
pletely   acquired,    continues,    in  general,    to  be   an 
acquilition  for  life ;  or  if,  accidentally,  any  article  of 
it  ftiould  be  loft,  it  may  often  be   recovered  by  a 
procefs  of  reafoning. 

14  Something 


Seft.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  421 

Something  very  fimilar  to  this  happens  in  the  ftudy 
of  languages.  A  perfon  who  acquires  a  foreign  lan- 
guage merely  by  the  ear,  and  without  any  knowledge 
of  its  principles,  commonly  fpeaks  it,  while  he  remains 
in  the  country  where  it  is  fpoken,  with  more  readinefs 
and  fluency,  than  one  who  has  ftudied  it  grammatically  j 
but  in  the  courfe  of  a  few  years  abfence,  he  finds 
himfelf  almofl  as  ignorant  of  it  as  before  he  ac- 
quired it.  A  language  of  which  we  once  underftand 
the  principles  thoroughly,  it  is  hardly  poflible  to  lofe 
by  difufe. 

A  philofophical  arrangement  of  our  ideas  is  attended 
with  another  very  important  advantage.  In  a  mind 
where  the  prevailing  principles  of  affociation  are  found- 
ed on  cafual  relations  among  the  various  obje£ls  of 
its  knowledge,  the  thoughts  mufl  neceffarily  fucceed 
each  other  in  a  very  irregular  and  diforderly  manner ; 
and  the  occafions  on  which  they  prefent  themfelves, 
will  be  determined  merely  by  accident.  They  will 
often  occur,  when  they  cannot  be  employed  to  any  pur- 
pofe  ;  and  will  remain  concealed  from  our  view,  when 
the  recolledion  of  them  might  be  ufeful.  They  cannot 
therefore  be  confidered  as  under  our  own  proper  com- 
mand. But  in  the  cafe  of  a  philofopher,  how  flow  fo- 
ever  he  may  be  in  the  recolledion  of  his  ideas,  he  knows 
always  where  he  is  to  fearch  for  them,  fo  as  to  bring 
them  all  to  bear  on  their  proper  objed.  When  he 
wiflies  to  avail  himfelf  of  his  paft;  experience,  or  of  his 
former  conclufions,  the  occafion,  itfelf,  fummons  up 
every  thought  in  his  mind  which  the  occafion  requires. 
Or  iJf  he  is  called  upon  to  exert  his  powers  of  invention, 
and  of  difcovery,  the  materials  of  both  are  always  at 
E  e  3  hand. 


42  2  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    THILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

hand,  and  are  prefented  to  his  view  with  fuch  a  degree 
of  connexion  and  arrangement,  as  may  enable  him  to 
trace,  with  eafe,  their  various  relations.  How  much 
invention  depends  upon  a  patient  and  attentive  exami- 
nation of  our  ideas,  in  order  to  difcover  the  lefs  obvious 
relations  which  fubfifl  among  them,  I  had  occafion  to 
fhow,  at  fome  length,  in  a  former  Chapter. 

The  remarks  which  have  been  now  made,  are  fuffi_ 
cient  to  illuflrate  the  advantages  which  the  philofopher 
derives,  in  the  purfuits  of  fcience,  from  that  fort  of 
fyflematical  memory  which  his  habits  of  arrangement 
give  him.  It  may  however  be  doubted,  whether  fuch 
habits  be  equally  favourable  to  a  talent  for  agreeable 
converfation ;  at  leaft,  for  that  lively,  varied,  and  un- 
fludied  converfation,  which  forms  the  principal  charm 
of  a  promifcuous  fociety.  The  converfation  which 
pleafes  generally,  mufl  unite  the  recommendations  of 
quicknefs,  of  eafe,  and  of  variety  :  and  in  all  thefe 
three  refpefts,  that  of  the  philofopher  is  apt  to  be  defi- 
cient. It  is  deficient  in  quicknefs,  becaufe  his  ideas  are 
connected  by  relations  which  occur  only  to  an  attentive 
and  collected  mind.  It  is  deficient  in  eafe,  becaufe 
thefe  relations  are  not  the  cafual  and  obvious  ones,  by 
which  ideas  are  aifociated  in  ordinary  memories ;  but 
the  flow  difcoveries  of  patient,  and  often  painful,  exer- 
tion. As  the  ideas,  too,  which  he  alfociates  together, 
are  commonly  of  the  fame  clafs,  or  at  leafl  are  referred 
to  the  fame  general  principles,  he  is  in  danger  of  be- 
coming tedious,  by  indulging  himfelf  in  long  and  fyf- 
tematical  difcourfes  ;  while  another,  pofleffed  of  the 
moft  inferior  accomplifhments,  by  laying  his  mind 
completely  open  to  imprefTions  from  without,  and  by 

accom- 


Se£l.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  423 

accommodating  continually  the  courfe  of  his  own  ideas, 
not  only  to  the  ideas  which  are  darted  by  his  compa- 
nions, but  to  every  trifling  and  unexpedled  accident 
that  may  occur  to  give  them  a  new  direftion,  is  the 
life  and  foul  of  every  fociety  into  which  he  enters. 
Even  the  anecdotes  which  the  philofopher  has  coUefted, 
however  agreeable  they  may  be  in  themfelves,  are  fel- 
dom  introduced  by  him  into  converfation,  with  that  un- 
ftudied  but  happy  propriety,  which  we  admire  in  men 
of  the  world,  whofe  fads  are  not  referred  to  general 
principles,  but  are  fuggefled  to  their  recolle£lion  by  the 
familiar  topics  and  occurrences  of  ordinary  life.  Nor 
is  it  the  imputation  of  tedioufnefs  merely,  to  which  the 
fyftematical  thinker  mufl  fubmit  from  common  ob- 
fervers.  It  is  but  rarely  poffible  to  explain  completely, 
in  a  promifcuous  fociety,  all  the  various  parts  of  the 
mofl  fimple  theory ;  and  as  nothing  appears  weaker 
or  more  abfurd  than  a  theory  which  is  partially  dated, 
it  frequently  happens,  that  men  of  ingenuity,  by  at- 
tempting it,  fmk,  in  the  vulgar  apprehenfion,  below  the 
level  of  ordinary  underftandings.  "  Theoriarum  vires" 
(fays  Lord  Bacon)  "  in  apta  et  fe  mutuo  fuitinente 
"  partium  harmonia  et  quadam  in  orbem  demonftra- 
"  tione  confiftunt,  ideoque  per  partes  traditse  infirmas 
"  funt." 

Before  leaving  the  fubje£t  of  Cafual  Memory,  it  may 
not  be  improper  to  add,  that,  how  much  foever  it  may 
difqualify  for  fyftematical  fpeculation,  there  is  a  fpecies 
of  loofe  and  rambling  compofition,  to  which  it  is  pecu- 
liarly favourable.  With  fuch  performances,  it  is  often 
pleafant  to  unbend  the  mind  in  folitude,  when  we  are 
more  in  the  humour  for  converfation,  than  for  conneded 

E  e  4  thinking. 


424  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY  Chap.  VI. 

thinking.  Montaigne  is  unqueftionably  at  the  head  of 
this  clafs  of  authors.  "  What,  indeed,  are  his  Effays,** 
(to  adopt  his  own  account  of  them,)  "  but  grotefque 
*'  pieces  of  patchwork,  put  together  without  any  cer- 
**  tain  figure  ;  or  any  order,  connexion,  or  proportion, 
**  but  what  is  accidental  *  ?'* 

It  is,  however,  curious,  that  in  confequence  of  the 
predominance  in  his  mind  of  this  fpecies  of  Memory 
above  every  other,  he  is  forced  to  acknowledge  his 
total  want  of  that  command  over  his  ideas,  which  can 
only  be  founded  on  habits  of  fyftematical  arrangement. 
As  the  paflage  is  extremely  chara<51;eriftical  of  the  au- 
thor, and  affords  a  ftriking  confirmation  of  fome  of  the 
preceding  obfervations,  I  Ihall  give  it  in  his  own  words. 
**  Je  ne  me  tiens  pas  bien  en  ma  poffeffion  et  difpofi- 
*'  tion  :  le  hazard  y  a  plus  de  droit  que  moy  :  Pocca- 
"  fion,  la  compagnie,  le  branle  meme  de  ma  voix  tire 
**  plus  de  mon  efprit,  que  je  n*y  trouve  lors  que  je  fonde 
"  et  employe  a  part  moy.     Ceci  m'advient  aufTi,  que 
*'  je  ne  me  trouve  pas  oil  je  me  cherche  ;  et  me  trouve 
**  plus  par  rencontre,  que   par  I'inquifition  de  mon 
"  jugement  t." 

The  differences  which  I  have  now  pointed  out  be- 
tween philofophical  and  cafual  Memory,  conftitute  the 
mofl  remarkable  of  all  the  varieties  which  the  minds 
of  different  individuals,  confidered  in  refpeO:  to  this  fa- 
culty, prefent  to  our  obfervation.  But  there  are  other 
varieties,  of  a  lefs  ftriking  nature,  the  confideration 
of  which  may  alfo  fuggeft  fome  ufeful  reflexions. 
It  was  before  remarked,  that  our  ideas  are  frequently 

*  Liv.  i.  cliap.  27. 

t  Liv.  I.  chap,  10.  (Du  parler  prompt  ou  tardif.) 

affociated. 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  425 

aflbciated,  in  confequence  of  the  aflbciatlons  which 
take  place  among  their  arbitrary  figns.  Indeed,  in  the 
cafe  of  all  our  general  fpeculations,  it  is  difficult  to  fee 
in  what  other  way  our  thoughts  can  be  aflbciated  ;  for, 
I  before  endeavoured  to  fhew,  that,  without  the  ufe  of 
figns  of  one  kind  or  another,  it  would  be  impoflible 
for  us  to  make  clafles  or  genera,  objeds  of  our  at- 
tention. 

All  the  figns  by  which  our  thoughts  are  expreffed, 
are  addrefled  either  to  the  eye  or  to  the  ear  ;  and  the 
imprefllons  made  on  thefe  organs,  at  the  time  when  we 
firfl  receive  an  idea,  contribute  to  give  us  a  firmer  hold 
of  it.     Vifible  objeds  (as  I  obferved  in  the  Chapter  on 
Conception)  are  remembered  more  eafily  than  thofe  of 
any  of  our  other  fenfes  :  and  hence  it  is,  that  the  bulk 
of  mankind  are  more  aided  in  their  recollection  by  the 
imprefllons  made  on  the  eye,  than  by  thofe  made  on 
the  ear.     Every  perfon  mufl:  have  remarked,  in  fliudy- 
ing  the  elements  of  geometry,  how  much  his  recollec- 
tion of  the  theorems  was  aided,  by  the  diagrams  which 
are  connected  with  them  :  and  I  have  little  doubt,  that 
the  difficulty  which  fliudents  commonly  find  to  remem- 
ber the  propofitions  of  the  fifth  book  of  Euclid,  arifes 
chiefly  from  this,  that  the  magnitudes  to  which  they 
relate,  are  reprefented  by  fliraight  lines,  which  do  not 
make  fo  fl:rong  an  impreffion  on  the  memory,  as  the 
figures  which  illufl:rate  the  propofitions  in  the  other 
five  books. 

This  advantage,  which  the  objects  of  fight  naturally 
have  over  thofe  of  hearing,  in  the  diflinctnefs  and  the 
permanence  of  the  imprefllons  which  they  make  on  the 
memory,  continues,  and  even  increafes,  through  life, 

in 


426  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  VI. 

in  the  cafe  of  the  bulk  of  mankind ;  becaufe  their 
minds,  being  but  Httle  addicted  to  general  and  abftrad 
difquifition,  are  habitually  occupied,  either  with  the 
immediate  perception  of  fuch  objects,  or  with  fpecu- 
lations  in  which  the  conception  of  them  is  more  or  lefs 
involved  ;  which  fpeculations,  fo  far  as  they  relate  to 
individual  things  and  individual  events,  may  be  carried 
on  with  little  or  no  afliflance  from  language. 

The  cafe  is  different  with  the  philofopher,  whofe 
habits  of  abllraftion  and  generalifation  lay  him  conti- 
nually under  a  neceffity  of  employing  words  as  an  in- 
flrument  of  thought.  Such  habits  co-operating  with 
that  inattention,  which  he  is  apt  to  contract  to  things 
external,  mull  have  an  obvious  tendency  to  weaken 
the  original  powers  of  recollection  and  conception  with 
refpeft  to  vifible  objeds  ;  and,  at  the  fame  time,  to 
flrengthen  the  power  of  retaining  proportions  and  rea- 
fonings  expreifed  in  language.  The  common  fyftem 
of  education,  too,  by  exercifmg  the  memory  fo  much 
in  the  acquifition  of  grammar  rules,  and  of  paifages 
from  the  antient  authors,  contributes  greatly,  in  the 
cafe  of  men  of  letters,  to  cultivate  a  capacity  for  re- 
taining words. 

It  is  furprifmg,  of  what  a  degree  of  culture,  our 
power  of  retaining  a  fucceffion,  even  of  infignificant 
founds,  is  fufceptible.  Inftances  fomctimes  occur,  of 
men  who  are  eafily  able  to  commit  to  memory,  a  long 
poem,  compofed  in  a  language  of  which  they  are  wholly 
ignorant ;  and  I  have,  myfelf,  known  more  than  one 
inftance,  of  an  individual,  who,  after  having  forgotten 
completely  the  clafTical  fludies  of  his  childhood,  was  yet 
able  to  repeat,  with  fluency,  long  paifages  from  Homer 

12  and 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  427 

and  Virgil,  without  annexing  an  idea  to  the  words  that 
he  uttered. 

This  fufceptibility  of  memory  with  refpedl  to  words, 
is  poffelTed  by  all  men  in  a  very  remarkable  degree  in 
their  early  years,  and  is,  indeed,  neceflary  to  enable 
them  to  acquire  the  ufe  of  language  ;  but  unlefs  it  be 
carefully  cultivated  afterwards  by  conftant  exercife,  it 
gradually  decays  as  we  advance  to  maturity.    The  plan 
of  education  which   is  followed  in  this  country,  how- 
ever imperfect  in  many  refpefts,  falls  in  happily  with 
this  arrangement  of  nature,  and  ftores  the  mind  richly, 
even  in  infancy,  with  intellectual  treafures,  which  are 
to  remain  with  it  through  life.     The  rules  of  grammar, 
which  comprehend  fyftems,  more  or  lefs  perfect,  of  the 
principles  of  the  dead  languages,  take  a  permanent 
hold  of  the  memory,  when  the  understanding  is  yet 
unable  to  comprehend  their  import ;  and  the  claflical 
remains  of  antiquity,  which,  at  the  time  we  acquire 
them,  do  little  more  than  furnifh  a  gratification  to  the 
ear,  fupply  us  with  inexhauftible  fources  of  the  mofl 
refined  enjoyment ;  and,  as  our  various  powers  gradu- 
ally unfold  themfelves,  are  poured  forth,  without  effort, 
from  the  memory,  to  delight  the  imagination,  and  to 
improve  the  heart.     It  cannot  be  doubted,  that  a  great 
variety   of  other  articles  of  ufeful  knowledge,   parti- 
cularly with  refpecl  to  geographical  and  chronological 
details,    might   be  communicated   with   advantage  to 
children  in  the  form  of  memorial  hues.     It  is  only  in 
childhood,  that  fuch  details  can  be  learned  with  facility ; 
and  if  they  were  once  acquired,  and  rendered  perfectly 
familiar  to  the  mind,  our  riper  years  woald  be  fpared 
much  of  that  painjFul  aad  uninterefling  labour,  which 

is 


4^8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

is  perpetually  diflra£llng  our  intelledual  powers,  from 
thofe  more  Important  exertions,  for  which,  in  their 
mature  ftate,  they  feem  to  be  deftined. 

This  tendency  of  literary  habits  in  general,  and 
more  particularly  of  philofophical  purfuits,  to  exercife 
the  thoughts  about  words,  can  fcarcely  fail  to  have 
fome  effeft  in  weakening  the  powers  of  recolledion  and 
conception  with  refpedt  to  fenfible  objefts  j  and,  in 
fa(Sl,  1  believe  It  will  be  found,  that  whatever  advantage 
the  philofopher  may  pofTefs  over  men  of  little  education, 
in  ftating  general  propofitlons  and  general  reafonings, 
he  is  commonly  inferior  to  them  in  point  of  minutenefs 
and  accuracy,  when  he  attempts  to  defcrlbe  any  obje£t 
which  he  has  feen,  or  any  event  which  he  has  wltnefTed ; 
fuppofmg  the  curlofity  of  both,  in  fuch  cafes,  to  be 
interefted  in  an  equal  degree.  I  acknowledge,  indeed, 
that  the  undivided  attention,  which  men  unaccuftomed 
to  reflexion  are  able  to  give  to  the  objefts  of  their  per- 
ceptions, is,  in  part,  the  caufe  of  the  livelinefs  and 
corrednefs  of  their  conceptions. 

With  this  diverfity  in  the  intelledual  habits  of  cul- 
tivated and  of  uncultivated  minds,  there  is  another  va- 
riety of  memory  which  feems  to  have  fome  connexion. 
In  recognizing  vifible  objects,  the  memory  of  one  man 
proceeds  on  the  general  appearance,  that  of  another  at- 
taches itfelf  to  fome  minute  and  diftingulfhing  marks. 
A  peafant  knows  the  various  kinds  of  trees  from  their 
general  habits ;  a  botanift,  from  thofe  charadterlftical 
circumftances  on  which  his  claflification  proceeds. 
The  laft  kind  of  memory  is,  I  think,  moft  common 
among  literary  men,  and  arifes  from  their  habit  of  re- 
coUeding  by  means  of  words.     It  is  evidently  much 

eafier 


Seft  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  429 

eafier  to  exprefs  by  a  defcription,  a  number  of  botani- 
cal marks,  than  the  general  habit  of  a  tree  ;  and  the 
fame  remark  is  applicable  to  other  cafes  of  a  fimilar 
nature.  But  to  whatever  caufe  we  afcribe  it,  there 
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  fa6l,  that  many  individuals  are 
to  be  found,  and  chiefly  among  men  of  letters,  who, 
although  they  have  no  memory  for  the  general  appear- 
ances of  objects,  are  yet  able  to  retain,  with  corrednefs, 
an  immenfe  number  of  technical  difcriminations. 

Each  of  thefe  kinds  of  memory,  has  its  peculiar 
advantages  and  inconveniencies,  which  the  dread  of 
being  tedious  induces  me  to  leave  to  the  invefligation 
of  my  readers. 


SECTION    III. 

(^f  the   Improvement    of  Memory. Analyfis  of  the    Principles 

on  'which  the  Culture  of  Memory  depends. 

^  I  ^HE  improvement  of  which  the  mind  is  fufceptible 
-^  by  culture,  is  more  remarkable,  perhaps,  in  the 
cafe  of  Memory,  than  in  that  of  any  other  of  our 
faculties.  The  fa6t  has  been  often  taken  notice  of  in 
general  terms  ;  but  I  am  doubtful  if  the  particular 
mode  in  which  culture  operates  on  this  part  of  our 
conftitution,  has  been  yet  examined  by  philofophers 
with  the  attention  v/hich  it  deferves. 

Of  one  fort  of  culture,  indeed,  of  which  Memory 
is  fufceptible  in  a  very  flriking  degree,  no  explanation 
can  be  given  ;  I  mean  the  improvement  which  the  ori- 
ginal faculty  acquires  by  mere  exercife  j  or,  in  other 
words,  the  tendency  which  pra<3:ice  has  to  increafe  our 

natural 


430  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  VI. 

natural  facility  of  aflbciation.  This  effect  of  practice 
upon  the  memory,  feems  to  be  an  ultimate  law  of  our 
nature  ;  or  rather,  to  be  a  particular  inftance  of  that 
general  law,  that  all  our  powers,  both  of  body  and 
mind,  may  be  ftrengthened,  by  applying  them  to  their 
proper  purpofes. 

Befides,  however,  the  improvement  which  Memory 
admits  of,  in  confequence  of  the  effects  of  exercife  on 
the  original  faculty,  it  may  be  greatly  aided  in  its  ope- 
rations, by  thofe  expedients  which  reafon  and  expe- 
rience fuggefl  for  employing  it  to  the  beft  advantage. 
Thefe  expedients  furnifli  a  curious  fubjeft  of  philofo- 
phical  examination  :  perhaps,  too,  the  inquiry  may  not 
be  altogether  without  ufe  ;  for,  although  our  principal 
refources  for  alfiffing  the  memory  be  fuggefted  by 
nature,  yet  it  is  reafonable  to  think,  that  in  this,  as  in 
fmiiiar  cafes,  by  following  out  fyftematically  the  hints 
which  fhe  fuggefts  to  us,  a  farther  preparation  may  be 
made  for  our  intelleftual  improvement. 

Every  perfon  muff  have  rem.arked,  in  entering  upon 
any  newfpecies  of  ftudy,  the  difficulty  oftreafuring  up 
in  the  memory  its  elementary  principles  ;  and  the  grow- 
ing facility  which  he  acquires  in  this  refpedt,  as  his 
knowledge  becomes  more  extenfive.  By  analyffng  the 
different  caufes  which  concur  in  producing  this  facility, 
we  may,  perhaps,  be  led  to  fome  conclufions  which 
may  admit  of  a  practical  application. 

I .  In  every  fcience,  the  ideas  about  which  it  is  pe- 
culiarly converfant,  are  connected  together  by  fome 
particular  aflbciating  principle ;  in  one  fcience,  for 
example,  by  affbciations  founded  on  the  relation  of 
caufe  and  effe6t ;  in  another,  by  affbciations  founded 

on 


Sea.3.  Ol^    'l'"E    IIUMAX    MIND.  43 1 

on  the  neceflary  relations  of  mathematical  truths  ;  in 
a  third,  on  affociations  founded  on  contiguity  in  place 
or  time.  Hence  one  caufe  of  the  gradual  improvement 
of  memory  with  refped  to  the  familiar  objects  of  our 
knowledge  ;  for  whatever  be  the  prevailing  aflbciating 
principle  among  the  ideas  about  which  we  are  habitually 
occupied,  it  mufl  necelTarily  acquire  additional  (Irength 
from  our  favourite  ftudy. 

1.  In  proportion  as  a  fcience  becomes  more  familiar 
to  us,  we  acquire  a  greater  comimand  of  attention  with 
refpeft  to  the  objefts  about  which  it  is  converfant ;  for 
the  information  which  we  already  poffefs,  gives  us  an 
intereft  in  every  new  truth  and  every  new  fact  which 
have  any  relation  to  it.  In  moil  cafes,  our  habits  of 
inattention  may  be  traced  to  a  want  of  curiofity  ;  and 
therefore  fuch  habits  are  to  be  corrected,  not  by  en- 
deavouring to  force  the  attention  in  particular  inflances.. 
but  by  gradually  learning  to  place  the  ideas  which  we 
wilh  to  remember,  in  an  interefting  point  of  view. 

3.  When  we  firft  enter  on  any  new  literary  purfuit, 
we  are  unable  to  make  a  proper  difcrimination  in  point 
of  utility  and  importance,  among  the  ideas  which  are 
prefented  to  us  ;  and  by  attempting  to  grafp  at  every 
thing,  we  fail  in  making  thofe  moderate  acquilitions 
which  are  fuited  to  the  limited  powers  of  the  human 
mind.  As  our  information  extends,  our  felection  be- 
comes more  judicious  and  more  confined  ;  and  cur 
knowledge  of  ufeful  and  conne£ted  truths  advances 
rapidly,  from  our  ceafing  to  diftrad  the  attention  with 
fuch  as  are  detached  and  infignificant. 

4.  Every  objedt  of  our  knowledge  is  related  to  a  va- 
riety of  others  ;  and  may  be  prefented  to  the  thoughts, 

fome- 


432  ELE3IENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  VI. 

fometimes  by  one  principle  of  aflbciation,  and  feme- 
times  by  another.  In  proportion,  therefore,  to  the 
multiplication  of  mutual  relations  among  our  ideas, 
(which  is  the  natural  refult  of  growing  information, 
and  in  particular,  of  habits  of  philofophical  ftudy,)  the 
greater  will  be  the  number  of  occafions  on  which  they 
will  recur  to  the  recollection,  and  the  firmer  will  be 
the  root  which  each  idea,  in  particular,  will  take  in 
the  memory. 

It  follows,  too,  from  this  obfervation,  that  the  faci- 
lity of  retaining  a  new  faft,  or  a  new  idea,  will  depend 
on  the  number  of  relations  which  it  bears  to  the  former 
objefts  of  our  knowledge ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  every  fuch  acquifition,  fo  far  from  loading  the  me- 
mory, gives  us  a  firmer  hold  of  all  that  part  of  our 
previous  information,  with  which  it  is  in  any  degree 
connedled. 

It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  improper  to  take  this  op- 
portunity of  obferving,  although  the  remark  be  not 
immediately  connected  with  our  prefent  fubjed,  that 
the  acceffion  made  to  the  flock  of  our  knowledge,  by 
the  new  fads  and  ideas  which  we  acquire,  is  not  to  be 
eftimated  merely  by  the  number  of  thefe  fadls  and 
ideas  confidered  individually  ;  but  by  the  number  of 
relations  which  they  bear  to  one  another,  and  to  all  the 
different  particulars  which  were  previoully  in  the  mind  ; 
for  "  new  knowledge,*'  (as  Mr.  Maclaurin  has  well  re- 
marked *,)  *'  does  not  confift  fo  much  in  our  having 
**  accefs  to  a  new  objeft,  as  in  comparirg  it  with  others 
**  already  known,  obferving  its  relations  to  them,  or 

*  See  the  Conclufion  of  his  View  of  Newton's  Difcoveries. 

"  difcern- 


8ea.  3.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4^3 

"  difcerning  what  it  has  in  common  with  them,  and 
"  wherein  their  difparity  conlifts  :  and,  therefore,  our 
"  knowledge  is  vaftly  greater  than  the  fiim  of  what 
"  all  its  objeds  feparately  could  afford  ;  and  when  a 
**  new  object  comes  within  our  reach,  the  addition  to 
"  our  knowledge  is  the  greater,  the  more  we  already 
*'  know ;  fo  that  it  increafes,  not  as  the  new  objeds 
*'  increafe,  but  in  a  much  higher  proportion." 

5.  In  the  laft  place,  the  natural  powers  of  Me- 
mory are,  in  the  cafe  of  the  philofopher,  greatly 
aided  by  his  peculiar  habits  of  clafTification  and  ar- 
rangement. As  this  is  by  far  the  moil  important  im- 
provement of  which  Memory  is  fufceptible,  I  (hall 
confider  it  more  particularly  than  any  of  the  others  I 
have  mentioned. 

The  advantages  which  the  memory  derives  from  a 
proper  clafTification  of  our  ideas,  may  be  befl  conceived 
by  attending  to  its  effects  in  enabling  us  to  conduct 
with  eafe,  the  common  bufmefs  of  life.  In  what  in- 
extricable confufion  would  the  lawyer  or  the  merchant 
be  immediately  involved,  if  he  were  to  depofit,  in  his 
cabinet,  promifcuoufly,  the  various  written  documents 
which  daily  and  hourly  pafs  through  his  hands  ?  Nor 
could  this  confufion  be  prevented  by  the  natural 
powers  of  memory,  however  vigorous  they  might  hap- 
pen to  be.  By  a  proper  diflribution  of  thefe  docu- 
ments, and  a  judicious  reference  of  them  to  a  few  ge- 
neral titles,  a  very  ordinary  memory  is  enabled  to  ac- 
compUfh  more,  than  the  mofl  retentive,  unalTifled  by 
method.  We  know,  with  certainty,  where  to  find  any 
article  we  may  have  occafion  for,  if  it  be  in  our  pof- 
fefTion ;  and  the  fearch  is  confined  within  reafonable 

F  f  limits, 


434  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPPIY         Cliap.  VI, 

limits,  inftead  of  being  allowed  to  wander  at  random 
amidft  a  chaos  of  particulars. 

Or,  to  take  an  inflance  ftill  more  immediately  ap- 
plicable to  our  purpofe  :  fuppofe  that  a  man  of  letters 
were  to  record,  in  a  common-place  book,  without  any 
method,  all  the  various  ideas  and  fafts  which  occurred 
to  him  in  the  courfe  of  his  fludies  ;  what  difficulties 
would  he  perpetually  experience  in  applying  his  acqui- 
fitions  to  ufe  ?  and  how  completely  and  eafily  might 
thefe  difficulties  be  obviated  by  referring  the  particu- 
lars of  his  information  to  certain  general  heads  ?  It  is 
obvious,  too,  that,  by  doing  fo,  he  would  not  only 
have  his  knowledge  much  more  completely  under  his 
command,  but  as  the  particulars  clafled  together  would 
all  have  fome  connexion,  more  or  lefs,  with  each  other, 
he  would  be  enabled  to  trace,  with  advantage,  thofe 
mutual  relations  among  his  ideas,  which  it  is  the  object 
of  philofophy  to  afcertain. 

A  common-place  book,  conduced  without  any  me- 
thod, is  an  exaQ:  picture  of  the  memory  of  a  man 
whofe  inquiries  are  not  directed  by  philofophy.  And 
the  advantages  of  order  in  treafuring  up  our  ideas  in 
the  mind,  are  perfedly  analogous  to  its  effeds  when 
they  are  recorded  in  writing. 

Nor  is  this  ail.  In  order  to  retain  our  knowledge 
diftinftly  and  permanently,  it  is  necelTary  that  we 
lliould  frequently  recal  it  to  our  recolledion.  But  how 
can  this  be  done  without  the  aid  of  arrangement  ?  Or 
fuppofmg  that  it  were  poffible,  how  much  time  and  la- 
bour would  be  necelfary  for  bringing  under  our  review 
the  various  particulars  of  which  our  information  is  com- 
pofed  ?  In   proportion  as  it  is  properly  fyftematifed, 

this 


Sea.  3-  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  435 

this  time  and  labour  are  abridged.  The  mind  dwells 
habitually,  not  on  detached  facts,  but  on  a  compara- 
tively fmall  number  of  general  principles  ;  and,  by 
means  of  thefe,  it  can  fummon  up,  as  occafions  may 
require,  an  infinite  number  of  particulars  affociated  with 
them  ;  each  of  which,  confidered  as  a  folitary  truth, 
would  have  been  as  burthenfome  to  the  memory,  as 
the  general  principle  with  which  it  is  conne£led. 

I  would  not  wifh  it  to  be  underftood  from  thefe  ob- 
fervations,  that  philofophy  confifls  in  claffification 
alone ;  and  that  its  only  ufe  is  to  affift  the  memory. 
I  have  often,  indeed,  heard  this  aiferted  in  general 
terms ;  but  it  appears  to  me  to  be  obvious,  that  al- 
though this  be  one  of  its  mofl  important  ufes,  yet  fome- 
thingmore  is  necelTary  to  complete  the  definition  of  it. 
Were  the  cafe  otherwife,  it  would  follow,  that  all  claf- 
fifications  are  equally  philofophical,  provided  they  are 
equally  comprehenfive.  The  very  great  importance 
of  this  fubjedl  will,  I  hope,  be  a  fufficient  apology  for 
me,  in  taking  this  opportunity  to  correft  fome  miflaken 
opinions  which  have  been  formed  concerning  it. 


SECTION    IV. 

Continuation  of  the  fame  SuhjeB.  — ^id  which  the  Memory 
derives  from  Philofophical  Arrangement. 

TT  was  before  obferved,  that  the  great  ufe  of  the  fa- 
-*-  culty  of  Memory,  is  to  enable  us  to  treafure  up,  for 
the  future  regulation  of  our  conduct,  the  refults  of  our 
paft  experience,  and  of  our  paft  reflexions.  But  in  every 

F  f  2  cafe 


436  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOrHT        Chap.  VI. 

cafe  in  which  we  judge  of  the  future  from  the  paft, 
we  muft  proceed  on  the  behef,  that  there  is,  in  the 
courfe  of  e vents,  a  certain  degree,  at  leafl:,  of  unifor- 
mity. And,  accordingly,  this  behef  is  not  only  jufti- 
fied  by  experience,  but  (as  Dr.  Reid  has  fhewn,  in  a 
very  fatisfaclory  manner,)  it  forms  a  part  of  the  origi- 
nal conftitution  of  the  human  mind.  In  the  general 
laws  of  the  material  world,  this  uniformity  is  found  to 
be  complete ;  infomuch  that,  in  the  fame  combinations 
of  circumftances,  we  expect,  with  the  moft  perfed: 
affurance,  that  the  fame  refults  will  take  place.  In 
the  moral  world,  the  courfe  of  events  does  not  appear 
to  be  equally  regular  ;  but  ftill  it  is  regular,  to  fo  great 
a  degree,  as  to  afford  us  many  rules  of  importance  in 
the  conducl  of  life. 

A  knowledge  of  Nature,  in  fo  far  as  it  is  abfolutely 
neceifary  for  the  prefervation  of  our  animal  exillence, 
is  obtruded  on  us,  without  any  reflexion  on  our  part, 
from  our  earliefl  infancy.  It  is  thus  that  children  learn 
of  themfelves  to  accommodate  their  conduct  to  the 
eflablillied  laws  of  the  material  world.  In  doing  fo, 
they  are  guided  merely  by  memory,  and  the  inftindlive 
principle  of  anticipation,  which  has  jufl  been  men- 
tioned. 

In  forming  conclufions  concerning  future  events,  the 
philofopher,  as  well  as  the  infant,  can  only  build  with 
fafety  on  paft  experience  ;  and  he,  too,  as  well  as  the 
infant,  proceeds  on  an  inftinftive  belief,  for  which  he 
is  unable  to  account,  of  the  uniformity  of  the  laws  of 
nature.  There  are,  however,  two  important  refpefts, 
which  diftinguifh  the  knowledge  he  pofTelfes  from  that 
of  ordinary  men.     In  the  firft  place,  it  is  far  more 

extenfive, 


Seft.  4.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  437 

extenfive,  in  confequence  of  the  affiftance  which  fcience 
gives  to  his  natural  powers  of  invention  and  difcovery. 
Secondly,  it  is  not  only  more  eafily  retained  in  the 
memory,  and  more  conveniently  applied  to  ufe,  in 
confequence  of  the  manner  in  which  his  ideas  are 
arranged  ;  but  it  enables  him  to  afcertain,  by  a  procefs 
of  reafoning,  all  thofe  truths  which  may  be  fynthetically 
deduced  from  his  general  principles.  The  illuflration 
of  thefe  particulars  will  lead  to  fome  ufeful  remarks  ; 
and  A\dll  at  the  fame  time  ihew,  that,  in  difcuffing  the 
fubjeft  of  this  Section,  I  have  not  loft  fight  of  the  in- 
quiry which  occafioned  it. 

I.  I.  It  was  already  remarked,  that  the  natural 
powers  of  Memory,  together  with  that  inftindive  an- 
ticipation of  the  future  from  the  pad,  which  forms  one 
of  the  original  principles  of  the  mind,  are  fufficient  to 
enable  infants,  after  a  very  fhort  experience,  to  pre- 
ferve  their  animal  exiflence.  The  laws  of  nature, 
which  it  is  not  fo  important  for  us  to  know,  and  which 
are  the  objeds  of  philofophical  curiofity,  are  not  fo 
obvioufly  expofed  to  our  view,  but  are,  in  general, 
brought  to  light  by  means  of  experiments  which  are 
made  for  the  purpofe  of  difcovery  j  or,  in  other  words, 
by  artificial  combinations  of  circumflances,  which  we 
have  no  opportunity  of  feeing  conjoined  in  the  courfe 
of  our  ordinary  experience.  In  this  manner,  it  is 
evident,  that  many  connexions  may  be  afcertained, 
which  would  never  have  occurred  fpontaneouily  to  our 
obfervation. 

2.  There  are,  too,  fome  inftances,  particularly  in 

the  cafe  of  the   aftronomical    phenomena,   in  which 

events,  that  appear  to  common  obfervers  to  be  alto- 

F  f  -J  gether 


438  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

gether  anomalous,  are  found,  upon  a  more  accurate 
and  continued  examination  of  them,  to  be  fubjected 
to  a  regular  law.  Such  are  thofe  phenomena  in  the 
heavens,  which  we  are  able  to  predict  by  means  of 
Cycles.  In  the  cafes  formerly  defcribed,  our  know- 
ledge of  nature  is  extended  by  placing  her  in  new 
fituations.  In  thefe  cafes,  it  is  extended  by  continuing- 
our  obfervations  beyond  the  limits  of  ordinary  curiofity. 
3.  In  the  cafe  of  human  affairs,  as  long  as  we  con- 
fine our  attention  to  particulars,  we  do  not  obferve 
the  fame  uniformity,  as  in  the  phenomena  of  the  ma- 
terial world.  When,  however,  we  extend  our  views 
to  events  which  depend  on  a  combination  of  different 
circumftances,  fuch  a  degr.ee  of  uniformity  appears, 
as  enables  us  to  eftablifli  general  rules,  from  which 
':  probable  conjectures  may  often  be  formed  with  re- 
.  fpecL  to  futurity.  It  is  thus,  that  we  can  pronounce, 
with  much  greater  confidence,  concerning  the  pro- 
portion of  deaths  which  fhall  happen  in  a  certain 
period  among  a  given  number  of  men,  than  we  can 
predift  the  death  of  any  individual ;  and  that  it  is 
more  reafonable  to  employ  our  fagacity,  in  fpeculating 
concerning  the  probable  determinations  of  a  numerous 
fociety,  than  concerning  events  which  depend  on  the 
will  of  a  fmgle  perfon. 

In  what  manner  this  uniformity  in  events  depending 
on  contingent  circumftances  is  produced,  I  fhall  not 
inquire  at  prefent.  The  advantages  which  we  derive 
from  it  are  obvious,  as  it  enables  us  to  colled,  from 
our  paft  experience,  many  general  rules,  both  with 
refped:  to  the  hiftory  of  political  focieties,  and  the 
charaders  and  condud  of  men  in  private  life. 

4-  lu 


Se6t.  4.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4.-^^> 

4.  In  the  lail  place ;  the  knowledge  of  the  philo- 
fopher  is  more  extenfive  than  that  of  other  men,  in 
confequence  of  the  attention  which  he  gives,  not 
merely  to  objefts  and  events,  but  to  the  relations 
which  different  objects  and  different  events  bear  to 
each  other. 

The  obfervations  and  the  experience  of  the  vulgar 
are  almoft  wholly  limited  to  things  perceived  by  the 
fenfes.  A  fimilarity  between  different  objeds,  or  be- 
tween different  events,  roufes  their  curiofity,  and  leads 
them  to  claflification,  and  to  general  rules.  But  a 
fimilarity  between  different  relations^  is  feldom  to  be 
traced  without  previous  habits  of  philofophical  in- 
quiry. Many  fuch  fimilarities  or  connexions,  how- 
ever, are  to  be  found  in  nature  ;  and  when  once  they 
are  afcertained,  they  frequently  lead  to  important  dif- 
coveries  ;  not  only  with  refpeft  to  other  relations,  but 
with  refpeft  to  the  objeds  or  to  the  events  which  are 
related.  Thefe  remarks  it  will  be  neceffary  to  illuftrate 
more  particularly. 

The  great  obje6l  of  Geometry  is  to  afcertain  the 
relations  which  exift  between  different  quantities,  and 
the  connexions  which  exift  between  difierent  rela- 
tions. When  we  demonflrate,  that  the  angle  at  the 
centre  of  a  circle  is  double  of  the  angle  at  the  cir- 
cumference on  the  fame  bafe,  we  afcertain  a  relation 
between  two  quantities.  When  we  demonflrate,  that 
triangles  of  the  fame  altitude  are  to  each  other  as 
their  bafes,  we  afcertain  a  connexion  between  two  re- 
lations. It  is  obvious,  how  much  the  mathematical 
fciences  muft  contribute  to  enlarge  our  knowledge  of 
the  univerfe,  in  confequence  of  fuch  difcoveries.     In 

Ff4  that 


440  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

that  fimpleft  of  all  procefles  of  practical  geometry, 
which  teaches  us  to  meafure  the  height  of  an  accef- 
fible  tower,  by  comparing  the  length  of  its  fhadow 
with  that  of  a  fhaff  fixed  vertically  in  the  ground,  we 
proceed  on  the  principle,  that  the  relation  between 
the  fhadow  of  the  flafF  and  the  height  of  the  flaff  is 
the  fame  with  the  relation  between  the  fhadow  of  the 
tower  and  the  height  of  the  tower.  But  the  former 
relation  v/e  can  afcertain  by  aftual  meafurement ; 
and,  of  confequence,  we  not  only  obtain  the  other 
relation ;  but,  as  we  can  meafure  one  of  the  related 
quantities,  we  obtain  alfo  the  other  quantity.  In 
every  cafe  in  which  mathematics  afTifls  us  in  meafur- 
ing  the  magnitudes  or  the  diflances  of  objects,  it  pro- 
ceeds on  the  fame  principle ;  that  is,  it  begins  with 
afcertaining  connexions  among  different  relations,  and 
thus  enables  us  to  carry  our  inquiries  from  fads  which 
are  expofed  to  the  examination  of  our  fenfes,  to  the 
rooft  remote  parts  of  the  univerfe. 

I  obferved  alfo,  that  there  are  various  relations  ex- 
ifling  among  phyfical  events,  and  various  connexions 
exifling  among  thefe  relations.  It  is  owing  to  this 
circumllance,  that  mathematics  is  fo  ufeful  an  inflru- 
ment  in  the  hands  of  the  phyfical  inquirer.  In  that 
beautiful  theorem  of  Huyghens,  which  demonilrates, 
that  the  time  of  a  complete  ofcillation  of  a  pendulum 
in  the  cycloid,  is  to  the  time  in  which  a  body  would 
fall  through  the  axis  of  the  cycloid,  as  the  circum- 
ference of  a  circle  is  to  its  diameter,  we  are  made  ac- 
quainted with  a  very  curious  and  unexpedted  con- 
nexion between  two  relations  ;  and  the  knowledge  of 
this  connexion  facilitates  the  determination  of  a  mofl 

import- 


Sea.  4.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  441 

important  fa£l  with  refpe6l  to  the  defcent  of  heavy 
bodies  near  the  earth's  furface,  which  could  not  be 
afcertained  conveniently  by  a  direfl:  experiment. 

In  examining,  with  attention,  the  relations  among 
different  phyfical  events,  and  the  connexions  among 
different  relations,  we  fometimes  are  led  by  mere  in- 
dudlion  to  the  difcovery  of  a  general  law ;  while,  to 
ordinary  obfervers,  nothing  appears  but  irregularity. 
From  the  writings  oi  the  earlier  opticians  we  learn, 
that,  in  examining  the  firfl  principles  of  dioptrics, 
they  were  led,  by  the  analogy  of  the  law  of  reflexion, 
to  fearch  for  the  relation  between  the  angles  of  inci- 
dence and  refraclion,  (in  the  cafe  of  light  paffing 
from  one  medium  into  another,)  in  the  angles  them- 
felves ;  and  that  feme  of  them,  finding  this  inquiry 
unfuccefsful,  took  the  trouble  to  determine,  by  expe- 
riments, (in  the  cafe  of  the  media  which  moft  fre- 
quently fall  under  confideration,)  the  angle  of  refrac- 
tion correfponding  to  every  minute  of  incidence. 
Some  very  laborious  tables,  deduced  from  fuch  ex- 
periments, are  to  be  found  in  the  works  of  Kircher. 
At  length,  Snellius  difcovered  what  is  now  called  the 
law  of  refradtion,  which  comprehends  their  whole  con- 
tents in  a  fmgle  fentence. 

The  law  of  the  planetary  motions,  deduced  by 
Kepler,  from  the  obfervations  of  Tycho  Brahe,  is 
another  flriking  illuftration  of  the  order,  which  an 
attentive  inquirer  is  fometimes  able  to  trace,  among 
the  relations  of  phyfical  events,  when  the  events  them- 
felves  appear,  on  a  fuperficial  view,  to  be  perfectly 
anomalous. 

Such 


442  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

Such  laws  are,  in  feme  refpeds,  analogous  to  the 
cycles  which  I  have  already  mentioned ;  but  they  dif- 
fer from  them  in  this,  that  a  cycle  is,  commonly, 
deduced  from  obfervations  made  on  phyfical  events 
which  are  obvious  to  the  fenfes ;  whereas  the  laws  we 
have  now  been  confidering,  are  deduced  from  an 
examination  of  relations  which  are  known  only  to 
men  of  fcience.  The  mofl  celebrated  aftronomical 
cycles,  accordingly,  are  of  a  very  remote  antiquity, 
and  were  probably  difcovered  at  a  period,  when  the 
fludy  of  aflronomy  confifled  merely  in  accumulating 
and  recording  the  more  flriking  appearances  of  the 
heavens. 

II.  Having  now  endeavoured  to  fhew,  how  much 
philofophy  contributes  to  extend  our  knowledge  of 
fa6ts,  by  aiding  our  natural  powers  of  invention  and 
difcovery,  I  proceed  to  explain,  in  what  manner  it 
fuperfedes  the  neceflity  of  ftudying  particular  truths, 
by  putting  us  in  poffefRon  of  a  comparatively  fmall 
number  of  general  principles  in  which  they  are 
involved. 

I  already  remarked  the  afTiftance  wTiich  philofophy 
gives  to  the  memory,  in  confequence  of  the  arrange- 
ment it  introduces  among  our  ideas.  In  this  refpedl 
even  a  hypothetical  theory  may  facilitate  the  recol- 
leftion  of  fafts  ;  in  the  fame  manner  in  which  the 
memory  is  aided  in  remembering  the  objects  of  natural 
hiftory  by  artificial  clalTifications. 

The  advantages,  however,  we  derive  from  ti'ue 
philofophy,  are  incomparably  greater  than  what  are 
to  be  expeded  from  any  hypothetical  theories.  Thefe, 
indeed,    may  aflift  us  in  recolled;ing  the  particulars 

we 


Sea.  4-  ^^   I'l^^    HUMAN    MIND.  443 

we  are  already  acquainted  with ;  but  it  is  only  from 
the  laws  of  nature,  which  have  been  traced  analyti- 
cally from  fadls,  that  we  can  venture,  with  fafety,  to 
deduce  confequences  by  reafoning  a  priori.  An  ex- 
ample will  illuftrate  and  confirm  this  obfervation. 

Suppofe  that  a  glafs  tube,  thirty  inches  long,  is 
filled  with  mercury,  excepting  eight  inches,  and  is 
inverted  as  in  the  Torricellian  experiment,  fo  that  the 
eight  inches  of  common  air  may  rife  to  the  top  5  and 
that  I  wifh  to  know  at  what  height  the  mercury  will 
remain  fufpended  in  the  tube,  the  barometer  being  at 
that  time  twenty-eight  inches  high.  There  is  here  a 
combination  of  different  laws,  which  it  is  neceifary 
to  attend  to,  in  order  to  be  able  to  predid  the  refult. 
I.  The  air  is  a  heavy  fluid,  and  the  preffure  of  the  at- 
mofphere  is  meafured  by  the  column  of  mercury  in 
the  barometer.  2.  The  air  is  an  elaflic  fluid ;  and 
its  elafticity  at  the  earth's  furface  (as  it  refifts  the 
preffure  of  the  atmofphere)  is  meafured  by  the  column 
of  mercury  in  the  barometer.  3.  In  different  ftates, 
the  elaflic  force  of  the  air  is  reciprocally  as  the  fpaces 
which  it  occupies.  But,  in  this  experiment,  the  mer- 
cury which  remains  fufpended  in  the  tube,  together 
with  the  elaflic  force  of  the  air  in  the  top  of  the  tube, 
is  a  counterbalance  to  the  preffure  of  the  atmofphere  ; 
and  therefore  their  joint  effedl  mufl  be  equal  to  the 
preffure  of  a  column  of  mercury  twenty-eight  inches 
high.  Hence  we  obtain  an  algebraical  equation, 
which  affords  an  eafy  folution  of  the  problem.  It  is 
further  evident,  that  my  knowledge  of  the  phyfical 
laws  which  are  here  combined,  puts  it  in  my  power 
tp  foretel  the  refult,  not  only  in  this  cafe,   but  in  all 

the 


444  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

the  cafes  of  a  fimilar  nature  which  can  be  fuppofed. 
The  problem,  in  any  particular  inftance,  might  be 
folved  by  making  the  experiment ;  but  the  refult 
would  be  of  no  ufe  to  me,  if  the  flighteft  alteration 
were  made  on  the  data. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  philofophy,  by  putting  us  in 
pofleflion  of  a  few  general  facts,  enables  us  to  deter- 
mine, by  reafoning,  what  will  be  the  refult  of  any  fup- 
pofed combination  of  them,  and  thus  to  comprehend 
an  infinite  variety  of  particulars,  which  no  mem.ory, 
however  vigorous,  would  have  been  able  to  retain. 
In  confequence  of  the  knowledge  of  fuch  general  fafts 
the  philofopher  is  relieved  from  the  neceflity  of  treafur- 
ing  up  in  his  mind,  all  thofe  truths  which  are  involved 
in  his  principles,  and  which  may  be  deduced  from 
them  by  reafoning;  and  he  can  often  profecute  his 
difcoveries  fynthetically,  in  thofe  parts  of  the  univerfe 
which  he  has  no  accefs  to  examine  by  immediate  ob- 
fervation.    There  is,  therefore,  this  important  difference 
between  the  hypothetical  theory,  and  a  theory  obtained 
by  induction ;  that  the  latter  not  only  enables  us  to 
remember  the  fafts  we  already  know,  but  to  afcertain 
by  reafoning,  many  fads  which  we  have  never  had  an 
opportunity  of  examining :  whereas  when  we  reafon 
from  a  hypothefis  a  priori^  we  are  almoft  certain  of 
running  into  error  ;  and,  confequently,  whatever  may 
be  its  ufe  to  the  memory,  it  can  never  be  trufted  to, 
in  judging  of  cafes  which  have  not  previoufly  fallen 
within  our  experience. 

There  are  fome  fciences,  in  which  hypothetical 
theories  are  more  ufeful  than  in  others  ;  thofe  fciences, 
to  wit,  m  which  we  have  occafion  for  an  extenfive 

1 6  know 


Se(a.4«  ^^   "THE    HUMAN.  MIND.  445 

knowledge  and  a  ready  recolleftion  of  facls,  and 
which,  at  the  fame  time,  are  yet  in  too  imperfect  a 
ftate  to  allow  as  to  obtain  juft  theories  by  the  method  of 
induction.  This  is  particularly  the  cafe  in  the  fcience 
of  medicine,  in  which  we  are  under  a  neceflity  to  apply 
our  knowledge,  fuch  as  it  ic,  to  practice.  It  is  aifo, 
in  fome  degree,  the  cafe  in  agriculture.  In  the  merely 
fpeculative  parts  of  phyfics  and  chemiflry,  we  may 
go  on  patiently  accumulating  fad:s,  without  forming 
any  one  conclufion,  farther  than  our  fa61:s  authorife 
us  ;  and  leave  to  pofterity  the  credit  of  eflablifiiing 
the  theory  to  which  our  labours  are  fubfervient.  But 
in  medicine,  in  which  it  is  of  confequence  to  have 
our  knowledge  at  comm^and,  it  feems  reafonable  to 
think,  that  hypothetical  theories  may  be  ufed  with 
advantage ;  provided  always,  that  they  are  confidered 
merely  in  the  light  of  artificial  memories,  and  that 
the  ftudent  is  prepared  to  lay  them  alide,  or  to  correal 
them,  in  proportion  as  his  knowledge  of  nature 
becomes  more  extenfive.  I  am,  indeed,  ready  to 
confefs,  that  this  is  a  caution  which  it  is  more  eafy  to 
give  than  to  follow :  for  it  is  painful  to  change  any 
of  our  habits  of  arrangement,  and  to  relinquifh  thofe 
fyftems  in  which  we  have  been  educated,  and  which 
have  long  flattered  us  with  an  idea  of  our  own  wif- 
dom.  Dr.  Gregory  mentions  *  it  as  a  flriking  and 
diftinguilhing  circumftancein  the  character  of  Syden- 
ham, that,  although  full  of  hypothetical  reafoning, 
it  did  not  render  him  the  lefs  attentive  to  obferva- 
tion ;  and  that  his  hypothefes  feem    to  have  fat   fo 

*  Leftures  on  the  Duties  and  Qualifications  of  a  Phyfician. 

loofely 


446  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  Vl. 

loofely  about  him,  that  either  they  did  not  influence  his 
pradlice  at  all,  or  he  could  eafily  abandon  them,  when- 
ever they  would  not  bend  to  his  experience. 


SECTION    V. 

Continuation   of  the  fame  SubjeS.  —  EffeBs  produced  on  the  Memory 
by  committing  to  Writing  our  acquired  Knoivledge. 

HAVING  treated  at  confiderable  length  of  the  im- 
provement of  memory,  it  may  not  be  improper, 
before  leaving  this  part  of  the  fubjed,  to  confider 
what  effects  are  likely  to  be  produced  on  the  mind 
by  the  pradice  of  committing  to  writing  our  acquired 
knowledge.  That  fuch  a  pradice  is  unfavourable,  in 
fome  refpedls,  to  the  faculty  of  memory,  by  fuperfeding, 
to  a  certain  degree,  the  neceffity  of  its  exertions,  has 
been  often  remarked,  and  I  believe  is  true  ;  but  the 
advantages  with  which  it  is  attended  in  other  refpeds, 
are  fo  important,  as  to  overbalance  greatly  this  trifling 
inconvenience. 

It  is  not  my  intention  at  prefent  to  examine  and 
compare  together  the  different  methods  which  have 
been  propofed,  of  keeping  a  common-place  book.  In 
this,  as  in  other  cafes  of  a  fimilar  kind,  It  may  be 
difficult,  perhaps,  or  impoflible,  to  eftablifli  any  rules 
which  will  apply  univerfally.  Individuals  muft  be 
left  to  judge  for  themfelves,  and  to  adapt  their  con- 
trivances to  the  particular  nature  of  their  literary  pur- 
fuits,  and  to  their  own  peculiar  habits  of  afl^ociation 
and  arrangement.     The  remarks  which  I  am  to  offer 

are 


Sea.  5.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  447 

are  very  general,  and  are  intended  merely  to  illuftrate 
a  few  of  the  advantages  which  the  art  of  writing  affords 
to  the  philofopher,  for  recording,  in  the  courfe  of  his 
progrefs  through  life,  the  refults  of  his  fpeculations, 
and  the  fruits  of  his  experience. 

The  utility  of  writing,  in  enabling  one  generation 
to  tranfmit  its  difcoveries  to  another,  and  in  thus  giv- 
ing rife  to  a  gradual  progrefs  in  the  fpecies,  has  been 
fufficiently  illuftrated  by  many  authors.  Little  atten- 
tion, however,  has  been  paid  to  another  of  its  effefts, 
which  is  no  lefs  important ;  I  mean,  to  the  foundation 
which  it  lays  for  a  perpetual  progrefs  in  the  intelledual 
powers  of  the  individual. 

It  is  to  experience,  and  to  our  own  refledions, 
that  we  are  indebted  for  by  far  the  mod  valuable 
part  of  our  knowledge  ;  and  hence  it  is,  that  although 
in  youth  the  imagination  may  be  more  vigorous,  and 
the  genius  more  original,  than  in  advanced  years ; 
yet,  in  the  cafe  of  a  man  of  obfervation  and  inquiry, 
the  judgement  may  be  expefted,  at  lead  as  long  as  his 
faculties  remain  in  perfedion,  to  become  every  day 
founder  and  more  enlightened.  It  is,  however,  only 
by  the  conftant  practice  of  writing,  that  the  refults  of 
our  experience,  and  the  progrefs  of  our  ideas,  can  be 
accurately  recorded.  If  they  are  truited  merely  to 
the  memory,  they  will  gradually  vanifh  from  it  like  a 
dream,  or  will  come  in  time  to  be  fo  blended  with 
the  fuggeftions  of  imaginadon,  that  we  fhall  not  be 
able  to  reafon  from  them  with  any  degree  of  con- 
fidence. What  improvements  in  fcience  might  we 
not  flatter  ourfelves  with  the  hopes  of  accomplilhing, 
Jiad  we  only  activity  and  induflry  to  treafure  up  every 

plaufible 


448  ELEMENTS    OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

plaufible  hint  that  occurs  to  us  !  Hardly  a  day  pafles, 
when  many  fuch  do  not  occur  to  ourfelves,  or  are  fug- 
gefted  by  others  :  and  detached  and  infulated,  as  they 
may  appear  at  prefent,  fome  of  them  may  perhaps 
afterwards,  at  the  difhance  of  years,  furniih  the  key- 
flone  of  an  important  fyftem. 

But  it  is  not  only  in  this  point  of  view  that  the 
philofopher  derives  advantage  from  the  practice  of 
writing.  Without  its  afTiftance,  he  could  feldom  be 
able  to  advance  beyond  thofe  fimple  elementary  truths 
which  are  current  in  the  world,  and  which  form,  in 
the  various  branches  of  fcience,  the  eftablifhed  creed 
of  the  age  he  lives  in.  How  inconfiderable  would 
have  been  the  progrefs  of  mathematicians,  in  their 
more  abftrufe  fpeculations,  without  the  aid  of  the 
algebraical  notation  ;  and  to  what  fublime  difcoveries 
have  they  been  led  by  this  beautiful  contrivance, 
which,  by  relieving  the  memory  of  the  effort  necef- 
fary  for  recolledling  the  fteps  of  a  long  inveftigation^ 
has  enabled  them  to  profecute  an  infinite  variety  of 
inquiries,  to  which  the  unaflifted  powers  of  the  hu- 
man mind  would  have  been  altogether  unequal !  In 
the  other  fciences,  it  is  true,  we  have  feldom  or  never 
occafion  to  follow  out  fuch  long  chains  of  confequences 
as  in  mathematics  ;  but  in  thefe  fciences,  if  the  chain 
of  invefligation  be  fhorter,  it  is  far  more  difficult 
to  make  the  tranfition  from  one  link  to  another  ; 
and  it  is  only  by  dwelling  long  on  our  ideas,  and 
rendering  them  perfedly  familiar  to  us,  that  fuch' 
tranfitions  can,  in  mofl  inflances,  be  made  with  fafe- 
ty.  In  morals  and  politics,  when  we  advance  a  flep 
beyond  thofe  elementary  truths  which  are  daily   pre- 

fented 


Se&.S'  OF   THE  HUMAN    MIND.  445 

fented  to  us  in  books  or  converfation,  there  is 
no  method  of  rendering  our  conclufions  familiar 
to  us,  but  by  committing  them  to  writing,  and 
making  them  frequently  the  fubjeds  of  our  me- 
ditation. When  we  have  once  dune  fo,  thefe  con- 
clufions become  elementary  truths  with  refpedt  to 
us  ;  and  we  may  advance  from  them  with  confidence 
to  others  which  are  more  remote,  and  which  are 
far  beyond  the  reach  of  vulgar  difcovery.  By  fol- 
lowing fuch  a  plan,  we  can  hardly  fail  to  have  our 
induftry  rewarded  in  due  time  by  fome  important  im- 
provement ;  and  it  is  only  by  fuch  a  plan  that  we 
can  reafonably  hope  to  extend  confiderably  the  boun- 
daries of  human  knowledge.  I  do  not  fay  that  thefe 
habits  of  fludy  are  equally  favourable  to  brilliancy  of 
converfation.  On  the  contrary,  I  believe  that  thofe 
men  who  polTefs  this  accomplifiiment  in  the  highefl 
degree,  are  fuch  as  do  not  advance  beyond  elementary 
truths ;  or  rather,  perhaps,  who  advance  only  a  fingle 
flep  beyond  them ;  that  is,  who  think  a  little  more 
deeply  than  the  vulgar,  but  whofe  conclufions  are 
not  fo  far  removed  from  common  opinions,  as  to 
render  it  nece-flary  for  them,  when  called  upon  to  de- 
fend them,  to  exhauft  the  patience  of  their  hearers, 
by  ftating  a  long  train  of  intermediate  ideas.  They 
who  have  pufhed  their  inquiries  much  farther  than 
the  common  fyftems  of  their  times,  and  have  ren- 
dered familiar  to  their  own  minds  the  intermediate 
fteps  by  which  they  have  been  led  to  their  conclu- 
fions, are  too  apt  to  conceive  other  men  to  be  in  the 
fame  fituation  with  themfelves  ;  and  when  they  mean 
to  inflru(3:,  are  mortified  to  find  that  they  are  only 

G  g  regarded 


45<3  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

regarded  as  paradoxical  and  vifionary.  It  is  but 
rarely  we  find  a  man  of  very  fplendid  and  various 
converfation  to  be  poffefled  of  a  profound  judgment, 
or  of  great  originality  of  genius. 

Nor  is  it  merely  to  the  philofopher,  who  wifhes  to 
diflinguifh  himfelf  by  his  difcoveries,  that  writing  af- 
fords an  ufeful  inftrument  of  fludy.  Important  afTi  fi- 
ance may  be  derived  from  it  by  all  thofe  who  wifh  to 
imprefs  on  their  minds  the  invefligations  which  occur 
to  them  in  the  courfe  of  their  reading  ;  for  although 
writing  may  weaken  (as  I  already  acknowledged  it  does) 
a  memory  for  detached  obfervations,  or  for  infulated 
fa6ls,  it  will  be  found  the  only  eifeftual  method  of 
fixing  in  it  permanently,  thofe  acquifitions  which  in- 
volve long  procefles  of  reafoning. 

When  we  are  employed  in  inquiries  of  our  own,  the 
conclufions  which  we  form  make  a  much  deeper  and 
more  lading  impreffion  on  the  memory,  than  any  know- 
ledge which  we  imbibe  paffively  from  another.  This 
is  undoubtedly  owing,  in  part,  to  the  effed  which  the 
ardour  of  difcovery  has,  in  roufmg  the  a£tivity  of 
the  mind,  and  in  fixing  its  attention  ;  but  I  apprehend 
it  is  chiefly  to  be  afcribed  to  this,  that  when  we  follow 
out  a  train  of  thinking  of  our  own,  our  ideas  are  ar- 
ranged in  that  order  which  is  mofl  agreeable  to  our 
prevailing  habits  of  alTociation.  The  only  method  of 
putting  our  acquired  knowledge  on  a  level,  in  this  re- 
fpeft,  with  our  original  fpeculations,  is,  after  making 
ourfelves  acquainted  with  our  author's  ideas,  to  fludy 
the  fubjeft  over  again  in  our  own  way;  to  paufe,  from 
time  to  time,  in  the  courfe  of  our  reading,  in  order  to 
1    Gonfider  what  we  have  gained  ;  to  recoiled  what  the 

propo- 


Seft.  5'  OF  THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4^1 

propofitions  are,  which  the  author  wifhes  to  eftablifli'  \ 
and  to  examine  the  different  proofs  which  he  employs  ' 
to  fupport  them.  In  making  fuch  an  experiment,  we 
commonly  find,  that  the  different  fteps  of  the  procefs 
arrange  themfelves  in  our  minds,  in  a  manner  different 
from  that  in  which  the  author  has  flated  them ;  and 
that,  while  his  argument  feems,  in  fome  places, 
obfcure,  from  its  concifenefs  ;  it  is  tedious  in  others, 
from  being  unneceffarily  expanded.  When  we  have 
reduced  the  reafoning  to  that  form,  which  appears  to 
ourfelves  to  be  the  mofl  natural  and  fatisfaciory, 
we  may  conclude  with  certainty,  not  that  this  form 
is  better  in  itfelf  than  another,  but  that  it  is  the  beft 
adapted  to  our  memory.  Such  reafonings,  therefore, 
as  we  have  occafion  frequently  to  apply,  either  in  the 
bufmefs  of  life,  or  in  the  courfe  of  our  ftudies,  it  is  of 
importance  to  us  to  commit  to  writing,  in  a  language 
and  in  an  order  of  our  own ;  and  if,  at  any  time,  we 
find  it  neceffary  to  refrefh  our  recolledion  on  the 
fubject,  to  have  recourfe  to  our  own  compofition,  in 
preference  to  that  of  any  other  author. 

That  the  plan  of  reading  which  is  commonly  fol- 
lowed is  very  different  from  that  which  I  have  been 
recommending,  will  not  be  difputed.  Mofl  people 
read  merely  to  pafs  an  idle  hour,  or  to  pleafe  them-  * 
felves  with  the  idea  of  employment,  while  their  indo- 
lence prevents  them  from  any  adive  exertion  ;  and  a 
confiderable  number  with  a  view  to  the  difplay  which 
they  are  afterwards  to  make  of  their  literary  acquifi- 
tions.  From  whichfoever  of  thefe  motives  a  perfon  is 
led  to  the  perufal  of  books,  it  is  hardly  poffible  that  he 
can  derive  from  them  any  material  advantage.     If  he 

G  g  2  reads 


45  2  ELE:MEfrTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  VI, 

reads  merely  from  indolence,  the  ideas  which  pafs 
through  his  mind  will  probably  leave  little  or  no  impref- 
fion  ;  and  if  he  reads  from  vanity,  he  will  be  more 
anxious  to  feled  flriking  particulars  in  the  matter  or  ex- 
preflion,  than  to  feize  the  fpirit  and  fcope  of  the  author's 
reafoning,  or  to  examine  how  far  he  has  made  any 
additions  to  the  flock  of  ufeful  and  folid  knowledge. 
Though  it  is  fcarce  pofTible,"  fays  Dr.  Butler*,  "  to 
avoid  judging,  infome  way  or  other,  of  almoft  every 
thing  which  offers  itfelf  to  one's  thoughts,  yet  it  is 
certain,  that  many  perfons,  from  different  caufes, 
never  exercife  their  judgment  upon  what  comes  be- 
fore them,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  be  able  to  deter- 
mine how  far  it  be  conclufive.  •  They  are  perhaps 
entertained  with  fome  things,  not  fo  with  others  ; 
they  like,  and  they  diflike ;  but  whether  that  which 
is  propofed  to  be  made  out,  be  really  made  out  or 
not ;  whether  a  matter  be  flated  according  to  the 
real  truth  of  the  cafe,  feems,  to  the  generality  of 
people,  a  circumflance  of  Httle  or  no  importance. 
Arguments  are  often  wanted  for  fome  accidental  pur- 
pofe ;  but  proof,  as  fuch,  is  what  they  never  want, 
for  their  own  fatisfadlion  of  mind,  or  conduft  in 
life.  Not  to  mention  the  multitudes  who  read  mere- 
ly for  the  fake  of  talking,  or  to  qualify  themfelves 
for  the  world,  or  fome  fuch  kind  of  reafons  ;  there 
are  even  of  the  few  who  read  for  their  own  enter- 
tainment, and  have  a  real  curiofity  to  fee  what  is 
faid,  feveral,  which  is  aftonifliing,  who  have  no  fort 
of  curiofity  to  fee  what  is  true  :  I  fay  curiofity,  be- 

*  See  the  Preface  to  his  Sermons, 

"  caufe 


Seft.  f.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  453 

"  caufe  it  is  too  obvious  to  be  mentioned  how  much 
"  that  relipious  and  facred  attention  which  is  due  to 

O 

^  truth,  and  to  the  important  queftion,  what  is  the 
"  rule  of  Hfe,  is  loll  out  of  the  world. 

"  For  the  fake  of  this  whole  clafs  of  readers,  for  they 
*'  are  of  different  capacities,  different  kinds,  and  get 
"  into  this  way  from  different  occafions,  I  have  often 
*'  wifhed  that  it  had  been  the  cuftom  to  lay  before 
*'  people  nothing  in  matters  of  argument  but  premifes, 
"  and  leave  them  to  draw  conciufions  themfelves ; 
"  which,  although  it  could  not  be  done  in  all  cafes, 
"  might  in  many. 

"  The  great  number  of  books  and  papers  of  amufe- 
"  ment,  which,  of  one  kind  or  another,  daily  come  in 
"  one's  way,  have  in  part  occafioned,  and  moft  per- 
"  fedly  fall  in  with  and  humour  this  idle  way  of 
*'  reading  and  confidering  things.  By  this  means, 
"  time,  even  in  folitude,  is  happily  got  rid  of  without 
"  the  pain  of  attention  ;  neither  is  any  part  of  it  more 
"  put  to  the  account  of  idlenefs,  (one  can  fcarce  for- 
"  bear  faying,  is  fpent  with  lefs  thought,)  than  great 
**  part  of  that  which  is  fpent  in  reading." 

If  the  plan  of  ftudy  which  I  formerly  defcribed  were 
adopted,  it  would  undoubtedly  diminilh  very  much  the 
number  of  books  which  it  would  be  poffible  to  turn 
over ;  but  I  am  convinced  that  it  would  add  greatly 
to  the  flock  of  ufeful  and  folid  knowledge ;  and  by 
rendering  our  acquired  ideas  in  fome  meafure  our  own, 
would  give  us  a  more  ready  and  practical  command  of 
them  :  not  to  mention,  that  if  we  are  poffeffed  of  any 
inventive  powers,  fuch  exercifes  would  continually  fur- 
nifli  them  with  an  opportunity  of  difplaying  themfelves 

G  g  3  upon 


454  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Chap.  VI. 

upon  all  the  different  fubjedls  which  may  pafs   under 
our  review. 

Nothing,  in  truth,  has  fuch  a  tendency  to  weaken, 
,  not  only  the  powers  of  invention,  but  the  intelledual 
!'.  powers  in  general,  as  a  habit  of  extenfive  and  various 
reading,  without  reflection.  The  activity  and  force  of 
the  niind  are  gradually  impaired,  in  confequence  of 
difufe  ;  and  not  unfrequently  all  our  principles  and 
opinions  come  to  be  loft,  in  the  infinite  multiplicity 
and  difcordancy  of  our  acquired  ideas. 

By  confining  our  ambidon  to  purfue  the  truth  with 
modefty  and  candour,  and  learning  to  value  our  ac- 
quifitions  only  as  far  as  they  contribute  to  make  us 
wifer  and  happier,  we  may  perhaps  be  obliged  to  facri- 
fice  the  temporary  admiration  of  the  common  difpen- 
fers  of  literary  fame  ;  but  we  may  reft  aflured,  that  it 
is  in  this  way  only  we  can  hope  to  make  real  progrefs 
in  knowledge,  or  to  enrich  the  world  with  ufeful  in- 
ventions. 

"  It  requires  courage,  indeed,"  (as  Helved  us  has 
remarked,)  "  to  remain  ignorant  of  thofe  ufelefs  fub- 
"  jeds  which  are  generally  valued  ;"  but  it  is  a 
courage  neceflary  to  men  who  either  love  the  truth,  or 
who  afpire  to  eftablifh  a  permanent  reputation. 


Sea,  6.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  45^ 

SECTION     VI. 

Cont'muallon  of  the  fame  fubjeS. — Of  Artificial  Memory. 

BY  an  Artificial  Memory  is  meant,  a  method  of 
connedting  in  the  mind,  things  difficult  to  be 
remembered,  with  things  eafily  remembered  ;  fo  as  to 
enable  it  to  retain,  and  to  recoUeft  the  former,  by 
means  of  the  latter.  For  this  purpofe,  various  con- 
trivances have  been  propofed,  but  I  think  the  foregoing 
definition  applies  to  all  of  them. 

Some  forts  of  artificial  memory  are  intended  to  afTifl 
the  natural  powers  of  the  human  mind  on  particular 
occafions,  which  require  a  more  than  ordinary  effort  of 
recolledion  ;  for  example,  to  afTifl  a  public  fpeaker  to 
recolledl  the  arrangement  of  a  long  difcourfe.  Others 
have  been  devifed  with  a  view  to  enable  us  to  extend 
the  circle  of  our  acquired  knowledge,  and  to  give  us  a 
more  ready  command  of  all  the  various  particulars  of 
our  information. 

The  topical  Memory  fo  much  celebrated  among  the 
ancient  rhetoricians,  comes  under  the  former  defcrip- 
tion. 

I  already  remarked,  the  efFeft  of  fenfible  objects 
in  recalling  to  the  mind  the  ideas  with  which  it  hap- 
pened to  be  occupied,  at  the  time  when  thefe  objeds 
were  formerly  perceived.  In  travelling  along  a  road, 
the  fight  of  the  more  remarkable  fcenes  we  meet  with, 
frequently  puts  us  in  mind  of  the  fubjects  we  were 
thinking  or  talking  of  when  we  lafl  faw  them.  Such 
fa^s,  Avhich  are  perfectly  familiar  even  to  the  vulgar, 

G  g  4  might 


4S^  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

might  very  naturally  Juggefl  the  pofiibility  of  alii  fling 
the  memory,  by  eftablifliing  a  connexion  between  the 
ideas  we  wifh  to  remember,  and  certain  fenfible  objects, 
which  have  been  found  from  experience  to  make  a  per- 
manent impreflion  on  the  mind  *.  I  have  been  told 
of  a  young  woman,  in  a  very  low  rank  of  life,  who 
contrived  a  method  of  committing  to  memory  the 
fermons  which  fhe  was  accuftomed  to  hear,  by  fix-. 
ing  her  attention,  during  the  different  heads  of  the  dif- 
courfe,  on  different  compartments  of  the  roof  of  the 
church  ;  in  fuch  a  manner,  as  that  when  Ihe  afterwards 
faw  the  roof,  or  recolledled  the  order  in  which  its 
compartments  were  difpofed,  Ihe  recolleded  the  method 
which  the  preacher  had  obferved  in  treating  his  fubject. 
This  contrivance  w^as  perfectly  analogous  to  the  to- 
pical memory  of  the  ancients ;  an  art  which,  what- 
ever be  the  opinion  we  entertain  of  its  ufe,  is  cer- 
tainly entitled,  in  a  high  degree,  to  the  praife  of  in- 
genuity. 

Suppofe  that  I  were  to  fix  in  my  memory  the  dif- 
ferent apartments  in  fome  very  large  building,  and 
that  I  had  accuftomed  myfelf  to  think  of  thefe  apart- 
ments always  in  the  fame  invariable  order.  Suppofe 
farther,  that,  in  preparing  myfelf  for  a  public  difcourfe, 
in  which  I  had  occafion  to  treat  of  a  great  variety  of 
particulars,  I  was  anxious  to  fix  in  my  memory  the 
order  I  propofed  to  obferve  in  the  communication  of 

*  "  Cum  in  loca  aliqua  poft  tempus  reverfi  fumus,  non  ipfa  ag- 
"  nofcimus  tantum,  fed  etiam,  quje  in  his  fecerimus,  reminifcimur, 
"  perfonxque  fubeunt,  nonnunquam  tacitae  quoqiie  cogitationes  in 
*'  mcntem  revcrtuntiir.  Nata  eft  igitur,  ut  in  plerifque^  ars  ab  ex-. 
"  perimento." 

QuiNCT.  In/J.  Orat.  lib.  xi.  cap.  2. 

my 


Sea  6.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  4^7 

my  ideas.  It  is  evident,  that  by  a  proper  divifion  of  my 
fubjed:  into  heads,  and  by  connefting  each  head  with 
a  particular  apartment,  (which  I  could  eafily  do,  by 
conceiving  myfelf  to  be  fitting  in  the  apartment  while 
I  was  ftudying  the  part  of  my  difcourfe  I  meant  to  con- 
nedt  with  it),  the  habitual  order  in  which  thefe  apart- 
ments occurred  to  my  thoughts,  would  prefent  to  me, 
in  their  proper  arrangement,  and  without  any  effort  on 
my  part,  the  ideas  of  which  I  was  to  treat.  It  is  alfo 
obvious,  that  a  very  little  pradice  would  enable  me  to 
avail  myfelf  of  this  contrivance,  without  any  embarralF- 
ment  or  diftraclion  of  my  attention  *. 

As  to  the  utility  of  this  art,  it  appears  to  me  to  de- 
pend entirely  on  the  particular  objed  which  we  fup- 
pofe  the  fpeaker  to  have  in  view ;  whether,  as  was  too 
often  the  cafe  with  the  antient  rhetoricians,  to  bewilder 
a  judge,  and  to  filence  an  adverfary ;  or  fairly  and 
candidly  to  lead  an  audience  to  the  truth.  On  the 
former  fuppofition,  nothing  can  poffibly  give  an  orator 
a  greater  fuperiority,  than  the  poffeffion  of  a  fecret, 
which,  while  it  enables  him  to  exprefs  himfelf  with 
facility  and  the  appearance  of  method,  puts  it  in  his 
power,  at  the  fame  time,  to  difpofe  his  arguments  and 

*  In  fo  far  as  it  was  the  objeft  of  this  fpecies  of  artificial  me- 
mory to  affift  an  orator  in  recolleifting  the  plan  and  arrangement  of 
his  difcourfe,  the  accounts  of  it,  which  are  given  by  the  antient  rhe- 
toricians are  abundantly  fatisfadory.  Tt  appears,  however,  that 
its  ufe  was  more  extenfive  ;  and  that  it  was  fo  contrived,  as  to 
facilitate  the  recolleftion  of  a  premeditated  compofition.  In  what 
manner  this  was  done,  it  is  not  eafy  to  conjedure  from  the  imper- 
feft  explanations  of  the  art,  which  have  been  tranfmitted  to  modern 
times.      The  reader  may  confult  Cicero  de  Oral,  lib.ii.  cap    87, 

88. —  Rhetor,  ad  Hereiinlwn,   lib.  iii.  cap.  16.  et  feq. Ouinctil. 

Injl,  QraU  lib.  xi.  cap.  2. 

his 


45 S  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

his  fads,  in  whatever  order  he  judges  to  be  the  mofi: 
proper  to  miflead  the  judgment,  and  to  perplex  the 
memory,  of  thofe  whom  he  addreflfes.  And  fuch,  it 
is  manifeft,  is  the  effecl,  not  only  of  the  topical  me- 
mory of  the  antients,  but  of  all  other  contrivances 
which  aid  the  recollection,  upon  any  principle  dif- 
ferent from  the  natural  and  logical  arrangement  of  our 
ideas. 

To  thofe,  on  the  other  hand,  who  fpeak  with  a  view 
to  convince  or  to  inform  others,  it  is  of  confequence 
that  the  topics  which  they  mean  to  illuftrate,  fhould  be 
arranged  in  an  order  equally  favourable  to  their  own 
recollection  and  to  that  of  their  hearers.  For  this  pur- 
pofe,  nothing  is  effeftual,  but  that  method  which  is 
fuggefled  by  the  order  of  their  own  invefligations  ;  a 
method  which  leads  the  mind  from  one  idea  to  another, 
either  by  means  of  obvious  and  ftriking  aflfociations,  or 
by  thofe  relations  which  connect  the  different  fleps  of 
a  clear  and  accurate  procefs  of  reafoning.  It  is  thus 
only  that  the  attention  of  an  audience  can  be  com- 
pletely and  inceffantly  engaged,  and  that  the  fubflance 
of  a  long  difcourfe  can  be  remembered  without  effort. 
And  it  is  thus  only  that  a  fpeaker,  after  a  mature  con- 
fideration  of  his  fubject,  can  poffefs  a  juft  confidence 
in  his  own  powers  of  recollection,  in  ftating  all  the 
different  premifes  which  lead  to  the  conclufion  he 
wiihes  to  eftablifh. 

In  modern  times,  fuch  contrivances  have  been  very 
little,  if  at  all,  made  ufe  of  by  public  fpeakers ;  but 
various  ingenious  attempts  have  been  made,  to  afTift 
the  memory,  in  acquiring  and  retaining  thofe  branches 
of  knowledge  which  it  has  been  fuppofed  neceffary  for 
a  fcholar  to  carry  always  about  with  him  j  and  which, 

at 


Sed.  6.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  459 

at  the  fame  time,  from  the  number  of  particular  details 
which  they  involve,  are  not  calculated,  of  themfelves, 
to  make  a  very  lailing  impreffion  on  the  mind.  Of 
this  fort  is  the  Memoria  Technica  of  Mr.  Grey,  in  which 
a  great  deal  of  hiflorical,  chronological,  and  geogra- 
phical knowledge  is  comprifed  in  a  fet  of  verfes,  which 
the  ftudent  is  fuppofed  to  make  as  familiar  to  himfelf 
as  fchool-boys  do  the  rules  of  grammar.  Thefe  verfes 
are,  in  general,  a  mere  aifemblage  of  proper  names, 
difpofed  in  a  rude  fort  of  meafure  ;  fome  flight  altera- 
tions being  occafionally  made  on  the  final  fyllables  of 
the  words,  fo  as  to  bs  fignificant  (according  to  certain 
principles  laid  down  in  the  beginning  of  the  work)  of 
important  dates,  or  of  other  particulars  which  it  ap- 
peared to  the  author  ufeful  to  aiTociate  with  the  names. 

I  have  heard  very  oppofite  opinions  with  refpeft  to 
the  utility  of  this  ingenious  fyftem.  The  prevailing 
opinion  is,  I  believe,  againft  it ;  although  it  has  been 
mentioned  in  terms  of  high  approbation  by  fome  wri- 
ters of  eminence.  Dr.  Prieflley,  whofe  judgment,  in 
matters  of  this  fort,  is  certainly  entitled  to  refpe£t:, 
has  faid,  that  "  it  is  a  method  fo  eafily  learned,  and 
*'  which  may  be  of  fo  much  ufe  in  recollecting  dates, 
*'  when  other  methods  are  not  at  hand,  that  he  thinks 
"  all  perfons  of  a  liberal  education  inexcufable,  who 
*'  will  not  take  the  fmall  degree  of  pains  that  is  necef- 
"  fary  to  make  themfelves  mafters  of  it ;  or  who 
"  think  any  thing  mean,  or  unworthy  of  their  notice, 
*'  which  is  fo  ufeful  and  convenient  *." 

In  judging  of  the  utility  of  this,  or  of  any  other  con- 
trivance  of  the  fame  kind,  to   a  particular  perfon,  a 

*  Leftures  011  Hiftory,  p.  157. 

great 


4t5o  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

great  deal  muft  depend  on  the  fpecies  of  memory  which 
he  has  received  from  nature,  or  has  acquired  in  the 
courfe  of  his  early  education.  Some  men,  as  I  already 
remarked,  (efpecially  among  thofe  who  have  been 
habitually  cxerciied  in  childhood  in  getting  by  heart 
grammar  rules),  have  an  extraordinary  facility  in  ac- 
quiring and  retaining  the  mod  barbarous  and  the  mod 
infignificant  verfes  ;  which  another  perfon  would  find 
as  difficult  to  remember,  as  the  geographical  and  chro- 
nological details  of  which  it  is  the  object  of  this  art  to 
relieve  the  memory.  Allowing,  therefore,  the  general 
utihty  of  the  art,  no  one  method,  perhaps,  is  entitled 
to  an  exclufive  preference ;  as  one  contrivance  may  be 
beft  fuited  to  the  faculties  of  one  perfon,  and  a  very 
different  one  to  thole  of  another. 

One  important  objection  applies  to  all  of  them, 
that  they  accuftom  the  mind  to  affociate  ideas  by  acci- 
dental and  arbitrary  connexions  ;  and,  therefore,  how 
much  foever  they  may  contribute,  in  the  courfe  of  con- 
verfadon,  to  an  oflentatious  difplay  of  acquired  know- 
ledge, they  are,  perhaps,  of  little  real  fervice  to  us, 
when  we  are  ferioufly  engaged  in  the  purfuit  of  truth. 
I  own,  too,  I  am  very  doubtful  with  refpect  to  the  uti- 
lity of  a  great  part  of  that  information  which  they  are 
commonly  employed  to  imprefs  on  the  memory,  and  on 
which  the  generality  of  learned  men  are  difpofed  to  value 
themfelves.  It  certainly  is  of  no  ule,  but  in  fo  far  as  it 
is  fubfervient  to  the  gratification  of  their  vanity  ;  and 
the  acquifition  of  it  confumes  a  great  deal  of  time  and 
attention,  which  might  have  been  employed  in  ex- 
tending the  boundaries  of  human  know^ledge.  To  thofe, 
however,  who  are  of  a  different  opinion,  fuch  contri- 
vances 


Sea.  7,  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  461 

vances  as  Mr.  Grey's  may  be  extremely  ufeful :  and  to 
all  men  they  may  be  of  fervide,  in  fixing  in  the  memory 
thofe  infulated  and  uninterefting  particulars,  which  it 
is  either  necelTary  for  them  to  be  acquainted  with,  from 
their  fituation  ;  or  which  cuftom  has  rendered,  in  the 
common  opinion,  eflential  branches  of  a  liberal  educa- 
tion. I  would,  in  particular,  recommend  this  author's 
-method  of  recolleding  dates,  by  fubflituting  letters  for 
the  numeral  cyphers ;  and  forming  thefe  letters  into 
words,  and  the  words  into  verfes.  I  have  found  it,  at 
lead  in  my  own  cafe,  the  moft  efFeclual  of  all  fuch  con- 
trivances  of  which  I  have  had  experience. 


SECTION    VII. 

Continuation  of  the  fame  Suhje8.  —  Importance  of  making  a  proper 
SeIe8ion  among  the  Ohjecfs  of  our  Kjioivledgej  in  order  to  derizr 
Advantage  from  the  Acniiifiiions  of  Memory, 

f  I  ^HE  cultivation  of  Memory,  with  all  the  helps  that 
-^  we  can  derive  to  it  from  art,  will  be  of  little  ufe 
to  us,  unlefs  we  make  a  proper  feledion  of  the  parti- 
culars to  be  remembered.  Such  a  feledion  is  necef- 
fary  to  enable  us  to  profit  by  reading  ;  and  ftill  more 
fo,  to  enable  us  to  profit  by  obfervation,  to  which  every 
man  is  indebted  for  by  far  the  mofl  valuable  part  of 
his  knowledge. 

When  we  firft  enter  on  any  new  literary  purfuit,  we 

commonly  find  our  efforts  of  attention  painful  and  un- 

fatisfaftory.     We  have  no  difcrimination  in  ourcurio- 

fity  ;  and  by  grafping  at  every  thing,  we  fail  in  making 

1 1  thofe 


462  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  Vt. 

thofe  moderate  acquifitions  which  are  fuited  to  our 
limited  faculties.  As  our  knowledge  extends,  we 
learn  to  know  what  particulars  are  likely  to  be  of  ufe 
to  us  ;  and  acquire  a  habit  of  directing  our  examina- 
tion to  thefe,  without  diflracting  the  attention  with 
others.  It  is  partly  owing  to  a  fimilar  circumftance, 
that  moft  readers  complain  of  a  defect  of  memory, 
when  they  firfl  enter  on  the  ftudy  of  hiflory.  Fhey 
cannot  feparate  important  from  trifling  facts,  and  find 
themfelves  unable  to  retain  any  thing,  from  their 
anxiety  to  fecure  the  whole. 

In-  order  to  give  a  proper  direction  to  our  atten- 
tion in  the  courfe  of  our  ftudies,  it  is  ufeful,  before 
engaging  in  particular  purfuits,  to  acquire  as  familiar 
an  acquaintance  as  polTible  with  the  great  outlines  of 
the  different  branches  of  fcience  ;  with  the  mod  im- 
portant conclufions,  which  have  hitherto  been  formed 
in  them,  and  wdth  the  moft  important  defiderata 
which  remain  to  be  fupplied.  In  the  cafe  too  of  thofe 
parts  of  knowledge,  which  are  not  yet  ripe  for  the 
formation  of  philofophical  fyftems,  it  may  be  of  ufe 
to  ftudy  the  various  hypothetical  theories  which  have 
been  propofed  for  connecting  together  and  arranging 
the  phenomena.  By  fuch  general  views  alone  we  can 
prevent  ourfelves  from  being  loft,  amidft  a  labyrinth 
of  particulars,  or  can  engage  in  a  courfe  of  extenfive 
and  various  reading,  with  an  enlightened  and  difcri- 
minating  attention.  While  they  withdraw  our  notice 
from  barren  and  infulated  facts,  they  dired  it  to  fuch 
as  tend  to  illuftrate  principles  which  have  either  been 
already  eftabliftied,  or  which,  from  having  that  de-' 
gree  of  connexion  among  themfelves,  which  is  ne- 
1 6  ceflary 


Seft.  7.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  46^5 

ceflary  to  give  plaufibility  to  a  hypothetical  theory 
are  likely  to  furnifh,  in  time,  the  materials  ofajufter 
fyftem. 

Some  of  the  followers  of  Lord  Bacon  have,  I 
think,  been  led,  In  their  zeal  for  the  method  of  in- 
du6lion,  to  cenfure  hypothetical  theories  with  too 
great  a  degree  of  feverity.  Such  theories  have  cer- 
tainly been  frequently  of  ufe,  in  putting  philofophers 
upon  the  road  of  difcovery.  Indeed,  it  has  probably 
been  in  this  way,  that  mofh  difcoveries  have  been 
made ;  for  although  a  knowledge  of  fa6ts  mud  be 
prior  to  the  formation  of  a  juft  theory,  yet  a  hypo- 
thetical theory  Is  generally  our  bed  guide  to  the  know- 
ledge of  ufeful  fa6ls.  If  a  man,  without  forming  to 
himfelf  any  conjefture  concerning  the  unknown  laws 
of  nature,  were  to  fet  himfelf  merely  to  accumulate 
fads  at  random,  he  might,  perhaps,  (tumble  upon 
fome  important  difcovery ;  but  by  far  the  greater  part 
of  his  labours  would  be  wholly  ufelefs.  Every  phi- 
lofophical  inquirer,  before  he  begins  a  fet  of  ex- 
periments, has  fome  general  principle  In  his  view, 
which  he  fufpetls  to  be  a  law  of  nature  *  :  and 
although  his  conjectures  may  be  often  wrong,  yet 
they  ferve  to  give  his  inquiries  a  particular  diredion 
and  to  bring  under  his  eye  a  number  of  fadts  which 
have  a  certain  relation  to  each  other.     It  has  been 

*  *'  Re6te  fiquidem  Plato,  «  Qui  aliquid  qusrit,  id  ipfum,  quod 
*'  quserit,  generali  quadam  notione  comprehendit  :  aliter,  qui  fieri 
*'  poteft,  ut  illud,  cum  fuerit  inventum,  agnofcat  ?"  Idcirco  quo 
"  amplior  et  certior  fuerit  anticipatio  noftra  ;  eo  magis  direfta  et 
"  compendiofa  erit  inveftigatio." 

De  Aug.  Scient.  lib.  v.  cap.  3. 

often 


464  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI* 

often  remarked,  that  the  attempts  to  difcover  the  phi- 
lofopher's  ftone,  and  the  quadrature  of  the  circle, 
have  led  to  many  ufeful  difcoveries  in  chemiftry  and 
mathematics.  And  they  have  plainly  done  fo,  merely 
by  limiting  the  field  of  obfervation  and  inquiry,  and 
checking  that  indifcriminate  and  defultory  attention 
which  is  fo  natural  to  an  indolent  mind.  A  hypothe- 
tical theory,  however  erroneous,  may  anfwer  a  fimilar 
purpofe.  "  Prudens  interrogatio,"  (fays  Lord  Ba- 
con,) "  eft  dimidium  fcientise.  Vaga  enim  experi- 
"  entia  et  fe  tantum  fequens  mera  palpatio  eft,  et 
*'  homines  potius  ftupefacit  quam  informat."  What, 
indeed,  are  Newton's  queries,  but  fo  many  hypothe- 
fes  which  are  propofed  as  fubjecls  of  examination  to 
philofophers  ?  And  did  not  even  the  great  doctrine  of 
gravitation  take  its  firft  rife  from  a  fortunate  con- 
jecture ? 

While,  therefore,  we  maintain,  with  the  followers 
of  Bacon,  that  no  theory  is  to  be  admitted  as  proved, 
any  farther  than  it  is  fupported  by  facls,  we  fliould, 
at  the  fame  time,  acknowledge  our  obligations  to 
thofe  writers  who  hazard  their  conjectures  to  the 
world  with  modefty  and  diffidence.  And  it  may  not 
be  improper  to  add,  that  men  of  a  fyftematizing  turn 
are  not  now  fo  ufelefs  as  formerly  ;  for  we  are  al- 
ready polfeffed  of  a  great  ftock  of  fads  ;  and  there  is 
fcarcely  any  theory  fo  bad  as  not  to  bring  together  a 
number  of  particulars  which  have  a  certain  degree  of 
relation  or  analogy  to  each  other. 

The  foregoing  remarks  are  applicable  to  all  our 
various  ftudies  ;  whether  they  are  conducted  in  the 
way  of  reading,  or  of  obfervation.     From  neither  of 

thefe 


Seft.  7.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  465 

thefe  two  fources  of  information  can  we  hope  to  de- 
rive much  advantage,  unlefs  we  have  fome  general 
principles  to  dire6t  our  attention  to  proper  objedls. 

With  refpedt  to  obfervation,  fome  farther  cautions 
may  be  ufeful ;  for  in  guarding  againft  an  indifcrimi- 
nate  accumulation  of  particulars,  it  is  poflible  to  fall 
into  the  oppofite  extreme,  and  to  acquire  a  habit  of 
inattention  to  the  phenom  ?na  which  prefent  themfelves 
to  our  fenfes.  The  former  is  the  error  of  men  of  little 
education ;  the  latter  is  more  common  among  men  of 
retirement  and  ftudy. 

One  of  the  chief  effeds  of  a  liberal  education,  is  to 
enable  us  to  withdraw  the  attention  from  the  prefent 
objefts  of  our  perceptions,  and  to  dwell  at  pleafure 
on  the  paft,  the  abfent,  or  the  future.  But  when 
we  are  led  to  carry  thefe  efforts  to  an  excefs,  either 
from  a  warm  and  romantic  imagination,  or  from  an 
anxious  and  fanguine  temper,  it  is  eafy  to  fee  that 
the  power  of  obfervation  is  likely  to  be  weakened, 
and  habits  of  inattention  to  be  contrafted.  The  fame 
effed  may  be  produced  by  too  early  an  indulgence  in 
philofophical  purfuits,  before  the  mind  has  been  pre- 
pared for  the  fludy  of  general  truths,  by  exercifmg 
its  faculdes  among  particular  objeds,  and  particular 
occurrences.  In  this  way,  it  contrads  an  averfion  to 
the  examination  of  details,  from  the  pleafure  which 
it  has  experienced  in  the  contemplation  or  in  the  dif- 
covery  of  general  principles.  Both  of  thefe  turns  of 
thought,  however,  prefuppofe  a  certain  degree  of  ob- 
fervation ;  for  the  materials  of  imagination  are  fup- 
plied  by  the  fenfes ;  and  the  general  truths  which  oc- 
cupy the  philofopher,  would  be  wholly  uninteliigible 

Hh  to 


466  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI. 

to  him,  if  he  was  a  total  flranger  to  all  experience 
with  refped:  to  the  courfe  of  nature  and  of  human 
life.  The  obfervations,  indeed,  which  are  made  by 
men  of  a  warm  imagination,  are  likely  to  be  inaccu- 
rate and  fallacious ;  and  thofe  of  the  fpeculative  phi- 
lofopher  are  frequently  carried  no  farther  than  is  ne- 
ceffary  to  enable  him  to  comprehend  the  terms  which 
relate  to  the  fubjeds  of  his  reafoning  ;  but  both  the 
one  and  the  other  mud  have  looked  abroad  occafion- 
ally  at  nature,  and  at  the  world  ;  if  not  to  afcertain 
facls  by  adual  examination,  at  lead  to  flore  their 
minds  with  ideas. 
I  .  The  metaphyfician,  whofe  attention  is  directed  to 
the  faculties  and  operations  of  the  mind,  is  the  only 
man  who  poflefTes  within  himfelf  the  materials  of  his 
fpcculations  and  reafonings.  It  is  accordingly  among 
this  clafs  of  literary  men,  that  habits  of  inattention 
to  things  external  have  been  carried  to  the  greateft 
extreme. 

It  is  obferved  by  Dr.  Reid,  that  the  power  of  re- 
flexion, (by  which  he  means  the  power  of  attending 
to  the  fubjefts  of  our  confcioufnefs),  is  the  lafl  of  our 
intelledual  faculties  which  unfolds  itfelf ;  and  that  in 
the  greater  part  of  mankind  it  never  unfolds  itfelf  at 
all.  It  is  a  power,  indeed,  which  being  fubfervient 
merely  to  the  gratification  of  metaphyfical  curiolity, 
it  is  not  effentially  neceflary  for  us  to  poflefs,  in  any 
confiderable  degree.  The  power  of  obfervation,  on 
the  other  hand,  which  is  neceifary  for  the  prefervation 
even  of  our  animal  exiftence,  difcovers  itfelf  in  in- 
fants long  before  they  attain  the  ufe  of  fpeech ;  or 
rather  I  Ihould  have  faid,  as  foon  as  they  come  into 

10*  the 


Sea.  7.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  ^^y 

the  world :  and  where  nature  is  allowed  free  fcope,  it 
continues  a£tive  and   vigorous  through  life.      It  was 
plainly  the  intention  of   nature,  that  in  infancy  and 
youth  it  fhould  occupy  the  mind  almofl  exclufively, 
and  that  we  fhould  acquire  all  our  neceifary  informa- 
tion before  engaging  in  fpeculations  which   are   lefs 
eifendal :  and  accordingly   this  is  the  hiftory  of  the 
intelleftual  progrefs,  in  by   far  the  greater  number  of 
individuals.     In  confequence  of  this,  the  difficulty  of 
metaphyfical  refearches  is  undoubtedly  much  increaf- 
ed  ;  for  the  mind  being   conftantly   occupied  in  the 
earlier  part  of  life  about  the  properties  and  laws  of 
matter,  acquires  habits  of  inattention  to  the  fubjefts 
of  confcioufnefs,  which  are    not    to  be   furmounted, 
without  a    degree   of   patience    and  perfeverance    of 
which  few  men  are  capable  :  but  the  inconvenience 
would   evidently  have   been  greatly  increafed,  if  the 
order  of  nature  had,  in  this  refpetl,  been   reverfed, 
and  if  the  curiofity    had  been  excited  at  as  early   a 
period,  by  the  phenomena  of  the  intellectual  world, 
as  by  thofe  of  the  material.     Of   what  Vv^ould  have 
happened  on  this   fuppofition,  we  may  form  a  judg- 
ment from  thofe  men  who,  in  confequence  of  an  ex- 
ceffive  indulgence  in  metaphyfical  purfuits,  have  weak- 
ened, to  an  unnatural  degree,    their  capacity  of   at- 
tending   to    external    objects  and  occurrences.     Few  ] 
metaphyficians,    perhaps,  are  to   be  found,    who  are  I 
not    deficient   in  the  power  of  obfervation ;  for,   al- 1 
though    a  talte  for  fuch    abftraft  fpeculations  is  far 
from  being  common,   it  is  more  apt,  perhaps,  than 
any  other,  when  it  has  once  been  formed,   to  take  an 
exclufive  hold  of  the  mhid,  and   to  fliut  up  the  other 
H  h  2  fources 


468  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Cl.ap.Vl. 

fources  of  intellectual  improvement.  As  the  meta- 
phyfician  carries  within  himfelf  the  materials  of  his 
reafoning,  he  is  not  under  a  neceflity  of  looking 
abroad  for  fubjefts  of  fpeculation  or  amufement ;  and 
unlcfs  he  be  very  careful  to  guard  againfl  the  effeds 
of  his  favourite  purfuits,  he  is  in  more  danger  than 
literary  men  of  any  other  denomination,  to  lofe  all 
intereft  about  the  common  and  proper  objetts  of  hu- 
man curiofity. 

To  prevent  any  danger  from  this  quarter,  I  appre- 
hend that  the  fludy  of  the  mind  fhould  form  the  laft 
branch  of  the  education  of  youth  ;  an  order  which 
nature  herfelf  feems  to  point  out,  by  what  I  have  al- 
ready remarked,  with  refpect  to  the  developement  of 
our  faculties.  After  the  underftanding  is  well  flored 
with  particular  facls,  and  has  been  converfant  with 
particular  fcientific  purfuits,  it  will  be  enabled  to  fpe- 
culate  concerning  its  own  powers  wdth  additional  ad- 
vantage, and  will  run  no  hazard  of  indulging  too  far 
in  fuch  inquiries.  Nothing  can  be  more  abfurd,  on 
this  as  well  as  on  many  other  accounts,  than  the  com- 
mon practice  which  is  followed  in  our  univcrfities,  of 
beginning  a  courfe  of  philofophical  education  with 
the  ftudy  of  logic.  If  this  order  were  completely 
reverfed  ;  and  if  the  fludy  of  logic  were  delayed  till 
after  the  mind  of  the  fludent  was  well  flored  with 
particular  fa6ls  in  phyfics,  in  chemiflry,  in  natural  and 
civil  hiftory  ;  his  attention  might  be  led  with  the  mofl 
important  advantage,  and  without  any  danger  to  his 
power  of  obfervation,  to  an  examination  of  his  own 
faculties  ;  which,  befides  opening  to  him  a  new  and 
pleafmg  field  of  fpeculation,  would  enable  him  to  form 

an 


Sea.  7.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  469 

an  ellimate  of  his  own  powers,  of  the  acqulfitions  he 
has  made,  of  the  habits  he  has  formed,  and  of  the  far- 
ther improvements  of  which  his  mind  is  fufceptible.     ^ 

In  general,  wherever  habits  of  inattention,  and  an 
incapacity  of  obfervation,  are  very  remarkable,  they 
will  be  fomid  to  have  arifen  from  fome  defeft  in  early 
education.  I  already  remarked,  that,  when  nature  is 
allowed  free  fcope,  the  curiofity,  during  early  youth, 
is  alive  to  every  external  objeft,  and  to  every  external 
occurrence,  while  the  powers  of  imagination  and  re- 
flexion do  not  difplay  themfelves  till  a  much  later 
period  ;  the  former  till  about  the  age  of  puberty,  and 
the  latter  till  we  approach  to  manhood.  It  fome- 
times,  however,  happens  that,  in  confequence  of  a  \ 
peculiar  difpofition  of  mind,  or  of  an  infirm  bodily 
conftitution,  a  child  is  led  to  feek  amufement  from 
books,  and  to  lofe  a  reliih  for  thofe  recreations  which 
are  fuited  to  his  age.  In  fuch  inflances,  the  ordi- 
nary progrefs  of  the  intelleftual  powers  is  prematurely 
quickened  ;  but  that  beft  of  all  educations  is  loft, 
which  nature  has  prepared  both  for  the  philofopher 
and  the  man  of  the  world,  amidft  the  adive  fports  ; 
and  the  hazardous  adventures  of  childhood.  It  is  - 
from  thefe  alone,  that  we  can  acquire,  not  only  that 
force  of  charafter  which  is  fuited  to  the  more  ardu? 
ous  fituations  of  life,  but  that  complete  and  prompt 
command  of  attention  to  things  external,  without 
which  the  higheft  endowments  of  the  underflanding, 
however  they  may  fit  a  man  for  the  folitary  fpecula- 
tions  of  the  clofet,  are  but  of  little  ufe  in  the  practice 
of  affairs,  or  for  enabling  him  to  profit  by  his  perfonal 
experience. 

H  h  3  Where, 


470  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

Where,  however,  fuch  habits  of  inattention  have 
unfortunately  been  contracted,  we  ought  not  to  de- 
fpair  of  them  as  perfectly  incurable.  The  attention, 
indeed,  as  I  formerly  remarked,  can  feldom  be  forced 
in  particular  inftances  ;  but  we  may  gradually  learn  to 
place  the  objeds  we  wifh  to  attend  to,  in  lights  more 
interefling  than  thofe  in  which  we  have  been  accuf- 
tomed  to  view  them.  Much  may  be  expected  from  a 
change  of  fcene,  and  a  change  of  purfuits  ;  but  above 
all,  much  may  be  expected  from  foreign  travel. 
The  objeds  which  we  meet  with  excite  our  furprife 
by  their  novelty  ;  and  in  this  manner  we  not  only 
gradually  acquire  the  power  of  obferving  and  examin- 
ing them  with  attention,  but,  from  the  effects  of  con- 
trail, the  curiofity  comes  to  be  roufed  with  refpe£t  to 
the  correfponding  objects  in  our  own  country,  which, 
from  our  early  familiarity  with  them,  we  had  formerly 
been  accuflomed  to  overlook.  In  this  refped:  the  ef- 
fects of  foreign  travel,  in  directing  the  attention  to 
familiar  objeds  and  occurrences,  is  fomewhat  analogous 
to  that  which  the  ftudy  of  a  dead  or  of  a  foreign  lan- 
guage produces,  in  leading  the  curiofity  to  examine 
the  8:rammatical  ftrudture  of  our  own. 

Confiderable  advantage  may  alfo  be  derived,  in 
overcoming  the  habits  of  inattention,  which  we  may 
have  contracted  to  particular  fubjeds,  from  ftudying 
the  fyftems,  true  or  falfe,  which  philofophers  have  pro- 
pofed  for  explaining  or  for  arranging  the  fads  conned- 
ed  with  them.  By  means  of  thefe  fyftems,  not  only 
is  the  curiofity  circumfcribed  and  direded,  inftead  of 
being  allowed  to  wander  at  random,  but,  in  confequence 
of  our  being  enabled  to  conned  fads  with  general 

principles. 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  471 

principles,  it  becomes  interefted  in  the  examination  of 
thofe  particulars  which  would  otherwife  have  efcaped 
our  notice. 


SECTION    VIII. 

Of  the  Connexion  het'ween  Memory  and  ph'ilofoph'tcal  Genius. 

IT  is  commonly  fuppofed,  that  genius  is  feJdom 
united  with  a  very  tenacious  memory.  So  far, 
however,  as  my  own  obfervation  has  reached,  I  can 
fcarcely  recollect  one  perfon  who  poflefles  the  former 
of  thefe  qualities,  without  a  more  than  ordinary  fhare 
of  the  latter. 

On  a  fuperficial  view  of  the  fubjeft,  Indeed,  the 
common  opinion  has  fome  appearance  of  truth ;  for, 
we  are  naturally  led,  in  confequence  of  the  topics  about 
which  converfation  is  ufually  employed,  to  eflimate  the 
extent  of  memory,  by  the  impreffion  which  trivial  oc- 
currences make  upon  it :  and  thefe  in  general  efcape 
the  recolleftion  of  a  man  of  ability,  not  becaufe  he  is 
unable  to  retain  them,  but  becaufe  he  does  not  attend 
to  them.  It  is  probable,  likewife,  that  accidental  aflb- 
ciations,  founded  on  contiguity  in  time  and  place,  may 
make  but  a  flight  impreffion  on  his  mind.  But  it  does 
not  therefore  follow,  that  his  flock  of  fads  is  fmall. 
They  are  connefted  together  in  his  memory  by  prin- 
ciples of  affociation,  different  from  thofe  which  prevail 
in  ordinary  minds ;  and  they  are  on  that  very  account 
the  more  ufeful :  for  as  the  affociadons  are  founded 
upon  real  connexions  among  the  ideas,  (although  they 

H  h  4  may 


472  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI. 

may  be  lefs  conducive  to  the  fluency,  and  perhaps  to  the 
wit  of  converfation,)  they  are  of  incomparably  greater 
ufe  in  fuggefling  fads  which  are  to  ferve  as  a  founda- 
tion for  reafoning  or  for  invention. 

It  frequently  happens  too,  that  a  man  of  genius,  in 
confequence  of  a  peculiarly  ftrong  attachment  to  a  par- 
ticular fubjedt,  may  firft  feel  a  want  of  inclination,  and 
may  afterwards  acquire  a  want  of  capacity  of  attending 
to  common  occurrences.  But  it  is  probable  that  the 
whole  ftock  of  ideas  in  his  mind,  is  not  inferior  to 
that  of  other  men ;  and  that  however  unprofitably  he 
may  have  directed  his  curiofity,  the  ignorance  which  he 
difcovers  on  ordinary  fubjedts  does  not  arife  from  a  want 
of  memory,  but  from  a  peculiarity  in  the  feleftion 
which  he  has  made  of  the  objeds  of  his  ftudy. 

Montaigne  *  frequently  complains  in  his  writings,  of 
his  want  of  memory  ;  and  he  indeed  gives  many  very 
extraordinary  inftances  of  his  ignorance  on  fome  of  the 
mod  ordinary  topics  of  information.  But  it  is  obvious 
to  any  perfon  who  reads  his  works  with  attention,  that 
this  ignorance  did  not  proceed  from  an  original  defeat 
of  memory,  but  from  the  fmgular  and  whimfical 
direction  which  his  curiofity  had  taken  at  an  early 
period  of  life.  "  I  can  do  nothing,"  fays  he,  "  with- 
*'  out  my  memorandum  book  ;  and  fo  great  is  my  dif- 
"  ficulty  in  remembering  proper  names,  that  I  am 
"  forced  to  call  my  domeftic  fervants  by  their  offices. 
"  I  am  ignorant  of  the  greater  part  of  our  coins  in 
"  ufe ;  of  the  difference  of  one  grain  from  another, 

*  II  n'efl  homme  k  qui  il  fiefe  fi  mal  de  fe  mefler  de  parler  de 
memoire.  Car  je  n'en  recognoy  quafi  trace  en  moy  ;  et  ne  penfe 
qu'il  y  en  ait  au  monde  une  autre  ft  marveilleufe  en  defaillance. 

£Jais  de  Montaigne,  liv.  i.  ch.  9. 

**  both 


Sea.  8.  O^   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  473 

'*  both  Jn  the  earth  and  in  the  granary ;  what  ufe  leaven 
"  is  of  in  making  bread,  and  why  wine  muft  (land 
"  fome  time  in  the  vat  before  it  ferments/*  Yet  the 
fame  author  appears  evidently,  from  his  writings,  to 
have  had  his  memory  ftored  with  an  infinite  variety 
of  apophthegms,  and  of  hiftorical  paflages,  which  had 
ftruck  his  imagination ;  and  to  have  been  familiarly 
acquainted,  not  only  with  the  names,  but  with  the  ab- 
furd  and  exploded  opinions  of  the  antient  philofophers ; 
with  the  ideas  of  Plato,  the  atoms  of  Epicurus,  the 
plenum  and  vacuum  of  Leucippus  and  Democritus, 
the  water  of  Thales,  the  numbers  of  Pythagoras,  the 
infinite  of  Parmenides,  and  the  unity  of  Mufasus.  In 
complaining  too  of  his  want  of  prefence  of  mind,  he 
indirectly  acknowledges  a  degree  of  memory,  which,  if 
it  had  been  judicioufly  employed,  would  have  been 
more  than  fufficient  for  the  acquifition  of  all  thofe 
common  branches  of  knowledge  in  which  he  appears 
to  have  been  deficient.  "  When  I  have  an  oration  to 
*'  fpeak,"  fays  he,  "  of  any  confiderable  length,  I  am 
"  reduced  to  the  miferable  neceffity  of  getting  it,  word 
"  for  word,  by  heart." 

The  ftrange  and  apparently  inconfiftent  combina- 
tion of  knowledge  and  ignorance  which  the  writings 
of  Montaigne  exhibit,  led  Malebranche  (who  feems  to 
have  formed  too  low  an  opinion  both  of  his  genius  and 
charafter)  to  tax  him  with  affedation ;  and  even  to 
call  in  queftion  the  credibility  of  fome  of  his  alfer- 
tions.  But  no  one  who  is  well  acquainted  with  this 
mod  amufing  author,  can  reafonably  fufpeft  his  vera- 
city ;  and,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  I  can  give  him  com- 
plete credit,  not  only  from  my  general  opinion  of  his 
10*  fincerity, 


474  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY     Chap.  VI. 

fiiicerity,  but  from  having  obferved,  in  the  courfe  of 
my  own  experience,  more  than  one  example  of  the 
fame  fort  of  combination  ;  not  indeed  carried  to  fuch  a 
length  as  Montaigne  defcribes,  but  bearing  a  ftriking 
refemblance  to  it. 

The  obfervations  which  have  ah-eady  been  made, 
account,  in  part,  for  the  origin  of  the  common  opi- 
nion, that  genius  and  memory  are  feldom  united  in 
great  degrees  in  the  fame  perfon ;  and  at  the  fame  time 
fhew,  that  fome  of  the  fads  on  which  that  opinion  is 
founded,  do  not  juftify  fuch  a  conclufion.  Befides 
thefe,  however,  there  are  other  circumftances,  which 
at  firfl  view,  feem  rather  to  indicate  an  inconfiftency 
between  extenfive  memory  and  original  genius. 

The  fpecies  of  memory  which  excites  the  greateft 
degree  of  admiration  in  the  ordinary  intercourfe  of  fo- 
ciety,  is  a  memory  for  detached  and  infulated  facts  ; 
and  it  is  certain  that  thofe  men  who  are  poffeffed  of  it, 
are  very  feldom  diftinguifhed  by  the  higher  gifts  of  the 
mind.  Such  a  fpecies  of  memory  is  unfavourable  to 
philofophical  arrangement ;  becaufe  it  in  part  fupplies 
the  place  of  arrangement.  One  great  ufe  of  philofo- 
phy,  as  I  already  fhewed,  is  to  give  us  an  extenfive 
command  of  particular  truths,  by  furnifliing  us  with 
general  principles,  under  which  a  number  of  fuch  truths 
is  comprehended.  A  perfon  in  whofe  mind  cafual  aflb- 
ciations  of  time  and  place  make  a  lafling  impreflion,  has 
not  the  fame  inducements  to  philofophize,  with  others 
wlio  conned  facts  together,  chiefly  by  the  relations  of 
caufe  and  effect,  or  of  prcmifes  and  conclufion.  I  have 
heard  it  obferved,  that  thofe  men  who  have  rifcn  to  the 
greatefl  eminence  in  the  profelTion  of  law,  have  been 

in 


Sea.  8.  OF   THE   HUMAN    MIND.  475 

in  general  fuch  as  had  at  firft,  an  averfion  to  the  ftudy. 
The  reafon  probably  is,  that  to  a  mind  fond  of  general 
principles,  every  ftudy  muft  be  at  firft  difgufting,  which 
prefents  to  it  a  chaos  of  facts  apparently  unconnected 
with  each  other.  But  this  love  of  arrangement,  if 
united  with  perfevering  induftry,  will  at  laft  conquer 
every  difficulty  ;  will  introduce  order  into  what  feemed 
on  a  fuperficial  view  a  mafs  of  confufion,  and  reduce 
the  dry  and  uninterefting  detail  of  pofitive  ftatutes  into 
a  fyftem  comparatively  luminous  and  beautiful. 

The  obfervation,  I  believe,  may  be  made  more  gene- 
ral, and  may  be  applied  to  every  fcience  in  which  there 
is  a  great  multiplicity  of  fads  to  be  remembered.  A 
man  deftitute  of  genius  may,  with  little  effort,  treafure 
up  in  his  memory  a  number  of  particulars  in  chemiftry 
or  natural  hiftory,  which  he  refers  to  no  principle,  and 
from  which  he  deduces  no  conclufion ;  and  from  his 
facility  in  acquiring  this  ftock  of  information,  may 
flatter  himfelf  with  the  belief  that  he  pofleffes  a  natural 
tafte  for  thefe  branches  of  knowledge.  But  they  who 
are  really  deftined  to  extend  the  boundaries  of  fcience, 
when  they  firft  enter  on  new  purfuits,  feel  their  atten- 
tion diftracled,  and  their  memory  overloaded  with  fads 
among  which  they  can  trace  no  relation,  and  are  fome- 
times  apt  to  defpair  entirely  of  their  future  progrefs. 
In  due  time,  however,  their  fuperiority  appears,  and 
arifes  in  part  from  that  very  diffatisfadion  which  they 
at  firft  experienced,  and  which  does  not  ceafe  to  ftimu- 
late  their  inquiries,  till  they  are  enabled-  to  trace, 
amidft  a  chaos  of  apparently  unconnected  materials, 
that  fimplicity  and  beauty  which  always  charaderife 
the  operations  of  nature. 

There 


4.76  ELEME5^TS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VL 

There  are,  befides,  other  circumilances  which  retard 
the  progrefs  of  a  man  of  genius,  when  he  enters  on  a 
new  purfuit,  and  which  fometimes  render  him  appa- 
rently inferior  to  thofe  who  are  poiTeffed  of  ordinary 
capacity.  A  want  of  curiofity  *,  and  of  invention,  faci- 
litates greatly  the  acquifition  of  knowledge.  It  renders 
the  mind  paffive,  in  receiving  the  ideas  of  others,  and 
faves  all  the  time  which  might  be  employed  in  examin- 
ing their  foundation,  or  in  tracing  their  confequences. 
.  They  who  are  poiTeiTed  of  much  acutenefs  and  origi- 
nality, enter  with  difficulty  into  the  views  of  others ; 
not  from  any  defed  in  their  power  of  apprehenfion,  but 
becaufe  they  cannot  adopt  opinions  which  they  have 
not  examined  ;  and  becaufe  their  attention  is  often 
feduced  by  their  own  fpeculations. 

It  is  not  merely  in  the  acquifition  of  knowledge  that 
a  man  of  genius  is  likely  to  find  himfelf  furpaifed  by 
others  :  he  has  commonly  his  information  much  lefs 
at  command,  than  thofe  who  are  poffeiTed  of  an  inferior 
degree  of  originality  ;  and,  what  is  fomewhat  remark- 
able, he  has  it  leaft  of  all  at  command  on  thofe  fubjeds 
on  which  he  has  found  his  invention  mod  fertile. 
Sir  Ifaac  Newton,  as  we  are  told  by  Dr.  Pemberton, 
was  often  at  a  lofs,  when  the  converfation  turned  on 
his  own  difcoveriest.  It  is  probable  that  they  made 
but  a  flight  impreffion  on  his  mind,  and  that  a  con- 
fcioufnefs  of  his  inventive  powers  prevented  him  from 

*  I  mean  a  want  of  curiofity  about  truth.  "  There  are  many 
*'  men,"  fays  Dr.  Butler,  "  who  have  a  ftrong  curiofity  to  know 
♦'  what  is  faid,  who  have  little  or  no  curiofity  to  kr.ow  what  is 
*«  true." 

t  See  Note  [T]. 

taking 


Se£l.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  477 

taking  much  pains  to  treafure  them  up  in  his  memory. 
Men  of  little  ingenuity  feldom  forget  the  ideas  they 
acquire  ;  becaufe  they  know  that  when  an  occafion 
occurs  for  applying  their  knowledge  to  ufe,  they  mud 
trufl  to  memory  and  not  to  invention.  Explain  an 
arithmetical  rule  to  a  perfon  of  common  underftanding, 
who  is  unacquainted  with  the  principles  of  the  fcience  ; 
he  will  foon  get  the  rule  by  heart,  and  become  dexte- 
rous in  the  application  of  it.  Another  of  more  inge- 
nuity, will  examine  the  principle  of  the  rule  before  he 
applies  it  to  ufe,  and  will  fcarcely  take  the  trouble  to 
commit  to  memory  a  procefs  which  he  knows  he  can, 
at  any  time,  with  a  little  refledion,  recover.  The 
confequence  will  be,  that,  in  the  pradice  of  calculation, 
he  will  appear  more  flow  and  hefitating,  than  if  he  fol- 
lowed the  received  rules  of  arithmetic  without  refledion 
or  reafoning. 

Something  of  the  fame  kind  happens  every  day  in 
converfation.  By  far  the  greater  part  of  the  opinions 
we  announce  in  it,  are  not  the  immediate  refult  of  rea- 
foning on  the  fpot,  but  have  been  previoufly  formed 
in  the  clofet,  or  perhaps  have  been  adopted  implicitly 
on  the  authority  of  others.  The  promptitude,  therefore, 
with  which  a  man  decides  in  ordinary  difcourfe,  is  not 
a  certain  teft  of  the  quicknefs  of  his  apprehenfion  *  ; 
as  it  may  perhaps  arife  from  thofe  uncommon  efforts 
to  furnifh  the  memory  with  acquired  knowledge,  by 
which  men  of  flow  parts  endeavour  to  compenfate  for 

*  Memoria  facit  prompti  ingenii  famam,  ut  ilia  quae  dicimus, 
non  domo  attulifle,  fed  ibi  protinus  fumpfifTe  videamur. 

QuiNCTIL.  Injl,  Orat.  lib.  xi.  cap.  2. 

their 


475  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VI- 

their  want  of  invention  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
is  pofTible  that  a  confcioufnefs  of  originality  may  give 
rife  to  a  manner  apparently  embarraifed,  by  leading 
the  perfon  who  feels  it,  to  trull  too  much  to  extempore 
exertions  *. 

In  general,  I  believe,  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  rule, 
that  thofe  who  carry  about  with  them  a  great  degree 
of  acquired  information,  which  they  have  always  at 
command,  or  who  have  rendered  their  own  difcoveries 
fo  familiar  to  them,  as  always  to  be  in  a  condition  to  ex- 
plain them,  without  recolleftion,  are  very  feldom  pof- 
felfed  of  much  invention,  or  even  of  much  quicknefs  of 
apprehenfion.  A  man  of  original  genius,  who  is  fond 
of  exercifmg  his  reafoning  powers  anew  on  every  point 
as  it  occurs  to  him,  and  who  cannot  fubmit  to  rehearfe 
the  ideas  of  others,  or  to  repeat  by  rote  the  conclufions 
which  he  has  deduced  from  previous  reflexion,  often 
appears,  to  fuperficial  obfervers,  to  fall  below  the  level 
of  ordinary  underflandings ;  while  another,  deftitute 
both  of  quicknefs  and  invention,  is   admired  for  that 

*  In  the  foregoing  obfervations  it  is  not  meant  to  be  implied, 
that  originality  of  genius  is  incompatible  with  a  ready  recollec- 
tion of  acquired  knowledge  ;  but  only  that  it  has  a  tendency  un- 
favourable to  itj  and  that  more  time  and  practice  will  commonly  be 
neceffary  to  familiarize  the  mind  of  a  man  of  invention  to  the  ideas 
of  others,  or  even  to  the  conclufions  of  his  own  underftanding,  than 
are  requifite  in  ordinary  cafes.  Habits  of  literary  converfation,  and 
ftill  more,  habits  of  extempore  difcufiion,  in  a  popular  afiembly, 
are  peculiarly  ufeful  in  giving  us  a  ready  and  praftical  command  of 
our  knowledge.  There  is  much  good  fenfe  in  the  following  apho- 
rifm  of  Eacdn  :  "^  Reading  makes  a  full  man,  writing  a  correal 
"  man,  and  fpeaking  a  ready  man."  See  a  commentary  on  this 
aphorifm  in  one  of  the  Numbers  of  the  Adventurer. 

prompti- 


Sea.  8.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  479 

promptitude  in  his  decifions,  which  arifes  from  the  in- 
feriority of  his  intelledual  abilities. 

It  muft  indeed  be  acknowledged  in  favour  of  the  lafl 
defcription  of  men,  that  in  ordinary  converfation  they 
form  the  mofh  agreeable,  and  perhaps  thejmoft  inftruc- 
tive  companions.  How  inexhauftible  foever  the  in- 
vention of  an  individual  may  be,  the  variety  of  his  own 
peculiar  ideas  can  bear  no  proportion  to  the  whole  mafs 
of  ufeful  and  curious  information  of  which  the  world 
is  already  polTefled.  The  converfation,  accordingly,  of 
men  of  genius,  is  fometimes  extremely  limited ;  and 
is  interefling  to  the  few  alone,  who  know  the  value, 
and  who  can  diftinguifh  the  marks  of  originality.  In 
confequence  too  of  that  partiality  which  every  man 
feels  for  his  own  fpeculations,  they  are  more  in  danger 
of  being  dogmatical  and  difputatious,  than  thofe  who 
have  no  fyftem  which  they  are  interefted  to  defend. 

"The  fame  obfervations  may  be  applied  to  authors. 
A  book  which  contains  the  difcoveries  of  one  indivi- 
dual only,  may  be  admired  by  a  few,  who  are  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  the  hiftory  of  the  fcience  to 
which  it  relates,  but  it  has  little  chance  for  popularity 
with  the  multitude.  An  author  who  poflefies  induf- 
try  fufficient  to  coiled  the  ideas  of  others,  and  judg- 
ment fufficient  to  arrange  them  ikilfully,  is  the  mod 
likely  perfon  to  acquire  a  high  degree  of  literary 
fame :  and  although,  in  the  opinion  of  enlightened 
judges,  invention  forms  the  chief  characteriflic  of 
genius,  yet  it  commonly  happens  that  the  objects  of 
public  admiration  are  men  who  are  much  lefs  diftin- 
guiflied  by  this  quality,  than  by  extenfive  learning 
and  cultivated  talte.  Perhaps  too,  for  the  multi- 
tude. 


480  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VI. 

tude,  the  latter  clafs  of  authors  is  the  moft  ufeful ; 
as  their  writings  contain  the  more  folid  difcoveries 
which  others  have  brought  to  hght,  feparated  from 
thofe  errors  with'  which  truth  is  often  blended  in  the 
firfl  formation  of  a  fvflem. 


Sea.  I.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  481 

CHAPTER  SEVENTH. 
Of  Imagination. 

SECTION  I. 

Analyfis    of  Imagination. 

r\  attempting  to  draw  the  line  between  Conception 
and  Imagination,  I  have  already  obferved,  that  the 
province  of  the  former  is  to  prefent  us  with  an  exa£l 
tranfcript  of  what  we  have  formerly  felt  and  perceived  ; 
that  of  the  latter,  to  make  a  feledion  of  qualities  and 
of  circumflances  from  a  variety  of  different  objeds, 
and  by  combining  and  difpofmg  thefe,  to  form  a  new 
creation  of  its  own. 

According  to  the  definitions  adopted,  in  general,  by 
modern  philofophers,  the  province  of  Imagination 
would  appear  to  be  limited  to  obje6i:s  of  fight.  "  It 
"  is  the  fenfe  of  fight,"  (fays  Mr.  Addifon,)  "  which 
*'  furnifhes  the  Imagination  with  its  ideas  j  fo  that  by 
"  the  pleafures  of  Imagination,  I  here  mean  fuch  as 
"  arife  from  vifible  objeds,  either  when  we  have  them 
*'  actually  in  view,  or  when  we  call  up  their  ideas 
"  into  our  minds,  by  paintings,  flatues,  defcriptions, 
*'  or  any  the  like  occafions.  We  cannot,  indeed, 
"  have  a  fingle  image  in  the  fancy,  that  did  not 
**  make  its  firfl  entrance  through  the  fight."  Agree- 
ably to  the  fame  view  of  the  fubje(5l,  Dr.  Reid  ob- 
ferves,  that  "  Imagination  properly  fignifies  a  lively 

I  i  "  concep- 


4^2        ELE:\n:NTS  of  thi:  philosophy     cLip.  viu 

"  conception  of  objects  of  fight ;  the  former  power 
*'  being  diftinguifhed  from  the  latter,  as  a  part  from 
«  the  whole." 

That  this  limitation  of  the  province  of  Imagina- 
tion to  one  particular  clafs  of  our  perceptions  is  alto- 
gether arbitrary,  feems  to  me  to  be  evident ;  for, 
although  the  greater  part  of  the  materials  which  Ima- 
gination combines  be  fupplied  by  this  fenfe,  it  is  ne- 
verthelefs  indifputable,  that  our  other  perceptive  fa- 
culties alfo  contribute  occafionally  their  fhare.  How 
many  pleafmg  images  have  been  borrowed  from  the 
fragrance  of  the  fields  and  the  melody  of  the  groves  ; 
not  to  mention  that  fifler  art,  whofe  magical  influence 
over  the  human  frame,  it  has  been,  in  all  ages,  the 
highest  boafl  of  poetry  to  celebrate  1  In  the  following 
paffage,  even  the  more  grofs  fenfations  of  Tafte  form 
the  fubjeci  of  an  ideal  repaft,  on  which  it  is  impof- 
fibie  not  to  dwell  with  fome  complacency  ;  particu- 
larly after  a  perufal  of  the  preceding  lines,  in  which 
the  Poet  defcribes  "  the  Wonders  of  the  Torrid 
Zone." 


Bear  me,  Fomona  f  to  thy  citron  groves  ;. 
To  where  the  lemon  and  the  piercing  lime. 
With  the  deep  orange,  glowing  thro'  the  green, 
Their  lighter  glories  blend.     Lay  mercclin'd 
Beneath  the  fpreading  tamarind  that  (hakes, 
Fann'dby  the  breeze,  its  fever-cooling  fruit: 
Or,  llretch'd  amid  thefe  orchards  of  the  fun, 
O  let  me  drain  the  cocoa's  milky  bowl, 
More  bounteous  far  than  all  the  frantic  juice 
Which  Bacchus  pours  !   Nor,  on  its  flendcr  twigs 
Low  bending,  be  the  full  pomegranate  fcorn'd  ; 
Nor,  creeping  thro'  the  woods,,  the  gelid  raca 

Of 


Seft.  I.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  483 

Of  berries.     Oft  in  humble  ftation  dwells 

Unboaftful  worth,  above  faftidious  pomp. 

Witnels,  thou  bcft  Anana,  thou  the  pride 

Of  vegetable  life,  beyond  whatc'er 

The  Poets  imag'd  in  the  golden  age  : 

Quick  let  me  ftrip  thee  of  thy  fpiny  coat, 

Spread  thy  ambrolial  flores,  and  feail  with  Jove  * ! 

What  an  aflemblage  of  other  conceptions  different 
from  all  thofe  hitherto  mentioned,  has  the  genius  of 
Virgil  combined  in  one  diftich  ! 

Hie  gelidi  fontes,  hie  mollia  prata,  Lycori, 
Hie  nemus  :  hie  ipfo  tecum  confumerer  aevo. 

Thefe  obfervations  are  fufEcient  to  fhew,  how  inade- 
quate a  notion  of  the  province  of  Imagination  (con- 
fidered  even  in  its  reference  to  the  fenfible  world)  is 
conveyed  by  the  definitions  of  Mr.  Addifon  and  of 
Dr.  Reid.  —  But  the  fenfible  world,  it  muff  be  remem- 
bered, is  not  the  only  field  where  Imagination  exerts 
her  powers.  All  the  objects  of  human  knowledge 
fupply  materials  to  her  forming  hand  j  diverfifying 
infinitely  the  works  Ihe  produces,  while  the  mode  of 
her  operation  remains  eflentially  uniform.  As  it  is 
the  fame  power  of  Reafoning  which  enables  us  to  carry 
on  our  invefligations  with  refped:  to  individual  ob- 
je£ls,  and  with  refped  to  clafles  or  genera ;  fo  it  was 
by  the  fame  proceffes  of  Analyfis  and  Combination, 
that  the  genius  of  Milton  produced  the  Garden  of 
Eden  ;  that  of  Harrington,  the  Commonwealth  of 
Oceana ;  and  that  of  Shakefpeare,  the  chara6ters  of 

*  Thomfon's  Summer. 

I  i  2  Hamlet 


484  ELEMENTS    OF  THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VIL 

Hamlet  and  FalftafF.  The  difference  between  thefe 
feveral  efforts  of  invention,  confifts  only  in  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  original  materials  were  acquired  ;  as 
far  as  the  power  of  Imagination  is  concerned,  the  pro- 
celfes  are  perfeftly  analogous. 

The  attempts  of  Mr.  Addifon  and  of  Dr.  Reid  to 
limit   the  province  of  Imagination  to  objects  of  fight, 
have  plainly  proceeded  from  a  very  important  fa£l, 
which  it  may  be  worth  while  to  illuflrate    more  parti- 
cularly ;  —  That  the  mind  has  a  greater  facility,  and, 
of  confequence,  a  greater  delight  in  recalling  the  per- 
ceptions of  this  fenfe  than  thofe  of  any  of  the  others ; 
while,  at  the  fame  time,  the  variety  of  qualities  per- 
ceived by  it  is  incomparably  greater.     It  is  this  fenfe, 
accordingly,  which  fupplies  the  painter  and  the  ftatu- 
ary  with  all  the  fubjefts  on  which  their  genius  is  ex- 
ercifed  ;  and  which  furnifhes  to  the  defcriptive  poet 
the  largeft  and  the  mofl  valuable  portion  of  the  ma- 
terials which  he  combines.     In  that  abfurd  fpecies  of 
profe  compofition,  too,  which  borders  on  poetry,  no- 
thing is  more  remarkable  than  the  predominance  of 
phrafes  that  recal  to  the  memory,  glaring  colours,  and 
thofe  fplendid  appearances  of  nature,  which  make  a 
ftrong  impreiTion  on  the  eye.     It  has  been  mentioned 
by  diff'erent  writers,  as  a  charafteriflical  circumftance 
in  the  Oriental  or  Afiatic  ftyle,  that  the  greater  part 
of  the  metaphors  are  taken  from  the  celeftial  lumi- 
naries.    "  The  Works  of  the  Perfians,"  (fays  M.  de 
Voltaire,)  "  are  like  the  titles  of  their  kings,  in  which 
*'  we  are  perpetually  dazzled  with    the  fun  and  the 
"  moon."    Sir  William  Jones,  in  a  fhort  Effay    on 
the  Poetry  of  Eaflern  Nations,  has  endeavoured  to 
10*  (hew» 


Sea.  I.  OF   THE    HUMAN   MIND.  48 j^ 

fhew,  that  this  is  not  owing  to  the  bad  tafle  of  the 
Afiatics,  but  to  the  old  language  and  popular  religion 
of  their  country.  But  the  truth  is,  that  the  very  fame 
criticifm  will  be  found  to  apply  to  the  juvenile  pro- 
dudions  of  every  author  pofl'effed  of  a  warm  imagi- 
nation ;  and  to  the  compofitions  of  every  people 
among  whom  a  cultivated  and  philofophical  tafte  has 
not  eflablilhed  a  fufficiently  marked  diftinclion  be- 
tween the  appropriate  ftyles  of  poetry  and  of  profe. 
The  account  given  by  the  Abbe  Girard  of  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  Phcbus^  as  employed  by  the  French 
critics,  confirms  llrongly  this  obfervation.  *'  Le 
"  Phebus  a  un  brillant  qui  fignifie,  ou  femble  figni- 
"  fier  quelque  chofe  :  le  foleil  y  entre  d'ordinaire  ;  & 
"  c*efl:  peut-etre  ce  qui,  en  notre  langue,  a  donne 
"  lieu  au  nom  de  Phebus  *." 

Agreeably  to  thefe  principles,  Gray,  in  defcribing 
the  infantine  reveries  of  poetical  genius,  has  fixed, 
with  exquifite  judgment,  on  this  clafs  of  our  con- 
ceptions : 

Yet  oft  before  his  infant  eye  would  run 
Such  Forms  as  glitter  in  the  Mufe's  ray 
With  Orient  hues 

From  thefe  remarks  it  may  be  eafily  underftood, 
why  the  word  Imagination,  in  its  moft  ordinary  ac- 
ceptation, fhould  be  applied  to  cafes  where  our  con- 
ceptions are  derived  from  the  fenfe  of  fight ;  although 
the  province  of  this  power  be,  in  fad,  as  unlimited 
as  the  fphere  of  human  enjoyment  and  of  human 
thought.  Hence,  the  origin  of  thofe  partial  defini- 
tions which  I  have  been  attempting  to  corred  ;  and 

*  Synonymes  Francois, 

I  i  3  hence 


486  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

hence  too,  the  origin  of  the  word  hnagination  ;  the 
etymology  of  which  impHes  manifeftly  a  reference 
to  vifible  objects. 

To  all  the  various  modes  in  which  Imagination 
may  difplay  itfelf,  the  greater  part  of  the  remarks 
contained  in  this  Chapter  will  be  found  to  apply, 
under  proper  limitations ;  but,  in  order  to  render 
the  fubject  more  obvious  to  the  reader's  examination, 
I  fhall,  in  the  farther  profecution  of  it,  endeavour  to 
convey  my  ideas,  rather  by  means  of  particular  ex- 
amples, than  in  the  form  of  general  principles  ;  leav- 
ing it  to  his  own  judgment  to  determine,  with  what 
modifications  the  conclufions  to  which  we  are  led, 
may  be  extended  to  other  combinations  of  circum- 
ftances. 

Among  the  Innumerable  phenomena  which  this 
part  of  our  conltitution  prefents  to  our  examination, 
the  combinations  which  the  mind  forms  out  of  mate- 
rials fupplied  by  the  power  of  Conception  recommend 
themfelves  (Irongly,  both  by  their  fimplicity,  and  by 
the  interefling  nature  of  the  difculTions  to  which  they 
lead.  I  fliall  avail  myfelf,  therefore,  as  much  as  pof- 
fiblc,  in  the  following  inquiries,  of  whatever  illultra- 
tions  I  am  able  to  borrow  from  the  arts  of  Poetry  and 
of  Painting  ;  the  operations  of  Imagination  in  thefe 
arts  furnilliing  the  moft  intelligible  and  pleafmg  exem- 
plifications of  the  intellectual  procelTes,  by  which,  in 
thofe  analogous  but  lefs  palpable  inftances  that  fall 
under  the  confideration  of  the  Moralift,  the  mind  de- 
viates from  the  models  prefented  to  it  by  experience, 
and  forms  to  itfelf,  new  and  untried  objeds  of  pur- 
fuit.     It  is  in  confequence  of  fuch  procefTes  (which, 

1 1  how 


Uea.  r.  ^T^   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  487 

how  little  foever  they  may  be  attended  to,  are  habi- 
tually paffing  in  the  thoughts  of  all  men,)  that  hu- 
man affairs  exhibit  fo  bufy  and  fo  various  a  fcene  ; 
tending,  in  one  cafe,  to  improvement,  and,  in  an- 
other, to  decline  ;  according  as  our  notions  of  excel- 
lence and  of  happinefs  are  jufl  or  erroneous. 

It  was  obferved,  in  a  former  part  of  this  work, 
that  Imagination  is  a  complex  power  *.  It  includes 
Conception  or  fimple  Apprehenfion,  which  enables 
us  to  form  a  notion  of  thofe  former  objects  of  per- 
ception, or  of  knowledge,  out  of  which  we  are  to 
make  a  feledion  ;  Abflraclion,  which  feparates  the 
feleded  materials  from  the  qualities  and  circumftances 
which  are  connecled  with  them  in  nature  ;  and  Judg- 
ment or  Tafte,  which  feleds  the  materials,  and  di- 
rects their  combmation.  To  thefe  powers,  we  may 
add,  that  particular  habit  of  aifociation  to  which  I 
formerly  gave  the  name  of  Fancy  ;  as  it  is  this  which 
prefents  to  our  choice,  all  the  different  materials  which 
are  fubfervient  to  the  efforts  of  Imagination,  and  which 
may  therefore  be  confidered  as  forming  the  ground- 
work of  poetical  genius. 

To  illuftrate  thefe  obfervations,  let  us  confider  the 
fteps  by  which  Milton  muff  have  proceeded  in  crea- 
ting his  imaginary  Garden  of  Eden.  When  he  firft 
propofed  to  himfelf  that  fubjeft  of  defcription,  it  is 
reafonable  to  fuppofe,  that  a  variety  of  the  moft  ftrilir 
ing  fcenes  which  he  had  feen,  crowded  into  his  mind. 
The  affociation  of  ideas  fuggefted  them,  and  the 
power  of  Conception  placed  each  of  them  before  him 

*  See  p.  136. 

I  i  4  with 


488  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

with  ail  its  beauties  and  imperfedions.  In  every  na- 
tural fcene,  if  we  deftine  it  for  any  particular  pur- 
pofe,  there  are  defects  and  redundancies,  which  art 
may  fometimes,  but  cannot  always,  correct.  But  the 
power  of  Imagination  is  unlimited.  She  can  create 
and  annihilate  ;  and  difpofe,  at  pleafure,  her  woods, 
her  rocks,  and  her  rivers.  Milton,  accordingly,  would 
not  copy  his  Eden  from'  any  one  fcene,  but  would 
feleft  from  each  the  features  which  were  moft  emi- 
nently beautiful.  The  power  of  Abftraction  enabled 
him  to  make  the  feparation,  and  Tafte  directed  him 
in  the  feledion.  Thus  he  was  furnifhed  with  his  ma- 
terials ;  by  a  ikiliul  combination  of  which,  he  has 
created  a  landfcape,  more  perfeft  probably  in  all  its 
parts,  than  was  ever  realifed  in  nature  ;  and  certainly 
very  different  from  any  thing  which  this  country  ex- 
hibited, at  the  period  when  he  wrote.  It  is  a  curious 
remark  of  Mr.  Walpole,  that  Milton's  Eden  is  free 
from  the  defe6ts  of  the  old  Englifh  garden,  and  is 
imagnied  on  the  fame  principles  which  it  was  referved 
for  the  prefent  age  to  carry  into  execution. 

From  what  has  been  faid,  it  is  fufficiently  evident, 
that  Imagination  is  not  a  fmiple  power  of  the  mind, 
like  Attention,  Conception,  or  Abftradion ;  but  that 
it  is  formed  by  a  combination  of  various  faculties.  It 
is  farther  evident,  that  it  mufl  appear  under  very  dif- 
ferent forms,  in  the  cafe  of  different  individuals  j  as 
feme  of  its  component  parts  are  liable  to  be  greatly 
influenced  by  habit,  and  other  accidental  circum- 
ftances.  The  variety,  for  example,  of  the  materials 
out  of  which  the  combinations  of  the  Poet  or  the 
Painter  are  formed,  will  depend  much  on  the  tend- 
ency 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MINI).  489 

ency  of  external  fituation,  to  flora  the  mind  with  a 
muhiplicity  of  Conceptions;  and  the  beauty  of  thefe 
combinations  will  depend  entirely  on  the  fuccafs  with 
which  the  power  of  Tafte  has  been  cultivated.  What 
we  call,  therefore,  the  power  of  Imagination,  is  not 
the  gift  of  nature,  but  the  refult  of  acquired  habits, 
aided  by  favourable  circumftances.  It  is  not  an  ori- 
ginal endowment  of  the  mind,  but  an  accomplilliment 
formed  by  experience  and  fituation ;  and  which,  in 
its  different  gradations,  fills  up  all  the  interval  between 
the  firft  efforts  of  untutored  genius,  and  the  fubhme 
creations  of  Raphael  or  of  Milton. 

An  uncommon  degree  of  Imagination  conflitutes 
poetical  genius ;  a  talent  which,  although  chiefly  dif- 
played  in  poetical  compofition,  is  alfo  the  foundation 
(though  not  precifely  in  the  fame  manner)  of  various 
other  Arts.  A  few  remarks  on  the  relation  which 
Imagination  bears  to  fome  of  the  mofl  interefling  of 
thefe,  will  throw  additional  light  on  its  nature  and 
office. 


SECTION    II. 

Of  Imagination  conftdered  in  its  Relation  to  fome  of  the 
Fine  Arts. 

AMONG  the  Arts  conneded  with  Imagination, 
fome  not  only  take  their  rife  from  this  power,  but 
produce  objefts  which  are  addreffed  to  it.  Others 
take  their  rife  from  Imagination,  but  produce  objeds 
which  are  addreffed  to  the  power  of  Perception. 

To 


490  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VII. 

To  the  latter  of  thefe  two  clalTes  of  Arts,  belongs 
that  of  Gardening  ;  or,  as  it  has  been  lately  called, 
the  Art  of  creating  Landfcape.     In  this  Art,  the  de- 
figner  is   limited  in  his  creation  by  nature  ;  and  his 
only  province  is  to  correal,  to  improve,  and  to  adorn. 
As  he  cannot  repeat  his  experiments,  in   order  to  ob- 
ferve  the  effeft,  he  mufl  call  up,  in  his  imagination 
the  fcene  which  he  means  to   produce  ;    and   apply  to 
this  imaginary  fcene  his  tafle  and  his  judgment ;  or, 
in  other  v/ords,  to  a  lively  conception  of  vifible  ob, 
je6ts,  he  mufl  add  a  power  (which  long  experience 
and  attentive  obfervation  alone  can  give  him)  of  judg- 
ing beforehand,  of  the  effeft  which  they  would  pro- 
duce, if  they  were  actually  exhibited    to  his  fenfes. 
This  power  forms,  what  Lord  Chatham    beautifully 
and    expreffively    called  the  prophetic  Eye    of  Tajle ; 
that  eye  which  (if  I  may  borrow  the  language  of  Mr. 
Gray)  *'  fees  all  the  beauties  that  a  place  is  fufcep- 
*'  tible  of,  long  before  they  are  born  ;  and   when  it 
"  plants  a  feedling,  already  fits  under  the  fliade  of  it, 
**  and  enjoys  the  effed:  it  will  have,   from  every  point 
*'  of  view  that  lies  in  the  profpefb*."     But  although 
the  artift  who  creates  a  landfcape,  copies  it  from  his 
imagination,  the  fcene  which  he  exhibits  is  addreffed 
to  the  fenfes,  and  may  produce  its  full  effect  on  the 
minds  of  others,  without  any  effort  on  their  part,  either 
of  imagination  or  of  conception. 

To  prevent  being  mifunderftood,  it  is  neceflfary  for 
nie  to  remark,  that,  in  the  lafl  obfervation,  I  fpeak 
merely  of  the  natural  effeds  produced  by  a  landfcape, 

*  Gray's  Works,  by  Ma-soN;,  p.  277. 

and 


Seft,2.  OF    THE    HU3IAN    MIND.  49 1 

and  abflraO:  entirely  from  the  pleafure  which  may  re- 
fult  from  an  accidental  affociation  of  ideas  with  a  par- 
ticular fcene.  The  eiYeQ.  refuhing  from  fuch  alToci- 
ations  will  depend,  in  a  great  meafure,  on  the  livelinefs 
with  which  the  affociated  objects  are  conceived,  and  on 
the  affeding  nature  of  the  pictures  which  a  creative 
imagination,  when  once  roufed,  will  prefent  to  the 
mind  ;  but  the  pleafures  thus  arifmg  from  the  acciden- 
tal exercife  that  a  landfcape  may  give  to  the  imagination, 
muft  not  be  confounded  with  thofe  which  it  is  naturally 
fitted  to  produce. 

In  Painting,  (excepting  in  thofe  inftances  in  which 
it  exhibits  a  faithful  copy  of  a  particular  object,)  the 
original  idea  muft  be  formed  in  the  imagination : 
an.d,  in  moft  cafes,  the  exercife  of  imagination  muft 
concur  with  perception,  before  the  picture  can  pro- 
duce that  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  fpe6tator  which 
the  artift  has  in  view.  Painting,  therefore,  does  not 
belong  entirely  to  either  of  the  two  clafles  of  Arts 
formerly  mentioned,  but  has  fomething  in  common, 
with  them  both. 

As  far  as  the  Painter  aims  at  copying  exa<^ly 
what  he  fees,  he  may  be  guided  mechanically  by  ge- 
neral rules ;  and  he  requires  no  aid  from  that  creative 
genius  which  is  charaderiftical  of  the  Poet.  The 
pleafure,  however,  which  refults  from  paindng,  con- 
fidered  merely  as  an  imitative  art,  is  extremely 
trifling  ;  and  is  fpecifically  different  from  that  which  it 
aims  to  produce,  by  awakening  the  imagination.  Even 
in  portrait-painting,  the  fervile  copy i ft  of  nature  is 
regarded  in  no  higher  light  than  that  of  a  tradefman. 
*'  Deception,"  (as  Reynolds  has  excellently  obferved,) 

*'  inftead 


492  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY       Cliap.VlI. 

*'  inftead  of  advancing  the  art,  is,  in  reality,  carry- 
"  ing  it  back  to  its  infant  ftate.  The  firft  effays  of 
"  painting  were  certainly  nothing  but  mere  imitations 
"  of  individual  objecls ;  and  when  this  amounted  to 
"  a  deception,  the  artift  had  accomplifhed  his  pur- 
"  pofe*." 

When  the  hiftory  or  the  landfcape  Painter  indulges 
his  genius,  in  forming  new  combinations  of  his  own, 
he  vies  with  the  Poet  in  the  nobleft  exertion  of  the 
poetical  art :  and  he  avails  himfelf  of  his  profelTional 
fkill,  as  the  Poet  avails  himfelf  of  language,  only  to 
convey  the  ideas  in  his  mind.  To  deceive  the  eye  by 
accurate  reprefentations  of  particular  forms,  is  no 
longer  his  aim ;  but,  by  the  touches  of  an  expreflive 
pencil,  to  fpeak  to  the  imaginations  of  others.  Imi- 
tation, therefore,  is  not  the  end  which  he  propofes 
to  himfelf,  but  the  means  which  he  employs  in  order 
to  accompUfh  it :  nay,  if  the  imitation  be  carried  fo 
far  as  to  preclude  all  exercife  of  the  fpeclator*s  ima- 
gination, it  will  difappoint,  in  a  great  meafure,  the 
purpofe  of  the  artift. 

In  Poetry,  and  in  every  other  fpecies  of  compoli- 
don,  in  which  one  perfon  attempts,  by  means  of  lan- 
guage, to  prefent  to  the  mind  of  another,  the  objects 
of  his  own  imagination ;  this  power  is  neceffary, 
though  not  in  the  fame  degree,  to  the  author  and  to 
the  reader.  When  we  perufe  a  defcription,  we  natu- 
rally feel  a  difpofition  to  form,  in  our  own  minds,  a 
diftind  pidure  of  what  is  defcribed  5  and  in  propor- 

*  Notes  on  Mason's  Tranflation  of  Fresnoy's  Poem  on  the 
Art  of  Painting,  p.  114. 

tioil 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  493 

tion  to  the  attention  and  intereft  which  the  fubjed 
excites,  the  pifture  becomes   fleady  and  determinate. 
It  is  fcarcely  poffible  for  us  to  hear  much  of  a  parti- 
cular town,  without  forming  fome  notion  of  its  figure 
and  fize  and  fituation  ;  and    in  reading  hiflory  and 
poetry,  I  beheve  it   feldom  happens,  that  we  do  not 
annex  imaginary  appearances  to  the  names  of  our  fa- 
vourite characters.     It  is,  at   the   fame  time,  ahnofl 
certain,  that  the  imaginations  of  no  two  men  coincide 
upon  fuch  occafions  ;   and,    therefore,    though  both 
may  be  pleafed,  the  agreeable  impreffions  which  they 
feel,  may  be  widely  different  from  each    other,  ac- 
cording as  the  pictures  by  which  they  are  produced 
are  more  or  lefs  happily  imagined.     Hence  it  is,  that 
when  a  perfon  accuftomed  to  dramatic  reading  fees, 
for  the  firfl  time,  one  of  his  favourite  characters  re- 
prefented    on    the    ftage,   he  is  generally  diifatisfied 
with  the  exhibition,   however  eminent  the  a6tor  may 
be ;  and  if  he  ihould  happen,  before  this  reprefenta- 
tion,    to  have   been  very  familiarly  acquainted  with 
the  character,  the  cafe  may  continue  to  be  the  fame 
through  life.     For  my  own  part,  1  have   never  re- 
ceived from  any  Falftaff  on  the  ftage,  half  the  plea- 
fure  which  Shakefpeare  gives  me  in  the  clofet ;  and 
I  am  perfuaded,  that   I  fhould   feel  fome  degree  of 
uneafmefs,  if  I  were  prefent  at  any  attempt  to  per- 
fonate  the  figure  or  the  voice   of  Don   Quixote  or 
Sancho  Panca.     It  is  not  always  that  the  actor,  on 
fuch  occafions,  falls  fhort    of  our  expectation.     He 
difappoints  us,  by  exhibiting  fomething  different  from 
what  our  imagination  had  anticipated,  and  which  con- 
fequently  appears  to  us,  at  the  moment,  to  be  an  un- 
faithful 


494  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Cliap.  VII. 

faithful  reprefentiition  of  the  Poet's  idea :  and  until  a 
frequent  repetition  of  the  performance  has  completely 
obliterated  our  former  impreffions,  it  is  impolfible  for 
us  to  form  an  adequate  ellimate  of  its  merit. 

Similar  obfervatrons  may  be  applied  to  other  fub- 
jedls.  The  fight  of  any  natural  fcene,  or  of  any  work 
of  art,  provided  we  have  not  previoufly  heard  of  it, 
commonly  produces  a  greater  eifect,  at  firft,  than 
ever  afterwards  :  but  if,  in  confequence  of  a  defcrip- 
tion,  we  have  been  led  to  form  a  previous  notion  of 
it,  I  apprehend,  the  effect  will  be  found  lefs  pleafmg, 
the  firft  time  it  is  feen,  than  the  fecond.  Although 
the  defcription  Ihould  fall  fhort  greatly  of  the  reality, 
yet  the  difappointment  which  we  feel,  on  meeting 
with  fomething  different  from  what  we  expeded,  di- 
miniflies  our  fatisfaction.  The  fecond  time  we  fee 
the  fcene,  the  elfeft  of  novelty  is  indeed  lefs  than  be- 
fore ;  but  it  is  flill  confiderable,  and  the  imagination 
now  anticipates  nothing  which  is  not  realifed  in  the 
perception. 

The  remarks  which  have  been  made,  afford  a  fa- 
tisfactory  reafon  why  fo  few  are  to  be  found  who 
have  a  genuine  relifh  for  the  beauties  of  poetry.  The 
defigns  of  Kent  and  of  Brown  evince  in  their  authors 
a  degree  of  imagination  entirely  analogous  to  that  of 
the  defcriptive  poet ;  but  when  they  are  once  execut- 
ed, their  beauties  (excepting  thofe  which  refult  from 
alTociation)  meet  the  eye  of  every  fpeclator.  In  po- 
etry the  effed  is  inconfiderable,  unlefs  upon  a  mind 
which  polfeffes  fome  degree  of  the  author's  genius ; 
a  mind  amply  furnifhed  by  its  previous  habits,  with 
the  means  of  interpreting  the  language  which  he  em- 
ploys ; 


Sea.  2.  OF    THE     HUMAN    MIND.  495 

ploys ;  and  able,  by  its   own  imagination,  to  co-ope- 
rate with  the  efforts  of  his  art. 

It  has  been  often  remarked,  that  the  general  words 
which  exprefs  complex  ideas,  feldom  convey  precifely 
the  fame  meaning  to  different  individuals,  and  that 
hence  arifes  much  of  the  ambiguity  of  language.  The 
fame  obfervation  holds,  in  no  inconfiderable  degree, 
with  refpeft  to  the  names  of  fenfible  obje£ls.  When 
the  words  River,  Mountain,  Grove,  occur  in  a  de- 
fcription,  a  perfon  of  lively  conceptions  naturally 
thinks  of  fome  particular  river,  mountain,  and  grove, 
that  have  made  an  impreffion  on  his  mind  ;  and  what- 
ever the  notions  are,  which  he  is  led  by  his  imagina- 
tion to  form  of  thefe  objects,  they  muff  neceffarily  ap- 
proach to  the  ftandard  of  what  he  has  feen.  Hence 
it  is  evident  that,  according  to  the  different  habits  and 
education  of  individuals ;  according  to  the  livelinefs 
of  their  conceptions,  and  according  to  the  creative 
power  of  their  imaginations,  the  fame  words  will  pro- 
duce very  different  effeds  on  different  minds.  When 
a  perfon  who  has  received  his  education  in  the  coun- 
try, reads  a  defcription  of  a  rural  retirement ;  the 
houfe,  the  river,  the  woods,  to  which  he  was  firft 
accuftomed,  prefent  themfelves  fpontaneoufly  to  his 
conception,  accompanied,  perhaps,  with  the  recol- 
lection of  his  early  friendfliips,  and  all  thofe  pleafmg 
ideas  which  are  commonly  affociated  with  the  fcenes 
of  childhood  and  of  youth.  How  different  is  the 
effeft  of  the  defcription  upon  his  mind,  from  what  it 
would  produce  on  one  who  has  paffed  his  tender 
years  at  a  diftance  from  the  beauties  of  nature, 
and  whofe  infant  fports  are  connected  in  his  me- 
mory 


496  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VII, 

mory    with    the    gloomy    alleys    of   a    commercial 
city  ! 

But  it  is  not  only  in  interpreting  the  particular 
words  of  a  defcription,  that  the  powers  of  Imagina- 
tion and  Conception  are  employed.  They  are  farther 
neceflary  for  filling  up  the  different  parts  of  that  pic- 
ture, of  which  the  moft  minute  defcriber  can  only 
trace  the  outline.  In  the  beft  defcription,  there  is 
much  left  to  the  reader  to  fupply ;  and  the  effe£t 
which  it  produces  on  his  mind  will  depend,  in  a  con- 
fiderable  degree,  on  the  invention  and  tafte  with 
which  the  picture  is  finifhed.  It  is  therefore  poflible, 
on  the  one  hand,  that  the  happieft  efforts  of  poetical 
genius  may  be  perufed  with  perfedl  indifference  by  a 
man  of  found  judgment,  and  not  defhitute  of  natural 
fenfibility  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  a  cold  and 
common-place  defcription  may  be  the  means  of  awak- 
ening, in  a  rich  and  glowing  imagination,  a  degree  of 
enthufiafm  unknown  to  the  author. 

All  the  different  arts  which  I  have  hitherto  men- 
tioned as  taking  their  rife  from  the  imagination,  have 
this  in  common,  that  their  primary  objeft  is  to  pleafe. 
This  obfervation  applies  to  the  art  of  Poetry,  no  iefs 
than  to  the  others  ;  nay,  it  is  this  circumftance  which 
charafterifes  Poetry,  and  diflinguilhes  it  from  all  the 
other  claffes  of  literary  compofition.  The  objeft  of 
the  Philofopher  is  to  inform  and  enlighten  mankind  ; 
that  of  the  Orator,  to  acquire  an  afcendant  over 
the  will  of  others,  by  bending  to  his  own  purpofes  their 
judgments,  their  imaginations,  and  their  paffions: 
but  the  primary  and  the  dillinguifhing  aim  of  the 
Poet  is,  to  pleafe ;  and  the  principal   refource  which 

he 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  497 

he  poffefles  for  this  purpofe,  is  by  addrefling  the 
imagination.  Sometimes,  indeed,  he  may  feem  to 
encroach  on  the  province  of  the  Philofopher  or  of  the 
Orator  ;  but,  in  thefe  inftances,  he  only  borrows 
from  them  the  means  by  which  he  accompHfhes  his 
end.  If  he  attempts  to  enhghten  and  to  inform,  he 
addrefles  the  imderftanding  only  as  a  vehicle  of  plea- 
fure :  if  he  makes  an  appeal  to  the  palTions,  it  is  only 
to  paffions  which  it  is  pleafmg  to  indulge.  The  Phi- 
lofopher, in  like  manner,  in  order  to  accomplifh  his 
end  of  inftruftion,  may  find  it  expedient,  occafion- 
ally,  to  amufe  the  imagination,  or  to  make  an  appeal 
to  the  paffions  :  the  Orator  may,  at  one  time,  ftate  to 
his  hearers  a  procefs  of  reafoning ;  at  another,  a  calm 
narrative  of  fa^ls ;  and,  at  a  third,  he  may  give  the 
reins  to  poetical  fancy.  But  ftill  the  ultimate  end  of 
the  Philofopher  is  to  inftruft,  and  of  the  Orator  to 
perfuade;  and  whatever  means  they  make  ufe  of 
which  are  not  fubfervient  to  this  purpofe,  are  out  of 
place,  and  obftrud:  the  effedl  of  their  labours. 

The  meafured  compofition  in  which  the  Poet  ex- 
prefles  himfelf,  is  only  one  of  the  means  which  he 
employs  to  pleafe.  As  the  delight  which  he  conveys 
to  the  imagination,  is  heightened  by  the  other  agree- 
able impreffions,  which  he  can  unite  in  the  mind  at 
the  fame  time ;  he  ftudies  to  beftow,  upon  the  me- 
dium of  communication  which  he  employs,  all  the 
various  beauties,  of  which  it  is  fufceptible.  Among 
thefe  beauties,  the  harmony  of  numbers  is  not  the 
lead  powerful ;  for  its  effect  is  conftant,  and  does  not 
interfere  with  any  of  the  other  pleafures  which  lan- 
guage produces.     A  fucceffion  of  agreeable  percep- 

K  k  tions 


49B  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY        Cliap.VII. 

tions  is  kept  up  by  the  organical  efFeft  of  words  upon 
the  ear  ;  while  they  inform  the  underftanding  by  their 
perfpicuity  and  precifion,  or  pleafe  the  imagination, 
by  the  pictures  they  fugged,  or  touch  the  heart  by 
the  aflbciations  they  awaken.  Of  all  thefe  charms  of 
language,  the  Poet  may  avail  himfelf ;  and  they  are 
all  fo  many  inflruments  of  his  art.  To  the  PhiIofo» 
pher  and  the  Orator  they  may  occafionally  be  of  ufe  ; 
and  to  both  they  mufl  be  conjiantly  fo  far  an  obje£t  of 
attention,  that  nothing  may  occur  in  their  compofitions, 
which  may  diftrad;  the  thoughts,  by  oifending  either 
the  ear  or  the  tafte  ;  but  the  Poet  muft  not  reft  fatis- 
fied  with  this  negative  praife.  Pleafure  is  the  end  of 
his  art :  and  the  more  numerous  the  fources  of  it  which 
he  can  open,  the  greater  will  be  the  efFed  produced 
by  the  efforts  of  his  genius. 

The  province  of  the  poet  is  limited  only  by  the  variety 
of  human  enjoyments.  Whatever  is  in  the  reality 
fubfervient  to  our  happinefs,  is  a  fource  of  pleafure, 
when  prefented  to  our  conceptions,  and  may  fome- 
times  derive  from  the  heightenings  of  imagination,  a 
momentary  charm,  which  we  exchange  with  reluc- 
tance for  the  fubflantial  gratifications  of  the  fenfes. 
The  province  of  the  painter,  and  of  the  flatuary,  is 
confined  to  the  imitation  of  vifible  objefts,  and  to  the 
exhibition  of  fuch  intellectual  and  moral  qualities,  as 
the  human  body  is  fitted  to  exprefs.  In  ornamental 
architecture,  and  in  ornamental  gardening,  the  fole  aim 
of  the  artifl  is  to  give  pleafure  to  the  eye,  by  the  beauty 
or  fublimity  of  material  forms.  But  to  the  poet  all 
the  glories  of  external  nature ;  all  that  is  amiable  or 
interefting,  or  refpedable  in  human  character  j  all 
I G.  that 


Seft.  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  499 

that  excites  and  engages  our  benevolent  afFeftions ; 
all  thofe  truths  which  make  the  heart  feel  itfelf  better 
and  more  happy  ;  all  thefe  fupply  materials,  out  of 
which  he  forms  and  peoples  a  world  of  his  own, 
where  no  inconveniences  damp  our  enjoyments,  and 
where  no  clouds  darken  our  profpedls. 

That  the  pleafures  of  poetry  arife  chiefly  from  the 
agreeable  feelings  which  it  conveys  to  the  mind,  by 
awakening  the  imagination,  is  a  proportion  which 
may  feem  too  obvious  to  Hand  in  need  of  proof.  As 
the  ingenious  Inquirer,  however,  into  "  the  Origin  of 
our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful,"  has  difputed 
the  common  notions  upon  this  fubjeft,  I  fhall  confider 
fome  of  the  principal  arguments  by  which  he  has  fup- 
ported  his  opinion. 

The  leading  principle  of  the  theory  which  I  am 
now  to  examine  is,  "  That  the  common  efFe£t  of  po- 
"  etry  is  not  to  raife  ideas  of  things  ;'*  or,  as  I  would 
rather  chufe  to  exprefs  it,  its  common  effed  is  not  to 
give  exercife  to  the  powers  of  conception  and  imagi- 
nation. That  I  may  not  be  accufed  of  mifreprefenta- 
tion,  I  fhall  ftate  the  dodrine  at  length  .n  the  words 
of  the  author.  "  If  words  have  all  their  poffible  ex- 
"  tent  of  power,  three  effeds  arife  in  the  mind  of  the 
"  hearer.  The  firft  is  the  found ;  the  fecond,  the 
"  pidurCy  or  reprefentation  of  the  thing  fignified  by 
*'  the  found  ;  the  third  is,  the  affedion  of  the  foul 
"  produced  by  one  or  by  both  of  the  foregoing.  Com- 
"  pounded  abftracl  words,  (honour,  juflice,  liberty, 
"  and  the  like,)  produce  the  firft  and  the  laft  of  thefe 
"  effefts,  but  not  the  fecond.  Simple  abftrafts  are 
**  ufed  to  fignify  fome  one  fnnple  idea,  without  much 

K  k  2  "  advert- 


500  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

"  adverting  to  others  which  may  chance  to  attend  it  j 
"  as  blue,  green,  hot,  cold,  and  the  like :  thefe  are 
"  capable  of  efl'eding  all  three  of  the  purpofes  of 
"  words  ;  as  the  aggregate  words,  man,  caflle,  horfe, 
"  &c.  are  in  a  yet  higher  degree.  But  I  am  of  opi- 
"  nion,  that  the  mofl  general  efted  even  of  thefe  words 
*<  does  not  arife  from  their  forming  pictures  of  the 
*'  feveral  things  they  would  reprefent  in  the  imagina- 
"  tion  ;  becaufe,  on  a  very  diligent  examination  of  my 
"  own  mind,  and  getting  others  to  confider  theirs,  I  do 
**  not  find  that  once  in  twenty  times  any  fuch  picture 
*«  is  formed  ;  and  when  it  is,  there  is  mod  commonly 
"  a  particular  effort  of  the  imagination  for  that  pur- 
"  pofe.  But  the  aggregate  words  operate,  as  I  faid 
"  of  the  compound  abftrafts,  not  by  prefenting  any 
"  image  to  the  mind,  but  by  having  from  ufe  the 
*'  fame  efteft  on  being  mentioned,  that  their  original 
"  has  when  it  is  feen.  Suppofe  we  were  to  read  a 
•'  pafTage  to  this  effed  :  "  The  river  Danube  rifes  in 
"  a  moifl  and  mountainous  foil  in  the  heart  of  Ger- 
"  many,  where,  winding  to  and  fro,  it  waters  feve- 
**  ral  principalities,  until  turning  into  Auflria,  and 
"  leaving  the  walls  of  Vienna,  it  pafTes  into  Hungary  ; 
«*  there  with  a  vaft  flood,  augmented  by  the  Saave 
**  and  the  Drave,  it  quits  Chriflendom,  and  rolling 
"  through  the  barbarous  countries  which  border  on 
"  Tartary,  it  enters  by  many  mouths  into  the  Black 
♦'  Sea."  In  this  decfription  many  things  are  mentioned ; 
"  as  mountains,  rivers,  cities,  the  fea,  &c.  But  let  any 
"  body  examine  himfelf,  and  fee  whether  he  has  had 
"  imprelTed  on  his  imagination  any  pictures  of  a  river, 
**  mountain,  watery  foil,  Germany,  &c.     Indeed,  it 

"  is 


Sea.  2.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  5OI 

"  is  impoflible,  in  the  rapidity  and  quick  fucceflion  of 
*'  words  in  converfation,  to  have  ideas  both  of  the 
*'  found  of  the  word,  and  of  the  thing  reprefented  j 
"  befides,  fome  words  expreffing  real  effences, 
*'  are  fo  mixed  with  others  of  a  general  and  nominal 
*'  import,  that  it  is  imprafticable  to  jump  from 
*'  fenfe  to  thought,  from  particulars  to  generals, 
"  from  things  to  words,  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to 
"  anfwer  the  purpofes  of  life  ;  nor  is  it  neceflary 
"  that  we  fliould." 

In  farther  confirmation  of  this  do<5lrine,  Mr.  Burke 
refers  to  the  poetical  works  of  the  late  amiable  and  in- 
genious Dr.  Blacklock.  "  Here,''*  fays  he,  "  is  a  poet, 
**  doubtlefs  as  much  affc^ed  by  bis  own  defcripiions ,  as 
*'  any  that  reads  them  can  be  ;  and  yet  he  is  affefted 
**  with  this  flrong  enthufiafm,  by  things  of  which  he 
*'  neither  has,  nor  can  poflibly  have,  any  idea,  far- 
*'  ther  than  that  of  a  bare  found  ;  and  why  may  not 
"  thofe  who  read  his  works  be  affeded  in  the  fame 
"  manner  that  he  was,  with  as  little  of  any  real  ideas 
**  of  the  things  defcribed  ?" 

Before  I  proceed  to  make  any  remarks  on  thefe 
paffages,  I  mufl  obferve  in  general,  that  I  perfedly 
agree  with  Mr.  Burke,  in  thinking  that  a  very  great 
proportion  of  the  words  which  we  habitually  employ, 
have  no  effect  to  "  raife  ideas  in  the  mind  ;"  or  to 
exercife  the  powers  of  conception  and  imagination. 
My  notions  on  this  fubject  I  have  already  fufficiently 
explained  in  treating  of  Abflradion. 

I  agree  with  him  farther,  that   a  great  proportion 

of  the  words  which  are  ufed  in  poetry  and  eloquence, 

produce  very  powerful  effeds  on  the  mind,  by  ex- 

K  k  3  citing 


502  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.  VII. 

citing  emotions  which  we  have  been  accuftomed  to 
aflbciate  with  particular  founds  ;  without  leading  the 
imagination  to  form  to  itfelf  any  pictures  or  reprefent- 
ations  :  and  his  account  of  the  manner  in  which  fuch 
words  operate,  appears  to  me  fatisfactory.  "  Such 
"  words  are  in  reality  but  mere  founds  ;  but  they  are 
**  founds,  which,  being  ufed  on  particular  occafions, 
"  wherein  we  receive  fome  good,  or  fuffer  fome  evil ; 
"  or  fee  others  afFefted  with  good  or  evil ;  or  which 
"  we  hear  applied  to  other  interefting  things  or 
"  events  ;  and  being  applied  in  fuch  a  variety  of  cafes, 
"  that  we  know  readily  by  habit  to  what  things  they 
"  belong,  they  produce  in  the  mind,  whenever  they 
*'  are  afterwards  mentioned,  effects  fimilar  to  thofe 
"  of  their  occafions.  The  founds  being  often  ufed 
"  without  reference  to  any  particular  occafion,  and 
"  carrying  ftill  their  firfl  imprefTions,  they  at  lail  utterly 
*'  lofe  their  connexion  with  the  particular  occafions 
• '  that  gave  rife  to  them  ;  yet  the  found,  without  any 
"  annexed  notion,  continues  to  operate  as  before." 

Notwithllanding,  however,  thefe  conceffions,  I  can- 
not admit  that  it  is  in  this  way  poetry  produces  its 
principal  eifedt.  Whence  is  it  that  general  and  ab- 
ftradt  expreffions  are  fo  tame  and  lifelefs,  in  compa- 
rifon  of  thofe  which  are  particular  and  figurative  ?  Is 
it  not  becaufe  the  former  do  not  give  any  exercife  to 
the  imagination,  like  the  latter  ?  Whence  the  dif- 
tinaion,  acknowledged  by  all  critics,  ancient  and  mo- 
dern, between  that  charm  of  words  which  evaporates 
in  the  procefs  of  tranflation,  and  thofe  permanent 
beauties,  which  prefenting  to  the  mind  the  diflindnefs 
of  a  pidure,  may  impart  pleafure  to  the  mofl  remote 

regions 


Sea,  2.  OF   THE  HUMAN    MIND.  503 

regions  and  ages  ?  Is  it  not,  that  in  the  one  cafe,  the 
Poet  addrefles  himfelf  to  aflbciations  which  are  local 
and  temporary ;  in  the  other,  to  thofe  eflential  prin- 
ciples of  human  nature,  from  which  Poetry  and  Paint- 
ing derive  their  common  attractions  ?  Hence,  among 
the  various  fources  of  the  fublime,  the  peculiar  ftrefs 
laid  by  Longinus  on  what  he  calls  Vi/ions,  (^ai/rao-iai) 

In  treating  of  Abftradion  I  formerly  remarked,  that 
the  perfection  of  philofophical  ftyle  is  to  approach 
as  nearly  as  poflible  to  that  fpecies   of  language  we 
employ  in  algebra,  and  to  exclude  every  expreffion 
which  has  a  tendency  to  divert  the  attention  by  ex- 
citing the  imagination,  or  to  bias  the  judgment  by 
cafual  aifociations.     For  this  purpofe  the  Philofopher 
ought  to  be  fparing  in  the  employment  of  figurative 
words,  and  to    convey  his  notions  by  general  terms 
which  have  been  accurately  defined.     To  the  Orator, 
on  the  other  hand,  when  he  wifhes  to  prevent  the 
cool  exercife  of  the  underftanding,  it   may,  on  the 
fame  account,  be  frequently  ufeful  to  delight  or  to 
agitate  his   hearers,  by  blending  with  his  reafonings 
the  illufions  of  poetry,  or   the  magical  influence  of 
founds  confecrated  by  popular  feelings.     A  regard  to 
the  different  ends  thus  aimed  at  in  Philofophical  and  in 
Rhetorical  compofition,  renders   the  ornaments  which 
are  fo  becoming  in  the  one,  inconfiftent  with  good 
tafte  and  good  fenfe,  when  adopted  in  the  other. 

*  De  Sublim.  §  xv.— -Quas  qtavra^icc^  Gi'seci  vocant,  nos  fane 
Vtfiones  appellamus  ;  per  quas  imagines  rerum  abfentium  ita  re- 
praefentantui-  animo,  ut  eas  cernere  oculis  ac  prasfentes  habere  vi- 
deamur.     Quinct.  Inst.  Orat.  vi.  2. 

K  k  4  In 


504  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY    Chap.  VH. 

In  Poetry,  as  truths  and  fads  are  introduced,  not 
for  the  purpofe  of  information,  but  to  convey  pleafure 
to  the  mind,  nothing  oifends  more,  than  thofe  general 
expreffions  which  form  the  great  inftrument  of  philo- 
fophical  reafoning.  The  original  pleafures,  which  it 
is  the  aim  of  poetry  to  recal  to  the  mind,  are  all 
derived  from  individual  objects  ;  and,  of  confequence, 
(with  a  very  few  exceptions,  which  it  does  not  belong 
to  my  prefent  fubjett  to  enumerate,)  the  more  parti- 
cular, and  the  more  appropriated  its  language  is,  the 
greater  will  be  the  charm  it  poffeifes. 

With  refpect  to  the  defcription  of  the  courfe  of 
the  Danube  already  quoted,  I  fhall  not  difpute  the 
refult  of  the  experiment  to  be  as  the  author  reprefents 
it.  That  words  may  often  be  applied  to  their  proper 
purpofes,  without  our  annexing  any  particular  notions 
to  them,  I  have  formerly  fhewn  at  great  length  ;  and 
I  admit  that  the  meaning  of  this  defcription  may  be 
fo  underftood.  But  to  be  underftood,  is  not  the 
fole  objedl  of  the  poet  :  his  primary  objeft,  is  to 
pleafe  ;  and  the  pleafure  which  he  conveys  will,  in 
general,  be  found  to  be  proportioned  to  the  beauty 
and  livelinefs  of  the  images  which  he  fuggefls.  In 
the  cafe  of  a  poet  born  blind,  the  effed:  of  poetry 
mufl  depend  on  other  caufes  ;  but  whatever  opinion 
we  may  form  on  this  point,  it  appears  to  me  impof- 
fible,  that  fuch  a  poet  fhould  receive,  even  from  his 
own  defcriptions,  the  fame  degree  of  pleafure  which 
they  may  convey  to  a  reader,  who  is  capable  of  con- 
ceiving the  fcenes  which  are  defcribed.  Indeed  this 
inftance  which  Mr.  Burke  produces  in  fupport  of 
his   theory,    is  fufficient  of   itfelf  to  shew,  that  the 

theory 


Sea.  2.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  505 

theory  cannot  be  true  in  the  extent  In  which  it  is 
ftated. 

By  way  of  contrail  to  the  defcription  of  the  Da- 
nube, I  fliall  quote  a  ftanza  from  Gray,  which  affords 
a  very  beautiful  example  of  the  two  different  effects 
of  poetical  expreffion.  The  pleafure  conveyed  by  the 
two  laft  lines  refolves  almost  entirely  into  Mr.  Burke's 
principles ;  but,  great  as  this  pleafure  is,  how  incon- 
fiderable  is  it  in  comparifon  of  that  arifing  from  the 
continued  and  varied  exercife  which  the  preceding  lines 
give  to  the  imagination  ? 

*'  In  climes  beyond  the  solar  road, 
"  Where  ftaggy  forms  o'er  ice-built  mountains  roam, 
"■  The  mufe  has  broke  the  twilight- gloom, 
"  To  cheer  the  fhiv'ring  native's  dull  abode. 
'  And  oft,  beneath  the  od'rous  fhade 
"  Of  Chili's  boundlefs  forefts  laid, 
'*  She  deigns  to  hear  the  favage  youth  repeat, 
'*  In  loofe  numbers  wildly  fweet, 
"  Their  feather-cinftur'd  chiefs,  and  duUcy  loves. 
"  Her  track  where'er  the  goddefs  roves, 
*'  Glory  purfue,  and  generous  fliame, 
*'  Th'  unconquerable  mind,  and  freedom's  holy  flame." 

I  cannot  help  remarking  further,  the  effedt  of  the 
folemn  and  uniform  flow  of  the  verfe  in  this  exquifite 
ftanza,  in  retarding  the  pronunciation  of  the  reader  ; 
fo  as  to  arrefl  his  attention  to  every  fucceffive  pifture, 
till  it  has  time  to  produce  its  proper  imprellion. 
More  of  the  charm  of  poetical  rythm  arifes  from  this 
circumftance,  than  is  commonly  imagined. 

To  thofe  who  vidfh  to  ftudy  the  theory  of  poetical 
expreflion,  no  author  in  our  language  affords  a  richer 
variety  of  illuftrations  than  the  poet  laft  quoted.     His 

merits, 


5o6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chrp.  VII. 

merits,  in  many  other  refpe6ts,  are  great ;  but  his  fkill 
in  this  particular  is  more  peculiarly  confpicuous.  How 
much  he  had  made  the  principles  of  this  branch  of 
his  art  an  objed  of  ftudy,  appears  from  his  letters 
publifhed  by  Mr.  Mafon. 

I  have  fometimes  thought,  that,  in  the  laft  line  of 
the  following  paffage,  he  had  in  view  the  two  dif- 
ferent effeds  of  words  already  defcribed  ;  the  effeft 
of  fome,  in  awakening  the  powers  of  Conception 
and  Imagination ;  and  that  of  others,  in  exciting 
affociated  emotions  : 

"■  Hark,  his  hands  the  lyre  explore ! 
"  Bright-ey'd  Fancy  hovering  o'er, 
*'  Scatters  from  her  piAur'd  urn, 
•♦  Thoughts,  that  breathe,  and  words,  that  burn."- 


SECTION    III. 

Continuation    of  the  fame  Subjed.  —  Relation    of  Imagination  and 
of  Tafle  to    Genius. 

TpROM  the  remarks  made  in  the  foregoing  Sections, 
"^  it  is  obvious,  in  what  manner  a  perfon  accuflomed 
to  analife  and  combine  his  conceptions,  may  acquire 
an  idea  of  beauties  fuperior  to  any  which  he  has  feen 
realifed.  It  may  alfo  be  eafily  inferred,  that  a  habit 
of  forming  fuch  intelledual  combinations,  and  of  re- 
marking their  eifedts  on  our  own  minds,  muft  con- 
tribute to  refine  and  to  exalt  the  Tafte,  to  a  degree 
which  it  never  can  attain  in  thofe  men,  who  /ludy  to 

improve 


Sea.  3.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  507 

improve  it  by  the  obfervation  and  comparifon  of  ex- 
ternal objects  only. 

A  cultivated  Taile,  combined  with  a  creative  Ima- 
gination, conftitutes  Genius  in  the  Fine  Arts.  With- 
out tafte,  imagination  could  produce  only  a  random 
analyfis  and  combination  of  our  conceptions ;  and 
without  imagination,  tafte  would  be  deftitute  of  the 
faculty  of  invention.  Thefe  two  ingredients  of  ge- 
nius may  be  mixed  together  in  all  poffible  propor- 
tions ;  and  where  either  is  pofleifed  in  a  degree  re- 
markably exceeding  what  falls  to  the  ordinary  fhare 
of  mankind,  it  may  compenfate  in  fome  meafure  for 
a  deficiency  in  the  other.  An  uncommonly  corredt 
tafte,  with  little  imagination,  if  it  does  not  produce 
works  which  excite  admiration,  produces  at  leaft  no- 
thing which  can  offend.  An  uncommon  fertility  of 
imagination,  even  when  it  offends,  excites  our  wonder 
by  its  creative  power  ;  and  fhews  what  it  could  have 
performed,  had  its  exertions  been  guided  by  a  more 
perfect  model. 

In  the  infancy  of  the  Arts,  an  union  of  thefe  two 
powers  in  the  fame  mind  is  neceffary  for  the  produc- 
tion of  every  work  of  genius.  Tafte,  without  ima- 
gination, is,  in  fuch  a  fituation,  impoffible  j  for,  as 
there  are  no  monuments  of  ancient  genius  on  which 
it  can  be  formed,  it  muft  be  the  refult  of  experi- 
ments, which  nothing  but  the  imagination  of  every 
individual  can  enable  him  to  make.  Such  a  tafte  muft 
neceflarily  be  imperfeft,  in  confequence  of  the  limited 
experience  of  which  it  is  the  refult ;  but,  without  ima- 
gination, it  could  not  have  been  acquired  even  in  this 
imperfeft  degree. 

In 


5o8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

In  the  progrefs  of  the  Arts  the  cafe  comes  to  be 
altered.  The  productions  of  genius  accumulate  to 
fuch  an  extent,  that  tafte  may  be  formed  by  a  careful 
ftudy  of  the  works  of  others  ;  and,  as  formerly  ima- 
gination had  ferved  as  a  neceifary  foundation  for  tafte, 
fo  tafte  begins  now  to  invade  the  province  of  imagi- 
nation. The  combinations  which  the  latter  faculty 
has  been  employed  in  making,  during  a  long  fuc- 
ceffion  of  ages,  approach  to  infinity  ;  and  prefent  fuch 
ample  materials  to  a  judicious  feledion,  that  with  a 
high  ftandard  of  excellence,  continually  prefent  to  the 
thoughts,  induftry,  aftifted  by  the  moft  moderate  de- 
gree of  imagination,  will,  in  time,  produce  perform- 
ances, not  only  more  free  from  faults,  but  incompa- 
rably more  powerful  in  their  effefts,  than  the  moft 
original  efforts  of  untutored  genius,  which,  guided 
by  an  uncultivated  tafte,  copies  after  an  inferior  model 
of  perfeftion.  What  Reynolds  obferves  of  Painting, 
may  be  applied  to  all  the  other  Fine  Arts  :  that,  "  as 
"  the  Painter,  by  bringing  together  in  one  piece,  thofe 
"  beauties,  which  are  difperfed  amongft  a  great  va- 
"  riety  of  individuals,  produces  a  figure  more  beau- 
"  tiful  than  can  be  found  in  nature  ;  fo  that  artift  who 
"  can  unite  in  himfelf  the  excellencies  of  the  various 
"  painters,  will  approach  nearer  to  perfedion  than  any 
"  of  his  mafters  *." 

*  P.  226. 


Sca.4- 


OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  509 


SECTION     IV. 

Of  the  hifluence  of  Imagination  on  Human   CharaSer  and 
Happ'inefs. 

TTITHERTO  we  have  confidered  the  power  of  Ima- 
■*■  gination  chiefly  as  it  is  conne-^^ed  with  the  Fine 
Arts.  But  it  delerves  our  attentiorTftill  more,  on  ac- 
count of  its  extenfive  influence  on  human  character 
and  happinefs. 

The  lower  animals,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge, 
are  entirely  occupied  with  the  objeds  of  their  prefent 
perceptions :  and  the  cafe  is  nearly  the  fame  with  the 
inferior  orders  of  our  own  fpecies.  One  of  the  prin- 
cipal effe£ls  which  a  liberal  education  produces  on 
the  mind,  is  to  accuftom  us  to  withdraw  our  attention 
from  the  objetls  of  fenfe,  and  to  dired  it,  at  pleafure, 
to  thofe  intelledual  combinations  which  delight  the 
imagination.  Even,  however,  among  men  of  culti-' 
vated  underltandings,  this  faculty  is  poffefled  in  very 
unequal  degrees  by  different  individuals ;  and  thefe 
differences  (whether  refulting  from  original  conftitu- 
tion  or  from  early  education)  lay  the  foundation  of 
fome  flriking  varieties  in  human  character. 

What  we  commonly  call  fenfibility,  depends,  in  a 
great  meafure,  on  the  power  of  imagination.  Point 
out  to  two  men,  any  objed  of  compaflion  ;  — a  man, 
for  example,  reduced  by  misfortune  from  eafy  cir- 
cumftances  to  indigence.  The  one  feels  merely  in 
proportion  to  what  he  perceives  by  his  fenfes.     The 

other 


5IO  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

Other  follows,  in  imagination,  the  unfortunate  man  to 
his  dwelling,  and  partakes  with  him  and  his  family  in 
their  domeflic  diflreifes.  He  liftens  to  their  converfa- 
tion,  while  they  recal  to  remembrance  the  flattering 
profpecls  they  once  indulged  ;  the  circle  of  friends 
they  had  been  forced  to  leave ;  the  liberal  plans  of 
education  which  were  begun  and  interrupted ;  and 
pictures  out  to  himfelf  all  the  various  reiburces  which 
delicacy  and  pnd^  fuggeft,  to  conceal  poverty  from  the 
world.  As  h<?  jDv>ceeds  in  the  painting,  his  fenfibility 
increafes,  and  he  weeps,  not  for  what  he  fees,  but  for 
what  he  imagines.  It  will  be  faid,  that  it  was  his  fen- 
fibility which  originally  roufed  his  imagination ;  and 
the  obfervation  is  undoubtedly  true  ;  but  it  is  equally 
evident,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  warmth  of  his 
imagination  increafes  and  prolongs  his  fenfibility. 

This  is  beautifully  illuflrated  in  the  Sentimental 
Journey  of  Sterne.  While  engaged  in  a  train  of  re- 
flexions on  the  State  prifpns  in  France,  the  accidental 
fight  of  a  fliarling  in  a  cage  fuggefl:s  to  him  the  idea 
of  a  captive  in  his  dungeon.  He  indulges  his  imagina- 
tion, "  and  looks  through  the  twilight  of  the  grated 
"  door  to  take  the  pidure." 

"  I  beheld,"  (fays  he,)  "  his  body  half- wafl;ed  away 
**  with  long  expectation  and  confinement,  and  felt 
"  what  kind  of  ficknefs  of  the  heart  it  is,  which 
"  arifes  from  hope  deferred.  Upon  looking  nearer, 
"  I  faw  him  pale  and  feverifh :  in  thirty  years  the 
"  wefl:ern  breeze  had  not  once  fanned  his  blood :  he 
**  had  feen  no  fun,  no  moon,  in  all  that  time,  nor  had 
**  the  voice  of  friend  or  kinfman  breathed  through 

"  his  lattice.  —His  children But  here  my  heart 

"  began 


SeA.  4.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  5  1 1 

"'  began  to  bleed,  and  I  was  forced  to  go  on  with 
"  another  part  of  the  portrait. 

"  He  was  fitting  upon  the  ground,  in  the  farthefl 
"  corner  of  his  dungeon,  on  a  little  ftraw,  which  was 
"  alternately  his  chair  and  bed  :  a  little  calendar  of 
**  fmall  flicks  was  laid  at  the  head,  notched  all  over 
"  with  the  difmal  days  and  nights  he  had  pafled 
"  there  :  —  he  had  one  of  thefe  little  flicks  in  his  hand, 
•*  and  with  a  rufly  nail  he  was  etching  another  day  of 
"  mifery  to  add  to  the  heap.  As  I  darkened  the  little 
**  light  he  had,  he  lifted  up  a  hopelefs  eye  towards 
"  the  door,  then  caft  it  down  —  fliook  his  head,  and 
"*  went  on  with  his  work  of  afflidion." 

The  foregoing  obfervations  may  account,  in  part, 
for  the  effeft  which  exhibitions  of  fiditious  diflrefs 
produce  on  fome  perfons,  who  do  not  difcover  much 
fenfibility  to  the  diftreffes  of  real  life.  In  a  Novel  or 
a  Tragedy,  the  picture  is  completely  finifhed  in  all  its 
parts  ;  and  we  are  made  acquainted  not  only  with 
every  circumflance  on  which  the  diflrefs  turns,  but  with 
the  fentiments  and  feelings  of  every  character,  with  re- 
fpeft  to  his  fituation.  In  real  life  we  fee,  in  general, 
only  detached  fcenes  of  the  Tragedy ;  and  the  im- 
prefTion  is  flight,  unlefs  imagination  finifhes  the  cha- 
rafters,  and  fupplies  the  incidents  that  are  wanting. 

It  is  not  only  to  fcenes  of  diflrefs  that  imagination 
increafes  our  fenfibility.  It  gives  us  a  double  (hare  in 
the  profperity  of  others,  and  enables  us  to  partake, 
with  a  more  lively  interell,  in  every  fortunate  incident 
that  occurs  either  to  individuals  or  to  communities. 
Even  from  the  productions  of  the  earth,  and  the  vicif- 
fitudes  of  the  year,  it  carries  forward  our  thoughts  to 

the 


512  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VI I. 

the  enjoyments  they  bring  to  the  fenfitive  creation, 
and  by  interefting  our  benevolent  affections  in  the 
fcenes  we  behold,  lends  a  new  charm  to  the  beauties 
of  nature. 

I  have  often  been  inclined  to  think,  that  the  apparent 
coldnefs  and  felfifhnefs  of  mankind  may  be  traced,  in 
a  great  meafure,  to  a  want  of  attention  and  a  want  of 
imagination.  In  the  cafe  of  misfortunes  which  happen 
to  ourfelves,  or  to  our  near  connexions,  neither  of 
thefe  powers  is  neceffary  to  make  us  acquainted  with 
our  fituation ;  fo  that  we  feel,  of  neceflity,  the  corre- 
fpondent  emotions.  But  without  an  uncommon  degree 
of  both,  it  is  impoflible  for  any  man  to  comprehend 
completely  the  fituation  of  his  neighbour,  or  to  have 
an  idea  of  a  great  part  of  the  diftrefs  which  exifls  in 
the  world.  If  we  feel  therefore  more  for  ourfelves 
than  for  others,  the  difference  is  to  be  afcribed,  at  leaft 
partly,  to  this ;  that,  in  the  former  cafe,  the  fafts 
which  are  the  foundation  of  our  feelings,  are  more 
fully  before  us  than  they  poffibly  can  be  in  the  latter. 

In  order  to  prevent  mifapprehenfions  of  my  meaning, 
it  is  neceffary  for  me  to  add,  that  I  do  not  mean  to  deny 
that  it  is  a  law  of  our  nature,  in  cafes  in  which  there  is 
an  interference  between  our  own  intereft  and  that  of 
other  men,  to  give  a  certain  degree  of  preference  to 
ourfelves  ;  even  fuppofmg  our  neighbour's  fituation 
to  be  as  completely  known  to  us  as  our  own.  I  only 
affirm,  that,  where  this  preference  becomes  blameable 
and  unjuft,  the  effed  is  to  be  accounted  for  partly  in 
the  way  I  mentioned  *.     One  ftriking  proof  of  this  is, 

*  I  fay  partly  ;  for  habits  of  inattention  to  the  fituation  of  other 
men,  undoubtedly  prefuppofe  fome  defedl  in  the  focial  affedions. 

the 


Sea.  4-  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  513 

the  powerful  emotions  which  may  be  occafionally 
excited  in  the  minds  of  the  mod  callous,  when  the 
attention  has  been  once  fixed,  and  the  imagination 
awakened,  by  eloquent  and  circumflantial  and  pathetic 
defcription. 

A  very  amiable  and  profound  moralift,  in  the  account 
which  he  has  given  of  the  origin  ofour  fenfe  of  juftice, 
has,  I  think,  drawn  a  lefs  pleafing  pifture  of  the  natu- 
ral conftitution  of  the  human  mind,  than  is  agreeable 
to  truth.  "  To  difturb"  (fays  he)  "  the  happinefs 
"  of  our  neighbour,  merely  becaufe  it  (lands  in  the  way 
**  of  our  own  ;  to  take  from  him  what  is  of  real  ufe 
"  to  him,  merely  becaufe  it  may  be  of  equal  or  of 
**  more  ufe  to  us ;  or,  to  indulge,  in  this  manner,  at 
"  the  expence  of  other  people,  the  natural  preference 
"  which  every  man  has  for  his  own  happinefs  above 
"  that  of  other  people,  is  what  no  impartial  fpedator 
"  can  go  along  with.  Every  man  is,  no  doubt,  firfl 
"  and  principally  recommended  to  his  own  care  ;  and 
*'  as  he  is  fitter  to  take  care  of  himfelf  than  of  any  other 
"  perfon,  it  is  fit  and  right  that  it  fliould  be  fo.  Every 
"  man,  therefore,  is  much  more  deeply  interelled  in 
*'  whatever  immediately  concerns  himfelf,  than  in  what 
"  concerns  any  other  man  :  and  to  hear,  perhaps,  of 
"  the  death  of  another  perfon  with  whom  we  have  no 
"  particular  connexion,  will  give  us  lefs  concern,  will 
"  fpoil  our  ftomach,  or  break  our  reft,  much  lefs  than 
*'  a  very  infignificant  difafter  which  has  befallen  our- 
"  felves.  But  though  the  ruin  of  our  neighbour  may 
**  affed  us  much  lefs  than  a  vei'v  fmall  misfortune  of 
"  our  own,  we  muft  not  ruin  him  to  prevent  that 
"  fmall    misfortune,    nor    even   to  prevent  our  own 

L  I  **  ruin« 


514  ELEMENTS    OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.VlI. 

"  ruin.  We  mud  here,  as  in  all  other  cafes,  view 
"  ourfelves  not  h  much  according  to  that  light 
"  in  which  we  may  naturally  appear  to  ourfelves, 
"  as  according  to  that  in  which  we  naturally  ap- 
"  pear  to  others.  Though  every  man  may,  ac- 
"  cording  to  the  proverb,  be  the  whole  world  to 
"  himfelf,  to  the  reft  of  mankind  he  is  a  mofl  infig- 
"  nificant  part  of  it.  Though  his  own  happinefs  may 
"  be  of  more  importance  to  him  than  that  of  all  the 
"  world  befides,  to  every  other  perfon  it  is  of  no  more 
"  confequence  than  that  of  any  other  man.  Though 
*'  it  may  be  true,  therefore,  that  every  individual,  in 
"  his  own  breaft,  naturally  prefers  himfelf  to  all  man- 
"  kind,  yet  he  dares  not  look  mankind  in  the  face, 
*'  and  avow  that  he  acts  according  to  this  principle. 
"  He  feels  that,  in  this  preference  they  can  never  go 
"  along  with  him,  and  that  how  natural  foever  it  may 
<'  be  to  him,  it  muft  always  appear  exceffive  and  ex- 
"  travagant  to  them.  When  he  views  himfelf  in  the 
"  light  in  which  he  is  confcious  that  others  will  view 
*'  him,  he  fees  that  to  them  he  is  but  one  of  the  mul- 
*'  titude,  in  no  refped  better  than  any  other  in  ft.  If 
"  he  would  acl  fo  as  that  the  impartial  fpedator  may 
*'  enter  into  the  principles  of  his  conduct,  which  is 
*^  what  of  all  things  he  has  the  greateft  defire  to  do,  he 
*'  muft,  upon  this,  as  upon  all  other  occafions,  humble 
**  the  arrogance  of  his  felf-love,  and  bring  it  down 
"  to  fomething  which  other  men  can  go  along  with." 
I  am  ready  to  acknowledge,  that  there  is  much  truth 
in  this  paiTage ;  and  that  a  prudential  regard  to  the 
opinion  of  others,  might  teach  a  man  of  good  fenfe, 
without  the  aid  of  more  amiable  motives,  to  conceal 

his 


86(^.4.  OF   THE   HUMAN   MIND.  ^ir 

his  unreafonable  partialities  in  favour  of  himfelf,  and 
to  aft  agreeably  to  what  he  conceives  to  be  the  fenti- 
ments  of  impartial  fpeftators.  But  1  cannot  help 
thinking,  that  the  fact  is  much  too  ftrongly  ftated  with 
refped  to  the  natural  partiality  of  felf-love,  fuppofmg 
the  fituation  of  our  neighbours  to  be  as  completely 
prefented  to  our  view,  as  our  own  muft  of  neceflity  be. 
When  the  Orator  wiflies  to  combat  the  felfifh  paffions 
of  his  audience,  and  to  roufe  them  to  a  fenfe  of  what 
they  owe  to  mankind ;  what  mode  of  perfuafion 
does  nature  diftate  to  him  ?  Is  it  to  remind  them  of 
the  importance  of  the  good  opinion  of  the  world, 
and  of  the  neceflity,  in  order  to  obtain  it,  of  accom- 
modating their  condud  to  the  fentiments  of  others, 
rather  than  to  their  own  feelings  ?  Such  confiderations 
undoubtedly  might,  with  fome  men,  produce  a  cer- 
tain efFed  ;  and  might  lead  them  to  aflume  the  appear- 
ance of  virtue ;  but  they  would  never  excite  a  fenti- 
ment  of  indignation  at  the  thought  of  injuflice,  or  a 
fudden  and  involuntary  burft  of  difmterefted  affedion. 
If  the  Orator  can  only  fucceed  in  fixing  their  attention 
to  fads,  and  in  bringing  thefe  fads  home  to  their 
imagination  by  the  power  of  his  eloquence,  he  has 
completely  attained  his  objed.  No  fooner  are  the 
fads  apprehended,  than  the  benevolent  principles  of 
our  nature  difplay  themfelves  in  all  their  beauty.  The 
mofl  cautious  and  timid  lofe,  for  a  moment,  all  thought 
of  themfelves,  and  defpifing  every  confideration  of  pru- 
dence or  of  fafety,  become  wholly  engroffed  with  the 
fortunes  of  others. 

Many  other  fads,  which  are  commonly  alledged  as 

proofs  of  the  original  felfifhnefs  of  mankind,  may  be 

L  1  2  explained. 


5l6  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

explained,  in  part,  in  a  fimilar  way ;  and  may  be  traced 
to  habits  of  inattention,  or  to  a  want  of  imagination, 
arifmg,  probably,  from  fome  fault  in  early  education. 

What  has  now  been  remarked  with  refpeft  to  the 
focial  principles,  may  be  applied  to  all  our  other  paf- 
fions,  excepting  thofe  which  take  their  rife  from  the 
body.  They  are  commonly  flrong  in  proportion  to 
the  warmth  and  vigour  of  the  imagination. 

It  is,  however,  extremely  curious,  that  when  an 
imagination,  which  is  naturally  phlegmatic,  or  which, 
like  thofe  of  the  vulgar,  has  little  activity  from  a  want 
of  culture,  is  fairly  roufed  by  the  defcriptions  of  the 
Orator  or  of  the  Poet,  it  is  more  apt  to  produce  the 
violence  of  enthufiafm,  than  in  minds  of  a  fuperior 
order.  By  giving  this  faculty  occafional  exercife,  we 
acquire  a  great  degree  of  command  over  it.  As  we 
can  withdraw  the  attention  at  pleafure  from  objefts  of 
fenfe,  and  tranfport  ourfelves  into  a  world  of  our 
own,  fo  when  we  wifh  to  moderate  our  enthufiafm,  we 
can  difmifs  the  objecls  of  imagination,  and  return 
to  our  ordinary  perceptions  and  occupations.  But  in 
a  mind  to  which  thefe  intellectual  vifions  are  not  fami- 
liar, and  which  borrows  them  completely  from  the 
genius  of  another,  imagination,  when  once  excited,  be- 
comes perfectly  ungovernable,  and  produces  fomething 
like  a  temporary  infanity.  Hence  the  wonderful  effedts 
of  popular  eloquence  on  the  lower  orders ;  effedts 
which  are  much  more  remarkable,  than  what  it  ever 
produces  on  men  of  education. 


SEC- 


Seft.  5-  O^   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  517 


SECTION    V. 

Continuation  of  the  fame    Sulject.  —  Inconveniences    refulilng  from 
an  lll-regiilaled  Imagination. 

IT  was  undoubtedly  the  intention  of  nature,  that  the 
objefts  ofperceptionfliould  produce  much  (Ironger 
impreffions  on  the  mind  than  its  own  operations.  And, 
accordingly  they  always  do  fo,  when  proper  care  has 
been  taken  in  early  life  to  exercife  the  different  prin- 
ciples of  our  conftitution.  But  it  is  poffible,  by  long 
habits  of  folitary  refleftion,  to  reverfe  this  order  of 
things,  and  to  weaken  the  attention  to  fenfible  objedts  to 
fo  great  a  degree,  as  to  leave  the  conduct  almoft  wholly 
under  the  influence  of  imagination.  Removed  to  a  dif- 
tance  from  fociety,  and  from  the  purfuits  of  life,  when 
we  have  been  long  accuflomed  to  converfe  with  our 
own  thoughts,  and  have  found  our  aftivity  gratified  by 
intelledual  exertions,  which  afford  fcope  to  all  our 
powers  and  afFedions,  without  expofmg  us  to  the  in- 
conveniences refulting  from  the  buflle  of  the  world,  we 
are  apt  to  contraQ:  an  unnatural  predilection  for  medi- 
tation, and  to  lofe  all  intereft  in  external  occurrences. 
In  fuch  a  fituation  too,  the  mind  gradually  lofes  that 
command  which  education,  when  properly  conduced, 
gives  it  over  the  train  of  its  ideas  ;  till  at  length  the 
mofl  extravagant  dreams  of  imagination  acquire  as 
powerful  an  influence  in  exciting  all  its  paflions,  as  if 
they  were  realities.  A  wild  and  mountainous  country, 
which  prefents  but  a  limited  variety  of  objedts,  and 
I-  I  3  thefe 


51 8  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII: 

thefe  only  of  fuch  a  fort  as  "  awake  to  folemn 
*'  thought,"  has  a  remarkable  efFedl  in  cherifhing 
this  enthufiafm. 

When  fuch  diforders  of  the  imagination  have  been 
long  confirmed  by  habit,  the  evil  may  perhaps  be  be- 
yond a  remedy  ;  but  in  their  inferior  degrees,  much 
may  be  expected  from  our  own  efforts  ;  in  particular, 
from  mingling  gradually  in  the  bufmefs  and  amufe- 
ments  of  the  world  ;  or,  if  we  have  fufficient  force  of 
mind  for  the  exertion,  from  refolutely  plunging  into 
thofe  active  and  interefting  and  hazardous  fcenes, 
which,  by  compelling  us  to  attend  to  external  circum- 
ftances,  may  weaken  the  imprefTions  of  imagination, 
and  itrengthen  thofe  produced  by  realities.  The  ad- 
vice of  the  poet,  in  thefe  cafes,  is  equally  beautiful 
and  juft : 

'*  Go,  foft  enthuiiail  !   quit  the  cyprefs  groves, 

*'  Nor  to  the  rivulet's  lonely  moanings  tune 

**  Your  fad  complaint.     Go,  feek  the  cheerful  haunts 

"  Of  men,  and  mingle  with  the  buftling  crowd  ; 

"  Lay  fchemes  for  wealth,  or  power,  or  fame,  the  wilh 

*'  Of  nobler  minds,  and  pufh  them  night  and  day. 

"  Or  join  the  caravan  in  quefl  of  fcenes 

"  New  to  your  eyes,  and  fhifting  every  hour, 

"  Beyond  the  Alps,  beyond  the  Appenines. 

"  Or,  more  adventurous,  rufh  into  the  field 

'*  Where  war  grows  hot ;  and  raging  through  the  flcy, 

"  The  lofty  trumpet  fwells  the  madd'ning  foul  ; 

*'  And  in  the  hardy  camp  and  toilfome  march, 

"  Foxget  all  fofter  and  lefs  manly  cares  *." 

*  .Armilrong. 


The 


Seft.  5-  OF    THE   HUMAN    MIND.  5(9 

The  difordered  ftate  of  mind  to  which  thefe  obfer- 
vations  refer  is  the  more  interefling,  that  it  is  chiefly 
incident  to  men  of  uncommon  fenfibility  and  genius. 
It  has  been  often  remarked,  that  there  is  a  connexion 
betv/een  genius  and  melancholy  ;    and   there  is  one 
fenfe  of  the  word  melancholy^  in  which  the  remark  is 
undoubtedly  true  ;  a  fenfe  which  it  may  be  difficult  to 
define,  but  in  which  it  implies  nothing  either  gloomy 
or  malevolent  *.     This,  I  think,  is  not  only  confirmed 
by  fads,  but  may  be  inferred  from  fome  principles 
which  were  formerly  flated  on  the  fubjedl  of  inven- 
tion ;  for  as  the  difpofition  now  alluded  to  has  a  ten- 
dency to  retard  the  current  of  thought,  and  to  colle£t 
the  attention  of  the  mind,  it  is  peculiarly  favourable  to 
the  difcovery  of   thofe  profound  conclufions  which 
refult  from  an  accurate  examination  of  the  lefs  obvi- 
ous relations  among  our  ideas.     From  the  fame  prin- 
ciples too,  may  be  traced  fome  of  the  effeds  which 
fituation  and  early  education  produce  on  the  intellec- 
tual character.     Among  the  natives  of  wild  and  foli- 
tary  countries  we  may  exped  to  meet  with  fublime 
exertions  of  poetical  imagination  and  of  philofophical 
refearch  ;  while  thofe  men  whofe  attention  has  been 
diflipated  from  infancy  amidft  the  buflle  of  the  world, 
and  whofe  current  of  thought  has  been  trained  to 
yield  and  accommodate  itfelf,  every  moment,  to  the 
rapid  fucceffion  of  trifles,  which   diverfify  fafliionable 
life,  acquire,  without  any  effort  on  their  pare,  the  in- 

Aristot.  Problem,  fed.  xxx. 

L  1  4  telleclual 


520  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOPHY     Chap.  VII, 

telleclual  habits  which  are  favourable  to  gaiety,  viva- 
city, and  wit. 

When  a  man,  under  the  habitual  influence  of  a 
warm  imagination,  is  obliged  to  mingle  occafionally 
in  the  fcenes  of  real  bufmefs,  he  is  perpetually  in 
danger  of  being  mifled  by  his  own  enthufiafm.  What 
we  call  good  fenfe  in  the  conduft  of  life,  confifts 
chiefly  in  that  temper  of  mind  which  enables  its  pof- 
felTor  to  view,  at  all  times,  with  perfect  coolnefs  and 
accuracy,  all  the  various  circumftances  of  his  fitua- 
tion ;  fo  that  each  of  them  m^ay  produce  its  due  im- 
preflion  on  him,  without  any  exaggeration  arifmg 
from  his  own  peculiar  habits.  But  to  a  man  ot  an 
ill-regulated  imagination,  external  circumftances  only 
ferve  as  hints  to  excite  his  own  thoughts,  and  the  con- 
dudl  he  purfues  has,  in  general,  far  lefs  reference  to 
his  real  fituation,  than  to  fome  imaginary  one,  in 
which  he  conceives  himfelf  to  be  placed :  in  confe- 
quence  of  which,  while  he  appears  to  himfelf  to  be 
acting  with  the  moll  perfect  wifdom  and  confiilency, 
he  may  Ixequently  exhibit  to  others  all  the  appear- 
ances of  folly.  Such,  pretty  nearly,  feems  to  be  the 
idea  which  the  Author  *  of  the  "  Reflexions  on  the 
*'  Character  and  Writings  of  Roufleau,"  has  formed 
of  that  extraordinary  man.  *'  His  faculties,"  we  are 
told,  *'  were  flow  in  their  operation,  but  his  heart 
"  was  ardent :  it  was  in  confequence  of  his  own  me- 
"  ditations  that  he  became  impaflioned  :  he  difcovered 
"  no  fudden  emotions,  but  all  his  feelings  grew  upon 
*'  reflexion.     It  has,    perhaps,   happened  to  him  to 

*  Madame  dc  Stael  Holstmn. 


SeSi.  ^.  OF   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  52I 

**  fall  in  love  gradually  with  a  woman,  by  dwelling 
"  on  the  idea  of  her  during  her  abfence.     Sometimes 
"  he  would  part  with  you  with  all   his  former  affec- 
"  tion ;  but  if  an  expreffion  had  efcaped  you,   which 
**  might  bear  an  unfavourable  conftruclion,  he  would 
"  recoiled  it,  examine  it,  exaggerate  it,  perhaps  dwell 
"  upon  it  for  a  month,  and  conclude  by  a  total  breach 
"  with  you.     Hence  it  was,  that  there  was  fcarce  a 
"  poffibility  of  undeceiving  him  ;  for  the  light  which 
"  broke  in  upon  him  at  once  was  not  fufficient   to 
*'  efface  the  wrong  impreffions  which  had  taken  place 
"  fo  gradually  in   his  mind.     It  was  extremely  diffi- 
"  cult,  too,  to  continue   long  on  an  intimate  footing 
"  with  him.     A  word,  a  gefture,  furnifiied  him  with 
"  matter  of  profound  meditation :  he  connected  the 
"  mod  trifling  circumftances  like  fo  many  mathema- 
*'  tical  proportions,  and  conceived  his  concluiions  to 
"  be  fupported  by  the  evidence  of  demonftration.     I 
"  believe,"    continues  this  ingenious   writer,    "  that 
"  imagination  was  the  flrongefl  of  his  faculties,  and 
"  that  it  had  almoft  abforbed  all  the  reft.     He  dreamed 
*'  rather  than  exifted,  and  the  events  of  his  life  might 
*'  be  faid,  more  properly,   to  have  paifed  in  his  mind, 
"  than  without  him :    a  mode  of  being,  one  fliould 
"  have  thought,  that  ought  to  have  fecured  him  from 
"  diftruft,  as  it  prevented  him  from  obfervation  ;  but 
*'  the  truth  was,  it  did  not  hinder  him  from  attempt- 
"  ing  to  obferve  ;  it  only  rendered  his  obfervations 
"  erroneous.     That  his  foul  was  tender,  no  one  can 
"  doubt,  after  having   read  his  works ;  but  his  ima- 
"  gination  fometimes   interpofed  between  his   reafon 
"  and   his  affedlions,  and  deftroyed  their  influence: 

"  he 


522  ELEMENTS    OF    THE   PHILOSOPHY       Chap.VII. 

*'  he  appeared  fometimes  void  of  fenfibility ;  but  it 
"  was  becaufe  he  did  not  perceive  objects  fuch  as  they 
"  were.  Had  he  feen  them  with  our  eyes,  his  heart 
«'  would  have  been  more  affected  than  ours." 

In  this  very  flriking  defcription  v/e  fee  the  melancholy 
pidure  of  fenfibility  and  genius  approaching  to  infanity. 
It  is  a  cafe,  probably,  that  but  rarely  occurs,  in  the 
extent  here  defcribed  :  but,  I  believe,  there  is  no  man 
who  has  lived  much  in  the  world,  who  will  not  trace 
many  refembling  features  to  it,  in  the  circle  of  his  own 
acquaintances :  perhaps  there  are  few,  who  have  not 
been  occafionally  confcious  of  fome  refemblance  to  it 
in  themfelves. 

To  thefe  obfervations  we  may  add,  that  by  an  ex- 
ceffive  indulgence  in  the  pleafures  of  imagination, 
the  tafte  may  acquire  a  faflidious  refinement  unfuitable 
to  the  prefent  fituation  of  human  nature ;  and  thofe 
intelledual  and  moral  habits,  which  ought  to  be 
formed  by  actual  experience  of  the  world,  may  be 
gradually  fo  accommodated  to  the  dreams  of  poetry 
and  romance,  as  to  difqualify  us  for  the  fcene  in  which 
we  are  deftined  to  act.  Such  a  diflempered  ftate  of 
the  mind  is  an  endlefs  fource  of  error  ;  more  particu- 
larly when  we  are  placed  in  thofe  critical  fituations, 
in  which  our  condud  determines  our  future  happinefs 
or  mifery ;  and  which,  on  account  of  this  extenfive 
influence  on  human  life,  form  the  principal  ground- 
work of  fiftitious  compofition.  The  effedt  of  novels, 
in  mifleading  the  pallions  of  youth,  with  refpedt  to 
the  molt  interefting  and  important  of  all  relations,  is 
one  of  the  many  inftances  of  the  inconveniences  re- 
fulting  from  an  ill-regulated  imagination. 

17  Th^ 


Sea.5«  O^    ^^^    HUMAN    MIND.  523 

The   pafTion  of  love  has  been,   in  every  age,  the 
favourite  fubje£l  of  the  poets,  and  has  given  birth  to 
the  fnieft  produdions  of  human  genius.     Thefe  are 
the  natural  delight  of  the  young  and  fufceptible,  long 
before  the  influence  of  the  paffions  is  felt ;  and  from 
thefe  a  romantic  mind  forms  to  itfelf  an  ideal  model 
of  beauty  and   perfe6lion,    and  becomes  enamoured 
with  its  own  creation.    On  a  heart  which  has  been  long 
accuftomed  to  be  thus  v/armed  by  the  imagination, 
the  excellencies  of  real  charaders  make  but  a  flight 
impreflion :  and,  accordingly,  it  will  be  found,  that 
men  of  a  romantic  turn,  unlefs  when  under  the  in- 
fluence of  violent  pafilons,  are  feldom  attached  to  a 
particular   object.     Where,  indeed,    fuch   a   turn   is 
united  with  a  warmth  of  temperament,  the  effbcls  are 
diflferent ;   but  they  are  equally  fatal  to  happinefs.    As 
the  difliindions  which  exifl;  among  real  characters  are 
confounded  by  falfe  and  exaggerated  conceptions  of 
ideal  perfection,  the  choice  is  directed  to  fome  object 
by  caprice  and  accident ;  a  flight  refemblance  is  mif- 
taken  for  an  exa£t  coincidence ;  and  the  defcriptions 
of  the  poet  and  novelifl  are  applied  literally  to  an  in- 
dividual,   who   perhaps  falls   fliort   of  the   common 
fl;andard   of  excellence.     "  I  am  certain,'*  fays   the 
Author  lafl:  quoted,  in  her  account  of  the  character 
of  Rouflfeau,  "  that  he  never  formed  an  attachment 
"  which  was  not  founded  on  caprice.     It  was  illufions 
"  alone  that  could  captivate  his  pafllons ;  and  it  was 
"  neceflary  for  him  always  to  accomplifli  his  miftrefs 
"  from  his  own  fancy.     I  am  certain  alfo,"  flie  adds, 
"  that  the  woman  whom  he  loved  the  moft,  and  per- 
"  haps  the  only  woman  whom  he  loved  conftantly, 
**  was  his  own  Julie." 

In 


524  ELEMENTS    OF  THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

In  the  cafe  of  this  particular  pafTion,  the  effects  of 
a  romantic  imagination  are  obvious  to  the  mofl  care- 
lefs  obferver ;  and  they  have  often  led  moralifts  to 
regret,  that  a  temper  of  mind  fo  dangerous  to  hap- 
pinefs  fhould  have  received  fo  much  encouragement 
from  fome  writers  of  our  own  age,  who  might  have 
employed  their  genius  to  better  purpofes.  Thefe, 
however,  are  not  the  only  efFefts  which  fuch  habits 
of  fludy  have  on  the  character.  Some  others,  which 
are  not  fo  apparent  at  firft  view,  have  a  tendency,  not 
only  to  miflead  us  where  our  own  happinefs  is  at 
flake,  but  to  defeat  the  operation  of  thofe  active  prin- 
ciples, which  were  intended  to  unite  us  to  fociety. 
The  manner  in  which  imagination  influences  the  mind, 
in  the  inftances  which  I  allude  to  at  prefent,  is  curious, 
and  deferves  a  more  particular  explanation. 

I  fhall  have  occafion  afterwards  to  fhew  *,  in  treat- 
ing of  our  moral  powers,  tliat  experience  diminifhes 
the  influence  of  pafllve  impreflions  on  the  mind,  but 
flrengthens  our  adive  principles.  A  courfe  of  de- 
bauchery deadens  the  fenfe  of  pleafure,  but  increafes 
the  defire  of  gratification.  An  immoderate  ufe  of 
flirong  liquors  defliroys  the  fenfibility  of  the  palate, 
but  flrengthens  the  habit  of  intemperance.  The 
enjoyments  we  derive  from  any  favourite  purfuit 
gradually  decay  as  we  advance  in  years  :  and  yet  we 
continue  to  profecute  our  favourite  purfuits  with  in- 
creafmg  flieadinefs  and  vigour. 

*  The  following  reafoning  was  fuggefted  to  me  by  a  paflage  in 
Butler's  Analogy,  wliich  the  reader  will  find  in  Note  [UJ  at  the 
end  cf  the  volume. 

On 


Sea.  5-  <^P   THE    HUMAN    MIND.  525 

On  thefe  two  laws  of  our  nature  is  founded  our 
capacity  of  moral  improvement.  In  proportion  as  we 
are  accuftomed  to  obey  our  fenfe  of  duty,  the  influ- 
ence of  the  temptations  to  vice  is  diminiflied  ;  while, 
at  the  fame  time,  our  habit  of  virtuous  conduft  is 
confirmed.  How  many  paffive  impreffions,  for  in- 
(lance,  mufl  be  overcome,  before  the  virtue  of  benefi- 
cence can  exert  itfelf  uniformly  and  habitually  !  How 
many  circumftances  are  there  in  the  diftrelfes  of  others, 
which  have  a  tendency  to  alienate  our  hearts  from 
them,  and  w'hich  prompt  us  to  withdraw  from  the 
fight  of  the  miferable !  The  impreffions  we  receive 
from  thefe  are  unfavourable  to  virtue  :  their  force, 
however,  every  day  diminifhes,  and  it  may,  perhaps, 
by  perfeverance,  be  wholly  deftroyed.  It  is  thus  that 
the  character  of  the  beneficent  man  is  formed.  The 
paffive  impreffions  w^hich  he  felt  originally,  and  which 
counteradted  his  fenfe  of  duty,  have  lofi:  their  influ- 
ence, and  a  habit  of  beneficence  is  become  part  of  his 
nature. 

It  muft  be  owned,  that  this  reafoning  may,  in  part, 
be  retorted ;  for  among  thofe  paffive  impreffions, 
which  are  weakened  by  repetition,  there  are  fome 
which  have  a  beneficial  tendency.  The  uneafinefs, 
in  particular,  which  the  fight  of  diftrefs  occafions,  is 
a  ftrong  incentive  to  ads  of  humanity  ;  and  it  cannot 
be  denied  that  it  is  leffened  by  experience.  This 
might  naturally  lead  us  to  expeft,  that  the  young  and 
unpradifed  would  be  more  difpofed  to  perform  bene- 
ficent adions,  than  thofe  who  are  advanced  in  life, 
and  who  have  been  familiar  with  fcenes  of  mifery. 
And,  in  truth,  the  fact  would  be  fo,  were  it  not  that 

the 


526  ELEMENTS   OF   THE   PHILOSOPHY      Chap.VlI. 

the  eife£t  of  cuftom  on  this  paflive  impreffion  is  coun- 
terafted  by  its  effects  on  others  ;  and,  above  all,  by- 
its  influence  in  flrengthening  the  adive  habit  of  bene- 
ficence. An  old  and  experienced  phyfician  is  lefs  af- 
feded  by  the  fight  of  bodily  pain,  than  a  younger 
praditioner  ;  but  he  has  acquired  a  more  confirmed 
habit  of  aflifting  the  fick  and  helplefs,  and  would 
offer  greater  violence  to  his  nature,  if  he  fhould  with- 
hold from  them  any  relief  that  he  has  in  his  power 
to  beftow.  In  this  cafe,  we  fee  a  beautiful  provifion 
made  for  our  moral  improvement,  as  the  effeds  of 
experience  on  one  part  of  our  conftitution  are  made  to 
counterad  its  effefts  on  another. 

If  the  foregoing  obfervations  be  well  founded,  it 
will  follow,  that  habits  of  virtue  are  not  to  be  formed 
in  retirement,  but  by  mingling  in  the  fcenes  of  adive 
life,  and  that  an  habitual  attention  to  exhibitions  of 
fiftitious  diflrefs,  is  not  merely  ufelefs  to  the  charader, 
but  pofitively  hurtful. 

It  will  not,  1  think,  be  difputed,  that  the  frequent 
perufal  of  pathetic  compofitions  diminifhes  the  uneafi- 
nefs  which  they  are  naturally  fitted  to  excite.  A  per- 
fon  who  indulges  habitually  in  fuch  ftudies,  may  feel 
a  growing  defire  of  his  ufual  gratification,  but  he  is 
every  day  lefs  and  lefs  affefted  by  the  fcenes  which 
are  prefented  to  him.  I  believe  it  would  be  difficult 
to  find  an  ador  long  hackneyed  on  the  ftage,  who  is 
capable  of  being  completely  interelled  by  the  diftrefles 
of  a  tragedy.  The  effect  of  fuch  compofitions  and 
reprefentations,  in  rendering  the  mind  callous  to  ac- 
tual dillrefs,  is  dill  greater  ;  for  as  the  imagination  of 
the  Poet  almofl  always  carries  him  beyond  truth  and 

nature, 


Sea.  5.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  527 

nature,  a  familiarity  with  the  tragic  fcenes  which  he 
exhibits,  can  hardly  fail  to  deaden  the  imprelTion  pro- 
duced by  the  comparatively  trifling  fufferings  which 
the  ordinary  courfe  of  human  affairs  prefents  to  us. 
In  real  life,  a  provifion  is  made  for  this  gradual  de- 
cay of  fenfibihty,  by  the  proportional  decay  of  other 
pailive  impreffions,  which  have  an  oppofite  tendency, 
and  by  the  additional  force  which  our  adive  habits 
are  daily  acquiring.  Exhibitions  of  fiditious  diftrefs, 
while  they  produce  the  former  change  on  the  charac- 
ter, have  no  influence  in  producing  the  latter :  on  the 
contrary,  they  tend  to  fl:rengthen  thofe  pafllve  im- 
prefllons  which  counterad  beneficence.  The  fcenes 
into  which  the  Novelift  introduces  us  are,  in  general, 
perfectly  unlike  thofe  which  occur  in  the  world.  As 
his  objed  is  to  pleafe,  he  removes  from  his  defcrip- 
tions  every  circumftance  which  is  difgufling,  and  pre- 
fents us  with  hiflories  of  elegant  and  dignified  diftrefs. 
It  is  not  fuch  fcenes  that  human  life  exhibits.  We 
have  to  aft,  not  with  refined  and  elevated  charaders, 
but  with  the  mean,  the  illiterate,  the  vulgar,  and  the 
profligate.  The  perufal  of  fiditious  hiftory  has  a 
tendency  to  increafe  that  difguft  which  we  naturally 
feel  at  the  concomitants  of  diftrefs,  and  to  cultivate  a 
falfe  refinement  of  tafte,  inconfiftent  with  our  condi- 
tion as  members  of  fociety.  Nay,  it  is  pofllble  for 
this  refinement  to  be  carried  fo  far,  as  to  withdraw  a 
man  from  the  duties  of  life,  and  even  from  the  fight 
of  thofe  diftreflfes  which  he  might  alleviate.  And, 
accordingly,  many  are  to  be  found,  who,  if  the 
fituations  of  romance  were  realifed,  would  not  fail  to 
difplay  the  virtues  of  their  favourite  chara^ers,  whofe 

fenfe 


528  ELEMENTS    OF   THE    PHILOSOPHY      Chap.  VII. 

fenfe  of  duty  is  not  fufficlently  Urong  to  engage  them 
in  the  humble  and  private  fcenes  of  human  mifery. 

To  thefe  effefts  of  fictitious  hiflory  we  may  add, 
that  it  gives  no  exercife  to  our  adive  habits.  In  real 
life,  we  proceed  from  the  paffive  impreffion  to  thofe 
exertions  which  it  was  intended  to  produce.  In  the 
contemplation  of  imaginary  fufferings,  we  flop  fhort  at 
the  impreffion,  and  whatever  benevolent  difpofitions  we 
may  feel,  we  have  no  opportunity  of  carrying  them  into 
aftion. 

From  thefe  reafonings  it  appears,  that  an  habitual 
attention  to  exhibitions  of  fiftitious  dift refs,  is  in  every 
view  calculated  to  check  our  moral  improvement.  It 
diminifhes  that  uneafmefs  which  we  feel  at  the  fight  of 
diftrefs,  and  which  prompts  us  to  relieve  it.  It  ftrength- 
ens  that  difguft  which  the  loathfome  concomitants  of 
diftrefs  excite  in  the  mind,  and  which  prompts  us  to 
avoid  the  fight  of  mifery  ;  while,  at  the  fame  time,  it 
has  no  tendency  to  confirm  thofe  habits  of  adive  bene- 
ficence, without  which,  the  beft  difpofitions  are  ufelefs. 
I  would  not,  however,  be  underftood  to  difapprove 
entirely  of  fictitious  narratives,  or  of  pathetic  com- 
pofitions.  On  the  contrary,  I  think  that  the  perufal 
of  them  may  be  attended  with  advantage,  when  the 
effects  which  I  have  mentioned  are  correfted  by  habits 
of  real  bufinefs.  They  foothe  the  mind  when  rufiled 
by  the  rude  intercourfe  of  fociety,  and  ftealing  the  at- 
tention infenfibly  from  our  own  cares,  fubllitute,  in- 
ftead  of  difcontent  and  diftrefs,  a  tender  and  pleafing 
melancholy.  By  exhibitions  of  characters  a  little  ele- 
vated above  the  common  ftandard,  they  have  a  tendency 
to  cultivate  the  tafte  in  life ;  to  quicken  our  difguft 

at 


Sea.  6.  OF    THE    HUMAN    MIND.  529 

at  what  is  mean  or  offenfive,  and  to  form  the  mind  in- 
fenfiblyto  elegance  and  dignity.  Their  tendency  to 
cultivate  the  powers  of  moral  perception  has  never 
been  difputed  ;  and  when  the  influence  of  fuch  per- 
ceptions is  powerfully  felt,  and  is  united  with  an  aftive 
and  manly  temper,  they  render  the  charader  not  only 
more  amiable,  but  more  happy  in  itfelf,  and  more  ufe- 
ful  to  others  ;  for  although  a  rectitude  of  judgment 
with  refpeft  to  conduct,  and  ftrong  moral  feelings,  do, 
by  no  means,  alone  conftitute  virtue  ;  yet  they  are 
frequently  necelTary  to  direft  our  behaviour  in  the 
more  critical  fituations  of  life  ;  and  they  increafe  the 
intereft  we  take  in  the  general  profperity  of  virtue  in 
the  world.  I  believe,  likewife,  that,  by  means  of  fifti- 
tious  hiftory,  difplays  of  charafter  may  be  moil  fuccefs- 
fully  given,  and  the  various  weaknelTes  of  the  heart 
expofed.  I  only  mean  to  infmuate,  that  a  tafle  for 
them  may  be  carried  too  far  ;  that  the  fenfibility  which 
terminates  in  imagination,  is  but  a  refined  and  felfifh 
luxury ;  and  that  nothing  can  effectually  advance  our 
moral  improvement,  but  an  attention  to  the  a6live 
duties  which  belong  to  our  flations. 


SECTION    VI. 

Continuation    of  the  fame    SitbjeB.  —  Important    Ufes   to  which  the 
Po'Vi'er  of  Imagination  is  fubfervient. 

THE  faculty  of  imagination  is  the  great  fpring  of 
human    adivity,    and    the    principal  fource  of 
human  improvement.     As  it  delights  in  prefenting  to 
the  mind  fcenes  and  charaders  more  perfed  than  thofe 
M  m  which 


530  ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY         Chap.  VII. 

which  we  are  acquainted  with,  it  prevents  us  from 
ever  being  completely  fatisfied  with  our  prefent  con- 
dition, or  with  our  paft  attainments ;  and  engages  us 
continually  in  the  purfuit  of  fome  untried  enjoyment, 
or  of  fome  ideal  excellence.  Hence  the  ardour  of  the 
felfifh  to  better  their  fortunes,  and  to  add  to  their  per- 
fonal  accomplifhments  ;  and  l;ence  the  zeal  of  the 
Patriot  and  the  Philofopher  to  advance  the  virtue  and 
the  happinefs  of  the  human  race.  Deftroy  this  faculty, 
and  the  condition  of  man  will  become  as  ftationary  as 
that  of  the  brutes. 

When  the  notions  of  enjoyment  or  of  excellence 
which  imagination  has  formed,  are  greatly  raifed  above 
the  ordinary  ftandard,  they  intereft  the  paffions  too 
deeply  to  leave  us  at  all  times  the  cool  exercife  of 
reafon,  and  produce  that  ftate  of  the  mind  which  is 
commonly  knovm  by  the  name  of  Enthufiafm ;  a  tem- 
per which  is  one  of  the  mofl  fruitful  fources  of  error 
and  difappointment ;  but  which  is  a  fource,  at  the 
fame  time,  of  heroic  adions  and  of  exalted  charafters. 
To  the  exaggerated  conceptions  of  eloquence  which 
perpetually  revolved  in  the  mind  of  Cicero  ;  to  that 
idea  which  haunted  his  thoughts  of  aliquid  mmenfujn 
injinitumqiie ;  we  are  indebted  for  fome  of  the  mod 
fplendid  difplays  of  human  genius  ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  fomething  of  the  fame  kind  has  been  felt  by  every 
man  who  has  rifen  much  above  the  level  of  humanity, 
either  in  fpeculation  or  in  aftion.  It  is  happy  for  the 
individual,  when  thefe  enthufiaflic  defires  are  direftedto 
events  which  do  not  depend  on  the  caprice  of  fortune. 

The  pleafure  we  receive  from  the  higher  kinds  of 
poetry  takes  rife,    in  part,    from    that  diflatisfaclion 

which 


Sea.  6.  OF  THE  HUMAN  MIND.  53 1 

which  the  objeds  of  imagination  infpire  us  with,  for 
the  fcenes,  the  events,  and  the  characters,  with  which 
our  fenfes  are  converfant.  Tired  and  difguiled  with 
this  world  of  imperfedion,  we  delight  to  efcape  to 
another  of  the  poet's  creation,  where  the  charms  of 
nature  wear  an  eternal  bloom,  and  where  fources  of 
enjoyment  are  opened  to  us,  fuited  to  the  vail  capaci- 
ties of  the  human  mind.  On  this  natural  love  of  po- 
etical fidion,  lord  Bacon  has  founded  a  very  ingenious 
argument  for  the  foul's  immortality ;  and,  indeed,  one 
of  the  moft  important  purpofes  to  which  it  is  fubfer- 
vient,  is  to  elevate  the  mind  above  the  purfuits  of  our 
prefent  condition,  and  to  dired  the  views  to  higher 
objeds.  In  the  mean  time,  it  is  rendered  fubfervient 
alfo,  in  an  eminent  degree,  to  the  improvement  and 
happinefs  of  mankind,  by  the  tendency  which  it  has  to 
accelerate  the  progrefs  of  fociety. 

As  the  pidures  which  the  poet  prefents  to  us  are 
never  (even  in  works  of  pure  defcription)  faithful  co- 
pies from  nature,  but  are  always  meant  to  be  improve- 
ments on  the  original  (he  aifords,  it  cannot  be  doubted 
that  they  muft  have  fome  effed  in  relining  and  exalt- 
ing our  tafte,  both  with  refped  to  material  beauty, 
and  to  the  objeds  of  our  purfuit  in  life.  It  has  been 
alledged,  that  the  works  of  our  defcriptive  poets  have 
contributed  to  diffufe  that  tafte  for  pidlurefque  beauty, 
which  is  fo  prevalent  in  England,  and  to  recal  the 
public  admiration  from  the  fantaftic  decorations  of  art, 
to  the  more  powerful  and  permanent  charms  of  culti- 
vated nature  ;  and  it  is  certain,  that  the  firft  ardours 
of  many  an  illuftrious  charader  have  been  kindled  by 
the  compofitions  of  Homer  and  Virgil.     It  is  difficult 

M  m  2  to 


332  ELEMENTS    OF    THE    PHILOSOriiY       Chap.  V IT. 

to  fay,  to  what  a  degree,  in  the  earlier  periods  of  fociety, 
the   rude  compofitions  of  the  bard  and   the  minftrei 
mav  have  been  inftrumental  in  humamzino;  the  minds 
of  favage  warriors,  and  i\\  accelerating  the  growth  of 
cultivated  manners.     Among  the  Scandinavians  and 
the  CeltK  we  know  that  this  order  of  men  was  held 
in  very    peculiar    veneradon  ;    and,    accordingly,    it 
would  appear,  from  the  monuments  which  remain  of 
thefe  nadons,  that  they  were  diilinguifhed  by  a  dehcacy 
in  the  paflion  of  love,  and  by  a  humanity  and  genero- 
fitv  to  the  vanquilhed    in  war,  which  fcldom   appear 
among  barbarous  tribes  ;  and  with  which  it  is  hardly 
poffible  to  conceive  how  men  in  fuch  a  ftate  of  fociety 
could  have  been  infpired,  but  by   a  feparate  clafs  of 
individuals  in  the  community,  who  devoted  themfelves 
to  the  pacific  profefTion  of  poetry,  and  to  the  cultiva^ 
tion  of  that  creative  power  of  the  mind,  v.hich  antici- 
pates the  courfe  of  human  affairs  ;  and  prefents,  in 
prophetic  vifion,  to  the  poet  and  the  philofopher,  the 
bleffings  which  accompany  the  progrefs  of  reafon  and 
refinement. 

Nor  mufl  w^e  omit  to  mendon  the  important  efFe£ts 
of  Imagination  in  multiplving  the  fources  of  innocent 
enjoyment,  beyond  what  this  limited  fcene  affords. 
Not  to  infift  on  the  nobler  efforts  of  genius,  which 
have  rendered  this  part  of  our  conftitudon  fubfervient 
to  moral  improvement ;  hovv^  much  has  the  fphere  of 
our  happinefs  been  extended  by  thofe  agreeable  fidions 
which  introduce  us  to  new  worlds,  and  make  us  ac- 
quainted vdth  new  orders  of  being  !  "What  a  fund  of 
amufement,  through  life,  is  prepared  for  one  who 
reads,  in  his  childhood,  the  fables  of  antient  Greece  1 

1 1  They 


Sea.  6.  OF   TPIE    I-IUMAX    MIND.  533 

They  dwell  habitually  on  the  memory,  and  are  ready, 
at  all  times,  to  fill  up  the  intervals  of  bufinefs,  or  of 
ferious  reflexion  ;  and  in  his  hours  of  rural  retirement 
and  leifure,  they  warm  his  mind  with  the  fire  of  antient 
genius,  and  animate  every  fcene  he  enters,  with  the 
offspring  of  claflical  fancy. 

It  is,  however,  chiefly  in  painting  future  fcenes  that 
Imagination  loves  to  indulge  herfelf,  and  her  prophetic 
dreams  are  almoft  always  favourable  to  happinefs.  By 
an  erroneous  education,  indeed,  it  is  pofTible  to  render 
this  faculty  an  inflrument  of  conftant  and  of  exquifite 
diftrefs ;  but  in  fuch  cafes  (abflracling  from  the  in- 
fluence of  a  conflitutional  melancholy)  the  diftreffes 
of  a  gloomy  imagination  are  to  be  afcribed  not  to  na- 
ture, but  to  the  force  of  early  imprefTionG. 

The  common  bias  of  the  mind  undoubtedly  is, 
(fuch  is  the  benevolent  appointment  of  Providence,) 
to  think  favourablv  of  the  future ;  to  overvalue  the 
chances  of  pofTible  good,  and  to  under-rate  the  rilks  of 
pofTible  evil  ;  and  in  the  cafe  of  fome  fortunate  indivi- 
duals, this  difpofition  remains  after  a  thoufand  difap- 
pointments.  To  what  this  bias  of  our  nature  is  owing, 
it  is  not  material  for  us  to  inquire  :  the  fa6t  is  certain, 
and  it  is  an  important  one  to  our  happinefs.  It  fup- 
ports  us  under  the  real  diflreifes  of  life,  and  cheers  and 
animates  all  our  labours  :  and  although  it  is  fometimes 
apt  to  produce,  in  a  weak  and  indolent  mind,  thofe 
deceitful  fuggeftions  of  ambition  and  vanity,  which 
lead  us  to  facrifice  the  duties  and  the  comforts  of  the 
prefent  moment,  to  romantic  hopes  and  expectations ; 
yet  it  muft  be  acknowledged,  when  connefted  v.dth 
habits  of  adivity,  and  regulated  by  a  folid  judgment, 

M  m  3  to 


534      ELEMENTS  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHY,  &C.    Chap.  VII. 

to  have  a  favourable  effect  on  the  charader,  by  in- 
fpiring  that  ardour  and  enthufiafm  which  both  prompt 
to  great  enterprifes,  and  are  neceffary  to  enfure  their 
fuccefs.  When  fuch  a  temper  is  united  (as  it  com- 
monly is)  with  pleafing  notions,  concerning  the  order 
of  the  univerfe,  and  in  particular  concerning  the  con- 
dition and  the  profpefts  of  man,  it  places  our  happinefs, 
in  a  great  meafure,  beyond  the  power  of  fortune. 
While  it  adds  a  double  relifli  to  every  enjoyment,  it 
blunts  the  edge  of  all  cur  fufferings  ;  and  even  when 
human  life  prefents  to  us  no  objeft  on  which  our  hopes 
can  reft,  it  invites  the  imagination  beyond  the  dark 
and  troubled  horizon  which  terminates  all  our  earthly 
profpeds,  to  wander  unconfined  in  the  regions  of 
futurity.  A  man  of  benevolence,  whofe  mind  is  en- 
larged by  philofophy,  will  indulge  the  fame  agreeable 
anticipations  with  refped  to  fociety  ;  will  view  all  the 
different  improvements  in  arts,  in  commerce,  and  in  the 
fciences,  as  co-operating  to  promote  the  union,  the 
happinefs,  and  the  virtue  of  mankind  ;  and,  amidft  the 
political  diforders  refulting  from  the  prejudices  and 
follies  of  his  own  times,  will  look  forward  with  tranf- 
port,  to  the  bleflings  which  are  referved  for  pofterity 
in  a  more  enlightened  age. 


NOTES 


AND 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


M  m  4 


[    537     3 


NOTES,    ^c. 


NOTE   [A],  page  4. 

AM  happy  in  being  able  to  quote  the  following  paflage,  in 
illuflration  of  a  do6lrine,  againfh  which  I  do  not  conceive 
it  pofTible  to  urge  any  thing,  but  the  authority  of  fome  il- 
luftrious  names. 

"  Puifque  Tcxiftence  des  corps  n'eft  pour  nous  que  la 

"  permanence  d'etres  dont  les  proprietes  repondent  a  un 

"  certain  ordre  de  nos  fenfations,  il  en  refulte  qu'elle  n'a 

"  rien   de  plus  certain  que   celle  d'autres  etres  qui  fe  mani- 

«<  feftent  egalement  par  leurs  efFets  fur  nous  ;   &  puifque  nos 

"■''  obfervations  fur  nos  propres  facuIteSj  confirmees  par  celles 

"  que    nous  faifons  fur  les  etres  penfants  qui  animent  auffi 

"  des  corps,  nc  nous  montrent  aucune  analogie  entre  I'etre 

"  qui  fent  ou  qui  penfe  &  I'etre  qui  nous  ofFre  le  phenomena 

"  de  I'etendue  ou  de  I'impenetrabilite,  il  n'y  a  aucune  raifon 

"  de  croire  ces  etres  de  la  meme  nature.     Ainfi  la  fpiritualite 

<'  de  Tame  n'eft  pas  une  opinion  qui  ait  befoin  de  preuves, 

«  mais  le  refultat  fimple  8c  naturel  d'une  analyfe  exaQe  de 

"  nos  ideeSj  8c  de  nos  facultes." 

Vie  de  M.  Tvkgot: par  M.  Condorcet. 

Des  Cartes  was  the  firft  philofopher  who  ftatcd,  in  a  clear 

and  fatisfaftory  nranner,  the  diftindion  between  mind  and 

matter,  and    who  pointed  out  the  proper  plan  for  ftudying 

the  intelle£tual  phenomena.     It  is  chiefly  in  confequence  of 

his 


538  NOTES  AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

his  precife  ideas  with  refpeft  to  this  diftindion,  that  wc 
may  remark,  in  all  his  metaphyfical  writings,  a  perfpi- 
cuity  which  is  not  obiervable  in  thofe  of  any  of  his  prede- 
cefTors. 

Dr.  Rcid  has  remarked,  that  although  Des  Cartes  infers 
the  exiftence  of  mind,  from  the  operations  of  which  we  are 
confcious,  yet  he  could  not  reconcile  himfelf  to  the  notion 
of  an  unknown  fubflance,  or  fubftratum,  to  which  thefe 
operations  belonged.  And  it  was  on  this  account,  he  con- 
jeftures,  that  he  made  the  eflence  of  the  foul  to  confift  in 
thought ;  as,  for  a  fimilar  reafon,  he  had  made  the  eflence 
of  matter  to  confift  in  extenfion.  But  I  am  afraid,  that  this 
fuppofitiou  is  not  perfectly  reconcileable  with  Des  Cartes* 
writings  •,  for  he  repeatedly  fpeaks  with  the  utmoft  confidence 
of  the  exiftence  of  fubftances  of  which  we  have  only  a  rela- 
tive idea  j  and,  even  in  attempting  to  (liew  that  thought  is- 
the  eflential  attribute  of  mind,  and  extenfion  of  matter,  he 
confiders  them  as  nothing  more  than  attributes  or  qualities 
belonging  to  thefe  fubftances. 

"  Per  fubftantiam  nihil  aliud  intelligere  pofTumus,  quam 
«  rem  quae  ita  exiftit,  ut  nulla  alia  re  indigeat  ad  exiften- 
"  dum.  Et  quidem  fubftantia  quae  nulla  plane  re  indigeat, 
"  unica  tantum  poteft  intelligi,  nempe  Deus.  Alias  vero 
<'  omnes,  non  nifi  ope  concurfus  Dei  exiftere  pofle  percipi- 
*'  mus.  Atque  ideo  nomen  fubftantias  non  convenit  Deo  et 
"  illis  tmivoce  ut  dici  folet  in  fcholis  j  hoc  eft,  nulla  ejus  no- 
"  minis  fignificatio,  poteft  diftinde  intelligi,  quae  Deo,  et 
^*  creaturis  fit  communis. 

"  PofTunt  autem  fubftantia  corporea,  et  mens,  five  fub- 
«  ftantia  cogitans,  creata,  fub  hoc  communi  conceptu  intel- 
"  ligi ;  quod  fmt  res,  quae  folo  Dei  concurfu  egent  ad  exif- 
"  tendum.  Verumtamen  non  poteft  fubftantia  primum  ani- 
"  madverti  ex  hoc  folo,  quod  fit  res  exiftens,  quia  hoc  folum 
"  per  fe  nos  non  afBcit:  fed  facile  ipfam  agnofcimus  ex 
«  quolibet  ejus  attribute,  per  communem  illam  notionem, 
«  quod  nihili  nulla  funt  attributa,  nullaeve  proprietates  aut 
"  qualitates.  Ex  hoc  enim,  quod  aliquod  attributum  adeflfe 
J  2  "  per- 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  539 

"  percipiamus,  concludimus  aliquam  rem  exifleiitem,    five 
"  fubftantiam  cui  illud  tribui  poffit,  neceflario  etlam  adefle. 

"  Et  quidem  ex  quolibet  attribute  fubftantia  cognofcitur . 
"  fed  una  tamen  eft  cujufque  fubftantiae  prsecipua  proprietas^ 
"  quas  ipfius  naturam  effcntiamque  conftituir,  et  ad  quam 
"  alise  omnes  referuntur.  Nempe  extenfio  in  longum,  la- 
♦'  turn  et  profundum  fubftantise  corporese  naturam  conftituit ; 
<*  €t  cogitatio  conftituit  naturam  fubftantise  cogitantis." 

Pr'wcip.   Phihfoph.  pars  i.  can.  51,  52,53. 

In  ftating  the  relative  notions  v»/^hicli  we  have  of  mind  and 
of  body,  I  have  avoided  the  ufe  of  the  word  fnhjlance^  as  I 
am  unwilHng  to  furnifli  the  flighteft  occafion  for  controverfyi 
and  have  contented  myfelf  wivh  defining  mind  to  be  that 
which  feels,  thinks,  wills,  hopes,  fears,  defires,  See.  That 
my  ccnfcioufnefs  of  thefe  and  other  operations  is  neceflarily 
accompanied  with  a  conviAion  of  my  own  exiftence,  and 
with  a  conviction  that  all  of  them  belong  to  one  and  the 
fame  being,  is  not  an  hypothefis,  but  a  fa£t ;  of  which  it  is 
no  more  poffible  for  me  to  doubt,  than  of  the  reality  of  my 
own  fenfations  or  volitions. 

NOTE   [B.],  page  68. 

j^OCTOR  Reid  remarks,  that  Des  Cartes  rejected  a  part 
only  of  the  antient  theory  of  perception,  and  adopted 
the  other  part.  <«  That  theory,"  fays  he,  "  may  be  divided 
*'  into  two  parts  :  the  firft,  that  images,  fpecies,  or  forms  of 
"  external  objedls,  come  from  the  object,  and  enter  by  the 
"  avenues  of  the  fenfes  to  the  mind  :  the  fecond  part  is,  that 
'*  the  external  objeft  itfelf  is  not  perceived,  but  only  the 
"  fpecies  or  image  of  it  in  the  mind.  The  fir  ft  part,  Des 
«  Cartes  and  his  followers  rejefted  and  refuted  by  folid  ar- 
"  guments  ;  but  the  fecond  part,  neither  he  nor  his  followers 
"  have  thought  of  calling  in  queftion  ;  being  perfuaded  that 
"  it  is  only  a  rcprefentative  image  in  the  mind  of  the  exter- 
"  nal  object  that  we  perceive,  and  not  the  obje£l  itfelf. 
"  And  this  image,  which  the   perip-atctics  called   a  fpecies, 

<•   he 


540  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  he  calls  an  idea,  changing  the  name  only,  while  he  admits 
*<  the  thing." 

The  account  which  this  paflage  contains  of  Des  Cartes* 
doflrine  concerning  perception,  is,  I  believe,  agreeable  to 
his  prevailing  opinion,  as  it  may  be  colleiled  from  the  general 
tenor  of  his  writings ;  and  the  obfervation  with  which  it 
concludes  is  undoubtedly  true,  that  neither  he  nor  any  of  his 
followers  ever  called  in  queflion  the  exiftence  of  ideas,  as  the 
immediate  obje£ls  of  our  perception.  With  refpedt,  how- 
ever, to  the  firil  part  of  the  antient  theory,  as  here  ftated, 
it  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  Des  Cartes,  although  evi- 
dently by  no  means  fatisfied  with  it,  fometimes  exprefles 
himfelf  as  if  he  rather  doubted  of  it,  than  exprefsly  denied 
it  ;  and  at  other  times,  when  prefled  with  objections  to  his 
own  particular  fyflem,  he  admits,  at  leaft  in  part,  the  truth 
of  it.  The  following  pafTage  is  one  of  the  moffc  explicit  I 
recolle61:,  in  oppofition  to  the  antient  doctrine. 

"  Obfervandum  prasterea,  animam,  nullis  imaginibus  ab 
"  objeftis  ad  cerebrum  miflis  egere  ut  fentiat,  (contra  quam 
"  communiter  philofophi  noftri  flatuunt,)  aut  ad  minimum 
"  longe  aliter  illarum  imaginum  naturam  concipiendam  efle 
*'  quam  vulgo  fit.  Quum  enim  circa  eas  nil  confiderent, 
''  prxter  fimilitudinemearum  cum  objectis  quae  reprsefentant, 
"  non  poiTunt  explicare,  qua  ratione  ab  obje£lis  formari 
"  queant,  et  recipi  ab  organis  fenfuum  exteriorum,  et  demum 
"  nervis  ad  cerebrum  tranfvehi,  Ncc  alia  caufa  imagines 
"  iftas  fingere  eos  impulit,  nifi  quod  viderent  mentem  noftram 
"  eflicacirer  pi£l:ura  excitari  ad  apprehendendum  obje6lum 
"  illud,  quod  exhibet :  ex  hoc  enim  judicarunt,  illam  eodem 
"  modo  excitandam,  ad  apprehendenda  ea  quae  fenfus  mo- 
"  vent,  per  exiguas  quafdam  imagines,  in  capite  noflro  de- 
"  lineatas.  Sed  nobis  contra  eft  advertendum,  multa  proeter 
"  imagines  efle,  qu?e  cogitationes  excitant,  ut  exempli  gratia, 
*'  verba  et  figna,  nullo  modo  fimilia  iis  quse  fignificant." 

Dioptric,  cap.  4-  §  ^^ 

In  his  third  meditation  (which  contains  his  celebrated  argu- 
ment for  the  exiftence  of  a  Deity)  the  following  paflage  occurs. 

«  Sed 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  541 

"  Sod  hlcprsecipue  delis  efl  quaerendum  quas  tanquam  a 

*'  rebus  extra  meexiilcntibus  defumptas  confidero,  quaenam 

*'  me  moveat  ratio  ut  ill^is  iftis  rebus  fimiles  effe  oxiftimcm  ; 

"  nempe  Ita  videor  doclus  a  natura^  et  prxterea  experior  illas 

**  non  a  mea  voluntate  nee  proinde  a  mc  ipfo  pendero,  fscpe 

*'  enim  vel  invito  obverfantur,  ut  jam,  five  vclim  five  nolim, 

"  feHtio  calorem,    et   ideo    puto  fenfum  ilium,  five  ideam 

"  caloris  a  re    a:  me  divevfa,    nempe  ab  ignis,  cui  aflideo 

"  calore  mihi  advenire,    nihiique  magis  obvium  eft,  quam 

'<  ut  judicem  iftam  rem  fuam  fimilitudinem  potius,  quam 

*'  aliud  quid  in  me  immittere  ;  quae  rationes  an  fatis  firmae 

**  fint,  jam  videbo.     Cum    hie  dico  me   ita  doclum    efle  a 

"  natura,    intelligo  tantum  fpontaneo  quodam  impetu    me 

*f  ferri  ad  hoc  credendum,  non  lumine  aliquo  natural!  mihi 

*'  oftendi  efle  verum,  qu^    duo    multum  difcrepant,    nam 

"  qusecumque  himine  natural!  mihi  oftenduntur,   (ut  quod 

*'  ex  eo  quod  dubitem  fequatur  me    efle,  et  fimilia,)  nullo 

"  modo  dubia  efle  poflunt  quia  nulla  alia  facultas  efl~e  po- 

**  teft,  cui  asque  fidam  ac  lumini  ifti,  qua2que  ilia  non  vera 

*'  poflTit    docere ;  fed    quantum    ad   impetus  naturales,  jam 

*'  faspe  olim  judicavi  me  ab  illis  in  deteriorem  partem  fuifl~e 

*'  impulfum  cum  de  bono  eligendo  ageretur,  nee  video  cur 

**  iifdem  in  ulla  alia  re  magis  fidam.  Deinde  quamvis  ideje 

**  illse  a  voluntate  mea  non  pendeant,  non  ideo  conftat  ipfas 

*'  a  rebus  extra   me   pofitis    necefllirio  procedere  ;  ut    enim 

**  impetus  illi,  de  quibus  rnox  loquebar,  quamvis  in  me  fint, 

"  a  voluntate  tamen  mea  diverfi  efle  videntur,  ita  forte  etlam 

"  aliqua  alia  eft  in  me  facultas  nondum  mihi  fatis  cognita 

«  iftarum  idearum  efFe6lrix,  ut  haftenus  femper  vifum  eft 

"  illas,  dum  fomnio,  abfque  ulla  rerum  externarum  ope  in 

**  me  formari  •,  ac    denique  quamvis  a    rebus  a  me  diverfis 

"  procederent,  non  inde  fequitur  illas  rebus  iftis  fimiles  efTe 

"  debere  -,  quinimo  in  multis  fiepe  magnum  difcrimen  videor 

**  deprehendifl"e  ;  fie,  exempli  caufa,  duas  diverfas  folis  ideas 

"  apud  me  invenio,  unam  tanquam  a  fenfibus  hauftam,  et 

*<  quae  maxime  inter  illas  quas  adventitias  exiftimo  eft  re- 

*'  cenfenda,  per  quam  mihi  valde   parvus   apparet  j  aliam 

"  vero 


542  NOTES  AND   ILLUSTRATIONS. 

**  vero  ex  rationibus  aflronomiae  defumptam,  hoc  eft  ex  no- 
"  tionibus  quibufdam  mihi  innatis  elicitam  vel  quocumque 
*'  alio  modo  a  me  fa6\am,  per  quam  aliquoties  major  quam 
**  terra  exhibetur  ;  utraque  profefto  fimilis  eidem  foli  extra 
"  me  exiftenti  efle  non  poteft,  et  ratio  perfuadet  illam  ei 
"  maxime  efle  diflimilem,  quae  quam  proxime  ab  ipfo  videtur 
*'  eman^fle.  Qua  omnia  fatis  demotillrant  me  non  haQenus 
"  ex  certo  judicio,  fed  tantum  ex  caeco  aliquo  impulfu  cre- 
•f  didifle  res  quafdam  a  me  diverfis  exiftere,  quae  ideas  five 
"  imagines  fuas  per  organa  fenfuum,  vel  quolibet  alio  pa6lo 
*'  mihiimmittant." 

Among  other  animadverfions  upon  this  meditation  fent  to 
Des  Cartes  by  one  of  his  correfpondents,  it  is  objected  ;  — 
"  Videris  vertere  in  dubium  non  tantum  utrum  ideae  aliquae 
«'  procedant  ex  rebus  externis,  fed  etiam  utrum  omnino  fint 
"  externae  res  aliquae."  To  which  Des  Cartes  anfwers  : 
*^  Notandum  eft,  me  non  affirmafle  ideas  rerum  materialium 
**  ex  mente  deduci,  ut  non  fatis  bona  fide  hie  fingis ;  ex- 
*'  preiTe  enim  poftea  oftendiipfas  a  corporibus  faepe  advenire, 
"  ac  per  hoc  corporum  exlftentiam  probari." 

Vide  ObjeSliones  in  Meditntioties  Renati   Des  Cartes,  cum 
ejufdem  adtllas  Refponfionibus, 

NOTE  [C],  page  71. 

TNconfequence  of  the  inferences  vi^hich  Mr.  Hume  has 
-*■  deduced  from  this  do£lrine  concerning  caufe  and  efl^e£l, 
fome  later  authors  have  been  led  to  difpute  its  truth  ;  not 
perceiving  that  the  fallacy  of  this  part  of  Mr.  Hume's  fyftem 
does  not  confift  in  his  premifes,  but  in  the  conclufion  which 
he  draws  from  tliem. 

That  the  objeiSt  of  tlie  phyfical  inquirer  is  not  to  trace 
JnecefTary  connexions,  or  to  afcertain  the  efficient  caufes  of 
phenomena,  is  a  principle  which  has  been  frequently  afcrib- 
ed  to  Mr.  Hume  as  its  author,  both  by  his  followers  and 
by  his  opponents  ;  but  it  is,  in  fa£l,  of  a  much  earlier  datt, 
and  has  been  maintained  by  many  of  the  moft  enlightened, 

and 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  543 

and  tlie  leaft  fceptlcal  of  our  modern  philofophers :  nor  do  I 
know  that  it  was  ever  fufpetted  to  have  a  dangerous  tendency, 
till  the  publication  of  Mr.  Hume's  writings.  "  If  we  except" 
(fays  Dr.  Barrow)  "  the  mutual  caufality  and  dependence  of 
"  the  terms  of  a  mathematical  demonftration,  I  do  not  think 
"  that  there  is  any  other  caufality  in  the  nature  of  things, 
*'  wherein  a  neceflary  confequence  can  be  founded.  Logi- 
**  cians  do  indeed  boaft  of  I  do  not  know  what  kind  of  de- 
"  monflirations  from  external  caufes  either  efficient  or  final, 
*'  but  without  being  able  to  fhew  one  genuine  example  of 
*'  any  fuch ;  nay,  I  imagine  it  is  impoflible  for  them  fo  to 
"  do.  For  there  can  be  no  fuch  connexion  of  an  external 
"  efficient  caufe  with  its  effisft,"  (at  leaft  none  fuch  can  be 
underftood  by  us,)  "  through  which,  ftri6lly  fpeaking,  the 
*'  efFe£t  is  neceffarily  fuppofed  by  the  fuppofition  of  the 
*«  efficient  caufe,  or  any  determinate  caufe  by  the  fuppofition 
*'  of  the  efFeft."  He  adds  afterwards,  "Therefore  there 
**  can  be  no  argumentation  from  an  efficient  caufe  to  the 
*^  efFe£l,  or  from  an  efFe£t  to  the  caufe  which  is  lawfully 
<*  neceflary."  Mathematical  Lectures   read  at  Cambridge. 

Dr.  Butler  too,  in  his  difcourfe  on  the  ignorance  of  man, 
has  remarked,  that  "  it  is  in  general  no  more  than  efFe<9:s, 
**  that  the  mod  knowing  are  acquainted  with ;  for  as  to 
"  caufes  they  ai-e  entirely  in  the  dark  as  the  moft  igno- 
"  rant."  *'  What  are  the  laws,"  (he  continues,)  "by  which 
"  matter  a£ts  on  matter,  but  certain  effefts,  which  fome 
"  having  obferved  to  be  frequently  repeated,  have  reduced 
"  to  general  rules  ?"  ButLErV  Sermons. 

"  The  laws  of  attraction  and  repulfion,"  (fays  Dr.  Berke- 
ley) "  are  to  be  regarded  as  laws  of  motion,  and  thefe  only 
*'  as  rules  or  methods  obferved  in  the  produftions  of  natural 
**  effefbs,  the  efficient  and  final  caufes  whereof  are  not  of 
*'  mechanical  confideration.  Certainly,  if  the  explaining  a 
"  phenomenon  be  to  affign  its  proper  efficient  and  final 
'*  caufe,  it  (houid  feem  the  mechanical  philofophers  never 
^  explained  any  thing  ;  their  province  being  only  to  difcover 
"  the  laws  of  nature  j  that  is,  the  general  rules  and  method 

<«  of 


(44  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

*'  of  motion  •,  and  to   account  for  particular  phenomena,  bv 
"  reducing  them  under,  or  (hewing  their  conformity  to  fuch 
"  general  rules."     Siris  :  or,  Philofoph'ical  Inquiries  concern- 
ing the  Virtues  of  Tar  Water ^  p.  io8. 

*'  1  he  words  attraElion  and  repuljion  may,  in  compliance 
**  with  cuftom,  be  ufed  where,  accurately  fpeaking,  motion 
"  alone  is  meant."  Ihid.^.  114. 

<•  Attraction  cannot  produce,  and  in  that  fenfe  account, 
"  for  the  phenomena  ;  being  itfelf  one  of  the  phenomena 
"  produced  and  to  be  accounted  for."  Ihid.  p.  115. 

"  There  is  a  certain  analogy,  conflancy,  and  uniformity  in 
"  the  phenomena  or  appearances  of  nature,  which  are  a  foun- 
<*  dation  for  general  rules  :  and  thefe  are  a  grammar  for  the 
«'  underfhanding  of  nature,  or  that  feries  of  effetfts  in  the  vi- 
«  fible  world,  whereby  we  are  enabled  to  forefee  what  will 
"  come  to  pafs  in  the  natural  courfe  of  things.  Plotinus 
<«  obferves,  in  his  third  Ennead,  that  the  art  of  prefaging, 
«  is  in  fome  fort  the  reading  of  natural  letters  denoting 
"  order,  and  that  fo  far  forth  as  analogy  obtains  in  the  uni- 
«  verfe,  there  may  be  vaticination.  And  in  reality,  he  that 
«  foretells  the  motions  of  the  planets,  or  the  efFefts  of  me- 
*<  dicines,  or  the  refult  of  chemical  or  mechanical  experi- 
"  ments,  may  be  faid  to  do  it  by  natural  vaticination." 

Ibid.  p.  120,  121. 

«  Inftruments,  occafions,  and  figns,  occur  in,  or  rather 
"  makeup,  the  whole  vifible  courfe  of  nature."  Ib.^.  123. 

The  following  very  remarkable  paflage  from  Mr.  Locke 
fliews  clearly,  that  this  eminent  philofopher  confidered  the 
connexion  between  impulfe  and  motion,  as  a  conjunBion 
which  we  learn  from  experience  only  ;  and  not  as  a  confe- 
quence  deducible  from  the  confideration  of  impulfe,  by  any 
reafoning  a  priori.  The  palTage  is  the  more  curious,  that  it 
is  this  particular  application  of  Mr.  Hume's  do6lrine,  that 
has  been  generally  fuppofed  to  furnilh  the  ftrongefl  objedion 
againft  it. 

«  Another  idea  we  have  of  body,  is  the  power  of  com- 
«  municating  motion  by  Impulfe  -,    and  of  our  fouls,  the 

"  power 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  545 

**  power  of  exciting  motion  by  thought.  Thefe  ideas,  the 
**  one  of  body,  the  other  of  our  nainds,  every  day's  cxperi- 
*^  ence  clearly  furnifhes  us  with :  but  if  here  ?.gain  we  in- 
"  quire  how  this  is  done,  we  are  equally  in  the  d?.rk,  For 
''  m  the  communication  of  motion  by  impulfe,  wherein  as 
«  much  motion  is  loft  to  one  body,  as  is  got  to  the  other, 
"  which  is  the  ordinarieft  cafe,  we  can  have  no  other  con- 
*«  ception,  but  of  the  pafling  of  motion  out  of  the  one  into 
"  another  •,  which  I  think  is  as  obfcure  and  inconceivable, 
"  as  how  our  minds  move  or  ftop  our  bodies  by  thought^ 
"  which  we  every  moment  find  they  do." 

"  The    communication    of  motion  by  thought, 

"  which  we  afcribe  to  fpirit,  is  as  evident  as  that  of  impUife, 
*^  which  we  afcribe  to  body.  Confrant  experience  makes  us 
"  fenfible  of  both  of  thefe,  though  our  narrow  underftand- 
"  ings  can  comprehend  neither." 

— "  To  conclude,  fenfation  convinces  us,  that  there 

"  are  folid  extended  fubftances  •,  and  reflexion,  that  there 
^<  are  thinking  ones  :  experience  afliires  us  of  the  exiftence 
'*  of  fuch  beings  ;  and  that  the  one  hath  a  power  to  move 

"  body   by  impulfe,  and  the  other  by  thought. If  we 

"  would  inquire  farther  into  their  nature,  caufes,  and  man- 
"  ner,  we  perceive  not  the  nature  of  extenfion  clearer  than 
"  we  do  of  thinking.  If  we  would  explain  them  any  far- 
"  ther,  one  is  as  eafy  as  the  other  ;  and  there  is  no  more 
*'  difficulty  to  conceive,  how  a  fubftance  we  know  not, 
"  (hould  by  thought  fet  body  into  motion,  than  how  a  fub- 
"  ftance  we  know  not,  fhould  by  impulfe  fet  body  into  mo- 
"  tion."  Locke,  book  ii.  chap.  23.  §  28,  29. 

It  is  not  indeed  very  eafy  to  reconcile  the  foregoing  ob- 
fervations,  which  are,  in  every  refpe£l:,  worthy  of  the  faga- 
city  of  this  excellent  philofopher,  with  the  paflage  quoted 
from  him  in  page  81  of  this  work. 

Some  of  Mr.  Hume's  reafonings  concerning  the  nature  of 

the  connexions  among  phyfical   events,  coincide   perfedlly 

with  thofe  of  Malebranche  on  the  fame  fubjecSV ;  but  they 

N  n  were 


j46  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

were  employed  by  this  lall  writer  to  fupport  a  very  different 
conclufion. 

At  a  ftill  earlier  period,  Hobbes  exprefled  himfelf  with  re- 
■fpecl  to  phyfical  conneflions,  in  terms  fo  nearly  approaching 
to  Mr.  Hume's,  that  it  is  difhcult  to  fuppofe  that  they  did 
not  fuggeft  to  him  the  language  which  he  has  employed  on 

m/Hr>'..  that  fubj eft.  "  What  we  call  e:cperience,"  (he  remarks,) 
"  is  nothing  elfe  but  remembrance  of  what  antecedents  have 
"  been  followed  by  what  confequents."  — "  No  man,"  (he 
continues,)  "  can  have  in  his  mind  a  conception  of  the  fu- 
♦'  ture ;  for  the  future  is  not  yet  -,  but  of  our  conceptions  of 
"  the  pait  we  make  a  future,  or  rather  call  palt,  future 
*'  relatively.  Thus  after  a  man  hath  been  accuflomed 
"  to  fee  like  antecedents  followed  by  like  confequents, 
•'  whenfoever  he  feeth  the  like  come  to  pafs  to  any  thing  he 
*'  had  \een  before,  he  looks  there  (hould  follow  it  the  fame 
"  that  followed  then.- — When  a  man  hath  fo  often  obferved 
*'  like  antecedents  to  be  followed  by  like  confequents,  that 
"  whenfoever  he  feeth  the  antecedent,  he  looketh  again  for 
"  the  confequent,  or  when  he  feeth  the  confequent,  maketh 
"  account  there  hath  been  the  like  antecedent,  then  he  call- 
"  eth  both  the  antecedent  and  the  confequent  figns  of  one 
«  another."  Hobbes'  Tripos. 

I  am  doubtful  whether  I  fliould  not  add  to  thefe  authori- 
ties, that  of  Lord  Bacon,  who,  although  he  has  no  where 
formally  ftated  the  doftrine  now  under  confideration,  has 
pluialy  taken  it  for  granted  in  all  his  reafonings  on  the  me- 
thod of  profecuting  phllofophical  inquiries  •,  for  if  we  could 
pciTcive  in  any  inftance  the  manner  in  which  a  caufe  pro- 
duces its  effe£l,  we  fliould  be  able  to  deduce  the  effect  from 
its  caufe  by  reafoning  a  priori ;  the  impoflibility  of  which  he 
every  where  fl;rongly  inculcates.  ''  Homo  naturae  minifter 
"  et  intcrpres  tantum  facit  et  intelligit  quantum  de  nature 
"  ordine  re  vel  mente  obfervavevit  j  nee  amplius  fcit  aut 
"  poteft,"  I  acknowledge,  at  the  fame  time,  that,  from  the 
g^i^  general  fcope  of  Lord  Baton's  writings,  as  well  from  fome 

^  '^    particular 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  547 

particular  expreffions  in  them  with  regard  to  caufes,  I  am 
inclined  to  believe  that  his  metaphyfical  notions  on  the  fub- 
jeA  were  not  very  accurate,  and  that  he  was  led  to  perceive 
the  neceflity  of  recurring  to  obfervation  and  experiment  ia 
natural  philofophy,  not  from  a  fpeculative  confideration  of 
our  ignorance  concerning  neceflary  connections,  but  from  a 
convi£l:ion,  founded  on  a  review  of  the  hiftory  of  fcience,  of 
the  infufliciency  of  thofe  metliods  of  inquiry  which  his  pre- 
deceflbrs  had  purfued.     The  notion  which  the  antients  had 
formed  of  the  objeft  of  philofophy,   (which   they  conceived 
to  be  the  inveftigation  of  efficient  caufes,)  was  the  principal 
circumftance  which  mifled  them  in  their  refearches :  and  the 
erroneous  opinions  of  Des  Cartes  on  the  fame  fubjedl,  fruf- 
trated  all  the  efforts  of  his  great  and  inventive  genius,  in  the 
vtudy  of  phyfics.     "  Perfpicuum  eft,"  (fays  he,  in  one  paf- 
fage,)  "  optimam  philofophandi  viam  nos  fequuturos,  fi  ex 
"  ipfius  Dei  cognitione  rerum  ab  eo  creatarum  cognitionem 
"  deducere  conemur,  ut  ita  fcientiam  perfefliffimam  qu?e  eft 
"  effeftuum  per  caufas  acquiramus  *." 

The  ftrong  prejudice  which  has  been  entertained  of  late 
againft  Mr.  Hume's  doftrine  concerning  the  connection  among 
phyfical  events,  in  confequence  of  the  dangerous  conclufions 
to  which  it  has  erroneoufly  been  fuppofed  to  lead,  will,  I 
hope,  be  a  fufficient  apology  for  multiplying  fo  many  autho- 
rities in  fupport  of  it. 

NOTE  [D],  page  74. 

npHIS  language  has  ever  been  adopted  by  philofophers,  and 
by  atheifts  as  well  as  theifts.  The  latter  have  reprefentecf 
natural  events  as  parts  of  a  great  chain,  the  higheft  link  of 
which  is  fupported  by  the  Deity.  The  former  have  pre- 
tended, that  there  is  no  abfurdity  in  fuppofing  the  number 
of  links  to  be  infinite.  Mr.  Hume  had  the  merit  of  ftiewjng 
clearly  to  philofophers,  that  our  common  language,  with 
|efpe£t  to  caufe  and  effect,  is  merely  analogical ;  and  that 

*  There  is,  1  believe,  reafon  to  doubt  if  Des  Cartes  had  ever  read  the  works  of 
Bacon. 

N  n  ij  if 


548         NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS, 

if  there  be  any  links  among  phyfical  events,  they  mud  for 
ever  remain  invifible  to  us.  If  this  part  of  his  fyftem  be  ad- 
mitted ;  and  if,  at  the  fame  time,  we  admit  the  authority  of 
that  principle  of  the  mind,  which  leads  us  to  refer  every 
change  to  an  efEcient  caufe  ;  Mr.  Hume's  do£lrine  feems  to 
be  more  favourable  to  theifm,  than  even  the  common  no- 
tions upon  this  fubje£l  j  as  it  keeps  the  Deity  always  in 
viev/,  not  only  as  the  firft,  but  as  the  conftantly  operating 
efficient  caufe  in  nature,  and  as  the  great  conne6ling  prin- 
ciple among  all  the  various  phenomena  which  we  obferve. 
This,  accordingly,  was  the  conclufion  which  Malebranche 
deduced  from  premifes  very  nearly  the  fame  with  Mr. 
Hume's. 

NOTE  [E],  page  irp. 

TV /TR.  LOCKE,  in  his  Eflay  on  Human  Underftanding,  has 
"*■  taken  notice  of  the  quicknefs  with  which  the  operations 
of  the  mind  are  carried  on,  and  has  referred  to  the  acquired 
perceptions  of  fight,  as  a  proof  of  it.  The  fame  Author  has 
been  (truck  with  the  connexion  between  this  clafs  of  fa£l:8 
and  our  habitual  actions  ;  but  he  does  not  (late  the  queftion, 
whether  fuch  actions  are  voluntary  or  not.  I  think  it  pro- 
bable, from  his  mode  of  expreflTion,  that  his  opinion  on  the 
fubjedl  was  the  fame  with  mine.  The  following  quotation 
contains  all  the  remarks  I  recoUeQ  in  his  writings,  that  have 
any  connexion  with  the  do6trines  of  the  prefent  chapter  : 

*'  We  are  farther  toconfider,  concerning  perception,  that 
*'  the  ideas  we  receive  by  fenfation  are  often,  in  grown 
"  people,  altered  by  the  judgment,  without  our  taking  notice 
**  of  it.  When  we  fet  before  our  eyes  a  round  globe,  of 
"  any  uniform  colour,  e.g.  gold,  alabafter,  or  jet,  it  is  cer- 
"  tain  that  the  idea  thereby  imprinted  on  our  mind  is  of  a 
*^  fiat  circle,  varioufly  (hadowed,  with  feveral  degrees  of 
<*  light  and  brightnefs  coming  to  our  eyes.  But  we,  having 
"  by  ufe  been  accudomed  to  perceive  what  kind  of  appear- 
"  ance  convex  bodies  are  wont  to  make  in  us,  and  what  al- 

"  terations 


NOTSS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  549 

**  terations  are  made  in  the  reflexions  of  light  by  the  dif- 
**  ference  of  the  fenfible  figure  of  bodies;  the  judgment 
"  prefently,  by  a  habitual  cuftom,  alters  the  appearances 
"  into  their  caufes  ;  fo  that,  from  that  which  truly  is  variety 
"  of  {hadow  or  colour,  collecting  the  figure,  it  makes  it  pafs 
"  for  a  mark  of  figure,  and  frames  to  itfelf  the  perception  of 
"  a  convex  figure,  and  an  uniform  colour ;  when  the  idea 
**  we  receive  from  thence  is  only  a  plane  varioufly  coloured  ; 
*'  as  is  evident  in  painting."  Chap.  ix.  §  8. 

*'  But  this  is  not,  I  think,  ufually  in  any  of  our  ideas 
"  but  thofe  received  by  fight  j  becaufe  fight,  the  moft  com- 
"  prehenfive  of  all  our  fenfes,  conveying  to  our  minds  the 
"  ideas  of  light  and  colours,  which  are  peculiar  only  to  that 
*■*  fenfe,  and  alfo  the  far  different  ideas  of  fpace,  figure, 
"  and  motion,  the  feveral  varieties  whereof  change  the  ap- 
"  pearances  of  its  proper  objedt,  viz.  light  and  colours,  we 
*f  bring  ourfelves  by  ufe  to  judge  of  the  one  by  the  other. 
*'  This,  in  many  cafes,  by  a  fettled  habit  in  things  whereof 
**  we  have  frequent  experience,  is  performed  fo  conftantly, 
"  and  fo  quick,  that  we  take  that  for  the  perception  of  our 
"  fenfation,  which  is  an  idea  formed  by  our  judgment ;  fo 
"  that  one,  viz.  that  of  fenfation,  ferves  only  to  excite  the 
"  other,  and  is  fcarce  taken  any  notice  of  itfelf;  as  a  man 
"  who  reads  or  hears  with  attention  and  underftanding, 
«  takes  little  notice  of  the  characters  or  founds,  but  of  the 
"  ideas  that  are  excited  in  him  by  them. 

"  Nor  need  we  wonder  that  this  is  done  with  fo  little 
*'  notice,  if  we  confider  how  very  quick  the  actions  of  tlie 
*<  mind  are  performed  ;  for  as  itfelf  is  thought  to  take  up 
«  no  fpace,  to  have  no  extenfion,  fo  its  actions  feem  to  re- 
*'  quire  no  time,  but  many  of  them  feem  to  be  crowded 
"  into  an  inftant.  I  fpeak  this  in  comparifon  to  the  aftions 
«  of  the  body.  Any  one  may  eafily  obferve  this  in  his  own 
"  thoughts,  who  will  take  the  pains  to  refleCl  on  them. 
"  How,  as  it  we»e  in  an  inftant,  do  our  minds,  with  one 

N  n  3  "  glance^^ 


^5o  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

^*  glance,  fee  all  parts  of  a  demonftration,  which  may  very 

"  well  be  called  a  long  one,  if  we  confider  the  time  it  will 

**  require  to  put  it  into  words,  and  ftep  by  ftep  fhew  it  to 

"  another  ?    Secondly,  we  fhall  not  be  much  furprifed  that 

"  this  is  done  in  us  with  fo  little  notice,  if  we  confider  how 

**  the  facility  which  we  get  of  doing  things  by  a  cuflom  of 

<*  doing,  makes  them  often  pafs  in  us  without  our  notice. 

*'  Habits,  efpecially  fuch  as  are  begun  very  early,  ccme  at 

<^  lafl  to  produce  actions  in  us,  which  often  efcape  our  ob- 

<^  fervation.     How  frequently  do  we  in  a  day  cover  our  eyes 

"  with  our  eye-lids,  without  perceiving  that  we  are  at  all  in 

*'  the  dark  ?  Men  that  by  cuflom  have  got  the  ufe  of  a  bye- 

«<  word,    do  almoft  in  every  fentence   pronounce  founds, 

"  which,  though  taken  notice  of  by  others,  they  themfelves 

**  neither  hear  nor  obferve ;    and,  therefore,   it  is  not  fo 

«  ftrange  that  our  mind  fhould  often  change  the  idea  of  its 

"  fenfation  into  that  of  its  judgment,  and  make  one  ferve 

**  only  to  excite  the  other,  without  our  taking  notice  of 

««  it."  3id.  §9,  ic. 

The  habit  mentioned  by  Locke,  in  this  paragraph,  of  oc- 

^lafionally  winking  with  the  eye-lids,  (which  is  not  accom- 

j^anied  with  any  memory  of  our  being,  in  every  fuch  inftance, 

in  a  momentary  ftate  of  total  darknefs,)  deferves  to  be  added 

to  the  cafes  already  mentioned,  to  fhew  the  dependence  of 

memory  upon  attention. 

Note  [F],  page  i66. 

«  — "pLATONI  quid  idea  fit,  peculiarl  tradatione 

*<  prolixe  excufhmus  *,  qux  confuli  ab  iis  debet, 

"  qui  accurate  totam  rei  feriem  pernofcere  cupiunt.  Nos 
"  pro  prsefentis  inflituti  modo  paucis  notamus,  Platoni  ideam 
•*  non  efTe  illam,  qua  ex  contemplatione  objedorum  fingu- 
**  larium  exfurgit  notionem  univerfalem  reique  alicujus  gene- 

*  Brucker  here  alludes  to  his  work,  intitled,  Hijloria  Philofophica  de  Ideis% 
which  I  have  never  had  an  opportunity  of  feting^ 

«  ralem 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  s5^ 

"  ralem  conceptum,  quern  recentiores  ideam  vocant,  ille 
"  iih  vocavit  et  ab  idea  diftinxit.  Sed  ideas  funt  illi  eflen- 
**  tialia  rerum  omnium  fingularium  exemplaria,  «t^To«o-ta  gau- 
**  dentia,  ad  quorum  naturam  indolemque  res  fmgularcs 
"  formatas  funt,  et  qux  illis  veram  certamque  atque  ftabilem 
"  effentiam  largiuntur.  Has  ideas  ex  divina  mente  orivi, 
"  inque  ea  radicari,  fua  autem  propria  fubftantia  gaudere,  et 
"  effe  .xtTru?  )ixi  onu;  cncc  ftatuit,  et  circa  earum  cognitionem 
"  verfari  intelle£lum  humanum,  in  his  rerum  eflcntiis  fepa- 
"  ratim  et  extra  matcriam  exiflentibus  cognofcendis  cardl- 
'*  nem  verti  totius  philofophice  afTeruit.  Ridiculum  id  vifum 
"  Ariftoteli,  dari  extra  materiam  ejufmodi  eflentias  univer- 
"  fales,  quibus  res  omnes  fingulares  eiTentialiter  modifica- 
*'  rentur,  rato,  efTe  hcec  Ti^inrjAXTx  et  nugas  otiofi  ingenii, 
"  Platonemque  fine  caufa  rationeque  fufficienti  base  fomnia 
"  ex  fcholis  Pythagoreorum,  quse  iftis  entibus  perfonabant, 
"  recepifle,  fuoque  intulilfe  fyftemati.  Cum  autem  negare 
'^  non  auderet,  efle  in  rebus  formas  eflentiales,  has  ideas, 
"  five  formas,  qua  voce  Platonicum  nomen  exprimere  ma- 
"  luit,  materiae  ab  aeterno  efle  imprefPas,  et  in  eo  latere 
"  affirmavit,  et  ita  demum  ex  rationibus  iftis  formifque  fe- 
"  minalibus,  materiam  efle  formatam  ftatuit." 

Bruck.  Hi/}.  Phil.  iii.  p.  905^. 

NOTE  [G],  page  168. 
'T^HE  Stoics,  who  borrowed  many  of  their  do£lrines  from 
the  other  fchools  of  philofophy,  fcem,  in  particular,  to 
have  derived  their  notions  on  this  fubje£l  from  fome  of  their 
predecelTors.  Stilpo,  who  was  of  the  Megaric  fe£t,  is  faid 
to  have  held  opinions  approaching  nearly  to  thofe  of  the 
Nominalifts. 

«'  Stilpo  univerfalia  plane  fuftulit.  Dicebat  enim  :  qui 
"  hominem  dicat  eum  neminem  dicere,  quod  non  hunc  vel 
'*  ilium  ea  vox  fignificet,  nee  huic  magis,  quam  alteri  con- 
«<  veniat.  —  Scilicet  fiipponebat  Stilpo,  non  dari  hominem  in 
"  abftradto,  adeoque  has  fpecies  et  genera  rerum  nan  natura 

N  n  4  '*  exiftere  % 


552  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

**  exiflere  ;  cum  ncque  in  hoc  neque  in  alio  homine,  ille 
*'  homo  univerfalis  queat  oftendi.  Indu£lione  itaque  fa£la, 
"  cum  neque  hunc,  ncque  ilium,  neque  alium  hominem 
**  efle  coUigei-ft,  infcrebat  nullum  efle  hominem,  ficque 
*'  ludendo  ambigua  hominis  in  genera  five  abftraclo,  uti 
"  logici  dicuut,  (k  in  individuo  five  fingulari  confiderati 
"  notione,  incautos  exagitabat.  Altiora  tamen  hie  latere 
"  putat  P.  Bayle,  et  non  in  folo  verborum  lufu  fubilitifle 
"  Stilpoiiem,  led  univerfalia  five  prvedicabilia  negavifle. — 
**  Neque  prorfus  eft  dillimile,  fuifle  Stilponem  inter  eos, 
"  qui  univerfalia  pr;cter  nuda  nomina  nihil  efle  dicerent, 
"  quod  et  cynicos  fecifl'c  et  alios,  alibi  docuimus  :  quorum 
'<  partes  poflea  fufceperunt  Abelardi  fequaces  et  tota  nomi- 
"  nalium  fccia."  Brucker,  vol.  i.  p.  619. 

NOTE  [I-I],page  170. 
*•   ^!ECULO  XI.  Rofcelinus  vel  Rucelinus  facerdos  et  phi- 
*'  lofophus  Compendienfis,  ab  Ariftotele  fecefliim  fecit, 

"  et  in  Stoicorum  caiba  ita  tranfiit,  ut  ftatuerit,  univerfalia, 
'"  nee  ante  rem,  nee  in  re  exiftere,  nee  ullam  habere  realem 
"  exiftentiam,  fed  efle  nuda  nomina  et  voces,  quibus  rerum 
"  fingularium  genera  denotentur." 

Brucker,  Hi/I.  Phil.  vol.  iii.  p.  906. 

"  Dum  Porphyrins  prudenter  qu^eftionem  ;  an  univerfalia 
*'  revera  exrftant,  omitlendam  efle  cenfet,  de  qua  inter  Pla- 
"  tonicos  et  Stoicos  mire  decertari  noverat,  occafionem  fup- 
'*  peditavit  otiofo  Rofcelini  ingenio,  earn  novo  acumine  in- 
"  genii  aggrediendi  definiendique.  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  674. 

Rofcelinus  was  a  native  of  Brittany,  and  canon  of  Com- 
piegne.  He  is  much  celebrated,  even  by  his  adverfaries,  for 
the  acutenefs  and  fubtlety  of  his  genius,  vv^hich  he  difplayed 
both  in  fcholaftical  and  theological  controverfy.  He  was 
condemned  for  Tritheifm  by  a  council  aflembled  at  Soiflbns 
in  the  year  J092.  {See  Moshrim'j-  Ecclefiajiical  Hiftory.) 
It  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  taught  in  Paris,  or  that  he 
gave  public  ledures  •,  but  he  had  the  honour  to  direct  the 

ftudies, 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  553 

ftudies,  and  to  foi-m  the  philofophical  opinions  of  Abelard, 
by  whofe  means  the  innovations  he  had  introduced  into 
Diale6tics  obtained  a  very  wide  and  rapid  circulation. — 
(Bruckek,  voL  iii.  p.  728.)  He  is  mentioned  as  an  Englifh- 
man  by  Mallet,  in  his  life  of  Bacon,  and  by  other  Writers ; 
a  miftake  into  which  they  have  fallen,  by  confounding 
Britain  with  Bretagne.  Very  little  is  known  of  the  particu- 
lars of  his  life.  "  Primum  nominalium  aiunt  fuifle,"  fays 
Leibnitz  ;  "  ncfao  quern  Rucelinum  Britonem."  5ee  his 
Dijjtrtation  de  Stylo  Philofophico  Marti  Nizolii. 

The  opinion  of  Abelard  concerning  Univerfals,  is  faid 
to  have  differed,  in  fome  refpefts,  from  that  of  his  mafter. 
<<  Alius  confiftit  in  vocibus,"  fays  John  of  Salifbury,  who 
was  a  fcholar  of  Abelard,  "  licet  haec  opinio  cum  Rofcelino 
*'  fuo  fere  omnio  jam  evanuerit :  alius  fermones  intuetur, 
*«  et  ad  illos  detorquet,  quicquid  alicubi  de  univerfalibus 
*'  meminit  fcriptum.  In  hac  autem  opinione  deprehenfus 
"  eft  Peripatelicus  Abelardus  nofter." 

Metalog.Wh.'n.  c.  ly. 

Of  this  difference  between  the  do6lrines  of  Rofcelinus 
and  Abelard,  I  find  myfelf  perfectly  unable  to  give  any 
account ;  and  I  am  glad  to  find  that  MorhofF acknowledges 
his  ignorance  upon  the  fame  fubjeft.  "  Alii  fuerunt,  qui 
*'  univerfalia  quasfiverunt,  non  tarn  in  vocibus  quam  in 
'*  fermonibus  integris  ;  quod  Joh.  Sarifberienfis  adfcribit 
«*  Petro  Abelardo ;  quo  quid  intelligat  ille,  mihi  non  fatis 
"  liquet."  Polybijl.  tom.ii.  lib.  i.  cap.  13.  ^  2. 

Abfurd  as  thefe  controverfies  may  now  appear,  fuch  was 
the  prevailing  tafbe  of  the  twelfth  century,  that  they  feduced 
the  young  and  afpiring  mind  of  Abelard  from   all  tlie  other 

purfuits  which  Europe  then  prefented  to    his  ambition 

"  Ut  militaris  glorixpompam,"  fays  he,  «  cum  haereditate 
"  ct  prasrogativa  primogenitorum  meorum  fratribus  derelin- 
«'  quens,  Martis  curiae  penitus  abdicarem,  ut  Minervze 
«  gremio  educarer."  Hijl.  Calam.  Suar.  c.  i. 

Among  the  literary  men  of  this  period,  none  feems  to 
have  arifcn  to  fuch  an  eminent  fuperiority  above  his  age, 

in 


554  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

in  the  liberality  of  his  philofophicai  views,  as  John  of  Salif- 
bury,  the  celebrated  friend  of  archbifhop  Becket.  In  his 
youth  he  had  ftudied  at  Paris  under  Abelard  and  other  emi- 
nent mailers,  and  had  applied  himfelf,  with  diilinguifhed 
ardour  and  fuccefs,  to  the  fubtile  fpeculations  which  then 
occupied  the  fchools.  After  a  long  abfence,  when  his  mind 
was  enlarged  by  more  liberal  and  ufeful  purfuits,  and  by  an 
extenfive  intercourfe  with  the  world,  he  had  the  curiofity  to 
revifit  the  fcene  of  his  early  ftudies,  and  to  compare  his  own 
acquifitions  with  thofe  of  his  old  companions.  The  account 
which  he  gives  of  this  vifit  is  flrikingly  charafteriftical,  both 
of  the  writer  and  of  his  age :  "  Invent!  funt,  qui  fuerant,  et 
**  ubi :  neque  enim  ad  palmam  vifi  funt  proceffifle  ad  quaf- 
*^  tiones  priftinas  dirimendas,  neque  propofitiunculam  unam 

*<  adjecerant. ■     '■  '    — Expertus  itaque  fum  quod 

*'  liquido  colligi  poteft,  quia  ficut  dialeftica  alias  expedit 
<*  difciplinas,  fie,  fi  fola  fuerit,  jacet  exfanguis  et  fterilis. 
«  &c."  Metalog.  lib.ii.  cap.  to. 

The  fame  Author,  fpeaking  of  the  controverfy  between 
the  Nominalifts  and  the  Realifts,  thus  exprefles  himfelf  : 
**  Quaeftionem  de  generibus  et  fpeciebus  in  qua  laborans 
**  mundusjam  fenuit,  in  qua  plus  temporis  confumptum  eft 
*'  quam  in  acquirendo  et  regendo  orbis  imperio  confumferit 
"  Caefarea  domus  :  plus  efFufum  pecunise,  quam  in  omnibus 
*'  divitiis  fuis  poflederit  Croefus.  Haec  enim  tamdiu  multos 
**  tenuit,  ut  cum  hoc  unum  tota  vita  qusererent,  tandem 
*<  nee  iftud,  nee  aliud  invenirent." 

De  Nugis  Curialiumy  lib.  vii.  cap.  12. 

NOTE  pj,  page  187. 
«  — —  OECTA  nominalium,    omnium  inter  fcholafticas 
**  profundiflima,  et  hodiernae  reformatae  philofo- 

"  phandi  rationi  congruentiflima  •,  quae  quum  olim  maxime 
«  floreret,  nunc  apud  fcholafticos  quidem,  extinfta  eft. 
"  Unde  conjiciaa  decrementa  potius  quam  augmenta  acu- 

"  minis. 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  SS5 

«  minis.  Ouum  autem  ipfe  Nizolius  nofter  fe  Nominalem 
*'  exferte  profiteri  non  dubitet  prope  finem  capitis  fexti,  libri 
**  primi ;  et  vero  in  rcalitate  formalitatum  et  univerfalium 
"  evertenda  nervus  difputationis  ejus  omnis  potiflimum  con- 
"  tineatur,  pauca  quasdam  de  Nominalibus  fubjicere  opera 
'<  pretium  duxi.  Nominales  funt,  qui  omnia  putant  efle 
"  nuda  nomina  prseter  fubftantias  fingulares,  abflradiorum 
**  igitur  et  univerfalium  realitatem  prorfustoUunt.  Primum 
"  autem  nominalium  aiunt  fuifle  nefcio  quern  Rucelinum 
"  Britonem,  cujus  occafione  cruenta  certamina  in  academia 
*'  Parifienfi  fuerunt  excitata. 

"  Din  autem  jacuit  in  tenebris  fecla  nominalium,  donee 
"  maximi  vir  ingenii,  et  eruditionis  pro  illo  asvo  fummce, 
**  Wilhelmus  Occam  Anglus,  Scoti  difcipulus,  fed  mox 
<'  oppugnator  maximus,  de  improvifo  eam  refufcitavit ;  con- 
"  fenfere  Gregorius  Ariminenfis,  Gabr.  Biel,  et  plerique 
"  ordinis  Auguftinianorum,  unde  et  in  Martini  Lutheri 
*«  fcriptis  prioribus  amor  nominalium  fatis  elucet,  donee 
"  procedente  tempore  erga  omnes  monachos  asqualiter 
*'  affeftus  efle  coepit.  Generalis  autem  regula  eft,  qua 
i'  nominales  pafllm  utuntur;  entia  non  efle  mukiplicanda 
"  prseter  neceflltatem.  Hjec  regula  ab  aliis  paflim  oppug- 
"  natur,  quafi  injuria  in  divinam  ubertatem,  liberalem 
"  potius  quam  parcam,  et  varietate  ac  copia  rerum  gauden- 
"  tern.  Sed,  qui  fie  objiciunt,  non  fatis  mihi  nominalium 
«  mentem  cepifl^e  videntur,  qua^,  etfi  obfcurius  propofita, 
"  hue  redit :  hypothefin  eo  efle  meliorem,  quo  fimpliciorem, 
"  et  in  caufis  eorum  quae  apparent  reddendis  eum  optime 
«  fe  gerere,  qui  quam  pauciflima  gratis  fupponat.  Nam 
"  qui  aliter  egit,  eo  ipfo  naturam,  aut  potius  autorem  ejus 
«  Deum  ineptse  fuperfluitatis  accufat.  Si  quis  aftronomus 
«  rationem  phenomenorum  coeleftium  reddere  poteil  paucis 
«  fuppofitis,  meris  nimirum  motibus  fimplicibus  circularibus, 
«  ejus  certe  hypothefis  ejus  hypothefi  proeferenda  erit,  qui 
"  multis  orbibus  varie  implexis  ad  explicanda  cccleftia  in- 
"  diget.     Ex  hac  jam  regula  nominales  deduxerunt,  omnia 

«  in 


556  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

*'  in  rerum  natura  explicari  pofle,  etfi  univerfalibus  et  for- 
"  malitatibus  realibus  prorfus  careatur  ;  qua  fententia  nihil 
"  verius,  nihil  noflri  temporis  philofopho  dignius,  ufque 
"  adeo,  ut  credam  ipfum  Occamum  non  fuifle  nominaliorem, 
"  quam  nunc  eft  Thomas  Hobbes,  qui,  ut  verum  fatear, 
«f  mihi,  plufquam  nominaUs  videtur.  Non  contentus  enim 
«  cum  nominalibus  univerfalia  ad  nomina  reducere,  ipfam 
««  rerum  veritatem  ait  in  nominibus  confiftere,  ac,  quod 
«  majus  eft,  pendere  ab  arbitrio  humano,  quia  Veritas  pen- 
*'  deat  a  definitionibus  terminorum,  definitiones  autem  ter- 
'<  minorum  ab  arbitrio  humano.  Hxc  eft  fententia  viri 
"  inter  profundiflimos  fecuH  cenfendi,  qua,  ut  dixi,  nihil 
«'  poteft  eiTe  nominalius." 

This  paffage  from  Leibnitz  has  given  rife  to  a  criticifm  of 
Morhoff",  which  appears  to  me  to  be  extremely  ill-founded.  — 
<'  Accenfet  nominalibus"  (fays  he,)  "  Leibnitzius  Thomam 
*'  Hobbenfium,  quern  ille  ipfo  Occamo  nominaliorem,  et 
"  plufquam  nominalem  vocat,  qui  non  contentus  cum  no- 
"  minalibus  univerfalia  ad  nomina  reducere,  ipfam  rerum 
"  veritatem  ait  in  nominibus  confiftere,  ac  quod  majus  eft, 
"  pendere  ab  arbitrio  humano.  Quae  bella  ejus  fententia, 
"  quamquam  laudat  eam  Leibnitzius,  monftri  aliquid  aUt, 
<'  ac  plane  nequam  eft.  Immania  enim  ex  uno  fummo 
"  paradoxo  fluunt  abfurda." 

MoRHOF.  Po/yhi/Ior.  vol.  I'u  pzge  Si. 

I  {hall  not  at  prefent  enter  into  a  particular  examination 
of  the  do6lrine  here  afcribed  to  Hobbes,  which  I  ftiall  have 
occafion  to  confider  afterwards  under  the  article  of  Reafon- 
ing.  I  cannot,  however,  help  remarking,  that  nothing  but 
extreme  inattention  to  the  writings  of  Leibnitz,  could  have 
led  Morhoff  to  fuppofe,  that  he  had  given  his  fan6lion  to 
fuch  an  opinion.  In  the  very  paffage  which  has  now  been 
quoted,  the  expreffion  ("  qui  ut  verum  fatear,  mihi  plus 
"  quam  nominalis  videtur")  plainly  implies  a  cenfure  of 
Hobbes's  philofophy  •,  and  in  another  differtation,  entitled, 
Meditationes  de  Cognitione,  Veritatey   et  Ideis,  he  is  at  pains 

directly 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  557 

lilreaiy  to  refute  this  part  of  his  fyftem  :— "  Atque  ita 
«  habemus  quoque  difcrimen  inter  definitiones  nominales, 
«  quje  notas  tantum  rei  ab  aUis  difcernendse  continent,  et 
<«  reales,  ex  quibus  conftat  rem  efle  poflibilem,  et  hac  ra- 
««  tione  fatisfit  Hobbio  qui  veritates  volebat  efle  arbitrarias, 
"  quia  ex  definitionibus  nominaUbus  penderent,  non  con- 
'«  fiderans  realitatem  definitionis  in  arbitrio  non  efle,  nec- 
*'  quaflibet  notiones  inter  fe  pofle  conjungi.  Nee  defini- 
«  tioues  nominales  fufficiunt  ad  perfe£lam  fcientiam,  nifi 
«  quando  aUunde  confl:at  rem  definitam  efle  poflibilem, 
«  &c.  &c." 

Leibnitzii  Operay  Edit.  DutenSt  tom.  ii.  p.  16,  17. 


NOTE  [K],  page  193. 

"  ^''O  form  a  clear  notion  of  truth,  it  is  very  neceflary  to 
"  confider  truth  of  thought,   and  truth  of  words,  dif- 

"  tin£tly  one  from  another  :  but  yet  it  is  very  difficult  to 
"  treat  of  them  afunder :  becaufe  it  is  unavoidable,  in  treat- 
♦'  ing  of  mental  propofitions,  to  make  ufe  of  vv^ords  :  and 
*<  then  the  inftances  given  of  mental  propofitions  ceafe  im- 
"  mediately  to  be  barely  mental,  and  become  verbal.  For 
«  a  mental  propofition  being  nothing  but  a  bare  confidera- 
"  tion  of  the  ideas,  as  they  are  in  our  minds  ftripped  of 
"  ,names,  they  lofe  the  nature  of  purely  mental  propofitions, 
*'  as  foon  as  they  are  put  into  words. 

*'  And  that  which  makes  it  yet  harder  to  treat  of  mental 
<«  and  verbal  propofitions  feparately,  is  that  mofl:   men,  if 
"  not  all,  in  their  thinking  and  reafonings  within  themfelves^ 
**  make  ufe  of  words,  infl:ead  of  ideas,  at  leafl:  when  the 

**  fubjedl  of  their  meditation  contains  in  it  complex  ideas.* 

Locke,  book  iv.  c.  5.  §  3>4. 
" But  to  return  to  the  confideration  of  truth.  We 

**  muft,  I  fay,  obferve  two  forts  of  propofitions,   that  we 

"  are  capable  of  making. 

«  Firft, 


55»  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  Firfl,  mental,  wherein  the  ideas  in  our  underftandings 
"  are  without  the  ufe  of  words  put  together  or  feparated  by 
**  the  mind,  perceiving  or  judging  of  their  agreement  or 
**  difagreement. 

"  Secondly,  verbal  propofitions,  which  are  words,  the 
«'  figns  of  our  ideas  put  together  or  feparated  in  affirmative 
"  or  negative  fentences,  &:c.'*  Ibid.  §  5. 

«  Though  the  examining  and  judging  of  ideas  by  them- 
«  felves,  their  names  being  quite  laid  afide,  be  the  beft  and 
*<  fureft  way  to  clear  and  dillinft  knowledge  ;  yet  through 
<*  the  prevailing  cuftom  of  ufing  founds  for  ideas,  I  think  it 
*•  is  very  feldom  pra6lifed.  Every  one  may  obferve,  how 
<f  common  it  is  for  names  to  be  made  ufe  of,  inftead  of 
"  the  ideas  themfelves,  even  when  men  think  and  reafon 
"  within  their  own  breads  :  efpecially  if  the  ideas  be  very 
"  complex,  and  made  up  of  a  great  colle<Slion  of  fimple 
*'  ones.  This  makes  the  confidcration  of  words  and  pro- 
"  pofitions  fo  neceffary  a  part  of  the  treatife  of  knowledge, 
«'  that  it  is  very  hard  to  fpeak  intelligibly  of  the  one,  with- 
«<  out  explaining  the  other. 

"  All  the  knowledge  we  have,  being  only  of  particular  or 
"  of  general  truths,  it  is  evident  that  whatever  may  be  done 
"  in  the  former  of  thefe,  the  latter  can  never  be  well  made 
<f  known,  and  is  very  feldom  apprehended,  but  as  con- 
*'  ceived  and  exprefled  in  words."  Book  iv.  c.  6.  §  i,  2. 
From  thefe  pafTages  it  appears,  tliat  Locke  conceived  the 
ufe  ■which  v/e  make  of  words  in  carrying  on  our  reafonings 
both  with  refpe£t  to  particular  and  to  general  truths,  to  be 
chiefly  the  effeft  of  cuftom  ;  and  that  the  employment  of 
language,  however  convenient,  is  not  cflential  to  our  intel- 
ledlual  operations.  His  opinion  therefore  did  not  coincide 
with  that  which  1  have  afcribed  to  the  Nominalifts. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  following  paflage  Ihews  clearly, 
how  widely  his  opinion  differed  from  that  of  the  Realiftsj 
and  indeed  it  would  have  led  us  to  believe  that  it  was  the 

1(5  fame 


NOTES   AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  559 

-fame  with  Berkeley's,  had  not  the  foregoing  quotations  con- 
tained an  explicit  declaration  of  the  contrary. 

**  To  return  to  general  words,  it  is  plain,  by  what  has 
"  been  faid,  that  general  and  univerfal  belong  not  to  the  real 
"  cxillence  of  things,  but  are  the  inventions  and  creatures  of 
"  the  underftanding,  made  by  it  for  its  own  ufe,  and  con- 
"  cern  only  figns,  whether  words  or  ideas  •  Words  are 
"  general,  as  has  been  faid,  when  ufed  for  figns  of  general 
"  ideas,  and  fo  are  applicable  indifferently  to  many  particu- 
*<  lar  things  ;  and  ideas  are  general,  when  they  are  fet  up  as 
*'  the  reprefentatives  of  many  particular  things  :  but  univer- 
*'  fality  belongs  not  to  things  themfelves,  which  are  all  of 
*'  them  particular  in  their  exiftence :  even  thofe  words  and 
"  ideas  which  in  their  figniiication  are  general.  When, 
-<<  therefore,  we  quit  particulars,  the  generals  that  reft  are 
*'  only  creatures  of  our  own  making  ;  their  general  nature 
*'  being  nothing  but  the  capacity  they  are  put  into  by  the 
*'  underftanding,  of  fignifying  or  reprefenting  many  parti- 
<'  culars.  For  the  fignification  they  have  is  nothing  but  a 
"  relation  that  by  the  mind  of  man  is  added  to  them." 

Book  iii.c.  3.  §  II. 

On  the  whole,  it  is  evident,  that  Mr.  Locke  was  neither 
completely  fatisfied  with  the  doftrine  of  the  Nominalifts, 
nor  with  that  of  the  Realifts  ;  and  therefore  I  think  it  is 
with  good  reafon  that  Dr.  Reid  has  clafled  him  with  the 
Conceptualifts.  Indeed,  Mr.  Locke  has  put  this  matter  be- 
yond all  doubt  himfelf ;  for,  in  explaining  the  manner  in 
which  we  conceive  univerfals,  he  has  ftated  his  opinion  in 
the  ftrongeft  and  moft  paradoxical  and  moft  contradiftory 
terms.  The  ridicule  beftowed  on  this  part  of  his  philofophy 
by  the  Author  of  Martinus  Scribjerus,  although  cenfured  for 
unfairnefs  by  Dr.  Warburton,  is  almofl  juftified  by  fome  of 
his  expreflions. 


NOTE 


56o         NOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

NOTE  [L],  page  202. 
TN  a  letter  from   Leibnitz   to  a  Scotch   gentleman   (Mr, 

Burnet  of  Kemney),  dated  in  the  )iear  1697,  there  is  the 
following  pafTage  : 

"  J'ay  confidere  avec  attention  le  grand  ouvrage  du  cha- 
"  radlere  rt^el,  et  langage  philofophique  de  Monfieur  Wil- 
*'  kins.  Je  trouve  qu'il  y  a  mis  une  infinite  de  belles  chofes, 
*«  et  nous  n'avons  jamais  eu  une  table  des  ptedicMmer;  nlus 
*'  accomplie.  Mais  I'application  pour  les  charafteres,  et 
"  pour  la  langue,  n'eft  point  conforme  a  ce  qu'on  pouvoit 
*'  et  devoit  faire.  j'avois  confidere  cette  matlere  avant  le 
"  livre  de  Monfieur  Wilkins,  quand  j'etois  un  jeune  homme 
*'  de  dix  neuf  ans,  dans  mon  petit  livre  de  arte  combinatorial 
**  et  mon  opinion  eft  que  ces  charafteres  veritablement  reels 
"  &  philofophiques  doivent  repondre  a  I'analyfe  des  penf^es. 
"  II  eft  vray  que  ces  chara£leres  prefuppofent  la  veritable 
*'  philofophie,  et  ce  n'eft  que  prefentement  que  j'oferois 
"  entrependre  de  les  fabriquer.  Les  objeftions  de  M.  Dal- 
*'  garus,  et  de  M,  Wilkins,  contre  la  methode  veritablement 
"  philofophique  ne  font  que  pour  excufer  I'imperfection  de 
'*  leurs  eflais,  et  marquent  feulement  les  difRcultds  qui  les  en 
"  ont  rebutes." 

The  letter,  of  which  this  is  a  part,  was  publiflied  at  the  end 
of  A  Defence  of  Dr.  Clarke,  (which  I  believe  is  commonly 
afcribed  to  Dr.  Gregory  Sharpe,)  and  which  was  printed  at 
London  in  1744.  The  perfon  mentioned  by  Leibnitz  under 
the  name  of  M.Dn/garus,  was  evidently  George  Dalgarno,  a 
native  of  Aberdeen,  and  author  of  a  fmall  and  very  rare 
book,  intitled,  *'  Ars  Signorunty  vulgo  character  unlverfalis 
"  et  lingua  philofophica,  qua  poterunty  homines  diverfjfimortim 
*'  idiomatumy  fpatio  diiarum  feptimanaruniy  otnnia  animi  fui 
"  fenfuy  [in  rebus  familiaribus^  non  mitius  ifjtelligihiliter,  ftve 
**  fcribendo,  ftve  loquendoy  mutuo  C0J7imunicare,  quam  Unguis 
**  propriis  vernaculis.  Praterea,  hinc  etiam  poterunt  juvenes^ 
**  philofophie  principia,  et  veram  logics  praxin,  citius  et  facdius 
*■'  multo  imbiherey  quam  ex  vulgaribus philofophorutn fcripiis.'' 

It 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  561 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  this  work  of  Dalgarno  is  never 
(at  lead  as  far  as  I  recolleft)  mentioned  by  Wilkins  ;  al- 
though it  appears  from  a  letter  of  Charles  I.  prefixed  to 
Dalgarno's  book,  that  Wilkins  was  one  of  the  perfons  who 
had  recommended  him  to  the  royal  favour. 

The  treatife  de  Arte  Combinatoria  is  publifhed  in  the  fecond 
volume  of  Dutens'  edition  of  Leibnitz's  works,  but  it  does 
not  appear  to  me  to  throw  much  light  on  his  views  with 
refpe£t  to  a  philofophical  language. 

I  muft  requeft  the  indulgence  of  the  reader  for  adding  to 
the  length  of  this  note,  by  quoting  a  paflage  from  another 
performance  of  Leibnitz  j  in  wliich  he  has  fallen  into  a 
train  of  thought  remarkably  fimilar  to  that  of  Mr.  Hume 
and  Dr.  Campbell,  in  the  paflages  already  quoted  from  them 
in  this  fe£lion.  The  performance  is  entitled,  M(?i//Va2'i(?wj' ^* 
Cognitiofie,  Feritate,  ^  Ideis,  and  is  printed  in  the  fecond 
volume  of  Dutens'  edition. 

**  Plerumque  autem,  pra^fertim  in  analyfi  longiore,  non 
"  totam  fimul  naturam  rei  intuemur,  fed  rerum  loco  fignis 
"  utimur,  quorum  explicationem  in  praefenti  aliqua  cogita- 
"  tione  compendii  caufa  folemus  prastermittere,  fcientes,  aut 
"  credentes  nos  earn  habere  in  poteftate  :  ita  cum  chiliogo- 
"  num,  feu  polygonum  mille  sequalium  laterum  cogito,  non 
*'  femper  naturam  lateris,  et  asqualitatis,  et  millenarii  (feu 
"  cubi  a  denario)  confidero,  fed  vocabulis  iftis  (quorum 
"  fenfus  obfcure  faltem,  atque  imperfe£l:e  menti  obverfatur) 
"  in  animo  utor  loco  idearum,  quas  de  lis  habeo,  quoniam 
'*  memini  me  fignificationem  iftorum  vocahulorum  habere, 
"  explicationem  autem  nunc  judico  neceflariam  non  efle ; 
<«  qualem  cogitationem  csecam,  vel  etiam  fymbolicam  appel- 
"  lare  foleo,  qua  et  in  algebra,  et  in  arithmetica  utimur,  imo 
*<  fere  ubique.  Et  certe  cum  notio  valde  compofita  eft,  non 
'*  poflumus  omnes  ingredientes  earn  notiones  fimul  cogi- 
*•  tare  :  ubi  tamen  hoc  licet,  vel  faltem  in  quantum  licet, 
"  cognitionem  voco    intuitivam.     Notionis    diftinftsc   pri- 

O  o  "  mitiva? 


56a  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATJONS. 

"  mitivse  non  alia  datur  coguitio,  quam  intuitiva,  ut  com- 

"  pofitarum  plerumque  cogitatio  non  nifi  fymbolica  eft. 

"  Ex  his  jam  patet,  nos  eorum  quoque,  quie  diftin6te 
"  cognofcimus,  ideas  non  percipere,  nifi  quatenus  cogita- 
"  tione  intuitiva  utimur.  Et  fane  contingit,  ut  nos  foepe 
'f  falfo  credamus  habere  in  animo  ideas  rerum,  cum  falfo 
•*  fupponimus  aliquos  terminos,  quibus  utimur,  jam  a  nobis 
<'  fuifle  explicatos  :  nee  verum  aut  certe  ambiguitati  ob- 
«  noxium  eft,  quod  aiunt  aliqui,  non  poffe  nos  de  re  aliqua 
"  dicere,  intelligendo  quod  dicimus,  quin  ejus  habeamus 
«'  ideam.  Ssepe  enim  vocabula  ifta  fmgula  utcunque  in- 
"  telligimus,  aut  nos  antea  intellixifle  meminimus,  qui  ta- 
"  men  hac  cogitatione  caeca  contenti  fumus,  et  refolutionem 
"  notionum  non  fatis  profequimur,  fit  ut  lateat  nos  contra- 
«'  didlio,  quam  forte  notio  compofita  involvit." 


A 


NOTE  [M],  page  223. 

S  the  paflage  quoted  in  the   text  is  taken  from  a  work 
which  is  but  little  known  in  this  country,  I  (hall  fub- 
join  the  original. 

*'  Qu'il  me  foit  permis  de  prefenter  a  ceux  qui  refufent 
"  de  croire  a  ces  perfedtionnemens  fucceflifs  de  I'efpece 
**  humaine  un  exemple  pris  dans  les  fciences  oia  la  marche 
"  de  la  verite  eft  la  plus  fiire,  ou  elle  peut  etre  mefuree 
*'  avec  plus  de  precifion.  Ces  verites  elementaires  de 
"gcometrie  et  d'aftronomie  qui  avoient  ete  dans  I'lnde 
**  et  dans  I'Egypte  une  do6trine  occulte,  fur  laquelle  des 
**  pretres  ambitieux  avoient  fonde  leur  empire,  etoient 
<*  dans  la  Grece,  au  temps  d'Archimede  ou  d'Hipparque, 
"  des  connoiflances  vulgaires  enfeignees  dans  les  ecoles 
"  communes.  Dans  le  fiecle  dernier,  il  fufBfoit  de  quelques 
"  annees  d'etude  pour  favoir  tout  ce  qu'Archimede  etHip- 
"  parque  avoient  pu  connoitre  ;  et  aujourd'hui  deux  annees 
"  de  I'enfeignement  d'un  profefleur  vont  au-dela  de  ce  que 
"  favoient  Leibnitz  ou  Newton.     Qu'on  medite  cet  exemple, 

15  **  qu'oii 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  563 

•*  qu'on  faififle  cette  chaine  qui  s'etend  d'un  pretre  deMem- 
*'  phis  a  Euler,  et  remplit  la  diftance  immenfe  qui  les  fepare; 
"  qu'on  obferve  a  chaque  epoque  le  genie  devangant  le 
"  fiecle  prefent,  et  la  mediocrite  atteignant  a  ce  qu'il  avoit 
*'  decouvert  dans  celui  qui  precedoit,  on  apprendra  que  la 
"  nature  nous  a  donne  les  moyens  d'epargner  le  temps  et 
"  de  manager  I'attention,  et  qu'il  n'exifte  aucune  raifon  de 
*'  croire  que  ces  moyens  puifTent  avoir  un  terme.  On  verra 
*'  qu'au  moment  ou  une  multitude  de  folutions  particu- 
*'  lieres,  de  faits  ifoles  commencent  a  epuifer  rattention, 
**  a  fatiguer  la  memoire,  ces  theories  difperfees  viennent  fe 
"  perdre  dans  une  methode  generale,  tous  les  faits  fe 
"  reunir  dans  un  fait  unique,  et  que  ces  generalifations,  ces 
*'  reunions  rJpetees  n'ont,  comme  les  multiplications  fuc- 
*'  ceflives  d'un  nombre  par  lui-meme,  d'autre  limite  qu'un 
*'  infini  auquel  il  eft  impoflible  d'atteindj'e." 

Sur  I'  InJiruElion  publique,  par  M.  Condorcet. 


Continuation  of  Note  [M].     {Second  Edition.) 

TJO W  much  is  it  to  be  regretted,  that  a  dodlrine  fo  pieaf. 
ing,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  fo  philofophical,  (hould 
have  been  difgraced  by  what  has  been  fince  written  by 
Condorcet  and  others,  concerning  the  Perfeftibility  of  Man, 
and  its  probable  efFe£l  in  baniftiing  from  the  earth,  Vice, 
Difeafe,  and  Mortality !  Surely  they  who  can  reconcile 
their  minds  to  fuch  a  Creed,  might  be  expetled  to  treat 
with  fome  indulgence  the  credulity  of  the  multitude.  Nor 
is  it  candid  to  complain  of  the  flow  progrefs  of  Truth, 
when  it  is  blended  with  fimilar  extravagances  in  Philofo- 
phical Syftems. 

While,  however,  we  reje£t  thefe  abfurdities,  fo  com- 
pletely contradi£ted  by  the  whole  analogy  of  human  affairs, 
we  ought  to  guard  with  no  lefs  caution  againft  another 
Creed,  much  more  prevalent  in  the  prefent  times ; — a  Creed 
•which  taking  for  granted  that   all  things    are  governed  by 

O  o  2  chance 


564            NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS, 
chance  or  by  a  blind  delliny,  overlooks  the  beneficent  arrange* 
ment  made  by  Providence  for  the  advancement   and  for  the 
difFufion  of  ufeful  knowledge  ;  and,  in  defiance  both  of  the 
moral  fuggeftions  and  of  the  univerfal  experience  of  man- 
kind, treats   with  ridicule   the   fuppofed  tendency  of  truth 
and  juilice  to  prevail    finally   over    falfehood  and  iniquity. 
If  the  dodlrine  which  encourages  thefe  favourable  profpe£ts 
of  the  future  fortunes  of  our  race,  leads,  when  carried  to  an 
extreme,  to   paradox   and  inconfiftency  ;  the   fyftem  which 
rcprefenls  this  doctrine,  even  when  ftated  with  due  limita- 
tions, as  altogether  groundlefs  and  vifionary,  le:ids,  by  a  fhort 
and  inevitable  procefs,  to  the  conclufions  either  of  the  Atheift 
or  of  the  Manichsean.     In  the  midfl,  indeed,  of  fuch  fcenes 
of  violence  and  anarchy  as  Europe  has  lately  witnefled,  it  is 
not  always  eafy  for  the  wifeft  and  beft  of  men  to  remain 
faithful  to  their  principles  and  their  hopes  :  But  what  mull 
be  the  opinions  and  the  views  of  thofe,  who,  during  thefe 
florms  and  convulfions  of  the  Moral  World,  find  at  once,  in 
the  apparent  retrogradation  of  Human  Reafon,  the  gratifica- 
tion of  their  Political  Ambition,  and  the    fecret  triumph  of 
their  Sceptical  theories  ? 

Fond,  impious  Man  !   Think'ft  thou  yon  Sanguine  Cloud, 

Rais'd  by  thy  breath,  has  quench'd  the  Orb  of  Day  ? 

To-morrow,  he  repairs  the  golden  flood, 

And  warms  the  Nations  with  redoubled  ray. 

NOTE  [N],  page  251. 
iT  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  under  the  title  of  Econo' 
mijlsy  I  comprehend  not  merely  the  difciples  of  ^efnay* 
but  all  thofe  writers  in  France,  who,  about  the  fame  time 
with  him,  began  to  fpeculute  about  the  natural  order  of 
political  focieties ;  or,  in  other  words,  about  that  order 
which  a  political  fociety  would  of  itfelf  gradually  aflume, 
on  the  fuppofition  that  law  had  no  other  objedl  than  to 
proteft  completely  the  natural  rights  of  individuals,  and 
left  every  man  at  liberty  to  purfue  his  own  interefl  in 
his  own  way,  as  long  as  he    abdiiined  from  violating  the 

rights 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  5O5 

lights  of  others.  The  connciSlion  between  this  natural 
order  and  the  improvement  of  mankind,  has  been  more 
infifted  on  by  the  biographers  of  Turgot  than  by  any  other 
authors ;  and  the  imperfect  hints  which  they  have  given  of 
the  views  of  that  truly  great  man  upon  this  important  fub- 
jefl,  leave  us  much  room  to  regret  that  he  had  not  leifure 
to  execute  a  work,  which  he  appears  to  have  long  meditated, 
.on  the  principles  of  moral  and  political  philofophy. 

Fie   de  M.  TuRGOT.      Par  tie  \\.  p.  ^0^. 

It  is  merely  for  want  of  a  more  convenient  expreihon  that  I 
have  diftinguiflied  thefe  diiFerent  writers  by  the  title  of  Econo- 
tnijls.  It  is  in  this  extenfive  fenfe  that  the  word  is  commonly 
underilood  in  this  country  ;  but  I  am  fenfible  that  it  is  fome- 
what  ambiguous,  and  that,  without  the  explanation  which 
I  have  given,  feme  of  my  obfervations  might  have  been 
fuppofed  to  imply  a  higher  admiration  than  I  really  entertain 
of  the  writings  of  M.  Ouefnay,  and  of  the  affected  phrafeo- 
logy  employed  by  his  feet. 

,  The  connexion  between  M.  Turgot  and  M.  Quefnay,  and 
the  coincidence  of  their  opinions  about  the  molt  eflential 
principles  of  legiflation,  will  I  hope  juftify  me  in  ranking 
the  former  with  the  Economifts  j  although  his  views  feem 
to  have  been  much  more  enlarged  than  thofe  of  his  contem- 
poraries j  and  although  he  exprefsly  difclaimed  an  implicit 
acquiefcence  in  the  opinions  of  any  particular  fe6l. 

"  M.  Turgot  etudia  la  do£lrine  de  M.  Gournay  et  de 
"  M.  Quefnay,  en  profita,  fe  la  rendit  propre  ;  et  la  com- 
«  binant  avec  la  connoiflance  qu'il  avoit  du  Droit,  &  avec 
«  les  grandes  vues  de  legiflation  civile  &  criminelle  qui 
«  avoient  occupe  fa  tete  &  interefle  Ton  coeur,  parvint  a  en 
«  former  fur  le  gouvernement  des  nations  un  corps  de  prin- 
"  cipes  a  lui,  embraiTant  les  deux  autres,  et  plus  complet 
•<  encore." 

Metnoires  fur  la  Vie  et  les  Owurages  de  M.  TuRGOT, 
par  M.  DuPONT,  p.  40,  41. 

O  o  3  "II 


S66  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

**  II  a  pafle  pour  avoir  ete  attache  a  plufieurs  fefteS,  ou 
"  a  plufieurs  focietes  qu'on  appelait  ainfi  ;  et  les  amis 
"  qu'il  avait  dans  ces  focietes  divcrfes  lui  reprochalent  fans 
""  cefle  (le  n'etre  pas  de  leur  avis  ;  &  fans  cefle  il  leur  re- 
"  prochait  de  fon  cote  de  vouloir  faire  communaute  d'opi- 
"  nions,  &  de  fe  rendre  folidaires  les  uns  pour  les  autres. 
«  II  croyait  cette  marche  propre  a  retarder  les  progres 
"  memes  de  leurs  decouvertes."  Ibid.p.  41,  42* 

NOTE  [O],  page  347. 

'X'HE  foregoing  obfervations  on  the  flate  of  the  mind  in 
fleep,  and  on  the  phenomena  of  dreaming,  were  written 
as  long  ago  as  the  year  1772  ;  and  were  read  (nearly  in  the 
form  in  which  they  are  now  publifhed)  in  the  year  1773, 
in  a  private  literary  fociety  in  this  univerfity.  A  confider- 
able  number  of  years  afterwards,  at  the  time  when  I  was 
occupied  with  very  different  purfuits,  I  happened,  in  turn- 
ing over  an  old  volume  of  the  Scots  Magazine,  (the  volume 
for  the  year  1749,)  to  meet  with  a  fliort  eflay  on  the  fame 
ruKjeft,  which  furprized  me  by  its  coincidence  with 
fome  ideas  which  had  formerly  occurred  to  me.  I  have 
reafon  to  believe  that  this  efTay  is  very  little  known,  as  I 
have  never  feen  it  referred  to  by  any  of  the  numerous 
writers  who  have  fince  treated  of  the  human  mind  ;  nor 
have  even  heard  it  once  mentioned  in  converfation.  I  had 
fome  time  ago  the  fatisfaftion  to  learn  accidentally,  that  the 
author  was  Mr.  Thomas  Melville,  a  gentleman  who  died  at 
the  early  age  of  27  ;  and  whofe  ingenious  obfervations  on 
light  and  colours  (publilhed  in  the  Eflays  of  the  Edinburgh 
Philofophical  Society)  are  well  known  over  Europe. 

The  paiTages  which  coincide  the  moR  remarkably  with 
the  do6lrine  I  have  dated,  are  the  following.  I  quote  the 
firfl:  with  particular  pleafure,  on  account  of  the  fupport 
which  it  gives  to  an  opinion  which  I  formerly  propofed  in 
the  effay  on  Conception,  and  on  which  I  have  the  misfortune 
to  differ  from  fon>e  of  my  friends. 

«  When 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  567 

"  When  I  am  walking  up  the  High-ftreet  of  Edinburgh, 
"  the  obje£ls  which  ftrike  my  eyes  and  ears  give  me  an  idea 
"  of  their  prefence ;  and  this  idea  is  lively,  full,  and  per- 
"  manent,  as  arifing  from  the  continued  operation  of  light 
*'  and  found  on  the  organs  of  fenfe. 

"  Again,  when  I  am  abfent  from  Edinburgh,  but  con- 
**  ceiving  or  imagining  myfelf  to  walk  up  the  High-ftreet,  in 
**  relating,  perhaps,  what  befel  me  on  fuch  an  occafion,  I 
'*  have  likewife  in  my  mind  an  idea  of  what  is  ufually  feen 
*'  and  heard  in  the  High-ftreet ;  and  this  idea  of  imagination 
"  is  entirely  fimilar  to  thofe  of  fenfation,  though  not  fo 
"  ftrong  and  durable. 

**  In  this  laft  inftance,  while  the  imagination  lafts,  be 
"  it  ever  fo  fhort,  it  is  evident  that  I  thinh  myfelf  in  the 
"  ftreet  of  Edinburgh,  as  truly  as  when  I  dream  I  am 
**  there,  or  even  as  when  I  fee  and  feel  I  am  there.  It 
"  is  true,  we  cannot  fo  well  apply  the  word  belief  in  this 
*'  cafe  j  becaufe  the  perception  is  not  clear  or  fteady,  being 
"  ever  difturbed,  and  foon  diflipated,  by  the  fuperior  ftrength 
"  of  intruding  fetjfation :  yet  nothing  can  be  more  abfurd 
"  than  to  fay,  that  a  man  may,  in  the  fame  individual  in- 
**  ftant,  believe  he  is  in  one  place,  and  imagine  he  is  in  another. 
"  No  man  can  demonftrate  that  the  obje£ls  of  fenfe  exift 
"  without  him  j  we  are  confcious  of  nothing  but  our 
"  own  fenfations :  however,  by  the  uniformity,  regularity, 
"  confiftency,  and  fteadinefs  of  the  impreflion,  we  are  led  to 
«  believe,  that  they  have  a  real  and  durable  caufe  without 
"  us  ;  and  we  obferve  not  any  thing  which  contradi6ls  this 
*'  opinion.  But  the  ideas  of  imagination,  being  tranfient 
*<  and  fleeting,  can  beget  no  fuch  opinion,  or  habitual  be- 
"  lief  j  though  there  is  as  much  perceived  in  this  cafe  as 
«  in  the  former,  namely,  an  idea  of  the  objeft  within  the 
"  mind.  It  will  be  eafily  underftood,  that  all  this  is  in- 
**  tended  to  obviate  an  objedion  that  might  be  brought 
«•  againft  the  fimilarity  of  dreaming  and  imagination,  from 
"  our  believing  in  fleep  that  all  is  real.  But  there  is  one 
O  o  4  "  faft. 


568  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  fadl,  that  plainly  fets  them  both  on  a  parallel,  that  int 
"  fleep  we  often  recolle£l  that  the  fcenes  which  we  behold 
"  are  a  mere  dream,  in  the  fame  manner  as  a  perfon 
"  awake  is  habitually  convinced  that  the  reprefentations  of 
"  his  imagination  are  fi6litious." 

<«  In   this   eflay  we  make  no  inquiry  into  the  ftate 

**  of  the  body  in  lleep. 

"  If  the  operations    of  the   mind  in   fleep  can  be 

'*  fairly  deduced  from  the  fame  caufes  as  its  operations  when 
"  awake,  we  are  certainly  advanced  one  confiderable  ftep, 
*'  though  the  caufes  of  thefe  latter  fhould  be  flill  unknown. 
"  The  doctrine  of  gravitation,  which  is  the  moft  wonder- 
*'  ful  and  extenfive  difcovery  in  the  whole  compafs  of  hu- 
**  man  fcience,  leaves  the  defcent  of  heavy  bodies  as  great 
"  a  myllery  as  ever.  In  philofophy,  as  in  geometry,  the 
*'  whole  art  of  inveftigation  lies  in  reducing  things  that  are 
*'  difficult,  intricate,  and  remote,  to  what  is  fimpler  and 
*'  eafier  of  accefs,  by  purfuing  and  extending  the  analogies 
"  of  nature." 

On  looking  over  the  fame  eflay,  I  find  an  obfervation 
which  I  dated  as  my  own  in  page  150  of  this  work.  "  The 
"  mere  imagination  of  a  tender  fcene  in  a  romance,  or 
"  drama,  will  draw  tears  from  the  eyes  of  thofe  who  know 
"  very  well,  when  they  recoiled  themfelves,  that  the  whole 
"  is  fidlitious.  In  the  mean  time  they  muft  conceive  it  as 
*'  real ;  and  from  this  fuppofed  reality  arifes  all  its  influence 
"  on  the  human  mind." 

Continuation  of  Note  [O].     [Second  Edition.) 

QOON  after  the  publication  of  the  Firit  Edition  of  this 
Work,  a  difficulty  was  darted  to  me  with  refpe6t  to 
my  conclufions  concerning  the  ftate  of  the  mhid  in  fleep,  by 
my  excellent  friend  Mr.  Prevoft;  of  Geneva  ;  a  gentleman 
who  has  long  held  a  high  rank  in  the  republic  of  letters, 
and  to  whofe  valuable  correfpondence  I  have  often  been 
indebted  for  much    pleafure    and    inftrudion.     The  fame 

difficulty 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  569 

'difficulty  was  propofed  to  me,  nearly  about  the  fame  time, 
by  another  friend  (then  at  a  very  early  period  of  life),  who 
has  fince  honourably  diftinguiflied  himfelf  by  his  obferva- 
tions  oa  Dr.  Darwin's  Zoonomia  ;  the  firft  fruits  of  a  phi- 
lofophieal  genius,  which,  I  truft,  is  deftined  for  yet  more 
important  undertakings  *. 

As  Mr.  Prevofl  has,  in  the  prefent  inftance,  kindly  aided 
me  in  the  talk  of  removing  his  own  objeftion,  I  fhall  take 
the  liberty  to  borrow  his  words  : 

"  Sans  I'aflion  de  la  Volonte  point  d'efFort  d'attention. 
^*  Sans  quelque  eifort  d'attention  point  de  Souvenir.  Dans 
**  le  Sommeil,  I'adlion  de  la  Volonte  eft  fufpendue.  Com- 
*'  ment  done  refte-t-il  quelque  Souvenir  des  Songes  ? 

**  Je  vois  bien  deux  ou  trois  reponfes  a  cette  difficulte. 
"  Quant  a  prefent,  elles  fe  reduifent  a  dire,  ou  que  dans 
"  un  Sommeil  parfait,  il  n'y  a  nul  Souvenir,  et  que  la 
"  ou  il  y  a  Souvenir,  le  Sommeil  n'etoit  pas  parfait ;  ou  que 
"  i'aftion  de  la  Volonte  qui  fuffit  pour  le  Souvenir  n'eft  pas 
"  fufpendue  dans  le  Sommeil ;  que  ce  degre  d'adtivite  refte 
"  a  Tame  ;  que  ce  n'eft,  pour  ainfi  dire,  qu'une  Volonte 
"  elementaire  et  comme  infenfible.'^ 

I  am  abundantly  fenfible  of  the  force  of  this  objedion; 
and  am  far  from  being  fatisfied,  that  it  is  in  my  power 
to  reconcile  completely  the  apparent  inconfiftency.  The 
general  conclufions,  at  the  fame  time,  to  which  I  have  been 
led,  feem  to  refult  fo  neceflarily  from  the  fadls  I  have  ftated, 
that  even  although  the  difficulty  in  queftion  fhouid  remain 
for  the  prefent  unfolved,  it  would  not,  in  my  opinion,  ma- 
terially afFefit  the  evidence  on  which  they  reft.  In  all  our 
inquiries,  it  is  of  confequence  to  remember,  that  when  we 
have  once  arrived  at  a  general  principle  by  a  careful  in- 
duAion,  we  are  not  entitled  to  reje£l:  it,  becaufe  we  may 
find  ourfelves  unable  to  explain  from  it,  fynthetically,  all 
the  phenomena  in  which  it  is   concerned.     The  Newtonian 

*  Oblenations  on  the  Zoonomia  of  Dr.  Darwin.  By  Thomas  Brown,  Efq. 
'Edinburgh,  i  798. 

Theory 


57©  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS, 

Theory  of  the  Tides  is  not  the  lefs  certain,  that  feme  apj.a-' 
rent  exceptions  occur  to  it,  of  which  it  is  not  eafy  (in  con- 
fequence  of  our  imperfedt  knowledge  of  the  local  circum- 
ftances  by  which,  in  particular  cafes,  the  effedl  is  modified) 
to  give  a  fatisfa£lory  explanation. 

Of  the  folutions  fuggefted  by  Mr.  Prevoft,  the  firfl  coin- 
cides moft  nearly  with  my  own  opinion  •,  and  it  approaches 
to  what  I  have  hinted  (in  page  147  of  this  work)  concerning 
the  feeming  exceptions  to  my  doftrine,  which  may  occur  in 
thofe  cafes  where  fleep  is  partial.  A  ftrong  confirmation  of 
it,  undoubtedly,  may  be  derived  from  the  experience  of 
thofe  perfons  (feveral  of  whom  I  have  happened  to  meet 
with)  who  never  recolleft  to  have  dreamed,  excepting  when 
the  foundnefs  of  their  fleep  was  diflurbed  by  fome  derange- 
ment in  their  general  health,  or  by  fome  accident  which 
excited  a  bodily  fenfation. 

Another  folution  of  the  difficulty  might  perhaps  be  de- 
rived from  the  fa6ts  (dated  in  pp.  104,  105,  of  this  volume) 
which  prove,  "  that  a  perception  or  an  idea,  which  pafles 
"  through  the  mind,  without  leaving  any  trace  in  the  me- 
*'  mory,  may  yet  ferve  to  introduce  other  ideas  connected 
"  with  it  by  the  Laws  of  Afl"ociation." 

From  this  principle  it  follows,  that  if  any  one  of  the  more 
remarkable  circumftances  in  a  dream  (liould  recur  to  us  after 
we  awake,  it  might  (without  our  exerting  during  fleep  that 
attention  which  is  eflential  to  memory)  revive  the  fame  con- 
catenation of  particulars  with  which  it  was  formerly  accom- 
panied. And  what  is  a  dream,  but  fuch  a  concatenation  of 
feeming  events  prcfenting  itfclf  to  the  imagination  during  our 
waking  hours  ;  the  origin  of  which  we  learn  by  experience 
to  refer  to  that  interval  which  is  employed  in  fleep  ; — -Bnding 
it  impoffiblc  to  conne£l  it  with  any  fpecific  time  or  place  in 
our  paft  hifhory  .-'  One  thing  is  certain,  that  we  cannot,  by 
any  direct  afis  of  recolleftion,  recover  the  train  of  our  fleep- 
ing  thoughts,  as  w^e  can,  in  an  evening,  review  the  medita- 
tions of  the  preceding  day. 

Another 


NOTES   AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  571 

Another  caufe,  it  muft  be  owned,  prefents  an  obftacle  to 
fuch  efforts  of  recollection ;  and  is,  perhaps,  adequate  of 
itfelf  to  explain  the  faft.  During  the  day,  we  have  many 
aids  to  memory  which  are  wanting  in  fleep  (thofe,  in  parti- 
cular, which  are  furnifhed  by  the  objeds  of  our  external 
fenfes)  ;  and  of  thefe  aids  we  never  fail  to  avail  ourfelves,  in 
attempting  to  recollect;  the  thoughts  in  which  the  day  has 
been  fpent.  We  confider,  in  what  place  we  were  at  a 
particular  time,  and  what  perfons  and  things  we  there  faw ; 
endeavouring  thus  to  lay  hold  of  our  intelleftual  proceffes, 
by  means  of  the  fenfible  objects  with  which  they  were  af- 
fociated  :  and  yet,  with  all  thefe  advantages,  the  account 
which  molt  men  are  able  to  give  of  their  meditations  at  the 
clofe  of  a  long  fummer's  day,  will  not  be  found  to  require 
many  fentences.  As  in  fleep,  our  communication  with  the 
external  world  is  completely  interrupted,  it  is  not  furprifing, 
that  the  memory  of  our  dreams  {hould  be  much  more  im- 
perfect than  that  of  our  waking  thoughts ;  even  fuppofing 
us  to  befliow  at  the  moment,  an  equal  degree  of  attention 
on  both. 

It  is  of  more  importance  to  remark,  in  the  prefent  argu- 
ment, that  thofe  perfons  who  are  fubje£t  to  Sommmbulifm, 
feldom,  if  ever,  retain  any  recolleftion  of  the  obje£ts  of 
their  perceptions,  while  under  the  influence  of  this  diforder. 
If  the  principles  I  have  endeavoured  to  eftabliflibe  juft,  this 
is  a  neceffary  confequence  of  their  inattention  to  what  then 
paflfes  around  them  ;  an  inattention  of  which  nobody  can 
doubt,  who  has  had  an  opportunity  of  witnefling  the  vacant 
and  unconfcious  ftare  which  their  eyes  exhibit.  The  fame 
fadt  illuftrates  {Irongly  the  fufpenfion,  during  fleep,  of  thofe 
voluntary  powers,  to  which  the  operations  both  of  mind  and 
body  are  at  other  times  fubjecSled. 

Thefe  confiderations   derive    additional   evidence  from  a 
common  remark,  that  idle  people  are  moft  apt  to  dream,  or, 
at  lead,  to  recolledt  their  dreams.     The  thoughts  of  the 
bufy  and  of  the  ftudious  are  directed  by  their  habitual  occu- 
pations 


l^^  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

pations  into  a  particular  channel  ;  and  the  fpontaneoub 
courfe  of  their  ideas  is  checked,  and  turned  afide,  by  the  un- 
remitted activity  of  their  minds.  In  the  heedlefs  and  dif- 
fipated,  the  thoughts  wander  carelefsly  from  object  to  ob- 
jeft,  according  to  the  obvious  relations  of  refemblance  and 
of  analogy,  or  of  vicinity  in  place  and  time.  As  thefe  are  the 
prevailing  principles  of  aflbciaiion  in  fleep,  the  chances  that 
the  dreams  of  fuch  men  (hall  be  again  prefented  to  them  in 
the  courfe  of  the  following  day,  are  infinitely  multiplied. 

Which  of  thefe  folutions  approaches  moil  nearly  to  the 
real  ftate  of  the  faft,  I  do  not  prefume  to  decide.  I  think 
it  probable,  that  both  of  them  are  entitled  to  notice,  in 
comparing  the  phenomena  of  dreaming  with  the  general 
principles  to  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  refer  them.  In 
cafes  where  our  dreams  are  occafioned  by  bodily  fenfations, 
or  by  bodily  indifpofition,  it  may  be  expetled  that  the  dif- 
turbed  ftate  of  our  reft  will  prevent  that  total  ceflation  of  the 
power  of  attention,  which  takes  place  when  fleep  is  pro- 
found and  complete  ;  and,  in  fuch  inftances,  the  attention 
which  is  given  to  our  paflTing  thoughts,  may  enable  us  after- 
wards to  retrace  them  by  an  ai^l  of  recollection.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  more  general  fa£l  unqueftionably  is,  that  at 
the  moment  of  our  awaking,  the  interval  fpent  in  fleep  pre- 
fents  a  total  blank  to  the  memory  ;  and  yet,  it  happens  not 
unfrequently,  that,  at  the  diftance  of  hours,  fome  acciden- 
tal circumftance  occurring  to  our  thoughts,  or  fuggefted  to 
us  from  without,  revives  a  long  train  of  particulars  aflbciated 
in  the  mind  with  each  other  ;  to  which  train  (not  being  able 
to  account  otherwife  for  the  concatenation  of  its  parts)  we 
give  the  name  of  a  Dream. 

After  all,  I  am  very  far  from  fuppofing  that  I  have  ex- 
hauiled  this  fubjeCt  ;  and  I  ftiall  be  fully  fatisfied  with  the 
fuccefs  of  my  inquiries,  if  thofe  who  are  qualified  to  diftin- 
guifh  between  legitimate  and  hypothetical  theories  fhall  ad- 
mit, that  I  have  pointed  out  the  plan  on  which  thefe  pheno- 
mena   fhouid  be  ftudied,    and    have  made  fome  progrefs, 

(how 


NOTES   AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  573 

(how  fmall  foever)  towards  its  execution.  Much  additional 
light,  I  am  fenfible,  might  have  been  eafily  thrown  on  this 
part  of  our  conftitution,  as  well  as  upon  many  others,  if  I 
had  not  impofed  on  myfelf  the  reftraint  of  adhering,  where- 
ever  it  was  at  all  poflible,  to  the  modes  of  fpeaking  em- 
ployed by  my  predecefTors  in  defcribing  our  mental  ope- 
rations. 

One  remark  I  muftbcg  leave  to  recommend  to  the  con- 
fideration  of  thofe  who  may  hereafter  engage  in  this 
refearch ;  that,  among  the  aflonifhing  appearances  exhi- 
bited by  the  mind  in  lleep,  a  very  large  proportion  are 
precifely  analogous  to  thofe  of  which  we  are  every  mo- 
ment confcious  while  awake.  If  the  exciting  caufes,  for 
example,  of  our  Dreams  feem  myfterious  and  infcrutable, 
is  not  the  fatl  the  fame  with  the  origin  of  every  idea  or 
thought  which  fpontaneoufly  folicits  our  notice  ?  The  only 
difference  is,  that  in  the  latter  inftance,  in  confequence  of 
long  and  conftant  familiarity,  they  are  furveyed  by  all  with 
little  wonder,  and  by  moil  with  hardly  any  attention.  In 
the  former  inftance,  they  roufe  the  curiofity  of  the  moft 
illiterate,  from  their  comparative  infrequency,  and  from  the 
contraft  which,  in  fome  refpefts,  they  prefent  to  the  refults 
of  our  habitual  experience. — It  is  thus,  that  a  peafant  who 
has  been  accuftomed  from  his  infancy  to  fee,  without  any 
emotion,  the  fall  of  heavy  bodies  to  the  ground,  never  fails 
to  exprefs  the  livelieft  admiration  when  he  firft  witneffes  the 
powers  of  the  loadftone. 

In  fuch  cafes,  the  refearches  of  genuine  fcience  have 
a  tendency  to  produce  two  moral  effefts  equally  benefi- 
cial. The  one  is  to  illuftrate  the  unity  of  defign  in  nature, 
by  reconciling  what  feems,  from  its  rarity  or  fmgularity,  to 
be  myfterious  or  incomprehenfible,  with  the  general  laws 
which  are  familiarized  to  us  by  daily  experience  ;  the  other, 
to  counteraft  the  effects  of  familiarity  in  blunting  our  natural 
curiofity  with  rcfpe£l  to  thefe  laws,  by  leading  the  thoughts 
to  fome  of  their  more  curigus  and  apparently  anomalous 
applications. 

The 


574  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

The  phenomena  of  Dreaming  may  perhaps,  in  this  laft 
point  of  view,  form  an  article  not  altogether  ufelefs  in  the 
Natural  Hiftory  of  Man  ;  inafmuch  as  they  contribute  to 
attradt  our  attention  to  thofe  intelleclual  powers,  from 
which  it  is  fo  apt  to  be  withdrawn  by  that  external  world, 
which  affords  the  firft,  and  (for  the  common  purpofes  of 
5  life)  the  moft  interefting  field  for  their  exercife.  In  my  own 
I  cafe,  atleaft,  this  fuppofition  has  been  exaaiy  verified ;  as 
\  the  fpeculations  concerning  the  human  mind  which  I  have 
•  ventured  to  prefent  to  the  public,  all  took  their  rife  from 
»he  fubjedl  to  which  this  note  refers.  The  obfervations 
which  I  have  ftated  with  refpe£l  to  it  in  the  text  (excepting 
a  very  few  paragraphs  fince  added)  were  written  at  the  age 
of  eighteen,  and  formed  a  part  of  the  firft  philofophical 
eflay  whichi  recolleft  to  have  attempted.  The  fame  eflay 
contained  the  fubftance  of  what  I  have  introduced  in  chapter 
third,  concerning  the  belief  accompanying  conception  ;  and  of 
the  remarks  ftated  in  the  third  fedlion  of  chapter  fifth,  on  the 
extent  of  the  power  which  the  mind  has  over  the  train  of  its 
thoughts.  When  I  was  afterwards  led  profeffionally,  at  the 
diftance  of  many  years,  to  refume  the  fame  ftudies ,  this  fhort 
manufcript  was  almoft  the  only  memorial  I  had  preferved  of 
thefe  favourite  purfuits  of  my  early  youth  ;  and  from  the 
views  which  it  recalled  to  me,infenfibly  arofe  the  Analyfis  I 
have  fince  undertaken  of  our  intelleftual  faculties  in  general. 
For  feme  indulgence  to  the  egotifm  of  this  note,  I  muft 
truft  to  the  good-nature  of  my  readers.  It  has  been  length- 
ened much  beyond  my  original  intention,  by  an  anxiety 
(not,  I  hope,  unpardonable  in  an  Author)  to  fix  the  date  of 
fome  of  my  difquifitions  and  conclufions,  of  which  it  is  highly 
probable  I  may  magnify  the  importance  beyond  their  juft 
value.  The  fituation  of  a  public  teacher,  (I  muft  beg  leave 
to  add,)  by  giving  an  immediate  circulation  to  the  doftrines 
he  delivers,  expofes  him  to  many  inconveniences  which  other 
clafles  of  literary  men  have  in  their  power  to  avoid. 

Before  concluding  thefe  remarks,  I  cannot  help  reminding 
my  readers  once  more,  that  my  fundamental  principle  with 

refpedl 


'  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  575 

refpeft  to  the  ftate  of  the  mind  in  fleep  is,  —  not,  that  the 
power  of  volition  is  then  fufpended  ;  but,  that  the  influence  of 
the  will  over  the  faculties  both  of  mind  and  body  is  then 
interrupted.  (See  pp.  330,  331,  332,  333*)  ^  mention  this 
chiefly,  in  order  to  mark  the  difference  between  my  dotlrine 
and  that  maintained  in  Dr.  Darwin's  Zoonomia.  According 
to  this  ingenious  writer,  "  the  power  of  volition  is  totally 
"  fufpended  in  perfe£l  fleep."  (Zoonomia,  vol.  i.  p.  315.)  — 
"  In  the  Incubus"  (he  obferves)  "  the  Jg//r^  of  moving  the 
**  body  is  painfully  exerted  j  but  the  power  of  moving  it,  or 
*'  volition,  is  incapable  of  a£tion  till  we  awake."  (p.  288.) 
Would  he  not  have  ftated  the  faft  more  correal y,  if  he  had 
faid,  that  volition  is  painfully  exerted  •,  but  that  the  power 
of  moving  the  body  is  fufpended  ?  In  the  very  accurate 
phrafeology  of  Mr.  Locke,  "  volition  is  an  adt  of  the  mind, 
*<  knowingly  exerting  that  dominion  it  takes  itfelf  to  have 
*'  over  any  part  of  the  man,  by  employing  it  in,  or  with- 
"  holding  it  from,  any  particular  a£lion."  This  adt  of  the 
mind  Dr.  Darwin  exprefles  by  the  word  deftre\  an  indiftinft- 
nefs  ftill  extremely  common  among  metaphyfical  writers  \ 
although  it  was  long  ago  remarked  and  cenfured  by  the  emi- 
nent author  juft  quoted:  "  I  find"  (fays  Locke)  "the 
«  will  often  confounded  with  deftre,  and  one  put  for  the 
"  other  •,  and  that  by  men,  who  would  not  willingly  be 
**  thought  not  to  have  very  diftindl  notions  of  things,  and 
*«  not  to  have  written  very  clearly  about  them."  (Eflay  on 
Human  Underftanding,  vol.  i.  p.  203.   13th  edition.) 


NOTE  [P],  page  349- 

T^R.  REID  has,  with  great  truth,  obferved,  that  Des  Cartes' 
reafoning  againft  the  exiftence  of  the  fecondary  quali- 
ties of  matter,  owe  all  their  plaufibility  to  the  ambiguity  of 
words. — When  he  affirms,  for  example,  that  the  fmell  of  a 

rofe 


S']6  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

rofe  is  not  in  the  flower  but  in  the  mind,  his  propofition 
amounts  only  to  this^  that  the  rofe  is  not  confcious  of  the 
fenfation  of  fmell ;  but  it  does  not  follow  from  Des  Cartes* 
reafonings,  that  there  is  no  quality  in  the  rofe  which  excites 
the  fenfation  of  fmell  in  the  mind ;  —  which  is  all  that  any 
perfon  means  when  he  fpeaks  of  the  fmell  of  that  flower. 
For  the  word /?«<?//,  like  the  names  of  all  fecondary  qualities, 
fignifies  two  things,  a  fenfation  in  the  mind,  and  the  un- 
known quality  which  fits  it  to  excite  that  fenfation*.  The 
fame  remark  applies  to  that  procefs  of  reafoning  by  which 
Des  Cartes  attempts  to  prove  that  there  is  no  heat  in  the 
fire. 

All  this,  I  think,  will  be  readily  allowed  with  refpeft  to 
fmells  and  taftes,  and  alfo  with  refpedt  to  heat  and  cold  ; 
concerning  which  I  agree  with  Dr.  Reid,  in  thinking  that 
Des  Cartes'  do£lrine,  when  cleared  of  that  air  of  myftery 
which  it  derives  from  the  ambiguity  of  words,  differs  very 
little,  if  at  all,  from  the  commonly  received  notions.  But 
the  cafe  feems  to  be  different  with  refpect  to  colours,  of  the 
nature  of  which  the  vulgar  are  apt  to  form  a  very  confufed 
conception,  which  the  Phllofophy  of  Des  Cartes  has  a  ten- 
dency to  correft.  Dr.  Reid  has  juftly  diftinguiflied  the 
quality  of  colour  from  what  he  calls  the  appearance  of  colour, 
which  laft  can  only  exiil  in  a  mmd  f .     Now  I  am  difpofed 

•  Some  judicious  remarks  on  this  ambiguity  in  the  names  of  fecondary  qua- 
lities, are  made  by  Malebranche  : 

"  It  is  only  (fays  he)  fince  the  time  of  Des  Cartes,  that  thofe  confufed  and 
"  indeterminate  queftions,  whether  fire  is  hot,  grafs  green,  and  fugar  fvveet,  phi- 
«'  lofophers  are  in  ufe  to  anfwer,  by  diftinguiihing  the  equivocal  meaning  of  the 
"  words  exprefllng  fenfible  qualities.  If  by  heat,  cold,  and  favour,  you  under- 
♦'  ftand  fuch  and  fuch  a  difpofition  of  parts,  or  fomc  unknown  motion  of  infen- 
"  fible  particles,  then  fire  is  hot,  grafs  green,  and  fugar  fweet.  But  if  by  heat 
"  and  other  qualities  you  underftand  what  I  feel  by  fire,  what  I  fee  in  grafs,  &c. 
"  fire  is  not  hot,  nor  grafs  green  ;  for  the  heat  I  feel,  and  the  colours  I  fee  are 
*'  only  in  the  foul." 

f  Dr.  Akenfide,  in  one  of  his  Notes  on  his  Ple.^scres  of  Imagination^ 
obferves,  tiiat  colours,  as  apprehended  hy  the  mind,  do  net  exift  in  the  body.  By 
this  qualification,  he  plainly  means  to  dillinguilh  what  Dr.  Riid  calls  the  appear- 
ance «f  colour,  from  colour  conf.dercd  as  a  quality  of  matter. 

to 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  577 

to  believe,  that  when  the  vulgar  fpeak  of  colour,  they  com- 
monly mean  the  appearance  of  colour ;  or  rather  they  alTo- 
ciate  the  appearance  and  its  caufe  fo  intimately  together, 
that  they  find  it  impoffible  to  think  of  them  feparately*. 
The  fenfation  of  colour  never  forms  one  fimple  objefl  of 
attention  to  the  mind  like  thofe  of  fmell  and  tafte  j  but  every 
time  we  are  confcious  of  it,  we  perceive  at  the  fame  time 
extenfion  and  figure.  Hence  it  is,  that  we  find  it  impofiTible 
to  conceive  colour  without  extenfion,  though  certainly  there 
is  no  more  neceflary  connexion  between  them,  than  between 
extenfion  and  fmell. 

From,  this  habit  of  aflbciating  the  two  together,  we  are 
led  alfo  to  aflfign  them  the  fame  place,  and  to  conceive  the 
different  colours,  or  (to  ufe  Dr.  Reid's  language)  the  appear- 
ance  of  the  difi^erent  colours,  as  fomething  fpread  over  the 
furfaces  of  bodies.  I  own  that  when  we  reflect  on  the 
fubjeft  with  attention,  we  find  this  conception  to  be  indif- 
tinct,  and  fee  clearly  that  the  appearance  of  colour  can  exift 
only  in  a  mind :  but  ftill  it  is  fome  confufed  notion  of  this 
fort,  which  every  man  is  difpofed  to  form  who  has  not  been 
very  familiarly   converfant  with  philofophicai  inquiries. — I 


*  Dr.  Reid  is  of  opinion,  that  the  vulgar  always  mean  to  exprefs  by  the  word 
colour,  a  qualit)-,  and  not  a  fenfation.  "  Colour  (fays  he)  differs  from  other  fe- 
"  condary  qualities  in  this,  that  whereas  the  name  of  the  quality  is  fometimes 
"  given  to  the  fenfation  which  indicates  it,  and  is  occafioned  by  it,  we  never,  as 
"  far  as  I  can  judge,  give  the  name  of  colour  to  the  fenfation,  but  to  the  quality 
"  only."  This  queftion  is  of  no  confequence  for  us  to  difcufs  at  prefent,  as  Dr. 
Reid  acknowledges  in  the  following  paflage,  that  the  fenfation  and  quality  are  fo 
intimately  united  together  in  tlie  mind,  that  they  feem  to  form  only  one  fimple 
objeiSt  of  thought.  "  When  we  thinlc  or  fpeak  of  any  particular  colour,  however 
"  fimple  the  notion  may  feem  to  be  which  is  prefented  to  the  imagination,  it  is 
"  really  in  fome  fort  compounded ;  it  involves  an  unknown  caufe  and  a  known 
"  effecl.  The  name  of  colour  belongs  indeed  to  the  caufe  only,  and  not  to  the 
"  effect.  But  as  the  caufe  is  unknown,  we  can  farm  no  dillindt  conception  of 
"  it,  but  by  its  relation  to  the  known  effcdl.  And  therefore  both  go  together  in 
"  the  imagination,  and  are  fo  clofely  united  that  they  are  miftaken  for  one  fimple 
"  objed  of  thought." 

Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind,  chap.  vi.  fedl.  4. 


P  p  find, 


578  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

find,  at   leaft,  that  fuch  is  the  notion  which  moft  readily 
prefents  itfelf  to  my  own  mind. 

Nor  is  fhis  reference  of  the  fenfation,  or  appearance  of 
colour  to  an  external  obje£l,  a  fa£t  altogether  fmgular  in 
our  conftitution.  It  is  extremely  analogous  to  the  reference 
which  we  always  make,  of  the  fenfations  of  touch  to  thofe 
parts  of  the  body  where  the  exciting  caufes  of  the  fenfations 
exift. — If  I  ftrike  my  hand  againft  a  hard  obje£l,  I  naturally 
fay,  that  I  feel  pain  in  my  hand.  The  philofophical  truth 
is,  that  I  perceive  the  caufe  of  the  pain  to  be  applied  to  that 
part  of  my  body.  The  fenfation  itfelf  I  cannot  refer  in  point 
of  place  to  the  hand,  without  conceiving  the  foul  to  be  fpread 
over  the  body  by  difFufion. 

A  ftill  more  ftriklng  analogy  to  the  fadl:  under  our  con- 
fideration,  occurs  in  thofe  fenfations  of  touch  which  we  refer 
to  a  place  beyond  the  limits  of  the  body  ;  as  in  the  cafe  of  pain 
felt  in  an  amputated  limb. 

The  very  intimate  combination  to  which  the  foregoing 
obfervations  on  the  fenfation  of  colour  relate,  is  taken  notice 
of  by  d'Alembert  in  the  Encyclopediey  as  one  of  the  moft  cu- 
rious phenomena  of  the  human  mind. 

"  11  eft  tres  evident  que  le  mot  couleur  ne  d^figne  aucune 
*'  propriety  du  corps,  niais  feulement  une  modification  de 
"  notre  ame  ;  que  la  blancheur,  par  exemple,  la  rongeur, 
"  &c.  n'exiftent  que  dans  nous,  et  nullement  dans  le  corps 
**  auxquels  nous  les  rapportons  j  neanmoins  par  une  habi- 
*^  tude  prife  dcs  notre  enfance,  c'eft  une  chofe  tres  fingu- 
"  Here  et  digne  de  I'attention  des  metaphyficiens,  que  ce 
*'  penchant  que  nous  avons  a  rapporter  a  une  fubftance 
"  materielle  et  divifible,  ce  qui  appartient  r^ellement  a  une 
"  fubftance  fplrituelle  et  fimple ;  et  rien  n'eft  peut-etre  plus 
**  extraordinaire  dans  les  operations  de  notre  ame,  que  de 
**  la  voir  tranfporter  hors  d'elle-meme  et  ^tendre,  pour  ainfi 
'^^  dire,  fes  fenfations  fur  une  fubftance  a  laquelle  elles  ne 
«  peuvent  appartenir." 

From  the  following  paflage  in  Condillac's  Traite  des  Sen- 

fations,  it  appears  that  the  phenomenon  here  remarked  by 

1 2  d'Alembert, 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  579 

d'Alembert,  was,  in  Condillac's  opinion,  the  natural  and  ob- 
vious efFe6l  of  an  early  and  habitual  aflbciation  of  ideas.  I 
quote  it  with  the  greater  pleafure,  that  it  contains  the  hap- 
pieft  illuftration  I  have  feen  of  the  do£trine  which  I  have 
been  attempting  to  explain 

"  On  pourroit  faire  une  fuppofition,  ou  I'odorat  appren- 
"  droit  a  juger  parfaitement  des  grandeurs,  des  figures,  des 
*<  fituations,  et  des  diftances.  II  fuffiroit  d'un  cote  de  fou- 
"  mettre  les  corpufcules  odoriferans  aux  loix  de  la  diop- 
*'  trique,  et  de  I'autre,  de  conftruire  I'organe  de  I'odorat  a 
**  peu  pres  fur  le  modele  de  celui  de  la  vue ;  enforte  que 
**  les  rayons  odoriferans,  apres  s'etre  croifes  a  I'ouverture, 
"  frappaflent  fur  une  membrane  interieure  autant  de  points 
*'  di{lin6ls  qu'il  y  en  a  fur  les  furfaces  d'oii  ils  feroient 
"  reflechis. 

*'  En  pareil  cas,  nous  contra61:erions  bientot  I'habitude 
"  d'etendre  les  odeurs  fur  les  objets,  et  les  philofophes  ne 
**  manqueroient  pas  de  dire,  que  I'odorat  n'a  pas  befoin  des 
"  le9ons  du  toucher  pour  appercevoir  des  grandeurs  et  des 
«  figures." 

Oeuvres  de  CoNDlLLAC. — Edit,  Aniji.  vol.  v.  p.  223. 

NOTE  [Q],  page  350. 

T/'ERUM  quidem  eft,  quod  hodierni  mufici  fie  loqui  fo- 
leant  (acutum  in  alto  reputantes  et  grave  in  imo) 
quodque  ex  Grsecis  recentioribus  nonnulli  fie  aliquando 
(fed  raro)  loquuti  videantur  •,  apud  quos  fenfim  inolevit 
mos  fie  loquendi. — Sed  antiquiores  Grajci  plane  contra- 

*  rium  (grave  reputantes  in  alto  et  acutum  in  imo).  Quod 
'  etiam  ad  Boethii  tempora  continuatum  eft,  qui  in  fchema- 

*  tifmis  fuis,  grave  femper  in  fummo  ponit,  et  acutum  in 
'  imo."    David  Gregory,  m  Praf at.  ad  edit,  fuam  Euclid. 

Op.  Oxon.  1703. 

The  aflbciation  to  which,  in  modern  times,  we  are  habi- 
tuited  from  our  infancy,  between  the  ideas  of  acute  and 
high,  and  between  thofe  of  grave  and  low,  is  accounted  for 

Pp  3  bjr 


SSo         NOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 

by  Dr.  Smith,  in  his  Harmonics,  from  the  formation  of  the 
voice  in  finging;  which  Ariftides  Ouintilianus  thus  defcribes  : 

"  'luTTi:  iTrivoXn:  "B-foiEfAEis;,  Scc.  Et  quidem  gravitas  fit,  fi  ex 
"  inferiore  parte  (gutturis)  fpiritus  furfum  feratur,  acumen 
"  vero,  fi  per  fummam  partem  prorumpat ;"  (as  Meibomius 
tranflates  it  in  his  notes.)  See  Smith's  Harmomcs,  p.  3. 

Dr.  Beattie,  in  his  ingenious  Eflay  on  Poetry  and  Mufic, 
fays,  it  is  probable  that  the  deepeft  or  gravefl:  found  was 
called  fumma  by  the  Romans,  and  the  fhrilleft  or  acuteft  ima: 
and  he  conjeclures,  that  "  this  might  have  been  owing  to 
''  the  conftrucStion  of  their  inflruments  ;  the  firing  that 
"  founded  the  former  being  perhaps  highefl  in  place,  and 
"  that  which  founded  the  latter  loweft."  If  this  conje£lure 
could  be  verified,  it  would  afford  a  proof  from  the  fa6l,  how 
liable  the  mind  is  to  be  influenced  in  this  refpeft  by  cafual 
combinations. 

NOTE  [R],  page  395. 

npHE  difference  between  the  efFe£ls  of  ajfociation  and  of 
imagmattony  (in  the  fenfe  in  which  I  employ  thefe 
words,)  in  heightening  the  pleafure  or  the  pain  produced  on 
the  mind  by  external  obje6ls,  will  appear  from  the  following 
remarks : 

1 .  As  far  as  the  affociation  of  ideas  operates  in  heighten- 
ing pleafure  or  pain,  the  mind  is  pafTive  :  and  accordingly 
where  fuch  afTociations  are  a  fource  of  inconvenience,  they 
are  feldom  to  be  cured  by  an  effort  of  our  volition,  or  even 
by  reafoning  ;  but  by  the  gradual  formation  of  contrary  af- 
fociations.  Imagination  is  an  adtive  exertion  of  the  mind  ; 
and  although  it  may  often  be  difficult  to  reflrain  it,  it  is 
plainly  diftinguiflrable  in  theory  from  the  afTociations  now 
mentioned. 

2.  In  every  cafe  in  which  the  afTociation  of  ideas  operates, 
it  is  implied  that  fome  pleafure  or  pain  is  recalled  which 
was  felt  by  the  mind  before.     I  vifit,  for  example,  a  fcene 

I J  where 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  581 

where  I  have  been  once  happy ;  nnd  the  fight  of  it  afFe£ts 
me,  on  that  account,  with  a  degree  of  pleafure,  which  I 
Ihould  not  have  received  from  any  other  fcene  equally  beau- 
tiful. I  inall  not  inquire,  whether,  in  fuch  cafes,  the  afib- 
ciated  pleafure  arifes  immediately  upon  the  fight  of  the  ob- 
ject, and  without  the  intervention  of  any  train  of  thought  ; 
or  whether  it  is  produced  by  the  recolletSlion  and  conception 
of  former  occurrences  which  the  perception  recals.  On 
neither  fuppofition  does  it  imply  the  exercife  of  that  creative 
power  of  the  mind  to  which  we  have  given  the  name  of 
Imagination.  It  is  true,  that  commonly,  on  fuch  occafions, 
imagination  is  bufy ;  amd  our  pleafure  is  much  heightened 
by  the  colouring  which  flie  gives  to  the  objeil^s  of  memory. 
But  the  difference  between  the  effects  which  arife  from  the 
operation  of  this  faculty,  and  thofe  which  refult  from  aflb- 
ciation,  is  not,  on  that  account,  the  lefs  real. 

The  influence  of  imagination  on  happinefs  is  chiefly  felt 
by  cultivated  minds.  That  of  affociation  extends  to  all  ranks 
of  men,  and  furniflies  the  cliief  inftrument  of  education  ; 
infomuch  that  whoever  has  the  regulation  of  the  aflbciations 
of  another  from  early  infancy,  is,  to  a  great  degree,  the 
arbiter  of  his  happinefs  or  mifery. 

Some  very  ingenious  writers  have  employed  the  word 
Aflbciation  in  fo  extenfive  a  fcufe,  as  to  comprehend,  not 
only  imagination,  but  all  the  other  faculties  of  the  mind. 
Wherever  the  pleafing  or  the  painful  effe6l  of  an  objecft  does 
not  depend  folely  on  the  objeft  itfelf,  but  arifes  either  wholly 
or  in  part  from  fome  mental  operation  to  which  the  percep- 
tion of  it  gives  rifej  the  effe£l  is  referred  to  affociation.  And 
undoubtedly,  this  language  may  be  employed  with  propriety, 
if  the  word  Affociation  be  applied  to  all  the  ideas  and  feel- 
ings which  may  arife  in  the  mind,  in  confequence  o  the 
exercife  which  the  fight  of  the  objedl  may  give  to  the  imagi- 
nation, to  the  reafoning  powers,  and  to  the  other  principles 
of  our  nature.  But  in  this  work,  and  particularly  in  the 
fecond  part  of  chap,  v.,  I  employ  the  word  Affociation  in  a 
much  more   limited   fenfe ;  to   exprefs  the  effe6l  which  an 

P  p  3  object 


58z  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

obje£t  derives  from  ideas,  or  from  feelin-^s  which  it  does 
not  neceflarily  fuggeft,  but  which  it  uniformly  reciils  to  the 
mind,  in  confequence  of  early  and  long-continued  habits. 

NOTE  [8],  page  412. 

'"I'^HE  following  paflage  from  Malebranche  will  be  a  fuffi- 
cient  fpecimen  of  the  common  theories  with  refpecSt 
memory. 

"  In  order  to  give  an  explanation  of  memory,  it  fliould 
**  be  called  to  mind,  that  all  our  different  perceptions  are 
"  affixed  to  the  changes  which  happen  to  the  fibres  of  the 
*'  principal  parts  of  the  brain,  wherein  the  foul  particularly 
*'  refides. 

"  This  fuppofition  being  laid  dov/n,  the  nature  of  the 
"  memory  is  explained  :  for  as  the  branches  of  a  tree,  which 
*'  have  continued  for  fome  time  bent  after  a  particular  man- 
*'  ner,  preferve  a  readinefs  and  facility  of  being  bent  afrelh 
"  in  the  fame  manner ;  fo  the  fibres  of  the  brain,  having 
"  once  received  certain  impreffions  from  the  current  of  the 
"  animal  fpirits,  and  from  the  a6lion  of  the  obje£ls  upon 
"  them,  retain  for  a  confiderable  time  fome  facility  of  re- 
"  ceiving  the  fame  difpofitions.  Now  the  memory  confifts 
"  only  in  that  promptnefs  or  facility ;  fince  a  man  thinks 
"  upon  the  (nme  things,  whenever  the  brain  receives  the 
*'  fame  impreffions  *.'' 

"  The  moft  confiderable  differences,"  fays  the  fame 
Author  in  another  pafTage,  "  that  are  found  in  one  and 
"  the  fame  perfon,  during  his  whole  life,  are  in  his  infancy, 
"  in  his  maturity,  and  in  his  old  age.  The  fibres  in  the 
"  brain  in  a  man's  childhood  are  foft,  flexible,  and  delicate ; 
"  a  riper  age  dries,  hardens,  and  corroborates  them  ;  but 
*'  in  old  age  they  grow  altogether  inflexible,  grofs,  and  in- 
"  terrr.ixcd  with  fuperfluous  humours,  which  the  faint  and 
**  languiffiing  heat  of  that  age  is  no  longer  able  to  difperfe  : 

•  Book  ii.  ch.ip.  5,  (Page  54  of  Taylor's  Traiifl.) 

««  for 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  583 

"  for  as  we  fee  that  the  fibres  which  compofe  the  fle(h 
"  harden  by  time,  and  that  the  flefh  of  a  young  partridge  is 
"  without  difpute  more  tender  than  that  of  an  old  one,  fo 
"  the  fibres  of  the  brain  of  a  child,  or  a  young  perfon,  muft 
"  be  more  foft  and  delicate  than  thofe  of  perfons  more  ad- 
*'  vanced  in  years. 

"  We  fhall  underftand  the  ground  and  the  occafion  of 
"  thefe  changes,  if  we  confider  that  the  fibres  are  continually 
''  agitated  by  the  animal  fpirits,  which  whirl  about  them 
"  in  many  different  manners :  for  as  the  winds  parch  and 
"  dry  the  earth  by  their  blowing  upon  it,  fo  the  animal 
"  fpirits,  by  their  perpetual  agitation,  render  by  degrees  the 
*'  greateft  part  of  the  fibres  of  a  man's  brain  more  dry,  more 
"  clofe,  and  folid  ;  fo  that  perfons  more  ftricken  in  age 
*'  muft  neceflarily  have  them  almoft  always  more  inflexible 
*'  than  thofe  of  a  leffer  {landing.  And  as  for  thofe  of  the 
*'  fame  age,  drunkards,  who  for  many  years  together  have 
"  drank  to  excefs  either  wine,  or  other  fuch  intoxicating 
"  liquors,  muft  needs  have  them  more  folid  and  more  in- 
"  flexible  than  thofe  who  have  abftained  from  the  ufe  of 
"  fuch  kind  of  liquors  all  their  lives*." 

NOTE  [T],  page  476. 
"  npHOUGH  Sir  Ifaac's  memory  was  much  decayed  in 
the  laft  years  of  his  life,  I  found  he  perfe(Slly  under- 
"  ftood  his  own  writings,  contrary  to  what  I  had  frequently 
"  heard  in  difcourfe  from  many  perfons.  This  opinion  of 
**  theirs  might  arife,  perhaps,  from  his  not  being  always  ready 
"  at  fpeakingon  thefe  fubjeds,  when  it  might  be  expefted 
«  he  (hould.  But  as  to  this  it  may  be  obferved,  that  great 
«  geniufes  are  frequently  liable  to  be  abfent,  not  only  in 
«  relation  to  common  life,  but  with  regard  to  fome  of  the 
"  parts  of  fcience  they  are  the  beft  informed  of.  Inventors 
**  feem  to  treafure  up  in  their  minds  what  they  have  found 
"  out,  after  another  manner  than  thofe  do  the  finiie  things, 

*  Bookii.  chap.  6  (Piige  j;6  ofTATiOR's  Tranfl.) 

«  who 


584  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

«  who  have  not  this  inventive  faculty.  The  former,  when 
"  they  have  occafion  to  produce  their  knowledge,  are,  in 
"  fome  meafure,  obliged  immediately  to  inveftigate  part  of 
"  what  they  want.  For  this  they  are  not  equally  fit  at  all 
"  times  j  fo  it  has  often  happened,  that  fuch  as  retain  things 
«  chiefly  by  a  very  ftrong  memory,  have  appeared  off-hand 
«  more  expert  than  the  difcoverers  themfelves." 

Preface  to  Pemberton's  Vienv  c/"  Newton's  Philofophy. 

NOTE  [U],  page  524. 

«'   r^  OING   over   the  theory  of  virtue  in  one's    thoughts, 
*'   ^-^    talking  well,  and  drawing  fine  piftures  of  it ;  this  is 
"  fo  far  from  neceffarily  or  certainly  conducing  to   form   a 
«  habit  of  it  in  him  who  thus  employs  himfelf,  that  it  may 
"  harden  the  mind  in  a  contrary  courfe,  and  render  it  gra- 
"  dually  more  infenfible  j  i.  e.  form  a  habit  of  infenfibility 
«  to   all  moral  obligations.     For,  from  our  very  faculty  of 
«  habits,    paffive  impreflions,    by    being    repeated,    grow 
«  weaker.     Thoughts,  by  often  pafling  through  the  mind, 
«  are  felt  lefs  fenfibly  :  being  accuflomed  to  danger,  begets 
«  intrepidity,  i.e.  leffens  fear  -,  to  diftrefs,  leflens  the  pafiion 
"  of  pity  ;  to  inftances  of  others'  mortality,  leflens  the  fen- 
«  fible  apprehenfion  of  our  own.     And  from  thefe  two  ob- 
«  fervations  together,  that  practical  habits  are  formed  and 
*^  ftrengthened  by  repeated  afts  j  and  that  pafllve  impreflions 
**  grow  weaker  by  being  repeated  upon  us  ;  it  muft  follow, 
«  that  a«^ive  habits  may  be  gradually  forming  and  ftrength- 
<'  ening  by  a  courfe  of  a6ling  upon  fuch  and   fuch  motives 
"  and   excitements,  whilft  thefe  motives   and  excitements 
*'  themfelves  are,  by  proportionable  degrees,  growing  lefs 
"  fenfible,  i.  e.  are  continually   lefs   and    lefs  fenfibly   felt, 
*'^  even  as  the   aftive   habits  ftrengthen.     And  experience 
"  confirms  this  :  for  active  principles,  at  the  very  time  they 
*^  are  lefs  lively  in  perception  than  they  were,  are  found  to 
"  be,  fomehow,  wrought  more  thoroughly  into  the  temper 
«  and  charader,  and  become  more  effectual  in  influencing 

"  our 


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  585 

"  our  pra£lice.  The  three  things  juft  mentioned  may  af- 
"  ford  inftances  of  it.  Perception  of  danger  is  a  natural 
"  excitement  of  paffive  fear  and  a<Slive  caution :  and  by 
"  being  inured  to  danger,  habits  of  the  latter  are  gradually 
"  wrought,  at  the  fame  time  that  the  former  gradually  lef- 
«  fens.  Perception  of  dillrefs  in  others,  is  a  natural  excite- 
"  ment  pafTively  to  pity,  and  a«Slively  to  relieve  it :  but  let 
"  a  man  fet  himfelf  to  attend  to,  inquire  out,  and  relieve 
"  diftrefled  perfons,  and  he  cannot  but  grow  lefs  and  lefs 
**  fenfibly  affefted  with  the  various  miferies  of  life  with 
*'  which  he  mud  become  acquainted  j  when  yet,  at  the 
"  fame  time,  benevolence,  confidered  not  as  a  paflion,  but 
"  as  a  pratElical  principle  of  a£lion,  will  ftrengthen  j  and 
*'  whilft  he  paflively  compaflionates  the  diftrefled  lefs,  he 
*'  will  acquire  a  greater  aptitude  aftively  to  aflift  and  be- 
**  friend  them.  So  alfo,  at  the  fame  time  that  the  daily  in- 
"  ftances  of  men's  dying  around  us,  give  us  daily  a  lefs 
**  fenfible  paffive  feeling  or  apprehenfion  of  our  own  mor- 
**  tality,  fuch  inftances  greatly  contribute  to  the  ftrengthen- 
"  ing  a  practical  regard  to  it  in  ferious  men ;  i.  e.  to  form- 
*'  ing  a  habit  of  acling  with  a  conftant  view  to  it." 

Butler's  Analogy,  page  12Z.  3d  edit. 


THE    END. 


Strahan  and  Preftoii, 
Printers-Street,  London.