•(^.)7 


-^,-^^;-l-     * 


yM 


't)mm 


.'■f'^fT^ 


'^:^'- 


m^-j^ui 


Boston  Medical  Library 
in  the  Francis  A.  Countway 
Library  of  Medicine  -Boston 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Open  Knowledge  Commons  and  Harvard  Medical  School 


http://www.archive.org/details/viewofnervoustemOOtrot 


VIEW 

OF  THE 

NERVOUS  TEMPERAMENT; 

BEING 

A  PRACTICAL  ENQUIRY 

INTO 

THE  INCREASING  PREVALENCE,  PREVENTION,  AND 
TREATMENT  OF   THOSE  DISEASES 

COMMONLY   CALLED 

NERVOUS,  BILIOUS,   STOMACH,   AND    LIVER 

COMPLAINTS;    INDIGESTION;    LOW 

SPIRITS;  G our,  ^c. 

THE    SECOND   EDITION. 


BY  THOMAS  TROTTER,  M.  D* 

LATE  PHYSICIAN  TO   HIS    MAJESTy's    FLEET    UNDER  THE    COM- 
MAND  OF  ADMIRAL  EARL  HOWE,  K.  G. ;     AND    TO    THE    SQUA- 
DRONS   COMMANDED    BY    ADMIRAL    LORD    BRIDPORT,    K.  B. 
ADMIRAL    EARL    ST    VINCENT,   K.  B.    AND    THE    HONOUR- 
ABLE ADMIRAL  CORNAVALLIS; 

MEMBER  OF  THE  ROYAL    MEDICAL   SOCIETY  OF  EDINBURGH  ; 
AN    HONORARY    MEMBER    OF    THE    ROYAL    PHYSICAL    SO- 
CIETY   OF    EDINBURGH,   OF    THE    MEDICAL    SOCIETY 
OF  ABERDEEN;    AND    FORMERLY    PHYSICIAN   TO 
THE  ROYAL  HOSPITAL  AT  HASLAR, 
&C.  &C. 


Boundless  intemperance 

In  Nature  is  a  tyranny  :  it  hath  been 

The  untimely  emptying  of  the  happy  throne. 

And  fall  of  many  kings.  Shakespear. 


PRINTED  BY  EDW.  WALKER,  NEWCASTLE, 
FOR  LONGMAN,  HURST,  REES,  AND  ORME,  LONDON. 

1807. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION. 


X  HE  rapid  fale  of  a  large  impreffion  of  this  work 
having  rendered  another  edition  neceflary,  many  im- 
portant facts  are  now  added,  fo  as  to  make  the  hiftory 
of  the  Nervous  Conftitution  as  full  as  the  prefent  ftate 
of  knowledge  will  admit  of.  Since  the  publication  of 
this  book,  I  have  been  confulted  by  letter,  from  differ- 
ent parts  of  England,  by  a  numerous  lift  of  nervous  pa- 
tients, who  feem  to  have  been  much  gratified  by  the 
explanation  which  is  here  given  of  thefe  difeafes  ;  and 
I  can  now  add  with  great  pleafure  that  the  whole  have 
recovered  their  health. 

My  grateful  thanks  are  juftly  due  to  thofe  members 
of  the  profeilion,  in  London  and  other  large  towns, 
who  have,  with  a  liberality  and  benevolence  worthy  of 
their  learning  and  eminence,  fo  warmly  recommended 
this  treatife,  as  calculated  to  produce  much  good  in 
families  of  the  nervous  temperament.  An  opinion  ex- 
prefTed  with  fuch  difmtereftednefs,  will  amply  fecure 
my  labours  againft  the  cavils  of  the  ignorant  and 
illiberal. 

a*   2 


IV  PREFACE. 

Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  medical  literature 
of  the  prefent  day,  will  perceive,  that  I  have  ufed  no 
aiFe(fled  language  in  the  introdudlion  of  the  words 
"  Nervous  Temperament,"  into  my  title.  They 
are  given  on  the  higheft  authority,  as  referred  to  in  the 
proper  place ;  for  I  am  acquainted  with  no  name  in 
medicine,  under  which  I  would  fooner  take  Ihelter  than 
that  of  Dr  Gregory,  of  Edinburgh.  As  marking  a 
peculiar  ftate  of  body,  the  term  is  well  adapted  to  com- 
prehend that  variety  of  anomalous  fymptoms,  which 
cannot  well  be  reduced  to  a  generic  definition.  It  is  a 
fad,  that  I  think  will  be  generally  admitted  by  every 
phyfician  who  has  attended  to  this  clafs  of  difeafes,  that 
the  treatment  or  cure,  turns  almoft  entirely  on  the  par- 
ticular condition  of  the  ftomach,  and  accommodating 
medicine  to  the  ftate  of  that  organ.  In  female  habits 
this  is  found  to  be  ftill  more  the  cafe  than  in  males  : 
and  although  it  requires  the  moft  acute  apprehenfion 
to  deted  the  different  traits  of  conftitution  fo  as  to  fuit 
the  prefcription  to  thefe,  yet  it  appears  to  me,  to  re- 
duce the  pradice  to  a  very  narrow  compafs,  if  the  ex- 
hibition of  articles  of  materia  medical  is  to  be  at  all  fuc- 
cefsful.  The  prevention,  therefore,  as  operating  with 
more  certainty  on  the  human  body,  and  effedling  more 
lafting  changes,  will  always  be  kept  in  view  by  the  pru- 
dent phyfician  j  while  at  the  fame  time  it  has  the  advan- 


PREFACE.  Y 

tage  of  being  more  familiar  to  the  capacity  of  the  pa- 
tient. In  the  courfe  of  my  pra6lice,  an  Immenfe  num- 
ber of  cafes  faid  to  be  "  difeajed  liver"  have  been  pre- 
fented  to  me.  But  according  to  the  pathology  on 
which  my  general  dodlrlne  Is  founded,  I  confidered 
nineteen  out  of  twenty  of  the  whole,  to  be  nothing 
more  than  that  affedllon  of  the  hepatic  fyjlem^  which  ac- 
companies a  weak  conftltutlon  of  bowels  :  and  I  think 
myfelf  fully  juftified  by  the  health  which  fucceeded  a 
treatment  refting  on  thefe  principles.  But,  as  I  pro- 
fefs  no  obftinate  attachment  to  my  own  opinions,  I  fhall 
gladly  retrad  my  errors,  when  pointed  out  by  thofe 
who  are  more  capable  of  obfervation ;  and  mod  wil- 
lingly fhall  I  embrace  improvement  from  whatever 
quarter  it  may  come.  On  the  whole,  I  have  great  rea- 
fon  to  be  fatished  with  having  directed  my  fludies  to 
this  enquiry  :  for  what  was  originally  written  as  felf- 
defence,*  has  in  the  end  proved  to  be  a  Treatife  on 
Nervous  Diforders.  <*  There  is  a  Providence  thatfiapes 
our  endsi  rough  heiv  them  as  ive  'will."  Shakespear. 
Newcajlle  on  Tyne^  Odober  1,   1807. 

*  Vide  a  Case  of  Gastrodynia,  (Nervous  Temperament)  in 
Nos.  68  and  7z,  of  the  London  Medical  and  Physical  Journal, 
for  1804-5. 


CONTENTS, 


PAGE. 

Dedication  .  .  .         ,  vii 

Introduction  .         ,         ,         ,  xv 

I.  Chap.  The  health  of  the  favage  ftate  com- 

pared with  modem  tim^        .  .  19 

II.  The  medical  defcrlption  of  the  inhabitants 

of  a  large  town  or  city  ;  being  an  analyfis 
offociety  .....  37 

III.  Remote  caufes  of  nervous  difeafes  .  54? 

IV.  Influence  of  thefe  difeafes  on  the  character 

of  nations,  and  on  domeflic  happinefs  145 

V.  Hiftory  and  progrefs  of  thefe  difeafes  1G9 

VI.  The  general  dodlrine  of  thefe  difeafes  200 

VII.  Prevention  and  treatment  of  nervous  difeafes  235 


DEDICATION. 


TO  JAMES  GREGORY,  M.  D. 

Professor  of  the  FraBice  of  Medicine  in  the  University 
of  Edinburgh^  ^c,  ^c»  ^c. 

MY  B£AR  SIR, 

In  requefling  the  fandion  of  your 
name  to  the  prefent  work,  with  honefl  pride  I 
acknowledge  the  many  and  great  obligations 
you  have  conferred  on  the  profeflion  of  medi- 
cine by  your  eftimable  talents ;  but  ftill  more, 
by  the  manly  fpirit  and  dignified  independence, 
with  which,  on  all  occafions,  you  have  defend- 
ed its  rights,  and  maintained  its  honours.  At 
a  time  when  avarice  is  making  rapid  advances 
to  narrow  its  benevolence,  and  a  fervile  com- 
pliance with  the  frivolous  forms  of  fafhionable 
life  is  degrading  its  duties,  it  mufl  be  grateful 
to  every  generous  raind,  to  behold  a  nobler 

b 


tin  DEDICATION- 

example  from  the  pradical  chair  of  the  Uni- 
verfity  of  Edinburgh.  And  fliould  any  merit 
be  due  to  the  following  pages,  it  will  be  de- 
rived from  the  humble  imitation  of  your  zeal, 
integrity,  and  candour.  Mankind  have  feldom 
been  delighted  with  a  pidure  of  their  infirmi- 
ties y  and  the  phyfician  who  warns  his  fellow 
mortals  how  to  evade  them,  is  liable  to  be 
confidered  rather  as  an  officious  advifer  than 
a  welcome  monitor.  But  ^if  it  is  true,  as  I 
have  faid,  that  nervous  difeafes  make  up  two- 
thirds  of  the  whole  with  which  civilized 
fociety  is  infefled,  and  are  tending  faft  to 
abridge  the  phyfical  flrength  and  mental  ca- 
pacities of  the  human  race,  it  muft  be  the 
duty  of  fome  perfon  to  found  the  alarm,  and 
to  announce  the  danger,  however  unprofitable 
the  tafk. 

The  work,  which  I  have  now  the  honour 
to  lay  before  the  public,  was  written  eighteen 
months  ago :  and  though  feveral  authors 
have  appeared  on  the  fame  fubjed,  fmce  that 
time,  I  do  not  find  my  labours  anticipated. 
The  ground  which  I  have  taken  in  the  dif« 
cuHion,  is  in  many  refpefts  new.  This  View 
OF  THE  Nervous  Temperament  may 
therefore  be  confidered  as  the  refult  of  a  more 


DEDICATION.  IX 

extenfive  field  for  experience  than  generally 
falls  to  the  lot  of  every  phyfician ;  for  it  has 
been  acquired  by  attendance  on  fome  thou- 
fands  of  cafes  in  both  fexes,  under  all  the 
varieties  of  rank,  employment,  age,  fituation, 
climate,  &c. 

I  well  remember,  when  I  was  young  in 
the  profeffion,  no  difeafes  puzzled  me  fo 
much  as  thofe  of  the  nervous  kind.  I  was 
every  day  committing  blunders  :  in  vain  I 
had  recourfe  to  books,  for  books  could  not 
fupply  the  deficiency,  and  I  was  frequently 
mortified  with  feeing  my  patients  get  worfe 
under  my  treatment.  Time  and  much  ex- 
perience only,  were  capable  of  correcting 
my  errors.  What  fLrft  gave  my  pradice 
confiftency,  was  the  careful  fludy  of  the  ner- 
vous temperament ;  to  mark  what  were  its 
original  peculiarities ;  what  its  propenfities ; 
and  by  what  caufes  its  difeafes  were  drawn 
forth.  I  am  rather  apt  to  believe,  that 
mofl  young  men,  in  beginning  their  medical 
career,  run  great  hazard  of  miflaking  thefe 
complaints ;  as  they  only  become  apparent 
by  a  concourfe  of  fymptoms,  that  is  ex- 
tremely irregular  and  equivocal.  And  I 
have   known    more   than    one    inflance    of 

b  2 


DEDICATION. 


nervous  females  having  been  treated  for 
typhus  fever,  to  the  great  alarm  of  their  fa- 
milies, when  they  were  labouring  under 
debility  of  body  and  mind,  widely  different 
in  nature ;  and  attended  too  by  men  who 
called  themfelves  feniors  in  the  pradtice.  A 
prevailing  contagion  mull  be  badly  under- 
flood,  when  both  phyfician  and  patient  be- 
come dupes  of  fuch  unnecelfary  fears.  I 
am,  therefore,  in  hopes,  that  the  method 
which  I  have  taken  in  the  following  invefti- 
gation,  will  fomewhat  contribute  to  familiarize 
the  junior  members  of  the  profeffion  with 
the  genius  of  nervous  diforders,  and  to  guard 
them  againft  miftakes  in  the  treatment. 

But  I  have  no  hefitation  in  thinking, 
that  my  enquiry  may  be  ufeful  to  general 
readers.  We  meet  with  numbers  of  perfons 
in  the  world,  who,  though  obftinate  in  re- 
fufmg  advice  for  their  own  health,  are  never- 
thelefs  very  ready  to  comply  with  every  pre- 
cept that  may  corred:  the  hereditary  predif- 
pofition  to  difeafe  in  their  offspring.  Much 
of  my  animadverfions  on  thefe  diforders,  is 
with  a  view  to  the  prevention  ;  and  if  parents 
and  guardians  will  only  interefl  themfelves  in 
the  bufinefs,  my  trouble  cannot  be  in  vain» 


DEDICATION.  Xl 

It  IS  indeed  a  tafk,  in  the  prefent  ftage  of 
fociety,  that  well  deferves  the  attention  of 
every  friend  of  his  fellow-creatures,  and  his 
country.  Great  Britain  has  outftripped  rival 
flates  in  her  commercial  greatnefs:  let  us 
therefore  endeavour  to  preferve  that  afcen- 
dancy,  which  is  fo  eifential  to  our  welfare  in 
the  convulfed  condition  of  Europe,  by  the 
only  means  that  can  do  it  effectually.  That 
is,  by  recurring  to  fimplicity  of  living  and 
manners,  fo  as  to  check  the  increafmg  pre- 
valence of  nervous  diforders;  which,  if  not 
reflirained  foon,  mufl:  inevitably  fap  our  phy- 
fical  ftrength  of  conftitution;  make  us  a^ 
eafy  conqueft  to  our  invaders ;  and  ultimate- 
ly convert  us  into  a  nation  of  flaves  and 
ideots. 

It  has  been  cuflomary  with  writers  on 
thefe  difeafes,  to  illuftrate  their  fubjed  with 
the  anatomy  and  phyfiology  of  the  parts  con- 
cerned. But  I  fee  no  neceflity  for  this  in 
the  prefent  enquiry ;  and  my  fheets  have  un- 
expectedly fwelled  to  a  fize  that  precludes 
the  introduction  of  fuch  matter.  I  mufl 
therefore  refer  my  young  readers  to  Dr 
Whytt  on  nervous  diforders,  and  to  the 
valuable  volume  of  Dr  Saunders  on  the  liver. 


,5£U  DEDICATION. 

for  what  they  may  not  find  explained  in 
common  elementary  treatifes  of  anatomy  and 
phyfiology. 

My  plan  is  briefly  this :    a  curfory  view  is 
given  of   the  health  of  the  favage  ftate,   in 
order  that  the  contraft  with  civilized  mankind 
may  appear  more  flriking.     The  inhabitants 
of  a  large  town  are  next  defcribed ;  which 
may  be  conflrued  into  a  kind  of  medical  ana- 
lyfis  of  fociety  :  and  this  leads  to  an  account 
©f  the  remote  caufes^  as  found  among  refined 
modes  of  life  and  luxurious  habits.     A  chap- 
ter follows  on  the  influence  which  thefe  dif- 
orders  have  on  national  character  and  do- 
meflic  happinefs.     The  hifl:ory  and  progrefs 
of  nervous  difeafes,  with  a  general  dodrine, 
or  fummary  of  the  pathology,   precede  the 
prevention  and  method  of  treatment. 

On  the  whole  there  will  be  found  little  of 
what  is  called  theory  in  this  difcuflion :  un- 
fhackled  by  any  attachment  to  fyftem,  and 
unfeduced  by  the  love  of  novelty,  I  have  en- 
deavoured to  delineate  the  Nervous  Tem- 
perament, as  I  have  feen  it  in  actual  prac- 
tice, and  in  a  large  intercourfe  with  mankind. 
But  in  treating  of  a  clafs  of  difeafes  out  of 
the  ufual  tradt  of  enquiry,  I  am  willing  to 


DEDICATION.  Xlll 

confefs,  that  many  peculiarities  may  be  ob- 
ferved,  and  fome  obfcurities  detected.  I  will 
make  no  apologies  to  my  countrymen,  for 
offering  them  my  advice,  on  matters  that  fo 
nearly  concern  their  health  :  if  the  title  of  my 
book  excites  diflike,  let  them  remember  the 
perufal  of  it  is  voluntary.  Nor  will  I  infult 
their  difcernment,  by  any  fulfome  juftification 
of  my  own  motives  and  difmtereflednefs :  if  I 
have  a£led  the  part  of  an  honefl  man,  that 
muft  anfwer  for  itfelf. 

But,  fir,  ihould  you  recognize  any  thing 
in  thefe  labours  worthy  of  the  medical  fchool 
of  Edinburgh,  I  fhall  be  greatly  overpaid* 
And  as  this  may  be  the  laft  time  I  fhall  appear 
before  the  public  as  an  author,  gratitude  com- 
pels me  to  thank  the  profefTion,  both  in  this 
country  and  on  the  Continent,  for  the  kind 
reception  of  my  former  fludies,  and  the  nu- 
merous teflimonies  given  in  their  favour. 

I  remain,  my  dear  Sir, 
With  the  utmofl  regard, 
Your  mofl  faithful  humble  fervant, 
T.  TROTTER. 

Newcastle  on  Tyne^ 
Nov.  8,  1806.. 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  lafl  century  has  been  remarka- 
able  for  the  increafe  of  a  clafs  of  difeafes, 
little  known  in  former  times,  and  which  had 
but  flightly  engaged  the  ftudy  of  phyficians 
prior  to  that  period.  They  have  been  de- 
fignated,  in  common  language,  by  the  terms. 
Nervous  ;  Spasmodic  ;  Bilious  5  Indi- 
gestion ;  Stomach  complaints  ;  Low 
spirits  ;  Vapours,  &c.  A  generic  de- 
finition of  them,  from  their  protean  fhape 
and  multiform  appearance,  is  almoft  im- 
pradicable.  They  vary  in  every  conflitution, 
and  aflume  in  the  fame  perfon,  at  different 
times  of  life,  an  inconftant  alfemblage  of 
fymptoms. 

In  another  work,  when  curforily  treating  of 
thefe  difeafes,  I  have  attempted  to  give  a 
general  character  of  them,  and  for  Vv^ant  of  a 

c 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

better,  I  fliall  infer t  it  here.  "  Nervous 
"  feelings,  nervous  affections,  or  weak  nerves, 
''  though  fcarcely  to  be  refolved  into  technical 
*^  language,  or  reduced  to  a  generic  defini- 
*'  tion,  are  in  the  prefent  day,  terms  much 
"  employed  by  medical  people,  as  v^ell  as 
"  patients ;  becaufe  the  expreffion  is  known 
"  to  comprehend  what  cannot  be  fo  well 
"  explained.  An  inaptitude  to  mufcular 
"  adion,  or  fome  pain  in  exerting  it ;  an 
"  irkfomenefs,  or  diflike  to  attend  to  bufmefs 
"  and  the  common  affairs  of  life ;  a  felfifh 
"  defire  of  engrofling  the  fympathy  and  atten- 
*'  tion  of  others  to  the  narration  of  their 
"  own  fufFerings ;  with  ficklenefs  and  in- 
*'  fteadinefs  of  temper,  even  to  irrafcibility  j 
*'  and  accompanied  more  or  lefs  with  dyfpep- 
"  tic  fymptoms,  are  the  leading  charad^riflics 
**  of  nervous  dif orders  ;  to  be  referred  in 
"  general,  to  debility,  increafed  fenfibility, 
*'  or  torpor  of  the  alimentary  canal."  * 

In  the  prefent  day,  this  clafs  of  difeafes 
forms  by  far  the  largeft  proportion  of  the 
whole,  which  come  under  the  treatment  of 

*  Medicina  Nautica.  Vol.  iii,  Spafmodic  Af- 
feiftioiis. 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 


the  phyfician.     Sydenham  at  the  conchilion 
of  the  feventeenth  century,  computed  fevers 
to  conftitute  two  thirds  of    the   difeafes   of 
mankind.     But,  at  the  beginning  of  the  nine- 
teenth century,  we  do  not  hefitate  to  affirm, 
that  nervous    diforders  have  now  taken  the 
place  of  fevers,  and  may  be  juftly  reckoned 
two  thirds   of  the  whole,    with  which  civi- 
lized fociety  is  afflidied.     Dr   Cheyne  who 
wrote  about  the  year  1733,  ^^  his  work  en- 
titled the  "  EngUJh  Malady ^^  makes  nervous 
diforders  almofl  one  third  of  the  complaints 
of  people  of  condition   in  England  :    from 
which  we  are  led  to  believe,  they  were  then 
little  known  among  the  inferior  orders.      But 
from  caufes,  to  be  hereafter  inveftigated,  we 
fhall   find,    that   nervous    ailments    are    no 
longer  confined  to  the  higher  ranks  in  life, 
but  rapidly  extending  to  the  poorer  clafTes. 
In  this  neighbourhood,  as  far  I  am  able  to 
judge   from    my  own  experience,    they  are 
by  no    means    limited  to  the   rich :    and  it 
affords  a  melancholy  pidure  of  the  health  of 
the  community,  to  obferve  this  proportion  fo 
very  large.     It  is  probable  the  other  countries 
of  Europe  do   not  exhibit  fuch  general  ex- 
amples of  thefe  difeafes ;    as  many  of  their 

c  2 


XVlll  INTRODUCTIOK. 

caufes  are  to  be  traced  to  the  peculiar  fitua- 
tion  of  Britain  ;  its  infalar  varieties  of  climate 
and  atmofphere ;  its  political  inftitutions  and 
free  government ;  and  above  every  thing,  its 
yaft  wealth,  fo  diffufed  among  all  ranks  of 
people. 


VIEW 


OF  THE 


NERVOUS  TEMPERAMENT, 

\ffc.   l^c.   \^c. 


CHAPTER  L 

The  health  of  the  favage  Jiate  compared  with 
inodern  times. 

JL  HE  favage  and  civilized  dates  of  man,  as 
may  be  obferved  in  the  earliell:  accounts  of 
hiftory,  have  been  marked  by  phyfical  traits 
of  character,  as  well  as  moral :  and  though 
his  difeafes  and  his  vices  may  be  fmaller  in 
number  in  the  one  condition  than  in  the 
other,  they  have  neverthelefs  exhibited  figns 
and  difpofitions  peculiar  to  themfelves.     Our 


20 

rude  anceflors,    born  and  brought  up  In  a 
hut  or  a  hovel,  almoft  naked  from  infancy 
to  manhood,  and  conflantly  expofed  to  the 
weather,    whether   employed   in   agriculture, 
tending  herds  and  flocks,  or  the  more  labo- 
rious purfuits  of  hunting  and  fifhing,  had  few 
bodily  diforders.     Death,  under  fuch  modes 
of  living,  is  to  be  confidered  as  the  decay  of 
nature :     fome  may  fall  by  war,  and  a  few 
by   accidents  ;  but  none  are  brought  to  the 
grave  by  excefs  or  debauch.     It  is  notorious 
that  all  the  favage  tribes  of  the  new  continent, 
when    compared    with   European    manners, 
are  obferved  to  be    chafte,    temperate,  and 
abflemious.  *     Tacitus,  fpeaking  of  the  man- 
ners of  the  Germans  in   his  days,  defcribes 
the  convivial  aflemblies  of  that  people,  where 
drinking  fermented  liquors  was  carried  to  the 
moft   ferocious   degree   of  ebriety ;    but   no 
where    does    he    mention    their    difeafes   as 
having  fprung  from  this  caufe.     The  favour- 
ite beverage  among  them  feems  to  have  been 
beer,  which  when  duly  prepared,  is  a  whole- 
fome  drink.     But  their  manner  of  living  mud 

*  The  inhabitants  of  fome  of  the  South  Sea  Iflands 
are  examples  to  the  contrary. 


21 

in  a  great  meafure  have  counteraded  the 
effeds  of  intoxication:  fuch  as  the  robuft 
exercifes,  and  their  fimple  food,  *'  confiding 
of  wild  apples,  freih  venifon,  curds  and 
cream,"  and  the  like,  none  of  which  were 
calculated  to  opprefs  the  ftomach  and  hurt 
digeftion,  as  we  obferve  among  full  livers  in 
modern  times.  Indeed  it  is  to  be  remarked 
every  where,  how  much  longer  the  laborious 
porter  and  drayman,  who  get  often  drunk, 
will  continue  their  career,  than  the  lefs-exer- 
cifed  gentleman :  a  proof  that  labour,  by  in- 
vigorating and  hardening  the  body,  makes  it 
refill  even  the  effe6ls  of  debauch.  How  foon 
would  the  morning  dram  of  a  Billingfgate 
filh-wife,  deftroy  one  of  our  high  bred  women 
of  fafhion  ? 

The  virtue  of  chaftity  was  general  among 
the  Germans :  matrimony,  it  is  faid,  was  fe- 
verely  kept ;  and  the  intercourfe  of  the  fexes, 
before  the  body  was  full-grown,  was  flridly 
prevented.  Here  was  one  of  the  flrongeft  fe- 
curities  of  health  ;  as  a  contrary  pradice  in 
this  age,  is  one  of  the  great  caufes  of  bodily 
decay.  We  are  alfo  told,  that  the  large  limbs 
and  mufcular  form  of  the  parents,  were  ex- 
prefled  in  the  fhape  of  the  children.     Ano» 


22 

ther  proof  of  bodily  health  was,  that  every 
mother  was  able  to  nurfe  her  own  child  ;  the 
oppolite  to  this  parental  office,  is  one  of  the 
lamentable  failings  of  modern  conilitutions. 
It  was  part  of  the  matrimonial  contrad  for 
the  wife  to  fhare  with  the  hufband  his  labours 
and  dangers,  and  to  be  his  companion  in 
peace  and  war.  This  cullom,  of  courfe,  pre- 
vented all  the  evils  of  a  fedentary  life.  In  a 
country  that  held  the  marriage  vow  fo  facred, 
adultery  was  feldom  found  ;  and  it  was  confi- 
dered  in  fo  heinous  a  light,  that  neither  beauty 
nor  wealth  could  ever  find  the  adulterefs  ano- 
ther fpoufe.  Such  was  the  healthful  fyftem 
of  manners  pradifed  in  the  woods  of  Ger- 
many, which  were  the  cradle  of  thofe  laws  that 
now  govern  this  land  of  freedom. 

The  feudal  fyftem  which  fucceeded  to  the 
age  which  Tacitus  defcribes,  and  which  fpread 
over  Europe,  was  highly  favourable  to  vigour 
of  body,  and  by  confequence  to  health.  The 
women  were  then  accuftomed  to  attend  their 
hufbands  to  the  fields  and  to  remain  in  fight 
of  the  battle ;  not  only  with  a  view  to  load 
them  with  praifes  and  carelTes  at  the  conclu- 
fion ;  but  to  remind  them  of  the  protedion 
due   to  wives  and  children.       Courage  and 


23 

valour,  with  fuch  Incentives  would  become  in- 
vincible. All  the  paftimes  and  tournaments 
of  thofe  days,  were  only  kinds  of  palseflr^  for 
exercifmg  the  body,  fo  as  to  enure  it  to  mar- 
tial fatigues.  The  females  were  conftant  fpec- 
tators  of  thefe  tilts  and  feats,  and  their  pre- 
fence  did  not  fail  to  animate  the  brave  ;  and 
it  was  the  province  of  the  fair  to  reward  the 
victor,  and  confer  the  prize  on  the  fuccefsful 
candidate.  Now  in  the  woods  of  Germany, 
where  mothers  of  families  fhared  with  their 
hufbands  all  the  toils  and  privations  of  the 
field,  fuch  complaints  as  bilious  and  nernjous, 
mufl  have  been  unknown,  becaufe  all  the 
caufes  which  render  them  prevalent  in  this 
age,  did  not  then  exift.  They  are  the  progeny 
of  wealth,  luxury,  indolence,  and  intempe- 
rance, as  they  now  appear. 

In  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  Genefis,  we 
meet  with  fome  fine  proofs  of  the  fimplicity 
of  living  among  the  patriarchs,  which  may 
be  called  the  earlieft  ftage  of  civilized  fo- 
ciety.  When  Abraham  entertained  the  three 
angels  in  the  plains  of  Mamre,  he  haftened 
to  welcome  them  with  all  the  tokens  of  a  kind 
hofpitality.  Sarah  his  wife  kneaded  three 
meafures  of  fine  n;ieal  into  cakes,  and  baked 

D 


2'4 

them  upon  the  hearth.  Abraham  himfelf 
went  to  the  herd,  and  fetched  a  calf  tender 
and  good,  and  gave  it  unto  a  young  man  to 
drefs  it.  And  he  took  butter  and  milk,  and 
the  calf  which  he  had  drefled,  and  fet  it  be- 
fore them,  and  they  did  eat :  and  he  flood 
by  under  a  tree,  as  if  to  watch  when  they 
wanted  any  thing.  Again,  when  Lot  enter- 
tained two  angels,  it  is  faid,  he  made  a  feaft, 
and  baked  unleavened  bread.  Thefe  ban- 
quets for  angels,  fo  limply  detailed  in  holy 
writ,  would  be  confidered  poor  fare  for  the 
epicures  and  gluttons  of  our  times,  who  dme 
at  a  Lord  Mayor's  feaft,  if  we  are  to  judge 
from  the  lift  of  dainties,  juft  publiflied,  of  one 
of  thefe  entertainments.  "We  are  farther  told, 
in  the  facred  volume,  that  Boaz  invited  Ruth 
to  come  at  meal  time,  and  eat  bread,  and 
dip  her  morfel  in  the  vinegar  with  the  reap- 
ers ;  and  he  reached  her  parched  corn  to  eat. 
Our  prefent  labourers  in  the  harveft  would  be 
fadly  pinched  with  hunger  before  they  would 
content  themfelves  with  fuch  fimple  fare.  In 
the  Iliad  and  Odyffey  of  Homer,  we  meet 
every  where  accounts  of  the  like  fimplicity  of 
food  and  manners.  "When  the  foreign  am- 
bafTadors  came  to  treat  with  the  Roman  con- 


25 

Ril  Dentatus,  they  found  him  at  his  farm 
drelling  turnips :  a  fpecies  of  amufement  and 
economy  that  does  not  enter  the  budget  of 
Britifh  ftatefmen.     Where  the  earth  is  thinly 
peopled,  and  when  commerce  has  made  no 
progrefs,  mankind  live  chiefly  in  families: 
and  their  habits  and  employments  uniformly 
inculcate  temperance  and  fobriety.      Society 
and  population  muft  be  far  advanced,  before 
luxurious  living,  and  vicious  cuftoms,  attain 
fuch  growth  as  to  enervate  the  human  frame. 
The  nervous  fyjiem^  that  organ  of  fenfation, 
amidfl:  the  untutored  and  illiterate  inhabitants 
of  a  foreft,  could  receive  none  of  thofe  fine 
impreffions,  which,  however  they  may  polifh 
the   mind  and   enlarge  its   capacities,  never 
fail  to  induce  a  delicacy  of  feeling,  that  difpofes 
alike  to  more  acute  pain,  as  to  more  exquifite 
pleafure.     The  timid  difpofitions  are  apt  to 
increafe  in   proportion  to  delicacy  of  feeling 
and  debility  of  frame.     We  fee  the  truth  of 
this  fully  exemplified,  as  we  recede  from  the 
country  to  the  town  ;  from  the  occupation  of 
the  hufbandman  and  farmer,  to  that  of  the 
artifan  and  manufadurer  \  and  from  the  ruftic 
expofed  to  all  the  viciilitudes  of  weather  and 
feafon,  to  the  reclufe  life  of  the  citizen.     The 

D  2 


26 

phyflclan,  of  a  cultivated  under  (landing,  who 
knows  how  to  appreciate  the  refources  of  his 
art,  in  approaching   the  lick  bed  of  any  of 
thefe  perfons,  would  endeavour  to  inveftigate 
the  marks  and  difpofitions  of  body  and  mind, 
that  give  the  peculiar  cafl  of  charadler  to  each, 
before  he  would  attempt  to  prescribe  for  their 
difeafes.     He  would  not  confound  the  com- 
plaint  of  the   flim    foft- fibred    man-milliner 
with  that  of  the  firm  and  brawny  ploughman ; 
nor  would   he    miftake   the   nervous  cramp 
of  the  delicate  lady,    for    the    inflammatory 
pleurify  of  a  nut-brown  country  girl.     If  both 
expreflTed  pain  on  the  fame  fpot  or  organ,  he 
would,  ill  confideration  of  original  tempera- 
ment, along  with  the  concourfe  of  fymptoms, 
refolve  into  firft  principles  what  belonged  to 
each  conftitution  ;  and  thus  analyze  the  mor- 
bid phenomena,  fo  as  to  give  a  degree  of  cer- 
tainty to  his  indications  of  cure,  and  a  deci- 
lion  to  his  pradice,  that  would  infure  fuccefs, 
if  the  difeafe  was  at  all  remediable. 

As  the  human  being,  in  a  ftate  of  progref- 
five  improvement  and  civilization,  quits  his 
earthern-floored,  flraw-clad  cottage  on  the 
ikirts  of  the  foreft,  or  a  creek  of  the  ocean, 
where  his  time  had  been  fpent    in  hunting 


27 

and  fifhing,  for  the  town,  where  he  is  to  turn 
himfelf  to  trade  and  manufadure,  he  necef- 
farily  undergoes  a  prodigious  change  of  cir- 
cumllances.  He  forfakes  a  mode  of  life  that 
had  been  prefented  to  him  by  nature  :  and  in 
adopting  a  new  fituation  he  becomes  the  crea- 
ture of  art.  When  occupied  in  hunting  and 
iiliiing  for  fupport,  expofure  to  the  external 
air  in  winter  and  fummer,  gradually  endued 
him  with  fuch  hardihood  and  torpor,  as  to 
make  him  proof  againft  the  extremes  of  either 
cold  or  heat.  His  diet,  well  fuited  for  the  pur- 
pofes  of  nouriibment,  was  fufficiently  palatable, 
without  any  of  -  thofe  adventitious  luxuries 
which  cookery  fupplies.  His  blood  and  juices 
were  not,  therefore,  inflamed  or  vitiated  by 
highly-feafoned  dainties ;  and  his  fentient  fyf- 
tem,  while  it  was  fully  excited  for  all  the 
movements  of  vital  energy,  was  never  raifed 
to  excefs  by  inordinate  flimulation.  By  fpend- 
ing  fo  large  a  portion  of  the  day  out  of  doors, 
he  enjoyed  the  full  benefit  of  a  pure  and  un- 
polluted atmofphere.  The  mufcular  parts  of 
the  body  becoming  thus  firm  and  flexile  from 
confl:ant  exercife,  all  his  motions  are  per- 
formed with  flrength,  eafe,  and  agility.  His 
walk  is  marked  by  ftability,  and  his  running 


28 

by  fwiftnefs.     Having  few  avoccLtions  to  en- 
gage his  attention,  he  foon  acquires  uncom- 
mon dexterity  in  all  his  geftures  and  adions. 
He  afcends  the  mountain  and  precipice,  or 
climbs  the  tree  and  rock,  with  equal  fafety 
and  fpeed :  the  arrow  from  his  bow  is  dif- 
charged  with  force,  and  fure  of  its  mark  :  the 
dart  and  the  javelin  are  alike  unerring  in  his 
hands.     He  manages  his  hook  and  tackle,  as 
well  as  his  (kiff,  with  furprifmg   knowledge 
and  addrefs  ;  and  in  the  various  attitudes  of 
fwimming,  he  is  accomplifhed,  graceful,  and 
unrivalled.     Though  in  his  domeftic  tranfac- 
tions,  he  performs  all  the  relative  duties  of 
hulband,  father,  and  fon,  he  feems  exempted 
from  the  turmoils  and  cares  which  thefe  con- 
nections neceffariiy  bring  with  them  in  civilized 
fociety.     The  child  is  early  inftruded  to  fol- 
low and  imitate  his  parent  in  the  fports  and 
toils  of  the  field,  and  foon  learns  to  earn  his 
own  fubfiflence.     No  painful  emotions  for  his 
fuccefs  in  a  bufy  world,   harafs    or  perplex 
the  minds   of  the  father  and  mother,  for  it 
does    not  depend  on  uncertain  patronage  or 
capricious  friendfhips.     But  the  young  favage 
confiders  it  a  part  of  his  filial  engagements  to 
fhare  his  board  with  his  parents,  when  age 


29 

and  infirmity  have  unfitted  them  for  labour* 
His  paffion  for  the  fex  is  temperate,  becaufe 
it  meets  with  no   refined  allurements,    from 
drefs,  manners,  or  fafhion,  to  inflame  it  beyond 
bounds.      Tacitus,  fpeaking  of  the  manners 
of  the  Germans,  fays,  "  They  behave  them- 
*'  felves  with  the  flridefl  modefty,  being  de- 
**  bauched  with  no  alluring  objeds,  with  no 
"  provocatives    in    banqueting/'       Revenge 
feems  the  only  paffion  carried  to  extremes,  to 
be  attributed  chiefly  to  a  folitary  life.     When 
the  favage  makes  love,  he  is  almofl:  fure  of  a 
return :  he  is  neither  perplexed  with  doubts 
or  fears,  nor  tantalized  by  falfe  hopes  and  pro- 
mifes.     The  damfel  of  the  forefl:  is  a  ftranger 
to  thofe  airs  and  duplicities  of  the  coquet  and 
the  prude,  which  charaderife   fome   of  the 
fifterhood  in  every  great  town.     Hence  the 
uncivilized  being  is  free  from  all  thofe  mental 
difquietudes,  as  well  as  bodily  ailments,  which 
are  frequently  brought  on,  in  both  fexes,  by 
difappointed  love,  and  an  ill-requited  paffion. 
Thus  health  and  vigor  of  body,  with  infen- 
fibility  or  paffive  content  of  mind,  are  the  in- 
heritance of  the  untutored  favage ;  and  if  his 
enjoyments  are  limited,  his  cares,  his  pains, 
and  his  difeafes  are  alfo  few. 


30 

If  then  It  be  certain  that  the  rude  conditions 
of  foclety  furnlfli  mankind  with  a  hardihood 
of  frame,  that  is  fufceptible  of  few  difeafes; 
let  us  examine  man  in  the  polilhed  circle  of 
life,  occupied  by  pleafure,  or  bufy  in  trade 
-and  manufadure.  His  modes  of  living  are 
in  every  refpecl  the  reverfe  of  the  favage  ftate: 
his  body  and  mind  are  enervated  by  debilitat- 
ing powers,  that  render  him  unfit  for  labour 
or  great  privations  ;  and  his  difeafes  acquire  a 
more  diverfified  train  of  phenomena.  The 
hufbandman,  in  point  of  conflitution,  may  be 
confidered  as  a  medium  between  the  two  ex- 
tremes. By  his  active  occupation,  his  labour, 
and  expofure  in  the  external  air,  he  partakes 
of  the  ftrength  of  the  barbarian  ;  and  a  cor- 
refponding  tone  is  given  to  his  nervous  fyf- 
tem :  his  mind  is  not  debauched  by  effemi- 
nacy;  while  his  temperance  and  moderation 
fecure  him  againft  the  diforders  which  prevail 
in  fafhionable  life. 

But  as  we  purfue  our  enquiry  among  the 
inhabitants  of  large  cities,  we  fhall  obferve 
mankind  divided  into  an  immenfe  variety  of 
perfons ;  all  diftind  by  fortune,  by  bufinefs, 
and  modes  of  living  ;  and  again,  all  thefe 
greatly  influenced  by  original  conflitution  and 


31 

education.  Among  ruftlcs,  and  ftill  more 
among  favages,  there  is  an  univerfal  famenefs 
of  chara£ler.  For  as  the  ambition  or  ingenui- 
ty of  man  finds  out  for  him  new  employments ; 
thefe,  while  they  draw  forth  latent  talents,  call 
forth  alfo  new  paflions  and  defires :  fo  that 
however  much  he  may  be  fly  led  the  creature 
of  habit,  he  is  in  many  refpedls  the  creator  of 
his  own  temperament.  The  Indian  paddling 
in  his  canoe ;  or  the  Norwegian  fculling  his 
fkifF,  remain  unchanged  in  their  manners ;  be- 
caufe  they  return  at  night  to  their  family,  and 
to  intercourfe  with  their  kindred.  But  em- 
bark man  at  an  early  age  in  a  large  fhip,  fuch 
as  an  Eafl  or  Weft  Indiaman,  to  traverfe  the 
deep  as  a  navigator  and  feaman,  and  you  foon 
find  that  he  changes  to  a  different  fpecies  of 
being,  and  exhibits  traits  of  a  profefTion,  of 
the  moft  fmgular  kind,  which  differ  from  all 
others.*  This  new  occupation  while  it  dif- 
tinguifhes  him  from  all  the  world  befide,  in 

*  Compare  the  charader  which  I  have  drawn  of 
the  Britilli  feaman,  in  my  preliminary  difcourfe  in  the 
lirft  voUime  of  Medicina  Nautica,  with  the  Indian 
in  Robertfon's  or  RaynaPs  Hiftory  of  America ;  or 
with  the  Bond-Street  Lounger,  as  pourtrayed  in  any 
modern  con^edy  or  novel. 

E 


S2 

gefture,  manner,  and  addrefs,  beflows  alfo  a 
new  difpofition  on  his  morbid  flate.  His  dif- 
eafes,  therefore,  fhow  a  particular  genius  and 
feature,  fuch  as  are  found  only  among  his  own 
clafs,  and  which  fpring  from  caufes  peculiar  to 
the  fea  life,  as  fcurvy,  &c. 

It  has  been  remarked  by  fome  acute  politi- 
cal arithmeticians,  particularly  the  famous 
Gregory  King,  that  the  marriages  in  London 
and  other  great  towns,  produce  fewer  children 
than  thofe  in  the  country.  The  reafons  for 
this  difference  are  very  obvious  :  he  gives  ex- 
amples of  the  fad,  and  then  enumerates  the 
caufes,  which  are  the  following  :  * 

1.  The  more  frequent  fornications  and 
adulteries. 

2.  A  greater  luxury  and  intemperance. 

3.  Greater  intenfenefs  to  bufmefs. 

4.  Unhealthfulnefs  of  the  coal  fmoke. 
(He  ought  to  have  added,  impure  air, 

from  hot  and  crowded  rooms.) 

5.  Greater  inequality  of  age  between  huf- 
bands  and  wives. 

All  thefe  caufes,  befide  many  others,  flill 
hold  good  in  the  prefent  times.      His  firft  and 

*  See  his  Political  Cpnclufions,  printed  in  Cham„ 
bers's  Eftimate. 


fifth  reafon  require  fome  explanation,  which 
can  be  done  belt  at  this  part  of  my  work.      It 
will  be  allowed  on  all  hands,  to  be  the  inten- 
tion of  nature,  that  years  nearly  equal  (hould 
be  joined  in  marriage:  and  were  mankind  left 
to  themfelves  this  would  be  the  cafe.     But  art 
and  fafhion  have  become  dictators  to  matrimo- 
ny in  this  venal  age.     The  young  man  of  the 
prefent  day,  muft  begin  the  world  for  himfelf ; 
and  like  a  knight  errant  in  romance,  muft  fight 
his  way  to  a  fortune,  before  he  dares  to  take 
a  wife.     It  is  too  often  the  cafe,  that  the  fordid 
parent  winks  at  the  fon's  indifcretions  with  the 
fex,  rather  than  confent  that  he  fhould  marry 
the  woman  he  loves,  without  a  rich  dower. 
And  while  by  this  growing  cuftom,  a  certain 
number  of  defencelefs  females  are  doomed  to 
all  the  horrors  of  proftitution,  in  order  to  gra- 
tify the  pafTions  of  the  young,  and  the  avarice 
of  the  old,  it  is  one  grand  ftep  to  the  degene- 
racy of  the  fpecies.     It  is  thus  the  beft  years 
of  manhood  pafs  away   before   marriage    is 
thought  of :  it  then  becomes  a  convenience 
more  than  an  equal  attachment  of  the  parties  ; 
and  hence  we  frequently  obferve  a  difference 
of  thirty  years  and  upwards,  when  the  lady 
may  be  faid  to  be  rather  the  miftrefs,  than  the 

E    2 


54 

wife  of  her  hufband.  Amldft  thefe  unnatural 
unions,  it  is  pleafing  to  mention  fome  excep- 
tions. Many  of  the  old  noble  families  of  the 
nation,  have  within  thefe  few  years,  married 
at  the  prime  of  life.  And  it  is  to  be  remark- 
ed, that  thefe  marriages  have  all  been  noted 
for  happinefs  and  reciprocal  affedion:  the 
men  being  all  diftinguiihed  by  worth  and  fo- 
bricty  ;  as  the  ladies  are  by  their  virtues,  ac- 
compliftiments  and  beauty. 

When  Gregory  King  made  his  obfervations, 
about  the  year  1696,  London  contained  little 
more  than  one  half  the  inhabitants  it  does  at 
this  day.  Other  great  towns  throughout  the 
kingdom,  have  increafed  in  like  proportion. 
Now  if  fuch  effedts  followed  the  city  and 
town  life  in  thofe  times,  how  much  greater 
mufl  they  be  in  the  prefent.  Certain  it  is, 
the  phyfician  of  the  feventeenth  century,  had 
not  the  multitude  of  nervous  cafes  to  treat, 
which  now  occupy  the  profeflion.  It  is  pro- 
bable alfo,  as  far  as  experience  goes,  that  the 
proportion  of  marriages,  without  children, 
and  the  number  of  mifcarriages  in  married 
life,  are  greatly  increafed  ;  and  thefe  are  chief- 
ly confined  to  the  town  lady,  or  at  leaft  to 
people  of  better  condition.    It  was  a  remark 


35 

of  the  fagacious  King,  that  the  fyftem  of  agri- 
culture in  his  days,  was  advancing  to  diminilh 
the  number  of  cottagers  ;  but  to  increafe  the 
village,  and  ftill  more  the  town.  If  fuch  was 
the  cafe  a  hundred  years  ago,  how  much 
more  reafon  muft  there  be  now  for  the  obfer- 
vation,  when  it  is  notorious,  that  fome  over- 
grown farmers  poffefs  capitals  of  twenty  or 
thirty  thoufand  pounds;  and  engrofs  lands 
that  formerly  fupported  twenty  or  thirty  fa- 
milies. The  middling  clafs  of  countrymen 
are,  by  this  pradice,  annihilated,  :^orced  to 
betake  themfelves  to  trade,  and  there  is 
no  degree  of  rank  left  between  the  affluent 
farmer  and  his  menial  fervants  :  thus, 

■  a  bold  peafantry  their  country's  pride. 

When  once  deftroy*d  can  never  be  fupplied. 

Goldsmith. 

The  lying-in  ftate  exhibits  fome  of  the  great 
difadvantages  of  refined  life.  To  the  delicate 
well-bred  woman,  it  is  always  attended  with 
danger ;  and  the  difeafes  which  immediately 
follow,  even  a  fortunate  delivery,  are  often 
fatal.  The  rude  conditions  are  exempted 
from  all  thefe*    The  nervous  fyftem  rendered 


36 


ilrong  and  refifting,  furmounts  the  various 
changes  and  evolutions  of  the  birth,  and  fub- 
fequent  ladation,  v^ithout  being  much  ha- 
raflfed  or  weakened  in  the  flruggle.  Bounti- 
ful nature,  unfettered  in  her  operations,  and  left 
to  herfelf,  eafily  accomplifhes  her  purpofe.  The 
robuft  ruitic  therefore  attends  her  hufband  in 
the  field  in  a  few  days  ;  while  the  genteel  lady 
is  flretched  on  her  couch,  often  a  prey  to 
fome  nervous  affedtion,  but  always  flow  in 
convalefcence. 

Again,  the  wives  of  the  countryman  and 
favage  feldom  fail  in  being  mothers  of  a  nu- 
merous offspring.  But  fterility,  or  what  is 
next  to  it,  premature  birth,  are  common  evils 
in  towns  and  cities.  Ninety-nine  cafes  of  abor- 
tion, out  of  the  hundred,  may  be  imputed 
to  a  relaxed  nervous  frame  ;  either  from  here- 
ditary debility,  an  improper  education  in 
childhood,  or  other  caufes  that  are  known  to 
weaken  the  nervous  fyftem.  Does  not  every 
woman  know  how  quickly  frights  and  alarms 
bring  on  mifcarriages  ?  In  a  vigorous  confti- 
tution,  accompanied  with  a  healthful  fet  of 
nerves,  fuch  caufes  can  do  no  harm;  but 
where  the  fenfibility  trembles  at  every  breath, 
the  ftate  of  pregnancy  is  attended  with  conftant 
terror  and  dread. 


CHAPTER  IL 

^he  medical  defcription  of  the  inhabitants  of  a 
town  or  city  ;  being  an  analyfis  offociety. 

In  order  to  bring  detached  fa£ls  into  a  ge- 
neral view,  I  fhall  divide  the  inhabitants  of  a 
large  town  into  the  following  clalTes,  and 
give  a  concife  hiflory  of  each,  fo  far  as  it 
may  be  neceffary  to  fhew  how  bufinefs,  cuf-p 
toms  and  manners,  influence  health. 
Clafs  I.  Literary  men. 

2.  Men  of  bufinefs. 

3.  The  idle  and  diflipated. 

4.  The  artificer  and  manufacturer. 

5.  Thofe  employed  in  drudgery. 

6.  Perfons  returned  from  the  colonies. 

7.  The  female  fex,    confiding   of  the 

higher,  middling,  and  lower  or- 
ders of  women. 
I.  Literary  men.      The   philofopher  and 
man   of  letters,   who  devote  moft  of  their 
time  to   ftudy,   mufl  lead   a  fedentary  life. 
The  perfon  who  thinks  and  refledls  much. 


3S 

mufl:  retire;  and  retirement  neceflarily  ab- 
ftradts  from  exercife  and  amufement.  To 
be  (hut  up  in  a  elofe  room,  little  expofed 
to  a  free  and  pure  air  out  of  doors,  foon 
induces  a  fallownefs  of  countenance ;  and 
as  want  of  exercife  accompanies  this  con- 
finement, the  mufcular  power  is  diminifhed, 
the  flefhy  parts  grow  foft  and  flabby,  and  ge- 
neral debility  is  the  confequence.  Few  men 
attached  to  literary  purfuits  are  adive,  ftrong, 
and  athletic :  as  if  ftudy  was  incompatible 
with  bodily  exertion,  the  gefture  of  a  thought- 
ful man  is  always  folemn  ;  and  his  pace  and 
motions  are  meafured  and  uniform  when  he 
walks  abroad.  The  poflure  of  the  body  in  a 
ftudious  man  at  his  defk,  is  unfavourable 
to  health.  The  lungs  are  feldom  expanded 
by  full  infpiration ;  and  while  the  bronchial 
cells  are  not  duly  ftimulated  by  the  powerful 
influx  of  an  oxygenized  atmofphere,  the 
whole  pulmonary  organs  lofe  their  vigour,  and 
the  blood  that  floridity  which  is  neceflary  for 
vital  energy  and  a  glowing  complexion.  All 
the  fecretions,  and  their  excretories,  fall  into 
inadion  from  want  of  mufcular  motion.  By 
little  recreation,  and  no  change  of  objeds  to 
relieve  the  attention,  the  whole  nervous  fyfliem 


*        39 

fmks  into  iiftlefsnefs  and  inadivity.  The 
mind  itfelf,  by  purfuing  one  train  of  thought, 
and  poring  too  long  over  the  fame  fubjed,  be- 
comes torpid  to  external  agents :  and  an  un- 
due mental  exertion  feems  to  fubtra£l  from 
the  body  much  of  that  ftimulation  which  is  re- 
quired for  many  operations  in  the  animal  eco- 
nomy, particularly  what  belongs  to  emotion 
and  paflion.  The  powers  of  digeftion,  with 
all  the  vifcera  fubfervient  to  them,  partake  in 
a  particular  manner  of  this  derangement,  and 
grow  unequal  to  their  office.  The  debility 
and  inadivity  which  take  place  in  the  chylo- 
poeitic  organs,  readt  on  the  nervous  part  of  the 
frame ;  and  the  faculties  of  intelled,  as  fym- 
pathizing  in  a  great  degree,  with  all  thefe 
highly  fenfible  bowels,  are  influenced  by  the 
general  diforder.  Hence  the  numerous  in- 
ftances  of  dyfpepfia,  hypochondriacs  and  me- 
lancholia, in  the  literary  character. 

But  it  is  to  be  fuppofed,  that  all  men  who 
pofTefs  genius,  and  thofe  mental  qualifications 
which  prompt  them  to  literary  attainments 
and  purfuits,  are  endued  by  nature  with  more 
than  ufual  fenfibility  of  nervous  fyflem.  And 
there  are  moral  caufes  to  which  they  are  ex- 
pofed  beyond  others,  that  may  have  a  large 


40 

Ihare  in  th«  produdion  of  their  indifpofitions. 
The  man  who  ftudies  and  writes  for  his  bread, 
often  depends  on  a  precarious  fubfiftence; 
fometimes  the  cold  charity  of  an  infolent  book- 
feller  :  a  mind  of  fine  feeling,  under  the  pref- 
fure  of  thefe  circumllances,  mufl  frequently 
undergo  the  moft  poignant  fufFerings.  Such 
feem  to  be  the  chief  caufes  which  give  a  decid- 
ed character  to  the  predifpofition  and  difeafes 
of  literary  men.  To  this  clafs  properly  be- 
long all  the  learned  profeflions  ;  and  all  thofe 
who  cultivate  the  fine  arts,  either  for  a  liveli- 
hood or  amufement. 

2.  Men  of  bufinefs.  The  fubjeds  of  this 
clafs  are  very  numerous  in  all  our  great  towns. 
It  includes  all  thofe  engaged  in  trade  :  many 
of  them,  no  doubt,  have  much  adive  bodily 
exercife ;  but  that  part  of  them  confined  to 
the  counting-houfe  and  Ihop,  cannot  be  faid 
to  enjoy  the  advantages  of  air  and  adivity,  as 
requifite  for  vigour  of  body.  The  pofture  of 
leaning  over  a  defk,  contrads  the  motion  of 
the  lungs,  and  impedes  the  fundions  of  the 
ftomach.  Thefe  perfons  are  commonly  pale 
and  fallow,  foft-fibred,  and  of  a  {lender  make. 
Not  a  few  of  them  behind  the  counter,  ap- 
proach in  external  form  towards  the  female 


41 

conftitutlon ;  and  they  feem  to  borrow  from 
their  fair  cuflomers  an  effeminacy  of  manners, 
and  a  fmallnefs  of  voice,  that  fo  me  times  make 
their  fex  doubtful.  Such  degeneracies  in  cor- 
poreal flrudlure,  cannot  fail  of  engendering  a 
predifpofition  to  difeafes  of  the  nervous  kind. 
It  is  furprifing  to  fee  and  hear  with  what  ad- 
drefs  and  loquacity  fome  of  thefe  little  beings 
in  London,  fet  off  their  wares  j  as  if  there 
were  a  neceflity  for  a  vender  of  lilk  and  muf- 
lin  to  be  foft  as  the  commodity  he  deals  in. 
You  will  perceive  them  to  wheedle  the  buyers 
of  goods  out  of  their  money,  by  a  kind  of 
fafcination.  Yet  it  has  often  been  matter  of 
wonder  to  me,  how  a  lady  of  fpirit  can  liften 
to  the  prattle  of  thefe  manikins  without  dif- 
guft  ;  more  efpecially  when  it  is  confidered 
that  they  have  fupplanted  the  fex  in  an  em- 
ployment which  is  their  birth-right,  and  are 
devouring  that  bread  which  belongs  to  thou- 
fands  of  poor  women,  who  are  thereby  con- 
figned  to  a  life  of  drudgery,  if  not  of  wretch- 
ednefs. 

But  the  man  of  bufmefs,  in  this  commercial 
age,  is  not  always  to  be  eftimated  a  corred 
liver :  luxury  follows  hard  upon  gain.  How- 
ever punctually  the  ledger  may  be  kept  in  the 

F  2 


42 


fore  part  of  the  day,  the  tavern  too  often  has 
its  fhare  of  the  evening.  The  perfon  who  has 
any  thing  to  fell,  very  naturally  praifes  the 
quality  of  his  goods ;  and  as  he  has  daily  to 
difpofe  of  the  like  aflbrtment,  he  foon  ac- 
quires a  kind  of  phrafeology  and  eloquence 
in  making  a  bargin.  This  fort  of  conver- 
fation  is  always  enlivened  by  fomething  to 
drink  :  the  vender  knows  well  how  liquor 
dilates  the  heart,  fo  that  if  he  can  perfuade 
his  cuftomer  to  drink  a  bottle  of  wine,  he  is 
almoft  fure  of  getting  his  price.  This  is  what 
makes  the  trading  town  fo  full  of  taverns : 
hence  thofe  frequent  inftances  of  nervous  and 
bilious  complaints  which  follow  habitual  ine- 
briation, to  be  daily  met  with  in  medical 
pradlice. 

Mankind  when  in  purfuit  of  money,  do  not 
give  themfelves  much  trouble  about  intellec- 
tual attainments.  The  man  of  bufmefs  how- 
ever fortunate  he  may  have  been  in  the  acqui- 
fition  of  wealth,  is  therefore  little  fitted  to  en- 
joy retirement ;  for  riches  do  not  bring  content. 
When  he  comes  to  retire  he  is  of  all  men  the 
leaft  fatisfied  j  for  his  eafy  circumftances  be- 
come the  root  of  all  his  evils ;  and  from  having 
no  longer  any  motive  for  adion,  he  falls  a  cer- 


4-3 

tain  prey  to  low  fplrits.  Thefe  are  the  perfons 
in  this  age,  when  riches  are  fo  generally  difFuf- 
ed,  that  make  up  the  bulk  of  hypochondriacs 
in  this  country.  So  certain  it  is,  that  happi- 
nefs  in  this  ftate  of  being,  rather  confifts  in  the 
purfuit,  than  in  the  poflefTion  of  our  object. 

All  thofe  employed  in  the  public  offices  of 
government,  and  in  the  houfes  of  trading  com- 
panies and  banks,  come  within  this  clafs : 
they  are  all  diftinguifhed  by  a  fedentary  me- 
thod of  life  within  doors  ;  and  when  they  pafs 
the  middle  age,  are  often  troubled  with  indi- 
geflion  and  low  fpirits. 

3.  The  idle  and  diffipated.  This  is  alfo  a 
numerous  clafs  in  every  great  town.  Thefe 
perfons  are  the  fubjeds  of  difeafes  which  ori- 
ginate chiefly  from  excefs  and  debauch  ;  and  are 
not  unfrequently  fpedacles  of  mifery  the  mod 
humiliating  to  human  nature.  Such  diforders 
appear  efpecially  in  the  prime  of  life  ;  often  in 
early  youth  ;  and  if  they  are  not  fatal  before 
forty,  they  introduce  premature  fenility,  decre- 
pitude and  fatuity.  A  large  city  or  town  may 
be  truly  called  a  hot-bed  for  the  pallions :  all 
the  vices  that  more  particularly  enervate  the 
conftitution  and  injure  health,  can  be  there 
pradifed  long  without  fufpicion  or  reftraint,  and 


44 

indulged  to  the  utmofl :  thus  the  young  and  in- 
experienced are  quickly  initiated  into  every 
fafhionable  folly,  and  a  vortex  of  diffipation. 
The  fexual  appetite  is  prematurely  excited  by 
the  numerous  hordes  of  unfortunate  women 
that  are  permitted  to  range  the  ftreets.  The 
powers  of  procreation  are  thus  weakened  be- 
yond recovery,  before  the  body  has  acquired 
its  full  (lability  and  growth  ;  and  the  vigor  of 
conflitution  as  well  as  the  faculties  of  mind 
are  Ihook  to  the  very  centre.  When  fuch  de- 
bilitated beings  have  progeny,  the  fms  of  the 
father  are  vifited  upon  the  children,  and  they 
appear  a  race  of  invalids  from  their  birth. 

But  as  there  is  a  difeafe  the  peculiar  fcourge 
of  unlawful  embraces,  fo  its  effeds  on  health 
are  equally  difgufting  and  dangerous.  The 
inconfiderate  young  man  who  contrads  this 
complaint,  from  delicacy  often  conceals  his 
misfortune  till  it  has  gained  a  decree  of  viru- 
lence not  to  be  defcribed.  This  diftrefs  is 
frequently  aggravated  by  mental  fenfibility  ; 
and  families  and  connexions  are  at  once 
involved  in  general  calamity.  In  the  ad- 
vanced ftage,  hideous  deformity  of  body  is 
often  the  confequence ;  but  in  all  the  grada- 
tions af  this  infedion,  a  long  and  rigorous 


45 


courfe  of  mercuiy  is  the  only  remedy  to  be 
depended  on.  Mercury,  rendered  antivenereal 
and  poifonous  by  oxydation  with  the  different 
acids,  is  confidered  a  certain  cure  for  fyphi- 
lis ;  but  its  exhibition  is  fometimes  fatal  to' 
the  conftitution,  and  conftantly  leaves  behind 
it  a  weakened  frame  of  nerves^;  and  a  difpofi- 
tion  of  ftomach  and  bowels  liable  to  fpafmodic 
affedions. 

All  full  livers  and  drunkards  come  within 
this  clafs.  Frequent  furfeits  from  high-feafon- 
ed  food;  and  frequent  intoxication  from 
vinous  or  fpiritous  potations,  commit  dreadful 
ravages  on  the  human  body  and  mind.  It  is 
a  misfortune  in  polifhed  fociety,  that  many 
indulge  in  thefe  exceifes  without  thinking 
they  are  doing  wrong  ;  and  often  fmk  into  the 
grave  by  difeafes  of  their  own  creating,  with- 
out being  warned  of  their  mifcondudt.  The 
difgufting  propenfity  to  luxurious  eating  for- 
tunately is  feldom  the  cafe  with  the  fair  fex ; 
but  where  it  happens,  a  train  of  nervous  and 
bilious  complaints  are  more  certainly  the 
confequence.  To  devour  a  large  quantity  of 
food  is  only  a  bad  habit ;  moft  perfons  could 
be  nourilhed  with  half  what  they  feed  on ;  fo 
that  not  only  temperance  as  to  quality,  but 


46' 


abilemioufneis  as  to  quantity,  is  one  of  the 
golden  rules  of  health. 

4.   The  artificer  and  manufadlurer.     The 
numbers  of  this  clafs  are  daily  increafirig  ;  the 
natural  effed  of  the  vail  commercial  wealth 
of  the  united  kingdoms.      The  artifan  and 
manufacturer  are  not  confined  to  the  town  ; 
for    almoft    every    village     throughout    the 
country  polTefles  fome  branch  of  manufadure. 
Here  again  all  the  efFe£ls  of  a  fedentary  life 
appear,- — the  uneafy  pofture  and  unwholefome 
air.     But   many  fpecies  of  manufadure  are 
unhealthful  from  noxious  metallic  fumes,  to 
which  the   workmen   are   expofed,    fuch   as 
thofe  of  mercury,    lead,    copper,  &c.     The 
exhaufling  heats  of  furnaces,  fmeking  houfes, 
laboratories,  ovens,  boilers,    &c.  in  different 
kinds  of  employments,    have  their  difeafes  ; 
but  the  moft  noxious  are  thofe  which  fix  on 
the    nervous     fyftem.      Thofe    trades    alfo, 
where  the  articles  wrought  give  out  confider- 
able  quantities  of  unrefpirable  gafes,  from  the 
decompofition  of  animal  and  vegetable  mat- 
ter, are  infalubrious ;  the  workmen  common- 
ly look  pale,  fallow,  and  dejeded. 

Such  perfons  as  are  expofed  to  the  heat  of 
large  fires    in    their  labour,    and  undergo 


47 

fudden  changes  of  temperature,  cannot  fail 
of  being  ibon  exhaufted  in  conftitution.  As 
far  as  I  have  obtained  information,  it  does  not 
appear  they  live  long.  Their  profufe  perfpi- 
rations,  induced  by  hard  work,  as  well  as  by 
great  heats,  give  moil  of  them  a  propenfity 
to  drinking.  Were  they  always  to  quench 
their  third  by  water  only,  the  exceffive  labour 
might  be  borne  for  a  length  of  time  ;  but  the 
ftrongell  malt  liquors,  often  mixed  with  fpirits, 
are  the  common  drinks  of  men  employed  near 
fires. 

But  I  have  alfo  met  with  many  fevere  fto- 
mach  complaints  among  forge-men,  where 
there  could  be  no  fufpicion  of  irregular  living. 
Twenty  of  this  kind  occurred  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Newcaftle  in  the  lafl  three  years, 
and  fome  of  the  number  proved  fatal.  The 
itanding  poflure  when  long  continued  is  very 
hurtful  to  the  bowels,  as  often  happens  among 
blacksmiths. 

I  da  not  find  that  the  pitmen  in  the  coal- 
mines of  this  diftrid  are  liable  to  any  parti- 
cular difeafes ;  when  temperate  in  drinking, 
they  commonly  Hve  to  a  great  age. 

5.  Thofe  employed  in  drudgery.  This 
clafs  is  compofed  of  both  fexes  j    they  grow 

G 


4s 

flrong  and  broad-fhouldered  from  labour,  pro- 
vided it  is  chiefly  out  of  doors.  But  in  this 
clafs  we  often  obferve  many  addided  to 
drunkennefs ;  and  I  much  doubt  if  their  work 
is  ever  fo  fevere  as  to  injure  health,  when 
they  are  regular  livers. 

It  may  however  be  confidered  as  a  fad, 
fubflantiated  by  the  daily  experience  of  phy- 
ficians,  that  all  the  difeafes  which  are  caufed 
by  hard  labour,  poverty,  and  want,  are  much 
eafier  of  cure,  than  thofe  which  arife  from  in- 
dolence, luxury,  and  debauch.  A  conftitu- 
tion  that  has  been  weakened  by  fubtradion 
of  nourilhment,  may  foon  have  its  energies 
reftored  by  fuitable  regimen,  diet,  and  me- 
dicine :  but  the  frame  that  has  been  wafled 
of  its  vital  powers,  by  exceflive  ftimuli  and  de- 
bilitating pleafures,  has  feldom  or  never  been 
brought  to  its  former  ftrength. 

6.  Perfons  returned  from  the  colonies.  It 
is  very  common  in  the  prefent  times,  for  men 
brought  up  to  bufmefs,  to  fpend  a  number  of 
years  in  the  colonies,  till  they  are  able  to 
return  with  fortunes.  They  may  therefore 
be  confidered  as  a  diflind  clafs,  in  this  en- 
quiry. Thefe  perfons  bring  with  them  to 
Britain,  indelible  marks  of  the  effedt  of  the 


49 

climates  they  have  lived  in :  dyfpeptic  com- 
plaints, and  all  their  nervous  accompaniments, 
are  the  never-failing  difeafes  of  this  enervated 
people.  The  tropical  heat,  and  luxurious 
modes  of  living,  are  chiefly  to  be  blamed  in 
the  production  of  fuch  bilious  and  nervous 
ailments ;  and  they  have  ufually  taken  fo  deep 
a  root  in  the  conflitution,  that  they  are  rather 
aggravated  than  relieved  by  our  variable  at- 
mofphere.  The  foggy  weather,  and  fickle 
temperature  of  Britain,  keep  the  feeble  nerves 
of  thefe  relaxed  frames  in  a  flate  of  conllant 
irritation. 

The  difeafes  of  tropical  climates,  but  parti- 
cularly the  fevers  of  fome  countries,  weaken 
the  nervous  fyftem,  produce  great  mobility, 
and  a  difpofition  to  fpafmodic  complaintSo 
Hence  the  chylopoeitic  vifcera  become  the 
feat  of  fo  many  painful  afFedions ;  and  the 
word  bilious^  has  grown  a  theme  of  conflant 
converfation  in  England,  as  well  as  in  the 
colonies. 

7.  The  female  fex.  Nature  has  endued 
the  female  conflitution  with  greater  delicacy 
and  fenfibiiity  than  the  male,  as  deftined  for  a 
different  occupation  in  life.  But  fa(l)ionable 
manners  have  ifhamefully  miftaken  the  pur- 


50 

pofes  of  nature ;  and  Tne  modern  fyftem  of 
education,  for  the  fair  fex,  has  been  to  refine 
on  this  tendernefs  of  frame,  and  to  induce  a 
debility  of  body,  from  the  cradle  upwards,  fo 
as  to  make  feeble  woman  rather  a  fubje6l  for 
medical  difquifition,  than  the  healthful  com- 
panion of  our  cares.  The  medical  literature 
of  the  prefent  day,  affords  abundant,  but 
melancholy  proofs  of  the  juflnefs  of  this  re- 
mark. Their  whole  tenor  of  living,  and  do- 
meftic  economy,  are  at  variance  with  health. 
The  female  infant  before  fhe  can  well  crawl 
along  the  floor,  is  taught  fome  employment 
that  will  encourage  her  to  fit,  to  (loop,  or  to 
walk  two-fold.  That  it  fhould  be  rude  for 
an  innocent  young  girl  to  run  about  with  her 
brother,  to  partake  of  his  fports,  and  to  ex- 
ercife  herfelf  with  equal  freedom,  is  a  maxim 
only  worthy  of  fome  infipid  goflip,  who  has 
the  emolument  of  the  family  phyfician  and 
apothecary  folely  in  view.  A  man  of  fortune 
and  wealth,  when  he  builds  a  ftable  or  a  dog- 
kennel  for  his  horfes  or  hounds,  takes  care 
that  thefe  companions  of  his  field-fports  ihall 
be  duly  preferved  found  in  wind  and  limb, 
by  frequent  exercife  out  of  doors,  when  he  does 
not  hunt.     But  in  no  part  of  his  premifes  do 


51 

you  fee  a  gymnafium  for  his  children.  If  the 
ingenious  arts  are  chiefly  to  be  valued  as  they 
increafe  the  fum  of  human  happinefs,  we  thus 
make  it  a  misfortune  to  have  a  houfe  over 
our  heads,  though  it  may  flielter  us  from  the 
froft,  the  temped  and  the  rain ;  for  it  too  often 
becomes  the  means  of  depriving  us  of  health, 
when  it  prevents  exercife  and  excludes  pure 
air.  But  we  indulge  our  boys  to  yoke  their 
go-carts,  and  to  ride  on  long  rods,  while  little 
mifs  mud  have  her  more  delicate  limbs  crampt 
by  fitting  the  whole  day  dreffing  a  doll.  An- 
cient cuftom  has  been  pleaded  in  favour  of 
thefe  amufements  for  boys,  as  we  read  in  Ho- 
race :  but  it  is  no  where  recorded  that  the 
infancy  of  Portia,  Arria,  and  Agrippina  was 
fpent  in  fitting  clothes  for  a  joint  baby. 

All  female  employments  that  are  performed 
in  the  fitting  podure,  injure  health ;  and  are 
hurtful  in  proportion  to  the  early  age  in  which 
they  are  begun.  Few  of  the  fex  are  entirely 
free  from  this  habit. 

Women  of  very  moderate  fortune,  and  the 
wives  and  daughters  of  all  reputable  tradef- 
men  in  this  country,  may  be  faid  to  indulge 
in  mod  of  the  follies  of  their  fuperiors.  They 
can  have  their  hot  clofe  rooms,  drink  drong 


d2 

hyfoiij,  and  keep  late  hours,  as  well  as  i 
dutchefs.  The  female  conflitution,  therefore, 
furnifhed  by  nature  with  peculiar  delicacy 
and  feeling,  foft  in  its  mufcular  fibre,  and 
eafily  adled  upon  by  flimuli,  has  all  its  native 
tendernefs  increafed  by  artificial  refinements. 
Hence  the  difeafes  of  which  we  now  treat,  are 
in  a  manner  the  inheritance  of  the  fair  fex  : 
when  to  thefe  we  fuperadd  all  the  prepofle- 
rous  cuftoms  of  fafhionable  life,  need  we  won- 
der at  the  numerous  inftances  of  bad  health 
and  feeble  exiftence,  fo  often  to  be  met  with 
among  them. 

One  of  the  curfes  which  was  pronounced 
againft  fome  of  the  Jewilh  mothers,  is  unfor- 
tunately realized  among  many  of  our  fair 
countrywomen.  "  The  tender  and  delicate 
woman  among  you^  which  would  not  venture 
to  Jet  the  fole  of  her  foot  upon  the  ground^  for 
delicatenefs  and  tendernefs^  her  eye  Jioall  be 
evil  towards  the  hufband  of  her  hofom^  and 
towards  her  fon^  and  towards  her  daugh- 

No  text  in  fcripture,  or  any  other  book, 
ever  conveyed  a  more  jufl  cenfure  on  the  in- 

*  Deuteronomy,  chap,  xxxviii.  v.  SQ* 


difcreet  conduct  of  a  parent  to  the  offspring. 
From  having  injured  her  own  frame  by  re- 
finements in  living,  the  mother  thus  fows  the 
feeds  of  difeafe  in  the  conftitutions  of  her 
children :  hence  a  weak  body,  delicate  nerves, 
and  their  confequence,  a  fickly  exiftence,  be- 
come hereditary.  Such  may  be  here  called  a 
fair  interpretation  of  thofe  emphatic  expref- 
fions,  '^  Her  eye  jhall  he  evil  towards  the  huf- 
^^  band  of  her  hofom^  and  towards  her/on^  and 
*'  towards  her  daughter  I " 


54 


CHAPTER  III. 

Re7note  caufes  of  nervous  difeafes^  ^c, 

TriE  remote  caufes  of  nervous  difeafes 
are  chiefly,  to  be  fought  for  in  populous  towns ; 
and  increafe  in  proportion  to  the  deviation 
from  fimplicity  of  living.  The  ftate  of  ci- 
vilized mankind  is  thus  expofed  to  caufes  of 
bad  healthj  which  have  no  power  among 
rude  nations,  viz.  :  In 

1.  Air. 

2.  Exercife. 

3.  Food. 

4.  C  loathing. 

5.  Paffions  of  the  mind. 

6.  Intenfe  ftudy. 

7.  Ladtation. 

8.  Mifcarriages    and  premature    la- 

bours, &c. 

9.  Climate. 

10.  Medicine. 
I.  Air.     A  pure  atmofphere  is  of  the  firfl 

importance  to  fuflain  animal  life  in  full  health 


'55 

and  perfe£lIori»  Mankind  in  the  earlieff 
ages  of  the  world  itiuft  have  foon  learned  this. 
Although  they  had  no  knowledge  of  either 
the  chemical  qualities  or  the  mechanical  pro- 
perties of  common  air,  fbme  particular  devia- 
tion from  the  ufual  flandard,  was  reckoned 
the  chief  caufe  of  epidemic  fevers.  The 
fenfes  in  a  great  meafure  were  the  beft  tefts  of 
a  tainted  atmofphere,  efpecially  that  of  fmell : 
and  where  large  collections  of  animal  and 
vegetable  filth  were  found  in  a  ftate  of  cor- 
ruption, offenfive  effluvia  would  be  quickly  de- 
tected, and  would  be  avoided.  But  a  more  cor- 
rect method  of  judging  of  the  medium  in 
which  we  breathe  is  now  obtained  from  che- 
mical philofophy ;  for  independent  of  any 
noxious  fubllance  which  may  impregnate  the 
atmofphere,  as  arifmg  from  the  decompofi- 
tion  of  animal  or  vegetable  matter,  or  other 
fources,  it  is  liable  to  become  noxious  to  life, 
by  whatever  means  the  oxygen  or  refpirable 
portion  is  deftroyed,  leflened,  or  abflradted. 
Such  is  the  cafe  when  a  number  of  perfons 
are  confined  in  a  fmall  place ;  or  where  large 
fires  are  kept,  and  the  doors  and  windows 
made  too  clofe.  It  is  thus  the  city  or  popu- 
lous town  is  rendered  lefs  falubrious  than  the 

H 


55 

country.  Narrow  lanes,  high  buildings  and 
houfes,  filthy^  kennels,  fmall  apartments,  huge 
warehoufes,  manufacturing  eftablifhments,  cel- 
lars under  ground,  confumption  of  fuel,  and  a 
large  population,  are  fo  many  fources  whence 
the  air  is  contaminated.  The  fun-fhine 
fcarcely  beams  on  any  window  of  a  houfe  in 
town :  the  ventilation  of  the  upper  parts  of 
the  building  is  imperfed ;  but  the  lower 
(lories,  particularly  what  is  under  ground,  can 
receive  no  pure  portion  at  all.  The  bufinefs 
of  the  whole  inhabitants  almoft:  confines  them 
within  doors  ;  fo  that  the  very  complexion 
and  countenance  difcover  a  citizen.  It  is  fa- 
miliar to  people  bred  in  great  towns  to  re- 
mark, how  imperfedly  all  the  trees  and  Ihrubs 
grow  in  their  Httle  gardens.  Nothing  but  the 
foul  atmofphere  is  to  be  blamed  for  this  ;  for 
the  richeft  foil  cannot  corred  or  prevent  fuch 
rickety  productions.  Animal  growth  labours 
under  the  fame  difadvantages  as  the  vegetable 
tribe.  A  deficiency  of  colour,  in  old  times^ 
fuggefled  to  phyficians  the  predominance  of 
fome  humour  in  the  body  ;  and  from  this  caufe 
particular  names  of  temperament  were  afTigned 
to  different  people.  But  we  now  impute  a  de- 
licate look,  and  a  pale  face,  to  confinement 
within  doors,  and  to  breathing  an  impure  air. 


•       57 

That  portion  of  the  atmofphere  which  tinges 
the  Ikin  with  a  lively  hue,  and  the  blood  with 
a  florid  colour,  is  known  to  be  oxygen.  Yet 
fo  unnatural  and  perverted  are  fafhionable 
opinions  on  this  fubjed,  that  a  blooming  com- 
plexion is  thought  to  indicate  low  life  and 
,  vulgarity  in  breeding.  What  a  depraved 
mode  of  thinking  !  What  a  falfe  ftandard  for 
beauty  ;  to  prefer  a  fickly  fallow  hue  of  the 
countenance  to  the  rofes  of  health !  And  yet 
feek  to  imitate  them  by  artificial  means.  This 
wan  and  pallid  complexion,  or  negation  of 
colour,  is  always  an  indication  of  debility,  and 
ufually  accompanies  bad  health,  from  whatever 
caufe,  but  chiefly  imperfect  action  of  the  di- 
geftive  powers.  The  functions  of  refpiration 
and  digeftion  have  therefore  fome  dependence 
on  one  another.  Some  perfons  give  the  name 
of  bilious  to  thefe  fallow  looks :  but  they  cer- 
tainly often  appear  where  there  is  no  fuffufion 
of  bile  ;  and  in  this  ft  age  are  to  be  imputed  to 
deficient  oxygenizement  of  the  blood. 

But  it  is  the  known  effedl  of  the  oxygenous 
principle  of  the  atmofphere,  when  duly  in- 
haled from  a  current  breeze,  not  only  to  fatu- 
rate  the  blood  with  floridity,  but  to  exhilirate 
the  fpirits  in  a  high  degree  \    invigorate  and 

H  2 


A  t, 


58 

redden  the  mufcular  fibre ;  beflow  energy  on 
every  nerve,  and  call  forth  at  once  mental 
and  cprporeal  ftrength.  Mofl:  perfons  muft 
have  taken  notice  of  that  languor,  drowfinefs, 
and  diflike  to  motion,  which  are  felt  in  a  clofe, 
warm,  and  crowded  room.  Inftances  have 
come  within  our  own  obfervation,  where  the 
candles  feemed  fcarcely  to  burn,  and  where 
half  of  the  company  was  yawning  at  the  other, 
without  knowing  the  caufe.  Should  any  phi- 
lofopher,  who  might  pity  the  fomnolency  of 
the  party,  attempt  to  open  a  fafh  by  way  of 
eorreding  the  air,  his  politenefs  would  be  apt 
to  give  oifence.  What  efFe6l  the  popular 
ledures  of  Mr  Davy,  and  thofe  delivered  in 
provincial  towns,  may  have  on  fuch  aflem- 
blies,  time  only  can  fhew.  A  modern  rout 
IS  certainly  one  of  the  completed  examples  of 
a  warm  crouded  houfe.  The  good  lady,  who 
entertains  for  the  evening,  commonly  thinks 
herfelf  honoured  in  proportion  to  the  number 
of  vifitors ;  and  the  guefts  find  themfelves 
fupplied  with  every  elegance,  except  a  pure 
cool  zephyr.  The  warm  full  theatre,  or  danc- 
ing alfembly,  if  not  duly  perflated,  like  the 
rout,  are  fo  many  marts  of  bad  health.  *     Im- 

*  Perfons  who  are  fond  of  frequenting  thofe  un- 


59 

pure  air  faps  the  conftitution  by  flow  ap* 
preaches  ;  but  no  miner  more  certainly  car* 
ries  his  point  at  laft.  I  hope  Mr  Davy  *  is 
duly  attended  by  all  thofe  matrons  who  keep 
boarding  fchools  for  young  ladies,  in  and  near 
London. 

One  of  the  great  misfortunes  which  fome 
fpecies  of  manufadure  have  brought  on  this 
country,  is  the  employment  of  children,  be- 
fore the  body  has  attained  its  full  growth. 
During  infancy  and  childhood,  and  till  the 
human  frame  has  acquired  its  full  ftature,  it 
would  appear,  that  more  pure  air  is  required 
for  the  purpofes  of  health  than  at  a  remoter 
period  of  life.  The  heart  of  the  child  much 
furpaffes  that  of  the  adult  in  the  frequency  of 
its  pulfations ;  and  every  movement  of  the 
body  is  more  conftant  and  quicker,  fo  that  it 
feems  to  be  never  at  reft,  but  during  fleep. 
Hence  the  greater  expenditure  of  vital  air. 
The  child  who  is  early  employed  in  a  woollen 

wliolefome  crowds  ought  to  be  Informed  that  nothing 
is  fo  indelicate  as  to  breathe  refplred  air.  To  drink  of 
the  fame  cup  is  the  height  of  politenefs  compared  with 
this  cuftom. 

*  Leaiurer  on  Chemiftry,  at  the  New  Inftitution, 
and  highly  celebrated  for  his  difcoveries  in  the  fcience. 


60 


♦  <  ^ 


or  cotton  manufadory,  is  to  the  village  plough- 
boy,  what  the  town- lady  is  to  the  country 
girl.  They  are  both  examples  of  nature's 
precepts  being  difobeyed  :  for  to  be  ftewed  in 
foul  air,  is  the  fame  in  effedt,  wherever  it 
happens. 

A  warm  unventilated  nurfery  is  a  nuifance 
of  the  firfh  magnitude.  Nurfes  and  fervants 
have  too  often  the  fole  fuperintendance  of 
thefe  apartments  :  fafhionable  mothers  at  lead, 
as  fome  may  be  juflly  called,  feldom  vifit 
nurferies.  Bad  health,  particularly  among 
the  deUcate  children,  is  too  often  brought 
on  by  a  clofe  lleeping  place.  It  is  only  when 
the  weather  is  extremely  cold,  that  a  fire 
Ihould  be  permitted  in  thefe  apartments ;  for 
during  the  lleeping  ftate,  the  body  is  not  fenfi- 
ble  of  the  deficient  purity  of  air ;  and  it  may 
be  fubtraded  altogether,  without  any  ftruggle 
being  obferved,  and  without  the  body  being 
waked.  It  is  thus  infants  are  fo  eafily  fufFo- 
cated  or  overlaid :  as  the  air  becomes  more 
impure  the  ftupor  increafes,  till  refpiration 
flops ;  and  the  child  is  ahvays  found  in  the 
fleeping'poflure.  *  Sleep  is  not  only  the  image 
of  death,  but  it  feems  a  ftep  towards  it. 

*  In  1801,  while  I  refided  at  Plymouth  Dock,  a' 


61 

The  modern  pradliee  of  confining  children 
to  fleep  in  a  crib,  till  they  are  three  or  four 
years  of  age,  is  highly  commendable :  it  has 
thus  all  the  advantages  of  the  breaft  to  put 
it  to  fleep,  and  is  in  no  danger  of  being  over- 
laid. The  fize  of  the  bed  afterwards  fliould 
ftill  be  proportioned  to  the  child  ;  and  they 
Ihould  never  be  permitted  to  lie  with  a  grown 
perfon.  The  convulfions  of  infants,  which 
are  purely  a  nervous  affection,  we  know  to 
be  often  brought  on  by  want  of  ventilation ; 
and  we  naturally  expofe  them  at  a  window 
for  recovery,  as  we  do  with  a  lady  fainting 
in  a  crowded  room. 

A  few  years  ago,  the  numerous  deaths 
which  happened  in  a  foundling  hofpital  in 

houfe  adjoining  took  fire,  in  an  upper  apartment  of 
which,  that  had  no  chimney,  a  poor  woman  with  eight 
children  perifhed.  They  were  all  found  In  bed,  in  the 
Jleeping  pojiiire ;  and  had  been  fufFocated,  from  the 
flame  furrounding  the  room,  and  exhaufting  the  air, 
for  no  part  of  them  was  fcorched.  During  the  alarm 
no  perfon  thought  of  this  poor  family,  otherwife  the 
whole  of  them  might  have  been  eafily  refcued,  for  only 
a  portion  of  the  premifes  was  confumed.  It  Is  proba- 
ble that  none  of  them  waked,  as  their  cries  would  have 
been  heard,  the  houfe  being  only  of  two  low  ftoriesj 
^ad  this  garret  room. 


61 

Dublin,  made  a  great  noife  in  this  country. 
On  inquiry,  it  v/as  found  that  foul  air  had 
the  chief  fhare  in  this  uncommon  mortality. 
Some  hofpitals  in  Paris,  about  the  fame  time^ 
were  fcenes  of  the  like  deftrudion  to  infant 
life*  Now  children  who  furvive  thefe  nur- 
feries  and  hofpitals,  or  dungeons  as  they  may 
be  called,  are  fo  (tinted  in.  their  health,  that 
they  are  unfit  for  every  occupation  that  re- 
quires flrength ;  and  fhould  they  have  fa- 
milies, hereditary  debility  and  deformity  are 
the  lot  of  the  offspring.  Of  fuch  vaft  impor- 
tance is  pure  atrpiofpheric  air  to  the  growth 
and  health  of  the  human  body. 

The  following  inftance  of  a  fhocking  cala- 
mity, fliews  how  neceflary  it  is,  for  all  defcrip- 
tions  of  perfons  to  be  informed,  that  ivifhout  a 
conftant  fupply  of  pure  air,  life  cannot  be  fiif 
tamed. 

In  1797-8,  a  fmall  pafTage  veflel  belonging 
to  Southampton,  had  on  board  feventy  men, 
women,  and  children,  coming  from  Jerfey; 
among  whom  were  many  foldiers  and  their 
families.  It  began  to  blow  frefh  breezes,  and 
for  the  fafety  of  his  floop,  the  mafler  laid  the 
hatches  over,  and  covered  them  with  a  tar- 
paulin, which  he  battened  down,  for  better 


63 

fecurlty.  When  the  veflel  came  within  the 
ifle  of  Wight,  the  hatches  were  opened,  but, 
dreadful  to  be  told  !  the  whole  of  the  pajjengers 
were  found  dead  !  I  !  The  mafter,  who  did 
all  this  through  ignorance  of  the  efFeds  of 
foul  air^  became  mad,  and  died  foon  after. 

2.  Exercife.  This  affiftant  of  health  can« 
not  well  be  faid  to  form  a  part  of  the  recrea- 
tions or  amufements  of  a  great  town.  The 
inhabitants  have  neither  been  taught  to  wifh 
for  it,  nor  how  to  enjoy  it.  A  formal  walk 
before  dinner  to  call  on  a  few  friends,  or  to 
make  fome  purchafes  at  a  fhop,  bounds  the 
travels  and  excurfions  of  thoufands  of  women 
in  London,  and  other  populous  cities.  If  the 
flreets  are  difagreeable  to  walk,  or  fhould  the 
lead  fatigue  be  felt,  the  remainder  of  the  jour- 
ney is  performed  in  a  coach.  The  male  part  of 
the  community  do  not  much  avail  themfelves 
of  greater  advantages.  Can  a  few  flrides  to 
the  office  or  counting-houfe  be  deemed  exer- 
cife ?  Or  can  a  lounge  in  Bond-flreet  be  con- 
fidered  as  a  parade  for  mafculine  health  ? 
The  whole  bufmefs  of  a  town- life  is  tranf- 
a6led  within  doors  :  fcarcely  a  houfe  in 
London  has  an  area  attached  to  it  fufficient 
for    the    fports    of  a    child,    where    it  may 

I 


64 

flretch  its  limbs,  and  ramble  about.  Where 
there  is  no  fpace  out  of  doors  appropriated 
for  the  play  and  diverfions  of  children,  fuch 
as  running,  leaping,  and  wreftling,  a  manly 
vigour  of  body  can  never  be  acquired.  The 
flature  may,  no  doubt,  attain  its  common 
height ;  but  can  there  be  firmnefs  of  mufcle, 
or  energy  of  nerve,  in  fuch  a  frame  ?  Like 
the  plant  that  is  reared  in  a  hot^houfe,  it  may 
grow  tall  and  look  fair,  but  the  firft  gale  of 
wind  lays  it  low.  The  city  cTiild,  like  the 
dwarf,  being  denied  the  free  motion  of  its 
limbs,  is  fecluded  from  play-mates  of  its  own 
age,  and  foon  imitates  the  manners  of  its 
feniors.  It  thus  infenfibly  acquires  a  vo* 
lubility  of  tongue,  and  fluency  of  fpeech,  that 
appear  like  premature  talent  of  mind.  But 
this  early  fhow  of  intelledt,  is  not  liable  in  its 
growth ;  and  fuch  a  youth  feems  to  learn  no^ 
thing  after  fourteen.  But  the  child  educated 
in  the  country,  who  has  no  bounds  fet  to  his 
walks  and  fports,  is  indifferent  to  fludy  and  all 
mental  acquirements :  his  great  flow  of  fpirits 
gives  him  confl:ant  amufement,  and  his  good 
health  keeps  his  limbs  in  continual  motion. 
The  body  having  thus  copied  the  didlates  of 
nature  to  its  full  growth,  will  be  better  pre- 


65 

pared  by  the  foundnefs  of  its  texture  for  thofe 
intelledtual  recreations,  of  either  elegance  or 
utility,  that  are  to  be  the  future  employ- 
ment of  life.  The  town  and  the  country  in 
this  refpedt  may  be  faid  to  exchange  commo- 
dities. The  youth  bred  in  the  village  will 
have  the  befl  chance  for  found  health  and 
pure  morals,  and  will  find  the  city  the  bed 
mart  for  thefe  virtues.  But  as  a  vigorous  cor- 
poreal flrudure,  as  well  as  intellectual  excel- 
lence, cannot  remain  long  in  the  town  without 
degeneracy,  perhaps  not  more  than  three  ge- 
nerations ;  fo  if  thefe  endowments  are  to  be 
preferved  in  the  fame  family,  they  are  only  to 
be  recruited  by  refuming  the  habits  and 
amufements  of  a  country  life. 

Broad  fhoulders,  a  full  chefl,  and  mufcular 
limbs,  are  concomitants  of  exercife  and  la- 
bour ;  they  mark  what  is  called  the  brawny 
form.  The  limb  or  mufcle  that  is  often  exer- 
cifed  and  put  in  motion,  expands  from  the 
influx  of  blood  that  is  thereby  direded  to  its 
vefTels ;  which  increafed  influx  of  blood  dif- 
tends  the  arteries  and  veins ;  fupplies  the 
flefliy  parts  with  a  larger  proportion  of  nutri- 
ment, and  ultimately  adds  bulk,  firmnefs,  and 
ftrength,  to  the  n)Oving  fibre.     During  a6live 

I  2 


66 

mufcular  exercife  there  is  a  great  expenditure 
of  the  fluids :  the  more  aqueous  and  volatile 
are  thrown  oflF  or  exhaled,  by  fweat  and  infen- 
fible  perfpiration  ;  while  an  increafe  of  appe- 
tite to  fupply  the  wafted  juices,  is  a  neceflary 
effed  of  this  expenditure.  The  organs  of 
digeftion  alfo  gain  new  vigour,  and  perform 
their  office  with  more  facility  and  expedition : 
the  food  aflimilates  more  readily  with  the  other 
fecretions,  and  is  propelled  with  greater  rapi- 
dity along  the  inteftinal  tube. 

By  competent  exercife,  the  blood  that  re- 
turns to  the  heart  from  the  extremities,  is  duly 
liberated  of  certain  parts  intended  to  be  thrown 
off  J  and  acquires  in  the  lungs  frefh  qualities 
from  the  infpired  atmofphere.  It  is  probable 
this  fundion  of  the  pulmonary  organs  could 
not  go  on  in  a  manner  confiftent  with  health, 
without  fome  degree  of  agitation,  fuch  as  we 
obferve  during  the  increafed  motion  of  the 
cheft.  It  is  thus  exercife  out  of  doors,  be- 
ftows  on  the  countenance  the  animated  bloom 
of  health.  The  mental  faculties  receive  a  like 
degree  of  energy  from  adlive  bodily  motion  ; 
it  fhifts  the  train  of  thought  from  one  objed: 
to  another,  forces  new  impreffions  on  fenfa- 
tion,  and  a  change  of  ideas  is  the  confequence. 


67 

All  the  nations  of  antiquity,  of  which  we 
read,  who  trufted  to  the  art  of  war  for  fafety, 
found    it   expedient    to  train  their  youth  to 
hardy  and  adive  exercifes,  for  the  purpofe  of 
making  them  foldiers.     The  Olympic  games, 
Gymnafmm,  Palseftra,  Campus  Martius,  Cir- 
cus and  Arena,  were  fo  many  places  appro- 
priated to  the  diverfions  and  ihows  of  chariot- 
racing,  horfe-racing,  running,  wreftling,  fenc- 
ing, throwing  the  coit,  &c.     Without  flated 
exhibitions  of  this  fort,  the  inhabitants  of  large 
cities  could  not  be  well  inured  to  bodily  fa- 
tigue, or  become  athletic.     It  was  alfo  necef- 
fary  to  keep  up  emulation  among  young  men, 
and  to  grant  marks  of  diftindion  to  thofe  who 
excelled  in  thefe  atchievements.     Xenophon, 
in  drawing  the  charader  of  a  finifhed  general, 
lays  great  ftrefs  on  the  pains  taken  by  his  hero 
to  detach  his  officers  on  hunting  parties,  that 
they  might  learn  to  bear  thirft,  hunger,  in- 
clement weather  and  danger.  *  He  mufl  know 
little  of  a  military  life,  who   would  truft  the 
defence  of  a  country  to  a  fedentary  people. 
All  the  qualifications  of  a  foldier  are  wanting 
among  fuch  perfons.     What  drilling  or  train- 

*  Cyropsedia. 


ing  could  ever  fit  fuch  men  to  fleep  with  im- 
punity on  the  wet  turf,  to  bear  cold,  fatigue^ 
and  all  the  privations  peculiar  to  aduai  war  ? 

Dr  Gillies,  in  his  animated  defcription  of  the 
Olympic  games  and  Gymnaftic  exercifes  of 
the  Greeks,  fays,  "  Bodily  ftrength  and 
"  agility  were  accompanied  by  health  and 
"  vigour  of  conflitution.  Their  athletic  hardi- 
"  nefs  bore  without  inconvenience,  the  vicifli- 
'^  tudes  of  cold  and  heat.  Even  in  the  fcorch- 
"  ing  heat  of  July,  (for  that  was  the  feafon 
"  of  the  Olympic  games,)  they  received  bare- 
"  headed  the  dired  rays  of  the  fun.  And  the 
''  firm  organization  acquired  by  perpetual  ex- 
*'  ercife,  counteracted  that  fatal  propenfity  to 
"  vicious  indulgence,  too  natural  to  their 
"  voluptuous  climate,  and  produced  thofe 
"  inimitable  models  of  ftrength  and  beauty, 
"  which  are  fo  defervedly  admired  in  the  pre- 
"  cious  remains  of  Grecian  ftatuary.  There 
®^  is  a  courage  depending  on  ner-ves  and  bloody 
"  which  was  improved  to  the  highefl  pitch 
"  among  the  Greeks."  * 

If  therefore  exercife  tends  fo  powerfully  to 
ilrengthen  the  body  and    exalt  the  courage. 


*  Hiftory  of  Greece,  chap.  vi. 


69 

how  fatal  to  health  muft  be  the  total  privation 
of  it  ?  And  if  there  is  one  difeafe  more  than 
another  that  is  induced  by  indolence,  by 
lloth,  and  want  of  adive  motion,  it  is  that 
train  of  nervous  weaknelTes,  which  puts  on  the 
form  of  every  other  complaint,  and  becomes 
one  of  the  greateit  flings  to  human  happinefs. 
3.  Food.  Luxurious  living,  joined  to 
other  caufes,  has  a  manifeft  tendency  to  in- 
duce nervous  and  bilious  derangement.  When 
a  large  quantity  of  rich  food  is  confumed, 
heightened  to  the  palate  by  all  the  arts  of 
cookery,  more  than  nature  demands  muft 
be  taken  down.  A  variety  of  diihes  alfo  in- 
vites to  inordinate  appetite  and  gluttony.  The 
organs  of  digeilion  are  thus  opprefTed  and 
weakened  by  the  furplus ;  the  liver  in  parti- 
cular is  enlarged  in  its  volume :  the  blood  is 
charged  with  a  richer  quality,  and  every  vef- 
fel  and  gland  ftimulated  to  excefs.  The 
nervous  fyftem  is  alfo  preternaturally  excited, 
and  grows  highly  fufceptible  of  ftimulus,  and 
eafily  affeded  in  mind  by  pleafurable  fenfa- 
tion.  If  a  life  of  indolence  is  led  under 
luxuriant  diet,  joined  to  the  liberal  ufe  of  fer- 
mented liquors,  together  they  form  that  habit 
which  conflitutes  the  'voluptuary.     It  is  cha- 


ra£i:erifed  by  a  florid  complexion,  fparkling 
eyes,  an  unmeaning  fimper,  foftnefs  of  flefli, 
and  fullnefs  of  blood,  rather  than  obefity. 
The  mind  is  light,  indolent,  and  indifferent 
to  every  thing  but  pleafure.  A  perfon  o( 
this  defcription  is  perpetually  in  purfuit  of 
fome  felfiih  indulgence ;  courts  the  acquaint- 
ance of  all  who  keep  good  tables ;  flatters 
the  weak  part  of  the  fifl:erhood,  but  fliuns 
the  fociety  of  fenfible  women  ;  and  calls  phi- 
lofophers  infipid  companions,  and  diflurbers 
of  a  party.  Such  a  man  is  remarkable  for  a 
great  flow  of  fpirits  at  the  convivial  board : 
but  his  round  of  delights  is  not  lading.  He 
that  laughs  and  drinks  with  every  one,  grows 
fad  in  time  ;  and  early  decrepitude,  and  ner- 
vous debility,  are  his  certain  portion.  As  his 
youth  was  remarkable  for  good  health  and 
levity  of  difpofition,  fo  his  age  is  tortured  by 
low  fpirits  and  paralytic  weaknefs. 

There  are  fome  perfons  of  the  nervous 
temperament,  that  are  much  addided  to  high 
feafoned  food,  which  I  call  luxurious  living. 
This  cuflom  is  often  firfl:  acquired  by  indulg- 
ing in  the  ufe  of  hot  articles,  with  a  view  to 
obviate  flatulence,  and  other  dyfpeptic  feel- 
ings;  but  it  infenfibly  gains  ground,  and  by 


11 

i-epetition  it  is  confirmed  Into  habit ;  arid  the 
excitability,  or  vital  power  of  the  ftomach,  is 
fpeedily  exhaufted  aiid  worn  out.  Such  per- 
fons  commonly  die  of  apoplexy,  after  a  vora- 
cious repaft,  or  linger  a  while  under  incura- 
ble palfies  of  the  limbs  and  other  organs ^  and 
idiotifm. 

When  perfons,  after  a  courfe  of  high  liv- 
ing, are  compelled  to  feed  on  a  lefs  generous 
diet,  we  often  meet  with  painful  ftomach 
complaintSj  and  low  fpirits.  In  thefe  cafes 
the  organs  of  digeftion  feem  to  be  fo  much 
weakened  by  the  previous  excefs,  that  poor 
fare  is  uiiiable  to  ftimulate  them  to  healthful 
adion.  Under  fuch  circumftances  men  are 
apt  to  feek  relief  from  fpiritous  liquors,  which 
quickly  terminate  exiftence^  by  aggravating  all 
their  complaints* 

The  ufe  of  tEA  in  this  country,  as  an  ar- 
ticle of  diet,  comes  under  this  head.  The 
confumption  of  the  Chinefe  plant  is  enormous 
throughout  the  united  kingdoms  :  it  is  a  be- 
verage well  fuited  to  the  tafte  of  an  indolent 
and  voluptuous  age.  To  the  glutton  it  affords 
a  grateful  diluent  after  a  voracious  dinner; 
and  from  being  drunk  warm,  it  gives  a  footh- 
ing  ftimulus  to  the  ftomach  of  the  drunkard. 

K 


But  however  agreeable  may  be  its  immediate 
flavour,  the  ultimate  efFeds  are  debility  and 
nervous  difeafes.  There  may  be  conditions 
of  health,  indeed,  where  tea  can  do  no  harm, 
fuch  as  in  the  flrong  and  athletic ;  but  it  is 
particularly  hurtful  to  the  female  conflitution ; 
to  all  perfons  who  poflfefs  the  hereditary  pre- 
difpofition  to  dyfpepfia,  and  all  the  difeafes 
with  which  it  is  afTociated  j  to  gout,  and  to  thofe 
who  are  naturally  weak  nerved.  If  this  ob- 
fervation  is  jufl,  we  may  account  for  many 
taking  it  with  impunity,  and  holding  out  the 
deleterious  qualities  of  tea  as  a  medical  chi- 
mera, conjured  up  to  magnify  the  importance 
of  phyfic,  and  to  frighten  old  women.  Fine 
tea,  where  the  narcotic  quality  feems  to  be 
concentrated,  when  taken  in  a  ftrong  infufion^ 
by  perfons  not  accuftomed  to  it,  excites  naufea 
and  vomiting,  tremors,  cold  fweats,  vertigo, 
dimnefs  of  fight,  and  confufion  of  thought. 
In  its  more  diluted  Hate,  fweetened  with 
fugar,  and  foftened  by  the  judicious  mixture 
of  bland  cream,  it  is  grateful  to  the  ftomach, 
gives  a  foothing  fenfation  as  if  it  lulled  pain, 
exhilirates  the  fpirits,  produces  wakefulnefs^ 
relieves  fatigue ;  and  from  being  taken  down 


73 

warm,  promotes  perfpiration,  and  ads  power- 
fully by  the  kidneys. 

But  I  have  known  a  number  of  men  and 
women  fubjedt  to  nervous  complaints,  who 
could  not  ufe  tea  in  any  form,  without  feeling 
a  fudden  increafe  of  all  their  unpleafant  fymp* 
toms,  particularly  acidity  of  ftomach,  vertigo, 
and  weaknefs  of  the  eyes.  Though  fond  of  tea 
myfelf,  I  have  fometimes  been  obliged  to  leave 
it  off,  by  fufpe£ling  that  it  added  to  my  na- 
tural fhortnefs  of  fight. 

As  the  ufe  of  this  article  in  diet  extends 
among  the  lower  orders  of  the  community 
and  the  labouring  poor,  it  muft  do  the  more 
harm.  A  man  or  woman  who  has  to  go 
through  much  toil  or  hardfhip,  has  need  of 
fubftantial  nourifliment :  but  that  is  not  to  be 
obtained  from  an  infufion  of  tea.  And  if 
the  humble  returns  of  their  indullry  are  ex- 
pended on  this  leaf,  what  remains  for  the 
purchafe  of  food  better  adapted  to  labour  ?  In 
this  cafe  tea  becomes  hurtful,  not  only  from 
its  own  narcotic  qualit}^,  but  becaufe  that  qua- 
lity a£ls  with  double  force  in  a  body  weak- 
ened from  other  caufes.  This  certainly  is  one 
great  reafon  for  the  increafed  and  increafmg 
proportion  of  nervous,  bilious,  fpafmodic,  and 

K    2 


74 

ftomach  complaints,  &c.  appearing  among  the 
lower  ranks  of  life.  This  fad  has  long  been 
confirmed  to  me  in  different  countries,  and 
among  perfons  varying  much  in  their  employ* 
ments.  I  have  lately  met  with  many  fevere 
and  obftinate  cafes  among  poor  tradefmen 
and  labourers,  where  it  was  plain  they  origin 
nated  from  this  caufe.  I  alfo  think  that  the 
ufe  of  tea  often  paves  the  way  to  habitual 
dram-drinking  among  this  clafs  of  fociety, 
more  than  among  the  better  orders. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  finer  the  tea, 
the  more  it  contains  of  the  pernicious  quality ; 
hence  the  greens  which  are  gathered  in  the 
bud,  or  before  the  leaves  fully  expand,  have 
with  that  colour  the  ftrongefl;  flavour.  To 
fip  frequently  of  green  tea,  produces  wake-^ 
fulnefs  and  gaiety  of  fpirits  :  hence  fome  lite- 
rary men,  who  protradb  their  fludies  to  a  late 
hour,  ufe  ftrong  tea,  like  the  late  Dr  Johnfon, 
to  keep  them  awake.  It  alfo  poiTeiTes  an  eme- 
tic quality,  on  which  account  it  can  feldom 
be  taken  in  the  quantity  to  induce  fleep.  Dr 
Cullen,  of  Edinburgh,  who  was  fubjed  to 
gout,  faid,  he  never  could  take  it  without  feeU 
ing  fome  arthritic  affedion  of  his  ftomach  | 
yet  many  dyfpeptic    people   find   it    highly 


75 

agreeable,  while  others  feel  immediate  bad  ef- 
feds  from  indulging  in  it. 

The  nervous  ailments  of  female  conftitu- 
tions,  which  are  often  induced  and  aggravated 
by  tea-drinking,  in  advanced  age,  are  apt  to 
terminate  in  palfy.  And  from  a  concomitant 
torpor  of  the  abforbent  fyftem  of  veffels,  they 
alfo  very  frequently  terminate  in  general 
dropfy.  Coffee  poflefles  the  narcotic  principle ; 
but  in  a  lefs  degree  than  tea :  the  fame  dif- 
eafes  follow  its  ufe,  though  its  hurtful  quality  is 
perhaps  diminifhed  by  roafting.  How  far  the 
hot  water  taken  with  tea  and  coffee,  increafes 
their  deleterious  efFe(3:s  on  the  flomach  and 
nerves,  may  depend  on  natural  temperament. 
Some  perfons  are  in  the  habit  of  drinking 
them  very  warm,  while  others  prefer  them  at  a 
lower  temperature.  The  befl  degree  I  fhould 
think,  about  blood  heat. 

A  number  of  aromatic  fubjianees^  which  in- 
clude all  the  fpices  and  peppers,  as  well  as 
fome  other  articles,  are  in  common  ufe  as 
condiments  of  diet.  It  may  be  part  of  natural 
inflindt,  that  food  to  be  nourifhing  and  agree- 
able, fhould  be  fapid.  Yet  the  infant  at  the 
breaft  feeks  no  addition  to  his  milky  ftream ; 
and  it  is  doubtful  to  me,  if  any  of  the  warm 


•76 

ingredients  are  ufefuL  The  tropical  favage 
ufes  pepper  with  his  vegetable  meal,  in  great 
quantity.  Now  this  kind  of  diet  is  watery  and 
infipid.  Without  fomething  favoury,  he  has 
no  pleafure  in  eating  it ;  and  the  ftimulus  of 
feafoning  becomes  neceffary.  But  the  Euro- 
pean who  imitates  this  cuftom,  with  his  turtle 
and  beef  foup,  while  he  is  a  refident  in  the 
Eafl  or  Weft  Indies,  errs  egregioufly  from  the 
indications  of  nature.  All  dyfpeptic  perfons 
are  fond  of  hot  articles.  When  I  hear  them 
call  for  Cayenne  pepper  at  table,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  find  out  their  modes  of  living.  It 
is  a  key  to  the  temperament,  and  facilitates  the 
phyfician's  inquiries.  But  plain  fare,  fuch  as 
all  dyfpeptics  ought  to  be  fed  on,  needs  no  aid 
of  this  kind  :  and  I  differ  widely  from  thofe 
medical  authorities  who  inculcate  the  pradice ; 
the  whole  of  them  manifeftly  weaken  the 
ftomach.  All  the  fpices  owe  their  warm 
pungency  to  a  volatile  oil :  but  as  far  as  I 
have  correctly  watched  their  efFe6l,  inftead  of 
promoting  digeftion,  they  evidently  difturb  it* 
They  float  on  the  furface  of  the  food,  and  irri- 
tate the  cardia  or  upper  orifice  of  the  ftomach, 
which  has  the  immediate  effed  of  inverting  the 
motion  of  the  mufcular  fibres ;    and  then  the 


77 

flatulence  appears  by  rifing  upwards,  and  pro- 
ducing emulation.  This  belching  is  faid  to 
be  falutary,  though  proved  to  be  a  fymptom 
of  difeafe.  If  thefe  articles  are  ever  admiflible 
at  all,  it  muft  be  in  advanced  life,  when  the 
vigour  of  the  ftomach  and  inteftinal  canal 
grow  naturally  torpid  and  flow.  Of  them- 
felves  they  yield  nothing  of  the  nourifh- 
ing  principle.  Soy,  catchup,  and  all  the  warm 
fauces,  increafing  daily  in  number,  have  the 
fame  pernicious  eifeds.  But  when  we  hear 
of  a  dozen  of  large  bacon  hams  being  melt- 
ed down  into  a  few  pint  bottles  of  condiments, 
that  pamper  and  poifon  health,  while  they  de- 
ftroy  what  would  have  been  wholefome  food 
for  numbers,  it  is  a  moral  evil  of  great  magni- 
tude, and  ought  to  be  prevented.  All  the  hot 
peppers  have  alfo  the  eiFedt  of  hurting  the 
teeth,  by  corroding  the  enamel. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  condiments  of 
every  kind,  from  cuftom,  become  very  defira- 
ble,  till  at  lad  no  food  is  relilhed  without 
them.  But  it  is  rather  the  palate  than  the 
ftomach  to  which  they  are  grateful.  Some  of 
the  peppers  are  cauftic,  and  cannot  fail  of  in- 
juring, if  not  corroding  the  coats  of  the  firil 
paflages.  Even  muflard,  though  one  of  the 
mildeft  of  the  condiment  kind,  is  capable,  in 


the  form  of  a  fmapifm^  of  veficating  the  fole  of 
the  foot,  over  which  is  fpread  the  thickeft 
epidermis  on  the  whole  furface  of  the  body* 
Muft  not  fuch  a  fubftance  be  hurtful  to  the 
delicate  flomach  ?  To  muftard  and  pepper  I 
have  never  accuflomed  myfelf,  from  infancy 
upwards  ;  and  I  remain  a  proof  of  the  truth  of 
my  own  doctrine,  few  perfons  being  more  ex- 
empt from  dyfpepfia.  All  thefe  articles  ought, 
therefore,  to  be  denied  to  children,  which  will 
be  one  grand  ftep  to  make  them  diflike  every 
hot  ingredient  in  diet,  when  they  grow  up. 
Should  brandy,  or  thofe  waters  which  are  im- 
pregnated with  the  kernel  flavour,  be  mixed 
with  fauces  of  any  kind,  it  is  evident  they 
muft  be  noxious.  They  are  dangerous  as  be- 
ing narcotics  the  moft  enticing  of  all  articles 
applied  to  the  tafte;  and  children  that  are 
early  accuftomed  to  fuch  poifons,  will  run 
great  hazard  of  ending  their  career  as  fots  and 
dram-drinkers. 

4.  Cloathing.  In  the  prefent  times,  cloath- 
ing  or  drefs  is  to  be  found  in  the  extreme  ; 
either  too  much  or  too  little.  It  is  a  proof 
of  the  declining  vigour  of  the  human  frame, 
when  fo  many  young  men,  in  this  age,  are 
under  the  necefTity  of  being  fwaddled  in  flan- 
nel.    An  enervated  ftate  of  body  can  alone^ 


79 

want  this  afTiftance.  But  many  of  the  fair 
fex  have  adopted  a  contrary  praftice :  a  few 
folds  of  fine  muflin,  fo  loofely  put  on,  that 
the  whole  drefs  appears  to  be  made  for  the 
purpofe  of  being  thrown  afide,  in  an  inftant, 
like  a  cloak  or  a  fliawL  Cloathing  the  body 
ought  to  be  regulated  by  the  feafon  :  but  the 
rule  mufl  vary  with  the  age,  conftitution,  and 
habits  of  life.  There  is  an  intimate  connec- 
tion between  the  ilomach  and  the  furface  of 
the  body:  *  and  as  the  former  is  the  chief  feat 
of  nervous  affedions,  what  chills  the  Ikin  fud- 
denly,  is  apt  to  injure  the  bowels.  Eruptions 
on  the  furface  often  free  the  flomach  from 
painful  complaints ;  and  the  repulfion  brings 
them  back.  This  is  often  the  cafe  where 
warm  cloathing  has  been  haftily  laid  afide :  we 
obferve  this  fympathy  particularly  after  wet 
feet,  a  fa£t  which  moil  delicate  females  know 
well.  The  lady  of  weak  health,  who  may 
wifh  to  difplay  a  fine  ancle,  fhould  be  very 
guarded  how  fhe  throws  off  her  warm  focks. 

*  I  lately  had  a  young  woman  as  a  patient,  fubjed 
to  violent  flomach  complaints,  who  at  different  times, 
fufFered  the  lofs  of  the  luhok  cuticle.  She  was  reflored 
to  perfedl  health  by  medicine,  and  tlie  furface  of  the 
body  is  now  fmooth  and  even, 

i. 


80 

Many  evils  befal  the  fex  from  cold  feet ;  fuch 
as  follow  walking  abroad  with  thin  Ihoes  in 
damp  roads  ;  fitting  long  inadive,  as  in 
churches  and  theatres,  &c.  I  have  known 
fome  ferious  nervous  ailments  brought  on  by 
a  young  lady  evading  the  orders  of  a  judici- 
ous parent ;  and,  after  being  dreffed,  retiring 
privately  to  put  off  the  additional  petticoat  and 
under  ftockings,  that  fhe  might  dance  more 
lightly.  As  my  plan  is  to  make  the  female 
habit  healthful  by  adive  exercife  and  pure 
air,  fo  I  would  recommend  in  addition  to  thefe 
precautions,  the  ufe  of  half  boots,  which,  with 
a  warm  fpencer,  will  fecure  the  body,  and 
enable  the  lady  to  walk  abroad  in  mofl  kinds 
of  weather. 

A  few  years  ago  a  practice  prevailed  much 
among  young  women,  of  lacing  their  ftays  fo 
tightly,  as  fometimes  to  impede  the  free  motion 
of  the  ribs  and  lungs,  I  have  known  inftances 
where  young  girls  had  nearly  expired  in  a 
crowded  room,  by  ftraight  lacing,  and  were 
only  faved  by  the  flays  being  fuddenly  divided 
by  a  penknife.  The  modern  elegant  im- 
provements of  female  drefs  very  much  corred 
this  practice  5  but  I  doubt  much  of  tight  la- 
cing being  entirely  laid  afide.    I  believe  much 


81 

bad  health  has  been  induced  by  it :  the  fto- 
mach  and  other  vifcera  have  been  fo  comprefs- 
ed  as  to  bring  on  fainting  fits,  and  the  whole 
procefs  of  digeflion  diflurbed. 

Perfonal  cleanlinefs,  being  preferved  by 
change  of  cloathing,  may  be  mentioned  under 
this  head.  Where  it  is  negleded,  from  v/hat 
has  been  faid,  it  is  to  be  reckoned  among  the 
caufes  of  thefe  difeafes.  That  the  fkin  may  be 
pure  and  pervious,  it  ought  often  to  be  wafh- 
ed ;  perfpiration  cannot  make  its  way  through 
pores  obftruded  with  filth  ;  it  mufl  therefore 
be  wafhed  off.  The  habit  of  perfonal  cleanli- 
nefs  is  beft  eftablifhed  when  begun  in  infancy, 
and  kept  on  through  childhood  and  age. 

It  may  be  worth  while  to  obferve,  that  it  is 
fometimes  of  confequence  to  accommodate  the 
temperature  of  the  water  to  the  condition  of 
the  furface.  The  face  and  hands  will  be  lia- 
ble to  be  chopped  if  this  is  not  attended  to : 
very  cold  water  fhould  not  be  ufed  when  the 
Ikin  is  warm  ;  nor  warm  water  when  the  fkin 
is  chilled.  Many  a  polifhed  neck,  face,  and 
arm,  have  been  fpoiled  by  not  attending  to  this 
rule.  The  fame  holds  good,  in  going  fudden- 
ly  too  near  a  fire,  when  coming  out  of  a  cold 
wind :  or  going  into  a  frofty  air  too  fuddenly 

h  2 


82 

from  a  hot  room.  Thefe  are  not  trifling  mat- 
ters :  how  many  fine  women  have  become 
nervous  by  having  their  beauty  fpoiled ! 

5.  Pafiions  of  the  mind.     The  intercourfe 
and    communication    between   our    material 
and  immaterial  parts,  is  a  difficult  and  intricate 
fubjedt  to  enter  upon.     All  philofophers  who 
have  ventured  to  go  beyond  the  threfhold  of 
inquiry  in  this  department,  have  been  bewil- 
dered, or  returned  no  wifer  than  when  they 
began.     Nature  feems  to  have  endued  parti- 
cular portions  of  our  frame  with  a  more  ex- 
quifite  connexion  with  our  mental  part ;  and 
fubjedl  to  a  clofer  fympathy  with  our  paffions. 
Many  external  figns  correfpond  with  our  in- 
ternal emotions.     It  is  a  difficult  tafk,  if  at  all 
poffible,  to  wear  the  fmile  of  gladnefs  when  the 
heart   is   fad.     A  nervous   conftitution  is  ill 
qualified  to  difguife  its  feelings.     Perfons  ac- 
cuftomed  to  fludy  the  variations  of  feature  in 
the  human  countenance,  fuch  as  phyficians, 
fometimes  acquire  a  wonderful  expertnefs  in 
developing  the  paffions.     This  phyfiognomo- 
nic  experience  is  of  great  utility  to  the  prac- 
tice of  medicine  :  it  is  the  gift  of  genius  5  and 
in  this  refpe^t,  the  phylician  like  the  poet, 
may  be  faid  to  be  "  nafdtur  non  JiU"    The 


83 

want  of  this  eminent  quality  of  intellect,  make* 
the  laborious  plodder  a  dangerous  vifitor  at 
the  fick  bed,  particularly  to  the  nervous  pa- 
tient :  nature  refufes  to  draw  her  veil  afide  to 
a  clumfy  obferver ;  who,  being  denied  accefs 
to  her  myfteries,  is  very  apt  to  pervert  the 
purpofe  of  what  fhe  difcovers. 

But  there  is  a  fpecies  of  fympathy  among 
certain  organs  of  our  body,  that  points  out  a 
more  intimate  connexion  with  the  mind,  than 
what  is  polTeiTed  by  others.     The  lungs  and 
heart,  in  the  thorax  :    the  flomach,  inteftines, 
liver,  and  all  the  vifcera  fubfervient  to  digef- 
tion,  have  an  innate  fympathy  with  our  emo- 
tions.     During    ftrong    impreilions   on   the 
mind,  the  heart  beats  quick  and  tremulous, 
and   is  faid  to  palpitate ;    the  motion  of  the 
ribs  and  diaphragm  grows  irregular  and  invo- 
luntary ;  and  the  adion  of  the  lungs  fo  un- 
equal as  to  make  refpiration  hurried  and  con- 
vulfed ;  hence  fobbing,  fighing,  and  panting 
take  place.     The  effe<5t  of  violent  paffions  on 
the  chylopoeitic  vifcera,  is  to  deflroy  appetite, 
diflurb  digeflion,  invert  the  periflaltic  motion 
of  the  flomach  and  bowels,  and  render  the 
alvine  difcharge  variable  and  irregular.     The 
biliary  fecretion  is  alfo  inconftant,  and  per- 


S4. 

haps  altered  in  quality :  the  hepatic,  cyftic,  and 
common  duds,  may  be  affeded  with  fpafms, 
inverted  and  obflruded  ;  thus  jaundice,  and 
vomiting  of  bile  are  no  unfrequent  attendants 
of  violent  emotions.     The  ancients  held  the 

liver  to  be  the  feat  of  choler  and  jealoufy, 
hence  the  poet  fays. 

Cum  tu  Lydia,  Telephi 

Cervicem  rofeam,  et  cerea  Telephi 

Laudas  brachia,  vse,  meum 

Fervens  difficili  bill  tumet  jecur. 

Horace. 

The  kidneys,  ureters,  and  bladder,  are  all 
fubjed  to  this  fympathy,  from  fimilar  caufes ; 
as  appears  by  violent  pains,  flrangury,  and 
total  fuppreffion  of  urine  :  the  colour  of  the 
urine  is  variable  ;  and  the  quantity  is  fome- 
times  profufe,  at  other  times  deficient.  Thefe 
aifedions  of  the  urinary  organs  are  among  the 
fureft  diagnoflics  of  nervous  difeafes.  On 
the  whole,  all  the  more  violent  emotions 
ftrongly  aifefl:  all  thefe  organs,  which  form  a 
chain  of  feeUng  with  one  another,  of  a  more 
exquifite  kind,  thaa  is  to  be  found  in  any 
other  part  of  the  fyftem,  or  from  any  other 
difeafe.  The  degree  of  the  efFed  on  thefe 
parts,  will  be  in  proportion  to  the  fenfibility 


85 

of  the  temperament ;  and  in  many  fubjecls 
we  find  hyfteric  fits,  epilepfy,  and  other  con- 
vulfions,  tetanus,  menorrhagia,  amenorrhaea, 
&c.  take  place  in  an  inftant,  from  mental 
fympathy. 

One  of  the  moil  common  caufes  of  ner- 
vous, bilious,  and  flomach  complaints,  is  ex- 
ceillve,  or  long  protraded  grief.  Mothers  who 
have  loil  children,  particularly  fufFer  under  thefe 
painful  afFedions,  and  often  date  their  fir  ft  ap- 
pearance from  the  death  of  a  child.  I  believe 
the  attachment  of  a  mother  to  the  infant,  is  by 
far  the  ftrongeft  of  all  human  paffions.  Me- 
dical attendants  are  in  the  daily  practice  of 
feeing  thefe  parental  feelings  exemplified. 
We  read  in  Tacitus  of  a  Roman  mother  dy- 
ing by  the  rack,  rather  than  difcover  the 
place  where  her  fon  was  concealed,  during 
the  conteft  between  Otho  and  Vitellius.  In 
fome  inftances  of  maternal  affli£lion,  we  have 
obferved  the  faculties  fo  powerfully  opprefled 
by  forrow  ;  fo  abforbed  in  the  contemplation 
of  one  object,  that  the  mind  appeared  almoft, 
or  wholly  unconfcious  of  its  own  exiftence, 
and  fcarcely  attended  to  a  fingle  external  im- 
preflion.  In  fuch  cafes  the  intervals  of  rea- 
fon,  or  confcioufnefs,  were  only  to  be  marked 


86 

by  fighs,  groans,  and  tears,  as  the  expreflions 
of  grief,  Shakefpeare  has  beautifully  painted 
this  paffion,  in  the  lamentation  of  Conflance 
for  her  fon,  in  King  John  *. 

Grief  fills  the  room  up  of  my  abfent  child. 
Lies  in  his  bed,  walks  up  and  down  with  me, 
Puts  on  his  pretty  looks,  repeats  his  words. 
Remembers  me  of  all  his  gracious  parts, 
Stuffs  out  his  vacant  garments  with  his  form  ; 
Then  have  I  reafon  to  be  fond  of  grief  ? 
O  Lord !  my  boy,  my  Arthur,  my  fair  fon ; 
My  life,  my  joy,  my  food,  my  all  the  world. 

Some  fuch  expreflions  as  thefe  might  have 
been  uttered  by  the  mother  of  Sifera,  when 
flie  heard  of  his  death,  if  it  did  not  at  once 
deprive  her  of  life.  The  facred  hi  dorian  de^ 
fcribes  in  fuch  glowing  language  her  expeda- 
tion  of  his  return,  that  he  probably  withheld 
the  reft  of  the  narrative,  from  finding  terms 
unequal  to  exprefs  the  ftruggle  of  maternal 
feelings,  in  the  tranfition  from  hope  to  de- 
fpair.*  When  David  received  the  account  of 
Abfalom's  death,  he  appears  to  have  been  fo 

*  The  mother  of  Sifera  looked  out  at  a  window, 
and  cried  through  the  lattice,  why  is  his  chariot  fo 
long  in  coming  ?  Why  tarry  the  wheels  of  his  chariots? 


87 

overwhelmed  by  it,  as  to  be  infenfible  to  a 
vidory  that  fecured  both  his  life  and  his  crown* 
Was  ever  grief  depided  in  more  plaintive 
meafure  than  in  his  exclamation  on  this  cicca- 
fion  ?  0  my  /on  Abfalom^  my  fon,  my  fon  Ab» 
falom :  would  God  I  had  died  for  thee^  0  Ab' 
falom,  my  fon^  my  fon  !  * 

We  cannot  contemplate  fuch  violent  in- 
ftances  of  natural  afFedion  without  fufpicion 
of  health  being  injured  thereby  ;  and  though 
not  immediately  apparent,  the  effe£l  will  flrike 
a  quick  obferver  in  the  event  of  difeafe. 

Next  to  thefe  heart-rending  emotions  of 
parental  forrow,  may  be  reckoned  the  efFedls 
of  difappointed  love,  on  the  fenfible  female 
frame.  In  the  male  fex  the  adive  purfuits 
of  bufmefs  or  pleafure,  more  quickly  fupplant 
tender  impreilions  ;  and  men  much  fooner  re- 

Her  wife  ladies  ^nfwered  her ;  yea,  llie  returned 
anfwer  to  herfelf, 

Have  they  not  fped?  Have  they  not  divided  the 
prey,  to  every  man  a  damfel  or  two  ?  To  Sifera  a 
prey  of  divers  colours,  a  prey  of  divers  colours  of 
needle-work,  of  divers  colours  of  needle-work  on  both 
fides,  meet  for  the  necks  of  them  that  take  the  fpoih  I 
Judges  v.  28—30. 

*  2  Samuel  yiii.  33. 

M 


gain  that  mental  tranquillity  which  fits  them  for 
the  bufy  fcenes  of  life.  This  is  not  the  cafe 
with  the  fair  fex ;  for  the  influence  on  both 
body  and  mind,  feems  to  be  in  proportion  to 
the  concealed  ftruggle  of  attachment.  The 
heart  obtains  relief  in  pouring  forth  its  com- 
plaint, and  acquires  refolution  when  this  is 
done  :  but  the  hidden  paffion  burns  the  fiercer 
by  being  fupprefled.*  The  feparation  of  the 
parties,  and  long  engagements  that  procrafli- 
nate  marriage,  are  often  fatal  to  health.  The 
condition  of  mind,  alternately  pafTed  between 
hopes  and  fears,  is  worfe  than  certain  difap- 
pointment ;  hence  the  ftate  of  fufpence^  to 
perfons  of  nice  fenfibility,  is  always  deemed 
the  moft  tormenting. 

It  is  this  conflidt  between  attachment  and 
fecrecy,  that  has  often  given  birth  to  the  em- 
phatic^xpreffion,  "  dying  of  a  broken  heart.^* 
But  fuch  afflidions  of  mind  commonly,  fooner 
or  later,  produce  fome  difeafe  of  the  nervous 

* _  She  never  told  her  love, 

But  let  concealment,  like  a  worm  i'  the  bud, 
Prey  on  her  damalk  cheek :  jfhe  pined  in  thought  y 
And  with  a  green  and  yellow  melancholy,  f 
She  fat,  like  patience  on  a  monument. 
Smiling  at  grief.  Shakespeare, 

t  Here  the  poet  bas  finely  caught  the />a/(6tf/cfj'  of  love-sieknew. 


fyftem,  which  quickly  draws  into  confent 
the  digeftive  organs,  and  others  of  equally 
acute  fenfibility.  Hence  a  certain  hue  of  the 
countenance  is  faid  to  mark  melancholy  and 
defpair,  which  is  brought  on  by  vitiated  di* 
geftion,  and  imperfect  aflimilation  of  the 
food. 

As  the  manners  of  the  age  mud  always 
materially  influence  difeafes  of  the  nervous 
clafs,  fo  among  their  moral  caufes,  ought  to 
be  reckoned  religious  melancholy,  and  enthu- 
fiafm ;  jealoufy,  avarice,  infatiable  revenge, 
boundlefs  ambition,  envy,  misfortunes  in  bufi- 
nefs,  and  fome  fpecies  of  pride.  All  thefe^ 
in  their  various  operations  on  the  human 
mind,  excite  extravagant  hope,  or  abjed:  de- 
preflions  of  fpirit :  in  the  iflue,  harafs  the 
nervous  fyftem;  produce  watchfulnefs,  or 
unrefrefhing  fleep  ;  engender  tumultuous  paf- 
fions,  impair  the  appetite,  and  difturb.  chyli- 
fication.  To  thefe  fucceed  fpafmodic,  bilious, 
and  hypochondriacal  complaints ;  all  of  which 
center  in  the  organs  that  prepare  and  afli- 
milate  the  nourifhment  of  the  body. 

Some  of  the  fevereft  inftances  of  thefe  dif- 
eafes, which  have  come  under  my  care,  were 
in  officers  :  men  endued  with  acute  fenfibility 

M  2 


90 

of  mind,  of  fine  parts,  and  with  high  notions 
of  honour.  They  had  been  long  tantalized 
by  promifes  of  promotion,  and  lived  to  fee 
unworthy  favourites  put  over  their  heads. 
Similar  cafes  are  too  often  met  with  among 
other  conditions  of  life ;  where  worth,  virtue, 
and  talents,  mud  give  place  to  wealth,  fer\41ity, 
and  intrigue. 

The  paflion  of  novel  reading  Is  intitled  to  a 
place  here.  In  the  prefent  age  it  is  one  of  the 
great  caufes  of  nervous  diforders.  The  mind 
that  can  amufe  itfelf  with  the  love-fick  traih 
of  moft  modern  compofitions  of  this  kind, 
feeks  enjoyment  beneath  the  level  of  a  rational 
being.  It  creates  for  itfelf  an  ideal  world,  on 
the  loofe  defcriptions  of  romantic  love,  that 
leave  paflion  without  any  moral  guide  in  the 
real  occurrences  of  life.  To  the  female  mind 
in  particular,  as  being  endued  with  finer  feel- 
ing, this  fpecies  of  literary  poifon  has  been 
often  fatal ;  and  fome  of  the  moft  unfor- 
tunate of  the  fex  have  imputed  their  ruin 
chiefly  to  the  reading  of  novels.  How  cau- 
tious then  ought  parents  to  be  in  guard- 
ing againft  the  introdudion  of  thefe  ro- 
mances among  their  children ;  fo  calculated 
Xo  induce  that  niorbid  fenfibility  which  is  tq 


91 

he  the  bane  of  future  happinefs ;  which  to 
prevent,  is  the  talk  of  a  correft  education ; 
which  firft  engender  ardent  palTions,  and 
then  leave  the  mind  without  power  to  refifl 
or  fubdue  them.  It  is  lamentable  that  three- 
fourths  of  thefe  produdions  come  from  the 
pens  of  women ;  fome  of  whom  are  known  to 
have  drank  deep  of  the  fountains  of  pleafure 
and  adverfity. 

The  drama  is  another  hot-bed  of  this  dif- 
eafed  feniibility.  It  has  been  long  ago  re- 
marked, that  few  Englifh  comedies  were  fuf- 
ficiently  pure  for  the  ear  and  eye  of  a  chafle 
and  virtuous  woman.  But  if  fuch  fcenes  are 
to  be  found  among  them,  the  fentiments  they 
exprefs  cannot  be  much  improved  from  the 
mouths  of  fome  firfl-rate  adreifes,  who  live 
openly  as  kept  miftrefles.  We  are  very  little 
obliged  by  the  late  importation  of  a  few  loofe 
German  plays  on  the  Englifh  ftage.  They 
are  the  offspring  of  a  newfchool^  and  commu- 
nicate poifon  in  a  new  way  5  fuch  poifon  as 
has  no  antidote  on  the  fhelves  of  the  apothe- 
cary. 

The  modern  general  habit  of  gaming^  Is  a 
frequent  caufe  of  nervous  affedion,  even  to 
mental  derangement.     It  is  an  hereditary  vice 


^  * 


in  fome  families,  where  children  are  introduced 
to  the  card-table  before  they  are  half  educa- 
ted. The  country  life  as  yet,  has  fcarcely 
tafled  of  this  depravity. 

6.  Intenfe  iludy.  Severe  mental  applica- 
tion deprefles  the  nervous  power :  and  whe- 
ther this  arifes  from  bufinefs  or  pleafure,  the 
ultimate  effect  feems  much  the  fame.  Intenfe 
thought  appears  to  fubtraQ:  a  great  fhare  of 
excitement  from  many  corporeal  organs :  when 
long  continued,  or  often  indulged,  it  leaves 
them  in  a  ftate  of  dire£i:  debility.  Mathe- 
matical ftudies  are  faid  to  have  this  eifedt 
more  than  others ;  and  among  fome  intimate 
friends  I  have  known  thefe  eifeds.  But  it 
is  to  be  obferved,  that  perfons  attached  to  the 
mathematical  fciences,  are  commonly  men  of 
cool  judgment,  of  deliberate  modes  of  think* 
ing,  not  eafily  diverted  from  their  purfuits, 
and  rather  of  a  torpid  nervous  fyftem.  Their 
complaints  therefore  aiTume  much  of  a  hypo- 
chondriacal call.  Among  people  of  a  more 
mobile  habit,  fevere  ftudy  excites  in  the  firfl 
palTages,  a  difpofition  to  fpafm,  and  convul- 
five  motions,  amounting  frequently  to  what  is 
called  the  hyfteric  afFedion,  or  globu?  hyjlericus. 
The  abdominal  vifcera  particularly  feel  on 


93 

thefe  occafions :  the  ftrong  exertions  of  the 
animal  fundions  abftrad  or  expend  much 
of  that  energy  or  fenforial  power,  which 
ought  to  be  alike  diffufed  over  the  natural 
and  vital  adions.  The  appetite  flags; 
the  bowels  become  flow ;  flatulence  and 
acidity  fupervene  from  imperfedt  digeflion ; 
the  bile  is  fecreted  in  fmall  quantity,  and 
its  flow  into  the  duodenum  often  obflirud- 
ed ;  dyfpncea  is  a  common-  attendant ;  fyn- 
cope  not  unfrequently  happens,  and  dejedion 
of  fpirits  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  reduce  the 
philofopher  to  an  idiot.  Emaciation  of  body 
quickly  follows  this  courfe  of  life;  partly 
owing  to  vitiated  fanguification,  but  perhaps 
alfo,  from  obfl:rudions  in  the  ladeals  and 
mefenteric  glands.  The  pallid  colour  of  a 
hard  thinker  or  fevere  fludent,  may  therefore 
be  imputed  to  dyfpepfia,  or  to  de-oxygenized 
blood,  from  confinement  within  doors.  Young 
men  who  are  ardent  in  purfuit  of  knowledge, 
and  greedy  of  literary  fame,  often  lay  the 
foundation  for  ftomach  complaints  at  the  uni- 
verfity,  that  are  never  afterwards  to  be  over- 
come. 

Perfons  much  attached  to  mufic,  as  being 
furniflied  with  acute  nerves,  and  nice  fenfibi- 


94> 

lity,  and  of  a  fedentary  turn,  are  often  haralT- 
ed  by  thefe  difeafes.  This  remark  indeed, 
applies  to  all  who  may  be  confidered  as  vota- 
ries of  the  fine  arts.  Such  people,  whether 
male  or  female,  have  commonly  a  predifpofi- 
tion  to  nervous  diforders. 

I  have  met  with  many  obftinate  cafes  among 
fchoolmafters  ;  in  part  to  be  attributed  to 
confinement  within  doors,  but  chiefly  to  ftudi- 
ous  habits.  But  what  is  flill  more  ftrange,  I 
have  even  known  them  among  fhepherds,  a 
Clafs  of  men  enjoying  the  pureft  air,  but  be- 
coming nervous  and  hypochondriacal  from  an 
inaftive  folitary  live,  and  a  thoughtful  mode  of 
fpending  time,  and  reading  abflrufe  fubjed:s. 

7.  Lactation  or  nurfmg.  This  office  of 
the  mother  to  the  child,  if  the  dilates  of  Na- 
ture deferve  attention,  ought  to  be  confidered 
as  a  very  falutary  duty  ;  for  if  we  look  to  the 
natural  ftate  of  mankind,  we  find  every  mother 
able  to  perform  it.  The  child-bearing  part 
of  life  is  ufually  healthy ;  and  weakly  females 
have  their  health  improved  by  becoming 
mothers.  It  muft  therefore  be  owing  to  fome 
deviation  from  the  eftablilhed  rules  of  the 
^nimal  economy,  that  fo  many  women  are  to 
be  found  unequal  to  this  talk.    It  is  the  duty 


95 

©f  the  hufband  to  encourage  the  wife  In  the 
exercife  of  this  amiable  attention  to  the  infant ; 
and  if  he  prevents  it,  he  rends  afunder  one  of 
the  ftrongeft  ties  of  human  afFe£tion*  Yet 
we  often  fee  mothers  fo  attached  to  the  office 
of  nurfe,  as  to  view  the  weaning  of  their  child 
with  horror :  fuch  feelings  dignify  human  na- 
ture ;  what  a  pity  there  fhould  be  found  ex- 
ceptions to  their  being  general* 

It  would  appear  to  be  the  indication  of  na- 
ture, to  fuckle  the  infant  till  it  is  nine  months 
old,  as  correfponding  with  the  time  of  gefta* 
tion*  At  this  age  the  child  is  capable  of  tak- 
ing other  nourifhment  for  its  fupport.  But 
when  the  mother  grows  too  delicate  and  weak 
for  the  office,  it  mud  be  weaned  fooner. 
The  complaints  which  are  brought  on  by  long 
fuckling,  are  much  the  fame  with  thofe  that 
follow  frequent  abortions,  and  immoderate  or 
irregular  menftruation.  They  are  all  of  the 
nervous  clafs.  As  the  regular  peculiarity  of 
the  fex  is  the  bed  tell  of  female  health,  fo 
the  vicarious  ladation  may  be  confidered  as  a 
relief  to  the  other  organs,  and  thus  beneficial. 
But  when  continued  too  long,  the  general 
frame  is  debilitated,  and  particularly  the  uterine 
fyftem.     The  ftrength  of  the  woman  is  not 

N 


reduced  by  afFording  nourlfliment  to  the  infant 
merely  ;  it  is  the  fympathy  which  fubfifts  be- 
tween the  different  organs,  that  gives  birth  to 
morbid  feelings,  and  the  ftomach  and  inteflinal 
canal  with  many  others  are  quickly  drawn  in- 
to confent. 

Mothers  who  truft  their  children  to  hired 
wet  nurfes,  would  do  well  to  inform  them- 
felves  how  far  thefe  women  have  weaned  their 
own  children  with  fatisfadion.  Few  mothers, 
among  the  decent  orders  of  women,  can  be 
fuppofed  to  leave  their  offspring  without 
regret ;  and  it  may  happen  that  the  health  of 
the  other  infant  is  liable  to  fuffer  in  the  con- 
flict. Much  pretended  refinement  often  takes 
place  about  feledling  a  nurfe  free  of  difeafe : 
but  what  fcrutiny  can  fecure  the  fuckling 
againft  the  bad  effeds  of  her  paffions?  Thefe 
muft  frequently  fow  the  feeds  of  future  indif- 
pofition,  that  may  not  be  difcovered  till  tod 
late.  A  mild  and  ferene  condition  of  mind 
muft  be  a  valuable  ingredient  in  the  character 
of  a  nurfe  ;  for  which  reafon  the  nervous  con- 
ftitution  fhould  be  avoided.  On  the  whole,  a 
hired  nurfe  is  only  a  lefler  evil,  that  can  by 
no  means  repay  the  offspring  for  the  want  of 
the  mother's  breaft. 


97 

But  nurfing  mothers  among  the  lower  or- 
ders of  women,  if  they  remain  with  their  fa- 
milies, are  often  badly  nourifhed  :  and  if  they 
feed  much  on  tea,  are  fubjed  to  that  fpecies  of 
confumption  that  is  denominated  nervous.  This 
IS  in  fad:  a  high  degree  of  nervous  exhauftion 
and  debility,  attended  with  many  of  the  moft 
prinful  fymptoms.  *  To  keep  the  child  at  the 
bread  for  1 8  months  or  two  years,  cannot  be 
done  without  injury  to  the  mother's  health. 
Yet  this  practice  is  frequent,  and  mufl  be  con- 
fidered  as  a  fad  alternative  to  prevent  the 
quick  increafe  of  a  family. 

8.  Mifcarriages  and  premature  labours,  &c. 
Few  mothers  who  have  fuffered  miftiaps  during 
pregnancy,  efcape  with  impunity.  All  mif- 
carriages are  attended  with  fome  degree  of 
danger,  and  much  bad  health  is  with  juftice 
imputed  to  them.  The  wife  who  has  pro- 
fpeds  of  being  a  mother,  muft  undergo  much 
mental  diflrefs  at  being  difappointed,  indepen- 
dent of  all  perfonal  hazard.  This  fpecies  of 
anxiety  is  one  great  caufe  of  one  mifcarriage 
being  fo  apt  to  fucceed  another,  as  the  mind 

*  All  wet  nurfes  ought  to  abllain  from  tea.     Next  to 
Jplrits  and  malt  liqiiorsj  it  is  mod  hurtful  to  the  fuckJing. 

N    2 


♦  '  *• 


98 

is  tremblingly  alive  to  every  fymptom  that  re-^ 
fembles  the  former.  This  ftate  uatiirally  bc^ 
gets  a  nervous  fenfibility,  which  too  often 
cfeates  imaginary  fears  when  there  are  none 
real.  Long  and  fevere  labours,  to  which  may 
be  added  fome  pf  the  difeafes  of  the  puerperal 
feafon,  are  alfo  to  be  confidered  as  a  frequent 
fource  of  nervous  diforders.  Large  evacua^ 
tions  of  blood  at  that  period  are  known  to  in- 
duce the  moft  violent  hyfleric  paroxfyms  and 
other  convulfions  ;  hence  thefe  affedions  fo 
commonly  follow  floodings  during  labour  and 
after  it. 

The  changes  which  take  place  in  the  breafl 
and  womb  after  the  birth,  very  materially  afFe6i: 
the  general  fyftem  of  nerves.  Thefe  evolu- 
tions are  marked  by  increafed  irritability,  and 
fevers  of  the  mofl  acute  kind  are  liable  to  fu- 
pervene  5  and  point  out  the  neceflity  of  a 
foothing  regimen,  tranquillity  of  mind,  pure 
air,  mild  diet,  open  bowels,  &c.  If  there  is  an 
hereditary  predifpofition,  nervous  ailments  will 
of  courfe  more  readily  appear,  and  be  aggra-* 
vated  by  all  improper  treatment. 

9.  Climate.  In  the  defcription  of  the  in- 
habitants of  a  large  town,  I  have  mentioned 
perfon5  returned  from  the  Eaft  and  Weft  In- 


99 

dies.     Such  perfons  are  remarkably  fubje£l  to 
the  difeafes  of  which   we   now  treat.      The 
acute  fevers  of  tropical  climates  in  a  particular 
manner  affe£t  the  ftomach,  bowels,  and  biliary 
fecretion.     The  yellow  fever  of  the  Weft  In- 
dies derives  its  name,  and  part  of  its  charac- 
ter, from  the  exceflive  flow  of  bile  ;    which 
not  only  tinges  the  ferum  of  the  blood,  the 
urine,  and  ikin,  but  in  a  manner  inundates 
the  inteftines.      No   pain  or  tenfion  in  the 
region   of  the   liver,    accompanies    this  un- 
ufual  fecretion ;    and   the   bile   is  taken  up 
by    the    abforbents,    enters    the    circulation, 
and  produces  yellownefs  of  the  furface,  with- 
out any  obftrudion  of  the  dudls  as  in  jaun- 
dice, for  the  fasces  are  highly  bilious.     There 
feems  to  be  little   refemblance  between   this 
endemic  of  the  Weft,  and  the  hepatitis  of  the 
Eaft  Indies.     I  would  therefore  call  it,  as  has 
been  done  by  one  of  the  beft  writers  on  the 
fubjedt,  Caufos.  *     In  the  hepatitis,  an  excel- 
five  biliary  fecretion  is  not  mentioned.     The 
Weft  India  fever  is  always  rapid  in  its  pro- 
grefs;    but   the  liver  difeafe  of  the  Eaft  is 
often  fb  chronic  in  its  form,  as  to  fteal  on  im- 

#  Dr  Mofeley  on  Difeafes  of  the  Weft  Indies. 


f  » 


100 

perceptibly  for  months,   without  pain   fufH-. 
cient  to  create  uneafinefs  or  alarm,  though  it 
may  at  laft  arrive  at  fuppuration.     They  both 
afFed  chiefly  young  robuft  Europeans,  new- 
comers, who  live  full,  and   drink  freely  of 
vinous  liquors.     The  fame  modes  of  living, 
we  know,  create  hepatic  difeafes  in  England ; 
and  the  analogy  extends  to  other  pampered 
animals,  as  the  domeftic    fowl,  turkey,  and 
pig.     Both  difeafes  leave  the  digeftive  powers 
in  a  weakened  condition ;  and  there  are  few 
who  do  not  complain  of  a  degree  of  dyfpepfia 
after  thefe  attacks.     But  in  a  multitude    of 
cafes  in  which  I  have  been  confulted,  by  perfons 
returned  from  India,  it  was  doubtful  to  me, 
whether  mercury  exhibited  as  a  remedy,  or 
the  difeafe  itfelf,  were  to  be  mod  blamed  for 
the  production  of  dyfpeptic  afFedion.     As  far 
as  I  have  been  able  to  learn,  from  both  writ- 
ten and  verbal  accounts,  this  complaint,  fo  fre- 
quent on  the  Coromandel  coaft,  ought  to  be 
treated  with  large  bleedings,  and  copious  ac- 
tive purgatives,  in  the  very  firll  attack.     The 
quantity  of  blood  to  be  taken,  I  think,  ought 
not  to  be  regulated  by   rules  laid  down  by 
fyftematic  writers  for  the  inflammatory  fevers 
of  this  country  j  if  it   is  done  at  the  proper 


101 

period,  it  ought  to  be  infinitely  larger*  If 
thefe  evacuations  have  been  negleded,  or 
fparingly  employed,  fuppuration,  torpor,  or 
infardion  of  the  liver,  to  a  certainty  fucceed, 
which  render  the  ufe  of  mercury  indifpenfi- 
ble.  Where  the  difeafe  aflumes  at  firfl  the 
chronic  form,  mercury  is  confidered  the  only 
remedy.  The  phrafe,  "  chronic  inflamtnation^^ 
is  a  new  term  in  mxcdicine,  and  I  think  an  im- 
proper one  here.  The  lefs  adive  hepatitis  is 
ftill  a  febrile  difeafe,  only  lefs  marked ;  for 
how  can  we  fuppofe  purulent  matter  to  be 
generated  without  thofe  diftinguifhing  pheno- 
mena that  are  charadleriftic  of  it  ?  The  mer- 
cury in  this  cafe,  I  fhould  fuppofe  to  ad 
partly  on  the  biliary  pores  and  duds,  partly 
on  the  circulation  of  the  liver,  but  chiefly  on 
the  abforbents  of  that  vifcus.  Thefe  effeds 
from  mercury  being  fo  well  known,  why  con- 
tend for  it  as  2ifpecific^  in  this  oriental  difeafe  r 
It  would  therefore  appear,  that  there  is  a 
period  in  hepatitis,  when  it  is  indicated 
and  fafe ;  and  as  its  ftimulant  powers  are  fo 
evident,  that  muft  be,  when  the  fymptoms  of 
adive  inflammation  have  fubfided.  We  thus 
fee  how  fridions  in  fome  nervous  conftitutions, 
muft  be  the  mod  eligible  w^y  to  dired  this 


102 

medicine,  as  fome  authors  contend.  Yet  mer- 
cury, neverthelefs,  at  all  times  has  a  manifefl 
r  »  a6tion  immediately  on  the  nervous  fyftem  j  and 
if  limits  can  be  drawn  to  its  exhibition  in  the 
different  ftages  of  hepatitis,  care  fhould  be 
taken  that  the  habit  is  not  deftroyed  by  it,  and 
difeafes  worfe  than  the  original  one  produced. 
But  if  this  treatment  deferves  all  the  encomiums 
which  have  been  given  it,  how  comes  it,  that  fo 
many  return  to  this  country  labouring  under 
the  Uvei'  complaint^  as  they  call  it,  after  having 
repeatedly  undergone  the  mercurial  courfe  ? 

The  confequences  of  tropical  fevers,  will 
however  be  in  a  great  meafure  prevented  as 
the  affufion  of  cold  water  gets  into  univerfal 
pradice  ;  and  employed  with  the  precautions 
directed  by  two  great  phyficians  of  the  prefent 
times,  my  late  lamented  friend,  Dr  Currie,  and 
my  learned  friend  and  neighbour,  Dr  Jackfon, 
of  the  army.  In  the  acute  hepatitis  it  pro- 
mifes  to  be  an  effectual  remedy.  Much  rea- 
foning  has  been  employed  on  the  caufe  and 
treatment  of  fever  ;  but  no  certain  method  of 
cure  was  ever  given  to  mankind  before  the 
cold  affufion.  We  can  now  readily  admit 
that  the  fudden  abftradtion  of  a  great  quantity 
of  heat,  by  the  ftock,  as  it  is  called,  diffevers 


103 

lii  an  inftant  thofe  aflbciated  adions  which 
coriftitute  the  febrile  phenomena  :  or  what  is 
emphatically  faid,  to  cut  the  fever  off  at  once* 

The  hepatitis  of  the  Eafl  Indies,  as  alFeding 
an  organ  fo  hecelTary  to  the  animal  economy, 
may  have  thus  a  large  fhare  in  the  produ£lion 
of  dyfpeptic  complaints* 

The  effeds  of  a  warm  climate  on  the  hepatic 
fyflem,  and  producing  a  redundancy  of  bile, 
admit  of  much  fpeculation.  A  warm  fummer 
in  this  country  has  a  fimilar  eifeO: :  in  fuch 
a  feafon,  cholera  and  dyfentery  are  common. 
Exceflive  heat  may  be  regarded  as  it  a£i:s  on 
the  nervous  and  fanguiferous  fyflems.  It 
powerfully  increafes  the  fenfibility  of  every 
part ;  and  renders  the  mind  more  fufceptible 
of  pleafurable  fenfations*  The  mufcular  fibre 
becomes  more  irritable ;  and  what  are  called 
fpafmodic  complaints,  are  more  common  in 
warm  than  in  cold  regions.  Fevers  alfo  are 
more  frequent  than  in  Europe,  in  which  the 
ftomach  is  much  difeafed,  and  bilious  vomit- 
ing and  a  yellow  tinge  of  the  tunica  adnata 
are  attendant  fymptoms.  Infolation  is  the  ef- 
fe(3:  of  the  rays  of  the  fun  in  a  perpendicular 
direction,  acting  on  the  fenforium  commune* 
The  laft  degree  of  debility,  with  bilious  vo-* 


104 

miting,  indicates  this  affedlon  ;  juft  as  we  ob- 
ferve  fevere  hurts  or  wounds  of  the  head  in- 
duce the  fame  fymptoms.  Now  we  explain 
thefe  fymptoms  from  the  nice  confent  of  parts ; 
they  prove  the  flrong  fympathy  with  which  the 
chylopoeitic  organs,  by  their  office,  are  linked 
with  the  functions  of  the  brain.  The  exceflive 
heat  is  an  exhaufling  power  diredly  afting  on 
the/enforium  commune  ;  for  compreffion  of  the 
brain  from  blood  or  other  caufes,  does  not  ex- 
cite the  fame  train  of  fymptoms.  We  there- 
fore draw  the  conclufion,  that  warm  climates 
induce  hepatic  and  flomach  difeafes,  by  prima- 
rily affefting  the  nervous  fyflem.  As  far  as 
heat  affeds  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  it 
feems  to  have  little  effed  in  bringing  on  ner-- 
Vous  irritability,  and  is  of  inferior  confideration 
in  this  inquiry. 

But  while  we  blame  the  heat  of  the  climate 
for  the  production  of  nervous  and  bilious 
difeafes  among  Europeans,  we  muft  alio  take 
into  account  their  niodes  of  living,  fo  injurious 
to  health.  The  mg/l  debilitating  of  all pleafures 
is  by  them  indulged  to  excefs ;  and  the  pafllan 
feems  to  grow  from  what  it  feeds  on.  High- 
ly feafoned  food,  the  large  ufe  of  vinous  li- 
quors, and  licentious  manners,  cjury  luxury  to 


105 

its  utmoft  pitch*  The  warmth  of  the  climate 
is  therefore  not  to  be  fmgly  blamed  in  engen- 
dering bilious  and  dyfpeptic  complaints. 

If  perfons  who  live  in  this  way,  remain  in  a 
tropical  country  till  they  pafs  the  meridian  of 
life,  and  then  return  to  Britain,  they  feldom 
enjoy  good  health.  The  caufe  of  this  is  obvi- 
ous. They  ought  therefore,  if  convenient,  to 
pafs  their  firfl  winters  in  fome  of  the  fouthern 
provinces  of  France,  or  in  Spain  or  Portugal  j 
and  thus  accommodate  the  conflitution  gradu* 
ally  to  the  great  change  of  temperature. 

Some  diflrids  of  country  that  are  low, 
fwampy,  and  fubjed  to  fogs,  commonly  dif- 
agree  with  nervous  and  bilious  people.  And 
thofe  feafons  when  the  weather  is  variable, 
and  liable  to  fudden  tranfitions,  are  alfo  hurt- 
ful* Many  of  their  fymptoms,  particularly 
depreflion  of  fpirits,  increafe  under  a  cloudy 
atmofphere :  hence  the  glooms  of  November 
are  proverbial  for  having  this  eifeO:. 

10.  Medicines.  All  nervous  perfons  are 
uncommonly  fond  of  drugs  ;  and  they  are  the 
chief  coiifumers  of  advertifed  remedies,  which 
they  conceal  from  their  medical  friends.  Among 
fome  well  meaning  people,  this  inordinate  de- 
fire  for  medicine  has  frequently  become  of  it- 
.^o  2 


106 

felf  a  difeafe.  With  many  of  them^  phyfiq 
to  be  ufeful,  muft  be  clothed  in  myftery  j  and 
the  moment  a  difcovery  is  made  of  the  compo^ 
fition,  the  confidence  is  loft.  Medical  at^ 
tendants  have  too  often  brought  this  punifh? 
ment  on  themfelves.  Were  they  unanimous 
in  combating  the  prejudices  of  mankind,  by 
candour  and  opennefs  of  condud,  by  a  fair  a-? 
vowal  of  the  imperfections  of  their  art,  a^d  the 
honeft  confeflion  that  articles  of  Materia  Me^ 
dica  form  but  a  fmall  portion  of  its  refources, 
they  would  not  fo  frequently  fee  their  conif 
mands  difregarded,  or  learn  that  their  com- 
pounds have  been  thrown  out  of  a  window. 
This  is  the  only  way  in  which  I  can  account  for 
fo  many  perfons  of  good  fenfe  and  difcern- 
ment,  configning  themfelves  and  families  into 
the  hands  of  impudent  and  illiterate  quacks.  * 
It  was  the  faying  of  a  very  fagacious  profefs*? 
or  of  medicine,  to  his  pupils,  "  young  gent lemetiy 
if  your  medicines  Jhould  do  no  good^  take  care  that 

*  The  duty  on  quack  medicines  at  this  time  h 
eflimated  at  upwards  of  300,0001.  annually.  From 
this  it  may  be  fuppofed  that  ignorant  pretenders  to 
medicine  take  not  lefs  than  two  millions  out  of  the 
pockets  of  the  community  ! 


101 

they  do  no  harm?^  *  When  a£live  medicines 
are  long  continued,  and  do  not  cure,  it  is  very 
likely  they  may  do  mifchief.  But  the  remedy 
that  cures  one  difeafe,  if  injudicioufly  adminif* 
tered,  npt  unfrequently  predifpofes  the  body, 
and  paves  the  way  to  another  malady.  I  Ihall 
begin  with 

Emetics,  The  exhibition  of  £';7z^//Vj  is  of- 
ten taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the  medical 
profeflion ;  and  every  good  woman  thinks  her- 
felf  competent  to  diredk  a  vomit.  Some  peo- 
ple with  delicate  ftomachs  are  in  the  habit  of 
taking  thefe  articles,  for  every  uneafy  ftate  of 
that  organ,  which  is  conftrued  into  a  foul  fto- 
mach.  But  nothing  can  more  certainly  tend 
to  weaken,  nay  paralyze  that  vifcus.  The 
operation  itfelf  is  painful  and  unnatural  j  for 
the  ad  of  vomiting  is  to  invert,  and  evacuate 
the  contents  of  the  flomach  the  wrong  way* 
This  cannot  be  done  without  medicines  that 
are  firft  highly  ftimulating :  they  pafs  through 
the  ftimulant  ftage  of  the  procefs  firft ;  and 
when  that  is  over,  the  fibres  of  the  ftomach 
being  exhaufted  for  a  time,  ficknefs  is  the 

*  The  firft  Dr  Rutherford,  ProfefTor  of  Medicine 
in  the  Univerfity  of  Edinburgh. 


108 


confequence,  and  vomiting  fucceeds  it.  This 
naufea  is  fometimes  fo  fevere,  as  to  occafion 
fainting,  and  even  convulfions ;  and  the  fre* 
quency  of  the  pulfe  during  the  operation  is 
often  fo  reduced  as  to  give  ferious  caufe  of 
alarm ;  and  is  at  all  times  flower  till  the  fick- 
nefs  is  overcome.  Such  are  the  fymptoms  to 
be  marked  during  the  emetic  efFeds  of  tarta- 
rized  antimony,  vitriolated  zinc,  vitriolated 
mercury,  ipecacuanha,  fquill,  &c  If  there- 
fore, this  operation  is  too  frequently  reforted 
to,  what  is  to  be  expelled  but  a  weakened, 
mobile  or  torpid  condition  of  the  ilomach, 
and  every  organ  that  fills  a  link  in  the  great 
chain  of  fympathy  with  it.  The  hurtful  ef- 
fe6:  is  alfo  much  increafed  by  the  copious 
draughts  of  warm  water,  taken  to  encourage 
the  vomiting. 

At  the  time  that  James's  Powders  were  in 
general  ufe,  and  when  families  were  in  the 
practice  of  taking  that  medicine  as  a  preven- 
tive of  fever,  at  ftated  periods,  weaknefs  of 
flomach  and  indigeltion  were  often  traced  to 
this  caufe.  Ignorant  people  are  apt  to  confider 
many  complaints,  where  the  pulfe  is  quick, 
as  fevers,  and  fly  to  improper  remedies. 

But  antimonial  emetics  require  the  utmofl 


109 

caution  in  the  exhibition  to  nervous  people, 
and  all  who  poflefs  irritable  bowels  ;  fuch  as 
dyfpeptic  and  gouty ;  fevere  cramps,  hyflerics 
and  diarrhaea,  too  commonly  follow.  They 
likewife  encourage  erudation,  and  by  invert- 
ing the  gullets  of  fome  people,  a  kind  of  ru* 
minating  of  the  food  takes  place,  a  habit 
very  disagreeable  and  difgufting.  When  we 
refledl  what  a  fmall  portion  of  antlmonial  pre- 
paration is  required  to  excite  vomiting,  we 
mull  be  convinced  of  its  uncommon  adllvlty, 
and  that  it  ads  immediately  on  the  nerves  of 
the  ftomach.  The  fame  guarded  pradice  ap- 
plies to  all  the  metallic  oxides,  when  ufed  as 
emetics.  What  may  at  feafonable  times  be  a 
valuable  remedy,  may  thus,  by  being  impro- 
perly direded,  have  the  mod  baneful  effeds. 
Nervous  patients  are  particularly  fubjed  to 
a  kind  of  rifmg  in  the  cardia,  or  upper  ori- 
fice, a  fort  of  inverted  motion  in  fome  of  the 
mufcular  fibres,  wdth  diftention,  flatulence, 
and  acidity,  that  create  vafl  ficknefs.  But  to 
have  recourfe  to  vomits  for  relief,  would  only 
aggravate  the  complaint.  Thefe  perfons  are 
alfo  more  eafily  affeded  by  difagreeable  ob- 
jfids,  and  bad  fmells,  than  others,  which  ha- 
rafs  them  not  a  little.     As  they  grow  ae- 


lid 

quainted  with  this  frailty  of  their  flomachsi, 
they  will  rather  ftudy  to  avoid  the  eaufes, 
than  truft  to  any  article  of  medicine  for  relief* 
When  conftant  vomiting  has  been  brought- 
on,  in  nervous  flomachs,  by  whatever  means, 
no  complaint  is  more  difficult  to  be  reilrained : 
fome  affliding  cafes  of  this  kind  have  come 
within  my  knowledge,  in  young  perfons,  part 
of  which  terminated  fatally. 

Purgatives.      This  clafs  of  medicines, 
like  the  preceding,  are  too  often  directed  by 
improper  judges  of  their  fitnefs.      But  the 
greatell  harm  is  done  in  infancy  and  child* 
hood,  when  parents  run  to  the  aid  of  phylic 
for  every  trifling  complaint,  but  chiefly  for 
cutaneous  alFedions.     It  is  immediately  de* 
cided  that  thefe  fpots  are  owing  to  bad  hu-^ 
mours  and  foulnefs  of  the  blood,  and  mufl  be 
carried  oflF  by  a  purge.     Such  reafoning  as 
this  formerly  prevailed  among  medical  peo- 
ple ;  we  cannot  therefore  be  furprized  that 
perfons  not    in  the    profeflion   fhould    ftill 
retain  a  little  of  the  old  leaven*.     Purgative 
medicines  differ  extremely  from  one  another  ; 
and  if  it  is  a  nice  point  in  medical  praftice  to 
fuit  the  purge  to  the  nature  of  the  complaint 
and  peculiarity  of  conftitution,  it  muft  be  often 


Ill 

dangerous  to  truft  them  in  common  hands.  I 
was  once  called  to  vifit  a  farmer  who  had  taken 
two  ounces  of  faltpetre,  inftead  of  Glauber's 
fait.  I  found  him  in  extreme  pain  about  the 
ftomach,  with  ghaftly  looks,  an  intermitting 
pulfe,  and  cold  fweats.  A  few  minutes  longer 
would  have  been  too  late  to  fave  him :  by 
drinking  plentifully  of  warm  milk  and  water, 
and  a  briik  emetic,  he  was  recovered.  But  I 
have  known  fmiilar  cafes  prove  fatal. 

Confinement  within  doors,  an  uniform  mode 
of  living,  and  fedentary  habits,  are  fo  com- 
monly met  with,  among  perfons  of  the  ner- 
vous temperament,  that  a  conflipated  ftate  of 
body  is  a  general  condition  of  their  difeafe. 
Hence  the  frequent  recourfe  to  medicine  for 
opening  the  bowels.  Some  of  the  mod  draf- 
tic  purgatives,  fuch  as  aloes  and  fcammony, 
come  at  laft  to  be  in  common  ufe  with  them. 
This  cuflom  foon  begets  a  habit ;  when  the 
bowels  are  brought  to  that  torpor  and  inadi- 
vity  as  never  to  be  moved  without  the  aid  of 
a  drug.  The  fenfibility  of  the  inteftines  is 
thus,  by  degrees,  worn  out ;  the  ladeals 
which  take  up  the  food,  the  mucous  glands 
and  exhalants,  that  pour  forth  fluids,  as  well 
as  the  nerves  and  mufcular  fibres,  grow  torpid : 


113 

the  confequence  is  the  lofs  of  the  peiiflaltic 
power,  and  the  bowels  are  apt  to  run  into 
inverted  motion,  and  fpafmodic  conftridion, 
till  a  fatal  cholic,  an  intufception,  iliac  paf- 
fion,  or  cramp,  clofe  the  fcene.  Painful  dif- 
eafes  of  the  redlum,  fchirrus,  hemorrhoidal 
tumours,  and  fiftulas,  too  often  render  life 
miferable,  from  this  ill-condu6led  pradice. 
We  have  known  families  of  children  that  un- 
derwent a  courfe  of  purging  twice  a  week  ! 

But  if  mercury^  in  the  form  of  calomel^  or 
any  other  preparation  of  that  metal,  make 
part  of  thefe  habitual  purges,  the  confequences 
are  always  to  be  dreaded.  Calomel  is  a  favo- 
rite article  with  fome  phyficians  as  a  purga- 
tive, and  from  the  minutenefs  of  its  dofe,  very 
defirable  to  the  patient.  It  alfo  operates 
quickly  and  briikly ;  which,  with  nervous  and 
dyfpeptic  fubjeds,  is  matter  of  great  fatisfac- 
tion  \  for  their  odd  feelings  and  fmgular  fen- 
fations  within,  give  the  fufpicion  that  they  are 
full  of  obftrudions  and  cannot  be  fufficiently 
evacuated.  Yet  fuch  inftances  of  flow  bowels 
are  not  to  be  confidered  as  depending  alto-* 
gether  on  a  local  afFedion.  They  are  joined 
with  a  general  flate  of  the  body,  and  only  to 
be  radically  cured  by  correcting  the  original 


113 

evil.  Thus  a  long  walk  out  of  doors,  and  a 
little  adive  exercife  and  recreation,  will  efFe£t 
fometimes,  what  large  dofes  of  medicine  are 
unable  to  perform. 

But  mercury  is  the  moft  dangerous  of  all 
frequent  purges ;  it  fooner  exhaufts  the  irri- 
tability and  vital  power  of  the  inteftines,  than 
any  other  metallic  oxide,  except  arfenic.  It 
never  fails  in  the  end  to  add  to  the  difeafe  :  it 
is  peculiarly  contra-indicated  in  the  nervous 
temperament,  from  the  mobile  difpofition  of 
nerve;  and  its  adion  on  the  bowels,  very 
much  refembles  a  ftate  of  dyfentery,  by  pro- 
ducing the  moft  violent  contractions,  gripes, 
and  tenefmus.  It  thus  frequently  brings  on 
prolapfus  a?2ii  a  complaint  to  which  perfons  of 
weak  bowels  are  liable,  and  efpecially  women, 
who  have  experienced  hard  labours,  and  borne 
a  number  of  children. 

Many  volumes  have  been  written  on  dif- 
eafes,  fuppofed  to  have  originated  from  the 
ufe  of  mercury  when  given  for  the  cure  of 
lues  venerea :  yet  ftrange  to  relate,  its  moft 
common  confequences,  dyfpeptic  and  nervous 
affedions,  are  fcarcely  mentioned.  *     I  firmly 

*  A  lltde  tra<Et,  «  on   the   Use  and  Abuse  or 

P  2 


lU 

believe  all  the  derangements  which  it  occafions 
in  the  iDody,  are  fmall  when  compared  with  the 
injury  done  to  the  nervous  fyflem  and  digeftive 
powers.  Some  phyficians  and  furgeons  fly, 
even  in  common  cafes,  to  one  of  its  mod  dan- 
gerous preparations,  hydrar,  mur.  and  feem  to 
overlook  its  ultimate  efFeds  on  the  conftitution. 
It  has  often  been  my  lot  to  witnefs  thefe  ef- 
fedls  in  the  pradice  of  others :  for  of  ffty 
thou/and  cafes  of  the  venereal  difeafe,  which  I 
have  attended,  I  am  convinced,  that  not  one  of 
the  number  ever  required  this  acrid  mercurial. 
Hsemoptyfis  ending  in  phthifis,  was  a  frequent 
fequel  to  this  treatment. 

It  is  well  known  that  miners  and  workers 
of  this  metal  in  the  various  arts,  are,  after  a 
certain  time,  fubjecl  to  the  moll  violent  ner- 
vous afflidions,  fuch  as  colics,  epilepfies, 
cramps,  tremors,  &c.  and  the  laft  ftage  of 
thefe  is  palfy,  in  its  moft  hideous  form.     In 

Mercury,"  has  juft  been  publifhed  by  Dr  Wilfon ;  In 
which  he  particularly  notices  Its  hurtful  efFedls  on  the 
ftomach  and  inteftlnes.  I  am  glad  to  obferve,  that  his 
remarks  are  very  much  like  my  own.  This  eflay  ap- 
pears to  be  only  a  prelude  to  more  extenfive  dlfquifitlons 
on  the  fubjed  ;  which  I  hope  the  learned  author  will 
follow  up  with  his  accuftomed  ability. 


115 


the  filver  mines  of  Spain,  in  South  America, 
where  mercury  is  employed  to  feparate  the 
gold,  the  poor  Haves  feldom  live  three  years, 
from  being  expofed  fo  much  to  its  fumes. 
Hence  to  be  fent  to  the  mines  implies  the  laft 
degree  of  human  punifhment.  As  the  lues 
venerea  extends  in  fociety,  and  the  exhibition 
of  mercury  for  its  cure  becomes  every  day- 
more  familiar  with  medical  people,  there  is 
danger  that  they  forget  they  have  in  their  hands 
one  of  the  moft  adive  mineral  poifons,  and 
extend  its  ufe  to  all  thofe  difeafes  that  refift 
other  remedies.  In  the  hands  of  the  ignorant 
and  indolent  of  the  profeflion  it  has  done  in- 
calculable mifchief.  The  ignorant  man  is 
neither  capable  of  felefting  its  proper  prepara- 
tions for  particular  conditions  of  body^  nor  of 
knowing  when  it  is  forbidden;  and  he  is  unable 
to  difcern  when  it  has  done  harm.  The  indo- 
lent among  us,  who  give  themfelves  no  care 
about  the  inveftigation  of  a  diflemper,  cannot 
be  fit  perfons  to  prefcribe  an  article,  that  in- 
judicioufly  given,  may  deftroy  life.  This  re- 
mark does  not  merely  apply  to  the  vender  of 
advertifed  remedies ;  it  comprehends  many 
in  private  life,  who,  from  deficient  education, 


116 

are  not  entitled  to  more  confidence  than  the 
itinerant  tribe. 

But  there  is  a  form  of  the  difeafes  of  which 
we  now  treat,  in  which  mercury  is  faid  to  aft 
^ith  undeniable  efficacy ;  namely,  in  what  are 
called  bilious  complaints. 

The  term  belongs  to  common  language ; 
as  fuch  I  have  adopted  it  in  my  title  ;  but  it  is 
not  correct  in  a  medical  nomenclature.  Some 
members  of  the  profeffion,  to  improve  our 
vernacular  idiom,  have  thought  proper  to  give 
thefe  ailments  the  name  of  liver  complaints^  as 
that  organ  is  faid  to  be  their  feat ;  but  this  term 
is  equally  undefined  in  a  fcientific  view,  as  that 
oijiomach  complaints^  fo  long  applied  to  difeafes 
of  the  digeftive  powers.  The  phrafe  bilious  de- 
rives its  origin  from  that  tinge  of  the  fldn  fo  of- 
ten obferved  in  dyfpeptic  perfons,  who  alfo  oc- 
cafionally  pafs  bile  both  upwards  and  down- 
wards. Now  bile  appearing  in  thefe  forms, 
being  a  natural  fecretion  made  by  the  liver,  is 
to  be  confidered  as  the  effe6i^  rather  than  the 
direO:  caufe  of  indifpofition.  In  the  prefent 
day,  a  dyfpeptic  perfon  no  fooner  complains 
of  pain  in  the  right  hypchondrium,  than  the 
liver  is  faid  to  be  difeafed ;  and  a  bilious  fuf- 
fufion  of  the  furface,  is  confidered  an  infalli- 


117 

ble  fymptom  of  the  fame  vifcus  being  affeded ; 
and  the  mercurial  procefs  is  immediately  com- 
menced. It  is  difgufting  to  hear  this  phrafeo- 
logy  fo  common  in  the  mouths  of  medical 
people.  It  is  well  known  that  jaundice  itfelf 
is  common  enough,  even  during  the  mercurial 
treatment  of  lues  venerea. 

We  fhall  learn  from  a  defcription  of  the 
nervous  temperament,  that  perfons  fubje^t  to 
indigeftion,  to  frequent  difcharges  of  bile,  and 
fpafmodic  affedions  of  the  chylopoeitic  organs, 
are  endued  with  uncommon  delicacy  and  ir- 
ritability of  the  firfl:  pafTages ;  and  that  this 
ftate  is  generally  attended  with  great  debility. 
Such  a  condition  of  the  mufcular  fibres,  in  the 
ofophagus,  ftomach  and  bowels,  with  all  the 
canals  which  pour  fluids  into  them,  naturally 
makes  the  whole  fubjed:  to  reverfed  motions, 
irregular  contradlions,  increafed  fenfibility  in 
one  part,  and  deficient  power,  or  torpor,  in 
another.  The  flate  of  the  Uver  itfelf  will  par- 
take of  all  thefe  irregularities.  Its  fecretion 
will  fometimes  be  fufpended,  fometimes  defi- 
cient. It  will  fuffer  ftagnation  in  the  biliary 
pores,  and  in  all  its  duds.  Even  when  it 
flows  freely  into  the  duodenum,  it  will  at  one 
place  be  collected  in  greater  quantity  than  at 


118 

another ;  fometimes  retained,  and  at  others 
flowing  profufely ;  and  the  flow  or  quicker 
motion  of  the  bowels,  will  exhibit  a  proof  of 
this  inconftant  palTage  of  the  bile  in  the  alvine 
difcharge  ;  in  its  colour,  its  confiftence,  and 
foetor ;  while  tranfient  jaundice  will  alfo  ap- 
pear. 

The  duds  may  alfo  be  obllrudled  by  biliary 
calculi,  over  which  mercury  has  no  power. 
Indeed  dyfpeptic  perfons  are  very  fubjedt  to 
thefe  concretions,  which  are  probably  owing 
to  fome  difpofition  in  the  bile  itfelf. 

Thefe  commotions  will  frequently  bring  on 
epileptic  and  hyfteric  convulfions,  violent 
cramps,  and  death.  The  mind  flrongly  fym- 
pathifes ;  it  is  irritable,  irrefolute,  timid,  de- 
fponding,  and  fuifers  more  or  lefs  fuch  derange- 
ment in  its  relation  of  things,  and  in  its  per- 
ceptions, as  amounts  to  a  degree  of  delirium. 
This  conftitutes  what,  in  common  language, 
fome  perfons  call  a  bilious  or  nervous  attack. 

This  being  our  explanation  of  the  biliary 
affedion  of  the  nervous  temperament,  it  mud 
be  {training  fads  to  the  utmoft,  to  find  any 
analogy  between  it  and  the  hepatitis  of  the 
eaflern  hemifphere.  How  indeed  can  any 
qualified  obferver  of  the  phenomena  of  difeafe> 


119 

compare  the  full  robuft  habit  of  a  young 
European,  on  the  coaft  of  Coromandel,  with 
the  weakly  and  delicate  nervous  lady  of  our 
climate  ?  Yet  the  analogy,  monftrous  as  it 
is,  in  the  practice  of  fome  phyficians,  has 
been  faid  to  be  corred ;  and  dyfpeptic  and 
hyflerical  females,  have,  on  the  faith  of  this 
dodrine,  been  tortured  with  mercurial  courfes, 
till  their  very  teeth  have  been  in  hazard  of 
dropping  from  their  fockets,  and  their  lives 
brought  into  danger ;  and  this  plan  of  treat- 
ment fometimes  repeated,  as  the  fymptoms 
were  found  to  recur. 

I  hold  it  as  an  unqueftionable  fa£l,  that  a 
peculiar  predifpofition  attends  both  difeafes ; 
and  that  local  caufes  excite  both.  It  appears 
from  many  particular  fymptoms,  that  a  diredt- 
ly  oppofite  flate  of  the  body  prevails  in  the 
two  complaints.  How  then  can  the  fame 
medicine  be  indicated  in  both  ?  The  iderus  is 
not  characteriftic  of  hepatitis ;  nor  is  the  capri- 
cious difpofition  of  the  bowels,  and  the  mental 
difquietudes  of  nervous  affedion,  ever  includ- 
ed in  the  account  of  its  fymptoms.  The  ana- 
logy therefore  between  hepatitis  and  the 
dyfpepfia  of  the  nervous  temperament,  has  no, 
foundation  in  pathology,  and  leads  to  no  ra- 


126 

tional  method  of  cure.  That  the  liver  may 
be  enlarged  in  thefe  difeafes,  as  well  as  from 
hepatitis,  I  readily  admit :  but  fuch  enlarge- 
ment mufl  be  brought  on  in  a  very  different 
manner.  It  mufl  be  chiefly  owing  to  the  de- 
bihty  of  the  hepatic  nerves ;  by  which  means 
a  torpor  or  kind  of  paralyfis  takes  place  ;  effu- 
fion  of  fome  kind  may  then  happen  in  the 
parenchyma  of  the  liver,  which  the  lymphatics 
are  not  able  to  carry  off.  What  are  called 
tubercles  of  the  liver,  are  mod  likely  enlarged 
lymphatic  glands  and  veffels ;  this  may  be 
another  caufe  of  increafed  fize.  But  it  is  pro- 
bable alfo,  that  the  fecreted  bile  itfelf  is  fre- 
quently the  caufe  of  the  great  bulk,  from 
torpor  of  the  port  biliarii  and  duds.  I  believe 
however  in  dyfpeptic  habits,  that  fuch  increafed 
fize  of  the  liver  is  a  rare  difeafe  ;  and  when  it 
does  happen,  it  ought  to  be  confidered  as  an 
effect,  not  a  primary  caufe  of  indifpofition. 
If,  therefore,  there  is  much  nervous  predifpofi- 
tion,  mercury  muff  do  a  great  deal  of  harm, 
and  add  to  the  mifchief. 

Some  perfons  have  an  opinion,  that  mer- 
cury adts  immediately  on  bilious  affedion,  in* 
dependent  of  evacuation ;  but  this  is  fanciful. 
A  purge,  in  which  calomel  is  combined  with 


121 

a  cathartic,  as  it  excites  the  duodenum  in  its 
paflage,  it  alfo  urges  into  adion  the  diiFerent 
du6ts  which  open  into  it ;  and  the  lafl  evacua- 
tions of  a  mercurial  purge  are  commonly  bi- 
lious. This  increafed  adion  may,  by  fympa- 
thy,  go  farther  ;  the  pori  biliarii  may  feel  it, 
and  perhaps  the  whole  vifcus.  Thus  the  liver 
may  be  purged,  and  excited  to  healthful  ac- 
tion. But  what  one  dofe  or  two  may  efFeCt, 
a  third  and  fourth  may  deftroy  ;  and  by  know- 
ing the  conflitution  of  the  patient,  we  fhall 
know  when  to  flop.  And  as  cramps  and 
fpafms,  of  the  mod  painful  kind,  are  part  of 
thefe  difeafes,  fo  mercurial  purges,  as  I  have 
often  feen,  caufe  great  hazard  of  bringing  them 
on.  But  there  are  many  purgative  articles, 
that  in  thefe  cafes,  have  all  the  good  efFe£ts 
of  mercury,  without  the  deleterious  ones  ;  and 
they  ought  to  be  preferred.  Very  adlive  ex- 
ercife  will  alfo,  in  many  inftances,  fuperfede 
the  ufe  of  medicine ;  fo  great  is  the  power  of 
agitating  the  abdominal  vifcera,  in  promoting 
the  due  flow  of  bile. 

The  hepatitis  of  the  Eaft  Indies  has  been 
long  confidered  a  ferious  difeafe,  and  often  fa- 
tal ;  and  as  it  has  feldom  yielded  to  a  mild 
tT^atment,  the  exhibition  of  mercury  is  jufli- 

a.2 


12^ 

Aed.  But  it  cannot  be  denied,  although  this 
medicine  Is  chiefly  to  be  depended  on,  that  even 
in  India  it  has  done  infinite  harm  to  the  confti- 
tutlon,  I  therefore  embrace  the  opportunity  of 
quoting  the  following  paffage  from  a  modern 
Journal.  It  is  given  virithout  the  writer's 
name,  but  the  cautions  which  it  inculcates  are 
of  fuch  great  value  in  pradice,  that  even 
anonymous  authority  renders  it  refpedable. 

Extrad  of  a  letter  from  a  furgeon  on  the 
Madras  eftabllfhment,  dated  the  2  2d  Odober, 

1805. — "  My  lad  letter  from gave  me 

"  fad  accounts  of  his  health.     He  is  fufFering 

"  much  from  exceflive  ufe  of  mercury  ;  and 

"  has  had,  he  fays,  fpafms  of  the  diaphragniy 

*'  and  excruciating  fains  in  his  Jkin^  hones  ^  and 

"  head.     It  may  be  news  to  you,  that  mer- 

*'  cury   in  this   country,  when  given  in  too 

"  large  quantity,  caufes  fufFerings  more  dread- 

"  ful  than  the  difeafe  for  which  it  is  2.fpecijic^ 

"  and  experienced  furgeons  are  cautious  never 

"  to  exceed  in  its  employment.      You  aik 

*'  me  if  the  erythema  mercuriale  is  frequent 

*'  with  us?     Very  lately  a  brother  furgeon 

*'  here  had  a  cafe  of  it  in  his  hofpital  which 

"  terminated  fatally ;    and  with   the  natives 

"  who  never  can  be  made  to  cloath  them- 


12S 

"  felves  fufficiently,  or  almoft  at  all,  wheii 
"  under  the  ufe  and  influence  of  mercury, 
"  this  difeafe  occurs  frequently,  and  often 
"  proves  deftrudive." 

If  fuch  are  the  eiFeds  of  mercury  in  robufl 
conftitutions,  and  in  a  climate  peculiarly  fa- 
vourable to  its  adminiftration,  what  feverities 
are  we  not  to  expedt  in  weak  nervous  bowels, 
and  in  a  condition  of  atmofphere,  that  in  de- 
fpite  of  every  precaution,  fo  often  throws  its 
adivity  on  the  firft  paffages  ?  It  is  to  be  hoped 
the  advice  given  in  this  extract  will  not  be 
loft  on  phyficians  and  furgeons  in  England, 
who  are  fo  apt  to  refolve  every  pathological 
difficulty,  into  a  liver  complaint  5  and  pour 
in  mercury  ad  injinitum. 

Mercury  as  a  cathartic  a6i:s  beft  in  conjunc- 
tion with  jalap  :  a  pill  containing  three  grains 
of  the  latter  to  one-fixth  of  a  grain  of  the  for- 
mer, purges  moderately  in  a  hale  ftate  of  body. 
I  may  be  told  in  contradidlion  to  this,  that  a 
dram  of  calomel  has  been  given  to  a  child ; 
and  half  an  ounce  to  an  adult,  in  a  few  days, 
without  any  bad  effed.  But,  becaufe  thefe 
patients  were  not  deftroyed,  is  the  heedlefs 
adminiftration  of  fo  adive  a  medicine  to  be 
juftified  by  fuch  proofs  ?  I  have  feen  perfons 


1^4 

furvlve  large  dofes  of  corrofive fuhlimate  mercu* 
ry  and  arfenic  ;  yet  no  judicious  phyfician  will, 
compare  thefe  recoveries  with  the  limited  dofes 
of  either  article,  adapted  to  the  nature  of  tem- 
perament, anddifeafed  ftate  of  his  patient. 

Mercury  being  a  medicine  given  in  a  great 
variety  of  preparations,  has  long  been  the  chief 
ingredient  in  quack  remedies.  It  is  thus 
vended  under  the  form  of  tindure,  drop, 
powder,  pill,  &c.  An  article  of  materia  medi' 
ca  polTeffing  fuch  adivity  in  fome  conditions 
of  the  living  fyftem,  may  be  capable  of  pro- 
ducing great  and  falutary  changes.  But  in 
efFeding  thefe,  certain  premifes  and  indications 
are  to  be  attended  to,  to  juftify  the  exhibition : 
and  the  phyfician  who  does  not  give  himfelf 
the  trouble  to  confider  thefe  circumftances, 
may  perform  the  part  of  an  executioner. 
Mercury  being  particularly  hurtful  where  the 
ilomach  and  bowels  are  very  irritable,  is  for- 
bidden in  gout  and  in  the  nervous.  In  thofe 
perfons,  frictions  of  the  ointment  leiTen  the 
danger.  Hence  it  is  improper  in  women  and 
children ;  in  thofe  fubjed  to  epilepfy,  or  other 
convulfions ;  and  in  every  one,  who  may  be 
liable  to  fpafmodic  complaints  of  any  form. 
In  ftates  of  torpor  and  llrength,  it  can  be 


125 

given  with  more  fafety  :  it  is  fuppofed  to  be 
the  befl  remedy  in  glandular  obflrutlion,  if 
the  attendant  debility  does  not  contra-indicate 
its  ufe.  But  it  is  too  often  to  be  obferved, 
that  thofe  who  make  mofl  free  with  the  exhi- 
bition of  mercury,  are  the  lead  qualified  to 
guard  againft  its  bad  effeds  in  improper  cafes, 
I  refided  a  few  years  ago  in  a  naval  fea-port, 
where  I  was  often  confulted  for  ftomach  and 
nervous  complaints,  by  ladies,  the  wives  and 
relatives  of  officers,  and  my  other  friends  in  the 
public  fervice.  Many  of  thefe  females  had 
been  refidents  in  warm  climates.  The  great 
refemblance -which  the  cafes  had  to  one  an- 
other, excited  no  fmall  degree  of  furprize  at 
firft,  till  I  learned  they  had  been  all  fub- 
je£ted  to  a  fimilar  mode  of  treatment.  In 
fliort,  they  had  been  patients  of  a  phyfician  of 
extenfive  practice  in  the  neighbourhood,  who 
prefcribed  mercury  for  every  difeafe.  Mofl  of 
thefe  women,  among  whom  were  fome  of  great 
mental  and  perfonal  accomplilhments,  had 
been  kept  for  months  or  weeks  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  medicine;  with  their  throats, 
mouths,  and  tongues  fo  fwoln  and  excoriated, 
and  the  teeth  fo  loofe,  as  to  confine  them  to  a 
diet  of  flops.     Thofe  who  had  no  ftomach 


126 

complaints  when  they  began  this  treatment, 
found  them  come  on  after  it ;  and  fuch  as 
had  been  nervous  and  dyfpeptic  before,  felt  all 
their  ailments  aggravated.  This  phyiician  not 
fatisfied  with  the  milder  preparations,  made  a 
common  remedy  of  hydrar,  mur. 

A  pradlice  not  unlike  to  what  I  have  jufl 
related,  made  fome  noife  in  our  navy  during 
the  late  war.  A  phyfician  on  a  foreign  fta- 
tion,  took  it  into  his  head  that  all  modern 
difeafes  originated  from  Syphilis.  It  was  in 
vain  that  officers  and  feamen  pleaded  in- 
nocence :  if  they  were  unconfcious  of  receiving 
infeftion  themfelves,  they  were  told  it  muft 
come  from  their  parents,  fometimes  to  many 
generations  back.  Few  men  could  anfwer 
for  their  purity  on  thefe  occafions  :  a  mercurial 
courfe  was  therefore  direded  ;  not  for  days  or 
weeks,  but  for  years ;  for  there  was  no  fafety 
but  in  continuing  it  at  intervals  through  life. 
A  medicine  of  the  kind,  employed  on  fuch 
terms,  could  not  fail  to  do  harm  :  fome  of  the 
moft  unfortunate  ftomach  afFedions  which  ever 
came  under  my  care,  owed  their  caufe  to  this 
treatment ;  a  few  valuable  men  were  brought 
to  the  grave  by  it,  in  the  circle  of  my  own  ac^ 


127 

quaintance,  where  I  fufpeded  a  fchirrous  pylo- 
rus. 

Mercury  exhibited  in  quantity,  either  by  the 
mouth  or  by  fridion,  very  quickly  excites  an 
artificial  fever,  ufhered  in  by  chills,  fhivering, 
and  a  hot  ftage.  The  pulfe  becomes  frequent, 
at  firfl  full,  but  latterly  weaker  and  quicker  : 
want  of  appetite,  naufea,  and  often  vomiting, 
commence ;  reftlelTnefs  and  night  fweats  fuper- 
vene ;  the  body  bears  the  cold  air  ill ;  head-ach ; 
fetid  breath ;  the  bowels  are  commonly  oppreflf- 
ed  with  flatulence,  fevere  twitches,  purging, 
tenefmus,  and  even  bloody  flools  j  to  thefe 
fymptoms,  debility  and  emaciation  fucceed;  the 
tongue,  mouth,  and  throat,  inflame,  fwell,  grow 
painful,  and  ulcerate,  and  the  faliva  is  poured 
forth  in  a  continual  fliream.  During  thefe  effects 
of  mercury  on  the  body,  the  mind  becomes 
irritable  and  unequal,  but  generally  low-fpirit- 
ed ;  and  after  fome  time  exhibits  all  thofe 
feelings,  ufually  called  nervous,  inducing  the 
hyfleric  affedion,  convulfions,  and  frequently 
the  epileptic  paroxyfm  itfelf.  It  is  therefore 
plain,  that  in  the  nervous  temperament,  all  the 
phenomena  now  defcribed,  mud  appear  with 
greater  violence,  as  is  obferved  in  children  and 
women,  and  in  all  who  have  weak  bowels, 

R 


*  » 


128 

The  coritlitutions  of  children,  in  point  of 
debility  and  irritability,  approach  to  the  female 
habit  of  body  :  the  nervous  power  is  liable  to 
irregular  motions  ;  eafily  affeded  by  liiiriuli, 
and  prone  to  convulfions.  Hence  mercury  is 
apt  to  have  dangerous  effeds  upon  them. 
With  fome  medical  people,  as  well  as  parents, 
this  medicine  is  much  employed  as  a  vermi- 
fuge :  it  h^s  the  advantage  of  being  eafily  dif. 
guifed,  and  if  joined  with  a  purgative,  ads 
very  brifkly,  and  commonly  brings  away 
many  of  the  vermin.  |But  worms  being 
only  the  confequehce  of  a  weak  condition  of 
bowels,  mercui^y,  when  continued  long,  in- 
ftead  of  correcting  the  caufe,  tends  ftill 
more  to  debilitate  the  firfl  paifages,  and  lays  the 
foundation  for  much  ill  health.  I  Ihall  touch 
on  this  part  further,  in  the  treatment,  as  being 
intimately  connected  with  my  inquiry.  In  the 
meantime,  I  cannot  fufficiently  reprobate  the 
condudl  of  fome  perfons  in  high  life,  who  per- 
mit their  names  to  be  publifhed  in  the  hand- 
bills and  advertifements  of  an  illiterate  quack^ 
whofe  worm  medicine  is  known  to  be  mer* 
cury,  and  liable  to  be  given  in  very  tmequ^l 
(iofes,  from  the  nature  of  the  compolition. 

About  twenty  years  ago,  two  children  of  a 


129 

friend  of  mine,  took  calomel  from  the  family 
apothecary,  for  worms.  The  exa£l  dofe  in 
which  it  was  given  I  do  not  recolledl ;  but  the 
motions  which  it  produced  were  innumerable. 
The  family,  during  this  procefs,  were  all  at 
once  alarmed,  by  the  fmgular  noife  which  the 
children  made  in  their  throats,  with  an  unufual 
change  of  countenance  and  caft  of  the  eyes  5 
which  were  quickly  followed  by  violent  agita- 
tions and  contortions  of  body,  and  laftly  con- 
vulfions.  In  a  few  days  thefe  odd  complaints 
difappeared,  as  the  eifefts  of  the  mercury 
abated  :  but  the  apothecary  thought  proper  to 
repeat  the  calomel,  obflinately  contending 
that  the  fits  were  mere  aifedation,  and  not  to 
be  imputed  to  the  medicine.  The  fame  effeds 
however  appeared  after  the  fecond  exhibition ; 
the  evacuations  were  not  lefs  profufe  and  debi- 
litating, and  the  convulfions  more  frequent  and 
fevere.  The  moment  one  child  was  feized, 
the  other  was  affeded  in  like  manner :  fo  cer» 
tain  was  this  kind  of  nervous  fympathy,  that 
there  was  a  necellity  for  feparating  them,  that 
they  might  not  fee  or  hear  one  another,  and 
the  fits  went  gradually  oif.  One  of  them,  a 
young  lady,  has  been  long  a  martyr  to  the 
moft  painful  nervous  complaints ;  and  I  can- 

R    2 


130 


not  help  thinking  that  much  of  this  indifpofi* 
tion  was  brought  on  by  this  vermifuge  procefs. 

This  mineral,  after  long  ufe,  befides  ex- 
haufting  the  nervous  energy,  is  known  to  af- 
kd:  the  bones,  and  render  them  friable,  juft 
as  they  are  found  in  rickets  and  in  old  age. 
A  poifon  fo  fubtle  and  active,  thus  confumes 
the  vigor  of  body,  and  brings  on  premature 
fenility.  Thefe  hideous  effeds  are  mo  ft  pro- 
bably produced  by  the  mercurial  oxide  firft 
depraving  the  digeftive  powers,  preventing 
aflimilation  of  the  chyle,  and  vitiating  fanguifi- 
cation.  On  the  whole,  while  mercury  is  capa- 
ble of  great  good  in  the  hands  of  the  fagacious 
phyfician,  when  indifcriminately  ufed  by  the 
ignorant  of  the  profelTion,  it  muft  do  incalcula- 
ble mifchief. 

Bitters  and  aromatics.  Thefe  articles 
when  well  timed  and  direded  with  judgment, 
are  valuable  medicines  in  treating  the  difeafes 
now  under  difcuflion.  But  like  many  of  the 
other  good  things  in  life,  are  too  often  mif- 
applied,  and  thus  tend  to  confirm  what  they 
were  meant  to  remove.  There  ufe  the  term 
bitters  in  a  greater  latitude  than  is  commonly 
done  by  writers  on  the  materia  medica^  and 
include  the  celebrated  Peruvian  bark,   and 


131 

thofe  fubftances  which  are  allied  to  it,  either 
in  their  effeds  or  fenfible  qualities.  Their 
office  is  to  flrengthen  and  ftimulate.  The 
cinchona  (bark)  itfelf  is  a  medicine,  now-a- 
days  in  fuch  general  ufe,  that  there  are  few 
difeafes  to  be  met  with  in  this  country,  in  which 
it  is  not  given  at  one  period  or  another  ;  and 
it  is  to  be  found  in  every  family  medicine 
cheft.  An  article  pofleffing  fo  much  aCtive 
quality  in  the  human  body,  as  to  be  capable 
of  fufpending  a  fevere  ague-fit,  cannot  be 
deemed  a  paffive  remedy,  or  what  ought  to  be 
trufted  in  every  perfon's  hands.  The  phar- 
maceutical treatment  of  cinchona  is  alfo  wor- 
thy of  confideration.  When  duly  prepared, 
and  fuited  to  the  condition  of  flomach,  its 
powers  are  invaluable ;  whereas  admininfler- 
ed  in  an  improper  form,  it  may  have  moft 
baneful  effeds.  It  is  recommended  by  fome 
authors  in  dofes  fo  large,  as  in  our  pradice 
were  never  feen  expedient,  or  the  flomach 
capable  of  retaining  them.  It  is  therefore  to 
be  fufpeded,  that  in  certain  difeafes,  pain, 
ficknefs,  and  vomiting  fupervene  its  ufe,  and 
that  the  effeds  of  oppreiTion  about  the  flo- 
mach after  a  large  dofe,  have  not  unfrequent- 
ly  brought  on  fuch  a  degree  of  torpor,  as  to 


152 

terminate  in  death.     On  the  coafl  of  Africa, 
where  intermittents  aflume  a  more  aggravated 
form  than  ever  feen  in  Europe,    I  always 
found,  upon  an  average,   fix  drams  of  the 
powder  given  in  eight  dofes,  for  four  hours 
before  the  acceflion  of  the  cold  ftage,  at  half 
an  hour's   interval,   have  more  effe£t  than 
eighteen  drams  given  in  twenty-four  hours 
before  the  fit.     This  was  a  great  faving  of  the 
medicine,    which  is  worthy  of  attention  by 
naval  or  military  furgeons  on  foreign  ftations. 
Nothing  in  the  pradice  of  phyfic  can  be 
more  irkfome  than  to  fee  a  poor  patient  ftrug- 
gling  to  get  over  his  bitter  potion ;  it  ought  at 
ieaft  to  caution  the  phyfician  againft  an  unne- 
ceflary  allowance  of  medicine,  for  it  mud  of- 
ten defeat  its  purpofe.     When  convalefcent 
myfelf  of  fever  in  the  Weft  Indies,  I  was  or- 
dered a  dofe  of  bark  every  hour ;  but  fuch 
was  my  averfion  to  the  medicine,  and  fuch  the 
irritable  ftate  of  my  ftomach^  that  the  fourth 
dofe  always  brought  on  ficknefs  and  vomiting, 
by  which  the  whole  was  difgorged.     I  tried 
from  day  to  day  to  go  on  with  my  quantum  : 
it  was  all  in  vain  ;  and  at  laft  the  very  fight  of 
bark  made  me  fick.    If  fuch  a  fchool  cannot 


133 

teach  a  phyfician  fympathy,  I  know  not  how 
it  is  to  be  done. 

Thofe  articles,  more  flridly  called  bitters^ 
require  ftill  more  caution  in  the  exhibition,  as 
polTefling  the  power  of  exhaufling  the  excita- 
bility of  the  flomach  by  long  ufe.  They  im- 
pede fermentation  in  the  -priTiKZ  via^  and  cor- 
i*e6t  acidity ;  thefe  they  effed  chemically. 
When  long  continued,  as  in  the  hiftory  of  the 
Portland  powder  for  gout,  they  are  faid  to 
produce  palfy  and  dropfy,  and  every  fpecies 
of  nervous  debility.  There  muft  therefore  be 
a  period  when  the  good  effeds  ceafe,  and 
which  careful  obfervers  will  mark.  If  bark 
and  bitters  are  medicated  by  alcohol,  in  the 
form  of  tincture,  it  is  obvious  the  hurtful 
effe£ls,  after  a  certain  time,  muft  be  inevi- 
table. 

The  arojnatic  fubjiances^  among  which  may 
be  reckoned  all  the  fpiees  and  volatile  oils  ufed 
in  either  diet  or  medicine,  by  repetition  be- 
come hurtful  to  the  ftomach,  whether  as  con- 
diments, with  food,  or  to  cover  the  difagree- 
able  flavour  of  fome  articles.  Thefe  fub- 
ftances  have,  therefore,  a  limited  time  to  Ao 
good,  that  their  ufe  may  not  become  habitual. 
There  is  always  fomething  wrong  in  thofe 


134 

flomachs  which  hanker  after  hot  ingredients : 
when  thefe  perfons  are  ferved  with  watery 
preparations  of  medicine,  they  complain  that 
they  are  too  cold,  and  difagree  with  them ; 
but  the  moment  a  fpiritous  tin<^ure  is  fubfti- 
tuted,  there  is  little  danger  of  its  being  refufed. 
It  is  the  duty  of  every  honed  phyfician  to  re- 
fift  thofe  cravings  of  his  patient,  and  to  en- 
deavour all  in  his  power  to  corred:  hurtful 
propenfities. 

Vegetable  Acids.  It  is  a  well  known 
fa6t,  how  much  thefe  acids  weaken  the  or- 
gans of  digeftion.  They  are  often  drank 
clandeftinely  by  corpulent  young  women,  to 
corred  obefity,  that  they  may  preferve  their 
fhape.  This  is  always  accomplifhed  at  the 
expence  of  health :  cramps  and  pains  of  the 
flomach,  morbid  acidity,  and  erudations, 
bowel  complaints,  fallownefs  of  complexion, 
nervous  head-achs,  fainting  fits,  amenorrha^a, 
fluor  albus,  ftrangury,  &c.  follow  this  prac- 
tice, and  death  frequently  happens.  All  per- 
fons fubjed  to  indigeftion,  the  gouty  and  hy- 
flerical,  know  well  from  experience,  the  bad 
effeds  of  native  vegetable  acids.  They  may  be 
fuppofed  to  aft  diredly  on  the  fibres  of  the 
ftomach :   but  if  they  ad  chemically  on  the 


135 

gaftric  juice  and  bile,  they  cannot  fail  of 
vitiating  the  chyle,  preventing  the  affiniilation 
of  the  different  inteflinal  juices,  and  thus  de- 
praving the  nourifliment.  But  it  may  alfo  be 
fuppofed,  if  not  in  fome  degree  certified,  that 
in  pafTing  the  glands  of  the  mefentery,  they 
caufe  obflru6i:ion  and  enlargement  of  them, 
give  a  difpofition  to  fcrophula,  and  otherwife 
injure  the  whole  habit.  Vegetable  acids  have 
thus  a  diredly  oppofite  tendency  to  the  mine- 
ral acids,  fuch  as  the  fulphuric,  muriatic,  and 
nitric,  all  of  which  have  a  fhare  of  reputation, 
in  ftates  of  weakened  digeftion. 

Narcotics.  Thefe  include  ardent  fpirits, 
opium,  and  all  thofe  articles  commonly  called 
anodynes,  hypnotics,  paregorics,  &c.  fuch  as 
laduca,  bang,  belladonna,  hyofciamus,  laurus 
cerafus,  cicuta,  &c.  Of  the  effects  of  ardent 
fpirits,  in  producing  flomach  and  nervous 
complaints,  I  have  treated  largely  in  my 
Effay  on  Drunkennefs,  to  which  I  refer 
the  reader.  *  All  the  articles  now  enume- 
rated, acl  very  much  alike  on  the  human 
body.  In  fmall  quantities,  they  induce  vigor, 
activity  and  ilrength,    and    an    increafe  of 

*  Second  Edition,  London,  1805. 
s 


^  t 


136 

mufcular  power  throughout  the  frame  ;  at  the 
fame  time  are  felt  ferenity,  pleafure,  and 
courage  of  mind.  In  larger  dofes  they  bring 
on  fleep,  llupor  and  delirium ;  and  when  car- 
ried to  the  utmoil  quantity,  infenfibility,  apo- 
plexy and  death.  It  is  of  little  moment  in 
this  inquiry,  whether  narcotics  ought  to  be 
confidered  as  direQ:ly  or  indirectly  fedative. 
They  are  forbidden  in  all  inflammatory  difeafes, 
where  they  certainly  do  harm  in  the  firfl 
flage :  they  generally  occafion  conflipation, 
but  hyofciamus  has  a  laxative  quality.  When 
long  continued,  they  are  knov/n  to  weaken 
the  nervous  fyftem  in  a  furprizing  degree ; 
difpofing  to  amentia,  epilepfy,  palfy,  tre- 
mors, convulfions,  melancholy,  madnefs,  &c. 
No  fubflances  in  nature  more  certainly  injure 
the  powers  of  digeftion,  and  bring  on  all  the 
fevere  fymptoms  of  nervous  infirmity.  This 
efFed  of  narcotics,  is  mofl  likely  primarily  de- 
rived from  the  nerves  of  the  flomach,  with 
which  they  come  firfl  in  contact,  and  from 
thence  extended  to  the  other  vifcera.  Where 
there  is  a  predifpofition,  or  hereditary  nervous 
temperament,  or  gout,  the  permanent  ufe  of 
them  is  flill  more  quickly  hurtful  :  in  fuch 
ftates  of  the  body,  they  ought,  like  vinous 


137 

fpirits,  never  to  be  prefcribed  but  from  ne- 
ceflity. 

Opiuni^  the  noblefl  attribute  of  Medicine,  fo 
calculated  by  its  powers  to  fweeten  life,  and 
fufpend  pain,  when  all  earthly  comforts  avail 
nothing,  has  its  limits  in  doing  good.  It  is  a 
misfortune  when  it  comes  to  be  difpenfed  by 
injudicious  hands  ;  for  it  is  often  prefcribed  by 
the  moft  ignorant,  in  difeafes  where  it  is  for- 
bidden. The  bodily  complaints  of  the  human 
race,  when  enervated  by  luxury  and  refine- 
ment, feem  to  produce  more  acute  pain ;  at 
lead  the  temperate  man  is  obferved  to  bear  fick- 
nefs  with  more  patience  and  refignation,  than 
thofe  accuftomed  to  indulgence.  The  fpirits 
are  apt  to  flag,  as  if  the  mind  had  no  relling 
place.  Opium  alone  gives  relief,  though  it 
mud  feed  the  difeafe.  Such  perfons  feem  to 
compound  with  their  phy  fician  for  found  nights, 
and  days  of  eafe  ;  and  if  he  does  not  comply 
he  mufl  be  changed.  Hard  is  the  taik  impofed 
on  the  medical  attendant ;  he  mufl  obey,  or 
ftarve.  The  night  draught  thus  becomes  fa- 
miliar in  the  family  :  the  fervant  goes  to  the 
apothecary  for  it  with  as  little  ceremony  as  he 
buys  kitchen  fait.  He  fees  the  (hop  boy  count 
the  drops  into  the  phial,  and  when  he   gets 

S  2 


138 

home,  narrates  the  compofition  of  the  placebo 
to  the  cook  and  the  nurfemaid.  Not  a  do- 
meftic  in  the  houfe  but  foon  learns  what  a 
fine  thing  laudanum  is ;  and  mafter  fwears  he 
can  get  no  reft  without  it. 

If  fuch  things  did  not  exift,  how  comes  it 
that  feven  young  women  in  this  neighbourhood, 
within  the  laft  three  years,  fhould  have  known 
that  a  large  dofe  of  this  tindure  will  kill.  Two 
of  the  number  effeded  their  purpofe.  I  was 
called  to  vifit  another  in  Percy  Street ;  Ihe 
had  fwallowed  twelve  drams  of  laudanum ; 
but  I  arrived  before  it  had  been  twenty 
minutes  in  her  ftomach,  and  by  plentiful  dilu- 
tion with  vinegar  and  water,  followed  by  an 
adive  emetic,  the  bad  elFefts  were  prevented. 
I  remained  in  the  houfe  till  I  was  fure  that 
every  drop  of  the  opium  was  difcharged,  and 
ihe  did  well.  It  appeared  that  thefe  poor 
girls  had  become  the  dupes  of  defigning  men, 
and  called  for  death  to  end  their  fufferings. 
Thus  the  dofe  of  opium  concludes  what  was 
begun  in  the  circulating  library.  A  little 
more  fecrecy  and  difcretion  are  certainly 
wanted  in  the  general  ufe  of  this  dangerous 
narcotic. 

But  there  is  reafon  to  believe,  that  even 


139 

medical  men  themfelves,  have  of  late,  entered 
too  eafily  into  the  indifcriminate  ufe  of  opium* 
He  mufl  be  a  fhort-fighted  phyfician  that  does 
not  calculate  upon  the  ultimate  effeds  of  his 
prefcription :  it  is  a  weak  excufe  for  getting 
quit  of  the  importunities  of  a  patient,  by  com- 
plying with  an  improper  requefl,  that  may  af- 
ford temporary  eafe,  at  the  expence  of  per- 
manent health.  In  the  nervous  temperament 
it  is  particularly  hurtful.  I  am  acquainted 
with  numbers  of  ladies  that  feel  fuch  horror 
at  taking  opium,  as  nothing  can  equal ;  and  in 
every  illnefs  they  may  labour  under,  con- 
ilantly  warn  the  medical  vifitor  againft  giving 
it,  as  no  difguife  can  make  it  agreeable  to  them* 
But  when  opium  happens  to  be  foothing  to 
weak  nerved  people  from  their  quick  fenfations 
it  is  apt  to  be  the  more  craved  for,  and  con- 
verted into  habit.  The  langour  and  dejedion 
which  follow  its  operation  pave  the  way  for 
the  repetition  of  the  dofe,  till  general  debility 
fucceeds.  In  fuch  conftitutions,  the  exhibi- 
tion of  opium  ought  never  to  take  place  on 
flight  occafions.  Midwives,  nurfes,  and  other 
perfons  out  of  the  medical  profeflion,  who 
difpenfe  laudanum  at  random,  ought  to  be 
folemnly  warned  againfl  it. 


no 


The  opium-eaters  m  Turkey,  are  the  moft 
pitiable  objeds  in  fociety.  Their  fqualid  looks 
and  emaciated  bodies,  after  a  long  courfe  of 
this  narcotic,  evince  how  fatal  its  ufe  is  to  the 
digeflive  organs,  and  how  it  prevents  the  due 
aflimilation  of  nourifhment.  On  diffedion, 
the  fame  effeds  appear  in  the  ftomach,  liver, 
and  bowels,  which  follow  a  long  courfe  of 
ardent  fpirits.  Like  the  dram-drinker  alfo, 
when  deprived  of  his  wonted  cordial,  they  are 
languid,  faintifh,  low-fpirited,  nervous,  and 
feeble.  Their  limbs  totter  under  them  ;  their 
heads  and  hands  tremble,  and  the  very  wind 
is  in  danger  of  overfetting  them.  Their  facul- 
ties feem  exhaufted,  the  memory  fails,  and 
the  only  remnant  of  intelled  which  they  pof- 
fefs,  appears  in  the  frightful  accounts  which 
they  give  of  their  horrors,  and  the  hypochon- 
driacal glooms  with  which  they  are  infefled. 
No  form  of  difeafe  exhibits  exiftence  under  a 
more  deplorable  fhape  than  the  opium-eater  and 
dram-drinker.  There  is  great  reafon  for  fuf- 
picion,  that  this  drug  is  daily  getting  more  into 
ufe  as  a  cordial,  and  privately  confumed  by 
numbers  of  perfons.  It  is  well  adapted,  from 
its  preparation  in  tindure,  to  be  carried  about^ 
and  drank  at  pleafure.     Its  exhilirating  quality 


141  •  . 

creates  a  momentary  heaven  for  minds  who  find 
nothing  but  guilt  and  defpair  in  their  own  re- 
flections ;  hence  it  has  grown  fo  general  in 
high  Hfe,  and  in  fafliionable  circles.  I  am  alfo 
of  opinion  that  many  fudden  deaths  are  in  the 
prefent  times,  occafioned  by  this  drug,  without 
exciting  the  leaft  fufpicion  of  its  being  taken. 
Thofe  who  accuftom  themfelves  to  the  narco* 
tic  article  called  bang^  in  the  Eall  Indies  and 
in  the  Turkifh  dominions,  are  faid  to  perifh 
under  difeafes  fimilar  to  thofe  of  the  opium- 
eater. 

Tobacco  is  another  narcotic  in  common 
ufe.  Perfons  who  are  in  the  habit  of  chew- 
ing, fnuffing,  or  fmoking  this  Indian  leaf, 
are  not  aware,  that  a  few  grains  of  it  taken 
into  the  flomach,  caufe  fudden  death.  Nay 
the  fmoke  of  it  injeded  into  the  redum,  has 
frequently  proved  fatal.  It  a6ls  powerfully  on 
the  nervous  fyftem,  deftroys  the  fenfibility  of 
the  ftomach  ;  and  it  is  obferved  that  thofe  who 
devour  it  in  great  quantity,  die  of  apoplexy, 
palfy,  and  dropfy. 

Poisons.  All  kinds  of  poifon,  fo  called, 
whether  taken  from  the  animal,  vegetable,  or 
mineral  kingdom,  if  not  immediately  fatal, 
weaken  or  deftroy  the  fundions  of  the  ftomach, 


142 

derange  the  nervous  fyflem,  and  bring  on  ner- 
vous difeafes ;  fo  certainly  are  the  digeflive 
organs  the  firll:  to  fufFer,  and  fland  from  their 
office  as  centinels  of  life. 

Bleeding.  Numbers  of  perfons  labour- 
ing under  nervous  debilities,  attribute  the  firfl 
appearance  of  their  malady  to  large  bleedings, 
or  evacuations  of  blood  from  other  caufes. 
No  fadt  is  better  known  to  the  medical  ob- 
ferver  than  that  frequent  convullions  are 
a  common  confequence  of  the  large  lofs  of 
blood.  The  nice  connedlion  between  the  cir- 
culating and  nervous  fyftems,  cannot  be  well 
explained,  but  they  a61:  reciprocally  on  one  an- 
other. It  is  equally  clearly  afcertained,  that 
men  or  women  of  the  nervous  temperament, 
bear  the  lofs  of  blood  ill.  Indeed  it  feldom 
or  never  happens,  that  their  difeafes  indicate 
the  pradice  :  when  done,  it  has  commonly 
been  through  the  ignorance  of  fome  flupid 
attendant.  Abortions,  and  fevere  floodings 
after  child-birth,  are  often  traced  as  the  be- 
ginning of  painful  and  lingering  nervous  affec* 
tions,  that  fometimes  remain  for  life. 

Reflections  on  Medicines.  Phyficians 
having  wifely  drawn  the  line  between  medi'- 
cine  and  diet,  the  former  can  only  be  indi' 


us 

cated  in  fome  of  the  difeafed  conditions  of  the 
body.  There  are  a  multitude  of  articles  in 
materia  medica^  beyond  what  I  have  thought 
proper  to  animadvert  on  here,  pofleffing  equal 
a£tivity  to  thofe  enumerated.  Some  of  thefe 
may  be  fuppofed  to  have  a  chemical  agency 
on  both  the  folids  and  fluids ;  while  others 
appear  to  a£t  more  immediately  on  our  fen- 
tient  parts.  It  is  evident,  then,  from  the  mofl 
accurate  obfervations,  that  fuch  fub fiances 
ought  to  be  exhibited  with  great  caution,  and 
their  operations  watched  with  the  moft  punctual 
attention.  Many  of  the  metallic  falts,  the  mi- 
i\eral  acids,  all  the  alkalis,  fome  of  the  neutral 
falts,  and  many  fimple  remedies  taken  from  the 
vegetable  kingdom,  are  of  this  defcription. 
The  nicefl  ftudy  of  the  phylician  muft  be  that 
at  the  bed- fide  of  his  patient ;  in  obferving  the 
phenomena  of  difeafe ;  developing  the  genius 
of  a  diflemper ;  unfolding  peculiarities  of  con- 
ftitution  \  fele(5ling  medicines  for  thefe  indica- 
tions of  cure,  and  difcerning  their  adion  and 
appreciating  their  power,  that  he  may  be  en- 
abled to  proceed  on  the  fame  plan  of  treat- 
ment, or  adopt  another.  Nature  has  endow- 
ed fo  few  minds  with  that  fuperior  intelligence 
of  being  equal  to  this  talk,  that  we  cannot  be 

T 


U4, 

furprized  when  told,  that  medicine  Is  ftill  in 
many  refpeds  ^'  a  conjedural  art.'^  Where 
men  do  not  all  poflefs  the  fame  fagacity,  culti- 
vated talents,  and  extenfive  acquirements,  they 
muft  think  and  reafon  differently,  on  fubjedts 
which  bear  no  refemblance  to  other  human 
purfuits  ;  and  concerning  which  no  appeal  can 
be  made,  without  overftepping  the  bounds 
which  divine  Providence  has  prefcribed  for  the 
ingenuity  of  mankind. 


i45 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Injluence  ofthefe  difeafes  on  the  charaBer  ofua^ 
tions,  and  on  domefiic  happinefs. 

It  is  a  fad  fully  confirmed  in  the  hiftory 
of  mankind,  that  a  limilarity  of  manners  has 
marked  ail  nations,  in  their  progrefs  from 
rudenefs  to  refinement ;  in  their  rife  and  in 
their  decline.  An  infant  flate  is  commonly- 
poor  :  but  from  intercourfe  with  its  neigh- 
bours, it  learns  the  advantages  of  a  change  of 
produce  and  commodities  ;  and  this  traffic 
foon  gives  fpring  to  ingenuity,  and  birth  to 
adventure.  Amidfl  its  articles  of  utility,  it 
alfo  imports  fome  that  are  fhowy  and  elegant : 
the  arts  of  inventing  new  fources  of  gain,  be- 
ing natural  to  the  human  mind,  gradually  ex- 
tend ;  till  luxury  in  all  its  fhapes,  appears  in 
the  manners,  amufements,  and  government  of 
every  commercial  people.  The  arms  of  impe- 
rial Rome  fubdued  the  world,  and  made  that 
city  the  emporium  of  wealth  and  grandeur, 
drawn  from  all  other  nations.  Luxury,  crimes, 

T  3 


146 

and  irreligion,  were  foon  the  confequences  of 
power  overgrown,  and  riches  unbounded. 
And  this  haughty,  wicked  people,  when 
they  had  loft  their  moral  virtue  and  digni- 
ty, and  with  thefe,  their  phyfical  ftrength, 
became  a  prey  to  barbarous  hordes  ;  who, 
undebauched  by  refined  pleafures,  found  the 
enervated  Romans  an  eafy  conqueft.  Let 
Great  Britain  look  to  this  example.  The 
Eaft  and  Weft  Indies  at  this  moment,  are 
a  theatre  of  oppreffion  and  flavery,  to  gorge 
her  with  commercial  wealth ;  and  a  diftriQ: 
of  Africa,  larger  than  Europe,  is  made  a  field 
of  blood,  to  purchafe  the  natives  for  cultivat- 
ing her  colonies,  whofe  produce  only  tends  to 
weaken  her  manly  charadler,  and  overwhelm 
her  with  nervous  infirmities  !  * 

The  rife  and  fall  of  a  large  commercial 
town,  may  be  taken  as  an  example  of  a  na- 

*  Since  this  work  was  printed,  the  Parliament  of 
this  country,  after  twenty  years  hefitation,  has  abolifii- 
ed  the  hellifli  flave  trade.  This  a<5t  was  chiefly  owing 
to  Mr  Fox  making  it  a  minifterial  queftion.  Thou 
perfecuted  ftatefman !  this  deed  will  embalm  thy 
memory  while  chriftianity  is  our  national  religion;  and 
thy  meek  fpirit  will  find  its  reward  in  Abraham's 
bofom  I 


147 

tlon.  From  a  few  fifhermen's  huts,  on  feme 
river,  or  arm  of  the  fea,  it  gradually  extends 
and  improves,  till  the  exchange  for  bufmefs, 
and  the  theatre  for  amufement,  become  its  or- 
naments. A  narrow  port  is  by  degrees, 
widened  into  a  capacious  harbour :  and  the 
warehoufe,  manufactory  and  (hop,  increafe  in 
proportion,  till  wealth  and  elegance  dazzle  in 
every  lane  and  alley.  The  coffee-houfe,  the 
inn,  and  the  tavern,  grow  neceflary  appendages 
to  bufmefs  and  pleafure  :  the  morning  begins 
with  a  bargain,  and  the  evening  clofes  with 
a  banquet.  Then  the  rout  commences,  to 
teach  the  young  the  arts  of  gaming  :  and  the 
midnight  mafquerade  initiates  them  into  the 
wiles  of  intrigue.  The  riot  difturbs  lleep ; 
the  drunkard  is  feen  daggering  home,  in  dan- 
ger of  robbery  and  death  ;  and  the  woman  of 
the  town,  deferted  by  her  deftroyer,  is  feeking 
reprifals,  and  looking  for  prey  in  the  ftreets. 
Now  the  hofpital  and  bedlam  appear  in  the 
fuburbs  ;  the  firft  to  receive  the  poor,  fick, 
and  lame  ;  and  the  other  to  confine  the  more 
wretched  in  mind.  The  phyfician  and  apothe- 
cary are  feen  gliding  in  their  chariots,  with 
retuiues  fometimes  not  much  like  men  who 
are  converfant  with  human  afflidion,  and  en- 


lis 


riched  by  the  luxuries  and  vices  of  their  fel- 
low mortals.  Morals  and  health  are  alike 
committed  in  this  vortex  of  wealth  and  diffipa- 
tion.  The  induftrious  man  who  began  the 
world  with  a  capital  of  fifty  pounds,  who  rofe 
at  five,  and  went  to  bed  at  nine,  who  dined 
on  a  plain  joint  and  pudding,  and  drank  no- 
thing (Ironger  than  table  beer,  does  not  find  a 
fortune  of  fifty  thoufand  pounds  exempt  him 
from  gout  and  nervous  torments.  A  crouded 
population  multipUes  all  contagious  maladies, 
but  efpecially  fevers  of  the  worfl  kind.  Fa- 
fliionable  pleafures,  fuch  as  towns  only  afford, 
are  a  fruitful  fource  of  weaknefs  and  pain  : 
and  drunkennefs  and  mercurial  courfes,  of 
themfelves,  produce  more  wretchednefs  and 
diforders,  than  the  whole  natural  infirmities  of 
life.  Under  thefe  circumftances,  the  human 
frame  mufl  degenerate  in  both  body  and  mind, 
as  we  fee  in  modern  Egypt,  Turkey  and  Italy. 
Thus  flourifhes  the  commercial  town  or  flate, 
till  its  wealth  and  effeminacy  weigh  it  down  ; 
when  it  falls  like  Tyre  or  Alexandria,  like 
Corinth  and  Carthage,  to  be  a  retreat  to  rob- 
bers, and  a  den  to  wild  beafts. 

As  we  analyze  the  manners  of  fociety,  and 
fcrutinize  thofe  caufes  which  lead  to  the  dif- 
eafes  of  which  we  treat,  we  obferve  their  ope- 


149 

ration  and  influence  to  be  very  general,  and 
daily  increafmg.  Commercial  Britain,  en- 
riched by  manufadlure  and  colonial  wealth, 
when  compared  with  her  barbarous  ftate,  does 
not  exhibit  a  nobler  fpirit  of  independence,  or 
fhow  more  fortitude  in  oppofmg  French  inva- 
lion,  than  what  was  done  nineteen  hundred 
years  ago,  by  our  forefathers,  in  repelling 
the  Roman  legions.  Our  invaders  were 
then  obliged  to  build  flrong  walls  and  ram- 
parts to  fhelter  them  from  the  Britons  :  *  but 
modem  Britons  have  ereded  Martello  towers, 
projeded  the  inundation  of  Eflex,  and  hoard- 
ed up  the  current  gold  coin,  as  tokens  of 
being  afraid  of  the  French.  Thefe  alarms  are 
to  be  conlidered  as  fo  many  fymptoms  of  a 
nervous  temperament  appearing  in  our  nation- 
al character.  Britain  had  no  fhips  to  oppofe 
the  landing  of  Julius  Caefar  ;  but  at  this  mo- 
ment fhe  has  a  navy  capable  of  fighting  the 
whole  fleets  of  Europe  united ;  yet  flie  trem- 
bles at  a  flotilla  of  cock-boats  !  It  is  that 
puddle  of  corruption,  the  Stock  Exchange ; 
that  Delphi  of  Plutus,  where  flock-brokers 
pay  their  vows,  and  expound  prophecies,  that 

*  The  walls  of  Adrian  and  Severus- 


150 

has  filled  the  nation  with  degenerate  fears ,  ap- 
prehenfion,  and  hypochondriacifm.  Europe 
has  been  faved  by  the  Britilh  navy  from  the 
fangs  of  French  tyranny ;  yet  fhameful  to 
be  told,  after  the  fleets  of  France  have  been 
annihilated,  we  are  now  to  be  aflailed  by  three 
thoufand  wherries,  manned  with  blue  devils  !  * 
If  I  am  altogether  corred:  in  faying,  that  the 
nervous  temperament  is  hereditary,  and  there- 
fore the  difeafes  which  depend  upon  it,  liable 
to  be  extended  to  the  offspring,  they  muft 
multiply  in  prodigious  proportion.  They  ap- 
pear in  the  prefent  age  to  have  acquired  that 
growth,  which  nothing  but  a  general  revolu- 
tion among  all  ranks  of  fociety  can  check.     I 

*  Ihe  gentlemen  of  the  Stock  Exchange^  as  they  deno- 
minate themfelves,  are  projeifting  great  things  from  the 
conqueft  of  Buenos  Ayres.  Spain,  humbled,  degrad- 
ed, pillaged  by  an  imperial  cut-throat,  is  almoft  blotted 
out  of  the  map  of  Europe ;  which  fhe  owes  to  the  gold 
and  filver  brought  from  the  new  world.  Yet  thefe 
gentlemen  feem  to  entertain  no  fears  for  the  like  fate  hap- 
pening to  Great  Britain.  Such  is  the  patriotifm  of* 
money-lenders! — Sept.  H,  1807.  It  is  to  be  hoped 
the  melancholy  accounts  juft  received  from  the  army 
in  South  America  will  be  fome  check  to  the  avarice  of 
thefe  ftock-jobbers  ;  this  trading  expedition,  it  now  ap- 
pears, is  annihilated  at  the  expence  of  2000  brave  men  I 


151     ,         ■ 

rnay  be  told,  that  thefe  difeafes  are  not  very 
dangerous,  and  very  feldom  produce  death ; 
and  it  may  be  added,  the  bills  of  mortality 
do  not  juftify  my  conclufions.  Thefe  argu^ 
ments  are  eafily  anfwered.  It  is  true,  death  is 
feldom  put  down  to  nervous  diforders :  but 
if  conftant  pain,  mental  difquietude,  and  ap- 
prehenfion  of  dying,  are  to  be  confidered  as 
evils  in  this  ilage  of  exiftence,  then  are  ner- 
vous afflictions  to  be  held  as  the  chief  caufe  of 
them*  And  it  is  to  be  remembered,  that  the 
mod  frightful  part  of  the  catalogue  of  dif- 
eafes, fuch  as  apoplexy,  palfy,  madnefs,  me- 
lancholy, epilepfy,  convulfions,  colic,  iliac 
paflion,  atrophy  and  dropfy,  are  often  ufhered 
in  by  nervous  affedion,  before  they  alTume 
their  own  charader  and  fhape.  Phyfical 
flrength  of  body  cannot  be  long  preferved 
under  enervating  modes  of  living  :  the  ftature 
and  the  mind  mufl  both  diminifh  and  dege- 
nerate. The  poet  fay  s,yZ?r/^j-  creantur  fortihus 
it  bonis  ;  and  very  aptly  adds, 

—  nee  imbellem  feroces, 


Progenerant  aquils  columbam.  Hor. 

An  eminent  fenator.  Sir  John  Sinclair,  has 
lately  made  fome  noble  attempts  to  regenerate 

u 


152 

the  phyfical  ftrength  of  the  country,  by  re- 
calling mankind  to  agricultural-  life.  His  in- 
ftitution  of  a  fociety  for  that  purpofe,  under 
the  authority  of  parliament,  has  already  had 
confiderable  effed.  Many  noblemen  and  gen- 
tlemen, of  great  landed  property,  have  fecond- 
ed  thefe  patriotic  views,  and  turned  their  at- 
tention to  this  national  obje£l :  a  fpirit  of  im- 
provement has  appeared  in  every  county,  and 
is  daily  increafmg.  No  man  who  poffeiTes  the 
fmallefl  fpark  of  love  for  his  country,  but 
muft  wilh  full  fuccefs  to  the  undertaking. 
No  truth  in  political  economy  is  better  proved, 
than  that  a  nation  of  fedentary  people  can 
never  be  a  nation  of  heroes.  We  might,  in- 
deed, preferve  all  our  manufaduring  eftablifh- 
ments,  and  mod  of  the  fine  arts,  during  the 
degeneracy  of  phyfical  courage :  but  could 
an  army  of  man-milliners  defend  the  Britifh 
iflands  againft  the  ruffians  of  Bonaparte?* 
The  puny  inhabitants  of  Italy  and  Indoftan 
are  finer  fpinners  of  filk  and  cotton  than 
Engliflimen,  becaufe  they  are  ftrangers  to  all 
the  mafculine  virtues.  Let  us  therefore  be- 
ware how  we  extol  too  much  the  eiFeminate 

*  Non  his  juventus  orta  parentibus,  &c.     Hor» 


153 

labours  of  the  fpindle  and  the  loom.  A  com- 
mercial people  merely,  can  never  be  an  inde- 
pendent nation.  They  owe  to  foreigners  the 
confumption  of  their  manufadures ;  and  when 
thefe  chufe  to  do  without  them,  or  to  buy 
them  elfewhere,  fuch  a  people  muft  become 
bankrupts  in  finance.  The  glory  and  fecurity 
of  the  United  Kingdom,  muft  be  to  blend  thefe 
purfuits,  agriculture  and  commerce,  in  the  na- 
tional character. 

From  the  imperfedl  ftate  of  medical  hifto- 
ries,  which  have  come  to  us,  from  the  early 
ages  of  the  world,  we  are  left  much  in  the 
dark,  how  far  luxurious  living  and  effeminate 
cuftoms  affected  the  health  of  nations.  We 
are  told  of  their  vices  and  debaucheries  arifing 
to  excefs ;  and  thefe  feem  to  have  generally 
been  forerunners  of  their  fall  and  decline. 
When  the  form  of  republican  government  in 
Rome,  yielded  to  the  tyranny  of  the  Csefars, 
with  it  the  republican  virtues  gave  way  to  the 
vices  of  courts ;  and  the  Romans,  foon  after, 
loft  their  charader  for  military  prowefs.  It  is 
therefore  but  fair  to  infer,  that  the  faculties 
of  foul,  and  the  vigour  of  body,  underwent 
immediate  changes  ;  and  that  a  train  of  dif- 
eafes  of  a  peculiar  caft,  fprung  up  among  this 

u  2 


154. 

debafed  people.     Hence  the  modern  enervat- 
ed inhabitant  of  Italy  muft:  be  very   unlike 
the    ancient   warlike  Roman.      The    youth 
of  the  one  is  fpent  in  learning  mufic,  painting 
and  frippery  :    the  other  v^ras  early  trained  to 
bear  fatigue,  hunger,  thirft,  running,  leaping, 
fwimming,  &c.      Difeafes  of  the  fame  clafs 
could  not  therefore  exift,  in  conftitutions  fo 
different  in  habit  and  predifpofition.    The  rural 
life  alfo  occupied  a  confiderable  portion  of  time 
with  the  Rornan  worthies  of  the  old  republic. 
All  the  Latin  claflics  abound  with  beautiful 
eulogies  on  ruftic  manners,  fcenery  and  recrea- 
tion, particularly  Virgil,  Horace,  and  Pliny  the 
younger.     The  greateft  man  whom  modern 
ages  have   produced,    George    Wafliington, 
was  of  this  fchool.     How  much  nobler  was  it  to 
retire  from  the  command  of  a  vidorious  army, 
after  fecuring  the  independence  of  his  country, 
for  the  ftudy  of  nature  in  his  own  farm,  than  to 
live  in  a  city  to  learn  excife  laws,  and  fqueeze 
taxes  from  induftry,  to  pay  profligate  favourites, 
and  unprofitable  wars.     How  mean  and  con- 
temptible the  upftart  emperor  of  France  ap- 
pears, when  compared  with  this  truly  chriflian 
hero,  the  friend  and  admiration  of  human 
kind! 


loo 

The  difeafes  of  a  labouring  and  a£live  pea- 
fantry,  pr  of  thofe  of  any  condition  of  man- 
kind, expofed  to  the  weather  in  all  feafons,  are 
almoft  confined  to  the  inflammatory  clafe; 
fuch  as  pleurify,  acute  rheumatifm,  catarrh, 
cynanche,  &c.  Thefe  depend  on  a  vigorous 
vital  power,  a  rigid  fibre,  and  a  florid  denfe 
blood:  they  are  a  diredlly  oppofite  flate  of 
the  fyftem  to  what  predifpofes  to  nervous 
difeafes.  No  kind  of  diet  comes  wrong  to  the 
flomach  of  a  hale  ruilic ;  the  unleavened  fari- 
naceous meal,  or  a  draught  of  imperfedly 
fermented  malt  liquor,  that  would  throw  the 
dyfpeptic  and  bilious  citizen  into  a  colic,  he 
takes  down  with  impunity.  He  is  alfo  capa- 
ble of  braving  fatigue,  privation  of  food  and 
fleep,  and  every  other  hardfliip,  in  a  manner 
that  would  foon  deftroy  the  town  inhabitant. 
A  nation  that  cannot  recruit  its  foldiers  from  a 
robufl:  and  hardy  peafantry,  can  never  bring 
into  the  field  an  army  able  to  endure  the  toils 
and  adventures  of  adlual  war.  * 

Amidft  the  general  effeminacy  of  manners, 
that  is  rapidly  confuming  the  manly  fpirit  and 

*  See  Dr  Robert  Jackfon,  the  army  phyficlan,  on 
this  fubje^. 


156 

phyfical  flrength  of  this  age,  and  what  may 
uhimately  annihilate  all  that  is  great  in  the 
character  of  Britons,  it  is  fomewhat  confoling 
to  obferve,  that  the  feamen  of  the  navy,  that 
bulwark  of  our  liberties,  will  be  the  lafl  of  the 
community  to  feel  the  efFed  of  thofe  enervating 
cuftoms.  The  naval  officer  and  feaman  em- 
bark in  their  profeflion  while  boys,  before  they 
can  be  acquainted  with  the  foftening  arts  of 
the  day.  Hardfhip,  danger,  and  privation, 
are  the  lot  of  naval  fervice:  to  brave  the 
weather,  the  feafon,  and  climate,  is  their  de- 
light and  their  duty ;  which,  fortunately  for 
their  country,  grow  into  habit.  Hence  they 
have  little  enjoyment  among  the  common  a- 
mufements  of  fociety ;  and  feel  that  kind  of 
life  hang  heavy  upon  them,  which  gives  no  birth 
to  adion  and  enterprize.  It  is  true  a  fpecies 
of  nervous  difeafe  did  make  its  appearance 
during  the  late  war.  It  occurred  among  both 
officers  and  men ;  but  was,  by  no  means,  a 
general  malady.  *  The  hard  duty  of  a  ftupid 
blockade  had  a  chief  fhare  in  its  produdion. 

Statefmen,  I  believe,  feldom  or  never  read 
the  medical  hiftory  of  fleets  and  armies.  They 

*  Med.  Nautica.  vol,  3. 


157 

are  afraid  that  fuch  gloomy  narratives  would 
alarm  confcience,  and  bring  on  fits  of  hypo- 
chondriacifm.  *  Yet  by  thefe  means,  they 
might  be  made  wifer  minifters,  if  not  better 
men.  The  practice  of  blockade  has  crept  much 
into  our  naval  fyftem  of  late ;  yet  it  was  ab- 
horred by  Howe  and  Nelfon,  as  inconfiftent 
with  the  genius  of  our  feamanfhip.  But  though 
it  may  be  conduced  with  eafe  in  the  equal  wea- 
ther between  the  tropics,  it  can  never  be  effec- 

*  The  fate  of  the  coiv-poch  inoculation  in  this  coun- 
try, is  a  proof  of  the  indifference  of  ftatefmen  to  the 
improvement  of  the  health  and  fafety  of  the  comnmni- 
ty.  It  has  been  faid,  that  the  late  minifter  refufed  to 
become  a  member  of  the  fociety  for  encouraging  'oac- 
cination  :  and  his  predeceffor,  the  fon  of  a  phyfician,  op- 
pofed  the  gift  of  20,0001  to  the  immortal  author  of  this 
matchlefs  difcovery,  fo  that  xSx'Q  grant  was  only  10,0001. ! 
The  prefent  minifters,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  will  retrieve 
the  credit  of  the  nation,  by  beftowing  the  merited 
honours  and  rewards  due  to  Dr  Jenner.  See  alfo  the 
fate  of  this  difcovery  in  a  branch  of  public  fervice, 
Med.  Naut.  vol.  3.  Since  the  firft  edition  of  this 
work  was  publifhed,  a  parliamentary  gift  of  20,0001. 
has  been  beftowed  on  my  learned  friend  j  in  which 
grant  Mr  Chancellor  Percival  found  himfelf  in  the 
minority y  to  the  eternal  honour  of  the  prefent  Houfe  of 
Commons. 


15S 

live  in  the  (lormy  feafoAS  of  European  feas. 
Such  a  mode  of  fervice  is  calculated  to  pleafe 
underwriters  and  flock- brokers,  but  it  can  ne- 
ver be  acceptable  to  the  officer  and  feaman.  A 
duty  fo  fevere,  without  variety  to  give  fpring 
to  adventure,  benumbs  the  faculties,  exhaufls 
the  bodily  powers,  and  in  habits  predifpofed, 
brings  on  nervous  irritability  that  Ihortens  the 
fpan  of  life. 

It  has  been  gravely  afferted,  and  with  much 
probability  of  truth,  that  during  the  reign  of 
terror  in  France,  in  the  late  revolution,  a  period 
marked  by  fury  and  blood  beyond  whatever 
was  known  in  a  civilized  country,  all  difeafes, 
ufually  called  nervous,  low  fpirits,  or  hypo- 
chondriacifm,  quickly  difappeared.  Thefc 
difeafes  are  fo  nearly  connedied  with  the  tenor 
of  the  mind,  that  great  commotions  in  the  mo- 
ral world  may  both  induce  and  remove  them. 
But  if,  as  we  contend,  they  are  chiefly  the  ofF- 
fpring  of  a  life  of  floth  and  inadion,  violent 
popular  tumults,  that  roufe  anarchy  and  fero- 
cious paffions,  and  let  loofe  the  furies  among 
mankind,  cannot  fail  of  making  ftrong  impref* 
fions  on  the  timid  and  defponding.  All  phy- 
ficians  converfant  with  thefe  diftempers,  are 
aware,  that  a  correfponding  train  of  thought 


15& 

attends  the  bodily  diforder ;  and  that  it  is  a 
preliniininary  ftep  to  the  cure,  to  infufe  adivity 
of  mind,  fo  as  to  force  new  ideas  on  the  patient. 
We  have  heard  of  a  fit  of  the  goutbeing  inftant- 
ly  cured  by  the  alarm  of  fire ;  and  the  perfon 
confined,  throwing  his  crutches  away  to  efcape 
from  the  danger.  Nervous  perfons,  in  dif- 
ferent families,  have  been  fuddenly  relieved  by 
unexpeded  good  fortune  coming  upon  their 
near  relatives ;  and  the  indifpofition  has  again 
recurred  bv  the  return  of  a  frefh  difafter  :  and 
all  ftrong  emotions  while  they  laft,  have  more 
or  lefs  the  fame  effed  in  fufpending  or  removing 
both  the  mental  and  corporeal  ailment. 

The  South  Sea  fcheme  of  1720,  that  bub- 
ble of  commercial  fpeculation,  gives  a  curi- 
ous example  of  the  Englifli  charader.  It 
was  remarked  at  that  time,  that  more  in- 
ftances  of  madnefs  appeared,  than  at  any 
former  period.*  In  fhort,  numbers  became 
maniacs,  from  the  fudden  wealth  which  fell 
to  them  :  thefe  were  probably  of  the  nervous 
temperament.  The  tranfition  was  too  great 
and  quick  for  the  fenfibility  of  particular  con- 
flitutions.     This  fcheme  having  foon  failed^ 

*  Dr  Mead. 
X 


160 

it  is  likely  that  hypochondriaclfm  and  low 
fpirits  would  fucceed  to  an  equally  fudden 
reverfe  of  fortune ;  but  of  this  we  are  not 
told. 

A  naval  officer,  while  abroad  in  the  late 
war,  received  a  letter  from  his  fifter,  telling 
him,  that  his  ticket  in  the  lottery  had  come 
up  a  prize  of  20,000/.  He  was  fo  elated 
with  the  news,  that  he  became  inftantly  de- 
lirious ;  leaped  from  a  wardroom  window  in- 
to the  fea,  and  was  drowned.  The  Athenian 
foldier,  who  ran  to  the  city  covered  with  duft 
and  blood,  to  announce  the  victory  of  Ma- 
rathon, was  fo  overpowered  at  the  event,  that 
he  could  only  call  out,  "  Rejoice  with  the 
vidtors^^  and  immediately  expired.  In  like 
manner  the  Roman  mother  died  fuddenly, 
on  hearing  that  her  fon  had  furvived  the  bat- 
tle of  Cannae.  It  is  probable  all  thefe  per- 
fons  were  of  the  nervous  temperament,  from 
being  fubjed  to  fuch  violent  emotions.  Bad 
news,  fuch  as  the  death  of  wives  and  huf- 
bands,  or  children,  however  fuddenly  told,  or 
happening  unexpectedly,  do  not  feem  to  ope- 
rate like  exceffive  joy.  Grief  is  flow  in  pro- 
ducing derangement  of  mind  ;  and  is  nearer 
to  what  we  call  the  mild  delirium  :  while  the 


161 

frenzy  of  joy  partakes  more  of  the  delirium 
ferox,  I  have  obferved  fomething  like  tem- 
porary infanity,  in  feveral  officers,  who  had  at 
once  been  elevated  from  extreme  poverty  to 
a  fortune,  by  prize-money.  Men  who  have 
been  wealthy,  and  afterwards  reduced  to  in- 
digence, often  fmk  into  defpondency  and  low 
fpirits.  But  it  is  alfo  true,  that  perfons  who 
have  unexpectedly  received  great  riches  or 
legacies,  are  apt  to  turn  hypochondriacal 
by  being  lulled  into  eafe  and  fecurity,  and 
having  no  longer  caufe  for  adion  and  enter- 
prize.  I  have  known  habitual  drunkennefs  in  a 
family,  that  brought  on  fome  of  the  moft  afflict- 
ing nervous  fymptoms,  completely  overcome 
on  a  fignal  misfortune  befalling  a  brother ; 
and  nothing  beyond  water  ufed  afterwards. 
Such  a  fadt  totally  difproves  the  reafoning  of 
thofe  phyficians,  who  tell  us  it  is  dangerous 
to  fubtradt  the  ftimulus  all  at  once.  The 
mind  that  is  ftable,  by  a  firm  nervous  fyftem, 
is  little  ihook  by  the  incidents  of  life  :  where- 
as the  fickle  conftitution  of  nerves  bears  un- 
equally every  viciffitude  ;  but  fuftains  forrow 
and  difappointment,  better  than  joy  and  good 
fortune.  Thus  the  moral  propenfities  are  to 
be  learned  from  the  phyfical  habit  j  and  the 

X    2 


162 

peculiar  genius  of  difeafes,  unfolded  by  the 
pallions  of  the  individual. 

The  nervous  temperament^  abflradedly  con- 
fidered,  is  often  the  feat  of  difpofitions,  that 
appear  in  two  extremes ;  and  giving  birth  to 
paffions  of  the  mod  oppofite  kind.  Under 
the  government  of  a  bad  heart,  it  is  ferocioufly 
cruel,  or  abjedly  timid.  When  men  pofTeffing 
thefe  traits  of  charadler,  happen  to  be  armed 
with  power,  they  become  the  fcourges  and 
butchers  of  mankind.  Such  we  fufpeft  to 
have  been  the  temperament  of  all  thofe  tyrants, 
whofe  reigns  have  been  marked  by  murder 
and  outrage  in  the  hiftory  of  nations*.  The 
prefent  ruler  of  a  neighbouring  people,  ap- 
pears to  be  a  man  anfwering  to  this  defcrip- 
tion.  He  is  faid  to  be  fubjed,  at  times,  to  the 
deeped  hypochondriacal  glooms  ;  and  while 
under  their  influence,  his  temper  ■  exhibits 
more  of  the  demon  than  the  human  being. 
Jealous  of  his  perfonal  fafety,  even  to  timidi- 

*  Such  were  Philip,  Alexander,  and  Julius  Caefar. 
Philip  and  Alexander  were  great  drunkards,  and  con- 
fequendy  nervous,  verfatile,  and  dyfpeptic.  And  Plu- 
tarch informs  us,  that  Caefar  was  fubjedt  to  violent 
headachs,  and  frequent  fits  of  epilepfy,  adifeafe  of  th 
nervous  temperament. 


163 

ty,  becaufe  he  is  aware  that  his  plans  of  am- 
bition are  to  be  efFefted  by  blood,  and  accom- 
plifhed  by  perfidy,  he  knows  that  he  cannot 
be  beloved.  Through  fiaughter  and  fraud, 
he  has  waded  to  a  throne :  and  his  obtain- 
ing the  fceptre,  was  the  fignal  to  fhut  the 
gates  of  mercy  againfl  his  fpecies.  A  Granger 
to  every  domeftic  enjoyment ;  unfufceptible 
of  the  tender  paiTion  ;  and  aloof  from  all  the 
temperate  and  foothing  pleafures,  which 
fweeten  the  fl  umbers  of  a  good  man  in 
power  and  profperity,  this  arch-tyrant  is  faid 
never  to  Deep  two  nights  in  the  fame  bed,  from 
the  dread  of  alTalTination.  When  any  fudden 
difafter  befals  his  projedls,  without  a  fmgle  vir- 
tue to  cheer  his  refleQ:ions,  he  becomes  his  own 
tormentor :  his  bowels  are  wrung  with  fpafms ; 
the  biliary  dudls  partake  of  the  commotion ; 
and  a  jaundiced  hue  of  the  eye  indicates  to 
the  fpedator,  the  features  of  fome  devil  that 
has  ufurped  the  human  form.  Under  this 
fonlbre  cad  of  countenance,  his  vindidive 
paflions  brood  over  crimes,  and  hatch  plots, 
that  he  may  find  vidlims  to  glut  his  defire  for 
blood.  In  fuch  moods,  he  fends  to  the  guillo- 
tine,  incarcerates,  or  prefcribes  the  devoted 
loyalifts  of  France  ;  anticipates  in  their  fate 


16i 

the  doom  of  Englifhmen  ;  and  feels  in  minia- 
ture that  gratification,  which  he  longs  to  ex- 
perience by  the  invafion  of  Great  Britain. 
Hiftory  tells  us  of  bad  men  that  were  born 
with  teeth  in  their  jaws,  and  of  others,  whofe 
hearts  were  found  hairy:  fuch  relations  are 
amiable,  if  they  even  arofe  from  the  folly  of 
fuperftition,  as  they  imply  the  hideoufnefs  and 
deteftation  of  vice.  And  future  ages  may  in- 
quire with  avidity,  for  the  phyfiological  ftruc- 
ture  of  that  bread  which  was  fo  fuperlatively 
fleeled,  and  poffefTed  paffions  fo  tranfcendent- 
ly  cruel  above  what  is  recorded  of  the  common 
deflroyers  of  mankind. 

But  it  mufl  be  unfortunate  for  any  nation 
to  be  governed  by  a  man  of  capricious  tem- 
per, even  though  his  paffions  are  gentle  and 
mild.  A  nervous  ftatefman  could  not  eafily 
diveft  his  public  meafures  of  fome  portion  of 
his  conftitutional  difpofitions.  He  would  at 
times  view  things  through  a  falfe  medium : 
and  by  judging  from  miftaken  premifes,  would 
condudl  the  bufinefs  of  government  with  im- 
becility and  fupinenefs,  and  bring  it  into 
contempt.  Every  plan  he  devifed  would  par- 
take of  the  mood  he  happened  to  be  in  at  the 
moment :    it  would  be  liable  to  defeat,  and 


165 

expofed  to  oppofition ;  in  hazard  of  being  di- 
vulged before  execution,  and  open  to  derifion. 
The  morbid  fenfibility  of  a  deluded  hypochon* 
driac,  might  alarm  a  people  by  imaginary  dan« 
gers ;  and  in  the  feafon  of  difafter,  might 
bring  ruin  on  affairs  by  irrefolution  and  de- 
fpondency.  By  fuch  men  nations  have  been 
plunged  into  unnecefTary  wars  ;  and  inglorious 
peace  concluded,  when  advantageous  terms 
might  have  been  obtained.  Men  endued  with 
an  exquifitely  nervous  temperament,  ought  to 
be  banifhed  from  the  councils  of  all  fovereigns, 
however  refpedable  their  talents ;  for  con- 
fiftency  and  fortitude  are  incompatible  with 
their  phyfical  character. 

In  the  medical  profeflion,  the  nervous  tem- 
perament might  alfo  fo  affed  the  pradlice  of 
the  phyfician,  as  to  render  it  feeble,  fluduat- 
ing  and  irrefolute.  Difeafes  often  take  mod 
unaccountable  turns,  not  to  be  forefeen  or 
prevented  by  human  abilities.  Such  fudden 
changes  not  only  require  firmnefs  of  mind  and 
addrefs,  on  the  part  of  the  attending  phy- 
fician ;  but  his  conduct  and  example  may  fo 
aiFed  the  patient,  as  to  bring  on  a  fatal  de- 
fpondency.  Hence  the  value  of  confidence  in 
the  medical  friend.    To  a  fick  perfon,  who 


166 

thinks  himfelf  in  danger,  nothing  is  fo  dif- 
treiling,  as  to  behold  fear  and  diftruft  in  the 
countenance  and  deportment  of  his  medical 
director :  a  nervous  frame  is  therefore  very 
inadequate  to  fome  fituations  of  this  office. 

But  in  the  common  tranfadions  of  life, 
nervous  people  are  difficult  to  be  managed. 
Their  tempers  are  fickle,  their  fpirits  unequal, 
and  their  attachments  equivocal.  In  bufmefs 
'they  are  indecifive,  unfteady,  and  impracticable. 
Their  friendftiips  are  often  puerlifh,  and  their 
refentments  unmanly.  Amidft  domeftic  con- 
nexions, they  are  apt  to  teaze  their  relatives 
by  the  obfervance  of  trifles  ;  while  concerns  of 
importance  are  frequently  degraded  by  an  ill- 
timed  levity.  Much  of  their  time  therefore  is 
fpent  in  making  conceffions  to  others,  for  the 
inordinate  ebullitions  of  paffion ;  or  in  tortu- 
ring themfelves  by  groundlefs  fears,  or  ima- 
ginary affronts.  At  one  moment,  you  find  them 
obfequious  and  compliant ;  grateful  for  cor- 
redion,  and  gentle  on  being  reminded  of  their 
duty.  But  this  even  tenor  feldom  lafts  long  ; 
and  they  grow^  impatient  of  contradiction,  and 
furious  from  reftraint.  Thefe  tranfitions  are 
commonly  fudden :  the  fame  wavering  and 
capricious  principle  of  adion,  appears  to  dired 


167    ' 

alike  the  healthful  and  the  morbid  flate.  We 
behold  them  one  day,  taking  leave  of  their 
friends  with  all  the  folemnity  and  earneftnefs 
of  dying  men  ;  and  in  imagination  fufFering 
worfe  than  death :  while  on  the  next,  they 
will  be  feen  plunged  into  dillipation,  fafcinated 
with  pleafure,  and  attending  every  falhionable 
amufement. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  nervous  temperament 
is  often  found  to  be  the  foil  of  numerous  vir- 
tues :  the  nobleft  feelings  are  cheriflied  here, 
Senfibility  to  excefs  marks  the  conftitution ; 
and  afflidtion  cannot  addrefs  it  without  meet- 
ing its  fympathy.  It  is  this  degree  of  feeling, 
that  too  often  makes  it  the  fport  and  vidim 
of  paflion.  It  loves  and  hates  beyond  bound. 
Hence  thofe  corroding  forrows,  which  fome- 
times  overtake  the  mod  tender  of  all  attach- 
ments, and  which  ultimately  bring  the  polTef- 
for  to  the  grave.  In  adverfe  circumftances 
nervous  people  eafily  defpond,  and  fmk  under 
misfortunes,  which  if  oppofed  by  patience 
and  firmnefs,  might  be  happily  overcome.  In 
this  temperament  of  the  fentient  fyftem,  a 
genius  for  the  elegant  arts  chiefly  originates. 
The  poet,  painter,  and  mufician,  may  be  juftly 
llyled  genus  Irritable  vatum.  We  here  meet  with 

Y 


16$ 

the  whole  eccentricities  of  fuperior  endowmentSj 
often  blended  with  the  moft  abjedt  purfuits  5 
fublimity  and  debafement  frequently  mixed  in 
the  fame  character.  Cheyne,  in  his  Englifh 
Malady,  facetioully  remarks,  "  I  feldom  ever 
*Vobferved  a  heavy,  dull,  earthy,  clod-pated 
*^  clown  much  troubled  with  nervous  difor- 
**  ders,  or  at  lead:,  not  to  any  eminent  degree ; 
*^  and  I  fcarce  believe  the  thing  poffible,  from 
^^  the  animal  economy  and  the  prefent  laws  of 
*'  nature."-^p.  180. 

On  the  whole  the  influence  of  thefe  difeafes 
is  often  great  on  national  charader,  and  do- 
meftic  happinefs.  When  wealth  and  luxury 
arrive  at  a  certain  pitch  in  any  country,  man- 
kind cannot  remain  long  ftationary  in  mental 
qualifications  or  corporeal  ilrength.  Domeftic 
peace  is  firfl  invaded  by  afperity  of  temper  and 
turbulent  paifions.  Vices  and  difeafes  are 
clofe  attendants  on  riches  and  high  living. 
All  thefe  gradually  extend  among  the  com- 
munity ;  and  the  circle  widens,  till  it  engulphs 
a  whole  people  5  when  polifhed  fociety  may  be 
faid  to  bring  on  its  own  dotage,  and  to  dig  its 
own  grave  / 


169 


CHAPTER  V. 

Hifiory  and  progrefs  of  thefe  difeafes* 

A  methodical  hiftory  of  thefe  difeafes,  at 
lead  a  narrative  of  the  fymptoms  as  they  ap- 
pear in  fuccellion,  is  almoft  impoflible.  They 
aflume  fuch  variety  in  form  and  manner  in 
different  perfons,  that  we  look  in  vain  for  re- 
gular order.  The  only  thing  certain  and 
peculiar  in  their  character  is  predifpofition ; 
which  may  be  divided  into  hereditary  and  ac-- 
quired, 

I.  By  hereditary  fredifpojition  is  to  be  un- 
derflood  an  original  conformation  of  body, 
tranfmitted  from  the  parent  to  the  offspring  ; 
by  reafon  of  which,  when  particular  exciting 
caufes  are  applied,  a  limilar  train  of  morbid 
phenomena  takes  place.  A  predifpofition  may 
therefore  appear  long  before  any  fymptom 
of  adual  difeafe  has  fhewn  itfelf :  as  in  the 
phthifically  difpofed,  a  perfon  will  be  eafily 
affeded  by  weather  and  fudden  changes  of 


no 

temperature ;  and  on  flight  occafions,  liable 
to  cough,  hoarfenefs,  tightnefs  or  flitches  of 
the  breafl,  &c.  The  hereditary  difpofition  to 
the  difeafes  in  queftion,  may  be  marked  in  the 
firft  flages  of  infancy  in  many  cafes :  in  others 
not  to  a  later  period,  or  till  particular  caufes 
bring  forth  the  latent  peculiarity.  The  child 
born  of  nervous  parents,  that  is  to  fay,  per- 
fons  of  weak  digeftive  organs,  and  irritable 
nervous  fyilem,  fubjedt  to  bilious  and  fpaf- 
modic  complaints,  &c.  will,  at  the  breaft,  be 
very  liable  to  bowel  afFedions,  fuch  as  car- 
dialgia,  flatulence,  conflipation,  or  diarrhoea, 
gripes,  yellow  gum  or  jaundice,  &c.  Thefe 
will  be  apt  to  come  on  from  flight  occafions, 
as  when  the  milk  of  the  nurfe  is  affeded, 
either  by  her  paffions  or  improprieties  of  diet, 
or  when  any  thing  has  entered  its  food  that  is 
difficult  of  folution  in  the  flomach.  Thefe 
caufes  will  frequently  operate  with  fuch  efFe6t, 
and  to  fuch  a  degree,  as  to  induce  convulfions 
and  death. 

As  the  child  grows  up,  the  tendency  to 
thefe  complaints,  will  be  more  perceptible  on 
flight  deviations  from  its  regular  modes  of 
living.  If  it  meets  with  badly  fermented 
bread,  heavy  pudding,  eats  too  freely  of  fruit, 


171 


fweetmeats,  pye-cruft,  all  kinds  of  paftry, 
pound  cake ;  or  drinks  of  cyder,  perry,  beer, 
wine,  punch,  &c.  the  flomach  and  bowels 
will  be  quickly  difordered.  At  the  fame  time 
a  peevifiinefs  and  fretfulnefs  of  temper  will 
appear,  extreme  irritability,  want  of  fleep,  lleep 
difturbed,  with  other  nervous  fymptoms,  till 
the  offending  caufe  has  been  correded  in  the 
firfl:  paffages. 

In  fome  of  the  difeafes  of  infancy,  fuch  a 
child  will  fuffer  more  than  other  children. 
At  the  teething  period,  it  will  be  more  likely 
to  be  feized  with  bowel  diforders  and  convul- 
fions  :  in  the  eruptive  fever  of  the  fmall  pox, 
it  will  be  more  prone  to  thefe  fits :  and  in 
the  hooping  cough,  as  being  a  fpafmodic  dif- 
eafe,  the  nervous  infant  will  be  a  fevere  fuf- 
ferer.  Frights  of  all  kinds,  that  ruffle  the 
temper,  and  impatience  under  bodily  pain, 
will  be  attended  with  irritable  paffions.  Worms 
are  the  confequence  of  weak  bowels  and  dif- 
ordered digeftion  ;  a  child  of  this  defcription, 
will  therefore  be  much  troubled  with  worms, 
and  generally  their  mod  troublefome  fymp- 
toms. Thefe  fymptoms  will  fometimes  put  on 
all  the  appearance  of  a  confirmed  hydro- 
cephalus  internus,  even  to  the  lad  degree  of 


172 

ftrablfmus.  I  have  leen  fo  many  inflances  of 
recovery  from  this  apparently  hopelefs  .ftatCj 
that  I  am  difpofed  to  refer  the  v^rhole  to  their 
inteftinal  vermin,  or  to  fome  aggravated  attack 
of  flomach  affedion,  depending  on  original 
nervous  predifpofition.  It  appears  indeed  to 
me,  from  a  multitude  of  cafes,  that  this  dif- 
eafe  is  purely  the  offspring  of  this  tempera- 
ment 5  arid  when  fluid  is  found  in  the  venticles 
of  the  brain,  it  is  to  be  confidered  as  the  effeB 
rather  than  the  caufe ;  for  death  has  often 
happened  where  no  water  could  be  deteded. 

At  the  age  of  puberty,  if  a  female,  it  will  be 
liable  to  be  affected  with  that  difeafe  ufually 
called  chlorojis  ;  which,  befides  fo  many  fymp- 
toms  of  dyfpepfia,  combines  with  it  the  emanft9 
menfium.  The  chorea,  or  St  Vitus's  dance,  al- 
fo  appears  about  this  age  :  and  in  numerous 
cafes  which  I  have  feen  of  both  complaints,  I 
am  difpofed  to  think,  that  they  never  occur 
without  manifeft  predifpofition,  and  are  there- 
fore to  be  confidered  rather  as  fymptoms  of  the 
nervous  temperament,  than  diftind  difeafes. 
The  changes  which  now  take  place  in  the 
conftitution,  conjoined  to  the  quick  growth  of 
the  body  at  the  fame  time,  will  render  this  a 
moft  critical  period.     At  this  feafon,  the  ner- 


173 

vous  woman  Is  firll  affeded  with  hyflerics ; 
thefe  added  to  many  painful  fymptoms  of  in- 
creafed  irritability,  will  be  apt  to  recur  at  dif' 
iind  intervals^  through  life,  particularly  if  un- 
married. Extreme  delicacy  of  ftomach,  dyf- 
peptic  aifections,  and  what  are  called  bilious, 
dyfuria,  leucorrhcea,  hemicrania,  &c.  with 
other  nervous  figns,  will  be  the  lot  of  this  he- 
reditary predifpofition. 

The  female  that  is  born  of  gouty  parents, 
comes  entirely  within  this  defcription.  The 
fad  is  notorious,  that  what  is  called  regular 
gouty  or  gout  fhewing  itfelf  in  the  extremities 
pf  the  body,  feldom  attacks  the  fair  fex : 
and  when  it  happens,  the  woman  is  marked 
Ly  a  more  mafculine  form,  or  other  external 
figns  indicating  this  peculiarity.  But  even 
this  will  not  explain  why  the  female  is  fo  fel- 
dom affected  wdth  arthritic  inflammation. 
Something  may  perhaps  be  fought  in  the  ge- 
nerative faculty  :  the  cqftratos  are  faid  to  be 
exempt  from  gout:  regular  gout  is  very 
rare  before  the  age  of  puberty ;  and  all  the 
women  whom  I  have  known  fubje6l  to  in« 
flammatory  gout,  except  one,  had  never  borne 
children.  Gout,  in  all  its  fhapes,  is  preceded 
by  flomach  alFedion  ;    fo  alfo  is  the  periods 


174- 

Again,  the  flomach  recovers  as  the  pain  and 
inflammation  fix  in  the  joints  ;  and  if  they 
prematurely  recede,  the  affection  of  the  ftomach 
returns.  It  is  the  fame  with  the  period: 
when  one  goes  on  properly,  the  other  declines 
in  due  time  :  and  if  cold,  paflions  of  the  mind, 
or  other  caufes,  bring  on  a  fudden  ftoppage, 
all  the  complaints  of  the  digeftive  powers  in- 
flantly  recur. 

But  as  the  dyfpeptic  fymptoms  which  at- 
tend gout,  are  fo  much  alike  in  both  fexes, 
making  allowance  for  the  greater  fenfibility 
of  the  female,  they  ftrongly  fupport  the  idea, 
that  the  chylopoeitic  vifcera  are  the  original 
feat  of  this  difeafe ;  and  thefe  the  primary 
fymptoms  of  gouty  diathefis.  The  child  there- 
fore, who  is  born  of  arthritic  parents,  has  in 
its  conftitution  what  may  be  called  the  pre- 
difpofition  to  nervous  and  bilious  difeafes.  In 
infancy  it  is  prone  to  all  ftomach  and  bowel 
complaints  from  flight  caufes,  as  have  been 
defcribed,  and  thefe  will  be  its  attendants 
through  life.  Even  the  man  of  the  gouty 
family  will  not  be  exempt  from  this  difpofi- 
tion  to  be  dyfpeptic  and  bilious,  on  every  kind 
of  excefs  or  improper  indulgence.  In  both 
fexes,  they  fhow  a  ftronger  tendency,  as  they 


175 

appear  early ;  for  that  proves  a  weaker  ftruc- 
ture  of  the  digeftive  powers,  and  greater  debili- 
ty of  frame ;  juft  as  gout  is  to  be  more  dread- 
ed in  proportion  to  its  attack  at  an  early  age. 
Thus  the  youngeft  votaries  of  Venus  and  Bac- 
chus will  run  greater  hazards  of  immature 
gout,  and  premature  decrepitude  as  a  confe- 
quence.. 

2.  The  other  divifion  of  predifpofition  to 
thefe  difeafes,  is  the  acquired  predifpojition^  or 
what  may  be  brought  on  by  caufes  which  efpe- 
cially  weaken  the  frame  of  nerves,  and  the  chy- 
lopoeitic  organs.  This  predifpofition  may  take 
root,  even  during  the  earliefl  ftages  of  infancy, 
in  children  born  of  the  healthieft  parents.  The 
efFefts  of  the  milk  of  an  unwholefome  nurfe 
often  lay  this  foundation.  It  may  happen 
when  the  child  is  not  fuificiently  nourifhed ; 
where  the  nurfe  is  much  affected  with  the  dif- 
orders  herfelf ;  if  Ihe  drinks  too  freely  of  fpiri- 
tous  or  fermented  liquors,  or  is  in  the  habit  of 
taking  opium  or  other  drugs.  Bad  lodgings ; 
impure  air ;  hot  rooms  ;  chills  from  expofure  to 
cold  ;  walhing  the  infant  in  water  too  cold  or 
too  hot ;  want  of  cleanlinefs ;  dofmg  it  with 
hot  things,  whether  fpirits  or  aromatics  :  fre- 
quent opiates  in  any  form  to  make  it  fleep  j 


176 

theufeoftea;  deficient  exerdfe  ;  fweetmeats ; 
frequent  recourfe  to  medicines,  futh  as  emetics, 
and  purgatives,  but  particularly  calomel :  and 
if  thefe  articles  are  often  repeated  at  any  ftage 
of  childhood,  unlefs  competently  prefcribed, 
they  muft  infallibly  debilitate  the  flomach  and 
bowels,  and  induce  the  difeafes  in  quellion. 
To  all  thefe  caufes  may  be  added,  the  efFe6t 
which  the  furious  paflions  of  fome  women 
have  oil  the  infant  they  fuckle.  But  even 
children  at  an  early  age,  are  not  beyond  the 
reach .  of  moral  caufes,  particularly  females, 
and  thefe  will  often  operate  with  great  force 
on  fenlible  minds. 

The  girl  whofe  health  has  been  thus  ruined 
by  improper  nurling  in  infancy,  or  bad  treat- 
ment in  childhood,  will  be  apt  to  fuffer  at 
puberty^  and  at  tho.  change' of  life.  Ai  the 
former  period,  violent  hyfteric  and  chlorotic 
affedtions  will  comtnence,  and  health  will  be 
precarious  for  a  length  of  time.  Such  a  wo- 
man will  be  generally  liable  to  fterihty  from 
conftitutional  infirmities ;  to  abortion  in  the 
early  months,  and  to  premature  births :  thefe 
will  often  happen  from  flight  caufes  ;  and 
much  danger  will  be  encountered  during  par- 
turition and  in  the  puerperal  ftate.      Other 


177 

difeafes  of  equal  delicacy,  which  are  too  often 
the  bane  of  female  life,  will  be  the  portion  of 
fuch  a  woman.  .  Thefe  girls  acquire  an  inac- 
tive fedentary  turn  in  early  age,  which  is  fel- 
dom  overcome ;  they  feem  to  vegetate  rather 
than  live,  and  but  rarely  reach  .to  fifty  years. 
When  women  of  this  kind  of  habit  fuckle 
their  own  offspring,  or  that  of  others,  they 
much  injure  the  health  of  the  infant  as  well  as 
themfelves  :  fuch  children  commonly  die  in 
great  proportion  under  two  years  ;  and  if  they 
furviv^e  that  age,  it  is  with  indelible  marks  of 
a  puny  and  vitiated  conftitution.  Among  the 
poor  in  large  towns,  the  proportion  of  deaths 
in  infancy  is  great,  chiefly  owing  to  vicious 
nurfmg ;  and  much  caufed  by  that  nervous 
weaknefs  brought  on  by  the  ufe  of  tea  and  fpi- 
ritous  liquors. 

The  acquired  predifpofttion  is  alfo  the  fre- 
quent effed  of  preceding  difeafes  and  confine- 
ment ;  fuch  as  typhus  fever,  and  all  the  fevers 
of  tropical  climates.  Luxurious  living,  and 
highly  feafoned  food,  that  weaken  and  exhaufl 
the  digeflive  powers :  excefs  of  animal  plea- 
fure;  courfes  of  active  medicines  long  con- 
tinued ;  fuckling  the  babe  till  weaknefs  and 
emaciation  take  place ;  fevere  labours ;  hse- 

Z   2 


178 

morrhages ;  dlfappointed  love,  revenge,  or  am- 
bition ;  confinement  in  impure  air  ;  want  of 
exercife  ;  intenfe  thought ;  long  protraded , 
grief;  frights;  a  long  flate  of  fufpenfe  in 
waiting  the  decifion  of  fome  important  event ; 
the  improper  ufe  of  opium ;  fumes  of  metals, 
as  quickfilver,  lead,  or  copper ;  fpiritous  li- 
quors, and  other  narcotics  ;  poifons  of  every 
kind  in  fmall  dofes  ;  and  in  fhort,  whatever 
greatly  difturbs  or  debilitates  the  whole  ner- 
vous fyftem  and  abdominal  vifcera.  • 

"Wounds  and  injuries  of  the  head,  concuf- 
fions  of  the  brain,  and  whatever  may  induce 
effufion  and  compreflion,  fo  as  to  weaken  the 
organs  of  fenfe  and  motion,  or  render  them  un^ 
equal  in  their  adion,  fometimes  bring  on  a 
nervous  temperament,  or  at  leafl  pave  the  way 
to  thefe  difeafes.  Thefe  incidents  are  common 
enough  among  our  feamen  and  foldiers,  and 
now  and  then  to  be  met  with  in  private  life.  * 

Having  now  fully  defcribed  the  nature  of 
predifpofition  under  thefe  forms,  we  are  pre- 
pared to  relate,  what,  in  common  language, 

*  Convulfions  in  the  form  of  epileptic  fits,  are  cpm- 
mon  enough  after  organic  lefions  of  the  brain.  They 
have  been  frequently  relieved  by  the  trepan. 


179 

goes  by  the  name  of  a  nervous  complaint^  or  a 
bilious  attack ;  expreflions  frequently  heard 
among  all  kinds  of  people.  But  without  pre- 
difpofition  in  fome  degree,  it  is  to  be  prefumed, 
that  no  perfon  has  at  once  been  feverely  afflid- 
ed  with  thefe  difeafes.  The  two  kinds  of 
predifpofition  which  have  been  inveftigated, 
conftitute  what  modern  phyficians  have  called 
the  Nervous  Temperament,  for  it  is  not 
mentioned  by  old  writers. 

A  perfon  fubjedt  to  nervous  or  bilious  conu 
plaints^  has  commonly  fome  warning  of  an 
aggravation  of  the  fymptoms,  or  of  an  attack* 
Some  uneven  tenor  of  the  fpirits ;  fomething 
to  ruffle  the  temper  or  paffions ;  or  fome  irre- 
gularity in  diet,  moil  frequently  precedes  them. 
In  the  fex,  thefe  complaints,  for  the  moll  part, 
commence  near  the  -period^  and  when  not  fe- 
vere,  decline  with  it.  A  frequent  defire  of 
micturition,  or  a  profufe  difcharge  of  limpid 
urine  very  often  ufliers  in  the  attack,  in  both 
fexes. 

The  patient  himfelf  finds  it  difficult  to  de- 
fcribe  his  uneafy  fenfations,  for  want  of  lan- 
guage :  he  knows  not  with  what  fymptom  to 
begin,  though  he  will  anfwer  the  queflions  of 
the  phyfician  with  fufHcient  corredlnefs.    The 


V   * 


180 

phyficlan  therefore,  finds  advantage  in  putting 
queries  to  the  patient,  as  a  few  leading  ones 
will  often  fave  both  much  embarraffment  and 
converfation.  The  mind  is  irritable,  fickle, 
and  apprehenfive  ;  at  one  moment,  tenacious 
of  imprelTions,  fufpicious  and  jealous  of  con- 
tradiction :  at  another,  hurrying  from  one 
thing  to  another :  grave  and  gay  by  turns  ; 
with  fits  of  crying,  laughing  and  incoherent 
talking  ;  but  lefdom  indulging  in  converfation 
that  is  unconnected  with  the  confultation. 
The  defire  for  food  commonly  fails ;  an  un- 
pleafant  tafte  is  perceived,  which  excites  fre- 
quent fpitting  ;  ficknefs  at  flomach  fometimes 
comes  on  very  fuddenly,  with  vomiting  of 
green  four  mucus,  or  of  bilious  matter. 
What  is  thrown  up  is  often  found  fo  acrid 
and  corrofive  as  to  excoriate  the  throat  and 
mouth,  and  ilightly  tinge  filver ;  the  fauces 
and  tongue  have  been  bliftered  from  this  caufe, 
fo  as  to  appear  full  of  pimples,  or  Kttle  ulcers, 
that  render  maftication  of  the  food  painful, 
and  deglutition  impracticable.  The  bowels 
are  generally  irregular,  either  conftipated  or 
the  contrary,  and  opprefTed  with  flatulence. 
Acidity,  erudations,  and  dyfpncea,  fpafmodic 
twitches  about  the  breafl,  back  and  loins,  ac- 


181 

company  thefe  feelings.  It  Is  often  fur- 
prlzlng  to  fee  the  degree  of  Inflation  of  fto- 
mach  at  this  time  ;  coming  on  fuddenly,  and 
remaining  for  hours.  The  fkin  Is  dry,  and 
conflrided,  or  In  profufe  fweats  ;  the  whole 
furface  of  the  body  unufually  cold,  or  uncom- 
monly hot  by  turns  ;.  with  vertigo,  tremors, 
rllings  In  the  gullet,  and  vaft  depreffion  of  fpl- 
rits.  The  patients  are  extremely  fenfible  to 
the  changes  of  weather,  and  bear  eaflerly 
winds  ill. 

The  countenance  is  commonly  downcafl 
and  fallow  ;  and  the  white  of  the  eye  exhibits, 
more  or  lefs,  a  bilious  tinge.  Few  dyfpeptic 
perfons  have  at  all  times  a  clear  complexion; 
indeed  the  looks  are  a  fure  criterion  to  judge 
of  the  habit.  This  fuffufion  of  bile  fometlmes 
amounts  to  real  jaundice,  tranfitory,  or  more 
permanent ;  and  attended  with  pain  about  the 
epigaftric  region,  extending  upwards  from  the 
liver  to  the  flioulder,  and  generally  with  con- 
ftlpation.  Thefe  ideritial  fymptoms  are  fpeedi- 
ly  moved  by  laxatives,  though  briflv  purges 
may  be  necelTary,  with  which  confiderable 
quantities  of  infpiflated  bile  and  mucus  are 
brought  away,  and  alfo  biliary  calculi,  called 


182 


gall-flones,    which    Ibmetimes    obflrud    the 
duds. 

Paffions  of  the  mind,  or  whatever  greatly 
and  fuddenly  diflurbs  the  digeflive  powers, 
bring  on  jaundice.  But  the  fallow  complexion 
of  the  nervous  temperament,  is  not  always  ex- 
preffive  of  bile  being  carried  into  the  blood. 
It  probably  originates  alfo  from  imperfect  fan- 
guification  ;  and  when  the  florid  colour  is  de- 
ficient from  fubtraction  of  oxygen,  or  oxygen 
not  duly  fupplied.  When  the  yellow  tinge  of 
the  eye  proceeds  from  bile,  it  may  be  deteded 
by  dipping  a  thread  or  linen  rag  into  the  urine, 
which  will  be  ftained  yellow.  I  think  women 
are  much  more  liable  than  men,  to  the  fpaf- 
modic  form  of  this  complaint ;  which  may 
arife  from  their  weaker  flate  of  bowels,  and 
greater  irritability  of  nervous  fyftem. 

The  liver  itfelf  is  capricious  in  its  office  r 
we  perceive  at  one  time,  a  fufpenfion  of  the 
biliary  fecretion,  when  no  obftrudtion  of  the 
duds  is  to  be  fufpeded  j  and  at  another,  the 
bile  is  flowing  in  great  profufion,  fo  as  to  re- 
gurgitate by  the  pylorus,  and  be  evacuated  in 
quantity  by  vomiting ;  while  it  pafles  by  the 
other  way  in  increafed  proportion.      Warm 


183 

feafons  are  known  to  produce  this  eiFe£t  on 
the  liver  of  nervous  people. 

A  particular  laffitude,  liflleflhefs,  and  Inap- 
titude to  all  kinds  of  motion,  and  mental  exer- 
tion^ are  common  attendants  of  thefe  afFedions. 
The  patients  will  fu  for  hours  in  the  fame 
poflure,  without  paying  the  lead  attention  to 
what  is  going  on  around  them.  Even  the 
calls  of  hunger  are  difregarded,  and  without 
force  they  are  not  roufed  from  their  reverie  and 
ennui ^  to  take  food. 

Convulfive  ajihma^  often  recurring  periodi- 
cally, is  to  be  enumerated  among  the  attacks 
of  thefe  difeafes.  Indeed  the  true  afthma  is 
perhaps  never  met  with,  but  in  conflitutions  of 
great  nervous  irritability.  Such  to  a  certainty 
mud  be  that  fpecies  of  it  which  is  induced  by 
particular  fmells.  I  knew  a  lady,  who  was 
always  feized  with  afthma,  whenever  rad. 
ipecac,  was  pounding  in  the  fhop  ;  fo  fenfible 
was  fhe  of  this  efFe£t,  that  it  was  in  vain  to 
conceal  from  her  what  was  going  on  in  the 
mortar. 

When  fpafms  aflail  the  kidneys^  there  is 
often  much  acute  pain  in  the  loins  \  increafed 
on  moving  the  body,  and  lying  on  a  foft 
feather  bed  \    extending  downwards  by  the 


ureter  to  the  bladder,  occafioning  conftant  or 
very  frequent  defire  to  make  water  ;  produce 
ing  the  fymptom  called  ftrangury  ;  fometimes 
with  a  pain  of  the  mammae  in  women,  or  re- 
tratlion  and  pain  in  the  tefles  in  men,  and  a 
numbnefs  of  the  thigh  and  leg.  The  irritabi- 
lity in  thefe  parts  is  often  fo  confiderable,  as 
to  force  blood  from  the  paflage  of  the  urethra : 
the  urine  is  even  at  times  totally  fupprelTed, 
and  obliged  to  be  evacuated  by  a  catheter. 
When  the  urine  is  made  in  fmall  quantities,  it 
is  high  coloured,  letting  fall  a  copious  muddy 
fediment ;  but  at  intervals  it  is  voided  in  great 
profufion,  and  pale  as  common  water*.  The 
urine  not  unfrequently  depolits  an  uncommon 
quantity  of  mucous  fediment,  fometimes 
ftreaked  with  blood ;  at  other  times  more 
dark  coloured  and  even  black.  The  ftools 
alfo,  are  occafionally,  in  a  great  meafure 
compofed  of  mucous  matter.  I  know  fome 
gentlemen  who  experience  this  on  every  at- 
tack of  indigeftion  ;  and  independent  of  any 
preceding  venereal  affedion. 

When  great  flatulence  and  diftention  ac- 
company thefe  fhades  of  the  complaints  in  the 

^  Diabetes  Hyftencus, 


185 

urinary  paffages,  a  very  uncouth  appellation 
has  been  beflowed  on  them,  viz.  windy  gravel* 
Though  an  odd  kind  of  term,  it  would  feem, 
however,  to  convey  a  very  emphatic  meaning 
of  the  patient's  feelings* 

Pain  and  fulnefs  of  the  mammae  in  fome 
women  ufually  accompany  the  period:  but 
thefe  pains  have  at  other  times  continued  for 
months  j  and  I  have  met  with  inflances, 
wherein  the  female  was  fubjeded  to  fevere 
courfes  of  medicine,  under  the  idea  of  im* 
pending  cancerous  dispofiiion.  Such  affec- 
tions often  arife  from  pure  nervous  fympathy, 
and  yield  to  proper  treatment.  I  have  alfo 
known  fwellings  of  the  teftes,  and  other  pains 
of  the  male  genitals,  treated  by  incautious 
medical  people,  as  Lues  Venerea ;  which  to 
me  appeared  to  originate  from  a  nervous  tem- 
perament, and  yielded  to  a  treatment  that 
ftrengthened  the  digeftive  powers.  What  is 
called  feminal  weaknefs^  is  a  part  of  thefe 
complaints,  in  which  cafes,  delicate  and  ig- 
norant perfons  are  too  apt  to  trufl  themfelves 
in  the  hands  of  the  mofl  unprincipled  of  all 
quacks^  till  their  health  is  completely  ruined. 

Weaknefs  of  the  eyes,  even  to  total  blindnefs, 
being  a  common  attendant  of  nervous  debili- 

a  A  2 


1S6 

ty,  has  fometimes  been  miftaken  for  other 
difeafes,  and  a  mercurial  courfe  adminiflered 
not  only  without  relief,  but  adding  to  the 
malady. 

Though  at  times  the  appetite  for  food  is  de- 
ficient, yet  at  others  it  is  excefTive,  and  crav- 
ing after  many  out-o-the-way  things.  Hence 
thofe  longings  that  occafion  great  anxiety  to 
the  patients  and  all  about  them  ;  as  there  is 
commonly  a  neceflity  for  indulging  them  more 
or  lefs.  Deficient  appetite,  and  other  impedi- 
ments to  chylification,  fometimes  difappear  on 
eruptions  coming  upon  the  fkin,  and  alternate 
with  them.  It  is  commonly  judged  prudent 
not  to  repel  thefe  ;  as  it  is  held  dangerous  to 
dry  up  iffues  at  once,  or  any  other  drain. 

There  is  often  acute  pain  about  the  region 
of  the  ftomach,  bending  the  body  forward ;  it 
gets  the  name  of  cramps  and  is  attended  with 
vafl  dejection  of  fpirits,  and  fyncope.  This 
ought  always  to  be  confidered  an  alarming 
fymptom ;  and  I  have  generally  found  fuch 
cafes  terminate  fatally  on  a  fudden.  But 
fainting  fits  otherwife,  indicate  little  danger  : 
women  frequently  fall  down  without  any 
warning,  and  recover  in  a  few  minutes  as  if 
nothing  had  happened.    It  has  been  told  of 


187 


different  perfons  remaining  for  a  number  of 
days  without  external  figns  of  life ;  a  fituation 
which  never  came  within  my  knowledge,  and 
almofl  exceeds  my  belief.  Dr  Cheyne  relates 
the  cafe  of  Colonel  Townfhend,  who  had  fuch 
command  over  the  vital  fundions,  that  he 
could  fufpend  them  at  will,  or  die  when  he 
pleafed,  and  recover  again.  In  the  company 
of  another  phyfician,  he  faw  this  officer  go 
through  the  experiment  and  recover  himfelf : 
but  Col.  T.  did  not  long  furvive  thefe  intereft- 

ing  trials. 

Worms  are  common  enough  in  all  (lages  of 
thefe  difeafes,  but  are  particularly  fo  among 
women  and  children,  as  the  confequence  of  a 
weak  condition  of  bowels  and  impaired  digef- 
tion.  The  fymptoms  which  point  out  the  pre- 
fence  of  worms  in  the  body,  are  chiefly  of  the 
nervous  kind ;  but  urine  of  a  chylous  confif- 
tence  and  colour,  or  refembling  milk,  is  fel- 
dom  known  but  from  this  caufe.  Itching  of 
the  nofe  ;  gnafhing  the  teeth  ;  ftarting  fudden« 
ly  from  fleep  ;  change  of  colour  in  the  face  ; 
foul  breath,  &c.  fometimes  accompanied  with, 
fever  and  convulfions,  all  denote  worms. 

It  is  probable  that  the  difeafe  called  colic,  is 
only  an  attack  of  thefe  affedions  in  a  particular 


188 

part  of  the  inteftines.  The  ileus  ^  or  iliac  paf* 
Jion^  is  the  laft  degree  of  this  affliding  diforder ; 
which  confifts  of  an  inverted  a£lion  of  the  whole 
inteftinal  tube,  fo  as  even  to  evacuate  clyfters 
by  the  mouth. 

From  the  exceffive  third  obferved  in  fome 
cafes  of  nervous  affedion,  it  would  appear 
there  mufl  be  at  times  an  uncommon  confump- 
tion  of  liquid  in  the  (tomach,  whether  from 
the  increafed  adion  of  the  abforbents,  or  other 
caufes.  This  great  abforption,  in  the  firfi;  paf- 
fages,  is  one  way  to  explain  the  attending  con- 
ftipation  ;  as  the  more  fluid  parts  being  taken 
up,  the  remainder  is  propelled  with  more  diffi- 
culty. I  knew  a  lady  who  was  fo  tormented 
with  polydipjia^  that  a  pitcher  of  water  was  car- 
ried with  her  in  her  rides. 

Uneafy  fiutterings,  as  they  are  called,  about 
the  bread,  and  palpitations,  with  the  fenfe  of  a 
ball  rifmg  to  the  throat,  and  there  giving  the 
feeling  of  drangulation,  form  what  has  been 
named  globus  hyjiericus.  In  thefe  the  patient 
grows  vertiginous,  and  blind,  and  falls  down, 
often  in  violent  agitations  and  convulfions, 
with  loud  fcreams,  and  looks  expreflive  of  hor- 
ror. This  paroxyfm  is  mod  apt  to  be  brought 
on  by  furprife,  a  fright,  or  whatever  excites 


189 

flrong  and  fudden  emotions :  lofs  of  voice,  for 
a  time,  is  a  common  confequence.  This  fit 
was  long  thought  peculiar  to  the  fair  fex  ;  but 
Dr  Sydenham  mentions  it  as  occurring  among 
men  ;  and  it  is  certain  that  many  males  of  very 
mobile  habits,  and  gouty  conftitutions,  where 
there  is  great  fenfibility  of  the  firfl  paflag^s, 
are  very  liable  to  it.  I  have  known  it  in  num- 
berlefs  inftances  among  naval  officers,  efpecial- 
ly  thofe  who  had  fuffered  in  warm  climates ; 
and  alfo  among  feamen,  as  told  in  my  3d  vo- 
lume of  Med.  Naut. 

That  fpecies  of  convulfion  called  epilepfy^ 
can  fcarcely  be  faid  to  differ  from  the  hyfteric 
affedion,  unlefs  in  its  violence.  They  both 
occur  in  a  fimilar  temperament  of  body,  and 
are  brought  on  by  the  fame  caufes ;  and  it  is 
agreed  by  phyficians,  that  the  neceffary  fteps 
to  the  cure  of  both  are  alike,  that  is,  to  cor- 
re6t  the  predifpofition. 

I  have  alfo  feen  a  confiderable  number  of 
cafes  of  nervous  affedion,  with  all  the  figns 
which  are  faid  to  mark  angina  peSloris,  This 
complaint  has  been  thought  to  accompany 
particular  organic  affedlions  of  the  heart  and 
large  blood  veifels ;  fome  of  thefe  I  have  feen, 
and  they  proved  fatal.     Of  this  kind  was  the 


190 

cafe  of  the  late  Captain  Fiflier,  of  the  Power- 
ful. But  thefe  organic  derangements  could'^ 
not  be  the  caufe  of  the  fymptoms,  in  caf^s 
which  quickly  recovered  under  appropriate 
treatment.  Two  of  thefe  I  have  met  with  in 
Newcaftle.  I  cannot  therefore  help  being  of 
opinion,  that  the  anomalous  form  of  the  dif- 
eafes  under  difcuffion,  renders  it  very  proba- 
ble, that  they  have  often  given  caufe  for  un- 
neceifary  alarm,  as  refembling  what  has  been 
flyled  angina  pedoris.  Some  forms  of  nervous 
affedion  bear  fo  ftrong  a  refemblance  to  an  ague, 
that  I  have  frequently  known  them  to  be 
treated  as  fuch;  and  violent  remedies  ad- 
miniftered  under  the  idea  of  their  obllinacy. 
But  a  careful  fcrutiny  of  the  predifpofition  is 
the  beft  method  for  correcting  the  errors  of  the 
practice. 

It  is  not  eafy  to  combat  the  fancies  and  ap- 
prehenfions  of  nervous  people  when  under 
ftrong  paroxyfms  of  their  difeafe  ;  while  thefe 
laft,  they  are  to  be  confidered  as  alienations  of 
mind,  and  treated  accordingly.  In  fome  fitua- 
tions  of  this  kind,  the  flatulence  is  unufually 
troublefome,  and  fo  fluduating  in  its  move- 
ments over  the  abdomen,  that  the  fenfation  of 
air  or  wind,  rifmg  upwards  to  the  brain,  is 


191 

among  the  moft  folemn  beliefs  of  the  patient. 
This  fanciful  idea  has  given  birth  to  the  phrafe 
vapors^  a  name  for  weak  nerves.  Thefe  va- 
pors are  therefore  faid  to  generate  every 
thing  in  the  brain  that  is  terrific  or  ridiculous* 
Hence  blue  devils^  ghojis^  and  hobgoblins^  have 
been  conjured  up  to  the  affrighted  imagination 
of  the  patient ;  and  bad  men  are  faid  to  fuffer 
under  their  influence,  torments  compared  with 
the  pains  of  hell :  fo  faithful  and  certain  are 
the  admonitions  of  confcience !  Sleep  difturb- 
ed  and  harafled  by  dreams  of  the  mofl  fright- 
ful fort,  fuch  as  falling  down  precipices,  fuf- 
fering  fhipwreck,  being  devoured  by  wild 
beads,  are  common  enough  on  thefe  unhappy 
occafions.  Some  hiftories  of  the  effeds  of 
vapors,  are  as  old  as  the  days  of  Galen.  Are 
nodi-ambuli  of  the  nervous  temperament  ? 

Another  train  of  tormenting  fymptoms  are 
thofe  head-aches  which  accompany  nervous 
diforders.  Sometimes  only  one  fide  of  the 
head  is  affeded,  and  the  pain  receives  the 
name  of  hemicrania :  when  it  is  in  the  fore- 
head, and  gives  the  fenfation  of  a  nail  being 
driven  into  the  bone,  it  has  been  called  clavtis 
hyjiericus^  as  being  peculiar  to  the  hyftericaL 
But  this  laft  kind  of  pain  is  not  more  confined 

2   B 


192 

to  women  than  the  globus  ;  males  are  alfo  fub- 
je£l  to  it.  A  nervous  head-ache  in  the  occiput, 
is  often  attended  with  a  fenfe  of  coldnefs  j  as 
if  very  cold  water,  or  a  current  of  cold  air, 
was  poured  upon  the  part.  Vertigo,  to  fuch  a 
degree  as  to  make  the  patient  fall  down,  dim- 
tiefs  of  light,  tinnitus  aurium,  partial  or  total 
deafnefs,  are  affociated  with  thefe  complaints. 
Thefe  head-aches  frequently  feize  perfons  at  re- 
gular intervals,  and  have  obtained  the  name  of 
periodical  head-aches,  Acceffions  and  intermif- 
fions  of  pain  that  acquire  regular  movements, 
muft  depend  on  fome  important  law  of  the  fyf- 
tem ;  and  here  they  are  probably  direded  by 
the  digellive  procefs. 

To  this  clafs  of  fymptoms  may  alfo  be  re- 
ferred, that  lingular  and  obftinate  pain  of  the 
face,  called  dolor  facet,  or  tic  doloreux,  by  the 
French.  It  is  faid  to  have  been  once  cured 
by  Dr  Haighton,  of  London,  by  dividing  a 
branch  of  \hQ  fifth  pair  of  nerves,  which  was 
fuppofed  to  be  the  feat  of  the  pain.  But  me- 
dicine muft  become  a  bloody  art  indeed,  if  the 
organs  of  fenfe  and  motion  are  to  become  fub- 
je6ts  of  furgical  operations.  Flatulence,  con- 
flipation,  and  nervous  feelings,  are  known  to 
be  attendants  of  this  pain :    it  afFeds  chiefly 


193 

women,  and  thofe  above  thirty  ;  but  it  is  not 
confined  to  a  particular  fpot  of  the  face.  It  is 
doubtful  to  me,  whether  this  tormenting  af- 
fedion  is  ever  met  with  but  in  the  nervous 
conftitution ;  at  lead  in  fuch  only  has  it  come 
under  my  obfervation.  I  cannot  therefore 
fee  any  reafon  for  confidering  it  a  diltind 
difeafe ;  for  it  has  always  been  relieved  by  the 
general  method  of  cure,  though  it  is  apt  to 
return. 

Pains,  cramps,  and  contractions  of  the  joints 
and  mufcular  parts,  are  not  uncommon  fymp- 
toms :  but  the  mod  painful  are  thofe  of  the 
calves  of  the  legs  and  foles  of  the  feet.  I  have 
a  patient  now,  a  man  of  large  fize,  who  is 
drawn  to  the  one  fide,  and  the  mufcles  of  the 
abdomen  contra<3:ed  into  irregular  lumps. 
This  man  is  flrongly  afFeded  with  hypochon- 
driacifm ;  is  jealous  of  his  fafety,  and  afks  my 
fervants  if  they  ever  hear  their  mafter  fpeak 
of  him.  *  He  inherits  the  temperament  from 
his  mother. 


*  This  poor  fellow,  who  lives  30  miles  from  New- 
caftle,  lately  afked  me  by  letter,  whether  I  thought  he 
ought  to  go  into  a  lunatic  hofpital,  as  he  confidered 
himfelf  infane  ? 

2  B  2 


194 

Perfons  fubje£l:  to  thefe  difeafes  are  very 
liable  in  advanced  life  to  hsemorrhoidal  tu- 
mours, and  procedentia  redli ;  which  at  times 
are  moll  affli£ling  fymptoms,  as  they  prevent 
all  kinds  of  motion  or  exercife.  Thefe  are 
too  often  the  unfortunate  confequences  of 
frequent  purgatives,  efpecially  of  the  mer- 
curial aiid  aloetic  kind ;  which  tend  mofl 
to  weaken  the  bowels  and  bring  on  a  conftant 
tenefmus. 

It  is  the  nature  of  thefe  difeafes  to  pervert 
the  regular  economy  of  both  body  and  mind. 
We  therefore  frequently  hear  patients  exprefs 
fenfations,  as  if  they  had  no  bowels,  and  all 
was  vacuum  within  them.  A  friend  of  mine 
of  an  exquifite  nervous  temperament,  a  cler- 
gyman and  elegant  fcholar,  expreffes  this 
fenfation,  as  if  half  of  his  body  was  joined  to 
the  other  like  a  wafp.  So  fenfible  are  they  at 
times  to  arterial  pulfation,  that  they  fay  they 
have  pulfes  all  over ;  and  count  the  flrokes  of 
the  heart  without  applying  the  fingers  to  ah 
artery. 

When  dyfpnoea,  with  cough  and  hoarfenefs, 
is  prefent,  it  is  of  confiderable  importance  to 
diftinguifh  how  far  thefe  form  a  part  of  ner- 
vous indifpofition,  for  phthifis  frequently  fuper- 


195 

venes  without  much  caufe  of  fufpicion.  When 
irregularity  of  the  period  accompanies  thefe 
pe£toraI  fymptoms,  they  become  ftill  more 
equivocal.  Even  the  expedorated  matter  only 
helps  to  create  doubts.  But  there  is  a  kind 
of  cough,  that  has  not  inaptly  been  called 
nervous  cough,  which  confifts  of  a  fhort  hick, 
fomething  approaching  to  a  hoop,  and  not  at- 
tended with  much  fixed  pain  of  the  bread : 
nor  does  the  difficulty  of  breathing  which  ac- 
companies the  nervous  cough,  give  the  fenfa- 
tion  of  fo  much  fulnefs  of  the  cheft,  or  oppref- 
fion  ;  but  rather  a  feehng  that  the  cells  of  the 
lungs  refufe  to  admit  the  air.  The  nervous 
cough  is  alfo  more  afFedled  by  the  paffions  than 
that  of  phthifical  perfons.  The  family  pre- 
difpofition  will  enable  the  phyfician  to  form  a 
corredt  prognofis  on  moft  of  thefe  occafions. 

I  have  feen  fome  obflinate  hiccups,  in  both 
fexes,  in  thefe  difeafes,  that  refilled  every 
thing  that  could  be  thought  of ;  nor  did  they 
intermit,  for  fome  weeks,  except  during  fleep. 

Hydrophobia  has  been  met  vdth  in  thefe 
difeafes,  and  where  the  dread  of  fwallowinp^ 
liquids  was  little  fhort  of  what  has  been  ob- 
ferved  in  canine  madnefs,  I  believe  in  all 
fituations  where  deglutition  is  difficult,  when 


196 

not  owing    to    mechanical  compreflion,  it  is 
found  more  painful   to  fwallow  liquids  than 
folids.     The  hydrophobia  of  Rabies,  is  to  be 
confidered  as  a  nervous  fymptom,  exprelTive 
of  the  inverted  adion  of  the  ofophagus  and 
mufcles  of  the  pharynx.     The  dread  of  vi^ater 
is  therefore  to  be  explained,    from  the  I'm- 
prefTion  which  the  mind  receives  on  looking 
at  the  water,  as  affociated  with    the    a6t  of 
fwallowing  it  under  the  reverfed  motion  of 
the  mufcular  fibres  which  perform  deglutition. 
It  mufl  be  nearly  allied  to  the  globus  hyjieri- 
cus.     It  is  ftrange  that  anatomifls  fhould  look 
to  the  pharynx  and  gullet,   for  the   feat   of 
hydrophobia  ;  which  muft  be  imputed  to  the 
fenforium  commune^  and  is  not  to  be  detefted  by 
diffedion.     I  have  however  frequently  known 
the  throat  fo  contracted,  and  the  tongue  fo 
cumberfome  in  the  mouth,  that  nothing  but 
flops    was    taken  down   for   months,   under 
nervous  indifpofition. 

In  general,  nervous  perfons  are  bad  fleepers. 
In  fome  cafes  fleep  is  neither  felt  nor  wiflied  for 
by  the  patient  j  whole  nights  being  paffed 
without  it.  But  we  have  alfo  feen  a  continu- 
al drowfmefs  and  inclination  to  fleep  prevail- 
ing fymptoms.     If  lying  long  in  bed  is  much 


197 

indulged,  it  is  apt  to  terminate  in  a  foporofe 
difeafe ;  for  fleep,  like  other  cuftoms,  grows 
upon  us  by  ufe,  and  leads  to  fatal  confe- 
quences. 

The  flate  of  the  pulfe  in  thefe  diforders,  is 
as  variable  and  inconftant  as  all  the  other 
fenfations  of  the  patient.  It  is  fometimes  re- 
gular and  equal,  in  conditions  of  great  pain 
and  fuffering  :  and  at  other  times,  is  found 
uncommonly  quick,  unequal,  irregular,  and 
intermitting,  when  the  fymptoms  are  very  mo- 
derate. It  may  be  prefumed,  from  thefe  af- 
fections being  primarily  feated  in  the  nervous 
fyflem,  they  only  affed  the  vital  fundions  at 
intervals.  I  have  certainly  known  the  pulfe 
remain  with  little  variation  from  health,  in 
fome  fatal  cafes,  till  within  a  few  hours  of  dif- 
folution.  Yet  nervous  perfons  in  general, 
have  a  quick  pulfe ;  and  in  fome  inftances  it 
has  been  noticed  at  200  in  a  minute.  *  Their 
fenfes  being  all  uncommonly  acute,  a  fudden 
noife  or  flart  quickens  the  pulfe,  and  produces 
palpitation  in  an  inflant. 

But  the  moft  formidable  afpe6t  which  thefe 
difeafes  alTume,  is  when  they  have  lafted  (o 

*  Whytt. 


'^  » 


198 

long,  as  to  bring  on  fatuity,  or  imbecility  of 
mind,  melancholy,  and  madnefs.  Among 
drunkards  in  particular,  thefe  kinds  of  termi- 
nation are  very  common ;  and  we  impute 
them  to  the  diforganization  of  the  brain  it- 
felf,  *  For  in  thefe  cafes,  whatever  caufes  an 
increafed  determination  of  the  blood  to  the 
head,  increafes  the  delirium  j  this  is  obferved 
particularly  with  regard  to  ardent  fpirit  and 
opium.  But  nervous  people  commonly  die 
of  apoplexy,  palfy,  atrophy,  dropfy  or  convul- 
fions. 

I  have  forborne  to  mention  many  of  thofe 
idle  flories,  w;hich  fome  authors  take  delight  in 
telling,  as  the  effed  of  extravagant  illufions  of 
fancy,  which  nervous  people  are  faid  to  be  fub- 
jed  to.  I  hold  their  whole  complaints  to  have 
a  real  exiftence :  and  from  whatever  caufe 
pain  may  arife,  it  is  the  province  of  the  phyfi- 
cian  to  employ  his  art  to  fubdue  it ;  not  to 
ruffle  an  irritable  mind  by  unfeafonable  levity, 
or  expofe  a  morbid  fenfibility  to  infult  and  re- 
proach. 

*  See  the  account  of  the  difledlion  of  inebriates, 
where  the  cerebrum  was  found  difeafed. 

Essay  om  Drunkenness^  2d  Edition.. 


199 

Diffedions  have  not  forwarded  our  know- 
ledge  of  thefe  difeafes :  and  indeed  when  we 
tonfider  the  nature  of  their  fymptoms,  fymp- 
toms  flying  from  one  organ  to  another  in  an 
inftant,  and  thought  fucceeding  thought,  with 
the  rapidity  of  lightning,  we  are  the  more  in- 
clined to  think  that  infpedion  of  dead  bodies 
will  not  improve  our  method  of  cure.  It  is 
true,  that  the  flomach,  liver,  pylorus,  inteftines, 
mefentery,  kidneys  and  bladder,  and  the  uterine 
organs  in  females,  have  at  times  been  found 
difeafed  ;  but  fuch  deviations  from  the  healthy 
Hate,  muft  in  general  be  fecondary  fymptoms, 
the  efFed,  not  the  caufe,  of  thefe  ailments.  In 
the  tranfitory  jaundice  of  dyfpeptics ;  or  in  the 
migrating  cramps,  globus,  or  (trangury  of  the 
hyfteric  affedtion,  what  phyfician  would  look 
to  organic  lefions  for  their  feat  ?  Perfons  are 
known  to  die  of  the  mofl  dreadful  fymptoms  of 
thefe  diforders,  where  nothing  could  be  dif- 
covered  by  the  knife  :  *  which,  with  all  other 
circumftances  attending  them,  confirm  the  be- 
lief, that  their  pathology  is  to  be  fought  for  in 
the  nervous  fyftem  j  which  will  be  our  next 
talk  to  inveftigate, 

*  Whytt  on  nervous  difeafes. 
2  C 


200 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  general  doBrine  ofthefe  difeafes. 

The  moft  prominent  parts  of  the  chara£ler 
of  thefe  difeafes  are,  that  they  occur  chiefly 
under  peculiar  modes  of  living ;  are  heredita- 
ry, and  affed  in  a  particular  manner,  the  or- 
gans fubfervient  to  the  preparation  of  nourifh- 
ment. 

It  appears  from  what  has  been  faid  in  the 
preceding  chapters  of  this  work,  that  they  are 
unknown  in  the  favage  (late  ;  only  rarely  met 
with  among  ruftics ;  but  are  to  be  found  in 
abundance  in  large  towns,  or  wherever  luxuri- 
ous habits  have  difplaced  iimplicity  of  living. 
They  are  fo  far  to  be  clafled  among  mental 
diforders,  that  a  difpofttion  of  mindy  not  eafily 
to  be  defined,  attends  every  degree  and  ftage 
of  them  ;  beginning  with  uncommon  fenfibili- 
ty  to  all  impreffions ;  peevifhnefs  of  temper ; 
irrefolution  of  conduct ;  fudden  tranfitions 
from  fadnefs  to  joy,  and  the  contrary ;  filent 
or  loquacious ;  officioufiy  bufy,  or  extremely 
indolent;  irrafciblej  falfe perceptions  j  waver- 


20  i 

ing  judgment ;  melancholy  ;  madnefs  :  ex- 
hibiting in  the  whole,  figns  of  deranged  fenfa- 
tion. 

Thefe  difeafes  receive  a  ftronger  tin6lure 
from  the  manners  of  the  age,  than  any  others 
to  which  the  human  frame  is  liable :  and  when 
they  appear  in  great  numbers,  as  in  the  prefent 
day,  they  form  an  epoch  in  the  phyfical  and 
moral  hiftory  of  fociety ;  fo  wide  is  their  range, 
fo  important  their  influence  on  the  (late  and 
condition  of  mankind.  I  have  feldom  known 
any  of  thofe  perfons  denominated  Quakers, 
to  have  been  feverely  troubled  with  nervous 
complaints.  This  teftimony  is  at  leafl  honour- 
able to  thefe  people  ;  and  fome  proof  of  the 
good  moral  condud  and  fobriety  which  prevail 
among  them. 

The  caufes  which  produce  nervous  difeafes, 
may  be  divided  into  two  kinds^  namely  thofe 
which  arife  from  the  mind  ;  and  thofe  which 
arife  from  the  body.  Of  the  firil  kind,  are  all 
the  diforders  of  the  paffions,  of  the  fecond 
kind,  all  thofe  caufes  which  afFed:  particular 
organs  of  the  body,  that  by  their  office,  are  in- 
timately conneded  with  the  nervous  fyftem. 
Many  of  thefe  caufes,  of  both  the  mental  and 
corporeal  clafs,  ad  for  a  length  of  time  before 

2  c   2 


202 

they  bring  forth  afl;ual  difeafe ;  but  this  mode 
of  operation  would  feem  to  happen  only  where 
there  was  no  predifpolition.  They  may  there- 
fore be  faid  firfl  to  create  predifpofition,  and 
when  this  is  fufEciently  done,  a  train  of  fymp- 
toms  appears  which  conftitutes  real  difeafe. 

To  predifpofition,  whether  hereditary  or  ac- 
quired, I  give  the  name  of  nervous  temperament^ 
which  is  now  to  be  confidered  as  a  permanent 
ftate  of  body,  that  cannot  be  eafily  changed, 
and  will  commonly  remain  for  life.  This 
temperament  is  to  be  obferved  in  different 
fliades  and  gradations,  mixed  with  the  other 
temperaments ;  but  where  it  is  exquifitely 
formed,  it  is  known  by  the  following  fign& : 
afenfihle^  irritable^  and  mobile  condition  of  nerves; 
by  which  different  organs  of  the  body  ^  from  flight 
caufes^  are  urged  into  violent  and  involuntary 
action  ;  and  their  motions  and  fympathy  often 
reverfed  ;  giving  birth  to  falfe  perceptions  and 
erroneous  judgment ;  and  fometimes  accompanied 
with  pain  of  the  acuteji  kind.  This  tempera- 
ment is  faid  to  bear  all  evacuations  ill,  efpecial- 
ly  the  lofs  of  blood  j  and  alfo  is  eafily  injured 
by  medicines  of  the  rougher  clafs  ;  it  is  not 
very  liable  to  difeafes  of  the  inflammatory 


203 

kind*,  and  fuffers  in  an  uncommon  manner 
from  every  excefs  of  debauch. 

It  is  evident,  from  the  hiftory  of  thefe  dif- 
eafes,  that  where  the  nervous  temperament 
prevails,  all  the  caufes  which  operate  upon  it, 
bring  forth  motions  and  fenfations  very  dif- 
ferent from  what  is  found  in  a  healthful 
ftrudure  of  nerves,  in  perfons  who  are  with- 
out the  predifpofition.  This  is  more  exem- 
plified in  what  may  be  called  the  mental 
caufes,  than  in  the  corporeal.  The  moral 
evils  of  life  are  very  much  of  a  relative  na- 
ture ;  their  effeds  depend,  in  a  great  meafure, 
on  our  capacity  of  feeling,  for  receiving  them, 
or  the  fortitude  which  we  are  able  to  oppofe 
to  them.  Thus,  one  man  is  condemned  for 
linking  under  adverfity,  as  a  proof  of  defi- 
cient virtue  and  fpirit ;  while  another  is  ex- 
tolled for  his  courage,  as  a  token  that  he 
poffelTes  noblenefs  of  mind.  Yet  the  phyfical 
trait  of  their  temperaments  will  befl:  decide 
with  impartiality  on  their  refpedive  merits. 
The  firft  may  be  a  weak  nerved  being,  and 
a  good  man  ;  and  the  other,  under  apparent 

*  Gregorii  med.  ther.  confpeft.  voL  ii,  chap,  xxiii. 


204. 

refolutlon  of  foul,  may  poflefs  nothing  beyond 
want  of  feeling. 

But  this  applies  even  to  the  corporeal  caufes. 
Let  the  two  perfons  flart  together,  to  drink  a 
bottle  of  ardent  fpirit  in  the  twenty-four  hours, 
for  life.  The  nervous  man  will,  mofl  likely, 
find  his  frame  fhook  to  pieces  at  the  end  of 
two  weeks,  or  as  many  months ;  while  the 
other  will  continue  his  potation  for  as  many 
years.  When  the  firft  dies,  of  weak  nerves 
and  tuberculous  liver,  at  the  end  of  three 
months,  the  other  may  ftill  remain  ftrong  and 
hale.  It  may  now  be  faid  that  the  firfl  was  a 
drunkard,  and  Aie6.felo  defe :  but  the  furvivor 
will  have  a  chance  of  preferving  his  reputation 
for  fobriety.  Of  fo  much  importance  is  the 
lludy  of  temperament  in  judging  of  the  caufes 
of  thefe  difeafes. 

The  living  body  poffefles .  the  faculty,  if  I 
may  fo  call  it,  of  receiving  impreffions,  and 
retaining  them,  even  to  the  hazard  of  its 
deflrudion.  All  predifpofitions  are  of  this 
kind.  When  a  perfon  fubjed  to  gout,  un- 
dergoes a  long  mercurial  courfe  for  the  cure 
of  fyphilis,  he  may  not  be  always  warned  of 
the  increafe  of  predifpofition,  which  he  will 
infallibly  acquire  by  this  procefs ;  though  he 


205 

may  be  duly  told  of  the  neceflity  for  mer- 
cury to  fubdue  the  other  difeafe.  And  if  it 
were  left  to  his  choice,  he  would  dill  prefer 
the  antifyphiiitic  regimen,  and  make  the  bed 
he  could  of  his  gouty  diathefis.  If  befides, 
he  is  attached  to  the  bottle,  or  has  contra£led 
the  habit  of  taking  opium  in  large  dofes  to 
eafe  his  griping  pains,  he  is  going  faft  on  to 
give  the  final  blow  to  health;  and  the  lafl 
degree  of  this  is,  the  completion  of  predifpo- 
fition,  or  conftant  gout  and  nervous  afflidion. 
So  that  predifpojition^  in  its  various  ftages,  is 
the  medium  between  health  and  difeafe.  A 
gentleman  fubjed  to  gout,  weak  nerves,  and 
all  their  horrors,  confulted  me  fome  time  ago. 
He  took  his  wine  freely,  and  an  opiate  every 
night  at  bed-time.  The  lafl,  he  faid,  was  to 
eafe  his  fpafms,  and  to  give  him  reft.  He 
was  alfo  of  extremely  flow  bowels.  I 
warned  him  of  the  dangerous  habit  he  had 
got  into ;  and  in  order  to  fave  the  remainder 
of  his  conftitution,  recommended  him  to  give 
up  his  bottle  and  his  laudanum  immediately. 
But  the  conflict,  was  too  great  for  his  forti- 
tude ;  he  did  not  call  upon  me  a  fecond  time. 
This  man,  I  dare  fay,  was  both  able  and 
willing  to  pay  a  phyfician,  provided  he  could 
find  one  to  his  mind.     That  fociety  muft  be 


206 

undergoing  the  lafl  degree  of  vitiation,  where 
the  faculty  of  medicine  receives  gold,  and  re- 
turns poifon ! 

All  thofe  paflions  of  the  mind,  which  have 
been  narrated  among  the  caufes,  ad  immedi- 
diately  on  the  nervous  fyftem  ;  whence  a  train 
of  fympathetic  afFedions  inftantly  commence 
throughout  the  whole  body,  but  efpecially  in 
the  chylopoeitic  organs.  And  again,  thofe 
caufes  which  induce  nervous  diforders  through 
the  body,  affect  firfl  the  digeftive  and  aflimi- 
lating  powers ;  and  are  from  them  refle6:ed 
on  the  nervous  fyftem ;  whence  commences 
a  train  of  inverted  fympathies  and  falfe  per- 
ceptions, which  fhow  how  far  the  mental  part 
of  us  is  concerned  in  this  general  tumult  of 
fenfation  and  motion. 

Why  a  ftation  fo  exalted  in  the  animal  eco- 
nomy was  given  to  the  chylopoeitic  vifce- 
ra,  we  can  only  account  for  from  the  pre-emi- 
nence they  occupy  in  preparing  the  nourifli- 
ment  of  the  whole  fyftem.  The  appetite  for 
food,  the  digeftion  of  it,  chylification,  fan- 
guification,  and  the  nutriment  derived  there- 
from, are  among  the  moft  wonderful  opera- 
tions of  nature.  One  of  the  firft  inftinds  of 
our  exiftence  is  the  defire  of  food.     Nay^ 


207 

it  is  probably  the  firft,  and  coeval  with  the  ra- 
di merits  of  the  foetus.     Some  peculiar  inhe- 
rent power,  not  to  be  expreffed  by  abftrad 
terms,  enables  the  vivified  germ  to  draw  nou» 
rifhment  from  its  nidus,  the  fluid  which  fur- 
rounds    it.     Every    particle  of  the  nutritive 
juices,  elaborated  by  the  maternal  procefs,  i$ 
attracted  by  the  congenial  fympathies  of  the 
embryo.     Thefe  juices  hold  in  folution  what 
is  to  be  the  future  folid,  fuch  as  cellular  mem- 
brane, mufcle,  tendon,  bone,  and  nerve  it/elf. 
The  nervous  fyftem,    or  fenforium,  muft  be 
the  bafis  and  the  prime  diredor  of  this  crea- 
tive procefs,   till   the   human  form  in  all  its 
parts  is  fully  evolved.     The  circulation  of  the 
blood,  from  the  mother  to  the  foetus,   now 
commences,  and  continues  the  fupply,  though 
not  by  a  dired  continuity  of  veflels.     And  the 
placenta,  by  oxygenizing  the  foetal  blood,  fup- 
plies  the  place  of  the  future  lungs.     When 
the  required  bulk  is  completed,  the  infant, 
endued  with  peculiar  inftind,  urges  the  womb 
to  expel  it,  which    terminates  in  the  birth. 
The  nourifhment,   which   the  child  received 
from  its  mother  before  birth,  is  now  to  be 
prepared  in  part  by  its  own  organs.     I  fay  in 

2  P 


208 

part,  becaufe  milk  is  a  fubflance  half  animaliz- 
ed,  and  nearly  ready  for  affimilation. 

We  thus  comprehend  three  ftages  in  animal 
exiftence,  where  the  manner  of  receiving  nou- 
rilhment  is  varied.  The  Jirji  ftage  is  limited 
to  that  early  condition  of  the  germ,  before  the 
circulation  of  red  blood  can  be  diftinguiihed. 
The  fecond  ftage  commences  with  the  circula- 
tion of  red  bloody  and  terminates  with  the 
birth.  The  third  ftage  begins  with  the  birth, 
when  the  nourifliment  of  the  body  is  to  be 
prepared  by  the  chylopoietic  vifcera,  which 
continues  through  life. 

The  human  ftomach  is  an  organ  endued 
by  nature,  with  the  moft  complex  properties 
of  any  in  the  body  ;  and  forming  a  centre  of 
fympathy  betw^een  our  corporeal  and  mental 
parts,  of  more  exquiftte  qualifications  than 
even  the  brain  itfelf.  Yet  the  knife  and  eye 
of  the  anatomift  do  not  difcover  the  whole 
important  ftation  it  holds  in  the  economy  : 
we  muft  look  to  the  Hving  fyftem  for  thofe 
nice  connexions  of  caufe  and  effed,  and  that 
fource  of  affociation,  which  give  it  a  rela- 
tionfliip  to  fo  many  organs,  both  in  the 
healthy  and  difeafed  ftate.  There  are  few 
difcafes  in  which  it  does  not  participate :  even 


209 

flight  blows  upon  it  have  proved  fatal :  but  its 
wounds  are  to  a  certainty,  mortal.  In  all 
thofe  diforders  whofe  feat  is  the  nervous  fyf- 
tem,  it  particularly  fufFers.  In  fevers  of  every 
defcription  the  ftomach  is  peculiarly  affeded  ; 
and  till  the  febrile  movements  decline,  the 
functions  of  this  vifcus  are  fufpended. 

An  organ  intended  for  fuch  important  pur- 
pofes  in  the  animal  economy,  mufl  receive 
from  the  hand  of  Nature  fingular  tokens  of 
her  favour.  Hence  we  find  all  thofe  vifcera, 
which  affifl  in  preparing  the  chyle,  and  what 
is  called  the  affimilation  of  the  food,  joined  in 
a  circle  of  nervous  communication,  of  which 
the  ftomach  is  the  centre.  One  portion  of 
nerve  is  diftributed  over  the  whole ;  fo  that 
while  they  are  all  employed  in  one  purpofe, 
diforder  cannot  take  place  in  any  of  them, 
without  the  whole  being  thrown  into  con- 
fufion. 

Anatomifts  have  difcovered  an  unufual 
fhare  of  nerves  about  the  upper  orifice  of  the 
ftomach ;  from  which  it  was  thought  by  fome 
philofophers  to  be  i\it  feat  of  the  foul. 

The  nerves  of  the  ftomach  are  derived 
from  thQpar  vagum^  or  eighth  pair,  which  com- 
municates with  the  great  intercoftal  or  fympa- 

2  D  2 


210 

ihetic  ;  and  by  it.  Is  conne£led  with  almofl  every 
other  nerve  of  the  body.  The  femilunar  gang- 
Hon  of  the  great  fympathetic,  fupplies  particu- 
larly the  liver  ;  gall  bladder  and  duds ;  duo- 
denum ;  pancreas  ;  fpleen  ;  jejunum ;  ileum ; 
and  part  of  the  colon,  &c. :  the  renal  glands, 
kidneys,  ureters,  and  bladder ;  the  womb, 
ovaria,  teftes,  &c.  are  all  fupplied  by  the  fame 
nerve  ;  and  joined  by  others  from  the  lumbar 
vertebras.  The  mufcles  of  the  pharynx,  and 
trachea,  thofe  of  the  neck  and  lower  extremi* 
ties,  are  even  connected  by  branches  of  this 
nerve.  The  lungs,  heart,  and  diaphragm, 
being  all  furnifhed  with  nerves,  which  com- 
municate with  the  great  fympathetic,  it  would 
appear,  that  this  nerve  is  the  grand  link  or 
chain,  which  conneds  the  vital,  animal,  and 
natural  fundions  with  one  another. 

When  the  great  fympathetic  enjoys  its  full 
health,  all  the  organs  to  which  it  is  diflributed 
will  be  found  performing  their  different  offices 
with  vigour,  accompanied  with  pleafurable 
fenfation.  When  the  ftomach  has  been  re- 
pleniftied  by  a  full  meal,  after  fome  time,  fleep 
fupervenes,  which  is  eafy  and  found  ;  and  with 
this  commences  the  procefs  of  digeflion  ;  the 
folution  and  expulfion  of  the  food  from  the 


211 

ftomach ;  Its  mixture  afterwards  with  bile, 
pancreatic  juice,  and  inteftinal  mucus.  Every 
pore,  veflel,  dud,  or  gland,  that  is  engaged  in 
this  great  bufmefs,  contributes  a  Ihare  of  footh- 
ing  influence  to  the  dormant  animal  fundions  ; 
and  the  temperate  man  awakes  refrefhed  and 
invigorated  in  body,  with  faculties  equally 
clear  and  renovated.  But  the  dyfpeptic  fto- 
mach exhibits  a  very  different  train  of  pheno- 
mena. After  the  repaft,  lleep  fcarcely  clofes 
the  eye-lids  of  the  nervous  man :  a  croud  of 
unpleafing  ideas  difturbs  the  mind  ;  flatulence, 
acidity  and  borborrigmi,  torment  the  body ; 
digeftion  goes  on  imperfedlly ;  and  he  wakes 
low,  languid,  and  unrecruited ;  fick  at  ftomach, 
and  without  appetite  for  breakfaft. 

The  pathology  of  thefe  difeafes  is  therefore 
to  be  chiefly  fought  in  the  fundtions  of  this 
nervous  communication ;  and  moft  of  the 
fymptoms  to  be  referred  to  the  fame.  Thus 
in  a  dyfpeptic  condition  of  ftomach,  fuch  as 
attends  nervous  complaints,  it  is  not  the  muf- 
cular  fibre  alone  of  that  organ  that  is  to  be 
confidered  as  difeafed ;  but  every  gland  and 
pore,  exhalent  or  follicle,  that  feparates  either 
gaftric  juice  or  mucus  5  and  confequently  all 
the  fluids  are  poured  forth  in  a  vitiated  ftate. 


212 

The  appetite  will  then  be  irregular,  fome- 
times  fupprefled,  fometimes  voracious ;  the 
acidity  will  increafe  fo  as  to  become  pain- 
ful ;  the  food  will  remain  undigefted,  and 
uneafinefs,  and  inflation  of  flomach  will  fuc- 
ceed.  Other  vifcera  will,  by  confent  of  nerves, 
be  alfo  deranged  in  their  refpe£i:ive  offices. 
The  pancreas,  its  juice  and  dud  are  affeded. 
The  liver  will  fecrete  the  bile  in  quantity  and 
quality,  both  different  from  its  healthy  ftate  ; 
and  the  duds  will  be  irregular  in  conveying 
it  forward.  The  periflaltic  motion  of  the  in- 
teftines  will  be  inverted  and  inconftant  j  and 
conftipation  or  diarrhoea  be  the  confequence. 
Even  the  kidneys,  more  remotely  conneded, 
will  difcover  indifpofition,  by  the  urine  being 
voided  turbid  or  pale,  in  fpare  or  profufe  quan- 
tity ;  fometimes  with  pain  in  the  loins,  ureters, 
bladder,  teftes,  or  mammae.  Thofe  uneafy 
fenfations  which  rife  to  the  throat,  and  there 
give  the  idea  of  flrangulation,  often  attend 
the  ftomach  affedion.  Ths  lungs  expand 
with  difficulty,  the  breafl  labours,  the  heart 
palpitates,  the  eyes  grow  dim,  a  giddinefs 
comes  on,  confufion  of  thought  and  infenfibi- 
lity  commence,  and  the  patient  often  falls  down 


213 

convulfed.  *  There  is  not  a  mufcle  or  organ 
of  the  body  that  receives  a  fingle  tendril  of 
thi^  fympathetic  nerve ^  without  partaking  more 
or  lefs,  in  thefe  difeafed  feelings. 

But  there  are  not  two  people  who  feel  ex- 
a£tly  alike,  in  a  difordered  condition  of  flo- 
mach :  and  this  difference  depends  on  caufes 
fo  various,  that  the  idiofyncrafy,  or  peculiarity 
of  conftitution,  in  every  individual,  muft  be 
fought  for  before  it  can  be  explained.  Ear- 
ly habits,  purfuits  in  life,  modes  of  living, 
moral  charader,  preceding  difeafes,  amufe- 
ments,  profeffions,  feafons,  climate,  &c.  muft 
all  be  taken  into  the  account.  Thus  one  per- 
fon  fuffers  by  fevere  and  obftinate  head-aches ; 
another  is  prone  to  hyfteric  or  epileptic  fits ; 
fome  are  afflicted  with  cramps  and  fpafms  of 
ftomach,  others  by  acidity  and  flatulence. 
The  liver  and  biliary  duds,  with  deficient  fe- 
cretion  of  bile,  its  increafed  quantity,  or  ob- 
ftrudion  from  fpafm,  mucus  or  gall-ftones, 
and  fuffufion  of  the  Ikin,  are  peculiar  to  one 
conftitution  :  while  bowel  complaints,  nephri- 
tic pains,  urinary  calculi,  and  ftrangury,  ha- 
rafs  another.      Nervous  females  particularly 

*  Hjfterics,  and  epilepfy,  or  falling  ficknefs. 


214? 


fufFer  at  the  period  ;  in  all  irregularities  of  it, 
from  whatever  caufe ;  and  in  the  puerperal 
ftate.  Some  perfons  fmk  more  under  dejec- 
tion of  fpirits ;  while  others  exhibit  fudden 
viciflitudes  from  high  to  low,  and  the  con- 
trary. Temporary  infanity  is  more  frequent 
with  women  than  men  ;  and  it  attends  fome 
of  them  during  every  pregnancy.  Yet  I  hold 
all  thefe,  and  many  other  fhades  of  nervous 
indifpofition,  to  be  (till  one  and  the  fame  dif- 
eafe.  Nay  we  frequently  obferve  the  family 
peculiarity  to  be  hereditary ;  and  often  dif- 
tinguifhed  by  external  figns,  as  the  child  hap- 
pens to  be  like  the  father  or  mother.  The 
nervous  power,  in  fome  perfons,  is  precipitate 
in  its  movements,  tumultuous  and  convulfive, 
and  gives  a  hurry  to  all  their  adions.  Others 
again  appear  more  lluggifh  and  deliberate, 
where  the  nervous  power  is  more  torpid ;  but 
it  is  at  the  fame  time  liable  to  inconftancy 
when    under  the  influence  of  different   paf- 

fions. 

We  know  fo  little  of  the  nature  of  the  ner- 
vous power,  that  we  can  only  judge  of  the  moral 
caufes  of  nervous  indifpofition,  from  their  ef- 
fefts.  Some  of  the  pafTions  have  received  the 
name  oi  exciting^  and  others  that  of  deprejfmg  ; 


215 

but  their  effe&s  on  the  nervous  temperament^ 
feem  much  alike.  The  chief  of  the  paflions, 
fuch  as  anger,  joy,  grief,  fear,  &c.  deftroy  ap- 
petite, difturb  digeflion,  prevent  fleep,  make 
the  breafl  labour,  and  the  heart  palpitate ;  ren- 
der the  mind  fickle,  timid,  incapable  of  judging 
accurately,  &c.  Here  is  no  proof  that  any  of 
thefe  paflions  weaken  the  nervous  fyftem  j 
they  only  diflever  that  combination,  or  aflbci- 
ation  of  ideas,  which  imprefles  the  mind  with 
pleafmg  objeds ;  and  which  difleverment  to 
the  mind  is  painful,  and  throws  all  the  more 
fenfible  organs  of  the  body  into  immediate 
diforder.  The  mind  and  body  being  con- 
neded  by  the  nervous  fyjiem^  the  fame  train  of 
fymptoms  appear,  when  thofe  caufes  are  ap- 
plied to  the  body,  which  firft  afFe£t  the  chy« 
lopoietic  vifcera ;  fuch  as  a  mercurial  courfe, 
or  a  debauch  with  ardent  fpirit  or  opium. 
Now,  what  can  be  the  reafon,  that  thefe  paf- 
fions,  or  the  articles  jufl  mentioned,  have  fuch 
extraordinary  adlion  on  nervous  people,  while 
on  others  they  have  no  fuch  effed  ?  I  would 
explain  the  fa£t  in  this  manner :  the  heredi- 
tary temperament  is  fuppofed  to  inherit  all  the 
bad  impreflions  of  its  progenitor,  hoarded  as 
it  were  in  the  ftrudure  of  its  nerves :  in  like 

2  £ 


^16 

manner  the  acquired  temperament  retains,  or 
records  as  it  may  be  termed,  all  the  efFe£ls  of 
vicious  indulgence.  So  that  when  any  frefh 
guft  of  paflion  arifes,  or  any  luxurious  ftimu- 
lus  is  applied  to  any  portion  of  the  fympathe- 
tic  nerve,  thefe  accumulate  the  quantum  of 
predifpofition ;  and  a  nervous  Jit^  or  a  bili- 
ous attack^  is  the  immediate  confequence  of 
every  new  trouble  of  mind,  and  of  every 
recent  debauch  of  the  body.  Thus  the  habit 
may  become  fo  completely  nervous,  or  in  other 
words,  the  predifpofition  may  arrive  at  that 
height,  that  the  faculties  of  the  foul  will  be 
worn  out,  and  fatuity  take  place  5  and  the 
body  will  be  fo  enervated  as  to  be  in  a  ftate 
of  conflant  pain,  tremor  or  convulfion.  Such 
cafes,  in  no  fmall  numbers,  are  certainly  to  be 
feen  every  day  by  medical  obfervers  who 
poffefs  difcernment  to  appreciate  experience. 

The  operation  of  ardent  fpirit,  which  in- 
cludes wine  and  all  fermented  liquors,  and  of 
opium,  if  not  all  narcotics  whatever,  is  much 
alike  on  the  animal  economy.  They  aflail  in 
the  firft  place,  the  nervous  fyflem,  and  all 
other  efFeds  are  fecondary.  The  nerves  of 
the  ftomach  feel  the  firfl  injury :  but  fo  inti- 
mately are  thefe  nerves  conneded  with  the 


€17 

whole  that  fupply  the  chylopoietic  vifcera, 
that  they  are  inftantly  drawn  into  confent. 
The  flomach,  inteftines,  pancreas,  liver  and 
duels,  become  thickened,  and  grow  torpid  by 
long  indulgence  in  thefe  articles,  and  unequal 
to  their  functions.  But  it  will  not  be  doubted 
by  any  perfon  who  has  attentively  watched  the 
efFefts  of  opium  and  ardent  fpirit,  that  all  the 
early  fymptoms  of  indifpofition  which  they 
create,  are  purely  nervous,  and  extended  by 
fympathy.  I  was  formerly  of  opinion,  that 
the  enlarged  liver  was  owing  to  the  conftring- 
ing  power  of  the  alkohol  being  fpread  from  . 
the  duodenum  to  that  vifcus  through  the  du£ls. 
But  this  explanation  is  not  fatisfadory  :  and 
opium,  and  other  narcotics,  cannot  a6t  by 
hardening  the  fibre  or  animal  folid.  The 
hepatic  fyjiem  muji  be  injured  by  nervous  conu 
munication  and  fympathy  with  the  ftomach. 
But  if  it  is  common  in  a  fevere  difeafe,  and 
after  long  continuance,  for  the  liver  of  dyfpep- 
tics  to  be  found  fometimes  enlarged,  where  no 
vinous  ftimulus  had  been  ufed,  fuch  a  cafe 
muil  have  been  of  nervous  origin  to  a  certain- 
ty ;  and  from  this  we  have  a  right  to  conclude, 
that  the  difeafed  liver  of  drunkards  is  almoft 
always  of  this  kind.  When  the  hepatic  nerves 
are  rendered   weak,    mobile,    or  torpid,  by 

2  E  2 


218 

the  excelTive  ufe  of  alkohol,  it  neceflarily  fol- 
lows that  this  debility  is  extended  to  the  whole 
fubftance  of  the  liver.  There  is  no  proof  that 
an  inflammatory  flage  and  fever  are  always 
the  confequence ;  on  the  contrary,  I  believe 
inflammation  feldom  happens.  The  hepatic 
fyfl:em  of  inebriates  does  not  appear  injured, 
till  a  very  confiderable  degree  of  debility  has 
taken  place  throughout  the  body  :  there  is  a 
general  derangement  before  this  aflumes  any 
lignal  mark  of  difeafe  5  and  many  of  the 
worfl  fymptoms  are  often  prefent,  when  no- 
thing beyond  nervous  alFedion  can  be  fufpect- 
ed.  Jaundice  has  too  frequently  been  deemed 
a  fign  of  enlarged  liver :  but  it  fo  happens 
that  the  jaundice  of  nervous  people  has  little 
connexion  with  the  liver.  *  The  irritable,  or 
torpid  fliate  of  the  duodenum  and  duds,  juft 
as  the  nervous  power  happens  to  be  deranged 

*  Within  thefe  four  years,  of  rich  and  poor  who 
have  confulted  me,  not  lefs  than  50  cafes  oi  Juppojed 
d'lfeafed  liver,  were  of  the  number.  Yet  the  treatment 
proved  that  no  fixed  hepatic  affedion  was  prefent. 
Many  of  thefe  had  their  complaints  aggravated  by  the 
previous  ufe  of  mercury.  A  gentleman  lately  applied 
to  me  who  was  under  a  mercurial  courfe  for  L.  V. 
during  which  jaundice  fupervencd. 


219 

in  them  at  the  time,  is  the  mofl  common  caufe 
of  biliary  obftrudion,  and  confequent  jaun- 
dice. Nay  the  appearance  of  jaundice  mufl 
often  be  a  proof  that  the  fecreting  office  of 
the  liver  is  perfed.  During  the  inverted  mo- 
lion  of  the  mufcular  fibres  of  the  inteftines, 
fo  peculiar  to  the  nervous  temperament,  the 
opening  of  the  du£l  that  conveys  the  bile, 
from  its  fmgular  form,  muft  be  very  liable  to 
obftrudion.  And  this  is  thought  to  be  the 
mofl  common  caufe  of  iderus. 

But  if  the  torpid  and  enlarged  liver  is  thus 
proved  to  arife  from  nervous  debility,  mufl 
not  cure  the  turn  upon  an  invigorating  plan  ? 
The  firfl  ftep  to  this  mufl  be  to  remove  the 
caufes  vi^hich  brought  it  on  ;  in  the  drunkard, 
let  the  bottle  be  laid  afide  entirely ;  let 
fuch  mental  and  corporeal  flimuli  be  ufed  as 
have  a  reftorative  quality ;  and  health  muft 
return,  if  it  can  be  brought  about  by  human 
means. 

But  thefe  principles  apply  with  flill  more 
force  where  biliary  obftrudtions  infeft  the  fe- 
male conflitution.  The  irritable  nervous  fyf- 
tem,  and  delicate  bowels  of  mofl  women, 
ought  to  make  medical  people  confider  well 
before  they  attempt  violent  remedies,  to  over- 
come obflruftion.    The  true  method  of  cure 


220 

in  weakened  females,  mud  be  to  ftrengthen 
the  whole  chylopoietic  vifcera,  by  fuch  medi- 
cines as  communicate  permanent  energy  to  the 
nervous  fyflem:  to  obviate  flow  bowels  or 
diarrhoea,  to  corre£t  acidity  and  flatulence ; 
to  attend  to  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the 
food  ;  to  regulate  the  paffions ;  to  obferve 
ftri£i:  rules  of  air  and  exercife  ;  to  avoid  cau- 
tiouily  every  excefs  in  flimulation,  whether  men- 
tal or  corporeal :  in  ihort,  to  reverfe  all  efta- 
blijhed  habits  ^  and  to  force  a  new  train  of  actions 
upon  the  temperament,  I  fpeak  from  much 
experience  on  this  fubjedt :  and  it  is  admitted 
by  the  advocates  for  the  mercurial  courfe,  that 
they  have  no  certainty  of  the  fuppofed  liver 
affeSlion  being  removed ;  but  their  patients  are 
at  intervals  returning  to  the  medicine;  and 
we  have  known  fome  inftances  where  ladies  of 
the  nervous  temperament  were  taken  very  un- 
expededly  out  of  their  hands ^  by  what  was  called 
the  cramp  of  the  flomach ;  a  fymptom  that 
fometimes  follows  with  a  quick  pace,  the  exhi- 
bition of  mercury.  Thefe  gentlemen  mud  have 
often  met  with  obftrudion  and  fuppreffion  of 
urine  among  nervous  patients  :  yet  it  does  not 
appear  that  they  confider  calomel  the  befl  re- 
lief to  the  kidneys  and  bladder.  In  fad,  in 
mod  cafes,  of  both  jaundice  and  ifchuria,  we 


22  r 


are  to  look  to  nervous  fympathy  for  their 
caufe;  for  they  commence  and  difappear  in 
general  fo  fuddenly,  that  local  caufes  can  fcarce- 
ly  be  fufpedled.     We  might  as  well   diffed 
the  top  of  the  ofophagus  for  the  caufe  oi  globus 
hyjiericus^  as  attempt  to  ^^  the  pathology  of 
thefe  verfatile  movements  in  the  fecreting  or 
other  organs ;  or  infpecl  the  brain  of  a  hypo- 
chondriac for  the  picture  of  his  blue  devils. 
The  migratory  power  which  thefe  afFedions 
pofTefs,  of  traverfmg  every  part  of  the  body, 
is  the  infcrutable  idiofyncracy  of  the  Nervous 
Temperament. 

A  phyfician  of  our  acquaintance,  for  many 
years  was  fubjed  to  dyfpepfia,  and  conceived 
that  he  had  a  difeafed  liver^  as  he  termed  it. 
For  twenty  years   he  took  calom.el  in  large 
dofes  very  frequently ;  and  all  this  time  with 
a   manifeft  increafe  of  his   complaint.     The 
bowels  however  came  to  that  torpid  ftate,  as 
to  refill  every  common  laxative ;    and  he  at 
laft   got  to  the  enormous  quantity  of  thirty 
grains  of  calomel  for  a  dofe.     I  fpeak  from 
his  own  authority.     He   became   weak  and 
emaciated,  and  at  times  fuffered  great  pain ; 
and  funk  under  the  debility,  which  was  to  a 
certainty  produced  by  the  mercurial  poifon  \ 


222 

for  when  the  body  was  opened  no  liver  difeafe 
appeared! 

About  eight  months  ago  a  medical  gentle- 
man confulted  me  for  various  nervous  and 
dyfpeptic  complaints.  He  faid  his  liver  was 
affeded ;  and  he  had  taken  calomel,  at  in- 
tervals, by  the  advice  of  a  neighbouring  phy- 
fician,  for  the  laft  twelve  years.  He  had  a 
flight  bilious  look,  and  evidently  pofTefled 
hereditary  predifpoiition ;  was  rather  thin,  and 
the  bowels  in  a  very  irregular  ftate.  I  recom- 
mended the  ufual  ftrengthening  plan,  with 
horfe  exercife,  and  abftinence  from  vinous 
liquors,  and  opium,  which  he  ufed  freely.  In 
a  few  weeks  he  got  well,  and  recovered  his 
flefh.  In  four  months  he  felt  fome  return  of 
his  indifpofition,  and  reforted  again  to  his 
calomel.  But  his  bowels  became  more  un- 
eafy,  and  he  felt  a  conftant  tenefmus.  He 
came  again  to  me,  and  he  fufpeded  when  I 
faw  him,  an  incipient  afcites  ;  nothing  however 
appeared  outwardly.  I  repeated  my  former 
cautions  to  him  about  the  ufe  of  mercury, 
for  I  looked  upon  it  as  the  chief  caufe  of  his 
fufferings.  He  took  the  advice  of  two  emi- 
nent phyficians,  at  fome  diftance  from  his 
home  J    and  they  prefcribed  mercury.      He 


223 

began  the  plan  recommended,  and  died  in  a 
few  weeks ;  in  my  opinion,  with  a  conftitu- 
tion  deftroyed  by  this  medicine. 

The  miftaken  pathology  of  thefe  difeafes, 
it  thus  appears,  had  given  birth  to  this  un- 
warrantable ufe  of  mercury.  Such  cafes  can- 
not be  made  too  public,  in  order  to  caution 
inconliderate  people  againft  the  indifcriminate 
adminiftration  of  a  medicine,  fo  capable  of 
doing  harm :  the  bowels  of  thefe  gentlemen 
were  evidently  reduced  by  it  to  a  Hate  of 
palfy. 

But  however  affliding  the  condition  to 
which  the  body  is  often  brought  by  nervous 
infirmity,  the  mental  indifpofition  is  the  caufe 
of  greater  mifery.  To  enumerate  all  the  de- 
grees of  deranged  intellect  in  thefe  difeafes, 
would  be  a  difficult  and  ufelefs  talk.  They 
comprehend  all  that  is  extravagant  in  delufion, 
or  abfurd  in  fiction.  The  acute,  but  too  of- 
ten falfe  perceptions  of  nervous  people,  are  an 
apology  for  fome  of  the  ftories  we  hear  of  ap- 
paritions, of  magic,  and  of  witchcraft,  that  have 
at  different  times  impofed  on  the  credulity  of 
mankind.  Their  deluded  and  vivid  imagina- 
tions are  capable  of  believing  any  thing ;  and 
inftances   of  fuppofed   fupernatural   agency, 

ftp 


conceived  in  a  dream,  have  often  made  fucli 
flrong  impreffions  on  the  mind,  as  to  be  at- 
tended by  confequences  of  great  importance, 
not  only  to  the  individual,  but  to  the  commu- 
nity. All  jugglers  and  mountebanks  find  thefe 
perfons  an  eafy  prey.  The  impoftor  Mefmer, 
who,  about  twenty-three  year^  ago,  exhibited 
his  talents  in  animal  magnetifm,  by  exercifing 
nervous  people  at  a  kind  of  ordeal  which  he 
bad  invented,  found  them  anfwer  all  the  pur- 
pofes  of  his  deceptions;  and  many  well  in- 
formed men  believed  firmly  in  the  truth  of 
his  dodrines.  Yet  the  effeSs  which  were 
produced,  were  plainly  owing  to  fympathy, 
and  the  power  of  imagination ;  juft  as  we  ob- 
ferve  one  nervous  lady  fall  into  a  hyfteric  by 
looking  at  another  in  a  fit ;  or  like  the  twa 
children  mentioned  before.* 

The  temper  of  mind  with  nervous  people^ 
renders  them  very  prone  to  what  is  called  r^- 
^erie.  In  the  funftiine  of  their  fenfations, 
much  of  the  time  pafles  in  contemplating  ima- 
ginary pleafures^  or  what  in  common  lan- 
guage is  called,    building  cajiks  in  the  air. 

*  See  the  report  of  the  Examiners  appointed  by  thfe 
King  of  France. 


225 

And  when  they  are  roufed  from  this  fool's  pa- 
radife,  they  are  very  apt  to  fall  into  the  other 
extreme,  of  low  fpirits  and  apprehenfions.  So 
certainly  does  a  correfponding  train  of  thought 
follow  every  odd  feeling,  in  thefe  whimfical 
diforders. 

In  the  introduflory  part  of  this  inquiry,  we 
have  given  a  curfory  view  of  the  favage  date, 
fo  as  to  fliew  how  favourable  it  is  to  vigor  and 
health  of  body.  We  there  obferve  man  to 
pafs  through  exiflence  with  wants  fo  feWj 
that  he  overcomes  them  by  his  individual  ex- 
ertions. The  fpot  that  gave  him  birth  bounds 
his  travels  j  and  his  knowledge  is  confined  to 
the  cuftoms  of  his  own  tribe ;  fo  that  if  he 
has  little  call  for  bodily  labour,  he  has  flill  lefs 
for  mental  acquirements.  His  difeafes  are  on- 
ly the  infirmities  and  decay  of  nature  ;  but  of 
the  whole  catalogue  of  ills  which  infeft  mortal 
life,  he  is  lead  in  danger  of  being  afflidted 
with  thofe  of  the  nervous  clafs. 

But  how  different  is  man  in  the  civilized 
world !  He  is  obliged  to  undergo  a  kind  of 
training  how  to  live  ;  to  inftrudl  him  in  what 
he  owes  to  himfelf,  and  what  to  fociety. 
Where  the  favage  feels  one  want,  the  civilized 
being  has  a  thoufand.    Devoted  either  to  love 

2   F  2 


226 

or  ambition,  thefe  imprefs  all  his  aftions  with 
extraordinary  vehemence,  perfeverance,  and 
enterprize.  He  is  no  fooner  brought  into  the 
world,  than  he  is  taught  to  admire  every  thing 
that  dazzles,  glitters,  or  makes  a  noife.  His 
very  employment  is  play  y  and  all  his  toys  are 
either  (hinirig  or  fonorous.  Flattery  is  the  firfl 
expreffion  addreffed  to  dawning  intelligence : 
he  is  called  pretty  to  make  him  a  coxcomb  ; 
named  good  till  he  becomes  a  hypocrite ;  and 
learns  to  a6;  the  tyrant  by  feeing  every  perfon 
afraid  to  difoblige  him.  Every  thing  within 
his  view  is  calculated  to  prompt  his  defnes  and 
provoke  his  paflions  j  no  antidote  is  oppofed 
to  fupprefs  the  one  or  to  moderate  the  other  : 
and  he  finds  example  every  where  at  variance 
with  precept.  If  he  is  born  the  fon  of  a  rich 
man,  he  is  ftill  more  unfortunate ;  as  he  will 
be  careffed  by  more  fycophants,  and  expofed  to 
greater  temptations :  and  to  be  born  a  prince, 
is  to  be  the  moft  unfortunate  of  mankind. 

The  more  complicated  and  various  the 
pleafures  and  bufmefs,  which  man  is  to  pur- 
fue  in  life,  he  will  be  the  more  liable  to  de- 
feat and  difappointment :  and  the  more  ardent 
his  paflions,  they  will  the  fooner  terminate  in 
exhauftipn   and  difgqfl:.       The   bufy   fcene. 


227 

therefore,  leads  quickeft  to  fatiety :  the  retired 
circle  preferves  the  longeft  enjoyment.  So 
that  thoufands  of  human  beings  walk  the 
round  of  gaiety  and  difllpation,  for  the  certain 
reward  of  nervous  debility.  It  is  only  at  a 
particular  ftage  of  refinement,  that  thefe  dif- 
eafes  receive  their  birth:  and  when  they  ex- 
ceed the  fum  of  other  diforders  in  a  nation, 
they  afford  fure  tokens,  that  that  people  is 
pafling  fall  into  dotage,  and  even  under  ap- 
parent profperity  verging  to  decline.  They 
multiply  in  prodigious  proportion :  for  befxdes 
the  hereditary  predifpofition  which  taints  the 
offspring,  they  are  daily  gaining  ground  from 
acquired  infirmities.  When  we  thus  con- 
template with  a  philofophic  eye,  the  rife 
and  progrefs  of  a  nation,  we  obferve  a  kind  of 
phyfical  neceffity  for  the  regeneration  of  man- 
kind. A  people,  polifhed  and  improved  to 
the  utmoft,  cannot  remain  long  ftationary; 
it  muft  degenerate  in  body  and  mind.  It 
muft  fall  into  flavery  under  fome  powerful 
invader ;  or  fmk  by  fome  convulfion  of  na- 
ture \  and  with  all  the  arts  and  elegancies  of 
life,  return  to  the  barbarifm  of  its  aborigines. 
Such  a  change  of  condition  brings  man  back 
to  paftoral  and  agricultural  habits  \  by  which 


228 

his  finews  will  be  newly  flrung,  and  his  vigor 
of  body  renovated.  And  with  thefe  acquifi- 
tions  of  corporeal  reproduction,  the  faculties  of 
mind  in  a  latent  (late,  will  accumulate  thofe 
powers  and  excellencies,  that  in  a  future 
period,  will  exalt  human  nature  to  civilized 
perfedion ;  though  Hill  to  be  expofed  in  its 
turn  to  a  fimilar  decline. 

Although  much  ftrefs  has  been  laid  on  the 
ImperfeCi:  ftate  of  the  digeftive  and  ailimilating 
powers  in  thefe  difeafes,  yet  we  often  find  a 
confiderable  degree  of  obefity  prefent,  where 
the  fymptoms  of  indigeftion  prevail.  But 
obefity  is  feldom  a  proof  of  ftrength  ;  perhaps 
it  oftener  accompanies  weaknefs:  and  the 
indolent  inadive  life  fo  often  led  by  nervous 
people,  muft  favour  the  depofition  of  fat.  A 
fpare  thin  habit,  is  however  a  more  frequent 
attendant  on  dyfpeptic  conftitufions.  The 
food  may  not  only  be  badly  prepared  in  the 
llomach,  or  vitiated  by  imperfed  bile  and 
pancreatic  juice ;  the  ladeals  and  mefenteric 
glands  muft  alfo  be  difeafed,  fometimes  im- 
permiable,  and  perhaps  ulcerated.  The  quick 
evolution  of  acidity,  in  fome  of  thefe  cafes,  is 
furprizing  ;  it  is  no  fooner  corre^ed  by  alkalies 
or  carbonate  of  lime,  than  frefli  Quantities  arc 


229 

felt.  There  is  even  reafon  to  believe  that 
fome  of  the  inteftinal  fecretions  are  fo  depraved 
at  timeSi,  as  to  become  acid  immediately,  the 
accumulation  is  fo  rapid.  The  limple  defi- 
ciency of  bile  cannot  account  for  this,  unlefs 
the  bile  alfo  lofes  its  alkaline  properties, 
which  I  rather  fufped:  it  does  in  part. 

Acidity  is  not  always  accompanied  with 
flatulence.  The  laft  fyraptom  is  peculiar  to 
fome  conflitutions  j  and  it  is  moft  troublefome 
where  fedentary  habits  are  carried  to  excefs,  as 
in  fome  females.  The  uncommon  quantity  of 
air  fometimes  extricated  in  the  procefs  of  di' 
geftion,  would  make  us  fufpedt  a  large  propor- 
tion of  the  food  or  water  to  undergo  chemical 
decompofition.  Some  aftiv  eexercife  or  quick 
agitation  of  the  body  affords  the  moft  certain 
relief.  The  frequent  midurition,  and  ftrangu- 
ry,  which  attend  nervous  indigeftion,  prevail 
moft  when  the  ftomach  is  loaded  with  acidity, 
and  this  points  out  the  method  of  cure.  I 
have  not  made  any  experiments  on  the  urine 
in  thefe  cafes ;  but  it  is  likely,  that  the  uri^ 
acidmuH  appear  in  large  proportion  at  that 
time. 

All  derangements  of  the  uterine  fyftem  ex- 
emplify in  the  moft  ftriking  manner  the  ftrong 


230 

fympathy  between  the  chylopoietic  vifcera, 
and  thefe  organs.  This  is  obferved  particular- 
ly at  the  age  of  puberty ;  at  the  period ;  at 
the  beginning  of  pregnancy  ;*  in  the  puerperal 
ftate ;  in  fuckling  the  infant  too  long  ;  at  the 
change  of  life ;  in  all  conditions  that  affed  the 
paflions  ;  and  more  or  lefs  in  every  complaint 
to  which  the  female  may  be  expofed.  It 
muft  therefore  be  of   great  importance  in 

*  Many  of  my  contemporaries  at  Edinburgh  will 

recollect  a  cafe  mentioned  by  Dr  CuUen,  in  his  leftures 

on  the  pra(5lice  of  phyfic,  that  ftrongly  proves  the  power 

of  aflbciation  during  geftation.     A  lady  in  a  hopeful 

way,  found  it  neceflary  to  have  her  robe  made  eafier, 

and  fent  for  her  mantua-maker.    But  in  (landing  up  to 

be  meafured,  fhe  grew  fo  fick,  that  it  was  accomplifhed 

with  great  difficulty.     The  gown  was  brought  home ; 

and  in  attempting  to  try  it  on,  the  lady  became  fo 

fqueamifh,  that  the  mantua-maker  was  obliged  to  defift, 

and  leave  her  work  to  another  time.    A  few  days 

afterwards,  another  attempt  was  made  to  try  it  on ; 

but  now  the  very  fight  of  the  gown  brought  on  fick- 

nefs.     It  was  determined  to  take  the  gown  away,  and 

to  hang  it  up  in  a  dark  clofet,  not  to  be  feen.  Even  this 

precaution  did  not  avail ;  the  lady  could  not  look  at 

the  clofet,  or  pafs  near  it,  without  feeling  immediate 

ficknefs.     It  was  therefore  carried  out  of  the  houfe  : 

and  this  extraordinaty  affociation  remained  till  the  lady 

got  her  bed. 


231 

pradice,  that  the  phyfician  fliould  inform 
himfelf  well,  withrefped  to  predifpofition  and 
temperament.  We  thus  fee  on  what  irrational 
grounds  the  ufe  of  a  clafs  of  medicines  call- 
ed emenagogues^  was  founded  ;  and  how  necef- 
fary  it  muft  be  in  uterine  obftrudions,  to  at« 
tend  to  the  influence  of  that  chain  of  fympa- 
thies  on  which  they  chiefly  depend. 

How  far  the  clafs  of  nervous  difeafes  is  con- 
nected with  gout,  may,  perhaps,  require  much 
future  experience  to  determine.  But  as  far 
as  the  inflammatory  fymptoms  are  not  con- 
cerned, the  two  affections  appear  to  be  the 
fame.  They  both  depend  on  hereditary  or 
acquired  predifpofition  :  the  caufes  which  pro- 
duce  them  are  entirely  alike  :  thefe  are  chiefly 
luxurious  habits  and  the  debilitating  pleafures : 
all  the  dyfpeptic  ailments  of  the  nervous  frame, 
appear  in  the  arthritic  conftitution.  Every 
derangement  of  the  biliary  fecretions,  par- 
takes in  each,  of  a  fimilar  difpolition  ;  the 
ftate  of  the  inteftinal  canal  is  fubjedt  to  the 
like  capricious  viciflitudes  in  both  ;  and  alfo 
the  urinary  organs.  The  irritable  feelings, 
and  hallucinations  of  mind,  with  which  both 
fubjeCts  are  affeCted,  have  an  exaCt  refem- 
blance.     And  wa  obferve,  that  the  prevention 

2  G 


232 

and  treatment  of  nervous  indifpofition  and 
gout,  are  to  be  conducted  on  the  fame  prin- 
ciples. 

No  fad  in  medicine  appears  more  clear, 
than  that  the  female  of  every  gouty  family, 
inherits  in  a  high  degree,  the  nervous  tempe- 
rament ;  and  is  liable  from  the  general  caufes 
mentioned  before,  to  fufFer  all  the  infirmities 
to  which  that  temperament  paves  the  way. 
This  is  exemplified  by  the  exhibition  of  mer- 
cury and  antimony ;  in  the  ufe  of  narcotics, 
particularly  tea,  opium,  and  vinous  fpirit ;  in 
every  improper  indulgence  in  food  or  drink, 
and  in  the  government  of  the  paflions. 

Gouty  conftitutions  are  known  to  be  parti- 
cularly liable  to  urinary  calculi.  The  uric 
add,  which  has  been  found  to  form  fo  large 
a  portion  of  thefe  concretions,  is  moft  likely 
evolved  during  the  depraved  digeftion  and  af- 
fimilation  of  the  nourifhment  5  and  afterwards 
feparated  by  the  kidneys,  and  lodged  there, 
or  in  the  bladder.  It  would  be  worth  while 
to  make  experiments  on  the  morbid  acidity  of 
a  dyfpeptic  ftomach,  for  there  is  great  reafon 
to  think  that  it  does  not  differ  elTentially  from 
the  uric  acid.  All  the  alkalis  are  given  with 
advantage  in  thefe  kinds  of  urinary  calculi  ^ 


233 

and  It  IS  fair  to  allow  their  chief  efFedl  to  be  in 
corredling  the  acid  in  the  firfl  paflages.  * 

From  what  has  been  faid,  I  Ihall  hope  to  be 
juftified  in  not  attempting  to  divide  thefe  dif- 
eafes  into  genera  and  fpecies,  which  have  little 
foundation  in  nature,  and  are  of  no  utility  in  a 
pradical  view.  Combined  in  the  definition 
of  Nervous  Temperament,  they  bear  a 
near  analogy  and  connection  to  one  another. 
We  thus  obferve,  the  perfon  who  in  youth 
pofleffes  a  mobile  condition  of  nervous  fyftem, 
with  a  temper  of  mind  depending  on  that, 
making  him  fickle,  volatile,  paffionate,  will  in 
the  advance  of  life>  be  lefs  irritable  ;  but  will 
ftill  preferve  fo  many  traits  of  original  charac- 
ter of  habit,  as  flill  to  juftify  the  term.  The 
dyfpeptic  infirmities  will  alfo  undergo  modifi- 
cation, in  proportion  to  the  manner  of  living 
and  moral  habits.  Hence  melancholy  and 
hypochondriacifm  feldom  appear  before  the 
meridian,  but  more  commonly  not  till  later  in 
life. 

On  the  whole  then,  it  is  fair  to  conclude, 
that  the  pathology  of  thefe  difeafes  is  to  be 
fought  in  the  deranged  fenfations^  and  inverted 

"    *  See  the  French  chemifts  on  this  fubje<5l. 
2  G    2 


234  . 

fympathies  of  the  great  sympathetic 
NERVE  ;  and  in  the  irregular  adion  of  all 
thofe  organs  to  which  it  is  diftributed.  The 
caufes  therefore,  whether  7noral  or  phyftcal^ 
exert  their  influence  on  this  portion  of  the 
nervous  fyflem  ;  whofe  office  diredls  the  mofl 
important  operations  in  the  animal  economy, 
and  binds  together  in  one  great  circle  of  feel- 
ing, anions  and  motions  both  diftant  and  op- 
pofite.  Hence  a  concourfe  of  fymptoms  of 
the  mofl  extraordinary  kind,  that  invert  the 
ufual  fundions  of  fo  many  vifcera  ;  fufpend 
their  powers,  or  give  to  them  new  movements : 
by  which  means  a  train  of  falfe  perceptions 
occupies  the  mind ;  and  ideas  the  mofl  mon- 
flrous  and  incongruous,  fupplant  for  a  while, 
all  rational  thought.  In  this  reciprocal  action 
between  body  and  mind,  in  whatever  part  of 
the  circle  difeafe  commences,  it  is  quickly 
communicated  to  all  the  others.  For  as 
bowel  complaints  fpeedily  afFed  the  mind  and 
deprefs  the  fpirits ;  fo  all  violent  emotions,  in 
their  turn,  induce  affeftions  of  the  chylopoietic 
vifcera,  and  raife  fuch  commotion  through- 
out the  fenfitive  fyflem,  as  to  beftow  the  ner- 
vous character  on  thefe  difeafes. 


235 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Prevention  and  treatment* 

In  giving  a  title  to  this  chapter,  I  have  been 
cautious  in  holding  out  too  much  confidence 
in  medicine.  The  word  cure^  implies  a  cer- 
tain and  perfect  recovery,  without  danger  of 
the  difeafe  returning,  a  circumflance  very- 
doubtful  here.  But  according  to  what  is 
meant  by  treatment^  I  only  lay  down  rules  to 
regulate  the  practice,  fo  far  as  experience  has 
approved.  This  has  been  the  condudt  ufually 
obferved  with  my  own  patients :  and  as  fo 
much  depends  on  their  own  difcretion,  it  puts 
them  on  their  guard,  and  reminds  them  how 
far  they  are  to  calculate  on  permanent  health. 

It  has  been  unfortunate  for  the  medical  pro-^ 
feflion,  as  well  as  patients  themfelves,  that 
perfons  labouring  under  nervous  diforders, 
have  too  much  expelled  from  the  prefcription 
of  the  phyfician,  and  the  fhop  of  the  apo- 
thecary, what  is  only  to  be  obtained  from  their 
own  caution  and  circumfpedion.     We  thirs 


236 

find  mofl  of  them  ready,  and  greedy  to  fwal- 
low  every  medicine  that  is  recommended  ;  but 
ftubborn  and  untra£table  in  all  that  relates  to 
breaking  in  upon  eflablifhed  habits  and  cuf- 
toms ;  whether  of  luxurious  living,  depraved 
appetites,  indolence  of  body  or  mind,  or  vici- 
ous indulgence  of  any  kind  inconfiflent  with 
health.  Many  of  thefe  habits,  it  is  true,  are 
fo  far  interwoven  with  the  conftitution,  as  to 
make  fome  changes  almoft  impracticable  :  but 
as  indifpofition  is  fo  frequently  brought  on,  or 
aggravated,  by  the  improper  condud  of  the  pa> 
tients  themfelves,  the  phyfician  cannot  be  too 
much  on  his  guard,  in  demonftrating  to  them 
all  that  belongs  to  their  own  government  and 
demeanor.  The  medical  advifer,  therefore, 
who  obferves  the  mofl  difintereftednefs  to- 
wards his  friends,  will  often  be  the  firft  man 
to  be  difmifled  ;  while  the  felfifh  diflembler, 
however  ignorant,  will  become  a  favourite,  and 
engrofs  the  emolument.  On  fuch  an  occafion, 
the  virtuous  mind  of  a  liberal  phyfician,  will 
know  where  to  look  for  approbation. 

This  branch  of  medical  pradice  has  com- 
monly been  reckoned  one  of  the  mo  ft  lucra- 
tive ;  for  the  fubjeds  of  it  are  generally  found 
.among  the  affluent :  they  are  alfo  feldom  with* 


237 

out  fome  complaint  that  requires  afliflance ; 
and  they  meafure  their  comforts  too  often,  by 
the  quantity  of  medicine  that  is  ferved  up. 
Nervous  people  are,  moreover,  endued  with 
acute  feelings ;  liable  to  a<9:  from  the  firft  im- 
prellion  and  impulfe,  aiid  eafily  deceived  by 
the  defigning  and  interefted.  And  fhould  they 
fall  into  the  hands  of  a  goffiping  phyfician,  or 
a  wheedling  apothecary,  thefe  perfonages  be- 
come a  kind  of  appendage  to  their  eftablifh- 
ment,  if  not  fixtures  in  their  houfes.  Being 
lingular  in  the  feledion  of  friends,  they  fel- 
dom  mix  in  company  ;  fedentaiy  from  habit, 
they  go  little  abroad ;  their  amufements  and 
recreations  are  thus  limited,  and  fuch  as  pof- 
fefs  the  talent  of  bringing  news,  and  telling  a 
ftory,  are  at  all  times  welcome  guefts.  But 
as  the  tale  of  their  own  complaints  engrofles  fo 
much  of  their  converfation,  a  medical  goflip, 
before  all  others,  is  the  moil  acceptable.  Ne- 
verthelefs,  let  the  nervous  and  valetudinary 
beware  how  they  truft  their  health  and  their 
purfe  in  fuch  hands. 

The  prevention  of  all  difeafes  depends  on  a 
knowledge  of  their  remote  caufes. 

If  in  the  former  part  of  this  inquiry,  it  has 
been  found  neceffary  to  contraft  the  health  of 


238 

the  favage  flate  with  that  of  the  civilized  con- 
dition of  mankind,  for  the  purpofe  of  tracing 
caufes  from  their  origin,  it  does  not  follow,  in 
prefcribing  regulations  to  the  nervous  and  in- 
firm, that  we  are  to  imitate  the  robufl:  exercifes 
of  the  barbarian,  for  the  fake  of  flrengthening 
the  body,  or  to  yield  up  the  refinements  of 
education  and  polifhed  fociety,  in  order  to 
fubdue  fenfibility  of  mind.  The  lefTon  is  only 
fo  far  in  point,  as  it  tends  to  confirm  general 
truths  by  an  appeal  to  facts,  or  to  illuftrate  a 
precept  by  ihowing  an  example. 

In  the  prefent  difeafes,  according  to  the  hif- 
tory  given,  we  admit  2i  predifpojition  oi  body, 
without  which,  it  is  probable,  they  never  ap- 
pear. This  predifpofition  may  be  either  heredi- 
tary or  acquired  ;  to  both  we  give  the  name  of 
nervous  temperament.  What  therefore  relates 
to  correcting  and  preventing  predifpofition, 
mufl:  begin  with  the  earliefl  ftages  of  infancy, 
and  includes  the  whole  rules  of  nurfing  and 
rearing  children. 

Man  is  fo  much  the  creature  of  habit  and 
imitation,  particularly  with  what  belongs  to 
Yiisfood^  airy  exercife^  and  claathingy  thzt  he 
may  be  moulded  into  any  form  we  pleafe. 
Nature  has  wifely  provided  milk  ibr. the inr 


S39 

fant,  as  bed  adapted  to  the  delicate  digeftivc 
organs  and  weak  frame  of  early  exiftence. 
This  kind  of  food  ought  to  be  continued  as 
long  as  it  is  capable  of  giving  due  fupport  to 
the  body.  The  mother,  if  poflible,  ought  to 
fuckle  the  child  till  it  is  nine  months  old ; 
when  cow's  milk  may  be  fubllituted.  And  it 
is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  fodder  of  the 
cow  very  much  affeds  the  milk,  fuch  as  grains 
and  turnips^  fo  much  in  ufe  near  great  towns. 
The  firft  article  makes  the  milk  difpofed  to 
acefcency ;  and  the  turnips  impregnate  it  with 
a  difagreeable  flavour,  which  comes  from  an 
oil  in  the  tops  and  rind.  Such  qualities  are 
hurtful  to  the  flomachs  of  infants :  and  grafs 
and  hay  are  the  natural  food  of  this  ufeful 
animal. 

A  child  that  is  to  be  brought  up  by  the  pan 
andfpoon^  as  it  is  called,  it  is  obvious,  ought 
to  have  the  milk  in  the  befl  perfection.  This 
is  a  praClice  which  I  am  forry  to  obferve  is 
fometimes  too  lightly  given  into,  in  families.  I 
have  weighed  its  merits  fully,  in  rearing  my 
only  child  in  this  way,  to  fulfil  the  lad  wiflies  of 
an  afFedionate  mother.  But,  though  my  dar- 
ling boy  has  furmounted  his  lofs  with  the  bed 
poflible  health,  I  would  not  recommend  this 

2  H 


2i0 

mode  of  nurfmg,  on  any  terms,  if  it  can  be 
avoided.  Nothing  can  compenfate  to  the  in- 
fant for  the  want  of  the  breaft.  About  the 
third  month,  a  little  pounded  bifcuit,  previous- 
ly foftened  with  a  little  boiling  water,  may  be 
add^d  to  give  the  milk  confiftence :  and  from 
the  beginning,  as  much  brown  fugar  may  be 
mixed,  as  to  give  it  the  fweetnefs  of  mother's 
milk.  Sugar,  it  ought  to  be  remembered,  is 
a  bad  ingredient  in  the  diet  of  infants. 

The  infant  may  be  confined  to  milk  for  the 
firftyear;  when  a  mefs  of  chicken,  veal,  or 
mutton  broth,  may  be  given  once  a  day,  tak- 
ing care  to  add  nothing  of  the  aromatic  kind. 
However  if  the  infant  is  much  harafled  with 
acidity,  animal  broth,  fuch  as  gravy  foups, 
are  not  only  the  befl  fubftitutes,  but  the  beft 
medicine.  After  two  years,  the  diet  may  be 
extended  to  a  little  folid  animal  food,  fome 
kinds  of  fifh  and  eggs,  but  ftill  with  a  large 
proportion  of  milk.  All  paflry  muft  be  care- 
fully fhunned  :  fweetmeats  of  every  fort  are 
hurtful :  every  made  dijh^  into  which  feafon- 
ings  and  fauces  are  put,  ought  to  be  avoided, 
as  being  a  chief  caufe  of  ftomach  affedions. 
All  beers,  ales,  wines,  and  fpirits,  are  exclud- 
ed from  this  anti-dyfpeptic  regimen.     Fud- 


241 

dings  made  of  rice,  or  light  bread,  may  be  al- 
lowed ;  but  thofe  of  unfermented  flour,  have 
all  the  difadvantages  of  paftry.  Cheefe  is 
grofs  food  for  children  :  and  butter  fhould  be 
fparingly  ufed.  Vegetables  may  be  eaten  with 
animal  food  ;  the  child  being  allowed  fufiicient 
exercife  out  of  doors,  will  always  find  them 
eafy  of  digeftion.  The  objedt  to  be  kept  in 
view,  in  recommending  for  infancy  and  child- 
hood, a  diet  fufficiently  nourifliing  and  eafy  of 
digeftion,  but  at  the  fame  time,  mild  and 
bland,  is,  that  the  appetite  may  become  ac- 
cuftomed  to  no  high-feafoned  or  lufcious  difhes; 
or  the  ftomach  inured  to  any  hot  or  ftimula- 
ting  article. 

Were  thefe  rules  ftridlly  attended  to  in 
families  fubjed  to  gout  and  nervous  difeafes, 
many  fcenes  of  mifery  and  afflidion  might  be 
prevented.  It  is  a  fad,  to  be  daily  obferved, 
that  the  offsprings  of  thefe  families,  are,  of  all 
mankind,  the  moft  liable  to  fall  into  habitual 
drunkennefs,  and  the  love  of  luxurious  feaft- 
ing.  Their  feelings  and  fenfations  are  of  that 
acute  kind,  that  they  eafily  receive  the  impref- 
fion  of  flimulating  articles,  and  are  quickly 
fufcepdble  of  the  pleafure  of  taking  them 
down* 

2H2 


Tea  and  coffee  are  excluded  from  this  diet, 
as  pofleffing  a  narcotic  quality:  milk  is  the 
bed  breakfaft,  but  thofe  who  may  incline  for 
more  variety,  may  ufe  cocoa.  Cocoa  is  a 
mild,  wholefome,  nutritive  food,  and  after  a 
little  perfeverance,  very  grateful  to  moil  peo- 
ple, and  eafy  of  digeftion. 

From  what  has  been  juft  delivered  on  the 
diet  moil  proper  for  infants  and  children, 
grown-up  perfons  will  fee  reafons,  why  they 
fliould  prefer  a  fimilar  conduft  in  the  choice 
of  their  food.  This  is  indeed  a  ferious  evil 
with  mod  nervous  and  bilious  people :  they 
commonly  indulge  in  high  feafoned  difhes, 
and  ufe  great  quantities  of  hot  fauces  or  pep- 
pers, for  the  purpofe,  it  is  thought,  of 
overcoming  the  flatulent  propenfity  of  their 
ilomachs.  I  have  before  condemned  this 
cuftom :  where  flatulence  prevails,  the  flo- 
mach  fhould  feled  plain  fare,  and  that  in 
fmall  quantity;  and  after  a  fliort  refl:  take 
fome  adive  exercife,  which  will  affbrd  certain 
relief. 

The  value  of  air  and  exercife  to  health,  i& 
amply  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  parts  of 
this  work :  attention  to  them  ought  to  begin 
with  early  infancy.    The  child  mud  be  exer- 


243 

cifed  in  the  open  air,  that  is  ever  to  attain  ' 
due  flrength  or  ftability  of  frame.     The  mod 
fpacious  and  well  ventilated  room  cannot  fup- 
ply  the  want  of  the  external  atmofphere.     A 
degree  of  vigor  and  fortitude  of  mind  is  in- 
fenfibly    acquired  by  being  expofed   to   the 
weather ;  while  liftleifnefs   and  depreflion  of 
fpirits  as  conftantly  follow  confinement  within 
doors.  Much  of  this  mental  exhiliration  mud  be 
derived  from  the  objects  which  refrefh  the  eyes. 
The  fedentary  life  falls  more  to  the  lot  of  the  girl 
than  the  boy,  and  is  too  often  encouraged  by 
thofe  prepofterous   modes    of    education  to 
which  young  females  are  expofed  ;    but  cer- 
tainly a  fedentary  life  may  be  confidered  as  the 
chief  caufe  of  female  ill-health.     I  have  heard 
a  mother  boaft  of  her  daughter  being  attended 
hyjive  mafters,  in  different  branches  of  educa- 
tion, in  the  day,  befides  her  tafk  in  the  boards 
ing  fchool.     What  human  body  or  mind,  at 
the  age  of  fifteen,  is  equal  to  fuch  a  trammel 
of  fludy  ?     Let  the  difcerning  mother,  there- 
fore, refled  in  time,  on  the  magnitude  of  the 
fault,  if  (he  beflows  her  daughter  with  a  fick- 
ly  conftitution  as  a  dower,  on  her  hufband. 
Can  any  evil  in  this  world  be  worfe  than  con- 
ftant  bad  health  ?    How  melancholy  is  the 


244. 


ftate  of  a  family  that  is  daily  befet  by  an  at- 
tending phyfician  and  apothecary  ;  continual- 
ly ferved  with  medicine ;  and  a  large  propor- 
tion of  income  annually  confumed  in  fupport 
of  its  phyfical  retinue  ! 

Among  children  defcended  of  nervous  and 
bilious  parents,  it  is  a  caution  worthy  of  every 
well  informed  phyfician,  to  be  guarded  in  the 
ufe  of  emetics,  purgatives,  opiates,  and  worm 
medicines.  The  lad  articles  require  particular 
animadverfion.  The  fathers  and  mothers  of 
fuch  families,  have  too  often  been  in  the  habit 
of  ufmg  medical  prefcriptions  on  every  flight 
occafion ;  and  very  naturally  think  a  fimilar 
praaice  neceffary  for  the  health  of  their  chil- 
dren. Worms  can  only  be  confidered  as  the 
confequence  of  a  weak  condition  of  bowels  ; 
fo  that  their  prevention  and  cure  in  children, 
muft  turn  on  ftrengthening  the  vifcera,  and 
expelling  the  vermin.  A  brifk  purgative  Is 
commonly  employed  for  diflodging  worms, 
and  calomel  has  been  the  chief  ingredient. 
But  calomel  ought  never  to  be  given  alone ; 
it  is  beft  to  join  it  with  jalap  or  rhubarb  5 
though  thefe  articles  by  themfelves  are  fuffici- 
ently  powerful.  I  ufually  give  mag.  uft. 
with  the  jalap  or  rhubarb,  with  a  view  to  the 


245 

dyfpeptic  ftate  of  ftomach ;  and  follow  this 
purge  with  gentle  dofes  of  bark,  colomba,  or 
any  other  fuitable  bitter.  Nothing  anfwers 
better  than  the  fern,  fanton.  or  common 
wormfeed.  With  all  thefe  I  combine  mag- 
nes.  uft.  or  cret.  prepar,  as  the  bowels  hap* 
pen  to  be  flow  or  quick.  Some  chalybeate, 
fuch  as  the  red  oxide,  carbonas  ferri,  or  lema- 
tura,  may  alfo  be  advantageoufiy  added. 
When  thefe  have  been  taken  for  eight  or  ten 
days,  the  brifk  purge  may  be  repeated.  This 
plan  may  be  continued  for  two  or  three  weeks 
at  a  time :  it  will  invigorate  the  digeftive 
powers,  and  the  general  habit :  and  while  it 
enables  the  bowels  to  expel  the  worms,  it  will 
prevent  their  generation,  by  removing  the 
caufe.  Nothing  can  be  more  cruel  than  forc- 
ing the  bowels  of  children  by  draflic  purga- 
tives,  to  evacuate  worms  :  the  mofl  a6iive  will 
fometimes  fail  in  doing  this  ;  whereas  the  in- 
vigorating method  is  fure  and  fafe,  and  cures 
radically. 

What  other  precautions  are  neceflary  for 
the  health  of  children,  will  appear  fufficiently 
plain  from  what  has  been  faid  on  the  caufes  of 
thefe  difeafes.  Thefe  caufes  muft  be  avoided, 
to  infure  fuccefs.    The  inhabitants  of  towzr^ 


246 

ouglit  if  poflible,  to  place  their  children  in  the 
country  for  the  benefit  of  education.     It  is 
not  merely  the  pure  air,  and  fpace  for  recrea- 
tion and  exercife,  that  a  country  fituation  af- 
fords, which  make  it  preferable  ;  other  confi- 
derations  of  equal  weight,  are  to  be  taken  into 
the  account.      The  habits  which  we  are  now 
combating,    are  the  vices   of   artificial   life. 
And  the  love  of  nature  is  one  of  the  beft  lef- 
fons  to  a  young  fcholar ;  it  checks  every  ex- 
cefs,  and  prefcribes  nothing  unwholefome  to 
either  body  or  mind.     To  fee  the  grafs  fpring, 
the  plant  Ihoot,  and  the  flower  bloffom,  are 
among  the  fineft  objects  for  contemplation. 
What  ingenuous  youth  ever  heard  the  bird 
fing,  the  lamb  bleat,  or  the  heifer  low,  but 
warmed  with  emotions  of  a  fuperior  kind. 
The  beauties  of  landfcape,    more  than  any 
thing  we  view,  purify  the  heart,  refine  the 
tafte,  and  warm  the  feelings.     All  is  chearful, 
adive,  and  heathful,  becaufe  all  is  natural 
and  innocent.     Youth  is  the  feafon  of  life,  to 
learn  with  advantage  the  value  of  nature's 
produdions,  and  pi£turefque  fcenery.     If  ne- 
gleded  then,  the  foil  will  groan  under  lefs 
amiable  productions.     To  what  an  unfortu- 
nate change  the  prefent  falhions  are  conform* 


247 

ing  mankind.  The  country  houfes  of  our  no- 
bility and  gentry  are  empty  till  July.  Thus 
the  fpring  months,  that  feafon  of  joy  through- 
out creation,  pafTes  unobferved  by  the  affluent 
and  gay.  The  fouls  of  human  beings  in  this 
age  of  art,  would  feem  to  wifh  the  fun  to  be 
darkened ;  they  find  no  pleafure  but  in  the 
light  of  a  lamp  or  a  flambeau.  I  feel  for  the 
rifing  generation,  when  I  confider  the  efFeds 
of  thefe  overgrown  follies  upon  unexperienced 
minds. 

With  refpeft  to  the  prevention  of  thefe  dif- 
eafes  in  grown-up  people,  or  what  is  the  fame 
thing,  correding  the  predifpofttion^  no  tafk  in 
medicine  has  more  difficulties  to  fur  mount. 
It  is  not  that  it  is  impradicable ;  but  the  pa- 
tients themfelves  are  feldom  willing  to  fubmit 
to  a  code  of  rules  for  the  diredion  of  their 
health,  and  view  with  jealoufy  and  pain  every 
precept  that  is  to  fubtrad  from  their  pleafures. 
What  reward  can  encourage  the  flothful  to 
adivity  ?  Who  can  teach  the  voracious  glutton 
moderation  in  eating  ?  Or  what  eloquence  can 
perfuade  the  habitual  inebriate  to  forfake  his 
bottle  ?  Nay  how  difficult  the  talk,  to  draw  the 
nervous  female  from  her  tea ! 

Where  the  predifpofition  is  not  hereditary, 

2  I 


*  V 


248 

fome  of  the  caufes  which  have  been  aflignedj 
will  generally  be  found  to  have  brought  it  on. 
If  thefe  caufes  have  been  owing  to  any  indif- 
cretion  of  the  patients  themfelves,  to  counter- 
ad  them  will  be  difficult  in  proportion  to 
their  inveteracy  ;  and  the  defires  and  paffions 
which  give  them  effedl.  A  habit  is  to  break 
up,  without  which  there  are  no  hopes  of  re- 
lief. Every  nervous  perfon  has  fome  favourite 
pleafure  to  indulge.  Articles  of  materia  medt' 
ca  avail  little,  unlefs  the  patient  forms  the  re- 
folution  to  obey  the  injundions  of  his  phyfician. 
To  begin  new  modes  of  living ;  to  go  to  bed 
foon  and  rife  early ^  to  drink  water  inftead  of 
wine ;  to  labour  and  toil,  and  be  expofed  to 
the  weather  after  years  fpent  in  luxury  and 
floth,  are  changes  not  likely  to  be  heard  with 
fatisfa£Uon,  far  lefs  to  be  pradifed  with  perfe- 
verance,  by  an  enervated  voluptuary.  Yet 
changes  equally  great  mufl  be  effected,  or  there 
can  be  no  recovery. 

The  treatment  of  thefe  difeafes  is  a  part  of 
the  phyfician's  duty,  that  differs  much  from 
the  experience  neceflary  to  dired:  with  fuccefs, 
the  pradice  in  moft  other  diftempers.  For, 
however  well  he  may  be  informed  by  prepara- 
tory ftudies,  and  however  ftored  with  the  re- 


249     • 

iburces  of  his  profeiTion,  fomething  will  ftill  be 
wanting  to  infure  a  decifive  method  of  cure, 
which  even  the  fick-bed  cannot  fupply.  This 
is  the  knowledge  of  character  and  of  mankind, 
w^hich  can  only  be  learned  by  quick  difcrimina- 
tion,  and  correct  obfervations  formed  in  the 
bufy  world.  The  living  man,  feen  in  his  varied 
purfuits,  can  alone  beftow  that  knowledge  on 
the  phyfician.  For  this  very  reafon,  there  are 
no  diforders  that  fo  puzzle  and  confound  the 
young  and  inexperienced  j  and  none  fo  liable 
to  be  mifunderftood  by  the  ignorant,  or  plod- 
ding part  of  the  profeffion. 

The  old  maxim  contraria  contrariis  meden- 
ter,  is  better  exemplified  here,  than  in  moft 
other  difeafes.  To  change  a  ftate  of  body  in- 
duced by  long  cuftoms  of  living,  or  derived 
from  nature  itfelf,  muft  be  entered  upon  with 
fortitude  and  refolution.  But  even  where  no 
improper  habits  have  been  formed,  changes 
and  variations  of  regimen  that  powerfully  im- 
prefs  the  nervous  fyftem,  and  call  forth  adive 
paffions  of  a  different  kind,  will  often  be  ne» 
ceffary  to  health.  To  the  inhabitant  of  a 
town,  a  country  life  will  offer  many  new  ob- 
jects to  the  fenfe,  and  afford  the  moft  falutary 
recreations.     But  that  this  change  of  fcene 

2  I  2 


250 

fhould  operate  with  due  force  on  the  fentient 
part,  it  is  not  that  a  few  weeks  or  months 
fhould  be  pafled  in  a  new  fituation  ;  if  it  can 
poflibly  be  done,  it  ought  to  be  for  years ; 
nay,  in  fome  inftances  it  mufl:  be  continued  for 
life.  And  when  fuch  tranfitions  of  living  are 
entered  upon,  whoever  intends  to  praftife 
them,  mufl.  duly  weigh  the  circumfl:ances. 
The  mind  mufl  not  be  left  in  a  fl:ate  of  inac- 
tion, lefl:  it  fhould  relapfe  into  its  old  feel- 
ings, and  become  the  prey  of  former  paflions. 
In  making  this  tranfition  from  the  city  to  the 
village,  every  perfon  mufl:  be  fatisfied  firfl:, 
that  he  can  employ  his  retirement  without 
enmity  and  pafs  his  time  to  advantage.  The 
bufmefs  of  a  farm  is  the  natural  avocation  of 
a  country  life.  Agriculture  in  the  prefent 
day  is  improved  to  the  form  of  a  fcience,  and 
requires  a  regular  courfe  of  fl:udy  from  the 
books  which  contain  it ;  and  when  combined 
with  the  pradical  part,  it  becomes  a  fource  of 
profitable  and  elegant  purfuit.  Every  feafon 
brings  with  it  fomething  to  be  done ;  fo  that  a 
mind  difpofed  to  be  adive,  cannot  want  a  mo- 
tive :  and  the  fports  of  hunting,  fowling,  and 
fifhing,  will  amply  vary  the  hours  which  are 
devoted  to  relaxation. 


251 

The  fmall  circle  of  domeftic  duties,  which 
many  perfons  have  to  go  through,  exhibits  fuch 
a  famenefs,  that  no  recreation  can  be  derived 
from  it  5  there  is  fo  little  of  variety,  that  the 
mind  as  well  as  the  body,  dwindles  into  a  te- 
nor of  lifllefs  inactivity .  Sufficient  ftimulus  is 
wanting  to  roufe  the  languid  faculties :  and  in 
fuch  fituations  we  meet  with  the  mod  confirm- 
ed habits  of  nervous  affedion.  I  once  knew 
a  lady,  who  for  twenty  years  was  never  out  of 
her  room :  at  length,  without  any  known 
caufe,  fhe  ventured  abroad,  and  returned  to 
the  full  exercife  of  all  her  former  duties  of 
friendihip  and  family  affairs.  Such  cafes  are 
chiefly  to  be  feen  among  people  enjoying  eafy 
fortunes,  who  had  been  formerly  adive,  but 
are  now  without  any  of  thofe  urgent  motives 
which  preferve  energy  of  mind,  fo  conducive  to 
health.  The  public  funds  of  this  country 
are  one  great  caufe  of  thofe  torpid  habits  of 
living ;  where  the  fecurity  of  property  is  fo 
compleat,  that  any  care  about  its  fafety  is 
needlefs.  A  vaft  capital  is  by  this  means  un- 
produdive  of  any  thing  to  the  public,  but  is  a 
fource  of  bad  health  to  its  owner.  All  inter- 
prize  is  thus  checked  among  a  large  part  of 
the  community,  who  become  vidims  to  dif- 


t  i\ 


252 

eafed  feelings,  and  to  thofe  kindred  glooms 
which  prey  on  flill  life.  I  have  known  fome 
benevolent  ladies  of  fortune,  who,  having  no 
bufy  employment  to  fill  up  their  time,  took 
under  their  protection  feveral  large  families  of 
children,  among  their  poor  neighbours  j  and 
by  adminiilering  to  their  wants,  directing  their 
education,  and  difpenfmg  cordials,  medicines, 
and  neceflaries  to  the  fick,  made  themfelves  a 
blefUng  to  fociety  :  and  by  the  air,  exercife, 
and  recreation,  which  were  required  for  the 
difcharge  of  thefe  good  offices,  they  warded 
off  all  the  unpleafant  attacks  of  a  delicate 
frame,  and  a  nervous  conflitution. 

To  the  man  of  bufmefs  and  the  artifan, 
who  are  neceflarily  confined  to  a  town,  I 
would  recommend,  that  as  much  time  as  pof- 
fible,  in  their  leifure  hours,  ihould  be  fpent 
out  of  doors,  in  riding  or  rambling  about  the 
outfkirts  of  their  refidence.  This  kind  of  ex- 
ercife ought  to  be  carried  to  a  much  greater 
length  than  has  ufually  been  advifed ;  it  ought 
to  be  continued  to  the  breaking  out  of  a  free 
fweat.  Thefe  perfons  muft  learn  to  brave 
the  weather,  and  fally  out  in  purfuit  of  their 
health  and  recreation,  in  defpite  of  wind  and 
rain :   and  their  drefs  may  at  a  cheap  rate,  be 


253 

accommodated  to  the  flate  of  the  atmofphere 
and  feafon.  The  diilance  from  town,  which 
may  be  neceflary  for  thefe  excurfions,  muft  be 
meafured  by  the  purity  of  the  air,  and  the  ruf- 
ticity  of  the  country  :  they  muft  get  beyond 
the  effluvium  of  fmoke  and  mud. 

When  employed  at  the  defk,  men  of  bufi- 
nefs,  and  indeed  all  perfons  who  write  or 
read  much,  ought  to  ufe  a  ftanding  pofture, 
to  prevent  the  body  from  being  bent,  by  which 
means  the  lungs  and  ftomach,  as  well  as  the 
whole  abdominal  vifcera,  will  be  free  from 
compreflion.  Want  of  exercife  at  all  times 
impedes  the  free  circulation  of  the  blood,  and 
the  regular  functions  of  the  different  bowels  j 
but  compreflion  of  thefe  organs,  whether  by 
tight  lacing  and  fwaddling,  or  by  any  unna- 
tural pofture  long  continued,  has  ftill  more 
pernicious  effeds.  A  fitting  pofture  is  alfo 
extremely  hurtful  to  the  urinary  paflages,  and 
favors  the  depofition  of  matter  that  brings  on 
the  difeafe  called  the  ftone. 

Exercife  and  recreation,  of  the  kinds  juft 
mentioned,  unfortunately  cannot  be  employed 
by  the  town-bred  female.  Indeed  the  fafhion 
of  a  town  life,  at  this  day,  almoft  excludes  the 
lady  from  every  fhare  of  healthftil  exercife ; 


4 


«    V 


for  it  is  not  to  be  expeded,  that  the  fair  fex 
can,  by  themfelves,  frequent  the  public  walks, 
or  perambulate  the  adjoining  fields,  to  breathe 
a  purer  atmofphere.  In  this  age  of  manufac- 
ture, trade  and  politics,  the  morning  hours  of 
the  gentleman  are  commonly  fpent  at  the 
counting-houfe,  the  exchange,  or  the  cofFee- 
houfe  ;  fo  that  the  ladies  muft  be  fatisfied  with 
a  fhort  vifit  of  their  male  companions  at  the 
dinner  table,  which  feems  almoft  the  only 
fcene  of  intercourfe  between  the  fexes.  In 
what  manner  then  is  the  city  lady  to  preferve 
health,  or  regain  it  when  loft  ?  If  fhe  cannot 
look  to  a  country  refidence,  her  fituation  muft 
be  pitiable. 


rmmt«e99'9999»U*" 


As  thefe  difeafes,  from  innate  delicacy  of 
frame,  fall  moftly  on  the  fair  fex,  how  cauti- 
ous ought  parents  to  be  in  feleding  proper 
-feminaries  of  education  for  their  daughters. 
Many  fathers  and  mothers,  I  believe,  ftill  pre- 
fer a  boarding  fchool  tuition,  to  private  inftruc- 
lion  under  their  own  eye.  But  I  am  here 
to  fpeak  chiefly,  as  it  concerns  the  health  of 
young  ladies.     Girls  are  commonly  fent  to 


S55 

thefe  houfes,  at  a  period  of  life  when  the 
conftitution  is  to  undergo  fome  material 
changes,  which  require  the  mod  attentive  and 
delicate  treatment.  Now  it  fo  happens,  that 
many  of  thefe  boarding  houfes  lodge  thirty, 
forty,  fifty,  nay  an  hundred  young  ladies.  1 
am  at  a  lofs  to  conceive  how  any  miftrefs  of  a 
fchool  can  do  juftice  to  fo  large  a  feminary  of 
pupils.  But  I  may  be  told,  affiftants  are 
kept  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  fcholars. 
This  is  evading  the  queftion,  not  anfwering 
it :  afliftant  teachers  may  anfwer  all  the  pur- 
pofes  of  fchool  hours ;  but  do  all  thefe  affift- 
ants poflefs  the  qualifications  neceffary  for 
forming  young  minds  to  be  amiable  wives, 
afFedionate  mothers,  and  accomplifhed  wo- 
men ?  Scarcely.  A  miftrefs  of  education  is  in 
the  place  of  a  parent :  is  this  maternal  duty 
then  of  fo  fmall  importance  that  it  admits  of 
being  deputed  to  the  third  degree  ?  They  muft 
have  cold  hearts  who  think  fo.  Every  difcem- 
ing  mother  knows  well,  that  the  fmaller  her 
family  is,  fhe  can  the  better  attend  to  the 
wants  of  her  children.  How  then  can  a  mif- 
trefs of  a  boarding  houfe,  who  officiates  for  a 
livelihood  only,  do  more  than  the  natural 
guardian  ?   The  mere  acquirements  of  learn-? 

2   K 


256 

ing  are  a  fmall  part  of  female  education  ;  it  is 
the  domeflic  virtues,  and  the  retiring  graces, 
■\X^hich  form  the  chief  excellencies  of  woman. 
Which  of  thefe  faihionable  fchools  have  given 
proofs  to  the  world,  that  thefe  are  the  ftudies 
they  inculcated  ;  and  that  their  matrons  are 
models  for  imitation,  beyond  the  generality  of 
mothers  ? 

In  this  country,  it  is  little  more  than  a  cen- 
tury, that  daughters  were  thought  worthy  of 
an  improved  education.  So  lately  have  we 
emerged  from  barbarifm.  Ever  bleffed  be  the 
memory  of  the  amiable  Mr  Addifon  for  this 
polifli  to  fociety  !  It  has  not  therefore  yet  crept 
into  our  cufloms,  to  honour  female  inftruc- 
tion  with  thofe  marks  of  authority  which  dif-. 
tinguifh  public  fchools  for  boys.  Preceptor^ 
bearing  academic  degrees,  and  licenfed  by  the 
learned,  are  alone  trufled  to  condudt  the  edu- 
cation of  young  men.  Whereas,  any  lady  of 
tolerable  mediocrity  in  talents  and  accomplifh- 
ments,  who  can  meet  with  the  countenance  and 
fupport  of  a  few  well-meaning  friends  in  her 
neighbourhood,  is  deemed  equal  to  diredl  a 
boarding  fchool  for  young  girls.  Books  may 
be  multiplied  without  number  on  female  man- 
ners, if  fome  check  cannot  be  given  to  the  cuf- 


^51 

torn  of  allov/ing  their  education  to  be  conduc- 
ed by  improper  perfons.  One  vicious  feminary 
will  do  more  harm  than  can  be  compeniated 
by  the  whole  philofophers  of  the  age.  Hence 
the  necellity  of  qualifying  the  mother  to  in- 
flrudt  her  own  children. 

In  a  public  boarding  fchool  there  is  a  very 
heterogeneous  concourfe  of  characters.  We 
there  behold  the  daughters  of  perfons  of  all 
ranks  in  life ;  of  families  of  the  moll  difcor- 
dant  habits  and  fentiments ;  many  of  thefe 
bringing  abroad  all  the  prejudices  of  kindred ; 
and  perhaps  not  a  few  labouring  under  heredi- 
tary difeafes,  or  imbec^hty  of  mind  :  all  lodged, 
boarded  and  trained,  under  one  roof.  If  imi- 
tation is  one  of  the  flrongefl  propenfities  of 
our  nature,  is  there  not  great  hazard  in  fuch  a 
colledion  of  young  people  ?  Every  good  mo- 
thor  is  cautious  whom  her  daughters  chufe  as 
companions  at  home  ;  and  can  fhe  be  lefs  jea- 
lous of  their  fafety  when  abroad  ?  The  bed  and 
word  of  our  habits  receive  a  tindure  of  our 
aflbciates,  but  particularly  during  youth.  Such 
a  fchool  of  young  girls,  all  differing  in  rank, 
in  fortune,  in  temper,  in  conftitution,  in  paf= 
lions,  and  in  profpeCts  in  life,  but  liable  to 
communicate  follies,  propenfities  and  difeales, 

2   K  2 


258 

to  one  another,  muft  be  confidered  as  an  im* 
proper  aflemblage. 

-All  boarding  fchools  ought  to  be  fituated  in 
the  country  ;  not  only  for  the  fake  of  air  and 
exercife,  but  that  the  young  ladies  may  be  cut 
off  from  gofliping  vifitors.  This  will  tend  to 
fecure  health,  by  rendering  the  introdudion  of 
contagious  difeafes  more  difficult.  Such  a 
fpace  of  ground  ought  to  be  laid  open  as  may 
be  fufficient  for  amufement  and  play  j  and 
certain  portions  of  the  day  allotted  for  walk- 
ing, or  more  adive  fports,  that  thofe  who  are 
moil  fedentary  may  be  forced  to  partake.  An 
adjoining  flower  garden  will  be  a  motive  for 
recreation  to  fome,  while  the  tafte  may  be  im- 
proved by  the  fludy  of  Botany  ;  a  tafk  pecu- 
liarly adapted  to  young  ladies.  Such  avoca- 
tions will  train  the  female  mind  to  the  love  of 
fimplicity,  and  ftore  it  with  that  fpecies  of  in- 
formation,  which  affords  food  for  refledion  at 
a  future  day ;  and  will  fill  up  much  of  the 
leifure  to  be  met  with  in  the  domeftic  fcene*^ 

*  The  young  ladies  In  boarding  fchools.  In  this  vi- 
cinity, who  are  Inftrufled  to  the  love  of  the  animated 
world,  have  now  a  rich  field  for  contemplation  in  the 
elegant  volumes  of  our  townfman,  Mr  Bewick.  A 
work  that  does  credit,  not  anly  to  this  country,  but  to 
the  age. 


259 

The  pupil  of  elegant  Nature  will  thus  find  a 
country  walk  as  much  the  habit  of  life  as  her 
hours  of  fleep  ;  and  will  not  be  feared  from  it 
by  a  dirty  road,  or  a  lowering  fky  :  a  portion 
of  time  will  always  be  due  to  exercife,  that  the 
faculties  may  be  refrefhed,  and  the  eye  feafted 
by  the  beauties  of  creation.  And  while  her 
nervous  aunts  are  moping  their  evenings  over 
the  card  table,  fhe  will  gather  health  by  her 
cheerful  excurfions  ;  and  preferve  her  bloom 
of  countenance  by  the  only  means  that  can 
give  it  an  additional  charm. — Thefe  ideas 
may,  by  fome,  be  deemed  a  little  romantic  ; 
but  when  I  look  to  the  lickly  frame  and 
miferable  exiftence  of  a  nervous  patient,  I  can 
find  an  antidote  againft  this  fpecies  of  criti- 
cifm. 

The  diet  of  thefe  fchools,  I  am  much  afraid, 
is  often  exceptionable.  And  if  their  matrons 
are  not  too  wife  for  advice,  they  will  find 
many  cautions  neceflary  with  girls,  nervous  in 
themfelves,  and  defcended  from  nervous,  bili- 
ous, and  gouty  parents.  They  will  therefore 
find  it  of  confequence  to  pay  fome  atten- 
tion to  the  phyfical  traits  of  their  pupils,  that 
they  may  learn  how  to  preferve  health.  Let 
them  beware  of  encouraging  hot,  or  highly 


260 

feafoned  diflies.  Tea  and  cofFee  bught  to  be 
excluded  from  their  bill  of  fare.  Plain  drefled 
meat ;  plain  puddings  ;  no  paftry  ;  no  cake 
or  fweetmeats ;  water,  or  milk  and  water,  with 
meals  ;  fifh  with  plain  butter ;  no  vinous  li- 
quors, but  when  prefcribed  medically.  A 
plentiful  dairy,  willbe  a  mod  valuable  appen- 
dage to  every  boarding  fchooi :  but  above  all 
let  them  inculcate  and  be  the  examples  of  ear- 
ly hours  in  rifmg  and  going  to  bed. 

I  am  one  of  thofe  who  confider  the  office  of 
fuperintending  a  female  boarding  fchooi,  as  a 
flation  of  great  importance  and  refponfibility : 
and  officious  friends  fhould  not  be  too  precipi- 
tate in  recommending  perfons  to  fill  it.  It  ap- 
pears to  me  of  even  greater  moment  than  a 
teacher  of  boys,  let  their  rank  and  confequence 
be  what  they  may.  The  boys  whofe  educa- 
tion may  have  been  negleded,  by  future  at- 
tention may  be  recovered  :  but  the  young  lady 
whofe  manners  have  once  received  a  wrong 
bias,  is  feldom  reftored  to  a  fimple  and  unaf- 
fected demeanor  ;  and  fo  it  is  with  health  alfo. 
To  married  women  only  this  bufinefs  fhould 
be  afligned :  and  it  ought  to  be  given  in  pre- 
ference, to  one  who  has  educated  her  own 
daughters.    It  will  not  be  contended  in  oppo- 


'261 

fition  to  this  opinion,  that  any  one  can  be  fen- 
fible  of  the  mother's  duties,  who  has  not  flood 
in  that  relation  herfelf.  A  good  temper  and 
benevolent  difpofitions  mufl  be  eflential  ingre- 
dients in  this  character.  Thefe  animadverfions 
on  female  education  and  management  cannot 
be  called  foreign  to  a  treatife  on  nervous  dif- 
eafes.  They  are  the  refult  of  long  obferva- 
tion,  and  of  much  converfation  on  the  fubjecl, 
in  different  parts  of  the  world,  with  many 
fenfible  women,  who  had  received  a  boarding 
fchool  inftrudion,  and  often  lamented  the  im- 
perfeclions  to  be  found  there. 

Dr  Beddoes  in  his  Hygeia,  has  lately  pub- 
lifhed  fome  remarks  on  thefe  inftitutions,  and 
given  accounts  truly  frightful  of  theii*  internal 
economy.  The  medical  attendants  of  thefe 
feminaries  have  hitherto  preferved  a  filence, 
not  always  commendable,  when  improvements 
for  the  fake  of  health  appeared  fo  neceffary. 
It  is  fortunate  for  the  progrefs  of  fcience  and 
the  good  of  human  kind,  that  fuch  men  as  Dr 
Beddoes  now  and  then  rife  up  on  the  theatre 
of  the  world ;  who,  above  the  low  trammels 
that  fetter  felfifh  beings,  dare  to  combat  pre- 
judice and  error,  and  expofe  the  ftupidity  of 
rejeding  improvement.     But  the  firll  flep  t© 


< « 


262 

a  wholefome  reform  in  behalf  of  this  moft 
amiable  part  of  creation,  muft  be  to  limit  the 
number  of  pupils.  Parents  have  it  in  their 
power  to  effed  this,  by  fending  their  daugh- 
ters to  thofe  fchools  only,  whofe  numbers  ne- 
ver exceed  a  family  circle. 

When  we  recommend  air  and  exercife  to 
our  patients,  the  nature  of  what  advantage  we 
exped  from  them  ought  to  be  explained,  that 
the  due  effed  may  be  obtained.     A  number 
of  people  are  too  apt  to  think,  that  a  fhort 
formal  walk  out  of  doors,  at  flated  hours,  is 
fufficient  for  this  purpofe.      Nay,  there  are 
hundreds  who  think  they  have   done  great 
things  if  they  go  abroad  for  an  hour  or  two  in 
a  clofe  carriage.      Such  perfons  may  be  very 
much  pleafed  with  medical  admonitions ;  but 
they  pay  a  poor  compliment  to  their  phyfician, 
when  they  limit  his  diredions  to  fuch  forms. 
In  a  luxurious  age,  and  in  a  country  like  Eng- 
land, wallowing  in  wealth,  and  rioting  in  in- 
dulgence,  I  am  well  aware  how  difficult  and 
unthankful  the  tafk,  to  tell  people  they  are 
doing  wrong,  when  they  receive  fo  much  plea- 
fure ;  and  how  hopelefs  the  profped:  of  bring- 
ing them  back  to  fimplicity  of  manners,  and 
fober  modes  of  living,  after  unbounded  gratifi- 


26S 

nation.  I  mufl  however  contend,  in  the  pre- 
vention of  thefe  difeafes  as  depending  on  pre- 
difpofition,  that  the  exercife  ought  to  be  of  the 
mofl:  adlive  kind,  even  to  labour  and  fatigue ; 
and  always  till  it  produces  a  moid  fkin,  if  not 
a  profufe  fweat.  As  thefe  refolutions  gain 
ground  in  the  nervous  temperament^  the  idle 
and  trifling  objedions  commonly  made  againft 
feafon  and  weather,  will  foon  vanifh.  It  is  the 
certain  efFetSt  of  recreation  out  of  doors,  to 
exhilirate  the  mind,  while  it  invigorates  the 
body  ;  which  foon  gives  birth  to  new  feelings, 
new  ideas,  and  adive  faculties.  To  a  perfon 
accuftomed  to  a  warm  clofe  room,  and  feldom 
moving  beyond  the  threfhold,  I  conceive  the 
influence  of  the  external  air,  and  fufficient  gef- 
tation  at  the  fame  time,  to  be  a  confiderable 
flep  towards  a  reverfed  method  of  living* 

The  value  of  exercife  on  horfehack^  is  fo  welF 
known,  that  it  may  feem  fuperfluous  to  men- 
tion it  here.  But  in  the  prevention  and  treat- 
ment of  nervous  and  bilious  difeafes,  it  is  fuper- 
eminent.  When  it  is  begun  with  confidence, 
care  fhould  be  taken  the  ride  may  not  grow 
irkfome  by  being  confl:antly  over  the  fame 
road.  A  journey  fliould  therefore  be  frequent- 
ly interpofed  j  and  fome  bufmefs  to  be  tranf- 

2  L 


264? 

a^led,  kept  in  view.  The  motion  and  a6:ion 
which  are  communicated  by  riding,  to  the  or- 
gans of  digeflion  and  refpiration,  are  of  the 
mod  falutary  kind.  The  ftomach,  by  being 
duly  comprefled  by  the  abdominal  mufcles, 
has  its  contents,  after  being  fully  diffolved  by 
the  gaftric  liquor,  expelled  at  the  proper  time. 
Some  perfons  will  tell  you,  that  it  is  hurtful  to 
ufe  exercife  after  a  full  repafl :  but  that  is  the 
language  of  a  pampered  being,  and  of  one  who 
eats  beyond  what  nature  requires  :  how  other- 
wife  could  the  labourer  rife  to  his  work,  with 
fo  fliort  a  reft  after  his  dinner  ?  But  cuftom  has 
made  it  familiar  to  him,  and  he  is  fatisfied  with 
what  will  fupport  him.  Were  every  lover  of 
good  eating  compelled  to  walk  a  few  miles  im- 
mediately after  dinner,  he  would  foon  learn  mo- 
deration. By  riding,  the  liver,  with  its  fluggifh 
circulation,  its  gall-bladder  and  du£ts,  is  well 
prefled  and  agitated  ;  fo  that  the  bile  is  fecre- 
ted  in  proportion  to  the  wants  of  the  digeftive 
procefs,  and  all  its  canals  kept  pervious.  The 
periftaltic  motion  of  the  inteftines  is  thus  pro- 
moted with  all  the  fluids ;  and  the  ladeals  in 
like  manner  perform  their  office.  The  kidneys 
at  the  fame  time,  as  well  as  the  bladder,  dif- 
charge  the  urine  to  the  laft  drop  j  and  no  par- 


265 

tide  of  fabulous  matter  is  detained  in  either 
cavity,  to  become  the  nucleus  of  a  future  (lone, 
as  fo  often  follows  a  life  of  indolence  and  lloth. 
The  lungs  being  fully  ftretched  and  expanded, 
by  the  full  infpiration  of  a  pure  atmofphere, 
the  vivifying  oxygen  is  taken  in,  in  due  quan- 
tity, to  afford  llrength  and  ftimulus  to  the 
body,  and  adiivity  to  the  intelledual  faculties. 
Hence  the  heart  is  excited  by  the  florid  denfe 
blood  to  ftrong  contractions  ;  and  the  furface 
and  extremities  warmed  and  foftened  by  a 
generous  vital  fluid ;  which,  while  it  defends 
from  a  cold  and  fickle  atmofphere,  keeps  up  a 
glowing  perfpiration,  to  the  certain  relief  of 
every  dyfpeptic  fymptom.  From  thefe  effedts 
of  equitation  arife  cheerful  fpirits,  acute  under- 
ftanding,  good  appetite,  perfeQidigeftion,  foun4 
and  refrefhing  fleep,  and  all  the  healthful  and 
pleafurable  fenfations  which  flow  from  mens 
Jana  in  corpore  fano. 

The  cold-bath  is  a  common  remedy  with 
weakly  people  ;  and  it  is  often  reforted  to  by 
the  nervous  invalid.  I  rather  wilh  to  confider 
it  as  an  athletic  exercife  than  a  medicine,  I 
therefore  introduce  it  under  the  prevention. 
Modern  phyficians  have,  however,  made 
greedy  attempts  to  bring  it  under  their  con- 

2  L   2 


266 

trol,  and  to  point  out  how  and  when  it  ought 
to  be  ufed.  But  the  rules  which  have  been 
laid  down  for  the  pradice,  and  the  explana- 
tions which  have  been  given  of  its  mode  of 
adion,  are  alike  unfatisfadory.  In  the  recent 
publication  of  Dr  Buchan,  on  cold  and  warm 
bathing,  the  fubjed  is  treated  more  fcienti- 
fically ;  and  his  book  ought  to  be  carefully 
read  by  every  perfon  who  reforts  to  a  water- 
ing place. 

When  we  look  at  the  fubjeds  who  flock  to 
the  fea-fide  to  ufe  the  cold  bath^  we  find  per- 
fons  of  every  defcription,  labouring  under  all 
the  varieties  of  difeafe.  It  mufl  therefore  be 
either  a  univerfal  remedy,  or  no  remedy  at 
all.  Hence  one  fpeaks  of  it  as  a  bracer^  and 
.giving  tone  to  the  folids.  Another  accounts 
for  the  good  effedh  of  it,  from  the  Jhock  it 
gives :  and  a  third  explains  it,  by  accurnulating 
fenforial  power,  or  excitability.  Leaving  all 
thefe  gentlemen  in  full  pofleffion  of  their 
theories,  I  muft  beg  to  confider  it  chiefly  as 
an  exercife  and  amufement.  A  degree  of  re- 
folution  is  required  for  the  employment  of 
cold  bathing,  which  infpires  courage ;  for  the 
time,  it  fliifts  the  train  of  thought,  and  calls 
forth  a  confiderable  mufcular  exertion.     On. 


367 

the  fudden  immerfion  of  the  body  into  the 
cold  water,  a  quantity  of  heat  is  inftantly  given 
out,  which  gives  what  is  called  the  Jhock  ;  and 
the  temperature  of  the  body  is  for  the  time 
reduced,  at  leaft  fo  long  as  it  remains  in  the 
water.  In  order  therefore  to  render  it  a  falu- 
tary  exercife,  the  water  muft  be  of  a  tempe- 
rature fuited  to  the  vigor  of  body,  or  its  habit 
of  bearing  cold.  We  thus  fuppofe  that  the 
feafon  for  cold  bathing  is  limited  to  the  fum- 
mer  months ;  for  in  winter  the  degree  of  cold 
which  we  require,  can  be  obtained  from  the 
atmofphere.  In  the  ad  of  drefling  and  un- 
drefling,  the  body  is  expofed  naked  to  the  air ; 
I  fancy  this  may  be  the  means  of  hardening  it 
a  little  to  the  weather,  which  is  a  good  effect. 
Perfons  who  are  timid  at  firft,  if  their  fears 
decline  as  they  go  on,  gain  advantage  from 
bathing.  But  thofe  who  never  furmount  the 
dread,  cannot  expedt  benefit  from  it.  Much 
of  the  good,  it  would  appear,  arifes  from  the 
vigor  and  activity  it  calls  forth.  If  the  bather 
can  fwim,  and  ufe  confiderable  exercife  in  the 
water,  he  may  remain  in  it  a  length  of  time ; 
but  others  cannot  do  this  without  danger  of 
catarrh.  After  coming  out,  if  the  Ipirits  arc 
raifed,  the  body  agile,  with  a  glowing  warmth 


"f » i 


268 

fpeedily  fucceeding  on  the  ikin,  and  fitnefs  for 
mufcular  motion,  with  increafe  of  appetite,  the 
bath  has  done  good.  When  a  perfon  is  ex- 
tremely apprehenfive,  he  ought  to  begin  bath- 
ing very  gradually ;  lave  the  body  firil  gently, 
then  ti7  deeper  water,  till  at  lafl  he  can  bear 
a  plunge.  To  remain  long  chilly,  low  fpirited, 
and  without  appetite,  are  figns  that  the  bath 
is  hurtful.  It  rauft  be  cautioufly  tried  by  pa- 
tients much  reduced ;  and  is  mofl  fafe  after 
convalefcence,  when  the  ufual  health  returns, 

I  am  alfo  of  opinion,  that  thofe  vifits  to  wa- 
tering places  are  highly  beneficial  to  nervous 
people,  by  breaking  in  upon  eflablifhed  habits, 
that  uniform  tenor  of  life  which  they  com- 
monly lead  ;  Ihaking  off  indolent  cuftoms, 
and  forcing  them  into  company  and  cheerful 
fociety.  They  are  put  out  of  their  way,  as  the 
vulgar  exprefTion  is ;  and  this  very  change  of 
difcipline  is  a  great  flep  to  a  cure  :  the  more 
the  etiquette,  therefore,  to  be  gone  through,  fo 
much  the  better. 

In  this  age  of  refinement,  while  fo  many  in- 
dulgencies  creep  in  upon  our  domeftic  arrange- 
ments, it  is  furprizing  that  baths  do  not  be- 
come appendages  to  our  houfes.  They  are 
never  thought  of   till  the   phyfician  orders 


269 

them  for  the  recovery  of  health.  Yet  there 
appears  nothing  more  Hkely  to  conduce  to  the 
comfort  of  a  family  than  a  fuite  of  baths ;  to 
which  all  the  members  of  it  might  daily  re- 
pair. 

Moderate  exercife  ought  to  be  continued 
for  fome  time  after  coming  out  of  the  bath,  fo 
as  to  promote  the  glow,  and  encourage  per- 
fpiration  :  and  the  bed  time  for  ufmg  it  is  be- 
tween breakfaft  and  dinner.  Very  weakly 
people  may  begin  with  72^  of  Fahrenheit;  and 
reduce  it  as  they  find  occafion,  but  it  never 
fhould  be  brought  below  54^  of  that  fcale. 
The  employment  of  the  bath  was  a  common 
ceremony  with  the  ancient  Romans ;  and 
though  frequently  fpoken  of  by  Celfus,  it  does 
not  appear  to  have  been  much  of  a  medical 
regimen :  but  the  cleanhnefs  and  purification 
of  body,  which  flow  from  it  as  an  ablution, 
muft  be  allowed  to  be  a  grand  defence  to 
health. 

The  warm  bath  is  another  remedy  in  ner- 
vous and  dyfpeptic  cafes.  In  that  kind  of  de- 
bility which  is  marked  by  a  languid  circulation 
of  the  blood,  and  a  dry  furface  ;  lefs  mobility 
of  nervous  fyftem,  or  rather  torpor  of  it ;  lefs 
prone    to   violent   emotion,    and   fubje6l  to 


270 

coldnefs  of  the  extremities,  and  general  inac- 
tivity of  mufcular  power ;  in  fuch  cafes  the 
warm  bath  is  often  a  certain  remedy.  It 
ought  to  be  pradifed  twice  a  day ;  after 
which  the  body  mufl  be  kept  warm  by  fuch 
exercife  as  can  be  taken  within  doors ;  fo  that 
it  may  be  gradually  brought  to  the  common 
atmofphere.  This  glaw  may  be  affifted  by 
flannel  cloathing.  If  the  warm  bath  is  tried  in 
cold  weather,  the  tranfitions  ought  not  to  be 
great  at  once,  either  before  or  after  its  ufe.  A 
range  of  baths  of  different  degrees  of  heat, 
would  bed  anfwer  this  purpofe ;  where  the 
patient  might  begin  with  84°.  and  afcend  to 
1 10^.  if  neceffary. 

The  warm  bath  is  to  be  confidered  as  a 
means  for  applying  the  flimulus  of  heat  by 
immerfion,  when  it  would  be  improper  to  de- 
rive it  from  the  atmofphere;  which  cannot 
well  be  done  in  our  latitudes,  without  at  the 
fame  time  injuring  its  refpirable  quality.  It  is 
of  eminent  advantage  in  that  harfh,  impervious 
ftate  of  the  fkin,  which  often  accompanies 
weak  digeflion ;  where  the  ftomach  and 
bowels  become  torpid  from  fympathy  with  the 
furface.  No  relief  is  obtained  in  fuch  cafes, 
if  a  free  perfpiration  does  not  follow :  fo  liable 


^ 


^1 

is  dyfpepfia,  and  the  fuppreflion  of  the  cuticu-^ 
lar  difcharge  to  alternate  with  one  another. 
The  foothing  fenfation  which  it  gives,  and  fe- 
renity  of  mind  which  it  infpires,  are  the  index 
of  the  good  efFeds  of  the  warm  bath.  But 
where  thefe  are  not  felt,  and  on  the  contrary 
an  increafe  of  dejedlion  and  weaknefs,  they  are 
proofs  of  its  doing  harm,  and  it  muft  be  given 
up.  When  the  warm  bath  does  not  agree,  it 
is  furprizing  to  fee  how  quickly  it  debilitates, 
fo  that  it  cannot  be  perfifted  in  long  with  fafe- 
ty.  I  do  not  prefume  to  decide  whether  the 
natural  thermal  waters,  fuch  as  Bath  and  Bux- 
ton, or  the  water  heated  by  artificial  means, 
ought  to  have  the  preference.  But  it  ought 
to  be  remembered,  that  a  journey  to  and  from 
thefe  places  of  public  refort,  muft  be  advanta- 
geous to  an  invalid  :  and  the  change  of  fcene, 
cheerful  company,  and  gay  amufements,  which 
they  afford,  cannot  but  be  beneficial  to  the 
body  and  mind  of  a  nervous  patient. 

When  employed  as  a  phyfician  of  his  ma- 
jefty's  fleet,  I  made  many  attempts  to  get  bur 
naval  hofpitals  furnifhed  with  fuites  of  baths  : 
but  all  my  applications  were  in  vain.  Few 
public  infirmaries  in  England,  though  fome  of 
them  are  well  fupported,  can  boaft  of  thefe 

2  M 


272 

ufeful  appendages.  Yet  cold  lavation  of  the 
body  mufl  be  allowed  one  of  the  beft  adju- 
vants to  health. 

Mineral  waters  are  another  form  of  water 
conveying  medicinal  powers  to  the  body. 
They  may  be  confidered  either  under  the  pre- 
vention, or  treatment  of  nervous  difeafes.  But 
they  are  more  commonly  ufed  by  the  infirm 
and  convalefcent,  than  by  thofe  labouring  un- 
der fevere  difeafe  :  they  will  therefore  be  no- 
ticed with  moft  propriety  in  this  place.  I  fliall 
have  occafion  to  fpeak  of  fome  of  their  ingre- 
dients  as  medicines,  under  the  treatment. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  efficacy  of 
mineral  waters  is  very  confiderable  in  many 
cafes  of  indigeftion,  nervous  debility,  and  thofe 
variations  of  it,  ufually  called  bilious.  The 
ferruginous^  or  thofe  impregnated  with  iron, 
are  the  moft  valuable:  and  where  this  princi- 
ple happens  to  be  joined  in  the  fame  water, 
with  fome  fait  of  a  purgative  quality,  as  that  of 
Cheltenham,  in  certain  nervous  and  dyfpeptic 
habits  they  are  peculiarly  ufeful.  Where  oc-> 
cafional  ideritial  fymptoms  prevail,  from  ob- 
.ftrudion  of  the  biliary  dudls,  whether  from 
fpafm,  mucus,  or  other  caufes,  which  retard 
the  periftaltic  motion  of  the  inteftines  by  the 


273 

bile  being  deficient,  fuch  combinations  of  iron 
and  purgative  fait,  have  the  bed  effeds ;  as 
the  laxative  power  of  the  one  does  not  inter- 
rupt the  invigorating  quality  of  the  other. 
Iron  difTolved  in  water  by  the  chemiftry  of 
Nature,  feems  to  acl  more  powerfully  by  its 
extreme  diffufion  :  and  as  in  this  ftate  of  fo- 
lution,  it  is  capable  of  circulating  through  the 
minuted  vefTels,  its  flimulant  and  ftrengthening 
powers  are  exerted  on  the  remoteft  parts  of  the 
fyftem.  Much  of  the  operation  of  ehalybeates 
may  be  by  chemical  union  with  the  fluids  of 
the  body,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
they  alfo  diredly  flimulate  and  excite  the 
nervous  fubftance.  In  thofe  perfons  where 
cold  extremities  and  pale  complexion  indicate 
a  languid  circulation  and  poor  blood,  befides 
weak  digeftion,  chalybeate  waters  often  per- 
form wonders.  But  where  there  is  much  co- 
lour on  the  furface,  and  a  florid  bloody  I  think 
them  improper. 

There  arc  however  many  cafes  of  nervous 
indifpofition,  for  which  the  waters  impregnated 
with  the  fulphurated  hydrogenous  gas,  and  a 
neutral  fait,  are  to  be  preferred  :  fuch  are  thofe 
of  Harrogate  and  Mofiat.  Where  cutaneous 
eruptions  or  defaedations,  are  troublefome,  or 

a  M  2 


apt  to  alternate  with  the  dyfpeptic  and  bilious 
fymptoms,  thefe  hepatifed  or  fulphurous  wa-* 
ters,  feem  the  fitted.  They  may  alfo,  at  the, 
fame  time,  be  ufed  as  a  warm  bath  -,  and  their 
efficacy  in  this  way  is  known  to  be  confidera- 
ble.  Thefe  cutaneous  difeafes  are  probably 
much  owing  to  the  inadivity  or  torpor  of  the 
abforbents,  and  perfpiratory  veifels  on  the  fur- 
face  of  the  body,  over  which  this  kind  of  wa- 
ter has  a  manifefl:  ftimulant  power.  I  have 
often  feen  fimilar  good  efFedts  from  a  prefcrip- 
tion  imitating  the  compofition  of  thefe  wa- 
ters. * 

But  while  I  fully  admit  the  medicinal  effeds 
of  mineral  waters  in  thefe  difeafes,  I  mufl  ftill 
referve  a  fhare  of  the  credit,  to  the  relaxation 

*  Since  writing  this  paragraph,  I  have  perufed  a 
very  fenfible  pamphlet,  by  Mr  Peacock,  furgeon  in 
Darlington,  announcing  the  difcovery  of  a  fulphurous 
nvater,  at  Dinfdale,  in  the  county  of  Durham.  This 
water,  from  the  analyfis  given,  contains  a  very  large 
proportion  of  fulphurated  hydrogenous  gas :  and  its  effi- 
cacy on  the  ufual  complaints,  for  which  this  kind  of 
water  Is  employed,  has  been  confirmed  by  many  trials. 
This  little  work  contains  many  able  and  pertinent  re- 
marks on  cutaneous  diforders  ;  and  fome  ftriking  fadis, 
on  their  alternating  with  nervous  and  llomach  aiFec- 
dofis.    May,  180^6.  .     •  -,  /     ' 


and  amufement  that  are  to  be  met  with  at, 
thefe  heakhy  and  fafhionable  reforts  of  com- 
pany. Taken  together,  and  properly  employ- 
ed, they  form  a  mod  miportant  part  in  our 
preventive  pra£lice.  I  know  not  what  would 
become  of  numbers  of  families  in  this  country^ 
were  it  not  for  the  enjoyment  which  is  obtain- 
ed, once  in  the  year,  at  fome  popular  watering 
place.  The  time  of  leaving  home  is  wifhed 
for  with  impatience ;  and  the  avocations  and 
engagements  which  delight  them  abroadj^ 
make  up  the  chief  theme  of  converfation  till 
the  feafon  returns. 

Nervous  people  ought  to  clothe  rather 
warm,  and  guard  againft  variable  weather.  If 
they  are  accuflomed  to  flannel  next  the  furface 
of  the  body,  it  mufl:  be  often  fhifted  :  and  the 
body  ought  to  be  wet-fpunged,  or  fprinkled 
with  cold  water  every  morning,  then  wiped 
dry  with  a  hard  towel.  Perfons  who  pradife 
this  mode  of  lavation  daily,  know  that  cheer- 
ful fpirits,  an  agreeable  warmth,  keen  appetite, 
and  eafy  digedion,  fucceed  to  it.  And  when 
through  indolence  or  forgetfulnefs,  they  hap- 
pen to  leave  it  off,  their  dyfpeptic  difpofition 
foon  gains  ground.  The  feet  of  fome  nervous 
people  are  very  liable  to  be  cgld  j  but  this^  oe* 


♦  t 


276 

tnrs  moftly  with  fuch  as  ufe  no  exerclfe  ;  for 
the  fitting  pofture  checks  the  circulation  in  the 
lower  extremities,  and  alfo  difpofes  them  to 
fwell.  Stockings  made  of  lamb's  wool,  laced 
flockings,  or  at  leaft  flannel  focks,  elaftic 
gaiters,  and  hair  or  cork  foles,  make  the  pro- 
per defence  in  winter,  for  the  heels  and  feet : 
and  while  they  prevent  chilblains  in  froft,  they 
infure  the  pleafure  of  recreation  out  of  doors, 
when  the  ground  is  damp.  But  where  one 
perfon  receives  an  injury  to  health  from  damp 
ground  and  thick  fogs,  a  thoufand  perifh  by 
loitering  within  doors  to  avoid  them. 

To  fuch  of  the  nervous  temperament,  as 
complain  much  of  head-ach  and  vertigo,  in  full 
habits,  with  frequent  heat  and  coldnefs  of  the 
head,  accompanied  with  drowfmefs  and  ftu- 
por  ;  thefe  fymptoms  in  advanced  life,  are  al- 
ways to  be  dreaded.     They  particularly  at- 
tack drunkards  and  great  eaters,  who  are  cor- 
pulent, have  large   heads   and  fhort  necks. 
Perfons  of  this  defcription  muft  corred  their 
modes  of  living,  if  they  wifh  to  avoid  a  fudden 
death.     Low  diet,  with  entire  abftinence  from 
fpiritous  and  fermented  liquors,  and  much  ac^ 
tive  exercife,  is  the  bed  regimen  for  health. 
Bleeding,  cupping,  and  leeching  the  temples. 


277 

are  fometimes  required :  but  thefe  can  only 
be  confidered  as  temporary  remedies,  for 
frequent  blood-letting  favours  fulnefs  of  the 
veflels.  The  (late  of  the  bowels  muft  be  lax  ; 
the  ileeping  room,  airy  and  cool ;  fuppers  mud 
be  avoided  ;  the  lleep  fhould  not  be  long,  and 
violent  paflions  of  the  mind  muft  be  guarded 
againft. 

Where  nervous  difeafes  have  been  brought 
on  by  affedions  of  the  mind^  misfortunes  in 
life,  or  afflidion  of  any  fort,  it  is  obvious  they 
muft  be  confidered  as  partaking  more  of  a 
mental  diforder.  Change  of  fcene  in  thefe 
cafes,  is  commonly  the  firft  ftep  to  the  cure  : 
as  by  removing  the  diftance  of  all  objeds  that 
have  a  tendency  to  refrefh  the  memory,  or 
caufe  aflbciation  of  ideas,  that  bring  up  gloomy 
reflections,  you  weaken  the  chain  of  fympa- 
thy,  till  it  is  gradually  broken.  It  is  the  duty 
of  relations  and  others,  who  may  be  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  patient,  to  inform  the 
phyfician  minutely  of  every  circumftance  ;  for 
it  muft  be  in  vain  to  prefcribe  for  a  mental 
difeafe,  where  we  are  kept  in  the  dark  con- 
cerning the  caufe.  Every  fuch  cafe  muft  have 
its  appropriate  management,  both  on  the  part 
of  the  medical  attendant  and  inmates,    Such 


'    V     ^ 


2^S 


hallucinations  of  mind  are  always  to  be  re- 
garded as  threatening  infanity  or  idiotifm; 
and  without  a  careful  inveftigation  of  the  an- 
tecedents, no  phyfician  can  direfl:  the  treat- 
ment to  advantage,  or  pronounce  the  iflue. 
It  happens  too  often,  that  the  early  figns  of 
mental  difquietude,  which  difcover  themfelves 
firfl  by  peevifhnefs  of  temper,  and  irritable 
feelings,  have  been  mifconftrued  by  relations : 
and  a  degree  of  harlhnefs  fometimes  has  been 
exercifed  upon  the  patient  from  a  difbelief  of 
his  diforder,  and  not  forefeeing  to  what  it  was 
tending.  The  fubje£t  in  all  refpeds  requires 
infinite  addrefs  on  the  part  of  the  phyfician : 
for  petulant  meddlers  are  more  difficult  to  be 
managed  than  the  deranged  patient.  To  treat 
this  flage  of  a  ferious  malady  with  doubts  of 
its  exigence  would  be  deliberate  cruelty.  To 
mock  their  fears,  however  falfe,  befpeaks  cold- 
nefs  of  affection  ;  and  I  have  often  feen  it 
bring  on  intemperate  fallies  of  rage:  flattery  an- 
Twers  better,  for  they  have  lefs  jealoufy  where 
there  is  no  attempt  at  difputing  they  are  right. 
But  there  are  moral  and  phyfical  caufes  prompt- 
ing thefe  feelings,  with  an  impulfe  not  to  be 
refifled :  and  while  the  mind  is  occupied  with 
•fuch  fenfations,  it  is  in  vain  to  perfuade  the 


279 

patient  that  they  have  no  reality.  When: 
people  with  low  fpirits  are  to  be  cheered  and 
recruited  by  converfation,  it  ought  always  to 
be  conduced  with  delicacy  ;  and  this  can  ne- 
ver be  duly  managed  but  by  a  perfon  of  intel- 
ligence. If  the  mind  at  any  time  is  ruffled 
by  negledt,  when  it  expeded  fympathy,  we 
run  the  hazard  of  feeing  the  whole  regimen 
of  health  given  up,  and  all  confidence  of  at- 
tendance lofl  for  ever.  And  when  medicine  is 
direded,  every  argument  mull:  be  employed  to 
infpire  hope  of  its  virtues,  and  the  certainty  of 
its  doing  good.  Here,  as  in  maniacal  cafes, 
fubjedion  and  reftraint  have  been  frequently 
carried  too  far ;  and  the  patients  have  been 
driven  to  defpair,  and  ended  their  torments  by 
fuicide,  rather  than  fubmit  to  the  lafh  of  their 
keepers.  If  infanity  is  purely  a  mental  aliena- 
tion, the  method  of  cure  mud  turn  chiefly  on 
a  mode  of  difcipline  addrefled  to  the  weakened 
powers  of  intellect.  Such  perfons  ought  ne- 
ver to  be  left  alone ;  their  train  of  thought 
fliould  be  conftantly  interrupted  ;  for  by  in- 
dulgence it  acquires  growth  and  retention.  I 
do  not  fee  how  corporal  punifhment  can  be  ad- 
mitted, where  the  reafoning  faculties  have 
ceafed  to  exercife  their  authority,  and  where 

2  N 


280 

the  living  foul  is  not  confcious  of  moral  obli- 
gation. A  phyfician  who  has  to  dired  the 
treatment  of  maniacs,  mufl  live  among  them, 
that  he  may  learn  the  genius  of  every  indivi- 
dual cafe,  if  his  difcipline  is  to  conduce  to 
their  recovery. 

There  are  certain  forms  and  cuftoms  of 
living,  pradifed  by  men  vi^ho  are  commonly 
deemed  models  of  temperance.  The  ftriking 
part  of  a  regular  life,  is  an  exa£l  and  corred 
divifion  of  time.  Every  hour  of  the  day  has 
its  appropriate  tafk ;  and  pleafure  and  diflipa- 
tion  never  fupplant  bufinefs  and  duty.  The 
temperate  man  goes  to  bed  before  a  late  hour, 
and  uniformly  rifes  early.  Hence  early  hours 
are  another  term  for  a  regular  and  temperate 
mode  of  living :  as  the  contrary  befpeaks  a  life 
of  frivolity  and  infignificance.  Can  any  hu- 
man being  be  in  purfuit  of  noble  and  elevated 
honours,  who  is  found  in  bed  at  eight  or  nine 
in  the  morning  ?  Such  a  man  never  yet  in  the 
world,  acquired  the  title  of  either  good  or  great. 
It  is  therefore  one  of  the  mofl  unpardonable 
negleds  of  a  family,  where  parents  give  the 
example  of  late  hours  to  their  children.  What 
an  infult  to  nature,  to  allow  the  fun  to  fhine  fix 
hours  above  the  horizon,  before  getting  up ! 


281 

Late  hours  at  night,  and  long  in  bed  in  the 
morning,  are  among  the  nurfing  mothers  of 
nervous  complaints.  A  permanent  and  per- 
fe6t  cure  is  never  to  be  accomplilhed,  without 
forfaking  thefe  flothful  habits :  and  to  difcard 
them  is  always  a  part  of  my  difcipline. 

The  diet  of  a  temperate  man,  or  fuch  as 
wifh  to  be  free  from  nervous  and  bilious  com- 
plaints, is  plain  food,  and  that  in  moderate 
quantity.  A  pcrfon  ought  to  rife  from  table, 
cheerful,  adive,  and  refrefhed  with  what  he 
has  eaten ;  not  opprefled,  drowfy  or  unfit  for 
motion.  Where  great  quantities  of  ftrong 
malt  liquor,  or  wine,  are  taken  with  dinner, 
the  ftomach  becomes  the  more  overloaded  j 
and  fleep  is  called  for,  to  be  relieved  from  the 
burthen,  as  an  inftinQ:  of  nature.  An  appetite 
not  accuflomed  to  high  feafoned  difhes,  or 
favoury  meat,  fele£ts  for  itfelf  what  is  whole- 
fome  and  eafy  of  digeftion.  Beef  or  mutton 
are  better  than  veal  or  lamb ;  roafted  meat 
not  overdone  is  preferable  to  boiled ;  but 
broths  not  too  rich  or  fuperfeafoned  with 
fpices,  ought  to  be  a  daily  part  of  every  tem- 
perate dinner.  Nervous  people  complain  of 
broths  diftending  the  ftomach  and  occafioning 
flatulence ;  but  this  is  the  language  of  iloth  ; 

2  N    2 


282 

motion  and  exercife  foon  corred  this  kind  of 
uneafmefs ;  and  when  the  ftomach  has  been 
accuftomed  to  broths,  no  fuch  effeds  can  be 
perceived.  The  legianina^  fuch  as  peas  and 
beans,  muft  be  fparingly  ufed  at  all  times ; 
they  load  the  bowels  and  render  them  flow  ; 
and  raw  vegetables,  as  fallad  and  cucumber, 
are  alfo  improper.  But  pot  vegetables  in  mode- 
rate quantity,  are  all  mild  and  wholefome  to 
be  ufed  with  meat.  Fifh  and  poultry  without 
rich  fauces,  may  be  allowed :  and  game  on 
the  fame  terms.  All  kinds  of  paflry  and  pye- 
cruft  are  difficult  of  digeflion,  and  prone  to 
fermentation  and  acidity;  they  lie  heavy  on 
the  ftomach,  according  to  the  common  phrafe  : 
and  bread,  rice,  and  cuftard  puddings,  are  the 
only  articles  of  that  clafs  that  fhould  be  eaten. 
Sound  bifcuit,  and  light  well  fermented  bread 
are  to  be  ufed  j  leavened  bread,  or  bread 
baked  without  yealt,  in  weak  ftomachs,  pro- 
duces acidity,  heart-burn  and  flatulence.  Co- 
coa or  milk,  forms  the  mildefl:  fare  for  break- 
faft,  which  ought  to  be  taken  foon  after  rifmg. 
A  very  light  meat  fupper  is  often  neceflary  to 
amufe  digeftion  :  but  gruels,  fago,  arrow-root, 
and  fuch  like,  are  improper,  they  run  into  fer- 


283 

mentation,  and  partake  of  the  unfermented  fa- 
rinacea. 

Water,  or  toafl  and  water,  is  the  beft  drink 
with  meals ;  and  milk  and  water  at  other 
times :  cyder,  perry,  beer,  and  porter,  create 
diflention,  flatulence  and  heartburn.  The 
quantity  of  wine  at,  or  after  dinner,  fhould  be 
fmall,  and  that  diluted  with  water :  Madeira 
when  genuine,  is  the  purell  wine,  and  beft 
fuited  to  a  gouty  or  dyfpeptic  (lomach.  Shrub, 
fherbet,  punch,  and  every  thing  into  which  an 
unfermented  acid  enters,  are  improper  drinks : 
liqueurs y  znd/pirits  of  every  defcription,  are  to 
be  confidered  as  Syrens,  that  charm  the  road  to 
deftrudlion,  and  ought  to  be  rigidly  abftained 
from. 

Nervous  perfons  do  bed  to  dine  off  a  few 
difhes ;  and  thofe  of  the  fimpleft  kind:  two 
or  three  articles  at  mod  fhould  bound  their 
repafl.  They  are,  of  all  mankind,  the  moft 
liable  to  furfeits ;  and  when  they  refledl,  that 
the  very  weakefl  parts  of  their  conftitutions, 
are  the  digeflive  organs,  they  mufl  either  be 
fparing  in  their  good  things  at  table,  or  expedl: 
to  be  punifhed  for  their  indifcretions.  There 
are  few  of  the  number,  who  have  not  had  ex- 
perience of  this  truth. 


*■ « 


28^ 

Having  recommended  a  milk  breakfaft,  I 
am  aware  that  many  objedions  will  be  oppo- 
fed  to  it.  I  have  been  often  told  the  ftomach 
could  not  bear  it.  If  a  phyfician  is  pliant 
enough  to  yield  to  fuch  excufes,  he  runs  a 
poor  chance  of  doing  any  good  in  thefe  dif- 
orders.  This  is  the  common  language  of 
perfons  w^ho  have  worn  out  the  excitability  of 
their  flomachs,  by  ftrong  green  tea  and  other 
improprieties  of  diet.  The  foft  bland  milk 
does  not  convey  to  them  that  warmth  which 
they  have  been  accuflomed  to  receive  from 
more  ftimulating  fare.  But  let  them  be  en- 
couraged to  perfevere ;  and  as  this  alteration 
of  breakfaft,  is  only  a  part  of  a  greater  rever- 
fion  in  modes  of  living,  it  will  not  fail  in 
the  end  to  be  agreeable.  I  muft  on  that  ac- 
count caution  them  againft  any  mixture  of 
fpirit,  or  even  fpice  in  their  milk.  But  if  the 
acidity  afterwards  fhould  be  troublefome,  they 
may  with  eafe  correal  it  by  calcined  magnefia, 
or  fifteen  grains  of  prepared  powder  of  chalk, 
as  the  bowels  may  be  flow  or  otherwife.  To 
young  women  of  all  ranks,  the  milk  breakfaft 
is  peculiarly  adapted :  and  I  have  the  authority 
of  Sydenham,  that  it  is  the  beft  food  for  the 
gouty. 


•  285 

From  the  experience  which  I  have  had,  in 
fome  thoufands  of  thefe  cafes,  under  all  the  va- 
riety in  which  they  ufually  appear,  I  freely  give 
it  as  my  opinion,  that  the  only  means  of  cure 
lie  in  a  total  abftinence  from  every  fpecies  of 
fpirit  or  fermented  liquor ;  from  every  thing 
that  bears  any  analogy  to  them,  fuch  as  tea, 
coffee,  opium,  and  all  other  narcotics  ;  and  to 
regulate  the  diet,  cloathing,  air,  exercife,  and 
pafTions,  as  becomes  a  rational  being.  The 
improper  ufe  of  thefe  articles  being  the  chief 
caufe  of  nervous  indifpofition,  it  follows  that 
no  recovery  can  be  perfect,  till  they  are  in  toto 
difcontinued. 

Attention  to  the  ftate  of  the  bowels  forms 
an  important  part  of  the  prevention  :  but  if 
due  regard  is  had  to  air,  exercife,  and  diet, 
even  habitual  conftipation  may  be  overcome. 
What  relates  to  its  relief  otherwife,  will  be 
noticed  in  the  proper  place ;  but  if  the  food 
can  be  fo  regulated  as  to  fupercede  medicine, 
it  is  an  important  point  gained. 

The  whole  of  the  precepts  which  have  been 
delivered,  as  the  means  of  prevention  againft 
this  fmgular  train  of  difeafes,  it  will  be  readily 
perceived,  turn  upon  a  reverfed  7node  of  livings 
or  changes  oppofed  to  former  habits  j  and  to 


286 


bring  our  patients  back  to  a  fimple  regimen 
of  food,  air,  exercife,  &c.  Our  plans  com- 
prehend no  favourite  theories,  or  any  intricate 
dodrines  ;  they  aim  at  being  natural,  fimple, 
and  eafy  to  be  underftood. 

Some  Ilriking  inftances  of  the  beneficial  ef- 
fects of  thefe  rules,  when  entered  upon  with 
a  determined  fpirit,  have  been  proved  in 
my  own  pradice.  A  few  years  ago,  when  it 
was  my  good  fortune  to  be  honoured  with  un- 
bounded confidence  by  the  naval  fervice,  I 
was  confulted  by  fome  particular  friends,  of 
great  affluence,  on  the  bad  health  of  their 
wives,  who,  to  the  regret  of  all  connected, 
had  never  been  in  that  happy  way, 

<*  Which  ladies  wifh  to  be,  who  love  their  lords.*' 

Thefe  ladies,  after  being  married  for  feveral 
years  without  having  children,  devotees  of 
fafhionable  life,  and  a  prey  to  painful  nervous 
diforders,  are  now  the  mothers  of  healthy 
boys  and  girls,  and  enjoy  the  beft  health  ima- 
ginable.  All  thefe  happy  changes  were  ef- 
feded  by  little  affiflance  from  medical  prefcrip- 
tion  ;  they  were  brought  about  by  reverfed 
modes  of  living.  A  few  vifits  to  their  town 
friends,  and  an  equal  number  to  a  provincial 
aflembly,  are  all  that  thefe  once  gay  parties 


287 

now  fee  of  the  fafliionable  world.  What 
married  woman  could  refufe  to  quit  a  life  of 
late  hours,  infipidity  and  diffipation,  for  fuch 
tokens  of  happinefs  and  health  ? 

Change  of  climate  is  one  of  thofe  means  of 
relief  in  nervous  cafes,  that  may  fometimes  be 
reforted  to  with  great  advantage.  There  are 
nervous  perfons  who  are  mod  fenfibly  affeded 
by  variable  weather;  where  the  tranfitions 
are  quick,  particularly  from  fettled  and  clear, 
to  damp  and  foggy.  The  human  nerves  in 
fuch  patients  are  like  barometers  :  it  is  thus 
the  fall  of  the  year,  in  November  and  Decem- 
ber, is  proverbial  for  lownefs  of  fpirits  and 
melancholy.  A  refidence  in  Italy,  or  the 
fouth  of  France,  for  fome  time,  may  therefore 
be  ufeful  to  fuch  as  can  afford  it.  But  it  muft 
be  remembered,  if  thefe  perfons  return  to  Bri- 
tain without  having  made  great  changes  in  the 
difcipline  of  health,  they  muft  expedi:  frefh 
attacks  of  their  complaints.  A  climate  not 
too  warm,  where  the  atmofphere  is  clear,  and 
the  temperature  equal,  or  not  liable  to  ex- 
tremes, is  chiefly  to  be  preferred  by  fuch  peo- 
ple. Here  again  the  change  of  fcene  may 
have  a  powerful  influence  on  the  mind. 

From  the  effeds  which  thefe  difeafes  are 
2  o 


288 

known  to  produce  on  the  fpirits,  there  is  a  nio^ 
ral  regimen^  as  it  may  be  called,  necelfary  for 
our  patients,  and  which  mud  remain  with 
themfelves.  The  perfon  who  is  fubjed  to 
nervous  afFedions,  can  feldom  promife  him- 
felf  long  equality  of  health  and  fpirits : 
thefe  vicilTitudes  muft  often  happen,  from 
caufes  which  neither  could  be  forefeen  nor  pre- 
vented, and  fometimes  when  lead  to  be  fuf- 
peded.  The  mind,  however,  is  not  always 
prepared  to  combat  fenfations  that  imprefs  it 
with  ideas  of  diffolution ;  otherwife  it  could 
not  fo  fully  believe  in  imaginary  horrors.  It 
is  a  fmgular  fa£t,  that  even  men,  whom  I  have 
known,  renowned  for  valour  and  perfonal 
courage,  and  who  have  been  familiar  wich 
danger,  fhould  fometimes  be  found  among  the 
number  of  thofe  who  conceive  fuch  dread 
from  indifcribable  feelings,  and  torture  them- 
felves with  a  phantom.  When  thefe  halluci- 
nations are  removed,  the  patients  can  con- 
demn the  imbecility  that  created  their  fears  j 
yet  neverthelefs,  on  a  next  attack  their  appre- 
henfions  are  renewed  as  ftrongly  as  ever.  The 
judgement  being  thus  perverted  for  the  time, 
the  falfe  perception  is  to  be  confidered  as  a  de- 
gree  of   delirium    and    temporary    infanity. 


When  the  patient  perceives  the  firft  approach 
of  thefe  odd  feelings,  he  ought  to  turn  his  at- 
tention inftantly  to  the  recolledion  of  fuch 
fcenes  and  objeds,  as  he  has  been  accuftomed 
to  contemplate  with  much  pleafure,  and  review 
with  fatisfadion  :  there  let  him  rivet  his  me- 
mory, and  if  he  can  raife  it  to  extacy,  he  will 
infallibly  fubdue  the  morbid  aflbciations,  and 
the  frightful  images  which  they  prefent  to  the 
mind.  This  kind  of  mental  controul  will  be 
difficult  at  firfl :  but  we  have  known  patients 
who  became  quite  adepts  in  the  pradice  of  it, 
and  fecured  themfelves  from  many  pain- 
ful flruggles.  It  unfortunately  happens  in 
thefe  moments,  that  bad  adions  and  fubjeds 
of  afflidlion  are  mod  apt  to  occupy  the  memo- 
ry ;  hence  it  is  that  wicked  men  are  faid  to 
have  fufFered  the  pains  of  hell  in  this  world. 
Some  nervous  people  in  this  (late  of  derange- 
ment, have  fo  magnified  their  own  guilt,  as  to 
make  formal  confeffions  of  crimes  they  never 
had  the  mod  diftant  idea  of  committing. 

If  when  in  company,  any  thing  happens 
to  be  faid,  which  brings  to  recolledlion  any 
diftreffing  circumftance,  the  nervous  invalid 
mud  either  retire,  or  the  converfation  mufl  be 
changed.     And  fuch  of  them  as  live  much 

2  0  2 


290 

alone,  mufl  endeavour  to  regulate  their  train 
of  thinking,  fo  as  to  turn  it  quickly,  the  mo- 
ment any  thing  difagreeable  is  called  up  to 
memory.  I  once  witnefled  a  very  afFeding 
fcene  of  this  fort :  a  gentleman  in  company 
repeated  a  line  from  Cato, — 

««  Welcome  my  fon  ;  there  lay  him  down  my  friends." 

A  lady  in  the  room  who  had  loft  an  only  fon 
ten  years  before,  was  immediately  thrown  into 
violent  hyfterics,  that  had  nearly  proved  fatal. 
The  habit  of  breaking  up  thefe  aflbciations  gives 
a  new  relifh  to  life  ;  while  the  want  of  refolu- 
tion  makes  nervous  people  fo  frequently  their 
own  tormentors.  And  when  they  acquire 
this  manner  of  felf-government,  if  I  may  fo 
fpeak,  it  is  furprizing  what  confidence  it  gives 
to  the  mind.* 

*  For  the  following  anecdote  of  Dr  Cullen,  I  am 
obliged  to  the  late  Mr  Whale,  re^or  of  the  grammar 
fchool  of  Kelfo,  an  eminent  fcholar,  who  had  lived  in 
Hamilton,  where  Dr  Cullen  once  pradifed.  Dr  Cul- 
len T^as  fubjeft  to  gout,  and  poffeffed  thereby  the  pre- 
difpofition  to  nervous  affedion,  and  often  fuifered 
from  dem'ulfio  animi.  He  had  a  fevere  attack  of  low 
fpirits,  perhaps  brought  on  by  narrow  circumstances. 


291 

As  mankind  in  thefe  difeafes,  are  £o  often 
the  authors  of  their  own  mifery,  mnpunclious 
vifitings  of  nature  mud  frequently  recur.     In 
fuch  conditions  of  aiflidion,  I  do  not  fee  that 
it  is  at  all  out  of  Ghara6ler  for  the  phyfician  to 
adminilter  even  what  is  called  fpiritual  comfort, 
A  medical  friend  who  may  know  the  value  of 
religious  duties  in  his  own  life,  cannot  be  an 
intrufive  monitor  at  a  time  when  di  ft refs  opens 
the  avenues  to  the  human  heart ;  and  when  his 
profeflional  vifits  neceffarily  attach  confidence, 
which  cannot  be  repofed  in  a  ftranger,  and  who 
may  be  lefs  converfant  in  thofe  failings  that  fome 
times  bend  the  ftrongeft.  There  are  alfo  certain 
delicate  fituations  with  low  fpirited  people,  that 
make  a  formal  vifit  from  a  clergyman  imprac- 
ticable, however  much  it  may  be  wifhed  for 
otherwife.     I  believe  it  is  a  common  remark 


and  great  application  to  bufinefs  and  ftudy  j  when  he 
was  furprifed  in  his  lackadafical  mood,  by  a  friend  com- 
ing in  — .«  I  am  very  ill  indeed,"  faid  the  dodor.  The 
gentleman  endeavoured  to  divert  him  from  his  glooms : 
Do  you  never  build  cajlles  in  the  air  by  way  of  amufementy 
DoBor  P  "  Oh  no,  I  have  not  even  ftrength  for  that." 
Did  you  never  imagine  your/elf  a  great  general,  leading  vie* 
torious  armies  to  battle,  and  enjoying  a  triumph  P    "  No, 

ty ,  not  even  in  imagination  did  I  ever  fancy  my- 

felfafoldier!'* 


292 

of  the  profellion,  that  on  the  fick-bed,  wc  ob- 
ferve  more  fortitude  of  mind  among  women, 
than  is  to  be  found  among  men.  We  muft 
attribute  this  excellence  in  the  fex  to  fuperior 
virtue  ;  and  to  their  being  educated  more  in 
domeftic  life,  where  religious  and  moral  habits^ 
take  deeper  root,  by  being  lefs  corrupted  from 
intercourfe  with  the  world. 
♦  «  Perfons  liable  to  thefe  difeafes,  mufl:  be  cau- 

tious how  they  plunge  themfelves  into  any  af- 
fairs or  bufmefs,  where  croiTes  or  difappoint- 
ments  may  irritate  the  temper.  As  they  are 
commonly  fubjed  to  fudden  gufls  of  pafTion, 
a  prudent  and  guarded  command  over  them, 
is  the  only  fecurity  for  tranquillity  of  mind, 
and  a  fmooth  paflage  through  life.  The  ner- 
vous frame  mufl,  therefore,  truft  to  felf-regu- 
lation,  in  a  great  meafure,  for  exemption  from 
many  painful  affedtions,  over  which  the  powers 
of  medicine  have  no  controul. 

Having  thus  finilhed  the  means  of  preven- 
tion for  nervous  difeafes,  or  what  may  be  call- 
ed the  mode  for  correcting  the  predifpofition, 
it  will  readily  appear  that  the  whole  of  our 
precepts  have  an  equal  application  againft  the 
arthritic  diathefis.  If  gout  can  be  prevented  at 
^  V  V         all,  it  muft  be  by  a  rigid  adherence  to  fimpli- 


253 

City  of  living  ;  whether  In  air,  exercife,  food, 
cloathing,  paflions  of  the  mind,  &c.  and  to 
avoid  all  excefles  and  debilitating  pleafures 
which  are  known  to  enervate  the  general 
frame,  or  weaken  the  chylopoietic  organs.  I 
know  of  no  diflindion  that  can  be  drawn  be- 
tween the  habits  of  body  that  give  birth  to  gout 
and  nervous  difeafes,  beyond  what  has  been  faid 
in  the  preceding  part  of  this  work  ;  and  it  ap- 
pears that  the  mod  fuccefsful  prevention  of 
both,  will  much  depend  on  its  being  enforced 
from  the  birth,  and  continued  through  life. 
The  gouty  conflitution  is  certainly  injured  by 
every  excefs  of  flimulus,  like  the  nervous  tem- 
perament, but  particularly  by  narcotics  of  all  de- 
fcriptions.  If  any  fad  more  than  another  has 
been  proved  in  my  own  pradice,  it  is  that  fpi- 
ritous  liquors,  and  all  wines,  with  tea,  opium, 
mercurial  courfes,  and  the  fexual  indifcretions, 
are  the  chief  caufes  of  the  acquired predifpofition 
that  equally  engenders  both  thefe  difeafes. 


<«»»•«  ««OftS39oo<n»o 


I  come  now  to  the  treatment^  that  may  be 
called  more  llridly  medical.  And  it  is  to  be 
remembered,  that  the  whole  of  the  precepts. 


294 

which  have  been  delivered  under  the  preven- 
tion, are  to  be  duly  attended  to  during  the 
ufe  of  medicine  ;  for  unlefs  regard  is  paid  to 
them,  articles  of  Materia  Medica  are  not  on- 
ly of  no  avail,  but  may  fometimes  do  much 
harm. 

Though  I  repofe  due  confidence  in  medi- 
cine, when  well  timed,  it  is  to  be  obferved, 
that  here  the  praQice  is  directed  againft  a 
difeafed  ftate  of  fenfation  and  motion,  brought 
on  by  caufes  which  exert  a  peculiar  influence 
on  the  nervous  fyftem :  caufes  which  invert 
all  the  regular  operations  of  a  mofl  complicat- 
ed fet  of  organs ;  and  in  the  cure  of  which 
the  common  refources  of  our  art  feem  to  lofe 
their  ufual  power.  Thofe  cuftoms  and  habits 
which  form  as  it  were  a  part  of  Nature  in  the 
living  body,  are  to  be  counteracted  by  rever- 
fions  in  diet,  air,  exercife,  and  even  mental 
regimen,  great  in  proportion  to  the  morbid  af- 
fedions  they  are  intended  to  overcome.  In 
the  body  we  obferve  fymptoms  that  counter- 
feit every  other  difeafe,  forming  a  part  of  this 
aflemblage  5  and  in  the  intelledual  fundions 
we  find  difproportionate  emotions  and  the  moft 
extravagant  illufions. 


295 

The  indications  of  treatment  may  be  divided 
into  two  heads, 

I.  To  ftrengthen  the  conflitution  : 

II.  To  palliate  particular  fymptoms. 

I.  To  prefcribe  for  a  clafs  of  difeafes,  fo 
variable  in  appearance,  and  equivocal  in  their 
fymptoms,  requires  a  full  fhare  of  experience 
and  difcernment,  and  not  a  little  patience  in 
adual  attendance.  The  phyfician  muft  often 
take  a  very  circuitous  route  to  put  queflions 
to  his  patients,  that  he  may  learn  the  real 
genius  of  the  diftemper.  He  muft  in  many 
cafes  be  guarded  in  his  inquiries,  left  he  excite 
fears  and  fufpicions  in  the  irritable  mind, 
which  is  obfervant  of  every  trifle,  jealous  of  a 
whifper,  and  when  once  alarmed,  however 
falfely,  not  eaftly  quieted  again. 

I  have  generally  found  it  the  beft  way  to  be 
candid  and  open  in  my  opinions  with  nervous 
people.  It  is  the  condudb  which  will  infure 
moft  fatisfadion  in  the  end,  whatever  tempo- 
rary embarraffment  it  may  occafion.  And  I 
have  never  found  it  improper  to  inform  them 
of  every  article  of  medicine  prescribed,  and  to 
explain  the  effedt  I  expeded  from  it.  By  t^efe 
means  they  will  not  be  taken  by  furprife,  for 
if  they  find  themfelves  deceived  once,  their  con- 

2  P 


296 

iidence  will  not  be  eafily  regained.  This  de- 
meanor becomes  the  more  necefl'ary,  as  they 
are  very  apt  to  liften  to  (lories  of  wonderful 
cures,  and  to  pore  over  medical  books,  that 
they  may  compare  the  opinion  of  their  phyfi- 
cian  with  what  they  imbibe  there. 

In  the  treatment,  it  is  always  to  be  confi- 
dered,  how  far  thefe  difeafes  are  the  primary 
complaint,  or  idiopathic  ;  or  how  idiX  fytnptoma^ 
iic^  and  excited  by  another  diforder.  Wherever 
the  body  has  been  reduced  to  great  debility, 
the  leading  features  of  a  nervous  temperament 
when  prefent,  will  appear  :  and  the  method 
of  cure  for  the  original  difeafe,  mufl  conjoin 
with  it  the  appropriate  treatment  of  nervous 
afFedion.  Many  females,  with  a  delicate  and 
irritable  nervous  fyflem,  at  the  period,  expe- 
rience more  or  lefs  of  thefe  complaints  ;  and 
they  fubfide  with  it.  If  they  were  even  fevere 
for  the  time,  we  are  acquainted  with  the  rea- 
fon ;  and  it  would  be  improper  to  harafs  the 
patient  with  quantities  of  medicine  for  fymp- 
toms,  that  we  know  mufl  decline  in  a  day  or 
two,  perhaps  in  as  many  hours.  Similar  cau- 
tions mud  be  ufed,  w^hen  from  any  caufe  the 
menfes  ceafe,  and  fevere  nervous  afFedions 
fupervene.    This  may  happen  from  pregnan- 


297 

cy ;  and  the  treatment  mud  be  guarded  ac- 
cordingly ;  for  all  the  figns  of  breeding  are 
from  fympathy  between  the  uterine  fyflem, 
and  the  chylopoietic  organs.  The  lying-in  ftate, 
even  under  the  mod  fortunate  circumitances, 
will,  for  the  fame  reafons,  be  often  marked 
by  a  recurrence  of  nervous  complaints.  In 
fuch  fituations  it  is  impolTible  to  lay  down 
rules,  as  the  practice  muft  vary  according  to 
the  peculiarities  attending,  whether  from  fe- 
vere  and  lingering  labours ;  excellive  flood- 
ing ;  puerperal  fever  ;  improprieties  of  diet 
or  regimen  ;  pafTions  of  the  mind ;  milk  fever ; 
difeafes  of  the  breaft,  &c.  all  of  which  will 
bring  forth  nervous  afFedions  of  the  mofl  af- 
flicting kind,  fuch  as  frequent  fyncope,  cramps, 
convulfions,  delirium,  &c.  I  was  lately  called 
to  vifit  a  woman,  when  the  midwife  had  taken 
away  fixteen  ounces  of  blood,  under  the  idea 
that  a  pain  of  the  fide  was  a  pleurify :  delirium 
commenced  immediatelv,  with  violent  convul- 
fions  ;  and  the  patient  died  in  forty- eight  hours 
from  the  bleeding.  In  no  conditions  of  a  dif- 
eafed  flate  of  body,  are  miftakes  of  the  nature 
of  a  complaint,  fo  liable  to  lead  to  fatal  confe- 
quences  as  in  the  puerperal  patient. 

Married  women  who  have  never  borne  chil- 

2  P  2 


298 

dren,  it  is  faid,  are  more  liable  than  mothers  to 
^  *  thefe  difeafes.  The  nervous  female  commonly 
finds  her  health  improved  v^hen  (he  becomes  a 
parent ;  from  which  it  may  be  fairly  inferred 
that  the  child-bearing  period  is  favourable  to 
the  conftitution.  Every  intelligent  mind 
knows  well,  whatever  cares  a  family  may 
bring  with  it,  they  are  more  than  overba- 
lanced by  the  fweet  folicitudes  of  affection 
which  fpring  from  them.  Hence  every  wife 
wifhes  to  be  a  mother :  the  want  of  children 
thus  grows  to  a  misfortune,  and  thofe 
motives  for  energy  of  mind  are  negleded. 
But  if  this  misfortune  has  been  owing  to  ner- 
vous indifpofition,  brought  on  by  any  caufe 
which  has  been  affigned  in  thefe  pages,  if  it  is 
at  all  remediable,  the  means  are  obvious,  and 
eafy  to  be  employed. 
^  ^  When  thefe  difeafes  appear  about  the  age  of 

puberty,  at  a  feafon  when  delicate  changes 
take  place  in  the  fyflem,  we  are  then  aware  of 
the  event,  and  can  calculate  upon  their  de- 
cline. Their  appearance  at  this  time  of  life,  is 
marked  by  a  fmgular  train  of  phenomena,  all 
depending  on  a  mobile  condition  of  nervous 
power,  as  the  body  acquires  the  pofTeffion  of 
new  paffions  and  new  faculties.     The  generic 


299 

names  ol  chorea  and  chlorojls^  have  been  given 
to  thefe  difeafes  ;  but  I  hold  them  nothing 
more  than  traits  of  the  nervous  temperament. 
Chorea  or  St  Vitus's  dance,  commonly  begins 
fome  years  before  the  age  of  puberty  ;  and  in 
both  fexes  it  feems  to  decline  as  foon  as  the 
body  has  acquired  its  ftability,  and  the  fexual 
organs  are  fairly  evolved.  It  confifts  of  invo- 
luntary motions  of  the  extremities,  and  fome- 
times  of  the  mufcles  of  the  face,  appearing 
like  antic  tricks  and  gefliculations ;  but  there 
is  alfo  more  or  lefs  of  dyfpepfia.  I  have  feen 
fome  inftances  where  convulfions  and  delirium 
of  a  fmgular  kind  attended  this  difeafe. 

The  predominant  fymptoms  of  chlorofis  are 
mufcular  debility,  fallow  fkin,  indicating  defi- 
cient oxygen  in  the  blood,  and  great  derange- 
ment of  the  chylopoietic  organs,  with  other 
fymptoms  of  dyfpepfia  and  nervous  aifeclion. 
There  is  commonly  a  defire  for  eating  duft, 
chalk,  or  lime,  and  probably  depending  on 
exceflive  acidity  in  the  firfl  paflages.  As  this 
complaint  chiefly  appears  about  the  age  of 
puberty,  it  has  juftly  been  confidered  as  hay- 
ing fome  connexion  with  the  evolution  of  the 
uterine  fyftem :  and  years  of  bad  health  fome- 
times  follow,  before  the  menftrual  difcharge  is 


300 

duly  eilabliOied.  With  this  all  the  dyfpeptic 
fymptoms  difappear ;  the  mammse  fwell,  and 
the  countenance  refumes  its  rofy  colour ;  the, 
body  recovers  its  mufcular  ftrength,  and 
the  fliape  is  moulded  into  all  the  foftnefs  of 
form  and  beauty.  But  at  the  fame  time, 
it  ought  to  be  remembered,  that  the  male 
conftitution,  at  puberty,  is  alfo  frequently 
fubjedl  to  chlorotic  indifpofition.  As  chorea  and 
chlorojis  indicate  the  prefence  of  the  nervous 
temperament,  I  have  nothing  particular  to  of- 
fer on  their  treatment ;  it  falls  entirely  in  with 
our  general  plan.  Thefe  complaints  are  an- 
other confirmation  of  that  intimate  fympathy 
which  fubfiils  between  the  fexual  organs,  and 
the  chylopoietic  vifcera.  There  can  be  nothing 
ftrange  in  thefe  fymptoms  appearing  in  an  ag- 
gravated form  at  this  age,  where  the  nervous 
power  is  very  mobile ;  for  we  find  other  fymp- 
toms fometimes  at  an  earlier  period,  that  are 
ufually  confidered  as  the  difeafe  of  riper  years, 
namely,  the  JIuor  albus,  I  have  at  this  moment 
two  children  of  feven  years  of  age,  now  con- 
valefcent  of  that  complaint,  with  all  the  figns 
of  hereditary  nervous  predifpofition. 

In  directing   forms   of  medicine  for  our 
patients,  there  is  one  rule  muft  be  carefully 


301 

attended  to,  not  to  ficken  the  ftomach  by- 
beginning  with  a  large  dofe.  If  the  digeftive 
organs  in  their  deranged  ilate  are  incapable  of 
ading  on  the  food,  how  much  more  may  they 
be  opprefTed  by  a  naufeous  medicine.  This 
article,  as  well  as  the  diet,  mufh  undergo  the  di- 
geftive  procefs,  if  it  is  to  be  ufeful ;  and  it  is  the 
bufmefs  of  pharmacy  fo  to  prepare  it,  that  it 
may  beft  anfwer  this  purpofe.  It  is  not  that  a 
medicine  is  to  be  fweetened  to  cover  its  bad 
tafte,  or  warmed  with  fpirits,  that  it  may  af- 
ford a  grateful  ftimulus  to  an  exhaufted  fto- 
mach :  it  muft  be  exhibited  in  a  ftate  wherein 
its  powers  may  be  moft  efre6lually  exerted  on 
the  nerves  of  that  organ  ;  or  fo  eafy  of  de- 
compofition,  as  to  combine  readily  v/ith  the 
animal  fluids,  and  yield  its  quahties  to  be  con- 
veyed by  the  circulation  to  remote  parts. 
Cinchona,  or  Peruvian  bark,  fo  often  prefcribed 
in  nervous  and  dyfpeptic  cafes,  has  been  fome- 
times  given  to  the  amount  of  two  ounces  in 
fubftance  in  twenty-four  hours  ;  and  becaufe 
the  ftomach  did  not  rejefl:  this  enormous  load 
by  vomiting,  it  has  been  triumphantly  ex- 
claimed, that  large  dofes  only  could  do  good* 
Such  a  quantity  could  only  produce  torpor 
and  infenfibility  ;  its  active  qualities  could  not 


302 

be  exerted  as  a  medicine  on  the  gaflric  nerves ; 
for  what  folvent  in  the  flomach  could  effedt  its 
decompofition  ?  For  my  own  part,  I  have 
never  met  with  patients  who  could  retain  fuch 
quantities  of  bark.     It  appears  to  me  much 

^  ,  ^  more  rational  to  begin  with  fmall  dofes,  and 
to  watch  its  efFeds.  Hence  we  learn  that 
decodion  and  infufion  will  fometimes  fucceed, 
when  the  powder  has  failed.  Thefe  forms 
feem  to  derive  flill  further  power,  by  being 
conjoined  with  fome  of  the  alkalies,  the  carbo- 
nate of  lime,  (chalk,)  or  magnes.  ufl.  all  of 
which  not  only  increafe  its  adivity,  but  make 
it  to  fit  eafy  on  the  ftomach.  The  pharma- 
ceutical treatment  of  mod:  of  the  bitters  more 
or  lefs  refembles  that  of  cinchona. 

^ » *  It  is  fometimes  neceffary  to  premife  a  n)omit 

or  purge ^  or  both,  before  the  ufe  of  ftrengthen- 
ing  remedies,  as  the  ftomach  and  bowels  in 
their  irregular  ftate  are  often  loaded  with 
phlegm  and  mucus  to  a  furprizing  degree. 
Befides  the  capricious  flow  of  the  bile  into 
the  duodenum  is  often  the  means  of  render- 
ing different  portions  of  the  inteftinal  tube 
torpid,  or  irritable,  as  it  happens ;  and  an  aftive 
purgative  will  always  have  confiderable  effe£t 
in  reftoring  the  equal  motion  of  the  bowels. 


303 

As  an  emetic  I  prefer  the  ipecacuanha,  to  be 
affifted  by  a  weak  infufion  of  chamomile.  As 
a  gentle  purgative  I  prefer  rhubarb ;  and 
when  a  quicker  one  is  required,  I  employ  pulv. 
jalap.  With  each  of  thefe  I  uniformly  com- 
bine magnes.  ufl.  kali  or  foda.  Thefe  not  only 
correct  acidity  in  the  firfl:  paflages,  but  alfo 
render  the  adive  part  of  the  other  articles 
more  certain  in  their  operation ;  they  alfo  be- 
come folvents  of  the  animal  mucus  fo  often 
accumulated  there. 

After  the  primse  viae  are  thus  cleared,  we 
may  with  fafety  begin  the  corroborant  medi- 
cines ;  being  always  cautious  in  feleding  and 
combining  them  with  fuch  flimulant  and  ad- 
juvant ingredients,  as  may  make  them  eafy  to 
the  flomach,  and  adapted  to  the  conflitution. 
It  is  impofiible  to  lay  down  rules  for  what  is 
to  be  directed  by  experience  in  every  indivi- 
dual cafe :  but  it  will  often  happen,  that  the 
fame  article  which  does  harm  under  one  for* 
mula,  will  be  eminently  ufeful  in  another. 
And  in  fuiting  the  medicine  to  the  exa6t  con- 
dition of  the  ftomach,  the  fuccefs  of  the  prac- 
tice will  be  more  or  lefs  compleat.  The  phy- 
fician  will  but  too  often  find  reafon  for  re- 
monftrating  with  his  patient  on  negle^ing  his 

2Q. 


304< 


injundions,  whether  in  air,  diet,  or  exercife  : 
"a  watchful  eye  muft  therefore  be  kept  over 
the  regimen,  that  medicine  may  not  fall  into 
unmerited  difcredit. 

The  flrengthening  medicines  which  have 
been  chiefly  employed  in  thefe  difeafes,  are 
iron^  Peruvian  bark,  and  bitters ;  but  zincy 
copper y  and  twtnjilver  and  /^^Jhave  been  ufed. 
And  the  mineral  zaA^^fulphuric,  nitric ^  and 
muriatic,  have  on  fome  occafions  been  deferv- 
edly  praifed  in  many  dyfpeptic  flomachs. 

Iron  very  properly  is  conlidered  as  the  firfl 
article  in  this  clafs.  Its  reputation  is  very  an- 
cient, and  phyficians  have  been  uniform  in 
extolling  its  powers;  they  are  certainly  in 
fome  fhades  of  thefe  difeafes  truly  wonderful. 
There  are  few  of  our  patients  whofe  habits  of 
body  contra-indicate  its  exhibition  ;  but  it  is 
commonly  forbid  where  there  is  much  ftrength 
and  tenfion  of  mufcular  fibre,  and  a  florid 
denfe  blood.  Such  a  flate  of  body  is  feldom 
met  with  among  the  nervous,  bilious,  and  dyf- 
peptic :  but  we  have  frequently  been  obliged 
to  lay  afide  the  ufe  of  chalybeates  for  the  very 
reafons  juft  afligned. 

Sydenham,  who  feldom  erred  in  pradice, 
preferred  iron  in  its  metallic  or  oxide  ftate. 


305 

to  all  its  other  preparations.  I  can  readily 
join  in  the  praife  which  the  EngliOi  Hippo- 
crates pronounced  on  this  celebrated  ftrength- 
ener ;  but  there  are  certainly  conditions  of 
the  fyftem  in  nervous  difeafes,  in  which  fome 
of  its  faline  combinations  are  to  be  preferred. 
In  fome  female  habits  where  there  is  vaft  dif- 
pofition  to  acidity  of  flomach,  the  limatura 
ferri,  and  carbonas  ferri,  will  a£t  molt  power- 
fully. And  there  is  reafon  to  fuppofe,  that 
this  very  acidity  of  the  primae  vise,  further 
oxidates  the  metal ;  by  that  means  deftroys 
itfelf,  and  leaves  the  iron  in  a  more  adlive 
ftate  to  Ilrengthen  the  fibre,  or  to  mix  with 
the  blood,  and  exert  its  efficacy  on  the  whole 
circulation.  But  in  cafes  where  there  is  little 
or  no  acidity  in  the  firfl  paiTages,  the  muriated 
tincture  of  iron,  and  vitriolated  iron,  have 
appeared  to  me  to  have  manifeft  advantage. 
Again,  in  cafes  where  there  is  much  torpor, 
or  as  you  may  call  it,  fluggilhnefs  of  fibre,  and 
coldnefs  of  conftitution,  with  acefcency,  then 
the  ferrum  ammonicale,  or  the  tincture  made 
from  it,  are  of  fuperior  efficacy.  Some  of 
the  moft  fortunate  recoveries  which  ever  oc- 
curred under  my  own  prefcription,  were  ef- 
fected by  the  ferrum  ammonicale.     In  thefe 

2CL2 


1  »  • 


306 

cafes,  violent  p<dii  of  the  gaftric  region, 
occafional  jaundice,  flatulent  colic,  fbifting 
fpafms  of  the  whole  abdomen,  vait  acidity, 
vertigo  and  head-ach,  &c.  wtrt  the  predomi- 
nant fymptoms.  Yet  mod  of  thefe  cafes  were 
reduced  to  the  lad  degree  of  debility  before 
I  firft  faw  them.  Certainly  in  ftomach  and 
bilious  complaints  under  extreme  weaknefs, 
very  unexpeded  returns  to  health  fome- 
times  take  place  by  a  fortunate  change  of 
medicine.  It  mufl  therefore  be  a  point  of 
nice  difcrimination  in  the  pradtice,  to  fuit  the 
preparation  of  this  metal,  to  the  exad  difpo- 
fition  of  the  difeafe,  and  the  idiofyncrafy  of 
conftitution. 

When  I  employ  chalybeates  of  any  defcrip- 
tion,  it  is  ufual  with  me  to  precede  their  ufe, 
for  a  few  days,  with  fome  preparation  of  bark 
or  of  bitters ;  and  to  continue  them  for  two 
or  three  weeks  with  the  ferruginous  medicine. 
After  a  fhort  interval  they  may  be  again  re- 
newed, as  circumftances  require.  In  this  man- 
ner the  two  articles  will  efFed  what  neither  of 
them  can  do  alone.  But  I  am  of  opinion, 
with  many  other  phyficians,  that  ferruginous 
medicines  of  all  kinds,  ought  to  be  continued 
for  a  length  of  time,  if  full  benefit  is  to  be  de- 


307 

rived  from  them.  Even  where  the  good  ef- 
fects are  early  apparent,  they  muft  not  be  too 
foon  laid  afide  :  from  three  to  fix  months  are 
often  required  to  infure  all  the  good  that  may 
be  obtained.  All  the  different  forms  of  iron 
are  apt  to  make  the  bowels  flow  ;  which  with 
fome  patients  is  a  conftant  objedion  to  their 
employment.  Even  the  fagacious  Sydenham 
went  fo  far  as  to  fay  that  laxatives  ought  not 
to  be  given  during  their  ufe,  as  weakening 
their  efficacy.  It  is  however  to  be  remembered, 
the  diet  of  Engliflimen  in  his  days,  was  not  fo 
full  and  pampering  as  in  the  prefent  times. 
This  opinion  of  Sydenham  has  however  had 
very  little  weight  with  me  :  I  not  only  inter- 
pofe  laxatives  during  the  ufe  of  iron,  butfome- 
times  order  a  fmart  purge  at  intervals  ;  and  fo 
far  am  I  from  thinking  that  it  weakens  the 
power  of  the  other  medicine,  I  have  always 
thought  it  neceflary  for  fecuring  its  bed  efficacy. 
The  office  of  the  inteftines  muft  be  preferved 
regular  in  fuch  patients,  if  any  good  is  to  be 
done.  The  kali  tartar,  is  perhaps  the  beft 
purgative  article  at  this  feafon  ;  and  it  may 
have  fome  action  on  the  chalybeate  that  we 
cannot  well  explain.  If,  however,  our  regi- 
men of  air  and  exercife  is  ftriftly  complied 


ao8 


» % » 


with,  there  will  be  the  lefs  necefTity  for  forcing 
the  bowels  with  medicine. 

When  iron  is  adapted  to  the  cafe,  the  good 
effeds  are  firfl  obferved,  in  the  decHne  of  the 
dyfpeptic  feelings :  the  calls  of  appetite  be- 
come more  frequent ;  the  food  digefts  with 
more  eafe,  and  acidity  and  flatulence  ceafe  to 
be  painful.  At  this  time  the  colour  of  the 
face  improves,  and  grows  florid  ;  and  the  Mn 
from  being  fallow  and  dry,  becomes  better 
coloured,  foft,  and  perfpirable;  the  alvine 
fseces  are  commonly  tinged  during  the  ufe  of 
iron.  With  thefe  changes,  ftrength  of  body 
and  alacrity  of  mind  foon  appear.  In  delicate 
females,  fome  weakening  fexual  fymptoms 
quickly  decline. 

The  indifputable  good  eflTeds,  which  have  fo 
often  refulted  from  a  trial  of  the  Bath  waters^ 
in  many  varieties  of  thefe  difeafes,  render  it 
almofl:  certain,  that  thefe  have  been  produced 
by  the  ferruginous  principle  ¥/hich  they  poflefs : 
but  which  is  only  efFe6:ual  at  the  fountain,  as 
it  foon  precipitates,  and  cannot  be  preferved. 
As  we  perceive  this  m.etal  when  artificially 
managed,  to  efFed  furprizing  changes  in  the 
animal  economy,  it  is  but  fair  to  allow,  that 
much  more  may  be  expedled  from  the  fine 


309 

chetnidry  of  nature.  It  is  in  vain  to  deny 
this,  becaufe  the  Bath  water  contains  an  ex- 
tremely minute  portion  of  iron,  difcovered  on 
analyfis :  the  efFed  muft  reft  on  the  adlivity  of 
the  ingredient,  whether  in  the  (late  of  oxide 
or  not,  not  on  its  quantity.  The  fenfible  qua- 
lities of  the  water,  when  drank  on  the  fpot, 
are  highly  ferruginous ;  and  the  ftimulant 
power  is  fo  perceptible,  that  in  fome  habits  of 
body,  it  is  dangerous  ;  inducing  temporary  fe- 
ver and  vertigo,  and  in  fome  inftances  apo- 
plexy. The  torpid  habit  is,  therefore,  moft  re- 
lieved by  them  ;  perfons  worn  down  by  the 
difeafes  and  exceifes  of  tropical  climates ; 
and  thofe  debilitated  by  luxurious  and  hard 
living  at  home.  The  regular  hours,  corred: 
manners,  and  elegant  pleafures  of  the  com- 
pany at  this  failiionable  place  of  refort,  be- 
come the  be  ft  antidotes  in  life,  againft  licen- 
tious drunkennefs  :  no  wonder  then  the 
enervated  debauchee  fliould  return  healthy, 
and  fometimes  reformed,  from  a  courfe 
of  Bath  waters.  But  when  nervous,  bili- 
ous, and  dyfpeptic  complaints  depend,  as 
they  often  do,  on  a  gouty  diathefis^  Bath  waters 
are  a  fovereign  remedy.  The  energy  which 
they  quickly  impart  to  the  chylopoietic  organs, 


310 

is  foon  extended  over  the  whole  frame  ;  and  all 
thofe  anomalous  fymptoms,  ufually  called  jiy- 
Ing  gout^  feem  to  rally  to  a  point,  and  ceafe, 
when  the  afFe£lion  comes  to  be  fixed  in  the 
extremities.  I  am  thus  induced  to  mention 
thefe  falutary  fprings,  under  the  method  of 
treatment. 

With  refped  to  the  effeds  of  the  prepara- 
tions of  zinc^  copper^  filver^  and  lead^  which 
have  been  tried  in  thefe  difeafes,  excepting 
the  firft,  I  have  little  experience  of  them.  I 
have  frequently  combined  the  oxide  of  zinc  with 
carboms  ferri^  and  other  forms  of  iron,  cer- 
tainly with  great  effed ;  but  not  more  than 
what  is  daily  feen  of  iron  by  itfelf.  A  farmer 
lately  brought  his  fon  to  me,  who  by  the  de- 
fcription,  had  been  fubjed  for  fix  weeks  to  fits 
three  or  four  times  in  the  day,  that  were  epi- 
leptic. He  faid  he  was  returning  at  night  to 
his  father's  houfe,  and  in  a  thunder  florm  was 
ftruck  down  by  lightning.  He  was  an  hour 
and  half  in  getting  home,  though  not  more 
than  a  mile  from  the  place  ;  and  being  infenfi- 
ble,  he  did  not  know  where  he  was  till  morn- 
ing. I  found  he  had  an  hereditary  nervous 
temperament,  and  many  fevere  dyfpeptic  fymp* 
toms.    I  ordered  iron,  zinc,  and  cinchona,  in 


311 

the  form  of  electuary.  After  the  firfl  three 
dofes,  the  convulfions  ceafed  :  but  he  took 
his  medicine  only  a  fortnight,  and  the  fits  re- 
turned. He  refufed  to  go  on  with  it,  and  I 
faw  him  no  more.  In  this  cafe,  I  was  guided 
in  the  pradice,  by  the  dyfpeptic  flomach  and 
predifpofition.  Of  the  cuprum^  argentum^  et 
plumbum^  I  have  no  experience.  The  iron  is 
my  grand  fafety.  I  fancy  the  refources  of  ;;;^- 
teria  med'ica  are  fufficiently  abundant  at  pre- 
fent ;  the  beft  phyfician  mull  be  he  who  can 
bed  feled,  and  bed  prepare  what  we  now 
poffefs. 

The  cinchona^  or  Feruvmi  hark^  ilands  fore- 
moft  in  our  lift  of  medicines  taken  from  the 
vegetable  kingdom.  No  article  of  materia  me- 
dica  has  acquired  equal  reputation ;  but  it  is 
the  fate  of  this  medicine,  to  be  often  difpenfed 
from  the  hands  of  ignorant  people,  where  nei- 
ther the  difeafe,  nor  the  nature  of  the  bark, 
are  underftood;  and  it  muft  frequently  do 
harm.  Some  attention  ought  certainly  to  be 
paid  to  the  manner  in  which  it  can  be  exhibit- 
ed with  moft  effed.  The  powder  has  been 
faid  to  be  the  moft  eftedual  form,  but  there  are 
many  ftomachs  that  cannot  bear  it  in  fubftance. 
If  therefore  fmall  dofes  do  not  fit  eafy,  the  in- 

2    R 


312 

fufion  or  decodion  mufl;  be  tried  ;  and  it  is 
the  beft  way  to  begin  even  thefe  in  fniall  quan- 
tity. To  exhibit  the  bark  in  tin<Si:ure  in  thefe 
complaints,  is  an  inconfiftency  in  pradice  :  it 
is  no  doubt  very  grateful  to  fome  ftomachs, 
but  let  us  remember  we  are  pouring  into  the 
body  one  of  thofe  narcotics,  that  is  daily  bring- 
ing nervous  afflidlions  upon  thoufands.  It  is, 
however,  fometimes  neceffary  to  add  a  fmall 
proportion,  to  preferve  the  watery  preparation 
from  fpoiling.  It  frequently  happens  that 
bark  a6ls  purgatively,  and  palTes  rapidly 
through  the  bowels ;  and  laudanum  has  been 
the  common  corrector  of  its  purgative  quality. 
But  I  objeft  to  opium  in  any  form,  in  thefe 
difeafes,  unlefs  we  are  compelled  by  urgent 
pain.  I  have  always  found  creta  preparata 
fuiEcient  for  this  purpofe :  for  it  would  appear, 
that  this  effect  of  bark  is  chiefly  to  be  met  with 
in  thofe  fubjed  to  great  acidity.  I  even  find 
it  neceflfary  to  combine  ammonia  with  bark  \  as 
both  chalk,  magnefia,  and  the  fixed  alkalies, 
are  fometimes  incapable  of  fubduing  the  vaft 
acidity  in  the  firft  paflTages  ;  and  I  think  this  is 
frequently  one  of  the  beft  additions  to  the  other. 
In  my  own  pradice  I  have  long  confidered 
thefe  anti-acids,  when  well  timed,  as  the  caufc 


313 

of  my  fuccefs.  With  refped  to  aromatics,  as 
adjuvants  to  either  the  bark  or  bitters,  their 
good  effe£ls  are  very  doubtful  with  me.  I 
wifh  to  exclude  from  medicine,  as  well  as  diet,^ 
every  thing  that  is  warming ;  and  I  have  a 
flrong  fufpicion  that  aromatics  invert  the  ac- 
tion of  the  fibres  of  the  cardia  or  upper  ori- 
fice, and  thereby  occafion  belching,  which  is 
falfely  faid  to  be  ufeful. 

When  the  extract  of  bark  is  genuine  and 
recently  prepared,  it  will  be  found  in  fome 
cafes,  to  fucceed,  where  milder  forms  of  the 
medicine  have  failed.  I  have  given  it  in  both 
pill  and  folution  with  great  effedt.  I  combine 
the  pill  with  a  third  of  gently  calcined  foda  ; 
and  I  think,  by  thus  converting  the  extract 
into  a  kind  of  foap,  the  folution  of  it  in  the 
ftomach  is  more  certain  and  equal,  and  the 
efFed  much  increafed.  This  form  of  pill 
anfwers  very  well  with  all  the  bitter  extrads, 
fuch  as  gentian,  chamomile,  &c.  The  diftil- 
led  water  of  peppermint  forms  a  good  vehicle 
for  the  folution,  and  the  extrad  mixes  perfectly, 
when  a  due  quantity  of  kali  prepar.  is  triturat- 
ed with  it. 

When  bark  or  bitters  produce  conftipation, 
laxatives  may  be  aptly  joined  with  them.     I 

2   R    2 


314 

prefer  rhubarb  and  jalap,  though  I  have  no  ob- 
jedion  to  kali  tartar. 

Next  in  power  to  cinchona  I  reckon  anguf- 
tiira  hark.  This  article  has  not  been  long  in  ufe 
in  this  country  ;  it  is  certainly  a  valuable  addi- 
tion to  materia  medica.  It  is  a  rougher  medi- 
cine than  the  bark,  and  ought  to  be  given  in 
fmaller  dofes ;  and  in  thofe  ftomachs  where  it 
fits  eafy,  it  a6ts  powerfully  in  fubduing  dyfpep- 
tic  fymptoms.  It  may  be  therefore  proper  to 
begin  with  infufion  and  decoction,  joining  to 
them  magnefia  uft.  and  the  alkalies,  as  in  the 
pharmaceutical  treatment  of  bark.  Anguftura, 
from  its  aftringency,  is  more  apt  to  bring  on 
conflipation  than  bark,  fo  that  fome  of  the 
milder  laxatives,  fuch  as  kali  tartar,  may  be 
advantageoufly  taken  with  it :  and  for  this  rea- 
fon  it  is  better  adapted  to  thofe  cafes  of  nervo.us 
affedion,  where  a  laxity  of  bowels  forms  part 
of  the  difeafe.  It  is  alfo  an  excellent  anthel* 
mintic,  and  may  be  given  to  children  fubje£l 
to  worms,  in  the  morning  failing,  triturated 
with  magnefia  and  foda,  preceded  and  follow- 
ed by  a  brifk  purge  as  directed  before. 

The  gentian  root  is  perhaps  one  of  the  beft 
pure  bitters  in  this  clafs  of  difeafes.  The 
cgmpound  infufion  of  the  Pharmacopeia  Lon^ 


315 

dinenfis,  vel  Edin.  is  the  mofl  advantageous 
form  to  employ  it,  to  which  may  be  added 
magnes.  ufl.  carbonate  of  lime,  or  the  alkalies* 
When  bitters  are  firfl  tried  they  are  apt  to 
ficken  fome  flomachs  ;    but  this  Ihould  be  re- 
medied by  lelTening  the  dofe.     It  is  true  that 
a  pill  of  extrad  of  gentian  and  foda  as  direded 
before,  is  more  eafily  taken ;    but  I  think  by 
this  change  we  lofe  confiderably  in  the  value 
of  the  medicine.     All  bitters  feem  to  adl  mofl 
powerfully    when    largely    diffufed ;     where 
there  is  much  acidity  as  the  effed  of  fermen- 
tation of  the  food,  with  great  flatulence  from 
the  fame  caufe,  they  produce  very  fudden  re- 
lief.      It    is  known   that   bitters   chemically 
check   the    fermentation    by  fome  antizymic 
power,  and  corred  acidity  by  the  fame  means. 
1  never  permit  the  ufe  of  any  of  them  beyond 
fixteen  days  at  a  time. 

Colomha  root  has  become  a  favourite  medi- 
cine in  thefe  difeafes,  with  a  number  of  phyfi- 
cians  in  this  country.  It  is  certainly  a  very 
agreeable  bitter,  but  I  think  in  effed  lefs  than 
gentian.  It  has  been  faid  to  be  particularly 
ufeful  in  bilious  cafes ;  but  it  does  not  appear, 
even  in  that  trait  of  the  nervous  temperament, 
that  it  furpaffes  other  bitters,  however  fuccefs- 


316 

fully  given,  where  there  Is  much  uneafmefs 
from  indigeftion,  acid  erudations,  and  diften- 
tion.  I  would  recommend  the  fame  pharma- 
ceutical treatment  of  colomba,  as  mentioned 
of  gentian.  Chamomile,  fantonicum,  worm- 
wood, quaffia,  &c.  are  all  of  the  bitter  clafs, 
and  refemble  one  another  in  virtue.  It  is 
certainly  an  objed  in  pradice  to  chufe  the  moft. 
powerful,  which  is  gentian.  A  very  valuable 
addition  is  now  made  to  this  clafs  by  the  falix 
latifolia,  which  anfwers  well  in  decodion  to  be 
taken  with  any  of  the  ferruginous  preparations. 
Articles  of  the  growth  of  our  own  foil  ought 
to  be  encouraged  by  all  medical  people.  See 
an  ingenius  Effay  on  this  medicine,  by  Mr 
Wilkinfon,  of  Sunderland. 

2.  I  come  now  to  the  fecond  head  of  treat- 
ment, viz.  To  palliate  particular  fymptoms. 
This  is  fometimes  a  difficult  talk  in  thefe  dif- 
eafes ;  as  what  tends  mofl  to  give  immediate 
eafe,  is  what  muil  inevitably  have  the  effe£t 
of  increafmg  the  predifpofition,  and  endanger- 
ing the  return  of  the  complaint  in  a  more  ag- 
gravated form.  Such  I  conceive  to  be  the  ef- 
fects of  ardent  fpirit,  opium,  and  all  other  nar- 
cotics. To  a  perfon  who  refleds  properly  on 
the  horrid  effeds  of  dram-drinking,  nothing 


317 

can  be  fo  difgufting  as  to  fee  fplrits  fwallowed 
in  an  undiluted  ftate.  It  is  therefore  my  fo- 
lemn  opinion,  that  they  ought  never  to  be  re- 
forted  to  on  trifling  occafions ;  for  when  often 
repeated,  even  in  the  hands  of  the  moft  cauti- 
ous, they  cannot  fail  of  injuring  the  ftomach* 
They  moreover  undermine  health  by  favour- 
ing the  attachment  to  fpiritous  liquors.  And 
fuch  is  the  effeci:  of  opium,  that  many  women 
fubjea  to  hyfteria,  are  very  apt  to  be  feized 
with  a  fit,  whenever  they  take  a  dofe  of  lauda- 
num. I  have  known  numberlefs  inftances  of 
this  kind ;  even  epilepfy  is  fometimes  the  con- 
fequence.  Other  women  I  am  acquainted 
with,  who  never  can  ufe  opium  in  any  form, 
without  a  temporary  delirium  of  the  mod  dif- 
agreeable  kind,  and  followed  by  ficknefs  at 
ftomach  dill  more  diftrefling.  Thefe  extraor- 
dinary effedls  chiefly  arife  from  great  mobility 
of  nervous  fyftem.  Too  much  caution  cannot 
therefore  be  beftowed,  to  avoid  temporary  pal- 
liatives, that  mufl;  ultimately  produce  perma- 
nent pain. 

In  the  courfe  of  my  paflfage  through  the 
world,  I  have  at  different  times  known  fome 
fafliionable  women  in  high  life,  of  the  nervous 
temperament,  who  had  got  into  the  baneful 


318 

habit  of  ufing  opium  as  a  cordial.  Some  of 
them  were  fo  familiar  with  it,  as  to  carry  a 
vial  of  laudanum  conflantly  with  them :  a 
long  evening  could  not  be  pafTed  abroad  with- 
out retiring  to  repeat  the  dofe.  The  confe- 
quence  of  all  this,  as  mufl  be  readily  imagined, 
was  continual  bad  health.  Though  none  of 
thefe  ladies  were  beyond  middle  age,  yet  they 
had  all  the  looks  of  old  women.  It  mufl  be 
a  grievous  (lain  on  the  medical  character,  if 
fuch  habits  took  their  beginning  from  any  in- 
confiderate  practice  of  a  medical  attendant, 
I  am  afraid  the  profeffion  is  not  free  from  this 
imputation.  A  man  who  carries  for  ever  on 
his  face  the  lleek  fimper  of  artful  infignifi- 
cance  j  who  has  a  bow  and  a  fmile  ready  for 
every  perfon  that  addrelTes  him,  will  be  very 
apt  to  accommodate  his  prefcription  to  a  fa- 
ihionable  folly. 

The  firft  ftep  to  health  is  to  avoid  the  caufc 
of  difeafe.  But  there  are  fome  phyficians  who 
contend  that  it  is  hurtful  for  habitual  drunkards 
to  leave  off  the  bottle  at  once.  Were  the  ha- 
bit of  dram-drinking  a  falutary  practice,  there 
might  be  fome  truth  in  this  dictatorial  precept. 
But  as  ardent  fpirit  is  a  ftrong  poifon  to  both 
foul  and  body^  and  forms  no  part  of  that  nou- 


319 

rifliment  which  can  be  converted  into  animal 
matter,  I  have  never  been  able,  after  the  rnqfl: 
unwearied  application  in  the  exercife  of  my 
profellion,  to  find  a  fingle  fad  in  fupport  of 
a  dodrine  fo  deflrudUve  of  moral  and  phyfical 
health.  Whenever  I  have  known  habitual 
ebriety  completely  overcome,  it  has  been  where 
all  fpecies  of  liquors  were  given  up  in  totofrom 
thejirfi. 

The  delirium  which  fucceeds  the  paroxyfm 
of  ebriety,  is  of  two  kinds,  the  phrenitic  and 
the  nervous.  The  firfl  bears  bleeding  and  other 
evacuating  means :  the  lafl:  is  to  be  treated  by- 
ftimuli.  But  wine  or  fpirits  fhould  never  be 
ufed  ;  as  bringing  up  to  recolledion  the  plea- 
fing  fenfations  which  precede  drunkennefs, 
and  connecting  thofe  aflbciations  which  it  is 
the  province  of  medicine  to  break  afunder. 
When  there  is  much  watchfulnefs,  and  little 
inclination  for  fleep,  in  the  nervous  delirium, 
opium  in  due  dofes  mull  be  given.  But  na- 
ture in  this  cafe,  as  in  many  others,  with 
nothing  beyond  the  ufual  ftimuli  which  ac- 
company temperance,  recovers  the  powers  of 
reafon :  the  confcious  pleafure  of  refuming 
fober  habits,  as  a  mental  excitement,  muft  be 
one  of  the  beft  on  fuch  occafions.     The  treat- 

2  S 


3120 

ment  of  phrenitis  does   not  belong  to   this 
work. 

The  moft  painful  fymptoms  which  attend 
nervous  indifpofition,  are  thofe  crajnps  and 
fpafms  which  particularly  affed  the  (lomach, 
bowels,  kidneys,  ureters  and  bladder.  In  the 
female  fubjed  they  are  moft  apt  to  occur  at; 
the  period  ;  and  often  commence  in  an  inftant. 
Such  women  ought  to  be  careful  about  the 
ftate  of  the  bowels  and  ftomach  at  that  time, 
with  refped  to  the  kinds  of  food  and  the  alvine 
difcharge  5  fo  as  to  obviate  acidity,  flatulence, 
&c.  the  painful  companions  -of  that  ftate. 
The  amenorrhcea,  or  fuppreflion,  from  what- 
'ever  caufe,  is  alfd  remarkable  for  the  recur- 
rence of  thefe  fymptoms,  which  are  feldom 
fully  relieved  till  regularity  is  reftored.  The 
condition  of  mind  is  worthy  of  great  attention 
at  that  time  j  for  every  ruffle  of  paffion  creates 
milchief.  i  jvni 

The  warm  gums^  as  they  have  been  called>  ^ 
have  been  long  in  ufe  for  thefe  troublefome 
pains  and  other  nervous  affedions.  They 
have  been  adminiftered  in  the  form  of  pill  and 
tindure ;  not  without  fome  confidence  being^ 
given  to  their  unpleafant  flavour,  a  fingular 
way  of  prejudging  the  effefts  of  a  medicine. 


321 

In  nothing  have  I  been  more  difappointed, 
than  in  the  foetid  gums ;  and  where  they  have 
been  apparently  ufeful,  it  \7as  probably  from 
the  fpirit  taken  with  them.  Like  aromatics^ 
they  caufe  erudation,  which  is  faid  to  be  a  good 
efFed ;  though  with  me  an  opinion  that  they 
invert  the  fibres  of  the  cardia,  which  is  im- 
proper. Afafoetida  is  the  foremofl  of  this 
lift :  but  it  ought  to  be  remembered,  that  its 
tindure  in  the  modern  pharmacopeias,  is  made 
with  alcohol ;  and  a  teafpoonful  or  two,  how- 
ever diluted,  comes  to  be  a  tolerable  dram. 
Here  the  alliaceous  flavour  is  very  ftrong  and 
impregnates  the  breath.  In  the  form  of 
enema  I  have  however  known  the  afafoe- 
tida very  ufeful.  Caftor,  ol.  animale  and 
mu£k,  are  prefcribed  for  the  fame  purpofe  as 
afafoetida :  but  though  they  may  poiTefs  a  fti- 
mulant  power,  it  is  very  trifling  and  tranfitory ; 
they  are  moreover,  apt  to  diforder  the  ftomach 
and  bring  on  vomiting.  Camphor  and  am- 
monia are  of  much  greater  value  in  nervous 
pains;  and  their  effeds  more  permanent, 
^ther  is  alfo  a  common  remedy,  and  when 
joined  with  opium  and  ammonia,  of  great  fer- 
vice.  This  is  a  judicious  mode  of  exhibiting 
laudanum,  for  a  fmaller  quantity  is  required 

2  S  2 


322 

than  when  given  alone.  Valerian  is  another 
of  the  foetid  tribe,  frequently  ordered  in  large 
quantity,  to  the  manifeftinjury  of  theftomach, 
I  believe  it  to  be  a  very  inert  ftimulant.  As 
opium  is  known  to  produce  a  flow  (late  of 
bowels,  ext.  hyofciami  nigri,  which  has  a  laxa- 
tive quality,  was  long  ago  recommended  by 
Dr  Whytt  in  thefe  diforders.  We  certainly 
by  this  change  get  quit  of  fome  of  the  bad  efr 
feds  of  the  opium ;  but  hyofciamus  extrad 
mufl  be  recently  prepared  to  be  adive ;  and 
there  is  fome  difficulty  in  afcertaining  the  dofe 
at  once, 

But  when  pain  and  reftleffnefs  become 
urgent,  and  when  common  harmlefs  remedies 
fail,  there  is  no  refource  befides  opium.  We 
know  its  fovereign  powers  as  an  anodyne,  and 
we  muft  compound  with  its  bad  effeds  in  the 
bed  manner  we  can.  We  ought  to  combine 
it  with  fuch  articles  as  co-operate  with  it,  fuch 
as  aether  and  ammonia,  and  the  befl  vehicle  is 
,  the  mift.  camphor  of  the  difpenfatory.  But  it 
often  happens  that  the  ftomach  rejeds  the  lir 
quid  medicine,  and  the  dry  opium  may  be 
fubflituted.  I  prefer  the  mode  by  enema  ;  and 
we  may  combine  diluted  fpirit,  or  fome  of  the 
ftronger  white  wines  with  it,  fuch  as  Madeira 


323 

or  Sherry,  to  great  advantage.  I  have  never 
been  difappointed  with  a  clyfter  of  this  fort. 
This  alfo  in  a  great  meafure  prevents  ficknefs 
at  ftomach  afterwards. 

Some  other  fymptoms  which  come  on  fud- 
denly  in  nervous  cafes,  fuch  as  vertigo  and 
head-ach^  palpitation  and  faintnefs^  do  not  ad- 
mit of  fuch  eafy  relief.  They  commonly  at- 
tend fome  difordered  ftate  of  the  ftomach  and 
bowels,  and  to  thefe  the  medical  regimen  muft 
be  direded.  *     The  hy  ft  eric  and  epileptic  pa- 

*  I  was  lately  confulted  In  a  remarkable  cafe  o£pal- 
pttatioriy  in  a  girl  of  eight  years  old.  The  motion  was 
fo  violent  it  could  be  feen  at  a  confiderable  diftance, 
and  it  was  conftant,  though  fomewhat  Increafed  by 
violent  exercife.  It  appeared  hopelefs,  from  the  idea 
of  organic  affedion  in  the  heart :  but  the  girl  was  in 
general  bad  health,  and  of  a  ftrongly  marked  nsrvous 
temperament,  I  therefore  direfled  my  advice  to  corred: 
the  predifpofition,  which  was  chiefly  to  the  relief  of 
the  ftomach.  The  next  time  I  faw  her,  the  complexion 
was  entirely  changed  ;  fhe  was  grown  florid  and  beau, 
tiful,  and  full  in  flefh.  I  now  think,  extreme  irritabi- 
lity in  the  heart,  with  nervous  weaknefs,  was  the  whole 
difeafe.  Similar  cafes  have  come  under  my  obferva- 
tion,  but  none  fo  violent  as  this :  yet  it  Is  furprlzing  to 
fee  to  what  a  height  this  fymptom  will  arlfe  In  female 
habits.  An  appeal  to  the  ruling  temperament  muft 
therefore  be  always  a  fafe  refource  to  the  phyfician. 


32^ 

roxyfms,  are  convulfions  that  fometimes  give 
alarm  of  their  approach  j  but  at  other  times 
their  attack  is  inftant.  We  certainly  pofTefs 
no  medicine  that  either  prevents  or  fhortens 
thefe  convulfions.  I  have  feen  epilepfy  check- 
ed by  the  ligature  round  the  thigh,  when  the 
fenfe  of  the  aura^  as  it  is  called,  w^as  afcending 
the  thigh  :  but  in  other  cafes  the  ligature  did 
not  check  the  aura^  or  prevent  the  fit.  The 
only  treatment  which  I  can  recommend  here 
is  the  whole  rules  of  prevention ;  which  im- 
prove the  health,  by  abridging  the  predifpofi- 
tion.  If,  as  I  contend,  epilepfy  is  the  offspring 
of  the  nervous  temperament,  the  force  of  that 
muft  be  lelfened  ;  and  all  cures  of  this  convul- 
fion  by  any  particular  article,  can  have  no  real 
exiflence. 

Acidity  and  flatulence  being  two  of  the  mofl 
painful  fymptoms  attending  thefe  difeafes,  the 
common  corre6:ors  are  well  known  5    they 

On  the  fame  principles,  I  have  juft  difmifTed,  cured,  a 
cafe  of  epilepfy,  in  a  youth  of  fixteen,  an  apprentice  in 
this  town,  which  threatened  to  be  permanent.  He 
had  no  fit  after  he  began  his  medicines.  But  in  order 
to  make,  great  changes  in  his  modes  of  living,  I  ordered 
him  to  the  country,  with  many  alterations  in  diet,  &c. 
during  the  treatment. 


S25 

ought  to  be  obviated  as  much  as  poffible  by 
diet,  which  has  been  fuiEciently  explained. 
The  aerated  foda  water  has  now  become  a  fa- 
fhionable  morning  draught  for  the  cure  of 
acidity,  after  a  debauch  of  wine.  It  is  really 
to  be  met  with  in  coffee-houfes,  as  if  it  had  never 
been  manufadured  by  the  apothecary,  and  it. 
is  humiliating  to  the  phyfical  vigor  of  Britons 
to  fee  fuch  degeneracy ;  a  medicine  converted 
into  a  tavern  beverage !  But  it  is  worth  men- 
tioning, that  a  long  ufe  of  this  water  hurts  the 
ftomach  and  kidneys,  and  produces  very  feri- 
ous  cutaneous  difeafes,  fo  as  to  injure  the  fkin. 
I  mull  beg  leave  to  caution  perfons  fubjecl 
to  nervous  and  ftomach  complaints,  about  re- 
pelling eruptions  on  the  Jkin,  efpecially  of  the 
face,  by  any  fevere  means.  Thefe  cutaneous 
affettions  are  commonly  aflbciated  with  the 
dyfpeptic  difpofition,  and  when  imprudently; 
forced  from  the  furface,  never  fail  to  aggravate 
the  internal  diforder.  The  beft  way  is  to  leave, 
them  to  the  general  treatment.  It  is  true, 
they  are  particularly  difagreeable  to  women  j; 
but  as  they  are  a  part  of  the  original  malady^; 
fo  they  ufually  yield  with  it.  Of  this  patients- 
fliould  be  duly  warned  ;  for  many  conftitutioiis; 
have  been  ruined  by  the  ufe  of  thofe  articles, 
vended  under  the  fpecious  names  of  creams. 


326 

dews,  honeys,  &c.  all  of  which  contain  mer- 
cury, lead,  or  fome  powerful  aftringent,  that 
repels  the  pimples  at  an  improper  period. 
When  ftomach  complaints  have  been  rendered 
more  fevere  by  this  caufe,  the  firft  and  bell  re- 
lief is  to  recal  them  to  the  fkin.  The  warm 
bath,  particularly  of  fait  or  fulphur  v/ater,  is 
one  of  the  mod  effedtual  means.  But  fome 
medicines  of  the  fudorific  clafs,  fuch  as  cam- 
phor and  ammonia,  joined  to  bark  and  iron, 
"with  warmer  clothing,  and  exercife  continued 
to  the  fweating  ftage,  will  alfo  have  confidera- 
ble  efFed  in  reftoring  the  eruption. 

Morning  Jtcknefs  and  ^vertigo  ajre  common 
with  fome  of  thefe  patients.  They  are  felt 
immediately  on  (landing  ered,  and  fometimes 
bring  on  retching  and  faintnefs.  Thefe  fymp- 
toms  are  chiefly  to  be  imputed  to  the  empty 
flate  of  the  flomach  from  long  fading.  They 
are  befl  relieved  by  fome  tafty  food,  fuch  as 
cold  ham,  cold  tongue,  &c.  taken  before  get- 
ting up.  But  warm  tindures  and  medicines 
of  any  fort  ought  never  to  be  reforted  to.  By 
way  of  preventing  this  ficknefs,  I  commonly 
dired  a  fmall  fupper  of  meat  at  going  to  bed, 
fo  as  to  amufe  digeflion,  and  breakfafl  imme- 
diately on  rifmg.    In  the  early  months  of  preg- 


327 

nancy,  morning  licknefs  is  a  troublefome  at- 
tendant :  but  as  the  caufe  cannot  be  correded 
immediately,  the  only  alleviation  is  watching 
the  ftate  of  the  ftomach  and  bowels. 

Want  of  Jleep  or  wakefulnefs^  is  one  of  the 
mofl  diflrefling  companions  of  nervous  affec- 
tions :  indeed  fome  perfons  appear  fcarcely  to 
fleep  at  all.  Cold  ablution  of  the  whole  body 
a  little  before,  or  immediately  on  going  to  bed, 
is  one  of  the  beft  means  which  I  know,  to  pro- 
cure refrefliing  fleep  in  thefe  fituations.  Some 
people  find  great  advantage  from  what  has 
been  called  the  air-bath  ;  that  is  to  get  out  of 
bed,  and  walk  to  and  fro  in  the  room,  quite 
naked,  for  ten  or  fifteen  minutes.  After 
growing  warm  in  bed,  drowfinefs  and  fleep 
foon  fucceed  this  kind  of  nod-ambulation. 
But  fufficient  bodily  exercife,  with  moderate 
mental  recreation,  is  certainly  the  mofl:  faluta- 
ry  and  natural  mode  of  inducing  found  re- 
pofe.  I  think  opium  can  fcarcely  be  admitted 
here.  The  general  warm-bath,  femicupium, 
and  pediluvium,  may  alfo  be  tried. 

The  external  applications  which  are  em- 
ployed in  cramps  and  pains  ^  confifl:  of  bliflers ; 
camphorated  oil  \  ammoniated  oil ;  vitriolic 
setherj  faponaceous  liniment ;  muflard  flour  j 

2  T 


328 

wann  flannels  ;  bottles  and  bladders  of  warm 
water  ;  hot  bricks  ;  fridion  ;  dry  cupping, 
&c.  The  I'dft  remedy  is  often  found  ufeful^ 
where  there  is  much  pain  with  coldnefs  of  the 
part ;  as  by  favouring  the  influx  of  blood, 
and  thereby  exciting  heat,  it  proves  fl:imulant. 
With  the  fame  intention,  eUEtricity  is  often 
employed  to  advantage ;  and  to  this  we  may 
now  add  galvanifm.  The  warm  bath  may  al- 
fo  be  confidered  a  valuable  remedy  in  local 
pain,  and  may  be  practifed  with  the  reftric- 
tions  formerly  delivered.  The  vapour  bath, 
in  effe6:,  comes  near  the  nature  of  the  warm 
bath  :  but  pediluvium  being  eafier  accompliih- 
ed,  generally  fupercedes  both  the  others. 

The  Jirangury^  and  other  complaints  of  the 
urinary  paffages,  are  beft  relieved  by  the  fixed 
alkalis,  ammonia,  sether,  and  camphor,  exhi- 
bited in  aq.  menth.  pip.  with  the  milder  bit- 
ters, and  large  dilution.  Thefe  fymptoms  are 
apt  to  accompany  exceflive  acidity  and  flatu- 
lence of  the  firfl  paflages.  I  have  known 
cafes  of  this  kind  becoming  truly  alarming, 
from  the  great  delicacy  of  the  patient.  This 
fymptom  is  peculiarly  frequent  with  women 
fubje^k  to  the  hyfl.eric  afFedion :  adive  exer- 
eife  in  the  open  air  is  the  beft  preventive.    I 


329 

know  not  if  mucilage  can  have  any  efFe£t  here, 
beyond  dilution  from  the  water  taken  with  it ; 
but  even  that  may  be  ufeful. 

The  dyspnoea  and  qfthma^  or  difeafed  re- 
fpiration,  which  accompany  thefe  complaints, 
are  often  troublefome.  The  flatulence  of  fto- 
mach  frequently  impedes  the  motion  of  the 
lungs  and  diaphragma  mechanically  ;  but 
when  the  bronchise  and  air-cells  are  contract- 
ed, fo  as  to  make  the  bread  labour,  and  in- 
duce a  wheezing  of  breath  and  change  of 
voice,  they  muft  be  confidered  as  fympathetic 
affedions.  Several  of  the  ftimuh,  fuch  as 
sether  and  ammonia,  are  fometimes  exhibited 
with  fuccefs ;  but  I  would  recommend  the 
treatment  to  be  directed  againft  the  difordered 
condition  of  ftomach ;  which,  if  properly 
deteded,  will  feldom  fail  of  giving  relief. 

It  remains  for  me  to  confider  the  treatment 
of  the  bowels^  fo  generally  JJow  in  perfons  of 
the  nervous  temperament.  To  preferve  the 
alvine  difcharge  regular,  is  an  indifpenfible 
part  of  our  office.  The  ftomach  and  bowels 
being  the  chief  feat  of  nervous  and  bilious 
complaints,  much  of  the  inconvenience  and 
pain  occafioned  by  conftipation  is  to  be  refer- 
red to  their  weakened  flate  j    joined  to  the 

%T  2 


330 

fcanty  or  vitiated  bile  which  is  fent  from  the 
liver,  as  that  organ  partakes  by  aiTociation  and 
fympathy  vi^ith  the  inteftinal  tube.  By  an  in- 
verfion  of  the  adion  of  the  mufcular  fibres, 
the  periftaltic  motion  is  interrupted  ;  is  torpid 
in  one  place,  and  increafed  in  another ;  which 
irregularity  comprefles  the  flatulence  into  par- 
ticular portions  of  the  canal ;  creates  diftention, 
uneafmefs,  and  pain ;  and  very  frequently 
gives  the  evacuation  much  difference  in  form, 
confiftence,  and  colour.  Thefe  appearances 
fometimes  imprefs  the  patients  and  nurfes  with 
extraordinary  dread  and  apprehenfion  of  the 
difordered  flate  of  the  bowels.  While  the 
nervous  power  of  the  inteftines  thus  a6ls  tu- 
multuoully,  and  in  infulated  portions,  violent 
conftriftions  are  apt  to  happen,  which  give 
birth  to  the  fymptoms  of  colic :  and  at  other 
times  the  mind  is  more  particularly  alienated, 
and  what  is  called  hypochondriacifm  and  vapours ^ 
are  the  confequence. 

It  is  devoutly  to  be  wifhed  that  the  bowels 
could  be  kept  in  due  a£tion,  by  diet  and  exer- 
cife,  without  the  aid  of  medicine  :  but  fo  many 
caufes  confpire  to  defeat  this  purpofe,  that 
nothing  is  fo  difficult  to  be  accomplifhed. 
Such  patients  have  generally  long  accuftomed 


831 

themfelves  to  fome  purgative  medicine,  often 
one  of  the  moft  improper  kind  ;  and  it  is  not 
eafy  to  convince  them  they  have  been  doing 
wrong.  Among  thefe  habitual  purges,  calo- 
mel and  aloes  are  the  mo  ft  frequent  in  ufe. 
As  thefe  articles,  as  well  as  all  other  cathartics, 
are  not  directed  againffc  the  radical  caufe  of 
the  evil,  they  can  be  confidered  only  as  giving 
temporary  relief.  But  mercury  in  any  form 
cannot  be  long  ufed  by  perfons  of  weak  vifcera 
without  harm  :  and  aloes  is  a  medicine  of  the 
draftic  kind,  that  produces  great  irritation  in 
the  redum,  tenefmus,  and  is  apt  to  bring  on 
frocedentia  ani^  piles,  and  fiftulous  fores.  But 
purgatives  of  every  defcription,  when  frequent- 
ly reforted  to,  exhauft  the  flomach  and  bowels, 
and  never  fail  in  adding  to  the  caufe  of  the 
complaint.  It  muil  therefore  be  a  great  mis- 
fortune where  the  body  is  never  moved  with- 
out the  aid  of  medicine. 

Such  a  habit  as  this  ought  to  be  early 
guarded  againft,  where  the  difpofition  to  cof- 
tivenefs  is  hereditary.  This  can  be  done  only 
by  a  ftridt  attention  to  that  regimen,  which  is 
enforced  in  the  former  part  of  this  work. 
Parents  alone  can  efFed  this.  It  muft  be 
grateful  to  every  medical  attendant  of  a  family 


332 

where  it  Is  known  that  a  predlfpofition  to  thefe 
difeafes  prevails,  to  remind  the  father  and  mo- 
ther of  the  neceflary  rules  of  prevention.  Such 
an  office  will  refied  great  honour  on  the  pro- 
feffional  charader,  as  it  will  prove  an  honefl 
difregard  of  emolument,  when  the  welfare  of 
their  friends,  and  fociety  itfelf,  is  fo  deeply 
concerned.  Where  medicines  are  required 
daily  for  children,  in  the  flate  of  flow  bowels, 
the  profpe£t  in  advanced  age  muft  be  dread- 
ful. 

The  diet  in  the  conftipated  ftate  of  body, 
ought  to  confift  of  a  large  proportion  of  fluid 
aliment ;  in  fevere  cafes  it  ought  to  be  entirely 
of  this  kind,  with  vegetables  eafy  of  folution. 
What  folid  butcher-meat  is  taken,  muft  be 
mafticated  flowly  before  fwallowed,  which  will 
promote  the  flow  of  faliva,  aflift  its  comminii- 
tion  in  the  ftomach,  and  facilitate  its  paflage 
onwards.  I  am  well  aware  that  very  great 
obftacles  will  be  oppofed  to  thefe  precepts : 
fome  will  fpeak  of  their  diflike  to  broths ; 
others  that  foup  difagrees  with  them;  fome 
will  be  afraid  of  borborrigmi,  and  others  of 
their  fliape.  But  for  the  two  laft  objedions, 
exercife,  not  phyfic,  is  a  certain  cure  5  and 
with  refped  to  the  two  former,  if  iiealth  is  of 


333 

fo  little  moment  that  no  pleafure  is  to  be  fa- 
crificed  for  it,  things  muit  remain  as  they  are. 
The  quantity  of  bread  to  be  eaten  muft  be  very 
fmall ;  no  pudding  where  flour  forms  a  part, 
can  be  admitted  ;  cuftards  and  fuch  like  are 
allowed :  all  paftry  is  excluded ;  and  all  the 
legumina,  fuch  as  peas  and  beans,  are  forbidden. 
Thefe  reftridions  are  direded,  becaufe  what- 
ever increafes  the  bulk  of  the  foecal  mafs,  im- 
pofes  a  heavier  load  on  the  periftaltic  motion 
of  the  inteflines ;  and  confequently  a  flower 
adion.  Where  fruit  agrees  it  may  be  indulged 
ad  libitiwi*  All  vinous  and  fpiritous  liquors 
are  to  be  given  up,  in  conditions  of  torpid 
bowels :  they  all  ad:  by  exciting  the  abfor- 
bents  in  the  flomach  and  inteft:ines ;  and  thus 
deprive  the  refufe  of  chylification  of  that  fluid 
that  makes  it  pafs  equally  and  eaflly  along. 

We  ought  to  begin  with  the  milder  laxa- 
tives firfl:,  and  fo  afcend  to  the  more  adive ; 
to  reap  full  advantage  they  mufl:  alfo  be  often 
changed.  The  gentled  are  manna ;  tamannd 
infufion ;  eleduary  of  fenna  ;  fenna ;  rhubarb  ; 
tartarized  kali ;  jalap  ;  aloes  ;  fcammony  ;  ja- 
lap and  one  tenth  of  calomel ;  fcammony  and 
one  tenth  of  calomel,  &c. 

It  is  fometimes  obferved,  that  nervous  and 


S34. 

bilious  people  grow  corpulent  and  full :  this 
is  generally  owing  to  rich  food  and  indolence ; 
and  it  is  a  bad  trait  of  the  temperament.  Such 
perfons  however5never  bear  bleeding  well,  even 
under  fome  apparently  inflammatory  difpofition. 
The  beft  plan  here,  is  to  reduce  the  body  by 
low  living  and  exercife,  if  thefe  can  be  accom- 
plifhed.  But  nervous  perfons  are  the  mofl  in- 
tractable of  all  good  livers,  and  have  lefs  refo- 
lution  to  abridge  their  enjoyments.  They  not 
only  indulge  in  large  quantity,  but  that  is  com- 
monly feafoned  to  the  higheft  degree  of  flimu- 
lus.  For  my  own  part  I  would  fooner  en- 
counter the  prejudices  of  any  fick  man,  rather 
than  thofe  of  a  nervous  glutton.  Every  furfeit 
brings  additional  trouble  to  the  phyfician; 
and  he  will  often  hear  the  appetite  complained 
of,  when  a  lingle  dinner  ought  to  have  made 
three.  Nothing  (lands  more  in  the  way  of  a 
regular  medical  difcipline  than  errors  of  this 
kind,  and  it  is  neceflary  to  obferve  a  iharp 
fighted  jealoufy  over  them. 


.e«0eM9A99c>»««« 


When,  as  has  often  happened,  I  have  been 
confulted  for  cafes j  that  feemed  beyond  the 


S35 

reach  of  medical  affiftance,  I  have  feen  great 
advantage  obtained  by  dire£ling  the  treatment 
folely  againft  the  nervous  predifpofition.  This 
has  frequently  happened  in  thofe  defperate  af- 
fli^lions,  the  cancerous  uterus  and  mammse ; 
and  I  have  fometimes  thought,  had  the  rules 
of  pradice  been  tried  fooner,  even  in  fuch  fi- 
tuations  a  cure  might  have  been  effedted.  A 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  temperament^  in  my 
opinion,  forms  the  only  bafis  for  a  fuccefsful 
treatment  of  all  nervous  and  bilious  difeafes  fo 
called  ;  it  leads  us  to  the  fountain  head ;  un- 
folds the  fource  whence  the  evils  flow,  and  puts 
us  in  pofTelTion  of  the  only  means  for  preven- 
tion and  cure. 


F  I  N  I  s. 


NEWCASTLE  : 
PRINTED  EY  EDW.  WALRER. 


2  U 


BOOKS 

Lately  puUished  by  the  same  Author, 


1.  Medic  IN  A  Nautica  :  an  EfTay  on  the  Difeafes  of 

Seamen,  comprehending  the  Hiftory  of  Health 
m  the  Grand  Fleet,  from  1793  to  1802.  3  Vols. 
23s. 

2.  Observations  on  Scurvy,  with  a  New  Chemical 

Dodrine  of  that  Difeafe.     2d  Edition,  5s. 

S.  Medical  and  Chemical  Essays.    2d  Edition,  4s. 

4.  SuspiRiA  OcEANi :    A  Monody  on  the  Death  of 

Admiral  Earl  Howe,  K.  G.     2s. 

5.  An  Essay,  Medical,  Philosophical,  and  Che- 

mical, on  Drunkenness,  and  its  EiFeds  on  the 
Human  Body ;  being  a  Commentary  on  the 
Author's  Inaugural  Diflertation,  publifhed  at 
Edinburgh,  in  1788.     2d  Edition,  5s. 


*ev^. 


0> 


^^ 


COUNTWAY  LIBRARY   OF  MEDICINE 

RC 
351 

T75 
1807 

RARE   BOOKS  DEPARTMENT 


/Qi. 


^^m 


•if^*^ 


^ '  -fcW'fii^^i  'Yn" 


