BIBL. NAZ. 

/itt. Emanuele III 

II 

SUPPL. 

PALATINA 

A 

217 

NAPOLI 







-ntgitizEd by Googie 




Digitized by Google 




SERMONS 



TO 



YOUNG WOMEN 



VOLUME L 




Digitized by Google 




Printed by G. SIDNEY, 
Northumberiaud-Street, Strand, London. 





SERMONS* 

TO 

YOUNG WOMEN, 

IN TWO VOLUMES. 



By JAMES FORDYCE, 




VOLUME I. 



THE THIRTEENTH EOmON. 



LONDON: 



D. D. 





rSlKTED FOR T. CADBIL ANB W. DAVIES, 8TRAHD j 
LONGMAN, HURST, REES, AND ORMB, PATER- 
NOSTER ROW ; C. LAW, AVE MARIA LANE ; 

B. CROSBY, stationers’ COURT; AND 
J. HARRIS, ST. Paul’s 
CHURCH-YARD. 




Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Googlc 




P R E A C E. 



' i 

THE corruption of the age is a complaint 

with many men who contribute to increase it. 

In like manner, the inattention of the people 

is a complaint with many preachers who are 

themselves to blame. A dull discourse natu- 

. rally produces a listless audience; there being . 

few bearers who will attend to that by which 
* . . . 4 . 

their hearts are not engaged, or their imagi> 

nations entertained. To entertain the ima- 
gination principally, were a poor, and indeed 
a vicious aim in a preacher. To engage the 
heart, with a view to mend it, should be his 
■ grand ambition. Any farther than as it may^ 
■prove some way or other subservient to that, 
entertainment should never be admitted into 
a Sermon. There, to say, the truth, we sel- 
dom meet with too much of the latter. 
Would to God we often met there with 
more of the former ! ^ 

The author of the following Discourses was 
prompted- to publish them, from an unfeigned 
a 3 



Digitized by Googlc 




i 

.i 

VI PREFACE. 

regard for the Female Sex 5 from a fervent 
zeal for the best interests of society, on which 
he believes their dispositions and deportment 
will ever have a mighty influence; and, lastly, 
from a secret desire long felt of trying whe- 
ther that style of preaching, which to him 
appears, upon the whole, adapted to an audi- 
tory above the vulgar rank, might succeed on 
a subject of this nature ; nothing in the kind, 
that he knows of, having been endeavoured 
before, in any language. The attempt was 
as difHcult as it was new, and this very diffi- 
culty was probably the cause of its having 
been hitherto declined. He relied however 
on the candour of the public for every proper,, 
allowance, more especially, respecting some 
singularities in the mode of composition, upon 
which he would not have ventured but for 
the uncommonness of the occasion. Nor has 
Jrcbeen disappointed. But the public has not 
alibwn candour only : it has even exercised in- 
dulgence 5 persons of both sexes, of various 
denominations,* and of different tastes, having 
joined in expressing the most generous appro- 
bation. 

1 Tlweir very favourable opinion, so far be- 



Digilized by Google 




' 



PRfirACE. vii 

yond his 'expectation, affords him peculiar 
pleasure, as it raises his hopes, that what is 
here suggested may, by the blessing of Hea- 
ven, which he humbly implores, contribute to 
the improvement of the most agreeable part of 
the creation, and by consequence both to their 
own felicity, and that of millions with whom 
they are now, or may be hereafter, connected. 
In this case, it will add to his happiness to 
reflect, that he has rendered the plain vpice of 
Truth acceptable amongst those who are daily 
tempted by the siren song of Flattery. 

The preacher is willing to hope, that women 
ef mo^ conditions, and at alt ageS) may meet< 
with some useful counsel, or some salutary 
hint, should curiosity incite them to look ip^^. 
these discourses. Sho&ld any of those young 
persons in genteel life, to whom they are 
chiefly addressed, deem the apprehensions 
they contain too "severe, or too. indiscriminate^ 
he only can say, that as all were dictated by 
friendship no less than by conviction, so he 
wishes it to be. understood, that many were 
occasioned by a particular observation of those 
characters and manners which are esteemed 

4 \ 

fashionable amongst the Young ahd tbe £iay 
♦ ♦ * 



Digitized by Googic 




Vlll 



PREFACE. 



• 

of this metropolis. In the Country’ (a deno- 
mination which, as matters are commonly 
-conducted, he can by no means allow to the 
neighbourhood' of London) the" contagion of 
vice and folly, it may be presumed, is not so 
’^epidemical. In short, he is persuaded, that 
women of worth and sense -are to 'be found 
every where,* but niok frequently fin the calm 
of > retreat, ^and 'amidst the coolness -df-recol- 
lettion. - ^ ' 








t 



Digitized by Google 




CONTENTS 



OF THE 

FIRST VOLUME. 



SERMON I. 

' * •• •. 

On the Importance of the Female Sex, 
especially the Younger Part. 

1 Tim, ii. 8, 9> 10. ' 

/ luill-^that ivomen adorn themselves in modest 
apparel f with shamefacedness and sobriety ; 
ttot nvith hroidered hairy or ^oldy or pearls^ 
or costly array^ but ( which becometh women 
professing godliness ) with Good JVorks. 

, Page 1. 

SERMON II. ■ 

■ On Modesty of Apparel. 

^ 1 Tim, ii. 8, 9. 

I will— -that women adorn themalves in Modest 

Apparti* ' P. 81 



/ 



Digitized by Copgic 



X 



tONtESfTS. 



• SERMON lit. 

' Qn Female Reserve. 

1 Tim, ii. 8, 9. 

/ > 0 ) 111 — that noomtn adorn themselves nuith 

Shamrfacedness, P. 63. 

SERMON IV. - 
‘ 0^1 Female yiitiie.- ~ 

1 Tim, ii. 9. 

/ will — that •women adorn themselves with 



^Sobtiety. 


P. 93. 


V 


SERMON V. 


On Female 


Virtue, Friendship, and 




Conversation. « 


• 


iTim.ii. 8, 9. 


I will — that 


<* 

women adorn themselves with 


Sobriety, 


Colriv. 6. »- 


Let your Speech be always with Gjiace, seasoned 


with Salt, 


T. 122 



Digitized by Google 



CONTENTS. 



XI 



SERMON VI. 

On Female Virtue, with Domestic and 
Elegant Accomplishments. 

1 Tim, ii. 8, 9. 

L will — that women adorn themselves nuith 

Sobriety. ' 

Prov. xxxi. 10. 31. 

Who can a Virtuous Woman ? For her 
price is far above rubies.’- — ■ Give her of 
the fruit of her handsj and let her Works 
praise her in the gates. P. 159 

SERMON VII. 

On Female Virtue, with Intellectual 
Accomplishments. 

1 Tim, ii, 8, 9. . 

I vuill — that •women adorn themselves with 
Sobriety. 

Prov. iv. 5, 6. 8, 9. 

Get Wisdom, get Understanding. — Forsake her “ 
not, and she shall preserve thee: love her 

• ' and she shall keep thee. — Exalt her, and she 
shall promote thee. — She shall give to thine 
head an ornament of grace : a crown of 
glory shall she deliver to thee. ~ P. 205 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by Google 







SERMON I. 

On the Importance of the Female Sex, 
especially the Younger Part. 



1 Tim. ii. 8, 10. 

I will — that ivotnen adorn themselves in modest 
apparely -with shamrfacedness and sobriety ; 
not with broidered hair^ or goldy or. pearls^ 
or costly arrays but {which becometh women 
professing godliness ) with good works, 

“ Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a 
“ bride her attire V' is the Almighty’s ques- 
tion by the mouth of a prophet. Splendid 
attire and rich ornaments are in many places 
of scripture spoken of vrithout censure, and 
“ in some with approbation. “ The king’s 
“ daughter,” says the ipsalmist, “ is all glo- 
“ rious within he adds, “ her clothing is 
“ of wrought gold ; she shall be brought unto 
“ the king in raiment of needle-work.” The 
Virtuous Woman is in the Proverbs applauded 
VoL. L B * 



Digitized by Google 




2 



SERMON I. 



for “ clothing her household with scarlet, and 
herself with silk and purple.” The Creator 
has poured unbounded beauty over his works. 
Witness the flowers of the fleld, celebrated 
by Our Saviour himself ; witness the gems of 
the mine, mentioned in the Revelation of 
St. John, as employed to give additional lus- - 
tre even to the New Jerusalem ; witness. In 
general, all that wonderful colouring, and 
those fair proportions, that please the eye, and 
amuse the imagination, with endless variety. 
Who can resist, wlio indeed ought to resist, 
the agreeable efibct ? Surely the author of 
nature does nothing in vain. He surely 
meant, that by beholding her with delight we 
might be led to copy her with care, and from 
contemplating the inferior ordei.'S of beauty 
rise to the admiration of that which is su- 
preme. 

As he has furnished infinite materials for 
the exercise and entertainment, no less than 
for the provision and accommodation of man j 
so as he inspired that genius, and supplied 
those powers, by which they are moulded into 
form, and heightened into splendor. In say- 
ing this we are warranted by revelation itself. 



Digitized by Google 




SBRltON I. 



5 



vti\tre we are expressly told that, “ the spirit 

of the Lord filled Bezaleel, Aholiab,” and 
others, “ with wisdom, and understanding, 

“ and knowledge, to devise and work all man- 
“ ner of curious and cunning works of the 
“ carver of wood, the cutter of stones, the 
“ jeweller, the engraver, the weaver, the em- 
" broiderer in blue and in purple, in scarlet 
“ and in fine linen.” What multitudes are 
daily employed and comfortably supported by 
these and such like ornamental arts, hardly 
any one is ignorant. 

That works of ingenuity and elegance are 
particularly becoming in your sex, and that 
the study of them ought to enter into female 
education as much as possible, all, I think, 
are agreed. In fine, none but the most con- 
tracted, or the most prejudiced, will deny 
that women may avail themselves of every 
decent attraction, that can lead to a state for 
which they were manifestly formed ; and that, 
should they, by any neglect of their persons, 
render themselves less amiable than God has' 
made them, they would so far disappoint the 
design of their creation. 

These considerations will, I apprehend, be 
B 2 



Digitized by Google 




4 



SERMON I. 



thought more than sufficient to prove, that 
the passage of St. Paul which I have selected 
for my text, is not to be understood strictly 
and absolutely, where it seems to condemn 
female ornament in general. It was common 
with the Hebrews to express comparative pre- 
cepts in a positive manner, as might be shown 
from a number of texts. But you are not dis- 
posed to doubt it. What then is our apostle’s 
meaning ? ‘ I would exhort, and even enjoin 

* Christian women, always to dress with 
. ‘ decency and moderation j never to go beyond 

‘ their circumstances, nor aspire above their 

* station, so as to preclude or hinder works of 

. ‘ mercy 5 not to value themselves on their 

* dress, or despise others more meanly habited -, 
‘ in short, never to spend too much time or 

* thought on the embellishment of the body ; 
‘ but always to prefer the graces of the mind, 
‘ modesty, meekness^ prudence, piety, with 
‘ all virtuous and charitable occupations, all 

, ‘ beautiful and useful accomplishments suited 

‘ to their rank and condition. These are the 
‘ chief ornaments of their sex ; these will ren- 

* der them truly lovely as Women ; and as 
^ Christians, tKese will more peculiarly become 

* 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON 1. 



5 



' them.’ Such, I conceive, Is <he doctrine 
of this divine writer, and of his fellow 
apostle St. Peter on the same subject ; and 
such, in substance, was the doctrine of some 
of the wisest ’^heathens. Give me leave to 
quote one of them : “ It is not gold, nor . 
“ emeralds, nor purple, but modesty, gravity, 

“ and decent deportment, that can truly adorn 
“ a woman.” Ah, my fair friends, how attrac- 
tive and how happy might all of you be, 
were you effectually persuaded to form your- 
selves on such maxims ; and what singular 
pleasure would it afford the preacher, if by the ■ 
blessing of God he might so persuade you. 

Princes, it has been said, and young women, 
seldom hear truth. It is a melancholy con. 
sideration. Flattery you have often heard, ' 
and sometimes, I doubt not, listened to. May 
He hope for your atentlon, whose cliaracter 
forbids him to flatter, and whose principles 
are equally averse to it .J* Nothing, I am con- 
vinced, can be more pernicious to your best 
interests, than the adulation with which you 
are so early and so generally entertained. You 
will not look for it here. But be not afraid, 
on the other hand, of the bitterness of re- 



Digitized by Google 




6 



SERMON I. 

— 

proach, or the bluntness of incivility. If any 
thing sliould appear harsh, be assured it pro- 
ceeds frcni real regard. AVe would irot wil*- 
linijlv 00'end, we 'are natuTallv solicitous to 
please yon ; but we dare not promote your 
pleasure at the expence of your improvement. 
To tenderness and respect you are entitled : 
but .certainly faithful and candid admonition 
is not incomjTitible with the latter ; and of 
the former, if I be not mistaken, it is the 
truest proof. 

The Almighty’ has thrown you upon the 
* protection of our sex, To yours we are in- 
debted» on many accounts. He that abuses 
you'disiioriours his mother. Virtuous women 
are the sweeteners, die charm of humadQ life. 
“ A Virtuous Women — ^her price is far above 
“ rubies.” This is not flattery ; it is just, 
praise ; and that every one of you may deserve 
sueh connmendation, is my earnest prayen. 
Much, I am sure, depends on you. And diis 
shall Ije my first point; to. which I will de”- 
vote the present discour-se, as a proper, founda- 
lioii for what is to follow. That I thus ad- 
dress- you in particular, is princi[ially owing to 
the idea I have formed of your consequence. ' 



Digitized by Google 




SURMON I. 



7 



He that depreciates your sex is as unkind 
tosociety, as he is unjust to you. Yet to do 
so in your absence is, I am sorry to say, too 
common with many men ; with those very 
men that soothe you to your faces, and are 
dupes to your smiles. Is this either manly or 
fair ? Because there are foolish and vicious 
women, does it follow that there are hardly 
any other ? Were such .an opinion to prevail 
generally, what would become of human kind ? 
Were so ungracious a system once established, 

is there not reason to fear, it would soon grow 

* 

to be too well founded ? The world, we know, 
is mightily influenced by reputation. Ap- - 
plausc incites and animates ; contempt has 
the contrary eflect. A concern for character 
is, from their constitution, education, and cir> 
cumstances, particularly strong in women j 
in all but those wlao, having lost • their native 
honours, have with them lost their sense of 
sjiame ; ari infamy, to wliich they would have 
hardly descended, had they not first sunk in 
tlreir own estimation, 

, That admired maxim of heathen antiquity, 

“ Reverence thyself,” seems to me. peculiarly 
proper for a woman. She that does not re« 



Digitized by Google 




/ 



S SERMON I, 

« 

Terence herself must not hope to be respected 
by others. I would therefore remind you of 
your own value. By encouraging you to en- 
tertain a just’ esteem for yourselves, I would 
on one hand guard you against every thing 
degrading, and on the other awaken your 
ambition to act up to the best standard of your 
sex ; to aspire at every amiable, every noble 
quality that is adapted to your state, or that 
can insure the affection and preserve the im- 
portance to which you were born. Now this 
importance is very great, whether we con- 
sider you in your present single condition, or 
as afterwards connected in wedlock. 

Considering you in your present Single 
condition, I would begin where your duty 
in society begins, by putting you in mind 
how deeply your Parents are interested in 
your behaviour. For the sake of the argu- 
ment, I suppose your Parents to be alive. 
Those that have had the misfortune to be 
early deprived of theirs, are commonly left 
to the care of some friend or guardian, who 
is understood to supply their place ; and to 
such my remarks on this head will not be 
altogether inapplicable. But I must like- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON I. 



9 



wise suppose . that your parents deserve the 
name, that they are really concerned for 
your virtue and ^welfare. — Great God ! are 
there then any of thy creatures so unnatural, 
as to neglect the culture and happiness of the 
children thou hast given them ? Yes, and 
worse than to neglect it. “Be astonished, O 
“ ye heavens, at this !” There are beings 
called Parents, and Christian parents, who 
are at pains to introduce their unexperienced 
offspring to folly, to vice, to every practice 
that can plunge them in misery ! — What, 
Mothers too, and mothers “ professing god- 
“ liness !” Is it possible that They can train 
up the fruit of their womb, their own daugh- 
ters, to dishonour and destruction ? Alas ! it 
is done every day, and passes unregarded. 
There is not perhaps in the whole science 
of female vanity, female luxury, or female 
• falsehood, a single article that is not taught, 
and also exemplified, by those Christian 
mothers, to the poor young creatures whom 
every dictate of nature, as well as every 
principle of the gospel, should engage -their 
parents to bring up in modesty, sobriety, 
• B. 3 



Digitized by Google 




It) JEHMGN I. 

and simplicity of manners. Wh.it words can 
paint the guilt of such a conduct ^ 

. Are you who now he%r me blest with 
parents, that even in these times, and in this 
tnetropolis, where all the corruption and 
futility of* these times are concentred, dis- 
cover a zeal for your improvement an(T .salva- 
tion? How thankful should you be for the 
mighty blessing ! Would you show that you 
are thankful ? Do nothing to make them 
unhappy ; do all in your power to give them 
delight. Ah, did you but know how much 

it is ’ in your power to give them ! But 

who can describe the transports of a breast 
truly parental, on beholding a daughter shoot 
up like some fair but modest flower, and 
acquire, day after day, fresh beauty and 
growing sweetness, so as to fill every eye with 
pleasure, and every heart with admiration; 
while, like that same flower, she appears un- 
conscious of her opening charms, and only 
rejoices in the sun that cheers, and the hand 
that shelters her ? In this manner shall you, 
my lovely friends, repay most acceptably a 
part, (you never can repay the whole) of that 
immense debt you owe for all the pains and 






Digitized by Google 




SERMON li 



11 






fears formerly suflFered, and for all the 
unutterable anxieties daily experienced on 
your account. 

Perhaps you are the only daughter, per- 
haps the only child of your mother, and her a 
widow. All her care, all her sensations 
point to you. Of the tenderness of a much- 
loved and much-lamented husband you are. 
the sole remaining pledge. On you she often 
fixes her earnest melung eye j with watchful 
attention she marks the progress of your rising 
virtues ; in every softened feature she fondly 
traces your father’s sense, your father’s pro- 
bity. Something within her . whispers, you 
shall live to be the prop and comfort of her 
age, as you are now hef companion and friend. 
Blessed Lord ! what big emotions swell her 
labouring soul ! But lest, by venting them^ 
in your company, she should affect you too 
much, she silently withdraws to pour< them 
forth in tears of rapture a rapture only 
augmented by the sweetly-sad remembrance ' 
that mingles with it, while at the same time 
it is exalted and consecrated doubly by ardent 
vows to heaven for your preservation and 
prosperity. Is there a youngs woman that 

( 



Digitized by Google 




12 



SERMON I. 



can think of this with indifference ? Is there 
a young woman that can reverse the descrip- 
tion, suppose herself the impious creature that 
could break a widowed mother’s heart, and 
support the thought ? 

When a daughter, It may be a favourite 
daughter, turns out unruly, foolish, wanton } 
when she disobeys her parents, disgraces her 
education, dishonours her sex, disappoints the 
* hopes she had raised ; when she throws her- 
self away on a man unworthy of her, or if 
disposed, yet by his or her situation, unqualified 
to make her happy j what her parents in any 
of these cases must necessarily suffer, we may 
conjecture, they alone can feel. 

The world, I know not how, overlooks in 
our sex a thousand irregularities, which it 
never forgives in yours ; so that the honour 
and peace of a family are, in this view, 
much more dependant on the conduct, of 
daughters than of sons ; and one yoimg lady 
‘going astray sliall subject her relations to such 
discredit and distress, as the united good con- 
duct of all her brothers and sisters, supposing 
theip numerous, shall scarce ever be able to 
repair. But I press not any farther an argu- 



Digilized by Google 




SERMON I. 



15 



merit so exceedingly plain. We can prog- 
nosticate nothing virtuous, nothing happy, 
concerning those wretched creatures of either 
sex, that do not feel for the satisfaction, ease, 
or honoiu: of their parents. 

Another and a principal source of your 
importance is the very great and extensive 
influence which you, in general, have with 
Our sex. There is in female youth an at- 
traction, which every, man of the least sensi- 
bility must perceive. If assisted by beauty, 
it becomes in the first impression irresistible. 
Your power so far we do not affect to conceal. 
That He who made us meant it thus, is mani- 
fest from his having attempered our hearts to 
such emotions. Would to God you knew 
how to improve this power to its noblest ends ! 
We should then rejoice to see it increased: 
then indeed it would be increased of course. 
Youth and beauty, set off with sweetness and 
virtue, capacity and discretion — what have 
not they accomplished? ’ 

Far be it from me, my fair hearers, to 
damp your spirits, or to wish in the least to 
abridge your triumphs : on the contrary, by 
assisting you to direct, we .would contribute 



Digitized by Google 




li SERMON I 

to exalt and extend them. We are always 
sorry when we see them misplaced or abused ; 
and — I was going to add, there is nothing, 
more common. To give them their just di- 
rection, is truly a nice point. Power, from 
whatever source derived, is always in danger 
of turning the head. It has turned many an 
old one. What then shall become of a young 
woman placed on such a precipice ? What 
can balance or preserve her but sobriety and 
caution, a good Providence, and good advice? 

There are few young women who do not 
appear agreeable in the eyes of some ment 
And what might not be done by the greater 
part of yop to secure solid esteem, and to 
promote general reformation among our sex ? 
Are such objects unworthy your pursuit ? or 
will ye say, that those which frequently en- 
gage it are of superior or equal importance ? 

If men discover that you study to captivate 
them by an outside only, or by little frivolous 
arts, there are, it must be confessed, many 
of them who will rejoice at the discovery ; 
and while they themselves seem taken by the 
lure, they will endeavour in reality to make 
you their prey. Some more sentimentaJ spi- 



Digilized by Google 




SERMON I. 



IS 



rits, who might be da 2 zled in the beginning, 
will be soon disabused ; and a few more 
honourable characters will scorn to take ad- 
vantage of your folly. Folly most undoubtedly 
it is, by- a wrong application of your force to 
lose the substance for the shadow. 

Now and then a giddy youth may be caughti 
But what is the shallow admiratfon of an 
hundred such, or the smooth address of art- 
ful destroyers, to the heartfelt respect of men 
of worth and discernment, or the well-earned 
praise of reclaiming were it but one offender ? 
1 verily believe you might reclaim a multi- 
tude. I can hardly conceive that any man 
would be able to withstand the soft persuasion 
of your words, but chiefly of your looks and 
actions, habitually exerted on the side of 
goodness. 

“ Were- Virtue,” said an ancient philoso- 
pher, “ to appear among men in visible shape, 

what vehement desires would she enkin- 
** die!” Virtue exhibited without affectation 
by a lovely young person, of improved under- 
standing and gentle manners, may be said to 
appear with the most alluring aspect, sur- 
rounded’ by the Graces ; and that breast must 



Digitized by Googic 




16 



SERMON I. 



be cold indeed which does not take fire at the 
sight ! 

The influence of the sexes is, no doubt, 
reciprocal ; but I must ever be of opinion, 
that your’s is the greatest. How often have I 
seen a company of men who were disposed to 
be riotous, checked all at once into decency 
by the accidental entrance of an amiable wo- 
man ; while her good sense and obliging de- 
portment charmed them into at least a tempo- 
rary conviction, that there is nothing so beau- 
tiful as female excellence, notliing so delight- 
ful as female conversation in its best form I • 
Were such conviction frequently repeated, 
(and it would be frequently repeated, if such 
excellence and such conversation were more 
general) what might we not expect from it at 
last ? In the mean time, it were easy to point 
out instances of the most evident reformation 
wrought on particular men, by their having 
happily conceived a passion for virtuous wo- 
men: but among the least valuable of your 
sex, when have you known any that were 
amended by the society or example of the 
better part of ours ? 

To form the manners of men various causes 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON I. 



17 



contribute *, but nothing, I apprehend, of 
much as the turn of the women with whom 
they conTerse. Those who are most conver- 
sant with women of virtue and understanding 
V'ill be always found the most amiable cha- 
racters, other circumstances being supposed 
alike. Such society, beyond every thing eke, 
rubs off the corners that give many of our 
sex an ungracious roughness. It produces a 
polish more perfect, and more pleasing, than 
that which is received from a general com- 
merce with the world. This last is often spe- 
cious, but commonly superficial. The other 
is the result of gentler feelings, and a more 
elegant humanity : the heart itself is moulded ; 
habits of undissembled courtesy are formed ; 
a certain flowing urbanity is acquired 5 vio- 
lent passions, rash oaths, coarse jests, indeli-* 
cate language of every kind, are precluded 
and disrelished. Understanding and virtue, 
by being often contemplated in the most en- 
gaging lights, have a sort of assimilating 
power. I do not mean, that the men I speak 
of will become feminine; but their senti- 
ments and deportment will contract a grace. 
Their principles will have nothing ferocious 



Digitized by Google 




18 



SERMON I. 



or forbiddiag ; their affections will be chaste 
and soothing at the same instant. In their 
case, the Gentleman, the Man of Worth, tlie 
Christian, will all melt insensibly and sweetly 
into one another. How agreeable the com- 
position ! In the same way too, honourable 
love is inspired, and cherished. — Honourable 
k)ve ! that great preservative of jTurity, that 
powerful softener of the fiercest spirit, that 
mighty improver of the rudest carriage, that 
aJl-subduing, yet all -exalting principle of the 
human breast, which humbles the proud, and 
bends the stubborn, yet fills with lofty con- 
ceptions, and animates with a fortitude that 
nothing can conquer — what shall I Say more ? 

■ — which converts the savage into a man, and 
lifts the man into an hero ! What a happy 
change should we behold in the minds, the 
morals, and the demeanour of our youth, 
were this charming passion to take place of 
that false and vicious gal'antry, which gains 
ground amongst us every day, to the di^^ace 
of our country, to the discouragement of holy 
wedlock, to the destruction of health,’ for- 
tune, decency, refinement, rectitude of mind, 
and dignity of manners! For my part, I 



#■ 



Digitized by Coogle 




SERMON I. 



19 



despair of seeing the effeminate, trifling, and 
dissalate character of the age reformed, so 
long as this kind of gallantry is the mode* 
Bnt it will be the mode, so long as the pre- 
sent fashionable system of Female Education 
continues. 

Parents now a days almost universaliy, 
down to the lowest tradesman, or mechankj 
who to ape his superiors strains himself be- 
yond his circumstances, send thdir daughters 
to Boaj'dihg-Schools. And what do they 
mostly leam there ? I say. Mostly ; for there 
are exceptions, and such as do the Mistresses 
real honour. Need I nrention that, making 
allowance for those exceptions, they learn 
chiefly to dress, to dance, to speak bad French, 
to prattle much nonsense, to practice I know 
not how many pert conceited airs, and in 
consequence of all to conclude themselves 
Accomplished Women ? P say nothing here 
of the alarming suggestions I have heard as 
to the corruption of their morals,. Thus pre- 
pared they, come forth into the world. Their 
parents, naturally partial, fancy them to be 
' every thing that is fine, and are impatient to 
show them, or, according to the fashionable 
phrase, to let them see Company ; by which. 



Digitized by Google 




20 



SERMON I. 



is chiefly meant exhibiting them in public 
places. Thither at least many of them are 
conducted. They have youth, and perhaps 
beauty. The effect of both is heightened by 
.all possible means, at an expence frequently 
felt for a long time after. They are intoxi- 
cated by so many things concurring to deprive 
them of their little senses. Gazers and flat- 
terers they meet with every where. All is 
romance and distraction, the extravagance of 
vanity, and the rage of conquest. They think 
of nothing that is domestic or rational. Alas ! 
they were never taught it. How to appear 
abroad with the greatest advantage, is the 
main concern. In subserviency to that, as 
well as from the general love of amusement, 
Parties of Pleasure, as they are called, be- 
come the prevailing demand. The same dis- 
positions on the side of the men, sometimes 
stimulated by the worst designs, often seconded 
by good nature, and not seldom pushed on by 
the fear of appearing less generous or less 
gallant, prompt them to keep pace with all 
this folly. They are soon fired in the chace ; 
every thing is gay and glittering ; prudence 
appears too cold a monitor } gravity is deemed 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON I. 



21 



severe ; the Ladies must > be pleased ; mirth 
and diversion are all in all. The phantoms 
pass : the female adventurers must return 

home ; it is needless to say, with what impres- 
sions. The young gentlemen are not always 
under equal restraint ; their blood boils : 
the tavern, the streets, the stews, eke out the 
evening ; riot and madness conclude the scene : 
or if this should be prevented, it is not diffi- 
cult to imagine the dissipation that must natu- 
rally grow out of those idle gallantries often 
repeated. Nor shall we be surprised to find 
the majority of our youth so insignificant, and 
so profligate ; when to these we join the influ- 
ence of bad or giddy women grown up, the 
infection of the most pestilent books, and the 
pattern of veterans in sin, who are ever zeal- 
ous to display the superiority of their talents 
by the number of their disciples, and secretly 
solicitous by the strength of their party to 
make amends for the weakness of their cause. 

That men are sometimes dreadfully suc- 
cessful in corrupting the women, cannot be 
denied. But do women on the other side 
never corrupt the men ? I speak not at pre- 
sent of those abandoned creatures that are 






Dgilized by Google 




2a 



^RMON I. 



t)ie ^Ible ruin of 'so of our ualw^py 

youth } but I must take the liberty to say 
that) among&t a number of your sex who are 
hot sunkso lovr, there is a forwardness, a ieyky 
of lot^, conversation and demeanour, un- 
speakably hurtfjul to yopng men. Their 
peverence for female virtue it in a great mea- 
sure destroys ^ it even tempts them to sus{>ect 
that the whole is a pretence, that the sex are 
all of a piece. The consequences of this, 
witii regard to their beltaviour while they 
I'emain siqgie, the prejudices it must necessarily 
produce against marriage, and the wild work 
it is likely to make if they ever enter into 
that state, I leave you to imagine. 

Hitherto I have spoken only of the interest 
young women have with our sex. Let me 
BOW say something of that which they have 
with their Own. It is not perhaps so exten- 
sive as the other : but for obvious reasons 
it cannot be inconsiderable. Do they always 
use it to good purposes ? Do they never cor- 
rupt one another Do none of them assist 
the common enemy ; tliose wicked and design- 
ing men that are combined against the sex, 
especially against the innocent and unwary i 



Dtgilized by Googic 




SERMON I. 



Do tbe old never initiate the young in those 
low arts of dissimulation and cunning, which a 
wise woman cannot want, and which a worriiy 
woman will not practice ? Do the young — 
But I hasten from so painful a topic, to con^ 
sider the importance of your sex in another 
light. As you have certainly great influence 
at present, so, ' 

In the next ' place, it may be probably in 
your power to communicate much happiness, 
or to occasion much misery hereafter. I think 
now of the chances you have to be connected 
in Wedlock. These it is impossible to calcu- 
late : but there are not, I suppose, many young 
women who, at one time or another, unless 
they themselves be in fault, may not form that 
connection with the usual prospects ; and I say, 
that the men you marry, the children you * 
bring, and the community at large, will be 
all deeply interested in your conduct. 

As to the first, I am not ignorant that there 
are some men so grossly insensible, as to be for 
the most part little or nothing afiectod by the 
temper or behaviour of their wives j . provided 
only they «llo not ruin their afiairs. And in 
truth, if those wives be ill-tempered or ill- 



Digitized by Google 




24 



SERMON I. 



behaved, such want of feeling is so far well for 
their husbands. If otherwise, how much are 
they themselves objects of compassion, thus 
condemned to drag a wretched life with beings, 
on whom all their endeavours to delight 
are lost ? How sensibly must such a situation 
pain a delicate and ingenuous mind ! What 
can reconcile her to it, but the strongest prin- 
ciples of religion 

Some sordid or saturnine spirits of either 
sex there may be, who can support a connexion 
of this kind with a stupid indifference ; plod- 
ding along through a tasteless existence, with- 
out attachment or gratitude, desire or hope. 
Whether the case be very common, I leave 
others to decide. Of both sexes there are cer- 
tainly many who are not made of such dull 

materials. With respect to them But 

surely it cannot be necessary to display the 
felicity, or the wo, which must unavoidably 
arise to them from their partners. Here 
indeed, , as in most instances where the modes 
of life happen to influence, it must be allowed 
the men have the advantage. If they find 
themselves unequally yoked, they, are gene- 
rally furnished with various means of beguil- 



Digilized by Google 




SERMON I. 



is 



ing their wretchedness at a distance from home ; 
whereas, if such be the fate of the poor wo- 
men, they are commonly left to pine away in- 
solitary misery. For them scarce any allow- 
ance is made ; to them little or no pity is 
shown ; while the former make themselves 
judges in their own cause, and the partial 
world is ready to side with them. But yet,- if 
the usages of that leave them often more room 
to elude the ideas of domestic distress, the feel- 
ings of nature will never suffer them fairly to; 
escape it. A woman it is certain, if she be so 
minded, has sly II the power of plaguing her 
partner out of every real enjoyment ; — a 
p: wer however, of which nothing can justify, 
the exercise, and which when exercised is, like 
every other act of tyranny, sure to recoil upon 
the tyrant. 

It is natural for me to wish well to my own 
sex ; and therefore you will not wonder, if I 
be solicitous for your possessing every quality 
that can render you agreeable companions in 
a relation which of all others is the most inti- 
mate, should be the most endearing, and must 
be the happiest or the worst. But to this so- 
licitude my friendship for you is at least an 

VOL. I. c 



Digilized by Google 




29 



SERMON I. 



equal motiTe. Where the lower springs of sell- 
love to have no effect on your conduct, I must 
yet think, that the more refined principles of 
generosity and goodness ought to prompt it. 
Ah ! my young friends, what pleasure can be 
compared to that of conferring felicity ? What 
honour can be enjoyed by your sex, equal to 
that of showing yourselves every way worthy 
of a virtuous tenderness from ours ? What can 
be conceived so properly female as inspiring, 
improving, and continuing such a tenderness, 
in all its charming extent ? Contrasted with 
this, how unamiable, and Uow 'miserable, ’ 
must we pronounce the passion for ungentle 
command, for petulent dominion, so shame- 
fully indulged by some women as soon as they 
find a man in their power ! 

But lastly, let us suppose you Mothers ; a 
character which, in due time, many of you 
will sustain. How does your importance rise ! 
A few years elapsed, and I please myself with 
the prospect of seeing you, my honoured audi- 
tress, surrounded with a family of your own, 
dividing with the partner of your heart the 
anxious, yet delightful labour, of training 
your common offspring to virtue and society. 



Digitized by Google 




^ SCRUOM I. 



27 



to religion and immortality; while, by thus 
dividing it, you leave him more at leisure to 
plan and provide for you all ; a task, which 
he prosecutes with tenfold alacrity, when he 
reflects on the -beloved objects of it, and finds 
all his toils both soothed and rewarded by the 
wisdom and sweetness of your deportment to 
him and to his children. 

1 think 1 behold you, while he U otherwise ' 
necessarily engaged, casting your fond mater- 
nal regards round and round through the prptty 
smiling circle ; not barely to supply their bo- 
dily .wants, but chiefly to watch the gradual 
openings of their minds, and to study the turns 
of their various tempers, that you may “ teach 
the young idea how to shoot,” and lead their 
passions by taking hold of their hearts. I ad- 
mire the happy mixture of aflection and skill 
which you display in assisting Nature, not 
forcing her; in directing the understanding, 
not hurrying it ; in exercising without wearying 
tl^e memory, and in moulding the behaviour -j 
without constraint. I observe you prudently 
overlooking a thousand childish follies. You 
forgive any thing but falsehood or obstinacy ; 
jou commend as often as you can; you reproyc 
C.2 / 



Digitized by Google 




28 



SERMON I. 



only when you must ; and then you do it t* 
'purpose, with moderation and temper, but 
with solemnity and firmness, till you have 
carried your point. You are at pains to ex- 
cite honest emulation : you take care to avoid 
every appearance of partiality ; to convince 
your dear charge, that they are all dear to you, 
that superior merit alone can entitle to superior 
favour, that you will deny to none of them 
what is proper, but that the kindest and most 
submissive will be always preferred. At 
times you even partake in their innocent 
amusements, as if one of them ; that they may 
love you as their friend, while they revere you 
as their parent. In graver hours, you insinu- 
ate knowledge and piety by your conversation 
and example, rather than by formal lectures 
and awful admonitions. And finally, to se- 
cure as far as possible the success of all, you 
dedicate them daily to God, with the most fer- 
vent supplications for his blessing. Thus 

you show yourself a conscientious and a judi- • 
dicious mother at the same moment j and in 
that light I view you with veneration. I ho- 
nour you as sustaining a truly glorious charac- 
, ter on the great theatre of humanity. Of the 
part you have acted I look forward to the con-^ 



Digitized by Google 




. SERMON I. 



29 



sequences, direct and collateral, future and 
remote. Those lovely plants which you have 
reared I see spreading, and still spreading, 
from house to house, from family to family, 
with a rich increase of fruit. I see you dif- 
fusing virtue and happiness through the hu- 
man race ; I see generations yet unborn rising 
up to call you Blessed ! I worship that provi- 
dence which has destined you for such useful- 
ness, for such felicity. I pity the man that i< ' 
not charmed with the image of so much excel- 
lence ; an image which, in one degree or an- ^ ^ 
other, .has been realized by many women of • 
worth and understanding in every age ; I wilT 
add, an image which, when realized, cannot 
fail of being contemplated with peculiar de- 
light by all the benevolent spirits_^ of heaven, 
with the Father and Saviour of the world at 
their head ! and are there, among the sons of 
men, any that will presume to depreciate such 
women, to speak of them with an air of supe-> 
riority, or to suggest that your sex are not ca- 
pable of filling the important spheres of life ? 

To quote the words of an old writer; “All 
“ mankind is the pupil and disciple of female 
“ institution ; the daughters till they write 
“ women, and the sons till the first seven years 



Digitized 




m 



so SERMON I. ‘ 

« 

" be past ; the time when the mind is most 
ductile, and prepared to receive impression', 
being wholly in the care and conduct of the 
** mother.” Alas ! my fair country-womeni 
why are not more of you struck with such con- 
siderations ? Why, ye daughters of Britain, 
are so many of you insensible to those brightest- 
glories of your sex ? Where is your love for 
your native country, which, by thus excelling, 
you. might so nobly serve ? where yotu* emu- 
lation of, those Heroic Women,, that have in 
ancient days graced this happy land ? How 
long will you be ambitious of flaunting in 
French attire, of fluttering about with the , 
levity of that fantastic people ? When will 
you be satisfied with the simplicity of elegance^ 
and the gracefulness of modesty, so becoming 
in a nation like this, supported by trade, po- 
lished by taste, and enlightened by true reli- 
gion ? Say, when will you relinquish delusive 
pursuits; and dangerous pleasures, the gaze 
of fools, and the flattet*y of libertines, for the 
peaceful and solid study of whatever can — 
adorn your nature, do honour to your country, 
reflect credit on your profession of Christianity, 
give joy to all your connections, and confer 
dignity on womankind ? 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. 



On Modesty of Apparel. 



1 Tim. ii. 8, 9. 

I •• 

/ w;V/ — /iat tvoinen adorn tbtmselves in Modtst 

' apparel. ’ - * 

Let me recall the attention of my female * 

inends to a subject that concerns them highly. 

' I hope that hitherto I hare said nothing un- 
kind. 1 would not rob your sex of a single 
advantage they possess from nature, provi- * 
dence, or legitimate custom. 1 would not 
rob you of the smallest wnament that Judg- ' 
ment has put on, that Prudence allows, or 
that Decwicy warrants. On the contrary, I 
would willingly add to your allurements : I 
want to see you yet more engaging, to see you 
still more completely adorned. Superfluous, 
unbecoming, and unavailing decorations, it ■* 
is true, I would persuade you to renounce j 
hut it should be only in order to make room 






Digitized by Google 




SERMON If. 



3 ‘2 

for such as will improve beauty where found, 
or supply its place where wanting. 

Your consequence in the creation I fear 
not to acknowledge : I feel it all. You have 
already heard me assert it. I will assert it 
ever, by pleading your cause against igno- 
rance, prejudice, and malice. Only take 
care, my dear clients, not to h urt it -your- 
ieivos. Rcincinber how tender a thing a wo- 
man's reputation is, ^how hard to preserve, 
and when lost how impossible to recover ; how 
frail many, and how dangerous most, of the 
gifts you have received ; what misery and 
wliat shame liave been often occasioned by 
abusing them ! I tremble for your situation. 
Suffer me again to put you on your guard, 
^ly text, you have seen, has nothing in it 
really severe : St. Paul is, in fact, a better 
friend to women than has been commonly 
supposed : he seems to have understood per- 
fectly what became them, and to have con- 
sulted their interests more truly than the most 
passionate of their admirers While these, 
by corrupting or misleading you, whether 
with or without design, would lessen your in- 
fluence, ^id obstruct your felicity ; he would 



Digitized by Cooglc 




SERMON II. 



- as 

eflfectually contribute to both, by inculcating 
every thing that can make you at once more 
amiable and more happy. 

What I am now to offer will turn on 
the ornament he first mentions. “ I will — 

“ that women adorn themselves in Modest 
“ Apparel” — in Modest Apparel, as opposed 
- to that which is Indecent, and to that which 
is Vain : distinctions, whereof the theory, I 
must confess, it is in many cases not easy, 
and in some perhaps not practicable, to settle 
with precision ; such a powerful influence in 
those matters have custom and the opinion of 
the world. But in this instance, as in others 
where the passions are concerned, the strictest 
casuist will, I presume, be generally the safest. 
The zeal of the ancient Fathers on such sub- 
jects carried some of them fiir ; farther, I 
doubt, than the relaxation of modern man- 
ners would well bear. Were a young woman 
now a days, from a peculiar sense of the sa- 
predness and refinement of female virtue, to 
appear with any very singular severity in her 
dress, she would hardly, I fear, escape the 
charge of affectation; a charge, which every 
prudent woman will avoid as much as possible, ~ 
c 3 






Digitized by Google 




34 



SERMON n. 



But let thfe licence of the age be what it will, 
I must needs think that, according to every 
rule of duty and decorum, there ought ever 
t6 be a manifest difference between the attire 
of a virtuous Woman, and that of one who 
has renoynced ^ every title to the honourable 
name. It were indelicate, it is unnecessary, 
to explain this" difference. In some respects, 
it is sufficiently discerned by the eye of the 
public) though I am sorry to say, not suf- 
ficiently attended to by the generality of wo- 
men themselves. If, in other respects, it be 
not seen, or do not strike ; the cause, I ap- 
prehend, must be that declension from the 
strictness of morals, which was hinted at 
a moment before j • a declension that would 
have shocked Pagans themselves, in the purest 
state of ancient manners, when prostitutes 
were compelled to wear a particular garb, by 
which they were distinguished from women of 
virtue. 

But to enter more particularly into this 
first point of Modest Apparel, as opposed to 
that which a Christian woman should hold 
Indecent. 

Image to yourselves a circle composed only 




S£RMON II. 



ZB 

of people who are not ashamed of the gos- 
pel of Christ, nor in any circumstance afraid 
to act on that great maxim of our apostle, 

“ Be not conformed to this world ; but be 
** ye transformed by the renewing of your 
** minds.” At the same time, let them have • 
all the candour and charity, which the most 
charitable religion that was ever known can 
inspire. And now, suppose that a young lady 
dressed up to the height of the present fashion, 
but a stranger to most of them, drops into 
their company. ‘In what light, do ye con- 
ceive, the manner of her dress would proba- 
bly appear ? The laws of Christian candour 
would naturally prevent them from seeing her 
character in a bad light on that account, and 
would unquestionably incline them to hope • 
the best. But can ye believe that they would 
approve, or justify, the extreme gaiety and 
looseness of her attire ? Suppose however, 
that her conversation discovered a good under- 
standing, and that her behaviour had not the 
least tincture of that levity with which she 
seemed decked out ; that, on the contrary, 
every part of both was wholly unlike it (a , 
conjunction by no means impossible \) could 



Digitized by Google 




■SERMON II. 



S5 

they forbear, in that case, to lament the ty- 
ranny of the mode, or to regret that a daugh- 
ter of Wisdom should, notwithstanding her 
superior descent and noble pretensions, be 
decorated like the daughters of Folly ? But 
whose judgment, I beseech you, would a 
young woman, ambitious of regulating her 
appearance, as well as her dispositions and 
deportment, on the purest standard, prefer ; 
that of such persons as I have just described; 
or that of those w'ho either never regarded the 
precepts and spirit of Christianity at all, or 
who, professing some faint respect for them, 
yet scruple not to sink them in the spirit and 
maxims of the world ? 

Let us put another case, and suppose a 
^ young lady educated by a mother, who to the 
best sense and truest breeding joined the ut- 
most reverence for religion, and the tenderest 
concern for the soul of her child ; qualities 
which, for the honour of your sex, I hope 
you will not pronounce incompatible.- Let 
this accomplished parent bestow upon her 
daughter a culture worthy of herself; instruct- 
ing her in every thing that can 'become the 
Female and the Christian character; among 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. ST 

the rest, recommending a lovely Modesty and 
graceful simplicity of Apparel, and enforcing 
all by an example equally unexceptionable 
and pleasing. Suppose the daughter to im- 
prove these uncommon advantages (for un- 
common, I fear, they are) with the strictest 
care and attention. In what light do ye 
conceive the very free mode of dress, so gene- 
rally affected by the sex at present, would 
appear to her ? I am far from thinking she 
would assume the airs of sanctimonious pru- 
dery, or indulge the style of supercilious cen- 
sure; things totally difl'erent from the form 
of education we have figured Jier to receive. 
But would she admire that mode in others ? 
Would she copy it herself? or would she wish 
her companions to copy it ? Would she choose 
to be intimate with those young ladies that 
seize every opportunity of exhibiting their 
charms to the public, and vie with one ano- 
ther who shall most liberally display what her 
honoured mother taught her more decently to 
veil ? 

.Is the mode then in question to be con- 
sidered as inconsistent with the character of a 
Virtuous Woman? By no means. May not 



Digitized by Coogle 




SERMON IR. 



jsr 

disposition the most unchaste often hide under 
the mask of an attire the most modest ? Who 
can doijht it ? But what follows ? That such 
attire is not the properest coverings of virtue^ 
or what, if left to pursue undisturbed the dic- 
tates of delicacy an i prudence, she would not 
readily fly to in a state of civilized society 
Will any one say, that they who decline 
it, best consult either their safety, or their 
reputation among the wise ; that they, who 
run into all the latitudes allowed by the wan- 
tonness of fashion, are sufficiently watchful 
against temptation themselves, or sufficiently 
eareful not to throw it in the way of others ; 
that beauty may be as secure when most ex- 
posed, as when least so ; or finally, that in- 
stead of “ abstaining from all appearance of 
evil,” according to the doctrine of a reli- 
gion which requires the severest vigilance, 
every appearance' of evil may be admitted, in 
compliance with the practice of a world, whera 
Tice steals upon unwary mortals by persuading 
them to part with their out-guards ? 

Thus far have we argued for Modesty' of 
Apparel, in' opposition to its contrary, upon, 
the general principles of propriety and repttU' 



Digitized by Google 




SfiRDlON n. 






tation, of ittorality and religion. She to whom 
these principles are familiar, and in whom 
the feelings that arise oat of them are not 
blunted by too frequent Intercourse with the 
fashionable and the gay, will on this article 
carry about with her a kind of living stan* 
dard, which she will be enabled to apply to 
particular occasions, with a degree of discre«- 
tion that no rules of ours can teach ; and such 
a one will perceive in our apostle’s precept, 
a justness and solidity, of which we do not 
expect that any speculation of ours should 
thoroughly convince you, without the con- 
currence of a virtuous sensibility on your 
part. 

To what has been said in favour of Modest 
Apparel under this head, I must not forget to 
add, that it is a powerful attractive to Ho- 
nourable love. The male heart is a study, in 
which your sex are supposed to be a good deal 
conversant. Yet in this study, you must give 
me leave to say, many of them seem to me 
but indifferent proficients. To gain mens’ af» 
fections, women in general are naturally de- 
sirous. They need not deny, they cannot 
conceal it. The sexes were .-made for each 



Digitized by Google 




40 



SERMON II. ^ , 



Other. We wish for a place In jour hearts : 

9 

why should you not wish for one in our’s ? 
But how much are you deceived, my fair 
friends, if you dream of taking that fort by 
storm ! When you show a sweet solicitude to 
please by every decent, gentle, unaffected at- 
. tractipn, we are soothed, we are subdued, we 
.yield ourselves your willing captives. But if 
at any time by a forwar 1 appearance you be- 
tray a confidence in your charms, and by 
throwing them out upon us all at once, you 
^eem resolved, as it were, to force our admi- 
ration.; that moment we are on our guard, 
.;ind your assaults arc vain, provided at least 
' we have any spirit or sentintent. In reality, 
they who have very little of either, I might 
Jrave said they who have none, even the sil- 
liest, even the loosest men, shall in a sober 
mood be taken with the bashful air, and re- 
served dress, of an amiable young woman, 
infinitely more than they ever were with all 
the open blaze of laboured beauty, and arro- 
.gant claims of undisguised allurement ; the 
human heart, in its better sensations, being 
still formed to the love of virtue. 

Let me add, that the human imagination 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. 



41 



hates to be confined. We are never highly 
delighted, where something is not left us to 
fancy. This last observation holds true 
throughout all nature, and all art. But 
when I speak of these, I must subjoin, that 
■Art being agreeable no further than as it 
is conformed to Nature, the one will not be 
wanted in the case before us, if the other 
be allowed its full influence. What I mean 
is this ; that supposing a young lady to be 
deeply possessed with a regard for “ whatso- 
“ ever things are pure, venerable, and of 
“ good report,” it will lead- to decorum spon- 
taneously, and flow with unstudied propriety 
through every part of her attire and demean- 
our. Let it be likewise added, that simpli- 
city, the inseparable companion both of genu- 
ine grace, and of real modesty, if it do not 
always strike at first (of wrhich it seldom fails) 
is sure however, when it does strike, to pro- 
duce the deepest and most permanent im- 
pressions : which brings me by an easy transi- 
tion to 

The second part of the present considera- 
tion, that of Modest Apps^rel, as opposed to 
what may be styled Vain. I can never think 



Digitized by Google 




*9 



SERMON II. 



of this, without recollecting in general, (for 
who can remember the particulars of) th« 
catalogue given by the prophet Isaiah of the 
■various implements and instruments of dress 
used by the daughters of Zion in bis time. 
Tsarah is by all acknowledged the 'Prince 
of the Prophets, in evangelical view ; yet 
he did not deem it beneath the dignity of his 
commission, to descend into the most minute 
detail on such a subject, a circumstance which, 
it is hoped, may soften the severity of cen* 
sure against the preacher of this hour, if the 
spirit of criticism, or the spirit of scrupu- 
losity, should be disposed to condemn his well- 
meant endeavour. The passage I now refer to 
is in the third chapter of Isaiah, towards the 
end; where the prophet having, in the name 
of' God, complained of the pride and wan- 
tonness of those eastern females, and threat- 
ened them with disease and infamy on that 
account, goes on to mention the bravery of 
** their tinkling ornaments about their feet, 
and their cauls, and their round tires like 
the moon the chains, and the bracelets, 
** and the mnfilerr'i the bonnets, and the or- 

*V 

*<naments of the legs; and the head-band$^ 



fr 



Digitized by Google 




settMOM tt. 



** and the tablets^ and the ear-rings • the ring*' 

** and nose-jewels ; the changeable suits of' 

** apparel, and the mantles, and the wim- 
“ pies, and the crisping pins ; the glasses^ 

“ and the fine Imen, and the hoods, and the 
“ veils.” ’ On the first reading of this cata- 
logue, it must be owned, one can scarce for-^ 
bear to smile.' But to those unhappy women . 
who gave occasion for it, nothing ala&l could 
be more serious, if you attend to the denun- 
ciations which both precede and follow it. I 
leave you to p«"use them at your leisures 
They are in the style of- the country and age 
in which they were uttered. I am sure they 
convey a loud lesson to this. Whether tho^ 
daughters of our Zion, in the present very 
polite generation, and especially in this most 
polite city, do or do not outstrip those Jewish 
ladies of* old, we cannot take upon iis to 
determine. But were we inclined- to indulge 
a vein of ridicule on female follyi here me- 
thinks we might have ample scope. We are 
not inclined to indulge it. We reflect on 
these things with real concern ; and with the 
utmost seriousness conjure our country womei\ 
to reform whatever is indecent, and. to rO'* 






Digitized by Google 




44 . 



SERMON n. 



trench whatever is exorbitant, in their at- 
tire, 

. That there are stations and circumstances, in 
which splendor of dress is perfectly allowable, 
nay extremely proper, none, I think, but the 
narrowest minds, will deny. For my own 
part, I freely acknowledge that I love to see a 
woman genteely habited, if her situation ad- 
mit of it. In truth, splendor without genti- 
lity, as well in this as in every other article 
where ornament is concerned, will ever seem 
poor and insipid to all but untaught and vulgar 
spirits j whereas, on the other side, it is cer- 
tain, that the latter may very well subsist with 
out the former ; nor is its effect ever felt more 
strongly, or more happily, than when it re- 
ceives no assistjjnce from the other, but results 
solely from our perceptions of elegant simpli- 
city. I say Elegant Simplicity ; an object, 
which appears to me deserving of more atten- 
tion than is commonly paid it by your sex. 

In aff.iirs of this kind, it is but just to al- 
low to women a degree of curiosity and care, 
which the laws of good sense, sound philoso- 
phy, and masculine virtue, refuse to men : a 
distinction so true, so universal, and so palpa- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. . 



■•.4S 



ble, that those of the last, who betray a parti- 
cular solicitude in adorning their persons be- 
yond cleanliness and a certain graceful ease, 
seldom fail to make themselves little, in the 
■ eyes of every man who is not himself' effemi- 
nate, and of every woman too who is not a 
slave to fashion. How contemptible many of 
our young men must necessarily appear to such, 
it is not easy to express, but of seeing them 
become truly Men in this instance, any more 
than in others that might be named, I despair ; 
while so many of our young women give so 
visible a preference to embroidery, finer}', and 
foppish manners, above a plain coat, a culti- 
vated understanding, and a manly deportment. 
It will be always so, till they acquire a taste 
for plainness, sobriety, and wisdom, in what 
relates to themselves. But that must begin by 
' restraining, in every possible way, the foolish 
and pernicious passion I am speaking of ; for 
a foolish and pernicious passion I scruple not 
to pronounce it, t 

Is there any probability, that those who are 
entirely under its power will take delight in 
domestic, intellectual, or spiritual improve- 
' ments ? Is not a constant pursuit of> trivial or- 



Digitized by Google 







SSRMOM II. 



- nament an indubitable proof of a trivialmbid ? 
Will she that is always looking into her -glassj 
be much disposed to look into her character ? 
Is the spending of whole hours every morniog 
at the toilet, a likely method of marking; the 
rest of the day down for wisdom ? Is vanity 
favourable to devotion, or self-conceit the pa- 
rent of self-correction ? Will that young wo- 

> man who hopes to captivate by dress, or by 

- appearance alone, be very anxious about any 
better recommendation ? if to sparkle here fer 
a few years be the supreme ambition, Here- 
after will be hardly thought of. The flattery 
of every fool will be preferred to the approba- 
tion of angels } and a connexion with some 
wretched creature (wretched indeed must he 
be who is caught by mere show ! ) will be ar- 
dently sought, while the friendship of God is 
neglected. What shall I say more ? For ;a 

I mortal and immortal being, who has many an 
carror to correct, many a passion to mortify, 
many a virtue to practise, and who> if she live, 
j may probably have important service to ren- 
der society— for such a being to lavish the prin- 
• ■cipal portion of her time and study on the de- 
^cadon of a body that wUl soon, that loay 



Digitized by Google 




SBRMW II» 



4T 



suddenly, become the 'prey of creeping thing# 
—Gracious God, what folly, what madness ! 

Are there no allowances theni to be made ? 
Allowances for what ? For the vanity of a 
young mind. Most certainly, if by this plea 
you mean to extenuate the guilt of such a con- 
duct. But would you offer to excuse it P Would 
you pretend to justify a reasonable creature in 
acting, habitually, and wilfully, a most un- 
reasonable part } in sacrificing her improve- 
ment, her salvation, her prospects of usefijl- 
ness and dignity in life, the best interests of 
this world, as well as the everlasting concern- 
ments of the next, to the idol Dress ? For so I 
state it. I suppose, aiul would to God it were not 
too common a case ! that this miserable idol is 
suffered to swallow up the consideration of all 
that is solid, rational, and praise- worthy ; to 
consume those precious hours that were allotted 
for the most valuable purposes } amd, in place 
of securing the great ends of existence both 
present and future, to pervert the capacities of 
nature, the acquirements of education, and the 
bounties of Providence — to pervert them to the 
low design of being admired for embellish^ 
meats that Imply no mecit in the weareri aiid 



Digitized by Google 




48 - 



SBRMON II. 




can confer no honour In the eye of any but the-- 
worthless and the vain. Can such a conduct, 

I say, be thought innocent, or in any respect 
consistent with the rules of Christianity, or of 
conscience? 

That the idol I speak of renders its votaries 
unhappy even in this world, is a fact daily ex- 
perienced. But who can describe the profu-. 
sion of expence, with the painful and pitiful 
shifts that are often necessary to support it ; 
the encroachments on health, the hurry of spi- 
rits, the travail of fancy ; the degradation of ' 
being frequently, for whole hours, under the 
confident hands of the meanest of mankind j 
together with all the anxieties of heart, the 
agonies of rivalship, the deep-felt disgrace on 
being disappointed of conquest, or of fame ; 
the distraction and despair on being outshone 
by — a Finer Gown ; in a word, all the ridi- 
culous and all the deserved distress, to which 
they are perpetually exposed ? ' 

* I have just mentioned encroachments on 
health. These indeed, as well as the rest, are 
little considered by a young lady keen in the 
pursuit of show and admiration. But if she 
be not aj^rehensive of their consequences, in^. 



Cic;!iied by Gt)OgIc 




SERMON II. 



relation to life, and comfort, and ease, I won- 
der she is not immediately alarmed at their ef- 
fects, with regard to that very appearance which 
is her favourite object. I wonder she does not 
perceive at once, how much her bloom and 
sprightliness, the lustre of her eyes, and the 
freshness of her form, are impaired by such 
endless, such enormous fatigue, agitation, and 
irregularity. I am astonished she does not re- 
flect, that she is taking the most effectual me- 
thods to shorten that period of youtli, on which 
her triumphs depend. Mistaken creature 1 
thou art cruelly hastening on the time, when 
thou shalt be frightened to look at thyself j 
when not only thy mind, but thy face, shall be 
“ sickled o’er with the pale cast of thought 
when languor, disease, and depression, shall 
undermine and destroy every remaining allure- 
ment, and leave thee to lament too late the 
jading course thou hast run. You forget also 
that dressing up beauty continually, wears it 
out; that, like strength, or study, or busi- 
ness, it requires the frequent intermission of its 
toils ; but that, more than any of them, it is 
enfeebled by constant exertion ; and that the 
arts commonly made use of to heighten and re- 
VoL. I. E 



i *. 



Digitized by Google 




50 



SERMON n. 



pair it, only accelerate and increase its decay, 
while the complexion, the skin, and the hair, 
are all unnaturally disguised and tortm*ed. 

Did not this shameful passion destroy, or 
deaden in^a great measure, the worthier sen- 
sibilities of good nature, I should also men- 
tion here the more serious and important dis- 
tresses, in which they involve others. But 
the stretches of credit to parents, the incon- 
veniencies to many families, the ruin to not 
a few, the losses to tradesmen, wha are often 
not paid, the hardships to a vast variety of peo- 
ple, whose sufferings are little thought of 
amidst the glare of ostentation and the triumph 
of fancy, it were impossible fully to paint. 
Who does not know, that the parade of one 
gaudy evening shall sometimes subject a score 
of honest citizens to difficulties for a whole 
month ? Is this Christian ? Is this humane ? 
But where the Fury of dress tyrannizes, how- 
can the gentle pleadmgs of Charity hope to be 
heard ? And as to Charity's eldest daughter. 
Beneficence, what chance has she, in general, 
to contend with that mighty sorceress, the 
Mode ? Those streams whieh heaven has com- 
mitted to the direction of the former, for the 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON Jl^ 



Si 



refreshment of industry, and the comfort of 
affliction ; how often are they diverted with 
sacrilegious violence to the feeding of pride ! 

But the present age, it will be said, is dis- 
tinguished by the most diffiisive, the most il- 
lustrious works of humanity, both private and 
public. We own it, and rejoice in' the effect. 
Far from denying the people of this country 
any of their just honours, we are almost 
tempted to speak of them with exultation. But 
— I wish the works in question may not be fre- 
quently performed by way of atonement for 
cert^n fashionable vices, which it is too easy 
to reconcile with them. — “ Charity hopeth ^ 
things.” — I know it, and do verily believe 
that even now, addicted as the world is t« 
ostentation, there are many, very many cha- 
racters, who noWy deny themselves for the 
sake of others ; or rather, who find the highest 
indulgence in consecrating to objects of bene- 
volence and piety a large share of their for- 
tunes, without seeking by such means to pur- 
chase a dispensation for criminal pursuits. But 
forgive me, if 1 say, with regard to numb^s, 
that the flagrant affectation of shining 'in pub- 
lic, and the dreadful passions thence arising ill 

E 2 



Digitized by Google 




52 



SERMON II. 



private life, are not easily reconciled with, real 
principles of religious munificence. These, I 
know, are unpopular ideas. I am sorry for 
it : but there being so is no reason why we 
should suppress them ; it is the very reverse. 

To the arguments already urged several 
may be added. It may deserve your consi- 
deration. 

In the first place, that to cultivate cleanli- 
ness and finery at the same time, is rather per- 
haps a difficult attainment. 'Your sex is much 
belied, if it be a very common one. This, I 
think, is certain, that to attend with exact- 
ness to one object at once, is ordinarily suf- 
cient employment for the mind. But can 
any degree of finery compensate the want of 
cleanliness ? A dirty woman — I turn from 
the shocking idea, to mention. 

In the next place, that engaging thing 
hinted, at before, Simplicity of Dress. In all 
the sciences, in every valuable profession, in 
the common intercourses of life, and let me 
add, even in the sublimest subjects. Simpli- 
city is that which above every thing else 
touches and delights. Without it, indeed, 
all else is feeble and unaffecting. Where 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. 



ss 



simplicity is wanting, men may be dazzled for 
a moment. Mere splendor will strike them 
at first; but on reflection they will soon dis- 
cover, that splendor of itself, like every other 
idol, is nothing. On the other hand, where 
Simplicity, the sister of Truth, appears, the 
attraction is eternal. Hence the never-failing 
entertainment and instruction derived from the 
works of antiquity in all the fine arts ; of 
which, I suppose for that reason chiefly, they 
remain to this day, and will ever- remain, the 
sovereign standards. Those amongst the mo- 
derns, who have in this respect copied tliem 
most happily, have been always most admired. 
To instance in the art of painting, with a 
more immediate reference to our subject ; what 
honour has been acquired by such of its pro- 
fessors as have approached nearest to the noble 
simplicity of ancient workmanship? Its busi- 
ness, we know, is most particularly with Beau- 
ty, in all her finest forms. That, I presume, 
was never studied more successfully by any,' 
than by the great Raphael. But who, that 
'has aq eye for such objects, can avoid being 
struck with the chaste, sober, and una.Tected 
graces of his females ? And as to his manner 



Digitized by Google 




• 54 



SERMON Ili 



of clothing them, what remarkable plainness, 
what delightful modesty, even where the 
colours and stulis are intended to be richest t 
How dificrent from those painters of the gothic 
style, who, not understanding the distinction 
between ornament, and finery, \vhich is its - 
excess ; between beauty and show, which is 
the affectation of it ; load their women with 
jewels, trappings, and other embellishments, 
magnificent indeed, but tawdry ! 

Nor is the grand principle of Simplicity 
confined to the irratative arts ; it runs through 
all. Hence, in a great measure, the pecu- 
liar satisfaction derived from the company of 
a man \vell bred and worthy at the same time* 
He looks, he speaks, he moves, with a mo- 
dest ease i there is nothing artificial or studied 
in his conversation and deportment. Hence 
to the superior pleasure from the prospect of 
a garden laid out with taste, in which the views 

i 

are natural, ample, and unforced, above that 
of seeing one, cut into a thousand little par- 
terres, and encumbered with a crowd of la- 
boured conceits. Let me subjoin, henqe the * 
inexpressible power and majesty of Holy Writ 

itself, even abstracted from its divine original, 

« 



Digitized by Googic 




SERMON II. 55 

And, to come to the case directly before us, 
hence the resistless charm which attends a 
Virtuous woman attired with plainness and 
judgment ; two things, which, making allow- 
ance for the mutability and caprice of fashion 
in circumstances of less moment, will always 
give the most genuine and lasting content. 

The neat appearance of many females be- 
longing to a sect well known, has been fre- 
quently remarked, and greatly admired. It 
would be much more agreeable, could it be 
disjoined from the stiflfness that acconipanies 
it ; a defect utterly inconsistent with the rules 
of taste. But those people are taught to de- 
spise every thing of this kind, and to under- 
stand literally such passages of scripture as seem 
to prohibit sumptuous apparef. In short, they 
plead religious principle for the form of their 
attire. We should believe them, but for the 
richness of the materials, and the fineness of 
the texture. Many of that sect are very in- 
telligent : can they persuade themselves, that 
through all their afiectation of plainness the 
world does not perceive the utmost pride of 
expence ? 

On this article your judgment will be seen 



/ 



Digitized by Googic 




56 



SERMON II. 



in joining frugality and simplicity together; 
•in being never fond of finery; in carefully 
distinguishing between what is glaring, and 
what is genteel ; in preserving elegance with 
the plainest habit ; in wearing costly array but 
seldom, and always with ease ; a point, that 
may be attained by her who has learnt not to 
think more highly of herself for the richest 
raiment she can put on. 

Were a system of this kind to prevail, 
I cannot help thinking, that the effects would 
be beneficial and happy. What sums would 

A 

be saved, where they ought to be saved, for 
more valuable ends! What sums would be 
kept at home, that now go abroad to en- 
rich our most dangerous rivals ! French gew- 
gaws would give place to British manufac- 
tures. The ladies of this island, inferior to 
■one in beauty, would be the apes of none in 
dress. They would practise that species of 
patriotism, wlilch is the most proper for their 
se.x ; they would serve their country in their 
own way. . How many evils to the com- 
munity, to private families and to individu- 
als, would be prevented ! If In some of the 
most expensive parts of female decoration 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON n. 



sr 



fewer hanJs were employed, a much greater 
number on the other side would find exercise 
in cultivating an elegant propriety, and a 
beautiful diversity, through all the rest. The 
public taste would be improved in a thousand 
articles. And is there not reason to hope, 
that the appearance, the manners, and the 
minds of the Fair, would gain by the 
change ? 

They would be less showy indeed ; but 
they would be more engaging. 'Our gay as- 
semblies, for gay assemblies there will always 
be, would glitter less in the gaze of foolish 
wonder; but they would shine more in the 
eye of just discernment. And what honour 
would it reflect on your understandings, when 
in company, to see you superior to your dress, 
entirely forgetting that, and every other ad- 
vantage you may possess, in 'an obliging at- 
tention to all present, and. lending lustre to 
each ornament, instead of borrowing it merely 
from thence 1 Or will any of vou say, tliat 
a, woman on the contrary is likely to be more 
esteemed, for appearing attentive to herself 
alone, or trying to catch by so poor a bait, as 
a. little gay clothing? She who does either,. 



Digitized by Google 




II. 



59 ’ 

piques our pride, and offends our judgment, 
at the same instant. We are hurt by her bad 
breedii^, in the one case *, and in the other 
we are provoked to think she should pay us 
suck a sorry compliment, ai tcK&ncy we can be 
entangled in a cobweb. 

When shall women, i& general, under- 
stand thoroughly the effect of a comely habit> 
that, independent of pomp and despising e^ 
travagance, is worn as the sober, yet transpa- 
rent veil of a more comely mind ? Be assu- 
red, my yoimg friends, it is thus that you. 
will captivate most, and pkase longest, ffp 
pursuing this plan, you will preserve an equa- 
lity in that ^eat indispensable article of neat- 
ness. You win be clean, and you will b» 
easy; nor will you be in danger of appearing 
butterflies one day, and slatterns the next. 
You will be alwaya ready* to receive yout 
friends, without seeming to be caught, or 
being at all disconcerted on. account of your 
dress. How sel<k>m is that the case amongst 
the fiutterers of the age 1 ' I wish we could 
say, amongst them cmly. For young ladies- 
•f more sobriety to be found so often slovenly^ 
I might have said downright squalid and 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. 



•l 



fustj) when no visitors are expected> is most 
peculiarly shameful. I cannot express the 
contempt and the disgust I feel^ when 1 think 
of it* I will not think of it. 

I proceed to observe, that what you take - 
from tinsel trappings you will gain in time, 
ifk saving, and in real loveliness. The less 
vanity you betray, the more^merit we shall be 
always disposed to 'allow you. We shall be 
doubly charmed, first with finding young wo- 
men that are not slaves to show, and next 
with your putting so much respect on our 
heads and hearts, as to suppose we are only 
to be gained by better qualities. * 

Add to this, that men of ordinary for- 
tunes, and proper sentiments, will not be 
afraid of connecting themselves with persons 
too prudent to be profuse ; and too wise, as 
well as too worthy, when married, to court 
^e admiration of all — but their Husbands. 

The unbounded and undistinguishing love 
of admiration, has been thought the most 
common, the rankest, and the most noxious 
weed, that grows in the heart of a female. 

It is nourished by nothing more than by the 
love of finery. la effect, they depend oa ' 



Digitized by Google 




SfiRMON n. 



oo* 

each other. But if you will begin by crush- 
ing the latter ; the former, I am persuaded, 
will quickly decay, and at last fall to 'the 
ground. The love of finery naturally prompts 
the passion to be seen, that is, to be admired ; 
for between these a conceited young creature . 
makes no distinction. Alas 1 what woman is 
there at any age, who, if devoted to dress, 
burns not with impatience to display in public 
a new fashi«^n, or a new any thing, which 
she has been told by those about her, or by 
her own imagination, looks exceeding fine ? 
And of this impatience what' is the source, 
but that very passion which I just now called 
the unbounded and undistinguishing love of 
admiration ? The ' mischiefs flowing from 
thence have been touched upon in part. They 
will be farther traced hereafter. At present 1 
shall add, what ought to alarm women of 
decency, that an immoderate fondness for only 
• external embellishment is a strong temptation 
to a light and lascivious mind. 

From the passage of Isaiah before quoted, 
compared with the verse immediately prece- 
ding, it appears that, in the case there pointed 
to, an indecent deportment was closely con- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON II. 



61 



nected with an excessive vanity in apparel. 
And from the whole of that discourse it is 
manifest, the behaviour of the daughters of 
Zion at that time was highly displeasing to 
the Almighty ; which could only proceed 
from the influence their behaviour had upon 
•heir dispositions, or reciprocally from the 
latter as giving birth to the former. How 
applicable the observation to the case of many 
females at this day ! 

But has it not been too much the man- 
ner amongst preachers of every age, to decry 
that in which-they lived, as having remarka- 
bly degenerated from those that went before, 
and to denounce peculiar judgments accord- 
ingly ? It often has, no doubt. And so far 
certainly they have forgotten the caution of 
Solomon ; “ Say not thou. What is the cause 
** that the former days were better than these ? 

For thou dost not enquire wisely concerning 

this.” A mistake we would willingly avoid. 
Such complaints, when indulged indiscrimi- 
nately, are either the dictates of a gloomy 
querulous temper, or the trite and unmean- 
ing declamation of mere popular preaching, 
I trust, we shall be charged with neither in 



Digitized by Google 




SBRMOM II. 



saying, that to this nation there can accrue n« 
good from the spirit of luxury, of levity, 
and of vice, so prevalent, and so spreading, 
in a sex that leads the vrorld. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON III 






On Female Reserve./ 



1 Tim. ii. 8, 9. 

I ’WtU — that •women adorn themselves nuith 
Shamefacedness. 

Many of you, my honoured hearers, have 
been addressed in the style of love and admi- 
raticHi. I have taken the Kberty to address 
you in diat of zeal anii friendship ; a style 
not the less sincere, oi^^ the less worthy of your 
attention, for being sober and impartial. Will 
you permit me to proceed in the same man- 
ner ? Suppose me speaking to you as a bro- 
ther. It will be more than a supposition. 
Have we not all one father by creation, even 
the great God ? and by religion, Is not the 
New Jerusalem the mother of us all With 
a brother’s affection then I will go on to lay 
before you some better ornaments than wealth 
can purchase. In which 1 wish my beloved 



D^itized by Google 




64 



SERMON III. 



sisters to shine, that they may appear as be* 
comes their high birth, and the noble expec- 
tations they are encouraged to entertain. 

After modest apparel our apostle mentions 
Shamefacedness. “ I will — that women adorn 
“ themselves in modest apparel^ with Shame- 
“ facedness.” This lovely quality, in its 
largest extent, and in its most pleasing effects 
on female manners, shall he the subject of 
our present meditation. It is an ornament 
equally necessary and wise. 

I. It is a Necessary ornament, considered, 
I mean, in a moral and religious light. I 
would only premise, that the amiable reserve, 
termed by St. Paul Shamefacedness, is some- 
thing widely distant from^hase airs of disdain, 
those pretences of aversion to men, which we 
now and then meet with in your sex. I said 
Pretences: For no degree of candour can 
persuade us to believe that such women, gene- 
rally speaking, do not play a part, and under 
the mask of this seeming severity, this violent 
affectation of virtue, harbour passions of a 
very different kind. Who does not know, 
that the greatest prudes have often dropt their 
disguise at last ; and betrayed such dispositions. 



Digitized by Google 







JRRMON III. 6S 

as many a young woman of good nature, and 
courteous behaviour, is incapable of indulg- 
ing ? Every thing overdone is liable to sus- 
picion. Innocence in woman wants not the 
aid of ostentation : like integrity in men, it 
rests in its own consciousness. Not so, how- 
ever, as to neglect the rules of prudence and 
circumspection. To say the truth, prudery 
is not the prevailing evil of the times. Fe- 
male fhodesty, even where it is most real, is 
in little danger, as the world goes, of being 
carried to an extreme. In ’ the gayer part 
of the world, how seldom, alas ! does it rise 
to the Shamefacedness enjoined in our text, 
and wnich, on the very first hearing, suggests 
the idea of a virtuous bashfulness. This 
beautiful grace, 



“ Clear Chastity 

“ With blushes redcl'ning as she moves along, 

“ Disorder’d at the deep regard she d:aws j ’ 

whither is she retired ? Where is the charm- 
ing original, from which the poet drew so 
sweet a picture ? — Has Virtue then forsaken 
the sex ? God forbid. But I am bold to say, 



Digitized by Google 




66 



SERMON 111, 



her faTOurite walks are not in those places of 
public entertainment, now so fondly frequented 
by so many women. She loves the shade. 
There she finds herself most secure from the 
blights of calumny, and the heats of tempta- 
tion. Ah ! ye mothers of this land, how can 
you expose so rashly those tender blossoms 
committed to your care ? Have ye forgotten 
that every unkindly breath is ready to blast 
them ? Are ye ignorant, how soon the 
whitest innocence may be sullied } that it is 
possible even for the strictest principles to be 
corrupted? Is there nothing in your own 
minds that whispers the frailty of your sox ? 

But you plead the necessity of allowing to 
youth a little amusement, of showing your 
daughters a little of the world, of preventing, 
or rubbing o9T the awkwardness, that is apt to 
adhere to young persons who are confined at 
home. You urge the propriety of convinc- 
ing them by comparison, bow much the calm 
and rational pleasures of that homo are pre- 
ferable to the noise and giddy diversions usu- 
ally found abroad ; that in the latter there is 
nothing so wonderfully fine, so irresistibly al- 






Digitized by 



Coogle 




SCRMON in. 



(57 



luring, as their youthful fancies, or the in- 
formation of others,' might lead them to sup- 
pose. 

We admit your arguments, so far as they 
go. Keep within these bounds and be blame- 
less. But do the parents of the present gene- 
ration commonly keep within them ? Are 
not many of those parents as fond of gaiety 
and show, as the merest girl can possibly be ? 
Is it surprising to see the daughters of such 
become very early the votaries of Folly, 
when every other day or night they are con- 
ducted in triumph to her temples, without 
any precaution, any previous pains taken to 
instruct them in the emptiness and worthless- 
ness of the object worshipped there j worship- 
ped with every circumstance that can serve to 
propagate the idolatry, ^^while the poor inno- 
cents are inflamed by the concurrence of com- 
pany, dress, flattery, example ; the example 
of those whom, by nature and education, they 
are disposed to respect most highly, and to 
imitate most implicitly ? It were strange In- 
deed, if in this situation their too susceptible 
hearts should escape the fashionable conta- 
gion. But what can be said for • those, who 



Digitized by Google 




68 



st;rmon in. 



thus directly, and with their eyes open, lead 
their children into a snare? — Cease, thou rest- 
less and raging spirit of hell, who art “ going 
“ about seeking whom thou mayest devour,” 
cease thy cruel toll. The parents of Britain 
render it needless. The mothers of the church 
hasten to bring thee their little lambs, as 
if impatient for the pleasure of presenting 

them. Excuse, ye better characters, this 

transport of indignation, kindled by an im- 
piety which you are not capable of commit- 
ting. I think with honour of all who truly 
merit the parental name. May the Father of 
the world increase their number, and multi- 
ply their joys! But for those wicked 1 

turn from them to you, ye pretty helpless 
creatures who have lost - it may be, hap- 
pily - merciful heaven! must I say. Happily 
lost your parents.? or whose parents yet alive, 
but lost to themselves and to their offspring, 
have in the blindness of indulgence, or the 
b.rrbarity of neglect, abandoned you to your 
own untutored conduct. I.et me warn you of 
your danger. If there be no other friend to 
show a solicitude for ymur welfare, allow m© 
at least to have that satisfaction. 



Digitized by Googlc 




SERMON in. 6d 

Reflect, my sisters, on all I have said con- 
cerning your importance in life •, and look 
beyond life’s narrow boundary. Consider 
everlasting consequences. Contemplate ap- 
proaching judgment. You have received 
from the Almighty your bodies, and your 
souls, unstained by dishonour. You will be 
soon required to restore them immaculate. 
You belong to a society, for which your Sa- 
viour gave himself, that he might sanctify 
and cleanse it with the washing of water by 
** the word, that he might present it to him- 
self a glorious church, not having spot, or 
** wrinkle, or any such thing.” Think of 
this. “ Watch and pray, that ye enter not 
** into temptation.” 

The love of promiscuous amusement, how 
innocent soever it may often seem, and some- 
times be, ensnares multitudes of our sex. 
Their earliest days are marked by a mixture 
of sprightliness and simplicity. They run, they 
laugh, they prattle j and then they often blush, 
for fear of having offended. As they grow up, 
their sensibilities become more enlightened, 
and more awake. They blush oftenef. It is - 
the precious colouring of virtue, as one has 



Digitized by Google 




7 # 



88RM0N III. 



happily phrased it. They contract a quicker 
perception of what is decent, and what is 
wise. A sweet timidity was given them to 
guard their innocence, by inclinii^ them to 
shrink from whatever might threaten to in- 
jure it. Their passions, as they rise, are re- 
strained from Exorbitance, by a secret senti- 
ment of shame and honour. In this state of 
mind, they come to hear much concerning 
public diversions. The description is fre- 
quently repeated, i and always exaggerated. 
Their curiosity takes fire ; they are eager to 
participate. They are indulged once, a second, 
a third time, often, without controul. By little 
and little tlieir natural fearfulness begins to 
abate. For a while they are shocked at signs 
of rudeness. Their ears are wounded by the 
language, of vice : Oaths, imprecations, dou- 
ble meanings, every thing obscene fills them 
with disgust and horror. But custom soon be- 
gets familiarity ; and familiarity produces in- 
difference. The emotions of delicacy are less 
frequent, less strong- And now they seldom 
blush, although perhaps they often affect it» 
At the image of sin they tremble no longer '. 
their minds are already debauched. All the 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON in. 



71 



internal fences of modesty are broken down. 
Can you wonder, if it be then easily assailed 
from without ? But what if it be not ? What 
if appearances be still preserved, if , open scan* 
dal be not incurred, or if secret enormity 
should be always avoided ? Is it enough for 
a young woman to be free from infamy, from 
crimes? Between the state of virgin purity 
and actual prostitution are there no interme* 
diate degrees ? Is it nothing to have the soul 
deflowered, the. fancy polluted, the passions 
flung into a ferment ? Say, is it nothing to 
forfeit inward freedom and self-possession ? 
The beauty, the dignity, the tranquillity of 
conscious virtue— are all these of no account ? 
Such indeed one would think were the opU 
nion of those, who imagine there can be no 
harm in a passion for places of entertain- 
ment ; because, say they, all attacks on the 
honour of persons who resort thither are pre- 
cluded. Be that as it may, I must ever 
maintain, that young women of principle 
will be cautious of frequenting scenes where 
Shamefacedness, at once the companion and 
the guardian of female innocence, is in dan- 
ger of being lost. But I add, that every pni- 



Digitized by Google 




72 



SERMON in. 



dent young woman also will be extremelj*' 
wary in this particular ; because, 

II. The ornament we now recommend is 
as Wise, as it is Necessary. There is nothing 
so engaging as bashful beauty. The beauty 
that obtrudes itself, how considerable soever, 
will either disgust, or at most excite but infe- 
rior desires. Men are so made. They refuse 
their admiration, where it is courted : where 
it seems rather shunned, they love to bestow it. 
The retiring graces have been always the most 
attractive. ^ 

You remember the representation which 
Milton puts into Adam’s mouth, of his first 
meeting ■. with pur general mother. How 
beautiful, and how delicate ! , 

" She heard me thus, and tho' divinely brought, 

" Yet innocence and virgin modesty, 

" Her virtue and the conscience of her worth, 

“ That would be woo’d, and not unsought be won. 
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but retir’d. 

The more desirable; or, to say all, 

“ Nature herself, tho’ pure of sinful thought, 

“ Wrought in her so, that seeing me she turned. 

, “ I follow’d her. She was what honour knew. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON in. 



n 

** And with obsequious majesty approv'd 
“ My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower 
" I led her blushing like the morn." 

But this was only the poet’s fancy. True. 
Yet the poet knew the sexes well, and seems 
to have studied yours particularly. He painted 
from the completest standards he could find. 
His picture of Eve in her state of innocence, 
may be considered as the model of a woman ' 
most amiably feminine ; in whom his imagi- 
nation, alike exalted and correct, could figure 
nothing so alluring, 

“ As those graceful acts, 

" Those thousand decencies that daily flow 
" From all her words and actions.” 



What mind of any worth can forbear to be 
charmed with the description you liave just 
heard ? 

To say the truth, there is not, I verily be- 
lieve, a man living, who in his sober senses 
would not prefer a modest to an impudent 
woman. An impudent woman — Who can 
tell which is greater, the disgrace thrown 
VoL. I. F 



Digitized by Google 




74 . 



SERMON HI. 



upon humanity by such a character, or the 
honour reflected on our natures by that ab- 
horrence, which is raised by the bare idea in 
every breast not totally degenerate 
Surely it deserves your notice, what pains 
the all-presiding power has graciously taken 
to show his care of female virtue, not only 
by impressing the minds of your sex with that 
deep and lively sense of reputation, which is 
one of its most powerful preservatives, but 
also by forming the minds of ours with so 
high an esteem for every indication of chastity 
in women, and with so strong a disapproba- 
tion of the contrary. That esteem, and this 
disapprobation, it is certain, are felt by the 
men, whensoever reason is permitted to take 
place of appetite ; and these indications are 
perfectly and universally intelligible. I say 
* not, that those of the last kind are always ap- 
parent, where women have given themselves 
up to vice ; but, I apprehend, they are so for 
the greater part. This breach of her most 
sacred law, the justness of Nature has gene- 
rally ’branded with a look and manner pecoi- 
liarly characteristic and significant ; as, on the 
Other side, she has always (I think always) 



Digitized by Google 




/ 



sermon hi, 

marked the genuine feelings of modesty with 
a look and manner no less correspondent and 
impressive. 

In the latter case, she seems to say to us 
men, pointing to her yet uncorrupted daugh- 
ters, ‘ Behold these smiling innocents, whom 
‘ I have graceil with my fairest gifts, and 
‘ committed to your protection; behold them 
‘ with love and respect ; treat- them* with ten- 
‘ derness and honour. They are timid, and 
‘ v.'ant to be defended. They are frail ; O 
‘ do not take advantage of their weakness. 

‘ Let their fears and blushes endear them. 

‘ Let their confidence in you never be abu- 

‘ sed But is it possible, that any of you 

‘ can be such barbarians, so supremely wicked, 

‘ as to abuse it ? Can vou find in vour hearts 
‘ to despoil the gentle trusting creatures of 
‘ their treasure, or do any thing to strip them 
‘ of their native robe of virtue ? Curst bo 
‘ the impious hand tl'rat would dare to violate 
‘ the unblemished form of Chastity ! Thou 
‘ wretch ! thou ruffian ! forbear ; nor venture. 
‘ to provoke lieaven’s fiercest vengeance.’ 

In the other case, the same parental power, 
equally watchful for all her children, seems 
f2 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON in. 



\ 



'7G 

to cast an eye of awful reproach on such of 
her daughters as are unhappily abandoned, 
and, raising her voice, to address our sex to 
this purpose : ‘ Flee, my sons, flee these de- 
‘ structive Syrens. They smile, only to tempt ; 

* and they tempt, in order to devour. Once 
‘ indeed they shone in many of my sweetest 
‘ charms. These are no more. They have 

* forgotten to blush ; their foreheads are har- 
‘ dened into shamelessness. Their eyes for- 
‘ merly soft, virtuous, and downcast ; those 

* very eyes that efiused the soul of innocence, 

* have learned to stare, and roll with unbounded 

* wantonness : to dart nothing but unholy fire. 

* Their hands are the hands of Harpies. 

‘ Their feet go down to death, and their steps 

* take hold on hell.’ 

This account of those wretched beings will 
be always true in part. The profligate and 
the foolish, that are taken in their toils, shall 
some time or other be sure to repent it. 
Nevertheless it must be owned, there are 
of them who, with hearts of adamant to the 
best impressions, and without any remains of 
natural modesty, yet practise the art of feign- 
ing its decentdemeanour ; one of the strongest 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON III. 



77 



arguments that can be conceived in its fa- 
vour ! 

Yes, those more accomplished ensnarers 
are 'sufficiently aware, that there is no allure- 
ment equal to that of maiden virtue j and 
therefore, having lost the reality, they study 
to retain the appearance. In this instance, 
no doubt, as in numberless others, the opera- 
tions of Nature may be counteracted by vio- 
lence, and her most speaking features silenced 
by dissimulation. But, ah ! how much more 
easy, pleasant, noble and happy, to be vir- 
tuous, than only to seem so ! That vice- 
gerent of God within -us. Conscience, will 
not bear the abuse calmly. All essential ' 
transgressions of order, how successful soever 
they may outwardly appear, shall certainly 
be punished by inward disquietude, and home- 
felt meanness. But the truth is, that the art 
of dissembling, in the case before us, seldom 
succeeds so far, as not to be seen through 
on many occasions j and when it is, the con- 
tempt and aversion produced by it are only 
heightened by those attempts to impose. Of 
this be assured, that to the sense of decency 
there is nothing more disgusting than the 



4k 



Digitized by Google 




78 



SERMON JU. 



nation of a younjf woman who cannotrlje pat 

*» 

out of countenance. In our sex, the charac- 
ter ofi being lost to shame is scandalous ; but 
in yours — who can describe the detestation it 
excites ? 

Next to tliis is the dislike we feel to her 
who has contracted . a certain briskness of air 
and devity of deportment, which, tliough by , 
good I nature, or the courtesy of custom, dis- 
tinguished ifrotn the 'brazen front and ;bold 
attack <ofithe prostitute, does yet, I cannot 
help saying, approach too near them, and can 
never, il. am sure, be pleasing to men of sen- 
timent. fSuch^an air and deooittmeiit. I -well 
- ^ 

kr.cV;, by r.‘,any esteemed marks of spirit. 

It rriay be ' so. 'I am‘ willing at least 'to beliCve,., 
tlvat no Teak harrti is 'tneaht' by numbers wh-o 
affect 'them. *^But surely 'they are'the wof^ 
kind 'of affectation. ^I had rather a 'theusantl 
times *see ‘a young lady carry her bashfulneSs 
too far, thampique herself on 'ihe freedom 6f . 
her manners. ' " . ' 

'A masculine woman must be nattirally an 
unamiable creature. ‘I cbnfess myself shocked, 
whenever T see the seics confounded. An 
effeminate fellow, 'that, destitute of cvety 



Digitized by Google 




SCRMON III. 



79 , 



manly sentiment, copies with inverted ambi- 
tion from your sex, is an object of contempt 
and aversion -at once. On the other 'hand, 
any young woman of better rank, that throws 
oiF all the lovely softness of her nature, and 
emulates the daring, intrepid temper of a 
man — how terrible! The transformation on 
either side must ever be monstrous. Is not 
this shadowed out to us in that particular 
prohibition of the Jewish law, which says, 
“ The woman shall not wear that which per- 
“ taineth unto a man ; neither sliall a man 
“ put on a woman’s garment. For all that 
do so are abomination to the Lord '{ ’ Such 
confusion of apparel was to be considered as 
renouncing, in effect, the distinction of form, 
which the Almighty had established in the 
creation. To this unnatural mode do we not 
sometimes observe a visible tendency in our 
days ? But what though the dress be kept 
ever so distinct, if the behaviour be not ; in 
those points, I mean, where the character pe- 
culiar to each sex seems to require a difference ? 
There, a metamorphosis in either will always 
offend an 'eye that is not greatly vitiated. It 
will do so particularly in your sex. By dint 



♦ v’ 



Digitized by Google 




80 



SERMON ni. 



of assiduity and flattery, fortune and show, a 
Female Man shall sometimes succeed strangely 
with tlie women : but to the men an Amazon 
never fails to be forbidding. Are none of 
you, my fair hearers, in danger of roughening 
into this ungracious figure ? How readily it 
is assumed, in those scenes where the igno- 
rance of youth co-operates with the magic of 
fashion, maay of you perhaps will not suspect. 

Men, I presume, are in general better 
judges than women, of the deportment- of 
women. Whatever aflSscts them from your 
quarter they feel more immediately, ion 
slide insensibly into a certain cast of man- 
ners; you perceive not the gradations; you 
do not see yourselves at a proper distance. If the 
effect produced be on the whole disagree- 
able, self-love will not be the first to discover 
it. Men, it is true, are often dazzled by- 
youth, vivacity, and -beauty; but yet at times 
they will look at you with a cooler eye, and 
a closer inspection, than you apprehend ; at 
least, when they have opportunities of seeing 
you in private company. 

In splendid crowds all is dissipated, because 
all is garish. The multiplicity of objects 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON in. 



81 



scatters and distracts : nothing is felt or 
thought of, in the way of either serious re- 
flexion, or serious passion. How much mis- 
judged is an excessive fondness for such scenes ! 
Believe me, they are not the places, where 
the heart is most apt to be touched. 

At any rate, the majesty of the seit is sure 
to suffer by being seen too frequently and too 
familiarly. Discreet reserve in a woman, 
like the distance kept by royal personages, 
contributes to maintain the proper-reverence. 
Most of our pleasures are prized in proportion 
to the difficulty with which they are obtained. 
The sight of beauty may be justly reckoned 
in that number. Nothing can be more im- 
politic in young ladies, than to make it cheap. ' 
“So long,” says a lively author, “as they 
“ govern themselves by. the exact rules of 
“ prudence and modesty, their lustre is like 
“ the meridan sun in its clearness, which, 

“ though less approachable, is counted more 
“ glorious ; but when they decline from 

those, they are like that sun in a cloud, 

“ which, though safelier gazed on, is not 
“ half so bright ” 

Even the worst men are struck by the sove- 
F 3 



Digitized by Google 




SERTVION III. 



fc'2 

reignty of female worth unambitious of ap- 
pearing. But if a young person (supposing 
lier dispositions in other respects ever so good) 
will be always breaking loose through each 
domestic inclosure, and ranging af large the 
wide common of the world, those destroyers 
will see«hcr in a very different point of Kght. 
They will consider her as lawful game, to be 
hunted down without hesitation. And if her 
virtue, or (which to a woman is in effect 
nearly the' same) her reputation, should be 
lost, what will it avail the poor wanderer, 
to plead that she meant only a little harm- 
less amusement, and n^ver thought of stray- 
ing into the abhorred paths of vice ? 

With regard to the opinion of the better 
sort of men, I will tell you a secret. If in 
the flutter of too publick a life you should at 
any time so far forget yourselves, as to drop 
that nice decorum of appearance and manner, 
which is expected from your sex, particularly 
from the younger part of it, they will be 
tempted to harbour suspicions which I dare 
not name p that is, many of them will. :The 
rest, who know you better, or have more 
charity, Vill be hurt to think you should ex- 

- * 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON III. 



83 



pose yourselves to a degree of censure, which 
in reality you do not deserve. Yet none 
of them hardly will be kind enough to offer 
you a friendly hint of what so much concerns 
you ; not even where it might be done with 
the most perfect propriety. Their general 
inclination to good nature, their love of 
amusement in their turn, and their finding 
it most readily in the society of your sex, 
will dispose them to laugh with you very 
freely. Intimacy will lead on to a kind of 
attachment. They will often entertain you 
with no little gallantry ; sometime perhaps 
at an expence which they can ill afford. In 
a word, they will be m'ightly pleased with 
you — as the companion of an hour. Com- 
panions for life, if they ever think of such, 
they will look out for elsewhere. They will 
then make the necessary discrimination I 
mean, if they be.wisc and honest enough to 
marry from choice. They will then try if 
they can find women well-bred and sober- 
minded at the same time,- of a cheerful tem- 
per with sedate manners *, women, of whom 
they may hope that they will love home, be 
attached to their husbands, attentive to their 



Digitized by Google 




81 * SERMON HI. 

families, reasonable in their wishes, moderate 
in their expences, and not addicted to exter- 
nal show. Having found them, whether with 
or without fortune (that will never be their 
prime consideration) they will endeavour to 
gain them by another sort of style and beha- 
viour, than they used towards you. Far 
other sentiments, far other emotions, will 
then possess them. In short their hearts 
will be then engaged ; and if they should be 
happy enough to obtain the much wished for 
objects, then, with a joy unfelt before, they 
will form the tenderest of all connexions ; 
leaving you where they found you, as widely 
removed as ever from the truest pleasures, 
and the fairest prospects, that humanity knows } 
the pleasures which are enjoyed at home, and 
the prospects which include a family. 

But many of you, I fear, will smile at all 
this, trusting to the flatterer. Beauty, that, 
whenever you shall please, you cannot fail to 
fix your men ; and so, in the gaiety of your 
spirits, you continue to exhibit that beauty as 
usual, and to dance along through the giddy 
maze. Not to insist, at present, how preca- 
tioiis and transient an attendant this arch- 



Digitized by Google 




' SERMON 111. 



85 



flatterer has always proved ; I must remind 
you, that a face hackneyed in the public eye, 
how striking soever when first seen, or how 
handsome soever it may yet remain, loses 
much of its power to please. Every new 
appearance takes something from its charms ; 
and for one instance wherein this kind of 
exhibition succeeds, how many might be 
named in which young women once extolled, 
and run after every where, have lived to 
tread the beaten round, uo praised, neglected, 
forlorn ! 

No, those large promiscuous circles are 
not the scenes where' the heart is commonly 
interested. Virtuous love, like true devo- 
tion, flies from noise, seeks retreat, and 
delights to indulge itself, unobserved by all 
but the object of its veneration. That re- 
spectful modesty, which attends it on the part 
of the man, is maintained and exalted by 
nothing so much as an unaftected bashfulness 
on the woman’s side. But this last, which 
properly speaking is the flower of female 
chastity, is of a nature so delicate and tender, 
as always to thrive best in places the least 
frequented. What pity, when, instead of 



Digitized by Google 




86 



SERMON III. 



being sheltered and cherished with care, it is 
lieedlessly exposed to the wanton gaze of 
every wandering eye, to the cruel hand of 
every rude, or of^ every sly invader I* Can any 
entertainment, or any admiration, the public 
has power to ofi'er, compensate the loss of this 
enchanting quality ? ’ 

f>Say not that it is incompatible with polite- 
ness, or with aftabllity. We have? seen it 
accompanied with the sweetest affability, and 
with the most perfect politeness. Depend 
upon it, that the best breeding is not learnt 
by rambling from one assembly, and one 
diversion, to another ; but by living among 
the .best-bred' people, by cultivating a fund 
of goodness in the heart, and possessing the 
advantage of a well-educated mind. 

After what you have heard, I hope you 
will not imagine, . that the 'Bashfulness 1 
plead for tends to obstruct any one view, 
which it becomes a wise and worthy woman 
to entertain. Some men, I confess, may be 
flattered by forward advances frorii those of 
your sex, whom the ingenious Mr. Richard- 
son used to term Seekers. But is there not 
reason to • apprehend, that when they come 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON III. 



87 



to reflect coolly, their esteem wilhnot be last- 
ing, where the foundation of it is not natu- 
ral ? There are ■- other men, dt is but fair 
to tell 'you, 'who will appear delighted with 
this kind of courtship, pretend the highest 
regard, pay /you a world of compliments by 
which they mean nothing, and swear to the 
first worthless companion they meet, that you 
have a design upon them. Can you bear the 
thought of exposing yourselves to such an 
imputation ? How mortifying, on those oc- 
casions, to hear a girl seriously boast of her 
imaginary conquests ! How weak in her, to 
faiicy that every man who flatters her, not 
to say every^ man who treats her with the 
attention to which your sex are entitled, is a 
lover ! 

I speak not of those more deserving fe- 
males, whose peace of mind has been cruelly 
sported with by a species of • poltrons, the dis- 
grace of their sex, the reverse of all that is 
brave or humane ; whose business and boast 
it is, to inveigle the aflbctions of virtuous 
women by endless obsequiousness, and solemn 
professions, they seem to imply every thing 
just and kind, till they have undone the cre- 



Digitized by Google 




88 



SERMON III. 



dulous fair ones, whom they then barbarously 
consign to infamy and wo j or else, finding 
that they have gone too far in the pursuit 
of those who will not yield but on honour- 
able terms, to which they have not the spirit 
or probity to agree, they poorly and basely 
relinquish them, after having stolen their 
hearts. Happy creatures, to be so relinquish- 
ed, though not happy to be so inveigled ! 
What an escape have ye made from wretches 
that never deserved you ! If your honest 
pride be hurt at first, as^ it-, cannot fail of 
being, that very pride will soon inspire you 
with a generous contempt, the only sensation 
fit to be retained on such a subject. 

To return to those of your sex, whom a 
rage for amusement and admiration has rob- 
bed of one of the finest ornaments that can 
adorn them, the Shamefacedness I have been 
endeavouring to inculcate. After having said 
so much to show how highly 'they are to 
blame ; what shall I say to those, whose duty 
it is to advise them better, but who have 
always neglected it ? Surely , it might be 
thought, that such of their female acquaint- 
ance, and such especially of their female re- 



Digilized by Google 




SERMON III. 



89 



lations as are advanced in life, would, from 
their superior store of judgment and observa- 
tion, be friendly enough to communicate to 
those ignorant or unexperienced young crea- 
tures, some salutary counsel on this and other 
important articles. I know they will excuse 
themselves, by pleading the difficulty of the 
task. I own it difficult. To advise well was 
always so ; and who ,can be sure of advising 
successfully Is it therefore never to be at- 
tempted ? In the present case, I cannot doubt 
but good counsel, offered with prudence and 
affection, would often succeed. 

p ^ 

St. Paul, who held it not unworthy of an 
Apostle to enter with the greatest particu- 
larity into the concerns of common life, 
directs Titus to remind the aged women of 
their duty on this very head. His words are 
remarkable : “ Speak thou the things that be- 
“come sound doctrine;” — among the rest — ■ 

that the aged women may teach the young 
“ women to be sober, to love their husbands, 
“to love their children” — What follows? — 
“ to be discreet, chaste, keepers at home.” 
The precept indeed points to young women 
in the state of wedlock. But will any sup- 



Digitized by Google 




90 



SERMON m. 



pose the apostle meant to exclude women yet 

unmarried from that part of it, which, on 

his principles, must necessarily be applicable 

to them ? That women who, having families 

of their own, go much abroad, and affect - to 

shine any where but in their proper sphere, 

are peculiarly to blame, must, I think, be 

acknowledged. But will you thence infer, 

that they who have none are at liberty to 

stroll about perpetually, to prefer every place 

0 

to home, and neglect the most respectable 

virtues, the most valuable accomplishments, 

for nf ,lress. the disolav of beautv- 

-• * r — ‘ — - ■ - . , j t 

and the tricks of affectation ? 

It is truly sad to see so many young ladles, 
showing them.stlves every day in the markets 
of vanity, who by a proper deportment else- 
where might render themselves agreeable and 
happy ; to see them trifling away the opportu- 
nities of doing both, and sacrilicing to a false 
ambition the real importance of their sex. 
But it is no less surprising than sad, to find 
amongst women of age and OMoerienre so few, 
comparatively speaking, who have the con- 
science or the humanity >to contribute to their 
reformation and welfare. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON III. 



‘*>1 



Imagiue la set of chaste matrons, anciently 
mothers in this metropolis, who lived and 
died in sacred obscurity, were seldom found 
from their ownihouses, but placed their hum- 
ble glory in shining there, particularly in 
breeding their children to every thing prudent 
and praise-worthy ; imagine them for a little 
to return to life, and to observe unknown the 
manners of the present age. When, amongst 
other things, they saw the- daughters of many 
a citizen, glittering in gorgeous apparel not 
paid for, rolling their eyes on every side 
through a large assembly, studying by every 

cnuoisn art to uraw tne notice ot the men, 
contending with one another who should be 
most the objects of attention, catching with a 
kind of triumph each transient glance, nor 
shewing the smallest uneasiness even to be 
stared at by the most licentious eye, or to 
be blown upon by the most corrupted breath 
of every vile betrayer — I pursue the descrip- 
tion no farther — what would our venerable 
spectators think of their posterity ! Wha t 
grief would fill their hearts on the occasion ! 
But how great would be their astonisliment 
and horror, when informed, that number s 



Digitized by Google 




92 



SERMON III. 



of those young perscms, whose behaviour was 
unbecoming, had not been taught by their 
mothers, their grand-mothers, or any other 
friend in the world, one solid lesson of wis- 
dom or frugality, of female decorum, or 
Amiable Reserve ! 









i 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



On Female Virtue. 



1 Tim. ii. 8, 9. 



I •will — that •women adorn themselves •with 
Sobriety. 



A PLAIN dress you have often found ex- 
tremely pleasing. What such a dress is to 
the person ; that, and much more, is Sobriety 
to the mind. Sobriety is a sort of spiritual 
vesture entirely void of show ; substantial* 
home-spun, and hardy j calculated to defend 
against the injuries of the world, as well 
as to cover the nakedness of the soul ; proper 
to be worn every day, and not unfit for any 
place where a reasonable being ought to ap- 
pear } perfectly decent, and to a judicious 
eye extremely beautiful ; in a word, so in- 
dispensable and becoming, that she who is 
without it has been ever deemed, by the 
virtuous and wise, an object of deformity, 



Digitized by Google 




94 



SERMON IV. 



loathing, and wretchednsss. Like every thing 
else of greatest value, its worth is best known 
by its loss. That this quality, which like 
your daily clothing answers so raany useful 
and necessary ends, should like that too not 
strike the generality of beholders, reflects in 
my opinion honour on your sex. It would 
be more esteemed, were it less common. 
And here I must complain of those men who 
will allow little or no merit to a woman for 
being sober; when, if she were not, they 
would condemn her loudly. If the vice be 
scandalous, can the virtue fail of being 
honourable ? - 

To argue from an instance somewhat simi- 
lar. Because disobedience to parents is un- 
natural and' vile, does it follow that filial 
piety deserves little or no praise ? But the 
'temptations to this crime are usually incon- 
siderable, frequently none at all ; whereas to 
* indecorum, intemperance, and incontinence, 
it is certain many women are under strong 
temptations: it is also certain, that many 
have given way to them j it is probable there 
are but few, whose virtue in those particulars 
has not been exposed to very dangerous snares : 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



yet the far greater part preserve it entire ; 
and shall we deny them our tribute of ap- 
probation ? Forbid it Generosity and Justice ! 

The speaking with contempt of wliat is 
commonly called Negative Virtue, is often- 
the mere rant of an affected philosophy. To 
make some allowance for the condition of 
humanity, where surely more modest and can- 
did. Were does he live, and what is his 
name, who dares be confident, that in any 
given circumstance of critical trial his own 
resolutions would remain unshaken ? For 
vice and immorality, though there may be 
alleviations, there can be no excuse. But 
yet, on the other hand, situated as mortals 
are, a moral or inoffensive conduct is fairly 
entitled to commendation from mortals. 
Your situation, my young friends, demands 
much candour from us, and m.ighty caution 
in you. 

The ornament of Sobriety, wliich comes 
next to be considered, is by no means a cheap 
one. But though it be purchased with ^diffi- 
culty, it is lost with ease. To preserve it, 
will require the unreihitted exercise of pru- 
dence, vigilance, and severe circumspection : 



Digitized by Google 




99 



SERMON IT. 



or to speak more properly, these are parts of 
this quality, which in effect is of a mixed 
and comprehensive nature. To describe it at 
large, Is not my design. The attempt would 
lead into a discussion much too dry and unin- 
teresting. If possible, I would engage your 
attention to truth, and your hearts to good- 
ness, in a different way ; by sentiment, per- 
suasion, and the native influence of fraternal 
counsel. Come then, my sisters, and hearken 
to a brother, while he endeavours to show 
you on one side those things which you ought 
principally to shun, in order to the maintain- 
ing of your Sobriety ; and to point out on the 
other that positive discipline, which must co- 
operate for this purpose. At present w'e can 
only undertake the former of these points. 
But before we proceed to that, let me desire 
you to take notice with what propriety the 
apostle’s ideas seem to rise one above another. 
He begins with that which is most directly 
obvious, and the very first precaution to be 
observed,. Modesty of Apparel.' Then he 
mentions Shamefacedness ; which, though 
sometimes less apparent, yet when observed 
cannot fail of recommending itself to every 



Digitized by Google 




SJERMON IT. 



97 



eye, and with which decency of garb is 
mere aflTectatton. Shamefacedness, as he has 
ranked it, appears like a kind of finer cover- - 
ing, the virgin veil of chastity, to be thrown 
over all the rest. But that it may be a veil in 
the best sense, a holy veil and no mask, he 
subjoins Sobriety as the more inward habit 
(so to speak) which must support and give va- 
lue to the whole ; or to drop the metaphor, 

t 

as that internal and prevailing character, by 
which every part of a woman’s dress and de- 
meanour must ever be regulated. Now to 
cultivate this character, it is of infinite con- 
sequence. • 

In the first place, to avoid Dangerous Con- 
nexions. If that be not done, what is there 
on earth, or in heaven, that can save you ? 
Of miraculous interposition I think not at 
present. She can have no right to expect it, 
who throws herself into the broad way of 
temptation. What those dangerous connex- 
ions are, it may not be always easy to explain 
when it becomes a question in real life. Un- 
happily for young women, it is a question^ 
sometimes of very nice decision. Cases there 
are, in which nothing can be clearer. The 
VoL. I. r 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



man that behaves with open rudenessy the 
man that avowedly laughs at virtue, the man 
that impudently pleads for vice ; such a man 
is to be shunned like a rattle-snake. In this 
case, “The woman that deliberates is lost.” 
What ! would you parley with the destroyer, 
when he gives you warning ? Then you are 
not ensnared, you knowingly and wilfully 
expose yourself. If you be poisoned, if 
you be lost ; your folly is without excuse, 
and your destruction without alleviation. 

But in this manner none will proceedj ex- 
cept wretches alike licentious and imprudent. 
Of artful men the approaches will be silent 
and slow ; all will be soft insinuation : or else 
they will put on a blunt face of seeming good 
humour ; the appearance of honest frankness, 
drawing you to every scene of dissipation with 
■ a kind of obliging violence, should violence 
of any kind be necessary. If they be. also 
agreeable in their persons, or lively in their 
conversation ; above all, if they wear the air 
of gentlemen, which, unfortunately for your 
, sex, is too often the case ; then indeed your 
danger is extreme. Thus far the trap is con- 
cealed. You apprehend^ nothing; your un- 



Digitized by Google 




SEQLJifO^ IV. 



99 



suspecting hearts b^gin to slide = they are gone 
befpre you are aware. The ijaen I am speajk:- 
ing of perceive their advantage the moment 
it appears. 1 have supposed them destitute 
of worth. If they be also unchecked by fear, 
what can preserve you ? A sense of reputa>- 
tion ? the dread of ruin ? Perhaps .they may i 
but perhaps not. They have often, no doubtf 
come in to prevent the last excess. And, hut 
for such restraints, what would become of 
many a woman who is not under that best 
one, religious principle? The experiment, 
however, you will own is hazardous. Mul- 
titudes have trusted to it, and been undone. 

But do those, who in the world’s sense are 
not undone, escape, think ye, unhurt ; un- 
hurt in their health and spirits, in their sere- 
nity and self-enjoyment, in their sobriety of 
mind and habits of self-controul ? You can- 
not think it. Very seldom at least can you 
suppose, that, where there is much sensibility 
of temper, an ill placed passion shall not 
leave behind it, in a youthful breast, great 
disorder and deep disquietude. 

But how, you will ask, is the snare to 
be eluded, hidden as it frequently is ? Not 
F 2 



Digitized by Google 




100 



SSRMON IT. 



SO hidden throughout, as to be invisible, un- 
less you will shut your eyes. Is it not your 
business to enquire into the character of the 
man that professes an attachment ? Or is 
character nothing ? Isjthere no essential dif- 
ference between a man of decency and ho. 
nour, or who has all along passed for such, 
and a man who is knovra to lead an irregular 
life, or who is suspected however to be the 
smiling foe of female virtue ? May you not 
learn, if you please, with whom the person 
in question associates ? Or is a man’s choice 
of company nothing ? If not resolved to be 
blind, you may surely discover whether such 
a person proceeds by little and little to take 
off the visor, and appear what he is, by loose 
sentiments, indecent advances, an ambiguous 
style, an alarming assurance, “ foolish talk- 

ing, and jesting which is not convenient.” — 
I blush for numbers of your sex, who not 
only express no displeasure at these things, 
but by a loud laugh, or childish titter, or 
foolish simper, or some other indication of a 
light mind, show real satisfaction, perhaps 
high complacence. 

Another thing, no less abominable, I can- 



Digiiized by Google 




SERMON IT. 



101 



not forbear to mention. How common it is 
to see young ladies, who pass for women of 
reputation, admitting into their company in 
public places, and with visible tokens of ci- 
vility and pleasure, men, whom the moment « 
before they saw herding with creatures of in- 
famous name ! Gracious God, what a defi- 
ance to the laws of piety, prudence, charac- • 
ter, decorum ! What an insult, in effect,' to 
every man and woman of virtue in the world ! 
What a palpable encouragement to vice and 
dishonour ! What a desperate attempt to pull 
down, in appearance, and with their own 
hands, the only partition that divides them 
from the most profligate of their sex ! Be- 
tween the bold and the abandoned woman 
there may still remain, notwithstanding such 
behaviour, a distinction in the world’s eye; 
but we scruple not to declare, that religion, 
purity, delicacy, make none. 

To return from this digression, if it be one, 

. we will allow it possible to put cases wherein 
no particular rules of discovery, no determi- 
nate modes of judgment, will enable a young . 
woman, by her own unassisted skill, to dis- 
cern the dangers that lie in her way. But 



«c 



Digitized by Google 




sirwon ly. 



1192 

a young wftitt&n be justly ^excused', or cam 
She fairly excuse herseif, if, where all is at 
stake, she call not in the joint aid of wise 
suspicion, friendly cotinsel, and grave expe^ 
riOnce, together with prayers for God's pro- 
tection n\ore than ordinarily fervent r 
*Butj iAielhinks^ I hear some of you ask, 
with an air of earnest curiosity, Do not re^ 
' formed libCrtities then iti^e the best hte- 
bihds ? I afo siOrty for the question, i am 
doubly Soiry, Whenever it is staHed by a Vif- 
tWOus WOttaan. I will not Wound the ext of 
foodesiy by drawing minutely the character 
df a libertine ; hut give me Ifave to answer 
ydnr inquiry, by asking a question or two in 
itty turn. In the first place, We wiii suppose 
Wich a one teally reformed^ Uo !far a» to treat 
the woman he marries with esteem send fide- 
lity; and that he gives up for ever ids old 
companions, at least is to any chot«n. iftti- 
lUacy, or preference of their company to 
hens. We gtant it possible ; we rejoice when 
it ba]^nS. It is certainly the best atone- 
ment' that catt be made for his former oOn- 
duet. But ttoW let me aSk yon, or rathef let 
me desire yOu to ask vouT OWn hearts. Without 



■r 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IT. 



lOf 



any regard to the opinions of the world, 
which is most desirable on the score of sen- 
timent, on the score of that respect which you 
owe to yourselves, to your friends, to your 
sex, to order, rectitude, and honour; the 
pure unexhausted affection of a mui who has 
not by intemperance and debauchery corrupt- 
ed his principles, impaired his constitution, 
enslaved himself to appetite, submitted to 
share with the vilest and lowest of mankind 
the mercenary embraces of harlots, contri- 
buted to embolden guilt, to harden Vice, ta 
render the retreat from a life of scandal and 
misery more hopeless ; who never laid snares 
for beauty, never betrayed the innocence that 
trusted him, never abandoned any fond crea- 
ture to want and despair, never hurt the repu- 
tation of a woman, never disturbed the peace 
of families, or defied the laws of his country, 
or set at nought the prohibition of his God 
which, I say, n most desirable, the affection- 
of such a man, or that of him who has pro- 
bably ddne all this, Who has certainly done a 
great part of it, and who has nothing now to- 
offer you, but* the shattered remains of his 
health, and of his heart P How any df yoa 



Digitized by Google 




104 



SERMON XV., 



may feel on thit subject, I cannot say. But 
if, judging as a man, I believed, vrhat I have 
often heard, that the generality of women 
would prefer the latter, I know not any thing 
that could sink them so low in my esteem. 

That he who has been formerly a rake 
atay after all prove a very tolerable husband, 
as the world goes, I have said already that 1 
do not dispute. But I would ask, in the next 
place, is this commonly to be expected ? Is 
there no danger. that such a man will be 
tempted by the power of long habit to return 
to his old ways ; or that the insatiable love of 
* variety, which he has indulged so freely, will 
some time or other lead him astray from the 
finest woman in the world i Will not the 
very idea of a restraint, which he could never 
brook while single, make him only the more 
impatient of it when married ? Will he have 
the better opinion of his wife’s virtue, that 
he has conversed chiefly with women who had 
none, and with men amongst whom it was 'a 
favourite system, that the sex are> all alike ? 
But it is a painful topic. Let the women 
who are so connected make the best of their 
condition ; and let us go on to something else. 



Digitized by Google 




'SERMON IV. 



105 



If you, my honoured hearers, would preserve 
your sobriety, I would warn you, 

In the second place, against a Dissipated 
Life; into which many, who I verily believe 
have no ill intentions, are unhappily drawn 
by one engagement or another. Youth, 
sprightliness, the love of society, the love of 
shining, (the last particularly strong in minds 
where imagination predominates) joined with 
a taste for amusement, which the circum- 
scribed situation of the sex serves perhaps 
only to increase — all these put together lead 
them very readily into such a track most 
especially if their education has lain in that 
line, or if their connexions, whether natural 
or accidental, have concurred to strengthen 
the bias. But how innocent soever it may be 
in the first instance, who does not know, that 
in its after-consequences it is often to the last 
degree hurtful ^ 

Does it not manifestly breed an impatience 
of home, and such a propensity to show, as, 
rather than not be gratified, shall balk the 
most important duties, and court the most 
improper company ? Does it not tend directly 
to expence and profusion ? Does it not un- 
F 3 



It' 



Digitized by Google 




10 « 



s«Amon iV. 



avbrd^Iy ch^i^ish th6 passion fdr idleness and 
sauntering, so intonsistertt with every thing 
solid, useful, and improving? Not to speak 
ndw of the prejudice done by it to the health 
and constitution} is such a temper, 'and such 
a conduct, agreeable to the great rules ‘of 
ntttdei*ation ? Will that mind be acquainted 
with wisdom, which is averse to thought? 
Will self-government be her study, who flies 
from self-inspection ? Can Religion or Vir- 
tue hope to make any lasting impression on a 
spirit, that by perpetual agitation is wrought 
up into mere froth ? What imaginable folly 
is there that may not find its way into a 
heart, like the garden of the sluggard, thrown 
open to every incursion ? If your mornings 
be spent in rambling and dressing, your even- 
ings in visits and cards, or public entertain- 
ments ; if this be the general tenor of your 
transactions, on which side, I beseech you, 
can the balance be expected to lie at the bot- 
tom of the account ? 

But that perhaps is not your care. ‘ What 

* have the young and the gay to do, but to divert 

* themselves ?’ ,Indeed ? Were you sent then 
into this world for no other purpose ? Do 



Digitized by Google 




I 



SERMON IT. lOT 

you design to apply to nothing serious ? 

‘ Ye^ certainly, when we ate settled, and 
‘ have families.’ But pray, tdl me : To act 
your parts prcqierly then, is there no prepara- 
tion necessary now ? Is roving about conti*- 
nualiy, the way to grow either fond of do- 
mestic employments, or & for them ? Will 
neglecting the lesser affairs committed to you 
at present, dispose or Qualify you for a larger 
sphere of activity hereafter ? 

But have we not often seen young women, 
that were thou^tless and profuse, turn out 
very prudent and oeconomical wives I We 
have ; arid what then ? Would you build a 
system of action on events so precarious and 
unlikely ? Because by the force of genius, or 
a felicity of circumstances, boys who were 
good for little or nothing at school, have not 
unfrequently, in process of time* shot up 
into men of ability or spirit, would you thence 
infer that youth may safely trifle away their 
early yeats ? . ... 

But is it certain, i after all, that yOu are* 
to change your, state, as well as your charac- 
ter ? Will the train of life we are consider- 
ing recommend you. much to young men ?; 



\ 



DigitizBtrt)y Coogle 




108 



SERMON IV. . 



I have conversed with many of them on this 
subject. Shall I • tell you their opinions ? 
Some« I find) would like a sprightly compa- 
nion in marriage, but none a dissipated one ; 
and all of them, to a man, dread a woman 
of expence. I say not, that it is right in this 
case to count the cost too nicely ; but men 
that are not very violent lovers, or very great 
foob, will not overlook it. Our sex of late 
years have been by many thought more back- 
ward than formerly to enter into the holy 
bands of wedlock; and what I hint at has 
been assigned as a principal cause. 

It is too common, I confess, to hear those 
who have been addicted to vagrant pleasures, 
and vain profusion, plead the smallness of 
their fortunes as an excuse for not marrying ; 
when, if they connected themselves -with wo- 
men of sobriety and discretion, it is perhaps, 
demonstrable that they would live cheaper. 
But what, say they, if, hoping to find a help 
meet, we should wed our ruin f I answer 
them, Choose the better. Shall I give you 
their reply ? ‘ The ladies of the present age 
‘ are so immoderately expensive’ — You may 
guess the rest. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



109 



But it is not only such men that speak this 
language. There are of a different . character 
not a few, who, strongly attached to the wor- 
thier part of the sex, wish for nothing so 
much as an honourable connexion with them, 
but are restrained by the very consideration 
in question. We would willingly convince 
them, that they carry it too far. They ap- 
peal to facts, and persist in the argument. 
We are weary of the disputes It is incon- 
ceivable what frivolous articles of parade are 
insisted on by some women, of whom better 
things might be expected. But rivalship in 
show is the ruling passion of the times ; and 
how much is it nourished by dissipation ! 

I cannot leave this point without observing, 
that one of the worst consequences attending 
such a course is its throwing many young 
ladies into the company of women, who with 
the general reputation of virtue, or under the 
particular shelter of matrimony, are often the 
very quintessence of vice ; a set of smooth per- 
nicious tempters, like Satan to Eve, winding 
themselves by flattery into the hearts of those 
her heedless daughters, discanting on their 
beauty, perfections, prospects, and I know 



Digitized by Google 




110 



SEUMON IV. 



not what ; first exciting, and then ^tifying 
their youthful curiosity, with such suggestions, 
and such tales, as set thdr fancies all on fire ; 
by which any little structure of modesty, that 
Nature and Education may have raised, is 
consumed in a moment. Which contributes 
most to their fall from innocence, those she 
serpents, or the male ones mentioned before, 
I will not determine *, but remember, I have 
warned you against both. 

Permit me farther, on this occasion, just 
to remind you of poor Dinah. Secure as 
you may think yourselves, none of you, I 
suppose, have been trained more virtuously 
than it is probable she was under the 6ye of a 
pious father. But, alas ! the spirit of wan- 
dering seized her. “ She went forth to see 

the daughters of the land.” She met a 
betrayer, and lost her honour. But 1 pro- 
ceed. 

In the third place, to caution you against 
lliat fatal poison to virtue, which is conveyed 
by Profligate and by Improper Books. 

When entertainment is made the vehicle 
of instruction, nothing surely can be more 
harmless, agreeable, or useful. To prohibit 



Digitized by Google 




SffUMON IV. 



Ill 



y6ung minds the perusal of any writings, where 
Wisdom addresses the affections in the language 
of the imagination, may be sometimes well 
meant, but must be always injudicious. Some 
such Writings undoubtedly there are ; the off- 
spring of real genius enlightened by knowledge 
of the world, and prompted, it is to be hoped, 
by zeal for the improvement of youth.. 

Happy indeed, beyond the vulgar story- 
telling tribe, and highly to be praised, is he 
who, to fine sensibilities and a lively fancy 
superadding clear and comprehensive views of 
men and manners, writes to the heart with 
simplicity and chasteness, through a series , 
of adventures well conducted, and relating 
chiefly to scenes in ordinary life ; where the 
solid joys of virtue, and her sacred sorrows, 
are strongly contrasted with the hollowness and 
the hort-ors of vice ; where, by little and un- 
expected yet natural incidents of the tender 
and domestic kind, so peculiarly fitted to touch 
the soul, the most important lessons are im- 
pressed, and the most generous sentiments 
awakened ; where, to say no more, distress 
occasioned often by indiscretions, consistent 
with many degrees of worth, yet clouding 



Digitized by Google 




112. 



SERMON IT. 



for the time, is vrr’'? J up into n storm, such 
as to cnll i .e ,>: ;nc’j 'n? of fortitude nnd ’ 

wisdom, cciifirniing and b*.^iiten!iTg them by 
that exertion ; till at length the bursting tem- 
pest is totally, or in a great measure dispelled, 
so that the hitherto suspended and agitated rea- 
der is either relieved entirely, and delighted 
even to transport, or has left upon his mind at 
the conclusion a mixture of virtuous sadness, 
which serves to fasten the moral deeper, and 
to produce an unusual sobriety in all its pas- 
sions. 

Amongst the few works of this kind which 
I have seen, I cannot but look on those of Mr. 
Richardson as well entitled to the first rank; 
an author, of whom an indisputable judge has 
with equal truth and energy pronounced, 

“ that he taught the passions to move at the 
“ command of reason I will venture to add, 
an author, to whom your sex are under singu- 
lar obligations for his uncommon attention to 
their best interests ; but particularly for pre- 
senting, in a character sustained throughout 
with inexpressible pathos and delicacy, the 
most exalted standard of female excellence that 
was ever held up to their imitation. I would 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



113 



be understood to except that part of Clarissa’s 
conduct, which the author meant to exhibit as . 
exceptionable. Setting this aside, we find in 
her character a beauty, a sweetness, an art> 
lessness — what shall I say more } a sanctity of 
sentiment and manner, which, I own for my 
part, I have never seen equalled in any book 
of that sort ; yet such, at the same time, as 
appears no way impracticable for any woman 
who is ambitious of excelling. 

Beside the beautiful productions of that in- 
comparable pen, there seem to me to be very 
few, in the style of Novel, that you can read 
with safety, and yet fewer that you can read 
with advantage. — What shall we say of certain 
books, which we are assured (for we have not 
read them) are in their nature so shameful, in 
their tendency so pestiferous, and contain such, 
rank treason against the royalty of Virtue, such 
horrible violation of all decorum, that she who 
can bear to peruse them must in. her soul be a 
prostitute, let her reputation in life be what 
it will. But can it be true — say, ye chaste 
stars, that with innumerable eyes inspect the 
midnight behaviour of mortals — can it be- 
true, that any young woman, pretending to 



Digitized by Google 




Il-l' SERMON IV. * 

d^ceftcy, should endure for a moment to Idolt 
on this infernal brood of futility and lewdness ? 

Nor do we condenm those writings only, 
that with an effrontery which defies the laws . 
of G6d and meh, carry on their very forehead 
the mafic of the beast. We consider the gene- 
ral rtin of Novels as utterly unfit for you.’ In- 
struction they convey none. They paint scenes 
df pleasure and paSsion altogether improper fbr 
you to behold, even with thfe mhid’s tfe. 
Their descriptions are ofiien iooSe ahd luscious 
in a high dc^ee ; theif repfesefitatidns 6f l6ye 
between the sexes are almost universally 
Arained. All is dotage, dr despair; or else 
ranting sWeBed into burlesque. In short, the 
inajdtity of their lovers are either tri^e 
tks^ dr mock-heroes. A swefet sehSifaiKty, a 
charmifag tenderness, a delightful anguish, 
exalted generosity, heroic worth, and refihe- 
ittent of thought ; hoW seldom are these best 
ingredients of virtuous love mixed With any 
judgment or care in the composition of their 
principal characters ! 

In the Old Romance the passion appeared 
With all its enthusiasm. But then it was the 
enthusiasm df honour ; for love and honour 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



115 



» 



wtre there the same. The men were sincere, 
magnanimous, and noble ; the women were 
patterns of chastity, dignity, and affection. 
They were only to be won by real heroes ; and 
this title was founded in protecting, not in be- 
traying, the sex. The proper merit with them 
consisted in thedisplay of disinterested goodness, 
undaunted fortitude, and unalterable fidelity. 
The turn of those books was influenced by the 
genius of the times in which they were com- 
posed ; as that, on the other hand, was nou- 
rished by them. The characters they drew 
Were, no doubt, often heightened beyond na- 
ture j and the incidents they related, it is cw- 
tain, were commonly blended with the most 
ridiculous extravagance. At present, how- 
ever, I believe they may be read with perfect 
safety, if indeed there be any who choose to 
look into them. 

The times in which we live are in no danger 
, of adopting a system of romantic virtue. The 
parents of the present generation, what with 
selling their sons and daughters in marriage, 
and what with teaching them by every possible 
means the glorious principles of Avarice, have 
contrived pretty effectually to bringdown from 



Digitized by Google 




116 



SERMON ir. 



its former flights that idle, youthful, unprofit- 
able passion, which has for its object personal 
attractions, in preference to all the wealth of 
the world. With the successful endeavours of 
those profoundly politic parents, the levity of 
dissipation, the vanity of -parade, and the fury 
of gaming, now so prevalent, have concurred 
to cure completely in the fashionable of both 
sexes any tendency to mutual fondness. 

What has a modish young gentleman to do 
with those antiquated notions of gallantry, that 
were connected with veneration for female ex- 
cellence, invincible honour, and unspotted 
fame ? Is it not enough for him, if he intend 
to strike the matrimonial bargain, that by 
himself, or an old cunning father, he can 
drive a good one, to get possession of some 
woman, whose fortune joined to his own, if 
any he have, shall enable him to glitter in 
public, and in private to gratify other fa- 
vourite inclinations more freely ? Provided 
these grand points are gained in the person he '* 
thus traflicks for to be the partner of his life, 
what signifies her appearance, her understand- 
ing, or her character ? And those Fine Ladies 
who seek conquest only for show, too weU 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IV. 



117 



instructed in the superior consequence of that 
to put any value on so simple a thing as a 
Heart, merely for Its own sake ; what else have 
they to mind but securing, by whatever arts, 
such settlements as shall place them, when 
married, on a level with their companions, or 
if possible above them, in the all-important 
articles of gaiety and splendor ? As to men’s 
hazarding any thing In the defence of girls who 
may take it into their heads to think of repu- 
tation, delicacy, sentiment, and other such 
exploded ideas ; what can be so foolish ? — al- 
though to hazard their lives in a drunken 
quarrel for a prostitute might perhaps be 
brave ! 

That in so polite an age the elevations of 
love, the sanctity of truth, and the majesty of 
virtue, should pass for knight-errantry, can- 
not be surprising ; - nor is it any wonder, that 
the very best things, in the productions last- 
mentioned, should be no way interesting to a 
modern reader, whose taste and manners are 
formed on standards far different. Some how- 
ever may not be displeased to hear the opinion 
of no less a judge than Milton concerning them. 
It seems they were one of his early studies, and 



Digitized by Google 




IIS 



SSS.MON If. 



that on a m<»ral account. As his words to this 
purpose are remarkable, and not much known, 
I shall take the liberty to quote part of th^. 
^ I betook me among those lofty fables and 
** romances, which recount in solemn cantos 
the deeds of knighthood founded by our 
victorious kings, and from hence had in re- 
** nown over all Christendom'. There I read 
" it in the oath of every knight, that he 
** should defend to the expence of his blood, 
**^or of his life, if it so befell him, theho- 
“ nour and chastity of virgin or matron. From 
whence even then I learnt, what a noble 
** virtue chastity sure must be, to the defence 
“ of which so many worthies by such a dear 
« adventure of themselves had sworn. And 
<< if I found in the story afterwards any of 
them by word or deed breaking that oath, I 
judged it the same fault of the poet as that 
“ which is attributed to Homer, to have 
“ written undecent things of tliQ Gods. Only 
** this my mind gave me, that every free and 
** gentle spirit, without that oath, ought to be 
« born a knight, nor needed to expect the gilt 
” spur, or the laying of a sword upon his 
“ shoulder, to stir him up both by his counsel 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON IT. 



119 



and his arm to secure atid protect the weak> 
ness of any attempted chastity.” 

To come back to the species of writ^g 
which so many young women are apt to doat 
upon, the offspring of our present Novelists, I 
mean the greater part ; with whom we may 
join the common herd of Play-writers, Be- 
side the remarks already made on the former, 
is it not manifest with respect to both, that 
such books lead to a false taste of life and hap^ 
piness ; that they represent vices as frailties, 
and frailties as virtues ; that they engender no- 
tions of love unspeakably perverting and in- 
flammatory ; that they overlook in a great 
measure the finest part of the passion, which 
one would suspect the authors had never ex- 
perienced ; that they turn it nmst ccunmonly 
into an affair of wicked or of frivolous gallan- 
try ; that on many occasions they take off hiom 
the worst crimes committed in the prosecution 
of it, the horror which ought ever to fol- 
low them ; on some occasions actually re- 
ward those very crimes, and almost on all 
leave the female readers with this persuasion 
at best, that it is there business to get husbands 
at any rate, and by whatever means ? Add to 



Digitized by Google 




120 



SERMON IV. 



the account, that repentance for the foulest in- 
juries which can be done the sex, is generally 
represented as the pang, or rather the start, 
of a moment ; and holy wedlock converted 
into a sponge, to wipe out at a single stroke 
every stain of guilt and dishonour, which it 
was possible for the hero of the piece to con- 
tract. — Is this a kind of reading calculated to 
improve the principles, or preserve the So- 
briety, of female minds ? How much are 
those young women to be pitied, that have no 
wise parents or faithful tutors to direct them 
in relation to the books which are, or which 
are not, fit for them to read ! How much are 
those parents and tutors to be commended, 
who with particular solicitude watch over 
them in so important a concern ! 

I conclude with saying, that the subject of 
this discourse has unavoidably suggested some 
ideas, which, had we not undertaken to ad- 
dress young women at large, we should have 
certainly suppressed for the sake of more mo- 
dest natures, whom we would not willingly 
pain, -no not for a moment. But such we 
hope will be candid enough to excuse us, if, 
by throwing out to others what to them would 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON nr. 



121 



have been unnecessary, we may be happily 
instninaental in rescuing were it but one of 
their sex from the slavery of vice, or defend- 
ing a single innocent from its snares. 






VoL. I. c 



Digitized by Google 




■ ‘ SERMON V. 

. - fr ■ ^ ^ . t 

On Female Virtue, Friendship, and 
Conversation.* 



1 Tim. ii. 8, 9. 

I will— that wcmen 'adorn themselves with 
Col. iv. 6. 

m 

Let your Speech be always with Gracey seasoned 
with Salt. 

n*0 preserve the Sobriety enjoined by our 
apostle, there is required a positive discipline, 
as well as the negative part already explained. 
Be not alarmed at the name of Discipline. In 
what we are going to propose you will find 
‘nothing forbidden or harsh. We do not, you 
may believe, wish to see you cut off from the 
friendly intercourse and Innocent delights of 
society, confined to convents, as millions of 



Sobriety. 




StRMON V. 



123 

yonr sex most unnaturally are in popish coun- 
tries, and there condemned to the idle yet fa- 
tiguing task of a devotion unreasonable in 
many respects, uninteresting in most, feeble 
for want of temptation, visionary and dry at ' 
the same time. The genuine intention of 
piety was certainly to make its disciples amia- 
ble, useful, aud happy ; to give solidity to 
every virtue, aud grace to every relation of 
human life. Is it possible to reflect on the 
prodigious .multitudes of women shut up in 
those dens of superstition, without feeling hor-' 
ror at a system which, under the guise of su- 

* 

perior sanctity, sacrifices to hopeless solitude, 
frequently in all the flower of '^youth and 
beauty, such swarms of helpless beings ; who, 
had they remained in the world, might have 
been the ornament of their own sex, the de- 
light of ours, the mothers of a numerous race, 
and blessings to every country where they 

, dwell ! 

Of the colours with which this cruel prac- 
tice is disguised-by the church of Rome we are 
not ignorant : and we can even cortceive, th^lt 
the prepossessions of art, and the softenings of 
habit 5 their commerce with one another, their 



Digitized by Google 




124 



SERMON V. 



employments in their prison, and often, I 
doubt not, the ardour df a well-meaning 
though much mistaken zeal ; that all these 
may have the power to reconcile many of 
them to a state, otherwise gloomy beyond ex- 
pression. But what shall be said for the situa- 
•tion of the rest ; and what can justify the fla- 
grant opposition of such a system to the sacred 
laws of social duty, and the truly benevolent, 
joyful, and active spirit of the religion of Je- 
sus, as taught and exemplified by himself and 
his apostles ? 

But to proceed in our plan. From danger- 
ou’s connexions, from a dissipated life, and 
from books of a corrupting tendency, we at- 
tempted to put you upon your guard in our last 
discourse. In the present we will endeavour 
to point out that Society or Conversation, and 
in some following ones those Talents or Ac- 
complishments, which will contribute at once 
to fortify you against such snares, if they 
should fall your way ; to subdue any pro- 
pensities that might expose you too rashly to 
th*eir influence ; to strengthen all your virtuous 
resolves j and to supply inexhausted sources of 
solid, rational, and refined entertainment. 




SERMON V. 



125 



As to the conversation which you ought with | 

these views to cultivate, it may be proper. 

First of all, to say somewhat concerning ! 

those Early Friendships with one another, 
that usually lead you to the most intimate 
communications. I take it for granted, there | 

is no young woman who has not, or wishes | 

not to have, a companion* of her own sex, to \ 

whom she may unbosom herself on every oc- i 

casion. That there are women capable of 
friendship with women, I cannot, for my 
part, question in the least. - I have seen indu- 
bitable proofs of it, and those carried as far as 
seemed compatible with the imperfections of 
our common nature. I know it is questioned 
by many men ; while others believe, that it 
happens exceedingly seldom. Between mar-’ 
ried and unmarried women, I hope it happens 
very often. Whether it does so between those 
that are single, I confess myself a little doubt- 
ful. The preacher will be probably charged with 
partiality to his own sex, when he adds, that, 
so far as 'he has been able to observe, young 
men have appeared more frequently suscepti- 
ble of a generous and steady friendship for each 
other, than females as yet unconnected i es- 






Digitized by Google 





126 SFUMON V. 

pecially if the latter have had, or been sup- 
posed to have, pretentions to beauty not yet ad- 
justed by the public. 

Having professed himself however, what 
(as often as trut'v* will permit him) ^ he really 
Is, an advocate for the sex, and this being, 
the feature in their character which seems to 
him the most unfitvourable, ' he is willing to 
fijid out whether in their frame and condition. 



compared with those of the men, there be any 
ci cumstances which may help towards an 
apology , and h6 argues in the following man- 
ner- - . . 

The state of matrimony is necessary to the 
support, order, and comfort of society. But 
it is a state, that subjects the women to a greSit . 
variety of solicitude and pain. ' Nothing could 
carry them through it with any tolerable satis- 
faction or spirit, but • very strong almost un- 
conquerable 'attachments. To produce these, 
is it not fit they should be peculiarly sensible 
to the attention and regards of*' men ’iJpoii * 
the same ground^ does it not seem jigreeable to 
the pui^^ioses of rrovidence, that the securing 
of this attention, andthese regards, should be 
a principal aim ? But can such an aim be 




Digitized by Google 




SERMON V. 



127 

I 

pursued without frequent competition ? And 
will -not that too readily occasion jealousy, 
envy, and all the unamiable effects of mutual 
rivalship ? I mean, without the restraints 
of superior worth and sentiment. But can 
these be ordinarily expected from the prevail- 
ing, turn of fgniale education, or from the 
little pains that women, as well as other hu- 
man beings, commonly take to controul them- 
selves, and to act nobly ? In this last respect, 
the sexes appear pretty much on the ^same 
footing : in others, it is manifest, that the 
nature and situation of the men are very dif- 
ferent. Their constitution of mind, no less than 
of body, is for the most part hardy and rough. 

By means of both, by the demands of life, and 
by the impulse of passion, they are engaged • 
, in a vast diversity of pursuits, from whidx 
your sex are precluded by decorum, by soft- 
ness, and by fear. This diversity of daily 
pursuits, joined with the multiplicity of fe- 
mile o'rjict? thaf freer modes of living pre- 
sent to their imagination, and the power they 
have of unlimited choice whenever they are 
disposed to make it (a power which Nature . , 
probably, and Custom certainly, have denied . 



* 



Digitized by Google 




128 



SBR1\10M T. 



to the others) ; all this put together mmt m 
the case of our sex be productive of very 
difierent effects. ' 

Do I mean by this reasoning to justify 
in yours the indulgence of those little, and, 

I must needs say, in many instances, base 
passions towards one another, with which 
they have been so generally charged ? God 
forbid. I only mean to represent such passions ' 
in the first approach, and while not enter- 
tained, as less criminal than the men are apt 
to state them ; and to prove, that, in their 
attachments to each other, the latter have not 
always ^ that merit above the poor women, 
which they are apt to claim. In the mean 
» time it will be your business, by emulating 
them where they appear good-natured and dis- 
„ interested, to disprove their imputation, and - 
to show a temper open to Friendship, as well 
as to Love. h' 

To talk much of the latter is natural for 
both; to talk much of the former, is con- 
sidered as one way of doing themselves ho- 
nour. Friendship, they well know, is that 
dignified form, which in speculation at least 
•very heart must reverence. But in friend- 



Digitized by Google 




^SERMON ▼. 



129 



ship, as in religion, which in many respects 
it resembles, speculation is often substituted 
in the place of practice. ^People fancy them- 
selves possessed of the thing, and hope that 
others will fancy so too, because they are 
load of >the name, and have learnt to talk 
about it with plausibility. - Such tolk indeed 
imposes, till experience gives it the lie. 

To say the truth, there sedns in either sex 
but Jittle of what a fond imagination, unac- 
quainted with the falshood of the world, and 
warmed. by affections which its selfishness has 
not yet chilled, would reckon Friendship, 
la theory the standard is raised too high ; 
yet, metltinks, I would not have it set 
much lower. I would not, on any account,! 
have the honest sensibilities of ingenuous na- 
tnre checked by the o»:er-cautious documents 
of political -prudence. No advantage, ob- 
tained by such frigidity, can compensate the 
want of those warm effusions of the heart into 
the hoGom .of a Iriend, x which are idoubtless 
among the most exquisite pleasures -, at the 
same time that it must he owned they often, 
by >the inevitable 'lot of humanity, -make way 
for the bitterest pains which the breast can 
g^3 



Digitized by Google 




130 



Seiuion- V. 



experience. Happy beyond the coraihon con- 
dition of her sex is she, who has found a 
Friend indeed; open-hearted yet ' discreet, 
generously fervent yet steady* thoroughly vir- 
tuous but not severe, wise and chearful at the 
same, time ! Can such a friend be loved tod 
much, or cherished too tenderly ? If to ex- 
cellence, as well as liappiness, there be any 
one way more compendious than another, 
next to- friendsliip with the great Almighty, 
k is this. t . • 

But when a mixture of minds so beautifhl 
#> 

and so blessed takes place, it is generally,* if- 
not always, the result of early prepossession, » 
casual intercourse, secret sympathy, inexpli- 
cable attraction, or else a combination of such 
causes as are not to be brought together by’ 
management or design. This noble- plant* 
may be cultivated ; but it must grows sponta- 
neously. I can only therefore "'wish to each of 
you, beloved, the felicity of. finding such a* 
firiend ; and, having found her, the wisdom 
to use her well. ’ . . 

For the .more general commerce of social 
life, a few advices may not be improper. 
That, like the ordinary duties of religion, may 
. », • 



Digitized by Google 




, SERMON V. 



131 



be directed with tolerable advantage by hu- 
man precepts. The harmonies of holy friend- 
ship, like the sublimer contemplations of the 
Divinity, must depend more immediately on 
that hand, which can alone attune the finer 
movements, and exalt the best conceptions of 
the soul. Let us go on then, 

In the second place, to whal we may term 
the common tenor of your Company ; whichj ' 
for the sake of our subject, we must suppose 
left in some measure to your own choice. 
That it ought to be such as shall not corrupt 
your good manners, is a principle already 
established. It will be likewise understood,' 
that, in the society you choose to frequent, 
you will seek for that style of virtue which is 
most adapted to the turn of your own minds. 

But this last propensity should not, I appre- 
hend,-sbe indulged too far. I will explain 
myself. s 

The more intimate reciprocations of a close 
friendship are now, as . you know, out of the 
question. That at your time of life you should ' 
be particularly fond of sprightly conversation, 
where all is enlivened and joyful, and where 
Wisdom, when allowed to enter puts on her 



Digitized by Google 




182 



SERMON ▼. 



gayest garb, is perfectly natural. To advise 
you against it were as weak, as it would be i 
unfriendly. Such sprightliness and freedom, 
when supported by sense, and chastened by 
decency, have, always, I frankly acknow- 
ledge, appeared to me delightful. Dulness 
and insipidity, moroseness and rigour, are 
dead weights on every kind of social inter- 
course ', nor will I conceal it from you that I 
wish, as much as any of you can do, to make 
my escape from them on hll occasions. But 
tell me, my lively friends ; when the heart 
overflows with gaiety, is there no danger of its 
‘ bursting the proper bounds ? Is not extreme 
vivacity a near borderer on folly ? To pre- 
vent its breaking loose,' and throwing itself 
into very serious inconveniences, into a very 
hurtful conduct, will surely require the check 
of self-command. But how is that to’ be at- 
tained ? By associating only with the fanciful, 
the vivacious, or the witty ? Is hazard to be 
shunned by rushing into the fleld of battle ? 

Or, to represent things at the hest, is famili- 
arity with Wisdom to be contracted most rea- 
dily, where Wisdom appears most seldom .^ 
Would ye form habits ja£ sobriety, a spirit of 



Digitized by Google 




SBftmOK T. 



\ 

13S 

sedstteness, no way inconsistent with innocent 
mirth* you must frequently resort to the com- 
pany of the sober and the sedate. But will 
not these be chiefly found among such as are 
farther advanced in years than yourselves ? 
Shoold not you be ambitious of profiting by 
their experience and knowledge ? And will 
not a respect for sttpericu* age, when possessed 
of superior <li8cretion, often piiove a seasonable 
restraint on the wildness of more youthful sal- 
Kes ? He that waHceth with wise men shall 
^ be wise,” said the wisest of mortals. Is • 
not the maxim equally applicable to wcanen ? 

Will yon give me leave on this occasion to 
mention. What is much to the honour of our 
sex, that all the most sensible and worthy 
of yours have ever professed a particular relish 
for -the conversation of men of sense and 
worth i Such men, 1 presume, -are attached 
to the society of such women beyond every 
thing else in the world. And when circum- 
stances favour., this mutual tendency caimot 
fail to be a rich source of mutual improve- 
ment. Was not such reciprocal aid a great 
part nf Nature^ intention in that meiual and 
moral dif&renceof sex, which she has marked 



Digitized by Google 




4T SERMON V. 



JS4 

t. 

by characters no less distinguishable than those 
that diversify their outward forms ? 

To adopt the language of an amiable writer, 
who has studied the human heart with sue- 
cess: “We believe that it' is proper for per- 
“ sons of the same age, of the same sex, of* 

“ similar dispositions and pursuits, to associate 
“ together. But here we seem to be deceived 
“ by* words. If we consult nature and com- 
“ mon sense, we sliall find, that the true pro- * 
“ priety and harmony of social life depends 
“ upon the connexion of people of differ- 
“ ent, dispositions and characters judiciously 
“ blended together. Nature hath made, no 
“individual, nor no .class of people, inde. 

“ pendant of the rest of their species, or suf- 
“ fici nt for their own happiness. Each .sex, 
each character, each period of life, have 
“ their several advantages and disadvantages j 
“ and that union is the happiest and most 
“ proper, where wants are mutually supplied. 

“ The fair sex should naturally expect to gain 
“ from our conversation, knowledge, wisdom, 
and sedateness ; and they should give us in 
exchange humanity, politeness, chearful- 
dess, taste, and sentiment.” He adds 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON V. 



13£ 



* 



“ The levity, the rashness, and folly of early 
“ life, are tempered with the gravity, the 
“ caution, and the wisdom of age ; while the 
timidity, coldness of heart* and languor 
“ incident to declinmg years, are supported 
and assisted by .the courage, the warmtli, 
“.and the vivacity of .youth.” 

.The conversation of peopl colder than your- 
selves ;>vill be often accompanied with less 
joy at .the moment; but afterwards it will 
make 1 abundant compensation. It will pro- 
duce more recollection : and be assured, my 
^isters, those are thetruest pleasures which are 
tasted by a mind composed and serious. In 
that situaticHi, every thing is felt more strong- 
ly. A dissipated spirit is too su^jerficial to be 
capable of deep or permanent delight. Be- 
• sides, ^ as has been already hinted, the experi- 
ence and maturity of more years will enlarge 
your . understandings, at the same time that 
they will repress your vanity and presump- 
tion,;^ while the. sportiveness peculiar to youth 
will,'- on your pact, enliven, the seriousness of 
age. And if those, whom you thus respect- 
fully cultivate, have any good nature, they 
will certainly treat you with condescension 



Digitized by Google 




156 ^ SERMON V. 

I 

and forbearance. I said Good nature i for 
whatever excludes <that,^ is sure to lose- all the 
' influence, as well as praise of wisdom. 

• On this principle, 1 would .particularly re- 
commend to you the company of those, whose 
piety is of the most chearful and the mbst 
charitable strain. They are strangers to hu- 
man nature, who would affright the young 
by the frown of austerity-. True religion ever 
was, and ever will be, of the friendly ^kind. 
It is not zeal, hot bigotry., that refuses to 
make allowance for juvenile -^nrits and gayer 
tempers!. Could the old he convinced by^is, 
there ;is nothing we should he at greater pains 
to impress upon them than thk,,-.That as 
cheacfulness is the naost natural efiect of real 
goodness, it is also its most powerful recom- 
mendation. ,, Wisdom ;is never so ..attractive 
as.wh^ishe smiles. ;- >^i v , , .ji .. 

fiut do not:, my rdear hearers, conceive an 

I 

unfavourable . ophnoB of that venerable fdrm^ 
if in the virtue i of your mothers and aunts 
you should happen to And. a ^de£^t of good 
humour. -.Consider the conse^ences of de- 
clining health, ■ disagreeable , accidents, the 
death of their best friends, frequent inac- 



Digiiized by Google 




SERMON V. 



137 



tivity and depression after a life of action and 
enjoyment. If you can look forward so far 
as a few years at most, it will be right for 
you to think what you may probably feel 
at their age. And pray remember, that if 
you require and expect allowances to be made 
for starts of ill humour in yourselves, at a 
season when all should be naturally soft and 
gentle, it is but fair at least that you should 
excuse the same in those who, not to insist 
now on their other claims, are objects of 
tender sympathy, as being invaded by lan- 
guor, inhrmity, and affliction. 

I cannot however omit to caution them 
against giving way too. easily to that peevish- 
ness, which is apt to grow upon them from 
these circumstances ; and to remind them, 
that in such as have survived tlie lively taste 
of delight themselves, there is nothing so 
noble or pleasing, as not to discourage otherf 
who still retain it,' but on the contrary to 
show a generous satisfaction in seeing and 
making young people happy. Ah ! my re- 
spected friends, why would you ever forfeit 
this highest honour of an excellent temper ? 

» Why would you ever render your company 



Digitized by Google 




1S8 



SERMON V. 



forbidding, or assist in the ravage which Na- 
ture is unavoidably making on your attrac- 
tions ? Why rob Religion, of that engaging 
appearance, which is not only her native ap- 
pearance, but so peculiarly necessary to pro- 
mote her interest with unexperienced minds, 
in opposition to the wiles of her laughing 
rival? You will hardly believe Eow much 
harm is done by this conduct to the best 
of causes. ^ 

Tlie world will judge of piety by its pro- 
fessors. The proceeding is often unfair be- 
cause they are often unlike that which they 
profess. But there is no possibility of pre- 
venting it. 'fhe youqg have heard religion" 
represented as an enemy to joy, and affability/ 
Nothing can be more unjust. Instead there- 
fore of confirming those prejudices, it be- 
comes you to confute them by the only argu- 
ment that will thoroughly convince, the 
che »rfuine%s of your discourse, and the mild- 
ness of your demeanour. In this way you^ 
may hope to do great good. When “ Wis- 
“ doni is thus justified of her children,’’ they 
who are yet strangers to her will be induced 
to venerate an authority that appeal's. so.coj> • 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON V. 



155 



Uescenduig, and to study precepts that are 
productive of such happiness. But to retutn 
to my young hearers, allow me,'* 

In the third place, to offer you a few hints 
on the spirit and manner, in which I con- 
ceive your Conversation should be conducted. 
And now perhaps you imagine we want to 
preclude, every degree of tha( which passes 
under the name of Trifling. You are mis- 
taken. We do not expect that women should 
always utter grave sentences, nor men nei- 
ther. It were inconsistent with the state of 
mankind.* It cannot be expected from philo- 
sophers of the first rank ; nor if it could, do 
I know that it would be desirable. I am 
even inclined to believe’, that they who under- 
stand the art of what has been termed Trifling 
agreeably, have gained a very considerable 
point. 'The frailty of liuman nature^ and 
the infelicity of human life, require to be re- 
lieved and soothed. There arc many occa- 
eions, on which this is not to bo done by sage 
admonitions, or solemn reflexions. 'These* 
to well disposed minds, are often highly so- 
lacing ; but to dwell on them always^were to « 
' strain the machine beyond its powers. Be- 

« 

ft 



V • 



Digitized by Google 




140 



SERMON V. 



sides, in fact, a seasonable diversion to anxie- 
ty, a temporary forgetfulness of grief, is fre- 
quently a far better method to remove it, than 
any direct application or laboured remedy. To 
change the metaphor ; when the road proves 
rugged, or is in danger of growing tedious, one 
successful method of beguiling it is for the tra- 
vellers to chear and amuse one another by 
the play of fancy, and the facetiousness of 
mirth. But then the end of the journey must 
not be forgotten. Because v/e are weak, there 
is no reason why we should be silly. The 
brow of care may surely be smoothed without 
converting it into the laugh of folly. While 
we indulge the recreation necessary for mor- 
tal, let us maintain the temper requisite in 
immortal beings. To reconcile these two 
things, and to blend them happily, seems _ ‘ 

the proper science of creatures on their pro- , 
gress' through time to eternity. From you, 
my gentle friends, we look for every thing > 
that, next to the diviner influence of religion, 
can' soften the inequality, and animate the 
dulness of the way. ^ - 

, We wish to see you often smile ; but we 
would .not have you snuie always, if it were * •, , 

• 4jr • * 

% 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON r. 141 

possible. There are many scenes that demand 
a grave deportment ; there are not few that 
call for a mournful one. She that cannot dis- 
tinguish between laughter and happiness, ne- 
ver knew what the latter means. She that 
cannot “ 4feep with them that weep,” as well 
as “ rejoice with them that rejoice,” is a 
stranger to one of the sweetest sources of en- 
joyment, no less than to one of the noblest 
lessons of Christianity. Those are the happiest 
dispositions, which are the best. Benevolence 
is the supreme perfection of the ever-blessed 
Deity. He is infinitely removed from every 
painful impression. Yet scripture, in the style 
of accomodation, ascribes to him all the 
guiltless emotions of humanity : and we know 
that our Saviour was formerly on earth, and 
is now in heaven^ “ touched .with the feeling 
of our infirmities.” . 

With the character of a Christian Wo- 
man nothing, methinks, can better correspond 
than a propensity to melt into affectionate sor- 
row. It becomes alike her religion and her ' 
sex. Never, my fair auditory, never do your 
eyes shine with a more delightful effulgence, 
than when suffused with all the trembling soft- 




3ERM0N T. 



U2 






ness of •grief for virtue in distress, or of soli- 
citude for firiendship ^ in danger. Believe me, 
if the gaiety of conversation gave place some- 
what oftener to the tender tale of wo, you 
would not to f such at least of your male ac- 
quaintaiica .as have hearts, appeal* at all the 
less IdVely. " The sigh of compassion stealing 
from a female breast, on the mention of ca- 
lamity, would be rather more musical in their 
ears, than the loud bursts of unmeaning laugh- ^ 
ter, with wiiich they are often entertained. 
Let me add here, that the charms of innocence' 
and sympathy appearing in your discourse will, 
to every discerning man, spread around you 
a lustre which all the jewels in the world can- 
not bestow. i;< 



Tlie diamond’s and the ruby’s blaze 

Disputes the palm with beauty’s queen : 

Not beauty's queen commands such praise. 

Devoid of virtue if she's seen. 

But the soft tear in Pity’s eye 
Outshines the diamond's brightest beams j 
But the sweet blush of Modesty • » 

More beauteous than the ruby seems. 

If we speak of improvement ; merciful Re- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON V. 



U3 



deemer, how edifying to the soul, is this ge- 
nerous sensibility ! “ It is better to go to the 

“ house of mourning than to the house of 
feasting : for that is the end of all men, and 
** the living will lay it to heart. Sorrow is 
“ better than laughter : for by the sadness of 
“ the countenance the heart is made better. 
“ The heart of the wise is in the house of 
“ mourning; but the heart of fools is in the 
“ house of mirth. As the crackling of thorns 
“under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool. 
“This also is vanity.’ You know who said 
so — The man who had spent many a day, and 
many a night, in the bower of vofnptuousness, 
far from the cries of misery, and the moans of 
complaint; who gat him “ men-singers and 
“ women-singers, and the delights of the 
“ sons of men who had, times without 
number, said in ^ his heart, “ Go to now, I 
“ will prove thee with mirth, therefore en- 
“ joy pleasure;” who sought by a -prudent 
use of wine to exalt his own spirits, and to 
promote the hilarity of those about him in 
a word, who kept not from his eyes whatso- 
ever they desired^ nor withheld his heart 
from any joy. This, I say, was the man whom 

^ 9 

# 



Digitized by Google 




MiRMON V. 



experience, as well as inspiration prompted to 
give the preference you have just now heard. 
There is — yes, there is attendant on virtuous 
sadness a sensation which,, in point of indul- 
gence and elevation at once, is superior to all 
that was ever felt by a light mind, in the 
flush of festivity, or amidst the triumph of 
wit. 

Having mentioned Wit, let me proceed to 
warn you against the affectation and the abuse 
of it. Here our text from the Colossians 
comes in with propriety, “ Let your speech be 

always with Grace, seasoned with Salt.” 
'rtiese remarkable words were addressed to 
Christians in geneial. They are considered by 
.the best commentators, as an exhortation to 
that kind of converse, which, both for matter 
and manner, shall appear most graceful, and 
prove most acceptable: being tempered by cour- 
teousness and modesty, seasoned with wisdom 
and discretion, that like salt will serve at the 
same instant, to prevent its corruption and 
heighten its flavour. How beautiful this pre- 
cept in itself! How useful and pleasing in the 
, practice I How peculiarly flt to be practised by 
you, my female friends, on the turn of whose 

^ V* 




SERMON ▼. 



US 

conversation and deportment so much depends 
to yourselves, and all about you ! From what 
I have now to ^er, it will be found likewise 
to come, with advantage, in aid of our lead- 
ing doctrine ; since there are net perhaps ma- 
ny worse foes to that Sobriety of spirit^ which 
we would still inculcatej than the abuse and 
affectation'already mentioned. 

It is not my design to gather up, if I could, 
the profusion of flowers that have been scat- 
tered by innumerable hands on this tempting 
theme ; and by which those very hands have, 
in their own case, shown how difficult it is to 
resist the temptation. I would only observe, 
that the dangerous talent in question has been 
well compared to the dancing of a meteor, 
that blazes, allures, and misleads^ Most cer- 
tainly it alone can never be a steady light ; and 
too probably k is often -a fatal one. Of those 
who have resigned themselves to its guidance, 
how few has it not betrayed into great indis- 
cretions at least, by inflaming their thirst of 
applause t by rendering them little nice in their 
choice of company j by seducing them into 
strokes of satire, too offensive to the persons 
against whom they were levelled, not to be 
VoL. I. H * 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON T. 



H6 

repelled upon the authors with full vengeance ; 
and finally, by making them, in cousequence 
of that heat which produces, and that vanity 
which fosters it, forgetful of those cool and 
moderate rules that ought' to regulate their 
conduct ! 

A very, few there may have been, endowed 
with judgment and temper sufficient to restrain 
them from indulging “ the rash dexterity of 
wit,” and to direct it to purposes equally 
agreeable and beneficial. -But one thing is 
certain, that witty men for the most part have 
had few friends, though many admirers. Their 
conversation has been courted, while their 
abilities have been feared, or their charac- 
ters hated, or both. In truth the last have 
% 

seldom merited affection, even when the first 
have excited esteem. Sometimes their hearts 
have been so bad, as at. length to bring their 
heads into disgrace. • At any rate,' ^e faculty 
termed Wit is commonly looked upon with a’ 
suspicious eye, as a two-edged sword, from 
which not even the sacredness of friendship 
gip secure. It is especially, I think, dreaded 
in women. In a Mrs. Rowe, I dare say, it 
Vas not. To great brilliancy of imagination 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON V. 



14-T 

that female angel joined yet greater goodness of 
disposition ; and never wrote, nor, as I have 
been told, was ever supposed to have said, in 
her whole life, an ill-natured, or even an in- 
delicate thing. Of such a woman, with all 
her talents, none could be afraid. In her 
company, it must have been impossible not to 
feel respect; but then it would be like that, 
which the pious man entertains for a ministering 
spirit from heaven, a respect full of confi- 
dence and joy. If aught on earth can present 
the image of celestial excellence in its softest 
array, it is surely an Accomplished Woman, 
in whom purity and .mieekness, intelligence 
and modesty, mingle their charms. But when 
I speak on this subject, need I tell you, that 
men of the best sense have been usually 
averse to the thought of marrying a witty 
female ? 

You will probably tell me, they were afraid 
of being outshone ; and some of them perhaps 
might be so. But I am apt to believe, that 
many of them acted on difterent motives. 
Men who understand the science of domestic 
happiness, know that its very first principle 
* is ease. Of that indeed we grow fonder, in 

H 2 



Digitized by Google 




V. 






¥ 



whatever condition, as we advance in We, 
and as the heat of youth, abates. But we can- 
not be easy, where we are not safe. We are 
never safe in tlie company of a critic ; and al- 
most every wit is a critic by ' profession. In 
such company we are not at liberty to unbend 
ourselves. All must be the straining of study, 
or the anxiety of apprehension ; Iww painhil I 
Where the heart may not expand and openit- 
^ self with freedom, farewell to real friendship, 
farewell to convivial delight ! 'But 'to su#er 
this restraint at home, what misery 4 From 
*' the brandishings of wit in the hand of iH-na- 
ture, of imperious passion, or of unbounded 
vanity, who would not flee ? But when that, 
weapon is pointed at a husband, is it to be 
wondered if from his own house he takes shel- 
te;- in the tavern ? He sought a soft friend ; he 
expected to be happy in a reasonable compa- 
nion. He has found a perpetual satirist, or a 
self-suflficient pratler. How have I pitted such 
a man, when 1 have seen him tn continual 
fear on his own account, and that of his 
friends, and for the poor lady herself; lest, 
in the run of her discourse, she should ^ 
guilty of soil;e petulance, or some tadiscretim, 




Mltll«>K T. 



HSt 

that would expoM her aitd hart them all ! 
But take the matter at the best ; there is still 
all the difihrence m the world between the’ 
entertainer of an • ereniog, and a partner for 
life. Of the latter a sober mind, steady at> 
tachraent> and j;entle manners, joined to a 
good understanding, will ever be the chief 
recommendations ; whereas the qualities that 
sparkle will be often sufficient for the for> 
iner. 

As to the affiectation of wit, one can hardly 
say, whether it be most ridiculous or hurtful. 
The abuse of it, which we have been just con- 
sidering, we are sometimes, perhaps too often, 
inclined to forgive, for the sake of that 
amusement which in spite of all the im^H-o- 
prieties mentioned it yet affiords. The other 
is universally contemptible and odious. Who 
is not shocked by the flippant impertinence of 
a self-conceited woman, that wants to dazzle 
by the supposed superiority of her powers ? If 
you, my fair ones, have knowledge and capa- 
city } let it be seen, by your not affecting to 
show them, that you have something much 
more valuable, humility and wisdom. 



Digitized by Google 




ISO 



>SBRMt>M r. 



" Nflked in nothing^ shaU a woman be^ * 

Y, But veil lier very wit with modesty. 

“ Let man discover, let not her display, 

" Bnt yield her charms of miad with sweet delay.” 

Must women then keep silence in the house, 
as well as in the church? By no meahs. There 
may indeed be "many cases, in which it wil> 
particularly become a young lady to observe 
the apostolic rule, Be swift to hear, and slow 
to speak;”' but there Are many too, whereifi 
it will be no less fit, that with an unassuming 
air she should endeavour t» support and enlf- 
ven the conversation. It is the^ opinion of 
some, that girls should never speak before 
company, when their parents are present; 
anti parents there are, so deficient in under- 
standing, as to make this" a rule. How then 
shall those girls learn to acquit themselves 
properly in their absence ? It is hard if you 
cannot distinguish, and teach your daughters 
to distinguish, between good "breeding and 
pertness, between an obliging study to please 
and an Indecent desire to put themselves for- 
ward, between a laudable inquisitiveness and 
an Imfropet curiosity. But this, I confess, is 
not the most common mistake, in the educa- 






Digitized by Google 




SERMON ▼. 



•151 



lion of young women ; and they most permit 
me to say, that it were ;well if the generality of * 
mothers were careful, by prudent instruction 
in private, to repress that talkative humour 
which runs away with so many of them, End 
never* quits them all their life after, for want 
of being curbed in their early years. * But 
what words can express the impertinence of a 
finale tongue let loose into boundless loqua- 
city ? Nothing can be more stunning, except 
where a number of Fine Ladies open at once 
——Protect us, ye powers of gentleness and 
decoruna, protect us from the disgust of such 

a scene. Ah ! my dear hearers, if ye knew 

how terrible it appears to a male ear of the 
least delicacy, I. think you would take care 
never to practise it. 

For endless prattling^ and loud discourse, 
no degree of capacity can atone. I join them 
together, because in effect they are seldom se- 
parate. But the noisy, empty, trivial chatter 
of everlasting folly — it is too much for human 
patience to sustain. How different from that 
playful spirit in conversation, spoken of before ; 
which, blended with good sense and kept 
within reasonable bounds, contributes, like 



Digitized by Google 







SBIIUOK V. 



lighter ami more careless tcmehes in a pic* 
tmre, to give an air of ease atnd freedom to the 
whole f This fmdom and ease, when ac> 
companicd with decency and variety, a certain 
native prettiness and unstudied correctness, are 
among the most pleasing chancfieristies of 
aoale society in its best shape. 

Toot taikn^ so much about dress, and fa« 
^ionl, and faSluonable amusements, as the 
h.% greater part of yon are ever dokig, in pre* 
ference better sohjects, is, to say the softest 
^ thing of k, a weakness which cannot be justH 
but which ptiiHps niust, ^ 
sure, be fbrgieen to yoitr sex. As to the 
of seaiidal and depute, which imy be called 
the Aeid of speech, ih contradistihetion td the 
Salt recommended by our apostle^ it must be 
reserved foe a future CohsideratitHt. The men. 
indeed, are ready to triumph at the very men^ 
tion of k. Whether they have reason to 
triumph on the Whole, may be a diffictilt qoes* 
tion. The agreeable ^alities named a mo^ 
ment ago, they must fairly give dp to the wo*' 
men. HoW few of them in comparison possess, 
or at least exercise, the power of keeping dis- 
. course aUve, without assistance froin win<% 



Digitized by Google 




‘ MlkMON T, 



153 



fgom politicr,' from business, from the news 
of the day, and £rom another theme, for 
which their unrestrained and inextinguishable* 
passion, in male company, argues a descent of 
soul, a degradation of thought, whereof men 
endowed with the least understanding ought 
to be ashamed I 

1 jutt nsentioned Unstudied Correctness as 
t^propmted to the conversation of cultivated 
women. 1 mean that easy elegance of sp^h, 
which results from clear and lively ideas, ex> 
pressed with the simplicity of nature, some- 
what aided by the knowledge of books. Tq 
this the best scholars amongst the men rousr- 
seldom or never lay claim. It is necessari.^ 
precluded by their profounder studies, and 
that scrupulous attention to the minutest rules 
of grammar, which is induced by the turn of 
their education ; and which, though by prac- 
tice it nuy become in a great degree habitual 
and .mechanical, will yet always appear defi» 
eient in the happy £kciUty, wherewith so uiany 
females clothe their sentiments. That theg 
who are naturally fond of ornament in every 
thing else, should show a certain honest neg- 
lect of it, where it is least requisite, where it i» 

N 8 



Digitized by Google 




154 



teRMOK V; 



generally hurtful by embarrassing and fetter* 
ing that which ought to befree and unaffected*' 
isurely 'entitles them to some praise. 

How often 'have we seen very ingeniotia 
men perplexed,' when they have wished to ex- 
plain themselves on- some topic by no means 
abtruse, and which they perfectly understood)^ 
With how little grace have we heard them 
tell a story ! ' In these, and such like points, 
women of any capacity exceU To what can 
the difference be owing? I- fancy to this, that 
the former, in their words and ideas, attend 
too sedulously to precision and embellishment } 

' while the latter are content to speak just what 
they mean, and to relate simply what they 
^ have read or heard, as it rises to, their minds, 

^ , -V , — 

without the labour of accuracy, which often, 
hampers the faculties in their operation, and 
disturbs the train of nature. 

On this’ principle, I presume, is founded that 
maxim, which makes the perfection of art to 
lie in concealing it ; an attainment extremely 
uncommon, and which, where it has taken 
place, has always been considered as the most 
difficult* -and the most beautiful, of any that 
can distinguish the productions of taste. From 



Digitized by Google 




SEUMON ▼. 



155 



ihis it is, that the celebrated works of anci- 
ent genius have been judged to derive a large x 

share of the superiority usnally ascribed to 
. them^ ^FrcHn the'same source chiefly, to com- 
pare small thBngs' .nith great,) has .probably 
‘ arisen that peculiar happiness in letter-writing, 
which-! the men,- 1 think, are willing to allow * 
to your sex. Here, indeed, they comfort- 
themselves with their superior ' strength, and 
depth, and learned elegance in that, and 
ether matters where ) intellect is "concerned. 
Pretensions to tUfcse, with a few exceptions, I 
believe, to say ‘the truth, you had better re- 
sign. 

For my part, I could heartily wish to see 
. the female world more accomplished than it 
is ; ban I do not wish to, see it abound with 
metaphysicians, historians, speculative philo- 
sophers, or Learned Ladies of any kind. I 
should be afraid, lest the sex should lose in. 
softness what they gained in force; and lest 
the pursuit of such elevation should interfere- 
a little with the plain duties and' humble vir- 
tues of life. Amiable instances of the con- 
trary I know there are. I think at this mo- 
ment of one lady, in particular, who to an 



Digitized by Google 




156 



SIEMOH ▼. 



cltensife knowledge in phil6sopb]r and ka- 
guagts ancictat and itaodcni) with some poex 
tion of poetical geniui, and a considerable de- 
gree of literary fame, has the sense and worth 
. to joih every, domestic foality that can adorn 
a woman in situation. 

• « 

To ktculcate such qualities, together with 
diote elegvxt and intellectual improvemenoa 
' trhich young ladies would ^.Wril tb acquire^ 
With a view to sobriety, usefulnesB,- self-en- 
jOyment, and the powers of pleasing, will be 
the business of some subsequent addresses. 
What place religion ot^t to hate in female 
discourse, must be likewise a subject of w- 
quiry under anothel* head. In the mean^ 
while, let me entreat you to recollect^ that on . 
^cultivating a propw, spirit of conversation will 
depend a great part of yoiir ju-ofictency ai^ 
Ours ; of your present acceptance amongst the 
wise and deservmg j Of your future conse- 
qVience and merit in society ; of your enter- 
tainment, satisfaction, and, I may add, safety^ 
through the* successire stages of life. Much 
of that life is spent hi scenes of social inter- 
course. knport^t occasions arise but seldom. 

A large proportion must be consigned to trifles. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON ▼. 



Little things belong to Iktle mortals. The 
virtue and happiness of the sexes are princi^ • 
pally affected by the* daily indiscriminate te- 
nor of their coaunerce. What felicity, and 
what gbry, may not you, my friends, derive 
from those talents by which that is regulated 
and sweetened, refined and raised ! 



Digitized by Google 




i i, 




Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 

On Female Virtue, with Domestic ancE 
Elegant Accomplishments.. 



1 Tim. li. 8, 9. 

I v)ill — that nuotmn adorn ibtmstlvts nuith 
Sobriety. 

Prov. xx-xi. to. 31: . ' ‘ 

^ho can find a Virtuous Woman? For.fier 

price is far above rubies. Give her cf the 

fruit of her handsy and let her Works praise: 
her. in the gates. * * 



To divert fancy, ta gratify desire, and in 
general to be a sort of better servants, are all. 
the purposes for which some suppose your sex, 
designed. A most illiberal supposition ! The 
least degree of refinement or candour will dis- 
pose us to regard them in a far higher point 
of light. They were manifestly, intended to be 



Digitized by Googitf 




160 



N 



SERMON TI. 



the mothers and formers of a rational and inv> 
mortal ofispring ; to be a kind of softer comn 
panions, who, by nameless delightful sympa- 
thies and endearments, m'ght improve oor 
pleasures and soothe our pains j to lighten the 
load of domestic cares, and thereby leave us 
more at leisure for rougher labours, or severer 
studies ; and finally, to spread a certain grace 
and embellishment over human life. To wish 
to degrade them from so honourable a station, 
indicates a mixture of ignorance, grossness, 
and barbarity. But the men who think in 
this manner, do themselves irreparable wrong, 
by putting it out of their power ever to enjoy 
the tenderest sentiment and most delicious 
feelings of the heart. He that has a true taste 
of happiness will choose, for his own sex, to 
cherish the*kindest opinion of the female des-, 
tination. 

Yet what shall we say ? Are there not many 
women who seem to have entirely forgottra it 
themselves ; to have relinquished at least the 
most valuable part of their claim, and to haw 
conspired with those male tyrants in sinking, 
their own importance ? How often do- we sec 
them disfigured. by afiectation and cancel 




SKRMON VI. 



161 



How often dii^gnic^ and ruined bf unpru- 
dence ! What shameful inattention to the cul- 
ture of their minds> in numberless instances ! 
What perversion, in not a few, of excellent 
understandings, through a levity that passes for 
.innocent, because not polluted by vite, nay 
for agreeable, because accompanied with 
youth I Who that ia a Well-wisher to the sex, 
can forbear to be mortified on finding such 
multitudes so ungaiidy in then manners, so 
unentertaming in their discourse, so destitute 
of every S(did and useful improvement, in a 
word, so totally devoid of all that can confer 
significance, or beget esteem \ not to speak of , 
downright worthlessness, proceeding from bad 
princi{des or wicked company. 

With respect to these indeed, as well as the 
rest, I am willing to believe, that they arc 
frequently occasioned by vacancy of thought, 
and want of occupation, which expose the 
mind to every snare ; and that, in many caset^ 
all this evil might, through God's blessing^ 
be happily prevented by . an early and diliget^ 
application to Female 'Accomplishments. Snch 
therefore I will proceed to recommend, aS a 
farther means of maintaining the Sobriety eQ^ 



Digitized by Google 




162 



SERMON TI.' 



joined by oiir apostler 'Not that I propose to 
oonBne myself to this -■ single view. Every 
other laudable and beneficial purpose, which 
tliose accomplishments are calculated to serve, 
will concur to enforce tfeeni. . They may be • 
divided into three classes. Domestic, Elegant,, 
and Intellectual. ~ 

As to the first, I' most remind' you ''that, 
how much soever they -may be now neglected 
by many women as ^ow their notice, no 
height of rank or affluence can justify such 
neglect.:.; The care of a houishold all ages and 
nations have agreed to consider as an indi^pen^ 
sable part of i female employment, in every 
situation Jhat admks.it. The passage, from 
which I have taken one of my texts deserves 
on this, occasion your particular attention. ^'As 
it exhibits perhaps the most beautiful picture 
that was ever drawn of the Virtuous Woman, 
in a sphere of activity which you all hope to 
fill, and for which you ought tot qualify youT'* 
selves as much as possible in'yonr present cou- 
jlition; I will read the whole, together wkk 
a short paraphrase which I have borrowed 
chiefly from the pious and learned bishop Pa- 
trick, but without adhering to his diction. - 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON rr. 



163 



Verse 10. “ Who can find a Virtuous Wo- 

man ? her price is far above rubies.” Such 
a person, says the mother of Lemuel (a young 
prince for whose welfare she was most ten- 
derly solicitous) such a person as I would re- 
commend for a wife is too hard to be found; 
one endowed with true worth and piety, who 
deems nothing beneath her that can any way 
become her station ; one, in short, possessed of 
those various and ’ excellent qualities that fit 
her for adorning it, and render her infinitely 
more 'valuable than all the pearls or precious 
stones, with which so many women are fond 
of being decked. 

11.“ The heart of her husband doth safely 
“ trust in her ; so that he shall have no need 
“ of spoil.” In her personal honour and fide^ 
lity, and also in her oeconomy and prudence 
with regard to all affairs at home, her husband 
reposes such perfect confidence, that he can 
go abroad, and attend to public business, with- 
out the smallest anxiety about his domestic 
concerns, or the least temptation to enrich 
himself at the expence of other men. 

^ 12.*^“ She will do him good, and not evil, 
“ all the days of her life.” She will not onl^ 



Digitized by Google 




}64 



SERMON Tl. 



retarn his lore with equal auction,' but en- 
deavour to ensure and heighten his esteem by 
every engaging and respectable virtue. She 
win not only avoid whatever might provoke 
or displease, but study to deserve well of him 
by promoting his interest, ■ and raising his re- 
putation } and that not merely by starts, or m 
transient fits of good humour, but uniformly 
and constantly every day of her life. 

13. <* She seeketh wool and flax, and 
“worketh willingly with her hands.’*. To 
Her idleness is so hateful, that her husband 
has no occasion to excite her to industry. Of 
her own accord she sets up a linen and woollen 
manufacture, to which she applies her bands 
so readily, as well as so dextrously, that it is 
apparent she delicts in the work. 

14. ** She is like the merchants* ships/ 
“ she brlngcth her food from afiur.’* Her ap- 
plication and ingenuity exutble her to maintain 
her family without expence, by exchanging the 
product for foreign commodities, when neces- 
sary, on terms no less advantageous than if 
her husband fitted out a fleet of merchant 
ships to fetch them directly frmn distant 
countries. 



Digitized by Google 




TI. 165 

1 5. She riseth dso ■while it is yet night ; 

** tnd giveth meat to her houshold, and a por- 

tion to her maidens.” With such spirit and 
vigour does she proceed, that, instead of in- 
dnlging herself in overmuch sleep, she rises 
before break of day, to make provision for 
those who are to go abroad to work in the 
fields, and to set her maidens their several 
tasks at home. 

1 6. She considereth a field, and buyeth 

** it : with the fruit of her hands she planteth 
** a vineyard.” So far is she from wasting 
her husband's estate, that by her frugality 
and capacity she is continually improving it j 
first purchasing a field fit for corn, when she 
meets with one that on due inspection she 
finds worth the price, and then from the 
fruit of her own labours adding to it a vine- 
yard, which she takes care -to have well 
planted. , 

17. “ She girdeth her loins with strength, 

** and strcngtheneth her arms.” As she is 
quick in her orders to those about her, so she 
bestirs herself with the utmost activity, de- 
clining no pains or exertion proportioned to ' 
her strength, which is increased by constant 



Digitized by Google 




^66 tSKMON TI. 

exercise* and which, with the chearfulness* 
expedition, and utility that attend it, she pre- 
fers to all the decorations and delicacy of in- 
dolent beauty. 

18. “ She perceiveth that her merchan- 
“ disc is good: her candle goeth not out 
** by night.” Her labour indeed she finds so 
wholesome, and her traffick so profitable, 
that she does not always conclude her work 
with the day ; but often continues it through 
as much of the night, as can be spared from 
necessary repose. 

19. “ She layeth her hands to the spindle, 
“ and her hands hold the distaff.” Such ma- 
nual operations as are suited to her sex, she 
reckons not any disjm'agement to her quality. 
Her fingers show a dexterity that is alike 
pleasing in the performance, and beneficial 
in the effects. 

20. ** She stretcheth out her hand to the 
poor : yea, she reacheth forth her hands to 
the needy.” Those hands, which she em- 
ploys with so much diligence for the ad- 
vantage of her family, she fails not to stretch 
out with equal alacrity for the relief of the 
indigent. She is not so engrossed by the 



Digitized by Google 




> 4 

f 

! 

1 

SERMON TI. 167 

t' 

cares of her own houshold, as to forget the 
claims of those who have no habitation. In ' 

Her frugality never degenerates into parsi- 
mony, but always ministers to munificence. 

The poor, whether nearer or more remote, 
share liberally in her bounty. 

21. “ She is not afraid of the snow for 
“ her houshold : for all her houshold are 

cloathed with scarlet.” Her bounty in the 
mean while is accompanied with such discre- 
tion, that' her own family and servants are in 
no danger of suflFering by it. They are pro- 
vided against the hardest winter ; they have 
changes of raiment for the several seasons; 
and when they are to wait upon her, or to 
appear on any particular occasion that requires 
it, she is careful to have them clothed with a 
. degree of splendour. . ; ' . 

22. “ She maketh herself coverings of 
“ tapestry : her clothing is silk and purple.” 

The furniture of her house is noble. Her 
own apparel corresponds with it. She Is not 
ignorant of what belongs to her rank ; and 
she supports it with a magnificence so much 
the more conspicuous for being principally 
her own handiwork. , . 



Digitized by Google 




16 B 



SEUMOM VI. 



23; • Her husband is known in the gates, 
” when he sitteth among the elders of the 
“ land.” Her attention to the appearance 
of her husband is not less than to her own. 
When he comes into the court of judica- 
ture, and takes his place amongst the senators 
of the eountry, he is distinguished by the 
richness and elegance of the robes which she 
has jwepared for him. The Beholders pro- 
nounce him a happy msm, in having such 
a wife as does him honour in public as well 
as private, and who, by easing him of all 
lesser cares, leaves him at full liberty to 
devote himself to the most important trans- 
actions. 

24. She maketh fine linen, and selleth 
** it, and delivereth girdles unto the mer- 
chant.” Her industry to provide for her 
family is such, that she follows more arts 
than one or two ; ending, for example, be- 
side other articles already named, fine linen, 
embroidered belts, and girdles of different 
kinds curiously wrought, which she sells at 
a considerable price to the Phenicbn mer- 
chant. 

25. " Strength and honour are her cloth- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



169 



lag ; and she shall rejoice in time to come.” 
jUthough in every thing she makes, whether 
for sale or for use, she displays a just taste of 
what is both beautiful and splendid, still it 
must be remembered, that her chief orna- 
ments are a firm and constant mind, a modest 
and becoming deportment, a manner of deal- 
ing with all, that is honourable, uniform, 
and generous ; which, joined to her other 
qualities before mentioned, free her from all 
fear about future events, and prepare her 
meet affliction, decay, and even death itself, 
with serenity and hope. 

26 . “ She openeth her mouth with wis- 

“ dom, and in her tongue is the law of 
“ kindness.” Add to the rest this particular 
praise, that as she preserves the due mean 
between taciturnity and loquaciousness, so she 
loves not to talk on foolish and frivolous sub- 
jects, but on such as are serious ^and useful j 
on which, when she c.m introduce them with 
propriety, she is sure to deliver herself perti- 
nently and gracefully. Her language on all 
occasions Is soft and pleasing, expressive of 
a gentle mind, and a tender heart. From 
the same fund, she is led to embrace every 
VoL. I. I 



Digitized by Google 




1 70 SERMON Tl. 

opportunity of inculcating on all around her, 
kind affections and mutual concord. 

27. " She looketh well to the ways of 
** her houshold, and eateth not the bread of 
** idleness.” In her own house most espe- 
cially she is studious of conveying edification. “ 
She observes the motions, and inspects the 
manners of every one there, whom she nei- 
ther suffers to go abroad at their pleasure, nor 
to labour at home without proper instruction : 

a concern, which might alone be thought 
sufficient to employ her ; insomuch that if 
she did nothing else she would yet deserve the 
bread she eats. 

28. “ Her children arise up, and call her 
blessed : her husband also, and he praiseth 
her.” Happy the children of such a mo- 
ther, whose maternal care for their provision, 
but much more for their education, cannot 
fail of exciting their love and gratitude very 
early, and of disposing them, when grown 
up, to honour her person and venerate her 
virtues ! Happy beyond expression the hus- 
band of such a wife ! He can never com- 
mend her sufllciently. While he attempts 
the favourite subject, he is so struck with her 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



171 ■ 

surpassing worth, that he cannot restrain him- 
self from crying out, 

29. “ Many daughters have done vir- 
“ tuously ; but thou excellest them all.” The 
number of those women who have acted wor- 
thily, who have mightily advanced their fa- 
milies, and nobly served the generations in 
which they lived, is not small. They are well 
entitled to applause, and I give it them' with 
pleasure ; but there never was any comparable 

to Thee. Thy merits, thou best of women, # 
and most beloved, thy merits far, far tran- 
scend them all ! 

30. “ Favour is deceitful, and beauty is 
** vain : but a woman that feareth the Lord, ^ 

“ she shall be praised.” A good complexion 
and fine shape are, no doubt, engaging. A 
graceful mien and lovely features are yet 
more so. But as the greatest beauty soon 
fades, and at last vanishes, so, alas ! many 
ill qualities may lie concealed under all these 
fair appearances j such, indeed, as utterly to 
disappoint every hope of happiness from that 
quarter. A truly pious woman, one who is 
governed throughout byr-a sense of duty, and 
who to all her other excellent qualities adds 

t 2 



Digitized by Googic 




172 



SERMON VI. 



that reverence for God, which gives them at 
once elevation and stability — she, and she 
alone, is the completely amiable object, who 
will always impart delight, and always de- 
serve approbation. 

SI. “ Give her of the fruit of her hands, 

and. let her owm works praise her in the 

gates.” Let all conspire to extol her cha- 
racter ; for I cannot do it enough. Let her 
never want her just tribute of commenda- 
tion. While some are magnified for their 
high birth, some prized for their great for- 
tune, others admired for their singular beauty, 
and others cried up for attainments of no in- 
trinsic, or of no considerable value ; let her 
personal conduct, and her superior qualities, 
be celebrated with peculiar honours in the 
largest assemblies ; where, indeed, if all men 
should be silent, that conduct and those qua- 
lities would resound her praise. 

What a description is here ! Can you at- 
tend to it without emotion ? Or have modern 
manners so -warped your minds, that the sim- 
plicity of ancient virtue, Instead of appearing 
to you an object of v^eneration, looks roman- 
tic and ridiculous ? Tell me then In good 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



173 



earnest, were the woii\en of those days the 
less estimable, or the less attractive, that they 
did not waste their lives in a round of dissipa- 
tion and impertinence, but employed them 
in works of ingenuity and usefulness, of piety 
and mercy ; that even women of the first rank 
amongst them, as we are informed by the 
oldest and best authors, held it no diminution 
to apply their hands to different kinds of 
manufacture ; that they took great delight in 
such occupations ; and finally, that good house- 
wifery, in all its extent, was reckoned an 
essential qualification of every matron } 

I am sufficiently sensible of the influence 
that the customs of different ages and nations 
have on the modes of thinking that succes- 
sively obtain ; nor do I expect, that in this 
land called Christian, which ought to be un- 
equalled on account of its attainments, as 
much as it is on that of its advantages, our 
mothers or our daughters, in general, will 
be persuaded by any thing preachers can say, 
to emulate the humble grandeur of many a 
noble lady, of many a fair princess, in for- 
mer generations. Yet I am *not without 
hope, that some of them may be induced to 



Digitized by Google 




174 



SERMON VJ. ' 



copy, though at a distance, those modest but 
exalted originals. 

I mentioned our daughters, as well as 
mothers ; because I would not have them 
think that they have nothing to learn from 
the picture we have just surveyed. Would 
the Virtuous Woman, so sweetly pourtrayed 
by Lemuel’s mother, and so particularly 
marked by the characters of married and 
maternal excellence, have been what she was, 
if in her single state she had not studied the 
necessary principles ? 

After looking at so sublime a standard, I 
am well aware, that any thing I can now 
offer on this part of my subject will appear 
to sink. I am sorry for it. But since it must 
be so, let the mortifying sentiment be felt 
by all, as a just satire on the declension of 
this age. To say the truth, the zeal of the 
preacher, is too much depressed by that con- 
sideration, to bear him out in urging our . 
young women to a close imitation of what 
however he must always admire. In short, 
when we speak of good housewifery now a 
days, we must submit to speak in a lower 
key. Would to heaven, that of this science 



V 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



175 



many mothers would teach their daughters 
but the common rudiments ; that they were 
imfashionable enough to educate them to be 
fit for any thing beyond show ! 

What do not great families suffer daily 
from the incapacity, or inattention, of those 
mistresses that leave all to housekeepers and 
other servants ! How many large estates 
might be saved from ruin by a wiser conduct ! 
I must say it once more, that no woman 
in the world ought to think it beneath her to 
be an oeconomist. An oeconomist is a cha- 
racter truly respectable, in whatever station. 
To see that time which should be laid out 
in examining the accounts, regulating the 
operations, and watching over the interests 
of perhaps a numerous family — to see it lost, 
worse than lost, in visiting and gaming, “ in 
“ chambering and wantonness,” is shocking. 
It is so, let the incomes be as certain, as 
considerable, or as immense as you will; 
though by the way they are hardly ever so 
immense in reality, as they often appear. 
But where, on the contrary, they are both 
moderate and precarious, a conduct of, this 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 

kind we have no words to stigmatize as it 
deserves. 

Merchants and tradesmen that marry suck 
women are surely objects of singular compas- 
sion, if indeed they were deceived into an 
opinion, that the women they have chosen 
for their partners were taught this necessary 
piece of knowledge. But very seldom, as 
matters are managed at present, have they 
such deception to plead for their choice. Is 
it possible they can be ignorant in what man- 
ner young ladies are bred at most of our 
Boarding-schools ? And do they not see in 
what manner they generally behave on com- 
ing home Some of them, I acknowledged 
before, when placed in houses of their own, 
appear to much more advantage than could 
be reasonably expected. But I repeat the 
question I then asked. Is so great a chance, 
in an affair of such consequence, to be relied 
upon 

It must be owned also, that in this age 
the order or figure of a table is pretty well 
understood, as far as relates to splendor, and 
parade. But would it not be worth your 
while to improve upon the art, by learning 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON TI. 



177 



to connect frugality with elegance ; to pro- 
duce a genteel, or however a good appear- 
ance, from things of less expence ? I know 
it is difficult, especially in great cities ; but I 
am sure it is laudable, and deserves to be 
attempted. This you may depend upon, that 
most men are highly pleased to observe such 
oeconomical talents in a young woman ; and 
those talents in one that is married will scarce 
ever fail to animate the application, excite 
the generosity, and heighten the confidence 
of a husband. The contrary discourages and 
disgusts beyond expression j. I mean, where 
the husband^has any sobriety, or any pru- 
dence. The follies inseparable from profu- 
sion, and the miseries daily produced by it, 
I do not pretend to enumerate. A moment’s 
consideration will convince you, that It is 
always unwise, and must be generally de- 
structive. 

Next to direct profusion is that Indispo- 
sition to family affairs, which too commonly 
follows on habits of dissipation contracted 
early. A young woman who has turned her 
thoughts^ to those matters in her father’s 
house, or in any other where Providence 
I 3 



Digitized by Googic 




178 



SERMON VI. 



may have disposed her lot, and who has been 
accustomed to acquit herself well in any les- 
ser department entrusted to her care, will 
afterwards, when her province is enlarged, 
slide into the duties of it with readiness and 
pleasure. The particulars have already passed 
through her mind. The diflferent scenes, as 
they rise, will not disconcert her. Being ac- 
quainted with the leading rules, and having 
had some opportunities of applying them,^or 
seeing them applied, her own good sense will 
dictate the rest, and render easy and agree- 
able to her that which, to a modish lady, 
is all strange, perplexing, and irksome. How 
strong the contrast ! Who does not perceive, 
where the preference is due ? ' 

Hear what a masterly writer, who^seems 
to have been well acquainted with the world, 
and particularly with the commercial part of 
it, has advanced on this head in his advice 
to a son, where he is directing him as to the 
choice of a wife. “ This bear always in 
” mind, that if she is not frugal, if she is 
** not what his called a Good Manager, if she 
“ does not pique herself on her knowledge 
of faimily affairs, and laying out her mo- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON XII. 



179 



ney to the best advantage ; let her be ever 
“ so sweetly tempered, gracefully made, or 
elegantly accomplished, she is no wife for 
“ a tradesman : and,” he even adds, “ all 
those otherwise amiable talents will but 
“ open just so many ways to ruin.” After 
relating a little story, full of instruction, he 
thus goes on : " In short remember your 
** mother, who was so exquisitely versed in 
this art, that her dress, her table, and 
** every other particular, appeared rather 
“splendid than otherwise and yet good 
“ housewifery was the foundation of all ; and 
“ her bills, to my certain knowledge, were 
“ a fourth less than most of her neighbours, 
“ who had hardly cleanliness to boast, in re- 
“ turn.«for their awkward prodigality.” 

But perhaps^ you will tell me, that you 
may never have occasion to exert such qua- 
lities in any sphere of consequence. The 
answer is obvious. As the future is uncer- 
tain, you ought to acquire* them in case of 
need; besides, in fact, there is no situation, 
where the general principles of frugality are 
not necessary, on the score both of discretion 
and charity. In the. mean while, the acqui- 



Digiiized by Google 




180 



SERMON TI. 



sition will be honourable, and the study use« 
ful. It not only becomes your sex, but will 
.employ your minds innocently, and virtu- 
ously, at hours which you might be tempted 
to spend in a very different manner. The 
subject is not intricate ; yet it admits of a 
considerable detail, and will take up some 
time. The learning to write a fair hand, 
and to cast accounts with facility; the look- 
ing into the dispositions and practices of ser- 
vants ; the informing yourselves about the 
prices of every thing needful for a family, 
together with the best methods, and properest 
seasons, for, providing it; the observing what- 
ever relates to cleanliness and neatness in the 
furniture and apartments of a house ; the 
understanding how to deal with domestics, 
tradesmen, and others ; above all, the obtain- 
ing every possible light with relation to the 
nursing, management, and education of chil- 
drin — these and such like articles will, if I 
mistake not, furnish ample scope for the exer- 
cise of your faculties, in the pursuit of what 
I have termed Domestic Accomplishments. 
Nor would I have you. despise any one of 
them as trivial or dull. -If they should seem 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON Vr. 



181 



either, you must give me leave to say the 
fault is in you. If on any pretence what- 
ever you should affect to call them so, “I 

should deem it a mark of But I forbear; 

and, for your encouragement to such applica- 
tion, would take notice, that from what is 
thus necessary and beneficial, you may, time 
after timcj pass, with a transition often im- 
perceptible, to what is also pretty and enter- 
taining. Which leads me to speak. 

In the second place, of tlie Elegant Ac- 
complishments I proposed to recommend. 
Of these all will be found consistent with 
Christian Sobriety, and several conducive to 
it. Where morals are not in some measure 
concerned, the peculiar modes of an age can 
occasion no ’'material difference. Some parti- 
culars, I am now to touch upon, might not 
suit that unsettled and persecuted state which 
the first professors of Christianity were in, nor 
that distinguished severity of manners which 
would naturally arise out of such a condition, 
as well as out of their late separation from 
paganism ; and yet those things may be no 
way improper in a Christian woman of these 
times, when religion is established, when 



Digitized by Google 




182 



SERMON VI. 



property is secured, and when the prevalence 
of a system supremely benevolent has nothing 
to fear from a jealous policy, or a bigoted 
priesthood. 

To begin with that exercise which women 
appear almost universally fond of, but which 
scrupulous minds have usually thought -ex- 
ceptionable. For ray own part, I roust ac- 
knowledge, I can see no reason for - declama- 
tion against the moderate and discreet use of 
Dancing.^ ‘‘ To every thing,” says Solomon, 
“ there is a season, and a time to every pur- 
“ pose under the heaven — among the rest — 
“ a time to dance.” Even those pursuits 
which all approve^ and approve most highly, 
may be abused. Nothing is exempt from 
snares : but one of the worst is a 'disposition 
to be peevish, illiberal, and unsociable. In 
the Jewish institution, it is well known, the 
exercise in question was adopted into^ religious 
worship itself. It is yet more remarkable, 
that in the parable of the prodigal son our 
Saviour mentions dancing, as making a part 
of the friendly and honest festivity indulged 
on his return. The single instance recorded 
in the New Testament, wherein it was per- 



t 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON TI. 



183 



verted to a pernicious purpose, has been 
weakly urged against a practice that, used 
with temperance and prudence, is certainly 
adapted to promote health and good humour, 
a social spirit, and kind affections between 
the sexes, with that easy graceful carriage, 
to which Nature has annexed very pleasing 
perceptions in the beholders. 

With respect to this last, it seems to me, 
that there can be no impropriety in it, any v 
more than in modulating the voice into the 
most agreeable tones in singing ; to which 
none, I think, will object. What is dan- 
cing, in the best sense, but the harmony of 
motion rendered more palpable ? Awkward- 
ness, rusticity, ungraceful gestures, can never 
surely be meritorious. It is the observa- 
tion of a celebrated philosopher, who was 
deeply skilled in most subjects, that “ the 
“ principal part of beauty is in decent and 
“ gracious motion.” And here one cannot 
help regretting that this, which may be con- 
sidered in some measure as the virtue of the 
body, is not oftener seen in our country, as 
if the sole design of dancing were to supply 
the amusement of the hour. A modest but 



Digitized by Google 




184 



SERMOM'VI. 



animated mien, an air at once unaffected and 
noble, are doubtless , circumstances of great 
attraction and delight. 

N 

I said a Modest mien ; for that roust never 
be given up ; And on this account, I own, I 
cannot much approve of a young lady’s danc- 
ing often in public assemblies, which, with- 
out a singular guard, must gradually wear off 
that lovely bashfulness so largely inculcated 
in a former discourse. Private circles croi- 
sisting chiefly of friends and relations, and 
where persons of more years than the younger 
performers are present, I should esteem in 
every respect the most eligible. Where such 
precautions are observed, and this diversion, 
is not suffered to interfere with health, regu- 
larity, modest apparel, and prudent expence; 
I freely confess, that I am one ’of those who» 
can look on with a very sensible satisfaction, 
well pleased to see a company of young people 
joyful with innocence, and happy in each 
other. If an exercise so sociable, and so en- 
livening, were to occupy some part of that' 
time which is lavished on cards, would the 
youth of either sex be losers by it ? I think 
not. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



185 

V 

Having mentioned Cards, I will use the 
freedom, unpleasing as it may prove, or ill 
bred, as it’ may seem, to offer a few plain 
remarks on the, passion for them, which is 
now become so strangely predominant, as to 
take, the lead of every thing else in almost 
every company of every rank. With many 
indeed it seems to be a calling, and, as a 
witty author has observed, “ a laborious one 
“ too, such as they toil night and day at, 
“ nay do not allow themselves that remission 
“ which the laws both of God and man have 
provided for the meanest mechanic. The 
“ sabbath is to them no day of rest ; but 
this trade goes on when all shops are shut. 
“ I know not,” continues he, “ how they 
“ satisfy themselves in such an liabitual waste of 
their time ; but I much doubt that plea, 
“ whatsoever it is, which passeth with them, 
“ will scarce hold weight at his tribunal who 
hath commanded us to redeem, not fling 
“ away our time.” 

To the same occupation what numbers sa- 
crifice their health and spirits, with every 
natural pleasure that depends on these, not 
excepting even the comforts of fresh air; 



Digitized by Google 




186 



SERMON VI. 



pursuing it in the country with the same un- 
abating ardour as in town, and to all the 
beauty and sweetness of rural scenes, in the 
£nest season, preferring the suffocating atmo- 
sphere of perhaps a small apartment, where 
they regularly, every day if possible, crowd 
round the card-table for hours together ! 
What neglect of business and study, what 
ruin of credit, of fortune, of families, of 
connexions, of all that is valuable in this 
world, often allows the frenzy I speak of, 
who can express ? 

. I will suppose, my fair hearers, nay I do 
hope, that the demon of Avarice has not yet 
taken possession of your hearts. But do ye 
know any thing so likely to introduce him, as 
the spirit of Gaming ? Is not this last a kin- 
dred fiend ; and does not he, like most othe# 
’ tempters, advance by slow steps, and with a 
smiling aspect ? Tell me in sober sadness, 
what security can you have that the love of 
play will not lead you to the love of gaming ? 

Between these I know there is a distinction. 
But is it not a distinction, at best, resembling 
that between twilight and darkness ; and does 
not one succeed the other almost as naturally ? 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON .VI. 



187 



The former at first is cheerful and serene, 
retaining some rays of pleasantry and good 
humour} but by little and little these dis- 
appear. A deeping shade takes place ; till 
at last, every emanation of mirth and good 
nature dying away, all is involved in the 
gloom of anxiety, suspicion, envy, disgust, 
and every dreadful passion that lours in the 
train of Covetousness. I say not, that this 
always happens ; but I ask again, what secu- 
rity is there that it will not happen to you ? 
Did not every gamester in the world, whe- 
ther male or female, begin just where you 
do ? And. is it not probable, that many of 
that infamous tribe had once ‘as little appre- 
hension as you can have, of proceeding those 
lengths to which they have since run, through 
the natural progress of vice, no where more 
infatuating or more rapid than in this execra- 
ble one ? 

But let us suppose the desire of winning 
should in you never rise to that rage, which 
agitates the breast of many a fine lady, dis- 
composes those features, and inflames those 
eyes, where nothing should be seen but soft 
illumination. Are there not lower degrees 



Digitized by Google 




TSS SERMON VI. 

in the. thirst of gain, which a liberal mind 
would ever carefully avoid ? And pray con- 
sider ; when either by superior skill, or what 
is called better duck, you happen to strip 
of her money, of that money which it is 
very possible she can ill spare, an acquaint- 
ance, a companion, a friend, one whom you 
profess at least to love and honour, perhaps 
at the verv moment to entertain with all the 
sacred rights of hospitality — is there nothing 
unkind, nothing sordid, in giving way to that 
which draws after it such consequences ! Is 
this the spirit of friendship or humanity ?— 
Blessed God ! how does the passion I con- 
demn deprave the worthiest affections of na- 
ture ; and how does that bewitching power, 
the Fashion of the times, pervert even the 
best understandings, when resigned to its im-* 
postures ! 

Nor is it the laws of humanity and friend- 
ship only, that are transgressed by the lust of 
gaming. The sweet emotions of love and 
tenderness between the sexes are often swal- 
lowed up by this all-devouring appetite; 
an appetite, which perhaps beyond any thing 
else tends to harden and contract the heart, 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



If 9 

at the same time that the immoderate indul- 
gence of it excludes a thousand little recipro- 
cations of sentiment and joy, which would 
serve to kindle and feed the flame of virtuous 

affection. How much conversation suffers 

from it, who does not perceive ? 

Here indeed you will tell me with an 
air of triumph, that it prevents a great deal 
of scandal. What, then, are your minds so 
unfurnished, so vacant, that without cards 
you must necessarily fly to that wretched 
resource Creation, providence, religion, 
books, observation, fancy ; do these present 
so narrow a field of entertainment, as to 
force you on the alternative of preying either 
on the reputation or on the property of 

others ? But now I recollect, while you 

possess an art of such utility as this lasf, for 
filling up the blanks of discourse, as well as 
for repairing the wastes of extravagance, 
why should you give yourselves any trouble 
to read or think, to enlarge your ideas or 
improve your faculties, beyond’ the usual 
standard i Surely the knowledge of the most 
fashionable games, of the most remarkable 
characters, of the reigning modes and amuse- 



Digitized by Google 




190 



SERMON VI. 



ments of the season, with a few common- 
place compliments, remarks, and matters of 
fact, but especially some passages of private 
history, told by way of secret to all the world, 
is quite sufficient, by the help of a little viva- 
city which Nature will supply, to accomplish 

you for every purpose of modern society. 

Alas, how poor is all this ! How unworthy 
the principal attention of beings made but 
•* a little lower than the angels,” and 
professing to believe in the communion of 
saints ! 

But are there not many general companies, 
in which it were impossible to spend a long 
evening with any tolerable ease, or propriety, 
but by borrowing assistance from the card table? 

/ I grant it, as things are now ; and, when you 
are so situated, your' complying with the oc- 
casion may be both allowable and proper, pro- 
vided the stakes are but trifling, your tempers 
not ruffled, and what you win or lose is agreed 
to be given away in charity. By this means 
perhaps you may “ make to yourselves friends 
“ of the mammon of unrighteousness.” 

But tell me, I beseech you, where is the ne- 
cessity of being very often in general compa- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON TI. 



191 



nies? Are these the scenes of true enjoyment? 
What, where the heart cannot be unfolded j 
where the understanding has little or no play ; 
where all is reserve, ceremony, show ; where 
the smile of complaisance is frequently put on 
to deceive, and even the warmest professions 
of regard are sometimes made the “ cloak of 
“ maliciousness !” 

There is not, methinks, any thing more 
contemptible, or more to be pitied, than that 
turn of mind, which finding no entertainment 
in itself, none at home, none in books, none 
in rational conversation, nor in the intercourses 
of real friendship, nor in ingenious works of 
any kind, is continually seeking to stifle re- 
flexion in a tumult of pleasures, and to divert 
weariness in a crowd. 

* But can it be supposed, that even in more 
‘ private meetings people should be always 
* able to pass the time without cards .?* You 
ought to speak more plainly, and say, to Kill 
the time \ for that is commonly the case. By 
the most favourable reckoning, the greatest 
part of those hours that are devoted to play is 
lost. That which was begun for amusement is 
lengthened out to fatigue. No one improving 



Digitized by Google 




192 



SERMON VI. 



or generous idea is circulated : no one happy 
or solacing recollection is secured. The whole 
is to be set down as a large portion of the span 
of life cut off without advantage, and with- 
out satisfaction, as far as virtue or reason is 
concerned. 

‘ What then shall we do when together r” 
Do ! Why, converse, or hold your tongues, 
as good sense and unaffected nature prompt 
to either. Do ! Why, work, read, sing, dance, 
laugh, and look grave by turns, as occasion 
serves ; any thing in the world that is inno- 
cent, rather than eternal play. For persons 
in all the gaiety of health, and sprightliness 
of youth 3 persons not relaxed by infirmity, or 
exhausted by business ; persons with number- 
less sources of de’ight laid open to them, and 
ever natural relish lively and strong — for 
them to be at a loss how to spend a single even- 
ing without cards, what a degradation of the 
human mind ! 

Willing to corroborate an argument which 
to me appears of such importance, I will avail 
myself of the words of a writer now living, 
who is not less respectable for the force than 
for the morality of his pen. Complaining of 






Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



193 



the fatal passion for play, he mentions, amongst 
other mischiefs to which it leads, its tendency 
** to destroy all distinctions both of rank 
** and sex ; to crush all emulation, hut that 
** of fraud •, to confound the world in a chaos 
** o£ folly; to withhold youth from its natn- 
ral pleasures, deprive wk . of its influence^ 
** and beauty of its channs; to extinguish the 
flames of the lover, aS' well as^ of the pa- 
** triot; to. ank life into a tedious uniformity, 
** and to allow, it no other hopes or fears but 
** those of robbing and being robbed.” He 
adds, in the same animated style, ‘‘ That if 
those of your sex who have minds capable 
of nobler sentiments, will unite in vindi- 
cation of their pleasures and their preroga- 
tives, they may fix a time at which cards 
** shall cease to be in fashion, or to be left only 
to those who have neither beauty- to be 
** loved, nor spirit to be fe^ed; neither 
‘‘ knowledge to teach, nor modesty to learn; 
“ and who, having passed their youth in vice, 
■“ are justly condemned to spend their age in 
« folly.” 

^ But I proceed to a more agreeable task, that 
VoL. i, * K 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



of recommending, in the next place, those in- 
genius works mentioned a little while ago. 

As to Needle-work in particular, we find 
it spoken of in scripture with commendation! 
Its beauty and advantages are universally ap- 
parent. It was practised by ladies formerly, 
and ladies of the first rank, much more than 
it is at present. ^ They indeed had much more 
leisure than most of their posterity. They were 
simple enough I suppose, ^to be in love with 
home, and to seek their happiness in their duty. 
Of that duty they considered diligence as a 
part ; nor does it appear to have in the least 
cramped their imaginations. Of ^their skill 
in this way we have seen very laudable monu- 
ments. ' They only wanted instruction in the 
principles of the Fine Arts, to give their per- 
formances a juster taste. At any rate, their 
time would by such means pass away • more^ 
pleasantly. They would b6 under little temp- 
tation of wandering abroad ,• consequently 
they would escape infinite snares and incon- 
veniences. Then, too, private conversation 
would be cultivated oh a much more rati- 

onal footing : and many a pleasing discussion 
* 

.r .. 






S 



Digitized by Google 




3ERMON Vr. 



195 



would arise on the subject of their various 
productions. Their fancies, called forth by 
a thousand prettinesses, and kept up by the 
spirit of elegant emulation, would of course be- 
polished and exalted. This, I believe, will be 
found true,' that those females of the present 
age, who have resolution enough to copy so 
antiquated an example, seldom fail to prove 
the most entertaining companions. 

I once knew a lady, noble by her birth, but 
more noble by her virtues, who never sat 
idle in company, unless when compelled to it 
by the punctilio of ceremony, which she took 
care should happen as rarely as possible. Be- 
ing a perfect mistress of her needle, and hav- 
ing an excellent taste in that, as in many other 
things, her manner, 'whether at home, or 
abroad with her friends (for friends she had, 
though a woman of fashion, and bred at 
court) was to be constantly engaged in work- 
ing something useful, or something beautiful; 
at the same time that she assisted in supporting 
the conversation, with an attention and capa- 
city which I have^never seen exceeded. For 
the sake of variety and improvement, when in 
her own house, some one of the company 
K 2 




196 



SERMON VI. 



would often read aloud) while she and her fe- 
male visitants were thus employed. I must 
add, that during an intimate acquaintance o£ 
several years, I do not remember to have seen- 
her once driven to the polite necessity of either 

i ^ 

winning or losing money at play, and making - 
her guests defray the expence of the entertain- 
ment. 

Permit me, before I dismbs this article, to 
offer a hint or two, that may not be unworthy 
your observation. Instead of that minute and 
laborious kind of work, which is often prac- 
tised by young ladies, I should think that 
slighter and freer patterns would for the most 
part be greatly preferable. The sight would 
be in no danger of being strained ; much less 
time would be required to ffnbh them ; and^ 
when finished, they would produce a much 
better effect. They would give, beyond com- 
parison, more scope to the imagination, they 
would exhibit an ease, a gracefulness, and a 
flow that ought to enter, as much as possible, 
into all works of taste ; and as they would ad- 
mit a far greater multiplicity of ornament, sof 
likewise the purpose of utility would be pro- 
moted in a iar higher degree. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



197 



The business of shading with the needle is 
now, comparatively, seldom thought of but at 
school, where it is frequently taught in a pal- 
try, and always in a defective manner, though 
certainly deserving of particular attention. 
The disposition, harmony, and melting of co- 
lours in this way, afford one of the finest 
exercises to female genius, and one of the most 
amusing that can be imagined; besides that 
.such productions are the most. permanent. 

But the truth is, nothing complete or dis- 
tinguished in those attempts can be expected ' 
while the proper foundation is 'SO generally 
jomitted to be laid; J mean Drawing, .which 
is 

The third accomplishment I. would take the 
.liberty to inculcate. That many. more youi|g 
ladies would be found qualified for such .a 
study than is usually apprehended, I cannot 
doubt. Several, 1 am certain, have applied to 
it with the greatest success and pleasure, who, 
before they began, did not promise themselves 
the least. It is truly surprising, that so few 
of uur more intelligent females should show, a 
deisire of being instructed in so pleasii^ anjart. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VI. 



199 



i • 

» proceed from idleness; and, be not hurt if I 
add, that would prove the means of future 
support, should it please the Supreme Wisdom 
to reduce you to a state of dependance. 

There are other pretty works, extremely 
proper for female hands, which I need not 
specify here, since several of the remarks al- 
ready made will, I presume, be applicable, to 
them. Let it suffice to say in general, that 
whatever is genteel, and whatever is useful, 
ill* such occupations, should always claim your 
regard, when you have leisure and capacity. 
The former you will seldom want, if you have 
learnt to portion out your time with judgment; 
and in the latter you ought never to pronounce 
yourselves defective, before you have honestly 
. tried. 

The last accomplishment of the elegant kind 
which .1 shall mention, is* Music. This I 
TOnceive, is to be recommended with more 
discrimination than the rest, how much soever 
such a notion may contradict the prevailing 
opinion. It is very true, there are young la- 
. dies who, without any particular advantage of 
a natural ear or good voice, have, by means of 
circumstances peculiarly favourable, made 



Digitized by Google 




200 



SERMON VI. 



great proficiency in music: but It is as true, 
that tliey have made it at a vast expence of 
time and application; such as no woman 
ought to bestow upon an object, to which she 
is not carried by the irresistible impulse of ge- 
nius. 

* In many other arts it is possible for original 
talents to lie dormant, till called up by assi- 
duity or accident; but where there is a strong 
propension to this, it will, I imagine, hardly 
forbear to burst out, by means 'of the tran- 
scendent pleasure derived from 'it on all occa- 
sions. If it do not, if even the best music can 
be heard without a degree of delight bordering 
on transport; either the practice will never 
reward the pains necessary for acquiring itj 
or, there being no native vein of excellence 
in that way, it will, as has been commonly 
observed, be discontinued on a change of con- 
dition ; in which case you lose the labour of 
years, that might have been directed with 
lasting benefit into some other channel. 

Be this as it may, you will readily allow, 
that for a young woman who has no turn for 
the study I am speaking of, to be condemned 
both to mortify herself, and to punish -her ac- 



Digitized by Google 




SERJ^ON VI. 



SOI 



^ainUDce, by murdering every lesson put into 
.ber handsy is a very awkward situation, how- 
.ever much her master may, for the sake of his 
^craft, flatter her or her friends assuring them, 
•perhaps with an air of great solemnity, that 
he never had a better scholar in his whole 
-life. If, she whose attainments in this kind 
are but indifferent, could be contented to 
• amuse herself, and those of her own family, 
now and then, with an air that happened to 
.please them, it were well : but how does a ju- 
dicious hearer blush for the poor beginner, 
.when set down by the command of a fond pa- 
,rent to^ntertain perhaps, a large fompany, as 
we have * often seen, with performing that 
of which she scarce knows the very rudiments ? 
« while all is' disappointment on their part, and, 
if she have any understanding, .ccmfusion on 
* hers ! 

Is the preacher then an enemy to music ? 
Much the reverse. Where there is a real ge- 
nius jfor it, improved by art and regulated 
by sentiment, nothing surely can be more 
charming, or more affecting. Its importance 
in the artcient Jewish worship is well known. 
„vQf, its b€wty and usefulness in oar churches. 



! 



Digiiizea by Google 




202 



SERMON VI. 



when conducted in a manner suitable to its 
sacred purpose, and not prostituted to levity, 
or perverted by ostentation, I am not insensi- 
ble. Its influence in all ages 'and nations 
stands universaUy confessed. It is foimded in 
some of the strongest perceptions of Nature, 
Wherever she'has seen fit to confer a lively sen- 
sibility to the melody of sounds. 

But how much is it. to be regretted, that 
this wonderful ‘charm of melody properly so 
called, together with the whole merit of ex-' 
pression, should be sacrified, as we frequently 
find, to the proud but poor afiectation of mere 
trick and execution ; that, instead of render- 
ing the various combinations of” sounds a 
powerful instrument .of touching the heart, 
exciting agreeable., emotions, ’ or allaying un- 
e^isy sensa^ns, as in the .d^ys of old, it 
should be. generally degraded into an idle' 
amusement, devoid of dignity, ' devoid of 
meaning, absolutely devoid of any one ingre- 
dient that can inspire delightful ideas, or en- 
gage unaffected applause ! What lover of this 
enchanting art but must lament, that the most 
insipid song which can^disgrace it is no sooner 

heard in places of public .entertainment, than 

: y 

^ 0 ' ■ • . , 

IT- • * 



Digitized by Google 




frEI^MON VI. 



203 



every young lady who has learnt the common 
notes, is immediately taught to repeat it in a • 
manner still more insipid ; while the no^ost sub- 
lime and interesting compositions, where sim- 
plicity, and greatness unite, are seldom or ne- 
ver thought of in her case ; as if the female 
mind were incapable of relishing any^ thing 
grave, pathetic, or exalted ! 

Let me here call on every musical spirit of 
your sex to assert the^rights of good sense ; 
and to insist that those, who are entrasted with 
this branch of their education, shall not^fail 
to introduce them, as early as possible, into 
an acquaintance with whatever is .most beau- 
tiful and noble in the article of melody. The 
more thorough knowledge of harmony may 
come afterwards, if you be ambitious of ad- 
vancing so far. In the mean time you will 
4lave the satisfactipn of pleasing the best judges, 
and of entertaining yourselves with such pieces 
as, while the words to which they are set convey 
no sentiments but what are elevated or virtu- 
ous,’ shall serve^ to refine and enlighten your 
thoughts, to raise your spirits into joy, or 
compose them into sweetness, and on chosen 
occasions, by the diviner strains of solemn 




M 



"204 SERMON TI. 

mnsic, to Hfi your hearts to heaven, 'prove-a 
^kind of prelude to the airs of paradise, and 
prepare you for joining the choir of angels. 





Digitized by Google 




SERMON VU. 

On Female Virtae, with JntellectufJ ^ 
Accomplishments. 



1 Tim. ii. 8) 9. 

I will — that women adorn themselves with 
Sobriety. 

V • 

Prov. iv. 5, 6. 8, 9. 

Get Wisdom^ get Understanding.— Forsake her 
noty and she shall preserve thee: love her^ 
and she shall keep the. — Exalt her^ and she 
shall promote thee. — She shall give to thy head 
an ornament of grace : a crown f glory shall 
she deliver to thee. 

In a country , like thi^j where there is cer> 
itainly a native hind of good sense* where 
sciences and arts are widely cultivated* where 
works of genius and taste in every dcuid are 
taUowed to ^)ound 3 .|s it. not somewhatetsai;^*. 



Digitized by Google 




206 



SERMON Vir, 



that the common style of conversation should . 
be so little instructive or entertaining? How • 
seldom do we fall into a company, »n which 
we learn any thing useful, or hear any thing 
whatever above the rate of the multitude ; 
such as low jests,* vulgar conceits, incoherent 
disputation, or impertinent tattle ! How very 
seldom does a thinking man come away from, 
the visit of an evening, delighted with his 
manner of spending it ! One wdio has con- 
versed only with a small circle of ingenious 
friends,' will hardly conceive what a frivolous, 
what a piteous thing, the ordinary strain of 
company appears to an intelligent by-stander. 

The favourite communications of men of 
pleasure are beyond description corrupt and 
groveling,' with scarce any diversity. . Those 
of gay assemblies are the quintessence of dull- 
ness and dissimulation ; except only that the- 
first is sometimes tinctured with a few sprink- 
lings of smartness, and the last always con- 
cealed under the specious colours of civi- 
lity.' As to the busy, the learned, and the 
grave the greater part are no sooner released ^ 
from their respective pursuits, than they thrqjv 
themselves loose into a Ustlessness of disposi-- 




SERMON VII. 



207 



tlon, that wanders with impatience in quest of 
public diversion, or diffuses itself in private 
through the vacuity of idle talk : as if there 
were no medium between seriousness and fol- 
ly, or as if people could not find relief from 
the stretch of application, in the agreeable im- 
bendings of moderate amusement and rational 
discourse. In short, if we want to find a con- 
versation enlivened with variety and spirit, en- 
lightened by intelligence, and tempered by 
politeness, we must seek for it amongst a few 
men who join sentiment to knowledge, and a 
few women who join knowledge to vivacity. 

That the number of these should be so 
small, compared with the untaught and the 
ungoverned Many, is surely matter of lamen- 
tation. To what shall we chiefly impute it ? 
To what else, but to that whirl of dissipation, 
which, like some mighty vortex, has swal- 
lowed up in a manner all conditions and cha- 
racters ? That the young indeed should be of-' 
ten carried down the stream, till they sink 
into insignificance, is' not much to be won- 
dered at, how much soever it is ,to be re- 
gretted. But, alas ! they do not always stop 
there, From what is trivial, how easy the 



Digitized by Googic 




'SERMON VII. 



208 

ttransition to what is mean ! How quick th^ 
'descent from thoughtlessness to vice ! No- 
rthing, perhaps, requires better sense, or a 
-Stricter guard, than to trifle without being 
■foolish, or to be flrolicksoiae without sin. 
They that would hold fast their righteousness, 
, iMd not depart from the decorum of their cha- 
.racter, cannot be too careful to regulate their 
conversation, as well as their conduct, by the 
great law of reflection, and in the hour of 
>gaity itself, not to lose sight of wisdom. But 
how should this be expected, where the mind 
is wholly unimproved, where no internal re- 
sources are secured in the days of youth, but 
all is left to nature neglected by education, and 
warped by fashion, or to the scanty supplies 
which company, news, and accidents afford ? 

What I would therefore now labour is, 
with the help of God, to persuade you, my 
.fair auditory, to enrich and adorn your un- 
'.derstandings with such attainments, as shall 
/reiider you not only less dependant on exter- 
.nal amusements and empty gratifications, but 
snore supericxr to every thing corrupting and 
' dangerous > such as >shall entertain and edify 
you at the same time, enable you to ei^^ 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



200 



iitude, and qualify you to shine in conversa- 
tion even without designing it, to inspire a 
mixture of complacence and respect, in fine, 
to unite decency and sense with mirth and joy. 
Thus would I still'endeavour to promote that 
spirit of Christian Sobriety which our apostle 
inculcates, and by the same means contribute 
to'the felicity and dignity of your sex. 

The passage from the Proverbs, which I 
'have read to you, by way of a second text, re- 
. quires no commentary; and in truth I know 
not any that could do it justice. As it is, it 
must strike you at once with its simplicity, ten- 
iderness, and sublimity. The Wisdom or Un- 
derstanding, so beautifully personified by So- 
lomon, is doubtless to be considered chiefly as 
Tcpresentkig Religion, which is certainly the 
; highest exercise of our rational powers. But -J 
see no reason for conccuvmg.it to nepresent that 
only. In many parts of his writings it is tna- 
nHestly used to signify Mental Improvements, 
in the proper sense of the phrase : nor is thene 
any thing said of it here, which will not in one 
degree or another hold true of these, when 
under right direction ; besides, in fact, the cul- 
tivation of those powers to every v^uaWe p«r- 



Digitized by Google 




210 



SERMON VII. 



pose, is unquestionably a duty which we owe 
to their author. That the exhortation is ad- 
dressed by our inspired writer to a male scho- 
lar, whom in the manner of eastern teachers 
he calls his son, makes no essential difference 
in the spirit of his doctrine, as I hope will ap- 
pear from the sequel. 

The degree of those' Intellectual Accom- 
plishments which your sex should aim at, I 
pretend not to determine. That'must depend 
on the capacities, opportunities, and encou. 
ragemcnts, which you severally enjoy. \^th 
regard to all these however, this may be said in 
general, that they are better, and more than 
many of you seem solicitous to improve. 

As to the first indeed,' I scruple not to de- 
clare my opinion, that nature appesurs to have 
formed the faculties of your sex for the most 
. part with less vigour than those of ours ; ob- 
serving the same distinction here, as in the 
.more delicate frame of your bodies. Excep- 
tions yre readily admit, and such as do the in- 
dividuals great honour in those particular 
walks of excellence, wherein they have 'been 
distinguished. But you yourselves, 1 think, 
~will allow that war, comnaerce, politics, ex- 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



211 



ercises of strength and dexterity, abstract 
philosophy, and all the abstruser sciences, 
are most properly the province of men. I 
am sure those masculine women, that would 
plead for your sharing any part of this pro- 
vince equally with us, do not understand 
your true interests. There is an influence, 
there is an empire which belongs to you, and 
which I wish you ever to possess : I mean that 
which has the heart for its object, and is secu- 
red by meekness and modesty, by soft attrac- 
. tion and virtuous love. 

But now I must add, that your power in 
this way "will receive a large accession from 
the culture of your minds, in the more 
elegant and polished branches of knowledge. 
When I say so, I would by no means in. 
sinuate, that you are not capable of the ju- 
dicious and the solid, in such proportion as 
is ’suited to your destination in life. This, 
I apprehend, does not require reasoning or 
. accuracy, so much as observation and dis- 
cernment. Your business chiefly is to read 
Men, in order to make ^urselves agree. 
, able and useful. It is not the argumenta- 
tive but the sentimental talents, which give 



Digitized by Google 




212 



SERUON Til. 



■you that insight and thoste openings into the 
human heart, that lead to your principal 
ends as Women. Nevertheless, in this 
study you may derive great assistance from 
books. Without them, in effect, your pro- 
-gress here will be- partial and confined. 
Neither are ‘■you to attach yourselves wholly 
to this study, important as it is, and grateful 
Jts you may find it. Whatever kinds of 
reading may contribute to your general im- 
provement and satisfaction, as reasonat^ 
beings designed for society, virtue, and re-., 
iigion, .will deserve your attentive regard. 
JBuffer me to enter a little into the detaih 
^Aud 

First, I would observe that History, iu 
which I include Biography and. Memoirs, 
ought to employ a considerable share of .your 
leisure."* Those pictures which it exhibits, 
of .the passions operating in real life and 
.genuine characters; of virtues to be imita- 
ted, and of vices^ to be shunned; of the 
jeffccts of both on society and individuals; 
.of the mutability of human affairs; of the 
•conduct of Divine Providence ; of the great 
omsequences that often arise from httle 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



215 



events ; of the weakness of power, and the 
wanderings of prudence, in mortal men ; 
with the sudden, unexpected, and frequently * 
unaccoimtable revoluttoils, that dash trium- 
phant wickedness, or disappoint presumptuous 
hope; — the pictures, I say, which History 
exhibits of all these, have been ever reckon* 
ed by the best judges among the richest 
sources of instruction and entertainment. 

On’ both accounts, we would also recom- 
mend books of Voyages and Travels i z 
vourite study of the celebrated Mr. -Locke. • 
How amusing to curiosity ! How enlarging 
to our prospects of mankind ! Hbw con- 
ducive to cure the contracted prepossessions 
of national pride, and withal to inspire gra- 
titude for the peculiar blessings bestowed 
upon our country ; to excite on one side pity 
towards the many millions of human beings 
left by mysterious heaven in ignorance and bar- 
barity, and to beget on the other admiration 
of the virtues and abilities displayed by num- 
bers of these under all the disadvantages that 
tend to darken and overwhelm them. 

Here too we would mention Geography, 
as closely connected with both the former* 



Digitized by Google 




214 < 



SERMON VII. 



as often useful in conversation ; and in uhicli 
a competent skill may be acquired writh little, 
application, but much amusement. 

These several studies, to which may be 
added the principal facts, 'or great outlines 
of Astronomy, are beautiful 3 and they are 
improving. Some of them present the most 
interesting scenes •, all contain the most plea- 
sing discoveries. They open and enlarge the 
mind ; they dilate and humanize the heart ; 
they remind us that we are citizens of the 
universe ; they show us how' small the part 
that we fill in the immense orb of being. 
Amidst the amplitude of such contempla- 
tions, superfluous trifles slirink away 5 wealth 
and grandeur “ hide their diminished heads 
a generous ambition rises in the thoughtful 
mind, to approve itself to the all-inspecting 
eye of Him to whom none of his works are 
indifierent, but to whom those only can be 
acceptable, that, under the uncertainty^ and 
imperfection of sublunary things,* seek their 
security, happiness, and glory, in doing well. 

Permit me to ask, whence it proceeds that 
studies like these are neglected by the genera- 
lity of your sex ? Is it because they are not 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



215 



calculated to mflatne the fancy, and flatter 
the passions ; or because to relish them to 
purpose, requires some degree of solidity and 
judgment ? But did not the preacher say, 
that there were women who are no way. defi- 
cient in these latter qualities ? He did, and 
therefore pleases himself with the hope, that 
the hints now ofiered may imprint conviction; 
on such, where there has been an omission, 
and encourage preseverance where there has 
not. 

As to works of imagination, It is allowed- 
on all hands, that the female mind is dis- ' 
posed to be peculiarly fond of them ; and 
surely when blended with instruction, so as 
to be rendered more immediately subservient 
to it, they have a particular claim to your 
attention. In this vie^, we must not forget 
to, recommend Fables, Visions, Allegories, 
and such like compositions, where Fancy 
sports under the controul of Reason ; Dra- 
matic Writings also, where truth of charac- 
ter and purity of thought are preserved ; (of 
these last how inconsiderable the number !) 
Poetry of all kinds, where a strict regard 
js paid to decorum, but chiefly of the $u- 






Digitized by Google 




216 



SERMON VII, 



blitner formS) where Nature, Virtue, RelU 
gion, are painted and' embellished with all 
the beauty of a chaste yet elevated imagina- 
ti(»i. What a field is here opened 'within 
the reach, and’ adapted' to the turn of female 
£iculties i What a profusion of intellectual 
ornament is spread before you, for memory 
to collect, and for reflection to work uprni-l 
How many sprightly, delightful, and lofty 
ideas do here pass before' the mental eye, 
all dressed in the brightest colours ! Hoiv 
strangely inexcusable must those be, who 
complain- at any time of want of amusement, 
when the genius and invention of every illu- 
minated age have taken such happy pains to 
supply the noblest ! 

I say nothing now of Novels and Ro- 
mances, having had occasion to speak of 
them so largely in a former discourse. But 
I must not admit to recommend those admira- 
ble productions of the present century, which 
turn principally on the two great hinges of 
sentiment and character ; joining descripticm 
to precept, and presenting in particular the 
most animated sketches of modern manners, 
^where the likeness is caught warm from 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



217 



life ; while the powers of fancy, wit, and 
judgment, combine to expose vice and folly, 
to 'enforce reformation, and in short but ^i- 
rlted essays to convey the rules of domestie 
wisdom and daily conduct." I need .not here 
name the Spectator, or those who have fol- 
lowed him. with various success in the same 
•track; many of them ingenious, some of them 
masterly writers. How much are both sexes 
indebted to their elegant pens, for a species 
of instruction better fitted perhaps than most 
others of human device, to delight 'and im- 
prove at the same moment ; such is its extent, 
its diversity, its familiarity, its ease,"its playful 
manner, its immediate reference to scenes 
and circumstances with which we are every 
day conversant ! , • 1 j- 

Works of this kind are peculiarly ''falcu- 
* lated to allure the lively and the gay/ who 
are not yet delivered over to licentiousness. 
‘ Hardly indeed will girls, for instance, who 
mean no ill, but whose^ fancies are all alive 
‘and .restless, submit to have their under- 
standings attired at Wisdom’s "glass ; if lovely 
forms and smiling images be not often 
fleeted from thence, <to detain the eye^ ;and 
Von. I. I. 



Digitized by Google 




218 



SERMON VII. 



captivate the heart.' In reality, none of ycm, 
my dear hearers, can be too well acquainted 
with those approved masters of life, those 
able teachers of decorum, those singularly 
successful painters ^of truth and morality. 
'Let me advise ’you to dwell on their pictures, 
• to imbibe their sentiments, to replenish your 
minds with that inexhausted fund of stores 

i 

and examples which they have furnished. 
You cannot fail of improving under such 
tutors. They too will ^ provide you with^ a 
touch-stone hy which to judge of other writ- 
ings, and while you -are searching “ for 
‘‘knowledge as ifpr hid treasures,” to sepa- 
rate between the' pure ore and the alloy. 

I should not on this occasion do justice to 
your sex, if I did not say, that such books as 
those last mentioned* are, in a particular de- 
< gree, proporticined to the sjcope of your capa- 
cities. Of this i 'am certain, that amongst 
women of sen*eT have discovered an uncom- 
, mon penetration in what relates ta char^- 
ters, an uncommon dexterity in hitting th^ 
■ off through t^ir , several specific distinc^tions, 
» and even -nicer- discriminations, togethcx with 
a race of fcincy, and ,a fund of what; may be 



Digitized by Google 




SfAMOtf VXI. 



211 



Strictly, tWHied Senti.meiU:, or.» patfce^ic man- 
ner of thinjpng, which I have not so fre- 
quently met with in men. It should seeiu 
that Natune, by her liberality to the female 
M mind in these respects,, has seen fit to com- 
pensate what has - been judged a defect in 
. point of depth a,ud force} a;Q)d a^.<real defect, 
1 believe, it is, if estimated absolutely. If 
estiiQated ^with a due regard to the design and 
fixmation of the sex, it ought to be consi- 
dered as no defect, at-all* 

I have already hinted, that to men and 
,women the Alaiighty has allotted very dif- 
ferent. provinces, on the filling of which with 
suitaj}le kinds of ability and excellence de- 
pends, under his conduct, the proper perfecr 
tion and welfare of each. - In all I have said 
thearefore, or may yet say, concerning Female 
Accomplishments, I would be still under- 
stood as recommending what is refined in 
study, and useful in the milder modes of life ; 
not what is profound in the former, or of no 
material advantage in the latter. This hin- 
ders ,not however, but that those ladies, whom 
Nature, not confining herself to her custom- 
sgry operations,- has endowed with any signal 
L *2 



Digitized by Google 




S20 



SERMON VTI. 



strength of genhis, may, if favoured also by 
their situation, give way to that original beat, 
by prosecuting severer studies to every pru- 
dent length. I say, to every Prudent length. 

^ For* should they push their application so far t 
as to hurt their more tender health, to hinder 
those family duties for which the seX are < 
chiefly intended, or to impair those softer 
graces that give them their highest lustre ; 
nothing I think can be more apparent than 
that, in such cases, they would relinquish their 
just sphere, for one much less amiable, and 
much less beneficial. But neither ffom this, 
nor from what was advanced immediately 
before, does it follow, that, in what relates 
to the acquisitions of the mind, women in 
general may not pursue studies that are solid, 
as well as entertaining which leads me to - 
add. 

In the next place, that the most obvious 
branches both of Natural and Moral Philo- 
sophy should engage some portion of your 
time. That they are so seldom, and so 
slightly thought of, you must allow me to 
'say, is a me'laricholy reflexion. Does Crea- 
tion, through her infinitely extended, and in- 



Digitized by Google 




SBRMON Vn. 



221 



/irntely diversified scenery, display innumera- 
ble wonders ? Have these been traced with 
skill - and accuracy, by many learned ^and 
many laborious hands r Are they laid open 
to ’^you, and almost pressed upon you, ficom 
every quarter ? For of Natural Philosophy- 
I consider Natural History, as a part. — And 
can ye with a giddy eye turn away froiBKthis 
glorious spectacle, to gaze on the meanest 
ornament of beauty, or the silliest pageant of 
vanity; thus pooriy, not to say impiously, 
prostituting that admiration which ought to 
be consecrated chiefly to the 'works of your 
all-perfect Creator ? 

Are the great and eternal obligations of . 
Cwiscience, the maxims of a wise and wor- 
"thy behaviour, the duties you owe to the 
Supreme of Beings, tO' your fellow-creatures, 
and yourselves ; the rules necessary for the 
government of your own minds in particular, 
or for the management of those that may 
be hereafter committed to your care ; are 
these mighty considerations, unfolded and en- 
forced as they have been with equal clearness 
and eloquence by various writers — are these, 

I say, matters of so little concern with you. 



Digitized by Google 




222 StSMON VII. 

that ■ tfce business of contriving some petty 
circumstance of dress, or the^ care of settling 
some foolish party of pleasure, shall be pre- 
ferred in almost every case of competition ? 

Here, I must confess, it is difficult to're- 
pltess the risings of indignation. Here I earn* 
not deny, but the feelings of contempt, mixed 
with those of compassion, are in some danger ' 
of banishing tlie favourable ideas we enter- 
*tain of your sex, when seen in happier points 
light. — For shame, Ladies, let not a this 
reiwoach rest on you any longer. Hasten to 
vindicate ' your reputation from the infamy of 
impertinence and nonsense. Be ambitious to 
demonstrate, by the most substantial proofs, 
that you are oapable of better things than the 
placing of a 'ribbon, or adjusting an head*' 
dress, than the glittering in an assembly- 
room, or prattling at a tea-table. Be all 

ardour to emulate those excellent ones of 
your ’ sex, who, without affecting to despise 
any thing that is innocently female, discovo* 
in their conversation among their friends, a 
"^mind' devoted to wisdomj and ennobled by 
knowledge, .y « * 

■ J The duty# and advantage of reading the 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON Vn. 



223 



ScriptnreS) with a few, boohs of the most 
serious and devotional strain, I will take ano>, 
ther occasion to consider. — But, I think I 
hear you exclaiming that, though God has 
given you the capacities of intellectual im- 
provement, men have denied you the Oppor- 
tunities of it. Let us therefore proceed to 
examine how this* matter stands, which wa; 

Our second point. If your complaint be 
well founded, you are certainly objects of^ 
pity, instead of blame. If the men, jealous 
of dominion, do really seek to depress the 
women, by keeping them in a state of igno» 
ranee, they,, are surely guilty of c^ual cruelty 
and meanness. But though the complaint 
be a very common one, and very popular 
with your sex, I must take the liberty of 
saying, that it appears to me without any 
foundation adequate to the bitterness with 
which it has been made, or to the keenness 
vnith which it has been propagated. 

That your minds are often much neglectec^ 
at home, that they are neglected perhaps yet 
more at many Boarding-schools, we readily 
admit, and heartily regret. But are you 
nevertheless desirous of knowledge.^ T^en 









Digitized by Google 







224 SEHMON Tir. 

what should hinder you from attaining k ? fsJ 
there any law or statute by which you ai« 
prohibited, under' SU^vere pains and penalties,' 
to read or to think, if you be so minded ? 

Books you have, or may have, on every sub- 
ject that is proper for you. This is not 
a country where these are scarce ; where 
Friendship, if permitted, will not supply, or 
where Benevolence, if asked, will not lend 
them. You will be pleased to remember 
too, that the price of one expensive gown, or 
of one shining toy, will at any time furnish 
a little library of the best authors. Nor 
docs it appear, that you are at a loss to 
find as many plays and novels as the most 
insatiable avidity can devour. But in fact 
there are few young ladies, who are nob to- 
lerably provided with books useful as well 
as amusing ; and in those who- are not under 
the necessity of earning their bread, it is 
both an idle and unthankful pretence, to 
plead that they want either opportunity or i 
leisure for any one study befitting their sex. 

Not fo speak of the time that with so 
much propriety they might, and that, for so 
many reasons, they ought to .redeem from*. 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON Vn. 



2Z5 



endl'ess visitings and other follies ; what is 
there to prevent their reading alternately tO' 
one another, when custom or coiweniency 
engages them at work together ? Such an 
exercise would not only enlarge the stock, 
of 'ideas in each individual, but also present 
materials on which their minds might ope- 
rate with an energy quickened by mutual 
exertion. “ As iron sharpeneth iron, so doth 
** the face of a woman her friend.” You, 
my fair pupils, cannot be offended, that to 
suit the quotation to the argument, I should 
here read Woman for Man. How smoothly 
have I seen those hours steal away, which. 
Were thus employed i n ^-^^jttle ring of in- 
telligent females, all sWeetly solicitefus to 
improve and be improved by eaefi dther ! 

By this means too may be acquired* a 
very valuable and pleasing- acconsplishment,* 
that of reading well ; and to this cause, I 
presume, it is to be ascribed, at leact in 
parr, that there are not a few women who 
possess it in no contemptible degree, and’ 
that there are some who read delightfully, 
ft is likewise probably, in some measure, 
owing to that fine feeling r>f nature and 



Digitized by Coogle 



SEftMQN Vn. 



‘226 

of sentiment) which may be supposed to re- 
sult -from the delicacy of their organs. 
in the exercise I speak of, they are often 
' deficient where force and vehemence are re- 
quisite, to that very delicacy it is obvious 
to impute it ; and also perhaps to their runr 
ning too commonly into a monotony, which 
their teachers have not taken sufficient pains 
to correct. , . • , 

Having touched on this head, I will take 
leave to remark by the way, that nothing, 
as I apprehend, can be more erroneous than 
to begin the study of what may be termed 
the Art of Reading, with poetry chiefly. 
For by the flow and h^mony of the nmr)r 
.bers, a learner is carried insensibly into the 
repetition of those -musical tones^ that chancp 
to seize the ear « with particular delight ; 
" from which the voice, once got into the 
same strain, cannot without a struggle per- 
suade itself to break away : a principal source 
of the evil of monotony, where it_ has not 
been contracted by bad example, and where 
the sense of an author is understood or at- 
tended to. Where it -is not, the proper em- 
phasis cannot be expected. 



Digitized i i 




SERMON Vn. 
* 



29T! 

Now to prevent or remedy this prevaijing 
evil, the most likely method, I conceive, 
would be to begin with frequently reading 
aloud those productions in prose of which 
the style is plain and easy, such as una- 
dorned Narrative, shorty Stories, 'Familiar 
Epistles; but principally those that approach 
^ nearest to the language of conversation, such 
as Dialogues, and the best Dramatic wi- 
tings ; mixing for a considerable time no- 
thing that is versified, and endeavouring to 
support the voice with firmness and simpli- 
city till you have formed a habit of so doing. 
Then, by slow and almost imperceptible pro- 
gression, you should advance to what is more 
varied,'' rhetorical, and raised ; such as Alle- ' 
gories. Orations, Moral and Religious Dis- 
courses, and Essays of the pathetic kind, 

^ * 

together with the most beautiful and ele- 
vated parts of Holy Writ ; keeping to these, 
till your voice has acquired flexibility, ex- 
pression, and energy. After repeated and 
patient efforts in this way, you may proceed 
with success to reading and reciting pieces 
of poetry^ in different styles ; setting out with 
those where there is least, and rising gra- 






Digitized by Google 




22S 



sermok vn. 



dually to tiiose where there is most of the* 
tender, the impassioned, and the sublime: 
Need I add, that all this should be practised 
in the frequent hearing, and under the kind 
ammadversion, of an experienced judge ? 

But perhaps you think the practice too la^., 
borious and troublesome. .Do ye ? Go, thou 
trifler, and be ashamed of thy folly. — To neg- 
lect the study of thy native English, the skilful 
use of which, joined to sentiment and know- 
ledge, would render thy conversation ’charm- 
ing ; and yet contentedly to puzzle thy silly 
head with learning a little imperfect Frenchji 
which it is a hundred to one if ever thou 
shalt have occasion to use — how preposterous 
and futile f To the language hist named I am 
no enemy : I only blame its occupying so large . 
a place in the female education of thrs coun- 
try. For women of rank the fashion has , 
made it necessary. But what can be more ri- 
diculous than to see our city girls, not except- 
ing the daughters of plai^^ tradesmen and ho- 
flest'mechanics, taught for years together, at 
great expence, a smattering of that which soon 
after they leave the boarding-school is gene- 
»ally forgotten i tvhile they are. left ignorant 

f • ' ■ ' ■ • 



Digitized by Google 




sERMO'N rrr. 



i29 

ftf the superior beauties and just pronuncia- 
tion of their mother tongue ? 

I mentioned the exercise of Reciting verses. 
With relation to this, I would only say, that 
I do not wish a young woman to indulge it in 
any company, that is not .very private and 
chosen indeed } how much soever it is to be 
desired, that she should store her memory with 
some of the most select sentiments, and strik- 
ing descriptions, from the best writers both i» 
verse and prose. 

On this last particular I am led to observe^, 
that, for a disengaged hour, there can be few 
occupations of greater entertainment or utility, 
than that of imprinting on the mind those pas- 
sages from any good author, which happen ta 
please and affect more than ordinary ; either^ 
by repeating them often at the time, till they 
are got by heart, or by writing them down, or 
sometimes by doing both. The advantages of 
such a practice are sufficiently apparent. 
Would it be one of the least, think ye, that * 
the attention of her who was thus employed, 

would be often turned from viewine and ad- 
* . . 

miring her person or dress in the mirror, to •• 
the conteinplaticn of Truth and Virtue, and 



Digitized by Google 




^30 



. SERMON VII. 



fixing their fair and venerable image in her 
soul ? * ^ 

Beside the several opportunities of mental 
culture now enumerated, I must not forget to 
add, that in all* probability there are few 
young women who are not, or who may not 
be, acquainted with some persons of both sexes, 
endowed alike with worth and capacity, that 
would take the highest pleasure, by their con- • 
versation and counsel, to aid them in the pur-* 
suit of knowledge ; which brings me to consider, 

. In the last place, our complaints of want 
of Encouragement to that pursuit. Who 
are they then that seek to discourage you ? I 
have read of foolish mothers, that would not 
suffer their daughters to read, lest they should 
dim the lustre of their eyes, or spoil the blooni 
of their complexions. .But I have never met 
with oney that seriously carried her folly so 
far,. On. the other haiid, I have known pa- 
rents 'not a few, who, though they had no 
taste for knowledge themselves, would yet 
speak with the utmost satisfaction of a girl that 
was fond of her books. ' * 

But perhaps my little friend is afraid, lest 
the men should suspect her of being what the 
• 4 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



231 



world styles in derision a Learned Lady. In- 
deed ? Is this then a character so very easily 
ac<pired, that you are in danger of it the mo- 
ment you emerge from the depth of ignorance, 
and begin to think and speak like a reasonable 
being ? Y ou are over hasty in your apprehen- 
sion. A Learned Lady is by no means a crea- 
ture that we run the risk of beingoften shocked 
with. For my own part, I have never, strictly 
.speaking, seen such a one ; and when at any 
time I have met with what approached to that 
charact er, I must profess, I found nothing to 
excite terror. But possibly you rilean a smat- 
terer in learning. There, indeed, I join with 
you in wishing you may never incur the impu- 
tation. 

•• 

That men are frighted at Female pedantry, 
is very certain. A woman that affects to dis- ' 
pute, to decide, to dictate on every subject ; 
that watches or makes opportunities of throw- 
ing out scraps of literature, or shreds of philo- 
sophy, in every company ; that engrosses the" 
conversation as if she alone were qualified to 
entertain ; that betrays, in short, a boundless 
intemperance of tongue, together with an in- 
extinguishable passion for shining by the splen- 



Digiiized by Google 




2S2 



imWo'N vxi. 



rfbr of her supposed talents ; such' a woman & 
truly insufferable. At first, perhaps, she^ may 
be considered merely as an object of ridicmle ; 
but she soon grows into an object of aversion. _ 
Be assured however that, where a character so 
unnatural appears, it is not the effect of too 
- much knowledge, but of too little. The deep 
river flows on with a noble stillness, while the 
shallow stream runs babbling along. Suspi- 
cious of her own deficiency, the Pedant we 
describe suspects lest you should discover it; but 
instead of learning caution from that conscious- 
ness, she strives to dazzle you with the little 
she does know ; Or else, what is more proba- » 
ble, olated with that which to her circum- 
^ scribed view appears great, she cannot restrain 
herself from displaying it on all occasions ; 
when farther progress, and higher ground, 
would have taught her modesty, by showing 
her immense regions of truth yet uutravelled, 
of which she had no conception before.' 

^In fact, we find that the best scholars of 
either sex are the least ostentatious. It will 
ever be so, wliere,^erudltion is accompanied 
with judgment, and matured by reHexion. 
Take care to preserve sober sense, and anas.- 




Digitized by Google 




SERMON Tir. 



Sinning manners : far froni giving disgust by 
literary attainments to any person whose re- 
gard is of moment, you will give pleasure to' 
every thinking man and woman of your ac- 
quaintance. I am even inclined to believe 
that, when in conversation you claim no kind 
of pre-eminence, but instead of pretending to 
teach are willing to learn, instead of courting 
applause • are ready to confer it, instead of 
proudly directing are content quietly to follow 
tfie current of discourse, every creature living 
will be delighted with your deportment, will 
listen with attention, and even deference, to 
one who has thus learnt, that the noblest im- 
provement of superior knowledge is superior 
humility. . ^ 

Now and then indeed there may be an invi- 
dious female, who cannot bear to see herself 
outdone. But that is a circumstance, which 
will only add to your exaltation •, while every 
<Mie else will be tempted, for the sake of mor- 
tifying her, to pay the more respect to yous. 
Be this as it may, the notion that letters are 
apt to generate self-conceit, because it can- 
not be denied that the ^use of them has often 
done 80, will in those of the least candour or 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. 



2S4 

discernment serve to heighten esteem for her, 
who considers an excellent understanding as 
only next in value to an excellent temper. If 
on any occasicm it should happen, that the ■ 
foolish or the worthless of one sex, or of the 
other are prejudiced against a young woman 
for discovering, though without parade, a cuU 
tivated mind, what then ? Is not the single 
plaudit of a real judge sufficient to outweigh a 
whole theatre of others ? ' : 

But you will ask. Do we not often see hand- 
some idiots complimented and caressed by 
those men from whom better things might be 
expected ; while the most accomplished wo- 
men in the same company shall be over-looked, 
if destitute of personal charms ? The fact can- 
mot be dissembled, and far be it from me to 
justify such partiality. There is in beauty a 
magic, which certainly does enchant for a . 
time the generality of beholders ; But ^ this 
will by no means excuse the injustice of ngg^ 
lecting merit in those who want that advan- 
tage. Let it be remembered however, that the 
triumph of their rivals is commonly, like that 
pf the wicked, short 5^ . The spell on whiph it 
is founded is soon broke. Men at l^st gf any 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VH. 



* 23.5 



sighifkance, are seldom long in recovering 
their semes. The admiration raised by. “ a set 
of features, or the tincture of a ski%” is 
often by the witlessness of the possessor thrown 
down in an instant. The witchcraft of a fair 
outside is always dispelled by familiarity. No- 
thing can detain affection or fix esteem, but 
tltat kind of beauty which depends not op 
flesh and blood. The least degree of underr 
standing will be disgusted at petulance, ca- 
price, or nonsense, even in the fairest form. 
External allurements are continually losing i 
internal attf*actk>ns are continually gaining. A 
beautiful character is as the morning light, 
“ that shineth more and more unto the perfect 
** day.” Sense, spirit, sweetness, are immor- 
tal. 'All beside “ withers like the grasfc” 
The power of a face to please, or indeed to 
displease, is diminished every time it is seeix. 
When appetite does not predominate, and 
appetite cannot predominate always, the 
soul will seek a soul ; it will refuse to be 
satisfied with any thing less. If it find none, 
in vain shall the brightest eye sparkle. In vain 
shall the softest smile entice. But if a mind 
appear, and, wherever it resides,; a mind will 



Digitized by Google 




256 



SERMON yir. 



appear^ it is recognized, admured, and em- 
braced i even though the eye should possess 
no lustre, and smiles should at the moment 
be banished by sorrow.. 

” Mind, mind alone, bear witness earth and 
heaven. 

The living fountain in itself contains 
" Of beauteous and sublime ! Here hand in hand 
" Sit paramount the Graces—— ” 

I cannot conclude this discourse, without 
taking so fair an opportunity, of addressing 
myself to such of the men as, by directing 
their praises .of young vtomen wholly or 
chiefly to an outward appearance^ turn the at- 
tention and solicitude of the little idols so 
strongly that way, as often to occasion the neg- 
lect of those inward perfections which* can 
alone give them value. Have you forgotten, 
Sirs, tlrat what they sec you admire, and hear 
you applaud, they will be induced to think 
most worthy of admiration and applause ; and 
that on it of coarse they ' will bestow their 
whole or tlieir chief care ? .tif you, who ought 
to assist their judgments, and animate their 
re^lutious, in what relates to the conduct <£ 

I 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII- 



231 



Jife, be accustomed to pay your main homage 
to their persons, their persons likewise they 
will adore. Beauty with them will constitute 
Merit j and every other endowment will be 
employed as a handmaid to dress that, -if not 
as a pander to sell it. Accordingly I fear, 
that to your score must be charged many errors 
of the sex, often less justly imputed to them. 
Those errors, I am sure, it would become you 
to prevent, or to correct at the source, by 
.pointing out to them what, in your wiser hours^ 
you want and wish them to be ; and what, 
when they are, will not fail to captivate love, 
■to command veneration, and to add perma^ 
nence to both. 

Consider, I beseech you, how honourable 
it will be for you, instead of corrupting the 
fair, to mend them ; instead of perverting then: 
ideas, to lead their taste to knowledge and 
elegance, to worth -and delicacy, to humility* 
and meekness ; things which in your inmost 
souls you cannot but prize, whenever you meet 
-with them in an amiable woman, and of 
which you are secretly convinced the absence 
cannot be compensated . by any advantages of 
docm or feature, any decorations of fashion or 



Digitized by Google 




S£KMON Vll. - 



fdi 

show. How auich nobler the power to' save, 
than the poweiT to destroy ! How much sweeter 
the praise of 'being esteemed men of virtue and 
sentiment, the friends and patrons of the sex, 
advocates for their true Interest, and zealous 
■to promote it, than that of being looked upon 
as smooth-tongued courtiers, or good-rnatured 
triflers ! To flatter a giddy girl into good hu> 
mour, or 'even tenderness, by- telling her per- 
petually how handsome >or how fine she is!, 
requires no’ capacity. Every empty. fellow, 
•every frivolous dangler, every wretch of a 
<paraske cas do the same. But to engage the 
esteem of a woman of principle and discern- 
ment, to preserve that esteem, and even to 
insure in 'her breast a 'silent testimony, that 
you have contributed to establish this principle, 
and to improve this discernment — is triumph 

indeed ! Those coxcombs that in truth make 

»■ 

* BO distinction, but yet would persuade every 
young thing they see, that her face, her shape, 
her dre^, her air, surpass those of all her sex } 
-and after throwing her into ecstacies ofiself- 
: complacence go away and l&ugh to their com- 
panions — area detestablejace. ’ 

Concerning many of you, my friend^^ 



Digitized by Google 




SERMON VII. • 



•239 



hope better things. Nor do I mean by aught 
I have said, rigidly to preclude every degree 
of compliment in conversation with the fair 
sex. I am for commending with moderation, 
what is commendable ; for acknowledging with 
prudence, what ' is pleasing. Yoiing minds 
ought to be encouraged. In every young 
mind there is something good. An agreeable 
appearance is certainly engaging. Truth will 
never deny it ; courtesy will readily own it. 
But then under the shelter of kind appro- 
bation, salutary counsel may be admitted. 
Wisdom may be found a welcome guest, when 
introduced by affection — I 'was -going to say, 
that vanity may be successively turned against 
itself. But why should the love of honest 
praise be deemed vanity ? Even tell your fe- 
male friends, that you do esteem them for 
whatever in their characters is estimable.* Tell 
them without exaggeration, but generously at 
the same time, what that is. Describe with 
complacence the qualities and accomplish- 
ments, which you have ever held most truly 
attractive, which it is in their powM: to ac- 
quire, and which it will be their glory to pps- 
. sess. If they have beauty, be hoU afraid 



Digitized 




240 



« SERMON VI L. 



to add how alluring it appears, when illumi- 
>nated by sense, and_ arrayed by virtue. If 
they have none, remind them freely that sense 
and virtue have often borne away the palm 
from the finest figure that .ever Flattery dei- 
£ed, if destitute of those Hving and lasting 
graces. 






■I 



OF VOLUliiEE 1. '• * 



\ 




Printed by GEORGE SIDNEY, 
Northumberlaiid'Street, Strand, 'Loadon. * 




027 4 -.; 8 




r 




