The Online Library of Liberty
A Project Of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Richard Price, Observations on the Importance of the
American Revolution, and the Means of Making it a
Benefit to the World [1784]
The Online Library Of Liberty
This E-Book (PDF format) is published by Liberty Fund, Inc., a private,
non-profit, educational foundation established in 1960 to encourage study of the ideal
of a society of free and responsible individuals. 2010 was the 50th anniversary year of
the founding of Liberty Fund.
It is part of the Online Library of Liberty web site http://oll.libertyfund.org, which
was established in 2004 in order to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
To find out more about the author or title, to use the site's powerful search engine, to
see other titles in other formats (HTML, facsimile PDF), or to make use of the
hundreds of essays, educational aids, and study guides, please visit the OLL web site.
This title is also part of the Portable Library of Liberty DVD which contains over
1,000 books and quotes about liberty and power, and is available free of charge upon
request.
The cuneiform inscription that appears in the logo and serves as a design element in
all Liberty Fund books and web sites is the earliest-known written appearance of the
word “freedom” (amagi), or “liberty.” It is taken from a clay document written about
2300 B.C. in the Sumerian city-state of Lagash, in present day Iraq.
To find out more about Liberty Fund, Inc., or the Online Library of Liberty Project,
please contact the Director at oll@libertyfund.org.
LIBERTY FUND, INC.
8335 Allison Pointe Trail, Suite 300
Indianapolis, Indiana 46250-1684

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Edition Used:
Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means of
Making it a Benefit to the World. To which is added, a Letter from M. Turgot, late
Comptroller-General of the Finances of France: with an Appendix, containing a
Translation of the Will of M. Fortuné Ricard, lately published in France(London: T.
Cadell, 1785).
Author: Richard Price
Author: Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot
Author: Charles-Joseph Mathon de La Cour (Fortuné Ricard)
About This Title:
A defence of the American Revolution by one of its key supporters in Britain, along
with a letter by Turgot and a short essay by Mathon de la Cour (also known as
Fortuné Ricard).
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 2 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
About Liberty Fund:
Liberty Fund, Inc. is a private, educational foundation established to encourage the
study of the ideal of a society of free and responsible individuals.
Copyright Information:
The text is in the public domain.
Fair Use Statement:
This material is put online to further the educational goals of Liberty Fund, Inc.
Unless otherwise stated in the Copyright Information section above, this material may
be used freely for educational and academic purposes. It may not be used in any way
for profit.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 3 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Table Of Contents
Advertisement.
Observations, &c.
Of the Importance of the Revolution Which Has Established the Independence
of the United States.
Of the Means of Promoting Human Improvement and Happiness In the United
States.—and First, of Public Debts.
Of Peace, and the Means of Perpetuating It.
Of Liberty.
Of Liberty of Discussion.
Of Liberty of Conscience, and Civil Establishments of Religion.
Of Education.
Of the Dangers to Which the American States Are Exposed.
Of Debts and Internal Wars.
Of an Unequal Distribution of Property.
Of Trade, Banks, and Paper Credit.
Of Oaths.
Of the Negro Trade and Slavery.
Conclusion.
Advertisement.
Letter From M. Turgot
Appendix,
Advertisement.
The Testament of Fortune Ricard
Tables.
Observations.
Remark, By the Translator.
No. II. Table of the Produce of Each Sum of 100 Livres, Bequeathed By the
Testator, From One Hundred to Five Hundred Years.
No. VI. Table of the Disposition of the 4 Th Sum, Amounting to
29,782,761,461 Liv. 13 Sous.
TO
The Free and United States of AMERICA,
THE FOLLOWING OBSERVATIONS ARE HUMBLY OFFERED,
as A LAST TESTIMONY of THE GOOD-WILL of
The Author.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 4 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
ADVERTISEMENT.
HAVING reason to hope I should be attended to in the American States, and thinking
I saw an opening there favourable to the improvement and best interests of mankind, I
have been induced to convey thither the sentiments and advice contained in the
following Observations. They were, therefore, originally intended only forAmerica.
The danger of a spurious edition has now obliged me to publish them in my own
country.
I should be inexcusable did I not take this opportunity to express my gratitude to a
distinguished writer(the Count deMirabeau) for his translation of these Observations
into French, and for the support and kind civility with which it has been accompanied.
Mr. Turgot’s letter formed a part of this tract when it was conveyed to America. I
have now given a translation of it.
I think it necessary to add that I have expressed myself in some respects too strongly
in theconclusion of the following Observations. By accounts from persons the best
informed, I have lately been assured that no such dissentions exist among the
American States as have been given out in this country; that the new governments are
in general well settled, and the people happy under them; and that, in particular, a
conviction is becoming universal of the necessity of giving more strength to that
power which forms and which is to conduct and maintain their union.
March, 1785.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 5 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OBSERVATIONS, &C.
Of TheImportanceOf TheRevolutionWhich Has Established
The Independence Of The United States.
HAVING, from pure conviction, taken a warm part in favour of the Britishcolonies
(now the United States of America) during the late war; and been exposed, in
consequence of this, to much abuse and some danger; it must be supposed that I have
been waiting for the issue with anxiety—I am thankful that my anxiety is removed;
and that I have been spared to be a witness to that very issue of the war which has
been all along the object of my wishes. With heart-felt satisfaction, I see the
revolution in favour of universal liberty which has taken place in America;—a
revolution which opens a new prospect in human affairs, and begins a new æra in the
history of mankind;—a revolution by which Britonsthemselves will be the greatest
gainers, if wise enough to improve properly the check that has been given to the
despotism of their ministers, and to catch the flame of virtuous liberty which has
saved their American brethren.
The late war, in its commencement and progress, did great good by disseminating just
sentiments of the rights of mankind, and the nature of legitimate government; by
exciting a spirit of resistance to tyranny which has emancipated one European
country, and is likely to emancipate others; and by occasioning the establishment in
Americaof forms of government more equitable and more liberal than any that the
world has yet known. But, in its termination,the war has done still greater good by
preserving the new governments from that destruction in which they must have been
involved, bad Britain conquered; by providing, in a sequestered continent possessed
of many singular advantages, a place of refuge for opprest men in every region of the
world; and by laying the foundation there of an empire which may be the seat of
liberty, science and virtue, and from whence there is reason to hope these sacred
blessings will spread, till they become universal, and the time arrives when kings and
priests shall have no more power to oppress, and that ignominious slavery which has
hitherto debased the world is exterminated. I therefore, think I see the hand of
Providence in the late war working for the general good.
Reason, as well as tradition and revelation, lead us to expect that a more improved
and happy state of human affairs will take place before the consummation of all
things. The world has hitherto been gradually improving. Light and knowledge have
been gaining ground, and human life at presentcompared with what it oncewas, is
much the same that a youth approaching to manhood is compared with an infant.
Such are the natures of things that this progress must continue. During particular
intervals it may be interrupted, but it cannot be destroy’d. Every present advance
prepares the way for farther advances; and a single experiment or discovery may
sometimes give rise to so many more as suddenly to raise the species higher, and to
resemble the effects of opening a new sense, or of the fall of a spark on a train that
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 6 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
springs a mine. For this reason, mankind may at last arrive at degrees of improvement
which we cannot now even suspect to be possible. A dark age may follow an
enlightened age; but, in this case, the light, after being smothered for a time, will
break out again with a brighter lustre. The present age of increased light, considered
as succeeding the ages of Greeceand Romeand an intermediate period of thick
darkness, furnishes a proof of the truth of this observation. There are certain kinds of
improvement which, when once made, cannot be entirely lost. During the dark ages,
the improvements made in the ages that preceded them remained so far as to be
recovered immediately at the resurrection of letters, and to produce afterwards that
more rapid progress in improvement which has distinguished modern times.
There can scarcely be a more pleasing and encouraging object of reflection than this.
An accidental observation of the effects of gravity in a garden has been the means of
discovering the laws that govern the solar system*, and of enabling us to look down
with pity on the ignorance of the most enlightened times among the antients. What
new dignity has been given to man, and what additions have been made to his powers,
by the invention of optical glasses, printing, gun-powder, &c. and by the late
discoveries in navigation, mathematics, natural philosophy, &c.?†
But among the events in modern times tending to the elevation of mankind, there are
none probably of so much consequence as the recent one which occasions these
observations. Perhaps, I do not go too far when I say that, next to the introduction of
Christianity among mankind, the American revolution may prove the most important
step in the progressive course of human improvement. It is an event which may
produce a general diffusion of the principles of humanity, and become the means of
setting free mankind from the shackles of superstition and tyranny, by leading them to
see and know “that nothing is fundamentalbut impartial enquiry, an honest mind, and
virtuous practice—that state policy ought not to be applied to the support of
speculative opinions and formularies of faith.”—“That the members of a civil
community are*confederates,not subjects;and their rulers, servants,not
masters.—And that all legitimate government consists in the dominion of equal laws
made with common consent; that is, in the dominion of men over themselves;and not
in the dominion of communities over communities, or of any men over other men.”
Happy will the world be when these truths shall be every where acknowledged and
practised upon. Religious bigotry, that cruel demon, will be then laid asleep. Slavish
governments and slavish Hierarchies will then sink; and the old prophecies be
verified, “that the last universal empire upon earth shall be the empire of reason and
virtue, under which the gospel of peace (better understood) shall have free course and
be glorified, many will run to and fro and knowledge be increased, the wolf dwell with
the lamb and the leopard with the kid, and nation no more lift up a sword against
nation.”
It is a conviction I cannot resist, that the independence of the Englishcolonies in
America is one of the steps ordained by Providence to introduce these times; and I can
scarcely be deceived in this conviction, if the United States should escape some
dangers which threaten them, and will take proper care to throw themselves open to
future improvements, and to make the most of the advantages of their present
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 7 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
situation. Should this happen, it will be true of them as it was of the people of the
Jews, that in them all the families of the earth shall be blessed.It is scarcely possible
they should think too highly of their own consequence. Perhaps, there never existed a
people on whose wisdom and virtue more depended; or to whom a station of more
importance in the plan of Providence has been assigned. They have begun nobly.
They have fought with success for themselves and for the world; and, in the midst of
invasion and carnage, established forms of government favourable in the highest
degree to the rights of mankind.—But they have much more to do; more indeed than
it is possible properly to represent. In this address, my design is only to take notice of
a few greatpoints which seem particularly to require their attention, in order to render
them permanently happy in themselves and useful to mankind. On these points, I shall
deliver my sentiments with freedom, conscious I mean well; but, at the same time,
with real diffidence, conscious of my own liableness to error.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 8 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
Of The Means Of Promoting Human Improvement And
Happiness In The United States.—And First, OfPublic Debts.
IT seems evident, that what first requires the attention of the United States is the
redemption of their debts, and making compensation to that army which has carried
them through the war. They have an infant credit to cherish and rear, which, if this is
not done, must perish, and with it their character and honour for ever. Nor is it
conceivable they should meet with any great difficulties in doing this. They have a
vast resource peculiar to themselves, in a continent of unlocated lands possessing
every advantage of soil and climate. The settlement of these lands will be rapid, the
consequence of which must be a rapid increase of their value. By disposing of them to
the army and to emigrants, the greatest part of the debts of the United States may
probably be sunk immediately.But had they no such resource, they are very capable
of bearing taxes sufficient for the purpose of a gradual redemption. Supposing their
debts to amount to nine millionssterling, carrying interest at 5½ per cent.taxes
producing a revenue of a million per ann. would pay the interest, and at the same time
leave a surplus of halfa million per ann. for a sinking fund,which would discharge
the principal in thirteen years. A surplus of a quarterof a million would do the same
in 20½ years. After discharging the principal, the appropriated revenue being no
longer wanted, might be abolished, and the States eased of the burthen of it. But it
would be imprudent to abolish it entirely. 100,000 l. per ann.reserved, and faithfully
laid out in clearing unlocated lands and other improvements, would in a short time
increase to a treasure (or continental patrimony) which would defray the whole
expenditure of the union, and keep the States free from debts and taxes for ever*.
Such a reservewould (supposing it improved so as to produce a profit of 5 per cent.)
increase to a capital of three millions in 19 years, 30 millions in 57 years, 100 millions
in 81 years, and 261 millions in 100 years. But supposing it capable of being
improved so as to produce a profit of 10 per cent.it would increase to five millions in
19 years, 100 millions in 49 years, and 10,000 millions in 97 years.
It is wonderful that no state has yet thought of taking this method to make itself great
and rich. The smallest appropriation in a sinking fund, never diverted,operates in
cancelling debts, just as money increases at compound interest; and is, therefore,
omnipotent*. But, if diverted,it loses all its power. Britain affords a striking proof of
this. Its sinking fund (once the hope of the kingdom) has, by the practice of alienating
it, been rendered impotent and useless. Had it been inviolably applied to the purpose
for which it was intended, there would, in the year 1775, have been a surplus in the
revenue of more than five millions per ann. But instead of this, we were then
encumbered with a debt of 137 millions, carrying an interest of near 4½ millions, and
leaving no surplus of any consequence. This debt has been since increased to*280
millions, carrying an interest (including expences of management) of ninemillions
and a half.—A monstrous bubble;—and if no very strong measures are soon taken to
reduce it within the limits of safety, it must produce a dreadful convulsion. Let the
United States take warning—Their debts at present are moderate. A Sinking fund,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 9 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
guarded†against misapplication, may soon extinguish them, and prove a resource in
all events of the greatest importance.
I must not, however, forget that there is one of their debts on which no sinking fund
can have any effect; and which it is impossible for them to discharge:—A debt,
greater, perhaps, than has been ever due from any country; and which will be deeply
felt by their latest posterity.—But it is a debt of gratitude only—Of gratitude to that
General, who has been raised up by Providence to make them free and independent,
and whose name must shine among the first in the future annals of the benefactors of
mankind.
The measure now proposed may preserve America for ever from too great an
accumulation of debts; and, consequently, of taxes—an evil which is likely to be the
ruin not only of Britain,but of other EuropeanStates.—But there are measures of yet
greater consequence, which I wish ardently to recommend and inculcate.
For the sake of mankind, I wish to see every measure adopted that can have a
tendency to preserve peace in America; and to make it an open and fair stage for
discussion, and the seat of perfect liberty.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 10 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfPeace,
And The Means Of Perpetuating It.
CIVIL Government is an expedient for collecting the wisdom and force of a
community or confederacy, in order to preserve its peace and liberty against every
hostile invasion, whether from withinor from without.—In the latter of these respects,
the United States are happily secured; but they are far from being equally happy in the
former respect. Having now, in consequence of their successful resistance of the
invasion of Britain,united to their remoteness from Europe,no external enemy to
fear, they are in danger of fighting with one another.—This is their greatestdanger;
and providing securities against it is their hardestwork. Should they fail in this,
America may some time or other be turned into a scene of blood; and instead of being
the hope and refuge of the world, may become a terror to it.
When a dispute arises among individualsin a State, an appeal is made to a courtof
law; that is, to the wisdom and justice of the State. The court decides. The losing party
acquiesces; or, if he does not, the power of the State forceshim to submission; and
thus the effects of contention are supprest, and peace is maintained.—In a way similar
to this, peace may be maintained between any number of confederated States; and I
can almost imagine, that it is not impossible but that by such means universalpeace
may be produced, and all war excluded from the world.—Why may we not hope to
see this begun in America?—The articles of confederation make considerable
advances towards it. When a dispute arises between any of the States, they order an
appeal to Congress,—an enquiry by Congress,—a hearing,—and a decision.—But
here they stop.—What is most of all necessary is omitted. No provision is made for
enforcing the decisions of Congress; and this renders them inefficient and futile. I am
by no means qualified to point out the best method of removing this defect. Much
must be given up for this purpose, nor is it easy to give up toomuch. Without all
doubt the powers of Congress must be enlarged. In particular, a power must be given
it to collect, on certain emergencies, the force of the confederacy, and to employ it in
carrying its decisions into execution. A State against which a decision is made, will
yield of course when it knows that such a force exists, and that it allows no hope from
resistance.
By this force I do not mean a standing army. God forbid, that standing armies should
ever find an establishment in America. They are every where the grand supports of
arbitrary power, and the chief causes of the depression of mankind. No wise people
will trust their defence out of their own hands, or consent to hold their rights at the
mercy of armed slaves.Free States ought to be bodies of armed citizens,well
regulated, and well disciplined, and always ready to turn out, when properly called
upon, to execute the laws, to quell riots, and to keep the peace. Such, if I am rightly
informed, are the citizens of America. Why then may not Congress be furnished with
a power of calling out from the confederated States, quotasof militiasufficient to
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 11 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
force at once the compliance of any State which may shew an inclination to break the
union by resisting its decisions?
I am very sensible that it will be difficult to guard such a power against abuse; and,
perhaps, better means of answering this end are discoverable. In human affairs,
however, the choice generally offered us is “of two evils to take the least.” We chuse
the restraint of civil government, because a less evil than anarchy; and, in like
manner, in the present instance, the danger of the abuse of power, and of its being
employed sometimes to enforce wrong decisions, must be submitted to, because a less
evil than the misery of intestine wars. Much, however, may be done to lessen this
danger. Such regulations as those in the ninth of the articles of confederation will, in a
great measure, prevent hasty and partial decisions. The rotation established by the
fifth article will prevent that corruption of character which seldom fails to be
produced by the long possession of power; and the right reserved to every State of
recalling its Delegates when dissatisfied with them, will keep them constantly
responsible and cautious.
The observations now made must be extended to money transactions. Congress must
be trusted with a power of procuring supplies for defraying the expences of the
confederation; of contracting debts, and providing funds for discharging them: and
this power must not be capable of being defeated by the opposition of any minority in
the States.
In short, the credit of the United States, their strength, their respectableness abroad,
their liberty at home, and even their existence, depend on the preservation of a firm
political union; and such an union cannot be preserved, without giving all possible
weight and energy to the authority of that delegation which constitutes the union.
Would it not be proper to take periodical surveys of the different states, their numbers
of both sexes in every stage of life, their condition, occupations, property,
&c.?—Would not such surveys, in conjunction with accurate registers of births,
marriages and deaths at all ages, afford much important instruction by shewing what
laws govern human mortality, and what situations, employments, and civil
institutions, are most favourable to the health and happiness of mankind?—Would
they not keep constantly in view the progress of population in the states, and the
increase or decline of their resources? But more especially, are they not the only
means of procuring the necessary information for determining accurately and
equitably the proportions of men and money to be contributed by each state for
supporting and strengthening the confederation?
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 12 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfLiberty.
THE next point I would insist on, as an object of supreme importance, is the
establishment of such a system of perfect liberty, religiousas well as civil,in
America, as shall render it a country where truth and reason shall have fair play, and
the human powers find full scope for exerting themselves, and for shewing how far
they can carry human improvement.
The faculties of man have hitherto, in all countries, been more or less cramped by the
interference of civil authority in matters of speculation, by tyrannical laws against
heresy and schism, and by slavish hierarchies and religious establishments. It is above
all things desirable that no such fetters on reason should be admitted into America. I
observe, with inexpressible satisfaction, that at present they have no existence there.
In this respect the governments of the United States are liberal to a degree that is
unparalleled. They have the distinguished honour of being the first states under
heaven in which forms of government have been established favourable to universal
liberty. They have been thus distinguished in their infancy.What then will they be in a
more advanced state; when time and experience, and the concurring assistance of the
wise and virtuous in every part of the earth, shall have introduced into the new
governments, corrections and amendments which will render them still more friendly
to liberty, and more the means of promoting human happiness and dignity?—May we
not see there the dawning of brighter days on earth, and a new creation rising. But I
must check myself. I am in danger of being carried too far by the ardor of my hopes.
The liberty I mean includes in it liberty of conduct in all civilmatters—liberty of
discussion in all speculativematters—and liberty of conscience in all religious
matters.—And it is then perfect,when under no restraint except when used to injure
any one in his person, property, or good name; that is, except when used to destroy
itself.
In liberty of discussion, I include the liberty of examining all public measures, and the
conduct of all public men; and of writing and publishing on all speculative and
doctrinal points.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 13 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfLibertyOfDiscussion.
IT is a common opinion, that there are some doctrines so sacred, and others of so bad
a tendency, that no public discussion of them ought to be allowed. Were this a right
opinion, all the persecution that has been ever practised would be justified. For, if it is
a part of the duty of civil magistrates to prevent the discussion of such doctrines, they
must, in doing this, act on their own judgments of the nature and tendency of
doctrines; and, consequently, they must have a right to prevent the discussion of all
doctrines which they think to be too sacred for discussion or too dangerous in their
tendency; and this right they must exercise in the only way in which civil power is
capable of exercising it, “by inflicting penalties on all who oppose sacred doctrines, or
who maintain pernicious opinions.”—In Mahometancountries, therefore, civil
magistrates have a right to silence and punish all who oppose the divine mission of
Mahomet,a doctrine therereckoned of the most sacred nature. The like is true of the
doctrines of transubstantiation, worship of the Virgin Mary, &c. in Popishcountries;
and of the doctrines of the Trinity, satisfaction, &c. in Protestantcountries.—In
Englanditself, this principle has been acted upon, and produced the laws which
subject to severe penalties all who write or speak against the Supreme Divinity of
Christ, the Book of Common Prayer, and the Church Articles of Faith. All such laws
are right, if the opinion I have mentioned is right. But in reality, civil power has
nothing to do with any such matters; and civil governors go miserably out of their
proper province, whenever they take upon them the care of truth, or the support of any
doctrinal points. They are not judges of truth; and if they pretend to decide about it,
they will decide wrong. This all the countries under heaven think of the application of
civil power to doctrinal points in every country but their own. It is, indeed,
superstition, idolatry, and nonsense, that civil power at present supports almost every
where, under the idea of supporting sacred truth, and opposing dangerous error.
Would not, therefore, its perfect neutrality be the greatest blessing? Would not the
interest of truth gain unspeakably, were all the rulers of States to aim at nothing but
keeping the peace; or did they consider themselves as bound to take care, not of the
future,but the presentinterest of men;—not of their souls and their faith,but of their
persons and property;—not of any ecclesiastical,but secularmatters only?
All the experience of past time proves that the consequence of allowing civil power to
judge of the nature and tendency of doctrines, must be making it a hindrance to the
progress of truth, and an enemy to the improvement of the world.
Anaxagoras was tried and condemned in Greece for teaching that the sun and stars
were not Deities, but masses of corruptible matter. Accusations of a like kind
contributed to the death of Socrates.The threats of bigets and the fear of persecution,
prevented Copernicusfrom publishing, during his whole life-time, his discovery of
the true system of the world. Galileowas obliged to renounce the doctrine of the
motion of the earth, and suffered a year’s imprisonment for having asserted it. And so
lately as the year 1742, the best commentary on the first production of human genius
(Newton’sPrincipia)was not allowed to be printed at Rome, because it asserted this
doctrine; and the learned commentators were obliged to prefix to their work a
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 14 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
declaration, that on this point they submitted to the decisions of the supreme Pontiffs.
Such havebeen, and such (while men continue blind and ignorant) willalways be the
consequences of the interposition of civil governments in matters of speculation.
When men associate for the purpose of civil government, they do it, not to defend
truth or to support formularies of faith and speculative opinions; but to defend their
civil rights, and to protect one another in the free exercise of their mental and
corporeal powers. The interference, therefore, of civil authority in such cases is
directly contrary to the end of its institution. The way in which it can best promote the
interest and dignity of mankind, (as far as they can be promoted by the discovery of
truth) is, by encouraging them to search for truth whereever they can find it; and by
protecting them in doing this against the attacks of malevolence and bigotry. Should
any attempt be made by contending sects to injure one another, its power will come in
properly to crush the attempt, and to maintain for all sects equal liberty, by punishing
every encroachment upon it. The conduct of a civil magistrate, on such an occasion,
should be that of Galliothe wise Roman proconsul, who, on receiving an accusation
of the apostle Paul, would not listen to it, but drove from his presence the accusers
who had laid violent hands upon him, after giving them the following admonition:—If
it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, reason would require that I should
bear with you. But if it be a question of words and names and the law, look you to it.
For I will be no judge of such matters.Acts xviii. 12. &c. How much happier would
the world have been, had all magistrates acted in this manner? Let Americalearn this
important lesson, and profit by the experience of past times. A dissent from
establishedopinions and doctrines has indeed often miserably disturbed society, and
produced mischief and bloodshed. But it should be remembered, that this has been
owing to the establishmentof the points dissented from, and the use of civil power to
enforce the reception of them. Had civil government done its duty, left all free, and
employed itself in procuringinstead of restrainingfair discussion, all mischief would
have been avoided, and mankind would have been raised higher than they are in
knowledge and improvement.
When Christianity, that first and best of all the means of human improvement, was
first preached, it was charged with turning the world upside down. The leaders of
Jewish and Pagan establishments were alarmed, and by opposing the propagation of
it, converted a religion of peace and love into an occasion of violence and slaughter;
and thus verified our Lord’s prophecy, that he was come not to send peace, but a
sword on earth. All this was the effect of the misapplication of the powers of
government. Instead of creating,they should have been employed in preventingsuch
mischief, and been activeonly in causing the Christian cause to receive a fair hearing,
and guarding the propagators of it against insult.—The like observation may be made
concerning the first reformers.—What we all see would have been right in Paganand
Popishgovernments with respect to Christianity and the Reformation; would it not be
nowright in Christianor Protestantgovernments, were any attempts made to
propagate a new religion, or any doctrines advanced opposite to those now held
sacred? Such attempts, if unsupported by reason and evidence, would soon come to
nothing. An imposture cannot stand the test of fair and open examination. On the
contrary, the cause of truth will certainly be served by it. Mahometanism would have
sunk as soon as it rose, had no other force than that of evidence been employed to
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 15 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
propagate it; and it is an unspeakable recommendation of Christianity,that it made its
way till it became the religion of the world in one of its most enlightened periods, by
evidence only, in opposition to the strongest exertions of civil power. There cannot be
a more striking proof, that nothing but fair discussion is necessary to suppress error
and to propagate truth. I am grieved, indeed, whenever I find any Christians shewing
a disposition to call in the aid of civil power to defend their religion. Nothing can be
more disgraceful to it. If it wants such aid, it cannot be of God. Its corruption and
debasement took place from the moment that civil power took it under its patronage;
and this corruption and debasement increased, till at last it was converted into a
system of absurdity and superstition more gross and more barbarous than Paganism
itself.—The religion of Christ disclaims all connexion with the civil establishments of
the world. It has suffered infinitely by their friendship.Instead of silencing its
opponents, let them be encouraged to produce their strongest arguments against it.
The experience of Britainhas lately shewn that this will only cause it to be better
understood and more firmly believed.
I would extend these observations to all points of faith, however sacred they may be
deemed. Nothing reasonable can suffer by discussion. All doctrines reallysacred must
be clear and incapable of being opposed with success. If civil authority interposes, it
will be to support some misconception or abuse of them.
That immoral tendencyof doctrines which has been urged as a reason against
allowing the public discussion of them, must be either avowedand direct,or only a
consequencewith which they are charged. If it is avowedand direct,such doctrines
certainly will not spread. The principles rooted in human nature will resist them; and
the advocates of them will be soon disgraced. If, on the contrary, it is only a
consequencewith which a doctrine is charged, it should be considered how apt all
parties are to charge the doctrines they oppose with bad tendencies. It is well known,
that Calvinistsand Arminians, Trinitariansand Socinians, Fatalistsand Free-willers,
are continually exclaiming against one another’s opinions as dangerous and
licentious. Even Christianity itself could not, at its first introduction, escape this
accusation. The professors of it were considered as Atheists,because they opposed
Pagan idolatry; and their religion was on this account reckoned a destructive and
pernicious enthusiasm. If, therefore, the rulers of a State are to prohibit the
propagation of all doctrines in which theyapprehend immoral tendencies, an opening
will be made, as I have before observed, for every species of persecution. There will
be no doctrine, however true or important, the avowal of which will not in some
country or other be subjected to civil penalties.—Undoubtedly, there are doctrines
which have such tendencies. But the tendencies of speculative opinions have often
very little effect on practice. The Author of nature has planted in the human mind
principles and feelings which will operate in opposition to any theoriesthat may seem
to contradict them. Every sect, whatever may be its tenets, has some salvofor the
necessity of virtue. The philosophers who hold that matter and motion have no
existence except in our own ideas, are capable of believing this only in their closets.
The same is true of the philosophers who hold that nothing exists butmatter and
motion; and at the same time teach, that man has no self-determining power; that an
unalterable fate governs all things; and that no one isany thing that he can avoid
being,ordoes any thing that he can avoid doing.—These philosophers when they
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 16 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
come out into the world act as other men do. Common sense never fails to get the
better of their theories; and I know that many of them are some of the best as well as
the ablest men in the world, and the warmest friends to the true interests of society.
Though their doctrine may seem to furnish an apology for vice, their practice is an
exhibition of virtue; and a government which would silence them would greatly injure
itself.—Only overt acts of injustice, violence or defamation, come properly under the
cognizance of civil power. Were a person now to go about London, teaching that
“property is founded in grace,” I should, were I a magistrate, let him alone while he
did nothing but teach,without being under any other apprehension than that he would
soon find a lodging in Bedlam.But were he to attempt to carry his doctrine into its
consequences by actually stealing,under the pretence of his right as a saint to the
property of his neighbours, I should think it my duty to lay hold of him as a felon,
without regarding the opinion from which he acted.
I am persuaded, that few or no inconveniencies would arise from such a liberty. If
magistrates will do their duty as soon as violence begins, or any overt acts which
break the peace are committed, no great harm will arise from their keeping themselves
neutraltill then. Let, however, the contrary be supposed. Let it be granted that civil
authority will in this case often be too latein its exertions; the just inference will be,
not that the liberty I plead for ought not to be allowed; but that there will be two evils,
between which an option must be made, and the least of which must be
preferred.—One is, the evil just mentioned.—The otherincludes in it every evil
which can arise from making the rulers of States judges of the tendency of doctrines,
subjecting freedom of enquiry to the controul of their ignorance, and perpetuating
darkness, intolerance and slavery. I need not say which of these evils is the least.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 17 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfLibertyOfConscience,AndCivil EstablishmentsOfReligion.
IN Liberty of Conscience I include much more than Toleration.Jesus Christ has
established a perfect equality among his followers. His command is, that they shall
assume no jurisdiction over one another, and acknowledge no master besides
himself.—It is, therefore, presumption in any of them to claim a right to any
superiority or pre-eminence over their brethren, Such a claim is implied, whenever
any of them pretend to toleratethe rest.—Not only all Christians,but all men of all
religions ought to be considered by a State as equally entitled to its protection as far as
they demean themselves honestly and peaceably. Tolerationcan take place only
where there is a civil establishment of a particular mode of religion; that is, where a
predominant sect enjoys exclusiveadvantages, and makes the encouragement of its
own mode of faith and worship a part of the constitution of the State; but at the same
time thinks fit to suffer the exercise of other modes of faith and worship. Thanks be to
God, the new American States are at present strangers to such establishments. In this
respect, as well as many others, they have shewn, in framing their constitutions, a
degree of wisdom and liberality which is above all praise.
Civil establishments of formularies of faith and worship are inconsistent with the
rights of private judgment—They ingender strife—They turn religion into a
trade—They shoar up error—They produce hypocrisy and prevarication—They lay an
undue byass on the human mind in its enquiries, and obstruct the progress of
truth.—Genuinereligion is a concern that lies entirely between God and our own
souls. It is incapable of receiving any aid from human laws. It is contaminated as soon
as worldly motives and sanctions mix their influence with it. Statesmen should
countenance it only by exhibiting in their own example a conscientious regard to it in
those forms which are most agreeable to their own judgments, and by encouraging
their fellow-citizens in doing the same. They cannot as public mengive it any other
assistance. All besides that has been called a public leadingin religion, has done it an
essential injury, and produced some of the worst consequences.
The Church Establishment in Englandis one of the mildest and best sort. But even
here what a snare has it been to integrity? And what a check to free enquiry? What
dispositions favourable to despotism has it fostered? What a turn to pride and
narrowness and domination has it given the clerical character? What struggles has it
produced in its members to accommodate their opinions to the subscriptions and tests
which it imposes? What a perversion of learning has it occasioned to defend obselete
creeds and absurdities? What a burthen is it on the consciences of some of its best
clergy, who, in consequence of being bound down to a system they do not approve,
and having no support except that which they derive from conforming to it, find
themselves under the hard necessity of either prevaricatingor starving?—No one
doubts but that the English clergy in general could with more truth declare that they
do not,than that they dogive their unfeigned assent toall and every thingcontained in
the thirty-nine Articles and the Book of Common-Prayer; and yet, with a solemn
declaration to this purpose, are they obliged to enter upon an office which above all
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 18 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
offices requires those who exercise it to be examples of simplicity and
sincerity.—Who can help execrating the cause of such an evil?
But what I wish most to urge is the tendency of religious establishments to impede the
improvement of the world. They are boundaries prescribed by human folly to human
investigation; and inclosures which intercept the light and confine the exertions of
reason. Let any one imagine to himself what effects similar establishments would
have in Philosophy, Navigation, Metaphysicks, Medicine or Mathematicks.
Something like this took place in Logick and Philosophy; while the ipse dixit of
Aristotle and the nonsense of the schools maintained an authority like that of the
creeds of churchmen: And the effect was a longer continuance of the world in the
ignorance and barbarity of the dark ages. But civil establishments of religion are more
pernicious. So apt are mankind to misrepresent the character of the Deity, and to
connect his favour with particular modes of faith, that it must be expected, that a
religion so settled will be what it has hitherto been—a gloomy and cruel superstition
bearing the name of religion.
It has been long a subject of dispute, which is worst in its effects on society, such a
religion or speculative Atheism. For my own part, I could almost give the preference
to the latter.—Atheism is so repugnant to every principle of common sense, that it is
not possible it should ever gain much ground, or become very prevalent. On the
contrary; there is a particular proneness in the human mind to Superstition, and
nothing is more likely to become prevalent.—Atheism leaves us to the full influence
of most of our natural feelings and social principles; and these are so strong in their
operation, that in general they are a sufficient guard to the order of society. But
Superstition counteracts these principles, by holding forth men to one another as
objects of divine hatred; and by putting them on harrassing, silencing, imprisoning
and burning one another in order to do God service.—Atheism is a sanctuary for vice
by taking away the motives to virtue arising from the will of God and the fear of a
future judgment. But Superstition is more a sanctuary for vice, by teaching men ways
of pleasing God without moral virtue, and by leading them even to compound for
wickedness by ritualservices, by bodily penances and mortifications, by adorning
shrines, going pilgrimages, saying many prayers, receiving absolution from the priest,
exterminating heretics, &c.—Atheism destroys the sacredness and obligation of an
oath. But has there not been also a religion (so called) which has done this, by leading
its professors to a persuasion that there exists a power on earth which can dispense
with the obligation of oaths, that piousfrauds are right, and that faith is not to be kept
with heretics?
It is indeed only a rational and liberal religion; a religion founded on just notions of
the Deity as a being who regards equally every sincere worshipper, and by whom all
are alike favoured as far as they act up to the light they enjoy; a religion which
consists in the imitation of the moral perfections of an almighty but benevolent
governor of nature, who directs for the best all events, in confidence in the care of his
providence, in resignation to his will, and in the faithful discharge of every duty of
piety and morality from a regard to his authority and the apprehension of a future
righteous retribution.—It is only this religion (the inspiring principle of every thing
fair and worthy and joyful, and which in truth is nothing but the love of God and man
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 19 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
and virtue warming the heart and directing the conduct.)—It is only this kind of
religion that can bless the world, or be an advantage to society.—This is the religion
that every enlightened friend to mankind will be zealous to promote. But it is a
religion that the powers of the world know little of, and which will always be best
promoted by being left free and open.
I cannot help adding here, that such in particular is the Christian
religion.—Christianity teaches us that there is none good but one, that is, God; that he
willeth all men to be saved, and will punish nothing but wickedness; that he desires
mercy and not sacrifice (benevolence rather than rituals); that loving him with all our
hearts, and loving our neighbour as ourselves, is the whole of our duty; and that in
every nation he that feareth him and worketh righteousness is accepted of him. It rests
its authority on the power of God, not of man; refers itself entirely to the
understandings of men; makes us the subjects of a kingdom that is not of this world;
and requires us to elevate our minds above temporal emoluments, and to look
forwards to a state beyond the grave, where a government of perfect virtue will be
erected under that Messiah who has tasted death for every man.—What have the
powers of the world to do with such a religion?—It disclaims all connexion with
them; it made its way at first in opposition to them; and, as far as it is now upheld by
them, it is dishonoured and vilified.
The injury which civil establishments do to Christianity may be learnt from the
following considerations.
First. The spirit of religious establishments is opposite to the spirit of Christianity. It
is a spirit of pride and tyranny in opposition to the Christian lowlyspirit; a contracted
and selfish spirit, in opposition to the Christian enlarged and benevolent spirit; the
spirit of the world in opposition to the Christian heavenlyspirit.
Secondly. Religious establishments are founded on a claim of authority in the
Christian church which overthrows Christ’s authority. He has in the scriptures given
his followers a code of laws, to which he requires them to adhere as their onlyguide,
But the language of the framers of church establishments is—We have authority in
controversies of faith, and power to decree rites and ceremonies.We are the deputies
of Christ upon earth, who have been commissioned by him to interpret his laws, and
to rule his church. You must therefore follow US. The scriptures are insufficient. Our
interpretations you must receive as Christ’s laws; our creeds as hisdoctrine; our
inventions as hisinstitutions.”
It is evident, as the excellent Hoadly has shewn, that these claims turn Christ out of
the government of his own kingdom, and place usurpers on his throne.—They are
therefore derogatory to his honour; and a submission to them is a breach of the
allegiance due to him. They have been almost fatal to true Christianity; and attempts
to enforce them by civil penalties, have watered the Christian world with the blood of
saints and martyrs.
Thirdly. The difficulty of introducing alterations into church establishments after they
have been once formed, is another objection to them. Hence it happens, that they
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 20 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
remain always the same amidst all changes of public manners and opinions*; and that
a kingdom even of Christans may go on for ages in idolatrous worship, after a general
conviction may have taken place, that there is but onebeing who is the proper object
of religious adoration, and that this onebeing is that one only living and true God who
sent Christ into the world, and who is hisno less than he is our God and father. What
a sad scene of religious hypocrisy must such a discordance between public conviction
and the public forms produce? At this day, in some Europeancountries, the absurdity
and slavishness of their hierarchies are seen and acknowledged; but being
incorporated with the state, it is scarcely possible to get rid of them.
What can be more striking than the State of Englandin this respect?—The system of
faith and worship established in it was formed above two hundred years ago, when
Europewas just emerging from darkness and barbarity. The times have ever since
been growing more enlightened; but without any effect on the establishment. Not a
ray of the increasing light has penetrated it. Not one imperfection, however gross, has
been removed. The same articles of faith are subscribed. The same ritual of devotion
is practised.—There is reason to fear that the absolution of the sick,which forms a
part of this ritual, is often resorted to as a passport to heaven after a wicked life; and
yet it is continued.—Perhaps nothing more shocking to reason and humanity ever
made a part of a religious system than the damning clauses in the Athanasiancreed;
and yet the obligation of the clergy to declare assent to this creed, and to read it as a
part of the public devotion, remains.
The necessary consequence of such a state of things is, that,
Fourthly, Christianity itself is disgraced, and that all religion comes to be considered
as a state trick, and a barbarous mummery. It is well known, that in some Popish
countries there are few Christians among the higher ranks of men, the religion of the
State being in those countries mistakenfor the religion of the Gospel. This indeed
shews a criminal inattention in those who fall into such a mistake; for they ought to
consider that Christianity has been grievously corrupted, and that their ideas of it
should be taken from the New Testament only. It is, however, so natural to reckon
Christianity to be that which it is held out to be in all the establishments of it, that it
cannot but happen that such an error will take place and produce some of the worst
consequences.—There is probably a greater number of rational Christians (that is, of
Christians upon enquiry) in England,than in all Popish countries. The reason is, that
the religious establishment here is Popery reformed; and that a considerable body
dissent from it, and are often inculcating the necessity of distinguishing between the
Christianity established by law and that which is taught in the Bible.—Certain it is,
that till this distinction is made, Christianity can never recover its just credit and
usefulness.
Such then are the effects of civil establishments of religion. May heaven soon put an
end to them. The world will never be generally wise or virtuous or happy, till these
enemies to its peace and improvement are demolished. Thanks be to God, they are
giving way before increasing light. Let them never shew themselves in America. Let
no such monster be known there as human authority in matters of religion. Let every
honest and peaceable man, whatever is his faith, be protected there; and find an
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 21 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
effectual defence against the attacks of bigotry and intolerance.—In the united States
may Religion flourish. They cannot be very great and happy if it does not. But let it be
a better religion than most of those which have been hitherto professed in the world.
Let it be a religion which enforces moral obligations; not a religion which relaxes and
evades them.—A tolerant and Catholicreligion; not a rage for proselitism.—A
religion of peace and charity; not a religion that persecutes, curses and damns.—In a
word, let it be the genuine Gospel of peace lifting above the world, warming the heart
with the love of God and his creatures, and sustaining the fortitude of good men by
the assured hope of a future deliverance from death, and an infinite reward in the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour.
From the preceding observations it may be concluded, that it is impossible I should
not admire the following article in the declaration of rights which forms the
foundation of the Massachusett’s constitution.—“In this State every denomination of
Christians demeaning themselves peaceably and as good subjects of the
commonwealth, shall be equally under the protection of the law; and no subordination
of any one sect or denomination to another shall ever be established by law*.”
This is liberal beyond all example.—I should, however, have admired it more had it
been more liberal, and the words all men of all religions been substituted for the
words every denomination of Christians.
It appears farther from the preceding observations, that I cannot but dislike the
religious tests which make a part of several of the Americanconstitutions.—In the
Massachusett’s constitution it is ordered, that all who take seats in the House of
Representatives or Senate shall declare “their firm persuasion of the truth of the
Christian religion.” The same is required by the Marylandconstitution, as a condition
of being admitted into anyplaces of profit or trust. In Pensylvaniaevery member of
the House of Representatives is required to declare, that he “acknowledges the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration.” In the
State of Delaware,that “he believes in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only
Son, and in the Holy Ghost, one God blessed for evermore.” All this is more than is
required even in England,where, though every person however debauched or
atheistical is required to receive the sacrament as a qualification for inferiorplaces, no
other religious test is imposed on members of parliament than a declaration against
Popery.—It is an observation no less just than common, that such tests exclude only
honestmen. The dishonest never scruple them.
Montesquieu probably was not a Christian. Newton and Locke were not Trinitarians;
and therefore not Christiansaccording to the commonly received ideas of
Christianity. Would the United States, for this reason, deny such men, were they
living, all places of trust and power among them?
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 22 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfEducation.
SUCH is the state of things which I wish to take place in the united American
States.—In order to introduce and perpetuate it, and at the same time to give it the
greatest effect on the improvement of the world, nothing is more necessary than the
establishment of a wise and liberal plan of Education. It is impossible properly to
represent the importance of this. So much is left by the author of nature to depend on
the turn given to the mind in early life, and the impressions then made, that I have
often thought there may be a secretremaining to be discovered in education, which
will cause future generations to grow up virtuous and happy, and accelerate human
improvement to a greater degree than can at present be imagined.
The end of education is to direct the powers of the mind in unfolding themselves; and
to assist them in gaining their just bent and force. And, in order to this, its business
should be to teach howto think, rather than whatto think; or to lead into the best way
of searching for truth, rather than to instruct in truth itself.—As for the latter, who is
qualified for it?—There are many indeed who are eager to undertake this office. All
parties and sects think they have discovered truth, and are confident that they alone
are its advocates and friends. But the very different and inconsistent accounts they
give of it demonstrate they are utter strangers to it; and that it is better to teach
nothing,than to teach what they hold out for truth. The greater their confidence, the
greater is the reason for distrusting them. We generally see the warmest zeal, where
the object of it is the greatest nonsense.
Such observations have a particular tendency to shew that education ought to be an
initiation into candour, rather than into any systems of faith; and that it should form a
habit of cool and patient investigation, rather than an attachment to any opinions.
But hitherto education has been conducted on a contrary plan. It has been a
contraction,not an enlargementof the intellectual faculties; an injectionof false
principles hardening them in error, not a disciplineenlightening and improving them.
Instead of opening and strengthening them, and teaching to think freely;it hath
cramped and enslaved them, and qualified for thinking only in onetrack. Instead of
instilling humility, charity, and liberality, and thus preparing for an easier discovery
and a readier admission of truth; it has inflated with conceit, and stuffed the human
mind with wretched prejudices.
The more has been learnt from such education, the more it becomes necessary to
unlearn. The more has been taught in this way, of so much the more must the mind be
emptied before true wisdom can enter.—Such was education in the time of the first
teachers of christianity. By furnishing with skill in the arts of disputation and
sophistry, and producing an attachment to established systems, it turned the minds of
men from truth, and rendered them more determined to resist evidence and more
capable of evading it. Hence it happened, that this heavenly instruction, when first
communicated, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness;and
that, in spite of miracles themselves,the persons who rejected it with most disdain,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 23 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
and who opposed it with most violence, were those who had been educated in
colleges, and were best versed in the false learning of the times: And had it taught the
true philosophy instead of the true religion, the effect would have been the same. The
doctrine “that the sun stood still, and that the earth moved round it,” would have been
reckoned no less absurd and incredible, than the doctrine of a crucified Messiah.And
the men who would have treated such an instruction with most contempt, would have
been the wise and the prudent;that is, the proud sophists and learned doctors of the
times, who had studied the Ptolemaicksystem of the world, and learnt, by cycles and
epicycles, to account for all the motions of the heavenly bodies.
In like manner, when the improvement of Logick in Mr. Locke’sEssay on the Human
Understandingwas first published in Britain,the persons readiest to attend to it and to
receive it were those who had never been trained in colleges; and whose minds,
therefore, had never been perverted by an instruction in the jargon of the schools. To
the deep professors of the time, it appeared (like the doctrine taught in his book on the
Reasonableness of Christianity) to be a dangerous novelty and heresy; and the
University of Oxford, in particular, condemned and reprobated the author.—The like
happened when Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries were first published. A romance (that
is, the Philosophy of Descartes) was then in possession of the philosophical world.
Education had rivetted it in the minds of the learned; and it was twenty-seven years
before Newton’sPrincipiacould gain sufficient credit to bring it to a second
edition.—Such are the prejudices which have generally prevailed against new lights.
Such the impediments which have been thrown in the way of improvement by a
narrow plan of education.—Even now the principal object of education (especially in
divinity) is to teach established systems as certain truths, and to qualify for
successfully desending them against opponents; and thus to arm the mind against
conviction, and render it impenetrable to farther light. Indeed, were it offered to my
option which I would have, the plain sense of a common and untutored man, or the
deep erudition of the proud scholars and professors in most universities, I should
eagerly prefer the former, from a persuasion that it would leave me at a less distance
from real wisdom. An unoccupied and simple mind is infinitely preferable to a mind
warped by systems; and the entire wantof learning better than a learning, such as
most of that is which hitherto has been sought and admired—A learning which puffs
up, while in reality it is nothing but profounder ignorance and more inveterate
prejudice.
It may be worth adding here, that a narrow education (should it ever happen not to
produce the evils now mentioned) will probably produce equal evils of a contrary
nature. I mean, that there will be danger, when persons so educated come to see the
absurdity of some of the opinions in which they have been educated, that they will
become prejudiced against them all,and, consequently, throw them allaway, and run
wild into scepticism and infidelity.—At present, in this part of the world this is a very
common event.
I am by no means qualified to give a just account of the particular method in which
education ought to be conducted, so as to avoid these evils: That is, so as to render the
mind free and unfettered; quick in discerning evidence, and prepared to follow it from
whatever quarter and in whatever manner it may offer itself. But certain it is, that the
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 24 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
best mode of education is that which does this most effectually; which guards best
against silly prejudices; which enflames most with the love of truth; which disposes
most to ingenuity and fairness; and leaves the mind most sensible of its own need of
farther information.—Had this been always the aim of education, mankind would now
have been farther advanced.—It supposes, however, an improvedstate of mankind;
and when once it has taken place, it will quicken the progress of improvement.
I have in these observations expressed a dislike of systems; but I have meant only to
condemn that attachment to them as standards of truth which has been too prevalent.
It may be necessary in education to make use of them; or of books explaining them.
But they should be used only as guides and helps to enquiry. Instruction in them
should be attended with a fair exhibition of the evidence on both sides of every
question; and care should be taken to induce, as far as possible, a habit of believing
only on an overbalance of evidence; and of proportioning assent in every case to the
degree of that overbalance, without regarding authority, antiquity, singularity,
novelty, or any of the prejudices which too commonly influence assent.—Nothing is
so well fitted to produce this habit as the study of mathematics.In these sciences no
one ever thinks of giving his assent to a proposition till he can clearly understand it,
and see it proved by a fair deduction from propositions previously understood and
proved. In these sciences the mind is inured to close and patient attention; shewn the
nature of just reasoning; and taught to form distinct ideas, and to expect clear
evidence in all cases before belief. They furnish, therefore, the best exercise for the
intellectual powers, and the best defence against that credulity and precipitation and
confusion of ideas which are the common sources of error.
There is, however, a danger even here to be avoided. Mathematical studies may
absorb the attention too much; and when they do, they contract the mind by rendering
it incapable of thinking at large;by disqualifying it for judging of any evidence
except mathematical; and, consequently, disposing it to an unreasonable scepticism on
all subjects which admit not of such evidence.—There have been many instances of
this narrowness in mathematicians.
But to return from this digression,—I cannot help observing on this occasion, with
respect to Christianity in particular, that education ought to lead to a habit of judging
of it as it is in the code itself of Christianity; that the doctrines it reveals should be
learnt only from a critical and fair enquiry into the sense of this code; and that all
instruction in it should be a preparation for making this enquiry and a communication
of assistance in examining into the proofs of its divine original, and in determining to
what degree of evidence these proofs amount, after allowing every difficulty its just
weight.—This has never yet been the practice among Christians. The New Testament
has been reckoned hitherto an insufficientstandard of Christian Divinity; and,
therefore, formularies of human invention pretendingto explain and define it (but in
reality misrepresenting and dishonouring it) have been substituted in its room; and
teaching thesehas been called teaching Christianity.And it is very remarkable, that in
the EnglishUniversities Lectures on the New Testament are seldom or ever read; and
that, through all Christendom, it is much less an object of attention than the systems
and creedswhich have been fathered upon it.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 25 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
I will only add on this subject, that it is above all things necessary, while instruction is
conveyed, to convey with it a sense of the imbecility of the human mind, and of its
great proneness to error; and also a disposition, even on points which seem the most
clear, to listen to objections, and to consider nothing as involving in it our final
interest but an honest heart.
Nature has so made us, that an attachment must take place within us to opinions once
formed; and it was proper that we should be so made, in order to prevent that levity
and desultoriness of mind which must have been the consequence had we been ready
to give up our opinions too easily and hastily. But this natural tendency, however
wisely given us, is apt to exceed its proper limits, and to render us unreasonably
tenacious. It ought, therefore, like all our other natural propensities, to be carefully
watched and guarded; and education should put us upon doing this. An observation
before made should, in particular, be inculcated, “that all mankind have hitherto been
most tenacious when most in the wrong, and reckoned themselves most enlightened
when most in the dark.”—This is, indeed, a very mortifying fact; but attention to it is
necessary to cure that miserable pride and dogmaticalness which are some of the
worst enemies to improvement.—Who is there that does not remember the time when
he was entirely satisfied about points which deeper reflexion has shewn to be above
his comprehension? Who, for instance, does not remember a time when he would
have wondered at the question, “why does water run down hill?” What ignorant man
is there who is not persuaded that he understands this perfectly? But every improved
man knows it to be a question he cannot answer; and what distinguishes him in this
instance from the less improved part of mankind is his knowing this. The like is true
in numberless other instances. One of the best proofs of wisdom is a sense of our want
of wisdom; and he who knows most possesses most of this sense.
In thinking of myself I derive some encouragement from this reflexion. I now see, that
I do not understand many points which once appeared to me very clear. The more I
have inquired, the more sensible I have been growing of my own darkness; and a part
of the history of my life is that which follows.
In early life I was struck with Bishop Butler’sAnalogy of religion natural and
revealed to the constitution and course of nature.I reckon it happy for me that this
book was one of the first that fell into my hands. It taught me the proper mode of
reasoning on moral and religious subjects, and particularly the importance of paying a
due regard to the imperfection of human knowledge. His Sermons also, I then
thought, and do still think, excellent. Next to hisworks, I have always been an
admirer of the writings of Dr. Clark. And I cannot help adding, however strange it
may seem, that I owe much to the philosophical writings of Mr. Hume, which I
likewise studied early in life. Though an enemy to his Scepticism, I have profited by
it. By attacking, with great ability, every principle of truth and reason, he put me upon
examining the ground upon which I stood, and taught me not hastily to take any thing
for granted.—The first fruits of my reading and studies were laid before the public in
a Treatise entitled AReviewof the principal Questions and Difficulties in Morals.This
publication has been followed by many others on various subjects.—And now, in the
evening of a life devoted to enquiry and spent in endeavours (weak indeed and feeble)
to serve the best interests, present and future, of mankind, I am waiting for the great
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 26 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
teacher, convinced that the order of nature is perfect; that infinite wisdom and
goodness govern all things; and that Christianity comes from God: But at the same
time puzzled by many difficulties, anxious for more light, and resting with full and
constant assurance only on this one truth—That the practice of virtue is the duty and
dignity of man; and, in all events, his wisest and safest course.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 27 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
Of TheDangersTo Which The American States Are Exposed.
IN the preceding observations, I have aimed at pointing out the means of promoting
the progress of improvement in the united States of America. I have insisted,
particularly, on the importance of a just settlement of the federal union, and the
establishment of a well-guarded and perfect liberty in speculation, in government, in
education, and in religion.—The united States are now setting out, and all depends on
the care and foresight with which a plan is begun, which hereafter will require only to
be strengthened and ripened. This is, therefore, the time for giving them advice; and
mean advice (like the present) may suggest some useful hints.—In this country, when
any improvements are proposed, or any corrections are attempted of abuses so gross
as to make our boasts of liberty ridiculous*, a clamour immediately arises against
innovation; and an alarm spreads, left the attempt to repairshould destroy.—In
America no such prejudices can operate. There abuses have not yet gained sacredness
by time. There the way is open to social dignity and happiness; and reason may utter
her voice with confidence and success.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 28 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfDebtsAndInternal Wars.
I HAVE observed in the introduction to this Address, that the AmericanStates have
many dangers to shun. In what follows I shall give a brief recital of some of the chief
of these dangers.
The danger from an endless increase of public debts has been already sufficiently
noticed.
Particular notice has been likewise taken of the danger from internal wars.—Again
and again, I would urge the necessity of pursuing every measure and using every
precaution which can guard against this danger. It will be shocking to see in the new
world a repetition of all the evils which have hitherto laid waste the oldworld—War
raging where peace and liberty were thought to have taken their abodes—The points
of bayonets and the mouths of cannon settling disputes, instead of the collected
wisdom of the confederation—and perhaps one restless and ambitious State rising by
bloody conquest above the rest, and becoming a sovereignState, claiming impiously
(as Britainonce did) “full authority to make laws that shall bind its sister States in all
cases whatever,” and drawing to itself all advantages at their expence.—I deprecate
this calamity. I shudder when I consider how possible it is; and hope those persons are
mistaken who think that such are the jealousies which govern human nature, and such
the imperfections of the best human arrangements, that it is not within the reach of
any wisdom to discover any effectual means of preventing it, without encroaching too
much on the liberty and independence of the States. I have mentioned an enlargement
of the powers of Congress. Others have proposed a consolidation of the powers of
government in one Parliament representing allthe States, and superseding the
particular parliaments by which they are now separately governed. But it is obvious,
that this will be attended with greater inconveniencies, and encroach more on the
liberty of the States, than the enlargement I have proposed of the powers of
Congress.—If such a parliament is not to supersede any of the other parliaments, it
will be the same with Congress as at present constituted.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 29 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
Of AnUnequal Distribution Of Property.
IT is a trite observation, that “dominion is founded on property.” Most free States
have manifested their sense of the truth of this observation, by studying to find out
means of preventing too great an inequality in the distribution of property. What
tumults were occasioned at Rome, in its best times, by attempts to carry into
execution the Agrarianlaw? Among the people of Israel, by the direction of heaven,
all estates which had been alienated during the course of fifty years, returned to their
original owners at the end of that term. One of the circumstances that has been most
favourable to the AmericanStates in forming their new constitutions of government
has been the equality which subsists among them.
The happiest state of man is the middle state between the savageand the refined,or
between the wild and the luxurious state. Such is the state of society in Connecticut,
and some others of the Americanprovinces; where the inhabitants consist, if I am
rightly informed, of an independent and hardy Yeomanry, all nearly on a
level—trained to arms,—instructed in their rights—cloathed in home-spun—of
simple manners—strangers to luxury—drawing plenty from the ground—and that
plenty, gathered easily by the hand of industry; and giving rise to early marriages, a
numerous progeny, length of days, and a rapid increase—the rich and the poor, the
haughty grandee and the creeping sycophant, equally unknown—protected by laws,
which (being their own will) cannot oppress; and by an equal government, which
wanting lucrative places, cannot create corrupt canvassings*and ambitious
intrigue.—O distinguished people! May you continue long thus happy; and may the
happiness you enjoy spread over the face of the whole earth!—But I am forgetting
myself. There is danger that a state of society so happy will not be of long duration;
that simplicity and virtue will give way to depravity; that equality will in time be lost,
the cursed lust of domineering shew itself, liberty languish, and civil government
gradually degenerate into an instrument in the hands of the fewto oppress and plunder
the many.—Such has hitherto been the progress of evil in human affairs. In order to
give them a better turn, some great men (Plato,Sir Thomas More, Mr. Wallace,&c.)
have proposed plans, which, by establishing a community of goods and annihilating
property, would make it impossible for any one member of a State to think of
enslaving the rest, or to consider himself as having any interest distinct from that of
his fellow-citizens. Such theories are in speculation pleasing; nor perhaps are they
wholly impracticable. Some approaches to them may hereafter be made; and schemes
of government may take place, which shall leave so little, besides personal merit, to
be a means of distinction, as to exclude from society most of the causes of evil. But be
this as it will; it is out of doubt that there is an equality in society which is essential to
liberty, and which every State that would continue virtuous and happy ought as far as
possible to maintain.—It is not in my power to describe the best method of doing
this.—I will only observe, that there are three enemies to equality against which
Americaought to guard.
First; Granting hereditary honours and titles of nobility. Persons thus distinguished,
though perhaps meaner than the meanest of their dependents, are apt to consider
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 30 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
themselves as belonging to a higher order of beings, and made for power and
government. Their birth and rank necessarily dispose them to be hostile to general
liberty; and when they are not so, and discover a just zeal for the rights of mankind, it
is always a triumph of good sense and virtue over the temptations of their situation. It
is, therefore, with peculiar satisfaction that I have found in the articles of
confederation an order that no titles of nobility shall be ever granted by the united
States. Let there be honours to encourage merit; but let them die with the men who
have earned them. Let them not descend to posterity to foster a spirit of domination,
and to produce a proud and tyrannical aristocracy.—In a word, let the united States
continue for ever what it is now their glory to be—a confederation of States
prosperous and happy, without Lords—without Bishops*—and without Kings.
Secondly; The right of primogeniture. The tendency of this to produce an improper
inequality is very obvious. The disposition to raise a name, by accumulating property
in one branch of a family, is a vanity no less unjust and cruel, than dangerous to the
interest of liberty; and no wise State will encourage or tolerate it.
Thirdly; Foreign Trade is another of the enemies against which I wish to caution the
united States. But this operates unfavourably to a State in so many more ways than by
destroying that equality which is the basis of liberty, that it will be proper to take
more particular notice of it.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 31 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfTrade, Banks,AndPaper Credit.
FOREIGN trade has, in some respects, the most useful tendency. By creating an
intercourse between distant kingdoms, it extends benevolence, removes local
prejudices, leads every man to consider himself more as a citizen of the world than of
any particular State, and, consequently, checks the excesses of that Love of our
Country*which has been applauded as one of the noblest, but which, really,is one of
the most destructiveprinciples in human nature.—Trade also, by enabling every
country to draw from other countries conveniencies and advantages which it cannot
find within itself, produces among nations a sense of mutual dependence, and
promotes the general improvement.—But there is no part of mankind to which these
uses of trade are of less consequence than the AmericanStates. They are spread over a
great continent, and make a world within themselves. The country they inhabit
includes soils and climates of all forts, producing not only every necessary,but every
convenienceof life. And the vast rivers and wide-spread lakes which intersect it,
create such an inland communication between its different parts, as is unknown in any
other region of the earth. They possess then within themselves the best means of the
most profitable traffic, and the amplest scope for it. Why should they look much
farther? What occasion have they for being anxious about pushing foreigntrade; or
even about raising a great naval force?—Britain, indeed, consisting as it does of
unarmed inhabitants, and threatened as it is by ambitious and powerful neighbours,
cannot hope to maintain its existence long after becoming open to invasion by losing
its naval superiority.—But this is not the case with the American States. They have no
powerful neighbours to dread. The vast Atlantic must be crossed before they can be
attacked. They are all a well-trained militia;and the successful resistance which, in
their infancy and without a naval force, they have made to the invasion of the first
Europeanpower, will probably discourage and prevent all future invasions. Thus
singularly happy, why should they seek connexions with Europe,and expose
themselves to the danger of being involved in its quarrels?—What have they to do
with its politics?—Is there any thing very important to them which they can draw
from thence—except Infection?—Indeed, I tremble when I think of that rage for trade
which is likely to prevail among them. It may do them infinite mischief. All nations
are spreading snares for them, and courting them to a dangerous intercourse. Their
best interest requires them to guard themselves by all proper means; and, particularly,
by laying heavy duties on importations. But in no case will any means succeed unless
aided by Manners. In this instance, particularly, there is reason to fear that an
increasing passion for foreign frippery will render all the best regulations ineffectual.
And should this happen, that simplicity of character, that manliness of spirit, that
disdain of tinsel in which true dignity consists, will disappear. Effeminacy, servility
and venality will enter; and liberty and virtue be swallowed up in the gulph of
corruption. Such may be the course of events in the American States. Better infinitely
will it be for them to consist of bodies of plain and honest farmers, than of opulent
and splendid merchants.—Where in these States do the purest manners prevail?
Where do the inhabitants live most on an equality, and most at their case? Is it not in
those inland parts where agriculture gives health and plenty, and trade is scarcely
known?—Where, on the contrary, are the inhabitants most selfish, luxurious, loose,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 32 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
and vicious; and at the same time most unhappy? Is it not along the sea coasts, and in
the great towns, where trade flourishes and merchants abound?—So striking is the
effect of these different situations on the vigour and happiness of human life, that in
the one population would languish did it receive no aid from emigrations; while in the
other it increases to a degree scarcely ever before known.
But to proceed to some observations of a different nature—
The united States have, I think, particular reason to dread the following effects of
foreign trade.
By increasing importation to feed luxury and gratify prodigality, it will carry out their
coin, and occasion the substitution of a delusive paper currency; the consequence of
which will be, that idealwealth will take place of real,and their security come to
depend on the strength and duration of a Bubble.—I am very sensible that paper credit
is one of the greatest of all conveniencies; but this makes it likewise one of the
greatest of all temptations. A public Bank, (while it can circulate its bills) facilitates
commerce, and assists the exertions of a State in proportion to its credit. But when it
is not carefully restricted and watched; when its emissions exceed the coin it can
command, and are carried near the utmost length that the confidence of the public will
allow; and when, in consequence of this, its permanence comes to depend on the
permanence of public credulity—In these circumstances, a Bank, though it may for a
time (that is, while a balance of trade too unfavourable does not occasion a run, and
no events arise which produce alarm) answer all the ends of a mine from which
millions may be drawn in a minute; and, by filling a kingdom with cash, render it
capable of sustaining anydebts, and give it a kind of Omnipotence.—In such
circumstances, I say, notwithstanding these temporary advantages, a public Bank
must at lastprove a great calamity; and a kingdom so supported, at the very time of
its greatest exertions, will be only striving more violently to increase the horror of an
approching convulsion.
The united States have already verified some of these observations, and felt in some
degree the consequences to which I have alluded. They have been carried through the
war by an emission of paper which had no solid support, and which now has lost all
value. It is indeed surprising that, being secured on no fund and incapable of being
exchanged for coin, it should ever have obtained a currency, or answered any
important purpose.
Unhappily for Britain,it has used the means of giving more stability to its paper-
credit, and been enabled by it to support expences greater than any that have been yet
known, and to contract a debt which now astonishes,and may hereafter produce a
catastrophe that will terrifythe world.—A longer duration of the late war would have
brought on this catastrophe immediately. The Peace has put it off for the present.God
grant, if still possible, that measures may be adopted which shall put it off for ever.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 33 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OfOaths.
OATHS are expedients to which all States have had recourse in order to obtain true
information and ascertain facts by securing the veracity of witnesses. But I know not
how to relish that imprecationwhich always makes a part of an oath. Perhaps, there is
no such necessity for it as is commonly imagined. An Affirmation solemnly made,
with laws inflicting severe penalties on falshood when detected, would probably
answer all the ends of oaths.—I am, therefore, disposed to wish, that in the united
States imprecatoryoaths may be abolished, and the same indulgence in this respect
granted to all which is now granted to the Quakers. But I am afraid they will think this
too dangerous an experiment; and what is of most consequence is to avoid,
First, Such a multiplicity of oaths as will render them too familiar.
And, Secondly, A slight manner of administering them. England, in this respect,
seems to be sunk to the lowest possible degree of degeneracy. Oaths among us are
required on so many occasions, and so carelessly administered, as to have lost almost
all their use and efficacy. It has been asserted, that, including oaths of office, oaths at
elections, custom-house oaths, &c. &c. there are about a millionof perjuries
committed in this kingdom annually.—This is one of the most atrocious of our
national iniquities; and it is a wonder if we are not to be visited for it with some of the
severest of God’s judgments.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 34 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
Of TheNegro TradeAndSlavery.
THE Negro Trade cannot be censured in language too severe. It is a traffick which, as
it has been hitherto carried on, is shocking to humanity, cruel, wicked, and diabolical.
I am happy to find that the united States are entering into measures for
discountenancing it, and for abolishing the odious slavery which it has introduced.
’Till they have done this, it will not appear they deserve the liberty for which they
have been contending. For it is self-evident, that if there are any men whom they have
a right to hold in slavery, there may be otherswho have had a right to hold themin
slavery.*—I am sensible, however, that this is a work which they cannot accomplish
at once. The emancipation of the Negroes must, I suppose, be left in some measure to
be the effect of time and of manners. But nothing can excuse the united States if it is
not done with as much speed, and at the same time with as much effect, as their
particular circumstances and situation will allow. I rejoice that on this occasion I can
recommend to them the example of my own country.—In Britain,a Negrobecomes a
freemanthe moment he sets his foot on Britishground.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 35 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
Conclusion.
SUCH is the advice which I would humbly(but earnestly) offer to the united States of
America.—Such are the means by which they may become the seats of liberty,
science, peace, and virtue; happy within themselves, and a refuge to the world.
Often, while employed in writing these papers, have I wished for a warning voice of
more power. The present moment, however auspicious to the united States if wisely
improved, is critical; and, though apparently the end of all their dangers, may prove
the time of their greatest danger. I have, indeed, since finishing this Address, been
mortified more than I can express by accounts which have led me to fear that I have
carried my ideas of them too high, and deceived myself with visionary
expectations.—And should this be true—Should the return of peace and the pride of
independence lead them to security and dissipation—Should they lose those virtuous
and simple manners by which alone Republics can long subsist—Should false
refinement, luxury, and irreligion spread among them; excessive jealousy distract
their governments; and clashing interests, subject to no strong controul, break the
federal union—The consequence will be, that the fairest experiment ever tried in
human affairs will miscarry; and that a Revolution which had revived the hopes of
good men and promised an opening to better times, will become a discouragement to
all future efforts in favour of liberty, and prove only an opening to a new scene of
human degeneracy and misery.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 36 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following letter was written by the late M. Turgot, Comptroller General (in the
years 1774, 1775, and 1776) of the finances of France. It contains observations in
which the United States are deeply concerned; and, for this reason, I now convey it to
them, not doubting but that the eminence of M. Turgot’s name and character will
recommend it to their attention, and that it will do honour to his memory among all
the friends of public liberty.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 37 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
A MonsieurPrice,
A Londres.
AParis,le22Mars, 1778.
MR. FRANKLIN m’a remis, Monsieur, de votre part, la nouvelle édition de vos
observations sur la liberté civile, &c. Je vous dois un double remerciment; 1° de votre
ouvrage dont je connois depuis longtems le prix, et que j’avois lu avec avidité, malgré
les occupations multipliées, dont j’etois assailli, lorsqu’il a paru pour la premiere fois;
2° de l’honnêteté que vous avez eue de retrancher l’imputation de maladresse*que
vous aviez mêlée au bien que vous disiez d’ailleurs de moi dans vos observations
additionelles. J’aurois pu la meriter, si vous n’aviez eu en vue d’autre maladresse que
celle de n’avoir pas sçu demêler les ressorts d’intrigues que faisoient jouer contre moi
des gens beaucoup plus adroitsen ce genre que je ne le suis, que je ne le serai jamais,
et que je ne veux l’etre. Mais il m’a paru que vous m’imputiez la maladresse d’avoir
choqué grossierement l’opinion générale de ma nation; et à cet égard je crois que vous
n’aviez rendu justice ni à moi, ni à ma nation, où il y a beaucoup plus de lumieres
qu’on ne le croit généralement chez vous, et où peut-être il est plus aisé que chez vous
même de ramener le public à des idées raisonnables. J’en juge par l’infatuation de
votre nation sur ce projet absurde de subjuguer l’Amérique, qui a duré jusqu’à ce que
l’aventure de Burgoyne ait commencé à lui dessiller les yeux. J’en juge par le systême
de monopole et d’exclusion qui rêgne chez tous vos écrivains politiques sur le
commerce, (J’excepte Mr. Adam Smith et le Doyen Tucker) systême qui est le
véritable principe de votre séparation avec vos colonies. J’en juge par tous vos écrits
polémiques sur les questions qui vous agitent depuis une vingtaine d’années, et dans
lesquels avant que le vôtre eut paru, je ne me rappelle presque pas d’en avoir lu un, où
le vrai point de la question ait êté saisi. Je n’ai pas conçu comment une nation qui a
cultivé avec tant de succès toutes les branches des sciences naturelles a pu rester si
fort au dessous d’elle même, dans la science la plus interessante de toutes, celle du
bonheur public; dans une science où la liberté de la presse, dont elle seule jouit, auroit
dû lui donner sur toutes les autres nations de l’Europe un avantage prodigieux. Est-ce
l’orgueil national qui vous a empêchés de mettre à profit cet avantage? Est-ce parce
que vous etiez un peu moins mal que les autres, que vous avez tourné toutes vos
spéculations à vous persuader que vous etiez bien? Est-ce l’esprit de parti, et l’envie
de se faire un appui des opinions populaires qui a retardé vos progrès, en portant vos
politiques à traiter de vaine métaphysique toutes les spéculations qui tendent à établir
des principes fixes sur les droits et les vrais interêts des individus et des nations?
Comment se fait-il que vous soyez presque le premier parmi vos écrivains qui ayez
donné des notions justes de la liberté, et qui ayez fait sentir la fausseté de cette notion
rebattue par presque tous les écrivains les plus républicains, que la liberté consiste à
n’être soumis qu’aux loix, comme si un homme opprimé par une loi injuste êtoit libre.
Cela ne seroit pas même vrai quand on supposeroit que toutes les loix sont l’ouvrage
de la nation assemblée; car enfin l’individu a aussi des droits que la nation ne peut lui
ôter, que par la violence et par un usage illegitime de la force générale. Quoique vous
ayez eu égard à cette verité, et que vous vous en soyez expliqué, peut-être méritoit-
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 38 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
elle que vous la dévelopassiez avec plus d’étendue, vû le peu d’attention qu’y ont
donnée même les plus zelés partisans de la liberté.
C’est encore une chose étrange que ce ne fût pas en Angleterre une vérité triviale de
dire qu’une nation ne peut jamais avoir droit de gouverner une autre nation; et qu’un
pareil gouvernement ne peut avoir d’autre fondement que la force, qui est aussi le
fondement du brigandage et de la tyrannie; que la tyrannie d’un peuple est de toutes
les tyrannies connues la plus cruelle et la plus intolérable, celle qui laisse le moins de
ressource à l’opprimé; car enfin un despote est arrêté par son propre interêt, il a le
frein du remords, ou celui de l’opinion publique, mais une multitude ne calcule rien,
n’a jamais de remords, et se decerne à elle même la gloire lors qu’elle mérite le plus
de honte.
Les événemens sont pour la nation Angloise un terrible commentaire de votre livre.
Depuis quelques mois ils se précipitent avec une rapidité très accelérée. Le
dénouement est arrivé par rapport à l’Amérique. La voila indépendante sans retour.
Sera-t’elle libre et heureuse? Ce peuple nouveau situé si avantageusement pour
donner au monde l’exemple d’une constitution où l’hommé jouisse de tous ses droits,
exerce librement toutes ses facultés, et ne soit gouverné que par la nature, la raison et
la justice, saura-t’il former une pareille constitution? saura-t’il l’affermir sur des
fondemens éternels, prévenir toutes les causes de division et de corruption qui
peuvent la miner peu-à-peu et la détruire?
Je ne suis point content je l’avoue des constitutions qui ont êté rédigées
jusqu’àprésent par les différens Etats Américains. Vous reprochez avec raison à celle
de la Pensylvanie le serment religieux exigé pour avoir entrée dans le corps des
représentans. C’est bien pis dans les autres; il y en a une, je crois que c’est celle des
Jerseis qui exige * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Je vois dans le plus grand
nombre l’imitation sans objet des usages de l’Angleterre. Au lieu de ramener toutes
les autorités à une seule, celle de la nation, l’on établit des corps différens, un corps
des représentans, un conseil, un gouverneur, parce que l’Angleterre a une chambre
des communes, une chambre haute et un Roi. On s’occupe a balancer ces différens
pouvoirs; comme si cet équilibre de forces, qu’on a pu croire necessaire pour balancer
l’énorme prépondérance de la Royauté, pouvoit être de quelque usage dans des
Républiques fondées sur l’égalité de tous les citoyens; et comme si tout ce qui établit
différens corps n’êtoit pas une source de divisions. En voulant prévenir des dangers
chimériques, on en fait naitre de réels; on veut n’avoir rien à craindre du clergé, on le
réunit sous la barriere d’une proscription commune. En l’excluant du droit
d’eligibilité, on en fait un corps, et un corps étranger à l’Etat. Pourquoi un citoyen, qui
a le même interêt que les autres à la defense commune de sa liberté et de ses
propriétés, est-il exclus d’y contribuer de ses lumieres et de ses vertus, parce qu’il est
d’une profession qui exige des lumieres et des vertus? Le clergé n’est dangereux que
quand il existe en corps dans l’Etat; que quand il croit avoir en corps des droits et des
interêts, que quand on a imaginé d’avoir une religion établie par la loi, comme si les
hommes pouvoient avoir quelque droit, ou quelque interêt à régler la conscience les
uns des autres; comme si l’individu pouvoit sacrifier aux avantages de la societé civile
les opinions auxquelles il croit son salut éternel attaché; comme si l’on se sauvoit, ou
se damnoit, en commun. Là où la vraye tolérance, c’est-à-dire l’incompétence absolue
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 39 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
du gouvernement sur la conscience des individus, est établie, l’ecclesiastique au
milieu de l’affemblée nationale n’est qu’un citoyen, lorsqu’il y est admis; il redevient
ecclesiastique lorsqu’on l’en exclut.
Je ne vois pas qu’on se soit assez occupé de réduire au plus petit nombre possible, les
genres d’affaires dont le gouvernement de chaque Etat sera chargé; ni à séparer les
objets de législation, de ceux d’administration générale et de ceux d’administration
particuliere et locale; à constituer des assemblées locales subsistantes, qui remplissant
presque toutes les fonctions de detail du gouvernement dispensent les assemblées
générales de s’en occuper, et ôtent aux membres de celles-ci tout moyen, et peut-être
tout désir d’abuser d’une autorité qui ne peut s’appliquer qu’à des objets généraux et
par là même étrangers aux petites passions qui agitent les hommes.
Je ne vois pas qu’on ait fait attention à la grande distinction la seule fondée sur la
nature entre deux classes d’hommes, celle des propriétaires de terres, et celle des
nonpropriétaires; à leurs interets et par conséquent à leurs droits différens,
relativement à la législation, à l’administration de la justice et de la police, à la
contribution aux dépenses publiques et à leur emploi.
Nul principe fixe établi sur l’impôt; on suppose que chaque province peut se taxer à sa
fantaisie, établir des taxes personnelles, des taxes sur les consommations, sur les
importations, c’est-à-dire se donner un interêt contraire à l’interêt des autres
provinces.
On suppose par tout le droit de régler le commerce; on autorise même les corps
executifs, ou les gouverneurs à prohiber l’exportation de certaines denrées dans
certaines occurrences; tant on est loin d’avoir senti que la loi de la liberté entiere de
tout commerce est un corollaire du droit de propriété; tant on est encore plongé dans
le brouillard des illusions Européennes.
Dans l’union générale des provinces entre elles, je ne vois point une coalition, une
fusion de toutes les parties, qui n’en fasse qu’un corps un,et homogene. Ce n’est
qu’une aggrégation de parties, toujours trop séparées, et qui conservent toujours une
tendance à se diviser, par la diversité de leurs loix, de leurs mœurs, de leurs opinions;
par l’inégalité de leurs forces actuelles; plus encore par l’inégalité de leurs progrès
ultérieurs. Ce n’est qu’une copie de la République Hollandoise; et celle-ci même
n’avoit pas à craindre comme la République Américaine les accroissemens possibles
de quelques unes de ses provinces. Tout cet édifice est appuyé jusqu’à présent sur la
bâse fausse de la très ancienne et très vulgaire politique; sur le prejugé que les nations,
les provinces, peuvent avoir des interêts, en corps de province et de nation, autres que
celui qu’ont les individus d’être libres et de défendre leurs propriétés contre les brigan
et les conquerans: interêt prétendu de faire plus de commerce que les autres, de ne
point acheter les marchandises de l’étranger, de forcer l’étranger à consommer leurs
productions et les ouvrages de leurs manufactures: interêt prétendu d’avoir un
territoire plus vaste, d’acquérir telle ou telle province, telle ou telle isle, tel ou tel
village: interêt d’inspirer la crainte aux autres nations: interêt de l’emporter sur elles
par la gloire des armes, par celle des arts et des sciences.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 40 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Quelques-uns de ces préjugés sont fomentés en Europe, parce que la rivalité ancienne
des nations et l’ambition des princes oblige tous les Etats à se tenir armés pour se
défendre contre leurs voisins armés, et à regarder la force militaire comme l’objet
principal du gouvernement. L’Amérique a le bonheur de ne pouvoir avoir d’ici à bien
longtems d’ennemi extérieur à craindre, si elle ne se divise elle même; ainsi elle peut
et doit apprécier à leur juste valeur ces prétendus interêts, ces sujets de discorde qui
seuls sont à redouter pour sa liberté. Avec le principe sacré de la liberté du commerce
regardé comme une suite du droit de la proprieté, tous les prétendus interêts de
commerce disparoissent. Les prétendus interêts de posseder plus ou moins de
territoires s’évanouissent par le principe que le territoire n’appartient point aux
nations, mais aux individus propriétaires des terres; que la question de savoir si tel
canton, tel village, doit appartenir à telle province, à tel Etat ne doit point être décidée
par le prétendu interêt de cette province ou de cet Etat, mais par celui qu’ont les
habitans de tel canton ou de tel village de se rassembler pour leurs affaires dans le lieu
où il leur est le plus commode d’aller; que cet interêt êtant mesuré par le plus ou
moins de chemin qu’un homme peut faire loin de son domicile pour traiter quelques
affaires plus importantes sans trop nuire à ses affaires journalieres, devient une
mesure naturelle et physique de l’étendue des jurisdictions et des Etats, et établit entre
tous un équilibre d’étendue et de forces, qui écarte tout danger d’inégalité, et toute
prétention à la supériorité.
L’interêt d’etre craint est nul quand on ne demande rien à personne, et quand on est
dans une position où l’on ne peut être attaqué par des forces considérables avec
quelque espérance de succès.
La gloire des armes ne vaut pas le bonheur de vivre en paix. La gloire des arts, des
sciences appartient à quiconque veut s’en saisir; il y a dans ce genre à moissonner
pour tout le monde; le champ des découvertes est inépuisable, et tous profitent des
découvertes des tous.
J’imagine que les Américains n’en sont pas encore à sentir toutes ces verités, comme
il faut qu’ils les sentent pour assurer le bonheur de leur postérité. Je ne blâme pas
leurs chefs. Il a fallu pourvoir au besoin du moment par une union telle quelle, contre
un ennemi présent et redoutable; on n’avoit pas le tems de songer à corriger les vices
des constitutions et de la composition des différens etats. Mais ils doivent craindre de
les éterniser, et s’occuper des moyens de réunir les opinions et les interêts et de les
ramener à des principes uniformes dans toutes leurs provinces.
Ils ont à cet égard de grands obstacles à vaincre.
En Canada, la constitution du clergé Romain, et l’existence d’un corps de noblesse.
Dans la Nouvelle Angleterre, l’esprit encore subsistant du Puritanisme rigide, et
toujours, dit on, un peu intolérant.
Dans la Pensylvanie, un très grand nombre de citoyens établissant en principe
religieux que la profession des armes est illicite, et se refusant par conséquent aux
arrangemens nécessaires pour que le fondement de la force militaire de l’Etat, soit la
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 41 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
réunion de la qualité de citoyen avec celle d’homme de guerre et de milicien; ce qui
oblige à faire du métier de la guerre un métier de mercenaires.
Dans les colonies méridionales, une trop grande inégalité de fortunes, et sur tout le
grand nombre d’esclaves noirs dont l’esclavage est incompatible avec une bonne
constitution politique, et qui même en leur rendant la liberté embarrasseront encore en
formant deux nations dans le même Etat.
Dans toutes, les préjugés, l’attachement aux formes établies, l’habitude de certaines
taxes, la crainte de celles qu’il faudroit y substituer, la vanité des colonies qui se sont
cru les plus puissantes, et un malheureux commencement d’orgucil national. Je crois
les Américains forcés à s’agrandir, non pas par la guerre, mais par la culture. S’ils
laissoient derriere eux les déscrts immenses qui s’étendent jusqu’à la mer de l’Ouest il
s’y etabliroit du mélange de leurs bannis, et des mauvais sujets échappés à la séverité
des loix, avec les sauvages: des peuplades de brigands qui ravageroient l’Amérique,
comme les barbares du nord ont ravagé l’empire Romain; de là un autre danger, la
nécessité de se tenir en armes sur la frontiere et d’être dans un état de guerre
continuelle. Les colonies voisines de la frontiere seroient en conséquence plus
aguerries que les autres, et cette inégalité dans la force militaire seroit un aiguillon
terrible pour l’ambition. Le remede à cette inégalité seroit d’entretenir une force
militaire subsistante à laquelle toutes les provinces contribueroient en raison de leur
population; et les Américains qui ont encore toutes les craintes que doivent avoir les
Anglois redoutent plus que toute chose une armée permanente. Ils ont tort. Rien n’est
plus aisé que de lier la constitution d’une armée permanente avec la milice, de façon
que la milice en devienne meilleure, et que la liberté n’en soit que plus affermie. Mais
il est mal aisé de calmer sur cela leurs allarmes.
Voila bien des difficultés, et peut-être les interêts secrets des particuliers puissans se
joindront-ils aux préjugés de la multitude pour arrêter les efforts des vrais sages et des
vrais citoyens.
Il est impossible de ne pas faire des vœux pour que ce peuple parvienne à toute la
prospérité dont il est suceptible. Il est l’espérance du genre humain. Il peut en devenir
le modéle. Il doit prouver au monde, par le fait, que les hommes peuvent être libres et
tranquilles, et peuvent se passer des chaines de toute espece que les tyrans et les
charlatans de toute robe ont prétendu leur impôser sous le pretexte du bien public. Il
doit donner l’exemple de la liberté politique, de la liberté religieuse, de la liberté du
commerce et de l’industrie. L’asyle qu’il ouvre à tous les opprimés de toutes les
nations doit consoler la terre. La facilité d’en profiter pour se dérober aux suites d’un
mauvais gouvernement forcera les gouvernemens d’être justes, et de s’éclairer; le
reste du monde ouvrira peu-à-peu les yeux sur le néant des illusions dont les
politiques se sont bercés. Mais il faut pour cela que l’Amérique s’en garantisse, et
qu’elle ne redevienne pas comme l’ont tant repeté vos écrivains ministeriels une
image de notre Europe, un amas de puissances divisées, se disputant des territoires ou
des profits de commerce, et cimentant continuellement l’esclavage des peuples par
leur propre sang.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 42 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Tous les hommes eclairés, tous les amis de l’humanité devroient en ce moment réunir
leurs lumieres et joindre leurs réflexions à celles des sages Américains pour concourir
au grand ouvrage de leur législation. Cela seroit digne de vous, Monsieur; je voudrois
pouvoir échauffer votre zêle; et si dans cette lettre je me suis livré plus que je ne
l’aurois dû peut-être à l’effusion de mes propres idées, ce désir a été mon unique
motif, et m’excusera à ce que j’espere de l’ennui que je vous aurai causé. Je voudrois
que le sang qui a coulé, qui coulera encore dans cette querelle ne fût pas inutile au
bonheur du genre humain.
Nos deux nations vont se faire réciproquement bien du mal, probablement sans
qu’aucune d’elles en retire un profit réel. L’accroissement des dettes et des charges, *
* * * * * * * * * * * * * *, et la ruine d’un grand nombre de citoyens en seront peut-
être l’unique resultat. L’Angleterre m’en paroit plus près encore que la France. Si au
lieu de cette guerre vous aviez pu vous exécuter de bonne grace dès le premier
moment, s’il êtoit donné à la politique de faire d’avance ce qu’elle sera infailliblement
forcée de faire plus tard, si l’opinion nationale avoit pu permettre à votre
gouvernement de prévenir les evenemens, en supposant qu’il les eut prévus, s’il eût
pu consentir d’abord à l’indépendance de l’Amérique sans faire la guerre à personne,
je crois fermement que votre nation n’auroit rien perdu à ce changement. Elle y perdra
aujourd’hui ce qu’elle a dépensé, ce qu’elle dépensera encore; elle eprouvera une
grande diminution pour quelque tems dans son commerce, de grands bouleversemens
intérieurs si elle est forcée à la banqueroute; et quoiqu’il arrive une grande diminution
dans l’influence politique au dehors, mais ce dernier article est d’une bien petite
importance pour le bonheur réel d’un peuple, et je ne suis point du tout de l’avis de
l’Abbé Rainal dans votre épigraphe. Je ne crois point que ceci vous mene à devenir
une nation meprisable, et vous jette dans l’esclavage.
Vos malheurs feront peut-être au contraire l’effet d’une amputation nécessaire; ils
sont peut-être le seul moyen de vous sauver de la cangrene du luxe et de la corruption.
Si dans vos agitations vous pouviez corriger votre constitution en rendant les elections
annuelles, en repartissant le droit de représentation d’une maniere plus égale et plus
proportionnée aux interets des représentés, vous gagneriez peut-être autant que
l’Amérique à cette révolution; car votre liberté vous resteroit, et vos autres pertes se
répareroient bien vîte avec elle et par elle.
Vous devez juger, Monsieur, par la franchise avec laquelle je m’ouvre à vous sur ces
points délicats, de l’estime que vous m’avéz inspirée, et de la satisfaction que
j’eprouve à penser quil y a quelque ressemblance entre nos manieres de voir. Je
compte bien que cette confidence n’est que pour vous. Je vous prie même de ne point
me répondre en détail par la poste, car votre réponse seroit infailliblement ouverte
dans nos bureaux de poste, et l’on me trouveroit beaucoup trop ami de la liberté pour
un ministre, même pour un ministre disgracié!
J’ai l’honneur d’etre, Monsieur, avec toute la consideration possible,
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 43 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Votre Très Humble,
Et Très Obeissant Serviteur,
TURGOT.
It is not easy to do justice inEnglish to many parts of the preceding letter. The
following Translation of it will however, I hope, be found to be nearly correct; and I
think myself greatly obliged to the Gentleman who has been so good as to favour me
with it.
TRANSLATION.
To Dr. Price,London.
Paris, 22d March, 1778.
Sir,
MR. FRANKLIN by your desire has put into my hands the last edition of your
Observations on Civil Liberty,&c. for which I think myself doubly indebted to you.
In the first place, for the work itself, of which I have long known the value and read
with great avidity, notwithstanding the multiplicity of my engagements, when it was
first published: And in the next place, for the politeness you have shewn in leaving
out the imputation of want of address,*which you intermixed with the handsome
things you said of me in your additional observations. I might have merited this
imputation, if you had in view no other want of addressthan incapacity to unravel the
springs of those intrigues that were employed against me, by some people who are
much more expert in these matters than I am, or ever shall be, or indeed ever desire to
be: But I imagined you imputed to me a want of addresswhich made my opinions
grossly clash with the general opinions of my countrymen; and in that respect I
thought you neither did justice to me nor to my country,where there is a degree of
understanding much superior to what you generally suppose in England, and where it
is more easy perhaps, than even with you, to bring back the public to hearken to
reason.
I have been led to judge thus by the infatuation of your people in the absurd project of
subduing America, till the affair of Burgoyne began to open their eyes; and by the
system of monopoly and exclusion which has been recommended by all your writers
on Commerce, (except Mr. Adam Smith and Dean Tucker); a system which has been
the true source of your separation from your Colonies. I have also been led to this
opinion by all your controversial writings upon the questions which have occupied
your attention these twenty years, and in which, till your observations appeared, I
scarce recollect to have read one that took up these questions on their proper ground. I
cannot conceive how a nation which has cultivated every branch of natural knowledge
with such success, should have made so little progress in the most interesting of all
sciences, that of the public good: A science, in which the liberty of the Press, which
she alone enjoys, ought to have given her a prodigious advantage over every other
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 44 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
nation in Europe. Was it national pride which prevented you from profiting by this
advantage? Or was it, because you were not altogether in so bad a condition as other
nations, that you have imposed upon yourselves in your speculations so far as to be
persuaded that your arrangements were compleat? Is it party spirit and a desire of
being supported by popular opinion which has retarded your progress, by inducing
your political writers to treat as vain Metaphysics*all those speculations which aim at
establishing the rights and true interests of nations and individuals upon fixed
principles. How comes it that you are almost the first of the writers of your country,
who has given a just idea of liberty, and shewn the falsity of the notion so frequently
repeated by almost all Republican Writers, “that liberty consists in being subject only
to the laws,” as if a man could be free while oppressed by an unjust law. This would
not be true, even if we could suppose that all the laws were the work of an assembly
of the whole nation; for certainly every individual has his rights, of which the nation
cannot deprive him, except by violence and an unlawful use of the general power.
Though you have attended to this truth and have explained yourself upon this head,
perhaps it would have merited a more minute explanation, considering how little
attention is paid to it even by the most zealous friends of liberty.
It is likewise extraordinary that it was not thought a trivial matter in England to assert
“that one nation never can have a right to govern another nation”—“that a
government where such a principle is admitted can have no foundation but that of
force, which is equally the foundation of robbery and tyranny”—“and that the tyranny
of a people is the most cruel and intolerable, because it leaves the fewest resources to
the oppressed.”—A despot is restrained by a sense of his own interest. He is checked
by remorse or by the public opinion. But the multitude never calculate. The multitude
are never checked by remorse, and will even ascribe to themselves the highest honour
when they deserve only disgrace.
What a dreadful commentary on your book are the events which have lately befallen
the English nation?—For some months they have been running headlong to
ruin.—The fate of America is already decided—Behold her independent beyond
recovery.—But will She be free and happy?—Can this new people, so advantageously
placed for giving an example to the world of a constitution under which man may
enjoy his rights, freely exercise all his faculties, and be governed only by nature,
reason and justice—Can they form such a Constitution?—Can they establish it upon a
never failing foundation, and guard against every source of division and corruption
which may gradually undermine and destroy it?
I confess that I am not satisfied with the Constitutions which have hitherto been
formed by the different States of America. It is with reason that you reproach the State
of Pensylvania with exacting a religious test from those who become members of the
body of Representatives. There are much worse tests in the other States; and there is
one (I believe the Jerseys) which requires(†) a declaration of faith in the Divinityof
Jesus Christ.—I observe that by most of them the customs of England are imitated,
without any particular motive. Instead of collecting all authority into one center, that
of the nation, they have established different bodies; a body of representatives, a
council, and a Governour, because there is in England a House of Commons, a House
of Lords, and a King.—They endeavour to balance these different powers, as if this
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 45 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
equilibrium, which in Englandmay be a necessary check to the enormous influence of
royalty, could be of any use in Republics founded upon the equality of all the
Citizens; and as if establishing different orders of men, was not a source of divisions
and disputes. In attempting to prevent imaginary dangers they create real ones; and in
their desire to have nothing to fear from the clergy, they unite them more closely by
one common proscription. By excluding them from the right of being elected into
public offices they become a body distinct from the State. Wherefore should a
Citizen, who has the same interest with others in the common defence of liberty and
property, be excluded from contributing to it his virtue and knowledge? Is it because
he is of a profession which requires knowledge and virtue? The clergy are only
dangerous when they exist as a distinct body in the State; and think themselves
possessed of separate rights and interests and a religion established by law, as if some
men had a right to regulate the consciences of other men, or could have an interest in
doing this; as if an individual could sacrifice to civil society opinions on which he
thinks his eternal salvation depends; as if, in short, mankind were to be saved or
damned in communities—Where truetoleration, (that is, where the absolute
incompetency of civil government in matters of conscience, is established); there the
clergyman,when admitted into the national assembly, becomes a simple citizen;but
when excluded, he becomes an ecclesiastic.
I do not think they are sufficiently careful to reduce the kind of business with which
the government of each State is charged, within the narrowest limits possible; nor to
separate the objects of legislation from those of the general administration, or from
those of a local and particular administration; nor to institute local permanent
assemblies, which by discharging almost all the functions in the detail of government,
make it unnecessary for the general assemblies to attend to these things, and thereby
deprive the members of the general assemblies of every means, and perhaps every
desire, of abusing a power which can only be applied to general objects, and which,
consequently, must be free from the influence of the little passions by which men
usually are agitated.
I do not find that they attend to the great distinction (the only one which is founded in
nature between two classes of men), between landholders, and those who are not
landholders; to their interests, and of course to their different rights respecting
legislation, the administration of justice and police, their contributions to the public
expence, and employment.
No fixed principle of taxation is established. They suppose that each State may tax
itself according to its own fancy, by establishing either personaltaxes, or taxes on
consumptionand importation;that is, that each State may assume to itself an interest
contrary to the interest of the other States.
They also every where suppose that they have a right to regulate commerce. They
even delegate authority to executive bodies, and to Governors, to prohibit the
exportation of certain commodities on certain occasions. So far are they from being
sensible that the right to an entire liberty in commerce is the consequence of the right
of property. So much are they still involved in the mist of European illusions.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 46 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
In the general union of the States I do not observe a coalition, a fusion of all the parts
to form one homogeneous body. It is only a jumble of communities too discordant,
and which retain a constant tendency to separation, owing to the diversity in their
laws, customs and opinions; to the inequality in their presentstrength; but still more,
to the inequality in their advances to greaterstrength. It is only a copy of the Dutch
republic, with this difference, that the Dutchrepublic had nothing to fear, as the
Americanrepublic has, from the future possible increase of any one of the
Provinces.—All this edifice has been hitherto supported upon the erroneous
foundation of the most ancient and vulgar policy; upon the prejudice that Nations and
States, as such, may have an interest distinct from the interest which individuals have
to be free, and to defend their property against the attacks of robbers and conquerors:
An interest, in carrying on a more extensive commerce than other States, in not
purchasing foreign merchandize, and compelling foreigners to consume their produce
and manufactures: An interest in possessing more extensive territories, and acquiring
such and such a province, island or village: An interest in inspiring other nations with
awe, and gaining a superiority over them in the glory of arts, sciences, and arms.
Some of these prejudices are fomented in Europe,from the ancient rivalship of
nations and the ambition of Princes, which compel every State to keep up an armed
force to defend itself against the attack of neighbours in arms, and to look upon a
military force as the principal object of government. Americais likely in no long time
to enjoy the happiness of having no external enemy to dread, provided she is not
divided within herself. She ought, therefore, to estimate properly those pretended
interestsand causes of discord which alone are likely to be formidable to her liberty.
On that sacred principle, “liberty of commerce considered as a natural right flowing
from the possession of property,” all the pretended interests of commerce must
vanish.—The supposed interest in possessing more or less territory disappear on this
principle, “that a territory does not belong to nations, but to the individuals who are
proprietors of the lands.” The question, whether such a canton or such a village
belongs to such a Province or such a State, ought not to be determined by the interest
in it pretended by that Province or that State; but by the interest the inhabitants of the
canton or village have in assembling for transacting their affairs in the place most
convenient for them. This interest, measured by the greater or less distance that a man
can go from his home to attend to important affairs without injuring his private
concerns, forms a natural boundary to the jurisdiction of States, and establishes an
equipoise*of extent and strength between them, which must remove every danger of
inequality, and every pretence to superiority.
There can be no interest in being feared when nothing can be demanded, and when
men are in a situation not to be attacked by a considerable force with any hope of
success.
The glory of arms is nothing to those who enjoy the happiness of living in peace.
The glory of arts and sciences belongs to every man who can acquire it. There is here
ample scope. The field of discovery is boundless; and all profit by the discoveries of
all.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 47 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
I imagine that the Americans are not as sensible of these truths, as they ought to be, in
order to secure the happiness of their posterity. I do not blame their leaders. It was
necessary to provide for the necessities of the moment, by such an union as they could
form against a present and most formidable enemy. They have not leisure to consider
how the errors of the different constitutions and States may be corrected; but they
ought to be afraid of perpetuating these errors, and to endeavour by all means to
reconcile the opinions and interests of the different provinces, and to unite them by
bringing them to one uniform set of principles.
To accomplish this they have great obstacles to surmount.
In Canada, an order of Roman Catholic Clergy, and a body of Nobles.
In New England, a rigid puritanical spirit which has been always somewhat
intolerant*.
In Pensylvania, a very great number of inhabitants laying it down as a religious
principle, that the profession of arms is unlawful, and refusing to join in the
arrangements necessary to establish the military force of the State, by uniting the
character of the Citizen with that of the Soldier and Militiaman, in consequence of
which the business of war is made to be the business of mercenaries.
In the Southern Colonies, an inequality of fortune too great; and what is worse, a great
number of Blacks, whose slavery is incompatible with a good political constitution;
and who, if emancipated, would occasion great embarrassement by forming two
distinct people in one State.
In all of them, various prejudices, an attachment to established forms, a habit of
paying certain taxes, and a dread of those which must be substituted for them; a vanity
in those colonies which think themselves most powerful; and a wretched beginning of
national pride. I imagine that the Americans must aggrandize themselves not by war,
but by agriculture. If they neglect the immense desarts which are at their backs, and
which extend all the way to the western sea, their exiles and fugitives from the
severity of the laws, will unite with the Savages, and settle that part of the country; the
consequence of which will be that bodies of Banditti will ravage America, as the
Barbarians of the North ravaged the Roman Empire, and subject the States to the
necessity of keeping the frontiers always guarded, and remaining in a State of
continual war. The Colonies next to the frontier will of course be better disciplined
than the rest; and this inequality of military force will prove a dreadful incentive to
ambition. The remedy for this inequality would be to keep up a standing army, to
which every State should contribute in proportion to its population; but the
Americans, who have the fears that the English oughtto have, dread nothing so much
as a standing army. In this they are wrong. There is nothing more easy than to
combine a standing army with a militia, so as to improve the militia, and gain
additional security for liberty. But it is no easy matter to calm their apprehensions on
that head.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 48 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
Here are a number of difficulties; and perhaps the private interests of powerful
individuals will unite with the prejudices of the multitude, to check the efforts of true
Philosophers and good Citizens.
It is impossible not to wish ardently that this people may attain to all the prosperity of
which they are capable. They are the hopeof the world. They may become a modelto
it. They may prove by fact that men can be free and yet tranquil; and that it is in their
power to rescue themselves from the chains in which tyrants and knaves of all
descriptions have presumed to bind them under the pretence of the public good. They
may exhibit an example of politicalliberty, of religiousliberty, of commericalliberty,
and of industry. The Asylumthey open to the oppressed of all nations should console
the earth. The case with which the injured may escape from oppressive governments,
will compel Princes to become just and cautious; and the rest of the world will
gradually open their eyes upon the empty illusions with which they have been hitherto
cheated by politicians. But for this purpose Americamust preserve herselffrom these
illusions; and take care to avoid being what your ministerial writers are frequently
saying She willbe—an image of our Europe—a mass of divided powers contending
for territory and commerce, and continually cementing the slavery of the people with
their own blood.
All enlightened men—All the friends of humanity ought at this time to unite their
lights to those of the Americansages, and to assist them in the great work of
legislation. This, sir, would be a work worthy of you. I wish it was in my power to
animate your zeal in this instance. If I have in this letter indulged too free an effusion
of my sentiments, this has been my only motive; and it will, I hope, induce you to
pardon me for tiring you. I wish indeed that the blood which has been spilt, and which
will contiune for some time to be spilt in this contest, may not be without its use to the
human race.
Our two nations are about doing much harm to each other, and probably without the
prospect to either of any real advantage. An increase of debts and public burthens,
(perhaps a national bankruptcy), and the ruin of a great number of individuals, will
prove the result. England seems to me to be more likely to suffer by these evils, and
much nearer to them, than France.—If instead of going to war, you had at the
commencement of your disputes endeavoured to retreat with a good grace; if your
Statesmen had then consented to make those concessions, which they will infallibly
be obliged to make at last; if the national opinion would have permitted your
government to anticipate events which might have been foreseen; if, in short, you had
immediately yielded to the independence of America without entering into any
hostilities; I am firmly persuaded your nation would have lost nothing.—But you will
nowlose what you have already expended, and what you are still to expend; you will
experience a great diminution of your commerce for some time, and great interior
commotions, if driven to a bankruptcy; and, at any rate, a great diminution of weight
in foreign politics. But this last circumstance I think of little consequence to the real
happiness of a people; for I cannot agree with the Abbe Raynalin your motto*. I do
not believe all this will make you a contemptible nation or throw you into
slavery.—On the contrary; your misfortunes may have the effect of a necessary
amputation. They are perhaps the only means of saving you from the gangrene of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 49 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
luxury and corruption. And if they should terminate in the amendment of your
constitution, by restoring annual elections, and distributing the right of suffrages for
representation so as to render it more equal and better proportioned to the interests of
the represented, you will perhaps gain as much as America by this revolution; for you
will preserve your liberty, and with your liberty, and by means of it, all your other
losses will be speedily repaired.
By the freedom with which I have opened myself to you, sir, upon these delicate
points, you will judge of the esteem with which you have inspired me; and the
satisfaction I feel in thinking there is some resemblance between our sentiments and
views. I depend on your*confining this confidence to yourself. I even beg that you
will not be particular in answering me by the Post, for your letter will certainly be
opened at our Post-Offices, and I shall be found much too great a friend to liberty for
a minister, even though a discarded minister.
I have the honour to be with all possible respect,
Sir,
Your Most Humble,
And Most Obedient Servant,
TURGOT.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 50 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
APPENDIX,
containing
A Translation from the French of
THE TESTAMENT
of
M. FORTUNÉ RICARD,
Teacher of Arithmetic at D—.
Read and published at the Court of Bailiwick of that Town, the 19th of August, 1784.
printed in m.dcc.lxxxv.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 51 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE followingTestament was lately published inFrance, and conveyed to me by
Dr.Franklin.It exemplifies, with an instructive pleasantry and great force, the account
in page10,&c. of the powers of Compound Interest or aSinking Fund, and the uses
to which they may be applied for the benefit of nations and of posterity. For this
reason I here offer to the public the following translation of it, not doubting but I shall
be excused if the turn of humour in it renders it a composition of a nature not
perfectly suitable to the other parts of this pamphlet.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 52 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
THE TESTAMENT, &C.
IN the name of God,I Fortuné Ricard,Teacher of Arithmetic at D—, invoking the
Holy Virgin and Saint Fortunemy patron, do make this my last Will as follows—
[“The Executors, who have caused this Will to be printed in order to fulfil the
intentions of the late M. Fortuné Ricard,do not think it necessary to publish those
particular bequests which concern only his own family.—After having disposed of his
patrimony among them with wisdom, he proceeds in the following manner.”]
It remains now for me to declare my intentions with regard to the promise of 500
livres*, subscribed on my behalf by M. P. banker of this town. This sum proceeded
originally from a present which was made me by Prosper Ricard,my much honoured
grandfather, when I entered the eighth year of my age. At that age he had taught me
the principles of writing and calculation. After having shewn me that a capital, with
its accumulating interest at five per cent.would amount at the end of 100 years to
more than 131 times the original sum*, and seeing that I listened to this lecture with
the greatest attention, he took 24 livres†out of his pocket, and addressed me with an
enthusiasm which is still present to my mind—“My child, said he, remember while
thou livest, that with œconomy and calculation nothing is impossible for man. Here
are 24 livres which I give thee. Take them to a merchant in our neighbourhood, who
will place them in trade out of regard to me. Every year thou shalt add the interest to
the principal. At thy death thou shalt employ the produce in good works for the repose
of thy soul and my own.”—I have executed this order with fidelity, and in the course
of my life I have planned many projects for employing this money. Having reached
the 71st year of my age, it amounts to 500 livres; but as I must some time or other set
bounds to myself, I now desire that it may be divided into five portions of 100 livres‡
each; to which the interests shall be annually added, and the accumulated sums shall
be successively applied to the following uses.
1. In a hundred years the first sum of 100 livres will amount to more than 13,100
livres§, (5822l.). From this sum a prize of 4000 livres shall be given for the best
theological dissertation, to prove the lawfulness of putting out money to interest.
Three medals, of 600 livres each, shall also be given for the three dissertations which
shall be adjudged the next in merit to the prize-dissertation. The remainder of the
13,100 livres shall be expended in printing the prize dissertation and extracts from the
others. Copies of these shall be sent, gratis,to all the bishops, clergy, and confessors
of the kingdom. I had intended to have sent them also into foreign countries; but I
observe that all the universities of the christian world, excepting those of France, have
solemnly recognized the lawfulness of putting money to interest*; and that it
continues necessary only in this kingdom to explain a question in morals so
interesting to the welfare of the State.
2. After two hundredyears a secondsum of 100 livres, amounting, with its
accumulated interest, to more than 1,700,000 livres†, (756,500l.) shall be employed
in establishing a perpetual fund for fourscore prizes of 1000 livres each, to be
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 53 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
distributed annually by the different academies of the kingdom, as follows:—Fifteen
prizes for the most distinguished virtuous actions—fifteen for works of science and
literature—ten for solutions of questions in arithmetic and calculation—ten for such
new processes in agriculture as shall produce the best crops—ten for master-pieces in
the fine arts—and ten to encourage races and other exercises proper to display the
force and agility of the body, and to restore amongst us a taste for the gymnasium
which was in such great esteem among the Greeks, and which formerly made so many
heroes.
After three hundredyears, from another sum of 100 livres, increased in that time to
more than two hundred and twenty-six millions, (10,057,000 l.) there shall be
appropriated 196 millions towards establishing, in the most considerable places in
France, 500 patriotic banks for lending money without interest; the largest of which
shall have a fund of ten millions of livres, and the smallest a fund of 100,000 livres.
These banks shall be managed by a committee of the most upright citizens in each
place, and the money shall be employed in loans to succour the unfortunate, or
advanced towards promoting agriculture, trade, and industry. The remaining thirty
millions shall be expended in sounding twelve museums in the cities of Paris, Lyons,
Rouen, Bourdeaux, Rennes, Lisle, Nancy, Tours, Dijon, Thoulouse, Aix, and
Grenoble. Each of these museums shall be placed at the most agreeable end of the
city. Five hundred thousand livres shall be expended upon each building, and in the
purchase of grounds which shall belong to them, and be laid out into botanical and
fruit gardens, and also into kitchen gardens and extensive walks. To each museum
shall be annexed an income of 100,000 livres; and there shall be lodged and boarded
in it forty literary men and artists of superior merit, who, at the time of meals shall be
divided into four tables, that their repasts may be chearful without being too noisy.
Each museum shall be provided with six Secretaries, a designer and engraver, and
four carriages. There shall be also a hall for concerts, a theatre, a chymical laboratory,
a cabinet of natural history, a hall for experimental philosophy, and a grand gallery for
a common library. A hundred thousandlivres shall be expended on a separate library
for each of these establishments. The same sum shall be employed in providing them
with separate cabinets of natural history and with philosophical instruments. And
10,000 livres shall be reserved annually for keeping up and increasing these cabinets
and philosophical instruments.*
The libraries shall always be open to the public. Twenty members of the museum
shall be engaged in giving public and gratuitous courses of lectures upon the foreign
languages, and upon all the arts and sciences. The other twenty shall be engaged in
such other employments as may be most useful. No one shall be admitted a member
till he has previously given proof, not of his rank, descent, or nobility, but of his
morals, and of his never having dishonoured his pen by writing against†religion and
government, or by satirising any member of the community. On being admitted he
shall make oath, “That he will prefer virtue, truth, and his country to every thing; and
the general good of literature to his own fame.” The works of the members of the
museum shall be printed at the expence of the establishment, and when those
expences are reimbursed, the profits shall belong to the authors.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 54 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
4. After four hundredyears the fourth sum of 100 livres, amounting, with interest, to
near 30,000 millions, (1,330,000,000l.) shall be employed in building 100 towns, each
containing 150,000 souls*, in the most agreeable situations which can be found in
France. The means of peopling these towns, of governing and making them flourish,
are explained in a memorial annexed to this will†. In a short time there will result
from hence an addition of 15 millions of inhabitants to the kingdom, and its
consumption will be doubled, for which service I hope the œconomists will think
themselves obliged to me.
I am sensible that all the specie in Europe is not equal to these 30,000 millions, and
that it will be impossible to make provision in money for such immense sums. For
this reason I leave it to the discretion of my executors to exchange cash at convenient
seasons for landed and other real possessions. The revenue arising from those
possessions shall either be laid out in cash, or realized by further purchases, so that
my bequests may be fulfilled in their due time without any difficulty.
I am convinced, by the most accurate calculations, that my arrangements instead of
clogging will give activity to the circulation of specie. Laying out the money I have
ordered in the purchase of estates, will soon increase their value; and when these
accumulating riches shall have so produced their effect as that there can no longer be
found in France a landholder who will sell his estate, purchases must be sought for
among the neighbouring nations.
5. Finally, with regard to the last sum of 100 livres, amounting nearly, by the
accumulation of five hundredyears, to four millions of millions of livres,*it shall be
disposed of as follows.
Six thousand millions shall be appropriated towards paying the national debt of
France, upon condition that the Kings, our good lords and masters, shall be entreated
to order the comptrollers general of the finances to undergo in future an examination
in arithmetic†before they enter upon their office.
Twelve thousand millions shall likewise be employed in paying the public debts of
England.—It may be seen that I reckon that both those national debts will be doubled
in this period; not that I have any doubts of the talents of certain ministers to increase
them much more, but their operations in this way are opposed by an infinity of
circumstances which lead me to presume that those debts cannot be more than
doubled. Besides, if they amount to a few thousands of millions more, I declare that it
is my intention that they should be entirely paid off, and that a project so laudable
should not remain unexecuted for a trifle more or less. I beg that the English would
not refuse this slight mark of the remembrance of a man, who was indeed born a
Frenchman, but who sincerely esteemed their nation, and always was a particular
admirer of that magnificent work which Newton, their countryman, has entitled
Universal Arithmetic.I earnestly desirethat, as an acknowledgment for this legacy,
the English nation will consent to call the French their neighbours*and not their
natural enemies;that they be assured that naturenever made man an enemy to man;
and that national hatreds, commercial prohibitions, and, above all, wars constantly
produce a monstrous error in calculations. But I dare not, in this instance, requireany
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 55 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
thing. We must hope for all we desire from time; and when we have the happiness of
rendering a service, we must not destroy its value by annexing conditions to it which
may encumber those whom we wish to serve.
Thirty thousand millions shall be formed into a fund for producing an annual revenue
of 15 hundred millions to be divided in times of peace among all the powers of
Europe. In time of war the share of the aggressor or aggressors shall be given to those
who have been attacked unjustly, in order to engage sovereigns, if possible, to reflect
a little before they commence unjust hostilities. This revenue shall be distributed
among the different nations in proportion to their population. Every ten years an exact
numeration shall be taken with a view to this distribution, which shall be made by a
diet composed of deputies from all the different nations; but I direct that a larger
proportion shall be distributed to those sovereigns who shall apply for it and appear to
desire it with no other view than to encourage population among their subjects.
I leave to the wisdom of my executors the care of extending the benefits of this
bequest to the other parts of the world; and if, by this means, they should hope to
succeed in extinguishing throughout the world the absurd and barbarous rage of war, I
willingly consent that they appropriate for this purpose the further sum of one
hundred thousand millions. I wish that six thousand millions may be offered to his
Majesty, the King of France; namely, a thousandmillions to supersede the necessity
of lotteries, a sort of tax imposed upon wicked men which infallibly renders them a
great deal more wicked; a thousandmillions to buy in all useless offices which are
attended with the sad inconvenience of persuading many persons that it is a sufficient
discharge of their duty to their country to occupy an office without functions, and that
an honour may be derived from bearing a senseless title; a thousandmillions to buy in
offices which, on the contrary, are too important to be left exposed to the danger of
venality; a thousandmillions to purchase a domain for his Majesty worthy of his
crown, and sufficient for the expences of his court, so that the nation may clearly
perceive that the taxes imposed upon them are applicable only to the expenditures of
the state. The remaining two thousand millions shall form a fund, whose annual
produce shall be employed by his Majesty in pensions and gratuities. By these means,
if sometimes those favours should be conferred upon intriguing and undeserving
persons, the nation will have no cause to complain of the improper use of money
drawn from taxes and the labours of the husbandman.
I appoint a thousand millionstowards adding a thousand livresto the settled income
of all the clergy in the kingdom, and 600 livres to that of their vicars, upon condition
that they no longer demand fees for saying masses. I had also some thoughts of
proposing to them the suppression of fees for baptisms, marriages, and burials; but I
have considered those functions to be of a civilas well as religiousnature; and that on
this account the clergy may, without impropriety, be allowed to receive a pay which
is, in fact, more moderate than would be required by any other public officers in their
places. Besides, this pay, perhaps, renders the service more exact, more speedy on
their part, and less irksome to the delicacy of some of those who receive it.
I appoint two thousand millions towards forming an income of tenlivres a month to
all the children which shall be born in the kingdom till they are three years of age; and
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 56 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
I desire this legacy to be increased to thirtylivres a month to those children which
shall be nursed by their own mothers. I do not except even the children of the rich; on
the contrary, I invite rich parents to accept this donation without reluctance, as an
honorary prize awarded to paternity and the cares of maternal love. They may, if they
please, apply it to acts of charity and benevolence.
I appoint four thousand millions towards purchasing the waste lands of the kingdom.
These shall be divided into 500 thousand little farms or tenements of four or five acres
each, on which shall be erected as many commodious cottages. These 500 thousand
farms shall be given as freeholds to an equal number of married peasants,chosen in
each parish by a vestry composed of ten of the most aged inhabitants. The possessors
of these freeholdsshall be obliged to make them their only residence, to cultivate
them with their own hands and those of their families, and to report every year the
improvements of them which they have made. These freeholdsshall be hereditary, but
only upon condition that they shall neither be divided, nor any two of them engrossed
by one person. When a freeholder dies without leaving behind him either wife,
children, brothers, sisters, nephews, or nieces, who have lived and laboured with him
for three years prior to his decease, the freehold shall be declared vacant, and given
anew by the vestry of the parish to that peasant who shall appear to deserve it best.
I desire that two thousand millions be laid out in purchasing all the manors of which
there shall be sellers, and that the vassals thereon be for ever afterwards exempted
from all servitude and fealty.
Six thousand millions shall be employed in founding houses of education in all the
country parishes, agreeable to the plan of the author of a work entitled, Patriotic
Views respecting the Education of the People.If in executing this plan of a man of
genius and an excellent citizen it should appear to want some little amendments and
alterations, I direct that they shall be adopted.
I appoint 20,000 millions towards erecting in the kingdom 40,000 houses of labour, or
public work-houses; to each of which shall be appropriated from 10,000 to 50,000
livres annual income. Every man and woman shall have a right to offer themselves at
any time to be maintained and employed in them. I chuse to say nothing of any other
particulars in the government and management of these houses; hoping that the ideas
which begin to be formed concerning establishments of this kind will be perfected
before the period fixed for these shall arrive; and that it will at length be universally
acknowledged, that though it is dangerous and foolish to give alms in money to a
strong beggar, yet that society has no right to deprive him of his liberty and inflict
punishments upon him, while it does not hold out to him any other means of
subsistence, or at least point out to him a method of discovering what means he is
capable of using.
I intreat the managers of these public work-houses to give the greatest encouragement
to such trades as can be performed by women. This sex, so dear to all sensible minds,
has been neglected or oppressed by all our institutions.—Seductions of all kinds seem
to conspire against their virtue—Necessity precipitates them involuntarily into an
abyss of infamy and misery.—The low price which is set upon the labour of women is
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 57 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
out of all proportion to the inferiority of their bodily strength. Let the public
workhouses set the example of paying them better.
There are in Francemany houses of correction where the misconduct of women is
severely punished, but where in reality it is only suspended, mere consinement having
no tendency to eradicate vice. Why should there not be oneestablishment where a
young woman, conquered by temptation and on the brink of despair, might present
herself, and say—“Vice offers me gold: I only ask for labour and bread. In
compassion to my remorse assist and strengthen me. Open an asylum for me where I
may weep without being seen, expiate those faults which pursue and overwhelm me,
and recover a shadow of peace.”—Such an institution exists no where—I appoint,
therefore, a thousand millions towards establishing one.
The snares which are laid by vice for women without fortunes, would make fewer
victims if more assistance was given them. We have an infinity of establishments for
persons in the higher ranks of life which do honour to the generosity of our
forefathers. Why have we none for this purpose?—I desire, therefore, that two
thousand millions be employed in establishing in the kingdom a hundred hospitals,
which shall be called Hospitals of Angels. There shall be admitted into each a
hundred females of the age of seven or eight years, and of the most engaging forms.
They shall receive the most perfect education in regard to morals, useful knowledge,
and agreeable accomplishments. At the age of eighteen they may quit the hospital in
order to be married; at which period they shall each be paid a portion of 40,000 livres.
I mention this moderate sum because it is my wish that they be neither reproached for
want of fortune, nor espoused from interest. An annual income of 2000 livres shall be
given also to their parents. * * * * Except once in the year at a solemn and splendid
procession, they shall rarely appear in public, but shall be constantly employed in
their asylum in learning all that can render them one day excellent wives and mothers.
In order to fit them, in particular, for domestic œconomy,I desire that after they have
been taught the most accurate ideas of expences of all kinds, questions be proposed to
them from time to time to which they shall be obliged to give answers by word of
mouth, and also in writing; as for example—“If you had such or such an income,
under such or such circumstances, how much would you appropriate to your table,
your house-rent, your maintenance, and the education of your children? How many
servants would you keep? How much would you reserve for sickness and unforeseen
expences? How much would you consecrate to the relief of the unfortunate and the
public good?—If your income depended either entirely or in part upon a transient
advantage or a place which was not assured to you, how much would you expend
annually? What sum would you reserve for forming a capital?” &c. &c. Prizes
publicly given to the best answers to questions of this kind would constitute, in my
opinion, an exercise equally engaging and more useful than the little comedies and
novels with which young persons in the higher stations are generally entertained.
The honours conferred upon great men have always appeared to me the most effectual
means of producinggreat men. I appoint, therefore, a thousand millions towards
striking medals, and placing in the halls of all towns, or in any other convenient
places, statues and busts in honour of such great men as shall hereafter rise up. I
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 58 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
desire further that these honours be not paid them till ten years after their decease; and
that they be decreed and proportioned by a tribunal composed of such upright,
enlightened, and worthy citizens, as shall be most likely not to be dazzled by false
virtues.—It has been once reckoned, that founding hospitals for the sick is one of the
best public services. For some years a conviction has been gaining ground, that
breathing the pestilential air of hospitals doubles the danger of diseases; and that on
this and other accounts they probably destroymore lives than they save.I desire,
therefore, that 10,000 millions be employed in establishing in each parish of the
kingdom houses of health,in which shall be maintained a physician, a surgeon, and a
convenient number of sisters of charity and nurses. These houses shall supply the sick
gratisin their own houses with every assistance in food and medicine, and none shall
be taken to the house of health excepting those whom it shall be impossible to assist at
home.
I have hitherto only directed the employment of about two hundred thousand millions.
There remain still near four millions of millions,the appropriation of which I leave to
the discretion of my executors. I wish them to purchase and pull down all such houses
as incommode the public way in all towns; to multiply squares, quays, fountains,
gardens, &c. in order to give salubrity to the air of towns; to empty ponds; to clear
heaths; to deepen the beds of rivers so as to render them navigable, and to unite them
by means of canals;—in a word, I wish them to co-operate in every possible method
with nature, which seems to have designed France*to be the most delightful country
under heaven.
I hope that all good citizens will assist my executors in the choice of such useful
establishments as shall yet remain to be formed. I call upon them to publish the ideas
with which patriotic zeal may inspire them, since now they are encouraged by the
consoling certainty that funds for executing them cannot be wanting.
I name for executors my dearest and best friends M. M. - - - - - - - - - - - [Here the
testator names six executors, who do not think proper at present to reveal themselves,
and then goes on as follows].
I beg of them to meet as often as the affairs of my executorship shall require. In case
of an equal division of opinions, the oldest shall have the casting vote. When one of
them dies, I desire the survivors to fill the vacancy, as soon as may be, with the most
honest, zealous, and disinterested citizen of their acquaintance, and to proceed in this
manner for ever. I hope that during the first years of their executorship, when the
operations of the fund will be easy, they will transact in this business out of regard to
me and to the public. I foresee that, in process of time, the sums to be laid out will
become so immensely great, as to render necessary voyages and other considerable
expences, which will be productive of no profit. For this reason I have left 125,000
livres of the second sum unappropriated; of the third 711,000; and of the fourth thirty-
two millions. These sums I request them to accept as a compensation for their
expences and trouble. I charge them always, as far as they can, without hazarding the
security of the fund, to prefer those ways of laying out the accumulating sums which
shall be most serviceable to individuals and the public.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 59 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
If a reduction in the rate of interest, or any unforeseen losses, should injure the fund,
so as to retard its increase, the execution of my desires need only be postponed in
proportion to the interruption that shall happen.
May the success of these establishments cause one day a few tears to be shed on my
grave. But above all, may the example of an obscure individual*kindle the emulation
of patriots, princes, and public bodies; and engage them to give attention to this new
but powerful and infallible means of serving posterity, and contributing to the future
improvement and happiness of the world.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 60 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 61 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
TABLES.
No. I.*
TABLEof the Produce of a Sum of100Livres, with its accumulating Interest, during
100Years, at 5 per Cent.
Years. £. s. d. Years. £. s. d.
100 — — 115 15 3
Int. 5 — — Int. 5 15 9
1 105 — — 4 121 11 —
5 5 0 6 1 6
2 110 5 — 5 127 12 6
5 10 3 6 7 6
3 115 15 3 6 134 — —
134 — — 1145 14 —
6 14 — 57 5 6
7 140 14 — 51 1202 19 6
7 — 6 &c.
8 147 14 6 60 1866 3 —
7 7 6 93 6 —
9 155 2 — 61 1959 9 —
7 15 — &c.
10 162 17 — 70 3039 13 9
&c. 151 19 6
20 265 4 — 71 3191 13 3
13 5 — &c.
21 278 9 — 80 4951 4 6
&c. 247 11 —
30 431 18 — 81 5198 15 6
21 11 9 &c.
31 453 9 9 90 8064 18 9
&c. 403 4 9
40 703 8 3 91 8468 3 6
35 3 3 &c.
41 738 11 6 99 12511 5 9
&c. 625 11 3
50 1145 14 — 100 13,136 17 —
*RULEfor an easy Conversion of Livres into Pounds Sterling.
Strike off from the number of livres the two figures on the right hand, and multiply
by 4 the remaining figures. The product increased by a tenthof itself will give nearly
the number of pounds answering to the number of livres.
Thus. 100,000 livres are equal nearly to 4000 multiplied by 4, and the product (4000)
increased by 400. That is, they are equal to 4400l.
In like manner, 1,725,768 livres are equal to 17,257 multiplied by 4, and the product
(69,028) increased by 6902. That is, they are equal to 75,930l.—Translator’s note.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 62 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
OBSERVATIONS.
We found among the papers of the late M. Ricarda great number of very curious
tables, but they have not been inserted here because they had no direct relation to the
object of his Will. He had computed the produce of a sum of 100 livres, with the
accumulated interest of 100 years, according to the different rates of interest; and the
results varied much more than could be believed from the proportion of those
different rates.
Interest at4per cent. gives50 }
at 5per cent. — 131 }
times the original sum.
at 6per cent. — 339 }
at 10per cent.— 13,780 }
From hence it follows, that if the operations are well managed, and the money laid out
to advantage, even by sinking the principal, (as is done in the fund for the 30 girls of
Geneva) and converting afterwards the annual produce into capitals, the executors
might considerably accelerate the accomplishment of the benevolent dispositions of
the testator.
By laying out the money every three months, as is the custom in some commercial
places, the operations might also be accelerated, although but in a small degree.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 63 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
REMARK, By TheTranslator.
These observations shew that M. Ricardwas himself possessed in a high degree of
that knowledge of arithmetic which he has required in the comptrollers-general (p.
139) as a condition of the redemption of the debts of France.In the last paragraph,
however, there is an incorrectness which shews that he had not attended sufficiently to
onecircumstance in the improvement of money by compound interest. This will
appear from the following calculations.
One hundred livres will amount, if improved at 5 per cent.interest,
Paid yearly. Livres. Half-yearly. Livres.
In 100 years to131,501 139,560
In 500 years to3″,932,400′,000,000—5″,296,100′,000,000
Paid quarterly.
In 100 years to143,890 livres.
In 500 years to6″,166,000′000,000 livres.
By directing, therefore, that the last hundred livres should be improved at 5 per cent.
quarterlyinterest, M. Ricardmight have gained an additional sum equal to
2″,234,000′,000,000 livres; that is, nearly equal to a hundred thousand millions
sterling, which is a sum more than sufficient to encompass the earth with a belt of
guineas all close and five feet broad.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 64 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
No. II.
TableOf The Produce Of Each Sum Of 100 Livres,
Bequeathed By The Testator, From One Hundred To Five
Hundred Years.
It has been proved by the preceding table, that a sum of 100 livres, with the interest
accumulating at 5 per cent.for 100 years, will produce 13,136liv.17sous. By
multiplying this sum by itself four times successively, it will appear that the following
sums are the produce of each 100 livres at the end of each century.
Liv. sousden.
mo
1 . Produce of 100 livres, with the accumulated interest
13,136 17 —
during 100 years
2°. Produce of 100 livres, with the interest, during 200
1,725,768 5 6
years,
3°. Produce of 100 livres in 300 years 226,711,589 12 6
4°. Produce of 100 livres in 400 years 29,782,761,461 13 —
5°. Produce of 100 livres in 500 years 3,912,516,739,07415 3
No. III.
TABLEof the Disposition of the first Sum, amounting to13,136livres17sous.
Livres sousden.
A prize of 4,000 — —
Three others of 600 livres each 1,800 — —
An edition of the Prize Discourse, extracts from the three others,
7,336 17 —
with 50,000 copies
Total13,13617 —
No. IV.
TABLEof the Disposition of the second Sum, amounting to1,725,768livres5
sous 6den.
Livres sousden.
A fund for 80 prizes of 100 livres each, 1,600,000— —
Reserved towards defraying the expences of the executors,125,768 5 6
Total1,725,7685 6
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 65 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
No. V.
TABLEof the Disposition of the third Sum, amounting to226,711,589liv.12sous 6
den.
Livres sousden.
Five hundred patriotic banks for lending money
196,000,000— —
without interest
6,000,000
Building 12 museums at 500,000 liv. each
}
30,000,000 — —
Fund for an annual income of 100,000 livres for 24,000,000
each museum }
Reserved towards defraying the expences of the
711,589 12 6
executors
Total226,711,58912 6
During the three years employed in building the museums, the income of 100,000
livres is to be laid by, towards purchasing the library, the cabinets, the carriages, the
horses, and all the furniture of the museum. Afterwards it is to be employed as
follows.
Livres.
Table-expences for the 40 members of the museum, the six secretaries, the
designer, the engraver, and all the domestics, coachmen, cooks, gardeners, 50,000
&c. }
Salaries of the secretaries, designer, engraver, and wages of the domestics, } 12,000
Expences of the stable and carriages, 10,000
The library and cabinets, 10,000
Repairs of the building and furniture, 8,000
Printing and unforeseen expences, 10,000
Total
100,000
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 66 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[Back to Table of Contents]
No. VI.
TableOf The Disposition Of The 4Th Sum, Amounting To
29,782,761,461 Liv. 13 Sous.
Towards building 100 towns, containing each of them 150,000 souls.
In order that these towns may be wholesome and convenient, it will be proper to
consecrate to each of them a very large circular piece of ground, containing 6000
acres; which being estimated at the highest, may be valued at 1000 livres each acre.
By judging from the towns which now exist, there will not be required more than
from 4 to 5000 houses for 150,000 inhabitants; but it is not conducive to the health of
mankind, to be so crowded together. I suppose then that each of these towns may
contain 7500 houses*, which, one with the other, will cost 35000 livres in building.
Each town will cost
Livres. sous.
Six thousand acres of ground at 1000 livres per acre 6,000,000 —
7,500 houses, at 35,000 livres each house 262,500,000 —
Public buildings, town houses, bridges, churches, &c. 29,000,000 —
Total297,500,000 —
The preceding sum multiplied into 100, gives 29,750,000,000—
Reserved towards defraying the expences of the executors,32,761,461 13
Total,29,782,761,46113
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 67 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
No. VII.
TABLEof the Disposition of the5th Sum, amounting to3,912,516,739,074liv.15sous
3den.
The national debt of France, 6 thousand millions.
— of England, 12
A fund towards dividing annually 15 hundred thousand
30
livres among the pacific powers of Europe,
A similar distribution among all the powers of the
100
world,
Abolition of lotteries, 1
Extinction of useless offices, 1
Suppression of venality in offices of of importance, 1
A domaine to be offered to his Majesty, 1
A fund to be employed in annuities and pensions, 2
An addition to the settled stipends of the clergy, 1
Allowance to children under three years of age, 2
A foundation for 500,000 small freeholdswith
4
commodious cottages,
Enfranchisement of vassals, 2
Foundations for houses of education for the people, 6
Houses of industry, 20
Asylums for penitent young women, 1
Hospitals of Angels, 2
Statues, busts, and public honours, 1
Houses of health, 10
Total of appropriated sums,203
Remain unappropriated,3,709,516,739,07415 3
Total,3,912,516,739,07415 3
FINIS.
[*]This refers to an account given of Sir Isaac Newton in the Preface to Dr.
Pemberton’s View of his Philosophy.
[†]Who could have thought, in the first ages of the world, that mankind would
acquire the power of determining the distances and magnitudes of the sun and
planets?—Who, even at the beginning of this century, would have thought, that, in a
few years, mankind would acquire the power of subjecting to their wills the dreadful
force of lightening, and of flying in aerostatic machines?—The last of these powers,
though so long undiscovered, is only an easy application of a power always
known.—Many similar discoveries may remain to be made, which will give new
directions of the greatest consequence to human affairs; and it may not be too
extravagant to expect that (should civil governments throw no obstacles in the way)
the progress of improvement will not cease till it has excluded from the earth most of
its worst evils, and restored that Paradisaical state which, according to the Mosaic
History, preceded the present state.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 68 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[*]These are the words of Montesquieu.
[*]The lands, forests, imposts, &c. &c. which once formed the patrimonyof the
crown in England,bore most of the expences of government. It is well for this
kingdom that the extravagance of the crown has been the means of alienating this
patrimony, for the consequence has been making the crown dependent on the people.
But in America such a patrimony would be continentalproperty, capable of being
applied only to public purposes, in the way which the public (or its delegates) would
approve.
[*]One penny put out at our Saviour’s birth to 5 per cent.compound interest would,
before this time, have increased to a greater sum than would be contained in two
hundred millions of earths all solid gold. But, if put out to simpleinterest, it would
have amounted to no more than seven shillings and six-pence.All governments which
alienate fundsdestined for reimbursements, chuse to improve money in the lastrather
than the firstof these ways.
[*]See the Postscriptto a pamphlet, entitled, The State of the Finances of the
Kingdom, at signing the Preliminary Articles of Peacein January 1783, printed for
Mr. Cadell.
[†]When not thus guarded, public funds become the worst evils, by giving to the
rulers of states a command of revenue for the purposes of corruption.
[*]This is an inconvenience attending civilas well as ecclesiasticalestablishments,
which has been with great wisdom guarded against in the new Americanconstitutions,
by appointing that there shall be a revisal of them at the end of certain terms. This will
leave them always open to improvement, without any danger of those convulsions
which have usually attended the corrections of abuses when they have acquired a
sacredness by time.
[*]The North Carolinaconstitution also orders that there shall be no establishment of
any one religious church or denomination in that State in preference to any other.
[*]The majority of the British House of Commons is chosen by a few thousandsof
the dregs of the people, who are constantly paid for their votes.—It is not ridiculous
to call a country so governed free?—See a striking account of the State of the British
Parliamentary Representation, in Mr. Burgh’s Political Disquisitions, Vol. I. p. 39,
&c.
It was proposed to the convention for settling the Massachusett’s constitution, that
oneof the two houses which constitute the general courtof that State should be a
representation of persons, and the othera representation of property;and that the
body of the people should appoint only the electorsof their representatives.—By such
regulations corruption in the choice of representatives would be rendered less
practicable; and it seems the best method of concentering in the Legislature as much
as possible of the virtue and ability of the State, and of making its voice always an
expression of the will and best sense of the people.—On this plan also, the number of
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 69 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
members constituting a Legislature might be much lessened.—This is a circumstance
of particular consequence, to which the united States, in some future period of their
increase, will find it necessary to attend. It has been often justly observed, that a
legislative body very numerous is little better than a mob.
[*]In this State, and also the State of Massachusetts, New Jersey,&c. any attempt to
canvas, or even the expression of a wish to be chosen, will exclude a candidate from a
seat in the House of Representatives. The same is true of any stain on his moral
character.
[*]I do not mean by Bishopsany officers among Christians merely spiritual;but
Lords spiritual, as distinguished from Lords temporal, or Clergymen raised to
preeminence, and invested with civil honours and authority, by a State establishment.
I must add, that by what is here said I do not mean to express a generalpreference of
a republicanconstitution of government. There is a degree of political degeneracy
which unfits for such a constitution. Britain, in particular, consists too much of the
high and the low, (of scum and dregs) to admit of it. Nor will it suit America,should it
ever become equally corrupt.
[*]The love of our country is then only a noble passion when it engages us to
promote the internalhappiness of our country, and to defend its rights and liberties
against domestic and foreign invasion, maintaining at the same time an equal regard
to the rights and liberties of other countries. But this has not been its most common
effects. On the contrary, it has in general been nothing but a spirit of rivalship
between different communities, producing contention and a thirst for conquest and
dominion.—What is his countryto a Russian,a Turk, a Spaniard,&c. but a spot
where he enjoys no right, and is disposed of by owners as if he was a beast? And what
is his loveto his country but an attachment to degradation and slavery?—What was
the love of their country among the Jewsbut a wretched partiality for themselves and
a proud contempt for other nations? Among the Romans also what was it, however
great in many of its exertions, but a principle holding together a band of robbers in
their attempts to crush all liberty but their own?—Christianity has wisely omitted to
recommend this principle. Had it done this, it would have countenanced a vice among
mankind.—It has done what is infinitely better—It has recommended universal
benevolence.
[*]See a remonstrance, full of energy, directed to the united States on this Subject, by
a very warm and able friend to the rights of mankind, in a Tract, entitled—Fragment
of an original Letter on the Slavery of the Negroes;written in the year 1776, but
published in 1784, by Thomas Day, Esq.
[*]See the Notes annexed to the Translation of this Letter.
[*]What is here said refers to the following account of M. Turgot’s administration in
the secondtract on Civil Liberty and the War with America,p. 150, &c. “A new reign
produced a new minister of finance in France,whose name will be respected by
posterity for a set of measures as new to the politicalworld, as any late discoveries in
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 70 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
the system of nature have been to the philosophicalworld—Doubtful in their
oparation, as all untried measures must be, but distinguished by their tendency to lay a
solid foundation for endless peace, industry, and a general enjoyment of the gifts of
nature, arts and commerce—The edicts issued during his administration exhibit
indeed a phænomenon of the most extraordinary kind. An absolute King rendering a
voluntary account to his subjects, and inciting his people to think;a right which it has
been the business of all absolute princes and their ministers to extinguish.—In these
edicts the King declared in the most distinct terms against a bankruptcy, &c. while the
minister applied himself to increase every public resource by principles more liberal
than France,or any part of Europe,ever had in serious contemplation.—It is much to
be regretted, that the opposition he met with and the intrigues of a court should have
deprived the world of those lights, which must have resulted from the example of
such an administration.” In this passage I had, in the first edition, mentioned
improperly Mr. Turgot’s want of address among the other causes of his dismission
from power. This occasioned a letter from him to inform me of the true reasons of his
dismission, and begun that correspondence, of which this letter is a part, and which
continued till his death.—It may not be improper to add here, that his successor was
Mr. Necker,author of the interesting Treatise on the Administration of the Finances of
France just published; and that in the passage just quoted, the following notice is
taken of this appointment.—“After a short interval, a nomination, in some respects
still more extraordinary, took place in the Court of France.A court, which a few years
since was distinguished by its bigotry and intolerance, has raised a protestant,the
subject of a small but virtuous republic, to a decisive lead in the regulation of its
finances. It is to be presumed that so singular a preference will produce an equally
singular exertion of integrity and talents.”
[*]See Mr. Burke’s Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol.
[(†) ]It is the Constitution of Delwarethat imposes the test here meant. That of the
Jerseys,with a noble liberality, orders that there shall never in that Province be any
establishment of any one religious sect in preference to another, and that all
Protestants of all persuasions shall enjoy equal rights and privileges.
[*]This seems to be a particular of much consequence. The great inequality now
existing, and which is likely to increase, between the different States, is a very
unfavourable circumstance; and the embarassment and danger to which it exposes the
union ought to be guarded against as far as possible in laying out future States.
[*]This has been oncetrue of the inhabitants of New-England,but it is not so now.
See p. 47.
[*]This refers to the following words (taken from Mr. Justamond’s translation of the
Abbe Raynal’s History of the European Settlements) in the Title-page to the Second
Tract on Civil Liberty—“Should the morals of the English be perverted by
luxury—should they lose their colonies by restraining them, &c. they will be
enslaved. They will become insignificant and contemptible; and Europe will not be
able to shew the world onenation in which she can pride herself.”
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 71 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[*]In compliance with Mr. Turgot’s desire, this letter was kept private during his life.
Since his death I have thought the publication of it a duty which I owe to his memory,
as well as to the United States and the world. I can add, with much satisfaction, that
my venerable friend and the excellent Philosopher and Satesman whose name
introduces this letter; and also, that some intimate friends of Mr. Turgot’s, who have
been consulted on this subject, concur with me in this sentiment.
Note omitted in Page 52.
The imperfection of realknowledge may often produce unreasonable
incredulity.—Had the best Philosophers been told a few years ago, “that there existed
fishes which had the command of lightening,and which used it to kill their prey,”
they would have scouted the information as absurd and ridiculous.
[*]22l.4s. 6d.
[*]See table 1st annexed to this Will.
[†]Nearly a guinea.
[‡]Four pounds nine shillings.
[§]See table 1st and 2d.
[*]See the approbations of the Universities of Alcala, Salamanca, Ingolstadt,
Fribourg in Brisgaw, Mayence, Cologne and Treves, printed at the end of a Treatise
upon Usury and Interest, Lyon, Bruysel-Ponthus,1776, in 12mo. The first five of
these approbations have been deposited in the archives of the consulship of the town
of Lyons.
[†]See table 2d and 4th.
[*]See table 5th.
[†]No good men will ever write against religion and government. On the contrary;
they will do all they can to render them greater blessings, by spreading just notions of
them, and clearing them from those abuses and corruptions by which usurpers and
hypocrites have made them the means of enslaving and debasing mankind.
[*]See table 6th.
[†]The Executors have not yet determined whether they shall publish this Memorial,
which is very copious, and contains some ideas that may claim originality. The more
immediate concerns of their executorship have not yet afforded them time for
examining the whole of it. Besides, there can be no necessity of hurrying the
publication, inasmuch as the towns of which it treats are not to be built till the end of
four centuries.
[*]176 thousands of millions sterling.—See tables 2d and 7th.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 72 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788

Online Library of Liberty: Observations on the Importance of the American Revolution, and the Means
of Making it a Benefit to the World
[†]There have been, it is said, even in England Lords of the Admiralty who could not
count,and Chancellors of the Exchequerwho could not read figures.
[*]The parable of the good Samaritan directs every man to look upon every man as
his neighbour,without regarding his country or religion. M. Ricardappears to have
attended to this divine instruction. But Englishmenprobably forget it, when, in their
public devotions, they pray that God would abate the prideand assuage the maliceof
their enemies.
[*]France, undoubtedly, possesses some of the best naturaladvantages, and is a great
kingdom. But it wants the first of all advantages. It wants a free constitution of
government. It wants civil and religious liberty. Britain enjoys these blessings; and
this, though less than a fourthof France in extent and population, gives it a vast
preeminence. May these blessings he soon recovered by one of these countries, and
never lost by the other.—Translator’s note.
[*]During the printing of this Will, the Gazette de Franceannounced a legacy of the
same kind, which will prove to our readers that those ideas may sometimes be
realized. “We read in some of our papers a very singular fact. Judge Normand, of
Norwich, who died 1724, made a will, in which he bequeathed 4000l, sterling towards
building in 60 years, from that time, a charity school, to the founding of which the
principal, and its accumulating interest, during this period, should be appropriated.
His further dispositions fix the number of scholars to 120, regulates their meals for
every day in the week, each to have for dinner on Sunday a pound of roast beef, and
in the evening ten ounces of plum-pudding. He invests the management of this school
in the Bishop, the Chancellor, the Dean, the four members for the city and county, and
eight clergymen. The period determined upon for the execution of this Will expired in
the month of May, and the accumulated sum amounts to 74,000l. sterling.”
Gazette de France, Friday, Aug.13, 1784. No. 65.
[*]It would have been much better if M. Ricardhad allowed a house for every family,
which would have made the number of houses about 30000.
PLL v6.0 (generated September, 2011) 73 http://oll.libertyfund.org/title/1788