/,./.  I. 


THE 

FEMALE 

SPECTATOR. 

B  Y 
Mrs  ELIZA  HAYWOOD. 


FOUR    VOLUMES. 


VOLUME    I. 


G    L    A    S    G    O    \V: 

PRINTED  AND  SOLD  BY  R. 
AND  A.  DUNCAN. 

MDCCLXXV. 


T  0 

^c 

HER     G  R 

A  C'E 

THE 

D    U    G   H 

E    S 

S 

O  F 

LEE 

D     S. 

May  it  pleafeyour  GRACEO 

AS  the  chief  view  in  publifhing  thefb 
Monthly  Effays  is  to  re&ify  fome 
errors,  which,  fmall  as  they  may  feem  at 
firft,  may,  if  indulged,  grow  up  into 
greater,  till  they  at  laft  become  Vices, 
and  make  all  the  misfortunes  of  our 
lives ;  it  was  necefiary  to  put  them  un- 
der the  protection  of  a  lady,  not  only  of 

an  unblemiihcd  conduct,  but  alib  of  an 
VOL.  I.  A 

d/Sf\t 


D  E  D  I  G  A  T  I  O  N. 

exalted  virtue,  whofe  example  may  in- 
force  the  precepts  they  contain,  <and  is 
herfelf  a  fhining  pattern,  for  others  to 
copy  after,  of  all  thofe  perfections  I  en- 
deavour to  recommend. 
;"••' Jt  is  not,  therefore,  madam,  that  yot 
are  defcended  from  a  Marlborough  or  a 
•Godolphin,  dear  as  thofe  patriot  names 
will  ever  be,  while  any  fenfe  of  liberty 
remains  in  Britons;  nor  on  the  account 
of  the  -high  rank  you  hold  in  th£  world, 
nor  for  thofe  charms  with  which  Nature 
has  ib  profufely ,  adorned  your  perfon ; 
but  for  thofe  innate  graces,  whicb,  no 
anceftry  can  give,  no  titles  can  embellifh, 
nor  no  beauty  atone  for  the  want  of,  that 
your  Grace  has  an  u&difputed  right  to 
this  offering,  as  the  point  .aimed  at  by  the 
work  itfelf,  gives  it,  in  fome  meafure,  a 
claim  to  your  acceptance. 

That  promife,  which  the  firil  years  of 

life  gave  of  a  glorious  maturity,  we  have 

.  feen  compleated  Iqng  before  your  Grace 


D  E  D  I  CTAT  I  O  N, 

arrived  at  an  age,  which  in  others  is  re- 
quilite  to  ripen  wit  into  wifdom,  and 
conciliate  the  fparkling  ideas  of  the  one, 
with  the  correcting  judgment  of  the  o- 
ther. — We  beheld  with  admiration,  how 
Reafon  out-ftripped  Nature,  even  in  the 
moft  minute  circumftances  and  actions  j 
.  but  the  crown  of  all,  was- the  happy 
choice  of  a  partner  in  that  ftate  which  is 

the  chief  end  of  our  beings. There 

fhone  your  penetration,  when  among  fo 
many  admirers,  you  tingled  out  him  wHo 

alone  was  worthy  of  you. One,  who 

great  as  he  is,  is  yet  more  good  than 
great ;  and  who  has  given  fuch  inflances 
how  much  it  is  in  the  power  of  virtue  to 
ennoble  nobility,  as  all  muft  admire, 
though-few  I  fear  will  imitate. 

Marriage,  too  long  the  jcft  of  fools, 
and  proftituted  to  the  moft  bafe  and  for- 
did aims,  to  you,  illuftrious.  pair  !  owes 
its  recovered  fame,  and  proves  its  inflitu- 

tion  is  indeed  Divine. 
A  a 


DEDICATION. 

But  this  is  no  more  than  what  every 
one  is  full  of;  and  in  intreating  your 
Grace's  protection  to  the  following 
flieets,  I  can  only  boaft  of  baing  one  a- 
jnong  the  millions  who  pray,  that  length 
of  days  and  uninterrupted  health  may 
continue  that  happinefs,  to  which  no* 
thing  can  be  added,  and  that 


With  the  moft  profound  Duty  and  Submiffion>. 
May  it  pleafe  Your  GRACED 
Your  GRACE'S, 
Moft  humble, 

Moft  obedient,  and  moft 
Faithfully  devoted  Servant, 

The  FEMALE  SPECTATOR- 


T    H    2 

FEMALE  SPECTATOR. 


B    O     O    K        L 


IT  is  very  much-  by  the  choice  we  make  of." 
fubjr&s  for  our  entertainment,  that  the  refin- 
ed t:ut:  uifimguilhes  itfclf  from  the  vulgar 
and  more'grofs.  Reading  is  univerfally  allowed" 
to  be  one  of  the  molt  improving  as  well  as  agree- 
able amutements;  but. then  to  render  it  fo,  one 
fhould,  among  the  number  of  books  which  are 
perpetually  iffuing  from  the  prefs,  endeavour  to 
finglc  out  fuch  as  promife  to  be  moll  conducive 
to  thofe  ends.  In.  order  to  be  as  little  deceived,  as 
pomble,  I,  for  my  own  pan,  love  to  get  as  weli'l 
acquainted  as  I  can  with  an  author,  before  I  run. 
the  riik  of  lofhig  my  time  in  perufing  his  workj 
and  as. I  doubt  not  but  mod  people  are  of  this  way 
of  thinking,  I  (hall,  in  imitation  of  my  learned" 
Brother,  of  ever  precious  memory,  give  fome  ac-  • 
count  of  what  I  am,  and  thofe  concerned  with  mex 
in  this  undertaking ;  and  likewife  of  the  chief  intent . 
cf  the  Lucubrations  hereafter  communicated,  that 
the  reader,  on  cafling  his  eye  over  the  four  or  fi-ve 
fir  ft  pages,  may  judge  how  far  the  book  may,  or 
may  not  be  qualified  to  entertain  him,  and  either, 
accept,  or  throw  it  afide  as  he  thinks  proper :  And  . 
4c;c  I  promife,  that  in  the  pictures  I  fliall  give  of 
A3, 


2  THE  FEMALE          B.I, 

myfelf  andaflbciates,!  will  draw  no  fiatteringlines, 
aflume  no  perfection  that  we  are  not  in  reality  pof- 
feffed  of,  nor  attempt  to  fhadow  over  any  defect 
with  an  artificial  glofs. 

Asa  proof  of  my  fmcerity,  I  (hall,  in  the  firft 
place,  aflure  him,  that  for  my  own  part  I  never 
was  a  beauty,  and  am  now  very  far  from  being' 
young;  (a  confefllon  he  will  find  few  of  my  fex 
ready  to  make :)  I  fhall  alfo  acknowledge,  that  I 
have  run  through  as  many  fcenes  of  vanity  and 
folly  as  the  grcateft  coquet  of  them  all. — Orel's,, 
equipage,  and  flattery,  were  the  idols  of  my  heart. 
• — I  fhould.have  thought  that  day  loft,  which 
did  not  prefent  me  with  fome  new  opportunity  of 
JhewingSnyfelf.  My  life,  for  fome  years,  was 
n  continued  round  of  what  I  then  called  pleafure, 
and  my  whole  time  engroffed  by  a  hurry  of  pro- 
mifcuous  diverfion-s.  But  whatever  inconveni- 
cncies  fuch  a  manner  of  conduct  has  brought  up- 
on myfelf,  I  have  this  confolation,  to  think  that 
the  public  may  reap  fome  benefit  from  it: — The 
company  I  kept  was  not,  indeed,  always  fo  well 
chofen  as  it  ought  to  have  been,  for  the  fake  of 
my  own  intereit  or  reputation;  but  then  it  was 
general, and  by  confequencefurnifhed  me,.not  only 
with  the  knowledge  of  many  occurrences,  which 
c-therwife  1  had  been  ignorant  of;  but  alfo  enabled 
jiie,  when  the  too  great  vivacity  of  my  nature  be- 
taine  tempered  with  reflection,,  to  fee  into  the  fc- 
cret  fprings  which  gave  rife  to  the  actions  I  had  ei- 
ther heard  or  been  witnefs  of; — to  judge  of  the 
various  paffions  of  the  human  mindvand  difiinguifh, 
ihofe  imperceptible  degrees  by  which  they  become 
matters  of  the  heart,  and  attain  the  dominion  over 
reafon. — A  thoufand  odd  adventures^  which,  »£ 


B.  I  SPECTATOR.  3 

the  time  they  happened,  made  flight  impreffion  on 
me,  and  feemed  to  dwell  no  longer  on  my  mind 
than  the  wonder  they  occafioned,  now  rife  frefh 
to  my  remembrance;  v/ith  this  advantage,  that 
the  my  fiery  1  then,  for  want  of  attention,  imagined 
they  contained,  is  entirely  vanifhed,  and  1  find  it 
cafy  to  account  for  the  caufe  by  the  confequence. 

With  this  experience,  added  to  a  genius  to- 
lerably extenfive,  and  an  education  more  liberal 
than  is  ordinarily  allowed  to  perfons  of  my  fex,  I 
flattered  myfelf  that  it  might  be  in  my  power  to  be 
in  fomemeafure  both  ufeful  and  entertaining  to  the 
public;  and  this  thought  was  ib  foothing  to  thofe 
remains  of  vanity,  not  yet  wholly  extinguished 
in  me,  that  I  refolved  to  purfue  it,  and  imme- 
diately began  to  confider  by  what  method  I  fhould 
be  moft  likely  to  fucceed.  To  confine  myfelf  to 
any  one  fubjedt,  1  knew  could  pleafe  but  one  kind 
of  tafte,  and  my  ambition  was  to  be  as  univerfally 
read  as  poffible.  From  my  obfervation  of  human 
nature,  I  found  that  curiofity  had  more  or  lefs  a 
fhare  in  every  breaft;  and  my  bufmefs  therefore, 
was  to  hit  this  reigning  humour  in  fuch  a  manner, 
as  that  the"  gratification  it  fhould  receive  from 
being  made  acquainted  with  other  people's  affairs,, 
might  at  the  fame  time  teach  every  one  to  regulate 
their  own. 

Having  agreed  within  myfelf  on  this  impor- 
tant point,  1  commenced  author,  by  fetting  down 
many  things,  which  being  pleafing  to  myfelf,  I 
imagined  would  be  fp  to  others;  but  on  examining 
them  the  next  day,  I  found  an  infinite  deficiency 
both  in  matter  and  fiyle,  and  that  there  was  an 
abfolute  neceflity  for  me  to  call  in  to  my  af- 
fiance fuch  of  my  acquaintance  as  were  yual> 


4  THE  FEMAL-E  B.  I. 

fied  for  that  purpofe. — The  firft,  that  occurred  to- 
me, I  ihall  diftinguifh  by  the  name  of  MIRA,  a 
lady  defcended  from  a  family  to  which  wit  feems 
hereditary,  married  to  a  gentleman  every  way 
worthy  of  fo  excellent  a  wife,  and  with  whom  ihe 
lives  in  fo  perfect  a  harmony,  that  having  nothing- 
to  ruffle  the  compofure  of  her  foul,  or  diflurb  thofe- 
fparlding  ideas  {he,  received. from  nature,  and  edu- 
cation, left  me  no  room  to  doubt  that  what  the 
t  favoured  me  with  would  be  acceptable  to  the  pub- 
lic.— The  next  is  a  Widow  of  quality,  who  not 
having,  buried  her  vivacity  in  the  tomb  of  her 
lord,  continues  to  make  one  in  all  the  modiih  di- 
verfions  of  the  times,  fo  far,  I  mean,  as  ihe  finds 
them  confident  with  innocence  and  honour;  and  as- 
dic is  far  from  having  the  lead  auilerity  in  her  be- 
haviour, nor  is  riged  to  the  failings  (he  is  wholly 
free  from  herfelf,  thofe  of  her  acquaintance,  who. 
had  been  lefs  circumfpecl:,  fcruple  not  to  make  her 
the  confidante  of  fecrets  they  conceal  from  all  the, 
world  befide. — The.  third,  is  the  daughter  of  a, 
wealthy  merchant,  charming  as  an  angel,  but  en- 
dued with,  fo.mauyaccomplifhments,  that  to  thofe 
who  know  her  truly,  her  beauty  is  the  lead  diftin- 
guiihed  part  of  her.  This  fine  young  creature  I 
ihall  call  Eu  PHROSiNEjfince  (lie  has  all  the  chear-* 
fulnefs  and  fvveetnefs  aicribed  to  that  goddefs. 

Thefe  three  approved  my  defign,  aflured  me  of 
all  the  help  they  could  afford,  and  foon  gave  a 
proof  of  it  in  bringing  their  feveral  effays j  but  as 
thereader,  provided  the  entertainment  be  agreeable,, 
will  not  be  interefted  from  which  quarter  it  comes, 
whatever  productions  I  fhallbe  favoured  with  fronu 
thefe  ladies,  or  any  others,  I  may  hereafter  corref-* 
pond  with,  will  be  exhibited  under  the  general  titl% 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  5 

of  THE  FEMALE  SPECTATOR;  and  how  many 
contributors  foever  there  may  happen  to  be  to  the 
vork,  they  are  to  be  confidered  only  as  feveral 
members  of  one  body,  of  which  I  am  the  mouth. 
It  is  alfo  highly  proper  I  mould  acquaint  the 
town,  that  to  fecure  an  eternal  fund  of  intelligence, 
fpies  are  placed,  not  only  in  all  the  places  of  refort 
in  and  about  this  great  metropolis,  but  at  Bath, 
Tunbridge,  and  the  Spaw,  and  means  found  out  to 
extend  my  fpeculations  even  as  far  asFrance,  Rome 
Germany,  and  other  foreign  parts  j  fo  that  nothing 
curious  or  worthy  remark  can  efcape  mej  and  this 
I  look  upon  to  be  a  more  effectual  way  of  penetra- 
ting into  the  myfteries  of  the  alcove,  the  cabinet, 
or  field,  than  if  I  had  the  power  of  invifibility,  or 
could,  with  a  wifh,  tranfport  myfelf  where-ever  I 
pleafed,  fince  with  the  aid  of  thofe  fupernatural 
gifts,  I  could  ftill  be  in  no  more  than  one  place  at 
a  tkne;  whereas  now,  by  tumbling  over  a  few  pa- 
pers from  my  emiflaries,  I  have  all  the  fecrets  of 
Europe,  at  lead  fuch  of  them  as  are  proper  for  my 
purpofe,  laid  open  at  one  view. 

I  would,  by  no  means,  however,  have  what  I 
fay  be  conftrued  into  a  defign  of  gratifying  a  vi- 
cious propenfity  of  propagating  fcandal:  who- 
ever fits  down  to  read  me  with  this  view,  will  find 
themfelves  miftaken;  for  though  I  (hall  bring  real 
fad~ls  on  the  ftage,  I  fhall  conceal  the  actors  names 
under  fuch  as  will  be  conformable  to  their  cha- 
racters; my  intention  being  only  to  expofe  the 
vice,  not  the  perfon. — Nor  mall  I  confine  myfelf 
to  modern  tranfa&ions :  whenever  I  find  any 
example  among  the  anticnts,  which  may  ferve  to 
illuftrate  the  topic  I  fhall  happen  to  be  upon,  I 
ihall  make  no  fcrunle  to  infert  it.  An  inftance  of 


6  THE   F  E  M  A  L  E  B.  I. 

(hining  virtue  in  any  age,,  can  never  be  too  often 
propofed  as  a  pattern,  nor  the  fatality  of  mifcon- 
dutl  too  much  imprefled  on  the  minda  of  our 
youth  of  both  fexes-;  and  as  the  fole  aim  of  the 
following  pages  is  to  reform  the  faulty,  and  give 
an  innocent  amufement  to  thofe  who  are  not  fo,  all 
poflible  care  will  be  taken  to  avoid  every  thing  that 
might  ferve  as  food  for  the  venom  of  malice  and 
ill-nature.  Whoever,  therefore,  (hall  pretend  to 
fix  on  any  particular  perfon  the  blame  of  actions 
.  they  may  happen  to  find  recorded  here,  or  make 
what  they  call  a  key  to  thefe  lucubrations,  muft 
expect  to  fee  themfelves  treated  in  the  next  publi- 
cation with  all  the  fevsrity  fo  unfair  a  proceeding, 
merits. 

And  now,  having  faid  as  much  as  I  think  need- 
ful of  this  undertaking,!  fhall,  without  being  either, 
too  greatly  confident,  or  too  anxious  for  the  fuc- 
cefs,  fubmit  it  to  the  public  cenfure. 

"  Of  all  the  paffions  given  us  from  above, . 

"  The  nobleft,  fofteft,  and  the  beft,  is  love,.- 
fays  a  juftly  celebrated  poet;  and  I  readily  agree 
that  love  in  itfelf,  when  under  the  direction  of 
reafon,  harmonizes  the  foul,  and  gives  it  a  gentle, 
generous  turn  j  but  I  can  by  no  means  approve  of 
fuch  definitions  of  that  paffion  as  we  find  in  plays, 
novels,  and  romances.  In  nioft  of  thefe  writings, 
the  authors  feem  to  lay  out  all  their  art  in  ren- 
dering that  character  moft  intercfting,  which  moft 
fets  at  defiance  all  the  obligations,  by  the  ftricl; 
obfervarice  of  which,  love  alone  can  become  a 
virtue.  They  drefs  their  Cupid  up  in  rofes,  call 
him  the  god  of  foft  dcfires  and  ever-fpringing  joys, 
yet  at  the  fame  time  give  him  the  vindictive  fury, 
and  the  rage  of  Mars  ;  mew  him  impatient  of 


8.  i.        SPECTATOR;  7 

controul,  and  trampling  over  all  the  ties  of  duty, 
friendmip,  or  natural  affe&ion,  yet  make  the  mo- 
tive fandify  the  crime.  How  fatal,  how  per- 
nicious to  a  young  and  unexperienced  mind  muft 
be  fuch  maxims,  efpecially  when  drefled-up  in  all 
the  pomp  of  words!  The  beauty  of  the.expreffion 
fleals  upon  the  fenfes,  and  every  mifchief,  every 
*roe  that  love  occafions,  appears  a  charm.— 
Thofe  who  feel  the  pafiion  are  fo  far  from  endea- 
vouring to  repel  its  force,  or  being  afhamed  of 
their  attachment,  however  oppofite  to  reafon,  that 
they  indulge,and  take  a  pride  in  turning  into  ridi- 
cule the  remonftrances  of  their  more  difcerning 
friends.  But  what  is  yet  more  prepofterous,  and 
more  evidently  (hews  the  ill  effects  of  writing  in 
this  manner,  is,  that  we  often  fee  girls  too  young 
cither  to  be  addrefled  to  on  the  fcore  o(  love,  or 
even  to  know  what  is  meant  by  the  paffion,  affecl: 
the  languifhment  they  read  of, — roll  their  eyes, 
fjgh,  fold  their  arms,  neglect  every  ufeful  learn- 
ing, and  attend  to  nothing  but  acquiring  the  re- 
putation of  being  enough  a  woman  to  know  all  the 
pains  and  delicacies  of  love. 

Mifs  Tendcrilla  is  one  of  thofe  I  have  defcrib- 
cd:  (lie  was  the  other  day  invited  to  a  concert, 
and  as  foon  as  the  mufic  began  to  ftrike  up,  cried 
out  in  a  kind  of  dying  tone,  yet  loud  enough  to 
be  heard  by  a  great  part  of  the  aflcmbly, 

"  If  mufic  be  the  food  of  love,  play  on." 
A  young  lady  happened  to  be  with  her,  who  is 
fuppofed  to  be  very  near  entering  into  the  marriage 
ftate,  but  contents  herfelf  with  difcovering  what 
fcntiments  fhe  is  pofiefled  of  in  favour  of  her  in- 
tcndedbridegroomonlytothofeintereftedin  them. 
She  biuflied  extremely  at  the  extravagance  of  her 


8  THE   FEMALE  B.  T. 

companion,  and  the  more  fo,  as  fhe  found  the 
eyes  of  every  one  turned  upon  her,  and  by  their 
fmiles  and  whifpers  to  each  other,  fhe  wed  that 
they  imagined  Mifs  hadburfl  into  this  exclamation 
merely  on  her  account.  A  fmart  gentleman,  on 
the  next  feat  to  them,  took  this  opportunity  of 
rallying  her  very  wittily,  as  he  thought,  on  the  dif- 
covery  her  young  confidante  had  made;  and  the 
poor  lady  was  in  the  utmofl  confufion,  until  fhe 
who  had  occafioned  it,  being  vexed  to  find  what  me 
had  faid  fo  much  iniftaken,  and  that  no  notice  was 
taken  of  herfelf,  behaved  in  fuch  a  manner  as  left 
no  room  to  doubt  which  of  them  was  the  proper 
object  of  ridicule. 

How  eafy  were  it  now  for  a  defigning  fortune- 
hunter  to  make  a  prey  of  this  bib-and-apron  he- 
roine!— The  lefs  qualified  he  was  to  render  her 
choice  of  him  approved,  and  the  more  averfe  her 
friends  appeared  to  fuch  a  match,  the  more  would 
fhe  glory  in  a  noble  obftinacy  of  contemning  their 
advice,and  facrificing  her  perfon  and  fortune  to  an 
imaginary  paflion  for  him ;  and  one  has  no  need  of 
being  a  very  great  prophet  to  foretel,  that  if  fhe  is 
not  fpeedily  removed  from  thofe  who  at  prefent 
have  the  caie  of  her,  and  fome  other  methods 
taken  than  fuch  as  have  hitherto  been  made  ufe 
of,  to  give  her  a  more  rational  way  of  thinking, 
that  wealth  her  frugal  parents  hoard  up,  in  order 
to  puichafe  for  her  a  laiting  happinefs,  will  only 
prove  the  bait  for  her  deftrudtion. 

1  am  forry  to  obferve,  that  of  late  years  this 
humour  has  been  flrangely  prevalent  among  our 
young  ladies,  fome  of  whom  are  fcarce  entered  in- 
to <h -ir  teens  before  they  grow  impatient  for  admi- 
ration, and  to  be  diitinguifhed  in  love-fongs  and 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  9 

verfes, — expect  to  have  a  great  buftle  made  about 
them,  and  he  who  firft  attempts  to  pcrfuade  them 
he  is  a  lover,  bids  very  fair  for  carrying  his  point. 
Theeagernefs  of  their  willies  tobeaddrefTcd,  gives 
charms  to  the  addrefs  itfelf,  which  otherwife  it 
would  not  have;  and  hence  it  follows,  that  when  a 
young  creature  has  fuffered  herfelf  to  fall  a  victim. 
to  the  artifices  of  her  pretended  lover,  and  her  own 
giddy  whim,  and  is  afterwards  convinced  of  her 
error,  {he  looks  back  with  no  lefs  wonder  than 
iliame  on  her  pad  conduit,  detefts  the  object  of 
•her  former  imaginary  paffion,  and  wifhes  nothing 
more  than  to  be  eternally  rid1  of  the  prefence  o£ 
him  (lie  once  with  fo  much  earneftnefs  purfued. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  from  the  inconstancy  of 
nature  which  men  charge  upon  our  fex,  but  from 
that  romantic  vein  which  makes  us  fometimes  i- 
magine  otirfelves  lovers  before  AVC  are  fo,  that  we 
frequently  run  fuch  lengths  to  fhake  off  a  yoke 
we  have  fo  precipitately  put  on. — When  once  we 
truly  love,  we  rarely  change : — we  bear  the  frowns 
of  fortune  with  fortitude  and  patience:  —  we  re- 
pent not  of  the  choice  we  have  made,  whatever 
we  fuffer  by  it;  and  nothing  but  a  long  continued 
feries  of  flights  and  ill  ufage  from  the  object  of  our 
affections  can  render  him  lefs  dear. 

To  be  well  convinced  of  the  fincerity.  of  the 
man  they  are  about  to  marry,  is  a  maxim,  with 
g;eat  juftice,  always  recommended  to  a  young 
Ja.ly;  but  I  fay  it  is  no  lefs  material  for  her  future 
happinefs,  as  well  as  that  of  her  intended  partner, 
that  (he  fhould  be  well  allured  of  her  own  heart, 
and  examine  with  the  utmoft  care,  whether  it  be 
re.il  tendcrnefs,  or  a  bare  liking  (he  at  prefent  feels 
for  him;  and  as  this  is  not  to  be  done  all  at  once, 

VOL.  I.  B 


io  THE   FEMALE  B.  I. 

I  cannot  approve  of hafty  marriages,  or  before  per- 
fons  are  of  fufficient  years  to  be  fuppofed  capable 
of  knowing  their  own  minds. 

Could  fourteen  have  the  power  of  judging  of 
itfelf,  or  for  itfelf,  who  that  knew  the  beautiful 
IVlartefia  at  that  age,  but  would  have  depended  on 
her  conduct! — Martefia,  defcended  of  the  moft 
illuflrious  race,  pofleffed  of  all  that  dignity  of  fen- 
timent  befitting  her  high  birth,  endued  by  nature 
with  a  furprifing  wit,,  judgment,  and  penetration, 
and  improved  by  every  aid  of  education! — Mar- 
tefia, the  wonder  and  delight  of  all  who  faw  or 
heard  her,  gave  the  admiring  world  the  greateft 
expectations  that  (he  would  one  day  be  no  lefs  ce- 
lebrated for  all  thofe  virtues  which  render  amiable 
the  conjugal  fhite,  than  fhe  at  that  time  was  for 
every  other  perfection  that  does  honour  to  the  fex. 

Yet  how,  alas,  did  all  thefe  charming  hopes  va~ 
niih  into  air!  Many  noble  youths,  her  equals  in 
birth  and  fortune,  watched  her  increafe  of  years  for 
declaring  a  pa  flic  n,  which  they  feared  as  yet  would 
be  rejefted  by  thofe  who  had  the  difpofal  of  her; 
but  what  their  refpeci  and  timidity  forbad  them  to 
attempt,  a  more  daring  and  unfufpe£ted  rival  ven- 
tured at,  and  fucceeded.  in. — Her  unexperienced 
heart  approved  hisperfon,  and  was  pleafed  with  the 
proteflations  he  made  to  her  of  it. — In  fine,  the 
novelty  of  being  addreflcd  in  that  manner,  gave  a 
double  grace  to  all  he  faid,  raid  fhe  never  thought 
herfelf  fo  happy  a.s  in  his  converfation. — His  fre- 
quent vifits  at  length  were  taken  notice  of;  he  was 
denied  the  privilege  of  feeing  her,  and  fhe  was  no 
longer  permitted  to  go  out  without  being  accom- 
panied by  fome  perfon  who  was  to  be  a  fpy  upon 
iicr  adieus. — Shs  ha.t!  a -great  fpirit,  impatient  of 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  n 

controuI,anJ  this  reftraiut  ferved  only  to  heighten 
the  inclination  (lie  before  had  to  favour  him: — « 
(he  indulged  the  moft  romantic  ideas  of  his  merit 
and  his  love: — her  own  flying  fancy  invented  a 
thoufand  melancholy  foliloquies,  and  fet  them 
down  as  made  by  him  in  this  feparation.  It  is  not* 
indeed,  to  be  doubted,  but  that  he  was  very  much 
mortified  at  the  impediment  he  found  in  theprofe*. 
cution  of  his  courtihip;  but  whether  he  took  this 
method  of  disburdening  his  affliction,  neither  me 
nor  any  body  elfe  could  be  allured.  It  cannot, 
however,  be  denied,  but  that  he  purfued  means 
much  more  efficacious  for  the  attainment  of  his 
wiflies.  By  bribes,  promifes,  and  intreaties,  he 
prevailed  on  a  perfon  who  came  frequently  to  the 
boufer  to  convey  his  letters  to  her,  and  bring  baclc 
her  anfwers.  This  correfpondence  was,  perhaps,- 
of  greater  fei  vice  to  him,  than  had  the  freedom  ot 
their  interviews  not  been  prevented;  ilie  con- 
fented  to  be  his,  a-nd  to  make  good  her  word,  ven- 
tured her  life,  by  descending  from  a  two  pair  of 
flairs  window,  by  the  help  of  quilt,  blankets,  and 
other  things  fattened  to  it  at  the  dead  of  night. — . 
His  coach  and  fix  waited  to  receive  her  at  the  end 
of  the  ftreet,  which  reaching  foon  after  break  of 
day,  his  chaplain  made  them  too  fait  for  any  au- 
thority to  feparate. 

As  he  was  of  an  antient  honourable  family,  and 
his  eltate  very  confiderable,  her  friends  in  a  fhort 
time  were  reconciled  to  what  was  now  irremedi- 
able, and  they  were  looked  upon  as  an  extreme 
happy  pair.  But  foon,  too  foon,  the  Heeling  plea- 
fures  lied,  and  in  their  room  anguifh  and  bitter-* 
nefs  of  heart  fuccealed. 

Mvutcfia,  in  a  vifit  fhe  made  to  a  lady  of  her 
B   2 


n  THE   FEMALE  B.  I. 

intimate  acquaintance,  unfortunately  happened 
to  meet  the  young  Clitander;  he  was  juft  return- 
ed frcm  his  travels, -had  a  handfome  perfon,  an  in- 
finity of  gaiety,  and  a  certain  fomethirg  in  his 
air  and  deportment  which  had  been  deftruclive  to 
the  peace  and  reputation  of  many  of  our  fex, 
lie  was  naturally  of  an  amorous  difpofition,  and 
being  fo,  felt  ail  the  force  of  charms,  which  had 
ibme  effect  even  on  the  moil  cold  and  tempe- 
.rate.  Emboldened  by  former  fucceffes,  the  know- 
ledge Martcfia  was  another's  dixl  not  hinder  him 
from  declaring  to  her  the  paffion  {he  had  infpired 
him  Vv'ith.  She  found  a  fecret  fatisfaclion  in 
hearing  him,  which  (he  was  yet  too  young  to  con- 
ficler  the  danger  cf,  and  therefore  endeavoured  not 
to  fupprefs  until  it  became  more  powerful  for  her 
to  have  done  fo,  even  had  me  attempted  it  with  all 
her  might  j  but  the  truth  is,  fhe  began  to  experi- 
ence in  reality  a  flame  fhe  had  but  imagined  her- 
felf  poffeffed  of  for  him  who  was  now  her  hu-f- 
band,  and  was  too  much  averfe  to  the  giving  her- 
felf  pain,  to  combat  with  an  inclination  which 
feemed  to  her  fraught  only  with  delights. 

The  houfe  where  their  acquaintance  firft  be- 
gan, was  now  the  fcene  of  their  future  meetings: 
The  rniftrefs  of  it  was  too  great  a  friend  to  gallantry 
herfelf,  to  be  any  interruption  to  the  happinefs 
they  enjoyed  in  entertaining  each  other  without 
witnefles.  How  weak  is  virtue  when  love  and 
opportunity  combine!  Though  no  woman  could 
have  more  refined  and  delicate  notions  than  Mar- 
tefia,  yet  all  were  ineffectual  againft  the  felici- 
tations of  her  adored  Clitander.  One  fatal  mo- 
ment deftroyed  at  once  all  her  own  exalted  ideas  of 
honour  and  reputation,  and  the  principles  early  in- 


B;  I.  SPECTATOR.  13 

(lilled  into  her  mind  by  her  virtuous  preceptors. 

The  confequence  of  this  amour  was  a  total 
neglect  of  huiband,  houfe,  and  family.  Ilerfelf 
abandoned,  all  other  duties  were  fo  too.  So  ma- 
nifeft  a  change  was  vifible  to  all  that  knew  her, 
but  mod  to  her  huiband,  as  moft  interested  in  it. 
He  truly  loved,  and  had  believed  himfclf  truly  be- 
loved by  her.  Loth  he  was  to  think  his  misfor- 
tune real,  and  endeavoured  to  find  fome  other  mo- 
tive for  the  averfion  me  now  expreffed  for  flay- 
ing at  home,  or  going  to  any  of  thofe  places 
where  they  had  been  accuftomed  to  vifit  together; 
but  fhe  either  knew  not  to  diffemble,  or  took  fo 
little  pains  to  do  it,  that  he  was,  in  fpite  of  him- 
felf,  coapnced  all  that  affection  (he  fo  lately  had 
profeiJed,  and  given  him  testimonies  of,  was  now 
no  more.  He  examined  all  his  actions,  and  could 
find  nothing  in  any  of  them  that  could  giveocca- 
fion  for  fo  fad  a  reverfe.  He  complained  to  her 
one  day,  in  the  tendered  terms,:  of  the  fmall  por- 
tion fhe  had  of  late  allowed  him  of  her  conver- 
fation:  intreated,  that  if  by  any  inadvertency  he 
had  offended  her,  me  would  acquaint  him  with  his 
fault,  which  he  affured  her  he  would  take  care 
never  to  repeat:  aflced,  if  there  was  any  thing  iu 
her  fettlcment  or  jointure  the  could  wiili  to  have 
altered*  and  affured  her  {he  need  but  let  him  kno\v 
her  commands  to  be  inftantly  obeyed. 

To  all  this  fhe  replied,  with  the  moft  ffobbing 
indifference,  that  Ihe  knew  not  what  he  meant. 
That  as  fhe  had  accufed  him  with  nothing,  he 
had  no  reafon  to  think  flie  was  diffatisfied.  But 
that  people  could  not  be  always  in  the  fame  hu- 
mour, arid  defired  he  would  not  give  hiinfelf  nor 


14  THE  FEMALE  B.  f. 

her  the  trouble  of  making  any  farther  interroga- 
tories, 

He  muft  have  been  infenfible,  as  he  is  known  to 
be  the  contrary,  had  fuch  a  behaviour  not  opened 
his  eyes;  he  no  longer  doubted  of  his  fate,  and 
refolving,  if  poffible,  to  find  out  the  author  of  it, 
he  caufed  her  chair  to  be  watehed  wherever  fhe 
went,  and  took  fuch  effectual  methods  as  foon  in- 
formed him  of  the  truth. 

In  the  firft  emotions  of  his  rage,  he  was  for 
fending  a  challenge  to  this  deftroyer  of  his  happi- 
nefs;  but  in  his  cooler  moments  he  rejected  that 
defign  as  too  injurious  to  the  reputation  of  Marte- 
fia,  who  \vas  ilill  dear  to  him,  and  whom  he  flat- 
tered himfelf  with  being  able  one  day  to*reclaim. 

It  is  certain,  he  put  in  practice  every  tender 
flratagem  that  love  and  wit  could  furnifh  him  with 
for  that  purpofe ;  but  fhe  appearing  fo  far  from  be- 
ing moved  at  any  thing  he  eithar  faid  or  did,  that, 
en  the  contrary,  her  behaviour  was  every  day  more 
cold,  he  at  laft  began  to  expoflulate  with  her,  gave 
fome  hints  that  her  late  condu&was  not  unknown 
to  him;  and  that  though  he  was  willing  to  for- 
give what  was  part,  yet,  as  a  hufband,  it  was  not 
confident  with  his  character  to  bear  any  future 
infults  of  that  nature.  This  put  her  beyond  all 
patience  :  fhe  reproached  him  in  the  bittereft 
terms  for  daring  to  harbour  the  leafl  fufpicion  of 
her  virtue,  and  cenfuring  her  innocent  amufe- 
ments  as  crimes  ;  and 'perhaps  was  glad  of  this 
opportunity  of  tePiifying  her  remorfe  for  having 
ever  liflened  to  his  vows,  and  curfing  before  his 
face  the  hour  that  joined  their  hands. 

They  now  lived  fo  ill  a  life  together,  that  not 
having  fufficient  proof  for  a  divorce,  he 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  r$ 

beds,  and  though  they  continued  in  one  houfe,  be- 
haved to  each  other  as  ftrangers;  never  eat  at  the 
fame  table  but  when  company  was  there,  and  then 
only  to  avoid  the  queftions  that  would  naturally 
have  been  aflced  had  it  been  otherwife;  neither  of 
them  being  defirous  the  world  mould  know  any 
thing  of  their  difagreement. 

But  while  they  continued  to  treat  each  other  in 
a  manner  fo  little  conformable  to  their  firft  hopes, 
or  their  vows  pledged  at  the  holy  akar,  Martcua 
became  pregnant.  This  gave  the  firft  alarm  to 
that  indolence  of  nature  fhe  hitherto  had  teftified; 
her  hufband  would  now  have  it  in  his  power  to  fue 
out  a  divorce;  and  though  Ihe  would  have  rejoiced 
to  have  been  Separated  from  him  on  any  other 
terms,  yet  (he  could  not  fupport  the  thought  of 
being  totally  deprived  of  all  reputation  in  the  world. 
She  was  not  ignorant  of  the  cenfures  fhe  incur- 
red, but  had  pride  and  fpirit  enough  to  enahle  her 
to  defpife  whatever  was  faid  of  her,  while  it  was 
not  backed  by  proof;  but  the  clearing  one  fhe  was 
now  about  to  give,  ftruck  fhamc  and  confufion  to 
her  foul.  She  left  no  means  untried  to  produce  an 
abortion;  but  failing  in  that,  me  had  no  other  re* 
courfe  than  to  that  friend  who  was  the  confidante 
of  her  unhappy  pafiion,  who  comforted  her  as  well 
as  flie  could,  and  afiured  her,  that  when  the  hour 
approached,  fhe  need  have  no  more  to  do  than 
to  come  directly  to  her  houic,  where  every  thing 
fhould  be  prepared  for  the  reception  of  a  woman 
in  her  condition. 

To  conceal  the  alteration  in  her  ftiape,  fhe  pre- 
tended indifpofition,  faw  little  company,  and  wore 
only  loofe  gowns.  At  length  the  fo  much-dread- 
fd  moment  came  upon  her  at  the  dead  of  night) 


r<5  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

and  in  the  midft  of  all  that  rack  of  nature,  made 
yet  more  horrible  by  the  agonies  of  her  mind,  me 
rofe,  rung  for  her  woman,  and  telling  her  me  had 
a  frightful  dream  concerning  that  lady,  whom  flic 
knew  (he  had  the  greateft  value  for  of  any  perfon 
upon  earth,  ordered  her  to  get  a  chair, for  (he  could 
not  be  eafy  unlefs  me  went  and  faw  her  herfelf. 
The  woman  was  ftrangely  furprized,  but  her  lady 
was  always  ab  fclute  in  her  commands.  A  chair 
was  brought,  and  without  any  other  company  or 
attendants  than  her  own  diftracted  thoughts,  ihe 
was  conveyed  to  the  only  afylum  where  (he  thought 
her  fhame  might  find  a  flicker. 

A  midwife  being  prepared  before,  me  was  fafe- 
ly  delivered  of  a  daughter,  who  expired  almoft  as 
foon  as  born;  and  to  prevent  as  much  as  pofiible, 
all  fufpicion  of  the  truth,  {he  made  herfelf  be  car- 
ried home  next  morning,  where  me  went  to  bed, 
and  lay  feveral  days,  under  pretence  of  having 
fprained  her  ancle. 

But  not  all  the  precautions  me  had  taken  were 
effectual  enough  topreventfome  people  from  guef- 
fing  and  whifpering  what  had  happened.  Thofe 
whofe  nearnefs  in  blood  gave  them  a  privilege  of 
fpeaking  their  minds,  fpared  not  to  tell  her  ail  that 
was  faid  of  her-,  and  thofe  who  durft  not  take  that 
liberty,  (hewed  by  their  diftant  looks  and  referved 
behaviour,  whenever  fhe  came  in  prefence,  how 
little  they  approved  her  conduft.  She  was  too 
difcerning  not  to  fee  into  their  thoughts,  nor  was 
her  innate  pride  of  any  fervice  to  keep  upherfpirita 
on  this  occafion.  To  add  to  her  difcontent,  Cli- 
tander  grew  every  day  more  cool  in  his  refpe&Sj 
and  me  foon  after  learned  he  was  on  the  point  of 
marriage  with  one  far  inferior  to  herfeli  in  evcrj 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  f7 

charm  both  of  mind  and  pcrfon.  In  fine,  finding 
hcrfelf  deferted  by  her  relations,  and  the  greateft 
part  of  her  acquaintance,  without  love,  without  re- 
fpedl:,  and  reduced  to  the  pity  of  thofe,  who  per- 
haps had  nothing  but  a  greater  fhare  of  circum-  * 
fpe&ioa  to  boaft  of,  (he  took  a  rcfolutiou  to  quit 
England;  and  having  fettled  her  affairs  with  her 
hufband,  who  by  this  time  had  entered  into  other 
amufements,  and  it  is  probable  was  very  well  fatif- 
fied  to  be  eafed  of  the  conilrairit  her  prefence  gave 
him,  readily  confentedto  remit  her  the  fum  agreed 
between  them,  to  be  paid  yearly  to  whatever  part 
of  the  world  flie  chofe  to  refide  in;  flic  then  took 
leave  of  a  country  of  which  {he  had  been  the  ulol, 
and  which  now  feemed  to  her  as  too  unjufl  in  not 
being  blind  to  what  (he  defired  mould  be  con- 
cealed. 

Behold  her  now  in  a  voluntary  banimmcnt  from 
friends  and  country, and  roaming  round  the  world 
in  fruitlefs  fearch  of  that  tranquility  fie  could 
not  have  failed  enjoying  at  home  in  thebofcm  of 
a  confort  equally  beloved  as  loving.  Unhappy 
charming  ladyl  born  and  endowed  with  every 
quality  to  attract  univerfal  love  and  admiration, 
yet  by  one  inadvertent  ftep  undone,  and  loft  to  e- 
vcry  thing  the  world  holds  dear,  and  only  the 
more  conipicuoufly  wretched,  by  having  been  con-, 
fpicuoufly  amiable. 

But  methinks  it  would  be  hard  to  charge  the 
blame  of  indifcreet  marriages  on  the  young  ladies 
thcmfelves:  parents  are  fometimes,  by  an  over- 
caution,  guilty  of  forcing  them  into  things,  which, 
otherwife,  would  be  far  flillant  from  their  thoughts. 
I  am  very  certain  it  is  not  becaufe  the  Italian,  Spa- 
nifli,  or  Fortugucfe  women  are  fo  much  warmer 


t«  THE   FEMALE  B.  I. 

in  their  ccnftitutions  than  thofe  of  other  nations, 
but  becaufe  they  are  fo  cruelly  debarred  from  all 
converfation  with  the  men,  that  makes  them  fo 
readily  accept  the  firft  offer  that  prefents  itfelf. 
Where  opportunities  are  fcarce,  they  are  glad  to 
fpeak  their  minds  at  once,  and  fear  to  deny,  left  it 
fhould  not  be  in  their  power  afterwards  to  grant. 
Even  in  Turkey,  where  our  travellers  boaft  of  hav- 
ing had  fuch  fuccefs  among  the  women,  I  have 
known  feveral  who  are  married  to  Englifh  gentle- 
men, and  permitted  to  live  after  the  cuftom  of 
our  country,  who  have  made  very  excellent  wives. 
In  France,  the  people  are,  queflionlefs,  the  gay- 
eft  and  moft  alert  in  the  world,  and  allow  the 
greateft  liberties  to  their  women;  yet  to  hear  o£ 
a  clandeftine  marriage  among  them  is  a  kind  of 
prodigy;  and  tho'  no  place  affords  fcenes  of  gallan- 
try equal  to  it  in  any  degree  of  proportion,  yet  I 
believe  there  is  none  where  fewer  falfe  fteps  are 
made,  or  hufbands  have  lefs  reafon  to  complain  of 
the  want  of  chaftity  in  their  wives.  Nature  in  all 
ages  is  abhorrent  of  reftraint ;  but  in  youth  efpe- 
cially,  as  more  headftrong  and  impetuous,  it  will 
hazard  every  thing  to  break  through  laws  it  had 
no  hand  in  making.  It  therefore  betrays  a  great 
want  of  policy,  as  well  as  an  unjuft  aufterity,  to 
feclude  a  young  lady,  and  shut  her  up  from  all  in- 
tercourfe  with  men,  for  fear  she  should  find  one 
among  them  who  might  happen  to  pleafe  her  too 
well.  Chance  may  in  a  moment  deftroy  all  that 
the  utmoft  care  can  do;  and  I  fay  a  woman  is  in 
far  lefs  danger  of  lofing  her  heart,  when  every-  day 
furrounded  with  a  variety  of  gay  objecls,  than 
-when  by  forne  accident  (he  falls  into  the  conver- 
fation of  a  fingle  one.  A  g^l*  who  is  continually 


*.  L  SPECTATOR.  i9 

bearing  fine  tilings  faid  to  her,  regards  them  but  as 
words  of  courfe ;  they  may  be  flattering  to  her 
vanity  for  the  prefent,but  will  leave  no  impreflion 
behind  them  on  her  mind :  but  fhe,  who  is  a  ftran- 
ger  to  the  gallant  manner  with  which  polite  perfon* 
treat  our  fex,  greedily  fwallows  the  fi.rH  civil  thing 
faid  to  her,  takes  what  perhaps  is  meant  as  a  mere 
compliment,  for  a  declaration  of  love,  and  replies 
to  it  in  terms  which  either  expofe  her  to  the  de- 
figns  of  him  who  fpeaks,  if  he  happens  to  have  any 
in  reality,  or  if  he  has  not,  to  his  ridicule  in  all 
company  where  he  comes  into. 

For  this  reafon  the  country-bred  ladies,  who 
are  never  fuffcred  to  come  to  town  for  fear  their 
faces  fhould  be  fpoiled  by  the  fmall-pox,  or  their 
reputations  ruined  Ipy  the  beaux,  become  an  eafier 
prey  to  the  artifices  of  mankind,  than  thofe  who 
have  had  an  education  more  at  large.  As  they 
rarely  flir  beyond  their  father's  pales,  except  to 
church,  the  parfon,  if  he  be  a  forward  man,  and 
has  courage  to  throw  a  love-fong,  or  copy  of  verfes 
to  Mifs  over  the  wall,  or  flip  it  into  her  hand  in 
a  vifit  to  the  family,  has  a  rare  opportunity  of  ma- 
king his  fortune;  and  it  is  well  when  it  happens 
no  worfe:  many  a  fquire's  daughter  has  clambered 
over  hedge  and  ftyle,  to  give  a  rampant  jump  into 
the  arms  of  a  young  jolly  haymaker  or  ploughman. 

Our  London  ladies  arc  indeed  very  rarely  laid 
under  fuch  reftri£ttons;  but  whenever  it  happens 
to  be  the  cnfc,  as  nature  is  the  fame  in  all,  the  ccn- 
fequence  will  be  fo  too.  Would  ever  Eagaretta 
have  cottdefcended  to  marry  the  greafy  footman 
that  run  befcie  li^r  c;»air,  had  he  not  b^n  thr  only 
n.an  her  over-c.ueful  father  permitted  her  to  fpeak 
to!  Or  would  Amilnia  have  found  any  charms 


23  THE   FEMALE  B.   I. 

in  a  Moufetrap,  or  Leathern  Apron,  had  fhe  been 
indulged  the  converfation  of  a  White  Staff? 

Seomamhe,  to  her  misfortune,  was  brought 
up  under  the  tuition  of  her  aunt  Negratia  a  wo- 
man extremely  four  by  nature,  but  rendered 
yet  more  fo  by  age  and  infirmity.  Pail  all  the 
joys  of  life  herfelf,  (he  looked  with  a  malicious 
eye  en  every  one  who  partook  of  them;  cen- 
fured  the  moft  innocent  diverfions  in  the  fevered 
manner-,  and  the  leaft  complaifance  between  per- 
fons  of  different  fexes,  was,  with  her,  fcanda- 
lous  to  the  lad  degree.  Her  character  was  fo 
•well  known, -that  none  but  prudes,  whofe  defor- 
mity was  an  antidote  to  defire, — worn-out,  fu- 
p-rannuated  rakes,  who  had  out-lived  all  fenfe  of 
plr:afure, — and  canting  zealots,  whofe  bread  de- 
pended on  their  hypocrify,  frequented  her  houfe. 
To  this  fort  of  company  was  the  young,  beau- 
tiful, and  naturally  gay  LSeomanthe  condemned: 
(he  he'ard  nothing  but  railing  againft  that  way  of 
life, (he  knew  was  enjoyed  by  others  of  equal  rank 
and  fortune  with  herfelf,  and  which  fhe  had  too 
much  good  fenfe  to  look  upon  as  criminal:  fhe 
thought  people  might  be  perfectly  innocent,  yet 
indulge  themfelves  in  fometimes  going  to  a  play 
or  opera;  nor  could  be  brought  to  believe  the 
court  fuch  a  bugbear  as  fhe  was  told  it  was: 
a  laced  coat  arid  a  toupee  wig  had  double  charms 
for  her,  as  they  were  every  day  fo  much  preached 
againft;  and  fhe  never  faw  a  coach  pafs,  wherein 
were  gentlemen  and  ladies,  but  the  wiihed  to  be 
among  them,  or  a  well-drefTed  beau,  with  \vhorn 
fhe  did  not  languiih  to  be'  acquainted. 

At  length  her  defires  were  fulfilled.    Clofe  as 
{he  was  kept,   th?  report  that  Negratia   had   a 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  21 

young  lady  in  her  houfe,  who  was  miftrefs  of  a 
large  fortune  on  the  day  of  marriage,  reached  the 
ears  of  one  of  thofe  harpies  who  purchafe  to  them- 
felves  a  wretched  fuftenance,  by  decoying  the  un- 
wary into  everlafling  ruin.  This  creature,  who 
had  been  employed  by  one  fo  far  a  gentleman  as  to 
be  bred  to  no  bufinefs,  and  whofe  whole  eftate  was 
laid  out  on  his  back,  in  hopes  of  appearing  charm- 
ing in  the  eyes  of  fome  monied  woman,  vtoo 
truly  gueffed  {he  had  found  in  Seomanthe  what 
(he  fought.  She  came  to  the  houfe  under  the  pre- 
tence of  offering  fome  lace,  holland,  and  fine  tea, 
extraordinary  cheap :  Negratia  being  what  is  called 
a  good  houfewife,  and  a  great  lover  of  bargains, 
readily  admitted  her;  and  while  me  was  examin- 
ing fome  of  the  goods  at  a  fmall  dillance  off,  the 
artful  woman  put  a  letter  into  Seomanthe's  hand, 
telling  her  it  came  from  the  fineft  gentleman  in  the 
world,  who  {he  was  fure  would  die,  if  (lie  did  not 
favour  him  with  an  anfwer.  The  young  lady  took 
it,  blufhed,  and  put  it  in  her  bofom,  but  had  not 
time  to  make  any  reply  to  the  woman,  Negratia 
that  inftant  coming  towards  them.  As  nobody  un- 
derftood  her  bufinefs  better,  {he  managed  it  fothat 
{he  was  ordered  to  come  again  the  next  day,  when 
{lie  faid  flie  ihould  have  greater  variety  to  me\r 
their  ladyihips.  While  {he  was  packing  up  her 
bundles,  (he  winked  onSeomanthe,and  at  thefame 
time"  gave  her  the  moft  befeeching  look ;  the  mean- 
ing of  which,  young  and  unexperienced  as  {he  was, 
the  deflined  victim  but  too  well  comprehended, 
and  was,  perhaps,  no  lefs  impatient  for  the  fuccefs 
of  an  adventure,  the  beginning  of  which  afforded 
her  infinite  fatisfa&ion. 

She  ran  immediately  to  her  chamber,  (huther- 
C 


22  THE   FEMALE  B.  I. 

fell"  in,  and  broke  open  her  billet,  which  (he  found 
itiiucd  with  flames,  darts,  wounds,  love,  and 
death ;  the  highefl  encomiums  on  her  beauty,  and 
the  moft  vehement  imprecations  of  not  out-living 
his  hope  of  obtaining  her  favour.  Expreflions, 
\vhieb  would  have  excited  only  the  laughter  of  a 
woman  who  knew  the  world,  but  drew  tears  into 
the  eyes  of  the  innocent  Seomanthe.  She  imagined 
he  had  fcen  her  either  atchurch,  or  looking  out  of 
the  window,  for  flie  was  permitted  to  mew  herfelf 
in  no  other  place;  and  doubted  not  but  all  he  had 
wrote  to  her  of  his  love  and  defpair,  was  no  lefs 
true  than  what  (he  had  heard  delivered  from  the 
pulpit.  She  looked  upon  herfe]  fas  too  much  obliged 
by  the  paffion  he  had  for  her,  not  to  write  an  an- 
fwcrftill  of  ccmplaifance5and  verydexteroufly  gave 
it  to  the  woman,  on  her  coming  the  next  day. 

On  the  enfuing  Sunday  fne  fa\v  a  ftrange  gentle- 
man in  the  next  pew  to  her;  by  the  glances  he  ftole 
at  her  every  time  he  could  do  it  without  being 
taken  notice  of,  me  fancied  him  the  perfon  who 
had  declared  himfelf  her  lover,  and  was  convinced 
her  conjecture  had  not  deceived  her,  when  being 
kneeled  down  at  her  devotions,  he  found  means, 
v,  hile  every  one  had  their  fans  before  their  faces,  to 
drop  a  letter  on  the  bench  (he  leaned  upon ;  me 
was  not  fo  much  taken  up  with  the  bufmefs  (he 
was  employed  about,  as  not  to  fee  it  immediately, 
and  throwing  her  .handkerchief  over  it,  clapped  it 
into  her  pocket.  The  looks  that  paflcd  between 
them  afterwards,  during  the  time  of  divine  fervice, 
confirmed  her  in  the  opinion,  that  he  was  no  lefs 
charmed  with  her  than  he  faid  he  was;  and  him, 
that  the  fight  of  him  had  not  deftroyed  the  impref- 
ficn  his  letter  by  th-s  old  woman  had  made  en  i;er. 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  23 

Both  thought  they  had  reafon  to  be  highly  f?.- 
tisfied  with  this  interview;  butpoorSeomanthewas 
up  to  the  head  and  ears  in  love.  The  perfon  of 
the  man  was  agreeable  enough,  and  compared  to 
thofe  Negratia  had  fuffered  her  to  converfe  with, 
angelic.  The  prepofleflion  ftie  had  for  him  at 
leaft,  rendered  him  fo  in  her  eyes,  and  flic  thought 
every  moment  an  age  till  (he  got  home  to  read  this 
fecond  billet;  the  contents  of  which  were  of  the 
fame  nature  with  the  former,  only  a  poftfcript 
added,  intreating  flie  would  contrive  fome  means 
to  let  him  entertain  her  with  his  paffion,  by  word 
of  mouth.  He  mentioned  the  woman  who  fold 
the  things,  and  by  whofe  means  he  at  firfl  made; 
a  difcovery  of  it,  and  gave  the  directions  where 
(he  lived  j  begged  a  meeting  there,  if  poflible;  at 
leaft  an  anfwer,  whether  he  might  be  fo  happy  cr 
not;  which,  he  told  her,  he  would  wait  foe  him- 
felf  early  the  next  morning  under  her  window,  i£ 
{he  would  be  fo  good  as  to  throw  it  out. 

She  fighed  at  reading  it;  thought  her  fate  very 
hard  that  it  was  not  in  her  power  to  comply  with 
the  firft  part  of  his  requeit,  but  hefitated  not  in 
the  leaft  if  flie.  ought  to  grant  the  other.  She 
fnatched  the  firft  opportunity  flie  could  lay  hold 
on,  to  prepare  a  letter,  in  which  fhe  let  him  know 
how  impoflible  it  was  for  her  to  come  out;  but 
exprcflcd  fuch  a  regret  at  not  being  able  to  do  fo, 
as  fhe  wed  it  would  be  ro  difficult  matter  to  pre- 
vail on  her  to  run  the  greateft  lengths. 

By  the  help  of  his  advifer,  he  carried  on  a  ccr- 
refpondence  with  her,  which  ended  in  her  con  fen  t« 
ing  to  quit  Negratia  for  ever,  and  put  herfclf  under 
his  protection:  In  fine,  flic  packed  up  all  her 
C'loaths  and  jewels,  threw  the  former  from  the 
C  2t 


24  THE    FEMALE  B.  I. 

window  to  the  woman,  who  flood  ready  to  receive 
them  on  an  appointed  night;  and  having  put  the 
other  into  her  pocket,  exchanged  one  fcene  of  hy- 
pocrify  for  another,  and  flew  from  a  life  irkfome  for 
the  prefent,  to  enter  into  one  of  lading  mifery. 

Early  in  the  morning  they  were  married,  and 
it  is  poffible  paffed  fome  days  in  the  ufual  tranf- 
ports  of  a  bridal  ftate;  but  when  their  place  of 
abode  was  difcovered  by  the  friends  and  kindred 
of  Seomanthe,  who,  diftrafted  at  her  elopement, 
had  fearched  the  whole  town,  in  how  wretched  a 
manner  was  fhe  found!  The  villain  had  drawn 
her  whole  fortune  out  of  the  Bank,  robbed  her 
of  all  her  jewels,  and  the;beft  of  her  apparel,  had 
{hipped  every  thing  off,  and  was  himfelf  embarked 
fhe  knew  not  to  what'  place.  The  people  of  the 
houfe  where  they  lodged,  perceiving  him,  whom 
they  expected  to  have  been  their  paymafter,  gone, 
feized  on  the  few  trifles  he  had  left  behind,  as  fa- 
tisfactipn  for  their  rent,  and  were  going  to  turn 
the  unfortunate  Seomanthe  cut  of  doors. 

Not  the  fight  of  her  cliftrefs,  nor  the  lamen- 
tations (lie  made,  which  were  pitiful  enough  to 
have  foftenea  the  moft  rugged  hearts,  had  any  ef- 
fect on  that  of  Negratia,  who  thought  no  punifh- 
ment  too  fevere  for  a  perfon  who  had  deceived  her 
caution :  but  fome  others  were  of  a  more  compaf- 
fionate  difpofition;  they  took  her  home  with  them, 
and  comforted  her  as  well  as  they  were  able :  flic 
ftill  lives  with  them  a  dependant  on  their  courtefy, 
which  (lie  is  obliged  to  purchafe  the  continuance 
of,  by  rendering  herfelf  fubfervient  to  all  their  hu- 
mours. No  news  is  yet  arrived  what  courfe  her 
•wicked  hufband  took;  but  it  is  fuppofed  he  is  re- 
tired either  to  France  or  Holland,  being  alraoft  as 


».  I.  SPECTATOR.  25 

much  in  debt  here  as  all  he  wronged  Seomanthe  of 
would  difcharge;  fo  that  there  is  little  probability 
of  his  ever  returning,  or  if  he  did,  that  it  would  be 
at  all  to  the  fatisfaction  of  his  unhappy  wife. 

I  was  going  on  to  recite  fome  other  instances 
of  the  mifchiefs,  which,  for  the  moft  part*  are  the 
confequence  of  laying  young  people  under  too 
great  a  reftraint,  when  MIR  A  came  in,  and  feeing 
what  I  was  about,  took  the  pen  out  of  my  hand, 
and  told  me  I  had  already  faid  enough;  if  I  pro- 
ceeded to  expatiate  any  farther  on  that  head,  I 
fliould  be  in  danger  of  being  underftood  to  coun- 
tenance an  extreme  on  the  other  fide,  which  was 
much  more  frequently  fatal  to  our  fex. 

I  yielded  to  her  fuperior  judgment,  and  need- 
ed but  few  arguments  to  be  convinced,  that  if  un- 
bridled youth  were  indulged  in  all  the  liberties  it 
would  take,  we  fhould  fcarce  fee  any  thing  but  un* 
happy  objects  before  maturity  arrived. 

The  great  encouragement  thefe  later  times 
afford  to  luxury  of  every  kind,  can  never  be  too 
much  guarded  againfl  by  thofe  who  are  charged 
with  the  fir  ft  forming  of  the  mind.  Nature  is  in 
itfelf  abhorrent  of  vice;  but  the  ingenious  contri- 
vers of  fome  of  our  modifh  entertainments,  have 
found  fuch  ways  to  take  oiF  the  dcformity»  that 
there  requires  a  more  ftrong  difcernment  than 
youth  will  ordinarily  admit  of,  to  diilinguifh  it 
from  innocence. — The  glitter  with  which  it  is 
adorned  ftrikes  the  eye  at  a  diftance,  and  you  per- 
ceive not  the  fpirit  within,  till,  by  too  near  an  ap- 
proach, you  are  in  danger  of  being  infe&ed  with. 
its  venom.  It  was  not  in  diverfions,  fuch  as  our 
modern  mafqucrades  in  winter,  and  ridottoes  ai 
frefco  hi  fummer,  that  our  auceftors  pafled  their 


a5  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

evenings  •,  both  which,  agreeable  as  they  may  fecm 
for  the  prefent  to  the  fenfes,  have  often  given  fource 
to  the  mofl  bitter  agonies  in  the  reflecting  mind. 
—They  appear  to  me  as  a  daring  attempt  to  in- 
vert the  very  order  of  nature,  efpecially  the  for- 
mer, which  begins  at  thofe  hours  when  recrea- 
tions ought  to  ceafe,  and  encroaches  on  the  time 
we  fliould  be  preparing  for  that  repofe  the  mind 
and  body  ftand  in  need  of.  Thofe  who  efcape  the 
beft,  are  fureto  lofe  one  day  from  life  after  every 
mafquerade;  but  others,  more  delicate  in  their 
conftitutions,  contract  colds,and  various  diforders, 
which  hang  upon  them  a  long  while,  and  fome- 
times  never  get  rid  of.  Yet,  how  feverely  treated 
•would  our  young  gentlemen  andladies  think  them- 
felves,  were  they  to  be  deprived  of  this  elegant  en- 
tertainment, as  they  term  it! — "What  can  be 
*{  more  innocent  (faythey)than  to  fee  fuch  a  num- 
"  ber  of  people  together,  all  dreffed  in  different 
"  habits,  fome  talking,  fome  dancing,  fome  gam- 
"  ing,  and  the  mufic  all  the  time  fweetly  playing! 
4t  Then  the  repartees  among  us  fo  whet  the  wit! " 
It  is  certain,  indeed,  that  fome  great  families, 
•who  continue  the  whole  winter  in  the  country, 
frequently  have  what  they  call  a  mafquerade  at 
their  houfes,  to  which  all  the  neighbouring  gentry 
are  invited,  and  nothing  can  be  more  agreeable 
than  thofe  kind  of  entertainments.  "Where  a  fe- 
le&  company  are  difguifed  fo  as  not  to  be  known 
for  a  time  to  each  other,  a  round  of  wit  is  perpe- 
tually played  off,  and  affords  matter,  by  the  plea- 
fant  miftakes  fometimes  made,  for  converfation 
afterwards;  for  where  every  one  is  obliged  to  pull 
off  his  mafk,  and  own  himfelf  for  what  he  is,  as 
foon  as  the  ball  is  over,  nothing  will  Jbe  faid  or  done 


B:  I.  SPECTATOR.  27 

improper  or  indecent:  but  here  it  is  quite% other- 
wife;  in  thefe  mercenary  entertainments,  the  moft 
abandoned  rake,  or  low-bred  fellow,  who  has 
wherewithal  to  purchafc  a  ticket,  may  take  the 
liberty  of  utteringthe  grofleft  things  in  thechafteft 
ear;  and  fafe  in  his  difguife,  go  off  without  in- 
curring either  the  fhame  or  punimment  his  beha- 
viour deferves.  "But,  befides  being  fubjecled  to  the 
infults  of  every  pert  coxcomb,  who  imagines  him- 
felf  moft  witty  when  he  is  moft  (hocking  to  mo- 
defty,  I  wonder  ladies  can  reflect  what  creatures 
of  their  own  fex  they  vouchfafe  to  blend  with  in 
thefe  promifcuous  afiemblies,  without  blufhing. 

A  witty  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,  but  feme,- 
what  wild,  told  me,  he  never  was  fo  much  divert-^ 
cd  in  his  life  as  one  night,  when  he  faw  the  great- 
eft  prude  in  the  nation,  after  having  been  accofted 
with  fome  very  odd  expreflions,  by  one,  who  doubt- 
lefs  miftook  her  for  another,  run,  as  if  to  fhield 
herfelf  from  his  importunities,to  a  certain  fille-de- 
joye,  to  whom  he  had  given  a  ticket,  and  cry  out, 
"  O  Madam,  did  you  hear  the  filthy  creature!" 

I  could  not  forbear  acknowledging  the  ridicule 
this  lady  incurred,  was  a  juft  punifliment  for  her 
appearing  in  a  place  fo  little  conformable  to  the 
aullerity  fhe  profefTed  in  other  things;  but  at  the 
fame  time  tookthis  opportunity  of  telling  him, that 
I  thought  women  of  honour  had  little  obligations 
to  him,  or  any  of  thofe  gentlemen,  who,  by  mak- 
ing prefents  of  tickets  to  fuch  loofe  creatures,  in- 
troduced them  into  company  they  otherwife  would 
never  have  the  aflurance  to  approach.  I  added, 
that,  in  my  opinion,  a  greater  affront  could  not  be 
put  upon  the  fex  •.  and  that  it  was  alfo  ftrangely 
impolitic  to  bring  their  miftrefles  into  an  afTembJy, 


20  THE   FEMALE  B.  f. 

where  chance  might  poffibly  engage  them  in  con- 
verfatioh  with  their  own  wives  or  fillers. 

To  thefe  laft  words  he  anfwered,  with  a  kind  of 
malicious  fmile,  <c  No,  Madam,  we  never  give 
"  mafquerade  tickets  to  them."  Intimating.,  that  it 
was  not  with  the  approbation  of  the  men,  that  the 
ladies  of  their  own  families  fliould  frequent  fuch 
places;  and  therefore,  if  they  happened  to  be  af- 
jfronted  there,  they  muft  condemn  themfelves. 

This  put  me  in  mind  of  an  acquaintance  of 
mine,  who  is  accounted  a  very  good  hufband,  and 
in  effect  is  fo,  though  he  took  fomewhat  an  ex- 
traordinary method  to  cure  his  wife  of  a  too  great 
paffion  (he  had  exprefled  on  their  firfl  marriage, 
for  going  to  thofe  nocturnal  revds.  Notice  was 
BO  fooner  given  of  a  mafquerade,  than  her  eye& 
fparkled  with  joy,  the  habit-maker  was  immedi- 
ately fent  for,  and  nothing  was  either  talked  or 
thought  on,  but  the  drefs  (he  mould  wear  on  the 
approaching  happy  night.  Not  but  he  was  con» 
vinced  her  intentions  were  perfectly  innocent,  as 
(he  never  defired  to  go  without  him,  and  even  tef- 
tified  an  eagernefs  that  he  would  participate  of  a 
pleafure  which  had  fo  many  charms  for  herfelf: 
but  he  was  a  man  who  knew  the  town,  and  the 
dangers  to  which  many  women  had  been  expofed 
in  thefe  aflemblies ;  befides,  the  expence  was  what 
he  could  by  no  means  relifh;  and  fearing  to  draw 
on  himfelf  the  character  of  a  churlifh,  or  a  jealous 
hufband,  if  he  gave  either  of  thefe  reafons  for  re- 
ftraining  her,  he  bethought  himfelf  of  a  ftratagem, 
which  fhould  render  her  avoiding  to  go  for  the 
future  entirely  her  own  act  and  deed. 

He  caufed,  unknown  to  her,  one  of  his  intimate 
fiiends  to  put  on  a  habit  fo  exa&ly  the  fame  with 


B.  1.  SPECTATOR.  29 

that  he  wore  himfclf,  that  being  of  a  pretty  equal 
flature,  they  could  not  be  diftinguifhed  from  each 
other  when  their  mafks  were  on.  The  gentle- 
man, in  the  midfl  of  a  dance,  flipt  into  the  huf- 
band's  place,  who  immediately  withdrew,  and 
abfcondcd  till  the  ball  was  over.  The  poor  lady, 
little  fufpe&ing  the  deception,  kept  clofe  to  her 
fuppofed  fpoufe  the  whole  time,  and  when  the 
company  broke  up,  was  put  by  him  into  a  hack- 
ney coach,  which  had  orders  to  drive  to  a  tavern 
in  Pall-mall.  She  was  a  little  furprized  at  finding 
where  (he  was;  but  thinking  it  a  whim  of  him, 
whom  it  was  her  duty  to  comply  with,  fuffered 
herfelf  to  be  conducted  into  a  room,  where  he, 
plucking  oft"  his  mafk,  the  fight  of  his  face,  and 
his  defiring  fhe  would  do  the  fame,  wilh  fome 
expreffions  not  very  becoming  the  perfon  fhe  had 
taken  him  for,  fo  alarmed  and  terrified  her,  that 
fhe  gave  a  great  fhriek.  The  hufband,  who  had 
followed  them  in  another  coach,  came  in  that  mo- 
ment, and  found  her  ringing  the  bell,  calling  for 
the  people  of  the  houfe,  and  for  a  chair,  that  fhe 
nrght  be  carried  home,  the  gentleman  ftruggling 
with  her,  endeavouring  all  he  could  to  prevail  on 
her  to  unmafk.  He  fo  well  acted  his  part,  that 
the  perfon  who  employed  him  was  highly  diverted, 
and  had  fufFered  the  farce  to  go  on  fome  time 
longer,  had  not  the  exceflive  fright  his  wife  was  in 
obliged  him  to  put  an  end  to  it,  which  he  did,  by 
plucking  off  his  vizard,  and  taking  her  in  his  arms, 
conjured  her  to  compofe  herfelf.  "This accident, 
"  faid  he,  might  have  proved  of  ill  confequencc 
"  indeed,  had  it  not  happened  with  my  particular 
"  friend.  I  faw,  and  followed  you  with  a  refolu- 
«*  tion  to  revenge  the  affront  I  imagined  offered  to 


3o  THE  FEMALE  B.  r. 

"  me;  I  am  now  convinced  it  was  all  a  miftakc  on 
"  his  fide,  as  well  as  yours.  See  here,  continued  he, 
ff  taking  off  his  wife's  mafk,  who  it  is  you  have 
"  gallanted,  and  were  about  to  be  fo  free  with." 

The  gentleman  affected  to  ftart,  and  be  very 
much  amazed  and  afhamed  of  what  he  had  done, 
begged  his  friend's  pardon,  and  the  lady's,  who  he 
faid  he  accofted,  as  thinking  her  a  fine  woman, 
and  meeting  with  no  manner  of  repulfe,  but,  on 
the  contrary,  that  me  was  very  defirous  of  keeping 
as  near  to  him  as  poflible,  and  fhunning  all  other 
converfation,  he  had  all  the  reafon  in  the  world  to 
flatter  himfelf,  fhe  would  be  no  lefs  fatisfied  with 
his  company  in  another  place.  "But,  faid  he,  I  now 
"  perceive  it  was  the  likenefs  of  habits  deceived 
"  her,  and  that  while  I  was  gaining  a  mittrefs,  flic 
'*  doubted  not  but  she  was  following  a  huiband." 

This  adventure  occafioned  a  good  deal  of  mer- 
riment among  them;  but  it  had  all  the  effect  my 
friend  wi&hed  it'should  have  on  his  wife.  The 
imagined  danger  she  had  been  in,  and  the  real  ter- 
ror it  had  given  her,  dwelt  fo  much  upon  her  mind, 
that  she  refolved  never  more  to  fet  her  foot  with- 
in a  place  where  virtue  and  reputation  were  liable 
to  fuch  hazards.  He  had  the  difcretion,  however,, 
to  maintain  inviolably  the  fecret  of  the  trick  he  had 
put  upon  her,  which,  had  it  been  fo  much  as  guef- 
fed  at  by  her,  might,  perhaps,  have  occafioned  a 
refentmentmore  to  the  prejudice  of  his  peace,  than 
the  continuance  of  that  immoderate  love  of  an  a- 
mufement  he  did  not  approve  could  have  been. 

But  what  this  gentleman  contrived  the  appear- 
ance of,  has  not  been  without  its  parallel  in  rea- 
lity. Two  noble  families  owe  the  ruin  of  their 
peace,  as  well  as  their  enmity  to  each  other,  whid\ 


«.  !.  SPECTATOR.  3r 

there  is  little  likelihood  will  foon  ceafe,  to  a  fatal 
miftake,  occafioned  by  the  unfortunate  fimilitude 
of  habits,  at  one  of  thefe  mafquerades. 

Alcaics  and  Palmyra  were  married  young;  the 
match  was  made  by  the  kindred  on  both  fides,  and 
their  hearts  not  confulted  in  the  affair: — they  liv- 
ed together,  not withftanding, in  very  good  harmo- 
r.y,  neither  t>f  them  having  any  attachment  elfe- 
where ;  and  though  no  more  than  a  calm  indiffe- 
rence feemed  to  fubfifl  between  them,  yet  either 
through  chance,  or  caution,  nothing  happened  for 
a  long  time  that  could  give  the  lead  umbrage  to 
one  or  the  other.  His  favourite  amufements  were 
reading,  walking,  and  the  play-houfes.  Hers  were 
giving  and  receiving  vifits,  and  going  to  operas 
and  mafquerades.  He  never  examined  into  what 
company  she  went,  nor  did  she  ever  give  herfelf 
the  trouble  to  inquire  in  what  manner  he  paffed 
his  time.  She  was  infinitely  gay  and  free  in  con- 
Terfation,  but  behaved  fo  equally  to  all  the  men 
of  her  acquaintance,  that  malice  had  found  no  room 
to  cenfure  her,  as  guilty  of  a  particular  regard  for 
any  one.  The  conduct  of  Alcaics  was  much  the 
fcme;  he  did  juftice  to  the  charms  of  every  lady, 
but  feemed  affefted  by  none:  fo  that  jealoufywasa 
paflion  which  this  happy  fenfible  pair  as  yet  had 
never  known.  With  how  much  tranquility  might 
life  have  glided  on,  until  both  had  dropped  into  e- 
ternity,  and  left  the  faireftreputation  on  their  tomb, 
had  they  continued  as  they  were  a  few  years  long- 
er? But  their  ill  fate  ordained  it  otherwife,  and  all 
the  unity  becween  them  was  neareft  to  a  diflbluti- 
oti,  whenmoftit  feemed  eftablished  and  confirmed. 
Palmyra,  as  flie  never  miffed  a  malquerade, 
was  there  one  night,  whsn  Alcaics,  after  {he  was 


32  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

gone,  was  alfo  dragged  thither  by  fome  friends, 
who  would  not  be  denied.    Tho'  he  had  not  the 
leaft  relifli  for  that  diverfion,  yet  being  there,  he 
thought  he  fhould  be  laughed  at  not  to  behave  in 
the  fame  fafhion  he  faw  others  did,  and  prefently 
fingled  out  a  lady,  whom  he  found  had  fome  wit 
and  addrefs,  for  his  partner.    A  lady,  who  had  ac- 
companied Palmyra,  and  happened  to  frand  near, 
difcovered  him  by  his  voice,  which  he  did  not  at- 
tempt to  conceal.    She  ran  immediately  with  the 
news  to  his  wife,  who  at  firft  did  not  believe  it; 
but  the  other  made  fo  many  proteftations,  that  he 
was  not  only  there,  but  was  alfo  deeply  engaged 
with  his  partner,  and  fhe  was  fure  there  was  an 
intrigue  between  them,  that  Palmyra,  at  laft,  re- 
folved  to  be  convinced,  and  went  to  that  part  of 
the  room  where  her  officious  informer  had  told  her 
he  was,  and  where  fne  found  him,  §ill  entertain- 
ing the  lady.    A  paffion  me  had  never  before  ex- 
perienced, now  took  pofleflion  of  her  heart.    She 
knew  (he  was  not  deceived,  (lie  heard  the  voice  of 
her  hufband  diftin&ly,  and  to  find  him  in  a  place 
he  had  always  pretended  an  averfion  to,  made  her 
look  upon  him  as  a  diflembler,  and  that  he  but 
feigned  a  diflike,  in  order  to  come'with  the  greater 
privacy,  and  carry  on  his  amours.    In  fine,  (he 
had  now  the  moft  difadvantageous  idea  of  him, 
that  a  wife,  imagining  herfelf  not  only  injured,, 
but  impofed  upon,  could  entertain.  She  had  fome- 
'    times  an  inclination  to  fpeak  to  him,  and  let  him 
fee  he  was  detected;  but  her  ill  genius  prevented 
her  from  doing  any  thing  that  might  have  cleared 
up  this  affair,  and  represented  to  her,  that  to  fhew 
her  refentment  in  that  public  place,  would  draw 
on  her  the  ridicule  of  her  acquaintance,  and  that 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  33 

it  would  bs  more  prudent  to  obfcrve  In?  behaviour 
during  the  ball,  and  afterwards  follow  him;  and 
in  cale  he  went  not  home,  purfue  him  to  the 
place  of  his  rendezvous. 

Accordingly  (he  kept  her  eye  upon  him 
\vherever  he  turned,  as  much  as  was  poiuble  ior 
her  to  do,  amidft  the  throng  which  happened  to 
be  there  that  night,  and  at  length  faw  hi:n,  as  (he 
thought,  quit  the  room  before  the  ailVmbly  was 
broke  up.  As  (he  had  before  loft  light  of  the  lady 
he  had  been  talking  to,  she  doubted  not  but  there 
was  an  aflignation  between  them ;  and  finding  he 
ftepped  into  a  chair,  she  took  another  and  followed 
till  she  found  he  entered  in  a  houfe  near  Co  vent- 
Garden.  She  confidered  but  a  moment  what  she 
should  do  before  she  ordered  the  chairman  to  knock 
at  the  door,  which  being  opened,  she  defired  the 
fervant  to  shew  her  to  the  gentleman  who  was  juft 
come  in.  The  fellow,  not  doubting  but  his  ma- 
fter  expected  this  fair  vifitor,  conducted  her  up 
ftairs,  where  she  waited  not  long,  before  a  very 
handfome  gentleman,  habited  exactly  in  the  feme 
manner  she  had  feen  her  hulband,  but  now  with- 
out a  mafk,  came  to  her,  and  in  the  moft  complai- 
fent  terms,  begged  to  know  her  commands. 

Vexed  and  confufed  without  meafure  at  the 
difappointment,  she  replied  abruptly,  that  she  had 
miftaken  him  for  another,  and  turned  haftily  away 
in  order  to  go  down  ftairs;  but  he  feized  her  by 
the  garment,  and  told  her  he  should  iil  deferve 
the  bounty  fortune  had  thrown  in  his  way,  if  he 
Coffered  her  to  depart  without  letting  her  know  she 
could  come  in  fearch  of  no  man  who  would  fet  a 
greater  value  on  any  condcfcenfion  she  should  be 
pleafed  to  grant  him. 

VOL,  I.  D 


34  THE   FEMALE  B.  L 

In  fpite  of  the  ill  humour  fhe  was  in,  there  was 
fomewhat  in  the  perfon  and  addrefs  of  this  ftranger 
that  pleafed  her,  and  it  j  uft  then  entering  into  her 
head,  that  there  was  a  poflibility  he  .might  have 
changed  habits  with  Alcaics,  as  people  fometimes 
do  at  a  mafquerade,  either  out  of  frolick,  or  the 
better  to  carry  on  an  intrigue,  flic  afked  him,  if 
he  had  worn  that  habit  the  whole  evening?  To 
which  he  anfwering  in  the  affirmative,  flie  grew 
more  and  more  perplexed,  but  was  certain  (he 
had  not  been  deceived  in  the  voice  fhe  had  heard, 
which  was  that  of  her  hufband,  and  very  differ- 
ent from  his  who  now  fpoke  to  her.  She  then 
;<.fked  farther,  if  he  had  not  taken  notice  of  a  gen- 
•jeman  in  the  fame  habit  with  himfelf?  To  which 
he  faid,  that  he  had  obferved  fuch  a  one,  and  that 
.  the  perfon  fhe  meant  was  very  much  taken  up 
•with  a  lady;  but,  added  he  with  a  fmile,  "  that 
"  lady  was  not  flie,  who  now  does  him  the  honour 
«  to  appear  fo  much  concerned  about  him." 

Thefe  words  piqued  Palmyra  to  the  foul,  and 
£attering  herfelf  that  flie  might  learn  fomething 
farther,  by  entering  into  a  converfation  with  him, 
fufFered  herfelf  to  be  prevailed  on  to  fit  down; 
and  having  told  him  fhe  was  the  wife  of  the  per- 
fon flie  enquired  for,  plucked  off  her  maflc,  in 
order  to  fhew,  that  her  face  was  not  fuch  as  might 
juflify  the  flight  he  had  put  upon  her;  and  con- 
jured him  not  to  conceal  any  thing  he  knew  of 
the  perfidy  of  her  hufoand. 

This  gentleman  whom  I  (hall  call  Lyfimon, 
affured  her,  with  a  great  deal  of  truth,  that  the 
perfon  who  happened  to  be  in  the  fame  clrefs  with 
timfelf,  and  which  made  him  take  the  greater  eo- 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  35 

tice  of  him,  was  utterly  unknown  to  him;  bu«fo 
exaggerated  the  compliments  he  had  heard  him 
make  to  the  lady,  that  Palmyra  was  (juite  loft  in 
fpite  and  jealous  rage;  which  he  perceiving,  art- 
fully blended  his  praifes  of  her  beauty,  with  his 
exclamations  on  the  ingratitude  of  a  hufband,  \vho, 
having  fuch  a  wife,  could  have  eyes  for  any  other 
charms,  till  vanity  on  the  one  fide,  and  revenge  on 
the  other,  rendered  her  in  a  fit  difpofition  to  lifteil 
to  the  pleas  of  a  new  flame;  which  he  fo  fuccefs- 
fully  puriued,  that  before  naorning  he  not  only 
gained  the  entire  poiTellion  of  her  perfon,  but  of  a 
heart,  which,  till  then,  had  been  infenfible  either 
of  the  pains  or  joys  of  love. 

It  was  fome  hours  paft  day-break  when  ihe 
came  home;  Alcaics  had  not  got  rid  of  the  com- 
pany who  had  carried  him  abroad,  until  pretty 
near  the  fame  time,  fo  was  returned  but  jufl  be- 
fore her,  and  not  yet  in  bed.  He  fcemecl  not, 
however,  the  lead  furprized  at  her  ftaying  fo  much 
beyond  the  time  Pae  was  accuftomed  to  come  from 
the  mafquerade,  ncr  aflced  any  queftions  concern- 
ing it;  and  (he  was  too  much  engrofied  by  the 
thoughts  of  Lyfimon,  to  take  any  notice  tharflae 
knew  he  had  been  there;  and  ail,  perhaps,  had 
pafled  over,  if  the  filter  of  Alcaics,  whofe  houfe 
was  dire&Jy  oppofire  to  that  where  Lyfimon  lodg- 
ed, had  not  unluckily  feen  her  at  his  window, 
adjufting  her  drcfs  before  fhe  took  her  leivc.  This 
Ia<!y  had  fccretJy  a  paflion  for  him,  and  1  -.J  tskv'n, 
all  opportunities  to  throw  herfelf  in  his  way,  in 
hores  of  engaging  him ;  but  he  having  either  not 
underftood,  cr  n?g'ecled  ths  advances  (lie 
the  f  i;ht  of  Palmyra  made  her  not  doubt,  but  it 
was  for  her  fake  he  had  appeared  To  ftupid  and  un- 
D  a 


36  THE   FEMAL.E  B.I. 

grateful.  Fired  with  all  the  rage  of  jealcufy,  re- 
venge, and  difappointment,  (he  came  the  next  day 
to  the  houfe  of  Alcales,  and  before  his  face,  flew 
on  Palmyra,  as  a  woman  that  had  brought  difho« 
nour  on  their  family,  and  was  unworthy  of  fo  good 
a  hufband :  repeated  all  (he  knew  of  being  with. 
Lyfimon,  and  faid  (he  would  bring  her  woman,, 
and  a  man-fervant,  whom  me  had  called  to  fee 
her  at  his  window,  to  be  witnefs  to  the  truth  of 
what  (he  faid.  So  home  a  charge,  and  given  by  his 
lifter,  roufed  Alcales  from  that  indolence  of  temper 
he  had  hitherto  behaved  with.  His  cheeks  glowed, 
but  his  heart  was  yet  more  inflamed.  Palmyra,  at 
firft,  denied  the  accufation,  but  finding  the  proofs 
were  too  plain  againft  her,  (he  turned  ihe  whole 
blame  of  this  cruel  cenfure  upon  her  hufbandr 
confefled  that  jealoufy  and  grief  at  feeing  his  en- 
gagement at  the  mafquerade,  had  made  her  follow 
a  perfon  whom  (lie  miflook  for  him-,  but  that  as 
to  having  any  acquaintance  with  that  gentleman, 
on  \vhof?  fcori  ihe  was  reproached,  she  utterly 
deni-d  it,  or  even  that  she  knew  his  name. 

Alcales  likened  to  all  she  faid,  without  offering 
to  givelier  the  leaft  interruption :  but  perceiving 
<h;  had  done,  replied,  with  a  fmile  that  had  fome- 
thing  in  it  which  denoted  a  mingled  malice  and 
difdain,  "  It  is  wondrous  ftrange,  madam,  fince 
"  your  exccfiive  love  for  me5andtheterroryou  were 
**  in  of  a  rival's  fupplanting  you  in  my  affections, 
"  had  carried  you  fuch  lengths,  how  you  cculd  im- 
u  mediately,  and  without  being  convinced  your 
14  fufpicions  were  groundlefs,  afTume  fuch  a  com- 
"  pofednefs  in  your  behaviour  j  you  muft  certain- 
c<  Jy  have  a  more  than  ordinary  command  over. 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  yj 

44  your  paflion.?,  never  fo  much  as  to  mention  what 
"  gave  you  fo  great  pain." 

Palmyra  had  little  to  alledge  againft  fo  critical 
an  obfervation;  but  what  she  wanted  in  argument, 
fhc  made  up  with  railing;  endeavouring,  as  is 
common  in  fuch  cafes,  to  conceal  her  own  faults 
Ly  exaggerating  thole  of  her  hufband.  At  laft  tha 
q'v.uei  arrived  to  fuch  a  height,  that  she  flew  to 
her  chamber,  packed  up  her  jewels,  and  went  to 
her  bi ether's  houfe,  where  she  complained  loudly 
of  the  injuftice  she  had  received, .and  made  bitter 
imprecations  never  to  return  to  AJcales. 

In  the  mean  time  he  was  fully,  convinced  of  the 
injury  that  had  been  done  him,  and  in  the  heat  of 
his  refentment  fent  a  challenge  to  Lyfimcn,  who 
was  too  brave  not  to  anfwer  it.  They  fought, 
and  were  both  of  them  dangeroufly  wounded. — 
The  whole  time  that  Alcales  was  confined  to  his 
bed,  neither  Palmyra,,  nor  any  of  her  friends,  onco 
fent  to  enquire  after  his  health  :  this  want  of  even 
common  complaifance,  neither  himfelf,  nor  rela^ 
tions,  have  ever  forgiven,,  efpecially  as  they  hear*.! 
that  Lyfimon  was  treated  by  them  with  mo:  e  rcfpe£r. 
Nothing  could  be  more  inveterate  than  the  hatred 
•which  has  from  that  time  been  between  the  two 
families.  Palmyra  kept  her  word  and  never  favr 
her  hufband  after;  the  only  thing,  perhaps,  she 
could  have  obliged  him  in.  Afiured  as  he  was  of 
her  infidelity,  proofs  were  wanting  for  a  divorce; 
therefore  it  was  agreed  by  the  lawyers  appointed 
by  each  party,  that  she  should  have  the  intereft  o£ 
her  own  fortune  to  live  upon,  ia  what  manner  was 
moft  agreeable  to  her.  They  putt-.i  with  the  fame 
indifference,  though  with  left  tnnouiiity  th.,i 
met.  He  retired  to  his  country  fear,  v/here  he 
D  3 


38  THE  FEMALE  B.  t 

Kill  drags  on  a  folitary  gloomy  life.  She  went  to 
France,  where  her  beloved Lyfimon  was  gone,  foon 
after  the  recovery  of  his  wounds ;  but  whether  fhe 
continues  to  find  in  his  conversation  fufficient  to 
ntcne  for  her  lofs  of  innocence  and  reputation,  is 
very  much  to  be  queftioned. 

But  of  all  who  ever  fuffered  by  their  curiofity, 
or  attachment  to  this  dangerous  diveriion,  the  cafe 
cf  the  innocent  Erminia  was  mod  truly  pitiable. 
This  young  lady  and  her  brother  were  the  only 
HTue  of  a  very  happy  marriage,  and  both  fhared 
equally  the  tendernefs  of  their  indulgent  parents. 
They  were  educated  in  the  ftricleft  rudiments  of 
pietyandvirtue,nndhadibmethingfo  innately  good 
.  ia  their  difpofmons,  as  made  the  practice  of  thofe 
duties,  which  to  others  feem  mod  fevere,  to  them. 
:i  pleafure.  The  family  lived  in  the  country,  and 
came  not  to  London  but  once  in  two  or  three 
ylsars,  and  then  flaid  but  a  fhort  time-,  till  the 
young  gentleman  having  finifhed  his  ftudies  at 
Cambridge,  it  was  thought  proper  he  fhould  fee 
mere  cf  the  world,  than  he  could  poffibly  do  in 
that  retired  part.  But  fearing  he  fhould  fall  into 
the  vices  of  the  age,  in  cafe  he  was  left  too  much 
to  him felf,  they  relolved  on  moving  to  town,  in 

to  have  him  ftill  under  their  own  eye. 

Accordingly  a  houfe  was  taken  in  a  certain 

fquare,  and  the  whole  family  ca.ne  up,  and,  not 

to  ieem  particular,  w^rc  obliged  to  live  after  the 

manner  people  do  in  town  :  Erminia  was  not  nov/ 

fixteen,  and  (as  all  new  faces  are,  if  tolera- 

:.y:]fome)  was  extremely  taken  notice  of,  yet 

v.'.is  not  her  young  heart  puffed  up  with  the  leaft 

pride  or  vanity;    and  though   llie    had  all  thaL" 

f.ihiefs  which  is  the  infeparable  companies 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  39 

of  innocence  and  good-nature,  yet  it  did  never 
tranfport  her  fo  far  as  to  take,  or  permit  any  of 
thofe  liberties,  which  (he  faw  fome  of  her  new 
acquaintance  make  no  fcruple  of. 

Soon  after  their  arrival  winter  came  on,  and 
wherever  either  fhe  or  her  brother  went,  nothing 
was  talked  on  but  the  mafquerade :  neither  of  them 
had  ever  feen  one,  and  the  eagernefs  they  obferv- 
ed  in  others,  excited  a  curiofity  in  them.  Their 
parents  would  net  oppofe  the  inclination  they  ex- 
prefled,  and  confented  they  Ihould  go  together j 
but  gave  their  fon  a  ftrict  charge  to  be  watchful 
over  his  fifter,  and  never  quit  fight  of  her  till  he 
brought  her  home  to  them  again.  Though  this 
was  an  entertainment  unknown  in  England  in 
their  gay  time  of  life,  and  confequently  they  were* 
flrangers  to  the  methods  praclifed  at  it,  yet  hav- 
ing heard  fomewhat  of  the  dangers,  they  repeated 
over  and  over  the  fame  injunction  to  the  young 
gentlema'n,  who  allured  them  he  would  take  the 
fame  care  as  if  themfelves  were  prefent. 

Alas!  he  little  knew  how  impracticable  it  was 
to  keep  his  promife;  they  were  no  fooner  entered, 
than  both  were  bewildered  among  the  promifcuous 
aflembly;  the  ftrange  habit?,  the  hurry,  the  con- 
fufion  quite  diftratled  their  attention.  They  kept 
clofe  to  each  other,  indeed,  for  fome  time;  but 
were  foon  feparated  by  a  croud  that  came  rufhing 
between  them,  fome  accofting  the  brother,  others 
the  fifter.  Thofe  who  talked  to  them  eafily  found 
they  were  flrangers  to  the  converfation  of  the 
place,  antl  whifpering  it  about,  our  young  country 
gentry  ferved  as  butts  for  the  company  to  level 
all  the  arrows  of  their  wit  againft. 

Erminia  had  loft  her  brother  for  a  confiderable 


4b  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

time,  and  was  encompafied  by  perfons  of  both 
fexes,  whofe  mode  of  fpcech  was  neither  pteafing 
to  her,  nor  did  fhe  know  how  to  ani'wer;  at  lail, 
the  fight  of  a  blue  domino,  which  was  the  habit 
he  went  in,  revived  her,  and  fhe  ran  to  the  perfon 
who  wore  it,  and  catching  fait  hold  of  him,  "  Dear 
a  Brother,  cried  ihe,  let  us  go  home.  I  have  been 
"  frighted  to  death  by  thofe  noify  people  yonder, 
«*  I  wonder  what  pleafure  "any  body  can  take  in 
u  being  here." 

The  peribn  fne  accofled  made  no  reply;  but 
taking  her  under  the  arm,  conducted  her  out  as 
fhe  had  defired,  and  went  with  her  into  a  hackney 
coach.  Little  fufpectirg  the  accident  that  had  he- 
fallen  her,  fhe  attended  not  to  what  orders  he  gave 
the  coachman ;  and,  glad  to  find  herfelf  out  of  a 
place  which  for  her  had  fo  few  charms,  entertain- 
ed her  fuppofed  brother  with  a  repetition  of  \vhst 
had  been  faid  to  her,  till  the  coach  flopped  at  the 
door  of  a  great  houfe:  as  it  was  not  yet  light,  fhe 
diftinguifhed  it  not  from  their  own,  and  innocent:- 
ly  jumped  out,  and  was  within  the  entry  before 
fhe  difcovered  her  miftake;  but  as  fcon  as  fhe  did> 
•*  Blefs  me,  cried  fhe,  where  have  you  brought 
"  me,  brother?"  She  fullowed  him,  however,  up 
flairs,  where  he,  pulling  off  his  vizard,  difcovered 
a  face  fhe  had  never  feen  before. 

Never  was  furprize  and  terror  greater  than  thai 
which  now  feized  the  heart  of  that  unfortunate 
young  lady:  fhe  wept,  fhe  prayed,  fhe  conjured 
him  by  every  thing  that  is  called  facred,  or  worthy 
of  veneration,  to  fuffer  her  to  depart;  but  he  was 
one,  to  whom,  had  fhe  been  lefs  beautiful,  her  in- 
nocence was  a  fufficient  charm.  The  more  averfe 
nd  fhocked  Ihe  feemed  at  the  rude  behaviour  with 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  41 

which  he  immediately  began  to  treat  her,the  more 
were  his  defircs  inflamed  ;  and  having  her  in  his 
power,  and  in  a  houfe  where  all  her  shrieks  and 
cries  were  as  unavailing  as  her  tears  and  intreaties, 
he  fatiated,  by  the  moft  barbarous  force,  his  bafc 
inclinations;  and  for  a  moment's  joy  to  himfelf, 
was  the  entire  ruin  of  a  poor  creature,  whofe  ig- 
norance of  the  world,  and  the  artifices  of  man- 
kind, alone  had  betrayed  to  him. 

The  cruel  conqueft  gained,  he  was  at  a  lofs 
how  to  difpofe  of  his  prey:  a  thoufand  times  she 
begged  he  would  complete  the  villany  he  had  be- 
gun, and  kill  the  wretch  he  had  made;  but  thisww 
what  neither  his  fafety,  nor  perhaps  his  principle, 
wicked  as  he  was,  would  permit  him  to  do. '  He 
eafily  found  she  was  a  girl  of  condition,  and  doubt- 
ed not  but  she  had  friends  who  would  revenge  the 
injury  he  had  done  her,  could  they  by  any  means 
difcover  the  author ;  he  therefore,  after  having  in 
vain  endeavoured  to  pacify  lit r, and  prevail  on  her 
to  comply  with  his  dellres  of  holding  a  fecret  cor- 
refpondence  with  him,  compelled  her  to  let  him 
bind  a  handkerchief  over  her  eyes,  that  she  might 
not  be  able  to  defcribe  either  the  houfe  or  ftreet 
where  she  was  abufed  j  then  put  her  into  a  hackney 
coach,  which  he  ordered  to  drive  into  an  obfcurc 
dirty  lane  in  the  Strand,  near  the  water-fide,  where 
he  made  her  be  fet  down,  and  immediately  drove 
away  with  all  the  fpeed  the  horfes  could  make. 

She  no  fooner  found  herfelf  at  liberty,  than  fhc 
plucked  the  bandage  from  her  eyes, — ftie  caft  a 
difconfolate  look  about, — me  knew  not  where  (he 
wasj  but  the  fight  of  the  water  at  fome  little  di- 
ftance  from  her,  tempted  her  more  than  once,  as 
Ihc  has  fince  confefled,  to  throw  herfelf  into  ic. 


4*  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

The  precepts  of  religion,  however,  reflrained  her, 
and  (he  wandered  backwards  and  forwards  for 
fome  time,  uncertain  what  to  do;  at  length  me 
came  to  a  more  populous  place,  and  feeing  a  chair, 
made  herfclf  be  carried  home,  though  with  what 
agonies  of  fhame  and  grief  is  eafier  to  imagine 
than  deferibe. 

The  young  gentleman,  her  brother,  had  all  this 
time  been  in  the  utmoft  diftratlion;  he  no  fooner 
miffed,  than  he  went  in  fearch  of  her  round  and 
round  the  room,  and  through  all  the  little  avenues 
that  led  to  it;  described  her  habit  to  the  fervants, 
and  afked  if  they  had  feen  fuch  a  lady;  but  all  his 
endeavours  being  fruitlcfs,  he  ran  home,  flattering 
himfelf,  that  miffing  him,  me  had  gone  before. 
Not  finding  her  there,  he  flew  back  again  to  the 
Hay-market;  made  a  fecond  fearch,. a  fecond  in- 
quiry, and  that  being  as  ineffectual  as  the  firfr,  his 
grief  and  his  defpair  were  beyond  all  bounds.  He 
truly  loved  his  fifter,  and  doubted  not  but  fome 
very  unhappy  accident  had  befallen  her;  but  what 
involved  him  yet  in  greater  horrors,  was  how  he 
(hould  anfwer  to  his  parents  his  fo  ill  acquitting 
himfelf  of  the  charge  they  laid  on  him  concerning 
her.  Dreading  their  reproaches,  and  even  yet 
more  the  agonies  they  would  feel  at  feeing  him  re- 
turn without  her,  he  flew  about  the  flreets  like 
one  totally  deprived  of  reafon,  until  day  being  far 
advanced,  and  every  body  he  met  flaring  at  him 
as  a  perfon  whom  drink  or  madnefs  had  rendered 
an  objeft  of  derifion,  mame,  at  laft,  got  the  bet- 
ter of  his  vexations,  and  he  ventured  to  encoun- 
ter what  was  more  dreadful  to  him  than  death  it- 
felf. 

The  anxious  parents  could  not  think  of  going 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  43 

to  their  repofe  until  their  dear  children  were  re- 
turned in  fafety;  they  had  apprehenfions  which 
they  could  not  account  for,  none  having  dared  to 
inform  them  that  Erminia  was  miffing,  or  that 
her  brother,  many  hours  before,  had  called  at  the 
door  to  afk  if  me  was  come:  but  when  they  now 
fa'w  him  enter  with  a  confufed  and  dejected  air, 
and  found  their  daughter  was  not  with  him,  they 
both  at  once  cried  out,  in  a  tranfport  of  mingled 
rage  and  grief,  "  Where  is  your  fifler?  what  is 
(t  become  of  Erminia?  do  you  approach  us  with- 
"  out  her?" 

The  condition  this  poor  youth  was  in,  would 
be  very  difficult  to  exprcfs;  he  trembled,  hung 
down  his  head,  and  his  flowing  eyes,  let  fall  a 
fhower  of  tears  upon  his  bread,  but  had  not  power 
to  fpeak,  until  his  father,  impatient  of  knowing 
even  the  word  that  could  befal,  commanded  him 
either  to  repeat  what  had  happened,  or  that  in- 
ftant  leave  his  fight  for  ever.  "O  Sir,  (then  cried 
v  he)  what  can  I  fay?  my  fitter  is  gone!  all  my 
'•c.care  in  obeying  your  commands  was  vain,  and 
«M  am  wholly  ignorant  how  this  misfortune  hap* 
«  pened." 

Scarce  had  he  fpoke  thefe  words,  when  the 
ruined  maid  appeared.  Father,  mother,  brother, 
all  ran  at  once  to  catch  her  in  their  arms;  but 
the  (hock  of  returning  to  them  as  (he  now  was 
rendered,  worked  too  powerfully  on  theweaknefs 
of  her  fpirits,  to  leave  her  in  a  condition  to  re- 
ceive their  embraces,  and  (lie  fell  into  a  fwoon,  in 
which  (he  continued  a  long  time,  though  they  im- 
mediately undreiled,  put  her  to  bed,  and  ufed  all 
proper  .means  for  her  recovery. 

On  the  return  of  her  fenfes,  flic  fell  into  the 


44  THE  FEMALE  B.  t 

mod  lamentable  complaints,  but  could  not  be  pre- 
vailed upon,  while  her  father  and  brother  were  in 
the  room,  to  reveal  any  thing  of  the  occafion. 
Her  mother  obferving  their  prefence  was  a  re- 
ftraint,  defired  them  to  withdraw;  after  which, 
partly  by  commands,  and  partly  by  intreaties,  but 
more  by  mentioning  all  the  evils  that  her  imagi- 
nation could  fuggeft,  at  lafl  the  whole  fad  fecret 
was  revealed. 

Never  was  fo  difconfolate  a  family,  and  the 
more  fo,  as  they  could  by  no  means  difcover  the 
brutal  author  of  their  misfortune;  the  precautions 
he  had  taken  rendered  all  their  fearch  in  vain; 
and  when  fome  days  after  they  prevailed  on  Er- 
minia  to  go  with  them  in  a  coach  almoft  through- 
out London,  yet  could  (he  not  point  out  either  the 
houfe  or  ftreet  where  her  ravifher  had  carried  her. 

To  fill  the  meafure  of  her  woes,  a  young  gen- 
tleman arrived  in  town,  who  long  had  loved,  and 
had  the  approbation  of  her  friends,  and  for  whom 
fhe  alfo  felt  all  the  paffion  that  can  infpire  a  vir- 
tuous mind.  He  had  by  fome  bufinefs  been  pre- 
vented from  accompanying  the  family  in  their  re- 
moval, but  was  now  come  full  of  the  hopes  of 
having  his  defires  compleated,  by  a  happy  mar- 
riage with  Erminia. 

Melancholy  reverfe  of  fate!  Inflead  of  being 
received  with  open  arms,  and  that  chearful  wel- 
come he  had  been  accuflomed  to,  and  had  rea- 
fbn  to  expe£r,,  the  moft  heavy  gloom  appeared  on 
all  the  faces  of  thofe  he  was  permitted  to  fee :  but 
Erminia  no  fooner  heard  of  his  arrival,  than  (he 
(hut  herfelf  up  in  her  chamber,  and  would  by  no 
means  be  prevailed  upon  to  appear  before  him. 
To  excufe  her  abfence,  they  told  him  fhe  was  in- 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  45 

difpofed;  but  this  feemed  all  pretence,  becaufe  the 
freedom  with  which  they  had  always  lived  together 
might  very  well  allow  him  the  privilege  of  vifitirtg 
her  in  her  chamber.  He  complained  of  this  altera- 
tion ia  her  behaviour,  and  doubted  not,  at  firft, 
but  it  was  occafioned  by  the  preference  they  gave 
lo  fome  new  rival.  The  true  reafon,  however, 
tould  not  be  kept  fo  much  a  fecrer,  but  that  it 
was  whifpered  about,  and  he  foon  got  a  hint  of  it. 
How  ieniible  a  fhock  it  muft  give  him,  may  eafily 
be  conceived;  but  he  got  the  better  of  it,  and  af- 
ter a  very  little  reflection,  went  to  her  father,  told 
•liiu  the  affii&ing  news  he  had  heard,  but  withal 
afi tired  him,  that  as  his  love  for  Erminia  was  chief- 
ly founded  on  her  virtue,  an  a&  of  force  could 
not  be  efteemed  any  breach  of  it,  and  was  ftill 
ready  to  marry  her,  if  me  would  confent. 

This  generofity  charmed  the  whole  family;, but 
Erminia  could  not  think  of  accepting  the  offer; 
-—the  more  fhe  found  him.  worthy  of  htr  atfe&ions 
in  her  ftate  of  innocence,  tlmlefs  could  {he  fup- 
port  the  (hame  of  being  h?s,  in  the  condition  fhe 
was: — fhe  told  her  parents,  that  fhe  had  taken  a 
firm  refolution  never  to  marry,  and  begged  their 
permifiion  to  retire  to  an  aunt,'  who  was  married 
to  an  old  clergyman,  and  lived  in  one  of  the  mcft 
remote  counties  in  England.  Dear  as  her  prefence 
was,  they  found  fomething  fo  truly  noble  in  her 
way  of  thinking,  that  they  would  not  oppofe  it; 
and  even  her  lover,  in  fpite  of  himfelf,  could  not 
forbear  applauding  what  gave  a  thoufand  daggers 
to  his  hca.t. 

Erminia,  in  a  fliort  time,  departed  for  her  coun- 
try rdidence:  nothing  was  ever  more  mournful 
than  the  leave  flic  took  of  her  rarcuts  and  bro- 

VOL,  1.  E 


46  THE   FEMALE  B.  t. 

ther;  but  not  all  the  entreaties  of  her  lover,  by 
meiTages  and  letters,  could  gain  ib  far  upon  her 
mcdefty,  as  to  prevail  on  her" to  fee  him;  fhe  fent 
him,  however,  a  letter,  fuil  of  the  moft  tender  ac- 
knowledgments of  his  love  and  penerofity,  and 
with  this  he  was  obliged  to  be  content. 

It  is  not  every  woman  would  have  refented 
fach  an  injuty  in  thefame  manner  with  Erminia; 
and  it  muft  be  confefled,  that  her  notions  of  ho- 
nour and  virtue  had  fomewhat  fuperlatively  deli- 
cate in  them.  What  a  lofs  then  to  the  world  to 
be  deprived  of  fo  amiable  an  example, as  fhe  would 
have  doubtlefs  proved,  of  conjugal  truth,  tender- 
nefs,  and  a  drift  observance  of  every  duty  the  men 
fo  much  defire  to  find  in  her  they  make  a  partner 
for  life!  How  can  her  brutal  ravifher  reflect,  as  it 
is  impoffible  but  he  fometimes  muft,  on  the  mif- 
chiefs  he  has  occafioned,  without  horrors,  fuch  as 
mull  render  life  a  burden? — Though  he  yet  is  hid 
ia  darknefs,  and  left  no  traces  by  which  the  public 
may  point  the  villain  out,  and  treat  him  with 
the  abhorrence  he  deferves,his  own  thoughts  muft 
furely  be  the  avengeraof  his  crime,  and  make  him 
more  truly  wretched  than  any  exterior  punifhment 
could  do. 

It  is  true  that  accidents  of  this  dreadful  na- 
ture but  rarely  happen;  and  heaven  forbid  they 
ibould  ever  be  more  frequent!  yet  I  am  afraid  they 
fa-e  much  more  fo  than  is  publickly  known:  me- 
tlunks,  therefore,  youth  and  innocence  cannot  be 
too  much  upon  itsguard, even  againft dangers  that 
fcem  moft  remote:  the  fnares  laid  for  it  are  fome- 
times fo  well  concealed,  that  the  moft  penetrating 
eye  cannot  difcover  them;  and  fhe  whoboafts  the 
greateft  difcerament,  is  often  entangled  in  them  the 


15.  I.  SPECTATOR.  47 

fooneft.  The  inadvertent  and  unwary  are,  indeed, 
to  be  pitied;  bat  thofe  who  run  wilfully,  ami  in 
defiance,  as  it  Avere,  of  all  temptations,  even  tho* 
they  (hould  efcape,  merit  little  thanks  from  thtir 
own  fex,  becaufe-they  fet  an  ill  precedent  Icr 
others,  who,  perhaps,  may  be  lefs  fortunate. 

I  cannot  fay  our  fummer  evenings  public  en- 
tertainments, of  which  I  think  Vauxhall  not  only 
the  moft  pleafant,  butalib  moil  frequented  by  ths 
great  world,  are  liable  to  fuch  unlucky  accidents. 
Every  one  there  appears  with  the  fame  face  which 
nature  gave  him,  and  if  intrigues  arc  carried  on,  it 
mult,  at  Jeaft,  be  with  the  conunt  of  both  parties; 
yet  here  are  dangerous  excitements, — mufic,  flat- 
tery, delightful  groves,  and  fweet  recefles,  to  lull 
afleep  trfe  guardians  of  honour.  A  certain  well 
known  gentleman,  whofe  acquaintance  bodes  no 
good  to  the  young  and  beautiful  of  our  fex,  has 
often  boafted  that  Vauxhail  was  the  temple  of 
Flora,  of  which  he  has  long  been  conftituted  high- 
prieft.  I  wifli  there  may  not  be  too  much  truth  in 
what  he  fays;  but  for  the  vindication  of  fome  la- 
dies who  have  been  lovers  of  a  ramble  crofs  ths 
water,  I  mud  recite  one  inftance  of  a  dilappoini- 
ment  he  met  with,  much  to  his  mortification,  ani 
which,  for  fome  time,  brought  him  under  dif- 
grace  with  the  moft  illuftrious  of  all  his  patrons. 

As  his  chief  employment  is  the  fearch  of  beauty, 
in  which  our  modern  fine  gentlemen  allow  him  to 
have  an  cxquifite  tafte,  he  one  night  fmgled  out  a, 
young  girl,  who  feemed  to  have  comprifed  iu  her 
every  thing  that  could  infpire  an  amorous  inclina- 
tion. Flavia,  for  fo  I  (hall  call  her,  had  two  com- 
panions with  her  of  her  own  fex.  He  artfully  in- 
trod ucedhimfelf  into  their converfation,:uKli 
E  2 


48  THE   FEMALE  B.  I. 

that  fhe  whom  he  had  pitched  upon,  had  no  lefs 
vfit  and  addrefs,  than  (he  had  beauty.  This,  he 
thought  to  hirnfelf  was  a  conqueft  worth  obtain- 
ing, and  was  refclved  to  fpare  no  pains  in  the  at- 
tempt, being  certain  that  if  he  was  fo  happy  to 
fucceed  in  it,  his  reward  would  be  proportionate 
to  the  fervice. 

The  modeft  and  grave  deportment  with  which 
he  behaved  towards  her  and  her  friends,  made 
them,as  they  had  no  male  acquaintance  with  them, 
glad  of  his  protection  to  fee  them  into  a  boat  when 
the  company  broke  up.  and  the  great  croud  and 
hurry  which  there  always  is, rendered  him,  indeed, 
fo  very  ufeful,  that  they  could  not,  without  being 
guilty  of  too  prudifh  a  referve,  refufe  permitting 
him  a  paflage  with  them  to  the  other  fide;  by  this 
means  he  got  knowledge  where  they  all  lived,  for 
his  compiaifance  would  need  extend  'itfelf  fo  far  as 
lo  fee  each  to  her  refpe&ive  habitation. 

Fiavia  being  the  only  perfon  on  whom  he  had 
:  defjgn,  he  went  to  wait  on  her  the  next  day, 
under  pretence  of  inquiring  after  her  health-,  the 
evening  happening  to  be  more  cool  than  ordinary, 
he  faid  he  feared  might  have  had  fome  ill  effeft  oa 
a  confutation  fo  delicate  as  her's.  Fiavia,  who 
fufpecled  not  the  ferpent  that  lay  hid  under  fuch 
fair  behaviour,  received  him  with  the  utmoft  civi- 
lity, but  her  mother  with  infinitely  more:  fhehad 
been  a  woman  of  gallantry  in  her  youth,  and  did 
not  think  herfelf  yet  paft  it,  fo  was  very  ready  to 
encourage  the  vifits  of  any  perfon  who  made  a 
good  appearance.  She  thanked  him  a  thoufand 
times  over  for  the  care  he  had  taken  of  her  daugh- 
ter; and  when  encouraged  by  her  manner  of  treat- 
ing him,  he  a&edperrniffion  to  wait  oa  themfoms- 


B,  I.  SPECTATOR  49 

times  at  tea-drinking,  fhe  a  flu  red  him,  nothing 
could  do  her  more  honour  and  pleafure,  than  tocul- 
tivate  an  acquaintance  with  a  gentleman  of  his  me-» 
rir.  He  now  looked  on  half  his  work  as  done,  and 
by  the  dilpofition  of  the  mother,  judged  he  ihouM 
find  little  difficulty  in  his  deligns  on  the  daughter-, 
efpecially  aa  on  inquiry  into  their  circiimftances, 
he  found  they  were  very  low; — that  the  father 
of  Fiavia,  at  his  death,,  had  left  a  numerous  family 
unprovided  for,  and  that  the  other  children  were 
difperfed,  fume  with  one  relation,  fome  with  an- 
other, the  mother  beingable  to  fupport  no  more  than 
this  one.  In  this  confidence  he  went  immediately 
to  the  illuftrious,  Rinaldo,  and,  after  magnifying 
his  own  zeal  and  jndufiry,  to  ferve  his  pleafures, 
told  him  he  had  difcovered  a-treafure  of  charms, 
iit  only  for  his  poilctlion;  and  with  fuch  iuicious 
phrafes  painted  to  him  every  grace  the  beautiful 
Fiavia  was  miltrtfs  of,  thatRinaldo  was  all  on  fire 
to  fee  her.  "  If  I  find  her  fuch  as  you  deicnbr, "' 
faid  he,  "  and  I  enjoy  her  by  your  means,  i  will 
"  deny  you  nothing  you.  Can  alk."  The  other 
bowed,  and  allured  him  he  would  bring  her  into 
the  Mall  the  next  day,  where  his  own  eye  mould 
convince  him  of  the  truth. 

This  beiug  agreed  to,   he  went  to  the  mother 
of  Fiavia,  and  intreated  they  would  favour  him  • 
with  their  company  to  the  Park,  for  he  would  not 
hazard  a  refufal,  by  aiking  the  one  without  the 
other;  and  betide,,  thought  it  would  be  imprudent 
to  give  them  any  room  to  fufpec~l  his  intentions.,, 
till  he  mould  know  Rinaldo's  ientimcnts. 

They  now  looked  on  him  as  one  of  tbeir  ac- 
quaintance, and  were  not  at  all  difpleafed  to  be 
gallanted  by  a  perfon  who-made  the  figure  he  did. 

£3 


50  THE  FEMALE'  B.  I; 

In  fins,  they  went;  Rinaldo  was  there,  met  them 
at  feveral  turns,  and  found  nothing  in  Flavia  but 
what  attracted  his  admiration.  The  laft  time  he 
patted  by  them,  "  You  are  a  happy  man,"  faid  he, 
calling  him  by  his  name,  "  to  have  the  conduct  o£ 
"  fo  much  beauty." 

This  purveyor  for  the  vices  of  other  men  was 
highly  pleafed  to  find  the  choice  he  had  made 
approved.  Flavia  blufhed;  but  her  mother  was 
tranfported  to  fee  by  whom  they  were  taken  notice 
of.  All  the  time  they  continued  walking  after- 
wards they  were  entertained  with  nothing  but  the 
praifes  of  Rinaldo, — his  fine  fhap? ,  his  genteel  air, 
but  above  all,  his  good-nature, 'gcnerofity,  and  li- 
berality to  the  ladies,  were  expatiated  oa  with  all 
the  pomp  that  words  could  give  them. 

He  proceeded  no  farther  at  that  time;  but  the 
next  day,  when  he  waited  on  Rinaldo  to  know  his 
commands,  he  found  him  all  impatience  for  the 
pofleffion  of  Flavia;  on  which  he  went  dire£lly  to 
her,  and  made  no  fcruple  of  acquainting  both  her-, 
ielf  and  mother  with  the  paflion  that  illuftrious 
perfon  was  infpired  with,  and  at  the  fame  time 
made  them  the  moft  formal  compliments  of  con- 
gratulation on  their  good  fortune. 

The  mother  liftened  to  him  with  the  moft  rap- 
tured attention,  bhe  already  fancied  herfelf  in 
Ler  coach-and-fix,  and  a  thonfand  wild  ideas  of 
grandeur,  homage,  and  magnificence,  ran  through 
her  head  in  an  inftant.  She  told  him,  that  fhe 
knew  her  duty  better  than  to  oppofe  any  thing  the 
great  Punildo  wifhed,  and  fhe  hoped  her  daughter 
•would  alfo  receive  the  honour  he  did  her  with  a 
Becoming  obedience. 

this  time  fpoke  not  a  word  j  the  iwr« 


B.  I.  SPECTATOR.  51 

prize  of  fuch  an  offer,  at  firft,  and  the  (hock  it  gave 
her  to  hear  her  mother's  reply  afterwards,  kept 
her  filcnt:  but  the  bluihes,  which,  in  realk^were 
excited  by  her  difdain,  were  taken  onlyas  the  effect 
of  her  modefty.  Both  of  them  urged  her  to  fpeafc 
and  the  emiflary  of  Rinaldo  intreated  to  know  from 
her  own  mouth,  what  anfwer  he  {hould  give  his 
patron : — At  laft,  "  Sir,  (faid  (he,)  1  am  utterly 
"  unworthy  of  any  regard  from  fo  great.a  perfon, 
"  and  equally  ignorant  how  to  repay  it  any  other- 
«{  wife  than  by  my  prayers  and  good  wimes.  This 
«  is  all  I  can  fay  as  to  Rinaldo;  but  as  to  yourfelf, 
"  from  whom  I  little  expected  fuch  a  propofal,  be 
"  affured  I  am  and  will  be  virtuous." 

With  thefe  words  me  flung  out  of  the  room, 
leaving  the  perfon  (he  addreffed  them  to  in  a  great 
deal  of  confternation;  but  her  mother  foon  brought 
him  into  a  better  humour:  me  told  him  the  girl 
had  forae  romantic  notions  in  her  head,  but  me 
{hould  eafily  bring  her  to  a  more  juft  fenfe  of  her 
duty,  when  ihe  talked  to  her  in  private;  and  there- 
fore begged  he  would  not  mention  her  foolilh  be- 
haviour to  Rinaldo,  for  me  would  undertake  to  pre- 
pare her  to  receive  his  commands  whenever  he 
pleafed. 

It  was  then  concluded  between  them,  that  me 
{hould  remove  with  her  daughter  to  a  fmall  but 
pleafant  houfe  they  had  on  the  banks  of  the  river, 
and  which,  indeed,  was  their  ufual  habitation,  they 
having  only  lodgings  in  town  for  the  prefent,  on 
account  of  a  law-fuit  the  mother  of  Flavia  came 
to  follicit: — that  Ihe  fhould  have  two  or  three 
days,  in  order  to  bring  her  into  fuch  a  difpofition, 
as  they  wimed;  and  that  when  every  thing  was 
ready,  fhe  would  let  him  know  by  a  letter,  after 


5*  THE  FEMALE  B.  I. 

which  Rinaldo  might  come  privately  to  their; 
houfe  by  water. 

Our  modern  Pandarus  was  no  fooner  gonej. 
than  die  flew  to  her  daughter's  chamber,  wheie  Ihe- 
found  her  in  tears.  Sue  called  her  a  thoufUad  fools,. 
— "  What,  (cried  the,)  do  you, grieve  for  what  any 
<f  other  than  yourfelf  would  rejoice  in  ? — Do  you 
"  confider  who  Rinaldo  is? — What  he  will  here- 
"  after  be? — And  what  your  fons,  if  you  have 
tf  any  by  him,  will  be?" 

To  this  Flavia  replied  as  became  a  maid  devot- 
ed to  virtue,  begged  me  would  inlift  no  farther  on 
a  thing  flic  was  determined  never  to  confent  to* 
-—and  concluded  with  » {Turing  her,  that  Ihe  mould 
prefer  the  loweft  Itatc  in  lire  to  ail  the  grandeur 
in  the  world,  if  purcnafed  at  the  expence  of  her 
innocence. 

The  old  lady's  vexation  was  inexpreffible  nt 
finding  her  fo  refractory  to  her  defires;  but  refcf 
lute  not-  to  lofe  the  advantages  {lie  promifed  to  her- 
felf  and  family  by  this  propofal,  {he  left  no  means 
untried  to  bend  or  perfuade  her  to  compliance. 

When  they  got  to  their  little  country  feat,  me 
fet  before  her  eyes  the  misfortunes  they  were  at 
prefent  involved  in,  and  endeavoured  to  convince 
her,  that  the  paffi.cn  Rinaldo  had  for  her,  feemed  a 
peculiar  mark  of  Divine  Providence  in  their  far 
your;  and  that  what  would  be  a  crime  to  grant  to 
any  other  man,  was  eruirely  fanttified  by  his  de- 
gree,and  woukl  be  approved  on  both  byheaven  and 
earth.  But  finding  thefe  arguments  of  no  weight, 
and, that  all  the  fophiftry  me  made  ufe  of  was  ia 
vain,  ih.-  proceeded  to  threats,  and  even  to  blows.; 
nay,  denied  her  necefTary  food,  and  ufed  her  with 
a  cruelty  icarce  to  be  paralleled  in  a  mother.  This 


8.  L  SPECTATOR.  53 

method  alfo  failing,  and  the  virtuous  maid  remain- 
ing fixed  in  her  refolution,  {he  again  had  recourfe 
to  perfuafion,  till  Flavia,  quite  tired  out  with 
hearing  the  fame  things  fo  often  repeated,  at  laft 
left  off"  making  any  reply;  but  was  all  the  time 
meditating  how  (he  fhould  avoid  the  ruin  intended 
her. 

The  mother  now  looked  upon  her  filence  as  a. 
kind  of  confent,  and  that  it  was  only  owing  to  an 
obftinacy  of  nature,  that  (lie  did  not  give  it  in 
plain  words. — In  this  opinion  (he  fet  her  houfe  in 
the  greateft  order,  and  wrote  to  her  good  friend, 
as  fhe  termed  him,  intimating  that  her  daughter 
now  reptnted  of  her  folly,  and  was  in  a  difpoft- 
tion  to  receive  the  honour  of  a  vifit  from  Rinaldo 
whenever  he  pleafed.  To  this  fhe  had  a  fpeedy 
anfwer,  and  a  day  appointed  for  the  coming  of 
that  great  perfon. 

Fa  via  was  foon  apprized  of  it  by  the  prepa- 
rations making  in  the  houfe,  and  the  order  given 
her  to  drefs,  and  to  appear  in  the  bed  manner  flie 
•was  able.  "  Whom  am  I  then  to  fee,  madam  ?"  de- 
manded fhe,  in  a  dejefted  tone:  her  mother  then 
told  her,  that  her  illuftrious  lover  intended  them 
the  honour  of  a  vifit;  "  but  (continued  fhe,)  I 
**  will  leave  it  to  yourfelf  how  to  behave  towards 
"  him,  and  hope  you  have  difcretion  enough  to 
"  manage  him  fo,  as  that  the  friendfiiip  he  now 
"  vouchfafes  to  have  for  us,  may  not  be  wholly  loft." 

This  artful  woman  had  two  reafons  for  now 
fpeaking  to  her  in  thefe  mild  terms;  the  one  was, 
that  iflhe  made  ufe  of  the  authority  of  a  mother, 
it  might  ruffle  her  features,  and  confequently  ren- 
der her  lefs  amiable  in  the  eyes  of  Rinaldo;  and 
the  other,  that  by  pretending  every  thing  would 


54  THE  F  EM  ALE  B.  I. 

be  left  to  her  own  choice,  fhe  would  be  lefs  averfe 
to  entertaining  him,  which  was  all  (he  wanted; 
firmly  believing  a  girl  of  her  years  would  not 
dare  to  refufe  a  perfon  like  him  any  thing  he 
{hould  alk,  though  fhe  might  have  courage  to  do 
it  to  thofe  employed  by  him. 

The  poor  young  creature,  in  the  mean  time, 
laboured  under  the  greateil  diitra&ion  of  mind 
how  to  avoid  an  interview,  in  which  fhe  could  not 
be  affured  of  not  lofing,  by  force,  that  which  she 
was  always  determined  never  to  yield.  She  had 
no  friend  on  whom  she  could  enough  depend  to  re- 
veal the  fecret.  At  laft  it  came  into  her  head  to 
apply  to  a  certain  clergyman,  who  lived  about  two 
miles  diftant  from  their  houfe.  He  was  a  man  pret- 
ty far  advanced  in  years,  and  had  the  reputation  of 
all  the  purity  of  manners  befitting  his  facred  func- 
tion: she  thought  there  could  not  be  a  more  pro- 
per perfon  for  one  in  her  circumftances  to  confult, 
or  better  able  to  advife  how  to  shun  the  fnares  laid 
for  her  innocence. 

Accordingly  she  rofe  extremely  early,  and  be- 
fore any  of  the  family  were  awake,  dole  out  of 
her  mother's  houfe,  and  made  the  bed  of  her  way- 
to  that  of  this  reverend  guide,  to  whom,  after  fome 
tears  and  fighs,  which  the  fad  compulfion  of  being 
obliged  to  reveal  the  shame  of  one  fo  near  to  her 
in  blood  occafioned,  she  related  the  whole  pity- 
moving  ftory;  and  concluded  with  begging  his 
protection,  till  she  could  find  fome  means  of  get- 
ting her  bread,  either  in  fervice,  or  by  working, 
with  her  needle. 

The  good  doctor,  who  indeed,  anfwered  the 
character  given  of  him,  heard  her  with  amazement 
and  admiration  j  and  after  he  had  paufcd  fome 


B.I.  SPECTATOR.  55 

time,  told  her,  that  confidering  who  were  her  fedu- 
cers,  he  queftioned  whether  ever  any  age  could  af- 
ford an  example  of  the  like  virtue;  "  but,  faid  he, 
•*  how  can  I  protect  you  a^ainft  the  authority  of  a 
"  mother,  feconded  by  the  power  of  Rinaldo? 
"  There  is,  continued  he,  but  one  way,  and  that 
*'  is,  by  making  you  my  wife.  1  know  the  difpa- 
'*  rity  of  our  years,  and  that  fuch  an  union  may  be 
'*  as  irkfome  to  your  inclinations,  as  the  other  is  to 
<*  your  virtue.  I  will  not,  therefore,  urge  it;  but 
*«  fear,  that  all  the  endeavours  I  can  make  will  be 
**  unavailing,  without  that  tie,  which  even  Rinal- 
«  do  himfelf  will  not  prefume  to  violate." 

Flavia  was  too  much  aftonished  to  be  able  to 
make  any  immediate  reply,  yet  teftified  nothing 
in  her  countenance  that  could  give  him  room  to 
think  she  was  averfe  to  his  propofals,  nor  had  she, 
in  reality,  any  reafon  to  be  fo.  He  had  a  good  be- 
nefice, afmall  eftate  in  land,  no  child,  and  a  very 
graceful  perfon,  tho'  his  face  was  fomewhat  fur- 
rowed by  time.  But  what  weighed  more  with  her 
than  all  other  confiderations  was,  that  a  marriage 
vith  him  would  be  a  fure  defence  from  all  attacks 
upon  her  honour,  and  deliver  her  from  the  power 
of  a  mother,  who,  she  had  too  much  reafon  to 
believe,  would,  one  time  or  other,  give  her  up  to 
infamy. 

But,  not  to  be  longer  in  relating  this  affair  than 
they  were  in  agreeing  on  it,  she  neither  had  nor 
affected  any  fcruplcs;  and  the  coach  that  morning 
fetting  out  for  London,  they  took  their  paflage  in 
it,  and  were  married  the  fame  day. 

The  dillraclion  which  the  mother  of  Flavia  was 
in  when  she  was  not  to  be  found,  may  eafily  be 
gusffcdj  but  when  RinalJo  came,  and  received 


$6  THE    FEMALE  B.  I. 

fuch  a  baulk  to  his  expectations,  he  was  extremely 
incenfed  at  firft  againft  the  perfon  who  had  fo  much 
affured  him  of  a  reception  anfwerable  to  his  warm- 
eft  wishes.  The  negotiator  had  little  to  fay  in  his 
defence,  but  that "  the  girl  was  certainly  run  irmdj 
"  that  he  had  never  thought  himfelf  more  fecure," 
and  begged  pardoa  in  the  moft  fervile  manner.-— 
That  /eat  perfon  too  much  defpifed  him  to  take 
a  J  other  revenge  on  him,  than  reporting  how 
inuch  he  had  proved  unfit  for  the  employment  he 
•valued  himfelf  upon:  this  was,  however,  a  very 
fevere  punishment^  for  whenever  he  attemptedany 
thing  of  rhe  like  "nature,  he  was  always  reproached 
with  Flavia,  and  all  h^  could  do  was  inefficient 
to  retrieve  his  credit  for  a  long  time. 

The  virtue  of  Flavia  has  its  reward  in  the  great- 
eft  bleffing  heaven  can  give,  a  mind  perfectly 
content.  -She  lives  pleafed  and  happy  in  her  lot, 
and  by  her  behaviour  judges  her  hufband's  choice, 
and  puts  to  fhame  all  thofe  who  at  firft  pretended 
to  cenfurefo  unequal  a  match. 

It  is  certain  the  ideas  that  arife  in  our  minds., 
•when  we  refieft  on  temptations  we  have  had  the 
power  to  fhun,  are,  beyond  all  defcription,  fweet. 
There  is  a  laudable  pride  in  triumphing  over  the 
artifices  of  thofe  that  would  feduce  us,  which  dif- 
fufes  the  higheft  fatisfa&ion  to  the  foul;  but  yet 
we  ought  to  be  aware  how  we  court 'dangers  in  the 
aflu  ranee  of  .overcoming  them.  We  may  flatter 
ourfelves  too  far-,  there  is  nothing  more  frequently 
deceives  us  than  our  own  hearts:  and  it  is,  me- 
thinks  venturing  too  far,  to  ftake  that  innate  fet- 
tled peace,  which  confcious  innocence,  tho'  un- 
tried, uumagnificd,  affords  agaiuft  the  precarious 
hope  of  purchafing  a  public  fame,  which,  how« 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  57 

ever  juft,  is  yet  in  danger  of  being  blafled  by  envy 
and  detraction. 

B    O    O    K    IT. 

WHEN  firft  myfelf  and  afManrs  fet  about 
this  undertaking,  we  agreed  to  lay  down 
certain  rules  to  Be  obferved  among  us,  in  order  to 
preferve  that  harmony  which  it  is  neceflary  fhould 
exift  in  all  focieties,  whether  compofed  of  a  great 
or  fmall  number.  One  of  the  mod  material 
of  which  is  to  devote  two  evenings  in  every  week 
to  the  bufinefs  we  have  engaged  in.  In  the  firft 
of  thefe  meetings  we  communicate  to  each  other 
what  intelligence  we  receive,  and  conlider  on  what 
topics  we  (hall  proceed.  In  the  fecond,  we  lay  our 
feveral  productions  on  the  table,  which  being  read 
ovcr,j;very  one  has  the  liberty  of  excepting  againft 
orcenfuring  whatever  fheclifapproves;  nothing  be- 
ing to  be  exhibited  to  the  public,  without  the  joint 
concurrence  of  ail.  The  rendezvous  is  kept  at  my 
lodgings,  and  I  give  ftricT:  orders  that  no  perfou 
whatever  (hall  be  admitted  to  interrupt  our  con- 
fultations;  but  you  may  as  well  attempt  to  exclude 
the  lightning  as  the  impertinence  of  fomc  people. 
I  dare  fay  there  are  few  of  my  readers  who  have 
not,  fome  time  or  other  in  their  lives,  been  plagued 
wiih  a  buzzing  fluttering  kind  of  animal,  \vhofc 
love,  for  the  time  it  lafts,  is  more  troublefome  than 
the  hate  of  any  other  created  being  that  1  know 
of.  1  mean  a  race  of  mortals,  who  will  tell  you 
VOL.  I.  F 


$8  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

all  their  own  fecrets  in  two  hours  acquaintance, 
and  from  thence  imagine,  they  have  a  right  to 
o:pe£t  you  mould  be  as  communicative  to  them. 
They  will  fee  one  whether  one  will  or  not;— • 
there  is  no  (hutting  one's  felf  from  them;— they 
burft  in  upon  one  at  all  hours,  and  purfue  one 
v-'herever  one  goes! — they  come  galloping  to  re- 
j  eat  every  thing  they  fee  or  hear  of;  and  one  mutt 
either  be  wholly  rude,  or  baniih  all  thoughts  of 
one's  own,  however  agreeable  or  necefTary,  to  lif- 
ten  to  the  vociferous  trifle  they  are  big  with  — 
snd  the  only  confolation  one  has,  is  trie  certainty 
of  getting  rid  of  them  the  next  new  acquaintance 
they  make. 

It  was  lately  my  misfortune  to  be  faftened  upon 
by  one  of  thofe  Tempo-Amyarians,  (if  I  may  ven- 
ture to  call  them  fo,  without  offending  the  critics) 
and  during  the  zenith  of  her  fondnefs  of  me,  had 
not  a  moment  I  could  call  my  own.  She  came 
one  of  thofe  evenings  we  had  fet  apart  for  the 
entertainment  of  the  public,  and  in  fpite  of  the 
charge  I  had  given,  forced  her  paffage  through 
my  fervants,  and  flew  directly  to  the  room  where 
we  were  fitting.  As  fhe  entered  without  cere- 
mony, fo  fhe  made  no  apology  for  the  abruptnefs, 
iho'  fhe  found  I  had  company,  and  might  eafily 
nave  feen,  by  my  countenance,  how  little  I  was 
pleafed  with  her  vifit,  if  fhe  had  not  been  too  te- 
naqious  of  a  welcome  for  the  news  (he  brought, 
which  fhe  told  me  v/as  of  fo  much  confequence, 
that  (lie  could  not  have  flept  all  night  without 
making  me  partaker  of  it;. 

As  it  was  not  from  a  lady  of  her  degree  of  un~ 
derftanding,  that  I  expe&ed  any  intelligence  fit  for 
my  purpofe,  and  wa£  very  much,  out  of  humour  at 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  59 

her  prefence,  I  returned  no  anfwer  to  the  compli- 
ment {he  made  me;  but  {he  feemed  to  take  no 
notice  of  my  indolence  in  this  point,  and  without 
waiting  to  fee  whether  I  ihould  grow  moreinqui- 
Ctiveor  not,  began  immediately  to  unlade  herfelf 
of  the  fardle  fhe  had  brought  with  her. 

She  informed  us  (he  had  been  at  court  that  day, 
had  feen  the  fine  lady  Bloometta,  it  being  the  firlt 
time  of  her  appearance  there  fince  her  marriage,— 
defcribed  every  article  of  her  drefs, — told  us  how 
'charming  fhe  looked, — how  all  the  young  peers 
envied  the  happinefs  of  old  Fompilius,  yet  at  the 
fame  time  fneered  at  the  unequal  match,  and  feem- 
ed to  promife  themfelves  ibme  agreeable  confe- 
quences  from  it. — How  fome,  as  he  led  her  to  the 
prefence,  crkd  out  "  May  and  December .!"  others, 
"  Fire  and  Frofl!"  and  a  thoufand  fuch  like  petty- 
reflections,  which  the  new- wedded  pair  could  not 
but  expecTr,  and  any  one  might  be  allured  would 
be  made,  without  being  an  eur-witneis  of. 

After  having  faid  all  fhe  could  on  this  affair, 
fhe  darted  up,  and  with  a  promife,  neither  wifhed 
nor  rcquefted  by  me,  of  calling  upon  me  early  the 
next  morning,  took  her  leave  with  as  little  cere- 
mony as  fhe  had  come  in,  and  left  us  the  liberty 
of  purfuing  our  own  difcourfc. 

However  as  good  fpriugs  fome  time£  out  of  e« 
vil,  this  very  interruption  occafioned  the  conver- 
fition  to  turn  on  a  fubjecl  which  never  can  be  too 
much  attended  to,  and  the  too  great  neglect  of 
which  is  the  fource  of  almoft  all  the  evils  we  cither 
feel,  or  are  witnefs  of  in  private  life. 

I  believe  I  fhall  eafily  be  underftood  to  mean 
Marriage,  fince  thu-re  is  no  one  thing  on  which 
the  huppinek  of  mankind  fo  much  depends.  It  is 

F   2 


6€>  THE  FEMALE  B.  11. 

indeed  the  fountain-head  of  all  the  comforts  we 
can  enjoy  ourfelves,  and  of  thofe  we  tranfmit  to 
our  pofterity: — It  is  the  band  which  unites  rot 
only  two  perfons,  but  whole  families  in  one  com- 
mon infeparable  intereft: — It  is  that  which  pre- 
vents thofe  num-berlefs  irregularities,  that  would 
elfe  overthrow  all  order,  and  deftroy  fociety ;  but 
then  not  to  pervert  the  intention  of  fo  neceflary 
and  glorious  an  inftitution,  and  rob  it  of  every 
blefluig  it  is  full  of,  lies  only  in  ourfclves.  No  vio- 
lated vows  before  pledged  to  another, — no  clan- 
deftine  agreements  made  up  by  a  hafiyand  ungo- 
verned  paflVon, — no  fordid  bargains  where  wealth, 
not  merit  is  the  chief  inducement, — no  notorious 
tlifparity  of  years,  of  family,  or  humours,  can  ever 
be  productive  of  a  lading  concord,  eilher  between 
the  principals  thcmfelves,  or  thofe  in  alliance  with 
them.  Dirges,  rather  than  Epithalamiums,  ihould 
be  fung  at  nuptials  fuch  as  thefe,  and  their  friends 
pity,  not  congratulate  their  let. 

Pompilius  had  lived  in  very  good  harmony  with 
his  former  lady,  and  none  would  have  condemned 
him  for  paying  his  vows  a  fecond  time  at  the  al- 
ter of  Hymen,  provided  he  had  made  choice  of  a 
partner  more  agreeable  to  his  prefent  years.  His 
inclinations  might  not,  indeed,  have  been  gra- 
tified to  fo  exquifite  a  degree,  but  then  his  judg- 
ment had  not  been  arraigned  j  nor  had  he  forfeited 
in  age,  that  reputation  of  good  fenfe  he  had  ac- 
quired in  youth.  How  great  a  pity  is  it  then,  that 
he  fhould  give  way  to  the  dictates  of  a  paflion,  the 
gratification  of  which  can  afford  him  but  a  fliort- 
lived  joy; — muft  be  injurious  to  his  own  charac- 
ter, and  doubly  fo  to  the  object  of  his  affections! 

What,  if  the  charming  Bloometta  had  been- 


B.  IL  SPECTATOR.  61 

difappointed  in  her  firft  wifhes! — What,  if  the 
too  fenfible  Palcmon  had  preferred  a  little  fordid 
drofs  to  the  pofleflion  of  the  fined  woman  upon 
earth,  and  her  refentment  at  the  indignity  offered 
to  her  youth  and  beauty,  joined  with  the  ambition 
of  her  parents,  had  fet  the  pretenfionsof  Pompilius 
in  an  advantageous  light,  a  moment's  reflection 
might  have  ferved  to  convince  him  of  the  motives, 
and  if  he  truly  loved,  have  made  him  chufe  to 
recommend  fome  noble  youth  of  his  own  family, 
whofe  merits  might  have  obliterated  whatever 
fentiments  (he  had  been  poflefied  of  in  favour  of 
Palemon!  This  indeed  would  have  been  a  proof 
of  the  mod  generous  affection,  and  at  the  fame 
time  of  that  command  over  himfelf,  which  is  ex- 
pected from  perfons  in  his  ftation. 

But  how  much  foever  the  united  joys  of  love 
and  wine  may  be  able  to  lull  all  thoughts  of  re- 
morfe  in  a  heart  which  feems  intent  only  on  in- 
dulging its  own  defires,be  they  ever  fo  extravagant, 
that  of  the  fweet  Bloometta  muft  endure  pangs, 
which  every  day  will  become  more  fevere,  by  the 
efforts  of  her  prudence  to  conceal  them : — What 
conflicts  between  Gncerity  and  duty  m  ufl  rend  her 
gentle  bread,  when  her  doating  lord  exacts  from 
her  a  return  of  his  endearments! — How  muft  flic 
regret  the  fad  neceflity  of  being  obliged  to  feiga 
what  nature  will  not  grant!  Thofe  tender  lan- 
guifhmentp,  which,  when  mutual,  afford  mutual 
tranfport,  feem  aukward  and  naufeous  in  the  man 
we  do  not  love;  and  inftead.of  more  endearing 
him  to  us,  turn  the  indifference  we  before  had  to 
him  into  averfion  and  contempt.  In  fine,  there 
are  no  words  to  exprefs  the  miferies  of  a  loathed 
j  and  flic  who  facrifices  to  pride  or  pique 
F3 


62  THE   FEMALE  B.  II. 

the  pleafures  of  her  youth,  by  marrying  with  the 
man  (he  hates,  will  foon,  though  too  late  to  repair 
the  irremediable  mifchicf,  repent  in  the  utmofl 
bitternefs  of  foul  what  flie  has  done. 

Methinks  it  is  with  great  injuftice  that  the  ge- 
nerality of  the  world  condemn  Ariftobulus  of  in- 
gratitude, perfulioufnefs,  and  cruelty :  he  is  indeed 
an  inftance,  that  love  is  not  in  our  power  j  and 
though  his  lady's  late  is  much  to  be  commifeiated, 
his  own  is,  in  reality,  no  lefs  deferving  our  com- 
paffion.  This  nobleman,  who  for  the  graces  of 
his  perfon  had  few  equals,  made  many  conquefls, 
•without  the  artillery  of  one  fingle  figh  or  protef- 
tation: — Celinda,  to  his  great  misfortune,  was 
among  the  number:  Celinda,  of  illuilrious  race, 
heirels  of  vail  pofleffions,  and  endued  with  many 
perfections  of  mind  and  body;  yet  Celinda,  whole 
love  has  been  the  bane  of  ail  his  happinefs,  long 
did  me  conceal  the  fecret  of  her  paflion  from  the 
whole  world,  as  well  as  from  him  who  was  the 
object  of  it ;  yet  indulging  the  pleafure  of  feeing 
him  as  much  as  poflible,  frequented  all  places 
where  there  was  a  probability  of  meeting  him,  till 
finding  that  he  paid  her  no  other  civilities,  than 
•what  her  rank  demanded,  thofe  foft  emotions, 
•which  in  the  beginning  afforded  only  delightful 
images,  now  degenerated  into  horrors,  as  they 
approached  nearer  to  defpair.  She  fell  fick: — the 
phyficians  foon  perceived  her  diforder  was  of  the 
mind,  and  perfuaded  thofe  about  her,  to  ufe  their 
utmoft  endeavours  for  difcovering  the  caufe.  In 
vain  were  all  the-entreaties  of  her  friends-,  in  vain 
the  commands  of  the  moft  tender  father;  her 
modefty  refifted  all,  and  it  was  not  till  (he  was 
judged  by  every  one  that  faw  her,  as  well  as  by 


B.1I.  SPECTATOR.  63 

hcrfelf,  to  be  at  the  point  of  death,  that  fhe  was 
prevailed  upon  to  confefs,  that  {he  defired  life  on- 
ly to  behold  Ariftobtfius. 

Her  father,  who  had  before  fufpe&ed  the  dif- 
cafe,  though  not  the  pcrfon  from  whom  the  in- 
fection came,  was  rejoiced  to  find  that  her  incli- 
nations had  not  difgraced  his  dignity;  and  allured 
her,  that  if  to  fee  Ariftobulus  was  of  fo  much  con- 
fcquence,  (he  {hould  not  only  fee,  but  live  with 
him,  till  death  {hould  put  a  period  to  thathappi- 
nefs. 

He  made  this  promife,  in  confidence  that  the 
father  of  Ariftobulus  would  gladly  accede  to  the 
union  of  their  families;  nor  was  he  deceived  in 
his  conjecture;  the  propofal  he  made  was  received 
with  the  utmoft  fatisfa£tion,  and  the  marriage- 
writings  were  drawn  between  them,  before  the 
young  lord,  who  happened  at  that  time  to  be  en 
a  party  of  pleafure  in  the  country,  knew  that  any 
fuch  thing  was  in  agitation.  «*  ^ 

Celinda  was  immediately  made  acqi»ited 
with  this  agreement,  and  from  that  momefljthe 
long-abfent  rofes  refumed  their  places  in  her 
cheeks,  her  wonted  ftrength  and  vivacity  returned, 
and  fhe  was  again  the  joy  of  all  who  knew  her. 

But  a  far  different  effect,  alas!  had  the  news 
of  this  affair  on  him,  who  was  with  fo  much  vehe- 
mence beloved  by  her.  A  fpeciul  mefienger  being 
difpatched  to  bring  him  to  London,  he  nofooner 
was  informed  of  the  occafion,  but  he  was  feized 
with  the  moft  mortal  anguiili ; — he  threw  himfclf 
at  his  father's  feet, and  with  all  the  moving  rhetoric 
of  dutiful  affection,  conjured  him  by  that  paternal 
tcndernefs  he  had  ever  treated  him  with,  and  which 
he  had  never  bv.cn  guilty  of  doing  any  thing  i 


$4  THB  FEMALE  B.  IT; 

felt,  not  to  infift  on  his  fulfilling  an  engagement, 
than  which  death  could  nor  be  more  terrible. 

Never  was  furprize  greater  than  that  of  the 
father  of  Ariftobulus,  to  hear  him  fpeak  in  this 
manner;  but  it  yet  received  a  confiderable  in- 
creafe,  when  on  demanding  the  reafons  of  his  re- 
fufal,  and  what  objections  he  had  to  makeagainft 
becoming  the  hufband  of  fo  well-defcended,  fo 
rich,  fo  virtuous,  and  fo  young  a  lady,  he  had 
none  to  offer,  but  that  he  was  not  inclined  to 
marry,  or  if  he  were,  had  fomething  in  his  nature 
which  oppofed  any  inclination  in  her  favour. 

The  match  was  too  advantageous  to  their 
family,  for  the  old  peer  to  be  put  off  with  what 
feemed  to  him  fo  trifling  a  motive,  as  mere  want 
of  lovej  he  therefore  refolved  that  his  fon  fhould 
comply  with  his  commands,  and  to  that  end  en- 
forced them  by  the  moft  terrible  menaces,  of  ne- 
ver feeing  him  more,  and  of  cutting  him  off  from 
all  his  inheritance,  except  what  was  entailed  upon 
the  title,  which  was  very  fmall,  and  little  able  to 
fupport  it. 

This  was  a  very  great  {hock  to  one  who  had 
the  higheft  notions  of  grandeur,  and  a  relifh  for 
all  the  expenfive  pleafures  of  the  young  and  gay. 
He  knew  his  father  rigid,  and  obftinate  to  be 
obeyed  by  all  who  had  any  dependence  on  him; 
and  doubted  not,  but  his  refentment  would  fway 
him  to  do  as  he  faid:  he  therefore  repented  he 
had  irritated  him  fo  far,  and  begun  to  feign  a  lefs 
averiion  to  the  marriage;  he  begged  to  be  for- 
given, and  promifed  to  vifit  Celinda,  in  the  hope, 
he  faid,  that  he  fhould  difcover  more  charms  in  her 
convention,  than  he  yet  had  been  fenfible  of, 
His  father  feemed  fomewhat  pacified  with  this  at; 


B.  II.  S  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  II.  6$ 

furance,  and  bid  him  go  and  offer  her  a  heart  (he 
well  deferred,  and  he  had  too  long  delayed  bc- 
ftowing. 

He  did  not,  it  is  certain,  deceive  his  father  in 
this  point; — he  went,  but  went  with  a  view  very 
different  from  what  any  one  could  have  imagined 
he  would  ever  have  conceived: — in  the  room  of 
entertaining  her  with  foft  profeflions,  which,  per- 
haps, are  fornetimes  made  by  thofewho  mean  them 
as  little  as  himfelf  could  have  done,  he  frankly 
confcffed,  he  had  an  averfion  to  the  married  ftate; 
that  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  make  a  hufband, 
fuch  as  fhe  had  rcafon  to  expect;  and  intreated 
that  fhe  would  order  it  Ib,  that  the  nuptials, 
which  his  father  feemed  fo  bent  on  completing, 
might  be  broke  off  on  her  fide. 

How  alarming  fuch  a  requefl  mufl  be  to  one 
who  loved  as  fhe  did,  any  one  may  judge  ;  but  the 
cxcefs  of  her  tendernefs  over-ruled  all  that  pride 
and  fpirit,  which  is  fo  natural  to  \vcmenon  fuch 
occafions: — fhe  paufed  a  while,  probably  to  fup- 
prcfs  the  rifing  fighs,  but  at  length  told  him,  that 
what  he  defired  was  the  only  thing  me  could  refufe 
him;  that  her  father  was  no  lefs  zealous  than  his 
own  for  the  alliance,  and  that  fhe  had  been  too 
much  accuftomed  to  obedience,  to  dare  to  difpute 
his  will  in  any  thing  he  fcsmed  fo  bent  upon.  . 

As  nothing  but  his  eternal  peace  could  have 
enforced  him  to  have  atled  in  this  manner,  with  a 
lady  of  her  birth  and  fortune,  and  whofc  accom- 
plifhments,  in  fpiteof  the  little  effe£t  they  had  upon 
him,  he  could  not  but  acknowledge,  he  was  afto- 
niflied  at  the  calmnefs  with  which  fhe  bore  it; 
and  judging  by  that,  her  affedion  could  not  be 
kfs  tender  than  he  had  been  told,  he  left  no  ar- 


66  THE  FEMALE  B,  IL 

guments  untried,  to  make  that  very  affe&ion  fub- 
fervient  to  his  aim,  of  being  freed  from  all  en- 
gagements with  her:  but  fhe  ftill  pleading  the  duty 
fhe  owed  to  him  who  gave  her  being,hegrewquite 
defperate,  and  throwing  off  that  complaifance  be 
had  hitherto  behaved  with,  told  her,  that  if,  for  the 
prefervation  of  his  birth-right,  he  were  compelled 
to  marry  her,  he  neither  could,  nor  would  even 
endeavour  to  love  her  as  a  wife; — that  fhe  muft 
expeft  only  uncomfortable  days,  and  lonely  wi- 
dowed nights; — and  that  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  the  ceremony,  nor  in  either  of  their  fathers,  to 
convert  an  utter  diilike  into  inclination. 

To  this  cruel  declaration  (he  replied  coldly,  that 
as  they  were  deftined  for  each  other  by  thofe  who 
had  the  fole  power  of  difpofing  of  their  hands,  it 
was  a  very  great  misfortune  their  hearts  could  not 
comply  with  the  injunction;  but  as  for  her  part, 
fhe  was  determined  to  follow  duty,though  fhe  fell 
a  martyr  to  it. 

Though  under  the  obedience  of  a  daughter  fhe 
had  the  opportunity  of  veiling  the  fondnefs  of  a 
lover,  the  honour  of  our  fex greatly  fuffered  by  fuch 
a  behaviour;  but,  poor  lady,  the  excefs  of  her 
paffion  hindered  her  from  feeing  into  the  meannefs 
of  it;  and  at  the  fame  time  flattered  her  with  the 
belief,  that  in  fpite  of  the  averfion  he  now  expref- 
fcd,  her  treatment  of  him,  and  the  tendernefs  fhe 
could  make  no  fcruple  of  revealing  to  him  iri  all 
its  force,  when  fhe  became  his  wife,  would  make 
an  entirechangeinhisfentiments,and  itwouldnot 
be  in  his  power  to  avoid  recompenfmg,  with  fome 
degree  cf  affection,  fo  pure,  fo  conft^nt,  and  fo 
violent  a  flame,  as  he  would  then  be  convinced  fhe 
long  had  felt  for  him. 


3.  II.  SPECTATOR.  67 

Ariftobulus,  after  he  had  left  her,  again  effay- 
cd  to  work  upon  his  father's  mind;  but  all  he 
could  urge  being  ineffectual,  he  yielded  to  be  a 
hufband,  rather  than  fuffer  himfelf  to  be  cut  off 
from  being  an  heir.  A  day  was  appointed  for  the 
celebration  of  their  nuptials,  and  they  were  mar- 
ried with  a  pomp  more  befitting  their  quality, 
than  the  condition  of  their  minds.  At  night  they 
were  put  to  bed  with  the  ufual  ceremonies;  but 
the  moment  the  company  withdrew  he  arofe,  and 
cbofe  rather  to  pafs  the  hours  till  morning  on  a 
couch  alone,  than  in  the  embraces  of  a  woman 
who  had  indeed  perfe&ions  fufficient  to  have  made 
any  man  happy,  who  I.  id  not  that  antipathy  in 
nature,  which  there  is  no  accounting  for,  nor  get- 
ting rid  of. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  Celinda,  not  only 
that  night,  but  for  a  long  time  afterward,  con- 
tinued to  put  in  pra&ice  every  tender  ftratagem, 
and  ufed  everyargument  that  her  love, and  the  cir- 
cumfhnces  they  now  were  in,  could  infpire;  but 
they  were  equally  in  vain,  as  the  poet  fays, 

*(  Love  fcorns  all  ties, but  thofe  that  are  his  own." 

Ariftobulus  remained  inflexible,  and  obftinately 
bent  never  to  be  more  of  a  hufband  than  the 
name;  neither  time,  nor  her  patient  enduring  the 
indignity  put  upon  her, 'have  wrought  the  lead 
alteration  in  her  favour.  Th:y  live  together  in 
one  houfe,  but  lye  not  in  the  fame  b:d;  eat  not  at 
the  fame  table;  rarely  fee  each  other,  and  their 
very  fervants  appear  as  if  of  different  families. 
Years  after  years  have  rolled  on  in  this  manner, 
yet  (lie  continues  dill  a  virgin-bride;  while  he, 
regardlefs  of  her  love  or  grief,  endeavours  to  lofe, 


•69  THE  FEMALE  B.  It 

in  the  arms  of  other  women,  the  difcontent  which 
a  forced  marriage  has  involved  him  in. 

Few  men,  indeed,  have  ailed  with  that  early 
fmcerity,  and  openly  declared  their  hatred,  like 
Ariftobulus,  before  marriage;  but  too  many  have 
done  it  afterwards,  and  proved  by  their  behaviour, 
that  they  looked  upon  the  facred  ceremony  but  aa 
a  thing  necefiary  to  be  done, 'either  for  the  fake  of 
propagating  their  families,  or  for  clearing  their 
eftates  from  mortgages,  or  for  the  payment  of 
younger  childr ens  fortunes.  Thefe,  and  various 
other  motives,  might  be  affigned  for  the  alliances 
daily  on  foot;  but  to  hear  of  one  that  promifes  an 
accomplifhment  of  all  the  ends  propofed  by  the 
firft  intention  of  this  inftitution,  is  a  kind  of  pro- 
digy, and  to  fay,  "  There  goes  a  truly  happy  pair," 
after  the  firft  month,  would  call  the  fpeaker's  ve- 
racity in  queftion. 

Fame  either  fwells  the  number  beyond  its  juft 
extent,  or  there  are  now  no  lefs  ;han  twenty  three 
treaties  of  marriage  either  concluded,  or  on  the 
carpet,  between  perfons  of  condition,  of  which 
fcarce  the  odd  three  afford  the  lead  profpeCt  of  fe- 
licity to  the  perfons  concerned. 

Can  Mrs  Tulip,  in  the  autumn  of  her  age,  tho* 
in  her  drefs  gaudy  as  the  flower  whofe  name  (he 
bears,  imagine  her  antiquated  charms  will  be  able 
to  reclaim  the  wild,  the  rovingheart  of  young  Brif- 
common?  Not  but  that  gentleman  has  fenfe,  ho- 
nour, and  good  nature-,  qualities  which  could  not 
fail  of  making  him  know  what  was  due  to  the  me- 
rits of  Claribella,  had  the  condition  of  his  fortune 
permitted  him  to  marry  her.  But  his  intended 
bride  mult  become  more  contemptible  in  his  eyes, 
than  even  her  gray  hairs  could  make  her,  when 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  69 

he  reflects  on  the  vanity  which  infatuates  her  fo 
far,  as  to  deprive  her  lovely  niece  of  what  might 
have  made  the  happihefs  of  her  life,  only  to  pur- 
chafe  to  herfelf  the  name  of  wife  to  one  young  e- 
nongh  to  be  her  fon. 

Who  fees  Philimont  and  Daria  together,  with- 
cut  perceiving  that  nothing  can  be  more  adored 
by  Philimont  than  Daria; — nothing  more  dear  to 
Daria  than  Philimont? — Do  not  the  equally  ena- 
moured pair  feem  to  fhoot  their  very  fouls  at  each 
other,  at  every  glance? — Is  Daria  ever  at  the  o« 
pera,  the  park,  the  play,  without  her  Philimont? 
— Or  does  Philimont  think  any  company  enter- 
taining, if  Daria  is  abfent! — Yet  Philimont  is  on 
the  point  of  marriage  with  Emilia,  and  Daria  has 
been  long  betrothed  to  Belmour.  Strange  chec- 
<juer-work  of  love  and  cleftiny! 

What  reafon  has  Sabina  to  boaft  of  charms  fu- 
perior  to  the  reft  of  her  fex,  or  flatter  herfelf  with 
being  always  the  object  of  Theomenes  wifhes? 
Have  not  his  vows  been  proftituted  to  half  the  fine 
women  in  town,  and  if  he  perfifted  in  thofe  he 
made  to  her,  fo  far  as  marriage,  is  it  not  becaufe 
her  fortune  is  larger  than  theirs,  and  more  enables 
him  to  difcharge  thofe  debts  his  extravagancies 
have  contracted. 

How  bitterly  does  Dalinda  repent  her  giving 
way  to  an  inconfiderate  paffion,  which  hurried 
her  to  throw  herfelf  into  the  arms  of  the  mean- 
born,  but  meaner-foul'd,  ill-natured  Macro!  She 
imagined,  as  (he  has  fince  confefled,  that  by  mar- 
rying one  fo  infinitely  beneath  her,  (he  would  have 
been  fole  miftrefs  of  herfelf  and  fortune-,  that  he 
would  never  dare  to  take  any  privileges  with  the 
one,  without  her  permifiion,  nor  pretend  to  have 

VOL.  I.  G 


70  THE  FEMALE  B.  IL 

the  leaft  command  over  the  other;  and  that  in- 
ftead  of  being  under  the  authority  of  a  hufband, 
{he  fhould  have  found  in  him  an  obfequious  flave: 
— But  poor  miftaken  woman!  Macro  was  no  foon- 
er  poffeffed  of  the  power  than  he  made  her  fee  a 
fed  reverfe  to  all  her, expectations;  he  was  fo  far 
fiom  regulating  the  affairs  of  .her  eftate  and  fa- 
mily, according  to  her  pleafure,  cr  as  fhe  had  been 
accuftomed  to  do,  that  he  plainly  fhewed  he  took 
a  pride  in  contradicting  her:— he  confulted  her 
inclinations  in  nothing,  and  even  before  her  face 
gave  commands,  which  he  knew  would  be  the 
moft  difagreeabk  to  her,  and  which,  if  me  offered 
to  oppofe,  told  her,  in  the  rudeft  manner,  that  be 
was  mafter,  and  as  fuch  would  be  obeyed.  At 
firft  fhe  raved,  reproached  him  with  ingratitude> 
and  vowed  revenge;  but  what  alas!  could  fhe 
do?  fhe  had  taken  no  care  that  proper  fettlements, 
111  cafe  of  accidents?  fhould  be  made,  and  was 
afhametl  to  have  recourfe-to  any  of  her  kindred, 
whom  fhe  had  difgraced  and  difobliged  byfo  un- 
worthy a  match.  The  refentment  fhe  teftified 
therefore  onlyferved  to  render  her  condition  worfe, 
and  add  new  weight  to  the  galling  yoke  fhe  had 
fo  precipitately  put  on:  he  retrenched  her  equipage 
and  table  ;  fet  limits  even  to  her  drefs;  would 
fuffer  her  neither  to  vifit,  nor  be  vifited,  but  by 
thofe  he  approved,  which  were  all  creatures  or  rela- 
tions of  his  own,  and  fuch  as  fhe  had  not  been  ufed 
to  converfe  with ;  denied  her  even  pocket-money; 
took  every  meafure  he  could  invent  r.o  break  her 
fpirit,  and  make  her  wholly  fubfervient  to  his  will, 
till  at  laft  his  tyranny  got  the  better,  and  he  has 
now  reduced  her  to  the  moft  abject  flavery. 
Tremble,  Mariana,  left  your  father's  clerk  ihould 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  7r 

prove  another  Macro;  and  rather  endure  the  fhort- 
lived  pangs  of  combating  an  unhappy  inclination, 
than  by  yielding  to  it,  run  the  hazard  of  miferies, 
to  which  death  alone  can  put  a  period. 

A  few  days  hence,  it  is  faid,  will  crown  the 
mutual  wifties  ofMyrtano  and  the  amiable  Cleora. 
The  friends  on  both  fides  are  contenting;  the 
marriage-articles  are  figned  ;  the  fumptuous  equi- 
page prepared;  the  country-feat  new  beautified; 
the  bride-bed  adorned ;  and  every  thing  com- 
pleated,  that  induflrious  oftentation  can  invent,  to 
make  the  ceremony,  affected  to  be  called  private, 
as  pompous  and  magnificent  as  poflible  :  yet,  how- 
can  Cleora  affure  herfelf  of  being  always  happy 
in  the  conftancy  of  her  Myrtano,  when  me  is  not 
infenfible  a  lady  equal  to  hcrfelf  in  tii  th  and  for- 
tune, and  noway  her  inferior  in  the  perfections 
either  of  mind  or  perfon,  is  a  melancholy  inftance 
of  an  unfortunate  mutability  in  his  nature!  Did 
he  not  once  purfue  Brilliante  with  all  thofe  dying, 
ardours  he  has  lately  done  Cleora  ?  Was  not  the 
whole  town  witnefs  of  the  adoration  with  which 
he  treated  her?  Nay,  did  he  not  for  her  fake  com- 
mit fome  extravagancies,  which  as  nothing  but  the 
moft  violent  and  real  paflion  could  occafion,  f<> 
could  be  excufed  by  nothing  left  ?  Yet  did  he  not, 
without  even  a  pretence  for  it,  all  at  once  forfakcr 
renounce,  feem  to  forget  he  had  ever  loved  this. 
Brilliante,  and  declare  himfdf  the  votary  of 
Cleora? 

Ah  Cleora!  you  triumph  now,  it  is  true,  and 
may  you  ever  triumph,  fince  the  divine  rites  06 
marriage  make  it  criminal  to  wifh  otherwif  • 
much  is  to  be  feared,  and  very  little  to  behopeJ,- 
Nothing  is  more  uncertain  than  inclinaticn;  an-.t 
G  3 


72  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

a  heart  that  once  has  varied,  without  being  able 
to  affign  any  motive  for  its  change,  may  poflibly 
do  the  like  again;  and  a  time  arrive,  in  which 
yourfelf  may  (land  in  need  of  that  commiferation, 
your  vanity  and  joy  now  hinder  you  from  beftow- 
ing  on  a  lucklefs,  though  not  undeferving  rival; 
while  flie,  cured  of  her  abufed  and  ill-requitted 
tendernefs,  may  fill  the  arms  of  a  more  conftant 
man,  and  tafte  the  felicities  of  mutual  truth  with 
higher  relifh,  by  having  been  once  deceived. 

Bellair  is  a  very  accomplished" gentleman,  has 
a  large  eftate,  and  lives  up  to  his  income,  with- 
out going  beyond  it;  is  charitable  to  the  poor; 
liberal  to  merit,  efpecially  in  diftrefs;  hofpitable 
and  generous  to  his  friends;  punctual  in  the  pay- 
ment of  his  tradefmen ;  keeps  an  handfome  equi- 
page, and  a  yet  better  table :  is  a  lover  of  pleafure, 
but  a  hater  of  vice;  and,  in  ?.  vrcrcl,  has  nothing 
in  his  character  that  might  not  make  a  prudent 
and  good-natured  woman  happy  in  ahufband:  he 
had  many  oblique  hints  given  him  to  that  purpofe, 
tut  he  liflened  to  none  for  a  long  time,  nor  feemed 
inclined  to  alter  his  condition,  till  he  faw  Miferia. 
lie  had  the  pleafure,  I  cannot  fay  the  bappiaefs, 
to  meet  this  young  lady  at  a  ball;  (he  was  tall, 
•\vell-fhaped,  had  fomething  extremely  graceful  in 
her  air  in  dancing;  a  face,  though  not  exquifitely 
beautiful,  yet  very  agreeable;  and  the  moft  wiiv- 
ning  foftncfs  in  her  converfation.  and  manner. 
Such  as  (lie  is,  however,  the  heart  of  Bellair  gave 
her  the  preference  to  all  he  had  ever  feen  before ; 
and  having  made  fome  flight  inquiry  into  her  cha- 
racter and  fortune,  defired  her  father's  permiflion 
to  vifit  her  in  the  quality  of  a  lover; — the  offer 
iras  too  advantageous  to  be  refufed,  the  old  gentle- 


B.  IL  SPECTATOR.  73 

man  hefitated  not  to  give  his  confent,  andMiferia 
H  her  new  admirer  with  as  much  complai- 
'hf  modefty  of  her  fex  admitted. 
.>",vks  compleated  the  courtfhip;  Bel- 
lair  married,  and,  after  fome  days,  carried  her 
home:— But,  good  gods.1  what  a  change  did  Ihe 
immediately  caufe  in  his  houfe !  A  bill  of  fare  be- 
ing by  his  orders  brought  to  her  every  morning* 
4he  ftrnck  out  three  parts  in  four  of  the  articles) 
and  when  Bellair,  on  finding  his  table  thus  re~ 
trenched,  rembriftrated  gently  to  her,  that  thers 
was  not  fufficient  for  the  fervants,  fhe  told  him, 
that  fhe  would  therefore  have  the  number  of  them 
cHminifhed;  that  {he  thought  it  a  fin  to  keep  fo 
many  idle  fellows,  who  might  ferve  their  coun- 
try either  abroad  in  the  wars,  or  in  hufbandry  at 
home;  and  as  for  the  maid-fervants,  inftead  of 
five,fhe  was  determined  to  keep  no  more  than  two. 
She  even  took  the  liberty  to  defire  he  would 
make  lefs  frequent  invitations  to  his  friends  and 
kindred;  and  as  for  the  poor  they  were  prefently 
driven  from  the  gate,  nor  dare  appear  in  fight  of 
it  again,  for  fear  of  being  fent  to  the  houfe  of  cor- 
rection. 

This  kind  of.  behaviour  makes  him  extremely 
uneafy ;  his  difcontent  increafes  every  day,  as 
none  pafs  over  without  affording  him  fome  frefh 
occadon.  His  reafon  and  his  love  are  continually 
at  war;  but  the  former  has  fo  much  the  advan- 
tage, that  though  he  is  loth  to  do  any  thing  which, 
'  may  give  offence  to  a.  wife  fo  dear  to  him,  yet  he 
is  ftill  more  loth  to  become  the  jeft  of  his  acquaint- 
ance, for  bearing  farther  with  her  failings  than 
becomes  a  man  of  fenfe  and  fpirit.  He  begins  of 
late  to  exert  the  authority  of  a  hufband  and  in . 


74  THE   FEMALE  B.  II; 

fnite  even  of  her  tears,  has  re-taken  fome  of  thofe 
fervants  fhe  had  difplaced,  and  put  many  things 
relating  to  the  oeconomy  of  his  family  nearer  to 
their  former  footing.  As  for  Miferia,  (lie  frets  in- 
ceflantly;  all  that  foftnefs  in  her  eyes,  which  once 
was  fo  enchanting,  is  now  converted  to  a  fullen 
gloom ; — her  voice,  her  manner,  is  quite  changed ; 
fhe  either  fits  in  his  company  obftinatcly  filent, 
or  fpeaks  in  fuch  a  fafhion,.  as  it  would  better  be- 
come her  to  be  mute.  The  little  fatisfaction  he 
finds  at  home,  drives  him  to  feck  it  abroad,  and 
every  thing  between  them  feems  drawing  to- 
wards a  mutual  dhlike.  And  if  that  fhould  hap. 
pen,  wliat  confequences  may  poflibly  enfue!  Re- 
ciprocal revilings  on  the  facred  ceremony  which 
united  them!  Every  a£t  of  refentrnent  again  (I 
each  other!  remorfe!  hatred!  fefaraticn!  ruin,and 
eternal  lofs  of  peace  to  both! 

A  fympathy  of  humour  is  therefore  no  lefs  to 
fee  confulted,  than  a  fympathy  of  inclination,  and 
indeed  1  think  more  fo;  for  1  have  known  feveral 
married  people  who  have  come  together,  without 
any  thing  of  what  we  call  the  paffion  of  lovej 
who,  by  happening  to  think  the  fame  way,  have 
afterwards  become  extremely  dear  to  each  other: 
whereas,  on  the  contrary,  fome  who  have  met  all 
fi  remind  flame,  have  after  wards,  through  an  unhap- 
py difagreement,  even  in  very  trifles,  become  ail 
froft  and  fnow.  There  is  a  vanityin  human  nature, 
which  natters  us  that  we  always  judge  right,  and 
by  confequence  creates  in  us  an  efteem  for  thofe, 
who  are  wife  enough  to  be  of  the  fame  opinion  we 
are;  in  a  word,  a  parity  of  fentiment  is  the  ce- 
ment of  that  lafting  friendftiip,  as  well  as  mutual 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  7$ 

confidence,  in  which  the  comforts  of  a  married  ~ 
(late  chiefly  confift. 

But  though  daily  experience  might  convince  us 
how  necefiary  an  ingredient  this  is  to  happinefs, 
and  that  without  it  all  the  others  are  ineffectual* 
yet  it  is  the  leaft  of  any  thing  £xamined  into;  as 
if  the  attainment  of  a  prefent  fatisfa&ion  was  the 
fole  intent  of  marriage,  and  it  matter'd  not  what 
confequences  enfued. 

It  cannot  indeed  be  in  an  acquaintance  of  a  week 
or  a  month,  that  one  can  be  able  to  judge  of  the 
difpofition  of  a  perfon; — parents,  therefore,  are 
highly  to  blame  when  they  condemn  their  chil- 
dren to  the  arms  of  thofe,  whom  perhaps  they  have 
never  feen  till  a  few  days  before  the  ceremony 
paflcs,  which  is  to  unite  them  for  ever* 

What  I  have  faid  on  this  fcore  rnaypoflibly  be 
looked  upon  as  urged  in  defence  of  a  late  wedding, 
which  gives  juil  matter  for  aftonifhment  to  all  the 
•world;  fince  it  certainly  could  have  been  brought 
about  by  nothing  (will  they  fay)  but  a  perfect 
knowledge  of  that  mutual  fympathy  of  humour, 
which  I  have  been  recommending  as  fo  great  an 
efiential  to  the  felicity  of  the  marriage  ftate.  It 
mutt  be  confefled,  the  artful  Vulpone  prevailed 
on  the  charming  Lindamira  to  think  as  he  did  in 
one  point;  but  that  is  what  no  more  than  thou- 
fands  have  done,  or  they  could  never  have  been 
united  to  the  object  of  their  wi(hes,  and  is  the 
confequence  only  of  that  paffion  which  arifes  from 
a  liking  of  the  perfon. 

This,  therefore,  I  am  far  from  taking  to  be  the 
cafe;  and  1  believe  the  reader  will  be  of  my  opi- 
nion, when  I  relate  the  progrcfs  of  thcfe  myderi-  • 
c-us  nuptials,  as  it  was  communicated  10  me  by  a. 


7$  TtfE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

Sylph,  whofe  bufinefs  it  is  to  attend  every  motion 
of  thofe,  whom  nature  has  diftinguiihed  by  fupe- 
rior  beauty. 

liindamira  from  her  very  infancy  gave  a  pro- 
mife  of  charrm,  which,  as  (he  drew  nearer  to  ma- 
turity, ripened  into  the  ct-noft  perfe&ion  : — de- 
fcended  by  her  fathei's  fide  from  a  prince,  \\ho> 
while  h-.:  Ji_viai,  v»  a1-  juftiy  the  darling  oi  his  people ; 
and  bv  her  nr'her's,  from  a  hero,  whole  name 
will  ever  be  remembered  with  honour: — bred  up 
in  the  Itri&dt  piinciples  of  virtue,  and  never  from 
under  the  eye  of  parents  diftinguilhed  for  every 
ihining  quality  befitting  their  high  dignity,  but 
for  nothing  more  than  conjugal  affection. 

Vulpone  has  no  family  to  boaft  of,  being  no 
more  than  what  one  may  call  of  the  modern  gen- 
try, of  which,  heaven  knows,  thcfe  latter  ages  have 
been  very  fertile  in  producing;  but  to  do  juftice 
to  him,. he  is  no  lefs  indebted  to  his  own  merit', 
than  to  favour,  for  promotions  he  has  attained: 
—what  he  wants  in  birth,  is  made  up  in  educa<- 
tion,  and  envy  cannot  deny  him,  the  character  of 
an  accompliihed  gentleman. 

He  had  frequently  the  honour  of  yifiting  the  il- 
laftrious  parents  of  Lindamira,  and  was  treated  by 
them  with  that  civility, .which  they  thought  his 
good  qualities.,  deferved.  Little,  alas!  did  they 
forefeethe  conference,  or  that  their  complaifance 
would  embolden  him  to  lift  up  his  eyes  to  the  pof- 
feflion  of  their  lovely  daughter;  much  lefs  that  a 
young  lady,  fcarce  eighteen,  the  idol  of  the  court, 
and  an  object  of  univerfal  admiration,  mould  ever 
condefccnd  to  entertain  the  lead  tender  emotiotis 
for  a  man,  by  fome  yeais  paft  the  meridian  of  his 
age,  aad  in  every  other  refpeft  fo  infinitely  hoc 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  77 

inferior,  that  the  diitance  between  them  would 
admit  of  no  degree  of  companion. 

Yet  fo  it  happened!  the  god  of  foft  defires  gave 
a  proof  how  much  his  power  can  do  in  overturn- 
in;;  what  has  ever  been  looked  upon  as  even  an 
antithefis  in  nature,  and  made  this  blooming 
charmer,  who  daily  faw  unmoved  the  lovelieft, 
nobleft,  and  moft  accomplifhed  youths  die  at  her 
feet,  unable  to  refifl  the  felicitations  of  a  man 
older  than  her  father. 

Few  were  the  opportunities  he  had  of  addreffing 
her,  but  thofe  he  fo  well  improved,  that  before  one 
could  well  imagine  fhe  had  forgiven  his  prdump- 
tion  in  declaring  the  paifion  he  had  for  her,  he  pre- 
vailed on  her  to  re  ward  it  byanaffurance  ihe  \vould 
never  confent  to  give  her  hand  to  another. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  the  correipondence 
they  held  together  was  carried  on  with  the  ex- 
tretneft  circumfpecfcion;  but  love,  like  fire,  is  dif- 
ficult to  be  concealed:  not  all  the  caution  in  the 
world  can  hinder  it  from  breaking  out  in  one  place 
or  another.  Some  of  the  family,  before  whom 
it  is  poflible  they  might  be  lefs  upon  their  guarJ, 
as  not  thinking  them  of  capacities  to  penetcate 
into  the  fecret,  took  notice  of  fomc,  paflages,  which 
feemed  to  them  as  derogatory  to  the  dignity  of 
their  young  lady,  and  immediately  difcovered  it  to 
her  mother,  who  that  moment  acquainted  her  lord 
with  what  flte  had  been  told.  After  confulting 
together,  tho'  the  thing  appeared  incredible,  yet 
they  judged  it  improper  to  admit  any  future  vifits 
from  a  perfon  of  his  Aation,  after  having  been 
fufpected  of  daring  to  hold  a  correfpondence  with 
their  daughter.  Vulponc  was  therefore  in  very- 
civil  terms,  though  without  acquainting  him  with 


78  THE    FEMALE  B.  II. 

the  motives  of  this  change  of  behaviour,  defired 
to  refrain  coming  to  their  houfe,  and  a  ftri& 
watch  at  the  fame  time  fet  over  every  motion  of 
Lindamira. 

They  gave  her  not  the  leaft  room  however  to 
guefs  they  had  any  doubts  a^  $p  her  conduct,  as 
believing,  that  if  there  was  any  truth  in  the  infor- 
mation that  had  been  given  them,  (he  would  be  lefs 
cautious,  by  not  thinking  herfelf  fufpe&ed,  and 
confequently  they  (hould  arrive  at  the  certainty 
much  eafier  than  by  a  formal  accufation. 

It  muft  be  acknowledged,  indeed,  that  this 
ma'nner  of  acting  was  extremely  prudent;  but 
Lindamira  had  her  intelligence: — thofe  very  fer- 
vants,  who  made  the  difcovery  to  her  mother, 
could  not  help  fpeaking  of  it  among  themfelvesj 
her  woman  over  heard  what  they  faid,  and  ac- 
quainted her  lady,  who  by  that  means  knew  fo 
well  how  to  difguife  her  fentiments,  and  affect  an 
unconcern  at  what  fecretly  wrung  her  very  heart- 
firings,  that  her  careful  parents  were  deceived  by 
it,  and  in  time  perfectly  affured  in  their  minds, 
that  there  was  not  the  leaft  ground  for  what  they 
had  been  told,  while  the  lovejs  had  this  confola- 
tion,  in  abfence,  to  converfe  by  letters,  which 
were  fecretly  conveyed  to  each  other  by  die  means 
of  a  confidante. 

Three  whole  months  pafled  over  in  this  man- 
ner, in  all  which -time  Vulpone  fed  not  his  fami  di- 
ed eyes  with  one  fight  of  his  Lindamira ;  that  art- 
ful young  lady,  the  better  to  lull  all  fufpicion,'  en- 
joining him  never  to  come  to  any  public  place 
when  (he  was  to  be  there,  of  which  (he  always 
took  care  to  inform  him ;  becaufe  as  me  feldom 
went  but  with  her  mother;,  or  fome  perfon  who 


B.  H.  SPECTATOR.  74 

might  probably  be  a  fpy  on  her  actions,  and  could 
not  anfwer  how  far  either  her  own  countenance, 
or  that  of  her  lover  might  betray  what  (he  fo  much 
defired  to  conceal,  fhe  refolved  to  leave  nothing 
to  chance,  or  give  even  the  leaft  fhadow  of  an  ex- 
cufe  for  being  fent,  as  otherwise  it  is  likely  me 
would  have  been  to  fome  place,  where  it  might 
have  beenimpoffible  for  her  either  to  give  or  receive 
the  fatisfa£lkm  (he  now  enjoyed  of  writing  to  her 
dear  Vulpone,  and  receiving  from  him  every  day 
frefh  proteftations  of  his  love  and  conftancy. 

At  length  an  opportunity  long  languifhed  for 
arrived : — Her  mother  had  befpoke  a  front-row  in 
the  ftage-box  at  the  playhoure,  but  happening  to 
be  a  little  indifpofed  that  day,  or  not  in  humour 
for  the  entertainment,  Lindamira  could  not  be 
excufed  from  going,  a  young  lady,  for  whom  the 
family  had  a  great  regard,  having  been  engaged  to 
accompany  them.  She  immediately  apprized 
Vulpone  of  it,  and  alfo  that  they  might  fpeak  to 
each  other  with  all  the  freedom  they  .could  wifh, 
as  the  perfon  who  would  be  with  her  was  wholly 
unacquainted  with  him. 

Accordingly,  they  had  not  been  in  the  box 
three  minutes  before  he  came  in,  and  the  houfe 
not  being  very  full  that  night,  there  was  nobody 
in  the  box  but  themfelves,  fo  that  they  were  in 
no  danger  of  having  any  thing  they  faid  over- 
fceard,  the  lady  who  came  with  Lindamira  being 
wholly  intent  on  the  play. 

However  it  was  what  he  whifpered  in  '-"T 
ear  that  night,  had  the  efficacy  to  draw  froi:  h  r 
a  promife  of  running  all  hazard  ,  and  mn • -•  :n<r 
him  the  next  morning.  Accordingly,  under  pre- 
tence of  taking  the  air  me  went  out  early,  and  a 


8o  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

place  being  appointed  for  their  meeting,  the  in- 
diffoluble  knot  was  tied;  after  which  (lie  returned 
home,  and  all  that  day  patted  over,  without  the 
leaft  fufpicion  of  what  was  done. 

On  the  next,  fome  perfon,  either  through  de- 
fign  or  accident  acquainted  her  mother,  that  fhe 
had  been  obferved  in  very  clofe  conference  with 
Vulpone  in  the  box, and  that  they  feemed  fo  much 
taken  up  with  each  other,  that  they  regarded  nei- 
ther the  play  nor  the  audience :  that  excellent 
Jady  was  a  little  alarmed  at  the  intelligence,  yet 
not  knowing  but  that  it  might  be  of  a  piece  with 
that  which  fhe  had  formerly  received,  and  faw  no 
proof  of  its  being  true,  refolved  not  to  give  any 
credit  to  this  till  fhe  had  more  certainty,  which  (lie 
thought  fhe  might  eafily  procure,  by  examining 
the  lady  who  went  with  her  to  the  play. 

But  how  greatly  did  her  fears  and  her  aflonifh- 
merst  increafe,  when  fitting  at  her  toilet  undreffing 
herfelf  for  bed,  her  illuftrious  confort  came  into 
the  room,  and  with  a  countenance  more  troubled 
than  fhe  had  ever  feen  him  wear,  commanded  her 
woman  to  quit  the  room,  then  aiked  in  a  kind  of 
corifufed  and  hafly  voice,  where  Lindamira  was? 
To  which  fhe  replying,  that  fhe  had  lately  left  her, 
and  was  retired  to  her  own  apartment;  he  re- 
joined with  a  figh,  that  he  doubted  much  if  any 
apartment  in  his  houfe  was  her  choice  at  prefent; 
then  proceeded  to  tell  Ifer,  that  he  was  well 
affured,  by  tbofe  whofe  eyes  had  convinced  them 
of  the  truth,  ;hat  Lindamira  had  been  with  Vul- 
pone the  morning  before, — that  they  were  toge- 
ther in  a  hackney-ccachT  and  drove  very  fail  to- 
wards the  city;  from  which  he  could  not  but  con- 
clude they  were  either  already  married,  or  too  far 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  8  c 

engaged  for  her  honour  and  reputation  to  break 
off.  He  haddoubtlefs  faid  more,  in  the  extremity 
of  rage  and  diicontent  his  foul  was  then  enflamed 
with,  had  not  the  tendernefs  he  had  for  his  lady, 
and  the  diforder  which  was  vifible  in  her  looks  and 
geftures,  retrained  him. 

After  the  firfl  emotions  were  a  little  over,  the 
fervants  were  one  by  one  called  up,  and  ftri&  in- 
quiry made  concerning  the  delivery  of  any  letters 
or  meflaijes  to  Lindamira;  but  all  were  either  re- 
ally ignoiant,  or  pretended  to  be  fo,  and  no  light 
could  be  got  from  them  into  this  affair,  but  that 
flie  had  gone  out  early  the  morning  before,  at- 
tended only  by  one  footman,  whom  (lie  left  at 
the  Park-gate,  and  he  f.iw  her  no  more  until  fhe 
returned  home  in  a  hackney-coach. 

The  whole  night  was  palled  in  examining  and 
debating  in  what  manner  they  fhould  proceed  to 
come  at  the  truth; — the  pailion  they  both  were  in 
would  not  fuffer  them  to  fee  her  with  any  degree 
of  moderation; — fo  it  was  at  laft  determined  that 
her  father  flioald  write  to  her,  which  he  did  in 
thefe  terms: 

"  LJNDAMIRA, 

"  I  hear  ftrange  things  of  you:  if  confcious 
**  of  having  done  nothing  to  cfFend  parents,  to 
M  whom  you  have  been  fo  dear,  nor  to  degrade  the 
"  dignity  of  your  birth,  delay  not  to  juftify  your- 
"  felf,  and  convince  us  you  have  carried  on  no 
<c  clumlefline  correfpondence  with  Vulpone,  or 
"  any  other  man;  but  if  guilty,  beware  how  you 
"  attempt  to  deceive  us,  left  a  fecond  fault  fhould 
*'  render  the  fir II  even  lefs  to  be  forgiven: — y.>u 
"  have  been  educateii  in  the  love  of  truth,  prove 
"  at  leaft  that  you  have  not  fwervcd  from  all  the 

VOL.  I.  H 


82  THE    FEMALE  B.  II. 

"  virtues  inculcated  into  you  by  your  careful  in- 
41  flruaors." 

This  he  fent  to  her  by  her  woman,  who,  in  a 
fmall  fpace  of  time,  returned  with  this  reply,  feal- 
ed  as  the  other  had  been. 

"  MOST  EVER  HONOURED  PARENTS, 

"  It  is  poffible  fome  bufy  perfon  may  have 
"  informed  you  of  what  I  neither  can  nor  will 
"  deny,  though  by  acknowledging,  1  have  no  o- 
"  ther  merit  than  by  fincerity  to  plead  my  pardon. 
"  I  confefs,  then,  I  have  ventured  to  clifpofe  of 
"'  my  felf  without  your  permiffion,  which  be  afTured 
"  I  never  would  have  elone,  could  I  have  enter- 
<:  tained  theleafl  hope  of  obtaining  it;  or  if  any 
u  thing  lefs  than  the  ruin  of  my  eternal  peace 
14  threatened  me,  in  being  deprived  of  him  who  is 
*'  now  myhufband.  Pity,  therefore,  I  befeech  you, 
"  the  fad  extreme  which  enforced  this  action  in 
*k  her,  who  in  every  other  thing  will  always  be  o- 
"  beclient."  LINDAMIRA  VULPONE. 

Sufpence  now  ceafed ;— this  iiluftrious  pair  now 
knew  all  that  their  care  would  have  prevented, 
was  irrevocably  paffcd: — How  greatly  they  were 
troubled,  none  but  parents  in  the  like  circumflan- 
ees  can  conceive;  yet  did  their  anger  furmount 
even  their  grief: — the  anfwer  me  fent  feemed  to 
them  fome  what  too  bold,  and  tho'  they  had  com- 
manded her  to  declare  the  truth,  they  thought  me 
might  have  done  it  in  more  fubmiiiive  terms ;  and 
looking  on  her  as  one  that  had  abufed  their  indul- 
gence, affronted  their  authority,  difgraced  their 
family,  and  in  a  manner  renounced  all  pretenfions 
to  meir  favour,  they  fent  an  immediate  order  to 
her  to  quit  the  houfe  that  in  flan  t,  and  never  pre* 
fume  to  Zee  them  more. 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  8j 

Lindamira,  on  receiving  this  command,  fent 
repeated  meflages,  imploring  their  pardon  and 
blefllng,  but  they  were  deaf  to  all  intreaties  on 
that  fcore,  and  {he  was  obliged  to  depart-,  after 
which  they  retired  to  their  country  feal,  to  give  a 
Joofe  to  their  difquiet,and  avoid  hearing  any  thing 
on  fo  difagrceable  a  fubject.  Vulpone  alfo  carried 
his  amiable  bride  into  a  fweet  recefs  he  had  pre- 
pared for  her,  in  cafe  any  accident  fhould  difco- 
ver  their  marriage,  before  they  intended  it. 

The  town  abounds  with  various  conjectures  on 
what  the  event  will  be ;  but  I  am  of  opinion  it  can- 
not but  be  happy,  provided  that  LinJamira  conti- 
nues to  find  in  Vulpone  the  fame  charms  as  fir  ft  in- 
duced her  to  make  choice  of  him,  and  her  noble 
parents  vouchfafe  to  give  a  fanclion  to  their  love. 

Great  preparations  are  now  making  for  the 
nuptials  of  beauBelfont  gnd  mifs Tittup: — a  .  .hey 
are  both  of  the  fame  way  of  thinking,,  and  tco 
much  in  love  with  their  own  dear  felves  to  be  m 
much  concern  about  each  other,  they  may  agree 
well  enough  while  they  continue  as  they  are;  but 
if  a  reformation  mould  happen  on  one  fide  without 
the  other,  then  what  in  any  different  circum- 
ftance  would  be  the  greateft  bleiling  to  the  party 
changed,  would  prove  a  curie  to  both;  fmce  it  is 
only  by  pei  filling  in  follies  of  our  own,  we  can 
be  able  to  endure  them  in  thofe  we  are  obliged  to 
live  with: — thebeft  wifti  that  can  be  given  them, 
therefore,  as  a  mutual  converfion  is  not  to  be  ex- 
pe£ted,  is,  that  they  may  both  be  always  the  fa-ni 
vain,  fluttering,  thoughtlcfs  creatures  they  hav; 
ever  been-,  fo  will  they  pafs  their  days  with  cafe 
and  peace  at  home,  and  only  be  ridiculous  abroad. 
The  cafe  of  Altizeera  is  extremely  unhappy; 
H  a 


84  THE   FEMALE  B.  II. 

who,  endued  with  an  excellent  understanding  her- 
felf,  was  compelled,  by  the  arbitrary  will  of  her 
father,  to  become  the  bride  of  the  verieft  fop  in 
town;  a  fool  by  nature,  and  rendered  yet  more 
fo  by  a  wrong  education:  he  thinks  he  muft  have 
a  judgment  fuperior  to  his  wife,  becaufe  he  is  a 
man;  and  that  it  becomes  him  to  contradict  every 
thirg  fhe  fays  and  does,  becaufe  he  is  a  hufband. 
Her  good  fenfe  makes  her  fubmit  to  him  as  fuch ; 
but  ihe  fears  to  open  her  mouth  in  any  company 
if  he  is  prefent,  left  he  fhould  expofe  his  folly  by 
attempting  to  fhew  his  wit  in  finding  fault  with 
what  {lie  utters.,  I  know  not  how  {he  may  forgive 
him  in  her  own  mind;  but  am  fure  her  acquaint- 
ance neither  can  nor  ought  to  do  it,  for  depriving 
them  of  the  pleafure  they  might  receive  in  her 
converfation,  by  his  ftupidity  and  arrogance. 

I  remember,  feme  year?  ago,  I  heard  a  lady  fay, 
ilie  imagined  it  was  owing  to  our  long  peace,  that 
every  public  place  abounded  fo  with  coxcombs 
and  finikinsj  and  that  if  we  once  came  to  have  a 
war  again,  a  more  manly  air  and  drcfs  would  be  fo 
much  the  fafhion,  that  thofe  gentlemen  who  (laid 
at  home  would  naturally  a  ft  eft  it,  and  exchange 
their  foreign  filk  brocades  for  downright  Englilh 
cloth.  Some  accidents  in  life  have  fince  that  time 
broke  off  our  acquaintance,  it  would  elfe  have 
given  me  fome  pleafure  to  rally  her  miflake.  "We 
are  now  engaged  in  three  -wars;  threatened  with 
invafions,  Popifh  pretenders,  plots,  and  what  not! 
Great  fleets  are  equipping;  huge  armaments  get- 
ting ready;  preffing  for  land  and  fea-fervice;  our 
fields  are  covered  with  tents ;  our  ftreets  fwarm 
with  foldiers;  in  every  quarter  we  hear  drums 
beating,  trumpets  founding;  nothing  but  military 


B.  IT.  SPECTATOR.  9; 

prcpanuions  going  forwards;  yer,  in  my  opinion, 
our  fine  gentlemen  appear  every  whit  as  clean,  as 
calm,  anil  unconcerned  as  ever,  except  when  they 
labour  under  the  want  of  any  of  thofe  commodi- 
ties, the  interruption  of  our  commerce  prevents 
from  being  imported;  and  then  indeed  they  com- 
plain bitterly  againft  the  times.  One  \vho  can 
endure  no  clothes  that  are  not  of  the  French  cut, 
cries,  he  is  made  a  monfter  by  a  dunce  of  an  En- 
glifh  taylor:  another  is  poifoned  with  ill  fcentc, 
and  dies  for  fome  i'refh  orangerie  and  bergamot; 
a  third  fays.  "  Pox  on  the  Spanifh  war,  and  thofe 
"  that  forced  our  late  minifter  into  it ;  there  is  not 
"  a  bit  of  right  vermilion  pafte  now  to  be  had!" 

How  long  this  over-delicacy  will  continae,hei- 
ven  knows !  but  it  is  yet  far  from  being  extirpated. 
Even  among  the  military  gentlemen,  there  are 
fome,  who  being  infected  with  it  before  they  be- 
came fo,  find  it  an  infuperable  difficulty  to  bill-.? 
themfelves  to  thathardinefs  and  neglect  of  perfo- 
nal  ornaments,  which  fuit  the  life  of  a  foldier. 

A  perfon,  who  has  had  great  dealings  wkh  the 
Keau  monde,  and  has  lately  been,  obliged  to  deliver 
up  her  books,  on  account  of  a  ftatute  of  bankrupt- 
cy awarded  againft  her,  one  of  the  affignccs,  who 
happens  to  be  a  particular  acquaintance  of  mine, 
took  the  pains  to  tranfcribe,  as  a  great  curiofity^ 
the  copy  of  a  bill  owing  to  her  from  a  gentleman 
now  in  the  army,  and  made  me  a  prefent  of  it. 
As  I  am  convinced  all  the  items  in  it  are  genuine, 
it  afforded  me  a  great  deal  of  diverfion,  and  1  be- 
lieve will  not  be  unacceptable  to  the  public. 

Cornet  Lovely,  debtor  to  Rebecca  Facemend,, 

June  6,  1743. 
For  a  riding  mafic  to  prevent  fun-burn    i     I     o 


8(5  THE  FEMALE  B.  IT. 

For  a  night  mafic  to  take  away  freckles  r  i  o 
For  6  pounds  of  Jeflamin  butter  for  ?  ^ 

the  hair $   6     6     ° 

For  12  pots  of  cold  cream  -  -  -  i  10  O 
For  4  bottles  of  Benjamin  water  -  -  i  o  o 
For  30  pounds  of  perfumed  powder  -  i  10  o 
For  3  boxes  of  tooth-powder  -  -  -  o  15  o 
For  a  fpunge  tooth  brufh  ---026 
For  a  hair  tooth-brufli  -  -  -  -  o  i  o 
For  6  bottles  of  perfumed  mouth-water  i  4  o 
For  a  filver  comb  for  the  eye-brows  -050 
For  2  ounces  of  jet  powder  for  ditto  -  o  18  o 
For  4  boxes"  of  fine  lip-falve  -  -  -  I  o  o 
For  an  ounce  of  beft  Carmine  --300 
For  6  bottles  of  orange  flower- water  i  i  o  o 
For  12  pounds  of  almond  pafie  --660 
For  2  pounds  of  Bergamot  fnuff  -  800 
For  3  bottles  of  efTence  ditto  -  -  -  i  10  o 
For  6  pair  of  dog- ikin  gloves  -  -  i  10  o 

Total     38     9     6 

Such  was  the  ammunition  this  doughty  hero,  it 
feems,  took  with  him;  the  lofs  of  which,  had  it 
.happened  to  have  fallen  into  the  enemy's  hands, 
would  probably  have  given  him  more  concern  than 
routing  of  the  whole  army,  provided  his  own  dear 
perfon  had  efcaped  without  a  fear. 

Frequent  campaigns,  however,  it  is  to  be  hoped 
will  wear  this  effeminacy  off,  and  the  example 
of  others  teach  fuch  new-fledged  warriors,  that  if 
they  would1  foar  to  glory,  they  muft  entirely  throw 
afideall  the  foftcningluxuriesof  their filken  youth. 
Not  that  there  is  any  neceflity  that  a  man  muft 
be  a  floven,  becaufe  he  is  a  foldier,  and  negle£l  all 
the  decencies  of  life  to  prove  his  attachment  to 


t.H.  SPECTATOR.  fc> 

his  vocation; — there  is  an  affe&ation  in  this  alfo, 
as  well  as  the  other;  and  I  fhould  fay,  that  offi- 
cer, who,  when  he  might  have  a  good  tent  to  de- 
fend him  from  the  weather,  chofe  to  lye  on  the 
bare  earth,  expofed  to  all  the  inclemencies  of  the 
air,  had  an  equal  (hare  of  vanity  with  him  who 
had  his  pavilion  hung  with  velvet  and  embroidery. 
To  endure  all  the  toils  and  hardlhips  of  the  field 
•with  patience  and  intrepidity,  to  be  fearlcfs  of 
danger  when  the  duties  of  his  poft  commanded, 
as  highly  laudable  and  emulative;  but  to  run  into 
them  without  a  call,  and  when  bravery  can  be  of 
no  fervice,  is  altogether  idle;  and  courage  in  fuch 
a  one,  like  all  other  virtues,  degenerates  into  a 
vice,  by  being  carried  to  an  extreme. 

But  1  am  moft  of  all  concerned  when  I  hear 
a  man,  having  done  a  gallant  action  in  the  field, 
is  fo  far  puffed  up  with  it,  that  he  looks  upon  him- 
felf  as  a  little  deitjyand  that  he  may,  in  confide- 
ration  of"  having  been  able  to  fulfil  his  duty  in  one 
point,  difpenfe  with  all  other  obligations. 

Some  time  before  the  opening  of  the  laft  cam^ 
paign,  Amaranthus,  a  brave  young  officer,  made 
his  addrefles  to  Aminta;  his  paffion  had  all  the 
effecl:  hewifhed  it  Ihould  have  on  her  tender  heart: 
—me  either  had  too  much  confidence  in  rys  ho- 
nour, or  too  little  artifice  to  conceal  the  fenti- 
ments  he  had  infpired  her  with: — he  was  ravifh- 
ed  at  the  difcovcry;  fwore  never  to  be  but  her's, 
and  there  pafled  between  them  a  folemn  promife 
of  marriage  on  his  return  from  Germany,  for 
which  place  it  was  expc&ed  his  regiment  would 
have  orders  fpeedily  to  embaik. 

Each  day  fecmed  to  bring  with  it  an  increafe  of 
mutual  tendernefs,  and  fcarce  ever  was  there  a 


£3  THS  FEMALE  B.  Ifc 

pair,  whofe  love  in  its  beginning  promifed  more 
lading  felicity.  Amaranthus,  in  every  a&ion, 
teftifted  h-2  had  no  will  but  that  of  his  Aminta; 
and  Aminta,  by  all  her  behaviour,  proved,  that 
whatever  (lie  commanded  or  intreatcd  of  her  A- 
maranthus,  was  only  what  flie  knew  he  wimed  (he 
fhould  do. 

At  length  the  fatal  hour  of  feparation  arrived, 
accompanied  with  all  thofe  agonies  which  none 
but  thofe  who  love  are  able  to  conceive : — glory, 
which  till  now  had  been  the  darling  idol  of  Ama- 
ranthus' foul,  loft  all  its  charms,  fince  it  tore  him 
from  the  fociety  of  Aminta;  and  Aminta,  in  being 
about  to  be  deprived  of  the  prefence  of  Amaran- 
thus, feemed  to  have  no  life  but  for  complaints. 

The  cruel  necefiity,  however,  muft  be  fubmit- 
ted  to:  tears,  fighs,  embraces,  and  mutual  protef- 
tations  of  everlafting  conftancy,  compleated  the 
tender.,  but  melancholy  farewel:  none  that  had 
feen  them  part,,  could  have  well  diftinguifhed 
•which  felt  the  deepeft  anguifh;  but  if  we  confider 
the  nature  of  the  circum'ftance,  we  (hall  find  the 
difference  muftbe  wide.  Amaranthus,  doubdefs, 
loved  with  the  utmolt  paffion  at  that  time,  and 
•was  going  to  lofe,  he  knew  not  for  how  long,  the 
fight  of  her  who  was  the  object  of  his  flame-,  but 
then  fhat  abfence  was  the  fole  misfortune  he  had 
to  ftruggle  with:  whereas  Aminta  had  not  only 
the  fame  in  an  equal  degree,  but  attended  with 
others  of  a  more  dreadful  kind.  The  dangers  to 
which  a  "fife,  far  dearer  to  her  than  her  own,  muft 
inevitably  be  expofed,  filled  her  with  apprehen- 
fions,  which  (lie  was  fcarceable  to  fuppcrt.  After 
his  departure,  (he  pa  fifed  the  greateft  part  of  her 
time  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  offering  up  her  vows 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  89 

and  prayers  for  his  protection;  nor  could  the  in- 
treaties  of  her  dearefl  friends  prevail  on  her  to 
partake  with  them  any  of  thofe  diverfions  and  en- 
tertainments her  youth  had  formerly  delighted  in : 
all  the  converfation  (he  coveted,  was  fuch  as  in- 
formed her  concerning  the  army;  (lie  was  conti- 
nually aflcing  queftions  on  that  head;  was  only 
pleafed  or  fad,  according  as  (he  heard  they  were 
near,  or  at  a  diftance  from  the  enemy,  the  arri- 
val of  every  courier  gave  a  palpitation  to  her  heart, 
till  the  receipt  of  a  letter  from  Amaranthus  con- 
vinced her,  that  her  terrors  as  yet  had  been  with- 
out foundation. 

He  wrote  to  her  feveral  times  before  the  battle 
of  Dettingen,  in  the  lad  of  which  he  acquainted 
her,  that  they  were  on  the  point  of  leaving  Afchaf- 
fenburgh,  in  order  to  join  the  forces  at  Hanau, 
from  which  place  (he  might  ex  peel  to  hi?ar  from 
him  a?ain.  Welcome  as  all  his  letters  wer?,  this 
afforded  her  a  double  portion  of  fatif  faction;  be- 
caufe,  in  cafe  of  an  engagement  with  the  French, 
the  number  of  the  combined  armies  would  give 
her  left  to  fear  from  him  who  took  up  all  her  care. 

But  what  became  of  her,  when  inflead  of  re- 
ceiving the  joyful  intelligence  fhe  hoped,  of  having 
made  the  enemy  fly  before  them  without  a  blow, 
fhe  heard  there  had  been  a  terrible  rencounter; 
that  great  numbers  of  brave  men  had  fallen  on 
both  fides,  and  that  Amaranthus  was  among  the 
number  of  the  (lain? 

It  would  be  in  vain  to  go  about  to  defcribe 
•what  it  was  (he  felt;  her  grief  and  her  defpair 
were  above  all  reprefentation,  as  they  v.  ere  beyond 
all  bounds;  fo  I  fhall  only  fay,  that  both  were 
too  vialent  to  endure  long  continuance,  but  muft 


po  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

have  found  a  period  with  her  life,  had  (he  not  been 
relieved  by  different  and  more  comfortable  news. 

The  wounds,  which  had  occafioned  the  report 
of  his  death,  were  dangerous  indeed,  but  not  mor- 
tal ;  and  his  friends  had  greater  reafon  to  congra- 
tulate than  condole  them,  fince  the  manner  in 
which  they  were  received,  purchafed  him  immor- 
tal honour. 

It  is  certain  he  behaved  with  the  utmofl  intre- 
pidity, and  was  fo  far  from  being  daunted  by  the 
fall  of  others,  that  he  feemed  rather  animated  with 
frefh  courage  to  revenge  their  fate;  and  though 
the  legiment  he  was  in  fullered  greatly,  and  he  was 
himfelf  wounded  in  many  places,  yet  he  would  not 
be  prevailed  upon  to  quit  the  field,  till  an  unlucky 
blow  upon  the  head  quite  lluiined  him,  and  he 
fell  in  all  appearance,  dead. 

As  his  valour  had  gained  him  friends,  even 
1 , — -aroon£  thcfe  v.-ho  were  till  now  the  lead  acquainted 
with  his  perfon,  he  was  immediately  taken  up,  but 
for  fome  hours  difcovered  no  fymptoms  of  breath  j. 
fo  that  it  was- not  ftrange,  in  the  confuiion  every 
one  was  after  the  battle,  that  in  the  accounts  tranf- 
mitted  of  it,  this  young  hero's  name  mould  be  in- 
ferted  in  the  lilt  of  thoie  who  were, killed. 

Aminta  heard  of  his  recovery,  and  the  praifes 
•which  every  one  gave  to  his  merit,  with  a  plea- 
fure  conformable  to  the  love  flic  had  for  him;  but 
could  not  help  being  a  little  alarmed  when  (he 
found  he  had  wrote  to  others,  and  (he  who  flattered 
herfelf  with  being  the  firit  to  whom  he  would  em- 
ploy his  pen,  had  not  received  the  leafr  line  from 
him  fince  the  battle:  but  it  is  not  without  great 
difficulty  we  bring  ouifelves  to  have  an  ill  opini- 
on of  thofe  we  love :  her  tcndernefs  inventc.l  ex- 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  91 

cufcs  for  him,  which,  it  is  poflible,  he  would  not 
have  had  artifice  to  invent  for  himfelf,  and  chofe 
to  impute  his  filence  to  any  caufe,  rather  than 
neglect.  The  diflance  between  them  was  great; 
couriers  might  not  have  opportunity  to  wait  his 
writing;  the  pcfi  might  mifcarry,  or  he  might 
poflibly  be  detached  to  fome  place,  whence  nei- 
ther courier  nor  poft  could  come;  and  what  let- 
ters he  fent,  might  pafs  through  hands,  which 
he  did  not  judge  proper  to  intruft  with  the  fecret 
of  his  correfpondence  with  her. 

In  this  manner  did  (he  beguile  defpair  till  his 
return;  and  though  (he  refolved  to  accufe  him, 
doubted  not  but  he  would  give  fuch  reafons  for  his 
feeming  unkindnefs,  that  (he  would  be  obliged  to 
afk  his  pardon  for.  having  been  unjuft  enough  to 
fufpeft  him. 

Far  was  flie  from  being  truly  unhappy,  till 
after  fhe  was  informed  of  his  arrival;  and  fevcral 
days  pafled  over,  without  either  feeing  or  receiv- 
ing any  meflage  from  him.  This  was,  indeed, 
what  all  her  love  and  tendernefs  wanted  ingenuity 
to  account  for,  and  fhe  was  now  compelled,  even 
in  fpite  of  herfeif,  to  think  him  ungrateful  and 
perfidious.  Amazement,  and  fome  little  (hare  of 
pride,  which  never  fails  to  exert  itfclf  in  love 
abufcd,  prevented  her  fome  time  from  fending  to 
him;  at  laft  fhe  wrote,  reproached  him  with  the 
alteration  in  his  behaviour,  yet  mingled  her  up- 
brauiings  with  fo  much  f \veetnefs,  as  fhewed  her 
ready  to  forgive,  whenever  he  came  to  intrcat  it. 

To  this  he  returned  an  anftvcr  extremely  com- 
plaifant,  but  fir  from  any  thing  thatcxpreflsd  the 
ardour  of  a  lover;  excufed  himfelf  by  the  hurry 
of  his  affairs,  for  having  not  yet  been  able  to  wait 


92  THE  FEMALE  B.  IT. 

upon  her;  but  affured  her,  he  would  not  fail  of 
paying  his  refpe&s  the  firft  leifure  hour  5  conclud- 
ed with  telling  her,  that  nobody  could  have  a 
greater  regard  for  her  than  himfelf,  and  that  he 
fhould  be  proud  of  any  opportunity  to  convince 
her  of  it;  and  fubfcribed  himfelf,  not  as  he  was 
accuftomed,  '<  her  eternal  adorer,"  but  "  her 
"  moft  humble  and  obedient  fervant." 

She  muft  have  been  the  dulleft  and  mod  infa- 
tuated of  her  fex,  had  fhe  not  now  feen  (he  had 
intirely  loft  a  heart  fhe  thought  herfelf  fo  fecure 
of,  and  had  fo  much  gloried  in:  rage  and  grief 
had  alternately  the  pofTeffion  of  her  foul;  yet  love 
ftill  retained  a  part,  and  wns  fo  blended  with  them 
both,  that  it  would  not  fuffer  the  one  to  grow  into 
difdain,  nor  the  other  to  deftroy  fome  little  re- 
mains of  hope,  that  ihe  ihould  one  day  be  able  to 
reclaim  him. 

She  was  apt  to  imagine,  that  if  once  fhe  faw 
him,  he  could  not  behold  thofe  eyes,  which  he  a 
thoufand  timeshad  fwcrn  were  the  lights  of  his  life, 
now  drowned  in  tears,  of  which  he  was  the  caufe, 
•without  refuming  thofe  emotions  they  had  for- 
merly infpired  him  with;  but  having  waited  his 
expected  vifit  longer  indeed  than  is  ordinarily  con- 
fident with  the  impatience  of  a  lover,  and  finding 
he  came  not,  fhe  wrote  a  feccnd  time,  conjuring 
him  not  to  let  her  languifh  in  this  uncertainty, 
and  told  him,  that  fhe  only  begged  to  know,  from 
his  own  mouth,  her  fate,  and  after  that  would 
never  afk  to  fee  him  more. 

This  preffing  mandate  he  complied  with:  the 
fafhion  in  which  fhe  received'him  may  eafily  be 
guefTed  at,  by  what  has  been  faid  of  the  violence 
of  her  afFe&ion ;  but  the  c:ccrfTive  crUlnefs,  and 


B.IL-          SPECTATOR.  93 

diftant  air  of  his  replies  to  all  me  faid,  could  not 
be  exprefied  even  by  her,  who  was  the  witnefs  of- 
it;  but  the  fum  of  what  he  gave  her  to  underftand 
was,  that  he  was  convinced  a  tender  intercourfe 
with  the  ladies  took  up  too  much  of  a  foldier's 
mind)  and  that  he  had  made  a  refolution  to  em- 
ploy all  his  in  the  duties  of  his  function:  he  told 
her,  that  were  he  in  any  other  fituation,  or  could 
think  it  compatible  with  that  purfuit  of  fame  he 
was  engaged  in,  to  continue  an  amorous  corre- 
fpondence,  Aminta  fhould  have  the  preference  of 
all  her  fex;  but  as  he  was  circumftanced,  he  flat- 
tered himfelf  her  good  fenfe  would  induce  her  to 
pardon  this  change  of  temper  in  him,  fmce  his 
zeal  for  the  fervicc  of  his  king  and  country  was 
the  only  rival  which  had  occafioned  it. 

It  muft  be  acknowledged  he  deceived  her  not  in 
this  lalt  article;  for,  in  fa&,  the  promotion  he 
had  acquired,  the  applaufe  of  the  whole  army, 
the  praife  beftowed  on  him  by  the  general,  and 
the  compliments  made  him  by  ladies  of  the  firft 
quality  at  his  return,  on  account  of  his  behaviour 
at  Dettingen,  have  fo  much  elated  him,  that  he 
is  no  longer  the  fame  perfon : — his  once  foft  be- 
feeching  air  is  now  converted  into  one  all  referved 
and  haughty;  a  fcornful  tofs  of  the  head;  a  carc- 
lefs  fling  of  the  arms;  eyes  that  feem  intent  rather 
on  things  within  himfelf,  than  any  thing  he  can 
find  without; — in  fine,  there  appears  fo  thorough 
a  change  in  his  whole  manner,  that  if  the  geflures 
of  the  body  may  be  looked  upon  as  any  indication 
of  the  affections  of  the  mind,  as  qucfiionlefs  they 
may,  his  are  full  of  felf-fufliciency : — he  feems 
to  think  what  he  has  done  commands,  as  his  due, 
the  love  and  refpeft  of  all  who  fee  him,  and  that 

VOL.  1.  1 


94  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

it  is  beneath  him  even  to  regard,  much  lefs  ima- 
gine himfelf  obliged  by  it. 

Aminta  had  therefore  the  lefs  to  mortify  her, 
as  it  was  not  becaufe  the  fuperior  beauty  of  any 
other  had  fupplanted  her  in  his  affections,  but 
becaufe  in  reality  he  now  thought  no  woman  wor-* 
thy  of  the  ferious  paffion  of  a  man  like  himfelf. 

She  was,  notwithftanding,  utterly  unable  to 
fupport  the  fliock,  and  no  fooner  found  his  heart 
was  irrecoverable,  than  defpifing  all  other  con- 
quefts,  though  fhe  has  youth,  beauty  and  fortune 
enough  to  make  many,  retired  to  a  lone  country 
houfe,  where  (lie  endeavours,  among  rural  plea- 
fures,  to  forget  thofe  of  the  great  world,  and  in 
the  melody  of  the  fweet  inhabitants  of  the  woods 
and  groves,  lofe  the  memory  of  that  voice  by 
which  fhe  was  undone. 

However  fome  people  may  approve  this  action 
in  Amaranthus,  I  cannot  help  thinking  there  is 
more  of  the  favage  than  the  true  hero  in  it;  and 
I  am  certain  we  muft  give  the  lie  to  our  fenfes, 
and  many  modern  great  examples,  as  well  as  to 
numbers  in  antiquity,  if  we  fhould  fay,  that  love 
and  glory  are  things  incompatible;  or  that  a  wife 
and  prudent  wife,  be  her  paffion  never  fo  violent, 
will  not  always  be  too  tender  of  her  hufband's 
intereft  and  reputation,  to  defire,  that  to  prove 
'  his  regard  to  her,  he  fhould  neglect  any  part  of 
what  he  owes  to  them. 

That  fiction  of  the  poets,  concerning  the  loves 
of  Mars  and  Venus,  feems  built  on  a  very  juft 
foundation : — women,  in  general,  are  obferved  to 
be  moft  fond  of  military  gentlemen; — and  where- 
fore is  it  fo? — Surely  not  becaufe  they  wear  red 
coats! — That  many  others  do,  who  fometimes  fit 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  95 

behind  a  counter,  and  what  is  worfe  have  not 
the  heart  to  draw  a  fword,  or  fire- a  piflol;  but  it 
is,  becaufe  a  foldier  is  fuppofed,  at  lead,  to  have 
courage  to  defend,  in  any  exigence,  all  who  are 
under  his  protection ;  and  alfo  becaufe  the  cha- 
racter of  a  brave  man  is,  of  all  other,  mod  efteem- 
ed  in  the  world,  as  that  of  a  coward  is  the  mod 
contemned.  Will  a  woman,  therefore,  by  arti- 
fice or  perfuafion,  either  directly  or  indirectly, 
attempt  to  make  the  man  {he  loves,  guilty  of  any 
thing  that  might  fully  the  luftre  of  that  character 
for  which  me  loves  him  ? — Would  (lie  not  rather 
pufti  him  on  to  actions,  which  might  juftify  the 
choice  (he  made  of  him  ?  and  whatever  Ihe  fuffer- 
ed  in  abfence  for  him,  or  from  the  fears  her  ten- 
dernefs  fuggefted  as  to  the  dangers  he  encountered, 
would  me  not  value  herfelf  on  furmounting  them, 
and  take  a  laudable  pride  in  proving  how  worthy 
(he  was  of  her  hufoand's  affection,  by  the  regard 
file  had  for  his  fame  ? 

I  remember  to  have  been  one  night  at  the  play, 
when  the  wife  and  two  fons  of  a  great  admiral 
came  into  the  box; — fome  who  knew  them  whif- 
pered  it  to  others,  till  a  general  murmur  ran 
throughout  the  houfe: — all  eyes,  all  tongues,  all 
hands  were  immediately  employed  to  (how  the  love 
and  gratitude  the  aflembly  had  for  the  family  of 
that  illuftrious  hero.  The  voice  of  the  people  is 
the  beft  trump  of  fame;  it  is  not  by  fulfome  pa- 
negyricks,  or  by  the  praifes  of  an  interefted  few, 
or  by  rewards,  often  partially  beftowed,  that  true 
merit  is  diflinguimed,  but  by  the  unfought,  un- 
biafled  prayers  and  bleffings  of  the  whole: — the 
acclamations  bellowed  on  him  fprang  from  thi 
heart  j— his  excellent  lady  fawand  felt  an  inward 
I  a 


96  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

fatisfa£lkm  at  it,  which  diffufed  itfelf  through  all 
her  features,  and  gave  an  additional  lufue  to  her 
eyes;  and  yet,  no  doubt,  flie  mourned  his  tedious 
abfence,  languidied  for  his  return,  had  often  wept 
in  private,  and  given  a  looie  to  all  the  tender 
anxiety  the  knowledge  of  thofe  numberlefs  and 
imminent  dangers,  with  which  he  was  at  that 
jime  furrounded,  muft  involve  her  in; — yet  his 
glory,  dearer  to  her  than  all  the  fatisfa£Hon  his 
prefence  could  have  beftowed,  dearer  to  her  than 
even  his  life,  fince  it  was  fo  to  him,  enabled  her 
to  take  a  pleafure  even  in  the  fufferings  by  which 
he  purchafed  it. 

Many  fuch  examples,  which  I  have  either 
heard  or  read  of,  I  could  produce  for  the  honour 
of  my  fex  in  this  point;  but  what  the  eye  is  wit- 
uefs  of  ftrikes  the  moft,  and  makes  the  moft  deep 
and  lading  impreffion:  I  chufe,  therefore;  rather 
to  mention  this  lady,  becaufe  I  doubt  not  but 
many  of  my  readers  were  fpe£tators,  as  well  as 
jmyfelf,  of  her  amiable  behaviour  on  this  occafion ; 
and  perhaps  alfo 'on  many  others,  when  I  was  not 
fo  happy  to  be  prefent. 

Some  women,  I  know,  have  not  ftrength  of 
fpirits  to  fupport  the  parting  from  a  beloved  and 
loving  hulband,  without  fuch  agonies  as  might  (tag- 
ger the  refolution  of  the  bolder!  man,  render  him 
Icarce  able  to  tear  himfelf  away,  and  when  he  does, 
compelled  by  cruel  duty,  feem  as  if  he  had  left 
half  his  foul  behind  him;  and  yet  thpfe  very  ladies 
may  be  far  from  thinking  the  foftnefs  of  their  fex 
ought  to  be  complied  with,  or  would  think  that 
hufband  more  worthy  their  affedion,  who,  to  the 
prejudice  of  his  honour,  mould  humour  her  foible. 

But  in  fuch  cafes  I  would  recommend  the  wife 


S.  il,          SPECTATOR.  97 

of  a  late  general  as  an  example.  Never  woman 
loved  a  hufband  to  a  greater  degree  of  fondnefs, 
nor  received  a  more  grateful  return  of  tenderncfi 
and  affection ;  (he  was  one  of  thofe  who  could 
»ot  bear  the  ihock  of  parting,  without  thofe  emo- 
tions I  have  been  defcribing;  and  perceiving  the 
fight  of  her  diforders  had  a  greater  effect:  on  him 
than  fhe  wiflied  them  to  have,  intreated,  that  for 
the  future,  whenever  they  were  obliged  to  fepa- 
rate,  he  would  take  no  leave  of  her: — he  feemed 
furprized  that  a  greatnefs  of  foul,  fuch  as  fhe  tefli- 
fied  in  making  this  requefl,  could  not  enable  her 
to  endure,  with  equal  firmnefs,  a  misfortune  which 
was  irremediable  in  the  ftation  he  was,  and- would 
fain  have  refufed  what  (lie  defired :  "  How  unkind, 
"  faid  he,  and.  how  unjufl  to  your  merits  mufl  I 
"  appear,  if  I  fhould  do  as  you  would  have  me', 
"  And  how  {hall  1  flatter  myfelf  you  will  fuffer  lefs 
"  when  the  news  of  my  departure  is  brought  to. 
11  you,  than  if  you  actually  faw  me  on  horfe* 
"  back!"  "  No  matter,  replied  fhe,  what  I  mall 
"  fufFer,  fince  the  foolifh  timidity  of  my  nature, 
"  will  not  permit  me  to  govern  myfelf  as  becomes. 
"  a  perfon  who  has  the  honour  to  be. your  wife;  in. 
*'  will  be  more  for  my  reputation,  and  your  eafe. 
<{  that  theloofelgive  my  griefs  may  be  in  private." 
With  fuch  kind  of  arguments  fhe  prevailed  orv 
him;  and  orders  foon  after  arriving  that  he  muft 
repair  to  the  army,,  every  thing  was  got  ready  for 
his  departure  with  all  the  fccrefy  imaginable;  not 
the  lead  mention  made  of  it  to  the  family,  nor  by 
any  one  who  came  to  the  houfe;  and  on  a  time, 
prefixed,  his  equipage  attended  him  at  the  gates, 
ami  he  went  forth  with  no  other  ceremony,  thaa. 

13 


98  THE   FEMALE  B7  II. 

he  was  accuftomed  to  ufe  when  he  was  to  return 
the  fame  day. 

All  the  tender  adieus  he  had  to  make  were  fent 
to  her  by  letter,  and  how  much  foever  fhe  en- 
dured, none  but  her  woman  was  a  witnefs; — fhe 
could  command  her  pen,  though  not  her  eyesj 
and  returned  him  anfwers,  fuch  as  convinced  him 
nothing  was  fo  much  defired  by  her  as  new  addi- 
tions to  that  reputation  he  had  in  fo  many  battles, 
and  amidfl  fo  many  dangers,  acquired. 

The  parting  of  friends  and  lovers  is  like  the 
parting  of  the  foul  and  body,  always  moft  eafy 
when  leaft  warned  of  it.  The  preparations  are 
more  terrible  than  the  thing  itfelf;  and  as  reafon 
is  oftentimes  too  weak  to  overcome  a  natural  ti- 
midity, it  is  infinitely  bed  to  be  wholly  ignorant 
of  the  fhock  we  are  to  fuftain,  till  it  arrives. 

I  wilh,  however,  there  were  more  occafion 
than  there  feems  to  be  for  this  caution; — it  is 
jny  bufmefs,  as  a  Spectator,  to  let  as  little  as  pof- 
fible  efcape  me;  and  I  am  forry  to  obferve,  that 
my  refearches  prefent  me  with  few  inftanccs  of 
that  conjugal  tendernefs,  which  require  fuch  a 
command  over  themfelves,  as  the  above-mention- 
ed lady  endeavoured  to  attain. 

Thefarewels  married  people  ordinarily  take  of 
each  other,  feem  little  more  than  mere  matters  of 
form;  and  fome  there  are,  who,  after  the  moment 
of  feparation,  appear  like  a  prifoner  juft  got  rid  of 
!»is  fetters ;  they  frifk  and  fkip  about,  as  if  they 
knew  not  how  enough  to  repair,  by  a  prefent  jol- 
lity, the  anxiety  of  their  lats  confinement. 

.iin-Ja  no  fooner  finds  herfelf  freed  from 
the  pfefence  of  Romero,  than  fhe  hurries  from  af- 
fembly  to  aficmbly;  gallants  it  with  every  pretty 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  99 

fellow  (he  comes  in  company  with;  drives  from 
one  end  of  the  town  to  the  other;  fer.ds  for  gen- 
tlemen out  or"  chocolate  houfes,  am*  i0  the  veriefl 
rattle  in  nature. 

Silax  pretends  the  town  is  full  of  diftempers, 
and  perfuadeshis  wife  to  go  to  their  country  feat 
for  the  benefit  of  the  air;  but  the  coach  which 
carries  her  is  fcarcely  out  of  fight,  before  he  fends 
for  half  a  dozen  friends  of  his  own  way  of  think- 
ing, as  many  ladies  of  pleafure  to  entertain  them, 
and  converts  every  room  in  bis  houfe  into  a  bro- 
thel :  nothing  but  feafting,  drinking,  dancing,  and 
rioting  is  to  be  feen;  till  tired  with  debauchery, 
and  not  till  then,  he  retires  to  his  wife,  and  lives 
regular  by  way  of  penance. 

Lelia  adored  Macrobius  while  prefent  with  her, 
but  the  fervice  of  his  country  no  fooner  obliged 
him  to  quit  her  arms,  than  (he  fought  confolation 
in  the  embraces  of  his  own  brother;  yet  Macro- 
bius had  married  her  without  a  fortune,  and  ftill 
continues  to  love  her  too  well  for  his  repofe. 

Dorimon  had  made  a  figure  little  to  be  envied 
by  his  neighbours,  had  he  not  been  fortunate  e? 
nough  to  appear  agreeable  in  the  eyes  of  the  young, 
rich,  and  beautiful  Clotilda;  in  fpiteofall  the  dif- 
f uafions  of  her  fr  iends,  flie  married  him,  and  makes 
him  the  moft  obiequious  and  tender  wife;  yet  the 
ungrateful  Dorimon,  quite  infenfible  of  the  obli- 
gations he  has  to  her,  as  well  as  of  the  charms 
which  could  not  fail  to  bind  any  other  man,  is 
continually  finding  pretences  to  be  abfent  from 
her,  and  pafles  the  greateft  part  of  his  time  with 
a  loofe  creature,  whom  chance  brought  him  ac- 
quainted with  at  a  houfe  of  ill  fame. 

Can  any  one  believe,  that  fouls  like  thcfe  were 


ioo  THE  F  E  M  A  L  E  B.  HV 

ever  paired  in  heaven!  Might  one  not  rather  be 
tempted  to  imagine,  that  fome  daemon,  enemy  to 
mankind,  had  been  permitted  to  difpofe  of  them! 
Thofe  who  feem  moil  formed  for  each  other,  and 
fuited  for  mutual  happinefs,  are  very  rarely  fuf- 
fered  to  give  any  teftimonies  here  below  of  that 
divine  andprc-exifting  union  fo  much  talked  on,, 
but  ftill  by  fome  crofs  intervening  accident,  fe- 
vered and  doomed  to  lots  of  different  kinds. 

Who  can  reflect  on  the  ftrange  circumftance 
which  pai  ted  Panthea  from  her  dear  and  betroth- 
ed Fidelio,  without  being,  fcized  v/ith  the  utmoft 
amazement!  But  as  there  is  fomewhat  very  re- 
markable in  the  ftory  of  this  young  lady,  and  fev; 
have  been  able  to  attain  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  1  think  I  fhould  not  fill  the  province  I 
have  undertaken,  if  I  omitted  giving  the  public  3 
full  account  of  the  particulars;  and.  to  do  that,  I 
mufl  trace  her  misfortunes  to  their  fountain-head, 
which  indeed  was  from  the  firft  moment  of  hei 
being. 

Miietta,  her  mother,  was  miftrefs  to  the  fub- 
tle  and  opulent  Lacroon,  many  years  before  tha 
death  of  his  lady,  but  had  the  artifice  to  engage 
him  in  a  covenant,  that  if  he  ever  happened  to  ba 
a  widower,  he  fhould  either  marry  her,  or  forfeit 
to  her  a  very  large  fum  of  money  therein  fpecified. 
Fate  feemed  to  favour  her  wifties;  he  became  in  a 
condition  for  her  to  demand  either  the  one  or  the 
other.  He  knew  himfelf  bound,  and  hsfitated  not 
long  before  he  confented  to  be  the  huiband  of  one, 
for  whom  his  pnflion  was  then  greatly  abated,  ra* 
ther  than  Puffer  fo  much  money  to  go  out  of  his 
family.  Panthea  was  at  that  time  about  eleven  cr 
twelve  years  old,  but  had  been  bred  in  the  moft 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  101 

private  manner,  and  utterly  ignorant  of  her  pa* 
rents;  a  perfon,  who  had  been  fervant  to  Miletta, 
being  intruded  with  the  care  of  her,  whatever  (he 
received  was  tranfmitted  through  her  hands,  to 
whom  fhe  imagined  herfelf  fome  diftant  relation. 

Miletta,  who  had  always  preferved  fome  fenfe 
of  reputation,  was  now  more  averfe  than  ever  to 
acknowledging  her;  and  the  poor  girl  was  not  at 
all  the  happier  for  her  mother's  grandeur. 

A  flrange  caprice  in  fome  women!  they  are  a- 
fbamed  of  the  fruits  of  their  fin,  though  not  of  the 
fin  itfclf :  every  body  knew  {he  was  kept  by  La- 
croon,  for  the  gratification  of  his  loofer  hours, 
nor  was  fhe  fo  weak  as  to  imagine  it  a  fecret;  yet 
could  ihe  not  fupport  the  thoughts  of  being  called 
n  mother,  without  being  a  wife,  or,  that  even  after 
(he  was  fo,  that  fo  glaring  a  proof  mould  appear 
of  her  former  tranfgreflion. 

But  it  was  for  a  very  fhort  time  me  enjoyed 
the  title  fhe  had  fo  much  defired;  fcarce  had  fhc 
(hewn  herfelf  in  her.fplcndor,  before  fhe  was  feiz,- 
cd  with  a  diftemper  which  puzzled  the  phyfician's 
art  to  give  a  name  to;  fuch  as  it  was,  however,  it 
afte&ed  both  her  mind  and  body;  (he  became  deli- 
rious, and  at  fome  times  had  fuch  violent  fits  of 
frenzy,  that  they  were  obliged  to  tie  her  in  her 
bed;  yet  was  all  this  without  any  fymptoms  of  a 
fever:  an  inward  wafting  at  the  fame  time  preyed 
on  her  vitals,  and  fo  decayed  her  whole  frame,  that 
in  a  few  weeks  fhe  grew  the  moH:  pity-moving 
obje&  that  ever  was  beheld,  and  died  little  lament- 
ed by  any,  except  thofc  who  reaped  the  advan- 
tage of  h'er  fecrcts. 

After  her  death,  Lacroon  took  it  in  his  head  to 
C.U1  Tanthca  home,  acquainted  her  with  her  birth, 


lo*  THE  FEMALE  B.  IF. 

and  not  only  owned  her  as  his  daughter  in  the 
face  of  the  world,  but  treated  her  with  all  the 
marks  of  a  paternal  care  and  affe&ion. 

A  change  of  fortune  fo  undreamed  of,  fo  pro- 
digious, could  not  but  be  tranfporting  to  a  young 
heart;  (lie  had  now  a  croud  of  fervants,  all  ob- 
fequious,  and  flying  to  obey  her  leaft  commands; 
her  perfon  was  adorned  with  jewels,  and  the  mofl 
fkilful  matters  in  their  feveral  profeffions  attended 
her  every  morning,  to  perfect  her  in  all  the  ac- 
complifhments  of  her  fex,  and  the  ftation  to  which 
(he  now  was  raifed;  yet  was  fhe  not  elated  fo  far 
as  to  give  herfelf  any  unbecoming  airs;  and  all 
this  ferved  only  to  make  her  pleafed,  not  vain  or 
arrogant. 

Envy  muft  allow,  that  though  fhe  is  far  from 
being  a  beauty,  there  is  fomewhat  of  a  fweetnefs 
in  all  her  air  and  features  that  is  very  attractive; 
and  thofe  who  were  the  leaft  inclined  to  converfe 
•with  her  on  the  fcore  of  her  birth,  if  by  chance 
they  happened  into  her  company,  were  infenfibly 
engaged  riot  only  to  continue  in  it,  but  alfo  to 
Vf'ifh  the  pleafure  they  took  in  being  with  her 
might  be  renewed. 

She  had  fcarce  reached  fifteen,  before  her  youth- 
ful charms  were  taken  notice  of  by  many  worthy 
perfons  of  the  ether  fex;  but  the  moil  powerful 
effect  they  had  to  bcaft  was  on  the  heart  of  the 
noble  and  accompliflied  Fidelio.  The  paflion  he 
had  for  her  made  him  overlook  all  thefcruples  o- 
thers  raifed  on  the  account  of  her  mother's  cha- 
racter, and  indeed  on  that  of  her  father  alfo;  who, 
for  many  reafons,  was  little  efleemed  by  the  ge- 
nerality of  mankind. 

Lacroon  was  highly  pleafed  with  his  addreiTes 


B.  II.  SPECTATOR.  103 

on  the  fcore  of  his  quality;  but  Panthea  for  that 
of  his  perfon  and  converfation.  She  loved  him 
long  before  her  modefty  would  permit  her  to  con- 
fefs  it;  but  at  length  her  paffion  broke  through  all 
reftraints,  and  (he  repaid  the  pain  fhe  had  given 
Kim  by  acknowledging  flie  felt  an  equal  (hare.  Af- 
ter this  declaration  they  engaged  themfelves  by  a 
folemn  vow  to  live  only  for  each  other  Alas,  lit- 
tle did  either  of  them  think  they  erred  in  doing 
fo!  Fidelio  was  entirely  at  his  own  difpofal,  and 
Panthea  had  received  her  father's  pofitive  com- 
mands to  omit  nothing  in  her  power  for  the  bet* 
t^r  confirming  his  affections. 

The  confent,  however,  was  to  be  afked  in  form, 
which  Fidelio  did  not  fail  to  do  in  the  mod  fub- 
miflive  terms;  and  Lacroon,  though  he  at  firft,  to 
difguife  his  fatisfa£tion,  affected  to  delay  the  cere- 
mony on  account  of  Pantbea's  extreme  youth, 
was  eafily  prevailed  upon  to  fix  the  day,  which 
was  no  longer  than  was  rcquifite  to  prepare  for  it 
in  a  manner  befitting  the  quality  of  the  one,  and 
the  riches  of  the  other. 

But  fee  the  uncertainty  of  all  human  events! 
This  equally-enamoured  pair,  when  they  thought 
themfelves  mod  fecure,  and  near  being  joined  to 
each  other,  were  on  the  point  of  being  feparated 
eternally;  and  that  too  by  a  way  the  mod  fevere 
and  mocking  to  them  both,  that  the  extremeft 
malice  of  their  fate  could  have  invented: 

Lncroon,  to  acquire  the  wealth  he  now  is  in 
pofieflion  of,  has  done  fuch  things  as  perhaps  no 
man  before  him  ever  did  with  impunity.  Not 
but  he  had  been  frequently  called  to  account  by 
thofe  whom  he  had  injured,  but  his  cunning,  and 
the  corruption  cf  the  timrs,  ftill  got  him  oiFj  and 


K>4  T£E  FEMALE  B.  II. 

thofe  frequent  efcapes  having  rendered  him  more 
bold  in  vice,  he  at  length  arrived  at  that  height,  as 
to  add  infults  to  injuftice,  which  fo  provoked  fome 
perfons  of  greater  credit  than  any  who  had  yet  ap- 
peared againft  him,  that  they  refolved  to  under- 
take the  caufe,  and  either  fink  themfelves,  or  pro- 
cure that  punifhment  on  him  his  crimes  deferved. 

This  happened  fome  few  days  before  that  which 
was  affigned  for  the  nuptials  of  Fidelio  and  Pan- 
thea.  The  lovers  were  wholly  ignorant  of  this 
misfortune,  and  paffed  their  hours  in  all  the  joys 
•which  mutual  affection,  joined  with  innocence> 
affords;  while  Lacroon  was  calling  all  his  inven- 
tion to  his  aid  for  means  to  remedy  the  fo  much 
dreaded  evil.  He  had  no  hope  but  in  Imperio, 
whofe  power  was  incouteftible,  and  had  on  many 
lefs  occafions  flood  his  friend;  but  how  to  aflure 
himfelf  that  he  would  exert  it  in  this,  he  was  for 
fome  time  at  a  lofs.  At  laft  the  tutelar  daemon,who 
had  hitherto  never  left  him  without  fome  fubter- 
fuge,  infpired  him  with  one,  if  poflible  more  black 
and  horrid  than  ever  he  had  yet  been  mafter  of. 

He  remembered  to  have  heard  Imperio  praife 
the  innocent  charms  of  .Panthea,  and  refolved  to 
make  no  fcruple  to  effsr  her  up  a  facrifice  to 
{hame,  if  by  her  proftitution  he  could  be  preferved 
from  the  juft  profecution  of  his  enemies.  In  fine, 
he  went  directly  to  that  great  perfon,  and  intreat- 
ed  he  would  interpofe  between  him  and  thofs  who 
fought  his  ruin,  and  flily  infinuated,  that  Panthea 
would  think  heifelf  bleft  to  be  the  flave  of  him 
who  was  the  deliverer  of  her  father. 

Imperio,  juft  in  his  own  nature,  had  not  that 
ill  opinion  of  Lacroon  which  he  deferved,  and 
dpubtlefs  would  have  done  all  he  could  for  him  i« 


B.  IT.  SPECTATOR.  105 

his  exigence,  without  this  offer;  but  being  one  of 
the  mod  amorous  men  on  earth,  could  not  refufe 
fo  fweet  a  bribe  as  the  pofieflion  of  a  young  virgin, 
whom  he  had  frequently  looked  upon  with  defiring 
eyes.  He  therefore  took  Lacroon  at  his  word,  and 
promifed  in  return  to  ufe  all  the  influence  he  had 
to  make  up  matters  between  him  and  thofe  anta- 
gonifls  from  whom  he  had  mod  to  fear. 

Lacroon  returned  home  with  a  joyful  heart,  as 
being  certain  thofe  who  had  the  greateft  malice  to 
him,  loved  and  refpected  Imperio  too  much  to 
difoblige  him;  but  when  he  broke  the  matter  to 
Panthea,  and  told  her,  that  inftead  of  being  the 
bride  of  Fidelio,  (he  muft  prepare  herfelf  to  be  the 
miftrefs  of  Imperio,  he  found  difficulties  which  he 
expected  not  from  one  fo  young,  and  fo  entirely 
a  dependent  on  him.  She  had  even  the  courage 
to  tell  him,  fhe  would  die  rather  than  forfeit  her 
virtue;  to  which  he  fcornfully  replied,  t(  If  your 
*'  mother  had  been  a  girl  of  fuch  fqueamifh  prin- 
**  ciples,  you  had  not  come  into  the  world  to  con- 
"  tradift  my  will." 

This  cruel  reproach  on  her  birth,  and  coming 
from  a  father,  joined  with  the  part  he  acted  in  this 
affair,  ftruck  her  to  the  heart;  fhe  burft  into  tears, 
was  unable  to  fpeak  another  word,  and  was  ready 
to  fink  on  the  floor.  He  then  repented  what  he  had 
faid,  and  finding  the  foftnefs  of  her  nature  would 
be  more  eafily  prevailed  upon  by  gentle  means, 
"  Be  comforted,  my  child,  refumed  he,  your  mo- 
"  ther  was  the  more  dear  to  me,  as  I  found  her 
"the  more  leadyto  recompence  my  love  ;  I  meant 
**  not  what  I  faid  (hould  give  you  pain ;  you  know 
"  I  have  the  greateft  tendernefs  for  you;  I  have 
<c  proved  it,  and  hope  you  have  gratitude  enough 
VOL.  I.  K 


Tctf  THE  FEMALE  B.  II. 

"  to  be  obedient,  efpecially  in  a  thing  where  my 
"  whole  fortune,  nay  even  my  life  is  concerned." 

He  then  proceeded  to  let  her  know  he  had  ma- 
ny enemies,  and  had  no  friend  capable  of  ferving 
him  but  Imperio;  made  ufe  by  turns  of  perfua- 
ficns  and  menaces,  till  at  length  her  virtue  had 
not  flrength  to  refift  their  united  force,  and  fhe 
yielded  to  do  what  in  reality  her  foul  abhorred, 
rather  than,  by  refufing,  be  the  occafion  of  her 
father's  ruin,  and  at  the  fame  time  be  driven  out 
to  mifery  herfelf. 

His  point  thus  gained,  Lacroon  conduced  her 
himfelftothe  houfe  of  Imperio,  where  me  ftill 
refides;  but  whether  any  better  reconciled  to  her 
fate,  none  but  her  own  heart  can  determine. 

As  for  Fidelio,  it  would  be  utterly  impoflible 
to  exprefs  the  force  of  his  grief  and  rage,  when 
he  found  his  tender  expectations  of  a  lafting  hap- 
pinefs  thus  vanifhed  into  air : — as  his  paffion  for 
Panthca  had  made  him  think  her  the  moil  perfect 
of  her  fex,  to  find  her  falfe  has  given  him  an  anti- 
pathy to  all  womankind;  he  fhuns  all  converfation, 
but  fuch  as  join  with  him  in  invectives  againfl  love 
and  marriage;  yetfometimes,whenhe  thinks him- 
fclf  alone, cries  out,  "OPanthea,  lovely,  bewitch- 
"  ing  maid!  wherefore  did  heaven  join  fo  fair  a 
"  face  with  fo  unchafte  and  perfidious  a  heart!" 

In  hope  to  cure  the  diforder  of  his  mind,  fome 
fi lends  prevailed  on  him  to  quit  the  town;  but 
this  change  of  place  has  wrought  no  other  change 
in  him,  than  to  convert  the  wildnefs  of  his  beha-i 
viour  into  a  profound  melancholy,  which  it  is 
feared  will  be  lafting. 

I  muft  confefs  the  fate  of  this  young  gentleman 
is  greatly  to  be  lamented ;  but,  methinks,  the  world 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  107 

}s  too  fevere  upon  poor  Panthea:  her  youth,  and 
the  authority  of  a  father,  than  whom  (he  had  na 
other  friend,  may  plead  fomeexcufe  for  her  want 
of  that  fortitude  and  refolution,  which  alone  could 
have  preferved  her  virtue. — It  is  onLacroon  alone 
that  the  juft  cenfures  of  her  fall  mould  light:— 
Lacroon,  guilty  of  crimes  unnumbered,  yet  of 
none  more  unnatural,  more  deteftable,  than  this 
of  feparating  two  hearts,  which  feemed  by  heaven 
united,  and  feducing  and  betraying  his  owa  child 
to  infamy  and  perdition. 


B    O    O    K    III 

METHINKS  it  is  with  great  impropriety, 
that  people,  when  they  fee  an  unfocial  per- 
fon,  cry  out,  "How  ill-natured  fuch  a  one  is!" 
—Nature  in  itfelf  delights  in  harmony,  is  loving, 
grateful,  benevolent,  pleafcd  in  itfelf,  and  plealVd 
to  fee  others  fo. — Every  one  is  born  with  quali- 
ties fuited  to  fociety;  and  when  they  deviate,  it 
is  not  the  eflecl  of  nature,  but  of  the  influence  of 
thofe  vitious  paflions,  which,  by  their  ill  conditi- 
ons, corrupt  nature,  and  render  it  no  longer  what 
it  was: — avarice,  ambition,  rage,  envy  and  jea- 
loufy,  are  the  weeds  that  grow  up  in  the  foul ;  and, 
if  indulged,  will  by  degrees  choak  all  the  nobler 
principles. — How  beautiful  is  natuie  in  infancy, 
-before  thofe  turbulent  paflions  gather  ftrength  1 
and  how  beautiful  would  flie  alfo  be  in  maturity, 
could  thofe  paflions  be  always  under  the  govern- 
ment of  reafon ! 

K  3 


ic«  THE  FEMALE  B.  lit 

Some  may  perhaps  objeft,  that  I  pretend  to  di- 
vide what  heaven  in  our  compofition  has  thought 
fit  to  blend : — that  paffions  are  in  reality  a  part  of 
nature,  and  that  none  are  born  without  fome  fhare 
of  them. — They  may  fay,  that  in  childhood  we 
are  no  lefs  a£Fe£led  for  fuch  trifles,  as  are  conform- 
able to  our  years,  than  at  a  riper  age  we  are  for 
\vhat  we  then  look  on  as  more  fubftantial  benefits. 
— They  all  quote  againft  me  this  line  of  one  of  the 
moft  excellent  of  our  Englifh  poets, 

"  Men  are  but  children  of  a  larger  growth.'* 

To  all  this  I  readily  agree;  but  then  the  paf- 
fions of  childhood  are  too  weak  to  hurry  to  any 
thing  that  can  be  called  a  vice,  unlefs  ftrongly  in- 
dulged indeed  by  thofe  who  have  the  care  of  us ; 
and  as  they  increafe  in  flrength,  our  own  reafon, 
which  is  given  us,  for  a  guide,  increafes  in  propor- 
tion alfo;  fo  that  it  is  the  undoubted  bufinefs  of 
our  parents  and  governors,  to  keep  all  dangerous 
propensities  in  us  under  the  greateft  fubjedtion, 
and  preferve  nature  in  its  purity  while  we  are 
young,  and  our  own  to  do  it  afterward,  fmce  the 
infallible  confequences  of  any  neglect  on  thisfcore, 
arc  no  lefs  than  to  render  us  obnoxious  to  the 
world,  and  irkfome  to  ourfelves. 

I  would  not  here  be  thought  to  mean,  that  the 
referved,  the  fullen,  the  peevifh,  or  even  the  mo- 
rofe,  are  always  under  the  dominion  of  vitioms 
paffions : — a  continued  feries  of  difappointments, 
calamities,  ill-ufage,  (which,  lam  forry  to  fay,  is 
the  fure  attendant  on  misfortune)  or  a  long  fit  o£ 
ficknefs,  may  in  time  make  four  the  fweetell  tem- 
per -,  but  then  the  gloom  which  they  occafion  will 
not  render  the  perfon  fo  affe£ed  cruel,  bafe,  CO* 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  109 

vetous,  perfidious,  or,  in  fine,  any  way  wicked :— • 
fuch  a  one  may  be  tirefome,  and  looked  upon  as 
a  dead  weight  in  company,  but  will  never  be  found 
dangerous,  and  the  only  mifchief  he  does  is  to 
himfelf. 

But  where  avarice  prevails,  all  that  is  injurious 
to  mankind  may  be  expected : — 1  think  under  this 
head  almoft  whatever  is  pernicious  to  fociety  may 
be  ranged;  fince,  where  it  does  not  find  other  bad 
qualities,  it  certainly  creates  them.  It  indeed  de- 
ftroys  the  very  end  of  our  being.  A  mean  diltruft, 
envy,  hatred,  and  malice,  will  neither  fuller  us  to 
enjoy  a  moment's  peace  ourfelves,  nor  allow  it  to 
others,  when  but  fufpecled  of  a  bare  poflibility  of 
ftandingbetween  us  and  ourdarling  intereft.  Con- 
cord, that  univerfal  good,  is  entirely  aboliflied  by 
it;  every  public  virtue,  every  private  obligation  of 
duty,  gratitude,  and  natural  afFe&ion,  is  facrificed 
to  particular  views,  which  centre  all  in  felf;  and 
to  attain,  neither  fecret  fraud  nor  open  violence 
are  fpared.  How  many  wars  have  been  rendered 
unfuccefsf ul !  how  many  well-laid  fchemes  dif- 
concerted!  how  many  communities  broken  and 
diflblved!  how  many  once  flourimLng  families 
reduced  to  beggary,  merely  by  the  avarice  of  one 
perfon,  who  found  his  interelt  in  the  ruin  of  tha 
whole!  Nothing  is  more  known  than  this  truth, 
and  we  often  fee  that  thofe  of  the  fame  blood, 
nay,  who  have  fucked  the  fame  milk,  have  proved 
the  mod  cruel  and  inveterate  enemies  to  each  o- 
ther. — Shocking  reflection !  let  us  quit  it,  and 
turn  our  eyes  on  the  contrail* 

The  worthy  family,  of  which  Euphrofine  is  a. 
has,  in  a  very  late  inflance,  given  us  a  molt 


no  THE    FEMALE  B.  III. 

amiable  one,  and  will,  I  hope,  be  an  example  for 
many  others  to  imitate. 

This  beautiful  young  lady  was  addrefled  by  a 
gentleman  immenfely  rich,but  of  more  than  twice 
her  age,  and  befides  had  nothing, either  in  his  per- 
fon  or  con  verfation,  capable  of  rendering  hi  magiee- 
able  to  a  delicate  and  refined  tafte,  fuch  as  her's. 
He  made  his  court  to  her  father  before  he  men- 
tioned any  thing  of  his  paffion  to  herfelf;  and  at 
the  fame  time  accompanied  his  declaration  with 
offers  of  a  nature  few  parents  but  would  readily 
have  accepted.  But  he  referred  him  to  his  daugh- 
ter's inclinations,  only  afluring  him,  that  he  would 
]ay  his  commands  on  her  to  receive  his  vifits;  and 
that  if  me  confented,  he,  for  his  part,  mould  be 
extremely  proud  of  his  alliance. 

With  this  the  old  lover  was  obliged  to  be  con- 
tent; and,  fince  he  found  it  mufh  be  by  rhetoric 
his  point  was  to  be  gained,  endeavoured  to  prove 
his  paffion,  and  infpire  one  in  her  by  thofe  ways 
he  thought  moft  likely  to  fucceed:  he  entertained 
her  with  all  the  amorous  fpeeches  he  could  re- 
member out  of  plays,  bought  her  all  the  favourite 
airs  in  the  opera  for  her  fpinnetj  cawied  her  to 
Vauxhall  gardens,  and  Ruckholt;  and  told  her, 
"  That  wherever  (he  came,  ihe  was  the  Venus  of 
«'  the  place." 

Euphrofme,  who  is  all  obedience,  knowing  her 
father  authorized  his  fuit,  durft  neither  repulfe, 
nor  make  a  jeft  of  it,  but  accepted  his  fine  fpeech- 
es, treats,  and  prefents,  as  coming  from  a  man, 
•who,  in  all  probability,  fhe  was  deftined  for :  the 
contempt  (he  had  for  him  {he  kept  as  an  inviola- 
ble fecret;  and  never  fpoke  of  him  to  her  dcareft 
companions,  nor  even  her  brothers  and  fillers,  but 


B.  III.          SPECTATOR.  t/i 

with  all  imaginable  refpe£h  The  conftraint  (he 
put  on  herfelf  by  this  behaviour,  however,  took 
away  great  part  of  that  chearfulnefs  and  vivacity 
which  had  ufed  to  fparkle  in  her  eyes;  (he  grew 
much  more  refer  ved  in  company  than  me  had  been, 
jmd  was  often  furprized  with  tears  running  down 
her  cheeks,  when  flie  thought  herfelf  alone. 

bhe  was  too  dear  to  all  belonging  to  her  for  fo 
vifible  a  change  not  to  be  taken  notice  of,  yet  none 
mentioned  the  leaft  word  to  her  concerning  it;  and 
the  courtfhip  continued  fo  for  near  a  month,  when 
the  impatience  of  the  lover,  emboldened  by  his 
miftrefs'obliging  reception,  madehimverypreffing 
for  a  day  being  fixed  to  confummate  his  happinefs : 
—the  anfwers  fhe  gave  him  on  that  head  were, 
that  fhe  was  entirely  at  her  father's  difpofal,  and 
that  it  would  not  be  becoming  in  her  either  to  an- 
ticipate or  delay  his  pleafure.  When  he  talked  to 
her  father, he  told  him,  that  he  had  notyet  examin- 
ed his  daughter's  heart-,  but  when  he  had  fo  done, 
he  would  either  haften  or  prolong  the  time  accord- 
ing as  he  found  her  in  a  difpofition  for  it;  always 
concluding  with  reminding  him,  that,  to  render 
them  both  happy,  it  was  neceflary  nothing  mould 
have  the  leaft  air  of  conftraint  on  either  iide.  • 

This  did  not  fatisfy  the  other;  for,  as  lovers  na- 
turally flatter  them/elves,  he  took  all  the  civilities 
paid  him  by  Euphrofine,  in  obedience  to  her  fa- 
ther, for  fo  many  proofs  of  her  liking  his  perfon; 
and,  as  he  doubted  not  but  fhe  was  no  lefs  defirous 
than  himfelf  for  a  conclufton  of  the  affair,  feemed 
to  refent  thefe  delays,  as  much  as  he  durft,  to  him 
who  had  the  fole  difpofal  of  his  miftrefs:  he  be- 
came, however,  fo  urgent,  that  the  father  of  Eu- 
jhrefinc  at  length  piomifed  him  to  found  her  in- 


MS  THE  FEMALE  B.  in; 

clinations  the  next  day,  and  that  he  fliould  then 
know  his  refolution. 

Accordingly  heJfcnt  for  her  into  his  clofet,  and 
having  made  her  fit  down  by  him,  told  her  how- 
impatient  her  lover  was  for  the  completion  of  his 
wifhes,  and  the  promifes  he  had  given  him  of  a 
definitive  anfwer; — fet  forth  the  paflion  he  had  for 
her  in  much  better  terms  than  he  had  ever  done 
for  himfelf;  and  added,  that  he  was  fo  far  from  de» 
firing  any  portion  with  her,  that,  on  the  firft  de- 
claration he  had  made  to  him  of  his  love,  he  had 
pretexted  he  would  accept  of  nothing  from  him 
but  his  confent. 

"  This,  Euprofine,  continued  he,  is  the  ftate  of 
"  the  cafe,  and  fuch  the  difinterefted  kindnefs  he 
"  has  for  you:  you  kaow  that  1  have  feveral  chil- 
"  dren;  that  part  of  my  fortune,  which  I  mould 
"  give  with  you  to  a  man  who  required  it,  will  be  a 
ft  considerable  addition  to  their  portions:  you  may 
"  believe  alfo,  there  are  not  many  fathers  who 
"  would  confult  your  inclination  in  this  point; 
"  but,  my  dear  child,  I  am  not  one  of  thofe.  I  am 
t(  fenfible,  that  true  felicity  does  not  confift  in 
"  wealth  alone,  and  think  it  both  unjuftand  cruel 
"  to.  make  thofe  wretched  to  whom  I  have  given 
"  being:  Tell  me,  therefore,  without  referve,  or 
"  fear  of  offending  me,  what  your  thoughts  of  this 
u  gentleman  are,  and  whether  you  can  love  him, 
"  as  it  will  be  your  duty  to  do,  if  you  become  his 
"wife?" 

The  virtuous  maid  hung  down  her  head  at 
thefe  words,  and  faintly  replied,  "  that  the  edu- 
<;  cation  fhe  had  received  would  always  inftruci 
«  her  to  fulfil  her  duty." 

Her  father  on  this  told  her,  there  were  two 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  113 

ways  of  fulfilling  a  duty, — the  one  merely  becaufc 
it  was  fo, — and  the  other  becaufe  it  afforded  a  plea- 
fure  to  one'*  felf: — "And,  refumed  he,  I  fhould 
"  be  forry  to  fee  you  facrifice  your  peace  to  the 
*'  former.  The  melancholy  I  have  obferved  in 
"  you,  ever  fince  this  gentleman  had  mypermif- 
"  fion  to  vilit  you  as  a  lover,  makes  me  think  that 
"  the  propofal  is  far  from  being  agreeable;  but,  as 
ft  I  may  poffibly  be  miftaken,  I  would  be  convin- 
*'  ced  by  your  laying  open  your  whole  heart  to  me 
*c  on  this  occafion." 

Emboldened  by  fo  much  goodnefs,  fhe  at  laft 
ventured  to  declare,  that  if  me  never  happened  to 
fee  a  man  more  agreeable,  flie  would  chuie  always 
to  live  fingle :  "  However,  Sir,  continued  fhe,  as 
"  the  match  affords  fome  conveniency  to  you,  and 
"  you  approve  of  it,  I  refolvedfrom  the  firft  mo- 
"  ment,  to  offer  nothing  in  oppefition  to  your 
*f  will,  but  to  endeavour  to  merit,  in  fome  mea- 
"  fure,  the  indulgence  you  have  treated  me  with, 
"  by  an  implicit  obedience." 

"  No,  no,  my  dear  child,  replied  this  excellent 
"  father,  you  well  deferve  to  be  left  to  the  freedom 
"  of  your  choice,  by  your  readinefs  to  refign  it. — 
11  You  fhall  no  more  be  troubled  with  the  folici- 
"  tations  of  a  perfon,  whom  I  never  expected  you 
"  could  regard  in  the  manner  his  vanity  has  made 
"  him  hope.  This  day  fhall  put  an  end  to  all  your 
*'  difquiets  on  that  fcore." 

Euphiofine  was  about  to  thank  him,  as  the  con- 
fideration  he  had  of  her  peace  deferved  from  her, 
\vhcn  the  fudden  entrance  of  her  two  brothers  and 
three  filters  obliged  her  to  delay  it.  They  had 
heard  of  the  propofal  her  lover  had  made  of  re- 
linquifiiing  her  portion  j  and  finding  (lie  was  now 


114  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

fent  for  by  their  father,  and  fliut  up  with  him, 
doubted  not  but  it  was  in  order  to  enforce  her, 
by  his  command,  to  make  a  choice  it  was  eafy  for 
them  to  perceive  was  utterly  againft  her  inclina- 
tions. Urged  by  the  necefllty  they  thought  there 
was  of  their  interpofnion,  they  came  together  in 
a  body,  and  all  at  once  falling  at  their  father's 
feet,  conjured  him  not  to  fuffer  any  confiderati- 
ons  of  intereft  to  them  to  prevail  on  him  to  ren- 
der a  fitter,  fo  juftly  dear  to  them,  unhappy,  by  a 
match  which  they  were  well  convinced,  though 
never  frcm  herfelf,  could  not  be  agreeable  to  her. 
Some  hung  about  his  feet,'fome  killed  his  hands, 
and  all  lifted  up  their  eyes,  dreaming  with  tears,  as 
dreading  the  anfwer  he  fhould  give  to  this  requeft. 

The  tender  father  liftened  to  fo  uncommon  a 
teftimony  of  fraternal  affection,  with  a  tranfport 
mixed  with  aftonifhment;  but,  unwilling  to  in- 
dulge the  pleafure  he  took  in  feeing  them  thus,  at 
the  expence  of  the  pain  and  fufpence  infli£ted  on 
them; — "  Rife! — Rife,  my  dear,  my  worthy 
tf  children!"  cried  he,  embracing  them  one  after 
another,  "  your  fuit  is  granted  before  you  thought 
"  of  aiking  it :  neither  Euphrcfine,  nor  any  one  of 
*'  you,  ihall  ever  be  compelled  by  my  authority 
"  as  a  father,  to  give  your  hands  where  your  hearts 
"  do  not  firftlead  the  way." 

Nothing  could  equal  the  joy  they  felt  at  hear- 
ing him  fpeak  in  this  manner,  except  the  fatisfac- 
tion  their  mutual  tendernefs  to  each  other  afforded 
them.  Euphrofine,  on  her  part,  knew  not  how  to 
exprefs  her  gratitude  and  love  either  to  the  one  or 
the  other.  In  fine,  there  was  nothing  to  be  feen 
among  this  endearing  family,but  embraces,  kifles, 
and  all  the  demonflraticns  of  the  moft  fond,  uu- 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  115 

feigned  affe&ion,  flowing  from  minds  perfectly  at 
cafe,  and  fatisfied  with  each  other. 

Oh!  what  could  the  greateft  acquifitions  of 
fortune  beftow,  in  any  degree  of  competition,  with 
thofe  pure  and  unmixed  raptures,  which  arife  from 
the  difinterefted  love  and  friendfliip  between  per- 
fons  of  the  fame  blood ! — It  is  fure  a  pleafure 
which  no  words  can  paint! — No  heart  unfeel- 
ing it  conceive! — <t  pleafure  infpired  by  nature, 
confirmed  by  reafon,  heavenly  in  itfclf,  and  laud- 
able before  God  and  man. 

But  befides  the  fatisfadion  we  feel  within  our- 
fcives,  and  the  efteem  we  acquire  in  the  world  by 
living  with  our  kindred  in  concord,  there  is  a  po- 
licy in  it,  even  as  to  the  gratification  of  our  moft 
fordid  view£,  which  I  wonder  any  body  can  be  fo 
blind  as  not  to  fee ;  I  mean  that  of  fulfilling  the  old 
proverb, — "Laying  up  againfla  rainy  day."  There 
are  few  families  fo  unfortunate  as  to  have  none 
among  them  profper;  and  when  all  are  governed 
by  one  common  intereft,  will  not  the  fuccefs  of 
one  be  the  advantage  of  the  other? — Life  is  an  un- 
certain ocean;  numberlefs,  namelefs  dangers  lurk 
beneath  the  faircft  furface: — no  one,  at  his  firft 
embarkation,  can  promife  to  himfelf  he  (hall  go 
thro'  his  voyage,  unruffled  with  the  florins  which 
from  above,  below,  and  every  where  impend.—-* 
Who  then  would  not  be  glad  to  fecure  fome 
friendly  bark  at  hand,  whofe  kind  afliflance,  in 
cafe  of  a  wreck,  might  fave  him,  and  the  rem- 
nants of  IMS  fcattered  fortune! 

How  well  known,  yet  how  little  attended  to,  Is 
that  excellent  flory  of  him,  who  having  many  chil- 
dren, and  finding  the  hour  of  his  diflblution  ap- 
proaching fent  for  them  all  to  come  to  bis  bedfide; 


H6  TH£  FEMALE  B.  III. 

then  ordered  a  bundle  of  flicks  well  tied  up  to  be 
brought,  and  giving  it  into  the  hands  of  the  eldeft, 
commanded  him  to  break  it-,  which  having  in  vain 
eflayed  to  do,  the  fecond  brother  took  it,  then  the 
third,  and  fo  on,  till  they  had  all  tried  their  feveral 
ftrengths  with  equal  fuccefs.  "  The  thing  is  im- 
"  practicable,  faid  one  of  them,  unlefs  we  cut  the 
**  bandage; — fingiy  we  may  eafily  break  them." 
"  True,  replied  the  father;  and  fo,  my  fons,  will 
"  it  be  impoflible  to  hurt  any  of  you,  while  you 
"  continue  in  the  bandage  of  love  and  unity;  but 
«*  if  that  fhould  be  once  diffolved,  your  ftrength 
**  is  loft,  and  you  are  in  danger  of  becoming  a 
"  prey  to  every  artifice  of  defigning  man." 

Love  and  friendfhip,  they  fay,  will  admit  no 
(hares  in  the  heart; — where  either  are  fincereand 
without  referve  it  mult  be  between  two  perfons; 
when  a  third  comes  in  for  any  part,  that  intereft, 
•which  ought  to  be  entire,  is  divided,  weakened, 
and  perhaps  by  different  views  thrown  into  con- 
fufion;  the  maxim  queftionlefs  is  juft  as  to  the  ge- 
neral, but  has  nothing  to  Ho  with  the  union  which 
ought  to  fubfift  among  thofe-  of  the  fame  family, 
•who,  like  fo  many  young  branches  of  the  fame 
tree,  if  clofely  knit  together,  are  beft  defended 
from  the  Inclemency  of  the  weather  for  being 
numerous. 

It  is  odd,  methinks,  that  even  pride  of  blood 
fliould  not  influence  thofe  defcended  from  an  illu- 
ftrious  houfe,  to  fupport,  in  fome  meafureanfwer- 
able  to  the  dignity  of  their  birth,  thofe  of  their  own 
kindred,  who  may  have  happened  to  fall  into  mif- 
fortunes.  Are  they  not  fenfible  tha,t  all  the  con- 
tempt they  are  treated  with  by  mean-foul'd  crea- 
tures, points  obliquely  at  themfelves  ?  And  cam 


B.III.          SPECTATOR.  117 

they  know  the  miferable  fhifts  to  which  they  are 
frequently  reduced  for  bread,  without  reflecting, 
that  the  grandeur  of  the  whole  family  fuffers  in 
thefe  unhappy  branches? 

Strange  infatuation!  To  what  can  be  afcrib- 
ed  fo  total  a  neglecT:  of  that  which  we  owe  to 
heaven,  ourfelves,  and  thofe  belonging  to  us?— • 
Where  is  the  fatal  fpell  that  flops  up  all  the  ave- 
nues of  the  foul,  and  fuffers  neither  the  dictates  of 
religion,  the  pleas  of  foft  compafiion,  nor  the  more 
powerful  impulfes  of  nature  to  our  own  ilefh  and 
blood,  to  gain  th'eleaft  admittance? — Where  but 
in  luxury,  and  a  falfe  pride  of  being  able  to  outvie 
each  other  in  thofe  expenfive  vices  former  ages 
would  have  blufhed  to  be  found  guilty  of? 

Did  not  the  once  difcreet  and  virtuous  Lucillia 
refufe  fo  poor  a  gift  as  half  a  guinea  to  a  very  near 
relation,  who  once  had  been  her  equal  in  fortune, 
but  now,  in  the  extremeft  exigence,  took  the  liberty 
of  petitioning  her,  yet  went  the  fame  evening  to  art 
aflembly,  where  (he  loft  a  thoufand  piftolesat  play! 

Wonderful  are  the  changes  which  difference 
of  times  create!  A  few  years  fince,  a  gamefter 
was  the  mofl  dcfpicable  character  in  lifej — now, 
whofe  fociety  more  coveted  than  people  of  that 
profefiion! — All  who  had  any  reputation  to  lofe, 
or  dcfired  to  be  thought  well  of  by  their. neigh- 
bours, took  care,  whenever  they  indulged  them- 
fclves  in  that  diverfion,  to  do  it  with  as  much  pri- 
vacy as  poflible: — but  now,  not  to  love  play  is  to 
be  impolite: — cards  were  then  made  ufe  of  only 
as  the  amufement  of  a  tedious  winter's  evening;— • 
now  all  feafons  are  alike  5  they  are  the  employment 
of  the  year;  and,  at  fome  of  our  great  Chocolate- 
houics,  many  thoufand  acres  are  often  f wallowed 
VOL.  I.  L 


ii8  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

up  before  a  dinner.  Perfons  who  were  obferved 
to  have  fuperior  flcill  in  play,  were  then  diftin- 
guiflied  by  the  odious  name  of  Sharpers,  and,  as 
fuch  avoided  by  all  men  of  fenfe !  now  they  are 
complimented  with  the  title  of  great  connoifleurs., 
applauded  for  their  underflanding  in  all  the  nice- 
ties of  the  game;  and  that  is  looked  upon  as  the 
mod  ufeful  kind  of  learning,  which  teaches  how 
to  circumvent  an  adverfary  at  the  important  bufi- 
nefs  ofWhift. 

This  vice  of  gaming,  originally  defcended  from, 
the  worft  of  paffions,  is  certainly  the  moft  perni- 
cious of  any  to  fociety.  How  great  a  misfortune 
is  it  therefore  that  it  mould  become  the  mode,  and 
by  being  encouraged  by  perfons  of  figure  and  con- 
dition, render  the  lower  clafs  of  people  (who  are 
always  fond  of  imitating  their  fuperiors)  ambitious, 
as  it  were,  of  being  undone  in  fuch  good  company! 

To  this  unhappy  propensity  it  is  greatly  owing 
that  fo  many  mops,  lately  well  flocked  and  flou- 
rifhing,  are  now  fhut  up,  even  in  the  heart  of  the 
city,  and  their  owners  either  bankrupts  or  mife- 
rable  refugees  in  foreign  parts: — nor  is  it  to  be 
wondered  at,  when  the  honeft  profit  that  might  be 
made  of  trade  is  neglected,  for  the  precarious  hopes 
of  getting  more  by  play;  the  citizen  will  have  but 
little  fhare  with  the  courtier;  and,  to  add  to  his 
mortification,  will  find  that  the  misfortunes,  which* 
attend  this  going  out  of  his  own  fphere,  ferve  only 
as  a  matter  of  ridicule  to  thofe  very  perfons  who 
reap  the  advantage  of  his  folly. 

We  may  date  this  extravagant  itch  of  gaming, 
which,  like  the  plague,  has  fpread  its  contagion 
through  all  degrees  of  people,  from  the  fatal  year 
1720.  The  alluring  profpect  of  making  a  great 


£.111.          SPECTATOR.  119 

fortune  at  once,  and  without  any  labour  or  trouble, 
fo  infatuated  the  minds  of  all  the  ambitious,  the 
avaricious,  and  the  indolent,  that  for  a  time  there 
feemed  an  entire  ftagnation  of  all  bufinefs,  but 
what  was  tranfaclcd  by  the  brokers  in.  'Change- 
Alley.  Then  it  was  that  (harping  began  to  flou- 
rifh  in  the  nation,  and  has  ever  fince  continued 
under  various  fhapes.  The  great  bubble  of  the 
South  Sea  diflipated,a  thoufand  lefier  ones,  though 
equally deftru&ive  to  honed induflry,  fprung  up: 
new  modes  of  ruin  were  every  day  invented: — 
lotteries  on  lotteries  were  continually  drawing, 
in  which  few,  befide  thofe  who  fet  them  up,  had 
any  thing  but  blanks.  Thefe  the  wifdom  of  the 
legiflature  thought  fit  to  put  a  flop  to ;  but  had  not 
power  to  extirpate  the  unhappy  influence  which 
a  long  inattention  to  bufinefs  had  gained.  The 
people  had  been  too  much  accuftomed  to  idlenefs 
to  return  with  any  fpirit  to  their  former  vocations.: 
they  wanted  the  golden  fruit  to  drop  into  their 
laps,  and  frefii  opportunities  of  renewing  thofe  chi- 
merical expectations,  by  which  already  three  parts 
in  four  of  the  middling  clafs  had  been  undone. — 
Chance  was  the  idol  of  their  fouls;  and  when  any 
of  their  more  fober  friends  remonflrated  to  them 
the  madnefs  of  quitting  a  certain  fettled  way  of 
getting  a  moderate  living,  for  the  fleeting,  vifion- 
ary  fchsme  of  a  luxurious  one,  they  all  returned 
this  common  cant  anfwer, — "  That  they  were 
**  willing  to  put  themfelves  in  fortune's  way ;  and, 
"  that  they  might -poflibly  be  as  lucky  as  fome 
'«  others,  who,  being  very  poor  before,  bad  now 
"  fet  up  great  equipages,  and  made  a  fine  figuie 
«  in  the  world." 

This  it  was  that  converted  gaming  from  art 
L  * 


120  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

araufement  into  a  bufmefs,  it  being  the  only  maN 
tcrnow  remaining,  out  of  which  their  fo-much- 
beloved  catties  in  the  air  could  be  formed : — one 
night's  good  run  at  cards,  or  a  lucky  caft  of  the 
dice,  would  repair  all  that  had  been  loft  in  other 
ventures,  and  every  one  thought  it  worth  his  while 
to  ftake  his  lad  remains. 

There  are  always  a  fet  of  artful  people,  who 
•watch  to  take  advantage  of  any  public  frenzy. — 
Thefe  foon  difcovered  the  general  bent,  and,  to 
humour  it  with  novelty,  contrived  various  kinds 
cf  gaming  which  never  had  before  been  dreamed 
of;  by  which  every  one,  if  it  fo  happened,  might 
arrive  at  the  end  of  his  defires.  Numbers,  by  this 
ftratagem,  were  taken  in,  who  otherwlfe,  perhaps, 
by  a  confcious  want  of  fkill  in  the  old  games, 
would  have  been  reflrained,  flnce  it  requires  ner- 
'  ther  thought  nor  ingenuity  to  be  fuccefsful  at  thefe 
new-invented  tables. 

I  could  name  a  certain  fpot  of  ground,  within 
the  liberties  of  Weftminfter,  which  contains  no 
lefs  than  fourteen  public  gaming-houfes  in  the 
compafs  of  two  hundred  yards;  all  which  are  every 
night  crouded  with  a  promifcuous  company  of 
the  great  vulgar  and  the  fmall,  as  Congreve  ele- 
gantly and  juftly  calls  all  fuch  aflemblies. 

To  hurl  the  tennis-ball,  or  play  a  match  at 
cricket,  are  certainly  robufb  and  manly  exercifes; 
they  were  originally  invented  to  try  and  preferve 
ftrength  and  activity,  and  to  keep  thofe  of  our 
youth,  who  were  not  born  to  meaner  labours,  from 
idlenefs  and  effeminacy.  The  playing  at  the  latter 
alfo,  county  againft  county,  was  defigned  to  in- 
fpire  a  noble  emulation  to  excel  each  other  in  thofe 
feats,  which  might  render  them  more  able  to  ferYfc 


B.  Ill,          SPECTATOR.  121 

their  king  and  country,  when  the  defence  of  either 
required  them  to  take  up  arms.  No  mercenary 
views  had  any  (hare  in  the  inftitution  of  thefe 
games. — honour  was  the  only  excitement;  ap- 
plaufe  the  only  end  propofed  by  each  bold  attemp- 
ter.  Thefe,  alas !  of  latter  days,  are  but  empty* 
names;  a  thoufand  pounds  has  more  real. charms 
than  any  are  to  be  found  in  glory;  gain,  fordid 
gain,  is  all  that  engrofles  the  heart,  and  adds  trarif- 
port  to  fuccefs.  Without  that,  numbers,  who 
throng  to  give  proofs  of  their  activity,  would  ra- 
ther chufe  to  pafs  the  time  away  in  lolling  over  ,x 
lady's  toilet  while  {he  is  drefling, .  or  in  his  own., 
eafy  chair  at  home,  liftening  to  the  mufic  of  his. 
footman's  French  horn. 

"Will  any  one.fay,  that  this  is  true  nature?— 
No,  it  is  the  vices  which  deform  nature,  and  only 
by  being.too  general  and  cuftomary,  may  be  called . 
a  fecond  na,ture.- — Would  ever  natuce  direct  us  to  - 
fearch  into  thebofom  of  the  earth  for  gold  ?  or  when 
found,  to  idolize  the  ore  our  hands  had  dug?  to 
pride  ourfelves,moreor  Iefs5accordingtothequaa- 
tity  of  the  mining  pelf  we  are  matters  of,  and  to 
place  all  honour,  virtue  and  renown  in  being  rich  ? 

However,  fince  the  world  is  fo  much  altered 
from  what  it  was  in  the  true  ftate  of  nature,  and 
there  is  now  no  fubfifling  without  fome  portion  of 
this  gold, we  muft  not  affect  to  defpife  it  toomuch  : 
but  as  we  ought  not  to  IHten  to  the  calls  of  avarice, 
in  acquiring  it  by  indifcreet  or  fcandalous  means; 
fo  when  pofTefled  of  it,  we  ought  not  to  faviOi  it 
away  in  trifles  we  have  no  occafionfor,and  perhaps 
had  better  be  without.  We  mould  reflect,  that 
our  pofterity  will  have  need  of  it  as  well  as  our- 
fclves,  and  look  on  every  extravagancy  we. ate 

13 


122  THE  F-EM  ALE  B.  IH/ 

guilty  of  as  a  robbery  of  them;  that  we  are  no 
more  than  tenants  for  life  in  whatever  defcends  to. 
us  from  our  parents ;  and  that  we  mould  leave  it 
as  intire  and  unembezzled  as  we  received  it  from 
them.  Nor  is  the  injuftice  lefs,  when  we  need- 
lefsly,  and  to  gratify  an  inordinate  appetite,  dif- 
fipate  thofe  goods  of  fortune,  we  may  have  ac- 
quired by  our  owninduftry.  Children,  being  parts 
of  ourfelves,  are  born  to  fhare  in  our  poflemons; 
and  nothing  is  more  abfurd,  in  my  opinion,  than 
the  faying,  of  forne  people,,  "  That  their  children 
*f  may  labour  for  tliemfelves  as  they  have  done." 
How  are  fuch  parents  certain  they  will  be  able  fc 
to  do?  A  thoufand  accidents  may  happen  to  ren- 
der the  utmoft  efforts  they  can  make  of  no  effect  j; 
and  when  that  is  the  cafe,  how  hardly 'muft  a  fori 
think  of  a, father,.  who>  by  a  profufe  and  riotous 
manner  of  living>.  has  reduced  to  (tarvihg,  thofe 
•who  derive  their  being  from  him? 

Not  that  I  would  wifli  any  one  to  deny  himfelf 
the  neceflaries,  nor  even  the  pleafures  of  life,  for 
the  fake  of  his  pofte;ity;  but3.in  all  thefe  things,, 
there  is  a  golden  mean  to  be,  obferved,  which  is 
indeed  no  other  than  to  follow  nature,  enjoy  our- 
felves  while  we  live,  and  prudently  referve  fume- 
thing  for  thofe  to  enjoy  who  are  to  live  after  us. 

It  is  certain  that  no  age,  no  nation,  ever  were 
equal  to  us  in  luxury  of  all  kinds.  The  mofl 
private,  low-bred  man  would  be  a  Heliogabalus  in 
his  table:  and  too  m*ny  women  there  are,  who, 
like  Cleopatra,  would  not  fcruple  to  fwallow  a. 
whole  province  at  a  draught. 

Then  as  to  drefs,  they  feem  to  fludy  now  not 
what  is  mod  becoming,  but  what  will  coft  the. 
moft;— -no  difference  made  between  the  young 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  123 

nobleman  and  the  city-apprentice,  except  that  the 
latter  is  fometimes  the  greater  beau: — gold-head- 
ed canes,  watches,  rings,  fnuff-boxes,  and  laced 
waiftcoats,  run  away  with  the  fortune  that  fhould 
let  him-  up  in  bufinefs,  and  frequently  tempt  him 
to  defraud  his  matter;  who  perhaps  alfo,  taken  up 
with  his  own  private  pleafures,  examines  too  little 
into  his  fhop  affairs,  and  when  the  till  is  drained, 
borrows  a  while  to  fupport  his  darling  pride,  then 
finks  at  once  into  ruin  and  contempt. 

Our  fex  is  known  to  be  fo  fond  of  appearing 
fine  and  gay,  that  it  is  no  wonder  the  tradefmens 
wives  fhould  even  exceed  their  hufbands  in  the 
article  of  drcfs;  but  it  is  indeed  prodigious,  that 
fo  many  of  them  fhould,  merely  for  the  fake  of 
being  thought  able  to  afford  any  thing,  deflroy  the 
reafonable  end  of  finery,  and  render  themfelves 
aukward,  nay  prepofterous,  indeed  of  genteel 
and  agreeable. — When  a  gold  and  filver  fluff, 
enough  to  weigh  a  woman  down,  fhall  be  loaded 
yet  more  with  heavy  trimmings,  what  opinion  can 
we  have  either'of  the  fancy  or  judgment  of  her 
that  wears  it! — And  is  not  her  neighbour,  whom 
to  outflnne, perhaps,  fhe  has  flrained  her  hufband's 
purfc-ftrings  for  this  coflly  garment,  infinitely 
more  to  be  liked  in  a  plain  Ducape  or  Almazen! 

I  am  forry  to  obferve,  that  this  falfe  delicacy  in 
eating,  drinking,  apparel,  furniture,  and  diverfi- 
om,  fo  prevalent  among  us,  has  not  only  undone 
half  the  nation,  but  rendered  us  extremely  ridicu- 
lous to  foreigners,  who  are  witncflcs  of  it.  Thus 
avarice  introduces  luxury,  luxury  leads  us  to  con- 
tempt, and  beggary  comes  on  space. 

J,  fear  what  t  have  faid  on  thefe  topics  will  be 
but  ill  relifhed  by  a  great  many  of  my  readers  j 


124  TlJE  FEMALE  B.  Ilk 

but  if  I  have  the  good  fortune  to  find  it  has  had-. 
an  effect  on  any  one  of  them,  fo  far  as  to  caufs 
them  to  fee  the  error  they  have  been  guilty  of,  I 
{hall  be  the  lefs  chagrined  at  the  refentment  of  the 
wilfully  blind.  Times  like  thefe  require  corro- 
fives,  not  balfams,  to  amend: — the  fore  has  al- 
ready eaten  into  the  very  bowels  of  public  happi- 
nefs,  and  they  muft  tear  away  the  infected  part,  or 
become  a  nuifance  to  themfelvcs,  and  all  about 
them. 

I  remember  to  have  formerly  heard  a  ftory  of 
one  Adulphus,  the  truth  of  which  was  ftrongl-/ 
aflerted.  This  man,  who  it  feems  had  an  eftate 
of  300  1.  per  annum,  lived  happy  and  contented 
on  it,  till  one  afternoon,  as  he  was  fleeping  in  his 
garden,  he  dreamed  a  perfon  of  a  very  venerabls 
afpett  came  to  him,  and  faidj."  Adulphus!  yous 
«*  integrity,  hofpitality,  and.  thofe  other  virtues 
<(  you  are  poflefled  of,,  intitle  you  to  a  reward 
"  from  above.  This  day  twelvemonth,  and  at 
"  this  hour'precifely,  you  {hall  receive  from  my 
"  hands  the  fum  of  305oool." 

This  dream  made  a  ftrong  impreffion  on  him; 
—He  fet  it  down  in  his  pocket-book  the  moment 
he  awoke;  and  believing  as  firmly  it  would  come 
to  pafs,  as  if  an  angel  from  heaven  had  really  de- 
fcended  to  him  with  this  promife,  he  began  to 
confider  in  what  manner  he  (hould  live,  and  how 
thetreafure  mould  be  employed.  Athoufandgrand 
ideas  prefently  came  into  his  head : — he  looked  on 
his  houfe,  he  found  it  old,  decayed,  infinitely  too 
fmall  for  a  man  of  the  fortune  he  was  to  receive; 
—to  lofe  no  more  time,  therefore,  he  fent  for  work- 
men, and  contracted  with  them  to  build  it  an 
after  an  elegant  plan  he  drew  himfelf. 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  12$ 

A  garden,  which  before  was  planted  with  all 
things  ufeful  in  a  kitchen>  was  now  converted  in- 
to a  large  court-yard  in  a  femicircle,  and  en- 
corapafled  with  a  wall  ornamented  with  gilded 
Rower-pots;  a  fine  portico,  raifed  with  five  fteps. 
led  to  a  hall  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  fquare, 
lined  with  cedar,  and  fupported  by  twelve  marble 
pillars,  curiouily  carved  and  cornifhed  after  the 
Doric  and  Ionic  manner: — the  cieling  was  lofty, 
and  painted  with  the  flory  of  Orpheus  and  the 
Bacchanalian  dames,  who,  in  their  wild  fury,  tore 
both  the  mufieian  and  lyre  to  pieces.  On  each 
fide,  a  little  avenue  led  to  a  range  of  handfome 
parlours;  and  feme  few  paces  farther  two  noble 
Hair-cafes,  which,  t)y  an  eafy  afcent,  brought  you, 
the  one  to  the  right,  and  the  other  to  the  left  wing 
of  the  houfe,  both  which  contained  an  equal  num- 
ber of  lodging  rooms.  Over  the  great  portico  and 
hall  was  a  gallery  with  windows  on  both  fides> 
fo  that  there  was  a  thorough  profpecl:  from  the 
great  court-vard  to  tire  gardens  behind  the  houfe, 
which  had  feven  defcents,  all  laid  out  in-  difFerent 
parterres,  and  embellifaecl  with  ftatues  and  foun- 
tains. The  laft  of  them  terminated  in  a  wilder* 
nefs,  in  which  was  a  filh-pond,  and  near  it  feveral 
curious  grottoes,  where  m  the  noon-tide  heats  of 
Auguft,you  might  feel  all  the  coolnefs  and  fweets 
of  a  May  morning. 

A  great  number  of  hands  being  employed,  the 
building  was  foon  finimed ;  and  againft  it  was  fo, 
Adulphus  had  bcfpoke  furniture  fuitablc  to  it. 
lie  indeed  fheweJ  his  good  tarte  in  every  thing 
he  did; — every  body  allowed  nothing  could  be 
more  complete,  but  at  the  fame  time,  as  his  in- 
come was  known  to  all  about  the  country,  it  af- 


126  THE  FEMALE  B,  III, 

forded  matter  of  difcourfe,  by  what  means  he  was 
become  fo  fuddenly  rich,  as  to  be  able  to  erect 
an  edifice  of  fuch  expence.  They  took  upon 
them  to  calculate  how  much  it  coft;  and  found, 
that  though  there  were  many  things  in  the  old 
building  which  might  contribute,  yet  the  whole 
of  what  he  muft  infallibly  lay  out  could  not  be 
lefs  than  10,000  1.  Some  thought  he  had  found 
hidden  treafures;  fome,  that  he  was  privately 
married  to  a  rich  wife;  others,  lefs  inclined  to 
judge  favourable,  faid  he  dealt  with  the  devil. 
Various  were  the  conjectures  of  what  he  was  a- 
bout;  but  all  were  far  diftant  from  the  truth.  A- 
las!  they  knew  not  that  he  had  been  up  to  Lon- 
don, and  deeply  mortgaged  his  paternal  eftate  to 
purchafe  marble,  cedar,  and  other  things,  which 
were  not  to  be  procured  without;  and  as  to  the 
artificers,  he  had  fet  the  day  of  payment  accord- 
ing to  his  dream;  and  as  his  character  was  fair, 
and  he  had  always  been  accounted  an  honcft,  fru- 
gal man,  not  one  of  them  but  were  perfectly  fa- 
tisfied. 

He  trufled  not  his  moft  intimate  friends,  how- 
ever, with  the  fecret,  by.  what  means  fo  great  an 
acceffion  of  fortune  was  to  befal  him;  but  was 
always  fo  gay  and  eafy,  that  none  doubted  but  he 
was  well  affured  of  it  himfelf. 

At  length  the  wifhed-for  day  arrived,  againft 
which  time  he  had  ordered  a  great  collation  to  be 
prepared;  all  his  kindred, and  feveralpf  the  neigh- 
bouring gentry  were  invited,  before  whom  he  in- 
tended to  difcharge  all  his  tradefmens  bills. 

The  hour  appointed  by  the  vifion  was,  as  near 
as  I  can  remember  the  fiery,  about  five;  and  he 
no  fooner  heard  the  clock  Itrike,  than  he  begged 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  f  2f 

the  company's  pardon  for  a  moment,  anil  went  into 
his  clofet,  not  in  the  Icaft  doubting  but  he  (hould 
return  loaded  with  wealth.  He  fat  for  fome  time 
in  the  moft  pleating  expectation,  till  the  hour  elap- 
fingjhis  heart  began  to  be  invaded  with  fome  flight 
palpitations.  But  what  became  of  him,  when  not 
only  fix,  but  feven  o'clock  pafled  over,  and  no  guar- 
dian angel,  nor  any  meflage  from  him,  arrive*!! 

Perfons  of  his  fanguine  complexion,  however, 
do  not  eafily  give  way  to  defpair.  To  excufe  the 
difappointmeut,  he  flattered  himfelf  that  this  de- 
lay had  been  entirely  his  own  fault,  and  that  as 
the  promife  had  been  made  to  him  while  he  was 
deeping,  fo  he  ought  to  have  waited  the  perform- 
ance of  it  in  the  fame  fituation;  befides,  he  did 
not  know  but  the  noife  and  hurry  he  had  in  his 
houfe  might  not  be  pleafing  to  thofe  intellectual 
beings,  who  delight  in  folitude  and  privacy. 
Thefe  were  the  imaginations  which  enabled  him 
to  return  to  hie  friends  with  a  compofed  counte- 
nance, and  firmly  believing,  that  in  the  night  he 
{hould  receive  what  his  inadvertency  in  the  day 
had  deprived  him  of,  he  told  his  creditors,  that  an 
accident  hadpoftponedthe  fatisfa&ion  he  propofed 
in  difcharging  the  obligations  he  had  to  them,  till 
the  next  morning;  but  that,  if  they  pleafedtocome 
at  that  time,  they  might  depend  on  being  paid. 
On  this  all  retired  well  fatisfied,  and  Adulphus 
pafled  the  remainder  of  the  evening  among  his 
guefts,  with  the  fame  jollity  and  good  humour  he 
bad  been  in  the  whole  day. 

This,  indeed,  was  the  laft  night  of  his  tranqui- 
lity.  He  went  to  bed  and  fell  afleep,  but  no  de- 
lightful ideas  prefcnted  themfelvcs  to  him:  he  a-- 
woke,  and  by  the  light  of  a  candle  which  he  kept 


1^8  TKE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

burning  in  the  chimney,  looked  round  the  room 
in  hopes  of  feeing  the  dear  money-bags  lying  ready 
for  him  on  the  table,  but  found  every  thing  juft 
as  he  left  it: — he  then  put  out  the  candle,  ftill 
flattering  himfelf  that  darknefs  would  be  more  fa- 
vourable. A  little  ruftling,  which  fome  accident 
foon  after  occafioned,  made  him  certain  that  his 
wiflies  were  now  completed : — out  of  bed  he 
jumps  in  tranfport,  and  feels  in  every  corner,  but 
found  nothing  of  what  he  fought;  then  lay  down 
again,  in  vain  endeavouring  to  compofe  himfelf  to 
reft.  At  length  the  morning  brok'e,  and  he  once 
more,  with  withful  eyes  and  aking  heart,  renewed 
his  fearch, — alas!  to  the  fame  purpofe  as  before: 
all  he  could  fee  were  pictures,  glafles,  and  other 
rich  furniture,  which  being  unpaid  for,  ferved 
only  as  fo  many  mementoes  of  his  misfortune.— 
He  now  began  to  tremble  for  the  confequences  of 
his  too  credulous  dependence  on  a  vifion;  yet  dill 
unwilling  to  believe  what  gave  him  fo  much  hor- 
ror, a  new  matter  of  hope  ftarted  into  his  head : — 
The  promife  was  made  to  him  that  day  twelve- 
month, which  it  was  certain  was  gone  without  any 
effect  qf  what  he  had  been  made  to  expect;  but 
then  he  reflected,  that  it  was  not  the  fame  day  of 
the  week,  and  that  poflibly  this  might  bring  him 
better  news. 

He  therefore  ventured  to  tell  his  creditors,  that 
though  a  fecond  delay  had  happened,  they  fhould 
be  all  paid  on  the  morrow.  His  character,  and  the 
affurance  with  which  he  fpoke,  prevented  them 
from  being  uneafy  as  yet;  but  when  they  came  the 
third  time,  and  found  that,  inftead  of  having  their 
demands  anfxvcred,  Adulphus  would  not  befeenby 
them,  but  had  (hut  himfelf  up  in  his  chamber,  and 


B.  HI.  SPECTATOR.  129 

ordered  his  fervants  to  fay  he  was  indifpofed,  they 
began  to  murmur;  and  fome  of  them,  who  had 
been  informed  of  his  having  mortgaged  his  eftate, 
thought  it  was  beft  for  them  to  take  fome  other 
method  of  getting  their  money,  than  barely  afking 
for  it,  before  all  was  gone. 

Several  proceiTes  were  prefently  made  out  a- 
gainfl  him,  and  officers  continually  watching  about 
his  houfe  to  take  him ;  but  he  kept  himfelf  fo  clofe, 
that  all  their  endeavours  were  in  vain  for  a  long 
time.  His  friends,  being  informed  of  all  this, 
could  not  conceive  what  had  induced  him  to  act 
in  the  manner  he  had  done,  and  came  often  to  his 
houfe  on  purpofe  to  interrogate  him  concerning  his 
affairs,  and  offer  their  affiftance  in  making  them 
up,  in  cafe  there  was  a  poflibiliry;  but  none  of 
them  could  ever  get  accefs  to  him; — his  grief,  his 
fhame,  and  his  defpair,  at  finding  the  impofition 
he  had  put  upon  himfelf,  the  injuflice  it  had  made 
him  guilty  of  to  others,  and  the  inevitable  ruin 
that  ftared  him  in  the  face,  would  not  fuller  him 
to  fee  even  thofe  for  whom  he  had  the  moft  good- 
will; and  nothing  is  more  ftrangs  than  that,  in 
the  agonies  of  his  foul,  he  did  not  lay  violent  hands 
on  his  own  life. 

In  fpite  of  all  his  caution  he  was  at  lad  arrefted, 
and  thrown  into  prifon;  and  this  occasioning  a 
thorough  inquiry  into  his  circumftances,  it  was 
foon  difcovercd,  that  he  had  made  every  thing  a- 
wny;  bat  the  motive  which  had  induced  a  man, 
who  had  a]!  his  life,  till  this  unhappy  infatuation, 
behaved  with  the  greateft  prudence  and  modera- 
tion, was  flill  a  fecret;  and  this  fo  incenfed  all 
xvho  had  any  dealings  with  him,  as  making  them 
think  he  had  only  a  defign  to  defraud  them  from 

VOL.  I.  M 


?3o  THE  FEMALE  B.  HI. 

the  beginning,  that  they  would  Men  to  no  terms 
of  accommodation. 

The  truth  is,  he  was  become  too  fenfible  of  his 
folly  to  be  able  to  declare  it,  till  from*  a  full  belief 
that  he  had  be«n  mad,  he  grew  fo  in  reality,  and 
in  his  ravings  difclofed  what  fhame,  while  he  had 
any  remains  of  reflection,  made  him  fo  earneftly 
conceal. 

His  golden  dream,  and  the  fad  effect  it  had  on 
him,  were  now  the  talk  of  the  whole  town;  and 
thofe  who  had  been  mofl  exafperated  againft  him, 
now  pitied  him.  His  friends  confulted  together, 
and  the  fine  houfe  and  furniture  were  fold,  as  was 
alfo  his  eftate,  after  clearing  the  mortgage,  to  pay 
the  creditors  as  far  as  the  money  would  go  j  and  on 
this  he  was  difcharged  from  prifon,  but  naked, 
pennylefs,  and  in  no  condition  of  doing  any  thing 
for  his  fubfiftence. 

In  this  miferable  condition,  it  was  thought  the 
greateft  charity  that  could  be  fhewn  to  him,  was  to 
put  him  into  Bedlam,  where,as  I  am  informed,  he 
regained  his  fenfes  enough  to  relate  the  whole  par- 
ticulars of  what  before  he  had  by  darts  imperfectly 
difcoveredj  but  the  wildnefs  of  his  late  diforder 
being  fucceeded  by  a  deep  melancholy,  he  never 
once  defired  to  quit  the  place  and  company  he  was 
in,  and  after  languishing  fome  months,  died  a 
fad  example  of  indulging  profpects  which  are 
merely  fptculative. 

I  am  afraid  one  need  not  give  one's  felf  much 
trouble  to  find,  many  Adulphufes  in  this  kindgom  j 
and  that  if  all  who  have  acted  like  him,  on  as  lit- 
tle foundation,  were  to  be  accounted  lunatics,  new 
hofpitals  muft  be  erected,  for  that  in  Moorfields 
vould  not  contain  a  thoufandth  part. 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  131 

It  is  indeed  a  dreadful  thing  when  people  can- 
not refolve  to  content  themfelves  with  the  fpherc 
in  which  they  are  placed  by  heaven  and  nature. 
It  is  this  reftlefsnefs  of  the  mind  that  occafions  half 
the  mifchiefs  which  befal  mankind: — and  yet  we 
are  all,  more  or  lefs,  apt  to  have fome  ihare  of  it; 
every  one  wifhes  for  tbmething  he  ha-s  not,  and 
that  hinders  him  from  enjoying  properly  what  he 
is  poflefled  of.  We  fancy  we  know  better  than 
him  that  made  us,  what  would  befit  us,  and  ac- 
cufe Providence  of  partiality  in  the  lot  afligned  us; 
and  how  fond  foever  we  may  be  of  the  writings  of 
the  late  celebrated  Mr  Pope,  it  is  but  rarely  we 
remember  this  maxim  of  his,  and  acknowledge- 
with  him,  that 

«  —Whatever  i«,  is  right." 

But  thjs,  as  I  faid  before,  is  wholly  owing  to 
the  dominion  we  fuffer  ill  pafllons  to  get  over  us,, 
and  not  to  nature,  which  is  eafily  fatisfied,  and  ne- 
ver craves  a  fuperfluity  of  anything. — I  have  often 
obferved,that  the  attainment  of  what  we  have  pur- 
fued  with  the  moil  eageruefs,has  proved  our  great- 
eft  curfe;  and  I  clare  anfwer,  that  there  are  fearer 
any  of  my  readers  but  have,  fome  time  or  other,  in 
the  courfe  of  their  lives,  experienced  this  truth. 

Thoufands  there  are  in  this  great  metropolis, 
who  have,  with  the  utmoft  ardency,  wifiied  the 
death  of  a  parent,  an  elder  brother,  a  hufbatid,  or 
a  wife;  and  yet,  a  fmall  time  after,  have  found 
the  lofs  of  them  the  fevered  misfortune  that  could 
have  befallen  them. 

In  the  defigns  men  have  upon  our  fex,  I  appeal 
to  themfelves,  if  the  feducing  a  wife  or  daughter 
of  a  friend,  has  not  brought  on  them  worfc  corn. 
M  z 


J32  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

fequences,  than  the  refufal  of  the  gratification  of 
their  paffion  could  poffibly  have  done. 

Even  in  lefs  unwarrantable  aims,  we  often  find 
that  the  grant  of  what  we  afk  is  a  greater  cruelty 
than  the  denial.  Suppofe  the  partial  favour  of  a 
prince  fhoukl  confer  any  of  the  great  offices  of 
ilate  on  a  perfon,  who  had  not  abilities  to  dif- 
charge  his  truft  with  any  tolerable  degree  of  ho- 
nour, would  it  not  have  been  better  for  fuch  a 
one  to  have  continued  in  a  private  life,  rather 
than,  by  this  exaltation,  have  his  ignorance  expo- 
fed,  and  become  the  jeft  of  a  fneering  world,  v/ho- 
rejoice  in  an  opportunity  of  ridiculing  the  foibles 
of  the  great? 

In  fine,  there  is  no  one  thing,  let  it  wear  ever 
fo  fair  a  face  of  happinefs,  but  the  pofleffion  of  it 
may  render  us  miferable,  either  by  its  not  being 
eiTentially  fo  in  itfelf,  or  by  our  own  want  of  ca- 
pacity to  ufe  it  as  we  ought. 

Not  to  be  too  anxious  after  any  thing,  is  there- 
fore the  only  fure  means  of  enjoying  that  tranqui- 
lity  we  but  vainly  depend  upon,  in  the  acquit! tion 
of  what  our  paffions  make  us  look  on  for  a  time 
as  our  greateil  good. 

O  but,  fome  people  will  cry,  thefe  are  ftupid 
maxims:  nature,  in  accuffoming  itfelf  to  fuch  a 
ftate  of  indolence  and  inactivity,  would  fall  into  a 
lethargy,  and  we  mould  be  little  better  than  walk- 
ing ftatues.  Paffions  were  given  us  to  invigorate 
the  mind,  and  roufe  us  to  noble  and  great  actions  j 
and  he  that  is  born  without  them,  or  mortifies 
them  too  much,  is  incapable  of  doing  any  thing 
to  ferve  his  God,  his  country,  or  himfelf. 

This  is  undoubtedly  true;  and  whoever  under- 
flands  what  1  have  faid  in  a  contrary  fenfe,  does 


B.  IB.  SPECTATOR  133 

an  injury  to  my  meaning.  I  am  for  having  every 
one  endeavour  to  excel  in  whatever  ftation  or  pro- 
fefficn  he  has  been  bred;  but  I  am  for  having  none 
attempt  to  go  out  of  it,  or  to  regard  promotion 
more  than  che  means  by  which  he  aims-  to  acquire 
it.  He  ought  to  have  ambition  enough  to  do  all 
-  .ight  make  him  worthy  of  being  railed,  but 
a ;  to  make  him  capable  of  overleap- 
ing all  the  barriers  ol  virtue  to  attain  his  end.  I 
would  not  have  a  lieutenant  in  the  army  llioot 
fris  captain  in  the  back,  for  the  fake  of  getting  in- 
to hi.,  poll;  but  1  would  have  him  behave  fo  as 
to  delerve  a  better. 

But  there  is  one  very  unfortunate  propenfity 
in  moft  of  us;  for  I  know  not  whether  it  may  be 
called  a  pailion,  and  that  is  the  vanity  of  imagin* 
ing  we  deferve  much  more  than  in  reality  we  do* 
This  vanity,  when  not  gratified,  makes  us  murmur 
and  repine  at  thofe  who  have  it  in  their  power  to 
grant  what  we  defire,  and  yet  with-hold  it  from 
us;  it  excites  in  us  an  envy  and  hatred  againft 
thofe  who  are  in  pofleflion  of  what  we  think  b 
due  to  us  alone;  it  infpires  us  with  a  thoufand. 
bafe  artifices  to  undermine  and  ruin  all  who  have 
a  fairer  profpecl;  than  ourfelves.  When  a  perfou 
of  this  {tamp  happens  to  fucceed  in  his  aim,  you. 
may  know  him  by  a  haughty  ftrut,  and  contemp- 
tuous tofs  of  the  head  to  his  inferiors,  an  air  of 
importance  to  his  equals,  and  a  fervile  fawn  on 
all  who  can. any  way  contribute  to  exalting  him 
yet  higher;  for  there  are  no  bounds  to  the  ambit- 
tion  of  a  felf-fufficient  man. 

"  What  crowds  of  thefe  do  we  fee  ev'ry  day, 
"  At  park,  at  opera,  at  court,  and  play  I " 

ML  3 


134  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

Aperfon  who,  on  the  contrary,  really  rifes  by 
his  merit,  is  affable  and  mild  to  all  beneath  him, 
fociable  among  thofe  of  his  own  rank,  and.  pays 
that  regard  to  thofe  above  him,  which  their  ftations 
or  intrinfic  worth  demand,  but  no  farther;  fuch'a 
one  is  rejoiced  at  his  good  fortune,  but  not  altered 
in  his  humour:  he  forgets  not  what  he  was,  nor 
his  former  companions,  and  thinks  himfelf  not  at 
all  the  better  man  for  being  a  greater. 

'*  What  pity  'tis  that  fuch  no  more  abound, 

"  Whofe  modeft  merit  recompence  has  found."" 

That  confederation,  however,  nor  a  thoufand 
rebuffs  which  a  virtuous  man  often  meets  with  in 
the  difcharge  of  his  duty,  or  the  attainment  of 
v/hat  he  has  really  purchafed  by  his  good  beha- 
viour, will  not  deter  him  from  going  on  in  the 
fame  laudable  courfe;  becaufe  it  is  pleafmg  to 
himfelf,  and  renders  him  infinitely  more  at  eafe 
in  his  own  breafl",  than  he  can  ever  feel,  who  by 
indirect  means,  arrives  at  the  higheft  fummit  of 
his  ambitious  views. 

Xeuxis,  by  a  long  feries  of  hypocrify,  trea- 
chery and  deceit,  pretended  menaces  on  the  one 
fide,  equally  falfe  friendfhips  on  the  other,  and 
every  artifice  of  wicked  policy,  has  at  lait  forced 
himfelf,  as  it  were,  into  a  feat,  which  neither  his 
birth,  his  parts,  nor  the  mod  fanguine  wifhes  of 
his  beft  friends,  could  ever  promife;  yet  how 
wretchedly  does  his  new  grandeur  fit  upon  him! 
Do  not  his  fullen  looks,  and  contracted  brow,, 
denote  a  fecret  remorfe,  that  preys  upon  his  foul, 
when,  infteadpfthe  refpecl:  he  flattered  himfelf 
vith,  he  meets  only  with  in  fulls,  and  that  the  dig- 
nity fo  unworthily  conferred  upon  him,  has  ferved 


E.I1I.  SPECTATOR.  r3$ 

but  to  render  him  the  object  of  all  good  men's 
contempt,  and  the  deteflation  of  the  vulgar! 

From  this  lump  of  glutted  avarice  and  Arollen 
ambition,  let  us  turn  our  eyes  on  brave  Timoleon^ 
whofe  untainted  virtue  would  honour  the  higheft 
dignities,  yet  is  poffeffed  of  none  but  thofe  derived 
to  him  from  his  illuftrious  anccftors:  uncourting, 
uniudebted  to  favour,  a  native  greatnefs  {nines 
through  his  whole  deportment;  confcious  worth* 
and  innate  peace  of  mind,  fmile  in  his  eyes,  at  once 
commanding  homage  and  affection  :  his  name  is 
never  mentioned  but  with  bleflings;  and  the  love 
and  admiration  of  all  degrees  of  people  give  him 
that  folid  grandeur  which  empty  titles,  and  all  tke- 
pomp  of  arrogance,  would  but  in  vain  aflumc. 

Who  then  would  fay  it  is  not  better  to  tieferve 
than  to  receive?  Who  would  not  chufc  to  be  a 
Timoleon  rather  than  a  Xeuxis,  did  they  well  weigh 
the  difference  of  characters  before  too  far  entered 
into  the  guilty  labyrinth  to  be  able  to  retreat? 

There  are,  indeed,  a  fort  of  people  in  the  world, 
who  are  too  proud  to  be  obliged ;  who  think  it 
their  glory  to  refufe  favours,  even  though  they 
ftand  in  the  greateft  need  of  them,  ami  with 
a  cynical  furlinefs,  affront,  inrtead  of  thanking 
thofe  who  make  offers  of  their  friendship.  This 
is  a  difpofition  which  has  nothing  in  it  commen- 
dable; but  as  it  arifcs  only  from  too  much  great- 
nefs of  mind,  or  what  one  may  call  honour  over- 
ftraincd,  fuch  a  perfon  can  never  be  dangerous  to 
fbciety;  and  how  little  good  foever  he  may  be  ca- 
pable of  doing  to  himfelf,  he  will  be  fure  to  do 
no  hurt  to  others. 

In  an  age  fo  felfifli  and  gain-loving  as  this  of 
ours,  there  are  but  few  examples  of  the  kind  1 


135  t  THS  FEMALE  R,  IIF. 

have  mentioned  j  I  fliall  therefore  prefent  my  rea- 
ders with  one  which  happened  very  lately,  and 
is,  I  think,  pretty  extraordinary. 

Leolin,  a  gentleman  defcended  from  one  of 
the  bed  families  in  Wales,  and  born  to  a  conf?- 
derable  eftate,  had,  from  his  very  early  years,  been 
attached  by  the  molt  tender  paffion  to  a  young  lady 
called  Elraira,  an  heirefs  of  1600!  a  year, — His 
vows  had  all  the  fuccefs  he  could  defirc;  and  if  he 
thought  that  all  the  charms  of  the  whole  f:>:  \vers 
united  in  his  Elmira,  me  coul.:  find  nothing  woi> 
thy  of  her  affection  but  her  Leohn.  i  hei*  lathers, 
who  had  been  long  intimate  friends,  approved  their 
mutual  flame;  and  when  Leolin  arrival  at  his 
twentieth  year,  and  Elmira  to  that  Oi  flxteen, 
they  refolved  to  join  the  hands  of  two  perfons, 
whofe  hearts  had  been  united  even  beiore  they 
knew  either  the  nature,  or  the  aim  of  the  paffion 
'  they  were  infpired  with. 

Accordingly  the  marriage-articles  were  drawr, 
and  great  preparations  were  making  to  folem- 
nize  the  nuptials,  when  within  two  or  three  days 
of  that  which  was  intended  to  complete  it,  the 
father  of  Elmira  had  the  misfortune  to  fall  off 
his  horfe  and  break  his  leg,  which  turning  into  a 
mortification,  was  obliged  to  be  cut  off.  Either 
•want  of  (kill  in  the  furgeons,  or  his  own  obflinacy 
in  not  fuffering  the  amputation  to  be  above  the 
knee,  proved  fatal  to  him,  and  he  died  in  twenty* 
four  hours  after  the  operation. 

This  occafioned  a  melancholy  delay  of  our 
lovers  happinefs.  The  virtuous  and  difcreet  El- 
mira could  not  think  of  devoting  herfelf  to  the 
joys  and  gaiety  of  a  bridal  ftate  immediately  after 
the  lofs  of  a  parent  to  whom  {he  had  been  ex^ 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  137 

tremely  dear,  and  whofe  indulgence  (lie  had  al- 
ways repaid  with  the  moft  fincere  filial  duty  and 
affe&ion.  Leolin  himfelf,  who  fhared  in  all  her 
forrows,  durft  not  prefume  to  prefs  it;  and  his 
father  was  too  great  an  obferver  of  decency,  as 
well  as  too  much  concerned  for  the  death  of  his 
good  old  friend,  to  urge  the  completion  of  an  af- 
fair, which  though  he  very  much  defired,  yet  he 
thought  might  be  more  agreeable  to  all  the  par- 
ties concerned,  when  time  had  a  little  worn  off 
the  prefent  poignancy  of  grief. 

The  firft  mourning  being  over,  and  the  white 
garments  accompanied  with  fomewhat  of  a  more 
chearful  afpecr.,  the  paffionate  Leolin  began,  by 
degrees,  to  remind  his  charming  miftrefs  of  her 
engagement;  and  flic  was  half-confenting  to  put 
an  end  to  all  his  languiihnients,  when  a  fecond, 
and,  in  its  conferences,  more  fatal  difappoint- 
ment  than  the  former,  came  between  them  and 
the  felicity  they  expected. 

The  father  of  Leolin  was  taken  fuddenly  ill: 
his  indifpofition  terminated  in  a  violent  fever,, 
which  in  a  very  few  days  took  him  from  the  world; 
but  even  this  event,  afHiding  as  it  was  to  the  fon, 
proved  a  flight  misfortune  to  that  which  immedi- 
ately enfuecl. — The  funeral  obfequies  were  no 
fooner  over,  than  the  houfe  of  tht  young  gentle- 
man was  forcibly  entered  by  officers,  who  carrie 
to  feizc  on  all  he  had,  by  virtue  of  a  deed  of  gift 
made,  as  they  faid,  by  his  father  fome  years  be- 
fore, to  his  brother's  fon.  Leolin,  impetuous  by 
nature,  oppofcd  their  paflage  all  he  could;  but 
the  number  they  brought  with  them  by  far  ex- 
ceeded thofe  of  liU  fervatits,  and  they  took  pof- 
icffion:  on  which  he  went  to  the  houfe  of  a 


13$  THE  FEMALE  B.  lffr 

neighbouring  gentleman,  who  had  been  an  inti- 
mate acquaintance  of  his  father,  complained  to 
him  of  his  wrongs,  and  intreated  his  advice. 

Not  only  this  perfon,  but  the  chief  gentlemen 
of  the  county,  perfuaded  him  to  have  recourfe  to 
law;  it  feeming  highly  improbable,  that  any  fa- 
ther mould  give  away  the  inheritance  of  an  only 
fon,  and  fuch  a  fon  as  Leolin,  who  had  never 
done  any  thing  to  difoblige  him,  and  of  whom 
he  had  always  feemed  extremely  fond. 

The  kinfman,  however,  had  his  pretences,, 
which,  for  the  better  understanding  this  myfte- 
rious  affair,  I  muft  not  pafs  over  in  filence.  The 
mother  of  Leolin,  when  he  was  not  above  four  or 
five  years  old,  eloped  from  her  hufband,  and  took 
refuge  in  France  with  a  gentleman  who  had  for- 
merly courted  her,  and  whom  fhe  continued  to. 
love,  to  the  eternal  ruin  of  all  that  ought  to  be 
dear  to  womankind. 

So  manifeft  a  proof  of  her  unchaflity,  it  is  cer- 
tain, made  him  difregard  the  young  Leolin,  for  a 
time,  as  dubious  if  he  were  really  of  his  blood* 
and  wit'nefles  were  produced,  who  fwore  they 
had  hea*rd  him  fay,  "  The  baftard  fhould  never 
*'  inherit  an  acre  of  his-  land;"  and  when  they 
anfwered,  "  That  it  would  not  be  in  his  power  to 
"  cut  him-  off,"  he  rejoined,  "  No  matter,  there 
"  were  other  courfes  to  be  taken." 

This  they  depofcd  that  theyunderftood  as  meant, 
by  the  deed  of  gift  now  produced;  and  that  tho' 
fince  then  he  had  treated  Leolin  as  his  fon,  and 
feemed  to  ufe  him  well,  it  was  only  to  avoid  any 
farther  noife  being  made  in  the  world  of  his  difr 
honour  while  he  lived,  deferring  to  flie  w  his  refent- 
merit  to  the  mother  on  the  fon,  till  after  hisdeceafe. 


£.  lit          SPECTATOR.  i3f 

In  fine,  after  a  long  procefs  the  trial  came  on, 
and  the  kinfman  had  fo  well  concerted  his  inea- 
fures,  that,  in  fpite  of  all  the  probabilities  that 
were  againft  him,  he  got  the  better  of  Leolin;  the 
judge  only,  in  confideration  of  his  having  been 
bred  a  gentleman,  and  in  the  expectation  of  fo 
large  an  cftate,  ordering  he  {hould  be  allowed  200!. 
per  annum,  out  of  fo  many  thoufands. 

Few  there  were,  however,  who  did  not  believe 
him  greatly  wronged;  nor  could  the  jury  them- 
felves  reconcile,  to  their  own  reafon,  the  verdi£l 
they  were  obliged  to  give  on  the  evidence,  who 
fwore  fo  pofitively,  and  corroborated  their  depofi- 
ticns  with  fo  many  circumftances,  that,  in  law, 
there  was  no  poffibility  for  the  court  to  a£t  other- 
wife  than  it  did  on  this  occafion. 

Leolin,  who,  for  his  many  good  qualities,  had 
always  been  highly  esteemed  and  beloved  in  the 
country  where  he  was  born,  had  many  friendly  of- 
fers made  him,  and  continual  invitations  from  one 
houfe  to  another;  but  he  would  accept  of  none, 
avoided  all  converfation  with  thofe  he  was  once 
intimate  with, and  (hut  himfelf  up  in  a  little  farm- 
houfe,  ordering  the  people  belonging  to  it  to  fuf- 
fcr  no  perfon  whatever  to  come  to  him. 

But  his  behaviour,  with  regard  to  Elmira  was 
the  rnofl  aftonifhing,  and  what  indeed  excited  me 
to  give  this  melancholy  detail  of  his  adventures. 
—During  the  continuance  of  the  law-fuit,  and 
vhile  he  had  hope  of  overcoming  his  adverfary, 
he  was  fcarce  ever  from  her;  and,  in  fpite  of  the 
vexation  this  cruel  invafion  of  his  birth-right  had 
'  involved  him  in,  found  always  a  fatisfadtion  in  her 
unaltered  and  endearing  converfation,  which  more 
t  .  i  compeafated  for  all  the  frovvas  of  fortune. 


140  THE   FEMALE  B.  III.' 

But  the  moment  he  was  caft,  that  he  was  certain 
his  ruin  was  completed,  he  fhunned  her  even  more 
than  all  the  world  befide;  and  though  her  love, 
and  the  engagements  between  them,  made  her  not 
to  look  upon  it  as  a  breach  of  modefty  to  write 
tojiim,  to  conjure  him  in  the  moft  preffing  terms 
to  come  to  her,  and  aflured  him  the  change  in  his 
circumftances  had  wrought  no  change  in  her  af- 
fe£tion ;  and  that  (lie  was  ready  to  make  him  a 
prefent  of  that  with  herfelf,  yet  could  fhe  not 
prevail  on  him  to  fee  her. 

In  fine,  from  the  moft  affable  and  obliging  of 
mankind,  he  was  now  become  the  moft  ftern,  mo» 
rofe,  and  ill-tempered  ;  according  to  the  poet, 

"  Great  fouls  grow  always  haugh.ty  in  diftrefe." 

In  vain  a  miftrefs  fo  lately  beloved,  admired, 
almoft  adored,  now  condefcended  to  folicit  him 
to  accept  all  in  her  power  to  give:  all  the  proofs 
fhe  gave  him  of  her  tendernefs,  her  conflancy, 
her  difinterefted  paffion,,  ferved  but  to  add  new 
matter  for  his  difcontent;  and,  to  get  rid  of  her 
importunities,  he  at  laft  fent  one  letter  in  anfwer 
to  the  many -obliging  ones  he  had  received  from 
her. — A  friend  of  mine  happening  to  be  with  her 
when  it  arrived,  aflured  me  it  contained  thefe 
lines : 

"  MADAM, 

"  I  Believe  there  is  no  occafion  for  any  affe- 
"  verations,  that  no  man  has  ever  loved  with 
"  greater  fincerity  than  1  have  done,  or  more  paf- 
*'  fionately  defired  to  be  united  to  you  for  ever, 
"  while  there  remained  the  leatt  hope  of  being  fo 
"  without  rendering  both  of  us  the  fubject  of  ri- 
"  diculc. — In  fine,  I  have  ftill  too  much  regard 


B.  III.          SPECTATOR.  141 

"  for  you,  to  have  it  faid,  you  bought  a  hufband, 
*'  and  for  myfelf,  to  think  of  fubmitting  to  the 
"  flavifli  dependance  of  a  wife's  fortune  — Were 
"  the  balance  on  my  fide,  I  fhould  not  act  in  this 
"  manner;  but,  as  things  are  now  circumftanced 
<{  between  us,  I  beg  you  will  give  neither  your- 
"  felf  or  me  any  further  trouble  on  this  fcore; — 
"  the  moft  prudent  ftep  you  can  take  for  the  peace 
*'  of  both,  is  to  think  of  me  no  more,  fmcel  ne- 
"  ver  can  be,  in  the  manner  I  once  flattered  my- 
"  felt"  with  being, 

Yours,  &c.     LEOL1N. 

"  P.  S.  I  quit  the  place  I  am  in  this  very  mo- 
44  mcnt,  nor '{hall  make  any  perfon  in  the  world 
**  the  confidante  of  my  retirement;  fo  that  no 
"  letters  can  poffibly  come  to  my  hands ;  but  have 
*c  ordered  the  honeft  man  who  has  been  my  hoft 
"  for  fome  time,  to  pay  you  300!.  which  you  may 
4*  remember  I  borrowed  of  you  while  my  unhappy 
"  law-affair  was  in  agitation,  and  the  intereft  due 
"  upon  the  loan. — Adieu  for  ever;  be  aflured,  I 
fl  wiih  you  much  better  than  you  do  yourfelf." 

Poor  Elmira  read  the  letter  with  tears  in  her 
eyes,  and  cried  out,  "  O  what  a  noble  mind  is 
"  here  perverted!  Qume  changed  from  what  he 
"  was,  by  an  ill-judging  and  injurious  world  1" 
But  when  (he  came  to  the  poftfcript,  and  the  man 
counted  the  money  to  her  on  the  table,  (he  grew 
beyond  all  patience. — "  How  meanly  muft  he 
«' think  of  me  I  faid  fhe. — How  little  does  he 
«  know  of  Elmira!"  And  then  again,  "  What! 
>  i(  am  I  turned  ufurer  then!"  Tliis  litde  indigna- 
tion, however,  foon  fubfided,  and  gave  way  to 
the  fofter  dictates  of  love  and  friendship:  flic  aflc- 
-cd  the  farmer  athouiand  qucftions  concerning  his 
VOL.  I.  N 


14*  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

•behaviour;  conjuredhim  to  deal  fmcerely  with  her, 
and  to  inform  her,  whether  he  had  really  leftliis 
houfe  or  not,  and,  if  he  had,  what  road  he  took. 

To  this  he  replied  with  a  great  deal  of  truth  j 
that  he  had  never  feen  a  man  fo  changed  as  to  his 
•humour,  but  that  he  did  not  think  his  brain  was 
any  way  difordered  :  that  fome  time  pa  ft  he  fent 
for  a  money-fcrivener,  and  fold  the  annuity  or- 
dered him  for  life  for  loool.  part  of  which  he  had 
tlifpofed  of  in  paying  all  the  little  debts  he  had 
contracted  fmce  his  misfortune,  and  had  taken 
the  remainder  with  him:  that  he  went  on  horfe- 
-back,  but  could  not  fay  what  road,  becaufe  he 
was  forbid  accompanying  him  even  to  the  lane's 
•end  that  led  to  his  houfe. 

In  the  prefent  emotions  of  her  various  paffions, 
ilie  would  certainly  have  followed  him  herfelf, 
could  fhe  have  known  what  route  to  take,  and 
either  brought  him  back  or  gone  with  him;  but 
as  this  was  impoflible,  fhe  difpatched  men  and 
-horfes  every  where  fhe  could  think  of,  to  each  of 
whom  fhe  gave  little  billets,  befeeching  him  by 
all  he  ever  did  or  could  love,  to  return  to  her, 
and  not  make  them  both  miferable  by  a  foolifli 
punctilio,  which  the  fenfe  of  the  injuries  he  had 
fuftained  alone  had  put  into  his  head. 

The  fervants  knowing  their  miftrefs's  attach- 
ment, and  befides  having  a  very  great  refpecl:  for 
Leolin,  who  had  been  always  extremely  affable 
and  liberal  to  them,  fpared  no  pains  to  execute 
their  commiffion. 

But  all  their  endeavours  were  fruitlefs;  Leolin, 
doubtlefs,  fiifpe&ing  what  would  be  the  confe« 
-quence  of  his  letter,  and  obftinate  in  his  refolution, 
£0  -fuller  any  thing  rather  than  be  under  the  leaft 


B.  Iir.  S  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  K.  r4? 

obligation,  even  to  the  woman  he  loved,  parted 
through  fuch  bye-ways  as  eluded  all  their  fearch. 

He  came  up  to  London,  where  having  furnifh- 
ed  himfelf  with  all  things  neceflary  for  a  cam- 
paign, he  went  a  volunteer  into  the  army.  The 
little  regard  he  had  for  life,  joined  to  his  natural 
impetuofity,  hurried  him  into  the  thickeft  dan- 
gers, and  he  fell  among  many  other  gallant  men 
at  the  battle  ofvDettingen. 

An  old  officer,  who  had  been  an  acquaintance 
of  his  father's,  faw  and  knew  him  on  his  firft 
coming  into  the  camp;  and, having  heard  the  ftory 
of  his  misfortunes,  offered  him  all  the  fcrvices  in 
his  power;  but  Leolin  reje&ed  every  thing  that 
might  afford  him  any  advantage,  and  continued  de- 
termined to  the  laft  not  to  be  obliged  to  any  one. 

It  was  this*gendeman,  who,  on  the  account 
of  his  great  age  and  many  wounds,  returning  to 
England  after  the  campaign  was  over,  brought 
the  account  of  him,  who  elfe  perhaps  might  till 
this  moment  have  been  vainly  fought  by  the  dif- 
confolate  Elmira. 

So  anxious,  fo  unhappy  had  (he  been  from  the 
time  of  his  departure,  that  to  hear  he  was  no  more 
could  fcarce  add  to  it. — The  news,  however,  en- 
couraged feveral  gentlemen  to  make  their  addrefles 
to  her,  which,  while  he  was  living,  in  any  cir- 
cumftances,  they  knew  would  have  been  in  vain; 
but  they  found  his  death  of  no  fervice  to  their 
fuit:  his  memory  was  ftill  a  rival,  which  all  theic 
efforts  were  too  weak  to  furmount;  to  that  fhe 
affurcs  thenvfhe  is  wedded,  and  to  that  will  to  her 
laft  breath  continue  conftant. 

What  now  can  we  fay  of  this  Leolin,  but  that 
he  was  an  honed,  brave,  and  worthy  man  !  Can 
N  a 


144  THE   FEMALE  B.  IIL 

we  help  admiring  him,  at  the  fame  time  that  we 
condemn  him !  And  had  not  that  unhappy  obfti- 
nacy,  to  which  he  fell  a  martyr,  wounded  at  the 
fame  time  the  breaft  of  the  generous,  the  fweet  El- 
mira,  (hould  we  not  have  greatly  compaffionated 
a  foible,  which  if  we  examine  to  the  bottom,  we 
(hall  find  had  its  rife  from  a  virtue  in  excels. 

The  love  of  freedom  and  independency,  it 
feem?,  was  his  darling  propenfity;  and  though  he 
had  nothing  in  reality  to  fear  from  the  excellence 
of  Elmira's  nature,  yet  to  know  himfelf  obliged, 
and  that  there  was  even  a  poffibility  for  herfome 
time  or  other  to  think  he  was  fo,  had  fomewhat  in 
it  which  the  greatnefs  of  his  fpirit  could  not  fub- 
mit  to  bear.  I  am  apt  to  believe,  that  had  (lie 
been  reduced  in  the  manner  he  was,  and  he  been 
poflefled  of  as  many  millions  as  he  was  born  to 
thoufand?,  he  would,  with  the  utmoft  pleafure, 
have  thrown  them  at  her- feet,  and  found  his 
greateft  felicity  in  her  acceptance. 

Such  a  man  muft  certainly  have  made  a  very- 
great  figure  in  the  fenate,  had  he  ever  arrived  at  be- 
ing a  member  of  it;  and  for  the  good  of  my  coun- 
try, I  fincerely  wiih  there  were  five  hundred  of  th? 
fame  way  of  thinking.  What  in  private  life  was 
his  greateft  misfortune,  would  in  a  publicone  have 
rendered  him  of  the  higheft  fervice  to  the  pre- 
fent  age,  and  endeared  his  name  to  late  pofterity. 
No  carefles,  no  penfions,  no  ribbands,  no  pre- 
ferments, would  have  had  any  influence  over  a 
perfon  of  his  principles:  refolute  to  fupport  the 
cative  freedom  of  an  Englifhman,  he  would  havrc 
uttered  his  mind  without  referve;  and  the  more 
he  had  been  offered  by  a  court  parafite  for  his 
filence,  the  more  warmly  had  he  fpoke  in  the 


B.m.          SPECTATOR.  145, 

caufe  of  liberty.  Perhaps,  indeed,  he  might  have 
been  too  bold,  and,  for  his  particular  mortification, 
have  occafioned  the  Habeas  Corpus  aft  to  be  fuf- 
pended;  but  what  of  that!  It  might  have  burt 
fome  individuals,  but  muft  have  been  of  general 
fcrviee,  and  have  opened  the  eyes  of  thofe,  who,, 
more  through  indolence  and  luxury,  than  corrup- 
tion, were  made  blind. 

So  far  I  blame  him,  in.  refuting  a  fine  woman, 
whom  he  loved,  and  who  had  an  eftate  which  would 
have  put  it  in  his  power  to  be  of  ufe  to  his  coun- 
try, whi.ch,  heaven  knows,  and  he  could  not  have, 
been  ignorant  of,  (lands  in  need  of  fuch  funportsj, 
but  as  he  was  very  young,  and  the  confederation. 
of  thefe  things  had  not  time  to  make  the  impref— 
fion  it  ought,  I  cannot  but  pity  him,  and  lament; 
the  lofs  which  the  public  have  in  a. friend  fo  qua-»- 
lified  to  ferve  the  common-  intereft. 

ALL  the  young. and  gay  of  both  fexes,  who  are 
advocates,  for  the  tender  paffion,  I  know,  cannot 
find  in  their  hearts  to  forgive  him:  as  to  the- 
confiderations  1  have  mentioned,  they  will  have 
indeed  but  very  little  weight  with  them.  The. 
griefs  of  Elmira  will  be  accounted  of  infinite  more 
confequence,  and  he  will  be  looked  upon'as  a  man 
ofafavage  and  barbarous  foul,  who,  to  gratify 
his  pride,,  could  forfake  a  lady  that  fo  truly  loved, 
an<i  had  made  him  fuch  condefcenfions.  I  grant 
that  there  was  fomething  cruel  in  the  effects  of  his 
behaviour  to  her,  yet  I  cannot  help  vindicating 
the  caufe;  and  I  think  I  cannot  do  it  more  effec- 
tually, than  by  fetting  a  character  of  a  quite  oppo- 
fite  nature  in  the  fame  point  of  li^Kt  with  l>im. 
"White  is  bed  iJluitrated  by  being  near  to  black;, 
and  the  rough  diamond,  which  at  prefent  appears 
N3 


{46  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

of  fo  little  value,  will  rife  in  a  more  juil  eftima- 
tion  when  placed  near  a  common  pebble. 

Cleophil  is  what  the  world  calls  a  fine  gentle- 
man; he  is  tall,  well  made,  has  a  gay  and  lively 
air,  a  good  fancy  in  drefs,  dances  to  perfection, 
tells  a  thoufand  agreeable  ftories,  and  is  very  en- 
tertaining in  converfation. 

Belliza,  the  only  daughter  of  a  late  very  e- 
minent  tradefman  in  the  city,  was  the  object  of 
his  flame;  for  though  he  was  the  moft  gallant 
man  imaginable  among  "all  the  ladies  he  came  in 
company  with,  yet  to  this  alone  he  made  his  ad- 
dreffes.  It  is  certain,  indeed,  that  nobody  could 
condemn  the  choice  he  made  of  her ;  for  befides 
the  large  fortune  it  was  expected  would  be  given 
her  by  her  father,  fhe  had  2000!.  left  by  her  grand- 
mother, which  was  entirely  at  her  own  difpofal. 
Her  wealth,  however,  was  the  lead  motive  to  that 
envy  with  which  many  young  gentlemen  faw  the 
favourable  reception  Cleophil  was  treated  with  by 
her.  The  moft  detracting  of  her  own  fex  cannot 
but  allow  her  to  have  beauty,  wit,  virtue,  good- 
nature, and  all  the  accomplifhments  that  can  at- 
tract both  love  and  refpect;  and  as  for  thofe  of 
the  other,  there  are  few  that  fee,  without  feeling 
for  her  fomewhat  more  than  bare  admiration. 

Never  was  a  more  paflionate  lover,  to  all  ap- 
pearance, than  Cleophil ;  he  feemed  jealous  even 
of  the  hours  allowed  for  repofe,  becauie  they  de- 
*  prived  him  of  herprefence;  and  would  fometimes 
encroach  on  them,  by  bringing  muficians  under  her 
low,  to  ferenade  her  with  fongs,  either  of  his 
own  compofing,  or  which  he  pretended  were  fo. 

She  was  extremely  young,  ignorant  of  the  ar- 
.  .-iftancy  of  mankind,  and  as  the 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  M; 

perfon  of  this  admirer  was  agreeable  to  her,  rea- 
dily believed  all  he  faid,  and  returned  his  profef- 
fjons  with  the  moft  tender  and  fincerc  ones  on  her 
part:  nothing  feemed  wanting  to  complete  their 
mutual  felicity  but  her  father's  confent,  whom, 
(he  was  too  dutiful  to  difobey,  and  could  not  yet 
obtain. 

The  old  gentleman  had  an  idea  of  Cleophil  very 
different  from  what  his  daughter  had  entertained : 
he  looked  on  him  as  a  man  who.  had  too  much 
regard  for  intereft  to  be  ib  much  in  love  as  he  pre- 
tended: he  had  a  penetrating  judgment,  and 
eafily  difcovered  a  great  fund  of  felf-fufficiency; 
and  that  arrogance  and  hypocrify  were  hid  beneath 
the  fp.ecious  fliew  of  honour,  generofity,  and  ten- 
dernefs.  But  as  he  found  the  young  Belliza  gave 
him  the  preference  to  all  who  had  made  cilcrs  of 
the  nature  he  did,  he  would  not  fuddenly  thwart 
her  inclinations,  but  only  feemed  to  delay  what 
indeed  he  was  very  unwilling  ihould  come  to  pafs. 
lie  imagined,  that  by  repeated  prolongations  of 
giving  any  definitive  anfwer,  either  the  patience 
of  the  lover  would  be  tired,  or  his  daughter  find 
fomething  in  him  which  might  give  her  caufe  to 
alter  her  prefent  favourable  opinion :  he  wifely 
confideredy  that  all  youth  is  headftrong,  and  that 
whatever  bent  it  takes,  opposition  oniy  ferves  to 
render  it  more  obdinate  and  blind  to  conviction; 
ajid  though  the  temper  of  IJelliza,  in  ether  things, 
nu'ht  render  her  an  exception  to  this  general  rule, 
yet  hf  knew  not  how  far  1'hc  might  be  tranfported 
by  her  paflion  to  act  in  a  different  manner  from 
;t:iy  other  motive  co;/  her  to 

i!'->.  He  therefore  thought,  by  neither  fccming  to 
contradict  or  approve  her  deGrcs,  to  give  her  au 


148  THE  FEMALE  B.  Ill, 

4 

opportunity  of  difcovering  herfelf,  what  would 
not  perhaps  have  gained  the  lead  credit  with  her 
from  any  other  perfon. 

The  indifferent  opinion  he  had  of  Cleophil, 
and  his  knowledge  of  human  nature,  which  can 
feldom  carry  on  a  courfe  of  deceit  for  any  long 
time, without  elapfing  into  fomething  that  betrays 
itfelf,  madeliim  not  doubt  but  this  would  happen 
as  indeed  it  did,  but  by  a  way  little  foreleen,  QF 
even  apprehended  by  him. 

He  had  at  that  time  two  (hips  of  his  ov/n  at  fea,, 
very  richly  laden,  the  return  of  which  he  was 
daily  expecting,  when  the  melancholy  news  ar- 
rived that  the  one  was  wrecked,  and  the  other 
taken  by  the  Spaniards: — feveraJ  others  alfo,  iiL 
which  he  had  considerable  fhares,  met  with  the. 
fame  fate,  fo  that  his  credit,  as  well  as  his  fpirits,. 
was  very  much  funk: — bills  came  thick  upon 
him,  and  he  foori  became  unable  to  difcharge 
them;  a  {hock,  which  in  the  whole  courfe  of  his 
dealing  he  had  never  known  before!  Beliiza,  in, 
this  exigence,  intreated  him  to  accept  of  her.zoool. 
but  he  refufed  it,  telling  her  he  knew  not  but  his 
other  ventures  abroad  might  be  as  unfuccefsful  as 
the  laft  had  been,  and  if  fo,  thefum  me  was  mif- 
trefs  of  would  be  incapable  of  doing  him  any  real 
fervice,  and  it  would  add  to  his  misfortune  to 
think,  that  for  a  fhort  refpite  for  himfelf,  he  had 
involved  her  in  ruin  with  him. 

This  did  not  fatisfy  the  dutiful  and  tenderly 
affe&ionate  Beliiza;  fhe  continued  to  prefs  him 
•with  the  uttnoft  ardency  not  to  reject  her  fair, 
till  he  at  laft  allured  her,  that  the  demands  on  him 
were  fo  large  and  numerous,  that  lefs  than  4000], 
would  not  prefeive  his  credit  till  the  time  in  which 


B.  III.          SPECTATOR.  149 

he  might  reafon ably  hope  to  hear  from  Hamburgh, 
Turkey,  and  fome  other  places  where  he  trafficked. 
iShe  then  propofcd  to  break  the  matter  to  Cleophil, 
who  (he  knew  had  a  confiderable  fum  in  the  bank, 
and  doubted  not  but  he  would  be  glad  of  fuch  an 
opportunity  to  iliew  the  love  and  refpeft  he  had 
for  their  family. 

The  father  cooly  anfwered,  that  fire  might  do 
as  fiie  thought  proper,  and  that  if  the  young  gen- 
tleman obliged  him  in  this  point,  he  mould  take 
all  the  care  he  could  not  to  let  him  be  a  lofcr. 

It  was  not  that  he  imagined  his  daughter  would 
have  any  fuccefs  in  this  negociation  that  he  per- 
mitted her  to  attempt  it,  but  becaufe  he  was  wil- 
ling fhe  mould  put  a  friendship,  the  had  fo  much 
confidence  in,  to  the  teil. 

Having  obtained  his  permiffion,  me  fent  im- 
mediately for  her  lover,  and  in  a  few  words  re- 
lated to  him  the  prefent  occafion  there  was  for  her 
father  to  be  fupplied  with  io  much  ready  cafh,  and 
then  added,  thutas  (he  was  in  poffcflion  of  no  more 
than  half  the  fum  required,  Hie  did  not  doubt  but 
he  would  lay  down  the  other  part. 

As  Ihe  had  no  anxiety  in  making  this  reque/T, 
b^ca  ufe  allured  in  her  own  mind  of  its  being  grant- 
ed, (he  never  thought  of  examining  his  counte- 
nance while  fhe  was  fpc-aking;  which,  if  {he  had, 
it  would  have  been  eafy  for  her  to  perceive  the 
change  that  was  in  it.  All  the  rapture  with  which 
he:  flew  to  receive  her  commands  was  now  no 
more,  and  in  its  place  was  fubftituted  an  air  of 
diflunce,  mixed  with  furprize.  When  fhe  had 
done  fpeaking,  he  told  her,  "  he  was  extremely 
forry  for  her  father's  misfortunes,  but  doubted 
not,  as  he 'was  a  man  very  much  beloved  among 


150  THE  FEMALE  B.  IIL 

the  perfons  he  dealt  with,  they  would  have  pati- 
ence with  him  till  he  could  hear  from  abroad,  and 
would  advife  him  rather  to  make  a  trial  of  their 
good-nature,  than  put  himfelf  to  anyftraits  for  the 
money  to  pay  them  immediately." 

"  How,  Cleophil!  cried  fhe,  quite  thunder- 
"  ftruck  to  hear  him  {peak  in  this  manner,  do  you 
"  call  it  ftraits  to  make  ufe,  for  a  fhort  time,  of 
"  what  his  own  daughter,  and  a  perfon  who  has- 
"  pretended  he  wifhes  nothing  more  than  to  be  his 
"  fon,  have  it  in  their  power  to  fumifh  him  with ! 
«<  — Sure  he  has  a  right  to  demand  all  we  can  do 
"  to  ferve  him!" 

•.  "  No  doubt  he  has,  madam,  anfwered  he,  ftill 
"  more  referved,  and  I  fhould  rejoice  in  any  op- 
"  portunity  to  oblige  him;  but  I  am  under  an, 
41  unfortunate  engagement  never  to  lend  money 
"  on  any  account  whatever:  my  father,  at  his 
"  death,  exacted  an  oath  from  me,  which  there 
**  is  no  poffibilky  of  my  difpenfing  with,  nor  do 
**  I  believe  you  will  defire  it  of  me." 

"  No,  Cleophil,  refumed  (he,,  almoft  burfting 
"  with  inward  rage  and  grief,  you  never  fhall  be 
"  perjured  at  my  requeft: — too  much  already  you 
«'  are  fo  in  the  falfe  vows  you  have  made  of  difin- 
"  terefted  and  inviolable  love." 

He  made  fome  faint  efforts  to  convince  her  of 
the  fincerity  of  his  paffion;  but  (lie  eafily  faw  they 
were  but  words  of  courfe,  and  fuch  as  no  maa 
could  well  avoid  fpeaking  to  a  woman  he  had  e- 
ver  pretended  to  love,  and  therefore  replied  to 
them  accordingly. 

As  he  found  now  there  was  no  poffibility  of  her 
being  miftrefs  of  that  fortune,  which  as  it  proved 
was  the  chief  motive  of  his  address,  he  was  not 


B.  III.  S  PECT  AT  OR.  151 

at  all  concerned  that  his  excufes  had  no  greater 
effect  upon  her ;  and  though  when  (he  told  him  fhe 
•vvas  afhamed  to  remember  that  fhe  ever  had  any 
confidence  in  him,  or  regard  for  him,  he  replied, 
"  that  when  fhe  ceafed  to  think  well  of  him,  he 
*«  fhould  be  the  moft  miferable  of  mankind}"  yet 
his  eyes,  and  the  accent  of  his  voice  fo  little  cor- 
refponded  with  his  words,  that  what  he  faid 
feemed  rather  meant  in  irony  than  reality. 

In  fine,  they  entirely  broke  off: — fhe  obliged 
him  to  take  back  all  the  prefents  he  had  made  her, 
and  the  letters  fhe  had  received  from  him,  and  de- 
fircd  he  would  return  thofe  fhe  had  fent  to  him  as 
foon  as  pofTible.  At  parting,  to  preferve  the  fine 
gentleman,  as  he  thought,  he  affe£ted  an  infinity 
of  grief,  which,  as  fhe  eafily  faw  through,  fhe  but 
the  more  clefpifed  him  for,  and  for  his  lake  almoft 
the  whole  fex. 

Now  will  I  appeal  to  thofe  who  have  been  the 
lead  willing  to  excufe  the  behaviour  of  my  Welch 
Jhero,  if  the  character  of  Leolin  is  notamiablewhen 
compared  with  that  of  Cleophil.  Belliza,  indeed, 
was  lefs  unhappy  than  Elmira,  becaufe  the  mean- 
nefs  of  foul  which  (lie  difcovered  in  her  lover,gave 
an  immediate  cure  to  the  inclination  fhe  had  for 
,  his  perfon;  whereas  the  true  greatnefs  of  Leolin's 
way  of  thinking  preferved  a  lading  tendernefs  in 
•his  miftrefs,  which  made  her  partake  in  all  his  fuf- 
ferings,  and  even  continue  devoted  to  his  memory 
when  himfelf  was  no  more.  But  to  'return  : — 

When  the  father  of  Belliza  thought  his  affairs 
moft  defperate,  and  there  feemed  not  the  lea  ft  pro- 
bability of  his  bring  able  to  retrieve  himfelf,  hea- 
ven, by  an  unexpected  way,  fcnt  him  relief: — A 
brother  of  hi,,  \vho  had  lived  a  long  time  in  the 


152  THE   FEMALE  B.  III. 

"Eaft  Indies,  and  by  his  honeft  induftry  and  fruga- 
lity acquired  a  large  fortune,  died  without  iffue, 
and  left  him  the  fole  heir  of  all  his  wealth.  The 
news  arrived  juft  as  a  ftatute  of  bankruptcy  was 
about  to  be  taken  out  againil  him  ;  which,  accord- 
ing to  the  cuftom  of  the  world,  made  a  great 
change.  He  might  now  command  what  fums  he 
pleafed; — nobody  was  in  hafte  to  have  their  bills 
difcharged; — all,  HkeTimon's  friendsjn  the  play, 
endeavoured  to  glofs  over  the  terrors  of  their  for- 
mer treatment  of  him,  and  nothing  was  omitted  to 
regain  that  good- will  from  him  they  had  but!  too 
juftly  deferved  to  lofe  forever. 

Cleophil,  above  all,  curfed  his  ill  ftars: — what 
would  he  not  now  have  done  to  reinftate  himfelf 
in  Be'lliza's  favour !     Belliza,  now  a  greater  for- 
tune than  ever,  was  more  than  ever  adored  by 
him.     He  wrote; — he  prevailed  on  fcveral  who 
vifited  her  to  fpeak  in  his  behalf; — he  pretended 
to  fall  fick  on  her  account; — ordered  it  to  be  given 
out,  that  he  had  many  times  fince  their  quarrel 
attempted  to  deftroy  himfelf; — tried  every  ftrata- 
gem, — employed  every  artifice, — but  all  alike  in 
vain: — the  contempt  (he  had  for  him  increafed 
by  the  means  he  took  to  leflen  it,  and  by  much 
exceeded  all  the  inclination  fhe  ever  had  for  him, 
while  me  believed  he  merited  it : — me  blefled  the 
misfortunes  which  had  fhewn  him  to  her  in  hio 
proper  colours,  and  made  a  firm  refolution  never 
more  to  fuffcr  herfelf  to  give  credit  to  the  profef- 
fions  of  any  one  man,  till  her  father  fhould  have 
made  a  fufficient  fcrutiny  into  his  character  and 
temper,  to  be  able  to  judge  of  his  finceiity. 

She  found  the  happy  effects  of  the  prudent  re- 
ferve  with  which  (he  now  behaved  to  all  mankind. 


B.  III.  SPEC/TAT  OR.  153 

She  was  in  a  fhort  time  addrefled  by  a  young  gen- 
tleman much  fuperior  in  birth,  fortune,  and  good 
feufe  to  Cleophil,  and  had  as  great  a  (hare  of  real 
affection  for  her  as  that  unworthy  lover  had  pre- 
tended. Her  father  approved  highly  of  him  for  a 
fon,  and  me  could  not  refufe  her  heart  to  fo  ac- 
complifhed  a  perfon,  after  being  told  by  him, 
whofe  judgment  ftie  was  determined  to  rely  up- 
on, that  (lie  could  not  err  in  doing  fo. 

They  have  been  married  fomewhat  more  than 
a  year,  in  which  time  he  has  made  her  mother  of 
a  fine  fon,  who  is  the  only  rival  either  of  them  has 
in  the  tendernefs  of  the  other.  The  old  gentle- 
man has  received  all  the  effects  he  expected  from 
i.broad: — They  all  live  together  in  the  mo  ft  perfect 
harmony,  and  the  fhort  anxiety  of  mind  they  had 
endured  on  the  fcore  of  his  lofles,  ferves  only  to 
give  their  prefent  happinefs  a  higher  relifli. 

The  (lory  of  this  family,  and  many  other  fuch 
like  inftances  which  daily  happen  in  the  world, 
methinks,  fhould  make  whatever  misfortunes  we 
may  labour  under  for  the  prefent  fit  more  eafy  on 
us,  in  the  hope,  that  while  the  play  of  life  conti- 
nues, we  have  yet  a  chance  for  better  fcenes. 

I  have  fomcwhere  read  of  an  antient  philofo- 
pher,  who,  whenever  any  very  ill  accident  bcfel 
him,  made  invitations  to  his  friends,  entertained 
them  in  the  mod  Aearful  manner,  and  appeared 
extremely  happy  in  his  mind: — but,  on  the  con- 
trary, on  the  arrival  of  any  thing  for  which  other 
people  expect  congratulations,  he  (hut  himfelf  up 
in  his  chamber,  fatted,  wept,  and  in  his  whole 
deportment  had  all  the  tokens  of  a  perfon  under 
fome  inconfolable  affliction.  On  beihg  afked  the 
reafon  of  a  behaviour  fo  contradictory  to  that  of 

VOL.  I.  O 


?54  THE    FEMALE  B.  III. 

all  mankind  befides,  he  replied,  <f  Thofe  who 
•!  wonder  to  fee  me  merry  in  advcrfity,  and  fad  in 
"  a  more  profperous  condition,  do  not  confider 
"  what  Fortune  is,  or  do  not  righdy  underftand 
18  the  nature  of  that  fickle  deity.  Is  fhe  not  ever 
<!  fleeting, — ever  changing,  and  generally  from 
«'  one  extreme  to  the  other? — How  then,  when 
**  any  good  befals'  me,  can  I  avoid  being  under 
«  the  moft  terrible  apprehensions  that  an  adequate 
"  evil  will  immediately  enfue? — And  when  any 
*'  mifchief  has  happened  to  me,  have  not  I  rea- 
11  fon  to  rejoice  in  the  expectation  that  the  fame 
"  proportion  of  happinefs  is  at  hand?" 

The  humour  of  this  philofopher  was  very  ex- 
traordinary indeed,  and  one  may  juftly  fay,  he 
drained  the  point  beyond  what  it  will  well  bear; 
yet,  upon  the  whole,  there  is  fomewhat  of  reafon 
in  it,  according  to  Mr  Dryden: 

"  Good  unexpected,  evil  unforefeen, 

«'  Appear  by  turns,  as  fortune  fhifts  the  fcene." 

But  not  to  have  recourfe  to  caprice  or  fiction 
to  enable  us  to  fupport  calamities  which  heaven 
fometimes  inflicts  on  us,  we  ought  to  confider, 
that  by  well  bearing  them,  we  have  the  better 
claim  to  hope  an  alternative  in  our  favour.  A 
defponding  temper  is,  of  all  others,  the  Icaft  plea- 
fing  both  to  God  and  man;  it  fhews  a  diffidence 
in  the  one,  and  to  the  other  a  want  of  that  com- 
plaifance  which  is  due  from  us  to  fociety. 

Can  any  thing,  if  we  confider  rightly,  be  more 
rude  than  to  difturb  the  chearfulnefs  of  whatever 
converfation  we  come  into,  with  a  melancholy 
detail  of  our  private  misfortunes! — They  are  our 
c\vn,  and  ours  alone,  and  a  man  ought  no  more 


ft.  III.  SPECTATOR.  .155 

to  \vli"h  to  Infect  others  with  his  grief,  than  with. 
his  difeafes. 

Thofe  who  imagine  they  find  cafe-  in  comphin- 
'ing,  are  of  a  very  mean  and  felfiih  clifpofuion.  A 
great  fpirit  is  almoft  as  much  afhamed  of  pity  as 
of  contempt;  and  a  generous  one  will  nerer  en- 
dure to  excite  that  forrow  from  which  pity  natu- 
rally flows. 

Indeed,  where  prpximity  of  blood,  or  the  more 
binding  ties  of  friendfhip,  afford  a  reafonable  ex- 
pectation of  relief  in  any  exigence  of  fortune,  it 
would  be  a  foolifh  pride  to  with-hold  the  know- 
ledge of  it,  and  what  they  may  juftly  fufpetft  was 
owing  to  a  want  of  that  confidence  which  is  the 
only  cement  of  a  true  affection,  and  alfo  betray? 
fcmewhat  of  a  defpondency,  which  it  is  much, 
better  to  try  every  thing,  depend  on  every  thing, 
and  even  cheat  ou.fclves  into  a  belief  of  impofii- 
bilities,  rather  than  give  way  to» 

Foreigners  will  have  it,  that  there  is  fomewhat. 
in  our  climate  which  renders  this  unhappy  pro- 
penfity  more  natural  to  us  than  to  any  other  na- 
tion; and  I  believe  the  frequent  changes  in  the 
weather,  and  a  certain  heavinefs  in  the  air  at  foms 
feafons  of  the  year,  m?.y  indeed  contribute  greatly 
to  it;  but  I  fear  there  may  alfo  be  other  caufes 
affigncd,  \vhich  it  lies  folely  in  ourfelvcs  to  re- 
move, and  which,  if  we  do  not  fpeedily  do,  the- 
reflections  made  upon  us  abroad  will  carry  a  fr- 
verer  fting  than  we  are  yet  aware  of. 

Our  climate,  I  fuppofe,  is  the  fame  it  ever  \va^ ; 

our  hcmifphere  is  no  more  clouded  with  vapours; 

our   winds  no    more   variable    than   fome  ages 

£a(l;  yet  I  challenge  any  of  the  foreign  ones  to 

O    2 


156  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

produce  half  the  number  of  fad  examples  of  de- 
ipondency  than  thefe  latter  ones  have  done. 

Let  us  not  therefore  lay  the  whole  blame  of 
thofe  unhappy  actions  we  daily  hear  of,  on  ele- 
mentary caufes,  or  depreciate  a  climate  which  has, 
and  I  hope  again  may  be  productive  of  thebrighteft 
geniufes,  and  braveft  fpirits  that  ever  any  country 
had  to  boaft  of.  It  is  not  the  ill  afpect  of  the  ftars,. 
nor  the  unkindly  influence  of  the  rnoon,has  wrought 
this  effect  on  us,  but  our  fall ingofr"  from  the  virtues 
of  our  anceftors: — the  change  is  in  ourfelves; — 
and  while  all  feem  eager  to  undo,  or  be  undone, 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  horrors  of 
eonfcious  guilt  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  contempt 
1»nd  miferies  of  poverty  on  the  other,  fhould  hurry 
many  of  us  to  deeds  of  defperation. 

The  fatal  fource  of  all  the  calamities  we  labour- 
wnder,  is  an  indulgence  of  thofe  deflruc"live  paf- 
fions,  which  in  their  beginning  might  be  eafily 
rooted  out;  but  ones  fuffered  to  get  head,  not  all 
our  refolution  will  have  power  to  fubdue.  Ava- 
rice, ambition,  luxury,  and  pride,  are  the  very 
tyrants  of  the  mind:  they  act  without  council, 
are  above  all  reflraint,  and  having  once  depofed 
Reafon  from  her  throne,  rendej  h«r  even  fubfer- 
yient  to  their  bafeft  aims. 

How  then  can  thofe  who  have  the  care  of  youth 
anf\ver  to  themfelves  the  neglect  of  fo  material  a 
point,  as  not  inculcating  early  into  them  an  abhor- 
rence of  thefe  deftruclive  vices!  This  is  a  duty 
\vhich  principally  belongs  to  parents;  but  when 
other,  no  lefs  indifpenfible,  a  vocations  deny  them 
leifure  for  difcharging  it;-»— ficknefs,  or  old  age, 
renders  th«m  unable,  or  indolence  unwilling,  to 


B.  IIL  SPECTATOR.  157 

-do  it;  the  leaft  they  can  do,  is  to  chufe  perfous. 
properly  qualified  for  this  mighty  truft. 

Few  people  of  condition,  indeed,  but  take  care 
that  thole  they  fet  over  their  children  fhall  be  fucb 
•as  are  capable  of  inftr  lifting  them  in  all  the  rao- 
diili  accomplishments  of  life;  Jjut  however  necef- 
fary  that  may  be  towards  procuring  them  a  charac- 
ter of  good  breeding,  it  ought  not  to  come  into 
competition  with  that  of  good  reputation.  Go- 
vernors and  governeilcs,  therefore,  fhould  not  fo 
much  be  cholen  lor  their  ficill  in  language, — fen* 
oing, — dancing,  playing  on  mufic,  or  having  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  beau-monde,  as  for  their 
fobriety,  morality,  and  good  conduct.  Their  ex- 
ample ought- to  be  fuch  as  fhould  enforce  their 
precepts,  arid  by  mewing  the  beauty  of  a  regular 
life  in  themfelves,  make  their  pupils  fall  in  love- 
with  it,  and  endeavour  an  imitation. 

It  were  almoft  as  well,  if  not  entirely  fo,  to  leave 
a  young  gentleman  to  his  own -management,  as  to 
put  him  under  the  care  of  one,  who,  to  endear 
himfelf  to  him,  fhaii  flatter  his  vices,  becaufe  it  is 
giving  him  a  fancb'on,  as  it  were,  for. -.ill  the  irre- 
gularities he  may  take  it  in  his  head  to  commit.-— 
Too  many  inftances  of  this  may  be  found  among: 
thofe  who  are  at  an  infinite  expence  in  travelling.-, 
for  improvement,  yet  bring  home  little  bcfides  tha 
\vorft  part  of  the  nations  where  they  have  been. 

Would  people  cf  fafhion  but  give  themfelvo 
time  to  reflect  how  great  an  afcendant  the  very 
name  of  Governor  has  over  their  children,  they 
would  certainly  be  more  cautious  on  whom  they, 
conferred  it.  Methinks  the  fto-y  of  the  young  riclr 
M'crcator,  yet  recent  in  every  one's  memory, 
Jhould  be  a  warning  not  only  to  the  friends,  but 
O  5 


153  THE  FEMALE  B.  III. 

even  to  every  gentleman  himfelf  who  is  going  to 
travel,  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  character 
and  principles  of  him  who  is  to  attend  him  in  the 
above-mentioned  quality. 

He  was  the  only  fon  of  a  wealthy  foreign  mer- 
chant, who  lofmg  both  his  parents  while  he  was 
yet  an  infant,  was  left  to  the  guardianmip  of  two 
perfons,  of  whofe  integrity  his  father  had  many 
proofs.  Nor  had  the  young  Mercator  any  reafon 
to  complain  of  their  abufing  the  truft  repofed  in 
them. 

Theyufed  him  with  the  fame  tendernefs  they 
could  have  done  had  he  been  their  only  fon; — 
tl^ey  put  him  to  the  beft  fchools; — they  faw  that 
J-.c  matters  did  their  duty  by  him; — and  when  he 
had  finifhed  all  that  a  home  education  could  be- 
llow, they  thought  fit  to  fend  him,  for  his  greater 
improvement,  to  make  the  tour  of  Europe. 

The  only  care  they  now  had  upon  their  hands,, 
•was  to  find  a  perfon  whofe  abilities  for  a  governor 
were  well  attefted.  It  is  certain  they  fpared  no 
pains  for  that  purpofe,  and  were  at  laft  recom- 
mended to  one  who  had  all  the  appearance  of  a  fo- 
ber  gentleman,  had  travelled  before  in  the  capaci- 
ty, and  was  well  acquainted  both  with  the  langua- 
ges and  cufloms  of  thofe  places  which  they  in- 
lended  their  young  charge  fhould  fee. 

It  gave  them  a  very  great  fatisfa£tion  to  ima- 
gine they  had  found  one  who  fo  well  anfwered 
their  deOres;  but  Mercator  much  more,  to  be 
under  the  direction  of  a  perfon,  who,  he  was  well 
convinced,  would  net  be  fevere  on  his  pleafures. 
This  young  gentleman  was  of  an  amorous  confti- 
tution,  and  contract-dan  intimacy  with  a  woman, 
\vho,  tho'  far  from  being  handfome  in  her  perfon? 


B.  III.  SPECTATOR.  j59 

and  of  a  chara&er  the  moft  infamous  that  could 
be,  he  was  neverthelefs  fond  of  to  a  very  great 
degree.  He  had  happened  to  be  in  company  with 
the  perfon  who  was  afterwards  made  choice  of  for 
his  governor,  at  the  lodgings  of  this  proftitute, 
and  fome  others  of  the  fame  profefllon;  and  when 
hefawhim  with  his  guardians,  though  he  had  now 
affumed  a  very  different  air,  well  remembered  he 
was  the  fame  with  whom  he  had  pafled  more  than 
one  night  in  rioting  and  debauchery. 

In  fine,  they  foon  came  to  a  perfect  underftand- 
rng  of  each  other;  and  when  the  time  arrived  for 
their  departure,  the  complaifant  governor  was  far 
from  oppofinghis  pupil's  taking  this  fille-de-joye 
with  him. 

Paris  was  the  firft  place  at  which  they  flayed 
any  time;  and  our  young  traveller  was  fo  taken 
up  with  the  gaieties  he  found  there,  that  he  was  in 
no  hafte  to  quit  it,  which  his  governor  perceiving, 
thought  fit  to  humour  him  in;  and  accordingly 
they  took  a  fine  hotel,  lived  in  the  moft  volup- 
tuous manner,  and  Marian,  for  fol  {hall  call  the 
partner  of  the  loofer  pleafures  of  the  unhappy 
Mercator,  fliared  with  them  in  all  the  wild  frolics 
they  were  continually  inventing  for  the  paffing 
away  thofe  hours,  which  the  careful  guardians  at 
home  flattered  themfelves  were  employed  in  a  far 
different  way. 

After  having  wafted  near  a  year  in  this  man- 
ner, JMercator  was  fuddenly  taken  fick;  whether 
the  difeafe  he  laboured  under  was  brought  on  him 
by  his  excefles,  or  by  any  other  more  fecret  caufe, 
I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  determine,  nor  do  I 
hear  of  any  one  that  can  be  more  pofitive;  but 


i6o  THE   FEMALE  B.  lift 

this  is  certain,  that  his  diforder  lay  greatly  in  his 
head,  and  he  was  often  very  delirious. 

It  is  to  be  fuppofed,  that  in  one  of  thefe  fits  it 
was  that  the  governor  wrought  on  him  to  fend  for 
a  prieft  and  a  notary-public  at  the  fame  time ;  tha 
one  married  him  to  Marian,  and  the  other  drew 
up  a  teftament,  in  which  he  bequeathed  that  wo- 
man, by  the  name  and  title  of  his  wifer  the  fum 
of  6o,oool.  and  40,000!.  which  was  the 
remainder  of  his  fortune,  to  his  dear  fricu  I 
governor,  as  a  recompence  for  the  great  care  he 
had  taken  both  of  his  foul  and  body, 

Thefe  were  the  words  of  his  will,  which  being 
Cgned,  fealed,.and  in  all  points  duly  executed,  in 
the  prefence  of  feveral  witnefles,  the  teftator,  ?s 
having  no  more  to  do  with  life,  or  thofe  he  was 
among  having  no  more  for  him  to  do,  expired,  as 
I  have  been  told,  in  the  mo  ft  intolerable  agonies. 

Marian,  in  thofe  altered  circumftances,  fooa 
after  returned  to  England  with  him  who  (hared 
in  poor  Mercator's  fortune,  and  whom  (he  mar- 
ried the  moment  the  decency  me  now  affected  in 
her  new  grandeur  would  permit. 

The  guardians  and  other  friends  of  the  deceaf- 
ed  gentleman,  made  all  imaginable  enquiry  into 
this  bufmefs,  but  could  receive  only  dark  hints, 
and  fuch  conjectures  as  were  not  fufficient  to  com- 
mence a  procefs  upon :  but  with  what  vexation 
they  fee  this  wicked  pair  roll  in  their  coach 
and  fix,  and  triumph  in  their  guilt,  any  one  may 
imagine. 

It  will  not  be  expected  Ifhould  comment  en 
this  aftion,  becaufe  I  have  already  faid  the  truth 
of  the  particulars  is  yet  hid  in  darknefs :  what  tirns 
may  produce,  I  know  not ;  but  at  prefent  every 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  161 

one  is  at  liberty  to  judge  as  they  think  mod  agree- 
able to  the  nature  of  the  thing.  All  I  propofe  by 
relating  it,  is  to  remind  thofe  who  have  any  young 
gentlemen  to  fend  abroad,  that  they  cannot  be  too 
fcrutinous  into  the  principles  &£  the  perfons  en-' 
truited  with  the  direction  of  them. 


B    O    O    K    IV. 

HOW  glorious  a  privilege  has  man  above  all 
other  fublunary  beings!  who,  though  in- 
digent, unpitied,  forfaken  by  the  world,  and 
even  chained  in  a  dungeon,  can,  by  the  aid  of 
divine  contemplation,  enjoy  all  the  charms  of 
pomp,  refpeft,  and  liberty! — tranfport  himfelf 
in  idea,  to  whatever  place  he  willies,  and  grafp  in 
theory  imagined  empires! 

Unaccountable  is  it,  therefore,  that  fo  many 
people  find  an  irkfomenefs  in  being  alone,  tho* 
for  never  fo  fmall  a  fpace  of  time! — Guilt,  in- 
'decd,  creates  perturbations,  which  may  well 
make  retirement  horrible,  and  drive  the  felf-tor- 
mcnted  wretch  into  any  company,  to  avoid  the 
agonies  of  rcmurfc;  but  I  fpeak  not  of  thofe  who 
are  afraid  to  refleft,  but  of  thofe  who  feem  to  me 
iiot  to  have  the  power  to  do  it. 

There  are  feveral  of  my  acquaintance  of  both 
fexes,  who  lead  lives  perfectly  inoffenfive,  and 
when  in  company  appear  to  have  a  fund  of  viva- 
city, capable  of  enlivening  all  the  converfation 
tlit-y  come  into;  yet,  if  you  happen  to  meet  them 


162  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

after  half  an  hour's  folitude,  are  for  fome  minutes 
the  moft  heavy  lumpifh  creatures  upon  earth. 
Afk  them  if  they  are  indifpofcd?  they  will  drawl 
out,  "  No,  they  are  well  enough."  If  any  misfor- 
tune has  befallen  them?  ftill  they  anfwer,  "  No," 
in  the  fame  ftupid  tone  as  before,  and  look,  like 
things  inanimate,  till  fomething  is  faid  or  done  to 
reinfpire  them.  One  would  imagine  they  were 
but  half  awake  from  a  deep  fleep;  and  indeed  their 
minds  during  this  lethargy,  may  be  faid  to  hare 
been  in  a  more  ina&ive  ftate  than  even  that  of 
fleep,  for  they  have  not  fo  much  as  dreamed:  but 
I  think  they  may  juftly  enough  be  compared  to 
clock  work,  -which  has  power  to  do  nothing  of 
itfelf  till  wound  up  by  another. 

Whatever  opinion  the  world  may  have  of  the 
wit  of  perfons  of  this  cafl,  I  cannot  help  think- 
ing there  is  a  vacuum  in  the  mind; — that  they 
have  no  ideas  of  their  own; — and  only  thro'  cu- 
ftom,  and  a  genteel  education,  are  enabled  to  talk 
agreeably  on  thofe  cf  other  people.  A  real  fine 
genius  can  never  want  matter  to  entertain  itfelf: 
and  tho'  on  the  top  of  a  mountain,  without  focietyj. 
and  without  books,  or  any  exterior  means  of  em- 
ployment, will  always  find  that  within  which  will 
keepit  from  being  idle: — memory  and  recolle&ion 
will  bring  the  tranfactions  of  pail  times  to  view: 
obfervaiion  and  difcernment  point  out  the  prefent 
with  their  caufes; — and  fancy,  tempered  with 
judgment,  anticipate  the  future.  This  power  of 
contemplation  and  reflection  it  is  that  chiefly  dif- 
tinguifhes  the  human  from  the  brute  creation,  and 
proves  that  we  have  fouls  which  a;e  in  reality 
fparks  of  that  Divine,  Omnifcient,  Omniprefent 
Being,  whence  we  all  boaft  to  be  derived. 


B,  IV.  SPECTATOR.  163 

The  plcafurcs  which  an  agreeable  foclety  be- 
ftows,  are  indeed  the  moft  elegant  we  can  taftej 
but  even  that  company  we  like  beft  would  grow 
infipid  and  tircfome,  were  we  to  be  for  ever  in  it; 
and  lo  a  perfon  who  knows  how  to  think  juftly,  it 
would  certainly  be  as  great  a  mortification  never 
to  be  alone,  as  to  be  always  fo. 

Converfation,  in  effect,  but  furnifhes  matter 
for  contemplation; — it  exhilarates  the  mind,  and 
fits  it  for  reflection  afterwards.  Every  new  thing 
we  hear  in  company  raifes  in  us  new  ideas  in  the 
clofet  or  on  the  pillow;  and  as  there  are  few  peo- 
ple but  one  may  gather  fomething  from,  either  to 
divert  or  improve,  a  good  underflanding  will,  like 
the  induftrious  bee,  fuck  out  the  various  fweets, 
and  digeft  them  in  retirement.  But  thofe  who  are 
perpetually  hurrying  from onecompany  toanother\ 
and  never  fuffer  themfelves  to  be  alone  but  when 
*veary  Nature  fummons  them  to  repofe,  will  be 
little  ammended,  tho'  the  maxims  of  a  Seneca  were 
to  be  delivered  to  them  in  all  the  enchanting  elo- 
quence of  a  Tully. 

But  not  to  be  more  improved,  is  not  the  word 
mifchief  that  attends  an  immoderate  averfion  to 
folitude.  People  of  this  humour,  rather  than  be 
alone,  fly  into  all  company  indifcriminately,  and 
fometimes  fall  into  fuch  as  they  have  reafon  to 
repent  their  whole  lives  of  having  ever  feen;  for 
tho'  they  may  not  poffibly  reap  any  advantage  from 
thegood,  their  reputations  mufl  certainly, and  per- 
haps  their  morals  and  fortune  too,  will  fuffer  very 
much  from  the  bad;  and  where  we  do  not  give 
curfelves  leifure  to  chufe,  it  is  rarely  we  happen  or 
t'(C  former,  as  they  are  infinitely  the  fmallor  num» 


1 64  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

her,  and  alfo  lefs  eafy  of  accefs  to  thofe  whofe 
characters  they  are  unacquainted  with. 

Many  young  perfons  of  both  fexes  owe  their 
ruin  to  this  one  unfortunate  propenfity  of  loving 
to  be  always  in  company;  and  it  is  the  more  dan- 
gerous, as  nobody  takes  any  pains  to  conquer  it  in 
themfelves,  but  on  the  contrary,  are  apt  to  miftake 
it  for  a  laudable  inclination,  and  look  on  thofe  who 
preach  up  the  happinefs  of  a  more  retired  life,  as 
phlegmatic  and  vapoiuifh.  I  doubt  not  butl  fhall 
pafs  for  fuch  in  the  opinion  of  many  of  my  reader?, 
who  are  too  volatile  to  confider  that  it  is  not  a  ful- 
len,  cynical,  total,  avoiding  of  fociety  that  I  recom- 
mend, but  a  proper  love  of  folitude  at  fome  times, 
to  enable  us  to  relifh  with  more  pleafure,as  well  as 
to  be  effentially  the  better  for  converfation  at 
others,  and  alfo  to  feleft  fuch  for  our  companions 
as  may  be  likely  to  anfwerboth  thefe  ends. 

Nor  is  it  only  where  there  is  a  difference  of 
fex  that  I  think  youth  ought  to  be  upon  its  guard; 
the  dangers  in  that  cafe  are  too  univerfally  allowed 
to  ftand  in  need  of  any  remonftrances,  and  yet 
perhaps  are  not  greater  than  others  which  both 
may  happen  to  fall  in  among  thofe  of  their  own. 
Are  not  aJmoft  all  the  extravagances,  parents  with 
fo  much  grief  behold  their  children  guilty  of,  ow- 
ing to  ill-chofen  company? — Great  is  the  privi- 
lege of  example,  and  fome  are  fo  weak  as  to  think 
they  muft  do  as  they  fee  others  do.  The  fear  of 
being  laughed  at  has  made  many  a  young  gentle- 
man run  into  vices  to  which  his  inclination  was  at 
firft  averfe;  but,  alas!  by  habitude  become  more 
pleafmg  to  him,  he  has  in  his  turn  played  the 
tempter's  part,  and  made  it  his  glory  to  feduce 
others  as  himfelf  had  been  feduced.  It  is  this  love 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  16; 

of  company,  more  than  the  diverfions  mentioned 
in  the  bills,  that  make  our  ladies  run  galloping  in 
troops  every  evening  to  mafquerades,  balls,  and 
aflemblies  in  winter,  and  in  the  fummer  to  Vaux- 
hall,  Ranelagh,  Cuper's  Garden,  Mary-le-bon, 
Sadler's  Wells,  both  old  and  new,  Goodman's 
Fields,  and  twenty  other  fuch  like  places,  which 
in  this  age  of  luxury  fenre  as  decoys  to  draw  the 
thoughtlefs  and  upwary  together,  and,  as  it  were, 
prepare  the  way  for  other  more  vinous  excefles : 
for  there  are,  and  of  condition  too,  not  a  few  (as  I 
am  informed  by  the  Gnomes  who  prefide  over  mid- 
night revels)  that,  going  with  no  other  intention, 
than  to  partake  what  feems  an  innocent  recreation, 
are  prevailed  upon  by  the  love  of  company,  either 
to  remain  in  thefe  houfes,or  adjourn  to  fome  other 
place  of  entertainment,  till  the  fweet  harbinger  of 
day,  Aurora,  awakes, and  blufhes  to  behold  the  or- 
der of  nature  thus  perverted;  nor  then  perhaps 
would  feparate,  did  not  wearied  limbs,  heavy  lan- 
guid eyes,  and  dirty  linen,  remind  them  of  re- 
pairing to  their  refpe&ive  habitations,  where  hav- 
ing lain  awhile,  they  rife,  drefs,  and  go  again  in 
queft  of  new  company,  and  new  amufements. 

Heaven  forbid,  and  I  am  far  from  fuggefting, 
that  to  run  fuch  lengths  as  thefe  mould  be  com- 
mon to  all  who  hate  retirement  and  reflection: 
fortune  is  fometimes  kinder  than  our  endeavours 
merit,  and  by  not  throwing  any  temptations  in  our 
ri  our  carelefsncfs  of  no  worfe  confe-- 
qucnce  than  bcingdepdved  of  thofe  folidp,ieafures 
which  flow  from  a  confcioufnefs  of  having  behaved 
according  to  the  dictates  of  honotti  and  reafon. 

But  fuppoie  we  make  fome  allowances  to  a  few 
of  the  very  young  and  gay,efpecully  the  beauiuiiJ, 

VOL.  I.  P 


i66  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

and  high-born,  who,  by  a  miftaken  fondnefs  in 
their  parents,  from  the  moment  they  were  capable 
of  underftanding  what  was  faid  to  them,  heard 
nothing  but  flattery,  and  are  made  to  believe  they 
came  into  the  world  for  no  other  purpofe  than  to 
be  adored  and  indulged,  what  can  we  fay  for  thofe 
•who  had  a  different  education,  and  are  of  riper 
years? — How  little  excufe  is  there  for  a  gadding 
matron,  or  for  a  woman  who  ought  to  have  the 
care  of  a  houfe  and  family  at  heart! — How  odd 
a  figure  does  the  mother  of  five  or  fix  children 
make  at  one  of  thefe  nocturnal  rambles;  and  how 
ridiculous  is  it  for  a  perfon  in  any  trade  or  avoca- 
tion to  be,  or  affect  to  be,  above  the  thought  of  all 
oeconomy,and  make  one  in  every  party  of  pleafure 
that  prefents  itfelf  ?  Yet  fuch  as  thefe  are  no  pro- 
iligies.  All  kinds  of  regulation  and  management 
require  fome  fmall  reflection  and  recefs  from  com- 
pany, and  thefe  are  two  things  fo  terrible  to  fome 
people,  that  they  will  rather  fuffer  every  thing  to 
be  ruined,  than  endure  the  fatigue  of  thought. 

A  young  widow  of  my  acquaintance,  rich,  beau- 
tiful, and  gay,  had  fcarce  fullied  the  blacknefs  of 
her  weeds,  before  fhe  ventured  to  take  for  a  fe- 
cond  hufband  a  man,  who,  had  fhe  once  confider- 
cd  on  what  fhe  was  about  to  do,  fhe  would  have 
found  had  no  one  quality  that  could  promife  her 
any  felicity  with  him.  He  had  not  been  married 
a  month  before  he  loaded  her  with  the  moft  grofs 
nbufe,  turned  her  innocent  babes  out  of  doors, 
and  affronted  all  her  friends  who  came  to  reafon 
•with  him  on  the  injuftice  and  cruelty  of  his  beha- 
viour, i  he  unadviied  ftep  fhe  had  taken,  indeed, 
bat  little  merited  compaffion  for  the  event;  but 
the  fweetnefs  of  difpofition  with  which  fhe  had 


B.IV.  SPECTATOR.  167 

always  treated  all  who  knew  her,  rendered  it  im- 
poflible  not  to  have  a  fellow-feeling  of  the  cala- 
mities fhe  laboured  under.  A  particular  friend  of 
her's,  however,  took  one  day  the  liberty  of  aflcing 
how  ihe  could  throw  away  herfelf  on  a  perfon  fo 
every  way  undeferving  of  her?  To  which  fhe 
made  this  fhort,  but  fincere  reply: — "  Ah!  fall 
u  fhe,  it  is  a  fad  thing  to  live  alone."  To  this 
the  other  might  have  returned,  that  fhe  could  not 
be  faid  to  be  alone,  who  had  a  mother  to  advife, 
and  three  fweet  children  to  divert  her  moft  melan- 
choly hours;  but  this  would  have  been  only  add- 
ing to  her  affliction,  and  her  condition,  being 
now  irremediable,  required  eonfolation. 

Perhaps  the  reading  this  fhort  detail  of  ihe  mif- 
fortune  her  inadvertency  had  brought  upon  her, 
may  give  her  fome  palpitations  which  1  fiiouUl 
be  forry  to  occafion;  but  as  fhe  is  a  much  lament- 
ed inftance  of  the  danger  to  which  any  one  may 
be  fubjected  through  want  of  a  due  reflection,  I 
could  not  forbear  mentioning  it  as  a  warning  to 
others. 

"When  this  immoderate  defire  of  company  re- 
mains in  perfons  of  an  advanced  age,  tho'  it  threa- 
tens lefs  mifchief,  it  is  more  ridiculous  than  in 
the  younger  fort.  I  know  a  lady,  who,  by  her  own 
confeffion,  is  no  lefs  than  fixty-five,  yet  in  all  that 
long  length  of  time  has  treafured  up  nothing  in 
her  mind  wherewith  fhe  can  entertain  herfelf  two 
minutes.  She  has  been  a  widow  for  feveral  year?, 
has  a  jointure  fufficient  to  fupport  a  handforr.c 
equipage,  is  without  children,  or  any  other  in- 
cumbrance,  and  might  live  as  much  refpedted  by 
'  the  world  as  (he  is  really  contemned,  could  fhe 
prevail  on  herfelf  to  reflect  what  fort  of  behaviour 
P  * 


163  THE   FEMALE  B.  IV. 

would  be  mod  becoming  in  a  woman  of  her  age 
and  circumftances. 

But  inftead  of  living  in  a  regular  decent  man- 
ner, fire  roams  from-  place  to  place,  hires  lodgings 
at  three  or  four  different  houfes  at  the  fame  time, 
lies  one  night  at  St  James's,  another  at  Covent- 
-Garden,  a  third  perhaps  at  Weftminfter,  and  a 
fourth  in  the  city: — nor  does  flie  look,on  this  as 
a fujHcicnt  variety : — fhe  has  at  this  moment  apart- 
ments at  Richmond, — Hammerfmith,  Kenfing- 
ton,  and  Chelfea,  each  of  which  fhe  vifits  two  or 
three  times-at  lead  every  month;  fo  that  her  time 
is  paffed  in  a  continual  whirl  from  one  home  to 
another,  if  any  can  be  juftly  called  fo:  but  it  feems 
as  if  fhe  had  an  averfion  to  the  very  name;  for  the 
room  fiie  pays  for,  Hie  dwells  in  the  lead,  feldom 
eats  in  any  of  them,  and  forces  herfelf  as  it  were 
intothofe  of  other  people,  where  flie  fends  in  a 
ftock  of  provifion  fufficient  for  the  whole  family^ 
in  order  to  purchafe  for  herfelf  a  welcome.  But 
as  people  ofany  figure  in  the  world  would  not  ac- 
cept of  fuch  favours,  and  thofe  of  good  fenfe  not 
endure  to  be  deprived  of  the  privilege  of  thinking 
their  own  thoughts,  and  entertaining  their  own 
friends,  it  can  be  only  the  extremely  neceffitous, 
or  thofe  who  have  as  little  on  their  heads  as  her- 
felf, that  will  fubmit  to  have  their  lodgings  and 
time  taken  up  in  this  manner. 

Poor  woman!  How  does  flie  lavifii  away  a 
handfome  income ! — how  forefeit  all  pretenfions  to 
good  underftartding  and  good  breeding,  merely  fqr 
the  fake  of  being  permitted  to  talk  as  much  as  fhe 
pleafes  without  contradiction,  and  being  never 
alone  but  when  afleep ! — I  have  been  told  by  thofe 
who  #re  to  be  depended  upon,  that  the  moment  fh« 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  i6>> 

is  out  of  bed,  fhe  runs  with  her  flays  and  petticoats 
into  the  next  neighbour's  chamber,  not  being  abl<5 
to  Jive  without  company  even  till  (lie  is  drefled. 

There  are  people  fo  uncharitable,  as  to- believe 
fome  latent  crime  hangs  heavy  on  the  minds  of 
all  thofe  who  take  fo  much  pains  to  avoid  being 
alone;  but  I  am  far  from  b?ing  of  that  number; 
it  is  my  opinion,  that  neither  this  old  rattle  I 
have  mentioned,,  nor  many  others  who  a£k  in  the 
fame  manner,  ever  did  a  real  hurt  to  any  one. 
Thofc  who  are  incapable  of  thinking,. are  certain- 
ly incapable  of  any  premeditated  mifchief;  and, 
as  I  have  already  faid,  feem  to  me  a  fet  of  infen- 
Cbles,  who  never  a£l  of  themfelves,  but  are  acled 
upon  by  others. 

ore  one  pafles  fo  cruel  a  cenfure,  one  {hould 
certainly  examine,  I  mean'  not  the  lives  and  cha- 
racters, for  they  may  deceive  us,  but  at  what  point 
of  time  this  averfion  to  folitude  commenced: — 
if  from  childhood,  and  fo  continued  even  to  the 
extremefl  old  age,  it  can  proceed  only  from  a 
weakncfs  in  the  mind,  and  is  defer  ving  our  com- 
paffion  j  but  if  from  taking  that  fatisfadion  in  con- 
templation and  retirement,  which  every  reafonable 
foul  finds  in  it,  one  fees  a  perfon  has  turned  to  the 
reverfe, — ftart,  even  while  in  company, at  the  bare 
mention  of  quitting  it,  and  flies  folitude  as  an, 
houfe  on  fire,  one  may  very  well  fufped  fomq  fe- 
cret  crime  has  wrought  fo  great  a  tranfition,  and 
that  any  converfation,  though  the  moft  infipid  and 
worthlefs,  feems  preferable  to  that  which  the  guil- 
ty bread  can  furnifh  to  itfelf. 

I  am  well  aware,  that  there  is  another  motive* 
befiiles  either  a  want  of  power  to  think,  or  a  con- 
fcioufnefs  of  having  done  what  renders  thought  a 


iyo  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

pain,  that  induces  many  people  to  avoid  being 
alone  as  much  as  poflible;  and  that  is,  when  the 
mind  is  opprefied  with  any  very  fevere  affli&ion. 
To  be  able  to  reflect  on  our  misfortunes,  goes  a 
great  way  towards  bearing  them  with  that  forti- 
tude which  is  becoming  the  dignity  of  human  na- 
ture; but  all  have  not  courage  to  do  it,  and  thofe 
who  have,  would  fink  beneath  the  weight  of  grief, 
Tvere  they  to  indulge  the  memory  of  what  occa- 
fioned  it.  • 

This  I  am  fenfible  is  the  cafe  of  many  who  pafs 
for  perfons  of  good  underftanding,  and  the  ex- 
cufe  is  allowed  by  the  generality  of  the  world  as 
a  rcafonable  one;  but  yet  I  muft  beg  their  pardon,, 
\vben  1  fay,  that  whatfoever  fhare  of  fine  fenfe 
they  may  fliew  in  other  things,  they  betray  a  very 
great  deficiency  ui  this.  The  relaxation  which 
'  noife  nnd  hurry  may  afford,  is  but  fhortUived,  and 
are  fo  far  from  removing  that  burden  which  the 
fpirit  labours  under,  that  they  afterwards  make  it 
i'cJt  with  double  weight. 

Some  are  fo  madly  ftupid,  as  to  attempt  to  lofe 
the  thoughts  of  one  evil,  by  running  into  others  of 

,ps  worfe  confequence.  I  mean  that  of  drink- 
ing, nnd  fome  ether  excefies,  equally  pernicious 
both  to  fortune  and  conftitution;  but  how  falfe  a 
;  this  gives,  I  need  only  appeal  to  thofe  who 

made  the  trial. 

Would  fuch  people  be  prevailed  upon  to  make 
a  little  reflection  before  it  is"  too  late,  they  would 
certainly  have  recourfe  to  more  folid  confolations. 
— Would  not  the  works  of  fome  of  our  moft  ce- 

ed  poets  divert  a   melancholy  hour  much 
more  than  al!  the  rhodomontades  of  a  v;-.^ue  idle 

.  fation !     Would  not  the  precepts  of  philo- 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  i7r 

fophy,  of  which  fo  many  excellent  trcatifcs  have 
been  wrote,  give  them  more  true  courage  than  all 
the  bottle  can  infpire! — And  above  all,  would  not 
the  duties  of  an  entire  fubmiflion  and  refignation 
toihe  Almighty  Difpofer  of  all  things,  fo  oftenand 
fo  ftrenuoufly  recommended,  be  infinitely  more 
efficacious  to  quiet  all  perturbations  of  the  mind, 
than  any  vain  amufements  of  what  kind  foever  1 

It  is  not  that  I  would  perfuade  anyone  to  a  con- 
tinual poring  over  books 5  too  much  reading,  tho* 
of  the  beft  authors,  is  apt  to  dull  the  fpirits,  and 
deftroy  that  attention  which  alone  can  render  this 
employment  profitable.  A  few  good  maxims,  well 
digelted  by  reflection,  dwell  upon  the  memory, 
arid  are  not  only  a  remedy  for  prefent  ills,  but  al- 
fo  a  kind  of  antidote  agamft  any  future  ones  that 
fate  may  have  in  flore.. 

But  it  may  be  faid,  that  this  advice  can  only  be 
complied  with  by  perfons^f  condition;  and  as  for 
the  meaner  part,  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  they 
have  either -time  or  capacities  to  enable  them  to 
fquare  themfeives  by  fuch  rules: — this  indeed 
mult  be  allowed ;  but  then  it  muft  alfo  be  allowed, 
that  they  can  the  lead  afford  to  wafte  what  time 
they  have  in  fuch  li  uitlefs  attempts  as  they  gene- 
rally make  ufe  of  for  forgetting  their  cares;  and 
as  to  their  capacities,  we  arc  to  fuppofe  that  every 
one  ur.acrihuula  the  trade  of  buftnefs  to  which  he 
has  been  bred,  and,  in  my  opinion,  nothing  is 
jhorepidin  than  that  an  induftrious  application  to 
that,  wauid  be  his  beft  relief  for  any  vexation  he 
jiveri  in,  as  well  as  the  fureft  means  of  a- 
voiding  falii;^  into  others. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  denotes  a  mcannefs  of  foul, 
»ot  to  be  forgiven  even  in  the  loweft  rank  oi  j to- 


tyz  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

pie,  much  lefsthofeofa  more  rch^  d  ed  ration, 
•when,  to  Ihun  the  remembiance  perhaps  of  a  L.i- 
fling  affli&ion,  they  run  into  ri  regularities,  each 
of  which  their  reaibu  might  in-oim  them  would 
be  productive  of  greater  ills  than  any  they  yet  had 
to  lament  i  and  is  io  far  from  affording  any  relief, 
that  it  ferves  only  to  give  new  additions  to  their 
former  difquiets,  according  to  the  poet,  juftly 
defcribing  this  fever  of  the  mind, 

"  Reftlefs  they  tofs,  and  turn  about  their  fe- 

«  verifh  will, 
« "Whten  ill  their  eafe  muft  come  by  lying  ftill.** 

But  what  can  be  more  amazing,  than  that  pcrfon?, 
•who  have  no  one  thing  upon  earth  to  incommode 
them,  ihould  not  be  able  to  take  any  pleafure  in 
contemplating  on  the  tranquilityof  their  fituationJ 
— Yet  fo  it  is :  there  are  thofe  in  the  world,  and  in 
the  great  world  too,  who  being  poffeffed  of  every 
thing  they  can  wifh,  and  frequently  much  more 
than  either  they  deferve,  or  could  ever  expecl:, 
feem  altogether  infenfible  of  the  benefits  they  re- 
ceive from  heaven,  or  any  obligations  they  may 
have  to  man.  This,  methinks,  is  an  indolence 
of  nature,  which  can  never  be  too  much  guarded 
againft,  becaufe  whoever  is  guilty  of  it,  becomes 
ungrateful  and  unjuft,  without  knowing  he  is  fc, 
and  incurs  the  cenfure  of  all  who  are  acquainted 
\vith  him,  for  omiffions  which  himfelf  is  wholly 
ignorant  of,  and  if  he  were  not  fo,  would  per- 
haps be  very  far  from  meriting. 

The  beautiful  and  noble  widow,  who  is  fo 
good  never  to  tail  making  one  in  our  little  fcciety, 
was  inclined  to  impute  this  thought' efs  behavi- 
our in  many  people  to  the  negligence  of  thoiis 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  173 

who,  having  the  care  of  their  education,  did  not 
infpire  them  with  proper  notions  of  the  ncceffity 
tlure  is  for  every  body  to  enter  fometimes  into 
themfelvcs;  but  we  are  all  againfther  in  this  point, 
and  (he  was  eafily  convinced,  that  though  this 
was  certainly  a  duty  incumbent  on  all  who  had 
the  government  of  youth,  yet  without  fome  fliare 
of  a  natural  bent  that  way,  no  leffbns  would  be 
effectual ;  and  that  where  the  fpirits  were  too  vo- 
latile, any  confinement,  though  for  never  fo  fiiort 
a  fpace  of  time,  would  rather  mope  than  render 
them  profitably  ferious. 

But  u/ter  all  that  has,  or  can  be  faid,  the  world 
is  more  inclinable  to  excufc  this  defedl  than  any 
other  I  know  of; — a  perfon  who  loves  to  be  al- 
ways in  company,  and  accept  of  any  fort  rather 
than  be  alone,  is  accounted  a  good-natured  h' arm- 
let creature;  and  though  it  is  impoflible  they  can- 
be  magnified  for  any  extraordinary  virtues  or  qua- 
lifications, what  they  lofe  in  refpecH  is  for  the  moft 
part  made  up  with  love.  They  have  rarely  any 
enemies;  and  the  rcafon  is  plain,  they  are  gene- 
rally merry,  never  contradict  whatever  is  faid  or 
done,  nor  refufe  any  thing  that  is  afked  of  them. 
People  of  a  middling  underftanding  like  their  con- 
verfation; — the  moil  weak  are  in  no  awe  of 
them ;  and  the  wifeft  wijl  fometimes  fuffer  them- 
fclves  to  be  diverted  by  them: — in  fine,  every 
body  is  eafy  with  them,  and  how  eafy  they  are 
to  thcmfelves  in  all  events,  there  are  innumerable 
in  fiances. 

Belinda  is  defcended  of  a  good  family  among 
the  gentry,  is  agreeable  without  being  a  beauty, 
and  has  foincwhat  of  a  fparkle  in  her  converfa- 
tion,  which  with  manypeoplepafles  forwitj  fqr, 


174  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

as  (he  never  gives  herfelf  the  trouble  to  think 
what  (he  is  about  to  fay,  butfpeaks  all  that  comes 
into  her  head,  fome  very  fmart  things  frequently 
fall  from  her,  which,  being  reported  afterwards  in 
other  companies,  ferve,  in  this  undiftinguifhing 
age,  to  eftabliih  her  chara&er.  She  came  very  ear- 
ly into  the  great  world,  and  her  youth  and  a  new- 
face  were  fufficient  to  make  her  to  be  taken  no- 
tice of  by  Rinaldo,  as  his  quality  was  to  make  her 
pleafed  and  Tain  of  his  addrefles;  but  that  great 
perfon  looks  upon  it  as  derogatory  to  his  dignity 
to  attach  himfelf  to  any  particular  miftrefs,  fo  that 
the  amour  between  them  continued  no  longer  than 
juil  to  fay  there  had  been  one. 

Some  women  would  have  been  inconfolable  to 
find  themfelves  no  fooner  gained  than  abandoned ; 
their  pride,  if  not  their  love,  would  have  made 
them  regret  the  lofs  of  fo  illuftrious  an  admirer; 
but  Belinda  was  juft  the  fame  laughing,  rallying, 
romping  creature  as  before;  (he  feemed  no  more 
affected  by  this  change,  than  (he  had  been  at  the 
reproofs  given  to  her  by  her  friends  on  the  firft  ru- 
mour of  her  intimacy  with  Rinaiclo;  and  Lavallie, 
a  man  of  no  lefs  gallantry  and  inconftancy,  fuc- 
ceeded  to  her  affe&ion,  if  that  kind  of  liking, 
•which  ferves  only  to  amufe  an  idle  hour,  is  wor- 
thy to  be  called  fo. 

Equally  gay,  inconfiderate,  and  regardlefs  of  the 
ccnfure  of  the  world,  this  intrigue  was  managed 
with  fo  little  circumfpe&ion,  that  it  foon  reached 
the  ears  of  Manella,  the  wife  of  Lavallie,  a  lady 
infinitely  fond  of  her  hufband,  and  fo  tenacious  of 
the  rights  of  love,  that  even  a  tender  glance  to  any 
other  wcma'n  feemed  the  mod  unpardonable  inju- 
ry to  her.  But  though  (he  had  been  enough  accuf- 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  175 

tomed  to  vexations  of  that  kind,  to  have  inured  a 
perfon  lefs  vehement  in  her  paffions  to  have  borne 
them  with  more  patience,  and  the  little  advantage 
fhe  gained  over  him  by  publifhing  all  the  difcove- 
ries  me  made  of  his  amours,  might  have  made  her 
fee  that  it  would  have  been  greater  prudence  in  her 
to  be  filent;  yet  the  greatnefs  of  her  fpirit  would 
cot  fuffer  her  to  fit  tamely  down  under  the  leaft 
indignity  offered  to  her  love  or  beauty.  She  re- 
proached him  on  the  fcore  of  Belinda,  with  a  bitter- 
nefs  which,  perhaps  to  revenge,  he  perfifted  in  his 
intrigue  with  that  lady  much  longer  than  his  incli- 
nation, without  having  been  thus  provoked,  would 
have  prompted  him  to;  and  the  rage  (he  was  in, 
ferved  (being  reported  to  Belinda)  to  make  that 
thoughtlefs  creature  triumph  in  the  power  of  her 
own  charms,  and  inftead  of  giving  her  the  leaft 
(hare  of  fhame  or  remorfe,  afforded  her  matter  of 
merriment  and  ridicule. 

Manella,  finding  all  me  could  fay  to  her  huf- 
hand  was  far  from  working  the  effect  fhe  defired, 
was  refolved  to  fly  to  any  extremities  to  break  off 
the  intercourfe  between  him  and  this  hated  rival: 
— me  knew  very  well  that  Rinaldo  had  once  a 
liking  to  that  young  lady,'and  though  he  feemed  at 
prefent  entirely  diverted  of  his  former  inclinations, 
yet  me  imagined  it  might  pique"  him  to  be  told 
that  one  he  had  honoured  with  his  addrefles  mould 
condefcend  to  receive  thofe  of  a  perfon  fo  much 
liis  inferior;  and  therefore  flattered  herfelf  that 
he  would  not  fail  to  lay  his  commands  on  Lavallie 
to  defifl.  his  vifits  to  her,  efpecially  when  he  had 
fo  plaufible  a  pretence  for  it,  as  the  complaints  of 
a  wife. 

Slie  therefore  threw  herfelf  at  his  feet,  inform- 


176  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV, 

cd  him  of  every  thing  {he  had  heard,  and,  with  a 
fhower  of  tears,  befeeched  him  to  exert  the  autho- 
rity he  had  over  her  perfidious  hufband,  to  oblige 
.him  to  return  to  his  firft  vows,  and  not  entirely 
break  the  heart  of  a  woman,  who  had  merited  him 
more  for  love  than  intereft,  and  had  never  fwerved, 
even  in  thought  from  the  duties  of  her  place. 

The  noble  Rinaldo  eafily  faw  into  the  thing, 
but  would  not  feem  to  do  fo;  and  would  fain  have 
perfuaded  Manella  there  was  no  foundation  for  her 
fufpicions;  but  (lie  was  not  to  be  fo  eafily  put  off. 
She  renewed  her  intreatiesj  £he  repeated  the  rea- 
fons  which  convinced  her  of  the  injuilice  done 
her,  and  became  fo  importunate,  that  he  at  laft 
promifed  to  fpeak  to  Lavallie  to  be  at  leaft  more 
circumfpecl:  in  his  behaviour. 

Whether  this  great  perfon  thought  any  far- 
ther on  it  is  uncertain,  but  chance  and  the  inad- 
vertency of  the  parties  concerned  gave  the  jealous 
Manella  a  fufficient  opportunity  to  vent  all  her 
enraged  foul  was  full  of,  on  the  psrfons  who  had 
wronged  her. 

She  happened  one  day  to  go  to  a  millener's 
where  fhe  was  accuftomed  to  buy  feme  trifles  be- 
longing to  her  drcfs,  and  finding  the  miitrefs  of 
the  houfe  not  in.  the  (hop,  ran  dire&ly  up  flairs, 
where  was  kept  a  kind  of  lace  chamber.  1  hough 
fhe  had  been  often  there,  and  was  perfectly  ac- 
quainted with  the  room,  by  accident  flie  puflied 
Lhe  door  of  another,  which  being  but  i  ;.t 
thrown  to,  without  being  locked,  eafijy  gar 
admittance,  and  afforded  her  a  profpecl:  flie  little 
expected, — her  hufband  and  Belinda  in  a  fituation, 
fuch  as  might  have  afiared  her  of  their  guilt,  had 
fhe  not  been  fo  before. 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  177 

Aftonithment  at  finding  them  in  that  place 
for  fome  moments  kept  her  filent,  as  (Lame  and 
vexation  to  be  thus  caught  did  them;  but  the  mil- 
lener,  who  hearing  {he  was  come  up  flairs,  and 
fearing  the  confequence,  came  running  into  the 
room,  and  was  beginning  to  make  fome  au'kward 
excufes, — fuch  as  crying  to  Lavallie  and  Belinda, 
"  Good  Heaven,  how  came  you  here! — And  you, 
"  Madam!  to  Manella.  Blefs  me!  fure  you  ha\^ 
"  all  miftaken  the  apartment!  nobody  ever  comes 
"  into  this  room  but  for" — "  But  for  private  pur- 
(s  pofes,  infamous  woman !"  cried  Manella,  in  a 
voice  quite  hoarfe  with  paflion,  which  rofe  with 
fo  much  vehemence  in  her  throat,  as  to  render 
what  me  faid  fcarce  intelligible;  then  flew  at  her, 
at  Belinda,,  and  her  hufband,  railing,  flirieking, 
fcratching,  and  throwing  promifcuoufly  the  patch, 
powder-boxes,  and  every  thing  that  flood  upon 
the  toilette: — till  Lavallie,  recovered  from  the 
confufion  which  the  furprize  of  her  firfl  cnterance 
had  thrown  him  in,  ran  to  her,  held  her  hands, 
and  told  her  if  (he  did  not  behave  with  more  mo- 
deration, he  would  oblige  her  to  it  by  worfe  ufage. 

This  menace  only  ferved  to  give  frefli  addition 
to  her  fury,  and  that  ihcreafing  her  ftrength  fhe 
broke  from  him,  and  flying  to  the  window,  where 
fhe  perceived  he  had  laid  his  fword,  inftantly  drew 
it,  and  made  at  Belinda  with  fuch  precipitation, 
that  it  was  as  much  as  Lavallie  could  do  to  &ve 
his  miftrefs  from  feeling  a  fatal  effeft  of  her  de- 
fpcration. 

By  fuperior  force,  however,  he  difarmed  this 
enraged  amazon,  though  not  without  cutting  his 
own  hands  in  the  ftruggle.  All  this  time  there 
vas  fuch  a  mingled  found  of  curfes,  (bricks,  cries 


178  THE   FEMALE  B.  IV. 

of  murder,  and  (lamping  on  the  floor,  as  muft  be 
very  alarming  to  thofe  who  heard  it. 

As  this  millener  got  infinitely  more  by  her  pri- 
vate cuftomers  than  by  her  public,  and  kept  a  houfe 
chiefly  for  the  meeting  of  perfons  of  condition, 
Rinaldo,  who  at  that  time  had  a  new  flame,  and 
was  come  to  gratify  it  with  the  beloved  objea, 
heard  this  difturbance  from  an  adjacent  chamber; 
and  wholly  unable  to  guefs  the  occafion,  ran  with 
his  fword  in  his  hand  to  inform  himfelf  of  the 
truth,  where  the  noife  directed. 

He  came  into  the  room  juft  as  Lavallie  had 
wrenched  from  his  wife's  hand  that  weapon  of  de- 
ftruftion,  and  feeing  who  was  there,  was  no  longer 
at  a  lofs  to  know  what  had  happened :  his  prefcnce, 
however,  ohjiged  every  one  to  more  moderation, 
and  Belinda  took  this  opportunity  of  running  a- 
way,  which  before  flie  could  not  do,  the  furious 
Manella  being  between  her  and  the  door.  The 
millener  now  began  to  account  for  this  accident  in 
a  more  plaufible  manner  than  me  had  done  before. 
She  faid,  that  Belinda  being  taken  with  a  fudden 
faintnefs,  fhe  had  defired  to  lie  down  on  her  bed 
in  order  to  recover  herfelf,  and  that  fhe  being  af- 
terwards bufy  with  cuftomers,  had  not  feen  La- 
vallie enter,  but  imagined,  that  being  but  little 
acquainted  with  the  houfe,  he  had  gone  into  that 
room  by  miftake. 

Lavallie  took  the  hint  flue  had  given,  and  pro- 
tefted,  that  being  directed  up  to  the  lace-chamber, 
he  had  opened  this  door,  as  being  the  firft  he  came 
to,  and  feeing  a  lady  lie  on  the  bed,  he  had  the 
curiofity  to  approach,  in  order  to  fee  if  he  knew 
her,  and  to  rally  her  for  trufting  herfelf  in  that 
pofbare  in  an  unlocked  chamber.  *'  As  I  drew 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  179 

"  nearer,  continued  he,  I  found  it  was  Belinda, 
*'  and  alfo  by  fome  groans  that  fhe  was  indifpofed : 
"  good-manners,  as  well  as  good-nature,  obliged 
"  me  to  enquire  how  (he  did,  and  as  I  was  trooping 
"  towards  the  bed,  that  (he  might  hear  what  1  had 
"  to  fay  with  the  more  eafe,  Manella  came  into  the 
"  room  with  a  rage  little  becoming  her  character, 
'*  andloaded  thatinnoccntlady  and  myfelf  with  the 
"  moft  opprobrious  reflection  malice cculd  invent." 

All  the  time  he  was  fpeaking,  Maneila  (hook 
her  head,  and  bit  her  lips  till  they  even  bled  with 
inward  vexation;  but  the  prefence  of  Rinaldo  for- 
bidding her  to  continue  her  reproaches  in  the  fame 
manner  me  had  done  before  his  entrance,  (he  only 
faid,  that  Heaven,  who  knew  how  greatly  (he  was 
injured,  would,  one  time  or  other,  revenge  her 
caufc. 

The  millener,  who  knew  Rinaldo  had  reafon 
to  be  of  her  (ide,  began  now  in  her  turn  to  refent 
the  afperfion  ManeLa  endeavoured  to  caft  upon 
her  houie,  and  faid  in  plain  terms,  that  no  reputa- 
tion could  be  faie  Irom  the  idle  whims  ot  a  jea- 
lous wife.  Lavallie  affected  to  beg  her  pardon 
for  the  injullice  his  wite  was  guilty  of  to  her",  and 
curfed  himielf  for  the  unhappy  mhtakc  which  had 
occafioned  all  this  confufion. 

Rinaldo  was  highly  diverted  at  this  fcene  in  his 
own  mind,  but  would  not  add  to  Manila's  afllic- 
tion,  by  letting  her  fee  how  little  he  regarded  it; 
(he  had,  however,  too  much  penetration  not  to 
perceive,  that  neither  complaints  nor  rcfentment 
vjould  be  oi  much  fervice  to  her  in  that  place,  and 
being  almofl  ready  to  burft  with  fpite  and  rage, 
went  out  of  the  room,  giving  a  look  at  Lavallie  and 
the  woman  of  the  houfe,  which  teftified  how  ill 


iSo  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

fhe  was  fatisfied  with  the  fhallow  excufes  they  had 
made,and  was  indeed  fo  diftrafted  in  her  thoughts, 
that  {he  had  almoft  pafled  the  door  before  fhe  re- 
covered prefence  enough  of  mind  to  pay  to  Ri- 
naldo  the  refpedlhis  dignity  demanded. 

Her  abfence  put  an  end  to  all  the  conftraint 
they  had  been  in;  Lavallie  was  obliged  to  endure 
a  good  deal  of  raillery  on  the  occafion  from  Ri- 
naldo,  and  afterwards  to  double  the  prefent  he 
always  made  to  the  millener,  on  account  of  the 
confufion  his  wife  had  caufed  in  her  houfe. 

Whether  this  adventure  put  an  end  to  the 
amour  he  had  with  Belinda,  is  uncertain;  but  if 
continued,  it  was  with  fo  much  caution,  that  the- 
interviews  between  them  were  never  afterwards 
difcovered. 

Manella  finding  fhe  could  no  other  way  be  re- 
venged, took  care  to  render  this  affair  as  public  as 
poffible;  fo  that  Belinda  met  with  the  mod  fevere 
reproofs  from  all  her  friends  for  her  ill  conduct 
yet  fo  infenfible  was  this  unthinking  lady  either  of 
fname,  or  the  prejudice  it  might  be  to  her  inte- 
reft,  to  forfeit  the  love  and  efteem  of  her  family, 
that  though  (lie  heard  their  admonitions  with  her 
fenfual  ears,  thofe  of  her  mind  feemed  wholly 
deaf;  nor  could  all  that  was  faid  to  her  make  the 
leaft  alteration  in  her  deportment,  or  prevail  on, 
her  to  give  herfelf  one  moment's  reflection. 

Thus  with  the  fame  unmoved,  unfhaken  indo*- 
lence  fhe  had  ever  behaved,  did  fhe  go  on,  laugh- 
ing, finging,  dancing,  coquetting  among  the  gay 
world  for  near  two  years,  in  which  time  no  ma- 
terial incident  happened  to  her:  the  truth  is,  in- 
deed, whatever  was  reported  of  her,  fo  little  con- 
cerned her,  that  her  carelefsnefs  blunted  the  edge 


U.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  iSi 

of  fcandal,  and  had  the  fame  effe£t  as  not  to  de- 
ferve  it  would  have  had:  people  grew  weary  of 
talking  of  what  every  one  knew,  and  was  made  no 
fecret  of  by  the  perfon  whofe  intereft  it  chiefly 
was  to  have  kept  it  fo. 

In  a  long  courfe  of  unregarded  follies  might  (lie 
have  continued,  till  age  and  wrinkles  had  enforced 
that  folitude  her  own  prudence  was  too  weak  to 
make  choice  of,  had  not  count  Loyter  profefled  a 
paffion  of  a  different  nature  for  her  than  any  be- 
fore him  had  pretended. 

So  greatly  did  he  feem  enamoured  with  her,  that 
he  never  was  two  hours  abfent  from  her ;  ^nd  his 
quality  and  attachment  obliged  all  who  were  looked 
upon  as  her  former  admirers  to  keep  a  greater  di- 
ftance.  Her  kindred  and  friends  were  tranfported 
to  hear  with  what  refpecl:  and  tendernefs  the  ad- 
drefles  he  made  to  her  were  accompanied;  but 
their  rejoicing  was  very  much  abated,  when,  on 
examining  her  on  this  account,  they  could  not 
find  that  he  had  ever  once  mentioned  marriage  to 
her;  and  though  he  fwore  ten  thoufand  oaths 
that  he  was  utterly  unable  to  live  without  pof- 
feffing  her,  he  had  not  made  one  that  it  was  his 
intention  to  poflefs  her  by  thofe  ways  which  alone 
could  do  honour  to  her  family.  As  there  feemed 
fome  reafon,  however,  to  believe  the  regard  he 
had  for  her  was  infinitely  more  fmcere  than  any 
who  before  had  called  themfelves  her  lovers,  they 
advifed,  nay  conjured  her  to  omit  nothing  in  her 
power  for  improving  it,  and  converting  the  de- 
figns  he  had  upon  her  into  honourable  ones,  if 
they  were  not  fo  already:  all  this  me  promifed 
them  to  do,  but  thought  no  more  of  what  they 
had  faid  than  the  time  they  were  fpeaking,  and 
0.3 


i8z  THE    FEMALE  B.  m 

being  herfelf  quite  eafy  in  the  matter,  made  hep 
lover  fo  too,  by  leaving  him  to  do  as  inclination 
fhould  dire£t  him. 

This  behaviour  was  an  infinite  trouble  to  all 
\vho  wifhed  to  fee  her  retrieve,  by  a  happy  marri- 
age, the  errors  of  her  paft  life ;  but  one  more  fan- 
guine  than  the  reft  for  her  intereft,  refolved  to  do 
that  for  her  which  he  found  there  was  no  poflibility 
of  prevailing  on  her  to  do  for  herfelf,  and  took  an 
opportunity  of  difcourfing  with  the  count  on  the 
affair.  He  at  firft  would  have  evaded  all  talk  of 
it,  and  made  feveral  efforts  to  give  a  turn  to  the 
converfation;  but  finding  himfelf  clofely  preffedj 
he  at  lafl  replied,  that  as  Belinda  and  himfelf  were 
the  chief  perfons  concerned,  and  were  perfe&ly 
fatisfied  with  each  other's  intentions,  he  thought 
all  interfering  between  them  wholly  unneceffary. 

Thefe  words  were  a  little  refented  by  the 
friends  of  Belinda,and  gave  rife  to  fome  expreflions 
on  both  fides,  which  if  either  of  them  demanded 
not  that  fatisfa&ion  of  the  other,  which  is  ufual 
in  fuch  cafes  between  gentlemen,  there  wanted 
but  a  very  little  of  it.  From  this  time,  however, 
their  former  intimacy  was  broke  off: — Belinda's 
kinfman  reproached  her  for  that  levity  which  had 
like  to  have  proved  fatal  to  him ;  and  count  Loyter, 
to  (hew  how  little  he  regarded  the  difpleafure  of 
any  of  her  family,  prevailed  on  that  thoughtlefs 
lady  to  come  and  live  publickly  at  his  houfe. 

All  the  world  now  looked  upon  her  as  his  mif- 
trefs;  and  indeed  how  could  it  be  otherwife!— 
She  had  an  apartment  fo  near  his  own,  that  they 
could  with  eafe  pafs  to  each  other,  without  being 
known  to  do  fo  by  any  of  the  family; — me  went 
abroad  with  him  to  all  publick  places ;— (he  had 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  183 

the  entire  command  of  all  his  fervants ; — (he  did 
the  honours  of  his  table  whatever  company  was 
there;  yet  was  there  not  the  lead  mention  of  any 
marriage  between  tl»em: — but  in  fpite  of  all 
thefe  circumftances,it  is  poflible  they  might  be  in- 
nocent. 

After  having  lived  together  in  this  manner,  till 
the  talk  of  it  (which  never  continues  long  on  one 
fubjecl)  began  to  fubfide,  the  count  all  at  once 
declared  his  intention  of  making  her  his  wife. 
New  equipages  and  new  habits  were  prepared,-— 
invitations  fent  to  the  friends  on  both  fides,  and 
they  were  really  married  at  a  time  when  it  was 
leaft  to  be  hoped  or  expeded. 

It  muft  be  owned  that  there  was  fomething 
fpiiited,  and  at  the  fame  time  truly  honourable 
in  the  behaviour  of  count  Loyter  on  this  occafion: 
he  would  not  be  compelled  to  give  any  definitive 
anfwer  as  to  his  defigns  on  a  woman  of  Belinda's 
character;  but  when  he  found  himfelf  free  from 
the  perfecutions  of  her  friendss  and  that  they  had 
entirely  given  her  over  for  loft,  then  did  he  (hew 
the  fmcerity  of  his  paflion,-  and  entirely  wipe  off 
all  the  afpeifions  that  had  been  caft  on  her  upon 
his  account. 

I  fhould  be  glad  there  was  a  pofllbility  of  ex- 
cufing  Belinda  alib;  but  alas!  me  confented  to 
live  in  his  houfe  without  any  certainty,  or  even  a 
promife  of  ever  being  his  wife,  and  was,  perhaps, 
not  the  leaft  furprized  of  any  that  heard  it,  that 
(lie  was  made  fo. 

Her  change  of  fortune  has  wrought  no  change 
in  her  humour  and  conduct;  and  as  fhe  would  be 
commended  for  being  no  way  elated  with  the  gran- 
deur me  pofleflesjfo  muft  (he  alfo  be  highly  blamed 


i&4  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV; 

for  not  remembering  her  honour  is  now  the  proper- 
ty of  her  lord,  and  that  every  light  unbecoming 
aclipn  me  is  guilty  of,  is  a  reflection  upon  him. 

I  believe  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  prove  that 
(he  has  ever  wronged  him  in  faft;  but  it  is  the 
duty  of  every  married  woman  to  behave  fo  as  not 
even  to  be  fufpe&ed.  This  Belinda  has  fenfe  e- 
nough  to  know,  but  not  enough  to  remembe-r 
that  ihe  knows. 

Adonius,  no  lefs  amorous  and  inconftant  thaa 
his  brother  Rinaldo,  and  much  more  endued  with 
thofe  perfections  which  charm  womankind,  has 
found  in  the  now  countefs  Loyter  graces,  which, 
till  after  me  was  another's,  had  not  been  difcover- 
ed  by  him.  The  admiration  he  exprefles  to  have 
for  her,  and  the  pleafure  his  converfation  affords, 
are  of  too  much  confequence  to  her  happinefs  not 
to  be  indulged,  bhe  forgets  the  obligation  fhe 
has  to  her  lord,  and  wholly  taken  up  with  this  new 
and  illuftrious  lover,  is  fcarce  ever  at  home,  but 
when  he  vouchfafes  to  vifit  there.  It  is  certain, 
that  in  the  parties  of  pleafure  fhe  makes  with  him, 
her  hufband  frequently  is  one;  yet  does  not  his 
being  feen  with  them  fometimes  take  off  the  cen- 
fure  which  their  being  together  without  him  at 
others  too  juftly  incurs. 

As  yet  the  count  is  under  no  uneafinefs  on  ths 
fcore : — he  looks  on  the  fine  things  faid  in  his  pre- 
fence  by  Adonius  to  his  wife,  as  proceeding  only 
from  an  excefs  of  complaifance;  and  imputes  the 
fatisfadion  the  takes  in  hearing  them  merely  to 
the  little  vanity  of  her  fex; — the  rambles  they 
take  together  to  the  levity  of  both  their  humours; 
and,  inftead  of  being  angry,  often  laughs  at  the 
recital. 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  i*S 

Not  fo  the  young,  the  beautiful,  the  tender  A- 
nnadea  fupports  the  being  deprived  of  the  fociety 
of  her  adored  Adonius; — (he  pines  in  fccrct,  with- 
out daring  to  complain,  and  now,  too  late,  regrets 
her  eafy  faith,  which  nattered  her  with  the  hopes 
of  fccuring  to  herfelf  fo  mutable  a  heart. 

Rumour  will  have  it,  that  not  two  moons  fince, 
deaf  to  all  confiderations  but  thofe  of  gratifying 
their  mutual  paffion,  he  ran  the  rifque  of  ruining 
himfelf  for  ever  with  thofe  on  whom  he  depends, 
and  who  had  betrothed  him  to  another;  and  (he, 
of  being  (hamefully  repudiated  by  that  authority 
whence  there  is  no  appeal;  they  both  venturing 
every  thing  that  might  enfue,  to  be  united  to  each 
other  by  a  clandeiiine  and  unlicenfed  marriage. 
If  fo,  how  great  a  change! — the  facred  ceremony 
has  no  power  to  bind  Adonius: — he  thinks  him- 
felf under  no  obligations  to  continue  conftant  to  a 
wife  fo  much  beneath  him: — and  where  fl.all  flic 
apply  for  juilice  againft  a  hufband,  whom  to  ac- 
knowledge as  fuch,  would  only  incur  the  difplea- 
fure  of  thofe  ihe  would  oblige. 

What  fad  efre6r,s  do  giving  way  to  any  paflion, 
though  of  the  mod  tender  kind,  produce,  efpeci- 
ally  in  ourfcx!  If  Amadea  thinks  (he  has  fatisfied 
her  virtue,  in  granting  nothing  to  her  lover  til!  the 
fanc'lion  of  marriage  has  converted  inclination  into 
duty,  what  will  fuch  a  marriage  avail,  when  (he 
durft  not  avow  it? — When  the  very  prieft  that, 
joined  their  hands,  (hall  be  obliged  to  dilbwn 
his  ever  having  performed  that  ceremony  between 
them;  and  when  Adonius,  whofe  perfeverance  in 
love,and  patience  in  enduring  all  that  could  be  in- 
flicted on  him, could  alone  obtain  forgivenefs;  and 
a  fandion  of  ratifying  what  he  had  done,  (hall  be 


i8<5  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

fo  far  from  taking  any  fuch  meafures,  that  he  fhall 
teftify  a  joy  in  having  made  it  void! — What  woe, 
what  mifery,  what  defpair,  would  then  be  the  lot 
of  fo  every  way  an  abandoned  wife. 

Already  has  (he  a  tafte  of  what  {he  may  juflly 
apprehend  will  infallibly  arrive  in  his  prefent  at- 
tachment to  Belinda;  already  does  fhe  feel  the 
cruel  ftings  of  jealoufyand  difappointment,and  re- 
flects with  agonies  not  to  be  exprefled,  on  the  ap- 
proaching ills,  which  following  the  dictates  of  a 
blind  heedlefs  difpofition,  and  perhaps  fome  mix- 
ture of  ill-judged  ambition,  muft  involve  her  in. 

It  is  certain,  fhe  is  far  from  being  that  vain, 
wild,  unthinking  creature  that  Belinda  is;  yet  had 
fhe  thought  juftly  me  never  would  have  confented 
to  marry  a  perfon,  where  the  character  of  wife  muft 
lay  her  under  greater  inconveniencies  than  even 
that  of  a  miftrefs. 

As  the  principal  dcfign  of  thefe  fpeculations  is, 
therefore,  to  con  eel  thofe  errors  in  the  mind, 
which  are  moft  imperceptible,  and  for  that  reafon 
the  moftdangerouSjfuch  examplesare  not  fetdown 
but  with  a  view  of  (hewing  how  the  want  of  a 
proper  way  of  thinking  in  our  youth  involves  our 
whole  future  lives  jn  misfortunes,  which  frequent- 
ly no  reflection  can  afterwards  retrieve.  The  ana- 
tomifts,  indeed,  will  tell  you,  that  where  there  is 
a  defect  in  the  texture  of  the  brain,  this  incapacity 
of  reflection  is  mechanical,  and  confequently  irre- 
mediable; but  by  this  way  of  reafoning  they  may 
alfo  pretend,  (as  it  is  certain  many  do)  that  all  vices 
are  conftitutional,  which  I  never  can  be  brought 
to  allow,  becaufe  fuch  an  opinion  would  be  im- 
puting an  error  to  the  Author  of  our  formation, 
wholly  deftroying  the  doctrine  of  free-will,  and^ 


S.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  i$7 

in  fine,  levelling  human  nature  with  the  brutal, 
which  acts  merely  by  inftinct.  I  grant  that  by 
the-itructure  of  our  parts  we  may  have  a  more  or 
lefs  propensity  to  good  or  evil,  and  alfo  that  the 
foul  has  greater  power  of  exerting  itfelf,  in  what 
\ve  call  reafon,  through  the  organs  of  fome  peo- 
"ple,  than  it  has  in  others;  yet  this  is  in  a  great 
meafure  to  be  helped,  if  thofe  who  have  the  care 
of  us  when  young,  begin  the  work,  and  we  our- 
felves  carry  it  on  afterwards  with  that  vigour  and 
application  which  it  requires. 

Socrates  the  philofopher  was  an  inftance  of  this 
truth,  who  being  addicted  to  all  manner  of  in- 
temperance, gained  the  victory,  by  his  reafon  and 
refolution,  over  each  inordinate  paflion,  and  was 
the  pattern  of  virtue  and  abftemioufnefs. 

To  know  ourfelves,  is  agreed  by  all  to  be  the 
moft  ufeful  learning;  the  firft  lefibns,  therefore, 
given  us  ought  to  be  upon  that  fubject.  The  pa- 
rents or  governors  of  children  can  never  anfwer 
to  themfelves  a  neglect  in  this  point.  Youth 
(hould  be  tried  and  fifted;  and  when  the  favourite 
propenfity  is  found  out,  it  will  be  eafy  either  to 
eradicate  or  improve  it,  according  as  it  tends  to 
vice  or  virtue. 

1  muft  confefs,  that  where  there  is  a  kind  of 
heavy  ftupidity,  or  xvhat  they  call  too  much  mer- 
cury in  the  difpofition,  the  one  requires  a  great 
deal  of  art  to  enliven,  and  the  other  no  lefs  to  fix; 
and,  as  they  are  direct  contraries,  fo  contrary  me- 
thods fhould  be  made  ufe  of.  But  this  is  a  duty 
which  ought  not  to  be  difpenfed  with  on  account 
of  its  difficulty,  nor  is  perhaps  fo  hard  a  matter  as 
it  feems,  if  we  confider,  that  to  give  fpirit  and 
Tivacity  to  the  dull,  nothing  but  chearful  objects 


m  THE   FEMALE  B.  IV. 

fhould  be  prefented;  and  to  the  too  wild  and  giddy, 
thofe  of  the  mod  ferioua  and  afFe&ing  nature. 

Where  an  excefs  of  gaiety  and  the  love  of  plea- 
fure  is  predominant,  the  mind  fliould  be  early 
feafoned  with  the  knowledge  of  the  many  difap- 
pointments,  difafters,  and  calamities,  which  are 
the  portion  of  the  greatefl  part  of  mankind.  Pity 
for  the  woes  of  others,  and  the  certainty  that  no 
condition  or  degree  can  allure  itfelf  with  being  de- 
fended from  the  frowns  of  fate,  will  give  a  more 
ferious  turn  to  our  ideas,  and  ferve  very  much  to 
abate  that  impetuofity  which  arifes  from  a  too 
great  redundancy  of  fire  or  air  in  perfons  of  that 
difpofition. 

Few  are  fo  happy  as  to  be  compofed  of  equal  e- 
lements;  therefore,  what  is  deficient  in  the  confti- 
tution,  ought  to  be  fupplied  by  judgment.  The 
earthy  ftupid,  and  the  watry  phlegmatic,  are  to  be 
raifedbyexercife,  mufic,  dancing,  and  all  fprightly 
amufements :  as  the  fiery  choleric,  and  the  airy 
giddy,  are  to  be  tempered  with  their  contraries. 

But,  as  I  have  already  taken  notice,  this  me- 
thod, though  it  mud  not  be  omitted  by  the  tu- 
tors, will  fail  of  fuccefs,  if  not  feconded  by  the 
endeavours  of  the  pupils,  when  left  to  the  ma- 
nagement of  themfelves;  but  where  there  is  a 
good  foundation  laid  by  thofe  who  have  had  the 
care  of  inftructing  us  in  our  youth,  it  will  be  en- 
tirely our  own  fault,  if  we  afterwards  fall  into 
very  grofs  irregularities.  , 

R.efle£lion,  therefore,  and  recollection,  are  as 
neceflary  for  the  mind  as  food  is  for  the  body:  a 
little  examination  into  the  affections  of  the  heart 
can  be  of  no  prejudice  to  the  mod  melancholy 
conftitution,  and  will  be  of  infinite  fervicc  to  the 


fc.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  189 

too  fanguine.  The  unhappy  may,  pofiibly,  by 
indulging  thought,  hit  on  fome  lucky  ftratagem 
for  the  relief  of  his  misfortunes;  and  the  happy 
may  be  infinitely  more  fo,  by  contemplating  on 
his  condition. 

So  great  a  pleafure  do  many  people  find  in  re- 
tiring fometimes  into  themfelves,  that  they  would 
not  be  denied  that  privilege  for  any  other  enjoy- 
ment whatfoever. 

I  once  knew  a  gentleman,  who  had  a  wife  of 
tvhom  he  was  infinitely  fond, and  whofe  fociety  he 
preferred  to  all  others  in  the  world,  at  thofe  times 
when  he  was  difpofed  for  converfation ; — yet,  if 
(lie  offered  to  difiurb  his  meditations,  would  grow 
quite  peevifh  with  her.  So  valuable  to  him  was 
the  freedom  of  his  thoughts,  that  he  could  not  bear 
an  interruption,  even  tho'  he  knew  it  to  be  a  proof 
of  love  from  her  who  was  by  fo  much  the  cleared 
part  of  himfelf.  1  remember  I  was  one  day  at 
his  houfe,  when  his  lady  thinking  he  had  been  too 
long  alone,  had,  with  a  gentle  force,  dragged  him 
from  his  clofet.  1  wondered  to  fee  him  more  than 
ordinarily  grave,  and  on  inquiring  into  the  caufe, 
was  anfwered  by  him  in  thefe  terms:  "'This  dear 
"  creature  (faid  he)  robs  me  of  half  the  pleafure 
'*  of  her  love,  by  not  permitting  me  to  contem- 
"  plate  on  the  blefiings  I  poffefs  in  her." 

How  then  happens  it,  that  fuch  numbers  deny 
themfelves  the  .greateft  fatisfaclion  a  reafonablc 
being  can  enjoy,  and  which  is  alfo  of  fuch  high 
importance  in  every  accident  in  life,  that  without 
it  we  have  no  power,  either  to  attain  any  good, 
or  defend  ourfelves  from  any  evil! 

But  fome  people  are  fo  ignorant  as  to  imagine, 
or  fo  wicked  as  to  infinuate,  that  thofe  who  think 

VOL.  I.  R 


ipo  THE   FEMALE  B.  IV. 

much,  and  are  lovers  of  folitude,  feclude  them- 
felves,  not  from  the  world,  but  with  a  view  of 
doing  fome  mifchief  to  it-  According  to  the  fta- 
tions  they  are  in,  they  are  judged  capable  of  ru- 
minating on  greater  or  Jefler  evils  to  mankind. 
They  will  have  a  fedentaryftatefman  to  be  plotting 
treafon  either  againft  his  prince  or  country; — a 
fteward  ftudying  new  methods  to  enlarge  his  bills ; 
a  tradefman  to  impofe  upon  his  cuftomers; — and 
fo  on,  from  the  higheft  to  the  loweft  degree. 

A  few  examples  have,  alas!  but  too  much  au- 
thorized this  opinion.  We  have  feen  great  think- 
ers who  have  only  thought  to  aggrandize  them- 
felves  on  the  ruins  of  thofe  they  pretend  toferve;— 
great!  prcfeffors,  who  have  fpared  no  pains  to  gain 
confidence  for  no  other  purpofe  than  to  betray, — 
great  advocates  for  liberty,  only  to  enflave; — and 
great  preachers  up  of  juftice,  only  to  purchafe  fe- 
curity  for  the  worft  of  criminals. 

So  grofs  an  abufe  of  the  faculty  of  thinking  is, 
indeed,  turning  the  arms  of  heaven  againft  itfelf, 
and  forcing  that  facred  reafon,  which  was  given 
us  fora  guide  to  virtue,  to  accompany  us  in  the 
paths  of  vice.  To  think  of  fuch  purpofes,  I  rnuft 
confefs,  is  infinitely  worfe  than  not  to  think  at 
ail;  becaufe  the  one  tends  to  injure  and  opprefs 
mankind  in  general,  the  other  is  for  the  moft  part 
hurtful  only  to  the  perfons  themfelves. 

Hypocrifyis  deteftableboth  to  God  and  man:— 
we  are  told  from  an  unerring  mouth,  that  thofe 
found  guilty  of  it  "  fhall  have  the  loweft  place  in 
"  hell;"  andfureon earth  theymeritthe  moftcon- 
temptible  treatment  from  their  fellow  creatures! 
When  once  the  maflc  of  benevolence  and  fiucerity 
is  plueked  from  the  face  of  the  feeming  angel,  and 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  ipl 

the  grim  treacherous  fiend  appears  in  his  native 
uglinefs,  by  fo  much  the  more  as  our  admiration 
before  was  of  him,  will  be  our  abhorrence  of  him 
afterwards : — we  fball  hate  and  fly  him,  as  we 
once  loved  and  followed  him:  every  body  will  be 
ready  to  catch  up  a  ftone  to  throw  at  him,  and  no 
opportunities  of  infuhing  him  will  be  omitted. 

Proteus,  by  fad  experience,  is  convinced,  that 
all  his  arts  are  ineffectual  to  retrieve  any  part 
of  that  efteem  he  once  was  happy  in  from  all  de- 
grees of  people.  The  beguiler  can  beguile  no 
more.  By  miftaken  meafures,  vainly  aiming  at 
greater  homage,  like  Lucifer,  the  pride-fwollea 
bubble  fell,  at  once,  into  the  gulph  of  endlefs  in- 
famy and  contempt,  whence  he  can  never  hope  to 
rife. 

Even  the  very  ladies  take  a  pleafure  in  giving 
him  all  the  mortification  in  their  power;  and  as 
our  fex  has  the  privilege  of  faying  whatever  we 
have  a  mind  to,  without  any  danger  of  refcnt- 
ment  from  the  men,  he  often  meets  with  .the  fe- 
vereft  farcafms  from  thofe  who  have  wit  enough 
to  make  them. 

He  was  one  day  at  cards  with  fome  perfons  of 
condition,  when  being  feized  with  a  fudden  vio- 
lent pain  in  his  fide,  after  diltorting  his  iace  into 
feveral  difagreeable  pofitions,  he  could  not  forbear 
at  laft  crying  out,  "  Oh,  my  fide!  my  fide!"  On 
which  Tartilla,  who  was  one  of  the  company, 
with  a  malicious  fneer  rejoined,  "  Your  fide,  Pro- 
'*  teus!  I  thought  you  had  no  fide  now."  Thele 
words,  which  plainly  alluded  to  his  being  aban- 
doned by  both  parties,  gave  him,perhaps,an  agony 
more  poignant  than  that  he  complained  of,  and 
both  together  rendered  him  fo  peevifh,  that  he  re- 
ft 2 


Ipi  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

plied  haflily,  and  in  a  tone  which  was  far  from 
his  accuftomed  politenefs, — u  Yes,  madam,  and  a 
*'  back-fide  too."  This  anfwer,  grofs  as  it  was, 
gave  not  Tartilla  the  lead  confufion;  and  with- 
out any  hesitation,  "  I  do  not  know  that,"  faid  {he, 
t(  but  all  the  world  knows  your  wife  has  one." 

All  the  company  burft  into  a  loud  laughter  at 
this  repartee,  as  the  character  of  Proteus's  wife 
made  it  no  lefs  juft  than  fmart.;  and  he,  having  no- 
thing to  return  to  a  piece  of  fetire  which  had  fo 
much  truth  in  it,  went  out  of  the  room  ready  to 
burft  between  fhamc  and  unavailing  fpite,  leaving 
his  fair  antagonifl  to  receive  all  the  praifes  her. 
ready  wit  and  preferice  of  mind  deferred. 

When  people  of  fuch  confideration  in  the  world 
are  guilty  of  any  notorious,  indirect,  or  ridiculous 
actions,  they  can  expect  no  lefs  than  to  become  the 
theme  of  every  fatiric  genius :  but  I  think  the  jeer 
which  old  Pompilius  met  with  from  his  own  fon, 
on  account  of  his  being  lately  married  to  a  lady 
young  enough  to  be  his  grand-daughter,  was  no, 
lefs  flinging  than  that  I  have  been  relating. 

Some  little  time  after  thefeprepofterous  nuptials 
were  confummated,  the  father  and  fon  were  toge- 
ther at  an  affembly: — feveral  who  had  not  before 
that  time  feen  old  Pompilius  fince  the  ceremony,, 
congratulated  him  upon  it  in  thephrafes  common 
on  fuch  occafions;  and  this  turning  the  converfati- 
on  on  the  happinefs  of  the  conjugal  (late,  one  of 
the  company  happened  to  afk  the  young  gentleman 
"Avhen  he  intended  to  marry?  "  Really,  fir,"  an- 
fwered  he,  "  it  is  a  thing  I  have  not  yet  given  my-. 
«'  felf  any  trouble  about;  for  (added  he,  with  a  far- 
«  cafticlook)  the  onlyladyl  wifh  to  have  for  a  wife, 
"  is  the  fifter  of  my  mother-in-law;  and  the  only 


B,  IV*  S  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  H.  193 

"  inducement  Ihave  to  that,  is  becaufe  I  mighthave 
"  the  honour  of  beingcalled  brother  by  "my  father." 

Not  even  thofe  whofe  intereft  it  was  to  preferve 
the  good-will  of  Pompilius,  had  guard  enough  o- 
ver  themfelves  to  reftrain  fmiling  at  fo  unexpected 
and  fo  fevere  a  reply  from  his  fon  before  his  face; 
but  thofe  who  regarded  neither  his  favour  nor  re- 
fcntment,  laughed  outright;  and  the  old  bride- 
groom, finding  what  he  had  done  thus  publickly 
fcofted  at  by  his  own  blood,  was  in  no  lefs  con- 
fufion  and  incapacity  of  making  any  return  than 
he  had  once  before  been  in,  when  employed  to 
give  an  account  of  a  battle,  while  the  dreadful 
rear  of  the  cannons  were  ftill  in  his  ears,  and  all 
the  terrors  of  death  before  his  eyes;  nor  could 
now,  as  then,  recover  himfelf  from  it,  till  more 
than  half  a  dozen  bottles  of  Burgundy  (his  ufual 
ilint)  had  given  him  frefh  fpirits. 

It  is  certain,  that  of  late  years  the  family  of  the 
Wrongheads  have  increafed  to  a  prodigious  num- 
ber. We  have  feen  fuch  things  as  even  the  very  re- 
port of  in  former  times  would  have  been  treated  as 
mere  fiction;  and,  indeed,  all  the  tales  that  romance 
can  furnifh  us'with,  come  infinitely  fhort  of  many 
prefent  characters.  We  have  knight-adventurers, 
who,  like  Don  Quixote,  when  he  fpurred  Rofi- 
nante  to  encounter  with  the  windmill,  by  attempt- 
ing to  furmount  imaginary  dangers,  run  into  real 
ones.  We  have  hypocrites  and  felf-favers,of  whom 
Sir  Hudibrafs,  in  laying  the  whipping  taflc  on  the 
back  of  his  poor  'fquire,  is  but  an  imperfect  mo- 
del. We  have  ourTherfites,  our  Pandarus's,  our 
Demagorus's  too,  in  a  much  higher  degree  than 
roet  or  hiftorian  painted  them.  Difficult  is 
ii  LO  fay,  whether  wickednefs  or  folly  moft  abounds 
R3 


194  THE  FEMALE          "  B.  IV, 

among  us ;  and  whether  there  are  more  people  who 
purchafe  what  they  call  happinefs  at  the  expence 
of  their  virtue,  or  who  forfeit  all  pretenfions  to 
it  by  their  madnefs:  for  there  is  nothing  more 
common  than  to  fee  thofe  who,  in  court,  in  camp, 
in  town,  and  in  country,  take  as  much  pains  to 
be  undone,  as  others  do  to  undo. 

In  fine,  when  one  looks  into  the  world,  and  con- 
fides the  prefent  times  and  humours  of  mankind,, 
one  cannot  help  crying  out  with  the  poet, 
"  There  is  no  wonder,  or  elfe  all  is  wonder!'* 
Yet  to  what  can  we  impute  all  thofe  miftakes,, 
mifcarriages,  or  thofe  cruelties,  oppreffions,  unna-. 
tural  actions,  and  the  innumerable  train  of  mif- 
chiefs,  which  we  either  bring  upon  ourfelyes,  on 
inflicl  on  others,  but  to  the  want  of  thought,  or 
to  thought  mifapplied!  The  latter  I  again  allow 
to  be  of  much  worfe  confequence  than  the  former; 
but  as  we  are  free-agents,-  and  the  choice  is  in, 
ourfelves  whether  we  will  be  virtuous  or  vicious,, 
it  would  be  a  poor  excufe  to  fay,  "•  We  durft  not 
"  think,  left  we  mould  think  amifs." 

Man  was  created  little  inferior  to  the  angels>. 
and  it  is  his  own  fault  that  he  is  not  very  near  as 
happy  too.  This  world  is  plentifully  ftored  with 
every  thing  fuited  to  the  nature  of  his  being;  and, 
borne  en  the  wings  of  facred  contemplation,  he 
may  alfo  partake  of  heavenly  raptures:  but  this 
point  I  leave  to  divines!  for  though  it  is  a  truth 
felf-evident,  yet  there  are  people  who  chufe  rather 
to  be  convinced  by  the  learning  of  others,  than  by 
the  witnefles  in  their  own  breads. 

A  friend  of  mine,  who  with  fome  other  Eng-* 
lifh  gentlemen  was  making  the  tour  of  Europe, 
happened,  as  he  paffed  through  one  of  the  moft 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  i95 

wild  and  mountainous  parts  of  France,  tolofe  his 
company.  On  his  firft  finding  himfelf  alone,  he 
imagined,  that  having  been  in  a  deep  mufing,  they 
bad  gone  on  before  without  his  obferving  them, 
therefore  clapped  fpurs  tohishorfe  in  order  to  over- 
take them:  but  having-  rode  fome  miles  without 
feeing  either  any  thing  of  them,  or  meeting  any 
perfon  who  could  dire£t  him  to  the  town  where 
they  had  agreed  to  put  up  for  that  night,  he  was 
extremely  at  a  lofs,  efpecially  when  he  came  where" 
three  roads  met.  To  add  to  his  misfortune,  there 
fell  a  very  heavy  rain,  accompanied  with  a  great 
\vind,  infomuch  that  he  was  obliged  to  make  to- 
wards a  wood,  which  he  faw  at  fome  diftance,  to 
shelter  himfelf  and  horfe  from  the  fury  of  the  fr.orm 
which  every  moment  feemed  to  gather  ftrength. 

The  intermingling  boughs  of  the  trees  for 
fome  little  time  defended  him>  but  would  not  have 
continued  tovdo  fo  much  longer,  and  he  was  be- 
ginning to  give  way  to  impatience ;  when,  on  a 
fudden,  he  heard  a  human  voice  call  to  him  to  turn 
towards  the  right  of  a  little  mount,  about  fome 
twenty  yards  from  him. 

He  has  aflured  me,  that  never  any  mufic  had 
given  him  half  the  pleafure  as  the  found  of  one  of 
his  own  fpecies  did  in  that  unfrequented  wild. 
He  failed  not  to  obey  the  (ummons,  and  prefently 
perceived  a  man  habited  like  a  hermit,  ftand  at 
the  entrance  of  a  cave  beneath  the  mount.  The 
tempeit  did  not  prevent  him  from  coming  forth 
to  meet  his  diltrefled  traveller:  he  helped  him  to. 
alight,  tied  his  horfe  under  one  of  the  thickefl; 
trees,  and  then  conducted  him  into  his  gloomy 
l-.abitaticnj  vuh  all  ihe  politencfs  of  a  firil-rate 
sourticr. 


196  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

My  friend  was  extremely  furprized,  not  only  at 
his  reception,  but  at  the  exceflive  neatnefs  of  every 
thing  he  faw  in  his  cavern,  which  he  found  was 
divided  into  two  rooms:  the  firfl  contained  a  table, 
two  eafy  chairs,  a  fmall  beaufet  with  glafles,  and 
fome  china,  loaded  with  the  mod  excellent  fruits: 
— the  other  had  in  it  only  a  couch,  with  a  mat- 
trefs  and  coverlid,  one  chair,  and  a  shelf  of  books, 
near  which  was  fixed  a  little  altar  with  a  crucifix. 
He  could  not  help  teflifying  his  admiration  at  the 
contrivance  of  this  habitation;  and,  as  he  fpoks 
French  very  well,  began  to  afk  fome  queftions 
concerning  it,  and  in  what  manner  his  holt  could 
be  provided  with  necefiaries,  as  he  faw  no  town, 
nor  even  village,  near  that  place. 

To  which  the  other  replied  with  a  fmile,  that 
his  curiofity  should  be  fully  fatisfied  ;  "  But  firft 
"  (faid  he)  y<5u  muft  refresh  yourfelf  with  fuch 
**  things  as  this  homely  cell  affords." 

In  fpeaking  thofe  words,  he  fpread  a  curious 
damaflc "napkin  on  the  table,  and  then  fet  plates  of 
pickles,  feveral  forts  of  frefh  and  dried  fruits,  fine 
manchet,  fromage,  and  a  bottle  of  the  beft  Bur- 
gundy. In  fine,  a  more  elegant  afternoon's  colla- 
tion could  not  have  been  prefented  in  the  moft  o 
pulent  city,  than  what  this  cavern  in  the  midil  of 
an  unfrequented  wood  afforded. 

The  more  the  ftranger  faw,  the  more  he  was 
furprized;  which  the  feeming  hermit  perceiving, 
entertained  him,  while  they  were  eating,  with  this 
account  of  himfelr. 

He  told  him,  that  he  was  not  a  conftant  inha- 
bitant of  the  place  he  found  him  in,  but  repairexl 
thither  occafionally,  and  when  he  was  in  the  hu- 
mour to  indulge  refls&ioa  i — that  he  wore  that 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  J9y 

habit,  which  was  always  held  facred,  even  by  the 
moft  profligate,  to  protect  him  from  any  infults  in 
ca!c  he  fhould  happen  to  be  feen  by  any  of  thofc 
wretches,  who,  living  on  the  plunder  of  travellers, 
frequently,  when  purfued,  took  fhelter  in  that 
wood;  and  that  he  was  called  the  count  de  Mon- 
taubin,  and  his  ufual  refidence  in  a  caftle  of  his 
own  about  twelve  miles  diltant. 
*  My  friend,  after  paying  him  thofe  refpe£ts  which 
the  knowledge  of  his  quality  demanded,  exprefled 
fome  amazement  that  he  fhould  have  occafion  to 
take  the  pains  to  come  fo  far,  and.fubjeci;  himfelf 
to  fo  many  inconveniencies,  merely  for  the  fake  of 
a  retirement,  which  he  might,  doubtlefs,  enjoy  in 
as  full  a  manner  at  home,  if  he  was  difj.oied  to  let 
his  inclinations  for  folitude  be  fignified  to  his  ac- 
quaintance, 

To  which  the  count  replied,  that  he  pcrct4ve4 
he  was  a  flranger  to  the  humour  of  ihe  French  na- 
tion : — that  what  he  mentioned  was  a  thing  whol- 
ly imp  radii  cable  to  a  man  of  his  quality: — that 
though  he  lived  -at  a  confiderable  diitance  from 
Paris,  or  any  gieat  city,  his  caftle  was  continually 
crowded  either  with  the  neighbouring  gentry,  or 
perfons  who  travelled  that  way;  and  that  befides, 
he  was  married  to  a  lady  of  fo  gay  and  volatile  a 
difpofition,that  it  was  impoffiblcfor  him  ever  to  be 
entirely  alone.  "  To  add  to  all  this,  continued  he, 
*{  1  have  fcvcral  children,  and  a  numerous  retinue 
"  of  fervants,  and  though  I  fliould  (hut  myfelf  up 
"  in  the  moft  retired  room  I  have,  I  could  not  (till 
ft  be  free  from  interruption  of  one  kind  or  other." 

**  The  mind,  faid  he,  requires  fome  relaxation. 
*<  as  well  as  the  body;  and  when  fatigued  with 
**  the  hurry  of  thofc  pleafures  with  which  it  is 


I9S  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

"  expelled  one  mould  entertain  one's  friends,  here 
"  I  retire,  give  a  loofe  to  contemplation,  and 
"  when  I  have  recruited  my  fpirits,  return  again 
<{  into  the  world,  and  tafte  the  joys  of  love  and 
"  converfation  with  a  much  higher  reliih  than  if 
cc  I  never  were  abfent  from  them." 

The  Englifh  gentleman  could  not  help  allow- 
ing the  juflnefs  of  his  notion  in  this  point,  but  ilill 
thought  it  rtrange  that  he  did  not  make  choice  of 
fome  place  where  he  might  be  lefs  expofed  to  acci- 
dents, than  in  the  wildnefs  of  this  wood;  but  the 
count,  who  it  feems,  was  one  of  the  molt  com- 
plaifant  obliging  perfons  on  earth,  would  not  fuffer 
him  to  remain  in  a  fu [pence,  which  it  was  in  his. 
power  to  eafe,  and  therefore  made  no  fcruple  of 
relating  to  him  fome  paflages  of  his  former  life, 
which  entirely  banifhed  all  the  difUcuhi^s  he  had 
found  in  himfeif  to  reconcile  to  reaton  a  behaviour 
that  at  firil  appeared  to  have  in  it  fo  much  oddity.- 

The  count  in  his  younger  years  had  the  mif- 
fortune  to  have  a  rencounter  witlva  nobleman,  in 
which  he  gave  him  fome  wounds  which  he  knew 
not  but  were  mortal.  Befides  the  law,  which  in 
that  country  is  very  fevere  againft  duelling,  his  an- 
tagonift  was  a  pericn  in  great  favour  with  the  king, 
and  he  had  little  room  to  hope  for  mercy  in  cafe 
the  other  died.  To  avoid  the  profecution,  he  fled 
from  Paris,  and  not  doubting  but  all  houfes  where 
they  might  expe6l  to  find  him  would  be  ftriclly 
fearched,  he  concealed  himfejf  in  this  wocd,  ac- 
companied only  by  one  faithful  fervant,  who  hav- 
ing been  brought  up  with  him,  would  not  be  pre- 
vailed upon  to  quit  him  in  fuch  an  extremity. 

He  aflured  my  friend,  that  they  lived  for  near 
three  weeks  on  fuch  provifion  only  as  that  dsfo- 


B.  IV.          SPECTATOR.  i<;f 

hte  wild  afforded;  that  for  feveral  days  they  could 
not  find  a  brook  at  which  they  might  flake  their 
third,  fo  that  the  fruits  they  found  on  fome  of  the- 
hedges  ferved  them  both. as  food  and  drink;  and  to 
fecure  themfelyes  from  the  wolves  by  night,  which 
frequently  prowled  about  that  foreft,  they  were 
obliged  to  take  up  their  lodgings  in  the  tailed  trees 
they  could  find.  Nothing,  he  faid,  but  the  pro- 
tecting hand  of  heaven  could  have  enabled  them 
to  fuftain  the  hardfhips  they  were  obliged  to  fuffer. 
Atlaft,  quite  tired  and  worn  out  with  defpair,  death 
feemed  lefs  terrible  than  the  continuance  of  fuch  a 
life,  and  he  ventured  to  fend  his  fervant  to  enquire 
what  was  become  of  the  wounded  gentleman,  and 
at  the  fame  time  to  procure  fome  place  where  he 
might  once  more  be  accommodated  with  the  ne- 
ceffaries  which  the  nature  of  his  being  required. 

The  fellow's  return  brought  him  the  good  news 
.that  his  enemy  was  not  only  recovered  of  the  hurts 
he  had  received  from  him,  but  had  alfo  confefled 
that  himfelf  had  been  the  aggreflbr,  and  laboured 
by  all  his  friends  to  obtain  the  fame  pardon  for  the 
count  as  for  himfelf: — that  every  body  expected 
it  would  foon  be  Hgnsd,  and  that,  though  it  was 
not  proper  he  mould  appear  in  publick  till  it  was 
fo,  yet,  as  all  fearch  after  him  was  entirely  over, 
he  might  quit  that  dreadful  fituation,  and  repair 
to  the  lioufe  of  a  relation,  who  would  meet  him  at 
the  entrance  of  the  foreft,  and  conduct  him  with 
all  manner  of  privacy. 

Every  thing  happened  according  to  his  intelli- 
gence; and  lie  had  not  been  a  week  before  the 
royal  clemency  exerted  itfelf  in  favour  of  both  the 
delinquents;  who  then,  as  great  friends  as  before 
they  had  been  the  contrary,  went  together  to 


*<55  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

throw  themfelves  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  and 
pay  their  grateful  acknowledgments. 

The  count  concluded  his  little  narrative  with 
faying,  that  though  this  adventure  was  fo  happily 
ended,  the  danger  and  hardfhips  it  had  involved 
him  in,  gave  a  much  more  ferious  turn  to  his 
humour  than  he  had  ever  known  before; — that 
during  his  abode  in  that  folitary  place,  he  had 
found  fo  much  matter  for  contemplation,  that  the 
remembrance  ftill  dwelt,  and  ever  would  do  fo,  up- 
on his  mind;  and  though  the  ideas  which  he  now 
had  demanded  in  privacy  to  indulge,  yet  they  were 
fo  far  from  having  anything  melancholy  or  gloomy 
in  them,  that  they  afforded  him  the  moft  icrene 
and  perfect  fatisfaclion. 

"  You  fee  now,  added  he,  the  motives  I  hate 
"  for  retiring  myfelf  fometimes  from -the  noife 
"  and  hurry  of  the  world;  and  as  this  place  was 
"  my  afylum  in  diftrefs,  I  cannot  help  having  a 
"  kind  of  love  for  it,  and  think  I  ought  in  grati- 
"  tude  to  make  it  the  fcene  of  my  more  pleafmg 
**  meditations;—!  therefore  made  this  cavern  be 
««  cut  out  of  the  mount,— furnifhed  it  as  you  fee* 
«  — provided  two  chairs  in  cafe  any  diftreffed  per- 
t*  fon  fhould  have  occafion  to  take  refuge  here,  as 
"  it  has  now  happened; — and  I  could  wifh  that  I 
"  had  taken  the  fame  precaution  as  to  a  bed,  for  it 
"  now  grows  late,  and  1  forefee  the  ftorm  will  not 
"  abate  while  you  can  depart  with  any  fafety; 
<{  but  we  will  pafs  the  night  as  well  as  we  can;  I 
«<  have  a  fufficient  quantity  of  Burgundy  within, 
"  and  by  the  help  of  that  and  converfation,  we 
"  may  beguile  the  hours  till  morning,  when  my 
"  fervant  will  be  here,  and  then  I  will  beg  the  fa- 
."  vour  of  your  company  to  a  place,  where  it  will 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  201 

"  be  in  my  power  to  entertain  you  in  a  fafliion 
'fi  more  agreeable  to  my  inclination  and  your 
*«  merit." 

My  friend  then  told  him,  how  having  loft  his 
company  he  could  not  do  himfelf  the  honour  to 
accept  his  invitation,  becaufe,  he  mufl  make  the 
.bed  of  his  way  to  the  town  where  they  had  agreed 
to  ftay  for  that  night;  and  faid,  he  did  not  doubt 
but  to  overtake  them,  provided  he  could  but  find 
his  way  out  of  the  foreft. 

Count  Mcntaubiii  afTured  him,  that  what  he 
talked  pf  was  no  way  to  be  performed ;  that  the 
town  he  mentioned  lay  quite  on  the  other  fide  of 
the  wood,  which  was  wholly  impracticable  to  be 
pafFed  without  a  guide,  even  though  he  had  the 
day  inftead  of  the  night  before  him,  by  reafon  of 
the  many  intricate  turnings  it  contained :— that  the 
great  road  was  not  only  the  fafeft  but  the  neareft; 
and  as  he  had  mifled  it  by  turning  into  the  wood, 
be  might  by  the  affiflance  of  his  fervant  eafily  re- 
cover it : — "  But,  faid  he,  as  the  man  will  be  with 
'*  me,  as  he  always  is,  extremely  early,  the  beft 
<c  way  will  be  to  fend  him  to  your  friends,  acquaint 
«  them  Avhere  you  arc,  and  engage  them  either  to 
«  come  to  you  at  my  caftle,  which  luckily  hap- 
"  pens  to  be  fituated  very  near  the  road,  or  to 
"  tarry  till  you  can  reach  them." 

This  expedient  fcemed  no  lefs  reafonable  and 
convenient  to  the  gentleman,  than  it  was  kind  and' 
obliging  in  him  that  propofed  it;  snd  being  a  man 
perfectly  free  from  all  that  troublefome  formal 
ceremony  which  half-bred  people  arc  fo  full  of,  he 
agreed  to  it  without  any  hcfitation  or  apologies. 

The  night  glided  almofl  infenfibly  away  iu  fuch 
agreeable  converfation,  and  Aurora  had  fcarce 

VOL.  I.  S 


202  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

given  place  to  the  chariot  of  the  fun,  before  the 
fervant  of  count  Montaubin  arrived  with  a  led 
horfe,  it  being  the  day  his  lord  had  appointed  for 
his  return  home,  and  the  wood  altogether  impaf- 
fable  for  any  wheel-carriage. 

The  ftorm  having  now  entirely  fubfided,  every 
thing  feeraed  more  beautiful  for  the  late  rufHe  it 
had  fuftained.  So  pleafing  a  wildnefs  appeared 
through  the  whole,  that  my  friend  was  perfectly 
charmed  with  it;  and  the  count  did  not  fail,  du- 
ring the  time  of  their  little  journey,  to  fet  forth  all 
the  delights  this  rural  fcene  afforded.  "  Here, 
««  faid  he,  we  fee  nature  in  its  purity,  juft  as  it  came 
«'  from  the  hand  of  the  Creator.  What  art,  what 
*'  agriculture  can  equal  the  fweet  confufion  with 
44  which  every  plant  fprings  up  fpontaneous?— 
44  What  a  folemn  reverence  do  thefe  tall  ancient 
"  trees  excite? — How  ravifhing  is  the  fragrancy 
"  of  the  air,  that  their  fanning  boughs  waft  to  ue, 
*'  unmixed,  unadulterated  with  any  of  thofe  grofs 
44  particles  which  the  neighbourhood  of  cities  con- 
"  ftantly  fend  forth? — Here  we  enjoy  untainted 
4{  aether,  partake  the  food  of  angels,  new-wing 
"  our  fouls,  and  almolt  fpiritualize  our  dull  mor- 
"tality; — yet,  added  he,  how  many  live,  and 
4<  how  many  years  did  I  live,  without  giving  my- 
"  felf  leave  to  know  that  Heaven  had  beftowed 
4!  fuch  bleffings  upon  man!" 

He  further  added,  that  he  found  an  inward  fa- 
tisfaclion  fuch  as  no  tongue  could  exprefs,  in  his 
meditations  during  the  times  of  his  thus  fecluding 
himfelf  from  fcciety,  which  was  ordinarily  no 
more  than  four  or  five  days  together: — that  no 
perfon  whatever  knew  the  place  of  his  retirement 
tut  that  faithful  fervant,  who  came  every  morning 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  205 

to  receive  his  commands,  and  to  bring  him  fuch 
things  as  were  needful. 

With  thefe  kind  of  difcourfes  they  beguiled 
the  time,  till  being  come  into  the  great  road,  the 
count  difpatched  his  fervant  to  the  inn  where  my 
friend  had  informed  him  it  was  likely  his  compani- 
ons might  be  found,  with  his  compliments  to  them 
unknown,  and  an  earneft  intreaty  that  they  would 
come  to  hiscaftle  in  fear ch  of  him  they  had  loft,  and 
for  whom  they  were  doubtlefs  in  great  trouble. 

Thefe  orders  were  no  fooner  given,  than  the 
man  who  received  them  clapped  fpurs  to  his  horfe, 
and  was  immediately  out  of  fight;  the  count  arid 
his  newgueft  rode  flowly,not  only  that  they  might 
converfe  with  the  more  eafe,  but  alfo  to  favour  the 
poor  animal,  who  was  very  much  fatigued  with 
being  expofed  all  night  to  the  feverity  of  the  wea- 
ther, and  whom  the  count-had  it  not  in  his  power 
to  refrefli  as  he  had  done  his  rider. 

A  (hort  time,  however,  brought  them  to  a  (late- 
ly caftle,  where  the  count  entered  by  a  back-gate, 
of  which  he  had  the  key,  and  having  conducted 
the  ftranger  into  a  magnificent  anti-chamber,  in- 
treated  his  pardon  for  leaving  him  a  few  minutes; 
after  which  he  returned  habited  according  to  his 
quality,  and  fo  much  changed  from  what  he  had 
appeared  in  his  hermit's  drefs,  that  he  was  hardly 
to  be  kno\vn: — he  then  introduced  him  to  his 
lady,  a  very  lovely  woman,  and  five  children,  the 
elded  not  exceeding  eleven  years  of  age,  but  were 
all  extremely  beautiful  and  well  made.  My  friend 
beheld  them  with  admiration,  and  after  making 
his  proper  compliments  to  each,  faid  to  the  count, 
that  not  ail  the  elegant  defcripticns  he  had  given 
.him  of  the  charms  of  contemplation  were  half  fo 
S  * 


204  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

convincing  to  him,  as  to  find  they  were  capable  of 
rivalling  in  his  efteem  thofe  he  left  at  home. 

The  countefs  prevented  her  hufband  from  ma- 
king any  return  to  this  compliment,  by  replying 
herfelf  in  fo  gay  and  gallant  a  manner,  as  (hewed 
her  a  lady  whofe  wit  was  not  at  all  inferior  to  her 
perfonal  perfections. 

They  all  breakfafted  in  her  apartment,  after 
which  they  entered  into  an  agreeable  converfation, 
which  wag  pleafmgly  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of 
the  Englifh  gentlemen.  The  joy  to  fee  their  friend 
iafe,  and  in  fuch  good  company,  after  having  ima- 
gined fome  very  ill  accident  had  befallen  him,  did 
not  hinder  them  from  receiving  the  welcome  given 
them  by  their  illuftrious  hofts,  with  a  politenefs 
that  did  not  fhame  the  appearance  they  macie,  and 
both  together  concurred  to  convince  thofe  who 
law  them,  that  they  were  in  reality  perfons  of  fa- 
mily and  fortune. 

The  firft  civilities  being  over,  the  count  led  them 
into  his  gardens,  which  were  laid  out  with  all  the 
exa&nefs,  propriety,  and  good  fancy  imaginable. 
Here,  parterres  of  flowers  charmed  the  fenfes  with 
their  fragrancyand  beauty. — there,  bubbling  foun- 
tains, encompailed  with  grots,  ornamented  with 
the  richeft  treafureof  the  lea,  invited  to  foft  repofe : 
rnoft  curious  ftatues  of  ancient  heroes  and  philo- 
fophers,  placed  at  the  corner  of  each  avenue,  re- 
minded the  beholder  of  the  happinefs  pad  times 
enjoyed;  and  the  fpacious  walks,  bordered  with 
trees,  which  met  on  the  top,  forming  long  arbours, 
afforded  a  mod  delightful  fhade,  and  gave  room  to 
thofe  who  walked  to  converfe  without  the  trouble 
of  turning  back  to  each  other,asin  the  narrow  pent- 
alleys  of  fome  gardens.  He  then  conduced  ther.i 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  2:5 

into  the  chief  apartments  of  the  cattle,  where  they 
found  every  thing  fplendid  and  magnificent.  In  a 
word,  according  to  the  defcription  given  me  of  it, 
grandeur  and  elegance  feemed  to  vie  with  each 
other,  which  (hould  excel  in  the  attra&ive  power. 

When  the  time  of  dining  arrived,  the  table 
was  fpread  with  all  the  delicacies  of  the  feafon;— 
a  continued  round  of  fprightly  wit  rendered  the 
repafl  yet  more  agreeable,  and  for  the  fpace  of  ten 
days,  (for  fo  long  the  count  detained  them,)  they 
were  entertained  in  a  manner,  which  (hewed  the 
hofpitality  and  politenefs  of  the  French  nation. 

But  my  friend  informed  me,  that  during  the 
whole  time  they  were  there,  fcarcean  hour  pafled 
without  introducing fome new guefl,  and  that  every 
night  there  was  either  a  ball  or  concert.  In  fine, 
they  feemed  to  live  only  for  diverfion;  and  the 
count,  though  no  man  appeared  more  gay  in  com- 
pany, would  often  in  the  midft  of  his  hurry  take 
him  afide,  and  fpeak  in  this  manner: — "  You  fee, 
««  fir,  how  impoflible  it  is  to  indulge  contempla- 
«f  tion  in  this  place,  and  may  judge  if  a  little  re- 
"  cefs  from  fuch  a  profufion  of  thefe  noify  plea- 
"  fures,  is  not  entirely  neceflary  for  a  man  wh» 
"  would  not  chufe  to  forget  himfelf,  and  the  ends 
"for  which  he  was  created." 

I  muft  confefs,  that  when  I  fir  ft  heard  this  flo- 

ry,  the  veracity  of  which  I  had  no  reafon  to  call' 

in  queftion,  the  perfon  who  related  it  being  of 

undoubted  integrity,  I  could  not  believe  but  this 

count  Montaubin  had  fome  defect  in  the  compo- 

fure  of  his  brain,  which  rendered  hfm  at  fome 

certain  times  a  little  delirious, and  aflccd  my  friend' 

..it  ahitude  of  the  moon  this  nobleman  wa* 

accuilomed  to  go  into  this  voluntary  baniihment. 

S  3 


aoS  THE    FEMALE  B.  IV. 

The  gentleman,  who  by  this  queftion  faw  into 
my  thoughts,  afiured  me  I  was  greatly  miflaken 
in  my  conjectures; — that  the  perfon  I  took  to  be 
mad  or  whimtieal,  was  fo  far  from  either,  that  he 
never  knew  a  man  of  a  more  juft  way  of  think- 
ing; that  not  only  his  converfation,  but  manner 
of  deportment  in  every  thing  was  perfectly  unex- 
ceptionable; and  that  its  being  fo  might  greatly 
be  imputed  to  thofe-treflections  he  made  in  his  re- 
tirement. 

I  was  then  too  gay,  and  Heaven  knows  too  lit- 
tle a  lover  of  folitude,  to  be  brought  into  his  opi- 
nion, and  really  made  a  jeft  of  it  to  all  my  acquain- 
tance; but  I  have  firice  been  of  another  mind, 
and  find  there  was  much  more  to  be  admired  than, 
condemned  in  his  thus  fecluding  himfelf  from  the 
world  for  a  time,  that  he  might  know  the  better 
how  to  conduct  himfelfin  it  at  his  return. 

But  I  flill  think  there  was  a  poflibility  for  him 
to  have  enjoyed  his  beloved  retirement  in  a  place 
more  commodious  and  lefs  dangerous  than  that 
he  made  choice  of.  I  am  very  well  afl'ured  there 
are  impertinents  in  the  world,  who,  if  they  know 
where  one  is,  will  come  with  a  great  deal  of  offi- 
cious love,  and  in  a  manner  drag  one  into  com- 
pany; but  that  could  not  be  the  cafe  of  the  French, 
count,  who  doubtlefs  had  many  little  houfes,  to 
iiiy  of  which  he  might  have  withdrawn,  and  with 
the  fame  precaution  been  as  effectually  concealed 
;xs  in  this  cavern. 

I  fhould  have  been  glad  fo  have  had  my  curi- 
t'fity  fatisfied  in  one  point,  and  that  was,  whether 
:he  countefs  his  wife  was  let  into  the  fecret  of  the 
of  his  abode,and  his  reafons  forfuch  frequent 
himfelf  from  her;  but  this  my  friend 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  207 

was  as  ignorant  of  as  myfelf,  no  mention  being 
ever  made  of  it  in  the  family  that  he  heard  of; 
but  he  feemed  inclined,  as  well  as  myfelf,  to  be- 
lieve that  (he  was  not  kept  in  the  dark  in  this  ar- 
ticle, by  the  perfect  harmony  that  feemed  to  be 
between  them,  which,  without^  fhe  was  a  very  ex- 
traordinary woman  indeed,  could  not  have  fub- 
fifted,  if  ignorant  from  what  motives  he  deprived 
her  of  his  fociety. 

It  is  certain  there  are  very  few  married  women, 
efpecially  if  theylojfe  their  hufbands,  who  would 
approve  of  fuch  a*  behaviour,  even  though  they 
\vere  convinced  they  had  no  other  excitements  to 
it  than  the  count,  but  would  be  quite  outrageous 
to  be  left  alone,  without  a  perfect  knowledge  of 
every  particular  that  occafioned  it.  Madam  de 
Montaubin,  therefore,  could  have  no  firch  thing  as 
jealoufy  in  her  nature,  or  (he  muft,  without  all 
tloubt,  be  acquainted  with  the  whole  of  the  affair. 

But  however  that  was,  it  is  nothing  to  my  pre- 
fent  purpofe;  I  only  wifh  that  fome  of  our  incon- 
fiderates  would  ifnpofe  upon  themfelves  the  talk 
of  being  fometimes  alone,  and  am  apt  to  believe 
that  thofe,  to  whom  reflection  is  now  the  mod 
irkfome  thing  imaginable,  would,  by  frequent 
ufing  themfelves  to  it,  find  it  at  laft  iufficient  to 
COmpenfitte  for  all  they  fuffered  at  firft  from  their 
reluctance. 

I  know  nothing  more  difficult  than  for  perfons 
of  too  airy  and  volatile  a  difpofuion,  to  bring 
themfdvesto  that  habitude  I  am  endeavouring  to 
recommend;  nor  is  fuch  a  change  to  be  expected 
all  at  once,  much  lefs  is  if  to  be  hoped  for  from 
compulfion.  You  may  fliut  them  all  day  into  a 
wcni,  yet  aik  them  en  what  they  have  becu  think.- 


2o8  THE  FEMALE  B.  I/. 

ing,  and  they  will  tell  you,  on  nothing  but  their 
confinement.  That,  therefore,  is  the  moil  wrong 
method  can  be  taken : — fuch  people  mud  be  footh- 
cd,  not  menaced  into  reflexion;  and  I  know  of 
no  better  means,  than  by  laying  before  them  fuch 
books  as  may  be  moft  likely  to  hit  their  fancy:— 
even  thofe  which  ieem  the  lead  calculated  for  im- 
provement, provided  they  have  nothing  immoral 
or  incedent  in  them,  will  be  of  excellent  fervice 
to  bring  the  mind  to  take  delight  in  reading;  and 
when  that  is  once  accompli Lhed,  others  of  a  more 
ferious  nature  may  by  degrees  be  recommended. 

Painting,  efpecially  hiflory,  landfcape,  and 
fea-pieces,  is  alfo  an  excellent  promoter  of  reflec- 
tion:— fuch  profpe&s  charm  the  eye,  and  thence 
gain  an  eafy  paffage  to  the  foul,  exciting  curiofity 
in  the  moft  indolent.  It  is  impoffible  to  behold 
nature  thus  delineated,  without  receiving  an  im- 
preffion  which  will  dwell  upon  the  mind: — we 
{hall  think  of  the  great  tranfac~\ions  of  part  times, 
—the  different  fcenes  which  this  wide  earth  affords 
in  its  mountains,  its  vallk'S,  its  meadows,  and  it3 
rivers,  and  all  the  lovelinsfs  and  horrors  of  the 
furrounding  deep, — the  fhips  fmooth.  failing  with 
a  profperous  gale,  and  the  wrecked  veffel  bulged 
againfta  rock,  or  juft.  finking  in  thofe  fands  which 
lurk  beneath  the  waves.  Thefe  representations 
on  the  canvafs,  I  fay,  will  remain  in  our  remem» 
brancewhen  the  object  is  withdrawn,  aucl  cannot 
but  infpire  us  with  ideas  at  once  delightful  and 
inftru£tive : — they  will  afford  us  an  agreeable  en- 
tertainment within  ourfelves,  and  we  fhall  no 
longer  be  under  a  neceffity  of  fee-king  it  el  few  here. 

It  is  true,  that  moft  of  our  nobiiity  and  gentry 
themfelves  great  admirers  of  this  art,  and 


B.  IV.  SPECTATOR.  20? 

that  when  notice  is  given  of  any  capital  pictures 
to  be  difpofed  of  by  way  of  auction,  the  rooms 
where  they  are  to  be  exhibited  are  fufficiently 
crowded;  but  the  misfortune  is,  that  three  parts 
in  four  of  thofe  numerous  afiemblies  are  drawn 
thither  more  by  the  defire  of  feeing  one  another, 
than  any  other  motive : — they  look  on  it  as  one 
of  the  many  ways  of  killing  time; — a  morning's 
amufement,  and  meet  and  laugh,  make  appoint- 
ments for  parties  of  pleafure,  and  fometimes  for 
gallantry  : — on  fuch  as  thefe  the  works  of  a  Ti- 
tian, or  a  Pvaphae!,  will  have  little  force. — There 
are  generals,  who  feem  wholly  unaffected  by  the 
triumphs  of  old  Rome;  orators,  who  are  unmoved 
with  the  attitude  of  a  Cicero  or  a  Demofthenes; 
and  ladies,  whofe  hearts  are  incapable  of  feeling 
either  compaffion  for  a  dying  Lucretia,  or  admi- 
ration of  that  famed  Englifh  princefs,  who  fucked 
the  pcifch  from  her  hufband's  wound. 

The  fame  may  likewife  be  faid  of  many  who 
frequent  the  theatres: — they  regard  the  actors 
more  than  the  characters  they  rcprefent,  and  feera 
more  interefted  in  the  little  quarrels  they  fome- 
times have  among  themfelves,  than  in  the  fate  of 
the  real  heroes  and  heroines.  The  drefs,  the 
voice,  the  manner  of  Mr.  Quin,  Mr.  Garrick, 
Mr.  Cibbcr,  Mrs.  Horton,  Mrs.  Clive,  Mrs. 
Woflington,  £c.  &c.  mail  be  the  fubject  of  long 
converfations,  when  not  the  leaft  comment  is 
made,  or  notice  taken  of  the  cruelties  of  king 
Richard,  the  caufelefc  jealoufy  of  Othello,  the  filial 
piety  of  Hamlet,  the  virtue  of  Andromache,  the 
reformation  of  lady  Townly,  and  all  thofc  ftriking 
characters  which  the  poets  either  attempt  to  per- 
p.r.uate  or  invent,  as  excitements  to  great  actions 


2io  THE  FEMALE  B.  IV. 

in  feme,  and  leffons  of  morality  and  good  conduct 
in  others. 

Yet  what  is  more  truly  pleafmg  to  a  thinking 
mind,  than  to  fee  the  mofl  remarkable  paflages  of 
antiquity,  the  various  manners  of  far  diftant  na- 
tions, exhibited  in  the  touching  fcenes  of  well- 
wrote  tragedy!  Or  what  more  conducive  to  re- 
forming whatever  follies  we  are  guilty  of,  than  to 
find  them  artfully  expofed  in  the  ungalling  fatire 
of  genteel  comedy! 

To  reform  our  manners,  and  correct  our  errors, 
— to  infpire  us  with  high  ideas  of  honour  and  vir- 
tue through  the  canal  of  pleafure,  as  the  mod  likely 
means  of  conveying  them  into  the  foul,  was  un- 
deniably the  great  end  propofed  in  the  inftitution 
of  the  Drama ;  and  very  many  of  the  ancient,  and 
fome  modern  poets  have  happily  fucceeded  in  it. 
I  have  heard  of  perfons,  who  confcious  of  fome 
fecret  criip.e,  have  bren  fo  ftruck  with  the  repre- 
fcntation  of  it  on  the  ftage,  that  they  have  gone 
home,  confeffed  all,  and  paffed  their  whole  future 
lives  in  a  kind  of  penance  for  their  paft  tranfgref- 
fions.  Herbert  fays, 

"  A  verfe  may  catch  him  who  a  fermon  flies, 
"  And  turn  delight  into  a  facrifice." 

But  then  to  be  amended  either  by  this  or  any 
other  method  which  can  be  taken  for  that  purpofe, 
we  muft  be  a  little  attentive  to  the  objects  prefented 
to  us;  which,  I  am  forry  to  obferve,  is  feldom  the 
cafe  of  the  audiences  that  of  late  frequent  the 
theatres: — they  feem  difpofed  to  regard  only  what 
makes  them  laugh :  and  even  many  of  thofe,  who, 
in  complaifance  to  perfons  of  a  different  way  of 
j  udging,affec~l  to  be  mod  difiatisfied  with  the  rnana- 


B.  IV,          SPECTATOR.  an 

gers  of  the  playhoufes  for  introducingPantomime, 
are  in  their  hearts  pleafed  with  nothing  elfe. 

Some  again  will  boldly  argue  in  the  defence  of 
thofe  dumb  reprefentations:-— they  will  tell  you, 
that  the  Italians,  who  are  a  very  wife  nation, 
vouchiafe  the  higheft  encouragement  to  them  :— 
that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  wit  and  ingenuity  in 
the  contrivance  of  them;  and  that  it  mews  the 
fegacityand  penetration  of  an  audience  to  compre- 
hend, by  the  motions  of  the  performers,  every 
dcfign  of  the  piece,  as  well  as  ifit^ere  delivered 
in  fpeech.  There  is,  I  confefs,  fome  truth  in  this, 
v/here  people  give  themfelves  the  pains  of  obferva- 
tion;  but  where  they  are  too  indolent  to  do  that, 
and  are  diverted  only  with  the  transformations  of 
a  Harlequin,  without  any  regard  to  the  motives 
he  has  for  them,  I  fee  no  benefit  they  can  receive 
from  fuch  an  entertainment,  but  what  might  arife 
from  feeing  a  common  tumbler  or  rope-dancer. 

In  fine,  there  is  nothing  but  what  a  thinking 
mind  may  reap  fome  advantage  from ;  nor  is  there 
any  thing,  be  its  intrinfic  merit  never  fo  great, 
that  a  perfon  without  thought  can  be  the  better 
for  : — it  is  like  mufic  to  the  deaf,  or  a  beautiful 
landfcape  to  the  blind. 

There  is  a  mode  of  expreflion  in  every  one's 
mouth,  though  I  am  afraid  unclerftood  by  a  few, 
and  that  is,  when  you  would  give  the  higheft 
compliment  to  any  one  you  fay  he  has  a  good  tafle. 
This  is  a  character  which  all  are  ambitious  of 
acquiring,  as  it  is  looked  upon  to  imply  the  utmoft 
perfection  of  elegance  and  propriety  in  any  thing 
you  undertake.  To  explain  the  difference  of  ths 
true  and  falfe  tafle,  has  employed  the  pens  of  many 
great  authors  j  and  yet  I  think  none  have  done  ic 


2U2  THE  FEMALE  B,  IV. 

effectually  enough  to  give  the  reader  that  diftindl 
idea  of  it  which  is  neceflary;  for  what  is  the  true 
tafte,  but  a  fine  fancy  blended  with  a  ftrong  judg- 
ment!— What  indeed,  but  that  juft  manner  of 
thinking  I  have  been  all  this  time  recommending; 
and  what  the  falfe,  but  a  heedlefs  following  the 
notions  of  others! — aiming  to  do  as  fome  pcr- 
fons,  whofe  reputation  for  a  fine  genius  is  efta- 
bliflied,  have  done,  without  confidering  that  what 
is  infinitely  becoming  in  one,  often  happens  to  be 
the  reverfe  in  another.  There  are  a  thoufand 
circumftances  which  may  render  fuch  an  imitati- 
on aukward  and  prepofterous,  and  juflly  deferve 
to  be  called  falfe  taftc. 

It  is  therefore  the  bufinefs  of  every  one,  who 
would  make  a  finning  figure  in. life,  avoid  any 
inconveniencies,  reap  any  benefits,  enjoy  any  per- 
manent felicity  themfelves,  or  beftow  it  on  others, 
to  gain  as  perfect  an  acquaintance  as  in  them  lies, 
by  thought  and  application,  both  with  what  they 
are,  and  what  they  ought  to  attempt  to  be. 


B    O    O    K    V. 

IN  gratitude  and  complaifance  to  the  firft  cor- 
refpondent  the  FEMALE  SPECTATOR  has  yet 
been  favoured  with,  it  is  the  opinion  of  our  Society 
that  the  entertainment  prepared  for  this  month 
fhoulc  be  poftponed,  in  order  to  infert  her  obli- 
ging letter,  and  purfue  the  theme  me  has  been  fo 


B,  V.          SPECTATOR.  213 

good  to  give,  which  indeed  cannot  be  too  often 
nor  too  flrenuoufly  enforced. 

To  the  FEMALE  SPECTATOR. 

" MADAM, 

"  Though  you  have  not  thought  fit,  in  thofe 
<f  monthly  lucubrations  with  which  you  have 
"  hitherto  obliged  the  public,  to  invite  any  cor- 
"  refpondence,  and  I  am  wholly  ignorant  whether 
4<  a  hint,  communicated  to  you  in  this  manner, 
"  will  be  acceptable j  yet,  as  the  intention  of 
'*  your  work  is  plainly  to  reform  thofe  errors  in 
tl  conduct,  which,  if  indulged,  lead  on  to  vices, 
"  fuch'as  muft  render  us  unhappy  for  our  whole 
'*  lives,  I  cannot  forbear  acquainting  you  with  my 
'*  fentiments  on  the  undertaking,  and  how  far  I 
"  am  pleafed  or  difpleafed  with  the  execution. 

"  You  are  fenfible  that  every  thing  which  ap- 
"  pears  in  print  pafles  through  as  many  various 
*'  cenfures  as  there  are  opinions  in  the  readers; 
•«  but  I  aflure  you  I  am  of  that  number  which  au- 
**  thors  call  the  courteous, and  take  a  much  greater 
«'  fatisfacr.ion  in  applauding  than  condemning.  The 
"  praifes  you  receive  from  all  the  wife  and  virtuous, 
*'  I  readily  join  in,  and  make  as  publick  as  my  way 
*f  of  life  will  permit.  I  am  a  zealous  defender  of 
'"  your  caufe  againft  all  the  cavils  of  conceited  ig- 
"  norance  and  open  libertinilm ;  and  where  I  ima- 
'**  gine  you  fall  a  little  fhort  of  my  expectations,  I 
"  am  entirely  filent.  This  I  think  is  dealing  with 
"  you  as  a  friend,  and  you  will  not  therefore  take 
*(  it  ill  if  I  fometimes  play  the  part  of  a  monitor, 
*'  and  remind  you  both  now,  and  as  often  as  I 
"  (hall  find  occafion,  of  any  ©millions,  which  can- 
<*  not  be  fuch  as  you  may  not  eafily  atone  for  in 

VOL.  I.  T 


2T4  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

"  the  enfuingbook;  or  even  venture  to  impart  to 
"  you  a  few  wandering  notions  of  my  own,  fince 
"  I  leave  you  at  full  liberty  either  to  conceal  or 
"  publifh  them  as  you  may  judge  proper. 

"  Nothing  certainly  can  be  more  juft  than 
"  your  definition  of  the  paffions,  or  more  pathetic 
'*  than  your  reprefentation  of  the  milchiefs  they 
"  bring  upon  mankind;  but  I  think  you  have 
"  touched  fomewhat  too  flightly,  or  at  leaft  not 
w  been  fo  particular  as  might  have  been  expected 
*'  from  a  Spectator,  on  fome  of  thofe  innumerable 
"  ways  that  licenfed  luxury  has  of  late  invented  to 
"  footh,  or  rather  to  excite,  the  moft  dangerous 
"  propenfities  in  youth. 

"  I  am  far  from  being  of  that  auftere  nature  fome 
"  are,  who  make  no  allowances  for  the  difference 
*'  of  age,  and  deny  to  thofe  under  their  tuition,  the 
*-'  innocent  recreations  which  theearly  years  of  life 
**  demand: — on  the  contrary,  I  am  for  having 
«'  them  partake,  in  a  reafonable  degree,  every  plea- 
"  fure  this  great  world  affords;  but  then  I  would 
•*  not  have  any  of  thofe  pleafures  become  a  bufi- 
"  nefs,  and  engrofs  the  attention  fo  much  as  to 
<e  take  it  off  from  fubje£b  of  a  more  profitable 
"  kind,  thereby  rendering  dangerous  what  is  un- 
"  hurtful  in  itfelf,  and  making  future  time  pay  too 
*<  dearly  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  prefent. 

"  Some  of  our  modern  diverfion-mongers  think 
"  it  not  enough  to  be  every  day  contriving  new  en- 
"  tertainnients  for  our  evenings  amufement;  the 
*'  morning  too  muft  be  taken  up  in  them,  as  tho* 
«*  we  were  born  for  nothing  but  recreation.  Vaux- 
«c  hall,  Cuper's,  and  all  thofe  numerous  places  of 
•<«  rendezvous,  except  Ranelagh-Gardens,  content 
*<  themfelves  indeed  with  ingroffing  that  part  o-£ 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  3*5 

"  our  time  in  which  bufinefs  ufually  gives  way  to 
'*  pleafure;  but  this  latter  is  not  fatisfied  without 
"  encroaching  on  thofc  hours  which  reafon  and 
"  nature  require  mould  be  otherwife  employed. 
"  There  is  not  fo  great  a  fpace  of  time  between 
<c  me  and  youth,  but  lean  very  well  remember,  that 
"  after  having  paid  my  devotions  to  Heaver.,  wafh- 
'*  ed,  drefled,  and  eat  my  breakfaft,  the  remaining 
"  hours  till  noon  were  chieily  taken  up  with  thofe 
*'  who  inftru&ed  me  in  working,  dancing,  mu  fie, 
*'  wiiting,  and  thofe  other  necefiary  accomplifh- 
"  ments  of  my  fex;  and  thought  that  if  I  was  al- 
"  lowed  to  take  a  little  walk  in  St  James's- Park, 
"  or  in  our  own  garden,  in  order  to  get  a  ftomach 
M  to  my  dinner,  it  was  as  much  relaxation  as  I 
"  ought  to  expect. 

"  1  trained  up  my  only  daughter  in  the  fame 
"  manner  1  had  been  bred  up  myfelf,  and  had  no 
"  reafon  to  fufpeci  fhe  was  diflatisfied  with  this 
'*  regulation,  till  fhc  arrived  ather  fourteenth  year  j 
**  at  which  time  Ranelagh  unhappily  gave  notice 
"  there  would  be  publickbreakfafting  every  morn- 
*{  ing.  This  gave  a  turn  very  vexatious  to  me,  and 
"  prejudicial  to  the  education  I  intended  to  be- 
"  (tow  on  her :  1  immediately  difcovered  a  remifs- 
'*  nefs  in  all  her  former  ftudies;  and,  at  length,  a 
"  total  averfion  to  them.  The  French  miltrefs  is 
<{  nowatroublefome  companion-,  theneedleamod 
"  odious  employment;  the  fpinnetis untuned;  the 
tf  mufick-books  are  thrown  afide;  nothing  feems 
<'  worthy  her  regard,  but  how  to  appear  in  the 
"  gentecleft  clifliabille  at  Ranelagh.  Every  morn- 
*'  ing  my  houfe  is  crowded  with  young  ladies,  to 
"  call  mifs  Biddy  to  go  with  them  to  breakfaft  at 
«  Ranelagh;  nothing  is  talked  of  at  their  return 
T  2 


216  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

*{  but  what  was  faid  and  done  at  Ranelagh ;  and 
*'  in  what  drefles  they  fhall  repair  at  night  again 
«  to  that  charming  place;  fo  that  the  whole  day 
«'  is  entirely  taken  up  with  it. 

"  Tell  me,  dear  Spectator,  is  it  confiftent  with 
**  the  character  of  a  woman  of  prudence, to  fufFer  a 
**  young  creature,  over  whom  Heaven  and  nature 
'«'  has  given  me  the  fole  authority,  to  conduct  her- 
«'  felf  in  this  fafhidn?  Yet  by  what  means  is  the 
*c  growing  miichief  to  be  fupprefled?  When  I 
«  offer  to  fet  any  bounds  to  this  wild  career,  I  have 
"  only  fullennefs  and  whimpering.  athome,and  no 
«*  doubt  cenfures  abroad  for  my  great  feverity.  In 
<c  vain  are  my  remonftrances  on  mifpending  time 
*l  in  thofe  giddy  rambles;  all  I  can  fay  makes  not 
*'  the  lead  impreffion;  and  1  dread  to  drive  her  to 
"  extremes,  by  laying  thofe  reftri£tions  on  her 
4<  which  are  neceflary  to  keep  her  at  home  Who 
«'  knows  what  lengths  unthinking  youth  may  run? 
«  We  often  fee  people  of  her  years  fatally  inge- 
<£  nious  in  contriving  methods  to  difappoint  the 
4<  utmoft  vigilance  of  thofe  who  have  the  care  of 
"  them ;  and  if,  by  endeavouring  to  preferve  her 
"  from  one  danger,  I  fhould  provoke  her  to  throw 
*{  herfelf  into  others,  Lfhould  be  inexcufable  to 
€<  myfelf.  The  dilemma  I  labour  under  on  this 
«f  fcore  is  terrible; — I  therefore  conjure  you,  as 
«'  you  cannot  be  infenfible  of  what  many  afflicted 
<(  parents,  as  well  as  myfeif,muft  feel,  in  feeing  all 
"  the  fruit  of  their  long  care  and  teadernefsfonear 
*(  being  blafted,  to  fet  forth,  in  the  moft  moving 
*'  and  pathetic  terms  you  can,  the  folly  of  gadding 
«  eternally  to  thofe  public  places: — convince  our 
'*  young  ladies  of  the  lofs  it  is  to  themfelves,  how 
f '  much  it  dif^ualtfies  them  for  all  the  facial  duties, 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  217 

"  renders  them  neglectful  of  what  they  owe  to 
"  Heaven,  and  to  thofe  who  gave  them  being,  and 
"  incapable  of  being  either  good  wives,  good  mo- 
"  thers,  good  friends,  or  good  miftreffes ;  and 
"  thereby  entails  fure  unhappinefs  on  their  own 
"  future  days,  as  well  as  on  all  thofe  who  havs 
**  any  relation  to  them. 

*'  A  public  reproof  from  you,  may,  perhaps,  be 
"  more  effectual  than  all  the  private  admonitions 
"  of  their  friends,  which  they  are  too  apt  to  look 
"  upon  as  words  of  courfe: — the  advice  of  a  per- 
"  fon,  who  can  have  no  other  intereft  in  giving 
"  it,  than  the  generous  part  (he  takes  in  the  happi- 
*(  nefs  of  her  fellow-creatures,  will  certainly  fink 
"  into  the  foul  of  every  one,  not  wholly  loft  to  all 
"  fenfe  of  her  own  good,  and  complete  the  wifhes 
"  of  a  great  number  of  your  readers,  as  well  as  of 

Your  real  admirer, 

Hanover-Square,          and  moft  humble  fervanr, 
Aug.  2,  1744.  SARAH  OLDFASHION. 

"  P.  S.  If  the  hopeslhave  in  the  Spectator  fhould 
"  fail  me,  I  am  refolved  to  fend  Biddy  to  a  rela- 
"  tion  I  have  in  Cornwall,  whofe  neareft  neigh- 
w  bour  is  twelve  miles  diftant;  and  whence,  if 
"  fhe  continues  her  rambling  humour,  huge  crag- 
"  gy  rocks  on  the  one  fide,  and  no  lefs  dreadful 
"  mines  on,  the  other,  will  be  her  only  profpe£t." 

The  cafe  of  this  lady,  I  mud  confefs,  is  greatly 
to  be  commiferated,  and  muft  be  felt  by  all  who 
either  are,  or  have  been  mothers.  Could  children 
be  fenfible  of  the  endlefs  cares,  the  watchings,  the 
anxieties  which  attend  paternal  tender  nefs,  and  how 
im- edible  it  is  for  them  to  return  in  kind  thofe  o- 
biigations,  they  would  certainly  avoid  doing  any 
thing  that  might  render  fruitlefs  the  pains  and  h- 


218  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

bour  employed  for  their  intereft; — gratitude,' as 
well  as  felf-love,  would  make  them  ufe  their  utmoft 
efforts  to  improve  the  education  beftowed  on  them; 
but  how  hard  it  is  to  bring  young  people  to  a  juft 
way  of  thinking,  I  have  already  taken  notice  of  in 
a  former  Spe&ator,  as  I  have  fomewhere  read, 
f*  Experience  vainly  in  our  youth  is  fought, 
""And,  with  age  purchas'd,  is  too  dearly  bought." 
Too  many  there  are,  who  know  not  how  to  live 
in  the  world  till  they  are  ready  to  go  out  of  it; 
but,  as  Dryden  fays,. 

"  Let  life  pafs  through  them  like  a  leaky  fieve." 
Much  therefore  is  it  to  be  lamented,  that  fuch 
encouragements  are  given  to  the  natural  giddinefs 
of  youth,  and  that  the  prevalence  of  example  in 
thofe  of  riper  years  fhould  afford  a  fanction  to  thofe 
jn  whom  the  love  of  pleafure  is  lefs  inexcufable. 
Yet,  after  all,  what  are  the  mighty  pleafures 
which  thefe  walks  afford? — Have  not  moft  of 
our  nobility  who  frequent  them  much  more  de- 
lightful recefles  of  their  own! — Can  either  Rar 
nelagh,  or  any  of  thofe  places  where  they  pay  for 
entrance,  equal  in  elegance  or  magnificence  many 
of  thofe  gardens,  which  they  need  but  ftep  out  of 
their  own  apartments  to  enjoy  the  pleafures  of! — 
Nobody  fure  will  pretend  to  fay  the  contrary; 
but  then  indeed  it  may  be  alledged,  that  to  fuch 
perfons,  who  by  their  high  offices  in  the  ftate,  or 
attendance  at  court,  are  obliged  to  keep  much  in 
town,  places  of  relaxation  are  both  necefTary  and 
agreeable:  it  muft  be  acknowledged  that  they  are 
fo,  and  it  would  be  the  higheft  injuftice,  as  well 
as  arrogance  in  a  Spectator,  to  pafs  any  cenfure  on 
the  great  world  for  amufments,  which  are  indeed 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  21? 

prejudiciaf  to  the  people  of  an  inferior  condition, 
only  by  being  indulged  to  an  excefs. 

But  the  misfortune  is,  that  whatever  is  done 
by  perfons  of  quality  prefently  becomes  the  mode,- 
which  every  one  is  ambitious  of  apeing,  let  it  fuit 
ever  fo  ill  with  their  circumftances :  it  is  not  the 
fine  profpect  that  Ranelagh  is  happy  in,  the  plea- 
fant  walks,  the  magnificent  amphitheatre,  nor  the 
melodious  founds  that  ifiuefrom  the  orcheflra,  that 
make  the  afiembly  there  fo  numerous;  but  the 
vanity  every  one  has  of  joining  company,  as  it 
were,  with  their  fuperiors; — of  having  it  in  their 
power  to  boaft*  when  they  come  home,  of  the  no- 
tice taken  of  them  by  fuch  a  lord,  or  fuch  a  great 
lady:  to  defcant  upon  their  drefles,  their  behaviour, 
and  pretend,  to  difcover  who  likes  who;  what  fine 
new  married  lady  cftqyets  it  with  her  huiband's 
intimate;  what  duke- regards  his  wife  with  no 
more  than  an  enforced  complaifance ;  and  whether 
the  fortune,  or  perfon,  of  the  young  heirefs,  is 
the  object  of  her  obfequious  follower's  flame. 

This  ridiculous  defire  of  being  thought  to  have 
a  knowledge  of  things,  no  lefs  out  of  their  fphere 
to  attain  than  unprofitable  if  acquired,  is  extreme- 
ly prevalent  in  many  people,  efpecially  among  the 
little  gentry^  and  is  one  of  the  chief  motives  which 
draw  them  in  fuch  crowds  to  all  places  where  their 
fuperiors  refort. 

An  afib&atum  of  this  fort  is  not  confined  to  any 
age; — we  fee  it  from  fixtten  to  fixty;  but  when  it 
happens  to  gain  entrance  in  the  mind  of  a  lady  fo 
rery  young  as  mifs  Biddy,  and  is  joined  with  that 
vanity  of  attracting  admiration,  and  a  train  of  lo- 
vers, which  naturally  arifes  on  the  entrance  into 
tlicir  teens,  h  it  nut  to  be  wondered  at,  that  it  is 


220  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

fo  difficult  to  reftrain  them  from  going  to  any 
place  which  flatters  them  with  the  gratification  of 
their  piide  in  both  thefe  points. 

I  am  afraid,  therefore,  that  Mrs  Oldfafhion  will 
find  all  her  endeavours  for  this  purpofe  unavail- 
ing, unlefs  (he  has  recourfe  to  force,  which  (he 
feems  little  inclined  to  put  in  practice,  and  I  can 
by  no  means  approve,  as  the  remedy  might  prove 
to  be  of  worfe  confequence  than  the  difeafe: — 
much  lefs  would  I  advife  her  to  fend  her  into 
Cornwall.  A  young  lady  of  her  vivacity,  and  who 
feems  to  have  fo  high  a  relifh  for  the  pleafures  of 
the  town,  finding  herfelf  fnatched  away  from  e- 
very  thing  (he  thinks  a  joy  in  life,  and  plunged 
into  fo  frightful  a  folitude,  would  certainly  be  able 
to  preferve  no  degree  of  moderation.  If  of  a  mild 
and  gentle  nature,  inward  repinings  and  a  waft- 
ing melancholy  would  prey  upon  her  vitals,  im- 
pair her  health  and  underftanding,  and  by  de- 
grees render  her  both  ftupid  and  difeafed-, — if,  on 
the  contrary,  there  be  the  feeds  of  obftinacy  and 
perverfenefs  in  her  foul,  (he  will  refent  the  cruelty 
(he  imagines  herfelf  treated  with;  and,  as  confe- 
deration is  not  to  be  expected  at  thofe  years,  per- 
haps throw  herfelf  into  much  greater  misfortunes 
than  fb.e  was  fent  thither  to  avoid,  merely  to  pre- 
vent the  too  great  caution  of  thofe  who  have  the 
power  over  her:— -either  of  thefe  con  fe  quenches 
muft  be  terrible  to  a  parent;  fo  that  I  am  wholly 
againft  running  fuch  a  hazard  by  exerting  autho- 
rity in  this  manner. 

Alvario,  a  gentleman  of  fortune  and  figure  in 
the  world,  was  left  a  widower  with  two  daughters, 
who,  in  right  of  their  mother,  were  coheirefles  of 
an  eftate  of  upwards  of  a  thoufand  pounds  a-yeai ; 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  221 

the  eldeft,  whom  I  fliall  call  Chriftabella,  v?as  ex- 
tremely beautiful,  and  full  of  fpirit;  but  Lucilla, 
her  younger  fifter,  was  of  a  fickly  conftitution, 
and  confequently  more  dull,  and  lefs  qualified  or 
inclined  to  converfation :  fhe  never  cared  for  ihr- 
ring  out,  or  emeitaining  any  company  at  homej 
but  Chriftabella's  airy  difpofition  would  fcarce  fuf- 
fer  her  to  be  at  home: — the  park,  the  play,  the  o- 
pera,  the  drawing-room,  were  the  idols  of  her 
heart :-— drefs,  equipage,  and  admiration  took  up  all 
her  thoughts.  Youth,  beauty,  arid  fortune  are  rare- 
ly poffefled  without  an  adequate  proportion  of  va- 
nity; and  it  muft  be  owned,  this  lady  was  not  with- 
out it : — fhe  plumed  herfelf  on  the  daily  conquefts 
her  charms  gained  herj  and  though  fhe  had  too 
much  wit  to  believe  all  the  flattering  declarations 
made  to  her,  by  fome  perfons  who  were  not  in  a 
condition  to  fulfil  their  pretences,  yet  (lie  had  not 
power  enough  to  defend  her  from  taking  pleafure 
in  them. 

In  fine,  though  perfectly  innocent,  even  in 
thought,  of  every  thing  to  which  virtue  was  repug- 
nant, the  gaiety  of  her  behaviour  rendered  her  li- 
able to  the  ccn lures  of  fome,  who  take  a  malicious 
pleafure  in  blafting  the  characters  of  thofe  more 
amiable  than  thcmfclves.  Her  father,  who  was 
a  man  of  gallantry  himielf,  and  confequently  too 
ready  to  mifmterpret  any  little  freedom  taken  by 
our  fex  as  the  efFedl  of  an  amorous  inclination, 
opened  his  ears  to  all  the  infinuations  made  hiiiy 
by  thofe  of  their  kindred,  who  had  no  good- will 
to  Chriftabella,  on  account  of  her  not  being  able 
to  reftrain  herfelf  from  frequently  throwing  out 
bitter  jefts  on  fome  of  their  too  rigid  rules:  among 
;  or  rather  at  thsir  head,  was  an  old  maiden 


ill  THE   FEMALE  B.  V. 

aunt,  -who  lived  in  the  fame  houfe,  and  was,  as  it 
were,  a  kind  of  governante  over  the  two  young 
ladies :  this  ill-natured  creature  picked  up  all  the 
ftories  (he  could  from  the  enviers  of  her  niece's 
perfections,  and  reported  them  with  the  moft  ag- 
gravating additions,  to  Alvario,  conjuring  him  to 
lay  his  commands  on  her  to  be  more  circumfpect 
in  her  conduct. 

Chriftabella  ftarted  at  finding  herfelf  accufed 
of  crimes  which  (he  never  had  the  leaft  notion 
of,  and  would  have  disd  rather  than  been  guilt/ 
of ;  but  neither  the  ciifpleafure  (he  found  it  gave 
her  father,  nor  the  regard  {he  had  of  her  own  re- 
putation, were  powerful  enough  to  make  her  re- 
trench any  of  thofe  liberties  (he  had  accuftorned 
herfelf  to  take,  and  as  me  knew  them  to  be  only 
fuch  as  (he  could  anfwer  to  her  own  honour,  feem- 
ed  altogether  indolent  how  they  might  appear  in 
the  eye  of  the  world. 

In  vain  Alvario  remonft-ated,  menaced,,  forbade 
her,  on  pain  of  forfeiting  all  pretenfions  to  his  fa- 
vour, ever  to  come  any  more  into  fome  company, 
or  be  feen  in  fome  places  the  had  been  ufed  to  fre- 
quent : — no  confederations  of  the  duty  (he  owed  to 
him  as  a  parent  were  fufficient  to  reftrain  her  from 
following  her  inclinations;  and  (he  thought  her- 
felf more  injured  by  his  believing  the  afpertions 
thrown  on  her,  than  fhe  could  injure  him  by  her 
difobedience. 

It  is  highly  probable,  that  the  knowledge  (he 
was  born  to  a  fortune  independent  on  him,  went 
a  great  way  towards  emboldening  her  to  aft  in  this 
manner: — certain  it  is,  that  her  conduct  was  fuch 
as  plainly  teftified  (he  had  but  a  fmall  fhare  either 
of  love  or  fear  for  him;  which,  fo  enraged  him^ 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  223 

as  indeed  he  had  juft  caufe  to  be,  that  he  made 
her  be  locked  up  in  her  chamber,  and  fuffered  her 
to  fee  nobody  but  her  aunt,  whofe  fociety  {he 
would  have  been  glad  to  have  difpenfed  with,  and 
a  maid-fervantj  who  came  in  to  bring  her  food  and 
other  necefl'aiies. 

"  But  this  confinement  was  fo  far  from  humbling 
the  haughtinefs  of  her  fpirit,  that  on  the  contrary 
it  rendered  her  more  obftinate;  and  looking  on  the 
treatment  (lie  received  as  the  effect:  of  tyranny 
rather  than  paternal  care,  me  no  longer  confidered 
Alvario  as  her  father,  but  a  cruel  gaoler,  to  whom 
(he  would  not  condefcend  to  make  the  lead  fub- 
miffion;  and  when  her  aunt  told  her,  that  if  me 
would  promife  to  make  a  better  ufe  of  her  liberty 
than  me  had  done,  me  would  endeavour  to  prevail 
with  her  brother  to  pardon  what  was  part,  (lie  an- 
fwered,  that  (he  knew  herfelf  guilty  of  nothing  that 
required  amendment,  and  therefore  would  not  pre- 
tend to  make  any  alteration  in  her  conduct. 

In  fine,  ihe  behaved  with  fo  little  natural  affec- 
tion or  duty,  that  Alvario  was  foon  convinced  he 
had  taken  the  wrong  method  to  bring  her  to  a 
better  way  of  thinking,  and  repented  he  had  not 
made  trial  of  more  gentle  means :  but  though  he 
extremely  loved  her,  he  thought  it  would  be  un- 
becoming his  character  to  be  the  firfl  that  fhould 
recede  i  therefore  continued  her  confinement,  flat- 
tering himfclf  that  me  would  in  time  petition  him, 
at  lead  for  a  releafe. 

But  while  he  was  vainly  expecting  to  bend  a 
fpirit  fo  untameable,  (he  was  contriving  means 
to  make  her  efcape  at  once  from  his  houfe  and 
authority,  refolving,  if  fhe  could  once  get  loofe, 
to  take  lodgings,  and  oblige  her  father  to  put  inu> 


224  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

her  hands,  or  thofe  of  fome  perfon  flie  would 
nominate  as  her  guardian,  that  part  of  the  eftate, 
which  (he  was  too  fenfible  he  could  not  with-hold 
from  her. 

The  firfl  attempt  (he  made  for  this  purpofe  was 
to  get  the  maid  that  waited  On  her  into  her  inte- 
reft;  but  all  the  promifes  (he  made  being  ineffec- 
tual to  corrupt  the  integrity  of  this  faithful  crea- 
ture, (he  had  recourfe  to  a  ftratagem,  which  one 
would  be  furprized  to  think  fhould  ever  enter  in- 
to the  head  of  one  who  was  not  yet  arrived  at  her 
fixteenth  year. 

Pen,  ink,  and  paper,  unhappily  being  not  re- 
fufed  her,  fhe  wrote  a  great  number  of  little  billets, 
complaining  of  the  injultice  fhe  received  from  aa 
inhuman  father,  who  had  locked  her  up  on  pur- 
pofe to  make  her  pine  herfelf  to  death,  that  the 
whole  of  the  eftate  might  defcend  to  his  other 
more  favoured  daughter.  Thefe  fhe  folded  up, 
and  directed, 

«'  To  any  charitable  perfon  who  fhall  pa{s  this 
"  way,  and  has  companion  enough  to  aflift  an 
'*  abufed  daughter  in  her  efcape  from  the  moft 
"  barbarous  of  all  fathers." 

Several  of  thefe  letters  fhe  threw  out  of  the  win- 
dow as  foon  as  it  was  dark,  but  they  were  either 
net  feen  and  trod  under  foot,  or  fell  into  the  hands 
of  fuch,  as  either  knew  not  what  to  make  of  them, 
or  did  not  care  to  interfere  in  the  affair.  At 
length,  when  fhe  grew  half  diftra&ed  at  the  {cu- 
pidity and  infenfibility  of  the  world,  and  began  to 
defpair  of  the  fuccefs  fhe  aimed  at  by  this  means, 
as  fhe  was  throwing  out  the  laft  flie  intended  to 
make  trial  of,  fate  dire£V.ed  it  to  light  on  the 
ihoulder  of  a  gentleman,  who  happened  to  be 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  225 

knight-errant  enough  to  attempt  the  relief  of  this 
diftrefled  damfel. 

He  Xaw  from  whence  it  fell  by  the  light  of  a 
lamp  which  was  oppofite  to  the  houfe,  and  heard 
the  window  fhut  juft  as  he  took  it  up : — the  mo- 
ment he  came  home  he  examined  the  contents,  and 
found  fomething  fo  whimfical  in  the  adventure, 
that  he  refolved  to  fathom  the  bottom  of  it.  He 
was  a  man  of  no  fortune,  and  had  fupported  the 
appearance  of  a  gentleman  merely  by  gaming;  fo 
thought,  that  if  the  confined  lady  was  really  fuch 
as  her  letter  (ignified,  he  ought  not  to  neglect  what 
liis  good  genius  had  thrown  in  his  way,  but  make 
u(e  of  the  opportunity  which  gave  him  fuch  fair 
hopes  of  eftablifliing  himfelf  in  the  world. 

Early  the  next  morning  he  made  it  his  bufi- 
nefs  to  enquire  among  the  neighbourhojcl  into  the 
circumftancesof  Alvario,  and  was  foon  informed 
of  the  truth  of  every  thing.  To  be  afiiired  that 
the  young  lady,  who  implored  affiftance,  had  art 
eftate  independent  either  of  her  father  or  any  one 
elfe,  flattered  his  moftfanguine  views;  but  which 
way  he  fhould  let  her  know  how  ready  he  was  to 
obey  any  injunction  fhe  fhould  lay  upon  him  for 
the  recovery  of  her  liberty,  was  the  great  diffi- 
culty. To  write,  he  perceived,  would  be  in  vain ; 
he  fuppofed  by  the  method  fhe  took,  that  fhe  had 
no  perfon  whom  (he  could  confide  in,  either  for 
fending  or  receiving  any  letters;  or  if  (he  had,  was 
wholly  ignorant  who  that  perfon  was : — at  lad,  af- 
ter various  turns  of  invention,  he  bethought  him- 
felf of  one,  dangerous  enough  indeed,  but  fome- 
what  he  thought  was  to  be  ventured. 

The  window  from  whence  he  found  the  letter 
came,  was  but  one  (lory  from  the  ground,  and  be«< 

VOL.  I.  U 


226  THE   FEMALE  B.  V. 

ing  a  back-room,  looked  into  a  little  court,  which, 
though  a  thorough-fare,  was  not  much  frequented 
in  the  night.  He  therefore  refolved  to  climb  it, 
which  he  did  by  the  help  of  a  ftep-ladder  he  pro- 
cured, and  brought  himfelf  to  the  place  about  the 
fame  hour  he  had  received  the  letter.  As  he  made 
not  the  leafl  noife  in  mounting,  he  looked  through 
the  glafs,  and  by  the  curtains  not  being  entirely 
clofed,  faw  the  fair  authorefs  of  the  fummons  fit- 
ting in  a  melancholy  pofture,  leaning  her  head  up- 
on her  hand : — he  found  flie  was  alone,  and  ven- 
tured to  knock  foftly  againft  the  window: —  fhe 
darted  at  the  noife,  but  being  of  a  difpofition  far 
from  timid,  ftepped  toward  the  window,  which  he 
immediately  drew  up  on  the  outfide,  and  making 
as  low  a  bow  as  the  pofture  he  was  in  would  ad- 
mit, "  Be  not  alarmed,  fair  creature,  faid  he,  I 
"  come  to  offer  you  that  affiftance  which  this 
<(  mandate  tells  me  your  condition  requires."  In 
fpeaking  thefe  words  he  prefented  her  with  the 
billet  (he  had  thrown; — the  fight  of  which  diflipa- 
ting  all  the  apprehenfions  fhe  might  have  on  his 
being  there,  on  fome  lefs  agreeable  defign,  fhe 
thanked  him  for  the  trouble  he  took,  and  the  dan- 
ger to  which  he  expofed  himfelf,  in  the  moft  grate- 
ful and  obliging  terms : — after  this,  as  time  would 
not  permit  much  ceremony  on  either  fide,  fhe  in- 
formed him,  that  the  fervice  fhe  intreated  of  him 
was  firft  to  provide  a  lodging  for  her  in  fome  houfe 
of  reputation,  and  that  he  would  come  again  the 
next  night  and  help  her  to  defcend  from  the  win- 
dow, there  being  no  other  way  of  her  getting  out 
of  the  houfe.  This  he  allured  her  of  performing, 
and  fhe  promifed  him  that  fhe  would  return  the 
obligation  with  every  mark  of  gratitude  a  virtuous 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  227 

woman  had  to  bellow,  or  a  man  of  honour  could 
expect: — after  which  he  defcended,  and  me  made 
fafl  her  window,  both  of  them  highly  fatisfied 
with  this  interview,  though  for  different  realons; 
(he  full  of  hopes  of  regaining  her  dear  liberty; 
and  he,  of  having  it  in  his  power  to  oblige  her 
to  enter  into  a  fecond,  and  more  laiting  con- 
finement. 

The  gamefter  was  not  remifs  in  any  thing  that 
might  contribute  to  the  gaining  fo  rich  a  prize  as 
Chriftabella;  he  prepared  a  lodging  for  her,  fur- 
nifhed  in  a  very  complete  manner,  but  it  was  at  the 
houfe  of  a  perfon  to  whom  he  eommunicated  the 
whole  of  the  affair,  arid  who  had  reafons  to  a£t  in 
fuch  a  manner  as  fhould  forward  his  defigns. 

When  the  appointed  hour  arrived,  he  repaired 
to  the  window,  where  Chviftabella  flood  in  full 
expectation  of  his  coming,  and  no  fconer  faw  the 
ladder  fixed  than  (he  defcended,  without  exacting 
any  other  promife  from  her  deliverer  than  what 
(he  had  received  from  him  the  night  before.  - 

Some  hours  before  her  departure,  (he  wrote  a 
letter  to  her  father,  and  laid  it  in  a  place  where 
me  was  certain  it  would  be  found  as  foon  as  her 
flight  mould  be  difcovered.  The  terms  in  which 
Ihe  exprefied  herfelf  to  him  were  as  follow : 

SI  R, 

"  The  cruel  ufage  I  have  received  from  you 
"  makes  me  imagine  you  forget  you  gave  me  be- 
««  ing,  and  abfolves  me  from  the  duty  I  otherwife 
«*  mould  owe  you  as  a  father : — 1  go  for  ever  from 
*{  you,  and  expect  you  will  not  force  me  to  take 
«{  any  meafures  unbecoming  the  character  of  a 
«  daughter,  in  order  to  gain  poffeffion  of  my  birth- 
U  2 


228  THE    FEMALE  B.  V. 

**  right,  which  you  have  long  enjoyed  the  ufe  of, 
*'  and  is  high  time  fhould  now  devolve  on, 
S  I  R, 

Your  much  injured  daughter, 

CHRISTABELLA.' 

A  coach  that  waited  at  the  end  of  the  ftreet 
conveyed  her  to  her  new  lodging,  and  the  perfon 
•who  attended  her  thither  omitted  nothing  that 
might  infpire  her  with  a  high  idea  of  his  honour, 
and  alfo  make  her  think  he  was  not  her  inferior 
either  in  birth  or  fortune.  Late  as  it  was,  he 
obliged  her  to  fit  down  to  a  very  elegant  collation 
he  had  caufed  to  be  provided. 

At  firft  (lie  was  highly  delighted  with  her  re- 
ception ;  but  fuppcr  was  no  fooner  over  than  he 
began  to  fpeak  his  mind  more  freely,  and  let  her 
know  he  had  not  taken  all  this  pains  but  with  a 
view  of  becoming  the  mafter  both  of  her  perfon 
and  eftate :  he  made  his  declaration,  however,  in 
the  moft  fubmiflive  terms,  and  accompanied  with 
a  fhew  of  the  utmoft  paflion  and  adoration  of  her 
charms;  and  as  me  had  been  accuftomed  to  hear 
profeflions  of  this  nature,  (he  was  not  greatly  dif- 
pleafed  with  thofe  he  uttered,  and  affected  to  rally 
what  he  faid  with  the  fame  gaiety  (he  had  treated 
her  former  admirers:  but,  alas!  me  foon  found 
he  was  not  to  be  put  off  in  that  manner;  he  pref- 
ied  her  for  an  immediate  promife  of  marrying  him 
the  next  morning;  told  her  that  he  was  extremely 
ferious  in  the  affair,  and  expe£ted  me  mould  be 
fo  too,  and  that  he  was  determined  not  to  quit 
her  prefence  till  he  had  an  aflurance  of  being  her 
hufband. 

She  now  began  to  tremble,  and  as  fhe  has  con- 
fefled,  wifhed  herfelf  agaia  under  Alvario's  roof; 


B.  T.  SPECTATOR.  229 

(he  was  in  the  power  of  a  man  utterly  a  ftranger 
to  her,  and  who  feemed  refolute  enough  to  at- 
tempt any  thing  he  had  a  mind  to: — no  vifible 
way  of  efcaping  the  danger  with  which  her  honour 
was  threatened,  unlefs  ihc  complied  with  his  de- 
fires,  offered  itfelf  to  her: — the  more  (he  reflected 
on  her  condition,  the  more  dreadful  it  appeared; 
and  (he  at  laft,  in  fpite  of  all  the  greatnefs  of  her 
fpirit,  burfl  into  a  flood  of  tears. 

As  he  did  not  want  wit,  and  exerted  it  all  on 
this  occafion,  he  faid  the  moft  endearing  things  to 
her,  laying  the  blame  of  the  compulfion  he  was 
obliged  to  make  ufe  of,  on  the  excefs  of  his  love, 
and  the  apprehenfions  he  was  in,  that  if  he  let  flip 
this  opportunity,  me  would  not  hereafter  liften  to 
his  vows: — he  added  alfo,  that  if  the  place  of  her 
abode  mould  be  difcovered  by  Alvario,  the  autho- 
rity of  a  father  might  force  her  back  into  that  con- 
finement, from  which  (he  had,  but  with  the  ut- 
moft  difficulty,  got  out  of; — whereas,  when  (he 
was  once  a  wife,  all  former  duties  and  obligations 
would  be  diflblved,  and  (he  would  be  only  under 
the  power  of  a  hufband,  to  whom  her  will  mould 
ever  be  a  law. 

During  this  difcourfe  a  ftrange  viciffitude  of 
different  paflions  rofe  in  her  troubled  mindj— • 
fometimes  foftened  by  the  flattering  expreflions  of 
his  Jove  and  admiration, — inflamed  with  rage  at 
others,  when  (he  confidered  that  he  had  the  bold- 
nefs  to  think  of  forcing  her  inclinations : — the  in- 
difcretion  of  trufting  herfelf  in  the  hands  of  a  man 
fo  wholly  a  ftranger  now  (hewed  itfelf  to  her  in 
its  true  colours;  one  moment  (he  argued  mildly 
with  him  how  incompatible  the  laying  her  under 
conftraint  was,  with  the  refpeft  he  pretended  for 


230  THE  FEMALE  B'.'V. 

her;  the  next,  (he  reproached  him,  and  teftified 
the  utmoft  fcorn  at  his  proceeding;  by  turns  de- 
fcended  to  footh  and  to  revile ;  both  which  were 
equally  effectual:  he  replied  to  every  thing  (he 
faid  with  all  the  humility  of  the  moft  befeeching 
and  obfequious  love,  yet  the  purport  of  his  words 
convinced  .her  the  refolution  he  had  taken  was 
unalterable,  that  fhe  had  no  means  of  avoiding 
being  his,  and  that  all  in  her  own  choice,  was  to 
be  his  miftrefs,  or  his  wife. 

Great  part  of  the  night  being  now  elapfed, 
and  no  poffibility  of  prevailing  with  him,  me  at 
length  yielded  to  neceffity,  and  confented  to  marry 
him;  on  which  he  left  her  to  take  what  repofe  fo 
unexpected  a  change  of  fortune  would  permit;  but 
that  no  chance  or  contrivance  might  deprive  him 
of  his  hopes,  obliged  her  to  make  the  woman  of 
the  houie  the  partner  of  her  bed. 

When  at  liberty  to  ruminate  on  the  accident 
had  befallen  her,  the  compulfion  fhe  was  under 
feemed  to  her  the  moft  vexatious  part  of  it : — the 
perfon  andconverfation  ofherintended bridegroom 
had  nothing  in  them  difagreeable  to  her;  he  had 
the  appearance  of  a  man  of  fafhion,  and  had  fworn 
a  thoufand  oaths  that  his  birth  and  fortune  were 
fuch,  as  none  of  her  kindred  would  have  caufe  to 
blame  her  choice  of  him : — he  had  told  her  his 
name,  which  happening  to  be  the  fame  of  a  very 
great  family,  (tho',  in  reality,  he  was  not  at  all 
related  to  them)  fhe  imagined  it  would  be  no  de- 
meaning of  herfelf  to  be  called  by  it;  therefore 
eafily  flattered  herfelf  that  it  was,  as  he  pretended, 
only  the  violence  of  the  paffion  me  had  infpired 
him  with,  which  made  him  take  the  methods  he 
did  for  the  gratification  of  it: — this  vanity  con^ 


B.V.  SPECTATOR.  *u 

tributcd  greatly  to  her  cafe,  and  made  her,  with 
lefs  relu&ance,  perform  the  promife  he  had  ex- 
torted from  her. 

In  fine,  they  were  married,  after  which  he  car- 
ried her  into  the  country  under  the  pretence  of 
diverting  her,  but  in  reality  to  elude  any  profe- 
cution  which  might  be  made  againft  him  for 
ftealing  an  heirefs. 

AlvariB,  indeed  no  fooner  found  the  letter  (he 
had  left  for  him,  than  he  fearched  for  her  at  e- 
very  houfe  where  it  was  known  fhe  had  the  leaft 
acquaintance;  and  not  being  able  to  hear  the 
lead  tidings  of  her,  doubted  not  but  fhe  was  gone 
away  with  fome  perfon  for  whom  (he  had  a  fecret 
affection. 

Chriftabella,  in  the  mean  time,  grew  perfect- 
ly reconciled  to  her  lot;  and  not  in  the  leaft 
doubting  but  her  hufband  was  in  reality  of  the  fa- 
mily and  fortune  he  had  told  her,  was  continually 
importuning  him  to  demand  the  writings  of  the 
eftate  out  of  her  father's  hands;  but  he  had  too 
much  cunning  to  comply,  and  feeming  not  to 
regard  her  wealth,  fince  he  got  pofleffion  of  her 
perfon,  won  fo  far  upon  her  as  to  create  in  her  a 
molt  perfect  affe&ion;  and  it  was  not  till  after  he 
found  himfclf  aflured  that  fhe  would  not  join  in 
any  thing  againft  him,  by  being  the  mafter  of  her 
heart,  and  that  fhe  was  pregnant,  that  he  brought 
her  to  town,  and  fuffered  their  marriage  to  be  de- 
clared; but  it  no  fooner  was  fo,  than  the  whole 
truth  of  his  circumftances  was  alfo  divulged: — - 
Alvario  was  like  a  man  deprived  of  reafon ;  all  her 
kindred  aud  friends  were  inconfclable;  every  one 
who  wilTiedhcr  wclljnrr.azet!  a:u!  fhocked;  and  the 
•whole  town  full  of  no  other  fubje&of  difcourfe* 


*3*  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

Chriftabella  herfelf,  at -the  fir/I  difcovery  of 
the  deception  had  been  put  upon  her,  felt  a  re- 
fentment,  which  nothing  but  her  own  behaviour 
can  defcribe: — fhe  threatened  to  abandon  this 
unworthy  hufband,  and  leave  him  to  that  punifh- 
ment  the  law  infli£ts  on  the  crime  he  had  been 
guilty  of: — fhe  had  even  packed  up  her  cloaths 
and  jewels  for  that  purpofe;  yet  did  his  intreaties 
and  pretended  paffion  for  her,  added  to*the  con- 
dition fhe  was  in,  and  the  refle&ion  how  dread- 
ful a  reproach  it  would  be  to  the  child  fhe  was 
to  bring  into  the  world,  fhould  the  father  of  it  be 
brought  to  fo  infamous  a  fate,  prevail  on  her  to 
continue  with  him,  and  content  herfelf  with  vent- 
ing her  indignation  in  the  moft  bitter  terms  flie 
could  invent:  all  which  he  bore  with  a  {hew  of 
patience,  as  he  knew  it  was  not  yet  time  to  exert 
any  authority,  but  kept  in  mind  every  reviling 
word,  refolving  to  revenge  it  hereafter. 

But  not  to  fpin  this  little  narrative  to  a  too 
tedious  length,  he  had  artifice,  and  fhe  had  good- 
nature enough,  tobring  about  an  entire  forgivenefs 
on  her  part: — (he  did  every  thing  he  requefted 
of  her; — fhe  affiired  whoever  fpoke  to  her  of  the 
affair,  that  no  impofition  had  been  pra&ifed  on 
her; — that  fhe  knew  before  hand  the  true  circum- 
ftances  of  the  perfon  who  was  now  her  hufband; 
and  that  the  love  (lie  had  for  him  made  her  over- 
look the  difparity  between  them.  She  employed 
a  lawyer  to  go  to  her  father  on  the  account  of  the 
cftate,  and  before  the  affair  was  wholly  determin- 
ed, the  death  of  her  fifter  gave  her  a  right  to  the 
whole;  which  Alvario,  feeing  there  was  no  re- 
medy, was  obliged  to  refign. 

The  pofieffion  of  this  eftate  difcoveredto  Chrr-. 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  233 

ftabella  how  mifcrable  flic  was;  the  feemingten- 
dernefs  and  fubmiffive  temper  of  her  hufband  had 
made  her  not  doubt  but  (he  always  would  be  the 
fole  miftrefs  both  of  her  actions  and  fortune;  but 
all  being  now  compleated,  and  he  having  nothing 
more  to  fear  from  her  difpleafure,  he  prefently 
made  her  feel  the  effe£ts  of  the  power  he  had  over 
her,  and  that  he  had  not  forgot  the  difdain  with 
which  fhe  had  treated  him  during  the  continuance 
of  her  rage. 

A  fpirit  like  her's  was  not  eafy  to  be  broke;  yet 
did  he  accomplifh  the  talk  in  a  very  few  months: 
— it  is  now  her  turn  to  fue,  and  often  fue  in 
vain  for  a  (mail  (hare  of  her  own  wealth,  which 
he  profufely  lavifhes  abroad  among  his  former 
companions,  leaving  her  at  home  to  lament  alone 
her  wretched  (late. 

Never  was  a  greater  tyrant;  he  denies  her  even 
the  privilege  of  vifiting,  or  being  vifited  by  thofe 
who  would  wifli  to  continue  a  correfpondence  with 
her:  as  for  her  father  and  kindred,  not  one  among 
them  would  ever  fee  her  fince  her  elopement,  and 
the  difcovery  of  her  marriage: — no  words  can 
paint  the  miiery  of  her  condition,  and  to  render 
it  worfe,  there  is  not  the  lead  appearance  of  any 
relief  but  by  death. 

It  is  certain  that  the  fate  of  fo  difobcdient  a 
daughter,  cannot  excite  much  commiferation  in 
the  world;  but  it  ought  to  be  a  warning  to  all 
parents,  who  wifh  to  fee  their  children  happy,  to 
fludy  carefully  their  difpofitions  before  they  go 
about  to  treat  them  with  ungentle  means,  and  ra- 
ther condefcend  to  footh  an  obftinate  temper,  than 
compel  it  to  a  change.  Where  there  is  vanity  and 
felf-fufficiency,  it  muft  be  only  time  and  reflec- 


234  THE  FEMALE  B.  V.. 

tion  that  can  convince  them  what  they  ought  to 
do  ;  and  if,  by  laying  fome  pleafures  in  their  way, 
lefs  prejudicial  than  thofe  to  which  they  are  ad- 
dicted, one  could  divide  the  inclination  fo  as  to 
render  the  former  lefs  ftrong,  it  might  be  eafy,  by 
degrees,  to  bring  them  to  an  indifference  for  all. 
This  is  a  method  which  might  at  leaft  be  made 
trial  of,  and  I  fancy,  would  more  often  anfwer 
the  end  than  fail. 

If  Mrs  Oldfafhion  would,  therefore,  wean 
Mifs  Biddy  from  the  immoderate  delight  (lie  has 
takenatprefentinRaneJagh-gardens,and  thecom- 
pany  who  frequent  that  place,  it  might  be  right 
to  vary  the  fcene;  but  in  my  opinion  altogether 
the  reverfe  to  change  it  to  one  where  onlydifoial 
objects  offering  to  the  view,  mould  render  the  pail 
more  pleafing  in  idea,  than  they  were  even  in  en- 
joyment. 

Did  not  reafons  of  ftate,  which  the  SPECTATOR, 
muft  not  prefume  to  fathom,  engage  us  at  prefent 
in  a  war  with  France,  I  mould  advife  to  fend  a 
young  lady  too  much  bigotted  to  any  one  pleafure, 
into  that  polite  country,  where  me  would  find  fo. 
vaft  a  variety,  as  would  give  a  quite  different  turn 
to  her  temper,  and  make  her  defpife  all  that  be- 
fore feemed  fo  enchanting  to  her. 

I  forefee  that  many,  on  reading  this  paragraph, 
will  be  aftonifhed,  and  cry  out,  that  following  this 
counfel,  fhe  would  lofe  all  relifli  for  the  delights- 
her  own  country  affords,  only  to  become  more 
fond  of  thofe  of  another! — This  objection  at  firft 
may  appear  plaufible  enough,  but  when  conGder- 
ed,  will  be  found  of  no  weight ;  for  befides  the  re- 
membrance of  thofe  dear  friends  (he  has  left  be- 
hind, there  is  fomething  of  a  natural  partiality  in 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  235 

us  all  to  the  place  which  gave  us  birth,  which  would 
make  her  in  a  fhort  time  with  to  return;  fo  that 
of  confequence,  (he  would  be  much  fooner  cured 
of  this  immoderate  love  of  pleafure,  than  by  en- 
joying it  in  a  place  where  nothing  is  abfent  to  her 
wifhes. 

There  are  alfo  two  reafons  which  render  the  in- 
dulging one's  felf  in  all,  or  any  particular  kind  of 
diverfion,  lefs  prejudicial  in  France  than  it  fre- 
quently proves  in  England: — the  firft,  becaufe 
whatever  time  is  fpent  in  them  is  fo  far  from  be- 
ing wholly  loft,  that  it  is  rather  an  improvement, 
than  a  diminution  of  the  education  we  have  before 
received,  as  every  body  muft  allow  that  knows  any 
thing  of  the  cuftoms  of  that  nation; — the  arrival 
of  a  foreign  lady  is  no  fooner  known,  than  fhe  is 
invited  to  partake  of  all  th^ir  entertainments:— 
fhe  immediately  enters  into  balls,  aflemblies,  maf- 
/querades,  arid  a  continual  round  of  pleafure  in  the 
palaces  of  princes,  and  houfes  of  perfons  of  the  firft 
quality,  where  fhe  is  treated  with  the  utmoft  ele- 
gance and  delicacy,  ami  hears  nothing  of  thofe  im- 
pertinencies,  and  loole  ribaldry,  fhe  is  liable  to  be 
perfecuted  with,  in  thofe  mixed  companies  at  our 
mercenary  places  of  refort;  where  all,  without 
diftincUcn,  are  admitted  for  their  money.  A  wo- 
man of  honour  ought  to  tremble  to  think  what 
creatures  may  join  in  converfation  with  her  in 
fome  of  our  public  rendezvous,  who  will  not  fail 
afterwards  to  boaft  of  an  acquaintance  with  her; 
and  take  notice  of  her  as  fuch  if  they  happen  to 
fee  her  in  any  other  place  Few  of  our  Er^lifh 
beaux  have  the  difcrction  a  French  gentleimn  had, 
vho  had  been  in  the  gallery  at  an  opera  in  Paris, 
and  fitting  near  a  fine  lady,  who  being  drcfled,  as 


136  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

he  thought,  a  little  too  gay  for  that  part  of  the 
houfc,  he  took  for  a  fille  de  joye,  and  accofted  with 
all  the  freedoms  ufed  to  women  of  that  character: 
-—  (he  gave  herfelf  no  pains  to  undeceive  him,  but 
evaded  fuffering  him  to  attend  her  home,  as  he  ex- 
pelted  to  have  done.  Some  days  after,  happening 
to  fee  her  go  into  court,  attended  by  a  great  num- 
ber of  pages  and  footmen,  he  afked  a  perfon  who 
flood  near,  who  that  lady  was,  and  was  anfwered, 
Madam  de  Charleroy,  one  of  the  princcfles  of  the 
blood.  Afhamed  of  his  former  behaviour  to  her, 
he  wasfculkingawayas  faftas  he  could,  but  her  pe- 
netrating eyes  immediately  difcovered  her  would- 
have-been  gallant, and  making  him  be  called  back, 
'*  What,  monfieur,  faid  fhe  ironically,  is  the  lady 
"  you  entertained  with  fo  much  freedom  at  the 
"  opera,  a  few  nights  fince,  not  worth  a  fingle  fa- 
<{  lute? — O  madam,  returned  he,  with  an  admi- 
"  rable  prefence  of  mind,  in  *  Paradife  we  are  on 
"  an  equality,  but  now  I  know  the  refpecl:  due  to 
**  Madam  de  Charleroy."  On  which  fhe  laughed, 
and  owned  the  blame  was  wholly  her  own,  for  in- 
dulging a  frolic,  which  carried  her  to  a  place, 
where  ihe  could  fo  little  be  expected  to  be  found. 

Had  this  tranfa&ion  happened  at  any  of  our  pu- 
blic diverfions,  it  is  poflible  the  lady  need  not  have 
been  at  the  trouble  to  have  the  gentleman  called 
back;  he  would  have  made  her  a  low  bow  to  mew 
his  breeding,  and  never  refted  till  he  had  gone 
through  all  the  coffee-houfes  in  town,  and  enter- 
tained the  company  with  his  intimacy  with  a  cer- 
tain great  lady,  whom,  if  he  did  not  directly  name, 

*  \  bye-word  they  have  in  Paris  fjr  the  galleries;  as  we  fay, 
Among  the  goJt. 


$.  V.  SPECTATOR.  237 

he  would  take  care  to  defcribe  in  fuch  a  manner, 
as  every  one  fhould  know. 

I  appeal  to  our  ladies  themfelves,  if  they  have 
not  fometimes  been  put  to  the  blufh,  by  being , 
claimed  as  acquaintance  by  perfons  of  both  fexes, 
whom  they  have  happened  to  join  with  in  thofe 
promifcuous  affemblies;  and  by  whom  it  is  unbe- 
coming of  their  characters  even  to  be  mentioned. 

The  other  reafon  I  promifed  to  give  why  the 
partaking  of  all  kinds  of  divepfions  in  France  is 
not  attended  with  the  fame  ill  confequence  as  in 
England,  is  this : — the  innocent  freedoms  allowed 
in  our  lex,  give  no  encouragement  to  thofe  of  the 
other  to  expect  fuch  as  are  not  fo;  it  being,  with- 
out all  queftion,  a  place  of  the  greateft  gaiety,  leaft 
fcandal,  and  leaft  room  for  it,  of  any  in  the  world :  - 
— the  gentlemen  there  addrefs,  prefent,  and  treat, 
with  no  other  view  than  to  (hew  their  own  gallan- 
try;  and  the  ladies  receive  all  the  marks  of  refpe£l 
that  can  be  paid  them,  as  the  privilege  of  their  fex, 
and  not  as  proofs  of  any  particular  attachment. 

I  am  forry  to  fay,  that  in  England,  ladies,  even 
of  the  firft  quality,  are  treated  with  very  great  in- 
difference, except  by  thofe  men  who  have  a  dcfign 
upon  them;  and  as  for  women  of  inferior  condi- 
tion,  though  pofiefled  of  the  moft  extraordinary 
talents  of  mind  or  body,  they  may  (hew  themfelves 
as  much  as  theypleafe,inail  public  places,  without 
being  able  to  make  themfelves  be  taken  notice  of, 
if  they  allow  no  hope  of  one  day  purchafing  dif- 
tindion  at  too  dear  a  rate. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  as  vanity,  and  the  de- 
fire  of  admiration,  are  th<»  chief  motives  which 
induce  our  very  young  ladies  to  thefe  continual 
rambles,  France  is  the  only  place  vrhere  they  may 

VOL.  I.  X 


i}3  THE   FEMALE  B.  V. 

find  their  inclinations  gratified  to  its  full  extent, 
without  danger  to  their  virtue,  or  prejudice  to  their 
reputation.  But  as  the  enmity  at  prefent  between 
the  two  nations,  renders  fuch  an  excurfion  im- 
practicable, my  correfpondent  might  fend  mifs 
Biddy,  under  the  care  of  fome  relation,  or  other 
prudent  perfon,  if  her  affairs  permit  her  not  to  go 
herfelf,  to  Bath,  Tunbridge,  or  Scarborough;  in 
fine,  to  any  place  where  (he  might  be  entertained 
with  fomething,  that  (hould  render  her  forgetful 
cf  what  (lie  now  fo  much  delights  in. 

It  would  be  extremely  fortunate  for  her,  if, 
while  her  paffion  for  the  pleafures  of  Ranelagh  are 
in  their  zenith,  one  of  her  kindred  or  intimates 
{hould  happen  to  marry,  and  go  down  into  the 
country  to  celebrate  their  nuptials; — to  accom- 
pany the  new-joined  happy  pair,  and  be  witnefs  o£ 
the  rural  fports,  invented  for  their  welcome,  by 
the  innocent  country  people,  would  perhaps  be  a 
fcene  too  novel  not  to  have  fome  charms  for  her: 
— the  woods,  the  fields,  the  groves,  the  fweet 
purling  dreams,  the  horn,  the  halloo  of  the  huntf- 
men,  and  the  chearful  ruddy  countenance  of  thofe 
who  purfue  the  chace,  afford  alfo  a  pleafing  varie- 
ty of  amufement.  By  ways  like  thefe,  I  fancy  (he 
inight  be  cheated,  as  it  were,  into  a  tafte  more 
fuited  to  make  her  happy,  and  brought  to  a  more 
regular  way  of  thinking,  without  feeming  to  en-* 
deavour  it. 

This  is  indeed  a  crifis  which  calls  for  the  ut- 
moft  precaution  in  a  parent:  I  am  told  by  perfons 
-who  are  always  confulted  oa  every  occafion  that 
relates  to  pleafure,  that  a  fubfcription  is  intended, 
fome  fay  actually  on  foot,  for  ridottos  and  maf- 
querades  at  Ranelagh  next  winter;  and  if  fo,  our 


5.  V.  S  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  R.  *39 

young  ladies  will  probably  live  there  all  night  as 
well  as  all  day.  Whether  Mr  Heidegger  will  have 
intereft  enough  to  prevent  this  invafion  of  his  pro- 
vince, I  know  not;  but  if  it  mould  go  on,  one  may 
venture  to  pronounce,  without  beingany  great  con- 
jurer, that  thofe  no&urnal  rambles  will  be  found 
of  more  dangerous  confequence  at  Chelfea,  than 
they  have  proved  at  the  Haymarket. 

I  communicated  this  piece  of  intelligence  to. 
a  young  lady,  who  at  prefent  pafles  the  grcateft 
part  of  her  time  at  Ranelagh,  and  never  in  my 
life  did  I  fee  a  creature  fo  tranfported : — her  eyes 
fparkled,  her  lips  quivered,  all  her  frame  was  in 
agitation,  through  eagernefs  to  know  fomething 
farther  of  this  important  affair;  and  when  I  men- 
tioned the  apprehenfions  I  had,  that  if  fuch  a  de- 
fign  mould  take  place,  it  might  be  prejudicial  to 
the  health  of  thofe  who  mould  venture  themfelves, 
in  the  damps  of  winter,  in-  a  place  fo  near  the 
water, — "O  madam,  cried  me,  one  cannot  catch 
"  cold  at  Ranelagh!" — I  could  not  forbear,  after 
this,  giving  her  fome  broad  hints  of  other  incon- 
veniencies,  which  might  probably  attend  being  fo 
far  from  home,  at  hours  that  might  encourage  at- 
tempts, no  way  agreeable  to  the  modefty  of  our 
fex;  on  which  me  only  faid,  "  Lard,  madam, 
*'  how  you  talk!" — And  all  my  admonitions  had' 
no  other  effe&,  than  to  make  her  fhortan  her  vi- 
fit;  no  doubt  to  impart  the  difcourfe  we  had  to- 
gether to  fome  of  her  acquaintance,  and  to  ridi- 
cule my  want  of  tafte. 

She  has  one  motive,  as  I  have  been  told  by  the 

men,  which,  notwithftanding,  (he  would  be  very 

unwilling  to  acknowledge,  for  her  preferring  maf~ 

queradcs  to  ajl  other  public  diver fioris;  which  is% 

X  * 


240  THE   FEMALE  B.  V: 

that  fhe  never  had  a  handfome  thing  faid  to  her 
out  of  a  vizard; — nature,  it  is  certain,  having  not 
been  over-curious  in  the  formationof  her  features, 
and  that  cruel  enemy  to  beauty,  the  fmall-pox,  has 
rendered  them  yet  lefs  delicate;  but  with  the  help 
of  new  ftays  once  a  month,-  and  ftrait  lacing,  fhe 
has  a  tolerable  fhape;  but  then  her  neck  fuffers 
for  it,  and,  corifefles,  in  fcarlet  blufhes,  the  con- 
ftraintput  upon  herwaifl: — this  misfortune,  how- 
ever, (he  conceals  under  a  handkerchief,  or  pele- 
rine, and  high  tucker,  and  never  trips  it  in  the 
•walks  without  feme  fhare  of  admiration  from 
thofe  who  follow,  and  are  not  nimble  enough  to 
overtake  her. 

A  mafquerade  may,  therefore,  well  be  the  de- 
light of  her  heart,  where  the  advantageous  part 
of  her  only  is  revealed;  yet  though  me  cannot 
be  infenfible  of  what  is  amiable  in  herfelf,  and 
•what  the  contrary,  as  (lie  looks  fo  often  in  her 
glafs,  fhe  was  weak  enough  laft  winter  to  lay  her- 
felf open  to  a  rebuff  at  the  mafquerade,  which 
occasioned' a  good  deal  of  raillery  among  thofo 
ivho  heard  it. 

To  difplay  all  her  perfections  in  the  beft  light 
flie  could,  (he  aflumed  the  habit  of  a  Diana.  A 
green  velvet  jacket,  fringed  with  filver,  made  fo 
ftrait,  that,  as  I  heard,  her  chambermaid  fprained 
both  her  thumbs  with  buckling  it  on,  very  much 
added  to  her  natural  ilendernefs: — a  filver  cref- 
cent  glittered  on  her  head,  which  had  no  other 
covering  than  her  hair,  of  which  indeed  fhe  has  a 
great  deal,  and  well  coloured,  braided  with  rows 
cf  pearl  and  flowers  interfperfed;  the  vizard  on, 
it  muft  be  owned  fhe  made  a  very  complete  figure, 


3.  V.  SPECTATOR.  14* 

and  attracted  the  eyes  of  a  good  part  of  the  aflein- 
bly  who  were  there  that  night. 

But  that  which  flattered  her  ambition  moft,  was, 
that  the  great  Imperio  took  notice  of  her,  and  i- 
magining  that  a  real  Venus  might  be  hid  under 
the  fi&itious  Diana,  ordered  a  nobleman  who  flood 
near  him,  to  go  to  her,  and  prevail  with  her  to 
come  to  the  beauiet  and  unmafk.  He,  who  was 
not  unaccuftomed  to  fuch  employments,  readily 
flew  to  execute  his  commiffion,  and,  after  having 
brought  her  to  the  higheft  pitch  of  vanity  by  th<5 
mod  extravagant  compliments,  to  crown  all,  let 
her  know  who  it  was  that  fent  him,  and  on  what 
errand.  Charmed  as  (lie  was  with  the  praifes  hs 
gave,  it  was  fome  time  before  flie  yielded  to  do 
as  he  defired;  but  at  laft  her  refolution  was  fub- 
dued,  by  the  reflection  that  me  ought  not  to  re- 
fufe  any  thing  to  Imperio;  and  fhe  fuffered  her- 
.{elf  to  be  conducted  by  him  to  the  beaufet,  near 
which  Imperio  flood,  who  prefented  her  with  a 
glafs  of  wine  with  his  own  handy  accompanied 
with  many  compliments;  both  which  me  received 
with  a  low  obeifance,  and  at  the  fame  time  pluck- 
cd  ofFher  malk. 

But  fatal  was  this  complaifance  to  all  her  hopes  :: 
— Imperio  ftarted  back,  and  above  the  neceflity  of" 
concealing  the  difappointment  of  his  expectations v 
— "  It  will  not  do,  my  lord,  faid  he  to  the  noble-* 
"  man,  it  will  not  do,, and  I  am  forry  I  gave  you. 
"  fo  much  trouble." 

Several  of  the  company,  whom  this  adventure 
had  drawn  to  that  part  of  the  room,  faw  her  facs 
before  (he  could  be  quick  enough  to  replace  her 
mafk;  and  a  much  greater  number  heard  the  words 
Imoerio  fpoke,  as  he  turned  from  her-,  fo  that 


242  THE  FEMALE  B.  V; 

the  whole  time  fhe  ftaid  afterwards,  she  was  fa- 
Juted  with  nothing  but,  "  it  will  not  do,"  and  a 
loud  laugh. 

Had  she  been  miftrefs  of  refolution  enough  to 
have  refiftedtheimportunitiesof  theemiffary-lord, 
and  the  commands  of  Imperio,  she  would  doubt- 
lefs  have  heard  many  praifes  of  the  charging  Diana 
repeated  afterwards  in  company;  whereas  now 
the  my  fiery  was  revealed,  and  the  real  Diana 
1,  her  grenteft  intimates  could  not  forbear 
laughing  r?r  the  mortification  she  had  received; 
and  on  everv 'little  difputc  with  any  of  them,  the 
way  they  took  to  be  revenged,  was  to  cry,  '•  It 
'"will  rot  do." 

Much  more  lovely  women  than  the  perfon  I 
have  been  fpeaking  of,  have  fometirnes  met  with 
little  indignitiesand  flights,  which  their  pride  could 
ill  fuftain:  and,  indeed,  how  should  it  be  other- 
wife  !  The  men  are  fo  cenforious,that  they  lock  on 
all  thofe  of  our  fex,  who  appear  too  much  at  thefe 
public  places,  as  fetting  themfelves  up  for  fale,and 
therefore  taking  the  liberty  of  buyers,  meafure  us 
with  their  eyes  from  head  to  foot;  and  as  the  moil 
perfect  beauty  may  not  have  charms  for  .all  who 
gaze  upon  her  in  this  fcrutincus  manner,  few- 
there  are,  if  any,  who  have  not  found  fome  who 
will  pafs  by  her  with  a  contemptuous  tofs,  no  lefs 
fignificant  than  the  moft  rude  words  could  be. 

*  O  wherefore  then  will  net  women  endeavour 
to  attaSr;  thofe  talents  'which  are  fure  of  com- 
manding refpecl! — No  form  fo  fauklefs,  but  the 
inquiring  eyes  of  wanton  and  ungenerous  men 
may  find  a  blemifh  in.  But  fhe  who  has  not  the 
lead  pretence  to  beauty,  has  it  in  her  power, 
v.cuid  flic  but  once  be  prevailed  upon  to  exert  it> 


If.  V.  SPECTATOR.  243 

to  awe  the  boldeft,  or  moft  affectedly  nice  liber- 
tine into  fubmiflion,  and  force  him  to  confefs  her 
worthy  of  a  ferious  attachment.  If  even  by  indir 
gence  of  circumftances,  or  the  unjuft  parfimony 
fome  parents  are  guilty  of,  flie  is  denied  the  means 
of  cultivating  her  genius,  and  making  herfelf  mif- 
trefs  of  thofe  expenfive  accompliihments,  which 
might  render  her  whafe  we  call  a  mining  figure 
an  the  world,  innocence,  and  modeity  are  ilill  her 
ownj  they  were  born  with  her,  they  will  coll 
nothing  to  preferve,  and,  without  the  aid  of  any 
other  charm,  will  be  a  fure  defence  from  all  in- 
fults. 

Modefty  is  the  chara&eriitic  of  our  fex;  it  is 
indeed  the  mother  of  all  thofe  graces  for  which  we 
can  merit  either  love  or  eiteem: — fweetnefs  of 
behaviour,  meekncfs,  courtefy,  charily  in  judging 
others,  and  avoiding  all  that  would  not  fland  the 
tell  of  examination  in  ourfelves,  flow  from  it: — it 
is  the  fountain-head  as  well  as  the  guardian  of  our 
chaftity  and  honour,  and  when  it  is  once  thrown 
off,  every  other  virtue  grows  weak,  and  by  degrees 
is  in  danger  of  being  wholly  loll: — she  who  is 
poffeffvd  of  it  can  be  guilty  of  no  crime,  but  she 
•who  forfeits  it  is  liable  to  fall  into  all. 

How  far  it  is  confident  with  that  decent  referve, 
or  even  that  foftnefs  fo  becoming  in  womankind, 
I  leave  any.  one  to  judge,  who  has  been  witnefs  in 
what  manner  fome  ladies  come  into  public  affcm- 
blies: — they  do  not  walk  but  (Iraddle,  and  fome- 
times  run  with  a  kind  of  fiifkand  jump; — throw 
their  enormous  hoops  almoft  in  the  faces  of  thofe 
who  pafs.  by  them', — ftretch  out  their  necks,  and 
roll  their  eyes  from  fide  to  fide,  impatient  to  take 
ike  whole  company  at  one  viewj  and  if  they  ha£» 


244  TH-E   FEMALE  B.  V. 

pen  to  fee  any  one  d reflect  lefs  exact,  according  to 
the  mode,  than  themfelves,  prefently  cry  out,-— 
"Antiquity  to  perfection! — A  picture  of  the 
"  laft  age !" — then  burft  into  a  laugh  loud  enough 
to  be  heard  at  two  or  three  furlongs  diftant;  hap- 
py if  they  can  put  the  unfortunate  object  of  their 
ridicule  out  of  countenance. — Can  fuch  a  beha- 
viour pafs  upon  the  world  for  modefty,  good-man- 
ners, or  good-nature? 

I  do  not  pretend  to  fay,  that  all  the  ladies  who 
give  themfelves  an  air  of  boldnefs,  merely  becaufs 
it  is  the  falhion,  are  guilty  of  any  thing  which  may 
arraign  their  chaftity;  many  may  be  innocent  in 
£a£V,,  who  are  not  fo  in  shew :  but  are  they  not  then 
greatly  cruel  to  themfelves  to  aflame  the  appear- 
ance of  vices  they  are  free  from  ? — Some  are  placed 
fo  high  as  to  have  their  aclions  above  the  reach  of 
fcandal;  and  others,  by  their  avowed  manner  cf 
life,- render  themfelves  below  it;  but  it  is  to  thofs 
I  fpeak  who  have  reputation  to  lofe,  and  who  are 
not  altogether  fo  independent,  as  not  to  have  it 
their  intereft  to  be  thought  well  of  by  the  world. 

Far  be  it  from  me  to  debar  my  fex  from  going 
to  thofe  public  diverfions,  which,  at  prefent,  make 
fo  much  noife  in  town : — none  of  them  but  may 
be  enjoyed  without  prejudice,  provided  they  are 
frequented  in  a  reafonable  manner,  and  behaved 
at  with  decency ; — it  is  the  immoderate  ufe,  or 
rather  the  abufe  of  any  thing,  which  renders  the 
partaking  it  a  fault. — What  is  more  agreeable  than 
freedom  in  converfation ;  yet  when  it  extends  to 
levity  and  wantonnefr,  what  more  contemptible 
and  odious! — Some  pleafureis  doubtlefs  neceflary 
to  the  human  fyflem;.  taken  in  moderation,  it  in- 
yigorates  both  mind  and  body;  but  indulged  to 


B.  V.          SPECTATOR.  24^ 

excefs  is  equally  pernicious: — in  fine,  it  ought 
never  to  break  in  upon  thofe  hours,  which,  with 
greater  propriety,  might  de  devoted  to  bufinefsin 
perfons  of  maturity,  and  to  improvement  in  the 
younger  fort. 

Time,  always  precious,  can  never  be  more  fo 
than  in  our  early  years; — the  firft  ideas  make 
the  flrongeft  and  moll  lading  impreffion: — while 
the  genius  is  free,  and  unclogged  with  any  of  the 
cares  of  life,  and  the  foul  a£ts  through  the  organs 
of  the  body,  uninterrupted  with  any  paffions,  dif- 
eafes,  or  diiafters,  then  it  is  that  we  mould  endea- 
vo.ur  to  lay  in  a  ftock  of  knowledge  for  our  whole 
lives; — to  acquire  thofe  accomplishments  which 
alone  deferve,  and  will  certainly  attract  refpeft; 
and  to  eftabliih  foiid  principles  of  virtue,  which 
hereafter  growing  up  into  practice,  will  conduce 
to  the  happinefs  of  all  about  us,  as  well  as  of  our- 
fclves. 

This  crifis,  if  once  neglected,  can  never  be  re- 
trieved, and  will  fooner  or  later  be  attended  with 
a  fevere  repentance. — How  melancholy  a  thing 
muft  it  be  for  a  lady  to  hear  others,  who  have 
better  hufbanued  the  ineftimable  moments,  ex- 
tolled for  perfections  flie  is  confcious  me  might 
have  excelled  in,  had  me  not  ralhly  and  inadver- 
tently let  flip  the  golden  opportunity. 

Nor  are  the  hours  employed  in  pleafu're  all 
that  are  loft  by  it,  efpccially  when  it  happens  to  be 
of  that  fort  which  takes  us  much  out  of  our  own 
houfes: — the  idea  of  it  is  apt  to  render  ns  indo- 
lent in  our  arT;\irs,  even  the  little  time  we  are  at 
home. — Where  the  heart  is,  the  thoughts  will 
continually  be  when  the  body  is  abfent: — the 
£  topic  engroffes  too  much  of  the  mind,  and 


2}6  THE  FEMALE  B.  V* 

occafions  an  inattention  to  every  thing  but  itfelf. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  greatly  to  be  wondered  at,  that 
young  ladies,  who  cannot  be  expected  to  have 
that  folidity  which  experience  only  teaches,  fhould 
feem  fo  carelefs  in  improving  time,  when  we  fee 
very  many  of  thofe  who  have  been  married  years, 
negle6t  their  hufbands,  children  and  families,  to 
run  galloping  after  every  new  entertainment  that 
is  exhibited. 

But  as  there  is  great  room  to  fear  the  prefent 
age  is  too  far  loft  in  luxury  and  indolence  to  Men 
to  any  remon (trances,  I  would  fain  perfuade  the 
very  young  ladies  to  adt  fo  as  to  render  the  next 
more  prominng. 

As  marriage  is  a  thing  which  they  will  one  day 
think  of,  and  a  good  huiband  is  both  a  natural  and 
laudable  wifh,  who  would  not  endeavour  to  render 
herfelf  deferving  the  lafting  affe&ion  of  a  man  of 
fenfe? — fuch  a  one,  who,  as  Mr.  Rowe  elegantly 
exprefTes  it,  will  be  always 

"  Pleas'd  to  be  happy,  as  flic's  pleas'd  to  blefs, 

"  And  confcious  of  her  worth  can  never  love 
"  her  lefs." 

Somany  youngcharmers  are  continually  fpring- 
ing  up,  and  the  men  grow  fo  exceflively  delicate  in 
their  taile,  that  beauty,  in  their  eyes,  feems  to 
have  loft  all  its  bloom  at  fixteen  or  feventeen;  and 
how  great  a  flab  muft  it  be  to  the  vanity  of  a  wo- 
man, who,  at  five-and-twenty,  finds  herfelf  either 
not  married  at  all,  or  to  a  hufband  who  regards 
her  no  otherwife  than  as  a  withered  rofe!  for  fo 
it  will  ever  be,  whatever  the  ladies  may  flatter 
themfelves  with,  where  there  is  no  tie  more  ftrong 
than  merely  perfonal  perfection,  to  bind  the  natu- 
rally roving  and  inconflant  heart. — Convinced  by 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  247 

fad  experience  of  this  truth,  in  vain  fhe  looks  back 
upon  her  mifpent  days: — in  vain,  with  heart- 
felt tears,  regrets  the  time  fhe  has  lavifhed  in  trifles 
unworthy  of  her; — in  vain  effays  to  atone  for 
paft  follies  by  a  quite  contrary  behaviour: — all 
(he  can  do  is  now  too  late  ; — with  her,  alas !  the 
fun  of  hope,  of  admiration,  of  flattery  and  plea- 
fure,  is  fet  for  ever,  and  the  dark  gloom  of  cold 
.  neglect:  and  loathed  obfcurity  envelopes  all  her 
future  life. 

Amafina  had  a  form  fo  every  way  exact,  that 
envy  itfelf  could  find  nothing  to  object  againft 
it: — all  other  beauties  loft  their  charms  when  fhe 
appeared,  and  feemed  but  as  Uars  in  the  prefence 
of  the  fun; — (he  was  what  the  fong  defcribcs, 
**  Faireft  among  the  fair." 

Her  high  birth,  and  the  accomplifhments  fhe 
was  miftrefsof,  heigrrened  tlu  grace-;  of  her  per- 
fon,  and  fcarce  any  age  ever  produced  an  object 
of  more  univerfal  admiration.  But  of  all  the  ad- 
drefles  made  to  her,  thofe  of  Palamon  were  the 
mod  countenanced  by  her  nobje  parents,  and  agree- 
able to  herfelf: — his  virtue,  good-fenfe,  and  breed- 
ing, made  him  refpected  by  them,  as  the  grace- 
fulnefs  of  his  perfon  gave  him  the  advantage  in  her 
eyes,  above  all  others  who  pretended  to  her,  tho' 
fome  there  were  whofe  eflates  were  far  fuperior, 
and  whofe  declarations  of  love  were  alfo  accom- 
panied with  a  greater  fliew  of  vehemence. 

Palamon,  it  is  certain,  was  a  lover  of  that  fort 
which  all  women  who  judge  as  they  oughr  to  do, 
would  approve; — his  profeflions  were  accompa- 
nied \yith  no  adulations,  no  extravagancies; — his 
pafuon  was  perk-clly  fincere  and  tenrler,  but  was 
&r  from  either  jealoufy  or  impetuofity: — he  could 


54$  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

know  his  rivals  without  challenging  them  to  fight, 
and  could  bear  the  little  flights  (he  fometimes  af«- 
fected  to  treat  him  with,  and  not  immediately 
fwear  he  would  threw  himfelf  upon  his  fword. 

Amafina,  too  confcious  of  her  charms,  was 
fometimes  very  uneafy  that  fhe  could  render  him 
no  more  fo ;  and  imagining  fhe  had  begun  to  place 
her  affections  on  a  man  who  had  not  that  defe- 
rence for  her  which  fhe  merited,  made  ufe  of  her 
utmoft  efforts  to  withdraw  it: — to  this  end  (he 
indulged  her  natural  propenfity  to  gaiety, in  going 
to  all  public  places;  liftened  to  the  vows  of  every 
one  who  prefumed  to  make  them;  and  in  fine, 
became  a  perfect  coquet:  this  method  feemed  to 
her  the  only  one  to  render  him  more  affiduous, 
and  at  the  fame  time  to  regain  that  liberty  for  her 
own  heart  which  fhe  found  the  inclination  fhe  had 
to  him  above  all  overmen,  was  beginning  to  en- 
thral. "  All  I  defire  in  the  world,"  faid  (he  one 
day  to  a  perfon  who  afterwards  repeated  it  to  me, 
*'  is  to  fee  the  infenfible  Palamon  dying  with  de- 
<c  fpair  at  my  feet;  and  that  I  may,  from  my  very 
"  heart,  defpife  and  hate  him." 

How  fuccefsful  foever  this  way  of  proceeding 
may  fometimes  have  been  found,  it  was  far  from 
anfwering  the  end  Amafina  propofed  by  it;  and 
inftead  of  rendering  Palamon  more  fubmiflive  than 
he  had  been,  made  her  appear  to  him  every  way 
lefs  worthy  of  refpecl;.  , 

As  he  truly  loved  her,  and  looked  on  her  as  a 
woman  who  was  fliortly  to  be  his  v/ife,  all  the 
little  levities  of  her  behaviour  feemed  to  him  as  fo 
many  wounds  to  his  own  honour;  and  he  could 
not  therefore  forbear  reprefenting  to  her,  how  un- 
worthy of  them  both  it  was,  that  ILe  (hould  be  fd 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  249 

frequently  feenat  places,  and  with  company,  which 
he  told  her  he  was  fure  me  muft  be  fenfible  herfelf, 
gave  occafion  of  cenfure  to  malicious  tongues. 

She  affected  to  refent  the  liberty  he  took,  but 
was  in  her  heart  pleafed  to  find  he  was  piqued  at 
what  flie  did,  becaufe  (he  took  it  as  a  proof  of  his 
love,  as  indeed  it  was ;  but  then  she  too  much  de- 
pended on  the  force  of  that  love,  and  flattered  her- 
felf with  a  belief,  that  at  lad  it  would  humble  him 
into  that  tame  enduring  admirer  she  wished: — to 
this  end,  therefore,  she  ftudied  eternally  how  to 
give  him  fresh  matter  of  difquiet;  she  contrived 
to  be  always  abroad  at  thofe  hours  when  she  ex- 
pelled him  to  vifit  her; — she  pafled  her  whole  days 
in  going  from  onepublic  place  toanother; — would 
often  leave  word  at  home  that  if  he  deGred  to  fee 
her,  he  might  come  to  lady  Diamond's,  mifs  Toy- 
well's,  or  fome  other  of  her  female  acquaintance, 
•whofe  comluft  she  knew  he  the  moft  difapproved 
of  any  she  had : — she  fuffered  beau  Trifle,  a  crea- 
ture whofe  converfation  was  shuned  by  every  wo- 
man of  prudence,  to  romp  with  her  before  his 
face;  and  in  fine,  did  ever  a  violence  to  her  own 
inclinations,  as  well  as  to  her  reputation,  only  to 
make  trial  how  far  the  love  Palamon  had  for  her 
would  compel  him  to  bear. 

Poor  unthinking  lady!  little  did  she  forefee  the 
confequences  of  this  behaviour;  and  being  guil- 
ty of  no  real  crime,  was  too  neglectful  what  the 
appearance  of  it  would  in  time  fubjecT:  her  to: 
—her  mother,  tho'  a  woman  of  gaiety  herfelf, 
was  vexed  to  find  her  daughter  give  into  fuch  ex- 
cefles,as  all  her  friends  and  kindred  highly  blamed 
her  fop  permitting,and  did  all  in  her  power  to  pre- 
vail on  ner  to  be  at  kaft  more  cautious  to.  prevent 

Vol.  I.  Y 


*5o  THE   FEMALE  B.  V. 

fcandal :  but  Amafina contented herfelf with liften- 
ing  to  her  reproofs  without  being  at  all  amended 
by  them;  and  thinking  she  was  the  bed  judge  of 
her  own  actions,  perfifte'd  as  she  had  begun,  till  by 
long  affumingaboldnefs,  which  atfirft  was  far  from 
being  natural  to  her,  she  at  lad  really  loft  all  that 
fimplicity  and  fweet  timidity  fo  becoming  in  a  vir- 
gin date; — fierce  fires  now  fparkled  in  her  eyes; 
— her  voice  became  more  shrill; — she  talked  in- 
ceflantly; — she  laughed  aloud; — she  blushed  not 
at  hearing  a  loofe  fong,  nor  darted  at  freedoms  she 
would  once  have  thought  a  violation  of  decency 
and  good  manners. 

Palamon  was  both  furprized  and  grieved  to 
find  this  change  in  a  perfon  whom  he  loved  with 
the  utmoft  tenderncfs,  and  had  flattered  himfelf 
of  being  one  day  happy  with  : — he  intreated  her 
with  all  the  moving  eloquence  of  an  honourable 
affection,  that  for  her  own  fake,  if  not  for  his, 
she  would  reflect  QS.  her  prefent  conduct,  and  re- 
turn once  more  to'her  amiable  former  felf : — he 
reprefented  to  her,  how  unworthy  of  her  conver- 
fation  fome  of  thofe  were  who  now  were  honour- 
ed with  it; — the  little  folid  happinefs  was  to  be 
found  in  thofe  noify  and  tumultuous  pleafures, 
to  which  she  had,  of  late,  too  much  devoted  her 
time;  and  touched,  though  with  all  the  gentlenefs 
he  could,  on  the  cenfures  she  incurred,  and  the 
dangers  she  was  liable  to  fall  into,  by  thus  indifcri- 
minately  fuffering  herfelf  to  be  led  into  all  forts  of 
company,  and  even  into  places  reforted  to  by  the 
mod  irregular  of  both  fexes. 

Thefe  remondrances  she  fometimes  affected 
to  ridicule,  and  at  others  to  refent;  not  but  she 
had  too  much  fenfe  not  to  allow  the  judice  of 
them;  but  as  her  whole  aim  in  acting  in  the  manner 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  251 

she  did,  was  to  bring  him  to  fuch  a  temper  of 
mind  as  to  fubjedl  his  very  reafon  to  her  will,  and 
to  think  every  thing  jultifiable  (he  did,  (he  refolved 
to  make  no  alteration  in  her  conduct,  till  he 
fhould  fay  with  the  lover,  in  one  of  Mrs  Cent- 
livre's  comedies, 

"  No  follies  fatal  to  the  fair  can  prove, 
**  All  things  are  beauties  in  the  nym  ph  we  love/* 
Some  men,  it  is  certain,  have  behaved  with  tha* 
flavilh  dependence  before  marriage,  who  afterwards 
have  become  very  tyrants,  and  made  their  wives 
dearly  pay  for  all  the  fubmiilions  they  exacted  from 
them  while  they  were  miflrefles. 

Palamon,  however,  was  of  a  quite  contrary 
difpofition: — he  did  not  defire  to  marry  Amafina 
but  with  a  view  of  living  with  her  in  that  happy- 
equality  which  was  doubdefs  intended  by  the  iu- 
ftitution;  and  though  nothing  could  be  more  fin- 
cere  and  ardent  than  the  paffion  he  had  for  her, 
yet  he  could  neither  think  of  making  her  his  wife 
while  (he  continued  in  this  inordinate  love  of  un- 
becoming pleafures,  nor  of  exerting  the  power  of 
a  hufband  in  order  to  reclaim  her: — the  one  he 
knew  was  inconfiftent  with  his  honour,  the  other 
with  his  peace  of  mind,  both  which  were  extremely 
dear  to  him ;  and  though  on  many  occafions  he 
had  room  to  believe  he  was  not  indifferent  to  .her, 
yet  as  he  found  the  regard  (he  had  for  him  was  not 
of  force  enough  to  reftrain  her  from  being  guilty 
of  any  one  thing  he  had  tefl  ified  his  difapprobation 
of,  he  refolved  rather  to  break  off  with  her  irv- 
tirely,  and  futfer  all  the  pangs  fuch  a  parting  mail 
inflict,  than  fubjecl  himfelf  to  others  of  a  yet  more 
alarming  kind,  and  which  might  probably  be  as 
Lifting  as  his  life. 

Y  2 


25*  THE  FEMALE  B.V. 

With  what  prodigious  difficulty  he  brought 
himfeif  to  determine  in  this  fafliion,  none  but 
thofe  poffeffed  of  an  equal  (hare  of  affection  can 
poffibly  conceive;  fo  I  fhall  only  fay  that  it  was 
fuch,  as  he  flood  in  need  of  all  his  fortitude  and 
good  underdanding  to  furmount.. — I  have  been 
told  by  one  who  knew  him  well,  and  was  indeed 
the  confidante  of  his  mofl  fecret  thoughts,  that  he 
has  feen  him  in  agonies  fuch  as  he  often  feared 
would  have  been  mortal,  and  which  he  imagined, 
till  he  was  convinced  to  the  contrary,  would  have 
got  the  better  of  all  his  refolution;  fo  hard  it  is 
to  wean  the  heart  from  an  objecl:  it  has  been  long 
accuftomed  to  love,  and  which  has  fome  merits  to 
atone  for  its  defects ! 

Had  'Amafina  feen  him  in  thefe  conflicts,  it  is 
probable  her  good  nature  would  have  been  too 
itrong  for  her  vanity,  and  fhe  would  have  abated 
fome  part  of  thofe  fubmiflions  fhe  expected  from 
him,  in  confideration  of  the  rack  he  fultained ;  and 
thought  that  that  alone  was  fufficient  to  prove  the 
height  of  paflion  fhe  wifhed  to  infpi-re  in  the  man 
on  whom  (he  intended  to  beftow  herfelf. 

But  it  was  not  her  good  fortune  to  be  informed 
of  any  part -of  what  he  fuffered; — he  revealed 
himfeif  to  none  that  would  betray  it  to  her,  and 
the  greatnefs  of  his  fpirit  would  not  permit  him  to 
behave  in  her  prefence,  fo  as  to  enable  her  to  pe- 
netrate into  his  foul;  fo  that  (he  knew  no  more 
than  that  he  had  the  prefumptionto  attempt  bring- 
ing her  over  to  his  way  of  thinking,  and  obliging 
her  to  live  according  to  his  rules,  and  for  that  very 
reafon  thought  fhe  mould  be  guilty  of  an  injuftice 
to  herfelf  not  to  (hew  him  the  vanity  of  fuch  an 
eflay,  and  that  fhe  knew  he  ought  rather  to  be 


B.V.  SPECTATOR.  253 

pleafed  with  every  thing  {he  did  merely  becaufe 
ihe  did  it. 

This  kind  of  flruggle  between  them,  and  that 
Palamon  had  with  himfelf,  continued  for  fome 
time;  but  at  laft  his  love,  infulted  by  additional 
provocations,  yielded  to  his  reafon;  and  all  the 
fpells  her  inchanting  beauty hadlaid  upon  him, loft 
their  power  at  once : — he  fat  down,  and  in  the  pre*. 
fence  of  that  friend,  who  was  the  fole  repofitory  of 
his  fecrets,  wrote  to  her  in  the  following  terms  r 

To  the  lovely  thoughtlefs  AMASINI. 

"  Since,  unjuft  and  cruel  to  yourfelf,  as  well? 
tf  as  to  the  mod  fincere  paflion  ever  heart  was  pof- 
"  fefled  of,  you  prefer  thofe  trifling  diverfions,  un- 
"  worthy  to  be  called  pleafures,and  the  gallantries 
<*  of  men,  whom,  I  have  ftill  too  good  an  opinion 
'<  of  you  not  to  aflure  myfelf,  you  in  realit-y  de- 
"fpife,  to  your  own  reputation  and  my  eternal 
**  peace;  you  ought  not,  nor  I  flatter  myfelf  will,, 
"  accufe  me  of  inconftancy,  if  1  no  longer  fuhmit 
"  to  mingle  with  the  herd,  whofe  addrefies  yo'i 
««  have,  of  late,  not  only  permitted  but  encou- 
«  raged;  nor  can  I  think  of  pafling  my  whole  Ufa 
'*  with  a  lady,  who  feems  determined  to  devote  all 
<c  her's  in  fcenes  no  way  fuited  to  render  the  mar* 
"  riage-ftate  agreeable: — my  intreaties,  my  re- 
«'  monftrances,  my  difquiets,  my  very  tears  have-. 
"  not  only  been  ineffectual  to  -prevail  on  you  ta 
«  make  the  lead  alteration  in  your  conduct,  but 
«  have  ferved  as  matter  of  ridicule  and  deiiliou 
"  among  your  more  gay  acquaintance;  you  (hall, 
"  therefore,  no  more  be  perfecuted.  with  them. 
"  And  now  I  take  my  everlalling  leave,  which  I 
"  had  done  in  perfon,  having  often  been  to  wait 


2 J4  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

«  on  you  for  that  purpofe,  but  heard  you  were  in 
"  places,  where  I  thought  it  inconfiftent  with  that 
"  character  I  would  always  endeavour  to  preferve, 
«  to  go   feek  you  in. — With  what  difficulty  I 
"  brought  myfelf  to  this  refolution,  I  need  not 
tell  you,  who  are  enough  fenfible  of  the  force 
your  charms  have  had  upon  me;  but  I  am  the 
more  confoled,  as  it  cannot  but  be  agreeable  to 
you,  ft  nee  you  have  taken  fo  much  pains  to  en- 
able me  to  accomplifh  fo  painful  a  talk,  and  to 
convince  me  it  is  the  only  thing  can  be  accept* 
able  to  you  from 

"  The  unfprtunate  PALAMON- 
i{  P.  S.  I  cannot  reftrain  my  pen  from  bidding 
"  you  once  more  farewel,  and  wilhing  you 
«  may  find  in  fome  more  happy  man,  thofe 
"  merits  which  may  prevail  on  you  to  render 
*s  him  completely  blefl,  by  refuming  thofe* 
*{  perfections,  which,  perhaps,  your  diflike 
*'  of  me  made  you,  for  a  time,  fufpend." 
Amafina  was  at  a  mafquerade  when  this  let- 
ter arrived,  fo  that  it  came  not  to  her  hands  till 
the  next  morning  at  her  return — a  bitter  fequel  of 
the  laft  night's  pleafure ! — Amazement  and  rage 
at  firft  tq&k  up  all  her  thoughts,  and  left  no  room 
for  admittance  to  the  fofter  paffions : — (lie  knew 
not  Ihe  either  loved  Palamon,  or  was  grieved  at 
feeing  forfaken  by  him ;  but  a  few  moments  after 
convinced  her  fhe  did  both :  fhe  went  not  now  to 
bed  as  was  her  cuftom  after  coming  from  the  Hay- 
market; — no  repofe  remained  for  her  heart  or 
eyes ; — by  turns  fhe  wept  and  raved, — upbraided1 
the  inconftaney  of  Falamon,  and  her  own  want  of 
charms; — curfed  thdhaughtinefs  of  his  fpirit,  and 
her  inability  of  bending  it  j  and  laid  the  blame  of 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  *S5 

her  misfortune  on  every  thing  but  that  which  a- 
lone  was  the  occafion,  her  own  ill  conduct. 

She  was  in  agitations,  fuch  as  were  very  near 
throwing  her  into  fits,  when  Armico  her  brother 
happened  to  come  into  her  chamber,  and  alking 
the  meaning  of  that  diforder,  which  was  vifible 
in  all  her  air  and  countenance, — "  Palamon," 
cried  (he,  at  the  fame  time  burfting  into  a  flood  cf 
tears,  "  has  ufed  me  ill." 

"  How!"  cried  the  impatient  Armico,  who  was 
a  kind  of  a  Chamont,  and  had  no  lefs  affc&ion  for 
lab  fitter  than  the  poet  has  beftowed  on  that  young 
•warrior, — "  Quick, — let  me  know  in  what,  that 
**  I  may  fly  to  revenge  your  caufe." 

"  Read  there,"  replied  me,  pointing  to  the  let- 
ter which  lay  open  on  the  table;  "  he  has  the  im- 
**  pudencc  to  renounce  his  vows,  to  abandon  me, 
<*  and  then  lay  the  blame  of  his  falfehood  on  my 
**  innocent  diverfions." 

Armico  took  fire  immediately,and  without  giv- 
ing himiclf  the  trouble  of  examining  any  farther 
than  five  or  fix  lines,  fwore  that  Palamon  was  a 
villain,  and  that  he  would  not  fuffer  the  honour 
of  his  family  to  be  abufcd;  and  a  thoufand  fuch- 
like  fpe.eches,  which  rafli  young  men  are  apt  to  - 
make  on  caufes  of  this  nature,  however  ground- 
lefs  or  imaginary. — Purfuing  the  dictates  of  his 
rage,  and  without  giving  himfelfany  time  for  re- 
fleftion,  he  flew  out  of  the  room,  and  fenta  chal- 
lenge to  Palamon,  requiring  him  to  meet  him  at  a 
place  he  mentioned,  and  was  proper  enough  for 
the  purpofe,  with  fvvord  and  piftol,  to  anfwer  the 
indignity  he  had  offered  to  their  family,  in  the  per- 
fon  of  Amafma. 

This  he  fent  by  his  valet  de  cliambre,  whom  ho 


256  THE    FEMAL!  3.  V; 

charged  to  bring  back  an  anfwer;  but  he  foori  re- 
turned, letting  him  know  it  was  not  in  his  power 
to  obey  him,  Palamon  having  left  London  the 
evening  before,  in  order  to  retire  to  his  country- 
feat. 

Armico  at  firft  was  enraged  at  the  difappoint* 
ment  of  that  revenge  he  imagined  hirnfelf  fure  of 
taking  on  Palamon;  but  his  pailion  foon  after  growl- 
ing more  cool,hedid  not  think  fit  to  followhim;  o 
peciallyas  his  father>  being  informed  the  fame  day 
of  all  that  had  happened,  abfolutely  fctbade  him  to 
make  any  noife  of  the  affair,  and  feemed  to  ac- 
knowledge, that  Palamon  had  behaved  no  other- 
wife  than  as  a  reaionable  man,  and  Amafiua,  thut 
if  (lie  looked  on  the  lofs  of  him  as  a  misfortune, 
had  nobody  in  reality  to  accufe  but  herfelf. 

Palamon,  in  fa£t,  had  no  fooner  difpatched  his 
letter  to  Amafina  than  he  wifhed  it  back: — a  flood 
of  tendernefs  returned  upon  his  heart,  and  made 
her  appear  lefs  faulty  than  he  before  had  thought 
her: — he  had  accufed  himfelf  of  having  taken  his 
farewel  in  too  harih  and  unbecoming  terms,  and 
wifhed  he  had  at  lead  done  it  with  more  ibftnefs ; 
but  on  hie  fervant's  return,  and  informing  him  fhe 
was  gone  to  the  mafquerade,  he'grew  more  fatif- 
fied  with  what  he  had  done;  and  convinced  it  was 
right  to  part  with  a  woman,  whom  there  was  net 
the  leati  appearance  of  ever  being,  happy  with,  to 
prevent  the  interpofition  of  friends,  and  put  it  out 
of  his  own  power  to  recede  from  what  he  had 
wrote,  abfence  feemed  to  him  the  only  fure  way: 
therefore  without  any  longer  delay  than  the  time, 
his  horfes  were  putting  to  the  chariot,  quitted  the 
town  immediately,  taking  with  him  that  above- 
mentioned  friend,  whofe  advice  and  company  he 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  257 

knew  would  ftrengthen  him  in  his  refolution,  and 
confole  him  in  the  pains  he  endured,  while  tear- 
ing the  once  precious  image  of  Amafina  from  his 
heart. 

To  be  told  of  his  departure,  inflicted  on  that 
unhappy  lady  agonies  more  cruel  than  all  his  letter 
had  done: — (he  now  was  aflured  he  was  in  ear- 
ned;— that  he  was  inevitably  loft; — and  by  the 
violence  of  her  grief,  knew  the  violence  of  the 
love -that  had  occafioned  it: — all  the  pride,  the  vain 
defire  of  conquering  his  reafon,  and  rendering  it- 
fubfervicnt  to  her  will,  which  had  prompted  her 
to  a£l  as  (lie  dki,  was  now  no  more : — gladly 
would  me  have  yielded  to  relinquifh  every  joy  for 
that  of  retrieving  his  affe&ions ;  and  perhaps,  even 
descended  to  confefs  how  far  (he  had  been  toblame,  .- 
had  he  been  prefent  to  defire  it  of  her;  but  he  was 
at  too  great  a  diftance,  and  to  write  (he  thought 
would  be  demeaning  herfelf  too  much,  and  might 
jnake  him  rather  defpife  than  love  her. 

All  he  fo  long,  and  with  fo  much  ardency,  in 
vain  attempted  to  bring  to  pafs,  while  he  was  pre- 
fent and  continued  to  admire  her,  was  however  ef- 
fected by  his  forfaking  her. — What  was  denied  to 
love,  defpair  enfoiced!  She  looked  back  with  won- 
der and  deteflation  on  thofe  irregularities  which 
had  deprived  her  of  him;  and  it  became  as  great 
a  prodigy  now  to  fee  her  in  any  public  place  of  dt- 
verfion,as  it  had  lately  been  to  find  her  abfent:— 
(he  has,  ever  fince  his  breaking  with  her,  been  that 
refeived,  that  pruden;  Amafina  he  had  fo  much 
wifhed  to  find  her,  and  which  would  have  made 
him  the  happkft  of  mankind;  but  it  is  now  too 
late  to  be  any  other  than  a  matter  of  indifference 
to  him;  and  is  accompanied  with  a  misfortune  to 


258  THE  FEMALE  F.  V. 

herfelf,  whrch  is,  that  the  remembrance  of  his  paf- 
fion,  and  the  ill  return  (he  made,  will  not  permit 
her  to  entertain  the  leafl  regard  for  any  other  man, 
though  ftill  addrefied  by  the  nobleft  youths  of 
Britain. 

Palamon  had  not  been  many  months  in  the 
country,  before  he  became  acquainted  with  a 
young  lady,  who,  though  not  altogether  fo  re- 
fplendent  a  beauty  as  Amafina,  wanted  not  charms 
to  render  any  man  fdrgetful  of  a  miftrefs,  by 
whom  he  thought  himfelf  ill  treated;  and  had  be- 
fides,  all  thofe  perfections  of  the  mind,  which  Pa- 
lamon  fet  fo  high  a  value  on: — in  fine,  he  made 
his  addreiFes  to  her,  was  received  by  her  relations 
with  the  higheft  approbation,  and  by  herfelf  with  a 
modeft  kindnefs :— the  courtmip  lafled  no  longer 
than  decency  required: — the  equally  defired  cere- 
mony completed  both  their  wifties,  and  they  con- 
tinue mutual  patterns  of  conjugal  affe&ion ;  while 
poor  Amafina  fuffers  her  bloom  to  wither  in  fecrct 
repinings  and  unavailing  repentance,  her  affliction 
heavier  to  be  borne  by  the  endeavours  ihe  makes 
to  conceal  it. 

By  this  example  young  ladies  ought  to  be  warn- 
ed how  dangerous  it  is  to  fport  with  the  affections 
of  a  man  of  ferife:  a  fop,  a  fool,  who  has  no  fenfi- 
bility  of  what  is  owing  to  the  woman  he  addreffes, 
or  to  himfelf,  may  think  the  little  artifices,  which 
fome  make  ufe  of,  in  order  to  inflame  their  lovers, 
as  a  pretty  amufement,  and  be  delighted  with  thofe 
jealoufies  which  neither  give  him  real  pangs,  nor 
the  ecclairciflement  of  any  real  pleafure;  but  the 
man  who  loves  fincerely,  and  fees  through  fuch, 
idle  ftratagems,  cannot  but  refent,  and  at  la  ft  de- 
fpife  them. 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  2^9 

Too  many  I  fear  arc  in  Amafina's  cafe,  and  for 
the  gratification  of  a  whim,  of  a  moment's  dura- 
tion, have  facrificed  what  would  have  made  the 
happinefs  of  their  whole  lives. — According  to  that 
great  difcerner  of  nature,  the  immortal  Shakefpeare, 
nothing  is  fo  much  deGred  by  women  as  to  have 
their  own  will;  but  as  it  is  impoflible  for  any  one, 
of  what  ftation  foever,  to  enjoy  it  in  every  thing, 
we  ought  to  confider  and  weigh  well  in  what  we 
can,  with  the  leaft  mortification  to  ourfelves,  en- 
dure to  be  debarred  from  it,  and  not  hazard  the 
higheft  wifh  our  fouls  can  form  to  the  attainment 
of  the  meaneft: — but  what  Sir  John  Suckling 
wrote  extempore,  on  the  fight  of  two  lovers  quar- 
relling about  a  trifle,  may  very  well  be  applied  to 
a  number  of  our  prefent  pretended  devotees  to 
Cupid>  of  both  fexes. 

"  Lovers,  like  little  girls  and  boys, 

"  Cry  for  hearts,  as  they  for  toys; 

"  Which  when  once  gain'd  in  childim  play, 

•"  They  wantonly  do  throw  away." 

After  all,  no  young  lady,  if  me  thinks  at  all, 
can  think  the  indulging  herfeH  too  much  in  the 
modim  diverfions  of  the  age  will  ever  be  agreeable 
to  any  man,  whofe  good  opinion  it  is  worth  her 
while  either  to  infpire  or  preferve:  nor  can  (he 
anfwerit  to  her  reafon,  that  (he  takes  more  pains 
to  engage  the  idle  flatteries  of  a  few  unmeaning 
coxcombs,  than  the  folid  praifcs  of  a  man  of  vir- 
tue and  good  fenfe. 

But  I  am  fenfible  all  this  is  talking  to  the  wind : 
— mufic,  dancing,  love,  and  gallantry,  are  favour- 
ite amufements  with  the  young  and  gay:— they 
will  purfue  them  wherever  they  are  to  be  found. 
Ir  is,  therefore,  a  great  pity,  methinks,  that  peo- 


$60  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

pie  of  fafhion  have  not  frequent  entertainments  of 
this  nature  at  their  own  houfes ;  where  only  fe- 
leCt  companies  being  admitted,  all  the  dangers, 
the  indecencies,  the  mifchiefs,  which  attend  ram- 
bling to  public  afiemblies,  would  be  avoided : — the 
gentlemen, knowing  who  they  were  among,  would 
treat  the  ladies  with  the  refpect  due  to  them,  and 
exert  all  their  wit  and  addrefs  to  render  them- 
felves  agreeable : — the  ladies  might  be  as  pleafant 
as  they  pleafed;  all  innocent  freedoms  are  allow- 
able with  men  of  honour  and  good  fenfe : — no 
mifconftru&ions  are  made,  either  through  igno- 
rance or  ill  nature,  on  what  pafles  in  converfati- 
on  •, — all  is  free  arid  eafy,  and  the  prefent  fatisfac- 
tion  is  not  hereafter  embittered  with  any  remorfe 
or  anxiety. 

In  fine,  my  fpectatoriar"  capacity  will  permit  me 
to  approve  of  no  other  entertainments  which  are 
paid  for,  and  at  which  all  people,  without  diftinc- 
tion,  have  an  equal  privilege  for  their  money,  than 
thofe  which  are  exhibited  on  the  theatres;  for 
there,  though  it  is  poflible  the  moft  abandoned 
proftitute  may  thruft  herfelf  into  the  fame  box  with 
the  fi/tt  duchefr,  and  even  have  the  arrogance 
to  lay  hold  of  that  opportunity  of  fpeaking  to  her, 
yet  fuch  inftanees  very  rarely,  if  ever,  happen; 
not  becauie  fuch  wretches  want  either  impudence 
or  vanity  enough  to  mix,  as  much  as  they  can, 
with  the  great  and  virtuous  part  of  their  fex  in 
thefe,  as  well  as  in  any  other  public  place,  but 
becaufe  they  know  it  is  not  their  intereft  to  do  it. 
Thr  defign  they  have  in  coming  there  would  be 
totally  overthrown  by  fuch  a  behaviour;  fince 
the  moft  profefled  and  avowed  libertine  would  be 
alhamed  and  afraid  to  accoft  them  in  the  fight  or 


B.V.  SPECTATOR.  261 

hearing  of  thofe  noble  perfonages,  or  even  any  lady 
of  reputation: — the  play-houfe  will  not  admit  of 
thofe  freedoms,  which  may  eafily  be  taken  either 
at  Ranelagh,  Vauxhall,  &c.  &c.  or  the  mafque- 
rade,  where  a  man  may  lead  his  little  miftrefs  of 
an  hour  out  through  a  private  walk,  or  run  away 
with  her  in  a  vizard,  without  being  obferved  by  the 
reft  of  the  company. 

It  is  indeed  but  of  latter  years  that  vice  has 
dared  to  appear  barefaced  at  the  theatres;  loofe  as 
the  age  is  faid  to  have  been  in  the  reign  of  king 
Charles  II.  I  am  told  no  woman  of  an  infamous 
character  ever  came  there  without  a  mafk,  and 
long  fince  then,  throughout  the  days  of  his  fuc- 
ceflbrs,  James,  William, and  Mary,and  the  greatcft 
part,  if  not  all  thofe  of  queen  Anne,  they  retained 
that  modeft  mark  of  a  lewd  life,  or  exchanged  it 
for  a  black-hood,  pulled  over  their  faces,  after  the 
manner  of  a  veil,  which  diilinguiflied,  and  at  the 
fame  time  concealed  them  from  the  virtuous  part 
of  the  audience;  fo  that  there  was  then  no  poffi- 
bility  of  any  difagreeable  intermixtures;  nor  is 
there  any  danger  of  it  now  for  the  reafon  above 
alledged. 

No  objections,  therefore,  can  be  made  againfl 
ladies  frequenting  the  theatres  on  thofe  accounts, 
for  which  thofe  others,  at  prefent  more  encouraged 
places  of  refort,  ought  juftly  to  be  avoided. 

Befules,  a  good  play  is  an  elegant  entertain, 
mcnt  for  thofe  of  the  brighteft  and  moft  elevated 
capacities,  and  cannot  but  afford  fome  improve- 
ment to  the  dulleft  and  lead  informed: — it  alfo 
engrofles  no  more  of  the  time  than  may  very  well 
be  fpared  from  all  other  avocations,  whether  of 
fludy  or  bufinefsj  nor  breaks  in  upon  thofe  hours 

VOL.  I.  Z 


26z  THE   FEMALE  3.  V. 

which  decency,  and  the  confederation  of  our 
health,  fhould  devote  to  repofe. 

It  muft  be  allowed,  that  there  is  no  kind  of 
diverfion  whatever,  in  which  three  hours  may  fo 
agreeably  and  profitably  be  fpent;  and  among  the 
many  misfortunes  of  the  prefent  age,  1  think  the 
vifible  decay  of  the  ftage  may  well  be  accounted 
not  the  leaft;  fince  nothing  can  be  a  greater  proof 
how  much  the  general  talte  is  vitiated,  than  to 
neglccT:  an  entertainment  in  which  pleafure  and 
inftru&ion  are  blended,  ^for  others,  which  the  beft 
that  can  be  faicl  of  them  is,  that  they  afford  fome 
amufement  to  the  fenfes. 

Nothing  to  me  feems  more  ridiculous  than  to 
hear  thofe  reafons  which  the  trading  part  of  the 
nation,  and  fome  of  the  inferior  gentry,  give  for 
their  averfion  to  that  portion  of  the  drama,  which 
is  called  tragedy : — "  We  have  tragedy  enough 
"  at  home,  fay  they;  involved  in  wars,  burthened 
"  with  taxes,  and  in  continual  terrors  of  worfe 
"  confequences,  our  fpirits  want  exhilaration, 
"  not  depreffion; — our  own  miferies,  and  in  all 
"  probability  thofe  of  our  pofterity,  afford  us  too 
"  many  fad  ideas,  without  adding  to  them  by  me- 
<c  lancholy  repreientations  on  the  ftage." 

Methinks  there  is  a  riarrownefs  of  conception 
in  people  who  argue  in  this  manner,  which  de- 
ferves  compaflion : — it  (hews,  they  have  capacities 
for  nothing  farther  than  \vhat  is  called  the  tale 
or  fable  of  the  piece;  and  either,  through  want  of 
attention  or  underftanding,  cannot  take  in  thofe 
beautiful  morals  and  reflections,  which  in  all  good 
tragedies  fhew,  that  the  misfortunes  to  which  life 
is  incident  are  not  difplayed,  but  with  a  view  of 
enabling  perfons  to  undergo,  with  the  more  forti- 


B.  V.          SPECTATOR.  263 

tude  and  patience,  ills  which  they  find  have  been 
inflicted  on  others. 

But  where  nature,  or  the  want  of  proper  edu- 
cation, denies  this  intended  benefit,  thofe  perfons 
whom  the  folemn  fcene  too  much  affects,  have  not 
the  fame  excute  for  with-holding  their  encourage- 
ment to  comedy; — fince,  to  forget  their  cares  is 
all  they  want,  the  fock  may  afford  what  the  bufkin 
cannot  give: — they  will  fee  the  follies  and  mif- 
takes  both  of  the  great  and  low  world  agreeably 
ridiculed;  and  if  they  do  not  amend  their  own, 
they  may  at  lead  laugh  at  thofe  of  other  people. 

It  is  not,  however,  to  this  part  of  the  nation  I 
am  at  prefent  pretending  to  give  advice,  nor  is  it 
owing  to  thofe  motives  I  have  mentioned,  that 
our  young  ladies  of  condition  fliun  theatrical  di- 
verfionsfor  mafquerades,affemblies,and  ridottoes: 
the  calamities  of  the  times  affect  not  them: — all 
within  their  gentle  bofoms  is  harmony,  and  joy, 
and  peace: — they  can  condole  with  Melpomene, 
and  not  be  depreffed  by  the  diftreffes  ihe  preientf ; 
and  can  never  want  a  difpofrtion  to  laugh  with 
Thalia. 

Thefe,  who  are  themfelves  the  real  mufes,  and 
by  their  charms  infpire  all  that  is  attributed  to  the 
tuneful  Nine,  fliould  not,  methinks,  difdain  the 
effects  of  their  own  influence.  Did  they  vouch- 
fafe  to  fpaikk  in  the  boxes  as  formerly,  the  poets 
would  write  with  double  energy,  and  the  players 
act  with  double  fpirit.  What  at  prefent  is  want- 
ing to  anfwer  the  ends  propofed  by  the  inftitution 
of  the  drama,  is  chiefly  owing  to  their  having,  of 
late  years,  withdrawn  their  accultomed  favours. 

Some  ladies  indeed  have  (hewn  a  truly  public 
fpirit  in  refcuing  the  admirable,  yet  ajmofl  forgot- 
Z  2 


264  THE   FEMALE  B.  V. 

ten  Shakefpear,  from  being  totally  funk  in  obli- 
vion:— they  have  generoufly  contributed  to  raife 
a  monument  to  his  memory,  and  frequently  ho- 
noured his  works  with  their  prefence  on  the  ftage: 
— -an  .a&ion,  which  deferves  the  higheft  enco- 
miums, and  will  be  attended  with  an  adequate 
reward;  fince,  in  preferving  the  fame  of  the  dead 
bard,  they  add  a  brightnefs  to  their  own,  which 
will  (hine  to  late  pofterity. 

Yet  I  could  wim  this  benevolence  of  nature 
•were  expended  farther: — it  is  a  melancholy  re- 
flection to  a  poet,  that  he  muft  be  dead  before  he 
can  arrive  at  the  end  of  his  ambition : — there  are 
many  living  authors,  who,  we  cannot  deny,  merit 
fome  portion  of  regard ;  and  if,  while  depreffed, 
neglected,  and  perhaps  ill-treated,  they  force,  as 
it  were,  our  approbation,  how  infinitely  more 
would  they  be  capable  of  exciting  it,  if  cheriihed 
and  encouraged!  as  I  remember  to  have  fome- 
where  read, 

"  As  tender  plants  by  kindly  influence  live,, 
*'  So  favour  is  the  fun  makes  poets  thrive." 
Let  us  not  therefore  lavifh  all  our  garlands 
on  the  grave,  but  referve  fome  chaplets  for  the 
living  brows  of  thofe  who  make  it  their  endeavours 
to  pleafe  us : — gratitude  requires  it  of  us-, — juftice, 
good-nature,  and  good-manners,  demand  fome 
return  on  our  parts;  and  if  even  all  thofe  pleas 
were  filent,  felf-intereft  ought  to  oblige  us  to  it. 
If  we  confider  ferioufly,  we  mall  find  that  it  is 
the  greateft  robbery  we  can  commit  againft  our- 
felves,  when  we  refufe  encouragement  to  works 
of  wit  and  ingenuity;  for  befides  the  countenan- 
cing thofe  perfections  in  others,  being  a  proof  we 
want  not  fome  (hare  of  them  ourfelves,  how  many 


B.  V.  SPECTATOR.  265 

ladles  have  there  been,  the  fame  of  whofe  endow- 
ments had  properly  exifled  no  longer  than  their 
own  lives,  or  of  fome  particular  admirers,  which 
are  now  immortalized  in  the  poet's  fong! — Had 
Sacharifla  been  poffefled  of  more  perfections  than 
even  Waller  has  afcnbed  to  her,  they  would  long 
fince  have  been  forgot,  did  fhe  not  Itill  live  in  his 
inimitable  lines. 

It  is  not  that  our  fex  have  not  the  defire  of  ad- 
miration as  much  at  heart  as  ever;  on  the  con- 
trary, the  love  of  praife  was  never  more  predomi- 
nant: and  that  they  aim  to  acquire  it  by  ways  fo 
widely  different  from  what  before  was  ever  prac- 
tifed  by  our  Britifli  ladies,  fince  the  firft  civilizing 
of  the  country,  feems  to  me  entirely  occafioned 
by  the  example  of  fome  few  perfons,  who,  though 
in  an  elevated  itation,  being  hoydens  in  their  own 
nature,  have  eftablifhed  into  a  famion  thofe  cuf- 
toms  among  us,  which  would  have  incurred  the 
fevereft  fatire  in  the  days  of  our  anceftors. 

Our  very  drefs  too  much  correfponds  with  the 
airs,  which  none  now  can  be  accounted  genteel 
without  afiuming: — one  while  we  are  tranfmo- 
grified  into  milk-maids; — then  into  a  kind  of  A- 
mazonians, — half  men,  half  women; — and  a  tru- 
ly modifli  lady  looks  now,  by  turns,  every  thing— 
but  a  gentlewoman. 

For  my  part,  1  think  I  fee  fo  great  a  tendency 
towards  barbarifm  and  rufticity  among  us,  that  I 
expect,  if  the  queen  of  Hungary's  arms  continue 
to  prevail  as  they  have  done,  we  (hall  have  patterns 
fent  over  to  us  of  the  habits  worn  by  the  Pandour 
and  Talpack  ladies,  in  order  to  regulate  ourfelves 
according  totluir  mode, in  honour  of  the  afiiilance 
their  hulbands  have  afforded  in  the  prefent  war. 


266  THE  FEMALE  B.  V. 

Wild  Infatuation !  Strange  prevalence  of  example! 

In  fine,  there  is  nothing  fo  difagreeable,  fo 
Shocking  to  the  natural  foftnefs  and  modefty  of  our 
fex,  as  well  as  to  good  fenfe  and  good  breeding, 
that  we  may  not  in  time  degenerate  into,  if  we 
proceed  to  un woman  ourfelves  by  the  fame  fwift 
degrees  we  have  done;  and  a  few,  very  few  years 
more  will  reduce  us  to  that  favage  wildnefs,  which, 
it  is  faid,  the  Phoenicians  firft  found  us  in. 

However,  as  extremes  are  feldom  of  a  long  con- 
tinuance, it  is  to  be  hoped  the  prefent  humour 
will  take  a  different  turn; — that  our  ladies  will 
defpife  all  unworthy  imitations,  ceafe  to  compli- 
ment away  their  characters  to  any  perfon  or  per- 
fons  whatever, and  once  more  depend  on  their  own 
good  fenfe  for  the  guide  of  their  behaviour;  and 
then  they  cannot  fail  of  exciting  all  that  love,  ad- 
miration, and  efteem,  which  it  is  no  lefs  laudable 
than  natural  to  be  pieafed  with. 


BOOK    VI. 

THERE  is  one  quality,  which  has  fomewh'at 
fo  heavenly  in  it,  that  by  fo  much  the  more 
•we  are  poflefled  of  it,  by  fo  much  the  more  we 
draw  nearer  to  the  great  Author  of  Nature.  Of 
all  the  virtues,  it  is  that  which  moft  finds  its 
reward  within  itfelf,  and  at  the  fame  time  mofl 
endears  us  to  fociety;  atoning  for  almoft  every 
other  deficiency: — of  all  the  beauties,  it  is  that 
which  attracts  the  moil  lafting  admiration,  gives 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  25; 

the  greateft  charm  to  every  thing  we  fay  or  do, 
and  renders  us  amiable  in  every  flage  of  life. 

Yet  it  is  no  more  than  what  is  in  the  pQwer 
of  every  one,  with  the  help  of  a  very  little  appli- 
cation, to  attain : — it  is,  indeed,  no  other  than 
an  affability  of  manners  and  behaviour,  or  what  is 
coznmonly  called  good-nature;  but  then  it  mud 
be  permanent,  fincere;  not  aflumed  or  affe&ed, 
but  flowing  from  a  real  benevolence  of  mind> 
which  takes  delight  in  contributing  all  it  can  to 
the  welfare  of  others. 

It  was  always  my  opinion,  that  good  fenfe  will 
make  good-nature;  becaufe  it  (hews  us  what  is  our 
true  intereft  and  happinefs;  and  whatever  fome 
people  fay  to  the  contrary,  I  never  will  believe  a 
perfon  can  be  poflefled  ef  the  one,  without  fome 
lhare  of  the  other.  A  man  may,  indeed,  be  an 
excellent  mathematician,  philofopher,  theologift, 
lawyer,  or  poet;  have  learning,  memory,  fancy, 
ingenuity,  to  a  fuperlative  degree;  yet  if  in  his 
deportment  there  be  any  tincture  of  arrogance, 
peevirtmefs,  morofenefs,  fullennefs,or  any  of  thofe 
indications  by  which  ill-nature  may  be  known,  I 
will  not  allow  him  to  have  a  clear  and  ftrong 
judgment.  When  any  extraordinary  endowment 
makes  him  treat  with  contempt  or  impatience  the 
ideas  of  thofe  who  are  lefs  learned,  or  have  lefs 
bright  capacities,  it  mews  his  own  to  be  clouded; 
and  whatever  fparkles  may  fometimes  iflue  forth, 
there  is  ftill  a  dark  and  uninformed  corner  in  his 
foul,  which  hinders  him  from  being  the  perfect 
great  man. 

Good-nature  is  religion  too,  in  the  higheft 
meaning  of  the  word;  becaufe  it  will  not  fuffer 
us  to  do  by  any  one  what  we  would  riot  willingly 


i6S  THE  FEMALE          B.  VI. 

nave  done  to  ourfelves:  and  though  I  am  far  from 
thinking  that  thofe  who  have  not  this  happy  dif- 
pofition  of  mind  are  wicked,  yet  this  I  venture  to 
affirm,  that  thofe  who  are  really  pofiefled  of  it, 
never  can  be  fo. 

A  perfon  may  be  a  drift  obferver  of  the  ten 
commandments,  yet  do  a  great  deal  of  mifchief  in 
the  world:  he  may  defpife  all  mean  and  bafe  ac- 
tions, and  have  in  the  utmoft  abhorrence  the  more 
capital  offences;  yet,  by  a  teizing  or  contemptu- 
ous behaviour,  drive,  as  it  were,  thofe  about  him 
to  be  guilty  even  of  the  worft,  and  fo  become  the 
author,  though  not  the  actor  of  the  crime. 

A  certain  noble  perfon,  who  in  his  time  was 
looked  upon  as  the  arbiter  of  wit,  found  among 
the  many  pieces  which  were  every  day  laid  on  his 
toilet  for  his  infpection,  one  which  had  been  left 
by  a  namelefs  author,  with  a  letter,  moft  humbly 
requefting  his  lordfhip's  judgment  on  the  perfor- 
mance : — this,  it  feems,  was  a  dramatic  poem,  en- 
titled, Mariamne;  and  whether  it  was  wrote  with 
that  fkill  and  energy  a  ftory  fo  affecting  as  that 
of  the  Jewifh  princefs  merited,  or  whether  it  only 
feemed  to  fall  fliort  by  any  ill-humour  the  illu- 
ftrious  reader  might  happen  to  be  in  at  that  time-, 
is  uncertain;  but  he  was  fo  little  fatisfied  with  the 
piece,  that  he  had  no  fooner  looked  it  over,  than 
taking  up  his  pen  haftily,  he  wrote  on  the  outfide, 
and  juft  under  the  title,  thefe  lines: 

"  Poet,  whoe'er  thou  art,  G — d  d — n  thee; 

•c  Go  hang  thyfelf,  and  burn  thy  Mariamne." 

This  was  all  the  anfwer  he  vouchfafed  to  give, 
and  on  the  gentleman's  calling  fome  days  after, 
•was  accordingly  delivered  to  him  by  the  valet  de 
chambre. 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  16$ 

The  fondnefs  which  mod  young  authors  have 
for  their  firft  performance,  made  him  impatient  to 
fee  how  his  had  been  received ;  but  the  (hock  wai 
fo  great  on  finding  the  cruel  fentence  patted  upen 
him,  that  he  executed  it  immediately,candemning 
to  the  flames  his  play,  and  his  neck  to  a  halter 
made  of  his  own  garters. — Nobody  can  fuppofe 
the  noble  lord  either  intended  or  defired  fo  difmal 
an  effect. of  the  feverity  he  had  ufed  to  one  alto- 
gether unknown  to  him,  and  who  poflibly  might 
be  a  man  of  fome  merit,  though  he  did  not  hap- 
pen to  be  an  excellent  poet.  It  was,  however,  a 
piece  of  ill-nature,  which  thofe  who  are  full  of 
take  all  opportunities  to  vent;  and  I  mention  it 
only  to  (hew  what  fatal  confequence  the  derifionof 
perfons  on  whom  we  depend  may  poffibly  produce. 
It  looks  indeed  as  if  this  poor  poet  wanted  both 
fpirit  and  prefence  of  mind;  for  had  he  been  ma- 
fter  of  either,  he  might  eafily  have  retorted  on  the 
peer>and  obliged  him  in  his  turn  to  take  fhamcto 
himfelf:  fince  I  think  there  could  ivot  well  be 
greater  improprieties  in  the  play,*than  in  the  judg- 
ment he  pafled  upon  it;  as  any  one  will  fee 
who  confiders  his  lordfhip's  bidding  "  him  hang 
"  himfelf,"  and  afterward  adding,  "  burn  thy 
"  Mariamne;"  the  fecdnd  part  of  which  injunction 
was  impofilble  to  be  performed  after  the  fulfill- 
ing of  the  former. — This  therefore,  was  with  all 
fubmiflion  to  the  memory  of  fo  great  a  man,  a  fo- 
lecifm  in  phrafe,  which  the  very  trials  at  the  Old- 
Bailey  might  have  inflructed  anyone  to  avoid. 

The  cruel  lines  were  however  wrote  inftanta- 
neoufly,  and  doubtlefs,  as  1  before  obferved,  to 
gratify  a  fpleen,  which  in  that  moment  got  the 
better  of  all  other  confidcrations ; — but  I  appeal 


270  THE  FEMALE  8.  VI; 

to  all  the  world,  and  would  to  his  lordfliip's  own 
cooler  thoughts,  were  he  living,  if  it  had  not  been 
a  greater  proof  of  his  underftanding,  as  well  of 
tbat  good  manners  and  good-will  we  all  owe  to 
one  another,  if  he  had  teftified  his  difapprobation 
of  the  piece,  modeflly  fubmitted  to  his  cenfure, 
with  lefs  abruptnefs : — nay,  it  could  not  have  been 
in  the  leaft  derogatory  to  his  dignity,  had  he  con- 
defcended  to  point  out  in  what  particulars  he  had 
fwerved  from  the  rules  of  poetry,  and  even  advifed 
him  what  emendations  he  might  make  in  that  per- 
formance, and  how  he  might  avoid  falling  into  the 
like  errors  in  ahy  future  attempt. 

It  is  certainly  a  fiend-like  difpofition  to  be 
pleafed  with  giving  pain;  yet  how  have  I  feen 
fome  people  exult  and  triumph  in  their  power  of 
doing  it!  and  the  more  difquiet  they  are  capable 
of  fpreading,  the  more  confiderable  they  imagine 
themfelves. — Ridiculous  infatuation  of  ill  -judging 
pride! — Does  not  a  wafp,  or  even  a  common  fly, 
buzzing  about  one's  ears  inflict  a  temporary  un- 
eafinefs?  Not  the  moft  infignificant  reptile  the  air 
or  earth  affords,  but  has  the  power  of  being  vexa- 
tious to  us  for  a  while,  and  is  the  rival  of  the  ill- 
natured,  who,  by  being  fuch,  but  vainly  boafls  of 
a  fuperioj  reafon. 

Perfons  of  this  temperament  diffufe  a  gloom 
wherever  theyeome;  no  fooner  they  appear,  than 
converfation  is  at  a  {land,  mirth  is  checked,  and 
every  oneprefent  feemsto  have  catched  fome  (hare 
of  the  infection:  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  the 
fight  of  one  who  is  known  to  have  good-nature,  in- 
vigorates like  the  fun,  infpires  a  chearfulnefs 
where  it  before  was  wanting,  and  heightens  what 
it  finds. 


B.  VL  SPECTATOR.  271 

Whoever  reflects  on  any  two  perfons  in  whom 
this  contraft  in  humour  is  vifible,  will  naturally 
fhun  the  one,  and  court  the  fociety  of  the  other, 
even  though  they  have  no  concern  with  either: 
but  where  there  is  any  kind  of  dependence,  or  a 
neceffity  of  living  with,  or  being  much  with  one 
of  them,  the  influence  muft  be  felt  in  proportion  to 
the  good  or  bad  qualities  of  which-ever  it  happens 
to  be. 

A  fweetnefs  of  difpofition  is  what  every  one 
wifhes  to  find  in  thofe  they  are  obliged  to  live 
with, and  it  is  the  more  endearing  according  to  the 
authority  of  the  perfon's  ftation.  When  the  heads 
of  a  family  are  in  amity  with  each  other,  and  be- 
have with  gentlenefs  and  humanity  to  all  beneath 
them,  how  perfect  is  the  harmony  that  reigns 
throughout!  If  there  happens  to  be  any  dogged  or 
ill-natured  perfons  among  them,  they  will  either 
conceal  or  endeavour  to  rectify  their  humours  by 
the  example  of  their  fuperiors;  and  a  chearful  and 
ready  application  to  their  feveral  duties  Renders  all 
things  eafy,  foftens  the  afperity  of  crofs  accidents, 
and  gives  a  double  relim  to  profperity. 

But  when  thofe,  whofe  province  it  is  to  go- 
vern, fhew  a  diflatisfaction  with  each  other,  and 
receivewith  imperioufnefs  andpeeviGmefsthefer- 
vice  done  by  their  inferiors,  how  unhappy  does  it 
make  all  about  them!— A  general  difcontent  runs 
through  the  whole;  the  commands  of  fuch  people 
are  obeyed  with  reluctance;  they  may  be  feared, 
but  they  cannot  be  truly  loved;  and  their  very 
children  are  capable  of  paying  them  no  more  than 
an  exterior  duty.  But  mod  terrible  of  all  is  it  for 
either  him  or  her,  who,  by  nature  mild  and  gentle, 
flnres  the  bed  of  one  of  a  contrary  difpofition} 


27*  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

when,  infte^ad  of  fond  endearments,  they  find  them- 
felves  accofted  with  teftimonies  of  difguft,  or  fuch 
as  may  very  well  be  taken  for  it ;  when,  infitad 
of  foft  repofe,  they  have  only  fiumbers,  broken  by 
diftra&ing  dreams,  the  effects  of  waking  quarrels ; 
when,  inllead  of  thofe  amicable  confultations  which 
the  aiFairs  of  two  people,  whofe  interefts  are  one, 
demands,  they  are  treated  with  either  fullen  fi- 
lence,  reproaches,  or  equally  provoking  unreafona- 
ble  contradiction-, — what  words  can  paint  the  mi- 
fery  of  fuch  a  forced  enduring ! 

Still  worfe  is  it  where  two  perfons  equally 
harfh  and  unfociable  happen  to  be  united  in  mar- 
riage.— Where  ill  conditions  clafh,  and  both  feem 
to  vie  which  (hall  create  the  moft  difquiet  to  all 
related  or  belonging  to  them,  as  well  as  to  each 
other,  they  form  an  epitome  of  hell  wherever  they 
come,  and  well  may  be  compared  to  the  tormenting 
fiends,  who  capable  of  feeling  no  reft,  no  comfort 
in  their  own  bofoms,  deny  it,  as  much  as  in  them 
lies,  to  all  befides. 

There  are  two  fources  from  whence  what  is 
called  ill-nature  proceeds;  the  one  is  from  the  feeds 
of  tyranny  in  the  foul;  the  other,  only  from  habit 
or  accident :  the  former  is  hardly  ever  to  be  eradi- 
cated; fair  means  will  but  footh,  and  ferve  rather 
to  confirm  than  abate  the  impetuous  propenfity; 
and  rough  meafures,  though  never  fo  ftrenuoufly 
purfued,  will  fcarce  be  able  to  fubdue  it;  but  the 
latter  may  eafily  be  removed  by  one's  own  reafon 
and  reflection,  without  any  other  affiftance. 

I  have  known  feveral  inftances  where  perfons 
who, en  a  ftricT:  examination  into  themfelves,  find- 
ing a  tendency  to  fall  into  fbme  one  or  other  of 
thofe  many  different  modes,  in  which  ill-nature  up- 


B.  VT.  SPECTATOR.  273 

pears,  have  by  theftrength  of  resolution,  been  able 
to  throw  them  off;  ami  by  keeping  a  conftanr 
guard  over  all  their  words  and  actions,  even  in  the 
minuted  matters,  fo  rcftrained  all  turbulent  emo- 
tions from  breaking  out,  that  they  have  in  time  en- 
tirely fubfided,  and  never  after  returned. 

This  is  a  tafk  which  methinks  all  people,  be 
they  of  what  condition  or  degree  foever,  ought  to 
impofe  upon  themfelves:  religion,  morality,  and 
even  common  policy,  require  it  of  them;  and 
whatever  difficulties  they  find,  or  pains  they  take, 
while  making  the  e«Tay,  I  am  well  aflured  both 
will  be  much  more  than  corripenfated  for  in  the 
accomplimment. 

In  order  to  enable  us  to  do  this  with  the  more 
eafe,  we  mould  confider  who  are  the  objects  on, 
whom  we  have  the  power  of  difcharging  our  ill- 
humour. — Are  they  not  fuch  as  fate  has  in  fome 
meafure  fubje&ed  to  us?  for  it  is  not  our  fupe- 
riors,  or  thofe  of  equal  circumftances  with  our- 
felves,  will  brook  ungentle  treatment,  and  few  there 
are  who  tempt  the  confequences.  We  fhould  there- 
fore reflect,  that  old-age,  infancy,  the  poor,  the 
fickj  in  fine,  whatever  is  helplefs  of  itfelf,  and 
flands  in  need  of  tendernefs,  has  an  imlifputable 
claim  to  it-,  and  as  it  is  only  over  fuch  we  dare 
t flu  me  the  privilege  of  infulting,  how  truly  mean, 
bafe  and  ungenerous,  as  well  as  wicked,  it  is,  to 
make  ufe  of  the  means  our  happier  ftars have  given 
us,  to  add  to  the  affliction  of  thofe  whom  it  is  cer- 
tainly our  duty  to  confole. 

In  fafit,  there  would  be  no  fuch  thing  as  cala- 
mity in  the  world,  did  every  member  of  this  great 
body  behave  with  any  tolerable  degree  of  good- 
nature and  humanity  to  the  others.  Good-nature 

VOL.  I.  A  a 


274  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

is  the  cement  of  love  and  friendftiip,  the  bandage 
of  fociety,  the  rich  man's  plcafure,  and  the  poor 
man's  refuge. — Peace,  harmony,  and  joy  reign 
where  it  fubfifts,  and  all  is  difcord  and  confufion 
where  it  is  banifhed. 

But  as  all  other  vices,  fo  a  fournefs  of  humour 
isalfo  more  unbecoming  in  women  than  in  men: 
a  virago,  how  much  foever  fhe  may  be  blown  up 
with  felf-conceit,to  imagine  that  to  domineer, and 
rail,  and  bounce,  denotes  her  a  perfon  of  wit  and 
oeconomy,  is  as  defpicable  a  character  as  any  I 
know;  and  is  defervedly  fh>nned  and  hated  by 
the  more  gentle  of  her  own  fex,and  ridiculed  and 
laughed  at  by  all  in  general  of  the  other. 

Softnefs  and  affability  fhould  go  hand  in  hand 
with  modefty;  and  where  the  former  are  intirely 
wanting,  one  may  very  well  fufpecl:  fome  defici- 
ency in  the  latter.  But  as  a  depravity  of  manners 
fhews  itfelf  in  various  fhapes,  the  fullen  and 
thwarting  difpofition  is  often  as  perplexing  as  the 
afluming  and  violent:  unhappy  are  all  who  con- 
tra£t  an  intimacy  with  a  woman  of  either  of  thefe 
tempers;  but  greatly  to  be  pitied  is  the  hufband, 
the  child,  and  the  fervant  of  fuch  a  wife,  a  mo- 
ther, and  a  miftrefs. 

I  have  often  thought  it  ftrange,  that  fome  la- 
dies, who  think  no  expence  of  time  or  money  too 
much  for  any  thing  they  are  told  will  afford  either 
addition  or  fupporttotheirperfonalcharms, fhould, 
by  an  ill  difpofition  of  mind,  deftroy  what  all  the 
arts  they  make  ufe  of  never  can  repair.  Ill-nature 
is  a  greater  enemy  to  beauty  than  the  fmall-pox 
ever  was;  it  gives  a  difagreeable  depth  to  all  the 
lines  of  the  face;  it  finks  the  cheeks;  throws  a 
difagreeable  deadnefs,  or  *  fiery  rednefs  into  the 


B,  VI.          5  P  E  C  T  A  T  O  R.  275 

eye,  according  as  the  malady  proceeds  from  an  ex- 
c--fs  of  phlegm  or  choler;  it  fwells  the  lip,  fades 
the  complexion,  contra&sthe  brow,  and  brings  on 
a  decay  before  the  time.  Sure,  if  they  who  plume 
•  themfclves  chiefly  on  their  attractions,  would  con- 
fider  this,  it  would  occafion  a  prodigious  alteration 
in  the  behaviour  of  many  of  them! 

Some  few  there  are,  indeed,  to  whom  Nature 
has  been  fo  prodigal  of  her  favours,  that  it  is  not 
even  in  their  own  power  to  leffen  the  magnetfc 
force  of  their  charms;  and  thefe  may  maintain 
their  dominion  over  their  lovers,  and  perhaps  feern 
faultlcfs  fora  time:  but  when  once  marriage  has, 
as  the  poet  fays,  dcbafed  the  imperious  miflrefs 
into  wife,  all  that  blaze  of  beauty,  which  lately 
was  beheld  with  awe  and  admiration,  becomes  fa- 
miliar to  the  hufband's  eye; — the  luftre  of  it 
dazzles  him  no  longer,  and  he  diftinguiflics  the 
errors  which  before  he  was  incapable  of  imagining 
were  hid  under  it.  He  then  perhaps  difcovers 
pride,  vanity,  felf-fufficiency,  a  contempt  of  every- 
thing befides  herfelf,  and  all  the  follies,  afcribed 
to  the  weakeft  of  her  fex,  peep  out  through  that 
form  his  paffion  had  once  made  him  look  upon  as 
all  perfection.  Amazed  and  angry  with  the  "de- 
ception it  had  put  upon  him,  he  attempts  to  re- 
form and  bring  the  charmer  back  to  what  he  lately 
thought  her-, — perfuades, — remonftrates,  threat- 
ens;— all,  alas!  too  often  proves  in  vain: — incor- 
rigible, and  determined  to  perfift,  (he  accufes  his 
too  great  penetration;  reproaches  in  her  turn; 
mutual  indifference  cccafions  mutual  flights;  they 
end  one  quarrel  but  to  begin  another,  and  their 
whole  future  lives  are  fure  to  be  one  continued 
fciies  of  difcord. 

A  a  2 


276  THE  FEMALE  B.  Vl. 

This  is  fo  common  a  cafe,  that  I  am  furprifed 
and  grieved  to  find  any  married  woman  can  ex- 
peel  to  maintain  an  authority  with,  much  lefs  over 
her  hufbandj  but  byfuch  arms  as  are  allowed  alone 
prevalent  in  our  lex. — When  a  woman  umvo- 
manizes  herfelf,  renounces  the  foftnefs  of  her  na- 
ture, and  idly  boafts  of  having  it  in  her  power  to 
conquer,  man  has  a  right  to  exert  his  ftrength,  and 
fhew  her  the  vanity  of  her  attempt. — Complai- 
fance,  tendernefs,  and  fidelity,  will  always  have 
charms  for  a  man  of  understanding;  but  rough 
meafures  will  never  get  the  better  of  any  thing  but 
a  fool. 

To  this  it  may  be  alledged,  that  it  is  frequently 
the  lot  of  a  woman  of  true  fenfe  to  be  joined  to  a 
man  of  mean  capacity,  and  fo  refractory  in  his 
humour,  that  though  fhe  does  all  in  her  power  to 
pleafe,  him,  yet  he  is  diflatisfied  with  her  beha- 
viour; and  it  would  be  too  meanly  fubmiflive  in 
her  to  continue  any  marks  of  tendernefs  to  a  per- 
fon  fo  altogether  unworthy  of  them.  I  grant, 
that  a  wife  thus  circumftanced  is  very  unhappy, 
but  muft  think  ihe  would  but  render  herfelf  more 
fo  by  ftruggling  with  her  chain:  the  verieft  cox- 
comb of  them  all  is  fenfible  of  a  hufband's  power, 
and  frequently  exerts  it  the  more  as  he  has  lefs 
reafon  to  do  fo;  for  her  own  peace  therefore  fhe 
ought  to  do  nothing  that  may  ftir  up  his  ill-hu- 
mour and  if  all  is  ineffectual,  bear  with  him  as 
much  as  poffible. 

I  know  very  well  that  this  is  a  doctrine  will 
found  but  harfhly  in  the  ears  of  moft  wives;  but 
1  appeal  to  any  of  thofe  who  have  made  the  trial, 
whether  they  ever  found  any  thing  was  gained  by 
robuftnefs. 


B.  VT.  SPECTATOR.  '277 

In  fine,  there  are  no  provocations,  no  circum- 
ftances  in  life,  that  1  can  allow  to  be  a  fufficient 
excufe  for  ill-nature:  on  fome  occafions,  it  is  nei- 
ther unju't  nor  impolitic  to  refent  being  treated 
\vith  it;  but  we  (hould  never  return  it  in  the  fame 
manner,  fince  there  are  many  other  ways  to  (hew 
we  are  fcnfible  of  an  affront,  without  imitating 
that  which  we  complain  of  when  offered  to  our- 
fclves. 

Much  lefs  ought  we,  when  at  any  time  we  ima- 
gine ourfelves  hardly  dealt  with  by  thofe,  where 
duty,  intereft,  or  any  other  confideration,  obliges 
us  to  fubmit  to  without  any  (hew  of  refcntmenr,- 
to  v? nt  the  inward  difcontent  it  may  occafion  in 
us  on  others  who  have  no  way  contributed  to  ag- 
grieve us:  that  were  to  ptinifh  the  innocent  for 
the  fake  of  the  guilty;  yet  1  am  forry  to  obferve 
it  is  but  too  frequently  pradi fed  by  perfons  of  both 
fcxes,  and  of  all  ages  and  degrees. 

How  often  have  I  feen  people,  after  having  met 
with  fome  matter  of  difquiet  abroad,  come  home 
and  revenge  themfelves  on  all  they  find  in  their 
way ! — Wife,  children,  fervants,  down  to  the  fa- 
vourite dog,  felt  the  effects  of  an  ill-humour^ 
which  the  poor  creatures  have  been  fo  far  from 
doing  any  thing  to  excite,  that  they  even  know 
not  the  meaning  of. 

Nay,  there  are  fome  fo  far  gone  in  this  folly, 
that  it  extends  even  to  things  inanimate  and  infeu- 
fible  of  the  ill  ufage  they  fuftain;  as  many  a  fhat- 
tered  fet  of  china,  glafies,  tables,  chairs,  and  other 
Wenfils,are  a  proof. — What  monftrousftupidityis 
this!  What  can  a  by-flander  think  of  the  unJ.cr- 
fhnding  of  any  one  who  afts  in  this  mad  manner  f 

Nor  do  the  bad  effects  of  ill-nature  ahvay?  ftop 
Aa3 


278  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

here.  If  he  who  receives  the  firft  offence  re- 
venges, it  on  another,  that  perfon  may  perhaps 
fall  on  a  third  by  the  fame  motive ;  he  on  a  fourth; 
and  fo  on,  ad  infinitum •;  fo  that  not  one,  but 
many  families,  fufFer  for  the  mifbehaviour  of  a 
finale  perfon. 

Many  are  the  pretences  which  thofe,  afhamed 
of  fuch  exploits,  will  make  after  being  guilty  of 
them: — they  will  tell  you,  that  they  are  troubled 
with  the  overflowing  of  the  gall;  that  they  have 
the  vapours,  the  fpleen,  or  lownefs  of  fpirits, 
which  being  diflempers  of  the  body,  they  cart  no 
more  help  acling  in  the  manner  they  do,  when  the 
fit  is  on  them,  than  a  min  in  a  high  fever  can  help 
raving.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  thefe  are  diflein- 
pers  of  the  body;  but  when  we  confider  how  great 
an  influence  the  mind  has  over  the  body,  I  believe 
we  fhall  be  forced  to  acknowledge,  that  in  recti- 
fying the  errors  of  the  one,  we  (hall,,  in  a  great 
*  meafure,  prevent  not  only  thefe,  but  many  kinds 
of  difordcrs  in  the  other. 

What  numbers  have  pined  themfelves  into  con- 
fumptions  by  immoderate  grief! — How  dreadful 
a  ravage  has  furious  paflion  occaficned  among  the 
human  ipecies,  under  the  names  of  fevers,  pleu- 
rities,  convulfions! — It  is  notorious,  and  no  phy- 
lician  will  deny  it,  that  the  violent  agitations  of 
the  mind  have  made  more  filicides,  than  poifon, 
ivv'Oid,  or  halter. 

Well  then  may  pur  ill-conditions  create  a  con- 
tinual reftlefsnefs  within,  difturb  the  motion  of  the 
animal  fpirits,  and  bring  on  the  diforders  above- 
mentioned;  fo  that  the  excufes  made  on  this  fcore 
i'erve  rather  to  exaggerate  than  alleviate  the  fault. 

1  do  not  fay  that  the  mind  has  in  all  conflituti- 


E/Vt.  SPECTATOR.  279 

ons  fo  much  the  direction  of  the  body,  as  to  ren- 
der it  fickly  or  healthy,  and  prolong  or  fhorten  life 
merely  by  its  own  operation ;  but  1  will  venture  to 
affirm,  that  in  fame  it  has,  and  that  there  are  none 
but  feel  its  efFedls  in  a  more  or  lefs  degree. 

I  am  very  fenfible  there  are  difeafes  which  we 
inherit  from  oui  paierts,  others  that  are  contra£led 
in  our  iniai.cy,  and  that  alter  we  arrive  at  maturi- 
ty, too  much  fleep  or  over- watching,  violent  colds, 
or  excciFive  heats,  unwholeibme  food,  bad  air,  too 
vehement  or  too  little  exerciie,  and  a  thoufand 
other  accidents,  in  which  the  mind  has  no  part, 
may  breed  diflempers  in  the  body,  and  haflen  dif- 
folution-,  but  even  then,  according  to  the  good  or 
bad  affections  of  the  mind,  they  are  greatly  mode- 
rated, or  rendered  more  viruleiit. 

This  is  fo  plain  and  obvious  a  maxim,  that  it 
{lands  in  need  of  no  examples  to  illuftrate  the  truth, 
of  it;  yet  I  cannot  forbear  making  mention  of  one, 
which  filled  all  who  had  the  oppoitunity  of  know- 
ing it  with  admiration. 

A  perfon,  with  whom  I  am  intimately  acquaint- 
ed, laboured  under  a  fevere  indifpofition  of  more 
than  feven  years  duration;  often  have  1  feen  the 
ilruggles  between  life  and  death ;  often  have  the 
animal  functions  been  at  a  ftand,  and  leemed  to 
ceafe  for  ever; — yet  did  me  at  Jait  get  the  better 
of  this  rack  of  nature,  recovered  her  fo  long  loft 
health  and  ftrength;  and  thofe  who  had  taken 
of  her,  as  they  had  all  the  reafcn  in  the  world  to 
imagine,  their  laft  farewel,  now  behold  her  in 
more  perfed  cafe  than  many  of  them  arc  them- 
felves. — The  cure  was  wonderful,  and  the  more 
fo  as  not  accompli {hed  by  the  power  of  medicine, 
as  the  phyficians  themfchesucaminoufly  agreed^ 


28o  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI, 

but  merely  by  her  own  confummate  patience, 
conftant  chearfulnefs,  and  fteady  fortitude,  in  the 
midft  of  all  the  agonies  fhe  fuftained.— To  add  to 
her  diftemper,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  her  glory 
in  furmounting  them,  me  had  alib  many  fecret 
woes  to  combat  with,  the  leaft  of  which  was  fuf- 
ficient  to  have  overwhelmed  a  mind  not  refolved 
to  be  above  all  tilings,  in  this  world,  and  entirely 
refigned  to  the  will  of  the  fupreme  Being. 

For  this  one  inftance  of  true  heroiim  and  mag* 
naaimity,  1  could  produce  a  great  number  of  others 
of  a  different  nature. — Few,  if  any  families,  have 
been  without  one  or  more  perfons  in  it,  who,  by 
their  careleflnefs  in  reftraining  thofe  inordinate 
emotions,  to  which  the  mind  is  fo  liable,  have 
brought  forne  fearful  ailment  in  the  body,  and 
then  with  an  equal  meannefs  have  funk  under  it. 

Thaumantius  is  allowed  by  all  his  acquaint- 
ance to  be  one  of  th-e  greateft  valetudinarians  in 
the  world. — He  trembles  at  the  very  mention  of 
a  diftemper,  though  in  a  fingle  perfon,  and  at  the 
diftance  of  many  miles,  and  confults  his  phy- 
ficians,  whether  fome  fymptoms,  he  prefently 
imagines  he  feels  within  himfelf,  be  not  an  indica- 
tion of  his  having  catcihed  it : — he  flies  the  tor.va 
on  the  leaft  increafe  of  the  bills  of  mortality,  and 
returns  to  it  on  the  news  of  even  an  infant's  being 
fick  in  the  country. — In  fummer  he  is  apprehen- 
five  of  a  fever,  in  winter  of  an  ague. — Autumn 
and  the  fpring  threaten  fome  change  in  the  confti- 
tution,  which  he  is  fure  to  think  will  be  for  the 
•worfe. — He  was  told  that  the  attitudes  of  the  body- 
in  fencing  opened  the  bread,  and  thereby  prevent- 
ed all  diftempers  of  the  lungs,  on  which  he  pafled 
three  parts  in  four  of  his  time  in  that 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  281 

but  afterwards  happening  to  hear  one  fay,  the  mo- 
tion was  too  violent  and  precipitate,  and  might 
pofiibly  occafion  languors  and  fainting  fweats, 
hurtful  to  the  human  fyltem,  he  threw  away  his 
foil:,  and  never  fince  could  be  perfuaded  to  wear 
a  fword,  leit  fome  affront  fliould  provoke  him  to 
draw  it  to  the  prejudice  of  his  mufcles. — Wfcen 
the  wind  is  in  theeaft,  it  affects  his  eyes;  if  in  the 
north,  it  gives  him  cold;  in  the  fouth,  it  deftroys 
his  appetite;  in  the  weft,  it  fpoils  his  digeflion; 
it  can  veer  to  no  point  of  the  compafs  without  af- 
fecting him,  and  every  change  brings  with' it  new 
terrors. — Nor  fun,  nor  moon,  nor  air,  can  fatisfy 
him  for  three  minutes  together;  and  the  conti- 
nual anxiety  he  is  in  at  every  little  motion,  either 
of  celeftial  or  terreftrial  bodies,  has  at  length 
brought  him  into  a  kind  of  jxeeviflinefs,  which  it 
is  much  to  be  feared  will  caufe,  in  a  fhort  time, 
fome  of  thofe  diftempers  he  is  fo  fearful  of,  and 
takes  fuch  an  over-care  to  avoid. 

Mirandola  had  once  a  very  graceful  perfon,  fine 
eyes,  and  a  complexion  rather  too  delicate  for  his 
fex:  his  whole  ambition  was  to  be  weil  with  the 
ladies;  but  envy  at  his  younger  brother's  good 
fortune,  has  worn  him  to  a  fkeleton,  given  afour- 
nefs  to  his  features,  and  fpread  a  livid  palencfs  o- 
ver  his  face,  rendering  him  rather  an  object  of  pi- 
ty than  admiration. 

Placida,  finding  the  charms  of  her  perfon  de- 
cays, deflroys  thofe  which  flie  might  retain  even 
in  old  age,  by  becoming  difcontented  in  herfelf, 
and  harlh  in  her  behaviour  to  others. 

Draxalla,  poffeffed  of  an  imagination  that  her 
hufband  had-  not  that  affection  for  her  he  pre- 
tended, and  (he  believed  her  due,  became  fo  ter- 


282  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

magant  a  wife,  and  continued  fo  long  to  perfecute 
him  with  caufelefs  jealoufies,  that  he  grew  at  laft 
weary  of  her  fociety;  in  faft,  fought  confolation 
for  his  difquiets  at  home  in  the  arms  of  a  more 
endearing  companion  abroad ;  leaving  her  to  pine 
almoft  to  death,  for  a  misfortune  her  own  ill  tem- 
per had  been  the  occafion  of. 

Thus  fo  many  people,  by  the  fear  of  imagi- 
nary ills,  create  to  themfelvcs  real  ones;  and  o- 
thers,  by  endeavouring  to  fly  a  danger  which  feems 
to  threaten,  run  into  far  worfs  which  they  never 
thought  on. 

As  fancy  is  never  idle,  and  however  indolent 
and  fupine  the  body,  it  will  be  always  preferring 
ideas  to  the  mind  of  one  kind  or  other,  we  mould 
make  it  our  principal  care  to  cherifli  only  fuch  as 
afford  a  pleating  profpe£t;  and  when  any  black 
and  horrid  images  would  force  themfelves  upon 
us,  to  expel  them  as  much  as  lies  in  our  power. 
— Sad  thoughts  will  grow  upon  us  if  indulged, 
and  not  only  thew  whatever  is  difagreeable  in  it- 
felf  in  a  moil  hideous  form,  but  alfo  make  what 
is  moft  capable  of  delighting  become  odious;  all 
places  will  be  irkfome;  all  company  diftaftefui; 
we  (hall  hate  our  very  felves,  and  even  life  itfelf 
at  laft  will  feem  a  burthen;  and  then — but  I  for- 
bear to  mock  the  reader  wiih  a  repetition  of  thofe 
fatal  confequence?,  which  too  frequently,  efpeci- 
ally  of  late  years,  have  attended  fuch  a  fituation 
of  mind. 

But  fuppofing  we  are  enabled  by  Him,  who 
alone  has  ihe  power  over  life  and  death,  to  refrain 
from  any  aft  of  defperatibn  either  on  ourfelves 
or  others,  it  is  impoflible  for  us,  while  in  this  lelf- 
tormenting  ftate,  to  perform  any  of  the  duties  of 


B..VI.  SPECTATOR.  283 

9.  good  chriftian,  or  a  good  moralift. — All  love 
and  affe£tion  ceafes  in  us. — We  feel  no  commi- 
feration  for  the  woes,  nor  partake  in  the  felicity 
of  our  neighbours. — On  the  contrary,  to  fee  any 
one  chearful  affords  new  matter  for  our  difpleafure, 
and  we  drive  by  a  thoufand  ill-natured  actions  to 
deftroy  it. — Unable  to  take  any  fatisfaftion  but 
that  hellifh  one  of  giving  pain,  all  about  us,  as  I 
have  already  taken  notice,,  are  fure  to  feel  the  ef- 
fe£b  of  our  little  malice;  and  I  know  not  whe- 
ther this  venting  our  fpleen,  and  infuflng  fome 
degree  of  it  in  others,  especially  thofe  of  a  weak 
conftitution,  thereby  contributing  to  diforders  de- 
itru&ive  of  their  health,  though  to  kill  may  be  far 
from  our  intention,  is  not  in  reality  to  be  guilty 
of  man-flaughter  at  lead. 

Vapours,  fpleen,  a  dejection  of  fpirits,  or  by 
what  name  foever  this  epilepfy  of  the  mind  is  call- 
ed, whether  it  proceeds  from  a  real  or  imagined 
caufe,  is  certainly  the  word  mifchief  one  can  fall 
into.  It  puzzles  the  phyfician's  art,  becaufe  the 
remedy  is  only  in  ourfelves;  and  we  are  incapable 
of  applying  itafter  the  difeafe  has  gathered  drength. 
Few  are  ever  cured  of  it,  but  all  may  prevent  it 
by  a  timely  care.  If  therefore  we  defire  a  long 
life,  or  to  enjoy  any  of  its  bleflings,  let  us  begin 
early  to  harmonize  the  mind,  to  feafon  it  with  a 
tlefire  of  doing  good,  to  preferve  an  unfliaken 
chearfulnefs  in  whatever  dation  we  may  happen 
to  be  placed,  to  be  always  refigned  to  the  great 
Difpofer  of  all  things,  to  keep  peace  within  our 
own  bofoms,  and  accudom  ourfelves  to  afts  of 
benevolence,  affability,  and  good-humour  to  all 
\ve  conveife  or  have  any  dealings  with.  Such  fen- 
ti meats,  and  fuch  a  behaviour,  are  the  only  ami- 


iS4  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

dotes  againft  thofe  poifonous  conditions  which 
corrupt  the  manners,  pervert  the  underftanding, 
and  rob  us  of  every  thing  that  either  is  or  ought 
to  be  dear  to  us. 

I  doubt  not  but  I  fhall  be  condemned  by  fome 
of  my  readers,  for  having  exprefied  myfclf  with 
too  much  warmth  on  this  fubje&;  and  by  others 
for  having  omitted  faying  many  things  which 
the  authority  of  holy  writ  gives  me  a  fufficient 
warrant  to  have  urged.  As  to  the  firft,  the  me- 
lancholy inftances  I  daily  fee,  or  am  credibly  in- 
formed of,  joined  with  the  good- will  I  bear  to 
mankind  in  general,  would  not  permit  me  to  be 
more  cool; — and  as  to  the  other,  I  thought  it 
proper  to  leave  the  ftrongeft  part  of  the  argument 
to  the  reverend  clergy,  who  can  beft  handle  it,  and 
whofe  province  it  is.  Certainly  there  is  nothing 
more  demands  their  prefent  care,  or  would  more 
teftify  their  zeal  and  charity  for  the  happy  few, 
who  in  thefe  times  of  libertinifm  ftill  continue  to 
think  that  attending  to  divine  fervice  is  a  duty  in- 
cumbent on  them,  and  not  to  be  difpenfed  with. 

Let  the  modifh  contemners  of  all  facred  rites 
laugh  at  me  as  much  as  they  pleafe,  I  fhall  not  be 
afhamed  to  give  it  as  my  firm  belief,  that  not  only 
all  the  irregularities  and  extravagancies  I  have  men- 
tioned, but  many  more,  on  which  1  have  yet  been 
filent,  owe  their  rife  chiefly  to  the  vifible  decay  of 
religion  among  us.  If  we  throw  off  all  regard 
for  that  Omnipotence  to  whom  we  owe  our  being, 
our  preiervation,  and  our  future  hopes,  well  may 
all  confideration  of  cur  fell-creatures  ceafe.  If 
we  level  the  dignity  of  human  nature  with  that 
of  the  brutes,  it  cannot  but  be  expected  we  mould 
a£tas  they  do;  and  if  we  renounce  all  prctenfions 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  28? 

to  another  world,  it  ought  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
that  while  we  are  in  this,  we  fhould  think  our- 
felves  bound  to  obey  no  rules  but  the  dictates  of 
our  own  will,  and  even  quit  it  when  no  longer 
Capable  of  purfuing  our  wicked  inclination. 

The  greateft  fceptic  of  them  all  readily  acknow- 
ledges, that  religion  is  good  for  focicty,  and  ftrikes 
an  awe  into  vice;  how  then  is  it  confident  with 
that  mighty  reafon  on  which  they  vaunt  them- 
felves,or  that  morality  they  pretend  to  as  the  guide 
of  their  actions  to  depreciate  an  inftitution,  which, 
by  their  own  confeffion,  is  fo  conducive  to  the 
peace  and  happinefs  of  mankind? 

But  though  there  be  fome  who  doubtlefs  ima- 
gine they  can  fathom  infinity  with  the  fhallow 
plummets  of  their  own  weak  reafon,  and  make 
life  (with  all  their  might)  of  what  fliare  they  are 
pofiefled  of  in  oppotition  to  him  who  gave  it,  1 
am  ftrongly  of  opinion,  that  the  bulk  of  thofe  who 
affect  to  turn  things  facred  into  ridicule,  think 
quite  otherwife  in  their  own  hearts :  they  fee  clear 
enough  the  truths  which  they  will  not  own,  and 
but  pretend  to  be  purblind  in  their  faith,  as  many 
of  our  modern  fine  gentlemen  do  in  their  fenfual 
optics,  merely  in  complaifance  to  others,who  have 
in  reality  thofe  defects. 

How  ample  a  field  for  ebfervation  now  opens  to 
my  view!  But  I  may  pofiibly  be  accufed  as  hav- 
ing already  gone  too  great  lengths  for  a  FEMALE 
SPECTATOR: — and  1  muil  indeed  confeis,  that 
fome  late  fad  events  which  have  happened,  and 
others  which  threaten  in  families  for  whom  1  have 
the  greateft  regard,  have  taken  me  fomewrmt  out 
of  my  way,  but  I  fliall  eafily  get  home  again,  and 
return  to  my  old  path,  1  hope  to  the  fatisfiiction 

VOL.  I.  B  b 


286  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

and  emolument  of  thofe  for  whofe  fake  this  un- 
dertaking was  principally  fet  on  foot. 

Of  all  the  miftakes  mankind  are  guilty  of  in 
domeftic  affairs,  there  is  none  greater,  or  more 
prevents  the  attainment  of  our  wiflies,  be  they  of 
what  kind  foever,  than  attempting  to  acquire  it 
merely  by  compulfion.  The  proud  and  felf-willed 
perfon  finds  others  as  little  condefcending  as  him- 
felf,  and  the  one  ferves  to  harden  the  other  in 
obftinaoy  and  perverfenefs. 

Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  a  fweet  gentle  be- 
haviour fteals  upon  the-foul  by  imperceptible  de- 
grees, and  melts  the  moft  obdurate  heart.  In 
feeming  to  yield,  it  vanquifhes;  and  though  the 
victories  it  gains  are  often  flow,  yet  they  are  en- 
tire and  permanent.  There  is  fomewhat  in  hu- 
man nature,  through  the  corruption  of  ill  habits 
cr  paffions,  that  will  not  fuffer  it  always  to  hold 
out  agarnft  a  continued  benevolence  and  foftnefs. 

The  prefent  age  affords  a  royal  example  of  this 
truth.  We  have  feen  a  hero  labouring  under  the 
difpleafure  of  his  king  and  father,  difgraced,  me- 
naced, imprifoned,  and  at  laft  compelled  to  give 
his  hand  to  a  princefs  far  whom  at  that  time  he 
had  not  the  leaft  inclination.  He  wedded  her,  it 
is  true; — the  ceremony  of  the  church  was  per- 
formed; but  that  was  all.  The  rites  of  marriage 
remained  incomplete;  nor  could  any  confidera- 
tion  prevail  on  him  to  become  more  a  hufband 
than  in  name.  Long  did  fhe  continue  a  Virgin- 
ia iJe, — long  fmother  her  fecret  difcontents; — fhe 
complained  not  of  his  injuftice  even  to  himfelf, 
but  preferved  an  unfhaken  complaifance  and  ten- 
dernefs  to  him  in  private ;  and  in  public  aflumed 
a  chsarfulnefs,  which  was  aftcnifhing  to  himfelf, 


B.  VI.  SPEC  TAT  OH. 

as  w:;ll  as  to  thofe  who  being  about  him  could  not 

avoid  being  made  acquainted  with  the  fecret  of 

his  behaviour,  and,  at  the  fame  time,  (hewed  her 

to  others  as  a  princefo  poflefled  of  all  fhe  had  to 

jrifh. 

The  death  of  his  royal  father,  at  lafir,  put  an 
end  to  the  conftraint  both  had  fo  long  endured, 
and  the  poor  priricefs  expected  nothing  lets  than 
that,  as  their  marriage  had  not  been  contaminated^ 
he  would  begin  his  reign  by  difanulling  it. 

After  the  chief  of  the  nobility  had  paid  their 
compliments  to  their  new  fovereign,  on  his  accef- 
fion  to  the  throne,  they  all  came  into  her  apart- 
ment on  the  fame  occalion;  bat  the  greateft  part 
of  them  more  out  of  form,  than  any  belief  they 
had  {he  would  enjoy  the  title  they  now  gave  her: 
fhe  received  their  congratulations  however  \virii 
her  ufual  affability,  though  with  a  heart  full  of  the 
extremeft  perturbations,  convinced  \vlthinherfelf 
that  the  refpe£t  flic  now  received,  was  no  more 
than  a  pageantry  of  greatnefs,  a  mimic  ftate,  which 
would  only  ferve  to  heighten  her  difgrace,  when 
the  king's  intentions  towards  her  ihould  be  re- 
vealed. 

But  how  did  her  diforders  and  her  apprchsnfi- 
ons  magnify,  when  the  room  being  very  full,  fhe 
faw  thofe  at  the  lower  end  fall  back  to  mate  way 
for  his  majefty,  who  in  perfon  was  juft  entering! 
— She  now  not  doubted  but  this  unexpected  viiit 
was  made  to  let  her  know  (he  muft  remove  from 
his  palace,  and  that  he  had  the  cruelty  to  add  to 
the  mortification  it  muft  give  her,  by  telling  her 
fo  in  the  prefence  of  thofe  who  were  at  that  in- 
fiant  making  their  court  to  her. 

Scarce  had  fhe  the  power  to  rife  from  the  chair 
13  b  j 


i88  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

(he  fat  on,  to  receive  him;  and  whence  did  fo, 
her  trembling  limbs  refufed  to  bear  her  weight, 
and  fhe  was  obliged  to  lean  on  a  lady's  arm  who- 
flood  next  her.  She  was  endeavouring,  however, 
to  make  fome  apology  for  the  diforders  fhe  was 
fenfible  were  but  too  vifible  in  her  countenance, 
when  he  prevented  her,  by  approaching  with 
words  to  this  effect: 
MADAM, 

"  The  whole  kingdom  knows  with  what  re- 
f{  luftance  I  accompanied  you  to  the  altar,  and 
"  you  know  the  manner  in  which  I  have  lived 
"  with  you  ever  fince: — both  thefe  reflections  may 
<*  give  you  fome  reafon  to  imagine,  that  as  I  am 
tf  now  the  mafter  of  my  actions,  I  fhall  renounce 
"  thofe  obligations,  which  I  was  but  compelled  to 
<c  enter  into,  and  which  on  my  part  have  never 
"  been  fulfilled: — but  know,  madam,  that  your 
"  patience,  tendernefs,  forgiving  fvveetnefs  of  dif- 
*'  pofition,  and  a  thoufand  other  virtues  of  the 
"  mind,  have  long  fince  opened  my  eyes  to  the 
c<  beauties  of  your  perfon;  though  there  was  fome- 
"  thing  in  my  nature,  call  it  by  what  name  you 
*'  pleafe,  that  would  not  fufFer  me  to  confefs  it, 
«'  till  I  could  do  fo  in  a  manner  as  fhould  convince 
<c  you,  and  all  the  world,  that  it  was  the  effecl:  of 
<{  my  own  free-will:  that  opportunity  is  arrived; 
<{  and  I  now  invite  you  to  partake  with  me  a 
11  throne  you  are  fo  worthy  to  fill,  and  a  bed  you 
C{  have  been  too  long  abfent  from.  Let  this  me- 
"  mory  of  my  paft  injuftice  to  your  merit  be  for- 
"  gotten,  or  remembered  only  to  increafe  your  tri- 
**  umph  in  furmounting  it." 

The  beginning  of  this  fpeech  feeming  to  con- 
firm all  that  her  moft  dreadful  apprehenfions  had 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  289 

fuggefted,  fo  overcame  her  fpirits,  that  the  latter 
part  of  it  would  hardly  have  been  intelligible  to 
her,  had  (he  not  on  his  concluding  it  found  her- 
felf  within  his  arms,  locked  in  the  moft  tender  and 
ftrenuous  embrace;  a  favour  he  had  never  granted 
her  before,  and  which  now  affured  her  of  the  fo 
fortunate  reverfe  in  her  condition. 

The  eyes  of  the  whole  illuftrious  afiembly  were 
filled  with  tears  of  joy  at  this  moving  fcene; 
which  fo  divided  their  admiration,  that  they  knew 
not  which  deferved  it  moft,  the  virtues  of  the 
queen,  which  had  occafioned  a  change  the  mod 
unexpected  that  could  be,  or  the  generofity  of  the 
king  in  rewarding  it. 

What  then  mud  that  amiable  princefs  herfelf 
feel  on  fo  fuclden  a  tranfition  from  a  ftate  of  the 
fevereft  anxiety  and  grief,  to  one  all  happinefs 
and  joy! — To  find,  infleadof  an  implacable  aver- 
•  iion  and  difdain,  proofs  of  the  ftrongeft  affection 
and  refpect; — inftead  of  the  difgrace  (lie  thought 
immediate  and  inevitable,  to  be  lifted  to  the  part- 
nerfhip  of  fovereign  power  j — inftead  of  being 
reduced  to  the  pity  of  the  world,  to  become  the 
pride  and  envy  of  it; — and  to  reflect  that  all  this 
was  wholly  owing  to  her  own  conduct  and  tem- 
per, was  fuch  accumulated  felicity,  as  more  than 
compenfated  for  the  fufFerings  (lie  had  undergone! 
This,  I  think,  is  a  fliining  inflance  what  won- 
ders good-nature,  and  the  qualities  arifing  from  it, 
are  capable  of  producing. — How  wretched  had 
this  now  happy  princefs  been,  had  me  returned 
the  indifference  of  her  illuftrious  fpoufe  with  ful-' 
len  difcontent,  fecret  reproaches,  open  complain- 
ing, or  any  other  marks  of  refentment  for  the 
affront  offered  to  her  youth  and  beauty,  and  how 
Bb  3 


290  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI, 

greatly  would  fuch  a  behaviour  have  juftified  his 
diflike! — On  the  other  hand,  how  amiable  did 
fhe  appear  to  him,  adorned  with  mecknefs  and 
good-nature;  and  how  eafily  did  that  great  heart 
unmoved,  unfliaken  by  the  tempeft;  of  authority, 
bow  clown  and  yield  itfelf  to  the  more  prevailing 
force  oflove  and  foftnefs! 

Such  inftances  rarely  happen  in  perfons  of  this 
exalted  ftation;  and  when  they  do,  attract  the  eyes 
of  the  wbcle  admiring  world :  but  there  have  been 
thofe,  who,  though  in  a  lower  fphere  of  life,  have 
behaved  in  a  manner  no  lefs  worthy  of  imitation. 

Dorimon  and  Alithea  \vere  married  almoft  too 
young  to  know  the  duties  of  the  ftate  they  enter* 
ed  into;  yet  both  being  extremely  good-natured,, 
a  mutual  defire  of  obliging  each  other  appeared 
in  all  their  words  and  actions;  and  tho'  this  com- 
plaifance  was  not  owing  to  thofe  tender  emotions 
•which  attract  the  heart  with  a  refiftlefs  force,  and 
bear  the  name  of  love,  yet  were  the  effects  fo 
much  the  fame  as  not  to  be  diftinguifhed. 

The  firfl  year  of  theijc  marriage  made  them 
the  happy  parents'  of  an  heir  to  a  plentiful  eftate. 
•  ~~The  kindred  on  both  lutes  feerned  to  vie  with 
each  other,  which  fhould  give  the  greateft  tefti- 
monies  of  their  fatisfaction. — All  their  friends 
congratulated  this  addition  to  their  felicity;  and, 
for  a  time,  the  moil  perfect  joy  and  tranquility 
reigned,  not  only  in  their  own  family,  but  in  all 
thofe  who  had  any  relation  to  them. 

Alithea,  after  (he  became  a  mother,  began  to 
feel,  by  degrees,  a  greater  warmth  of  affection  for 
him  that  made  her  fo;  and  having  no  rcafon  to 
doubt  an  equal  regard  from  him,  thought  herfelf 
as  happy  as  woman  could  be,  and  that  there  were 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  291 

joys  in  love  greater  than  before  (lie  had  any  no- 
tion of. 

Quite  other  wife  was  it  with  Dorimon;  the  time 
indeed  was  now  arrived,  which  taught  him  what 
it  was  to  love. — The  hopes,  the  fears,  the  anxie- 
ties, the  impatiencies,  all  the  unnumbered  carea 
which  are  attributed  to  that  paffion,  now  took  pof- 
fefiion  of  his  heart: — he  pined,  he  languifhed, 
but  alas!  not  for  his  wife. — He  had  unhappily 
feen  a  young  lady  at  the  opera,  who  had  charm* 
for  him,  which  he  had  never  feen  in  the  whole 
fex  before. — As  he  happened  to  fit  in  the  fame 
box  with  her,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  fpeaking 
to  her,  which  though  only  on  ordinary  fubje&s, 
every  anfwer  fhe  made  to  what  he  faid,  feemed  to 
kirn  to  difcover  a  profufion  of  wit,  and  gave  him 
the  moft  longing  defire  to  be  acquainted  with  her. 

Fortune,  favourable  to  his  withes,  prefented  her 
to  him  the  next  day  in  the  park,  accompanied 
with  a  lady  and  gentleman,  the  latter  of  whom  he 
had  a  flight  knowledge  of: — he  only  bowed  to 
them  the  firft  turn,  but  gathered  courage  to  join 
company  with  them  on  the  fecond;  and  perceiv- 
ing that  it  was  to  the  other  lady  that  the  gentle.- 
man  feemed  moft  attached,  he  was  at  the  greater 
liberty  to  fay  a  choufand  gallant  things  to  her,  who 
was  the  object  of  his  new  flame. 

Melifla,  for  fo  I  fhall  call  her,  was  vain,  gay, 
and  in  every  refpeft  one  of  thofe  modifh  ladies, 
cf  which  a  former  SPECTATOR  has  given  a  de- 
fcription:  (he  received  the  compliments  he  made 
her  in  a  manner,  that  made  him  fee  his  convcr- 
fation  was  not  difagreeable  to  her;  and  fome  men- 
tion happening  to  be  made  of  a  mafquerade  that 
night,  (he  told  him,  as  if  by  chance,  that  fix 


2pz  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

to  be  there,  and  that  her  fair  companion  and  her- 
felf  were  going  to  befpeak  habits  at  a  ware-houfe 
fhe  mentioned,  as  foon  as  they  left  the  Park. 

The  hint  was  not  loft  upon  him,  and  thinking 
that  it  would  feem  too  prefuming  to  alk  leave  to 
wait  on  her  at  her  houfe,  the  firft  time  of  being  in 
her  company,  he  refolved  to  make  it  his  bufinefs 
to  find  out,  if  poflible,  what  habit  (he  made  choice 
of  to  go  to  the  mafquerade,  where  the  freedom 
of  the  place  might  give  him  a  better  opportunity 
of  teflifying  the  defire  he  had  of  improving  an  ac- 
quaintance with  her. 

Accordingly,  after  their  quitting  him  at  the 
Park-gate,  he  followed  at  a  diftance  the  two  chairs 
that  waited  for  them,  and  placing  himfelf  neaF 
enough  the  habit-fhop,  to  fee  whoever  went  in 
or  out,  found  his  flame  had  not  deceived  him  in 
what  (he  faid. — The  ladies  having  difpatched  what 
they  came  about,  went  again  into  their  chairs. — 
They  were  no  fooner  gone  than  he  went  into  the 
{hop,  and  on  a  pretence  of  ordering  a  domino  for 
himfelf,  fell  into  difcourfe  with  the  woman  be- 
hind the  counter,  whom  he  eafily  prevailed  on  to 
let  him  know,  not  only  what  habits  the  ladies  who 
had  juil  left  her  had  befpoke,,  but  alfo  of  what 
condition  and  character  they  were. — She  inform- 
ed him,  that  Melifla  had  a  large  fortune,  and  her 
parents  being  dead  was  under  the  care  of  guar- 
dians, whom,  notwithftanding,  (he  did  not  live 
with,  but  had  lodgings  herfelf  near  Grofvenor- 
fquare: — that  fhe  kept  a  great «deal  of  company, 
was  what  the  world  called  a  coquet,  but  had  hi- 
therto preferved  her  reputation; — that  the  lady 
who  was  with  her  was  the  daughter  of  a  country 
gentleman  fomewhat  related  to  her,  how  nearly 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  293 

(he  could  not  tell,  but  heard  me  was  on  the  point 
of  marriage  with  a  perfon  of  rank. 

Dorimon  was  tranfported  at  this  intelligence, 
as  it  feemed  to  promife  him  an  eafy  accefs  to  her 
acquaintance,  and  the  privilege  of  vifiting  her; 
which  probably  in  thefe  early  days  of  his  paffion, 
was  all  he  aimed  at,  or  if  he  thought  on  any  thing 
farther,  the  difficulties  in  accompliihinghis  defire 
feemed  lefs  formidable  than .  they  would  have 
done,  had  (he  been  of  a  more  referred  temper, 
were  already  married  or  under  the  direction  of 
parents.  • 

Never  did  time  appear  fo  tedious  as  that  be- 
fore the  hour  of  going  to  the  mafquerade:  hia 
impatience  brought  him  there  the  very  firft,  and 
by  that  means  he  had  an  opportunity  of  obferving 
every  one  as  they  came  in : — Melifla,  he  was 
told,  would  be  in  the  habit  of  a  nun;  and  though 
there  were  feveral  drefled  in  that  manner,  yet  he 
diftinguimed  her  from  the  others  by  her  tallnefe 
the  moment  (he  appeared. 

He  acceded  her  with  the  ufual  phrafes  of— 
"  Do  you  know  me?"  and  "  I  know  you;"  but 
was  not  long  before  he  made  her  fenfible  of  his 
more  particular  attachment;  and  told  her,  that 
having  loft  his  heart  that  morning  in  the  park,  it 
now  directed  him  how  to  difcover  the  lovely  thief, 
though  difguifed,  amidft  fo  numerous  an  aflembly. 

This,  and  fome  other  expreffions  of  the  fam\; 
nature,  convincing  her  that  he  was  the  gentleman 
who  had  made  her  fo  many  compliments  in  the 
morning,  immediately  flattered  her  vanity  with  a 
new  conqueft;  and  as  flie  found  him  a  perfon  of 
wit,  and  doubted  not  of  his  being  a  man  of  con- 
dition by  his  appearance,  refolved  to  omit  nothing 


294  THE  FEMALE          B.  Vl. 

that  might  fecure  him;  accordingly,  as  all  true 
coquets  do  at  firft,  {he  aftetted  to  liften  with  a 
pleafed  attention  to  the  afiurances  he  gave  her  of 
his  paffion,  an^  frequently  let  fall  fome  words,  as 
if  they  efcaped  her  inadvertently,  that  might  make 
him  think  (he  would  not  be  ungrateful  if  he  per- 
fifted  in  giving  her  teftimonies  of  a  conftant  flame. 
Ladies  of  her  chara&er  have  always  this  maxim 
at  heart, 

"  Kindnefs  has  refiftlefs  charms, 
"  All  things  elfe  but  faintly  warms: 
<{  It  gilds  die  lover's  fervile  chain, 
"  And  makes  the  flave  grow  pleas'd  and  vain." 
But  the  misfortune  is,   that  fuch  a  behaviour 
for  the  moft  part  proves  fatal  to  themfelves  in  the 
end:  they  toy  fo  long  with  the  darts  of  love,  that 
their  own  bofomsare  frequently  pierced  when  they 
little  think  of  it;  and  the  deluding  fhe,  who  has 
made  numbers  languifh,  becomes  a  prey  perhaps 
to  one  who  leaft  merits  or  regards  the  victory  he 
gains. 

Dorimon,  however,  was  tranfported  to  find  the 
offer  he  had  made  her  of  his  heart  fo  well  receiv- 
ed, and  made  fo  good  ufe  of  the  opportunity  fhe 
gave  him  of  entertaining  her  the  whole  time  of 
the  mafquerade,  that  he  obtained  her  permiflion  to 
attend  her  home,  and  as  it  was  then  too  late  for 
them  to  continue  their  converfation,  to  vifit  them 
the  next  day  in  the  afternoon. 

This  quite  eftablifhed  an  acquaintance  between 
them;  he  went  every  day  to  fee  her;  (he  admit- 
ted him  when  all  other  company  were  denied;  he 
had  always  the  preference  of  waiting  on  her  to  the 
park,  the  opera,  the  play,  and,  in  fine,  wherever 
{he  went;  and  when  fome  of  her  more  prudent 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  295 

friends  took  notice  of  their  being  fo  frequently  to- 
gether, and  had  heard  that  he  was  a  married  man, 
fhe  only  laughed  at  their  remonftrances,  and  re- 
plied, that  as  fhe  had  no  farther  concern  with  him 
than  merely  to  gallant  her  about  to  public  places, 
fhe  had  no  bufinefs  to  enquire  into  his  private  cir- 
cumftances; — that  if  he  were  married,  his  wife 
only  had  to  do  with  it;,  and  as  for  her  own  part, 
me  thought  him  a  very  pretty  fellow,  and  quite 
fit  for  the  ufe  (he  had  made  of  him;  adding,  that 
i-f  (he  were  miftrefs  of  his  heart,  it  was  indifferent 
to  her  who  had  his  hand. 

Meliffa,  it  is  probable,  had  indeed  no  other 
view  in  entertaining  Dorimon  and  receiving  his 
addreffes,  than  the  fame  fhe  had  in  treating  with 
a  like  behaviour  numbers  before  him,  merely  for 
the  foke  of  hearing  herfelf  praifed,  and  giving 
pain,  as  fhe  imagined,  to  others  of  her  admirers, 
who  were  lefs  frequently  admitted. 

But  how  dangerous  a  thing  it  is  to  have  too 
great  an  intimacy  with  a  perfon  of  a  different  fex, 
many  of  a  greater  (hare  of  difcretion  than  Melifla 
have  experienced.  This  unwary  lady,  in  medita- 
ting new  arts,  the  more  to  captivate  her  lover, 
became  enfnared  herfelf; — in  fine,  (he  liked,  fhe 
loved,  as  much  as  any  woman  of  that  airy  and  vo- 
latile difpofition  can  be  faid  to  love: — what  (he 
felt  for  him,  however,  had  all  the  effects  which 
the  moft  ferious  paflion  in  one  of  a  different  tern- 
per  could  have  produced,  arid  Dorimon  had  as 
ample  a  gratification  of  his  defires,  as  his  moft 
fanguins  hopes  could  have  piefented  him  an 
icka  of. 

Alithea,  all  this  while  loft  ground  in  his  affec- 
tion;— fhc  every  day  teemed  lefs  fair,  and  what- 


296  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

ever  (he  faid  or  did  had  in  it  a  kind  of  aukward- 
nefs,  which  before  he  was  far  from  difcovering  in 
her:  every  thing  was  now  difpleafing  in  her.  If 
endearing,  her  fondnefs  was  childiih  and  filly; 
—and  if  fhe  was  more  referved,  fallen  and  ill- 
natured.  One  moment  he  was  out  of  humour 
if  fhe  fpoke,  the  next  offended  at  her  filence. — 
He  was  continually  feeking  fome  pretence  to  find 
fault  with  the  moft  juftifiable  conduit  that  ever 
was,  and  even  vexed  that  he  had  nothing  in  reality 
to  condemn.  An  unhappy,  but  certain  confe- 
quence  of  a  new  attachment,  which,  not  content 
with  the  injury  it  does,  alfo  adds  to  it  by  ill  hu- 
mour, and  a  wim  of  fome  occafion  to  hate  the  ob- 
ject we  no  longer  love. 

The  poor  lady  could  not  but  obferve  this  alte- 
ration in  his  behaviour;  but  as  {he  was  far  from 
gueffmg  the  real  motive,  imputed  it  to  fome  un- 
lucky turn  in  his  affairs,  though  of  what  nature 
flie  could  not  imagine,  he  having  a  large  fortune 
fettled  on  him  at  their  marriage,  befide  the  rever- 
fion  of  what  his  father  should  die  poffeffed  of,  and 
•was  in  the  power  of  nobody  to  deprive  him  of. 

On  the  firft  notice  she  took  of  his  difcontent, 
she  aflted  him  as  became  a  tender  and  affectionate 
wife,  if  any  thing  had  happened  either  from  her 
family  or  his  own  to  give  him  fubjecl:  of  com- 
plaint? But  he  anfwering  with  peevishnefs,  she 
defifted  from  any  farther  inquiry,  judging,  as  he 
did  not  think  proper  to  trud  her  with  the  fecret, 
it  would  but  add  to  his  difquiets  to  teilify  a  de- 
fire  of  knowing  it. 

For  more  than  a  whole  year  did  she  combat 
his  ill-humour  with  fweetnefs,  gentlenefs,and  the 
moft  obliging  behaviour j  and  though  she  began 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  397 

to  think  herfelf  loft  to  his  arTedlion,  bore  even  that 
affli&ing  reflection  with  the  mod  fubmiffive  pa- 
tience, ilill  flattering  herfelf,  that  if  it  were  even 
fo,  he  would  one  day  confider  she  defer ved  not 
her  ill  fortune. 

Jealoufy  was,  however,  a  pafiion  she  was  whol- 
ly unacquainted  with :  many  very  beautiful  ladies 
often  viiited  at  her  houfe,  and  she  had  never  feen 
the  leaft  propenfity  in  him  to  gallantry  with  any 
of  them; — he  rather  behaved  to  them  with  a 
greater  referve  than  was  confident  with  the  good 
breeding  and  complaifance  which  might  have  been 
expected  from  a  man  of  his  years;  fo  that  (lie  ima- 
gined rather  a  difgurt  to  the  whole  fex  was  grow- 
ing on  him,  than  any  particularattachment  to  one. 
Thus  did  her  innocence  and  unfufpecting  na- 
ture deceive  her,  till  one  day  a  female  friend,  more 
bufy  than  wife,  opened  her  eyes  to  the  true  reafon 
of  her  hufband's  coldnefs. 

This  lady,  by  means  of  a  fervant-maid  (he  had 
lately  entertained,  and  who  had  lived  with  Me- 
lifla  long  enough  to  know  the  whole  fecret  of  her 
amour  with  Dorimon,  and  was  difmifled  on  fome 
diflike,  was  made  acquainted  with  all  that  pafled 
between  that  guilty  pair.  She  learned  from  this 
unfaithful  creature,  that  Melifla  had  been  made  a 
mother  by  Dorimon,  and  that  the  child  was  dif- 
pofed  of  to  a  perfon,  who,  for  a  prefent  of  fifty 
guineas,  had  taken  the  folc  charge  cf  it,  fo  as  it 
ihould  never  appear  to  the  difgrace  of  the  unna- 
tural parents.  Not  the  moft  minute  circumftance 
relating  to  the  affair  but  was  betrayed  by  this 
wretch,  partly  in  revenge  for  her  having  been 
difcarded  by  her  former  lady,  and  partly  to  gain 
VOL.  I.  C  c 


298  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

favour  with  the  prefent,  who,  fhe  eafily  perceived, 
loved  to  hear  news  of  this  kind. 

Alithea  would  fain  have  treated  this  account 
as  fabulous,  and  have  perfuaded  her  friend  to  re- 
gard it  only  as  a  piece  of  malice  in  the  reporter; 
but  the  other  was  pofitive  in  her  afiertion,  and 
told  her  it  was  utterly  impoffible  for  fuch  a  crea- 
ture to  drefs  up  a  fiction  with  fo  many  particulars, 
and  fuch  a  fhew  of  truth; — "  Befides,  added  (he, 
"  if  there  was  nothing  in  it,  we  might  eafily  dif- 
*'  prove  all  fhe  has  faid,  by  going  to  the  woman 
<{  who  has  the  care  of  the  child,  and  w'hofe  name 
"  and  place  of  abode  (lie  has  told  me." 

Compelled  at  laft  to  believe  her  misfortune  but 
too  certain,  a  while  fhe  gave  loofe  to  tears,  and  to 
complainings,  but  her  good  fenfe,  as  well  as  good- 
nature, foon  got  the  better  of  her  burft  of  paffi- 
on;  and  when  her  friend  aflced  her  in  what  man- 
ner fhe  would  proceed,  in  order  to  do  herfelf  juf- 
tice, — "  What  can,  I  do,  replied  this  .charming 
"  wife,  but  endeavour  to  render  myfelf  more  obli- 
t(  ging,  more  pleafant,  more  engaging,  ifpoffible, 
"  than  my  rival,  and  make  Dorimon  iee,  he  can 
"  find  nothing  in  MelifTa  that  is  wanting  in  me.'* 

"  O  Heaven!  cried  the  lady,  can  you  forgive 
"  fuch  an  injury?"  tc  Yes,  refumed  Alithea,  lli- 
"  fling  her  fighs  as  much  as  fhe  was  able,  Love 
<{  is  an  involuntary  paflion."  "  And  will  you  not 
<*  upbraid  him  with  his  ingratitude,  and  expofe 
"  Melifla!"  fakl  fhe.  "  Neither  the  one  nor  the 
"  other,  anfwered  AJithea  coldly :  Either  of  thefe 
"  methods  would  indeed  render  me  unworthy  of  a 
"  return  of  his  affection;  and  I  conjure  and  be- 
"  feech  you,  added  she,  by  all  the  friendship  I 
"  flatter  myfelf  you  have  for  rne,  that  you  svill 


15.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  299 

<(  ncvermakethe  lead  mention  of  this  affair  to  any 
"  one  in  the  world." 

This  moderation  was  aftonishing  to  the  perfon 
who  was-witnefs  of  it;  however  she  promifed  to 
be  intirely  filentr  fmce  it  was  requefted  with  fo 
much  earneftnefs;  but  how  little  she  was  capable 
of  keeping  her  word,  rnoft  of  her  acquaintance 
could  teltify,  to  whom  not  only  the  fault  of  Do- 
rimon,  but  the  manner  in  which  his  wife  received 
the  account  of  it,  was  not  three  days  a  fecret. 

Alithea  was  no  fooner  left  alone,  and  at  liber- 
ty  to  meditate  more  deeply  on  the  shocking  in- 
telligence she  had  received,  than  she  again  began 
to  fancy  there  was  a-poffibility  of  its  being  falfe, 
— the  fufpence,  however,  feeming  more  uneafy  to 
her  than  the  confirmation  could  be,  refolved  to  be 
more  fully  convinced  of  the  truth,  if  there  was 
any  means  of  being  fo. 

Accordingly  she  made  an  old  woman,  who  had 
been  her  nurfe  in  her  family,  and  whofe  fidelity 
and  difcretion  she  could  depend  upon,  her  confi- 
dante in  this  affair;  and  it  was  concluded  be- 
tween them,  that  a  fpy  should  be  employed  to 
follow  Dorimon  at  a  diftance  wherever  he  went, 
and  alfo  make  a  private'  inquiry  into  the  beha- 
viour and  chara&er  of  Melifia  among  the  neigh- 
bours who  lived  near  her. 

A  very  little  fearch  ferved  to  unravel  the  my- 
ftery,  and  corroborate  all  that  had  been  faid  to  her 
concerning  it. — The  emifiary  foon  learned  that 
Dorimon  failed  not  one  day  in  his  vifits  to  this  en- 
grofierofhis  heart; — that  they  were  often  feen 
to  go  out  together  in  a  hackney-coach  in  the  be- 
ginning of  the  evening,  and  that  the  lady  returned 
not  till  near  morning: — that  (he  had  been  ob- 
Cc  a 


3oo  TBE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

ferved  fome  months  paft,  to  be  more  grofs  than 
ufual,  and  had  affected  to  wear  a  loofe  drefs-, — 
that  (lie  had  been  abfent  from  her  lodgings  three 
or  four  days,  came  home  very  much  indifpofed, 
and  kept  her  bed  for  more  than  a  week,  yet  had 
neither  phyfician  nor  apothecary  to  attend  her;  and 
on  the  whole,  it  was  believed  by  every  body,  that 
ine  had  been  in  that  time  delivered  of  a  child. 

The  unhappy  wife  of  Dorimon,  now  as  much 
affured  of  his  perfidy  as  fhe  could  be  without  ocu- 
lar dcmonftration,  fet  herfelf  to  bear  it  with  as 
much  patience  as  fhe  was  able;  which  was  indeed 
fufficient  to  render  her  behaviour  fuch  as  mads 
him  certain  in  his  own  mind,  that  she  had  not  the 
kail  fufpicion  of  the  wrong  he  did  her;  and  alfo 
compelled  him  very  often  to  accufe  himfelf  for 
being  gu-ilty  of  what  he  could  not  anfwer  to  his 
reafon,  yet  had  not  ftrength  enough  of  refolution 
to  refrain,  even  though  the  conduct  of  Melifla, 
who  could  not  help  coquetting  with  others,  even 
before  his  face,  occafioned  him  to  have  many  quar- 
rels with  her,  and  made  him  fee,,  in  fpite  of  the 
pa  (lion  he  itill  continued  to  have  for  her,  the  dif- 
ference between  a  miilrefs  and  a  wife. 

Whenever  Alithea  reflected  on  this  change  ia 
her  hufband,  as  she  had  little  elfe  in  her  mind, 
there  was  no  part  in  the  adventure  appeared  more 
ft  range  to  her,  than  that  a  lady  born  and  educated 
in  the  manner  she  knew  Melifla  was,  and  who 
has  fo  far  yielded  to  the  temptations  of  her  paflion, 
as  to  throw  off  all  modefty  and  honour  for  the  gra- 
tification of  it,  should  have  fo  little  regard  for  the 
innocent  babe,  the  produce  of  her  guilty  flame,  as 
to  abandon  it  to  miferies  of  she  knew  not  what 
kind This  was  a  barbarity  she  thought  exceeded 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  301 

the  crime  to  which  it  owed  its  birth,  and  flic 
more  readily  forgave  the  injury  done  to  herfelf, 
than  that  to  the  helplefs  infant. 

The  more  fhe  renccled,  the  more  (he  was  af- 
tonilhed,  that  womankind  could  aft  fo  contrary 
to  nature;  and  by  often  picturing  to  herfelf  the 
woes  to  which  this  poor  deferted  child  might  pro- 
bably be  expofed,  became  at  length  fo  difiblved  in 
foft  compaflion,  as  to  form  a  refolution,  which  I 
believe,  few  befide  herfelf  were  ever  capable  of. 

She  had  been  informed,  by  her  officious  friend., 
both-  of  the  name  and  habitation  of  the  woman 
\vuh  whom  this  poor  little  creature  had  been  left; 
and  without  making  any  one  perfon  privy  to  he? 
defign,  muffled  herfelf  up  in  hsr  capuchin,  and 
went  in  a  hackney-chair  to  her  houfci  the  other 
received  her  with  a  great  deal  of  refpe£land  kind* 
jiefi,  imagining  fhe  was  come  on  the  fame  bufinefs 
Molina,  and  many  bsfides  her,  who  love  the  crime, 
but  hate  the  fliame  of  being,  detected  in  it,  had 
done. — She  was  immediately  conducted  into  a- 
private  room,  and  told,  that  me  might  be  free  ia 
communicating  any  thing  to  herrfor  fhe  was  a  per- 
fon who  had  been  intruded  by  thofe  who  would 
not  be  thought  guilty  of  a  falfe  ftep  lor  the  world. 

The  virtuous  Alithea  blufhed,  even  at  beiii^ 
fufpected  by  this  woman  to  be  guilty  of  an  act  her 
foul  Ihuddercd  at  the  thoughts  another  could  com- 
mit, and  foon  put  an  end  to  the  harangues  fhe  waj 
making  on  her  own  care,  fkill,.and  fidelity:—"  I 
"come  not,"  faid  the  wife  of  Dorimon,  "  on  ths 
**  bulincfs  you  feem  to  think,  yet  that  which  no 
"  lefs  requires  your  fecrccy : — 1  have  no  unhappy 
**  infant  to  leave  with  you-;  but  to  eafe  you  of  one 
«*  whom  you  have  lately  taken  charge  of." 
Cc3 


302  THE  FEMALE  B.  Vt 

The  midwife  looked  very  much  furprized  to 
hear  her  fpeakin  this  manner,  and  knew  not  well 
what  anfwer  to  make-,  but  Alithea  foon  put  an  end 
to  her  fufpence,  by  telling  her  that  ihe  was  in  the 
fccret  of  the  lady  who  wasxlelivered  of  a  child  at  her 
houfe  fuch  a  time,  which  (he  mentioned  exactly  to 
her,  and  who  had  given  fifty  guineas  to  be  eafed 
for  ever  of  the  trouble  of  it. — "  i  am,"  faid  Alithea,. 
41  a  near  relation  of  that  gentleman  to  whom  the  lit- 
"  tie  wretch  owes  its  being,  and  who  cannot  con- 
"  fent  that  any  thing  which  does  fo,  though  begot 
"  in  an  unwarrantable  way,fhould  be  deferted  and 
"  expofed  in  the  fafhion  fuch  children  often  are : — 
"  I- therefore  defire,.  that,  if  alive,  you  will  let  me 
•"  fee  it,  that  I  may  provide  for  it  in  a  different 
*{  way  than  it  can  be  expected  you  fliould  do  for 
"  the  poor  pittance  left  you  by  the  mother." 

The  woman  then  began  to  expatiate  on  the  im- 
poffibility  of  her  taking  the  care  fhe  could  wifh  to 
do  of  children  left  with  her  on  thofe  terms;  but, 
that  Heaven  knew,  fhe  did  all  fhe  could,  and  often 
laid  out  more  than  fhe  received. — She  afTured  her 
that  the  child  fhe  inquired  after  was  alive,  and  a 
-fine  boy;  and  that  he  was  with  a  perfon  who  in- 
deed nurfed  for  the  parifh,  but  was  a  very  good 
•woman,  and  did.  her  duty, 

41  That  may  be,"  faid  Alithea;  "but  I  mufthave 
"him  removed;  and  if  you  can  provide  another, 
u  who  may  be  depended  upon,  I  have  orders  from 
"  the  father  to  fatisfy  you  for  your  trouble,  in  a 
0  more  ample  manner  than  you  can  defire :  in  the 
"  mean  time," continued  (he,  putting  five  guineas 
into  her  hand,  "take  this  as  an  earneft,  and  let 
v<  the  child  be  brought  here  to-morrow  about  this. 
"  time,  and  a  new  nurfe  whom  you  can  recom« 


fc.  VT.  SPECTATOR.  303- 

M  mend,  and  I  will  give  them  a  meeting." 

A  great  deal  of  farther  tliicourfe  patted  between 
them  on  this  affair,  on  the  conclufion  of  which 
the  woman  agreed  to  do  whatever  was  required? 
of  her;  and  was  dcubtlefs  no  lefs  rejoiced  at  the 
offer  made  by  this  unknown  lady,  than  fhe  was 
that  by  accepting  of  k  fhe  fhould  preferve  from 
mifery  an  innocent  creature,  who  though  {he  had 
not  feen,  fhe  fek  a  kind  of  natural  affection  for, 
as  being  Dorimon's. 

This  excellent  pattern  of  good-nature  and  con- 
jugal love,  took  with  her  the  next  day  every  thing, 
beiitting  a  child  to  wear  whom  (he  was  determined 
to  make  her  own  by  adoption;  and  no  fooner  faw 
him  in  his  new  nurfe's  arms,  than  fhe  took  him,, 
embraced  and  kifled  him  with  a  tendernefs  little 
lefs- than  maternal;  and  having  agreed  upon  terms 
for  him,  made  him  be  drefled  in  her  pretence  in 
the  things  fhe  had  brought,  which  were  very  rich, 
and  had  belonged  to  her  own  fon  at  his  age;  and 
every  thing  being  fettled  highly  to  the  fatisfaftion 
of  all  parties  concerned,,  returned  home  with  a  fe- 
cret  contentment  in  her  mind,  which  no  words 
are  able  to  exprefs. 

Nor  was  this  a  fudden  flart  of  goodnefsand  ge- 
nerofity  which  1  have  known  fome  people  to  have 
manifested  for  a  time,  and  afterwards  repented  of: 
— the  more  fhe  refleded  on  what  fhe  had  done, 
the  more  pleafure  {he  felt  in  it  — She  never  let  a 
week  pafs  over  without  going  to  fee  her  charge, 
and  hovr  the  perfon  intrufled  with  him  behaved. 
— Had  he  been  in  reality  her  own,.and  heir  of  the 
greateft  pofTeffions,  her  diligence  in  looking  after 
the  management  of  him  could  not  beTnore. 

Dorimon  all  this  -while  perfifled  in  his  attack- 


304  TflE  FEMALE  B.  VT. 

ment  to  Meliffa,  though  her  ill  conduct  gave  him 
fuch  frequent  occafions  of  quarrelling  with  her, 
that  they  were  feveral  times  on  the  point  of  fee* 
ing  each  other  no  more. — The  long  intimacy  be- 
tween them,  however,  gave fufficient  room  forcen- 
fure: — thofe  leaft  inclined  to  judge  the  worft  of 
things,  could  not  help  faying,  that  it  looked  ill 
for  a  married  man  to  appear  in  all  public  places 
without  his  wife,  and  in  company  with  a  lady 
whom  me  was  not  even  acquainted  with;  but  o 
thers  there  were  who  were  informed  of  their  more 
guilty  meetings  in  private,  and  talked  with  fo 
little  referve  on  the  occafion,  that  what  was  faid 
reached  the  ears  of  the  kindred  of  them  both : — 
thofe  of  Alithea's  were  extremely  troubled  and  in- 
cenfed  at  the  indignity  offered  to  a  woman  whofe 
behaviour  not  envy  itfelf  could  traduce-, — but  d&- 
firous  of  being  better  informed  of  the  truth  than 
by  common  fame,  they  aficed  her  many  queftionc-, 
concerning  the  conduct  of  her  hufband  towards 
her  j  and  ^ave  fome  hints,  plain  enough  to  be  unr 
derftood,  that  the  world  had  but  an  ill  opinion  of 
him  on  that  head.. 

To  all  which  this  excellent  wife  replied  with 
an  air  that  (hewed  how  little  me  was  pleafed  with 
any  difcourfcs  of  that  nature; — telling  them,  thai 
the  idle  fcandal  of  perfonsj  who  made  it  their  bu- 
finefs  to  pick  meanings  out  of  nothing,  ought  to  be 
defpifed,  not  liftened  to; — that  {he  herfelf,  who 
muft  be  allowed  the  befl  judge,  found  nothing  hi 
Dorimon's  manner  of  living  with  her  to  complain 
of;  and  that  {he  mould  never  believe  that  perfon 
wifhed  her  well,  who  endeavoured  to  fill  her  mind 
with  any  fufpjcions  on  that  fcore. 

Thefe  anlwers  at  length  filenced  all  who.  took. 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  30$ 

an  intereft  in  her  happinefs ;  her  friends  wifely  re- 
flecting, that  though  all  they  had  heard  of  Dori- 
mon  were  true,  the  greatefl  addition  that  could  be 
to  her  misfortune,  was  to  be  convinced  of  it. 

But  the  father  of  Dorimon,  who  was  a  perfon 
of  great  lobriety,  and  to  whom  the  virtues  of  Ali- 
thea  had  rendered  her  extremely  dear,  was  lefs 
eafily  put  off  than  thofe  of  her  own  blood. — He 
chid  his  fon  in  the  fevered  manner;  and  on  his 
denying  what  he  was  accufgd  of,  and  throwing 
out  fome  infinuation?,  as  if  he  imagined  his  wife 
had  uttered  fomecomplaintsagainfthim, — "No," 
faid  the  old  gentleman,  "  (he  bears  the  wrongs 
"  you  do  her  but  with  too  much  patience;  and 
*c  either  not  fees,  or  pretends  not  to  fee,  what  is 
'*  obvious  to  the  whole  town  befide."  He  then 
ran  into  many  encomiums  on  the  fweetnefs  of  her 
difpofirion;  faid,  that  whether  her  complaifance. 
toward  him  were  owing  either  to  an  unfufpecting 
nature,  or  to  her  prudence  in  aiming  to  regain  his 
love  byfuch  ways  as  were  moft  likely  to  fucceed, 
either  of  thcfe  qualities  ought  not  to  lofe  their 
merit  with  a  man  of  undcrltanding;  "  and  me- 
"  thinks,"  added  he,  "  mould  make  you  afhamed 
*'  as  often  as  you  reflect  that  you  have  a£led  fo  as 
"  to  oblige  her  to  exert  all  htr  love  and  virtue  to 
"  forgive. " 

:c  kind  of  difccurfcs  loft  not  all  their  ef- 
fect on  Dorimon: — he  had  often  been  artonimedv 
tint  all  the  rumours  which  had  been  fprcad  con- 
cerning his  amour  with  MeliiTa,and  which  feemed 
to  him  next  to  an  impoflibility  not  to  have  reached 
the  ears  of  his  wife,  had  never  occafioned  her  to 
let  fall  fome  hints  at  leaft,  as  if  (he  feared  a  rival 
in  his  heart. — He  very  well  knew  flic  wanted  not 


3o6  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

a  great  fhare  of  difcernment  in  other  things,  and 
to  be  blind  to  that  alone  wherein  Hie  had  the  moft 
concern,  he  never  could  account  for. — He  had  of- 
ten heard  from  his  acquaintance,  and  fometimes 
been  a  witnefs  of  the  behaviour  of  women  to  their 
hufbands  on  thefubject  of  jealoufy;  and  found  that 
of  Alithea  fo  widely  different  from  all  he  had  been 
told  of  others,  that  he  could  not  help  being  ex- 
tremely puzzled  what  motive  to  afcribe  it  to;  but 
was  obliged  to  acquiefce  in  his  own  mind  with  the 
remonftrance  made  by  his  father,  that  whether  it 
were  owing  to  her  own  innocence,  which  would  not 
fuffer  her  to  think  another  could  be  guilty}  or  to 
the  ftrength  of  refolution  and  difcretion  which  en- 
abled her  to  bear  the  injury  done  to  her,  he  was, 
however,  either  way- more  fortunate  than  any  huf- 
band  he  knew  of  in  the  like  ciicumftances;  and  in 
fpite  of-  his  faulty  inclination  for  Mclifia,  prefent-  ' 
e<i  her  to  his  cooler  thoughts  in  the  moft  amiable 
light. 

It  is  highly  probable,  that  in  maturely  balancing 
the  folid  merits  of  the  wife,  againfl  the  light  and 
trifling  allurements  of  the  miftrefs,  he  would  in 
time  have  biought  himfelf  to  do  jultice  to  the  one, 
aiid  entirely  ceafed  to  have  any  regard  for  the  o- 
taer;  but  the  virtues  of  Alithea  had  already  fuf- 
tained  a  fufficient  trial,  and  Heaven  thought  fit  to 
reward  them,  when  (he,  fo  long  inured  to  fuffcr- 
ing,  leaft  expected  a  relief. 

By  accuftoming  herfelf  to  perform  the  duties  of 
a  mother  to  the  child  of  Melifla,  flie  grew  really 
to  love  him  as  fuch;  and  what  at  firft  was  only 
pity,  converted  by  degrees  into  a  tender  affection. 
— When  Dorimon  was  abroad,  me  would  often 
order  him  to  be  brought  to  her,  and  fending  tor 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  307 

her  own  at  the  fame  time,  diverted  herfelf  with  ob- 
ferving  the  little  grimaces  which  the  two  infants 
would  make  at  each  other. — She  was  one  day  em- 
ployed in  this  manner,  when  Dorimon  unexpect- 
edly returned,  and  came  directly  into  the  room 
where  they  were : — whatever  indifference  he  had 
for  his  wife,  he  had  always  fhewn  the  greateft  ten- 
dernefs  to  her  fon,  and  he  now  took  him  in  his 
arms  and  kified  him,  as  was  his  cuftom  to  do. — 
"Here  is  another  little  one,"faid  Alithea,  failing, 
"who  claims  fome  portion  of  your  kind  nets  too," 
and  at  the  fame  time  prefented  Melifla's  child  to 
him.  "  By  what  right,  madam?"  replied  Dori- 
mon, in  the  fame  gay  tone. — "  \s  he  is  mine,"  re- 
Aimed  his  wife  — "  Yours!"  cried  he. — "  Yes," 
anfwered  (he,  "he  is  mine  by  adoption, and  I  muft 
Hhave  you  look  upon  him  as  your's  alfo."  *'  My 
"  com  plaifance  for  you  may  carry  me  great  lengths," 
faid  he;  "  but  as  I  know  you  do  nothing  without 
"  being  able  to  give  a  reafon,  I  mould  be  glad  to 
"  learn  the  motive  of  fo 'extraordinary  a  requeft." 

One  of  the  children  beginning  to  whimper  a  lit- 
tle, Alithea  ordered  the  nurfes  to  take  them  both  into 
another  room ;  and  finding  Dorimon  in  an  exceed- 
ing good  humour,  was  pufhed  on  by  an  irrefiftible 
impulfe,  to  fpeak  to  him  in  the  following  manner: 

"  The  infant  you  faw,"  faid  fhe  in  a  more  fe- 
rioustone  than  before,"  and  whom  I  have  in  reality 
*f  taken  under  my  care,  owes  its  being  to  two  per- 
<c  fons  of  condition ;  but  being  illegally  begot,  the 
"  care  of  reputation  prevailed  above  nature;  and 
"  this  innocent  produce  of  an  inconfulerate  pafTion 
"  I  found  abandoned;  a  wretched  caft-away,  ei- 
"  thcr  to  pcriih,  or  furviving,  furvive  but  to  mifc- 
*'  ries  much  worfc  than  death.- — The  thought  was 


3o8  THE   FEMALE  B.  VI. 

"  fhocking  to  me,  and  I  refolved  to  fnatch  him 
"  from  the  threatened  woes,  and  provide  for  him 
'*  out  of  my  private  purfe,  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
'*  may  not  make  his  life  hateful  to  him." 

"  An  attion  truly  charitable,"  faid  Dorimon  a 
little  perplexed;  "  but  this  is  not  the  reafon  I  ex- 
"  pelted,  fince  by  the  fame  rule  your  pity  might 
<(  be  extended  to  hundreds,  whom,  doubtlefs,  you 
"  may  find  expofed  in  the  like  manner.  It  mull, 
<{  therefore,  be  fome  plea  more  forcible  than  mere 
"  compaflion  that  attaches  you  particularly  to  this 
«  child." 

Alithea,  who  had  forefeen  what  anfwer  her  huf- 
band  would  make,  was  all  the  time  he  was  fpeak- 
ing,  debating  within  herfelf,  whether  it  would  be 
bed  for  her  to  evade,  or  to  confefs  the  truth  of 
this  affair;  and  not  being  able  to  determine  as  yet, 
appeared  no  lefs  confufcd  and  diforde'red  than  (he 
would  have  been,  if  about  to  make  an  acknow- 
ledgment for  fome  great  offence: — at  laft,  "  A 
*'  plea  there  is  indeed,"  faid  (he,  "  but" — here 
her  voice  and  courage  failed  her,  and  fhe  was  ut- 
terly unable  to  give  him  the  fatisfa&ion  he  afked. 
Dorimon  was  confounded  beyond  meafure,  and 
not  knowing  what  to  think  of  a  behaviour  fo  new, 
ami  which  feemed  to  denote  fhe-  laboured  with 
fome  fecrct  of  great  importance,  he  looked  fted- 
faftly  on  her  for  fome  minutes;  and  perceiving 
that  me  changed  colour,  and  had  her  eyes  fixed 
on  the  earth,  grew  quite  impatient  for  the  certain- 
ty of  what,  as  he  has  fmce  confeffed,  he  then  be- 
gan to  conceive,  cried  out,  "  What  plea? — What 
«  myftery?" 

"  A  myftery,"  replied  fhe,  u  which  I  had  much 
"  rather  you  would  gnefs  at  than  oblige  me  to  un- 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  309 

"  ravel. — Oh  Dorimon!"  continued  fhe,  after  a 
paufe,  "  is  there  no  in(lin£t  in  nature  that  can  in- 
«'  form  you ;  my  affection  for  the  father,  makes  his 
"  offspring,  of  whomfoever  born,  dear  to  me? — I 
"  cannot  hate  Melifla  fo  much  as  I  love  Dorimon; 
"  and  while  lam  performing  the  offices  of  a  mother 
"  to  this  child,  forget  the  (hare  me  has  in  him,  to 
**  remember  what  I  owe  to  him  as  yours." 

The  reader's  own  imaginations  mult  here  fup- 
ply  the  place  of  defcription. — Impoilible  it  is  for 
any  words  to  give  a  juft  idea  of  what  a  hufband, 
circumftanced  like  Dorimon,  mud  feel ! — To  have 
his  fault  thus  palpably  made  known  to  her,  whom 
he  rnoft  defired  mould  be  ignorant  of  it, — to  re- 
ceive the  higheft  obligations,  where  he  could  have 
expected  only  refentment, — and  to  hear  the  de- 
tection of  what  he  had  done  difcovered  to  him  by 
the  injured  perfon  in  fuch  a  manner  as  if  herfelf, 
not  he,  had  been  the  criminal, — fo  hurried  his 
thoughts  between  remorfe,  aftonimment,  anal 
fliame,  as  left  him  not  the  power  of  making  the 
leaft  reply  to  what  fhe  faid: — he  walked  feveral 
turns  about  the  room  in  a  difordered  motion,  en- 
deavouring to  recover  a  prefence  of  mind,  which 
feemed  fo  neceflary  on  this  occailon,  but  in  vain; 
and  at  laft,  throwing  himfelf  into  an  eafy  chair, 
juft  oppofite  to  that  in  which  his  wife  was  fitting, 
"  Good  God!"  cried  he,  "  am  I  awake! — Can 
*'  it  be  poffible  there  is  fuch  a  woman  in  the 
«  world." 

The  fweet-tempered  Alithea  could  not  fee  him 
in  thefe  agitations  without  a  concern,  which  made 
her  almoft  repent  her  having  cccafioned  them  :— * 
{he  ran  hallily  to  him,and  throwing  her  arms  about 
his  neck,  "  My  dear, dear  Dorimon,"  faid  ihe,  "  let 

VOL.  I.  D  d 


3io  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI, 

«c  it  not  trouble  youthatlamin  pofleffionofafecret 
€«  which  I  neither  fought  after,  nor,  when  in  a  man- 
cc  ner  forced  upon  me,  ever  divulged  to  any  perfon  in 
"  the  world. — Confider  me  as  I  am — your  wife, — 
«  part  of  yourfelf, — and  you  will  then  be  allured 
*•  you  can  be  guilty  of  no  errors  which  I  fhall 
*-'  not  then  readily  excufe,  and  carefully  conceal. 
« — Judge  of  my  fmccrity,"  continued  fhe,  re- 
newing her  embraces,  "  by  my  behaviour,  which 
*f  you  are  fenGble  has  not  the  lead  been  changed 
"  by  mv  knowledge  of  this  affair.** 

"  O  Alithea,"  cried  he,  prefiing  her  tenderly  to 
his  bofom,  "  I  am  indeed  fenfible  how  little  I  have 
<(  deferved  fuch  proofs  of  your  amazing  goodnefs; 
«  my  foul  overflows  with  gratitude  and  love;— 
"  yet  how  can  I  atone  for  my  paft  crimes?" — 
"  By  mentioning  it  no  more,"  interrupted  fhe, 
«  and  to  let  me  fhare  in  that  heart  my  want  of 
«<  charms  denies  me  the  hopes  of  filling  wholly." 

To  thefe  endearing  words  he  anfwered  only  in 
broken  fentences,  but  fuch  as  more  teftified  what 
fhe  wimed  to  find  in  him  towards  her,  than  the 
mod  eloquent  fpeeches  could  have  done. — She 
now  was  convinced  that  the  vidory  fhe  had  gain- 
ed over  him  was  perfect  and  fincere,  and  would 
have  known  a  tranfport  without  alloy,  but  for  the 
tender  pain  it  gave  her  to  find  fo^nuch  difficulty 
in  perfuading  him  to  forgive  himfelf. 

He  held  her  fitting  on  his  knee,  with  his  arms 
round  her  waift,  while  fhe  related  to  him  the  means 
by  which  (he  was  made  acquainted  with  his  crime; 
concealing  no  part  of  what  either  fne  heard,  the 
fteps  lhe  took  after  the  knowledge  of  her  misfor- 
tune, and  the  various  emotions  which  paiTed  in 
her  foul,  during  the  long  feries  of  his  indifference 


».  IV.  SPECT  AT  OR.  311 

to  her;  in  all  which-  he  found  fomething  to  ad- 
mire; and  the  more  he  law  into  the  greatnefs,  23 
well  as  fweetnefs  of  her  mint!,  the  more  his  love 
and  aftonifhment  increafed. 

The  fir  ft  proof  he  gave  her,  that  fhe  fhouli 
have  nothing  for  the  future  to  apprehend  on  the 
fccre  of  Mclifla,  was  to  write  a  letter  to  that  lady; 
•wherein  he  acquainted  her,  that,  fenfible  of  the 
injury  he  had  done  the  be  ft  of  wives  and  women, 
he  \vas  determined  to  purfue  no  pleafures  in  which 
flie  did  not  participate.— He  reprefented  to  her 
the  (ha me  and  folly  of  carrying  on  an  intrigue  ci' 
the  nature  theirs  had  been,  in  the  moft  pathetic 
terms;  and  advifed  her  to  think  of  Jiving  fo  as  tor 
regain  that  reputation  in  the  world,  which  he  was 
obliged  to  confefs,  he  had  contributed  to  make  her 
lofej — aflured  her,  that  the  refolution  he  had 
now  made,  of  feeing  her  no  more,  was  not  to  be 
fhaken  by  any  arguments  in  her  power  to  make 
ufe  of;  therefore  begged  fhe  would  endeavour  to 
follow  his  example,  and  forget  all  that  had  pa  fled 
between  them. 

This,  he  Chewing  to  Aliihea,  gave  her  a  new 
opportunity  of  exerting  her  good-nature — Shs 
made  him  write  it  over  again,  in  order  to  (often 
fome  expreffions  in  it,  which  fhe  would  have  it 
were  more  harfh  than  was  becoming  in  him  to  a 
woman  he  had  once  loved  j  and  perhaps  would 
have  rendered  it  at  laft  too  gentle  for  the  purpofe 
it  was  inter.'cd,  could  fhe  have  prevailed  on  him 
to  alter  it  according  to  the  diclates  of  her  own 
compaffionate  and  forgiving  foul.  But  he  belt 
knew  the  temper  of  the  perfon  he  had  to  deal  with, 
and  would  not  bid  her  adieu  in  fuch  a  manner  as 
Dd  z 


312  THE  'FEMALE  B.  VI. 

Should  give  her  the  leaft  room  to  flatter  herfelf  it 
would  not  be  his  laft. 

Though  he  defired  no  anfwer,  he  received  one, 
filled  with  the  mofl  virulent  reproaches  on  him- 
felf,  and  mingled  with  many  contemptuous  re- 
fle£tions  on  his  wife. — The  firft,  he  was  unmoved 
atj  but  the  o^her  totally  deftroyed  all  the  remains 
of  regard  and  confideration  he  had  for  her. — He 
tore  the  letter  into  a  thoufand  pieces;  and  to  fhew 
this  injurious  lady  the  contempt  and  reientment 
•with  which  he  had  treated  what  me  faid,  gathered 
up  the  fcattered  fragments,  and  fent  them  back 
to  her  under  a  fealed  cover,  but  without  writing 
2  word. 

After  this  he  was  entirely  eafy;  Meliffa  made 
no  efforts  to  regain  him,  but  contented  herfelf  with 
railing  againfthim  and  theinnocent  Alithea  where- 
ever  fhe  went;  but  moft  people  knowing  the  mo- 
live,  her  malice  had  no  other  cffec"l  than  to  make 
herfelf  laughed  at: — fhe  foon,  however,  entered 
into  a  new  amour,  and  in  the  noife  that  made,  all 
talk  of  her  former  engagement  was  laid  afide; 
while  the  happy  Alithea  enjoyed  the  recompence 
of  her  virtue,  in  the  continued  tendernefs  of  a  huf- 
band,  whenever  could.have loved  her  half  fo  well 
had  he  not  loved  elfewhere,  becaufe  he  never  could 
have  had  an  opportunity  of  being  fo  well  acquain- 
ted with  thofe  virtues  in  her,  which  were  the 
ground  of  his  affe&ion. 

The  compafiion  fhe  had  fhewn  for  the  child  of 
Meliffa  was  not  a  temporary  ftart  of  goodnefs; 
— fhe  perfifted  in  the  moft  tender  care  of  him, — 
had  him  educated  in  the  fame  manner  with  her 
own, — and,  to  alleviate  the  misfortune  of  his 
birth,  engaged  Dorimon  to  fet  apart  a  considerable 


a.  VI,  SPECTATOR.  313 

fum  of  money,  in  order  to  put  him  into  a  bufinefr, 
\vhich,  when  ha  grows  of  years  to  undertake  if, 
•will,  according  to  all  human  probability,  be  his 
Q\vn  fault  if  he  does  not  fucceed  in. 

I  have  been  the  more  tedious  in  this  narrative, 
becaufe  I  think  there  is  no  particular  in  the  con~ 
duel:  of  the  amiable  Alithea  that  ought  to  b>i 
omitted,  or  may  not  ferve  to  (hew  how  much  a 
perfect  good-nature  may  enable  us  to  fuftain,  and 
to  forgive. 

I  would  have  no  hufband,  however,  depend  on 
this  example,  and  become  a  Dorimcn  in  expecta- 
tion of  finding  an  Alithea  in  his  wife: — it  is  put- 
ting the  love  and  virtue  of  a  woman  to  too  fevere 
a  teit;  and  the  more  he  thinks  her  capable  of  for- 
giving, the  kfs  ought  he  to  offend. 

Numberlels  are  the  branches  of  good-nature ! 
Numberlefs  are  the  benefits  we  receive  ourfelves 
by  it,  and  confer  on  others!  Yet  1  have  obferved 
that  this  admirable  quality,,  though  in  every  one's 
mouth,  is  undcrftood  but  by  few:  mod  people  are 
apt  to  confound  it  with  another,  which  indeed,  in 
fome  refpecb,  has  very  much  the  appearance  of 
it,  but  is  in  reality  far  (hoit  of  it  in  value.  It 
may  juitly  be  called  the  hand- maid  of  that  great  la- 
dy; it  obeys  her  commands,  delivers  her  decrees, 
and  waits  on  aJl  her  actions;  but  can  do  little  of 
itfeif,  and  mould  never  be  put  in  comparifon. 

What  I  mean,  is  an  eafy  freedom  of  behaviour, 
a  ready  compliance  with  any  thing  propofed  in 
company,  an  endeavour  to  divert  and  preafe,  and 
fometimesan  hofyitality  and  liberality;  and  yet  a 
perfon  may  be  all  this,  without  that  good-nature  I 
have  ;'.tte;nptcd  to  defcribe,  and  which  is  able  to 
work  fuch  prodigious  efiefts. — The  term  I  would 
Drf  3 


3 14  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

therefore  give  this  inferior  good-quality,  is  good- 
humour;  and  how  wide  a  difference  there  is'be- 
tween  that  and  good-nature  few  but  have  experi« 
enced. 

Not  but  it  has  its  virtues,  though  in  a  lefs  ex- 
tenfive  degree,  and  not  equally  permanent. — Meer- 
good-humour,ifabufed,willdegenerateintoits  re- 
verfe;  but  good-nature  is  always  the  fame,  and  in- 
capable of  changing: — like  the  divine  Source,  of 
which  it  is  an  emanation,  it  returns  injuries  with 
benefits-,  it  endeavours  to  work  on  the  bad  heart 
that  offers  them,  by  foft  perfuafion,  and  pities 
what  it  cannot  mend. — In  fine,  good-humour  is 
obliged  to  others  for  its  fupport,  good-nature  only 
to  itfelf. 

As  they,  however,  appear  fo  much  alike,  that 
•without  a  long  and  perfect  acquaintance  with  the 
perfon  they  are  not  to  be  diftinguifhed,  and  are 
often  miftaken  even  by  ourfelves,  a  little  retrofpeft 
into  our  actions,  and  the  fource  of  them,  is  abfo- 
lutely  necefiary ;  and  then  whofoever  is  poflefled 
of  the  one  may,  without  much  difficulty,  improve 
it  into  the  other. 

There  is  no  one  thing  which  affords  a  greater 
proof  of  good-nature  than  being  communicative, 
and  imparting,  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  what  degree 
of  knowledge  we  are  poflefled  of,  to  thofe  who 
may  have  lefs  extended  capacities,  or  fewer  advan- 
tages of  improvement. — Good-humour  will  make 
us  ready  to  acknowledge  and  commend,  perhaps 
beyond  what  it  even  merits,  any  excellence  we  find 
"in  another;  but  good-nature  will  make  us  take 
the  pains  of  inftru&ing  how  that  excellence  maybe 
heightened. — Good-humour  fhuns  not  an  oppor- 
tunity cf  obliging  j  but  good-nature  i&induftrious 


B.  VI.          SPECTATOR.  31$ 

in  feeking  out  as  many  as  it  can. — Good-humour 
frequently  promifes  more  than  is  in  its  power  to 
perform;  but  good  nature  does  more  than  it  gives 
you  reafon  to  expect. 

Thefe  are  fome  of  the  many  marks  by  which, 
with  a  little  application,  you  may  know  the  diffe- 
rence between  them;  and  it  certainly  is  the  bufi- 
nefs  of  every  prudent  perfon  to  make  this  difco- 
very  in  all  thofe  they  have  any  dealings  with,  or 
dependence  upon;  becaufe  otherwife  they  may  be 
deceived  into  too  high  an  opinion  of  the  one,  and 
fail  in  their  due  regard  to  the  other. 

There  are  people  in  the  world,  who  feel  no 
fatisfa&ion  equal  to  that  of  doing  good; — who 
wait  not  to  be  aflced  to  do  every  thing  in  their 
power  to  ferve  you; — -and  will  not  fcruple  to  do 
a  fmall  prejudice  to  themfelves,.  if  by  it  they  may 
procure  a  great  advantage  to  their  neighbours :-— 
yet,  notwithstanding  all  this  innate  benevolence 
and  fweetnefs  of  difpofition,  have  fo  ungracious  a 
manner  in  conferring  favours,  that  the  receiver 
lofes  half  the  fatisfa&ion  of  the  benefit,  and  the 
giver  more  than  half  the  praifes  due  to  his  gene- 
rofity. — The  foul  of  fuch  a  one,  has  in  it  all  thofe 
heavenly  qualities  which  make  up  what  we  call 
good-nature;  but  there  are  oftentimes  deficiencies 
either  in  the  education  or  temperament  of  a  per- 
fon, which  will  not  fuffer  it  to  ihine  forth  with 
that  unblemifhed  luftre  that  fo  much  attracts  the 
love  and  admiration  of  mankind;  and  the  high  c  it 
character  he  bears  from  thofe  moft  obligated  to 
him,  is  that  of  a  furly  good  man. 

A  benefit  beftowed  in  a  pcevifh,  fullen,  or  die* 
tatorial  way,  is  making  one  feel  too  fcverely  the 
neccflity  we  are  under  of  receiving  it;  and  fom* 


3 16  THE  FEMALE  B.  VI. 

there  are  fo  delicate,  that  they  would  rather  chufe 
to  remain  under  the  moft  cruel  diftreffes,  than  be  / 
relieved  from  them  by  a  perfon  of  this  caft. 

Good-humour  is  therefore  the  proper  channel 
through  which  the  benefits  flowing  from  good-na- 
ture ought  to  be  conveyed,  in  order  to  compofe  a 
truly  amiable  character. 

I  doubt  not  but  my  readers  will  underftand,that 
by  good-humour  I  mean  courtefy,  affability,  chear- 
fulnefs,and  that  certain  foftnefs  of  manners  which 
is  fo  engaging  to  all  we  come  among;  but  more 
particularly  to  thofe  who  are  any  ways  obliged  to 
US.T— Thofe  qualities,  I  think,  may  with  propriety 
enough,  be  compared  to  fo  many  fweetly  purling 
ftreams,  which,  though  too  fhallow  to  afford  us 
any  great  advantages,  delight  and  charm  us  with 
their  gentle  murmurs;  and  good-nature  to  the 
capacious  river  which  feeds  their  currents,  and  is 
the  fource  of  all  the  pleafures  they  produce;  yet, 
but  for  thefe  outlets,  would  be  apt  to  fwell  into  a 
roughnefs  difagreeable  both  to  the  eye  and  ear  o£ 
all  who  approach  its  banks. 

Surinthus  and  Montano  are  two  gentlemen 
who  have  an  equal  propenfity  to  atlions  of  gene- 
rofity  and  benevolence, yet  are  perfect  oppofites  ia 
their  manner  of  conducting  them. — A  merchant 
in  the  city,  who  had  been  in  a  very  great  intimacy 
with  them  both  for  a  long  time,  happened  by  fome 
loffes  at  fea,  and  other  difappointrnentsr  to  be  very 
much  diftrefied  in  his  circumflances:  bills  came 
fail  upon  him,  and  though  he  paid  while  he  was 
able,  and  frequently  put  himfelf  to  the  utmoft  in~ 
conveniency  to  do  fo,  being  willing  to  prefer ve  his 
credit,  in  the  hope  of  better  fuccefs  in  other  ven- 
jures  he  had  abroad  j  yet  he  was  j  uft  upon  the  point 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  $17 

of  breaking,  when  one  day  Surinthus  having  heard 
whifpzrs  of  his  condition,  came  to  hi:n,  and  ac- 
coiling  him  in  an  abrupt  manner,  "  What,"  iiii.i 
he,  "  is  it  true  that  you  arc  undone? — they  tell 
"  me  you  muftbecome  a  bankrupt  in  three  or  four 
"  days,  and  that  there  is  no  poffibility  of  your 
"  holding  out  longer." 

The  mei  chant  was  extremely  fhocked,  but  con- 
fefled  that  what  he  had  heard  was  but  too  true  ; — 
and  that  he  mud  yield  to  his  hard  fate  unlefs  he 
could  raife  a  thoufand  pounds  immediately;  which 
fum  he  faid,  would  make  him  perfe&ly  eafy  till 
the  arrival  of  a  fhip,  by  which  he  hoped  better 
news. 

<(  That  is  uncertain,"  replied  Surinthus,  with 
his  former  roughnefs;  "  however,  1  will  advance 
"  the  money  for  you: — call  on  me  two  or  three 
"  hours  hence,  and  1  will  have  it  ready. — But," 
continued  he,  ,u  you  have  certainly  been  guilty  of 

"  len  into  thefe  misfortunes;" — then  proceeded 
to  tell  him  he  did  not  like  his  dealing  with  fuch 
a  one,  and  fuch  a  one ;  and  his  trading  to  this  or 
that  part  of  the  world;  and  that,  indeed,  he  had 
for  a  good  while  expefted  it  would  come  to  this. 

So  true  are  the  poet's  words: 
«  When  things  go  ill,  each  fool  pretends  t'  advife^ 
«  And,  if  more  happy,  thinks  himfelf  more  wife." 

All  this  the  poor  merchant  was  obliged  to  k«  r, 
for  the  fake  of  the  favour  he  was  to  do  hutt  ;  which 
Tva?,  indeed,  truly  generous  and  friendly,  though 
offered  in  a  fathion  a  little  galling  to  one  who  was 
himfelf  a  man  of  great  fpirit,  and  had  been  more 
accuftomed  to  confer  than  to  receive  obligations, 


3i8  THE   FEMALE  B.  V5. 

But  he  had  fcarce  time  to  reflect  on  this  adven- 
ture, before  he  was  told  Montano  defired  to  fpeak 
to  him. 

This  gentleman,  who  had  heard  the  Tame  news 
Surinthus  had  done,  and  inftigated  by  the  fame 
motive,  came  to  make  an  offer  of  his  fervice,  tho* 
in  a  manner  altogether  the  reverfe.— -He  took  not 
the  If  aft  notice  of  his  misfortune;  and  behaving 
with  his  ufual  cheerfulnefs  and  complaifance,afteF 
feme  talk  on  ordinary  affairs,  "I  am  glad,"  faid  he, 
"  I  was  fo  fortunate  to  find  you  at  home;  for  Ihavd 
"  a  rcqueft  to  make  to  you,  \\  hich  your  compliance 
"  with  will  cafe  me  of  a  great  deal  of  trouble." 

The  merchanthaving  allured  him,  thatheihouhi 
rejoice  in  any  opportunity  of  obliging  him,  "lhave 
"  juft  received  fifteen  hundred  pounds,"  refumei 
the  other;  "and  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  do  net 
"  know  hew  to  difpofe  of  it; — I  do  not  care  to 
"  keep  fuch  a  fum  in  my  houfe,  and  I  have  no 
[J  hanker  at;  nrefenr,  nor  any  way  of  laying  it  out 
to  my  mind;— I  fliould  therefore  be  infinitely 
"  obliged  to  you,  if  you  would  take  it  and  thro.v 
''  it  into  trade. — Ikncwpeifons  of  ycur  great deal- 
"  ings  in  the  world  can  at  any  time  have  opporta- 
"  nities  of  getting  rid  of  money  to  advantage." 

Two  fuch  offers  in  one  day,  arid  from  gentle- 
men who  had  no  other  obligations  to  him,  than 
fuch  as  were  reciprocal  and  common  between  per- 
fons  of  equal  fortunes  and  conditions,  might  very 
wc*l  aftonifh  him;  but  the  engaging  manner  in 
which  the  latter  was  made,  did  much  more  fo. 
However,  as  he  was  not  perfectly  affured  Montano 
was  acquainted  with  his  neceffities,  he  could  not 
think  of  abufing  fo  generous  a  friend  (hip,  and 


B.  VI.  SPECTATOR.  31$ 

therefore  frankly  difclofed  to  him  all  he  knew  be- 
fore as  well  as  himfelf. 

While  he  was  making  the  detail  of  his  loffes, 
the  other  gave  him  frequent  interruptions,  telling 
him,  that  fuch  accidents  were  no  prodigies  among 
men  of  bufmefs; — that  what  one  year  took  away, 
another -might  return; — and  that  he  was  fo  far 
from  thinking  a  much  greater  fum  than  he  had 
mentioned  would  be  unfafe  in  his  hands,  that  no- 
thing could  give  him  a  more  fenfible  mortification 
tlian  his  not  accepting  it.—"  1  do  affure  you,  Sir, 
11  I  offer  you  no  more  than  what  I  can  very  well 
u  fpare;  and  if  fortune  mould  be  fo  unjuft  to  your 
"  merits,  as  not  to  enable  you  to  return  it  in  one, 
"  two,  three  years,  or  longer,  my  affairs  will  fuf- 
"  fer  nothing  by  the  delay,  and  I  mould  take  it 
"  unkindly,  mould  you  ever  think  of  the  affair 
"  with  any  fort  of  concern,  till  it  entirely  fuits 
"  with  your  convenience  to  repay  it." 

With  words  like  thefe  the  merchant  was  pre- 
vailed on  to  accept  the  money;  and  as  foon  as  he 
had  received  it,  he  went  to  his  more  furly  friend, 
and  after  having  returned  thofe  grateful  acknow- 
ledgements, which  it  muft  be  confeffed  he  merit- 
ed, told  him,  that  an  unlooked-for  piece  of  good- 
fortune  had  happened,  which  gave  him  the  means 
of  fatisfying  his  creditors,  without  that  kind  aflift- 
ance  he  had  been  fo  generous  to  offer. 

Surinfcaus  feemed  neither  pleafed  nor  difpleaf- 
ccl,  but  in  his  own  rough  fafliion,  though  honeft 
meaning,  faid,  it  was  very  well; — that  he  fliould 
Inve  been  welcome  to  the  money  if  he  had  want- 
ed it ; — and  that  if  ever  he  happened  to  have  occa- 
fjon  again,  he  might  know  where  to  find  a  friend. 

Now  though  anyotjcin  the  fame  circumftarccs 


*:o  THE  FEMALE,  Sec.  B.  VI. 
•with  this  merchant,  would  think  it  a  great  bleffing 
to  meet  with  a  friend  like  Surinth  us,  yet  everybody 
muft  allow  that  the  weight  of  fuch  an  obligation 
fat  much  15ghter,by  the  engaging  manner  in  which 
Montano  conferred  it. 

Strange  it  appears  to  me,  that  feme  perfons, 
who  go  very  great  lengths  to  ferve  their  friends, 
fhould  not  go  a  little  farther,  and  adorn  their  boun- 
ties with  good-humour,  fince  it  would  coft  them 
nothing,  and  is  no  lefs  conducive  to  the  happinds 
of  the  receiver,  than  the  more  expcnfive  part  of 
the  obligation. 

Certain  it  is,  they  do  not  fee  this  deficiency  in 
themfelves,  or  they  would  never  leflen  the  merit 
of  their  favours,  by  a  wrong  manner  of  conducting 
them;  efpecially  as  it  is  an  error  in  behaviour  fa 
eafily  avoided. 

I  would,  therefore,  fain  perfuade  every  one  who 
is  about  to  give  a  proof  of  his  good-nature  in  any 
friendly  and  benevolent  office,  to  contrive  it  fo,  33 
that  what  he  does  may  feem  a  favour  to  himfelf.— 
This  it  was  that  made  the  offer  of  Montano  fo 
much  more  acceptable  than  that  of  Surinthus  :— 
this  fets  a  double  value  on  the  fmalleil  obligations, 
and  makes  the  receiver  eafy  under  the  greateft. 


THE  END  OF   THE  SIXTH   BOOK. 


INDEX. 

AUTHOR,  her  character,  Page  3 

•**•   Arminia,  her  "bad  tafle,  19 

Alcaics  and  Palmyra    tlicir  (lory,  31 

Ariftobulus,   how  cxcufable,  6l 

Antipathy  in  nature  not  to  be  worn  off,  67 

Alt  zeu-a,  much  to  be  pitied  83 

Amaranthus,  his  pafllon  for  Aminta,  87 

Applaufe,  how  intoxicating,  91 

Avarice,  the  worll  of  paflions,  109 

Adulphus,  ruined  by  a  dream,  .124. 

Ambition  has  no  bounds,  133 

Aftions  unhappy,  the  true  caufe,  157 

Avenlon  to  lolitiule,  a  fault,  163 

Adonius,   his  charafter,  184 

Amadea,  her  caufcs  for  grief,  I95 

Abufc  of  thinking,  worfe  than -not  thinking  at  all,  ^J9O 

Adventure  of  a  traveller,  "*94 

Auctions  greatly  frequented,  *c>8 

Alvaro,  unhappy  in  his  chilcWn,  ft-O 

Accomplifhments,  which  moft  valuable,..  243 

Amafma,  how  made  unhappy,  247 

Armico,  too  hafty  in  his  judgment,  «55 

Admiration,  by  what  preierved,  266 

Alithca,  an  infhncc  of  her  generofity,  302 

"DLUE  domino,  caufe  of  a  fad  milfoke, .  40 

**    Brother,   his  diftrefs,  4* 

Blodmetta,  her  unhappy  condition,  59 

Ik-Hair  and  Miferia,  an  ill  matched  couple,  73 
Beau  Uelfor.t  and  Mifs  Tittup,  the  belt  \vi(h  can  be  ir.uJe  for 

them,  £3 

Bedlam,  who  fit  for  it,  130 

Bellizo,  her  hiftory,  146 

Belinda,  her  adventures, .  173 

Britifh  ladies  different  from  what  they  were  formerly,  265 

Beauty,  hurt  by  ill-nature,  274 

Body,  how  far  influenced  by  the  mindr  279 
Benefits,  the  manner  in  which  they  ought  to  be  conferred,    3^9 

CL  IT  A  N  D  F.  R>  fuccefsful  in  love-affairs,  1 1 

Country  ladies,  eafily  feduced,  3$ 

Caution,  neceMary  in  parents,  39 
Clergyman,  a  remarkable  inftance  of  one, 

Celinda,  unfortunate  in  her  love,  61 

Clcora,  a  warning  to  her,  71 

Cleophil,  his  ungenerous  behaviour,  150 

Caprice  of  a  philofopHcr,  154 

Climate  of  England  the  fame  as  ever,  if  j 

Contemplation,  how  pleafm^in  all  fhtions,  J6r 

••y,  madame,  her  adventure  at  the  opfl-a,  z?'t 

Grids  not  to  be  ncglccUd,  245 

Compulfion,  hateful  to  all  reafonable  beings,  286 

Comphifance,  always  ncccflary,  313 
VOL.  I.                                 Ee 


I    N    1}    E    X. 

DALIND  A,  her  mean  fpirit,  Page  69 

Diftruft,  a  bafe  paflion,  109 

Diverfion-mongers,  very  induftrious,  2l6- 

Difobedience,  juftly  punifhed,  »34 

Draxalla,  an  inftance  of  felf-created  wretchednsfs,.  381 

Dorimon,  how  reclaimed,  307 

•pUPHROSINE,  her  charafter,,  4 
•*•"•  F.rminia,  how  ruined, 

Effeminacy  in  the  army  cenfiired,  85 

Examples  of  unhappy  marriages,  99 

Elmira,  an  extraordinary  cafe,  136 

Elements,  feldom  blended  equally,  289 
Englifh  ladies,  treated  with  too  U«£le  refpeft,  and  wherefore,    237 

Examination  into  otirfelves  neceffary,  27* 

fR  E  N  C  H  ladies,  feldom  make  an  ill  ufe  of  liberty,  18 

•*"     Flavia,  her  adventures,  47 

Father,  the  locdid  e.ontrivan^e  of  one,  105; 

fidelio,  hisdefpair,  ic6 

I  ortune,  the  author  and  breaker  of  mod  friendfMps,  150 

Free-will,  not  to  be  doubted,  194 
France,  the  many  innor.yit.  diverfions  to  be.,  found  there,        234 

Fop,  may  be  trifled  with,  259, 

Fr.ncy,  never  idle,  281 
Favours,  the  merit  of  them  lefle»ed  by  an  iU  manner  ,of  be- 

ftowing,  329 

£**  I  R  L  S,  naturally  -?i?jn,  .  7 

^^   Genercfity  of  a  lover,  AS 

Glory  and  love,  not  incompatible,-  94 

Oaming  and  gamefters,  ho\v  treated,  1*8 

Grant  of  owr-defiyes  often  imlwppv,,.  I  :f 

Good  -breeding  inferior  to  reputation,  157 

Gaiety  in  excels,  how  to  be  corrected,  iSf 

Gratitude,  highly  due  to  parents,  219 

Good-nature,  what  it  is,  267 

ar_4  good-humour,  .in  what  they  differ,              3^3 

28 
AS 

Home  n-ews,  ^3 

3iappinefs,  doubly,  welcome  after  adverGty,.  153 
'Hope  ought  to  be  encouraged, 

Hoydens,  fome  naturally  fo,  26^ 

TEA  LOUSY,  the  rp;te  it  occafions,  25 

J    Impertinence  of  fome  people,  5,^ 

Inftance  of  public  gratitude,  95 

Inaperso,  a  lover  of  beauty,  l°4 

Inrii'-ffion  made  by  a  dream,  I%J. 

Iraperio,  the  mortification  he  gave  a  lady,  2,-f, 

Inconiiflcncies  in  Ic^e,  243 

Ill-nature,  the  lource  of  it,  274 

Infancy,  a  claim  to  tendernefs,  275 

KEY  to  the  FEMALE  SPECTATOR,  forbid,.  6 

Kindaefs,  ill  repaid,  J^o 


,     _  ,  . 

TJ  U  S  BA  ND,  the  innocent  ftratagem.  of  one, 
Honour,  an  inftance  of  it, 


I     N     D     E     X. 

LOY3,  when  to  be  approved,  Page   $• 

Liking,  often  taken  for  Ipvc,  ib. 

Luxury,  the  encouragement  it  finds,,  3,$ 

Lindamira,  her  ftory,  •  76 

Lacroon,  his  character,.  IOO 

Lotteries,  numerous  of  tate,  llS 

Leolin  and  Elmira,  their  ftory,  136 

Layallie,  his  amour  with  Belinda^  174 

I.oytcr,  count,  an  odd  proceeding  in  him,  l8l 

Letter  of  Sarah  Oldfafhion's,  3IJ 

Life,  what  time  of  it  is  beft  for  improvement,.  »l8 

MI  R  A,  her  character,  4 

Martefia,  her  adventures,.  :a 

Marriages,  hafty,  feldom  happy,  If 

Mafquerades,  how  prejudicial,  .  25 

Macro,  his  brutality,  69 

Mariana,  a  feaioDnble  warning  to  her,  7* 
Myrtano  and  Clcora,  what  may  be  expeCteJ  from  their  union,  71 

Milctta,  her  atfefted  modefty,  IOI 

Mercator,  his  ftory,  157 

Manella,  troublefome  in  her  conjugal  affec^loo^  174 

Man,  the  dignity  of  his  fpecics,  194 

Mind,  delights  in  contemplation,  107 

Montuubin,  count,  his  ftory,  2OI 

Mode,   not  always  to  be  followed,  ai0 

Modefty,  the  chief  grace  of  women*  443 

Mariamne,  a  play  fatal  to  the  author,  268 

Manflaughter,  a  new  way  of  being  guilty  of  it»  s8j 

MelifTa,  a  great  coquette,  39$ 

Myftery,   plealingly  unravelled,  310 

Montano,  the  manner  of  his  conferring  obligations,,  318 

"VJEGRATjIA,  her*eharafterv.  2O 

•^    Nothing  cytaJn  tiU  poflefied,.  103 

Nature  corrupted  by  the  pafTions,  107 

Numbers  make  their  own  misfortunes,,  280 


,  cenfured,  85 

PARENTS,  fometimes  in  fa^ilt,  17 

Pride,  when  laudable,  r<J 

Porr.pilius,   his  marriage,   why  blamed,  60 

Philimont  aod  Daria,  their  capricious  dtftiny,.  69 

Peace,  a  promoter  of  finikins,  fy 

Panthea,  her  fad  dilerrnrv,  i^e 

Pofterity,  how  far  to  be  regarded,  j  ^^ 

Paffions,  duly  regulated,  of  feryice  to  us,,  134 

Philofopher,  his  remark,  1^.4 

Pantomimes,  how  ufeful,  2JO 

Poetry,  not  enough  encouraged,  264 

Pretences,  various,   for  ill  humour,  578 

Vaticnce,  an  extraordinary  example,  aSo 

UESTION   proper  to  be  afked,  17 
between  married  people,  matter  of  ridipilc 

for  others,  i;<j 


"^     book  is  •'"'••'•T1     - 
T>  i  i     ^Jt-i  .jient,  Page  ^ 

•"«•  R  ics  obfei        i.  /  the  FEMALE  SPECTATOR,  5 

Rebecca  Facemend,  her  bill*  £• 

Refolva,  the  obftinacy  of  one,,  14 

Regret,  an  inftance  of  it,  1.5 

Recollection  neceflary,  I' 

Ranelagh  too  much  frequented,  I 

Refpecfr,  how  attracted,  r.. 

Religion,  when  real,  excites  good-nature,  2', 

Royal  example  of  generofity,  28 

CEOMANTHE,  her  ftory, 
*•'  Sympathy  of  humours  requisite  to  make  marriage  happy,  7 
Source,  the  true  one  of  our  calamities,  i.< 

Solitary  life  hated  by  molt,  16 

Socrates, an  inftanct  that  virtue  is  to  be  acquired  by  application,  1 8 
Saicafm  of  a  lady  to  an  apouate  patriot,  19 

Sneer  of  a  fon  on  his  father's  marrying  a  very  young  wife, 
Subfcriptions  intended  for  mafqueraJes  at  Ranelagb, 
Stage  affords  the  nobleft  diversion, 
Softnefs,  the  moft  prevailing  aims  c"  women, 
Sceptic  confcffes  too  much  without  he  confcfTed  more,  28 

Surinthus,  his  furly  friendlhip,  31 

'TTE  NDERILLA,  her  romantic  turn, 

•^     True  love  unchangeable, 
Temptations  overcome  are  pleafures, 
Tempo-Amiarians,  what  they  are, 
Tulip,  Mrs.  her  folly, 
Tennis,  a  manly  exercife, 
Ti.noleon,  his  charaGer, 
Trial  of  a  lover,  15 

Tragedy,  its  intent,  21 

Tafte,  the  difference  of  the  falfe  and  rlie  true  tafte,  2] 

Talpack  ladies,  their  habits  may  probably  become  our  mode,  z( 
Thaumantius,  a  great  valetudinarian,  "i\ 

•VTA  U  X-H  AJL.L,  the  temple  of  Flora,  t 

"     Vulpone,  his  ftrange  fuccefs,  • 

Unity  among  kindred  recommended,  i; 

Vizards,  when  worn  at  the  theatres,  26 

Virago,  how  ridiculous, 
Vapours,  an  epilepfy  of  the  mind, 
"%\,  O  RLD,  the  ridicule  of  it  on  unfuitable  matches, 

*  *     Women,  why  fond  of  military  gentlemen,  o. 

Wife  of  a  late  general,  her  behaviour,  o 

Wlr.ft,  the  game  much  admired,  11 

Widow,  her  reafon  for  marrying,  16- 

Widow,  her  rambling  humour,  16! 

_/^EUXIS,  a  confummate  hypocrite,  13. 

YOUTH  and  age  difagreeable  to  each  cth-ir, 

THE  END  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


L 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


REG'D  LD-URt 
'FEB221995 


DEC  2  0  1996 

£86-6  LD-U&L 


LOS  Al 


JC  SOUTHERN  REG'ONA.  LIBRARY  FACILI" 


A     000007145     6 


tia 


