/'

ft

'

%

:  ‘  ,

A

/

/

r

*

-

I

-•  ;r  ,1.

;a  >

-~-y  \  r  *  ’  *  ***  r r  -

.1 V v v  '  -i w  ■  1 t i  ■■■'!.  '  .1

4'  ^

u".  l.-;

'  or-T c'A

':  V  ...

r*  t

•i V  '  F

'  ■  4 '

'  ^  li J
■<■'<  C  *

•X

■  c  :  >  / .

\  >  f  *>

'

'  <>•  ;  *  .

:i ;■:•»■■  ,U 1  •• / <

v  .  . .  < .  >

it t

'pr.  -Dr.

•  ■  ■  V'  ■  1  *

V

f rtf 1  ■;

\?u'r

'  K'Jfi iO 1 f  -•  ■

■•i rw D-:  )fr

■  •  J  >  ,  Vf  •-»  •*.  4 w,  ;

<  {■  A 4 J  •  .

■'■■■  •  v'  ,i o

c  ,  .\Zi

r,  ■  '  v  -  •  ■

'

-  ;h.  v ui SJi

■  r-.  i» .

j;  ff  £

rfi rtf,!

’  S 1.0  •  '  •’  ‘  ’

!  .  ,  <  t  <■ ;

£•  '  , 0 0 ; ;  .OA

....  w..  V Vi'  .

,j;f r

S f

.  r !  •  i

>  -

r  -i

:  >V 1

<•  <  -wo

•no  .;i:  .r![v

•  J'

u . ;

-  "J  ■  !  •  <  A r  ,  ,  !  ,  r>  »

•  •  .

■. 1  %  •  »

*

PRO

London,  April 4oth,  1773*

P O S A L S

FOR

PRINTING by SUBSCRIPTION,

A

GENERAL HISTORY of MUSIC,

From the Earliest Ages to the Present Period.

CONDITIONS.

I.  That the work  {hall be elegantly printed in Two Volumes
Quarto,  illuftrated with examples of national mufic,  and com-
pofitions of different ages,  and in different ffyles,  as rvell as
with original drawings of ancient and modern inftruments,
engraved by the beft artifts.

II.  That the pric6 to fubfcribers  {hall be two guineas  ;  one to be
paid at the time of fubfcribing,  and the other on the delivery
of the fecond volume,  in  {heets.

Ill It is the author’s intention to publilh the firft volume in the
courfe of next year,  1774.  But,  as the printing of it will be
attended with too great an expence for him to rifk it againft
the public opinion,  though the work is in great forwardnefs,
he cannot venture to fend it to the prefs before jive hundred
copies,  are fubfcribed for.  He therefore entreats thofe who
may be inclined to honour this undertaking with their patronage,  to fend in their names early.  And in order to render
fecurity reciprocal,  between the public and the writer,  if
the number of copies fpecified be not afcertained by next
Chriftmas,  he will abandon the enterprise,  and return the
money to the fubfcribers.

Subscriptions will betaken in,  and Receipts delivered,  by
the Author,  at his hcufe in Queen’s Square,  Bloomlbury  ;
T.  Becket and Co.  Strand  ;  J.  Robson,  New Bond Street;
G-  Robinson,  Parernofter-Row ;  Meff.  Fletcher and Prince,
Oxford;  Meff.  Merril and Woodyer,  Cambridge;  and
at the mufic  {hops of R.  Bremner,  in the Strand;  and P.
Wejxker,  Gerrard-Street,  Soho.

•t

THE

PRESENT STATE

O F

MUSIC

I N

G E R M ANY,

THE NETHERLANDS,

AND

UNITED PROVINCES.

O R,

The JOURNAL of a TOUR through thofe
Countries,  undertaken to collect Materials for

A GENERAL HISTORY OF MUSIC.

By CHARLES BURNEY,  Muf.  D*

IN TWO VOLUMES;

VOL.  II.

2fuf SBirtuofen feg  (Ms,  ©ermaniet?/  Die Du gadget ;

3n granfrdcD unD 25>e(fcblanD jtnb grojfere nlcDL

LONDON,

Printed forT-  Becket and Co.  Strand j J.  Robson,  New Bond-
Street}  and G.  Robinson,  Paternofter Row,  177$.

>

♦  J-

A D V B R T I S E M E N T.

V  -  ‘  -  "■>  -  •

>  •  r  -  •

^5 it may probably have been expelled
that this work ,  like the account of The

Prefent State of Mufic in France and
Ital y,Jhould have been comprifed in one volume,  it may be neceffary to account for its

\  •

having fwelled into two .  As the author
proceeded in arranging his materials ,  he foon
found that one volume would not contain
thofe which related merely to mufic ,  without
fuch retrenchments ,  or comprefjion ,  as would
juftly fib] eft him to cenfure ,  either for to -
tally neglecting^  or too flight ly mentioning
fever al perfons and things,  which merit particular attention.  It was,  therefore.)  the opinion of fever al of his friends ,  whofe judgment he has reafon to refpett,  that by intermixing with his account of mufic and

muficians ,

vi ADVERTISEMENT.

muficians,  a few mifcellaneous memorandums,  he would connect the fever al parts of
his narrative,  and,  by rendering the whole
a more uniform feries,  carry his reader with
him wherever he went .

'This indeed a little breaks into his origi-

4

nal defign,  of confining his remarks wholly
to mufical matters .  However,  to give the
Prefent State of Mufic,  in the feveral
countries through which he travelled,  is fiill
the object of this publication ,  as to acquire
materials for the Hiftory of its Paft State
was that of his voyage •

*

ERRATA to Vot,  L

Page 36.  for balloons players,  read balloon player;  p.  52.
laft line,  for Toinetti,  read Toinette;  p.  57.  for it it,  read it
is  ;  for into there dalles,  read into their dalles;  p.  65.  for
theogift,  read theologift  ;  p,  78.  for thril,  read fhrill ;  p.  83.
for defed,  read defers  ;  p.  85.  for Etrennes Palatine,  read
Etrennes Palatines;  p 97.  for forms the judgment,  and
eftablilhes a tafte,  read form the judgment,  and eftablilh a
tafte  ;  p.  100  .for Gurreieri,  read Guerrieri ;  p.  21 1  .for focias,
read foi ias  ;  p,  244,  for inperial,  read imperial;  p.  269  .for
dilineated,  read delineate.

V O L.  II.

Page 8.  and elfewhere ,  dele e after Wolfe;  p.  19.  dele s
after impolition  ;  p.  3 5. ./or chemical,  read chymical ;  p.  152.
lafl line but one,  for fincc,  read fince  ;  p.  157.  for palles,  read
paflages ;  p.  171.  for Hienfchen.  read Heinicben  ;  p.  173 .for
rational,  read national;  ib.  for performances,  read performance;  p.  183 .'for coutryman,  read countryman;  p.  231.
dele s after motion  ;  p.  232*  dele softer opinion;  p.234.  for-
preferibes,  read prefcribes ;  p.  244.  dele s after objed j ib,
p.  9,  after at,  dele comma.

.

V

.1 o V  :

-  ^  -r

>

2*  Vi  ..

•  •  -  r  ■

_  !;  T f.  :•/  .  :  '

.  ’  ■  .

•f  .  -V

.1'  ,-  -J

-  .  .'-•••

'  ..  .  '■■  '  •  X  •..  <

, , ;  \

v  ,  o  *xa\  (
.  ■  rr:  /  rrt.

*

X-  7 jj  '  r  ■
^  :  *

Ih  •:

•  i-  *

_ i

V*  <*  i  -  „c;  '

.  .  .  •  .•  *

V V,  .*

■\  ■  f*

...

•a v  ’

. :  i»v/\

I  ■»  *  *

6\  •  '

.....  .-iV\

7T r  ~  7

•..4 1  <Ki,  7  /

8  .or.  7!  :

i  .q  ;  !■
iv.Vi'i  <  ‘  •;  *

M.’\  .fvx  .<i J

.  x  .

..

\,.,Vv

J  .  I  .S!

Uv.{  ,
'  '  :  • "  i r.  ;

V

Vt

'll)  ’* . .

s'1

•  *  k  *  ‘  ,

.  A  -  -  -  „

*  /

THE

PRESENT STATE

O F

MUSIC,  &c.

BOHEMIA,

|T Y journey through this country*
was one of the moil fatiguing
I ever took in my life ;  for
though the road,  in general,  is very
good,  for a German road,  vet my want
of time,  which obliged me to travel
night and day ;  the exceflive heat and
cold of the weather,  oecafioned by the
prefence and abfence of the fun  ;  together with bad horfeS,  and diabolical
Vol.  IL B wagons.

I 2 3

wagons,  ufed as chaifes,  exhaufted both
my fpirits and my patience.

The country is flat,  naked,  and dif-
agreeable to the eye,  for the mod part,
all the way through Auftria,  Moravia,
and Bohemia,  as far as Prague,  the fixation and environs of which are very beautiful.

*  •'  V*  vi fit l  >*■  4 i 4*.  Ji 4'V i  £■  •

The dearnefs and fcarcity of provifions,
of all kinds,  on this road,  were now ex-
ceflive  ;  and the half-ftarved people,  juft
recovered from malignant fevers,  little
lefs contagious than the plague,  occafion-
ed by bad food,  and by no food at all,
offered to view the moft

i w A k  •£*  v./  jt  -.J ■■  '  t

tacles I ever beheld.

■  *  •'  •  y  -  W'  ’V-  &  '  -

No refrefhments of any kind were to
be found,  till I arrived at Colin,  a village
rendered famous,  by the battle fought
near it in the laft war ;  here a pigeon,
and half  ,  a pint of miferable four wine,
coft me three or four  (hillings  ;  till now
I had fubfifted on bread and water,  ex-
"  ’  .  cept

melancholy fpec-

C 3 3

cept one pint of milk,  which I obtained
with difficulty,  and which coft me fourteen creuzers ,  about feven-pence Eng-
liffi.

I had frequently been told,  that the
Bohemians were the moft mufical people
of Germany,  or,  perhaps,  of all Europe;
and an eminent German compofer,  now
in London,  had declared to me,  that if
they enjoyed the fame advantages as the
Italians,  they would excel them.

I never could fuppofe efFeds without
a caufe j mature,  though often partial to
individuals,  in her diftribution of genius
and talents,  is never fo to a whole peo-
pie.  Climate contributes greatly to tL

K 5 _ T  -  A  ’  .  ,

forming of cuftoms and manners ;  and,
it is,  I bdieve,  certain,  that thbfe who
inhabit hot climates, :  are more delighted
with muiic than thofe of cold ones;

•  "V  '  f I  •

perhaps,  from the auditory nerves being
more irritable in the one than in the other,
and from found being propagated with

B 2 greater

[  4  ]

greater facility  :  but I could,  by no means*
account for climate operating more in
favour of mufic upon the Bohemians,
than on their neighbours,  the Saxons
and Moravians.

I croffed the whole kingdom of Bohemia,  from fouth to north ;  and being
very afliduous in my enquiries,  how
the common people learned mufic,  I
found out at length,  that,  not only in
every large town,  but in all villages,
where there is a reading and writing
fchool,  children of both fexes are taught
mufic.

At Teuchenbrod,  Janich,  Czas-
lau,  Bomischbrod,  and other places,
I vilited thefe fchools ;  and at Czaflau,
in particular,  within a poll of Colin,  I
caught them in the fad.

The organift and cantor,  M.  Johann
Dulfick,  and the firfl violin of the pari ill church,  M.  Martin Kruch,  who
are likewife the two fchool-mafters,  gave

me

\

t 5  ]

me all the fatisfadtion I required.  I
went into the fchool,  which was full
of little children of both fexes,  from fix
to ten or eleven years old,  who were
reading,  writing,  playing on violins,  haut-
bcis,  bafioons,  and other inftruments.
The organifi had in a fmall room of his
houfe four clavichords,  with little boys
pradtifing on them all  :  his fon of nine
years old,  was a very good performer.

After this,  he attended me to the
church,  which is but a fmall one,  and
played an admirable voluntary on the
organ,  which is likewife but fmall,
though well- toned ;  its compafs was
from C to C,  and there were no reed
flops ;  but it had pedals,  and an even
good chorus.  He played an extempore
fugue ,  upon a new,  and pleating fubjedf,
in a very mafterly manner;  and I think
him one of the beft performers on the
organ,  which I heard throughout my journey.  He complained of lofs of hand,  for

B 3 want

»

want of practice,  and faid,  that he had
too  -many learners to inftruft,  ■  in the
firft rudiments,  to be allowed leifure for
ftudy,  and that he had his houfe not only
full of other people’s children,  but his
own 5

I jt  ;  |>  jp  ...  ‘  s C'  t f'-  ',.  :  ..  f  ■  -i j  ^

*e Chill penyry reprefied his noble rage

which is the cafe of many a mufician,
whofe mind and talents are fuperior to
fuch drudgery  !  yet,  thus circumflanced,
therein no alternative,  but a jail.

.  i:yxd arfi’  •  gnhnb inrnibtsdrnod- bos

PRAGU Ev

j A 7  ,  '  I r>. r- J t* ft

This city is extremely beautiful,  when
feen at a didance.  It is fituated on two

•  *  '  -y  •  *  .  ,  *

or three hills,  and has the river Mulda

.  •

running through the middle of it.  It is
divided into three different quarters,or dif-
trials,  which arediftinguifhed by the names
of Silt 0tGl)f/  tRcilC 0t«bw and SviCliJC

<E5tttbt or Old Town,  New Town,  and

'  ~j J  '  •  •  '  p  \  f*  ■">  r"-  '  ;  .  •  '■•f  > ;  yp\  "  I  •  £  r*  *'

Little Town j the Kleine Stadtis the moft

■-  -  2  .  ,  ;  i  .  .  .  ■

mo-

r i i r'  -

[7]

modern,  and the belt built of the three.
The houfes are all of white Hone,  of
ducco,  in imitation of it,  and all uniform in fize and colour.  The hill of

\  '  *  L

St.  Laurence,  the higheft about the
town,  commands a profped,  not only

of the whole city,  but of all the adjacent

.

country  :  the declivity of this hill is covered with wood,  confiding-  chiefly of
fruit-trees,  and vineyards.  A great part

of the town is new,  as fcarce  ~a ltngle

■*

building efcaped the Pruffian batteries, .
and bombardment during the blockade,

'J t S  '  /f'.i

in the lad war.  A few churches and
palaces only,  that were flrongly built,
and of lefs combpftible materials than

'  •  {£..11  . .  Bj ll  £  ’  3

the red,  v/ere proof againft their fury ;

and in the walls,  of tbefe,  are, dill ftick-

i 9fil n|  iq id m ui  •.  •

ing innumerable cannon balls,  and bombs,

.  '  .  dtQtn vil

particularly,  in the fliperb palace of count

Czernin,  and in the Capuchin’s church.
This palace,  which is of the,  Ionic order,  and
built of white done,  has thirty windows

l  •  1  ■*  f  ■)  ‘  ,  i 3  •  ■  I  ,

in front  >  the chapel,  at the Capuchins,

B 4

is

[  8  ]

is an exadt copy,  in  (lone,  of that at
Loretto,  in marble.

The inhabitants are ftill at work
throughout the city,  in repairing the Pruf-
fian devaluations,  particularly at the cathedral and imperial palace,  which were both
almoft entirely demolifhed ;  thefe are fi-
tuated on a high hill,  facing that of St.
Laurence.  The organ of the cathedral,
which,  as well as the building,  has been
newly conftrudted,  fince the Jaft war,
r is very large,  and finely toned  ;  it was
well played on during the morning fer-
vice,  though the principal organift,  M.
Wolfe,  was ill in bed of a fever.  I
went to his houfe,  in order,  if he had
been well enough,  to have convcrfed
with him concerning the prefent hate of
mufic at Prague;  but the meffenger I
fent in before me,  in order to negotiate
the viiit,  returned quite pale with
fear,  telling me,  that it would he very
dangerous for me to enter the houfe,  as
IVL Wolfe was ill of the malignant and

contagious

€

[  9  ]

\

contagious fever,  which had lately raged
with fo much violence,  and fwept off
fuch a number of the inhabitants of this
city.

M.  Wolfe,  who is efteemed one of
the beft organ ills in Germany,  is called

am  .<Sdj!ofj  £)rgant$m,  o*r organift of the
caftle ;  for the cathedral of Prague is
built within the caifle or royal palace
walls,  of which it makes a part.

There are three large colleges of Je-
fuits in Prague  ;  that of St.  Nicholas has
a very beautiful church,  in which the
organ is divided into two parts,  placed
one on each fide the gallery ;  and the keys,
with a pofjify or fmall choir organ,  are
in the middle,  but placed fo low,  as to
leave the weft window clear  :  inftead of
wood,  the frame- work,  pillars,  bafe,
and ornaments of this inftrument,  in
front,  are of white marble  ;  the organ
and church feem quite new.  I never
faw a more rich or noble front to an organ than this ;  it was conftru&ed by one

of

t 1°  ]

of the Jefuits,  and is well-toned;  but
has a very heavy touch.

An itinerant band of ftreet-muficians
came to falute me at the inn,  the  (j£tn=
1)0Vtlr or Unicorn,  during dinner;  they
played upon 'the harp,  violin,  and horn,
feveral minuets and Polonoifes,  which
were,  in themfelves very pretty,  though
their  .performance  >  of them added no  ¬
thing to the beauty of the compofitions ;
and it will,  perhaps,  appear ftrange to
fome,  that this capital of fo mufical a
kingdom,  in which the genius of each
inhabitant has a>  fair trial,  fhould not
more abound with great muficians.  It
is not,  however,  difficult to account for
this,:  if we refled:,  that rndfic is one of

the arts of peace,  leifure,  and1 abundance;
and if,  according to M.  Roufieau,  arts
have flourifhed moft in the moffi corrupt
times,  thofe times  -  ffiuft,  at leaft;  have

i

been profperous and tranquil.  'Now,  the

Bohemians are never tranquil long together  ;  and even in the ffiort intervals of

r-  f-.  ^  ^ A  .  *

peace,

[  M  ]

peace,their firft nobility are,attached to the
court,  of Vienna,  and feldom refide in
their own capital'.;;  fo that thofe among
the poorer fort,  who are taught mufic in
their infancy,  have no encouragement to
purfue it in riper years,  and feldom advance further than to qualify themfelves
for the ftreet,  or for fervitude.

Indeed many of thofe who learn mufic
at fchool go afterwards to the plough,
and to other laborious employments]  and
then their knowledge of mufic turns to
no other account,  than to enable them
to fing in their parilh-church,  and as an
innocent domeftic recreation,  which is,
perhaps,  the belt and moft honourable
ufe,  to which mufic can be appropriated.

It has been faid by travellers*;
that the Bohemian  :nobility keep mufi-
cians in their  .houfes ;  but,  in keeping
fervants,  it is impoflible to be otherwife,
as all the children of the peafants and

■  i

an

!

> ;

,  ;i  ■  '  ;  -V"

I

*  Nugent’s Grand Tour,,  vol.  ii.

U o M V i J

l I I

jJf.tA

trades-

[  12  ]

trades-people,  in every town and village
throughout the kingdom of Bohemia are
taught mufic at the common reading
fchools,  except in Prague,  where,  indeed
it is no part of fchoob learning ;  the
muiicians being brought thither from
the country.

In thefe common country fchools,  now
and then a great genius appears,  as was
the cafe at TeuchenbrGd,  the birth-place
of the famous Stamitz.  His father
was cantor of the church in that
town ;  and Stamitz,  who was afterwards
fo eminent,  both as a compofer and performer,  was brought up in the common
fchool,  among children of common talents,  who lived and died unnoticed ;
but he,  like another Shakefpeare,  broke
through all difficulties and difcourage-
ments j and,  as the eye of one pervaded
all nature,  the other,  without quitting
nature,  puihed art further than any one
had done before him  ;  his genius v/as
truly original,  bold,  and nervous ;  invention.

*  [  *3  ]

vention,  fire,  and contraft,  in the quick
movements ;  a tender,  graceful,  and in-
finuating melody,  in the flow;  together
with the ingenuity and richnefs of the
accompaniments,  charaCterife his productions  ;  all replete with great effeCts,
produced by an enthufiafin of genius,
refined,  but not reprefled by cultivation.

M.  Seger,  is organifl:  of the
or convent of the Holy Crofs in Prague.
I was defired by M.  Gafman,  to enquire
after him,  as he is the beft player in
this city ;  he favoured me with a long
converfation,  and I found him to be a
fenfible man,  as well as an excellent performer.  He remembers Tartini,  and
Vandini,  at Prague,  fifty years ago ;  and
ieems well acquainted with the character
and works of all the great muficians in
Europe.

He informed me,  that at the convent
of the Holy Crofs,  where he is organifl:,
there are now three or four boys,  brought
thither from country fchools,  who fing
4  -  moft

C Hi

moft admirably  ;  having goad voices,
and good  (hakes,  with good tafte and
expreffion.  I arrived at Prague one day
too late,  for a great mufical performance in the church of this convent.

It was with great difficulty that I acquired information from the Bohemian
muficians,  as even the German language
is of little ufe in that kingdom,  throughout which the Sclavonian dialedt is generally ufed.  M.  Seger,  indeed,  fpoke Ita*
lian,  and was very communicative ;  it
was from him that I obtained a confirmation of my difcovery,  that not only in
Bohemia,  but in Moravia,  Hungary,  and
part of Auftria,  children are taught mu-
fic at the common reading fchools.  The
Bohemians are remarkably expert in the
ufe of wind inftruments,  in general  ;  but
M.  Seger fays,  the inftrument upon which
their performers are mod excellent,  on
the Saxon fide the kingdom,  is the haut-*
bois;  and on that of Moravia,  the tube,
or clarion.

The

[  *5 3

The celebrated Milli wiceck was brought
up at a village fchool in Bohemia,  and
afterwards ftudied counterpoint,  at Prague,  under M.  Seger.

Thebeft violin players in this city,  at
prefent,  are M.  Jofeph Strobach,  Johan
Galli,  of the Amfchlofs,  and Wenzel
Braupner,  who is an admirable folo
player,  Thebeft,  and indeed,  the only
violoncello player in this city,  is M.
Hetes ;  and on the hautbois,  Stieftni is
an excellent performer*

There have been no operas here lately  •, :  however,  German and Sclavonian.
play?  are performed three times a week,
which are,'  at prefen t>  -  the only public
exhibitions at Prague,,  of:  any kind^  The
nobility were now,  for the mo ft part,  out
of town  ;  but in winter,  they are faid to
have great concerts frequently at their
hotels,  and palaces,  chiefly performed by
their own domeftics and vaflals,  who have
learned mufic at country fchools.

fioiisb  *io

—  *  *  *  *  *  #

I quitted

/

[  i6 1

I quitted Prague,  Thu rid ay morning,
September 17th,  after many delays and
plagues,  incident to travellers in a foreign
country ;  among the reft,  my good landlord at the  ©n&Ortlj inftigated the poft>
mafter’s fervant to inlift on my having an
additional horfe to my poft wagon  ;  and
threw all the difficulties in my way,  he
poffibly could,  in hopes of keeping me
longer in his fpunging houfe.  After thefe
fquabbles were over,  and I had run the
gauntlet through the gates and barriers,
where my baggage was narrowly ran-
facked,  by cuftom-houfe inquifitors,  I
got away about feven o'clock.

The firft poll,  to Sdieps,  I travelled
through a mountainous country,  and cold
thick fog;  the fecond,  to Weltrus,
through a good road,  and level,  though
naked country ;  here the weather was
again very hot!  Sour milk,  and black four
bread,  ^3oilipCi*nicfd were thus far,  all the
refrelhments that could be obtained.

At Budin,  the next ftage,  I found a
mufic fchool ;  and heard two of the poor

boys

[  ‘7  ]

boys perform in the ftreet,  one on the
harp,  and the other on the triangles,  tolerably well.

At Lobeschutz,  two or three ftages
from the confines of Saxony,  there
is likewife another fchool,  with more
than a hundred children,  of both fexes,
of which number all learn mufic who
chufe it.  I vifited the church,  which is
fmall and neat,  with a little plain organ
in it here the children,  vocally and
inftrumentally,  perform.  I heard a con-
liderable number of the boys pradlif-
ing on the fiddle,  at fchool,  but in a very
coarfe manner.

I hope I lhall be excufed,  if I here relate
a few of the hardships which I underwent,
in the courfe of my journey through thefe
parts of Germany ;  as the account of them
may put future travellers on their guard,
or,  at leaf:,  prevent furprize,  under fimilar
circumftances.

And firft,  I mud inform them that I
did not meet with a chaife,  or carriage,
Vol.  II.  C of

.  [  *  8 3

of any kind,  that had a top,  or covering.*
to protect paffengers from heat,  cold*
wind,  or rain,  in my whole journey  ;
and fo violent are the jolts,  and fo hard
are the feats of German poft-wagons,
that a man is rather kicked than carried
from one place to another.  Yet,  for
thefe wretched conveyances,  when I travelled in them alone,  extra-pofte ,  as it is
called,  it cod me frequently at the rate
of eighteen pence for each Englifh mile*
fo great is the number of fees and taxes
on this occafion  :  5Bagcnge(£v

SatTtergelfy and Snnfgri&z to hundreds,  but particularly to the

for getting SPfcrbcil/  borfes,  ready in
fomewhat lefs than than three hours

*  For fach of my readers as may be unacquainted with the language of their progenitors,  the Saxons,
it may he neceffary to tranflate the names of the im-

pofts above mentioned,  into their Englifh equiva-

.

lents,  of horfe-hire ,  chaife-hire ,  turnpikes ,  poflilim *
greqfing wheels ,  toll at the gates^  on both Tides each
town,  as well as drink to the oftkr,  and a fwarm of

helpers,

2

[  i9 1

.  *  4 1

But fuch as are provided with a
Comfortable carriage,  with beds,  pro-
vifions,  and a number of fervants,  and
are fo indifferent about expence,  that
they calmly fubmit to all kinds of im-
pofiiions,  as things of courfe,  may be
Utterly ignorant of the fufferings of
Others who dread expence ;  and who are
expofed to all the plagues of bad vehicles,  bad horfes,  bad inns*  and worfe
provifions,  or who are unable to find cither inns or provisions of any kind.

The excellent roads,  inns,  and carriages^
throughout Great Britain,  make an Englishman very unfit to encounter fuch
hardships  ;  but indeed they exceed thofe

Of raoft other countries in Europe fo

>  *

much,  that to travel with a Vittorino ,  a
Procaccio ,  or a Corriere,  through the
worft Italian roads,  is eafe and luxury,

helpers,  who,  in removing baggage,  {teal cordage,
{traps,  and every thing which they can carry off un-
difcovered.

C a

com-*

[  20  ]

compared with what is differed in Germany.

At Lobefchiitz,  which is fituated on
the Elbe,  I quitted the chaife,  and hired
a boat down that river to Drefden,  in
order to efcape two or three terrible
pods,  and indeed podilions,  for every
German is fuch a friend to

furge ry,  that I always wilhed to get out
of his hands  ;  and,  befides perfonal fafety,
the country is fo mountainous,  and road
fo full of holes,  and great loofe dones,
that both carriage and baggage frequently
fuffer.  It was now fix o’clock in the
evening,  when I arrived at the water-
fide 5 I was much didurbed at feeing the
boat,  in which I was to perform the
voyage ;  it was long,  narrow,  and quite
open at the top.  There was draw to
lye on,  but nothing to cover me or my
baggage in cafe of rain  ;  at this time,
indeed,  the weather was hot,  and I
nedled into my draw,  accommodating
myfelf to my circumdrances as well as
I could.

[  21  ]

The boat moved fo very flow,  there being only one waterman,  that it frequently
feemed to ftand ftill.  The weather as yet
continued calm,  but as we proceeded
lower down the river,  through an amazingly wild and rocky country,  there were
frequent waterfalls that made a violent
noife,  and feemed very likely to overfet
our little boat ;  about midnight it grew
totally dark,  and began to rain  $  I protected my head as well as I was able,
with a parapluye,  or fmall umbrella,  but
was very wet elfewhere.

The rain continued till day-break,
after which,  the wind got up,  and became quite furious,  juft in our teeth  ;  in
this kind of hurricane,  the boat could
make no way.  Diftrefs on diftrefs !  the
parapluye ,  my only defence,  was forced
from my hands,  in a violent guft of
wind,  and blown into the river,  where
it inftantly funk  ;  and we tried in vain,
a confiderable time,  to fifli it up :  I was
now wet,  cold,  hungry,  and totally help-

C 3 lefs j

[  22  ]

1 e£s  ;  for the boatman himfelf was in
defpair of ever4 getting to Drefden during
this fcorm  !

At length,  however,  we reached K o-
ningstein,  a village and caftle,  on one
of the higheft rocks in Europe  ;  this was
but half way from Lobefchiifz to Drefden.  I fent my fervant and the boat-man
to try if they could procure a chaife,
a cart,  a wheelbarrow,  pr any thing,  to
carry me to Pirna,  the firft poll-town,
and after keeping me ihivering with cold
and wet,  more than an hour,  they re-?
turned with the news of having pro^
pured a wagon.

Here I got fome bread,  which revived
me a little,  and enabled me to clamber
up this terrible rock,  on foot,  to warm
myfelf ;  which it did as effectually,  before I reached the fummit,  as if I had
had recourfe to a warm bed and fudo-
rific.  After this I had twelve Englifh
miles to Pirna,  through the moft ftony
gnd jumbling road I ever travelled.

At

[  23 j

/

At Pirna,  the place where the king
of Pruffia took all the Saxon troops pri-
foners,  at the beginning of the laft war,
I was detained two hours before I could
get horfes,  for each of which,  by a new
reglement ,  or regulation,  I was obliged
to pay a rixdollar,  inftead of a florin,  the
ufual price.

At Koningftein and Pirna,  there are
fchools for mufic,  though both are in
Saxony.  At Pirna,  there is one for the
children of officers,  and one for thofeof
the poorer fort,  where they learn,  as elfe-
where,  muiic,  with reading and writing.

It would be tirefome to the reader
were I minutely to defcribe all the mufic-
fchools which I entered in my way through
Auftria,  Moravia,  Bohemia,  and Saxony.

I  (hall only fay,  that in general,  the performance of the fcholars in them was
rude and coarfe,  and that perfe&ion
feems never aimed at amongfl:  them.
Metaflafio is of opinion,  that the children
Jearn fo ill in thefe fchools,  as to be ever
,  C 4 after-

[  24  ]

afterwards incorrigible y indeed,  moil;  of
them are intended for fervants,  and mean
employments 3 and as,  in many parts of
Bohemia and Saxony,  the Gothic power
over vaffals flill fubfifls,  thefe people
have feldom any ambition to excel in
mufic,  as they have no opportunities of
mending their condition by it 3 now and
then,  indeed,  a man of genius among
them,  becomes an admirable mufician
whether he will or no 3 but when that
happens,  he generally runs away,  and
fettles in fome other country,  where he
can enjoy the fruit of his talents.

Upon the whole,  however,  it is ma-
nifeft from thefe fchools,  that it is not
nature ,  but cultivation ,  which makes
muiic fo generally underftood by the
-  Germans 3 and it has been faid by an accurate obferver of human nature,  who
has long refided among them,  that u if
innate genius exifts,  Germany cer-
tainly is not the feat of it  ;  though it
<c muft be allowed,  to be that of per*?
feverance and application”.

[  25  ]

The road from Pirna to Drefden Is
good  $  the country on the left hand is
flat,  naked,  and unpleafant to the eye,
when the grain is off the ground ;  but
on the right,  the hills,  covered with vines
and houfes,  all along the banks of the
Elbe,  are delightful.

DRESDEN.

The approach to this city through the
Eledtor’s Gardens,  by a beautiful Chateau ,
or Villa,  and pavilions,  in a very good tafte,
is extremely ftriking  •,  but the city itfelf
has fuffered fo much in the laft war,  that it
is difficult for a flranger to imagine him-
felf near the celebrated capital of Saxony,
even when he fees it from the mo ft
favourable eminence in the neighbourhood,  fo few of it’s once many cloud-
capt towers are left ftanding ;  only
two or three remain intire,  of all the
ftately edifices which formerly enibel*
Jiffied this city  :  fo that here,  as well as at

Prague,

[  26-]

Prague,  the inhabitants are ftijl repairing
the ravages of the Pruffians ;  of whom it
is remarkable,  that though,  during the
laft war,  they ruined many a noble city,
they never took one by a regular fiege.

They were in pofieflion of Drefden
three years :  it was taken from them
during the abfence of the king of Pruflia,
by the prince of Deux-ponts,  who commanded the army of the empire.  In
1760;  that monarch inverted it again,
and did incredible damage by his batteries,  and bombardments,  till it wa$
relieved by general Lacy.

The river Elbe divides the city into
two parts,  which are called the Old and
New Town;  thefe have a communication
by one of the fineft bridges in Europe,
built of white ftone,  and conlifting of
eighteen arches ;  it is 540 feet long,  and 36
broad.  There is a rule obferved in parting
this bridge,  worthy of imitation  ;  one fide
being appropriated to the ufe of thofe who

are

[  *7 3

are going to the OldTown,  and theotherto
thofe who are going to the New ;  io that
each paffenger moves without interruption,  and has his right hand conftantly
next the parapet wall

The firft thing I did,  after my arrival,
was to wait on Mr.  Ofborn,  our minifter
at this cGurt,  who received me fq
well,  and honoured me with fo many
kind offices,  and marks of regard,  during my refidence at Drefden,  that,  to
forget,  or conceal them,  would be the
higheft ingratitude.  /

He was no fooner informed of my
mufical curiofity,  than he made me acquainted with Signor Bezozzi,  the celebrated hautbois player,  in the fervice
of this court ;  and,  upon converfing with
this able performer,  I found that he was
not only poflfefled of an excellent under-
ftanding,  but that he had thought more
profoundly concerning the theory of his
art,  than moil pradtical muficians with
whptn I had converfed,  who had devoted

[  28  ]

ed fo much time to any one inftrument,
as he muft have bellowed upon the haut-
bois,  in order 10 acquire that high degree
of perfection upon it,  to which he has attained.  The father of fignor Bezozzi,  who
is ftill living,  and in the fervice of the
eledtor of Saxony,  is brother to the famous Bezozzis of Turin.

Mr.  Olborn was fo kind,  during this
interview with Signor Bezozzi,  as to defire him to colleCt together in a few days
the bell:  band ofmufical performers which
Drefden could furnilh,  in order to afford me an opportunity of hearing,  in a
concert at his houfe,  whatever that city
could furnifli moft perfect in practical
mufic.

The day after my arrival,  Mr.Ofborn did
me the honour of carrying me to dine
with feveral of the foreign minifters,  at
the houfe of Dr.  Bayley,  a worthy Eng-
lilh phyfician,  no lefs remarkable for.
ikill in his profeffion,  than for hofpita-
lity  :  and in the evening to the prime
i minifies

[  29 J

minifter,  count Sachen,  who occupies the
fir ft floor of the late count Briihl’s palace,
of which his eldeft fon,  the Staroft,  has
only the fecond.  Here we ftaid till the
Electoral family arrived from the country,  to go to the opera.

It was only a burletta,  that was re-
prefented to-night in the little theatre,
which is fmall,  but neat;  it has four
rows of boxes,  nineteen in each.  U Amor e
innocent e was the name of the piece,  of
which Signor Salieri was the compofer.
The mufic was as innocent of defign,  as
the drama and performance  :  nothing in
the leaft feducing or inflammatory was
to be heard or feen  ;  but all was tranquil,  unmeaning,  and as truly foporific
as a purfe’s lullaby.

The beft finger in this placid paftoral,
was Signora Calori,  who,  twelve or fourteen years ago,  when in England,  wanted
only fpirit to make her an excellent
performer ;  for then her voice,  fhake,
and execution,  were good;  her perfon

ele-

t 3°  ]

elegant,  and features regular;  but now^
fame of thefe particulars being rather impaired by time,  her performance pafled
as untioticed as that of the reft,  which
was infipid to a very tirefome degree;

I muft,  however,  mention,  that in the
fecond adt of this opera.  Signora Calori
fung a long bravura fong,  accompanied
on the violin,  obligato ,  by M.  Hunt*  the
principal violinift of this place,  in which
both thefe performers executed many
great difficulties with little effect.  He
has indeed a very ftrong hand,  and clear
tone ;  but neither his tafte nor expref-
fion are of the mod delicate or touching
kind,

Sunday,  20th September.  1 went this
morning to the Fraue?i Kirche,  or great
Lutheran church of our Lady,  placed ori
the fide of a fpacious fquare ;  it is a very
noble and elegant building,  of white
ftone,  with a high dome in the middle  $
this church is fquare without,  but formed into an amphitheatre within.  There

is

[  31 1

is a projection for the communion table*
over which is placed a moft magnificent
organ*  This is the only inftance I can
recollect,  of an organ being placed at the
eaji end of a church.  I had hitherto
only feen it at the weft window,  at the
weft end of the choir,  or on one fide.

The finging here,  with fo fine an in-
ftrument,  has a very ftriking effect.  The
whole congregation,  confifting of near
three thoufand perfons,  fing in tinifon*
melodies almoft as flow as thofe ufed in
our parifh churches  $  but the people
being better muficians here than with
us,  and accuftomed from their infancy
to fing the chief part of the ferviee,  were
better in tune,  and formed one of the
grandeft chorufles I ever heard.

The building is very high and fpaeious,
and there are four galleries in elegant
forms,  one over the other,  between
the columns  :  the feats below are circular,  and all facing the organ and communion table  ;  upon the whole,  this was

©ng

[  32  ]

one of the moft decent and refpedtable
congregations which I had ever feen.

The King of Pruffia,  in his laft bombardment of Drefden,  tried every means
in his power to beat this church,  as well
as the other public buildings,  about the
ears of the inhabitants,  but in vain,  fi*r
the orbicular form of the dome threw
off the balls and fhells,  and totally prevented their effedt :  however,  he fuc-
ceeded better in five or fix other churches,
which he totally demolithed.  This of
our Lady confritutes the great feature
of the city,  like St.  Peter’s at Rome,  and
St.  Paul’s in London.

When I quitted this church,  I ftepped
into the Ele&or’s chapel,  which is a new,
large,  and elegant building,  adorned
with feveral capital paintings,  by Mengs,
and Battoni.  I was too late to hear the
organ,  or any thing but the ordinary ritual of the Romifti church*.

*  The court is of a different religion from the

(j

people,  who are Lutherans.

At

[  33  ]

At noon Mr.  Olborn carried me to
court,  where,  after waiting about an
hour,  in the drawing-room,  among the
ambaffadors and great officers of ft ate,
for the arrival of the Elector,  I had
the.  honour of being prefented to his
highnefs as foon as he entered  :  he was
pleafed to enquire,  <c from whence I
ct came laft?”  I anfwered,  from Vienna;
but Mr.  Ofborn informed his highnefs,
that I had been at Munich,  and had had
the honour of being prefented to the Elec -
trefs dowager,  his mother,  and added
fomething concerning my mufical enquiries  ;  this feemed to awaken curiofity.
“  You lovemufic ?”  “YesSir.”  “Haveypu
“  been in Italy  ?”  and upon my anfwer-
ing in the affirmative,  his Electoral highnefs appeared to be pleafed,  and defirous
of entering into a more particular con-
verfation  ;  but,  throwing his eyes around,
and feeing the foreign minifters,  officers
of  (late,  and a number of ftrangers,  and
people of condition eager for notice,  and
Vol.  II.  D expedl-

/

[  34 3

expecting their  (hare of his attention^
he turned about,  and fpoke two or three
words to prince Belofellky,  the Ruffian
minifter ;  then one or two to the Pruffian
and Auftrian minifters,  after which he
retired.

His Eledioral highnefs was born 1750,
and fucceeded to the electorate,  upon the
death of his father,  in 1763  ;  he is of a
referved difpofition.  Naumann,  his maef-
tro di capella ,  and Gafman,  had informed
me,  that his highnefs was fo good a mu-
lician as to accompany readily,  and in
a mafterly manner,  on the harpfichord,
at fight s but was fo ffiy of playing before company,  that even the Eledtrefs,  his
confort,  had hardly ever heard him.  His
favourite amufement is dancing,  and,  to
oblige him,  his fubjedts and courtiers are
dancing for ever.

When the Elector quitted the drawing-room,  every one haftened up another
pair of ftairs,  to the apartment of the Elec-
trefs.  I had the honour of being pre-

fented

t 35 3

fcnted to her highnefs,  as die paffed by,
in her way to dinner ;  die was a princefs
Palatine of Deuxponts,  and born in
1752;  die is tall and thin,  of a frefh
rofy complexion,  and has ftrong indications of good humour in her countenance.

After dinner,  Mr.  Olborn honoured
me fo far as to carry me with him in a
round of vints to all the foreign mini-
fters,  and to the houfes of feveral other
perfons of diftindion.

There was at this time in Drefden,
an Englidiman,  Mr.  Tunnerftick,  who
was born at Pool,  in Dorfetihire,  but
brought up in France,  and who,  laft
fummer,  in feveral parts of Germany,
had undertaken to perform a very curious
experiment :  it was no lefs,  than to drive
a nail through the brain of a horfe,  by
which he would be,  to all appearance
dead ;  but,  after extracting the nail,  and
pouring into the wound a chemical liquor
prepared by himfelf for that purpofe,

D 2 the

[  36  ]

the horfe in five or fix minutes time,
was to recover fufficiently to carry any
one of the fpedtators.

Mr.  Tunnerftick was at Vienna at the
fame time as myfelf,  and performed before thoufands of fpedlators ;  but the account of the operation feemed to me fo
extraordinary,  that imagining there was
fome quackery or deception in it,  I
would not make one of the number.
However,  upon my arrival at Drefden,
I found that he had repeatedly performed
the fame thing there,  before phyficians,
anatomifts,  and the whole court;  one of
the horfes that had undergone this fingu-
lar operation,  and was recovered,  had been
killed by command of the Elector,  in
order,  by difle&ion to afcertain the fadt,
whether the nail had really penetrated
the brain ;  and it was allowed by all the
phyficians and furgeons of the place,  to
have pafled through the mod dangerous
part of it.  Another horfe that had been
fiffajjinated in the fame barbarous manner,

L 37  ]

ner,  at the fame time and place,  was recovered,  and continued perfectly well,
when I left Drefden.

The Elector wifhing to have this medicine turned to fome ufeful account,  and
not merely employed in healing wounds
made through wanton cruelty,  had afked
this equeftrian operator,  whether it would
be equally efficacious if applied to frefh
wounds in other parts of the body P Dr.
Tunnerftick anfwered in the affirmative;
but afterwards,  pretending to take offence
at fome doubts,  that had been expreffed,
concerning the fuccefs of this fecond experiment,  evaded making it,  and went
away in a pet.

In the evening I was again carried to
court,  where the Ele&oral family,  with
their principal attendants were at cards.
I here had the honour of being prefented
to the  .  Elector’s three brothers ;  prince
Charles Maximilian,  prefumptive heir
to the Ele&orate,  born in 1752;  prince
Anthony  -Clement,  born in 1755,  in-

D 3 tended

[  38  ]

tended for the church  ;  and prince Maximilian Emanuel,  born in 1759.  The
eldeft of thefe princes has the misfortune
to be fo lame,  that he is obliged to
wheel himfelf about in a chair ;  having
not only loft the ufe,  but almoft the
appearance of his legs  ;  he feems,  however,  very intelligent and curious in
converfation.  The other two are far
from robuft.

The next day I was prefented to the
two princefles,  lifters of the Eledtor ;
the eldeft,  though but fifteen,  is formed,
and perfectly well-bred;  fhe honoured
me fo far as to fpeak a confiderable
time to me concerning the Eledtrefs
dowager,  her mother,  whom Mr.  Of-
born had told her,  I had feen frequently at Munich.  The youngeft lifter,  about twelve years of age,  is very
pretty,  and has a  (harp and intelligent
countenance;  fhe fpoke but little,  however that little Was pertinent and ob-
liging.

Drefden

[  39 3

Drefden ftill affords matter of great
amufement to the eye of a Granger,
though much lefs to the ear,  than formerly.  If I quit my mufical remarks
for a moment,  in order to give the reader
an idea of the contents of the Eledtor’s
celebrated pi&ure gallery,  I hope I fhall
be pardoned ;  as the catalogue is but in
few hands,  and the colledfcion is,  with*
out doubt,  the firft,  and moft confider-
able in Europe,  both for the number
and excellence of the paintings it contains  *  .

The collection was begun by Au-
guflus II.  but was greatly augmented by
his fucceffor,  Auguftus the III.  who,
in 1745,  purchafed,  for fixty thoufand
pounds,  the whole gallery of the duke of
Modena,  in which were all the paintings
of Correggio,  as well as moft of thofe by

*  The colle&ion of prints,  commonly called,
the Drefden gallery,  was never finifhed,  and only
contains engravings from a fmall number of thefe
pictures,

D 4 Ani-

[  40  ]

Anibal Carrach,  which enrich the pre-
fent collection  ;  and,  in 1748,  he added
to it the imperial gallery of Prague,
which he purchafed of the Emprefs queen ;
this collection he acquired at a very eafy

■.*:  W ri jfj I G-S'V  •

rate,  having had fixty-eight capital pictures of eminent mailers for fixty thou-
fand florins,  which is lefs than fix thoufand
pounds fterling ;  but,  even fince that
time,  the collection has been augmented
by fuch a number of different purchafes,
that many hundred excellent pictures are
placed againft the wainfcot of the gallery three or four deep,  for want of
room to hang them up  ;  and though the
printed catalogue makes the outward
gallery contain only eight hundred and
thirty,  and the interiour three hundred
and fifty-feven,  I was a£Tured by the Cicerone,  or Interpreter,  that the EleCtor
was in pofleffion of two thoufand original paintings,  and two thoufand four
hundred copies.

In

[  4i  ]

In the cabinet of crayon paintings,
there are no lefs than a hundred and
fifty- feven portraits by Rofalba,  among
which,  is that of Fauftina,  when young,
and in the fervice of this court.  She was
very handfome when this was painted,
or was very much flattered ;  there is
likewife in this cabinet,  a portrait,  in
crayons,  by Mengs,  of Mingotti,  when
young,  with a mufic paper in her hand  ;
and if the refemblance was exadt,  fhe
was then nearer a beauty,  than it is now
eafy to imagine her ever to have been;
fhe is here painted in youth,  plumpnefs,
and with a very expreflive countenance.

There are only two Raphaels,  in this
immenfe collection  ;  the St.  George is the
beft  ;  the other,  an afcenfion of the Virgin,  with the Bambino in her arms,  and
popeSextusQuintusandSt.  Barb,  in theadt
of adoration,  has fuffered greatly in the
colouring;  the heads,  however,  are
charming.  There is not one piece by
Domenichini in the gallery,  though

there

E 42  ]

there are eleven capital works by Guido  ;
eleven by Albano,  twelve by Guercino,
feventeen by Paul Veronefe,  ten by Ani-
bal Carracci,  feventeen by Vandyke,
four by Parmegiano,  thirteen by Nic.
Poufiin,  eleven by Spagnolet,  thirty-
nine by Rubens,  and fifteen by Titian,
with three by Leonardo da Vinci.

But the mod precious pieces of this
colle&ion,  are the Correggios,  of which
charming painter,  there are fix capital
pidtures.

Firft.  The Virgin fitting on a throne,
with Jefus on her knee;  fhe is furround-
ed by St.  John the Baptift,  St.  Catherine,  St.  Anthony of Padua,  and St.
Francis d'Aflifi,  all as big as the life;  this
is in his firfl manner;  he has written
his name on it :  the colouring is lefs
bright than in his fucceeding works ;
but the elegance and grace of the figures
are very llriking.

Second.  The St .  George ,  exquifite in
colouring and keeping.

*

Third,

[  43 1

Third.  The Magdalen which is beautiful and delicate beyond defcription.

Fourth.  The Nativity ,  known by the
name of the Night-piece of Correggio;
all the light comes from the child  :  it is
the mo ft perfedl of his works.  The
King of Pruffia flopped half an hour to
admire it,  when he firft entered Dref-
den.  The Ele&refs Queen offered it to
him,  but he declined taking it ;  however,  he had a fine copy made of it by
Dietrich,  at a very high price.

Fifth.  The St.  Sebajiian ,  a large and
capital pidure,  in which the Virgin and
Child are in glory,  furrounded by a choir
of angels  :  below are St.  Sebaftian,  St,
Geminiano,  and other figures.

Sixth.  A Portrait of Coreggio’s phy-
fician  ;  and fuppofed to be the only portrait that he ever painted.

There are in the cabinet,  copies of the
capital pidures of Raphael and Correggio,
in water colours,  and in enamel,  uncommonly large,  by Mengs,  father,  fon,

6 and

f 44  ]

and daughter,  which are delicious.  To
examine and defcribe this vaft collection,
minutely,  would require ten years,  and
ten folios.

I had the honour of dining,  to-day,
with a large company,  at Mr.  Ofborn’s.
After dinner,  Signor Bezozzi,  and a
band of muficians,  which he had provided,  were ready to begin a concert in
a different part of the houfe from that
where the company had dined.  During
the performance,  all the foreign minifters
came in and out,  and,  at times,  the rooms
were full of the firfl people in Drefden.

The concert was opened by a fym-
phony of Halfe  ;  after which,  a folo on
the violin by M.  Hunt,  who,  as was before obferved,  has a clear tone,  and ftrong
hand;  but he wants high finifhing,  and
plainly difcovered that he was not much
accuftomed to folo playing  :  the mufic
which he performed was by Tartini.

The next piece was a German flute
concerto,  played by M.  Gotfel.  I did

not

i

[  45  ]

not much like the compofition,  there
was noife in the choruffes,  and,  in the folo
parts,  there were repetitions of old and common paffages ;  but it was not compofed
by the performer,  who manifeded,  in the
courfe of it,  great execution,  a clear and
fweet tone,  always even,  and perfectly
in tune ;  though not fo full above the
middle D as below it.

After this,  Signor Bezozzi played an
extremely difficult concerto on the haut-
bois,  in a very pleafing and maderly manner  ;  yet I mud own that the lefs one
thinks of Fifcher,  the more one likes
this performer.  However,  I tried to
difcriminate,  and to difcover in what
each differed from the other  :  and
fird,  Fifcher feems to me the mod
natural,  pleafing,  and original writer
of the two,  for the inftrument,  and is
the mod certain of his reed which,  whether from being in lefs condant practice,  or from the greater difficulty of the
paffages,  I know not,  more frequently

fails

t 4«  ]

fails Bezozzi in rapid divifions,  than
Fifcher:  however,  Bezozzi’s mefja di voce,
or fwell,  is prodigious 3 indeed,  he continues to augment the force of a tone fo
much,  and fo long,  that it is hardly pof-
fible not to fear for his lungs.

His tafle and ear are exceedingly delicate and refined 3 and he feems to poffefs
a happy and peculiar faculty of tempering a continued tone to different bafes,
according to their feveral relations :  upon
the whole,  his performance is fo capital,
that a hearer muft be extremely fafti-
dious not to receive from it a great degree
of pleafure.

The fecond part of the concert began
with an admirable fymphony of Vanhall*
produced in thofe happy moments of ef-
fervefcence,  when his reafon was lefs
powerful than his feeling.

After this,  a folo of Nardini,  by M.
Hunt,  which he executed correctly 3 but
the compofition was full of repetitions
of pafiages,  neither very new nor intending  >

1

C 47 3

terefting ;  and thefe were not meliorated
by any thing remarkable in the tafte or
expreflion of the performer.

This folo was fucceeded by another
concerto on the German flute,  by M.
Gotfel,  which he played much better,
and,  indeed,  it was a much better com-
pofition than the former.

Signor Bezozzi performed,  after this,
a new concerto on the hautbois,  which
was very graceful and ingenious.  The
Allegro was more rapid,  and of a ftill
more difficult execution,  than that in his
preceding piece.  He exerted himfelf
very much in this performance,  which
ended with a pleafing rondeau,  and left
the company in great good humour.  He
afterwards was prevailed on,  though not
without difficulty,  to play,  by way of
bonne louche ,  Fifcher’s well-known rondeau minuet,  which he had performed
here fo frequently,  and with fuch ap-
plaufe,  that I had been affured he made
more of it than the author himfelf ;  but

I can-

[  48  ]

I cannot lay that his prefent performance
of it convinced me of the truth of this
affertion.  However,  after being accuf-
tomed to the exquiiite manner in which
Mr.  Fifcher has played it in England,  it
is no fmall praife to fay,  that I heard
Signor Bezozzi perform it with great
pleafure.

On Tuefday the 22d September.  At
nine o’clock in the morning,  I went to
the Frauen Kir che ,  to hear the organ
played by M.  Hunger,  the organifl,  who
met me there,  by appointment.  This
inftrument,  of which the largeft pipe in
the pedals,  is thirty-two feet long,  was
made by old Silbermann,  of Neuburg  :
it is one of the bed:  works of this celebrated builder,  and was condru&ed about
twenty-three years ago.  There are forty-
eight flops,  three fets of keys,  in the
manual,  which extend from double D,
in the bafe,  to D in alt ;  and two odtaves
in the pedals  ;  there is likewife a fpring
of communication,  by which the three

fets

[  49 J

fets of keys may be played together,  in.
order to augment the force of the chorus ;
but this renders the touch fo heavy,  that
each key requires a foot,  infteadof a finger,
to prefs it down.

The reed flops in this inftrument are
but feven in number,  fo that the imitations and changes are very few.  The
beft folo flops it contains are the viol
da gamba,  bafloon,  vox hum aha,  trumpet,  fchalmo,  tremulant,  and 0d)tt!C=
blUlg  :  this lafl,  as the name implies,  is
to imitate a clofe  (hake.

M.  Hunger poffefles neither great fancy
nor finger:  but his performance wasmafter-
ly,  and manifefted a perfect knowledge
of his inftrument.

This being the firft organ which I had
met with,  that was built by Silbermanri,  I
entered the infide cafe,  and found the work
ftrong,  neat,  and well difpofed  :  it is remarkable that to fo immeufe a machine,
there are but five bellows.

On Sundavs and feftivals,  the fchool
fingers frequently perform in this church

Vol.  II.  E Can -

[  5°  3

Cantatas ,  which in Germany is a different word for anthems ;  at other times the
whole congregation lings in unifon,  accompanied only by this organ,  of which
the chorus,  affifted,  perhaps,  by the form of
the building,  is the moil noble I ever heard.

From hence I went to the great theatre,
where the ferious opera ufed to be exhibited.  It was built in 1706,  by Auguftus
the fecond  >  but was afterwards decorated,
and the ftage much enlarged,  by Auguftus
the third.

I was extremely curious to fee this

j

celebrated fcene of adtion,  where general
Haffe ,  and his well- difciplined troops,
had made fo many glorious campaigns,
and acquired fuch laurels ;  all his bed:
works having been exprefsly compofed,
as fome of Metaftado’s dramas were
written,  for its ufe  *.

*  Italy is very defirous of adopting Hafle for her
fon.  Count Algarotti,  in an epiftle addreffed to
Auguftus the third,  fpeaking of this theatre,  fays,
Ivi cF Italia Farmonla divina
Ne’  bei concenti fuoi yaria,  e concorde

Rifuona

i

C 5*  3

No money was ever taken for admiffion
into this theatre,  which is nearly as large
as that at Milan.  It has five rows of
boxes,  thirty in each,  is of an oval form,
like the theatres of Italy,  and has an or-
cheftra capable of containing a hundred
performers.

In the year 1755,  the late king of Poland had in his fervice,  for this theatre,
ten fopratio voices,  four contralto ,  three
tenors,  and four hafes.  Among thefe,
were Fauflina,  Mingotti,  Pilaia,  Monti-
cellij Pozzi,  Anibali,  Amorevoli,  and
Campagnari.  The inflrumental performers were of the firft clafs,  and more
numerous than thofe of any other court
in Europe;  but,  now,  not above fix or

Rifuona cTHafTe fotto all*  agil dito,

Che gli affetti del cuor,  del cuor Signore,

Irrita,  e molce a un fbl toccar di lira,

E pieta,  com’  ei vuol,  fdegno,  od amore
NuovoTimoteo in fen d’Augufto infpira.

Op.  del Conte Algarotti ,  tom.  viii.

E 2 eight

[  52  ]

eight of thefe are to be found at Dresden

It was from the difperfion of this celebrated band,  at the beginning of the
laft war,  that almoft every great city of
Europe,  and London among the reft,  acquired feveral exquifite and favourite performers.

At prefent,  this theatre is fhut up,  for
ceconomical reafons,  no ufe having been
made of it fince the marriage of the prefent Elector,  three years ago ;  at which
time two operas were performed in
it,  one fet by Haffe,  and another by
Naumann,  the prefent chapel mafter of
this court.

The opera houfe being in the neighbourhood of the pi&ure gallery,  I could
not refill:  the defire of entering it again,

*  Signor Bezozzi was fo obliging as to furnifh
me with a lift of the court and chapel muficians,
now at Drefden  ;  but,  by comparing it with that
publifhed by Marpurg,  in 1756,  I find only the two
Bezozzis,  Binder,  Gotfel,  Hunt,  Neruda,  and
Adam,  remaining of the old corps.

4

in

L S3  ]

in order once more to contemplate the
divine Coreggios ;  but in the way to
them,  through the interior gallery,  my
eye was caught by the magic of Battoni’s
Magdalen,  and Pordenone’s queen of Cy-
.prus,  both of which are exquifitely beau^
tiful.  The Night-Piece of Correggio
ftruck me more now than before;  though
the three figures on the left fide feem
ill drawn,  and one of them is too much
hidden  :  however,  the light from the
Child is thrown on them fo admirably,
•and the expreffion of the third of thefe
figures is fo natural,  her eyes blinking,
and hand held up to keep off the glare,
that a little defeat in the drawing
may be well excufed.  The figures in
the air,  are truly divine  ;  and the Virgin
and Child feem fuperior to any thing I
ever faw expreffed on canvafs.

The little Magdalen is all beauty,  foft-
nefs,  expreffion,  and grace.  The frame is
ornamented with precious flones ;  and the
late duke of Modena prized this piece fo

E 3 much.

t 54 1

much,  that he never quitted his capital
without taking it with him,  nor could
fleep if it was not in his chamber.---  ■
But,  as I had little time to fpare from my
muiical purfuits,  for thefe picforefque enjoyments,  after this flight mention of

-S  ■  >  s.  *

them,  I fhall return to bufinefs.

Mr.  Ofborn,  whofe friendly offices
fupplied me every hour with opportunities of gratifying my curiofity,  had engaged M.  Binder,  the court organift,  tq
meet me this afternoon,  at the Elector’s
chapel,  where there is a dill larger organ than that at the Frauen Kirche .

This indrument was begun by old
Silbermann,  who dying before it was
dnifhed,  his nephew of Strafburg was
called to Drefden to put the laft hand to
it.  I entered the infide cafe of this as
well as of the other organ,  found the
work well finifhed,  very ingenioufly
arranged,  and the pipes fo highly po-
lifhed,  that they had the appearance of
diver,  even when nearly examined.

The

[  ss  ]

The chorus is amazingly rich and
powerful  ;  but fo great is the echo,  and
long the continuance of the found in this
building,  particularly when empty,  that
no melody can be heard diftindtly.

M.  Binder,  the organift,  was a fcholar
of the famous Hebenftreit,  inventor of
the Pant ale one,  an inftrument much celebrated in the beginning of this century,
in the practice of which M.  Binder fpent
all his youth  ;  but though he applied to
the organ and harpfichord late in life,  he is
a very able performer on both.  He played
three or four fugues in a very full and
mafterly manner,  making great ufe of
the pedals.  I did not indeed find him
pofleffed of much fancy  ;  but in the German full manner of playing,  there is not
much opportunity of  (hewing it.  To
ufe the pedals of thefe huge inftruments
much,  at the fame time as two hands
are fully employed on the ftiff and heavy
manuals,  is a very laborious bufinefs.

E 4  *  The

[  £6 3

The multiplicity of flops in this organ*
amounting to 54,  only augments noife,
and adds to the weight of the touch.
The vox humana is bad ;  and there are
very few folo flops that are agreeable ;
no fwell has ever been heard cf in an
organ at Drefden ;  and the echos to common fops,  are all that can be called
fweet,  by themfelves.  The great merit
of all the German organs that I had yet
feen,  was in the richnefs and power of
the chorus  ;  indeed little elfe is wanted,
for voluntaries,  like thofe in our parifli

churches,  are unneceffarv,  where there
'  «✓  .  >

is tinging;  as are imitative flops to play
retornellos ,  where the real inftruments
abound.

Signor Bczozzl and M.  Hunger,  with
feveral other maders were in the chapel
to hear M.  Binder;  who,  when he had
done,  was in as violent a heat with fatigue
and exertion,  as if he had run eight or
ten miles,  full-fpeed,  over ploughed
|ands in the dog~days0

At

[  57 1

At night I went to M.  Binder’s houfe

o

to fee the ruins of the famous Pantale one.
This inflrument,  and the performance
upon it,  at Paris,  in 2705,  gave birth
to a very ingenious little work,  under
the title of Dialogue fur la Mufique des
Aneiens ,  by the Abbe Chateauneuf :  the
inventor went by the name of his inflrument ever after  ;  it is more than nine
feet long,  and had,  when in order,  186
firings of catgut.  The tone was produced
by two baguettes ,  or flicks,  like the
dulcimer;  it mufc have been extremely
difficult to the performer,  but feems capable of great effedts.  The firings were
now almoft all broken,  the prefent Elector will not be at the charge of fur-
niffiing new ones,  though it had ever
been thought a court inflrument in former reigns,  and was kept in order at
the expence of the prince.  M.  Binder
lamented,  that he could not poffibly afford to firing it himfelf,  as it was an inftrument

t 58  ]

ftrumenfc upon which he had formerly
employed fo much of his time.

Every one here is in the utmofi indigence;  this poor man has a fmall nominal penfion,  as court organift,  but it is
ill-paid ;  and moft of the nobility and
gentry are too much impoverifhed,  to be
able to afford to learn,  or to let their
children learn mufic.

The Saxons of old,  fo remarkable for
patience,  induftry,  and probity,  are now
reduced to knavery and chicane,  beyond
the inhabitants of any other country,
Drefden is at prefent a melancholy re**
fidence ;  from being the feat of the Mu-
fes,  and habitation of pleafure,  it is now
only a dwelling for beggary,  theft,
and wretchednefs.  No fociety among
the natives can be fupported ;  all muft
retrench ;  the court is obliged to abandon genius and talents,  and is,  in turn,
abandoned by them !

Except the wretched comic opera,
there is no one fpedtacle,  but that of mi-

fery.

t 59 3

fery,  to be feen at Drefden 5 no guiriguettc*
no public diverfion in the city or fuburbs,
for the people,  and not a boat or veftel
either of pleafure or buflnefs can be def-
cried on the river Elbe,  which is here
nearly as wide as the Thames at London-
b ridge  % .

The horfes in this Electorate have had
no corn allowed them,  nor the foldiers
powder for their hair,  thefe three years  \
but though every fpecies of  ©economy
feems now put in practice,  yet,  it is
thought with little efteCt,  as to reftoring
the inhabitants and  (late to their ancient
affluence and fplendor.

During the reign of Auguftus the Hid
this city was regarded by the reft of Eu-

*  The Saxon traffic up this fine river,  is faid
to be ruined by fome commercial difputes with
Auftria ;  and down it,  by the king of Pruffia
not permitting a fingle velTel from Drefden to pafs
by his fortrefs at Magdeburg;  fo that befides paying
heavy duties,  all goods muft be removed into
Pruffian veflels before they are fullered to proceed
to Hamburg.

I

rope*

r 60  ]

rope,  as the Athens of modern times ;  ail
the arts,  but particularly,  thofe of mufic,
poetry,  and painting,  were loved and che-
riihed by that prince,  with a zeal and
munificence,  greater than can be found
in the brighteft period of ancient hiftory;
but,  perhaps,  fome part of the late and
prefent diftreffes of this country,  have
originated in this exceflive magnificence.

The gardens of the late minifter,  count
Briihl,  which are fituated on the banks
of the Elbe,  and open to the public,
command a delightful profpedl of that
river,  of its hilly and fertile banks,  towards Pirna,  and of the New Town,
and beautiful bridge,  leading to it.

A moil magnificent and elegant temple in thefe gardens was reduced to a  *
heap of rubbifh,  in which it ftill lies,
during the Pruffian bombardment ;  and
the Saxons accufe his Pruffian majefty of
carrying perfonal refentment againft their
minifter fo far,  as to order his engineer
to point his artillery at the temple and

other

[  6i  ]

other buildings,  as well as ftatues in
thefe gardens.  However this may have
been,  not a ftreet of this once charming city has recovered the devaftations
of the laft war.

The prefent Elector is a great encou-
rager of honefty and good morals in his
fubjedts ;  and has manifefted himfelf to be
fufceptibleof the tender feelings of humanity,  by the abolition of racks and tortures,  to which criminals were expofed in
his dominions,  daring former reigns.

The late minifter,  count Briihl,  left three
fons at his deceafe,  of whom the eldefi:
only,  known by the name of the Starojl
now refidesat Drefden.  I had the honour of
being prefented to this nobleman,  whofe

v

figure and appearance are the moft perfect and pleafing I ever faw ;  he is faid
to be very accomplifhed,  and a great
mufician  ;  he condefcended to defire Mr.

*  Starojl is a Polifh title given to the lord,
and principal judge of a JlaroJly ,  or fief.  Count
Brufil,  is ftaroft of Warfcw,  ftarojla Warfzawfki.

Olborn

[  62  ]  .

Ofborn to bring me with him to one
of his country refidences,  to fee his
books,  hear mufic,  and converfe about
it at leifure  ;  but the talks I had af-
figned myfelf would allow of no fuch
tranquil enjoyment.

However,  I remained one day longer
at Drefden than I intended,  at the ob
liging inflance of his excellency count
Sachen,  minifter for foreign affairs,  who
did me the honour to invite me in the
moft preffing manner to dine with him.
This nobleman gives a public dinner
once a week to the foreign minifters,
to perfons of condition,  and to flrangers,
in a truly hofpitable and fplendid manner;  and though his appointment is not
great,  fo confiderable is his private fortune,  that he is able to fupport the dignity of his office at his own expence,
without aggravating the prefent miferies
of the people,  by appropriating the public money,  either to enrich himfelf or
maintain magnificence.

The

['63 1

The counts entertainment was one of
the moft fumptuous I ever faw ;  the
company confifted of near forty perfons,
of both fexes,  moft of whom were of
high rank and condition  ;  each courfe
was ferved on the moft elegant plate,
and beautiful Drefden china, —  But to
return to mufic.

I have had frequent occafion,  in the
courfe of my journey,  to mention the

or finging boys of the mu-
Jic fchool ,  commonly called poor fcholars  ;
and during my refidence at Drefden,  I
procured all the information I could concerning the origin of this inftitution,  and
the following is the refult of my enquiries.

When the Roman catholic religion
was the only one profeffed in this country,  the clergy,  who officiated in cathedrals and collegiate churches,  ufed to employ boys,  that had good voices,  to fing
part of the divine fervice in the choirs,
in nearly the fame manner as the cho-

rifters.

[  64  ]

riders,  in Englifh cathedrals,  fing at pre-
fent.  In recompenfe,  the clergy main^
tained and educated thefe boys,  and prepared all fuch as had a literary genius for
the priefthood.

The change of religion propounded to
the Saxons,  by Martyn Luther,  though
iupported by powerful protestors,  and
forwarded by favourable circumftances,
had great obdacles to furmount  :  the
chief part of the people of the city of
Drelden were fo far from having a pro-
penfity to embrace the new preached
doftrine,  that they obftinaiely refufed to
give into any religious innovations.  This
is fo true,  that the cuftom of  {hutting
the city gates,  during divine fervice,
which cuftom is obferved to this day,
had its rife from the people’s diflike to
the new liturgy  :  for the citizens having
been obferved to go in great numbers to
walk in the fields while the public prayers were performing,  rather than affift at
them,  the gates were ordered to be  {hut,

to

to prevent the inhabitants from going
out,  and they were forced to church by
the foldiers then in garrifon.  At pre-
fent,  the army is never made ufe of for
that purpofe,  for the Saxons are now as
ftrongly attached to the tenets of Luther,
as they were then to the Roman catholic
religion.

Upon the fecularization of biihopricks,
the fuppreffion of abbies,  and the alienation of their lands,  the finging boys
loft the only means of fubfiftance that
they had.  But the clergy of the new,
religion foon began to employ thefe
voices,  by making them fing canticles in
the ftreets,  which dwelt on the impropriety of fuch articles,  in the Roman catholic religion,  as were to be rejected,
and extolled the tenets they began to
preach,  in order to accuftom and familiarize,  by degrees,  the ears of the people
to Luther’s religious fentiments,  and infen fibly to gain them univerfal approbation.

Vox..  II.

F

It

[  «  I

It is generally thought,  that thefe
fcholars or linging boys contributed greatly to the rapid progrefs of the Lutheran
religion in Saxony.  There being no
fixed foundation to provide for the continual fupport of thefe fingers,  fuch
families as favoured the reformation,
readily confented to contribute towards it,  by voluntary gifts ;  and
when the people became all Protef-
tants,  thefe diferetionary charities en-
creafed.  The method prescribed to them
to follow and obferve,  is this :  the town
is divided into certain wards  •>  when they
begin to fing,  the firft of the month,  for
inftance,  before the doors of the principal ward,  they fing the fecond of the
month at the next ;  and fo on,  till they
have fucceffively made their finging
rounds over all the wards of the city,
which they commence again in a perpetual rotation.

Befides the ufual turn,  it is cuftomary
with families of diftindtion,  and feme

citizens

/

[  6;  3

citizens who maintain the ftri&eft Ap*
pearance of devotion,  to appoint thefe
fcholars to ling before their houfes once
or twice in the week,  for which they
receive extraordinary payment,  and although that is difcretionary,  yet it is fo
far regulated,  that no one ihould give
them lefs than two graft hen ,  or four
pence for every canticle they ling.  Some
families employ them to fing gay genial
airs on birth-days and name-days  ;  and
they are frequently engaged to fing
mournful ditties and dirgies at night,
with lighted torches in their hands,  before the houfes of the rich and opulent,
when they die;  and they accompany the
funerals to the place of interrment,  fing*
ing the nenice ,  in the fame manner the
prceficce ,  or weeping women,  at the buri*
als of the ancients,  ufed to do.

It is to be obferved,  that befides the
laborious way of finging in the ftreets
during the whole winter*  in a fevere
climate,  they are obliged to fing in different churches every Sunday and fefti-

F 2 V2I.

/

[  68  ]

val.  They are generally divided into
troops of fixteen or eighteen together,
and what they colled:  during the whole
week,  is put into a common box,  which
is opened every Saturday by the redor
of the fchool,  and what remains over
and above their neceflary expences,  he
divides into fmall fums among them,  in
proportion to their mufical merit ;  for
when he that leads the vocal band gets a
dollar to his  (hare,  the next that excels
gets but a florin,  or two thirds of a dollar.
Thefe  {hares are not entrufted into their
own hands immediately,  but are kept
for them by the redor,  till they have
alfo finifhed their claflics,  and then,  at
their quitting the fchool,  they refpec-
tively receive their favings.

Thofe who know Latin and Greek
tolerably well,  become fchool- mafters
in the different parifhes throughout
Saxony ;  but they muft be able to play
upon the organ,  becaufe every parifh
church,  even the fmalleft,  in Saxony,

is

i

I 69  ]

is furniflied with an organ,  and a fet of
fuch indruments as are ufually employed
in church-mufic.

Thofe,  among the Tinging fcholars,  who
are found to have the bed genius,  and the
greated difpofition to the learned profef-
fions,  are fent either to the univerfity of
Leipfic,  or to that of Wittemberg,  where
they are edablifhed,  as vacancies happen,
on the foundation,  in thofe feminaries of
literature called Convert orium,  where they
are maintained without any expence to
their friends.

The two univerfities fupport above 300
of thefe poor dudents ;  when they have
finifhed the common courfe of philofo-
phy,  they apply themfelves,  as their different inclinations lead them,  either
to divinity,  law,  or phyfic,  and often become very ufeful in different
branches of learning.  Thofe who discover a particular genius and propenfity
to mufic,  confine themfelves entirely to
that art,  as a regular profedion.

Even

[  7°  3

Even at the common boarding-fchools
of this city,  children are taught to fing
hymns in parts.  The fchool fingers
who frequent the ftreets,  not excepting
the little boys,  wear a black undertaker-like uniform,  and large grizzle
wigs  ;  and as every houfe pays annually
fomething towards their fupport,  the am-
baffadors generally give them a crown a
quarter,  for not finging at their doors.

Mufical airs,  known by the name of
Tolonoifes,  are very much in  -vogue at
Drefden,  as well as in many other parts
of Saxony  ;  and it is probable,  that this
was brought about during the long in*
tercourfe between the Poles and Saxons,
during the reigns of Auguftus the fecond
and third.

The JlroJil ,  which is a mufical inftru-
ment,  made of pieces of glafs of different
lengths,  initead of wood or metal,  and
is played on by flicks,  like the Jticcado,
is much ufed by the common people
throughout Saxony,

M.  Ho-

[  7*  3

M.  Homilius,  cantor of the Kreuz -
kirche in this city,  is a great conirapun-
tid,  and church -compofer,  and in high
edeem throughout Germany ;  and M.
Adam,  a veteran mufician,  one of the few
remaining performers in the celebrated
opera-band,  under the direction of Signor Haffe,  has edablifhed a great reputation by his compofition of the mufic
to the dances performed at this opera in
its mod flouridling date.

L E I P S I C.

This city has not yet recovered its rigorous treatment during the lad war 5
and its celebrated fair,  which ufed to be
the rendezvous of the rich,  the gay,  and
the indudrious citizens of every quarter
of the globe,  as well as an aflembly of
the fovereign princes and nobility of all
the northern parts of Europe,  feems now
dwindled into a common mart,  or quarterly fair,  fuch as is held in a fmall Eng-
lifh market-town.

F 4

M.  Ebe-

C 72  ]

M.  Ebeling,  of Hamburg,  a man of
letters,  and an extremely well-informed
dilettante in mufic,  on the publication of my account of The prefent State
of Mujic in France and Italy ,  had voluntarily favoured me with feveral very intelligent letters,  and ufeful communications,  concerning the mufical Hiftory of
Germany;  and,  upon his being informed
of my intention to travel through that
country,  he carried his zeal fo far as to
write to feveral of his friends,  and to able
profeffors in the different cities of my
route,  prefling them,  in the moft urgent
manner,  to afford me all poflible information and afiiftance in my enterprize.

On coming to Leipfic,  I experienced
the good effedls of his friendfhip,  in the
reception I met with from M.  Hiller,
mufic- director of this city,  whom he
had prepared,  by letter,  for my arrival.
This gentleman,  who is not only an eminent writer on the fubjedt of mufic,  but
the firft and moft popular compofer of

comic

C 73 3

comic operas in the German language,
was indefatigable in his endeavours to
ferve me the whole time I remained at
Leipfic.

1 expe&ed to receive much information
concerning mufic and muficians from
M.  Breitkopf,  the mod ccnfiderable vender of mufical compofitions in Europe,
whom I vifited immediately on my arrival
in this city ;  but I found him rather
taciturn than communicative.  He claims
the honour of being the inventor of
mufical types,  and feems entitled to it,
as he has,  for thirteen or fourteen years*
furnifhed his own country,  as well as
other parts of Europe,  with a prodigir
ous quantity of mufic from his prefs,
of all kinds,  by the greatest compofers
of the prefent age,  of which he prints
catalogues quarterly  ;  he feems likewife
to have been the firft who gave to his
catalogues an index in notes,  containing
the fubjebls,  or two or three firft bars,
of the feveral pieces in each mufical work ;

by

[  74 1

by which a reader is enabled to difcover
not only whether he is in pofleffion of
an entire book,  but of any part of it’s
contents.

Befides printed copies of works of the
moft celebrated compofers of all nations,
he fells in manufcript,  at a reafonable
price,  lingle pieces of any work already
printed,  as well as of innumerable others
which have never been publifhed.

M.  Hiller,  who hardly ever quitted
me from my arrival to my departure,  was
fo obliging,  the firft evening,  as to take
me with him into his box at the comic opera.  This city,  before the laft
war,  ufed to find conftant employment
for a company of comedians  ;  but fince
that time no one has been long ftatio-
nary there  :  the prefent company was
juft arrived from Berlin,  where they
had been during eighteen months.  The
piece they reprefented this night,  was
the Deferteur9 in German;  but to M.
Gretry’s original mufic.  The perfor-

mers

mers did not charm me,  either by their
finging or acting  $  all were out of tune,
out of time,  and vulgar.  I hardly ever
was more tired  ;  but indeed,  after travelling all night in an open wagon,  a
better performance would with difficulty
have kept me awake.  However,  from
hence,  I went home with M.  Hiller,
whofe great good nature and intelligence,
furnilhed a much better and more inte-
refting entertainment than the theatre
had done.

The next morning,  September 25,  M.
Hiller was fo obliging as to condufl:  me
to the play-houfe,  where one of his comic operas was rehearfing The overture,  and one fong,  had been performed
when we entered,  but all was begun
again.  I found this mufic very natural
and pleafing,  and deferving of much better performers than the prefent Leipfic
company can boaft;  for,  to fay the truth,
the finging here is as vulgar and ordinary
as our common finging in England,

among

[  76  ]

among thofe who have neither had the
advantage of being taught,  nor of hearing good finging.  There is juft the fame
pert fnap in taking the high notes,  which
they do with a kind of beat,  and very
loud,  inftead of a mejfa di voce,  or fweil.
The inftrumental parts went ill ;  but as
this was the firft rehearfal,  they might
have been difciplined into good order,  if
M.  Hiller had chofen to bounce and play
the tyrant a little  ;  for it is a melancholy
reflection to make,  that few compofers
are well treated by an orcheftra,  till they
have firft ufed the performers roughly,
and made themfelves formidable.

I endeavoured to account for the bad
manner of finging which prevails fo generally among the performers on the
Leipfic ftage,  and I could fuggeft nothing
that was fo likely to explain it,  as the
diftance which this town is at prefent
from an Italian opera,  which being ufual-
Jy fupplied by Italians,  is an excellent
fchool for finging,  to the inhabitants of

I 77 3

places where operas are conftantly performed  :  as at Manheim,  Ludwiglbourg,
Munich,  Vienna,  and Drefden,  where I
found the common finging very pleafing,
the exprefllon natural,  and the carriage
of the voice far from vicious  $  in all thefe

places,  Italian operas have long been ef-

$

tabliflied,  which have certainly had an
effedt on the public tafte,  and manner of
finging.  :

At the latter end of the laft century,
and in the beginning of this,  Italian
operas very frequently made apart of the
public amufements at Leipfic,  during the
three annual fairs,  at New Year’s tide,
Eafter,  and Michaelmas  :  and fo great
was the paffion for thefe exhibitions,  in
1703,  that fix new operas were performed there within the compafs of that year.
In 1720,  thefe reprefentations were discontinued  ;  and I do not find any memorial of their having been revived fince
that time.

When

6

[  7§  ]

When the rehearfal of M.  Hiller’s
burletta was over,  he was fo kind as to
attend me through the town,  in fearch of
books.  It feems,  by the catalogues pub-
lifhed in this city,  at the two great fairs
of Eafter and Michaelmas,  that more
books are printed in Germany,  than in
any other country of Europe  :  and perhaps Leipfic has a greater  {hare in thefe
publications,  than any other city of Germany.

In a fecond vilit to Ereitkopf,  I mounted his printing office,  and found a great
number of prelfes at work,  of various
kinds,  for his publications are not confined to mufic.  Among the feveral quef-
tions which my curiofity put to the workmen,  one was,  how many different characters were ufed for letter-prefs,  and
what proportion they bore in their number to the types ufed in printing  ?  and I
was much furprifed to find,  that the dif-
.  ferent characters employed in the mufic-
prefs,  were upwards of three hundred,
8 and

[  79  ]

and that there were not more than one
hundred ufed in common printing.

I entered fome of the principal churches
here,  and found them in general very-
fine,  and very dirty There are,  however,  in feveral of them good organs,  particularly in the reformed church ;  but I
heard no great player in any one of them,
nor did I find,  upon enquiry,  that this
city is at prefent in pofieflion of many
performers of the firft clafs,  upon any
inftrument.  It muftnot be inferred from
hence,  that Leipfic has been lefs the re-
fidence of genius than other places,  as
it would not be difficult to trace a fuc-
ceffion of able mafters with which it has

N

*  In Charles the fifth’s time,  before religious disputes were adjufted,  a kind of truce was agreed on
between the catholics and reformers,  under the title
of Interim ,  which ftipulated,  that the ornaments and
veftments of the church,  as well as fome of the ceremonies,  fhould remain in Jiatu quo>  till,  by a general
council,  religious peace was finally concluded j and
this Interim was afterwards adopted in fome of the
'  free cities,  where the churches,  though ftill in the
pofieflion of Lutherans,  retain all the ancient ornaments of the Roman catholic times.

been

I 80  ]

been fupplied for near a century paft>
but the mufical hiftory of this city can
furnifh no circumftance more interefting
to the lovers of harmony,  than its having
been the refidence of the great Sebaftian
Bach,  father of the prefent eminent mu-
licians of that name,  from the year 1723,
to his death in 1754.

This celebrated mafter,  who was fuc-
ceflively cantor,  organift,  and mufic-di-
redor,  at Leipfic,  was bom at Eifenach,
in Saxony,  1685.  There has been a
conftant fucceffion of great muficians in
his family,  for more than two hundred
years.  All the mufical writers of Germany,  for thefe laft fifty years,  have given
teftimony to his abilities :  M.  Quantz,
in his Art of Playing the Flute ,  written
during the life of Sebaftian Bach,  fays*
that this admirable mufician had brought
organ-playing to the higheft degree of
perfedion  ;  and M.  Marpurg,  in his
Treatife upon Fugues ,  published foon
after his death,  in fpeaking of him,  fays,

that

[  *«  ]

that he united in himfelf the talents of
many great men  :  deep feience,  a fertile
and lively genius,  an eafy and natural
tafte,  and the mod powerful hand that
can be imagined.

The challenge which he received,  and
accepted,  from the celebrated French or-
ganift,  Marchand,  at Drefden,  is well
known in Germany.  Upon the arrival of
Marchand in that city,  after he had van-
quifhed all the organ players of France and
Italy,  he offered to play,  extempore,  with
any German whom the King of Poland
could prevail upon to enter the lifts againft
him  ;  no one at Drefden had the courage
to encounter fo fuccefsful a champion,  but
an exprefs being fent to Sebaftian Bach,
who was at that time a young man,  and
refiding at Weymar*,  he came away immediately,  and,  like another David,
vanquifhed this Goliah.  It muft not,
however,  be concluded from hence,  that

*  Sebaftian Bach refided at Weymar,  from the;
year 1708,  to 1717.

Vol.  II.  G Mar-

[  82  ]

Marchand v/as a mean performer 3 if that
had been the cafe,  the victory over him
would have added nothing to the fame of
his competitor.  It was an honour to
Pompey that he was conquered byCsefar,
and to Marchand to be only vanquilhed
by Bach.

Befides many excellent compofitions
for the church,  this author produced
Ricercari ,  confiding of preludes,  and
fugues,  for the organ,  upon two,  three,
and four fubjedts ;  in Modo redlo  &  Con-
trario,  and in everyone of the twenty-four
keys.  All the prefent organ-players of
Germany are formed upon his fchool,  as
mod of thofe on the harpfichord,  clavichord^  and piano forte are upon that of
his fon,  the admirable Carl.  Phil.  Emanuel Bach ;  fo long known by the name
of Bach of Berlin,  but now mufic-di-
redtor at Hamburg.

As Leipfic was the lad confiderable
town in Saxony to which I extended my
mufical enquiries,  it feems here the place
to remark,  that this Electorate has been

1

ex-

[  s3  ]

extremely fertile in muficians of extraordinary genius and abilities :  for it has
given birth to Keifer,  Handel,  the Bach
family,  to Hade,  and to Graun.

*  %  -x-

i

A word or two more of travelling in
Germany,  and I have done with deferip-
tion and complaints.

The road to knowledge is rough and
rugged in every country,  but in none
more than Germany.

— - Alpeftre,  feofeefo,  erto e felvaggio,

Degno d’un alma audace.

After fuffering the ufual hardfhips of
bad fare,  bad roads,  bad carriages,  and
bad horfes,  for two days and a night,
in my way from Leipfic to Berlin  ;  and
being obliged,  during that time,  to wait
three or four hours,  either in my open
vehicle,  or the open air,  at each poft-
houfe,  while horfes were fought and fed
with draw,  wheels greafed,  and inevit-  '
able fquabbles about the number of

G 2 horfes

[  84  ]

horfes which I was to have,  were adjuft-
eft,  I arrived at Schwarmuth,  within
one poft of Berlin.

When a traveller comes to a poft-houfe,
in this part of the world,  with two horfes,
he is rudely teafed to go out with threes
and if he arrive with three,  four are forced
upon him,  if poffible,  at his departure,  and
fo on,  crefcendo ,  let the firft number be
what it will j and all this is tranfaCted on
the part of the poft-mafter and his people*
with an infolence and brutality fo determined,  that reafoning and remonftrating
operate no otherwife than in rendering
them more obftinate and malevolent.  It
feems a thing of neceftity,  for poftilions*
in every part of the world,  to be greater
brutes than thofe they drive  :  here,  it is
the cafe,  par excellence y and fo infatiable
in their demands and expectations,  are
thefe fworn foes to man and beaft,
that I have frequently tried to part in
peace and good humour with them,  by
more than doubling their ftated and ac-

cuftomed

C  »5 3

cuftomed fees,  but in vain:  each claim
was a hydra.

I quitted Schwarmuth at feven o’clock
in the evening,  in hopes of getting to
Berlin before midnight.  The weather was
now extremely difagreeable  ;  rain was
coming on,  with a cold and furious north
wind full in my face.  The wagon with
which I had been furnifhed,  at the laffc
poft-houfe,  was tho worft and mod:  de-
fencelefs that I had hitherto mounted ;
before nine o’clock,  it rained violently,  and became fo dark,  that the
poftilion loft his way,  and defcended
from his place,  in the front of the wagon,  in order to feel for it with his
hands ;  but being unable to diftinguifti
any track of a carriage,  he mounted again,
and,  in driving on,  at a venture,  got into
a bog,  on a bleak and barren heath,
where we were ftuck faft,  and obliged
to remain from eleven o’clock at night,
till near fix the next morning ;  when
day-light enabled us to difentangle the

G 3 horfes

f  *6  ]

horfes and carriage,  and difcover the road
to the capital of Brandenburg,  It had
never ceafed raining and blowing the
whole night ;  the cold was intenfe ;  and
nothing could be more forlorn than
my condition,

B E R L I N.

When I arrived at the gates of this
city,  about nine o’clock in the morning.
Sept.  28th,  I had hopes that I fhould
have been fuffered to pals peaceably to
an inn,  having received a pafiport at
Trauenbritzen,  the firft Pruffian town I
entered on the Saxony fide,  where I had
Submitted to a thorough rummage of my
baggage,  at the perfuafion of the cuftom-
houfe officers,  who had allured me that
it would prevent all future trouble upon
entering Berlin.  But this was merely to
levy fees upon me,  for,  notwithstanding
my pafiport,  I was  (topped three quarters
of an hour at the barrier,  before I was
taken into thecuftodyof a centinel  ;  who

mount-

mounting my poit-wagon,  with his muf-
ket on his fhou'lder,  and bayonet fixed,
conducted me,  like a prifoner,  through
the principal fireets of the city,  to the
cuftom-houfe.  Here I was detained in

i

the yard more than two hours,  {hivering
with cold,  in all my wet garments,  while
every thing was taken out of my trunk
and writing box,  and examined as cu-
rioufly as if I had juft arrived at Dover,
from the capital of France.

As I had long wilhed to vifit the capital of a prince,  no lefs renowned for his
protection and cultivation of the liberal
arts,  than for his military  {kill and he-
roifm ;  fo I was impatient to begin my

mufical enquiries in a place where operas

/

had long been eftablifhed,  and where
both the theory and practice of mufic
had been more profoundly treated than
elfewhere,  by profeflbrs of great and acknowledged abilities,  who are  {Fill living;
and who have published the refult of
their long experience and fuperior  {kill
in treatifes which are regarded through-

G 4'  out

[  88  ]

out Germany as claffical.  Among thefe,
The Art of Playing the Piute ,  by M.
Quantz  ;  The Art of Playing upon Keyefl
InfrumentSy by M.  C.  P.  E.  Bach  ;  The
Art of Singing ,  by M.  Agricola  ;  the numerous and well -written diflertations,
Pra&icaf Hiftorical,  and Critical ,  by M.
Marpurg;  Mufcallnfitutesy by M.  Kirn-
berger  ;  and The Theory of Polite Arts ,  by
M.  Sulzer,  ftand foremoft  *.

*  The original titles of the above books are as
follow :  3ol)ann 3?oacl)tm jQuan£en£,  Sonigl.
^reufnjcben ftammerniuficug,  OJerfucl)  einer
milting Die S(otetraDer|icr 511 fpielen*  23erlm
1 7f2*  Q}eifucl)  uber Die voaf>re 2Irt ba^  (£fat>ter
6U fpiefcti/  oon Gar!  $M)thp  €manuel 53atl).  25ev*

lift*  this work is in two vols.  of which the
fir ft was publifhed in 1753,  anc^  fecond in

1762.  SInleitung  $ur  ©ingfunfl cm3 Deni 3taiid*
tufc^en,  mi t  (Frlduterungen unD gufd^en Don 3of>*
griebr.  21gricofa.  2$crlm 175-7*  93?arpurg3
Slnleiftmg jur  ©ingecompofition.  23evL 175-8*
Traite fur la Fugue.  *J)cmDbuc[)  bep bem  ©encrat
baflfe/  unD Der Sonipojl'tion*  1762*  n.  k.  SDie
5?un(f De3 reinen  ©a£e3 in Der SEftufif.  23erl.
1771*  Slilgenuine tymit Der fc&onen 5?unfle,
Don 3of>.  @eo.  ©uljer/  SQiifglieD Der 5?onig(*
SJcaDemie Der SGifTenfcDaften in 58er(in.  1771*

My

[  89  ]

My zeal for the buiinefs in which I
had embarked,  was not fo much cooled
by the fufferings of the night,  as to prevent me from haftening,  as foon as I had
obtained my liberty at the cuftom-houfe,
to Mr.  Harris,  his majefty’s envoy extraordinary at the court of Berlin.  Mr.
Harris received me with the utmoft po-
litenefs,  ^and honoured me in the kindeft
manner with his counfel concerning the
mod expedient methods to be purfued in
making my enquiries.

In the afternoon I vifited M.  Nicolai,
an eminent and learned bookfeller,  who
had been previoufly apprifed of my journey,  and its objeCt,  by my zealous friend,
M.  Ebeling,  of Hamburg;  fo that he expected my arrival,  and entered upon bu-
finefs diredtly.  After a long conver-
fation,  concerning the date of mufic in
Berlin,  M.  Nicolai was fo obliging as
to conduCt me to M.  Agricola,  the pre-
fent compofer of his Pruffian majedy’s
ferious opera;  a dation which he has held
2

ever

[  9°  ]

ever fince the death of the late chapel-
mafter,  Graun.

John Frederic Agricola was born at Do-
bitzen,  a village near Altenburg,  in Upper
Saxony,  in the year 1720.  His mother
was a near relation of the late Mr*  Handel,  and in correfpondence with him till
the time of his death,  M.  Agricola was
educated atLeipfic,  and ftudied mufic there,
under the famous Sebaftian Bach.  He has
refided at Berlin ever fince the year 1741  ;
and in 1751 he was taken into his Pruf-
lian majefty’s fervice,  under the title of
*f)Ofccompomft,  or compofer to the court.
His life has been very a&ive in the exercife
of his profefiion,  and the number of his
compofitionSjbothfor the church andftage,
are a proof of the fertility of his genius.

He is more corpulent than Jomelli,  or
than his relation Handel ever was.  He
received me very politely;  and though
he was indifpofed,  and had juft been
blooded,  he obligingly fate down to a
fine piano forte,  which I was defirous of

hear-

[  9i 1

hearing,  and touched it in a truly great
flyle.  He is regarded as the heft organ-
player in Berlin,  and the bed:  Tinging
mafter in Germany.  He Shewed me
Tome of his compositions for the church,
in Tcore,  which were very maiterly  ;  but
he faid that it was a Style of writing
which was but little cultivated,  at Berlin,  as the King will not hear it.  Indeed,  I had been told before my arrival
that his PruiTian majefty carries his prejudice againfl this kind of mufic To far,
that when he hears of any compofer
having written an anthem,  or oratorio,
he fancies his taSte is contaminated by
it,  and fays,  of his other productions,
every moment.  Oh!  this fmells of the church .

From hence I went to the French
theatre,  more to fee the building than
to hear Tinging.  However,  as aCtors,  the
company is excellent :  they were performing le Mercure Galant ;  and though
I had feen this piece at Paris,  more than
once,  I was very much pleafed with it

now.

now.  For Petite Piece ,  the comic opera
of the Cadi Dupe-,  was faid and fung.  The
piece itfelf has very little mufical merit,
and the performers of to-night contrived
to make that little,  ftili lefs.

Sept.  29th.  This morning M.  Nicolai did me the favour of introducing me to
M.  Jofeph Benda,  brother of the celebrated violin-player of that name,  who
is mafter of his Pruffian majefty’s band.
This able mufician was fo obliging as to
play to me a very pleafing folo,  compofed
by his brother,  which he executed with
great neatnefs and delicacy.  He was accompanied by his fon,  under whofe direction there is an Academia of Dilettanti ,
every Friday night,  to which I had the
honour of an invitation.

Upon quitting M.  Benda,  we called
on M.  Lindner,  an eminent performer
on the German flute,  and fcholar of M.
Quantz.  His Pruflian majefty’s attach*-
ment to this inftrument has rendered the
practice of it very general at Berlin.  M.

Lindner

C 93 J

Lindner invited me to another concert
that was to be on the enfuing Sunday,
to which he was fo kind as to promife
to condud me*

After this I made a fecond vifit to M*
Agricola,  accompanied fiill by my obliging friend M.  Nicolai,  who dedicated
this whole day to my fervice.  I was
now prefented to Signora Agricola,  whole
name before marriage,  was,  Benedetta E-
milia Molteni ;  Ihe is now near fifty
years of age,  and yet fings fongs of bravura,  with amazing rapidity.  The thin-
nefs of fome parts of her voice,  difcovers
the lofs of youth,  but yet Ihe has fine
remains of a great finger;  her compafs
extends from A in the bafe,  to D in alt;
and Ihe has a mod perfed ihake and intonation  ;  Hie was born at Modena,  and
had inllrudions from all the great masters of her time ;  among whom ihe
numbers Porpora,  Haffe,  and Salinbeni.
She has been upwards of thirty years fettled
at Berlin,  and in the fervice of the court.

ihe

[  94 3

fhe now performs the fecond woman's
partin his Pruffian majefty’s ferious opera.
During this vifit,  (lie was fo obliging as
to favour me with three airs in different
ftyles,  a Graziofo ,  an Allegro ,  and an A-
dagio ,  all compofed by M.  Agricola.

From hence we went to the great
opera-houfe this theatre is infulated in
a large fquare,  in which there are more
magnificent buildings than ever I faw,  at
one glance,  in any city of Europe.  It
was conftrudled by his prefent majefly
foon after his coming to the crown.  The
principal front has two entrances ;  one
level with the ground,  and the other by
a grand double efcalier;  this front is decorated with fix Corinthian pillars,  with
their entablature entire,  fupporting a
pediment ornamented with reliefs ,  and
with this infcription upoa it.

FRIDERICUS REX,

APOLL1NI ET MUSIS.

This front is decorated with a confider-
able number of ftatues of poets,  and

dramatic

[  95 3

dramatic actors,  which are placed in
niches.  The two fides are conftrudied
in the fame manner,  except that there
are no pillars.

A confiderable part of the front of
/this edifice forms a hall,  in which the
court has a repaft on ridotta days ;  the
reft is for the theatre,  which,  befides a
vaft pit,  has four rows of boxes,  thirteen in each,  and thefe feverally contain
thirty perfons.  It is one of the wideft
theatres I ever faw,  though it feems rather fhort in proportion.

The orcheftra is very large,  and arranged after that at Drefden.  The band
confjfts of about 50 performers,  among
whom are.

Two compofers.

The concert-mafter.

Eleven violins.

Five violoncellos.

Two double bafes.

Two harpfichord-players.

One harp.

Four

C ft  ]

Four tenors,

c:  -

Four flutes.

Four hautboys*

'4

Four bafioons,  and

Two French horns.

The moft eminent profeflors in his
majefty’s fervice,  are  :

M*  John Johachim Quantz,  compofer
and chamber-mufician in ordinary to the
king no lefs  .celebrated for his performance and compofitions,  than for having
had the honour of inftrudinghis Pruflian
majefty on the German flute.  But few
of his Concertos for that inftrument are
*  publiihed ;  however,  he has compofed
more than three hundred for the ufe of
his royal fcholar.

M.  Joh.  Frederic Agricola,  compofer
and diredor of the opera,  mentioned
above ;  his name is as well known in Germany by his writings on the fubjed of
mufic,  as by his compofitions*

M.  Francis Benda,  mufician,  \n ordinary to his majefty,  and mafter of his

concert

•I

t 97 3

concert,  has acquired a great reputation
in his profefiion,  not only by his ex-
preffive manner of playing the violin,  but
by his graceful and  *affed:ing compofi-
tions for that inftrument.

H is Pruffian majefty’s favourite o-
peras,  are thofe of his late maejiro-
di capella ,  Charles Henry*  Graun,  to
which he is fo much attached,  as to
hear,  unwillingly,  thofe of any other
mafter  ;  and the overtures and concer-

7 _  -

tos for violins of his brother,  the concert mafter,  M.  Joh.  Gottlib Graun,  but
lately deceafed,  are ftill in high reputation at Berlin,  though not of the firft
clafs for tafte or invention.

The chief fingers of this ferious opera,
in the female parts,  are Mademoifelle
Schmeling,  Signora Agricola,  and Signora Gafparini,  feventy~two years of age;
a time of life,  when nature feldom allows
us any other voice,  than that of complaint,  or fecond childhood.

Vol.  II.  H

The

The principal male parts are performed
by Signor Ant.  Uberti Porporino,  whofc
voice is a Contralto  \  he has been more
than twenty years,  in the fervice of his
Pruffian majefty,  and is extremely admired for his tafte and expreffion,  particularly in Tinging adagios.  And Signor
Carlo Concialini,  a foprano ;  his voice is
feeble,  but extremely fweet,  and his
manner of tinging flow movements is delicate and touching.

Betides the compofers and performers
juft mentioned,  the theatre royal employs twenty-four chorus fingers,  a bal-
let-mafter,  a great number of dancers of
both fexes,  and the Abate Landi,  as
poet.

The king being at the whole expence of
this opera ;  the entrance is gratis ,  fo that
any one,  who is decently dreffed,  may have
admiflion into the pit.  The firft row of
boxes is fet apart for the royal family
and nobility  $  the boxes that are even

with the pit,  and thofe of the fecond
and third row,  are appropriated to the
ufe of the’  minifters of ftate,  foreign mi-
nifters,  and perfons of rank,  who have
offices about the court  ;  and a ftranger of
diftindtion,  by application to the baron
^olnitz,  chamberlain and dire&or of
public fpedtacles,  is fure of being accom-
tnodated with a place in the theatre*  according to his rank.

The performance of the opera begins
at fix o’clock  ;  the king,  with the princes,
and his attendants,  are placed in the
pit,  clofe to the orcheftra  •,  the queen,
the princefies,  and other ladies of dif-
tindtion,  fit in the front boxes ;  her ma-
jefty is fainted at her entrance into the
theatre,  and at her departure thenceby two
bands of trumpets and kettle drums,  placed
one on each fide the houfe,  in the upper

row of boxes
%

*  This fpecies of muilc,  as it is the moft
ancient,  fo it feems to be that for which the

H 2

The

t 100  ]

The king always  (lands behind the
maejiro di capella ,  in fight of the fcore,
which he frequently looks at,  and indeed
performs the part of dir eel or -general here,
as much as of generalijjimo in the field.

Such is the prefent Jiate of the opera
at Berlin,  and hiftory muft  (hew what
it has been in times paft.  I  (hall only
juft mention,  that from the death of
Frederic the Firft,  in 1713,  till the year
1742,  there were no operas performed
in this capital.  Soon before the accef-
lion of his prefent majefty to the throne,
in 1740,  a new theatre was conftrudted,
which was opened on the birth-day of
the queen-mother,  in 1742  ;  at which

northern inhabitants of Europe have,  in fpite of
new fafhions and refinements in mufic,  the greateft
paflion.  There is fcarce a fovereign prince in Germany,  who thinks he can dine comfortably,  or
with proper dignity,  without a flourifh of drums
and trumpets  ;  and this love of noife,  perhaps firft
introduced mufic at our city entertainments,  at my
lord mayor’s feaft,  and at the feaft of every mayor
in the kingdom.

-  time

[ .  ioi  ]

time,  the mod able German inflrumen-
tal performers,  Italian lingers,  and French
dancers,  were engaged,  and mufic faw
herfelf eftablilhed in more than her former
fplendor.

Everfince this period,  operas have been

exhibited in the theatre royal at each

*

carnival with fpirit and magnificence;
the brilliancy of their fuccefs has fome-
what varied according to the talents of
the vocal performers,  which have been
in general,  very numerous,  and very emi-

H

nent ;  however,  one of the mod fhining
periods in the mufical annals of Berlin
feems to have been in 1752,  when Ca-
reftini and the Aftrua performed the two
principal parts.  At this time,  the whole
band of vocal and inftrumental performers was the mod:  fplendid in Europe ;
among the latter,  we find the celebrated
names of Bach,  Benda,  Czarth,  Graun,
Hefife,  Quantz,  and Richter.

A confiderable part of this afternoon
was fpent in vifiting fuch churches,  as

H 3 are

[  502  ]

&re the moft remarkable for good organs*
In general,  I found the organs of Berlin
large,  coarfe,  and crowded with noify
flops,  which,  if they had been in tune,
would have produced no pleafing effe&s$

v  .  ‘  »  ,  l

but as it was,  fuch a number of dilfo-
nant and ill-voiced pipes,  more tortured
that tickled my ears.

Before I left England,  M,  Snetsler

’  *•  \

had told me,  that 1 fhould doubtlefs

...  ?  (  >

find ] wells in Berlin organs,  though he
was not certain that this improvement,
which was Englifh,  had been adopted
in other places on the continent  $  for
Mr.  Handel,  feveral years ago,  had de~
fired him to deferibe,  in writing,  the
manner in which the fwell wTas pro-

.  ,  r

duced,  that he might fend it to a particular friend in Berlin,  who very much
wiflied to introduce it there.

But I enquired in vain of mufical peo-
pie in that city,  whether they knew of
any fuch machine,  as a fwell,  worked
by pedals,  in any of their organs ;  no fuch

contri-

f I03 1

contrivance had ever been heard of,  and
it was difficult to explain it.

At the garrifcn church built in 1722,  .
which is an oblong Square,  fupported by

1

maffive pillars,  there are eight doors,

♦

and over each there is a black eagle,
which is the crefi of the Pruffian arms,
taking his flight,  towards a golden fun,
with a thunder-bolt in his talons ;  and
above,  is this inscription,  non foli cedet .

I found a large organ in this church,
built by Joachim Wagner;  it. is remarkable for compafs,  having 50 keys in the
manuals,  and for its number of pipes,
amounting to 3220  ;  but ftill more fo,
for the ornaments and machinery of the

cafe,  which are in the old Teutonic tafte,

•%

and extremely curious.

At each wing is a kettle drum,  which
is beat by an Angel placed behind it,
whofe motion the organift regulates by
a pedal ;  at the top of the pyramid,  or
fiddle column of pipes,  there are two

H 4 fig ures.

[  104  ]

figures,  reprefenting Fame,  fpreading
their wings,  when the drums are beat,
and raifing them as high as the top of
the pyramid  $  each of thefe figure founds
a trumpet,  and then takes its flight.

There are likewife two funs,  which
move to the found of cymbals,  and the
wind obliges them to crofs the clouds ;
during which time,  two eagles take
their flight,  as naturally as if they were
alive.

1 was much more pleafed with four
monumental pidlures,  which are placed
in the fame church,  than with this eccle^
fiaftical puppet-fhe*w.  They were pre->
fents from M.  Bernard Rode,  hiftory-?
painter,  and member of the royal academy,  who in 1762,  painted them in
honour of four Pruflian heroes,  who feH
in battle during the lad war.

I.  Marfhal Schwerin,  dying,  and em^
bracing Victory,  by whom he is crowned.
The colours are leaning againft him,

which

[  >o5 3

which he had in his hand when he was
llain at the battle of Prague,  in 1757*.

II.  The monument of general Win-
terfeld,  upon which the hiftorical Mufe
is feated,  and writing his hiftory.

III.  Marffial Keith,  whofe monument
Glory is covering with laurels^

IV.  Major Kleift,  the celebrated
poet,  killed at Kunnerfdorf,  upon whofe
urn Friendship is weeping.  Beneath the
monument,  his fword and lyre are entwined in a laurel wreath.

This evening I had the pleafure of
being introduced to the acquaintance of
M.  Marpurg,  a perfon who had fo long

'  1

laboured in the fame vineyard as myfelf,
that he was a perfedt judge of the difficulties I had to encounter.  Nothing
could be more flattering than the manner
in which he received me.  I found him

*  There is a marble ftatue of this brave general,  lately erected at Berlin,  in the fquare called
Place Guillawnej where the foldiers are daily exer-
cifed ;  an animating fight to military men.

X

to

[  io6  ]  ,  .  -|

to be a man of the world ;  polite,  accef-
fible,  and communicative.  His mufical
writings may juflly be faid to furpafs,  in
number and utility,  thofe of any one
author who has treated the fubjed.  He
was perhaps the firffc German theorifl
that could patiently be read by perfons
of tafle ;  fo addided were former writers to prolixity and pedantry.

This author,  befides the works which
I have already mentioned,  p.  88.  has
publifhed five volumes of EfTays and
DiiTertations towards the hiflory and
pradice of mufic ;  A Hiflory of Ancient Mufic;  and a great number of
correct and pleafing competitions of various kinds,  both vocal and inflrqmental.

It is a misfortune to mufic,  that he has

;

now wholly quitted his former fludies,
being invefted,  by bis majefty,  with the
title of counfellor of war,  and the office
of diredor of the royal lottery.

His Hiflory of Mufic was intended to
be general,  and to comprife modern times ;

an4

i

[  *97  ]

and he had projected a continuation of
Walther’s Mufical Didionary,  and feve-

•  ~  I  .*  •  ;  •  <  v  *

ral other interefting works to lovers of
mufic but he is prevented from exe-
cuting thefe defigns,  by his new office.

i  '  '  n

He kindly undertook to furniffi me
with feveral books and papers,  of which
I was in fearch  :  and offered,  in a mod

>  -  j  •  '  -  *  '  :  t  *

obliging manner,  to condud me to fuch

i  -  *

perfons and things,  as the nature of my
enquiries rendered the mod effential for

«k

me to fee,  during my refidence at Berlin.

After this vifit,  I went home with my

■>  *

guide,  M.  Nicolai.  He had provided a

:  *

fmall concert of dilettanti ,  his friends,  with

«  i  ’  *  !

whom I fpent a very agreeable evening.

*  ‘  t  -  e f  '  i

Wednefday,  30th.  This morning was
fixed upon,  by previous arrangement,  for
vifiting mademoifelle Schmeling.  How
much my expedations had been raifed
concerning this performer,  the reader
will be enabled to judge,  by the follow-
ing extrad of a letter which I had received from a very intelligent mufical

[  ioS  ]

correfpondent,  in Germany,  before my
departure from England.

4C At Berlin there is now a German
tc opera finger,  that aftonifhes every one
44 who hears her.  People who have been
44 a long time in Italy,  and who have for-
44 merly heard Fauftina,  Cuzzoni,  and
44 Aftrua,  allure me that fhe furpafTes
44 them all.  Indeed,  when I heard her
44 at Leipfic,  two years ago,  I was en-
44 raptured.  I never knew a voice fo
44 powerful and fo fw'eet,  at the fame
44 time  :  (he could do with it juft what
44 fhe pleafed.  She lings from G to E
44 in altifjimoy with the greateft eafe and
44 force,  and both her portamento di voce,
44 and her volubility are,  in my opinion,
44 unrivalled ;  but when 1 heard her,  Ihe
44 feemed to like nothing but difficult
44 mufic.  She fung at fight,  what very
44 good players could not play,  at fight,
44 on the violin  ;  and nothing was too
44 difficult to her execution,  which was
44 eafy and neat.  But,  after this,  fhe re-

44 fined

[  .  109  ]

<€  fined her tafte,  infomuch that fhe was
**  able to perform the part of  ^Tijbe ,  in
€t Haffe’s opera,  which requires fimpli-
“  city and expreffion,  more than volu-
“  bility of throat ;  and in this fhe per-
li fedly fucceeded,  as Agricola,  the
“  tranflator of Toffs Arte del Canto ,
“  and our beft finging matter in Ger-
“  many,  allures me.  The King of Pruf-
€t fia,  a great connoifleur,  was attonifhed
“  at it.  Her name is Schmeling,  fhe is
about twenty-four years of age,  and
“  was in England,  when a child,  where
“  fhe played the violin ;  but fhe quitted
c(  that inftrument,  and became a finger,
t€  by the advice of Englifh ladies,  who
**  difliked a female fidler

This account had been corroborated
fince my arrival on the continent,  where
I had been informed that his Pruflian
majefty was at firft,  with difficulty,  prevailed on to hear mademoifeile Schme-
ling  :  “  A German finger  ?  I fhould as
4‘  foon expert to receive pleafurefrom the

4(  neigh-

[  lio 3

^  neighing of my horfe.”  However*
after he had heard her fing one fong,  his
majefty is faid to have fought among his
manufcript mufic for the moft difficult
airs in his collection,  in order to try her
powers,  as much as to gratify his own
ear ;  but fhe executed,  at fight ,  whatever he commanded her to perform,  in
all ftyles,  as well as if  (he had praCtifed
each of thefe compofitioris during jief
whole life,

Mademoifelle Schmeling received me
very politely and unaffectedly.  She is
Ihort,  and not handfome,  but is far from
having any thing difagreeable in her countenance  $  on the contrary,  there is a
ftrong expreffion of good nature im prefixed upon it,  which renders her addrefs
very engaging.  Her teeth are irregular,
and projeCt too much,  yet,  altogether,
her youth and fmiles taken into the account,  the is rather agreeable in face and
figure.

I found

[  III j

I found that fhe had preferved her
Bngliffi ;  indeed  (lie fometimes wanted
words,  but,  having learned it very young,
the pronunciation of thofe which occurred,  was perfectly correft.  She was
fo obliging as to ling,  at my requeft,
very foon after my entrance.  She began with a very difficult aria di bravura,  by Traetta,  which I had heard
before at Mingotti’s.  She fung it admirably,  and fully anfwered the great
ideas which I had formed of her abilities,
in every thing but her voice,  which was
a little cloudy,  and not quite fo powerful as I expe&ed*  However,  fhe had a
flight cold and cough,  and complained of
indifpofition  :  but with all this,  her voice
was fweetly toned,  and fhe fung perfedly
well in tune.  She has an excellent  (hake,
a good expreffion,  and facility of executing and articulating rapid and difficult divifions,  that is aftonifhing.

Her fecond fong was a Lar ghetto,  by
Schwanenberg,  of Brunfwick,  which was
very pretty in itfelf ;  but fhe made it

truly

[  112  ]

truly delightful by her tafte and expref-
fion  :  file was by no means lavifh of
graces,  but thofe fbe ufed,  were perfectly fuited to the ftyle of the mufic,  and
idea of the poet.

After this,  (he fung an Andante ,  in
the part which fhe had to practife for
the enfuing carnival,  in Graun Merope;
and in this acquitted herfelf with great

tafte,  expreffion,  and propriety.

/  0

His Pruffian rnajefty very feldom re-
lid es at Berlin,  except during the carnival,  which generally commences about
the middle of December,  and terminates
with the month of January.

When his majefty and the court arrive
at Berlin,  every day of the week,  except
Saturday,  which is a day of reft,  has its
particular amufements allotted to it,  according to the following regulations.

On Sunday ,  the Queen has a great
court.  On Monday ,  there is an opera.

( Tuefday ,  a ridotta,  or mafqued ball,  in
the opera-houfe.  .  Wednefday1 a French

play.

/

[  3

play,  at the court theatre.  Thurfday,  the
princefs dowager has a drawing-room j
and on Friday ,  there is another opera.

At other times,  his majefty's ufual refid e nee is at Sans-Souci,  a palace near
Potfdam,  five German miles from Berlin,  where he is attended by his muficians
in ordinary,  who are there in monthly
waiting,  by turns.

The celebrity of his majefly’s performance on the German flute,  had long
excited in me a ftrong defire to hear him
play,  and I had now,  in concert with
feveral friends,  taken the moft likely
meafures for gratifying that wifh.  I was
furnifhed with letters to feveral perfons
of diftindion at Potfdam,  who were en-
treated to ufe their utmofl:  endeavours to

*■  \  ■'  1 k t 1 i'  '•  t?  /

■  9  *'■  ■  *  ,  i  ■*  *  *  ■  „  .>

procure me the honour of being admitted into the royal apartments,  at Sans-
Souci,  during the performance of his
majefty’s ufual evening concert.

As the court was now at Sans-Souci,
and feveral of the mod eminent mufi-
Vol.  II.  I

cians

[  H4  ]

clans of the King’s band were there in
waiting,  I was impatient to go thither,
in hopes of fatisfying my curiofity relative to his majefty’s mufical abilities.  I
therefore fet off for Potfdam this morning,  immediately after quitting made-
moifelle Schmeling,  and taking leave of
my worthy friend,  M.  Nicolai,  who,  unluckily for me,  was going to Leipfic
fair  $  which I regarded as a real lofs to
myfelf,  for his knowledge of mufic,  and
mufical people,  joined to his zeal for mjr
fervice,  rendered him a moll agreeable
and ufeful acquaintance.

POTSDAM.

The road from Berlin hither,  is
through a deep running fand,  like the
worft parts of Norfolk and Suffolk,  where
there are no turnpikes,  till within a few
miles of the town ;  and then it is through
a wild foreft of fir-trees,  with lakes frequently in fight.  Upon a nearer approach,  there is a fine opening on the

left

*  t

[  ”5  ]

left hand,  to a very large piece of water,
and a beautiful view of the town,  in
which three towers,  of the fame fize and
fhape,  only appear,  but thefe are elegant.  The reft:  of the way is through a
wood,  cut into walks and rides,  which
interfed each other,  and lead to different
towns and villas.

The examination at the gates of this
city,  is the mofl:  minute and curious,
both in going in,  and out,  which I have
ever experienced in my travels  ;  it could
not be more rigorous at the poftern of a

town befieged.  Name,  character,  whence,

#

where,  when,  to whom recommended,
bufinefs,  ftay,  and feveral other particulars,  were demanded,  to which the an-
fwers were all written down.

However,  a ftranger,  upon his entrance
into this city,  is made fome amends,  by
the variety and fplendor of new objeds,
for the bad road,  and difficulty of ad-
miffion,  which he has previoufly encountered.

I a

The

[  n 6  ]  -

Theftreets are the moft regularly beautiful which I ever remember to have feen  ;
the houfes all feem to be built of white
ftone,  though they are only of brick,
ftuccoed over,  in imitation of ftone.  A
canal,  fupplied by the river Havel,  runs
through the middle of the town,  which
is lituated on an ifland,  called the Werder
of Potfdam,  which implies an ij, land in a
river .  This ifland is four German miles
in circumference :  the approach to Potfdam is over a very wide piece of water,
by a ftone bridge.

The number of houfes in this city has
been very much encreafed during the
reign of his prefent majefty,  and that of
his father.  At the beginning of this century,  there were only two hundred houfes,
and at prefent there are at leaft two thou-
fand,  and feventeen thoufand inhabitants,
exclufive of the military,  which amount
to about eight thoufand men.

Four battalions of foot guards,  with
the fquadron of life guards,  and the

regiment

[  "7  ]

regiment of the prince of Prufiia,  com-
pofe the conftant garrifon of Potf-
dam.  The uniform of the firfi battalion of foot-guards,  is blue,  embroidered with filver,  and turned up with
red  ;  the waiftcoats are of pale yellow  ;
The hats,  which are extremely large,
have a very broad filver lace,  in imitation
of point d’efpagne ,  and are cocked in
the old Kevenhuller fathion,  which,  added to huge black whiikers,  give the men

/

a molt formidable appearance.  The fourth
battalion,  called the Leftewitz battalion,
is formed of the remains of the late king’s
/^//grenadiers.  ,  .  •  :  ‘-'1

The fquares,  public buildings,  and
houfes of individuals,  in this city,  are
elegant and noble.  The architecture of

#  f Y  '  •

Palladio,  in the Venetian ftate,  is here
very frequently and fuccefsfully copied.  His majefty’s prefent pafiion is
for architecture,  in which he is faid to
expend 200,000 1.  fieri,  a year Potf-
dam is almofi entirely new built,  from his

I 3 own

I n8  ]

own defigns,  belides his new palace,
near Sans-Souci,  and innumerable houfes
and palaces in Berlin,  cqnftrudled fince
the laft war.  Whenever a citizen is about
building a houfe,  either in his capital,  or
at Potfdam,  his majefty furnifhes the de-
fign,  and is at the expence of building
the front.

The inftant I arrived at Potfdam,  I
went to M.  Benda,  in hopes of feeing
him before his duty called him to the
king’s concert ;  but he was already gone
thither,  and I was told that the performance was begun,  fo that there was no
poffibility of my hearing his majefty that
evening.  It was now near feven o’clock,
and rather late for a firft vifit,  to a great
perfonage however,  time was fo precious,  that I could not be exadt in ob-
ferving forms  $  in defiance of which,  I
ventured to wait upon lord Marfhal,  to
whom Mr.  Harris had kindly honoured
me with a letter.

M His

V

'  t  "9  ]

His lordfhip lives in a neat fmaii
houfe,  in the fuburbs,  built for him by
the king,  as the coachman,  unafked,  informed me.  The porter,  an honeft Scotf*
man,  afked immediately if I fpoke Eng-
lifh,  and told me that his lord was at
home,  but in his night-gown.  I acquainted him with the letter which I had
to deliver,  fent in my name,  and faid if my
vifit would at all incommode his lordfhip,  I would return in the morning.
The porter foon came back,  and defired
me to walk in.

I was inftantly conduced to my lord  ;
it was fo dark that I could hardly fee
him.  He defired me to fit down,  with
a very benevolent tone of voice,  in a
Scots accent.  I prefented to him my
letter,  and acquainted him that I was
extremely prefled in time,  or fhould not
have broke in upon his lordfhip at fo late
an hour  :  he faid he was glad to fee me
at any time.  When lights were brought
in,  I was as much pleafed with his face,

I 4 as

[  120  ]

as I had been before by his voice  ;  it is
themoft plealing,  elegant,  and benign
that can be imagined.

I continued with his lordfhip three
hours,  during which time he entertained
me with a great number of anecdotes,
many of which related to mufic.  When
he had perufed Mr.  Harris’s letter,  in
which mention was made of my Italian
tour,  and the tranflation of it into German,  he told me,  that he had ceafed to
go to court on account of his age,  though
the king frequently told him,  that he
kept a cover for him conftantly at his
table ;  but he would fend what I had in
German of my book*  ,  and my plan,  to
his majefty,  in the morning.  His lord-

*  At this time I was in pofleflion of only a few
loofe fheets of the German tranflation of my former
tour,  which has fince been pu’blifhed at Hamburg,
under the title of,  53urtKbifd[)e$  ^ClCjebUCl)  eitlCt

9)?uf]fa(ifcf)en 3vcife burcf)  granfreid)  unb 3taf ten,
bem Sngtifd)en uber fefct Don  £be(ing>
Sluffdjer ber  ^anWungi 2CfaDcmi'c ju Hamburg*
Q5obe i77z*

[  III  ]

Clip did me the honour of inviting me
to dine with him at twelve o'clock the
next day,  and informed me of whatever
was belt worth feeing at Potfdam and
Sans Souci ;  as to mufic,  he faid,  that
I was unfortunate in being addrefled to
him,  for he was fuch a Goth,  as to
know nothing of it,  nor to like any mufic,
but that of his own country bagpipes.
On this occafion,  he was very pleafant
upon himfelf :  here enfued a difcuffion
of Scots mufic,  and Erfe poetry  ;  after
which,  his lordfhip faid,  <c but left you
(i fhould think me too infenfible to the

*  t  \  a  'V  ■  y  >  f  •  .  ' s  *  .

*‘s power of found,  I muft tell you,  that I
<£  have made a collection of national tunes
c *  of aim oft all the countries on the globe,
“  which I believe I can  {hew you."  After a fearch,  made by himfelf,  the book
in which thefe tunes were written,  was
found,  and I was made to fingthe whole
collection through,  without an inftru-
ment ;  during which time,  he had an
anecdote for every tune.  When I had

done.

r 122 i

done,  his lordfhip kindly wrote down a
lift of all fach tunes as had pleafed me
moft by their oddity and originality,  of
which he promifed me copies,  and then
ordered a Scots piper,  one of his domef-
tics,  to play to me fome Spanilh and Scots
tunes,  which were not in the colle&ion;

“  but play therri in the garden,  fays he,

((  for thefe fine Italiariifed folks cannot  '
€€  bear our rude mufic near their delicate
“  ears’’.

The converfation afterwards turned
upon French mufic,  and the comparative
merit of that and the Italian,  upon which
fubjedt his lordfhip told me a ltory,  that
very much refembled one related by
Roufleau,  in his Lettre fur la mufique
Fran^oife.

A young Greek lady being brought
from her own country to Paris,  fome
years fince,  was,  foon after her arrival
in that city,  carried to the opera by fome
French ladies,  fuppofing,  as fhe had never

heard any European mufic,  that  (he

would

[  123 1

✓

would be in raptures at it ;  but,  contrary
to thefe expectations,  (he declared,  that
the finging only reminded her of the
hideous howlings of the Calmuc Tartars;
and as to the machinery,  which it was
thought would afford her great amufe-
ment,  fhe declared her diflike of many
parts of it,  and was particularly fcanda-
lized,  by what fhe called,  the impious and
wicked imitation of God’s thunder.  Soon
after this experiment,  fhe went to Venice,
where another was made upon her uncorrupted ears,  at an Italian opera,  in which
the famous Gizziello fung;  at whofe performance fhe was quite diffolved in plea-
fure,  and was ever after paffionately fond
of Italian mufic.

Upon mentioning this rtory to an excellent judge of mufic and of human nature,  who had been at Paris when M.  de
Bougainville brought thither a native of
the new difcovered ifland of Otaiti,  he
told me,  that the effects of French mufic

had

[  124  ]

had been fairly tried upon Putaveri immediately on his arrival.  “  I with”,
faid my friend,  “  you had been there,
<c to have obferved with me,  what a
“  flrange impreffion the French opera
€€  made upon him;  as foon as he returned
€C to his lodgings,  he mimicked what
“  he had heard,  in the mod natural and
<c ridiculous manner imaginable  ;  this he
(€  would repeat only when he was in
€c good humour;  but as it was juft be-
Cc fore his departure that I faw him,  he
cc was melancholy,  and would not dance,
€i however entreated.  I propofed to fend
“  for mufic,  and one of the fervants was
€t ordered to play on his bad fiddle juft
tc without the door of the room  ;  upon
ce hearing this,  Putaveri fuddenly fprang
“  up,  and feizing two of the candle-
t€  flicks,  placed them on the floor,  and
€C danced his own country dance  ;  after
c<  this,  he gave the company a fpecimen
<c of the French opera,  which was the
ce moft natural and admirable parody

“  that

C I25  ]

“  that I have ever heard,  and accom-
“  panied with all its proper geftures.  I
“  wifhed at this time to try the power
€C of Italian mufic upon him ;  but there
“  was no opportunity,  for how could it
€t be properly executed at Paris  ?”

Among the anecdotes relative to the
ftrange effefts of muiic,  which were
given to me by lord Marfhal,  he told me
of a Highlander,  who always cried,  upon
hearing a certain flow Scots tune,  played
on the bagpipe.  General G.  whofe
fervant he was,  Hole into,  his room one
night,  when he was faft afleep,  and
playing the fame tune to him very foftly,
on the German flute,  the fellow,  without
waking,  cried like a child.

His lordfhip next confirmed to me,
the account of the Maladie du Pais ,  or
home-ficknefs,  being brought on by the
tune,  called the Rens de V ache,  if heard
by any of the Swifs troops in foreign
fervice.  Five foldiers at Yaladolid,  in
Spain,  wrho had heard one of their countrymen

\

[  I26.]

trymen play this tune,  on the top of the
fleeple,  were all feized with this dif-
temper,  and obliged to be fent home.
An effed which can only be accounted
for,  by reminifcence of former liberty
and happinefs,  in their native country.

The Tarantula ftory,  his lordfhip allowed to be all a lye,  as to the mufical
cure  ;  but not the bite,  which was to his
knowledge certain;  however,  fome of the
inhabitants of Apulia had confeffed to
him,  that the only falutary effed of mafic,  was to keep the patient awake,  as
fleep was ufually fatal,  if indulged before the poifon is extraded.

I had frequently been told by perfonS
who were well acquainted with lord
Marlhal many years ago,  that his cha-
rader approached nearer to perfedion,
than that of any other human being  ;  and this became now my own
opinion.  It was with great reludance
that I quitted him,  in order to return
to my inn ;  he had attached me as much

during

7

[  127  ]

during this vifit of three hours,  by his
fociable,  entertaining,  eafy,  and benign
manner,  as any one elfe had ever done
in as many years.

Thurfday,  O&ober ift.  My firft vifit
this morning was to M.  Benda,  whom
I found to be a plain,  obliging,  fenfible
man,  and pofiefTed of all the modefty
of a truly great genius.  I was furnifhed
with a letter to him from Mr.  Giardini,
with whofe remembrance he appeared
to be much pleafed,  and faid,  that
though it was more than twenty years

fince he had feen or heard him,  he had

* .

not forgot his fine tone,  fo remarkably
clear,  full,  and fweet ;  and added,  that
he fhould always retain a precife and
pleafing idea of his graceful manner
of playing,  of his fancy in extempore
cadences,  and facility in executing whatever was poflible to be performed on the
violin.

Mr.  Giardini,  in his letter,  had defired
M.  Benda to indulge me with the plea-

fur e

[  128 3

fare of hearing him perform ;  when he
read this requeft,  he  (hook his head,
and faid,  non fum qualis eram,  (c I have
“  ceafed to play folos even to the king
€c my matter,,  thefe five years ;  however,
€e fuch as they are,  you fhall hear my
cc feeble endeavours to oblige you.’*

He performed to me an admirable folo,
of his own compofition,  confordino  ;  his
hand,  he faid,  wanted force fufficient to
play without.  The gout has long en*
feebled his fingers  ;  however,  there are
fine remains of a great hand,  though I
am inclined to fuppofe him to have been
more remarkable at all times for his feeling than his force.  His ilyle is fo truly
cantabiky that fcarce a paflfage can be
found in his compofitions,  which it is
not in the power of the human voice to
fing  >  and he is fo very affe&ing a player,
fo truly pathetic in an Adagio ,  that
feveral able profeflbrs have afiured me
he has frequently drawn tears from
them in performing one.  How he ac-

r

[  129  ]

quired this ftyle of writing and playing,
it may be of fome ufe to mufical ftudents
to trace and develope  :  the productions
and performance of this matter are indeed
fo truly original and pleattng,  that I hope
every lover of mufic,  among my readers,
will excufe me if I here infert a fketch
of his life,  the principal incidents of
which I obtained from himfelf,  during
my vifit ;  the reft are extracted from a
printed account of him,  publifhed at
Leipfic,  1766,  in a work which was then
carried on by M.  Hiller,  under the title
of Weekly Intelligence,  and Obfervations
concerning Mufic  ■’ .

Francis Benda was born at Alt Be-
natky.,  in Bohemia,  1709.  Ke was
brought up in the choir at Neubenatky,
as a finging boy.  At nine years old,  he
was conducted to Prague,  by one of his
relations,  and employed at the church of

*  $?ac&ritiSjren tint)  Slrnnerfungen Die  ©lufif

fetre|fenb.  4to.  This publication,  which was begun in 1766,  continued till 1769.

Vol.  ir.  ■  •  1 K

the

J  *3°  1

'  the Benedidtines,  as a foprano.  Soon
after this,  his voice became fo excellent*
that he was enticed away to Drefden*
without the confent of the Benedidtines*
in order to ling in the Eledtor of Saxony's
chapel.  After continuing a year and half
in this fervice,  he ran away with a lighterman,  intending to return to his friends j
but in going with him up the Elbe,  he
was ftopt at Pirna,  and carried back to
Drefdeh  $  however,  not being ufed to the
water,  and the night before having been
very cold,  he loft his treble voice.

This misfortune immediately removed
the difficulty of obtaining his difmiffion:
he now found himfelf at full liberty to go
whither he pleated ;  and,  returning to his
parents,  they were much perplexed what
to do with him  :  but,  at the performance
of the Barter mafic,  he was perfuaded to
attempt a contralto part in the church.
At firft,  his voice was coarfe,  but it very
foon grew fo much better,  that the fame
afternoon M.  Benda found himfelf able

to

f-  *3*  ]

/  -  >

to fing the counter-tenor,  as well as he
had formerly done the foprano .

Having difcovered his new voice,  he
went to Prague,  where he was engaged
at the Jefuit’s fem inary,  though there
were already fix counter-tenors in that
fervice.  But his manner of fi aging,  together with his having performed in the
chapel-royal at Drefden,  were two cogent reafons for his being well received.

In 1723,  Benda was one of the chorus fingers in the mufic performed at
Prague,  on occafion of the Emperor
Charles the fixth being crowded king
of Bohemia.  An event which forms
a very important asra in the life of
this eminent mufician,  who had now
attained his fifteenth year.  Hecbnfefied
to me,  that the excellent finging which
he then heard,  was of the utmoft ufe to
him in his future ft'iidies,  and particularly
the performance of Gaetano Orfini,  a
contralto ,  with which he was beyond
meafure affedted.  Soon after this folem-

K 2 nity

[  132  ']

nity was over,  a drama was performed,
at the Jefuit’s college,  by young Bohemian noblemen,  in which mufic was introduced  ;  it was compofed by the famous Zelenka,  the King of Poland’s chapel mafter.

Benda,  with another defcanter of the
Kreuzhern,  and an Italian,  with a bafe
voice,  were the lingers employed on this
occafion  :  three  .airs were given to each
I of them,  but Benda was fo fuperior to
the reft,  that he not only acquired great
applaufe by his performance,  but a new
appointment,  with a large falary,  at the
Kreuzhern convent ;  which being extremely rich,  and appropriated to the reception of the nobility who devote them-
felves to the defence of the chriftian religion againft:  the Turks,  is regarded by
xnuficians at Prague,  as the poll of honour.

Here he firft applied himfelf to com-
polition,  and fet to mufic the Salve Regina twice 5 once accompanied by the organ only,  and once by two violins.  Flea-

7

ven

[  *33 3

ven knows,  fays Benda,  how many of
the rules of counterpoint were broken in
this attempt !  not long after this,  he loft
his counter-tenor voice,  and was again
obliged to return to his friends at Be-
natki.

Being now deprived of all hope of
gaining a livelihood by finging,  and unable to bear the thoughts of becoming a
burden to his relations,  he applied him-
felf ferioufly to the violin,  upon which
he had made a beginning,  but he knows
not when,  nor under what mafter.  It
mull,  however,  have been early in his
life,  as he was remembered to play the
tenor,  in the concerts performed by the
finging boys at Drefden,  and to work
hard on the violin,  at Vivaldi’s concertos.

After lofing his voice,  he had no other
means of turning his mufical talents to
account,  than by playing dances about
the country with a company of ftrolling
Jews ;  in which,  however,  there was a

K 3 blind

i

[  *34 3

blind Hebrew, of the name of Lobel,  who,
in his way,  was an extraordinary player.
He drew a good tone from his inftrument,
and compofed his own pieces,  which
were wild,  but pretty  :  fome of his
dances went up to A in altijjimo  \  how-
eve he played them with the utmoft
purity and neatnefs.

The performance of this man excited
in Benda fo much jeaioufv,  that he redoubled his diligence in trying to equal
him  ;  and not to be his inferior in any
part of his trade,  he compofed dances,
for his own hand,  which were far from
eafy.  He often fpeaks of his obligations
to the old jew for ftimulacing him to excel on the violin.

After ftrolling about in this manner,
for fome time,  he fhut himfelf up in a
garret at Prague,  where he pradtifed two
things,  mufic,  and temperance  :  here he
obtained a few leffons from Konyczek,
vioiinift to prince Lobkowitz,  by which
he qualified himfelf for the fervice of a

nobler

[  *35  ]

nobleman,  with whom he travelled to
Vienna:  here he was transferred to a
new mafter,  count Uhlefeld,  with
whom he had frequently the advantage of
hearing the famous Francifchello,  who
taught the count,  and of playing trios
with him and his patron

When he quitted this fervice,  he travelled on foot to Breflau,  with three other
muficians,  who afterwards became very
eminent.  Thefe were M.  Hockh,  the
prefent chapel-mafter to the prince of
Zerbft,  the late M.  Weidner,  and M.
Czarth,  formerly in the Pruffian fervice,
but now at Manheim.

*  Francifchello was the greatefl performer on
the bafe-viol of his time.  Geminiani related of
him,  that in accompanying Nicolini,  at Rome,  in a
cantata compofed by Xlefiandro Scarlatti,  for the
violoncello,  the author,  who was at the harpfichord,
would not believe that a mortal could play fo divinely  ;  but faid,  that it was an angel who had aiTumed
the figure of Francifchello  ;  fo far did his performance furpafs all that Scarlatti had conceived in
compofing the cantata,  or imagined pofiible for man
to exprefs.

K 4

After

[  136 1

After flaying a ifhort time at Breflau,
thefe four adventurers fet off in the

or common wagon,  for War-
fa w.  Within four miles of this capital
of Poland,  they found,  in a foreft,  a
well-furniihed portmanteau  ;  and,  after
trying,  in vain,  to difcover the owner of
it,  they divided the contents among them.
By this partition,  a coat luckily fell to
the  (hare of Benda,  of which he was in
great want,  and which fitted him as
well as if it had been made by a Paris
taylor.

Being arrived at Warfaw,  they took
pofleffion of an apartment in the old
Cafiimir palace,  which,  for fifty years
before,  had had no other inhabitants than
rooks and jackdaws:  none of the primi^
tive faints ever pradifed the virtue of ab-
ftinence more rigidly than thefe three
young finners did now,  though guefts of
a royal palace ;  without a plan of future
condud,  without money,  and without
friends,  their heads had as yet furnifhed no

em«*

I

[  ‘  *37 3

employment for their hands,  but that of
amufing themfelves on their feveral in-
ftruments in their retirement;  fo that
they pradifed inceflantly*  During this
time the palace was fuppofed to be haunted,  but by what kind of fpirits,  none of
the neighbours had the courage to examine  ;  till the Starofl:  Suchaczewlki,  Sza-
niawlki,  being told that the ghofts were
mufical,  was fufficiently intrepid to wifh
to hear them,  and being pleafed with
their performance,  he engaged them in
his fervice.

i

It is a rule in Poland,  when a nobleman has more than four muficians in his
fervice,  to appoint a maefiro di capella
over them ;  and as the band of the Sta-
roft Suchaczewfky now confided of nine
performers,  this honourable office was
forced upon Benda by his new patron.
Our hero remained at Warfaw two or
three years,  after which,  returning to
Germany,  he was a fhort time employed
in the Eledor of Saxony’s chapel at Dref-

den ;

[  J38 3

den j daring which period,  he received
a letter from M.  Quantz,  inviting him to
enter into  .the fervice of the prince of
Pruffia,  at Ruppin,  where his prefent
majefty ufually refided before his accef-
fion to the crown.

It was by ftealth,  that  -this prince indulged his paffion for mufic,  during the
life of his father,  the late king,  who had
forbid him,  not only to ftudy and prac-
tife mufic,  but to hear it.  M.  Quantz
told me afterwards,  that it was the late
queen mother,  who at this time encouraged the prince in his favourite
amufement,  and who engaged muficians
for his fervice ;  but fo neceffary was fe-
crecy in all thefe negociations,  that if
the king his father had difcovered that
he was difobeyed,  all thefe fons of Apollo
would have incurred the danger of being
hanged.  The prince frequently took
occafion,  to meet his muficians a hunt*
ing,  and had his concerts either in a fo-
reft or cavern.

%

M.  Benda

[  J39  ]

M.  Benda,  who entered into the fervice
of Pruffia,  in 1732,  found already with
his royal highnefs the two Grauns,  with
whom he ftudied,  and from whom he
confefles to have received fignal fervices,
as well as from M.  Quantz.

He ftill leads the band at the great
opera,  where he is feconded by his brother Jofeph  •>  and he can boaft of having
had the honour of accompanying his ma-
jefty,  during the forty years he has been
in his fervice,  in near 50,000 different
concerts.

The father of M.  Benda was a linen
manufacturer,  but not lefs mufical than
other Bohemians,  his countrymen ;  for
he played a little on feveral inflruments,
particularly the hautbois,  bagpipe,  and
dulcimer.  In 1742,  being the fecond
year of his prefent majefty’s reign,  M.
Benda had the fatisfadtion of bringing
his parents to Berlin,  and of eftablifhing
them there,  under his roof.  In 1756,
this venerable pair celebrated the

[  H°  ]

^tf3uki(AUtUor marriage jubilee,  ufually
folemnized in Germany,  by perfons who
have lived together in wedlock,  fifty
years .

M.  Benda has two fons,  both able
muficians ;  his three brothers all applied
themfelves to mufic,  in confequence of
his fuccefs.  John,  the eldeft,  whofe in-
ftrument was the violin,  died in the fer-
vice of his Pruflian majefty;  George,  the
fecond brother,  is at prefent an eminent
chapel-mafter,  and elegant compofer in
the fervice of the duke of Saxe-Gotha;
and Jofeph,  the third,  is one of his
Pruflian majefty’s band.

A word more,  concerning the mufical
abilities of the worthy concert-mafter,
Francis,  fhall terminate this long article.
His ftyle is not that of Tartini,  Somis,
Veracini,  nor that of the head of any
one fchool or mufical fe£t,  of which I
have the leafl knowledge  :  it is his own>
and formed from that model which
fhould be ever fiudied by all inftrumen-*
tal performers,  good fin gin g.

i

[  HI 3

When I quitted M.  Benda,  I waited
on Col.  Quintus Icilius to whom I
was honoured with letters ;  he is member of the royal academy of fciences,  author of a celebrated treatife,  written in
French,  upon the military art of the ancients,  and a great collector of Virtu ;
he is a connoijfeur in all the arts,  except
muficj and has a well-chofen library,
in which I found feveral fcarce and curious books.

After this I had the honour to vifit
Coh de Forcade,  to whom I had likewife
letters.  I had been recommended to
this gentleman,  who is court-marfhal,

*  This officer’s original name is Guichard,  and
that of Quintus Icilius,  only his Nom de Guerre ,
given to him,  in pleafantry,  by his majefty,  who
when he conferred upon him a command in a regiment,  haftily raifed and collected from the  -
refufe of all nations,  during the heat of the laft
war,  honoured him with the appellation of the
commander of Caefar’s tenth legion,  a name which
has fince been adopted by the whole Pruffian
nation.

with

r 142 3

with a view to his doing me the honour
of prefenting me to his royal highnefs,
the prince of Pruffia,  to whom I had
been charged with a parcel of books
from England.

It was now twelve o’clock,  the general hour for dining at Potfdam ;  at my
lord Marfhal’s,  I was fo fortunate as to
fee and converfe with the Grecian lady,
who had been fo offended with French
mufic,  and fo pleafed with Italian,  upon
her firft arrival in Europe.  The dinner
was quite Englifh,  and the conversion
of his lordfhip was entertaining to a very
uncommon degree.

After dinner I went to fee the king’s
new palace ,  UCilC 0Cf)Iof^  built fince

the laft war.  The ground on which it
is eredled,  wras a morafs eight years ago,
as was the whole country round it,
v/hich is a dead flat,  and ftill very naked
and barren  ,  it was however in confe-
quence of the rapidity with which this
palace was conftrudted,  and the face of

the

f 143  ]

the country changed,  that a German
wit faid,  “  it mu ft be allowed,  that his
“  majefty performs miracles,  though he
“  believes none/5

It is not my defign to give a minute de-
fcription of this fuperb palace ;  I fhall
only obferve,  in general,  that it appeared
to me,  one of the moft elegant and perfect,  which I had feen in Europe.  It is
conftructed,  as well as moft of the magnificent buildings in Potfdam,  from his
majefty’s own defigns  ;  the front is decorated with fluted pilafters,  of the Corinthian order,  before each of which
there is a ftatue ;  thefe pilafters are of a
pale yellow colour,  and the reft of the
wall in imitation of red brick.  A cupola
appears above the pediment,  upon which
are placed on a high pedeftal,  the three
Graces  ;  and the ftatues and groupes
of figures which embeilifh the Attic ftory,
and the baluftrades,  are fcarcely to be
numbered.

The

[  *44  ]

The apartments are fitted up with the
utmoft magnificence and tafte.  There
is a fuite of rooms appropriated to almoft
every branch of the royal family.  Thofe
of the king,  of his filler princefs Amelia,  and the prince of Pruffia,  are
the mo ft fplendid.  In each of thefe
apartments,  there is a room dedicated to
mufic,  furnifhed with books,  defks,  a
harpfichord,  and with other inftruments.

His majefty’s concert room is ornamented with glades of an immenfe lize,
and with fculpture,  partly gilt,  and
partly of the mo ft beautiful green var-

\  +  i

nifh,  by Martin of Paris ;  the whole
furniture and ornaments of this room,
are in a moft refined and exquiiite tafte.
There is a pianoforte made by Silbermann
of Neuberg,  beautifully varnifhed and
embellifhed;  and a tortoife-fhell defk
for his majefty’s ufe,  moft richly and
elegantly inlaid with filver ;  on the table lay a catalogue of  -concertos for the

new

'  [  *45  ]

new palace ,  and a book of manufcript
Solfeggi,  as his majefty calls them,  or
preludes,  compofed of difficult divifions
and paffiiges for the exercife of the hand,
,as the vocal Solfeggi are for the throat.  His
majefty has books of this kind,  for the
ufe of his flute,  in the mufic room of
every one of of his palaces.

4*.

In another apartment,  there is a mofl
magnificent harpfichord,  made by Shudi,
in England ;  the hinges,  pedals,  and
frame are of filver,  the cafe is inlaid,
and the front is of tortoife-ffiell ;  this
inftrument which coft 200 guineas,  was
fent to Hamburg by fea,  and from thence
to Potfdam,  up the Elb and the Havel,
which,  I was told,  had injured it fo much,
that it has been ufelefs ever fince ;  however,  it is natural to fuppofe,  that lome
jealoufy may have been excited by it,
and that it has not had quite fair play from
thofe employed to repair it ;  for I never
heard of any one of the great number of
harpfichords,  which are annually fent
Vol.  II.  L from

[  i46  ]

from England to the Eaft and Weft Indies by fea,  receiving fo much damage
as this is faid to have done,  in a much
fhorter paftage.  And now I am upon the
fubje£t of mufical inftruments,  I muft
obferve,  that the Germans work much
better out of their own country,  than they
do in it,  if we may judge by the harpji -
chords of Kirkman and Shudi ;  the piano
fortes of Backers ;  and the organs of
Snetzler ;  which far furpafs,  in goodnefs,
all the keyed inftruments that I met with,
in my tour through Germany,

But to return to his Pruffian majefty's
new palace :  in every apartment through
which I was conducted,  there appeared
a ftudied elegance and delicacy in the
furniture,  which I had never met with
before ;  the tafte,  indeed,  is rather that

f

of France than Italy ;  however,  it is the
heft of the kind,  and includes both ele-
gance and convenience.  The hall,  called
the Marble Gallery ,  is truly fuperb,  and
worthy of royalty j it is extremely fpa-

cious.

[  i 47 J

clous,  and lofty,  and is totally encrufted
with red fpotted marble,  called Red Caroline ,  mixed with white Italian marble.  The
pavement likewife is of white marble,  and
the ceiling is ornamented with three large
pictures,  in gilt ftucco frames,  painted
by Rode,  the fubjefts of which,  are
morning ,  noon,  and night .

Though his majefly’s principal collection of paintings,  is in the pi&ure-gal-
lery at Sans-Souci,  yet there are two or
three rooms in the new palace,  very rich
in works of capital Italian mailers ;  but
it is out of my province to enumerate
thefe ;  and for the coftly gold and filver
hangings ;  the exquifitely varnifhed
wainfcots ;  rich ceilings,  or Mofaic
floors,  they are not to be defcribed.

Oppofite to the great front of this palace,  there are two elegant buildings of
white  (lone,  joined together,  by a fuperb
femi-circular colonade of fluted pillars,  of
the Corinthian order.  Thefe buildings
are called.  The Great Commons ;  in the

L 2 lower

E h8 3

lower part of which,  are the kitchens,
cellars,  and other offices;  and in the upper
ftories,  lodging-rooms for the king’s attendants,  and for foreigners of diftindtion.
At the front of each building there is a
double circular efcalier,  which leads to
a colonade of infulated and fluted Corinthian pillars,  which fupport a pediment,  ornamented with ftatues  :  at each
wing,  is placed a fmall tower,  with a
cupola.  The idea of thefe buildings,  is
taken from the ruins of Palmyra;  indeed,
his Pruffian majefty has made as frequent
ufe of the remains of Athens,  Palmyra,
and Balbec,  in the temples ruins,  and
other buildings,  in his gardens as he
has at Potfdam,  of the defigns of Palladio,  Sanfovino,  and Scamozzi.

There were innumerable things in and
about this palace,  which merited a minute examination ;  but I was obliged to
haften away,  in order to be prefent at
his majefty’s evening concert,  at Sans-
Souci.  I was carried thither between

'  ^  cfive

[  H9  ]

and fix o’clock in the evening,  by an officer of the houfhold,  a privileged per-
fon,  otherwife it would have been im-
poffible for a ftranger,  like myfelf,  to
gain admiflion into a palace where the
king refides  ;  and even with my well-
known guide,  I underwent a fevere examination,  not only at going out of the
gates at Potfdam,  but at every door
of the palace.  When we arrived at
the veffibule,  we were met by M.
de Catt,  ledurer to his majefty,  and
member of the royal academy,  to whom
I had been furnifhed with a letter,
who very politely attended my conductor
and me the whole evening.

I was carried to one of the interior
apartments of the palace,  in which the
gentlemen of the king’s band were wait-
ing for his commands.  This apartment was contiguous to the concert-room,
where I could diffindly hear his majefty
pradifing Solfeggi on the flute,  and exer-
cifing himfelf in difficult paffages,  previ-

L 3 ous

[  *5°  1

ous to his calling in the band.  Here I
met with M.  Benda,  who was fo obliging as to introduce me to M.  Quantz,
The figure of this Veteran mufician,
is of an uncommon fize  :

The fon of Hercules he juftly feems.

By his broad fhoulders,  and gigantic limbs  $

and he appears to enjoy an uncommon
portion of health and vigour,  for a per-
fon arrived at his 76th year.  We foon began a mufical converfation  ;  he told me,
that his majefiy and fcholar played no
other concertos than thofe which he had
exprefiy ccmpofed for his ufe,  which
amounted to 300,  and thefe he performed in rotation.  This exclufive attach-
to the productions of his old matter,
may appear fomewhat contracted  ;  however,  it implies a conftancy of difpofition,
but rarely to be found among princes.
The compofitions of the two Grauns and
of Quantz,  have been in favour with his
Prufiian majefty more than forty years ;
and,  if it be true,  as many aflert,  that

l mufic

[  J5r J

mufic has declined and degenerated fince
that time,  in which the Scarlattis,  Vincis,  Leos,  Pergolefis,  and Porporas flou-
rifhed,  as well as the greateft fingers
that modern times have known,  it is an
indication of a found judgment,  and of
great difeernment,  ,in his majefly,  to adhere thus firmly to the productions of a
period which may be called the Auguf-
tan age of mufic j to fiem the torrent of
caprice and fafliion with fuch unfhaken
conftancy,  is poflefling a kind of Jlet fol ,
by which Apollo and his ions are prevented from running riot,  or changing
from good to bad,  and from bad to
worfe.

Thefe reflections,  which occurred to
me while I was converfing with M.
Quantz,  were interrupted by the arrival
of a meflenger from the king,  commanding the gentlemen of his band to
attend him in the next room.

The concert began by a German flute
concerto,  in which his majefly executed'

L 4 the

[  152  ]

the folo parts with great precifion  ;  his
embouchure was clear and even,  his finger
brilliant,  and his tafte pure and fimple.

I was much pleafed,  and even furprifed
with the neatnefs of his execution in the
allegros,  as well as by his expreffion and
feeling in the adagio ;  in fhort,  his performance furpafled,  in many particulars,
any thing I,  had ever heard among jD/-
lettanti ,  or even profeffors.  His majefty
played three long and difficult concertos
fucceffively,  and all with equal perfection.

It muft be owned,  that many of the
paflages,  in thefe pieces of M.  Quantz,
are now become old and common  ;  but
this does not prove their deficiency in
novelty,  when they were firft compofed,
as fome of them have been made more
than forty years ;  and though M.  Quantz
has not been permitted to publiffi them,
as they were originally compofed for his
majefty,  and have ever fincc been appropriated to his ufe,  yet,  in a feries of

years.

i

✓

[  153 3

years,  other compofers have hit upon
the fame thoughts  :  it is with mufic as
with delicate wines,  which not only
become flat and infipid,  when expofed
to the air,  but which are injured by
time,  however  ‘well-kept.

M.  Quantz bore no other part in the
performance of the concertos of to-night,
than to give the time with the motion of
his hand,  at the beginning of each movement,  except now and then to cry out bra -
vo  !  to his royal fcholar,  at the end of the
folo parts and clofes ;  which feems to be
a privilege allowed to no other mufician
of the band.  The cadences which his
majefly made,  were good,  but very long
and ftudied.  It is eafy to difcover that
thefe concertos were compofed at a
time when he did not fo frequently require an opportunity of breathing as at
prefent ;  for in fome of the divifions,
which were very long and difficult,  as
well as in the clofes,  he was obliged to

take

\

[  J54  ]

take his breath,  contrary to rule,  before
the paffages were finifhed.

After thefe three concertos were played,  the concert of the night ended,  and
I returned to Potfdam ;  but not without
undergoing the fame interrogatories from
all the centinels,  as I had before done in
my way to Sans-Souci.

I have already given an account of the
regularity with which the pleafures of
the court fucceed each other every week,
during the king’s refidence at Berlin  :
and as fome of my readers may,  perhaps,
be curious to know in what manner his
majefly fpends his time each day,  at Sans-
Souci,  I fhall here prefent them with a
detail of that regular difpofition of it,  to
which he has fcri&ly adhered,  during
peace,  ever lince he began his reign  :  indeed,  the evolutions of his foldiers,  on
the parade,  cannot be more exadl than
his own diurnal motions.

His majefty’s hour of riling,  is con-
ftantly at four o’clock in the morning,

during

*

[  *55  ]

during fummer,  and at five in winter;
and from that time till nine,  when his
minifters of different departments attend
him,  he is employed in reading letters,
and anfwering them in the margin.  He
then drinks one difh of coffee,  and proceeds to bufinefs with his minifters,  who
come full fraught with doubts,  difficulties,  documents,  petitions,  and other pa-

/

pers,  to read.  With thefe hefpends two
hours,  and then exercifes his own regiment on the parade,  in the fame manner
as the youngeft colonel in his fervice.

At twelve o’clock he dines.  His dinner is long,  and generally with twelve or
fourteen perfons ;  after this he gives an
hour to artifts and proje&ors ;  then reads
and figns the letters,  written by his fe-
cretaries,  from the marginal notes which
he had made in the morning.  When
this is over,  he thinks the bufinefs of the
day is accomplifhed 5 the reft is given to
amufement ;  after his evening concert,
he gives fome time to converfation,  if

dif-

|  *56 3

difjpofed for it,  and his courtiers in waiting conftantly attend for that purpofej but
whether that is the cafe or not,  he has a lecturer to read to him,  every evening,  titles
and extra&s of new books,  among which
he marks fuch as he wifhes to have pur-
chafed for his library,  or to read in his
cabinet.  In this manner,  when not employed in the field,  reviewing his troops,
or in travelling,  he fpends his time :
always retiring at ten o’clock,  after which,
however,  he frequently reads,  writes,  or
compofes mufic for his flute,  before he
goes to bed.  :  *  ...  ,

Friday 2d.  I this morning vifited M.
Quantz ;  he was fo obliging as to play,
at my requeft,  three folos of his own
compofition,  and,  notwithftanding his advanced age,  he ftill executes rapid movements with great precifion.  His mufic is
fimpleand natural;  his tafte is that of forty
years ago ;  but though this may have been
an excellent,  period for compofition,  yet I
cannot entirely fubfcribg to the opinion

of

E  *57 3

of thofe who think muficians have dif-
covered no refinements worth adopting,
fince that time.  Without giving into
tricks and caprice,  and even allowing
compofition to have been arrived at its
acme of perfection,  forty years ago,  yet a
Ample melody may furely be embellished
by the modern manner of taking appogia-
turasy of preparing and returning Shakes,
of gradually enforcing and diminishing
whole pafies,  as well as Single notes,
and,  above all,  by the variety of expref-
fion arising from that fuperiority in the
ufe of the bow,  which the violin players
of this age poSTefs over thofe of any other
period Since its invention.

But even at the beft time of M.  Quantz,
the elder muficians,  and thofe in years,
cried out againft the innovations and levity of the younger.  And no period can
be named fince the time of Plato,  who
likewife complained of the degeneracy of
mufic,  in which it has not been faid to
be corrupted by the moderns.  Things

T"’£l  ^  3 j''  '  -  of

/

L J58  }

of fentiment,  and mere objects of tafte
and feeling,  cannot,  I fear,  be reduced to
any ftandard of perfection.  In painting,
we have nature to copy,  and to judge by  ;
in poetry,  though there is a fafhion in
language,  and the newefl:  and leaft de-
bafed by vulgar ufe,  are the belt words,
yet grammar and common fenfe muft
remain the fame.

As to Jynplkity in mufic,  there are degrees of it,  which border upon drynefs,
rufticity,  and vulgarity ;  and thefe,  it
is the bufinefs of every compofer to
avoid.  However,  fome who call them-
felves lovers of fimplicity,  would reduce
mufic to the fame metrical laws as poetry,  and make long and  (hort fyllables
determine melody  ;  which would be neither fuffering more than one found to be
given to one fyllable,  nor a longer or
fhorter duration to that found,  than the
poetical rhythmus requires ;  but in this
cafe,  what would vocal mufic be,  but a
mere Recitative ,  with which every one
is tired and difgufted!  Mankind will certainly

[  i59 3

tainly judge of their own pleafures  ;  and
it is natural to fuppofe,  that when a new
ftyle of compofition or performance generally prevails among the refined part of
them,  that it has fomething more captivating in it than that which they quitted.  However,  caprice,  vanity,  and a
fondnefs for Angularity,  on one fide  ;  and
obftinacy,  pride,  and prejudice,  on the
other,  will always make it difficult to
reconcile different fedts,  or to draw a
line between truth and falfehood.

M.  Quantz told me,  that the firfl:  concerto which his Pruffian majefty had played the night before,  was made twenty
years ago,  and the other two had been
made forty years.  Confidering this,  and
the great defire that every compofer has
to deviate from his predeceflbrs,  thefe
pieces have flood their ground very well.
There were traits both of melody and
harmony,  which muft be good to unprejudiced ears,  at all times,  and in all
places.

Be-

I

[  160  ]

Befides the three hundred concertos
which his majefty plays,  in turn,  he has
nearly as many folos,  which he performs
in the like rotation.  Upwards of a
hundred of thefe have been compqfed by
himfelf,  the reft by M.  Quantz.

M.  Quantz,  and his royal fcholar,  ufe
only two keys to the German flute;  and
thefe,  with a method of lengthening the
mouth-piece,  correct,  they fay,  all the
imperfections of this inftrument,  in point
of bad notes and falfe tuning.

In the year 17 54,  M.  Quantz drew up,
in the German language,  an account of
his own life,  which was printed in Mar-
purg’s Mufical Eflays :  and,  as it contains
feveral circumftances relative to mufic,
as well as to himfelf,  I fhall make no
apology to my readers,  for giving them
an abftraCt of it ;  feleCting only fuch parts
as are moil interefting,  and connecting
them with fuch particulars as I obtained
in my converfations with the author.

John

[  1 6 1  ]

John Joachim Quantz was born at
Oberfcheden,  a village in the Electorate
of Hanover,  in 1697.  His father,  who
was a blackfmith,  obliged him to work
at the anvil before he was nine years
old ;  which muft have afforded him an
early opportunity of making the famous
Pythagorean experiment,  mentioned by
Jamblicus,  de Vit.  Pythag .  and by all the
mufical writers of antiquity.  Indeed,
the ear of our young Ardalus  *  had been
already formed,  in hi$  excurfions with
his brother,  a village mufician,  that ufed
to play about the country,  on holydays
and feftivals,  whom he accompanied upon thefe occafions,  on the bafe-viol,
when but eight years old,  and without
knowing a note cf mufic  ;  but this performance,  bad as it was,  pleafed him fo
much,  that he determined to chufe mufic for his profeffion  ;  though his father,

*  Ardalus was the Ton of Vulcan,  by Aglaia,
one of the Graces,  and inventor of the pipe called
tibia*

'  VOL.  lie

M

who

[  162  ]

who died when he was only ten years of
age,  recommended to him,  on his deathbed,  to continue in the honourable pro-
feffion of his anceftors.

Quantz,  after lofing his father,  had
no other friends to depend upon for
counfel and protection,  than two uncles,
who lived at Merfeberg in Saxony ;  and
thefe,  fending for him,  gave him the
choice of their feveral profeflions,  the
one being a taylor,  and the other a
^miffpfetfer/ or town-wait.

t

Upon this occafion,  the paffion for
mufic in the young Quantz overpowered all other confiderations,  and,  preferring the fiddleftick to the  {hears,  he bound

»

himfelf apprentice to his uncle,  the mu-

•  /

fician,  for five years  ;  but this uncle dying three months after,  he was transferred to his fon-in-law,  Fleifchhack,  who
was of the fame profeffion  ;  and it was
under him that he firft pra&ifed the violin,  an inftrument to which his inclination
at this time impelled him,  preferably to
any other.

C 163 3

Soon after this,  however,  he pradtifed
the hautbois,  and the trumpet,  with
which inftruments,  and the violin,  he
chiefly filled up the term of his appren-
ticefh ip  ;  but as a true town mufician,
in Germany,  is expedited to play upon
all kinds of inftruments,  he had been
obliged,  occafionally,  to apply himfelf,
during this period,  to the fackbut,  cornet,  bale-viol,  French-horn,  common-
flute,  balloon,  viol da gamba,  and the
lord knows how many more.  Thefe
were in the way of bufinefs,  but for plea-
fare,  he now and then took leftons on
the harpfichord,  of the organift,  Kiefe-
wetter,  who was likewife his relation  ;
by which he laid the firft foundation of
his knowledge in harmony,  and love for
compofition.

Luckily for Quantz,  his mafter Fleifch-
hack,  was not like other country mufi-
cians,  fond only of old,  dry.  ftift,  and
taftelefs compofitions,  but had fufficient
difcernment to chufe his pieces out of

M 2 the

[  164 1

the neweft and befl productions of the
times,  by Telemann,  Melchior,  Hofmann,  and Heinechen,  which were published at Leipfic  ;  from the perufal,  and
practice of which,  our young performer
derived great advantage.

The duke of Merfeburg’s band not
being very numerous,  the town-waits,
at this time,  were often called in,  to affift
at the mufical performances,  both of court
and chapel.  Here Quantz frequently
heard foreigners play and ling,  in a manner far fuperior to any profeffors whom he
had hitherto met with,  which excited in
him a Strong defire to travel.  Drefden
and Berlin were at this time the mod
renowned cities in Germany,  for the cul-
tivation of mufic,  and for the number of
able muficians.  He eagerly wifhed to
vifit one of thofe cities,  but was destitute
of the means.  However,  he now began
to feel his Strength,  and trufting to his
feet and his fiddle,  he boldly fet off for
Drefden.

It

[  ]

It was In the year 1714 that he arrived
in this city.  His firft entrance was not
aufpicious,  being wholly unable to procure employment :  on this account,  he

j  *

made an excurfion to Radeburg,  where a
journeyman ftdler being wanting,  he entered into the fervice of the town-mufi-
cian.  Knoll;  but alas!  he was foon driven from this pod,  by the fatal accident
of the town being burnt down by lightning.  Again reduced to the date of a fugitive,  and a wanderer,  he levied contributions round the country,  by the power
of his violin,  which was now his principal inftrument,  till he reached Fima.

Here,  declined flill to be fervus Jervo-
rum,  he could procure no other means
of exercifing his profeffion,  than by accepting the office of deputy to a fick
journeyman mufician of the town.  It
was during this time,  that he fir ft faw
Vivaldi's concertos for the violin,  which
were fo congenial to his own feelings
and ideas of perfection,  that he made

M3  ’  them

[  *66  ]

them his model as long as he continued
to praflife that inflrument.

Still regarding Drefden as his centre,
he eagerly accepted an offer that was
made to him,  of being temporary affiftant
there,  to one of the town-waits,  who was
then ill ;  an employment which he pre?-
ferred,  for the opportunities it afforded
him of hearing good mufic and good
muficians,  to the more honourable poft
of being the beft of bad muficians at
jBerenburg,  where he might have been
appointed firft violin,  with a good fa-
lary.

His fecond arrival at Drefden,  was in the
year 17 1 6,  where he foon difcovered that it
was not fufhcient for a mufician to be
able to execute the mere notes which a
comppfer had fet on paper j and it was
now that he firft began to be feniible of
the exigence of tails and expreffion.

Auguftus the fecond,  was at this time
King of Poland,  and Eleftor of Saxony,
and the prchellra of this prince at Dref?

den

1

den was in a flourifhing condition;  however,  the ftyle which had been intro*
duced there,  by the concert-mafter Vo-
lumier,  was French  ;  but Pifendel,  who
fucceeded him,  introduced a mixed tafte,
partly French,  and partly Italian,  which
he afterwards brought to fuch perfedtion,
that Quantz declares,  he never heard a
better band in all his future travels.

No orcheftra in Europe could now
boaft of fo many able profeffors,  as that
of the Eledtor of Saxony,  among whom,
were Pifendel and Veracini,  on the violin  ;  Pantaleone Hebenftreit,  on the
pantaleone;  Weifs,  on the lute;  Richter,  on the hautbois ;  and BufFardin,  on
the German flute;  not to mention feve-
ral excellent performers on the violoncello,  balloon,  French horn,  and dou-
ble-bafe.

Upon hearing thefe great performers,
Quantz was filled with fuch wonder,  and
poflefled of fuch a rage for improvement,
that he laboured inceflantly to render

M 4 him-

t  *68  ]

himfelf worthy of a place among fuch
honourable affociates.

For,  however prejudiced he may have
been in favour of his own reputable
calling of kunflpfeifer ,  he began now
juft to think it poflible for him to be
prevailed upon,  to relinquish that part
of it,  at-leaft,  which required him to
play country dances,  though in itfelf
fo jovial,  pleafant,  and feftal an enjoyment.

He continued,  however,  to be the
kunjipfeifer s delegate in this city,  till the
death of Auguftus the fecond’s mother,
in 1717?  at which time,  the general mourning profcribing the ufe of
every fpecies of convivial muftc,  he
again,  in his ufual manner,  commenced
traveller,  and fiddled his way through
Silefia,  Moravia,  and Auftria,  to Vienna;
and in the month of Odtober,  of the
fame year,  returned through Prague to
Drefden ;  which journey,  he thinks,
contributed more to his knowledge,  in

practical

C 169 1

practical geography than in any o the t

art.

The jubilee of the reformation,  brought
about by Dr.  Luther,  happening to be
celebrated foon after his return,  he was
called upon,  among others,  to perform a
part upon the trumpet,  at church,  where
the chapel-matter Schmidt having heard
him,  offered to prevail on the king to
have him regularly taught that inftru-
ment,  in order to qualify him for the
place of court trumpeter ;  but Quantz,
however ardently he might have wiffied
for an office at court,  declined the acceptance of this,  well-knowing that the good
tafte to which he afpired,  was not to be
learned upon that inftrument,  at lead as
it was then played in Drefden.

In 1718,  the Polifh or royal .  chapel
was inflituted ;  it was to confift of
twelve performers,  eleven were already
chofen,  and a hautbois-player,  only,  was
now wanting,  to complete the number.
After undergoing the feveral trials,  and
®  giving

o

[  170  ]

giving the requifite proofs of his abilities,
he had the happinefs to be inverted with
that employment,  by the director,  baron
Seyfertitz,  with a falary of 150 dollars,
and a lodging.

This was an important period in his
life,  and in the exercife of his profeflion.
The violin,  which had hitherto been his

M.

principal inftrument,  was now laid afide
for the hautbois,  upon which,  however,
he was prevented from diftinguiflhing
himfelf,  by the feniority of his brethren.
Mortified at this circumftance,  he applied
himfelf ferioufly to the German flute,
upon which he had formerly made fome
progrefs without a mafter  ;  but his motive
now for refuming it,  was the certainty
of his having no rival,  in the king’s
band,  as M.  Friefe,  the firft flute,  had
no great pafiion for mufic,  and readily re-
linquifhed to him his place.

In order to work upon fure ground,
Quantz took leflons at this time of the famous BufFardin,  with whom,  however,

he

1

[  *7*  3

he only played quick movements,  in
which this celebrated flute-player chiefly

excelled.  The fcarcity of pieces,  com-

«

pofed exprefly for the German flute,  was
fuch,  at this period,  that the performers
upon that inflrument were obliged to
adopt thofe of the hautbois,  or violin,
and by altering or tranfpofing,  accommodate them to their purpofe,  as well as
they could.

This ftimulated Quantz to compofe
for himfelf ;  he had not as yet ever received any regular inftrudions in counter-

»

point,  fo that,  after he had committed
his thoughts to paper,  he was obliged to
have recourfe to others to corred them.
Schmidt,  the chapel- mafter,  had pro-
mifed to teach him compolition,  but
delayed keeping his word from time to
time,  and Quantz was afraid of applying
to Heincchen,  his collegue,  for fear of
offending Schmidt,  as thefe matters were
upon bad terms together.  In the mean
time,  for want of other affiftance,  he

dill-

[  J?2  ]

diligently fludied the fcores of great
mafters,  and without ftealing from them,
endeavoured to imitate their manner of
putting parts together,  in trios,  and concertos.

<  About this time he had the good fortune to commence a friendfbip with Pi-
fendel,  now appointed concert-mafter,
in the room of Volumier.  Quantz is
very warm in his praifes of Bifcndel,
whom he calls a profound theorift,  a great
performer,  and a truly honeft man.  It
was from this worthy concert-mader that
he learned to perform an adagio ,  and to
compofe in many parts.  Pifendel had
in his youth been taught to ling by
the famous Piftocchi,  and had received
inftruflions,  on the violin,  from To-
rellij however,  having travelled through
France and Italy,  where he had acquired
the peculiarities in the tafte of both
countries,  he fo blended them together
as to form a third genus,  or mixed ftyle
of writing and playing,  which was half
...>  v French

•  r  *733

French and half Italian.  Influenced by
his example,  Quantz declares,  that he
always preferred this compound ftyle,  to
the national one,  or that of his own
country.

At tne marriage of the prince royal of

Poland,  in 171 9,  feveral Italian operas

*

were performed at Drefden.  Lotti,  the
famous Venetian maejlro di capelin ,  together with the moft celebrated fingers
of Italy,  male and female,  were called
thither upon this occafion  ;  thefe were
the firfl:  Italian operas which Quantz had
heard,  and he confeffes,  that the performances of them gave him a very favourable
idea of the genuine and rational Italian
tafte,  from which he thinks later times
have too much deviated.

The principal fingers in thefe operas,
were Senefino,  Berfelli,  the wife of
Lotti,  the Tefi,  Dureftante,  and Faustina.  M.  Quantz charadterifes feveral of
them,  in fo difcriminate and mafterly a

manner,

[  t74 j

manner,  that I  (hall follow him more
exactly than I have hitherto done.

Trancefco Barnardi>  called SeneJino>
had a powerful,  clear,  equal,  and fweet
contralto voice*,  with a perfect intonation,  and an excellent fhake ;  his
manner of finging was mafterly,  and his
elocution unrivalled  ;  though he never
loaded adagios with too many ornaments,
yet he delivered the original and effentiai
notes,  with the utmoft refinement.  He
fung allegros with great fire,  and marked;
rapid divifions,  from the cheft,  in an articulate and pleafing manner ;  his countenance was well calculated for the ftage,
and his adtion was natural and noble :  to

*  M.  Quantz calls it a low mezzo foprano voice,
which feldom went higher than F j but as this
account was drawn up,  in the younger part of
Senefino’s life,  before he went to England,  it is
natural to imagine,  that his voice may afterwards
have loft fome of its high notes  ;  for in all the
airs which Handel made for him he is ftri&ly
confined to the limits of a true contralto .

thefe

t

I

[  *75  ]

thefe he joined a figure that was truly ma-
jedic,  but more fuited to the part of a
hero than a lover.

Matteo Berfelli had a thin,  high ,foprano
voice,  the compafs of which was fo extraordinary,  that he could go from the lowed C,  in the treble,  to F in altijJimoy with
the greated eafe,  by which he furprifed
the audience more than by his art in
finging.  In adagios he difeovered very
little pafiion,  and in allegros he ventured
at few difficulties ;  his countenance was
rather difagreeable,  and his adlion totally
devoid of fire.

Santa Stella Lotti had a full,  drong,
foprano voice,  a true intonation,  and a
good  (hake ;  high tones gave her little
trouble  ;  her principal excellence was in
finging adagios .  It was from her that
Quantz fird heard what profefiors call
tempo rubato :  her figure,  on the dage,
was full of dignity,  and her adtion,  particularly in elevated parts,  could not be
furpalfed.

Fit -

[  176 3

Vittoria Teji had by nature a mafcu«
line,  ftrong,  contralto voice.  In 1719
fhe generally fung,  at Drefden,  fuch airs
as are made for bale voices ;  but afterwards,  befides the majeftic and ferious
ftyle,  fhe had occafionally fomething co-
quettifh in her manner,  which was very
pleafing.  The compafs of her voice was
fo extraordinary,  that neither to fing high
nor low,  gave her trouble.  She was not
remarkable for her performance of rapid
and difficult pafiages ;  but fhe feemed
born to captivate every fpedator by her
a&ion,  principally in male parts,  which
fhe performed in a mofl natural and intelligent manner

But,  to return to Quantz.  After deferring the talents of the fingers,  he informs us,  that this famous opera,  at Dref-
den,  was broke up by a quarrel between
Heinechen,  the King of Poland's chapel-
mafter,  and Sene fin o,  who this fame year,
1719,  went to England,  for the firft
time.

*  See Vol .  L p.  318-

No-

*  V  .V

[  l77  ]

Nothing very interefting occurs in the
life of Quantz,  from this period,  till the
year 1723,  when he took a journey with
Weifs,  the famous lutanift,  and Graun,
the compofer,  to Prague.

1

About this time,  moft of the great
muficians of Europe were affembled together,  in this city,  by order of the emperor Charles VI,  to celebrate the fetti-
val of his being crowned,  king of Bohemia.  Hiftory does not furnifh a more
glorious event for mufic,  than this fo-
lemnity,  nor a fimilar inftanceof fo great
a number of eminent profefifors,  of any
one art,  being collected together.

Upon this occation,  there was an opera
performed in the open air,  by a hundred
voices,  and by two hundred inftruments.
There was not an indifferent finger a-
mong the principal performers,  all were
of the firft clafs.  The male parts were
filled by Orfini,  Domenico,  Careftini,
Gaffati,  Borofini,  and Braun,  a German
baritono ;  the female,  by the two fitters,
Vol.  II.  N Am-

[  i  ?$  I

Amberville,  one of whom was afterwards
married to Peroni,  a famous player,  on
the violoncello,  and the other to Borof-
fini,  the finger.

The opera was called la Conftanza e
Fortezza ,  and compofed by the famous
old Fux,  imperial chapel-mafter at Vienna.  The muiic,  which was in the
old church ftyle,  was coarfe and dry;
but,  at the fame time,  grand,  and had a
better e fifed,  perhaps,  with fo immenfe
a band,  and in fuch an immenfe fpace,
than could have been produced by more
delicate compofitions.

The choruflfes were in the French
ftyle,  and ferved for dances  ;  Caldara beat
the time;  but Fux,  who had the gout,
was brought into the theatre,  in a chair,
and placed near the Emperor.

As it was upon the finging in this
opera that Benda,  formed his ftyle,  and
as I have been told by the two Bezozzis,

i

of Turin,  and others who were prefent,
that it furpaffed all the  -  vocal performances-

[  1 79  ]

mances of other times,  I  {hall here in-
fert a character of the feveral fingers,  for
the entertainment of fuch of my readers
as have never heard them,  nor are verfed
in the German language.

Gaetano Orfmi was one of the greateft
fingers that ever exifted ;  he had a powerful,  even,  affecting contralto voice,  of a
confiderable compafs ;  his fhake was perfect,  and his portamento9 excellent.  In
allegros ,  he articulated divifions,  particularly in triplets,  mo ft admirably,  and always from the bread.  In adagios he was
fo perfedl a mailer of every thing which
pleafes and affedts,  that he took entire
poflefllon of the hearts of all that heard'
him ;  he was many years in the imperial
fervice,  and though he lived to an advanced age,  he preferved his fine voice
to the lafi:  *  .

Domenico had one of the fineft:  foprano
voices that has ever been heard on the

*  He died at Vienna,  about the year,  1 750.

N  %  ftage ;

[  .So]

flags ;  it was fo clear and penetrating,  as
to make its way through all obftrudtions,
and,  with this great force,  was fweet,
and well toned  ;  however he neither fung
nor adted with much fpirit.

Pietro GaJJati was more remarkable as
a great adlor,  than finger.

Eorofini had a.  fp irked,  and flexible,
tenor voice.

Braun ,  though his voice was that of
a low pitch,  from whence delicacy is not
expedted,  had fo much take and expref-
fion,  that he fung adagios in a moil pleaf-
ing and affedling manner.

Giovanni Carejlmi had a firong and
clear foprano voice,  which,  afterwards,
changed into the fulled,  fined,  and deeped counter-tenor,  that has ever been heard.
When he performed at Prague,  his com-
pafs was fixteen notes,  from B in the
bafe,  to c in alt ;  he had a wonderful
facility of executing difficult divifion3
from the ched,  like Farinelli,  and thole
of the Bernacchi fchool  ;  and graced,  and

varied

[  i8i  ]

varied paiTage$,ufually,  with great fuccefs,
{though in this he was fom.etimes a little
licentious and extravagant.  His adtion
was admirable*  and,  like his linging,
full of fire ;  but,  after this time he
improved,  greatly,  in his manner of performing adagios .  He continued on the
ftage,  with the high eft reputation,  for
more than thirty years;  in 1735 he was
in England,  and in 1750 went to Berlin,  where he continued till 1755,  after
which,  he retired to Italy,  and there,  foon
ended his days,

M.  Qjaantz,  not long after the congrefs
at Prague,  went to Italy,  in the fuite of
count Lagnafco,  with the confent of
his royal mafter,  the king of Poland.
He left Drefden,  in May 1724,  and,  when
he arrived at Rome,  he found that Vivaldi had juft introduced the Lombard
ftyle,  in that city,  with which the citizens were fo captivated,  that they
would hear no other.

N 3

During

[  *82  ]  *

Daring his refidence at Rome,  he took

o r

leifons in counterpoint of the famous
Gafparini,  who was,  at this time,  72 years
of age 5 and whofe good-nature and probity feem to have made as deep an im-
preffion upon M.  Quantz,  as his mufical
merit.

The cantatas and operas of Gafparini,
which were more numerous than thofe
of any other compofer of his time,  except Alef.  Scarlatti,  were in the higheft
ettimation,  at the beginning of the p refen t
century.  M.  Quantz attributes to him the
invention of accompanied recitatives  ;  he
compofed twenty-five  -operas for the
theatre at Venice  ;  and among his learned compofitions,  a mafs in four parts,
all in ftridt canon,  is extremely cele-
brated.

M.  Quantz,  after ftudying counterpoint,  which he calls  'mufic for the eyes ,
during fix months,  under this matter,
went to work for the ear,  and compofed

_ folos.

[  iS3  ]

folos,  duos,  trios,  and concertos ;  however,  he confeffes,  that counterpoint had
its ufe in writing pieces of many,  parts;
though he was obliged to unlearn many
things,  in practice ,  which theory had
taught him,  in order to avoid that dry,
and ftiff ftyle,  which,  too clofe an adherence to rules,  is apt to produce  ;  upon
this occalion,  he very judicioufly obferves,
that invention is the iirft requifite in a
compofer,  and that it behoves him to
preferve a friend  (hip between harmony
and melody.

In 1725,  he went to Naples,  where
he met with his coutryman Haife,  who
then fludied under Alef.  Scarlatti.  Haife
had not,  as yet,  difting-uilhed himfelf by
any compoiitions for the ftage ;  however,
it was at this time,  that a confiderable
Neapolitan banker employed him to fet
a ferenata for two voices,  which he did
in the pretence of Quantz ;  the lingers
who performed in it,  were Farinelli and
Tefi.  Haife gained fo much reputation

N 4 by

I

[  184  ]

by this production,  that it paved the way
to his future fuccefs,  and he was foon
after appointed compofer of the great
opera at the theatre royal.

Quantz intreated Haffe to introduce
him to his mafter,  Scarlatti,  to which he
readily confented  ;  but upon mentioning
him to the old compofer,  he faid,  t€  my
“  fon,  you know I hate wind inftru-
tc ments,  they are never in tune.”  However,  Haffe did not ceafe importuning
him,  till he had obtained the permiffion
he required.

In the vifit which he made to Scarlatti,
M.  Quantz fays,  that he had an opportunity of hearing him play on the harp-
fichord,  which he did in a very learned
manner ;  but obferves,  that his abilities
on that inftrument were not equal to
thofe of his fon  * .

Before his departure from Naples,  M.

Quantz frequently heard concerts,  at the

t  •

■r  •*  •  •,  *  '•  *  *y  '  i  •  ,-i.  r  •%

*  Quantz had heard Mimo Scarlatti,  during
his refidence at Rome,

duke

[  i85  ]

duke of Lichtenftein’s,  in which Haffe,
Farinelli,  Tefi,  and Francifchello,  were
employed.

In 1726,  he was at Venice,  during the
performance of two rival operas,  Siface,
compofed by Porpora,  and Siroe ,  by Vinci  ;  the latter was mod applauded.  The
Cav.  Nicolini,  a contralto>  la Romanina,
a deep foprano ,  and the famous tenor,
Paita,  were the principal fingers in thefe
dramas.

San Martini,  the celebrated performer,

V

on the hautbois,  who afterwards efta-
blifhed himfelf in London,  was now at
Venice,  as was Vivaldi.

At Turin,  he met with Somis,  under
whom,  Le Claire was at that time a
fcholar,  on the violin.

From Turin he went to Paris,  which
with refpeft to mufic,  was going from
one extreme to another.

“  I was difpleafed with the French
ce tafte now,”  fays M.  Quantz,  “  though
cc I had heard it formerly with patience,

“  The

>

*

[  286  ]

*4 The old,  worn  -  out,  fecond  -  hand
“  thoughts,  and paflfages ilLexprefied,
gc difgufted me now,  as much as a ftale
“  difh warmed again.  The refemblance
“  between recitative and air,  with the
<c affeded and unnatural howling of the
“  fingers,  particularly the women,  ihock-
“  ed my ears.”

M.  Quantz was the firft who applied
an additional key to the German flute,
in order to corred its imperfedions ;  and
it was in the courfe of this year,  1726,
that he made the difcovery.

In 1727 he arrived in London,  where
he found the opera in a very flourifhing
ftate,  under the diredion of Handel.
The drama of Admeius was now in run,
of which,  he fays,  the mufic was grand
and pompous.  Senefino performed the
firft male part,  and Cuzzoni and Faufti-
na were the principal women.

I fhall prefent the younger part of my
readers with a charader of thefe rival
Syrens,  Cuzzoni and Fauftina,  from

Qu_antz,

.  [  187  ]

Quantz,  whofe judgment feems to be
untainted by the partial rage of the
times.

Cuzzoni had a very agreeable,  and clear
foprano voice ;  a pure intonation,  and a
fine  (hake ;  her compafs extended two
o&aves,  from C to c in alt.  Her ftyle
of finging was innocent and affefting;
her graces did not feem artificial,  from
the eafy and neat manner in which  (he
executed them 5 however,  they took
pofiefiion of the foul of every auditor,  by
her tender and touching exprefiion.  She
had no great rapidity cf execution,  in
allegros but there was a roundnefs and
fmoothnefs,  which were neat and pleading.  Yet,  with all thefe advantages,  it
muft be owned that  (he was rather cold
in her action,  and that her figure was not
advantageous for the ftage.

Fauftina had a mezzo-foprano voice,
that was lefs clear than penetrating.
Her compafs was now only from B b to
G in alt ;  bul after this time,  (he extended

[  i88  ]

tended its limits downwards.  She pof-
fefied what the Italians call un cantar
granito  :  her execution was articulate and
brilliant.  She had a fluent tongue for
pronouncing words rapidly and diftin&ly,
and a flexible throat for diviflons,  with
fo beautiful and quick a fhake,  that  (he
could put it in motion upon fhort notice,
juft when  (he would.  The paflages might
'  be fmooth,  or by leaps,  or confift of iterations of the fame tone,  their execution
was equally eafy to her,  as to any inftru-
ment whatever.  She was doubtlels the
firft who inUoduced,  with fuccefs,'  a
fwift repetition of the fame tone.  She
lung adagios with great paflion and ex*
preflion,  but not equally well,  if fuch
deep forrow were to be impreflfed on the
hearer,  as might require dragging.  Aid-

/

ing,  or notes of fyncopation,  and tempo
rubato .

She had a very happy memory,  in arbitrary changes and embellifhments,  and
a clear and quick judgment in giving to

words

Words their full power and exprefiion.
In her adion fhe was very happy ;  and
as  (he perfedly poflfeffed that flexibility
of mufcles and features,  which confti-
tutes face-playing,  fhe fucceeded equally
well in furious,  amorous,  and tender
parts  :  in fhort,  fhe was born for finging
and for ading.

The violence of party,  fays M.  Quantz,
for the two fingers,  Cuzzoni and Faufti-
na,  was fo great,  that when one began
to applaud,  the other was fure to hifs ;  on
which account operas ceafed for fome
time in London.

If the frequenters of mufical dramas
had not then been enemies to their own
pleafure,  the merit of thefe fingers confided
of excellencies fo different and diftind,
that they might have applauded each by
turns,  and,  from their feveral perfedions,
by turns,  have received equal delight.

Unluckily for moderate people,  who
feek pleafure from talents wherever they
can be found,  the violence of thefe feuds

has

[  J9°  ]

has cured all fucceeding managers,  of the
extravagance of bringing over two fingers
of the fame fex,  at a time,  of difputable
abilities.

As it is natural to wifh to know the
opinion of Grangers concerning our own
country,  I fhall proceed a little farther
with M.  Quantz,  in his account of the
date of mufic in London,  when he was
there.

The opera orcheftra,  which confided
chiefly of Germans,  with a few Italians,
and two or three Englilhmen,  was led
by Caftrucci,  and,  being under Handel's
direction,  all went well.

The fecond opera which M.  Quantz
heard in London,  was compofed by Buo-
noncini j but this was not fo much approved as the other,  for Handel's depth
and folidity overpowered the lightnefs
and grace of Buononcini.

Attilio and Tofi were now in London,
which at this time did not abound in folo
players upon any inftrument.  The principal

4

[  I91  ]

cipal were Handel,  on the harpfichord
and organ  ;  Geminiani,  a great matter on
the violin  ;  Dubourg,  his fcholar,  an
Englifhman,  who was a pleafing performer on that inttrument ;  the two Caf-
trucci’s,  who were brothers,  and tolerable folo players :  Weidemann,  a German,  and Fefting,  an Englifhman,  on
the German flute,  with Mauro d’Alaia,
who came to England with Fauftina;  he
was a good performer on the violin,  and
an excellent leader  ;  his manner of playing was clear and diftindt,  but he never
ventured at great difficulties.

M.  Quantz acquaints us,  that he had
the good fortune to be well received by
feveral people of rank,  who endeavoured
to perfuade him to fettle in England ;
Handel advifed him to this meafure;
lady Pembroke,  a great judge and en-
courager of mufic,  propofed to make him
a benefit,  in which baron Bothmar
would have taken care of his intereft,
but he declined it;  for,  as he was ftill

a fer-

/  l J9*  ]

a fervant of the king of Poland,  he did
not chufe to perform in public,  thinking
it a duty to his prince to offer him the
firft fruits of his travels.

Upon his return to Drefden,  he was
eftablifhed in the King's chapel,  with
an addition to his former falary of 250
dollars a year.  He now entirely quitted
the hautbois,  fuppofing it hurtful to the
embouchure of the flute,  which,  from this
time,  he made his foie ftudy.

In 1728,  he went to Berlin,  with baron
Seyfertiz,  in the fuite of the king of
Poland  $  where he was obliged,  at the
command of the Queen of Pruflia,  and
with the permiflion of his royal matter,
to remain for fome months.  Pifendel,
Weifs,  and Buffardin were,  by the fame
order,  called thither.  After he had had
the honour of playing before the queen,
two or three times,  he was offered a place
and penfion of 800 dollars a year.  He
was very willing to accept of them,  but
the King his matter would not grant his

con-

L J93 3

confent :  however,  this prince gave him
a general permiflion to go to Berlin,  as
often as he was deftred.

This year,  1728,  the prince royal,  his
prefent majefty of Pruflia,  determined to

learn the German flute,  and M.  Quantz

\

had the honour to teach him.  On this
account,  he was obliged to go twice a
year to Berlin,  Ruppin,  or Reinfberg,
the feveral refidences of his royal fcho-
lar.

After the death of the king of Poland,
in 1733,  his fon,  Auguftus III.  not
chufing to difmifs M.  Quantz,  raifed his
appointment to 80c dollars,  and confirmed the permiflion which had been granted by his royal father,  for his going oc-
cafionally to Berlin.

In 1734,  he publifhed his firfl:  folos ;
but he does not acknowledge the fonatas,
which were printed under his name,  in
Holland,  about that time.

In 1739,  M.  Quantz finding a great
fcarcity of German flutes,  undertook to

Vol.  II.  O bore

[  194  ]

bore them himfelf for the ufe of his pupils  ;  an enterprize which,  after waids,  he
found to be very lucrative.

In 1741,  he was again invited to Berlin,  in order to enter into the fervice of his
royal fcholar,  now King of Pruffia,  with
offers of an annual penfion of 2000 dollars
for life ;  a feparate payment for compofi-*
tions;  100 ducats for every flute he fhould
deliver ;  and an exemption from playing in
the orcheilra,  or any where elfe,  but in the
King's chamber,  as well as from depen-
dance on any other commands than thofe
of his majefty ;  which terms,  as the
King of Poland was too gracious longer
to refufe his difmiffion,  M.  Quantz was
unable to refill.

In J752,  he publilhed his Art of Play-
mg the German Flute ;  and it was this
year that he invented the new joint for
the upper-piece of the flute,  by which
means,  without drawing out the middle
piece,  and without hurting the tone,  the
inftrument may be raifed or lowered,  half

0

a note.

[  i95 3

And now,  having traced our induf~
trious mufician through the troublefome
mazes by which he arrived at the temple
of Fortune,  we  (hall leave him to the
enjoyment of that reputable eafe,  that
otium cum dignitate ,  to which every artifl
in years,  and in his fenfes,  afpires.

Upon quitting M.  Quantz,  I went to
the parade,  in hopes of hearing military
mufic,  as well as of feeing military difci-
pline,  in its utmoft perfection.

The parade at Potfdam is in a field,
enclofed by a wall,  where no  (tranger is
permitted to enter,  without leave from
the captain of the guard.  With refpeCt
to mufic,  the fame  {lability of ftyle,  and
of talte,  is obfervable here as at court  $
and I did not find that the Pruffians,  in
their marches,  had advanced a fingle flep
towards novelty,  or refinement,  fince the
firft years of his prefent majefty’s reign ;
for neither the airs that were played,  nor
the inflruments that played them,  had
any peculiar merit :  however,  the old-

O a fafhioned

J?f>  J

fathioned march,  of dot and go one ,  is
perhaps,  beft calculated to mark the.
time,  and to regulate the fteps of the
foldiers.

OJ  £  'l  '  *11 l j  !" «  *  i  *  *  .  ~  ,;<■  *  j

In vifiting the principal ftreets and
fquares of this beautiful city,  which is
well-built,  well-paved,  magnificent,  and

;  »  j.  t  *  i i A A  *-  -1  *  I  ■  ».  i  -•>  \  ,«i  *  •  r  ';*  ,  .  '  7*  '

new,  I could not help obferving,  that
foot paffengers were here,  as well as in
every other city of Europe,  except Lon-

«  J  ^  *  •  i  .  '  .  JL  ‘  ■  k)  >  V

don,  expofed to accidents from being
mixed with horfes and carriages,  as well
as from the infolence and brutality of
their riders and drivers,  for want of a

f t r !  ;  i .  ’  ■  ’  i i v t j* ^

foot -path  *,

I know not whether it has been remarked by writers of travels,  that on the
Via Appia ,  and other ancient roads in

•  »  •  •  %  t 4 i t  ■■  i  *  j i  ;  i 4«

Italy,  a place was fet apart,  on each fide,
for the convenience of pedeftrians ;  and
in vifiting Pompeia,  where an entire antique Roman ftreet has been dug out,  I

*  In Par, is,  a great number of citizens are annually killed and maimed fo$  want of this retreat.

obferved

obferved the fame thing.  A Roman citizen,  whether patrician,  or plebeian,  was
a refpedtable character  $  and,  perhaps,
England is the only country,  at prefent,
where the common people are fufficiently
refpe&ed,  for their lives and limbs to be
thought worth preferving.

The prefent rage for architecture,  in his
Pruffian majefty,  is carried on with fuch
excefs,  that,  in Potfdam,  buildings which
have all the external grandeur and elegance of palaces,  are made the habitations of common foldiers,  who rather
exift than live in them,  upon five creu-
zers,  two pence half-penny,  a day.  However,  this paffion is hereditary,  for the
late King of Pruffia made it a condition,
in beftowing offices and employments
about his court and perfon,  that each
incumbent  (hould build a houfe;  referving
to himfelf the pleafure of planning and
conftructing the front.

I did not quit Potfdam,  before I had
again had the honour to partake of Lord

O 3 Mar-

[  193  ]

MarfhaPs hofpitality,  by dining with his
lordfhip a fecond time ;  where wit,  good
breeding,  and good humour,  crowned
the board.  After which,  while I was
preparing for my return to Berlin,  I received a mefiage from col.  Forcade,  to
acquaint me that the prince of Prufiia
defired me to fup with him,  at half an
hour paft fix,  and that he would prefent
me to his royal highnefs.  This great
and unexpected honour fomewhat embar-
rafled me,  as it was my full intention to
get to Berlin that evening,  time enough to
go to the Accademia ,  or concert,  to which
I had been invited,  and which,  I had been
told,  would be made as brilliant in performance as poffible,  on my account ;
but the fear of not appearing fufficiently
fenfible of the prince’s condefcenfion,  and
indeed of not executing properly the
commifiion which I had undertaken concerning the books,  determined me to flay.

At half an hour paft fix in the evening,  I therefore went to the palace of

the

[  *99  ]

the prince royal,  where I cxpedled to
hear mufic ;  but cards,  and converfation,
filled up the time,  till fupper.  At my
firft entrance,  1 had the honour of being
prefented to his princefs,  who is fair,
rather tall,  and pofifefled of that pleafing
degree of plumpnefs,  which the French
call 1 embonpoint charmant :  with a perfon
infinitely lefs agreeable than falls to the
fhare of this princefs,  her uncommonly
gracious and condefcending addrefs and
manner would captivate every one whom
{he honours with her notice.

Her royal highnefs had heard that I
had been with Lord Marfhal,  and that I
was attached to mufic ;  and upon thefe
fubjedts the politely dwelt a confiderable
time.  She plays the harpfichord well
herfelf,  as I was allured,  and was very
curious and converfible about mufic :
even while at cards,  {he condefcended to
addrefs herfelf to me very frequently,
and at laft aflced me if I had known her
brother,  when he was in England  ? — I

Q 4 then

[  200  ]J

then recollected,  and not before,  that her
royal highnefs was a princefs of Hefife-
Darmftadt,  and filler to that prince of
HefTe-Darmftadt,  who laft year made the
tour of England,  and to whom I had had
the honour of being prefented in London.

During this time,  a young prince of
two years of age,  and his lifter of only a
year old,  were brought into the card-
room to the princefs their mother ;  and,
not long after,  the prince of Pruffia entered,  to whom I had the honour of be~
ing prefented.  His royal highnefs is tall,
and of a rqanly,  plain,  natural,  and agreeable character.  At fupper,  he was fo
gracious as to make me fit down on his
left hand,  and to addrefs the difcourfe to
jne almoft the whole evening.  He was
chearful and open,  and feemed very well
acquainted with the prefent ftate of the
feveral countries of Europe,  particularly
England.  Mafic had a confiderable fibare
in the converfation,  and it was not diffi-

3  \  '  *  1  .  ?  i  *  ■  •  ‘

I

f 201  ]

t y

cult to difcover that his royal highnefs is
lefs ftrongly attached to old mufic,  and
to old matters,  than his majetty.

BERLIN.,

The evening after my return to this
city,  October 3d,  M.  Lintner was fo  -■>*

-

obliging as to conduct me to a private
concert,  compofed of the principal pro-
feflbrs,  and gentlemen performers of Berlin.  It was performed at the apartments
of M.  Kone,  the King of Pruffias firft
violin,  in one of the fine houfes of the
New Town,  built by his majetty.

I here heard a concerto of the late
concert-matter Graun’s compofition,  performed by M.  Kone,  with more force
than delicacy  \  a difficult flute concerto,  of
Quantz,  by M.  Lintner,  very neatly executed  ;  and a concerto,  on the fame inftru-
ment,  by M.  Riedt,  of his own compofition,  of which,  both the flyle and performance,  were rather ancient and coarfe  $  with

t

feveral fymphonies of HalTe and Graun.

With-  '

[  202  ]

Without farther difcuffion of the me?
rits of the feveral comoofitions which

JL

I heard at this concert,  I muft ob-
ierve,  that the muficians of many parts
of Europe,  have difeovered and adopted
certain refinements,  in the manner of
executing even old mufic,  which are
not yet received in the Berlin fchool,
where pianos  %nd fortes are but little attended to,  and where each performer
feems trying to furpafs his neighbour,  in
nothing fo much as loudnefs ;  a content
tion which very much refembles,  the
old naval fport of running the hoop,  in
which each fpitefully itrives to 0adt with
more force than thofe around himj for
as the chief exertion of the failor is to be
felt ,  that of the Berlin mufician is to be
heard .

If I may depend on.  my own fenfations,
I fhould imagine,  that the mufical performances of this country want contraft ;
and there feems to be not only too many
notes in them,  but thofe notes are ex-

4

preffed

[  203  ]

preffed with too little attention to the
degree of force,  that the inllruments,
for which they are made are capable of.
Sound can only be augmented to a certain degree,  beyond that,  is noife .  I
have elfewhere laid,  I confefs,  that even
noife is fometimes fuccefsfully made,  in
full pieces ;  but,  when this is attempted,
it Ihould be for the fa*ke of that contrail
and oppolition of paffages and mulical
phrafes,  by which one contributes to the
effedl of another ;  for,  when a piece is
executed with fuch unremitting fury,  as
I have fometimes heard,  it ceafes to be
mulic  ;  and,  inftead of a part,  the whole
deferves no other appellation than that
of noife.

At this concert I met with M.  Ruck,
formerly mulician to prince Henry,  his
Pruffian majefty’s brother.  This performer vifited England during the laft war,
at which time I frequently heard him
play the folos of Benda,  on the violin,
with great feeling and expreffion  ;  he
has fince relinquilhed mafic,  as a,  profef-

fion.

-  I 204  ]

fion,  but,  as a dilettante,  he has not been
idle ;  he has a ftrong hand on the violin,
with great knowledge of the fingerboard  ;  and has compofed feveral concertos,  folos,  and fymphonies,  in a pleaf-
ing and brilliant ftyle ;  but fo modern ,  that,
at Berlin,  he is regarded as a heretic.  I
went home with him from the concert,
and accompanied him in a great number
of his own pieces.

Sunday 4th.  This morning I was vi-
fited by M.  Agricola,  M.  Reidt,  the German flute-player,  who has been more
than twenty years in the fervice of his
Pruffian majefty,  and M.  Schiiler,  a dilettante of great merit,  and intelligence in
mufical matters.

M.  Agricola was fo obliging as to go
with me to St.  Peter’s church,  which has
the largeft organ,  and the beft organift
in Berlin  ;  this inflrument was begun in
the time,  and at the expence of the late
king,  and was intended to be the largeft

in the world.  Since the death of this

\  *  *  *.  *  (

prince

[  205 J

prince it has remained unfinifhed,  as his
prefent majefty’s zeal for the church has
not hitherto inclined him to complete it,
after the original plan.  The organ is
placed over the pulpit this inftrument
was to have contained 1 50 flops,  and to
have had fix fets of keys,  befides pedals  ;
at prefent,  its whole contents are 50 flops,
with three fets of keys for the hands,  and
one for the feet ;  but,  even in this dimi-
nithed ftate,  it is too powerful for the
building,  and each tone is continued fo
long,  by the reverberation,  after the
hand is taken off,  or removed to another,  that all is confufed and indif-
tindt.

M.  Bertuch,  the organift,  however,
is a good player  ;  he has a ftrong hand,
and great knowledge of the infirument.
After playing extempore,  a very raafter-
]y introduction,  he executed a very learned and difficult double fugue ,  compofed
by old Bach,  exprefly for the ufe of organs
with pedals.

In

[  206  ]

In the church of St.  Mary,  there is a
fine organ,  built by Wagner ;  M.  Ringk,
the organift,  is much efteemed as a performer of extempore fugues ,  though he
is poffefTed of lels brilliancy of finger
than the organift of St.  Peter.

I had this afternoon the pleafure of
another conference with M.  Marpurg.
It was a mortifying circumftance to me,
that the multiplicity and variety of my
enquiries in this city,  and the little time
allotted me for making them,  prevented
me from more frequently enjoying the
converfation of this gentleman,  whofe
learning and intelligence,  on the fubjeft
of mufic,  are equally extenfive and profound.

Upon quitting M.  Marpurg,  I made a
fecond vifit to mademoifelle Schmeling,
who favoured me with feveral fongs of
uncommon rapidity,  and compafs ;  her
powers,  in thefe particulars,  are truely
aftonilhing  ;  but fhe is frequently compelled to abufe thefe powers by the airs

that

[  207  ]

that are given her to execute,  in which  (he
has pafiages,  that degrade the voice into
an inftrument,  indeed,  often fuch as a
player of tafte would be afhamed to execute,  upon any inftrument.

Breaking a common chord into common arpeggios and paflages of no meaning,  fuch as may be feen in the fecond
allegro of Corelli’s third folo,  does not
feem to me an employment that reflects
much honour,  either upon a compofer,  or
performer.

There was ftill a little want of bright-
nefs in the middle of madlle Schmel-
ing’s voice j and I can imagine it poffible
for her ftill to improve in ftnging adagios ,
though not in the execution of allegros .
She does not feem,  at prefent,  to be placed
in the beft fchool for advancement in
tafte,  expreflion,  and high finifhing y for,
befidea the partiality of the king,  to
particular compofitions,  the principal men
fingers of this opera are not now at their
beft period,  and,  if they were,  variety is

7 perhaps

/

[  208 3

perhaps more neceffary to awaken genius,
and ferment the latent feeds of tafte in a
young performer,  than the example of
a few,  individuals,  which infpires no
other rage than that of mere imitation .  If
mademoifelle Schmeling were to go to
Italy,  (he would not perhaps meet with
greater powers than her own,  in any
one performer ;  but,  by adopting the
peculiar excellencies of many performers,
of different fchools,  and talents,  her ftyle,
like the Venus of Apelles,  would be an
aggregate of all that is exquifite and
beautiful.

At the houfe of mademoifelle Schmeling,  I heard this morning M.  Mara
execute,  with great abilities,  feveral
pieces on the Violoncello ;  he is a young
man,  and the fon of a performer of the
fame name,  and upon the fame inflru-
ment,  whofe talents have been much'
celebrated in Germany.

Odtober 5,  I this morning vifited
M.  Sulzer,  member of the royal academy

'  r,"  ...  '  1  ’  "  of

t 209  ]

of gentlemen at Berlin  ;  he is author of
feveral works in literature,  which are
much efteemed.  This gentleman is particularly attached to mufic,  and has been
very diffufe upon it in his Theory of Polite
Arts ,  where he has manifefted great tafte
and refinement,  as well as depth and
learning,  in his manner of treating feveral of the mufical articles  \  this work
is written in the form of a dictionary,  of
which only the firft volume,  extending
from the letter A to I,  is,  as yet,  pub-
liihed ;  however,  the fecond volume,
which will complete the defign,  is in
great forwardnefs.

We had a long mufical conference to^
gether,  and I found him to be,  not only
well-read in books concerning mufic,  but,
an ingenious and refined thinker,  on the
fubjeCL

M.  Schuler,  the dilettante ,  whom I
mentioned before,  and who had been to
obliging,  as to introduce me to this gentleman,  conduced me afterwards to M.
Vol.  II.  P Kirn-

{  210  ]

Kirnberger,  a matter whom I was very
defirous to fee,  as I was well acquainted
with many of his compofitions,  and had
heard much of his mufical controverttes.

John Philip Kirnberger was born in
1721,  at Saalfeld,  in Thuringia,  a province of Saxony ;  at the age of eighteen,  he
went to Leiplic,  where he ftudied under
Sebaftian Bach,  till 1741,  when he went
into Poland,  where he was admitted into
the fervice of feveral Folifh princes ;  and
afterwards,  appointed director of the
malic at a convent.  In 1751 he went
to Drefden,  where he fludied the violin
under Fielder,  and fome time after,  entered into the fervice of the king of Pruf-
fia,  as a performer on that inftrument;
at prefent,  he is court mufician to her
royal highnefs,  princefs Amelia of Pruttia.
The harpfichord,  which was his firft,
is likewife his beft inttrument ;  and his
compoiitions for that,  and for the organ,
are very numerous,  as well as his polemical and theoretical writings.  Befides

thefe

f 211  ]

thefe publications,  he has been editor of
four colledions of harpfichord pieces,
which include feveral of his own;  and
of all thefe,  he has marked the fingering,  according to the rules of C.  P.  E.
Bach.

He played at my requeft upon a clavichord,  during my vifit,  fome of his fugues
and church mufic,  which are very learned
and curious  ;  he likewife prefented me
with a copy of his mufical injiitutes ,  and a
fliort dilTertation upon temperament ,  which
he has lately published  * ,  as well as of
feveral manufcript compofitions.

After this he had the complaifance to go
with me to the houfe of Hildebrand,  the
beft maker of harpfichords,  and pianofortes,  in Berlin :  here M.  Kirnberger
played again,  and difcovered great
ftrength of hand,  as well as knowledge
in harmony and modulation.

*  The German title is,  SotlffruCflOn  &CC gfltC$*

fd)tt>ebcnDcn  ^empcrafur,  geforucft bep

SBBillfc..  SSirnfiiel*

P 2

»

I was

[  212  ]

I was perhaps,  the more flattered by
the kindnefs and compliance of this ingenious profeflor,  from his charadter,
which is grave and auftere ;  he is faid
to be foured by oppofition and difap-
pointment ;  his prefent inclination leads
him to mathematical ftudies,  and to the
theory of mufic,  more than the practice,
in which he has fuch great abilities ;  and
in his late writings,  he appears to be
more ambitious of the charadter of an
algebraifl:,  than of a mufician of genius.

This afternoon I went to M.  Marpurg
for the laft time,  who was fo obliging,
on this occafion,  as to throw out all the
temptations which he could fuggeft,  in
order to keep me longer in Berlin  ;  but my
want of time rendered me inflexible ;
however,  he kindly undertook to procure
and tranfmit to me feveral interefting
particulars relative to the hiftory of Ger-
man mufic and muficians,  and furnished
me with the defcription of a machine
for writing down extempore pieces of

mu lie,

[  213 3

mufi c,  commonly called voluntaries,  of
which I had been long in fearch.

To fix fuch fleeting founds as are generated in the wild moments of enthu-
fiafm,  while  **  bright-eyed fancy  —

“  Scatters from her pidtured urn.

Thoughts,  that breathe,  and notes,  that burn.”

would be giving permanence to ideas

which refledion can never find,  nor me-

*

mory retain.

I had been told,  upon mentioning
fuch a machine,  among mufical dejide -
rata ,  to counfellor ReifFenftein,  at Rome,
that one had been conftruded at Berlin ;
and,  upon my arrival here,  this intereft-
ing piece of mechanifm was among the
firfl:  objeds of my enquiry.  I was told,

indeed,  that fuch a one had been com-

■  *  __  %

pleted,  to the fatisfadion of the prin-
pal muficians of Berlin,  but that it was
foon negleded and thrown afide ;  and
not long fince,  a fire happening in a
houfe belonging to the royal academy

P 3 wherq

f 2H 3

where it was depofited,  this ingenious
piece of mechanifm was burnt,  and has
never fince been renewed.

Before I fpeak further concerning the
machine in queftion,  I mu ft inform my
readers,  that the firft idea of fuch a contrivance being practicable,  was fuggefted
to the Royal Society of London,  in a paper written by the late revd.  Mr.  Creed*
and fent to the preftdent,  1747,  under
the following title.

A demonfir at ion of the pojjibility cf making a machine that Jhall write extempore
voluntaries,  or other pieces of mufc ,  as jafl
as any majler Jhall be able to play them ,  upon
an organ ,  harpf chord,  &c.  and that in a
character more natural and intelligible ,  and
more exprefjive of all the varieties thofe in w
Jlruments are capable of exhibiting ,  than
the char after now in life.

This paper was publifhed the fame
year,  in The Philofophical Tranfa&ions,
N0,  183,  and,  afterwards,  in Martyns

Abridg-

[  2«5 J

Abridgment,  vol,  x.  p.  266 ;  and the author’s idea always appeared to me fo fea-
fible,  that I have long wondered at its
not having been executed by fome ingenious Englifh mechanic.

The firil mention that I can find to
have been made at Berlin,  of fuch a contrivance,  was in 1752,  in a printed Weekly
Account of the moft remarkable Difcoveries
in Nature and Science.  In 3753,  an ample
defcription of fuch a machine appeared
in the fame weekly publication  :  and
here,  in an elaborate preface,  the author
points out the great want of fuch a piece
of mechanifm,  its utility,  and properties ;
and concludes with faying,  that this machine,  fo big with advantages to mufic
and muficians,  is the particular invention ,

befon&erc  €vftn£>un&  of M.  Unger.

This defcription preceded the execution fome time.  The invention was
here only recommended to the public*
and offered to be completed,  and applied
to a keyed inftrurnent,  at a fmall expence.

P 4 It

[  216  ]

It was M.  Hohlfeld,  who afterwards
conftrudted the machine,  and rendered it
fo perfect,  that I was aflured,  by a great
performer,  who tried it upon a clavichord,
that there was nothing in mufic which
it could not exprefs,  except tempo ru -
bato .

The defcription of the Berlin machine,  fo much refembles that propofed
by M.  Creed,  that I  (hall not infert it
here,  but refer my reader to the Philofo-
phical Tranfadtions,  where he will find
that the machine was to confifi:  of two
cylinders,  which were to be rqoved by
clock work,  at the rate of an inch in a
fecond of time  ;  one of thefe was to fur-
ni£h paper,  and the other was to receive
it when marked by pins,  or pencils,  fixed
at the ends of the feveral keys of the in-
ftrument,  to which the machine was applied.  The paper was to be previoufly
prepared with red lines,  which were to
fall under their refpedtive pencils.

The

[  217  ]

The chief difficulties in the execution,
which have occurred to Engliffi mechanics,  with whom I have converfed on
the fubjedl,  were,  the preparation of the
paper for receiving the marks made by
the keys ;  and the kind of inftrument
which was to ferve as a pencil,  and
which,  if hard and pointed,  would,  in the
forte parts,  tear the paper ;  and if foft,
would not only be liable to break when
ufed with violence,  but would be worn
unequally,  and want frequent cutting.

In the Berlin machine,  the pencils
were approximated according to Mr*
Creed’s idea,  and made to terminate in a
very narrow compafs,  fo that paper of
an uncommon fize was not requifite ;
but it was not found neceffary to prepare
the paper,  as propofed in the Philofophi-
cal Tranfactions ;  for the degree of gravity,  or acutenefs,  of each found,  was af-

certained by a ruler applied to the mark-

*

ed paper,  when taken off the cylinder.

I  /hall

[  218  ]

I  {hall make no farther obfervations
upon this fubjedt,  at prefent,  except that
though M.  Unger feems to lofe the honour of the invention,  by Mr.  Creed's
more early publication of it;  yet,  that
of the execution will wholly remain with
M.  Hohlfeld,  till feme EngliQiman  {hall
participate it with him,  by a like fortunate completion of the difeovery of his
countryman,  Mr.  Creed.

When I quitted M.  Marpurg,  I went

>

to a concert,  at the houfe of baron Seid-
litZj one of his Pruffian majeily's mi-
niflers,  where I had the honour of being
introduced by M.  jof.  Benda.  The baron is his fcholar,  and played a concerto,
by M.  Fran.  Benda,  reafonably well,  for
a dilettante .  M.  Grauel,  a violoncello
performer in the King’s band,  played a
concerto ;  it was but ordinary mufic ;
however,  it was well executed,  though
in the old manner,  with the hand under
the bow.  After this,  M.  Jofeph Benda

[  2I9 3

played one of his brother’s concertos very
neatly,  with a good tone,  and true intonation.  This piece had no other fault,
than that of being too long,  which is
ever the cafe here,  in every fpecies of
compofidon,  where each movement is fq
protracted,  that attention can never be
kept awake to the end.

I found,  upon enquiry,  that the
ven^ocbufeiv or chorus of children,  who
ling about the ftreets,  ftill fubfifts in Berlin  ;  they are furnifhed with a grey uniform and cloaks,  and are twenty-four in
number.  The money which they col-
left is divided among them.

At the college of Cologne,  in this city,
the children are taught reading,  writing,
and finging :  as are the children of the
foldiers,  at the garrifon church.

In moil parts of Germany,  where the
proteftant religion is eftablifhed,  each
parilh has a cantor to teach finging,  and
to direft the, chorus.

Though

[  220  ]

Though cantor is a general appellation
for a linger,  it is in a particular manner
applied,  in this country,  to the perfon who
has the dire&ion of linging the pfalms
and hymns in parilh churches.  He is
precentor,  or leader of the pfalm,  which
he likewife ends,  by linging the laft word
of every line :  fo that he may be called
the alpha and omega of facred fong.

The cantor,  who is likewife frequently fchool-mafter,  befides having a good
voice,  Ihould neceffarily underftand counterpoint if not in a high degree,  at lead:
fufficiently to correct fuch errors as may
have crept into compofitions,  through the
ignorance or careleffnefs of tranfcribers.
He Ihould likewife be able to make an
accurate fcore,  and from the fcore to figure the bafe,  in fuch a manner as to include all the accidents of modulation,
**  Without thefe qualifications,”  fays M.
Walther,  in his Mufical Lexicon,  u as a

German organift is not gifted with

<<

uni~

[  221  ]

**  univerfal knowledge,  no perfedt har-
c<  mony can be hoped.”

i

In the market-towns and villages of
Thuringia,  in Saxony,  where two perfons
are ufually employed in a fchool,  he who
diredts the mufic in the choir,  or leads
the pfalm or chorus,  is called reftor,  or
fchool-mafter,  and the organift is commonly cantor .

The Italian comic operas are performed at the expence of the King,  for which
two women,  and three men fingers,  are
in falary.  The inftrumental performers
are drawn from his majefty’s band,  as are
the dancers,  from his ferious opera ;  the
fingers,  male and female,  refide at Potf-
dam.  Thefe operas are performed at no
fixed time,  but depend upon the King’s
pleafure to command them,  in one of the
theatres of bis palaces,  at Potfdam,  Berlin,  or Charlottenburg.

The Queen,  and the princefs dowager
of Pruflia,  frequently give concerts at
Berlin,  to which the entrance is open

and

[  222  ]

and general.  At thefe performances,  the
principal fingers of the opera,  and mu-
ficians of his majefty’s band,  are em-

In aflemblies,  except minuets,  the
dances are almoft conftantly Engliih  ;
the Polonoiie,  fo much in  *  vogue formerly,  are now no longer pra&ifed,  but
they ftill,  fomc times,  make ufe of French
dances.

The night watch here,  confifts of a
certain number of armed men,  who are
diftributed in the feveral ilreets,  throughout the city.  They cry the hour in a
kind of chanty with the found of a horn,
which is likewife the cuftom throughout
Germany.

Among the principal muficians of Berlin,  I have not yet mentioned M.  Charles
Fafch,  chamber-mu fician to the King,
and fon of the celebrated chapel- mailer of
that name.  In our feveral attempts to meet
each other at Berlin,  I was always unfortunate 5 and his waiting time at Potfdam

coming

[  223 1

coming on,  juft when I quitted that city,

I was not fo happy as to hear him play  :
but,  if I may judge by his reputation,
and by his compolitions for the harpfi-
chord,  in which the greateft fire and delicacy are united,  he muft be an excellent
performer.  *

M.  Schale is likewife an organift and
harpfichord-player of reputation in Berlin,  whom I was not fo fortunate as to
hear.

M.  Reidt,  the performer on the flute,
mentioned before,  is defcended from
Englifh parents ;  he is regarded as a
learned mufician ;  but his ftyle of com-
pofition and performance,  is dry and un«
interefting;  he is author of a Ireatife
upon mufical Intervals,  which has been
celebrated in its day  ;  it is full of calculations,  which are ufelefs to men of
fcience,  and which men of refinement
and genius will never fubmit to ftudy.
It is,  indeed,  a fpecies of learning,
among mufidans*  which is apt to dege-
7 nerate

[  224 3

nerate into pedantry ;  and it is fomewhat
remarkable,  that from all the learned
and operofe calculations of profeffed mathematicians,  not a fingle piece of practical mufic has ever been produced,  that
is fupportable to the ear of perfons of
tafte 5 fo true it is,  that the operations
of cool and deliberate reflection,  have
lefs power over our feelings,  than thofe
of paflion and enthuflafm.

Mufical controverfies in Berlin have
been carried on with more heat and ani-
mofity than elfewhere ;  indeed there are
more critics and theorifts in this city,
than practitioners ;  which has not,  perhaps,  either refined the tafte,  or fed the
fancy of the performers.

I muft not quit Berlin without a more
particular mention of the.  two Grauns,
than I have hitherto had occafion to
make ;  perhaps,  in fpeaking of thefe
compofers,  the faireft way would be to
give the reader two characters of each,  the
one that of their partifans and admirers in

Berlin,

f 22 5 J

Berlin,  and the other,  drawn from the
unbiased judgment of thofe whom neither habit nor authority have influenced,
but who examine their productions,
with as little prejudice as they would
thofe of anonymous compofers.

The works of the chapel  -  mafler
Graun,  are v^ry numerous  ;  before his
arrival at Berlin,  he fet three or four
operas in the German language,  at Brunf-
wick,  but the words were bad,  and
it is not fair to judge of his genius
by thefe early productions.

He compofed for the Berlin theatre,  in
the fpace of fourteen years,  from 1742 to
1756,  twenty- feven Italian operas ;  and for
the church,  a Te Deum ,  and a Paj/ione,  be-

■  l  >  l  *  •  ■  .a.

fides mifcellaneous productions of lefs importance,  as odes and cantatas,  with the
overture and recitatives of the paftoral
opera of Galatea,  of which his ma-
jefty,  Quantz,  and Nichelman,  fet the
fongs.

Vol.  II.  "

«

This

I

[  226  ]

h  (

This compofer died at Berlin 1759*
at which time innumerable poems and
panegyrics were written to his memory.
Among the critical Letters concerning
Mufic,  published by M.  Marpurg,  there
is an addrefs to M.  Freid.  Wilhelm Za-
charia,  the celebrated poet and mulician
of Brunfwick,  recommending the death
of Graun to his mufe.  No  ^reat ftrefs
can be laid on panegyrics ;  however,
there are few of Graun’s admirers,  who
are not ready to burn with tire and faggot all thofe who dare to doubt of this
author’s veracity.

“  Graun,  the brighteft ornament of
“  the German mufe,  the noble mailer
“  of fweet melody,  is now no more !
“  creator of his own taile,  he fpoke not,
“  but to our hearts ;  tender,  loft,  com-
“  paflionate,  elevated,  pompous,  and
“  terrible,  by turns  ; — he could force
“  tears of admiration from us,  at his
pleafure^  an artift>  who made no other

(C ufe

[  227  ]

**  ufe of art,  than to imitate nature,  in
“  the mod pleafing,  and expreffive
“manner;  each droke of his pencil
“  was equally perfedt,  full of invention,

“  and of new ideas,  his genius was in-
“  exhauftible.  The model of facred mu-
“  fic,  and in the theatre inimitable  !  a
i:  man who commanded our affedtions,
“  not only by his talents,  but by his
€s virtues,  of friendfhip,  probity,  and
“  patriotifm ;  no man was ever fo uni-
“  verfally lamented by the whole nation,
“  from the king,  to the lowed:  of his
“  fubjedts  *

Now,  to reverfe the medal ;  it is denied,  by the other party,  that Graun
was the creator of his own tafte,  which
is the tafte of Vinci ;  they deny,  that he
is ever pompous or terrible,  but fay,  that
an even tenor runs through all his works,
which never reach the fublime,  though

*  5vntifc()c SSricfe ubccbic^nfunfr.  I.  QSctnb
Berlin 1760*

Qjt

1

the

[  228  ]

the tender and graceful are frequently
•  found in them  ;  they are equally unwilling to fubfcribe to his great invention*
or the originality of his ideas  ;  and
think that ftill more perfect models of
facred mufic may be found in the cho-
ruffes of Handel,,  and the airs and duos
of Pergolefe and Jomelli :  nor can they
well comprehend,  how that compofer can
be called inimitable ,  who is himfelf an
imitator ,

The concert -matter,  John Gottlib
Graun,  brother to the opera-compofer,
his admirers fay,  “  was one of the greateft
performers on the violin of his time,  and
moft atturedly,  a compofer of the firft
rank  ;  his overtures and fymphonies are
majeftic,  and his concertos are mailer-
pieces,  particularly thofe for two violins,
in which he has united the moil agreeable melody,  with all the learning that
the art of counter-point can boafl ;  he has
likewife frequently fet the Salve Regina-,.
and compofed mails which are rendered

grand

i

[  229  ]  '

grand and noble by fimplicity and good
melody,  even in the moft laboured parts.”

But lefs quarter is granted to this mafter,
by the admirers of more modern mufic,
than to his brother  ;  they often find
his overtures and fymphonies too like
thole of Lully,  and too full of notes to
produce any other erredt,  when played
at Berlin,  than that of ftunning the
hearers;  and in his concertos and church
mulic,  when that is not the cafe,  the
length of each movement is more immoderate,  than Chriftian patience can
endure.

Perhaps the truth may lie between
thefe two opinions ;  and with refpedt to
the chapel- mailer Graun,  it fhould be
remembered,  that he was feldom allowed
to follow jhe bent of his own genius.

It was not at fir ft my intention to detain mv reader fo long in Berlin,  and its
environs ;  but the mufical performances
in his Pruflian majefty’s dominions,  have
been fo much celebrated during his reign,

Q_3  '  that

[  23a 1

that they merited a particular inveftiga-
tion  >  it is now,  however,  time to fum
up the evidence,  and it would be the
higheft injuftice to deny,  that Berlin has
long had,  and ftill has,  a great number
of individuals among the mufical profef-
fors,  whofe abilities are great and ftrik-
ing ;  but,  with refpedt to the general
and national ftyle of compofition and performance,  it feems at prefent,  to be
formed fo much upon one model ,  that it
precludes all invention and genius.  Perhaps,  it would be equally rational to
fuppofe,  that the blood of a Qjaantz or a
•  Graun,  if injected into the veins of another compofer,  would circulate better
than his own,  as to imagine,  that their
ideas and thoughts,  when he has adopted
them,  will fuit him better than thofe
which he has received from nature.

Of all the muficians which have been
in the fervice of Pruffia,  for more than
thirty years,  CarL P,  E.  Bach,  and Francis Benda,  have,  perhaps,  been the only

two.

[  231  ]  '

two,  who dared to have a ftyle of their
own  ;  the reft are imitators 5 even
Quantz and Graun,  who have been fo
much imitated,  formed themfelves upon
the works of Vinci and Vivaldi.  M.
Quantz is an intelligent man,  and talks
well concerning mufic ;  but talking and
compofing are different things  ;  when he
wrote his book,  more than twenty years
ago,  his opinions were enlarged and liberal,
which is not the cafe at prefent ;  and
Graun’s compofitions of thirty years ago,
were elegant and fimple,  as he was among
the firft Germans to quit fugue and laboured contrivances,  and to allow,  that fuch
a thing as melody exifted,  which,  harmony  (hould fupport,  not fuffocate  ;  but
though the world is ever rolling on,  moft
of the Berlin muficians,  defeating its motions,  have long contrived to ftand ftill.

Upon the whole,  my expectations from
Berlin were not quite anfvvered,  as I did
not find that the llyle of compoiition,
or manner of execution,  to which his

Q_4 Pruffian

E 23z 1

Pruflian majefty has attached himfelf,
fulfilled my ideas of perfection.  Here,
as el fe where,  I fpeak according to my
own feelings  :  however,  it would be preemption in me to oppofe my fingle
judgment to that of fo enlightened a
prince ;  if,  luckily,  mine were not the
opinion of the greateft part of Europe ;
for,  Ihould it be allowed,  that his Pruffian majefty has fixed upon the Auguftan
age of mufic,  it does not appear that he
has placed his favour upon the beft com-
pofers of that age.  Vinci,  Pergolefe,
Leo,  Feo,  Handel,  and many others,  who
flourished in the beft times of Graun and
Quantz,  I think fuperiour to them in
tafte and genius.  Of his majefty’s two
favourites,  the one is languid,  and the
other frequently common and infipid, —
and yet,  their names are religion at Berlin,  and more fworn by,  than thofe of
Luther and Calvin.

There are,  however,  fchifms in this
city,  as clfe where ;  but heretics are obliged
o

■  r 233 3

liged to keep their opinions to them-
felve,  while thofe of the eftablrfhment
may fpeak out :  for though a univerfal
toleration prevails here,  as to different
fedts of 'chriftians,  yet,  in mufic,  whoever dares to profefs any other tenets
than thofe of Graun and Quantz,  is fure
to be perfecuted.

The mufic of this country is more
truly German than that of any other
part of the empire ;  for though there
are conflantly Italian operas here,  in carnival time,  his Prufiian majefty will
fuffer none to be performed but thofe of
Graun,  Agricola,  or Haffe,  and of this
laft,  and bed,  but very few.  And,  in
the opera houfe,  as in the field,  his ma-
jefty is fuch a rigid difciplinarian,  that
if a mifiake is made in a fingle movement or evolution,  he immediately marks,
and rebukes the offender  ;  and if any of
his Italian troops dare to deviate from
ftridt difcipline,  by adding,  altering,  or
diminifhing a fingle paffage in the parts

they

I

[  234  ]

they have to perform,  an order is fent,
de par le Roi,  for them to adhere ftri&ly
to the notes written by the compofer,
at their peril.  This,  when compofitions
are good,  and a finger is licentious,  may
be an excellent method ;  but certainly
Units out all tafte and refinement.  So
that mufic is truly ftationary in this coun-
try,  his majefty allowing no more liberty
in that,  than he does in civil matters of
government:  not contented with being
foie monarch of the lives,  fortunes,  and
bufinefs of his fubjedts,  he even pre-
feribes rules to their moft innocent plea-
fures,

HAMBURG.

The entrance into this city,  is free
,  from examination,  or cuftom-houfe em-
barraflments,  the name only of a traveller
being demanded at the gates.  The ftreets
are ill built,  ill paved and narrow,  but
crowded with people who feem occupied
with their own concerns  ;  and there is

an

i

[  235 3  '

£0 air of chearfulnefs,  induftry,  plenty,
and liberty,  in the inhabitants of this
place,  feldom to be feen in other parts of
Germany.

The city of Hamburg has long been
famous for its operas,  and it feems,  from
Matthefon’s lift of them in his Mujical
Patriot ,  that thofe performed there,  during the latter end of the laft century,
and the beginning of this,  exceeded,  in
number,  thofe of every other city in the
German empire.

The firft mufical drama,  to be found
in the annals of the Hamburg ftage,  is
Orontes,  fet by the chapel-mafter,  Theil,
16783 but this,  and moft of the operas
performed here till the beginning of the
prefent century,  were in the German language.

The compofitions of Keifer,  Matthe-
fon,  Handel,  and Telemann,  for this
theatre,  are the moft renowned  ;  of Keifer,  fome account has been already given,
vcl.  I.  p,  346,  to which I fhall only add,

that

t

[  236  ]

that he compofed a hundred and feven
operas,  chiefly for the Hamburg ftage ;
that he was born in 1673,  and died

*739-

Of Matthefon,  it will be neceflfary to
be fomewhat more particular,  as he was
not only a native of Hamburg,  but one
who long figured there in the triple cha-
rafter of finger,  compofer,  and theorift.
It was his boaft,  before his death,  in 1764,
at the age of eighty-two,  that he had
printed as many books,  on the fubjeft of
mufic,  as he had lived years 5 and that
he fhould leave to his executors an equal
number,  in manufeript,  for the ufe of
pofterity.

In 1761,  he published a tranflation of
the Life of Handel,  from the Englifh,
with additions and remarks,  which are
neither very candid nor liberal.  But how
fhould the author of that book expeft quarter from him,  in which it is afierted,  that
*c Matthefon was no great finger,  and only
f*  employed occaiionally.”  In refutation

of

[  237 3

of which he aflures us,  that be conftant-
ly fung the principal part in the Hamburg operas,  during fifteen years,  and
with fuch fuccefs,  that he could command
the paflions of his audience,  by exciting
,  in them,  at his pleafure,  joy,  grief,  hope,
and fear.  And who fhall venture to
doubt of his-having poflefied thefe powers,
when their effects are thus attefied by
himfelf ?

Indeed,  this author was not only captious and minute,  in his criticifms upon
the writers under his confideration,  but
perpetually quarrelling with his readers  :
however,  he was diligent in finding,  and
exadt in ftating fadls.

Whoever wifhes to be acquainted with
the particulars of Handel's younger years*,
before his arrival in England,  or journey into Italy,  will find them in the
writings of M.  Matthefon :  indeed,  tradition has preferved fo many anecdotes
concerning his performance at Hamburg,
that many mufical people,  who came

6 into

[  23s  ]

Into the world too late to hear him,  think
they have lived in vain.

It was in this city,  likewife,  that Handel began his career,  as a compofer,
though,  upon his firft arrival,  he was
only employed in the orcheilra,  as a per-  -
former on the violin,  upon which he
played the fecond ripie?io part.

He then pretended to know nothing
though he ufed to be very arch,  and had
always,  fays M.  Matthefon,  a dry way
of making the graveft people laugh without ever laughing himfelf;  it was upon
occaiion of the harpiichord player at the
opera happening to be abfent,  that he
was firil perfuaded to take his place ;  but
he then ill e wed himfelf to be a great
mailer,  to the aflonifhment of every one,
except Matthefon,  who had accidentally
met with him at an organ in one of the
Hamburgh churches in 1703  ;  at which
time,  he was nineteen,  and Matthefon
twenty- two years of age.

After

[  239 1

After this he ufed frequently to dine
with Matthefon,  at the houfe of his father,  and he then,  according to his own
confeffion obtained,  from Handel a knowledge in modulation,  and a method of
combining founds,  which no one elfe
could teach him.  Thefe young performers had at this time frequent
contefls together,  for pre-eminence on.
keyed inftruments  ;  and in their feveral
trials Handel had conftantly the advantage on the organ,  though Matthefon
fometimes was thought to equal him on
the harplichord.

Upon a vacancy in an organifl’s place at
Lubec,  they travelled thither together,  and  \
in the wagon compofed feveral double
fugues,  da merit e ,  fay Matthefon,  not da
penna .  Buxtehude was then at Lubec,
and an admirable organ-player;  however,  Handel’s powers on that inftru-
ment aftonifhed even thofe who were
accuftomed to hear that great performer.

Handel

[  240  ]

Handel and Matthefon were prevented from becoming candidates fo~the
place of organift at Lubec,  by a condition that was annexed to the obtaining
that office,  which was no other than to
take with it,  a wife,  whom their con-
ftituents were to nominate  ;  but thinking this too great an honour,  they precipitately retreated to Hamburg.

About this time was performed there
an opera compofed by Matthefon,  called
Cleopatra,  in which he.  adied the part
of Anthony himfelf,  and Handel played the harpfichord  ;  but Matthefon
being accuftomed,  upon the death of
Anthony,  which happens early in the
piece,  to take the harpfichord,  in the
chara&er of compofer,  Handel refufed
to indulge his vanity,  by relinquishing to him this poft  ;  which occafioned
fo violent a quarrel between them,  that
at going out of the houfe,  Matthefon
gave him a flap on the face,  upon which
both immediately drew their fwords,  and

a duel

a duel enfued,  in the market-place,  before the door of the opera-houfe  :  luckily,
the fvvord of Matthefon was broke again ft
a metal button upon Handel’s coat,  which
put an end to the combat,  and they were
foon after reconciled.

Such is the account,  which,-  long before the death of Handel,  Matthefon
himfelf publifhed  %  concerning the difference that happened between them,  during their youth,  at Hamburg.

Handel remained five or fix years in
this city,  and compofed here,  in 1705,
his firft opera of Almira ,  which being
greatly approved,  he next year produced
his fecond.  opera of Nero .  From this
time,  till 1708,  when he fet two other
operas,  Florino ,  and Daphne ,  hefurnifhed
nothing for the ftage,  though he compofed harpfichord pieces,  Angle fongs,
and cantatas innumerable  ;  but,  according to Matthefon,  who is not addifted to

*  ©run&fage cine  (Sbrcn Q)foi:fe.

1740.

Vol.  II.  R flattery.

/

[  242 3

flattery,  without tafle or delicacy,  though
excellent with refpedt to harmony  :  indeed,  during the laft century,  harmony
was fo much attended to by compofers*
that melody was utterly neglected.

During his retidence at Hamburgh
Matthefon allows,  that Handel improved
his flyle greatly,  by his ccnilant attendance at the opera,  and -fays*  that he was
even more powerful upon the organ,  in
extempore fugues,  and counterpoint,  than-
the famous Kuhnau of Leipfic,  who was*
at this time,  regarded as a prodigy.

Telemann,  born at Magdeburg,  inr
1 68 1,  fucceedea Keifer as opera com-
pofer at Flam bung,  for which city he
produced thirty-five operas.  His com-
pofitions for the church and chamber,
are faid to be more numerous than thofe
of Alef.  Scarlatti 5 in the year 1740 his
overtures amounted to fix hundred.  This
author,  like the painter Raphael,  had a
firfi:  and fecond manner ,  which were extremely different from each other.  In
the firfi:,  he was hard,  ftilf,  dry,  and in-

2  £fegant  -r

t 243 1

elegant ;  in the fecond,  all that was pleading,  graceful,  and refined.  This varied
and voluminous compofer,  died at Flam-
burg,  1767,  in the eighty-fixth year of
his age.

And now,  having difpatched the four
principal muficians of pad times,  whofd
works have been the delight and ornament of this city,  I  (hall proceed to give
an account of what it contains mod remarkable in mu fie at p refen t*

The fird vifit I made in this city,  was
to my worthy friend and correfpondent3
M.  Ebeling,  with whofe converfation i
was now as much captivated,  as I had
been before by his letters.  As this gentleman had been previoufly apprized of
my intention to take Hamburg into my
tour,  and was a perfect judge of the na**
ture of my enquiries,  he had collected all
his muficfd curiodties,  of which he is in
poffeffion of a great number,  and laid
them ready for my infpection.

Though this city has been fo famous
for its opera in times pad,  it is a fpecies

11 2  •  ,  of

f

[  244 3

of exhibition that has been difcontinued
here for force year's,  indeed,  I faw no feri-
ous opera while I was in Germany.  But
this drama being ufually fupplied by Italians,  I did not regard it as the principal
objects of my prefent tour,  which was to
enquire af tef mufic,  and muficians,  purely German.

Hamburg is not at,  prefent,  poffefled
of any muiical profeffor of great eminence,  except M.  Carl Philip Emanuel Bach  $  but he is a legion  !  I had long
contemplated,  with the higheft delight,
his elegant and original compofitions ;
and they had created in me fo ftrong a
defire to fee,  and to hear him,  that I
wanted no other muiical temptation to
vifit this city.

M.  Ebeling having been fo kind,  before my arrival,  as to communicate the
ttanflation,  which he has done me the
honour to make in German,  of my Italian Tour,  and to acquaint him with my
intention of coming to Hamburg,  undertook to introduce me to him,  the morning

[  245  ]

£ng of my arrival.  M.  Each received
me very kindly,  but faid that he was
afhamed to think how fmall my reward
would be,  for the trouble I had taken to
yifit Hamburg.  “  You are come here,
faid he,  fifty years too late. ’I
He tried a new piano forte ,  and in a
wild,  carelefs manner,  threw away
thoughts and execution upon it,  that
would have fet up any one elfe.  He de-
fired me to fix a time for coming again,
and faid,  that he m u ft have me for 3/
whole day to himfelf,  which would not
be half fufficient for the exchange of our
ideas.  He offered to accompany me to
every church in Hamburg,  where a good
organ was to be found ;  faid he would
look out for me fome old and curious
things ;  and told me,  at my departure,
that there would be fome poor mafic of
his,  performed in St.  Catherine’s church,
the next day,  which he  'advifed me not
to hear.  His pleafantry removed all re-
ftraint,  without leffening that refpeft and

R 3  -  yene-

[  246 3

veneration for him,  with which his works
had infpired me at a diftance.

After quitting M.  Bach,  I fpent the reft
of the day,  in delivering letters,  viewing
the town,  and in vifiting bookfellers,
of which,  there is a great number in Flam-

O

burg.  Among thsfe,  I muft make my
acknowledgments to M.  Bode,  an eminent printer and publifher,and a good mu*
fician,  who rendered me many fervices.

In the evening,  M.  Ebeling,  after
fliewing me part of his excellent collection of mufic,  and mufical Writers,  did
me the favour of introducing me to M,
Biifch,  profeflbr of mathematics,  at whofe
houfe,  and with whofe family,  I fpent
a moft agreeable evening ;  which,  indeed,  was productive of no mufical
event,  or new difeoyery  ;  for I had long
been convinced,  that there is no harmony
more enchanting,  than that arifing from
the coincidence of hearts,  and accord of
fentiments in fociety.

M.  profeflbr Biifch,  and M.  Ebeling
are at the head of the academy of com ¬

merce,

[  24 7  ]

..  /

merce,  eftablifhed at Hamburg,  in 1768,
-an inftitution admirably calculated for
the education of young perfons,  intended
for merchants,  in the feveral parts of the
world,  where the German,  Englifh,
French,  Italian,  and Dutch languages
are required;  with which the pupils are
taught book-keeping,  geography,  and
hiftory,  as far as it is connected with
the commercial interefts of the feveral
inhabitants of the globe

*  Meffieurs Bufch and Ebeling are affitted in
this undertaking,  by nine different matters,  two
.of whom are experienced merchants,  (killed in
every branch of trade.  I vifited the young ftudents
while they were receiving their inttrudfions from
the feveral matters,  and never before faw fo much
order,  decorum,  and application among young
perfons,  who feemed under fo little reftraint.  The
fociety at prefent is numerous,  and confitts of
young gentlemen from Spain,  France,  England,
Holland,  Ruffia,  and different parts of Germany;
two years only are required for completing the
courfe of their mercantile ttudies,  at the end of
which,  with a tolerable genius,  they will have
acquired a fufficient knowledge in languages and
traffic,  to be ufefully employed in a compting-
fcoufe.  The fame care that is taken in forming

R 4.  th-fe

/

.  '[  24B;  ]

Saturday,  ioth O.dtober,  Dr.  IV^ojjsp^
fon,  an eminent phyfician,  as well as 2
perfon of refined tafte in literature,  and
the arts,  to whom I was honoured with
a letter from England,  obligingly carried
me this morning to the celebrated poet,
Klopftock,  who is called,  the Milton
of Germany.  I had the pleafure of
converting with him,  and feveral per-
ions of learning and difcernment,  for a
confiderable time  ;  during which,  many
curious fubjedls were darted and difcuffed.
I am unable to fpeak of M.  Klopftock’s
poetical abilities 5 but it is the opinion
of his countrymen,  that he has left all
other bards far behind him:  his Meffiah,
which is but lately finifhed,  is the fir ft

j

poem of the Germans as the Iliad is of
the Greeks.

(  ■

thefe young perfon s for commercial concerns,  Is
likewife bellowed in preparing them for the commerce of the world,  by rendering them intelligent
and amiable members of fociety 5 feventy pounds a
year,  includes every expence of lodging,  board,
and inflructions.

They

1

[  249  ]

They fpeak of his odes,  as of a novum
a'tque inauditum fcribendi genus ;  and fay,
f*  that old Greece and Rome might de-
“  cide about the force,  fublimity,  truth,
**  and harmony of thefe poems  ;  the
“  numbers are fometimes taken from the
f*  Greek;  but many are of his own
ft invention.  Klopftock’s merit in the
“  German language,  will be beft known
“  to future ages ;  his odes require a rea-
V der of good natural fenfe,  well ac-
€f quainted with the hilfory of his own
“  country,  its language,  antiquity,  and
“  the harmony of verfe ;  the more they
f*  are ftudied,  the mere they will pleafe  ;
“  they are by many reckoned unintelli-
ct gible,  merely becaufe they are analo-
66 gous to no other fpecies of writing”.

After this vifit,  M.  Each accompanied
me to St.  Catherine’s church,  where I
heard fome very good mufic,  of his com-
pofition,  very ill performed,  and to a
.congregation wholly inattentive.  This
man was certainly born to write for

t

great

t 2J»  3

great performers,  and for a refined audience 5 but he now feems to be out
of his element.  There is a fluduation in
the arts of every city and country where
they are cultivated,  and this is not a
bright period for mufic at Hamburg.

At church,  and in the way home,  we
had a converfation,  which was extremely interefting to me :  he told me,  that
if he w--as in a place,  where his' compositions could be well executed,  and well
heard,  he Should certainly kill him-
felf,  by exertions to pleafe.  “  But
cs adieu mufic  !  now,  he faid,  thefe are
good people for Society,  and I enjoy
**  more tranquility and independence
here,  than at a court ;  after I was
“  fifty,  1 gave the thing up,  and faid,
let us eat and drink,  for to-morrow
<i we die  !  and I am now reconciled to
96 my fituation  ;  except,  indeed,  when J
meet with men of tafte and difcern-
ment,  who deferve better mufic than
we can give them here 5 then,  I blufh

M for

J

[  251  ]

«<  for myfelf,  and for my good friends,
“  the Hamburghers.”

After this,  when our converfation
turned upon learned jnufic,  he fpoke irreverently of canons,  which,  he faid,  were
dry and defpicable pieces of pedantry,
that any one might make,  who would
facrifke his time to them;  but it was
ever a certain proof to him,  of a total
want of genius,  in any one that,  was fond
of fuch wretched ftudies,  and unmeaning productions.

He afked,  if I had found many great
contra-puntilts in Italy ;  and upon my an-
fwering in the negative,  he replied,  nay,
if you had,  it would have been no great
matter ;  for after counterpoint is well
known,  many other more effential things
are wanting to conftitute a good com-
pofer.  He faid,  he once wrote word to
Haffe,  that he was the greateft cheat in
the world  ;  for in a  /core of twenty nominal parts,  he had feldom more than
three real ones in adlion  ;  but with thefe

he

t 252  ]

lie produced fuch divine effects,  a.s muff
never be expected from a crowded fcore;
upon this occafion I obferved,  that as it
is the part of a wife man in convention,
to wait for an opportunity of faying
fomething to the purpofe before he fpeaks;
£0 a good compofer iliould do in writing
accompaniments ;  and not,  like thofe
eternal praters,  who have a rage for faying fpmething,  when there’s nothing to
fee faid,  ftun an audience with worfe
than unmeaning notes,  which defiroy
all melody and expreffion in mufic ;  as a
large company fpeaking all at once deP
troys converfation  ;  and in  (lead of reafon,
good fenfe,  and good humour,  makes
facial intercourfe confift of nothing but
clamour,  impertinence,  and noife ;  to this
fee entirely affented*

In the evening,  M.  Ebeling was fo
kind as to colled together all the Hamburg performers and lovers of mufic,  he
could mufter.  in order to treat me with

a concert 5 and M.  Bach was there to

prefide*

■

[  253 J

prefide.  I have great re a Ton to be thankful for the pains that were taken in order to entertain me on this occalion.  Several of M.  Bach’s vocal compoiitions
were performed,  in all which great genius and originality were difcoverablei
though they did not receive the imbei-
lifhments,  which fingers of the firft clafs
might have given to them.  M.  Bach
has fet to mu fie,  a Pajjione ,  in the German language,  and feveral parts of this
admirable compofition were performed
this evening.  I was particularly delighted with a chorus in it,  which for
modulation,  contrivance,  and effects,  was
at leaft equal to any one of the beft
choruffes in Handel’s immortal Meffiah,
A pathetic air,  upon the fubjedl of St,
Peter’s weeping,  when he heard the cock
crow,  was fo truly pathetic as to mate
alrnofl:  every hearer accompany the faint
in his tears.

Several fymphonies and detached airs
ivith an accompanied harpfichord fona-

tina3

[  254  ]

iina>  confifting of a very curious mix*
lure of pathetic and bravuray were performed,  in which the band had very
hard duty,  and though they are not in
fuch conftant practice as to be under ex-
a£l difeipline,  yet they executed feveral
very difficult pieces,  with a reafonable
degree of accuracy.

I mention M.  Bach’s vocal and mif-
cellaneous compoiitions,  in order to prove
the duCtility of his genius  ;  but it is
not on thefe that I would reft his reputation,  fo much as on his productions for
his own inftruments,  the clavichord,  and
piano forte ,  in which he  {lands unrivalled y of thefe I  (hall have oceafion to fpeak
hereafter;  as to the reft,  perhaps as good
fongs,  choruffes,  and fymphonies,  have
been made by others :  for though his genius is equal to every thing in mufic,  yet
he has not had the practice,  the experience,  nor the fingers,  or orcheftra,  to
write for,  which others have had before
him  :  however,  each candid observer and

hearer,.

[2 55  ]

hearer,  mufl di/cover,  in his flighted:  and
mod trivial productions,  of every-' kind,
fome mark of originality in the modulation,  accompaniment,  or melody,  which
befpeak a great and exalted genius.

October Mth.  I fpent this day in
mod agreeable manner,  at the villa of
John Hanbury,  efq.  in the neighbourhood of Hamburg,  where true Englifli
hofpitality reigns.  I was carried thither
by Mr.  Mathias,  his majefty’s Refident,
to whom I had letters,  and who countenanced and honoured me with the fame
notice as his majefty's minifters had bellowed upon me in other parts of Germany.

At my return to Hamburg,  in the
evening,  on the Altena fide of the city,
there were fuch crowds of people walking and fauntering up and down the road,
it being Sunday,  that carriages could,  with
infinite difficulty,  approach the gates.  It
gave me a great idea of the populoufhefs
©f Hamburg  :  and,  upon enquiry,  I was

allured

i  -  ,  ■

[  256  ]

a flu red that it contains 120,000 inhabitants,  within the walls,  and 80,000 without.  The common people were to-day
dean,  and looked free from want;  a
fight not very frequent in the other parts
of Europe through which I had lately
•

1

At night I was carried to a concert,  at
the houfe of M.  Weflphal,  an eminent
and worthy mufic-rnerchant.  There was
a great deal of company,  and the performers,  who confided chiefly of dilettanti ,
were very numerous.  This kind of con^-
cert is ufually more entertaining to the
performers than the hearers ;  however,
there were many young muficians of this
party,  who had promiling hands upon
their feveral inftruments,  and who,  with
pains and experience,  would become excellent performers.  But in thefe meetings,  more than others,  anarchy is
too apt to prevail,  unlefs the whole be
condudted by an able and refpectable
mafter.

r

l 257.  3

Monday,  12th.  This was one of the
buiieft days of my German tour ;  I fpent
the early part of the morning amon?  the
mufical curiofities of my friend M.  Ebel-
ing,  and the reft of it,  at M.  Weftphal’s
mufical warehoufe.  As M.  Weftphal is
in correfpondence with all the great
printers and publifhers of mufic in Europe,  his catalogue is not merely local,
and confined to Hamburg,  or even the
German empire  ;  but is general,  and that
of all Europe  :  befides compofitions that
are printed and engraved,  he has a great
collection of manufcript mufic,  which he
difpofes of,  at a very fair and reafonable
price.  I was now unable to examine
half the contents of his catalogue,  before
it was time to go to M.  Bach,  with whom
I was engaged to dine and fpend the
day.

But,  previous to the making my

1 i

readers more intimately acquainted with
the talents and character of this excellent mufician,  I fhall prefent them with
Vol.IL S a few

[  258  ]

a few particulars relative to his life,
which will be rendered more interefting/
by a lift of his works,  than by his adventures.

If a narration of the ftill,  but fuccefs-
ful efforts of genius in the clofet,  could
render a book equally entertaining with
the public tranfadtions of the field j the
life of a philofopher,  a man of fcience,
or an artift,  would be read with as much
avidity,  as that of a Caefar,  or an Alexander.

But though the day,  and hour,  are carefully configned to poflerity,  when towns
have been facked,  and armies defeated,
yet the exadt time is feldom enquired,
when difcoveries the moil ufeful to human nature have been made,  or the
greateft produdtions of genius conceived.

He would,  therefore,  be thought a
mo ft contemptible biographer,  who,  in
the life of a mufician,  fhould circum-
ftantially relate the year,  the day,  the
hour*  when,  and place where,  a particular

final a was compofed,  though,  by its excellence,  it fhould bid fair for delighting
the lovers of mufic,  as long as the pre-
lent fyftem of harmony  {hall fuhiiil.

And yet an hiftorian will be read with
a kind of favage fitisfadtion,  who in the
courfe of events,  tells us,  when Kouli-kan,
or any other tyrant,  made difpohtions for
a battle,  in which fuch carnage enfued,
as will make humanity fhudder with
horror,  as long as the recital of it  £hall
blacken the annals of mankind.

Carl Philip Emanuel Bach,  fecond
fon of Sebaftian Bach,  mufic-diredtor at
Leipfic,  was born at Weimar,  in Upper Saxony,  and territory of Thuringia,
1714.  In his youth he  (ludied the law,
both at Leipfic,  and at Frankfort on the
Oder,  having been intended for a civilian  ;  but his father aifeovering in him
fuch a ftrong propen iity to mu lie,  as
would prevent his applying fufficiently
to any other arc,  indulged his natural

S a iftcli-

[  26 O 3

inclination,  and fuffered hirii to make it
his profeffiom

It was at Frankfort upon the Oder
that he firft turned his talents to account,
by compofing and diredUng the mufic,
at the academy,  as well as at all other
public exhibitions in that city,  even
while he continued his iludies at the
univerfity.

In 1738 he went to Berlin,  not without expedition that the prince royal of
Pruffia,  who was then fecretly forming
a band,  would invite him to Ruppin  >
he was not difappointed,  the fame of his
performance foon reaching this prince's
ears,  his royal highnefs fent for him to
his court,  and heard him with fo much
fatisfadtion,  that he afterwards frequently commanded his attendance y but froir*
the circumfcribed power of the prince at
that time,  he did not take him into actual fervice till his acceffion to the throne>
in 1740,  and then M.  Bach had alone

the

[  26l  ]

\

the honour to accompany his majefty upon
the harpfichord in the firft flute-piece
that he played at Charlottenberg,  after
he was king.

During bis refidence at Berlin,  M.  Bach
does not feem to have enjoyed that decree of favour to which his merit en-
titled him ;  for though mufic was extremely cultivated by his Pruflian majefty,
who fupported operas with great expence
and magnificence,  and who had in his
fervice mulicians of the firft abilities,
yet he honoured the flyle of*Graun and
Quantz more with his approbation,  than
that of any other of his fervants,  who
poflefled greater originality and refinement  ;  but his majefty having early attached himfelf to an inftrument which,
from its confined powers,  has had lefs
good mufic compofed for it,  than any
other in common ufe,  was unwilling,  perhaps,  to encourage a boldnefs and variety in compofition,  which his inftrument
would not allow him to participate,

S 3

But

[  262  ]

But though Bach’s ftyle did not infi-?
nuate itfelf into favour at the court of
Berlin,  it has been imitated and adopted
by the performers upon keyed inftru-*
men ts in every other part of Germany.
How he formed his  {fyle,  where he acr
auired all his tafte and refinement,  would
be difficult to trace ;  he certainly neither
inherited nor adopted them from his father,  who was his only m after  ;  for that
venerable mufician,  though unequalled
in learning and contrivance,  thought it
fo neceffary to crowd into both hands
all the harmony he could grafp,  that he
muft inevitably have facrificed melody and
expreffion.  Had the fon cho fen a model,
it would certainly been his father,  whom
he highly reverenced  ;  but as he has
ever difdained imitation,  he muft have
derived from nature alone,  thofe fine
feelings,  that variety of new ideas,  and
feleftion of paffages,  which are fo msp-
nifeft in his compofitions.

C  *63  }

The works which he produced,  during
his refidence at Berlin,  are fo numerous,
and,  in general,  fo unknown in England,
that I fhall fpecify the principal of them
here,  for the fatisfa&ion of thofe who may
wilh to procure them.

I.  Six Sonatas for the Harpfichord,  dedicated
to the King of Pi ulna.  Pubiilhed by Schmidt,
at Nuremberg,  1742.

II.  Ditto,  dedicated to the duke of Wiir-
temberg,  pubiilhed the fame year,  and in the
fame city,  by Windter.  Many of his admirers
look upon upon this as the belt of his works.

III.  Two Trios for Violins ,  and a Bafe ,  with
remarks by the author.  Printed by d°.  In thefe
pieces,  the compofer has endeavoured to fuoport
a dialogue between two perfons of different
characters.

IV.  Three Harpjichord Concertos .  Printed fe-
parately,  by d°.

V.  An EJJay on the Art of Playing the Harpfi -
chord,  with examples,  and twenty-fix copperplates,  written in the German language,  and
printed for the author,  1753.

S 4 VI,

[2 64  ]

VI.  Ten Sonatas for the Harpfichord^  printed
by Hafner,  at Nuremberg,  in his Mifcellanics,
from 1/55?  to 1 765.

VII.  Two Sonatas for the Harpfichord ,  with
fome detached pieces,  and a Fugue ,  in Biietr
kopf’s Collection,  Leipfic,  1757.

VIII.  Melodies to Gellerts Hymns ,  by Winter,
at Berlin-,  1759.

IX.  Twelve fhort Pieces ,  /<?r  /iw

Voices >  in a pocket form.  d°.

X.  *SV#  Sonatas ,  with his own Graces ,  book

firlt  :  this work has been printed in London,  by

the late Mr.  Walfh.

«  \

XI.  Second Part of dQ.  1761.

XII.  EJfay upon the Art of Playing the Harpfu
chord ,  vol.  II.  which treats of accompaniment,
and voluntary playing,  Berlin,  d9.

XIII.  A Collett ion of Odes ,  dQ.

XIV.  Six Sonatas for the Harpfichord ,  d°f
1762.

He has likewife compofed a great number of
fymphonies;  many of which have been printed
feparately.  The whole of his works,  include
thirty trios for the harpfichord,  and other in-
ftruments;  eighteen folos,  for different inflru-

ments ;

[  265  ]

merits;  twelve fonatines,  of which fome are for
two harpfichords,  with accompaniments;  forty-
nine concertos for the harplichord ;  a hundred
and feventy leflbns for the harpfichord ;  befides
fmaller pieces,  and  {ingle fugues.

*  *  *  *

It mud be owned,  that the dyle of
this author is fo uncommon,  that a little
habit is neceflary for the enjoyment of
it ;  Quintilian made a relifh for the works
of Cicero the criterion of a young orator’s advancement in his dudies ;  and
thofe of C.  P.  E.  Bach may ferve as a
touchdone to the tade and difcernment
of a young mulician.  Complaints have
been made againd his pieces,  for being
long,  difficult,  fantaftic ,  and far-fetched .
In the fird particular,  he is lefs defen-
fible than in the red ;  yet the fault will
admit of fome extenuation ;  for lengthy
in a mufical compofition,  is fo much ex-
pedted in Germany,  that an author is
thought barren of ideas,  who leaves off

till

[  266 J

till every thing has been faid which the

v d O

fubjed fuggefts.

Eafy and Difficult ,  are relative terms;
what is called a hard word by a perfon
of no education,  may be very familiar to
a fcholar :  our author’s works are more
difficult to exprefs ,  than to execute .  As
to their being fant aft ical,  and far-fetched*
the accufation,  if it be juft,  may be foften-
ed,  by aliedging,  that his boldeft ftrokes,
both of melody and modulation,  are always confonant to rule,  and fupported by
learning  ;  and that his flights are not the
wild ravings of ignorance or madnefs,
but the effnfions of cultivated genius.
His pieces,  therefore,  will be found,  upon a clofe examination,  to be fo rich in in-

i J r  \  (

vention,  tafte,  and learning,  that,  with all
the faults laid to their charge,  each line of
them,  if wire drawn,  would furniffi more
new ideas than can be difcovered in a
whole page of many other compofitions
that have been well received by the public.

Thou^

/

2 6y  ]

Though M.  Each continued near thirty
years at Berlin,  it cannot be fuppofed
that he fpent his time there very hap-
pily.  A ftyle of mufic prevailed,  totally
different from that which he wifhed to
effablifb ;  his falary was inconfiderable,
and he ranked below feveral that were
greatly inferior to him in merit.

Frequent opportunities offered,  during
this period,  for his effablhhing himfelf
very adyantageoufly elfe where,  feme of
which he wiChed to accept j but he could
not obtain his difmiffion  :  however,  his
falary,  aftej;  many years fervice,  was augmented.

i

Indeed,  as M.  Bach was not a fubjedt
of Pruffia,  it feems as if he might have
quitted Berlin whenever he pleafed;  but
as he had married during his refidence
there,  and had iffue by that marriage,  it
is fuppofed that his wife and children,
being all fubjedts of his Pruffian majefty,
could not retire out of his dominions
without his permiffiom

But

[  263  ]

Bet in 1767,  being invited to fucceed
Telemann,  as mufic-diredor at Hamburg,
after repeated folicitaticns and petitions,
he was allowed to go thither with his family,  where he has continued ever fince.

d  %  f?

When I went to his houfe,  I found

•  • ,  '  ■-  .  , o’)  ■  fi 0/1 pnoi

with him three or four rational,  and
well-bred perfons,  his friends,  befides f
his own family,  confiding of Mrs.  Bach,
his eldeft fon,  who pradifes the law,  and
his daughter  *.  The inftant.  I entered,
he conduded me up flairs,  into a large
and elegant mufic room,  furnifhed with
pidures,  drawings,  and prints of more
than a hundred and fifty eminent mufi-
cians  :  among whom,  there are many
Englifhmen,  and original portraits,  in
oil,  of his father and grandfather.  After
I had looked at thefe,  M.  Bach was fo

-  *  He has two Tons,  the youngeft of whom ftudies

painting,  at the academies of jLeipfic and Drefden.

obliging

[  269  ]

obliging as to fit down to his Silbermami
clavichord ,  and favourite inftrument,  upon which he played three or four of his
choicefl:  and mod difficult compofitions*
with the delicacy,  precifion,  and fpirit,
for which he is fojufily celebrated among
his countrymen.  In the pathetic and
flow movements,  whenever he had a
long note to exprefs,  he abfolutely contrived to produce,  from his inftrument,
a cry of borrow and complaint,  fuch as
can only be effected upon the clavichord*
and perhaps by him felt.

After dinner,  which was elegantly
ferved,  and chearfully eaten,  I prevailed
upon him to fit down again to a clavichord,  and he played,  with little inter-
miffion,  till near eleven o'clock at night.
During this time,  he grew fo animated
and poJJ'effed ,  that he not only played,  but
looked like one infpired.  His eyes were
fixed,  his under lip fell,  and drops of
effervefcence diftilled from his countenance.  He faid,  if he were to be fet to
2 work

r

2JQ

]

work frequently,  in this manner,  he
fhould grow young again.  He is now
fifty- nine,  rather Abort in ftature,  with
black hair and eyes,  and brown complexion,  has a very animated countenance,  and is of a chearful and lively
difpofition.

His performance to-day convinced me
of what I had fuggefted before from his
works ;  that he is not only one of the
greateft compofers that ever exifled,
for keyed inftruments,  but the beft
player,  in point of exprejjion  ;  for others,
perhaps,  have had as rapid execution :
however,  he poiTcffes every ftyle ;  though
he chiefly confines himfelf to the ex-
prefiive.  He is learned,  I think,
even beyond his father,  whenever he
pleafes,  and is far before him in variety
of modulation ;  his fugues are always
upon new and curious fubjedts,  and
treated with great art as well as genius.

He played to me,  among many other
things,  his lafl fix concertos,  lately pub-

liOied

t 2/i  ]

liflied by fubfcription,  in which he has fta-
died to be eafy,  frequently I think at the
expence of his ufual originality  ;  however,  the great mufician appears in every
movement,  and thefe productions will
probably be the better received,  for re-
fembling the mufic of this world more
than his former pieces,  which feem made
for another region,  or at leaft another
century,  when what is now thought
difficult and far-fetched,  will,  perhaps,
be familiar and natural.

There are feveral traits in the characters of the younger Scarlatti and E-
manuel Bach,  which bear a ftrong re-
femblance.  Both were fons of great
and popular compofers,  regarded as
ftandards of perfection by all their cotemporaries,  except their own children,
who dared to explore new ways to fame.
Domenico Scarlatti,  half a century ago,
hazarded notes of tafte and effeCt,  at
which other muficians have but juft arrived,  and to which the public ear is but

lately

[  2 72 1

lately reconciled ;  Emanuel Bach,  m
like manner,  feems to have outftript
his age.

M.  Bach  (hewed me two manufcript
books of his father’s compofition,  written on purpofe for him when he was a
boy,  containing pieces with a fugue,  in
all the twenty-four keys,  extremely difficult,  and generally in five parts,  at which
he laboured for the firft years of his life,
without remiffion.  Fie prefented me with
feveral of his own pieces,  and three or
four curious ancient books and treatifes
on mufic,  out of his father’s colle&ion*
promifing,  at any diftant time,  to furnifh
me with others,  if F would only acquaint
him,  by letter,  with my wants.

Tuefday 13th.  This morning was entirely employed in vifiting churches,  and
hearing organs,  to which M.  Bach was
fo kind as to conduft me.  The firft in-
ftrument we heard,  was at the new church
of St.  Michael,  which is an elegant and
magnificent building.

The

[  273  ]

The late Mr.  Matthefon,  who was fe-
ctetary of legation many years to the
Englifh Refident at Hamburg,  and who
has written fo many treatifes on muflc>
bequeathed all his pofTeffions to that republic,  on condition that an organ fhould
be built for this church,  fuch as he de-
fcribed in his will.  It has not been long
finished,  and is,  I believe,  the larged:  and
moft complete in Europe.  It cod:  upwards of  ^gooI.  fterl.  was built by Hildebrand,  is of thirty-two feet,  has four fets
of keys,  long compafs,  up to F in altiffimo>
and with the pedals goes down to double

double C.  The keys are covered with

*

mother of pearl,  and tortoii'e-fliell ;  the
front is curioufly inlaid,  and the cafe richly
ornamented,  though it is not,  I think,
of the mod:  elegant form.

There are fixty-four flops in this in-
ftrument,  among which the German flute
is compofed of as many real flutes as
there are notes.  The other flops are good
of the kind,  and the chorus is the mod;

Vol.  II.  T noble

i

\  r  :  f 274 1

noble that can be imagined j but it iV
more ftriking by its force,  and the rich*.
nefs of the harmony,  than by a clear and
diftindt melody,  which faflnon makes it
neceffary to load with a crowd of accompaniments in all the German churches.
M.  Hartmann,  a dilettante,  was fo obliging as to play on this inftrument a con-
liderable time,  in order to let me hear:
all its powers.  M.  Bach has fo long^
negledted organ-playing,  that he fays he
has loft the ufe of the pedals,  which are
thought fo eflential throughout Germany,,
that no one can pafs for a player worths
hearing,  who is-  unable to ufe them.  A
fwell has been attempted in this inftrument,  but with little effedt ;  only three-

»

flops have been put into it,  and the;
power of crefcendo and diminuendo is fo
fmal!  with them,  that if I had not been
told there was a fwell,  1 ihould not have,
difcovered it.

M.  Matthefon'spklure is placed in the

front of the organ,  and in the front of

the.

[  275  ]

/

the gallery there is a fine old fashioned
Latin infcription,  giving an account of his
benefaction  :  this good man had more pedantry and nonfenfe about him,  than
true genius.  In one of his vocal compo-
fitions for the church,  in which the word
rainbow occurred,  he gavehimfelf infinite
trouble to make the notes of his fcore
form an arch .  This may ferve as a fpe-
cimen of his tafte and judgment,  with
refpeCl to the propriety of mufical ex-
preffion and imitation.

By his laft will and teftament,  an anthem was performed,  which he had com-
pofed himfelf for the occafion ;  but it
was fairly laughed at,  when heard in its
old fafliioned guife.  However,  he pof-
felfed a large fhare of mufical erudition,
and was of great ufe to his countrymen,
in his younger days,  by bringing them
acquainted with the mufic of other parts
of the world,  and by introducing a better
ftyle among them than their own :  he
was lefs fond of fugues than his cotem-

T 2 poraries.

[  276 1

poraries,  but in his latter days he became a mere theorift,  without tafle or
feeling.

Hamburg has no lefs than five organs
of thirty-two feet;  three of them made
by Splitger,  about the latter end of the
Iaft century,  which are excellent for well-
toned pipes,  and noble choruffes  :  thefe
are to be found in the churches of St.
John,  St.  Nicholas,  and St James.

The organ of St.  Peter's church is the
moil ancient in the town ;  it is not
known when it was originally built,  but
the two laft manuals,  it has four,  were
made at Hartzogenbuch,  in Brabant,  by
Mijler Nargenhof,  in 1548,  and Cent hither by lea:  this,  the organift,  M.PfifFer,
told me,  is upon record.  Some of the
-flops are excellent,  particularly the vox
humanely which,  though not like a human
voice,  refembles,  in tone and in fweet-
nefs,  a better kind of clarinet.  M.  Pfh>
fer is in years,  but muil have been a very
brilliant performer in his youth,  and he

ftill

f 277  ]

fiill retains his powers of execution,  both
with hands and feet,  beyond any one I
ever heard,  at his time of life.

In the afternoon,  I was introduced to
Signor Anfani,  a firft rate Italian finger,
who had been two or three years at Copenhagen,  and was now going to Amfier-
dam.  He has an excellent tenor voice;
is tall,  thin,  and of a good figure  ;  he accompanied himfelf on the harpfichord,
in feveral fongs,  in which he manifefted
not only great tafte and exprefiion,  in
flow movements,  but great neatnefs in
the quick ;  for he is able to execute,  in
bravura airs,  the mod rapid paflages.
His fty.le is ferious,  and I never heard a
better finger of his fort.  He has a great
compafs of voice,  with much ftrength
and fweetnefs  ;  his fhake is a little too
clofe,  otherwife I fihould venture to pronounce him,  a perfect tenor finger.

Having been afiifted in my mufical enquiries,  at Hamburg,  with fuch friendly
zeal,  and treated with fo much kindnefs

T 3  >  and

f 273  ]

and hofpltality,  It gave me great concern
that I was unable to remain longer in
that city  ;  but the time being elapfed,
which 1 had allotted myfelf for viiiting
thofe parts of Germany where mufic has
been moft cultivated,  I was now under a
neceffity of turning my face towards England.

B R E M E N.

In my way from Hamburg to Am-
fterdam,  I ftopt only a few hours in this
city,  as it contained no mufical incitements fufficiently powerful to encourage
a longer reiidence.

However,  I vifited the or

cathedra],  belonging to the Lutherans,
where I found the congregation finging
a difrnal melody,  without the organ.
When this was ended,  the organift gave
out a hymn tune,  in the true dragging
flyle of Sternhold and Hopkins.  The in-
ft rumen t is large,  and has a noble and
well-toned chorus,  but the playing was
more old fafhioned,  I believe,  than any
thing that could have been heard in our
4 country

[  279 J

country towns,  during the laft century.
The interludes between each line of the
ihymn were always the fame,  and of the
following kind  :

After hearing this tune,  and thefe interludes*  repeated ten or twelve times,
I went to fee the town,  and returning
to the cathedral,  two hours after,  I  {till
found the people finging all in unifon,
and as loud as they could,  the fame tunc,
to the fame accompaniment.  I went to
the pdft-oflice,  to make difpofitions for
-my departure and,  rather from curioh-
ty than the love of fuch mufic,  I return-
*ed once more to this church,  and,  to
-my great aftonilhment,  ftill found
them,  vocally and organically perform-

T 4 ing

✓

[  28q 3

4

ing the fame ditty,  whofe duration feems
to have exceeded that of a Scots Pfalnv
in the time of Charles I.

This may give fome idea how necef-
fary a quality length is,  in the mufical
performances of fome parts of Germany.
In this city,  as there is neither court nor
theatre,  it is natural to fuppofe that
mufic cannot have been much culti-r
vated,

LOW COUNTRIES.

GRONINGEN.

I little expedted to find any thing inte-
refiing here concerning mufic;  but,  upon
enquiry after the organift of the principal
church of St.  Martin,  I was told,  that his
name was Luftigj I then remembered to
have feen,  many years ago,  fome fuites of
leffons by one of that name,  for the harpfi-
chord,full as good as any of the time ;  and at
Antwerp I had purchafed a mufical trea-

tife

[  2§I  ]

life in Dutch,  with the fame name prefixed to it ;  but I little fufpedted thefe
to have been the produ&ions of the or-
ganift of Groningen.  However,  upon
my calling at his houfe,  to beg his per-
mifiion to fee the organ,  I foon difco-
vered that he was author of the above,
and of feveral other works,  of which he
not only furniflied me with a catalogue,
but made me a prefent of a new edition
of his treatife.

The organ of St.  Martin’s church was
originally built by the famous Rodolpho
Agricola but it has received feveral
additions fince;  however,  that part which
was of his conftrucflion is far the beft,
particularly feveral reed flops.  The vox
humana is very fweet,  but refembles a

*  Rodolpho Agricola,  was born at Baffion,  a
village near Groningen,  1442  ;  if we may believe
bis hiftorian.  Melch.  Adami,  Agricola was poflefled
gf univerfal knowledge ;  he does not,  however,  tell
ns,  that he was an organ builder ,  though he makes
him an excellent mufician.  Cancbat voce,  jiatu%
pulfu.  Vitae Philof.

fine

[  282  ]

fine hautbois or clarinet,  more than a
human voice ;  there are four fets of
keys,  with 54 flops,  a few pipes of the
pedals are 32 feet long,  and,  upon the
whole,  it is one of the moft pleating in-
flruments I ever met with.

M.  Luftig,  who is a Ham burgher,
and was a fcholar both of Matthefon and
Telemann,  has been 44 years organiit of
this church  :  he is an intelligent well-
bred man,  and has been a very ufeful
profeffor;  he flill retains his hand,  and,
a few allowances made for change of
tafle,  he is a very able and good organift.

Here I again found myfelf in a country of carillons ;  I had indeed heard fome
flight attempts made at Bremen,  but
in this place every half hour is measured by chimes.

AMSTERDAM.

In my way from Groningen hither,
having eroded the Zuider- Zee,  I approached this city by water,  which affords one of the fined fpedtacles that can

be

[  283  }

be imagined j fuch a noble port,  and fo
crowded with  (hips of all fizes and countries I had never before feen at one
glance ;  I entered the town in great tranquility,  without a  (ingle queftion concerning myfclf or baggage.  The ftreets
through which I paffed to the Bible,  in
the Warmor-ftraat,  were narrow,  but
clean,  and well-paved,  with a brick footpath,  though not raifed,  as in London ;
the  (hops were well furnifhed,  and
there was all the appearancq of a brilk
commerce,  and an affluent people.

Upon the day of my arrival,  Odtober
20,  I went to the new church,  juft at the
time when the afternoon fervice was be-
gining ;  the building is lofty and noble ;
the organ which is partially gilt,  has a
fine appearance,  but no other ufe of it
was made now,  than to accompany the
congregation in two long and tirefome
Pfalms,  without either prelude or interlude,  nor was the Pfalm given out,  as
is ufual in other places.

/

The

[  284  ]

The chorus and tone of this inflru-
ment are very fine ;  it is well kept in
tune,  but no reed-flops were ufed this
evening.  I could not only diflinguifh
the bordun ,  or double bafe flop in
the pedals,  but,  in the treble parts ;
which,  though it enriched the harmony,
gave a heavinefs,  and,  if I may fo call it,
a clumfinefs to the melody,  that
fhould predominate,  and had the fame
effect,  as if the treble part in a concert
were played by double bafes,  with violins
and violoncellos.  It is the cuflom here
for the male part of the -congregation to
keep their hats on during the whole fer-
vice,  except when the Pfalm is finging.

There has been no theatrical exhibition in this city,  fince the play-houfe
was burnt down,  except at the fair,  in
an occafional booth nor is the theatre
likely to be foon rebuilt,  as the ground
is not yet fixed upon,  where ibis to be
conftrufted.  Perhaps the fatal accident
by which the former playhoufe was
-  burnt

[  205  ]

burnt down,  is regarded by the magistrates,  as a  'warning ;  for,  many years
ago,  when the fteeple of the New*  Kerk
was deltroyed by lightning,  before it
was near finished ,  fuppofing that heaven was averfe to fteeples,  they would
never refume the work.

The inhabitants at prefent feem to have
no places of amufement in the evening,
except their fhops and counting-houfes ;
but as I had neither of my own,  I went
to thole of the famous bookfeller,  Rey,
and the mufic-feller Hummel,  w'here,
having lightened my purfe,  and loaded
my Servant,  I retreated to the firft bed
which I had Seen Since my departure
from Hamburg.

This is truly the country of chimes  ;
every quarter of an hour a tune is played
by them at all the churches,  but So indif-
tindl’y,  on account of the confluence of
founds,  that I was feldom able to difco-
ver what was playing,

8

M.  Re-

[  -286  ]

M.  Renard,  his majefly’s agent,  to
whom I am indebted for all the information I acquired during my refidence
in this city,  did me the favour to carry
me to the organift of the Old Kerk,  M.
Pothofr,  who is blind ;  he was deprived
of his fight,  atfeven years old,  by thefmall
pox y and this misfortune firft fuggefted
to his friends the thought of making
mufic,  which hitherto had afforded him
no pleafure,  his profeffion 5 and it afterwards became his darling amufement.

The organ of the Old Kerk was completed twelve years ago,  by Batti,  of
Utrecht,  after having been begun in 17 25,
taken down in 1738,  and attempted to
be finished by feveral bunglers,  without
fuccefs :  it is only what is called a fix-
teen feet inftrument.  It is very full of
work,  and of flops,  to the amount of
fixty-four.  It has three fets of keys,  from
double C to c,  in alt .  both in the manuals and pedals,  with nine pair of bel^

.  lows.

M.  Pot-

[  *8 7 1

M*  Pothoff was organift of the Wef-
ter Kerk twenty-two years before he obtained this place;  his hand,,  tafte,  and
abilities in every particular,  are truly
aftonifhing  ;  the touch of this inftrument
is the heavieft that I ever felt,  each key
requiring almoft a two-pound weight to
put it down ;  and,  to play it full,  there is
a fpring of communication,  by which the
keys of the great and choir organ are
moved,  at the fame time,  which like—
wife adds very much to the ftiffhefs of
the touch ;  however,  fuch is the force of
M.  Pothoff’s hand,  that he plays this
organ with as muoh lightnefs and rapi~
dity,  as if it were a common harpfichord*

This admirable organift was never out
of Amfterdam except for a few days at
the Hague,  many years ago  ^  and yet
his tafte is of the beft modern kind  ;  his
appogiaturas are well taken,  and admirably
exprefled,  his fancy is extremely lively,,
and though he plays very full,  feldom
in lefs'  than five parts,  with the manuals

i

r 288 3

*.  r.  /-V  »  •  "  .'■*,*  -r

als and pedals together,  yet,  it is neither in the dry nor crude way,  which I
had fo frequently heard in Germany.
He difcovered,  though not injudicioufly,
by many of his paffages,  that he was a
harpfichord player ,  but fo well is he
acquainted with the different genius
of the organ,  that his mod:  rapid flights,
of which he had many,  cccafioned none
of thofe unpleafing vacuities of found,
which fo commonly happen,  when this
inftrument is touched by mere harpfichord
players.

M.  Pothoff played twro fugues in a very
mafterly manner,  the fubjedts of which
he reverfed,  and turned to a thoufand
ingenious purpofes;  they were fomething
like the following  :

0“  -

»  f  •

L.-|— 1—

L. — j — 1 — , — j

-H&

•0

!  IN

_ f*

3

■pi'

:&c.

-Pr

5:Ei

I

'[  289  ]

He received inftrudions,  when young,
from Vetvogle,  and Unhoorn,  both orga-
nifls at Amfterdam  ;  but his tafte is of fo
delicate a kind*  that I could not eafily
imagine it to have been acquired in a place
where little other miffic is encouraged or
attended to,  than the jinging of bells,  and
of ducats.  However,  he told me,  that
Locatelli,  the famous violin player,  who
lived many years in this city,  and died
here about eight years lince,  ufed to
give him inftru&ions,  and to encourage
his mufical ftudies by allowing him the
advantage of being always a hearer at his
public concerts,  as well as private performances.  This,  in fome meafure,  helped me to account for his tafte and fancy,
for Locatelli was poffefled of a great deal
of both  ;  and though he delighted in capricious difficulties,  which his hand
could as eafily execute as his head conceive,  yet he had a fund of knowledge,
in the principles of harmony,  that ren-
Vol.  II.  U dered

[  29°  3

dered fuch wild flights agreeable,  as in
lefs fldlful hands,  would have been in-
fupportable.

M.  PothofF feems not only to have
greatly profited from the inftrudtions
and example of Locatelli,  but to have kept
pace,  in point of tafite and refinement*
with more modern performers;  however,  neither imitation nor ftudy could
form fuch a mu-fician as M.  PothofF,  who
is poffefied of a large portion of that divine enthufiafm,  which alone can tranf-
port an artift beyond the bounds of mediocrity,  and,  by making him feel ftrong-
ly himfelf,  can enable him to communicate his feelings to others.

He is married,  and has children;  and
though not young and totally blind,  he
runs up and down the narrow fieps of the
organ loft,  as nimbly as if he were but
fifteen,  and had the perfedt enjoyment of
his fight  :  he likewife pulls out,  and
puts in the flops of the organ himfelf*

with

[  29<  3

with wonderful dexterity,  which,  from
their being fo numerous,  would be a
difficult talk,  and require practice,  in
one that could fee.

When he was a candidate for the organ,  at the JVeJler Kerk ,  he obtained a
victory over twenty-two competitors,
who all played againft him  *  .  Upon
this occafion,  in order to preclude all
partiality in the judges,  who were  -pro-
feffors,  they were not allowed to know
who had played,  till they had given
their opinion of each performance,  in
writing ;  a precaution which is thought
neceffary at Amfterdam,  left corhpaffion,
friendfhip,  or powerful recommendation,
fhould warp the judgment of thofe that
are inverted with the power of determine
ing the queftion.  If this method were

*  Our Stanley,  in 1726,  at the age of fourteen,  was in like manner elected organic of St,
Andrew’s church,  Kolborn,  in preference to near
as many candidates.

U 2 al*

4

t 2^2  ]

always pradlifed on fuch occafions,  ther^
would not be fo many bad organifts,  or
fuch a number of good performers unemployed but,  in general it is in vain to
play for a place,  be a candidate’s talents
ever fo great,  as the matter is often
determined before it comes to a hearing,  and almoft always by incompetent
judges.

Friday,  23d of Qdfober.  At nine o’clock
this morning,  I went by appointment,
to the JVeJier Kerk to hear the organ  ;
it is not fo large as that of the Atte
Kerk ,  but greatly fuperior in tone ;  the
vox humana is the word:  hop in this in-
ff rumen t  :  the reft are fweet,  even,  and
mellow 3 the touch,  though by no means
fo light as that of the inftruments made
lately in England,  is yet far lefs heavy
and laborious to the performer,  than that
of the Old Kerk.  M.  Stechwech,  the
organift,  is a neat performer ;  but not
pofleffed of that fire and invention,

which

I

[  293 1

which charade rife the voluntaries of M.
Pothoff This inftrument was built in
1687;  the organifts here have juft heard
of fuch a thing as a fwell in an organ,
but it is difficult to make them comprehend,  by defcription,  its conftrudion,
•and effed.

At noon I attended M.  Pothoff to the
-tower of the Stad-huys,  or town-houfe,  of
which he is carilloneur  ;  it is a drudgery
unworthy of fuch a genius ;  he has had
-this employment however,  many years,
having been eleded to it at thirteen.  He
had very much aftonifhed me on the organ,  after all that I had heard in the
reft of Europe  ;  but in playing thofe
bells,  his amazing dexterity raifed my
wonder much higher;  for he executed
with his two hands paffages that would
be very difficult to play with the ten
fingers ;  (hakes,  beats,  fwift divifions,
.triplets,  and even arpeggios he has contrived to vanquifh.

U3

He

[  294 1

He began with a Pfalm tune,  with
which their High MightinelTes are chiefly
delighted,  and which they require at his
hands whenever he performs,  which is
on Tuefdays and Fridays  -y he next played variations upon the Pfalm tune,  with
great fancy,  and even tafle :  when he
had performed this tafle,  he was fo obliging as to play a quarter of an hour extempore,  in fuch a manner as he thought
would be more agreeable to me than
plafmody ;  and in this he fucceeded fo
well,  that I fometimes forgot both the

difficulty and defeds of the inftrument  ;
*

he never played in lefs than three parts,
marking the bafeandthemeafure constantly with the pedals.  I never heard a greater
variety of paffages,  in fo fhort a time i
he produced effeds by the pianos and
fortes ,  and the crefeendo in the lhake,
both as to loudnefs and velocity,  which
I did not think poffible upon an inftrument that feemed to require little

other

[  29J  ]

•ether merit,  than force ki the performer.

But furely this was a barbarous invention,  and there is barbarity in the continuance of it ;  if M.  Pothoff had been
put into Dr.  Dominicetti’s hotted:  human
cauldron for an hour,  he could not have
perfpired more violently than he did after
a quarter of an hour of this furious ex-
ercife ;  he dripped to his fhirt,  put on
his night-cap,  and truffed up his fleeves
for this execution ;  and he faid he was
forced to go to bed the inftant it was over,
in order to prevent his catching cold,  as
well as to recover himfelf :  he being
ufually fo much exhaufted,  as to be
utterly unable to fpeak.

By the little attention that is paid to
this performer,  extraordinary as he is,
it fhould feem as if fome hewer of wood,
and drawer of water,  whofe coarfe con-
ftitution,  and grofs habit of body,  required frequent fudorifics,  would do the bull 4 iinefs,

i i

c_,  ^  _ _

[  296  ]

finefs,  equally to the fatisfadtion of fuch
upfiulful and unfeeling hearers.

I have defended the kind of keys to
Carillons ,  and manner of playing them,  in
fpeaking of thole at Ghent ;  thefe at
Amfierdam,  have three odtaves,  with all
the femitones complete,  in the manual,
and two odtayes in the pedals  :  each key
for the natural found,  projedls near a
foot  ;  and thofe for the flats and  (harps,
which are placed feveral inches higher,
only half as much.  All the keys are
feparated from each other,  more than
the breadth of a key,  which is about an
inch and a half,  to enable the player to
avoid hitting two at a time,  with one
hand.

Befides thefe carillons a clavier ,  the

»  ,  i

chimes here,  played by clock-work,  are
much celebrated.  The brafs cylinder,  on.
which the tunes are fet,  weighs 4474
pounds,  and has 7200 iron ftuds fixed in
ft,  which,  in the rotation of the cylinder,

give

[  297  ]

give motion to the clappers of the bells.
If their High Mightineffes’  judgment,  as
well as tafte,  had not failed them,  for
half the prime coil of this expenfive machine,  and its real charge for repairs,
new fetting,  and conftant attendance,
they might have had one of the bed
bands in Europe:  but thofe who can be
charmed with barrel mujic ,  certainly nei-
their want,  nor deferve better.  There
is fcarce a church belonging to the Cal-
vinids,  in Amderdam,  without its chimes,
which not only play the fame tunes every
quarter of an hour,  for three months together,  without their being changed ;
but,  by the difference of clocks,  one has
fcarce five minutes quiet in the four and
twenty hours,  from thefe corals for
grown gentlemen .  In a few days time

I had fo thorough a furfeit of them,  that
in as many months,  I really believe,  if
they had not firft deprived me of hearing,  I fhould have hated muficin general.

The

i

[  258 3

Thtvox humana>  in the organ of the New
Church here,  has been fo much celebrated by travellers,  that I determined not to
quit Amflerdam without hearing it ;  and
the organift,  M.  Linzen,  was fo obliging
as to fatisfy my curiofity.  This is one
of the largeft and moft ancient inftru-
ments in the city.  The chorus is a very
noble one,  as I had before obferved,  in
hearing it during the church fervice,  accompany the congregation in their pfal-
inody.  The vox hum an a,  it mu ft be
owned,  is one of the beft flops,  of that
kind,  which I have ever heard.

As every fpecies of national mufic
feemed to merit my attention,  I went to
the fynagogue of the German Jews,  in this
city,  to hear what the mufical. performance,
during their religiousrites,  was,andhowfar
it differed from that of other fynagogues
where I had heard finging in different
parts of Europe.  At my fir ft entrance,  one
of the priefts was chanting part of the

for*

\  I

[  299  ]

fervlce in a kind of ancient canto fermo ,
and refponfes were made by the congregation,  in a manner which refembled the
hum of bees.

After this,  three of the fweet fingers of
Ifrael,  which,  it feems,  are famous here,
and much attended to by Chriftians as
well as Jews,  began finging a kind of
jolly modern melody,  fometitnes in uni-
fon,  and fometimes in parts,  to a kind of
tol de rol>  inftead of wTords,  which,  to me,
feemed very farcical.  One of thefe voices
was a falfet,  more like the upper part
of a bad vox hwnana flop in an organ,
than a natural voice.  I remember feeing an advertifement in an English newspaper,  of a barber,  who undertook to drefs
hair in fuch a manner as exactly torefemble
a peruque  ;  and this finger might equally boaft of having the art,  not of finging like a human creature,  but of making
his voice like a very bad imitation of
one.  Of much the fame kind is the

merit

[  3°°  3  '  -

merit of fuch fingers,  who,  in execution*
degrade the voice into a flute or fiddle,
forgetting that they fhould not receive
law from inftruments,  but give inftru*-
ments law.

The fecond of thefe voices was a very
vulgar tenor,  and the third a baritono .
This laft imitated,  in his accompaniment
of the falfet,  a bad baboon  ;  fometimes
continued one note as a drone bale,  at
others,  divided it into triplets,  and femi-
quavers,  iterated on the fame tone.  But
though the tone of the falfet was very
difagreeable,  -  and he forced his voice
very frequently in an outrageous manner,
yet this man had certainly heard good
mufic and good finging.  He had a facility of running divifions,  and now and
then mixed them with pafiages of tafte,
which were far fuoerior to the reft.  At

X

the end of each ftrain,  the whole congregation fet up fuch a kind of cry,  as a
pack of hounds when a fox breaks cover.

It

[  301 3

It was a confufed clamour,  and riotous
noife,  more than fong or prayer.  However,  this is a defcription,  not a cenfure
of Hebrew mufic,  in religious ceremonies.  It is impoffible for me to divine
what ideas the jews themfelves annex to
this vociferation,  I fhall,  therefore,  neither pronounce it to be good or bad in
itfelf,  I fhall only fay,  that it is very unlike what we Chriftians are ufed to in
divine fervice.

I muft not quit Amfterdam,  without
obferving,  that though,  on account of
the theatre being burnt down,  and the
time of the year,  there was now neither
play nor concert to be heard,  yet in
winter there are,  as I was informed,  fe-
veral public and private concerts in this
city.  Signor Raimondi,  an Italian,  and
M.  Effer,  a Dutchman,  have been the
principal violins here,  fince the death of
Locateili.  There is alfo an Italian merchant,  Signor Sarti,  who is faid to be an

4 adini-

[  302 3

admirable performer on the German flute.
The French company of comedians,  who
aded here w7hile there was a theatre,
are not yet difmifled,  but are kept oa
half pay.  Upon the whole,  Amfterdam
does not feem to be a very amufing re-
fldence for idle people  ;  there is fo little
for them to fee in the way of pleafure,
and fo much for the mercantile part of
the inhabitants to do in the wray of bu-
finefs,  that they feem very unfit company
for each other.

HAARLEM,

r

There were few"  things that I was more
eager to fee,  in the courfe of my journey,
than the celebrated organ in the great
church of this city.  Indeed,  it is the /ion of
the place;  but to hear this lion roar,  is attended with more expence than to hear
all the lions and tvgers in the Tower of
London,  The fee of the keeper ,  or or-

ganift.

2

[  3°3 3

ganift,  is fettled at half a guinea ;  and
that of his affiftant keeper,  or bellows-
blower,  at half a crown.  Expe&ation,
when raifed very high,  is not only apt
to furpafs probability,  but poffibility.
Whether imaginary greatnefs diminifhed

the real,  on this occafion,  I know not,

*  «.

but I was fomewhat difappointed upon
hearing this inftrument.  In the fir ft place,
the perfon who plays it is not fo great a performer as he imagines  ;  and in the next,
though the number of flops amounts to
fixty,  the variety they afford is by no means
equal to what might be expefled.  As
to the vox Humana ,  which is fo celebrate
ed,  it does not at all referable a human
voice,  though a very good  (fop of the
kind  :  but the world is very apt to be
impofed upon by names  ;  the infant a
common hearer is told that an organift
is playing upon a  (lop which refembles
the human voice,  he fuppofes it to be
very fine,  and never enquires into the

pro-

C 3°4  ]

propriety of the name,  or exa&nefs of
the imitation.  However,  with refped
to my own feelings,  I muft confefs,  that
of all the flops I have yet heard,  which
have been honoured with the appellation
of vox humanay no one,  in the treble part,
has ever reminded me of any thing human,  fo much as of the cracked voice of
an old woman of ninety,  or,  in the
lower parts,  of Punch tinging through a
comb.

As this organ is not only faid to be the
largeft,  but the beft in Europe,  that is,
in the world,  I  (hall here infert a lift of
the flops it contains,  with equivalent
Englifh names,  to fuch as are ufed in
England,  and fhort explanations of the
reft.  But as technical terms will be unavoidable in this defeription,  I advife my
mifcellaneous readers to pafs it over,  for
it can intereft none but organ-players,  or
perfons not wholly unacquainted with
the conftrudion of that inftrument.

Cata-

[  3°5  ]

Ca talogue of the Stops in the great Organ
at Haarlem,  built by Muller,  1738*

Great Manual.

N°.  Names.  Length of longeft pipe;

Englifli equivalents.

I.  Prejiant ,

16 feet.

Open double diap.

2.  Bourdon ,

16.

Stopt ditto.

3.  Oftave,

8.

A narrow pipe

Open diapafon.

4.  Viol da Gamba ,

8.

which imitates
thevvhillling of
the bow.

Unifon with dittos

With a funnel.

5.  Roer Fluity

8.

or fmall pipe,

Diap.  half flopt.

upon the top.

6.  Offavey

4-

A kind of flute.

Principal,

7.  Geni s- Hoorn ,

4-

the pipes narrow at the top.

Unifon with ditto.

8.  Roer-Spuinty

6.

T welfth half flopt.

q,  Squint ,

3-

Fifth.

10.  Tertian ,

2 ranks.

Tierce or 17th.

11.  Mixture ,  6,  8

,  and 10 ranks.

F urniture,  or mix-

.

[ture.

12.  jP/mV,

Stopt pipe,

2 feet,  unifon with Fifteenth,  or oc-

me

[tave flute.

13.  Trumpet ,

16.'

Double trumpet.

14.  Trumpet ,

8.

j

>reed flops  ^

Trumpet.

15.  Trump ety

4

%

Clarion.

16.  Hautboisy

8.,

l

Hautbois,

VOL.  II.  -

X

(

Upper

[  3°6 3

Upper Manual.

N*.  Names.

Length.

Engliffl names.

I.  Prejianty

8 feet.

Open diapafon.

2.  ^ulntadeenay

Breaks into
l6.  a 5th.  which
predominates.

Double diapafon.

3.  Gemfhoorny

8.

Unif.  with ftopfe

4.  Baar pyp.

A muffled pipe

8.  ufed with the
•vox humana .

[diap.

Bear pipe.

5.  0 Slavey

4*

Principal.

6.  Fluity

a.  Derivation unknown.

Flute.

7.  Najfaty

3*

Stopt twelfth.

8.  Nagt-Hoortiy

Night-horn  ;  but,
why fo called,  no
z#  reafon can be given.

Flute.

9.  Flageolet y

i 1.

O&ave twelfth.

Tuned oflave

10.  Sefquialter ,  2 ranks,  and 12th to Sefquialter.

J the diaD.

the diap

11.  Cimbaal ,  3 ranks.

12.  Mixture,  a and 6  ^ >«  height

7  “  notes repeated

G&ave to mixture*

f.01es repeated Mixture.

ranks.  ‘hrouSh in-

Jtrument.

13.  Schalmay,  8.  Reed flop.  Bagpipe.

~  n A narrow delicate  .

14 * -Uulctany 8 •  pipe,  unifon with Dulcian.

the diap.

15*  Vox humana ?  8,  An imitation of the human voice*

Pofitif,

[  3°7  ]

Pofitif,  or fmall Organ.

Loweft fet of keys.

N*.  Names.

Length-

Englilh names!'

I.  Prejiant ,

8 feet.

Open diapafon.

2.  Holjiuity

3.  )uintadeena ,

8.

•x

8.

Diapafon half

tv  [flopt;

Ditto.

4.  Oftave,

4»

Principal*

5.  Flute ,

4*

Flute*

6.  Speel Fluity

3*

Twelfth*

7.  Sefquialter.y 2,

3,  and 4 Ranks.

8.  Super-Oflavey

2 feet.

Fifteenth.*

9.  Scherpy

6 and 8 ranks.

High mixture*

10.  Cornet y

4 ranks.

1 1 .  Cimbaaly

3 ranks.

Octave mixture*’

12.  Fagottey

16 feet.

Double balloon*

13.  Trump ety

14.  Regaaly

8

Formerly a portable organ ufed
in proceflions,
0 was called a  /*£-
®  •  gal ;  the flop in
this organ is entirely corapofed
of reeds.

Regal.

X 2

Pedals.

[  3oS J

Pedals.

N®.  Names.

Length.

Englifh names.

I.  Principal ,  longeft pipe 32 feet.

0£tave below the1

2.  P reft ant y

16.

{double diap.
Double diap.open.

3.  Subbasy

•

VO

Ditto,  ftopt.

4.  Roer- Quint y

12o

Fourth below the

5.  Holftuity

8.

[diap.  ftopt.
Diapafonhalf ftopt*

6.  Oftave,

80

Open diap.

7,  Quint-  Pr eft ant,  6.

Fifth.

8.  0 Slavey

4-

Principal,

9.  Ruifch- Quint y

3-

Twelfth.

10,  Holftuity

2.

Fifteenth.

IK*  Bazuiny

32-

By the Germans called
Pofaune ,  a

Double Sacbut.

1.2 .  Bazuiny

16.

reed flop.

Sacbut.

13.  Trump ety

8.

Trumpet.

I4>  Trumpety

4*

Clarion.

55.  Cinky

vXS”"'Oa»«  ci„i«.

This

t 3°9  ]

This organ has 60 flops,  2 tremu-
tants,  2 couplings,  or fprings of communication,  4 reparations or valves to clofe
the wind-cheft of a whole fet of keys,  in
cafe of a cipher ,  and 1 2 pair of bellows.

Upon the whole,  it is a noble inftru-
ment,  though I think that of the New
Church at Hamburg is larger,  and that
of the Old Kerk,  in Amfterdam,  better
toned  ;  but all thefe  -enormous machines
feem loaded with ufelefs flops,  or fuch
as only contribute to augment noife,  and
to ftiffen the touch,

LEYDEN.

In this city,  which is one of the beft
built and mod agreeable of the Low
Countries,  there is not only a celebrated
univerfity,  but a theatre,  where Dutch
plays are exhibited two or three times a
week.  As there is no great commerce
carried on here,  it is the place to which
the rich citizens of Amfterdam retreat,
as well when their plumb is full grown,

X 3 as

[  ]

when age and infirmities have deprived
them of the power of longer purfuing
the Mammon of unrighteoufnefs.

The plays and players of this theatre
are not of the moft refined fort;  farce has
not yet  -quitted tragedy,  nor has Punch
quitted farce ;  however,  thefe exhibitions
amufe perfons,  whole tafte has not been
formed upon refined models,  and perhaps
come more home to their bufinefs and bo-
foms,  than the tragedies of Sophocles,  or
comedies of Menander,  would do,  if they
were now to be reprefented in the original Athenian manner.

As to mufic,  mechanical chimes,  every
quarter of an hour  ;  carillons at noon,  two
or three times a week ;  and huge organs,
coarfely played,  to more coarfe pfalmody,
conftitute all that Apollo and the Nine
Mufes have given to this place,  in the
way of harmony and melody,  as far as I
was able to difcover.

However,  I was told,  that in this city,
during term time,  there is a very able

performer on the violin,  M*  Vermeullen,

who

[  3 11 J

who gives leflons to the ftudents of the
univerfity,  among whom there are frequent private concerts  ;  but he was
abfent when I was at Leyden,  fo that
|  had no opportunity of hearing him.

HAGUE.

Though Amfterdam is the capital of
the United Provinces,  yet this being the
refidence of the Stadthoider,  and the
place where his court is conftantly kept,
it fhould,  of courfe,  be likewife the feat
jo f the polite arts.

The mufical eftablifhmemt of his fe-
rene highnefs conlifts chiefly of German
muficians.  The chief dire&or and com-
pofer,  is M.  Graaf,  of whom feveral
works are printed in France and Holland.  The names of the reft are Keller,
Gundlach,  Muller,  Halfschmid,  Rohl-
ing,  Weis,  Keller jun.  and J.  A.  Dam-
bach.  Be Tides thefe fixtures ,  there are
meffrs.  Malherbe,  of Liege,  and Juft,  a
young German,  and fcholar of Schwindl,

X 4 who

f 312 3

♦

who Is author of fome pretty pieces for
the harpfichord.  M.  Schwindl himfelf,
whofe name is well known in the mu-
fical world,  by his admirable compofi-
tions for violins,  which are full of tafte,
grace,  and effeds,  refided a confiderable
time at the Hague,  but was gone from
thence before my arrival.

M.  Spandau,  who has been fince heard
with fuch fatisfadion in England,  I found
at the Hague.  In his performance upon
the French horn,  he has contrived,  by
his delicacy,  tafte,  and expreffion,  to
render an inftrument,  which,  from its
coarfenefs,  could formerly be only fup-
ported in the open air,  or in a fpacious
building,  equally foft and pleafing with
the fweeteft human voice.

Here are two theatres,  one for German,  and the other for French plays,
and comic operas.  I faw the little opera
of Toinon et Toinette,  in the French theatre,  which is fmall,  as was the company,
and the merit of the performers.

The

r 3*3 3

The Hague feems more calculated for
birds of paflage than natives.  The want
of variety in the company,  and in the
performers,  makes them foon mutually
tired of each  .other.  It is common for
German and Italian muficians,  in their
way to or from England,  to vifit,  and
flop a fhort time at the Hague,  where,
by concerts,  they ufually gain money
fufficient to enable them to purfue their
journey ;  but they feldom remain here
longer than a fhip which enters a port
merely to wood and water.

Here are four churches,  three belong**
ing to the Calvinids,  and one to the
Lutherans,  in all which there are large
organs ;  but neither the inftruments,  nor
thofe who perform upon them,  are much
celebrated.

If my mufical acquifitions and difcove-
ries received but fmall augmentation at
the Hague,  I was amply rewarded for the
troubie of going thither,  by the notice
with which I was honoured by his excel*

lency.

C 3*4 3

fency,  Sir Jofeph Yorke,  and the pains fie
kindly took with delign to render me
fervice-

DELFT.

There are two handfome churches m
this town,  and organs in both.  M.  Ber-
guys,  the organift,  and carilloneiir of one
of them,  is,  M.  PothofF excepted,  the bell
performer I met with in Holland,  particularly on the carillons ,  which he plays
with altonilhing dexterity.

ROTTERDAM.

i

M.  Van Hagen,  a German,  who is the
principal organift here,  is likewife an
excellent performer on the violin,  of
which he convinced me by playing one
of his own folos.  He was a fcholar of
Geminiani,  and he not only plays,  but
writes very much in the ftyle of that great
mafter of harmony.  His daughter has a
fine voice,  and lings with much tafte and
expreflion.  His fon has been under M*

Honaiir,

[  3J5 3

Konaiir,  at Paris.  Except thefe particulars,  the only difcovery which 1 was able

to make,  relative to mufic,  in this large and

%

populous city,  was,  that it contained nothing more to be difcovered  :  but this
negative kind of knowledge is not without its ufe,  as it affuages curiofity,  and
precludes all felf-reproach on the fcore
of negligence.

$  $  $  $

Here ends my fecond Tour.  With ref-
pedt to Germany,  if I have been unable
to penetrate into feveral parts of it which
were well entitled to my attention,  or
have omitted to mention mulicians of
abilities in others,  I hope it will be remembered,  that to have vifited every
province,  court,  and city,  of this vaft
empire,  and to have ftaid as long in each
as would have been neceffary to hear all
the bed:  performers,  during carnival time,
as was frequently recommended to me,
wpuld have required the life of a Patri-

7 arch.

[  3*6  ]

arch.  However,  if the reader will take
the pains to trace my route in a map,  he
will find that I vifited almoft every capi-
tal ;  and that,  from my firft landing on
the continent,  fleering from weft to eaft,
and from fouth to north,  I made an angle
through Flanders,  Brabant,  and the German empire,  of near two thoufand miles,
before I entered Holland,  in my way back
to England.

To compenfate,  however,  in fome degree,  for the length of the way,  and the
fhortnefs of my time,  I fhall here,  as an
appendix,  fubjoin a few particulars,  which
I have obtained from good authority,  relative to the ftate of mufic,  in fuch parts
of Germany as it was not in my power tp
vifit.

Father Martin Gerbert,  of the congregation of Benedictines,  at the abbey of
St.  Blaife,  in the Black Foreft,  near Fri-
burgh,  in Brifgaw,  about thirty miles
from Strafburg,  publifhed in 1763*  the
Plan of a Hijiory of Church Mufic ,  from

the

[  3f7  ]

the firft century,  to the prefent time
After this publication,  he travelled thro*
Germany,  and a great part of France
and Italy,  in order to coiled materials in
the feveral convents and public libraries
of thofe countries  ;  and in 1765 he
printed his Itinerary,  informing the pub*
lie of the fuccefs of his refearches  •f  •

When I arrived at Manheim,  my cu-
riofity was fo much excited by a perufal
of this Itinerary,  and the reports concerning the materials which M.  Gerbert
had been long accumulating for his projected Hiftory,  that I determined to vifit
his convent,  though it was fituated very
wide of my intended route  ;  but after preparing for this deviation from my firft
plan,  and obtaining the neceflary infor-

*  De Cantu  &  Mufica EccleJiaJUca a prima Ecclejia
JEtate ufque ad prefens Tempus .

f Martini Gerberti Iter Allemannicum ,  accedit Ita -
licum et Gallicum .  Sequuntur Gloffaria ex codicibus
Manufcriptis ,  a Seculo 9 ufque 1 3.  Typis San-BIa-
fianus,  1765.

mation

L 3l8 I

mation for finding my Way thither,  f
had the mortification to hear,  that this
great and valuable colleftion of materials
for the hiftory of facred raufic had been
deftroyed,  not longfince,  by a fire,  together with the convent in which they were
depofited.  I had nothing but patience
to comfort me under this difappointment*
however I was glad to hear,  that the reverend and learned compiler of all thefe
treafures of antiquity,  had lately had the
confolation of being exalted to the head
of his fociety,  under the denomination
of prince-abbot of St.  Blaife.

The duke and fovereign of Fursten-
burg,  is a great mufician and encourager
of mufic  ;  all the performers of Ger-*
many are fure of an afylum at his court,
of being well heard,  and,  if excellent,
well rewarded.

M.  Riepel at Ratisbon is efteemed
one of the beft theorifts,  and moft intelligent muficians of that place ;  I had
formed the defign of going thither from

Munich,

[  319 3

Munich,  in my way to Vienna,  but was
difcouraged from putting it into execution,  by hearing that M.  Riepel,  as well
as all the chief muficians of RatHbon,
were then with the prince of Tour-Taxis
at Tifchengen.  However,  I Ihould have
gone to Tifchengen in fearch of them,  had
not an excellent judge of mufic aflured
me,  that he had often vifited the Prince
of Tour-Taxis,  for a month or fix weeks at
a time,  both there and at Ratifbon,  but
was never charmed by his concerts,
though he had a numerous band ;  as the
mufic was performed in an inelegant and
inexpreflive manner,  with an almoft total
negleCt of piano and forte ,  and of light
and  {hade  ;  fo that the pieces which they
executed,  however good in themfelves,
afforded him but very little pleafure.

M.  Riepel has written feveral ingenious
trads mentioned inMarpurg’s and Hiller's
collections;  and,  in a curious compofition,
much celebrated in Germany,  he has found
the means of imitating almoft every
fpecies of military noife,  by mufical
inftruments.

[  32°  1

At Gotha there is a good band,  over
which M.  George Benda prefides,  as
maefiro di capella.  The principal performers are M,  Hattafch,  on the violin  *
Kramer,  on the harpfichord  $  and Boeh-
mer on the baffoon.  I have feen in different mufical collections,  fome pleafing
productions by M.  Grafe,  a dilettante
of this city.  The chapel-mafter is author of a great variety of works for the
church,  ftage,  and chamber.  His com-
pofitions are in general new,  mafterly,
and learned ;  but his efforts at Angularity,  will by fome be conftrued into affectation.

There was no place in Germany which
I left unfeen with more regret than
Br unswic,  as that city feems to be in
pofiefiion of feveral muficians of dif-
tinguifhed abilities.  At the head of thefe
muft be ranked M.  Schwanberger,  who
is author of feveral ferious operas,  which
are compofed in a moft refined and pleafing tafte;  his melodies are graceful and

natural.

t

[  321  ]

natural,  his accompaniments ingenious
and judicious,  and the clearnefs and fa-

4fV  <

cility with which he writes,  manifeft
great experience,  and a happy fele&ion;
his harpiichord pieces,  as well as thofe
written for violins,  are full of plealing
effe&s,  produced by fair and warrantable
means.

M.  Fleifcher is another Brunfwic com-
poferof great merit,  whofe church-mufic,
comic operas,  and harpiichord leffons,  are
all written in an elegant and plealing
ilyle.

The reigning duke’s firft violin and
concert-mafter is M.  Pefeh,  who is alfo
author of feveral agreeable pieces for his
inftrument,  which have been printed at
Leiplic,  by BrietkopF

This city is at prefent likewife in pof-
feffion of M.  J.  C.  Frederic Bach,  eldeft
fon of the celebrated Sebaftian Bach,
and chapel-mafter of the court of Bee-

kenberg  ;  he is an able mathematician,

^  \

and regarded as the greateft fugift,  and
Vol.  II.  Y moft

•  [  322 1

rnofl learned profeflbr in Germany.  He
was born in 1710,  and was fevejal years
organifl and mufic- director at Hall,  in
Saxony,  before he entered into the fer-
vice of the court at Beckenberg.

Mufic is cultivated in few places more
fuccefsfully than at Brunfwic,  to which
the pafiion of the reigning duke for operas,  and the tafte and difcernment of the
hereditary prince,  have greatly contributed.

The archbifhop and fovereign of
Saltzburg is very magnificent in his
iupport of mufic,  having ufually near a
hundred performers,  vocal and inftru-
mental,  in his fervice.  This prince is
himfelf a dilettante ,  and good performer
on the violin ;  he has lately been at great  ,
pains to reform his band,  which has
been accufed of being more remarkable
for coarfenefs and noife,  than delicacy
and high-finifhing.  Signor Fifchietti,  author of feveral comic operas,  is at present the director of this band.

The

The Mozart family were all at Saltz-
burg laft fummer ;  the father has long
been in the ferviee of that court,  and the
fon is now one of the band  ;  he compofed
an opera at Milan,  for the marriage of the
arch-duke,  withthe princefsofModena,and
was to compofe another at the fame place
for the carnival of this year,  though he
is now but fix teen years of age.  By a
letter from Saltzburg,  dated laft November,  I am informed,  that this young
man,  who fo much aftonifhed all Europe
by his infant knowledge and performance,  is ft i 11 a great mafter of his in-
ftrument ;  my correfpondent went to his
father's houfe to hear him and his lifter
play duets on the fame harplichordj but
file is now at her fummit,  which is not
marvellous ;  “  and,”  fays the writer of
the letter,  “  if I may judge of the mufic
<€  which I heard of his comoofition,  in
“  the orchefira,  he is one further in-
“  ftance of early fruit being more extra-
“  dinary than excellent.

Y 2

The

t 324 1

The mufic-fliops of Nuremberg ar£
the moft remarkable in Germany.  It is
in this city only,  that mufical compoft-
tiorrs are engraved  ;  in other parts of the
empire,  they are all printed with types.
Hafner,  Winterfchmidt,  and Schmid are
proprietors of the principal  (hops.  M*
Agrel is the only muiician redding at
Nuremberg,  who has diftinguifhed him-
felf as a compofer ;  his pieces for the
harpfichord were once in vogue,  but
though faultlefs as to counterpoint,  they
never,  with refpedt to invention,  feemed
to furpafs mediocrity.

-j  ...  /•

At Zerbst,  Mi Heock,  has the reputation of being a great performer on
the violin;  M.  Krebs of Altenburg,
fcholar of Sebaftian Bach,  has been very
much admired for his full and mafterly
manner of playing the organ,  and M.
Kunzen,  whofe performance muft be
hill remembered with great pleafure by
thofe who heard him in England,  is at
prefent the worthy organift of Lubec.

Belicfes

C 325  ]  '  '

Befides M.  Hiller,  four compofers re-
fide at Leipfic,  with whom I had not
time to cultivate a perfonal acquaintance;
thefe are M.  Doles,  cantor,  and compo-
fer of church mulic ;  M.  Lohlein,  a
harpfichord player,  and compoler ;  M,

Neefex author of fome pretty fonatas for

»

that inftrument,  and M.  Reichard,  a
compofer of comic operas,  by no means
devoid gf genius.

M.  Rolle,  mufic-direCtor of Magde-
berg,  is a fpirited and ingenious compofer,  who has difiinguilhed himfelf by
productions for the church ;  but I have
feen fome of his pieces for the harpfichord,  which have pleafed me more
than his other works,  particularly,  in
the Berlin collections,  where there are
leffons by this author,  full of fire,  and in
which pleafing effeCts are produced,  by
the introduction of old paiTages,  in a new
manner.

M. Miiller,  the court- organiftatDp.ssAu,
is polfefled of confiderable abilities ;  his

com

r 326  ]

compofitions difcover tafte,  fancy,  and a
powerful hand;  but his ambition to produce new palTages,  upon all occaiions,
renders his pieces frequently laboured,
unnatural,  and affeded ;  and to this vice
may be added,  that,  fo common to his
countrymen,  of fpinning his fubjeds and
movements to a tire fo me length.

M.  Wolf,  at Weymer,  is a natural
and pleafing compofer of comic operas,
in the German language ;  a fpecies of
cotnpoiiiion become very prevalent in the.
northern parts of the empire,  iince the
year 1750,  when M.  Hiller fet to muiic
the firft drama of that kind,  which was
brought upon the fcage,  It gained great
applaufe againft the opinion of the critics,
by whom it was much decried,  on account of the lownefs of the fubjed,
which was the Merry Cobler ,  imitated from
our farce of the Devil to Pay,  Before
this period the Germans had only ferious
operas and intermezziy in their own language,  upon the fhge;  but the prefen t

rage

[  327 J

rage for burlettas is fo flrong,  that perfons
of judgment think it will deftroy all true
tafle for mufic of a higher chfsc

M.  Richert,  of Koningsberg,  is a
great voluntary-player on the violin,  and
particularly remarkable for the truth and
facility with which he plays double
Jiops .

M.  Fr.  Xav.  Richter fhould have been
diflinguifhed among the muficians of
Manheim;  his works,  of various kinds,
have great merit  ;  the fubjedts are often
new and noble;  but his detail and manner of treating them is frequently dry and
fteril,  and he fpins and repeats paffages in
different keys without end.  The French
have a term for this tedioufn^fjs,  which
is wanting in other languages,  they call
it Rofalie :  I know not whence this ex-
preffion is derived;  but it means a firing
of repetitions,  either a note higher,  or a
note lower,  of the fame paffage or modulation  ;  which indicates a want of invention in a cornpofer,  as much as flam-

Y 4 merino

a 0

/

[  3*8  ]

mering and hefitation imply a want of
wit or memory in a ftory-teller.

Father Schmitt,  a monk of the Cifter-
tian order,  at the abbey of Eberbach,  in
Rheingau,  is author of trios for violins,
that are not only full of tafte and fancy,
but compofed with a boldnefs,  fpirtt,  and
accuracy,  which dilettanti feldom arrive
at.-

M.  Johann Gottfried Miithel,  of Riga,
being by birth and education a German,
deferves a place here,  though he is at
prefent eftablifhed in a city which appertains to Ruffia.  When a ftudent upon
keyed inflruments has vanquifhed all the
difficulties to be found in the leffons of
Handel,  Scarlatti,  Scnobert,  Eckard,  and
C.  P.  E.  Bach ;  and,  like Alexander,  laments that nothing more remains to conquer,  I would recommend to him,  as an
exercife for patience and perfeverence,
the compofitions of Miithel ;  which are
fo full of novelty,  tafte,  grace,  and contrivance,  that 1 fhould not hefitate to rank

them

/

[3 29  ]

them among the greateft productions of
the prefent age.  Extraordinary as are the
genius and performance of this mufician,
he is but little known in Germany,  and
all I could gather there concerning him
is,  that he received inftructions from Se-
baftian Bach,  and lived fome time at

-  .  '  .  .  i  ■'  '  t t t'  * X  >  .

Schwerin,  before he fettled in Riga.
The firft of his works,  which I can trace
to have been publifhed,  were Odes,  printed at Hamberg,  1759.  The reft,  which
are all for the harpfichord,  appeared in
the following order  :  three Sonatas,  and
two Airs,  with twelve variations,  Nu-
femburg,  1760.  Two Concertos,  printed
by Hartknock,  Riga,  and Mittau,  1767.
Duetto for two clavichords,  two harpfi-
chords,  or two forte pianos.  d°.  Riga,  1 77 r .

The ftyle of this compofer more refem-
bles that of Emanuel Bach,  than any o-
ther.  But the paffages are entirely his
own,  and reflect as much honour upon his
head as his hand.  Indeed his writings a-
bound with difficulties,  which to common

[  33°  1

*  \  o

mon hearers,  as well as common players,
mud appear too elaborate  ;  for even his
accompaniments are fo charged as to require performers,  for each instrument,  of
equal abilities to his own,  which is expecting too much,  in muficians of this
nether world.

If my leifure and abilities would have
fufficed for fo extenfive a plan,  I Ihould
have been glad to have made the journal of
this tour,  the prefent Jiate of arts and f time es,  in general ;  however,  poetry is fo
nearly conne&ea with  ?nujic ,  that I could
not help making fome enquiries after the
mod eminent poets now living in Germany,  and I fhall here prefent my readers
with what I found to be the general opinion there of men of tafte and learning,
with refpedt to their abilities.

M.  Klopfock has been already mentioned,  and Madame Karfch ,  the poetefs
of Berlin,  may be ranked next to him
for original genius.  This lady is quite a
meteor,  and furprifes the more by the e-

levation

[  331 3

levation and beauty of her poems,  on
account of her low origin,  (he being defcended from parents who were
unable to afford her a liberal education,
and married very young to a ferjeant,  in
a regiment quartered at Glogau.  When
(lie arrived idrft at Berlin,  a tew of her
verfes were handed about,  which were fo
much approved,  that a fubfcription was
opened for printing a collection of them  :
fince that time fhe has fupported herfelf
with dignity,  by the productions of her
pen.

The works and character of Wieland
are equally various  :  aliufque  &  idem .  He
fpent his youth in piety and flights of en-
thuuafm,  compofing nothing but Sympathies  ,  Mora!  Tales ,  Tetters from the Dead \
a poem on Nature ,  and Ghrijlian Hymns
and Pfaims .  At a different period of his
life,  his mufe pafling to another extreme,
he wrote tales of a different kind,  which
not only iurpaffed thofe of La Fontaine,
in fimplicity and beauty,  but in loofe-
i nefs

[  332  ]

nefs and immorality.  He wrote two
poems called Idris and Amadis>  in ftanzas,
like thofe of Ariofto,  with Don Sylvio de
Rojaha ,  a romance,  in the ftyle of Cervantes  ;  all full of wdt and humour.

His mailer-piece is faid to be Agathon9

a romance in the ancient Greek manner.

»  ,  *  -*  <4

He is likewife author of a poem called
Hie Graces  ;  of Mufarion ,  and Diogenes ,
the firft a poem,  the other written in
profe,  and with the humPur of Sterne.
His laft work is called the Golden Mirror ,
and abounds with fev^re ftriCtures on

^  *-  *•  i H  •  ..  »  .  (  >

princes and priefts.

This writer is a wonderful example of
contradiction in human nature.  His phi-
lofophy is calculated for perfons in the
great world.  The Germans frequently
compare his genius with that of Voltaire,
and even carry their admiration fo far,
as to fav,  that he excells him in all but
his dramatic pieces;  both have written
much,  and both have repeated them-
felves.

M.  LeJJing%

[  333 1  '  .  •

M.  Lejfing ,  of Wolfenbuttle,  is a man

9 I

of univerfal knowledge and genius,  having fucceeded equally well in Lyric Poems,
Fables ,  Remarks on Critics ,  Satyrs ,  Dramas,  and Difcoveries in Antiquity.

Haller's poems are chiefly on philofo-
phical fubjecls.  Thofe On the Origin of
Evil,  on Reafon,  Infidelity ,  Supeifiition ,
File Vanity of Human Virtue,  The Alps,
and an unfinilhed ode On Eternity,  are
accounted the belt.

Rammler,  of Berlin,  holds a diftin-

1  .  K 1

guifhed rank among German poets.  His
odes are faid to have too much of Greece
and Rome.  Glaucus is his beft poem.

Gleim ,  is called the Anacreon of modern times.

Gellert' s Fables and Tales are much
admired.

Gefnir is a pafloral poet of great reputation.

Dr.  Cramer s Odes on the Refur re cl ion,
his Luther ,  and MelanElhon,  are very
much efteemed.

Rabner

[  334 3

Rabner is a celebrated fatyrift;  and
Hagedorn ,  Utz,  Gifecke ,  Gerjlenberg ,
Schweibelsr ,  Jacobi ,  Weife,  and Licht-
wehr,  are poets whofe productions are
much efteemed by their countrymen.

Germany contains thirty-fix univerfi-
ties,  of which there are feventeen catholic,  feventeen proteftant,  and two,  as
thofe of Erfurt and Heidelberg,  where
Undents of both religions are admitted.
If I were to enumerate all the men of
learning and abilities,  in thefe femina-
ries,  who are labouring for the advancement of fcience,  the lift would doubtlefs
be too confiderahle for my work  :  however,  M.  Zacheriiiy of Brunfwick,  and M.
Kraufe ,  of Berlin,  are entitled to a place
here for their mufical talents.

M.  Zacherid ,  befides being a poet of
the firft rank,  and celebrated for the wit
and humour of his mock-heroic poems,
is likewife a good practical mufician,  and
an excellent theorift and critic of mufical productions.

And

f 3 35 1

And M.  Kraufe ,  of Berlin,  who has
acquired great reputation,  by his admirable work upon the fubjedt of German
Lyric Poetry ,  is likewife author of fe-
veral mufical competitions,  which are
much efteemed by connoifieurs.

Having now laid before the reader
fuch information as I have been able to
obtain,  concerning the prefent date of
»muhc in the countries through which I
have travelled in this Tour,  I have only
to add,  that,  befides the many excellent
muficians which I found in Germany,
it has furnilhed almoft every great city
in Europe with profeflors of uncommon
abilities ;  and it is hardly too much to
fay,  that the bed German muficians,  of
the prefent age,  with a few exceptions,
are to be found out of their own country.
Indeed,  it has been obferved,  that,  from
whatever caufe,  tranfplanted Germans,
c ceteris paribus ,  furpafs,  in mod of the
fine arts,  thofe that remain in their original foil.

Bv

■/

[  336 1

fey travelling,  muficians lofe,  among
other local partialities,  that veneration
for a particular ftyle,  which fo much en-
creafes the number of imitators,  arid
keeps them in fuch fubje&iori,  that,  like
the Writers of modern Latin*  they dare
not hazard a fingie thought for which
claffical authority cannot be produced.

The muficians of almoft every town,
and every band in the fervice of a German prince,  however fmall his dominions,  eredt themfelves into a mufical
monarchy,  mutually jealous of each other,
and all unanimoufly jealous of the Italians,  who come into their country  :  for
my own part,  as a byftander,  who had
no fhare in thefe quarrels,  and was not
in the leaft interefted in the event,  I
thought I could fee prejudice operating
ftrongly on both fides.  As to the Italians,  however,  it muft be acknowledged
that they are careffed,  courted,  and frequently rewarded with double the falary
that is paid even to fuch natives as have

the

2

f

[  ‘  -337 3

the claim of fuperior merit.  The Germans,  therefore,  under fuch provocation,
mu ft not be too feverely cenfured for
under-rating the talents of many great Italian matters,  and treating them with a
contempt and feverity which is due only
to the grofleft ignorance and ftupidity*
My intention was neither to write a

*  r  *  r

panegyric,  nor a fatire,  on the mufic of

•  .  .  •  f  •

Germany,  but to defcribe its effefts on
my own feelings.  I fet out with a defire to be pleafed  ;  and if I have been
fometimes diffatisfied,  and my difap-
pointment has produced cenfure,  I hope
it will not draw upon me the charge of
wanting either impartiality or candour.

Praijing all is praijing none  —  and
I have fometimes had my doubts con-

•  /->  *■  r  %

cerning fuch ideal beauties of particular

—  «  •  j  *■  *  r  •

ftyles as are fupported by excluftve admiration.

I will not fay that the Germans have
no national mufic ;  they have had many
men of great abilities,  who have never

Vol.  n.  Z been

[  33§  ]

been in Italy,  and who have difdained
to pillage the works of their neighbours ;
but the prefent call of German melody
can as eafily be traced from the opera
fongs of the Italians,  as the tafte of mod
German compofers and performers from
that of the beft fingers of Italy.

Indeed,  many favourable circumftances
have contributed to facilitate their acquiring this tafte ;  particularly their in-
tercourfe with the natives in the great
pofiefiions they have beyond the Alps ;
and.  even at home,  the inhabitants of
Vienna,  Munich,  Drefden,  Berlin,  Man-
heim,  Brunfwick,  Stutgard,  and Caffel,
where there is,  and has long been,  an
Italian opera,  have not liftened to Italian
finging in vain.

Setting however,  particular diftinitions
afide,  the refult of all my enquiries and
obfervations,  is the eftabliihment of two
fails  ;  the firft,  that there is very little
good finging by the natives,  in any part
of Europe,  except Italy 5 the fecond,

that

[  339  ]

that though the Italians excel the people
of all other nations in vocal mufic,  yet
the Germans,  with a few exceptions,
excel even the Italians in the conftruc-
tion and ufe of moft inftruments ;  and
perhaps,  it is not difficult to account for
the different mufical excellence of thefe
two nations.  The language of the Italians is more favourable to mufic than
that of any other people,  and the cuf-
tom of performing almoft continually,
the moft refined and expenfive competitions in their churches and theatres,
cannot but produce a general reditude of
tafte among all ranks of people,  and
afford a moft perfed model of imitation,  to all who have a diftinguifhing
ear,  and flexible voice.  On the contrary,  the language of the Germans is
among thofe that are the leaft favour- '
able to' mufic  $  and very little vocal mufic is performed among them,  except to
Italian WTords,  even in their operas:  it was
therefore natural,  that inftrumental mufic

Z 2 ffiould

[  34°  ]

fihould become the general objedt.  The
number of fchools that have been mentioned in this Jotirna!,  where inftru-
mental mufic is taught,  increafes the
number of competitors  ;  and the munificence of the German princes,  who
keep numerous bands of performers,
not only for the fervice of the court,
but the field,  cannot but incite the moft;
vigorous efforts to excel.

Upon the whole,  with refpedt to the
fine arts,  it fee ms as if every fchool,  and
every country,  had its peculiar vices,  as  .
well as virtues.  In mufic,  it has been
fihewn in my former tour,  that the Lombard,  Venetian,  and Neapolitan fchools,
have charadteriftic diftiridlidns ;  the fame
might be proved of the leveral ftyles of
compofition and performance in thq
principal cities of Germany;  Vienna being moft remarkable for fire and  "invention  ;  Manheim,  for neat and brilliant
execution ;  Berlin,  for counterpoint ;
and Brprifwic,  for tafte.  But,  without

A

r 341  ]

out oppofing town to town,  and  (late to
ftate,  it may be laid of Germany in general,  that the mufical virtues of its natives,  are patience and profundity ;  and
their vices,  prolixity and pedantry .  The
Italians are apt to be too negligent,  and
the Germans too elaborate ;  in fo much,
that mufic,  if I may hazard the thought,
feems play to the Italians,  and work to
the Germans.  The Italians are perhaps
the only people on the globe who can trifle
with grace,  as the Germans have alone
the power to render even labour pleafing.

I N-  '

■

J  •>  r

»  i.  t

O f  ,  . :

*  f'  **

J

..*1

;-Nf i

~  r»

•  i  • !.  •

.  i  ,  2  ..  vj V i

O

...  .1.

.

j^il c- v i  */*,  »

t  ■  '  i r  •  ’

A.  *.  *-i A  «  *  «»  I

bn

<  ^  m

'■IS  *  ...  V'  i7 7

•  .  ;  .vrf if'TJ  .

’  ^  l  <r, . .

S-hi l  .  f .  '  '  ■

f 0f9,  •■  ^  •■-  r

• -  i  .  .  ;

b-  n

\ /  ‘  orb  ->B-  ' .

-  C I  ,  *->/•  V  -  •
/*  w  ^  »  -  ♦  -

<-  ,*>  J  >i

f>.  w„

(•  -•  .  i  «  i  .

tv V r.  i

X

'jA.

f .?  J

t .

•  w 4 4

•*  fcV

b  .  •  ,  •  :

:  r ,  r

i

\  \

t  ■  J  :  ’

,4-vte

.  '  •  -  '
.  •  -.*  \y  '

J  :.  *

rt f ififtr
-  k/.wX^rLiJL i,u  *.

i  /  >  r  ••  l  '  X  *  ‘  ‘  \  '  \  !

..  *'  '•*'/  '

r-  V J  .J+*  >■

■  -  •

.  ••'■••  ;  -7  '

'v/  ..  v.  v  ’.-l]'

wl te n

•  •  -  «

b Woe

u3'TJ’  31 f]  .fl£l jj 1

lr%  •

j Ifit/i

■'-H tr;  'JtfcD.'jfBsH

•  -  .  i  .}i  •  1  .  .  .1  ’’  ;  i J  '■  *u

■  .  ■  ■•  oiM.'r  '  -‘■■f,  ;  .

c5 ;  -/  i srd  :c  :?riol.03i'bu’;l

(/’«  '"  i  •
f  -  ’•  t>  C.

n  <*

* ;  tv,  v  ;: ‘ijdix.'ji  'I

'

•  'vise1  ( rvr i b  ! ' !  /■  *?

/••f

?  v»  H  !  :  Ktyvi  \  Sfl

:'b  ■  W d  ,.!.fr.  *

r .  •r'v

■A

I N D

X

E

A.

ACADEMY of Commerce at Hamburg,  fome account of,  247.

Accompaniments,  compared to converfation,  252.

Adam,  M.  mufician at Drefden,  71.

Agrel,  324.

Agricola,  M.  compofer at Berlin,  89,  204,

- Signora,  finger at Berlin,  93.

- Rodolpho,  281.

Amsterdam,  282,

Anfani,  Signor,  an excellent tenor finger,  277.
Aotourou,  124.

Architecture,  at Potzdam,  117.  How encouraged there.

Bach,  Sebaftfan,  his great talents,  80.  Challenged by
Marchand,  81.

- Frederic,  321.

Bach,  Carl.  Phil,  Emanuel,  at Hamburg,  244.  His
reception of the author,  245.  His opinion of canons,  251-  Sketch of his life,  259.  Lift of his works,
263.  Reflections on his ftyle,  265.  Excellence of
his performance,  269.  Flexibility of his genius,  270.
Parallel drawn between him and Domenico Scarlatti,
271.

Backers,  146.

Band of the great opera at Berlin,  95.

Band,  the much celebrated,  under Hafle at Drefden in

1755*  51--.

Benda,  Francis,  concert-mafter to the king of Pruflia,  96,
1 18.  His opinion of Giardini,  127.  His afteCting

Z 4 manner

E 344 3

manner of playing,  128.  Sketch of his life,  129 to
140.  Formed his flyle from good Tinging,  ibid.
Benda,  George,  compofer at Saxe Gotha,  140.

-  Jofeph,  violin player at Berlin,  9?,  218.

Berguys,  organift and carilloneur at Delft,  314.

Berlin,  86,  201.  Great number of mufieal critics there,
224.

* - muficians formed upon one model,  230.

Berfelli,  Matteo,  his character as a huger,  175.

Bertuch,  M.  organift of St.  Peter’s,  Berlin,  205.
Bezozzi,  Signor,  hautbois player at Drefden,  27,  45.

Parallel between him and Fifcher,  45.

Binder,  M.  organift at Drefden,  55.

Bode,  M.  an eminent printer at Hamburg,  246.
Bohemia,  i.

Bohemians,  famous for mufical talents,  3.  Taught mii-
fic at the common reading fchools,  12,  14,

Borcfini,  linger,  180.

Braun,  his charadfer as a finger,  180.

Breitkopf,  mufic feller at Leipfic,  73.  Inventor of mufical types,  and of catalogues in notes,  ibid.  His prints
ing-office,  78.

Bremen,  278.  Pfal mod y there,  279-

Bridge at Drefden,  rule obferved in palling it,  26.

Brunswig,  320.

Budin,  16

Buffardin,  German flute player.  167,  170,  192.
Buononcim,  190.

Biifcb,  profeifor of mathematics at Hamburg.  246.
Buxtehude,  famous organift,  239.

C.

Calori,  Signora,  finger at Drefden,  29.

Cantor,  his office in Germany,  220.

Careftini,  Giovanni,  his character as a finger,  180.
Carillons,  282.  At Amfterdam,  293.  At Leyden,  310.
Chimes,  played by clock-work,  at Amfterdam,  29b.
Church mufic,  difcouraged at Berlin,  91.

Comic operas,  German,  326.

Con-

[  345  ]

Concert- room of the new palace at Potzdam defcribed,  144.
Concert,  at Drefden,  44.  At Sans-Souci,  15 1.  At
Berlin,  20/.  At Hamburg,  252,  256.

Concialini,  Carlo,  finger at Berlin,  98.

Converfations,  with M.  Dulfick,  5.  With Benda,  127.
With M.  Quantz,  150.  With C.  P.  E.  Bach,  245,
250.  With M.  Klopftock,  248.

Cuzzoni,  her character as a finger,  180.

Czarth,  101,  135.

Czaslau,  4.

D.

Delft,  312.

Domenico,  his chara&er as a finger,  179.

Doles,  325.

Dresden,  25.

Dubourg,  1 91.

Duel between Handel’and Matthefon,  240.

Dulfick,  Johann,  organift and cantor at Czafiau,  4.

E.

•  •  i  *■  •  *  *  .  ,

Ebeling,  M.  72.  His tranllation of the prefent State of
Muficy 243.  Introduces the author to M.  C.  P.  E.
Bach,  245.  A great collector of mufical curiofities,
246.

Elbe,  pafiage down that river from Lobefchiitz to Drefden,  20.

F*

Farinelli,  183.

Faich,  M.  chamber-mufician to the king of Prufiia,  222.
Fauftina,  her portrait in the Dreiden gallery,  41.  Her
character as a finger,  187.

Festing,  191.

Fifcher,  parallel drawn between him and Bezozzi,  45*
Fifchietti,  322.

Fleifcher,  321.

Foot-paths,  peculiar to London,  197.

Fran-

C 346  ]

Francifcbello,  137.

Frauen*  Kir die atDrefden,  30.

French mufic,  its effect on a Greek lady,  123.  On a
native of Otaiti,  124.  M.  Quantz’s opinion of it,
185.

Flute,  German,  improved by M.  Quantz,  186,  194.

Fux,  178.

G.  1

Galatea,  a pafloral opera,  225.

Gafparini,  Signora a finger at Berlin,  97.

Gafparini,  Signor,  a Roman compofer,  182,

GafTati,  Pietro,  180.

Gellert,  333.

Geminiani,  191,  314.

Gefner,  333.

Gerbert,  father,  his plan of a hiftory of church mufic,
316.  His materials deflroyed by fire,  318.

Giardini,  127.

Gleim,  333.

Gotfel,  M.  German flute player at Drefden,  44.

Graaf,  M.  mufic director at the Hague,  31 1.

Grauel,  M.  violoncello player at Berlin,  218.

Graun,  Charles Henry,  97.  His works,  125.  Two opinions concerning him,  227.

Graun,  Joh.  Gottlib,  97.  Praifed and cenfured,  228,
229.

Groningen,  280.

H.

Haarlem,  302.

Haarlem,  organ,  catalogue of its flops,  305.

Hague,  311.

Haller,  333.  *  '  v

Hamburg,  234.  Its populoufnefs,  255.

Handel,  190,  191.  Began his career at Hamburg,  238.
His great abilities upon the organ,  239,  242.  His
duel with Matthefon,  24c.

Harp-

t  ,347 3

Harpfichords made better in England by Germans than in
Germany,  146.

Hafle,  50.  His firft theatrical compofition,  183.  In
troduces Qjjantz to old Scarlatti,  184.

Heinichen,  17 1,  176.

Hiller,  M.  mufic director at Leiplic,  72,

Hoeckh,  M.  135,  324.

Hohlfeld,  conftrucbor of a machine for writing down extempore pieces of mufic,  216.

Homilius,  M.  cantor and church compofer at Drefden,

71*

Hunger,  M.  organift at Drefden,  48.

Hummel,  mufic feller at Amfterdam,  285.

Hunt,  M.  violin player at Drefden,  44.

I.

Juft,  compofer at the Hague,  311.

K.

Karfch,  Madame,  poetefs at Berlin,  330.

Keifer,  83.

Kirkman,  146.

Kirnberger,  mufician at Berlin,  209.  Scholar of Sebaf-
tian Bach,  210.

Klopftock,  the Milton of Germany,  248.  His countrymen’s opinion of him,  249,  330.

Kone,  chamber mufician to the king of Pruflia,  201.
Koningstein,  22.

Konyczek,  134.

Kraufe,  335.

3£rebs,  324.

Kruch,  firft violin at Czaflau,  4.

Kunzen,  324.

L.

Landi,  Abate,  poet at Berlin,  98.

Leipsic,  71.

Length,

t 348  }.

Length,  necefiary in German mufical compofkions,  265*
Leffing,  M.  333.

Leyden,  309.  -  -  .

Lindner,  M.  92,  201.

Linzen,  M.  organift of the new church at Amfterdam,
297.

Lobel,  a blind Hebrew fidler,  134.

Loeeschutz,  17.

Locatelli,  289.

Lohlein,  325.

Lotti,  173.

Luftig,  organift at Groningen,  280.

M.

Machine for writing down extempore pieces of mufic,
conftru£ted at Berlin,  213.  Deftroyed by fire,  214.
Mala die du pais,  125.

Marble gallery at Potzdam,  146.

Marchand challenges Sebaftian Bach,  8 r.

Mara,  M.  violoncello player at Berlin,  208.

Marpurg,  M.  at Berlin,  105.  His mufical writings,  106,
206,  212.

Marriage- Jubilee,  140.

Matthefon,  235.  Printed as many books as he lived years,
236.  Conteft for fuperiority over Handel,  239.  Quarrel and duel with ditto,  240.  Bequeaths an organ to
the new church at Hamburg,  273.  Its excellence,

274-

Metaftafio,  his opinion of German finging-fchools,  23.
Mifliwiceck brought up in Bohemia,  13.

Mingotti,  her portrait in the picture gallery at Drefden,
41-

Modern mufic always to be abufed,  157.

Monticelii,  51.

Mozart family,  322.

Mumfion,  Dr.  at Hamburg,  248.

Muller,  325.

Mufic,  its effects molt powerful in hot climates,  3.  By
what means become fo general in Bohemia,  4.  Injured
\  by

[  349 1

by time,  153.  Stationary at Berlin,  195,  234.  Requires paflion and enthufiafm,  224.

Mufic fchools in Bohemia,  4.  At Teechenbrod/  4.  At
Janich,  ibid.  At Bomifchbrod,  ibid.  At Czaflau,  5.
At Budin,  16.  At Lobefchiitz,  17.  At Koningftein,
23.  At Pirna,  ibid.  At Drefden,  63.

Muflc fhops at Leipfic,  73.  Hamburg,  257.  Amfler-
dam,  285,  and Nuremberg,  324.

Mufical writers at Berlin,  88.

Miithel.  great player and excellent compofer,  328.  Account of his works,  329.

N.

Naumann,  maeJlYo di capella at Drefden,  34*

Neefe,  325.

Nicolai,  a learned bookfeller at Berlin,  89.

Night-watch at Berlin,  89.

Nuremberg,  324.

O.

Organs at Czaflau,  5.  At Prague,  8,  9.  At Lobefchiitz,
17.  At the Frauen-Kirche,  Drefden,  30.  Eledfor’s
chapel,  Drefden,  54.  Garrifon church,  Berlin,  103.
St.  Peter’s,  Berlin,  204.  St-  Mary’s,  Berlin,  206.
New church,  Hamburg,  272.  St.  Peter’s,  Hamburg,
276.  At the cathedral,  Bremen,  278-  St.  Martin,
Groningen,  280.  New church,  Amfterdam,  283.  Old
church,  Amfteidam,  286.  The great church at Haar-#
lem,  302.

Organifts,  method of chufmg them at Amfterdam,  291.
Orflni,  Gaetano,  131.  His character as a finger,  179.
Orontes,  an opera by Theil,  235.

P.

Palace,  new,  at Potzdam,  defcribed,  143.

Pantaleone,  58,  167.

Parade at Potzdam,  195.

Pafiione

«  [  35°  ]

Paflione,  of C.  P.  E.  Bach,  253.  :

Pefch,  321.

Picture gallery at Drefden,  39,  52.  •

Pirna,  23.

Pifendel,  167,  172,  192.

Pfiffer,  M.  organilt of St.  Peter’s,  Hamburg,  276.

Poets,  German,  fome account of,  330.

Poor fcholars at Drefden,  their origin,  63.  Divided into troops,  68.  Their drefs,  70.

Porporino,  fig.  firft ferious linger at Berlin,  98.

Poftillions,  20,  84.

Pothoff,  M.  blind organift at Amfterdam,  286.  His
great abilities on the organ,  287.  An ingenious fugift,
288.  His aftonilhing execution as carilloneur,  293.

Potzdam,  114.  Its beautiful buildings,  177.

Poutaveri,  his mimickry of the French opera,  124.

Pr ague,  6.  Why not abounding in great muficians,

IO.  '

Chiantz,  John Joachim,  chamber mufician to the king
of Pruflia,  150.  Sketch of his life,  16110194.  His
improvement of the German flute,  186,  194.

R.

Tracks,  abolifhed at Drefden,  61.

Pvabner,  334.

Pvammler,  333.

Reflections on the mufical talents of the Bohemians,  3,
10.  On different ftyles in mufic,  157.  On the ne-
ceffity of contrail in mufic,  202.  On the Tinging at
Leipfic,  76.  On the comparative mufical merit of the
Germans and Italians,  337.

Reichard,  325.

Richert,  327.

Richter,  ior,  327.

Piiedt,  M.  flute player at Berlin,  201,  204.  His fond-
nefs for calculations,  -223.

Riepel,

[  351 3  .

Riepel,  M.  mufician at Ratifbon,  319.

Ringk,  M.  organift of St.  Mary’s,  Berlin,  206.

Rode,  four monumental paintings by him,  at Berlin,  104.
Rolie,  325.

Rofalba,  her portraits in the picture gallery at Dref-
den,  41.

Rofalie,  what,  327.

Rotterdam,  314.

Ruck,  M.  204.

S.

Saltsburg,  322.

Sans-Souci,  palace,  113,  147,  148.

Sarti,  Signor 301.

Scarlatti,  Aleftandro,  his opinion of wind inftruments,
184.

- Domenico,  ibid,  and 271.

Schale,  M.  223.

Schmeling,  Mademoifelle,  fir ft finger at Berlin,  97.  Her
amazing powers,  108,  111,  206.

Schmidt,  169,  17 1.

Schmitt,  father,  328.

Schiiler,  M.  204.

Schwanberger,  320.

Schwindl,  M.  312.

Seger,  organift at Prague,  13.

Senefino,  174.  His character as a finger,  176.

Shudi,  145.

Silbermann,  48.

Singing at Leipfic,  76.  At Bremen,  278.  At the German Jews fynagogue,  299.

Snetzler,  102,  146.

Spandau,  312.

Stamitz,  brought up in the common fchool at Teuchen-
brod,  12.  His great and original genius,  13.
Stechwech,  organift of the Wefter Kerk at Amfter-
dam,  292.

Street muficians at Prague,  10.

Strcfil,

’  [  352  ]

Strofil,  a mufical inftrument,  70.

Sulzer,  M.  208.

Swell*  not to be found in German organs,  102.
Synagogue,  German Jews,  at Amfterdam,  298.

T.

Telemann,  a moft voluminous compofer,  242.  His firft
and fecond manner,  243.

Tefi,  Vittoria,  176.

Theatres,  fmall one at Drefden,  29.  Great one at ditto,
50.  At Lcipfic,  74.  At Berlin,  94.

Thum-Kirche,  at Bremen,  278.

Tunnerftick,  Dr.  his experiment,  35.

v.  '  . :  "  '  ..

Van Hagen,  organift at Rotterdam,  314.

Vivaldi,  his concertos itudied by Fran.  Benda,  133.  By
Quantz,  165.

Vox humana,  ftop,  303.

Univerfities,  German,  334.

w.  _  :  : ;  \  111

Wagner,  103.

Weidemann,  191.

Weidner,  M.  135.

Weifs,  167,  177,  192.

Weftphal,  an eminent mufic merchant at Hamburg,  256*.
Wieland,  a German poet,  331.

Wolf,  M.  organift at Prague,  8.

Wolf,  at Weymer,  326.

Z.

\  ’  '  j  -t St 1 fiO 1st

Zaeharia,  226,  334.

FINIS.

i

\

f

I

*

f

1

I

>

f

\

I

.

«*

t

\

V.

fit.

\
