ia a®  ;

I ill!

I

I

/

f

1

THE

PRESENT STATE

O F

MUSIC

T N

FRANCE and ITALY:

O R,

The JOURNAL of a TOUR through thofe
Countries,  undertaken to colle£t Materials for

A GENERAL HISTORY OF MUSIC.

%

r

By CHARLES BURNEY,  Muf.  D.

Ei cantarono allor fi dolcemente,

Che la dolcezza ancor dentro mi fuona.

Dante,  Purg.  Canto zdo.

LONDON,

Printed for TJ*  Becket and Co.  in the Strand.

MDCCLXXI.

£It is difficult to write about the arts without ufing terms
of art j but though few foreign words,  or technical terms,
will occur in this Journal,  which are not tranflated or defined the firft time they are ufed,  yet,  to fave the reader
the trouble of feeking them in the text,  or of remembering them,  the following are collected and explained here.]

EXPLICATION

6 F

#  '  *  k i  '

Some Musical Terms and Foreign Words5
which occur in the following Journal.

•j  %

^£CCAD E Ml A,  a concert.

Adagio,  flow,  in the firft degree  ;  or,  when ufed
fubftantively,  it fignifies a flow movement.

Allegro ,  gay,  or a quick movement.

Appoggiatura ,  from appoggiare ,  to leaA on  ;  a note of
embellifhment  $  it is ufually written in a
fmall character,  as not eflential to the harmony,  though moft eflential to melody,  tafte5
and expreflion.

Baritono ,  a voice of low pitch,  between a tenor and
bafe.

Bravura ,  as aria di bravura ,  a quick fong of difficult execution.

Canon ,  a compofition in which the parts follow
each other in the fame melody and intervals.

Canto fermo ,  plain fong,  or chanting in the cathedral fervice.

A z

Canzone ,

Ctthzone9 a fong.

ContF AltOy counter-tenor,  or a voice of higher
pitch than the tenor,  but lower than the
treble.

Contrapuntifta ,  one  /killed in the laws of harmony,
a compofer.

Contrapunto ,  counterpoint ;  compofition in parts  :
this term came from the firft mufic in parts,
being expreffed in points placed over each
other.

Dilettante ,  a gentleman compofer or performer ;  fy-
nonimous with the French word amateur .

Diminuendo ,  diminifhing a found,  or rendering it
fofter and fofter by degrees.  *

Due Cori ,  two choirs,  orcheftras,  or choruffes.

ExpreJJion,  the performing a piece of melody,  or a
fingie paflage,  with that energy and feeling
which the poetry or paflion,  to be iiflprefted
upon the hearer,  requires.

Forte ,  loud.

Fugue ,  a flight and purfuit  ;  a fugue differs from
a canon only in being lefs rigid in its laws ;
a canon is a perpetual fugue :  the firft,  or
leading part gives the law to the reft in
both  ;  but,  in the courfe of a fugue ,  it is
allowable to introduce epifodes and new

Funxione ,  fun&ion,  ceremony in the church oil a
feftlval.

Gradually

Graduate ,  gradual ;  an appellation given,  in the
Romifh church,  to a verfe which is fung
after the epiftle,  and which was anciently
fung on the fteps of the altar.

Harmony ,  muflc in parts,  in oppofition to melody.

Imitation ,  a flight fpecies of fugue ,  in which the parts
imitate each other,  though not in the fame
intervals,  or according to the rigorous laws
of a fugue or canon .

Improvvifatrice ,  a female who pronounces verfes extempore.

Intermezzo ,  an interlude,  or muflcal farce,  ufually
performed between the a£ts of a ferious piece.

Laudiftiy pfalm fingers.

Maejiro di Capella ,  a compofer,  or one who dire&s
a muflcal performance in a church or chapel.

Maejiro del Coro ,  matter of the choir.

Melody ,  an air,  or Angle part,  without bafe or accompaniment.

Majfa Bajfa ,  a fllent mafs,  whifpered by the prieft
during a muflcal performance.

Mezzo Sopra?io ,  a fecond treble,  or voice between
the treble and counter-tenor.

Miferere ,  the firft word of the 51ft Pfalm,  in Latin.

Modulation ,  the art of changing the key,  or of conducting the harmony or melody into different keys,  in a manner agreeable to the
ear,  and conformable to eftablilhed rules.

Motettoy

t Vi  .1

Moteito,  Motet ,  a Latin hymn,  pfalm,  or anthem;

MuficOi a general term for mufician ;  but nov/
chiefly applied in Italy to a cajlrato.

Offertorioj Offertory ,  an anthem fung,  or a Voluntary played,  at the time the people are
making an offering.

Piano ,  foft.  .

Plain chant ,  plain fong,  or chanting.

Porta?nento ,  conduct of the voice  :  the portamento is
faid to be good,  when the voice is neither
nafal nor guttural.

Ritornello ,  originally the echo or repetition of any
portion of a fong by the inftruments ;  but,  iii
procefs of time,  it became the general term
for fymphony,  in which fenfe it will be
often ufed in this Journal,  and which will,
perhaps,  be called,  Verbum mover e loco  ;  but
though the wOrd Ritornel is rather obfolete/
and has for fome time been fupplied by fymphony,  it now wants revival,  as fymphony,"
among modern muficians,  is ufually fy-"
nonymous with overture.

Saltatoriy jumpers,  or dancers of uncommon agility.

Si/line,  the Pope’s chapel is fometimes called the
Si/line chapel,  from Sextus Quintus,  who
built it.

Scpranoy the fupreme,  or treble,  part in vocal com-
pofitions.

Sojlenuto s

-  [  vii 3

SoJlenutOy fuftained ;  or,  ufed fubfiantively,  the power
of continuing a found  :  in this cafe the
harpfichord has no Softenuto ,  the organ
has one.

Steiner ,  the name of a famous German maker of
violins.

Sinfonia ,  fymphony,  or overture.

Tqfte,  the adding,  diminifhing,  or changing a melody,  or paflage,  with judgment and propriety,  and in fuch a manner as to improve
it :  if this were rendered an invariable rule
in what is commonly called gracing ,  the
paftages,  in compofitions of the firft clafs,
would feldom be changed.

Virtu ,  talents,  abilities  ;  hence

Virtuofo ,  a performer.

Voce di Camera ,  a feeble voice,  fit only for a
chamber.  *

Voce di Petto ,  a voice which comes from the breafr,
in oppofition to one that is nafal or guttural.

Vox Humana ,  human voice.

THE

INTRODUCTION.

'  *

AMONG the numerous accounts
of Italy,  published by travellers
who have viftted that delightful
country,  from different motives of inte-
reft or curiofity ;  it is fomewhat exraor-
dinary,  that none have hitherto confined
their views and refearches to the rife and
progrefs,  or prefent hate of mufic in that
part of the world,  where it has been
cultivated with fuch fuccefs ;  and from
whence the reft of Europe has been fur-
nifbed,  not only with the moft eminent
compofers and performers,  but even with
all its ideas of whatever is elegant and refined in that art.

B

Not

-  C 2 I

Not a fingle picture,  ftatue,  or building
has been left undefcribed,  or an infcription
uncopied,  and yet neither the Confervato -
rios or mufical fchools,  the operas ,  or the
oratorios ,  have fcarce been mentioned  :
and though every library is crowded with
hiftories of painting and other arts,  as well
as with the lives of their moft illuftrious
profeffors ;  mufic and muficians have
been utterly negleCted.  And this is ft ill
the more unaccountable,  as no one of the

'  i

liberal arts is at prefent fo much cultivated,  nor can the Italians now boaft a
fuperiority over the reft of Europe in any
thing,  fo much as in their mufical productions and performances }  for neither
their painters,  fculptors,  or architects,
hiftorians,  poets,  or philofophers of the
prefent age,  as in fome centuries paft,
fo greatly furpafs their cotemporaries on
this fide the Alps,  as to excite much
curiofity to vifit or converfe with them.

But mufic ftill lives in Italy,  while the
other arts only fpeak a dead language

jclaffical

[  3 3  '

ciaftical and learned indeed*  but lefs
pleating and profitable to ftudents than
in the days of Leo X.  when Italy wag
perhaps as fuperior to the reft of the
world,  and therefore as well worth vifit-
ing,  as Greece was in the time of Pericles or Alexander,

To fay that mufic Was never in fuch
high eftimation,  or fo well underftood as
it is at prefent,  all over Europe,  would
be only advancing a fadt as evident,
as that its inhabitants are now more
generally civilized and refined,  than in
any other period of the hiftory of mankind.

Perhaps the grave and wife may regard
mufic as a frivolous and enervating luxury  ;  but,  in its defence,  Montefquieu has
faid that  “  it is the only one of all the
arts which does not corrupt the mind”
Electricity is universally allowed to be a
very entertaining and furprifing phenomenon,  but it has frequently been la-

*  Efprit des Loix.

B 2

mented

[  4 1

merited that it has never yet,  with much
certainty,  been applied to any very ufe-
ful purpofe,  The fame reflexion has
often been made,  no doubt,  as to mufic.
It is a charming refource,  in an idle hour,
to the rich and luxurious part of the
world.  But fay the four and the worldly,
what is its ufe to the reft cf mankind  ?
To this it may be anfwered,  that,  in England,  perhaps more than in any other
country,  it is eafy to point out the humane and important purpofes to which
it has been applied.  Its afliftance has
been called in by the moil refpedla-
ble profeffion in this kingdom,  in or-

i  *

der to open the purfes of the affluent
for the fupport of the diftreffed off-
fpring of their deceafed brethren
Many an orphan is c benched by its
influence  *f\ — The pangs of child-birth
are foftened and rendered lefs dangerous

X 4*

%

At the Feaft of the Sons of the Clergy.
f The Meffiah is annually performed for the benefit of the Foundling Hofpitah

‘  and

/•

[  5 1

and dreadful by the effedls of its

*

power It helps,  perhaps,  to ftop the
ravages of a difeafe which attacks the
very fource of life y .  And,  laftly,  it
enables its own profeffors to do what
few others can boaib  —  to maintain
their own poor  :  by that admirable and
well- directed inftitution,  known by the
name of Fhe Society for the Support of
decayed Mufcians and their Families ,

Mufic has indeed ever been the delight
of accomplifhed princes,  and the mod
elegant amufement of polite courts  :  but
at prefent it is fo combined with things
lacred and important,  as well as with our
pleafures,  that mankind feems wholly
unable to fubfift without it  :  it forms a
coniiderable part of divine fervice in our
churches  :  it i-s effential to military dif-
cipline  ;  and the theatres would languifh

*  The benefit every year for the Lying-in Hof
pital ,  Brownlow ftreet.

f The mufcal performance for the Lock Hof-
f ital,  \

.  B-3

without

[  6  ]

*  -  1  .  -N

without it.  Add to this,  that there is

%

hardly a private family in a civilized nation without its flute,  its fiddle,  its harpfi-
chord,  or guitar:  that it alleviates labour
and mitigates pain;  and is flill a greater
bl effing to humanity,  when it keeps us
out of mifchiefior blunts the edge of care.

Had the books I have hitherto con-
fulted,  which have been very numerous,
fupplied me with the information 1
wanted relative to a hiftory of mufic,
upon which I have been long meditating  ;  I fhould not have undertaken a
journey that has been attended with
much fatigue,  expence,  and negledt of
other concerns.

Eut thefe books are,  in general,  fuch
faithful copies of each other,  that he
who reads two or three,  has the fub-
ftance of as many hundred.  In hopes,
therefore,  of ftamping on my intended
hiftory fome marks of originality,  or at
leaft of novelty,  I determined to allay
my thirft of knowledge at the fource,

and

<

[  7 J

and take fuch draughts in Italy,  as England cannot fupply.  It was there I determined to hear with my own ears,  and to
fee with my own eyes ;  and,  if poffible,  to
hear and fee nothing but mujfc .  Indeed
I could have a mu-fed myfelf agreeably
enough in examining pictures,  flatties,
and buildings,  but as I could not afford
time for all this,  without neglecting the
chief bufinefs of my journey,  I determined not to have  “  my purpofe turned
awry  '’  by any other curiofity or enquiry

With thefe views I left London in the

/

beginning of June 1770,  and as I did not
intend my work ihould be local,  I determined in the way to Italy to acquire what
materials I could relative to the hiftory
of French mufic,  as well as to inform

*  In the courfe of my journey,  however,  I was
afterwards much pleafed to find that I could gratify my love for fculpture and painting even in the
purfuit of mufical materials  ;  as it was from thefe
I acquired my ideas and drawings of the infcru-
ments of the ancients as well as of the early
moderns.

B 4

my-

[  8  ]

inyfelf of its prefent ftate.  But it would
have been both arrogant and unjuft to
have attempted this in the few weeks
allowed me to remain in France,  had I
not before twice vifited Paris,  during
which time I frequented very much its
public places  ;  and for twenty years paft
I had conftantly been fupplied with the
works of the beft compofers,  and the
writings of the beft authors on the fub-
jedtof mufic in that kingdom.

THE

>

THE

PRESENT STATE

„  *

O F

MUSIC,  &c.

%

LISLE.

AS I made no confiderable flop till I
reached this city,  the capital of
French Flanders,  I here began my
enquiries,  and firft tried to difcover the
manner cf performing the Gregorian
chant,  which fubfifts throughout France
in all cathedrals and collegiate churches.
It is oftener performed without the organ
than with  ;  and though they have organs
in every large church in this town,  and
throughout the kingdom,  I find they are

4

only

[  IO  ]

only ufed as in our parifh churches,  on
Sundays,  and on great feftivals.  It appears plainly to me that our old chants
and refponfes were not new compofitions
by Tallis,  at the time of the reformation,
but only adjufted to Englifh words ;  the
little melody they contain being very
nearly the fame as in all catholic churches
abroad.  It is only on Sundays and fefti-
Vals that parts are added to the canto fer mo
or plain chant here.  All ling at other
times in unifon.  All the books out of
which the priefts chant,  are written upon
vellum in the Gregorian note,  that is,  in
the old black lozenge,  or fquare character,
upon four lines and fpaces only.  But in
order to inform myfelf ftiil further on the
fubjedt,  I found it neceffary to make myfelf acquainted with M.  Devillers,  an
agreeable and intelligent man in his pro-
feffion,  and organift of the principal
church here,  that of St.  Peter.  With
him I had a long converfation relative to
the ufe of plain chant .  He fays the boys

are

[  It  ]

are taught it by the Gregorian notes,  and
that no others are ufed by the ecclefiaftics.

In the French churches there is an in-*
firument on each fide the choir,  called
the ferpent ,  from its fhape,  I fuppofe,
for it undulates like one.  This gives
the tone in chanting,  and plays the bafe
when they fing in parts.  It is often ill-
played,  but if judicioufly ufed,  would
have a good effedt.  It is,  however,  in
general overblown,  and too powerful for
the voices it accompanies ;  other wife,  it
mixes with them better than the organ;
as it can augment or diminifh a found
with more delicacy,  and is lefs likely to
overpower or deflroy by a bad temperament,  that perfedt one,  of which the
voice only is capable.

The organ in this church is double,  and
very large,  confiding of four rows of keys,
fixty four flops,  and an immenfe front of
thirteen columns of pipes  :  it has been
made about fixty years.  The cafe is
finely carved and ornamented,  and the

front

[  12  ]

front pipes of the white and natural colour of the metal,  as they are in all the
organs here.  In England it is neceffary
to gild them,  to prevent their turning
black.  I have always found that but
little ufe is made of the organ in France,
even on thofe days when it is moft employed.  The ferpent keeps the voices up
their pitch,  and is a kind of crutch for
them to lean on.

As it was jubilee -Time  *  when I was
at Lille,  I had hopes of hearing better
mufic than ordinary,  but was difappoint-
ed.

M.  Anneufe,  organiftofthe church of St.
Maurice in this town,  is blind.  I called at
his houfe  ;  but he was from home,  other-

*  The name of jubilee is ufually given to an
ecclefiaftical folemnity,  or ceremony performed,  in
order to gain a plenary indulgence from the pope.
There are,  however,  particular jubilees in feme
cities,  upon the concurrence of certain feftivals,  as
when the feaih of the Annunciation happens on
Good Friday  ;  or that of St.  John theBaptift,  on
Corpus Chrlfi day.  Encyclop.  Art.  Jubilee.

wife

[  ]

wife I would have had fome converfation
with him on the fubjeCt of his profefiion.
For I found the fhortefl and belt road to
fuch information as I wanted,  was to talk
with the principal profeffors,  wherever I
went.  Learned men and books may be more
ufeful as to ancient mulic,  but it is only
living muficians that can explain what
living mufic is.  This method,  however,
where I had no letters of recommendation,  coft me a little money,  fome a durance,  and a great deal of trouble.

Thofe who vifit Italy for the fake of
painting,  fculpture,  or architecture,  do
well to fee what thofe arts afford in
France,  firft;  as they become fo dainty
afterwards,  that they can bear to look at
but few things that kingdom affords;  and
as I expeCted to have the fame prejudices,  or feelings at my return,  about
their mufic,  I endeavoured to give it a
fair hearing firft,  in the capital,  and the
two extremities of the kingdom,  Paris,
Lifle,  and Lyons.  I  (topped at Cambray,

vifited

%

'  \

[  i4 J

vifited the churches there,  in hopes of
hearing mufic,  but was difappointed ;
the fervice was performed entirely without chant or organ.  I was told there
would be finging in the afternoon,  but
was unable to flay.  Indeed the character
given of the voices by fome of the
inhabitants did not tempt me,  fo I went
on diredtly to

PARI S.

And here,  after fpending the greateft
part of the firft day in fearch of books,
I went in the evening,  June 12,  to the
Boulevard,  as no better entertainment
offered itfelf either at the play-houfe of
opera.  The Boulevard is a place of public diverfions,  without the gates of Paris. -
It is laid out in walks,  and planted.  In
the middle is a wide road for carriages,
and at the fides are coffee-houfes,  conjurors,  and fhows of all kinds*  Here every
evening,  during fummer,  the walks are
crowded with well-dreffed people and the

road

[  i5  ]  ,

road with fplendid equipages ;  and here
I faw the new Vauxhall,  as they call it,
but it is no more like ours,  than the emperor of China's palace.  Nor is it at all like
Ranelagh;  though,  at the fir ft entrance,
there is a fmall rotund,  with galleries
round it well lighted up,  and decorated.
Next to this is a quadrangle in the open
air,  where they dance in warm weather 3
it is illuminated,  and has galleries,  which
are continued to another room,  which is
fquare,  and ftill larger than the firft,
with two rows of corinthian pillars ornamented with feftoons and illuminations.
This is a very elegant room,  in which are
minuets ,  allemandes,  cotillons ,  and contre
danfes ,  when the weather is cold,  which
was now the cafe in the extreme.  However,
here was a great crowd of well-drefled
people.  From the name of this place it
was natural to look for a garden,  but
none was to be found.  r

In the cofiee-houfes on the Boulevard,
which are muchfrequented,  therearebands
7 of

[  *6  ]

of mu-fic,  and finging,  in the Sadler’s- Wdk
way,  but v/orfe.  The women who perform there,  go about with a plate to colled:  a reward for their trouble.  Here*
though they often fmg airs a l Italienne ,
original fin,  in the exprefiion,  flicks as
clofe to them as to us,  at fuch places,
in England.

Wednefday 13.  This morning I fpent in
the library of the College Des Quatre nations  >  founded by cardinal Mazarin.  It
is a noble one.  I confulted the catalogues,  and found feveral of the books I
wanted.

In the evening I heard two pieces performed at the c Theatre It alien ,  in which
the finging was the world part.  Though
the modern French compofers hazard
every thing that has been attempted by
the Italians,  yet it is ill executed,  and fo
ill underftood by the audience,  that it
makes noimpreffion.  Bravura I bugs,  or
fongs of execution,  are now attempted  *

but

[  J7 J

but they are fo ill performed,  that no one
ufed to true Italian Tinging can like any
thing but the words and adtion*  One of
thefe pieces was new,  and meant as a
comic opera,  in all its modern French
forms of Italian mufic,  (that is,  mufic
compofed in the Italian flyle)  to French
words.  No recitative,  all the dialogue
and narrative part being fpoken.  And
this piece was as thoroughly d-~d as
ever piece was here.  I ufed to imagine
that a French audience durft not hifs to
the degree I found they did upon this oc-
cafion.  Indeed quite as much,  mixt
with horfe laughs,  as ever I heard at
Drury Lane>  or Covent Garden.  In
ihort,  it was condemned in all the
Englifh forms,  except breaking the
benches and the adtors heads ;  and the
in cedant found of hijh inflead of hifs .

The author of the words,  luckily,  or

»

rather judicioufly,  lay concealed ;  but
the compofer,  M.  de St.  Amant,  was
very much to be pitied,  for a great deal

t I*  I

bf real good rtiufic was thrown away upon?
bad words,  and upon an audience not
at all difpofed*  efpeeially in the two-
laft adts  (there were three)  to hear any
thing fairly.  But this mufic,  though
I thought it much fuperkmr to the
poetry it accompanied,  was not without
its defeats ;  the modulation was too-
iludied*  fo much fo as to be unnatural,,  and always to difappoint the ear.
The overture however was good m-u fie*
full  ©f found harmony,  elegant and
pleafing melody,  with many paffages of
effect.  The hautbois at this theatre is
admirable;  I hardly'  ever heard a more
pleafing tone or manner of playing.  Several of the fongs would have been admirable too,  if they had been*  fung with
the true Italians expreffion.  But the
French voice never comes further than
from the throat r there is no voce di
petto,  no true portamento ■  or direction of
the voice,  on any of the ftages.  And
though feveral of the fingers in this
- '  -  .  theatre.

/

r 19  ]

theatre are Italians,  they are fo degene^
rated fince they came hither,  that if I
had not been allured of it,  their performance would have convinced me
of the contrary.  The new piece had
feveral movements in it very like what
is heard at the ferious opera.  (It
mufl:  be remembered that the whole
was in verfe,  and extremely ferious,
except fome attempt at humour in  *  Cal-
liot’s part)  which,  however,  did not
prevent the audience from pronouncing
it to be det eft able.

\ Thurfday 14*  This being Fete Dieu ,
or Corpus Chrijli Day,  one of the greateft
holidays in the whole year,  I went to
fee the pfoeefiions,  and to hear high mafs
performed at Notre Dame.  I had great
difficulty to get thither.  Coaches are not

*  M.  Call Sot is dfcfervedly the Favourite aefor and
finger of the comic opera at Paris.  His voice,
which he can make a bale or  %  tenor at pleafure,
is admirable,  and he is in all refpects a moft in-
tereffing and entertaining performer.

C a

allowed

f 20 J

allowed to flir till all the proceiBonsv
with which the whole town fwarms,  are
over.  The ftreets through which they
are to pafs in the way to the churches*
are all lined with tapeftry y or,  for want
of that,  with bed-curtains and old petticoats  :  I find the better fort of people*
fles gens comme il fautj all go out of
town on thefedays,  to avoid the emb arras
of going to mafs,  or the ennui of flaying
at home.  Whenever the hoft flops*
which frequently happens,  the priefts
fing a pfalm,  and all the people fall on
their knees in the middle of the ftreet,
whether dirty or clean.  I readily complied with this ceremony rather than give
offence or become remarkable.  Indeed,
when I went out,  I determined to do as
other people did,  in the ftreets and
church,  otherwife I had no bufinefe
there ;  fo that I found it incumbent on
me to kneel down twenty times ere I
reached Notre Dame.  This I was the lefs
hurt at,  as I faw it quite general ;

and

[  21  ]

and many much better d refled people
than myfelf,  almoft proftrated themselves,  while I only touched the ground  *
with one knee.  At length I reached the
church,  where I was likewife a conformifi i  '  .
though here I walked about frequently,
as I faw others do,  round the choir and
in the great aide.  I made my remarks
on the organ,  organift,  plain-chant,  and
motets.  Though this was fo great a fef-
tival,  the organ accompanied the choir
but little.  The chief ufe made of it,  was
to play over the chant before it was
fung,  all through the Pfalms.  Upon enquiring of a young abbe,  whom I took
with me as a nomenclatory what this was
called  ?  C'ejl profer ,  5Tis profing,  he faid.
And it fhould teem as if our word projing
came from this dull and heavy manner of
recital.  The organ is a good one,  but
when played full,  the echo and reverberation were fo flrong,  that it was all
confufion  ;  however,  on.  the choir organ
and echo  (lops I could hear every paf-

c 3

[  22  ]

fage didindlly.  The organift has a neat
and judicious way of touching the instrument but his paffages were very old
fafhioned.  Indeed what he played during the offertorioy which laded dx or
eight minutes,  feemed too ftiff and regular for a voluntary.  Several motets ,  or
fervices,  were performed by the choir,
but accompanied oftener by the ferpent
than organ  :  though,  at my firft entrance into the French churches,  I have
frequently taken the ferpent for an organ  ;  but foon found it had in its effedl
fomething better and fomething worfe
than that indrument.  Thefe compofi-
tions are much in the way of our old
church fervices,  full of fugues and imitation  ;  more contrivance and labour
than melody.  I am more and more convinced every day,  that what I before ob-
ferved concerning the adapting the Eng-
lifh words to the old canto fermo ,  by
Tallis,  at the Reformation,  is true  ;  and
it feems to me that mufic,  in our cathedral

I 23 3

dral fervice,  was left reformed than any
other part of the liturgy.

At five o’clock I went to the Concert
.  Spirit uel,  the only public amufement allowed on thefe great feftivals.  It is a
grand concert performed in the great hall
of the Louvre,  in which the vocal confiffs
of detached pieces of church mufic in
Latin I  (hall name the feveral performances of this concert,  and fairly fay
•what effect each had upon myfelf,  and
upon the audience,  as far as a ftander-by
could difcover.  The firft piece was a
motet by M.  De la Lande*,  Dominus reg-
.navity chiefly made up of chorufles,  performed with more force than feeling  ;  the
whole was in the ftyle of the old French

*  The French have never yet had ekher a fe-
rrious Italian opera or a regular  ..oratorio of any fort
performed in their country.  I  .fuppofe the managers of their  .public diverficms  .know too well the
tafte of the people to attempt them,  though every
other fpecies of novelty is tried,  and they even fuf-
fer Italian to be fpcken by feveral of the characters
the Harlequin pieces.

C 4

opera ;

[  24  ]

opera  ;  and,  except the fecond chorus,
which had a conduct and fpirit fomewhat
new and agreeable,  to me deteftable,
though much applauded by the audience,
who felt and admired it as much as them-
felves,  for being natives of a country abl

e

to produce fuch mafter-pieces of compo-
fition,  and fuch exquiiite performers.
Then a concerto on the hautbois by Bez-
zozi,  nephew to the celebrated hautbois
and balloon players of that name at Turin.
For the honour of the French,  I muftneeds
fay that this piece was very much applauded.  It is a ftep towards reformation,  to begin to tolerate what ought to
be adopted.  This performer has many
points in his tafte and expreffion that are
truly exquifite  ;  but I think he is not
conftantly perfedt.  He makes great ufe
of his tongue in divifions,  which perhaps
occafions a more frequent crack or cackle
in the reed than one would wifh  ;  neither
is his tone very powerful without forcing*

[  25  ]

ing,  which,  as this was a large room,  he
perhaps thought neceffary.  Upon the
whole,  however,  I was very much delighted with his performance.  But it is
not eafy to account for the latitude the
French take in their approbation,  or to
fuppofe it poflible for people to like
things as oppofite as light and darknefs.
If French mufic is good,  and its expref-
fion natural and pleafing,  that of Italy
mull:  be bad  :  or change the fuppofition,
and allow that of Italy to be all which an
unprejudiced,  but cultivated ear could
with;  the French mufic cannot,  one would
imagine,  give fuch an ear equal delight.
The truth is,  the French do not like
Italian mufic ;  they pretend to adopt and
admire it ;  but it is all mere affectation.  After this high-finifhed performance of Bezozzi Mademoifelle Delcam-
bre fcreamed out Exandi Dais with all
the power of lungs fhe could mufter  $  and

Was as well received as if Bczzozi had

done

c 26.  )

done nothing.  After this Signor Tfa-
verfa,  firft violin to the prince de Carig-
nan,  played a concerto in the Italian
ilyle very well  $  many parts with great
delicacy/good tone,  and facility of execution  :  but this was not fo well relifhed as
the Exaudi that went before it*  Nay,  I
could plainly difcover,  by their countenances and reception of it,  how little
they had felt it.  Madame Philidor fung
a motet next,  of her hufband’s compos
lition,  who drinks hard at the Italian
fountain  ;  but though this was more like
good finging and good mufic than any
vocal piece that had preceded it,  yet it
was not applauded with that fury,  which
leaves not the leaf!  doubt of its having
been felt.  The whale was finhhed by
Beatus Vir9 a motet,  in grand chorus,  with
folo and duet parts between.  The principal counter-tenor had a folo verfe in it
which he bellowed out with as much
violence as if he had done it for life,

whil^

7

t 27 1

while a knife was at his throat.  But
though this wholly ftunned me,  I plainly
Jaw ,  by the fmiles of ineffable fatisfadlion
which were vifible in the countenances
of ninety-nine out of a hundred of the
company,  and heard>  by the moft violent
applaufe that a ravifhed audience could
beftow,  that it was quite what their
hearts felt,  and their fouls loved.  Cefi
fuperbe!  was echoed from one to the other
through the whole houfe.  But the laft
chorus was a finijher with a vengeance  !  it
furpaffed,  in clamour,  all the noifes I had
ever heard in my life.  I have frequently thought the choruffes of our oratorios
rather too loud and violent;  but,  compared with thefe,  they are foft viiific ,  fuch
as might footh and lull to deep the heroine of a tragedy.

Friday 15.  In vifiting the king of
France’s library this morning,  I found
that if I could have contented myfelf

with

*

f 28  ]

with the dead letter of information,  fuch
as is to be obtained from books only,  I
need not to have eroded the Alps as the
number to be found here,  relative to my
fubjedt,  is almoft infinite.  The MSS.
were what I firft enquired after of the librarian,  and I found that the mere catalogue
of thefe alone amounted to four volumes
in folio  ;  not all about mufic indeed,  but
that fcience has not been negledled by
the collectors of thefe books.  The moft
ancient MSS.  in which mufic has any
concern,  if we except the feven Greek
authors publifhed by Meibomius,  which
are all here in MS.  are the liturgies and
offices of the church,  fuch as miffals,
rituals,  graduals,  breviaries,  and pfal-
ters,  in Greek and Latin ;  but of thefe
when I come to treat of the mufic
of pad times.  Of its prefen t ftate here ,
I thought I could get no better information than was to be acquired by going to
the opera of Zaide,  which was performed
this evening at the new opera-houfe adjuring

f 29 1

joining to,  or rather being part of the
Palais Royal belonging to the duke of
Orleans.  The former theatre was burnt
down about fi*  years ago,  during which
time the opera was performed in the
king's palace of the Louvre,  where the
Concert Spirituel is fiill held The
opera of to-night was firft performed in
1739  ;  revived again in 1745,  1756,  and
now,  for the fourth time,  in 1770.  It
is called by the French ballet-heroique,  or
heroic dance ;  the dances being interwoven,  and making an effential part of
the piece.  I believe in all fuch pieces,  the
intereft of the drama is very inconfider-
able  ;  at leaft,  if we may judge by this,
and fomeof thofe compofed by Rameau,

*  One of the fineft fights at Paris,  ufed then to
be the Tuilleries in fummer,  after the opera  ;  which
being over between feven and eight in the evening,
all the company,  in full drefs,  confifting of the
flower of this capital,  poured into the grand avenue  :  totis vomit  /Edibus undam ;  and formed an
aflembly not to be met with in any other part of
the world.

The

[  3°  3

The mufic of Zaide is by Royer ;  and it it
fomewhat wonderful that nothing better,
or of a more modern tafte,  has been com-
pofed fince ;  the ftyle of compofition is
totally changed throughout the reft of
Europe  ;  yet the French,  commonly ac-
cufed of more levity and caprice than
their neighbours,  have flood ftill in mufic
for thirty or forty years  :  nay,  one may
go ftill further,  and affert boldly,  that it
has undergone few changes at the great
opera fince Lulli's time,  that is to fay,  in
one hundred years.  In fhort,  notwith-
ftanding they can both talk and write fo
well,  and fo much about it ,  mufic in
France,  with refpect to the two great
eflentials of melody and expreflion  *,  may
ftill be faid to be in its infancy.

But to return to M.  Royer’s opera of
i£aide,  which,  in point of melody,  of
light and  {hade,  or contraft,  and of effe<ft,

*  The Italian mufic,  fays M.  D’Alembert,  is a
language of which we have not yet the alphabet.

Melange de Litter t

IS

[  p  ]

is miferable,  and below all criticifm  :  but
at the fame time it mull be allowed that
the theatre is elegant and noble*  that
the dreffes and decorations are fine ;  the
machinery ingenious;  and the dancing
excellent :  but,  alas  !  fhefe are all objects for the eye,  and an Opera elfewhere
is intended to flatter the ear.  A mu-
fical drama,  which has nothing intereft-
ing in the words,  and of which the
mufic is bad,  and the finging worfe,  muft
furely fall fhort of every idea that has
been formed in other countries of fuch a
fpecies of exhibition.

Three out of five of the principal
fingers in Zaide,  I had heard at the Concert-  Spirit ueh Meflieurs Gelin and Le
Gros,  and Mademoifelle du Bois ;  the

i i u  '  ' »

other two wereM.  and Mad.  L’Arrivee;  in
their manner of finging much like the reft.
One thing I find here,  which makes me
grieve at the abufe of nature's bounty,  the
voices are in themfelves really good and
well toned ;  and this is eafily to be dif-

covered.

[  32  ]

covered,  in defpight of falfe direction and
a vitiated expreffion.  But of this enough
has already been faid  :  a word or two
more about their compofition,  and I have
done with their mufic for fome time  ;
at leaft with their expreffion  ;  for they
have fome compofers of great merit
among them,  who imitate very fuccefs-
fully the Italian ftyle.  But it is in vain,
at leaft for the natives of France;  other
nations may indeed be the better for it ;
but let this deteftable and unnatural expreffion be given to any mufic in the
world,  and it becomes immediately
French.  One may apply to French fingers,  what Dryden faid of Mac Flecno’s
wit- —

Sound pafs’d thro*  them no longer is the fame*

As food digeffed takes a different name.

But it feems to be with the ferious French
opera here,  as it is with our oratorios in
England ;  people are tired of the old
by hearing them fo often  ;  the ftyle has
been puffied perhaps to its utmoft boundary*

[  33 1

t

dary,-  and is exhaufted and yet they cannot relifh any new attempts at pleating
them in a different way  :  what is there
in this world not fubjeCt to change  ?
And fliall we expeCt muiic to be permanent above all things,  which fo much
depends on imagination and feeling  ?

There are particular periods,  that one
would perhaps with to flop at,  if it were
poffble  ;  but as that cannot be,  let us
comply with neceffity,  in good humour*
and with a good grace.  Poetry,  painting,  and fculpture have had their rife
and declenlion:  have funk into barba-
rifm  :  have emerged from it in fucceed-

ing ages,  and mounted to a certain de-

^  >

gree of perfection,  from which they have
gradually and infenfibly funk again to the
loweft ftate of depravity :  and yet thefe
arts have a ftandard in the remains of
antiquity,  which mufic cannot bo.aft.
There are dafficks in poetry,  fculpture*
and architecture,  which every modern
Itrives to imitate ;  and he is thought

D moft

-  E 34  ]

moll to excel,  who comes neareft to tbiofc
models.  But who will venture to fay,  that
the mufician who Ihould coriipofe or perform like Orpheus,  or Amphion,  would
be defervedly moll applauded now  ?  Or
who will be bold enough to fay*  how thefe
immortal bards did play and ling,  when
^  not a fingle veftige of their mulic,  at
lead:  that is intelligible to us,  remains  ?
As far as we are able to judge*  by a comparative view of the moll ancient mulic
with the modern,  we fhould gain nothing
by imitation.  To copy the canto fermo
of the Greek church,  or that of the
Roman ritual,  the moll ancient mulic
now fub filling,  would be to retreat,  not
to advance in the fcience of found,  or
arts of talie and expreffion.  It would
afford but fmall amufement to ears acquainted with modern harmony,  joined
to modern melody.  In fhort,  to flop
the world in its motion is no eafy talk  *
on we mujl go,  and he that lags behind

is

[  35  ]

4  !  •  r  •  *

is hut lofing time,  which it will cofl
him much labour to recover.

Indeed many of the firfl:  perfons in
France,  for genius and tafte,  give up the
point :  among whom are Meffieurs Diderot,  D’Alembert,  and the Abbe Arnaud.
Meffieurs De la Lande and De Blainville
openly rank on the Italian fide likewife ;
but it feems always with fome degree
of referve  :  (fee M.  De la Lande,  Voyage
dun Francois,  p.  224,  tom.  vi.)  they ftill
lay great ftrefs on dancing and decoration  ;  but how few fubjedts fit for mufic
will admit dancing in the texture of the
drama  ?  And as to finging and dancing
at the fame time,  if equally good,  they
mud diftradt and divide the attention in
fuch a manner as to make it impoffible
to enjoy either  :  it would be eating of
two coftly difhes,  or drinking of two ex-
quifite wines at once — they reciprocally
deftroy the effedt of each other.  When
mufic is really good,  and well performed,

D 2 the

[  36 j

the hearer of tafte wants no adjundt or
additional provocative to  {Emulate attention.

\  /

Sunday .  I went to St.  Rocque,  to
hear the celebrated M.  Balbaftre,  organift
of that church,  as well as of Notre Dame
and the Concert Spirituel  *.  I had fent
the day before to enquire when M.  Bal-
baftre would play,  as a ftranger from
England was very curious to hear him.
He was fo obliging as to fay he fhould
be glad to fee me at his houle,  or would
attend me at St.  Roque,  between three
and four o’clock. — I preferred the latter,
as I thought it would give him lead;
trouble,  fuppofing he would,  of courfe,
be at church,  but I found he was not
expedled and that it was in complaifance
that he came.  He very politely took me
up into the organ-loft with him,  where
I could fee as well as hear.  The organ

*  There are four organifts of Notre Dame,  who
play quarterly  —  Meffieurs Couperin,  Baiba lire,
D’Aquin,  and Fouquet.

,  is

[  37  ]

Is an immenfe initrument,  made not
above twenty years ago ;  it has four
fets of keys,  with pedals;  the great and
choir organ communicate by a fpring  :
the third row of keys is for the reed ftops,
and the upper for the echoes.  This in-
ilrument has a very good effedt.  below
but above the keys are intolerably noify.
M.  Balbaflre took a great deal of pains
to entertain me;  he performed in all
ftyles in accompanying the choir.  When
the Magnificat was fung,  he played like-
wife between each verfe feveral minutes,
fugues,  imitations,  and every fpecies of
mufic,  even to hunting pieces and jigs,
without furpriiing or offending the congregation,  as far as I was able to difcover.
In profng,  I perceived he performed the
chant on the pedals,  which he doubled
with the lowed;  part of the left hand,
and upon this bails played with learning
and fancy,  v The bafepart was written in
iemibrev.es,  like our old pfalmody.  What

D 3 was

[  38  ]

was lung in the choir,  without the organ,
was inferted in the Gregorian character.

After church M.  Balbaftre invited me
to his houfe,  to fee a fine Rucker harp-
fichord which he has had painted infide
and out with as much delicacy as the
fineft coach or even fnuff-box I ever faw
at Paris.  On the outfde is the birth
of Venus ;  and on the infide of the
cover the Rory of Rameau’s moft famous opera,  Cafior and Pollux ;  earth,
hell,  and elyfium are there reprefented  :
in elyfium,  fitting on a bank,  with a lyre
in his hand,  is that celebrated compofer
himfelf ;  the portrait is very like,  for I
faw Rameau in 1764.  The tone of this
inftrument is more delicate than powerful  ;  one of the unifons is of buff,  but
very fweet and agreeable  ;  the touch very
light,  owing to the quilling,  which in
France is always weak.

M.  Balbaftre had in the fame room a
very,  large organ,  with pedals,  which it

may

f 39  ]

may be necefiary for a French organift to
have for pradice^  it is too large and
coarfe for a chamber,  and the keys are
as noify as thofe at St.  Roque.  However
M.  Balbaftre did his beft to entertain and
oblige me,  and I had great reafon to be
fatisfied both with his politenefs and
performance.

Monday 18.  This evening I went to
St.  Gervais,  to hear M.  Couperin,  nephew to the famous Couperin,  organift
to Louis XI V.  and to the regent duke of
Orleans it being the vigil or eve of the
Feaft of Dedication,  there was a full
congregation.  I met M.  Balbaftre and
his family there ;  and I find this annual
feftival is the time for the organifts to
difplay their talents.  M.  Couperin accompanied the TeDeitm ,  which was only
chanted,  with great abilities.  The interludes between each verfe were admirable.  Great variety of flops and ftyle,
with much learning and knowledge of

D 4 the

[  4°  ]

the inflrument,  were fhewn,  and a finger
equal in flrength and rapidity to every
difficulty.  Many things of effect were
produced by the two hands,  up in the
treble,  while the bafe was played on the
pedals.

M.  Balbaflre introduced me to M.  Couperin,  after the fervice was over,  and
I was glad to fee two eminent men of
the fame orofeffion,  fo candid and friend-
]y together.  M.  Couperin feems to be between forty and fifty  ;  and his tafle is not
quite fo modern,  perhaps,  as it might be ;
but allowance made for his time of life,
for the tafle of his nation,  and for the
changes mufic has undergone elfewhere,
fince his youth,  he is an excellent organ-
ifl ;  brilliant in execution,  varied in his
melodies,  and maflerly in his modulation.

It is much to be wdfhed that fome
opportunity,  like this annual meeting,
were given in England to our organifls,
who have talents,  and good inflruments
fo difplay.  It would awaken emulation,

and

C 41  ]

and be a flimulus to genius ;  the performer would be fure of being well
heard,  and the congregation well entertained.

The organ of St.  Gervais,  which feems
to be a very good one,  is almoftnew;
it was made by the fame builder,  M.  Cli-
quard,  as that of St.  Rocque.  The pedals
have three odlaves in compafs ;  the tone
of the loud organ is rich,  full,  and pleafing,
when the movement is flow ;  but in
quick paflages,  fuch is the reverberation
in thefe large buildings,  every thing is
indiftindt and confufed.  Great latitude
is allowed to the performer in thefe interludes  ;  nothing is too light or too grave,
all ftyles are admitted ;  and though M.
Couperin has the true organ touch,
fmooth and connected ;  yet he often
tried,  and not unfuccefsfully,  mere harp-
nchord paflages,  fmartly articulated,  and
the notes detached and feparated.

Tuefday ,  July 19.  Was fpent in the
king’s library.

Wednefday

J.

I 42  ]  ■

Wednefday 20.  I heard M.  Pagia oa
the violin,  at the houfe of Mad.  Brillon,
at PafTy  ;  fhe is one of the greateft lady*
players on the harpfichord in Europe.
This lady not only plays the moll difficult pieces with great precilion,  talle,  and
feeling,  but is an excellent fight’s-woman ;
of which I was convinced by her manner of executing fome of my own mufic,
that I had the honour of prefenting to
her.  She likewife compofes ;  and was
fo obliging as to play feveral of her own
fonatas,  both on the harpfichord and
piano forte>  accompanied on the violin
by M.  Pagin.  But her application and
talents are not confined to the harpfichord  ;  fhe plays on feveral inllruments ;
knows the genius of all that are in common ufe,  which fhe faid it was neceffary
for her to do,  in order to avoid compofing
for them fuch things as were either impracticable or unnatural 5 fhe likewife
draws well and engraves,  and is a mo ft
accomplifhed and agreeable woman.  To

this

[  43 3

this lady many of the famous compofers
of Italy and Germany,  who have redded
in France any time,  have dedicated their
works  ;  among thefe are Schobert and
Boccherini.

M.  Pagin was a pupil of Tartini,
and is regarded here as his bed fcholar ;
he has a great deal of expreffion and
facility of executing difficulties ;  but
whether he did not exert himfelf,  as the
room was not large,  or from whatever
caufe it proceeded,  I know not,  his tone
was not powerful.  Mu fie is now no
longer his profeffion ;  he has a place
under the Compte de Clermont,  of about
two hundred and fifty pounds derling a
year.  He had the honour of being hilled
at the Concert Spirit uel for daring to play
in the Italian dyle,  and this was the
reafon of his quitting the profeffion.

\ Thurfday .  I had the honour of being
introduced to the acquaintance of M.
I/Abbe Arnaud,  of the Academy Royal
des Infcriptions ct Belles Lettres  ;  his con-

verfation

[  44 j

fation confirmed what r I had gathered
from his writings,  that he was not only
a man of great learning,  but of great
tafte.  His difiertation upon the accents
of the Greek tongue is both ingenious
and profound  ;  there is a truth and pre-
cifion in his ideas concerning the arts,
which are irrefiftible to a mind at all open
to conviition.  With this gentleman I
had the honour to difcufs feveral points
relative to the mufic of the;  ancients,  and
the happinefs of being confirmed in fome
opinions I had already formed,  and enlightened in others.

At the Come die Fran coif e I was this
night very much entertained by the representation of La Surprife d* Amour,  and
George Dandin ;  the former is a piece of
Marivaux,  and was admirably played;
the latter is Moliere’s,  and a mere
farce,  full of buffoonery and indecency :
it is with this piece,  as with fome of
Shakefpeare’s,  the name fupports it ;  for
was any modern writer to produce fuch

t 45 3

gfofs ribaldry and nonfenfe,  it would be
very fhort-lived  :  at the fame time it
muft be confeffed,  that here and there,  as
in Shakefpeare’s word:  pieces,  there are
ftrokes of genius and ftrong comic wit
that ought to live for ever.  Preville
played admirably a clown’s part in both
thefe comedies ;  his humour is always
eafy and natural,  and there is a perpetual
laugh runs through the houfe from the
time he enters,  till he quits the ftage.  I
perceive that the overtures and ad:  tunes
of this theatre,  as of the  'Theatre It alien*
are all either German or Italian 5 they
begin to be afhamed of their own mufic
every where but at the ferious opera  ;  and
this revolution in their fentiments feems
to have been brought about by M.  Rouf-
feau’s excellent Lettre fur la Mufque
Franqoife.

Friday.  I met to-day with M.  L’Abbe
Rouffier  ;  had a long converfation with
hini relative to ancient mufic ;  his

Memoir e

t 46 1

Memoir e upon that fubjedb,  juft publifh^
ed,  has gained him great reputation here.
He feems to have difcovered,  in the
triple PrcgreJJion ,  the true foundation of

all the Greek Syftems I undertook,  at

...  -  •  ■

his re-queft,  to carry two of his books to
Bologna,  one for Padre Martini ,  and one
for the Injlitute .  -

At dinner to-day I again met with M.
If Abbe Arnaud  ;  M.  Gretry,  and the famous Liotard,  the painter of Geneva,  were
of the party.  M.  Gretry,  thebeft,  and,  at
prefen t,  the moft fafhionable compofer of
the comic opera,  has lived eight years in
Italy,  and is author of Luciley he Tableau
parlanty and the Huron ;  all pieces that have
had great fuccefs,  how defer vedly I do
not pretend to fay,  not having either
heard or feen them;  but from the cha^
rafter given them,  by perfons of good
tafte and found judgment,  I expefi them
to be excellent  :  the author is a young

*  Memoire fur la Mufique des Anciens,
Paris,  1770.

7

man.

[  47 I

man,  and in appearance and behaviour
very agreeable  ;  he requeued me to be the
bearer of a letter to Padre Martini ,  under
whom he ftudied fome time at Bologna.

It may not be amifs to remark here,
that in converfation with M.  Gretry,  a
young Lyric compofer,  about the poems
he had to fet,  he agreed with me entirely
in my affertion,  that there were in
France,  and elfewhere,  men,  at prefent,
who wrote very pretty verfes,  full of
wit,  invention,  and paffion ;  admirable ,
to read,  but very ill calculated for fong;
and perhaps one may venture to fay,
that,  among all the ingenious and elegant writers of this age,  Metaftafio is
the beit and almoit the only Lyric Poet

A fong for mufic fhould confift only of
one fnbjedlos pajfion,  exp re fifed in as few and
as foft words as pojjibk.  Since the refinement of melody,  and the exclufion of recitative,  a fong,  which ufually recapitu-

*  By Lyric Poet is here meant one who writes
poems for mufic,

lates.

r 48  ]

lates,  illuftrates,  or clofes a fcene,  is not
the place for epigrammatic points,  or for
a number of heterogeneous thoughts
and clashing metaphors ;  if the writer
has the leaft pity for the compofer,  or
love for mufic,  or wifhes to afford the
leaft opportunity for fymmetry in the
air,  in his fong,  I fay again,  the
thought fhould be one ,  and the exprefiion

0

as eafy and laconic as pofiible:  but,  in
general,  every new line in our fongs introduces a new thought,*  fo that if the
compofer is more tender of the poet's reputation than of his own,  he muft,  at
every line,  change his fubjedt,  or be at
ftrife with the poet ;  and,  in either cafe,
the alternative is intolerable.

In an air,  it is by reiterated ftrokes that
paftion is impreffedj and the moft paflion-
ate of all mufic is,  perhaps,  that where a
beautiful paftage is repeated,  and where
the firft fubjedt is judicioufly returned to,
while it ftill vibrates on the ear,  and is
recent in the memory  :  this,  no doubt,

may

1

1 49 3

may be,  and often is,  carried too far j but
not by men of true genius and tafte.

At night,  juft before my departure
from Paris,  I went to the Italian theatre,
to hear On ne s’avife jamais de tout ,  and
Le Huron .  The Huron is an entertaining drama,  taken from M.  de Voltaire’s
Ingenu  >  the mufic by M.  Gretry,  in
which there are many pretty and ingenious things,  wholly in the buon gnjio of
Italy ;  which convinced me,  that this
compofer had not been eight years in  -
that country for nothing.  But I could
not help remarking that our young com-
pofers,  who are profeffed imitators of

Italian muiic,  though they have never

.  »  *

been in Italy,  lefs frequently deviate into
abfolute Englifh muiic,  than M.  Gretry
into French ;  for feveral of his melodies
are wholly French  :  but it fee ms not
difficult to account for this ;  in France
there are no genuine Italian operas,  either ferious or comic y fo that England,
where we have both in great perfection,

E

in

[  50  ]

In the Italian language,  compofed and
performed by Italians,  may be faid to be
a better fchool for a young compofer
than France  ;  at lead;  his tafte,  if already
formed upon that of Italy,  is lefs likely
to be vitiated and depraved in a country
where good finging may frequently be
heard,  than in one where it is hardly too
much to fay,  it is never to be heard at
the theatres.

LYONS.

From the vicinity of this place to
Italy,  it was natural to fuppofe that the
mufic here would have been tinctured
rather more by the Italian gujio than at
Paris ,  but,  on the contrary,  what is bad
at Paris,  is worfe here:  At the theatre,
which is a very pretty one,  the finging
is deteftable :  I was entertained however at a coffee-houfe by an Italian
family,  who,  I am certain,  were never
heard in,  Italy but in the flreets,  yet
here their performance was charming.

Th®

i

t 51

The father played the firft violin,  and
with great fpirit ;  the fecond vioiin,  and
the violoncello were played by his two
fons ;  and the vocal part was performed
by h is two daughters,  who fung airs and
duets by turns*  Nothing was demanded
by the landlady,  but for the coffee and
other things that were drank 5 but the
girls,  after each fong,  went about the
room with a plate,  to colled;  what the
generofity of each new comer would
afford ;  which,  I fear,  was but little,  if
one may judge by the attention to the
mufic  ;  for fuch an inceffant chattering I
never heard among the mo ft loquacious
female goffips,  as the company,  not the
audience ,  here made,  during the prettieft
airs that were either fung or played.

The firft violin of this town is an old
Venetian,  Signor Carminati,  one of Tar-
tini’s earlieft fcholars.  And the principal performer on the harpfichord.  Signor
Leoni ;  but both have been here long
enough to have accommodated them-*

E 2 felves

[  J*  ]

jfelves to the muiic and tafle of thh
country.

I went twice to the cathedral church
of St.  John,  to hear the Plain Chant
a la Romaine ,  and found both the church
and the mulic as plain and unadorned
with pidures,  flatues,  harmony,  or iafie,  -
as any proteflant church I ever was in.
The prebends,  who are here called counts,
the canons,  and twenty-four boys,  all
fing in unifon,  and without organ or
books.

GENEVA.

There is but little mufic to be heard in
this place,  as there is no play-houfe al-
lowed ;  nor are there organs in the churches-,,
except two,  which are ufed for pfalmody
only,  in the true purity of John Calvin  :
however,  M.  Fritz,  a good compofer*
and excellent performer,  on the violin,
is ftill livings he has refided here near
thirty years,  and is well known to all
the Englifh lovers of mufic who have
vilited Geneva during that time.  In his
youth he had ftudied under Somis,  at

Turin.

{  S3  .1

Turin.  It was rather awkward to go to
him  ;  but I fent a meffage over night,
and he appointed two o’clock the next
day.  He lives at a houfe about a mile
out of town.  I found him to be a thin,
fend hie looking old man,  and we foon
grew very well acquainted.  He was fo
obliging as to play me one of his own
folos,  which,  though extremely difficult*
was pleafing ;  and though he.  muft be
near feventy years of age,  he fill performs with as much fpirit as a vouner

-*•  J o

man of twenty-five.  His bowing and
♦expreifion are admirable  ;  and he mu ft
him lei f be a real lover of mafic to keep
in fuch high practice,  with fo few  •opportunities of difp laying his talents,  or of
receiving their due reward.  He is on
the point of publiftiing,  by fubfc-ription,
fix fym phonies.  m

Befides M.  Fritz,  on the practical fide,
■Geneva can boaft an excellent theorift.,

A  •  0  *  •  ^  ^  *  J when at Paris,  fome
years ago,  had the fame honours conferred upon
him at the Concert Spiriiuel as M.  Pagin.  ( See p.  39. )

E 3 M,  Serre,

I 54  ]

M.  Serre,  an eminent miniature painter,
who has written fome learned and ingenious effays on the theory of harmony.
I had the pleafure of converting with
him on the fubjedt,  and of communicating
to him the plan of my intended hiftory
of mufic.  He is thought to be very
deep in the fcience of found  :  feemed
pleafed with my vifit,  and returned it
the fame evening  $  entering very heartily
into my views,  and feeming folicitous
that I fhould purfue them.

s

My going to M.  Fritz,  broke into a
plan I had formed of vifiting M.  de Voltaire at the fame hour,  with fome other
ftrangers,  who were then going to Fer-
ney.  But,  to fay the truth,  belides the
viiit to M.  Fritz being more my bujinefs ,
I did not much like going with thefe
people,  who had only a bookfeller to introduce them ;  and I had heard that fome
Englifh had lately met with a rebuff
from M.  de Voltaire,  by going without
any letter of recommendation,  or any

thing

[  55  ]

thing to recommend themfelves.  He
afked them what they wanted?  Upon
their replying they wifhed only to fee fo
extraordinary a man,  he faid — •“  Well,
“  gentlemen,  you now fee me — did you
“  take me for a wild bead:  or monfter,
“  that was fit only to be flared at as
“  a fhow  ?”  This llory very much
frighted me  ;  for not having any intention of going to Geneva,  when I left
London,  or even Paris,  I was quite unprovided with a recommendation  :  however I was determined to fee his place,
(which I took to be —

Cette maifon d'  Arijlippe,  ces jardins d'
Epicure:

to which he retired in 1755*  but was
miftaken  )  1 drove to it alone,  after I

had left M.  Fritz.  His houfe is three
or four miles from Geneva,  but near the
lake.  I approached it with reverence,
and a curiofity of the moft minute kind.
I enquired when I firft trod on his domain  ;  I had an intelligent and talkative

E 4 poftil-

r 56 i

poftillion,  who anfwered all my quef-
tions very fatisfa&orily.  His eftate is
very large here,  and he is building pretty
farm-houfes upon it.  He has ereCted on
the Geneva fide a quadrangular juJUce>  or
gallows,  to fhew that he is the feigneur.
One of his farms,  or rather manufacturing houfes  (for he is eftablifhing a manufacture upon his eftate)  was fo handfome
that I thought it was his chateau .  We
drove to Ferney,  through a charming
country,  covered with corn and vines,
in view of the lake and mountains
of Gex,  Swififerland,  and Savoy.  On the
left hand,  approaching the houfe,  is a neat
chapel with this infeription  :

DEO

E R E X I T
VOLTAIRE.

M DCC LXI.*

%

*  When this building was con ft ru elec! ,  M*  de
Voltaire gave a curious reafon for placing upon it
this infeription.  He faid that it was high time to
dedicate one church to Gody after fo many had been
dedicated to Saints.

I fent

[  57 1

I fent to enquire whether a A ranger
might be allowed to fee the houie and
gardens,  and was anfwered in the affirmative.  A fervant foon came,  and conducted me into the cabinet or clofet
where his mailer had juft been writing,
which is never ffiewn when he is at
home  ;  but having walked out,  I was allowed that privilege.  From thence I
paffed to the library,  which is not a very
large one,  but well filled.  Here I found
a whole length figure in marble of him-
felf,  recumbent,  in one of the windows ;
and many curiofities in another room  ;  a
buft of hirnfelf,  made not two years fince;
his mother’s pidure  ;  that of his niece,
Mad.  Denis ;  his brother,  M,  Dupuis ;
the Calas family,  and others.  It is a
very neat and elegant houfe,  not large,
or affeCtedly decorated.  I ft^ould have
faid,  that clofe to the chapel,  between
that and the houfe,  is the theatre,  which
he built fome years ago;  where he treated
his friends with fome of his own tragedies:

it

7

[  5*  j

it is now only ufed as a receptacle for
wood and lumber,  there having been no
play afted in it thefe four years.  The
fervant told me his mafter was feventy-
eight,  but very well.  “  11 travaille ,”  faid
he  “  pendant dix heures chaque jour  ”  He
ftudies ten hours every day ;  writes con-
ftantly without fpedtacles,  and walks out
with only a domeftic,  often a mile or
two-—' e<  Et le voila ,  la has  /” — and fee,
yonder where he is. —

He was going to his workmen.  My
heart leaped at the fight of lo extraordinary a man.  He had juft then quitted
his garden,  and was crofting the court
before his houfe.  Seeing my chaife,  and
me on the point of mounting it,  he made
a fign to his fervant,  who had been my
Cicerone ,  to go to him,  in order,  I fuppofe,
to enquire who I was.  After they had
exchanged a few words together,  he approached the place where I ftood,  motion-
lefs,  in order to contemplate his perfon
as much as I could when his eyes were

turned

/

N  •

[  59 1

turned from me ;  but on feeing him
move towards me,  I found myfelf drawn
by fome irrefiftible power towards him;
and,  without knowing what I did,  I in-
fenfibly met him half way.  It is not
eafy to conceive it poffible for life to fub-
fift in a form fo nearly compofed of mere
fkin and bone,  as that ofM.  de Voltaire.
He complained of decrepitude,  and faid
he fuppofed I was curious to form an
idea of the figure of one walking after
death.  However his eyes and whole
countenance are ftill full of fire ;  and
though fo emaciated,  a more lively ex-
preffion cannot be imagined.  He enquired after Englifh news,  and obierved
that poetical fquabbles had given way to
political ones ;  but feemed to think the
fpirit of oppofition as neceflary in poetry
as in politics.  “  Les querelles d auteurs
font pour le bien dj la literature,  comme
dans un governement lib re ,  les auarelles des
grands ,  et les clamours des petits font necef-

faires

[  6°  ]

jfaires a laliberte”  *  And added,  “  When
critics are filent,  it does not fo much
prove the age to be coined:  as dull/’  He
enquired what poets we had now  ;  and I
told him we had Mafon and Gray.  They
write but little,  faid he,  and you feem to
have no one who lords it over the reft
like Dryaen,  Pope,  and Swift.  I told
him that it was,  perhaps,  one of the in-
conveniencies of periodical journals,  however well executed,  that they often
iilenced modeft men of genius,  while
impudent blockheads were impenetrable,
and unable to feel the critic’s fcourge  :
that Mr.  Gray and Mr.  Mafon had both
been illiberally treated by mechanical
critics,  even in news-papers ;  and added,
that modefty and love of quiet feemed in
thefe gentlemen to have got the better
even of their love of fame.  During this

%  Difputes among authors are of ufe to literature  ;  as the quarrels of the great,  and the clamours of the little,  in a free government,  are necef-
fary to liberty.

con-

[  6i  ]

converfation,  we approached the buildings he was conflrucding near the road to
his chateau .  Thefe,  faid he,  pointing to
them,  are the moil innocent,  and,  perhaps,  the raoft ufeful of all my works.
I obferved that he had other works,
which were of far more extenfive ufe,
and would be much more durable than
thofe.  He was fo obliging as to fhew me
feveral farm-houfes he had built,  and the
plans of others;  after which I took my
leave,  for fear of breaking in upon his
time,  being unwilling to rob the public
of things fo precious as the few remaining moments of this great and univerfal
genius.

TURIN.

At the firft entrance into Italy,  if the
entertainment were as good as at Rome
or Naples,  travellers would be inclined
to flop fhort ;  but they find the curiofi-
ties,  both of art and nature,  flill more
numerous and interefling the nearer they
approach thofe capitals.

Turin

[  62 3

Turin is,  however,  a very beautiful
city,  though inferior perhaps to many
others in antiquities,  natural curiofities,
and in the number of its artifts.

The language here is half French and
half Italian,  but both corrupted.  This
cannot be applied to the mufic,  for Turin
has produced a Giardini ;  and there are
at prefent in this city the famous  'Dilettante,  Count Benevento,  a great performer
on the*  violin,  and a good compofer ;  the
two Bezozzi’s,  and Pugnani ;  all,  except
the Count,  in the fervice of the King of
Sardinia.  Their falary is not much above
eighty guineas a year each,  for attending
the chapel royal ;  but then the fervice is
made very eafy to them,  as they only
perform folos there,  and thofe juft when
they pleafe.  The Maejlro di Capella is
Don Quirico Gafparini.  In the chapel
there is commonly a fymphony played
every morning,  between eleven and
twelve o’clock,  by the king’s band,  which
is divided into three orcheftra9,  and

placed

[  63 3

placed in three different galleries ;  and

though far feparated from each other,  the

performers know their bufinefs fo well

#

that there is no want of a perfon to beat
time,  as in the opera and concert fpirituel
at Paris.  The king,  the royal family,
and the whole city feem very conftant in
their attendance at mafs  ;  and all their
devotion is filently performed at the
Mejfa Baffci)  during the fymphony On
feftivals Signor Pugnani,  or the B’ezozzis
play a folo,  and fometimes motets are
performed with voices.  The organ is in
the gallery which faces the king,  and in
this flands the principal firft violin.

The ferious opera begins here the fixth
of January,  the king’s name-day,  and
continues every day,  except Friday,  till
Lent,  and this is called the Carnival.
Here is an excellent tenor voice.  Signor

*  The morning fervice of the church here is
called Mejfa Bajfa ,  when the prieft performs it in a
voice fo little louder than a whifper,  that it cannot
be heard through the inftrumeiits.

Ottane,

[  64 J

Ottane,  who lings with tafle,  and in  &
plealing manner.  He favoured me with
two or three airs,  in different ftyles,
which difcovered him to be a mailer of
his profeffion.  He likewife paints well,
in the manner of Claude Lorrain and Du
Vernet,  and is fometimes employed as a
painter by his Sardinian majefty.  In
October a company of burletta performers
comes hither,  and remains till Chriftmas,
at the little theatre,  where there is,
during fummer,  a company of buffo comedians,  which exhibits every night,  except
Friday,  una farfa fattd da ridere ,  and an
intermezzo in mujica a qudttro voci.  *
This continues till the burlettas begin,
I went thither the evening after my arrival  ;  there was not much company  $
the boxes,  or pakhetti>  are all engaged by
the year,  fo that Grangers have no place
but in the pit ;  which,  however,  is far
more comfortable than the parterre or

*  A farce to laugh at,  and a mufical interlude
for four voices.

pit.

C 65  ]

pit,  at Paris,  where the company ftahd
the whole time ;  and even than that at
London,  where they are much crowded  ;
but there are backs to the benches in
this theatre,  which are of double ufe,  as
they keep off the crowd behind,  and fup-
port thofe who fill them.  This theatre
is not fo large as that at Lyons,  but
pretty,  and capable of holding much
company  :  it is dijlungato ,  or of an oblong form,  with the corners rounded off*.
There are no galleries in it,  but then there  -
are five rows of boxes,  one above another,  twenty-four in each row  ;  and each
box will contain fix per fens,  amounting in all to feven hundred and twenty ;
there is one ftage-box only on each fide.
The farce was truly what it promifed*
except the laughing part,  as it did not
produce that effedt.  The intermezzo was
not bad the mufic pretty,  but old  ;  the
finging very indifferent for Italy,  though
it would have been very good in France.
However,  it is but juft to fay,  that,  as a

F dram a ,

[  66  ]

drama,  the French comic operas have
greatly the advantage over the Italian  ;
take away the mufic from the French,
and they woidd be ftill pretty comedies ;

but,  without mufic,  the Italian would be
infupportable.  There were four characters  ;  the two girls were juft not offen-
iive.  Of the men fo much cannot be faid:
none of them would have pleafed in London  ;  and the Italians themfelves hold
thefe performances in no very high efti-
mation  :  they talk the whole time,  and
feldoin attend to any thing but one or
two favourite airs,  during the whole
piece:  *  the only two that were applauded
were encored  •,  and I obferved,  that the
performer does not take it as fuch a great
favour to be applauded here as in England  ;  where,  whenever a hand is moved,
all illufion is deftroyed by a bow or a

*’  I fhall have frequent occafion to mention
the noife and inattention at the mufical exhibitions
in Italy  ;  but mufic there is cheap and common,
whereas in England it is a coftly exotic,  and more
highly prized.

curtfey

f 67  ]

qurtfey from the performer,  who is a
king,  a queen,  or fome great perfonage,
ufualiy going off the ftage in diftrefs,  or
during the emotions of fome ftrong paf-
fion.  If Mr.  Garrick,  in fome of his
principal characters,  was to fubmit to
fuch a humiliating pradtice,  it would furs-
ly be at the expence of the audience  ;  who
would every inftant be told,  that it was
not Lear,  Richard,  or Macbeth they faw
before them,  but Mr,  Garrick,

Friday 1 3 .  This morning I vifited the two
Signor Bezozzis,  whofe talents are well
known to all travellers of tafte in rnufic.
Their long and uninterrupted regard for
each other is as remarkable as their performance.  They are brothers ;  the eldefc
feventy,  and the youngeft upwards of
fixty.  They have fo much of the Id^m
velle et idem nolle about them,  that they
have ever lived too-ether in the u'tmoft

O 5.

harmony and affefition;  carrying their
Similarity of tafte to their very chefs,

p z which

E 68 3

\vliich is the fame in every particular,

even to buttons and buckles.  They ate

batchelors,  and have lived fo long,  and in

fo friendly a manner together,  that it is

thought here,  whenever one of them dies,

the other will not long furvive him.  My

introduction to thefe eminent performers

*  •

was eafy and agreeable,  having been favoured with a letter to them from Mr.
Giardini,  who had been fo kind as to fave
me the confufion of afking them to play
upon fo ffiort an acquaintance,  by telling
them,  in his letter,  how much they would
oblige me by fuch a favour.  The eldeft
plays the hautbois,  and the youngeft the
baffoon,  which inftrument continues the
fcale of the hautbois,  and is its true bafe.
Their compofitions generally confift of
feledt and detached paffages,  yet fo elaborately finifhed,  that,  like feledt thoughts
or maxims in literature,  each is not a fragment,  but a whole  :  thefe pieces are in a
peculiar manner adapted to difplay the
powers of the performers ;  but it is difficult

[  69  ]

cult to defcribe their ftile of playing.
Their compositions,  when printed,  give
but an imperfedt idea of it.  So much
exprefiion  !  fuch delicacy  !  fuch a perfedt
acquiefcence and agreement together,
that many of the paffages feem heart-felt
Sighs,  breathed through the fame reed.
No brilliancy of execution is aimed at,
all are notes of meaning.  The imitations
are cxadt  ;  the melody is pretty equally
distributed between the two instruments ;
each forte ,  piano ,  crefcendo ,  diminuendo,'
and appoggiatura,  is obferved with a
minute exadtnefs,  which could be attained only by fuch a long residence and
Study together.  The eldeit has loSt his
under front teeth,  and complained of age;
and it is natural to fuppofe that the performance of each has been better  :  however,  to me,  who heard them now for the
firSt time,  it was charming.  If there
is any defedt in fo exquisite a performance,  it arifes from the equal perfection
of the two parts-,  which diftradts the

F 3 atten-

[  ]

attention,  and renders it impoffible id
liften to both,  when both have diffimilar
melodies equally pleafing.

They were born at Parma,  and have
been upwards of forty years in the fervice
of his Sardinian majefty,  without ever
quitting Italy,  except in one fhort excur-
fion to Paris;  or even Turin,  but for
that journey,  and one to vifit the place
of their nativity.  They are fober,  regular
perfons,and areineafycircumftances;  have
a town and country hdufe,  in the former
are many good pictures,  particularly one
of Lodovico Carrach,  fuperior to every
picture I had feen by that mailer.

After this vifit I heard a full piece performed at the king’s chapel,  and then
went to fee the great opera- houfe,  which
is reckoned one of the fined:  in Europe,
It is very large and elegant ;  the machinery and decorations are magnificent.  I
was carried into every part of it,  even to
the t ay] or s work-fhop.  Here are fix rows
©f boxes above the pit,  both larger and

deeper

C 71  ]

deeper than thofe of the other theatre:
the king is at the chief expence of this
opera.  Thofe who have boxes for the
feafon,  pay,  in a kind of fees only,  two
or three guineas ;  money at the door
being only taken for fitting in the pit.

The itinerant muficians,  Anglice ,  ballad-fingers,  and fidlers,  at Turin perform
in concert.  A band of this kind came to
the Hotel,  la bonne femme^  confiding of two
voices,  two violins,  a guitar,  and bafe,
bad enough indeed,  though far above our
fcrapers.  The fingers,  who were girls,
fung duets very well in tune,  accompanied by the whole band.  The fame people at night performed on a ftage in the
grand place or fquare,  where they fold
their ballads as our quack doctors do their
noftrums,  but with far lefs injury to fo-
ciety.  In another part of the fquare,  on
a different ftage,  a man and woman fung
Venetian ballads,  in two parts,  very
agreeably,  accompanied by a dulcimer.

F 4

Saturday

[  72  ]

Saturday 14,  Signor Pugnani played a
concerto this morning at the king’s cha^
pel,  which was crowded on the occafion.
It is an elegant rotund,  built of black
marble,  and happily conftrudted for
mufic,  being very high,  and terminated
by a dome.  I need fay nothing of
the performance of Signor Pugnani,  his
talents being too well known in England to require it.  I  £hall only obferve,
that he did not appear to exert him-
felf ;  and it is not to be wondered at,
as neither his Sardinian majerty,  nor any
one of the numerous royal family,  feem
to pay much attention to mufic.  There
is a gloomy famenefs at this court,  in the
daily repetition of ftate parade and
prayer.

Signor Baretti,  of this place,  in confe-
quence of a letter from his brother in
London,  received me very politely,  and
took great pains to be ufeful to me while
I remained in Turin  ;  and in this he fuc-
ceeded very much,  by introducing me to

.  \  Padre

[  73  ]

Padre Be cc aria,  for whom,  at firft fight*

I conceived the higheft regard and veneration.

He is not above forty  ;  with a large
and noble figure,  he has fomething open,
natural,  intelligent,  and benevolent in his
countenance,  that immediately captivates.
We had much conversation concerning
electricity*  Dr.  Franklin,  Drf Prieftly,
and others.  He was pleafed to make me
a prefen t,  finding me an amateur,  (which
Should be always tranilated a dablerj of
his laft book and the Syllabus of the
Memoir e he lately fent to our Royal Society.  He likewife wrote in my tablets
a recommendatory note to M.  Laura Baffi,  •
the famous dottorejfa and academift at Bologna  ;  recommended to me Some books,
and was So kind,  and with a manner So
truly Ample,  that I Shall for ever remember this vifit with oleafure.  Mr.  Martin,

*  Experimenta,  atque Obfervaiiones ,  quibns Eletlri-
citas vindex late f onftituitur atque explicatur .  Taurin:

'  1769.

7

the

[  74-  ]

the banker here,  came after me to Signof
Becearia’s  ;  and this great mathematician
is fo little acquainted with worldly concerns,  efpeciaiiy money-matters,  that he
was quite aftonifhed and pleated at the
ingenuity and novelty of a letter of credit*
Mr.  Martin defiring to look at mine,  in
his prefence,  in order to know how he
might fend my letters after me,  the good
father could hardly comprehend how this
letter could be argent comptant ,  ready
money,  throughout Italy,

He charged me with compliments to
Padre Bofcovich at Milan,  and Padre Mar-*
ttni at Bologna ;  and I left my new acquaintance,  impreffed with the higheft
refpedl and affection for him.  I muft juft
mention one particular more relative to
this great and good man,  which I had
from Signor Baretti 5 that he,  through
choice,  lives up fix pair of flairs,  among
his obfervatories,  machines,  and mathematical inftruments ;  and there does every
thing for himfelf,  even to making his bed,
and drefiing his dinner.  I vifit-

t 75 1

I vifited the univerfity,  or royal library*
Where there are fifty thoufand volumes*
and many manufcripts*  the catalogue of
which fills two volumes in folio.  The
accefs to thefe books is eafy,  both before
and after dinner,  every day,  holidays excepted.  I wa?  very politely treated there,
on Signor Baretti’s account,  by Signor
Grela,  the diftributer of the books,  who
fhewed me feveral of the moft ancient
MSS*

Among my mufical enquiries at Turin,
David Rizio was not forgotten *  who
having been a native of this city,  and his
father a mufician here,  I thought it likely,  if I could find any mufic compofed by
either of them,  or by their cotemporaries,  that it would determine the long
difputed queftion,  whether David Rizio
was author of the Scots melodies attributed to him*.

*  The iffiie of this enquiry will be related in
the Hiftory of Mufic.

In

[  76  ]

In my journey from Turin to Milan,
I flopped a little while at V ercelli j which
is a large town,  faid to contain twenty
thoufand inhabitants ;  where I met with
a book on the fubiedt of mufic,  and with
its author.  Signor Carlo Geo.  Teftori,
with whom I had the pleafure of converting.

MILAN.

In this city,  which is very large and
populous,  mufic is much cultivated.
Signor Battifia San Martini is organift of
two or three churches here ;  I had a letter to him from Signor Giardini,  which
procured me a very agreeable reception.
He is brother to the famous Martini of
London,  who fo long delighted us with
his performance on the hautbois,  as well
as by his competitions.  The mufic
of Signor Battifta San Martini of Milan
is well known in England.

But what I was moil curious after here,
was the Ambrofian Chant or church fer-

vice.

I

t 77  ]

vice,  which is peculiar to Milan,  after
the manner inftituted by St.  Ambrofe,
two hundred years before the Roman,  or
that of St.  Gregory.

At the Duo?no ,  or great church,  which,
in fize,  is fuperior to every Gothic ftruc-
ture in Italy,  and faid to be nearly as big
as St.  Peter’s at Rome,  there are two large
organs,  one on each fide the choir.  On
feftivals there are oratorios,  a due cori ,  for
two choirs,  and then both organs are
ufed  ;  on common days only one.  There
are two organifts ;  Signor J.  Bach,  before
his arrival in England,  was one of them :
at prefent the firft organift is Signor G„
Corbeli ;  he is reckoned a very able man
in his profeffion,  I heard him play feve-
ral times,  in a mafterly grave ftile,  fuited
to the place and inftrument.

Friday,  July 17.  After hearing the
fervice chanted in the Ambrofian manner,
peculiar to this place,  I was introduced to
Signor Jean Andre Fioroni,  Maejiro di Ca-

pella

fella at the great church*  who invited me
into the orcheltra,  fhewea me the fer-
vices they were juft going to ling,  printed
on wood,  in four parts,  the cantus and
tenor on the left fide,  and altus et baffus
on the right,  without bars.  Out of this
one book,  after the tone was given by the
organift,  the whole four parts were fung
without the organ.  There was one boy,
and three cajlrati for the foprano and contr
alto with two tenors and two bafes,  under
the direction of Signor Fioroni,  who beat
the time,  and now and then fung.  Thefe
fervices were compofed about one hundred and fifty years ago,  by a Maeftro di
Capella of th e Duomo,  and are much in the
ftile of our fervices of that time,  confift-

r

ing of good harmony,  ingenious points
and contrivances,  but no melody.  From
hence I went home with Signor Fioroni,
who was fo obliging as to  (hew me all
his mufical curiofities,  (he had before
done me the favour to  (hew me thofe in
the Sacrijlij and played over and fung to

[  79  ]

■4

me a whole oratorio of his own compoCU
tion.  He like wife favoured me with a copy
of one of his own fervices,  in eight parts
in fcore,  for two choirs,  which I begged
of him,  in order to convince the world,
that,  though the theatrical ftile and that
of the church are now much the fame,
when inftruments and additional lingers
are employed,  yet the ancient grave ftile
is not wholly loft

Piccini had been at Milan this year,
during the carnival,  for which he com-
pofed a ferious opera.  The principal
lingers were,  fir ft man.  Signor Aprile ;
firft woman,  la Signora Piccinelli ;  and
the two principal dancers were M.  and
Mad.  Pique.

After the carnival he compofed a bur-
letta,  called II Regno nella Luna ,  for the
performers,  who are ftill here.  Piccini
had been gone from hence but a little
while before my arrival.

*  This piece,  with feveral other curious com-
pofiticns,  mentioned hereafter,  wi,ll be publifhed.

6 There

%

c  §0 r

There is no ferious opera at Milan but
in carnival time.  The firft burletta I
heard there,  was L* Amor e Artegiano ;
it began at eight,  and was not over till
twelve o’clock  :  the mufic,  which had
pretty things in it,  was by Signor Floriano
Gafman,  in the fervice of the emperor,
who played the harpfichord.  There were
in it feven characters,  all pretty well done,
but no one very well,  as to finging.

The dance in this opera was very entertaining 5 there was an infinite number
of principals and figurers employed in
it,  befides two faltatori ,  Signor and
Signora Palecini,  who gained more ap-
plaufe than all the reft ;  indeed their
activity was very furprifing  :  there were
two others,  who danced all'Inglefe ,  and
there was a French peruquier in this burletta,  whofe finging was to be French :
but their imitations here are fuch as ours
in London,  when we are to take off the
Italians  ;  that is to fay,  about as like as a
miferable fign-poft,  called the King or
Queen’s head,  ufually is to George the

Third,

•  *

f 81  ]

Third,  or Queen Charlotte  :  one is more
inclined to laugh at than with fuch mimics.  In this dance the ftage was illuminated in a rnoft fplendid,  and,  to me,
new manner,  with lampioni color iti,  or
coloured lamps,  which had a very pretty
effedt ;  the front fcene and ceiling,  as
well as the fides,  had an infinite number
of thefe lamps.

The theatre here is very large and fplen-
did ;  it has five rows of boxes on each fide,
one hundred in each row ;  and parallel to
thefe runs a broad gallery,  round the
houfe,  as an avenue to every row of
boxes  :  each box will contain fix perfons,
who fit at the fides,  facing each other.
Acrofs the gallery of communication is
a complete room to every box,  with a fireplace in it,  and all conveniences for re-
freihments and cards.  In the fourth row
is a pharo table,  on each fide the houfe,
which is ufed during the performance of
the opera.  There is in front a very large
box,  as big as a common London dining-

G room,

[  s2 j

room,  fet apart for the Duke of Modena,
governor of Milan,  and the PrincipeJJina
his daughter*  who were both there.  The
noife here during the performance was
abominable,  except while two or three
airs and a duet were finging,  with which
every one was in raptures  :  at the end of
the duet,  the applaufe continued with
unremitting violence till the performers
returned to fing it again,  which is here
the way of encoring a favourite air.  The
firft violin was played by Lucchini :  the
band is very numerous,  and orcheftra
large in proportion to the fize of the
theatre,  which is much bigger than the
great opera-houfe at Turin.  In the high-
eft ftory the people fit in front ;  and
thofe for whom there are no feats,  ftand
behind in the gallery :  all the boxes
here are appropriated for the feafon,  as at
Turin.  Between the adts the company
from the pit come up ftairs,  and walk
about the galleries.  There was only one
dance,  but that very long.

It

t 83 1

It is not the Englifh genius to be
fatisfied with their prefent condition
or pofteflions,  or elfe,  upon the whole,
one may venture to pronounce,  that fuch
a comic opera as that of lalt winter in
London,  might have contented them ;
which,  on the fide of finging,  was greatly fuperior to this ;  nor did I meet,
throughout Italy,  with three fuch performers at lead:  on the fame fiage,  as
Signor Lovatini,  Signor Morigi,  and
Signora Guadagni.

The opera here is carried on by thirty
noblemen,  who fubfcribe fixty zechins
each,  for which every fubfcriber has a
box  *  j the reft of the boxes are let for
the year at fifty zechins la prima fila ,  or
firft row,  forty the fecond,  thirty the
third,  and in proportion for the reft.  The
chance money only arifes from the pit and
upper feats,  or picconai :  they perform
every night except Fridays.

*  A zechin is a gold coin,  current all over
Italy,  equal in value to about nine  {hillings
Englifli,

G 2

TV ednefday

[  84  }

Wednefday 18.  I went this morning*
for the firft time,  to the Ambrofian Library,  which,  in fize,  appears but diminutive,  after reading the accounts given of
it in books of travels,  and after having feen
the Biblioteque du Roi at Paris,  which is,  at
leaft,  ten times as big ;  there is,  in faCt,
but one large room filled with printed
books,  and two fmall ones for French literature,  printed and MS.  then a room full of
copies only of the beft ancient ftatues at
Rome and Florence ;  and,  laftly,  a large
hall or faloon,  full indeed of wonderful
performances of the greateft painters ;
among thefe are many ineftimable works
of Leonardo da Vinci,  and Jean Breugel,
of Antwerp,  the high finilher,  whofe four
elements in this collection are faid to
have coft him his fight.  There is an admirable portrait in the collection,  by this
painter,  of the organift Merula Upon

*  Claudius Merulus,  as the Germans called him,
was of Antwerp,  and flourifhed in the fifteenth
century.

my

I 85  ]

my enquiring for the catalogue of MSS.  I
was told it was not ufual to fhew it*  but t
might fee any one in the colle&ion,  if I
would afk for it by name  ;  but I knew no
more the name than the contents  :  I was
in quell of new exiftences,  new literary
beings,  unpolluted by profane compilers
and printers.  Upon explaining my errand to Milan,  and faying it was chiefly
to afcertain the time of eflablifhing the
Ambrofian Chant in that church,  I was

1

told that Padre Martini had made the
fame enquiries,  but without fuccefs ;  it
feeming as if that chant had been given
to St.  Ambrofe by the writers of his life,
one after the other,  without fufiicient
proof.  This was rather difcouraging ;
however I did not,  as yet,  give up the
point j and I afterwards found more favour in the fight of the librarians.  As
yet I had not delivered my letters to thofe
perfons,  whofe countenance,  in my future vifits,  procured me every fatisfadtion
this library could afford.

G 3 A gen-

[  36  ]

A gentleman of Parma,  with whom
I had travelled from*  Paris,  having a
letter from M.  Meffier to Padre Bof-
covich,  giving him an account of a new
comet which he had difcovered on the
eleventh of June,  I had the pleafure of
accompanying my friend in his vifit to
this father at the Jefuits College,  who
received us both with great courtefy ;  and
being told that 1 was an Englifhman,  a
lover of thefciences,  and ambitious of feeing fo celebrated a man,  he addrefledhim-
felf to me in a particular manner.  He had
feveral young ftudents of quality with
him,  and faid he expected that morning
three perfons of diftin&ion to fee his in-
ftruments,  and invited me to be of the
party ;  I gladly accepted the propofal,
and he immediately began to fhew and
explain to me feveral machines and contrivances whichhehadinventedformaking
optical experiments,  before the arrival of
the Signori ,  who were a Knight of Malta,
a nephew of Pope Benedict XIV.  and

another

[  27  ]

another Cavalier e .  He then went on,
and furprifed and delighted us all very
much,  particularly with his Stet Sol,  by
which he can fix the fun’s rays,  palling
through an aperture or a prifm,  to any
part of the oppofite wall he pleafes :  he
likewife feparates and fixes any of the
prifmatic colours of the rays.  Shewed
us a method of forming an aquatic prifm,
and the effects of joining different lenfes,
all extremely plain and ingenious.  He
has published a Latin differtation on
thefe matters at Vienna.  Then we af-
cended to different ohfervatories,  where I
found his inftruments mounted in fo ingenious and fo convenient a manner,  as to
give me the utmoft pleafure.  He was fo
polite as to add refs himfelf to me always
in French,  as I had at firft accofted him
in that language,  and in which I was at
this time much more at my eafe than in
Italian.  M.  Meffier had told him the
comet had very little motion,  being al-
moil ftationary ;  but Padre Bofcovich

G 4 after-

[  88  ]

afterwards found it fo rapid as to move
fifty degrees in a day.  Mats la comet e ,
Monjieur ,  lui dis-je>  ou ejl elle a prefent  ?
Avec le foleil9 elle eft mar tee.  The late

Duke of York made him a prefent of one
of Short's twelve-inch refledtors,  of twen^
ty guineas price  ;  but he has an acroma-
tic one,  by the fame maker,  which coft
one hundred.  The expence of his obfer-
vatory,  which is defrayed by himfelf,
muff have been enormous.  He is uni-
verfity profeffor at Pavia,  where he fpends
his winters.  If any new difcoveries are
to be made in aflronomy,  they may
be expe&ed from this learned Jefuit  $
whofe attention to optical experiments
for the improvement of glades,  upon
which fo much depends  ;  and whofe great
number of admirable inftruments of all
forts,  joined to the excellence of the climate,  and the wonderful fagacity he has
difcovered in the conftrudtion of his ob-
fervatory and machines,  form a concurrence of favourable circumftances,  not

eafiiy

/

[  s9 3

eafily to be found elfewhere.  He complained very much of the filence of the
English aftronomers,  who anfwer none
of his letters.  He was feven months in
England,  and during that time was very
much with Mr.  Mafkaline,  Dr.  Shepherd,
Dr.  Bevis,  and Dr.  Maty,  with whom he
hoped to keep up a correfpondence.  He
had,  indeed,  lately received from Mr.
Profeflor Mafkaline the laft Nautical Almanack,  with Mayer’s Lunar Tables,  who
gave him hopes of reviving their literary
intercourfe.  He is a tall,  ftrong built
man,  upwards of fifty,  of a very agreeable
addrefs.  He was refufed aamiffion into
the French academy,  when at Paris,
though a member,  by the parliament,
on account of his being a Jefuit  :  but if
all Jefuits were like this father,  making
ufe only of fuperior learning and intellects for the advancement of fcience,  and
the happinefs of mankind,  one would
have wifhed this fociety to be as durable
as the world.  As it is,  it feems as if

equity

[  90  ]

equity required that fome difcrimination
fhould be made in condemning the Je-
fuits ;  for though good policy may require a diflolution of their order,  yet humanity certainly makes one with to pre-
ferve the old,  the infirm,  and the innocent,  from the general wreck and deftruc-
tion due only to the guilty.

The fecond opera I heard here was
La Lavandara Jljiuta ,  a Pajiiccio ,  with a
large portion of Piccini’s airs in it.  Garibaldi,  the firft man,  had a better part in
this burletta than in the firft,  and fung
very well.  He has a pleafing voice,  and
much tafte and expreflion  ;  was encored,
alia Italiana,  two or three times.  One of
the Baglioni  *  fings better than the two
others,  and had more to do.  Caratoli
diverted the people at Milan very much by
his action and humour,  though local,  and
what would not pleafe in England  :  the

*  There are fix fitters of that name,  all fingers,
three of them were at Milan :  ’tis a Bolognefe
family.

dance

t 91  ]  •

dance was the fame as that I had feen
before.

A private concert in Italy is called an
accademia ;  the firft I went to was com-
pofed entirely of dilettanti ;  tl padrone ,  or
the mailer of the houfe,  played the firft
violin,  and had a very powerful hand;
there were twelve or fourteen performers,
among whom were feveral good violins ;
there were likewife two German flutes,
a violoncello,  and fmall double bafe ;  they
executed,  reafonably well,  feveral of our
Bach’s fymphonies,  different from thofe
printed in England  :  all the mufic here is
in MS.  But what I liked mo ft was the
vocal part by La Signora Padrona della
Cafa>  or lady of the houfe;  fhe had an
agreeable well-toned voice,  a good fhake,
the right fort of tafte and expreflion,  and
fung  (fitting down,  with the paper on
the common inftrumental defk)  wholly
without affectation,  feveral pretty airs of
Traetta.

Upon

[  92  ]

Upon the whole,  this concert was

much upon a level with our own private

concerts among gentlemen in England,

the performers were fometimes in and

fometimes out in general,  however,

the mufic was rather better chofen,  the

execution more brilliant and full of fire,

and the finging much nearer perfection

than we can often boaft on fuch occa-

«

fions ;  not,  indeed,  in point of voice or

execution,  for in refpeCt to them our fe-

%

males are,  at leaft,  equal to our neighbours,  but in the portamento or direction
of the voice,  in expreflion and in dif-
cretion

*  It is humbly hoped that my fair countrywomen will not take offence at the ufe of the word
dijcretion ,  as its acceptation here is wholly confined
to mufic,  in which the love for what is commonly
called gracing ,  is carried to fuch a pitch of indifcre -
tion^  as frequently to change paffages from good to
had,  and from bad to worfe.  A little paint may
embellifh an ordinary face,  though a great deal
would render it hideous  ;  but true beauty is furely
beff in its natural flate.

7

The

I 93 3

The fame day,  Friday,  July 20,  there
was mufic at three different churches ;  I
wifhed to be at them all during the performances,  but it was impoffible to be
prefent at more than two of them ;  the
firft of which was in the morning,  at the
chu.rch of Santa Maria Seer eta ;  it was a
Me fa in mufic a,  by Signor Monza,  and
under his direction  :  his brother played
the principal violoncello,  with much facility of execution,  but neither in tone or
tafte very pleafing.  The firft violin was
played by Signon Lucchini,  who leads at
the burletta ;  there were two or three
cafirati among the fingers.  A little paltry
organ was eredted on the occafion  ;  there
was a large one in the church,  but it
flood in a gallery,  which was too fmall for
a band  :  the mufic was pretty ;  long and
ingenious introductory fymphonies to each
concento ,  as each part or Civilian of the mafs
is called;  and the whole was in good tafte,
and fpirited ;  but the organ,  hautbois,
and fome of the fiddles being bad,  de-
ftroyed the effedt of feveral things that

were

C 94  ]

were well defigned.  As a principal violin,  Signor Lucchini is not of the firft
clafs ;  there is no want of hand,  but great
want of finifhing :  he had feveral folo
parts given him,  and made three or four
clofes.

The finging,  though in general rather
better than at our oratorios,  was by no
means fo good as we often hear in
England at the Italian opera.  As yet I
had met with no great linger fince my
arrival in Italy.  The firft foprano here
was what we fhould call in England a
pretty good finger,  writh a pretty good
voice  ;  his tafte neither original nor fu-
perior.  The fecond finger,  a contr altoy
had likewife but a moderate portion of
merit;  though his voice was pleafing,
and he never gave offence by the injudicious ufe of it.  But,

“  ’Tis in fong as it  ?tis in painting.

Much may be right,  yet much be wanting.”

However,  fuch a performance as this
fhould not be criticifed too feverely,  for

it

•u

[  95 3

it is heard for nothing.  I fpeak as a
traveller ;  but the people of Italy,  who
contribute fo much to the fupport of the
church,  are furely well entitled to have
thefe treats excellent.

The fecond mafs I heard to-day was
compofed by Battifta San Martini,  and
performed under his diredtion at the church
of theCarmini;  the fymphonies were very
ingenious,  and full of the fpirit and fire
peculiar to that author.  The inftrumental
parts in his compolitions are well written;
heletsnoneof the performers be long idle;
and the violins,  efpecially,  are never fuffer-
ed to fleep.  It might,  however,  fome-
times be wilhed that he would ride his
Pegafus with a curb-bridle ;  for he feems
abfolutely to run away with him.  Without metaphor,  his mufic would pleafe
more if there were fewer notes,  and fewer
.allegros in it :  but the impetuofity of his
genius impels him to run on in a fuccef-
fion of rapid movements,  which in the
end fatigue both the performer and the

8 hearers.

♦

t 96  ]

hearers.  Marchefini,  whom I did not

**  k  .  k*  J  '  •*  «•- -  ‘  •  X  '  -

much like,  fung the firft foprano part  ;
Ciprandi,  an excellent tenor,  who was
in England a few years ago,  and whofe
caft of parts has never fince been fo well
filled,  fung here in a manner far fuperior
to all the reft.  The band was but indifferent;  the firft violin was played by
Zuccherini,  who is reckoned here a good
mufician.  I find performances of this
kind but ill attended,  no people of
fafhion are ever feen at them  ;  the
congregation feems to confift principally
of the clergy,  trades-people,  mechanics,
country clowns,  and beggars,  who are,
for the raoft part,  very inattentive and
reftlefs,  feldom remaining in the church
during the whole performance.  San
Martini is Maejiro dl Capella to half the
churches in Milan,  and the number of
mafles he has compofed is almoft infinite ;
however his fire and invention ftill remain in their utmoft vigour.

At

.  t 97 3  .

At another church vefpers were performed this evening by Monks and Nuns
only ;  I was too late in my attempt to
hear them  :  however I was carried to one
of the largeft accademia of Milan,  where
there were upwards of thirty performers,
and among them feveral good ones,  Madame De fung ;  and though die had a
cold,  which affected her voice,  did feveral things which difcovered her to have
the abilities of a capital finger.  Befides
two fongs of great compafs and execution,
fhe fung an adagio with infinite tafte.
The mailer at the harpfichord was Signor Scotti two or three of Mr.  Bach’s
overtures were played,  and very much
approved ;  and an excellent one of Martini,  with a duet violin concerto of
Raymond,  a German,  very well written,
and,  though difficult,  well performed,  by
two violins of different powers,  but both^
good in their way  ;  one an elderly man,
with great neatnefs and delicacy of tone,
but feeble ;  the other very young,  with a

H force

[  93 3

force and fire which will foon render him
a very great player ;  efpecially as to thefe
requifites he joins expreffion  :  it was an
admirable conteft between age and youth,
judgment and genius.  Thefe were all
virtuoji or profefiors,  the reft of the band
was made up of dilettanti .

Saturday 21.  It did not feem foreign
to my bufinefs in Italy to vifit the Palazzo
SimonettOy a mile or two from Milan,  to
hear the famous echo,  about which travellers have faid fo much,  that I rather
fufpedted exaggeration.  This is not the
place to enter deeply into the doftrine of
reverberation  ;  I  (hall referve the attempt
for another work ;  as to the matter of
fa £t,  this echo is very wonderful.  The
Simonetto palace is near no other building  ,  the country all around is a dead flat,
and no mountains are nearer than thofe of
Swiflerland,  which are upwards of thirty
miles off.  This palace is now uninhabited and in ruin,  but has been pretty ;
the front is open,  and fupported by very

light

¥

[  99  ]

light double Ionic pillars,  but the echo
is only to be heard behind the houfe,
which,  next to the garden has two
wings,

o

Front-

0

1 I 1

— - }

0

c>

- i .  1 1 2 3 r CT

-1

L_ _

Garden.

1.  The bed:  window to make the experiment at.

2.  The beft window to hear the echo
from.

3.  A dead wall with only windows
painted upon it,  from whence the repetitions feem to proceed.

Now,  though it is natural to fuppofe that
the oppofite walls refled:  the found,  it is
not eafy to fay in what manner ;  as the
form of the building is a very common
one,  and no other of the fame conftruc-

H 2 tion,

C 100  ]

lion,  that I have ever heard of,  produces
the fame effects.  I made experiments of
all kinds,  £iid in every fituation,  with the
voice,  flow,  quick ;  with a trumpet,  which
a fervant who was with me founded ;
with a piftol,  and a mufquet,  and always
found agreeable to the dodtrine of echos,
that the more quick and violent the
percufilon of the air,  the more numerous
were the repetitions ;  which,  upon firing
the mufquet,  amounted to upwards of
fifty,  of whish the ftrength feemed regularly to diminifli,  and the diftance to become more remote.  Such a mufical canon
might be contrived for one fine voice here,
according to father Kircher’s method,  as
would have all the effedt of two,  three,
and even four voices.  One blow of a hammer produced a very good imitation of
an ingenious and pradtifed footman’s
knock at a London door,  on a vifiting
night.  A Angle ha !  became a long
horle-laugh;  and a forced note,  or a
found overblown in the trumpet,  became

the

[  Ibl  ]

the moft ridiculous and laughable noife
imaginable.

The compofers to be found in this city
are innumerable.  I was carried to-day to
hear three ladies fing,  who are lifters,
and I found at their houfe Signor Lam-
pugnani,  who is their mailer  :  he lives
conftantly at Milan,  plays the firft harp-
fichord at the opera,  in the abfence of
the compofers,  and puts together the
pajliccios.  Thefe ladies did him great
credit,  by the manner in which they fung
feveral fongs,  duets,  and trios.  One of
them performed a long fcene in the
Olimpiade of Jomelli,  which is extremely
difficult;  the campofition is juftly admired for the boldnefs and learning in the
modulation,  which is recherchee ,  but ex-
preffive and pleafing:  I have procured a
copy of this fcene.  There was at the
fame houfe a good performer on the violin,  Signor Pafqualini,  who accompanied
the fongs with great neatnefs and judgment.

H 3

After

[  *°2  ]

After this I went to the opera-hoiife,
where the audience was very much disappointed;  the firfc tenor,  and only good
finger in it,  being ill.  All his part was
cut out,  and the Barit ono ,  in the character
of a hindering old father,  who was to
abufe his fon violently in the firft fcene
and fong,  finding he had no fon there,
gave a turn to the misfortune,  which diverted the audience very much,  and made
them fubmit to their difappointment with
a better grace than they would have done
in England  ;  for inftead of his fon,  he
fell foul on the prompter,  who here,  as at
the opera in England,  pops his head out

■i.  t  *  —

of a little trap-door on the ftage.  The
audience were fo delighted with this attack upon the prompter,  who is ever regarded as an enemy to their pleafures,
that they encored the fong in which it
was made.  However,  after the fird adt
and the dance,  I came away,  as the lights
at the opera-houfe here affedted my eyes
in a very painful manner ;  and there being

no

[  I03  ]

no retribution for this differing, to-night,

I denied myfelf the reft of the performance.

Sunday 22.  This morning,  after hearing the Ambrofian fervice in ail its perfection,  at the Duomo,  I went to the
Convent of Santa Maria Maddalena ;  I
heard feveral motets performed by the
nuns;  it was their feaft-day.  The com-
pofition was by Signor B.  S.  Martini,
who is Maejlro di Capella ,  and teaches to
fing at this convent.  He made me ample
amends for the want of flow movements
in his mafs on Friday,  by an adagio in
the motet of to-day,  which was truly divine,  and divinely fung by one of the
fillers,  accompanied,  on the organ only,
by another.  It was by far the bed fing-
ing,  in every refpedt,  I had heard fince
my arrival in Italy ;  where there is fo
much,  that one foon grows faftidious.
At my firft coming I both hungered and
thirfled after mufic,  but I now had had

H 4 almoft

[  io4  ]

V

almoft my fill ;  and we are more feverc
critics upon-  a full ftomach,  than with a
good appetite.  Several of the nuns fung,
fome but indifferently,  but one of them
had an excellent voice ;  full,  rich,  fweet,

and flexible,  with a true fhake,  and ex-

«

quifite expreffion  ;  it was delightful,  and
left nothing to wifh,  but duration  !

There is a general complaint in England againft loud accompaniments  ;  and
if an evil there,  it is doubly fuch in Italy,
In the opera-houfe nothing but the in-
ftruments can be heard,  unlefs when the
baritoni or bafe voices fing,  who can contend with them;  nothing but noife can
be heard through noife ;  a delicate voice
is fuffocated  :  it feems to me as if the
orcheftra not only played too loud,  but
had too much to do.

Befides the organ in this convent for
the choruffes,  there was an organ and

harpfichord together,  which was likewife

&  *  *■

played by one of the nuns ;  and the accompaniment of that inftrument alone

with

C i°5 3

with the heavenly voice abovementioned,
pleafed me beyond defcription,  and not fo
much by what it did,  as by what it did
not do ;  furely one cannot hear too much
of fuch a mellifluous voice.  All the jargon of different parts,  of laboured contrivance,  and difficult execution,  is little
better than an ugly mafk upon a beautiful face ;  even harmony itfelf,  upon fuch
occafions is an evil,  when it becomes a
fovereign inftead of a fubjedh I know
this is not fpeaking like a mujician ,  but I
fhall always give up the profejjion ,  when
it inclines to pedantry ;  and give way to
my feelings,  when they feem to have
reafon on their fide.  If a voice be coarfe,
or otherwife difpleafing,  the lefs it is
heard the better,  and then tumultuous
accompaniments and artful contrivances
may have their ufe  ;  but a Angle note
from fuch a voice as that I heard this
morning,  penetrates deeper into the foul,
than the fame note from the mofi per-
fe£t inftrument upon earth can do,  which.

at

[  io6  ]

at beft,  is but an imitation of the human
voice.

The mufic this morning was entirely
performed by the nuns themfelves,  who
were invifible to the congregation  ;  and
though the church of the convent is open
to the public,  like a common parifh
church,  in which the priefls are in fight,
as elfewhere,  yet the refponfes are made
behind the altar,  where the organ is
placed.  I looked in vain for that and the
fingers,  upon my firft entrance into the
church,  without knowing it belonged to
a convent.  Upon my prailing this fing-
ing,  I was told that there were feveral
convents here in which the nuns fing
much better.  Of this 1 muft own I was
in doubt;  I could only fay I fhould be
very glad to hear them.  Ana I was fo
pleafed with this finging,  that though I
dined with a private family,  in a very fo-
ciable and agreeable way,  I ran from the
company ere the fecond courfe was
ferved,  in hopes of hearing more of it at

the

{  107  ]

the fame convent  ;  and was fo fortunate
as to enter it juft as the fervice was begun,  and heard the fame motet repeated
again by the fame nun,  and with double
delight.

The ballad-fingers at Milan fing duets
in the ftreets,  fometimes with,  and fome-
times without inftruments,  and keep very
firm to their parts  ;  but I did not perceive that they mount a ftage here as at
Turin.

At night,  the firft tenor of the bur-
letta continuing to be ill,  there was an
accademia at the theatre,  inftead of an
opera.  The fingers were the fame that I
had heard before ;  they were placed on
the ftage in much the fame manner as at
the annual performance in London for
the benefit of decayed muficians  :  they
fat at tables,  two and two,  and when they
fung,  each got up,  and advanced towards
the audience.  There were feveral opera
overtures performed,  but no folos;  inftead
of them there were dances between the

ads

<5

[  io8 j

*  acts of the concert.  On the ftage,  behind
the fingers,  which were fix,  there flood
fix fervants the whole time.  The Bag -
tioni appeared to more advantage to-night
than in the opera,  efpecially Clementina,
who,  in a lefs theatre,  would be a very
agreeable finger ;  in this all voices are
loft.

Monday 23.  This morning I went early
with father Moiana,  a very agreeable
Dominican,  to the Ambrofian Library,
and with fome difficulty got a fight of
two or three very ancient manufcripts relative to my purpofe,  and of the pompous edition of the fervices performed at
the Duomo,  printed in four vaft volumes
in folio,  1619,  for the ufe of that church
only.  The printing is very neat,  upon
wood,  but without bars,  and confequent-
]y not in fcore,  though the parts are all
in fight,  upon oppofite pages  ;  foprano and
tenor on the firft,  and alto and bajfo on
the fecond page  :  I made feveral extracts

from

[  i°9  ]

from all thefe.  Signor Oltrocchi,  the
librarian,  began to be more communicative than at firft.  One of the mofl ancient books he fhewed me this morning,
was a beautiful manufeript of the ninth
century,  and well preferved.  It is a mif-
fal,  written before the time of Guido,  at
lead two hundred years,  and confequent-
ly before the lines ufed by that monk
were invented.  The notes are little more
than accents of different kinds put over
the hymns I met with a noble and
learned churchman here,  Dan Triulzi,  a
perfon very much in years,  who had
ftudied thefe characters,  and had formed
fome ingenious conjectures about them.

The reft of this day was fpent in queft
of old books,  and the evening in hearing

mufic,  Chiefaand Monza feem,  and are

-  *  \  *

faid to be the two beft compofers for the
ftage here at prefent.  Serbelloni,  a con-
tralto caJiratOy who was in England fome

*  A fpecimen of this notation will be given in
the General Hiftory of Muiic.

8

years

[  110  ]

years ago,  has had a difpenfation to become a prieft,  and now only lings in the
church.

Tuefday 24.  This morning a Solemn
proceffion palled through the lireets to
the church of St.  Ambrofe for rain,  on
which account the public library was not
open,  which was a great disappointment
to me,  being the laft day I had to flay
here ;  but by this time my letters had procured me the notice and countenance of
his Excellency Count Permian ,  the Conte
Po ,  il Mar chef e Menafoglio ,  D.  Franc efco
Carcano ,  the Abate Bonel/i,  and others ;
which operated like magic in opening
doors and removing difficulties ;  and upon
my prefenting myfelf at the Ambrofian
Library with the Abate Bonelli>  it was in-
ftantly opened;  and,  indeed,  for the firll
time,  all its treafures ;  the moll:  curious
MSS.  were now difplayed  ;  among which
were feveral books of Petrarca’s and Leonardo da Vinci's own hand-writing.  I

7

was

L 1 1 1  ]

was likewife fhewn feveral very ancient
MSS.  upon papyrus ,  well preferved.  In
fhort,  I was made ample amends this
morning for former difappointmentsv being carried into a room containing nothing but MSS.  to the amount of fifteen
thoufand volumes.

From hence the Abate carried me to
Padre Sacchi ,  a learned mufician here,  as
to theory ,  he has publifhed two very curious books,  relative to mufic,  which I had
before purchafed.-  He received me very
courteoufly,  and we entered deeply into
converfation on the fubjedt of them and
of my journey.  Fie was fo obliging as to
write down my direction,  and gave me
great encouragement to write to him,  if
on reading his books I met with any
difficulties.

BRESCIA.

Phurfday ,  July 26.  I was only one day
in this town,  but,  it happening to be a
holiday,  I had the good fortune to hear a
boy,  at the church of the Jefuits delle

Grazie ,

I  "2  ]

Grazie,  whofe voice and volubility pleafed
me much.  His name is Carlo Mofchetti,
a fcholar of Pietro Pellegrino,  Maejira di
Gapella of this church,  who beat the
time during the performance of his motet.  This cajirato is not above fourteen
or fifteen.  He has a compafs of two
odtaves complete,  from the middle C in
the fcale to the higheft.  His voice is full,
when he has time to throw it out ;  and
he executes fwift paflages with fuch facility,  that he is apt to be lavifh and run
riot,  and now*  and then is not exa&ly in
tune.  But there feems to be good fluff
for a mafter to work upon ;  his fhake is
good,  and he promifes to be a great
finger.  There was a young counter tenor,
of whom little is to be faid ;  a tenor,
lefs ;  and a bafe that drove me out of
the church.

At a kind of Magdalen Hofpital in this
place,  the women were finging and playing moft furioufly ;  the mufic was in the
old ftile,  full of fugues upon hackneyed

fubjeds

r 113 J

fubiedts.  Thcfe females do the whol£
bufinefs,  upon fuch occafions,  them-
felvesj play the organ,  violins,  and bafes :
the performance indeed was fo cOarfe,
that I had foon enough of it.  I heard
no organs in this town that feemed to be
well toned,  but then they are much ornamented,  arid,  like the French opera,
more calculated to pleafe the eye than
the ear.  The pipes here are never gilt,
though fometimes the frame and cafe are*
and have not a bad effedt.

The theatre at Brefcia is very fplendid,
but it is much lefs than that at Milan,
with refpedt to length  ;  the height is the
fame.  The proportion of boxes round
each theatre is as one hundred to thirty-
four i there are five rows in each,  fo that
this houfe feems much higher than that
at Milan.  The boxes are more orna-  .
mented with glafles,  paintings,  front-
cloths of velvet,  or rich lilks fringed ;
more room is allowed here in the pit,  to
each auditor,  than at Milan  ;  every feat

I turns

[  ”4  ]

turns up,  and is locked till the perfon
comes wha has taken it  >  and here every
row,  and every box of each row,  is numbered,  as in our playhoufes,  when the
pit and boxes are laid together.  The
comedy was II Saggio Amico ,  the Prudent
Friend,  written by Goldoni y it was the
firfl:  I had ever feen in Italy without a
Harlequin,  Colombine,  Pierro,  and Dot-
tore  :  it was more like a regular comedy
than the Italian pieces ufually are.  There
was a Milordo Inglefe in it,  who gave away
his zechins by handfuls,  with which the
audience was very much pleafed.  Some
of the adtors came on with candles in
their  .hands y it never ftruck me before*
but,  on the Engliih and French ftage*
where this is not pradtifed,  probability
fuffers when the tranfadlions of the piece
are fuppofed to happen in the night.

Here was a burletta in run,  under the
diredtion of Signor Leopoldo Maria
Scherli,  Maejlra di Capella ;  the fingers
were Giovanni Simoni,  Giufeppe Fran-

i cefehini*

L  "S  ]

cefchini,  Niccola Menichelli,  Angiola
Dotti,  Geltrude Dotti,  Terefa Menichel-
li,  Terefa Monti,  but,  for my misfortune,
they did not perform while I was at
Brefcia.

At the fi gn of the Gambero Or Lobfter*
where 1 lodged,  and in the next room to
mine,  there was a company of opera
fingers,  who feemed all very jolly  ;  they
were juft come from Ruffia,  where they
had been fourteen or fifteen years.  The
principal finger among them,  I found,
upon enquiry,  to be the Cajirato Luini
Bonetto.  He is fi id to be frill very rich,
though he loft in one night,  at play,  ten
thoufand pounds of the money he had
gained per la fua virtu.  He is a native
of Brefcia ;  was Welcomed home by a
band of mufic,  at the inn,  the night of his
arrival,  and by another the night before
his and my departure,  confifting of two
violins,  a mandoline,  French horn,  trumpet,  and violoncello  ;  and,  though in the
dark,  they played ior/g concertos,  with

I 2 folo

[  1 1 6 J

fok>  parts for the mandoline.  I was fur-
prifed at the memory of thefe performers j
in fhort,  it was excellent Jlreet mufic,
and fuch as we are not accuftomed to ;
but ours is not a climate for ferenades.
The famous Venetian dancer.  La Colon-
na,  was likewife juft arrived from Ruffia,
and in the fame houfe ;  they were all
going to Venice.

V E R O N A,

There was no opera in this city,  fe~
rious or comic,  when I arrived in it,
July 28 however,  I was conduced to
the famous amphitheatre,,  faid to have
been built by Auguftus,  or*  at leaft,
about his time  $.  perhaps by Vitruvius,
who was not only his architect,  but a native of Verona.  The infide has been
lately repaired,  and is entire:  it has forty-
fix rows of feats,  of rough white marble  ;
is of an oval figure,  the greateft diameter
being two hundred and thirty- three feet,

and

I  ”7 3

and lead one hundred and thirty  *  fix  :  the
inhabitants fay that it will contain fixty
thoufand perfons,  which is more than
twice the number at prefent in Verona,
It was here that the people were formerly
amufed with wild hearts*  and upon my
•entrance into it*  I really thought it had
been ftill appropriated to that purpofe,
for the roaring and noife which affaiied
my ears,  feemed to proceed from nothing
human ;  when*  behold,  upon a nearer
approach I found it was only Pantalone
and Brighello,  who had been baited and
beaten by Harlequin ;  indeed this gentleman’s wit had great force to-night,
and,  I believe*  contributed more to the
happinefs of the fpeCtators*  than ever the
elephants,  lions,  or tigers did in former
times.  The comedy*  in which thefe
characters were introduced,  was repre-
fented in all its buffoon perfection  ;  and
I now faw*  for the firft time.  Harlequin,
Brighello ,  Pantalone ,  and Colon:  bina#  in
true Italian purity.  The rtage was ereCt-

I 3 cd

[  m8  ]

ed in the middle of the arena  \  there
were only two boxes,  one on each fide
the ftage  :  the area before the fiage made
£  kind of pit,  where the better fort of
company fat on chairs.  The next beft
places were on the fteps,  about twelve
deep,  railed off from the reft of the fteps,
which may be regarded as the upper gallery  ;  but all this in the open air,  and
the feats the naked marble.  Here is a

y  '  '  *  '  ’  -4  -  w  * •  • .  *

modern theatre,  but that is only ufed
in the winter for the opera  %

VICENZA,

*

There was neither opera nor comedy
at this place when I pafled through it,
nor fhould I have mentioned this city in

*  The fhort fpace of time I ftaid at Verona,
was not fufficient for many midical enquiries  ;  but
I was afterwards informed by an Englifh gentleman,  who had refided feveral years in that city,
that it contains,  befides feveral able profefTors,  a
great number of dilettanti ,  who both perform and
compofe in a fuperior manner.

my

[  IJ9  ]

my journal,  had I not been entertained*
during dinner,  with a kind of vocal
rnufic which I had not before heard in
Italy :  it confided of a pfalm,  in three
parts,  performed by boys of different
ages,  who were proceeding from their
fchool to the cathedral,  in procefiion,
with their mailer,  a pried,  at their head,
who fung the bafe.  There was more
melody than ufual in this kind of mufic  ;
and though they marched through the
ftreet very fail:,  yet they fung*  very well
in time and tune.  Thefe boys are a kind
of religious prefs-gang ,  who feize all
other boys they can find in their way to
the church,  in order to be cateehifed.

In coming from Verona to this city,  I
overtook a great number of pilgrims,
young men,  who were going to Venice
to vifit the tomb of St.  Francis ;  they ufed
to go to Loretto once a year,  but the fenate
has forbidden them to go out of the V ene-
tian territories.  Several of them marched
in large companies,  and fung,  or rather

I 4 chanted.

[  120  ]

chanted,  hymns and pfalms in canto

fermo .

PADUA.

This city has been rendered no lefs
famous,  of late years,  by the refidence of
Tartini,  the celebrated compofer and performer on the violin,  than in ancient
times,  by having given birth to the great
hiftorian Livy.  But Tartini died a few
months before my arrival here,  an event
which I regarded as a particular misfortune to myfelf,  as well as a lofs to the
whole mufical world ;  for he was a pro-
feffor,  whom I was not more defirous to
hear perform,  than ambitious to converfe
with.  I vifited the ftreet and houfe where
he had lived  ;  the church and grave where
he was buried ;  his buft,  his fucceffor,  his
executor,  and every thing,  however minute and trivial,  which could afford me
the leaft intelligence concerning his life
and character,  with the zeal of a pilgrim
at Mecca  :  and though,  lince his death,

all

[  I*1  ]

all thefe particulars are become hiftori-
cal,  and hardly belong to th q prefent Jlate
of mufic ;  yet I Ihould be inclined to
prefent the reader with a iketch of his
life,  if my books and papers collected in
the Venetian ftate,  among which are the
materials I acquired at Padua concerning
Tartini,  were arrived.  As it is,  I fliali
only fay,  that he was born at Pirano,  in
Iftria,  in 1692 3 that,  in his early youth,
having manifefted an attachment to a
young perfon,  who '  was regarded as unworthy of being allied to his family,  his
father lhut him up 3 and during his confinement he amufed himfelf with mufical
inftruments,  in order to divert his melancholy 3 fo that it was by mere accident
he difcovered in himfelf the feeds of thofe
talents which afterwards grew into fo
much eminence.

M,  de la Lande fays he had from his
own mouth the following Angular anecdote,  which fhews to what degree his
imagination was inflamed by the genius

of

I l22  ]

of compofition.  “  He dreamed one
“  night,  in 1713,  that he had made a
*c compact with the Devil,  who promifed
“  to be at his fervice on all occafions ;
cc and during this vifion every thing
*c fucceeded according to his mind ;  his
14 wifhes were prevented,  and his defires
iC always furpaflfed by the affiftance of
“  his new fervant.  In fhort,  he imagined
“  he gave the Devil his violin,  in order
44 to difcover what kind of a mufician he
44 was  ;  when,  to his great aftonifhment,
44 he heard him play a folo fo Angularly
44 beautiful,  and executed with fuch fu-
44 perior tafte and precifion,  that it fur-
**  pafled all he had ever heard or con-
44 ceived in his life.  So great was his
41 furprife,  and fo exquifite his delight
44 upon this occafion,  that it deprived
4f him of the power of breathing.  He
4 4 awoke with the violence of this fenfa-
44 tion,  and inftantly feized his fiddle,  in
44 hopes of expreffing what he had juft
“  heard,  but in vain  $  he,  however,  then

a

com-

[  I23 1

“  compofed a piece,  which is perhaps,
“  the belt of all his works,  (he called it
“  the Devil’s Sonata)  but it was fo in-

«  ferior to what his fleep had produced,

♦  _

**  that he declared he Ihould have broken
his inftrument,  and abandoned mufic
for ever,  if he could have fubfifted by
“  any other  .means.”  *

He married early a wife of the Xan-
tippe fort,  and his patience upon the moll
trying occafions was always truly Socra-
tip.  He had no other children than his
fcholars,  of whom his care wasconftantly
paternal.  Nardini,  his firft,  and favourite
pupil,  came from Leghorn to fee him in
his ficknefs,  and attend him in his laft
moments,  with true filial affe&ion and
tendernefs.  During the latter part of his
life he played but little,  except at the
church of St.  Anthony of Padua,  to
which he had devoted himfelf fo early as
the year 1722,  where,  though he had a
falary of four hundred ducats a year,  yet
his attendance was only required on great

fefti-

*  Voyage  (Tun Francois,  Tom.  8.

[  124  ]

feftivals j but fo ftrong was his zeal for the
fervice of his patron faint,  that he feldom
let a week pafs without regaling him to  •
the utmoft power of his palfied nerves.

He died univerfally regretted by the
Patavinians,  who had long been amufed
by his talents,  and edified by his piety
and good works.  To his Excellency
Count Torre Taxis of Venice,  his fcholar
and protedtor,  he bequeathed his MS.
raufic ;  and to the profeflor Padre Colombo ,  who had long been his friend and
counfellor,  he left the care of a pofthu-
mous work,  of which,  though chiefly mathematical,  the theory of found makes a
confiderable part  *.

There was a public function performed
for him at Padua,  March 31,  1770,  at
which a funeral oration was pronounced
by the Abate Francefco Fanzago ,  and an
anthem performed,  which was compofed

*  In this work he propofed to remove the ob-
fcurity,  and explain the difficulties of which he is
accufed in his former Treatifes,

on

t  ,25 3

©n the occafion by Signor P.  Maeftro-
Valloti.

His merit,  both as a compofer and
performer,  is too well known to need a
panegyric here  :  I fhall only fay,  that as
a compofer,  he was one of the few original geniufles of this age,  who conftantly
drew from his own fource ;  that his melody was full of fire and fancy,  and his
harmony,  though learned,  yet fimple and
pure ;  and as a performer,  that his flow
movements evince his tafte and expref-
fion,  and his lively ones his great hand.
He was the firfl:  who knew and taught
the power of the bow ;  and his knowledge of the finger-board is proved by a
thoufand beautiful pafiages,  to which that
alone could give birth.  His fcholar,
Nardini,  who played to me many of his
befl:  folos,  as I thought,  very well,  with
refpedt to eorrectnefs and exprefiion,  af-
fured me that his dear and honoured
mafter,  as he conflantly called him,  was
as much fuperior to himfelf,  in the performance

i

t  *26 5

formance of the fame folos,  both in the
pathetic and brilliant parts,  as he was to
any one of his fcholars.

With regard to the complaint made by
common readers,  of obfcurity in his
Treatife of Mulid,  and the abtrfe of mathematics,  of which he is accufed by men  ,
of fcience,  they are points which this is
not the place to difcufs.  Perhaps a more
exadt charadier of this work cannot be
given than that of M.  Rouffeau,  who fays,

“  If the Syftem of the celebrated Tar-
**  tini is not that of nature,  it is at leaft
“  that of which the principles are the mod
€<  Ample,  and from which all the laws
€C of harmony feem to arife in a ftfs ar-
i€  bitrary manner,  than in any other
€i which has been hitherto publifhed
That his Syflem is full of new and in*
genious ideas,  which could only arife

V

*  Since this Journal was prepared for the prefs,
a book has been published under the title of Principles and Power cf Harmony  ;  from which I have
received the higheft pleafure that an elegant,  clear,
and maflerly performance can give*  Who the author
*7 is

[  127  ]

from a fuperior knowledge in his art,
may be difcovered through its veil
of obfcurityj and his friend Padre Co*
lombo accounted to me for that obfcurity
and appearance of want of true fcience,
by confeffing that Tartini,  with all the
parade of figures,  and folutions of problems,  was no mathematician,  and that he
did not underftand common arithmetic
well.  However,  he faw more than he
could exprefs by terms or principles borrowed from any other fcience’>  and though
neither a geometrician or an algebraift,  he
had a facility and method of calculating peculiar to himfelf,  by which,  as he could fa-
tisfy his own mind,  he fuppofed he could
inftrudi others.  The truth is,  that,  with
refpeft to the myfteries of the fcience,
which he feems to have known intuitively,
he is fometimes intelligible,  and fome-
times otherwife ;  but I have fuch an
opinion of Tartini’s penetration and faga-

is I know not,  but he feems perfectly to underftand
Tartini’s principles,  and to have done juiliee to his
genius,  without being partial to his defers.

city

C 1 28  ]

city in his mufical enquiries,  that when
he is obfcure,  I fuppofe it to be occafioned
cither by his aiming too much at concifc-
nefs in explaining himfelf,  by the infuffi-
ciency of common language to exprefs uncommon ideas,  or that he foars above the
reach of my conceptions ,  and in this
cafe I am ready to apply to him what

Socrates faid to Euripides,  upon being
.  afleed by that poet how he liked the
writings of Heraclitus — “  What I under-
*'  ftand is excellent,  which inclines me
“  to believe that what I do not under-
4t ftand is excellent likewife.”

He is fucceeded in the church of St.
jAntonio by his fcholar.  Signor Guglietto
Tromba,  a young man of merit.

On my arrival at Padua I was extremely defirous of feeing the famous church
of Saint Antonio,  as well as of hearing
the fervice performed in it ;  and,  fup-
pofing my Reader to be pofleffed of a
fmall portion of my impatience,  I fhall
haften to give him a fliort defeription of  *

this

t  '*9  ]

this fabrick,  and an account of its mufi-
cal eftablifhments.

It is a large old Gothic building,  and
is called here,  by way of excellence,  il
Santo ,  the Saint.  It has fix domes or
cupolas,  of which the two largeft com-
pofe the nave ;  but though it is only the
fecond church in rank,  it is the firft in
fame and veneration at Padua.  It is extremely rich,  and fo much ornamented,
as to appear crowded with paintings and
fculpture.  At the entrance into the  .
choir the majeftic appearance of four im-
menfe organs is very ftriking,  of which
the front pipes are fo highly polifhed
as to have the appearance of burnifhed
filver  :  the frames too are richly carved
and gilt.  Thefe four organs are all
alike ;  there are no pannels to the frames,
but the pipes are feen on three fides of a
fquare.

There are on common days forty per«
formers employed in the fervice of this
church ;  eight violins,  four violetti or

K tenors,

L  *3°  ]

.tenors,  four violoncellos,  four double
bafes,  and four wind inftruments,  with
fixteen voices.  There are eight cajirati
in falary,  among whom is Signor Gaetano
Guadagni,  who,  for tafte,  expreffion,  figure,  and adion,  is at the head of his
profeffion.  His appointment is four hundred ducats a year,  for which he is required to attend only at the four principal
feftivals.  The firft:  violin has the fame
falary.  The fecond foprano ,  Signor Ca-
fati,  has a feeble voice,  but is reckoned
to fing with infinite tafte and expreffion.
The famous Antonio Vandini is the principal violoncello,  and Matteo Biffioli
Brefciano the firft hautbois in this feled
band.

Signor Francefco Antonio Valloti,  the
Maejiro di Capella ,  is a native of Piedmont  *
Dr.Marfili,  the worthy profeffor of botany
here,  to whofe friendly offices,  during my
ftay at Padua,  I have innumerable obligations,  did me the favour to introduce me
to this eminent mafter.  He is efteemed

one

[  *3*  ]

one of the firft compofers for the church
in Italy;  and in the frequent conventions I had with him,  I found him to be
a good theorift as well as practical muii-
cian  *.  He is a churchman,  of the order
of St.  Francis,  near feventy years of age
is in poffeffion of feveral fcarce and valuable books on the fubjeCt of muhc,  from
which he permitted me to make extracts  :  and was fo obliging as to fhew
me two large book-cafes filled with the
fcores of his own compofitions ;  fome for
voices only,  and fome for voices and in-
ftruments,  among which is the funeral
anthem for Tartini ;  I obtained copies of

feveral of thefe.  He likewife communi-

■

cated to me part of a treatife of his own
writing,  in MS.  upon modulation ;  which,
as it is lefs metaphyfical,  and has lefs of

*  Tartini fpeaks of Padre Valloti in the following
manner,  “  He was formerly a moft excellent per-
<c former on the organ,  as he is now a moft excel-
“  lent compofer,  and thorough malfer of his art/*
Trattato di Mufica ,  p.  ioo — Padova 1754.

K 2 mathematics

[  X32  ]  •

mathematics in it than Tartini’s Treatife*
fo it is more clear,  and fee mg more likely
to be generally ufeful,  if it fhould be
publifhed.

Iwas forry,  upon leaving Padua,  to quit
this good father,  who is of fo amiable a
character,  that it is irnpoffible to know
and not efteem him.  He promifed me
two of his maffes in fcore,  as foon as they
could be tranfcribed  *,  and preffed me to
fend him a copy of my book when publifhed  ;  he read my plan with great attention,  and over-rated it fo far as to fay it
was a public concern to Italy.

The theatre of Padua is handforne and
convenient ;  it is approached by two magnificent flone flair-cafes,  and its form is
nearly oval.  There are in it five rows of
boxes,  twenty-nine in each,  which would
perhaps be more pleaiing to the eye if
they did not projed one over the other.

*  Since my arrival in England I have received
advice of his having fent them to Venice,  in order
to be forwarded to England,

The

0

[  J33  ]

The pit contains one hundred and fifty
feats,  which turn up,  and have padlocks
fixed to them  ;  the boxes have Hiding
fhutters.  Between the grand efcaliers
and the theatre is a room for play,  called
Camera di Ridotto.  In June there was a
ferious opera in it,  during the fair of St.
Anthony;  at that time Padua is very gay,
and full of company from Venice and the
neighbouring cities.  The compofer was
Signor Sacchini,  a Neapolitan,  who is
Mailer to the Gonfervatorio of the Ofpida -
let to at Venice.  The firfl woman was
Camilla Mattei,  filler to Colomba Mattel,
who was in England eight or nine years
ago ;  and the two principal men were
Signor Potenza,  who was in England at
the fame time as Colomba Mattei,  and a
famous tenor,  il Cavalier Guglielmi Ettori ,
in the fervice of the Elector of Bavaria,  who was more applauded than all the
red.  The two principal dancers were
M.  Pic,  and Signora Binetti ;  the fubject
of the opera,  Scipio in Carthage.

K 3  ‘Thurfday ,

[  134  ]

t

Thurfday ,  Augujl 2.  This morning I
had the honour,  in company with Dr.
Marfili,  to breakfaft with the ProfelTor
of Mathematics,  Padre Colombo ,  with
whom I had a long converfation relative
to Tartini and his pofthumous work,
mentioned above.

From hence I went to St.  Anthony’s
.church,  where,  it being the Day of Pardons,
there was a mafs,  with folo verfes of Padre
Vallotis compofition,  who was there to beat
the time but the two principal fingers.
Signor Guadagni,  and Signor Cafati,  being
abfent,  little remains to be faid of the
execution of this mufic,  as far as the
vocal was concerned ;  the writing,  however,  was good,  the harmony pure,  the
modulation mafterly,  and the ftile grave
and fuitable to the church.  But I found
that two of the four organs were more
than fufficient to over-power the voices  ;
and Padre V allot i told me that the noife
tifed to be ftill more intolerable,  but
that he had reduced/by one at a time,  the

four

[  ^35  ]

four organs,  which were formerly played
all at once,  to two.  The whole four
never play now but for the common fer-
vice,  when there are no other performers
than the priefts.  The firft organift at
prefent,  'Signor Domenico Locatello,  is
reckoned an able artift*;  but it were to
be wilhed that he and his colleague
would accompany the voices and inftru-
ments,  which are good,  and well worth
hearing,  with the choir organs only,  as
we do in England for,  otherwife,  nothing but the organs can be heard  :  they
are,  indeed,  fine toned inftruments,  butfo
powerful,  as to render all the reft of the
performance ufelefs.

Though it was not a great feftival,  yet
the band was more numerous than ordinary.  I wanted much to hear the celebrated
hautbois Matteo Bifiioli,  and the famous
old Antonio Vandini,  on the violoncello,

*  It is but juftice to fay that I heard him
play the organ alone feveral times during the offer -
toriQy in a very folemn and mafterly manner.

K 4  *  who,

[  r36 1

who,  the Italians fay,  plays and expreffes
a parlare ,  that is,  in fuch a manner as to
Snase his inftrument fpeak>  but neither
had folo parts*  However,  I give thefe
two performers credit for great abilities,
as they are highly extolled by their countrymen,  who mult,  by the frequent hearing of excellent performers of all kinds,
infenfibly become good judges of mufical
merit.  People accufcomed to bad mulic,
may be pleafed with it ;  but thofe,  on the
contrary,  who have been long ufed to good
mufic,  and performers,  cannot .  It is remarkable that Antonio,  and all the other
violoncello players here,  hold the bow in
the old-fafhioned way,  with the hand
under it.  The choir of this church is
immenfe ;  the bafes are all placed on
one fide,  the violins,  hautbois,  French
horns,  and tenors on the other,  and the
voices half in one organ-loft,  and half in
another 5 but,  on account of their diftance
from each other,  the performers were

i

not always exadt in keeping time.

The

[  *37 3

The day before my departure from
Padua,  I vifited Signor Tromba,  Tar-

tini’s fcholar and fucceifor.  He was fo

»

obliging as to play feveral of his mailer’s
folos,  particularly two which he had
made iuit before his death,  of which I
begged a copy,  regarding thefe lail drops
of his pen as facred relics of fo great
and original a genius.

'  \  *y

VENICE.  ■

I had many enquiries to make,  and
had very fanguine expectations from this
city,  with regard to the mufic of pail
times as well as the prefent.  The church
of St.  Marc has had a conflant fupply
of able mailers,  from the time of Adriano,
Zarlino’s predeceffbr,  to Galuppi,  its
prefent worthy compofer.  Venice has
likewife been one of the frit cities in
Europe that has cultivated the muiical
drama or opera  :  and,  in the graver ilile,
it has been honoured with a Lotti and a

Mar-

r 138-  j

Marcello.  Add to thefe advantages the
confervatorios eftablifhed here,  and the
fongs of the Gondohert ,  or Water-men,
which are fo celebrated,  that every mufical
colleftor of taflein Europe is well furnifh-
ed with them,  and it will appear that my
expectations were well grounded.

The firft mufic I heard here was in the
ftreet,  immediately on my arrival,  performed by an itinerant band of two fiddles,  a violoncello,  and a voice,  who,
though as unnoticed here as fmall-coal-
men or oyfter-women in England,  performed fo well,  that in any other country of Europe they would not only have
excited attention,,  but have acquired ap-
plaufe,  which they juftly merited.  Thefe
two violins played difficult paffages very
neatly,  the bafe flopped well in tune,
and the voice,  which was a woman’s,
was well toned,  and had feveral effentials
belonging to that of a good finger,  fuch as
compafs,  fhake,  and volubility;  but I fhall
not mention all the performances of this

kind

I  *39 3

kind which I met with here ;  as they
happened To frequently,  the repetition
would be tirefome.

This city is famous for its confervato -
rios or mufical fchools,  of which it has
four,  the OJpidale della Pietd ,  the Mendicant /,  the Incurabiky and the Ofpidaletto
a S.  Giovanni e Paulo ,  at each of which
there is a performance every Saturday and
Sunday evening,  as well as on great fef-
tivals.  1 went to that of the Pietd ,  the
evening after my arrival,  Saturday,  Au-
guft 4.  The prefent Maejlro di Capella is
Signor Furlanetti,  a prieft,  and the performers,  both vocal and inftru.menta],
are all girls ;  the organ,  violins,  flutes,
violoncellos,  and even French horns,  are
fupplied by thefe females.  It is a kind
of Foundling Hofpital for natural children,  under the protection of feveral
nobles,  citizens,  and merchants,  who,
though the revenue is very great,  yet
contribute annually to its fupport.  Thefe
girls are maintained here till they are

married.

[  14°  1

married,  and all thofe who have talents
for mufic are taught by the bed:  mailers
of Italy.  The compofition and performance I heard to-night did not exceed
mediocrity  ;  among the lingers I could
difcover no remarkable fine voice,  or
performer poiTeffed of great tafte.  However,  the inftruments finilhed with a fym-
phony,  the fird movement of which,  in
point of fpirit,  was well written and
executed.

On Sunday morning,  Augud 5,  I went
to the Greek church,  which has been tolerated here ever fince the time of Leo X.
The fervice is performed in the Greek
language ;  the epiftles and gofpels are
chanted by a high-pried in a pulpit,  and
the prayers and refponfes are fung in a
kind of melody totally different from any
other I had ever heard in or out of the
church.  I11 this there is no organ,  but
it is more crowded with ornaments,  and
its ceremonials are more numerous than
in any of the Romifh churches.

From

[  14*  J

From thence I went to St.  Marc’s,  and
heard a mafs in mulic,  which was lung
by the priefts,  accompanied by the organ
only,  much in the manner of our full anthems.  At St.  Luke’s church I likewife
heard part of a mafs with inftruments ;
fome of the tenor voices here were good,
and the airs written and fung with tafte  $
the mufic was compofed by a prieft.  There
was an excellent fugue in the lad:  chorus,
well worked and well performed.

In the afternoon of the fame day I
went to the hofpital de Me n die anti >  for
orphan girls,  who are taught to ling and
play,  and on Sundays and feftivals they
ling divine fervice in chorus.  Signor
Bertoni is the prefent Maeftro di Capella .
There was a hymn performed with folos
and choruffes,  and a mottetto d voce fola>
which laft was very well performed,  particularly an accompanied recitative,  which
was pronounced with great force and
energy.  Upon the whole,  the compoli-
tions had fome pretty pafiages,  mixed

with

[  142  ]

with others that were not very new.  The
fubjedts of the fugues and choruffes were
trite,  and but  (lightly put together.  The
girls here I thought accompanied the voices
better than at the Pieta  :  as the choruffes
are wholly made up of female voices,
they are never in more than three parts,
often only in two ;  but thefe,  when reinforced by the inftruments,  have fuch
an effedt,  that the full complement to the
chords is not miffed,  and the melody is
much more fenfible and marked,  by being lefs charged with harmony.  In thefe
hofpitals many of the girls fing in the
counter tenor as low as A and G,  which
enables them always to keep below the
foprano and mezzo foprano ,  to which they
fing the bafe ;  and this feems to have
been long pradtifed in Italy,  as may be
feen in the examples of compofition
given in the old WTiters,  fuch as Zarlino,
Glariano,  Kircher,  and others,  where^the.
lowed:  part of three is often written in
-  the counter-tenor clef.

From

[  *43 1

From hence I went to the OJpidaletto ,
of which Signor Sacchini is the mailer,
and was indeed very much pleafed by the
compofition of part of the famous hymn
Salve Regina ,  which was finging when I
entered the church  ;  it was new,  fpirited,
and full of ingenious contrivances for the
inftruments,  which always  /aid fomething
interefting without difturbing the voice.
Upon the whole,  there feemed to be as
much genius in this compofition as in
any I had heard fince my arrival in Italy*
The performers here too are all orphan
girls  ;  one of them,  la Ferrarefe ,  fung very
well,  and had a very extraordinary compafs
of voice,  as fhe was able to reach the hi?h-
eft E of our harpfichords,  upon which
ihe could dwell a confiderable time,  in a
fair,  natural voice.

Even after this,  upon the Piazza di S .

i

Marco ,  I heard a great number of vagrant muficians,  fome in bands,  accompanying one or two voices ;  fometimes a
fingle voice and guitar;  and fometimes

two

i

[  *44  ]

or three guitars together.  Indeed it is
not to be wondered at,  that the ftreet-
mufic here is generally negledted,  as people are almoft ftunned with it at every
corner;  but,  however,  in juftice to the
tafte and difcernment of the Italians,  it
mu ft be allowed,  that when they do admire,  it is fomething excellent ;  and then,
they never  <c damn with faint praife,”  but
exprefs rapture in a manner peculiar to
themfelves  ;  they feern to agonize with
pleafure too great for the aching fenfe.

They had here,  laft Carnival,  feven
opera-houfes open at once,  three ferious,
and four comic,  befides four play-houfes,
and thefe were all crowded every night.

Monday 6.  This morning the Doge
went in proceffion to the church of S.
Giovanni e Paolo .  I was not only curious
to fee this proceftlon,  but to hear the
mufic,  which I expedted would be very
confiderable,  and by a great band  ;  however there was only a mafs fung in four
6 pans.

t i'4 5 3

parts,  without other inflrument than
the organ,  but then it was fo good of the
kind,  fo well executed and accompanied,
that 1 do not remember to have received
more pleafure from fuch mufic.  One of
the organifts of St.  Mark’s church,  who
is in orders,  attended,  and difcovered
himfelf,  in his voluntaries and interludes,
to be a very mafterly performer.  The
voices were well chofen,  and well afforted,
no one ftronger than the other  ;  the com-
pofition was of Signor Lotti,  and was truly
grave and majeftic,  confiding of fugues
and imitations in the ftile of our beft old
church fervices,  which have been fo well
feledted,  and publifhed in fo magnificent a
manner by Dr,  Boyce;  all was clear and
diftindi,  no confufion or unneceffary
hotes ;  it was even capable of exprefiion,
particularly one of the movements,  into
which the performers entered fo well*
that it affedted me even to tears.  The
organifi:  here very judicioufiy differed the
voices to be heard in all their purity,  in-

L fomuch

>  >

£  ]

fbmuch that I frequently forgot that they
were accompanied  ;  upon the whole this
feems to be the true ftile for the church  ;
it calls to memory nothing vulgar,  light,,
or prophane ;  it difpofes the mind to phil-
anthrophy,  and diverts it of its grofs and
fenfual paffions.  Indeed my being moved
was the mere effedfc of well-modulated
and well-meafured founds,  for I knew
not the words,  which were wholly loft
by the diftance ;  nor is this fpecies of
mufic at all favourable to poetry  :  in the
anfwers that are made to the points,  the
feveral parts all ling different words,  fo
that no great effects can be produced by

them ;  but natwithftanding this defedt,

*

fuch mufic as this,  in the fervice of th$
church,  muff ever be allowed to have its
merit,  however it may be exploded,  or
unfit for theatrical purpofes.

In confequence of a mefTage from Mr.
Richie,  Charge des Affaires to his Britan*-
nic Majefty,  to whom Sir James Wright
had honoured me with a letter,  and who

very

/

1 H7  -]

very politely and kindly was pleafed to
intereft himfelf effectually in my fervice,
I was this afternoon favoured with a vifit
from Signor Latilla,  an eminent compofer
here,  and had a long converfation with
him relative to the fubjeCt of my journey,
I found him to be a plain,  fenfible man*
of about fixty years of age,  who had
both read and thought much concerning
the mufic of the ancients,  as well as that
of the moderns,  to which he has contributed a confiderable fhare for many years
part I admired his candour in advifing
me to go to the Incurabili ,  to hear the
girls perform there,  with whom he faid f
fhould be much pleafed.  They are fcho-
lars of Signor Galuppi,  who is Maejiro di
Capella of this Confervatorio.  Unluckily
when I arrived there,  the performance
was begun,  however,  I had only loft the

*  Moft of the ecmic opefas performed in London with fuch fuccefs,  in the time of Perticj and
Lafchi,  were of Latilla’s compofition  $  particularly
La Comedia in Comedia ,  Don Calafcione ,  and others,
He is uncle to Signor Piccini,

h  %

\

#yer*

[  1+8 3

overture,  and part of the firft air.  The
words were taken from three or four of
the Pfalms in Latin,  from the hymn
Salve Regina ,  and one of the Canticles
put into Latin verfe,  and in dialogue.  I
knew not whether I was moft delighted
with the compofition,  or with the execution both were admirable.  Signor Bu-

ranello has preferved all his fire and ima-

*

gination from the chill blafts of Ruffia,
whence he is lately returned This ingenious,  entertaining,  and elegant com-
pofer abounds in novelty,  in fpirit,  and
in delicacy,  and his fcholars did his mafic great juftice.  Several of them had uncommon talents for finging,  particularly
the Rota ,  Pafqua Rojji,  and the Ortolani
the two laft fung the Canticle in dialogue.
The overture,  and the whole of this laft
performance were for two orcheftras.  In
the overture,  which was full of pretty

*  Signor Galuppi is beft known in Italy by the
name of Buranello ,  which he acquired from having
•been born in the little ifland ofBurano,  near Venice,
He is replaced at Peterfburg by Signor Traetta.

[  149 3

priflfages,  the two bands echoed each other.
There were two organs,  and two pair of
French horns.  In fhort,  1 was extremely entertained by this performance,  and
the whole company,  which was very numerous,  feemed equally pleafed.  The
young fingers,  juft mentioned,  are abfo-
lute nightingales ;  they have a facility
of executing difficult divifions equal to
that of birds.  They did fuch things in
that way,  efpecially the Rota ,  as I do not
remember to have heard attempted before.  The able mafter was difcoverable
in all the cadences of thefe young fub-
je&s.  The inftrumental parts were very
well executed,  and the whole indicated a
fuperior genius in the compofer and conductor of the performance.  This mufic,
which was of the higher fort of theatric
ftile,  though it was performed in a
church,  was not mixed with the church
fervice,  and the audience fat the whole
time as at a concert ;  and,  indeed,  this

L 3 might

might be called a concerto fpirituale with
great propriety.

Tnefday 7.  This morning there was  &
mafs in mufic at the church of S.  Gaetano .
It being a great feftival,  all the treafures
and relics were expofed to public view*
and there was a very great crowd*  The
cOmpofer of the mufic*  and the perfon
who beat the time was Signor Menagatto*
a prieft  $  I cannot fay that I received
much pleafure from this performance*
the organ v/as coarfe,  and poorly played  ;
the voices only two indifferent tenors,  and
a bafe,  and the compofition very common,  and unmarked by any ftamp of original genius.

The people here,  at this feafon,  feem
to begin to live only at midnight.  Then
the canals are crowded with gondolas*
and St.  Mark’s fquare with company  $
the banks too of the canals are all peopled,  and harmony prevails in every part.
If two of the common people walk together arm in arm,  they feem to converfe

in fong;  if there is company  ©n the water,
in a gondola,  it is the fame a mere melody,  unaccompanied with a fecond part,
is not to be heard in this city :  all the
ballads in the ftreets are fung in duo.
Luckily for me,  this night,  a barge,  in
which there was an excellent band of
mufic,  confifling of violins,  flutes,  horns,
bafes,  and a kettle-drum,  with apretty good
tenor voice,  was on the great canal,  and
flopped very near the houfe where I
lodged ;  it was a piece of gallantry,  at
the expence of an inamorato in order to
fenerade his miflrefs.  Shakefpeare fays
of nodturnal mufic,

“  Methinks it founds much Tweeter than by day.
Silence beflows the virtue on it— I think
The nightingale,  if fhefhould Ting by day,
lc When every goofe is cackling,  would be thought
<c No better a mufician than the wren,”

Whether the time,  place,  and manner of
performing this mufic,  gave it adventitious and collateral charms,  I will not
pretend to fay ;  all I know is,  that the

L 4 fympho-

[  152 1

fymphonies feemed to me to be admirable,
full of fancy,  full of fire  ;  the paflages
well con trailed  ;  lometimes the graceful,
fometimes the pathetic prevailed ;  and
fometimes,  however ftrange it may be
thought,  even noife and fury had their
efife<ft.  No one will I believe,  at prefent,
deny the necefilty of difcord in the com-
pofition of mufic in parts ;  it feems to be
as much the eflence of mufic,  as  {hade is
of painting not only as it improves and
meliorates conpord by oppofition and
companion,  but,  fiill further,  as it be^
comes a neceflary ftimulus to the attention,  which would languiih over a fqc^
cefiiqn of pure concords.  It occafions a
momentary diftrefs to the ear,  which remains pnfatisfied,  and even uneafy,  till it
hears fomething better ;  for no mufical
phrafe can end upon a difcord,  the ear
muft be fatisfied atlaft.  Now,  as difcord
is allowable,  and even neceflarily oppofed
to concord,  why may not noife ,  or a feem*-
ing jargon,  be oppofed to fixed founds

and

L  *53 1

and harmonical proportion  ?  Some of the
difcords in modern mufic,  unknown  ’till
this century,  are what the ear can but
juft bear,  but have a very good effedt as
to contraft.  The fevere laws of preparing and refolving difcord,  may be too
much adhered to for great effedts  ;  I atn
convinced,  that provided the ear be at
length made amends,  there are few dif-
fonances too ftrong for it.  If,  for in-
ftance,  the five founds c,  d.  e.  f.  g,  are
all ftruck at the fame inftant on the harp-
ftchord,  provided the d and the f are
taken foon oft,  and the three others remain,  the ear will not fuffer much by
the firft fhock.  Or,  ftill further  ;  if,  in^
ftead of the five founds above-mentioned,
the following are ftruck;  c.  d e.  f>&.
g.  and the d and f#  are not held on fo
long as the reft,  all will end to the fatis-
fadtion of the offended ear.

Wednefday 8.  This day was remarkable for no enquiry relative to the present ftate of mufic in Italy ;  however it

deferves

t  *54  ]

deferves mention here,  on account of the
opportunity it afforded me of converfing
with the Abate Martini ,  one of the befl
judges of every part of mufic,  ancient
and modern,  that I had yet met with.
He is an able mathematician,  a compofer,
and performer.  He had travelled into
Greece,  in order to make obfervations in
geography,  agriculture,  and natural hi£
tory,  but being unable to fatisfy himfelf
as he expefted,  his pride was fo hurt by
the difappointment,  that he would not
publifh any of his remarks or difeove-
ries.  Among other curious enquires,  he
made many concerning the mufic of
the modern Greeks,  in hopes it would
throw fome light upon that of the ancient.  He knows,  I believe,  as much as
any one elfe,  about the fyftems of Pythagoras,  Ptolemy,  and the writers collected
by Meibomius,  as well as of Rameau
and Tartini.  He is a great admirer of
the works of Marcello,  and fings by heart
all his cantatas and befi:  melodies.  After

reading

reading my plan,  which we difcuffed ar*
tide by article,  he entered much into my
views  ;  fhewed me his Grecian and other
matiufcript papers,  and I had great reafon
to be fatisfied both with my reception*  and
the information with which he favoured
me.

9 t/t.  I had this afternoon another long
converfation with the fame learned gentleman,  who was fo obliging as to bring
his manufcript papers concerning Greek
mufic,  and to defire my acceptance of
them.  I could not help regarding this

prefent as a valuable acquifition,  for

.  *

though the materials it contained were
toO few for his original purpofe of forming a book,  they appeared likely to be
of importance in the courfe of a work,
in which it is propofed to treat not only
of ancient mufic,  but of the national
mufic of moft parts of the world,  from
whence fpecimens,  or accounts well authenticated can be had.  The Abate has,
however,  collected a fet of apophthegms or

pro-

[  !56 3

proverbs,  which he intends to publifh,
and which will difcover the manners
and mifery of the modern Greeks,  perhaps more effectually than any other
work could do.

There was mufic this evening at the
church of St.  Laurence,  compofed and
directed by Signor Sacchini,  at which,
as it was the vigil of this faint,  there was
a great crowd.  I fuffered,  as well as
every one elfe,  too much by the heat,
perhaps,  to be eafily pleafed,  and the
compofition feemed rather more common
than that I had heard of this ingenious
matter before  $  however,  the vocal parts
were not fo well performed,  as there were
no other lingers than thofe of St.  Mark's
church,  who moft excel in mere church
mufic,  accompanied only by the organ.
The voices were not good enough for
long folo parts,  nor ftrong enough to get
through a large band ;  however there
were many very pleafing and agreeable
movements,  and fome of the chorufles

were

[  I57 3

were well worked in the fugue and oratorio way.  But for this kind of mufic,  that
of Handel will,  I believe,  ever ftand fu-
perior to all other writers ;  at lead:  I have
heard nothing yet on the continent of
equal force and effedt.  There is often
in the compofitions of others,  more melody in the folo parts,  more delicacy,  and
more light and fhade,  but as to harmony
and contrivance,  no one comes near him
by many degrees.  I muft confefs that I
had heard fome of Handel’s mufic fo long,
and often fo ill performed,  that I was
fomewhat tired and difgufted with it ;
but my Italian journey,  inftead of lowering the efteem I ever had for the befl
writings of that truly great ariift,  exalted
them in my opinion,  and at my return
renewed my pleafure in hearing them
performed.  As yet I had heard little
but church mufic in Italy ;  however,  in
that ftile,  with injl?-'umenisy all other compofitions appeared feeble by comparifon.
The fubjedtsof the fugues were,  in gene-

C 158 3

ral,  trivial and common,  and the manner
of working them dry and artlefs.  Indeed
the church ftile,  without injlruments>  except the organ,  was well known in Italy,
and all over Europe,  long before Han*-
del's time ;  and melody is certainly much
refined fince  :  it is more graceful,  more
pathetic,  and even more gay  \  but for
counter-point,  fugues,  and choruffes of
many voices,  with injiruments,  I repeat it,
I neither have heard,  nor do I ever expert
to hear him equalled.

10th.  This morning I went again to
the church of the convent of St.  Laurence,  where,  befides a mafs of Signor
Sacchini's compofition,  I heard Signor
Nazzari,  the firft violin of Venice,  play a
concerto  $  but we have long heard that
inftrument fo well performed upon in
England,  that nothing is left to admire.
However,  Signor Nazzari is certainly a
very neat and pleafing player  ;  his tone is
even,  fweet,  and full ;  he plays with great'
facility and expreffion,  and is,  upon the

whole,

[  *59 3

whole,  the beft folo player I had heard
on this fide the Alps.

Argus is faid to have had an hundred
eyes,  and Fame has been painted by the

poets all tongues  >  in this place one whiles
to be all ears for mufic,  and all eyes for
painting and architecture.  To-day there
were fo many temptations to a lover qf
harmony,  that it was difficult for him to
ehufe >  for,  befides the four confervato-
rios,  there were feveral accademias or private concerts.  I was invited to one*

,  *  *,-j  *  » ■

which aflembles on all feftivals,  in order
to fing the works of Marcello,  without

other accompaniment than a harpfichord*

*  «  ^

and as this was different from any other I
had been at in Italy,  I accepted the invi-
tation,  though I wifhed very much to be
at the Incurabtli%  where I wTas fure of
entertainment from Buranello and his
fcholars.

Several of Marcello’s Pfalms were here
fery well fung by the Abate Martini and
fome other dilettanti ,  among whom one

had

[  160  ]

had a very good bafe voice,  and,  betweert
the Pfalms,  fung Marcello's famous cantata called Caffandra ,  where this com-
poler has entirely facrificed the mufic to
the poetry,  by changing the time or  {tile
of his movement at every new idea which
occurs in the words j this may,  perhaps*
fhew a compofer to be a very fenfible
man*  but at the fame time it muft dif-
cover him to be of a very phlegmatic
turn,  and wholly free from the enthufi-
afm of a creative muiical genius.  And,
indeed,  fince melody has been allied
to grace and fancy,  mufical disjointed
thoughts on various fubje&s,  would
be but ill received by the public.  One
of thefe gentlemen performers was old
enough to remember very well the celebrated Benedetto Marcello,  who has
been dead forty-four years,  and gave me
feveral anecdotes about him  ;  his family,
which is noble,  ftill fubfifts,  and the head
of it is now ambaffador from the Venetian ftate at the Porte,

1 1 th.

i i6i 3  .

I ith.  This afternoon I went again to
the Pieid ;  there was not much company,
&nd the girls played a thoufand tricks in
finging,  particularly in the duets,  where
there was a trial of fkill and of natural
powers,  as who cGitld go higheft,  lo weft,
fwell a note the longeft,  or run divifions
with the greateft:  rapidity.  They always
finijfh with a fymphony;  andlaftWednef-
day they played one by Sarte,  which I
had before heard in England,  at the opera
of the Olimpiade .  The band here is certainly very powerful,  as there are in the
hofpital above a thoufand girls,  and
out of thefe there are feventy muficians,
vocal and inftrumental  ;  at each of the
other three hofpitals there are not above
forty,  as I was informed by Signor L’A-
tilla,  which are chofen out of about a
hundred orphans,  as theorignal eftabliih-
ment requires.  But it has been known
that a child,  with a fine voice,  has been
taken into thefe hofpitals before it was be-*
reaved of father or mother.  Children are

M fome-

[  i6z  ]

fometimes brought hither to be educated
from the towns belonging to the Venetian ftate,  upon the Continent from
Padua,  Verona,  Brefcia,  and even from
other places,  ftill more diftant;  for Fran-
cefca Gabrieli came from Ferrara,  and is
therefore called the Ferrarefe.  The Con-
fervatorio of the Pietd has heretofore been
the mod celebrated for its band,  and the
Mendicanti for voices  ;  but in the voices
time and accident may occafion great alterations  ;  the mafter may give a celebrity
to a fchool of this kind,  both by his com-
pofitions and abilities in teaching ;  and
as to voices,  nature may fometimes be
more kind to the fubjedts of one hofpi-
tal than another ;  but as the number is
greater at the Pietd than at the reft,
and confequently the chances of fupe-
rior qualifications more,  it is natural to
fuppofe that this hofpital will in general
have the beft band and the belt voices.
At prefent,  the great abilities of Signor
Galuppi are confpicuous in the performances

I  ]

ances at the Incurabiliy which is,  in point
of mufic,  finging,  and orcheftra,  in iny
opinion,  luperior to the reft.  Next to
that,  the Ofpidaletto takes place of the
other two j fo that the Piet a feems to
enjoy the reputation of being the beft
fchool,  not for what it does now,  but for
what it has done,  heretofore,

Sunday 12.  This morning,  after hearing high mafs well performed at St*
Mark’s,  I went to the patriarchal church
of St.  Peter,  and heard it again there,
accompanied by a very fine organ,  wTell
played on by one of the priefts ;  after
that I went to the Francifcans’  church*
where one of the Friars like wife was organ ift,  but he played in a very fuperior
manner,  both as to tafte and harmony  :
though I vifited thefe churches for the
fake of mufic,  it was impofiible to keep
my eyes off the pictures and architecture.
But it was here I began to find that thefe
two objeCts of fight were not fo remote
from my chief purpofe of writing a hif-

M 2 tory

[  i.64 1

fory of the pleafures of the ear,  as I at
firft imagined;  fori frequently,  in the
old mailers,  met with reprefentations of
mu heal inftruments,  either of their
'  own times,  or at leaf!  fuch as they
imagined to be in ufe at the time when
the adion of the piece happened ;  thus
I obferved in a famous pidure of the
Marriage of Cana by P.  Veronefe,  in the
Sacrifty of S.  Georgia Maggiore,  a concert,  with a variety of inftruments,  of all
which I have made a memorandum  :  and
I faw this morning,  at the Francifcans,  a
little pidure under the pulpit,  by San
Croce,  which is much admired,  and
thought to be a good deal in the ftile of
Raphael,  in which is a concert of che^
rubs and feraphs  ;  and I obferved among
feveral different kinds of lutes and guitars,  an inftrument played with a bow,
refting,  like a violin,  upon the fhoulder
of the performer,  but it had fix firings.

After I had feen thefe,  and fome more
churches,  I had the honour of a long

con-

[  ««5  ]

converfation with il Conte Torre Taxzs,
who is here a perfon of great weight  *  c,
he is Superintendant-general of the Ger-
man and Venetian poft-office,  was a great
friend of Tartini,  is now in pofleffion of
all his MS.  compofitions,  fhewed me a
great number of them,  and has defended
his friend in a pamphlet,  of which he did
me the honour to give me a copy,
again ft fome remarks made upon his Trat-
tato di Mujica ,  by M.  Roufteau,  in his
DiB.  de Mujique.  This nobleman,  though
young,  feems to poffefs great mufical erudition  ;  to have profited from the converfe
and correfpondence of Tartini,  and to be
an enthufiaft for the arts in general.  I
had great pleafure in his converfation,  in
which I communicated to him my plan
of a Hiftory of Mufic,  and was pleafed
and enlightened by his obfervations.

*  He is of the fame family with that German
prince,  better known in France and England by
the name of Tour Taxis .

"o.  .  M 3

In

'  [  i6$  ]

In the afternoon I Hopped a little while
at the new church of the Jefuati ,  where
I heard the organ played with a very un-
common brilliancy of execution,  by one
of the Dominicans.  It was indeed a
Hile of playing more fuitable to the harp-
lichord than organ,  but,  in its wray,  was
very mafterly and powerful.  There are
feme reed Hops in this mflrument which
I had never heard before,  and with which
the performer produced effefts that I was
unable to account for.  I had not time to
make enquiries,  as I took this church
only in my way to the Incur abili,  where
I was fo pleafed,  both with the compo-
fition and performance,  that in fpeaking
of them I lhall find it difficult to avoid
hyperboles.

It feems as if the genius of Signor
Galuppi,  like that of Titian,  became
more animated by age.  He cannot now
be lefs than feyenty years old,  and yet it is
generally allowed here that his laft operas,
nnd his laft compofitions for the church,

1  '  abound

t 167  ]

abound with more fpirit,  tafte,  and fancy,
than thofe of any other period of his life.
This evening the Latin Pfalms that were
fung by the orphan girls,  gave me great
reafon to concur in the common opinion,
for out of ten or twelve movements,
there was notone that could be pronounced indifferent .  There were feveral admirable,  accompanied recitatives,  and the
whole abounded with new paflages,  with
good tafte,  good harmony,  and good fenfe.
His accompaniments,  in particular,  are always ingenious,  but,  though full,  free
from that kind of confufion which dif-
turbs and covers the voice.  I muft like-
wife do juftice to the orcheftra,  which is
here under the moft exadt difcipline ;  no
one of the inflrumental performers feemed
ambitious of Aiming at the expence of
the vocal part,  but all were under that
kind of fubordination which is requifite
in a fervant to a fuperior .  Of thefe
young fingers I have fpoken rather warmly before,  but in this performance they

M 4 dif-

[  1 68  ]

difcovered ftili new talents and new cultivation.  Their mufic of to-night wa§
rather more grave than that which I had
heard here before,  and I thought they
were more firm in it ;  that their intonations were more exadt,  and,  as more time
was allowed for it,  a greater volume of
voice by the two principal fubjedts was
thrown out.  But in their clofes,  I know
not which aflonifhed me moft,  the com-
pafs of voice,  variety of paffages,  or rapidity of execution indeed all were fuch
as would have merited and received great
applaufe in the firft operas of Europe.
I dwell the longer on thefe performances^

i

as,  at prefent,  the theatres of Venice are
all fhut ;  but the only difference between
this kind of church mufic,  and that of
the drama,  confifcs in the choruffes j
thofe of the church are long,  elaborate,

and fometimes well written.  Thofe who

r  •

fuppofe all the church mufic of Italy to
be as light and airy as that of the opera,
are miflaken ;  it is only on feftiyals that

modern

t 169  ]

jrnodern mufic can be heard in any of the
churches.  The mufic of the cathedrals*
on common days,  is in a ftile as grave
and as ancient as that of our church
fervices of two hundred years ftanding ;
and in the parifh churches it is a mere
canto fermo ,  or chant,  fung in unifon by
the priefts only ;  fometimes with the
organ,  but more frequently without.  If
we compare the mufic of Mr.  Handel’s
firfi:  oratorios with the operas he com-
pofed about the fame time,  it will appear that the airs of the one are often as
gay as thofe of the other.  And as to the
chorufies of an opera,  which are all to be
in action,  and performed by memory*
they muft of courfe be fhorter and lefs laboured than thofe of an oratorio,  where
every finger has his part before him,  and
where a compofer is allowed fufficient
time to difplay his abilities in every fpe-
cies of what is called by muficians good
writing.

From

[  J7°  ]

From the Incur abili I had the honour
to be carried by his Excellency Signor
Murin Giorgi,  to an accademia ,  at the
Cafa Grimani,  where I fird had the
pleafure to hear Signora Baffa,  a noble
Venetian lady.  She has long been reckoned the bed:  performer on the harpfi-
chord of all the ladies of Venice;  and I
found that fhe played very neatly,  and
with much tade and judgment.  The
company confided of the chief nobility
of Venice,  the three perfons I have named
being among the fird clafs.  They did
great juftice in this affembly to the abilities of Mrs.  Caflandra Wynn,  from England,  who was there lad year,  and had
left behind her the character of a very
great player.

*Tuefday 14.  This evening being the
vigil of the Affumption,  there were mu-
fical performances at three different
churches.  I went fird to that of the
Celejiia ;  the vefpers were compofed and
directed by the Maejlro of the Pieta,

Signor

C  *7*  3

Signor Furlanetto ;  there were two or-
chefiras,  both well filled with vocal and
inftrumental performers  :  the overture
was fpirited,  and the firft chorus good,
in Contra Funto ;  then there was a long
fymphony in dialogue,  between the two
orcheftras,  and an air well accompanied,
though but indifferently fung.  Aftef
this an air in dialogue with the chorus,
which had a good  .effedt :  an air for a
tenor voice,  of little merit,  and one for a
bafe,  which was ingenioufly put together,
making ufe by turns of all the principal in-
ftruments :  I did not day out the wholeper^-
formance,  but what I heard feemedfuperior
to any compofition that I had before met
with of this author;  he availed himfelf
of the two orcheftras,  and produced fe-
veral effedts wrhich,  with one,  would have
been impracticable.

From hence I went to the Ofpidaletto>
where the mufic and muficians fpoke a
different language.  The performance was
a Latin oratorio ;  Machabaorum Mater ;

the

[  *72  ]

the mufic was by Signor Sacchini;  there
were fix chara&ers in it,  the principal was
performed by Francefca Gabrieli :  it was
divided into two parts;  the firft was
over before I arrived,  for which I was
very forry,  as^wh&  remained delighted
me j£&tremely,  both as to the compofi-
flbn,  which was excellent,  and the fing-
ing which had infinite merit.  When
I entered the church the Ferrarefe was
fpeaking an admirable accompanied recitative in fuch a manner as is feldom
heard ;  it was terminated by a Bravura
air,  with a pathetic fecond part in Jo-
melli’s oratorio ftyle,  but by no means
in his paflages ;  there was then a recitative and flow air by Laura Conti,  who is
poflefled of no great power of voice ;  it
is a mere voce di Camera ;  but  {he has infinite exprefiion and tafte,  and charmed

»

me in a different way  :  then followed another recitative,  and after it a duet,  which
was truly fublime ;  it was extremely
well executed by Domenica Pafquati and

Ippolita

[  173 1

Ippolita Santi;  upon the whole.  Signor
Sacchini rifes in my opinion,  and according to my feelings and intelligence he is
the fecond in Venice,  having no fuperior
there but Signor Galuppi.  The finging
I heard at this hofpital to-night would,
as well as that of the Mendicant! ,  I am
certain,  receive great applaufe in the firft
opera of Europe.

Wednesday 15.  I went this morning to
St.  Mark’s church,  at which,  being a
feftival,  the doge was prefent.  I there
heard high mafs performed under the
direction of Signor Galuppi,  compofer of
the mufic.  Upon this occafion there
were fix orcheftras,  two great ones in the
galleries of the two principal organs,  and
four lefs,  two on a fide,  in which there
were like wife fmall organs.  I was
placed very advantageoufly in one of the
great organ lofts,  with Signor L’Atilla,
afiiftant to Signor Galuppi The mu-

*  This inftrument has pedals,  and but one row
©f box keys.

'  ‘  ■  .  fie.

[  m  ]

fic,  which was in general full and grave,
had a great effect,  though this church is
not very happily formed for mufic,  as it
has five domes or cupolas,  by which the
found is too much broken and reverberated before it reaches the ear.

From hence I went again to the Celejiia ,
which church was very much crowded.
The mafs was fet to mufic by Signor
Furlanetto,  m after to the Pieta  :  the re-
fources of this compofer are very few;  he
has little fire and lefs variety,  but he fins
more on the fide of genius than learning,
as his harmony is good,  and modulation
regular and warrantable  $  but I muft own,
that his mufic is to me tirefome,  and
leaves behind it a languor and diffatif-
faftion y whereas that of Signor Galuppi
and Sacchini always exhilerates and enlivens.  Signor Nazari played here a
concerto on the violin in a very neat and
pleafing manner.  I know not of whofe
compofition,  but it was by no means
remarkable for novelty.  After dinner I

went

C  *75 3

went to the church of Santa Maria Mag-
giore to fee fome pictures,  and ftumbled
on mufic,  but fuch mufic as I did not
think it poffible for the people of Italy to
bear.  The organ was out of tune,  other
inftruments out of time,  and the voices
were both ;  then the compofition feemed
juft fuch fluff as a boy who was learning
counter-point would produce after the
firft two or three leffons.  After I had
feen the two beft pictures in the
church,  the famous St.  John the Baptift,
by Titian,  and Noah’s ark by Giacomo

i

Baffano,  I ran away from this mufic to
the Incur abili,  where Buranello’s nightingales,  the Rota,  and Pafqua Rofli,  poured
balm into my wounded ears.  There was
not much company,  and the girls did not
exert themfelves ;  however,  after what I
had juft heard,  their performance was
ravifhing ;  and it was not without regret
that I reflected upon this being the laji
time I fhould hear it.

4

T’hurfday

[  ]

Ikurfday 16.  My vifit to Signor Ga^
luppi this morning was long,  profitable,’
and entertaining,  I was very glad to
find upon feeing him,  that time had
fpared the perfon as well as genius of
this excellent compofer.  He is ftill lively and alert,  and likely to delight the
lovers of mufic many years.  His character and converfation are natural,  intelligent,  and agreeable.  He is in figure
little and thin,  but has very much the
look of a gentleman.  Signor Galuppi
was a fcholar of the famous Lotti,  and
very early taken notice of as a good harp**
fichord player,  and a genius in composition.  He was fo obliging as to prefent
me to Signora Galuppi ;  to fhew me his
houfe  ;  an admirable pi&ure of a lleeping
child,  by P.  Veronele,  which has been
long in his wife’s family;  and to carry
me into his working-room,  with only a
little clavichord in it,  where,  he told me,
he dirtied paper .  His family has been
Very large,  but all his children,  except

three

[  *77 3

three or four,  are now well married.  He
has the appearance of a regular family
man,  and is efceemed at Venice as much
for his private character as for his public
talents.  He feems,  however,  rather hurt
at the encouragement and protection
which fome eccleiiaftical dunces,  among

whom is F - meet with as compofers

here.  Indeed,  except Sacchini,  his fe-
cond,  he ftands fo high among the prefent
race of muncians in Venice,  that he feems
a giant among dwarfs :  he was fo obliging,
at my requefl,  as to promife me a piece
of his compofition,  which has not yet
been made public,  as a relick and mark
of his friendfhip.  I  {hewed him my
plan,  and we talked over that;  and mulic
and muficians,  very cordially,  and with
fimilar fentiments  :  his definition of good
muiic I think admirable,  and though
fhort,  very comprehend ve.  It confifts,
he fays,  of vaghezza,  chiarezza ,  e buo -
'  na  ??iodulazio?ie* .  He and Sianor L’A-

*  Beauty,  clearnefs,  and gcod modulation.

N till a.

L 1

tilla,  among many other particulars,  recollected the names of all the great mailers
of the confervatorios,  and had patience to
let me write them down.  Thefe gentlemen likewife informed me that the expence of the confervatorios,  on account
of mufic,  is very inconfiderable",  there
being but five or fix mailers to each for
finging and the feveral inilruments,  as
the elder girls teach the younger.  The
Maejlro di Capella feldom does more than
compofe and direCl :  fometimes,  indeed,
he writes down clofes,  and ufually attends
the lail rehearfal and firil public performance.

A fucceffion of able mailers has con-
ftantly been employed in thefe fchools  :
Hafle was once Maejlro to the Incur a bill 9
and has left a Mijererey which is frill performed there in Paffion Week,  and is,
according to the Abate Martini,  a wonderful compofition

I obtained,  before I left Venice,  a copy of
it j and fmee my arrival in England,  I have been

honoured

/

C  *79  ]

Signor Galuppi feemed to have Full
employment here,  even in Fummer,  when
there are no operas,  as he is firft Maejlro
di Capelin oF St.  Mark>  and of the Incur a-
bill .  He has a hundred rechins a year as
domeftic organift to the family of Gritti,
and is organift of another church,  of
which I have forgot the name.  He cer-
tainly merits all that can be done for
him,  being one of the few remaining
original geniu fifes of the beft fchool perhaps that Italy ever faw.  His compofi-
tions are always ingenious and natural,
and I may add,  that he is a good contra-
puntift,  and a friend to poetry.  The
firft appears by his fcores,  and the latter
by the melodies he fets to words,  in
which the expreffion of his mufic always correfponds with the fenfe of the
author,  and often improves it.  His com-
pofitions for the church are but litfle

honoured with a letter from Count Bujovich,  of
Venice,  with feveral interelling particulars relative
to the rife and progrefs of thefe mufcal inftitutions.

N 2 known

known in England y to me they ap^
pear excellent*  ;  for though many of the
airs are in the opera  (tile,  yet,  upon oc-
cafion,  he fhews himfelf to be a very
able writer in the true church ftile,  which
is grave,  with good harmony,  good modulation,  and fugues well worked.

I was this evening at a fecond Acca -
demia ,  at Signor Grimani’s,  which was
much more confiderable than the firft.
Signor Sacchini was there,  and feveral
of the principal muficians of Venice.  La
Signora Regina Zocchi,  a lady who had
her mufical education at the Incurabili ,
under the celebrated Signor Haffe,  and
who is now well married,  and re-
ceived,  and even courted by the firfl:
people here,  fung :  fhe has a very powerful voice,  and good  £hake,  with great volubility and expreffion.  D.  Flaminio Tomj,
who has a mere Face di Camera ,  fung _

*  I procured at Venice,  fome of his motets  ;
and Giafeppe,  an excellent copieft there,  undertook:
to tranfcribe,  and fend after me,  two or three of
his ffiaffes.

with

r 181  ]

with exquifite tafle.  La Signora Baffa
performed on the harpfichord,  two or
three concertos with much grace and pre-
cifion.  Add to this,  that the whole was
well heard by a very large company,  com-
pofed of the firft nobility of Venice,  a-
mong whom was .  Signor Mocenigo,  fon
to the prefent doge.

Friday 17.  I had this morning the
honour of a fecond interview with
Count Torre Taxis,  during which,  I
had the pleafure to hear his excellency perform on the harpfichord,  of
which inftrument he is an able mailer;
he played voluntaries for a confiderable
time,  in which he difcovered much  (kill
in modulation,  and 1 found him worthy
of a place on the upper form of the Far-
tini fchool.  He  (hewed me a great number of mafles,  motets,  and oratorios of
his compofition,  for though young,  he is
already a very voluminous writer.  He is
poffeffed of a very curious keyed inftru-
ment which was '  made at Berlin,  under

N 3 the

[  182  ]

the dire&ion of his Pruffian Majefly  :  it
is,  in  (haps,  like a large clavichord,  has
feveral changes of  (lops,  and is occafionally
a harp,  a harp fi chord,  a lute,  or piano
forte  ;  but the molt curious property of
this inflrument is,  that by drawing out
the keys the hammers are transferred to
different firings,  by which means a com-
pofition may he tranfpofed half a note,  a
whole note,  or a fiat third lower at plea?
fure,  without the embarraffment of different notes or clefs,  real or imaginary.

Among the Dilettanti here,  befides
Count Taxis,  there is a noble Venetian,
Signor Giovan Cornaro,  remarkable for
his genius and fkill in compofition  :  he
had compofed a mafs for a great feflival
at a church in Padua,  which was performed there,  while I was at Venice,  with
an immenfe band of voices and inftru-
ments.

This evening,  in order to make my-
felf more fully acquainted with the nature

\

[  183  ]

ture of the confervatorios,  and to finifh
my mulical enquiries here,  1 obtained
permiffion to be admitted into the mufic
fchool of the Mendicanti,  and was favoured with a concert,  which was performed wholly on my account,  and laded
two hours,  by the bed vocal and indru**
mental performers of this hofpital :  it
was really curious to fee ,  as well as to hear
every part of this excellent concert,  performed by females,  violins,  tenors,  bafes,
harpfichord,  French horns,  and even
double bafes ;  and there was a priorefs,  a
perfon in years,  who prefided :  the firft
violin was very well played by Antonia
Cubli,  of Greek extra&ion  ;  the harpfichord fometimes by Francefca Roffi,
maejlra del coro,  and fometimes by others  >
thefe young perfons frequently change
inftruments.  The finging was really excellent in different ftiles ;  Laura Rifegari
and Giacoma Frari,  had very powerful
voices,  capable of filling a large theatre 5
thefe fung bravura fongs,  and capital

N 4 fcenes

[  =§4 3

fcenes felecled from Italian operas ;  and
Francefca Tomj,  filler to the Abate of
that name,  and Antonia Lucuvich,  whofe
voices were more delicate,  confined
themfelves chiefly to pathetic fongs,  of
tafte and expreffion.  The whole was
very judicioufly mixed  ;  no two airs of
a fort followed each other,  and there
feerned to be great decorum and good
difcipline ohferved in every particular ;
for thefe admirable performers,  who are
of different ages,  all behaved with great
propriety,  and feerned to be well educated.  It was here that the two celebrated female performers,  the Archiapate,
now Signora Guglielmi,  and Signora
Maddalena Lombardini Sirmen,  who have
received fuch great and juft applaufe in
England,  had their mufical inftrudtions.
If I could have ftaid a few days longer at
Venice,  I might have enjoyed the fame
kind of entertainment at the other three
confervatorios,  having been tempted to
continue there by fuch an offer from a

friend

[  l85 3

friend who had intereft fufficient to procure me a fight of the interior difcipline
of thefe admirable mufical feminaries ;
and I declined this obliging offer with
the greater reluctance,  as there is not in
all Italy,  any eftablifhment of the fame
kind ;  but being willing to divide the
time I had allowed myfelf for the enquiries I had to make there as equally as
poffible,  I refilled that temptation as well
as feveral other offers with which I was
honoured,  from fome of the principal
nobility,  of being  .  admitted to their
private concerts  ;  and thus far for the
honour of Italy,  as well as for my own,
I mud fay,  that I met with the politefl
treatment,  and greatefl encouragement
and affiftance imaginable,  wherever I
flopt.  At Venice my expectations were
greatly furpaffed,  as 1 had always been
told that the inhabitants,  particularly the
better fort,  were referved and difficult of
accefs.

I

[  i 86  ]  ”<

I was indebted for much of my entertainment and information at Venice,  to
the affiduity and friendfhip of Mr.  Edwards,  a young gentleman who was born
in England,  but has lived fo long in this
city,  that he has wholly loft his verna-
nacular tongue.  With this gentleman,
and D.  Flaminio Tomj,  I went from the
Confervatorio of the Mendicanti ,  to Signor
Grimani’s  :  here the Abate Tomj fung
two or three pathetic airs with more tafle
than I can remember to have heard fince
the death of Palma.  There was a great
deal of company,  and the mufical performances of various kinds continued till
two or three o'clock in the morning ;  at
which time I took a melancholy leave of
Signor Grimani,  who had honoured me
with fomething more than mere polite-
nefs and hofpitality  :  in a lefs elevated
charafterl  (hould venture to call it friendfhip,  but here it could only be conde-
fcending goodnefs,

To

[  *«7  ]

To finifii my account of the mufic of
this charming city,  I mull obferve,  that
though the compofers of the Venetian
fchool are in general good con trapun tills,
yet their chief characterises are delicacy
of tafte,  and fertility of invention  ;  but
many circumftances concur to render the
mufic of Venice better,  and more general than elfewhere.  The Venetians have
few amufements but what the theatres
afford i walking,  riding,  and all field-
fports,  are denied them.  This in fome
degree accounts for mufic being fo
much,  and in fo coftly a manner,  cultivated  ;  the number too of theatres,  in all
which the Gondoliers have admifilon gratis,  may account for the fuperior manner
in which they fing compared with people
of the fame clafs elfewhere  *.  And in the
private families,  into which the girls of

*  When a box belonging to a noble family is
difengaged,  and likely to remain empty,  the opera
manager permits the Gondolieri to occupy it,  rather than a report fhould prevail that the performance drew but little company.

4

the

[  i38  ]

the Confervatorios marry,  it is natural to
fuppofe that good tafte and a love for
mufic are introduced.

The library of St.  Mark here,  which
abounds with books in all other faculties,  afforded me but few materials on
the fubjedt of mufic.  However I gained
confiderably by the converfatidn of Signor Zanetti,  the firft librarian,  who was
very polite and communicative.

Printing has been carried on in Venice
with great fpirit,  ever fince the year 1459,
when it was eftablifhed there by Nicholas Janfen  $  and there is perhaps no
city in Italy in which fo many books
have been publifhed.  At prefent the'
prefs is very adtive and fertile,  and the
number of bookfellers in the fine ftreet
called Merceria is very confiderable.  I
found in no one place fo many old authors on the fubjedt of mufic as here  ;
and as to the new,  I met with many that
I was unable to find elfewhere,  particularly the firft volume of Padre Martini’s

Hiftory

[  i89 1

Hiftory of Mufic.  The principal book-
fellers in Venice are Pafquali,  Remondini,
Bcttinelli,  Occhi,  and Antonio di Caftro.

The art of engraving mufic there feems
to be utterly loft,  as 1 was not able to find
a fingle work printed in the manner we
print mufic in England,  In the firft
place there is no fuch thing as a mufic
Jhop throughout Italy,  that I was able to
difcover.  Indeed M.  di Caftro,  a fpirited
bookfeller, '  one of the four abovemeti-
tioned,  has publifhed a propofal for printing mufic with types,  in the manner attempted by Mr.  Fought,  but has met
with fmall encouragement,  having only
publifhed one book of little duets and
trios.  Mufical compofitions are fo fhort-
lived in Italy,  fuch is the rage for novelty,  that for the few copies wanted,  it is
not worth while to be at the expence of
engraving,  and of the rolling-prefs.  Indeed there,  as in Turkey,  the bufinefs of
a tranfcriber furnifhes employment for
fo many people,  that it is cruel to wifti
to rob them of it,  efpecially as that
7 trade

[  ]

trade feems more brifk and profitable
than any other.

As a fupplement to the article Venice,
I muft add,  that,  fince my return to England,  I have been favoured with a letter
from thence,  dated January 25,  1771,
containing the following particulars relative to the flate of mufic there,  at that
time.  “  At the theatre of S.  Benetto we
“  have had reprefented,  during the pre-
“  fent carnival,  the opera of Alexander
“  in India ;  compofed by Signor Bertoni,
“  matter of the Mendicant! ,  which has
4f been univerfally applauded  ;  particu-
44 larly a duet,  fung by Signora de Amicis
44 and Signor Cafelli.  At the fame
44 theatre we have at prefent il Siroe ri ~
“  conofciutoy compofed by Signor Borghi,
€€  which is generally difliked.

44 The mufic,  at the opera-houfe of S.
44 Moise,  pleafes very much  ;  notwith-
44  (landing it is fo ill executed,  that the
44 author,  Signor Garzaniga,  a Neapoli-
4f tan,  has great reafon to be mortified,
though crowned with general praife/’

BOLOGNA.

[  *9l  ■  ]

BOLOGNA.

My chief errand in this city was to fee
and converfe with the learned Padre
Martini ,  and the celebrated Signor Pari-
nelli,  the former being regarded by all
Europe as the deepeft theorift,  and the
other as the greateft practical mufician of
this,  or perhaps of any age or country;
and,  as I was fo fortunate as to be well
received by both,  I fhall make no apology for being minute in my account of
two fuch extraordinary perfons.

Padre Martini is a Francifcan,  and
Maeftro di Capelia of the church belonging to that order in Bologna.  He has
many years been employed in writing the
Hiftory of Mufic,  of which the firft vp-
lume only has,  as yet,  been publifhed.
Two editions,  one in folio,  and one in
quarto,  were printed at the fame time in
Bologna,  1 757;  a fecond volume is in
the prefs,  and he propofes finifhing the
work in five volumes.  The firft volume
z  ~  ~  is

t J92 1

is chiefly employed in the Hiflory of
Mufic amoiig the Hebrews;  the fecond
and third will comprife that of the ancient Greeks ;  the fourth the Latin or
Roman mufic,  with the hiftory of mufic
in the church  ;  the fifth and lafi:  volume will be appropriated to modern
mufic,  with fome account of the lives
and writings of the mo ft famous mufi-
cians,  and engravings of their heads*  We
reciprocally agreed upon an open and
'  cordial correfpondence,  and a mutual pro-
mife of confidence and afliftance ;  but
it is greatly to be lamented that the good
Father Martini is far advanced in years*
and is of an infirm conftitution,  having
a very bad cough,  fwelled legs,  and a
fickly countenance  ;  fo that there is rea-
fon to fear he will hardly have life and
health fufficient to complete his learned,
ingenious,  and extenfive plan.

It is impoflible,  by reading his book,
to form a judgment of the character of
this good and worthy man.  As yet

he

[  193  ]

he has treated only the dried:  and moft
abfirufe part of the fubjed,  in which
he had great opportunities to fhew
his reading and knowledge,  which are
deep and extenfive,  but none to display the excellence of his character,
which is fuch as infpires not only refpeft
but kindnefs.  He joins to innocence of
life,  and fimplicity of manners,  a native
chearfulnefs,  foftnefs,  and philanthropy.
Upon fo fhort an acquaintance I never
liked any man more ;  and I felt as little
referve with him in a few hours,  as
with an old friend or beloved brother ;  it
was impofiible for confidence to be more
cordial,  efpecially between two perfons
whofe purfuits were the fame  :  it is how-
ever true,  that though they are the fame
with refped:  to the objedt,  they are different with refpect to the way  :  I had advanced too far to retreat before I could
procure his book,  and when I had found
it,  my plan was fo much digefled as to
render the adoption or imitation of any

O other

[  J94  ,]

other very inconvenient.  Befides,  as
every objedl may be approached by a
different route,  it may alfo be feen in a
different point of view j two different
perfons therefore may exhibit it with
equal truth,  and yet with great diverlity :

I fhall avail myfelf of P.  Martini’s learning and materials,  as I would of his fpec-
tacles,  I fli all apply them to my fubjeft,
as it appears to me,  without changing my
fituation ;  and fhall neither implicitly
adopt his fentiments in doubtful points,
nor tranfcribe them where we agree.

Befides his immenfe collection of printed books,  which has coft him upwards
of a thoufand zechins,  P.  Martini is in
poffeffion of what no money can purchafe,
MSS.  and copies of MSS.  in the Vatican
and Ambrofian libraries,  and in thofe of
Florence,  Pifa,  and other places,  for
which he has had a faculty granted him by
the Pope,  and particular permiffion from
others in power.  He has ten different
copies of the famous Micrologus of-

Guido

t  *9 S J

Guido i^retinus,  and as many made from
different manufcripts of John de Muris*
with feveral other very ancient and valuable MSS.  He has one room full of
them  ;  two other rooms are appropriated
to the reception of printed books,  of
which he has all the feveral editions extant  ;  and a fourth to practical mufic,  of
which he has likewife a prodigious quan^
tity in MS.  The number of his books
amounts to feventeen thoufand volumes,
and he is ftill encreafmg it from all parts
of the world He fhewed me feveral
of his mod curious books and MSS.  upon
which I communicated to him the catalogue of mine.  He was furprifed at feme

*  I had frequently furprifed feveral bookfellers
on the continent with the lift of my books on the'
fubjedt of mufic,  but,  in my turn,  I was now furprifed.  Though Padre Martini has had many pre-
fents made him of fcarce books and MSS.  yet he
has often paid a great price for othei^,  particularly
for one written in Spanifh,  1613,  which coft him
a hundred ducats,  about twenty guineas,  £t Naples,  where it was printed,

O t>  g£

[  *9.6  ']  :

of them,  and faid they were extremely
rare of thefe he took down the titles,
and,  at my fecond vifit,  he was pleafed to
think my plan worth borrowing to tran-
fcribe,  which he did with his own
hand.

cIhurfday ,  Augufl 23.  It will give plea-
fure to every lover of mafic,  efpecially
thofe who have been fo happy to have
heard him,  that Signor Farinelli ftill
lives,  and is in good health and fpirits.
I found him much younger in appearance
than I expe&ed.  He is tail and thin,  but
by no means infirm in his appearance.
Hearing I had letter for him,  he was fo
obliging as to come to me this morning at
Padre Martini’s,  in whofe library 1 fpent
a great part of my time here.  Upon my
obferving,  in the courfe of our converfa-
tion,  that I had long been ambitious of
feeing two perfons,  become fo eminent
by different abilities in the fame art,  and

that my chief bufinefs at Bologna was to

/

gratify that ambition.  Signor Farinelli,

point-

I

[  l97 1

pointing to P.  Martini,  faid,  cc What he
<(  is doing will laid,  but the little that I
“  have done is already gone and forgot-
“  ten/'  I told him,  that in England
there were ftill many who remembered
his performance fo well,  that they could
bear to hear no other finger ;  that the
whole kingdom continued to refound his
fame,  and I was fure tradition would
hand it down to the latefl:  pofterity.

Friday 24.  This being St.  Bartholomew's day,  I went to the church of that
name,  where I was told the mufic would
be good  ;  however,  I found it quite the
contrary.  Signor Gibello was Maejiro di
Capella ,  and feveral cafirati fun g,  but
neither the compofition nor execution
pleafed me ;  the compofition had not one
of Buranello’s three requifites,  vaghezza ,
chiarezza ,  e buona modulazione>  to recommend it,  and the execution was flo-
venly and incorredl.

Though there was no opera in Bologna
at this time,  yet,  for the fake of feeing

O 3 the

E 198  ]

the theatre,  I went to the play.  The
houfe is elegant,  but not large  ;  it has
however five rows of boxes,  twelve or
thirteen op a fide.  When I went in I
knew not what the play would be,  but
expedted a ribbald farce,  as ufual  ;  when,
tp my great furprife,  I found it was an
Italian tragedy,  called Tomire ,  written by
Padre Ringhieri.  1 had never feen one
before,  and was much pleafed with the
opening,  but foon grew tired of the long
fpeeches and declamation ;  they were
paft all bearing tedious.  Thomyris,
Queen of the Amazons,  came on dreffed
in a very equivocal manner j for,  in order to give her a martial look,  fhe had
her petticoats truffed up in front above
her knees,  which were very difcernible
through her black breeches.  However
ftrange this appeared to me,  the audience
clapped violently,  as they did conftantly
at the worfl and moft abfurd things in
the piece.  There was a great deal of
teligiqn in it,  and fuch anachronifms,

that

[  J99  ]

*  that they talked of J.  C.  and the Trinity,
nor were Free-will and Predeftination
forgotten ;  and when Cyrus is dying of
the wound he received in battle,  he is
examined by a Jewifh prieft  (a principal
character in the play)  as his confeffor,
concerning his religious principles,  and
he makes to him a profefjion of faith,

Th is kind of fpedtacle has been fo long
negledted in Italy,  that it feems to have
been wholly loft ;  and now,  after a fecond
birth,  appears to be in its infancy.  However,  the Italian language is certainly
capable of great things ;  as it can fupport
dignity without the trammels of rhyme.
The adtors too are good,  as to propriety
and variety of gefture ;  but in voice,  a
monotony reigns here,  as in the Italian
pulpit.  The paffion for dramas in mufic
has ruined true tragedy as well as comedy
in this country ;  but the language and
genius of the people are fo rich and fertile,  that when they become heartily
tired of mufic,  which by excefs of it they
:  O 4 will

[  200  ]

Will probably be very foon,  the fame rage
for novelty,  which has made them fly with
fuch rapidity from one fdle of cornpo-
fition to another,  often changing from a
better to a worfe,  will drive them to feek
amufement from the ftage,  without mufic.
And in that cafe,  when they apply all
their powers to the fock and bufkin,  and
the writer and adtor are obliged to make
ufe of every refource with which the national language and genius abound ;  they
will probably furpafs the reft of Europe
in the dramatic,  as well as in other arts.
But before this can happen,  much muft
be done towards refining the national
tafte,  which is at prefent too much depraved by farce,  buffoonery,  and fong.
The inattention,  noife,  and indecorum
of the audience too,  are quite barbarous
and intolerable.  The filence which reigns
in the theatres of London and Paris,
during representation,  is encouraging to
the adtor,  as well as defirahle to the hearer of judgment and feeling.  In Italy

the

t 20 t  ]  '

the theatres are immenfe,  and,  in order to
be heard through fpace and noife,  the
adtors feem in a perpetual bawl.  Each
fentence,  thus pronounced,  is more like
the harangue of a general at the head
of an army of a hundred thoufand men,
than the fpeech of a hero or heroine in
converfation ;  this allows of but few
modulations of voice ;  all the paffions
are alike noify,  the tender and the turbulent.

The fcenes and decorations in this
piece were elegant and judicious  :  there
was one fcene in particular very ftriking ;
it was that of a high,  but fertile mountain,  from which Thorny ris defcended
with her court and guards,  in order to
come to a parley with Cyrus.

The orcheftra was rather weak and ordinary  ;  and,  in general,  I found the mufic
in the ftreets here worfe,  and lefs frequent
then at Venice.  However,  I was faluted
foon after my arrival at the inn,  as every
flranger is,  with a duet,  very well played

by

[  202  ]

by a violin and mandoline ;  and,  this afternoon,  an itinerant band piayed under
my window feveral fymphonies and finale
movements of execution,  extremely well,
in four parts.

Saturday 25.  This day I had the plea-
fare to fpend with Signor Farinelli,  at
his houfe in the country,  about a mile
from Bologna,  which is not yet quite
finilhed,  though he has been building it
ever lince he retired from Spain  *.  II
Padre Maefcro Martini was invited to
dine there with me,  and I cannot refill
the delire of confeffing that I was extremely happy at finding myfelf in the
company of two fuch extraordinary
men.

Signor Farinelli has long left off fing-
ing,  but amufes himfelf Hill on the harp-

*  The country is flat all round him,  but though
the environs of this city are perhaps the moft fertile of any in Italy,  yet the inhabitants feem poffef-
fed of nothing like taftey in laying out their gardens  ;
however.  Signor Farinelli’s houfe commands a fine
j)rofpe£l of Bologna,  and of the little hills near it.

A lichord

[  2°3 1

fichord and viol d’  amour:  he has a great
number of harpfichords made in different
countries,  which he has named according to the place they hold in his favour,
after the greateft of the Italian painters.
His firft favourite is a piano forte ,  made
at Florence in the year 1730,  on which
is written in gold letters,  'Rafael d’Urbino  %
then,  Coreggio,  Titian,  Guido,  &c.  He
played a confiderable time upon his.
Raphael,  with great judgment and delicacy,  and has compofed feveral elegant
pieces for that inftrument.  The next in
favour is a harpficord given him by the
late queen of Spain,  who was Scarlatti’s
fcholar,  both in Portugal and Spain ;  it
was for this princefs that Scarlatti made
his two firft books of leffons,  and to her
the firft edition,  printed at Venice,  was
dedicated,  when fhe was princefs of Aftu-
rias :  this harpfichord,  which was made
in Spain,  has more tone than any of the
others.  His third favourite is one made

likewife

C 204 3

likewife in Spain,  under his own direction  ;  it has moveable keys,  by which,
like that of Count Taxis,  at Venice,  the
player can tranfpofe a compofition either
higher or lower.  Of thefe Spaniih harp-
iichords the natural keys are black,  and
the flats and  £harps are covered with mother of pearl  ;  they are of the Italian
model,  all the wood is cedar,  except the
bellies,  and they are put into a fecond
cafe.

Signor Farinelli was very converfible
and communicative,  and talked over old
times very freely,  particularly thofe when
he was in England ;  and I am inclined
to believe,  that his life,  were it well
written,  would be very interefting to the
public,  as it has been much chequered,
and fpent in the firft courts of Europe;
but,  as I hope it is yet far from finished,
this feems not to be the place to attempt
it  :  however,  the following anecdotes,
chiefly picked up in converfation with

himfelf

E 2°5  ]

himfelf and Padre Martini,  may perhaps
for the prefent,  gratify in fome meafure,
the curiofity of the reader.

Carlo Brofchi,  called Farinelli,  was born
at Naples in 1705 ;  he had his firft mu-
fical education from his father.  Signor
Brofchi,  and afterwards was under Por-
pora,  who travelled with him  ;  he was
feventeen when he left that city to go
to Rome,  where,  during the run of an
opera,  there was a ftruggle every night
between him and a famous player on the
trumpet,  in a fong accompanied by that
inftrument  :  this,  at firft,  feemed amicable and merely fportive,  till the audience began to intereft themfelves in the
conteft,  and to take different tides :
After feverally fwelling out a note,  in
which each manifefted the power of his
lungs,  and tried to rival the other in
brilliancy and force,  they had both a
fwell and a fhake together,  by thirds,
which was continued fo long,  while the
audience eagerly waited the event,  that

both

[  2c6  ]

both feemed to be exhaufled ;  and,  in
fa<ft,  the trumpeter,  wholly fpent,  gave
it up,  thinking,  however,  his antagonift
as much tired as himfelf,  and that it
would be a drawn battle;  when Fafi-
nelli,  with a fmile on his countenance,
fhewing he had only been fporting with
him all this time,  broke out all at once
in the fame breath,  with frefh vigour,  and
not only fwelled and fhook the note,  but
ran the mod:  rapid and difficult divisions,
and was at laft filenced only by the acclamations of the audience.  From this
period may be dated that fuperiority
which he ever maintained over all his
cotemporaries.

In the early part of his life he was dif-
tinguiffied throughout Italy,  by the name
of the boy .

From Rome he went to Bologna,
where he had the advantage of hearing
Bernacchi,  (a fcholar of the famous
Piftocco,  of that city)  who was then the

firft

[  2°7 1

iirft finger in Italy,  for tatte and knowledge  ;  and his fcholars afterwards rendered the Bologna fchool famous.

From thence he went to Venice,  and
from Venice to Vienna j in all which
cities his powers were regarded as miraculous  ;  but he told me,  that at Vienna,
where he was three different times,  and
where he received great honours from
the Emperor Charles the VI.  an admonition from that prince was of more
fervice to him than all the precepts of his
matters,  or examples of his competitors
for fame:  his Imperial Majefty conde-
fcended to tell him one day,  with great
mildnefs and affability,  that in his ling-
ing,  he neither moved nor flood ftill like
any other mortal ;  all was fupernatural.
“  Thofe gigantic ftrides,  (faid he) ;  thofe
“  never-ending notes and paffages fees
tf notes qui ne finifl'ent jamais J only fur-
“  prife,  and it is now time for you to
tc pleafe  ;  you are too lavifh of the gifts
“  with which nature has endowed you ;

«  if

[  2o8  ]

u if you wifh to reach the heart,  you
ie mull take a more plain and fimple
<c road/*  Thefe few words brought a-
bout an entire change in his manner of
finging ;  from this time he mixed the
pathetic with the fpirited,  the fimple
with the fuhlime,  and,  by thefe means,
delighted as well as aftonifhed every
hearer.

In the year 1734,  he came into England,  where every one knows who heard*
cr has heard of him,  what an effedt his
furprifing talents had upon the audience  ;
it was extacy  !  rapture  !  enchantment !

In the famous air Son qual Nave ,  which
was compofed by his brother,  the firft
note he funs:  was taken with fuch delica-
cy,  fwelled by minute degrees to fuch
an amazing volume,  and afterwards di-
minifhed in the fame manner,  that it was
applauded for full five minutes.  He afterwards fet off with fuch brilliancy and
rapidity of execution,  that it was difficult
for the violins of thefe days to keep pace
6 with

r 2°9  ]

with him.  In fhort,  he was to all other
lingers as fuperiour as the famous horfe
Childers was to all other running-horfes  $
but it was not only in fpeed,  he had now
every excellence of every great finger
united.  In his voice,  ftrength,  fweetnefs,
and compajs ;  in his fcile,  the tender,  the
graceful,  and the rapid.  He poffeffed
fuch powers as never met before,  or fince,
in any one human being  ;  powers that

were irreiifiifcle,  and which muft fubdue

*

every hearer  ;  the learned and the ignorant,  the friend and the foe.

With thefe talents he went into Spain
in the year 173 7,  with a full defign to
return into England,  having entered into
articles with the nobility,  who had then
the management of the opera,  to perform
the enfuing feafon.  In his way thither
he fung to the king of France at Paris,
where,  according to Riccoboni,  he enchanted even the French themfelves,  who
at that time univerfally abhorred Italian
mufic ;  but the firft day he performed

P before

[  2:0 j

before the king and queen of Spain,  it
was determined that he fhould be taken
into the fervice of the court,  to which
he was ever after wholly appropriated,
not being once fuffered to ling again in
public.  A penfion was then fettled on
him of upwards of 2000 1.  fterling a
year.

He told me,  that for the firlf ten years
of his refidence at the court of Spain,
during the life of Philip the Vth,  he lung
every night to that monarch the fame
four airs,  of which two were compofed
by HalTe,  Palido ilfok,  and Per quejlo dolce
Ample ffb.  I forget the others,  but one
was a minuet which he ufed to vary at
his pleafure.

After the death of Philip the Vth,  his
favour continued under his fucceffor Ferdinand the VJth,  by whom he was dignified with the order of Calatrava in
1750;  but then his duty became lefs
conflant and fatiguing,  as he perfuaded
this prince to have operas,  which were a

great

r

i 211  ]

\

great relief to him  :  he was appointed
foie director of thofe fpeCtacles ;  and had
from Italy,  the beft compofers and fingers
of the time,  and Metaftafio to write.
He fhewed me in his houfe four of the
principal fcenes in Didone and Netette ,
painted by Amiconi,  who accompanied
him firit into England,  and then into
Spain,  where he died.

When the prefent king of Spain af-
cended the throne,  he was obliged to quit
that kingdom,  but his penfion is ftill continued,  and he was allowed to bring
away all his effects.  The furniture of
his houfe is very rich,  as it is almoft entirely compofed of the prefents he received from great perfonages.  He feems
very much to regret the being obliged to
feek a new habitation,  after having lived
twenty-four years in Spain,  where he had
formed many friendlhips and connections
that were dear to him  ;  and it is a great
proof of the prudence and moderation of
his character,  that in a country and court,

P 2 where

212  ]

inhere jealoufy and pride are fo predominant,  he continued fo long to be the king's
chief favourite,  a difrindtion odious to
every people,  without the leaf):  quarrel or
difference with any of the Spaniards.

When he returned into Italy in 1761,
all his old friends,  relations,  and acquaintance were either dead or removed
from the places where he had left them ;
fo that he had a fecond life to begin,
without the charms of youth to attach
new friends,  or his former talents to gain
new protestors.

He fays that Metaftafio and he were
twins of public favour,  and entered the
world at the fame time,  he having performed in that poet’s firft opera.  When
he  (hewed me his houfe,  he pointed out
an original pidture,  painted about that
time,  by Amiconi,  in which are the portraits of Metaftafio,  of Farinelli himfelf,
of Faustina,  the famous finger,  and of
Amiconi  *

4

From

[  2I3 1

From his conversation,  there is reafori
to believe,  that the court of Spain had
fixed on Bologna for his refidence ;  though
the Italians fay his firft defign was to
fettle at Naples,  the place of his birth,
but that he was driven from thence by
the numerous and importunate claims of
his relations :  however that may be,  he
has a filler and two of her children with
him,  one of whom is an infant,  of which
he is doatingly fond,  though it is crofs,
fickly,  homely,  and unamiable ;  yet this
is a convincing proof,  among others,  to me
that he was defigned by nature for family
attentions and domeftic comforts  :  but in
converfation he lamented his not being
able,  for political reafons,  to fettle in
England  ;  for,  next to Spain,  that was
the place in the world,  he faid,  where he
fhould have wifhed to fpend the remainder of his days.

He fpeaks much of the refpedt and gratitude he owes to the Englifh.  When I
dined with him it was on an elegant fer~

P 3 vic«

[  2’4  ]

vice of plate,  made in England at the
time he was there.  He  {hewed me a
number of pictures of himfelf,  painted
during that time,  from one of which by
Amiconi,  there is a print.  He has an
Englifh fweep-chimney boy playing with a
cat,  and an apple- woman with a barrow,
by the fame hand  ;  he has likewife a curious Englifh clock,  with little figures
playing in concert on the guitar,  the
violip,  and violoncello,  whofe arms and
fingers are always moved by the fame
pendulum.

His large room,  in which is a billiard^
table,  is furnifhed with the pictures of
great perfonages,  chiefly fovereign princes,
who have been his patrons,  among whom
^re two emperors,  one emprefs,  three
kings of Spain,  two princes of Afturias,  a
king of Sardinia,  a prince of Savoy,  a king
of Naples,  a princefs of Afturias,  two
queens of Spain,  and Pope Benedict the
XIVth.  In other apartments are feverai
charming pictures,  by Zirnenes and Mo-

rillo,

[  21 5  ]

rillo,  two Spanifh painters of the firft
eminence,  and Spagnolet.

Sir Benjamin Keene was a great favourite with him,  and he fpeaks of his
death,  not only as a misfortune to the
two courts of England and Spain,  but as
an irreparable lofs to himfelf and all his
friends.  He  (hewed me feveral pi&ures
painted in England,  in the manner of
Teniers,  by a man,  during the time he
was in prifon for debt ;  I forget his name  ;
thefe,  he faid.  Lord Chefterfield had
given him in the politeft manner imaginable.

Upon my expreffing fome delire to
write his life,  or,  at leaf!:,  to infert particulars of it in my hiftory.  “  Ah/*  fays
he,  by a modefty rather pufhed too far,
“  if you have a mind to compofe a good
ee work,  never fill it with accounts of fuch
ic defpicable beings as I am.”  However,,
he furnifhed me with all the particulars

jl

concerning Domenico Scarlatti,  which I
defired,  and dictated to me very oblig-

P 4 ingly.

[  2l6  ]

ingly,  while I entered them in my pocket-
book.

He ftill retains a few words of the Eng-
lifh language,  which he had picked up
during his refidence in London,  and entertained me a great part of the day with

V

accounts of his reception and adventures
there.  He repeated a converfation he
had with Queen Caroline,  about Cuzzoni
and Fauftina ;  and gave me an account of
his firfl performance at court to his late
majefty George the lid.  in which he was
accompanied on the harpfichord by the
princefs royal,  afterwards princefs of O-
range,  who inlifted on his tinging two of
HandeFs fongs at fight,  printed in a different clef,  and compofed in a different
ftile from what he had ever been ufed to.
He told me of his journey into the country with the Duke and Duchefs of Leeds,
and with Lord Cobham  ;  of the feuds of
the two operas ;  of the part which the
late Prince of Wales took with that
managed by the nobility;  and the Queen

and

[  2*7  ]

and Princefs Royal with that which was
under the direction of Handel.

Pie likewife confirmed to me the truth
of the following extraordinary ftory,
which I had often heard,  but never before
credited.  Senefino and Farinelli,  when
in England together,  being engaged at
different theatres on the fame night,  had
not an opportunity of hearing each other,
till,  by one of thofe fudden ftage -re volutions which frequently happen,  yet are
always unexpected,  they were both employed to fing on the fame ftage.  Senefino had the part of a furious tyrant to
reprefent,  and Farinelli that of an unfortunate hero in chains i but,  in the courfe
of the firft fong,  he fo foftened the obdurate heart of the enraged tyrant,  that
Senefino,  forgetting his ftage- character,
ran to Farinelli and embraced him in his
own.

Monday 22.  This day,  after vifiting
the Xnftitute,  I waited on the Dottorejfa
Madame Laura BaJJi ,  and met with a very

polite

[21-8  ]  .  -

polite and eafy reception.  Upon naming
Padre Beccaria,  and  {hewing his recommendation in my tablets,  we were inftant-
ly good friends.  This lady is between
fifty and fixty  ;  but though learned,  and
a genius,  not at all mafeuline or affum-
ing.  We talked over the mod celebrated
men of fcience in Europe.  She was very
civil to the Englilh,  in eulogiums of
Newton,  Halley,  Bradley,  Franklin,  and
others.  She  {hewed me her eledtrical
machine and apparatus :  the machine is
fimple,  portable,  and convenient ;  it con-
lifts of a plain plate of glafs,  placed vertically  ;  the two cuftnons are covered
with red leather ;  the receiver is a tin
forked tube ;  the two forks,  with pins at
the ends,  are placed next the glafs plate.
She is very dextrous and ingenious in her experiments,  of which  {he was fo obliging as
to fhe w me feveral.  She told me thatSignor
Baffi,  her hulband,  immediately after Dr.
Franklin had proved the identity of electrical fire and lightning,  and publiflied
i his

.  t 2I9  ]

his method of preferving buildings from
the effects of it,  by iron rods,  had caufed
conductors to be erected at the Inftitute  ;
but that the people of Bologna were fo
afraid of the rods,  believing they would
bring the lightning upon them,  inftead of
the contrary,  that he was forced to take
them down.  Benedict XIV.  one of the
moft enlightened and enlarged of the
popes,  a nafive,  and in a particular manner the patron,  as well as fovereign of
Bologna,  wrote a letter to recommend
the ufe of thefe conductors ;  but it was:
fo much againfl:  the inclination of the
inhabitants of this city,  that Signor Baffi
defifted entirely,  and they have never
fince that time been ufed here.

There is an apparatus,  and a room
apart for eleCtricity at the Inftitute,  but
the machines are old,  and very inferior
to thofe in ufe at this time in England.
It is remarkable that this univerfity
has no correfpondence with England,
nor is it able to purchafe our Phi-

lofophical

[  223 j

tefbphical Tran fad ions.  The falaries
are fmall,  and the money allowed for the
fupport of the Inftitute is all appropriated.  This I was told by the Keeper
or Gftjlade,  who  {hewed me the apartments.  My vifit with the learned Signora Baffi was very agreeable,  and  £he
was fo obliging as to offer me a letter to
Signor Fontana at Florence,  one of the
iirfl mathematicians in Europe.

They fpeak much at Bologna of the
Brav Orbi>  or blind fidlers,  who were
not in town when I was there ;  but all
the matters admire them,  in their way,
very much,  particularly lomelli,  who
always fends for them,  when in the fame
town,  to play,  to him.  They travel
about in fummer to Rome,  Naples,  and
el fe where :  one plays on the violin,  the
other on the violoncello,  and is called
Spacea Nota ,  or Split Note.

Tuefday being a feftival,  mafs wa$
performed in mufic at the church of the
convent of St.  Auguftin.  The compofer

was

[  221 3

Was Signor Caroli,  Maejiro di Capella del
Duomo of Bologna,  There was a great
band,  but neither learning,  tafte,  or novelty to recommend the mufic.  It con-
filted of old paflages,  ftrung together in
a heavy manner,  without even the merit
of a little pertnefs now and then to enliven it.  And what rendered this mufic
Hill more tirefome,  was the finging,
which was rather below mediocrity.

In the afternoon I went to take a melancholy leave of the Cavalier Farinelli.
He kindly importuned me to ftay longer
at Bologna,  and even chid me for going
away fo foon.  I found him at his Raphael,
and prevailed on him to play agood deal :  he
fings upon it with infinite tafte and expref-
fion.  I was truly forry to quit this extraordinary and amiable perfon  :  he prefled me
to write to him,  if there was any thing
in Italy which he could procure or do
for me.  I ftaid with him till it was fo

•  *■  -  “  ■  t r p 0

late,  that I was in danger of being  {hut
out of the city of Bologna,  the gates being

[  222  ]

ing locked every night as foon as it is
dark.  '

By the advice of P.  Martini I ftaid at
'  Bologna two days longer than I intended,
in order to be prefent at a kind of trial
of fkill among fiich compofers of this
city as are members of the celebrated
Philharmonic Society,  founded in 1666.

There is an annual exhibition,  or public performance,  morning and evening,
on the thirtieth of Auguft,  in the church
of S.  Jchanni in Monte* .  This year the
Principe,  orPrefident,  was Signor Petro-
nio Lanzi.  The band was very numerous,  confiding of near a hundred voices
and inftruments.  There are two large
organs in the church,  one on each fide

*  This church is rendered famous by the pofTef-
fion of two of the befl pi£lures in Bologna,  or,  perhaps,  in the world,  the St Cecilia of Raphael,  and
the Madonna of the Rofary of Dominichini.  They
are placed in two chapels,  oppofite to each other,
between which,  and in full view of thefe charming
paintings,  I had the advantage of fitting to hear
the mufic.

of

i 3

of the choir;  and,  befides thefe,  a fmall
one was eredted for the occafion,  in front,
juft behind the compofer and fingers.
The performers were placed in a gallery,
which formed a femi-circle round the
choir.

In the Mejfa or Morning Service the
Kyrie and Gloria were compofed by Signor Lanzi,  Prefident for the fecond time.
His mufic was grave and majeftic;  it
opened with an introdu&ion,  by way of
overture,  of a confiderable length,  which
afterwards ferved as an accompaniment
to the voices in a very good chorus :
there were likewife in it feveral pleafing
airs,  and a well-w7ritten fugue.

The Gradual e was compofed by Signor
Antonio Caroli,  in the fame dry,  uninte-
refling ftile as the performance mentioned
above,  which would have been thought
trite and dull fixty years ago.

The Credo was compofed by Signor
Lorenzo Gibelli,  a fcholar of Padre Martini,

L 224  ]

tini,  which,  in point of harmony,  had"
its merit.

The morning fervice was finifhed by a
fymphony,  with folo parts,  by Signor
Gioanni Fiantanida,  principal violin of
Bologna,  which really aftonifhed me.
This performer is upwards of fixty years
of age,  and yet has all the fire of youth,
with a good tone,  and modern tafte ;  and,
upon the whole,  feerned to me,  (though
his bow-hand has a clumfy and aukward
look)  more powerful upon his inftrument
than any one I had,  as yet,  heard in
Italy.

In the Vefpero ,  or evening fervice,  the
Domine w’as compofed by Signor Anto.
Fontana di Carpi,  a prieft,  and was a
pleafing performance,  of one movement
only.

The Abate Gio.  Califlo Zanotti,  nephew to the learned librarian of that
name,  compofed the Dixit ;  and in this
performance there were all the marks of
an original and cultivated genius.  The

•  move

[  2 i$  ]

ftiOvemen£s,  and even paffages were well
contrafted ;  and,  to make ufe of the language of painters,  there were difcernible
in it,  not only light and fhade,  but even
mezzo tints .  He proceeded from one
thing to another by fuch eafy and in-
fenfible gradations,  that it feemed wholly
the work of nature,  though conducted
with the greateft art.  The accompaniments were judicious,  the ritornels always expreffed fomething ,  the melody was
new and full of tafte,  and the whole was
put together with great judgment,  and
even learning.  In fhort,  I have very lei-
dom in my life received greater pleafure
from mufic than this performance afforded me  ;  and yet the vocal parts were but
indifferently executed,  for at this time
there were no great fingers at Bologna,
though there were two or three that were
agreeable,  particularly a contr alto ,  Signor Cicognani,  who,  in a ferious opera,
would be a gcod fecond finger ;  and a
fopranoj Confoli,  a boy of about thirteen

or

226

/  ‘

or fourteen,  with a very fweet,  but feeble;
Voice,  who poffelfed great tafte and ex-
preffion.  Signor Zanotti is a fcholar of
Padre Martini,  and one of the Maejlri di
Capella in the church of S.  Petronio.

.  The next ,  compofer who took upon
him the direction of the orcheftra  (every
author beat time to his own performance)
was Signor Gabrielle Vignali.  His part
of the fervice was the Confitebar ,  which
he had fet in fuch an iriofFenfive manner,
that the niceft judge could not be hurt
by its faults,  nor the mcffc envious critic
by its beauties.

Beatus-Vir was fet by D.  Giufeppe Co-
retti,  a venerable prieft,  who ranks very
high in Bologna as a contrapuntiji ;  indeed
his mufiC;  was very mafierly,  and,  in
found harmony,  and regular modulation,
had infinite merit.

Laudato Puer was compofed by Signor
Bernardo Ottani,  another fcholar of P,
Martini,  who is young,  and a promifing
compofer.  There were many ingenious

pretty

t 22 7 1

pretty things in his performance,  as well
as in that which followed*  which was a
hymn by D.  Francefco Orfoni,  a young
prieft,  and fchoiar likewife of P*  Martini.

The whole was concluded by the Mag*
nificatoi Signor Antonio Mazzoni,  fecond
mailer of the duomo or cathedral*  who is
compofer to the opera here,  and has been
in that chara&er at Naples,  Madrid,  and
Peterfbourg*  He is faid to have great
fire and fancy,  but in this performance,
which was all chorus,  they were not dif-
coverable ;  the whole was founded upon a
ground-bafe,  which was played by all
the inftruments,  and feemed laboured
and coiiftrained*

There were prefent at this exhibition
all the critics of Bologna,  and the neighbouring cities,  and the church was extremely crowded.  Upon the whole,  I
was very well entertained ;  and the variety of ilile,  and maflerly compofition
were fuch as reflected honour,  not only

Q jz upon

[  223  ]

upon the Philharmonic Society,  but upon
the city of Bologna itfelf,  which has,  at
all times,  been fertile in genius,  and has
given birth to a great number of men
of abilities in all the arts.

I muft acquaint my mufical reader,
that at the performance juft mentioned,
I met with M.  Mozart and his fon,  th«
little German,  whofe premature and al~
moft fupernatural talents aftoniftied us in
London a few years ago,  when he had
fcarce quitted his infant ftate.  ,  Since his
arrival in Italy he has been much admired at Rome and Naples  ;  has been
honoured with the order of the Speron
d’QrOy or Golden Spur,  by his Holinefs,
and was engaged to compofe an opera at
Milan for the next Carnival.

I cannot quit this city without returning once more to the good Padre Martini.  After the mufical performance
above defcribed,  I went,  by appointment,
to his convent to bid him adieu,  as I was
to quit Bologna early next morning.  He

waited

[  229  ]

waited for me in his ftudy,  it being late,
and beyond the monaftic hours of feeing
company.  He had kindly prepared for
me recommendatory letters for Florence,
Rome,  and Naples ;  and had looked out
ftill more curious books to fhew me,  of
which I took the titles,  in hopes of meeting with them fome time or other.  He
had told me,  the day before,  that,  as he
(hould not be prefent at the Philharmonic
Meeting,  he ihould rely on my judgment
and account,  how matters went off and
were conducted ;  and now defired me to
defcribe to him every Angle piece.  After
doing this very faithfully,  I was going to
retire,  when he fays,  “  Won’t you ftay
6‘  for the words to be written to thefe
“  Canons  ?'* — I had the day before fung
with a young Francifcan,  his fcholar,
out of a prodigous large MS.  book of his
Canons,  feveral very pleafing ones for
two voices only,  of which I feemed to
exprefs a defire to have one or two
copied,  and this excellent father remem-

CL3 bering

[  23°  ]

beiing It,  had fet a perfon to work tor
tne,  who was writing when I entered the
ftudy j but,  as he had ufually two or
three amanuenfes there,  I did not mind
him*.  At length we parted,  on my
fide with forrow,  and on his with a recommendation to write to him often,

FLOR E-N C E.

This city has been longer in pofleflion
of mufic,  if the poets and hiftorians may
be credited,  than any other in Europe.
Dante,  a Florentine,  born in 1265,  fpeaks
of the organ and lute as inflruments well
known in his time ;  and has taken an
opportunity to celebrate the talents of
his friend Cafella,  the mufician,  in the
fecond canto of his Purgatorio .

The hiftorian Villani,  cotemporary
with Petrarca,  fays that his canzonets were

*  Padre Martini has compofed an amazing number of ingenious and learned canons ,  in which every
kind of intricacy and contrivance,  that ever had
admiffion into this difficult fpecies of compofition,
has been happily fubdued.

uni-

[  23I 3

univerfally fung in Florence,  by the old

and the young of both fexes.  And we

«  •

are told that Lore?izo il Magnifico ,  in

Carnival time,ufed to go out in the evening,  followed by a numerous company
of perfons on horfeback,  mafked,  and
richly drefied,  amounting fometimes to
upwards of three hundred  ;  and the fame
number on foot,  with wax tapers burning,  which rendered the ftreets as light
as at noon day,  and gave a fplendour to
the whole fpedtacle.  In this manner,
they marched through the city,  till three
or four o’clock in the morning,  finging,
with mujical harmony ,  in four,  eight,
twelve,  and even fifteen parts,  accompanied with various inftruments,  fongs,
ballads,  madrigals,  and catches,  or fongs
of humour,  upon fubjedts then in vogue  ;
and thefe,  from being performed in Carnival time,  were called Canti Carnafcia-
lefchL *  \'Y

*  They were firffc colle&ed and publifhed by
Francefeo Spaziano.  Florence,  1559.

Q^4 But

[  H*  ]

But even before this period thecompany
of Laudrjli ,  otPfalm -fingers,  was formed,
which has continued ever fince ;  it is

now called La Compagnia ,  and the morning after my arrival in Florence,  between
fix and feven o’clock,  they paffed by the
inn where I lodged,  in grand proceffion,
dreffed in a whitifh uniform,  with burning tapers in their hands.  They flopped
at the duomoy or great church,  juft by,  tp
fing a chearful hymn,  in three parts,
which they executed very well.  In this
manner,  on Sundays and holidays,  the
tradespeople and artifans form them-
felves into diftindt companies,  and fing
through the flreets,  in their way to
church.  Thofe of the parifh of S.  Benedetto,  we are informed by Crefcimbeni,
were famous all over Italy ;  and at the
great Jubilee,  in the beginning of this
century,  marched through the flreets of
Rome,  finging in fuch a manner as
pleafed and afeonifhed every body.

#

September-

[  ni  ]

September 3.  I went to the little theatre di via Santa Maria ,  to hear the comic
opera of La Pefcatrice,  compofed by Signor Piccini.  There are but four characters in this drama,  two of which were
reprefented by Signora Giovanna Bag-
lioni,  and her filler Colianza,  whom I
had heard at Milan  ;  the other two were
Signor Paolo Bonaveri,  a good tenor,  and
Signor Goftantino Ghigi.  Giov.  Bag-
lioni appeared here to much greater advantage than at Milan,  where the theatre
is of fuch a fize as to require the lungs
of a Stentor to fill it.  She fung very
well ;  her voice is clear,  and always in
tune,  her fhake open and perfect,  and her
tafte and expreffion left nothing to wifh
in the fongs  (he had to fing.  She was
extremely applauded ;  the houfe was
very much crowded,  the band was good,
and the mufic worthy of Signor Piccini ;
full of that fire and fancy which charac-
terife all the productions of that ingenious and original compofer.

*

In

[  234 3

**,•*  «»  ■  -f r

r In the duomo,  or cathedral'here,  which
is one of the large ft churches in Italy,
there is the fineft toned organ I ever heard ;

Whether,  like St.  Paul’s,  in London,  it is

*  *

meliorated by the magnitude and happy
conftru&ion of the building,  I cannot tell,
but it pleafed me exceedingly.  It has
moreover,  the advantage of being very
well played on by Signor Matucci,  the
prefent organift,  whole ftile is not only
grave and fuitable to the church,  but
learned in modulation,  and,  in flow movements,  truly pathetic.

M.  de Maupertuis,  in his voyage to the
polar circle,  was told by the Laplanders
of a monument which they regarded as
the moft wonderful thing in their country  :  upon the merits of this report only,
he fays,  he was almofl alhamed to confefs
that he undertook a very fatiguing and
dangerous journey to fee it.  Something
of the fame kind happened to me  :  in going to the opera,  a fecond time,  I was fur-
prized to find the theatre almofl:  empty;

and,

E 235 1

and,  upon enquiry into the reafon of it,  I
was told that the chief muficians,  and
the beft company of Italy,  were affembled
at Figline,  a town in the Upper Val
d’Arno,  about thirty miles from Florence,
to celebrate a kind of jubilee,  in honour
of Santa Maffimina,  the protedlrefs of that
place ;  and I am almoft afhamed to con-
fefs,  that,  without enquiring of perfons
well informed,  I took upon truft this report,  and travelled all night,  in order to
be prefent at thefe games the next day.

I arrived at the place of adtion about
feven o’clock in the morning,  and found
the road and town very full of country
people,  as at a wake in England,  but faw
very few carriages,  or perfons of rank and
fafhion  ;  however,  considerable preparations were making in the great fquare,
for the diverfions of the evening.

At eleven high mafs was performed in
the principal church,  which was very
much ornamented,  and illuminated with

innumerable

2

[  236  ]

innumerable wax tapers,  which,  together
with the greateft crowd I ever was in,
rendered the heat almofi equal to that of
the black-hole at Calcutta,  and the con-
fequences muft have been as fatal,  had
not the people been permitted to go out
as others preffed in 5 but neither religious
zeal,  nor the love of mufic,  could keep
any one long in the church who was able
to get out.  In fhort,  the whole was a
ftruggle between thofe whofe curiofity
m^de them ftrive to enter the church,  and
others whofe fufferings and fear made
them ufe every means in their power to
get out.

By permitting myfelf to drive with the
flream,  I at length was carried to a tolerable place near one of the doors,  where I
had perfeverance fufficient to remain during the whole fervice,  as I was in conftant
expeftation of being rewarded for my
fufferings,  by the performance of fome
great finger,  whom I had not heard before  ;

t 237 3

fore ;  but in this I was difappointed,  as
all the vocal performers,  except one*,
were very indifferent:  the mufic,  however,
was very pretty  $  full of tafte and fancy  :
it was compofed by Signor Feroce,  Fio-
rentino.  The principal violin was played by Signor Modele,  who,  with his fon,
played very neatly a duet concerto  :  after
this the Abate Fibbietti fuiig a motet
with fuch tafte in the flow movements,
and fire in the quick,  as were truly afto->
nifhing;  his voice was fweet and clear,
his intonations perfectly true  ;  his expref-
fion and fancy charming,  and he left nothing to wi(h,  but a  (hake a little more
open.

At four o’clock in the evening,  the
games began in the great fquare,  which
is a large piece of ground of an oblong
form.  There were 1500 peafants of the
neighbourhood employed upon this occa-
fion,  who had been three months in train-

*  The Abate Fibbretti,  an excellent tenor.

ing:

T

t 238  ]

ing :  they had the ftory of David and
Goliah to reprefen t,  which was done
with the mod:  minute attention to the
facred dory,  and the cofiume of the an-*
cients.  The two armies of the Ifraelites
andPhiliftines met,  marching to the found
of ancient inftruments,  fuch as the crot oh
or cymbal,  the fyftrum,  and others  :  they
were all dreffed a  /’ Antique ,  even to th$
common men j the kings*  princes,  and
generals,  on both tides,  were fnmptuoufly
clad,  and all on horfeback,  as were feveral
hundreds of the troops.

The giant,  Goliah,  advanced and gave
the challenge z the Ifraelites retreated in
great confternation,  till,  at length,  little
David appears,  and entreats Saul to let
him be his champion,  which requeft,  after
fome time is granted ;  the reft of the ftory
was well told,  and it was fo contrived,
that after Goliah was ftunned by the fton$
from David's fling,  in cutting off bis head
with the Giant’s own great fword,  a
quantity of blood gulhed out,  and many

of

C 239  ]

of the fpedtators fhrieked with horror,
fuppofing it to be the blood of the per foil
who reprefented the champion of the
Philiftines,  After this,  there was a
pitched battle between the two armies,
and the Ifraelites,  being victorious,  brought
Pavid in triumph,  at the head of the
prifoners and fpoils of the enemy,  mounted on a fuperb chariot,  in the ancient
form.

At Vefpers I heard the fame dor y fung
in an oratorio,  fet by the Abate Feroce,
in which Signor Fibbietti,  the tenor,  had
a capital part,  to which he did great juf-
tice  :  during this performance,  the whole
town was illuminated in an elegant manner,  and there were very ingenious fireworks played off in the great fquare 5 and,
in judice to the pacific difpofition of the
Tufcans,  I mull obferve,  that though
there were at lead;  20,000 people affem-
bled together on this occafion,  without
guards,  yet not the lead accident or disturbance happened.  This may perhaps
•-  *  :  be

[  24o 3

be owing,  in fome meafure,  to the peciK
liar fobriety of the Italians,  as I do not
remember to have feen one drunken
perfon during the whole time I was in
Italy.

It being impoffible to procure a bed,  if
I would have paid eight or ten zechins
for it,  and the night being very fine,  I
fet out at eleven o’clock for Florence,
where I arrived at four the next morning  :
and though the mufical performance at
Figline was not what I had been made
to expeit,  yet the reft was very fuperior,
and what I was not likely to meet with
elfewhere fo that,  upon the whole,  I
did not think the time fpent in this ex-
curfion entirely loft.

JVednefday9 Sept .  6.  I was prefen t at
the performance of another opera,  fet by
Piccini,  called Le Donne Ft mdicate .  There
were in this drama but four characters,
which were reprefented very well by the
fame perfons as thofe in the Pefcatrice .
There are but two aits in any of the comic

t 241  ]

tnic operas I have yet feen in Italy  >  but
the dances,  which are likewife two,  may
be called balli pantomimic or pantomime
entertainments,  as they are each as long
aimoft as an act of the opera.  There are
two or three charming airs in this bur-
letta:  Coftanza Baglioni fung extremely
well ;  and the tenor,  who is a favourite
here,  was very much applauded  ;  but
though a good linger,  I neither think his
voice or tafte equal to thofe of Signor
Lovatini.

Friday ,  Sept .  7.  In the evening I
heard vefpers performed at the church of
the Annunciation,  by a great number of
fingers,  priefts and laymen,  accompanied
only by a little organ,  a violoncello,  and
two double bafes.  The mufic was in the
old choral Itile of the lixteenth century.
After this full performance,  in the great
choir,  there was other linging in different
chapels of this beautiful church,  by boys
placed in different organ lofts,  who were

R accompanied

[  H2 3

accompanied by tenor and bafe voices be*

low.

Saturday ,  Sept .  8.  This morning,  there
were no other inftruments to accompany
the voices than thofe which I had heard
at the fame church yefterday,  though the
day was a great fefiival :  however,  the
vocal performers were more numerous,,
and they fung a mafs in eight parts,  four
on a fide,  very well  ;  it was compofed
by Orazio Benevoli,  of the Roman fchool,
who flourished foon after Paleflxina,  and,
for that time,  and that kind of mufic,  is
excellent.  There are no regular fugues,
the fubjedts are changed with the words,
•and little or no effect is produced by the
melody,  when divided among fo many
parts ;  but the points and imitations muji
be fhort,  or the movement would be end-
lefs.  However,  the efFedt of the whole-,
fjo lovers of harmony,  is admirable.  After the fer vices were ended,  Signor Veroli,
a very good foprano,  fung a grave motet

i' ■  \

I

a voce

[  243  ]

a voc t fola.  He is ufually the firft finger
in the ferious opera here,  and has a very
pleafing voice,  with a confiderable fhare
of tafte.  The motet was compofed by
Padre Dreyer,  Maejiro di Capella of the
Annunciata .  He was formerly a famous
finger at Drefden,  with a foprano voice,
but on account of the too great notice
which was taken of him,  by a perfon of
diftindtion there,  he was fent away,  and
has been many years eftablifhcd in this
city  :  he is now in years ;  I had a long
converfation with him,  and found him
very intelligent and obliging.  He fays,
the mufic of Paleftrina is ufed here on all
days,  except feftivals ;  and,  upon my re-
quefting him to favour me with a copy
of the mod celebrated compofition performed in his church,  he told me that it
was the Miferere of Allegri ,  which is fung
here,  as in the Pope’s chapel,  only on
Good Fridays,  and that it fhould be tran-
fcribed for me immediately  :  but as I
had already obtained a copy of that fall 2 mou$

[  244  ]

mous compolition from Padre Martini,
who had one made by the exprefs order of the late Pope,  I declined the ac^
ceptance of his obliging offer.

In the evening I went again to the
opera of Le Donne Vendicate ,  which I
mention only becaufe it gives me an opportunity of remarking the extraordinary
good humour of an Italian audience ;
for this being the laft night of the prefen t company’s performance,  the crowd
and applaufe were prodigious ;  printed
fonnets,  in praife of fingers and dancers,
were thrown from the flips,  and feen flying about the houfe in great numbers,
for which the audience fcrambled with
much eagernefs,  and at the clofe of
all,  it was rather acclamation than ap-

Sunday ,  Sept .  9.  This morning I was
at a very folemn fervice in the convent
delle Monache ,.  or nuns of the Portico ,
about a mile from Florence,  This performance coft upwards of 300 zechins ;

•

it

[  245 3

it was the laft confecration of eight nuns ;
the archbilhop was there,  a great deal of
the firft company of Florence,  and a very
numerous band of vocal and inftrumental
performers.  I had here the pleafure
of hearing Signor Manzoli.  In the firft
part of the mafs,  there was a trio between
him.  Signor Veroli,  and the fecond maejlro
of the Nunziata,  whofe voice is a Bari-
tono.  The mufic of the mafs was by
Signor Soffi,  of Lucca,  but he not being
prefent.  Signor Veroli beat time to the
chorufles.  Befides the verfes which Signor Manzoli fung in the mafs,  with
which I was very much delighted,  though
his voic#  feemed lefs powerful,  even in a
fpiall church,  than when he was in England  ;  he performed a charming motet,  compofed by Signor Monza,  of
Milan,

■»

m

Signor Guarducci,  and Sigrtor Riccia-
relli,  left Florence a few days only before my arrival there,  otherwife I might
have heard a duo fung by Signor Man-

R 3 zoli

[  246  ]

zoliand Signor Guarducci,  who performed
together at a private concert:  this was a
lols the more to be regretted,  as thefe two
great performers are feldom in the fame
place,  and very rarely fing together.

At prefent,  though Florence does not
abound in mufical geniufles of it’s own
growth,  yet it is very well fupplied from
other places ;  for,  belides the performers
above mentioned.  Signor Campioni is
fettled here,  as maejlro di Capella to the
grand duke j Signor Dottel,  the celebrated performer on the German flute,  is of
his band,  and Signor Nardini is engaged
here,  as principal violin,  in the fervice of
the fame prince  *.

I heard like wife in this city a good performer on the double harp.  Signora Anna
Fond,  from Vienna,  who is in the fervice
of the court ;  and my little countryman,
Linley,  who had been two years under

*  Thefe three eminent maflers,  whofe merit is
well known to all Europe,  have been lately tempted
to quit Leghorn,  by the munificence of the grand
duke.

Signor

[  H7  \

Signor Nardini,  was at Florence when I
arrived there,  and was universally admired.
The Tommqfino ,  as he is called,  and the
little Mozart,  are talked of all over Italy,
as the mod promifing geniuffes of this age.

The comedy of il Sag gw Amico ,  by
Goldoni,  which I had feen at Brefcia,  wafc
reprefented this evening at another theatre,
larger and more fplendid than that where
I had feen the burlettas.  I found fo
much company there,  that it was impof-
fible to procure a feat :  the play was dull*
but there was a Tufkiih dance between
the adts,  which lifted near half an hour  :
it was very ingenious,  and the fcenes and
dreftes were the moft magnificent I had
ever feemin my life

In my way to this theatre,  juft as it
was growing dark,  I met in the ftreets a
company of Laudijli :  they had been at
Fiefole,  and were proceeding in procef-
fion to their own little church.  I had

'  *  The price for the pit in this theatre,  and for

that of every comic opera in Italy,  is one paul,  a-
mountingto almoft fix pence Englifh.

:  R 4

the

r 24s  ]

the ruriofity  «)  follow the'in,  and procured a book of the words they were fing-
ing*.  They ftopt at every church in
their way,  to fing a ftanza in three parts;
and when they arrived at their own
church,  into which I gained admiflion,
there was a band of inftruments to receive
them,  who,  between each ftanza that they
fung,  played a fymphony.  They performed vefpers in Canto Fermo%  aflifted
by their chaplain  :  the whole was conduced with great decorum,  and was certainly a very innocent amufement.  Some
of the companies of Laudijli,  in Florence,
have fubfifted near five hundred years.  I
found a folio MS.  of Laudi Spiritual with
the notes,  in the Magliabecchi library,
compofed for the company of friars of
the order of the Umiliati ,  and fung at the
church of All Saints,  Florence,  1336.

Monday ,  Sept.  10.  This afternoon,  I

*  The title of thefe hymns runs thus,  Laudi
da Cantarfi da Fratelli della verier abil Compagnia di
S.  M.  Maddalena dey pazzi e S.  Guifeppe in S.  Ma-
‘  rla in Campidoglio in Firenze ,  1770.

had

1 249  ]

had the pleafure of hearing Signor Nardini,  and his little fcholar Linley,  at a
great concert,  at the houfe of Mr.  Hemp-
fon,  an Englifh gentleman,  where there
was much company.  This gentleman
plays the common flute in a particular

manner,  improving the tone very much,

,  .  >  '

by inferring a piece of fpunge into the
mouth-piece,  through which the wind
pafles.  He performed two or three difficult concertos,  by Hafle,  and Nardini,
very well.  There was a perfon from
Perugia,  who played a folo on the viol
d’amore,  very agreeably;  and Signor
Nardini played both a folo and a concerto,
of his own compofition,  in fuch a manner as to leave nothing to wifti :  his tone
<  ■

is even and fweet ;  not very loud,  but
clear and certain  ;  he has a great deal of
expreflion in his flow movements,  which,
it is faid,  he has happily caught from his
mafter Tartini.  As to execution,  he will
fatisfy and pleafe more than furprize :  in
fhort,  he feems the completed:  player on

the

[  25°  3

the violin in all Italy 5 and,  according
to my feelings and judgment,  his jftile

is delicate,  judicious,  and highly fi-

nifhed  *.

The Tommafmo Linley played two
concertos,  very much in the manner of
his mailer.  Signor Nardini has a great
number of young profeffors under his

care,  as his mailer,  Tartini,  ufed to have,
among whom is a fon of Mr.  Agus,  from
England.

Tuefday 1 1 .  At another great acca~
demia,  at the houfe of Signor Domenico
Baldigiani,  I this evening met with the
famous 1m prove if a trice.  Signora Mad-
dalena Morelli,  commonly called La Co -
rUla ,  who is likewife a fcholar of Signor
Nardini,  on the violin 3 and afterwards I
was frequently at her houfe -f*.  Befides

*  Whoever has heard the poliihed performance
of the celebrated Madame Sirmen,  may form a pretty
juft idea of Signor Nardini’s manner of playing.

f She has,  almoft every evening,  a converfaticne ,
©r aftembly,  which is much frequented by the
foreigners,  and men of letters,  at Florence.

her

[  2 51 3

her wonderful talent of fpeaking verfes
extempore upon any given fubjedt,  and
being able to play a ripieno part,  on the
violin,  in concert,  fhe fings with a great
deal of expreffion,  and has a confiderable
fhare of execution.

I was feveral times at the houfe of Signor Campioni,  whofe trios have been'  fa
well received in England.  He is married to a lady who paints very well,  and
who is likewife a neat performer,  on the
harpfichord.  He has the greatefl collection of old mufic,  particularly Madrigals,
of the fixteenth and feventeenth centuries,

-  r

Padre Martini’s excepted,  that I ever faw ;

he has likewife himfelf compofed a great

deal for the church,  fince his eftablifh-

ment at Florence.  He fhewed me the

fcore of a Te Deum ,  which he fet for the
•  *

birth of the grand duke’s eldeft daughter,
full of curious canons,  and ingenious con*
trivances :  it was performed by a band of
two hundred voices and inftruments.

[  ^52 1

Among th z Dilettanti,  at Florence,  the
Marquis of Ligniville is regarded as a
.  good theorift and compofer.  He has fet
the hymn Salve Regina in Canon ,  for three
voices.  The mufic is neatly engraved,
and copies of it are given to his friends.
The Marquis was not in Florence during

V

my refidence there ;  however,  I was pre-
fented with a copy of this curious piece,
by a mufician in the fervice of his excellence

-  Mr.  Perkins,  an Englifh gentleman,
who has refided a confiderable time in
this city and in Bologna,  is likewife a
good mufician.  A letter from Padre

*  In the title page of this Salve Regina ,  the Marquis of Ligniville is ftiled Prince of Conca,  chamberlain to their Imperial Majefties,  director of the
mufic of the court in Tufcany,  and member of the
philharmonic fociety of Bologna.  He is Prince
of Conca,  in the kingdom of Naples,  b y right of
his mother ;  is fon of the famous Marfhal Ligniville,  who was killed in the gardens of Colorno,  a
country houfe belonging to the Duke of Parma,
during the war of 1733.  -  '  ^  :

Martini

[  253  ]

Martini procured me the honour of his
acquaintance.  This gentlemen is entitled to my belt acknowledgments for
many mulical curiofities,  with which he
was fo kind to furnilh me;  and among
the reft,  for an eflay,  of which he is him-
felf the author,  on the capacity and extent
of the violoncello,  in imitating the violin,
flute,  French horn,  trumpet,  hautboy,  and
balloon.

At Florence,  I found the harplichord
of Zarlino,  which is mentioned in the fe-
cond part of his Harmonical Inftitutions,
p.  140.  This inftrument was invented
by Zarlino,  in order to give the temperament and modulation of the three genera,
the diatonic,  chromatic,  and enharmonic;
and was conftrudted,  under his direftion,
in the year 1548,  by Dominico Pefarefe  :
it is now in the pofleffion of Signora
Moncini,  widow of the late com-
pofer Pifcetti.  I copied Zarlino’s in-
ftruftions for tuning it,  from his own
hand-writing,  on the back of the foreboard  ;

[  2 54 3

board  ;  but I fhall referve them,  and the
particular defcription of this curious in-
ftrument,  for the Hiftory of Mufic,  to
which they more properly belong.

The grand duke’s gallery*  the Pitti palace,  the Lorenziana,  the Magliabecchi,
and the Rinuccini libraries,  all furnifhed
reflections and materials for my intended
work;  and the conventions with which
I was honoured by Dr.  Bicchierai,  Dr.
Perelli,  profeffor of mathematics.  Dr.
Guadagni,  profeffor of experimental phi-*
lofophy,  il propofto Dr.  Foffi,  Signor Ban-
dini,  librarian to the grand duke,  and  .
others ;  who facilitated my enquiries,  and
afforded me every opportunity for information I could with,  rendered by refb
dence,  in this delightful city,  to which

all the arts have been fo much and fo

S

long indebted,  at once both pleafant and
profitable.

SIENNA.

There had been an opera,  in this city,
during the month of Auguft,  in which

Signor

t 2 55  ]

Signor Nicolini was the principal finger,
and very much approved  ;  but fo capricious is public favour,  that,  with the
fame talents,  the fame voice,  the fame
performers,  and in the fame compolitions,
he was totally difliked and neglefted,  at
Lucca,  in the month of September !

MONTEFIASCONE.

September 18.  In my way to Rome,  I
vifited Signor Guarducci,  who has here
built himfelf a very good houfe,  and fitted
it up in the Englifh manner,  with great
tafle.  He had already been apprized of
my journey into Italy,  and received me
in the politeft manner imaginable.  He
was fo obliging as to let me hear him,  in
a fong of Signor Sacchini’s compofition,
which he fung divinely.  His voice,  I
thinks is more powerful than when he
was in England,  and his tafte and ex-
preflion feem to have received every pof-
fible degree of fele&ion and refinement.
Fie is a very chafte performer,  and adds

but

[  256  ]

but few notes ;  thofe few notes,  however,
are fo well chofen,  that they product
great effects,  and leave the ear thoroughly
fatisfied.  He has a winter-houfe in Florence,  and has built this at Montefiafcone,
the place of his birth,  to retire to in fum-
mer,  and to receive his mo ther,  and his brothers and fitters  :  it is charmingly fituated,
commanding,  on one fide,  a fine profpeft
of the country,  as far as Aquapendcnte,
and a great part of the Lake of Bolfena  ;
and,  on the other,  the hills of Viterbo,
and the country leading to it.  He fays
he has totally quitted the ttage,  and intends finging no more in public  :  this is
a lofs to Italy,  as I find he is now allow-
ed by the Italians the firft place among
all the fingers of the prefent period  ;  and,
at Rome,  they ftill fpeak of his performance,  in Piccini’s-  Didone Abbandonata ,
with rapture.  Signor Guarducci,  in a
manner truly obliging,  gave me letters to
eminent profefihrs at Rome and Naples,
and not only treated me with the greateft

hofpitality.

t 257 I  '

hoipitality while under his roof,  but loach
ed my chaife with exquifite wine,  the produce of his own vineyard*  and with other
refrefhments

Pv O M  &

It is impoffible to approach this city*
the capital of the world,  for fuch it Jl'ilt
is with refpedt to the arts*  without fern*
fations which ho other fituation can excite.  The remains of antiquity,  like the
Sibyls works of old,  become of greater
value the lefs there is of them.  At a traveller’s firft entrance into Rome*  every

flick,  half devoured by time*  or flone in-

\

crufced with mofs,  is fo interefting,  that
his curiofity is not to be fatisfxed but by
a moft minute examination of it ;  left
the precious fragments of fome venerable pile,  ot the memorial of fome illustrious atchievement*  (hould be palled
unnoticed.

*  The wine of Montefiaicone is proverbially famous all over Italy.

S Though

[  25«  ]

Though my views and expectations,
on arriving in this city,  were chiefly confined to antiquities,  and the inedited materials with which the Vatican and other
libraries might furnifh me,  relative to
ancient mujic ,  yet I received great pleafure
from the modern .

September 21.  The day after my arrival,  at his Grace the Duke of Dorfet’s,  I
heard Signor Celefiini,  the principal violin here,  who is a very neat,  and expref-
five performer  :  he was feconded by Signor Corri,  who is an ingenious compofer,
and fings in a very good tafte j there
was likewife a good performer on the
violoncello.

0-

Signor Celefiini played,  among other
things,  onp of his own folos,  which was
very pleafing,  though extremely difficult,
with great brilliancy,  tafte,  and pre-
cifion.

Saturday ,  Sept.  22.  This evening Mr,
Beckford,  to whofe zeal for the bufinefs
in which I am embarked I have infinite

obliga-

1

[  259 1

obligations,  made a concert for me*
confifting of twelve or fourteen of
the bed:  performers in Rome ;  thefe
were led by Signor CeleftinL There
were three voices,  Signor Criftofero,  of
the Pope’s chapel,  who lings very much
in Guarduccfs way,  and is little inferior
to him in delicacy  ;  if Graffetto ,  a boy,
who fubmitted to mutilation by his
own choice,  and again ft the advice of his
friends,  for the prefervation of his voice,
wThich is indeed a very good one,  and
he is,  in other refpe&s,  a very pleating
finger ;  and a buffo tenor,  a very comical
fellow,

September 23.  I was introduced to
Signor Crifpi,  a celebrated Maejiro diCa-

'  1

pelldy at whofe houfe there was an acca -
demia this evening,  in which the vocal
part was performed by his wife.  This
compofer has a n accademia at his houfe
every Friday evening,  at which there is
uiually a good band and much company.

S 2  .  Septem -

[  ^6o  ]

September 24,  There was a grand Fun*
zioni at the Santi Apojioli ,  on account of
the reconciliation  ©f the Pope and the
King of Portugal,  It was at this church
that I firfl faw his Holinefs,  and a great
number of Cardinals,  and heard T’e Deum •
There were two large bands of mufic,
and an immenfe crowd.  The mufic was
compofed by Signor Mofi.  Criftofero
fung charmingly ;  the airs were pretty*
but the chorufles poor.

In the evening the outfide of the cupola,  church,  and colonade of St.  Peter,
together with the  .Vatican palace,  were
finely illuminated,  which affords afpedla-
cle to the inhabitants of Rome,  n&t to
be equalled in the univerfe.  And in the
balconies,  next to the ftreet,  at the palaces of mod of the Cardinals,  befldes
illuminations,  there were concerts of very
numerous bands of inftrumental performers  ;  but chiefly at the refidence of
the Portuguefe Ambaflador,  where the
hands employed amounted to above a

hun-

[  26!  j

hundred,  and thefe continued their performance all night.  However,  this mu*
fie,  though in the open air,  was too noify
for me,  and I retreated from it early,  in
order to have my ears foothed with more
placid founds at the Duke of Dorfet’s
concert.

Fuefday 25.  I had this morning the
honour of being prefented to Cardinal
Alexander Albani,  principal librarian to
the Vatican,  and Prefeltoy or Governor
of the Pope’s chapel.  His eminence received me in the moft obliging and con-
defeendingmanner imaginable,  taking me
by the hand,  and faying,  Figlio mio ,  che
volet£%  “  My fon,  what do you wifh I
“  fhould do for you  ?”  And upon my
telling the views with which I came into
Italy,  and exprefling a defire to be permitted to examine MSS.  in the Vatican
library,  and in the archives of the pontifical chapel,  relative to mufic,  he faid,
“  You fhall have the permiflion you de-
“  fire,  but write it down in the form of

S 3

a

[  262  ]

*e a memorial f  ’  which being done,  he
called for his fecretary,  to whom he gave
inflrudiions to draw up an order,  which
he figned,  and addreffed to Monfignore
r Arcivefcovo di Apomea ,  prefetto della Va~
ca7ia ,  to admit me into the Vatican library when I pleafed,  to let me fee what
books and MSS.  I pleafed,  and to.  have
Copied what I pleafed.

This wras an important point gained,
but,  without the intelligence and affift-
ance of the Abate Elie,  one of the cujiodi ,
pr keepers of the books in the Vatican,
I fhould have been but little the better
for the permiffion I had obtained.  For
the MSS.  in this celebrated library are fo
numerous,  and many of them in fuch
diforder,  that to find the tradts I wifhed
would have been a work of years,  had
he not pointed them out*.  This gentleman employed five or fix whole days

$  As yet there is no regular catalogue of the
weftern MSS.  in the Vatican library.  One was
made and printed fbme years ago,  in fourteen volumes

.  1 1  *

in making a catalogue for me of all that
the Vatican contained relative to my
work ;  after which I regularly fpent my
mornings there,  in reading and marking
fuch things as I wifhed to have copied
entirely,  or from which I was dehrous
of extradts ;  and thefe my good friend
the Abate undertook to tranfcribe for me,
while I went to Naples.

During my firfl:  relidence at Rome,  I
had fo much to fee,  and fo many enquiries to make,  relative to ancient mulic,
and fpent fo much time in the Vatican
and other libraries,  that I had but little
to fpare for the modern  ;  however,  that
little was fpent much to my fatisfadtion,
in hearing public performances in the
churches,  and private concerts in the
houfes of feveral profeffors,  as well as
perfons of diftindtion.  But as many days
were fpent here in much the fame man-

lumes folio,  of the eaflern,  but the author died before he had completed the work j and it has never
fincc been refumed by any other«

S 4

ner.

[  2^4 1

net,  to avoid repetition,  I  (hall,  for the
prefent,  drop the journal ftile,  and try to
recolledt the principal mufical events
which happened while I was at Rome,
without attending to dates  ;  and,  in
enumerating thefe I fhould think myfelf
guilty of ingratitude,  if I paffed over in
filence the countenance and affiftance
with which  \  was honoured by my own
countrymen.  I hope I  (hall therefore be
pardoned the liberty of naming them oc«
cafionally,  with the refpedl due to their
rank,  and the fervices I received from
them.

And firft,  I cannot refill the vanity of
faying,  that I paffed few nights at Rome
without hearing mufic at the Duke of
Porfet’s^  and that his grace had the
goodnefs to contrive to have my curiofity
gratified by fomething new and curious,
either in composition or performance,  at
pioft of thefe concerts.  It was here that
I had an opportunity of meeting the bell
performers in Rome,  at a time when the

theatres

r  • 265  ]

theatres were ffiut,  and it would have
been difficult to have heard them elfe-
where.

To Mr.  Leighton,  whofe performance
and tafte in mufic are fuperior to thofe
of moft gentlemen,  I am indebted for
fome curious compofitions,  and for the
converfation of feveral perfons in Rome,
eminent for their fkill in the art,  and
learning in the fcience of found ;  among
whom were the Marchefe Gabriele,  and
Monlignor Reggio.

To the counlel and affiftance of thofe
eminent antiquaries,  Meffieurs Jenkins,
Morrifon,  and Byers,  I owe the greateft
part of my original drawings of ancient
inflruments  ;  and to their adtive friend-
fhip I like wife owe much of the pleafure
and information I received at Rome.

And now,  having acknowledged thefe
debts to my countrymen,  I mud again
fay,  that the men of learning and genius
among the Italians have,  throughout my
journey,  treated me with the utmoft

hof-

[  266  ]

liofpitality and kindnefs,  each Teeming to
ftrive who  £hou!d mo ft contribute to my
information and amufement.  For,  except the civilities with which I was honoured at Venice and Florence by Mr.
Richie,  Sir Horace Mann,  and Meflieurs
Perkins and Hempfon,  I owe all my information and entertainment,  till my arrival at Rome,  to the Italians themfelves.
Indeed,  it was to them I chiefly ad-
dr e fled myfelf,  thinking it moft profitable,  both in point of language and
information,  to mix with the natives.
But at Rome and Naples I met with To
many Englifh,  and found them all To
ready to countenance and aflift me in my
enquiries,  that I had no occafion,  or,
indeed,  time,  to deliver feveral letters,
with which I was furnilhed,  to eminent
perfons,  in the literary and mufical world,
at thofe two capitals.

However,  among the Romans I muft
diftinguifh il Cavalier Pirenefe ,  who gave
me feveral drawings,  and pointed out

4 proper

[  267  ]

proper obje&s for others,  of fuch ancient
inftruments as Hill fubfilt entire,  among
the bell remains of antiquity ;  the A-
bate Orfini,  a great colle&or of mufical
compofitions and trails,  who,  among
other ufeful materials for my intended
work,  furnifhed me with a fight and catalogue of all the mufical dramas that
have been performed at Rome,  from the
beginning of the laft century to the pre-
fent time ;  Counfellor Reiffenftein,  who,
though not a native of Rome,  has lived
fo long there,  and is poffefled of fo much
learning and tafte in the fine arts,  that
I found myfelf much enlightened by
his converfation,  and indebted to his
zeal and intelligence for very lingular
fervices ;  and the Cavalier Santarelli,  Gz-
fellano di Malta  %  and Maejlro di Capella
to his Holinefs.

To Signor Santarelli I was favoured
with a letter from Padre Martini,  which

*  As Capellano di Malta he wears a fmall crofs
and an ivory liar on his breaft.

had

[  263  ]

bad all the effect I could wifh,  as I ibon
found this excellent mufician and worthy
man,  not only difpofed to treat me with
politenefs,  but even with friendlhip in
the utmoft extent of the word  :  he was
the more able to render me real fervices
in my mufical enquiries,  as,  befides his
ftation in the Pope’s chapel,  and his great
fkill and experience in the pradical part,
I found him deep in the theory,  and
learned in the hiftory of his profeflion,
having been many years employed in the
following curious work,  Della Mujica del
Santuario e della difciplina de fnoi Cantori ;
or,  an Hiftorical Diflertation on Church
Mu lie.  This work is divided into different centuries fince the time of our Saviour,  as fecolo primo ,  fee .  fecundo ,  fee .
terzo ,  &c.  giving authorities throughout,
from ecclefiaftical hiftory.  The firft volume was printed in the year 1764,  but
has never yet been published  :  the fecond,
in MS.  is in great forwardnefs ;  it feems
to fupply all the deficiencies of another

curious

[  269 3

curious and fcarce work on the fame fabled,  publifhed in 1711,  called Ojfervazi-
oni per ben regolare il coro della Capella pon-
tificia or,  Rules for conduding the Choir
of the Pope’s Chapel,  by Andrea Adamo  ;

-  but the historical part of this book,  beginning only at the year 1400,  and ending in 1711,  that of Signor Santerelli,
which begins with the earlieft ages of
the church,  and continues to the prefer**
time,  would certainly be a valuable
acquifition to fuch lovers of church
mufic as wifh to trace it from it’s
fource*.

*  It Teems as if Signor Santarelli was prevented
from publifhing his work,  by the want of a patron
worthy of it.  He is fo fenfible of the contempt
with which mufic is treated at prefent,  by the
lirft dignitaries of the church,  that he entertains
but fmall hopes of the fuccefs of his book,  though
it has been a work of much time and labour,  and
feems worthy the patronage and protection of his
Holinefs,  for the ufe of whofe fervants,  as well as
for the fervice of mufic in general,  it is in an
eminent degree calculated.

Befides

\

*

[  27°  3

Befides communicating to me his tin**
publifhed printed book,  and the fecond
volume in MS.  Signor Santarelli obliged
me with extracts from two MS.  volumes
of curious anecdotes,  and paffages from
old and fcarce books relative to mufic  >
the whole collected in the courfe of many
years converfation and reading.  I muft
add to thefe favours,  that of procuring
me fome of the moll curious and fcarce
printed books which I fought at Rom©  i
it was owing to his friendly zeal likewife,
that,  after three weeks fpent in vain by
myfelf and friends there,  in fearch of the
firft oratorio that was ever fet to mufic,  I
at length got a fight and copy of it ;  and,
to crown the whole,  he joined to all thefe
benefits,  not only that of furnifhing me
with a true and genuine copy of the famous Miferere of Allegri ,  but all the com^
portions performed in the Pope’s chapel
during Paffion Week*  together with
many others of Palejlrina ,  Benevoliy Luccd

Marenzds and others which have never
*  /

been

[  -VJ\  3

been printed,  nor have they ever been per*
formed but in that chapel.

I was not more curious about the Vatican library,  than the Pope’s chapel,  that
celebrated fanduary in which church
mufic feems to have had it’s birth,  or at
leaft to have received its firfi:  refinement  $
and concerning this chapel I was favoured with all the fatisfadion I could wifh
from the Cav.  Santarelli.

In the Pope’s,  or Siftine chapel,  no organ,  or inftrument of any kind,  is employed in accompanying the voices,  which
confifl:  of thirty-two j eight bafes,  eight
tenors,  eight counter-tenors,  and eight
fopranos,  or trebles  ;  thefe are all in ordinary  :  there is likewife a number of
fupernumeraries ready to fupply the places
of thofe who are occafionally abfent,  fo
that the fingers are never fewer than
thirty-two,  on common days,  but on
great feftivals they are nearly doubled*.

*  Befides the fupernumerary expectants of this
chapel,  many of  ^he capital opera fingers from

pther

[  27*  ]

The drefs of the fingers in ordinary,  is
a kind of purple uniform  ;  their pay is
not great,  and at prefent fubjecfts of fupe-
rior merit,  belonging to this eftablifhmenf,
meet with but little notice or encouragement,  fo that mufic here begins to degenerate and decline very much ;  to which
the high falaries given to fine voices and
fingers of great abilities in the numerous
operas throughout Italy,  and,  indeed,  all
over Europe,  greatly contribute,  by little
and little,  all thofe embellifhments and
refinements in the execution of ancient
mufic,  as well as the elegant fimplicity
for which that of this chapel is fo celebrated,  will be loft.  Formerly,  even the
Canto Fermo was here infinitely fuperior
to that of every other place by its purity,
and by the expreffive manner in which
it was chanted.

I had indeed been told,  before my arrival at Rome,  by a friend who had re-

%

other parts of Italy,  are employed in Pallion

Week.

fided

[  273  ]

f-  »

lided there nineteen years,  that I mint
not expedt to find the mufic of the Pope’s
chapel fo fuperior in the performance
to that of the reft of Italy,  as it had been
in times paft,  before operas were invented
and fuch great falaries given to the principal
lingers ;  then the Pope's muficians being
better paid,  were confequehtly more likely to be poftefled of abilities fuperior to
thofe elfewhere ;  but,  at prefent,  this is
not the cafe,  and the confequence is obvious  ;  their fituation is fomewhat fimjlar
to that of our chorifters and choirmen in
England,  where their falaries remain at the
original efiablithment,  and at that ooint
of perfection their performance feems to
remain likewife  ;  living is dearer ;  money
of lefs value ;  more is given elfewhere 5
another profefliop is ufuaily tacked to
that of iinging,  in order to obtain a
livelihood;  and church mufic,  of courfe,
falls into decay,  and goes from bad to
worfe,  while that of the theatres re-

T ceives

[  274 1

ceives daily improvements by additional
rewards

*  See remarks on Mr.  Avifon’s EfTay on Mufical
Expreffion,  publifhed 1753,  in which the author has
well explained the caufes of degeneracy in our
church mufic,  and the want of fkill in the performers
of it.  With refpedt to thefe he fays,  44 I believe
44 if the flatutes of every cathedral were examined,
44 it would appear,  that the falary allotted to each
4 4 member was exadfly proportioned one to the other :
44 perhaps thus 5 to the chorifter,  or finging boy,
44 five pounds  ;  to the finging man,  ten  ;  to the
44 minor canon,  twenty  ;  the organift the fame ;
44 to the canon or refidentiary,  forty  ;  and to the
44 dean,  eighty pounds per annum  \  which,  if mul-
44 tiplied by four,  would make the firft twenty,  the
44 fecond forty,  the third eighty,  the fourth one
44 hundred and fixty,  and the fifth three hundred
44 and twenty  :  this,  with the chance of livings to
44 the clergy,  would be a decent competency for
44 each in his ftation j and I may venture to affirm,
44 that the three former would be very well con-
44 tented with it :  yet,  even this increafe will not
44 fatisfy the two latter j but,  without fcruple or
44 remorfe,  they  (by what authority I know not)
44 divide three fourths of the profits arifing from
44 the portions allotted to their inferiors,  among
44 themfelves  ;  a manifest abufe of the founder’s in-
44 tention,  and injuftice to the feveral incumbents  :
64 hence a canonry comes to be valued at two hun-

44 dred.

[  275  }

Signor Santarelli favoured me with the

o

following particulars relative to the famous Miferere of Allegri This piece,
which,  for upwards of a hundred and fifty
years,  has been annually performed in Paf-
iion Week at the Pope’s chapel,  on Wed-
nefday and Good-Friday,  and which,  in
appearance,  is fo fimple as to make thofe,
who have only feen it on paper,  wonder
whence its beauty and effect could arife,
owes its reputation more to the manner
in which it is performed,  than to the com-
pofition  :  the fame mufic is many times
repeated to different words,  and the
fingers have,  by tradition,  certain cuftoms,
exprefiions,  and graces of convention,
f certe efprejjioni e GruppiJ which produce

<c dred,  and a deanry at four hundred pounds per
<e annum  ;  and if this computation over-rates the
<e value of fome,  others however mud be allowed
<c to exceed it greatly.”

*  Miferere mei ,  Deus ,  Sec.  Have mercy upon
me,  O God  !  pf.  51.  Gregorio Allegri was a de-
feendant of the famous painter Correggio,  whofe
family-name was Allegri.

T 2

great

[  276  ]

great effects ;  fuch as fwelling and diminishing the founds altogether ;  accelerating or retarding the meafure at fome particular words,  and finging fome entire
verfes quicker than others.  Thus far Signor Santarelli.  Let me add,  from Andrea
Ad ami,  in the work mentioned above,
that,  “  After feverai vain attempts by
“  preceding compofers,  for more than a
“  hundred years,  to fet the fame words
“  to the fatisfadlion of the heads of
“  the church  ;  Gregorio Allegri fucceed-
“  ed fo well,  as to merit eternal praife ;
<(  for with few notes,  well modulated,
t£  and well under flood,  he compofed fuch
*c a Miferere as will continue to be fung
“  on the fame days,  every year,  for ages
*$yet to come  ;  and one that is conceived
**  in fuch juft proportions as will afto-
“  nifh future times,  and ravifh,  as at pre-
“  fent,  the foul of every hearer.”

However,  fome of the great effedts pro-

*

duced by this piece,  may,  perhaps,  be juflly
attributed to the time,  place,  and folem-
,  nity

[  277 1

nity of the ceremonials,  ufed daring the
performance  :  the pope and conclave are
all proftrated on the ground;  the candles
of the chapel,  and the torches of the balustrade,  are extinguished,  one by one ;  and
the laid verfe of this pfalm is terminated
by two choirs ;  the Maejlro di Capella
beating time flower and flower,  and the
Angers diminifliing or rather extinguifhing
the harmony,  by little and little,  to a perfect point

It is likewife performed by feledt voices,
who have frequent rehearfals,  particularly
on the Monday in Paflion Week,  which
is wholly fpent in repeating and polifhing
the performance.

This compofition ufed to be held fo
facred,  that it was imagined excommunication would be the confequence of an
attempt to tranfcribe it.  Padre Martini

*  Adami’s inftru&ions are thefe  : — Averta pure
il Signor Maefiro che V ultimo verfo del Salmo termina
a due Coriy e pero fara la Battuta Adagioy per finirlo
Piano y f?norzando a pocoy a poco TArmonia.

Oflerv.  per reg.  il Coro della cap.  pont.  p.  36.

T 3  %  told

[  2?8  ]

told me there were never more than two
copies of it made by authority,  one of
which was for the late king of Portugal,
and the other for himfelf :  this laft he
permitted me to tranfcribe at Bologna,
and Signor Santarelli favoured me with
another copy from the archives of the
Pope’s chapel :  upon collating thefe two
copies,  I find them to agree pretty exactly,  except in the firft verfe.  I have feen
feveral fpurious copies of this compofition
in the poffeffion of different perfons,  in
which the melody of the foprano ,  or upper part,  was tolerably corredt,  but the
other parts differed very much  ;  and this
inclined me to fuppofe the upper part to
have been written from memory,  which,
being fo often repeated to different words
in the performance,  would not be difficult
to do,  and the other parts to have been
made to it by fome modern contra-puntifl
afterwards.

Before I quit a fubjedt fo interefling to
the lovers of church mufic,  I fhall add

the

[  279 1

the following anecdote,  which was givCn
me likewife by Signor Santarelli.

The Emperor Leopold the firft,  not
only a lover and patron of mufic,  but a
good compofer himfelf,  ordered his am-
baffador,  at Rome,  to entreat the Pope to
permit him to have a copy of the celebrated Mlferere of Allegri ,  for the ufe of
the Imperial chapel at Vienna  ;  which being granted,  a copy was made by the Sig-
nor Maejlro of the Pope’s chapel,  and
fent to the Emperor,  who had then in his
iervice fome of the fir  (l fingers of the age  ;
but,  notwithdanding the abilities of the
performers,  this compofition was fo far
from anfwering the expectations of the
Emperor and his court,  in the execution,  that he concluded the Pope’s Maejlro
di Capella ,  in order to keep it a myftery,
had put a trick upon him,  and fent him
another compofition*.  Upon which,  in

*  Signor Santarelli’s words were thefe  : — ®>uan-
tunque Cantato da Mufici foavijjimi ,  fece alia Corte
di V lenna la Mifera Comparfa di un fimpBcijfimo
falfo Bordone .

T 4

great

[  2SO  ,]

great wrath,  he fent an exprefs to his Ho^
linefs,  with a complaint againft the
Maejtro Hi Cap ell a,  which occafioned his
immediate difgrace,  and difmiffion from
the fervice of the papal chapel;  and in fb
great a degree was the Pope offended,  at
the fuppofed impolition of his compofer,
that,  for a long time,  he would neither

fee him,  or hear his defence  ;  however,

•»

at length,  the poor man got one of the
cardinals to plead his caufe,  and to ac^
quaint his Holinefs,  that the ftile of fing-
ing in his chapel,  particularly in performing the Miferere ,  was fuch as could not
be expreffed by notes,  nor taught or tranf-
mitted to any other place,  but by example;
for which reafon the piece in queflion,
though faithfully tranfcribed,  muff fail
in its effedt,  when performed elfewhere.
His Holinefs did not underftand mufic,
and could hardly comprehend how”  the
fame notes fhould found fo differently in
different places ;  however,  he ordered
his Maejlro di Capella to write down his

defence.

i  ]

defence,  in.  order to be fent to Vienna*
Which was done j and the Emperor,  feeing no other way of gratifying his wifhes
with refpedt to this compohtion,  begged
of the Pope,  that fome of the muficians
in the fervice of his Holinefs,  might be
fent to Vienna,  to inftrudt thofe in the
fervice of his chapel how to perform the
Miferere of Allegri,  in the fame expreffive
manner as in the Siftine chapel at Rome,

which was granted.  But,  before they ar-

>

rived,  a war broke out with the Turks,
which called the emperor from Vienna;

and the Miferere has never yet,  perhaps,

>

been truly performed,  but in the Pope’s
chapel

I vifited feveral times,  while I was at
Rome,  Signor Mazzanti,  who not only
lings with exquifite tafle,  but is likewife

v  *  t

an excellent mulician.  He is both a
reader and a writer on the fubjedt of
mufic,  as well as a conliderable collector
of books and manufcripts.  The richnefs

of

[  282  ]

of his tafie,  in finging,  makes ample a-
mends for the want of force in his voice,
which is now but a thread.  He has a
-  great colledion of Paleftrini’s compofi-
tions,  and furnished me with feveral of
them,  which i could not get elfewhere.
Signor Mazzanti is famous for tinging
the poem or Talfo to the fame melody as
the Barcarolles of Venice.  This he does
with infinite tafte,  accompanying himfelf
on the violin,  with the harmony of which
he produces curious and pleating effeds.
I pievailed on him to write me down the
original melody,  in order to compare it
wuth one that I took down at Venice,
while it was finging on the great canal.  He
has compofed many things himfelf,  fuch
as operas and motets for voices ;  and trios,
quartets,  quintets,  and other pieces for
violins.  He plays pretty well on the
violin,  and is in poifeffion of the moft
beautiful and perfect Steiner I ever faw.
He has advanced very far in the theory of

mufic ;

t 283 3

mufic  ;  has made,  by way of ftudy,  an
abridgment of the modulation of Paleftri-
ni,  which is well fele&ed and digefted;
and he fhewed me a confiderable part of
a mufical treatife,  in manufcript,  written
by himfelf.

At Rome I alfo had frequent conver-
fations with Rinaldo di Capua,  an old
and excellent Neapolitan compofer.  He
is the natural fon of a perfon of very high
rank in that country,  and at firft only
ftudied mufic as an accomplishment ;  but
being left by his father with only a fmall
fortune,  which was foon aiflipated,  he
was forced to make it his profeffion,  He
was but feventeen when he compofed his
firft opera at Vienna.  I have often received great pleafure from his compofi-
tions  ;  he is not in great fafhion at pre-
fent,  though he compofed an intermezzo
for the Capranica theatre at Rome,  laft
winter,  which had great fuccefs.  He is very
intelligent in converfation ;  but,  though a

good-

[  284 3

good-natured man,  his opinions are rather lingular and fevere upon his brother
compofers.  He thinks they have nothing
left to do now,  but to write themfelves
and others over again  ;  and that the only
chance they have left for obtaining the
reputation of novelty and invention,  arifes
either from ignorance or want of memory in the public  ;  as every thing,  both
in melody and modulation,  that is worth
doing,  has been often already done.  He
includes himfelf in the cenfure ;  and
frankly confeffes,  that though he has
written full as much as his neighbours,
yet out of all his works,  perhaps not
above one new melody can be found,
which has been wire-drawn in different
keys,  and different meafures,  a thoufand
times.  And as to modulation,  it muff
be always the fame,  to be natural and
pleafing;  what has not been given to
the public being only the refufe of thou-
fands,  who have tried and rejedled it,

either

[  285  ]

either as impracticable or difpleafing.
The only opportunity a compofer has for
introducing new modulation in fongs,  is
in a fhort fecond part*  in order to fright
the hearer back to the firft,  to which it
ferves as a foil,  by making it compari-
tively beautiful.  He likewife cenfures
with great feverity the noife and tumult
of inftruments in modern fongs.

Signor Rinaldo di Capua has at Rome
the reputation of being the inventor of
accompanied recitatives ;  but in hunting
for old compolitions in the archives of
S.  Gerolamo della Carita,  I found an
oratorio by Aleflandro Scarlatti,  which
was compofed in the latter end of the
laft century,  before Rinaldo di Capua
was born,  and in which are accompanied
recitatives .  But he does not himfelf pretend to the invention ;  all he claims is
the being among the firft who introduced
long ritornellosy or fymphonies,  into the
recitatives of ftrong paffion and diftrefs,

r

which

[  286  ]

which exprefs or imitate what it would
be ridiculous for the voice to attempt*
There are many fine fcenes of this kind
in his works,  and Haffe,  Galuppi,  Jo-
melli,  and Piccini haye been very happy
in fuch interesting,  and often fublime
compofitions.

In the courfe of a long life Rinaldo di
Capua has experienced various viciffitudes
of fortune ;  fometimes in vogue,  fome-
times neglefted.  However,,  when he
found old age coming on,  he collected
together his principal works,  fuch as had
been produced in the zenith of his fortune and fancy ;  thinking thefe would
be a refource in diftrefsful times.  Thefe
times came ;  various misfortunes and
calamities befel him and his family,
when,  behold,  this refource,  this foie refource,  the accumulated produce of his
pen,  had,  by a gracelefs fon been fold
for wafte paper !

The

7

[  287  ']

The Roman performers from whom
I received the greatefl pleafure,  were,  in
the vocal.  Signor Criftofero,  of the Pope’s
chapel,  for voice and high finifhing;  Signor Mazzanti for tafte and knowledge of
mufic ;  La Bacchelli,  commonly called
the Mignatrice  *,  for brilliancy and va-*
riety of ftile  ;  and the eldeft daughter of
the celebrated painter Cavalier Battoni,
a dilettante ,  and fcholar of Signor Santa-
relli,  for art where no art appears,  and
for that elegant fimplicity,  and truly pathetic expreffion,  which cannot be defined.

The bed violin performers were,  Signor Celeftini,  whom I before mentioned  ;
Signor Niccolai,  a worthy fcholar of Tar-
tini ;  and Signor Ruma,  a young man
whom I frequently heard at Signor Crif-
pi’s concerts,  who plays with great facility and neatnefs.

*  Her profeflion is not mufic,  but painting in
miniature.

The

[  288  ]

The Abate Roffi is reckoned the neat-
eft harpfichord player at Rome;  and
Signor Crifpi,  without pretenfion,  is a
good performer on that inftrument.  But,
to fay the truth,  I have neither met with
a great player on the harpfichord,  nor an
original compofer for it throughout Italy*.
There is no accounting for this but by
the little nfe which is made of that inftrument there,  except to accompany the
voice.  It is at prefent fo much negledted
both by the maker and player,  that it is
difficult to fay whether the inftruments
themfelves,  or the performers are the
worft  *f\

.  *  It feems as if Alberti was always to be pillage

ed or imitated in every modern harpfichord lelTon.

■-  -  '

f To perfons accuftomed to Englifh harpli-
chords,  all the keyed inftruments on the continent
appear to great difadvantage.  Throughout Italy
they have generally little octave fpinets tp accona-r
pany Tinging,  in private houfes,  fometimes in a triangular form,  but more frequently in the fhape of
our old virginals  ;  of which the keys are fo noify,
and the tone fo feeble,  that more w’ood is heard
than wire.  The befl Italian harpfichord I met with

6  .  for

[  289 3

But with regard to the organ,  I have;
frequently heard it judieioufly and fpi^
ritedly played in Italy.  At Milan,  San
Martini has a way peculiar to himfelf of
touching that instrument,  which is truly
mafterly and pleafing.  The firft organifts
of St*  Marc’s church at Venice,  of
the Duomo at Florence,  and of St.  John
Lateran at Rome  (of whom I fhall
have occafion to fpeak hereafter)  are very
fuperiour in their performance to moil
others I have heard on the continent*
But,  in general,  the beft crganifts in
Italy are the monks and friars,  many of
whom I have heard play in the churches

for touch.  Was that of Signor Grimani at Venice;
and for tone,  that of Monfignor Reggio at Rome $
but I found three Englifh harpfichords in the three
principal cities of Italy,  which are regarded by the
Italians as fo many phenomena.  One was made by
Shudi,  and is in the pofleffion of the Hon.  Mrs.  Hamilton at Naples.  The other two,  which are of
fCirkman’s make,  belong to Mrs.  Richie at Venice,
and to the Hon.  Mrs.  Earl,  who refided at Rome
When I was there.

and

U

C 290 j

and chapels of their own convents#  not
only in a mafterly,  but a brilliant and
modern manner,  without forgetting the
genius of the inftrument.  And fome of
the girls of the Venetian Confervatorios,
as well as the nuns in different parts of
Italy,  play with rapidity and neatnefs in
their feveral churches but there is al-
moft always a want of force,  of learning,
and courage in female performances,
eccaftoned,  perhaps,  by that feminine
foftnefs,  with which,  in other Situations,
we are fo enchanted.

Having heard the moft eminen t performers y converfed with the principal theorifts
and compofers,  found many of the books,
manuferipts,  and antiquities I had fought  *
and explained my wants with regard to
the reft,  to feveral friends at Rome,  who
kindly promifed me their affiftance in
Supplying them during my.abfence  ;  I fet

©ff for Naples on Sunday evening,  the

*  •

fourteenth of October,

NAPLES.

C 291 3

/

NAPLES.

1 entered this city,  impreffed with the
higheft ideas of the perfect ftate in which
I fliould find practical mufic.  It was at
Naples only that I expeted to have my
ears gratified with every mufical luxury
and refinement which Italy could afford.
My vifits to other places were in the way
of bujinefs ,  for the performance of a tajk
I had affigned myfelf ;  but I came hither
animated by the hope of pleafure.  And
what lover of mufic could be in the place
which had produced the two Scarlattis,
Vinci,  Leo,  Pergolefe,  Porpora,  Farinelli,
Jomelli,  Piccini,  and innumerable others
of the firft eminence among compofers
and performers,  both vocal and inftru-
mental,  without the mod fanguine expectations.  How far thefe expectations
were gratified,  the Reader will find in the
courfe of my narrative,  which is con-
ftantly a faithful tranfcript of my feelings
at the time I entered them in my journal,

U 2 imme-

t 292  ]

immediately after hearing and feeing,  with
a mind not confcious of any prejudice or
partiality.

I arrived here about live o’clock in the
evening*  on Tuefday,  Oftober 16,  and
at night went to the Teatro de Fiorentini%
to hear the comic opera of Gelofia per
Gelofia>  fet to mufic by Signor Piccini.
This theatre is as fmall as Mr.  Foote’s
in London,  but higher,  as there are five
rows of boxes in it.  Notwithftanding
the court was at Portici,  and a great
number of families at their Villeggiature ,
or country- houfes,  fo great is the reputation of Signor Piccini,  that every part
of the houfe was crowded.  Indeed this
opera had nothing elfe but the merit and
reputation of the compofer to fupport it,
as both the drama and finging were bad.
There was,  however,  a comic character
performed by Signor Cafaccia,  a man of
infinite humour ;  the whole houfe was
in a roar the ififtant he appeared ;  and
the pleafantry of this aftor did not con-

fift

[  293

fift in buffoonery,  nor was it local,
which in Italy,  and,  indeed,  elfewhere,
is often the cafe ;  but was of that original
and general fort as would excite laughter
at all times and in all places.

The airs of this burletta are full of
pretty paffages,  and,  in general,  moft in-
genioufly accompanied :  there was no
dancing,  fo that the aft s,  of which there
were three,  feemed rather long.

There are three Confervatorios in this
city,  for the education of boys who are
intended for the profeffion of mufic,  of
the fame kind with thofe of Venice,  for
girls .  As the fcholars in the Venetian
Confervatorios have been j uftly celebrated
for their tafte and neatnefs of execution,
fo thofe of Naples have long enjoyed the
reputation of being the firft contra-pun-
tijls or compofers in Europe.

Wednefday 17.  This afternoon I went
to hear a mufical performance at the
church of the Francifcans,  where the
three Confervatorios were to furniih

U 3 mufic

t 294  ]

mufic and muficians for a great feftival
of eight fucceffive days,  morning and
evening*.  This,  is a large handfome
church,  but too much ornamented.  The
architecture feems to be good,  but it is
fo be-gilt that it almoft blinded me to
look at it j and in the few interftitial
parts where there is no gold,  tawdry
flowers are painted in abundance.

The band was numerous,  confifting
of above a hundred voices and inftru-
ments.  They were placed in a long 00-
cafional gallery,  totally covered with gold
and filver gilding s but though the band
feemed to be a very good one,  and the
leader very careful and attentive,  yet the
diftance of fome of the performers from the
others,  rendered it almoft impoffible that
the time fhould be always exactly kept,

*  It is by this performance that the Conferva-
torios hold their charters  ;  and,  in confideration of
the boys playing gratis,  they are exempted by the
King from all taxes-  upon wine and provilions,
which are paid by the other inhabitants of Naples,

The

i  *95 1

The compofition was by Signor GennaTO
Manni,  and in many movements admirable;  he attended hirnfelf to beat the time.
The opening was in a rough ftile  ;  'after
which this fpecies of overture was made
an accompaniment to a chorus,  which
was well written.  Several airs and a duet
fucceeded,  which pleafed me extremely ;
there were fancy and contrivance ;  light
and  (hade ;  and though the finging was
not of the firft clafs,  yet there was a
counter-tenor and a bafe which I liked
very much.  The counter-tenor had one
of the moft powerful voices I ever heard;
he made his way through the whole band,
in the loudeft and moft tumultuous parts
of the choruffes.  When he had an air
to fing alone,  his fhake was good,  and his

ftile plain,  but his portamento was a little
deficient,  and rather favoured of what we
call in England the cathedral manner of
finging,  through the throat.  The air
which was given to the hafe was as inge-
nioufly written as any I ever heard;  the

U 4 accom-

[  3

accompaniments were fall,  without de*
ftroying the melody of the voice parts :
inflead of fhortening or mutilating its
paffages,  the inftruments feemed to continue and firiifh them,  giving the finger
time for refpiration.  In a duet between
two fopranos ,  the accompaniments were
likewife admirable ;  as they were in a
chorus which had many folo parts in it.
After this the author did not feem to be
fo happy.  There were fome trifling* .
and fome heavy movements ;  in the
former of which there was no other no-
Velty than that of throwing the accent
upon the wrong note ;  for inftance,  upon
the fecond inflead of the firft  •>  or,  in
common time,  upon the fourth inftead
of the third.  This may have its merit in
comic operas,  where fome humour is
feconded by it,  but furely fuch a poor
expedient is beneath the dignity of church
mufic,  where a grave and majeftic ftils
fhould be preferved,  even in rapid move-
ments.  But the fame rage for novelty,

which

[  297  ]

which has occafioned fuch fudden revolutions in the mufic of Italy,  gives birth,
fometimes,  to ffrange concetti .

The national mufic here is fo fingti-
lar,  as to be totally different*  both in
melody and modulation*  from all I have
heard elfewhere.  This evening in the
ftreets there were two people finging
alternately  $  one of thefe Neapolitan
Canzoni was accompanied by a violin
and calafcione *.  The finging is noify
and vulgar,  but the accompaniments are
admirable,  and well performed.  The
violin and calafcione parts were incef*
fantly at work during the fong*  as well
as the ritornels.  The modulation fur-
prifed me very much  :  from the key of A
natural,  to that of C and F,  was not difficult or new;  but from that of A,  with
a fharp third,  to E flat,  was aftoni(hing  ;

*  The Calafcione is an inftrument very com*
mon at Naples  ;  it is a fpecies of guitar,  with
only two firings,  which are tuned fifths to each

ether.

and

[  29§  3

and the more fo,  as the return to the
orginal key was always fo infenfibly managed,  as neither to fhoek the ear,  nor to
be eafily difcovered by what road or relations it was brought about.

cflmrfday 1 8.  I was very happy to find,
upon my arrival at Naples,  that though
many perfons to whom I had letters,
were in the country,  yet Signor jomelli
and Signor Piccini were in town,  jo-
melli was preparing a ferious opera for
the great theatre of S.  Carlo,  and Piccini
had juft brought the burletta on the ftage
which I have mentioned before.

This morning I vifited Signor Piccini,
and had the pleafure of a long converfa-
tion with him.  He leems to live in a
reputable way,  has a good houfe,  and
many fervants and attendants about him.
He is not more than four or five  ' and
forty ;  looks well,  has a very animated
countenance,  and is a polite and agreeable
little man,  though rather grave in his
manner for a Neapolitan pofTelTed of fo

much

[  299  ]

•much fire and genius.  His family is
rather numerous ;  one of his ions is a
ftudent in the univerfity of Padua.  After
reading a letter which Mr.  Giardini was'
fo obliging as to give me to him,  he told
meheihouldbe extremely glad if he could
be of any ufe either to me or my work.
My firft enquiries were concerning the
Neapolitan Confervatorios  ;  for he having
been brought up in one of them himfelf,
his information was likely to be authentic and fatisfadlory.  In my firft vifit I
confined my queftions chiefly to the four
following fubjedts  :

1.  The antiquity of thefe eftablifta-
ments.

2.  Their names.

3 .  The number of mafters and fcholars.

4.  The time for admiflion,  and for
quitting thefe fchools.

To my firft demand he anfwered,  that
the Confervatorios were of ancient  {landing,  as might be feea by the ruinous condition

[  3°®  ]

dltion of one of the buildings,  which was
ready to tumble down*.

To my fecond,  that their names were

Onofrioy La Piet a,  and Santa Maria di
Loreto .

To my third queflion he anfwered,  that
the number of fcholars in the firfl Confer-
vatorio is about ninety,  in the fecond a
hundred and twenty,  and in the other,
two hundred.

That each of them has two principal
Maejlri di Capella ,  the firfl of whom fu-
perintends and corrects the compofitions
of the fludents j the fecond the fingingr
and gives leffons.  That there are affiflant.
maflers,  who are called Maejlri Secolari  *
one for the violin,  one for the violoncello,  one for the harpfichord,  one for
the hautbois,  one for the French horn,
and fo for other inflruments.

*  I afterwards obtained,  from good authority,
the exact date of each of thefe foundations  ;  their
fixed and flated rules,  amounting to thirty-one ;  and
the orders given to the Re&ors for regulating the
conduct and fludies of the boys,  every month in the
year.

To

[  3°*  I

To my fourth enquiry he anfwered,  that
boys are admitted from eight or ten to twenty years of age ;  that when they are taken
in young they are bound for eight years ;
but,  when more advanced,  their admiffion
is diffioult,  except they have made a con-
fi derable progrefs in the ftudy and practice of mufic.  That after boys have been
in a Confervatorio for fome years,  if no
genius is difcoVered,  they are difmified
to make way for others.  That fome are
taken in as peniioners,  who pay for their
teaching ;  and others,  after having ferved
their time out,  are retained to teach the
reft j but that in both thefe cafes they
are allowed to go out of the Confervatorio at pleafure.

I enquired throughout Italy at what
place boys were chiefly qualified for fing-
ing by caftration,  but could get no certain intelligence.  I was told at Milan
that it was at Venice  ;  at Venice,  that it
was at Bologna ;  but at Bologna the fadt
was denied,  and I was referred to Florence  ;

[  P2  ]

rence ;  from Florence to Rome,  and from
Rome I was fent to Naples.  The operation moft certainly is againft law in all
thefe places,  as well as againft nature ;  and
all the Italians arefo much alhamed of it,
that in every province they transfer it to
fome other.

cc Aik where’s the North  ?  at York,  ’tis on the
Tweed  ;

tc In Scotland,  at the Orcades ;  and there,

<c At Greenland,  Zembla,  or the Lord knows
where.”  Pope's EJf.  on Man.

However,  with refpedt to the Conferva-
torios at Naples,  Mr.  Gemineau,  the
Britilh conful,  who has fo long refided
there,  and who has made very particular
enquiries,  allured me,  and his account was
confirmed by Dr.  Cirillo,  an eminent and
learned Neapolitan phylician,  that this
practice is abfolutely forbiden in the Con*
fervatorios,  and that the young Caftrati
came from Leccia in Apuglia^  but,  before
the operation is performed,  they are
brought to a Confervatorio to be tried
as"  to the probability of voice,  and

then

2

[  3°3 I

then are taken home by their parents
for this barbarous purpofe.  It is,  however,  death by the laws to all thofe
who perform the operation,  and ex-
communication to every one concerned
in it,  unlefs it be done,  as is often pretended,  upon account of fome diforders
which may be fuppofed to require it,  arid
with the confent of the boy.  And there
are inftances of its being done even at the
requeft of the boy himfelf,  as was the
cafe of the Graffetto at Rome.  But as
to thefe previous trials of the voice,  it is
my opinion that the cruel operation is
but too frequently performed without
trial,  or at lead without fufficient proofs
of an improvable voice ;  otherwife fuch
numbers could never be found in every
great town throughout Italy,  without any
voice at all,  or at leaft without one
fufficient to compenfate fuch a lofs.
Indeed all the mufici*  in the churches at

*  The word mufico ,  in Italy,  feems now wholly-
appropriated to a finger with a foprano or contr alt&
voice,  which has been preferved by art.

pre-

[  3<H  ]

prefent are made up of the refufe of the
opera houfes,  and it is very rare to meet
with a tolerable voice upon the eftablifh-
ment in any church throughout Italy.
The virtuoji who ling there occafionally,
upon great feftivals only,  are ufually
ftrangers,  and paid by the time.

I went again this afternoon to the Fran-
cifcan’s church,  where there was a larger
band than the day before.  The whole
Confervatorio of the Pieta,  confiding of
a hundred and twenty boys,  all dreffed in
a blue uniform,  attended.  The Sinfonia
was juft begun when I arrived  *  it was
very brilliant,  and well executed  :  then
followed  .  a pretty good chorus ;  after
which,  an air by a tenor voice,  one by a
foprano ,  one by a contr alto ,  and another
by a different tenor ;  but worfe finging I
never heard before,  in Italy  ;  all was un-
finifhed and fcholar-like  ;  the clofes ftiff,
ftudied,  and ill executed ;  and nothing
like a lhake could be muftered out of the
whole band of fingers.  The fopranoforccd
: ,  ,l  ‘  the

[  3°5 3

the high notes in a falfe direction,  till
they penetrated the brain of every hearer;
and the bafe finger was as rough as a maf-
tiff,  whofe barking he feemed to imitate*
A young man played a folo concerto on
the bafioon,  in the fame incorredl and
unmafterly manner,  which drove me out
of the church before the vefpers were
finifhed.

*  From hence I went direftly to the
comic opera,  which,  to-night,  was at
the Featro Nuovo.  This houfe is not
only lefs than the Fiorentini,  but is older
and more dirty.  The way to it,  for carriages,  is through ftreets very narrow,  and
extremely inconvenient.  This burletta
was called Le Frame per Amore ,  and fet
by Signor Giovanni Paefiello,  Maefiro di
Capella Napolitano .  Thefinging was but
indifferent ;  there were nine charadlers in
the piece,  and yet not one good voice
among them  ;  however,  the mufic
pleafed me very much ;  it was full of
fire and fancy,  the ritornels abounding
-  '  '  '  X in

[  3°6  ]  •

in new paffages,  and the vocal parts ifi
elegant and fimple melodies,  fuch as
might be remembered and carried away
after the firft hearing,  or be performed
in private by a fmall band,  or even with-,
out any other inftrument than a harpfi-
chord*.  The overture,  of one movement
only,  was quite comic,  and contained a
perpetual fucceffion of pleafant paffages*
.There was no dancing,  which made it ne-
„ceffary to fpin the ads out to rather a
tirefome length.  The airs were much
applauded,  though it was the fourteenth
reprefentation of the opera.  The author
was engaged to compofe for Turin,  at the

•  •  f  . >

*  *  Th is is fdldom the cafe in modern opera fongs,

fo crowded is the fcore and the orcheftra.  Indeed
Piccini is accufed of employing inftruments to
Juch excefs,  that in Italy no copyift will transcribe
one of his operas without being paid a zechin more
"than for one by any other compofer.  But in bur-
.lettas he has generally bad voices to write for,
and is obliged to produce all his effedls with in*
ftruments  ;  and,  indeed,  this kind of drama
ufually abounds with brawls and fquabbks>  which
it is necefTaryto enforce with the orcheftra.

next

[  3°7 1

next carnival,  for which place he fet Out
while 1 was at Naples.  The performance
began  "about a quarter before eight,  and
continued till pad eleven o’clock.

Friday 19.  This evening I went a
third time to St.  Francefco’s church,  and
heard the performance of the fcholars of
another Confervatorio,  Santa Mara di
Loreto.  They appeared all in a white
uniform,  with a black kind of fafh*  The
finging was a little better than the day-
before,  but the inftruments were hardly
fo good.  The firft air,  after a fpirited
overture and chorus,  was fung by an
inoffenfive tenor ;  then another air by a
foprano,  not quite fo ;  after which,  a
third air by a bafe voice,  the direct contrary of inoffenfive.  Such a bawling
Stentor,  with a throat fo inflexible,  fure
never exifted before.  The divifions were
fo rough and fo ftrongly marked,  ,that
they became quite grotefque and ridiculous  ;  if it had not been for the ferious
effect which his performance had on the

X 2 melan-

[  303  ]

fiielancholy audience,  no one could pof-
fibly have fuppofed it to be ferious.  A
folo on the coarfeft:  double bafe that
was ever played upon,  would have been
melifluous,  by comparifon.  After him,
a middling counter-tenor fung,  which
even fo ftrong a foil could not make a-
greeable  ;  and then another foprano,  not
at all a hopelefs fubjeft :  his voice was
well toned,  and he had a little improvable  {hake.  In fhort,  this was the
only promiling finger I had heard for two
days.  But to the bad voices,  fo flovenly,
ignorant,  and unfinifhed a manner was
added,  that the people were fung out of
church as fafi:  as they came in.  There
was a young man who played folo parts
in the ritornels with a kind of clarinet,
which they call at Naples a vox humana ;
another on the trumpet,  and a third on the
hautbois ;  but in an incorreft and unin-
terefling manner.  The boys who fung
had very poor cadences to their fongs,

which.

[  3°9 3

which,  as they ufually had fecond parts,
were always repeated after the da capo .

Saturday ,  20.  This morning I heard,  at
the fame church,  the boys of the Con-
fervatorio of St .  Onofrio ,  who wear a
white uniform.  The performance was
much the fame as that of the other two.
Thefe feminaries,  which have heretofore
produced fuch great profelfors,  feem at
prefenttobebut low in genius.  However,
fince thele inftitutions,  as well as others,
are fubjeCt to fluctuations,  after being
languid for fome time,  like their neighbour Mount Vefuvius,  they will,  perhaps,
blaze out again with new vigour.

Sunday 21,  and Monday 22.  were
fpent in vifiting the environs of Naples.
However,  I arrived in town foon enough
on Monday night to hear Paefiello’s
opera,  a fecond time,  at the Teatro
Nuovo.  It pleafed me full as much now
as before,  and in the fame places.  The
overture ftill feemed comic and original,
the airs far from common,  though in

X 3 general

[  3io J

general plain and Ample.  If this cdrtw
pofer has any fault,  it is in repeating paf-
fages too often,  even to five or fix times,
which is like driving a nail into a plaif^
tered wall ;  two or three ftrokes fix it
better than more,  for after that number,
it either grows loofe,  or recoils :  thus an
energy is often given by reiterated ftrokes
on the tympanum ;  but too often repeated,  they not only ceafe to make any
further impreffion,  but feem to obliterate
thofe already made.  I ftill think this
opera too long for want of the intermezzi
of dancing

Tuefday 23.  This evening hearing in
the ftreet forne genuine Neapolitan fing-
ing,  accompanied by a calafcioncina,  a
mandoline,  and a violin ;  I fent for the
whole band up ftairs,  but,  like other
ftreet mufic,  it was beft at a diftance  ;  in
the room it was coarfe,  out of tune,  and
'out of harmony  ;  whereas,  in the ftreet,

%  I was afterwards informed that dancing is not
allowed in any other theatre at,  Naples than that
©f St.  Carlo,  which is the theatre royah

X

it

t 31 1 I

it feemed the contrary of all this :  however,  let it be heard where it will,  the
modulation and accompaniment are very
extraordinary.

In the canzone of to-night they began
in A natural,  and,  without well knowing
how,  they got into the moft extraneous
keys it is poffible to imagine,  yet without offending the ear.  After the inftru-
ments have played a long fymphony in
A,  the finger begins in F,  and flops in
C,  which is not uncommon or difficult;
but,  after another ritornel,  from F,  he
gets into E flat,  then clofesin A natural ;
after this there were tranfitions even into
B flat,  and D flat,  without given offence,
returning,  or rather Jliding ;  always into
the original key of A natural,  the inftru-
ments moving the whole time in quick
notes,  without the leaft intermiffion.
The voice part is very flow,  a kind of
pfalmody ;  the words,  of which there
are many ftanzas to the fame air,  are
in the Neapolitan language,  which is as

X 4 dif-

.■  [  31*  ]

different from good Italian,  as Weld*
from Englifh.  It is a very Angular fpe^
cies of mafic,  as wild in modulation,  and
as different from that of all the reft of
Europe as the Scots,  and is,  perhaps,  as
ancient,  being among the common people merely traditional.  However,  theviolia
player wrote down the melody of the
voice part for me,  and afterwards brought
me fomething like the accompaniment  $
but thefe parts have a ftrange appearance
when feen on paper together.  I heard
thefe muficians play a great number of
Neapolitan airs,  but all were different
from other mufic.  r  ...

A little before Chriftmas,  muficians
of this fort come from Calabria to Naples,  and their mufic is wholly different
from this  :  they ufually fing with a
guitar and violin,  not on the Ihoulder,
but hanging down*  Paefiello had introduced fome of this mufic into his comic

.  .  *

opera,  which was now in run.  Signor
Piccinni promifed to procure me fome of
'  thefe

t V3 J

thefe wild national melodies.  Another
fort is peculiar to A puglia,  with which
the people are fet a-dancing and fweat-
ing,  who either have,  or would be
thought to have been bitten by the tarantula.  Of this mufic Dr.  Cirillo procured me a fpecimen.  Signor Serrao,  in
a diflertation on the fub/ed;,  and Dr.  Cirillo,  who has made feveral experiments,
in order to determine the fa£t,  are both
of opinion that the whole is an impofi-
tion,  practiced by the people of Apuglia,
to gain money  :  that not only the cure
but the malady itfelf is a fraud.  Dr.  Cirillo affured me that he had never been
able to provoke the tarantula either to bite
himfelf or others upon whom he had repeatedly tried the experiment  *.  However,  the whole is fo throughly believed
by fome inocent people in the country,

*  This account may perhaps diminifh the honour
of mufic,  by augmenting the number of fceptics,
as to its miraculous powers ;  yet truth requires it
ihould be given.

— <  4

2

that

C 3*4 3

that,  when really bitten by other infers
or animals that are poifonous,  they take
this method of dancing,  to a particular
tune,  till they fweat ;  which,  together
with their faith,  fometimes makes them
whole.  They will continue the dance,  in
a kind of frenzy,  for many hours,  even till
they drop down with fatigue and laffi-
tude.

Wednefday 24.  I went again this evening to Piccini’s opera,  but was too late
for the overture ;  the houfe was very full,
and the muhc pleafed me more than the
firft time.  The airs are not fo familiar as
thofe in Paeliello’s opera,  yet there is much
better writing in them  ;  and there are fame
accompanied recitatives,  in the ritornels
of which,  though feveral different parts
are going on at the fame time,  there is a
clearnefs,  and,  if it may be fo called,  a
transparency 9 which is wondeful.  The
finging,  as I before obferved,  is wretched  ;  but there is fo much vis comica in
Cafaccia,  that his Tinging is never

thought

[  3 1 5  ]

thought of ;  yet,  for want of dancing,,
the a<fts are neceflarily fo long,  that it is
wholly impoffible to keep up the attention  ;  fo that thofe who are not talking,  or playing at cards,  ufually fall
afleep.

'Thurfday 25.  After dinner I went once
more to hear the boys of St.  Onofrio,  at
the Francifcans church.  They performed a Litany,  that was compofed by
Durante  *  $  the reft of the mufic,  which
feemed to be that of a raw and inexperienced compofer,  was by a young man,
who beat time.  There was again a folo
on the inftrument called la Voce Hu -

*  Durante,  who has been dead fome years,  was
a long time Matter to the Confervatorio of St-  Onofrio.  From the character Mr.  Roufleau has given
of this compofer,  I had conceived the higheft ideas
of his merit;  and in the courfe of my journey
through Italy,  I colledted a great number of his
compofitions for the church.  M.  Roufleau’s words
in fpeaking of him are very ttrong  :  L c Durante ejl
le plus grand harmonifte de F Italiey deft a dire dll
monde .”  Dift.  de Mufique,

maria ;

t 316  ]

f&ana  ;  it is of an agreeable tone,  has a
great compafs,  but was not well played
on.  A concerto on the violin was like-
wife introduced,  where hand and fire
were difcovered by the player,  but no
tafte or finishing.

Friday 26.  This morning I firft had
the pleafure of feeing and converfing with
Signor Jomelli,  who arrived at Naples
from the country but the night before.
He is extremely corpulent,  and,  in the
face,  not unlike what I remember Handel
to have been,  yet far more polite and
foft in his manner.  I found him in his
night-gown,  at an instrument,  writing.
He received me very politely,  and made
many apologies for not having called on
me,  in confequence of a card I had left at
his houfe ;  but apologies were indeed un-
neceffary,  as he was butjuftcome to town,
and at the point of bringing out a new
opera,  that mull have occupied both his
time and thoughts fufficiently.  He had
heard of me from Mr.  Hamilton,  I gave

him

l s1/  i

him Padre Martini’s letter,  and after he
had read it we went to bufinefs direftly.  I
told him my errand to Italy,  and fhewed
him my plan,  for I knew his time wag
precious.  He read it with great attention,  and converfed very openly and rationally  ;  faid the part I had undertaken was much negje&ed at prefent In
Italy  ;  that the Confervatorios,  of which,
I told him,  I wifhed for information,  were
now at a low ebb,  though formerly fo
fruitful in great men.  He mentioned to
me a perfon of great learning,  who had
been tranflating David’s Pfalms into excellent Italian verfe;  in the courfeofwhich
work,  he had found it neceflary to write
a diflertation on the mufic of the ancients,
which he had communicated to him.  He
faid this writer was a fine and fubtle
critic j had differed in feveral points from
Padre Martini ;  had been in correfpon-
dence with Metaftafio,  and had received
a long letter from him on the fubje<3:  of
lyric poetry and mufic;  all which he

thought

[  3>8 3

thought necefiary for me to fee.  He
promifed to procure me the book,  and to
make me acquainted with the author*
He fpoke very much in praife of Aleffandro
Scarlatti,  as to his church mufic,  fuch
as motets,  maffes,  and oratorios  ;  promifed to procure me information concerning

_ 9

the Confervatorios,  and whatever elfe
was to my purpofe,  and in his power.
He took down my direction,  and affured
me that the inftant he had got his opera
on the ftage,  he Ihould be entirely at my
fervice.  Upon my telling him that my
-time for remaining at Naples was very
fhort,  that I fhould even then have been
on the road in my way home,  but for
his opera,  which I fo much wifhed to
hear;  that befides urgent buhnefs in
England,  there was great probability of
a war,  which would keep me a pri Toner
on the continent  :  he,  in anfwer to that,
and with great appearance of fincerity,
faid,  if after I returned to England,  any
thing of importance to my plan occured,

he

[  3*9 1

r  ,  >  ►  t0

he would not fail of fending it to me.  In
fhort,  I went away in high good humour
with this truly great compofer,  who is
indifputably one of the firft of his pro-;
feffion now alive in the univerfe ;  for were
I to name the living compofers of Italy
for the ftage,  according to my idea of
their merit,  it would be in the following
order :  Jomelli,  Galuppi,  Piccini,  and
Sacchini.  It is,  however,  difficult to
decide which of the two compofers firft-
mentioned,  has merited mod from the
public Jomellfs works are full of great
and noble ideas,  treated with tafte and
learning ;  Galuppi’s abound in fancy,  fire,
and feeling  ;  Piccini has far furpaffed all
his cotemporaries in the comic ftile,*  and
Sacchini feems the mofi:  promifing compofer in the ferious.

The Honourable Mr.  Hamilton,  the
Britiffi minifter at this court,  whofe tafte
and zeal for the arts,  and whofe patronage
of artifts,  are well known throughout
Europe,  being out' of town when I came
■>  to

t 320 3

to Naples*  did me the honour,  as foon a&
he heard of my arrival,  to invite me to
his country-houfe,  called Villa Angelicas
at the foot of Mount Vefuvius  ;  and this
day,  after vifiting Signor Jomelli,  I waited upon him for the firft time,  and was
received by him and his lady,  not only
with politenefs,  but even kindnefs.  I
had the happinefs of continuing there
with them two or three days,  during
which time,  among other amufements,
mufic was not wanting,  as Mr.  Hamilton has two pages of his houfliold,  who
are excellent performers,  one on the
violin,  and the other on the violoncello,
Saturday 27.  This evening,  though I
had a violent head-ach,  yet,  in order firft
to brave,  and then to footh the pain,  I
determined to try the medicinal power
of mufic at Piccini’s opera,  and found,
that though it did not cure,  it alleviated
the pain,  and diverted my attention from
it.  The houfe was very full,  and the
adtors were in great fpirits.  I went

earlv

[  321 1

early enough,  for the fird time,  to hear
the overture;  it is very pretty and fanciful,  confiding of only two movements,
in which the violins were confined to
hard labour.  With what pleafed me
before,  I was more pleafed now ;  it is
impoffible not to be delighted with the
originality,  and furprifed at the refources
of this author.

Monday 29.  Mr.  Hamilton being returned to Naples,  in order to gratify my
mufical curiofity,  made a great concert at
his houfe,  where there was much company,  and where I had the fatisfadlion of
meeting with the chief mufical performers of this city ;  among whom were the
celebrated player on the violin Signor
Barbella,  and Orgitano,  one of the bed
harpfichord players and writers for that
indrument at Naples.  But Mrs.  Hamilton is herfelf a much better performer on
that indrument than either he or any one
I heard there.  She has great neatnefs,
and more expreflion and meaning in her

Y play-

[  32^  J

playing,  than is often found among
lady-players  ;  for ladies,  it mull be own-*
ed,  though frequently neat in execution*
feldom aim at expreffion.  Barbella rather difappointed me;  his performance
has nothing very furp riling in it now  :  he
is not young,  indeed ;  and folo playing is
never wanted or regarded here  ;  fo that
teaching and orcheftra playing are his
chief employments.  He performed,  however,  moil admirably the famous Neapolitan air,  which the common people
conliantly play at Chriftmas to the Virgin  ;  this he plays with a drone kind
of bag-pipe bafe,  in a very humorous,
though delicate manner.  But as a folo-  /
player,  though his tone is very even and
fweet,  he is inferior to Nardini,  and,  indeed,  to feveral others in Italy ;  but he
feems to know mufic well*  and to have
a good deal of fancy in his compofitions*
with a tindture of not difagreeable mad-
nefs*

•*:; a .

It

I

C 323 1

It was here that I had firft the honour4
bf being prefented to Lord Fortrofe,  from
whom I afterwards received many Angular favours.  I was likewife introduced
to the French Conful,  M*  D’Aftier,  who
is a real connoiffeur in mufic ;  perfectly
well acquainted with the different ftiles
of all the great compofers of Europe,
paft and prefent,  and difcriminates very
well in fpeaking of their feveral merits  *
To him I communicated my plan,  and
with him I had a very fatisfaftory con-
verfation.  In order,  I believe,  that I might
have more time for mufical difquifitions
with this gentleman,  and Signor Bar-
bella,  there was a fupper party feledted
of about ten or twelve,  and we ftaid till
near two o’clock in the morning.

Barbella is the beft natured creature
imaginable;  his-  temper,  as one of the
company obferved,  is as foft as the tone
of his violin.  By fitting next to him,  I
acquired much biographical knowledge
concerning old Neapolitan muficians.

Y 2 Mr,

i 334  ]

Mr.  Hamilton had offered to write to all
the governors of the feveral Confervato-
rios,  but Signor Barbella very obligingly
undertook to get me all the information
I could defire of thefe celebrated mufical
fchools.  And Lord Fortrofe,  whom he
attends every morning,  invited me to
meet him at his lordfhip’s houfe,  whenever I pleafed.  So that from Barbella,
and a young Englifhman,  Mr.  Oliver,  who
has been four years in the Confervatorio
of St.  Onofrio,  I obtained a fatisfadtory
account of whatever was neceffary for
me to know concerning this part of my
bufinefs at Naples.  Mr.  Hamilton entered fo far into my views,  as to take a
lift of my wants,  in order to confider of
the beft method of getting them fup-
plied.

Wednejday ,  Odlobcr 31.  This morning
1 went with young Oliver to his Confervatorio of St.  Onofrio,  and vifited all the
rooms where the boys pradtife,  deep,  and
eat.  On the firft flight of flairs was a

?  trum-

[  325 3

trumpeter,  fcreaming upon his inffru-

ment till he was ready to burfl ;  on the

;  v  *

fecond was a French horn,  bellowing in
the Tame manner.  In the common prac-
tifing room there was a Dutch concert ,
confifting of feven or eight harpfichords,
more than as many violins,  and feveral
voices,  all performing different things,
and in different keys :  other boys were
writing in the fame room  ;  but it
being holiday time,  many were abfent
who ufually ftudy and pradtife in this
room.  The jumbling them all together
in this manner may be convenient for
the houfe,  and may teach the boys to attend to their own parts with firmnefs,
whatever elfe may be going forward at
the fame time ;  it may likewife give
them force,  by obliging them to play
loud in order to hear themfelves ;  but in
the midft of fuch jargon,  and continued
diffonance,  it is wholly impoffible to
give any kind of polifh or finilhing to
their performance ;  hence the flovenly

Y 3 coarfe?

E 326  ]

coarfenefs fo remarkable in their public
exhibitions ;  and the total want of tafte,
neatnefs,  and exprefiionin all thefe young
muficians,  till they have acquired them
elfewhere.

t

The beds,  which are  |n the fame room,
ferve for feats to the harpflchords and
other inftruments,  Out of thirty or
forty boys who were pradtifing,  I could
difcover but two that were playing the
fame piece;  fome of thofe who were
pradifing on the violin feemed to have a
great deal of hand.  The violoncellos
pra&ife in another room ;  and the flutes,
Jiautbois,  and other wind inftruments,  in
a third,  except the trumpets and horns,
which are obliged to fag,  either on the
flairs,  or on the top of the houfe.

There are in this college flxteen young
faftrati ,  and thefe lye up flairs,  by them-*
felves,  in warmer apartments than the
other boys,  for fear of colds,  which
might not only render their delicate voices

[  3*7 3

unfit for exercife at prefent,  but hazard
the entire lofs of them for ever.

The only vacation in thefe fchools,
in the whole year,  is in autumn,  and
that for a few days only :  during the
winter,  the boys rife two hours before it
is light,  from which time they continue
their exercife,  an hour and a half at dinner excepted,  till eight o’clock at night;
and this conftant perfeverance,  for a number of years,  with genius and good teaching,  muft produce great muficians.

After dinner I went to the theatre of
St.  Carlo,  to hear Jomelli’s new opera
rehearfed.  There were only two acts
finifhed,  but thefe pleafed me much,
except the overture,  which was fhort,
and rather difappointed me,  as I expected more would have been made of the
ftrft movement ;  but as to the fbngs and
accompanied recitatives,  there was merit
of fome kind or other in them all,  as I
hardly remember one that was fo indifferent as not to feize the attention.  The

Y 4 fubjeft

[  ]

fubjectof the opera was Demofoonte;  the
names,  of the fingers I knew not then,
except Aprile,  the firft man,  and Bianchi,
the firft woman.  Aprile has rather a
weak and uneven voice,  but is conftantly
fteady,  as to intonation.  He has a good
perfon,  a good  {hake,  and much tafte and
expreftion.  La Bianchi has a fweet and
elegant toned voice,  always perfe&ly in
tune,  with an admirable portamento  ;  I
never heard any one fing with more eafe,
or in a manner fo totally free from affectation.  The reft of the vocal performers
were all above mediocrity ;  a tenor with
both voice and judgment fufficient to
engage attention;  a very fine contr’  alto;
a young man with a foprano voice,  whofe
finging was full of feeling and expreftion;
and a fecond woman,  whofe performance
was far from defpicable.  Such performers as thefe were neceffary for the mufic,
which is in a difficult ftile  ;  more full of
inftrumental effedls than vocal.  Sometimes it may be thought rather,  laboured.

[  329 1

but it is admirable in the tout enfemble ;
mafterly in modulation,  and in melody
full of new paflages  *.  This was the firft
rehearfal,  andtheinftruments were rough
and unfteady,  not being as yet certain
of the exaCt time or exprefiion of the
movements ;  but,  as far as I was then
able to judge,  the compofition was per-

*  s  <

feCtly fuited to the talents of the performers,  who,  though all good,  yet not
being of the very firft and moft exquifite
clafs,  were more in want of the afiiftance
of inftruinents to mark the images,  and
enforce the pafiion,  which the poetry
points out.

The public expectation from this production of Jomelli,  if a judgment may be
formed from the number of perfons who
attended this firft rehearfal,  was very
great  ;  for the pit was crowded,  and
many of the boxes were filled with the
families of perfons of condition.

-  ,  •  i  \  i  ■«  / .  1 v ik  -  .*■>-

*  Jomelli is now faid to write more for the
learned fcw>  than for the feeling many.

The

/

L 33°  J

The theatre of S.  Carlo is a noble
and elegant ftrudture  :  the form is oval,
or rather the fedtion of an egg,  the end
next the ftage being cut.  There are
feven ranges of boxes,  fu.fficient in fize to
contain ten or twelve perfons in each,
who lit in chairs,  in the fame manner as
in a private houfe.  In every range there
are thirty boxes,  except the three lowed:
ranges,  which,  by the king’s box being taken out of them,  are reduced to
twenty-nine.  In the pit there are fourteen or.  fifteen rows of feats,  which are
very roomy and commodious,  with leather cufliions and ftufted backs,  each fe-
parated from the other by a broad reft
far the elbow :  in the middle of the pit
thtte are thirty of thefe feats in a row.

November i,  being All Saints day,  I
went,  at leaft two miles,  to the church
of the Incorabili,  where I was told there
would be good mufic y but I found it
miferable.  From lienee I went tofeveral

others,

I

t 33  *  ]

others,  where I only heard bad mufic ill
performed.

Friday ,  Nov.  3.  This day I vifited his
Neapolitan majefty’s mufeum,  at Portici,
where I had enquiries to make concerning ancient inftruments and MSS.  which
were of real importance to my hiftory.
In the third apartment of this curious
repofitory,  where the ancient inftruments
of furgery are placed,  I met with the following mufical inftruments ;  three Syf-
trums ,  two with four brafs bars,  and one
with three  \  feveral Crotoli or cymbals ;
jT ambours de bafque ;  a Syringa ,  with fe-
ven pipes 5 and a great number of broken
bone or ivory tibia.

But the mu ft extraordinary of all thefe
inftruments is a fpecies of trumpets,  found
in Pompeia not a year ago  ;  it is a good
deal broken,  but not fo much fo as to
render it difficult to conceive the entire
form.  There are ftill the remains of fe-
ven fmall bone or ivory pipes,  which are
inferted in as many of brafs,  all of the

fame

[  332  ]

fame length and diameter,  which furround
the great tube,  and feem to terminate in
one mouth-piece.  Several of the finall
brazen pipes are broken,  by which the
ivory ones are laid bare;  but it is natural to fuppofe that they were all blown
at once,  and that the fmall pipes were
unifons to each other,  and odtaves to the
great one.  It ufed to be flung on the
fhoulder by a chain,  which chain is preserved,  and the place where it ufed to
be fattened to the trumpet,  is ftill vifible.
No fuch inftrument as this has been
found before,  either in ancient painting

r\  r  «  —  te  /v

or Sculpture,  which makes me the more
minute in fpeaking of it.  This Angular
fpecies of trumpet was found in the Corps
de Garde,  and feems to be the true military Clangor  ‘Tub arum.

As no perfon is fuffered to ufe a pencil
in the mufeum,  when the company with
which 1 had feen it was arrived at the inn
where we dined,  Mr.  Robertfon,  an in-
genius young artift of the party,  was fo

obliging

[  333 3

obliging as to make a drawing of it,  from
memory,  in my tablets  ;  which all the
company,  confifting of feven,  agreed
was very exad:.

In the ninth or tenth room are all the
volumes as yet found in Herculaneum*
of which only four have been rendered
intelligible,  thefe are Greek.  One upon
the Epicurean philofophy,  one upon rhetoric,  one upon morality,  and one upon
mufic  ;  each volume appears to be only
a black cinder.  I faw two pages,  opened
and framed,  of the MS.  upon mufic,
written by Philodemus ;  but it is not a
poem on mufic,  as Mr.  de la Lande fays,
nror a fatire againft it,  as others fay;  but a
confutation of the fyftem of Arifioxenus,
who,  being a practical mufician,  preferred
the judgment of the ear to the Pythagorean numbers,  or the arithmetical proportions of mere theorifts.  Ptolemy did
the fame afterwards.  I converfed with
Padre Antonio Ficggi about this MS.  it

t

was be who opened andexplained it;  and

he

[  334 1

lie is now fuperintending,  at a founder^
the calling of a new fet of Greek cha-
rafters exaftly,  refemblingthofe in which
it was written,  and in which it is to
be publilhed.

Every lover of learning laments the flow
manner in which they proceed in opening
thefe volumes.  All that have been found
hitherto were in Herculaneum.  Thofe
of Pompeia are fuppofed to have been
wholly deftroyed by fire.

Saturday 3.  At night I went to a little
neat new play-houfe,  jufl:  opened ;  there
was a comedy in profe,  a Turkifh ftory*
ill told,  and not well afted.

Sunday 4.  I went this morning to S.
Gennaro,  to hear the organ and to fee the
chapel,  and the piftures in it,  by Domini^
chini ;  after which I was condufted to the
houfeofDonCarloCotumacci, mailer to the
Confervatorio of St.  Onofrio,  whom I heard

I

play on the harpfichord ;  and who gave me
a great number of anecdotes concerning the
mufic of old times.  He was fcholar to the
2 Cavalier

[  335  ]

Cavalier Scarlatti,  in the year 1719;  and
{hewed me the leffons he received from
that great mafter,  in his own hand writ^
ing.  He alfo gave me a very particular
account of Scarlatti and his family.  Signor
Cotumacci,  was Durante’s fucceffor*  He
plays,  in the old organ ftile,  very full and
learnedly,  as to modulation ;  andhas com-
pofed a great deal of church mufic,  of
tvhich he was fo obliging as to give me a
copy of two or three curious pieces.  He
has had great experience in teaching  ;  and
{hewed me two books of his own writing,
in manufcript,  one upon accompaniment,
and one upon counterpoint.  I take him
to be more than feventy years of age.

At night I went to the firil public
reprefen tat ion of Signor jomelli’s opera
of Demofoonie ,  in the grand theatre of
San Carlo ,  where I was honoured with a
place in Mr.  Hamilton’s box.  It is not
eafy to imagine or defcri.be the grandeur
and magnificence of this fpedtacle.  It being the great feftival of St.  Charles and the

King

[  S3«  ]

King of Spain’s name-day,  the court was
in grand gala,  and the houfe was not
only doubly illuminated,  but amazingly
crowded with well-dreffed company*.  In
the front of each box there is a mirrour,
three or four feet long,  by two or three
wide,  before which are two large wax
tapers ;  thefe,  by reflection,  being multiplied,  and added to the lights of the
ftage and to thofe within the boxes,
make the fplendor too much for the aching fight.  The King and Queen were
prefent.  Their Majefties have a large
box in the front of the houfe,  which contains in height and breadth the fpace of
four other boxes.  The ftage is of an
immenfe fize,  and the fcenes,  drefles,  and
decorations were extremely magnificent ;
and I think this theatre fuperior,  in
thefe particulars,  as well as in the mufic,
to that of the great French opera at Paris.

*  The fourth of November is like wife celebrated as the name-day of the Queen of Naples
and the Prince of Afturias.

I

The

[  337 J

But M.  de la Lande,  after allowing tliat
€%  the opera in Italy is very well as to
mufic and words,”  concludes with laying
“that it is not,  in his opinion,  quite fo in
other refpefts,  and for the following rea-
fons ;

“  i.  There is fcarce any machinery in
the operas of Italy

“  2.  There is not fuch a multitude of
rich and fuperb drefles as at Paris.

“3.  The number and variety of the
aftors are lefs  *f\

>  “  4.  The choruffes are fewer and lefs
laboured.  And

5.  The union of fong and dance is
neglefted”  J.

To all which obj eft ions,  a real lover of
mufic wouldperhaps fay,  fo much the better*

M.  de la Lande,  however,  allows
that the hands employed in the orcheflra

*  The Italians have long given up thofe puerile
reprefentations q(  flying gods and goddefles,  of
which the French are ftill fo fond and fo vain.

-j-  If the charadlers are fewer,  the drefles muit be
fo,  of courfe.

X Voyage d'un Francois,  Tom.  vi.

Z ar^

[  33§  J

are more numerous and various,  but
complains that the fine voices in an Italian opera are not only too few,  but are
too much occupied by the mufic and its
embellifhments to attend to declamation
and gefture.

With regard to this laft charge,  it is
by no means a jult one ;  for whoever
rememoers Pertici and Lafchi,  in the
burlettas of London,  about twenty years
ago,  or has feen the Buona Figliuola
there lately,  when Signora Guadagni,
Signor Lovatini,  and Signor Morigi were
in it ;  or in the ferious operas of pail
times remembers Monticelli,  Elifi,  Min-
gotti,  Colomba Mattei,  Manfoli,  or,
above all,  in the prefent operas has feen
Signor Guadagni,  mull allow that many

of the Italians,  not only recite well,  but

are excellent aofors.

Give to a lover of mufic an opera in a
noble theatre,  at lead twice as large as
that of the French capital,  in which the
poetry and mufic are good,  and the vocal

and

t 339 3

and inftrumental parts well performed,
and he will deny himfelf the reft without murmuring;  though his ear ihould be
lefs ftunned with choruffes,  and his eye
lefs dazzled with machinery,  dreffes,  and
dances than at Paris.

But to return to the theatre of S.  Carlo,
which,  as a fpeftacle,  furpaffes all that
poetry or romance have painted :  yet
with all this,  it muft be owned that the*
magnitude of the building,  and noife of
the audience are fuch,  that neither the
voices or inftruments can be heard dif-
tinftly.  I was told,  however,  that on
account of the King and Queen being
prefent,  the people were much lefs noify
than on common nights.  There was not
a hand moved by way of applaufe during
the whole reprefentation,  though the audience in general feemed pleafed with
the mufic  :  but,  to fay the truth,  it did
not afford me the fame delight as at the
rehearfal ;  nor did the  ^fingers,  though
they exerted themfelves more,  appear

Z 2 tO

C 34°  1

to equal advantage  :  not one of the prc~
fent voices is fufficiently powerful for
fuch a theatre,  when fo crowded and fo
noify.  Signora Bianchi,  the firft woman,  whofe fweet voice and Ample manner of finging gave me and others fo
much pleafure at the rehearfal,  did not
fatisfy the Neapolitan?,  who have been
accuftomed to the force and brilliancy of
a Gabrieli,  a Taiber,  and a de Amici.
There is too much fimplicity in her
manner for the depraved appetites of thefe
enfans gates,  who are never pleafed but
when aftonifhed.  As to the mufic,  much
of the claire obfcure was loft,  and nothing
could be heard diftindldy but thofe noify
and furious parts which were meant
merely to give relief to the reft ;  the mezzotints and back-ground were generally
loft,  and indeed little was left but the
bold and coarfe ftrokes of the compofer’s

During the performance,  Caffarelli
came into the pit,  and Signor Giraldi,
1 who

[  34i  ]

who was in Mr.  Hamilton’s box,  pro-
pofed to make us acquainted ;  and at
the end of the performance,  he conducted me to him  ;  he looks well,  and has a
very lively and animated countenance  ;
he does not feem to be above fifty years
of age,  though he is faid to be fixty-
three.  He was very polite,  and entered
into converfation with great eafe and
chearfulnefs j he enquired after the
Duchefs of Manchefler,  and Lady Fanny
Shirley,  who had honoured him with
their protection when he was in England,
which,  he faid,  was in the end of Mr.
Heydegger’s reign.  He introduced me
to Signor Gennaro Manno,  a celebrated
Neapolitan compofer,  who fat behind
him.  Signor Giraldi had been with him
before,  to fix a time for bringing me to
his houfe  ;  it was now fettled that we
ihould meet at Lord Fortrofe’s ;  indeed
it was to his Lordfhip that I was indebted for this,  and for many other opportunities of information at Naples,

Z 3 The

L 342 3

The houfe was emptying very fail,  and I
was obliged to take my leave of this fire
of fong,  who is the oldeft finger in Europe
that continues the public exercife of his
profefiion  ;  for he frequently lings in
convents and in churches yet,  though he
has for fome time quitted the lfage?

In the opera to-night there were three
entertaining dances,  but all in the lively
way ;  the Italians are not pleafed with
any other.  Indeed,  as I have before ob-
ferved,  all their dances are more pantomime entertainments than any thing elfe,
in which the fcenes are ufually pretty,
and the  (lories well told.  The fubjedt
of the firlt dance was I'ifola difabitata ;
of the fecond,  the humours of Vauxhall
Gardens in England,  in which were introduced quakers,  failors,  women of the
town,  Savoyard  (hew- boxes,  &c.  and
in the third dance,  at the end of the
piece,  the people of Thrace figured at the
nuptials of Creufa and Cherinto,  characters of the opera.  The fix principal

dancers

[  343

dancers among the men are gli Signori
O nocut o Vigano ,  Giufteppe Trafieri ,  Fran -
cefco Rafetti ,  and among the women,  le
Signore Colomba Beccari ,  Anna Torfelli ,
and Caterina Ricci ;  the fir ft man has
great force and neatnefs,  and feems to
equal Slingiby in his a plomb,  or neatnefs
of keeping time ;  and the Beccari’s many
twinkling feet are not inferior in agility
to thofe of Radicate.

Monday 5.  This morning I went to
the Confer vatorio of St.  Onofrio,  to fee
the boys take their leffons,  and to hear
fome of the beft of them play ;  they were
all hard at work,  and a noble clangor
they made,  not to be equalled by

A hundred mouths,  a hundred tongues,

A hundred pair of iron lungs,

Tenfpeaking trumpets,  &c.

However,  the ears of both mafter and
fcholar are refpedted whenleffons in fing-
ing are given,  for that work is done in a
quiet room ;  but in the common prac-

Z 4 tifing

[  344  ]

tiling rooms the noife and diffonance are
beyond all conception.  However,  I
heard in a private room two of the boys
accompany each other ;  the one played a
foloof Giardini’s on the violin,  and the
other one of his own on the bafe ;  the
firft was but indifferently executed,
but the fecond was a pretty compofi-
tion,  and very well performed.  I find
all over Italy that Giardini's folos,  and
Bach’s and Abel’s overtures,  are in great
repute,  and very jufty fo,  as I heard no-?
thing equal to them of the kind,  on the
continent.

From hence I went to fee a great feflival
at the convent of la Donna Regina>  it was
nna belliffima Funzione ,  as the Italians call
it,  on account of two Turkifh flaves,  who
being converted to the Chriftian religion,
were this day publicly baptifed :  feveral
bifhops affifted at the ceremony,  and the
church was crowded with the bed:  company of Naples.  The mufic was com-
pofed by Giufeppe da Majo,  a Neapolitan

%

[  345 3

litan compofer,  brought up in the Con-
fervatorio of the Piet a,  and was excellent,
though coarfely performed.

Having the honour,  to-day,  of dining
at our miniiier’s,  I was very much entertained in the afternoon by the performance of a fat friar,  of the order of St.
Dominic,  who came there to fing buffo
fongs ;  he accompanied himfelf on the
harpfichord in a great number of humorous fcenes from the burletta operas
of Piccini and Paeiiello,  which he fung
with a comic force,  little inferior to that
of Cafaccia,  and with a much better
voice.

Signor Nafci,  who leads the band at
the comic opera in the theatre de Fioren -
tint,  played on the violin in the Dominican’s performance,  and afterward in
fome of his own trios,  which are extremely pretty,  with a very uncommon
degree of grace and facility.

After this Mr.  Hamilton was fo obliging as to fhew me his charming picture.

L 346  ]

painted by Correggio  ;  the fubjedt is a
naked Venus who has taken Cupid’s bow
from him,  which he is ftruggling for,
while a fatyr is running away with his

quiver.  It is a wonderful performance,

%

and reckoned equal,  for the number of figures,  to the St.  Jerome,  at Parma.

The curiofities both of art and nature
in Mr.  Hamilton’s poffefiion,  are num-
berlefs and ineftimable.  The examination of his immenfe collection of Etruf-
can vafes,  and other rarities of the higheft
antiquity,  wa s of the utmoft importance
to the fubjeCt of my enquiries.  But by
thefe precious remains of art I was not
more enlightened,  concerning the mufic
and inftruments of the ancients,  than by
his converfation and counfel.

When we returned to the apartments
which we had quitted,  in order to vilit the
library,  we found a Neapolitan Prince and
Princefs,  two or three ambaffadors.  Lord
Fortrofe,  the French conful,  a number
of Engliih gentlemen,  and much other

com-

[  347 3

company  ;  in the evening there was more
mufic,  and at fupper a feledt party,  which
did not feparate till two o'clock in the
morning,  when I took leave of Mr.  Hamilton and his lady with infinite regret,
as the countenance and afliftance with
which I was honoured by them,  during
my refidence at Naples,  were not only of
the utmoft utility to me and my plan,
but fuch as gratitude will never fuffer
me to forget.

Tuefday 6.  This day I had the honour of
dining with Lord Fortrofe ;  the company
was very numerous,  and chiefly muficaL
Barbellaand Orgitano wereinvited;  there
was likewife the French conful,  M.  D’Af-
tier.  After dinner,  a complete band was af-
fembled in the gallery,  and we had mufic till pafl:  eleven o’clock.  Barbella
pleafed me much more to-night than he
had done before  ;  he is very certain of
his tone,  and has a great deal of tafte
and exprefiion ;  if he had a little more
brilliancy and fullnefs of tone,  and a

greater

[  34s 3

greater variety of ftile,  his playing would
be unexceptionable,  and perhaps fuperior
to that of molt players in Europe :  as it
is,  there feems to be a drowfinefs in his
tone,  and a want of animation in his
manner.

Orgitano played the harpfichord,  and
Signor Conforte,  a mujico ,  was there to
fing  ;  there was likewife a pretty good
folo hautbois.  The whole company had
given Caffarelli over,  ywhen,  behold  !  he
arrived in great good humour  ;  and,  contrary to all expectation,  was,  with little
entreaty,  prevailed upon to ling.  Many
notes in his voice are now thin,  but there
are ftill traits in his performance fuffici-
ent to convince thofe who hear him,  of
his having been an amazing fine finger ;
he accompanied himfelf,  and fung without any other inilrument than the harp-
iichord  ;  exprefiion and grace,  with great
neatnels in all he attempts,  are his cha~
radteriftics.  Though Caffarelli and Barbell*

[  349 1

bella are rather ancient and in ruin,  yet
what remains of them is but the more
precious.  Caffarelli propofed our fpendj  ^
ing a whole day together,  in order to
difcufs muftcal matters,  and laid it would
even be too little for all that we had to
fay  ;  but when I had acquainted him of
the neceffity I was under cf fetting out
for Rome the next night,  immediately
after the opera,  he offered to meet
me again at Lord Fortrofe’s the next
morning.

After fupper,  Barbella played extremely well feveral Calabrefe,  Leccefe,  and
Neapolitan airs,  and among the reft,  a
humourous piece compofed by himfelf,
which he calls ninna norma ;  it is a nur-
fery tune,  or lullaby ,  excellent in its way,
and was well exprelfed.

V/ednefday 7.  I vifited by appointment,
Padre della Torre,  to whom I had letters j he is librarian to the king,  and
keeper of his majefty's cabinet of rarities at the foot of Capo di Monte.  I

never

[  356 3

never faw one of a more chearfully obliging character.  He cannot be lefs than
jo years of age,  and yet he is as lively,  and even fportive,  as a young man
of 20*  He and his affiftant had been
hunting with great diligence in the king’s
library,  which formerly belonged to the
Farnefe family,  and was brought hither from Parma,  for materials relative
to mufic.  He  (hewed me,  among feveral
books and MSS which I already knew,
fome curious inedited tradls which are no
where elfe to be found
After this,  he  (hewed me his micro-
fcopes and telefcopes,  which are famous
all over Italy ;  this father beeing faid to
have made great improvements in both,
butefpecially in microfcopes,  by means of
a very fmall drop or globule of pure
chryftal glafs,  the fmaller the better,

*  There is a differtation upon found in his own
works colle&ed and publifhed in 9 vols.  8vo*
under this title — Elementa Phyfices^  auftore P ,  D •
Johanns Maria de Terre .  Napoli ,  1769.

He

[  351 j

He melts the glafs himfelf in a veflel of
Tripoli earth,  and renders it fpherical
in a clear flame.  It magnifies the diameter of an objedt,  if the globule be of
the fmallefl clafs,  2560 times ;  the common microfcopes only magnify about
350 times  -f*.  After fhewing me the
whole procefs,  he was fo obliging as to
furniflh me with feveral of thefe glafs
globules for my own ufe.

From hence I went to the houfe of
Lord Fortrofe,  to meet Caffarelli ;  and

f The difcovery is not new  ;  Leeuwenhoek is
Laid to haveufed little fpheres of glafs in his microfcopes  ;  Mr.  Baker indeed treats them with contempt :
and fays,  <c Experience has taught,  that they ad-
“  mit fo little light,  can fhew fuch an exceedingly
“  fmall part of any objeft,  are fo difficult to make

ufe of,  and ftrain the eyes fo much,  that their
<c power of magnifying for want of due diftindt-
<c nefs,  is rather apt to produce error than difco*
<c ver truth. ”  Microfcope made eajy.  But however
true this might have been at the time Mr.  Baker
wrote,  Padre della Torre feems at prefent to have
got the better of every objection to thefe glafs
globules by the dexterity with which he forms and
ufe s them.

I

novv

[  552  ]

flow I have mentioned his name for the?
laft time,  it affords me an opportunity
of acquainting my reader,  that this celebrated finger has bought a dukedom for his nephew,  after his own de~
ceaie,  the title is Duca di Santi Dora to.
He is very rich,  yet often fings for hire
at convents and at churches.  He has
built himfelf a magnificent houfe,  and
over the door is this infeription  :

AMPHION THEBAS,  EGO DOMVM*.

To-day I was favoured at dinner with
the company of Signor Fabio,  the firfl
violin of the opera of S.  Carlo  ;  he was
fo obliging and fo humble as to bring
with him his violin.  It is very common in the great cities of Italy to fee
performers of the firft eminence carry
their own inftruments through the ftreets*
This feems a trivial circumflance to mention,  yet it ftrongly marks the difference of manners and charadters in two

*  Amphion built Thebes,  I only a houfe.

"  7 countries

[  353  ]

countries not very remote from each other.
In Italy,  the leader of the firft opera in
the world carries the inftrument of his
fame and fortune about him,  with as
much pride as a foldier does his fwor4
or mufquet  ;  while,  in England,  the indignities he would receive from the populace would foon imprefs his mind
with  (hame for himfelf and fear for his
inftrument.

I obtained from Signor Fabio an exadt
account of the number of hands employ*?
ed in the great opera orcheftra  :  there
are 18 firft,  and iB fecond violins,  5 double bafes,  and but 2 violoncellos  ^  which
I think has a bad effedl,  the double bafe
being played fo coarfely throughout Italy,  that it produces a found no more mu-
ideal than the ftroke of a hammer.  This
performer,  who is a fat,  good-natured

t  -  ,

man,  by being long accuftomed to lead
fo great a number of hands,  has acqufted
a ftile of playing,  which is fomewhat
rough and inelegant,  and consequently

A a

more

t 354  ]

more fit for an orcheftra than a chamber.
He fung,  however*  feveral buffo fongs
very well,  and accompanied himfelf on
the violin in fo maflerly a manner,  as to
produce mod of the effects of a numerous band.  After dinner,  he had a fecond
to accompany him in one of Giardini’s
folos,  and in feveral other things.

I fpent thiswhole evening with Barbel-
la,  who now delivered to me all the materials which he had been able to collect,  relative to ahifiory of the Neapolitan con-
fervatorios,  as well as anecdotes of the
old compofers and performers of that
fchool :  befides thefe,  I wrote down all
the verbal information I could extract
from his memory,  concerning mufical
perfons and things.  During my vifit,  I
heard one of his befc fcholars play a folo
of Giardini’s compofition very well ;  he
was the moft brilliant performer on the
violin that I met with at Naples.

And now,  having given the reader an
account of the mufical entertainment I

4 received

[  555  ]

received at Naples,  I hope I  {hall be
indulged with the liberty of making a
few reflexions before I quit this city  ;
which has fo long been regarded as the
centre of harmony,  and the fountain
from whence genius,  tafte,  and learning,
have flowed to every other part of Europe j that even thofe who have an opportunity of judging for themfelves,  take
upon truft the truth of the fact,  and give
the Neapolitans credit for more than they
deferve at prefent,  however they may
have been entitled to this celebrity in
times pad.

M.  de la Lande's account of mufic at
Naples,  is fo far from exadt,  that it would
incline his reader to fuppofe one of two
things,  either that he did not attend to
it,  or that he had not a very diftinguifh-
ing ear.

“  Mufic,  fays this author,  is in a par-
“  ticular manner the triumph of the
“  Neapolitans ;  it feems as if the tym-
“  panum in this country was more bra-

A a 2 ced.

[  3 56  ]

“  ced,  more harmonical,  and more fono-
“  rous,  than in the reft of Europe  ;  the
“  whole nation is vocal,  every gefture
“  and inflexion of voice of the inhabi-
“  tants,  and even their profody of fyl-
“  lables in converfation,  breathe har-
“  mony and mufic.  Hence Naples is
“  the principal fource of Italian mufic,
“  of great compofers,  and of excellent
operas

I am ready to grant that the Neapo-
litans have a natural difpofition to mufic  ;  but can by no means allow that they
have voices more flexible,  and a language
more harmonious than the inhabitants
of the other parts of Italy,  as the dired
contrary feems true.  The finging in the

*  Voyage dun Francois ,  Tom.  6.  The inaccuracy v/ith which M.  de la L.  fpeaks about mufic
and muficans,  runs  .through his work.  He
places Corelli and Galuppi among the Neapolitan

Compofers  ;  whereas it is well known that Co-

♦

relli was of the Roman fchool,  and he himfelf
fays in another place  (Tom.  5.)  that Galuppi was
of the Venetian.

ftreets

[  357 1

flreets is far lefs pleafing,  though more
original than el fe where and the Neapolitan language is generally faid to be the
moft barbarous jargon among all the
different diale&s of Italy
But though the rifing generation of
Neapolitan muficians cannot be faid to
poffefs either tafte,  delicacy,  or expreffion,
yet their compofitions,  it muft be allowed,  are excellent with refpedt to
counter-point and invention  ;  and in their
manner of executing them,  there is an
energy and fire,  not to be met with perhaps in the whole univerfe  :  it is fo ardent as to border upon fury  ;  and from
this impetuofity of genius,  it is common for a Neapolitan compofer,  in a
movement which begins in a mild and
fober manner,  to fet the orcheftra in

*  A fufficient proof of the Neapolitan language being only a patGis or provincial dialed!:,  is,
that it remains merely oral,  the natives themfelves,
who are well educated,  never daring to write in
it.  -

A a 3

flames

[  35s J

flames before it is finished.  Dr.  John foil
fays,  that Shakefpeare,  in tragedy,  is airways ftruggling after fome occafion to be
comic 5 and the Neapolitans,  like high
bred horfes,  are impatient of the rein,
and eagerly accelerate their motion to the
utmofl of their fpeed.  The pathetic and
the graceful are feldom attempted in
the confervatorios  ;  and thofe refined
andftudied graces, which not only change,
but improve paflages,  and which fo few
are able to find,  are lefs fought after by
the generality of performers at Naples,
than in any other part of Italy.

-ROME.

Sunday,  Nov .  Ji.  Having a little recovered the fatigue of my journey from
Naples,  I renewed my operations at
Rome.

This morning I went to the convent
of St.  Urfula,  to fee a nun take the veil.

r The

L 359  ]

The company was very numerous,  and
compofed chiefly of the firft people of
Rome,  who were all in full drels I was
placed clofe to the altar,  where I could
fee the whole ceremony,  and hear every
word that was uttered.  The fervice was
begun by faying mafs,  then cardinal de
Rofii entered in great Hate  ;  while the
organ was playing,  and the mafs wasfing-
ing :  the muficboth vocal and inftrumen-
tal,  was performed by the nuns and ladies
of the convent,  who were placed in the
organ gallery.  The compofition was pretty,
but ill executed the organ was a bad
one,  and too powerful for the band :
moft of the beft hands,  as I was informed,
were occupied in the convent with the
internal ceremony,  the external was all
performed in the chapel.

When the cardinal was robed,  the noviciate was led into the chapel by a lady
of the firft rank in Rome,  and brought
to the altar in exceeding high drefs.  Her
hair was of a beautiful light brown,  and

A a 4 curled

[  3«S  ]

fcUiled Tn tete demouten all over hcr head*
tier gown was of the richeft embroidered^
knd,  I believe,  embofied blue and filver,  I
ever law.  She had on a lar^e  (tare hoop,
and a great quantity of diamonds  ;  the
train of her robe dragged full two yards
bn the ground  ;  (he feemed rather a pretty fort of young perfon than a beauty.
When fhe find appeared,  (he looked very
pale,  and more dead than alive ;  fhe
made a mod profound reverence to the
‘cardinal*  who was feated on the fieps of
the altar in his mitre and all his rich
Veftments,  ready to receive her.  She threw
herfelf upon her knees at the foot of the
altar,  and remained in that pofture fome
time,  while other parts of the ceremony
\vere  &dj ufiing  ;  then fhe walked up to
the cardinal,  who faid,  FigUa mia9 che do -
Mandate  ?  My child,  what is your re-
quefl  ?  She faid,  that  (he begged to be
admitted into that convent as a fifter of
the order of St.  Urfula  :  Have you well,
faid the cardinal,  coafidered of what you
‘  '  afk?

1.  *.

afk  ?  She anfwered,  chearfully,  that  (116
had ;  and was well informed of all fhe
was about to do.  Then fhe kneeled
down again,  and killed the cardinal’s
hands,  and received from him a little
crucifix,  which fhe alfo kifled  ;  after
which fhe retired again to the foot of the
altar,  where fhe threw herfelf on her
knees,  while the cardinal faid mafs,
which was fung at the fame time in the
organ loft.  After this,  there was a
fermon in the Italian language,  and that
being over,  the cardinal led the nun-eledt
into the convent,  where fhe was diverted
of all her gorgeous attire and worldly
vanities,  and had her hair cut off.  She
then came to the gate in her religious
drefs,  to receive the white veil,  with
which fhe vvas inverted by the lady ab-
befs,  the cardinal and the other afiiftants
ftanding by.

After this there was more pretty mufic
badly performed.  The organ,  by executing all the fymphonies and accompaniments,

[  362 I

ments,  overpowered the violins,  and had a
bad effe&,  though neatly played.

When her veil was on,  the new lifter
came to the convent door,  to receive the
congratulations cf her friends and of the
company  ;  but firft,  with a lighted taper
in her hand,  fee went round the convent
to falute all the nuns,  who had likewife
tapers in their hands.  When fee was at
the door,  with the veil and crown on,  but
her face uncovered,  I,  among the reft,
went clofe to her,  and found fee was
much prettier than I had before imagined.-
She had a fweet mouth,  and the fined
teeth in the world,  wife lively fparkling
eyes,  and a genteel feaped vifage;  fee
would,  any where elfe,  have been ftiled
a very pretty woman  ;  but here,  fo cir-
cumftanced,  a beauty.  At the altar flie
changed countenance feveral times,  firft
pale,  then red,  and feemed to pant,  and
to be in danger of either burfting into
tears,  or fainting ;  but fee recovered before the ceremony was ended,  and at the

A

convent

[  363  ]

convent door affumed an air of great
chearfulnefs  >  talked to feveral of her
friends and acquaintance,  and feemed to
give up the world very heroically.— And
thus ended this human facrifice !

In the afternoon I went to the Chieia
Nuova,  to hear an oratorio in that church,
where the facred drama took its rife.
There are two galleries ;  in one there
is an organ,  and in the other a harpfi-
chord  ;  in the former the fervice was begun by the matins in four parts,  alia Pa -
lejlrina then the Salve Regina was fung
a VGce fola ,  after which there were
prayers ;  and then a little boy,  not above
fix years old,  mounted the pulpit,  and
delivered a difcourfe,  by way of fermon,
which he had got by heart,  and which
was rendered truly ridiculous by the vehicle through which it pa fled.  The oratorio of Abigail,  fet to mufic by Signor
Cafali,  was then performed.  This drama
confifted of four characters,  and was divided into two parts.  The two firfi:

move

me

[  3 H I

movements of the overture pleafed
very much,  the laft not at all.  It was,
as ufual,  a minuet degenerated into a jigg
of the moft common caft.  This rapidity
in the minuets of all modern overtures
renders them ungraceful at an opera,  but
in a church they are indecent.  The reft
of the mufic was pretty common place*
for though it could boaft of no new melody or modulation,  it had nothing vulgar in it.

Signor Criftofero fung the principal
part very well,  in Guarducci’s fmooth
and polifhed manner.  He made two or
three excellent clofes,  though they were
rather too long ;  this fault is general
throughout Rome and Naples,  where
fuch a long-winded licentioufnefs prevails in the cadences of every finger,  as is
always tirefome,  and often difgufting  ;
even thofe of great performers need com-
preffion,  and thofe made by performers
of an inferior clafs not only want curtailing,  but correction.  A few feledt notes

with

[  365 1

with a great deal of meaning and ex-
preffion given to them,  is the only expedient that can render a cadence defirable,
as it fhould coniifl of fomething fuperior
to what has been heard in the air,  or it
becomes impertinent.  This abufe in
making clofes is not of very ancient itand-
ing,  for in a ferious opera of old Scarlatti,
compofed in 171 7,  there is not a fingle
place for a cadence ad libitum to be
found.

Bet ween the two parts of this oratorio, .
there was a fermon by a Jefuit,  delivered
from the fame pulpit from whence the
child had defcended.  I waited to hear
the laft chorus,  which,  though it was
fung by book,  was as light and as unmeaning as an opera chorus,  which muft
be got by heart.  With refpedt to a true
oratorio chorus accompanied with inftru-
ments in the manner of Handel’s,  I heard
but few all the time I was in Italy,
When this performance was over,  I went,
6

as

[  $66  ]

as ufual,  to the Duke of Dofrfet’s concert.

Monday 12.  I vifited the Pope’s,  or
Siftine chapel,  and being a day in which
there was no fervice,  I had permiffion to
go into every part of it,  which I was
curious to do on many accounts.  Kirft,
as it was the place in which the famous
Miferere of Allegri is performed \  fecondly,
as it was here that church-mufic firfl had
its rife,  and wTas brought to its highefi:
perfection ;  and thirdly,  where,  at the
altar piece,  is fo wonderfully painted the
laft judgment :  it is the greateft work of
Michael Angelo,  and perhaps of man.
Nothing can be conceived more aftonifh-
ing and dreadful than the ideas and figures which his dark imagination has
produced :  neither the Inferno of Dante,
nor the hell of Milton,  can furnifli any
thing more terrible.  But this amazing
work is greatly difcoloured,  and the
ceiling,  by the fame painter,  is in many

places

I 3 67 3

places broken down two or three feet in.
breadth.  The fides are painted by Pietro
Perugino,  and are the beft works I have
feen of this famous mafter of the divine
Raphael.

I went up into the orcheftra with refpect-
ful curiofity,  to fee the place facred to the-
works of Paleftrina.  It feems hardly large
enough to contain thirty performers,  the
ordinary number of fingers in the Pope’s
fervice  ;  and yet,  on great feftivals,  fuper-
numeraries are added to thefe.  There was
nothing in the orcheftra now but a large
wooden defk,  for the fcore book of the
maeftro di Capella,  and marble feats at
the back and Tides :  it is placed on the right
hand in approaching the altar,  facing the
Pope’s throne,  whichis near the altar on the
other fide.  There are feats or ftalls for the
cardinals at the fides of the chapel and
a fmall place for ambaffadors to ftand in,
juft within the rails oppofite to the altar;
but no other ftrangers are ever admitted  ;
nor are any perfons,  except the performers,

fuffered

[  3^  ]

fuffered to enter the orcheftra during the
fervice.  The grate,  or haluftrade,  which
is in diamond fquares,  gilt,  feems to take
off one third of the whole room,  which
is very lofty and magnificent,  but now
very dufty and much out of repair  *  the
floor is in beautiful Mofaic of marble.

From hence I went to the Pauline
chapel,  which is ufed only once a year,
at which time it is illuminated with
many thoufand lamps.

In the afternoon I had the pleafure of
feeing my very good friend Signor Santa-
relli,  who had not only bufied himfeif
in feeking curious things for me during
my abfence at Naples,  but had employed
feveral perfons in tranfcribing them ;
the Abate Elie had done the fame at the
Vatican ;  and the Cavalier Piranefi,  my
Englifh friends,  and feveral eminent an?
tiquaries and artifts had been aftive in
fearching ancient infhuments,  among the
bajfi rilievi and beft fculptures of antiquity,  and copying them ready for me at my

return

t 369 1

Return to Rome.  Signor Sahtarelli was
fo obliging as to accompany me to the
Cavalier Battoni’s,  where his fcholar,  the
Signorina Battoni,  fang with noble fim-
plicity,  and a truly pathetic expreffion*
ieveral fongs of Haffe,  Galuppi*  Traetta*
and Piccini.

From hence I went to a great concert,  at the houfe of Schovclhoffe*
the Mofcovite general :  and  -  there I al-
moft fancied myfelf in London  ;  for*
except three or four,  the whole company*
confiding of near thirty noblemen,  gentlemen,  and ladies*  was Englifh.  The
little Mignatrici,  Bichelli,  was there to
fing,  and another girl ,  the former fung
very well,  and the other will ling*  fome
time hence  :  there was nothing extraordinary in the indruments.

Tuefday 1 3.  I had but jud time to
dep into the beautiful little church of
St.  Andrea della Noviciata,  built by
Bernini,  at which there was milfic com-
pofed by Orificchio,  and led by Nicolai ;

B b but.

[  370  ]

but,  though my Hay was very ffiort,  I
heard a finfonia or overture,  and a chorus
a due cor /,  which were excellent*.

Friday.  16.  In a vifit I made Signor San-
tarelli this morning,  I found with him
three or four of his brethren of the pope’s
chapel  ;  among the reft.  Signor Pafquale
Pifari,  who had with him the original
fcore of a mafs in 16 real parts,  which
was full of canons,  fugues,  and imitations  :  I never faw a more learned or ingenious compofition of the kind.  Pa-
leftrina never wrote in more than eight
real parts,  and few have fucceeded in fo
many as thofe ;  but to double the number
is infinitely more than doubling the difficulties.  After three parts,  the addition
of another becomes more and more difficult;  all that can be done on thefe oc-
cafions,  is to adhere to a fimple melody

*  Signor Orificchio ranks fo high among the
prefent Roman compofers for the church,  that upon
any feftival wherever he is Maeflro di Capella,  and
has compofed a mafs,  there is fure to be a very great

crowd.

and

L 3 7l 3

and modulation,  and to keep the parts as
much as poffible in contrary,  or at leaf!:,
diffimilar motion.  In the compofitiou
of Signor Pifari,  every fpecies of con~
trivance is fuccefsfully ufed.  Sometimes the parts anfwer or imitate each
other,  by two and two ;  fometimes the
fubjedts are inverted in fome of the parts.,
while their original order is preferved in
others,  A century or two ago,  the author of fuch a compofition would hav§
had a ftatue eredted to his honour ;  but
now,  it would be equally difficult to find
1 6 people who would hear it with path
ence,  as that number of good fingers,  in
any one place,  to perform it.  Befides
vocal parts in this mafs,  there is a part
for the organ,  often on a regular fub-
jedt,  different from the reft:  the ground-'
work,  upon which all is built,  is canto
fe?'mo and,  in fome of the movements*  this canto fermo is made a fub-
jedt of imitation,  and runs through all
the parts.  Upon the whole*  it mud be

Bb  ?  ah

[  27 2 1

allowed,  that this work,  which confifts of
many different movements,  and is of a
very considerable length,  though it may
be thought by Some to require more patience than genius to accomplifh,  feems
Sufficient to have employed a long life in
compofing,  and to entitle the author to
great praife and admiration.

During this vifit,  which was my laft
to Signor Santarelli,  he and his brethren
of the pope’s chapel,  were fo obliging as
to execute Several beautiful compositions
of Paleflrina,  Benevoli,  and Allegri,  in
order to give me a true idea of the delicate and expreffive manner in which they
are fung in the chapel of his holinefs.

In the afternoon I went to Signor Crifpi’s
accademia ;  I arrived late,  while fome new

t  „  i

^uartettos of his compofition were performing  ;  but he was fo obliging as to
defire the band to begin again,  and to go
through with the whole fix.  I think
thefe pieces have great merit,  and are
Superior to any of his other productions.

Sunday

[  373  ]

Sunday 18.  I went this morning with
Mr.  Wyfeman to the church of S.  John
Lateran  *  ;  it is the moft antient church
in Chriftendom.  I here heard hip-h mafs

o

performed in the Colonna chapel,  by two
choirs,  and faw it played by Signor Co-
iifta,  the celebrated organift of that
church,  on a little moveable organ.  The
mufic was by Signor Cafali,  Maeftro di
Capella,  who was there to beat time.  I
was introduced both to him and to Signor Colifta,  after the fervice  ;  and the
latter upon being entreated to let me hear
the great organ,  very obligingly confented,

*  Mr.  Wyfeman is a worthy Englifh.  mufic-
mafter,  who is well known and efteemed by all
the Englifh at Rome,  where he has fo long been
an inhabitant,  that he has almoft forgot his native tongue.  He now lives in the Palazzo Rafa -
ele ,  without the gates of Rome  ;  where,  during
the firft winter months,  he has a concert every
week till the operas begin.  It was here that the
great Raphael lived,  where there are Hill fome of
his paintings in frefco  ;  and where the late Duke
of York,  the Prince of Brunfwick,  and feveral
-other great perfonages,  gave concerts to the firft
people of Rome.

33 b 3

upon

E 374  ]

Upon condition that Monfignore il Pre-
Jet to of the church was applied to  $
which is a neceffary ceremony in confer
quence of fome injury formerly done
to the inftrument,  by the malice or ignorance of a ftranger who had played
upon it.  This application was readily
undertaken,  and the permiffion obtained,

by Signor Cafali.

0  ..

I was conducted into the great
organ-loft by Signor Colifta,  who did
me the favour to open the cafe,  and to
fliew me all the internal conftrudtion of
this famous inftrument.  It is a thirty-
two feet organ j and the large ft in Rome.
It was fir ft;  built in 1549,  and has undergone two repairs fince  ;  the one in 1600,
by Luca Blafi Perugino ;  and a fecond,  a
few years fince,  under the direction of the
prefent organift.  It has thirty-fix flops,
two fets of keys,  long eighths,  an ocflave
below double F.  and goes up to E.  in
altiflimo.  It has likewife pedals  ;  in the
ufe of which Signor Colifta is very dextrous*

t 375 3

tfous.  His manner of playing this inftru-
ment feems to be the true organ flile,
though his tafte is rather ancient ;  indeed the organ ftile feems to be better
preferved throughout Italy than it is
with us j as the harpfichord is not fuffi-
ciently cultivated to encroach upon that
inftrument.  Signor Colifta played feve-
ral fugues,  in which thefubjecfts were frequently introduced on the pedals,  in a very
mafterly manner.  But it feems as if
every virtue in mufic was to border upon
fome vice ;  for this ftile of playing
precludes all grace,  tafte,  and melody ;
while the light,  airy harpfichord kind of
playing,  deftroys the fojlenuto and rich-
nefs of harmony and contrivance of which
this divine inftrument is fo peculiarly
capable.

It is very extraordinary that the
/well ,  which has been introduced into the
Engliih organ more than fifty years,  and
which is fo capable of expreflion and of
pleafing effects,  that it may well be faid

B b 4 to

[  376  ]

to be the greateft and moft important
improvement that ever was made on any
keyed inftrument,  fhould be ftill utterly
unknown in Italy*.  The touch too of the
organ,  which our builders have fo much
improved,  ftill remains in its heavy,  noify
Hate ;  and now I am on this fubjedt,  I
muft obferve,  that moft of the organs I
have met with on the Continent,  feem
to be inferior to ours built by father
Smith,  Byfield,  or Snetzler,  in every
thing but fize.  As the churches there are
often immenfe,  fo are the organs ;  the tone
is indeed fomewhat foftened and refined
by fpace and diftance j but when heard
near,  it is intolerably coarfe and noify  $
and though the number of flops in thefe

*  It is the fame with the Beat upon t^e unifon,
odiave,  or any confonant found to a note on the
violin,  which fo well fupplies the place of the old
clofe-fhake  :  for this beautiful effect,  if not wholly
unknown,  is at leaft neglected by all the violin
performers I heard on the continent,  though fo
commonly and fuccefsfully pradlifed in England by
tbofe of the Giardini fchooh

large

[  377 1

large inftruments is very great,  they afford but little variety,  being,  for the moil
part,  duplicates in unifons and odtaves to
each other,  fuch as the great and fmall
i2ths,  flutes,  and I5ths;  hence in our organs not only the touch and tone,  but the
imitative flops are greatly fuperior to thofe
of any other organs I have met with.

Immediately after dinner I went to St.
Peter's,  where there was a great Funzwne
for the feaft of its foundation.  The vef-
pers were faid by Cardinal York,  affifted
by feveral bifhops  :  there were Mazzanti
and Criftofero to fing,  befides feveral other
fupernumeraries,  and the whole choir.
The fat Giovannini,  famous for playing
the violoncello,  as well as for being one
of the maejlri di capella of St Peter’s,  beat
time.  The folo parts were finely flung
by the two fingersjuft mentioned,  and the
choruffes by two choirs,  and two organs,
were admirably performed.  Part of the
mu flic was by Palefltrina,  part by Benevoli,
gnd the reft modern,  but in a grave and

majeftic

t 37s 1

majeftic flile.  I never heard church mu-
fic,  except that of the Pope’s chapel,  fo
well performed.  There were no other
inftruments than the two organs,  four
violoncellos,  and two double bafes.  Some
fugues and imitations in dialogue between
the two choirs were performed,  which
had a very fine effect.  The fervice was
in the large canonical,  or winter chapel
on the left,  in which is the largeft organ
of St.  Peter’s church*.

Cardinal York faid mafs likewife in the
morning,  when there was a great congregation.

At night I went to the oratorio of
Jonathan,  at the Chiefa Nuova;  but
not being either well fet or well fung,  I
quitted that performance at the end of the
firfi part,  in order to hear another at the
church of St.  Gerolamo della Carita,

•  *

%  There arc no other organs,  nor indeed choirs
at St.  Peter’s than thofe in the fide chapels j fo that
the diftance between the weft door and the great
altar,  is wholly a free and unbroken fpace.

6 which

t 379  ]

which had only three characters in it t
this oratorio was called the Judgment of
Solomon i the tenor finger in it was admirable  ;  he had great tafte,  and a very-
uncommon facility of execution  :  a eu~

*

nuch likewife,  who performed the part
of one of the mothers,  had a fweet toned
voice,  and fung in a very pleafing manner.  The fubjeCt feems to be extremely
well adapted for mufical expreffion  :  the
fiiernnefs of the judge;  the indifference of
the falfe mother ;  and the tendernefs of
the true,  are feverally fufceptible of different mufical colouring and expreffion.
The mufic,  which had merit,  was by a
young compofer who had begged employment in order to have an opportunity
of difplaying his talents  :  his name is
Giufeppe Maria Magherini.

T uefday 20.  I went this morning to
vifit the famous Podini gallery,  in the Ve-
rufpi palace.  All the accounts of Rome
are full of the praifes of this mufic gallery  ;  or,  as it is called,  gallery of inftru-

ments ;

1

[  3So  ]

ments j but nothing  {hews the neceffity of
feeing for one’s felf,  more than thefe accounts.  The inftruments in queftion cannot have been fit for ufe thefe many
years ;  but*  when a thing has once got
into a book as curious,  it is copied into
others without examination,  and without
end.  There is a very fine harpfichord,
to look at,  but not a key that will fpeak :
it formerly had a communication with an
organ in the fame room,  and with two
fpinets and a virginal ;  under the frame is
a violin,  tenor,  and  *  bafe,  which,  by a
movement of the foot,  ufed to be played
upon by the harpfichord keys.  The organ appears in the front of the room,
but not on the fide,  where there feems to
be pipes and machines enclofed ;  but there
was no one to open or explain it,  the old
Ciceroni being juft dead.

JVednefday 21.  This morning I went
to the Kirkeana mufeum,  founded about
the middle of the laft century by Father
Kircher,  author of the Mufurgia ,  and of

feveral

[  3«I  ]

feveral other curious and learned works*
Mr.  Morrifon,  who had obtained permif-
fion for me to fee it,  was fo obliging as
to accompany me thither.  The mufeo
was fhewn us by a young Irifh jefuit.  Father Plunket,  I think,  who’is.likewife^a
young antiquary ;  but Mr.  Morrifon,
who is undoubtedly one of the firft and
moft fagacious antiquaries in Rome,  fet
him right in many particulars.  Ancient
paintings,  urns,  vafes,  jewels,  intaglios,
cameos,  and other antiquities,  are here
in fuch abundance,  that I could have fancied myfelf atPortici;  but the curiofities
I chiefly went to fee,  were Father Kir-
cher’s mufical inftruments and machines,
defcribed in his Mufurgia:  they are now al-
moft all out of order,  but their conftrudtion
is really curious,  and manifefls the ingenuity as well as zeal of this learned father
in his mufical enquiries and experiments.

In vifiting Rome a fecond time,  I took
a view of the theatres,  of which there are
7 feven

i 382  ]

feven or eight :  the principal are the Ar->
gentina ,  the Aliberti,  the Pordinone ,  and
the Capranica :  the two firft are very
large,  and appropriated to ferioqs operas.
The Pordenone theatre is ufed as a play-
houfe for tragedies and comedies  ;  and
the Capranica for burlettas,  or comic
operas.

There are no public fpedtacles allowed
in Rome,  except during carnival time,
which lafts from the feventh of January to

Afh-Wednefday ;  nor are any women

\

ever fufferedto appear upon the ftage,  the
female characters being reprefented by
eunuchs,  and frequently fo well,  from
their delicacy of voice and figure,  as to
deceive perfons unacquainted with this
prohibition.

Rome is the poft of honour for com-
pofers,  the Romans being the moft faftidi-
ous judges of mufic in Italy.  There is like^
wife in this city more cabal than elfewhere,
and party runs higher.  It is generally
fuppofed,  that a compofer or performer

who

[  3*3  ]

who is fuccefsful at Rome,  has nothing
to fear from the feverity of critics in
other places.  At the opening of an opera,
the clamour or acclamation of the company frequently continues for a confide-
rable time before they will hear a note,
A favourite author is received with fhouts
of Bravo  !  Signor Maejiro .  Viva  !  Signor
Maejiro.  And when a compofer is condemned by the audience,  it is with discrimination in favour of the linger,  by
crying out,  after they have done hiding,
Bravo  !  pure,  it Guarducci  *  /  and on the
contrary,  if the performer difpleafes in
executing the mufic of a favourite compofer,  after they have expreffed their
disapprobation of him,  by hiding,  they
cry out Viva!  pure ,  il Signor Maejiro .

It was with much regret that I quitted
this venerable city,  which is no lefs delightful to ftrangers for the innumerable
rarities it offers to their view,  than for

*  Bray-o  !  however,  Guarducci.

[  S84 1

the eafy and focial manner in which they
live with the natives,  as well as with each
other*

I have now given an account of the
ftate of mufic in the principal cities of
Italy;  there are,  however,  many places
which I either was unable to vifit,  or in
which my flay was too fhort to obtain
much information ;  however,  the following particulars feem worthy of being
mentioned  :  at Loretto there is a confi-
derable mufic fchool  :  at Siena there are
curious mififals :  at Pifa,  mufic is in a ftou*
rifhing ftate,  as I was informed,  upon the
fpot,  by Signor Lidarti,  who lives there ;
Signor Gualberto Brunetti is Maeftro
di Capella at the cathedral;  and Gherar-
defchi,  Renzini,  Lidarti,  and Corrucci,
are eminent compofers in that city.

At Perugia Signor Zanetti has long
refided  ;  but he loft his place of Ma-
eftro di Capella to the great church there,
lately,  by having appeared on the Ali-
berti ftage at Rome,  as a finger in an ope-

'[  3^5 1

•  ra of his own compofition,  and that*
merely to fupply the place of the principal tenor,  who had run away,  and to
prevent the piece from being llopt :  he
is.  fince married to a pretty woman,  who
fings well,  and is likely to indemnify him
for the lofs of his place.

At Parma,  Signer Poncini is compofer to
the great church,  as is Signor Colla to the
prince;  and Signer Ferrara,  brother to the
famous violin player,  who is a remarkable
fine performer on the violoncello;  together
with the celebrated finger Baftardini,  and
Signora Roger,  a great harpfichord player,
who was miftrefs to the princefs of Aftu-
rias,  are all in penfion at the court of
Parma.  The theatre there is the largefb
in Europe  ;  it is capable of containing
four thoufand people,  and has water under the ftage fufficient to form a great
liver,  or for the reprefentation of a fea-
fight ;  but this theatre has not been ufed
fince the death of the laft duke.

Cc

In

[  386  ]

In arriving at Genoa,  I found no other
public muftcal performance than an intermezzo,  in which Piatti,  a young finger
who had juft returned from England,  was
principal,

From the number of mufical eftabliffi-
ments and performances mentioned in this
journal,  the Italians may,  perhaps,  be
accufed of cultivating mufic to excefs ;
but whoever continues a ffiort time in
any of their principal cities,  muft perceive
that other arts and fciences are not neglected  :  and even in travelling through
the country,  if the Ecclefiaftical State be
excepted,  the natural fertility of the foil
does not appear to be the only fource of
abundance in the neceflaries of life ;  for
I can venture to affirm,  that,  throughout
Lombardy and Tufcany,  agriculture is
carried on with fuch art and activity,  that
I never remember to have feen lands
better laid out,  or lefs frequently fuffered
to lie idle  :  the poor,  indeed,  are oppref-

4 fed

f 387  ]

fed and rendered worthlefs by the rigour
of government ;  but were they lefs fo under their Gothic tyrants,  when arts and
faiences were not only negleCted but extirpated from among them  ?  Perhaps the
Cultivation of the peaceful arts may contribute as much to the happinefs of the
prefent inhabitants of Italy,  and,  indeed,
of the reft of the world,  as the conquering kingdoms did to that of their martial
anceftors 3 who*  when they were not
bulled in cutting the throats of each other*
employed all their time and talents in
plundering and enflaving mankind.

But mulic is now thought neceftary in
every country in Europe  *  and if it mujl
be had,  why fhould it not be excellent  ?
The fuperior refinement of the Italian
inufic cannot be fairly attributed to the
great number of artificial voices with
which Italy,  to its dilhonour,  abounds 3 for
vocal mufic feems at prefent in its high-
eft ftate of perfection in the confervatorios
of Venice,  where only the natural voices

C c a of

[  388  ]

of females can be heard  ;  fo that the
greatsft crime of which the Italians feem
guilty is the having dared to apply to
their fofter language,  a fpecies of mufic
more delicate and refined,  than the reft of
Europe can boaft.

It is now time to clofe my account of
theprefent ftate of mufic in Italy,  in doing
which I cannot difiemble my fears that
the reader will think it prolix ;  as,  upon
reviling my journal,  I am forry to find
that the further I advanced into that
country,  the more loofe is the texture of
my narrative  ;  for in proportion as I had
more to hear and to fee,  I had lefs time
to fpare for reflection and for writing :
indeed,  the mere matters of fadt concerning mufical exhibitions,  will,  I doubt,  afford but final]  entertainment to the reader;
for they are fo much the fame,  that an
account of one is,  in many particulars,  an
account of all ;  fo that a circumftantiai
narrative of things,  perhaps not very

interefting in themfelves,  might be

tirefome

r 3S9  ]

tirefome even in fpight of variety  :  all I
have to urge in my defence,  is,  that the relation is faithful,  and that,  if the places,
through which I palled had afforded
more entertaining incidents,  they would
have been given to the public.

After a very fatiguing and dangerous
journey over the tremendous mountains of
Genoa,  and through Provence and Languedoc,  during inceffant rains which had
rendered the roads intolerable,  I arrived
at Lyons in my way home,  Dec.  3d,
where,  in vifiting the theatre,  I was more
difgufted than ever,  at hearing French
mufic,  after the exquifite performances to
which I had been accuflomed in Italy.
Eugenie,  a pretty comedy,  preceded Sil-
vain,  an opera by M.  G retry  :  there were
many pretty paffages in the mufic,  but
fo ill fung,  with fo falfe an expreflion,  fuch
fcreaming,  forcing,  and trilling,  as quite
made me lick.

I tried toobferve,  on the road,  by what
degrees the French arrive at this extreme

C c 3 de*3

E 39°  J

depravity in their mufical expreftion  ;  and
I find,  that in defcending the Alps,  it does
not come on all at once.  In Provence
and Languedoc,  the tunes of the country
people are rather pretty  :  I prevailed on
them to fing me fome wherever I ftopt,
which they did in a natural and Ample
manner.  The airs are lefs wild than the
Scots,  a  $  lefs ancient,  hut I rather think
the melodies of Provence and Languedoc
are older than any now fubfifling that
were formed upon the fyftem of Guido.

From Lyons I travelled night and day
to Paris,  and arrived there on Saturday ,,
Dec.  8th ;  but I fhall detain my reader
no longer v/ith obfervations upon French
mufic,  of which the expreflion is notori-
pufly hateful tP all the people in Europe
but themMves  :  however,  in the midft
of this feeming feverity of decifon,  it is
but juft to own,  that the French have as
long known the mechanical laws of counter-point as any nation in Europe;  and,  that
at prefent,  by means of M.  Rameau's fyftem

and

[  39i  ]

and rules for a fundamental bafe,  they
are very good judges of harmony.  It
mud:  likewife be allowed,  that they
have long been in pofteflion of fimple
and agreeable Provenfale and Langue-
docian melodies,  to which they continue
to adapt the prettied:  words,  for focial
purpofes,  of any people on the globe  ;  and
that they have now the merit of imitating
very fuccefsfully the mufic of the Italian
burlettas,  in their comic operas,  and of
greatly furpadlng the Italians,  and,  perhaps,  every other nation,  in the poetical
compofition of thofe dramas.

During my lad:  relidence at Paris,  I
had the honour of conferring with many
men of letters of the firft clafs,  whofe
opennefs and politenefs to me were fuch
as merit my mod:  grateful and public
acknowledgments ;  and I cannot relift
the defire of mentioning two,  among
thefe,  of a very didinguifhed order,  M.
Diderot,  and M.  Roufleau.

With M.  Diderot,  I had the happinefsi
of converling feveral times ;  and I was

C c 4 pleafed

L 392  ]

pleafed to find,  that among all the fci*
ences which his extenfive genius and
learninp-  have-  inveftigated,  there is no one
that he interefts himfelf more about,
than nvafic.  Mademoifelle Diderot,  his
daughter,  is one of the fineft harpfi-
chord-players in Paris,  and,  for a lady,
po fie fled of an uncommon portion of
knowledge in modulation  ;  but though I
had the pleafure of hearing her for fe-
veral hours,  not a fingle French compo-
fition was played by her the whole time,
ail v/as Italian and German ;  hence
it will not be difficult to form a judgment of M.  Diderot’s tafle in mufic,
He entered fa zeaioufly into my views
concerning the hiftory of his favourite
art,  that he prefented me with a number
of his own MSS,  fuffic-ient for a volume
in folio on the fubjedt.  Thefe,  from fuch
a writer,  I regard as invaluable;  “  Here,
<c take them,  fays he,  I know not what
“  they contain  ;  if any materials for your
purpofe,  ufe them in the courfe of

your

'  [  393  ]

“  your work,  as your own property;.'  if
**  not,  throw them into the fire.’5 But
notwithftanding fuch a legal transfer,  I
fhall look upon myfelfas accountable for
thefe papers,  not only to M.  Diderot,  but
to the public.

I regarded the meeting with M.  Rouf-
feau at Paris,  as a Angularly fortunate
completion of my perfonal intercourfe
with the learned and ingenious on the
continent :  I was fo happy as to converfe
for a confiderable time with him upon
mufic,  a fubjed which has received fuch
embellhhments from his pen,  that the
dry eft parts of it are rendered interefting
by his manner of treating them,  both in
the Encyclopedic,  and in his Mufical
Didionary.  He read over my plan very
attentively,  and gave me his opinion of
it,  article by article ;  after which he
made enquiries concerning feveral Italian
compofers of his acquaintance,  and feem-
ed to intereft himfelf very much about
the prefent ftate of mufic in Italy,  as

well

[  394 J

well as the acquifitions I had made there
towards my future work.

&  *  *

The reader of this journal will now be
enabled not only to form an idea of the
prefent flate of mufic in the countries
through which I have paffed,  but like-
wife of the opportunities with which I
have been favoured of confulting the libraries and the learned,  on whatever is
tnoft difputable and curious in my projected hiftory.  I have mentioned fome
of the materials which I acquired,  and
to thefe may be added a great number,
which I collected during many years in
England,  and near 400 volumes of fcarce
books on the fuhjeCt of mulic,  which I
procured abroad.  I have alfo fettled a
correfpondence in every great city that I
vifited on the continent,  by means of
which I hope to be furnifhed from time to
time with the neweft in telligence concerning modern mufic,  as well as with further

[  395 3

particulars,  relative to the ancient;  and
as I am certain that no place abounds
more with men of found learning,  or
with collectors of curious compofitions
and valuable materials neceffary to my
intended work,  than my own country  *
I humbly hope that I fhall alfo be
honoured with their counfel and communications.

But with all thefe requifites,  refpedt
for the public,  for the art about which I
write,  and even for myfelf,  will prevent
precipitate publication  :  a hiftory of the
kind I propofe,  mud:  inevitably be a
work of time ;  for after confulting the
mod:  fcarce and valuable books and MSS.
and conferring with the mod:  eminent
artids and theorids ;  to feleCt,  diged,  and
confolidate materials fo various and dif-
fufed,  will not only require leifure and
labour,  but fuch a patient perfeverance,  as
little lefs than the zeal of enthufiafm can
infpire.  It is not the hidory of an art
in its infant date,  whofe parents are dill

living.

[  396  ]

living,  that I have ventured to undertake  ;  but one coeval with the world  ;
one whofe high antiquity renders its
origin as doubtful,  as the formation of
language,  or the firft articulations of the
human voice.

W  %

PL sd
ia.  M

I N D E X.

ylCCADEMlA^i.^.  107.

Accompaniments ,  loud ones cenfured,  104.

AfforS)  Italian,  why loud,  200.

Albania Cardinal Alexander.,  261.

Allegri ,  account of his famous Mifererei from 275 to
281.

Amant ,  M.  de St.  his opera,  17.

Ambrofian Chant,  76.

- Library,  84.  108.

Anneuje ,  organift of Lille,  12.

Antonio ,  5/.  church of,  at Padua,  128.  1 34.

Applaufe and Difapprobation,  how limited at Rome,
383.

Arnaud ,  M.  L’Abbe,  43.  46.

Bajfa ,  Signora ,  a noble Venetian lady,  and fine harp-
fichord player,  170.

Baglioni ,  fix fillers,  fingers,  90.  108.  233.

Balbaftre ,  organift at Paris,  36.

Ballet Heroiquey 29.

Baretti^  Signor,  of Turin,  72.

Barbella ,  Signor,  322.  347.  349.

Beccaria ,  Padre,  73.

Benevento ,  Count,  62.

Bertoni ,  compofer,  at Venice,  141.

Bezozzi,  of Paris,  24.

Bezozzis,  of Turin,  62.  67.

Bibliotheque du Fvoi,  at Paris,  27.

Bifiioli ,  Matteo,  Brefciano,  130.  135.

Bocchirini ,

INDEX.

Boccherini ,  43*

Bologna,  19 i.  Account of it's theatre*  ig8c
Books on mufic,  unfarisfa&ory,  6.

Bonaveri ,  finger,  233.

Bonelh ,  Abate,  no.

BofcGvich ,  Padre,  86.

2?dyt,  where qualified tofingnot to be found,  30 X,
Boulevard ,  14.

JSrtf'z/  OrZ>/,  or blind fidlers,  at Bologna,  220.
Brescia,  iii.

Briilon ,  Madame ,  a fine harpfichord player,  42*

Cadences or Clofes,  long ones cenfured,  365.

Cajfarelli ,  Signor,  340.  351.

Caiaf clone,  297.

Calliot ,  an excellent a£tor and finger at Paris,  19.
Cambray,  13.

Campioni ,  compofer at Florence,  251.

Canto Fermo ,  10.

Caraioli ,  a finger at Milan,  90.

Carnival ,  63.

Cafali ,  Maeftro di Capella to S.  J.  Lateran at Rome*

.373-

Caj'ati ,  a finger at Padua,  130.

Celejlini ,  a violin player at Rome,  258.

Ceremony of a nun taking the veil,  358.

Chiefa ,  a compofer,  109.

Chief a Nuova,  an oratorio there,  363.

Ciprandi ,  96.

Cirillo ,  Dr.  313.

Clajfics ,  none in mufic,  33.

Houfes on the Boulevard at Paris,  15*

Colijla ,  famous organift at Rome,  373.

Colombo ,  Padre,  124.  127.

Confervatorios ,  at Venice,  139.  141,  143.  147.  17 r.

- at Naples,  293.  299.  304.  307.  309.

31 5-324-

Concert Spirituel ,  23.  43*

Comedie Fran^cife^  44.

Conti i

INDEX.

Conti ,  Laura,  ^  finger at Venice,  172.

Converfations ,  with the Abbe Arnaud at Paris,  44,
Abbe Rouflier,  45.  M.  de Voltaire,  59.  M.
Serre,  54.  Padre Beccaria,  73.  Padre Bofcovicb,
86.  Signor Galuppi,  176.  Abate Martini,  154.
Conte Torre Taxis,  165.  18 1.  Padre Colombo,
127.  134.  Signor Valloti,  130.  Padre Martini,
193.  229.  Signor Farinelli,  iq6.  202.  La Dot-
torefla M.  Laura Bafti,  217.  Rinaldo di Capua,
283.  Signor Piccini,  298.  Signor Jomelli,  316,
Padre de la Torre,  349,  Signor Santarelli,  267,
M.  Diderot,  391.  M.  Rouffeau,  393.

Cafaccia ,  an excellent actor in the comic opera,  292.

Comedy ,  Italian,  at Brefcia,  1 14.

- at Florence,  247.

- at Naples,  334.

Corbeli ,  organift at Milan,  77.

Cotumacci ,  matter of the Confervatorio of St.  Onofrio,
at Naples,  334.

Couperin ,  organift at Paris,  39.

Crijpi ,  compofer at Rome,  259.

Criftofero ,  finger at Rome,  364.

Dances ,  in Italian operas,  defcribed,  342.

Dancers names,  in the great theatre at Naples,  343.

Dancing and Tinging together,  35.

De ,  Madame ,  a finger at Milan,  97.

Demofoonte ,  opera of,  rehearfed 335.  performed 339.

Devillers ,  organift of Lille,  10.

Diderot ,  M.  391.

Dream ,  Tartint’s,  122.

Duomo of Milan,  77.  103.

Durante ,  315.

Ecfo,  an extraordinary one naar Milan,  98,

Electricity,  3.  218.

Elie,  Abate,  262.

Ettori,  il Cavalier Guglielmi,  finger at Padua,  133.

Fabio,

I N  \D E X.

Pablo ,  leader of the great opera at Naples,  352.
Farinclli ,  Signor,  196.  Building a houfe at Bologna*
2C2.  A collection of harpfichords,  203.  Sketch
of his life,  from 205 to 217.

Ferney,  the feat of M.  De Voltaire,  56.

Ferrareje ,  La ,  a finger at Venice,  143.

Fioroni ,  Maeftro di Capella at Milan,  77*

Florence.  230.  its early fame for mufic,  its libraries
254.  <  •

Figline,  a jubilee there,  from 235 10240.

French mufic,  ffiil in its infancy,  30.

— —  Partifans for Italian mulic,  35*

— — -  Excel in gay,  focial,  and femimentai fong5,

390

Fritz ,  M.  a performer,  and compofer at Geneva,  52.
Furlanetti ,  compofer at Venice,  139*

Funzione,  at St.  Peter’s,  377.

Gabrieli Francefca,  a finger at Venice 162.  172.
Galuppi ,  compofer at Venice,  137.  Maeftro di Capella of the Incurabili,  147.  Becomes more
animated by age,  166.  Vifited by the author*
176.  His definition of good mufic,  177.

Games at Figline,  237.

Gnfman ,  Signior Floriano,  compofer,  80.

Garibaldi ,  a finger,  90.

Gafparini ,  Don Quirico,  organift,  62.

Geneva,  52.

Genoa,  386.  .  s

Gcnno.ro Manni ,  Neapolitan compofer 295.

Gervais ,  <S/.  mufic in the church of,  39.

Giardiniy his folos much,  efteemed,  and pradlifed
throughout Italy,  344.  His fchool,  376.

Givfeppe ,  Maria Magherini,  a Roman compofer,

379-

Giovanni e Paolo ,  church at Venice,  144.

Greek church,  at Venice,  140.

Gregorian chant,  ufed in France,  9.

Greta,  Signor,  librarian at Tuiin,  75*

Gretry  *

INDEX.

Gretry ,  M.  a French compofer,  46,  49.  His opera
of Sil vain,  389.

Guadagni ,  Signor Gaetano,  130.  134.  338.

Guarducci ,  255.

Guglietti Trcmba ,  violin player at Padua,  128,  137.

•  •  .  >  «

Handel ,  the fuperiority of his chorufles with inftru-
ments,  157.  365.

Harpfechordsy bad in Italy,  288.  y

—  -  Farinelli’s named after great painters,  137.

JefuitSy 89.

Improvvifatricey Signora Maddalena Morelii,  her extraordinary talents,  250.

Incur abiliy confervatorio,  at Venice,  139.  147.
Johanni in Monte ,  church at Bologna,  an account
of its annual exhibition,  from 222 to 228.

*Jotnelliy 101.  316.

Italian^  their politenefs to the author,  266.  Their
pafiion for mulic defended,  386,

'Jubileey te?nsdey 12.

Intermezzoy at Turin,  65.

Kirchery father,  100.  142.

Kirkeanaf mufeo,  380.

Lampugnaniy 1 0 1 .

Landey M.  De La,  his account of Tartini’s dream,
121.  Of the opera in Italy,  337.

Laura Baffin La Dottorefla,  from 217,  to 220.
Laudijliy or pfalm fingers,  232.  247.

Laurencey St.  church of,  at Venice,  156.

L'Attillay compofer at Venice,  147.

LeOy X.  his reign favourable to the arts in Italy,  3.
Libraryy at the college des Quatre Nations,  at Paris,  16.

- the King’s at Paris,  27.

— — - —  at Turin,  75.

—  -  Ambrofian,  84.  108.

-  St.  Mark’s,  188. - -Padre Martini’s,  194. —

Magliabecchi,  234.  Vatican,  262.  That of
the King of Naples,  349.

D d

Lignivilky

X.

I N D E

Ligniville ,  il Marchefe,  252.

Linley ,  247.

Lisle,  9.

Locatello ,  Signor Domenico,  organift at Padua,  135.
Lottie Venetian compofer 145.

Lucchini ,  violin player at Milan,  82.  93.

Luint Bonetto ,  the finger,  115.

Lyons,  50.

Lyr/c Poetry,  reflexions,  on,  47.

Mark's,  St.  church at Venice,  137.  141.

- - -  Library ,  188.

Marco ,  Piazza di S.  143.

Manzoli ,  245.  ,

Marla Maddalena ,  convent,  103.

Marfili ,  Dr.  130.  134-

Martini ,  Signor Bauifta San,  compofer at Milan,  76.
95-  I03*

* - Abate,  a perfon of great erudition at Venice,

154-  155-

- — —  Padre,  his Hiflory ofMufic 191.  His arniable
charadier,  193.  His immenfe library,  194.  A great
compofer of canons,  230.  *

Marcksfini-,  a finger at Milan,  96.

Mattel ,  Camilla ,  finger at Padua,  133.

Mazzanti ,  a finger of great tafle at Rome,  281.
Menagatto ,  Signor,  a Venetian prieft, and compofer,  150*
Mendicant /,  confervatorio,  at Venice,  139.  141.

- - account of a concert there,  1 83.

Metajlafio ,  the beft lyric poet,  47.

Mignatrice ,  Bichelli ,  finger at Rome,  369.

Milan,  76/

Moliere ,  and Marivaux,  44.

Montefiascone,  255.

Mcnlefiquieu ,  3.

Monza,  compofer at Milan,  93.

Mofiart ,  228.

Mofchetti,  Carlo ,  finger at Brefcia,  112.

Mafic,  more cultivated now than in any former age,  3.

- - of public utility in England,  4.

— * —  why not permanent,  33.

i Mujic

INDEX.

Mufic ,  in the ftreets at Brefcia,  1 15.

- at Venice,  138.

- by what degrees it degenerates in the way from

Italy to France,  389.

Muficiam ,  itinerant at Turin,  71.

Mar cello ,  159.

Naples,  29?.

Nardini ,  firft fcholar of Tartini,  123.  125.  249.
Nazari ,  violin player at Venice,  158.

Neapolitan Mufic,  reflexions upon,  355..

Nun of St.  Urfula,  profefled at Rome,  from 358 to

363-

Nuns performance at Milan,  104
-  eight,  take the veil at Florence,  245-

Oltrocchi ,  Signor,  109.

Onofrio ,  confervatorio,  309.  315.  324.

Opera>  at Paris,  28.  At Milan,  80.  90.  At Florence,
233.  240.  At Naples 291.  305.  309.  314.

^  320.  335.  _ r

Oratorio ,  363.  379.  The nrft at Rome 270.

Organ ,  at Lille,  11.  At Notre Dame,  21.  St.
Rocque,  36.  St.  Gervais,  41.  At the Daomo,
Milan,  77.  At St.  Anthony’s,  Padua,  134.
Giovanni e Paolo,  Venice.  144.  At St.  John
Lateran,  Rome 373.

Organs ,  in Italy deficient in tone and touch,  376.
- on the continent compared with the Englifh,

376-

Organijls ,  feveral good ones in Italy,  but chiefly
among the monks and friars,  289.

Orgitano ,  mufic-mafter,  at Naples,  321.

Orifichio ,  compofer for the church at Rome,  369.
Ortolani,  finger,  148.

gfpidaletto ,  confervatorio,  at Venice,  139.  143.  171.
ttane ,  finger,  64.

Padua,  120.

Paefeello ,  305.

Paging M.  violinift,  42.

Paintingy

D d 2

I N D E X,

tainting and fculpture,  attention to them of ufe U>
the author in his mufical enquiries,  163.

Palejlrini ,  243,  270.  337.

Paris,  14.

Parma,  385.

Pafqua RoJJi ,  finger,  148.

Pafquali Pifari ,  compofer and finger,  370.

Peter’s ,  St.  church illuminated,  260.

Philharmonic fociety’s annual exhibition at Bologna*
222.

Piantanida ,  vioiinifl at Bologna,  224.

Piccini ,  298.

Pietd ,  confervatorio,  at Venice,  139.  161,

■ - - - —  at Naples,  304.

Piranefi ,  266.

Plain Chant ,  10.  52#

Poetry of the French comic opera fuperior to that of
the Italian,  65.

Pilgrims ,  119.

Pope’s chapel defcribed,  366,  368.

Portici ,  mufeum at,  331*334.

Potenza ,  133.

Prefs-gang ,  religious,  119.

Preville ,  a£tor at Paris,  45*

Profer ,  21.

Pugnani ,  61.  72.

Rameau ,  29.  38-

Rejlettions on the want of permanence in mufic,  3I/
On lyric poetry,  47.  On loud and bufy accompaniments,  105.  Upon difcord,  152.  On the Italian
drama without mufic,  200.  On rapid minuets,  364.
On long clofes,  On organ playing,  375.  On
the exceflive cultivation of mufic in Italy,  386.

Rinaldo di Capua ,  a Neapolitan compofer,  283.  284.*
286.

Rehearfal of an opera of Jomelli’s at Naples,  327.

Rizio,  David,  75.

Rome,  257,  358.  The poll of honour for performers
and compoiers,  382.

Rota ,

I N D

E

X.

Kota,  148.  ■

RouJJeau ,  M.  45.  126.  393.

RouJJiery M.  L’Abbe,  45.

Sacchi ,  Padre,  1 1 1.

Sacchini ,  compofer,  133.  143.  156.

Santarelli,  Maeftro di Capella to the Pope,  267.

Santi Apojloli ,  church of,  gran funzione,  260.

Scarlatti ,  Alexander ,  285.  335.  365.

— - Domenico ,  203.  215.

Schobert ,  43.

Serpent ,  an inftrument ufed in the French churches*
11.  22.  •-

&rr*,  M.  54.

Sienna,  254.

'Simonetto palace,  echo there,  98.

Singers in the flreets at Milan,  107.

Street mufic at Naples,  310.

Summary account of the prefent  (late of mufic in fcveral
towns,  384.

Swell ,  none in the organs of France and Italy,  375.
Symphonies ,  thofe of Bach and Abel much efteemed in
Italy,  344.

Tallis ,  not the inventor of the Englifh chanting,  10. 22.
Tarantula ,  account of,  313.

Tartini ,  Iketch of his life,  120.  134.

Tafte ,  the want of it at Naples accounted for,  325.
Taxis ,  Count Torre,  124.  165.  18 1.

Tejloriy Signor Carlo,  author of a mufical treatife,  76.
Theatre ,  Italian,  16.  49.  At Turin,  64.  70.  Milan,
81.  Brefcia,  113,  Verona,  116.  Padua,  132.
Bologna,  198.  Florence,  233.  Parma,  385.
Rome,  382.  Naples,  292.  305.  330.

Tragedy ,  an Italian one at Bologna,  198.

Todini gallery,  379.

Torre ,  Padre de la,  349.

Turin,  61.

Triulzi,  Don,  109.

Turkijh flaves baptifed,  344.

2 Fallotif

INDEX.

Valloti ,  Maeftro di Capella at Padua,  125.- 130.  134,
Vandini ,  Antonio ,  130.  135.

Vatican library,  262.

Venice,  137.  Mufic more cultivated there than
el fe where,  and why,  187.

Venetians ,  begin to live at midnight,  150.

Veronefe ,  Paul>  his famous picture of the marriage of
Cana,  164.

Vercelli,  76.

Verona,  116.

Vicenza,  118.

Vinci ,  Leonardo da ,  84.  no.

Voltaire ,  M.  de,  49.  54.

TVyfeman ,  Mr.  373.

Zanett'u at Perugia,  384.

Zanotti^  the Abate,  224.

Zarlino ,  142.  253.

Zocchiy Signora,  finger at Venice,  i8o»

FINIS,

f

ADVERTISEMENT.

/I General Plan of the author s Intended
Hiftory of Mufic,  with Propofals
for Printing it by Subfcription ,  will be fub -
nutted to the public as foon as the work is
fufjicie ntly advanced to enable him to fix a
time with any degree of certainty for its
appearance .

^  '

i

r

t>"

*

«

\

%

I

s

\

V

'  |

l

f

■\  ,

*

f

'I
