VI 


rm 


,  v 


3talm  JVframs 


I  N  THE  CUSTODY  OF  THE 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


rA 


A  N  m2- 

INQUIRY 

I  N  T  O    T  H  E 

Original  of  our  Ideas 

O  F 

BEAUTY '  and  FIRTUE; 

In  Two  Treatises. 

I.  Concerning  BEAUTY,   ORDER, 

HARMONY,    DESIGN. 

II.  Concerning  MORAL  GOOD  and 

EVIL. 

The  Second  Edition,  Corrected  and  Enlarg'd. 

Itaque  eorum  ipforum  quae  afpe&u  fentiuntur,  nullum  aliud 
animal  pulchritudinem,  venuftatem,  convenientiam  partium 
fentit.  Quam  fimilitudinem  natura  ratioque  ab  oculis  ad  ani- 
mum  transferens,  multo  etiam  magis  pulchritudinem,  con- 
ftantiam,  ordinem  in  confiliis,  fa&ifque  confervandum  putar. 
Quibus  ex  rebus  conflatur  6c  efficitur  id  quod  quaerimus  honefc 
turn  :  Quod  etiamfi  nobilitatum  non  fit,  tamen  honeftum  fit : 
quodque  etiamfi  a  nullo  laudetur,  natura  eft  laudabile.  For- 
mam  quidem  ipfam  5c  tanquam  factem  honefti  vides,  quae  ft 
oculis  cerneretur,  mirabiles  amores  excitaret  fapientiae.  Cic.  ^  *1  h 
deOjf.  lib.  i.  c.  4.  gj3    ' 

LONDON: 

Printed  for  J.  D  arby,  A.  Be  tt  e  swort h,  F.Fayram, 
J.  Pemberton,  C.  Rivington,  J.  HookEj 
P.  C  l  a  y,  J.  B  a  t  l  e  y,  and  E.  S  y  m  o  n.     1716. 


<  ADAMS 


T  O 

His  Excellency, 

J     O     H     N9 

Lord  CARTERET, 

Lord  Lieutenant  of  I  RE  LA  NZ>. 


May  it  pleafe  your  Excellency, 

WHEN  I  publiili'd 
thefe  Papers,  I  had 
fo  little  Confidence 
of  their  Succefs,  that  I  was 
unwilling  to  own  them  ;  and 


A    2 


what 


iv  Dedication. 

what  I  was  unwilling  myfelf 
to  own,  I  durft  not  prefume 
to    infcribe    to    any    great 

Name. 

Your  Excellency's  fa- 
vourable Reception  of  them, 
foon  put  me  out  of  all  Fears 
about  their  Succefs  with  the 
wifer  and  better  Part  of  the 
World  ;  and  fince  this  has 
given  me  Affurance  to  own 
them,  I  humbly  prefume  to 
infcribe  them  in  this  fecond 
Edition  to  your  Excellency, 
that  I  may  have  at  once  an 
Opportunity  of  expreffing 
the  fincereft  Gratitude  for 
the  Notice  you  were  pleas'd 
to  take  of  me,  and  have  the 
Pleafure   alfo  of  letting  the 

World 


Dedication. 

World  know  that  this  fmal! 
'Work  has  your  Excellency's 
Approbation. 

The  Praife  beftow'd  by 
Perfons  of  real  Merit  and 
Difcernfnent,  is  allow'd  by  all 
to  give  a  noble  and  rational 
Pleafure.  Your  Excellency 
firft  made  me  feel  this  in 
the  moft  lively  manner  ;  and 
it  will  be  a  Pleafure  as  lair- 
ing as  it  is  great :  'twill  ever 
be  matter  of  the  bigheft 
Joy  and  Satisfaction  to  me, 
that  I  am  Author  of  a  Book 
my  Lord  Carteret  ap- 
proves. 

I  know,   my  Lord,  that 

much  of  your  Commendation 

A  3  is 


vi  Dedication. 

is  to  be  attributed  to  your 
own  Humanity  :  You  can  en- 
tirely approve  the  Works  of 
thofe  alone,  who  can  think 
and  fpeak  on  thefe  Subjects 
as  juftly  as  your  felf ;  and 
that  is  what  few,  if  any, 
even  of  thofe  who  fpend 
their  Lives  in  fuch  Con- 
templations, are  able  to  do. 
In  the  Converfation,  with 
which  your  Excellency  has 
been  pleas'd  to  honour  me, 
I  could  not,  I  own,  without 
the  utmoft  furprize,  obferve 
fo  intimate  an  Acquaintance 
with  the  moil  valuable  Wri- 
tings of  contemplative  Men, 
Antient,  and  Modern  ;  fo  juft 
a  Tafte  of  what  is  excel- 
lent in  the  ingenious  Arts, 

in 


Dedication.  vii 

in  fb  young  a  Man,  amidft 
the  Hurry  of  an  active  Life. 
Forgive  me,  my  Lord,  that 
I  mention  this  part  of  your 
Character:  'tis  fo  uncommon 
that  it  deferves  the  higheft 
Admiration ;  and  'tis  the  only 
one  which  an  obfcure  Philo- 
fopher,  who  has  receiv'd  the 
greateft  Obligations  from 
your  Excellency,  can  with 
any  Propriety  take  notice  of. 

Those  other  ^reat  En- 
dowments  which  have  ena- 
bled you,  even  in  Youth,  to 
difcharge  the  moft  difficult 
Employments,  with  the  high- 
eft  Honour  to  your  felf,  and 
Advantage  to  your  Country, 
I  dare  not  prefume  to  de- 
A  4  fcribe. 


viii         Dedication. 

fcribe.  He  who  attempts 
to  do  Juftice  to  fo  great  and 
good  a  Character,  ought  him- 
felf  to  be  one  of  uncommon 
Merit  and  Diftin&ion ;  and 
yet  the  ableft  Panegyrift 
would  find  it  difficult  to  add 
any  thing  to  your  Excel- 
lency's Fame.  The  Voices 
of  Nations  proclaim  your 
Worth.       I  am, 

May  it  pleafe  your  Excellency, 
Tour  rnojl  obliged, 
Mojl  obedient,  and 
Moji  devoted  humble  Servant, 


Dublin, 
June  19. 


Francis  Hutchefon. 


(ix) 


THE 

PREFACE. 

THERE  is  no  part  of  Phi- 
lofophy  of  more  impor- 
tance, than  a  juft  Know- 
ledge of  Human  Nature,  and  its  va- 
rious Towers  and  Qifpofitions.  Our 
late  Inquires  have  been  very  much 
employ  d  about  our  Underftanding, 
and  the  fever al  Methods  of  obtaining 
Truth.  We  generally  acknowledge, 
that  the  Importance  of  any  Truth  is 
nothing  elfe  than  its  Moment,  or 
Efficacy  to  make  Men  happy,  or  to 
give  them  the  greateft  and  mofi  loft- 
ing tpleafure  3  and  Wifdom  denotes 
only  a  Capacity  of  purfuing  this  End 
by  the  bejl  Means.  It  muft  furely 
then  be  of  the  greatefi  importance, 

to 


The   PREFACE. 

to  have  dijlinfl;  Conceptions  of  this 
End  it  felf  as  well  as  of  the  Means 
necejfary  to  obtain  it  5  that  we  may 
find  out  which  are  the  greatefi  and 
mofi  lajiing  (PIeafuresy  and  not  em- 
ploy our  Reafon,  after  all  our  la- 
borious Improvements  of  it,  in  tri- 
fling 'PurfuitSi  It  is  to  be  feard 
indeed,  that  mojt  of  our  Studys, 
without  this  Inquiry,  will  be  of 
very  Tittle  ufe  to  us  5  for  they  fe em 
to  have  fcarce  any  other  tendency 
than  to  lead  us  into  fpeculative  Know- 
ledge it  felf  Nor  are  we  diflinttly 
told  how  it  is  that  Knowledge,  or 
Truth  is  pleafant  to  us. 

THIS  Confederation  put  the 
Author  of  the  following  papers  upon 
inquiring  into  the  various  'Pleafures 
which  Human  Nature  is  capable  of 
receiving.  We  Jloall  generally  find 
in  our  modem  philofophick  Writings, 
nothing  further  on  this  Head,  than 
fome  bare  Divifion  of  them  into  Sen- 
fible;  and  Rational,   and  fome  trite 

Com- 


The  P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  xi 

Commonplace   Arguments   to  prove 
the  latter  more   valuable    than    the 
former.     Our  fenfible  Pleafures  are 
(lightly  pafs  d  over,  and  explain  d  only 
by  fome  Inflames  in  Taftes,    Smells, 
Sounds,  or  fuch  Tike,  which  Men  of 
any  tolerable  Reflection  generally  look 
upon   as    very  trifling   Satisfactions. 
Our    rational    Pleafures    have    had 
much   the  fame   kind  of  treatment. 
We    are  Jeldom   taught    any    other 
Notion   of   rational  Pleafure   than 
that  which  we  have  upon  reflecting 
on  our  PojfeJJton,  or  Claim  to  thofe 
Objects,  which  may  be  Occajions  of 
^Pleafitre.     Such  Objects  we  call  ad- 
vantageous 3    but  Advantage,    or  In- 
tereif,  cannot  be    dijlintily  conceivd, 
till  we  know  what  thofe  pleafures 
are  which  advantageous  Objects  are 
apt  to  excite  5  and  what  Senfes   or 
powers  of 'Perception  we  have  with 
refpeffi   to  fuch    Objects.      We    may 
perhaps  find  fuch  an  Inquiry  of  more 
importance  in  Morals,  to  prove  what 
we  call  the  Reality    oi    Virtue,  or 

that 


m  The  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

that  it  is  the  fureft  Happinefs  of 
the  Agent.,  than  one  would  at  frji 
imagine. 

IN  reletting  upon  our  external 
Senfes,  we  plainly  fee,  that  our  Per- 
ceptions  of  Pleafure,  or  'Pain,  do 
not  depend  diretily  on  our  Will. 
Qbjetls  do  not  pleafe  us,  according 
as  we  incline  they  fhould.  The  pre- 
fence  of  fome  Objects  necejfarily  pled" 
fes  as,  and  the  prefence  of  others 
as  necejfarily  dijpleafes  us.  Nor  can 
we  by  our  Will,  any  other  wife  pro- 
cure  Pleafure,  or  avoid  Pain,  than 
by  procuring  the  former  Kind  of  Ob- 
jects, and  avoiding  the  latter.  By 
the  very  Frame  of  Our  Nature  the 
one  is  made  the  occajion  of  T)elight, 
and  the  other  of  T)ijfatisfa£tion. 

THE  fame  Obfervation  will  hold 
hi  all  our  other  Pleafures  and  Pains. 
For  there   are  many  other  forts  of 
Obje£is,  which  pleafe,  or  difpleafe  us 
as  necejfarily,    as    material  Objetfs 

do 


The   PREFACE.  xfc 

do  when  they  operate  upon  out  Or* 
gans  of  Senfe.  There  is  fcarcely 
any  Obje£i  which  oar  Minds  are 
employ  d  about,  which  is  not  thus 
conftituted  the  necejfary  occajion  of 
fome  Pleafure  or  cPain.  2  bus  we 
find  our  f elves  pleas  d  with  a  regu- 
lar Form,  a  piece  of  Architecture  or 
Painting,  a  Compofttion  of  Notes,  a 
Theorem,  an  Adtion,  an  Affection, 
(t  Character.  And  we  are  confc'ious 
that  this  Pleafure  neceffarily  arifes 
from  the  Contemplation  of  the  Idea, 
which  is  then  prefent  to  our  Minds, 
with  all  its  Circumftances,  altho  fome 
of  thefe  Ideas  have  nothing  of  what 
we  call  fenfible  Perception  in  them  5 
and  in  thofe  which  have,  the  Plea* 
fure  arifes  from  fome  Uniformity, 
Order,  Arrangement,  Imitation  5  and 
not  from  the  Jimple  Ideas  of  Colour, 
or  Sound,  or  mode  of  Extenfiony^- 
rately  conjiderd. 

THESE  Determinations    to  be 
pleas  d  with  any   Forms,    or  Ideas 

which 


/ 


xiv  The  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

which  occur  to  our  Objervation, 
the  Author  chufes  to  call  Sekses; 
dijlirguiflnng  them  from  the  lowers 
which  commonly  go  by  that  Name, 
by  calling  our  *Power  of  perceiving 
the  Beauty  of  Regularity,  Order, 
Harmony,  ^Inte rnal  Sense} 
and  that  Determination  to  be  ■  pleas  d 
with  the  Contemplation  of  thofe  At 
fe&ions,  A&ions,  or  Characters  of 
rational  Agents,  which  we  call  vir- 
tuous, he  marks  by  the  name  of  a 
Moral  Sense. 

HIS  principal  T)efign  is  tojhew, 
"  That  Human  Nature  was  not  left 
a  quite  indifferent  in  the  affair  of 
a  Virtue,  to  form  to  it  fclf  Obfer- 
a  nations  concerning  the  Advantage, 
"  or  Difadvantage  of  Attions,  and 
"  accordingly  to  regulate  its  Con- 
"  duff."  The  weahiefs  of  our  Rea- 
fon,  and  the  avocations  arifing  from 
the  Infirmity  and  Necejfitys  of  our 
Nature,  are  fo  great,  that  very  few 
Men  could  ever  have  formd  thofe 

long 


The   PREFACE.  xv 

long  T)edu£iions  of  Reafon,  which 
(hew  fome  Attions  to  be  in  the  whole 
advantageous  to  the  Agent,  and  thetr 
Contrarys  pernicious.  The  Au- 
thor of  Nature  has  much  better 
furnifh'd  us  for  a  virtuous  Conduct, 
than  our  Moralifts  feem  to  imagine, 
by  aJmofi  as  quick  and  powerful  In- 
ftruffions,  as  we  have  for  the  pre- 
fervation  of  our  Bodys.  He  has 
made  Virtue  a  lovely  Form,  to  ex- 
cite our  purjuit  of  it  3  and  has  gi- 
ven us  ftrong  Ane&ions  to  be  the 
Springs  of  each  virtuous  Aflion. 

THIS  moral  Senfe  of  Beauty  in 
Actions  and  Affeitions,    may  appear 
ftrange  at  jirft  View.     Some  of  our 
Moralifts  themfelves  are  offended  at 
it  in  my  Lord  Shaftesbury  5 
fo  much  are  they  accuftomd  to  de- 
duce  every  Approbation,   or  Aver- 
fion,  from  rational  Views  of  Inte- 
reft,  {except  it  be  merely  in  the  fimple 
Ideas    of   the  external  Senfes)  and 
have  fuch  a  Horror  at  innate  Ideas, 

which 


pri  The   PREFACE, 

which  they  imagine  this  borders  upon. 
Bat  this  moral  Senfe  has  no  relation 
to  innate  Ideas,  as  will  appear  in  th? 
fecond  Treatife.  Our  Gentlemen  of 
good  Tafte  can  tell  us  of  a  great 
many  Senfes,  Taftes,  and  Reliflies 
for  Beauty,  Harmony,  Imitation  in 
Painting  and  Poetry  5  #n d  may  not 
we  find  too  in  Mankind  a  Relifli  for  a 
Beauty  in  Characters,  in  Manners  ? 
/  doubt  we  have  made  Philofophy, 
as  well  as  Religion,  by  our  fooltfh 
management  of  it,  fo  aufiere  and  un- 
gainly a  Form,  that  a  Gentleman 
cannot  eafily  bring  himfelf  to  like 
it  5  and  thofe  who  are  Strangers  to 
it,  can  fcarceJy  bear  to  hear  our  (De- 
fcription  of  it.  So  much  it  is  changed 
from  what  was  once  the  delight  of 
the  jineji  Gentlemen  among  the  An* 
tients,  and  their  Recreation  after  the 
Hurry  of  publick  Affairs  ! 

INtheJirfi  Treatife,  the  Author 

perhaps  in  fome  Inftances  has  gone 

too  far,  \n  fuppoftng  a  greater  Agree- 

3  went 


The  PREFACE. 

ment  of  Mankind  in  their   Senfe  of 
Beauty,    than   Experience  will  con- 
firm ;  but  all  he  is  folltcitous  about 
is  to  Jfrew,    "  That  there  is  fome 
"  Senfe  of  Beauty  natural  to  Men  5 
"  that  we  find  as  great  an  Agree- 
"  ment  of  Men  in  their  Relifioes  of 
"  Forms,  as  in  their  external  Senfes 
"  which    all  agree  to  be  natural  5 
"  and  that  ^Pleafure  or  'Pain^    T)e- 
a  light  or   Averfion,  are   naturally 
"  join  d  to   their  'Perceptions."     If 
the  Reader  be  convinc  d  of  fuch  De- 
terminations of  th  e  Mind  to  be  pleas  d 
with    Forms,    Proportions,    Refem- 
blances,    Theorems,    it  will  be    no 
difficult  matter  to  apprehend  another 
fuperior  Senfe,  natural  alfb  to   Meny 
determining  them  to  be  pleas  d  with 
Actions,  Characters,  Affections.   This 
is  the  moral  Senfe,  which  makes  the 
Subjeti  of  the  fecond  Treatije. 

THE  proper  Occafions  of  \Per~ . 
ception  by  the  external  Senfes,  occur 
to   us   as  foon  as  we  come  into  the 

a  World  $ 


xvn 


xviii  The  PREFACE. 

World  3  whence  perhaps  we  eajily 
look  upon  thefe  Senfes  to  be  natural : 
bat  the  Objetfs  of  the  fuperior  Sen- 
fes of  Beauty  and  Virtue  generally 
do  not.  It  is  probably  fome  little 
time  before  Children  refte£iy  or  at 
leafi  let  us  know  that  they  refletf; 
upon  Proportion  and  Similitude  5 
upon  Affections,  Characters,  Tem- 
pers 3  or  come  to  know  the  exter~ 
nal  Actions  which  are  Evidences 
of  them.  Hence  we  imagine  that 
their  Senfe  of  Beauty,  and  their 
moral  Sentiments  of  Actions  y  muji 
be  entirely  owing  to  Inftruction,  and 
Education  5  whereas  it  is  as  eajy  to 
conceive^  how  a  Chara&er,  a  Tem- 
per, as  foon  as  they  are  obfernjd, 
may  be  conjiituted  by  Nature 
the  nevejjary  occafion  of  <pleafure, 
or  an  Gbjetf  of  Approbation^  as  a 
Tafte  or  a  Sound  $  tho  it  be  fometime 
before  thefe  Qbjeffis  prefent  themfehes 
to  our  Gbfervation. 

THE 


The  PREFACE.  xix 

THE  firfi  Imprejjion    of  thefe 
Papers   was  fo  we//  receiv  d,  that 
the   Author    hopes     it    will  be  no 
offence  to  any  who  are  concern  d  in 
the  Memory   of  the  late  Lord  Vif- 
count  Molesworth,    if  he  /ets 
his  Readers  know  that  he  was  the 
Nob/e  ^erfon  mention  d  in  the  Pre- 
face to  the  firfi  Edition,    and  that 
their  being  pub/ifhed  was  owing  to 
his  Approbation  of  them.      It  was 
from  him  he  had  that  Jhreud  Qbjec* 
tion,   which  the  Reader  may  find  in 
the   firft    Treatife  *  5    befides    many 
other  Remarks  in  the  frequent  Con* 
verfations  with  which  he  honour  d 
the  Author  5  by  which  that  Treatife 
was  'very  much  improved  beyond  what 
it  was  in  the  ^Draught  prefented  to 
him.      The  Author  retains  the  mop 
gratefu/  Senfe  of  his  fingu/ar  Civi- 
litysy   and  of  the  cPhafure  and  Im- 
provement he  received  in  his  Conver- 


*   Seft.  v.  Art.  1,  the  Ufi  Paragraph. 

a  2  fation  5 


xx  The  P  R  E  F  A  C  E. 

fatton^  andisjlill fond  of expreffinghis 
grateful  Remembrance  of  him  ;    buty 

Id  cinerem,  &  Manes  credas  curare 
iepultos. 

TO  be  concern  d  in  this  Book  can 
be  no  honour  to  a  Terfon  fo  jujlly  ce~ 
Jebrated  for  the  moft  generous  Sen- 
timents of  Virtue  and  Religion,  de- 
livered with  the  mojl  manly  Elo- 
quence :  yet  it  would  not  be  jujl  to- 
ward the  World,  floould  the  Author 
conceal  his  Obligations  to  the  Reve- 
rend Mr.  Edward  Syng3  not 
only  for  revifing  thefe  ^Papers,  when 
they  flood  in  great  need  of  an  accu- 
rate Review,  $  but  for  fuggefling 
fever  al  jufi  Amendments  in  the  ge- 
neral Scheme  of  Morality.  The 
Author  was  much  confirm  d  hi  his 
Opinion  of  the  Jvfinefs  of  thefe 
Thoughts,  upon  findingy  that  this 
Gentleman  had  fallen  into  the  fame 
way  of  thinking  before  htm  5  and 
will  ever  look  upon  his  Friendjloip 
1  as 


The  PREFACE.  xxi 

as   one   of  the  great ejt    Advantages 
and  cPleafures  of  his  Life. 

TO  recommend  the  Lord  ShA£tes* 
BURY;s  Writings  to  the  World \ 
is  a  very  needlefs  Attempt.  They 
will  he  ejleemed  while  any  Reflection 
remains  among  Men.  It  is  indeed 
to  be  wi/hed,  that  he  had  abfialned 
from  mixing  with  fuch  Noble  Per" 
formances,  fome  Prejudices  he  had 
receiv  d  agalnfl  Chriifcianity  5  a  Re- 
ligion which  gives  us  the  true  (I  I- 
dea  of  Virtue,  and  recommends  the 
Love  of  G  o  d,  and  of  Mankind, 
as  the  Sum  of  all  true  Religion.  How 
would  it  have  moved  the  Indigna- 
tion of  that  ingenious  Nobleman, 
to  have  found  a  dijfolute  fet  of  Men, 
who  relifh  nothing  in  Life  hut  the 
lowejl  and  moji  fordid  Pleafures, 
fearchlng  into  his  Writings  for  thofe 
Injinuatlons  agalnfl  Chriftianity,  that 
they  might  he  the  lefs  retrained 
from  their  Dehaacherys  j  when  at 
the  fame  time  their  low  Minds  are 
a  3  in- 


xxii  The  PREFACE. 

incapable  of  relijhing  thofe  noble 
Sentiments  of  Virtue  and  Honour, 
which  he  has  placed  in  fo  lovely 
a  Light ! 

WHATEVER  Faults  the  Inge- 
nious may  find  with  this  Performance^ 
the  Author  hopes  no  body  will  find  any 
thing  in  it  contrary  to  Religion   or 
good  Manners  :  and  he/hall  be  well 
pleafed  if  he  gives  the  learned  World 
an  occafion  of  examining  more  tho~ 
rowly  thefe  Subjects,  which  are,  he 
prefumesy   of  very   confiderable  Im- 
portance.    The  chief  Ground  of  his 
Affurance  that  his  Opinions  in  the 
main  are  juji,   is  this,  That  as    he 
took  the  firft  Hints  of  them  fromfome 
of  the  greateft  Writers  of  Antiquity, 
fo  the  more  he  has  conversed  with 
them,  he  finds  his  Ilhtjlrations  the 
more  conformable  to  their  Sentiments. 

IN  the   former   Edition  of  this 

Book  there  were  fome  Miflakes  in 

one  or  two  of  the  Inftances  borrowed 

*  from 


The   P  R  E  F  A  C  E.  xxiii 

front  other  Sciences,  to  a  perfect 
Knowledge  of  which  the  Author  does 
not  pretend ^  nor  would  he  now  un- 
dertake that  this  Edition  is  every 
way  fault lefs.  He  hopes  that  thofe 
who  are  ftudious  of  the  true  mea- 
fures  of  Life,  may  find  his  Ideas  of 
Virtue  and  Happinefs  tolerably  jtifl  5 
and  that  the  profound  ConnoilTeurs 
will  pardon  a  few  Faults,  in  the  II- 
lujt rations  borrowed  from  their  Arts, 
upon  which  his  Arguments  do  not 


THE 


THE 

CONTENTS 

TREATISE    I. 

Se&.  I.  f~^Oncerning    fome    Powers    of 

\^j  Perception  di/iincl  from  what 

is  generally   underjiood  by  Senfation. 

Page  i. 
Sedi.  II.  O/original  or  abfolute  Beauty.  16. 
Se&.  III.  Of  the  Beauty  of  Theorems.  30. 

Se<5L  IV.  Of  comparative  or  relative  Beau- 
ty. 40, 

Sedh  V.  Concerning  our  Reafonings  about 
Defign  and  Wildom  in  the  Caufe,  from 
the  Beauty  or  Regularity  of  Effects.   47. 

Sedt.  VI.  Concerning  the  Univerfality  of  our 
Senfe  of  Beauty.  72. 

Se<5t.  VII.  Concerning  the  Tower  of  Cuftom, 
Education  and  Example,  as  to  our  inter- 
nal Senfes.  87* 

Se#.  VIII.  Of  the  Importance  of  the  in- 
ternal Senles  in  Life,  and  the  final  Cau- 
ks  of  them.  $6. 

T  R  E  A- 


The  C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S.  xxv 

T  R  E  A  T  I  S  E  II. 

Introduction.  Page  in, 

Sed.  I.  Of  the  moral  Senfe  by  which  wis 
perceive  Virtue  and  Vice,  and  approi/e, 
or  difapprove  them  in  others.  nj. 

Sed.  II.  Concerning  the  immediate  Motive 
to  virtuous  Actions.  i  j6. 

Sed.  III.  The  Senle  0/ Virtue,  and  the  va- 
rious Opinions  about  it,  reducible  to  one 
general  Foundation.  The  manner  of  com- 
puting the  Morality  of  Adions.        162. 

Sed.  IV.  All  Mankind  agree  in  this  general 
Foundation  of  their  Approbation  of  mo- 
ral Adions.  The  Grounds  of  different 
Opinions  about  Morals.  i$6. 

Sed.  V.  A  further  Confirmation  that  we 
have  pradical  Difpofitions  to  Virtue  im- 
planted in  our  Nature;  with  a  further 
Explication  of  our  Inftind  to  Benevo- 
lence in  its  various  ^Degrees  ;  with  the 
additional  Motives  of  Intereft,  viz.  Ho- 
nour, Shame,   Pity.  21 5. 

Sed.  VI.  Concerning  the  Importance  of 
this  moral  Senfe  to  theprefent  Happinefs 
0/*  Mankind,  and  its  Influences  human 
Affairs.  242. 

Sed. 


mi         The  CONTENTS. 

Se&.  VII.  A  'Deduction  of  fome  complex 
moral  Ideas,  viz.  of  Obligation,  and 
Right,  Perfect,  Imperfect,  and  Exter- 
nal ;  Alienable  and  Unalienable /m»  this 
moral  Senfe.  266. 


ERRATA. 

PAge  ik  1.  6.  from  the  bot.  dele ,  after  Ideas.  V.  $.  I.  10. 
dele  ,  after  Bodys.  P.  6.  1.  i.  dele  in.  P.  42. 1.  3. 
for  which  r.  whom.  P.  43.  1.  4.  r.  even  of,  and  dele  would. 
P.  44.  1.  if,  ii«   for  Artificer  r.  Artificers,    and   for  A/j»  r. 

*£«».      P.  48.  1.  8. dele  foffibk. 1.  4.  in.  the  Note,  for 

This  r.  Tife.  P.  7$.  1. 13.  *•  Swine.  P.  140. 1.  2.  dele  pojfibljr. 
P;  148. 1.  13.  dele  ,  after  Action.  P.  149.  in  the  Reference, 
r.  Par.  5.  P.  160.  1. 7.  from  bot.  for  and  r.  or.  P.  162. 
in  the  Reference,  for  /^r.  i.  r.  Par.  3.  P.  171.  1.  n.  dele 
,  after  violent.  P.  188.  1.  1.  r.  ^=HxI.  P.  *I0.  in  the 
Reference,  r.  Par.  2.  P.  213.  I,  20.  r.  Perfons.  P.  *a£. 
1.  4.  from  bot.  r.  to  procure  us. 


Treatise  I. 


VIZ. 


A  N 


INQUIRY 


CONCERNING 


Beauty,  Order,  &c. 


A  N 

INQUIRY 

concerning 
Beauty,  Order,  &c. 

SECT.    I. 

Concerning  fome  Powers  0/Perception, 
dijltn£i  from  what  is  generally  un- 
derjtoodby  Senfation. 

TO  make  the  following  Obferva- 
tions underftood,  it  may  bene- 
cefTary  to  premife  fome  'Defi- 
nitions,  and  Obfirvations,  ei- 
ther univerfally  acknowledge,  or  fafficient- 
ly  prov'd  by  many  Writers  both  ancient  and 
modern,  concerning  our  Perceptions  called 
Senfations,  and  the  A&ions  of  the  Mind 
confequent  upon  them. 

Art.  I.  Those  Ideas  which  are  rais'd  in  senfath** 
the  Mind  upon  the  prefence  of  external  Ob- 

B  je&s, 


t         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6t.  i.je&s,  and  their  a&ing  upon  our  Bodys,  arc 
l/YS)  caird  Sen/at  ions.  We  find  that  the  Mind 
in  fuch  Cafes  is  paflive,  and  has  not  Power 
dire&ly  to  prevent  the  Perception  or  Idea, 
or  to  vary  it  at  its  Reception,  as  long  as 
we  continue  our  Bodys  in  a  date  fit  to  be 
a&ed  upon  by  the  external  Objedt. 

Different  II-  V/hen  two  Perceptions  are  entirely 
senfes.  different  from  each  other,  or  agree  in  no- 
thing but  the  general  Idea  of  Senfation,  .  we 
call  the  Powers  of  receiving  thofe  different 
Perceptions,  different  Senfes.  Thus  Seeing 
and  Hearing  denote  the  different  Powers  of 
receiving  the  Ideas  of  Colours  and  Sounds. 
And  altho  Colours  have  vaft  Differences 
among  themfelves,  as  alfo  have  Sounds; 
yet  there  is  a  greater  Agreement  among 
the  moft  oppofite  Colours,  than  between 
any  Colour  and  a  Sound :  Hence  we  call 
all  Colours  Perceptions  of  the  fame  Senfe. 
All  the  feveral  Senfes  feem  to  have  their 
diftindt  Organs,  except  Feeling,  which  is 
in  fome  degree  diffus'd  over  the  whole 
Body. 

The  Mind  HI.  T  h  e  Mind  has  a  Power  of  compound- 
ing Ideas,  which  were  receiv'd  feparately  ; 
of  comparing  their  Objects  by  means  of  the 
Ideas,  and  of  obferving  their  Relations  and 
Proportions ;  of  enlarging  and  diminijhing 
its  Ideas  at  pleafare,  or  in  any  certain  Ratio \ 
or  Degree  ;  and  of  confidering  feparately 
2  each 


how  ac- 
tive. 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  3 

each  of  the  fimple  Ideas,  which  might  per-  Sed\  1. 
haps  have  been  imprefs'd  jointly  in  the  Sen-  ^Y^-> 
fation.     This  laft  Operation  we  commonly 
call  AbftraEiion. 

IV.  The  Ideas  of  Subftances  are  com-  subflanm. 
pounded  of  the  various  fimple  Ideas  jointly 
imprefs'd,  when  they  prefented  themfelves 

to  our  Senfes.  We  define  Subftances  only 
by  enumerating  thefe  fenfible  Ideas  :  And 
fuch  Definitions  may  raife  an  Idea  clear  e- 
nough  of  the  Subftance  in  the  Mind  of  one 
who  never  immediately  perceiv'd  the  Sub- 
ftance  ;  provided  he  has  Separately  receiv'd 
by  his  Senfes  all  the  fimple  Ideas  which  are 
in  the  Composition  of  the  complex  one  of 
the  Subftance  defin'd  :  But  if  there  be  any 
fimple  Ideas  which  he  has  not  receiv'd,  or 
if  he  wants  any  of  the  Sen/es  neceffary  for 
the  Perception  of  them,  no  Definition  can 
raife  any  fimple  Idea  which  has  not  been 
before  perceived  by  the  Senfes. 

V.  Hence  it  follows,  "  That  when  In-  &****»*• 

"  firuEiion,  Education,  or  ^Prejudice  of  any  ^f rw^* 
"  kind,  raife  any  Defire  or  Averfion  toward 
**  an  Objedt,  this  Defire  or  Averfion  mud 
<c  be  founded  upon  an  Opinion  of  fome 
<c  Perfection,  or  of  fbme  Deficiency  in  thofe 
•*  Quality s,  for  Perception  of  which  wre 
"  have  the  proper  Senfes."  Thus  if  Beauty 
be  defir'd  by  one  who  has  not  the  Senfe  of 
Sight \  the  Defire  muft  be  rais'd  by  fome 
B  %  apprc- 


An  I N  QU  I  R  Y  concerning 

i .  apprehended  Regularity  of  Figure,  Sweet- 
nefs  of  Voice,  Smootlmefs,  or  Softnefe,  or 
fome  other  Quality  perceivable  by  the  other 
Senies,    without  relation  to  the  Ideas  of 

Colour. 

pkafure.  VI.  Many  of  our  fenfitive  Perceptions 
Pam.  are  p]eafanu  and  many  painful,  immedi- 
ately, and  that  without  any  knowledge  of 
the  Caufe  of  this  Pleafure  or  Pain,  or  how  the 
Objects  excite  it,  or  are  the  Occafions  of 
it  ;  or  without  feeing  to  what  further  Ad- 
vantage or  Detriment  the  Ufe  of  fuch  Ob- 
jects might  tend :  Nor  would  the  moft  ac- 
curate Knowledge  of  thefe  things  vary  ei- 
ther the  Pleafure  or  Pain  of  the  Perception, 
however  it  might  give  a  rational  Pleafure 
diffind:  from  the  fen fible;  or  might  raife  a 
diftincSfc  Joy,  from  a  profped:  of  further  Ad- 
vantage in  the  Objed:,  or  Averfion,  from 
an  apprehenfion  of  Evil. 

Different  VII.  The  fimple  Ideas  rais'd  in  different 
ideas.  Pcrfons  by  the  fame  Objed,  are  probably 
fome  way  different,  when  they  diiagree  in 
their  Approbation  or  Diflike ;  and  in  the 
fame  Perfon,  when  his  Fancy  at  one  time 
differs  from  what  it  was  at  another.  This 
will  appear  from  reflecting  on  thole  Ob- 
jedls,  to  which  we  have  now  an  Averfion, 
tho  they  were  formerly  agreeable  :  And  we 
iliall  generally  find  that  there  is  fome  acci- 
dental ConjufiEiim  of  a  difagreeable  Idea, 

which 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  5 

which  always  recurs  with  the  Objcd  ;  as  Sed.  1. 
in  thofe  Wines  to  which  Men  acquire  an  A-  ^V^>> 
verfion,  after  they  have  taken  them  in  an 
Emetick  Preparation  :  In  this  caie  we  are 
confeious  that  the  Idea  is  alter'd  from  what 
it  was  when  that  Wine  was  agreeable,  by 
the  Conjunction  of  the  Ideas  of  Loathing 
and  Sicknefs  of  Stomach.  The  l?ke  Change 
of  Idea  may  be  infenfibly  made  by  the 
Change  of  our  Bodys,  as  we  advance  in 
Years,  or  when  we  are  accuftomed  to  any 
Objed,  which  may  occafion  an  Indiffe- 
rence toward  Meats  we  were  fond  of  in 
our  Childhood  ;  and  may  make  ibme  Ob- 
jeds  ceafe  to  raife  the  difagreeable  Ideas, 
which  they  excited  upon  our  firft  ufe  of 
them.  Many  of  our  fimple  Perceptions 
are  difagreeable  only  thro  the  too  great  lu- 
tenfenefs  of  the  Quality  :  thus  moderate 
Light  is  agreeable,  very  ftrong  Light  may 
be  painful ;  moderate  Bitter  may  be  plea- 
fant,  a  higher  Degree  may  be  offenfive.  A 
Change  in  our  Organs  will  neceffarily  occa- 
fion a  Change  in  the  Intenfenefs  of  the  Per- 
ception at  lead  ;  nay  fometimes  will  occa- 
fion a  quite  contrary  Perception  :  Thus  a 
warm  Hand  (hall  feel  that  Water  cold,  which 
a  cold  Hand  fliall  feel  warm. 

We  fhall  not  find  it  perhaps  io  eafy  to 

account  for  the  Diverftty  of  Fancy  about 

more  complex  Id?as  of  Objeds,  in  which 

we  regard  many  Ideas  of  different  Senfes  at 

B  3  once  ; 


6         An  I N Q.U IRY  concerning 

Sed.  i .  once  ;  as  in  fome  Perceptions  of  thole  call'd 
O^VNj  primary  Quality <s,  and  fome  fee 'ondary,  as 
explain'd  by  Mr.  Locke:  for  inftance, 
in  the  different  Fancy  s  about  Architetturt, 
Gardening,  T>refs.  Of  the  two  former 
we  fhall  offer  fomething  in  Sed.  VI.  As 
to  Ttreft,  we  may  generally  account  for 
the  Diverfity  of  Fancys  from  a  like  Con- 
junction of  Ideas  :  Thus,  if  either  from  any 
thing  in  Nature,  or  from  the  Opinion  of 
our  Country  or  Acquaintance,  the  fancying 
of  glaring  Colours  be  look'd  upon  as  an 
evidence  of  Levity,  or  of  any  other  evil 
Quality  of  Mind  ;  or  if  any  Colour  or  Fa- 
Jhion  be  commonly  us'd  by  Rufticks,  or 
by  Men  of  any  difagreeable  Profeffion,  Em- 
ployment, or  Temper  ;  thefe  additional 
Ideas  may  recur  conftantly  with  that  of  the 
Colour  or  Fajhion,  and  caufe  a  conftant  Dif 
like  to  them  in  thofe  who  join  the  additio- 
nal Ideas,  altho  the  Colour  or  Form  be  no 
way  difagreeable  of  themfelves,  and  actu- 
ally do  pleafe  others  who  join  no  fiich 
Ideas  to  them.  But  there  does  not  feem  to 
be  any  Ground  to  believe  fuch  a  Diverfity 
in  human  Minds,  as  that  the  lame  fimple 
Idea  or  Perception  ftiould  give  pleafure  to 
one  and  pain  to  another,  or  to  the  fame 
Perfon  at  different  times  ;  not  to  fay  that 
it  feems  a  Contradiction,  that  the  lame 
fimple  Idea  fhould  do  fa 

VIII.  The 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  7 

Se&.  1 
VIII.  The  only  Pleaiure  of  Senfe,  which  ^\~ 
our  Philofophers  ieem  to  confider,  is  that  complex 
which  accompanys  the  fimple  Ideas  of  Sen- ldeas% 
iation  :  But  there  are  vaftly  greater  PJeafures 
in  thofe  complex  Ideas  of  Objedts,  which 
obtain  the  Names  of  Beautiful,  Regular, 
Harmonious.      Thus  every  one   acknow- 
ledges he  is    more  delighted  with   a  fine 
Face,  a  juft  Picture,  than  with  the  Vkw 
of  any  one  Colour,  were  it  as  ftrong  and 
lively  as  poffibie ;  and  more  pleas'd  with  a 
Prolpedl  of  the  Sun  arifing  among  fettled 
Clouds,  and  colouring  their  Edges,  with  a 
ftarry  Hemifphere,  a  fine  Landskip,  a  re- 
gular Building,  than  with  a  clear  blue  Sky, 
a  ftnooth  Sea,  or  a  large  open  Plain,  not 
diverfify'd  by  Woods,  Hills,  Waters,  Build- 
ings :  And  yet  even  thefe  latter  Appearan- 
ces are  not  quite  fimple.     So  in  Mufick, 
the  Pleafure  of  fin e  Composition  is  incom- 
parably greater  than  that  of  any  one  Note, 
low  fvveet,  full,  or  fwelling  foever. 

IX.  Let  it  be  obferv'd,  that  in  the  fol-  Beauty 
lowing  Papers,  the  Word  Beauty  is  taken 
for  the  Idea  rais'd  in  us,  and  a  Senfe  of 
Beauty   for  our  Tower  of  receiving  this 
Idea.     Harmony  alio  denotes  our  fleafant  Harmony. 
Ideas  arifing  from  Compofition  of  Sounds, 
and  a  good  Ear  (as  it  is  generally  taken) 
&  Tower  of  perceiving  this  Tie  a  Jure.     In 
the;  following  Sections,  an  Attempt  is  made 
B  4  to 


8         An  I  N  Q.U  I R  Y  concerning 

Sc&\  i.  to  diicover  "  what  is  the  immediate  Oc- 
L^Y\J  "  cafion  of  thefe  pleafant  Ideas,  or  what 

"  real  Quality  in  the  Obje&s  ordinarily  ex- 

!■  cites  them." 

inumai  X.  It  is  of  no  confequence  whether  we 
serf.  call  thefe  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Harmony, 
Perceptions  of  the  External  Senfes  of  See- 
ing and  Hearing,  or  not.  I  fhould  rather 
chufe  to  call  our  Power  of  perceiving  thefe 
Ideas,  an  Internal  Sense,  were  it  only 
for  the  Convenience  of  diftinsuifhins  them 
from  other  Senfations  of  Seeing  and  Hear- 
ing, which  men  may  have  without  Percep- 
tion of  Beauty  and  Harmony.  It  is  plain 
from  Experience,  that  many  Men  have  in 
the  common  meaning,  the  Senfes  of  See- 
ing and  Hearing  perfect  enough  ;  they  per- 
ceive all  the  Jimple  Ideas  feparately,  and 
have  their  Pleafares  ;  they  diftinguifh  them 
from  each  other,  fuch  as  one  Colour  from  a- 
nother,  either  quite  different,  or  the  ftronger 
or  fainter  of  the  fame  Colour,  when  they 
are  plac'd  befide  each  other,  altho  they  may 
often  confound  their  Names,  when  they 
occur  a-pai  t  from  each  other  ;  as  fbme  do 
the  Names  of  Green  and  Blue  :  they  can 
tell  in  feparate  Notes,  the  higher,  lower, 
foarper  or  flatter,  when  feparately  found- 
ed ;  in  Figures  they  difcern  the  Length \ 
Breadth,  JVidenefs  of  each  Line,  Surface, 
Angle  ;  and  may  be  as  capable  of  hearing 
and  feeing  at  great  diftances  as  any  men 

I  what- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  9 

whatfbever:  And  yet  perhaps  they  fhall  find  Sed\  1 
no  PJeaiure  in  Mufical  Competitions,  in  ^v^*-' 
Painting,  Architecture,  natural  Landskip  ; 
or  but  a  very  weak  one  in  comparifen  of 
what  others  enjoy  from  the  fame  Objects. 
This  greater  Capacity  of  receiving  fuch 
pleafant  Ideas  we  commonly  call  zjine  Ge- 
nius or  Tajie  :  In  Mufick  we  feem  univer- 
fally  to  acknowledge  fbmething  like  a  diftind: 
Senle  from  the  External  one  of  Hearing, 
and  call  it  a  good  Ear  ;  and  the  like  diftinc- 
tion  we  iliould  probably  acknowledge  in 
other  Objeds,  had  we  alfo  got  diftindl 
Names  to  denote  thefe  Towers  of  Percep- 
tion by. 

XI.  There  will  appear  another  Reafon  Different 
perhaps  afterwards,  for  calling  this  P°wer{^f'v" 
of  perceiving  the  Ideas  of  Beauty,  an  In- 
ternal Sen/e,  from  this,  that  in  fbme  other 
Affairs,  where  our  External  Senfes  are  not 
much  concern'd,  we  difcern  a.  fort  of  Beau- 
ty, very  like,  in  many  refpedts,  to  that  ob- 
ierv'd  in  fenfible  Objed;s,  and  accompany'd 

with  like  Pleafiire  :  Such  is  that  Beauty  per- 
ceiv'd  in  Theorems,  or  univerfal  Truths, 
in  general  Caufes,  and  in  fome  extenfive 
'Principles  of  A<3:ion. 

XII.  Let  every  one  here  confider,  how 
different  we  mult  fappofe  the  Perception 
to  be,  with  which  a  Poet  is  tranfported. 
upon  the  Frofpedt  of  any  of  thofe  Obie&s 

of 


i  o        An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se<5t  i.  of  natural  Beauty,  which  ravifhus  even  in 
l/yv  his  Defcription  ;  from  that  cold  lifelefs  Con- 
ception which  we  imagine  in  a  dull  Cri- 
tick,  or  one  of  the  Virtuo(i>  without  what 
we  call  zfine  Tafte,  This  latter  Clafs  of 
Men  may  have  greater  Perfe&ion  in  that 
Knowledge,  which  is  deriv'd  from  exter- 
nal Senfation  ;  they  can  tell  all  the  fpeci- 
flck  differences  of  Trees,  Herbs,  Mine- 
rals, Metals  ;  they  know  the  Form  of  every 
Leaf,  Stalk,  Root,  Flower,  and  Seed  of  all 
the  Species,  about  which  the  Poet  is  often 
very  ignorant :  And  yet  the  Poet  fliall  have 
a  vaftly  more  delightful  Perception  of  the 
Whole ;  and  not  only  the  Poet  but  any 
man  of  a  fine  Tafte.  Our  External  Senfes 
may  by  mealuring  teach  us  all  the  Propor- 
tions of  Architecture  to  the  Tenth  of  an 
Inch,  and  the  Situation  of  every  Mufcle  in 
the  human  Body ;  and  a  good  Memory  may 
retain  thefe :  and  yet  there  is  flill  fomething 
further  neceffary,  not  only  to  make  a  man 
a  compleat  Matter  in  Architecture,  'Paint- 
ing or  Statuary,  but  even  a  tolerable  Judge 
in  thefe  Works  ;  or  capable  of  receiving 
the  higheft  Pleafure  in  contemplating  them. 
Since  then  there  are  fuch  different  Powers 
of  Perception,  where  what  are  commonly 
called  the  External  Senfes  are  the  fame  ; 
fince  the  mod  accurate  Knowledg  of  what 
the  External  Senfes  difcover,  often  does  not 
give  the  Pleafure  of  Beauty  or  Harmony, 
which  yet  one  of  a  good  Tafte  will  en- 
joy 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.        it 

joy  at  once  without  much  Knowledge  ;  we  Sedt.  i . 
may  juftly  ufe  another  Name  for  thefe  i/Y^ 
higher,  and  more  delightful  Perceptions  of 
Beauty  and  Harmony,  and  call  the  Tower 
of  receiving  fuch  Impreffions,  an  Internal 
Senfe.  The  Difference  of  the  Perceptions 
feems  fufficient  to  vindicate  the  Ufe  of  a 
different  Name,  elpecially  when  we  are  told 
in  what  meaning  tfie  Word  is  applied. 

XIII.  This  fuperior  Power  of  Percep- lo- 
tion is  juftly  called  a  Senfe •,  becaufe  of  its  fa™  Tnd 
Affinity  to  the  other  Senfes  in  this,  that  the  immediate. 
Pleafure  does  not  arife  from  any  Knowledge 

of  Principles,  Proportions,  Caufes,  or  of 
the  Ufefulnefs  of  the  Objecft ;  but  ftrikes  us 
at  firft  with  the  Idea  of  Beauty  :  nor  does 
the  moil  accurate  Knowledge  increafe  this 
Pleafure  of  Beauty,  however  it  may  fu- 
per-add  a  diftincSt  rational  Pleafure  from 
profpedts  of  Advantage,  or  from  the  In- 
creafe of  Knowledge  *. 

XIV.  And  further,  the  Ideas  of  Beauty 
and  Harmony,  like  other  fenfible  Ideas, 
are  necejfarily  pleafant  to  us,  as  well  as  im- 
mediately fo  ;  neither  can  any  Refolution 
of  our  own,  nor  any  TrofpeEt  of  Advan- 
tage or  Difadvantage,  vary  the  Beauty  or 
Deformity  of  an  Object  :  For  as  in  the  ex- 
ternal Senfations,  no  View  of  Interefi  will 

*  See  aboye,  Art.  £„ 

make 


1 1         An  I N  QU I RY  concerning 

Sed\  i.  make  an  Objed:  grateful,  nor  View  of  cDe- 
\s~\z-sj  triment,  diftindt  from  immediate  Tain  in 
the  Perception,  make  it  difagreeable  to  the 
Senfe  ;  (b  propofe  the  whole  World  as  a  Re- 
ward, or  threaten  the  greateft  Evil,  to  make 
ns  approve  adeform'dObjed:,  ordifapprove 
a  beautiful  one  ;  Diffimulatioa  may  be  pro- 
cur'd  by  Rewards  or  Threatnings,  or  we  may 
in  external  Conduit  abftain  from  any  fur- 
fuit  of  the  Beautiful,  and  purfiie  the  De- 
form'd ;  but  our  Sentiments  of  the  Forms, 
and  our  Perceptions,  would  continue  in- 
variably the  lame. 

rhissenfe       XV.  He n  c  e  it  plainly  appears,  "  that 
antecedent  tt  fome  obje&s  are  immediately  the  Occa- 

to  and  dif-  _  •.-■%■'  r  r-  t»  %  11 

una  from  M  nons  of  this  Plealure  of  Beauty,  and  that 
$rofpectsof«  vve  have  Senfts  fitted  for  perceiving  it ; 
i«""A  *  c  and  that  it  is  diftina:  from  that  Joy  which 
"  arifes  from  Self-love  upon  profped:  of  Ad- 
"  vantage."  Nay,  do  not  we  often  fee 
Convenience  and  Ufe  negledled  to  obtain 
Beauty,  without  any  other  prolpedt  of  Ad- 
vantage in  the  Beautifnl  Form,  than  the 
fuggefting  the  pleafant  Ideas  of  Beauty  ? 
Now  this  fhews  us,  that  however  we  may 
furfue  beautiful  Obje&s  from  Self-love, 
with  a  view  to  obtain  the  Pleafares  of  Beau- 
ty, as  in  Architecture,  Gardening,  and 
many  other  Affairs  ;  yet  there  muft  be  a 
Senfe  of  Beauty,  antecedent  to  Profpecls 
even  of  this  Advantage,  without  which 
Senfe,    thefe  Objedts  would  not  be  thus 

Advan- 


Beauty,Order,  ^f.       15 

Advantageous,  nor  excite  in  us  this  Plea-  Sed.  1. 
fure  which  conftitutes  them  advantageous,  l/W 
Our  Senfe  of  Beauty  from  Objeds,  by 
which  they  are  conftituted  good  to  us,  is 
very  diftind  from  our  "Defire  of  them  when 
they  are  thus  conftituted  :  Our  T)efire  of 
Beauty  may  be  counter-ballanc'd  by  Re- 
wards or  Threatnings,  but  never  our  Senfe 
of  it ;  even  as  Fear  of  Death,  or  Love  of 
Life,  may  make  us  chufe  and  defire  a  bitter 
Potion,  or  negled  thofe  Meats  which  the 
Senfe  of  Tafte  would  recommend  as  plea- 
fant ;  and  yet  no  profped  of  Advantage, 
or  Fear  of  Evil,  can  make  that  Potion  a- 
greeable  to  the  Senfe \  or  Meat  difagreeable 
to  it,  which  was  not  lb  antecedently  to 
this  Profped.  Juft  in  the  fame  manner 
as  to  the  Senfe  of  Beauty  and  Harmony  ; 
that  the  Turfuit  of  fuch  Objeds  is  fre- 
quently negleded,  from  prolpeds  of  Ad- 
vantage, Averfion  to  Labour,  or  any  other 
Motive  of  Self-love,  does  not  prove  that 
we  have  no  Senfe  of  Beauty,  but  only  that 
our  Defire  of  it  may  be  counter-ballanc'd 
by  a  ftronger  Defire  :  So  Gold  out- weigh- 
ing Silver,  is  never  adduc'd  as  a  proof  that 
the  latter  is  void  of  Gravity. 

XVI.  H  a  d  we  no  foch  Senfe  of  Beauty 
and  Harmony  ;  Houfes,  Gardens,  Drefs,  E- 
quipage,  might  have  been  recommended  to 
us  as  convenient,  fruitful,  warm,  eafy  ;  but 
never  as  beautiful :  And  in  Faces  I  fee  no- 
thing 


1 4        An  I N QU IRY  concerning 

Sed.  i .  thing  which  could  pleafe  us,  but  Livelinefs  of 
v^Y^  Colour,  and  Smoothnefs  of  Surface :  And  yet 
nothing  is  more  certain,  than  that  all  thefe 
Objeds  are  recommended  under  quite  dif- 
ferent Views  on  many  Occafions  :  And  no 
Cuftom,  Education,  or  Example  could  e- 
ver  give  us  'Perceptions  diftind  from  thofe 
of  the  Senfes  which  we  had  the  ufe  of  be- 
fore, or  recommend  Objeds  under  another 
Conception  than  grateful  to  *  them.  But  of 
the  Influence  of  Cuftom,  Education,  Ex- 
ample, upon  the  Senfe  of  Beauty,  we  fhall 
treat  below  f. 

Beauty,         XVII.  Beauty  is  either  Original  or 

vc'Zp*  Comtarattve ;  or>  if  any  l^e  t^e  Terms 
'rath?,  better,  Abfolute,  or  Relative :  Only  let 
it  be  obferv'd,  that  by  Abfolute  or  Ori~ 
ginal  Beauty,  is  not  underftood  any  Qua- 
lity fuppos'd  to  be  in  the  Objed,  which 
Ihould  of  itfelf  be  beautiful,  without  rela- 
tion to  any  Mind  which  perceives  it :  For 
Beauty,  like  other  Names  of  fenfible  Ideas, 
properly  denotes  the  Perception  of  fbme 
Mind ;  fo  Cold,  Hot,  Sweet \  Bitter,  de- 
note the  Senfations  in  our  Minds,  to  which 
perhaps  there  is  no  refemblance  in  the 
Objeds,  which  excite  thefe  Ideas  in  us, 
however  we  generally  imagine  that  there 
is  fomething  in  the  Objed  juft  like  our 
Perception.     The   Ideas  of   Beauty    and 

*  See  Art.  5.  \  Sett.  7. 

Har- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.       i  5 

Harmony  being  excited  upon  our  Tercep-  Sed.  1 . 
tion  of  iome  primary  Quality,  and  having  LSVSj 
relation  to  Figure  and  Time,  may  indeed 
have  a  nearer  refemblance  to  Objeds,  than 
thefe  Senfations,  which  feem  not  fo  much 
any  TiElures  of  Objeds,  as  Modifications 
of  the  perceiving  Mind ;  and  yet  were  there 
no  Mind  with  a  Senfe  of  Beauty  to  contem- 
plate Objeds,  I  fee  not  how  they  could  be 
call'd  beautiful.  We  therefore  by  *  Abfo- 
lute  Beauty  underftand  only  that  Beauty, 
which  we  perceive  in  Objeds  without  com* 
parifon  to  any  thing  external,  of  which  the 
Objed  is  fuppos'd  an  Imitation,  or  Pidure  ; 
fuch  as  that  Beauty  perceiv'd  from  the 
Works  of  Nature,  artificial  Forms,  Fi- 
gures, Theorems.  Comparative  or  Rela- 
lative  Beauty  is  that  which  we  perceive  in 
Objeds,  commonly  confidered  as  Imita- 
tions or  Refemblances  of  fomething  elfe. 
Thefe  two  Kinds  of  Beauty  employ  the 
three  following  Sedions. 


*  This  divifion  of  Beauty  is  taken  from  the  different  Foun- 
dations of  Pleafure  to  our  Senfe  of  it,  rather  than  from  the 
Objetts  themfelves  :  for  moft  of  the  following  Inflames  of  re- 
lative Beauty  have  alfo  abfolute  Beauty  $  and  many  of  the  In- 
flames of  abfolute  Beauty,  have  alfo  relative  Beauty  in  fome 
refpecl  or  other.  But  we  may  diflinttly  confider  thefe  two 
Fountains  of  Pleafure,  Uniformity  in  the  Objett  it  felf,  and 
Refemblance  to  fome  Original. 


SECT. 


1 6        An  I N  QU  I  R  Y  concerning 


Sed:.  2. 


SECT.     II. 

Of  Original  or  Abfolute  Beauty. 

senfe  of     I.   O  I N  C  E  it  is  certain  that  we  have 
Mm.  J^  Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Harmony,  let 

us  examine  what  Quality  in  Obje&s  ex- 
cites thefe  Ideas,  or  is  the  occafion  of  them. 
And  let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that  our  Inqui- 
ry is  only  about  the  Qualitys  which  are 
beautiful  to  Men  ;  or  about  the  Foundation 
of  their  Senfe  of  Beauty  :  for,  as  was  above 
hinted,  Beauty  has  always  relation  to  the 
Senfe  of  fomeMind ;  and  when  we  afterwards 
ihew  how  generally  the  Objects  which  oc- 
cur to  us,  are  beautifuly  we  mean  that  fuch 
Objedts  are  agreeable  to  the  Senfe  of  Men  : 
for  as  there  are  not  a  few  Objedts,  which 
feem  no  way  beautiful  to  Men,  lb  we  fee  a 
variety  of  other  Animals  who  feem  delight- 
ed with  them  ;  they  may  have  Senfes  other- 
wife  conftituted  than  thofe  of  Men,  and 
may  have  the  Ideas  of  Beauty  excited  by 
Objeds  of  a  quite  different  Form.  We  fee 
Animals  fitted  for  every  Place ;  and  what 
to  Men  appears  rude  and  lhapelefs,  or  loath- 
fom,  may  be  to  them  a  Taradife. 

II.  That  we  may  more  diftin&ly  difccv- 
ver  the  general  Foundation  or  Occafion  of 

the 


Beauty,   Order,  &c.         \y 

the  Ideas  of  Beauty  among  Men,  it  will  be  Sedt.  2. 
neceflary   to  confider  it  firft  in  its  Jimpler  ^^r^ 
Kinds,  iiich  as  occurs  to  us  in  regular  Fi- 
gures ;  and  we  may  perhaps  find  that  the 
lame  Foundation  extends  to  all  the  more 
complex  Species  of  it. 

III.  The  Figures  which  excite  in  us  the  uniformity 
Ideas  of  Beauty,  feem  to  be  thofe  in  which  Wlth  Va~ 
there  is  Uniformity  amidft  Variety.  There 
are  many  Conceptions  of  Objects  which  are 
agreeable  upon  other  accounts,  fuch  as  Gran- 
deur, Novelty,  Sanffity,  and  fbme  others, 
which  fhall  be  mention'd  hereafter  *.  But 
what  we  call  Beautiful  in  Obje&s,  to  fpeak 
in  the  Mathematical  Style,  feems  to  be  in 
a  compound  Ratio  of  Uniformity  and  Va- 
riety :  fo  that  where  the  Uniformity  of  Bo- 
dys  is  equal,  the  Beauty  is  as  the  Variety  ; 
and  where  the  Variety  is  equal,  the  Beauty 
is  as  the  Uniformity.  This  will  be  plain 
from  Examples. 

First,  the  Variety  increafes  the  Beau-  varkty* 
ty  in  equal  Uniformity.  The  Beauty  of 
an  equilateral  Triangle  is  lefs  than  that  of 
the  Square  ;  which  is  left  than  that  of  a 
Pentagon  ;  and  this  again  is  llirpafs'd  by 
the  Hexagon.  When  indeed  the  Number  of 
Sides  is  much  increas'd,  the  Proportion  of 
them  to  the  Radius,  or  ^Diameter  of  the 


*  See  Sett.  yi.  Art.  n,  ia,  13. 

C  Fi« 


t8         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se<$.  2.  Figure,  or  of  the  Circle  to  which  regular 
w/V">J  Polygons  have  an  obvious  Relation,  is  fo 
much  loft  to  our  Obfervation,  that  the 
Beauty  does  not  always  increafe  with  the 
Number  of  Sides  ;  and  the  want  of  Paral- 
lelifm  in  the  Sides  of  Heptagons,  and  other 
Figures  of  odd  Numbers,  may  alfo  diminifh 
their  Beauty.  So  in  Solids,  the  Eicofiedron 
furpaffes  the  Dodecaedron,  and  this  the  Oc- 
taedron,  which  is  (till  more  beautiful  than 
the  Cube  ;  and  this  again  furpafTes  the  re- 
gular Pyramid:  The  obvious  Ground  of 
this,  is  greater  Variety  with  equal  Unifor- 
mity. 

uniforml-       The  greater  Uniformity  increafes  the 
#•  Beauty  amidft  equal  Variety,    in  thefe  In- 

stances :  An  Equilateral  Triangle,  or  even 
an  Ifofceles,  furpaffes  the  Scalenum  :  A 
Square  furpaffes  the  Rhombus  ot  Lozenge, 
and  this  again  the  Rhomboides,  which  is 
(till  more  beautiful  than  the  Trapezium, 
or  any  Figure  with  irregular  curve  Sides. 
So  the  regular  Solids  vaftly  liirpafs  all  other 
Solids  of  equal  number  of  plain  Surfaces  : 
And  the  fame  is  obfervable  not  only  in 
the  Five  perfectly  regular  Solids,  but  in 
all  thofe  which  have  any  confiderable  Uni- 
formity, as  Cylinders,  Pnfms,  Pyramids, 
Obelisks  ;  which  pleafe  every  Eye  more 
than  any  rude  Figures,  where  there  is  no 
Unity  or  Refemblance  among  the  Parts, 

In- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  i  c; 

Sett.  2. 
Instances  of  the  compound  Ratio  ^v-^ 
we  have  in  comparing  Circles  or  Spheres,  &$™nd 
with  Elliffes  or  Spheroids  not  very  eccen- 
tric ;  and  in  comparing  the  compound  So- 
lids, the  ExoElaedron,    and  Eicofidodecae- 
dron,  with  the  perfectly  regular  ones  of 
which  they  are  compounded  :   and  we  ihall 
find,  that  the  Want  of  that  moft  perfedfc 
'Uniformity  obfervable  in  the  latter,  is  com- 
peniated  by  the  greater  Variety  in  the  o- 
thers,  fo  that  the  Beauty  is  nearly  equal. 

IV.  These  Obfervations  would  proba- 
bly hold  true  for  the  moft  part,  and  might 
be  conftrm'd  by  the  Judgment  of  Children 
in  the  Jimpler  Figures,  where  the  Variety 
is  not  too  great  for  their  Comprehension 
And  however  uncertain  fome  of  the  particu- 
lar aforefaid  Inftances  may  feern,  yet  this 
is  perpetually  to  be  obferv'd,  that  Chil- 
dren are  fond  of  all  regular  Figures  in  their 
little  Diverfions,  althd  they  be  no  more 
convenient,  or  ufeful  for  them,  than  the 
Figures  of  our  common  Pebbles  :  We  fee 
how  early  they  difcover  a  Tafte  or  Senfe  of 
£eauty,  in  denring  to  lee  Buildings,  regular 
Gardens,  or  even  Reprefentations  of  them 
in  Pictures  of  any  kind* 

V.  It  is  the  fame  Foundation  which  we  Beauty  of 
have  for  our  Senfe  of  Beauty  in  the  Works  Nuue- 
of  Nature.     In  every  Part  of  the  World 

C  z  which 


2 o  An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sed.  2*  which  we  call  Beautiful,  there  is  a  vaftltoi- 
wv^  formity  amidft:  an   almoft  infinite  Variety. 
Many  Parts  of  the  Univerfe  feem  not  at 
all  defign'd  for  the  ufe  of  Man  ;   nay,   it 
is  but  a  very  fmall  Spot  with  which  we 
have  any  acquaintance.     The  Figures  and 
Motions  of  the  great  Bodys  are  not  obvi- 
ous to  our  Senfes,  but  found  out  by  Reafb- 
ning  and  Reflection,   upon  many  long  Ob- 
fervations :  and  yet  as  far  as  we  can  by 
Senfe  difcover,  or  by  Re  a  fining  enlarge  our 
Knowledg,    and   extend  our  Imagination, 
we  generally  find  their  Structure,   Order, 
and  Motion,    agreeable   to    our  Senfe  of 
Beauty.     Every  particular  Obje<5t  in  Na~ 
ture  does  not  indeed  appear  beautiful  to  us  ; 
but  there  is  a  vaft  Profufion  of  Beauty 
over  moft  of  the  Objedts  which  occur  either 
to  our  Senfes,   or  Reafonings  upon  Obfer- 
vation  :  For  not  to  mention  the  apparent 
Situation   of   the  heavenly  Bodys  in  the 
Circumference  of  a  great  Sphere,    which 
is  wholly  occafion'd  by  the  Imperfe&ion 
of  our  Sight  in  difcerning   diftances  ;    the 
Forms  of  all  the  great  Bodys  in  the  Uni- 
verfe are  nearly  Spherical ;  the  Orbits  of 
their  Revolutions  generally  Elliptick,   and 
without  great  Eccentricity,  in  thofe  which 
continually  occur  to  our  Obfervation  :  now 
thefe  are  Figures  of  great  'Uniformity,  and 
therefore  pleafing  to  us. 

Further, 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  21 

Se<a.  ! 
Further,  to  pais  by  the  lefs  obvious  ^v^ 
Uniformity   in    the    Proportion    of  their 
Quantitys  of  Matter,  "Dijiances,  Times  of 
revolving,  to  each  other ;  what  can  exhi- 
bit a  greater  Inftance  of  Uniformity  amidji 
Variety,   than  the  conftant  Tenour  of  Re- 
volutions in  nearly  equal  Times,  in  each 
'Planet,  around  its  Axis,  and  the  central 
Fire  or  S  u  n,  thro  all  the  Ages  of  which 
we  have  any  P.ecords,   and  in  nearly  the 
fame  Orbit  ?   by  which,  after  certain  Pe- 
riods, all  the  fame  Appearances  are  again 
renew'd  ;  the  alternate  Succeffions  of  Light 
and  Shade,  or  'Day  and  Night,   conftantly 
purfuing   each  other  around  each  Planet, 
with  an  agreeable  and  regular  Diverfity  in 
the  Times  they  pofTefs  the  feveral  Hemi- 
spheres, in  the  Summer,  Harveft,  Winter, 
and  Spring ;  and  the  various  Phafes,  Af- 
peBs,  and  Situations,  of  the  Planets  to 
each  other,  their  Conjunctions  zndQj>fo/iti- 
ons,  in  which  they  iuddenly  darken  each  o- 
ther  with  their  Conick  Shades  in  Eclipfes,  are 
repeated  to  us  at  their  fixed  Periods  with 
invariable  Conftancy  :  Thefe  are  the  Beau- 
tys  which  charm  the  Aftronome? ,  and  make 
his  tedious  Calculations  pleafant. 

Molliter  aiiflerumftudio  fallente  labor  em  *. 

*  Hor.  Lib.  i.  Sat.  z.v.iz. 

C  j  VI.  Again, 


n         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sect.  2. 

c-^V^o  VI.  Again,  as  to  the  dry  Part  of  the 
Earth.  Surface  of  our  Globe,  a  great  Part  of  which 
is  cover'd  with  a  very  pleafant  inoffenfive 
Colour,  how  beautifully  is  it  diverfify'd 
with  various  Degrees  of  Light  and  Shade  ^ 
according  to  the  different  Situations  of  the 
Parts  of  its  Surface,  in  Mountains,  Valleys \ 
Hills,  and  open  Plains,  which  are  vari- 
qufly  inclin  d  toward  the  great  Luminary? 

giants.  VII.  I  f  we  defcend  to  the  minuter  Works 

of  N  a  t  u  r  e,  what  vaft  Uniformity  among 
all  the  Species  of  Plants  and  Vegetables 
in  the  manner  of  their  Growth  and  Propa- 
gation !  what  exact  Refemblance  among  all 
the  Plants  of  the  fame  Species,  whofe  Num- 
bers furpafs  our  Imagination  !  And  this  1)- 
niformity  is  not  only  pbfervable  in  the  Form 
in  grofs  ;  nay,  in  this  it  is  not  ib  very  exact 
in  all  Inftances,  but  in  the  Structure  of  their 
minuted  Parts,  which  no  Eye  unaffifted 
with  GlafTes  can  difcern.  In  the  almoft  in- 
finite Multitude  of  Leaves,  Fruit,  Seed, 
Flowers  of  any  one  Species,  we  often  fee 
an  exact  Uniformity  in  the  Structure  and  Si- 
tuation of  the  fmalleft  Fibres.  This  is  the 
Beauty  which  charms  an  ingenious  Botanifi. 
Nay,  what  vaft  Uniformity  and  Regularity 
of  Figure  is  found  in  each  particular  Plant, 
Leaf  or  Flower  !  In  all  Trees  and  mod 
of  the  (mailer  Plants,  the  Stalks  or  Trunks 
are    either    Cylinders    nearly,    or  regular 

Prifms\ 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  23 

*PriJms  ;  the  Branches  fimilar  to  their  feve-  Sedt.  2 
ral  Trunks,  ariftng  at  nearly  regular  Diftan-  ^v^ 
ces,  when  no  Accidents  retard  their  natural 
Growth  :  In  one  Species  the  Branches  ariie 
in  Pairs  on  the  oppofite  Sides  ;  the  perpen- 
dicular Plain  of  Direction  of  the  immediate- 
ly fuperior  Pair,  interfering  the  Plain  of 
Dire&ion  of  the  inferior,    nearly  at  right 
Angles  :  In  another  Species,  the  Branches 
fpring  fingly,  and   alternately,    all  around 
in  nearly  equal  Diftances  :  And  the  Bran- 
ches in  other  Species  fprout  all  in  Knots  a- 
round  the  Trunk,  one  for  each  Year.     And 
in  every  Species,  all  the  Branches  in  the 
firft  Shoots  preferve  the  fame  Angles  with 
their  Trunk  ;   and   they  again  fprout  out 
into  fmaller  Branches  exadly  after  the  Man- 
ner of  their  Trunks.     xNor  ought  we  to 
pals  over  that  great  Unity  of  Colours  which 
we  often  lee  in  all  the  Flowers  of  the  fame 
Plant  or  Tree,  and  often  of  a  whole  Spe- 
cies ;   and  their  exadt  Agreement  in  many 
fcaded  Tranfitions   into  opppfite  Colours, 
in  which  all  the  Flowers  of  the  fame  Plant 
generally  agree,  nay  often  all  the  Flowers 
pf  a  Species. 

VJII.  Again,  as  to  the  Beauty  of  Ani-  AmmaU, 
mals7  either  in  their  inward  Stru&ure,  which 
we  come  to  the  Knowledg  of  by  Expe- 
riment and  long  Obfervation,  or  their  out- 
ward Form,  we  ihall  find  vaft  Unifonnity 
among  all  the  Species  which  are  known  to 
C  4  us, 


24         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se<3.  2-us'  in  r^e  Structure  of  thofe  Parts,  upon 
t/VNJ  which  Life  depends  more  immediately. 
And  how  amazing  is  the  "Unity  of  Media- 
niim,  when  we  fhall  find  an  almoft  infinite 
diverfity  of  Motions,  all  their  Adtions  in 
walking,  running,  flying,  fwimming  ;  all 
their  (erious  Efforts  for  Self-prefervationy 
all  their  freakifh  Contortions  when  they 
are  gay  and  fportful,  in  all  their  various 
Limbs,  perfornVd  by  one  fimple  Contri- 
vance of  a  contracting  Mufcle,  apply'd  with 
inconceivable  Diverfitys  to  anfvver  all  thefe 
Ends  !  Various  Engines  might  have  ob- 
tain'd  the  fame  Ends  ;  but  then  there  had 
been  lefeUvifirmity,  and  the  Beauty  of  our 
Animal  Sy Items,  and  of  particular  Animals, 
had  been  much  lefs,  when  this  iurprizing 
"Unity  of  Mechanifm  had  been  remov'd 
from  them, 

IX.  Among  Animals  of  the  fame  Spe- 
cies, theT^/>y  is  very  obvious,  and  this  Re- 
femblance  is  the  very  Ground  of  our  rank- 
ing them  in  fiich  Claffes  or  Species,  notwith- 
ftanding  the  great  Diverfitys  in  Bulk,  Co- 
lour, Shape,  which  are  obferv'd  even  in  thofe 
cali'd  of  the  fame  Species.  And  then  in 
each  Individual,  what  vaft  Beauty  arifes  from 
the  exadt  Refemblance  of  all  the  external 
double  Members  to  each  other,  which  feems 
the  univerfal  Intention  of  N  a  t  u  r  e,  when  no 
Accident  prevents  it !  We  fee  the  Want  of 
this  Refemblance  never  fails  to  pafs  for  an 

Im* 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  25 

Imperfection,  and  Want  of  Beauty,  tho  no  Sedt.  2. 
other  Inconvenience  enfiies ;  as  when  the  ^v^ 
Eyes  are  not  exa&ly  like,  or  one  Arm  or 
Leg  is  a  little  fhorter  or  fmaller  than  its 


fellow. 


As  to  that  moft  powerful  Beauty  in 
Countenances,  Airs,  Gefiures,  Motion,  we 
fhall  Jliew  in  the  fecond  Treatife  *,  that  it 
arifes  from  lome  imagined  Indication  of  mo- 
rally good  Difpofitions  of  Mind. 

X.  There  is  a  further  Beauty  in  Ani-  Proportion. 
mals,  arifing  from  a  certain  'Proportion  of 
the  various  Parts  to  each  other,  which  (till 
pleafes  the  Senle  of  Spectators,  tho  they 
cannot  calculate  it  with  the  Accuracy  of  a 
Statuary.  The  Statuary  knows  what  Pro- 
portion of  each  Part  of  the  Face  to  the 
whole  Face  is  moft  agreeable,  and  can  tell 
us  the  fame  of  the  Proportion  of  the  Face  to 
the  Body,  or  any  Parts  of  it ;  and  between 
the  'Diameters  and  Lengths  of  each  Limb  : 
When  this  Proportion  of  the  Head  to  the 
Body  is  remarkably  alter'd,  we  fliall  have  a 
Giant  or  a  Dwarf.  And  hence  it  is,  that 
either  the  one  or  the  other  may  be  repre- 
fented  to  us  even  in  Miniature,  without  Re- 
lation to  any  external  Object,  by  obferving 
how  the  Body  furpafTes  the  Proportion  it 
Ihould  have  to  the  Head  in  Giants,  and  falls 


J  Sett*  vf.  Art.  1. 

below 


2  6        An  INQUIRY  concerning 

SecSt.  2.  below  it  in  'Dwarfs.  There  is  a  further 
U^WJ  Beauty  arifing  from  that  Figure,  which  is  a 
natural  Indication  of  Strength  ;  but  this 
may  be  pafs'd  over,  becaufe  probably  it  may 
be  alledg'd,  that  our  Approbation  of  this 
Shape  flows  from  an  opinion  of  Advantage, 
and  not  from  the  Form  it  felf 

The  Beauty  arifing  from Mechanifm,  ap* 
parently  adapted  to  the  Neceilitys  and  Ad- 
vantages of  any  Animal ;  which  pleafes  us, 
even  tho  there  be  no  Advantage  to  our  felves 
enfuing  from  it  ;  will  be  confider'd  under 
the  Head  of  Relative  Beauty,  or  Defign  *„ 

fowls,  XI.  The  peculiar  Beauty  of  Fowls  can 

fcarce  be  omrtted,  which  arifes  from  the  vaft 
Variety  of  Feathers,  a  curious  Sort  of  Ma- 
chines adapted  to  many  admirable  Ufes, 
which  retain  a  vaft  Refemblance  in  their 
Structure  among  all  the  Species,  and  a  perfed: 
Uniformity  in  thole  of  the  lame  Species  in 
the  corresponding  Parts,  and  in  the  two 
Sides  of  each  Individual  ;  befides  all  the 
Beauty  of  lively  Colours  and  gradual  Shades, 
not  only  in  the  external  Appearance  of  the 
Fowl,  refulting  from  an  artful  Combination 
of  lhaded  Feathers,  but  often  vifible  even 
in  one  Feather  feparately. 


See  Sett.  iv.  Art.  j. 

XII.  If 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         27 

Sec5l.  2- 

XII.  If  our  Reafonings  about  the  Na-  C/'VNJ 
ture  of  Fluids  be  jutt,  the  vaft  Stores  of  l¥a-  F\Hus. 
ter  will  give  us  an  Inftance  of  'Uniformity 

in  Nature  above  Imagination,  when  we  re- 
fled:  upon  the  almoft  infinite  Multitude  of 
fmall,  polifli'd,  fmooth  Spheres,  which  mull 
be  fuppos'd  form'd  in  all  the  parts  of  this 
Globe.  The  fame  Uniformity  there  is  pro- 
bably among  the  Parts  of  other  Fluids  as 
well  as  Water  :  and  the  like  muft  be  obferv'd 
in  leveral  other  natural  Bodys,  as  Salts,  Sul- 
phurs, and  ftch  like  ;  whofe  uniform  Pro- 
pertys  do  probably  depend  upon  an  Uni- 
formity in  the  Figures  of  their  Parts. 

XIII.  Under  Original  Beauty  we  may  Harmny 
include  Harmony,  or  Beauty  of  Sound,  if 

that  Expreffion  can  be  allow'd,  becaufe 
Harmony  is  not  ufually  conceiv'd  as  an  Imi- 
tation of  any  thing  elfe.  Harmony  often 
yaifes  Pleafure  in  thofe  who  know  not  what 
is  the  Occafion  of  it :  And  yet  the  Foun- 
dation of  this  Pleafure  is  known  to  be  a 
fort  of  Uniformity.  When  the  feveral  Vi- 
brations of  one  Note  regularly  coincide 
with  the  Vibrations  of  another,  they  make 
an  agreeable  Compofition  ;  and  fuch  Notes 
are  call'd  Concords.  Thus  the  Vibrations  of 
any  one  Note  coincide  in  Time  with  two 
Vibrations  of  its  OEiave ;  and  two  Vibra- 
tions of  any  Note  coincide  with  three  of 
its  Fifth  ;  and  fo  on  in  the  reft  of  the  Con- 
z  cords. 


2 8  An  I N  QU I RY  concerning 

Sedt.  2.  cords.  Now  no  Compfition  can  be  harmo- 
v^v  nious,  in  which  the  Notes  are  not,  for  the 
moft  part,  difpos'd  according  to  theie  na- 
tural Proportions.  Befides  which,  a  due 
Regard  muft  be  had  to  the  Key,  which  go- 
verns the  whole,  and  to  the  Time  and  Hu- 
mour, in  which  the  Compofition  is  begun  : 
a  frequent  and  inartificial  Change  of  any 
of  which  will  produce  the  greatefl,  and 
moft  unnatural  T>ifcord.  This  will  appear, 
by  obferving  the  'Dijfonance  which  would 
arife  from  tacking  Parts  of  different  Tunes 
together  as  one,  altho  both  were  feparately 
agreeable.  A  like  Uniformity  is  alfo  ob- 
fervable  among  the  Bafes,  Tenors,  Trebles 
of  the  fame  Tune. 

There  is  indeed  obfervable,  in  the  bed 
Compofitions,  a  myfterious  Effed:  ofDif- 
cords :  They  often  give  as  great  Pleafure 
as  continu'd  Harmony  ;  whether  by  refrefh- 
ing  the  Ear  with  Variety,  or  by  awakening 
the  Attention,  and  enlivening  the  Relifli 
for  the  liicceeding  Harmony  of  Concords, 
as  Shades  enliven  and  beautify  Pictures, 
or  by  fome  other  means  not  yet  known  : 
Certain  it  is  however  that  they  have  their 
place,  and  fbme  good  Effed:  in  our  beft  Com- 
pofitions. Some  other  Powers  of  Mufick 
may  be  confider'd  hereafter  *. 

*  See  Sett.  vi.  Art.  12. 

XIV.  But 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.  29 

Se6t.  2. 
XIV.  But  in  all  thefe  Inftances  of  Beau-  ^"v^ 
ty  let  it  be  obferv'd,  That  the  Pleafure  is 
communicated  to  thofe  who  never  reflected 
on  this  general  Foundation  ;  and  that  all 
here  alledg'd  is  this,  "  That  the  pleafant 
"  Senfttion  arifes  only  from  Obje&s,  in 
"  which  there  is  Uniformity  amidft  Va* 
•■«  riety :  "  We  may  have  the  Senfation  with- 
out knowing  what  is  theOccafion  of  it ;  as 
a  Man's  Tajie  may  fagged  Ideas  of  Sweets, 
Acids,  Bitters,  tho  he  be  ignorant  of  the 
Forms  of  the  fmall  Bodys,  or  their  Mo- 
tions, which  excite  thele  Perceptions  in 
him. 


SECT. 


3 o  jin  I N Q.U IRY  concerning 

Scd.  3. 


U^V^J 


SECT.     III. 

Of  the  Beauty  of  Theorems. 

Theorems.  I.  r  |  l  H  E  Beauty  of  Theorems,  or  uni- 
j[  verfal  Truths  demonftrated,  de- 
ferves  a  diftindt  Confideration,  being  of 
a  Nature  pretty  different  from  the  former 
kinds  of  Beauty ;  and  yet  there  is  none  in 
which  we  iliall  fee  fuch  an  amazing  Variety 
with  Uniformity  :  and  hence  arifes  a  very 
great  Pleafure  diftindt  from  Profpe6ts  of  any 
further  Advantage. 

Hi  For  in  one  Theorem  we  may  find  in- 
cluded, with  the  mod  ex  ad  Agreement,  art 
infinite  Multitude  of  particular  Truths;  nay, 
often  an  Infinity  of  Infinites  :  fo  that  altho 
the  Neceffity  of  forming  abftracS  Ideas,  and 
univerfal  Theorems,  arifes  perhaps  from  the 
Limitation  of  our  Minds,  which  cannot  ad- 
mit an  infinite  Multitude  of  Angular  Ideas  or 
Judgments  at  once,  yet  this  Power  gives  us 
an  Evidence  of  the  Largenefs  of  the  human 
Capacity  above  our  Imagination.  Thus  for 
inftance,  the  qrjth  Propofition  of  the  firfl 
Book  of  Euclid's  Elements  contains  an 
infinite  Multitude  of  Truths,  concerning 
the  infinite  pofiibie  Sizes  of  right-angled 
Triangles,  as  vou  make  the  Area  greater 

Ot 


Beauty,  Order,    &c.         31 

or  lefs ;  and  in  each  of  theft  Sizes  you  may  Sedt  3. 
find  an  infinite  Multitude  of  diflimilar  Tri-  ^/^T^ 
angles,  as  you  vary  the  Proportion  of  the 
Bafe  to  the  Perpendicular  ;  all  which  In- 
finitys  of  Infinites  agree  in  the  general 
Theorem.  In  Algebraic k,  and  Fluxional 
Calculations,  we  lliall  ftill  find  a  greater 
Variety  of  particular  Truths  included  in 
general  Theorems  ;  not  only  in  general  E- 
quations  applicable  to  all  Kinds  of  Quan- 
tity, but  in  more  particular  Inveftigations 
ef  Areas  and  Tangents  :  In  which  one 
Manner  of  Operation  iliall  difcover  Theo- 
rems applicable  to  infinite  Orders  or  Spe- 
cies of  Curves,  to  the  infinite  Sizes  of 
each  Species,  and  to  the  infinite  Points 
of  the  infinite  Individuals  of  each  Size. 

III.  That  we  may  the  better  difcern  this  Foundati- 
Agreement,  or  Vnity  of  an  Infinity  of  Ob-  ^Ity!" 
jeSts,  in  the  general  Theorem,  to  be  the 
Foundation  of  the  Beauty  or  Pleafure  at- 
tending their  Difcovery,  let  us  compare  our 
Satisfaction  in  iuch  Difcoverys,  with  the 
uneafy  ftate  of  Mind  in  which  we  are,  when 
we  can  only  meafure  Lines,  or  Surfaces,  by 
a  Scale,  or  are  making  Experiments  which 
we  can  reduce  to  no  general  Canon,  but 
only  heaping  up  a  Multitude  of  particular 
incoherent  Obiervations.  Now  each  of 
theft  Trials  difcovers  a  new  Truth,  but 
with  no  Pleafure  or  Beauty,  notwithftand- 

ing 


5  z         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se&\  j.  ing  the  Variety,  till  we  can  difcover  fome 
i/vn;  fort  of  Unity i  or  reduce  them  to  fome  ge- 
neral Canon. 

Lhtie  IV.  Again,  let  us  take  a  Metaphyfi- 

lixtl  m  ca*  Axiom,   ^ch  as  t^lis»  ^w;7  ^^^  *? 
greater  than  its  Tart  ;   and  we  fhall  find 
no    Beauty   in   the    Contemplation      For 
tho  this   Propofition  contains  many    Infi- 
nitys  of  particular  Truths  ;  yet  the  Unity 
is  inconfiderable,  fince  they  all  agree  only 
in   a  vague,   undetermin'd  Conception   of 
Whole   and    Tart,    and  in    an   indefinite 
Excels  of  the  former  above  the  latter,  which 
is   fbmetimes  great    and  fometimes  finall. 
So,  fhould  we  hear  that  the   Cylinder  is 
greater  than  the  infcrib'd  Sphere,  and  this 
again  greater  than  the  Cone  of  the  lame  Al- 
titude and  Diameter  with  the  Bafe,  we  fhall 
find  no  pleafure  in  this  Knowledge  of  a  ge- 
neral Relation  of  greater  and  leis,  without 
any  precife  Difference  or  Proportion.     But 
when  we  fee  the  univerfal  exa<5t  Agreement 
of  all  poflible  Sizes  of  fuch  Syftems  of  So- 
lids, that  they  preferve  to  each  other  the 
conftant  Ratio  of  3,  2,  1  ;  how  beautiful  is 
the  Theorem,  and  how  are  we  ravifh'd  with 
its  firft  Difcovery  ! 


terns 


#afy  Thto-  W  e  may  likewife  obferve,  that  eajy  or 
obvious  Propofitions,  even  where  the  U- 
nity  is  fufficiently  diftind:,  and  determinate, 
do  not  pleafe  us  fo  much  as  thofe,    which 

being 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         33 

being  left  obvious,  give  us  fome  Surprize  Secft.  3. 
in  the  Difcovery  :  Thus  we  find  little  Plea-  <*s~Y\) 
fure  in  difcovering  that  a  Line  bifettmg  the 
vertical  Angle  of  an  Ifofieles  Triangle,  hi- 
fetts  the  Bafe,  or  the  Reverfe ;  or,  that  Equi- 
lateral Triangles  are  Equiangular.     Thefe 
Truths  we  almoft  know  Intuitively,  with- 
out Demonftration  :  They  are  like  common 
Goods,  or  thofe  which  Men  have  long  pof- 
lefled,  which  do  not  give  fuch  fenfible  Joys 
as  much  fmaller  new  Additions  may  give 
us.    But  let  none  hence  imagine,  that  the 
fble  Pleafure  of  Theorems  is  from  Sur- 
prize ;  for  the  fame  Novelty  of  a  fingle 
Experiment  does  not  pleafe  us  much  :  nor 
ought  we   to    conclude  from  the  greater 
Pleafare  accompanying  a  new,  or  unexpe6l* 
ed  Advantage,  that  Surprize,  or  Novelty 
is  the  only  Pleafure  of  Life,  or  the  only 
ground  of  Delight  in  Truth. 

V.  There  is  another  Beauty  in  Pro-  coroiu* 
pofitions,  which  cannot  be  omitted  ;  which  rys' 
is,  When  one  Theorem  contains  a  vafl 
Multitude  of  Corollarys  eafily  deducible 
from  it.  Thus  that  Theorem  which  gives 
us  the  Equation  of  a  Curve,  whence  per- 
haps moft  of  its  Propertys  may  be  de- 
duced, does  fbme  way  pleafe  and  fatisfy  our 
Mind  above  any  other  Propofition :.  Such 
a  Theorem  alfo  is  the  35th  of  the  ift  Book 
of  Euclid,  from  which  the  whole  Art  of 
meafuring  right-Iin'd  Areas  is  deduc'd,  by 

D  Re- 


34         J&n  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6t.  3.  Refolution  into  Triangles,  which  are  the 
^^Y^  halfs  of  fo  many  Tarallelogr  arris  ;  and 
thefe  are  each  refpe&ively  equal  to  ft>  many 
Rectangles  of  the  Bafe  into  the  perpendi- 
cular Altitude  :  The  47  th  of  the  ift  Book 
is  another  of  like  Beauty,  and  Co  are  many 
others. 

In  the  fearch  of  Nature  there  is  the 
like  Beauty  in  the  Knowledge  of-fome  great 
Principles,  or  univerlal  Forces,  from  which 
innumerable  EfFe&s  do  flow.  Such  is  Gravi- 
tation, in  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  Scheme; 
fuch  alfo  is  the  Knowledge  of  the  Original 
of  Rights,  perfect  and  imperfeEi,  and  ex- 
ternal;  alienable  and  unalienable,  with 
their  manner  of  Tranjlations  ;  from  whence 
the  greateft  Part  of  moral  Dutys  may  be 
deduc'd  in  the  various  Relations  of  human 
Life. 

It  is  eafy  to  fee  how  Men  are  charm'd 
with  the  Beauty  of  fuch  Knowledge,  befides 
its  Ufefulnefs  ;  and  how  this  fets  them  upon 
deducing  the  Propertys  of  each  Figure  from 
one  Genejis,  and  demonftrating  the  mecha- 
nick  Forces  from  one  Theorem  of  the  Com- 
pofition  of  Motion ;  even  after  they  have 
fufficient  Knowledge  and  Certainty  in  all 
thefe  Truths  from  diflind:  independent  De- 
monftrations.  And  this  Pleafure  we  enjoy 
even  when  we  have  no  Profpedt  of  ob- 
taining  any  other  Advantage  from  fuch 

2  Man- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  3  5- 

Manner  of  Dedu&ion,  than  the  imme- Sedt.  3. 
diate  Pleafure  of  contemplating  the  Beauty  ;  O^V\j 
nor  could  Love  of  Fame  excite  us  to  fuch 
regular  Methods  of  Deduction,  were  we 
not  confcious  that  Mankind  are  pleas'd  with 
them  immediately,  by  this  internal Senfe  of 
their  Beauty, 

It  is  no  lefs  eafy  to  fee  into  what  ab-  Famaftkk 
furd  Attempts  Men  have  been  led  by  this  BeaH*y* 
Senfe  of  Beauty,  and  a  filly  Afte&ation  of 
obtaining  it  in  the  other  Sciences  as  well  as 
the  Mathematicks.  'Twas  this  probably 
which  fet  D  e  scartes  on  that  hopeful  Pro- 
ject of  deducing  all  human  Knowledge  from 
one  Propofition,  viz.  Cogito,  ergo  fum  ; 
while  others  with  as  little  Senfe  contended, 
that  ImfoJJibile  eft  idem  Jlmul  ejfe  &  non 
efte,  had  much  fairer  Pretenfions  to  the  Style 
and  Title  of  Trincipium  humane  Cogni- 
tionis  abfblute  primum.  Mr.  Leibnitz 
had  an  equal  Afrediion  for  his  favourite  Prin- 
ciple of  a  fiifficient  Reafon  for  every  thing 
in  Nature,  and  brags  to  Dr .  C  l  a  r  k  e  of  the 
Wonders  he  had  wrought  in  the  intellectual 
World  by  its  Afliftance  ;  but  his  learned 
Antagonift  feems  to  think  he  had  not  fuffi- 
cient  Reafon  for  his  Boafting  *.  If  we  look 
into  particular  Sciences,  we  may  fee  in  the 
Syftems  learned  Men  have  given  us  of  them, 


*  See  the  Letters  which  pafs'd  beween  Br.  Ciauke   and 
Mr,  Leibnitz,  Pag.  1 3 . 

D  2  -     the 


3  6  An  I N  QJJ  I R  Y  concerning 

Sed:.  4>  the  Inconveniences  of  this  Love  of  Vni- 
C/VNj  formity.  How  aukardly  is  Puffendorf 
forc'd  to  deduce  the  feveral  Dutys  of  Men 
to  God,  themfelves,  and  their  Neighbours, 
from  his  fingle  fundamental  Principle  of  So- 
ciablenefs  to  the  whole  Rate  of  Mankind} 
This  Obfervation  might  eafily  be  extended 
farther,  were  it  neceflary ;  and  is  a  ftrong 
Proof  that  Men  have  a  Senfe  oi  Beauty  in 
Uniformity  in  the  Sciences,  even  from  the 
Contortions  of  common  Senfe  they  are  led 
into  by  purluing  it. 

VI.  This  Delight  which  accompanys 
Sciences,  or  univerial  Theorems,  may  really 
be  caird  a  kind  of  Senfation  ;  fince  it  ne- 
cefTarily  accompanys  the  Difcovery  of  any 
Propofition,  and  is  diftind  from  bare  Know- 
ledge it  ielf,  being  moil  violent  at  firft, 
whereas  the  Knowledge  is  uniformly  the 
fame.  And  however  Knowledge  enlarges 
the  Mind,  and  makes  us  more  capable  of 
comprehenfive  Views  and  Projects  in  lbme 
kinds  of  Bufinefs,  whence  Advantage  may 
alio  ariie  to  us  ;  yet  we  may  leave  it  in  the 
Breaft  of  every  Student  to  determine,  whe- 
ther he  has  not  often  felt  this  Pleafure  with- 
out any  fuch  prolped  of  Advantage  from 
the  Difcovery  of  his  Theorem.  All  which 
can  thence  be  infer'd  is  only  this,  that  as 
in  our  external  Senles,  fo  in  our  internal 
ones,  the  pleafant  Senfations  generally  a- 
rife  from  thofe  Objeds  which  calm  Reafon 
3  would 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  37 

would  have  recommended,  had  we  under-  Sect.  3 
flood  their  Ufe,  and  which  might  have  ^~y^ 
engag'd  our  puriuits  from  Self-intereji. 

VII.  If  any  alledge,  "  that  this  Pleafure 
"  in  Theorems  arifes  only  at  firft,  upon  the 
"  Novelty  of  the  Difcovery,  which  occa- 
"  fions  Surprize :  "  It  muft  be  own'd  in- 
deed that  *  Novelty  is  generally  very  agree- 
able, and  heightens  the  Pleafure  in  the 
Contemplation  of  Beauty  ;  but  then  the 
Novelty  of  a  particular  Truth,  found  wi 
by  meafuring,  as  above  mention'd,  gives  no 
confiderable  Pleafure,  nor  Surprize.  That 
then  which  is  flea/ant  and  fur  prizing,  is 
the  firft  Obfervation  of  this  Unity  amidft 
fiich  a  great  Variety.  There  is  indeed  ano- 
ther kind  of  Surprize,  which  adds  to  the 
Beauty  of  fbme  Propofitions  left  univerjal, 
and  may  make  them  equally  pleafant  with 
more  univerfal  ones  ;  as  when  we  difcover 
a  general  Truth  which  feem'd  before,  upon 
fome  confus'd  Opinion,  to  be  a  Falfhood :  as 
that  Ajfymptotes  always  approaching  fliould 
never  meet  the  Curve.  This  is  like  that 
Joy,  which  may  be  very  ftrong  and  violent, 
upon  the  unexpe&ed  Arrival  of  a  fmall  Ad- 
vantage, from  that  Occafion  from  which 
we  apprehended  great  Evil ;  but  ftill  this  V- 
nity  of  many  Particulars  in  the  general  Theo- 


*  SeeSf&Yi.  Atj.\%.  and  f£f  Spectator  there  referred  to. 

D  3  rem, 


1 8  An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed:.  5.  rem, "is  neceffary  to  make  it  pleafant,  in 

^v^  any  cafe. 

works  of  VIII.  As  to  the  Works  of  Art,  were  we 
Art*  to  run  thro  the  various  artificial  Contrivan- 
ces or  Structures,  we  Ihould  conftantly  find 
the  Foundation  of  the  Beauty  which  appears 
in  them,  to  be  fome  kind  of  Uniformity  y 
or  Unity  oi  Proportion  among  the  Parts, 
and  of  each  Part  to  the  Whole.  As  there 
is  a  vaft  Diverfity  of  Proportions,  poffible, 
and  different  Kinds  of  Uniformity,  fo  there 
is  room  enough  for  that  Diverfity  of  Fancys 
obiervable  in  Architecture \  Gardening,  and 
fuch  like  Arts  in  different  Nations ;  they 
all  may  have  Uniformity,  tho  the  Parts  in 
one  may  differ  from  thofe  in  another.  The 
Chinefe  or  Terfiau  Buildings  are  not  like 
the  Grecian  and  Roman,  and  yet  the  for- 
mer has  its  Uniformity  of  the  various  Parts 
to  each  other,  and  to  the  Whole,  as  well 
as  the  latter.  In  that  kind  of  Architecture 
which  the  Euro PEAxNS  call  Regular,  the 
Uniformity  of  Parts  is  very  obvious,  the 
leveral  Parts  are  regular  Figures,  and  ei- 
ther equal  or  fimilar  at  leaft  in  the  fame 
Range  ;  the  Pedeftals  are  Tarallelopipedons 
or  iquare  ^Prifms  5  the  Pillars,  Cylinders 
nearly  ;  the  Arches  Circular,  and  all  thofe 
in  the  fame  Row  equal  5  there  is  the  fame 
Proportion  every  where  obferv'd  in  the  fame 
Range  between  the  Diameters  of  Pillars 
and  their  Heights,  their  Capitals,  the  Dia- 
meters. 


Beauty,  Order,  &c  ^ 

meters  of  Arches,  the  Heights  of  thcTedef  Sedt.  3. 
tals,  the  Projections  of  the  Cornice,  and  all  L^v\J 
the  Ornaments  in  each  of  owx  five  Orders. 
And  tho  other  Countrys  do  not  follow  the 
Grecian  or  Roman  Proportions  5  yet  there 
is  even  among  them  a  Proportion  retain'd, 
a  Uniformity,  and  Refemblance  of  corre- 
iponding  Figures ;  and  every  Deviation  in 
one  part  from  that  Proportion  which  is  ob- 
ferv'd  in  the  reft  of  the  Building,  is  difc 
pleafing  to  every  Eye,  and  dellroys  or  dimi- 
niflies  at  leaft  the  Beauty  of  the  Whole. 

IX.  The  fame  might  be  obferv'd  thro 
all  other  Works  of  Art,  even  to  the  meaneft 
Utenfil;  the  Beauty  of  every  one  of  which 
we  fhall  always  find  to  have  the  fame  Foun- 
dation of  Uniformity  amidfi  Variety,  with- 
out which  they  appear  mean,  irregular  and 
deform'd. 


D  a  SECT 


40         An  INQUIRY  concerning 


Se<a.  4. 


SECT.    IV. 

Of  Relative  or  Comparative  Beauty. 

compara-  I.  X  F  the  preceding  Thoughts  concerning 
the  Beau-       J^   tht  Foundation  of  abfolute  Beauty 

be  juft,  we  may  eafily  underftand  wherein 
relative  Beauty  confifts.  All  Beauty  is  re- 
lative to  the  Senfe  of  fome  Mind  perceiving 
it  ;  but  what  we  call  relative  is  that  which 
is  apprehended  in  any  Objetf,  commonly 
confider'd  as  an  Imitation  of  fome  Original  : 
And  this  Beauty  is  founded  on  a  Conform 
mity,  or  a  kind  of  Unity  between  the  Ori- 
ginal and  the  Copy.  The  Original  may  be 
either  fome  Object:  in  Nature,  or  fome 
ejlablijtidldea  ;  for  if  there  be  any  known 
Idea  as  a  Standard,  and  Rules  to  fix  this 
Image  or  Idea  by,  we  may  make  a  beau- 
tiful Imitation.  Thus  a  Statuary ;  Tain- 
ter,  or  Toet,  may  pleafe  us  with  an  Her- 
cules, if  his  Piece  retains  that  Grandeur, 
3nd  thofe  marks  of  Strength,  and  Courage \ 
which  we  imagine  in  that  Hero. 

And  farther,  to  obtain  comparative 
Beauty  alone,  it  is  not  neceflary  that  there 
be  any  Beauty  in  the  Original ;  the  Imita- 
tion of  abfolute  Beauty  may  indeed  in  the 
whole  make  3  more  lovely  Piece,  and  yet 

an 


Beauty,  Ordef,  &c.  41 

an  exad  Imitation  ftall  ftill  be  beautiful,  Se<5t.  4. 
thd  the  Original  were  intirely  void  of  it  :  oO/Ni 
Thus  the  'Deformity s  of  old  Age  in  a  Pic- 
ture, the  rudeft  Rocks  or  Mountains  in  a 
Landskifi,  if  well  reprefented,  fhall  have 
abundant  Beauty v  tho  perhaps  not  fo  great 
as  if  the  Original  were  abfolutely  beautiful, 
and  as  well  reprefented. 

II.  The  fame  Obfervation  holds  true  in  **/«**« 
the  Delcriptions  of  the  Poets  either  ofnatu- m  oetry' 
ral  Objects  or  Perfons ;  and  this  relative 
Beauty  is  what  they  fhould  principally  en- 
deavour to  obtain,  7as  the  peculiar  Beauty 
of  their  Works.  By  the  Morata  Fabula% 
or  the  »$«of  Aristotle,  we  are  not  to 
underfland  virtuous  Manners 'in  a  moral 
Senfe,  but  xjuft  Reprefent at  ion  of  Manners 
or  Characters  as  they  are  in  Nature  ;  and 
that  the  AElions  and  Sentiments  be  fuited 
to  the  Characters  of  the  Terfons  to  whom 
they  are  afcrib'd  in  Epck  and  "Dramatick 
Poetry.  Perhaps  very  good  Reafons  may 
be  fuggefted  from  the  Nature  of  our  Taf 
fans,  to  prove  that  a  Poet  fhould  not  draw 
his  Characters  perfectly  Virtuous;  thefe 
Characters  indeed  abftra&ly  confider'd  might 
give  more  Pleafiire,  and  have  more  Beauty 
than  the  imperfefl;  ones  which  occur  in 
Life  with  a  mixture  of  Good  and  Evil :  But 
it  may  fuffice  at  prefent  to  fugged  againft 
this  Choice,  that  we  have  more  lively  Ideas 
of  imperfebt  Men  with  all  their  Paffions, 

than 


4*         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se&.  4.  than  of  morally  perfeEl  Heroes,  fiich  as 
really  never  occur  to  our  Obfervation  ; 
and  of  which  confequently  we  cannot  judg 
exactly  as  to  their  Agreement  with  the 
Copy  And  further,  thro  Confcioufhefs  of 
our  own  State,  we  are  more  nearly  touch'd 
and  affected  by  the  imperfect  Characters  ; 
fince  in  them  we  fee  reprefented,  in  the 
Perfons  of  others,  the  Contrajis  of  In- 
clinations, and  the  Struggles  between  the 
Paffions  of  Self-Love  and  thofe  of  Ho- 
nour and  Virtue,  which  we  often  feel 
in  our  own  Breafts.  This  is  the  Perfection 
of  Beauty  for  which  Homer  is  juftly  ad- 
mir'd,  as  well  as  for  the  Variety  of  his 
Characters. 

Probahtii-  III.  Many  other  Beautys  of  Poetry  may 
*y>  sim'lh>  be  reduc'd  under  thisClafs  of  relative  Beau- 
Metaphor.  ^  ,    The  cprobMHy  is  abf0lutely  necef- 

iary  to  make  us  imagine  Refemblance  ;  it 
is  by  Refemblance  that  the  Similitudes, 
Metaphors  and  Allegorys  are  made  beauti- 
ful, whether  either  the  Subjed:  or  the 
Thing  compar'd  to  it  have  Beauty  or  not ; 
the  Beauty  indeed  is  greater,  when  both 
have  fome  original  Beauty  or  Dignity  as 
well  as  Refemblance  :  and  this  is  the  foun- 
dation of  the  Rule  of  ftudying  decency  in 
Metaphors  and  Similys  as  well  as  Likenefi. 
The  Meafures  and  Cadence  are  inftances  of 
Harmony,  and  come  under  the  head  of 
&b folate  Beauty. 

IV.  We 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         43 

Sett.  4. 
IV.  We  may  here  obferve  a  ftrange  Prone*  yvvj 
nefs in  our  Minds  to  make  perpetual  Com-  Ptr0^{sre% 
parifons  of  all  things  which  occur  to  our 
Obfervation,  even  thofe  which  would  feem 
very  remote.  There  are  certain  Refemblan- 
ces  in  the  Motions  of  all  Animals  upon 
like  Paffions,  which  eafily  found  a  Com- 
parifon  ;  but  this  does  not  ferve  to  en- 
tertain  our  Fancy  :  Inanimate  ObjeEls  have 
often  fiich  Portions  as  refemble  thofe  of 
the  hitman  Body  in  various  Circumftances  ; 
thefe  Airs  or  Geftures  of  the  Body  are  In- 
dications of  certain  Dilpofitions  in  the  Mind, 
ib  that  our  very  Paffions  and  Affections 
as  well  as  other  Circumftances  obtain  a  Re- 
femblance  to  natural  inanimate  QbjeEis; 
Thus  a  Tempefl  at  Sea  is  often  an  Emblem 
of  Wrath  ;  a  'Plant  or  Tree  drooping  un- 
der the  Rain,  of  a  Perlbn  in  Sorrow  ;  a 
Poppy  bending  its  Stalk,  or  a  Flower 
withering  when  cut  by  the  Plow,  refem^ 
bles  the  Death  of  a  blooming  Hero  ;  an 
aged  Oak  in  the  Mountains  fliall  repre- 
fent an  old  Empire,  a  Flame  feizing  a 
Wood  fliall  reprefent  a  War.  In  fliort, 
every  thing  in  Nature,  by  our  ftrange  in- 
clination to  Refemblance,  ihall  be  brought 
to  reprefent  other  things,  even  the  mod 
remote,  efpecially  the  Paffions  and  Cir- 
cumftances of  human  Nature  in  which  we 
are  more  nearly  concern'd  ;  and  to  con- 
firm this,  and  furnifh  Inftances  of  it,  one 

need 


44  *dn  I N  QU  I RY  concerning 

Sedfc.  4.  need  only  look  into  Homer  or  Virgil- 

l/YV  A  fruitful  Fancy  would  find  in  a  Grove \ 

or  a  Wood,  an  Emblem  for  every  Character 

in  a  Commonwealth,  and  every  turn   of 

Temper ',  or  Station  in  Life. 

intention.  V.  Concerning  that  kind  of  compara- 
tive Beauty  which  has  a  necefTary  relation 
to  fome  eftablifh'd  Idea,  we  may  obferve, 
that  fbme  Works  of  Art  acquire  a  diftinEl 
Beauty  by  their  Correlpondence  to  fome  u- 
niverfally  fiippos'd  Intention  in  the  Artifi- 
cer, or  the  Perfbns  who  employ'd  him : 
And  to  obtain  this  Beauty,  fometimes  they 
do  not  form  their  Works  fo  as  to  attain  the 
higheft  Perfection  of  original  Beauty  fepa- 
xately  confider'd;  became  a  Compofition 
of  this  relative  Beauty,  along  with  fome 
degree  of  the  original  Kind,  may  give  more 
Pleafiire,  than  a  more  perfect  original  Beau- 
ty  feparately.  Thus  we  fee,  that  drift  Re- 
gularity in  laying  out  of  Gardens  in  Tar- 
terres,  Viftds,  parallel  JValks,  is  often 
negle&ed,  to  obtain  an  Imitation  of  Na- 
ture even  in  fome  of  its  Wildnejjes.  And 
we  are  more  pleas'd  with  this  Imitation, 
Specially  when  the  Scene  is  large  and  Ipa- 
cious,  than  with  the  more  confin'd  Exadl- 
nefs  of  regular  Works.  So  likewile  in  the 
Monuments  eredted  in  honour  of  deceafed 
Heroes \  altho  a  Cylinder,  or  Tri/m,  or  re- 
gular Solid,  may  have  more  original  Beau- 
ty than  a  very  acute  Tyramid  or  Obelisk, 

yef 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.         45^ 

yet  the  latter  pleafes  more,  by  anfwering  Se<5t  4. 
better  the  fuppos'd  Intentions  of  Stability,  <^r^ 
and  being  confpicuous.  For  the  fame  reafbn 
Cubes,  or  fquare  Trifms,  are  generally  cho- 
ftn  for  the  'Pedejials  of  Statues,  and  not 
any  of  the  more  beautiful  Solids,  which  do 
not  feem  fo  fecure  from  rolling.  This  may 
be  the  reafbn  too,  why  Columns  or  Tillars 
look  beft  when  made  a  little  taper  from 
the  middle,  or  a  third  from  the  bottom, 
that  they  may  not  feem  top-heavy  and  in 
danger  of  falling. 

VI.  The  like  reafbn  may  influence  Ar- 
tifts,  in  many  other  Inftances,  to  depart 
from  the  Rules  of  original  Beauty,  as  above 
laid  down.  And  yet  this  is  no  Argument 
againfl  our  Senfe  of  Beauty  being  founded, 
as  was  above  explain'd,  on  ^Uniformity 
amidjl  Variety,  but  only  an  Evidence  that 
our  Senfe  of  Beauty  of  the  Original  Kind 
may  be  vary'd  and  overballanc'd  by  ano- 
ther kind  of  Beauty. 

VII.  This  Beauty  arifing  from  Corre- 
fpondence  to  Intention,  would  open  to 
curious  Obfervers  a  new  Scene  of  Beauty 
in  the  Works  of  Nature,  by  confidering 
how  the  Mechanifm  of  the  various  Parts 
known  to  us,  feems  adapted  to  the  Per- 
fection of  that  Part,  and  yet  in  Subordi- 
nation to  the  Good  of  fome  Syftem  or 
Whole.    We  generally  fuppofe  the  Good  of 

the 


46         -An  I N Q.U IRY  concerning 

Se£t  4.  the  great  eft  Whole,  or  of  all  Beings,  to 
'^V^  have  been  the  Intention  of  the  Author  of 
Nature  ;  and  cannot  avoid  being  pleas'd 
when  we  fee  any  part  of  this  Defign  ex- 
ecuted in  the  Syftems  we  are  acquainted 
with.  The  Obfervations  already  made  on 
this  Subjed:  are  in  every  one's  hand,  in  the 
Treatifes  of  our  late  Improvers  of  mechani- 
cal Thilofophy.  We  fhall  only  obferve  here, 
that  every  one  has  a  certain  Pleafure  in  fee- 
ing any  Defign  well  executed  by  curious 
Mechanifin,  even  when  his  own  Advan- 
tage is  no  way  concerned  ;  and  alfb  in  dis- 
covering the  Defign  to  which  any  complex 
Machine  is  adapted,  when  he  has  perhaps 
had  a  general  Knowledge  of  the  Machine 
before,  without  feeing  its  Correfpondence 
or  Aptnefs  to  execute  any  Defign. 

The  Arguments  by  which  we  prove 
Reafon  and  'Defign  in  any  Caufe  from  the 
Beauty  of  the  Effects,  are  fo  frequently 
us'd  in  fome  of  the  higheft  Subjects,  that 
it  may  be  neceflary  to  enquire  a  little 
more  particularly  into  them,  to  fee  how 
far  they  will  hold,  and  with  what  degree 
of  Evidence. 


SECT. 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.        ^7 

Se<2.  5. 

' ^yxj 


S  E  C  T.  V. 

Concerning  our  Reafonings  about  De- 
fign  and  Wifdom  in  the  Caufe,  from 
the  Beauty  or  Regularity  of  Effects. 

I.  f       ''HERE  feems  to  be  no  neceffary  smfi,  av- 
X     Connexion  of  our  pleafing  Ideas  b^Atl, 
of  Beauty  with  the  Uniformity  or  Regit-  thor. 
larity  of  the  Objects,  from  the  Nature  of 
things,  antecedent  to  fome  Conftitution  of 
the  Author  of  our  Nature,    which  has 
made  fuch  Forms  pleafant  to  us.     Other 
Minds   may    be   fo   fram'd  as  to  receive 
no    Pleafare    from  Uniformity  ;    and  we 
actually  find  that  the  fame  regular  Forms 
feem  not  equally   to   pleafe  all   the  Ani- 
mals known  to  us,    as  ihall  probably  ap- 
pear afterwards.      Therefore  let  us  make 
what   is   the  moft   unfavourable    Suppofi^> 
tion  to  the  prefent  Argument,  viz.   That 
the  Conftitution  of  our  Senfe  fo  as  to  ap- 
prove Uniformity,    is  merely  arbitrary  in 
the  Author  of  our  Nature  ;  and  that  there 
are  an   infinity  of  Taftes    or  Relijhes  of 
Beauty  poffible  ;  fo  that  it  would  be  impof- 
fible  to  throw  together  fifty  or  a  hundred 
Pebbles,   which  fliould  not  make  an  agree- 
able Habitation  for  fome  Animal  or  other, 
and  appear  beautiful  to  it.     And  then  it  is 

plain, 


4 8  An  I N  QU  I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t.  5.  plain,  that  from  the  Perception  of  Beauty 
v^V^  in  any  one  EfFed,  we  Ihould  have  no 
reafon  to  conclude  cDefign  in  the  Caufe  : 
for  a  Senfe  might  be  fo  constituted  as  to  be 
pleas'd  with  fuch  Irregularity  as  may  be 
the  effed  of  an  undirected  Force.  *  But 
then,  as  there  are  an  Infinity  of  Forms 
poffible  into  which  any  Syftem  may  be  re- 
duc'd,  an  Infinity  of  T  laces  in  which  Ani- 
mals may  be  fituated,  and  an  Infinity  of 
Relifhes  or  Senfes  in  thefe  Animals  is  fup- 
pos'd  poffible  ;  that  in  the  immenfe  Spaces 
any  one  Animal  fhould  by  Chance  be  plac'd 
in  a  Syftem  agreeable  to  its  Tafte,  muft 
be  improbable  as  infinite  to  one  at  leaft : 
And  much  more  unreafbnable  is  it  to  ex- 
ped  from  Chance,  that  a  multitude  of  A- 
nimals  agreeing  in  their  Senfe  of  Beauty 
ihould  obtain  agreeable  *P  laces. 


*  By  undireded  Force,  or  undefigning  Force,  is  to  be  un- 
derload, That  Force  with  which  an  Agent  may  put  Matter 
into  Motion,  without  having  any  Defign  or  Intention  to  pro- 
duce any  particular  Form.  This  Conatus  ad  motum,  without 
an  actual  Line  of  Direction,  feems  fuch  a  grofs  abfurdity  in 
the  Cartefian  Scheme,  that  it  is  below  the  Dignity  of  common 
Senfe  to  vouchafe  to  confute  it.  But  Men  have  fo  many  con- 
fused Notions  of  [ome  Nature,  or  Chance  impreffing  Motions 
'-without  any  Defign  or  Intention  of  producing  any  particular 
Effect,  that  it  may  be  ufeful  tofhew,  that  even  this  very  abfurd 
Poftulatum,  tho  it  were  granted  them,  is  inefficient  to  anfwer 
the  appearances  in  the  Regularity  of  the  World  j  and  this  is 
what  is  attempted  in  the  fir ft  fourteen  Articles  of  this  Section. 
Thefe  Arguments  would  really  be  ufelefs,  if  all  Men  were  per- 
fuaded  of  what  to  a  Man  of  jnfl  Thought  will  appear  pretty 
obvious,  that  there  can  be  no  Thought-lefs  Agent  ;  and  that 
Chance  and  Nature  are  mere  empty  Names,  as  they  are  us'd 
*n  this  Occafisn,  relative  only  to  our  Ignorance. 

II.  It 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.        49 

Sc#.  5. 
II.  There  is  alfo  the  fame  Proba-  ^QQ^ 
bility,  that  in  any  one  Syftem  of  Mat-  Forte. 
ter  an  Undirected  Force  will  produce  a  re- 
gular Form,  as  any  one  given  irregular 
one,  of  the  fame  degree  of  Complication  : 
But  ftill  the  irregular  Forms  into  which 
any  Syftem  may  be  rang'd,  farpafs  in  multi- 
tude the  Regular,  as  Infinite  does  Unity  ; 
for  what  holds  in  one  fmall  Syftem  will  hold 
in  a  Thoufiand,  a  Million,  a  Univerfe,  with 
more  Advantage,  viz.  that  the  irregular 
Forms  poffible  infinitely  furpafs  the  Regu- 
lar. For  Inftance,  the  Area  of  an  Inch 
Square  is  capable  of  an  Infinity  of  regular 
Forms,  the  Equilateral  Triangle,  the 
Square,  the  'Pentagon,  Hexagon,  Hepta- 
gon, &c.  but  for  each  one  regular  Form, 
there  are  an  Infinity  of  Irregular,  as  an 
Infinity  of  Scalena  for  the  one  equilateral 
Triangle,  an  Infinity  of  Trapezia  for  the 
one  Square,  of  irregular  Pentagons  for  the 
one  Regular,  and  fo  on  :  and  therefore  ftp- 
pofing  any  one  Syftem  agitated  by  unde- 
Jlgning  Force,  it  is  infinitely  more  pro- 
bable that  it  will  refolve  itfelf  into  an  ir- 
regular Form,  than  a  regular.  Thus,  that 
a  Syftem  of  fix  Parts  upon  Agitation  fhall 
not  obtain  the  Form  of  a  regular  Hexagon, 
is  at  leaft  infinite  to  Unity  ;  and  the  more 
complex  we  make  the  Syftem,  the  greater 
is  the  hazard,  from  a  very  obvious  Reafon. 

E  We 


5  o         An  I N  Q.U  I R  Y  concerning 

Se<2.  5. 

</W  We  fee  this  confirm'd  by  our  conftant 
Experience,  that  Regularity  never  arifes 
from  any  undefigtfd  Force  of  ours  ;  and 
from  this  we  conclude,  that  wherever  there 
is  any  Regularity  in  the  difpofition  of  a 
Syftem  capable  of  many  other  Difpofiti- 
ons,  there  mult  have  been  'Defign  in  the 
Caufe  ;  and  the  Force  of  this  Evidence  in- 
creafes,  according  to  the  Multiplicity  of 
Parts  imploy'd. 

But  this  Conclufion  is  too  rafh,  unlels 
fome  further  Proof  be  introduced ;  and 
what  leads  us  into  it  is  this.  Men,  who 
have  a  Senfe  of  Beauty  in  Regularity \  are 
led  generally  in  all  their  Arrangements  of 
Bodys  to  ftudy  fome  kind  of  Regularity, 
and  feldom  ever  defign  Irregularity  ;  hence 
we  judge  the  fame  of  other  Beings  too, 
viz.  that  they  ftudy  Regularity,  and 
prefume  upon  Intention  in  the  Caufe 
wherever  we  fee  it,  making  Irregularity 
always  a  Preemption  of  Want  of  TDpfign : 
Whereas  if  other  Agents  have  different 
Senfes  of  Beauty,  or  if  they  have  no  Senfe 
of  it  at  all,  Irregularity  may  as  wrell  be 
defign'd  as  Regularity.  And  then  let  it  be 
cbferv'd,  that  in  this  Cale  there  is  juft  the 
fame  reafbn  to  conclude  Ttefign  in  the  Caufe 
from  any  one  irregular  Effedt,  as  from  a  re- 
gular one ;  for  fince  there  are  an  Infinity 
of  other  Forms  poffibie  as  well  as  this  irre- 
gular 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  5 1 

gular  one  produc'd,  and  fince  to  fuch  a  Sedt.  j, 
Being  *  void  of  a  Senfe  of  Beauty,  all  ^v^w 
Forms  are  as  to  its  own  Reliih  indifferent, 
and  all  agitated  Matter  meeting  muft  make 
fome  Form  or  other,  and  all  Forms ,  upon 
Suppofition  that  the  Force  is  apply'd  by 
an  Agent  void  of  a  Senfe  of  Beauty,  would 
equally  prove  "T>ejign  ;  it  is  plain  that  no 
one  Form  proves  it  more  than  another,  or 
can  prove  it  at  all ;  except  from  a  general 
metaphyfical  Confideration,  too  fabtile  to 
be  certain,  that  there  is  no  proper  Agent 
without  'Dejlgn  and  Intention,  and  that 
every  Effetl  flows  from  the  Intention  of 
ibme  Caufe. 

III.  This  however  follows  from  the  above  similar 
mention'd  Confiderations,  that  fuppofing  aF°rms^ 
Mafs  of  Matter  lurpaffing  a  cubic  k  Inch,  as  faM!* 

*  There  is  d  great  Difference  between  fuch  a  Being  as  is  hers, 
mention  'd,  and  a  Being  which  has  no  Intention  for  any  reafon 
whatfoever  to  produce  one  Form  more  than  another.  This  latter 
fort  of  Being,  as  to  the  prefent  Argument,  would  be  the  fame 
with  Chance,  but  not  the  former.  For  tho  a  Being  hasnofenfe 
0/ Beauty,  he  may  notwithjlanding  be  capable  0/ Defign,  and 
of  Intention  to  produce  regular  Forms  $  and  the  obfer-vation  of 
greater  Regularity  in  any  number  of  Effecls,  iha?i  could  be  ex- 
peeled  from  undirected  Force,  is  a  prefumption  of  Defign  and 
Intention  in  the  Caufe,  even  where  the  Caufe  is  fuppos'd  to 
have  no  fenfe  of  Beauty  in  fuch  Forms,  fin ce  perhaps  he  may 
have  other  Reafons  moving  him  to  chufe  fuch  Forms,  Thus 
fuppofing  the  D  e  1  t  y  no  way  necejfarily  pleased  with  Regu- 
larity, Uniformity,  or  Similarity  in  Bodys,  yet  there  may  be 
Reafons  moving  him  to  produce  fuch  Obj eels,  fuch  as  the  plea fing 
his  Creatures,  having  given  them  a  fenfe  of  Beauty  founded  on 
thefe  Quality s.     See  the  two  lafl  Paragraphs  of  the  lafi  Seclion. 

E  2  info 


5 1  An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t.  5.  infinite  of  the  fir  ft  Power  does  "Unity,  and 
L/VV/  that  this  whole  Mafs  were  Tome  way  deter- 
mined from  its  own  Nature  without  any  2>- 
fign  in  a  CW//2  (which  perhaps  is  fcarce 
poflible)  to  refolve  itfelf  into  the  folid 
Content  of  a  cubick  Inch,  and  into  a  prifi 
matick  Form  whofe  Bafe  fliould  always 
be  i  oi&fquare  Inch  ;  fuppofe  theie  Condi- 
tions determin'd,  and  all  others  left  to  undi- 
rected Force  ;  all  which  we  could  exped; 
from  undirected  Force  in  this  Cafe  would 
be  one  equilateral  Trifin,  or  two  perhaps  ; 
becaufe  there  are  an  Infinity  of  irregular 
Trifms  poffible  of  the  iame  Bafe,  and  folid 
Content  :  and  when  we  met  with  many 
fiich  Trifms,  we  muft  probably  conclude 
them  produc'd  by  cDefigny  fince  they  are 
more  than  could  have  been  expected  by 
the  Laws  of  Hazard. 

,  IV.  B  u  t  if  this  infinite  Mais  was  no 
way  determin'd  to  a  prifmatick  Form, 
we  could  only  exped  from  its  cafual 
Concourfe  one  ^Prifm  of  any  Kind,  fince 
there  is  an  Infinity  of  other  Solids  into 
which  the  Mais  might  be  refolv'd  ;  and 
if  we  found  any  great  number  of  Trifms^ 
we  fhould  have  reafon  to  prefume  T)e- 
fign  :  fo  that  in  a  Mais  of  Matter  as  in- 
finite of  the  firft  Power,  we  could  not 
from  any  Concourfe  or  Agitation  exped: 
with  any  good  ground  a  Body  of  any  gi- 
ven Dimenfions  or  Size,  and  of  any  given 

Form; 


Be\uty?  Order,  &c.  53 

Form;    fince  of  any  Dimenfion  there  areSedt.  5. 
infinite  Forms  poflible,   and  of  any  Form  ^WJ 
there  are  an  Infinity  of  Dimenfions  5  and  if 
we  found  feveral  Bodys  of  the  feme  Di- 
menfion and  Form,  we  jfhould  have  fo  much 
Preemption  for  "Deftgn. 

V.  There  is  one  trifling  Obje&ion 
which  may  perhaps  arife  from  the  crystal- 
lizing of  certain  Bodys,  when  the  Fluid  is 
evaporated  in  which  they  were  fvvimming  ; 
for  in  this  we  frequently  fee  regular  Forms 
arifing,  tho  there  is  nothing  fuppos'd  in  this 
Affair  but  an  undirected  Force  of  Attrac- 
tion. But  to  remove  this  Objection,  we 
need  only  confider,  that  we  have  good 
Reafon  to  believe,  that  the  fmalleft  Parti- 
eles  of  cry  ft  alii  z?d  Bodys  have  fix'd  regu- 
lar Forms  given  them  in  the  Conftitu- 
tion  of  Nature  ;  and  then  it  is  eafy  to 
conceive  how  their  Attractions  may  pro- 
duce regular  Forms :  but  unlefs  we  fup- 
pofe  fome  preceding  Regularity  in  the  Fi- 
gures of  attracting  Bodys,  they  can  never 
form  any  regular  Body  at  all.  And  hence 
we  fee  how  improbable  it  is,  that  the 
whole  Mafs  of  Matter,  not  only  in  this 
Globe,  but  in  all  the  fixed  Stars  known 
to  us  by  our  Eyes  or  GlafTes,  were  they 
a  thoufand  times  larger  than  our  Aftro- 
nomers  fuppofe,  could  in  any  Concourfe 
have  produced  any  Number  of  fimilar 
Bodys  Regular  or  Irregular. 

E  3  VI.  And 


5  4         -An  I N  QU  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sec».  j. 

<-<~^y  VI.  And  let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that 
tiomby'  there  are  many  Compofitions  of  Bodys 
chance,  which  the  fmalleft  Degree  of  "Defign  could 
¥*&*>  eafiiy  effe(a,  which  yet  we  would  in  vain 
exped  from  all  the  Powers  of  Chance 
-  or  undefign'd  Force,  after  an  Infinity  of 
Rencounters  ;  even  luppofing  a  Diflbluti- 
on  of  every  Form  except  the  regular 
one,  that  the  Parts  might  be  pfepar'd  for 
a  new  Agitation.  Thus,  foppofing  we 
could  expe£t  one  equilateral  Trifm  of  any 
given  Dimenfions  fhould  be  form'd  from 
undirected  Force,  in  an  Infinity  of  Mat- 
ter fome  way  determin'd  to  refblve  itfelf  in- 
to Bodys  of  a  given  folid  Content,  (which 
is  all  we  could  expert,  fince  it  is  infi- 
nite to  one  after  the  folid  Content  is  ob- 
tain'd,  that  the  Body  lhall  not  be  Trifi 
matte  al;  and  allowing  it  Trifmatical,  it 
is  infinite  to  one  that  it  fliall  not  be  E- 
quilateral :)  And  again,  fuppofing  another 
Infinity  of  Matter  determin'd  to  refblve 
itfelf  into  Tuhesy  of  Orifices  exactly  equal 
to  the  Bafes  of  the  former  Trifins,  it  is 
again  at  lead  as  the  fecond  Power  of  In- 
finite to  Unity,  that  not  one  of  theft 
Tubes  lhall  be  both  Trifmatick  and  E- 
quiangalar ;  and  then  if  the  Tube  were 
thus  form'd,  fo  as  to  be  exactly  capable 
of  receiving  one  of  the  Trifins  and  no 
more,  it  is  infinite  to  one  that  they  fliall 
never  meet  in  infinite  Space  \  and  iliould 

they 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  55 

they  meet,   it  is  infinite   to  one  that  the  Secft.  c 

Axes  of  the  Prifm  and  7^<?  ihall  never  ^v^ 

happen  in  the  fame  ftrait  Line ;  and  iup- 

pofing  they  did,  it  is  again  as  infinite  to 

three \  that  Angle  ihall  not  meet  Angle,  fo 

as  to  enter.     We  fee  then  how   infinitely 

improbable  it  is,  "  that  all  the  Powers  of 

"  Chance  in  infinite  Matter,  agitated  thro 

"  infinite  Ages,  could  ever  efTed:  this  fmall 

"  Compofition  of  a  Prijm  entering  a  Prifi 

16  matte k  Bore  ;    and,  that  all  our  hazard 

u  for  it  would  at  mod  be  but  as  three  is 

"  to  the  third  Power  of  Infinite"'     And 

yet  the  fmallefl  T)efign  could  eafily  effedt 

it. 

VII.  May  we  not  then  juftly  count  it 
altogether  abfurd,  and  next  to  an  abfolute 
ftri6t  ImfoJJtbility,  "  That  all  the  Powers 
"  of  undirected  Force  ihould  ever  effedl 
"  fuch  a  complex  Machine  as  the  mofl 
"  imperfed:  'Plant,  or  the  meaneft  Ani- 
"  maL  even  in  one  Inftance  ? "  for  the 
Improbability  jufl  increafes,  as  the  Com- 
plication of  Mechanifm  in  theft  natural 
Bodys  farpafles  that  Jlmfik  Combination 
above  mention'd. 

VIII.  Let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  "  That 
"  the  preceding  Reafoning  from  the  Fre- 
"  quency  oi  regular  Bodys  of  one  Form  in 
"  the  Vniver/e,  and  from  the  Combina- 
"  tions  of  various  Bodys,  is  intirely  inde- 

E  4  "  "  pendent 


5 6         An  I  N QU  I R  Y  concerning 

Seel.  y. <c  pendent  on  any  Perception  of  Beauty  ; 

v^v^  M  and  would  equally  prove  Defign  in  the 
"  Caufe,  altho  there  were  no  ite/V/g-  which 
"  perceiv'd  Beauty  in  any  Form  what- 
"  foever  :"  for  it  is  in  fliort  this,  "  That 
*■  the  recurring  of  any  Effefi  oftner 
"  than  the  Laws  of  Hazard  determine, 
"  gives  cPrefumption  of  cDeflgn  ;  and, 
"  That  Combinations  which  no  undejigtfd 
"  Force  could  give  us  reafon  to  expect, 
"  muft  necejfarily  prove  the  fame  ;  and 
"  that  with  fuperior  probability,  as  the 
**  multitude  of  Cafes  in  which  the  con- 
"  trary  might  happen,  furpafs  all  the 
' '  Cafes  in  which  this  could  happen  : " 
which  appears  to  be  in  the  fimpleft  Cafes 
at  leaft  as  Infinite  does  Unity.  And  the 
frequency  of  fimilar  irregular  Forms,  or 
exact  Combinations  of  them,  is  an  equal 
Argument  of  T)efign  in  the  Caufe,  fince 
the  Similarity,  or  exact  Combinations  of  «r% 
regular  Forms,  are  as  little  to  be  expected 
from  all  the  Powers  of  undirected  Force, 
as  any  fort  whatfbever. 

IX.  To  bring  this  nearer  to  fbmething 
like  a  Theorem,  altho  the  Idea  of  Infinite 
be  troublefom  enough  to  manage  in  Reafo- 
ning.  The  Powers  of 'Chance,  with  infinite 
Matter  m  infinite  j4ges,  may  anfwer  Ha- 
zards as  the  fifth  Power  of  Infinite  and 
no  more  :  thus  the  Quantity  of  Matter 
r^iay  be  conceiv'd  as  the  third  Power  of 


Beauty,  Ordee,  &c.  57 

Infinite  and  no  more,  the  various  Degrees  Sedt  j. 
of  Force  may  make  another  Power  of  In-  ^v>^ 
finite,  and  the  Number  of  Rencounters  may 
make  the  fifth.  But  this  laft  only  holds  on 
Suppofition,  that  after  every  Rencounter 
there  is  no  Cohefion,  but  all  is  diflblv'd  again 
for  a  new  Concourfe,  except  in  fimilar 
Forms  or  exalt  Combinations  ;  which  Sup- 
pofition is  entirely  groundlefs,  fince  we  fee 
dijfimilar  B&dys  cohering  as  ftrongly  as 
any,  and  rude  Majfes  more  than  any  Com- 
binations. Now  to  produce  any  given 
Body,  in  a  given  Place  or  Situation,  and 
of  given  Dimenfions,  or  Shape,  the  Ha- 
zards of  the  contrary  are,  one  Power  of 
Infinite  at  lead  to  obtain  the  Place  or  Si- 
tuation ;  when  the  Situation  is  obtain'd, 
the  /olid  Content  requires  another  Power 
of  Infinite  to  obtain  it ;  the  Situation  and 
Solidity  obtain'd  require,  for  accomplilhing 
the  fimpleji  given  Shape,  at  lead  the  other 
three  Powers  of  Infinite.  For  inflance, 
Jet  the  Shape  be  a  four-fided  Trifin  or 
Parallelopiped  ;  that  the  Surfaces  fhould 
be  Planes  requires  one  Power;  that  they 
fhould  be  Parallel  in  this  Cafe,  or  in- 
clhid  in  any  given  Angle  in  any  other  Cafe, 
requires  another  Power  of  Infinite  ;  and 
that  they  fhould  be  in  any  given  Ratio  to 
each  other,  requires  at  leaft  the  third 
Power :  for  in  each  of  thele  Heads  there 
is  ftill  an  Infinity  at  leaft  of  other  Cafes 
poffible  befide  the  one  given.    So  that  all 

the 


5  8         jin  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  y.  the  Powers  of  Chance  could  only  produce 
C/VNJ  perhaps  one  Body  of  every  Ampler  Shape 
or  Size  at  mojt,  and  this  is  all  we  could 
exped:  :  we  might  expedt  one  Pyramid, 
or  Cube*  or  Pri/m  perhaps  ;  but  when  we 
increafe  the  Conditions  requir'd,  the  Prof- 
ped:  mult  grow  more  improbable,  as  in 
more  complex  Figures,  and  in  all  Combi- 
nations of  Bodys,  and  in  fimilar  Species, 
which  we  never  could  reafonably  hope  from 
Chance  ;  and  therefore  where  we  fee  them, 
we  mufl:  certainly  afcribe  them  to  ¥)efign. 

comhma-       X.  T  h  e  Combinations  of  regular  Forms* 

UrTui°Ir "'  or  °^  *rre&ular  ones  exa&ly  adapted  to 
Forms,  e-  each  other,  require  fuch  vaji  Powers  of 
T*lVm~  Infinite  to  effect  them,  and  the  Hazards 
of  the  contrary  Forms  are  fo  infinitely 
numerous,  that  all  Probability  or  Pojfi- 
bility  of  their  being  accomplished  by  Chance 
feems  quite  to  vanilh.  Let  us  apply  the 
Cafes  in  Art.  vi.  of  this  SeEtion  about  the 
Prifm  and  Tube,  to  our  fimpleft  Machines, 
fuch  as  a  pair  of  Wheels  of  our  ordinary 
Carriages ;  each  Circular,  Spokes  equal  in 
length,  thicknefs,  jhape  ;  the  Wheels  fet 
"Parallel,  the  Axle-tree  fix'd  in  the  Nave 
of  both,  and  fecur'd  from  coming  out  at  ei- 
ther End  :  Now  the  Cafes  in  which  the  con- 
trary might  have  happen'd  from  undireElea 
Concourfes,  were  there  no  more  requir'd 
than  what  is  juft  now  mention'd,  muft  a- 
mount  in  Multitude  to  a  Power  of  Infinite 

equal 


pjfibk. 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         59 

equal  to  every  Circumftance  requir'd.    What  Sett.  5. 
Ihall  we  fay  then  of  a  Tlant,  a  Tree,  an  L^V^J 
Animal,  a  jl/40,  with  yfo  A  multitudes  of 
adapted  VefTels,   y?/^A  Articulations,   In- 
fertions  of  Mufcles,  Diffufion  of  Veins, 
Artery s,  Nerves  ?   The  Improbability  that 
fuch  Machines  fhould  be  the  Effed  of  Chance, 
muft   be  near  the  infinitefimal  Power  of 
Infinite  to  Unity. 

XI.  Further,  were  all  the  former 
Reafbning  from  Similarity  of  Forms  and 
Combinations  groundlefs,  and  could  Chance 
give  us  ground  to  exped:  fuch  Forms,  with 
exadt  Combination,  yet  we  could  only  pro- 
mife  ourfelves  one  of  thefe  Forms  among  an 
Infinity  of  others.  When  we  fee  then  fuch 
a  multitude  of  Individuals  of  a  Species, 
Jimilar  to  each  other  in  a  vaft  number  of 
Parts  ;  and  when  wrefee  in  each  Individual, 
the  correfponding  Members  fb  exadtly  like 
each  other,  what  poflible  room  is  there  left 
for  queftioning  TDefign  in  the  Univerfe  ? 
None  but  the  bareft  ToJJibility  againft  an  in- 
conceivably great  Trobability,  f urpaffing  e- 
very  thing  which  is  not  flritt  Ttemonfiration. 

XII.  This  Argument,  as  has  been  al- 
ready obferv'd*,  is  quite  abftra&ed  from 
any  Senfe  of  Beauty  in  any  particular  Form ; 
for  the  exati  Similarity  of  a  hundred  or  a 

?  See  above,  4rt.  yiil 

thou* 


60  An  I N  QU I RY  concerning 

Se<2.  5,  thoufand  Trapezia,  proves  "Defign  as  well 
V/YVJ  as  the  Similarity  of  Squares,  fince  both 
are  equally  above  all  the  Powers  of  undi- 
rected Force  or  Chance,  as  the  hundredth 
or  thoufandth  Power  of  Infinite  furpafTes 
Unity  ;  and  what  is  above  the  Powers  of 
Chance^  muft  give  us  proportionable  Pre- 
emption for  cDefign. 

Thus,  allowing  that  a  Leg,  or  Arm,  or 
Eye,  might  have  been  the  Effed;  of  Chance *, 
(which  was  flievvn  to  be  tnoft  ahfitrd,  and 
next  to  abfblutely  impojfible)  that  it  would 
not  have  a  corresponding  i>£,  ^r^,  Zy^, 
exa&Jy  fimilar,  muft  be  a  hazard  of  a 
Power  of 'Infinite  proportion'd  to  the  Com- 
plicacion  of  Parts  ;  for  in  Proportion  to 
this  is  the  multitude  of  Cafes  increas'd,  in 
which  it  would  not  have  a  correfponding 
Member  fimilar  :  fo  that  allowing  twenty 
or  thirty  Parts  in  fuch  a  Structure,  it  would 
be  as  the  twentieth  or  thirtieth  Power  of 
Infinite  to  Unity,  that  the  correlponding 
Part  fliould  not  be  fimilar.  What  ihall  we 
fay  then  of  the  fimilar  Forms  of  a  whole 
Species  ? 

Grofssiml-      XIII.  I  f  it  be  obje&ed,  "  That  natu- 

lantyby    «  rai  Bodys  are  not  exactly  fimilar,  but 

tojpbu.  only  grojly  fo  to  our  Senies  ;    as  that  a 

"  Vein,  an  Artery^  a  i?0/^  is  not  perhaps 

"  exaftly  fimilar  to  its  Correlpondent  in 

"  the  fame  Animal,  tho  it  appears  fo  to 

"  our 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.  61 

"  our   Senfes,    which  judge  only  of  the  Sedt.  y. 

"  Bulk,  and  do  not  difcern  the  fmall  con-  ^v^ 

"  ftituent  Parts  ;  and  that  in  the  feveral  In- 

"  dividuals  of  a  Species  the  cDiJJimilarity 

"  is  always  fenfible,  often  in  the  internal 

"  Structure,  and  often,  nay  always  in  the 

"  external  Appearance."     To  remove  this 

Obje&ion  it   will    be  fufficient   to   fliew, 

"  That  the  multitude  of  Cafes  w7herein  fen- 

w  fihle  cDijfimilitude  cou'd  have  happen'd, 

?  are  (till  infinitely  more  than  all  the  Cafes 

"  in  which  fenfible  Similitude  might ; "  ib 

that  the  fame  Reafoning  holds  from  fenfible 

Similarity,    as   from    the  mathematically 

exaB  :  And  again,  "  That  the  Cafes  of 

M  grofDiJfimilarity  do  in  the  lame  man- 

"  ner  furpafs  the  Cafes  of  grofs  Similarity 

u  poflible,  as  infinite  does  one?' 

XIV.  To  prove  both  thefe  Affertions, 
let  us  confider  a  fimple  Inftance.  Suppofe 
a  Trapezium  of  a  foot  Square  in  Area 
Ihould  appear  grofly  fimilar  to  another, 
while  no  one  fide  differs,  by  ~  of  an  Inch  ; 
or  no  Angle  in  one  furpaffes  the  corre- 
fponding  one  in  the  other  above  ten  Mi- 
nutes :  now  this  tenth  of  an  Inch  is  infi- 
nitely divifible,  as  are  alio  the  ten  Minutes, 
fo  that  the  Cafes  of  infenfihle  Tlijfimilarity 
under  apparent  Similarity  are  really  Infi- 
nite. But  then  it  is  alfo  plain  that  there 
are  an  Infinity  of  different  fenfibly  diffimi- 
lar  Trapezia^  even  of  the  fame  Area,  ac- 
2  cording 


6z         An  I N  QJU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  5.  cording  as  we  vary  a  Side  by  one  Tenth, 
v^v^  two  Tenths,  three  Tenths,  and  fo  on,  and 
vary  the  Angles  and  another  Side  Co  as  to 
keep  the  Area  equal.  Now  in  each  of 
theie  infinite  Degrees  of  fenfible  'DiJJimili- 
tilde  the  feveral  Tenths  are  infinitely  divi- 
fible  as  well  as  in  the  firft  Cafe  ;  fo  that 
the  multitude  of  fenfible  (DiJfimilaritys  are 
to  the  multitude  of  infienfible  cDiJfimilaritys 
under  apparent  Refemblance,  ftill  as  they?- 
cond  Power  of  Infinite  to  the  firft,  or  as 
Infinite  to  Unity.  And  then  how  vaftly 
greater  muft  the  Multitude  be,  of  all  poffi- 
ble  fenfible  "Dijfimilaritys  in  fiich  complex 
Bodys  as  Legs,  Arms,  Eyes,  Artery  s> 
Veins,  Skeletons  ? 

XV.  As  to  the  cDijfimilaritys  of  Ani- 
mals of  the  fame  Species,  it  is  in  the  fame 
manner  plain,  that  the  poffible  Cafes  of 
grofs  cDiJfimilarity  are  Infinite ;  and  then 
every  Cafe  of  grofs  'Diffimilarity  contains 
alfo  all  the  Cafes  of  infienfible  T)ijfimilarzty. 
Thus,  if  wre  would  count  all  Animals  of  a 
Species  grofiy  fimilar,  while  there  was  no 
Limb  which  in  Length  or  Diameter  did 
exceed  the  ordinary  Shape  by  above  a  third 
of  the  Head  ;  it  is  plain  that  there  are  an 
Infinity  of  grofs  T>ijfimilaritys  poffible, 
and  then  in  each  of  thefe  Cafes  of  grofs 
'Diffimilarity,  there  are  an  Infinity  of  Cafes 
of  nicer  cDijfirnilarity,  fince  -f  of  the  Head 
may  be  infinitely  divided.  To  take  a  low 
a  but 


Beauty,  OrdeS,  &c.        63 

but  eafy  Inftance  ;  two  Cockle-Shells  which  Sett,  j. 
fitted  each  other  naturally,  may  have  an  L^v*N# 
Infinity  of  infenfible  'Differences,  but  (till 
there  are  an  Infinity  of  poffible  fenfible 
"Differences ;  and  then  in  any  one  of  the 
fenfibly  different  Forms,  there  may  be  the 
lame  Infinity  of  infenfible  Differences  be- 
fide  the  fenfible  one  :  So  that  ftill  the  ha- 
zard for  even  grofs  Similarity  from  Chance 
is  Infinite  to  one,  and  this  always  increafes 
by  a  Power  of  Infinite  for  every  diftindt 
Member  of  the  Animal,  in  which  even  grofs 
Similarity  is  retain'd  ;  fince  the  Addition 
of  every  Member  or  Part  to  a  complex  Ma- 
chine, makes  a  new  Infinity  of  Cales,  in 
which  fenfible  Diffimilarity  may  happen  ; 
and  this  Infinity  combined  with  the  infinite 
Cafes  of  the  former  Parts,  raifes  the  Ha- 
zard by  a  Power  of  Infinite. 

Now  this  may  fufficiently  fhew  us  the 
Abiurdity  of  the  Cartefian  or  Epicurean 
Hypothefis,  even  granting  their  Tofinlatnm 
of  tmdireffed  Force  imprefs'd  on  infinite 
Matter  ;  and  feems  almoft  a  Demonftration 
of  Defign  in  the  Univer/e. 

XVI.  One  Objection  more  remains  to 
be  remov'd,  viz.  "  That  fome  imagine, 
"  this  Argument  may  hold  better  a  Triori 
**  than  a  Softer  tori  ;  that  is,  we  have 
"  better  Reafon  to  believe,  when  we  fee  a 
"  Caufe  about  to  aft,  without  Knowledge, 

"  that 


An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

that  he  will  not  attain  any  given,  or  de- 
fir'd  End ;  than  we  have  on  the  other 
hand  to  believe,  when  we  fee  the  End 
"  actually    attain'd,    that   he  adted    with 
Cl  Knowledge  :   Thus,  fay  they,  when  a 
"  particular  Perfbn  is    about   to   draw  a 
"  Ticket  in  a  Lottery \  where  there  is  but 
"  one  Trize  to  a  thouland  Blanks,  it  is 
M  highly  probable  that  he  fliall  draw    a 
"  Blank  ;  but  luppofe  we  have  feen  him 
"  actually  draw  for  himfelf  the  Trize,  we 
"  have  no  ground  to  conclude  that  he  had 
"  Knowledge  or  Art  to  accomplish  this 
"  End."    But  the  Anfwer  is  obvious  :   In 
fuch  Contrivances  we  generally  have,  from 
the  very  Circumftances  of  the  Lottery,  ve- 
ry flrong  moral  Arguments,  which  almoft  de- 
monftrate  that  Art  can  have  no  place ;  fb 
that  a  Probability  of  a  thoufand  to  one^  does 
not  lurmount  thofe  Arguments :  But  let  the 
Probability  be  increas'd,  and  it  will  loon 
lurmount  all  Arguments  to  the  contrary. 
For  inftance,  If  we  faw  a  Man  ten  times 
lucceffively  draw  Prizes,  in  a  Lottery  where 
there  were  but  ten  Prizes  to  ten  thoufand 
Blanks,  I  fancy  few  would  queftion  whe- 
ther he  us'd  Art  or  not :  much  lefs  would 
we  imagine  it  were  Chance,  if  we  law  a 
Man  draw  for  his  own  Gain  fucceffively  a 
hundred,  or  a  thoufand  Prizes,  from  among 
a  proportionably  greater  number  of  Blanks. 
Now  in  the  Works  of  Nature  the  Cafe  is 
entirely  different:  we  have  not  the  leaft 

Ar- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         6j 

Argument  againft  Art  or  T>efign.  An  in-  Sedt.  5. 
telligent  Caufe  is  furely  at  leaft  as  probable  ^^r^ 
a  Notion  as  Chance,  general  Force,  Cona- 
tus  ad  Motum,  or  the  Clinamen  Principio- 
rum,  to  account  for  any  Effect  whatfbever  : 
And  then  all  the  Regularity,  Combinations, 
Similaritys  of  Species,  are  io  many  De- 
monftrations,  that  there  was  ^DeJFgn  and 
Intelligence  in  the  Cause  of  this  Uni- 
verfe  :  Whereas  in  fair  Lotterys,  all  Art 
in  drawing  is  made,  if  not  actually  im- 
poflible,  at  leaft  highly  improbable. 

XVII.  Let    it   be  here  obferv'd  alfo, Jnprf** 

44  That  a  rational  Agent  may  be  capable  [y  does  not 
"  of  impreffing  Force  without  intending  w7m  of 
44  to  produce  any  particular  Form,  andDek^ 
"  of  defignedly  producing  irregular  or 
•*  dijjimilar  Forms,  as  well  as  regular 
4<  and  Jimilar  :  "  And  hence  it  follows, 
44  That  altho  all  the  Regularity,  Combi- 
44  nation  and  Similarity  in  the  Unrverfi, 
"  are  Preemptions  of  'Defign,  yet  Irre- 
44  gularity  is  no  Prefumption  of  the  con- 
44  trary  ;  unlefs  we  iuppofe  that  the  Agent 
44  is  determin'd  from  a  Senle  of  B?auty 
44  always  to  adt  regularly,  and  delight  in 
44  Similarity  ;  and  that  he  can  have  no 
46  other  inconfiftent  Motive  of  Acftion :  " 
Which  laft  is  plainly  abfurd.  We  do  not 
Want  in  the  Univerfe  many  Effedts  which 
feem  to  have  been  left  to  the  general  Laws 
of  Motion  upon  fbme  great  Imptlfe,  and 

F  have 


66         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  5.  have  many  Inftances  where  Similarity  has 
vyv  been  plainly  defign'd  in  fome  relpe&s,  and 
probably  neglected  in  others  ;  or  even 
"Dijfimilarity  defign'd.  Thus  we  fee  the 
general  exaff  Refemblance  between  the 
two  Eyes  of  1110ft  perfbns  ;  and  yet  per- 
haps no  other  third  Eye  in  the  World  is  ex- 
actly like  them.  We  lee  a  grof  Confor- 
mity of  lhape  in  all  Perfbns  in  innumera- 
ble Parts,  and  yet  no  two  Individuals  of 
any  Species  are  undiftinguilhable  ;  which 
perhaps  is  intended  for  valuable  Purpoles  to 
the  whole  Species. 

wifdom,  XVIII.  Hitherto  the  Proof  amounts 
prudence*  only  to  ^Defign  or  Intention  barely,  in 
oppofition  to  blind  Force  or  Chance  ; 
and  we  lee  the  Proof  of  this  is  inde- 
pendent on  the  arbitrary  Conftitution  of 
our  internal  Senfe  of  Beauty.  Beauty 
is  often  iuppos'd  an  Argument  of  more 
than  <DeJign,  to  wit,  Wifdom  and  *Pru- 
dence  in  the  Caufe.  Let  us  enquire  alio 
into  this. 

Wisdom  denotes  the  fur  filing  of  the 
befi  Ends  by  the  befl  Means  ;  and  there- 
fore before  we  can  from  any  Effed:  prove 
the  Caufe  to  be  wife,  we  mull  know  what 
is  befl  to  the  Caufe  or  Agent.  Among  men 
who  have  pleature  in  contemplating  rC  ii- 
formity,  the  Beauty  of  Effects  is  an  Argu- 
ment 01  Wiidom,  becaufe  this  is  Good  to 

them  5 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  67 

them  ;  but  the  fame  Argument  would  not  Se£t  5. 
hold  as  to  a  Being  void  of  this  Setife  of  l^V^J 
Beauty.  And  therefore  the  Beauty  appa- 
rent to  us  in  Nature,  will  not  of  itfelf  prove 
Wifdom  in  the  Caufe,  unlefs  this  Caufe,  or 
Author  of  Nature  be  fuppos'd  Bene- 
volent ;  and  then  indeed  the  Happinefs 
of  Mankind  is  defirable  or  Good  to  the 
Supreme  Cause  ;  and  that  Form  which 
pleafes  us,  is  an  Argument  of  his  Wifdom. 
And  the  Strength  of  this  Argument  is  in- 
creafed  always  in  proportion  to  the  Degree 
of  Beauty  produc'd  in  Nature,  and  expos'd 
to  the  View  of  any  rational  Agent ;  fince 
upon  fuppofition  of  a  benevolent  Deity, 
all  the  apparent  Beauty  produc'd  is  an  Evi- 
dence of  the  Execution  of  a  Benevolent 
'Defign,  to  give  him  the  Plealures  of 
Beauty. 

But  what  more  immediately  proves  Wif- 
dom is  this  ;  when  we  fee  any  Machine 
With  a  vaft  Complication  of  Parts  a&ually 
obtaining  an  End,  we  juftly  conclude, 
"  That  fince  this  could  not  have  been  the 
"  Effed:  of  Chance,  it  muft  have  been  m- 
"  tended  for  that  End,  which  is  obtain'd 
"  by  it  ;"  and  then  the  Ends  or  Inten- 
tions, being  in  part  known,  the  Compli- 
cation of  Organs,  and  their  nice  Difpofi- 
tion  adapted  to  this  End,  is  an  Evidence 
*'  of  a  comprehenfive  large  Underjianding 
11  in  the  Caufe,  according  to  the  Multi- 
F  2  "  plicity 


68         An  I N  QU  I R  Y  concerning 

Sett,  j. "  pliciry  of  Parts,   and  the  Appofitenefs 

{•YVj  "  of  their  Stru&ure,    even  when  we  do 

"  not  know  the  Intention  of  the  Whole'1 

Gmerai  XIX.  T  h  e  r  e  is  another  kind  of  Beauty 
canfes.  a]fo  which  is  ftjii  pleafing  to  our  Senfe,  and 
from  which  we  conclude  Wifdom  in  the 
Caufe  as  well  as  Defign,  and  that  is, 
when  we  fee  many  ufeful  or  beautiful  Ef- 
fects flowing  from  one  general  Caufe. 
There  is  a  very  good  Reafon  for  this  Con- 
clufion  among  Men.  Interejl  muft  lead 
Beings  of  limited  Powers,  who  are  un- 
capable  of  a  great  diverfity  of  Operations, 
and  diftra&ed  by  them,  to  chufe  this  fru- 
gal Oeconomy  of  their  Forces,  and  to  look 
upon  fuch  Management  as  an  Evidence  of 
Wifdom  in  other  Beings  like  themfelves. 
Nor  is  this  Ipeculative  Reafon  all  which  in- 
fluences them,  for  even  befide  this  Con- 
federation of  Interejl \  they  are  determin'd 
by  a  Senfe  of  Beauty  where  that  Reafon 
does  not  hold  ;  as  when  we  are  judging  of 
the  Productions  of  other  Agents  about 
whofe  Oeconomy  we  are  not  lollicitous. 
Thus,  who  does  not  approve  of  it  as  a 
Perfedion  in  Clock-work,  that  three  or  four 
Motions  of  the  Hour,  Minute,  and  fcond 
Hands,  zn&monthlycPlate,  fhould  ariie  from 
one  Spring  or  Weight,  rather  than  from 
three,  or  four  Springs,  or  Weights,  in  a 
very  Compound  Machine,  which  Ihould 
perform  the  fame  Effedts,  and  anfwer  all 

the 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  69 

the  fame  Purpofes  with  equal  exadlnefs  ?  Secft.  5. 
Now  the  Foundation  of  this  Beauty  plain-  \-ryv 
ly  appears  to  be  Uniformity  or  ^nity  of 
Caufe  amidft  "Diverfity  of  Effects. 

XX.  We  fhall  *  hereafter  offer  fome  General 
Reafons,  why  the  Author  of  Nature Laus 
may  chufe  to  operate  in  this  manner  by 
General  Laws  and  'Univerfal  extenjtve 
Caujes9  altho  the  Realbn  juft  now  men- 
tion'd  does  not  hold  with  an  Almighty 
Being.  This  is  certain,  That  we  have 
fome  of  the  mofl  delightful  Inftances  of 
^Dniverfal  Caufes  in  the  IVorks  of  Nature, 

and  that  the  mofl  ftudious  men  in  thefe 
Subje&s  are  fo  delighted  with  the  Obfer- 
vation  of  them,  that  they  always  look 
upon  them  as  Evidences  of  Wifdo?n  in  the 
Adminiftration  of  Nature,  from  a  Sense 
of  Beauty. 

XXI.  T  h  e  wonderfully  fimple  Mecha- 
nijm  which  performs  all  Animal  Motions, 
was  mention'd  \  already  ;  nor  is  that  of 
the  inanimate  Parts  of  Nature  lefs  admi- 
rable. How  innumerable  are  the  Effects  of 
that  one  Principle  of  Heat,  derived  to  us 
from  the  Sun,  which  is  not  only  delight- 
ful to  our  Sight  and  Feeling,  and  the 
Means  of  difcerning  Objects,  but  is  the 
Caufe  of  Rains,  Springs,  Rivers,  Winds, 

*  See  the  laft  Setfion.  $  See  above,  .Sett.  ii.  Art.  S. 

F  2  and 


7°         An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  5 .  and  the  univerfal  Caufe  of  Vegetation  I 
V^V^-/  The  uniform  'Principle  of  Gravity  pre- 
ferves  at  once  the  Tlanets  in  their  Orbits, 
gives  Cohefion  to  the  Parts  of  each  Globe, 
and  Stability  to  Mountains,  Hills,  and 
artificial  Structures ;  it  raifes  the  JV*z  in 
Tides,  and  finks  them  again,  and  reftrains 
them  in  their  Channels  ;  it  drains  the  Earth 
of  its  fuperfluous  Moifture,  by  Rivers ;  it 
raifes  the  Vapours  by  its  Influence  on  the 
Air,  and  brings  them  down  again  in  Rains  ; 
it  gives  an  uniform  Prejfure  to  our  At- 
mofphere,  neceflary  to  our  Bodys  in  gene- 
ral, and  more  efpecially  to  Infpiration  in 
Breathing  ;  and  furnifhes  us  with  an  uni- 
verfal Movement \  capable  of  being  ap- 
ply'd  in  innumerable  Engines.  How  in- 
comparably more  beautiful  is  this  Struc- 
ture, than  if  we  fuppos'd  fo  many  diftinfl; 
Volitions  in  the  Deity,  producing  every 
particular  Effe6t,  and  preventing  fbme  of 
the  accidental  Evils  which  cafually  flow 
from  the  general  Law  !  We  may  raflily 
imagine  that  this  latter  manner  of  Opera- 
tion might  have  been  more  ufeful  to  us  ; 
and  it  would  have  been  no  diftra&ion  to 
Omnipotence  :  But  then  the  great  Beauty 
had  been  loft,  and  there  had  been  no 
more  Pleafiire  in  the  Contemplation  of 
this  Scene,  which  is  now  fo  delightful. 
One  would  rather  chufe  to  run  the  ha- 
zard of  its  cafiial  Evils,  than  part  with 
that  harmonious  Form  which  has  been  an 
3  un- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  71 

unexhaufted  Source  of  Delight  to  the  fuc-  Seft.  5. 
ceflive  Spe&ators  in  all  Ages.  l/~vnj 

XXII.  Hence  we  fee,  "  That  how-  Mirac'es. 
44  ever  Miracles  may  prove  the  Superin- 
"  tendency  of  a  voluntary  Agent,  and 
44  that  the  'Vniv.erfe  is  not  guided  by  A/i?- 
44  cejjity  or  i*1^,  yet  /7^  Mind  mud 
44  be  se#v&&  and  inadvertent,  which  needs 
44  them  to  confirm  the  Belief  of  a  IVife 
44  and  Good  Deity;  fince  the  deviation 
44  from  general  Laws,  unlefs  upon  very 
"  extraordinary  Occafions,  muft  be  a  pre- 
44  fumption  of  Inconftancy  and  Weak- 
44  nefs,  rather  than  of  ft  eddy  Wifdom  and 
44  Tower,  and  muft  weaken  the  beft  Ar- 
44  guments  we  can  have  for  the  Sagacity 
44  and  Tower  of  the  univerfal  Mind." 


SECT. 


72         An  INQUIRY  concerning 


Sea.  6. 


Pain. 


SECT.     VI. 

Of  the  Univerfality  of  the  Senfe  of 
Beauty  among  Aien. 

internal  I.  T  X  7  E  before  *  infinuated,  "  That 
senfi  not  yy  <<  a\\  Beauty  has  a  relation  to 
"(Hate™*'  "  fomo.  perceiving  Powers"  and  confe- 
ss of  quently  fince  we  know  not  how  great  a 
Variety  of  Senfes  there  may  be  among  A- 
nimals,  there  is  no  Form  in  Nature  con- 
cerning which  we  can  pronounce,  "  That 
"  it  has  no  Beauty  ;"  for  it  may  ftill 
pleafe  fome  perceiving  Tower.  But  our 
Inquiry  is  confin'd  to  Men  ;  and  before  we 
examine  the  Univerfality  of  this  Senfe  of 
Beauty,  or  their  agreement  in  approving 
Uniformity,  it  may  be  proper  to  confider, 
"  whether,  as  the  other  Senfes  which  give 
"  us  Pleaftire  do  aifb  give  us  Pain,  fb  this 
"  Senfe  of  Beauty  does  make  fbme  Objedts 
"  difagreeable  to  us,  and  the  occafion  of 
"  Pain." 

That  many  Obje&s  give  no  pleafure to 
our  Senfe  is  obvious,  many  are  certainly 
void  of  Beauty  :  But  then  there  is  no 
Form  which  feems  necefTarily  difagreeable 
of  itfelf,   when  we  dread  no  other   Evil 

*  See  above  Seft.  i.  Art,  17 '.  Sect.  iy.  Art.  j. 

from 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  75 

from  it,  and  compare  it  with  nothing  better  Sedt  d. 
of  the  Kind.  Many  Objects  are  naturally  ^v^ 
diipleafing,  and  diftafteful  to  our  external 
Senfes,  as  well  as  others  pleafing  and  agree- 
able ;  as  Smells,  Tajtes,  and  fome  feparate 
Sounds  :  but  as  to  our  Senfe  of  Beauty,  no 
Compofition  of  Obje&s  which  give  not 
unpleafant  fimple  Ideas,  feems  pofitively 
unpleafant  or  painful  of  it  felf,  had  we 
never  obferv'd  any  thing  better  of  the  Kind. 
^Deformity  is  only  the  abfence  of  Beauty \ 
or  deficiency  in  the  Beauty  expelled  in  any 
Species  :  Thus  bad  Mufick  pleafes  Rujiicks 
who  never  heard  any  better,  and  the  fineft 
Ear  is  not  offended  with  tuning  of  Inftru- 
ments  if  it  be  not  too  tedious,  where  no 
Harmony  is  exped:ed  ;  and  yet  much  final- 
ler  cDijfonancy  fhall  offend  amidft  the  Per- 
fbrmance,  where  Harmony  is  expected.  A 
rude  Heap  of  Stones  is  no  way  offenfive 
to  one  who  fhall  be  difpleas'd  with  Irregu- 
larity in  Architecture,  where  Beauty  was 
expected.  And  had  there  been  a  Species 
of  that  Form  which  we  call  now  ugly  or 
deform' d>  and  had  we  never  ften  or  expec- 
ted greater  Beauty,  we  Ihould  have  receiv'd 
no  difgufl  from  it,  altho  the  Pleafure  wTould 
not  have  been  fo  great  in  this  Form  as  in 
thofe  we  now  admire.  Our  Senfe  of  Beau- 
ty feems  defign'd  to  give  us  pofitive  Plea- 
lure,  but  not  pofitive  Pain  or  Dilguft,  any- 
further  than  what  arifes  from  difappoint- 
ment. 

II  There 


74        ^n  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  6. 

l/VXJ       II.    There    are    indeed    many  Faces 

jipprria-     which       t   firft    yie         are         t  raifc    Difl 

x>i/?/^e      like ;  but  this  is  generally  not  from  any 
fromAf-  pofitive  Deformity  which  of  it  felf  is  pofi- 
rfifoas.    tively  difpleafing,  but  either  from  want  of 
expected  Beauty,  or  much  more  from  their 
carrying  fome  natural  indications  of  moral- 
ly bad'Di/pofitions,  which  we  all  acquire 
a  Faculty  of  difcerning  in  Countenances, 
Airs,  and  Gejiures.     That  this  is  not  oc- 
cafion'd  by    any  Form  pofitively  difguft- 
ing,  will  appear  from  this,    That  if  upon 
long  acquaintance  we  are  lure  of  finding 
fweetnefs  of  Temper,  Humanity  and  Cheer- 
fulnefs,  altho  the  bodily  Form  continues, 
it  fhall  give  us  no  Difguft  or  Difpleafure  ; 
whereas  if  any  thing  was  naturally  dis- 
agreeable,  or  the  occafion  of  Pain,  or  po- 
fitive Diftafte,    it  would  always  continue 
fb,  even  altho  the  Averfion  we  might  have 
toward  it  were  counterballanc'd  by  other 
Confiderations.     There  are  Horrors  rais'd 
by  lome  Objects,  which  are  only  the  Effed: 
of  Fear  for  our  felves,  or  Companion  to- 
ward others,  when  either  Reafon,  or  fome 
foolifh  Ajfociation  of  Ideas,  makes  us  ap- 
prehend Danger,  and  not  the  Effed:  of  any 
thing  in  the    Form  it  felf:    for   w7e    find 
that   moft  of  thole  Obje&s  which  excite 
Horror  at  firft,  when  Experience  or  Rea- 
fon has  remov'd  the   Fear,   may  become 
the    occafions  of  Pleafiire  ;    as  ravenous 

Beajfs, 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         75 

Beafts,  a  temp  eft  uous  Sea,  a  craggy  Treci-  Se<a.  <$. 
pice,  a  dark  jhady  Valley.  \y^r^j 

III.  We  fhall  fee  *  hereafter,    <{  That  AffocUtU 
"  Ajfociations    of   Ideas    make    Obje&s om' 

"  pleafant,  and  delightful,  which  are  not 
u  naturally  apt  to  give  any  fuch  Plea- 
"  fures  ;  and  the  fame  way,  the  cafual 
"  Conjunctions  of  Ideas  may  give  a  Dif 
"  guft,  where  there  is  nothing  difagree- 
"  able  in  the  Form  it  iett"  And  this 
is  the  occafion  of  many  fantaftick  Aver- 
sions to  Figures  of  fome  Animals,  and  to 
fome  other  Forms :  Thus  Swine  s,  Ser- 
pents of  all  Kinds,  and  fome  Infetts  real- 
ly beautiful  enough,  are  beheld  with  A- 
verfion  by  many  People,  who  have  got 
fome  accidental  Ideas  ajfbciated  to  them. 
And  for  Ttiftaftes  of  this  Kind,  no  other 
Account  can  be  given. 

IV.  But  as  to  the  univerfal  Agreement  unherfaiu 
of  Mankind  in  their  Senfe  of  Beauty  from  *y  of  this 
Uniformity  amidft  Variety,   we  mud  con- Sen** 
fait  Experience :  and  as  we  allow  all  Men 
Reafon,  fince  all  Men  are  capable  of  under- 
ftanding   fimple  Arguments,    tho  few  are 
capable  of  complex  Demonftrations  ;  lb  in 

this  Cafe  it  muft  be  fufficient  to  prove  this 
Senfe  of  Beauty  univerfal,  "  if  all  Men 
"  are  better  pleas'd  with  Uniformity  in  the 

*  See  below  Art.  II,  12.  of  this  Seftion. 

"  Ampler 


7 6  An  I  N  QU I RY  concerning 

Secft.  $.  "  fimpler  Inftances  than  the  contrary,  even 
C^W  l<  when  there  is  no  Advantage  obferv'd 
"  attending  it ;  and  likewife  if  all  Men, 
"  according  as  their  Capacity  enlarges,  fb 
*'  as  to  receive  and  compare  more  complex 
"  Ideas,  have  a  greater  Delight  in  Unifor- 
"  mity,  and  are  pleas'd  with  its  more 
u  complex  Kinds,  both  Original  and  Re- 
"  lative" 

N  o  w  let  us  confider  if  ever  any  Per- 
fon  was  void  of  this  Senfe  in  the  fimpler 
Inftances.  Few  Trials  have  been  made  in 
the  fimpleft  Inftances  of  Harmony,  becaufe 
as  loon  as  we  find  an  Ear  incapable 
of  relifhing  complex  Compofitions,  fuch 
as  our  Tunes  are,  no  further  Pains  are 
employ'd  about  iuch.  But  in  Figures, 
did  ever  any  Man  make  choice  of  a  Tra- 
pezium, or  any  irregular  Curve,  for  the 
Ichnography  or  Plan  of  his  Houfe,  with- 
out Neceffity,  or  fbme  great  Motive  of 
Convenience  ?  or  to  make  the  oppofite 
Walls  not  parallel,  or  unequal  in  Height  ? 
Were  ever  Trapeziums,  irregular  Toly- 
gons  or  Curves  chofen  for  the  Forms  of 
"Doors  or  Windows,  tho  thefe  Figures 
might  have  anfwer'd  the  Ufes  as  well,  and 
would  have  often  fav'd  a  great  part  of  the 
Time,  Labour  and  Expence  to  Workmen, 
which  is  now  employ'd  in  fuiting  the 
Stones  and  Timber  to  the  regular  Forms  ? 
Among  all  the  fantaftick  Modes  of  "Drejs, 

none 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.  yy 

none  was  ever  quite  void  of  Uniformity,  Se<3:.  6. 
if  it  were  only  in  the  refemblance  of  the  <vwj 
two  Sides  of  the  fame  Robe,  and  in  fome 
general  Aptitude  to  the  human  Form.  The 
ViEliJh  'Fainting  had  always  relative  Beau- 
ty by  refemblance  to  other  Objects,  and 
often  thole  Objedts  were  originally  beau- 
tiful:  however  juftly  we  might  apply 
Horace's  Cenlure  of  impertinent  Defcrip- 
tions  in  Toetry. 

Sed  non  erat  his  locus * 

But  never  were  any  fb  extravagant  as  to 
affed:  fuch  Figures  as  are  made  by  the  ca- 
fual  fplling  of  liquid  Colours.  Who  was 
ever  pleas'd  with  an  inequality  of  Heights 
in  Windows  of  the  fame  Range,  or  diffi* 
milar  Shapes  of  them  ?  with  unequal  Legs 
or  Arms,  Eyes  or  Cheeks  in  a  Miftrefs  ? 
It  mull  however  be  acknowledge,  "  That 
<c  Intereft  may  often  counterballance  our 
"  Senfe  of  Beauty  in  this  Affair  as  well 
*  as  in  others,  and  fuperior  good  Quali- 
"  tys  may  make  us  overlook  fuch  Imper- 
"  fecftions." 

V.  Nay  further,  it  may  perhaps  appear,  Real  Beau* 
"  That  Regularity  and  Uniformity  are  fo  ^j-™ 
"  copioufly    diffus'd   thro  the   Univerfe, 
"  and  we  are  fo  readily   determin'd  to 


*     Hor.  de  Arte  Poet,  v.  I?. 

*'  pur- 


7%         An  I N QJJ IRY  concerning 

Sedt  6-  "  purfue  this  as  the  Foundation  of  Beau- 
s^v^  "  (y  in  Works  of  ^r£,  that  there  is  fcarce- 
"  ly  anything  ever  fancy 'd  as  Beautiful, 
'.'  where  there  is  not  really  fomething  of 
"  this  Uniformity  and  Regularity  :yy  We 
are  indeed  often  miftaken  in  imagining  that 
there  is  the  greateft  poffible  Beauty,  where 
it  is  but  very  imperfect ;  but  ftill  it  is  fome 
degree  of  Beauty  which  pleafes,  altho  there 
may  be  higher  Degrees  which  we  do  not 
obierve  ;  and  our  Senfe  ads  with  full  Re- 
gularity when  we  are  pleas'd,  altho  we  are 
kept  by  a  falfe  Prejudice  from  purfuing  Ob- 
jects which  would  pleafe  us  more. 

A  Goth,  for  inftance,  is  miftaken,  when 
from  Education  he  imagines  the  Architec- 
ture of  his  Country  to  be  the  mod  per- 
fed: :  and  a  Conjunction  of  fome  hojiile 
Ideas,  may  make  him  have  an  Averfion 
to  Roman  Buildings,  and  ftudy  to  de- 
molifli  them,  as  fome  of  our  Reformers 
did  the  Topjh  Buildings,  not  being  able 
to  feparate  the  Ideas  of  the  fuperftitious 
Worfhipr  from  the  Forms  of  the  Buildings 
where  it  was  pra&ifed :  and  yet  it  is  ftill 
real  Beauty  which  pleafes  the  Goth, 
founded  upon  Uniformity  amidfi  Variety. 
For  the  Gothick  pillars  are  uniform  to 
each  other,  not  only  in  their  Sections, 
which  are  Lozenge -formed ;  but  alio  in 
their  Heights  and  Ornaments :  Their  Ar- 
ches are  not  one  uniform  Curve,  but  yet 

they 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.        79 

they  are  Segments  of  Jlmilar  Curves,  and  Sed:.  6. 
generally  equal  in  the  fame  Ranges.  The  ^yv 
very  Indian  Buildings  have  fome  kind  of 
Uniformity,  and  many  of  the  Eastern 
Nations,  tho  they  differ  much  from 
us,  yet  have  great  Regularity  in  their 
Manner,  as  well  as  the  Romans  in 
theirs.  Our  Indian  Screens,  which  won- 
derfully liipply  the  regular  Imaginations 
of  our  Ladys  with  Ideas  of  Deformity, 
in  which  Nature  is  very  churlifh  and 
Jparing,  do  want  indeed  all  the  Beauty 
arifing  from  Proportion  of  Parts,  and  Con- 
formity to  Nature  ;  and  yet  they  cannot 
diveft  themfelves  of  all  Beauty  and  V- 
niformity  in  the  feparate  Parts  :  And  this 
diverfifying  the  human  Body  into  various 
Contortions,  may  give  fome  wild  Plea- 
lure  from  Variety,  fince  lome  Uniformi- 
ty to  the  human  Shape  is  ftill  retain'd. 


m 
like  man- 


VI.  There  is  one  fort  of  Beauty  which  Mfiory 
might  perhaps  have  been  better  mention'd  ffi 

1.    r  1  r      .11  -i  •  -  1  liken 

before,  but  will  not  be  impertinent  here, 
becaule  the  Tafte  or  Relifh  of  it  is  univer- 
fal  in  all  Nations,  and  with  the  Young  as 
well  as  the  Old,  and  that  is  the  Beauty  of 
^Hiftory.  Every  one  knows  how  dull  a 
Study  it  is  to  read  over  a  Collection  of 
Gazettes,  which  fhall  perhaps  relate  all 
the  fame  Events  with  the  Hijiorian  : 
The  liiperioi  Pie  dure  then  of  Hiflory 
mult  arife,  like  that  of  Toetry,  from  the 

Man- 


So         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sedt.  6-  Manners  ;  as  when  we  fee  a  Character 
v/^fV>  well  drawn,  wherein  we  find  the  fecret 
Caufes  of  a  great  Diverfity  of  feemingly 
inconfiftent  Actions  ;  or  an  Intereft  of 
State  laid  open,  or  an  artful  View  nice- 
ly unfolded,  the  Execution  of  which  in- 
fluences very  different  and  oppofite  Actions, 
as  the  Circumftances  may  alter.  Now  this 
reduces  the  whole  to  an  Unity  of  Defign 
at  lead  :  And  this  may  be  obferv'd  in  the 
very  Fables  which  entertain  Children,  o- 
therwife  we  cannot  make  them  relifh  them. 

VII.  What  has  been  laid  will  probably 
be  afTented  to,  if  we  always  remember  in 
our  Inquirys  into  the  Univerfality  of  the 
Senfe  of  Beauty \  "  That  there  may  be 
*'  real  Beauty,  where  there  is  not  the 
c<  great  eft  ;  and  that  there  are  an  Infinity 
M  of  different  Forms  which  may  all  have 
"  fome  Unity,  and  yet  differ  from  each 
"  other."  So  that  Men  may  have  different 
Fancys  of  Beauty,  and  yet  Uniformity  be 
the  univerfal  Foundation  of  our  Appro- 
bation of  any  Form  whatlbever  as  Beauti- 
ful. And  we  lhall  find  that  it  is  lb  in  the 
Architecture,  Gardening,  "Drefs^  Equi- 
page, and  Furniture  of  Houfes,  even  a- 
mong  the  moll  uncultivated  Nations  ; 
where  Uniformity  ftill  pleafes,  without 
any  other  Advantage  than  the  Pleafure 
of  the  Contemplation  of  it. 

VIII.  It 


Beauty,   Order,  &c.         81 

Sed.  6* 
VIII.  I  t  will  deferve  our  Confideration  ^v^ 
on  this  Subjed:,    how,  in  like  Cafes,   we  J^S? 
form  very  different  Judgments  concerning  menu  "on* 
the  internal  and  external  Senjes.    Nothing  cerntnzour 
is  more  ordinary  among  thole,  who  after 
Mr.  Locke  have  ihaken  off  the  groundlefs 
Opinions  about  innate  Ideas,    than  to  al- 
ledge,  4t  That  all  our  Relilh  for  Beauty \ 
"  and  Order,  is  either  from  prolped  of  Ad- 
*'  vantage,  Cujiom,   ox  Education,"  for  no 
other  Reafbn  but  the  Variety  of  Fancy s  in 
the  World  :    and  from  this  they  conclude* 
"  That  our  Fancy s  do  not  arife  from  any 
"  naturalTower  of  Perception,  or  Senfe? 
And   yet   all  allow   our    external  Senfes 
to  be  Natural,  and   that  the  Pleafures  or 
Pains  of  their  Senfations,   howrever  they 
may  be  increas'd,    or  diminifh'd,   by  Cuf- 
tom,   or   Education,    and  counterbalanced 
by  Inter  eft,  yet  are  really  antecedent  to 
Cuftom,    Habit,    Education,    or   Prolpedt 
of  Inter  eft.     Now  it  is  certain,    "  That 
V  there   is  at  leaft  as  great  a  variety  of 
"  Fancys  about  their  Objedls,  as  the  Ob- 
"  jeds  of  Beauty  :"   Nay  it  is  much  more 
difficult,    and  perhaps  impoilible,  to  bring 
the    Fancys   or   Reliihes  of  the  external 
Senfes  to  any  general  Foundation  at  all,  or 
to  find  any  Rule  for  the  agreeable  or  d'rft 
agreeable :   and  yet  we  all  allow   %\  that 
"  thefe   are  natural  Powers  of  IPercep- 
"  tiw" 

G  IX.  Ths 


The  Rea- 
Jon  of  it. 


An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

IX.  The  Reafon  of  this  different  Judg- 
ment can  be  no  other  than  this,  That  we 
have  got  diftinit  Names  for  the  external 
Senfes,  and  none,  or  very  few,  for  the 
Internal ;  and  by  this  are  led,  as  in  ma- 
ny other  Cafes,  to  look  upon  the  former 
as  fome  way  more  fix'd,  and  real  and  na- 
tural, than  the  latter.  The  Senfe  of  Har- 
mony has  got  its  Name,  viz.  a  good  Ear  ; 
and  we  are  generally  brought  to  acknow- 
ledge this  a  naturalPowcv  of  Perception,  or 
a  Senfe  fome  way  diftind;  from  Hearing  : 
now  it  is  certain,  "  That  there  is  as  necef- 
4'  fary  a  Perception  of  Beauty  upon  the 
"  prefence  of  regular  Objects,  as  of  Har- 
"  mony  upon  hearing  certain  Sounds." 

An  inter-       X.  But  let  it  be  obferv'd  here  once  for 
iZw^isw     a^>    "  That  an  internal  Senfe  no  more  pre- 
prefuppcfe   "  fuppofes  an  innate  Idea,   or  Principle  of 
innate       <<  Knowledge,  than  the  external."    Both 
are  natural  Powers  of  Perception,  or  'De- 
terminations of  the  Mind  to  receive  necef- 
farily  certain   Ideas  from  the  prefence  of 
Objects.     The  internal  Senfe  is,  a  paffive 
Power  of  receiving  Ideas  of  Beauty  from 
all  Objects  in  which  there  is  Uniformity 
amidft  Variety.     Nor  does  there  feem  any 
thing  more  difficult  in  this   matter,  than 
that  the  Mind  fliould  be  always  determined 
to  receive  the  Idea  of  Sweet,  when  Par- 
ticles of  itich  a  Form  enter  the  Pores  of 

the 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  83 

the  Tongue  ;  or  to  have  the  Idea  of  Sound  Se£t.  6* 
upon   any  quick  Undulation   of  the   Air.  ^^r^ 
The  one  feems  to  have  as  little  Connection 
with  its  Idea,    as  the  other :    And  the  Jam? 
Power  could  with  equal  eafe  conftitute  the 
former  the  occafion  of  Ideas  as  the  latter. 

XI.  The  Affectation  of  Ideas  *  above  Afidati- 
hinted  at,  is  one  great  Caufe  of  the  appa-  ^sdJfJ^tem 
rent  Diverfity  of  Fancys  in  the  Senfe  of  mem. 
Beauty,  as   well  as  in  the  external  Sen- 
fes  ;  and  often  makes  Men  have  an  aver- 
sion to  Objects  of  Beauty,   and  a  liking 
to  others  void  of  it,  but  under  different 
Conceptions  than  thofe  of  Beauty  or  rDe- 
formity.    And  here  it  may  not  be  improper 
to  give  fome  Inftances  of  fome  of  thefe 
Affbciations.     The  Beauty  of  Trees*,  their 
cool  Shades,  and  their  Aptnefs  to  conceal 
from  Obfervation,  have  made  Groves  and 
Woods  the  ufual  Retreat  to  thofe  who  love 
Solitude,  efpecially  to  the  Religious,  the 
Penjive,  the  Melancholy,   and  the  Amo- 
rous.    And  do  not  we  find  that  we  have  fo 
join'd  the  Ideas  of  thefe  Difpofitions  of 
Mind  with  thofe  external  Obje&s,  that  they 
always  recur  to  us  along  with  them  ?    The 
Cunning  of  the  Heathen  cPrieJis  might  make 
iuch  obfeure  Places  the  Scene  of  the  ficti- 
tious Appearances  of  their  T)eitys  ;    and 
hence  we  join  Ideas  of  fomething  "Divine 


See  above  Art,  3.  of  this  Seftion. 

G  2  to 


84         ^n  I N  QU  I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt  6. t0  them.  We  know  the  like  EfFedt  in  the 
l/Y\j  Ideas  of  our  Churches,  from  the  perpetual 
ufe  of  them  only  in  religious  Exercifes. 
The  faint  Light  in  Gothick  Buildings  has 
'had  the  lame  AfTociation  of  a  very  foreign 
Idea,  which  our  Toet  fliews  in  his  Ep* 
thet, 

,         A  'Dim  religious  Light,  * 

In  like  manner  it  is  known,  That  often 
all  the  Circumftances  of  AEiions,  or  T *  laces v 
or  "Drejfes  of  Perfbns,  or  Voice,  or  Song, 
which  have  occur'd  at  any  time  together, 
when  we  were  ftrongly  affeded  by  any 
Paffion,  will  be  fo  connected  that  any  one 
of  thefe  will  make  all  the  reft  recur.  And 
this  is  often  the  occafion  both  of  great 
Pleafare  and  Pain,  Delight  and  Averfion 
to  many  Objeds,  which  of  themfelves 
might  have  been  perfedJy  indifferent  to 
us :  but  thefe  Approbations,  or  T)iftajlesy 
are  remote  from  the  Ideas  of  Beauty, 
being  plainly  different  Ideas. 

Mufck,         XII.  There  is  alfo  another  Charm  in 

how  it      Mufick  to  various  Perfons,  which  is  diflind: 

$if{"ntiy.  fronl  tne  Harmony,   and  is  occafion'd  by 

its  raifing  agreeable  Paffions.     The  human 

Voice  is  obvioufly  vary'd  by  all  the  ftrong- 

er  Paffions  ;  now  when  our  Ear  difcerns 


*  Milt.  II  Penfevofa; 

any 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.  85 

any  tefemblance  between  the  Air  of  a  Sedt.  6. 
Tune,  whether  fung  or  play'd  upon  an 
Inftrument,  either  in  its  Time,  or  Modu- 
lation, or  any  other  Circumftance,  to  the 
found  of  the  human  Voice  in  any  Paflion, 
we  fhall  be  touch'd  by  it  in  a  very  fen- 
fible  manner,  and  have  Melancholy,  Joy, 
Gravity,  Thought fulnefs  excited  in  by  us 
a  fort  of  Sympathy  or  Contagion.  The 
fame  Connexion  is  obfervable  between  the 
very  Air  of  a  Tune,  and  the  IVords  expref 
fing  any  Paffion  which  we  have  heard  it 
fitted  to,  fo  that  they  fliall  both  recur  to  us 
together,  tho  but  one  of  them  affe&s  our 
Senfes. 

Nov/  in  fuch  a  diverfity  of  pleafing 
or  difpleafing  Ideas  which  may  be  join'd 
with  Forms  of  Bodys,  or  Tines,  when 
Men  are  of  fuch  different  Difpofitions, 
and  prone  to  fuch  a  variety  of  Paffions, 
it  is  no  wonder  "  that  they  fhould  often 
"  difagree  in  their  Fancys  of  Obje&s,  e- 
"  ven  altho  their  Senfe  of  Beauty  and 
"  Harmony*  were  perfectly  uniform  ; M  be- 
caufe  many  other  Ideas  may  either  pleafe 
or  difpleaie,  according  to  Perfons  Tem- 
pers, and  part  Circumftances.  We  know 
how  agreeable  a  very  wild  Country  may 
be  to  any  Perfon  who  has  fpent  the 
chearful  Days  of  his  Youth  in  it,  and 
how  difagreeable  very  beautiful  Tlaces 
may  be,  if  they  were  the  Scenes  of  his 
G  3  Milery. 


86         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se£t  6.  Mifery.     And  this  may  help  us  in  many 
^v^o  Cafes   to   account    for   the    Diverfitys  of 
Fancy,    without  denying  the  'Uniformity 
of  our  internal  Senfe  of  Beauty. 

XIII.  Grandeur  and  Novelty  are  two 
Ideas  different  from  Beauty,  which  often 
recommend  Objects  to  us.  The  Reafon  of 
this  is  foreign  to  the  prefent  Subject.  See 
Spectator  N?  412. 


SECT. 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  87 

Sec*.  7. 
— —  O^V>w 


SECT.    VII. 

Of  the  'Power  o/Cuftom,  Education, 
and  Example^  as  to  our  internal 
Senfes. 

I.    r^\  USTOM,  Education,  and  Ex- 

V^/  ample  are  fo  often  alledg'd  in  this 
Affair,  as  the  occafion  of  our  Relifh  for 
beautiful  Objects,  and  for  our  Approba- 
tion of,  or  Delight  in  a  certain  Conduct  in 
Life,  in  a  moral  Senfe^  that  it  is  neceffary 
to  examine  thefe  three  particularly,  to  make 
it  appear  "  that  there  is  a  natural 'Power 
"  of  Perception^  or  Senfe  of  Beauty  in 
V  Objects,  antecedent  to  all  Cuftom,  Edit- 
"  cation,  or  Example." 

II.  Custom,   as  diftind  from  the  other  cuftom 
two,  operates  in  this  manner.     As  to  Ac-  P™5™ 

•  1  J-r     r  •  1       new  Senfe; 

tions,  it  only  gives  a  dupofition  to  the 
Mind  or  Body  more  eafily  to  perform  thofe 
Adtions  which  have  been  frequently  repeat- 
ed, but  never  leads  us  to  apprehend  them 
under  any  other  View  than  what  we  were 
capable  of  apprehending  them  under  at 
firft  ;  nor  gives  us  any  new  Power  of- 
Perception  about  them.  We  are  natural- 
ly capable  of  Sentiments  of  Fear,  and 
'Dread  of  any  powerful  Pre  fence  \  and 
G  4  fo 


88         An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  7.  ib  Cuftom  may  conned:  the  Ideas  of  religi- 
U7^  ous  Horror  to  certain  Buildings  :  but  Cuf- 
tom could  never  have  made  a  Being  natu- 
rally incapable  of  Fear,  receive  fuch  Ideas. 
So  had  we  no  other  Power  of  perceiving, 
or  forming  Ideas  of  Adions,  but  as  they 
were  advantageous  or  difadvantageous,  Cuf- 
tom could  only  have  made  us  more  ready 
at  perceiving  the  Advantage  or  'Difadvan- 
tage  of  Adions.  But  this  is  not  to  our 
prefent  Purpofe. 

A  s  to  our  Approbation  of,  or  Delight 
in  external  Objeds.  When  the  Blood  or 
Spirits  of  which  Anatomifts  talk  are  rouz'd, 
quicken'd,  or  fermented  as  they  call  it,  in 
any  agreeable  manner  by  Medicine  or  Nu- 
triment ;  or  any  Glands  frequently  ftimu^ 
lated  to  Secretion  ;  it  is  certain  that  to  pre- 
ferve  the  Body  eafy,  we  fhall  delight  in  Ob- 
jeds  of  Tafle  which  of  themfelves  are  not 
immediately  pieafant  to  it,  if  they  promote 
that  agreeable  State  which  the  Body  had 
been  accufio?nd  to.  Further,  Cujiom  will 
fo  alter  the  State  of  the  Body,  that  what 
at  firft  rais'd  uneafy  Senfations  will  ceafe 
to  do  fo,  or  perhaps  rai{e  another  agreeable 
Idea  of  the  iame  Senfe  5  but  Crjiom  can 
never  give  us  any  Idea  of  a  Senfe  different 
from  thofe  we  had  antecedent  to  it :  It 
will  never  make  the  Blind  approve  Objeds 
as  coloured,  or  thofe  who  have  no  Yajle 
approve  Meats  as  delicious,  however  they 

might 


Beauty,  Ordef,  &c.  89 

might  approve  them   as  Strengthning  or  Se6t.  7, 
Exhilarating.    Were  our  Glands  and  the  ^v^-' 
Parts  about  them  void  of  Feeling,   did  we 
perceive  no  Pleafure  from  certain  brisker 
Motions  in  the  Blood,  Cujiom  could  never 
make  ftimulating  or  intoxicating  Fluids  or 
Medicines  agreeable,  when  they  were  not 
fo  to  the  Tafte  :  So  by  like  Reafoning,  had 
we  no  natural  Senfe  of  Beauty  from  L~Dni- 
formity,  Cujiom  could  never  have  made  us 
imagine  any  Beauty  in  Objects  ;    if  we  had 
had  no  Ear,  Cujiom  could  never  have  given 
us  the  Pleafures  of  Harmony.     When  we 
have  thefe   natural  Senfes   antecedently, 
Cujiom  may  make  us  capable  of  extending 
our  Views  further,  and  of  receiving  more 
complex  Ideas  of  Beauty  in  Bodys,  or  Har- 
mony in  Sounds,   by  increafing  our  Atten- 
tion  and    quicknefs   of  Perception.      But 
however  Cujiom  may  increafe  our  Power  of 
receiving  or  comparing  complex  Ideas,  yet 
it  feems  rather  to  weaken  than  ftrengthen 
the  Ideas  of  Beauty^  or  the  Impreffions  of 
Pleafure  from  regular  Obje&s  ;    elfe  how 
is    it   poffible  that   any  Perfbn   could   go 
into  the  open  Air  on  a  funny  Day,  or  clear 
Evening,    without    the    molt   extravagant 
Raptures,  fuch  as  Milton  *  reprefents 
our  Ancejior   in  upon  his  firft  Creation  ? 
For  fiich  any  Perfbn  would  certainly  fall  in- 
to, upon  the  firft  Reprefentation  of  fuch  a 
Scene. 

*  -*  See  Paradife  Lofi}  Book  %* 

Custom 


po         An  I N Q\J  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.y. 

o^y^/  Custom  in  like  manner  may  make  it 
eafier  for  any  Perfon  to  difcern  the  Ule  of 
a  complex  Machine,  and  approve  it  as  ad- 
vantageous ;  but  he  would  never  have  ima- 
gin'd  it  Beautiful,  had  he  no  natural  Senfe 
of  Beauty.  Cujiom  may  make  us  quicker 
in  apprehending  the  Truth  of  complex  The- 
orcms,  but  we  all  find  the  Pleafiire  or 
Beauty  of *  Theorems  as  ftrong  at  firfl;  as  ever. 
Cuftom  makes  us  more  capable  of  retaining 
and  comparing  complex  Ideas,  lb  as  to  dif- 
cern more  complicated  Uniformity,  which 
efcapes  the  Obfervation  of  Novices  in  any 
Art;  but  all  this  prefuppofes  a  natural 
Senfe  of  Beauty  in  ^Uniformity  :  for  had 
there  been  nothing  in  Forms,  which  was 
conftituted  the  neceflary  occafion  of  Plea- 
fiire to  our  Senfes,  no  Repetition  of  indif- 
ferent Ideas  as  to  Pleafiire  or  Pain,  Beauty 
or  "Deformity,  could  ever  have  made  them 
grow  pleafing  or  difpleafing. 

xorEdu-  ni.  The  Effed  of  Education  is  this, 
that  thereby  we  receive  many  Ipeculative 
Opinions,  which  are  fometimes  true  and 
fbmetimes  falfe ;  and  are  often  led  to  be- 
lieve that  Objects  may  be  naturally  apt  to 
give  Pleafiire  or  Pain  to  our  external  Senfes, 
which  in  reality  have  no  fuch  Qualitys.  And 
further,  by  Education  there  are  fome  ftrong 
AfTociations  of  Ideas  without  any  Reafon, 
by  mere  Accident  fometimes,   as  well  as 

by 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c.        9 1 

by  Defign,  which  it  is  very  hard  for  usScd.  7. 
ever  after  to  break  afimder.     Thus  Aver-  L/VNJ 
fions  are  rais'd  to  Darknefs,   and  to  many 
kinds  of  Meat,    and  to  certain  innocent 
A&ions  :    Approbations  without  Ground 
are  rais'd  in  like  manner.     But  in  all  thefe 
Inftances,  Education  never  makes  us  appre- 
hend any  Qualitys  in  Objects,    which  we 
have  not  naturally  Senfes  capable  of  per- 
ceiving.    We  know  what  Sicknefs  of  the 
Stomach  is,  and  may  without  Ground  be- 
lieve that  very  healthful  Meats  will  raife 
this;  we  by  our  Sight  and  Smell  receive 
difagreeable  Ideas  of  the  Food  of  Swine, 
and  their  Styes,   and  perhaps  cannot  pre- 
vent the  recurring  of  thefe  Ideas  at  Table  : 
but  never  were  Men  naturally  Blind  pre- 
judice againft  Objects  as  of  a  difagreeable 
Colour,  or  in  favour  of  others  as  of  a  beau- 
tiful Colour  ;  they  perhaps  hear  Men  dif- 
praile  one  Colour,  and  may  imagine  this 
Colour  to  be  fome  quite  different  fenfible 
Quality  of  the  other  Senfes,  but  that  is  all : 
And  the  fame  way,  a  Man  naturally  void 
of  Tafte  could  by  no  Education  receive 
the  Ideas  of  Tafte,   or  be  prejudic'd  in  fa- 
vour of  Meats  as  delicious  :    So,  had  we 
no  natural  Senfe  of  Beauty  and  Harmo- 
7iy,  we  could  never  be  prejudic'd  in  favour 
of  Objedts  or  Sounds  as  Beautiful  or  Har- 
monious.    Education  may  make  an  unat- 
tentive  Goth  imagine  that  his  Country- 
men have  attain'd  the  Perfe&ion  of  Archi- 
tecture ; 


p z  An  I  N  QU  I RY  concerning 

Sect.  7.  teciure ;  and  an  Averfion  to  their  Enemys 
t/^rv  the  Romans,  may  have  join'd  fome  dis- 
agreeable Ideas  to  their  very  Buildings,  and 
excited  them  to  their  Demolition  ;  but  he 
had  never  form'd  thefe  Prejudices,  had  he 
been  void  of  a  Senfe  of  Beauty.  Did  ever 
blind  Men  debate  whether  Turfite  or  Scar- 
let  were  the  finer  Colour  ?  or  could  any 
Education  prejudice  them  in  favour  of 
either  as  Colours  ? 

Thus  Education  and  Cujlom  may  in- 
fluence cur  internal  Senfes,  where  they  are 
antecedently,  by  enlarging  the  Capacity  of 
our  Minds  to  retain  and  compare  the  Parts 
of  complex  Compofitions  :  And  then  if  the 
finefl  Objects  are  prefented  to  us,  we  grow 
confcious  of  a  Pleafure  far  fuperior  to  what 
common  Performances  excite.  But  all  this 
prefuppoles  our  Senfe  of  Beauty  to  be  natu- 
ral. Inftru&ion  in  Anatomy,  Obfervation 
of  Nature,  and  of  thofe  Airs  of  the  Coun- 
tenance and  Attitudes  of  Body,  which  ac- 
company any  Sentiment,  Affion,  or  TaJ/i- 
on,  may  enable  us  to  know  where  there  is 
a  jufl  Imitation  :  but  why  fhould  an  exadt 
Imitation  pleafe  upon  Obfervation,  if  we 
had  not  naturally  a  Senfe  of  Beauty  in  it, 
more  than  the  obferving  the  Situation  of 
fifty  or  a  hundred  Pebbles  thrown  at  ran* 
dom  ?  and  fhould  we  obferve  them  ever  fb 
often,  we  fhould  never  dream  of  their 
growing  Beautiful. 

IV.  There 


rem<s 


Beauty,  Order,  <&c. 

IV.  The r e  is  fbmething  worth  our  Ob 
fervation  as  to  the  manner  of  rooting  out  Phroc;udlces 
the   'Prejudices   of  Education,   not   quite  w. 
foreign  to  the  prefent  purpofe.     When  the 
Prejudice  arifes  from  AfTociations  of  Ideas 
without  any  natural  Connexion,  we  muft 
frequently  force  our  felves  to  bear  Repre- 
sentations of  thofe  Objedts,   or  the  Ule  of 
them  when  feparated  from  the  difagreeable 
Idea ;  and  this  may  at  laft  disjoin  the  un- 
reafbnable  Aflbciation,  efpecially  if  we  can 
join  new  agreeable  Ideas  to  them  :  Thus 
Opinions  of  Superjlition  are  beft  remov'd 
by   pleafant  Converfation   of  Perfbns  we 
efteem  for  their  Virtue,  or  by   obferving 
that  they  defpife  fuch  Opinions.     But  when 
the  Prejudice  arifes  from  an  Apprehenfion 
or  Opinion  of  natural  Evil,  as  the  Atten- 
dant,  or  Confequent  of  any  Objed:  or  Ac- 
tion ;  if  the  Evil  be  apprehended  to  be  the 
conftant  and  immediate  Attendant,   a  few 
Trials  without  receiving  any  Damage  will 
remove  the  Prejudice,   as  in  that  againft 
Meats  :  But  where  the  Evil  is  not  repre- 
fented  as  the  perpetual  Concomitant,   but 
as  what  may  poffibly  or  probably  at  lbme 
time  or  other  accompany  the  ufe  of  the  Ob- 
ject, there  muft  be  frequent  Reafoning  with 
our  felves,  or  a  long  Series  of  Trials  with- 
out any  Detriment,  to  remove  the  Preju- 
dice ;  liich  is  the  Cafe  of  our  Fear  of  Spirits 
in  the  dark,  and  in  Churchyards.*  And 

when 


94        -dn  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se&.  7.  when  the  Evil  is  reprefented  as  the  Confe- 
C/V\^  quence  perhaps  a  long  time  after,  or  in  a 
future  State,  it  is  then  hardeft  of  all  to 
remove  the  ^Prejudice  ;  and  this  is  only  to 
be  effected  by  flow  ProcefTes  of  Reafbn, 
becaufe  in  this  Cafe  there  can  be  no  Trials 
made  :  and  this  is  the  Cafe  of  fuperftitious 
Prejudices  againft  Actions  apprehended  as 
offenfive  to  the  Deity  ;  and  hence  it  is 
that  they  are  fo  hard  to  be  rooted  out. 

Example  V.  Example  feems  to  operate  in  this 
nc°*Jreeof  manner.  We  are  confcious  that  we  a&  ve- 
intlrnli  ry  much  for  Tleafure,  or  private  Good ; 
senfe.  and  are  thereby  led  to  imagine  that  others 
do  fo  too  :  hence  we  conclude  there  muft 
be  lome  Perfection  in  the  Objects  which 
we  fee  others  purfiie,  and  Evil  in  thole 
which  we  obferve  them  conftantly  fhunning. 
Or,  the  Example  of  others  may  lerve  to 
us  as  fo  many  Trials  to  remove  the  Ap- 
prehenfion  of  Evil  in  Obje&s  to  which  we 
had  an  Averfion.  But  all  this  is  done  upon 
an  Apprehenfion  of  Qualitys  perceivable 
by  the  Senfes  which  we  have  ;  for  no  Ex- 
ample will  induce  the  Blind  or  'Deaf  to 
purfue  Objects  as  Coloured  or  Sonorous  ; 
nor  could  Example  any  more  engage  us 
to  purfae  Obje&s  as  Beautiful  or  Har- 
monious,  had  we  no  natural  Senfe  of 
Beauty  or  Harmony, 

Exam- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         95 

Sefl:.  7. 
Example  may  make  us  conclude  with-  </Y\J 
out  Examination,    that   our    Countrymen 
have  obtain'd  the  Perfe&ion  of  Beauty  in 
their  Works,  or  that  there  is  left  Beauty 
in  the  Orders  of  Architecture  or  *Paint- 
ing  us'd  in  other.  Nations,   and  fo  content 
our  lelves  with  very  imperfed:  Forms.  And 
Fear' of  Contempt  as  void  of  Tafie  or  Ge- 
nius, often  makes  us  join  in  approving  the 
Performances  of  the  reputed  Matters  in  our 
Country,  and  reftrains  thole  who  have  na- 
turally a  fine  Genius,   or  the  internal  Sen- 
fes  very  acute,  from  ftudying  to  obtain  the 
greateft  Perfection  ;  it  makes  alio  thole  of  a 
bad  Tafie  pretend  to  a  Perception  of  Beau- 
ty which  in  reality  they  have  not :  But  all 
this  prefuppofes  fome  natural  Tower  of  re- 
ceiving Ideas  of  Beauty  and  Harmony.    Nor 
can  Example  effeit  any  thing  further,   un- 
left  it  be  to  lead  Men  to  purfue  Objedls  by 
implicit  Faith,  for  fome  Perfection  which 
the  Purluer  is  confcious  he  does  not  know, 
or  which  perhaps  is  fome   very  different 
Quality  from  the  Idea  perceiv'd  by  thole  of 
a  good  Tafie  in  fuch  Affairs. 


SECT. 


9 6         jin  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  8. 

(•V^o  • — — 

SECT.   VIII. 

Of  the  Importance  of  the  internal 
Senfes  in  Life,  and  the  final  Cau- 
fes  of  them. 

importance  I.  r  I  ^  H  E  bufy  part  of  Mankind  may 
of  them-  look  upon  thefe  things  as  airy 

ternal  Sen-  r\  r         •    ri        >  j    t  •        •  t_  -   i 

{QSm  Dreams  of  an  inflam  d  Imagination,  which 

a  wife  Man  fliould  defpife,  who  rationally 
purfues  more  folid  Pcffeffions  independent 
on  Fancy  :  but  a  little  Refle&ion  will  con- 
vince us,  "  That  the  Gratifications  of  our 
"  internal  Senfes  are  as  natural,  real,  and 
"  fatisfying  Enjoyments  as  any  lenfible 
"  Pleafure  whatsoever ;  and  that  they  are 
*c  the  chief  Ends  for  which  we  commonly 
"  purfue  Wealth  and  Tower"  For  how 
is  Wealth  or  Tower  advantageous  ?  How 
do  they  make  us  happy,  or  prove  good  to 
us  ?  No  otherwife  than  as  they  ftipply 
Gratifications  to  our  Senfes  or  Facultys  of 
perceiving  Pleafure.  Now,  are  thefe  Sen* 
fes  or  Facultys  only  the  External  ones  ? 
No  :  Every  body  fees,  that  a  fmall  portion? 
of  Wealth  or  Tower  will  ftpply  more 
Pleafures  of  the  external  Senfes  than  we 
can  enjoy  ;  we  know  that  Scarcity  often 
"heightens  thefe  Perceptions  more  than  A« 
\  bundance,. 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  yj 

bundance,  which  cloys  that  Appetite  which  Sedt.  8. 
is  necefTary  to  all  Pleafure  in  Enjoyment  :  ^v^ 
and  hence  the  Poet's  Advice  is  perfectly 
juft; 

Tu  pulmentaria  quaere 
Sudando * 

In  fhort,  the  only  ufe  of  a  great  Fortune, 
above  a  very  fmall  one  (except  in  good 
Offices  and  moral  Pleafures)  muft  be  to 
fiipply  us  with  the  Pleasures  of  Beauty \ 
Order,  and  Harmony. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  the  Enjoyment  of 
the  nobleft  Pleafares  of  the  internal  Senfes% 
in  the  Contemplation  of  the  Works  of  Na- 
ture, is  expos'd  to  every  one  without  Ex- 
pence  ;  the  Poor  and  the  Low,  may  have  as 
free  a  ufe  of  thefe  Objects,  in  this  way,  as 
the  Wealthy  or  Powerful.  And  even  in 
Objects  which  may  be  appropriated,  the 
Property  is  of  little  Conlequence  to  the 
Enjoyment  of  their  Beauty,  which  is  often 
enjoy'd  by  others  befide  the  Proprietor. 
But  then  there  are  other  Objects  of  thefe 
internal  Senfes,  which  require  IVealth,  or 
Power  to  procure  the  uie  of  them  as  fre- 
quently as  we  defire ;  as  appears  in  Architec- 
ture, Mujick,  Gardening,  Painting,  T>refs, 
Equipage,  Furniture  ;  of  which  we  cannot 


*  Hor.  Lib.  a.  Sat.  2,.  v.  20. 

H  have 


9  8         An  I N  Q.U  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed\  8.  have  the  full  Enjoyment  without  Property. 

C^VNJ  And  there  are  fome  confus'd  Imaginations, 
which  often  lead  us  to  purfue  'Property, 
even  in  Objed:s  where  it  is  not  necefTary 
to  the  true  Enjoyment  of  them.  Thefe 
are  the  ultimate  Motives  of  our  purfuing 
the  greater  Degrees  of  Wealth,  where  there 
are  no  generous  Intentions  of  virtuous  Ac- 
tions. 

This  is  confirmed  by  the  conftant  Prac- 
tice of  the  very  Enemys  to  thefe  Senfes. 
As  foon  as  they  think  they  are  got  above 
the  World,  or  extricated  from  the  Hurrys 
of  Avarice  and  Ambition  ;  banifh'd  Na- 
ture will  return  upon  them,  and  fet  them 
upon  Purfuits  of  Beauty  and  Order  in  their 
Houfes,  Gardens,  T)refs,  Table,  Equi- 
page. They  are  never  eafy  without  fome 
degree  of  this  ;  and  were  their  Hearts  open 
to  our  View,  we  lliould  fee  Regularity, 
'Decency,  Beauty,  as  what  their  Wiihes  ter- 
minate upon,  either  to  themfelves  or  their 
Pofterity  ;  and  what  their  Imagination  is 
always  prefenting  to  them  as  the  poflible 
Effects  of  their  Labours.  Nor  without  this, 
could  they  ever  juftify  their  Purfuits  to 
themfelves. 

There  may  perhaps  be  fome  Inftances 
of  human  Nature  perverted  into  a  thorow 
Mifer,  who  loves  nothing  but  Money,  and 
whole  Fancy  arifes  no  higher  than  the  cold 

dull 


Beauty,  Order,  <for.  pp 

dull  Thought  of  PoiTetfion  ;    but  fuch  an  Sect.  8- 
Inftance  in  an  Age,  muft  not  be  made  the  L^vnj 
Standard  of  Mankind   againft    the    whola 
Body. 

If  we  examine  the  Purfuits  of  the  Lux- 
urious, who  in  the  opinion  of  the  World  is 
wholly  devoted   to    his  Belly  ;    we  lhali 
generally  find  that  the  far  greater  part  of  his 
Expence  is  empfoy'd  to  procure  other  Sen- 
fations  than  thofe  of  Tafte  ;  luch  as  fine 
Attendants,    regular  Apartments,   Servi- 
ces of  Tlate,  and  the  like.     Befides,  a  large 
lhare  of  the  Preparation  muft  be  fuppos'd 
defign'd  for  fome  fort  of  generous  friendly 
Purpofes,  as  to  pleafe  Acquaintance,  Stran- 
gers, Tarafites.    How  few  would  be  con-  v 
tented  to  enjoy  the  fame  Senfations  alone, 
in  a  Cottage,  or  out  of  earthen  Pitchers  ? 
To  conclude  this  Point,  however  thefe  in- 
ternal Senfations  may  be  overlook'd  in  our 
Philofophical  Inquirys  about  the  human  Fa- 
culty s,  we  lhall  find  in  Fad:,  "  That  they 
*'  employ  us  more,  and  are  more  efficacious 
fi  in  Life,  either  to  our  cPleafure,  or  Vn- 
"  eafinefs,    than  all  our   external  Senfes 
**  taken  together." 

II.  A  s  to  the  final  Caufes  of  this  inter-  Thai 
nalSenfei  we  need  not  enquire,  "  whether,  €?"-P  °? 
,c  to  an  almighty  and  all-knowing  Being,  ml  senjsti 
"  there  be  any  real  Excellence  in  regular 
"  Forms,  in  adting  by  general  Laws,  in 
H  %  "  know- 


i oo       An  I N QU I R Y  concerning 

Sed:.  8.  "  knowing  by  Theorems  V  Wefeemfcarce 
t^VN*  capable  of  anfwering  fuch  Quefticns  any- 
way ;  nor  need  we  enquire,  "  whether  o* 
"  ther  Animals  may  not  difcern  Uniformi- 
1  <  ty  and  Regularity  in  Objedts  which  efcape 
"  our  Obfervation,  and  may  not  perhaps 
"  have  their  Senfes  conftituted  lb  as  to  per- 
"  ceive  Beauty,  from  the  fame  Foundation 
"  which  we  do,  in  ObjecSts  which  our  Sen- 
"  fesare  not  fit  to  examine  or  compare  V* 
We  fhall  confine  our  felves  to  a  Subject 
where  we  have  fome  certain  Foundation  to 
go  upon,  and  only  enquire,  "  if  we  can 
"  find  any  Reafons  worthy  of  the  great 
"  Author  of  Nature,  for  making  fiich 
"  a  Conne&ion  between  regular  Objects, 
"  and  the  Plealure  which  accompany s  our 
"  Perceptions  of  them  ;  or,  what  Reafons 
"  might  pollibly  influence  him  to  create 
"  the  JVor id,  as  it  at  prelent  is,  as  far  as 
"  we  can  obferve,  every  where  full  of 
"  Regularity  and  VniformityV 

Let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that  as  far  as 
we  know  concerning  any  of  the  great  Bodys 
of  the  Vniverfe,  we  fee  Forms  and  Motions 
really  Beautiful  to  our  Senfes  ;  and  if 
we  were  plac'd  in  any  Tlanet,  the  appa- 
rent Courfes  would  ftill  be  Regular  and 
Uniform,  and  confequently  Beautiful  to 
our  Senfe.  Now  this  gives  us  no  (mall 
Ground  to  imagine,  that  if  the  Senfes  of 
their  Inhabitants  are  in  the  fame  manner 
z  adapt* 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.  101 

adapted  to  their  Habitations,    and  the  Ob-  Sect.  8. 
jed:s  occurring  to  their  View,  as  ours  are  {s*Y\J 
here,   their  Senfes  muft  be  upon  the  fame 
general  Foundation  with  ours. 

But  to  return  to  the  Queftions  :  What 
occurs  to  refolve  them,  may  be  contain'd  in 
the  following  Propofitions. 

i.  The  Manner  of  Knowledge  by  tmi- 
verfal  Theorems,  and  of  Operation  by  uni- 
verfal  Caufes,  as  far  as  we  can  attain  it, 
muft  be  mod  convenient  for  Beings  of 
limited  Underftanding  and  Power ;  fince 
this  prevents  Diftra&ion  in  their  Under- 
ftandings  thro  the  Multiplicity  of  Propo- 
fitions, and  Toil  and  Wearinefs  to  their 
Powers  of  A&ion  :  and  confequently  their 
Reafon,  without  any  Senfe  of  Beauty,  muft 
approve  of  fuch  Methods  when  they  re- 
fled:  upon  their  apparent  Advantage. 

2.  Those  Objects  of  Contemplation 
in  which  there  is  ^Uniformity  *amidfl  Va- 
riety, are  more  diftindtly  and  eafily  com- 
prehended and  retain'd,  than  irregular  Ob- 
jects ;  becaule  the  accurate  Obfervation  of 
one  or  two  Parts  often  leads  to  the  Know- 
ledge of  the  Whole  :  Thus  we  can  from  a 
Millar  or  two,  with  an  intermediate  Arch, 
and  Cornice,  form  a  diftind:  Idea  of  a 
whole  regular  Building,  if  we  know  of 
what  Species  it  is,  and  have  its  Length  and 
H  3  Breadth : 


x  c2       An  I N  QU  I R  Y  rowr^fntng 

Sed.  8.  Breadth  :  From  a  Side  and  fo lid  Angle,  viz 
l/W  have  the  whole  regular  Solid \  the  meafu- 
ring  one  *?i^,  gives  the  whole  Square  ;  one 
Radius,  the  whole  Circle  \  two  diameters, 
an  Ow/ ;  one  Ordinate  and  Abfciffa,  the 
Tarabola  ;  and  fo  on  in  more  complex  Fi- 
gures which  have  any  Regularity,  which 
can  be  entirely  determin'd  and  known  in  e- 
very  Part  from  a  few  "Data :  Whereas  it 
mult  be  a  long  Attention  to  a  vaft  Multipli- 
city of  Parts,  which  can  aicertain  or  fix  the 
Idea  of  any  irregular  Form,  or  give  any 
diftind  Idea  of  it,  or  make  us  capable  of 
retaining  it ;  as  appears  in  the  Forms  of 
rude  Rocks,  and  'Pebbles,  and  confused 
Heaps,  even  when  the  Multitude  of  fen- 
fible  Parts  is  not  fo  great  as  in  the  regu- 
lar Forms  :  for  fiich  irregular  Objects  diC 
trad  the  Mind  with  Variety,  fince  for  e- 
very  fenfible  Part  we  rauft  have  a  quite 
different  Idea. 

3.  From  thefe  two  Proportions  it 
follows,  "  That  Beitfgs  of  limited  Under- 
"  (landing  and  Power,  if  they  ad:  ratio- 
"  nally  for  their  own  Inter  eft,  muft  chufe 
<c  to  operate  by  the  Jiwfleft  Means,  to  in- 
"  vent  general  Theorems,  and  to  ftudy 
"  regular  ObjeEts,  if  they  be  as  ufefql  as 
cc  irregular  ones  .  t\m  they  may  avoid 
*'  the  endlefs  Toil  of  producing  each  Effed: 
"  by  a  feparate  Operation,  of  fearching 
V  out  each  different  Truth  by  a  different 

"  In- 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.        103 

"  Inquiry,  and  of  imprinting  the  endlefs  Sed.  8. 
"  Variety  of  diflimilar  Ideas  in  irregular  i^Y^J 
"  Objects." 

4.  But  then,  befide  this  Consideration 
of  hit  ere  ft,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any 
neceflary  Connection,  antecedent  to  the 
Conftitution  of  the  Author  of  Nature, 
between  regular  Forms,  Ac! tons,  The- 
orems, and  that  fudden  ftnfible  Tkdfkre 
excited  in  us  upon  obftrvation  of  them, 
even  when  we  do  not  reflect  upon  the  Ad- 
vantage mention'd  in  the  former  Propofi- 
tion.  And  poflibly,  the  Deity  could  have 
form'd  us  fo  as  to  have  received  no  Plea- 
fare  from  fuch  Objects,  or  conneded  Plea- 
fare  to  thcfe  of  a  quite  contrary  Nature. 
We  have  a  tolerable  Preemption  of  this  in 
the  Beauty s  of  various  Animals  ;  they  give 
fome  fmall  Pleafure  indeed  to  every  one  who 
views  them,  but  then  every  one  leems  vaft- 
Jy  more  delighted  with  the  peculiar  Beau- 
tys  of  its  own  Species,  than  with  thole  of 
a  different  one,  which  feldom  raife  any  de- 
fire  but  among  Animals  of  the  fame  Species 
with  the  one  admir'd.  This  makes  it  pro- 
bable, that  the  Bleafiire  is  not  the  necef- 
fary  Refult  of  the  Form  it  felf,  otherwift 
it. would  equally  afTecT:  all  Apprehenfions 
in  what  Species  foever  ;  but  depends 
upon  a  voluntary  Conftitution,  adapted  to 
preferve  the  Regularity  of  the  'Vniverfe, 
and  is  probably  not  the  EfFedt  of  K 

H  4  "but 


1 04       -An  I  N QU  I R  Y  concerning 

Se£L  %.b\&  Choice  in  the  Supreme  Agent,  who 
\-^V~  conftituted  our  Senfes. 

From  the       5 .  N  o  w  from  the  whole  we  may  con- 
d£f™nef    elude,    4t  That  fuppofing  the  Deity   fo 
"  kind    as   to  conned:  finfible   Tleafure 
"  with  certain  Actions  or  Contemplations, 
"  befide  the  rat  tonal  Advantage  perceiva- 
"  ble  in  them ;  there  is  a  great  moral  Neceft 
"  y/hy,    from  his  Goodnefs,  that  the  fl*fijr% 
"  nal  Senfe  of  Men  ihould  be  conftituted 
"  as  it  is  at  prefent,  fo  as  to  make  IDni 
"  formity  amid  ft  Variety  the  Occafion  of 
"  Pleafure."     For  were  it  not  fo,  but  on 
the  contrary,  if  irregular  Objects,  parti- 
cular Truths,  and  Operations  pleafed  us, 
befide  the  endlefs  Toil  this  would  involve 
us  in,  there  muft  arife  a  perpetual  DifTatif- 
fa&ion  in  all  rational  Agents  with  them- 
felves  ;   fince   Re  a  fin  and  Inter  eft   would 
lead  us  to  firnple  general  Caufes,  while  a 
contrary  Senfe  of  Beauty  would  make  us 
difapprove    them  :     Univerfal    Theorems 
would  appear  to  our  Underftanding  the  bed 
Means  of  increafins  our  Knowledge  of  what 
might  be  uieiul ;    while  a  contrary  Senfe 
would  fet  us  on  the  fearch  after  particu- 
lar Truths :  Thought  and  Reflection  would 
recommend  Objeds    with   IJnifcrmity   a- 
midft  Variety,    and  yet  this  perverfe  In- 
ftpiEt  would  involve  us  in  Labyrinths   of 
Confufon  and  cDiffimilit&de.      And  hence 
we  fee  *'  how  luitable  it  is  to  the  fugacious 

"  Bounty 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.         \ 05 

"  Bounty  which  we  fuppofe  in  the  Deity,  Sedt.  8. 

"  to  conftitute  our  internal  Sen fes  in  the  v^v^ 

"  manner  in  which  they  are ;   by  which 

"  Pleafure  is  join'd  to  the  Contemplation 

"  of  thofe  Obje£ts  which  a  finite  Mind 

"  can  befl:  imprint  and  retain  the  Ideas  of 

"  with  the  leaft  Diftracftion  ;   to  thofe  Ac- 

"  tions  which  are    mod  efficacious,    and 

"  fruitful  in  ufeful  Effed:s ;    and  to  thofe 

f '  Theorems  which  moft  enlarge  our  Minds V 

III.  As  to  the  other  Queftion,  "  What  Reafinof 
"  Reafbn  might  influence  the  Deity,  whom  g™™1 
"  no  Diverfity  of  Operation  could  diftradt 
*■■  or  w7eary,  to  chufe  to  operate  by  fim- 
"  ple ft  Means  and  general  Laws,  and  to 
?.'  diffiife  Uniformity,  'Proportion  and  Si- 
"  militude  thro  all  the  Parts  of  Nature 
"  which  we  can  obferve  ?"  Perhaps  there 
may  be  fome  real  Excellence  in  this  Man- 
ner of  Operation,  and  in  thefe  Forms, 
which  we  know  not  x  but  this  we  may  . 
probably  fay,  that  fince  the  divine  Good- 
nefs,  for  the  Reafons  above  mention'd,  has 
conftituted  our  Senfe  of  Beauty  as  it  is 
at  prefent,  the  fame  Goodnefs  might  de- 
termine the  Great  Architect  to  a- 
dorn  this  vaft  Theatre  in  a  manner  a- 
greeable  to  the  Spectators,  and  that  part 
which  is  expos'd  to  the  Obfervarion 
of  Men,  fo  as  to  be  pleafant  to  them ; 
efpecially  if  we  fuppofe  that  he  defign'd  to 
difcover  himfelf  to  them  as  Wife  and  Good, 

as 


1 06       jln  I N  QJJ I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedh  8-  as  well  as  Powerful :  for  thus  he  has  gi- 
o^V^  yen  them  greater  Evidences,  thro  the  whole 
Earth,  of  his  ^r£,  Wifdom,  "Dejign,  and 
Bounty,  than  they  can  poflibly  have  for 
the  Reafon,  Counfel,  and  Good-will  of 
their  fellow-Creatures,  with  whom  they 
converfe,  w7ith  full  Perfaafion  of  thefe 
qualities  in  them,  about  their  common 
Affairs. 

A  s  to  the  Operations  of  the  Deity 
by  general  Laws,  there  is  ftill  a  further 
Reaion  from  a  Senfe  fuperior  to  thefe 
already  confider'd,  even  that  of  Virtue, 
or  the  Beauty  of  Atlion,  which  is  the 
Foundation  of  our  greatefl  Happinefs.  For 
were  there  no  general  Laws  fix'd  in  the 
Courfe  of  Nature,  there  could  be  no  5Pr#- 
dence  or  *DeJign  in  Men,  no  rational 
Expectation  of  Effects  from  Caufes,  no 
Schemes  of  Adfcion  projected,  or  any  re- 
gular Execution.  If  then,  according  to 
the  Frame  of  our  Nature,  our  greatefl 
Happinefs  mufl  depend  upon  our  Actions, 
as  it  may  perhaps  be  made  appear  it 
does,  "  The  'Vuiver/e  muft  be  govern'd, 
"  not  by  particular  Wills,  but  by  ge- 
"  neral  Laws,  upon  which  we  can  found 
"  our  Expedations,  and  project  our 
"  Schemes  of  A&ion."  Nay  further, 
tho  general  Laws  did  ordinarily  obtain, 
yet  if  the  Deity  ufually  flopp'd  their  Ef- 

2  fedts 


Beauty,  Order,  &c.      107 

feds   whenever  it  was  neceflary  to    pre-Se<a.  8. 
vent  any  particular  Evils  ;  this  would  ef-<^VN) 
fe&ually,    and  juftly  fuperfede   all  human 
^Prudence  and  Care  about  Actions ;  fince 
a  fuperior  Mind  did  thus  relieve  Men  from 
their  Charg*. 


The  End  of  the  Firjl  Treatife. 


Treatise    II. 
viz. 

A  N 

INQUIRY 

Concerning  the 

Original  of  our  Ideas 

O  F' 

Virtue  or  Moral  Good. 


•£>uod  magis  ad  nos 


VPertinet,  &  nefcire  malum  eft,  agitamus :  utrumnt 
fDivitizs  homines  >  anjint  Virtute  beati : 
§)uidve  ad  Amicitias,  Ufus,  Reffumne,  trahat  nos 
JEt  quae  Jit  natura  Soniy  fummumqtie  quid  ejus. 

Hor.  Sat.  6.  Lib.  z.  v.  72. 


1 1 1 


A  N 

INQUIRY 

CONCERNING 

Moral  Good  andEviL. 

INTRODUCTION. 

THE  Word  Moral  Good- Moral 
ness,  inthisTreatife,  denotes  Go0^'^ 
our  Idea  of  fome  Quality  ap- 
prehended in  Actions \  which 
procures  Approbation^  and  Love  toward 
the  Actor,  from  thofe  who  receive  no  Ad- 
vantage by  the  Aliion.  Moral  Evil, 
denotes  our  Idea  of  a  contrary  Quality, 
which  excites  Averfion,  and  "Diflike  to- 
ward the  Actor,  even  from  Terfons  un- 
concerned in  its  natural  Tendency.  We 
muft  be  contented  with  thele  imperfe<3:  De- 
fcriptions,  until  we  difcover  whether  we 
really  have  fuch  Ideas,  and  what  general 
Foundation  there  is  in  Nature  for  this  Dif- 
ference 


1 1 1       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

ference  of  A&ions,    as  morally  Good  or 
Evil. 

These  Defcriptions  feem  to  contain  an 
univerfally  acknowledg'd  Difference  of  Mo- 
ral Good  and  Evil,  from  Natural.  All 
Men  who  fpeak  of  moral  Good,  acknow- 
ledge that  it  procures  Love  toward  thofe 
we  apprehend  poffefs'd  of  it  ;  whereas  na- 
tural Good  does  not.  In  this  matter  Men 
muft  confiilt  their  own  Breafts.  How  dif- 
ferently are  they  affe&ed  toward  thofe  they 
fuppofe  poffefs'd  of  Honejly,  Faith,  Gene- 
rofity,  Kindnefs,  even  when  they  expedfc 
no  Benefit  from  thele  admir'd  Qualitys ;  and 
thofe  who  are  poffefs'd  of  the  natural  Goods, 
luch  as  Houfes,  Lands,  Gardens,  Vine* 
yards,  Health,  Strength,  Sagacity  ?  We 
fliall  find  that  we  neceffarily  love  and  ap- 
prove the  Poffeffors  of  the  former  ;  but  the 
Poffeffion  of  the  latter  procures  no  Love 
at  all  toward  the  Poffeffor,  but  often  con- 
trary Affections  of  Envy  and  Hatred.  In 
the  fame  manner,  whatever  Quality  we 
apprehend  to  be  morally  Evil,  raifes  our 
Hatred  toward  the  Perfon  in  whom  we  ob- 
fcrve  it,  fuch  as  Treachery,  Cruelty,  In- 
gratitude,  even  when  they  are  no  way 
hurtful  to  our  felves  ;  whereas  we  heartily 
love,  efteem,  and  pity  many  who  are  ex- 
pos'd  to  natural  Evils,  fuch  as  Tain,  Po- 
verty, Hunger,  Sicknefs,  TDeath,  even  when 

we 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       in 

we  our  felves  fuffer  Inconveniencies,    by 
thefe  natural  Evils  of  others. 

Now  the  firft  Queftion  on  this  Subject 
is,  "  Whence  arife  thefe  different  Ideas  of 
*'  A<2ions." 

Because  we  fhall  afterwards  frequently  intereft. 
ufe  the  Words  IntereJI,  Advantage,  natn  Advanm 
ral  Good,  it  is  neceffary  here  to  fix  their  *** 
Ideas.     The  Pleafure  in  our  fenfible  Per- 
ceptions of  any  kind,  gives  us  our  firft  Idea 
of  natural  Good,  or  Rappinefs ;  and  then 
all  Obje&s  which  are  apt  to  excite  this  Plea- 
lure  are  call'd  immediately  Good.      Thofe 
Objects  which  may  procure  others  imme- 
diately pleafant,  are  call'd  Advantageous  : 
and  we  purfue  both  Kinds  from  a  View  of 
Intereft,  or  from  Self-Love. 

Our  Senfe  of  Pleafure  is  antecedent  to 
Advantage  or  Interefl,  and  is  the  Founda- 
tion of  it.  We  do  not  perceive  Pleafure 
in  Objedts,  becaufe  it  is  our  Intereji  to  do 
fb  ;  but  Objects  or  Actions  are  Advanta- 
geous, and  are  purfa'd  or  undertaken  from 
Intereji,  becaufe  we  receive  Tlea/ure  from 
them.  Our  Perception  of  Pleaiure  is  ne- 
ceffary, and  nothing  is  Advantageous  or  na- 
turally Good  to  us,  but  what  is  apt  to  raife 
Pleafure  mediately,  or  immediately.  Such 
Objedts  as  we  know,  either  from  Experience 
of  Senfe,  qx  Reafon,  to  be  immediately* 

I  ©r 


1 1 4       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

or  mediately  Advantageous,  or  apt  to  mi- 
nifter  Pleafure,  we  are  faid  to  purfue  from 
Self- Inter  eft,  when  our  Intention  is  only 
to  enjoy  this  Pleafure,  which  they  have  the 
Power  of  exciting.  Thus  Meats,  'Drink, 
Harmony,  fine  Trofpefls,  Tainting,  Sta- 
tues, are  perceiv'd  by  our  Senfes  to  be  im- 
mediately Good ;  and  our  Reafbn  fhews 
Riches  and  Tower  to  be  mediately  fo,  that 
is,  apt  to  furnifh  us  with  Objects  of  imme- 
diate Pleafure  :  and  both  Kinds  of  thefe  na- 
tural Goods  are  purlu'd  from  Interejl%  or 
Self-Love, 

opinions        Now  the  greateft  part  of  our  latter  Mo* 
t™  raliP  eftablilh  it  as  undeniable,  "  That  all 
moral  Good  "  moral  Quality s  have   neceflarily   fome 
and  Evil.   «<  Relation    to  the  Law  of  a  Superior, 
"  of  fufficient  Power  to  make  us  Happy 
"  or  Miferable*"  and  fince  all  Laws  ope- 
rate only  by  Sanations  of  Rewards^    or 
cPuniJhments,  which  determine  us  to  Obe* 
dience  by  Motives  of  Self-Intereft,   they 
fuppofe,  "  that  it  is  thus  that  Laws  do  con- 
*'  ftitute  fome  Anions  mediately  Good,  or 
"  Advantageous,  and  others  the  fame  way 
"  DifadvantageousT      They  fay   indeed, 
■'  That  a  benevolent  Legijlator  conftitutes 
*'  no  Actions  Advantageous  to  the  Agent 
"  by  Law,  but  fuch  as  in  their  own  Na- 
"  ture  tend  to  the  natural  Good  of  the 
"  Whole,  or,  at  leaft,  are  not  inconfiftent 
"  with  it  5  and  that  therefore  we  approve 

"  the 


Moral  Goo  6  and  Evil.       i  t  j 

"  the  Virtue  of  others,  becaufe  it  has  fbme 
M  finall  Tendency  to  our  Happinefs,  either 
C£  from  its  own  Nature,  or  from  this  ge- 
u  neral  Confideration,  That  Obedience  to 
"  a  benevolent  Legijlator,  is  in  general 
"  Advantageous  to  the  Whole,  and  to  us 
'*  in  particular  ;  and  that  for  the  contrary 
*'  Reafons  alone,  we  difapprove  the  Vice 
«  of  others,  that  is,  the  prohibited  Adion, 
"  as  tending  to  our  particular  "Detriment  in 
**  fome  degreed  But  then  they  maintain, 
"  That  we  are  determin'd  to  Obedience  to 
*'  Laws,  or  deterr'd  from  Difbbedience, 
"  merely  by  Motives  of  Self-Interejl,  to 
u  obtain  either  the  natural  Good  arifing 
'c  from  the  commanded  Adion,  or  the 
"  Rewards  promifed  by  the  Sanation  ;  or 
11  to  avoid  the  natural  evil  Confequences 
M  of  Difobedience,  or  at  lead  the  "Penal- 
%i  tys  of  the  Law!' 

Some  other  Moralifts  fuppofe  "  an  im- 
"  mediate  natural  Good  in  the  Adions 
B<  called  Virtuous ;  that  is,  That  we  are 
**  determin'd  to  perceive  fome  Beauty  in 
"  the  Adions  of  others,  and  to  love  the 
'*  Agent,  even  without  refleding  upon  any 
"  Advantage  which  can  any  way  redound 
"  to  us  from  the  Adion ;  that  we  have 
"  alfo  a  fecret  Senfe  of  Pleafure  accom- 
"  panying  fuch  of  our  own  Adions  as  wre 
"  call  Virtuous,  even  when  we  exped  no 
V  other  Advantage  from  them/'  But  they 
I  t  alledge 


\  1 6       An  I N QU I R Y  concerning 

alledge  at  the  feme  time,  <c  That  we  are 
■•  excited  to  perform  thefe  A&ions,  even 
tl  as  we  purliie,  or  purchafe  TiElures,  Sta- 
*'  tues,  Lands  kips,  from  Self-Intereft,  to 
"  obtain  this  Pleafure  which  accompanys 
"  the  very  Action,  and  which  we  necefc 
,,  farily  enjoy  in  doing  it."  The  Defign  of 
the  following  Se&ions  is  to  enquire  into  this 
matter  ;  and  perhaps  the  Reaibns  to  be  of- 
fer'd  may  prove, 

I.  "  That  fome  A&ions  have  to  Men 
"  an  immediate  Goodnefs  ;  or,  that  by 
"  a  fuperior  Sen/e,  which  I  call  a  Moral 
"  one,  we  perceive  Pleafure  in  the  Con- 
lc  templation  of  fuch  Actions  in  others, 
"  and  are  determin'd  to  love  the  Agent, 
<c  (and  much  more  do  we  perceive  Plea- 
••  fare  in  being  confcious  of  having  done 
"  liich  Actions  our  felves)  without  any 
"  View  of  further  natural  Advantage 
V  from  them." 

II.  It  may  perhaps  alio  appear,  "  That 
"  what  excites  us  to  thefe  Actions  which 
M  we  call  Virtuous,  is  not  an  Intention 
"  to  obtain  even  this  fenfible  Tleajiire ; 
"  much  lels  the  future  Rewards  from 
•'  Sanctions  of  Laws,  or  any  other  natu- 
* '  ral  Good,  which  may  be  the  Conlequence 
"  of  the  virtuous  Action  ;  but  an  entirely 
"  different  Principle  of  Action  from  Inte* 
"  reft  or  Self-Love" 

SECT. 


Moral  Good^Evil.      117 

Sea.  1. 

UYNJ 


SECT.    I. 

Of  the  Moral  Senfe  by  which  we 
perceive  Virtue  and  Vice,  and  ap- 
prove or  disapprove  them  tn  0- 
thers. 

I    f  a  a  HAT  the  Perceptions  of  moral  Different 

X      Good  and  Evil,  are  perfectly  dif-  J^l 
ferent  from  thofe  of  natural  Good,  or  Ad-  and  Natu- 
vantage,  every  one  muft  convince  himfelf, val  Good' 
by  reflecting  upon  the  different  Manner  in 
which  he  finds  himfelf  affected  when  thefe 
Objects  occur  to  him.     Had  we  no  Senfe 
offiood  diftind:  from  the   Advantage  or 
Interejt  arifing  from  the  external  Senfes, 
and  the  Perceptions  of  Beauty  and  Har- 
mony ;  our  Admiration  and  Love  toward  a 
fruitful  Field,  or  commodious  Habitation, 
would  be  much  the  fame  with  what  we 
have  toward  a  generous  Friend,    or  any 
noble  Charafler  ;   for  botrf  are,  or  may  be 
advantageous  to  us  :   And  we  fliould  no 
more  admire  any  Action,  or  love  any  Perfbn 
in  a  diflant  Country,   or  Age,  whofe  Influ- 
ence could  not  extend  to  us,  than  we  love 
the  Mountains  of  Peru,  while  we  are  un- 
concern'd  in  the  Spanijh  Trade.  We  fliould 
have  the  fame  Sentiments  and  AfFe&ions 
I  j  toward 


1 1  8       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  i .  toward  inanimate  Beings,  which  we  have 
v-^V%^  toward  rational  Agents  ;  which  yet  every- 
one knows  to  be  falfe.  Upon  Companion, 
we  fay,  "  Why  fhould  we  admire  or  love 
"  with  Efteem  inanimate  Beings  ?  They 
"  have  no  Intention  of  Good  to  us  ;  their 
"  Nature  makes  them  fit  for  our  Ules, 
"  which  they  neither  know  nor  ftudy  to 
"  lerve.  But  it  is  not  fo  with  rational 
*(  Agents  :  they  ftudy  our  Inter  eft,  and 
«*  delight  in  our  Haffinejs*  and  are  Bene- 
*'  volent  toward  us." 

We  are  all  then  confcious  of  the  Di£ 
ference  between  that  Love  and  Efteem,  or 
Perception  of  moral  Excellence,  which 
Benevolence  excites  toward  the  Perfon  in 
whom  we  obferve  it,  and  that  Opinion 
of  natural  Goodnefs,  which  only  raifes 
Tlefire  of  PofTeftion  toward  the  good  Ob- 
jecft.  Now  "  what  jfhould  make  this  Dif- 
^  ference,  if  all  Approbation,  or  Senfe  of 
"  Good  be  from  Profped;  of  Advantage  ? 
*'  Do  not  inanimate  Objects  promote  our 
"  Advantage,  as  well  as  Benevolent  cPer- 
f<  fons  who  do  us  Offices  of  Kindnefs, 
"  and  Friendfloip  ?  Should  we  not  then 
*'  have  the  Tamd  endearing  Sentiments  of 
*'  both  ?  or  only  the  fame  cold  Opinion 
H  of  Advantage  in  both  ?  "  The  Reafon 
why  it  is  not  io,  mnft  be  this,  "  That 
*'  we  have  a  diftind:  Perception  of  Beau- 
4-  ty,  ox  Excellence  in  the  kind  Affec- 
5  "  tions 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       119 

V  tions  of  rational  Agents  ;  whence  we  Sedt  1. 
<f  are  determined  to  admire  and  love  fuch  ^Y\J 
"  Characters  and  Perjdns." 

Suppose  we  reap  the  fame  Advantage  in  Anions 
from  two  Men,  one  of  whom  ferves  us  fm t0 our 
from  delight  in  our  Happinefs,  and  Love  Je  ves' 
toward  us  ;  the  other  from  Views  of  Self 
Intereft,  or  by  Conftraint :  both  are  in 
this  Cafe  equally  beneficial  or  advantageous 
to  us,  and  yet  we  fhall  have  quite  different 
Sentiments  of  them.  We  muft  then  cer- 
tainly have  other  Perceptions  of  moral 
Actions  than  thole  of  Advantage  :  And 
that  Power  of  receiving  thefe  Perceptions 
may  be  call'd  a  Moral  Sense,  fince  the 
Definition  agrees  to  it,  viz.  a  Tyetermina- 
tion  of  the  Mind,  to  receive  any  Idea  from 
the  ^refence  of  an  ObjeCt  which  occurs 
to  us,  independent  on  our  Will.  * 

This  perhaps  will  be  equally   evident  of  Evil, 
from  our  Ideas   of  Evil,  done  to  us  de-  Morai  and 
fignedly  by  a  rational  Agent.     Our  Senfes  ^aniral* 
of  natural  Good  and  Evil  would  make  us 
receive,  with  equal  Serenity  and  Compofure, 
an  Ajfault,  a  Buffet,  an  Affront  from  a 
Neighbour,    a   Cheat  from  a  Partner,  or 
Truftee,  as  we  would  an  equal  Damage  from 
the  Fall  of  a  Beam,  a  Tile,  or  a  Tempeft  ; 
and  we  ihould  have  the  fame  Afledtions  and 
Sentiments  of  both.     Villany,  Treachery, 

*  See  the  Preface,  Page  6. 

I  4  Cruelty^ 


no       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  i .  Cruelty,  would  be  as  meekly  refented   as 
<^Y^  a  Blajij    or  Mildew,    or  an  overflowing 
Stream.     Bur  I  fancy  every  one  is  very 
differently  affe&ed  on  theie  Occafions,  tho 
there  may  be  equal  natural  Evil  in  both. 
Nay,  Actions  no  way  detrimental,  may  oo 
cafion  the  ftrongeft   Anger,    and  Indigna- 
tion, if  they  evidence  only  impotent  Ha- 
tred,   or   Contempt.     And,    on.  the  other 
hand,    the   Intervention    of   moral    Ideas 
may  prevent  our  Hatred  of  the  Agent,  o% 
bad  moral   Apprehenfion  of  that  Action, 
which    caufes  to    us   the  great  eft  natural 
Evil.     Thus  the  Opinion  of  Juftice  in  any 
Sentence,  will  prevent  all  Ideas  of  moral 
Evil  in  the  Execution,  or  Hatred  toward 
the  Magiftrate,    who    is    the    immediate 
Caufe  of  our  greateft  Sufferings. 

m  Anions  j\  jN  our  Sentiments  of  A&ions  which 
mketsf  affed:  our  felves,  there  is  indeed  a  Mix- 
ture of  the  Ideas  of  natural  and  moral 
Good,  which  require  fome  Attention  to 
leparate  them.  But  when  we  refied:  upon 
the  Adions  which  affedt  other  Perfons 
only,  we  may  obferve  the  moral  Ideas 
unmix'd  with  thofe  of  natural  Goo  K  or 
Evil.  For  let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that 
thofe  Senfes  by  which  we  perceive  Plea- 
fore  in  natural  Obje&'s,  whence  they  are 
conftituted  Advantageous,  could  never 
raile  in  us  any  Defire  of  publick  Gcody 
but  only  of  what  was    good  to  our  felves 


Moral  Good  and  Evil,     hi 

in  particular.     Nor  could  they  ever  make  Sedt.  j. 
us  approve  an  A&ion  becaufe  of  its  pro-  wxj 
moting  the  Happinefs  of  others.     And  yet 
as  foon  as  any  Adion  is  reprefented  to 
us  as  flowing  from  Love,  Humanity,  Gra- 
titude,   Companion,   a  Study  of  the  good 
of  others,  and  a  "Delight  in  their  Happi- 
nefs, altho  it  were  in  the  moft  diftant  Part 
of  the  World,  or  in  fome  paft  Age,  we  feel 
Joy  within  us,  admire  the  lovely  Adtion, 
and  praife  its  Author.     And  on  the  con- 
trary, every  Adtion  reprefented  as  flowing 
from  Hatred,    T^e  light  in  the  Mifery  of 
others,  or  Ingratitude,  raifes  Abhorrence 
and  Averfion. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  the  Adtions  we 
approve  in  others,  are  generally  imagin'd 
to  tend  to  the  natural  Good  of  Mankind, 
or  of  fome  Tarts  of  it.  But  whence 
this  fecret  Chain  between  each  cPerfon  and 
Mankind  1  How  is  my  Inter  eft  connected 
with  the  moft  diftant  Tarts  of  it  ?  And 
yet  I  muft  admire  Actions  which  are  benefi- 
cial to  them,  and  love  the  Author.  Whence 
this  Love,  Compajfion,  Indignation  and 
Hatred  toward  even  feigned  Charaffers? 
in  the  moft  diftant  Ages,  and  Nations, 
according  as  they  appear  Kind,  Faithful, 
Companionate,  or  of  the  oppofite  'Dijpo- 
fitions:  toward  their  imaginary  Contempo- 
raries ?  If  there  is  no  moral  Senfe,  which 
piakes  rational  Adtions  appear  Beautiful, 

ox 


i  2  2        -^ft  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Se£t  i .  or  Ttefornid  ;   if  all  Approbation  be  from 
v^v^  the  Intereft  of  the  Approver, 

Whafs   Hecuba    /<?   #.r,    or   we    to 
Hecuba  ?* 

Moral  III.  Some  refin'd  Explainers  of  Self-Love 

frZZ  may  tel1  us>  "  That  we  hate>  or  love 
terefi.  "  Characters,  according  as  we  apprehend 
"  we  fhould  have  been  fapported,  or  in- 
"  jur'd  by  them,  had  we  liv'd  in  their 
"  Days."  But  how  obvious  is  the  Anfwer, 
if  we  only  obferve,  that  had  we  no  Senfe  of 
moral  Good  in  Humanity,  Mercy,  Faith- 
fulnefs,  why  Ihould  not  Self-Love,  and 
our  Senfe  of  natural  Good  engage  us  al- 
ways to  the  victorious  Side,  and  make  us 
admire  and  love  the  fuccelsful  Tyrant,  or 
Traitor?  Why  do  not  we  love  Sin  on, 
orPYRRHUS,  in  xhzjfcneidl  for  had  we 
been  Greeks,  thefe  two  would  have  been 
very  advantageous  Characters.  Why  are 
we  affe&ed  with  the  Fortunes  of  Pria- 
mus,  Polites,  Choroebus  or  iE- 
neas?  It  is  plain  we  have  fome  fecret 
Senfe  which  determines  our  Approbation 
without  regard  to  Selflntereji ;  otherwife 
we  Ihould  always  favour  the  fortunate  Side 
without  regard  to  Virtue,  and  ftppofe  our 
felves  engaged  with  that  Party. 

*  Tragedy  of  Hamlet. 

Suppose 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       123 

Sedt  i. 
Suppose  any  great  Deftru&ion  occa-  O^v^O 
fion'd  by  mere  Accident,  without  any  De- 
fign,  or  Negligence  of  the  Perfon  who  ca- 
fually  was  the  Author  of  it :  This  Adion 
might  have  been  as  difadvantagcous  to  us 
as  defign'd  Cruelty,  or  Malice  ;  but  who 
will  Jay  he  has  the  fame  Idea  of  both 
Anions,  or  Sentiments  of  the  Agents  ? 
M  Whence  then  this  Difference  ?" 

And  further,    Let  us  make  a  Suppofi- 
tion,  which  perhaps  is  not  far  from  Matter 
of  Fad,  to  try  if  we  cannot  approve  even 
difadvantageous  Actions,   and  perceive  mo- 
ral Good  in  them.     A  few  ingenious  Arti- 
fans,  perfecuted  in  their  own  Country,  flee 
to  ours  for  Prote&ion  ;  they  inftrudt  us  in 
Manufactures  which   fupport  Millions  of 
Poor,  increafe  the  Wealth  of  almoft  every 
Perfbn  in  the  State,    and   make    us  for- 
midable  to    our   Neighbours.      In  a  Na- 
tion not  far  diftant  from  us,   fbme  refoluce 
Burgomajiers,   full  of  Love  to  their  Coun- 
try^ and  Companion  toward  their  Fellow- 
Citizens,  oppreft  in  Body  and  Soul  by  a 
Tyrant,   and  Inquifition,   with  indefatiga- 
ble ^Diligence,  public  Spirit,  and  Courage, 
fupport  a  tedious  perilous  War  againft  the 
Tyrant,  and  form  an  induftrious  Republick, 
which  rivals  us  in  Trade,    and  almoft  in 
Tower.     All  the  World  fees  whether  the 
former  or  the  latter  have  been  more  ad- 
vantageous 


1 24      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Secft  j .  vantageous  to  us  :  and  yet  let  every  Man 
v^V^  confult  his  own  Breaft,  which  of  the  two 
Characters  he  has  the  mod  agreeable  Idea 
of  ?  whether  of  the  ufeful  Refugee,  or  the 
public-fprited  Burgomajier,  by  whole 
Love  to  his  own  Country r,  we  have  often 
fuffer'd  in  our  Interefis  ?  and  I  am  confi- 
dent he  will  find  fome  other  Foundation  of 
Efteem  than  Advantage,  and  will  lee  a  juft 
Reafon,  why  the  Memory  of  our  Artifans 
is  fo  obfcure  among  us,  and  yet  that  of  our 
Rivals  is  immortal. 

setf-Love       IV.  Some  Moralifls,    who  will  rather 

mt  th\  r  twi^  Self'Love   into  a  thoufand  Shapes, 

Appnba-    t^a^1   allow  any   other   Principle  of  Ap- 

uon,         probation    than    Intereft,     may    tell    us, 

M  That  whatever  profits  one  Part  without 

cf  detriment  to  another,  profits  the  Whole, 

"  and  then  fome  fmall  Share  will  redound 

"  to  each  Individual  \  that  thofe  Actions 

"  which  tend  to  the  Good  of  the  Whole \  if 

"  univerfally  performed,    would  moft  ef- 

"  fedtually  fecure  to  each  Individual  his 

"  own  Happineft  ;  and  that  conlequently, 

*4  we  may  approve  luch  A&ions,  from  the 

"  Opinion  of  their  tending  ultimately  to 

"  our  own  'Advantage. " 

W  e  need  not  trouble  thefe  Gentlemen 
to  Ihew  by  their  nice  Train  of  Conle- 
quences,  and  Influences  of  Actions  by  way 
of  Precedent  in  particular  Inftances,    that 

wc 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       ny 

we  in  this  Age  reap  any  Advantage  from  Sedt  i. 
O r e s T e s's  killing  the  treacherous  iEGYS-  v^y^/ 
thus,  or  from  the  Anions  of  Codrus 
or  D  e  c  i  u  s.    Allow  their  Reafonings  to  be 
perfe&ly  good,  they  only  prove,  that  after 
long  Reflexion,  and  Realoning,  we  may 
find  out  fome  ground,   even  from  Views  of 
Interefi,    to   approve    the   fame   Actions 
which  every  Man  admires  as  foon  as  he 
hears  of  them  ;  and  that  too  under  a  quite 
different  Conception. 

Should  any  of  our  Travellers  find 
fbme  old  Grecian  Treafure,  the  Mifer 
who  hid  it,  certainly  perform'd  an  Ac- 
tion more  to  the  Traveller's  Advantage 
than  Codrus  or  Orestes  ;  for  he  muft 
have  but  a  fmall  Share  of  Benefit  from  their 
A&ions,  whole  Influence  is  fb  diipers'd, 
and  loft  in  various  Ages,  and  Nations  : 
Surely  then  this  Mifer  muft  appear  to 
the  Traveller  a  prodigious  Hero  in  Vir- 
tue!  For  Self-Intereji  will  make  us  only 
efteem  Men  according  to  the  Good  they 
do  to  our  Selves,  and  not  give  us  high 
Ideas  of  public  Good,  but  in  proportion 
to  our  Share  of  it.  But  muft  a  Man 
have  the  Reflection  of  Cumberland, 
or  Puffendorf,  to  admire  Generoflty, 
Faith,  Humanity,  Gratitude  ?  Or  realbn 
fo  nicely  to  apprehend  the  Evil  in  Cru- 
elty, Treachery,  Ingratitude  ?  Do  not  the 
former  excite  our  Admiration ,  and  Love* 
2  and 


t  2  6       An  I  N  QJJ  I RY  concerning 

Se£t.  i.  and  Study  of  Imitation,  wherever  we  fee 
l/V^  them,  almoft  at  firft  View,  without  any 
luch  Reflexion  ;  and  the  latter,  our  Ha- 
tred,  Contempt,  and  Abhorrence  ?  Un- 
happy would  it  be  for  Mankind,  if  a  Senfe 
of  Virtue  was  of  as  narrow  an  Extent,  as 
a  Capacity  for  fiieh  Metaphyficks. 

our  Moral  V.  This  moral  Senfe,  either  of  our 
senfe  can-  own  Actions,  or  of  thofe  of  others,  has 
f?  ff  this  in  common  with  our  other  Senfes,  that 
however  our  Defire  of  Virtue  may  be 
counterballanc'd  by  Inter  eft,  our  Senti- 
ment or  Perception  of  its  Beauty  cannot ; 
as  it  certainly  might  be,  if  the  only  Ground 
of  our  Approbation  were  Views  of  Advan- 
tage. Let  us  confider  this  both  as  to  oui: 
own  Actions  and  thofe  of  others. 

in  judging      A  Covetous  Man  fhall   diflike   any 

°LZn7n  Branch  °f  Trade> how  ufeful  foever  ic  may 

be  to  the  Publick,  if  there  is  no  Gain 
for  himfelf  in  it  ;  here  is  an  Averfion 
from  Intereft.  Propofe  a  fufficient  Pre- 
mium, and  he  fhall  be  the  firft  who  fets 
about  it,  with  full  Satisfaction  in  his  own 
Conduct.  .Now  is  it  the  fame  way  with 
our  Senfe  of  moral  Actions  ?  Should 
any  one  advife  us  to  wrong  a  Minor* 
or  Orphan,  or  to  do  an  ungrateful  Acftion 
toward  a  Benefactor  ;  we  at  firft  View  ab- 
hor it :  AfTure  us  that  it  will  be  very  ad- 
vantageous to  us,  propofe  even  a  Reward ; 

our 


Mor  A  l  Goo  d  and  Evil.      127 

our  Senfe  of  the  Aftion  is  not  alter 'd.  It  Se6t.  1 
is  true,  thefe  Motives  may  make  us  under-  L^y\J 
take  it ;  but  they  have  no  more  Influence 
upon  us  to  make  us  approve  it,  than  a  Phy- 
fician's  Advice  has  to  make  a  naufeous  Po- 
tion pleafant  to  the  Tafte,  when  we  per- 
haps force  our  felves  to  take  it  for  the  Re- 
covery of  Health. 

Mad  we  no  Notion  of  A&ions,  befide 
our  Opinion  of  their  Advantage \  or  TDifad- 
vantage,  could  we  ever  chule  an  Adtion 
as  Advantageous,  which  we  are  confcious 
is  ftill  Evil?  as  it  too  often  happens  in  hu- 
man Affairs.    Where  would  be  the  need  of 
fiich  high  Bribes  to  prevail  with  Men  to 
abandon  the  Interefts  of  a  ruin'd  Party,  or 
of  Tortures  to  force  out  the  Secrets  of  their 
Friends  ?    Is  it  fo  hard  to  convince  Mens 
Underftandings,  if  that  be  the  only  Faculty 
we  have  to  do  with,  that  it  is  probably 
more  advantageous  to  feture  prefent  Gain, 
and  avoid  prefent  Evils,  by  joining  with  the 
prevalent  Party,  than  to  wait  for  the  re- 
mote Poflibility  of  future  Good,   upon  a 
Revolution  often  improbable,  and  fometimes 
unexpe&ed  ?     And  when  Men  are  overper- 
fiiaded  by  Advantage,  do  they  always  ap- 
prove their  own  Conduit  ?     Nay,  how  of- 
ten is  their  remaining  Life   odious,    and 
lhameful,  in  their  own  Senfe  of  it,  as  well 
as  in  that  of  others,    to  whom  the  bale 
Adtion  was  profitable  ? 

If 


1*8       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  i. 

Vy^  If  any  one  becomes  fatisfy'd  with  his 
own  Condud  in  fuch  a  Cafe,  upon  what 
Ground  is  it  ?  How  does  he  pleafe  himfelf, 
or  vindicate  his  Actions  to  others  ?  Never 
by  refle&ing  upon  his  private  Advantage* 
or  alledging  this  to  others  as  a  Vindication  ; 
but  by  gradually  warping  into  the  moral 
'Principles  of  his  new  'Party ;  for  no  Party 
is  without  them.  And  thus  Men  become 
pleas'd  with  their  Actions  under  fome  Ap- 
pearance of  moral  Good,  diftind:  from  Ad* 
vantage* 

our  Moral     It  may  perhaps  be  alledg'd,  "  That  in 

founded  on  "    th°re  ASti0nS  °f  0Ur  OWn  Which  We  Cal1 

Religion.     "  Good,  there  is  this  conftant  Advantage, 
"  fuperior    to   all  others,    which   is  the 
"  Ground  of  our  Approbation,  and  the  Mo* 
"  tive  to  them  from  Self-love,  viz.  That 
"  we  fuppofe  the  Deity    will    reward 
"  them."    This  will  be  more  fully  confi- 
der'd  *  afterwards  :  At  prefent  it  is  enough 
to  obferve,  that  many  have  high  Notions 
of   Honour,    Faith,    Generojity,    Juftice* 
who  have  fcarce  any  Opinions  about  the 
Deity,  or  any  Thoughts  of  future  Re~ 
wards  ;  and  abhor  any  thing  which  is  Trea- 
cherous, Cruel,  or  Vnjuft,  without  any  re- 
gard to  future  Punifhments. 

*  Sec  Sett,  ih  Art.  % 

But 


Moral  Good  andEviL.       X1p 

Sed.  i. 
But  further,   tho  theft  Rewards,  and  ^v^ 
Tuni/hments,  may  make  my  own  Actions 
appear  advantageous  to  me,  and  make  me 
approve  them   from  Self-Love,  yet  they 
would  never  make  me  approve,  and  Jove 
another  Perfon  for  the  like  Adions,  whoft 
Merit  would  not  be  imputed  to  me.    Thoft 
Actions  are  advantageous    indeed   to  the 
Agent  ;  but  his  Advantage  is  not  my  Ad- 
vantage :    and  Self-Love  could  never  in- 
fluence me  to  approve  Adions  as  advan- 
tageous to  others,  or  to  love  the  Authors 
of  them  on  that  account. 

This  is  the  fecond  thing  to  be  confi-  our  Moral 
der'd,  "  Whether  our  Senfe  of  the  moral  StteA°l 
"  Good  or  Evil,  in  the  Actions  of  others,  thm  of  o~ 
"  canbeover-ballanc'd,  or  brib'd  by  Views  ther£  mt 
"  o£  Inter  eft  T     Now  1  may  indeed  eafily  brfrd. 
be  capable  of  wifhing,  that  another  would 
do  an  Adion  I  abhor  as  morally  Evil,  if 
it  were  very  Advantageous  to  me  :  Inter  eft 
in  that  Cafe  may  overbalance  my  Defire  of 
Virtue  in  another.     But  no  Inter  eft  to  my 
felf  will  make  me  approve  an  Adion  as 
morally  Good,  which,  without  that  Inte- 
reft  to  my  felf  would  have  appear'd  mo- 
rally Evil  ;   if,  upon  computing  its  whole 
Effeds,   it  appears  to  produce  as  great  a 
moment  of  Good  in  the  Whole,  when  it  is 
not  beneficial  to  me,  as  it  did  before  when 
it  was.    In  our  Senfe  of  moral  Good  or 
K  Evil9 


t  3  o       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sed:.  i.  Evil,  our  own  private  Advantage  or  Lofs 
^V^  is  of  no  more  moment,  than  the  Advan- 
tage or  Lois  of  a  third  Perfon,  to  make  an 
A&ion  appear  Good  or  Evil.  This  Senle 
therefore  cannot  be  over-ballanc'd  by  Inte* 
reft.  How  ridiculous  an  Attempt  wou'd  it 
be,  to  engage  a  Man  by  Rewards,  or  to 
threaten  him  into  a  good  Opinion  of  an 
Adtion,  which  was  contrary  to  his  tnoral 
Notions  ?  We  may  procure  Diflimulation 
by  fuch  means,  and  that  is  all. 

frotocca-  VI.  A  late  witty  Author  *  fays,  "  That 
PraJy  "  t'ie  Lea^ers  of  Mankind  do  not  really 
"  admire  fuch  A&ions  as  thole  of  Re- 
"  gulus,  or  Decius,  but  only  obferve* 
M  that  Men  of  liich  Dilpofitions  are  very 
"  uleful  for  the  Defence  of  any  State; 
"  and  therefore  by  Tanegyricks,  and  Sta- 
*'  tties,  they  encourage  luch  Tempers  in 
"  others,  as  the  molt  tr affable,  and  uje- 
"  fair  Here  firft  let  us  confider,  If  a 
Traitor,  who  would  fell  his  own  Country 
to  us5  may  not  often  be  as  advantageous 
to  us,  as  a  Hero  who  defends  us :  And  yet 
we  can  love  the  Treafon,  and  hate  the 
Traitor.  We  can  at  the  lame  time  praile 
a  gallant  Enemy,  who  is  very  pernicious 
to  us.  Is  there  nothing  in  all  this  but  an 
Opinion  of  Advantage  ? 


See  the  Fable  of  the  Bees,  Page  34,  56.   3d  Edition. 

Again, 


Moral  Good  a?id  Evil.      131 

Sea.  1. 
Again,  upon  this  Scheme  what  could  a  O^YNJ 
Statue  or  Tanegyrick  effedt  ? — Men  Jove 
Traife — They  will  do  the  Actions  which 
they  obferve  to  bepraijed. — ^Praife,  with 
Men  who  have  no  other  Idea  of  Good  but 
Self-Inter  eft,  is  the  Opinion  which  a  Na- 
tion or  Tarty  have  of  a  Man  as  ufefiil  to 
them — Regulus,  orCAio,  orDECius, 
had  no  Advantage  by  the  A&ions  which 
profited  their  Country,  and  therefore  they 
themfelves  could  not  admire  them,  how- 
ever the  Perlbns  who  reap'd  the  Advan- 
tage might  praife fuch  Actions. Regu- 
lus or  Cato  could  not  poffibly  praife  or 
love  another  Hero  for  a  virtuous  Aft  ion  ; 
for  this  would  not  gain  them  the  Advan- 
tage of  Honour ;  and  their  own  A&ions 
they  muft  have  look'd  upon  as  the  hard 
Terms  on  which  Honour  was  to  be  pur- 
chas'd,  without  any  thing  amiable  in  them, 
which  they  could  contemplate  or  refled: 

upon  with  Pleafure. Now  how  unlike 

is  this  to  what  the  lead  Obfervation 
would  teach  a  Man  concerning  fuch  Cha- 
racters ? 

But  fays  *  he,  "  Thefe  wondrous  cun- 
"  ning  Governours  made  Men  believe,  by 
"  their  Statues  and  Tanegyricks,  that  there 
"  was  pub  lick  Spirit,  and  that  this  was  in 


*  See  the  fame  Author  in  the  fame  Place, 

K  2  "  ic 


1 3 1        An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  i."  it  felf  Excellent ;   and  hence  Men  are 

•Y^  u  led  to  admire  it  in  others,  and  to  imi- 

"  tate  it  in  themfelves,  forgetting  the  Pur- 

"  fiiit  of  their  own  Advantage?     So  eafy 

a  matter  it  feems  to  him,   to  quit  judging  of 

others  by  what  we  feel  in  our  felves  ! • 

for  a  Perfon  who  is  wholly  felfijh,  to  ima- 
gine others  to  be  pub lie k-fpir it ed  ! 

for  one  who  has  no  Ideas  of  Gojod  but  in 
his  own  Advantage,  to  be  led,  by  thePer- 
fitafions  of  others,  into  a  Conception  of 
Goodnefs  in  what  is  avowedly  detrimental 
to  himielf,  and  profitable  to  others  ;  nay 
fo  entirely,  as  not  to  approve  the  Action 
thorowly,  but  fo  far  as  he  was  confeious 
that  it  proceeded  from  a  difint  ere  fled Study 

of  the   Good  of  others! Yet  this  it 

feems  Statues  and  Tanegyricks  can  ac- 
compliih ! 

Nil  intra  eft  oleam,  nil  extra  eft  in  nuce 
duri  !  * 

It  is  an  eafy  matter  for  Men  to  afTert 
any  thing  in  Words  ;  but  our  own  Hearts 
muft  decide  the  Matter,  "  Whether  fome 
"  moral  Affions  do  not  at  firft  View  ap- 
"  pear  amiable,  even  to  thole  who  are 
u  unconcern 'd  in  their  Influence?  Whe- 
"  ther  we  do  not  fincerely  love  a  gene- 
u  rous  kind  Friend,    or  Tatriot,    whofe 


*  Hor.  Ep.  i.  Lib,  z.  v.  31. 

L  *  Actions 


Moral  Good^JEvil.      135 

"  Adions  procure  Honour  to  him  only,  Sed.  1. 
"  without  any  Advantage  to  our  felves  V"  ^v^ 
It  is  true,  that  the  Adions  which  we  ap- 
prove, are  ufeful  to  Mankind  ;  but  not  al- 
ways to  the  Approver.  It  would  perhaps 
be  ufeful  to  the  Whole,  that  all  Men  agreed 
in  performing  fiich  Actions  ;  and  then  every 
one  would  have  his  Share  of  the  Advan- 
tage:  But  this  only  proves,  that  Reafon 
and  calm  Reflection  may  recommend  to  us, 
from  Self-Inter  eft,  thofe  Adions,  which 
at  firfl:  View  our  moral  Senfe  determines  us 
to  admire,  without  confidering  thislnterefl. 
Nay,  our  Senfe  fhall  operate  even  where 
the  Advantage  to  our  felves  does  not  hold. 
We  can  approve  the  Juftice  of  a  Sentence 
againft  our  felves  :  A  condemn'd  Traitor 
may  approve  the  Vigilance  ofaCiCERO  in 
diicovering  Confpiracies,  tho  it  had  been 
for  the  Traitor's  Advantage,  that  there  ne- 
ver had  been  in  the  World  any  Men  of  fuch 
Sagacity.  To  fay  that  he  may  ftill  approve 
fuch  Condud  as  tending  to  the  publick 
Good,  is  a  Jeft  from  one  whole  only  Idea 
of  Good  is  Self-Inter  eft.  Such  a  Perfon 
has  no  Defire  of  public k  Good  further  than 
it  tends  to  his  own  Advantage,  which  it 
does  not  at  all  in  the  prefent  Cafe. 

VII.  If  what  is  faid  makes  it  appear, Nor  Ct*f- 
that  we  have  fome  other  amiable  Idea  of  ^/&c! 
Adions  than  that  of  Advantageous  to  our 
felves,    we  may  conclude,    "  That  this 
K  3  "  Per- 


An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Perception  of  moral  Good  is  not  deriv'd 
from  Cufto?n,  Education,  Example,  or 
Study"  Thefe  give  us  no  new  Ideas  : 
They  might  make  us  fee  Advantage  to  our 
felves  in  Adtions  whofe  Ufefulnefs  did  not 
at  firft  appear ;  or  give  us  Opinions  of  fome 
Tendency  of  Adtions  to  our  Tjetriment, 
by  fome  nice  Deductions  of  Reafon,  or  by 
a  rafh  Prejudice,  when  upon  the  firft  View 
of  the  Action  we  fhould  have  obferv'd  no 
fuch  thing  :  but  they  never  could  have 
made  us  apprehend  Adtions  as  amiable  or 
odious,  without  any  Confideration  of  our 
own  Advantage. 

VIII.  It  remains  then,  "  That  as  the 
"  Author  of  Nature  has  determin'd  us 
"  to  receive,  by  our  external  Sen/es,  plea- 
"  fant  or  difagreeable  Ideas  of  Objedts, 
"  according  as  they  are  ufeful  or  hurtful  to 
"  our  Bodys ;  and  to  receive  from  uniform 
6 '  Objects  the  Pleafures  of  Beauty  and  Har- 
1 '  wo&y,  to  excite  us  to  the  Purfuit  of  Know- 
4i  ledge,  and  to  reward  us  for  it  ;  or  to  be 
c'  an  Argument  to  us  of  his  Goodnefs,  as 
"  the  Uniformity  it  felf  proves  his  Exif 
"  teixe,  whether  we  had  a  Senfe  of  Beauty 
"  in  Uniformity  or  not :  in  the  fame  man- 
"  ner  he  has  given  us  a  Moral  Sense, 
"  to  diredt  our  Actions,  and  to  give  us  ftill 
M  nobler  Tleafares  ;  fb  that  while  we  are 
M  only  intending  the  Good  of  others,  we 

"  unde- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      135 

<c  undesignedly  promote  our  own  greateftSed.  i- 
M  -private  Good'9  ^w-^j 

We  are  not  to  imagine,  that  this  moral  This  Mo- 
Senfe,  more  than  the  other  Senies,  fuppofes  rfl  Senf* 

J    .  TJ  Tjr  t     j  rr  does  not 

any   innate  Ideas,   Knowledge,    or  prac-  infer  m- 
tical  Tr  op  oft  ion  :  We  mean  by  it  only  a  nate  Ideas 
'Determination  of  our  Minds  to  receive  ZfmT 
amiable  or  difagreeable  Ideas  of  Actions, 
when  they  occur  to  our  Obfervation,   an- 
tecedent   to    any  Opinions  of  Advantage 
or  Lofs  to  redound  to   our  felves  from 
them  ;    even  as  we  are  pleas'd  with  a  re- 
gular Form,  or  an  harmonious  Compofition, 
without  having  any  Knowledge  of  Mat he- 
mat icks,  or  feeing  any  Advantage  in  that 
Form,  or  Compofition,  different  from  the 
immediate  Plealure. 


K  4        SECT. 


i  3  6       An  I N  Q.U  I R  Y  concerning 

Sea.  2. 


</vv> 


SECT.    II. 

Concerning  the  immediate  Motive  to 
virtuous  Actions, 

TH  E  Motives  of  human  A&ions*  or 
their  immediate  Caufes,  would  be 
bed  underftood  after  confidering  the  Taf- 
Jions  and  AjfeEiions  ;  but  here  we  fhall 
only  confide r  the  Springs  of  the  A<5tions 
which  we  call  virtuous \  as  far  as  it  is  ne- 
ceflary  to  fettle  the  general  Foundation  of 
the  Moral  Sen Je. 


Affetrwns,  J.  Every  AcSHon,  which  we  apprehend 
foAmlm* as  eit^er  morally  good  or  evil,  is  always 
fuppos'd  to  flow  from  fome  Affe5lion  to- 
ward rational  Agents  ;  and  whatever  we 
call  Virtue  or  Vic e,  is  either  fome  fuch  Af- 
feEiion,  or  fome  AElion  confequent  upon 
it,  Or  it  may  perhaps  be  enough  to  make 
an  Adtion,  or  Omiffion,  appear  vitious,  if 
it  argues  the  Want  of  liich  Afredion  to- 
ward rational  Agents,  as  we  expedt  in  Cha- 
racters counted  morally  good.  All  the 
A&ions  counted  religious  in  any  Country, 
are  fuppos'd,  by  tjiofe  who  count  them 
fo,  to  flow  from  fome  Affections  to- 
ward the  Deity  ;  and  whatever  we  call 
focial  Virtue  %  we  (till  fuppofe  to  flow  from 

Af- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     157 

Affe&ions  toward  our  Fellow-Creatures  :  Se&.  7. 

for  in  this  all  feem  to  agree,  "  That  exter-  [jryyj 

"  nal  Motions,  whenaccompany'd  with  no 

"  AfFedtions    toward  God    or   Man,    or 

"  evidencing  no  Want  of  the  expected  Af- 

"  fedtions  towTard  either,  can  have  no  mo~ 

M  ra/  Good  ox  Evil  in  them." 

Ask,  for  inftance,  the  mod  abjlemious 
Hermit,  if  Temperance  of  it  felf  would  be 
morally  good,  fuppofing  it  fliew'd  no  Obe- 
dience toward  the  Deity,  made  us  no  fit- 
ter for  Devotion,  or  the  Service  of  Mankind, 
or  the  Search  after  Truth,  than  Luxury  ; 
and  he  will  eafily  grant,  that  it  would  be 
no  moral  Good,  tho  ftill  it  might  be  na- 
turally good  or  advantageous  to  Health  : 
And  mere  Courage,  or  Contempt  of  Dan- 
ger, if  we  conceive  it  to  have  no  regard 
to  the  Defence  of  the  Innocent,  or  repair- 
ing of  Wrongs,  or  Self-Intereft,  wou'd  on- 
ly entitle  its  PoffefTor  to  Bedlam.  When 
fuch  fort  of  Courage  is  fometimes  admir'd, 
it  is  upon  fome  fecret  Apprehenfion  of 
a  good  Intention  in  the  ufe  of  it,  or 
as  a  natural  Ability  capable  of  an  ufe- 
ful  Application.  Trudence,  if  it  was  on- 
ly employ'd  in  promoting  private  In- 
tereft,  is  never  imagin'd  to  be  a  Vir- 
tue :  and  JuJIice,  or  obferving  a  ftridt  E- 
quality,  if  it  has  no  regard  to  the  Good 
of  Mankind,  the  Preiervation  of  Rights, 
and  fecuring  Teace,  is  a  Quality  properer 

for 


1 3  8        An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<a.  2.  for  its  ordinary  Gejlamen,  a  Beam  and 
^V^  Scales,  than  for  a  rational  Agent.  So 
that  thefe  four  Qualitys,  commonly  call'd 
Cardinal  Virtues,  obtain  that  Name,  be- 
caufe  they  are  DiJpofitions  univerfally  ne- 
ceflary  to  promote  fublick  Good,  and  de- 
note Affections  toward  rational  Agents  ; 
otherwife  there  would  appear  no  Virtue 
in  them. 

'jffittiom,.      II.  Now  if  it  can  be  made  appear,  that 
Wmerefi-  nonQ  of  thefe  Affe(aions  which  we   call 

virtuous,  fpring  from  Self-love,  or  Defire 
of  private  Intereft  ;  fince  all  Virtue  is 
either  fbme  fuch  Affections,  or  Actions 
confequent  upon  them  ;  it  muft  necefTarily 
follow,  "  That  Virtue  is  not  purfued^from 
*«  the  Intereft  or  Self  love  of  the  Tur- 
"  fuer,  or  any  Motives  of  his  own  Ad- 
"  vantage. " 

Love  of         The  Affections  which  are  of  moft  Im- 
compU-     portance  in  Morals,  are  Love   and  Ha- 

mtere/o}d  TRED:  Al1  the  reft  feem  but  different  Mo- 
niftiicence,  difications  of  thefe  two  original  Affections. 
Now  in  difcourfing  of  Love  toward  ratio- 
nal  Agents,  we  need  not  be  caution'd  not 
to  include  that  Love  between  the  Sexes, 
which,  when  no  other  Affe&ions  accom- 
pany it,  is  only  Defire  of  Pleafure,  and  is 
never  counted  a  Virtue.  -  Love  toward  ra- 
tional Agents,  is  fubdivided  into  Love  of 
Complacence  or  Efleem,   and  Love  of  Be* 

nevo* 


Moral  GooD^i  Evil.      139 

nevolence  :  And  Hatred  is  fubdivided  into  Sed:.  2- 
Hatred  of  'Difplicence  or  Contempt,   and   Wv 
Hatred  of  Malice.     Concerning  each  of 
thefe  feparately  we  lhall  confider,    "  Whe- 
"  ther  they  can  be  influenc'd  by  Motives 
"  of  Self  Inter  eft." 

Love  of  Complacence,  Efteem,  or  Good-  Aryn- 
liking,  at  firft  view  appears  to  be  difinte-  Zterefied. 
reftea,  and  fo  the  Hatred  of  T>ifplicence 
or  cDiftike  ;    and  are  entirely  excited  by 
fbme  moral  gjhialitys,  Good  ot  Evil,   ap- 
prehended to  be  in   the  Objects;  which 
Qualitys  the  very  Frame  of  our  Nature 
determines  us  to  love  or  hate,  to  approve 
or  disapprove,  according  to  the  moral  Senfe 
*  above  explain'd.     Propofe  to  a  Man  all 
the  Rewards  in  the  World,  or  threaten  all 
the  Punilhments,   to  engage  him  to  love 
with   Efteem,    and   Complacence,    a  third 
Perfon   entirely   unknown,   or  if  known, 
apprehended  to  be  cruel,  treacherous,  un- 
grateful ;  you  may  procure  external  Ob- 
lequioulhefs,  or  good  Offices,   or  Diffimu- 
lation  of  Love  ;   but  real  Love  of  Efteem 
no  Price  can  purchafe.     And  the  lame  is 
obvious  as  to  Hatred  of  Contempt,  which 
no  Motive   of   Advantage    can   prevent. 
On  the  contrary,    reprefent   a  Character 
as  generous,  kind,  faithful,  humane,  tho 
in  the  moll  diftant  Parts  of  the  World, 
and  we  cannot  avoid  loving  it  with  Eft 

*  See  SeSi,  I     ■, 

teem? 


140      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6t.  2.  teem,  and  Complacence.  A  ,6ri^  may 
^v~^  poffibly  make  us  attempt  to  ruin  fuch  a 
Man,  or  fome  ftrong  Motive  of  Advan- 
tage may  excite  us  to  oppofe  his  Intereft  ; 
but  it  can  never  make  us  hate  him,  while 
we  apprehend  him  as  morally  excellent. 
Nay,  when  we  confult  our  own  Hearts, 
we  fhall  find,  that  we  can  fcarce  ever  per- 
fuade  our  felves  to  attempt  any  Mifchief 
againft  fiich  Perfons,  from  any  Motive  of 
Advantage,  nor  execute  it,  without  the 
ftrongeft  Reludtance,  and  Remorfe,  until 
we  have  blinded  our  felves  into  a  bad 
Opinion  of  the  Perfbn  in  a  moral  Senfe. 

Benevo-  m.  A  s  to  the  Love  of  Benevolence, 
lMdkTd  the  very  Name  excludes  Self  Intereft.  We 
difmtereft-  never  call  that  Man  benevolent,  who  is  in 
**•  fad:  ufeful  to  others,  but  at  the  fame  time 

only  intends  his  own  Intereft,  without  any 
defire  of,  or  delight  in,  the  Good  of  others. 
If  there  be  any  Benevolence  at  all,  it  muft 
be  dijinterefted ;  for  the  moft  ufeful  A&ion 
imaginable,  lofes  all  appearance  of  Bene- 
volence, as  foon  as  we  difcern  that  it  only 
flowed  from  Self-Love  or  Intereft.  Thus, 
never  were  any  human  Adtions  more  ad- 
vantageous, than  the  Inventions  of  Fire, 
and  Iron  ;  but  if  thefe  were  calual,  or  if 
the  Inventor  only  intended  his  own  Inte- 
reft in  them,  there  is  nothing  which  can 
be  calFd  Benevolent  in  them.  Wherever 
then  Benevolence  is  fiippos'd,   there  it  is 

imagin'd 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       141 

imagin'd  difinterefted,   and  defign'd  for  the  Se<a.  2  i 
Good  of  others.  ^v^. 

B  u  t  it  muft  be  here  obferv'd,  That  as  Self-Love 
all  Men  have  Self  Love,  as  well  as  Bene-^Be_ 
volence,  thefe  two  Principles  may  jointly  nevoience 
excite  a  Man  to  the  fame  A<3ion  ;  and  then 
they  are  to  be  confider'd  as  two  Forces  im- 
pelling the  fame  Body  to  Motion  ;  fbme- 
times  they  confpire,  fometimes  are  indif- 
ferent to  each  other,  and  fometimes  are  in 
lome  degree  oppofite.  Thus,  if  a  Man 
have  liich  ftrong  Benevolence,  as  would 
have  produc'd  an  A&ion  without  any  Views 
of  Self-Inter  eft ;  that  fuch  a  Man  has  alfo 
in  View  private  Advantage,  along  with 
pub  lick  Good,  as  the  Effect  of  his  A&ion, 
does  no  way  diminilh  the  Benevolence  of 
the  Action.  When  he  would  not  have  pro- 
duc'd fo  much  public k  Good,  had  it  not 
been  for  Prolped:  of  Selflntereft,  then  the 
Effed:  of  Self  Love  is  to  be  deducted,  and 
his  Benevolence  is  proportion'd  to  the  re- 
mainder of  Good,  which  pure  Benevolence 
would  have  produc'd.  When  a  Man's  Be- 
nevolence is  hurtful  to  himftlf,  then  Self 
Love  is  oppofite  to  Benevolence,  and  the 
Benevolence  is  proportion'd  to  the  Sum  of 
the  Good  produc'd,  added  to  the  Refiftance 
of  Self  Love  furmounted  by  it.  In  moft 
Cafes  it  is  impoffible  for  Men  to  know  how 
far  their  Fellows  are  influenc'd  by  the  one 
or  other  of  thefe  Principles ;  but  yet  the 

gene- 


142        -An  I N  QJU I RY  concerning 

Se6t.  2.  general  Truth  is  fufficiently  certain,  That 
i/V\  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  Benevolence  of 
Actions  is  to  be  computed.  Since  then,  no 
Love  to  rational  Agents  can  proceed  from 
Self-Inter  eft,  every  A&ion  muft  be  difinte- 
refted,  as  far  as  it  flows  from  Love  to  ratio- 
nal Agents. 

caufeef  If  any  enquire,  "  Whence  arifes  this 
*™eV0m  "  Love  of  Efteem,  or  Benevolence,  to 
a  good  Men,  or  to  Mankind  in  general, 
"  if  not  from  fbme  nice  Views  of  Self 
"  Inter  eft  ?  Or,  how  we  can  be  mov'd  to 
"  defire  the  Happinefs  of  others,  without 
"  any  View  to  our  own  ?"  It  may  be  an- 
fwer'd,  "  That  the  fame  Caufe  which  de- 
"  termines  us  to  purfue  Happinefs  for  our 
"  felves,  determines  us  both  to  Efteem  and 
"  Benevolence  on  their  proper  Occafions  ; 
"  even  the  very  Frame  of  our  Nature,  or 
"  &  generous  InftirM,  which  fhall  be  after- 
"  wards  explain'd." 

xemvo-  IV.  Here  we  may  obferve,  That  as 
fuppofeT  Love  of  Efteem  and  Complacence  is  al- 
Eftem.  ways  join'd  with  Benevolence,  where  there 
is  no  ftrong  Oppofition  of  Inter  eft  ;  fo  Be- 
nevolence ieems  to  prefuppofe  fome  fmall 
degree  of  Efteem,  not  indeed  of  aliual 
good  Qualitys  ;  for  there  may  be  ftrong 
Benevolence,  where  there  is  the  Hatred  of 
Contempt  for  a&ual  Vices  ;  as  a  Parent  may 
have  great  Benevolence  to  a  moft  abandon'd 

Child, 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      145 

Child,  whofe  Manners  he  hates  with  the  Se6t.  2. 
greateft  T)ifplicence  :  but  Benevolence  (up-  v-^v^ 
poles  a  Being  capable  of  Virtue.  We 
judge  of  0^r  rational  Agents  by  02*r 
felves.  The  human  Nature  is  a  lovely 
Form  ;  we  are  all  confcious  of  fbme  mo- 
rally good  Qualitys  and  Inclinations  in  our 
felves,  how  partial  and  imperfeit  loever 
they  may  be  :  we  prefume  the  fame  of 
every  thing  in  human  Form,  nay  almoft 
of  every  living  Creature  :  ib  that  by  this 
fuppos'd  remote  Capacity  of  Virtue,  there 
may  be  fbme  fmall  degree  of  EJieem  along 
with  our  Benevolence,  even  when  they 
incur  our  greateft  Dilpleafure  by  their 
Conduit. 

A  s  to  Malice,    Human  Nature  ftems  Human 
fcarce  capable  of 'malicious,  difinterefted Ha-  f*p%ee™f 
tred,    or  a  fedate  Delight  in  theMifery  oi  fedate  Ma- 
others,  when   we   imagine  them  no  way  llce- 
pernicious  to  us,    or  oppofite  to  our  hi- 
tereft  :  And  for  that  Hatred  which  makes 
us  oppofe   thofe  whole  Interefts   are  op- 
pofite to  ours,    it   is  only  the  Effed  of 
Self- Love,    and  not  of  difinterefted  Ma- 
lice.     A    fudden    Paflion    may    give    us 
wrong    Reprefentations    of    our    Fellow- 
Creatures,    and  for  a  little  time  reprelent 
them  as  abfolutely  Evil ;   and  during  this 
Imagination  perhaps  we  may  give  lome  Evi- 
dences of  difinterefted  Malice :  but  as  foon 
as  we  refkd:  upon  human  Nature ',    and 
2-  form. 


1 44       ^n  I N  QJJ  I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t.  2.  form  jufi;  Conceptions,  this  unnatural  Pa£ 
^v^  fion  is  allay'd,  and  only  Self-Love  remains, 

which  may  make  us,    from  Self- Inter  eft, 

oppofe  our  Adverfarys. 

Every  one  at  prefent  rejoices  in  the  De- 
ftrudtion  of  our  Pirates  ;    and  yet  let  us 
iuppofe  a  Band  of  fuch  Villains  caft  in  upon 
fome  defblate  lfland,  and  that  we  were  af- 
fur'd  fome  Fate  would  confine  them  there 
perpetually,    fb    that   they   fhould  difturb 
Mankind  no  more.    Now  let  us  calmly  re- 
fled:  that  thefe  Perfbns  are  capable  of  Know- 
ledge and  Counfel,  may  be  happy,  and  joy- 
ful,  or  may  be   involv'd  in  Mifery,  Sor- 
row, and  Pain  ;  that  they  may  return  to 
a    State   of  Love,    Humanity,    Kindnefs, 
and  become  Friends,  Citizens,  Husbands, 
"Parents,    with  all   the   fweet  Sentiments 
which  accompany   thefe  Relations  :    then 
let  us  ask    our  felves,    when  Self  Love, 
or  regard  to   the  Safety  of  better  Men, 
no  longer  makes  us  defire  their  Deftruc- 
tion,    and   when  we  ceafe   to  look  upon 
them,  under  the  Ideas  fuggefted  by  frefh 
Refentment  of  Injurys  done  to  us  or  our 
Friends,  as  utterly  incapable  of  any  good 
moral  Quality  ;   whether  we   would  wilh 
them  the  Fate  of  Cadmus's  Army,    by 
plunging  their  Swords  in  each  others  Breaft, 
or  a  worfe   Fate   by    the   moft    exquifite 
Tortures  ;  or  rather  that  they  fhould   re- 
cover   the   ordinary   Affections   of  Men, 
2  be- 


Moral  Goon  and  Evil.       145 

become  Kind,  Cornpajfionate,  and  Friend-  Scdt.  2. 
iy  ;  contrive  Laws,  Conftitutions,  Govern-  o^y>J 
me?tts,  'Property*  ;    and   form   an    honeft 
happy  Society,  with  Marriages,  and 

Relations  dear,  and  all  the  Charities 
Of  Father,  Son,  and  Brother * 

t  fancy  the  latter  would  be  the  Wifh  of 
every  Mortal,  notwithftanding  our  prefent 
juft  Abhorrence  of  them  from  Self-Inter  eft, 
or  publick  Love  and  Defire  of  promoting 
the  Intereft  of  our  Friends  who  are  ex- 
pos'd  to  their  Fury.  Now  this  plainly 
evidences,  that  we  fcarce  ever  have  any 
fedate  Malice  againft  any  Perfon,  or  de- 
light in  his  Mifery.  Our  Hatred  is  only 
from  Oppofition  of  Intereft  ;  or  if  we 
can  entertain  fedate  Malice,  it  muft  be 
toward  a  Character  apprehended  necejja- 
rily  and  unalterably  Evil  in  a  moral 
Senfe  ;  fiich  as  a  fudden  Paffion  lome- 
times  reprefents  our  Enemies  to  us :  and 
perhaps  no  fuch  Being  occurs  to  us  among 
the  Works  of  a  good  Deity, 

V.   Having  offer'd  what  may  perhaps  0ther  A^ 
prove,    That  our  Love  either  of  Efteem,  fefthau 
or  Benevolence,    is  not  founded  on  Self- ffmeref'm 
Love,    or   views  of  Intereft  ;  let  us  fee 
'"  if  fome  other  AffeElions,  in  which  Vir- 
<c  tue  may  be  plac'd,  do  arife  from  Self 
■  ,^,— —        ■        im*^mm—       '        -         ■" 

*  Mik.  Par.  Loft,  B.  ty.  v.  7  5  6. 

L  "  Love  ; 


1 4^       -An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Se6t  2.  "  Z/0i>£  ;"  fach  as  i^r,  or  Reverence, 
*/VVJ  arifing  from  an  Apprehenfioti  of  Goodnefs, 
<power,  and  Juftice.  For  no  body  appre- 
hends any  Virtue  in  ^y?  Thread  and  <SVr* 
v  it  tide  toward  a  powerful  Evil  Being : 
This  is  indeed  the  meaneft  Selfifimefs.  Now 
the  fame  Arguments  which  prove  Love  of 
Efteem  to  be  difint  ere  fled,  will  prove  this 
honourable  Reverence  to  be  fo  too  ;  for  it 
plainly  ariles  from  an  Apprehenfion  of  ami- 
able Quality s  in  the  Perfon,  and  Love  to- 
ward him,  which  ratfes  an  Abhorrence  of 
offending  him.  Could  we  reverence  a 
Being  becaufe  it  w7as  our  Inter  eft  to  do 
fo,  a  third  Perfon  might  bribe  us  into  Re- 
verence toward  a  Being  neither  Good,  nor 
'Powerful*  which  every  one  fees  to  be  a 
Jeft.  And  this  we  might  fhew  to  be  com- 
mon to  all  other  Paflions,  which  have  ratio- 
nal Agents  for  their  Objecfts. 

Questions.  VI.  There  is  one  Objection  againft  dif- 
interefted  Love,  which  occurs  from  confi- 
dering,  "  That  nothing  fo  effectually  ex- 
"  cites  our  Love  toward  rational  Agents, 
"  as  their  Beneficence  to  us ;  whence  we  are 
"  led  to  imagine,  that  our  Love  of  Per- 
"  fons,  as 'well  as  irrational  Objeds,  flows 
44  intirely  from  Self  hit  er  eft.  "  But  let  us 
here  examine  our  felves  more  narrowly. 
Do  we  only  love  the  Beneficent,  becaufe 
it  is  our  Inter  eft  to  love  them  ?  Or  do  we 
chufe  to  love  them,  becaufe  our  Love  is  the 

means 


Mo ral  Good  and  Evil,       147 

means  of  procuring  their  Bounty  ?  If  it  be  Se£t.  2 
fo,  then  we  could  indifferently  love  any  U^V"\J 
Character,  even  to  obtain  the  Bounty  of 
a  third  Perfon  ;  or  we  could  be  brib'd  by  a 
third  Perlbn  to  love  the  greateft  Villain 
heartily,  as  we  may  be  brib'd  to  external 
Offices  :  Now  this  is  plainly  impoffible. 

But  further,  is  not  our  Love  always 
the  Confequent  of  Bounty,  and  not  the 
Means  of  procuring  it  ?  External  Shew, 
Obfequioufnefs,  and  DiiTimulation  may  pre- 
cede an  Opinion  of  Beneficence  ;  but  real 
Love  always  preftppofes  it,  and  fhall  ne- 
ceiTarily  arife  even  when  we  expedt  no 
more,  from  confideration  of  paft  Benefits. 
Or  can  any  one  fay  he  only  loves  the 
Beneficent,  as  he  does  a  Field  or  Gar- 
den, becaufe  of  its  Advantage  ?  His  Love 
then  muft  ceafe  toward  one  who  has  ruin'd 
himfelf  in  kind  Offices  to  him,  when  he 
can  do  him  no  more  ;  as  we  ceafe  to  love 
an  inanimate  Objedt  which  ceafes  to  be  ufe- 
fill,  unlefs  a  Poetical  Trofopopoeia  animate 
it,  andraife  an  imaginary  Gratitude,  which 
is  indeed  pretty  common.  And  then  again, 
our  Love  would  be  the  fame  towards  the 
worft  Characters  that  'tis  towards  the 
beft,  if  they  were  equally  bountiful  to  us, 
which  is  alio  falfe.  Beneficence  then  muft 
raife  our  Love  as  it  is  an  amiable  moral 
Quality  :  and  hence  we  love  even  thofe 
wrio  are  beneficent  to  others, 

L  2  It 


1 48       An  I N QU I R Y  concerning 

Scd:.  2. 

L/W/  'T  may  ^e  further  alledg'd,  "  That 
"  Bounty  toward  our  felves  is  a  ftronger 
"  Incitement  to  Love,  than  equal  Bounty 
"  toward  others."  This  is  true  for  a 
Reafbn  to  be  offered  below  *  :  but  it  does 
not  prove,  that  in  this  Cafe  our  Love 
of  Perfons  is  from  Views  of  Inter ejl ;  fince 
this  Love  is  not  prior  to  the  Bounty,  as 
the  means  to  procure  it,  but  fubfequent 
upon  it,  even  when  we  expert  no  more. 
In  the  Benefits  which  we  receive  our  felves, 
we  are  more  fully  fenfible  Gf  their  Value, 
and  of  the  Circumftances  of  the  Action, 
which  are  Evidences  of  a  generous  Temper 
in  the  Donor  ;  and  from  the  good  Opinion 
we  have  of  our  felves,  we  are  apt  to  look 
upon  the  Kindnefs  as  better  employ'd,  than 
when  it  is  beftow'd  on  others,  of  whom  per- 
haps we  have  lefs  favourable  Sentiments.  It 
is  however  fufficient  to  remove  the  Objec- 
tion, that  Bounty  from  a  "Donor  apprehended 
as  morally  Evil,  or  extorted  by  Force,  or 
conferr'd  with  fbme  View  of  Self-Intereft, 
will  not  procure  real  Love  ;  nay,  it  may 
raife  Indignation,  if  we  fiifpecSt  Diffimula- 
tion  of  Love,  or  a  Defign  to  allure  us 
into  any  thing  Dilhonourable  :  whereas 
wifely  employ'd  Bounty  is  always  approv'd, 
and  gains  love  to  the  Author  from  all  who 
hear  of  it. 


See  Sett.  v.   Art.  z. 

If 


Moral  Good^JEvil.      149 

Sc<3.  2. 
If  then  no  Love  toward  Perfons  be  in-  ^v^ 
fluenc'd  by  Self-Love,    or  Views  of  /*-  £Z3w 
tereft,  and  all  Virtue  flows  from  Z<?w  to- 
ward  Perfons,    or   fome  other   Affection 
equally  difinterefted  ;  it  remains,  "  That 
"  there  muft  be  fome  other  Motive  than 
"  Self-Love,    or  Inter  eft,  which   excites 
"■  us  to  the  Actions  we  call  Virtuous." 

VII.  There  may  perhaps  (till  remain  objeffion 
another  Sufpicion  of  Self  Inter  eft  in  our  from  Re!i- 
Profecution  of  Virtue,  arifing  from  this,  glon' 
"  That  the  whole  Race  of  Mankind  feems 
4'  perluaded  of  the  Exiftence  of  an  Al- 
*'  mighty  Being,  who  will  certainly  fe- 
"  cure  Happinels  either  now,  or  here- 
M  ^/?^r,  to  thofe  who  are  Virtuous,  ac- 
"  cording  to  their  leveral  Notions  of  Vir- 
«  /w  in  various  Places  :  and  upon  this  Per- 
*'  fuafion,  Virtue  may  in  all  Cafes  be  pur- 
*'  fu'd  from  Views  *  o£  Inter  eft."  Here 
again  we  might  appeal  to  all  Mankind,  whe- 
ther there  be  no  Benevolence  but  what 
flows  from  a  View  of  Reward  from  the 
Deity  ?  Nay,  do  we  not  fee  a  great  deal 
of  it  among  thofe  who  entertain  few  if 
any  Thoughts  of  Devotion  at  all  ?  Not 
to  lay  that  this  Benevolence  fcarce  de- 
ftrves  the  Name,  whenwedefire  not,  nor 
delight  in  the  Good  of  others,  further  thaa 
it  ferves  our  own  Ends. 


* 


See  aboye  Sett.  i.  Art.  5.  Par.  4. 

L  3  But 


1 5  o       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se&.  2. 

'^-^v^  But  if  we  have  no  other  Idea  of  Good, 
than  Advantage  to  our  felves,  we  muft  ima- 
gine that  every  rational  Being  a&s  only 
for  its  own  Advantage ;  and  however  we 
may  call  a  beneficent  Being,  a  good  Being, 
becaufe  it  adts  for  our  Advantage,  yet 
upon  this  Scheme  we  fhould  not  be  apt  to 
think  there  is  any  beneficent  Being  in 
Nature,  or  a  Being  who  ads  for  the 
Good  of  others.  Particularly,  if  there  is 
no  Senfe  of  Excellence  in  public k  Love, 
and  promoting  the  Happinefs  of  others, 
whence  ihould  this  Perfuafion  arife,  "  That 
"  the  Deity  will  make  the  Virtuous 
"  happy  ?"  Can  we  prove  that  it  is  for 
the  Advantage  of  the  Deity  to  do  lb? 
This  I  fancy  will  be  look'd  upon  as  very 
abfurd,  unlets  we  fuppofe  fome  beneficent 
Difpolltions  elTential  to  the  Deity,  which 
determine  him  to  coniult  the  publick  Good 
of  his  Creatures,  and  reward  fuch  as  co- 
operate with  his  kind  Intention.  And  if 
there  be  luch  Difpofitions  in  the  Deity, 
wThere  is  the  impoiTibility  of  fome  fmall 
degree  of  this  publick  Love  in  his  Crea- 
tures ?  And  why  muft  they  be  fuppos'd  in- 
capable of  aCting  but  from  Self-Love  ? 

I  n  fhort,    without  acknowledging  fome 
other  Principle  of  A6tion  in  rational  A- 
gents  than   Self-Love,    I  fee  no  Founda- 
tion to   expedt  Beneficence,    or  Rewards 
*  from 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      151 

from  God,  or  Man,   further  than  it  is  the  Sedt  2- 
Inter  eft  of  the  Benefactor  ;  and  all  Expec-  L/^V^J 
tation  of  Benefits  from  a  Being  whofe  In- 
terefts  are  independent  on  us,    rauft  be  per- 
feflly  ridiculous.     What  fhould  engage  the 
Deity  to  reward  Virtue  ?  Virtue  is  com- 
monly   fuppos'd,    upon    this    Scheme,   to 
be  only  a  confulting  our  own  Hafpinefs 
in  the  moft  artful  way,  confiftently  with 
the  Good  of  the  Whole  ;   and  in  Vice  the 
fame  thing  is  foolifhly  purfu'd,   in  a  man- 
ner which  will  not  fo  probably  fucceed, 
and  which  is  contrary  to  the  Good  of  the 
Whole.     But  how  is  the  Deity  concern 'd 
in  this  Whole,  if  every  Agent  always  ads 
from  Self  Love  ?  And  what  Ground  have 
we,  from  the  Idea  of  a  God  it  felf,  to  believe 
the  Deity  is  good  in  the  Chriftian  Senfe, 
that  is,  ftudious  of  the  Good  of  his  Crea- 
tures ?   Perhaps  the  Mifery  of  his  Crea- 
tures may   give  him    as    much    Pleafure, 
as  their  Happinefs  :    And    who  can   find 
fault,  or  blame  fuch  a  Being  to  ftudy  their 
Mifery ;   for  what  elfe  fhould  we  exped:  ? 
A  Manichean  Evil  God,  is  a  Notion  which 
Men  would  as  readily  run  into,   as  that  of 
a   Good  one,  if  there  is  no   Excellence  in 
dijinterefted  Love,    and  no  Being  ads  but 
for  its  own  Advantage  ;  unlels  we  proved 
that  the  Happinefs   of  Creatures  was  ad- 
vantageous to  the  De  ity. 

L  4  VIII.  Ths 


Trom  Con 
comitant 


i  5 2       An  I  N  QU  I R  Y  concerning 

Sed.  2. 

VIII.    The    laft,    and  only  remaining 
Objection  againft  what  has  been  faid,  is  this, 

pieajure.  "  That  Virtue  perhaps  is  puriu'd  becaufe 
64  of  the  concomitant  Tie  afire"  To 
which  we  may  anfwer,  firft,  by  obferving, 
that  this  plainly  fuppofes  a  Senfe  of  Virtue 
antecedent  to  Ideas  of  Advantage*  upon 
which  this  Advantage  is  founded  p  and  that 
from  the  very  Frame  of  our  Nature  we 
are  determin'd  to  perceive  Pleafure  in  the 
pradice  of  Virtue,  and  to  approve  it  when 
pradis'd  by  our  felves,  or  others. 

But  further,  may  we  not  juftly  queftion, 
whether  all  Virtue  is  fleafant  ?  Or,  whe- 
ther w7e  are  not  determin'd  to  fome  amiable 
Anions  in  which  we  find  no  Pleafure  ? 
'Tis  true,  all  the  Paffions,  and  Affections 
juftify  themfelves ;  or,  we  approve  our  being 
afteded  in  a  certain  manner  on  certain  Oc- 
cafions,  and  condemn  a  Perfbn  who  is  other- 
wife  affeded.  So  the  Sorrowful,  the  An- 
gry, the  Jealous,  the  Companionate,  think 
it  reafonable  they  fliould  be  fo  upon  the  fe- 
veral  Occafions  which  movetheie  Paflions  ; 
but  we  fliould  not  therefore  fay  that  Sor- 
row, Anger,  Jealoufy,  or  Tity  are  plea- 
fant,  and  that  we  chufe  to  be  in  thele  Paf- 
fions  becaufe  of  the  concomitant  Pleafure. 
The  matter  is  plainly  this.  The  Frame  of 
our  Nature,  on  ftch  Occafions  as  move 
thefe   Paffions,    determines  us  to  be  thus 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     155 

affeded,    and  to   approve  our   being  fozSed.  2. 
Nay,  we  diflike  any    Perfbn  who  is  not  tvw; 
thus  affeded  upon  fuch  occafions,  notwith- 
ilanding  the   uneafinefs  of  thefe  Paffions. 
This  uneafinefs   determines   us   to    endea- 
vour an  Alteration  in  the  itate  of  the  Ob- 
ject •,  but  not  otherwife  to  remove  the  pain- 
ful Affedion,  while  the  occafion  is  unal- 
ter'd  :    which  fhews  that  thefe  Affedions 
are   neither  chofen  for  their   concomitant 
Pleafure,  nor  voluntarily  brought  upon  our 
felves  with  a  view  to  private  Good.     The 
Adions    which    thefe   Paflions   move    u$ 
to,   tend  generally  to  remove  the  uneafy 
Paflion  by  altering  the  ftate  of  the  Ob- 
jed  ;  but  the  Removal  of  our  Pain  is  fei- 
dom  diredly  intended  in  the  uneafy  Bene- 
volent Taffions  :  nor  is  the  Alteration  in- 
tended in  the  State  of  the  Objeds  by  fuch 
Paflions,  imagin'd  to  be  a  private  Good  to 
the  Agent,    as  it  always   is  in  the  felfifh 
^PaJJions.     If  our  fole  Intention,   in  Com- 
pajfion  or  Tity,  was  the  Removal  of  our 
Pain,  .we  fhould  run  away,  fhut  our  Eyes, 
divert  our  Thoughts  from  the  miferableOb- 
jed,    to  avoid   the  Pain   of  Companion, 
which  we  feldom  do  :  nay,  we  croud  about 
luch  Objeds,    and  voluntarily  expofe  our 
felves  to  Pain,  unlefs  Reafon^  and  Refledion 
upon  our  Inability  to  relieve  the  Miferable, 
countermand  our  Inclination ;  or  fome  fel- 
fifh AfFedion,    as  fear  of  Danger,   over- 
ballances  it. 

Now 


154      J&n  * N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed.  2. 

CW  Now  there  are  feveral  morally  amiable 
A&ions,  which  flow  from  thefe  Paffions 
which  are  fo  uneafy  ;  luch  as  Attempts  of 
relieving  the  Diftrefs'd,  of  defending  the 
Injur'd,  of  repairing  of  Wrongs  done  by 
ourfelves.  Thefe  Actions  are  often  accom- 
pany'd  with  no  Pleafure  in  the  mean  time, 
nor  have  they  any  fubfequent  Pleafure,  ex- 
cept as  they  are  fucceisfol ;  unlefs  it  be 
that  which  may  arife  from  calm  RefleEiion, 
when  the  Paffion  is  over,  upon  our  having 
been  in  a  Difpofition,  which  to  our  moral 
Senfe  appears  lovely  and  good :  but  this 
Pleafure  is  never  intended  in  the  Heat  of 
Adlion,  nor  is  it  any  Motive  exciting 
to  it. 

Besides,  In  the  pleafant  TaJJlons,  we 
do  not  love,  becaufe  it  is  pleafant  to  love  ; 
we  do  not  chafe  this  State,  becaufe  it  is 
an  advantageous,  or  pleafant  State  :  This 
Paffion  neceflarily  arifes  from  feeing  its  pro- 
per Objed:,  a  ?norally  good  Character. 
And  if  we  could  love,  whenever  we  fee 
it  would  be  our  Intereft  to  love,  Love 
could  be  brib'd  by  a  third  Perfon  ;  and  we 
could  never  love  Perfons  in  Diftrefs,  for 
then  our  Love  gives  us  Pain.  The  fame 
Obfervation  may  be  extended  to  all  the 
other  Affections  from  which  Virtue  is  fup- 
pos'd  to  flow  :  And  from  the  whole  we 
may  conclude,  "  That  the  virtuous  Agent 

"  is 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      155 

il  is  never  apprehended  by  us  as  a&ing  on-  Se6t 
"  ly  from  Views  of  his  own  Interefi,  but  ^v 
"  as  principally  influenc'd  by  fome  other 
"  Motive" 


2. 


IX.  H  a  v  1  n  g  remov'd  thefe  falfe  Springs  The  true 
of  vinuous  Actions,  let  us  next  eftablifh  the  3W  °f 
true  one,  viz.  fome  'Determination  of  our 
Nature  to  ftudy  the  Good  of  others  ;  ox  fome 
Inftinct,  antecedent  to  all  Reafon  from 
Intereji,  which  influences  us  to  the  Love 
of  others ;  even  as  the  moral  Senfe,  *  above 
explain'd,  determines  us  to  approve  the 
Adtions  which  flow  from  this  Love  in  our 
felves  or  others.  This  difinterefted  Af- 
fection, may  appear  ftrange  to  Men*  im» 
prefs'd  writh  Notions  of  Self  Love,  as  the 
fole  Motive  of  A&ion,  from  the  Pulpit, 
the  Schools,  the  Syftems,  and  Conven- 
tions regulated  by  them  :  but  let  us  confider 
it  in  its  ftroiigeft,  and  fimpleft  Kinds ;  and 
when  we  fee  the  Poffibility  of  it  in  thefe 
Inftances,  we  may  eafily  difcover  its  uni- 
verfal  Extent.  , 

An  honeft  Farmer  will  tell  you,  that  Natural 
he  ftudies  the  Trefervation  and  Happinefs  ^siwn. 
of  his  Children,   and  loves  them  without 
any  defign  of  Good  to  himfelf.   But  fay  fome 
of  om  Philosophers,  "  The  Happinefs  of 

*  See  Seft.  I 

"  their 


1  5  6      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

SeCt.  2.  "  their  Children  gives  Parents  Pleafiire,  and 
c^v^o  m  their  Mifery  gives  them  Pain  ;  and  there- 
"  fore  to  obtain  the  former,  and  avoid  the 
"  latter,  they  ftudy,  from  Self-Love,  the 
"  Good  of  their  Children."  Suppofe  {eve- 
ral  Merchants  join'd  in  Partnerfliip  of  their 
whole  Effe&s  ;  one  of  them  is  employ'd  a- 
broad  in  managing  the  Stock  of  the  Com- 
pany ;  his  Prolperity  occafions.Gain  to  all, 
and  his  Lofles  give  them  Pain  from  their 
Share  in  the  Lofs  :  is  this  then  the  fame 
Kind  of  AfFe&ion  with  that  of  Parents  to 
their  Children  ?  Is  there  the  fame  tender, 
perfonal  Regard  ?  I  fancy  no  Parent  will  fay 
ib.  In  this  Cafe  of  Merchants  there  is  a 
plain  Conjunction  of  Intereft  ;  but  whence 
the  Conjunction  of  Intereft  between  the 
Tarent  and  Child  1  Do  the  Child's  Sen  fa- 
t'tons  give  Pleafure  or  Pain  to  the  Parent  ? 
Is  the  Parent  hungry,  thirfly,  fick,  when 
the  Child  is  fo  ?  '<  No,  but  his  Love  to 
"  the  Child  makes  him  affected  with  his 
"  Plealures  or  Pains."  This  Love  then  is 
antecedent  to  the  Conjunction  of  Intereft, 
and  the  Caufe  of  it,  not  the  Effecft  :  this 
Love  then  muft  be  difinterefted.  "  Noy 
'*  fays  another  Sophift,  Children  are  Tarts 
*'  of  our  fclves,  and  in  loving  them  we  but 
"  love  our /elves  in  them."  A  very  good 
Anfwer !  Let  us  carry  it  as  far  as  it  will 
go.  How  are  they  Tarts  of  our  felves  ? 
Not  as  a  Leg  or  an  Arm  :  We  are  not  con- 
fcious   of  their  Senfations.     "  But    their 

"  Bodys 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       157 

!'  Bodys  were  form'd  from  Parts  of  ours"Sz&.  2. 
So  is  a  Fly,  or  a  Maggot  which  may  breed  ^YNJ 
in  any  difcharg'd  Blood  or  Humour  :  Very 
dear  Infeds  furely  !  There  muft  be  fbme- 
thing  elfe  then  which  makes  Children  Tarts 
of  our  felves ;  and  what  is  this  but  that 
Affection  which  Nature  determines  us  to 
have  toward  them  ?  This  Love  makes  them 
Tarts  of  our  felves,  and  therefore  does  not 
flow  from  their  being  lb  before.  This  is 
indeed  a  good  Metaphor  ;  and  wherever 
we  find  a  Determination  among  feveral  ra- 
tional Agents  to  mutual  Love,  let  each  In- 
dividual be  look'd  upon  as  a  Tart  of  a 
great  Whole,  or  Syftem,  and  concern  him- 
felf  in  the  public k  Good  of  it. 

But  a  later  Author  obferves,  *  <c  That 
"  natural  AffeBion  in  Parents  is  weak, 
V  till  the  Children  begin  to  give  Evidences 
"  of  Knowledge  and  Ajfeltions."  Mo- 
thers fay  they  feel  it  ftrong  from  the  very 
firft  :  and  yet  I  could  wifli  for  the  Deftruc- 
tion  of  his  Hypothefis,  that  what  he  al- 
ledges  was  true.;  as  I  fancy  it  is  in  fbme 
meafure,  tho  we  may  find  in  fbme  Parents 
an  Affe&ion  toward  Idiots.  The  obferving 
of  Underftanding  and  AjfeBions  in  Chil- 
dren, which  make  them  appear  moral  A- 
gents,  can  increafe  Love  toward  them  with- 
out profpe<3:  of  Intereji  ;  for  I  hope  this 

*  See  the  Fable  of  the  Bees,  Page  62.  $d  Ed. 

In- 


158       An  I  N  QU  I RY  concerning 

Sed.  2.  Increafe  of  Love,  is  not  from  Profped  of 
vvv  Advantage  from  the  Knowledge  or  Affec- 
tions of  Children,  for  whom  Parents  are 
ftill  toiling,  and  never  intend  to  be  re- 
funded their  Expences,  or  recompens'd 
for  their  Labour,  but  in  Cafes  of  extreme 
Neceffity.  If  then  the  obferving  a  moral 
Capacity  can  be  the  occafion  of  increafing 
Love  without  Self-Inter  eft  *  even  from  the 
Frame  of  our  Nature  ;  pray,  may  not 
this  be  a  Foundation  of  weaker  degrees 
of  Love  where  there  is  no  preceding  tic 
of  Parentage,  and  extend  it  to  all  Man* 
kind  ? 

puhikk  X.  And  that  this  is  fo  in  fad:,  will  ap- 
nfturT'  Pear  fry  c°nfidering  fome  more  diftant  At- 
tachments. If  we  obierve  any  Neighbours, 
from  whom  perhaps  we  have  receiv'd  no 
good  Offices,  forrn'd  into  Friend/hips, 
Familys^  'Partnerjbips,  and  with  Honefty 
and  Kindnefs  affifting  each  other ;  pray  ask 
any  Mortal  if  he  would  not  be  better 
pleas'd  with  their  Tro/perity,  when  their 
Interefts  are  no  way  inconfiftent  with  his 
own,  than  with  their  Mi/ery,  and  Ruin  ; 
and  you  fhall  find  a  Bond  of  Benevolence 
further  extended  than  a  Family  and  Chil- 
dren^ altho  the  Ties  are  not  fo  ftrong. 
Again,  fuppofe  a  Perfon,  for  Trade,  had 
left  his  native  Country \  and  with  all  his 
Kindred  had  fettled  his  Fortunes  abroad, 
without  any  View  of  returning  ;  and  only 

una- 


MoralGood  andTL  vi  l.      i  59 

imagine  he  had  receiv'd  no   Injurys  from  Se<a.  2- 
his  Country  :    ask  fuch  a  Man,  would  it  wv^ 
give  him  no  Pleafare  to  hear  of  the  cProf 
ferity  of  his  Country  ?  Or  could  he,  now 
that  his  Interefts  are  feparated  from  that 
of  his  Nation,  as  gladly  hear  that  it  was 
laid  wafte  by  Tyranny  or  a  foreign  Power  ? 
I  fancy  his  Anfwer  would  fhew  us  a  Be- 
nevolence extended  beyond  Neighbourhoods 
or  Acquaintances.     Let  a  Man  of  a  com- 
posed Temper,  out  of  the  hurry  of  his  pri- 
vate Affairs,  only  read  of  the  Conflittition 
of  a  foreign  Country,   even  in  the  mojl 
dijiant  parts  of  the    Earth,    and   obferve 
Art)   TDeJign,    and    a  Study    of  publick 
Good  in   the   Laws  of  this  Aflbciation ; 
and  *  he  fhall  find  his  Mind  mov'd  in  their 
favour  ;    he    ihall   be    contriving  Recti- 
fications and  Amendments   in  their  Con- 
ftitution,   and  regret  any  unlucky  part  of 
it  which  may  be  pernicious  to  their   In- 
tereft  ;  he  lhall  bewail  any  Difafter  which 
befalls  them,   and  accompany  all  their  For- 
tunes  with   the   Affections  of  a    Friend. 
Now  this  proves  Benevolence  to  be  in  fbme 
degree   extended  to   all  Mankind,   where 
there    is  no   interfering   Intereft,     which 
from   Self  Love  may    obftrud:    it.      And 
had  we  any  Notions  of  rational  Agents, 
capable  of  moral  AffecStions,  in  the  mojl 
diftant    Planets,   our  good  TVijhes  would 
ftill  attend  them,   and  we  fhould  delight 
in  their  Happinefs. 

XL  Hers 


1 60       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sea.  2. 

i^VX^       XI.  Here  we  may  tranfiently  remark 
**"™al    the  Foundation  of  what  we  call  national 
Love,  or  Love  of  one's  native  Country. 
Whatever  place  we  have  liv'd  in  for  any 
confiderable  time,  there  we  have  molt  dil- 
tin&ly  remark'd  the  various  Affections  of 
human  Nature  ;    we  have    known  many 
lovely  Characters  ;  we  remember  the  Af- 
fociations,  Friendjhips,    Familys,  natural 
Affections,   and  other  human  Sentiments  : 
our  moral  Senfe  determines  us  to  approve 
thele  lovely  T)ifpofitions  where  we  have 
molt   diltindtly    obferv'd    them  ;   and  our 
Benevolence  concerns  us  in  the  Interelts  of 
the  Perfons  polTels'd  of  them.     When  we 
come  to  obferve  the  like  as  diltindtly  in 
another  Country,  we   begin  to  acquire  a 
national  Love  toward  it  alio  ;    nor  has  our 
own  Country  any  other  preference  in  our 
Idea,   unlefs  it  be  by  an  Affociation  of  the 
pleafant    Ideas   of   our    Youth,    with  the 
Buildings,  Fields,  and  Woods  where   we 
receiv'd  them.     This  may  let  us  fee,  how 
Tyranny,    Faction,  a  Neglect  of  Jultice, 
a  Corruption  of  Manners,    and  any  thing 
which  occafions   the   Mifery  of  the  Sub- 
jects, deltroys  this  national  Love,  and  the 
dear  Idea  of  a  Country. 

whynatZ  We  ought  here  to  obferve,  That  the 
raiAfecii-  only  Reafon  of  that  apparent  want  of 
Z'Jay™-  naturaI  AfFecSion  among  collateral  Rela- 
par.  tions, 


Moral  Goon  and  Evil.       x£x 

tions,  is,  that  thefe  natural  Inclinations,  se(cj.  2 
in  many  Cafes,  are  overpower'd  by  Self-  ^y~J 
Love,  where  there  happens  any  Oppoji- 
tion  of  Interefts  ;  but  where  this  does 
not  happen,  we  fhall  find  all  Mankind 
under  its  Influence,  tho  with  different  de- 
greed of  Strength,  according  to  the  nearer 
or  more  remote  Relations  they  (land  in  to 
each  other  ;  and  according  as  the  natu- 
ral Affettion  of  Benevolence  is  joind 
with  and  ftrengthen'd  by  Efteem,  Grati- 
tude, CompaJJion,  or  other  kind  Affections  ; 
or  on  the  contrary,  weaken'd  by  T>ijpli- 
cence.  Anger >  or  Envy, 


M  SECT. 


i6%       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  3.  , __ 


lent. 


SECT.     III. 

The  Senfe  of  Virtue,  and  the  various 
Opinions  about  tty  reducible  to  one 
general  Foundation.     The   Man~ 
net  of  computing  the  Morality  of 
Aitions. 

Ail  virtue  I.  T  F  we  examine  all  the  Anions  which 
J^  are  counted  amiable  any  where,  and 
enquire  into  the  Grounds  upon  which  they 
are  approved,  we  ihall  find,  that  in  the 
Opinion  of  the  Perfbn  who  approves  them, 
they  always  appear  as  Benevolent,  or 
flowing  from  Love  of  others,  and  a 
Study  of  their  Happinefs,  whether  the 
Approver  be  one  of  the  Perfbns  belov'd, 
or  profited,  or  not  ;  fb  that  all  thofe 
kind  Affections  which  incline  us  to  make 
others  happy,  and  all  Actions  fuppos'd 
to  flow  from  fuch  Affe&ions,  appear 
morally  Good,  if  while  they  are  benevo- 
lent toward  feme  Perfons,  they  be  not 
pernicious  to  others.  Nor  fhall  we  find 
any  thing  .amiable  in  any  Action  what- 
foever,  where  there  is  no  Benevolence 
ima?in'd  ;  nor  in  any  Difpofition,  or 
Capacity,  which  is  not  fuppos'd  applica- 
ble to,  and  defign'd  for  benevolent  Pur- 
pofes.      Nay,    as    was    before    obferv'd  *f 

*  See  Sett,  ii.  Art,  3.  Par.  I.  Art.  6.  Par.  1. 

the 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       163 

the  Adtions  which  in  fadt  are  exceedingly  Sedt.  3. 
ufeful,  fhajl  appear  void  of  moral  Beauty,  v-rV^< 
if  we  know  they  proceeded  from  no  kind 
Intentions  toward  others  ;  and  yet  an  un- 
fiiccefsful  Attempt  of  Kindnefs,  or  of  pro- 
moting/^//^ Good,  fhall  appear  as  ami- 
able as  the  moft  feccefsful,  if  it  flow'd  from 
zsjirong  Benevolence. 

II.  Hence  thofe  Affedtions  which  Relight 
would  lead  us  to  do  good  to  our  Bene- 
fadior,  fhall  appear  amiable,  and  the  con- 
trary Affedtions  odious,  even  when  our 
Actions  cannot  poffibly  be  of  any  advan- 
tage or  hurt  to  him.  Thus  a  Jincere  Love 
and  Gratitude  toward  our  Benefadtor,  a 
chearful  Readinefs  to  do  whatever  he  fhall 
require,  how  burdenfom  fbever,  a  hearty 
Inclination  to  comply  with  his  Intentions, 
and  Contentment  with  the  Stare  he  has 
plac'd  us  in,  are  the  ftrongeft  Evidences  of 
Benevolence  we  can  fhew  to  fuch  a  Perlbn  ; 
and  therefore  they  muft  appear  exceedingly 
amiable.  And  under  thefe  is  included  ail 
the  rational  ^Devotion,  or  Religion  toward 
a  Deity  apprehended  as  Good,  which  we 
can  poffibly  perform. 

We  may  here  tranfiently  obferve  one  Gratitude. 
Circumftance  in  the  Frame  of  our  Nature, 
Which  is  wonderfully  adapted  to  promote 
Benevolence,  viz.  that  as  a  Benefit  con- 
ferred necefTarily  raifes  Gratitude  in  the 
M  2  Per- 


1 64       dn  I N  QJU I R  Y  concerning 
Secft.  2,  Perfon  who  receives  it,  fo  the  Expreflion3 
v^v^^  °f  this  Gratitude,   even  from  the  mean- 
eft  of  Mankind,  are  wonderfully  delight- 
ful to  the  Benefa&or.     Never  were  there 
any  Mortals   fo  poor,   fo  inconfiderable, 
whofe  grateful  Praife  would  not  be  fome 
way  delightful ;  and  by  whom  we  would 
not  rather  chufe  to  be  lov'd,  than  hated, 
if  their  Love  no  way  evidenced  us  to  be 
Partners   in  their  Vices,    or  concerned  in 
their  Meannefs.     And  thus  the  moji  abjeEl 
ePerfon  obliged  is  capable,   and  inclined  to 
make  no  fmall  addition  to  our  Happinefs 
by  his  Love,  and  Gratitude,   when  he  is 
'utterly  incapable  of   any   other    Return, 
and  when    we    expe<5t    none  from   him  : 
Thus, 


A  grateful  Mind 


By  owing  owes  not,  and  fill  pays,  at  once 
Indebted  and  difiharg'd * 

As  to  external  Performances  of  Reli- 
gion, the}7  are  no  doubt  very  various  in 
different  Nations,  and  Ages  ;  and  Educa- 
tion may  give  Men  Opinions,  that  certain 
Actions  are  pleafing,  and  others  difpleafing 
to  the  Deity:  but  then  wherever  any 
external  Rite  of  Worlhip  is  approved,  there 
alfo  it  is  look'd  upon  to  proceed  from  Love 
toward  the  Deity,  or  fome  other  Affec- 


*  Par.  Loft,  B.  iv.  I  5  5- 

tion 


Moral  Good^JEvil,      165 

tion  neceffarily  join'd  with  Love,  as  Re-  Sedi  3. 
verence,  Repentance,   or  Sorrow  to  have  ^vv/ 
offended.     So  that  the  general  Principle  of 
Love,  is  the  Foundation  of  all  the  appa- 
rent moral  Excellence,  even  in  the  mod 
fantaftick  Rites   of  Worihip  which  were 
ever  approved.     For  as  to  Rites  defign'd  on- 
ly to  appeafe  a  furious  Being,  no  Mortal, 
J  fancy,  apprehends  there  is  any  Virtue,  or 
Excellence  in  them  ;    but  that  they  are 
chofen  only  as  the  difhonourable  Means  of 
avoiding  a  greater  Evil.     Now  as  there  are 
various   ipeculative  Opinions  about  what 
is  acceptable  to  the  Deity,   it  necefTarily 
follows,  "  That,  accordingly,  brattices, 
"  and  Approbation,  muft  be  various  ;  tho 
"  all  the  moral  Goodnefs  of  Actions  is  ftill 
f  prefum'd  to  flow  from  Love? 

III.  Again,  that  we  may  fee  how  Love,  social 
or  Benevolence^  is  the  Foundation  of  all  Virtues* 
apprehended  Excellence  in  focial  Virtues, 
let  us  only  oblerve,  That  amidft  the  diver- 
sity of  Sentiments  on  this  Head  among  va- 
rious Sedts,  this  is  ftill  allowed  to  be  the 
way  of  deciding  the  Controverfy  about  any 
difputed  Pra&ice,  viz.  to  enquire  whether 
this  Condud,  or  the  contrary,  will  moft 
effectually  promote  the  public 'k  Good.  The 
Morality  is  immediately  adjufted,  when  the 
natural  Tendency,  or  Influence  of  the  Ac- 
tion upon  the  univerfal  natural  Good  of 
Mankind  is  agreed  upon.  That  which  pro- 
M  3  duces 


1 66       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  3.  duces  more  Good  than  Evil  in  the  Whole \ 
V*^V^^  is  acknowledge  Good ;  and  what  does  not, 
is  counted  Evil.  In  this  Cafe,  we  no  other 
way  regard  the  good  of  the  Actor,  or  that 
of  thoie  who  are  thus  enquiring,  than  as 
they  make  a  Part  of  the  great  Syjhm. 

In  our  late  Debates  about  TaJJive  Obe- 
dience, and  the  Right  of  Refinance  in  De- 
fence of  'Privileges,  the  Point  difputed 
among  Men  of  Senfe  was,  "  whether  uni- 
"  verfal  Submijjion  would  probably  be  at- 
"  tended  with  greater  natural  Evils,  than 
"  temporary  InfurrecTions,  when  Privileges 
"  are  invaded ;  and  not,  whether  what  tend- 
"  ed  in  the  Whole  to  the  public k  natural 
"  Good,  was  alfb  morally  Good?"  And  if 
a  divine  Command  was  alledgM  in  favour 
of  the  Dodtrine  of  Pajjive  Obedience,  this 
would,  no  doubt,  by  its  eternal  Sanations 
cafl  the  ballance  of  natural  Good  to  its  own 
fide,  and  determine  our  Election  from  In- 
terefi  ;  and  yet  our  Senfe  of  the  moral 
Good  in  Pajfive  Obedience,  would  ftill  be 
founded  upon  fome  Species  of  Benevo- 
lence, fiich  as  Gratitude  toward  the  Deity, 
and  Submijjion  to  his  Will  to  whom  we 
are  fo  much  oblig'd.  But  I  fancy  thofe, 
who  believe  the  Deity  to  be  Good,  would 
not  ralhly  alledge  liich  a  Command,  un- 
lefs  they  alfo  aflerted,  that  the  thing  com- 
manded did  tend  more  to  the  univerfal 
Good,  than  the  contrary,  either  by  prevent- 
ing: 


•  Moral  Good  and  Evil.      167 

ing  the  external  Evils  of  Civil  IVar,   or  Sedt.  3. 
by  enuring  Men  to  'Patience,  or  fome  0*  U^Vnj 
ther  Quality  which  they  apprehended  ne- 
ceflary  to  their  everlafting  Happineis.    And 
were  it  not  fo,  Pajfive  Obedience  might  be 
recommended  as  an  inglorious  Method  of 
efcaping  a  greater  Miichief,  but  could  ne- 
ver have  any  thing  morally  amiable  in  it. 

B  u  t  let  us  quit  theDifputes  of  the  Learn- 
ed,  on  whom,  it  may  be  alledg'd,  Cujlom 
and  Education  have  a  powerful  Influence  ; 
and  confider  upon  what  Grounds,  in  com- 
mon Life,  Adions  are  approved  er  con- 
demned, vindicated  or  excused.  We  are 
univerfally  afham'd  to  fay  an  A<ftion  is  J///?, 
becaufe  it  tends  to  my  Advantage,  or  to  the 
Advantage  of  the  Affor  :  And  we  as  lei- 
dom  condemn  a  beneficent  kind  Affiion, 
becaufe  it  is  not  advantageous  to  us,  or 
to  the  Affor.  Blame,  and  Cenfure,  are 
founded  on  a  Tendency  to  publick  Evil, 
or  a  Principle  of  private  Malice  in  the 
Agent,  or  NegleEl  at  lead  of  the  Good  of 
others  ;  on  Inhumanity  of  Temper,  or  at 
leaft  iuch  ftrong  Selfijhnefs  as  makes  the 
Agent  carelefs  of  the  Sufferings  of  others  : 
and  thus  we  blame  and  cenfure  when  the 
A6H011  no  way  afie&s  our  felves.  All  the 
moving  and  perfoafive  Vindications  of  Ac- 
tions, which  may,  from  fome  partial  evil 
Tendency,  appear  evil,  are  taken  from 
this,  that  they  were  necefTary  to  fome 
M  4  greati 


168       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  3.  greater  Good  which  counterballanc'd  the 
C/V^  Evil :  "  Severity  toward  a  few,  is  Com* 
"  fiaJfim  towar^  multitudes. — Tranjitory 
u  Tunijhments  are  necefTary  for  avoiding 
"  more  durable  Evils. — Did  not  fome  fuf- 
"  fer  on  fuch  Occafions,  there  would  be  no 
*'  living  for  houeft  Men.'3 — and  fuch  like. 
And  even  when  an  Adtion  cannot  be  en- 
tirely juftify'd,  yet  how  greatly  is  the  Guilt 
extenuated,  if  we  can  alledge  ;  "  That  it 
"  was  only  the  Effed  of  Inadvertence 
"  without  Malice,  or  of  partial  good  Na- 
"  ture,  Friendfhip,  Compajfion,  natttral 
'<  yjfetfion,  or  Love  of  a  Tarty  ?  "  AH 
thefe  Confiderations  fhew  what  is  the  uni- 
verfal  Foundation  of  our  Senfe  of  moral 
Good,  or  Evil,  viz.  Benevolence  toward 
others  on  one  hand,  and  Malice,  or  even 
Indolence,  and  rOnconcemednefs  about  the 
apparent  publick  Evil  on  the  other.  And 
let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that  we  are  fo  far 
from  imagining  all  Men  to  ad  only  from 
Self-Love,  that  we  univerfally  exped  in 
others  a  Regard  for  the  Tublick  ;  and  do 
not  look  upon  the  want  of  this,  as  barely 
the  abfence  of  moral  Good,  or  Virtue,  bqt 
even  aspcfitively  evil  and  hateful. 

Mord  IV.   Contrarys   may  illuftrate   each 

E:;d  not    other  ;  let  us  therefore  obferve  the  general 

I      Foundation  of  our  Senfe  of  moral  Evil 

more    particularly.     cDiJintereflcd  Malice, 

or  "Delight  in  the  Mifery  of  others,  is  the 

higheft 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     169 

higheft  pitch  of  what  we  count  vitious ;  and  Sed\  3. 
every  A&ion  appears  evil,  which  is  ima-  L^\T\j 
gin'd  to  flow  from  any  degree  of  this 
Ajfettion.  Perhaps  a  violent  TaJJion  may 
hurry  Men  into  it  for  a  few  Moments,  and 
our  raft)  angry  Sentiments  of  our  Enemys, 
may  reprefent  them  as  having  fuch  odious 
'Dijpofitions  ;  but  it  is  very  probable,  from 
the  Reafons  offer'd  above  *,  that  there  is  no 
fuch  degree  of  Wickednefs  in  human  Na- 
ture, as,  in  cold  blood,  to  be  pleas'd  with 
the  Mifery  of  others,  when  it  is  conceived 
no  way  uieful  to  our  Interejls. 

The  Story  of  Nero  and  P.etus  may 
be   alledgM  #gainft    this,   but  perhaps  un- 
juflly,   even  allowing  the  Fad:  to  be  true. 
Nero  was  confcious  he  was  hated  by  thole 
whom  the  World  calPd  good  Men,    and 
that    they   were   dangerous   to  him  ;    he 
fancy'd  his  belt  Security  lay  in  being  ter- 
rible, and  appearing  fuch  on  all  Occafions, 
by  making  others  miferable  when  he  pleas'd, 
to  let  his  Enemys  fee,   that  they   ihould 
have   no  Security  from   that    Companion 
which  a  Ne  ro  would  imagine  argu'd  Weak- 
nefs.     This  unfortunate  Gentleman's  Hap- 
pinefs  might  by   fome  foolifh  Courtier  be 
io  related,   as  to  carry  a  Reproof  of  the 
Tyrant's  unnatural  Purfuits,    whereby   his 
Paffion  might  be  excited  to  cut  off  the  Per- 


J  See  Seft.  ii.  Art.  4. 

foQ 


170      An  I N QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  3.  fon  admir'd,  and  prefer'd  before  him.  Any 
is\~*^  of  thele  Motives  of  apparent  lnterefi  feem 
more  probably  to  have  influenced  him,  than 
that  we  ftiould  in  him,  and  a  few  others, 
fuppofe  a  Principle  of  calm  Malice  without 
Inter  eft,  of  which  the  reft  of  Mankind 
feem  entirely  incapable. 

Temper  of      The  Temper  of  a  Tyrant  ftems  proba- 
*  T>'rant-  bly  to  be  a  continu'd  ftate  of  Anger \  Ha- 
tred^ and  Fear.     To  form  our  Judgment 
then  of  his  Motives  of  Adtion,    and  thofe 
of  Men  of  like  Tempers  in  lower  Stations, 
let  us  refledt  upon  the  Apprehenfions  we 
form  of  Mankind,  when  we  are  under  any 
of  thofe  Pafiions  which  to  the  Tyrant  are 
habitual.     When  we  are  under  the  frefli 
Impreflions  of  an  Injury,  we  plainly  find, 
that  our  Minds  are  wholly  fill'd  with  Ap- 
prehenfions   of    the   Perfon    who   injur'd 
us,  as  if  he  was  abfolutely  Evil,   and  de- 
lighted in  doing  Mifchief :    We  overlook 
the  Virtues,  which,  when  calm,  we  could 
have    obferv'd   in    him  :    we  forget    that 
perhaps  only  Self-Love,  and  not  Malice, 
was  his    Motive  ;    or    it    may  be   fbme 
generous  or  kind  Intention  toward  others. 
Thefe,  probably,  are  the  Opinions  which 
a  Tyrant  conflantly  forms  concerning  Man- 
kind ;  and  having  very  much  weaken'd  all 
kind  Affections  in  himielf,  however  he  may 
pretend  to  them,  he  judges  of  the  Tem- 
pers of  others  by  his  own.     And  were 

Men 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       \y\ 

Men  really  fitch  as  he  apprehends  them,  Se<3.  3. 
his  Treatment  of  them  would  not  be  very  (^V\J 
unreafonable.  We  ihall  generally  find  our 
Paffions  arifing  fuitably  to  the  Apprehen- 
fions  we  form  of  others  :  if  thele  be  raihly 
form'd  upon  lome  fudden  flight  Views,  it  is 
no  wonder  if  we  find  Dilpofitions  follow- 
ing upon  them,  very  little  fuited  to  the 
real  State  of  human  Nature. 

The  ordinary  Springs  of  Vice  then  ordinary 
among  Men,  muft  be  a  mifiaken  Self-  s^gs  of 
Love,  made  fo  violent,  as  to  overcome 
Benevolence  ;  or  AjfeEtions  arifing  from 
falfe,  and  rajhly  form'd  Opinions  of  Man- 
kind, which  we  run  into  thro  the  weak*- 
nels  of  our  Benevolence.  When  Men, 
who  had  good  Opinions  of  each  other, 
happen  to  have  contrary  Interefts,  they 
are  apt  to  have  their  good  Opinions. 
of  each  other  abated,  by  imagining  a 
dejign'd  Oppofition  from  Malice  ;  with- 
out this,  they  can  fcarcely  hate  one  ano- 
ther. Thus  two  Candidates  for  the  fame 
Office  wiih  each  other  dead,  becaufe 
that  is  an  ordinary  way  by  which  Men 
make  room  for  each  other  ;  but  if  there 
remains  any  Reflection  on  each  other's 
Virtue,  as  there  fometimes  may  in  bene- 
volent Tempers,  then  their  Oppofition  may 
be  without  Hatred ;  and  if  another  better 
Poft,  where  there  is  no  Competition,  were 

be- 


\yz      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  3 .  beftow'd  on  one  of  them,  the  other  fhall 
U°/NJ  rejoice  at  it. 

self-Love  V.  The  A&ions  which  flow  folely  from 
mdffirent.  Self-Love,  and  yet  evidence  no  Want  of 
Benevolence,  having  no  hurtful  Effe&s  up- 
on others,  feem  perfectly  indifferent  in  a 
moral  Senfe,  and  neither  raife  the  Love  or 
Hatred  of  the  Obferver.  Our  Reafon  can 
indeed  difcover  certain  Bounds,  within 
which  we  may  not  only  ad:  from  Self- 
Love,  confiftently  with  the  Good  of  the 
Whole,  but  every  Mortal's  ading  thus 
within  thefe  Bounds  for  his  own  Good, 
is  abfolutely  neceffary  for  the  Good  of 
the  Whole  ;  and  the  Want  of  fuch  Self 
Love  would  be  univerfally  pernicious. 
Hence,  he  who  purfues  his  own  private 
Good,  with  an  Intention  alfb  to  concur 
with  that  Conftitution  which  tends  to  the 
Good  of  the  Whole;  and  much  more  he  who 
promotes  his  own  Good,  with  a  dired  View 
of  making  himfelf  more  capable  of  ferving 
God,  or  doing  good  to  Mankind ;  ads  not 
only  innocently,  but  alfb  honourably,  and 
virttioufly  :  for  in  both  thefe  Cafes,  a  Mo- 
tive of  Benevolence  concurs  with  Self- 
Love  to  excite  him  to  the  Adion.  And 
thus  a  Neglect  of  our  own  Good,  may  be 
morally  evil,  and  argue  a  Want  of  Benevo- 
lence toward  the  Whole.  But  when  Self- 
Love  breaks  over  the  Bounds  above-men- 
tion'd,  and  leads  us  into  Adions  detrimen- 
3  tal 


Moral  Good  anA^v\  l.       173 

tal  to  others,  and  to  the  whole ;  or  makes  Se6t.  3. 
us  infenfible  of  the  generous  kind  Ajfec-  L/^/\J 
tions  ;  then  it  appears  vitious,  and  is  dif- 
approvyd.  So  alfo,  when  upon  any  fmall 
Injurys,  or  fadden  Refentment,  or  any 
weak  faperftitious  Suggeftions,  our  Bene- 
volence becomes  fo  faint,  as  to  let  us 
entertain  odious  Conceptions  of  Men,  or 
any  Part  of  them,  without  juft  Ground, 
as  if  they  were  wholly  Evil,  or  Malici- 
ous, or  as  if  they  were  a  worfe  Sort  of 
Beings  than  they  really  are  ;  thefe  Con- 
ceptions muft  lead  us  into  malevolent  Af- 
fections, or  at  lead  weaken  our  good  ones, 
and  make  us  really  Vitious. 

VI.  Here  we  muft  alfb  obferve,  that  seif-Love 
every  moral  Agent  juftly  confiders  himfelf^*^ 
as  a  T *art  of  this  rational  Syftem,  which  nevokme. 
may  be  ufeful  to  the  Whole  ;  lb  that  he  may 
be,  in  part,  an  Object  of  his  own  Benevo- 
lence. Nay  further,  as  was  hinted  above, 
he  may  fee,  that  the  Prefervation  of  the 
Syjtem  requires  every  one  to  be  inno- 
cently follicitous  about  himlelf.  Hence 
he  may  conclude,  that  an  Adtion  which 
brings  greater  Evil  to  the  Agent,  than 
Good  to  others,  however  it  may  evidence 
ftrong  Benevolence  or  a  virtuous  'Difpo- 
fition  in  the  Agent,  yet  it  muft  be  founded 
upon  a  miftaken  Opinion  of  its  Tendency 
to  publick  Good,  when  it  has  no  fuch 
Tendency  :  fo  that  a  Man  who  reafon'd 

juftly, 


1 74  *dn  I  N  QU  I RY  concerning 
Sedt.  3.juftly,  and  confiderM  the  Whole,  would 
isy^o  not  be  led  into  it,  were  his  Benevolence 
ever  fo  ftrong  ;  nor  would  he  recommend 
it  to  the  Pra&ice  of  others ;  however  he 
might  acknowledge,  that  the  Detriment 
arifing  to  the  Agent  from  a  kind  Attion, 
did  evidence  a  ftrong  Difpofition  to  Vir- 
tue. Nay  further,  if  any  Good  was 
propos'd  to  the  Purfirit  of  an  Agent,  and 
he  had  a  Competitor  in  every  tefped:  only 
equal  to  himfelf ;  the  highejl  Benevolence 
poffible  would  not  lead  a  wife  Man  to 
prefer  another  to  himfelf,  were  there  no 
Ties  of  Gratitude,  or  fome  other  external 
Circumftance  to  move  him  to  yield  to 
his  Competitor.  A  Man  furely  of  the 
firongefi  Benevolence,  may  juft  treat  him- 
felf as  he  would  do  a  third  Perfon,  who 
was  a  Competitor  of  equal  Merit  with  the 
other  ;  and  as  his  preferring  one  to  another, 
in  fuch  a  Cafe,  would  argue  no  Weaknefs  of 
Benevolence ;  io,  no  more  would  he  evi- 
dence it  by  preferring  himfelf  to  a  Man 
of  only  equal  Ability  s. 

Wherever  a  Regard  to  my  /elf,  tends 
as  much  to  the  good  of  the  Whole,  as 
Regard  to  another  ;  or  where  the  Evil  to 
my  felf,  is  equal  to  the  Good  obtain'd 
for  another  ;  tho  by  ading,  in  fiich  Cafes, 
for  the  good  of  another,  I  really  ihew  a 
very  amiable  Difpofition  ;  yet  by  ading 
in  the  contrary  manner,   from  Regard  to 

my 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      175 

my  Jelf,  I  evidence  no  evil  Difpofuion,  Sedt.  3. 
nor  any  want  of  the  moft  extenfive  Be-  ISV^J 
nevolence  ;  fince  the  Moment  of  good  to 
the  Whole  is,  in  both  Cafes,  exa&ly  equal. 
And  let  it  be  here  obferv'd,  that  this  does 
not  fuperiede  the  neceffity  of  Liberality^ 
or  gratuitous  Gifts^  altho  in  fuch  Actions 
the  Giver  loies  as  much  as  the  other  re- 
ceives ;  fince  the  Moment  of  Good  to 
any  Perion,  in  any  given  Cafe,  is  in  a 
compound  Ratio  of  the  Quantity  of  the 
Good  it  felf,  and  the  Indigence  of  the 
Perion.  Hence  it  appears,  that  a  Gift 
may  make  a  much  greater  Addition  to 
the  happineis  of  the  Receiver,  than  the 
'Diminution  it  occafions  in  the  happineis 
of  the  Giver:  And  that  the  moft  ufeful 
and  important  Gifts  are  thofe  from  the 
Wealthy  to  the  Indigent.  Gifts  from  E- 
quals  are  not  ulelefs  neither,  fince  they 
often  increafe  the  Happineis  of  both,  as 
they  are  ftrong  Evidences  of  mutual  Love : 
but  Gifts  from  the  Toor  to  the  Wealthy 
are  really  foolilh,  unlefs  they  be  only  little 
Expreffions  of  Gratitude,  which  are  alfb 
fruitful  of  Joy  on  both  Sides  :  for  thefe 
Expreffions  of  Gratitude  are  really  de- 
lightful and  acceptable  to  the  Wealthy \ 
if  they  have  any  Humanity  ;  and  their 
Acceptance  oT  them  is  matter  of  Joy  to 
the  poor  Giver, 

In  like  manner,  when  an  Adtion  does 
more  Harm  to  the  Agent,  than  Good  to 

the 


176       An  I  N  QJJ I R  Y  concerning 

Se<2\  3 .  the  Tublick  ;  the  doing  it  evidences  an 
</VN*  amiable  and  truly  virtuous  Difpofition  in 
the  Agent,  tho  'tis  plain  he  ads  upon  a 
miftaken  View  of  his  Duty.  But  if  the 
private  Evil  to  the  Agent  be  fo  great,  as 
to  make  him  incapable  at  another  time,  of 
promoting  a  public k  Good  of  greater  mo- 
ment than  what  is  attain'd  by  this  Action  ; 
the  Adiion  may  really  be  Evil,  fo  far  as 
it  evidences  a  prior  Negledt  of  a  greater  at- 
tainable piblick  Good  for  a  Imaller  one  ; 
tho  at  prefent  this  Adtion  alio  flows  from 
a  virtuous  Dilpofition. 

Benevo-        VII.  The  moral  Beauty,  or  'Deformity 

*medT  of  A(aions'  is  not  afcer'd  by  the  moral 
*he  ®uail  Quality s  of  the  Obje&s,  any  further  than 
tyso/its  the  Qualitys  of  the  Objedts  increafe  or 
°je*J'  diminiih  the  Benevolence  of  the  Action,  or 
the  piblick  Good  intended  by  it.  Thus 
Benevolence  toward  the  worjf  Characters, 
or  the  Study  of  their  Good,  may  be  as  ami- 
able as  any  whatfbever  ;  yea  often  more  fo 
than  that  toward  the  Good,  fince  it  argues 
ftch  a  ftrong  Degree  of  Benevolence  as  can 
iurmount  the  greateft  Obftacle,  the  moral 
Evil  in  the  Object.  Hence  the  Love  of 
unjttft  Enemy s,  is  counted  among  the 
higheft  Virtues.  Yet  when  our  Benevo- 
lence to  the  Evil,  encourages  them  in  their 
bad  Intentions,  or  makes  them  more  capa- 
ble of  Mifchief ;  this  diminishes  or  deftroys 
the  Beauty  of  the  A&ion,  or  even  makes 

it 


Moral  Goon  and  Evit,.       X77 

it  evil,  as  it  betrays  a  Negle6l  of  rhe  Sedt.  2 
Good  of  others  more  valuable  ;  Beneficence  v-^v^w 
toward  whom,  would  have  tended  more  to 
the  publick  Good,  than  that  toward  our 
Favourites  :  But  Benevolence  toward  evil 
Characters,  which  neither  encourages  them, 
nor  enables  them  to  do  Mifchief,  nor  di- 
verts our  Benevolence  from  Perfons  more 
ufeful,  has  as  much  moral  Beauty  as  any 
whatsoever. 

VIII.  In  comparing  the  moral  Quality s  Quality* 
of  Actions,  in  order  to  regulate  our  Elec*  determim 
tion  among  various  Actions  propos  d,   or  Election, 
to  find  which  of  them  has  the  greateft  mo- 
ral Excellency,  we  are  led  by  our  moral 
Senfe  of  Virtue   to  judge   thus ;   that  in 
equal  "Degrees  of  Happinefs,  expected  to 
proceed  from  the  Ad:ion,  the  Virtue  is  in 
proportion  to   the  Number  of  Perfons  to 
whom  the   Happinefs  fhall  extend  ;  (and 
here  the  Dignity,  or  moral  Importance  of 
Perfons,    may  compenfate  Numbers)    and 
in  equal  Numbers,    the  Virtue  is  as  the 
Quantity    of  the    Happinels,    or    natural 
Good  ;    or  that  the  Virtue  is  in  a   com- 
found  Ratio  of  the  Quantity   of  Good, 
and   Number  of  Enjoyers.     In  the  lame 
manner,  the  moral  Evil,    or  Vice,    is  as 
the   Degree  of  Mifery,    and  Number  of 
Sufferers  ;  fo    that,    that  AElion   is  be  ft, 
which   procures    the   greateft    Happinefs 
for    the   greateft   Numbers ;    and    that, 

N  worft, 


\7%       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sedt.  j.  worfl,    which,  in  like  manner ',    occafions 
«/V\  M'ifery. 

confeqmn-      ix.  Again,  when  the  Confequences  of 
They  haffia  A&ions  are  of  a  mix'd  Nature,  partly  Ad- 
the  Mom-  vantageous,    and  partly  'Pernicious  ;  that 
lityof  Ac-  ^ftiQn  is  g00j9    whofe  good  Effe&s  pre- 
ponderate the  evil,  by  being  ufeful  to  many, 
and  pernicious  to   few  ;    and  that^  evil, 
which  is  otherwife.     Here  alio  the  moral 
Importance  of  Characters,    or  'Dignity  of 
Perfons  may  compenfate  Numbers  ;  as  may 
alfo  the  "Degrees  of  Happinels  or  Mifery  : 
for  to  procure   an  inconfiderable  Good  to 
many,  but  an  immenfe  Evil  to  few,  may 
be  Evil ;    and  an  immenfe  Good  to  few, 
may  preponderate  zfmall  Evil  to  many. 

But  the  Confequences  which  affed:  the 
Morality  of  Actions,  are  not  only  the 
diredt  and  natural  Effects  of  the  Actions 
themfelves  ;  but  alfo  all  thofe  Events  which 
otherwife  would  not  have  happen'd.  For 
many  Actions  which  have  no  immediate 
or  natural  evil  EffeEts,  nay,  which  ac- 
tually produce  good  EffeEls,  may  be  evil ; 
if  a  man  forefees  that  the  evil  Confe- 
quences, which  will  probably  flow  from 
the  Folly  of  others,  upon  his  doing  of  fuch 
Adtions,  are  fo  great  as  to  overbalance 
all  the  Good  produc'd  by  thofe  Adtions,  or 
all  the  Evils  which  would  flow  from  the 
Omiffion  of  them :  And  in  fuch  Cafes  the 
*  Fro- 


Moral  Good^Evil.      179 

Probability  is  to  be  computed  on  both  fides.  Sed.  3 
Thus  if  an   Action  of  mine  will  probably,  --y*v"vj 
thro  the  Miftakes  or  Corruption  of  others, 
be  made  a  'Precedent  in  unlike  Cafes,   to 
Very   evil  Actions  ;    or  when  my  Adion, 
tho  good  in  it  ielf,  will  probably  provoke 
Men   to   very    evil    Adions,    upon    fome 
miflaken    Notion  of  their  Right  ;  any   of 
thefe  Confiderations  forefeen  by  me,  may 
make  fiich  an  Adion  of  mine  evil,  when- 
ever the  Evils  which  will  probably  be  oc- 
cafion'd  by  the  AEiion,    are  greater  than 
the  Evils  occafion'd  by  the  Omiffion. 

And  this  is  the  Reafbnthat  many  Lawk 
prohibit  Adions  in  general,  even  when 
fome  particular  Inflames  of  thofe  Adions 
would  be  very  ufeful  ;  becaufe  an  univerial 
Allowance  of  them,  confidering  the  Mifc 
takes  Men  would  probably  fall  into,  would 
be  more  pernicious  than  an  univerfal  Pro- 
hibition  ;  nor  could  there  be  any  more 
Jfiecial  Boundary s  fix'd  between  the  right 
and  wrong  Cafes.  In  fuch  Cafes,  it  is  the 
Duty  of  Perfbns  to  comply  with  the  ge- 
nerally ufeful  Conftitution  5  or  if  in  fome 
very  important  Inftances,  the  Violation  of 
the  Law  would  be  of  kfs  evil  Covfequence^ 
than  Obedience  to  it5  they  muft  patiently 
refolve  to  undergo  thofe  Penalties,  which 
the  State  has,  for  valuable  Ends  to  the 
Whole,  appointed  :  and  this  Diiobedience 
Will  have  nothing  criminal  in  it. 

N  2  X.  From 


i  80       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sea.  3. 

y-/^ry°  X.  From  the  two  laft  Obfervations,  we 
Bmevo-  may  fee  what  Actions  our  moral  Senfe 
Unce,  bow  would  moft  recommend  to  our  Election,  as 
wrtHom.  tjie  mo^  perfef}iy  Virtuous  :  viz.  fuch  as 
appear  to  have  the  inoft  univerfal  unlimited 
Tendency  to  the  great  eft  and  moji  extenfive 
Hapfinefs  of  all  the  rational  Agents,  to 
whom  our  Influence  can  reach.  %  All  Bene- 
volence, even  toward  a  Tart,  is  amiable, 
when  not  inconfiftent  with  the  Good  of  the 
Whole :  But  this  is  a  fmaller  Degree  of 
Virtue,  unlefs  our  Beneficence  be  reftrain'd 
by  want  of  Power,  and  not  want  of  Love 
to  the  Whole.  All  ftri<5t  Attachments  to 
Partys,  Sec5ts,  Fa&ions,  have  but  an  im- 
perfect Species  of  Beauty,  unlefs  when  the 
Good  of  the  Whole  requires  a  ftrider  At- 
tachment to  a  Tart,  as  in  natural  Affec- 
tion, or  virtuous  Friendfkips  ;  or  when 
fome  Tarts  are  fb  eminently  ufeful  to  the 
Whole,  that  even  univerfal  Benevoleiice 
would  determine  us  with  lpecial  Care  and 
Affection  to  ftudy  their  Interefls.  Thus 
univerfal  Benevolence  would  incline  us  to 
a  more  flrong  Concern  for  the  Interefls  of 
great  and  generous  Characters  in  a  high 
Station,  of  make  us  more  earneftly  ftudy 
the  Interefls  of  any  generous  Society, 
whofe  whole  Conftitution  was  contriv'd  to 
promote  univerfal  Good.  Thus  a  good 
Fancy  in  Architecture,  would  lead  a  Man, 
who  was  not  able  to  bear  the  Expence 

of 


Moral  Good  gnd  Evil.      i  8  i 

of  a  compleatly  regular  Building,  to  chufe  Sedt.  j. 
fuch  a  Degree  of  Ornament  as  he  could  f^"V">o 
keep  uniformly  thro  the  Whole,  and  not 
move  him  to  make  a  vain  unfinifh'd  At- 
tempt in  one  Tart,  of  what  he  forefaw 
he  could  not  fucceed  in  as  to  the  Whole. 
And  the  mod  perfed:  Rules  of  Architecture 
condemn  an  exceffive  Profufion  of  Orna- 
ment on  one  Tart,  above  the  Proportion 
of  the  Whole,  unlefs  that  Tart  be  fome 
eminent  Place  of  the  Edifice,  fuch  as  the 
chief  Front,  or  public k  Entrance  ;  the 
adorning  of  which,  would  beautify  the 
Whole  more  than  an  equal  Expence  of 
Ornament  on  any  other  Tart. 

This  Increafe  of  the  moral  Beauty  of 
Actions,  or  Difpofitions,  according  to  the 
Number  of   Perfbns  to   whom  the  good 
Effe&'s  of  them  extend,  may  ihew  us  the 
Reafbn  why  Adtions  which  flow  from  the 
nearer  Attachments  of  Nature,    fuch  as 
that  between  the  Sexes,  and  the  Love  of 
our  Offspring,    are    not  fb  amiable,    nor 
do  they  appear  fo  virtuous  as  Actions   of 
equal  Moment  of  Good  towards  Perfbns 
lefs  attach'd  to  us.     The  Reafbn  is  plainly 
this.    Thefe  ftrong  Inftindts  are  by  Nature 
limited  to  fmall  Numbers  of  Mankind,  fuch 
as  our  Wives  or  Children  ;  whereas  a  Dif- 
pofition,    which  would  produce  a  like  Mo- 
ment of  Good  to  others,    upon  no  fpecial 
Attachment,  if  it  was  accompany *d  with 
N  3  natural 


t  8  2       An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedl.  j.  natural  Power  to  accomplilh  its   Intention, 
v^v~  would  be  incredibly  more  fruitful  of  great 
and  good  Eftedts  to  the  Whole, 

Moral Dif  From  this  primary  Idea  of  moral  Good 
prions  in  Actions,  ariles  the  Idea  of  Good  in  thofe 
%is.  °  Difpofitions,  whether  natural  or  acquired, 
which  enable  us  to  do  good  to  others ;  or 
which  are  prefum'd  to  be  defign'd>  and  ac- 
quired or  cultivated  for  that  purpofe.  And 
hence  thofe  Abilitys,  while  nothing  appears 
contrary  to  our  Preemption,  may  increale 
pur  Love  to  the  PoiTefTbr  of  them  ;  but 
when  they  are  imagin'd  tojbe  intended  for 
public  Mi/chief,  they  make  us  hate  him 
the  more  :  Such  are  a  penetrating  Judg- 
ment, a  tenacious  Memory,  a  quick  Inven- 
tion ;  Tatience  of  Labour,  'Fain,  Hunger, 
Watching ;  a  Contempt  of  Wealth,  Ru- 
mour, ^eath.  Thefe  may  be  rather  call'd 
natural  Abilitys,  than  moral  ^ualitys. 
Now,  a  Veneration  for  thefe  Qualitys, 
any  further  than  they  are  employ'd  for 
the  publick  Good,  is  foolilh,  and  flows 
from  our  moral  Senfe,  grounded  upon  a 
falie  Opinion  ;  for  if  we  plainly  fee  them 
malicioujly  employ'd,  they  make  the  Agent 
more  deteftable. 

hww  XI.  To  find  a  univerfal  Canon  to  com* 
ikrSrm-  Pute  tne  Mfrafity  of  any  Actions,  with  all 
UtyofAc-  their  Circumftances,  when  we  judge  of  the 
Vur  senfe  Adions  done  by  our  felves,  or  by  9thers, 
•ft  km.  vye 


'Moral  Good  and  Evil.     183 

we  muft  obferve  the  following  Tropafitions,  Sed.  3 , 
or  Axioms.  v^y^ 

i4  The  moral  Importance  of  any  A- 
gent,  or  the  Quantity  of  publick  Good 
produced  by  him,  is  in  a  compound  Ratio 
of  his  Benevolence  and  Abilitys  :  or  (by 
fubftitutingthe  initial  Letters  for  the  Words, 
as  M=  Moment  of  Good,  and  </= Moment 
of  £w/)  M=BxA. 

2.  In  like  manner,  the  Moment  of  pri- 
vate Good,  or  Intereji  produc'd  by  any 
Perlbn  to  himfelf,  is  in  a  compound  Ratio 
of  his  Self-Love,  and  Abilitys  :  or  (fub- 
ftituting  the  initial  Letters)  I=SxA. 

3.  When  in  comparing  the  Virtue  of 
two  A&ions,  the  Abilitys  of  the  Agents 
are  equal  ;  the  Moment  of  publick  Good 
produc'd  by  them  in  like  Circumftances,  is 
as  the  Benevolence  ;  or  M=Bxi. 

4.  When  Benevolence  in  two  Agents 
is  equal,  and  other  Circumftances  alike ;  the 
Moment  of  public k  Good  is  as  the  Abilitys  : 
or  M=Axi. 

5.  The  Virtue  then  of  Agents,  or  their 
Benevolence,  is  always  directly  as  the  A/0- 
ment  of  GW  produc'd  in  like  Circum- 
ftances, and  inverjly  as  their  Abilitys  :  01 

N  4  tf.  Bur 


1 84       ^n  I N  QJJ I R  Y  concerning 

v-^v^/  6.  But  as  the  natural  Confequences  of 
our  A&ions  are  various,  fome  good  to  our 
felves,  and  evil  to  the  Publick  ;  and  others 
evil  to  our  felves,  and  good  to  the  Pub- 
lick  ;  or  either  ufeful  both  to  our  felves  and 
others,  or  pernicious  to  both  ;  the  entire 
Motive  to  good  Actions  is  not  always  Be- 
nevolence  alone;  or  Motive  to  Evil,  Ma- 
lice alone ;  (nay,  this  laft  is  leldom  any 
Motive  at  all)  but  in  mod  Actions  we 
mufl:  look  upon  Self -Love  as  another  Force, 
fometimes  confpiring  with  Benevolence,  and 
a/Tilting  it,  when  we  are  excited  by  Views 
of  private  Inter  eft,  as  well  as  publick 
Good ;  and  fometimes  oppofing  Benevo- 
lence, when  the  good  Adtion  is  any  way 
difficult  or  painful  in  the  Performance, 
or  detrimental  in  its  Confequences  to  the 

Agent.     In  the  former  Cafe,  M=B+SxA 
=BA+SA  ;  and  therefore  BA=M— SA= 

]Yi I 

M — I,  and  B=  — — •     In  the  latter  Cafe, 

A 

M=B— SxA=BA— SA  ;    therefore  BA= 
M+SA=M+I,  andB=^B 

These  felfijh  Motives  fhall  be  *  here- 
after more  fully  explain 'd  ;  here  we  may 
in  general  denote  them  by  the  Word  In- 


Vide  SiSU  \\ 

tereft ; 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     185 

terefl  :  which  when  it  concurs  with  Be-  Sed.  3. 
nevolence,  in  any  Adion  capable  of  In-  <^V"v-i 
creafe,  or  Diminution,  muft  produce  a  great- 
er Quantity  of  Good,  than  Benevolence 
alone  in  the  fame  Abilitys  \  and  therefore 
when  the  Moment  of  Good,  in  an  Adion 
partly  intended  for  the  Good  of  the  Agent, 
is  but  equal  to  the  Moment  of  Good  in  the 
Adion  of  another  Agent ',  influenced  only  by 
Benevolence,  the  former  is  lefs  virtuous ; 
and  in  this  Cafe  the  Interejl  muft  be  de- 
duded  to  find  the  true  EfFed  of  the  Benevo- 
lence, or  Virtue.  In  the  fame  manner,  when 
Interejl  is  oppofite  to  Benevolence,  and 
yet  is  furmounted  by  it ;  this  Interejl  muft 
be  added  to  the  Moment,  to  increale  the 
Virtue  of  the  Adion,  or  the  Strength  of 
the  Benevolence  :  Or  thus,  in  advantageous 

M I 

Virtue,  B= — -r— •     And  in  laborious,  pain* 
A 

ful,    dangerous  or  expenfive  Virtue,  B= 

-—  •  By  Intereji,  in  this  laft  Cafe,  is  un- 

A 
derftood  all  the  Advantage  which  the  A- 
gent  might  have  obtain'd  by  omitting  the 
Adion,  which  is  a  negative  Motive  to 
it ;  and  this,  when  fubtraded,  becomes 
■pojitive. 

But  here  we  muft  obferve,  that  no  Ad-  intention, 
vantage,  not  intended,  altho  cafually,  or  fJj*Ta 
naturally  redounding  to  us  from  the  Adion,  %l0aJj 

does 


1 86       An  I  N  QU I RY  concerning 

Se<5t.  3 .  does  at  all  affed:  its  Morality  to  make  it 
v^v^-/  fcfe  amiable  ;  nor  does  any  Ttifficulty  or 
£i;/7  unforefeen,  or  not  refolved  upon, 
make  a  kind  A&ion  more  virtuous ;  fince 
in  fuch  Cafes  Self-Love  neither  affifts  nor 
oppofes  Benevolence,  Nay,  Self-Inter  eft 
then  only  diminifhes  the  Benevolence, 
when  without  this  View  of  Intereft  the 
A&ion  would  not  have  been  undertaken, 
or  fo  much  Good  would  not  have  been  pro- 
duced by  the  Agent ;  and  it  extenuates  the 
Vice  of  an  evil  A&ion,  only  when  with- 
out this  Intereft  the  A&ion  would  not 
have  been  pleafing  to  the  Agent,  or  fo 
much  Evil  have  been  produc'd  by  him. 

The  fixth  Axiom  only  explains  the  ex- 
ternal Marks  by  which  Men  muft  judge, 
who  do  not  fee  into  each  others  Hearts  ; 
for  it  may  really  happen  in  many  Cafes, 
that  Men  may  have  Benevolence  fuffici- 
ent  to  furmount  any  Difficulty,  and  yet 
they  may  meet  with  none  at  all :  And  in 
that  Cafe,  it  is  certain  there  is  as  much 
Virtue  in  the  Agent,  tho  he  does  not 
give  fuch  Proof  of  it  to  his  Fellow-Crea- 
tures, as  if  he  had  fiirmounted  Difficulty  s 
in  his  kind'AcStions.  And  this  too  muft  be 
the  Cafe  with  the  Deity,  to  whom  no- 
thing is  difficult. 


Since 


Moral  Good  andE vil.      187 

Se<3? 
Since  then  Benevolence ',  or  Virtue  in  ^V\J 

.       M  M+I  rfm 

zny  Agent,  lSasx?   or  as      ~  ?  and  no 

Being  can  ad:  above  his  natural  Ability ; 
that  muft  be  the  Perfe&ion  of  Virtue  where 
M=A,  or  when  the  i?^g  a&s  to  the  ut- 
moft  of  his  Power  for  the  public k  Good ; 
and  hence  the  Perfection  of  Virtue  in  this 

M 
Cafe,  or  -r-*  is  as  *U»//y.     And  this  may 

fhew  us  the  only  Foundation  for  the  boaft- 
ing  of  the  Stoic  ks,  '*  That  a  Creature  fup- 
*'  pos'd  Innocent,  by  purfuing  Virtue  with 
"  his  utmoft  Power,  may  in  Virtue  equal 
"  the  G<?</j\"  For  in  their  Cafe,  if  [A]  or 
the  Ability  be  Infinite,  unlefs  [M]  or  the 
Good  to  be  produced  in  the  whole,  be  Co 
too,  the  Virtue  is  not  abfolutely  perfeB  ; 
and  the  Quotient  can  never  lurmount  *U* 

XII.  The  lame  Axioms  may  be  apply 'd  Moral 
to  compute  the  awr*/  Evil  in  Anions  ;  f^^ 
that  is,  calling  the  Difpofition  which  leads 
us  to  Evil,  Hatred,  tho  it  is  oftner  only 
Self-Love,   with  Inadvertence  to  its  Con- 
fequences  :  then, 

1/?.  The  Moment  of  Evil produc'd  by 
any  Agent,  is  as  the  TroduEl  of  his  Ha- 
tred into  his  Ability,  pr/x^HxA.    And, 

•    idly. 


1 88      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  3. 

Ky^T^      zdly.  In  equal  Ability >s,  H=//Xi. 

idly.  When  Hatred  is  equal ;  ^=Axi: 
And,, 

^thly.  The  Degree  of  moral  Evil,  or 
Vice,  which  is  equal  to  the  Hatred  or 
Neglett  of  public k  Good,  is  thus  exprefs'd, 


5^/y.  The  Motives  of  Inter  efl  may  co- 
operate with  Hatred,  or  oppole  it  the  fame 
way  as  with  Benevolence  ;  and  then  accord- 
ing as  Self-Inter  eft  may  partly  excite  to  the 
Aaion,  and  fo  diminifh  the  Evil;  ordif 
(bade  from  it,  and  fo  increafe  it,  the  Malice 

which  lurmounts  it,  or  H='-L=_?    in  like 

A 

manner  as  in  the  Cafe  of  moral  Good. 

intention,  Bur  we  muft  obferve,  that  not  only  In- 
Tonfight.  mcence  is  expeded  from  all  Mortals,  but 
they  are  prefum'd  from  their  Nature,  in 
fbme  meafare  inclin'd  to  publick  Good  ;  fo 
that  a  bare  Abfence  of  this  Defire  is  enough 
to  make  an  Agent  be  reputed  Evil :  Nor  is 
a  dired  Intention  of  public k  Evil  neceflary 
to  make  an  A&ion  evil,  it  is  enough  that 
it  flows  from  Self-Love,  with  a  plain  Neg- 
lect of  the  Good  of  others,  or  an  Infenfi- 

bility 


Moral  Good  and  Evil,       189 

bility  of  their  Mifery,  which  we  either  ac-  Sedt.  3. 
tually  forefee,  or  have  a  probable  Trefump-  v^ry^ 
tion  of. 

It  is  true  indeed,  that  that  pub  lick  E- 
vil  which  I  neither  certainly  forefee,  nor 
have  adtual  Prefumptions  of,  as  the  Confe- 
quence  of  my  A&ion,  does  not  make  my 
prefent  AEtion  Criminal,  or  Odious ;  even 
altho  I  might  have  forefeen  this  Evil  by  a 
ferious  Examination  of  my  own  A&ions  ; 
becaufe  fuch  Actions  do  not,    at  prefent, 
evidence  either  Malice,  or  want  of  Bene- 
volence.   But  then  it  is  alfb  certain,   that 
my  prior  Negligence,    in  not  examining 
the  Tendency  of  my  Actions,   is  a  plain 
Evidence  of  the  want  of  that  Degree  of 
good  Affe&ions  which  is  neceflary   to  a 
virtuous  Chara&er  ;   and  confequently  the 
Guilt  properly  lies  in  this  Negleff,  rather 
than  in  an  Affion  which  really  flows  from 
a  good  Intention.    Human  Laws  however, 
which  cannot  examine  the  Intentions,   or 
fecret  Knowledge  of  the  Agent,  mull  judge 
in  grofs  of  the  Action  itfelf;  preluppofing 
all   that  Knowledge  as  a&ually   attain'd, 
which  we  are  oblig'd  to  attain. 

In  like  manner,  no  good  Effed:  which 
I  did  not  actually  forefee  and  intend,  makes 
my  A&ion  morally  Good ;  however  Hu- 
man Laws  or  Governours,  who  cannot 
fearch  into  Mens  Intentions,  or  know  their 
3  fecret 


i po      An  I N QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed.  3.  fecret  T)efigns,  juftly  reward  A&ions  which 
LT\rv  tend  to  the  publick  Good,  altho  the  A- 
gent  was  engag'd  to  thofe  Actions  only 
by  felfijh  Views  ;  and  confequently  had 
no  virtuous  Difpofition  influencing  him  to 
them. 

The  difference  in  degree  of  Guilt  be- 
tween Crimes  of  Ignorance,  when  the  Ig- 
norance is  Vincible,  and  Faulty,  as  to  the 
natural  Tendency  of  the  Adtion ;  and 
Crimes  of  Malice,  or  dired:  evil  Intention, 
confifts  in  this  ;  that  the  former,  by  a 
frior  NegleEl,  argues  a  want  of  the  due 
degree  of  Benevolence,  or  right  Ajfettion ; 
the  latter,  evidences  dired  evil  Affettions, 
which  are  vaftly  more  odious. 

'Morality  XIII.  From  Axiom  the  $tb9  we  may 
fivmi  ^0rm  2^m0^L  a  demonftrative  Conclufion, 
tmfi. n"  "  that  we  have  a  Senfe  of  Goodnefs  and  mo* 
"  ral  Beauty  in  Adions,  diftind  from  Ad* 
"  vantage  ;"  for  had  we  no  other  Founda- 
tion of  Approbation  of  Adions,  but  the  Ad- 
vantage which  might  arile  to  us  from  them, 
if  they  were  done  toward  our  felves,  we 
Ihould  make  no  Account  of  the  Ability s 
of  the  Agent,  but  would  barely  efteem 
them  according  to  their  Moment.  The 
Abilitys  come  in  only  to  fhew  the  De- 
gree of  Benevolence,  which  fiippofes  Be* 
nevolence  neceflarily  amiable.  Who  was 
€ver  the  better  pleas'd  with  a  barren  rocky 

Farmt 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      \^x 

Farm,  or  an  inconvenient  Houfe,  by  Seft.  j. 
being  told  that  the  poor  Farm  gave  as  v^v^ 
great  Increafe  as  it  could  ;  or  that  the 
Houfe  accommodated  its  PofTeflbr  as  well 
as  it  could  ?  And  yet  in  our  Sentiments 
of  Anions,  whofe  Moment  is  very  incon- 
fiderable,  it  fhall  wonderfully  increafe  the 
Beauty  to  alledge,  "  That  it  was  all 
"  the  poor  Agent  could  do  for  the  Tub* 
"  lick,  or  his  Friend" 

XIV.  The  moral  Beauty  of  Characters  Morality 
arifes  from  their  A&ions,  or  fincere  Inten-  fj£*' 
tions  of   the  publick  Good,    according  to 
their  Power.     We  form  our  Judgment  of 
them  according  to   what    appears    to    be 
their  fix'd  'Dijpojition,   and  not  according 
to  any  particular  Sallys  of  unkind  Taf- 
fions  ;    altho  thefe  abate  the   Beauty    of 
good  Characters,    as  the  Motions  of  the 
kind  Affections  diminilh  the  ^Deformity  of 
the  bad  ones.    What  then  properly  con- 
ftitutes  a  virtuous  Character,   is  not  forae 
few  accidental  Motions  of  CompaJJion,  na- 
tural AffeCtion,  or  Gratitude  ;  but  fuch  a 
jix'd  Humanity,  or  Tiefire  of  the  publick 
Good  of  all,  to  whom  our  Influence  can 
extend,  as  uniformly  excites  us  to  all  Adts 
of  Beneficence,    according  to  our  utmofl 
Prudence  and  Knowledge  of  the  Interefts  of 
others  :  and  a  ftrong  Benevolence  will  not 
fail  to  make  us  careful  of  informing  our 
felves  right,  concerning  the  trueft  Methods 

of 


192        An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  3 .  of  ferving  the  Interefts  of  Mankind.    Every 
v^v^^  Motion  indeed  of  the  kind  Affetlions  ap- 
pears in  fome  degree  amiable  ;  but  we  de- 
nominate the  Character  from  the  prevail- 
ing 'Principle. 

infmtt         XV.  I  K  n  o  w  not  for  what  Reafon  fome 
may  be  the  wy]  not  auow  that  to  be  Virtue,  which 
%Zf    flows   fr°m   Inftintts,     or  TaJJions  ;    but 
how  do  they  help  themfelves  ?   They  fay, 
"  Virtue  arifes  from  Reafon?      What  is 
Reafon  but  £/to  Sagacity  we  have  inprofe- 
cuting  any  End  ?  The  ultimate  End  pro- 
pos'd  by  the  common  Moralijls  is  the  77^- 
/i;/^/5  of  the  Agent  himfelf,  and  this  cer- 
tainly he  is  determin'd  to  purlue  from  In- 
Jiinfl.     Now  may  not  another  Inftinfl  to- 
ward the  Tublick,  or  the  Good  of  others, 
be  as  proper  a  Principle  of  Virtue,  as  the 
Inftinlt  toward  private  Hapfinefs  ?  And  is 
there  not  the  fame  Occafion  for  the  Exercife 
of  our  Reafon  in  purfuing  the  former,    as 
the  latter  ?    This  is  certain,  that  whereas 
we   behold  the  felfijb  Adtions  of  others, 
with  Indifference  at  beft,  we  fee  fomething 
amiable  in  every  Acftion  which  flows  from 
kind  Affections  or  Taffwns  toward  others  ; 
if  they  be  conduded  by  Prudence,   fo  as 
any  way  to  attain  their   End.     Our  paf 
Jionate  A&ions,  as  we  fhew'd  *  above,  are 
not  always  Selfinterefted ;  fince  our  In* 

*  See  Se&.  ii.  Art.  8. 

tention 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       \^j 

tention  is  not  to  free  our  felves  from  the  Sedt  2 
1)neafinefs  of  the  Paffion,  but  to  alter  the  ^v^-' 
State  of  the  Obje<3. 

If  it  be  faid,    4'  That  A&ions   from 
"  Inflintt,   are  not    the  Effecft  of  Tru* 
"  dfe^    and    Choke  ;"     this    Obje&ion 
holds  full  as  ftrongly  againft  the  A&ions 
which  flow  from  Self-Love  ;  fmce  the  ufe 
of  our  Reafon  is  as  requifite,  to  find  the 
proper  Means  of  promoting  public k  Good, 
as  private  Good,     And  as  it  mud  be  an 
InflinEi,    or  a  'Determination  previous  to 
Reafon,  *  which   makes  us  purfue  private 
Good,    as  well  as  public k  Good,    as    our 
End ;  there  is  the  lame  occafion  for  Pru- 
dence and  Choice,  in  the  Election  of  pro- 
per Means  for  promoting  ofj  either.     I  fee 
no  harm  in  fuppofing,  "  that  Men  are  nam- 
*c  rally  difpos'd   to  Virtue,    and  not  left 
f*  merely  indifferent,  to  be  ingag'd  in  Ac- 
"  tions  only  as  they  appear  to  tend  to  their 
"  own  private  Good"     Surely,  the  Suppo- 
fition   of  a  benevolent  univerfal  Infi'mct* 
would  recommend  human  Nature,  and  its 
Author,    more  to  the  Love  of  a  good 
Man,  and  leave  room  enough  for  the  Ex- 
erciie  of   our   Reafon,   in   contriving    and 
fettling  Rights,    Laws,    Conftitutions  ;  in 
inventing  Arts,  and  praffifing  them  fo  as  to 
gratify,  in  the  mod  effe&ual  manner,    that 
generous  Inclination.  And  if  we  mud:  bring 
in  Self-Love  to  make  Virtue  Rational,  a 

O  little 


1 94       An  I  N  QJJ  I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt  5.  little  Refle&ion  will  difcover,  as  fliall  ap- 
L/V^J  pear  hereafter,   that  this  Benevolence  is  our 
greateft   Happinefis  ;  and  thence  we  may 
refolve  to  cultivate,  as  much  as  poffible, 
this  fweet  Ttifpofition,  and  to  defpiie  every 
oppofite  InterejL    Not  that  we  can  be  truly 
Virtuous  *  if  we  intend  only  to  obtain  the 
Pleafure    which   accompanies   Beneficence, 
without  the  Love  of  others  :  Nay,  this  very 
Pleafure  is  founded  on  our  being  conicious 
oidifintere  fed  Love  to  others,  as  the  Spring 
of  our  A&ions.     But  Self-Interefi  may  be 
our   Motive,    in   chufmg  to   continue   in 
this  agreeable  State,  tho  it  cannot  be  the 
file,  or  principal  Motive  of  any  Action, 
which  to  our  moral  Senfie  appears  Virtuous. 

Heroifm,  The  applying  a  mathematical  Calcula- 
mail  fid-  tion  to  moral  Subjects,  will  appear  per- 
tions.  jiapS  at  £rfl.  extravagant  and  vuild  •»  but 
fome  Corollarys,  which  are  eafily  and  cer- 
tainly deduc'd  below  *,  may  fliew  the  Con- 
veniency  of  this  Attempt,  if  it  could  be  fur- 
ther puriu'd.  At  prefent,  we  ihall  only  draw 
this  one,  which  ieems  the  mod  joyful  ima- 
ginable, even  to  the  loweft  rank  of  Man- 
kind, viz.  tC  That  no  external  Circumftan- 
"  ces  of  fortune,  no  involuntary  Difad- 
"  vantages,  can  exclude  any  Mortal  from 
"  the  moftheroick  Virtue"  For  how  fmall 
foever  the  Moment  of  publick  Good  be, 


*  See  Setf.  \il.  Art.  8,  9. 

which 


Moral  Good^Evil.       195 

which  any  one  can  accornplifh,  yet  if  his  Sec2.  2. 
Ability  s  are  proportionably  Imall,  the  Quo-  ^~y^ 
tient,  which  exprefTes  the  Degree  of  Vir- 
tue, may  be  as  great  as  any  whatfoever. 
Thus,  not  only  the  Trince,  the  State/man, 
the  General,  are  capable  of  true  Heroifm, 
tho  thefe  are  the  chief  Characters,  whofc 
Fame  is  diffus'd  thro  various  Nations  and 
Ages  ;  but  when  we  find  in  an  honefi  Trader^ 
the  kind  Friend,  the  faithful  prudent  Ad- 
*vifer,  the  charitable  and  ho/pitable  Neigh- 
bour^  the  tender  Husband  and  affectionate 
Parent,  the  fedate  yet  ch earful  Compa- 
nion, the  generous  Affiftant  of  Merit,  the 
cautious  Allayer  of  Contention  and  T)ebate9 
the  Tromoter  of  Love  and  £00*/  Under- 
JIanding  among  Acquaintances  ;  if  we  con* 
ilder,  that  thele  were  all  the  good  Offices 
which  his  Station  in  the  World  gave  him 
an  Opportunity  of  performing  to  Mankind, 
we  muft  judge  this  Character 'really  as  ami- 
able, as  thole,  whofe  external  Splendor  daz- 
zles an  injudicious  World  into  an  Opinion, 
"  that  they  are  the  only  Heroes  in  Virtue" 


O  2  SECT. 


1 9  6       An  I N  QJJ I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt  a. 


SECT.    IV. 

All  Mankind  agree  in  this  general 
Foundation  of  their  Approbation 
of  moral  Actions.  The  Grounds 
of  the  different  Opinions  about 
Morals. 

Thh  Moral  I.   '"""jf^  O  fliew  how  far  Mankind  agree  in 
senfenni-  j[       j-j^  which   we  have  made  the 

univerfal  Foundation  of  this  moral  Senfe, 
viz.  Benevolence,  we  have  obferv'd 
already  *,  that  when  we  are  ask'd  the  Rea- 
fbn  of  our  Approbation  of  any  A&ion,  we 
perpetually  alledge  its  Ufefulnefs  to  the 
Tttblick,  and  not  to  the  ABor  himfelf.  If 
we  are  vindicating  a  cenfur'd  Adtion,  and 
maintaining  it  lawful,  we  always  make 
this  one  Article  of  our  Defence,  "  Thai* 
*•  it  injur'd  no  body,  or  did  more  Good 
"  than  Harm''  On  the  other  hand,  when 
we  blame  any  piece  of  Conduct,  we  fliew 
it  to  be  prejudicial  to  others,  befides  the 
Acior  ;  or  to  evidence  at  leaft  a  NegleEi 
of  their  Intereft,  when  it  was  in  our  power 
to  ferve  them ;  or  when  Gratitude,  natural 
JlffeEiion,  or  fome  other  dijinterefied  Tye 


*  See  above,  SeB.  Hi.  Art.  3.  Par.  3, 


fliould 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      197 

/hould  have  rais'd  in  us  a  Study  of  their  Scd:.  4. 
Intereft.      If  we  fometimes  blame  foolilh  <^VNJ 
Condud:  in  others,  without  any  refiedion 
upon  its  Tendency  to  public k  Evil,   it  is 
(till  occafion'd  by  our  Benevolence,  which 
makes  us  concern'd  for  the  Evils  befalling 
the  Agent,   whom  we  mud  always  look 
upon  as  a  part  of  the  Syftem.      We  all 
know  how  great  an  Extenuation  of  Crimes 
it  is,    to  alledge,    "  That  the  poor  Man 
"  does   harm  to  no  body  but  himfelf ;" 
and  how  often  this  turns  Hatred  into  Pity. 
And  yet  if  we  examine  the  Matter  well,  we 
fhall  find,  that  the  greatefl  part  of  the  Ac- 
tions which  are  immediately  prejudicial  to 
our  felves,  and  are  often  look'd  upon  as  ///- 
nocent  toward  others,  do  really  tend  to  the 
public  k  'Detriment,    by  making  us  incapa- 
ble of  performing  the  good  Offices  we  could 
otherwile  have  done,    and  perhaps  would 
have  been  inclined  to  do.     This  is  the  Cafe 
of  Intemperance  and  extravagant  Luxury. 

II.  And  further,  we  may  obferve,  that  Bow- 
no  Action  of  any  other  Perfon  was  ever  JEf*'^ 
approv'd  by  us,  but  upon  fbme  Apprehen-  of  a^ 
fion,  well  or  ill  grounded,    of  fbme  really  hatwn- 
good  moral  Quality.     If  we  obferve  the 
Sentiments  of  Men  concerning  Adions,  we 
fhall  find,  that  it  is  always  fbme  really  amia- 
ble and  benevolent  Appearance  which  engages 
their  Approbation.     We  may  perhaps  com- 
mit Miftakes,  in  judging  that  Adions  tend 
O  3  to 


i  p  8        An  I N  QJJ I RY  concerning 

Secft.  4.  to  the  publick  Good,  which  do  not ;  or  be 
t/YV  fo  ftupidly  inadvertent,  that  while  our  At- 
tention is  fix'd  on  fome  partial  good  Ef- 
fects, we  may  quite  over-look  many 
evil  Conferences  which  counter-ballance 
the  Good.  Our  Reafon  may  be  very 
deficient  in  its  Office,  by  giving  us  par- 
tial Reprefentations  of  the  tendency  of 
Anions  ;  but  it  is  ftill  fbme  apparent  Spe- 
cies of  Benevolence  which  commands  our 
Approbation.  And  this  Senfe,  like  our 
other  Senfes,  tho  counter- a6ted  from  Mo- 
tives of  external  Advantage,  which  are 
flronger  than  it,  ceafes  not  to  operate, 
but  has  Strength  enough  to  make  us  un- 
eafy  and  diffatisffd  with  our  felves  ;  even 
as  the  Senfe  of  Tafting  makes  us  loath, 
and  diflike  the  naufeous  Potion  which  we 
may  force  our  felves,  from  Intereft,  to 
fwallow. 

Fai/e  Ap-  It  is  therefore  to  no  purpofe  to  al- 
probauons.  ledge  here,  "  That  many  Anions  are 
"  really  done,  and  approv'd,  which  tend 
ik  to  the  univerfal  'Detriment ."  For  the 
fame  way,  Adfrons  are  often  perform'd, 
and  in  the  mean  time  approv'd,  which 
tend  to  the  Hurt  of  the  Aclor.  But 
as  we  do  not  from  the  latter,  infer  the 
Aclor  to  be  void  of  Self- Love,  or  a  Senfe 
of  Intereft  ;  no  more  fliould  we  infer  from 
the  former,  that  fuch  Men  are  void  of  a 
Senfe  of  Morals,   or  a  defire  of  public k 

Good. 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      199 

Good.  The  matter  is  plainly  this.  Men  Secft.  4. 
are  often  miftaken  in  the  Tendency  of  Ac-  ^v^ 
tions  either  to  publick,  or  private  Good  : 
Nay,  lometimes  violent  Tajfions,  while 
they  laft,  will  make  them  approve  very  bad 
Actions  in  a  moral  Senfe,  or  very  perni- 
cious ones  to  the  Agent,  as  advantageous  : 
But  this  proves  only,  "  That  fometimes 
"  there  may  be  fome  more  violent  Motive 
"  to  Action,  than  a  Senfe  of  moral  Good ; 
*'  or  that  Men,  by  Parfion,  may  become 
"  blind  even  to  their  own  Intereft." 

But  to  prove  that  Men  are  void  of  a 
moral  Senfe,  we  lhould  find  fome  Inftan- 
ces  of  cruel,  malicious  Actions,  done,  and 
approved  in  others,  when  there  is  no  Mo- 
tive of  Intereft,  real  or  apparent,  fave 
gratifying  that  very  ^De/lre  of  Mifchief  to 
others  :  We  muft  find  a  Country  where 
Murder  in  cold  blood,  Tortures,  and  eve- 
ry thing  malicious,  without  any  Advan- 
tage, is,  if  not  approved,  at  lead  look'd 
upon  with  indifference,  and  raifes  no  Aver- 
fan  toward  the  A&ors  in  the  unconcern'd 
Spectators  :  We  muft  find  Men  with  whom 
the  Treacherous,  ^Ungrateful,  Cruel,  are 
in  the  fame  account  with  the  Generous, 
Friendly,  Faithful,  and  Humane  ;  and  who 
approve  the  latter,  no  more  than  the  for- 
mer, in  all  Cafes  where  they  are  not  afFe&ed 
by  the  Influence  of  thele  Difpofitions,  or 
when  the  natural  Good 'or  Evil  befals  other 
O  4  •  Perlbns. 


2oo       An  I  NQ.U  I R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t  4.  Perfons.  And  it  may  be  queftion'd,  whether 
l/V\^  the  Vniverfe,  tho  large  enough,  and  ftor'd 
with  no  inconfiderable  variety  of  Charac- 
ters, will  yield  us  any  Inftance,  not  only 
of  a  Nation,  but  even  of  a  Club,  or  a  fin- 
gle  Per  Jon,  who  will  think  all  Adtions  in- 
different, but  thofe  which  regard  his  own 
Concerns, 


of  Man 
ners  ac 
ccun 


vherfiy  HI.  From  what  has  been  laid,  we  may 
eafily  account  for  the  vdft  Diverfity  of 
ted  moral  principles,  in  various  Nations,  and 
Ages ;  which  is  indeed  a  good  Argument 
againft  innate  Ideas,  or  Principles,  but 
will  not  evidence  Mankind  to  be  void  of  a 
moral  Senfe  to  perceive  Virtue  or  Vice 
in  A&ions,  when  they  occur  to  their  Obfer- 
vation. 

The   Grounds   of  this  "Diverfity  are 
principally  thefe  : 

Iromva-  ^     DIFFERENT    Opinions    of  Happl- 

rhm  no-   nefs,    or  natural  Good,    and  of  the  moft 
*™S4f     effe&ual  Means   to  advance  it.     Thus  in 
ntfa1'     one  Country,  where  there  prevails  a  coura- 
geous T)iJpofition,  wThere  Liberty  is  count- 
ed a  great  Good,    and  War  an  inconfide- 
rable Evil,  all  Infurredions  in  Defence  of 
Privileges,    will   have   the  Appearance   of 
moral  Good  to  our  Senfe,  becaufe  of  their 
appearing  benevolent  ;    and  yet  the  fame 
Senfe  of  moral  Good  in  Benevolence,  lhall 
3  in 


Moral  Good  and  Evi  l.     201 

in  another  Country,  where  the  Spirits  of  Sedt.4. 
Men  are  more  abjefl  and  timorous,  where  s^^ 
Civil   War  appears  the  greateft  natural 
Evil,    and   Liberty   no  great  Turchafe, 
make  the  fame  Adions  appear  odious.     So 
in  Sparta,    where,    thro    Contempt   of 
Wealth,    the  Security  of  PofTeffions  was 
not  much  regarded,  but  the  thing  chiefly 
defir'd,    as  naturally  good  to  the    State, 
was  to  abound  in  a  hardy  ft?  if  ting  Touth  ; 
Theft,    if  dexteroufly    perform'd,   was  fb 
little  odious,  that  it  received  the  Counte- 
nance of  a  Law  to  give  it  Impunity. 

But   in    thefe,    and   all  other  Inftan- 
ces  of  the  like  nature,    the  Approbation 
is  founded   on   Benevolence,    becaule    of 
fbme  real,   or  apparent  Tendency  to  the 
public k  *Good.     For  we  are  not  to  imagine, 
that  this  S$nfe  fhould  give  us,  without  Ob- 
fervation,    Ideas  of   complex  A&ions,  or 
of   their  natural   Tendencys  to    Good  or 
Evil:    It  only  determines  us  to  approve 
Benevolence,  whenever  it  appears  in  any 
Action,  and  to  hate  the  contrary.     So  our 
Senfe  of  Beauty  does  not,   without  Re- 
flection, Inftrudtion,  or  Obfervation,  give 
us  Ideas  of  the  regular  Solids,    Te?nples, 
Cirques,  and  Theatres  ;  but  determines  us 
to  approve  and  delight  in  'Uniformity  amidft 
Variety,  wherever  we  obferve  it.     Let  us 
read  the  Preambles  of  any  Laws  we  count 
unjuft,  or  the  Vindications  of  any   difpu- 

ted 


2  01        An  I N  Q.U  I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t.  4.  ted  Pra&ice  by  the  Moralifts,  and  we  fliall 
^V^J  find  no  doubt,  that  Men  are  often  miftaken 
in  computing  the  Excefs  of  the  natural 
Good,  or  evil  Confequences  of  certain  Ac- 
tions ;  but  the  Ground  on  which  any  Ac- 
tion is  approv'd,  is  ftill  Ibme  Tendency 
to  the  greater  natural  Good  of  others, 
apprehended  by  thole  who  approve  it. 

Travellers       The  fame  Reafbn  may  remove  alio  the 
ZrZlu!  Objections  againft  the  Vniverfality  of  this 
cujioms.    Senfe,    from   fbme    Storys  of  Travellers, 
concerning  Jirange  Crueltys  pra&is'd   to- 
ward the  Aged,    or  Children,    in  certain 
Countrys.      If  fuch   Actions  be  done   in 
fudden  angry  Paffions,    they  only  prove, 
that  other  Motives,  or  Springs  of  Adtion, 
may  overpower  Benevolence  in  itsjirongejl 
Ties  ;    and  if  they  really  be  univerfally 
allow'd,    look'd    upon    as    innocent,    and 
vindicated  ;  it  is  certainly  under  Ibme  Ap- 
pearance of  Benevolence  ;  fuch  as  to   fe- 
cure  them  from  lnfiilts  of  Enemys,   to  a- 
void  the  Infirmitys  of  Age,  which  perhaps 
appear  greater  Evils  than  Death,   or  to  free 
the  vigorous  and  ufeful  Citizens  from  the 
Charge  of  maintaining  them,  or  the  Trou- 
bles of  Attendance  upon  them.     A  love  of 
Plealure  and  Eafe,  may,  in  the   immediate 
Agents,     be    ftronger    in    fome  Inftances, 
than  Gratitude  toward  Parents,  or  natural 
Affection  to  Children.     But  that  iuch  Na- 
tions are  continu'd,  notwithftanding  all  the 

Toil 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       205 

Toil  in  educating  their  Young,  is  ftill  a  fuffi-  Se&.  4. 
cient  Proof  of  natural  Affefiion  :  For  I  l^V^ 
fancy  we  are  not  to  imagine  any  nice  Laws 
in  luch  Places,  compelling  Parents  to  a  pro- 
per Education  of  fome  certain  number  of 
their  Offspring.  We  know  very  well  that 
an  Appearance  of  publick  Good,  was  the 
Ground  of  Laws,  equally  barbarous,  enact- 
ed by  Lycurgus  and  Solon,  of  killing 
the  deform'd,  or  weak,  to  prevent  a  bur- 
denibme  Croud  of  ufelefs  Citizens. 

A  late  ingenious  Author  *  hasjuftly 
obferv'd  the  Abfurdity  of  the  monjirous 
Tafie,  which  has  pofTefe'd  both  the  Rea- 
ders and  Writers  of  Travels.  They 
fcarce  give  us  any  Account  of  the  natu- 
ral Affections,  the  Familys,  AJfociations, 
Friendjhips,  Clans,  of  the  Indians  ;  and 
as  rarely  do  they  mention  their  Abhor- 
rence of  Treachery  among  themfelves  ; 
their  Tronenefs  to  mutual  Aid,  and  to 
the  Defence  of  their  feveral  States  ;  their 
Contempt  of  Death  in  defence  of  their 
Country,  or  upon  points  of  Honour.  "  Thele 
"  are  but  common  Story s. — No  need  to 
"  travel  to  the  Indies  for  what  we  lee  in 
"  Europe  every  Day."  The  Entertainment 
therefore  in  thefe  ingenious  Studys  confifts 
chiefly  in  exciting  Horror,  and  making 
Men  Stare.    The  ordinary  Employment  of 


*  Ld.  Shaftesbury,  Vol.  i.  p.  $46,  7,  S3  9,  err. 

the 


204      Jin  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed\  4.  the  Bulk  of  the  Indians  in  ftpport  of  their 
«-',W>  Wives  and  Offspring,  or  Relations,  has  no- 
thing of  the  'Prodigious.     But  a   Human 
Sacrifice,  a  Feaft  upon   Enemys  Carcafes, 
can   raife   an  Horror    and   Admiration   of 
the  wondrous  Barbarity  of  Indians,   in  Na- 
tions no  ftrangers  to  the  Maffacre  at  Ta- 
ris,  the  Irifb  Rebellion,  or  the  Journals  of 
the  Inquifition.     Thefe  they  behold  with 
religious  Veneration  ;  but  the  Indian  Sa- 
crifices,   flowing  from  a  like  Perverfion  of 
Humanity  by  Super ftit ion,  raife  the  high- 
eft  Abhorrence  and  Amazement.     What  is 
mod  furprizing  in  thefe  Study  s,  is  the  won- 
drous Credulity  of  fome  Gentlemen,  of  great 
Pretenfions  in  other  matters  to  Caution  of 
AfTent,  for  thefe  marvellous  Memoirs  of 
Monks,    Fryars,     Sea-Captains,    Pyrates ; 
and   for  the  Hifiorys,  Annals,    Chronolo- 
gys,   receiv'd  by  Oral  Tradition,    or  Hie- 
roglyphicks. 

ufeofRea-  Men  have  Reafon  given  them,  to  judge 
fonin  mo-  0f  the  Tendencys  of  their  Actions,  that 
they  may  not  ftupidly  follow  the  firft  Ap- 
pearance of  public 'k  Good;  but  it  is  ftill 
fome  Appearance  of  Good  which  they  pur- 
iue.  And  it  is  ftrange,  that  Reafon  is  uni- 
verfally  allow'd  to  Men,  notwithftanding 
all  the  ftupid,  ridiculous  Opinions  receiv'd 
in  many  Places,  and  yet  ablurd  Practices, 
founded  upon  thofe  very  Opinions,  Jhall 
leem  an  Argument  againft  any  moral  Senfe ; 

altho 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       205 

altho  the  bad  Condudt  is  not  owing  to  any  Sed:.  4. 
Irregularity  in  the  moral  Senfe,   but  to  a  ^v^ 
wrong  Judgment  or  Opinion.     If  putting 
the  Aged  to  death 9  with   all   its  Confe- 
quences,  really  tends  to  the  publick  Good9 
and  to  the  lejfer  Mifery  of  the  Aged,  it 
is  no  doubt  jujiifiable  ;  nay,  perhaps    the 
Aged  chufe  it,  in  hopes  of  a  future  State. 
If  a  deform"  d,  or  ie^£  i&z^,  could  never, 
by   Ingenuity  and  Art,    make  themfelves 
uleful  to  Mankind,   but  ihould  grow  an  ab- 
fblutely  unfupportable  Burden,  lb  as  to  in- 
volve a  whole  State   in  Mifery,  it  is  jufl 
to  put  them   to   death.      This   all   allow 
to  be  juft,  in  the  Cafe  of  an  over-loaded 
Boat  in  a  Storm.     And  as  for   killing  of 
their   Children,    when    Parents    are  fiiffi- 
ciently  ftock'd,  it  is  perhaps  pra&is'd,  and 
allow'd  from  Self  love  ;  but  I   can  fcarce 
think   it   pafTes  for    a    good  A&ion   any 
where.     If  Wood,  or  Stone,  or  Metal  be 
a  Deity,   have  Government,  and  Toiler, 
and  have  been  the  Authors  of  Benefits 
to   us ;    it  is  morally    amiable '  to    praife 
and  worfhip  them.    Or  if  the  true  Deity 
be  pleas'd  with  Worlhip  before  Statues,  or 
any  other  Symbol  of  fome  more  immediate 
'Pre fence,  or  Influence  ;  Image-Worjhip  is 
virtuous.     If  he  delights  in  Sacrifices,  Pe- 
nances,   Ceremonys,    Cringings  ;  they  are 
all  laudable.     Our  Serf  of  Virtue,  gene- 
rally leads  us  exa&ly  enough  according  to 
our  Opinions  ;    and   therefore  the  abfurd 

Prac- 


2  06      An   I N  QU I  R  Y  cmcerntng 

Se<a.  4.  Pra&ices  which  prevail  in  the  World,    are 
v^V^  much  better  Arguments  that  Men  have  no 

Reafon>    than  that  they   have   no   moral 

Senfe  of  Beauty  in  A&ions. 

mrrow  IV.  The  next  Ground  of  ^iverjity  in 
SyJrv7nthe  Sentiments,  is  the  T)iverfity  of  Sy ferns, 
^moTIi  t  "  to  which  Men,  from  foolifh  Opinions, 
senfe.  confine  their  Benevolence.  We  infinuated 
above*,  that  it  is  regular  and  beautiful 
to  have  Jironger  Benevolence,  toward  the 
morally  good  Parts  of  Mankind,  who  are 
ufeful  to  the  Whole,  than  toward  the  tife- 
lefs  or  pernicious.  Now  if  Men  receive  a 
low,  or  bafe  Opinion  of  any  Body,  or  Se£l 
of  Men  ;  if  they  imagine  them  bent  upon 
the  Deftrudtion  of  the  more  valuable  Parts, 
or  but  ufelefs  Burdens  of  the  Earth  ;  Bene- 
volence itfelf  will  lead  them  to  negled  the 
Interefts  of  fuch,  and  to  fuppreis  them. 
This  is  the  Reafbn,  why,  among  Nations 
who  have  high  Notions  of  Virtue,  every 
Action  toward  an  Enemy  may  pafs  for  jujl ; 
why  Romans,  and  Greeks,  could  ap- 
prove of  making  thofe  they  call'd  Barba- 
rians, Slaves. 

■setts pernl-      A  late*  ingenious  Author  f  juftly  ob» 
*!!!L?      ferves,  "  That  the  various  Setts,  Tartys, 
"  Factions,  Cabals  of  Mankind  in  larger 


*  See  Sett.  Hi.  Art.  10.  Par.  1.  J  Ld-  Shaftesbury's 

EfTay  on  Wit  and  Humour,  Part  Hi.  Sett.  ii.  Vol.  1.  p.  no. 

*  "  Society s, 


Virtue. 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      207 

"  Society s,   are  all  influenced  by  a  public k  Se<3.  4. 
••  Spirit  :  That  fbme  generous  Notions  of  ^y^ 
"  public k  Good,  fome  ftrong  friendly  Dif- 
"  pofitions,  raife  them  at  firft,   and  excite 
"  Men  of  the  fame  Faction  or  Cabal  to 
41  the  moil:  difinterefted  mutual  Succour  and 
"  Aid:   That  all  the  Contentions  of  the 
•*  different  Factions,  and  even  the  fierceft 
<c  Wars  againft  each  other,  are  influenc'd 
"  by  a  fociable  public k  Spirit  in  a  limited 
V  Syftem."     But  certain  it  is,    that  Men 
are  little  oblig'd  to  thofe,    who  often  art- 
fully raife  and  foment  this  Party  Spirit  ;  or 
cantonize  them  into  feveral  Sedts  for  the 
Defence  of  very  trifling  Caufes.     AfTocia- 
tions  for  innocent  Commerce,  or  Manufac- 
tures ;  Cabals  for  Defence  of  Liberty  a- 
gainfl  a  Tyrant  ;  or  even  lower  Clubs  for 
*Pleafantry,   or  Improvement  by  Conver- 
fation,    are  very  amiable  and  good.     But 
when  Mens   heads    are   filled  with  fome 
trifling  Opinions  ;    when    defigning    Men 
raife  in  their  Minds  fome  unaccountable  No- 
tion of  SanEiity^  and  Religion,  in  Tenets 
or  Practices,    which  neither   increafe  our 
Love  to  God,  or  our  own  Species  ;  when 
the  feveral  Fa&ions  are  taught  to  look  upon 
each  other  as  Odious,    Contemptible,  Pro- 
fane, becaufe  of  their  different  Tenets,  or 
Opinions  ;  even  when  thefe  Tenets,  whe- 
ther true  or  falfe,  are  perhaps  perfectly  ufe- 
lefs  to  the  publick  Good  ;  when  the  keeneft 
Paffions  are  rais'd  about  fuch  Trifles,  and 

Men 


2  o  8        An  I  N  QjJ  I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<5t.  4.  Men  begin  to  hate  each  other  for  what,  of 
v^V^  it  felf,  has  no  Evil  in  it ;  and  to  love  the 
Zealots  of  their  own  Sedt  for  what  is  no 
way  valuable  ;  nay,  even  for  their  Fury, 
Rage,  and  Malice  againft  oppofite  Sedts  ; 
(which  is  what  all  Partys  commonly  call 
Zeal)  'tis  then  no  wonder  if  our  moral 
Senfe  be  much  impair'd,  and  our  natural 
Notions  of  Good  and  Evil  almoft  loft ; 
when  our  Admiration,  and  Love,  or  Con- 
tempt, and  Hatred,  are  thus  perverted  from 
their  natural  Objects. 

If  any  Mortals  "are  fo  happy  as  never 
to  have  heard  of  the  Tarty-Tenets  of  mod 
of  our  SecSs  ;   or  if  they  have  heard   of 
them,    have  either  never  efpous'd  any  Sed:, 
or  all   equally  ;  they  bid  faireft  for  a  truly 
natural  and  good  Difpofition,  becaufe  their 
Tempers  have  never  been  ibured  about  vain 
Trifles ;    nor  have    they    contracted   any 
Sullennefs,    or  Rancour  againft  any  Part 
of  their  own  Kind.     If  any   Opinions  de- 
ferve  to  be  contended  for,  they  are  thofe 
which  give  us  lovely  Ideas  of  the  Deity, 
and  of  our  Fellow-Creatures  :  If  any  Opi- 
nions deferve  Oppofition,  they  are  fiich  as 
raife  Scruples  in  our  Minds  about  the  Good- 
nefi  of  Providence,    or  reprefent  our 
Fellow-Creatures  as   bafe  and  felfifb,    by 
inftilli:ng   into  *  us    fome    ill-natur'd,     cun- 
ning,   ihreud  Infinuations,  "  that  our  mod 
"  generous  A&ions  proceed  wholly  from 

••  fetfijb 


Moral  Good  andEviL.       209 

M  y?^  Views."  This  wife  Thilofiphv  Sedt.  4. 
of  ibme  Moderns,  after  Epicurus,  muf  c  ^VNj 
be  fruitful  of  nothing  but  l.  if  content,  Sufi 
ficion%  and  JeaLujy  ,  a  State  infinitely 
worie  than  any  little  tranfitory  Injury* 
to  which  we  might  be  expos'd  by  a  good- 
natur'd  Credulity.  But  thanks  be  to  the 
kind  Author  of  our  Nature,  thar,  in 
fpite  of  fuch  Opinions,  our  Nature  it  felf 
leads  us  into  Friendjhifi,  Truj?9  and  mu- 
tual Confidence. 

Were  we  freely  converfant  with  Rob- 
bers, who  fhew  a  moral  Senfe  in  the  equal 
or  proportionabl?  cDievifion  of  their  Prey, 
and  in  Faith  to  each  other,  we  ihould  find 
they  have  their  own  fublime  moral  Ideas 
of  their  Party,  as  Generous,  Courageous, 
Trufiy,  nay  Honefi  too  ;  aud  that  thofe 
we  call  Honefi  and  Induflrious,  are  i:na- 
gin'd  by  them  to  be  Mean-fbirited,  Selfifio, 
Churlijb,  or  Luxurious  ;  on  whom  that 
Wealth  is  ill  beftow'd,  which  therefore  they 
would  apply  to  better  Vies,  to  maintain 
galianter  Men,  who  have  a  Right  to  a 
Living  as  well  as  their  Neighbours,  who 
are  their  profefs'd  Enemy s.  Nay,  if  we 
obferve  the  Difcourfe  of  our  profefs'd  'De- 
bauchees, our  mo  ft  dijfolute  Rakes,  we 
lhall  find  their  Vices  cloth'd,  in  their  Ima- 
ginations, with  fome  amiable  Drefs  of 
Liberty,  Generofity,  jufl  Refentment  a- 
gainft  the  Contrivers  of  artful  Rules   to 

P  ea- 


2 1 o       jin  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

SecSt.  4.  enflave  Men,  and  rob  them  of  their  Plea- 
L/VVJ  fures. 

Perhaps  never  any  Men  purfu'd  Vice 
long  with  Peace  of  Mind,   without  fome 
ftich  deluding  Imagination  of  moral  Good  *, 
while  they  may  be  Hill  inadvertent  to  the 
barbarous  and    inhuman    Confequences  of 
their  Aliens.     The  Idea  of  an  ill-natur>d 
Villain,  is  too  frightful  ever  to  become  fa- 
miliar to   any   Mortal.     Hence  we  fhall 
find,  that  the  bafeji  Anions  are  drefs'd  in 
lome  tolerable  Mask.    What  others  call  A- 
varice,    appears  to  the  Agent  a  prudent 
Care  of  a  Family,    or  Friends  ;  Fraud, 
artful  Conduct  ;    Malice  and  Revenge,  a 
jujl  Senfe  of  Honour,  and  a  Vindication  of 
our  Right  in  PofTeffions,  or  Fame  ;  Fire 
and  Sword,  and  ^Deflation  among  Enemys, 
a  juft  thorow  ^Defence  of  cur  Country ; 
'Persecution,  a  Zeal  for  the  Truth,  and  for 
the  eternal  Happinefs  of  Men,  which  He- 
reticks  oppofe.    In  all  thefe  Inftances,  Men 
generally  ad:  from  a  Senfe  of  Virtue  upon 
falfe  Opinions,  and  mijiaken  Benevolence  ; 
upon  wrong  or  partial  Views  of  public %k 
Good,  and  the  means  to  promote  it ;   or 
upon  very  narrow  Syfiems  form'd  by  like 
foolijh  Opinions.     It  is  not  a  "Delight  in 
the  Mifery  of  others,   or  Malice,  which 
occafions  the  horrid  Crimes  which  fill  our 

*  See  bel^w,   Sett.  \i.  Art.  2.   Par.  I. 

Hiftorys; 


Moral  Good^JEvil.       hi 

Hiftorys  ;  but  generally  an  injudicious  tin-  Sedt.  4. 
reafonable  Enthujiafm  for  fome  kind  of  //-  /Y~^-> 
mited  Virtue. 

Infani  fapiens  nomen  ferat,  aquus  iniqui, 
Ultra,  quam  fatis  eft,  VIRTVTEM 
Ji pet  at  ipfam  *. 

V,  T  h  e  laft  Ground  oiDiverfty  which  Faife  opU 
occurs,  are  the  falfe  Opinions  of  the  lVillni°nsf . 
or  Laws  of  the  Deity.  To  obey  thefe  Law?™ 
we  are  determin'd  from  Gratitude,  and  a 
Senfe  of  Right  imagined  in  the  Deity,  to 
difpofe  at  pleafure  the  Fortunes  of  his  Crea- 
tures. This  is  fo  abundantly  known  to 
have  produc'd  Pollys,  Super ftitions^  Mur- 
ders, ^cDevaflattons  of  Kingdoms,  from  a 
Senfe  of  Virtue  and  "Duty,  that  it  is  needlefs 
to  mention  particular  Inltances.  Only  we 
may  obferve,  "  That  all  thofe  Folly s,  or 
"  Barbarity s,  rather  confirm  than  deftroy 
11  the  Opinion  of  a  moral  Senfe  ;"  fince 
the  Deity  is  believ'd  to  have  a  Right  to 
difpofe  of  his  Creatures  ;  and  Gratitude  to 
him,  if  he  be  conceiv'd  good,  muft  move 
us  to  Obedience  to  his  Will  :  if  he  be 
not  conceived  good,  Self- love  may  over- 
come our  moral  Senfe  of  the  A&ion  which 
we  undertake  to  avoid  his  Fury. 


*  Hon  £/>.  6.  Lib*  1.  v.  1^ 

P  2  As 


2 1  z        An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Se<2.  4. 

W^  As  for  the  Vices  which  commonly 
proceed  from  Love  of  Tleaftre*  or  any 
violent  cPaJfon*  fince  generally  the  Agent 
is  loon  fenfible  of  their  £i//7,  and  that 
lbmetimes  amidft  the  heat  of  the  A&ion, 
they  only  prove,  "  That  this  moral  Senfe* 
*'  and  Benevolence,  may  be  overcome  by 
"  the  more  importunate  Sollicitations  of 
M  <?//^r  T)e fires." 

obkfrwn  VI.  Before  we  leave  this  Subject,  it 
./?-<«»  /«*?/?.  is  neceffary  to  remove  one  of  the  ftrongeft 
Objections  againft  what  has  been  faid  lb 
often,  viz.  "  That  this  Senfe  is  natural* 
66  and  independent  on  Cujiom  and  Educa- 
"  £**#. "  The  Obje&ion  is  this,  "  That 
"  we  iliall  find  fome  Actions  always  at- 
"  tended  with  the  ftrongeft  Abhorrence, 
<f  even  at  firft  View,  in  lome  whole  Na- 
"  tions,  in  which  there  appears  nothing 
"  contrary  to  Benevolence  ;  and  that  the 
"  fame  AEiions  iliall  in  another  Nation  be 
'*  counted  innocent,  or  honourable.  Thus 
"  Inceft,  among  Chrijlians,  is  abhorr'd  at 
"  firft  appearance  as  much  as  Murder  ; 
6i  even  by.thofe  who  do  not  know  or 
*•  refledt  upon  any  necelTary  tendency  of 
"  it  to  the  detriment  of  Manldnd.  Now 
"  we  generally  allow,  that  what  is  from 
"  Nature  in  one  Nation,  would  be  fo  in  all. 
"  This  Abhorrence  therefore  cannot  be 
•«  from  Nature*  fince  in  Greece,  the 
:  ■'  marrying 


Moral  Good^Evil.      2t} 

"  marrying  half  Sifters  was  counted  honou-  gC(^. 
*t  ruble  ;  and  among  the  Terfian  M  a  g  i,  s^rZt 
"  the   marrying  of  Mothers.     Say  they 
"  then,  may  not  all  our  Approbation  or 
"  'Dijlike  of  A6Hons  arife  the  fame  way 
**  from  Cujiom  and  Education  ?  * 

The  Anfvver  to  this  may  be  eafily  found 
from  what  is  already  faid.  Had  we  no  mo- 
ral Senfe  natural  to  us,  we  fhould  only 
look  upon  Inceji  as  hurtful  to  our  felves, 
and  Ihun  it,  and  never  hate  other  incejiuous 
*Perfons,  more  than  we  do  a  broken  Mer- 
chant ;  fo  that  ftill  this  Abhorrence  fuppofes 
a  Senfe  of  moral  Good.  And  further,  it  is 
true,  that  many  who  abhor  Inceji  do  not 
know,  or  refled:  upon  the  natural  tendency 
of  fome  forts  of  Inceji  to  the  public k  'De- 
triment ;  but  wherever  it  is  hated,  it  is 
apprehended  as  ofFenfive  to  the  Deity, 
and  that  it  expofes  the  Perfon  concern'd 
to  his  juft  Vengeance.  Now  it  is  univer- 
fally  acknowledged  to  be  the  grofTeft  Ingra- 
titude and  Bifenefs,  in  any  Creature,  to 
counteract  the  Will  of  the  Deity,  to 
whom  it  is  under  fuch  Obligations.  This 
then  is  plainly  a  moral  evil  Quality  appre- 
hended in  Inceji,  and  reducible  to  the  ge- 
neral Foundation  of  Malice,  or  rather  Want 
of  Benevolence.  Nay  further,  where  this 
Opinion,  "  that  Inceji  is  offenfive  to  the 
Deit  y,"  prevails,  Inceji  muft  have  another 
dired  Contrariety  to  Benevolence ;  fince 
P  3  we 


2 1 4       ^n  I N  Q.U  I RY  concerning 
Se6t  4.  we  muft  apprehend  the  Inceftuous,  as  ex- 
t/VN;  pofing  an  Aflbciate,  who  fhould  be  dear  to 
him  by  the  Ties  of  Nature,  to  the  loweft 
State  of  Mifery,    and  Bafenefs,    Infamy 
and  Tunijhment.    But  in  thole  Countrys 
where   no  fuch   Opinion  prevails  of   the 
Deity's  abhorring  or  prohibiting/^/?/?; 
if  no  obvious  natural  Evils  attend  it,  it 
may  be  look'd  upon  as  innocent.     And  fur- 
ther, as  Men  who  have  the  Senfe  ofTafling, 
may,  by  Company  and  Education,  have  Pre- 
judices againft  Meats  they  never  tafted,  as 
unfavoury  ;  ib  may  Men,  who  have  a  mo- 
ral Senfe,  acquire  an  Opinion  by  implicit 
Faith,  of  the  moral  Evil  of  A&ions,  altho 
they  do  not  themfelves  difcern  in  them  any 
tendency  to  natural  Evil ;  imagining  that 
others  do :  or,  by  Education,  they  may  have 
fome  Ideas  afTociated,  which  raiie  an  abhor- 
rence without  Reafon.     But  without  a  mo- 
ral  Senfe,  we  could  receive  no  Prejudice 
againft  A&ions,  under  any  other  View  than 
as  naturally  difadvantageous  to  our  felves. 

Mcrd  VII.  The  Vniverfility  of  this  moral 

floml°L  Senfe,  and  that  it  is  antecedent  to  Injiruc- 
cation.  tion,  may  appear  from  obferving  the  Senti- 
ments of  Children,  upon  hearing  the  Storys 
with  which  they  are  commonly  entertain'd 
as  foon  as  they  underftand  Language.  They 
always  paffionately  intereft  themfelves  on 
that  fide  where  Kindnefs  and  Humanity  are 
found ;  and  deteft  the  Cruel,  the  Covetous, 

1  the 


Mora  l  Good  and Evi  l.      215 

the  Selfijh,  or  the  Treacherous.  How  Se&.  4. 
ftrongly  do  we  fee  their  Paflions  of  Joy,  <-^V\J 
Sorrow,  Love,  and  Indignation,  mov'd  by 
thcfc  moral  Representations,  even  tho  there 
has  been  no  pains  taken  to  give  them  Ideas 
of  a  Deity,  of  Laws,  of  a  future  State, 
or  of  the  more  intricate  Tendency  of  the 
nniverfal  Good  to  that  of  each  Individual! 


P  4  SECT, 


i\6       An  INQUIRY  concerning 


Sed.  5. 


SECT.   V. 

A  further  Confirmation  that  *we 
have  practical  Difpoficions  to  Vii> 
tue  implanted  in  our  Nature  $  with 
a  further  Explication  of  our  In- 
ftind  to  Benevolence  in  its  va- 
rious ^Degrees  ^  with  the  additional 
Motives  of  Intereft,  viz.  Honour, 
Shame  and  Pity. 

Decrees  of  l.  TTCTE  have    already  endeavour'd  to 
fZ7°'  ▼▼       prove,  "  That  there  is  muni- 

"  verfanietermination  to  Benevolencp  in 
"  Mankind,  even  toward  the  moft  diftant 
"  parts  of  the  Species  : "  But  we  are  not 
to  imagine  that  this  Benevolence  is  equal, 
or  in  the  fame  degree  toward  all.  There 
are  fome  nearer  and  ftronger  Degrees  of  Be- 
nevolence, when  the  Objects  (land  in  fome 
nearer  relations  to  our  felves,  which  have 
obtain'd  diftind:  Names ;  luch  as  natural  Af- 
feftion,  and  Gratitude  ;  or  when  Benevo- 
lence is  increas'd  by  greater  Love  of  Ef- 
teem. 

Natural        One  Species  of  natural  Ajfeffion,  viz. 
jijetiion.  that  in  "Parents  towards  their  Children,  has 

3  been 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     217 

been  confider'd  already*;  we  fhall  only  Sed:  5. 
obferve  further,  That  there  is  the  lame  kind  s-^v^^ 
of  AffeBion  among  collateral  Relations, 
tho  in  a  weaker  degree  ;  which  is  univer- 
fally  obfervable  where  no  Oppofnion  of 
Intereft  produces  contrary  A&ions,  or 
counterballances  the  Power  of  this  natural 
AffeBion. 

We  may  alfb  obferve,    that  as  to  the  Not  found- 
AjfeBion  of  "Parents,  it  cannot  be  entire- ed  onM£ 
ly  founded  on  Merit  or  Acquaintance  ;  quaintaace. 
not  only  becaufe  it  is  antecedent  to  all  Ac- 
quaintance, which  might  occafion  the  Love 
of  Eft e em  ;    but  becaufe  it  operates  where 
Acquaintance  would  produce  Hatred,  even 
toward  Children  apprehended  to  be  viti- 
otts.      And   this  AjfeBion  is  further  con- 
firm'd  to  be  from  Nature,  becaufe  it  is 
always  obferv'd  to  defiend,  and  not  a/tend 
from  Children  to  "Parents  mutually.     N  a- 
ture,  who  feems  fometimes  frugal  in  her 
Operations,    has  ftrongly  determin'd   Pa- 
rents to  the  Care  of  their  Children,  becaule 
they  univerfally  Hand  in  abfolute  need  of 
Support  from  them  ;   but  has  left  it  to  Re- 
flection, and  a  Senfe  of  Gratitude,  to  pro- 
duce Returns  of  Love  in  Children,  toward 
fuch  tender  kind  BenefaBors,  who  very  fel- 
dom  ftand  in  fuch  abfolute  need  of  Sup- 
port from   their  Pofterity,    as   their  Chil- 


vee  above,  Sefl.  ii.  Art,  9.  Par,  1,  3. 

dren 


2i8        An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sedt.  5.dren  did  from  them.  Now  did  Acquain- 
\^yv  tance,  or  Merit  produce  natural  AffeEiion, 
we  furely  fhould  find  it  ftrongeft  in  Chil- 
dren, on  whom  all  the  Obligations  are  laid 
by  a  thoufand  good  Offices  ;  which  yet  is 
quite  contrary  to  Obfervation.  Nay,  this 
Principle  feems  not  confin'd  to  Mankind, 
but  extends  to  other  Animals,  where  yet 
we  fcarcely  ever  fuppofe  any  Ideas  of  Me- 
rit ;  and  is  obferv'd  to  continue  in  them  no 
longer  than  the  Neceffitys  of  their  Young 
require.  Nor  could  it  be  of  any  fervice 
to  the  Young  that  it  fhould,  fince  when 
they  are  grown  up,  they  can  receive  little 
Benefit  from  the  Love  of  their  T>ams.  But 
as  it  is  otherwife  with  rational  Agents,  fo 
their  Affections  are  of  longer  continuance, 
even  during  their  whole  lives. 

Gratitude.  II.  But  nothing  will  give  us  a  jufter 
Idea  of  the  wife  Order  in  which  hu- 
man Nature  is  form'd  for  univerfal  Love, 
and  mutual  good  Offices,  than  confidering 
that  Jlro7tg  attraction  of  Benevolence,  which 
we  call  Gratitude.  Every  one  knows  that 
Beneficence  toward  our  felves  makes  a  much 
deeper  Impreffion  upon  us,  and  raifes  Gra- 
titude, or  a  fironger  Love  toward  the  Be- 
nefactor, than  equal  Benefice7ice  toward  a 
third Terfion*.  Now  becaufe  of  the  vaft 
Numbers  of  Mankind,  their  diftant  Habi- 


*  See  above,  Sett,  n.  Art.  6.  Par.  5. 

tations, 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       up 

tations,  and  the  Incapacity  of  any  one  to  Sed.  *. 
be  remarkably  ufeful  to  vaft  Multitudes  ;  C/V>j 
that  our  Benevolence  might  not  be  quite 
diftra&ed  with  a  multiplicity  of  Obje&s, 
whole  equal  Virtues  would  equally  recom- 
mend them  to  our  regard  ;  or  become  ufe- 
lefs,  by  being  equally  extended  to  Multi- 
tudes at  vaft  diftances,  whole  Interefts  we 
could  not  underftand,  nor  be  capable  of 
promoting,  having  no  Intercourfe  of  Offices 
with  them  ;  Nature  has  more  powerfully 
determin'd  us  to  admire,  and  love  the  moral 
Quality*  of  others  which  affecft  our  felves, 
and  has  given  us  more  powerful  Impreffions 
of  Good-will  toward  thole  who  are  bene- 
ficent to  our  felves.  This  we  call  Gra- 
titude. And  thus  a  Foundation  is  laid  for 
joyful  Aflociations  in  all  kinds  of  Bufinefs, 
and  virtuous  Friendjhips. 

B  y  this  Conjlitution  alio  the  BenefaEior 
is  more  encourag'd  in  his  Beneficence, 
and  better  fecur'd  of  an  increafe  of  Hap- 
pinefs  by  grateful  Returns*,  than  if  his 
Virtue  were  only  to  be  honour 'd  by  the 
colder  general  Sentiments  of  Perfbns  un- 
concern'd,  who  could  not  know  his  Necefc 
fitys,  nor  how  to  be  profitable  to  him  ; 
efpecially,  when  they  would  all  be  equally 
determin'd  to  love  innumerable  Multitudes, 
whofe  equal  Virtues  would  have  the  fame 
Pretenfions  to  their  Love,  were  there  not 


T  See  above,  Sett.  iii9  Art,  a.  Par.  *, 


220      jin  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:-  <;.  an  increafe  of  Love,  according  as  the  Ob- 
^o/^^  jed:  is  more  nearly  attached  to  us,  or  our 

F?  tends,  by  good  Offices  which  affed:  our 

fives,  or  /te#. 

This  univerfal  Benevolence  toward  all 
Men,  we  may  compare  to  that  Principle  of 
Gravitation,  which  perhaps  extends  to  all 
Bodys  in  the  Vniverfe  ;  but,  like  the  Love 
of  Benevolence,  increafes  as  the  Diftance 
is  diminifh'd,  and  is  ftrongef  when  Bodys 
come  to  touch  each  other.  Now  this  in- 
creafe of  Attraction  upon  nearer  Approach, 
is  as  necefTary  to  the  Frame  of  the  Uni- 
verfe,  as  that  there  fliould  be  any  Attrac- 
tion at  all.  For  a  general  Attraction,  equal 
in  all  Diftances,  would  by  the  Contrariety  of 
fuch  multitudes  of  equal  Forces,  put  an  end 
to  all  Regularity  of  Motion,  and  perhaps 
flop  it  altogether. 

This  increafe  of  Love  toward  the  Be- 
nevolent, according  to  their  nearer  Ap- 
proaches to  our  fives  by  their  Benefits,  is 
obfervable  in  the  high  degree  of  Love, 
which  Heroes  and  Law-givers  univerfally 
obtain  in  their  own  Countrys,  above  what 
they  find  abroad,  even  among  thofe  who 
are  not  infenfible  of  their  Virtues ;  and  in 
all  the  ftrong  Ties  of  Friendjhif,  Acquain- 
tance, Neighbourhood,  Tartnerjhij? ;  which 
are  exceedingly  neceflary  to  the  Order  and 
Happinefs  of  human  Society. 

III.  From 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       2  z  i 

Se<a.  5 
III.  From  confidering  that  Jtrong  *De-  ^O^ 
termination  in  our  Nature  to  Gratitude,  HonoHr. 
and  Love  toward  our  Benefactors,  which 
was  already  ihewn  to  be  difinterejied*  ;  we 
are  eafily  led  to  confider  another  'Determi- 
nation of  our  Minds,  equally  natural  with 
the  former,  which  is  to  delight  in  the  good 
Opinion  and  Love  of  others,  even  when  we 
exped:  no  other  Advantage  from  them, 
except  what  flows  from  this  Conftitution* 
whereby  Honour  is  made  an  immediate 
Good.  This  Defire  of  Honour  I  would  call 
Ambition,  had  not  Cuftom  join'd  fome 
evil  Ideas  to  that  Word,  making  it  denote 
fiich  a  violent  defire  of  Honour,  and  of 
Tower  alio,  as  will  make  us  Hop  at  no 
bafe  Means  to  obtain  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  we  are  by  Nature  fubjedted  to  a 
grievous  Senfation  of  Mifery,  from  the 
unfavourable  Opinions  of  others  concerning 
us,  even  when  we  dread  no  other  Evil  from 
them.  This  we  call  Shame  ;  which  in  the 
lame  manner  is  conftituted  an  immediate 
Evil,  as  we  faid  Honour  was  an  immediate 
Good, 

Now  were  there  no  moral  Senfe,  or  had 
we  no  other  Idea  of  Anions  but  as  advan- 
tageous or  hurtful,  I  lee  no  reafbn  why  we 
Ihould  be  delighted  with  Honour,  or  fub- 

*  See  above,  Se£U  il  Art,  6> 

jeded 


222       An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  5.  jedted  to  the  uneafinefs  of  Shame  ;  or  how 
t-'VNj  it  could  ever  happen,  that  a  Man,  who  is 
fecure  from  Punifhment  for  any  Adtion, 
Jhould  ever  be  uneajy  at  its  being  known  to 
all  the  World.  The  World  may  have  the 
worfe  Opinion  of  him  for  it ;  but  what  fab- 
jedts  my  Eafe  to  tl^e  Opinion  of  the  Worldl 
Why,  perhaps,  we  fhall  not  be  lb  much 
trufted  henceforward  in  Bufinefs,  and  fo 
fuffer  Lofs.  If  this  be  the  only  reafbn  of 
Shame,  and  it  has  no  immediate  Evil,  or 
'Pain  in  it,  diftindt  from  Fear  of  Loft ;  then 
wherever  we  expofe  our  felves  to  Loft,  we 
Ihould  be  ajhanid,  and  endeavour  to  con- 
ceal the  Adtion  :  and  yet  it  is  quite  other* 
Wile. 

A  Merchant,  for  inftance,  left  it 
ihould  impair  his  Credit,  conceals  a  Ship- 
wrack,  or  a  very  bad  Market,  which  he  has 
fent  his  Goods  to.  But  is  this  the  lame  with 
the  Paffion  of  Shame  ?  Has  he  that  An- 
guijh,  that  TDejettion  of  Mind,  and  Self- 
condemnation,  which  one  fhall  have  whofe 
Treachery  is  deredted  ?  Nay,  how  will 
Men  lometimes  glory  in  their  LofTes,  \^hen 
in  a  Caufe  imagin'd  morally  good,  tho  they 
really  weaken  their  Credit  in  the  Merchant's 
Senfe  ;  that  is,  the  Opinion  of  their  Wealth, 
or  fitnefs  for  Bufinefs  ?  Was  any  Man  ever 
ajham'd  of  impoverilhing  himfelf  to  ferve 
his  Country,  or  his  Friend  ? 

IV.  The 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      22$ 

Se<a.  5. 

IV.  The  Opinions  of  our  Country  are  ^v"^ 
by  fome  made  the  firft  Standard  of  Virtue.  %£"£ 
They  alledge,    "  That  by  comparing  A&i-  Morals  not 
"  ons  to  them,  we  firft  diftinguifh  between  the(¥**- 
V  moral  Good,  and  Evil :    And  then,  fay  Country! 
"  they,  Ambition,    or  the  Love  of  Ho- 
"  nour,  is  our  chief  Motive  "    But  what 
is  Honour  ?  It  is  not  the  being  univerfally 
known,  no  matter  how.  A  covetous  Man  is 
not  honoured  by  being  univerfally  known  as 
covetous  ;  nor  a  weak,  felfijh,  or  luxurious 
Man,  when  he  is  known  to  be  lb  :  Much 
lefs  can  a  treacherous,  cruel,  or  ungrateful 
Man,   be  laid  to  be  honoured  for  his  being 
known  as  fuch.     A  Tojiure-mafter,  a  Fire- 
eater,  or   TraElifer  of  Leger -de-main,  is 
not  honoured  for  theie  publick  Shews,  unlefs 
we  confider  him  as  a  Perfbn  capable  of  giv- 
ing the  Pleafares  of  Admiration  and  Sur- 
prize to  Multitudes.     Honour  then  is  the 
Opinion  of  others  concerning  our  morally 
good  Actions,    or  Abilitys  frefunid  to  be 
appW d  that  way  ;   for  Abilitys  conftantly 
apply'd  to    other    Purpoies,    procure    the 
greateft  Infamy.     Now,    it  is  certain,  that 
Ambit  ion,  or  Love  of  Honour  is  really  y?/- 
fijh ;  but  then  this  Determination  to  love  Ho- 
nour, prefuppoles  a  Senfe  of  moral  Virtue, 
both  in  the  Perfons  who  confer  the  Ho- 
nour, and  in  him  who  puriues  it. 

And 


224       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sea.  5. 

U'VNJ  And  let  it  be  obferv'd,  that  if  we  knew 
an  Agent  had  no  other  Motive  of  Action 
than  Ambition,  we  ihould  apprehend  no 
Virtue  even  in  his  mod  ufefal  Actions,  fince 
they  flow'd  not  from  any  Love  to  others,  or 
^Defire  of  their  Happinefs.  When  Honour 
is  thus  conftituced  by  N at ure pleafant  to 
us,  it  may  be  an  additional  Motive  to  Vir- 
tue, as  we  laid  above  *,  the  Pleafure  arifing 
from  Reflection  on  our  Benevolence  was  : 
but  the  Perfbn  w7hom  we  imagine  perfectly 
virtuous,  adts  immediately  from  the  Love 
of  others  ;  however  thele  refin'd  Interefts 
may  be  joint  Motives  to  him  to  let  about 
fuch  a  Courie  of  Adions,  or  to  cultivate 
every  kind  Inclination,  and  to  delpife  every 
contrary  Intereji,  as  giving  a  fmaller  Hap- 
pinefs than  Reflection  on  his  own  Virtue, 
and  Confcioufnefs  of  the  Efteem  of  others. 

Shame  is  in  the  fame  manner  confti- 
tuted  an  immediate  Evil,  and  influences  us 
the  fame  way  to  abftain  from  moral  Evil ; 
not  that  any  A&ion  or  Omiflion  would  ap- 
pear virtuous,  where  the  fole  Motive  was 
Fear  of  Shame. 

opinions         V.  But  to  enquire  further,  how  far  the 
flow  from  Opinions  of  our  Company  can  raife  a  Senfe 

the  Moral       X  ,  ^        1  r*     -t        ir  r\    •   1 

senfe.        of  moral  Good  or  Evil.     If  any  Opinion 


SeeS<?#.  iii.  Art.  15.  Par.  1. 

be 


Moral  Good  andEviL*      225 

be  univerfal  in  any  Country,  Men  of  little  Se<5t  < 
Reflection  will  probably  embrace  it.  If  an  \^y^j 
Adlion  be  believ'd  to  be  advantageous  to 
the  Agent,  we  may  be  led  to  believe  fo  too, 
and  then  Self-Love  may  ma^e  us  undertake 
it  ;  or  may,  the  fame  way,  make  us  ihun  an 
A(5Hon  reputed  pernicious  to  the  Agent.  If 
an  Action  pafs  for  advantageous  to  the  Tub- 
lick,  we  may  believe  fo  too  ;  and  what  next  ? 
If  we  have  no  difinterefted  Benevolence, 
what  fliall  move  us  to  undertake  it  ?  "  Why, 
M  we  love  Honour ;  and  to  obtain  this  Plea- 
•*  fure,  we  will  undertake  the  Acftion  from 
"  Selflnterefl."  Now,  is  Honour  only  the 
Opinion  of  our  Country  that  an  Action  is 
advantageous  to  the  Tublick  ?  No  :  we  fee 
no  Honour  paid  to  the  ufeful  Treachery  of 
an  Enemy  whom  we  have  brib'd  to  our 
Side,  to  cafiial undefctfd  Services,  or  to 
the  mod  ufeful  Effedts  of  Compulfion  on 
Cowards ;  and  yet  we  fee  Honour  paid  to 
unfuccefsful  Attempts  to  ferve  the  Publick 
from  fincere  Love  to  it.  Honour  then  pre- 
fuppofes  a  Senfe  of  fomething  amiable  be- 
fides  Advantage,  viz.  a  Senfe  of  Excellence 
in  a  publick  Spirit  ;  and  therefore  the  firfl 
Senfe  of  moral  Good  mud  be  antecedent  to 
Honour,  for  Honour  is  founded  upon  it. 
The  Company  we  keep  may  lead  us,  with- 
out examining,  to  believe  that  certain  Acti- 
ons tend  to  the  publick  Good;  but  that  our 
Company  honours  fuch  A<5tions,  and  loves 
the  Agent,  muft  flow  from  a  Senfe  offdme 

Q_  Ex. 


2 2 6       An  I N  QU I RY  concerning 

Sed.  5.  Excellence  in  this  Love  of  the  Tub  lick, 
*/VX;  and  ferving  its  Interefts. 

44  We  therefore,  fay  they  again,  pre- 
<c  tend  to  /bw  the  Tub  lick,  altho  we  only 
"  defire  the  Pleafure  of  Honour ;  and  we 
"  will  applaud  all  who  feem  to  ad:  in  that 
"  manner,  either  that  we  may  reap  Ad- 
"  vantage  from  their  Actions,  or  that  o- 
"  thers  may  believe  we  really  love  the 
"  Tublick."  But  ihall  any  Man  ever 
really  love  the  Tublick,  or  ftudy  the  Good 
of  others  in  his  heart,  if  Self-love  be  the 
only  Ipring  of  his  A&ions  ?  No  :  that  is 
impoffible.  Or,  fliall  we  ever  really  love 
Men  who  appear  to  love  the  Tub  lick,  with- 
out  a  moral  Senfe  ?  No  :  we  could  form 
no  Idea  of  fuch  a  Temper  ;  and  as  for  thefe 
Pretenders  to  piblick  Love,  we  fliould 
hate  them  as  Hypocrites,  and  our  Rivals  in 
Fame.  Now  this  is  all  which  could  be  ef- 
fected by  the  Opinions  of  our  Country, 
even  fuppofing  they  had  a  moral  Senfe, 
provided  we  had  none  our  felves  :  They 
never  could  make  us  admire  Virtue,  or  vir- 
tuous Characters  in  others  ;  but  could  only 
give  us  Opinions  of  Advantage,  or  'Dif 
advantage  in  A&ions,  according  as  they 
tended  procure  to  us  the  Plealures  of  Ho- 
nour, or  the  Pain  of  Shame. 

B  u  t  if  we  luppofe  that  Men  have,   by 

Nature,  a   moral  Senfe  of  Goodnefs  in 

1  Ac- 


Moral  Good  andE  v  i  l.      227 

Adions,  and  that  they  are  capable  of  dif  Sed.  < 
interejled Love  ;  all  is  eafy.  1  he  Opinions  ^^y-v> 
of  our  Company  may  make  us  ralhiy  con- 
clude, that  certain  Actions  tend  to  the 
univerfal  Detriment,  and  are  morally  Evil, 
when  perhaps  they  are  not  i'o  ;  and  then 
our  Senfe  may  determine  us  to  have  an 
Averfion  to  them,  and  their  Authors  ;  or  wo, 
may,  the  fame  way,  be  led  into  implicit  Pre- 
judices in  favour  of  Adions  as  good  ;  and 
then  our  defire  of  Honour  may  co-operate 
with  Benevolence,  to  move  us  to  fuch  Ac- 
tions :  but  had  we  no  Senfe  of  moral  §hia- 
litys  in  Adions,  nor  any  Conceptions  of 
them,  except  as  advantageous  or  hurtful, 
we  never  could  have  honoured  or  lov'd  A- 
gents  for  public k  Love,  or  had  any  regard 
to  their  Adions,  further  than  itiey  affeded 
our  felves  in  particular.  We  might  have 
form'd  the  metaphyfical  Idea  of  puhlick 
Good,  but  we  had  never  defir'd  it,  further 
than  it  tended  to  our  own  private  lute- 
reft,  without  a  Principle  of  Benevolence ; 
nor  admir'd  and  lov'd  thofe  who  were  ftudi- 
ous  of  it,  without  a  moral  Senfe.  So  far  is 
Virtue  from  being  (in  the  Language  of  a 
late  *  Author)  the  Offspring  of  Flattery, 
begot  upon  Tride ;  that  Pride,  in  the  bad 
meaning  of  that  Word,  is  the  fpurious 
Brood  of  Ignorance  by  our  moral  Senfe, 
and  Flattery  only  an   Engine,  vjhich  the 

*  Author  of  the  fable  of  the  Bees,  Pag.  37.  ^d  Ed. 

Q.  2  Cnth 


n%       An  I N  QU I K  Y  concerning 

Se<£t.  5.  Cunning  may  ufe  to  turn  this  moral  Senfe  in 
v-^v~  others \  to  the  Turfiofes  of  Self -love  in  the 
Flatterer. 

Mord  VI.  T  o  explain  what  has  been  (aid  of  the 

senfe,  not   Power  of  Honour.     Suppofe  a  State  or 
{fHowZ  Prince,  obferving  the  Money  which  is 
'  drawn  out  of  England  by  Italian  Mufici- 
ans,  fhould  decree  Honours,  Statues,  Titles \ 
for  great  Muficians  :  This  would  certainly 
excite  all  who  had  hopes  of  Succefs,  to  the 
Study  of  Mufick  ;  and  Men  of  a  good  Ear 
would  approve  of  the  good  Performers  as 
ufeful  Subjects,  as  well  as  very  entertaining. 
But  would  this  give  all  Men  a  good  Ear,  or 
make  them  delight  in  Harmony  ?  Or  could  it 
ever  make  us  really  love  a  Mufician,  who 
ftudy'd  nothing  but  his  own  Gain,  in  the 
lame  manner  we  do  a  'Patriot,  or  a  gene- 
rous Friend?  I  doubt  not.  And  yet Friend- 
floip,  without  the  Affiftance  of  Statues,  or 
Honours,   can  make  Perlbns  appear  exceed- 
ingly amiable. 

Let  us  take  another  Inftance.  Suppofe 
Statues,  and  triumphal  Arches  were  de- 
creed, as  well  as  a  large  Sum  of  Money,  to 
the  Difcoverer  of  the  Longitude,  or  any 
other  uleful  Invention  in  Mathematicks  : 
This  would  raife  a  univerfal  Defire  of  liich 
Knowledge  from  Self-Love  ;  but  would 
Men  therefore  love  a  Mathematician  as  they 
do  a  virtuous  Man  ?  Would  a  Mathema- 
tician 


Moral  Good  andEviL.      ny 

tician  love  every  Perfbn  who  had  attain'd  Scdt  5. 
Perfection  in  thac  Knowledge,  wherever  he  ^y~xj 
obferv'd  it,  altho  he  knew  that  it  was  not 
accompany'd  with  any  Love  to  Mankind* 
or  Study  of their  Good,  but  with  Ill-nature* 
Tride*  Covetoufhefs  ?  In  fhort,  let  us  ho- 
nour other  Qualitys  by  external  Shew  as 
much  as  we  pleafe,  if  we  do  not  difcern  a 
benevolent  Intention  in  the  Application,  or 
prefiime  upon  it ;  we  may  look  upon  thefe 
Quaiitys  as  ufeful,  enriching,  or  otherwile 
advantageous  to  any  one  who  is  pofTefs'd  of 
them  ;  but  they  fliall  never  meet  with  thole 
endearing  Sentiments  of  EJieem  and  Love* 
which  our  Nature  determines  us  to  appro- 
priate to  Benevolence*  or  Virtue. 

L  o  ve  of  Honour*  and  Averfion  to  Shame* 
may  often  move  us  to  do  Adtions  for  which 
others  profefs  to  honour  us,  even  tho  we 
fee  no  Good  in  them  our  felves  :  And  Com- 
pliance with  the  Inclinations  of  others,  as 
it  evidences  Humanity,  may  procure  fbme 
Love  to  the  Agent*  from  Spectators  who 
fee  no  moral  Good  in  the  A&ion  it  felf.  But 
without  fome  Senje  of  Good  in  the  A<5tions, 
Men  lhall  never  be  fond  of  fuch  Actions  in 
Solitude,  nor  ever  love  any  one  for  Perfec- 
tion in  them,  or  for  pradtifing  them  in  Soli- 
tude ;  and  much  lefs  lhall  they  be  diflatil- 
fy'd  with  themfelves  when  they  a6t  other- 
wife  in  Solitude.  Now  this  is  the  cafe  with 
us,  as  to  Virtue ;  and  therefore  we  muft 
Q.  3  have, 


2 1  o       An  I  N  QV  I R  Y  concerning 

Se6t.  5.  have,  by  Nature,  a  moral  Sen fe  of  itan- 
i^w;  tecedenc  to  Honour, 

This  will  ihew  us  with  what  Judgment 
a  late  *  Author  compares  the  Original  of 
our  Ideas  of  Virtue,  and  Approbation  of  it, 
to  the  manner  of  regulating  the  Behaviour 
of  aukard  Children  by  Commendation.     It 
fhall  appear  afterward:):,  that  our  Approba- 
tion of  fome  Geflures,   and  what  we  call 
'Decency  in  Motion,  depends  upon  fome 
moral  Ideas  in  People  of  advanc'd  Years. 
But  before  Children  come  to  obferve  this 
Relation,  it  is  only  good  Nature,  an  Incli- 
nation to  pleaie,    and  Love   of    Traife, 
which  makes  them  endeavour  to  behave 
as  they  are  defir'd  ;   and  not  any  Percep- 
tion  of    Excellence   in    this    Behaviour. 
Hence  they  are  not  follicitous  about  Ges- 
tures when  alone,   unleft  with  a  View  to 
pleaie   when   they    return   to  Company  ; 
nor  do  they  ever  love  or  approve  others 
for  any  Perfection  of  this  kind,  but  ra- 
ther envy  or  hate  them ;   till  they  either 
difcern  the  Connexion  between  Gejiures, 
and   moral  Quality s ;    or  refled:   on    the 
good  Nature*  wfcich  is   evidenc'd  by  fuch 
a  Compliance  with  the  defire  of  the  Com- 
pany. 


*  See  tie  Fable  of  the  Bees,  Page  38.  3d,  Ed, 
£  See  Sftt.  vi.  Art,  4. 

VII.  The 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       231 

Se<3.  5. 
VII.    The  confidering  Honour  in  the  ^\rV 
manner  above  explain'd,  may  fliew  us  the  *££mr% 
reafbn,   why  Men  are  often   ajharrfd  for 
things  which   are    not  vitious,    and   ho- 
noured for  what  is  not  virtuous.    For,  if 
any  Adtion  only  appears  vitious  to  any 
Perfbns    or  Company,    altho    it    be    not 
fo,    they   will  have    a    bad    Idea   of  the 
Agent ;  and  then  he  may  be  aiham'd,  or 
fiiffer  Uneafinefs  in  being  thought  morally 
Evil.     The  fame  way,    thofe   who  look 
upon  an  Action  as  morally  good,  will  honour 
the  Agent,   and  he  may  be  pleas'd  with  the 
Honour,  altho  he  does  not  himfelf  perceive 
any  moral  Good  in  what  has  procur'd  it. 

Again,  we  fhall  be  afoamd  of  every  Moral  in. 
Evidence  of  moral  Incapacity,  or  Want  of  caPaaty» 
Ability  ;  and  with  good  ground,  when  this  'shame.0' 
Want  is  occafion'd  by  our  own  Negligence. 
Nay  further,  if  any  Circumftance  be  look'd 
upon  as  indecent  in  any  Country,   ojfenfive 
to  others,  or  deform  d\    we  ihall,  out  of 
our  Love  to  the  good  Opinions  of  others, 
be  ajharrfd  to  be  found  in  fuch  Circum- 
flances,    even  when  we  are  fenfible   that 
this  Indecency  or  Offence  is    not  founded 
on  Nature,    but  is  merely  the   Effed:   of 
Cujiom.      Thus  being   obierv'd    in    thole 
Fun&ions  of  Nature  which  are  counted  in- 
decent and  ojfenfive,  will  make  us  uneajy, 
altho  we  are  fenfible  that  they  really  do 
Q.  4  not 


2}z       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

SedJ.  5.  not  argue  any  Vice  or  Weaknefs.  But  on 
v/V^v  the  contrary,  fince  moral  Abilitys  of  any 
kind,  upon  the  general  Prefumption  of  a 
good  Application,  procure  the  Efteem  of 
others,  we  fhall  value  our  felves  upon  them, 
or  grow  proud  of  them,  and  be  aiham'd  of 
any  Diicovery  of  our  want  of  fiich  Ability s. 
This  is  the  reafon  that  Wealth  and  Tower, 
the  great  Engines  of  Virtue,  when  pre- 
funVd  to  be  intended  for  benevolent  Pur- 
pofes,  either  toward  our  Friends  or  our 
Country,  procure  Honour  from  others,  and 
are  apt  to  beget  Tride  in  the  PofTeiTor  ; 
which,  as  it  is  a  general  Paffion  which  may 
be  either  good  or  evil,  according  as  it  is 
grounded,  we  may  delcribe  to  be  the  Joy 
which  arifes  from  the  real  or  imagined 
ToffeJJion  of  Honour,  or  Claim  to  it.  The 
fame  are  the  Effects  of  Knowledge,  Saga- 
city, Strength  ;  and  hence  it  is  that  Men 
are  apt  to  boaft  of  them. 

But  whenever  it  appears  that  Men  have 
only  their  private  Advantage  in  view,  in 
the  application  of  thefe  Abilitys^  or  natural 
Advantages,  the  Honour  ceafes,  and  we 
ftudy  to  conceal  them,  or  at  lead  are  not 
fond  of  difplaying  them  ;  and  much  more 
when  there  is  any  Sufpicion  of  an  ill-natured 
Application.  Thus  forae  Mifers  are  aiham'd 
of  their  Wealth,  and  ftudy  to  conceal  it ;  as 
the  malicious  or  felfijh  do  their  Tower  : 
Nay,  this  is  very  often  done  where  there  is 

3  no 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     233 

no  pofitive  evil  Intention  ;  becaufe  the  dimi-  Secft.  5. 
nifhing  their  Abilitys,   increafes  the  moral  '^-^VNj 
Good  of  any  little  kind  Action,  which  they 
can  find  in  their  hearts  to  perform. 

In  ihort,  we  always  fee  A&ions  which  seityr.efs 
flow  from  public k  Love,  accompany 'd  with^***^ 
generous  Boldnefs  and  Openneis  ;  and  not 
only  malicious,  but  even  felfijh  ones,  the 
matter  of  Shame  and  Confufion  ;  and  that 
Men  ftudy  to  conceal  them.  The  Love  of 
private  Tleafure  is  the  ordinary  occafion 
of  Vice  ;  and  when  Men  have  got  any 
lively  Notions  of  Virtue,  they  generally  be- 
gin to  be  alham'd  of  every  thing  which  be- 
trays Selfijhnefs,  even  in  Inftances  where  it 
is  innocent.  We  are  apt  to  imagine,  that 
others  obferving  us  in  fiich  Purfuits,  form 
mean  Opinions  of  us,  as  too  much  fet  on 
private  Pleafure ;  and  hence  we  ihall  find 
fiich  Enjoyments,  in  moft  polite  Nations, 
conceaPd  from  thofe  who  do  not  partake 
with  us.  Such  are  venereal  Tleafures  be- 
tween Per  Jons  marry*  d,  and  even  eating  and 
drinking  alone,  any  nicer  forts  of  Meats  or 
Drinks ;  whereas  a  hofpitable  Table  is  ra- 
ther matter  of  boafting  ;  and  fo  are  all  other 
kind,  generous  Offices  between  marry' d 
Per  fins,  where  there  is  no  Sufpicion  of  Self- 
love  in  the  Agent ;  but  he  is  imagin'd  as  ac- 
ting from  Love  to  his  AJfociate.  This,  I 
fancy,  firft  introduc'd  Ideas  of  Modefty  in 
polite  Nations,  and  Cujtom  has  ftrengthen'd 

them 


2 1 4      An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Se<ft.  5.  them  wonderfully  ;   lb  that  we  are  now 
^V^  afham'd  of  many  things,    upon  ibme  con- 
fus'd  implicit  Opinions  of  moral  Evil,  tho 
we  know  not  upon  what  account. 

mnour         HEREtoowemay  fee  the  reafbn,  why 

and  Shame,  Qre        t  afljam'd   0f  any   Qf  tfe  Methods 

often  from  7  •    7     r  •     •  t<i 

feme  jiflb-  of  Grandeur,  or  high- Living.  There  is 
ciathns  of  foch  a  Mixture  of  moral  Ideas,  of  Bene- 
volence,  of  Ability s  kindly  employ'd ;  fb 
manyDependantsy^/wto/,  fomany  Friends 
entertairfd,  afjifted,  protected ;  fuch  a  Oz- 
facity  imagined  for  great  and  amiable  Acti- 
ons, that  we  are  never  afham'd,  but  rather 
boaft  of  fuch  things  :  We  never  affed:  Ob- 
fcurity  or  Concealment,  but  rather  defire 
that  our  State  and  Magnificence  ihould  be 
known.  Were  it  not  for  this  Conjun&ion 
of *  moral  Ideas,  no  Mortal  could  bear  the 
Drudgery  of  State,  or  abftain  from  laughing 
at  thofe  who  did.  Could  any  Man  be  pleas'd 
with  a  Company  of  Statues  Unrounding  his 
Table,  fo  artfully  contriv'd  as  to  coniume 
his  various  Courfes,  and  infpir'd  by  fbme 
Servant,  like  lb  many  Puppets,  to  give  the 
ufiial  trifling  Returns  in  praife  of  theiriFare  ? 
Or  with  fo  many  Machines  to  perform  the 
Cringes  and  Whifpers  of  a  Levee  ? 

The  Shame  we  fuffer  from  theMeannefs 
of  T)refs,  Table,  Equipage,  is  entirely 
owing  to  the  fame  reafbn.  This  Meannefs  is 
often  imagin'd  to  argue  Avarice,  Meannefs 

of 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      235 

of  Spirit,  want  of  Capacity,  or  Condufi  in  SeQ:.  5. 
Life,  oflndujtry,  or  moral  Ability <s  of  one  ^v^-' 
kind  or  other.     To  confirm  this,  let  us  ob- 
ferve  that  Men  will  glory  in  the  Meannefs 
of  their  Fare,  when  it  was  occafion'd  by 
a  good  A&ion.     How  many  would  be  a- 
fham'd  to  be  furpriz'd  at  a  Dinner  of  cold 
Meat,  who  will  boafl:  of  their  having  fed 
upon  *Dogs  and  Horfes  at  the  Siege  of 
<2Jerry  ?   And  they  will  all  tell  you  that 
they  were  not,  nor  are  afham'd  of  it. 

This  ordinary  Connexion  in  our  Ima- 
gination, between  external  Grandeur,  Re- 
gularity  in  'Drefi,    Equipage,    Retinue, 
Badges  of  Honour,  and  fome  moral  Abili- 
tys  greater   than  ordinary,    is  perhaps  of 
more  confequence  in  the  World  than  fome 
reclufe  Thilojophers  apprehend,  who  pique 
themfelves  upon   delpifing   theft   external 
Shews.    This  may  poffibly  be  a  great,  if 
not  the  only  Caufe  of  what  fome  count  mi- 
raculous, viz.    That  Civil  Governors  of 
no  greater  Capacity  than  their  Neighbours, 
by  fome  inexpreffible  Awe,    and  Autho- 
rity, quell  the  Spirits  of  the  Vulgar,  and 
keep  them   in   fubje&ion   by    fuch   fmall 
Guards,    as  might  eafily  be  conquer'd  by 
thofe  Aflbciations  which   might  be   rais'd 
among  the  cDifaffecled,  or  Factious  of  any 
State  ;  who  are  daring  enough  among  their 
Equals,  and  fhew  a  lufficient  Contempt  of 
Death  for  undertaking  iuch  an  Enterprize. 

Hence 


x  3  6      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  5-  . 

v^v-^  Hence  alfb  we  may  difco ver  the  reafon, 
why  the  gratifying  our  fuperior  Senfes  of 
Beauty  and  Harmony,  or  the  Enjoyment  of 
the  Pleafiires  of 'Knowledge \  never  occafions 
any  Shame  or  Confufion,  tho  our  Enjoy- 
ment were  known  to  all  the  IVorld.  The 
Objects  which  furnifh  this  Pleafure,  are 
of  fiich  a  nature,  as  to  afford  the  fame  De- 
lights to  multitudes ;  nor  is  there  any  thing 
in  the  Enjoyment  of  them  by  one,  which 
excludes  any  Mortal  from  a  like  Enjoy- 
ment. So  that  altho  wepurfue  thefe  Enjoy- 
ments from  Self-love,  yet,  fince  our  Enjoy- 
ment cannot  be  prejudicial  to  others,  no 
Man  is  imagin'd  any  way  inhumanly  felfijh, 
from  the  fulleft  Enjoyment  of  them  which 
is  poflible.  The  lame  Regularity  or  Har- 
mony which  delights  me,  may  at  the  fame 
time  delight  multitudes  ;  the  fame  Theorem 
fliall  be  equally  fruitful  of  Pleafure,  when  it 
has  entertain'd  thoufands.  Men  therefore 
are  not  aiham'd  of  fiich  Purfuits,  fince  they 
never,  of  themfelves,  feduce  us  into  any 
thing  malicious \  envious,  or  ill-natur'd ; 
nor  does  any  one  apprehend  another  too 
felfijh,  from  his  purfuing  Objects  of  un- 
exhaufted  univerfal  Pleafure. 

This  View  of  Honour  and  Shame  may 
alfb  let  us  fee  the  reafon,  why  mofl  Men 
are  uneafy  at  being  prais'd,  when  they  them- 
felves are  prefent.     Every  one  is  delighted 

with 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       227 

with  the  Efteem  of  others,  and  muft  enjoy  Sedt.  5. 
great  Pleafiire  when  he  hears  himfelf  com-  (/v^o 
mended ;  but  we  are  unwilling  others  fhould 
obferve  our  Enjoyment  of  this  Pleafiire, 
which  is  really  felfifb ;  or  that  they  fhould 
imagine  us  fond  of  it,  or  influenc'd  by 
hopes  of  it  in  our  good  Adions  :  and  there- 
fore we  chufe  Secrecy  for  the  Enjoyment  of 
it,  as  we  do  with  refpedt  to  other  Pleafures, 
in  which  others  do  not  fhare  with  us. 


a  mot rje  19 


VIII.  Let  us  next  confider  another  Dc-  cmpaf* 
termination  of  our  Mind,  which  ftrongly 
proves  Benevolence  to  be  natural  to  us,  VittU€% 
and  that  is  Compassion;  by  which  we 
are  difpos'd  to  ftudy  the  lnterejl  of  others, 
without  any  Views  of  private  Advantage. 
This  needs  little  Illuftration.  Every  Mortal 
is  made  uneafy  by  any  grievous  Mifery  he 
fees  another  involv'd  in,  unlefs  the  Perfbn 
be  imagin'd  evil,  in  a  moral  Senfe  :  Nay, 
it  is  almoft  impoffible  for  us  to  be  unmov'd, 
even  in  that  Cafe.  Advantage  may  make 
us  do  a  cruel  Adion,  or  may  overcome 
Pity  ;  but  it  fcarce  ever  extinguifhes  it. 
Afudden  Paflion  of  Hatred  or  Anger  may 
reprefent  a  Perfbn  as  abfolutely  evil,  and 
fo  extinguifh  Pity ;  but  when  the  Paffion  is 
over,  it  often  returns.  Another  dijlnte- 
refted 'View  may  even  in  cold  blood  over- 
come Pity  ;  fiich  as  Love  to  our  Country, 
or  Zeal  for  Religion.  Perfecution  is  ge- 
nerally occafion'd  by  Love  of  Virtue,  and 


238       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  j.  a  ^Defire  of  the  eternal  Happinefs  o(  Man- 
^W  /£i^,  altho  our  Folly  makes  us  xhufe  ab- 
furd  Means  to  promote  it ;  and  is  often  ao 
company'd  with  Tity  enough  to  make  the 
Terfecutor  uneafy,  in  what,  for  prepollent 
Reafons,  he  chufes;  unlefs  his  Opinion 
leads  him  to  look  upon  the  Heretick  as 
abfolutely  and  entirely  evil. 

We  may  here  obferve  how  wonderfully 
the  Conftitution  of  human  Nature  is  adapt- 
ed to  move  Compaffion.  Our  Mifery  or 
1)ijlrefs  immediately  appears  in  our  Counte- 
nance',  if  we  do  not  ftudy  to  prevent  it,  and 
propagates  feme  Pain  to  all  Spectators ;  who 
from  Obfervation,  univerfally  underftand 
the  meaning  of  thole  dijmal  Airs.  We  me- 
chanically fend  forth  Shrieks  and  Groans 
upon  any  fiirprizing  Apprehenfion  of  Evil; 
lb  that  no  regard  to  Decency  can  fbmetimes 
reftrain  them.  This  is  the  Voice  of  N  a- 
ture,  underftood  by  all  Nations,  by  which 
all  who  are  prefent  are  rous'd  to  our  Aflifc 
tance,  and  fbmetimes  our  injurious  Enemy 
is  made  to  relent. 

We  obferv'd  above  *,  that  we  are  not 
immediately  excited  by  Compaffion  to  defire 
the  Removal  of  our  own  Pain  :  we  think 
it  juft  to  be  fo  affe&ed  upon  the  Occafion, 
and  diflike  thofe  who  are  not  fo.     But  we 

*  See  Sett.  II  Art.  8.  Par.  z. 

arc 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       239 

are  excited  diredtly  to  defire  the  Relief  of  SecSt  j, 
the  Miferable ;  without  any  imagination  that  ^^r*j 
this  Relief  is  a  private  Good  to  our  felves  : 
And  if  we  lee  this  impoflible,  we  may  by 
Reflection  difeern  it  to  be  vain  for  us  to 
indulge  our  Compaffion  any  further  ;  and 
then  Self-love  prompts  us  to  retire  from  the 
Objed  which  occasions  our  Pain,  and  to 
endeavour  to  divert  our  Thoughts.  But 
where  there  is  no  luch  Reflection,  People 
are  hurry'd  by  a  natural,  kind  InjiincJ,  to 
lee  Objects  of  Compafl? on,  and  expofe  them- 
felves  to  this  Pain  when  they  can  give  no 
reafon  for  it  ;  as  in  the  Inftance  of  public  k 
Executions. 

This  fame  Principle  leads  men  to  Tra- 
gedys  ;  only  we  are  to  obferve,  that  ano- 
ther ftrong  reafon  of  this,  is  the  moral  Bean- 
ty  of  the  Characters  and  sitlions  which 
we  love  to  behold.  For  I  doubt,  whe- 
ther any  Audience  would  be  pleas'd  to  fee 
fi&itious  Scenes  of  Mifery,  if  they  were 
kept  ftrangers  to  the  moral  Quality s  of  the 
Sufferers,  or  their  Characters  and  Actions. 
As  in  fuch  a  cafe,  there  wouLd  be  no  Beauty 
to  raife  Defire  of  feeing  luch  Reprefentations, 
I  fancy  we  would  not  expofe  our  felves  to 
Pain  alone,  from  Mifery  which  we  knew 
to  be  fictitious. 

I  t  was  the  fame  Caufe  which  crouded  the 
Roman  Theatres  to  fee  Gladiators.     There 

the 


14°       ^n  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se<2\  y.  the  People  had  frequent  Inftances  of  great 
v^v^  Courage,  and  Contempt  of  Death,  two 
great  moral  Ability  s,  if  not  Virtues.  Hence 
Cicero  looks  upon  them  as  great  In- 
ftrucStions  in  Fortitude,  The  Antagonifl 
Gladiator  bore  all  the  blame  of  the  Cruelty 
committed,  among  People  of  little  Reflec- 
tion ;  and  the  courageous  and  artful  one, 
really  obtained  a  Reputation  of %  Virtue,  and 
Favour  among  the  Spectators,  and  was  vin- 
dicated by  the  Neceffity  of  Self-defence.  In 
the  mean  time  they  were  inadvertent  to  this, 
that  their  crouding  to  fiich  Sights,  and  fa- 
vouring the  Perfons  who  preiented  them 
with  fuch  Spectacles  of  Courage,  and  with 
Opportunitys  of  following  their  natural 
Injtintl  to  Compajfion^  was  the  true  occafion 
of  all  the  real  Diftrefs,  or  Aflaults  which 
they  were  ibrry  for. 

What  Sentiments  can  we  imagine  a 
Candidate  would  have  rais'd  of  himfelf, 
had  he  preiented  his  Countrymen  only 
with  Scenes  of  Mifery ;  had  he  drain'd 
Hofpitals  and  Infirmarys  of  all  their  pi- 
tyable  Inhabitants,  or  had  he  bound  io 
many  Slaves,  and  without  any  Refiftance, 
butcher'd  them  with  his  own  Hands  ?  I 
ihould  very  much  queftion  the  Succefs  of 
his  Ele&ion,  (however  Companion  might 
caufe  his  Shews  (till  to  be  frequented)  if 
his  Antagonifl  chofe  a  Diverfion  apparently 
3  more 


Moral  Good  andEviL,      ia\ 

more  virtuous,  of  with  a  Mixture  of  Scenes  Sed.  c, 
of  Virtue.  ^^-^ 

How    independent  this  Difpofition   to  companion 
CompaJJion  is  on  Cujiom,  Education,  or  In-  natural 
ftrutlion,  will  appear  from  the  Prevalence 
of  it  in  Women  and  Children,  who  are  lefs 
influenc'd  by   rhefe.     That  Children    de- 
light  in    ibme   Adions  which    are    cruel 
and   tormenting   to    Animals   which   they 
have  in  their  Power,  flows  not  from  Ma- 
lice, or  want  of  ComfaJJion\  but  from  their 
Ignorance  of  thole  figns  of  Pain    which 
many  Creatures  make  ;  together  with  a  Cu- 
rio fity  to  fee  the  various  Contortions  of  their 
Bodys.  For  when  they  are  more  acquainted 
with  thefe  Creatures,  or  come  by  any  means 
to  know  their  Sufferings,    their  Comfaffion 
often  becomes  too  ftrong  for  their  Reafon  ; 
as  it  generally  does  in  beholding  Execu- 
tions, where  as  foon  as  they   obferve  the 
evidences  of  Diftrefs,  or  Pain  in  the  Ma* 
lefaBor,    they  are  apt  to    condemn    this 
neceflary  Method  of  Self-defence  in   the 
State. 


R  SECt 


241       An  INQUIRY  concerning 
Se(2\  6. 


SECT.     VI. 

Concerning  the  Importance  of  this 
moral  Senfe  to  the  prefent  Hap~ 
pinefs  of  Mankind,  and  Its  Influ- 
ence on  human  Affairs. 

}£S#l  T  T  may  now  probably  appear,  that 
rd  senfe.  JL  notwithftanding  the  Corruption  of 
Manners  fbjuftly  complain'd  of  every  where, 
this  moral  Senfe  has  a  greater  Influence  on 
Mankind  than  is  generally  imagin'd,  altho 
it  is  often  directed  by  very  partial  imperfect 
Views  of  public  k  Good,  and  often  overcome 
by  Self-love.  But  we  fhall  offer  fome  fur- 
ther Confiderations,  to  prove,  "  That  it 
"  gives  us  more  Tleafure  and  Tain  than 
"  all  our  other  Faculty s."  And  to  prevent 
Repetitions,  let  us  obferve,  "  Thatwhere- 
"  ever  any  morally  good  Quality  gives 
"  Plealure  from  Reflection,  or  from  Ho- 
"  nour,  the  contrary  evil  one  will  give 
"  proportionable  Pain,  from  Remorfe  aod 
"  Shame"  Now  we  lhall  confider  the 
moral  T  leaf  ires,  not  only  fcparately,  but 
as  they  are  the  moft  delightful  Ingredient 
in  the  ordinary  Pleafures  of  Life. 

All 


Moral  Good  and  Evil,.       243 

Sed.  6. 
A  l  l  M  e  n  feem  perfuaded  of  fbme  Ex-  v^r-yvy 
cellency  in  the  Pone/lion  of  good  moral 
Qualitys,  which  is  fuperior  to  all  other  En- 
joyments ;  and  on  the  contrary,  look  upon 
a  State  of  moral  Evil,  as  worle  and  more 
wretched  than  any  other  whatsoever.  We 
mud  not  form  our  Judgment  in  this  matter 
from  the  Actions  of  Men  ;  for  however  they 
may  be  influenc'd  by  moral  Sentiments^  yet 
it  is  certain,  that  Self-inter  eft  ed  'Pajfions 
frequently  overcome  them,  and  partial 
Views  of  the  Tendency  of  Actions,  make 
us  do  what  is  really  morally  evil,  appre- 
hending it  to  be  good.  But  let  us  examine 
the  Sentiments  which  Men  univerfally  form 
of  the  State  of  others,  when  they  are  no 
way  immediately  concerned  5  for  in  thefe 
Sentiments  human  Nature  is  calm  and  un* 
difturb'd,  and  fliews  its  true  Face. 

Now  fhoiild  we  imagine  a  rational  Crea- 
ture in  a  fufficiently  happy  State,  tho  his 
Mind  was,  without  Interruption,  wholly 
occupy'd  with  pleafant  Senfations  of  Smell, 
Tafte,  Touch,  &c.  if  at  the  lame  time  all 
other  Ideas  were  excluded  ?  Should  we  not 
think  the  State  low,  mean  and  fordid,  if 
there  were  no  Society,  no  Love  or  Friend- 
ftoip,  no  good  Offices  ?  What  then  mud 
that  State  be  wherein  there  are  no  Pleafures 
but  thofe  of  the  external  Senfes,  with  fuch 
long  Intervals  as  human  Nature  at  preftnt 
R  %  rnuft 


244  ^n  *  N  Q.U  I R  Y  concerning 
Se6t.  <5.  muft  have  ?  Do  thefe  fhort  Fits  of  Pleaftrre 
l/Y^  make  the  Luxurious  happy  ?  How  infipd 
and  joylefs  are  the  Reflections  on  paft  Plea- 
liire  ?  And  how  poor  a  Recompence  is  the 
Return  of  the  tranfient  Senfation,  for  the 
naufeous  Satiety  s,  and  Languors  in  the  In- 
tervals ?  This  Frame  of  our  Nature,  lb 
incapable  of  long  Enjoyments  of  the  exter- 
nalSenfes,  points  out  to  us,  "  That  there 
"  muft  be  ibme  other  more  durable  Tlea* 
"  fire,  without  fuch  tedious  Interruptions, 
"  and  naufeous  Reflections" 

Let  us  even  join  with  the  Pleafiires  of 
the  external  Senfes,  the  Perceptions  of 
Beauty,  Order,  Harmony.  Thele  are  no 
doubt  more  noble  'Pleafiires,  and  leem  to 
inlarge  the  Mind ;  and  yet  how  cold  and 
joylefs  are  they,  if  there  be  no  moral  T lea- 
fur  es  of  Friendftoip,  Love  and  Beneficence  ? 
Now  if  the  bare  Abfence  of  moral  Good, 
makes,  in  our  Judgment,  the  State  of  a  ra- 
tional Agent  contemptible  ;  the  Prefence  of 
contrary  Difpofitions  is  always  imagined  by 
us  to  fink  him  into  a  degree  of  Mifery,  from 
which  no  other  Pleafiires  can  relieve  him. 
Would  we. ever  Willi  to  be  in  the  fame  Con- 
dition with  a  wrathful,  malicious,  revenge- 
ful, or  envious  Being,  tho  we  were  at  the 
fame  time  to  enjoy  all  the  Pleafures  of  the 
external  and  internal  Senfes  ?  The  internal 
Pleafiires  of  Beauty  and  Harmony,  contri- 
bute  greatly  indeed  toward  foothing  the 

Mind 


builders 
frove  it. 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      245 

Mind  into  a  forgetfulnds  of  Wrath,    Ma-  Sedt.  5. 
lice  or  Revenge  ;  and  they  muft  do  lo,  be-  L/'VNJ 
fore  we  can  have  any  tolerable  Delight  or 
Enjoyment:  for  while  thefe  AffeEiions  pel- 
fefs  the  Mind,  there  is  nothing  but  Torment 
and  Mifery. 

What  Cajlle-builder,  who  forms  to  him-  caffl* 
felf  imaginary  Scenes  of  Life,  in  which  he 
thinks  he  fliould  be  happy,  ever  made  ac- 
knowledged Treachery,  Cruelty^  or  Ingrati- 
tude, the  Steps  by  which  he  mounted  to 
his  wifh'd  for  Elevation,  or  Parts  of  his 
Character,  when  he  had  attain'd  it  ?  We 
always  condudl  our  felves  in  fuch  Refveries, 
according  to  the  Didfcates  of  Honour,  Faiths 
Generofity,  Courage  ;  and  the  lowed  we 
can  fink,  is  hoping  we  may  be  enrich'd  by 
fome  innocent  Accident. 

O  Ji  urnam  Argent i  Fors  qua  rnihi 
monftret  !  *  — — 

But  Labour,  Hunger,  Thirfl,  Toverty, 
"Fain,  "Danger,  have  nothing  lb  deteftable 
in  them,  that  our  Self-love  cannot  allow  us 
to  be  often  expos'd  to  them.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  Virtues  which  thefe  give  us  occa- 
fions  of  difplaying,  are  lb  amiable  and  excel- 
lent, that  fcarce  ever  is  any  imaginary  Hero 
in  Romance,  or  Epic,  brought  to  his  high- 


*  Hor.  Lib,  z.  Sat.  6.  v.  10. 

R  2  eft 


i^6       An  I  N  Q.U  I RY  concerning 

SecSt.  6.  eft  Pitch  of  Happinefs,  without  going  thro 
v^y^  them  all.  Where  there  is  no  Virtue,  there 
is  nothing  worth  Defire  or  Contemplation  ; 
the  Romance,  or  Epos  muft  end.  Nay,  the 
'Difficulty*,  or  natural  Evil,  does  fo  much 
increafe  the  Virtue  of  the  good  Adion 
which  it  accompanys,  that  we  cannot  eafily 
fuftain  thefe  Works  after  the  Diftrefs  is  over  ; 
and  if  we  continue  the  Work,  it  muft  be 
by  prefenting  a  new  Scene  of  Benevolence 
in  a  profperous  Fortune.  A  Scene  of  ex- 
ternal Trofperity  or  natural  Good,  with- 
out any  thing  moral  or  virtuous,  cannot 
entertain  a  Perfon  of  the  dulled  Imagina- 
tion, had  he  ever  fb  much  interefted  himfelf 
in  the  Fortunes  of  his  Hero  ;  for  where 
Virtue  ceafes,  there  remains  nothing  worth 
wifhing  to  our  Favourite,  or  which  we  can 
be  delighted  to  view  his  PofTeflion  of, 
when  we  are  moft  ftudious  of  his  Happi- 
nefs, 


virtue  Let  us  take  a  particular  Inflance,   to  try 

•wn'd  fit.  how  much  we  prefer  the  PofTeflion  of  Vir- 

i'upieL    tue  to  all  other  Enjoyments,  and  how  we 

fae,         look  upon  Vice  as  worfe  than  any  other 

Milery.     Who  could  ever  read  the  Hiftory 

of  Regulus,  without  concerning  himfelf 

in  the  Fortunes  of  that  gallant  Man,  for- 

rowing  at  his  Sufferings,  and  wifhing  him  a 

better  Fate  ?  But  how  a  better  Fate  ?  Should 


*  Sett.  in.  Art.  II.  Axiom  6. 

:       '  he 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      247 

he  have  comply'd  with  the  Terms  of  the  Se£t.  6. 
Carthaginians,  and  preferv'd  himfelf  l/^/V; 
from  the  intended  Tortures,  tho  to  the 
detriment  of  his  Country  ?  Or  ihould  he 
have  violated  his  plighted  Faith  and  Promife 
of  returning  ?  Will  any  Man  fay,  that  ei- 
ther of  theie  is  the  better  Fate  he  wifhes  his 
Favourite  ?  Had  he  aded  thus,  that  Virtue 
would  have  been  gone,  which  interefts  every 

one  in  his  Fortunes. "  Let  him  take  his 

"  Fate  like  other  common  Mortals. " 

What  elfe  do  we  wiih  then,  but  that  the 
Carthaginians  had  relented  of  their 
Cruelty,  or  that  Pro  v  id  en  ce,  by  fome 
unexpected  Event,  had  refcued  him  out  of 
their  hands. 

Now  may  not  this  teach  us,  that  we  are 
indeed  determined  to  judge  Virtue  with 
Peace  and  Safety,  preferable  to  Virtue  with 
Diftrefs  ;  but  that  at  the  fame  time  we  look 
upon  the  State  of  the  Virtuous,  the  Tub- 
lick-Jpirited,  even  in  the  utmoft  natural  Di£ 
trefs,  as  preferable  to  all  affluence  of  other 
Enjoyments  ?  For  this  is  what  we  chufe  to 
have  our  Favourite  Hero  in,  notwithftand- 
ing  all  its  Pains  and  natural  Evils.  We 
fhould  never  have  imagin'd  him  happier,  had 
he  adted  otherwife  ;  or  thought  him  in  a 
more  eligible  State,  with  Liberty  and  Safety, 
at  the  expence  of  his  Virtue.  We  fecretly 
judge  the  Purchafe  too  dear  ;  and  therefore 
we  never  imagine  he  adted  fooliihly  in  fecu- 
R  4  ring 


%^%       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  6.  ring  his  Virtue,  his  Honour,  at  the  expence 

W^  of  his  Eafe,  his  Tleafure,  his  L//£.    Nor 

can  we  think  thefe  latter  Enjoyments  worth 

the  keeping,  when  the  former  are  entirely 

loft. 

Kecetfary  II.  Let  us  in  the  fame  manner  examine 
in  other  our  Sentiments  of  the  Happmefs  of  others 
in  common  Life.  Wealth  and  Exter- 
nal Pleasures  bear  no  fmall  bulk  in 
our  Imaginations  ;  but  does  there  not  al- 
ways accompany  this  Opinion  of  Happinefs 
in  IVealth,  Tome  fuppos'd  beneficent  Inten- 
tion of  doing  good  Offices  to  Perfons  dear 
to  us,  at  leaft  to  our  Family  s,  or  Kinfinen  ? 
And  in  our  imagin'd  Happinefs  from  exter- 
nal 'Pleafure,  are  not  fome  Ideas  always  in- 
cluded of  fome  moral  Enjoyments  of  Soci- 
ety, fome  Communication  of  Pleafure,  fbme- 
thingof  Love,  of  Friendjhip,  of  Efieem,  of 
Gratitude  ?  Who  ever  pretended  to  a  Tafte 
of  thefe  Pleafures  without  Society  ?  Or  if 
any  feem  violent  in  purfuit  of  them, 
how  baje  and  contemptible  do  they  appear 
to  all  Perfons,  even  to  thofe  who  could 
have  no  expe&ation  of  Advantage  from 
their  having;   3  more  generous  Notion  of 


Pleafure  ? 


XT 


Now  were  there  no  moral  Senfe,  no 
Happinefs  in  Benevolence,  and  did  we  adi 
from  no  other  Principle  than  Self-love  ; 
fare  there  is  np  Pleafure  of  the  external  Sen- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     249 

fes,  which  we  could  not  enjoy  alone,  with  Sedt.  5. 
lefs  trouble  and  expence  than .  in  Society.  V*-"V^/ 
But  a  Mixture  of  the  moral  Tleajures 
is  what  gives  the  alluring  Relijh  ;  'tis 
fbmc  Appearance  of  Friendjhip,  of  Love, 
of  communicating  Pleafure  to  others,  which 
preierves  the  Pleafures  of  the  Luxurious 
from  being  naufeous  and  infipid.  And  this 
partial  Imagination  of  fome  good  moral 
Qualitys,  lome  Benevolence,  in  Adtions 
which  have  many  cruel,  inhuman,  and  de- 
jlruElive  Confequences  toward  others,  is 
what  has  kept  Vice  more  in  countenance 
than  any  other  Confideration  *. 

But  to  convince  us  further  wherein  the 
Happinefs  of  Wealth,   and  external  Tlea- 
fure  lies  ;  let  us  but  luppofe  Malice,  TVrath, 
Revenge  ;   or   only  Solitude,    Abfence  of 
Friendjhip,    of  Love,    of  Society,  of  Ef- 
teem,  join'd  with  the  PofTeffion  of  them  ; 
and  all  the  Happinefs  vanifhes  like  a  Dream. 
And  yet  Love,   Friendjhip,,    Society,    Hu- 
manity, tho  accompany'd  with  Poverty  and 
Toil,  nay  even  with  f  mailer  degrees  of  Tain, 
luch  as  do  not  wholly  occupy  the  Mind,  are 
not  only  the  Object  of  Love  from  others, 
but  even  of  a  fort  of  Emulation  :   which 
plainly  fhews,  "  That  Virtue  is  the  chief 
"  Happinefs  in  the  Judgment  of  all  Man- 
•-  kind." 
'"  ' > 

*  See  above,  Setf,  ivt  Art.  4.  Par,  4,  5. 

Ill  Ther$ 


250       An  INQUIRY  concerning 


Sea.  6. 

l/V^J  III.  There  is  a  further  Confideration 
'charm  in  w^^c^  mu^  noc  be  pafs'd  over,  concerning 
Beauty,  the  External  Beauty  of  Perfons, 
which  all  allow  to  have  a  great  Power  over 
human  Minds.  Now  it  is  iome  apprehended 
Morality,  fome  natural  or  imagin'd  Indica- 
tion of  concomitant  Virtue ',  which  gives  it 
this  powerful  Charm  above  all  other  kinds 
of  Beauty.  Let  us  confider  the  Chara&ers 
of  Beauty,  which  are  commonly  admir'd  in 
Countenances,  and  we  ihall  find  them  to 
be  Sweetnefs,  Mildnefs,  Majefiyr  Dignity \ 
Vivacity,  Humility,  Tendernefs,  Qood-na- 
ture ;  that  is,  that  certain  Airs,  Tropor- 
tions,  je  ne  fcai  quoy's,  are  natural  Indica- 
tions of  fuch  Virtues,  or  of  Abilitys  or 
Difpofitions  toward  them.  As  we  obferv'd 
above  *  of  Mifery,  or  Diftrefs  appearing 
in  Countenances  ;  fb  it  is  certain,  almoft  all 
habitual  'Difpofitions  of  Mind,  form  the 
Countenance  in  foch  a  manner,  as  to  give 
fome  Indications  of  them  to  the  Spectator. 
Our  violent  Paflions  are  obvious  at  firft 
view  in  the  Countenance  ;  fo  that  fome- 
times  no  Art  can  conceal  them :  and  fmaller 
degrees  of  them  give  fome  lefs  obvious 
Turns  to  the  Face,  which  an  accurate  Eye 
will  obftrve.  Now  when  the  nattiral  Air 
of  a  Face  approaches  to  that  which  any 
Paffion  would  form  it  unto,    we  make  a 

*  See  Sttt.  v.  Art,  8.  Par.  2. 

con- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       251 

conjecture  from  this  concerning  the  lead-  Sett.  6. 
ing  "Difpofition  of  the  Perfon's  Mind.  <^-v">o 

A  s  to  thole  Fancys  which  prevail  in  cer- 
tain Countrys  toward  large  Lips,  little 
Nofes,  narrow  Eyes  ;  unlets  we  knew  from 
thernfelves  under  what  Idea  fuch  Features 
are  admir'd,  whether  as  naturally  beautiful 
in  Form,  or  Proportion  to  the  reft  of  the 
Face  ;  or  as  preium'd  Indications  of  fbme 
moral  Quality's  ;  we  may  more  probably 
conclude  that  it  is  the  latter  ;  fince  this 
is  fo  much  the  Ground  of  Approbation,  or 
Averfion  towards  Faces  among  our  ielves. 
And  as  to  thofe  Features  which  we  count 
naturallydifagreeable  as  to  Form,  we  know 
the  Averfion  on  this  account  is  fo  weak, 
that  moral  Qualitys  ihall  procure  a  liking, 
even  to  the  Face,  in  Perfons  who  are  fen- 
fible  of  the  Irregularity,  or  want  of  that 
Regularity  which  is  common  in  others. 
With  us,  certain  Features  are  imagin'd  to 
denote  1)ulnefs  ;  as  hollow  Eyes,  large 
Lips  ;  a  Colour  of  Hair,  Wantonnefs :  and 
may  we  not  conclude  the  like  Ajfociation 
of  Ideas,  perhaps  in  both  Cafes  without 
Foundation  in  Nature,  to  be  the  Ground 
of  thofe  Approbations  which  appear  unac- 
countable to  us  ? 

In  the  fame  manner,  when  there  is  no- 
thing grojly  diiproportion'd  in  any  Face, 
what  is  it  we  diipraife  ?  It  is  Tride,  Haugh- 

tinefs% 


252      *An  INQ.UIRY  concerning 

Se<5t  6-  tinefi*  Sonrnefs,  Ill-nature,  'Difcontent* 
\s~v^j  Folly,  Levity,  JVantonnefs  ;  which  fome 
Countenances  difcover  in  the  manner  above 
hinted  at  ?  And  the fe  Airs,  when  brought 
by  Cuftom  upon  the  moft  regular  Set  of 
Features,  have  often  made  them  very  difa- 
greeable  ;  as  the  contrary  Airs  have  given 
the  ftrongeft  Charms  to  Countenances, 
which  were  far  fromPerfe&ion  in  w^r#tf/ 
Beauty. 

One  cannot  but  oblerve  the  Judgment 
of  Homer,  in  his  Character  of  Helen. 
Had  he  ever  fb  much  rais'd  our  Idea  of  her 
external  Beauty,  it  would  have  been  ridi- 
culous to  have  engag'd  his  Countrymen  in 
a  War  for  fuch  a  Helen  as  Virgil  has 
drawn  her.  He  therefore  ftill  retains  fome- 
thing  amiable  in  a  moral  Sen fe,  amidft  all  her 
Weaknefs,  and  often  iuggefts  to  his  Reader, 

as  the  Spring  of  his  Countrymens  Indigna- 
tion and  Revenge. 

TbeCaufe       This  Confideration  may  fhew  us  one 

of  different  Reafon,    among  many  others,    for  Mens 

BMttty!^   different  Fancy  s,   or  Relijhes  of  Beauty. 

The  Mind  of  Man,    however   generally 

dilpos'd  to  efteem  Benevolence  and  Virtue, 

yet  by  more  particular  Attention  to  fbme 


*  See  Homer,  llijd  2,  v.  35^  59c. 

kinds 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       255 

kinds  of  it  than  others,  may  gain  a  ftronger  Sedt.  6- 
Admiration  of  fome  moral  Difpojitions  O^VVi 
than  others.  Military  Men,  may  admire 
Courage  more  than  other  Virtues  ;  Perfbns 
otfmaller  Courage,  may  admire  Sweetnefs 
of  Temper ;  Men  of  Thought  and  Reflec- 
tion, who  have  more  extenfive  Views,  will 
admire  the  like  Quality s  in  others  ;  Men  of 
keen  TaJJions,  exped:  equal  Returns  of  all 
the  kind  AfFe&ions,  and  are  wonderfully 
charm'd  by  Compliance  :  the  Trotzd,  may 
like  thofe  of  higher  Spirit,  as  more  firitable 
to  their  Dignity  ;  tho  Tride,  joined  with 
Reflection  and  good  Sen 'fe,  will  recommend 
to  them  Humility  in  the  Perfon  belov'd. 
Now  as  the  various  Tempers  of  Men  make 
various  Tempers  of  others  agreeable  to 
them,  fb  they  muft  differ  in  their  Relijhes 
of  Beauty,,  according  as  it  denotes  the  fe- 
veral  Qualitys  moft  agreeable  to  them- 
felves. 

This  may  alfo  fhew  us,  how  in  vir- 
tuous Love  there  may  be  the  greateft  Beau- 
ty, without  the  leaft  Charm  to  engage  a 
Rival.  Love  it  felf  gives  a  Beauty  to  the 
Lover,  in  the  Eyes  of  the  Perfon  belov'd, 
which  no  other  Mortal  is  much  affedled 
with.  And  this  perhaps  is  the  flrongejl 
Charm  poflible,  and  that  which  will  have 
the  greateft  Power,  where  there  is  not  fome 
very  great  Counter-ballance  from  vuorldly 
Intereji,  Vice,  or  grofs  'Deformity. 

IV.  This 


An  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

IV.  This  fame  Confideration  may  be 

fhn ' Ge°r-  exten(^ec^  ro  t^ie  whole  Air  and  Motion 
'tuns.  of  any  Perfon.  Every  thing  we  count 
agreeable,  fome  way  denotes  Chearfulnefs, 
Eafe,  a  Condefcenfion,  and  Readinefs  to 
oblige,  a  Z/fl^  of  Company,  with  a  /vr*- 
*/<m»  and  Boldnefs  which  always  accompa- 
nys  an  honeft,  undefigning  Heart.  On  the 
contrary,  what  is  fhocking  in  Air,  ox  Mo* 
tion,  is  Roaghnefs,  Ill-nature,  a  T^ifre- 
gard  to  others,  or  afoolifh  Shame-facednefs, 
which  eyidences  a  Perfon  to  be  unexpe- 
rienc'd  in  Society,  or  Offices  of  Huma- 
nity. 

With  relation  to  thtk Airs,  Motions, 
Gejiures,  we  may  obftrve,  that  confidering 
the  different  Ceremony  s,  and  Modes  of  (hew- 
ing reiped,  which  are  pra&is'd  in  different 
Nations,  we  may  indeed  probably  conclude 
that  there  is  no  natural  Connexion  between 
any  of  theft  Gejiures,  or  Motions,  and  the 
Affections  of  Mind  which  they  are  by 
Cujiom  made  to  exprefs.  But  when  Cujlom 
has  made  any  of  them  pafs  for  Expreffions 
of  fiich  Affections,  by  a  conftant  Affocia- 
tion  of  Ideas,  lome  ihall  become  agreeable 
and  lovely,  and  others  extremely  offenflve, 
altho  they  were  botBrin  their  own  Nature, 
perfectly  indifferent.  g 

V.  Here 


Moral  Good  and  Evil,      255" 

Se<a.  £. 
V.  Here  we  may  remark  the  manner  i^ro 
in  which  Nature  leads  Mankind  to  the  lfLs^li 
Continuance  of  their   Race,    and    by  its  twten  the 
ftrongeft  Power  engages  them  to  what  occa-  Sexes- 
fions  the  greateft  Toil  and  Anxiety  of  Life ; 
and  yet  fupports  them  under  it  with  an  in- 
expreflible  delight.     We  might  have  been 
excited  to  the  Propagation  of  our  Species, 
by  fuch  an  uneafy  Senfation  as  would  have 
effectually  determin'd  us  to  it,  without  any 
great   profpecft  of  Happinefs  ;    as  we  fee 
Hunger  and  Thirfi  determine  us  to  preferve 
our  Bodys,  tho  few  look  upon  eating  and 
drinking   as    any   considerable  Happinefe. 
The  Sexes  might  have  been  engag'd  to  Con- 
currence,   as  we  imagine  the  Brutes  are, 
by  "Defire  only,  or  by  a  Love  of  fenfual 
crleajure.    But  how  dull  and  infipid  had 
Life  been,  were  there  no  more  in  Mar- 
riage ?    Who  would  have  had  Refblution 
enough  to  bear  all  the  Cares  of  a  Family \ 
and  Education  of  Children  ?  Or  who,  from 
the  general  Motive  of  Benevolence  alone, 
would  have  chofen  to  fubjedt  himfelf  to  na- 
Uiral  Affettion  toward  an  Offspring,  when 
he  could  fo  eafily  forefee  what  Troubles  it 
might  occafion  ? 

This  Inclination  therefore  of  the  Sexes, 
is  founded  on  fomething  ftronger,  and  more 
efficacious  and  joyful,  than  the  Sollicita- 
tions  of  Vneajinejs,  or  the  bare  defire  of 

fenjible 


1 5 6       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6t.  5.  fenfible  T  leaf  ire.     Beauty  gives  a  favou- 
l/*W  rable  Prefamption  of  good  moral  'Difpofi- 
tions,  and  Acquaintance  confirms  this  into 
a  real  Love  of  Efteem,  or  begets  it,  where 
there  is  little  Beauty.     This  raifes  an  ex- 
pectation of  the  greateft  moral  Tie  a  fares 
along  with  the  fenfble,  and  athoufand  ten- 
der Sentiments  of  Huma?iity  and  Geuero- 
fity  ;  and  makes  us  impatient  for  a  Society 
which    we   imagine  big  with  unfpeakable 
moral  Tleafures  :  where  nothing  is  indiffe- 
rent,   and  every  trifling  Service,  being  an 
Evidence  of  this  ftrong  Love  of  EJteem, 
is  mutually  receiv'd  with  the  Rapture  and 
Gratitude  of  the  greateft  Benefit,   and  of 
the  moft  fubftantial  Obligation.    And  where 
Trudence  and  Good-nature  influence  both 
fides,  this  Society  may  anfwer  all  their  Ex- 
pectations. 

Nay,    let  us   examine  thofe  of  loofer 
Ccndud:  with  relation  to  the  fair  Sex,  and 
we  fliall  find,  that  Love  of  fenfible  T lea- 
fire  is  not  the  chief  Motive  of  Debau- 
chery^ or  falfe  Gallantry     Were  it  fb,  the 
meanefl  Troftitutes  would  pleafe  as  much  as 
any.    But  we  know  fufEciently,  that  Men 
are  fond  of  Good-nature,  Faith,  Tleafantry 
of  Temper,  Wit,  and  many  other  moral 
Qualitys,  even  in  a  Miftrefs.     And  this 
may  furnifh  us  with  a  Reafon  for  what 
appears  pretty  unaccountable,  viz.   "  That 
"  Chafity  it  felf  has  a  powerful  Charm  in 
i  "  the 


I* 


Moral  Good^Evil.       257 

the  Eyes  of  the  Dijfolute,  even  when  Se&.  6. 
they  are  attempting  to  deftroy  it."  o^v'X-j 

This  powerful  Determination  even  to  a 
limited  Benevolence,  and  other  moral  Sen- 
timents,  is  obferv'd  to  give  a  ftrong  biafs  to 
our  Minds  toward  &i\univerfal  Goodnefsy 
Tendernefs,  Humanity,  Generofity,  and  Con- 
tempt of  private  Good  in  our  whole  Con- 
dud:  ;  befides  the  obvious  Improvement  it 
occafions  in  our  external 'Deportment,  and 
in  our  relifli  of  Beauty,  Order,  and  Har- 
mony. As  foon  as  a  Heart,  before  hard 
and  obdurate,  is  loften'd  in  this  Flame,  we 
ihall  obferve,  arifing  along  with  it,  a  Love 
of  Toetry,  Mufick,  the  Beauty  of  Na- 
ture in  rural  Scenes,  a  Contempt  of  other 
felfifli  Pleafures  of  the  external  Senfes,  a 
neat  Drefs,  a  humane  "Deportment,  a  De- 
light in  and  Emulation  of  every  thing  which 
is  gallant,  generous  and  friendly. 

I  n  the  fame  manner  we  are  determin'd  to  society, 
common  Friendfliips  and  Acquaintances,  not  F(]nend' 
by  the  fallen  Apprehenfions  of  our  Necefi  {TmotTi 
Jitys,  or  Profpe<5ts  of  Intereji ;  but  by  an  Senfi- 
incredible  variety  of  little  agreeable,    en- 
gaging Evidences  of  Love,   Good-nature, 
and  other  morally  amiable  Quality s  in  thofe 
we  converfe  with.    And  among  the  reft, 
none  of  the  lead  confiderable  is  an  Inclina- 
tion to  Chearfulnefs,    a  Delight  to  raile 
Mirth  in  others,  which  procures  a  fecret 

S  Ap= 


258       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6r,  6.  Approbation  and  Gratitude  toward  the  Per- 
^yv/  fon  who  puts  us  in  fuch  an  agreeable,  inno- 
cent, good-natur'd,  and  eajy  ftate  of  Mind, 
as  we  are  confcious  of  while  we  enjoy  plea- 
fant  Convention,  enliven d  by  moderate 
Laughter. 

ThePow-  VI.  Upon  this  moral  Senfe  is  founded 
ZrffZl  a11  the  Power  of  the  O  rat  or.  .  The  vari- 
ed  on  it,  ous  Figures  of  Speech,  are  the  feveral  Man- 
ners which  a  lively  Genius,  warm'd  with 
Paffions  fuitable  to  the  Occafion,  naturally 
runs  into,  only  a  little  diverfify'd  by  Cuf- 
tom  :  and  they  only  move  the  Hearers,  by 
giving  a  lively  Reprefentation  of  the  Paffi- 
ons of  the  Speaker  ;  which  are  communi- 
cated to  the  Hearers,  as  we  *  obferv'd  a- 
bove  of  one  Paffion,  viz.  Tity. 

Now  the  Paffions  which  the  Orator  at- 
tempts to  raife,  are  all  founded  on  moral 
ghalitys.  All  the  bold  Metaphors,  or 
^Jjefcripions,  all  the  artificial  Manners  of 
Expojiulation,  Arguing,  and  addrejjing  the 
Audience,  all  the  Appeals  to  Mankind,  are 
but  more  lively  Methods  of  giving  the  Au- 
dience a  ftronger  impreffion  of  the  moral 
Quality s  of  the  Peri  on  accused,  or  defend- 
ed';  of  the  A&ion  advis'd,  or  difuaded : 
And  all  the  Antithefes,  or  JVitticffms ;  all 
the  Cadences  of  fonorous  Periods,  whatever 


See  Sett.  v.  Art.  8.  Par.  z. 

inferior 


Moral  Good^Evil.       259 

inferior  kind  of  Beauty  they  may  have  fepa-  Se&.  6. 
rately,  are  of  no  confequence  to  perfuade,  ^v^ 
if  we  negled:  moving  the  Paffions  by  fome 
Species  of  Morality.  They  may  perhaps 
raife  a  little  Admiration  of  the  Speaker,  a- 
mong  thofe  who  already  favour  his  Party, 
but  they  oftner  raife  Contempt  in  his  Ad- 
verfarys.  But  when  you  difplay  the  Be- 
neficence of  any  A&ion,  the  good  EffeCt 
it  fliall  have  on  the  Tub  lick  in  promoting 
the  Welfare  of  the  Innocent,  and  relieving 
the  unjujily  dijirejfed  ;  if  you  prove  your 
Allegations,  you  make  every  Mortal  ap- 
prove the  undertaking  it.  When  any  Per- 
lon  is  to  be  recommended,  difplay  his  Hu- 
manity, Generofity,  Study  of  the  public k 
Good,  and  Capacity  to  promote  it,  his 
Contempt  of  Dangers,  and  private  Pleafures ; 
and  you  are  lure  to  procure  him  Love  and 
EJieem.  If  at  the  fame  time  you  fhevv  his 
*Diftrefs,  or  the  Injurys  he  has  fufFer'd, 
you  raife  Tity,  and  every  tender  Affec- 
tion. 

On  the  contrary,  reprefent  the  Bar- 
barity,  or  Cruelty  of  any  Adion,  the 
Mifery  it  fliall  procure  to  the  Kind,  the 
Faithful,  the  Generous,  or  only  to  the 
Innocent ;  and  you  raife  an  Abhorrence  of 
it  in  the  Breads  of  the  Audience,  tho  they 
were  not  the  Perfons  who  would  have  fuf- 
fer'd  by  it.  The  lame  way,  would  you 
make  a  Perfon  infamous,  and  dcfpisd  and 
S  2  hated, 


2  60       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  6.  hated,  reprefent  him  as  cruel,  inhuman  f 
t/y^  or  treacherous  toward  the  rnoft  diftant  ra- 
tional Agents  ;  or  fhew  him  only  to  be 
felfijh,  and  given  to  fo  lit  ary  Luxury,  with- 
out regard  to  any  Friend,  or  the  Intereji 
of  others  ;  and  you  have  gain'd  your  Point 
as  foon  as  you  prove  what  you  alledge. 
Nay,  how  does  it  flop  our  Admiration 
of  any  celebrated  Action,  to  fuggeft, 
"  That  the  Author  of  it  was  no  Fool, 
*«  he  knew  it  would  turn  to  his  own  Ad- 
"  vantagel" 

Now,  are  the  Learned  andTolite  the 
only  Perfons  who  are  mov'd  by  fuch 
Speeches  ?  Muft  Men  know  the  Schemes 
of  the  Moralifts  and  Politicians,  or  the 
Art  of  Rhetorick,  to  be  capable  of  being 
perfuaded  ?  Muft  they  be  nicely  converfant 
in  ail  the  Methods  of  promoting  Self-lnte- 
reft  ?  Nay,  do  we  not  fee  on  the  contrary, 
the  rude  undifcifilhid  Multitude  rnoft  af- 
fected ?  Where  had  Oratory  fo  much  Pow- 
er as  in  popular  States,  and  that  too  be- 
fore the  Perfe&ion  of  the  Sciences  ?  Re- 
flection* and  Study,  may  raife  in  Men  a 
Sufpicion  of  Defign,  and  Caution  of  AfTent, 
when  they  have  lome  knowledge  of  the 
various  Topicks  of  Argument,  and  find 
them  employed  upon  themfelves  :  but  rude 
Nature  is  ftill  open  to  every  moral  Im- 
preffion,  and  carry'd  fnrioufly  along  with- 
out Caution,  or  Sufpenle.     It  was  not  the 

Groves 


Moral  Good^JEvil.      261 

Groves  of  the  Academy,    or  the  polijVd  Sedi  5, 

Stones  of  the  Tortico,    or  the  managd  ^~v^ 

Horfes  of  Greece,  which  liften'd  to  the 

Harp  of  an  Amphion,  or  an  Orpheus; 

but  the  Trees,  and  Rocks,  and  Tygers  of 

the  Forefi  :  which  may  ihew  us,  "  That 

"  there  is  fbme  Senfe  of  Morality  antece- 

"  dent  to  Inftrudiion,  or  metaphyfical  Ar- 

"  guments  proving  the  private  Inter  eft  of 

"  the  Perfon  who  is  perfuaded,  to  be  con- 

"  nedled  with  the  public k  Good? 

VII.  We  lhall  find  this  Senfe  to  be  the  ^"7 
Foundation    alio   of   the    chief  Pleafures^^,. 

r>  r\  t  i  1  from  this 

of  Poetry.  We  hinted,  in  the  former  Moral 
Treatife,  at  the  Foundation  of  Delight  Se»fi- 
in  the  Numbers,  Meafures,  Metaphors, 
Similitudes*.  But  as  the  Contemplation 
of  moral  Objects,  either  of  Vice  or  Vir* 
ttte,  affedls  us  more  ftrongly,  and  moves 
our  Paffions  in  a  quite  different  and  more 
powerful  manner,  than  natural  Beauty,  or 
(what  we  commonly  call)  Deformity  ;  fo 
the  moft  moving  Beautys  bear  a  Relation 
to  our  moral  Senfe,  and  affed:  us  more  ve* 
hemently,  than  the  Reprefentation  of  na- 
tural Objects  in  the  livelieft  Delcriptions, 
'Dramatic,  and  Epic  Poetry,  are  entirely 
addrefs'd  to  this  Senfe,  and  raife  our  Paf- 
fions by  the  Fortunes  of  Characters,  difc 
tin&ly  reprefented   as    morally  good,    or 

If  SezTreatife  I.  Seft.il  Art.i$t  Sefi.iy.  Art,  5. 

S  3  evil  1 


i6z       ^  IN QJJ I RY  concerning 

Sed.  6-  evtt ;   as  might  be  feen  more  fully>  werc 
vl^Y"^  we  to  confider  the  Paffions  feparately. 

Where  we  are  ftudying  to  raife  any 
Ite/ire,  or  Admiration  of  an  Object  really 
beautiful,  we  are  not  content  with  a  bare 
Narration,  but  endeavour,  if  we  can,  to 
prefent    the   Objett  it  felf,    or  the  moft 
lively  Image  of  it.     And  hence  the  Epic 
Toem,  or   Tragedy,    gives  a  vaftly  grea- 
ter Pleafure  than  the  Writings  of  cPhilofo- 
fbers,  tho  both  aim  at  recommending  Vir- 
tue.    The  reprefenting  the  Actions  them- 
felves,  if  the  Reprefentation  be  judicious^ 
natural,  and  lively,  will  make  us  admire 
the  Good,  and  deteft  the  Vitious,  the  In- 
human,   the  Treacherous   and  Cruel,    by 
means  of  our  moral  Senfe,  without  any 
Reflexions  of  the  Toet  to  guide  our  Sen- 
timents.     It  is  for  this  Reafon  that  Ho- 
race has  juftly  made  Knowledge  in  Mo- 
rals fo  neceflary  to  a  good  Toet  : 

Scribendi  re  Be  Sapere  eft  &  princi- 
pium  &  fans*. 

And  again  : 

Qui  didicit  7 atria  quid  debeat,  &  quid 
Amicis, 

*  Hor.  de  Aite  Poet.  v.  30?. 

Quo 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      263 

Quo  fit  amove 'Parens,  quo  Frater  aman-  Se&.  6. 
dus,  &  Hofpes,  ^W; 

Quod  fit  Confiripti,  quod  Judicis  offi- 
cium,  qua 

Partes  in  helium  mijfi  "Ducts  ;  ille  pro- 
fetto 

Reddere  Per  fin  a  ficit  convenient  ia  cui- 
que  f . 

Upon  this  lame  Senfie  is  founded  the  i»*g*n 
Power  of  that  great  Beauty  in  Poetry,  vZ£ffim 
the  Prosopopoeia,  by  which  every  the  Moral 
Ajfetlion  is  made  a  Perfion  ;  every  natural  Se*fe- 
Event,  Caufie,  Objeff,  is  animated  by  mo- 
ral Epithets.  For  we  join  the  Contempla- 
tion of  moral  Circumftances  and  Quality  s, 
along  with  naturalObjetis,  toincreafe  their 
Beauty  or  "Deformity  ;  and  we  affed;  the 
Hearer  in  a  more  lively  manner  with  the 
Affe&ions  defcrib'd,  by  reprefenting  them 
as  Perfins.  Thus  a  fhady  Wood  muft 
have  its  filemn  venerable  Genius,  and  pro- 
per rural  Gods ;  every  clear  Fountain,  its 
fiacre d  chafte  Nymph  ;  and  River,  its  boun- 
tiful God,  with  his  Urn,  and  perhaps  a 
Cornucopia  diffufing  Plenty  and  Fruit- 
fulnefis  along  its  Banks.  The  Day-light  is 
holy,  benign,  and  powerful  to  banifh  the 
pernicious  Spirits  of  the  Night.  The  Morn- 
ing is  a  kind,  officious  Goddefis,  tripping 
over  the  dewy  Mountains,    and  ujhering 

\  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet.  v.  in,  err. 

S  4  ia 


264       An  I  NQU I R  Y  concerning 

Sed\  6.  in  Light  to  Gods  and  Men.  War  is  an  im- 
L/*V\J  petuous,  cruel,  undiflinguifhing  Monjier, 
whom  no  Virtue,  no  Circumftance  of  Com- 
pajflon,  can  move  from  his  bloody  Pur- 
pofes.  The  Steel  is  unrelenting  ;  the  Ar- 
row and  Spear  are  impatient  to  deftroy, 
and  carry  Tteath  on  their  Points.  Our 
modern  Engines  of  War  are  alfo  frightful 
cPerfonages,  counterfeiting  with  their  rude 
Throats  the  Thunder  of  Jove.  The  mo- 
ral Imagery  of  'Death  is  every  where 
known,  viz.  his  Infenfibility  to  Tity,  his 
Inflexibility,  and  tiniverfal  impartial  Em- 
fire.  Fortune  is  inimitably  drawn  by 
Horace  *,  with  all  her  Retinue  and  Vo- 
taries, and  with  her  rigid  fever e  Minifter, 
Neceffity.  The  Qualitys  of  Mind  too  be- 
come Terfons.  Love  becomes  a  Venus, 
or  a  Cupid;  Courage,  or  Conduct,  a 
Mars,  or  a  Pallas  protecting  and  af 
Jifting  the  Hero  ;  before  them  march  Ter- 
ror andDread,  Flight  and  Turfuit,  Shouts ■, 
and  Amazement.  Nay,  the  7nofl  facred 
"Poets  are  often  led  into  this  Imagery,  and 
reprefent  Jujiice  and  Judgment  as  ft 'import- 
ing the  Almighty's  Throne,  and  Mercy 
and  Truth  going  before  his  Face:  They 
ihew  us  Peace  as  fpringing  up  from  the 
Earth,  and  Mercy  looking  down  from 
Heaven. 

*  See  Lib.  i.  Od.  $5. 

Every 


Moral  Good  and  Evi  l.     265 

Sed.  6. 
Every  one  perceives  a  greater  Beauty  ^v^ 
in  this  manner  of  Reprefentation,  this 
Imagery,  this  Conjunction  of  moral  Ideas ; 
than  in  the  fulleft  Narration,  or  the  mod 
lively  natural  Defcription.  When  one  reads 
the  fourth  Book  of  Homer,  and  is  pre- 
paid, from  the  Council  of  the  Gods,  to 
imagine  the  bloody  Sequel,  and  amidfl:  the 
moft  beautiful  Defcription  which  ever  was 
imagin'd  of  /hooting  an  Arrow,  meets  with 
its  moral  Epithet ', 


•yLtksttVctav  £f^'  oJW*W 


•The  Source  of  blackefi  Woes  ; 


he  will  find  himfelf  more  mov'd  by  this  Cir- 
cumftance,  than  by  all  the  Profufion  of  na- 
tural Defcription  which  Man  could  imagine. 

VIII.  History  derives  its  chief  Excel-  Hiftcry. 
lence  from  the  reprefenting  the  Manners  and 
Characters  ;  the  Contemplation  of  which 

in  Nature  being  very  affe&ing,  they  mufl: 
neceffarily  give  Pleafure  when  well  related. 

IX.  It  is  well  known  too,  that  a  Collec-  Painting. 
tion  of  the  beft  Pieces  of  Face-painting  is 

but  a  poor  Entertainment,  when  compar'd 
with  thofe  Pieces  which  reprefent  moral 
Actions,  Tajfions,  and  Characters. 


See  Homer 3  Iliad  4.  v.  117. 

SECT. 


i66       An  I N  Q.U  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sea.  7. 

^y^T^J  — , 

SECT.    VII. 

A  jDedufiion  of  fome  Complex  mo- 
ral Ideas,  viz.  of  Obligation,  and 
Right,  Perfect,  Imperfed,  and  Ex- 
ternal, Alienable,  and  Unaliena- 
ble, from  this  moral  Senfe. 

I.  '  1  1  O  conclude  this  Subjed,  we  may, 
J|  from  what  has  been  faid,  fee  the 
true  Original  of  moral  Ideas,  viz.  This 
moral  Senfe  of  Excellence  in  every  Ap- 
pearance•,  or  Evidence  of  Benevolence. 
It  remains  to  be  explain^,  how  we  acquire 
more  particular  Ideas  of  Virtue  and  Vice, 
abftraciting  from  any  Law,  Human,  or  ©i- 
vine. 

obligation.  I  f  any  one  ask,  Can  we  have  any  Senfe  of 
Obligation,  abftradting  from  the  Laws 
of  a  Superior  ?  We  muft  anfwer  according 
to  the  various  Senfes  of  the  word  Obliga- 
tion. If  by  Obligation  we  underftand  a 
determination,  without  regard  to  our  own 
Inter  eft,  to  approve  Actions,  and  to  per- 
form  them  \  which  'Determination  JJ?all 
alfo  make  us  dijpleas'd  with  our  felves, 
and  uneajy  upon  having  affed  contrary  to 
it ;  in  this  meaning  of  the  word  Obligation, 

there 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       167 

there  is  naturally an  Obligation  upon  all  Men  Se6t.  7. 
to  Benevolence  ;  and  they  are  ftill  under  its  ^v^ 
Influence,  even  when  by  falfe,  or  partial  Opi- 
nions of  the  natural  Tendency  of  their  Ac- 
tions, this  moral  Senfe  leads  them  to  Evil; 
unlefs  by  long  inveterate  Habits  it  be  ex- 
ceedingly weaken'd.  For  it  fcarce  feems  pof- 
fible  wholly  to  extinguifh  it.  Or,  which  is 
to  the  fame  purpofe,  this  internal  Senje, 
and  Injiinit  toward  Benevolence,  will  ei- 
ther influence  our  A6Hons,  or  elfe  make  us 
very  uneafy  and  diflatisfy'd  ;  and  we  fhall 
be  confcious  that  we  are  in  a  bafe  unhappy 
State,  even  without  confidering  any  Law 
whatfbever,  or  any  external  Advantages 
loft,  or  Difadvantages  impending  from  its 
Sanctions.  And  further,  there  are  ftill 
ftch  Indications  given  us  of  what  is  in  the 
whole  benevolent,  and  what  not ;  as  may 
probably  difcover  to  us  the  true  Tendency 
of  every  Adtion,  and  let  us  fee,  fbme  time 
or  other,  the  evil  Tendency  of  what  upon 
a  partial  View  appear'd  benevolent :  or  if 
we  have  no  Friends  fo  faithful  as  to  admo- 
nifli  us,  the  Perfons  injured  will  not  fail  to 
upbraid  us.  So  that  no  Mortal  can  fecure 
to  himfelf  a  perpetual  Serenity,  Satisfa&ion, 
and  Self-approbation,  but  by  a  ferious  In- 
quiry  into  the  Tendency  of  his  A&ions\ 
and  a  perpetual  Study  of  univerfal  Good% 
according  to  the  jufteft  Notions  of  it. 

Bur 


i6S      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

isy^j  B  u  T  if  by  Obligation,  we  underftand  ^ 
Motive  from  Self  inter  eft,  fujfcient  to  de- 
termine all  thofe  who  duly  conjider  it,  and 
fur  file  their  own  Advantage  wifely,  to  a 
certain  Courfe  of  Actions  ;  we  may  have 
a  Senfe  of  fuch  an  Obligation,  by  reflect- 
ing on  this  'Determination  of  our  Nature 
to  approve  Virtue,  to  be  pleas'd  and  happy 
when  we  reflect  upon  our  having  done  vir- 
tuous ABions,  and  to  be  uneafy  when  we 
are  confcious  of  having  adted  otherwife  ; 
and  alfo  by  considering  how  much  Superior 
we  efteem  the  Happinefs  of  Virtue  to  any 
other  Enjoyment  *.  We  may  likewife  have 
a  Senfe  of  this  fort  of  Obligation,  by  con- 
sidering thofe  Reafons  which  prove  a  con- 
stant Coufe  of  benevolent  and  facial  Actions, 
to  be  the  moSt  probable  means  of  promoting 
the  natural  Good  of  every  Individual ;  as 
Cumberland  and  Puffendorf  have 
prov'd  :  And  all  this  without  Relation  to  a 
Law. 

But  further,  if  our  moral  Senfe  be  fup- 
pos'd  exceedingly  weaken'd,  and  the  felfijh 
"Paffions  grown  Strong,  either  thro  fome 
general  Corruption  of  Nature,  or  invete- 
rate Habits  ;  if  our  'Under [landing  be  weak, 
and  we  be  often  in  danger  of  being  hurry'd 
by  our  Taffions  into   precipitate  and  raSh 

*  See  aboye,  Scft*  \l  Art.  1,  2. 

Judg- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       269 

Judgments,  that  malicious  Actions  lhall  Se&.  7. 
promote  our  Advantage  more  than  Bene-  ^^t^j 
Jicence  ;  in  fuch  a  Caie,  if  it  be  inquir'd 
what  is  neceflary  to  engage  Men  to  bene- 
ficent Actions*  or  induce  a  fteady  Senle  of 
an  Obligation  to  ad:  for  the  public k  Good ; 
then,  no  doubt,  "  A  Law  with  Sanctions, 
•c  given  by  a  Juperior  Being*  of  fufficient 
"  Power  to  make  us  happy  or  miferable, 
"  muft  be  neceflary  to  counter-ballance 
M  thole  apparent  Motives  of  Intereji*  to 
*■  calm  our  Tafflons*  and  give  room  for 
"  the  recovery  of  our  moral  Senfe*  or  at 
a  leaft  for  a  juft  View  of  our  Intereji. " 

II.  Now  the  principal  Bufinefs  of  the  m™  far 
moral  Thilofopher  is  to  ihew,  from  folid  Vrtm  Cy 
Reafons,  "•  That  univerfal  Benevolence  ' 
"  tends  to  the  Happinefs  of  the  BenevG- 
**  lent,  either  from  the  Pleafares  of  Re- 
M  flection,  Honour,  natural  Tendency  to 
"  engage  the  good  Offices  of  Men,  upon 
"  whole  Aid  we  muft  depend  for  our  Hap- 
"  pinels  in  this  World  ;  or  from  the  Sanc- 
c<  tions  of  divine  Laws  dilcover'd  to  us 
"  by  the  Conftitution  of  the  Vniverfe  ;" 
that  fo  no  apparent  Views  of  Intereji  may 
counteract  this  natural  Inclination  :  but 
not  to  attempt  proving,  "  That  Prolpedls 
M  of  our  own  Advantage  of  any  kind,  can 
"  raile  in  us  real  Love  to  others."  Let  the 
Obftacles  from  Self-love  be  only  remov'd, 
and  Nature  it  felf  will  incline  us  to  Be- 
3  nevoknce. 


iyo      jln  I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sec3\  7.  nevolence.  Let  the  Mifery  ofexceftive  Sel- 
v^v^  fijhnefs,  and  all  its  Paffions,  be  but  once 
explain'd,  that  fo  Self-love  may  ceafe  to 
counteract  our  natural  'Propenflty  to  Bene- 
volence, and  when  this  noble  Dilpofition 
gets  loole  from  thefe  Bonds  of  Ignorance, 
and  falfe  Views  of  Intereft,  it  fliall  be 
afiifted  even  by  Self-love,  and  grow  ftrong 
enough  to  make  a  noble  virtuous  Cha- 
racter. Then  he  is  to  enquire,  by  Reflec- 
tion upon  human  Affairs,  what  Courfe  of 
Adtion  does  mod  effe&ually  promote  the 
univerfal  Good,  what  univerfal  Rules  or 
Maxims  are  to  be  oblerv'd,  and  in  what 
Circumftances  the  Reafon  of  them  alters, 
fo  as  to  admit  Exceptions  ;  that  fo  our 
good  Inclinations  may  be  directed  by  Rea- 
fon, and  a  juft  Knowledge  of  the  Inter  efts 
of  Mankind.  But  Virtue  it  felf,  or  good 
¥>ifpofitions  of  Mind,  are  not  directly 
taught,  or  produc'd  by  Inftru6lion  ;  they 
muft  be  originally  implanted  in  our  Na- 
ture, by  its  great  Author;  and  after- 
wards ftrengthen'd  and  confirm'd  by  our 
own  Cultivation. 

objeHion.  HI.  We  are  often  told,  "  That  there 
"is  no  need  of  fuppofing  fuch  a  Senfe 
"  of  Morality  given  to  Men,  fince  Re- 
"  flection,  and  InftruEiion  would  recom- 
"  mend  the  fame  A&ions  from  Arguments 
"  of  Self  Inter  eft,  and  engage  us,  from 
"  the  acknowledge  Principle  of  Self-love, 

"  to 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      iyi 

V  to  the  Pradtice  of  them,    without  this  Se<5h  7. 
"  unintelligible  Determination    to   i?6w-  L^V>J 
"  volence,  or  the  0O7//£  Quality  of  a  mo- 
"  ral  Senfe? 

I  t  is  perhaps  true,  that  Reflection  and  *&** 
Reafon  might  lead  us  to   approve  the  fame  %"£'%£ 
Actions  as  advantageous.     But  would  not  flexion. 
the  y^^6»  Reflexion   and  Reafon  likewife, 
generally  recommend  the  fame  Meats  to  us 
which   our  Tafle   reprefents   as   pleafant  ? 
Andfhall  we  thence  conclude  that  we  have 
no  Senfe  of  Tafling  ?  Or  that  fuch  a  Senfe 
is  ufelefs  ?  No  :  The  ufe  is  plain  in  both 
Cafes.     Notwithftanding  the  mighty  Rea- 
fon we  boaft  of  above  other  Animals,  its 
ProcefTes  are  too  flow,   too  full  of  doubt 
and  hefitation,  to  ferve  us  in  every  Exigency, 
cither  for  our  own  Preferv^tion,  without  the 
external  Senfes,    or  to  dired:  our  Actions 
for  the  Good  of  the  Whole,  without  this 
moral  Senfe.     Nor  could  we  be  fo  ftrongly 
determin'd   at   all  times  to    what  is  moll 
conducive  to  either  of  thele  Ends,  without 
thefe  expeditions  Monitors,  and  importu- 
nate  Sollicitors  ;  nor  fo  nobly  rewarded, 
when  we  ad:  vigoroufly  in  puriuit  of  thele 
Ends,  by  the  calm  dull  Reflections  of  Self 
Interefl,  as  by  thofe  delightful  Senfations. 

This  natural  Determination  to  ap- 
prove and  admire,  or  hate  and  diflike  Ac- 
tions,  is  no  doubt  an  occult  Quality.    But 

*  is 


iyz       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  7.  is  it  any  way  more  myfterious  that  the  Idea 
<-^W>  of  an  Adion  fhould  raife  Efteem,  or  Con- 
tempt, than  that  the  motion,  or  tearing  of 
Flelh  fhould  give  cPleafure,  or  Pain  ;  or 
the  Act  of  Volition  fhould  move  Flejh  and 
Bones  ?  In  the  latter  Cafe,  we  have  got 
the  Brain,  and  elaftic  Fibres,  and  animal 
Spirits,  and  elaftic  Fluids,  like  the  Indian's 
Elephant,  and  Tortoife,  to  bear  the  Burden 
of  the  Difficulty  :  but  go  one  ftep  further, 
and  you  find  the  whole  as  difficult  as  at 
firft,  and  equally  a  Myftery  with  this  de- 
termination to  love  and  approve,  or  hate 
and  defpife  Actions  and  Agents,  without 
any  Views  of  Intereft,  as  they  appear  be- 
nevolent, or  the  contrary. 

When  they  offer  it  as  a  Prefumption 
that  there  can  be  no  fiich  Senfe,  antecedent 
to  all  Profped  of  Inter  eft,  "  That  thefe 
"  Adions  for  the  mofl  part  are  really  ad- 
M  vantageous,  one  way  or  other,  to  the 
"  Actor,  the  Approver,  or  Mankind  in 
'*  general,  by  whofe  Happinefs  our  own 
M  State  may  be  fome  way  made  better  ;" 
may  we  not  ask,  fuppofing  the  Deity  in- 
tended to  imprefs  flich  a  Senfe  of  fomething 
a?niable  in  Adions,  (which  is  no  impoflible 
Suppofition)  what  fort  of  Adions  would 
a  good  God  determine  us  to  approve  % 
Muft  we  deny  the  poffibility  of  fach  a 
Determination,"  if  it  did  not  lead  us  to  ad- 
mire Adions  of  no  Advantage  to  Man- 
kind, 


Moral  Good  andEviL.      273 

kind,  or  to  love  Agents  for  their  being  emi-  Sed\  7. 
nent  Trijiers  ?   If  then  the  A&ions  which  v^v>-/ 
a  <ze;//£  and  good  God  muft  determine  us 
to  approve,  if  he  give  us  any  fuch  JV»/£  at 
all,  muft  be  Actions  uffulto  the  Publick, 
this  Advantage  can  never  be  a  Reafbn  a- 
gainft  the  Senfe  it  felf.      After  the  fame 
manner,   we    fhould   deny    all  Revelation 
which  taught    us  good  Senfe,    Humanity, 
Jujlice,  and  a  rational  IVorjhip,  becaufe 
Reafon  and  Intereft  confirm  and  recom- 
mend fuch  Principles,  and  Services  ;  and 
iliould  greedily  embrace  every  Contradic- 
tion, Foppery,  and  Pageantry,  as  a  truly 
divine  Inftitution,  wirhout  any  thing  hu- 
mane, or  ufeful  to  Mankind. 

IV.  The  Writers  upon  oppofite  Schemes,  Moral 
who  deduce  all  Ideas  of  Good  and  Evilffi"^?' 
from  the  private  Advantage  of  the  Affor,  *     *'""' 
or  from  Relation  to  a  Law  and  its  Sanati- 
ons, either  known  from  Reafon,  or  Revela- 
tion, are  perpetually  recurring  to  this  mora/ 
Senfe  which  they  deny  ;  not  only  in  cal- 
ling the  Laws  of  the  Deity  jujf  and 
good,   and  alledging  Jujlice  and  Right  in 
the  Deity  to  govern  us  ;   but  by  ufing 
a  fet  of  Words  which  import  fomething 
different  from   what  they   will  allow   to 
be  their  only  meaning.     Obligation,  with 
them,  is  only  ftch  a  Conftitution,   either 
of  Nature,  or  fome  governing  Power,  as 
makes  it  advantageous  for  the  Agent  to 

T  aft 


274       <An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed:.  7.  aEl  in  a  certain  manner.  Let  this  Defi* 
^/W  nition  be  fubftituted,  wherever  we  meet 
with  the  words,  ought,  jhould,  muft,  in  a 
moral  Senfe,  and  many  of  their  Sentences 
would  feem  very  ftrange  ;  as  that  the  D  eit  y 
muft  ad:  rationally,  muft  not,  or  ought  not 
to  punifh  the  Innocent,  muft  make  the  ftate 
of  the  Virtuous  better  than  that  of  the 
Wicked,  muft  obferve  Promifes  ;  fubftitu- 
ting  the  Definition  of  the  Words,  muft, 
ought,  Jhould,  would  make  theie  Senten- 
ces either  ridiculous,  or  very  difputable. 

V.  But  that  our  firft  Ideas  of  moral 
Good  depend  not  on  Laws,  may  plainly 
appear  from  our  conftant  Inquirys  into  the 
Juftice  of  Laws  themfelves ;  and  that  not 
only  of  human  Laws,  but  of  the  divine. 
What  elfe  can  be  the  meaning  of  that  uni- 
verfal  Opinion,  "  That  the  Laws  of  God 
"  are  juft,  and  holy,  and  goodl"  Hu- 
man Laws  may  be  call'd  good,  becaufe  of 
their  Conformity  to  the  cDivine.  But  to 
call  the  Laws  of  the  fufreme  Deity 
good,  or  holy,  or  juft,  if  all  Goodnefs, 
Holinefs,  and  Juftice  be  conftituted  by 
Laws,  or  the  Will  of  a  Superior  any  way 
reveal'd,  muft  be  an  infignificant  Tautology, 
amounting  to  no  more  than  this,  "  That 
••  God  wills  what  he  wills'' 

It  muft  then  firft  be  luppos'd,  that  there 
is  ibraething  in  Actions  which  is  apprehend- 
ed 


Moral  GoodWEvil       275 

ed  abfolutely  good -,  and  this  is  Benevo-  Sedt.  7. 
Z?«f*%  or  a  Tendency  to  the  publick  na-  ^v*' 
tural  Happinefs  of  rational  Agents  ;  and 
that  our  moral  Senfe  perceives  this  Excel- 
lence :  and  then  we  call  the  Laws  of  the 
Deity  good,  when  we  imagine  that  they 
are  contriv'd  to  promote  the  pub  lick  Good 
in  the  mod  effectual  and  impartial  manner. 
And  the  Deity  is  call' d  good,  in  a  moral 
Senfe,  when  we  apprehend  that  his  whole 
Providence  tends  to  the  univerfal  Happi- 
nefs  of  his  Creatures  ;  whence  we  conclude 
his  Benevolence,  and  'Delight  in  their  Hap- 
pinefs. 

Some  tell  us,  "  That  the  Goodnefs 
"  of  the  divine  Laws,  confifts  in  their: 
"  Conformity  to  fbme  ejfential  Rectitude 
"  of  his  Nature \"  But  they  muft  excufe 
us  from  alTenting  to  this,  till  they  make  us 
underftand  the  meaning  of  this  Metaphor, 
ejfential  Re£litude,  and  till  we  difcern 
whether  any  thing  more  is  meant  by  it  than 
a  perfectly  wife,  uniform,  impartial  Be- 
nevolence. 

Hence  we  may  fee  the  Difference  be- •&#*»* 
tween  Conftraiffi,  and  Obligation,     There  £22^ 
is  indeed  no  Difference  between  Conftraint,  and  obn- 
and  the  fecond  Senfe  of  the  word  Obliga*  zation> 
tion,  viz.  a  Confitution  which  makes  an 
Action  eligible  from  Selflntereft,  if  we 
only  mean  external  Inter  eft,  diftinft  from 
T  %  the 


iy6       An  I N  QU I R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  7.  the  delightful  Confcioufnefs  which  arifes 
^/W  from  the  moral  Senfe.  The  Reader  need 
fcarcely  be  told,  that  by  Conftraint,  we 
do  not  underftand  an  external  Force  moving 
our  Limbs  without  our  Confent,  for  in 
that  Cafe  we  are  not  Agents  at  all ;  but 
that  Conftraint  which  arifes  from  the  threat- 
ning  and  prefenting  fome  Evil,  in  order  to 
make  us  a6t  in  a  certain  manner.  And  yet 
there  feems  a  univerfally  acknowledge  Dif- 
ference between  even  this  fort  of  Coitftraint, 
and  Obligation.  We  never  fay  we  are  obligd 
to  do  an  A&ion  which  we  count  bafe,  but 
we  may  be  conftrain'd  to  it  ;  we  never  fay 
that  the  divine  Laws,  by  their  Sanctions, 
conftrain  us,  but  oblige  us  ;  nor  do  we  call 
Obedience  to  the  Deity  Conftraint,  un- 
lets by  a  Metaphor,  tho  many  own  they 
are  influenc'd  by  fear  of  Punifhments.  And 
yet  fuppofing  an  almighty  evil  Being  fhould 
require,  under  grievous  Penaltys,  Trea- 
chery, Cruelty,  Ingratitude,  we  would  call 
this  Conftraint.  The  difference  is  plain- 
ly this.  When  any  Sanctions  co-operate 
with  our  moral  Sen/e,  in  exciting  us  to 
Actions  which  we  count  morally  good,  we 
fay  we  are  obligd ;  but  when  Sanations 
of  Rewards  or  Punilhments  oppofe  our  mo- 
ral Sen/e,  then  we  fay  we  are  brib'd  or 
conftrain' d.  In  the  former  Cafe  we  call 
the  Lawgiver  good,  as  defigning  the  pub* 
lick  Happinefs  ;  in  the  latter  we  call  him 
evil,  or  unjuft,   for  the  (uppos'd  contrary 

In- 


Moral  Good^Evil.      277 

Intention.    But  were  all  our  Ideas  of  moral  Sedt.  7. 
Good  or  Evil,  deriv'd  folely  from  Opinions  ^^r^ 
of  private  Advantage  or  Lofs  in  Actions, 
I  fee  no  poflible  difference  which  could  be 
made  in  the  meaning  of  thefe  words. 

VI.  Frqm  this  Senfe  too  we  derive  our  Rights. 
Ideas  of  Rights.  Whenever  it  appears 
to  us,  that  a  Faculty  of  doing,  demand- 
ing^ or  fojfejjing  any  things  univerfally  al- 
lowed in  certain  Circumjiances^  would  in 
the  whole  tend  to  the  general  Good,  we  fay 
that  any  Perfon  in  fiich  Circumftances,  has 
a  Right  to  do^  poffefs^  or  demand  that 
Thing.  And  according  as  this  Tendency 
to  the  public k  Good  is  greater  or  lefs^  the 
Right  is  greater  or  lefs. 

The  Rights  call'd  perfect,  are  of  fuch  Pe,rf^ 
neceffity  to  the  public k  Good,  that  the  uni- Rtg  * 
verfal  Violation  of  them  would  make  hu- 
man Life  intolerable  ;  and  it  actually  makes 
thofe  miferable,  whofe  Rights  are  thus  vi- 
olated. On  the  contrary,  to  fulfil  thefe 
Rights  in  every  Inftance,  tends  to  the 
publick  Good,  either  direttly,  or  by  pro- 
moting the  innocent  Advantage  of  a  Tart. 
Hence  it  plainly  follows,  "  That  to  allow 
"  a  violent  Defence,  or  Profecution  of  fiich 
"  Rights,  before  Civil  Government  be  con- 
"  ftituted,  cannot  in  any  particular  Cafe  be 
"  more  detrimental  to  the  Tublick,  than 
"  the  Violation  of  them  with  Impunity." 
T  3  Asd 


ry%        An  I  N  QJJ  I RY  concerning 

Sed:.  7.  And  as  to  the  general  Confequences,  the 
iyY^J  univerfal  Ufe  of  Force  in  a  State  of  Na- 
ture, in  purfuance  of  ferfeEt  Rights,  feems 
exceedingly  advantageous  to  the  Whole,  by 
making  every  one  dread  any  Attempts  a- 
gainfl  the  perfect  Rights  of  others. 

fjgU  of        This  is  the  moral  Effect  which  attends 
war,  and  proper  Injury,  or  a  Violation  of  the  per- 
Sf  ~     fia  Rights  °f  others,  viz.    A  Right  to 
PFar,  and  all  Violence  which  is  neceffary  to 
oblige  the  Injurious  to  repair  the  Damage, 
and   give   Security   againft    fuch   Offences 
for  the  iuture,     This  is  the  fble  Foundation 
of  the  Rights  of  punijhing  Criminals,  and 
of  violent  Trofecutions  of  our  Rights,  in  a 
State  of  Nature.     And   thefe  Rights,  be- 
longing originally  to  the  Perfbns  injur'd,  or 
their  voluntary,  or  invited  Afliftants,  ac- 
cording to  the  Judgment  of  indifferent  Arbi- 
trators, in  a  State  of *  Nature,  being  by  the 
Confent  of  the  Terfojis  injur'd,  transferr'd 
to  the  Magiftrate  in  a  Civil  State,  are  the 
true  Foundation  of  his  Right  of  Puniihment. 
Inftances  of 'perfect  Rights  are  thofe  to  our 
Lives  ;  to  the  Fruits  of  our  Labours  ;  to 
demand  Performance  of  Contrails  upon  va-r 
luable  Confiderations,  from  Men  capable  or 
performing  them  ;  to  dire  El  our  own  Adi- 
eus either  for  publick,  or  innocent  private 
Good,  before  we  have  liibmitted  them  to 
the  Direction  of  others  in  any  meaiure  1 
and  many  others  of  like  nature. 

I  m  P  e  R? 


Moral  Good  and  Evi  l.      279 

Se<2.  7, 
Imperfect  Rights  are  fitch  as,  when  ^v^ 
univerfally  violated,  would  not  necejfarily  ^1^ 
make  Men  miferable.  Thefe  Rights  tend 
to  the  improvement  and  increafe  of  pofiti ]ve 
Good  in  any  Society,  but  are  not  abfolutely 
necefTary  to  prevent  univerfal  Mifery.  The 
Violation  of  them,  only  difappoints  Men 
of  the  Happinefs  expected  from  the  Hu- 
manity or  Gratitude  of  others  ;  but  does 
not  deprive  Men  of  any  Good  which  they 
had  before.  From  this  Defcription  it  ap- 
pear*, "  That  a  violent  Profecution  of  fuch 
V  Rights,  would  generally  occafion  greater 
**  Evil  than  the  Violation  of  them."  Be- 
fides,  the  allowing  of  Force  in  fuch  Cafes, 
would  deprive  Men  of  the  greateft  Plea- 
fure  in  Actions  of  Kindnefs,  Humanity \ 
Gratitude  ;  which  would  ceafe  to  appear 
amiable,  when  Men  could  be  conftrain'd 
to  perform  them.  Inftances  of  irnperfett 
Rights  are  thofe  which  the  Toor  have  to 
the  Charity  of  the  Wealthy  ;  which  all 
Men  have  to  Offices  of  no  trouble  or  ex- 
pence  to  the  Performer  ;  which  Benefac- 
tors have  to  returns  of  Gratitude,  and  fuch 
like. 

The  Violation  of  imperfect  Rights,  only 
argues  a  Man  to  have  fuch  weak  Benevo- 
lence, as  not  to  ftudy  advancing  the  pofitive 
Good  of  others,  when  in  the  leaft  oppo- 
site to  his  own:  but  the  Violation  of  per- 
T  4  fetf 


2 So       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Secft.  j.fect  Rights,  argues  the  injurious  Terfbn  to 
l/^f\)  hzpoftitively  evil  ox  cruel;  or  at  leaft  Co 
immoderately  felfijh,    as  to  be  indifferent 
about  the  pofitive  Mifery  and  Ruin  of 
others,  when  he  imagines  he  can  find  his 
Inter  eft  in  it.     In  violating  the  former,  we 
fhew  a  weak  Defire  of  public k  Happinefs, 
which  every  fmall  View  of  private  Inte- 
reft   over-ballances  ;    but  in  violating  the 
latter,  we  fhew  our  felves  fo  entirely  neg- 
ligent of  the  Mifery  of  others,  that  Views 
of  increafing  our  own  Good,  overcome  all 
our  Companion   toward    their   Sufferings. 
Now  as  the  abience  of  Good,  is  more  eafily 
born  than  the  prefence  of  Mifery  ;  lb  our 
good  JVifhes  toward  the  pofitive  Good  of 
others,  are  weaker  than  our  Compajfwn  to- 
ward their  Mifery.     He  then  who  violates 
imperfect  Rights,  fliews  that  his  Self-love 
overcomes  only  the  Defire  of  -pofitive  Good 
to  others  ;    but  he  who  violates  perfect 
Rights,  betrays  luch  zfelftjh  Defire  of  ad- 
vancing his  own  pofitive  Good,  as  over- 
comes all  Compajfion  toward  the  Mifery  of 
others. 

External  Beside  thefe  two  forts  of  Rights,  there 
*$**•  is  a  third  call'd  External ;  as  when  the  do- 
ing, pojfejfing,  or  demanding  of  any  thing 
is  really  detrimental  to  the  ^Publick  in  any 
particular  Inftance,  as  being  contrary  to 
the  imperfect  Right  of  another  ;  but  yet 
the  unlverfally  denying  Men  this  Faculty 

of 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     281 

of  doing,  pojfejfing,  or  demanding  that  Se<3\  7. 
Thing,  or  of  ufing  Force  in  purfuance  of[^rY>^ 
it,  would  do  more  mifchief  than  all  the 
Evils  to  be  fear'd  from  the  Ufe  of  this 
Faculty.  And  hence  it  appears,  "  That 
"  there  can  be  no  Right  to  ufe  Force  in 
"  oppofition  even  to  external  Rights,  fince 
"  it  tends  to  the  univerfal  Good  to  allow 
"  Force  in  purfaance  of  them." 

Civil  Society s  fubftitute  Attions  in 
Law,  inftead  of  the  Force  allow 'd  in  the 
State  of  Mature. 

Instances  of  external  Rights  are 
thefe  ;  that  of  a  wealthy  Mifer  to  recal  his 
Loan  from  the  moil  induftrious  poor  Trades- 
man at  any  time ;  that  of  demanding  the 
Performance  of  a  Covenant  too  burdenfom 
on  one  fide  ;  the  Right  of  a  wealthy  Heir 
to  refufe  Payment  of  any  Debts  which 
were  contra&ed  by  him  under  Age,  with- 
out Fraud  in  the  Lender  ;  the  Right  of 
taking  advantage  of  a  pojitive  Law,  con- 
trary to  what  was  Equity  antecedent  to 
that  Law  ;  as  when  a  regifter'd  "Deed 
takes  place  of  one  not  regifter'd,  altho 
prior  to  it,  and  known  to  be  fo  before  the 
fecond  Contract 

Now  whereas  no  AEtion,  demand,  oxv/kit 
'Pojfejjlon,  can  at  once  be  either  necefTary  to  ^***£ 
xhzpiblick  Good,   or  conducive  to  it,  and  oppofnu 

at 


I  %  z        An  I N  Q.U  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sedt.  7.  at  the  fame  time  its  contrary  be  either  ne- 
^V^  ceflary  or  conducive  to  the  fame  end  ;  it 
follows,  "  That  there  can  be  no  Oppofi- 
"  tion  of  p  erf  eft  Rights  among  themf elves, 
ic  of  imperfett  among  themfelves,  or  be- 
H  tween  perfect  and  imperfect  Rights" 
But  it  may  often  tend  to  the  public 'k  Good, 
to  allow  a  Right  of  doing,  poffeffmg,  or 
demanding,  and  of  ufing  Force  in  purfuance 
of  it,  while  perhaps  it  would  have  been 
more  humane  and  kind  in  any  Perfon  to  have 
a&ed  otherwife,  and  not  have  claim'd  his 
Right.  But  yet  a  violent  Oppofition  to 
thefe  Rights,  would  have  been  vaftly  more 
pernicious  than  all  the  Inhumanity  in  the 
ufe  of  them.  And  therefore,  tho  external 
Rights  cannot  be  oppofite  among  them- 
felves ;  yet  they  may  be  oppofite  to  im- 
perfect  Rights  ;  but  imperfect  Rights \ 
tho  violated,  give  no  Right  to  Force. 
Hence  it  appears,  "  That  there  can  never 
"  be  a  Right  to  Force  on  both  Sides,  or  a 
"  juji   War  on  both  Sides  at   the  lame 


"  time." 


nights  VII.  There  is  another  important  D^ 

tTum!'   ference  of  Rights,    according  as  they  are 
Enable,   Alienable,  or  'Unalienable.     To  determine 
what  Rights  are  alienable,   and  what  no^ 
vve  muft  take  thefe  two  Marks ; 

iji.  If  the  Alienation  be  within  our  na- 
tural Power,  fo  that  it  be  poflible  for  us  in 

Fait 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       283 

Fa&  to  transfer  our  Right ;  and  if  it  be  fo,  Sed.  7. 
then,  ^vv 

zdly.  It  mufk  appear,  that  to  transfer 
fuch  Rights  may  ferve  fome  valuable  Pur- 
pole. 

B  y  the  fir  ft  Mark  it  appears,  "  That  the 
"  Right  of  private  Judgment,  or  of  our 
"  inward  Sentiments \  is  unalienable  f  fince 
we  cannot  command  ourfelves  to  think  what 
either  we  our  felves,  or  any  other  Perfon 
pleafes.  So  are  alfo  our  internal  Ajfec- 
tions,  which  neceflarily  arife  according  to 
our  Opinions  of  their  Obje&s.  By  they£- 
cond  Mark  it  appears,  "  That  our  Right  of 
"  Jerving  God,  in  the  manner  which  we 
u  think  acceptable,  is  not  alienable  ;"  be- 
caufe  it  can  never  ferve  any  valuable  purpofe, 
to  make  Men  worfhip  him  in  a  way  which 
feems  to  them  difpleafing  to  him.  The 
fame  way,  a  dire  El  Right  over  our  Lives 
or  Limbs,  is  not  alienable  to  any  Perfon  ; 
fo  that  he  might  at  Pleafure  put  us  to  death, 
or  maim  us.  We  have  indeed  a  Right  to 
hazard  our  Lives  in  any  good  A6tion  which 
is  of  importance  to  the  Tublick ;  and  it  may 
often  ferve  a  mod  valuable  end,  to  fiibjedfc 
the  dire&ion  of  fuch  perilous  Adions  to  the 
Prudence  of  others  in  purluing  a  ptblick 
Good;  as  Soldiers  do  to  their  General, 
or  to  a  Council  of  TVar  :  and  fo  far  this 
Right  is  alienable.     Thefe  may  ferve  as 


284      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  7.  Inftances  to  fhew  the  Ufe  of  the  two  Marks 
v^v"^  of  alienable  Rights,  which  muft  both  con- 
cur to  make  them  fb,  and  will  explain  the 
manner  of  applying  them  in  other  Cafes. 

The  Toun-      VIII.  T  h  a  t  we  may  fee  the  Foundation 

dproZf     °f  ^°me    °f   the    1110re  tmt0rtant  Rights   Of 

Mankind,  let  us  obferve,  that  probably 
nine  Tenths,  at  leaft,  of  the  things  which 
are  ufeful  to  Mankind,  are  owing  to  their 
Labour  and  Induftry  ;  and  confequently, 
when  once  Men  become  fo  numerous,  that 
the  natural  TroduCt  of  the  Earth  is  not 
lufficient  for  their  Support,  or  Eafe,  or  in- 
nocent Pleafiire  ;  a  neceffity  arifes,  for  the 
fupport  of  the  increafing  Syftem,  that  fuch 
a  Tenour  of  Conduct  be  obferv'd,  as  fliall 
moft  effedually  promote  Induftry ;  and  that 
Men  abftain  from  all  Actions  which  would 
have  the  contrary  effedt.  It  is  well  known, 
that  general  Benevolence  alone,  is  not  a 
Motive  ftrong  enough  to  Induftry,  to  bear 
Labour  and  Toil,  and  many  other  Diffi- 
ciiltys  which  we  are  averfe  to  from  Self- 
love.  For  the  ftrengthning  therefore  our 
Motives  to  Induftry,  we  have  the  ftrongeft 
Attra&ions  of  Blood,  of  Friendjhip,  of 
Gratitude,  and  the  additional  Motives  of 
Honour,  and  even  of  external  Interejl. 
Self-love  is  really  as  necefTary  to  the 
Good  of  the  Whole,  as  Benevolence  ;  as 
that  Attraction  which  caufes  the  Cohefion 
of  the  Parts,  is  as  necefTary  to  the  regular 

State 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       285 

State  of  the  Whole,  as  Gravitation.    With-  SecSt.  7. 

out  thefe  additional  Motives,  Self-love  would  LXV^ 

generally  oppofe  the  Motions  of  Benevo- 

lence,  and  concur  with  Malice,  or  influence 

us  to  the  fame  Actions  which  Malice  would 

'*  That   Tenour  of   Action   then,    which 

"  would  take  away  the  ftronger  Ties  of 

"  Benevolence,   or  the  additional  Motives 

"  of   Honour  and  Advantage,  from  our 

"  Minds,  and  fo  hinder  us  from  purfuing 

"  indufirioujly    that   Courfe    which  really 

"  increafts    the  Good  of  the  Whole,    is 

"  evil\  and  we  are  oblig'd  to  fliun  it* 

First  then,  the  depriving  any  Perlbn  of 
the  Fruits  of  his  own  innocent  Labour,  takes 
away  all  Motives  to  Induftry  from  Self- 
love,  or  the  nearer  Ties  ;  and  leaves  us  no 
other  Motive  than  general  Benevolence  : 
nay,  it  expofes  the  Induflrious  as  a  conftant 
Prey  to  the  Slothful,  and  fets  Self-love 
againft  Indufiry.  This  is  the  Ground  of 
our  Right  of  "Dominion  and  Troperty  in 
the  Fruits  of  our  Labours  ;  without  which 
Rights  we  could  fcarce  hope  for  any  In- 
dustry, or  any  thing  beyond  the  Product  of 
uncultivated  Nature.  Indujlry  will  be  con- 
fin'd  to  our  prefent  NecelTitys,  and  ceale 
when  they  are  provided  for ;  at  leaft  it  will 
only  continue  from  the  weak  Motive  of 
general  Benevolence,  if  we  are  not  allow'd 
to  (tore  up  beyond  prefent  Neceflity,  and 
to  difpofe  of  what  is  above  our  Neceffitys, 

z  cither 


i%6      An   I N QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Se6t  7.  either  in  Barter  for  other  kinds  of  Necef- 
^V^  farys,  or  for  the  Service  of  our  Friends  or 
Familys.  And  hence  appears  the  Right 
which  Men  have  to  lay  up  for  the  future, 
the  Goods  which  will  not  be  fpoil'd  by  it ; 
of  alienating  them  in  Trade  ;  of  Donatio 
on  to  Friends,  Children,  Relations  :  other- 
wife  we  deprive  Indufiry  of  all  the  Mo- 
tives of  Self-love,  Friendfloi]?,  Gratitude, 
and  natural  Ajfettion.  The  fame  Foun- 
dation there  is  for  the  Right  of  Difpofi- 
tion  by  Teftament.  The  Trefumpion  of 
this  Difpofition,  is  the  Ground  of  the 
Right  of  Succeflion  to  the  Intefiate. 

The  external  Right  of  the  Mifer  to 
his  ufelels  Hoards,  is  founded  alfo  on  this, 
that  allowing  Perfons  by  Violence,  or 
without  Confent  of  the  Acquirer,  to  take 
the  Ufe  of  his  Acquifitions,  would  difcou- 
rage  Indufiry,  and  take  away  all  the  Plea- 
lures  of  Generofity,  Honour,  Charity,  which 
ceafe  when  Men  can  be  forc'd  to  thefe  Ac- 
tions. Befides,  there  is  no  determining  in 
many  Cafes,  who  is  a  Mifer,  and  who  is 
not. 

Rigfoof  Marriage  muft  be  lb  conftituted  as 
Manias  to  afcertain  the  Offspring  ;  otherwife  we 
take  away  from  the  Males  one  of  the  ftrong# 
eft  Motives  to  fublick  Good,  viz.  natural 
Ajfettion  ;  and  difcourage  Indufiry,  as  has 
been  Ihewn  above. 

*  The 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      287 

Sea.  7. 

The  Labour  of  each  Man  cannot  for-  ^v^ 
nifh  him  with  all  NecefTarys,  tho  it  may  Comm'r«- 
furnifti  him  with  a  needlds  Plenty  of  one 
fort  :  Hence  the  Right  of  Commerce,  and 
alienating  our  Goods ;  and  alfb  the  Rights 
from  Contracts  and  Tromifes,  either  to  the 
Goods  acquired  by  others,  or  to  their  La- 
bours. 

The  great  Advantages  which  accrue  to  Right  of 
Mankind    from   unprejudiced  Arbitrators,  civil  Go- 
impower'd  to  decide  the  Controverts  which  ™rnmnt' 
ordinarily  arife,  thro  the  partiality  of  Self- 
love,  among  Neighbours  ;  as  alio  from  pru- 
dent Dire&ors,    who  lhould  not  only  in- 
ftrud:  the  Multitude  in  the  befl:  Methods 
of  promoting  the  public k  Good,    and  of 
defending    themfelves   againfl:    mutual    or 
foreign  Injurys  ;   but  alio   be   arm'd  with 
Force  fufficient  to  make  their  Decrees  or 
Orders  effectual  at  home,  and  the  Society 
formidable  abroad :    thele    Advantages,    I 
fay,  fufficiently  lhew  the  Right  Men  have 
to  conftitute  Civil  Government,    and  to 
fiibjed:  their  alienable  Rights  to  the  Dif- 
pofal  of  their  Governours,  under  fuch  Li- 
mitations  as  their  Prudence  fuggefts.     And 
as  far  as  the  People  have  fubje&ed  their 
Rights,  fo  far  their  Governours  have  an 
external  Right  at  leaft,  to  difpofe  of  them, 
as  their  Prudence  fhall  dired:,  for  attaining 
the  Ends  of  their  Inftitution ;  and  no  further. 

IX.  These 


288       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sea.  7. 

<^V\j      IX.  These    Inftances    may  fhew  how 

fo7!iZpL  our  m0ral  Senfe>  hY  a  little  Reflexion  upon 
ring  the  the  tendencys  of  Actions,  may  adjuft  the 
degrees  of  Rights  0f  Mankind.  Let  us  now  apply 
vlcVi/lc,  rhe  general  Canon  laid  down  above  *,  for 
tions.        comparing  the  Degrees  of  Virtue  and  Vice 

in  A&ions,  in  a  few  Corollarys  befides  that 

one  already  dedue'd  %. 

From  a-  i.  The  Difapp ointment,  in  whole  or  in 
Mfty.  part,  of  any  Attempt,  Good  or  Evil,  if  it 
be  occafion'd  only  by  external  Force,  or  any 
unforefeen  Accident,  does  not  vary  the 
moral  Good,  or  Evil ;  for  as  in  good  At- 
tempts, the  Moment  of  Good,  or  [M]  is 
diminifh'd,  or  vanifhes  in  fuch  a  cafe,  fb 
does  the  Ability,  or  [A]  likewife  :  The 
Quotient  then  may  ftill  be  the  fame.  This 
holds  equally  in  evil  Attempts.  So  that 
Adtions  are  not  to  be  judg'd  good  or  evil  by 
the  Events,  any  further  than  they  might 
have  been  foreleen  by  the  Agent  in  evil 
Attempts  ;  or  were  a&ually  intended,  If 
they  were  good,  in  good  Actions  ;  for  then 
only  they  argue  either  Love  or  Hatred  in 
the  Agent. 

imtrefi.         2.  Secular  Rewards  annex'd  to  Vir- 
tue, and  a&ually  influencing  the  Agent  fur- 


*  See  Seel,  ii'u  Art.  11,  I  a. 
%  See  SeSUuu  Art.  15.  Par.  3, 


ther 


Moral  Good  and  Evi  l.       289 

ther  than  his  Benevolence  would,  diminifli  Seft.  7. 
the  moral  Good  as  far  as  they  were  need-  ^"V"^ 
iary  to  move  the  Agent  to  the  Adion,  or 
to  make  him  do  more  Good  than  other  wife 
he  would  have  done  ;  for  by  increafing  the 
Intereft,  or  [I]  pofitive,  to  be  iiibtradted, 
they  diminifli  the  Benevolence.     But  addi- 
tional Interefts  which  were  not  necefTary 
to  have  mov'd  the  Agent,  fuch  as  the  Re- 
wards of  a  good  Being  for  Actions  which 
he  would  have  undertaken  without  a  Re- 
ward, do  not  diminifli  the  Virtue.     In  this 
however  no  Mortal  is  capable  of  judging 
another.     Nor  do  the  Prolpedts  of  grateful 
Returns  for  Benefits  which  we  would  have 
conferr'd  gratuitoufly,   diminifli  the  Gene- 
rofity.     This  Corollary  may  be  apply'd  to 
the  Rewards  of  a  future  State,  if  any  Per- 
fbn  conceives  them  diftindt  from  the  Plea- 
furesof  Virtue  itfelf :  If  they  be  not  con- 
ceiv'd   as   fbmething    diftindt    from   thofe 
Pleafares,    then  the  very  Defire  of  them 
is  a  ftrong  Evidence  of  a  virtuous  'Dijpo- 
Jltion. 

3.  External  Advantage  exciting  us 
to  Actions  of  evil  Tendency  to  others,  if 
without  this  Profpedl  of  Advantage  we 
would  not  have  undertaken  them,  diminifhes 
the  Evil  of  the  A&ion  ;  fuch  as  the  Prof- 
pe&s  of  great  Rewards,  of  avoiding  Tor- 
tares,  or  even  the  uneafy  Sollicitations  of 
violent  felfijh    Taj/ions.      This   is    com- 

U  monly 


2  9  o        An  I  N  QJJ  I RY  concerning 

Sedt  7.  monly  call'd  the  greatnefs  of  Temptation. 
^v^  The  reaion  of  this  is  the  fame  with  that  in 

ft I 

the  former  Cafe,  fince  H=—r-#    We  may 

here  alfo  remember  again,  that  we  are 
more  uneafy  upon  the  prefence  of  Tain, 
than  upon  the  abfence  of  Good ;  and  hence 
Torture  is  a  more  extenuating  Circumftance 
than  Bribes,  engaging  us  to  Evil,  becaufe 
[I]  is  greater, 

Detriment,  4.  The  furmounting  the  uneafy  Solici- 
tations of  the  felfijb  Tajfions,  increafes  the 
Virtue  of  a  benevolent  ACtion,  and  much 
more  worldly  LofTes,  Toil,  &c.  for  now 
the  Inter  eft  becomes  negative  ;  the  Sub- 
traction of  which  increafes  the  Quantity, 

5.  A  malicious  Ad:ion  is  made  the 
more  odious  by  all  its  forefeen  cDifadvan- 
tages  to  the  Agent  *  for  the  fame  reafon  : 
particularly, 

Knowledge     6.  T he  Knowledge  of  &  Law  prohibit- 
of  Laws,  jng  an  evii  Action,   increafes  the  Evil  by 
fins  Ac-  increafing  the  negative  Intereft  to  be  fiib- 
tions.       traCted  ;  for  then  the  ill-natured  Inclination 
muft  be  fo  ftrong  as  to  fiirmount  all  the  Mo- 
tives of  Self-love,    to  avoid  the  Penaltys, 
and  all  the  Motives  of  Gratitude  toward 
the  Law-giver.     This  is  commonly  call'd 
(inning  againft  Confcience. 

7.  Offices 


Mora  l  Good  and  Evil.      291 

Sedt.  7, 

7.  Offices  of  no   Toil  or  Ex-pence,  ^~v~^ 
have    little  Virtue  generally,    becaufe  the 
Ability  is  very  great,    and  there  is  no  con- 
trary Inter ejt  furmounted. 

8.  B  u  t  the  refufing  of  them  may  be  very 
vitious,  as  it  argues  an  abfence  of  good  Af- 
fection, and  often  produces  a  great  enough 
Moment  of  natural  Evil.     And, 


9.  In  general,  the  fulfilling  the  fterfetl  De^e  °. 
Rights  of  others  has  little  Virtue  in  it ;  for  Rlght' 
thereby  no  Moment  of  Good  is  product 
more  than  there  was  before  ;  and  the  Lite-* 
reft  engaging  to  the  Adtion  is  very  great, 
even  the  avoiding  all  the  Evils  of  War  in 
a  State  of  Nature. 

10.  But  the  violating  j> erf, ell;,  or  even 
external  Rights,  is  always  exceedingly 
evil,  either  in  the  immediate,  or  more 
remote  Confluences  of  the  Action  ;  and 
the  felfifo  Motives  furmounted  by  this 
vitious  Inclination,  are  the  fame  with 
thofe  in  the  former  Cafe. 

11.  The  trueft  Matter  of  Praife  are  thofe 
Adions  or  Offices  which  others  claim  from 
us  by  an  imfierfecJ  Right ;  and  generally, 
the  ftronger  their  Right  is,  there  is  the 
lefs  Virtue  in  fulfilling  it,  but  the  greater 
Vice  in  violating  it. 

U  2  Lemma. 


4 


jyi        An  I N  QJJ I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed  7. 

lx-v~vj  Lemma.  The  ftronger  Ties  of  Bene- 
strength  ^olence,  in  equal  Ability  s,  muft  produce  a 
greater  Moment  of  Good,  in  equally  good 
Characters,  than  the  weaker  Ties.  Thus, 
natural  Affection,  Gratitude,  Friendjhip, 
have  greater  Effects  than  general  Benevo- 
lence.    Hence, 

12.  In  equal  Moments  of  Good produc'd 
by  two  Agent  f,  when  one  ad:s  from  gene- 
ral Benevolence,  and  the  other  from  a  near- 
er  Tie  ;  there  is  greater  Virtue  in  the  Agent, 
who  produces  equal  Good  from  the  weaker 
Attachment,  and  lefs  Virtue,  where  there 
is  the  ftronger  Attachment,  which  yet  pro- 
duces no  more. 

13.  B  u  t  the  OmiiTion  of  the  good  Offices 
of  the  ftronger  Ties,  or  A&ions  contrary  to 
them,  have  greater  Vice  in  them,  than  the 
like  Q millions  or  A&ions  contrary  to  the 
weaker  Ties  ;  fince  our  Selfifhnefs  or  Ma- 
lice muft  appear  the  greater,  by  the  ftrength 
of  the  contrary  Attachment  which  it  iur- 
mounts.  Thus,  in  co-operating  with  Grati- 
tude, natural  Affection,  or  Friendjhip,  we 
evidence  lefs  Virtue  in  any  given  Moment 
of  Good  produc'd,  than  in  equally  impor- 
tant AcSions  of  general  Benevolence  :  But 
Ingratitude  to  a  Benefactor,  Negligence 
of  the  Interefts  of  a  Friend,  or  Relation  ; 
or  Returns  of  evil  Offices,  are  vaftly  more 

odious, 


Moral  Good^JEvil.      29$ 

odious,    than    equal  Negligence,    or    evilSzdi.  7. 
Offices  toward  Strangers.  l/rVNo 

14.  When  we  cannot  at  once  follow  what  of- 
two  different  Inclinations  of  Benevolence,  %%£/' 
we  are  to  prefer  gratifying  the  ftronger  In-  when  there 
clination  ;    according  to  the  wife  Order  of  aPPears 
Nature,    who  has  conftituted  thefe  Ax-fi^J^ 
tachments.     Thus,    we  are   rather    to  be" 
Grateful   than    Liberal,    rather    ferve    a 
Friend,  or  Kinfman,  than  a  Stranger   of 

only  equal  Virtue,    when  we  cannot  do 
both. 

15.  Or  more  generally,  fince  there  can 
be  no  Right,  Claim,  or  Obligation  to  Im- 
jpojjibilitys  ;  when  two  Actions  to  be  done 
by  any  Agent,  would  both  tend  to  the 
good  of  Mankind,  but  they  cannot  be 
perform'd  both  at  once  ;  that  which  oc- 
cafions  moft  Good  is  to  be  done,  if  the 
Omiilion  of  the  other  occafions  no  pre- 
pollent  Evil.  If  the  omiffion  of  either, 
will  occafion  lome  new  natural  Evil, 
that  is  to  be  omitted,  whole  Omiflion  will 
occafion  the  lead  Evil.  Thus,  if  two 
Perfons  of  unequal  Dignity  be  in  Danger, 
wre  are  to  relieve  the  more  valuable, 
when  we  cannot  relieve  both.  Ingrati- 
tude, as  it  evidences  a  worfe  Temper 
than  negleit  of  Beneficence  ;  lb  it  raiies 
worfe  Sentiments  in  the  Benefactor,  and 
greater   Diffidence,    and    Sulpicion  of  his 

U  3  Fellow- 


294       ^n  INQUIRY  concerning 

Sed.  7.  Fellow-Creatures,  than  an  OmuTion  of  an 
L/V^  Ad  of  Beneficence :    we  ought  therefore 
to   be    Grateful,    rather  than  Beneficent* 
when  we  cannot  (in  any  particular  Cafe) 
evidence    both    Difpofitions.     If  omitting 
of  one  Ad  ion  will  occafion  new  fofitive 
Evil,   or  continuance  in  a  State  of  Pain* 
whereas  the  ©million   of   another  would 
only  prevent  foine  new  fofitive  Good;  fince 
a  State  of  Tain  is  a  greater  Evil,  than  the 
abfence  of  Good,  we  are  to  follow  Com- 
PaJJJon,  rather  than  Kindnefs  ;  and  relieve 
the  Difireffed*    rather   than   increafe    the 
Pieafures  of  the  Eafy  ;  when  we  cannot  do 
both  at  once,  and  other  Circumftances  of 
the  Qhjeds  are  equal.     In  fuch  Cafes,   we 
fliould  not  fuppofe  contrary  Obligations*  or 
Dntys  ;  the  more  important  Office  is  our 
frefent  'Duty*  and  the  Omiffion  of  the  left 
important  inconfifrent  Office  at  prefcnt,  is 
no  moral  Evil, 

X.  From  Art.  vii.  it  follows,  "  That 
"  all  human  Tower*  or  Authority*  muft 
"  confift  in  a  Right  transferred  to  any 
*'  Rerfon  or  Council*  to  difpofe  of  the  a li- 
"  enable  Rights  of  others  ;  and  that  con- 
"  fequently,  there  can  be  no  Government 
"  fo  ablolute,  as  to  have  even  an  external 
"  Right  to  do  or  command  every  thing." 
For  wherever  any  Invafion  is  made  upon 
unalienable  Rights*  there  muft  arife  either 
^perfect*  or  external  Right  to  Refifiance. 

The 


nal  of  Go- 
vernment. 


Moral  Good^Evil.       295 

The  only  Reftraints  of  a  moral  Kind  upon  Seft.  7. 
Subjects  in  fiich  cafes,  are,  when  they  fore-  v>~^v>^ 
lee  that,  thro  their  want  of  Force,  they 
ihall  probably  by  Refiftance  occafion  sweat- 
er Evils  to  the  Publick,  than  thofe  they 
attempt  to  remove  ;  or  when  they  find 
that  Governours,  in  the  main  very  ufeful 
to  the  Publick,  have  by  fome  unadvifed 
Pa/lion,  done  an  Injury  too  fmall  to  over- 
ballance  the  Advantages  of  their  Adminif- 
tration,  or  the  Evils  which  Refinance  would 
in  all  likelihood  occafion ;  efpecially  when 
the  Injury  is  of  a  private  Nature,  and  not 
likely  to  be  made  a  Precedent  to  the  ruin 
of  others.  Unalienable  Rights  are  ejfen- 
tial  Limitations  in  all  Governments. 

But  by  abfolute  Government,  either  in  Ahfol»** 
Prince,  or  Council,  or  in  both  jointly,  we  C 
underftand  a  Right  to  difpofe  of  the  natural 
Force,  and  Goods  of  a  whole  People,  as 
far  as  they  are  naturally  alienable,  accor- 
ding to  the  Prudence  of  the  Prince,  Coun- 
cil, or  of  both  jointly,  for  the  publick  Good 
of  the  State,  or  whole  People  ;  without 
any  Refervation  as  to  the  Quantity  of  the 
Goods,  manner  of  Levying,  or  the  pro- 
portion  of  the  Labours  of  the  Subject, 
which  they  Jhall  demand.  But  in  all  States 
this  tacit  Truji  is  prefappos'd,  "  that  the 
"  Power  conferr'd  fhall  be  employ 'd  ac- 
"  cording  to  the  belt  Judgment  of  the  Ru- 
M  iers  for  the  publick  Good."  So  that 
U  4  when- 


ment. 


tnent. 


296       An  INQUIRY  concerning 

SecT:.  7.  whenever  the  Governours  openly  profefs 
^"Y^^  a  Defign  of  deftroying  the  State,  or  ad:  in 
inch  a  manner  as  will  neceffarily  do  it ; 
the  ejfential  Trufl,  iiippos'd  in  all  con- 
veyance of  Civil  Tower,  is  violated,  and 
the  Grant  thereby  made  void. 

Limited  A  Prince,  or  Council,  or  both  jointly, 
co^cm-  niay  De  varioufly  Limited  ;  either  when 
the  Confetti  of  the  one  may  be  necejfary 
to  the  validity  of  the  Acts  of  the  other  ; 
or  when,  in  the  very  Conflitittion  of  this 
Jupreme  Tower,  certain  A  fairs  are  ex- 
firefly  exempted  from  the  JurifdiElion  of 
the  Trince,  or  Council,  or  both  jointly  :  as 
when  feveral  independent  States  uniting, 
form  a  general  Council,  from  whofe  Cog- 
nizance they  exprefly  referve  certain  Pri- 
vileges, in  the  very  Formation  of  this 
Council  ;  or  when  in  the  very  Conftitu- 
tion  of  any  State,  a  certain  Method  of 
Election  of  the  Perfon  of  the  Prince,  or 
of  the  Members  of  the  fupreme  Council 
is  determined,  and  the  Intention  of  their 
AfTembling  declared.  In  all  4uch  cafes,  it  is 
not  in  the  Power  of  fuch  Prince,  Coun- 
cil, or  both  jointly,  to  alter  the  very 
Form  of  Government,  or  to  take  away 
that  Right  which  the  People  have  to  be 
govern'd  in  fuch  a  manner,  by  a  Prince, 
or  Council  thus  elected,  without  the  uni- 
verfal  Confent  of  the  very  People  who 
have  fubje&ed  themfelves  to  this  Form  of 

Govern- 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.     297 

Government.  So  that  there  may  be  a  Sedt  7. 
very  regular  State^  where  there  is  no  '^v^ 
univerfal  abfolutc  Power,  lodg'd  either  in 
one  Perfbn,  or  Council,  or  in  any  other 
AfTembly  befide  that  of  the  whole  People 
aflbciated  into  that  State.  To  fay,  that  upon 
a  Change  attempted  in  the  very  Form  of  the 
Government,  by  the  fupreme  "Tower,  the 
People  have  no  Remedy  according  to  the 
Conftitution  itfelf,  will  not  prove  that  the 
fupreme  Tower  has  fitch  a  Right ;  ttnlefs 
we  confound  all  Ideas  of  Right  with  thofe 
of  external  Force.  The  only  Remedy  in- 
deed in  that  Cafe,  is  an  univerfal  Infurrec- 
tion  againft  fuch  perfidious  Trufiees. 

Despotick  Power,  is  that  which  Ter-  TheNataft 
fons  injur* d  may  acquire  over  thofe  Cri-  °^de^°nck 
initials,  whofe  Lives,  confidently  with  the 
public  k  Safety,    they  may  prolong,  that  by 
their  Labours  they  may  repair  the  'Da- 
mages they  have  done  ;  or  over  thofe  who 
ft  and  obliged  to  a  greater  Value,  than  all 
their  Goods   and  Labours  can  poffibly  a- 
mount  to.      This  Power  itfelf,  is  limited  to 
the  Goods  and  Labours  only  of  the  Crimi- 
nals or  Debtors  ;    and  includes  no  Right 
to  Tortures,   Troftitution,  or  any  Rights 
of  the  Governed  which  are  naturally  Una- 
lienable ;  or  to  any  thing  which  is  not  of 
ibme  Moment  toward  Repair  of  Damage, 
Tayment  of  Debt,  or  Security  againft  fu- 
ture Offences.     The  Chara&eriftick  of  de- 

fpotick 


298       An   I N  QU I  R  Y  concerning 

Sz&.y.fpotick  Tower,  is  this,  "  that  it  is  folely 
v-^v^^  "  intended  for  the  good  of  the  Gover- 
"  nours,  without  any  tacit  Truji  of  con- 
"  faking  the  good  of  the  Governed. "  De- 
fpotick  Government,  inthisSenfe,  is  direct- 
ly inconfiftent  with  the  Notion  of  Civil 
Government. 

From  the  Idea  of  Right,  as  above  ex- 
plain'd,  we  muft  necefiarily  conclude,  "  that 
"  there  can  be  no  Right,  ox.  Limitation  of 
■'  Right,  inconfiftent  with,  or  oppofite  to 
"  the  greateft  publick  Good. "  And  there- 
fore in  Cafes  of  extreme  Necejfity,  when 
the  State  cannot  otherwife  be  preferv'd  from 
Ruin,  it  muft  certainly  be  Juji  and  Good 
in  limited  Governours,  or  in  any  other 
Perfons  who  can  do  it,  to  ufe  the  Force  of 
the  State  for  its  own  prefer vation,  beyond 
the  Limits  fix'd  by  the  Conftitution,  in 
fome  tranfitory  Acts,  which  are  not  to  be 
made  Precedents.  And  on  the  other  hand, 
when  an  equal  Necejfity  to  avoid  Ruin  re- 
quires it,  the  Subje&s  may  juftly  relume 
the  Powers  ordinarily  lodg'd  in  their  Go- 
vernours, or  may  counteract  them.  This 
Privilege  of  flagrant  Necejfity,  we  all  al- 
low in  defence  of  the  moft  per fedt  private 
Rights  :  And  if  piblick  Rights  are  of 
more  extenfive  Importance,  fo  are  alfb///£- 
lick  Necejfitys.  Thefe  NecefTitys  muft  be 
very  grievous  and  flagrant,  otherwife  they 
can  never  over-ballance  the  Evils  of  vio- 
lating 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.      299 

lating  a  tolerable  Conftitution,  by  an  arbi-  Se6t.  7. 
trary  a£l  of  Tower,  on  the  one  hand  ;  ~^Y^J 
or  by  an  Infurre&ion,    or  Civil  War,    on 
the  other.      No   Perlbn,   or  State   can  be 
happy,   where    they    do    not   think   their 
important    Rights    are    fecur'd    from    the 
Cruelty,    Avarice,  Ambition,    or  Caprice 
of  their  Governours.    Nor  can  any  Magif- 
tracy  be  fafe,  or  effectual  for  the  ends  of 
its    Inftitution,    where  there  are   frequent 
Terrors  of  InfurreEiions.     Whatever  tem- 
porary Atis  therefore  may  be  allow'd  in 
extraordinary    Cafes  ;    whatever    may    be 
lawful  in  the  tranfitory  Act  of  a  bold  Le- 
giflator,    who    without    previous  Confent 
fliould  refcue  a  flavifh  Nation,    and  place 
their  Affairs  fo  in  the  Hands  of  a  Terfon, 
or  Council,    eleEied,    or  limited  by  them- 
felves,    that  they   fhould  foon  have  Con- 
fidence in  their  own  Safety,    and   in  the 
Wifdom  of  the  Adminiftration  ;  yet,   as  to 
the  fixed  State  which  fliould  ordinarily  ob- 
tain in  all  Communitys,    fince  no  AJfumer 
of  Government,  can  fo  demonftrate  his  fii- 
perior  Wifdom  or  Goodnefs  to  the  fatisfac- 
tion  and  fecurity  of  the  Governed,  as  is  ne- 
ceffary  to  their  Happinefs  ;  thismuft  follow, 
"  That  except  when  Men,  for  their  own 
"  Inter  eft,  or  out  of  public  k  Love,  have  by 
"  Confent  fubje&ed  their  A&ions,  or  their 
"  Goods  within  certain  Limits  to  the  Di£ 
•*  pofal  of  others  ;   no  Mortal  can  have 
"  a  Right  from  his  fuperior  JVifdom,   or 

"  Good- 


3  oo      An  INQUIRY  concerning 

Se6i.  7.  "  Goodnefs^  cr  any  other  Quality,  to  give 
Laws  to  others  without  their  Confent^ 
"  exprefs  or  tacit  ;  or  to  difpofe  of  the 
"  Fruits  of  their  Labours,  or  of  any  o- 
'*  ther  Right  whatfoever.  "  And  therefore 
fuperior  Wifdom^  or  Goodnefs,  gives  no 
Right  to  Men  to  govern  others. 


Divine  Go-      But  then  with  relation  to  the  Deity 

1  eminent 
founded  on 


fuppos'd  omnifcient  and  benevolent,  and  fe- 


ivifdom  cure  from  Indigence,  the  ordinary  Caufe  of 
and  Good-  Injurys  toward  others  ;  it  muft  be  amiable 
*'**'  in  fuch  a  Being,  to  aflume  the  Government 
of  weak,  inconftant  Creatures,  often  mif- 
led  by  Selfijhnefs  ;  and  to  give  them  Laws. 
To  thefe  Laws  every  Mortal  ftiould  fub- 
tnit  from  publick  Love,  as  being  contriv'd 
for  the  Good  of  the  Whole,  and  for  the^raz- 
teft  private  Good  confident  with  it  ;  and 
every  one  may  be  lure,  that  he  fhall  be 
better  directed  how  to  attain  thefe  Ends  by 
the  "Divine  Laws,  than  by  his  own  grea- 
teft  Prudence  and  Circumfpe&ion.  Hence 
we  imagine,  "  That  a  good  and  wife  God 
"  muft  have  zfierfetf  Right  to  govern  the 
"  Vniverfe  ;  and  that  all  Mortals  are  ob- 
"  lig'd  to  univerfal  Obedience  " 

D-tvim  The  Jujiice  of  the  Deity  is  only  a 

Juftue      Conception  of  his  univerfal  impartial  Be- 

^hat'       nevolence,  as  it  fliall  influence  him,  if  he 

gives  any  Laws,  to  attemper  them  to  the 

univerfal  Good,  and  inforce  them  with  the 

3  molt 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.       30* 

moft  efle&ual   San&ions  of  Rewards  andSedt.  7, 

Tunijhments.  ^v^ 

XI.  Some  imagine  that  the  Property  creation 
the  Creator  has  in  all  his  Works,  muft  be  »^*  of 
the  true  Foundation  of  his  Right  to  go-  God's  Do* 
vern.  Among  Men  indeed,  we  find  it  ne-  nMm. 
cefTary  lor  the  publick  Good,  than  none 
ihould  arbitrarily  difpofe  of  the  Goods  ac- 
quir'd  by  the  Labour  of  another,  which 
we  call  his  'Property  ;  and  hence  we  ima- 
gine that  Creation  is  the  only  Foundation 
of  God's  ^Dominion,  But  if  the  Reafon  * 
of  eftablifhing  the  Rights  of  Property  does 
not  hold  againft  a  perfeEily  wife  and  be- 
nevolent Being,  I  fee  no  Reafon  why  Tro- 
perty  fliould  be  neceflary  to  his  ^Dominion. 
Now  the  Reafon  does  not  hold  :  For  an 
infinitely  wife  and  good  Being,  could  never 
employ  his  aflumed  Authority  to  counter > 
ait  the  univerfal  Good,  The  tie  of  Grati- 
tude is  ftronger  indeed  than  bare  Benevo- 
lence ;  and  therefore  fuppofing  two  equally 
wife  and  good  Beings,  the  one  our  Creator, 
and  the  other  not,  we  ihould  think  our 
felves  more  oblig'd  to  obey  our  Creator. 
But  luppofing  our  Creator  malicious,  and  a 
good  Being  condefcending  to  relcue  us,  or 
govern  us  better,  with  fufficieDt  Power  to 
accomplifli  his  kind  Intentions ;  his  Right 
to  govern  would  be  perfectly  good.      But 

*  See  Mt.  10,  Par.  6,  of  this  UU\on. 

this 


302       An  I N  Q.U  I  R  Y  concerning 

Sed.  7.  this  is  rather  matter  of  curious  Speculation 

^v^  than  Ufe  ;  fince  both  Titles  of  Benevolence 

and  ^Property  concur  in  the  one  only  true 

Deity,  as  far  as  we  can  know,  join'd  with 

infinite  Wifdom  and  Tower, 

our  Moral      XII.  If  it  be  here  enquir'd,  "  Could  not 
senfetbe    <t    ^    Deity  have  given  us  a  different  or 

Effete  of  .  z)  M 

the  Divine  "  contrary  determination  of  Mind ,  viz. 

Goodnefs.  a  t0  approve  Adions  upon  another  Foun- 
"  dation  than  Benevolence  V  It  is  certain, 
there  is  nothing  in  this  fiirpaffing  the  natu- 
ral Power  of  the  Deity.  But  as  in  the  firft 
Treatife  *,  we  refolv'd  the  Conftitution  of 
our  prefent  Senfe  of  Beauty  into  the  divine 
Goodnefs,  Co  with  much  more  obvious  Rea- 
fon  may  we  afcribe  the  prefent  Conftitu- 
tion of  our  moral  Senfe  to  his  Goodnefs. 
For  if  the  Deity  be  really  benevolent \  or 
delights  in  the  Happinefs  of  others,  he 
could  not  rationally  ad:  otherwife,  or  give 
us  a  moral  Senfe  upon  another  Foundation, 
without  counterading  his  own  benevolent 
Intentions.  For,  even  upon  the  Suppofition 
of  a  contrary  Senfe^  every  rational  Being 
mud  ftill  have  been  follicitous  in  fome  de- 
gree about  his  own  external  Happinels  :  Re- 
flection on  the  Circumftances  of  Mankind 
in  this  World  would  have  fuggefted,  that 
univerfal  Benevolence  and  a  focial  Temper \ 
or  a  certain  Courfe  of  external  Adions, 


*  Sett.  viii.  Art.z.  Prop.  5. 

would 


Moral  Good  and  Evil.*      303 

would  moft  effectually  promote  the  exter-  Se6t.  7. 
nal  Good  of  every  one,  according  to  the  O^V^J 
Reafbnings  of  Cumberland  and  Puf- 
fendorf  ;  while  at  the  fame  time  this  per- 
*verted  Senfe  of  Morality  would  have  made 
us  uneafy  in  fuch  a  Courfe,  and  inclin'd  us 
to  the  quite  contrary,  viz.  Barbarity,  Cru- 
elty, and  Fraud ;  and  univerfal  War,  ac- 
cording to  Mr.  Ho bbs,  would  really  have 
been  our  natural  State  ;  Co  that  in  every 
A<5Hon  we  muft  have  been  diftradted  by  two 
contrary  Principles,  and  perpetually  refe- 
rable, and  diflatisfy'd  when  we  follow'd  the 
Directions  of  either. 

XIII.  It  has  often  been  taken  for  granted  whau* 
in  thefe  Tapers,  "  That  the  Deit  y  is  mo-  th!SJT'- 
'*  rally  good ;     tho  the  Realonmg  is  not  at  mon  of  the 
all  built  upon  this  Suppofition.     If  we  en-  divine 
quire  into  the  Reafon  of  the  great  Agree- G 
ment  of  Mankind  in  this  Opinion,  we  Jhall 
perhaps  find  no  demonftrative  Arguments  a 
priori,  from  the  Idea  of  an  Independent 
Being,  to  prove  his  Goodnefs.    But  there 
is  abundant  Probability,    deduced  from  the 
whole  Frame  of  Nature,  which  feems,  as 
far  as  we  know,  plainly  contriv'd  for  the 
Good  of  the  Whole  ;  and  the  cafiial  Evils 
feem  the  necefTary  Concomitants  of  lome 
Mechanifin  defign'd  for   vaftly   prepollent 
Good.     Nay,   this  very  moral  Senfe,  im- 
planted in  rational  Agents,   to  delight  in, 
and  admire  whatever  Actions  flow  from  a 
3  Study 


304  An  INQUIRY,  &t. 

Sect.  7.  Study  of  the  Good  of  others,  is  one  of  the1 
l/~V\J  ftrongeft  Evidences  of  Goodnefs  in  the  A  u- 
thor  of  Nature, 

But  thefe  Reflections  are  no  way  fb  uni- 
verfal  as  the  Opinion,  nor  are  they  often  in- 
culcated by  any  one.     What  then  more  pro- 
bably leads  Mankind  into  that  Opinion,  is 
this.     The  obvious  Frame  of  the  World 
gives  us  Ideas   of  boundlefs   Wifdom  and 
''Power  in  its  A  ut  h  o  r.     Such  a  Being  we 
cannot  conceive  indigent,    and  muft  con- 
elude  happy,  and  in  the  be  ft  State  poflible, 
fince  he  can  ftill  gratify  himfelf.     The  heft 
State  of  rational  Agents,   and  their  great- 
eft  and  moll  worthy  Happinefs,    we  are 
necefTarily  led  to  imagine  muft  confift  in 
univerfal    efficacious     Benevolence  :    and 
hence  we  conclude  the  Deity  benevolent 
in  the  moft  univerfal  impartial  manner. 
Nor  can  we  well  imagine  what  elfe  deferves 
the  Name  of  Terfeffion  but  Benevolence, 
and  thofe  Capacitys  or  Abilitys  which  are 
neceffary  to    make    it   effectual-,  fuch   as 
Wifdom,  and  Tower  :  at  leaft  we  can  have 
no  other  valuable  Conception  of  it, 


FINIS. 


V>  ■  A: 


% 


m 


' 


■ 


I 


