HH 

^^H       00 

jBi    g— CO 

91 1 — (D 

1 

^Pl^^^^^^^l 

H 

<'i 

^^^^^^^^^^^1 

^^K^^M 

'  ?flBi^^^^Hi^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^l 

||jB|||^ 

H^^^^^H 

^"^^^^^^^^^^^1 

Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2008  witii  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/cliaracteristicso02sliafuoft 


SHAFTESBURY'S 
CHARACTERISTICS 


CHARACTERISTICS 


OF 


Men,  Manners,  Opinions, 
Times,  etc. 

By  the  Right  Honourable 
ANTHONY  EARL  OF  SHAFTESBURY 


EDITED,  WITH  AN  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES,  BY 

JOHN   M.   ROBERTSON 


IN  TWO  VOLUMES 

\ 


VOL.  II  n 

V 


//^° 


A-'^ 


London 
GRANT   RICHARDS 

1900 


B. 


">. 


I    ^   OX) 


CONTENTS 


TREATISE   V 

The  Moralists,  A  Philosopmical  Rhapsody 


Paht      I. 

—  Section 

I 

>; 

II 

}} 

III 

Paht     11. 

—  Section 

I 

)) 

II 

)} 

III 

}> 

IV 

55 

V 

Paht   III. 

-Section 

I 

55 

II 
III 

;3 
10 
20 

26 
40 
47 
60 
84 

95 
124 
145 


TREATISE   VI 

Miscellaneous  Reflections  on  the  Preceding  Treatises,  etc. 

MISCELLANY  I 

CHAPTER    I 

Of  the  nature,  rise,  and  estal)lisliment  of  Miscellanies— Tlie  subject 

of  the.se  which  follow — Intention  of  the  writer    .  .  .     157 

V 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


CHAPTER   II 

PAGE 

Of  contro\'ersial  writings  :  answers  :  replies — Pctlemic  divinity,  or 
the  writing  Church  niilitant^I'hilosopliers,  and  l)ear  garden — 
Authors  paired  and  niatclied — The  matclnnakers — Football — A 
dialogue  between  our  author  and  his  bookseller  .  .  .     IGl 


CHAPTER   III 

Of  the  letter  concerning  Enthusiasm — Foreign  critics — Of  letters  in 
general,  and  of  the  epistolary  style — Addresses  to  great  men — 
Authors  and  horsemanship — The  modern  amble — Further  ex- 
planation of  the  miscellaneous  manner     ....      1G6 


MISCELLANY  II 


CHAPTER    I 

Review  of  Enthusiasm — Its  defence,  praise — Use  in  business  as  well 
as  pleasure — Operation  by  fear.  Love — Modifications  of  en- 
thusiasm ;  magnanimity;  heroic  virtue;  honour;  public  zeal; 
religion;  superstition;  pei-secution ;  martyrdom — Energy  of  the 
ecstatic  devotion  in  the  teiuler  sex-  Account  of  ancient  priest- 
hood— Religious  war — Reference  to  a  succeeding  chapter  .     173 


CHAPTER   II 

Judgment  of  divines  and  grave  authors  concerning  Enthusiasm — 
Reflections  upon  scepticism — A  sceptic  Christian — Judgment 
of  the  inspired  concerning  their  own  inspirations — Knowledge 
aiul  l)elief — History  of  religion  resumed — Zeal  offensive  aiul 
defensive — A  Church  in  danger — Persecution — Policy  of  tlie 
Church  of  Rome  .......      19G 

vi 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER   III 

PAGE 

Of  the  force  of  humour  in  religion — Support  of  our  autlior's  ;irgu- 
ment  in  his  essay  on  the  freedom  of  wit  and  raillery — Zeal  dis- 
cussed. Spiritual  surgeons;  executioners;  carvers  —  Original 
of  human  sacriiice — Exhilaration  of  religion — Various  aspects 
from  outward  causes         .  .  .  .  .  ,215 


MISCELLANY  III 

CHAPTER    I 

Further  remarks  on  the  author  of  the  treatises — His  order  and  design 
— His  remarks  on  the  succession  of  wit^  and  progress  of  letters, 
and  philosoj)hy  —  Of  words,  relations,  affections  —  Countrymen 
and  country — Old  Englaiul — Patriots  of  the  soil — Virtuosi  and 
philosophers— A  taste       ......     2.38 


CHAPTER    n 

Explanation  of  a  taste  continued — Ridiculers  of  it — Their  wit  and 
sincerity — Application  of  the  taste  to  affairs  of  Cio\erinnent  and 
politics  —  Imaginary  characters  in  the  State — Young  nohility 
and  gentry — Pursuit  of  heauty — Preparation  for  philosophy        .     250 


MISCELLANY  IV 


CHAPTER    I 

Connection  and  union  of  the  suhject-treatises — Philos(t])hy  in  form- 
Metaphysics —  Egoity— Identity — Moral  footing — Proof  and  dis- 
cipline of  the  fancies — Settlement  of  opinion — Anatomy  of  the 
mind — A  fable       .......      27o 

vii 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


CHAPTER   II 

PAGE 

Passage  from  terra  hicoynita  to  the  visible  world — Mistress-ship  of 
nature — Animal  confederacy,  deg-rees,  subordination — Master 
animal  man — Privilege  of  his  birth — Serious  countenance  of  the 
author       ........     286 


MISCELLANY  V 


CHAPTER   I 

Ceremonial  adjusted  between  author  and  reader — Affectation  of  pre- 
cedency in  the  former — \'arious  claims  to  inspii-ation — Bards, 
prophets,  Sibj'lline  Scripture — ^Vritten  oracles,  in  verse  and 
prose — Common  interest  of  ancient  letters  and  Christianity — 
State  of  wit,  elegance,  and  correctness — Poetic  truth — Prepara- 
tion for  criticism  on  our  author  in  his  concluding  treatise  296 

CHAPTER    II 

Generation  and  succession  of  our  national  and  modern  wit — Manners 
of  the  proprietors — Corporation  and  joint  stock — Statute  against 
criticism — A  coffee-house  committee — Mr.  Rays — Other  Bays' 
in  divinity — Censure  of  our  author's  dialogue  piece,  and  of  the 
manner  of  dialogue  writing  used  by  reverend  wits  .  .     .32-4 

CHAPTER    III 

Of  extent  or  latitude  of  thought — Free-thinkers — Tlieir  cause  and 
character— Dishonesty,  a  half-thought — Short-thinking,  cause  of 
vice  and  bigotry — Agreementof  slavery  and  superstition — Liberty, 
civil,  moral,  spiritual — Free-thinking  divines — Representatives 
incognito — Ambassadors  from  the  moon — Effectual  determination 
of  Christian  controversy  and  religious  belief        .  .  341 


Vlll 


TREATISE    V 

THE    MORALISTS, 

A  Philosophical  Rhapsody 

BEING 

A  Recital  of  certain  Conversations  on  Natural 
and  IMoral  Subjects 


Inter  silvas  Academi  quaerere  verum. 

Hor.  Ep.  II.  ii. 


Published  in  the  year  MDCCIX. 


VOL.  II 


THE   MORALISTS,  '7 - 

A  PHILOSOPHICAL  RHAPSODY 

PART   I 
Section  I 

Phllocles  to  Palemon 

What  mortal,  if  he  had  never  chanced  to  hear  your  character, 
Palemon,  could  imagine  that  a  genius  fitted  for  the  greatest 
affairs,  and  formed  amidst  courts  and  camps,  should  have  so 
violent  a  turn  towards  philosophy  and  the  schools  ?  AVho  is 
there  could  possibly  believe  that  one  of  your  rank  and  credit 
in  the  fashionable  world  should  be  so  thoroughly  conversant 
in  the  learned  one,  and  deeply  interested  in  the  affairs  of  a 
people  so  disagreeable  to  the  generality  of  mankind  and  humour 
of  the  age  ? 

I  believe,  truly,  you  are  the  only  well-bred  man  who  would 
have  taken  the  fancy  to  talk  philosophy  in  such  a  circle  of  good 
company  as  we  had  round  us  yesterday,  when  we  were  in  your 
coach  together,  in  the  Park.  How  you  could  reconcile  the 
objects  there  to  such  subjects  as  these  was  unaccountable.  I 
could  only  conclude,  that  either  you  had  an  extravagant  passion 
for  philosophy,  to  quit  so  many  charms  for  it,  or  that  some  of 
those  tender  charms  had  an  extravagant  effect,  which  sent  you 
to  philosophy  for  relief. 

In  either  case  I  pitied  you ;  thinking  it  a  milder  fate  to 
be,  as  I  truly  was  for  my  own  part,  a  more  indifferent  lover. 

3 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

'Twas  better,  I  told  you,  to  admire  beauty  and  wisdom  a  little 
more  moderately.  'Twas  better,  I  maintained,  to  engage  so 
cautiously  as  to  be  sure  of  coming  off  Avith  a  whole  heart,  and 
a  fancy  as  strong  as  ever  towards  all  the  pretty  entertainments 
and  diversions  of  the  world.  For  these,  methought,  were  things 
one  would  not  willingly  part  with  for  a  fine  romantic  passion 
of  one  of  those  gentlemen  whom  they  called  virtuosi. 

The  name  I  took  to  belong  in  common  to  your  lover  and 
philosopher ;  no  matter  what  the  object  was,  whether  poetry, 
music,  philosophy,  or  the  fair.  All  who  were  enamoured  any- 
way were  in  the  same  condition.  You  might  perceive  it,  I 
told  you,  by  their  looks,  their  admiration,  their  profound 
thoughtfulness,  their  waking  ever  and  anon  as  out  of  a  dream, 
their  talking  still  of  one  thing,  and  scarce  minding  what  they 
said  on  any  other  subject — sad  indications  ! 

But  all  this  warning  served  not  to  deter  you.  For  you, 
Palemon,  are  one  of  the  adventurous,  whom  danger  rather 
animates  than  discourages.  And  now  nothing  less  will  satisfy 
you  than  to  have  our  philosophical  adventures  recorded.  All 
must  be  laid  before  you  and  summed  in  one  comj)lete  account ; 
to  remain,  it  seems,  as  a  monument  of  that  unseasonable  con- 
versation so  opposite  to  the  reigning  genius  of  gallantry  and 
pleasure. 

I  must  own,  indeed,  'tis  become  fashionable  in  our  nation 
to  talk  politics  in  every  company,  and  mix  the  discourses  of 
State  affairs  with  those  of  pleasure  and  entertainment.     How- 
ever, 'tis  certain  we  approve  of  no  such  freedom  in  Jllli^QS-Qj^hy^ 
Nor  do  weJook__uj3on_politK^^  pi*ovince,  or^injhe 

least  related  to  her.     So  much  have  we  moderns  degraded  Ijer,' 


j    least  related  to  her.     So  much  hav 
\y  /     and  stripped  TieiM^T  her  chief  rights. 


"ou  must  allow  meTTalemon,  thus  to  bemoan  philosophy, 

since  you  have  forced  me  to  engage  with  her  at  a  time  when 

her  credit  runs  so  low.     She  is  no  longer  active  in  the  world^ 

'"-^^    nor_can_haixyy5^  wth  any   advantage,  be    brought   upon    the 

public  stage.     We  have  immured  her,  poor  lady,  in  colleges 


THE   MORALISTS 

and  cells^^  and  have  set  her  servilely  to  such  works  as  those  in 
the  mines.  Empirics  and  pedantic  sophists  are  her  chief  pnpils. 
The  school -syllogism  and  the  elixir  are  the  choicest  of  her 
products.  So  far  is  she  from  producing  statesmen,  as  of  old, 
that  hardly  any  man  of  note  in  the  public  cares  to  own  the 
feast  obTigation  ~to~Iier.  If  some  few  maintain  their  ac- 
quaintance, and  come  now  and  then  to  her  recesses,  'tis  as  the 
disciple  of  quality  came  to  his  lord  and  master,  "  secretly,  and 
by  night." 

But  as  low  as  philosophy  is  reduced,  if  morals  be  allowed 
belonging  to  her,  politics  must  undeniably  be  hers.  For  to 
understand  the  manners  and  constitutions  of  men  in  common, 
'tis  necessary  to  study  man  in  particular,  and  know  the  creature 
as  he  is  in  himself,  before  we  consider  him  in  company,  as  he 
is  interested  in  the  State,  or  joined  to  any  city  or  community. 

Nothino'  is  more  familiar  than  to  reason  concerning  man  in  his 

^1        . ,  ri — . __ ^  .      o 

confederate  state  and  national  relation,  as  he  stands  engaged 
to   this  or    that    society,   by   birth    or  naturalisation ;    yet  to 
consider  him  as  a  citizen  or  commoner  of  the  world,  to  trace     \   L     — 
his  pedigree  a  step  highei',  and   vitnv  his  eiul  and  fonslitution      '  ^^- — 
in   Nature   itself,   must    pass,   it    seems,    for  some   intricateZxS, 
over-refined  speculation. 

It   may  be  properly  alleged  perhaps,  as  a  reason  for  this 
general  shyness  in  moral  inquiries,  that  the  people  to  whom  it 
has  principally  belonged  to  handle  these  subjects  have  done  it 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  put  the  better  sort  out  of  countenance 
with   the    undertaking.       The   appropriating   this    concern    to 
mere  scholastics „has  brought  their  fashion   and   air   into  the 
very  subject.     There  are   formal   set-places  where,  we  reckon, 
there  is  enouoli  said  and  taught  on  the  head  of  these  graver 
subjects.     We  can  give  no  quarter  to  anything  like  it  in  good       j^u 
company.       The    least    mention    of    such    matters   gives   us   a         i 
disgust,  and  puts  us  out  of  humour.     If  learning  comes  across   '  ^ 
us,  we  count  it  pedantry;  if  morality,  'tis  preaching. 

One  nuist  own  this,  however,  as  a  real  disadvantage  of  our 

5 


■U 


A^lK^ 


(^ 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

modern  conversations,  that  by  such  a  scrupulous  nicety  they 
lose  those  masculine  hel})s  of  learning  and  sound  reason.  Even 
the  fair  sex,  in  whose  favour  we  pretend  to  make  this  con- 
descension, may  with  reason  despise  us  for  it,  and  laugh  at  us 
for  aiming  at  their  peculiar  softness.  ''Tis  no  compliment  to 
them  to  affect  their  manners  and  be  effeminate.  ^Qm*  sense, 
language,  and _style^_as  well  as  our  voice  and  person,  should 
have  something  of  that  male-feature  and  natural  roughness 
by  wliicli  our  sex  is  distrnguisheTT  And  whatever  politeness 
we  may  pretend  to,  'tis  more  a  disfigurement  than  any  real 
refinement  of  discourse  to  render  it  thus  delicate. 

No  work  of  wit  can  be  esteemed  perfect  without  that 
strength  and  boldness  of  hand  which  gives  it  body  and  pro- 
portions. A  good  piece,  the  painters  sa}',  must  have  good 
muscling  as  well  as  colouring  and  drapery.  And  surely  no 
writing  or  discourse  of  any  great  moment  can  seem  other  than 
enervated  when  neither  strong  reason,  nor  antiquity,  nor 
the  records  of  things,  nor  the  natural  history  of  man,  nor 
anything  which  can  be  called  knowledge,  dares  accompany  it, 
except  ])erhaps  in  some  ridiculous  habit,  which  may  give  it  an 
air  of  play  and  dalliance. 

This  brings  to  my  mind  a  reason  I  have  often  sought  for, 
why  we  moderns  who  abound  so  much  in  treatises  and  essays 
are  so  sparing  in  the  way  of  dialogue,^  which  heretofore  was 
found  the  politest  and  best  way  of  managing  even  the  graver 
subjects.  The  truth  is,  'twould  be  an  abominable  falsehood 
and  belying  of  the  age  to  put  so  much  good  sejQse  together 
in  any  one  conversation  as  might  make  it  hold  out  steadily 
and  with  plain  coherence  for  an  hour's  time,  till  any  one  subject 
had  been  rationally  examined.- 

To  lay  colours,  to  draw,  or  describe,  against  the  appearance 
of  nature  and  truth,  is  a  liberty  neither  permitted  the  painter 

^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  i.  §  •'5 ;  Miftc.  v.  ch.  ii. 

2  [Compare  Swift's  Polite  C'onver.sation ,  and  Hints  towards  (di  Essnif  on 
Conversation. ^^ 

6 


THE   MORALISTS 

nor  the  poet.  Much  less  can  the  philosopher  have  such  a 
privilege,  especially  in  his  own  case.  If  he  represents  his 
philosophy  as  making  any  figure  in  conversation,  if  he  triumphs 
in  the  debate,  and  gives  his  own  wisdoin__the^j^aivtoge  qw^ 
that  of  the  world/~he  may  be  liable  to  sound  raillery,  and 
possibly  be  made  a  fable  of. 

'Tis  said  of  the  lion,  that  being  in  civil  conference  with 
the  man,  he  wisely  refused  to  yield  the  superiority  of  strength 
to  him,  when  instead  of  fact  the  man  produced  only  certain 
figures  and  representations  of  human  victories  over  the  lion- 
kind.  These  master-pieces  of  art  the  beast  discovered  to  be 
wholly  of  human  forgery;  and  from  these  he  had  good  right 
to  appeal.  Indeed  had  he  ever  in  his  life  been  Avitness  to  any 
such  combats  as  the  man  represented  to  him  in  the  way  of  art, 
possibly  the  example  might  have  moved  him.  But  old  statues 
of  a  Hercules,  a  Theseus,  or  other  beast-subduers,  could  have 
little  power  over  him,  whilst  he  neither  saw  nor  felt  any  such  "^ 
living  antagonist  capable  to  dispute  the  field  with  him. 

We  need  not  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  sort  of  moral 
painting,  by  way  of  dialogue,  is  so  much  out  of  fashion,  and 
that  we  see  no  more  of  these  philosophical  portraitures  nowa- 
days. For  where  are  the  originals  ?  Or  what  though  you, 
Palemon,  or  I,  by  chance,  have  lighted  on  such  a  one,  and 
pleased  ourselves  with  the  life  ?  Can  you  imagine  it  should 
make  a  good  picture  ? 

You  know,  too,  that  in  this  academic  philosophy  I  am  to 
present  you  with,  there  is  a  certain  way  of  questioning  and  , 
doubting,  which  no  way  suits  the  genius  of  our  age.  Men  love 
to  take  party  instantly.  They  cannot  bear  being  kept  in 
suspense.  The  examination  torments  them.  They  want  to 
be  rid  of  it  upon  the  easiest  terms.  'Tis  as  if  men  fancied 
themselves  drowning  whenever  they  dare  trust  to  the  currenf^ 
of  reason.  They  seem  hurrying  away  they  know  not  whither, 
and  are  ready  to  catch  at  the  first  twig.  There  they  choose 
afterwards    to   hang,   though    ever  so    insecurely,   rather    than 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

trust  their  strength  to  bear  them  above  water.  He  who  has 
got  hold  of  an  hypothesis,  how  slight  soever,  is  satisfied.  He 
can  presently  answer  every  objection,  and,  with  a  few  terms 
of  art,  give  an  account  of  everything  without  trouble. 

'Tis  no  wonder  if  in  this  age  the  philosophy  of  the 
alchemists  prevails  so  much,^  since  it  promises  such  wonders, 
and  requires  more  the  labour  of  hands  than  brains.  We  have 
a  strange  fancy  to  be  creators,  a  violent  desire  at  least  to  know 
•the  knack  or  secret  by  which  Nature  does  all.  The  rest  of 
our  philosophers  only  aim  at  that  in  speculation  which  our 
alchemists  aspire  to  in  practice.  For  with  some  of  these  it 
has  been  actually  under  deliberation  how  to  make  INIan,  by 
other  mediums  than  Nature  has  hitherto  provided.  Every 
sect  has  a  recipe.  When  you  know  it,  you  are  master  of 
Nature  :  you  solve  all  her  phenomena,-  you  see  all  her  designs, 
and  can  account  for  all  her  operations.  If  need  were  you 
might  perchance,  too,  be  of  her  laboratory  and  work  for  her. 
At  least  one  would  imagine  the  partizans  of  each  modern 
sect  had  this  conceit.  They  are  all  Archimedeses  in  their 
way,  and  can  make  a  world  upon  easier  terms  than  he  offered 
to  move  one. 

In  short,  there  are  good  reasons  for  our  being  thus  super- 
ficial, and  consequently  thus  dogmatical  in  philosojihy.  We 
are  too  lazy  and  effeminate,  and  withal  a  little  too  cowardly, 
to  dare  doubt.     The  decisive  way  best  becomes  our  manners. 

^  [Boyle  himself,  wlio  was  at  his  strongest  in  chemistry,  left  to  his 
executors  at  his  death,  in  1G91,  a  quantity  of  red  earth  "  with  directions 
for  endeavouring  to  turn  it  into  gold."  Locke,  however,  seems  to  have 
been  persuaded  by  Newton  to  give  up  the  experiment  as  useless.  See 
Fox  Bourne's  Life  oj  Locke,  ii.  223-22.5.  The  correspondence  of  Spinoza 
{Epp.  xlv.  and  Ixvi.  B. ,  1667  and  1675),mentions  similar  instances  of  credulity 
among  liis  friends.  It  appears  tliat  his  correspondent  Schaller,  a  qualified 
pliysician,  believed  he  had  "  made  gold  "  by  a  certain  process.  Spinoza, 
like  Newton,  was  finally  quite  incredulous.  Doubtless  the  prevalent  opinion 
a  generation  later  was  still  on  the  side  of  fallacy.] 

2  See  Mxsc.  iii.  ch.  i. 

8 


THE   MORALISTS 

It  suits  as  well  with  our  vices  as  with  our  superstition.  Which- 
ever we  are  fond  of  is  secured  by  it.  If  in  favour  of  relicjion 
we  have  espoused  an  hypothesis  on  which  our  faith,  we  think, 
depends,  we  are  superstitiously  careful  not  to  be  loosened  in  it. 
If,  by  means  of  our  ill  morals,  we  are  broken  with  religion,  'tis 
the  same  case  still :  we  are  as  much  afraid  of  doubtirig.  We 
nmst  be  sure  to  say,  "  It  cannot  be,'"  and  "  'tis  demonstrable. 
For  otherwise  who  knows  ?     And  not  to  know  is  to  yield  ! "" 

Thus'  we  will  needs  know  everything,  and  be  at  the  pains 
of  examining  nothing.  Of  all  philosophy,  therefore,  how 
absolutely  the  most  disagreeable  must  that  appear  which  goes 
upon  no  established  hy])othesis,  nor  ])rcsents  us  with  any  flatter- 
ing scheme,  talks  only  of  probabilities,  suspense  of  judgment, 
inquiry,  search,  and  caution  not  to  be  imposed  on  or  deceived  ? 
This  is  that  academic  discipline  in  which  formerly  the  youth 
were  trained ;  ^  when  not  only  horsemanship  and  military  arts 
had  their  public  ])laces  of  exercise,  but  philosophy  too  had 
.its  wrestlers  in  repute.  Reason  and  Wit  had  their  academy, 
and  underwent  this  trial,  not  in  a  formal  way,  apart  from  the 
world,  but  openly,  among  the  better  sort,  and  as  an  exercise 
of  the  o-enteeler  kind.  This  the  greatest  men  were  not  ashamed 
to  })ractise  in  the  intervals  of  public  affairs,  in  the  highest 
stations  and  employments,  and  at  the  latest  hour  of  their  lives. 
Hence  that  way  of  dialogue,  and  patience  of  debate  and  reason- 
ing, of  which  we  have  scarce  a  resemblance  left  in  any  of  our 
conversations  at  this  season  of  the  world. 

Consider  then,  Palemon,  what  our  picture  is  like  to  prove, 
and  how  it  will  appear,  especially  in  the  light  you  have  un- 
luckily chosen  to  set  it.  For  who  would  thus  have  confronted 
})hilosophy  with  the  gaiety,  wit,  and  humour  of  the  age  ?  If 
this,  however,  can  be  for  your  credit  I  am  content.  The 
j)roject  is  your  own.  'Tis  you  who  have  matched  philosophy 
thus  unequally.  Therefore  leaving  you  to  answer  for  the 
success,  I  begin  this  inauspicious  work,  which  my  ill  stars  and 
1  Advice  to  mt  Aiitltor,  part  iii.  §  3,  and  notes, 

9 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

you  liave  assigned  me,  and  in  which  I  hardly  dare  ask  succour 
of  the  jNIuses,  as  poetical  as  I  am  obliged  to  show  myself  in 
this  enterprise. 

Section'    II 

-it'  "  O  WRETCHED  statc  of  mankind  !     Hapless  Nature,  thus  to  have 

erred  in  thy  chief  workmanship  !  Whence  sprang  this  fatal 
weakness  ?  ^^^hat  chance  or  destiny  shall  we  accuse  ?  Or 
shall  we  mind  the  poets  \\hen  they  sing  thy  tragedy,  Pro- 
metheus !  who  with  thy  stolen  celestial  fire,  mixed  with  vile 
clay,  didst  mock  heaven's  countenance,  and  in  abusive  likeness 
of  the  immortals  madest  the  compound  man  :  that  wretched 
mortal,  ill  to  himself,  and  cause  of  ill  to  all.'''' 

"What  say  you,  Palemon,  to  this  rant,  now  upon  second 
thoughts  ?  Or  have  you  forgot  "'twas  just  in  such  a  romantic 
strain  that  you  broke  out  against  human  kind,  upon  a  day  when 
everything  looked  pleasing,  and  the  kind  itself,  I  thought,  never 
appeared  fairer  or  made  a  better  show. 

Ikit  "'twas  not  the  whole  creation  you  thus  quarrelled  with, 
nor  were  you  so  out  of  conceit  with  all  beauty.  The  verdure 
of  the  field,  the  distant  prospects,  the  gilded  horizon  and  purple 
sky,  formed  by  a  setting  sun,  had  charms  in  abundance,  and 
were  able  to  make  impi-ession  on  you.  Here,  Palemon,  you 
allowed  me  to  admire  as  much  as  I  pleased,  when,  at  the  same 
instant,  you  would  not  bear  my  talking  to  you  of  those  nearer 
beauties  of  our  own  kind,  which  I  thought  more  natural  for  men 
at  our  age  to  admire.  Your  severity  however  could  not  silence 
me  upon  this  subject.  I  continued  to  plead  the  cause  of  the 
fair,  and  advance  their  charms  above  all  those  other  beauties  of 
Nature.  And  when  you  took  advantage  from  this  opposition 
to  show  how  little  there  was  of  Nature  and  how  much  of  Art  in 
what  I  admired,  I  made  the  best  apology  I  could,  and  fighting  for 
beauty,  kept  the  field  as  long  as  there  was  one  fair  one  present. 

Considering  how  your  genius   stood   inclined   to   poetry,   I 

10 


THE    MORAT.TSTS 

wondered  most  to  find  yo"  on  a  sudden  grown  so  out  of  conceit 
with  our  modern  poets  and  galantc  writers,  whom  I  quoted  to 
you  as  better  authorities  than  any  ancient  in  behalf  of  tlie 
fair  sex  and  their  prerogative.  But  this  you  treated  shghtly. 
You  acknowledged  it  to  be  true  indeed,  what  had  been  observed 
by  some  late  wits,  "  that  gallantry  was  of  a  modern  growth."" 
And  well  it  might  be  so,  you  thought,  without  dishonour  to  the 
ancients,  who  understood  Truth  and  Nature  too  well  to  admit 
so  ridiculous  an  invention. 

Twas  in  vain,  therefore,  that  I  held  up  this  shield  in  my 
defence.  I  did  my  cause  no  service,  when  in  behalf  of  the 
fair  I  pleaded  all  the  fine  things  which  are  usually  said  in 
this  romantic  way  to  their  advantage.  You  attacked  the  very 
fortress  of  gallantry,  ridiculed  the  point  of  honour,  with  all 
those  nice  sentiments  and  ceremonials  belonging  to  it.  You 
damned  even  our  favourite  novels :  those  dear,  sweet,  natural 
pieces,  writ  most  of  them  by  the  fair  sex  themselves.  In  short, 
r  this  whole  order  and  scheme  of  wit  you  condemned  absolutely 
^  as^false,  monstrous,  and  Gothic  ;  quite  out  of  the  way  of  Nature, 
and  sprung  from  the  mere  dregs  of  chivalry  or  knight-errantry ; 
a  thing  which  in  itself  you  preferred,  as  of  a  better  taste  than 
that  which  reigns  at  present  in  its  stead.  For  at  a  time  when 
this  mystery  of  gallantry  carried  along  with  it  the  notion  of 
doughty  knighthood,  when  the  fair  were  made  witnesses  and,  in 
a  manner,  parties  to  feats  of  arms,  entered  into  all  the  points  of 
war  and  combat,  and  were  won  by  dint  of  lance  and  manly 
]H*owess,  'twas  not  altogether  absurd,  you  thought,  on  such  a 
foundation  as  this,  to  pay  them  homage  and  adoration,  make 
them  the  standard  of  wit  and  manners,  and  bring  mankind 
under  their  laws.  Ikit  in  a  country  where  no  she-saints  were 
worshipped  by  any  authority  from  religion,  'twas  as  impertinent 
and  senseless  as  it  was  profane  to  deify  the  sex,  raise  them  to 
a  capacity  above  what  Nature  had  allowed,  and  treat  them  with  a 
lespect  which  in  the  natural  way  of  love  they  themselves  were 
the  aptest  to  complain  of. 

11 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

Indeed  as  for  the  moral  ])art,  'twas  wonderful,  you  said,  to 
observe  the  licentiousness  which  this  foppish,  courtly  humour 
had  established  in  the  world.  What  such  a  flatterinf?  way  of 
address  to  all  the  sex  in  common  could  mean  you  knew  not, 
unless  it  were  to  render  them  wholly  common  indeed,  and 
make  each  fair  one  apprehend  that  the  public  had  a  right  to 
her,  and  that  beauty  was  too  communicative  and  divine  a  thing 
to  be  made  a  property  and  confined  to  one  at  once. 

Meanwhile  our  company  began  to  leave  us.  The  beau-mondc, 
whom  you  had  been  thus  severely  censuring,  drew  off  apace,  for 
it  grew  late.  I  took  notice  that  the  approaching  objects  of  the 
night  were  the  more  agreeable  to  you  for  the  solitude  they 
y  introduced,  and  that  the  moon  and  planets  which  began  now  to 
appear  were  in  reality  the  only  proper  company  for  a  man  in 
your  humour.  For  now  you  began  to  talk  with  nuich  satis- 
faction of  natural  things,  and  of  all  orders  of  beauties,  man 
only  excepted.  Never  did  I  hear  a  finer  description  than  you 
made  of  the  order  of  the  heavenly  luminaries,  the  circles  of  the 
planets,  and  their  attendant  satellites.  And  you  who  would 
allow  nothing  to  those  fair  earthly  luminaries  in  the  circles 
which  just  now  we  moved  in ;  you,  Palemon,  who  seemed  to 
overlook  the  pride  of  that  theatre,  began  now  to  look  out 
with  ravishment  on  this  other,  and  triumph  in  the  new 
})hilosophical  scene  of  worlds  unknown.  Here,  when  vou  had 
pretty  well  spent  the  first  fire  of  your  imagination,  I  would 
have  got  you  to  reason  more  calmly  with  me  upon  that  other 
part  of  the  creation,  your  own  kind,  to  which,  I  told  you,  you 
discovered  so  much  aversion  as  would  make  one  believe  you  a 
complete  Timon  or  man-hater. 

"  Can  you  then,  O  Philocles,"  said  you  in  a  high  strain,  and 
with  a  moving  air  of  passion — "  can  you  believe  me  of  that 
character.'^  or  can  you  think  it  of  me  in  earnest,  that  being 
man,  and  conscious  of  my  nature,  I  should  have  yet  so  little  of 
humanity  as  not  to  feel  the  affections  of  a  man  ?  or  feeling 
what  is  natural   towards   my   kind,   that    I   should  hold  their 

12 


THE   MORALISTS 

interest  light,  and  be  indifferently  affected  with  what  affects  or 
seriously  concerns  them  ?  Am  I  so  ill  a  lover  of  my  country  ? 
or  is  it  that  you  find  me  indeed  so  ill  a  friend  ?  For  what  are 
all  relations  else  ?  What  are  the  ties  of  private  friendship  if 
that  to  mankind  be  not  obliging  ?  Can  there  be  yet  a  bond  in 
Nature  if  that  be  none  ?  O  Philocles  !  believe  me  when  I  say  I 
feel  it  one,  and  fully  prove  its  power  within  me.  Think  not 
that  I  would  willingly  break  my  chain ;  nor  count  me  so 
degenerate  or  unnatural  as  whilst  I  hold  this  form  and  wear  a 
human  heart  I  should  throw  off  love,  compassion,  kindness, 
and  not  befriend  mankind.  But  oh  !  what  treacheries  !  what 
disorders !  and  how  corrupt  is  all !  .  .  .  Did  you  not  observe 
even  now,  when  all  this  space  was  filled  with  goodly  rows  of 
company,  how  peaceful  all  apjjeared.  .  .  .  AVhat  charms  there 
are  in  public  companies  !  What  harmony  in  courts  and  courtly 
places  !  How  pleased  is  every  face  !  how  courteous  and  humane 
the  general  carriage  and  behaviour  !  .  .  .  What  creature  capable 
of  reflection,  if  he  thus  saw  us  mankind,  and  saw  no  more, 
would  not  believe  our  earth  a  very  heaven  ?  What  foreigner 
(the  inhabitant,  suppose,  of  some  near  planet)  when  he  had 
travelled  hither,  and  surveyed  this  outward  face  of  things, 
would  think  of  what  lay  hid  beneath  the  mask  ?  But  let 
him  stay  awhile.  Allow  him  leisure,  till  he  has  gained  a 
nearer  view,  and  following  our  dissolved  assemblies  to  their 
particular  recesses,  he  has  the  power  of  seeing  them  in  this  new 
aspect.  .  .  .  Here  he  may  behold  those  great  men  of  the 
Ministry,  who  not  an  hour  ago  in  public  appeared  such  friends, 
now  plotting  craftily  each  others  ruin,  with  the  ruin  of  the  State 
itself,  a  sacrifice  to  their  ambition.  Here  he  may  see  too  those 
of  a  softer  kind,  who  knowing  not  ambition,  follow  only  love. 
Yet,  Philocles,  who  would  think  it  ? ''  .  .  . 

At  these  words,  you  may  remember,  I  discovered  the 
lightness  of  my  temper  and  laughed  aloud,  which  I  could 
hardly  hope  you  would  have  pardoned  had  I  not  freely  told 
you  the  true  reason.     'Twas  not  for  want  of  being  affected  with 

13 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

what  you  spoke.  I  only  imagined  a  more  particular  cause  had 
provoked  you,  when  having  passed  over  the  ambitious,  you  were 
coming  full-charged  against  the  people  of  a  softer  passion.  At 
first  I  looked  on  you  as  deeply  in  the  spleen,  but  now  I  concluded 
you  in  love,  and  so  unhappily  engaged  as  to  have  reason  to 
complain  of  infidelity.  "  This,"  thought  I,  "  has  moved  Palemon 
thus.  Hence  the  sad  world  !  Here  was  that  corruption,  and 
those  disorders  he  lamented  !  " 

After  I  had  begged  pardon  for  my  rude  mirth,  which  had 
the  good  fortune  however  to  make  some  change  in  your  humour, 
we  fell  naturally  into  cool  reasoning  about  the  nature  and 
cause  of  ill  in  general :  "  through  what  contingency,  what 
chance,  by  what  fatal  necessity,  what  will,  or  what  permission 
it  came  upon  the  world,  or  being  come  once,  should  still  subsist."" 
This  inquiry,^  which  with  slight  reasoners  is  easily  got  over, 
stuck  hard,  I  found,  with  one  of  your  close  judgment  and 
penetration.  And  this  insensibly  led  us  into  a  nice  criticism 
of  Nature,  whom  you  sharply  arraigned  for  many  absurdities  you 
thought  her  guilty  of,  in  relation  to  mankind,  and  his  peculiar 
state. 

Fain  would  I  have  persuaded  you  to  think  with  more 
equality  of  Nature,  and  to  proportion  her  defects  a  little  better. 
My  notion  was,  that  the  grievance  lay  not  altogether  in  one 
part,  as  you  placed  it,  but  that  everything  had  its  share  of 
inconvenience  :  pleasure  and  pain,  beauty  and  deformity,  good 
and  ill,  seemed  to  me  everywhere  interwoven ;  and  one  with 
another  made,  I  thought,  a  pretty  mixture,  agreeable  enough 
in  the  main.  'Twas  the  same,  I  fancied,  as  in  some  of  those 
rich  stuffs  where  the  flowers  and  ground  were  oddly  put  together 
with  such  irregular  work  and  contrary  colours  as  looked  ill  in 
the  pattern,  but  mighty  natural  and  well  in  the  piece. 

But  you  were  still  upon  extremes.  Nothing  would  serve  to 
excuse  the  faults  or  blemishes  of  thi,s  jmrt  of  the  creation, 
mankind,  even  though  all  besides  were  fair,  without  a  blemish. 
^  Treatise  iv.    See  the  beginning'. 

14 


THE   MORALISTS 

The  very  storms  and  tempests  had  their  beauty  in  your  account, 
those  alone  excepted  which  arose  in  human  breasts.  'Twas  only 
for  this  turbulent  race  of  mortals  you  offered  to  accuse  Nature. 
And  I  now  found  why  you  had  been  so  transported  with  the 
story  of  Prometheus.  You  wanted  such  an  operator  as  this  for 
mankind,  and  you  were  tempted  to  Avish  the  story  could  have 
been  confirmed  in  modern  divinity ;  that  clearing  the  supreme 
powers  of  any  concern  or  hand  in  the  ill  workmanship,  you 
might  have  the  liberty  of  inveighing  against  it  without 
profaneness. 

This  however,  I  told  you,  was  but  a  slight  evasion  of  the 
religious  poets  among  the  ancients.  'Twas  easy  to  answer  every 
objection  by  a  Prometheus  :  as,  "  Why  had  mankind  originally 
so  much  folly  and  perverseness  ?  why  so  much  pride,  such 
ambition,  and  strange  appetites  ?  why  so  many  plagues  and 
curses  entailed  on  him  and  his  posterity  ? ""  Prometheus  was 
the  cause.  The  plastic  artist,  with  his  unlucky  hand,  solved 
all.  "  ""Twas  his  contrivance,"  they  said,  "  and  he  was  to  answer 
for  it.'"  They  reckoned  it  a  fair  game  if  they  could  gain  a 
single  remove  and  put  the  evil  cause  farther  off.  If  the  people 
asked  a  question,  they  told  them  a  tale,  and  sent  them  away 
satisfied.  None  besides  a  few  philosophers  would  be  such 
busybodies,  they  thought,  as  to  look  beyond,  or  ask  a  second 
question. 

And  in  reality,  continued  I,  'tis  not  to  be  imagined  how 
serviceable  a  tale  is  to  amuse  others  besides  mere  childi'en,  and 
how  much  easier  the  generality  of  men  are  paid  in  this  paper^  ^ 
coin  than  in  sterling  reason.  AVe  ought  not  to  laugh  so  readily 
at  the  Indian  philosophers,  who,  to  satisfy  their  people  how 
this  huge  frame  of  the  world  is  supported,  tell  them  'tis  by  an 
elephant.  And  the  elephant  how  .^  .  .  .  A  shrewd  question  !  but 
which  by  no  means  should  be  answered.  'Tis  here  only  that 
our  Indian  philosophers  are  to  blame.  They  should  be  con- 
tented with  the  elephant,  and  go  no  farther.  But  they  have 
a  tortoise  in  reserve,  whose  back,  they  think,  is  broad  enough. 

15 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

So  the  tortoise  must  bear  the  new  load ;  and  thus  the  matter 
stands  worse  than  before. 

The  heathen  story  of  Prometheus  was,  I  told  you,  much  the 
same  with  this  Indian  one,  only  the  heathen  mythologists  were 
so  wise  as  not  to  go  beyond  the  first  remove.  A  single  Pro- 
metheus was  enough  to  take  the  weight  from  Jove.  They 
fairly  made  Jove  a  stander-by.  He  resolved,  it  seems,  to  be 
neuter,  and  see  what  would  come  of  this  notable  experiment ; 
how  the  dangerous  man -moulder  would  proceed,  and  what 
would  be  the  event  of  his  tampering.  .  .  .  Excellent  account  to 
satisfy  the  heathen  vulgar !  But  how,  think  you,  would  a 
philosopher  digest  this  ?  " For  the  Gods,"  he  would  say  presently, 
"  either  could  have  hindered  Prometheus's  creation  or  they  could 
not.  If  they  could,  they  were  answerable  for  the  consequences  ; 
if  they  could  not,  they  were  no  longer  Gods,  being  thus  limited 
and  controlled.  And  whether  Prometheus  were  a  name  for 
chance,  destiny,  a  plastic  nature,  or  an  evil  daemon,  whatever 
was  designed  by  it,  'twas  still  the  same  breach  of  onniipotence." 

That  such  a  hazardous  affair  as  this  of  creation  should  have 
been  undertaken  by  those  who  had  not  perfect  foresight  as  well 
as  command,  you  owned  was  neither  wise  nor  just.  But  you 
stood  to  foresight.  You  allowed  the  consequences  to  have  been 
understood  by  the  creating  powers  when  they  undertook  their 
work,  and  you  denied  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  theni 
to  have  omitted  it,  though  they  knew  what  would  be  the  event. 
"  'Twas  better  still  that  the  project  should  be  executed,  what- 
ever might  become  of  mankind,  or  how  hard  soever  such  a 
creation  was  like  to  fall  on  the  generality  of  this  miserable  race. 
For  'twas  impossible,  you  thought,  that  Heaven  shoidd  have 
acted  otherwise  than  for  the  best.  So  that  even  from  this 
misery  and  ill  of  man  there  was  undoubtedly  some  good  arising, 
something  which  over-balanced  all,  and  made  full  amends." 

This  was  a  confession  I  wondered  indeed  how  I  came  to 
draw  from  you;  and  soon  afterwards  I  found  you  somewhat 
uneasy  under  it.     For  here  I  took  up  your  own  part  against 

16 


THE   MORALISTS 

you,  and  setting  all  those  villanies  and  corruptions  of  human 
kind  in  the  same  light  you  had  done  just  before,  I  put  it  upon 
you  to  tell  where  possibly  could  be  the  advantage  or  good 
arising  hence,  or  what  excellence  or  beauty  could  redound  from 
those  tragical  pictures  you  yourself  had  drawn  so  well  after  the 
life.  Whether  it  must  not  be  a  very  strong  philosophical  faith 
which  should  persuade  one  that  those  dismal  parts  you  set  to 
view  were  only  the  necessary  shades  of  a  fine  piece,  to  be 
reckoned  among  the  beauties  of  the  creation,  or  whether 
possibly  you  might  look  upon  that  maxim  as  very  fit  for 
heaven,  which  I  was  sure  you  did  not  approve  at  all  in  man- 
kind, "  to  do  ill  that  good  might  follow." 

This,  I  said,  made  me  think  of  the  manner  of  our  modern 
Prometheuses,  the  mountebanks,  who  performed  such  wonders 
of  many  kinds  here  on  our  earthly  stages.  They  could  create 
diseases  and  make  mischief  in  order  to  heal  and  to  restore. 
But  should  we  assign  such  a  practice  as  this  to  Heaven  .''  Should 
we  dare  to  make  such  empirics  of  the  Gods,  and  such  a  patient 
of  poor  Nature  ?  "  Was  this  a  reason  for  Nature's  sickliness  ? 
Or  how  else  came  she  (poor  innocent !)  to  fall  sick,  or  run 
astray  ?  Had  she  been  originally  healthy,  or  created  sound  at 
first,  she  had  still  continued  so.  'Twas  no  credit  to  the  Gods  to 
leave  her  destitute,  or  with  a  flaw  which  would  cost  dear  the 
mending,  and  make  them  sufferers  for  their  own  work." 

I  was  going  to  bring  Homer  to  witness  for  the  many  troubles 
of  Jove,  the  death  of  Sarpedon,  and  the  frequent  crosses  Heaven 
met  with  from  the  fatal  sisters.  But  this  discourse,  I  saw, 
displeased  you.  I  had  by  this  time  plainly  discovered  my  in- 
clination to  Scepticism.  And  here  not  only  religion  was 
objected  to  me,  but  I  was  reproached  too  on  the  accoimt  of  that 
gallantry  which  I  had  some  time  before  defended.  Both  were 
joined  together  in  the  charge  you  made  against  me  when  you 
saw  I  adhered  to  nothing,  but  was  now  as  ready  to  declaim 
against  the  fair  as  I  had  been  before  to  plead  their  cause,  and 
defend  the  moral  of  lovers.  This,  you  said,  was  my  constant 
VOL.  II  17  C 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

way  in  all  debates :  I  was  as  well  pleased  with  the  reason  on  one 
side  as  on  the  other  ;  I  never  troubled  myself  about  the  success 
of  the  argument,  but  laughed  still,  whatever  way  it  Avent,  and 
even  when  I  convinced  others,  never  seemed  as  if  I  was  con- 
vinced myself. 

I  owned  to  you,  Palemon,  there  was  truth  enough  in  your 
charge.  For  above  all  things  I  loved  ease,  and  qf  all  philosophers 
those  who  reasoned  most  at  their  ease,  and  were  never  angry  or 
disturbed,  as  those  called  Sceptics,  you  owned,  never  were.  1 
looked  upon  this  kind  of  philosophy  as  the  prettiest,  agreeablest, 
roving  exercise  of  the  mind  possible  to  be  imagined.  The  other 
kind,  I  thought,  was  painful  and  laborious :  "  to  keep  always 
in  the  limits  of  one  path,  to  drive  always  at  a  point,  and  hold 
precisely  to  what  men  at  a  venture  called  the  Truth ;  a  point, 
in  all  appearance,  very  unfixed  and  hard  to  ascertain."  Besides, 
my  way  hurt  nobody.  I  was  always  the  first  to  comply  on  any 
occasion,  and  for  matters  of  religion  was  farther  from  profane- 
ness  and  erroneous  doctrine  than  any  one.  I  could  never  have 
the  sufficiency  to  shock  my  spiritual  and  learned  superiors.  I 
was  the  farthest  from  leaning  to  my  own  understanding,  nor 
was  I  one  who  exalted  reason  above  faith,  or  insisted  much  upon 
what  the  dogmatical  men  call  demonstration,  and  dare  oppose 
to  the  sacred  mysteries  of  religion.  And  to  show  you,  continued 
I,  how  impossible  it  is  for  the  men  of  our  sort  ever  to  err  from 
the  catholic  and  established  faith,  pray  consider,  that  whereas 
others  pretend  to  see  M'ith  their  own  eyes  what  is  projjerest  and 
best  for  them  in  religion,  we,  for  our  parts,  pretend  not  to  see 
with  any  other  than  those  of  our  spiritual  guides.  Neither  do 
,  we  presume  to  judge  those  guides  ourselves,  but  submit  to  them 
I  as  they  are  appointed  us  by  our  just  superiors.  In  short,  you  who 
.are  rationalists,  and  walk  by  reason  in  everything,  pretend  to 
know  all  things,  whilst  you  believe  little  or  nothing.  We,  for 
our  parts,  know  nothing  and  believe  all. 

Here    I   ended,  and  in  return  you   only  asked  me   coldly 
"whether  with  that  fine  scepticism  of  mine  I  made  no  more. 

18 


THE   MORALISTS 

distinction  between  sincerity  and  insincerity  in  actions,  than  I 
did  between  truth  and  falsehood,  right  and  wrong,  in  arguments?" 

I  durst  not  ask  what  your  question  drove  at.  I  was  afraid 
I  saw  it  too  })lainly,  and  that  by  this  loose  way  of  talking,  which 
I  had  learnt  in  some  fashionable  conversations  of  the  world,  I 
had  given  you  occasion  to  suspect  me  of  the  worst  sort  of 
scepticism,  such  as  spared  nothing,  but  overthrcAv  all  principles, 
moral  and  divine. 

Forgive  me,  said  I,  good  Palemon  ;  you  are  offended,  I  see, 
and  not  without  cause.  But  what  if  I  should  endeavour  to 
compensate  my  sceptical  misbehaviour  by  using  a  known  sceptic 
privilege,  and  asserting  strenuously  the  cause  I  have  hitherto 
opposed  ?  Do  not  imagine  that  I  dare  aspire  so  high  as  to 
defend  revealed  religion,  or  the  holy  mysteries  of  the  Christian 
faith.  I  am  unworthy  of  such  a  task,  and  should  profane  the 
subject.  'Tis  of  mere  philosophy  I  speak  ;  and  my  fancy  is  only 
to  try  what  I  can  muster  up  thence,  to  make  head  against  the 
chief  arguments  of  atheism,  and  re-establish  what  I  have  offered 
to  loosen  in  the  system  of  theism. 

Your  project,  said  you,  bids  fair  to  reconcile  me  to  your 
character,  which  I  was  beginning  to  mistrust.  For  as  averse  as 
I  am  to  the  cause  of  theism,  or  name  of  Deist,  when  taken  in  a 
sense  exclusive  of  revelation,  I  consider  still  that  in  strictness 
the  root  of  all  is  theism,  and  that  to  be  a  settled  Christian,  it  is 
necessary  to  be  first  of  all  a  good  theist ;  for  theism  can  only 
be  opposed  to  polytheism  or  atheism.^  Nor  have  I  patience  to 
hear  the  name  of  Deist  (the  highest  of  all  names)  decried,  and 
set  in  opposition  to  Christianity.  "As  if  our  religion  was  a 
kind  of  magic,  which  depended  not  on  the  belief  of  a  single 
supreme  Being.  Or  as  if  the  firm  and  rational  belief  of  such  a 
Being  on  philosophical  grounds  was  an  improper  qualification 
for  believing  anything  further."^  Excellent  presumption  for 
those  who  naturally  incline  to  the  disbelief  of  revelation,  or  who 
through  vanity  affect  a  freedom  of  this  kind  !  .  .  . 

^  "To  polytheism  (daemonism)  or  atheism."  Inquiry,  part  i.  hk.  i.  §  2. 

19 


SHAFTESBUllY'S  CHARACTERISTICS 

But  let  nie  hear,  continued  you,  whether  in  good  earnest 
and  thorough  sincerity  you  intend  to  advance  anything  in 
favour  of  that  opinion  which  is  fundamental  to  all  religion,  or 
whether  you  design  only  to  divert  yourself  with  the  subject  as 
you  have  done  hitherto  ?  "  AVhatever  your  thoughts  are, 
Philocles,  I  am  resolved  to  force  them  from  you.  Vou  can  no 
longer  plead  the  unsuitableness  of  the  time  or  place  to  such 
grave  subjects.  The  gaudy  scene  is  over  ^ith  the  day.  Our 
company  have  long  since  ([uitted  the  field ;  and  the  solemn 
majesty  of  such  a  night  as  this,  may  justly  suit  with  the  ])ro- 
foundest  meditation  or  most  serious  discourse."" 

Thus,  Palemon,  you  continued  to  urge  me,  till  by  necessity 
I  was  drawn  into  the  following  vein  of  philosophical  enthusiasm^ 

Section  III 

You  shall  find  then,  said  I  (taking  a  grave  air),  that  it  is  possible 
for  me  to  be  serious,  and  that  'tis  probable  I  am  growing  so  for 
good  and  all.  Your  over-seriousness  awhile  since,  at  such  an 
unseasonable  time,  may  have  driven  me  ))erhaps  into  a  contrary 
extreme  by  opposition  to  your  melancholy  humour.  But  I 
have  now  a  better  idea  of  that  melancholy  you  discovered,  and 
notwithstanding  the  humorous  turn  you  were  pleased  to  give  it, 
I  am  persuaded  it  has  a  different  foundation  from  any  of  those 
fantastical  causes  I  then  assigned  to  it.  "  Love,  doubtless,  is  at 
the  bottom  ;  but  a  nobler  love  than  such  as  common  beauties 
inspire."" 

Here,  in  my  turn,  I  began  to  raise  my  voice,  and  imitate  the 
solemn  way  you  had  been  teaching  me.  "  Knowing  as  you  are," 
continued  I,  "  well-knowing  and  experienced  in  all  the  degrees 
and  orders  of  beauty,  in  all  the  mysterious  charms  of  the 
particular  forms,  you  rise  to  what  is  more  general,  and  with  a 
larger  heart,  and  mind  more  comprehensive,  you  generously 
seek  that  which  is  highest  in  the  kind.  Not  captivated  by  the 
lineaments  of  a  fair  face,  or  the  well-drawn  proportions  of  a 

20 


THE   MORALISTS 

human  body,  you  view  the  Hfe  itself,  and  embrace  rather  the 
mind  which  adds  the  lustre,  and  renders  chiefly  amiable. 

"Nor  is  the  enjoyment  of  such  a  single  beauty  sufficient  to 
satisfy  such  an  aspiring  soul.  It  seeks  how  to  combine  more 
beauties,  and  by  what  coalition  of  these  to  form  a  beautiful 
society.  It  views  communities,  friendships,  relations,  duties, 
and  considers  by  what  harmony  of  particular  minds  the  general 
harmony  is  composed,  and  commonweal  established, 

"  Nor  satisfied  even  with  public  good  in  one  comnmnity  of 
men,  it  frames  itself  a  nobler  object,  and  with  enlarged  affection 
seeks  the  good  of  mankind.  It  dwells  with  pleasure  amidst  that 
reason  and  those  orders  on  which  this  fair  correspondence  and 
goodly  interest  is  established.  Laws,  constitutions,  civil  and 
religious  rites ;  whatever  civilises  or  polishes  rude  mankind  ;  the 
sciences  and  arts,  philosophy,  morals,  virtue ;  the  flourishing 
state  of  human  affairs,  and  the  perfection  of  human  nature  ; 
these  are  its  delightful  prospects,  and  this  the  charm  of  beauty 
which  attracts  it. 

"  Still  ardent  in  this  pursuit  (such  is  its  love  of  order  and 
perfection)  it  rests  not  here,  nor  satisfies  itself  with  the  beauty 
of  a  part,  but,  extending  further  its  communicative  bounty, 
seeks  the  good  of  all^  and  affects  the  interest  and  prosperity  of 
the  whole.  True  to  its  native  world  and  higher  country,  'tis 
here  it  seeks  order  and  perfection  ;  wishing  the  best,  and  hoping 
still  to  find  a  just  and  wise  administration. 

"  And  since  all  hope  of  this  were  vain  and  idle  if  no 
universal  mind  presided ;  since  without  such  a  supreme  intelli- 
gence and  providential  care  the  distracted  universe  must  be 
condemned  to  suffer  infinite  calamities ;  'tis  here  the  generous 
mind  labours  to  discover  that  healing  cause  by  which  the 
interest  of  the  whole  is  securely  established,  the  beauty  of 
things  and  the  universal  order  happily  sustained. 

"This,  Palenion,  is  the  labour  of  your  soul,  and  this  its 
melancholy  when,  unsuccessfully  pursuing  the  supreme  beauty, 
it   meets    with    darkening   clouds   whicli    intercept    its    sight. 

21 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Monsters  arise,  not  those  from  Lybian  deserts,  but  from  the 
heart  of  man  more  fertile,  and  with  their  horrid  aspect  cast 
an  unseemly  reflection  upon  Nature.  She,  helpless  (as  she  is 
thought),  and  Avorking  thus  absurdly,  is  contennied,  the  govern- 
/  ment  of  the  world  arraigned,  and  Deity  made  void. 

/  "  Much  is  alleged  in  answer  to  show  why  Nature  errs,  and 

how  she  came  thus  impotent  and  erring  from  an  unerring  hand. 
j  But  I  deny  she  errs ;  and  when  she  seems  mo.st  ignorant  or 
perverse  in  her  productions,  I  assert  her  even  then  as  wise  and 
provident  as  in  her  goodliest  works.  For  'tis  not  then  that 
men  complain  of  the  world's  order,  or  abhor  the  face  of  things, 
when  they  see  various  interests  mixed  and  interfering ;  natures 
subordinate  of  different  kinds,  opposed  one  to  another,  and  in 
their  different  operations  submitted  the  higher  to  the  lower. 
'Tis  on  the  contrary  from  this  order  of  inferior  and  superior 
things  that  we  admire  the  world's  beauty,^  founded  thus  on 
contrarieties,  whilst  from  such  various  and  disagreeing  principles 
a  universal  concord  is  established. 

"  Thus  in  the  several  orders  of  terrestrial  forms  a  resigna- 
tion is  required,  a  sacrifice  and  mutual  yielding  of  natures  one 
to  another.  The  vegetables  by  their  death  sustain  the  animals, 
and  animal  bodies  dissolved  enrich  the  earth,  and  raise  again 
the  vegetable  Avorld.  The  numerous  insects  are  reduced  by  the 
superior  kinds  of  birds  and  beasts,  and  these  again  are  checked 
by  man,  who  in  his  turn  submits  to  other  natures,  and  resigns 
his  form  a  sacrifice  in  common  to  the  rest  of  things.  And  if  in 
natvu'es  so  little  exalted  or  j^re-eminent  above  each  other,  the 
sacrifice  of  interests  can  appear  so  just,  how  nuich  more  reason- 
ably may  all  inferior  natures  be  subjected  to  the  superior  nature 
of  the  world  !  that  world,  l*alemon,  Avhich  even  now  trans})orted 
you  when  the  sun's  fainting  light  gave  way  to  these  bright  con- 
stellations, and  left  you  this  wide  system  to  contemplate. 

"  Here  are  those  laws  which  ought  not  nor  can  submit  to 

1  See  Misc.  v.  cli.  i.  what  is  cited  in  the  notes  from  the  ancient  author 
on  The  World. 

22 


THE   MORALISTS 

anything  below.  The  central  powers,  which  hold  the  lasting 
orbs  in  their  just  poise  and  movement,  must  not  be  controlled 
to  save  a  fleeting  form,  and  rescue  from  the  precipice  a  puny 
animal,  whose  brittle  frame,  however  protected,  must  of  itself 
so  soon  dissolve.  The  ambient  air,  the  inward  vapours,  the 
impending  meteors,  or  whatever  else  is  nutrimental  or  pre- 
servative of  this  earth,  must  operate  in  a  natural  course,  and 
other  constitutions  must  submit  to  the  good  habit  and  con- 
stitution of  the  all-sustaining  globe. 

"Let  us  not  therefore  wonder  if  by  earthquakes,  storms, 
pestilential  blasts,  nether  or  upper  fires,  or  floods,  the  animal 
kinds  are  oft  afflicted,  and  whole  species  perhaps  involved  at 
once  in  common  ruin ;  but  much  less  let  us  account  it  strange 
if  either  by  outward  shock,  or  some  interior  wound  from  hostile 
matter,  particular  animals  are  deformed  even  in  their  first 
conception,  when  the  disease  invades  the  seats  of  generation, 
and  seminal  parts  are  injured  and  obstructed  in  their  accurate 
labours.  'Tis  then  alone  that  monstrous  shapes  are  seen : 
Nature  still  working  as  before,  and  not  perversely  or  erroneously, 
not  faintly,  or  with  feeble  endeavours ;  but  overpowered  by  a 
superior  rival,  and  by  another  nature's  justly  conquering  force. 

"  Nor  need  we  wonder  if  the  interior  form,  the  soul  and 
temper,  partakes  of  this  occasional  deformity,  and  sympathises 
often  with  its  close  partner.  Who  is  there  can  wonder  either 
at  the  sicknesses  of  sense,  or  the  depravity  of  minds  enclosed  in 
such  frail  bodies,  and  dependent  on  such  pervertible  organs  ? 

"Here  then  is  that  solution  you  require,  and  hence  those 
seeming  blemishes  cast  upon  Nature.  Nor  is  there  aught  in 
this  beside  what  is  natural  and  good.  Tis  o-ood  which  is 
predominant ;  and  every  corruptible  and  mortal  nature  by  its 
mortality  and  corruption  yields  only  to  some  better,  and  all  in 
common  to  that  best  and  highest  nature  which  is  incorruptible 
and  immortal."' 

"  I  scarce  had  ended  these  words  ere  you  broke  out  in 
admiration,  asking  what  had  befallen    me    that   of  a   sudden 

23 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

I  had  thus  changed  my  character,  and  entered  into  thoughts 
which  must  certainly,  you  supposed,  have  some  foundation  in 
me,  since  I  could  express  them  with  such  seeming  affection  as 
I  had  done. 

O,  said  I,  Palemon  !  that  it  had  been  my  fortune  to  have 
met  you  the  other  day,  just  at  my  return  out  of  the  country 
from  a  friend  whose  conversation  had  in  one  day  or  two  made 
such  an  impression  on  me  that  I  should  have  suited  you  to  a 
miracle.  You  would  have  thought  indeed  that  I  had  been 
cured  of  my  scepticism  and  levity,  so  as  never  to  have  rallied 
more  at  that  Avild  rate  on  any  subject,  much  less  on  these 
which  are  so  serious. 

Truly,  said  you,  1  could  wish  I  had  met  you  rather  at  that 
time,  or  that  those  good  and  serious  impressions  of  your  friend 
had  without  interruption  lasted  with  you  till  this  moment. 

Whatever  they  were,  I  told  you,  Palemon,  I  had  not  so  lost 
them  neither  as  not  easily,  you  saw,  to  revive  them  on  occasion, 
were  I  not  afraid.  Afraid  !  said  you.  For  whose  sake,  good 
Philocles,  I  entreat  you  ?  for  mine  or  your  own  'f  For  both, 
replied  I.  For  though  I  was  like  to  be  perfectly  cured  of  my 
scepticism,  'twas  bv  what  I  thought  worse,  downright  enthusiasm. 
You  never  knew  a  more  agreeable  enthusiast ! 

Were  he  my  friend,  said  you,  I  should  hardly  treat  him  in 
so  free  a  manner;  nor  should  I,  perhaps,  judge  that  to  be 
enthusiasm  which  you  so  freely  term  so.  I  have  a  strong 
suspicion  that  you  injure  him.  Nor  can  I  be  satisfied  till  I 
hear  further  of  that  serious  conversation  for  which  you  tax  him 
as  enthusiastic. 

I  must  confess,  said  I,  he  had  nothing  of  that  savage  air 
1  of  the  vulgar  enthusiastic  kind.  All  was  serene,  soft,  and 
[  harmonious.  The  manner  of  it  was  more  after  the  pleasing 
transports  of  those  ancient  })oets  you  are  often  charmed  with, 
than  after  the  fierce  unsociable  way  of  modern  zealots,  those 
starched,  gruff  gentlemen,  who  guard  religion  as  bullies  do  a 
mistress,   and  give  us  the  while  a  very  indifferent  opinion  of 

24- 


THE   IVIORALISTS 

their  lady's  merit  and  their  own  wit,  by  adoring  what  they 
neither  allow  to  be  inspected  by  others  nor  care  themselves  to 
examine  in  a  fair  light.  But  here,  I  will  answer  for  it,  there  was 
nothing  of  disguise  or  paint.  All  was  fair,  open,  and  genuine 
as  Nature  herself  Twas  Nature  he  was  in  love  with;  'twas 
Nature  he  sung.  And  if  any  one  might  be  said  to  have  a 
natural  mistress  my  friend  certainly  might,  whose  heart  was 
thus  engaged.  But  love,  I  found,  was  everywhere  the  same. 
And  though  the  object  here  was  very  fine,  and  the  passion  it 
created  very  noble,  yet  liberty,  I  thought,  was  finer  than  all ; 
and  I  who  never  cared  to  engage  in  other  love  of  the  least 
continuance,  was  the  more  afraid,  I  told  you,  of  this  which  had 
such  a  power  with  my  poor  friend  as  to  make  him  appear  the 
perfectest  enthusiast  in  the  world,  ill-humour  only  excej^ted. 
For  this  was  singular  in  him,  "  That  though  he  had  all  of  the 
enthusiast,  he  had  nothing  of  the  bigot.  He  heard  everything 
with  mildness  and  delight,  and  bore  with  me  when  I  treated  all 
his  thoughts  as  visionary,  and  when,  sceptic-like,  I  unravelled 
all  his  systems." 

Here  was  that  character  and  description  which  so  highlv 
})lea.sed  you  that  you  would  hardly  suffer  me  to  come  to  a  con- 
clusion. 'Twas  impossible,  I  found,  to  give  you  satisfaction 
without  reciting  the  main  of  what  ])assed  in  those  two  days 
between  my  friend  and  me  in  our  country  retirement.  Again 
and  again  I  bid  you  beware :  "  you  knew  not  the  danger  of 
this  philoso})hical  })assion,  nor  considered  what  you  might 
})ossibly  draw  upon  yourself,  and  make  me  the  author  of  I 
was  far  enough  engaged  already,  and  you  ^\ere  })ushing  me 
further,  at  yoiu"  own  hazard."" 

All  I  could  say  made  not  the  least  impression  on  vou.  But 
rather  than  proceed  any  further  this  night,  I  engaged,  for  your 
sake,  to  turn  writer,  and  draw  up  the  memoirs  of  those  two 
philosophical  days,  beginning  with  what  had  j)asscd  this  last 
day  between  ourselves,  as  I  have  accordingly  done,  you  see,  by 
way  of  introduction  to  my  story. 

25 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

By  this  time,  being  got  late  to  town,  some  hours  after  the 
latest  of  our  company,  you  set  me  down  at  my  own  lodging, 
and  thus  we  bade  good-night. 


PART   II 

Section'   I 

Philodcs  to  Palemon 

After  such  a  day  as  yesterday  I  might  well  have  thought  it 
hard,  when  I  awaked  the  next  morning,  to  find  myself  under 
positive  engagements  of  proceeding  in  the  same  philosophical 
way  without  intermission,  and  upon  harder  terms  than  ever. 
For  'twas  no  longer  the  agreeable  part  of  a  companion  which  I 
had  now  to  bear.  Your  conversation,  Palemon,  which  had 
hitherto  supported  me,  was  at  an  end.  I  was  now  alone, 
confined  to  my  closet,  obliged  to  meditate  by  myself,  and 
reduced  to  the  hard  circumstances  of  an  author  and  historian 
in  the  most  difficult  subject. 

But  here,  methought,  propitious  Heaven  in  some  manner 
assisted  me.  For  if  dreams  were,  as  Homer  teaches,  sent  from 
the  throne  of  Jove,  I  might  conclude  I  had  a  favourable  one  of 
the  true  sort  towards  the  morning  light,  which,  as  I  recollected 
myself,  gave  me  a  clear  and  perfect  idea  of  what  I  desired  so 
earnestly  to  bring  back  to  my  memory. 

I  found  myself  transported  to  a  distant  country,  which 
]iresented  a  pompous  rural  scene.  It  was  a  mountain  not  far 
from  the  sea,  its  brow  adorned  with  ancient  wood,  and  at  its 
foot  a  river  and  well-inhabited  plain,  beyond  which  the  sea 
appearing,  closed  the  prospect. 

No  sooner  had  I  considered  the  place  than  I  discerned  it  to 
be  the  very  same  where  I  had  talked  with  Theocles  the  second 
day  I  was  with  him  in  the  country.     I  looked  about  to  see  if 

26 


THE   MORALISTS 

I  could  find  luy  friend,  and  calling  Theocles  !  I  awaked.  But 
so  powerful  was  the  impression  of  my  dream,  and  so  perfect  the 
idea  raised  in  me  of  the  person,  words,  and  manner  of  my  friend, 
that  I  could  now^  fancy  myself  philosophically  inspired,  as  that 
Roman  sage^  by  his  Egeria,  and  invited  on  this  occasion  to 
try  my  historical  muse.  For  justly  might  I  hope  for  such 
assistance  in  behalf  of  Theocles,  who  so  loved  the  Muses,  and 
was  I  thought  no  less  beloved  by  them. 

To  return  therefore  to  that  original  rural  scene  and  that 
heroic  genius,  the  companion  and  guide  of  my  first  thoughts  in 
these  profounder  subjects;  1  found  him  the  first  morning  with 
his  beloved  jNIantuan  Muse,  roving  in  the  fields,  where,  as  I 
had  been  informed  at  his  house,  he  was  gone  out,  after  his  usual 
way,  to  read.  The  moment  he  saw  me  his  book  vanished,  and 
he  came  with  friendly  haste  to  meet  me.  After  we  had 
embraced,  1  discovered  my  curiosity  to  know^  what  he  w^as 
reading,  and  asked  "  if  it  were  of  a  secret  kind,  to  which  I  could 
not  be  admitted."'"'  On  this  he  showed  me  his  poet,  and  looking 
pleasantly,  Now  tell  me  truly,  said  he,  Philocles,  did  you  not 
expect  some  more  mysterious  book  than  this  't  I  owned  I  did, 
considering  his  character,  which  I  took  to  be  of  so  contemplative 
a  kind.  And  do  you  think,  said  he,  that  without  being  con- 
templative, one  can  truly  relish  these  diviner  poets  ?  Indeed, 
said  I,  I  never  thought  there  was  any  need  of  growing- 
contemplative,  or  retiring  from  the  world,  to  read  Virgil  or 
Horace. 

You  have  named  two,  said  he,  who  can  hardly  be  thought  so 
very  like,  though  they  were  friends  and  equally  good  poets. 
Yet  joining  them  as  you  are  pleased  to  do,  I  would  willingly 
learn  from  you  whether  in  your  opinion  there  be  any  dis- 
position so  fitted  for  reading  them  as  that  in  which  they  writ 
themselves.  In  this,  I  am  sure,  they  both  joined  heartily  :  to 
love  retirement ;  when  for  the  sake  of  such  a  life  and  habit  as 
you  call  contemplative,  they  were  willing  to  sacrifice  the  highest 

'  Num;i. 

27 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

advantages,  pleasures,  and  favour  of  a  court.  But  I  will  venture 
to  say  more  in  favour  of  retirement :  "  that  not  only  the  best 
authors  but  the  best  company  require  this  seasoning."  Society 
itself  cannot  be  rightly  enjoyed  without  some  abstinence  and 
separate  thought.  All  grows  insipid,  dull,  and  tiresome  without 
the  help  of  some  intervals  of  retirement.  Say,  Philocles,  whether 
you  yourself  have  not  often  found  it  so .''  Do  you  think 
those  lovers  understand  the  interests  of  their  loves  who  by 
their  good-will  would  never  be  parted  for  a  moment .''  or  would 
they  be  discreet  friends,  think  you,  who  would  choose  to  live 
together  on  such  terms  ^  What  relish  then  must  the  world 
have  (that  common  world  of  mixed  and  undistinguished 
company)  without  a  little  solitude ;  without  stepping  now  and 
then  aside,  out  of  the  road  and  beaten  track  of  life,  that 
tedious  circle  of  noise  and  show,  which  forces  wearied  mankind 
to  seek  relief  from  every  poor  diversion .'' 

By  your  rule,  said  I,  Theocles,  there  should  be  no  such 
thing  as  happiness  or  good  in  life,  since  every  enjoyment  wears 
out  so  soon ;  and  growing  painful,  is  diverted  by  some  other 
thing,  and  that  again  by  some  other,  and  so  on.  I  am  sure,  if 
solitude  serves  as  a  remedy  or  diversion  to  anything  in  the  world, 
there  is  nothing  which  may  not  serve  as  diversion  to  solitude, 
which  wants  it  more  than  anything  besides.  And  thus  there 
can  be  no  good  which  is  regular  or  constant.  Happiness  is  a 
thing  out  of  the  way,  and  only  to  be  found  in  wandering. 

()  Philocles,  replied  he,  I  rejoice  to  find  you  in  the  jmrsuit 
of  happiness  and  good,  however  you  may  wander.  Xay,  though 
you  doubt  whether  there  be  that  thing,  yet  if  you  reason,  "'tis 
sufficient ;  there  is  hope  still.  But  see  how  you  have  unawares 
engaged  yourself !  For  if  you  have  destroyed  all  good,  because 
in  all  you  can  think  of  there  is  nothing  will  constantly  hold  so; 
then  vou  have  set  it  as  a  maxim  (and  verv  justly  in  mv  oj)inion) 
"  that  nothing  can  be  good  but  what  is  constant.""' 

I  own,  said  I,  that  all  I  know  of  worldly  satisfaction  is 
inconstant.     The  things  which  give  it  are  never  at  a  stay,  and 

28 


THE    MORALISTS 

the  good  itself,  whatever  it  be,  depends  no  less  on  humour  than 
on  fortune.  For  that  which  Chance  may  often  spare,  Time  will 
not.  Age,  change  of  temper,  other  thoughts,  a  different  j^assion, 
new  engagements,  a  new  turn  of  life,  or  conversation, — the  least 
of  these  are  fatal,  and  alone  sufhcient  to  destroy  enjoyment. 
Though  the  object  be  the  same,  the  relish  changes  and  the 
short-lived  good  expires.  But  I  should  wonder  nuich  if  you 
could  tell  me  anything  in  life  which  was  not  of  as  change- 
able a  nature,  and  subject  to  the  same  common  fate  of  satiety 
and  disgust. 

I  find  then,  replied  he,  that  the  current  notion  of  good  is 
not  sufficient  to  satisfy  you.  You  can  afford  to  scepticise 
where  no  one  else  will  so  much  as  hesitate;  for  almost  every 
one  philosophises  dogmatically  on  this  head.  All  are  positive 
in  this,  "  that  our  real  good  is  pleasure." 

If  they  would  inform  us  "  which,"  said  I,  "  or  what  sort,"  and 
ascertain  once  the  very  species  and  distinct  kind,  such  as  must 
constantly  remain  the  same,  and  equally  eligible  at  all  times,  I 
should  then  perhajis  be  better  satisfied.  But  when  will  and 
pleasure  are  synonymous ;  when  everything  which  pleases  us  is 
called  pleasure,^  and  we  never  choose  or  prefer  but  as  we  please ; 
'tis  trifling  to  say  "  Pleasure  is  our  good."  For  this  has  as 
little  meaning  as  to  say,  "  We  choose  what  we  think  eligible  " ; 
and  "  AVe  are  pleased  with  what  delights  or  pleases  us."  The 
question  is  "  whether  we  are  rightly  pleased,  and  choose  as  we 
jhould  do  ? "  For  as  highly  pleased  as  children  are  with  baubles, 
or  with  whatever  affects  their  tender  senses,  we  cannot  in  our 
hearts  sincerely  admire  their  enjoyment,  or  imagine  them 
possessors  of  any  extraordinary  good.  Yet  are  their  senses,  we 
know,  as  keen  and  susceptible  of  pleasure  as  our  own.  The 
same  reflection  is  of  force  as  to  mere  animals,  who  in  respect  of 
the  liveliness  and  delicacy  of  sensation  have  many  of  them  the 
advantage  of  us.  And  as  for  some  low  and  sordid  pleasures  of 
human  kind,  should  they  be  ever  so  lastingly  enjoyed,  and  in 
1  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  ii.  ;  Minr.  iv.  ch.  i. 

29 


I 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

the  highest  credit   with  their  enjoy ers,  I  should   never  afford 
them  the  name  of  happiness  or  good. 

Would  yon  then  appeal,  said  he,  from  the  immediate  feeling 
and  experience  of  one  who  is  pleased  and  satisfied  with  what 
he  enjoys  ? 

Most  certainly  I  should  appeal,  said  I  (continuing  the  same 
zeal  which  Theocles  had  stirred  in  me,  against  those  dogmatisers 
on  pleasure).     For  is  there  that  sordid  creature  on  earth  who 
does  not  prize  his  own  enjoyment  ?     Does  not  the  forwardest, 
the  most  rancorous  distempered  creature  do  as  much  ?     Is  not 
malice  and  cruelty  of  the  highest  relish  with  some  natures  ?     Is 
not  a  hoggish    life  the    height  of  some  men's   wishes  ?     You 
would  not  ask  me   surely  to  enumerate  the  several  species  of 
sensations  which  men  of  certain  tastes  have  adopted,  and  owned 
for  their  chief  pleasure  and  delight.     For  with  some  men  even 
diseases  have  been  thought  valuable  and  worth  the  cherishing, 
merely  for  the  pleasure  found   in  allaying  the  ardovu*  of  an 
irritating  sensation.     And  to  these  absurd  epicures  those  other 
are  near  akin  M'ho  by  studied  provocatives  raise  unnatural  thirst 
and  appetite,  and,  to  make  way  for  fresh  repletion,   prepare 
emetics,  as  the  last  dessert,  the  sooner  to  renew  the  feast.     'Tis 
said,  I  know,  proverbially,  "  that  tastes  are  different,  and  must 
not  be  disputed."     And   I  remember  some  such  motto  as  this 
placed  once  on  a  device,  which  was  found  suitable  to  the  notion. 
A  fly  was  represented  feeding  on  a  certain  lump.     The  food, 
however    vile,    was    natural    to    the   animal.       There   was    no 
absurdity  in  the  case.     But  should  you  show  me  a  brutish  or  a 
barbarous   man   thus    taken    up,  and  solaced    in  his  pleasure ; 
should  you  show  me  a  sot  in  his  solitary  debauch,  or  a  tyrant 
in  the  exercise  of  his  cruelty,  with  this  motto  over  him,  to  forbid 
my  appeal ;  I  should  hardly  be  brought  to  think  the  better  of 
his  enjoyment ;  nor  can  I  possibly  suppose  that  a  mere  sordid 
wretch,  with  a  base,  abject  soul,  and  the  best  fortune  in  tlie 
Avorld,  was  ever  capable  of  any  real  enjoyment. 

By  this  zeal,  replied  Theocles,  which  you  have  shown  in  the 

30 


THE   MORALISTS 

refuting  a  wrong  hypothesis,  one  would  imagine  you  had  in 
reahty  some  notion  of  a  right,  and  began  to  think  that  there 
might  possibly  be  such  a  thing  at  last  as  good. 

That  there  is  something  nearer  to  good,  and  more  like  it 
than  another,  I  am  free,  said  I,  to  own.  But  what  real  good  is 
I  am  still  to  seek,  and  must  therefore  wait  till  you  can  better 
inform  me.  This  I  only  know,  "  that  either  all  pleasure  is 
good,  or  only  some."  If  all,  then  every  kind  of  sensuality  must 
be  precious  and  desirable.  If  some  only,  then  we  are  to  seek 
what  kind,  and  discover,  if  we  can,  what  it  is  which  distinguishes 
between  one  pleasure  and  another,  and  makes  one  indifferent, 
sorry,  mean  ;  another  valuable  and  worthy.  And  by  this  stamp, 
this  character,  if  there  be  any  such,  we  must  define  good,  and 
not  by  pleasure  itself,  which  may  be  very  great  and  yet  Aery 
contemptible.  Nor  can  any  one  truly  judge  the  value  of  any 
immediate  sensation  otherwise  than  by  judging  first  of  the 
situation  of  his  own  mind.  For  that  which  we  esteem  a 
happiness  in  one  situation  of  mind  is  otherwise  thought  of  in 
another.  AVhich  situation  therefore  is  the  justest  must  be 
considered  :  "  how  to  gain  that  point  of  sight  whence  probably 
Ave  may  best  discern ;  and  how  to  place  ourselves  in  that 
unbiassed  state  in  which  we  are  fittest  to  pronounce." 

O  Philocles,  replied  he,  if  this  be  unfeignedly  your  sentiment, 
if  it  be  possible  you  should  have  the  fortitude  to  withhold  your 
assent  in  this  affair,^  and  go  in  search  of  A\hat  the  meanest  of 
mankind  think  they  already  know  so  certainly,  "'tis  from  a 
nobler  turn  of  thought  than  what  you  have  observed  in  any  of 
the  modern  sceptics  you  have  conversed  with.  For  if  I  mistake 
not,  there  are  hardly  anywhere  at  this  day  a  sort  of  people 
more  peremptory,  or  who  deliberate  less  on  the  choice  of  good. 
They  who  pretend  to  such  a  scrutiny  of  other  evidences  are  the 
readiest  to  take  the  evidence  of  the  greatest  deceivers  in  the 
world,  their  own  passions.  Having  gained,  as  they  think,  a 
liberty  from  some  seeming  constraints  of  religion,  they  suppose 
^  Esmy  on  Wit  and  Humour,  part  i.  §  G. 

31 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

they  employ  this_libei'ty  to  perfection  by  following  the  first 
motion  of  their  6vill,  and  assenting  to  the  first  dictate  or  report 
of  any  prejjossessing  fancy,^  any  foremost  opinion  or  conceit  of 
good.  So  that  their  privilege  is  only  that  of  being  perpetually 
amused,  and  their  liberty  that  of  being  imposed  on  in  their 
most  imjjortant  choice.  I  think  one  may  say  with  assurance 
"  that  the  greatest  of  fools  is  he  who  imposes  on  himself,  and  in 
his  greatest  concern  thinks  certainly  he  knows  that  which  he 
has  least  studied,  and  of  which  he  is  most  profoundly  ignorant. 
He  who  is  ignorant  but  knows  his  ignorance,  is  far  wiser.  xVnd 
to  do  justice  to  these  fashionable  men  of  wit,  they  are  not 
all  of  them,  indeed,  so  insensible  as  not  to  perceive  something 
of  their  own  blindness  and  absurdity.  For  often  when  they 
seriously  reflect  on  their  past  pursuits  and  engagements  they 
freely  own  "that  for  what  remains  of  life  they  know  not 
whether  they  shall  be  of  a  piece  with  themselves,  or  whether 
their  fancy,  humour,  or  passion  will  not  hereafter  lead  them 
to  a  quite  different  choice  in  pleasure,  and  to  a  disapprobation 
of  all  they  ever  enjoyed  before."  ....  Comfortable  reflection  ! 
To  bring  the  satisfactions  of  the  mind,  continued  he,  and 
the  enjoyments  of  reason  and  judgment  under  the  denomination 
'  of  Pleasure,  is  only  a  collusion,  and  a  plain  receding  from  the 
%,  conimon  notion  of_the  wor^.  They  deal  not  fairly  with  us 
who  in  their  philosophical  hour  admit  that  for  pleasure  which 
at  an  ordinary  time,  and  in  the  connnon  practice  of  life,  is  so 
little  taken  for  such.  The  mathematician  who  labours  at  his 
problem,  the  bookish  man  who  toils,  the  artist  who  endures 
voluntarily  the  greatest  hardships  and  fatigues, — none  of  these 
are  said  "  to  follow  pleasure.''  Nor  will  the  men  of  pleasure  by 
any  means  admit  them  to  be  of  their  number.  The  satisfactions 
which  are  purely  mental,  and  dejiend  only  on  the  motion  of  a 
thought,  nmst  in  all  likelihood  be  too  refined  for  the  appre- 
hensions of  our  modern  epicures,  who  are  so  taken  up  with 
pleasure  of  a  more  substantial  kind.  They  who  are  full  of  the 
1  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  2. 

32 


THE   MORALISTS 

idea  of  such  a  sensible  solid  good  can  have  but  a  slender  fancy 
for  the  mere  spiritual  and  intellectual  sort.  But  'tis  this  latter 
they  set  up  and  magnify  upon  occasion,  to  save  the  ignominy 
which  may  redound  to  them  from  the  former.  This  done,  the 
latter  may  take  its  chance :  its  use  is  presently  at  an  end.  For 
'tis  observable  that  when  the  men  of  this  sort  have  recom- 
mended the  enjoyments  of  the  mind  under  the  title  of  pleasure, 
when  they  have  thus  dignified  the  word,  and  included  in  it 
whatever  is  mentally  good  or  excellent,  they  can  afterwards 
suffer  it  contentedly  to  slide  down  again  into  its  own  genuine 
and  vulgar  sense,  whence  they  raised  it  only  to  serve  a  turn. 
When  pleasure  is  called  in  question  and  attacked,  then  reason  ^^-^^ 
and  wTue~are  called  ni  to  her  aid,  and  made  principal  parts  of 
her  constitution.  A  complicated  form  appears,  and  comprehends 
straight  all  which  isgenerous,  honest,  and  beautiful  in  human 
life.  But  when  the  attack  is  over,  and  the  objection  once 
solved,  the  spectre  vanishes ;  pleasure  returns  again  to  her 
former  shape ;  she  may  even  be  pleasure  still,  and  have  as  little 
concern  with  dry,  sober  reason  as  in  the  nature  of  the  thing 
and  according  to  common  understanding  she  really  has.  For 
if  this  rational  sort  of  enjoyment  be  admitted  into  the  notion 
of  good,  how  is  it  possible  to  admit  withal  that  kind  of  sensation 
which  in  effect  is  rather  opposite  to  this  enjoyment?  'Tis 
certain  that  in  respect  of  the  mind  and  its  enjoyments,  the 
eagerness  and  irritation  of  mere  pleasure  is  as  disturbing  as  the 
importunity  and  vexation  of  pain.  If  either  throws  the  mind 
off  its  bias,  and  deprives  it  of  the  satisfaction  it  takes  in  its 
natural  exercise  and  employment,  the  mind  in  this  case  must  be 
sufferer  as  well  by  one  as  by  the  other.  If  neither  does  this, 
there  is  no  harm  on  either  side.   .  .  . 

^  By  the  way,  said  I,  interrupting  him,  as  sincere  as  I  am  in 
questioning  "  whether  pleasure  be  really  good,"  I  am  not  such 
a  sceptic  as  to  doubt  "  whether  pain  be  really  ill."" 

Whatever  is  grievous,  replied  he,  can  be  no  other  than  ill. 
But  that  what  is  grievous  to  one,  is  not  so  much  as  troublesome 

VOL.  II  33  -  D 


i 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

to  another,  let  sportsmen,  soldiers,  and  others  of  the  hardy 
kinds  be  witness.  Nay,  that  what  is  pain  to  one  is  pleasure  to 
another,  and  so  alternately,  we  very  well  know,  since  men  vary 
in  their  apprehension  of  these  sensations,  and  on  many  occasions 
confound  one  with  the  other.  Has  not  even  Nature  herself  in 
some  respects,  as  it  were,  blended  them  together,  and  (as  a  wise 
man  said  once)  "joined  the  extremity  of  one  so  nicely  to  the 
other,  that  it  absolutely  runs  into  it  and  is  indistinguishable"  ? 

In  fine  then,  said  I,  if  pleasure  and  pain  be  thus  convertible 
and  mixed ;  if,  according  to  your  account,  "  that  which  is  now 
pleasure,  by  being  strained  a  little  too  far,  runs  into  pain,  and 
pain,  when  carried  far,  creates  again  the  highest  pleasure,  by 
mere  cessation  and  a  kind  of  natural  succession  ;  if  some  pleasures 
to  some  are  pains,  and  some  pains  to  others  are  pleasures  *" ;  all 
this,  if  I  mistake  not,  makes  still  for  my  opinion,  and  shows 
that  there  is  nothing  you  can  assign  which  can  really  stand  as 
good.  For  if  pleasure  be  not  good,  nothing  is.  And  if  pain 
be  ill  (as  I  must  necessarily  take  for  granted)  we  have  a  shrewd 
chance  on  the  ill  side  indeed,  but  none  at  all  on  the  better.  So 
that  we  may  fairly  doubt  "  whether  life  itself  be  not  mere 
misery,"  since  gainers  by  it  we  can  never  be ;  losers  we  may 
sufficiently,  and  are  like  to  be  every  hour  of  our  lives.  Ac- 
cordingly, what  our  English  poetess  says  of  good  should  be 
just  and  proper,  ""'TIS  good  not  to  be  born."  .  .  .  And  thus  for 
anything  of  good  -which  can  be  expected  in  life,  we  may  e''en 
"  beg  pardon  of  Nature,  and  return  her  present  on  her  hands 
without  waiting  for  her  call."  For  what  should  hinder  us  ?  or 
what  are  we  the  better  for  living .'' 

The  query,  said  he,  is  pertinent.  But  why  such  dispatch  if 
the  case  be  doubtful  ?  This,  surely,  my  good  Philocles  !  is  a 
plain  transgression  of  your  sceptical  bounds.  We  must  be 
sufficiently  dogmatical  to  come  to  this  determination.  'Tis  a 
deciding  as  well  concerning  death  as  life,  "  what  possibly  may 
be  hereafter,  and  what  not."  Now  to  be  assured  that  we  can 
never  be  concerned  in  anything  hereafter,  we  must  understand 

34 


I 


THE   MORALISTS 

perfectly  what  it  is  which  concerns  or  engages  us  in  anything 
present.  We  must  truly  know  ourselves,  and  in  what  this  self 
of  ours  consists.  We  must  determine  against  pre-existence,  and 
give  a  better  reason  for  our  having  never  been  concerned  in 
aught  before  our  birth  than  merely  "because  we  remember 
not,  nor  are  conscious.''  For  in  many  things  we  have  been 
concerned  to  purpose,  of  which  we  have  now  no  memory  or 
consciousness  remaining.  And  thus  we  may  happen  to  be  again 
and  again  to  perpetuity,  for  any  reason  we  can  show  to  the 
contrary.  All  is  revolution  in  us.  We  are  no  more  the  self- 
same matter  or  system  of  matter  from  one  day  to  another. 
What  succession  there  may  be  hereafter  we  know  not,  since 
even  now  we  live  by  succession,  and  only  perish  and  are 
renewed.  'Tis  in  vain  we  flatter  ourselves  with  the  assurance 
of  our  interests  ending  with  a  certain  shape  or  form.  What 
interested  us  at  first  in  it  we  know  not,  any  more  than  how  we 
have  since  held  on,  and  continue  still  concerned  in  such  an 
assemblage  of  fleeting  particles.  Where  besides  or  in  what 
else  we  may  have  to  do,  perchance,  in  time  to  come,  we  know  as 
little,  nor  can  tell  how  chance  or  providence  hereafter  may 
dispose  of  us.  And  if  providence  be  in  the  case,  we  have  still 
more  reason  to  consider  how  we  undertake  to  be  our  own  dis- 
posers. It  must  needs  become  a  sceptic  above  all  men  to 
hesitate  in  matters  of  exchange.  And  though  he  acknowledges 
no  present  good  or  enjoyment  in  life,  he  must  be  sure,  however, 
of  bettering  his  condition  before  he  attempts  to  alter  it.  But 
as  yet,  Philocles,  even  this  point  remains  undetermined  between 
us :  "  whether  in  this  present  life  there  be  not  such  a  thing  as 
real  good." 

Be  you  therefore,  said  I,  my  instructor,  sagacious  Theocles ! 
and  inform  me  "  what  that  good  is,  or  where,  which  can  aftbrd 
contentment  and  satisfaction  always  alike,  without  variation  or 
diminution.""  For  though  on  some  occasions  and  in  some 
subjects  the  mind  may  possibly  be  so  bent,  and  the  passion  so 
\\Tought  up,  that  for  the  time  no  bodily  sufferance  or  pain  can 

35 


SHAFTESBUKY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

alter  it,  yet  this  is  what  can  seldom  happen,  and  is  unlikely  to 
last  long,  since  without  any  pain  or  inconvenience,  the  passion 
in  a  little  time  does  its  own  work,  the  mind  relaxes  with  its 
bent,  and  the  temper  wearied  with  repetition  finds  no  more 
enjoyment,  but  runs  to  something  new. 

Hear  then  !  said  Theocles.  For  though  I  pretend  not  to 
tell  you  at  once  the  nature  of  this  which  I  call  good,  yet  I  am 
content  to  show  you  something  of  it  in  yourself,  which  you  will 
acknowledge  to  be  naturally  more  fixed  and  constant  than  any- 
thing you  have  hitherto  thought  on.  Tell  nie,  my  friend,  if 
-^ever  you  were  weary  of  doing  good  to  those  you  loved  ?  Say 
when  you  ever  fovmd  it  unpleasing  to  serve  a  friend  ?  or 
whether  when  you  first  proved  this  generous  pleasure  you  did 
not  feel  it  less  than  at  this  present,  after  so  long  experience  "^ 
Believe  me,  Philocles,  this  pleasure  is  more  debauching  than 
any  other.  Never  did  any  soul  do  good,  but  it  came  readier 
I  to  do  the  same  again  with  more  enjoyment.  Never  Mas  love, 
or  gratitude,  or  bounty  practised  but  with  increasing  joy,  which 
made  the  practiser  still  more  in  love  with  the  fair  act.  Answer 
me,  Philocles,  you  who  are  such  a  judge  of  beauty,  and  have  so 
good  a]  taste  of  pleasure,  is  there  anything  you  admire  so  fair 
as  friendship .''  or  anything  so  charming  as  a  generous  action  .'' 
AVhat  would  it  be,  therefore,  if  all  life  were  in  reality  but  one 
continued  friendship,  and  could  be  made  one  such  entire  act  ? 
Here  surely  would  be  that  fixed  and  constant  good  you  sought. 
Or  would  you  look  for  anything  beyond  .'' 

Perhaps  not,  said  I.  But  I  can  never,  surely,  go  beyond 
this  to  seek  for  a  chimera,  if  this  good  of  yours  be  not 
thoroughly  chimerical.  For  though  a  poet  may  possibly  work 
up  such  a  single  action,  so  as  to  hold  a  play  out,  I  can  conceive 
but  very  faintly  how  this  high  strain  of  friendship  can  be  so 
managed  as  to  fill  a  life.  Nor  can  I  imagine  where  the  object 
lies  of  such  a  sublime,  heroic  passion. 

Can  any  friendshi]),  said  he,  be  so  heroic  as  that  towards 
mankind  ?      Do  you  think  the  love  of  friends  in  general  and 

36 


THE   MORALISTS 

of  one''s  country  to  be  nothing?  or  that  particular  friendship 
can  well  subsist  without  such  an  enlarged  affection  and  sense 
of  obligation  to  society  ?  Say,  if  possible,  you  are  a  friend, 
but  hate  your  country.  Say,  you  are  true  to  the  interest  of  a 
companion,  but  false  to  that  of  society.  Can  you  believe  your- 
self ?  or  will  you  lay  the  name  aside,  and  refuse  to  be  called  the 
friend,  since  you  renounce  the  man  ? 

That  there  is  something,  said  I,  due  to  mankind,  is  what  I 
think  will  not  be  disputed  by  one  who  claims  the  name  of 
friend.  Hardly  indeed  could  I  allow  the  name  of  man  to  one 
who  never  could  call  or  be  called  friend.  But  he  who  justly 
proves  himself  a  friend  is  man  enough,  nor  is  he  wanting  to 
society.  A  single  friendship  may  acquit  him.  He  has  deserved 
a  friend,  and  is  man's  friend,  though  not  in  strictness,  or  accord- 
ing to  your  high  moral  sense,  the  friend  of  mankind.  For  to 
say  truth,  as  to  this  sort  of  friendship  it  may  by  wiser  heads 
be  esteemed  perhaps  more  than  ordinarily  manly,  and  even 
heroic,  as  you  assert  it ;  but  for  my  part  I  see  so  very  little 
worth  in  mankind,  and  have  so  indifferent  an  opinion  of  the 
public,  that  I  can  propose  little  satisfaction  to  myself  in  loving 
either. 

Do  you,  then,  take  bounty  and  gratitude  to  be  among  the 
acts  of  friendship  and  good-nature  ?  Undoubtedly,  for  they 
are  the  chief.  Suppose  then  that  the  obliged  person  discovers 
in  the  obliger  sevei-al  failings ;  does  this  exclude  the  gratitude 
of  the  former  't  Not  in  the  least.  Or  does  it  make  the  exercise 
of  gratitude  less  pleasing  ?  I  think  rather  the  contrary.  For 
when  deprived  of  other  means  of  making  a  return,  I  might 
rejoice  still  in  that  sure  way  of  showing  my  gratitude  to  my 
benefactor  by  bearing  his  failings  as  a  friend.  And  as  to 
bounty  :  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  is  it  to  those  only  who  are 
deserving  that  we  should  do  good  ?  Is  it  only  to  a  good 
neighbour  or  relation,  a  good  father,  child,  or  brother 't  Or 
does  Nature,  reason,  and  humanity  better  teach  us  to  do  good 
still  to  a  father  because  a  father,  and  to  a  child  because  a  child, 

37 


/ 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHAllACTERISTICS 

and  so  to  every  relation  in  human  life  ?     I  think,  said  I,  this 
last  is  rightest. 

O  Philocles,  replied  he,  consider  then  what  it  was  you  said 
when  you  objected  against  the  love  of  mankind  because  of 
human  frailty,  and  seemed  to  scorn  the  public  because  of  its 
misfortunes.  See  if  this  sentiment  be  consistent  with  that 
humanity  which  elsewhere  you  o\vti  and  practise.  For  where 
can  generosity  exist  if  not  here  ?  Where  can  we  ever  exert 
friendship,  if  not  in  this  chief  subject  ?  To  what  should  we 
be  true  or  grateful  in  the  Avorld  if  not  to  mankind  and  that 
society  to  which  we  are  so  deeply  indebted  ?  What  are  the 
faults  or  blemishes  which  can  excuse  such  an  omission,  or  in  a 
grateful  mind  can  ever  lessen  the  satisfaction  of  making  a 
grateful,  kind  return  ?  Can  you  then  out  of  good-breeding 
merely,  and  from  a  temper  natural  to  you,  rejoice  to  show 
civility,  courteousness,  obligingness,  seek  objects  of  compassion, 
and  be  pleased  with  every  occurrence  where  you  have  power  to 
do  some  service  even  to  people  unknown  ?  Can  you  delight  in 
such  adventures  abroad  in  foreign  countries,  or  in  the  case  of 

— strangers  here  at  home ;  to  help,  assist,  relieve  all  who  require 
it,  in  the  most  hospitable,  kind,  and  friendly  manner  ?  And 
can  your  country  or,  what  is  more,  your  kind,  require  less  kind- 
ness from  you,  or  deserve  less  to  be  considered,  than  even  one 
of  these  chance  creatures  ?  O  Philocles  !  how  little  do  you 
know  the  extent  and  power  of  good-nature,  and  to  what  an 
heroic  pitch  a  soul  may  rise  which  knows  the  thorough  force 

j  of  it,  and  distributing  it  rightly,  frames  in  itself  an  equal,  just, 

\ ;  and  universal  friendship  ! 

Just  as  he  had  ended  these  words,  a  servant  came  to  us  in 
the  field  to  give  notice  of  some  company  who  Avere  come  to 
dine  with  us,  and  waited  our  coming  in.  So  we  walked  home- 
wards. I  told  Theocles,  going  along,  that  I  feared  I  should 
never  make  a  good  friend  or  lover  after  his  way.  As  for  a 
plain  natural  love  of  one  single  person  in  either  sex,  I  could 
'  compass  it,  I  thought,  well  enough ;  but  this  complex,  universal 

38 


THE   MORALISTS 

sort  was  beyond  my  reach.  I  could  love  the  individual,  but 
not  the  species.  This  was  too  mysterious,  too  metaphysical  an 
object  for  me.  In  short,  I  could  love  nothing  of  which  I  had 
not  some  sensible,  material  image. 

How  !  replied  Theocles,  can  you  never  love  except  in  this 
manner  .'*  when  yet  I  know  that  you  admired  and  loved  a  friend 
long  ere  you  knew  his  person.  Or  was  Palemon's  character  of 
no  force  when  it  engaged  you  in  that  long  correspondence 
which  preceded  your  late  personal  acquaintance  ?  The  fact, 
said  I,  I  must  of  necessity  own  to  you.  And  now,  methinks, 
I  understand  your  mystery,  and  perceive  how  I  nmst  prepare 
for  it ;  for  in  the  same  manner  as  when  I  first  began  to  love 
Palemon,  I  was  forced  to  form  a  kind  of  material  object,  and 
had  always  'such  a  certain  image  of  him  ready  drawn  in  my 
mind  whenever  I  thought  of  him  ;  so  I  must  endeavour  to  order 
it  in  the  case  before  us,  if  possibly  by  your  help  I  can  raise  any 
such  image  or  spectre  as  may  represent  this  odd  being  you 
would  have  me  love. 

Methinks,  said  he,  you  might  have  the  same  indulgence  for 
Nature  or  Mankind  as  for  the  people  of  old  Rome,  whom, 
notwithstanding  their  blemishes,  I  have  known  you  in  love 
with  many  ways,  particularly  under  the  representation  of  a 
beautiful  youth  called  the  Genius  of  the  People.  For  I  re- 
member that,  viewing  once  some  pieces  of  antiquity  where  the 
people  were  thus  represented,  you  allowed  them  to  be  no 
disagreeable  object. 

Indeed,  replied  I,  were  it  possible  for  me  to  stamp  upon  mv 
mind  such  a  figure  as  you  speak  of,  whether  it  stood  for  Mankind 
or  Nature,  it  might  probably  have  its  effect,  and  I  might  become 
perhaps  a  lover  after  your  way ;  but  more  especially  if  you 
could  so  order  it  as  to  make  things  reciprocal  between  us,  and 
bring  me  to  fancy  of  this  genius  that  it  could  be  "  sensible  of 
my  love,  and  capable  of  a  return."  For  without  this  I  should 
make  but  an  ill  lover,  though  of  the  perfectest  beauty  in  the 
world. 

39 


\ 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

'Tis  enough,  said  Theocles,  I  accept  the  terms,  and  if  you 
promise  to  love,  I  will  endeavour  to  show  you  that  beauty 
which  I  count  the  perfectest,  and  most  deserving  of  love,  and 
which  will  not  fail  of  a  return.  .  .  .  To-morrow,  when  the 
eastern  sun  (as  poets  describe}  with  his  first  beams  adorns  the 
front  of  yonder  hill,  there,  if  you  are  content  to  wander  with 
me  in  the  woods  you  see,  we  will  pursue  those  loves  of  ours  by 
favour  of  the  svlvan  nymphs ;  and  invoking  first  the  genius  of 
the  place,  we  will  try  to  obtain  at  least  some  faint  and  distant 
view  of  the  sovereign  genius  and  first  beauty.  This  if  you  can 
come  once  to  contemplate,  I  will  answer  for  it  that  all  those 
forbidding  features  and  deformities,  whether  of  Nature  or 
Mankind,  will  vanish  in  an  instant,  and  leave  you  that  love  I 
could  wish.  But  now,  enough  !  .  .  .  Let  us  to  our  company, 
and  change  this  conversation  for  [some  other  more  suitable  to 
our  friends  and  table. 

Section    II 

You  see  here,  Palemon,  what  a  foundation  is  laid  for  the  en- 
thusiasms I  told  you  of,  and  which,  in  my  opinion  (I  told  you 
too),  were  the  more  dangerous,  because  so  very  odd  and  out  of 
the  way.  But  curiosity  had  seized  you,  I  perceived,  as  it  had 
done  me  before.  For  after  this  first  conversation  I  must  own 
I  longed  for  nothing  so  much  as  the  next  day,  and  the  appointed 
mor;iing  walk  in  the  woods. 

We  had  only  a  friend  or  two  at  dinner  with  us,  and  for  a 
good  while  we  discoursed  of  news  and  indifferent  things,  till  1, 
who  had  my  head  still  running  upon  those  other  subjects,  gladly 
laid  hold  of  something  dropt  by  chance  concerning  friendship, 
and  said'  that  for  my  own  part,  truly,  though  I  once  thought  I 
had  known  friendship,  and  really  counted  myself  a  good  friend 
during  my  whole  life,  yet  I  was  now  persuaded  to  believe 
ijiyself  no  better  than  a  learner,  since  Theocles  had  almost  con- 
vinced me  "  that  to  be  a  friend  to  any  one  in  particular,  'twas 

40 


THE   MORALISTS 

necessary  to  be  first  a  friend  to  mankind."  But  how  to  qualify 
myself  for  such  a  friendship  was,  methought,  no  little  difficulty. 

Indeed,  said  Theocles,  you  have  given  us  a  very  indifferent 
character  of  yourself  in  saying  so.  If  you  had  spoken  thus  of 
the  friendship  of  any  great  man  at  court,  or  perhaps  of  a  court 
itself,  and  had  complained  "  how  hard  it  was  for  you  to  succeed, 
or  make  interest  with  such  as  governed  there,"  we  should  have 
concluded  in  your  behalf  that  there  were  such  terms  to  be  com- 
plied with  as  were  unworthy  of  you.  But  "  to  tleserve  well 
of  the  public,"  and  "to  be  justly  styled  the  friend  of  mankind," 
requires  no  more  than  to  be  good  and  virtujous ;  terms  which 
for  one's  own  sake  one  would  naturally  covet. 

How  comes  it  then,  said  I,  that  even  these  good  terms 
themselves  are  so  ill  accepted,  and  hardly  ever  taken  (if  I  may 
so  express  it)  except  on  further  terms  ?  For  virtue  by  itself  is 
thought  but  an  ill  bargain;  and  I  know  few,  even  of  the  religious 
and  devout,  who  take  up  with  it  any  otherwise  than  as  children 
do  with  phvsic ;  where  the  rod  and  sweetmeat  are  the  potent 
motives. 

Tliev  are  children  indeed,  replied  Theocles,  and  should  be 
treated  so,  who  need  any  force  or  persuasion  to  do  what  conduces 
to  their  health  aud_^ood.  But  where,  I  beseech  you,  are  those 
forbidding  circumstances  which  should  make  virtue  go  down  so 
hardly  ?  Is  it  not  among  other  things  that  you  think  yourself 
by  this  means  precluded  the  fine  tables  and  costly  eating  of  our 
modern  epicures,  and  that  perhaps  you  fear  the  being  reduced 
to  eat  always  as  ill  as  now,  upon  a  plain  dish  or  two  and  no 
more  .'' 

This,  I  protested,  was  injuriously  supposed  of  me.  For  I 
wished  never  to  eat  otherwise  than  I  now  did  at  his  table,  which, 
by  the  way,  had  more  resemblance,  I  thought,  of  Epicurus's, 
than  those  which  nowadays  preposterously  passed  under  his 
name.  For  if  his  opinion  might  be  taken,  the  highest  pleasures 
in  the  world  were  owing  to  temperance  and  moderate  use. 

If  then  the  merest  studier  of  pleasure,  answered  Theocles, 

41 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

even  Epicurus  himself,  made  that  favourable  report  of  temper- 
ance, so  different  from  his  modern  disciples ;  if  he  could  boldly 
say  "  that  with  such  fare  as  a  mean  garden  afforded,  he  could 
vie  even  with  the  gods  for  happiness "" ;  how  shall  we  say  of  this 
part  of  virtue  that  it  needs  be  taken  upon  terms  ?  If  the  im- 
mediate practice  of  temperance  be  thus  harmless,  are  its  conse- 
quences injurious  ?  Does  it  take  from  the  vigour  of  the  mind, 
consume  the  body,  and  render  both  the  one  and  the  other  less 
apt  to  their  proper  exercises,  "  the  enjoyments  of  reason  or  sense, 
or  the  employments  and  offices  of  civil  life"?  Or  is  it  that  a 
man's  circumstances  are  the  worse  for  it,  as  he  stands  towards 
his  friends  or  mankind  ?  Is  a  gentleman  in  this  sense  to  be 
pitied  "  as  one  burdensome  to  himself  and  others ;  one  whom 
all  men  will  naturally  shun  as  an  ill  friend  and  a  corrupter  of 
society  and  good  manners"?  .  .  .  Shall  we  consider  our  gentleman 
in  a  public  trust,  and  see  whether  he  is  like  to  succeed  best  with 
this  restraining  quality,  or  whether  he  may  be  more  relied  on, 
and  thought  more  incorrupt,  if  his  appetites  are  high,  and  his 
relish  strong  towards  that  which  we  call  pleasure  ?  Shall  we 
consider  him  as  a  soldier  in  a  campaign  or  siege,  and  advise 
with  ourselves  how  we  might  be  best  defended,  if  we  had  occa- 
sion for  such  a  one''s  service  ?  "  Which  officer  would  make  the 
best  for  the  soldiers,  which  soldier  for  the  officers,  or  which  army 
for  their  country  ? "  .  .  .  What  think  you  of  our  gentleman 
for  a  fellow-traveller  ?  AVould  he,  as  a  temperate  man,  be  an 
ill  choice  ?  Would  it  indeed  be  more  eligible  and  delightful 
"  to  have  a  companion  who,  in  any  shift  or  necessity,  would 
prove  the  most  ravenous,  and  eager  to  provide  in  the  first  place 
for  himself,  and  his  own  exquisite  sensations "  ?  .  .  .  I  know 
not  what  to  say  where  beauty  is  concerned.  Perhaps  the 
amorous  galcmts  and  exquisite  refiners  on  this  sort  of  pleasure 
may  have  so  refined  their  minds  and  tempers  that,  notwith- 
standing their  accustomed  indulgence,  they  can  ujjon  occasion 
renounce  their  enjoyment  rather  than  violate  honour,  faith,  or 
justice.  .  .  .    And   thus  at  last  there  will   be   little   virtue  or 

42 


THE   MOKALTSTS 

worth  ascribed  to  this  patient,  sober  character.  "The  dull, 
temperate  man  is  no  fitter  to  be  trusted  than  the  elegant, 
luxurious  one.  Innocence,  youth,  and  fortune  may  be  as  well 
committed  to  the  care  of  this  latter  gentleman.  He  would 
prove  as  good  an  executor,  as  good  a  trustee,  as  good  a  guardian, 
as  he  would  a  friend.  The  family  which  entrusted  him  would 
be  secure,  and  no  dishonour  in  any  likelihood  would  happen 
from  the  honest  man  of  pleasure." 

The  seriousness  with  which  Theocles  spoke  this,  made  it  the 
more  pleasant,  and  set  our  other  company  upon  saying  a  great 
many  good  things  on  the  same  subject  in  commendation  of  a 
temperate  life.  So  that  our  dinner  by  this  time  being  ended, 
and  the  wine,  according  to  custom,  placed  before  us,  I  found 
still  we  w^ere  in  no  likelihood  of  proceeding  to  a  debauch. 
Every  one  drank  only  as  he  fancied,  in  no  order  or  proportion, 
and  with  no  regard  to  circular  healths  or  pledges.  A  manner 
Avhich  the  sociable  men  of  another  scheme  of  morals  would  have 
censured  no  doubt  as  a  heinous  irregularity  and  corruption  of 
good  fellowship. 

I  own,  said  I,  I  am  far  from  thinking  temperance  so  dis- 
agreeable a  character.  As  for  this  part  of  virtue,  I  think  there 
is  no  need  of  taking  it  on  any  other  terms  to  recommend  it 
than  the  mere  advantage  of  being  saved  from  intemperance,  and 
from  the  desire  of  things  unnecessary. 

How,  said  Theocles,  are  you  thus  far  advanced  ^  And  can 
you  cany  this  temperance  so  far  as  to  estates  and  honours  by 
opposing  it  to  avarice  and  ambition.?  Nay,  then  truly  you 
may  be  said  to  have  fairly  embarked  yourself  in  this  cause. 
You  have  passed  the  channel,  and  are  more  than  half-seas 
over.  There  remains  no  further  scruple  in  the  case  of  virtue 
unless  you  will  declare  yourself  a  coward,  or  conclude  it  a 
happiness  to  be  born  one.  For  if  you  can  be  temperate  withal 
towards  life,  and  think  it  not  so  great  a  business  whether  it  be 
of  fewer  or  more  years ;  but,  satisfied  with  Mhat  you  have  lived, 
can  rise  a  thankful  guest  from  a  full,  liberal  entertainment,  is 

4-3 


SHAFTESEUKY'S   CHAIIACTEETSTICS 

not  this  the  sum  of  all  ?  the  finishing  stroke  and  very  ac- 
complishment of  virtue  ?  In  this  temper  of  mind  what  is 
there  can  hinder  us  from  forming  for  ourselves  as  heroic  a 
character  as  ^\■e  please  ?  What  is  there  either  good,  generous, 
or  great,  which  does  not  naturally  flow  from  such  a  modest 
temperance  ?  Let  us  once  gain  this  simple,  plain-looked  virtue, 
and  see  whether  the  more  shining  virtues  Avill  not  follow.  See 
what  that  country  of  the  mind  will  produce,  when  by  the 
wholesome  laws  of  this  legislatress  it  has  obtained  its  liberty ! 
You,  Philocles,  who  are  such  an  admirer  of  civil  liberty,  and 
can  represent  it  to  yourself  with  a  thousand  several  graces  and 
advantages ;  can  you  imagine  no  grace  or  beauty  in  that 
original,  native  liberty  which  sets  us  free  from  so  many  inborn 
tyrannies,  gives  us  the  privilege  of  ourselves,  and  makes  us 
our  own  and  independent  ?  A  sort  of  property  which,  me- 
thinks,  is  as  material  to  us  to  the  full  as  that  which  secures  us 
our  lands  or  revenues. 

I  should  think,  said  he  (carrying  on  his  humour),  that  one 
might  draw  the  picture  of  this  moral  dame  to  as  much 
advantage  as  that  of  her  political  sister,  whom  vou  admire,  as 
described  to  us  "  in  her  Amazon-dress,  with  a  free,  manly  air 
becoming  her ;  her  guards  the  laws,  with  their  written  tables, 
like  bucklers,  surrounding  her ;  riches,  traffic,  aiid  plentv,  with 
the  cornucopia,  serving  as  her  attendants ;  and  in  her  train  the 
arts  and  sciences,  like  children,  playing."  .  .  .  The  rest  of  the  piece 
is  easv  to  imagine  :  "  her  triumph  over  tvrannv,  and  lawless 
rule  of  lust  and  passion.""  .  .  .  But  what  a  triumph  would  her 
sister's  be !  what  monsters  of  savage  passions  would  there 
appear  subdued  !  "  There  fierce  ambition,  lust,  uproar,  mis- 
rule, with  all  the  fiends  which  rage  in  human  breasts,  would 
be  securely  chained.  And  when  fortune  herself,  the  queen  of 
flatteries,  with  that  prince  of  terrors,  death,  were  at  the  chariot- 
wheels  as  captives,  how  natural  would  it  be  to  see  fortitude, 
magnanimity,  justice,  honour,  and  all  that  generous  band 
attend  as  the  companions  of  our  inmate  Lady  Liberty  !     She, 

44 


THE   MORALISTS 

like  some  new-born  goddess,  would  grace  her  mother's  chariot, 
and  own  her  birth  from  humble  temperance,  that  nursing 
mother  of  the  virtues,  who  like  the  parent  of  the  gods  (old 
reverend  Cybele)  would  properly  appear  drawn  by  reined  lions, 
patient  of  the  bit,  and  on  her  head  a  turret-like  attire,  the 
image  of  defensive  power  and  strength  of  mind." 

By  this  picture  Theocles,  I  found,  had  given  entertainment 
to  the  company,'  who,  fronj  this  rough  draught  of  his,  fell  to 
designing  upon  the  same  subject  after  the  ancient  manner,  till 
Prodicus  and  Cebes  and  all  the  ancients  were  exhausted. 

Gentlemen,  said  I,  the  descriptions  you  have  been  making 
are,  no  doubt,  the  finest  in  the  world ;  but  after  all,  when  you 
have  made  virtue  as  glorious  and  triumphant  as  you  please,  1 
will  bring  you  an  authentic  picture  of  another  kind,  where  we 
shall  see  this  triumph  in  reverse:  "Virtue  herself  a  captive  in 
her  turn ;  and  by  a  proud  conqueror  triumphed  over,  degraded, 
spoiled  of  all  her  honours,  and  defaced,  so  as  to  retain  hardly 
one  single  feature  of  real  beauty."" 

I  offered  to  go  on  further,  but  could  not,  being  so  violently 
decried  by  my  two  fellow-guests,  who  protested  they  would 
never  be  brought  to  own  so  detestable  a  picture ;  and  one  of 
them  (a  formal  sort  of  gentleman,  somewhat  advanced  in  years) 
looking  earnestly  upon  me,  said,  in  an  angry  tone,  "  that  he 
had  hitherto,  indeed,  conceived  some  ho]:)es  of  me,  notwith- 
standing he  observed  my  freedom  of  thought,  and  heard  me 
quoted  for  such  a  passionate  lover  of  liberty  ;  but  he  was  sorry 
to  find  that  my  princijjle  of  liberty  extended  in  fine  to  a  liberty 
from  all  principles "  (so  he  expressed  himself),  "  and  none,"  he 
thought,  "  beside  a  libertine  in  principle  would  ap})rove  of  such 
a  picture  of  virtue  as  only  an  atheist  could  have  the  impudence 
to  make." 

Theocles  the  while  sat  silent,  though  he  saw  I  minded  not 
my  antagonists,  but  kept  my  eye  fixed  steadily  on  himself, 
expecting  to  hear  what  he  would  say.  At  last,  fetching  a  deep 
sigh,  O   Philocles,  said  he,  how  well  you  are   master  of  that 

45 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

cause  you  have  taken  on  you  to  defend  !  How  well  you  know 
the  way  to  gain  advantage  to  the  worst  of  causes  from  the 
imprudent  management  of  those  who  defend  the  best !  I  dare 
not,  for  my  own  share,  affirm  to  you,  as  my  worthy  friends 
have  done,  "  that  'tis  the  atheist  alone  can  lay  this  load  on 
Virtue,  and  picture  her  thus  disgracefully.""  No.  There  are 
other  over-officious  and  less  suspected  hands,  which  do  her 
perhaps  more  injury,  though  with  a  better  colour. 

That  virtue  should,  with  any  show  of  reason,  be  made  a 
victim  (continued  he,  turning  himself  to  his  guests)  must  have 
appeared  strange  to  you,  no  doubt,  to  hear  asserted  with  such 
assurance  as  has  been  done  by  Philocles.  You  could  conceive 
no  tolerable  ground  for  such  a  spectacle.  In  this  reversed 
triumph  you  expected  perhaps  to  see  some  foreign  conqueror 
exalted  ;  as  either  vice  itself,  or  pleasure,  wit,  spurious  philo- 
sophy, or  some  false  image  of  truth  or  Nature.  Little  were 
you  aware  that  the  cruel  enemy  opposed  to  virtue  should  be 
religion  itself !  But  you  will  call  to  mind  that  even  innocently, 
and  without  any  treacherous  design,  virtue  is  often  treated  so 
by  those  who  would  magnify  to  the  utmost  the  corruption  of 
man's  heart ;  and  in  exposing,  as  they  pretend,  the  falsehood 
of  human  virtue,  think  to  extol  religion.  How  many  religious 
authors,  how  many  sacred  orators,  turn  all  their  edge  this  way, 
and  strike  at  moral  virtue  as  a  kind  of  step-dame,  or  rival  to 
religion !  "  Morality  must  not  be  named ;  Nature  has  no 
pretence ;  reason  is  an  enemy ;  connnon  justice,  folly ;  and 
virtue,  misery.  Who  would  not  be  vicious  had  he  his  choice .'' 
Who  would  forbear  but  because  he  must .''  Or  who  would 
value  virtue  but  for  hereafter  i "  ^ 

Truly,  said  the  old  gentleman  (interrupting  him),  if  this  be 
the  triumph  of  religion,  'tis  such  as  her  greatest  enemy,  I 
believe,  would  scarce  deny  her ;  and  I  must  still  be  of  opinion 
(with  Philocles's  leave)  that  it  is  no  great  sign  of  tenderness  for 
religion  to  be  so  zealous  in  honouring  her  at  the  cost  of  virtue. 
^  Misc.  V.  cli.  iii. 

46 


THE   MORALISTS 

Perhaps  so,  said  I.  Yet  that  there  are  many  such  zealots 
in  the  Avorld  vou  will  acknowledge.  And  that  there  is  a  certain 
harmony  between  this  zeal  and  what  you  call  atheism,  Theocles, 
you  hear,  has  allowed.  But  let  us  hear  him  out,  if  perhaps  he 
will  be  so  free  as  to  discover  to  us  Avhat  he  thinks  of  the 
generality  of  our  religious  writers,  and  their  method  of  en- 
countering their  common  enemy,  the  atheist.  This  is  a  subject 
which  possibly  may  need  a  better  clearing.  For  'tis  notorious 
that  the  chief  opposers  of  atheism  write  upon  contrary  prin- 
ciples to  one  another,  so  as  in  a  manner  to  confute  themselves. 
Some  of  them  hold  zealously  for  virtue,  and  are  realists  in  the 
point.  Others,  one  may  say,  are  only  nominal  moralists,  by 
making  virtue  nothing  in  itself,  a  creature  of  will  only,  or  a 
mere  name  of  fashion.  'Tis  the  same  in  natural  philosophy  : 
some  take  one  hy})othesis  and  some  another.  I  should  be  glad 
to  discover  once  the  true  foundation,  and  distinguish  those  who 
effectually  refute  their  other  antagonists  as  well  as  the  atheists, 
and  rightly  assert  the  joint  cause  of  virtue  and  religion. 

Here,  Palemon,  I  had  my  wish.  For  by  degrees  I  engaged 
Theocles  to  discover  himself  fully  upon  these  subjects,  which 
served  as  a  prelude  to  those  we  were  to  engage  in  the  next 
morning,  for  the  approach  of  which  I  so  impatiently  longed. 
If  his  speculations  proved  of  a  rational  kind,  this  previous 
discourse,  I  knew,  would  help  me  to  comprehend  them  ;  if  only 
})leasing  fancies,  this  would  help  me,  however,  to  please  myself 
the  better  with  them. 

Here  then  began  his  criticism  of  authors,  which  grew  by 
degrees  into  a  continued  discourse.  So  that  had  this  been  at  a 
university,  Theocles  might  very  well  have  passed  for  some  grave 
divinity  professor,  or  teacher  of  ethics,  reading  an  afternoon 
lecture  to  his  pupils. 

Sectiox  in 

It  would  be  undoubtedly,  said  he,  a  happy  cause  which  could 
have  the  benefit  of  such  managers  as  should  never  give  their 

47 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

adversaries  any  handle  of  advantage  against  it.  I  could  wish 
that  in  the  cause  of  religion  we  had  reason  to  boast  as  much. 
But  since  'tis  not  impossible  to  write  ill  even  in  the  best  of 
causes,  I  am  inclined  to  think  this  great  one  of  religion  may 
have  run  at  least  an  equal  hazard  with  any  other,  since  they 
who  write  in  defence  of  it  are  apt  generally  to  use  so  much  the 
less  caution  as  they  are  more  exempt  from  the  fear  of  censure 
or  criticism  in  their  own  person.  Their  adversary  is  well  secured 
and  silenced  to  their  hand.  They  may  safely  provoke  him  to  a 
field  where  he  cannot  appear  openly,  or  as  a  professed  antagonist. 
His  weapons  are  private,  and  can  often  reach  the  cause  without 
offence  to  its  maintainers,  whilst  no  direct  attack  robs  them  of 
their  imaginary  victory.  They  conquer  for  themselves,  and 
expect  to  be  approved  still  for  their  zeal,  however  the  cause 
itself  may  have  suffered  in  their  hands. 

Perhaps  then,  said  I  (interrupting  him),  it  may  be  true 
enough  what  was  said  once  by  a  person  who  seemed  zealous  for 
religion,  "that  none  writ  well  against  the  atheists  beside  the 
clerk  who  drew  the  warrant  for  their  execution." 

If  this  were  the  true  writing,  replied  he,  there  would  be  an 
end  of  all  dispute  or  reasoning  in  the  case.  For  where  force  is 
necessary,  reason  has  nothing  to  do.  But  on  the  other  hand, 
if  reason  be  needful,  force  in  the  meanwhile  must  be  laid  aside ; 
for  there  is  no  enforcement  of  reason  but  by  reason.  And 
therefore  if  atheists  are  to  be  reasoned  with  at  all,  they  are  to 
be  reasoned  with  like  other  men,  since  there  is  no  other  way  in 
Nature  to  convince  them. 

This  I  own,  said  I,  seems  rational  and  just,  but  I  am  afraid 
that  most  of  the  devout  people  will  be  found  ready  to  abandon 
the  patient  for  the  more  concise  method.  And  though  force 
without  reason  may  be  thought  somewhat  hard,  yet  your  other 
way  of  reason  without  force,  I  am  apt  to  think,  would  meet 
with  fewer  admirers. 

But  perhaps,  replied  Theocles,  'tis  a  mere  sound  which 
troubles  us.     The  word  or  name  of  atheist  may  possibly  occa- 

48 

r 


THE   JMORALISTS 

sion  some  disturbance,  by  being  made  to  describe  two  characters 
so  very  different  as  his  who  absolutely  denies  and  his  who  only 
doubts.  Now  he  who  doubts  may  possibly  lament  his  own 
unhappiness  and  wish  to  be  convinced.  He  who  denies  is 
daringly  presumptuous,  and  sets  up  an  opinion  against  the 
interest  of  mankind  and  being  of  society.  'Tis  easily  seen  that 
one  of  these  persons  may  bear  a  due  respect  to  the  magistrate 
and  laws,  though  not  the  other,  who  being  obnoxious  to  them 
is  therefore  punishable.  But  how  the  former  is  punishable  by 
man  will  be  hard  to  say,  unless  the  magistrate  had  dominion 
over  minds,  as  well  as  over  actions  and  behaviour,  and  had 
power  to  exercise  an  inquisition  within  the  inmost  bosoms  and 
secret  thoughts  of  men. 

I  apprehend  you,  said  I.  And  by  your  account,  as  there 
are  two  sorts  of  people  who  are  called  atheists,  so  there  are  two 
ways  of  writing  against  them,  which  may  be  fitly  used  apart, 
but  not  so  well  jointly.  You  would  set  aside  mere  menaces 
and  separate  the  philosopher''s  work  from  the  magistrate's, 
taking  it  for  granted  that  the  more  discreet  and  sober  part  of 
unbelievers,  who  come  not  under  the  dispatching  pen  of  the 
magistrate,  can  be  affected  only  by  the  more  deliberate  and 
gentle  one  of  philosophy.  Now  the  language  of  the  magistrate, 
I  must  confess,  has  little  in  common  with  that  of  philosophy. 
Nothing  can  be  more  unbecoming  the  magisterial  authority 
than  a  philosophical  style,  and  nothing  can  be  more  unphilo- 
sophical  than  a  magisterial  one.  A  mixture  of  these  must  needs 
spoil  both.  And  therefore,  in  the  cause  before  us,  "  if  any  one 
besides  the  magistrate  can  be  said  to  write  well,  'tis  he  (accord- 
ing to  your  account)  who  writes  as  becomes  philosophy,  with 
freedom  of  debate,  and  fairness  towards  his  adversary." 

Allow  it,  replied  he.  For  what  can  be  more  equitable  ? 
Nothing.  But  will  the  world  be  of  the  same  opinion  ?  And 
may  this  method  of  writing  be  justly  practised  in  it?  Un- 
doubtedly it  may.  And  for  a  proof  we  have  many  instances  in 
antiquity  to  produce.  The  freedom  taken  in  this  philosophical 
VOL.  II  49  E 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

way  was  never  esteemed  injurious  to  religion  or  prejudicial  to 
the  vulgar,  since  we  find  it  to  have  been  a  practice  both  in 
writing  and  converse  among  the  great  men  of  a  virtuous  and 
religious  people ;  and  that  even  those  magistrates  who  officiated 
at  the  altars,  and  were  the  guardians  of  the  public  worship, 
were  sharers  in  these  free  debates. 

Forgive  me,  Theocles,  said  I,  if  I  presume  to  say  that  still 
this  reaches  not  the  case  before  us.  We  are  to  consider  Christian 
times  such  as  are  now  present.  You  know  the  common  fate  of 
those  who  dare  to  appear  fair  authors.  What  was  that  pious 
and  learned  man's  case  who  wrote  The  Intellectual  System  of  the 
Unive7'se  ?  ^  I  confess  it  was  pleasant  enough  to  consider  that 
though  the  whole  world  were  no  less  satisfied  with  his  capacity 
and  learning  than  with  his  sincerity  in  the  cause  of  Deity,  yet 
was  he  accused  of  giving  the  upper  hand  to  the  atheists  for 
having  only  stated  their  reasons  and  those  of  their  adversaries 
fairly  together.  And  among  other  writings  of  this  kind  you 
may  remember  how  a  certain  fair  Inquiry'^  (as  you  called  it) 
was  received  and  what  offence  was  taken  at  it. 

I  am  sorry,  said  Theocles,  it  proved  so.  But  now  indeed 
you  have  found  a  way  which  may,  perhaps,  force  me  to  discourse 
at  large  with  you  on  this  head,  by  entering  the  lists  in  defence 
of  a  friend  unjustly  censured  for  this  philosophical  libertv. 

I  confessed  to  Theocles  and  the  company  that  this  had  really 
been  my  aim,  and  that  for  this  reason  alone  I  made  myself 
the  accuser  of  this  author,  "  whom  I  hei'e  actually  charged,  as  I 
did  all  those  other  moderate  calm  writers,  with  no  less  than 
profaneness,  for  reasoning  so  unconcernedly  and  patiently,  with- 
out the  least  show  of  zeal  or  passion,  upon  the  subject  of  a 
Deity  and  a  future  state."" 

And  I,  on  the  other  side,  replied  Theocles,  am  rather  for 
this  patient  way  of  reasoning,  and  will  endeavour  to  clear  my 
friend  of  this  imputation,  if  you  can  have  patience  enough  to 
hear  me  out  in  an  affair  of  such  a  compass. 

1  [Cud worth.]  -  \J.e.  Sliaftesbury's  early  essay,  printed  above.] 

50 


THE   MORALISTS 

"We  all  answered  for  ourselves,  and  he  began  thus : — 
Of  the  many  writers  engaged  in  the  defence  of  religion,  it 
seems  to  me  that  the  greatest  part  are  employed  either  in 
^supporting  the  truth  of  the  Christian  Faith  in  general,  or  in 
i-efuting  such  particular  doctrines  as  are  esteemed  innovations 
in  the  Christian  Church.  There  are  not,  'tis  thought,  many 
persons  in  the  world  who  are  loose  in  the  very  grounds  and 
principles  of  all  religion ;  and  to  such  as  these  we  find,  indeed, 
there  are  not  many  writers  who  purposely  apply  themselves. 
They  may  think  it  a  mean  labour,  and  scarce  becoming  them, 
to  argue  sedately  with  such  as  are  almost  universally  treated 
with  detestation  and  horror.  But  as  we  are  required  by  our 
religion  to  have  charity  for  all  men,  so  we  cannot  surely  avoid 
having  a  real  concern  for  those  whom  we  apprehend  to  be  under 
the  worst  of  errors,  and  whom  we  find  by  experience  to  be  with 
the  greatest  difficulty  reclaimed.  Neither  ought  they  perhaps 
in  prudence  to  be  treated  with  so  little  regard  whose  number, 
however  small,  is  thought  to  be  rather  increasing,  and  this,  too, 
among  the  people  of  no  despicable  rank.  So  that  it  may  well 
deserve  some  consideration  "  whether  in  our  age  and  country 
the  same  remedies  may  serve  which  have  hitherto  been  tried, 
or  whether  some  other  may  not  be  preferred,  as  being  suitable 
to  times  of  less  strictness  in  matters  of  religion  and  places  less 
subject  to  authority."" 

This  might  be  enough  to  yiut  an  author  upon  thinking  of 
such  a  way  of  reasoning  with  these  deluded  persons,  as  in  his 
opinion  might  be  more  effectual  for  their  benefit,  than  the 
repeated  exclamations  and  invectives  with  which  most  of  the 
arguments  used  against  them  are  conunonly  accompanied.  Nor 
was  it  so  absurd  to  imagine  that  a  quite  different  method  might 
be  attempted,  by  which  a  writer  might  offer  reason  to  these 
men  with  so  much  more  favour  and  advantage,  as  he  appeared 
unprepossessed  and  willing  to  examine  everything  with  the 
greatest  unconcern  and  indifference.  For  to  such  persons  as 
these  'tis  to   be  feared  'twill   always  appear  "  that   what  was 

51 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

never  questioned,  was  never  proved ;  and  that  whatever  subject 
had  not,  at  some  time  or  other,  been  examined  with  perfect 
indifference,  was  never  rightly  examined  nor  could  rightly  be 
believed.""  And  in  a  treatise  of  this  kind,  offered  as  an  Essay 
or  Inquiry  only,  they  would  be  far  from  finding  that  impartiality 
and  indifference  which  is  requisite,  if,  instead  of  a  readiness  to 
comply  with  whatever  consequences  such  an  examination  as 
this  and  the  course  of  reasoning  brought  forth,  the  author 
should  show  a  previous  inclination  to  the  consequences  only  on 
one  side,  and  an  abhorrence  of  any  conclusion  on  the  other. 

Others,  therefore,  in  different  circumstances,  may  perhaps 
have  found  it  necessary,  and  becoming  their  character,  to  show 
all  manner  of  detestation  both  of  the  persons  and  principles  of 
these  men.  Our  author,  on  the  contrary,  whose  character 
exceeds  not  that  of  a  layman,  endeavours  to  show  civility  and 
favour  by  keeping  the  fairest  measures  he  possibly  can  with  the 
meil  of  this  sort,  allowing  them  all  he  is  able,  and  arguing  with 
a  perfect  indifference,  even  on  the  subject  of  a  Deity.  He 
offers  to  conclude  nothing  positive  himself,  but  leaves  it  to 
others  to  draw  conclusions  from  his  principles ;  having  this  one 
chief  aim  and  intention  :  "  how,  in  the  first  place,  to  reconcile 
these  persons  to  the  principles  of  virtue ;  that  by  this  means 
a  way  might  be  laid  open  to  religion,  by  removing  those  greatest, 
if  not  only  obstacles  to  it,  which  arise  from  the  vices  and 
passions  of  men." 

'Tis  upon  this  account  he  endeavours  chiefly  to  establish 
virtue  on  principles  by  which  he  is  able  to  argue  with  those 
who  are  not  as  yet  induced  to  own  a  God  or  future  state.  If 
he  cannot  do  thus  much,  he  reckons  he  does  nothing.  For  how 
can  supreme  goodness  be  intelligible  to  those  who  know  not 
what  o-oodness  itself  is  ?  Or  how  can  virtue  be  understood  to 
deserve  reward,  when  as  yet  its  merit  and  excellence  is  unknown.? 
We  begin  surely  at  the  wrong  end  when  we  would  prove  merit 
by  favour,  and  order  by  a  Deity.  This  our  friend  seeks  to 
redress.     For  being,  in  respect  of  virtue,  what  you  lately  called 

52 


/ 


,r>         THE   MORALISTS 

a  realist,  he  endeavours  to  show  "  that  it  is  really  something 
in  itself,  and  in  the  nature  of  things ;  not  arbitrary  or  factitious 
(if  I  may  so  speak) ;  not  constituted  from  without,  or  dependent 
on  custom,  fancy,  or  will ;  not  even  on  the  supreme  will  itself, 
which  can  no  way  govern  it ;  but  being  necessarily  good,  is 
governed  by  it  and  ever  uniform  with  it."  And  not\yithstand- 
ing  he  has  thus  made  virtue  his  chief  subject,  and  in  some 
measure  independent  on  religion,  yet  I  fancy  he  may  possibly 
appear  at  last  as  high  a  divine  as  he  is  a  moralist. 

I  would  not  willingly  advance  it  as  a  rule  "  that  those  who 
make  only  a  name  of  virtue  make  no  more  of  Deity,  and  cannot 
without  affectation  defend  the  principles  of  religion ""  ;  but  this  I 
will  venture  to  assert,  "  that  whoever  sincerely  defends  virtue,"? 
and  is  a  realist  in  morality,  must  of  necessity,  in  a  manner,  by/     sj 
the  same  scheme  of  reasoning,  prove  as  very  a  realist  in  divinity. 'L- 

AU  affectation,  but  chiefly  in  philosophy,  I  must  own,  I 
think  unpardonable.  And  you,  Philocles,  who  can  give  no 
quarter  to  ill  reasoning,  nor  endure  any  unsound  or  inconsistent 
hypothesis;  you  will  be  so  ingenuous,  I  dare  say,  as  to  reject 
our  modern  Deism,  and  challenge  those  who  assume  a  name  to 
which  their  philosophy  can  never  in  the  least  entitle  them. 

Commend  me  to  honest  Epicurus,  who  raises  his  deities 
aloft  in  the  imaginary  spaces,  and  setting  them  apart  out  of 
the  universe  and  nature  of  things,  makes  nothing  of  them 
beyond  a  word.  This  is  ingenuous  and  plain  dealing ;  for  this 
every  one  who  philosophises  may  easily  understand. 

The  same  ingenuity  belongs  to  those  philosophers  whom  you, 
Philocles,  seem  inclined  to  favour.     When  a  sceptic  questions 
"  whether  a  real  theology  can  be  raised  out  of  philosophy  alone, 
without  the  help  of  revelation,"  he  does  no  more  than  pay  a 
handsome  compliment  to  authority  and   the  received  religion. 
He  can  impose  on  no  one  who  reasons  dce})lv ;  since  whoever  / 
does  so,   will  easily  conceive  that  at  this  rate  theology  nmstj 
have  no  foundation  at  all.     For  revelation  itself,  we  know,  is)        ^ 
founded  on  the  acknowledgment  of  a  divine  existence;  and  "'tis' 

53 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

the  province  of  philosophy  alone  to  prove  what  revelation  only 
supposes. 

I  look  on  it  therefore  as  a  most  unfair  way  for  those  who 
would  be  builders,  and  undertake  this  proving  part,  to  lay  such 
a  foundation  as  is  insufficient  to  bear  the  structure.  Supplant- 
ing and  undermining  may  in  other  cases  be  fair  war,  but  in 
philosophical  disputes  "'tis  not  allowable  to  work  underground, 
or  as  in  sieges  by  the  sap.  Nothing  can  be  more  unbecoming 
than  to  talk  magisterially  and  in  venerable  terms  of  "  a  supreme 
Nature,  an  infinite  Being,  and  a  Deity,"  when  all  the  while  a 
providence  is  never  meant,  nor  anything  like  order  or  the 
government  of  a  mind  admitted.  For  when  these  are  understood, 
and  real  divinity  acknowledged,  the  notion  is  not  dry  and 
barren,  but  such  consequences  are  necessarily  drawn  from  it  as 
must  set  us  in  action,  and  find  employment  for  our  strongest 
affections.  All  the  duties  of  religion  evidently  follow  hence, 
and  no  exception  remains  against  any  of  those  great  maxims 
which  revelation  has  established.      ' 

Now  whether  our  friend  be  unfeignedly  and  sincerely  of 
this  latter  sort  of  real  theologists,  you  will  learn  best  from  the 
consequences  of  his  hypothesis.  You  will  observe  whether, 
instead  of  ending  in  mere  speculation,  it  leads  to  practice ;  and 
you  will  then  surely  be  satisfied  when  you  see  such  a  structure 
raised,  as  with  the  generality  of  the  world  must  pass  at  least  for 
high  religion,  and  with  some,  in  all  likelihood,  for  no  less  than 
enthusiasm. 

For  I  appeal  to  you,  Philocles,  whether  there  be  anything  in 
divinity  which  you  think  has  more  the  air  of  enthusiasm  than 
that  notion  of  divine  love  such  as  separates  from  everything 
worldly,  sensual,  or  meanly  interested  ?  A  love  which  is  simple, 
pure,  and  unmixed,  which  has  no  other  object  than  merely  the 
excellency  of  that  being  itself,  nor  admits  of  any  other  thought 
of  happiness  than  in  its  single  fruition.  Now  I  dare  presume 
you  will  take  it  as  a  substantial  proof  of  my  friend's  being  far 
enough  from  irreligion  if  it  be  shown  that  he  has  espoused  this 

54 


THE   JMORALISTS 

notion,  and  thinks  of  making  out  this  high  point  of  divinity, 
from  arguments  famiHar  even  to  those  who  oppose  reHgion. 

According  therefore  to  his  hypothesis  he  would  in  the 
first  place,  by  way  of  prevention,  declare  to  you  that  though 
the  disinterested  love  of  God  were  the  most  excellent  principle, 
yet  he  knew  very  well  that  by  the  indiscreet  zeal  of  some 
devout,  well-meaning  people  it  had  been  stretched  too  far, 
perhaps  even  to  extravagance  and  enthusiasm,  as  formerly 
among  the  mystics  of  the  ancient  church,  whom  these  of  latter 
days  have  followed.  On  the  other  hand,  that  there  were  those 
who  in  opposition  to  this  devout  mystic  way,  and  as  professed 
enemies  to  what  they  call  enthusiasm,  had  so  far  exploded 
everything  of  this  ecstatic  kind  as  in  a  manner  to  have  given 
up  devotion,  and  in  reality  had  left  so  little  of  zeal,  affection, 
or  warmth,  in  what  they  call  their  rational  religion,  as  to  make 
them  much  suspected  of  their  sincerity  in  any.  For  though  it 
be  natural  enough  (he  would  tell  you)  for  a  mere  political 
writer  to  ground  his  great  argument  for  religion  on  the  necessity 
of  such  a  belief  as  that  of  a  future  reward  and  punishment,  yet, 
if  you  will  take  his  opinion,  'tis  a  very  ill  token  of  sincerity  in 
religion,  and  in  the  Christian  religion  more  especially,  to  reduce 
it  to  such  a  philosophy  as  will  allow  no  room  to  that  other 
principle  of  love ;  but  treats  all  of  that  kind  as  enthusiasm 
for  so  much  as  aimin";  at  what  is  called  disinterestedness,  or 
teaching  the  love  of  God  or  virtue  for  God  or  virtue^s^  sake. 

Here,  then,  we  have  two  sorts  of  people  (according  to  my 
friend\s  account),  who  in  these  opposite  extremes  expose  religion 
to  the  insults  of  its  adversaries.  For  as  on  one  hand  'twill  be 
found  difficult  to  defend  the  notion  of  that  high-raised  love 
espoused  with  so  much  warmth  by  those  devout  mystics,  so  on 
the  other  hand  "'twill  be  found  as  hard  a  task,  upon  the 
principles  of  these  cooler  men,  to  guard  religion  from  the 
imputation  of  mercenariness  and  a  slavish  spirit.  For  how 
shall  one  deny  that  to  serve  God  by  compulsion,  or  for  interest 
merely,  is  servile  and  mercenary  ?     Is  it  not  evident  that  the 

bo 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

only  true  and  liberal  service  paid  either  to  that  supreme  Being, 
or  to  any  other  superior,  is  that  "  which  proceeds  from  an 
esteem  or  love  of  the  person  served,  a  sense  of  duty  or  gratitude, 
and  a  love  of  the  dutiful  and  grateful  part,  as  good  and  amiable 
in  itself"?  And  where  is  the  injury  to  religion  from  such  a 
concession  as  this  ?  Or  what  detraction  is  it  from  the  belief  of 
an  after  reward  or  punishment  to  own  "  that  the  service  caused 
by  it  is  not  equal  to  that  which  is  voluntary  and  with  inclina- 
tion, but  is  rather  disingenuous  and  of  the  slavish  kind ""  ?  Is 
it  not  still  for  the  good  of  mankind  and  of  the  world  that 
obedience  to  the  rule  of  right  should  some  way  or  other  be 
paid,  if  not  in  the  better  way,  yet  at  least  in  this  imperfect  one  ? 
And  is  it  not  to  be  shown  "  that  although  this  service  of  fear  be 
allowed  ever  so  low  or  base,  yet  religion  still  being  a  discipline 
and  progress  of  the  soul  towards  perfection,  the  motive  of  reward 
and  punishment  is  primary  and  of  the  highest  moment  with  us, 
till,  being  capable  of  more  sublime  instruction,  we  are  led  from 
this  servile  state  to  the  generous  service  of  affection  and  love  "  ? 

To  this  it  is  that  in  our  friend's  opinion  we  ought  all  of  us 
to  aspire,  so  as  to  endeavour  "  that  the  excellence  of  the  object, 
not  the  reward  or  punishment,  should  be  our  motive ;  but  that 
where,  through  the  corruption  of  our  nature,  the  former  of  these 
motives  is  found  insufficient  to  excite  to  virtue,  there  the  latter 
should  be  brought  in  aid,  and  on  no  account  be  undervalued  or 
neglected." 

Now  this  being  once  established,  how  can  religion  be  any 
longer  subject  to  the  imputation  of  mercenariness  ?  But  thus 
we  know  religion  is  often  charged.  "  Godliness,""  say  they,  "  is 
great  gain ;  nor  is  God  devoutly  served  for  naught.""  ...  Is 
this  therefore  a  reproach  ?  Is  it  confessed  there  may  be  a  better 
service,  a  more  generous  love  ?  Enough,  there  needs  no 
more.  On  this  foundation  our  friend  presumes  it  easy  to  defend 
religion,  and  even  that  devoutest  part,  which  is  esteemed  so 
great  a  paradox  of  faith.  For  if  there  be  in  Nature  such  a 
service  as  that  of  affection  and  love,  there  remains  then  only  to 

5Q 


THE   MORALISTS 

consider  of  the  object  whetheT^there  be  really  that  supreme  One 
we  suppose ;  for  if  there  be  divine  excellence  in  things,  if  there 
be  in  Nature  a  supreme  mind  or  Deity,  we  have  then  an  object 
consummate  and  comprehensive  of  all  which  is  good  or  excellent. 
And  this  object,  of  all  others,  must  of  necessity  be  the  most 
amiable,  the  most  enoaoino-  and  of  hio;hest  satisfaction  and 
'enjoyment.  Now  that  there  is  such  a  principal  object  as  this  in 
the  world,  the  world  alone  (if  I  may  say  so)  by  its  wise  and 
perfect  order  must  evince.  This  order,  if  indeed  perfect,  excludes 
all  real  ill.  And  that  it  really  does  so,  is  what  our  author  so 
earnestly  maintains,  by  solving  the  best  he  can  those  untoward 
phenomena  and  ill  signs,  taken  from  the  course  of  Providence, 
in  the  seemingly  unequal  lot  of  virtue  in  this  world. 

'Tis  true,  though  the  appearances  hold  ever  so  strongly 
against  virtue,  and  in  favour  of  vice,  the  objection  which  arises 
hence  against  a  Deity  may  be  easily  removed,  and  all  set  right 
again  on  the  supposal  of  a  future  state.  This  to  a  Christian,  or 
one  already  convinced  of  so  great  a  point,  is  sufficient  to  clear 
every  dark  cloud  of  Providence.  For  he  needs  not  be  over  and 
above  solicitous  as  to  the  fate  of  virtue  in  this  world  who  is 
secure  of  hereafter.  But  the  case  is  otherwise  as  to  the  ])eople 
we  are  here  to  encounter.  They^  ai^at,a_la§s  far  P^^ 
and  seek  to  find  it  in  the  world.  The  ag-onravation  of  the 
appearing  disorders  in  worldly  affairs,  and  the  blackest 
representation  of  society  and  human  nature,  will  hardly  helji 
them  to  this  view.  'Twill  be  difficult  for  them  to  read 
Providence  in  such  characters.  From  so  uncomely  a  face  of 
things  below,  they  will  presume  to ,  think  unfavourably  of  all 
above.  By  the  effects  they  see,  they  will  be  inclined  to  judge 
the  cause,  and  by  the  fate  of  virtue  to  determine  of  a  providence. 
But  being  once  convinced  of  order  and  a  providence  as  to  things 
present,  they  may  soon,  perhaps,  be  satisfied  even  of  a  futm*e 
state.  ^  For  if  virtue  be  to  itself  no  small  reward,  and  vice  in  a 
great  measure  its  own  pvniishment,  we  have  a  solid  ground  to 
go  upon.     The  plain  foundations  of  a  distributive  justice  and 

57 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

due  order  in  this  world  may  lead  us  to  conceive  a  further 
building.  We  apprehend  a  larger  scheme,  and  easily  resolve 
ourselves  why  things  were  not  completed  in  this  state,  but 
their  accomplishment  reserved  rather  to  some  further  period. 
For  had  the  good  and  virtuous  of  mankind  been  wholly 
prosperous  in  this  life ;  had  goodness  never  met  with  opposition, 
nor  merit  ever  lain  under  a  cloud  ;  where  had  been  the  trial, 
victory,  or  crown  of  virtue  ?  Where  had  the  virtues  had  their 
theatre,  or  whence  their  names .''  Where  had  been  temperance 
or  self-denial.''  Where  patience,  meekness,-  magnanimity.'* 
A^'^lence  have  these  their  being .''  What  merit  except  from 
hardshi})  't  What  virtue  without  a  conflict,  and  the  encounter 
of  such  enemies  as  arise  both  within  and  from  abroad  "^ 

But  as  many  as  are  the  difficulties  which  Virtue  has  to 
encounter  in  this  world,  her  force  is  yet  superior.  Exposed  as 
she  is  here,  she  is  not  however  abandoned  or  left  miserable. 
She  has  enough  to  raise  her  above  pity,  though  not  above  our 
wishes,  and  as  happy  as  we  see  her  here,  we  have  room  for 
further  hopes  in  her  behalf  Her  present  portion  is  sufficient 
to  show  Providence  already  engaged  on  her  side.  And  since 
there  is  such  provision  for  her  here,  such  happiness  and  such 
advantages  even  in  this  life,  how  probable  must  it  appear  that 
this  providential  care  is  extended  yet  further  to  a  succeeding 
life,  and  perfected  hereafter  "^ 

This  is  what,  in  our  friend's  opinion,  may  be  said  in  behalf 
of  a  future  state  to  those  Avho  question  revelation.  'Tis  this 
must  render  revelation  probable,  and  secure  that  first  step  to  it, 
the  belief  of  a  Deity  and  Providence.  A  providence  must  be 
proved  from  what  we  see  of  order  in  things  present.  We  must 
contend  for  order ;  and  in  this  part  chiefly,  where  virtue  is  con- 
cerned, all  must  not  be  referred  to  a  hereafter.  For  a  disordered 
state,  in  which  all  present  care  of  things  is  given  up,  vice  uncon- 
trolled, and  virtue  neglected,  represents  a  very  chaos,  and  reduces 
us  to  the  beloved  atoms,  chance,  and  confusion  of  the  atheists. 

What  therefore  can  be  worse  done  in  the  cause  of  a  Deity 

58 


THE   MORALISTS 

than  to  magnify  disorder,  and  exaggerate  (as  some  zealous 
people  do)  the  misfortunes  of  virtue,  so  far  as  to  render  it  an 
unhappy  choice  with  respect  to  this  world  ?  They  err  widely 
who  propose  to  turn  men  to  the  thoughts  of  a  better  world  by 

1 1  making  them  think  so  ill  of  this.  For  to  declaim  in  this 
manner  against  virtue  to  those  of  a  looser  faith,  will  make  them 
the  less  believe  a  Deity,  but  not  the  more  a  future  state.  Nor 
can  it  be  thought  sincerely  that  any  man,  by  having  the  most 
elevated  opinion  of  virtue,  and  of  the  happiness  it  creates,  was 
ever  the  less  inclined  to  the  belief  of  a  future  state.  On  the 
contrary,  it  will  ever  be  found  that  as  they  who  are  favourers 
of  vice  are  always  the  least  willing  to  hear  of  a  future  existence, 
so  they  who  are  in  love  with  virtue  are  the  readiest  to  embrace 
that  opinion  which  renders  it  so  illustrious,  and  makes  its  cause 
triumphant. 

Thus  it  was  that  among  the  ancients  the  great  motive 
which  inclined  so  many  of  the  wisest  to  the  belief  of  this 
doctrine,  unrevealed  to  them,  was  purely  the  love  of  virtue  in 
the  persons  of  those  great  men,  the  founders  and  preservers 
of  societies,  the  legislators,  patriots,  deliverers,  heroes,  whose 
virtues  they  were  desirous  should  live  and  be  immortalised. 
Nor  is  there  at  this  day  anything  capable  of  making  this  belief 
more  enoaoino;  amono;  the  o;ood  and  virtuous  than  the  love  of 
friendship,  which  creates  in  them  a  desire  not  to  be  wholly 
separated  by  death,  but  that  they  may  enjoy  the  same  blessed 
society  hereafter.  How  is  it  possible,  then,  that  an  author 
should,  for  exalting  virtue  merely,  be  deemed  an  enemy  to  a 
future  state.?  How  can  our  friend  be  judged  false  to  religion 
for  defending  a  principle  on  which  the  very  notion  of  God  and 
goodness  depends  ?  For  this  he  says  only,  and  this  is  the  sum 
of  all,  "  that  by  building  a  future  state  on  the  ruins  of  virtue, 

I, I  relio-ion  in  creneral  and  the  cause  of  a  Deitv  is  betrayed,  and 

''by  making  rewards  and  punishments  the  principal  motives  to 
duty,  the  Christian  religion  in  particular  is  overthrown,  and  its 

],  1  greatest  principle,  that  of  love,  rejected  and  exposed." 

59 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Upon  the  whole  then  we  may  justly  as  well  as  charitably 
conclude  that  it  is  truly  pur  author's  design,  in  applying  him- 
self with  so  much  fairness  to  the  men  of  looser  principles,  to 
lead  them  into  such  an  apprehension  of  the  constitution  of 
mankind  and  of  human  affairs  as  might  form  in  them  a  notion 
of  order  in  things,  and  draw  hence  an  acknowledgment  of  that 
wisdom,  goodness,  and  beauty,  which  is  supreme ;  that  being 
thus  far  become  proselytes,  they  might  be  prepared  for  that 
divine  love  which  our  religion  would  teach  them,  when  once 
they  should  embrace  its  precepts,  and  form  themselves  to  its 
sacred  character. 

Thus,  continued  he,  I  have  made  my  friend's  apology,  which 
may  have  shown  him  to  you  perhaps  a  good  moralist,  and,  I 
hope,  no  enemy  to  religion.  But  if  you  find  still  that  the 
divine  has  not  appeared  so  much  in  his  character  as  I  promised, 
I  can  never  think  of  satisfying  you  in  any  ordinary  way  of  con- 
versation. Should  I  offer  to  go  farther,  I  might  be  engaged 
deeply  in  spiritual  affairs,  and  be  forced  to  make  some  new 
model  of  a  sermon  upon  his  system  of  divinity.  However,  I 
am  in  hopes,  now  that  in  good  earnest  matters  are  come  well- 
nigh  to  preaching,  you  will  acquit  me  for  what  I  have  already 
performed. 

Sectiox    IV 

Just  as  he  had  made  an  end  of  speaking  came  in  some  visitants, 
who  took  us  up  the  remaining  part  of  the  afternoon  in  other 
discourses.  But  these  being  over,  and  our  strangers  gone  (all 
except  the  old  gentleman  and  his  friend,  who  had  dined  with  us), 
we  began  anew  with  Theocles,  by  laying  claim  to  his  sermon, 
and  entreating  him  again  and  again  to  let  us  hear  him  at  large 
in  his  theological  way. 

This,  he  complained,  was  persecuting  him  ;  as  you  have  seen 
company,  said  he,  often  persecute  a  reputed  singei',  not  out  of 
any  fancy  for  the  music,  but  to  satisfy  a  malicious  sort  of 
curiosity,  which  ends  commonly  in  censure  and  dislike. 

00 


THE   MORALISTS 

However  it  might  be,  we  tokl  him  we  were  resolved  to 
persist.  And  I  assured  our  companions  that  if  they  would 
second  me  heartily  in  the  manner  I  intended  to  press  him,  we 
should  easily  get  the  better. 

In  revenge  then,  said  he,  I  will  comply  on  this  condition, 
that  since  I  am  to  sustain  the  part  of  the  divine  and  preacher, 
it  shall  be  at  Philocles's  cost,  who  shall  bear  the  part  of  the 
infidel,  and  stand  for  the  person  pi'eached  to. 

Truly,  said  the  old  gentleman,  the  part  you  have  proposed 
for  him  is  so  natural  and  suitable  that  I  doubt  not  he  will  be 
able  to  act  it  without  the  least  pain.  I  could  wish  rather 
that  you  had  spared  yourself  the  trouble  of  putting  him  thus  in 
mind  of  his  proper  character.  He  would  have  been  apt  enough 
of  his  own  accord  to  interrupt  your  discourse  by  his  perpetual 
cavils.  Therefore  since  we  have  now  had  entertainment  enough 
by  way  of  dialogue,  I  desire  the  law  of  sermon  may  be  strictly 
observed,  and  "that  there  be  no  answering  to  whatever  is 
argued  or  advanced."" 

I  consented  to  all  the  terms,  and  told  Theocles  I  would 
stand  his  mark  willingly ;  and  besides,  if  I  really  were  that 
infidel  he  was  to  suppose  me,  I  should  count  it  no  unhappiness, 
since  I  was  sure  of  being  so  thoroughly  convinced  by  him  if  he 
would  vouchsafe  to  undertake  me. 

Theocles  then  proposed  we  should  walk  out,  the  evening 
being  fine,  and  the  free  air  suiting  better  (as  he  thought)  with 
such  discourses  than  a  chamber. 

Accordingly  we  took  our  evening  walk  in  the  fields,  from 
whence  the  laborious  hinds  were  now  retiring.  We  fell 
naturally  into  the  praises  of  a  country  life,  and  discoursed 
awhile  of  husbandry  and  the  nature  of  the  soil.  Our  friends 
began  to  admire  some  of  the  plants  which  grew  here  to  great 
perfection.  And  it  being  my  fortune  (as  having  acquired  a 
little  insight  into  the  nature  of  simples)  to  say  something  they 
mightily  approved  upon  this  subject,  Theocles  immediately 
turning   about    to    me,    "  O    my    ingenious   friend ! "    said    he, 

61 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTEKISTICS 

"  whose  reason  in  other  respects  must  be  allowed  so  clear  and 
happy,  how  is  it  possible  that  with  such  insight,  and  accurate 
judgment  in  the  particulars  of  natural  beings  and  operations, 
you  should  no  better  judge  of  the  structure  of  things  in  general, 
and  of  the  order  and  frame  of  Nature  ?  AVho  better  than 
yourself  can  show  the  structure  of  each  plant  and  animal 
body,  declare  the  office  of  every  part  and  organ,  and  tell  the 
uses,  ends,  and  advantages  to  which  they  serve  ?  How  there- 
fore should  you  prove  so  ill  a  naturalist  in  this  whole,  and 
understand  so  little  the  anatomy  of  the  world  and  Nature,  as 
not  to  discern  the  same  relation  of  parts,  the  same  consistency 
and  uniformity  in  the  universe  ! 

"  Some  men  perhaps  there  are  of  so  confused  a  thought,  and 
so  irregularly  formed  within  themselves,  that  'tis  no  more  than 
natural  for  them  to  find  fault,  and  imagine  a  thousand  in- 
consistencies and  defects  in  this  wider  constitution.  ""Twas 
not,  we  may  presume,  the  absolute  aim  or  interest  of  the 
universal  nature  to  render  every  private  one  infallible  and 
without  defect.  ""Twas  not  its  intention  to  leave  us  without 
some  pattern  of  imperfection,  such  as  Ave  perceive  in  minds 
like  these,  perplexed  with  froward  thought.  But  you,  my 
friend,  are  master  of  a  nobler  mind.  You  are  conscious  of 
better  order  within,  and  can  see  workmanship  and  exactness  in 
yourself  and  other  innumerable  parts  of  the  creation,  can  you 
answer  it  to  yourself,  allowing  thus  much  not  to  allow  all  ? 
Can  you  induce  yourself  ever  to  believe  or  think  that  where 
there  are  parts  so  variously  united,  and  conspiring  fitly  within 
themselves,  the  whole^  itself  should  have  neither  union  nor 
coherence ;  and  where  inferior  and  private  natures  are  often 
found  so  perfect,  the  universal  one  should  want  perfection,  and 
be  esteemed  like  whatsoever  can  be  thought  of,  most  monstrous, 
rude,  and  imperfect .'' 

"  Strange !  that  there  should  be  in  Nature  the  idea  of  an 
order  and  perfection  which  Nature  herself  wants  !  That  beings 
which  arise  from   Nature  should  be  so  perfect  as  to  discover 

62 


THE   MORALISTS 

imperfiection  in  her  constitution,  and  be  wise  enough  to  correct 
that  wisdom  by  which  they  were  made ! 

"  I*<^othing  surely  is  more  strongly  imprinted  on  our  minds, 
or  more  closely  interwoven  with  our  souls,  than  the  idea  or 
sense  of  order  and  proportion.  Hence  all  the  force  of  numbers, 
and  those  powerful  arts  founded  on  their  management  and 
use.  What  a  difference  there  is  between  harmony  and  discord  ! 
cadency  and  convulsion  !  What  a  difference  between  composed 
and  orderly  motion,  and  that  which  is  ungoverned  and  acci- 
dental !  between  the  regular  and  uniform  pile  of  some  noble 
architect,  and  a  heap  of  sand  or  stones  !  between  an  organised 
body,  and  a  mist  or  cloud  driven  by  the  wind ! 

"  Now  as  this  difference  is  immediately  perceived  by  a  plain 
internal  sensation,  so  there  is  withal  in  reason  this  account  of 
it,  that  whatever  things  have  order,  the  same  have  unity  of 
design,  and  concur  in  one ;  are  parts  constituent  of  one  whole 
or  are,  in  themselves,  entire  systems.  Such  is  a  tree,  with  all 
its  branches ;  an  animal,  with  all  its  members ;  an  edifice,  with 
all  its  exterior  and  interior  ornaments.  What  else  is  even  a 
tune  or  symphony,  or  any  excellent  piece  of  music,  than  a 
certain  system  of  proportioned  sounds  ? 

Now  in  this  which  we  call  the  universe,  whatever  the  per- 
fection may  be  of  any  ])articular  systems,  or  whatever  single 
parts  may  have  proportion,  unity,  or  form  within  themselves, 
yet  if  they  are  not  united  all  in  general,  in  one  system,^  but 

^  Vid.  Locke  :  Of  Human  Understanding,  bk.  iv.  ch.  vi.  §  11. 

Ac  milii  quidem  veteres  illi  majus  quiddam  animo  coniplexi  plus 
multo  etiam  vidisse  videntur,  quam  quantum  nostrorum  ingeniorum  acies 
intueri  potest  :  qui  omnia  haec,  quae  supra  et  subter,  unum  esse  et  una 
vi  atque  una  consensione  naturae  constricta  esse  dixerunt.  Nullum  est 
enim  genus  rerum  quod  aut  avulsum  a  caeteris  per  seipsum  constare  aut 
quo  caetera,  si  careaut,  vim  suam  atque  aeternitatem  conservare  possint. 

["  Indeed,  those  old  authors  seem  to  me  to  have  had  greater  power  of 
imagination^  or  even  of  vision,  than  is  given  to  the  penetration  of  our 
minds,  when  they  declared  that  everything  above  and  below  us  is  one  and 
bound  together  by  one  force  and  one  harmony  of  Nature.     For  there  is  no 

63 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

are,  in  respect  of  one  another,  as  the  driven  sands,  or  clouds, 
or  breaking  waves,  then  there  being  no  coherence  in  the  whole, 
there  can  be  inferred  no  order,  no  proportion,  and  consequently 
no  project  or  design.  But  if  none  of  these  parts  are  independent, 
but  all  apparently  united,  then  is  the  whole  a  system  complete, 
according  to  one  simple,  consistent,  and  uniform  design. 

"  Here  then  is  our  main  subject  insisted  on,  that  neither 
man  nor  any  other  animal,  though  ever  so  complete  a  system 
of  parts  as  to  all  within,  can  be  allowed  in  the  same  manner 
complete  as  to  all  without,  but  must  be  considered  as  having 
a  further  relation  abroad  to  the  system  of  his  kind.  So  even 
this  system  of  his  kind  to  the  animal  system,  this  to  the  world 
(our  earth),  and  this  again  to  the  bigger  world  and  to  the 
universe. 

"  All  things  in  this  world  are  united.  For  as  the  branch 
is  united  with  the  tree,  so  is  the  tree  as  immediately  with  the 
earth,  air,  and  water  which  feed  it.  As  much  as  the  fertile 
mould  is  fitted  to  the  tree,  as  much  as  the  strong  and  upright 
trunk  of  the  oak  or  elm  is  fitted  to  the  twining  branches  of 

kind  of  thing  wliicli  can  stand  alone  if  torn  from  the  rest,  or  which,  if 
withdrawn  from  the  rest,  would  suffer  them  to  keep  their  functions  and 
duration." — Cicero,  De  Oratore,  iii.  §  20.] 

Omne  hoc  quod  vides,  quo  divina  atque  humana  conclusa  sunt,  unum 
est ;  membra  sumus  corporis  magni. 

["  All  that  you  see,  of  which  God  and  man  form  parts,  is  one  ;  we  are 
the  limbs  of  one  great  body." — Seneca,  Ep.  95,  52.] 

Societas  nostra  lapidum  fornication!  simillima  est  :  quae  casura,  nisi 
invicem  obstarent,  hoc  ipso  sustinetur. 

[''  Our  fellowship  is  most  like  to  the  stones  of  an  arch.  'Die  arch 
would  fall  if  it  were  not  held  up  by  the  stones  blocking  each  other." — 
Seneca,  E}^.  95,  53.] 

Estne  dei  sedes,  nisi  terra,  et  pontus,  et  aether, 

Et  coelum,  et  virtus  }     Superos  quid  quaerimus  ultra  } 

Jupiter  est  quodcunque  vides,  quocunque  moveris. 

["  What  house  is  there  for  the  god  save  earth  and  sea  and  air  and  sky 
and  virtue  ?  Why  do  we  look  for  the  gods  outside  ourselves .''  All  that 
you  see,  all  that  you  feel,  is  Jupiter." — Lucan,  ix.  578-580.] 

64 


THE    MORALISTS 

the  vine  or  ivy ;  so  much  are  the  very  leaves,  the  seeds,  and 
fruits  of  these  trees  fitted  to  the  various  animals :  these  again 
to  one  another  and   to  the  elements  where  they  live,  and  to 
which  they  are,  as  appendices,  in  a  manner  fitted  and  joined, 
as  either  by  wings  for  the  air,  fins  for  the  water,  feet  for  the 
earth,  and    by  other  correspondent   inward    parts   of  a  more 
curious  frame  and  texture.     Thus  in  contemplating  all  on  earth, 
we  must  of  necessity  view  all  in  one,  as  holding  to  one  common 
stock.     Thus  too  in  the  system  of  the  bigger  world.     See  there 
the   mutual    dependency    of  things  !    the    relation    of  one    to 
another ;  of  the  sun  to  this  inhabited  earth,  and  of  the  earth 
and  other  planets  to  the  sun  !  the  order,  union,  and  coherence 
of  the   whole !    and  know,   my   ingenious   friend,  that  by    this 
survey  you  will  be  obliged  to  own  the  universal  system  and 
coherent  scheme  of  things  to  be  established  on  abundant  proof, 
capable  of  convincing  any  fair  and  just  contemplator  of  the 
works  of  Nature.     For  scarce  would  any  one,  till  he  had  well 
surveyed   this  universal  scene,  believe  a  union   thus  evidently 
demonstrable,    by  such    numerous   and    powerful    instances    of 
mutual  correspondency  and  relation,  from  the  minutest  ranks 
and  orders  of  beings  to  the  remotest  spheres. 

"  Now  in  this  mighty  union,  if  thei'e  be  such  relations  of 
parts  one  to  another  as  are  not  easily  discovered,  if  on  this 
account  the  end  and  use  of  things  does  not  everywhere  appear, 
there  is  no  wonder,  since  'tis  no  more  indeed  than  what  must 
happen  of  necessity ;  nor  coidd  supreme  wisdom  have  otherwise 
ordered  it.  For  in  an  infinity  of  things  thus  relative,  a  mind 
which  sees  not  infinitely  can  see  nothing  fully ;  and  since  each 
particular  has  relation  to  all  in  general,  it  can  know  no  perfect 
or  true  relation  of  any  thing  in  a  world  not  perfectly  and  fully 
known. 

"The   same   may   be   considered   in    any  dissected    animal, 

plant,  or  flower ;  where  he  who  is  no  anatomist,  nor  versed  in 

natural  history,  sees  that  the  many  parts  have  a  relation  to  the 

whole,  for  thus  much  even  a  slight  view  affords ;  but  he  who 

vol,.  II  Go  F 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

like  you,  my  friend,  is  curious  in  the  works  of  Nature,  and  has 
been  let  into  a  knowledge  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  world, 
he  alone  can  readily  declare  the  just  relation  of  all  these  parts 
to  one  another,  and  the  several  uses  to  which  they  serve. 

"  But  if  you  would  willingly  enter  further  into  this  thought, 
and  consider  how  much  we  ought  not  only  to  be  satisfied  with 
this  our  view  of  things,  but  even  to  admire  its  clearness,  imagine 
only  some  person  entirely  a  stranger  to  navigation,  and 
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  sea  or  waters ;  how  great  his  • 
astonishment  would  be,  when  finding  himself  on  board  some 
vessel,  anchoring  at  sea,  remote  from  all  land  prospect,  whilst  it 
was  yet  a  calm,  he  viewed  the  ponderous  machine  firm  and 
motionless  in  the  midst  of  the  smooth  ocean,  and  considered  its 
foundations  beneath,  together  with  its  cordage,  masts,  and 
sails  above.  How  easily  would  he  see  the  whole  one  regular 
structure,  all  things  depending  on  one  another ;  the  uses  of  the 
rooms  below,  the  lodgments,  and  conveniences  of  men  and 
stores  ?  But  being  ignorant  of  the  intent  or  design  of  all 
above,  would  he  pronounce  the  masts  and  cordage  to  be  useless 
and  cumbersome,  and  for  this  reason  condemn  the  frame  and 
despise  the  architect  ?  O  my  friend  !  let  us  not  thus  betray 
our  ignorance  ;  but  consider  where  we  are,  and  in  what  a 
universe.  Think  of  the  many  parts  of  the  vast  machine  in 
which  we  have  so  little  insight,  and  of  which  it  is  impossible  we 
should  know  the  ends  and  uses,  when  instead  of  seeing  to  the 
highest  pendants,  we  see  only  some  lower  deck,  and  are  in  this 
dark  case  of  flesh,  confined  even  to  the  hold  and  meanest  station 
of  the  vessel, 

"  Now  having  recognised  this  uniform  consistent  fabric,  and 
owned  the  universal  system,  we  must  of  consequence  ac- 
knowledge a  universal  mind,  which  no  ingenious  man  can  be 
tempted  to  disown,  except  through  the  imagination  of  disorder 
in  the  universe,  its  seat.  For  can  it  be  supposed  of  any  one  in 
the  world,  that  being  in  some  desert  far  from  men,  and  hearing 
there  a  perfect  symphony  of  music,  or  seeing  an  exact  pile  of 

66 


THE   MORALISTS 

regular  architecture  arising  gradually  from  the  earth  in  all  its 
orders  and  proportions,  he  should  be  persuaded  that  at  the 
bottom  there  was  no  design  accompanying  this,  no  secret  spring 
of  thought,  no  active  mind  ?  Would  he,  because  he  saw  no 
hand,  deny  the  handiwork,  and  suppose  that  each  of  these 
complete  and  perfect  systems  Avere  framed,  and  thus  united  in 
just  symmetry  and  conspiring  order,  either  by  the  accidental 
blowing  of  the  winds  or  rolling  of  the  sands  ? 

"  AVhat  is  it  then  should  so  disturb  our  views  of  Nature,  as 
to  destroy  that  unity  of  design  and  order  of  a  mind,  which 
otherwise  would  be  so  apparent  ?  All  we  can  see  either  of  the 
heavens  or  earth  demonstrates  order  and  perfection ;  so  as  to 
afford  the  noblest  subjects  of  contemplation  to  minds,  like 
yours,  enriched  with  sciences  and  learning.  All  is  delightful, 
amiable,  rejoicing,  except  with  relation  to  man  only,  and  his 
circumstances,  which  seem  unequal.  Here  the  calamity  and  ill 
arises,  and  hence  the  ruin  of  this  goodly  frame.  All  perishes 
on  this  account ;  and  the  whole  order  of  the  universe,  elsewhere 
so  firm,  entire,  and  innuovable,  is  here  overthrown  and  lost  by 
this  one  view,  in  which  we  refer  all  things  to  ourselves,  submit- 
ting the  interest  of  the  whole  to  the  good  and  interest  of  so 
small  a  part. 

"  But  how  is  it  you  complain  of  the  unequal  state  of  man, 
and  of  the  few  advantages  allowed  him  above  the  beasts  ? 
What  can  a  creature  claim,  so  little  differing  from  them,  or 
whose  merit  appears  so  little  above  them,  except  in  wisdom  and 
virtue,  to  which  so  few  conform  ?  jVIan  may  be  virtuous,  and 
by  being  so,  is  happy.  His  merit  is  reward ;  by  virtue  he 
deserves,  and  in  virtue  only  can  meet  his  happiness  deserved. 
But  if  even  virtue  itself  be  unprovided  for,  and  vice,  more 
prosperous,  be  the  better  choice ;  if  this  (as  you  suppose)  be  in 
the  nature  of  things,  then  is  all  order  in  reality  inverted,  and 
supreme  wisdom  lost,;  imperfection  and  irregularity  being,  after 
this  manner,  undoubtedly  too  apparent  in  the  moral  world. 

"  Have  you   then,  ere  you  pronounced   this  sentence,  con- 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

sidered  of  the  state  of  virtue  and  vice  with  respect  to  this  hfe 
merely,  so  as  to  say,  with  assurance,  when,  and  how  far,  in  what 
particulars,  and  how  circumstantiated,  the  one  or  the  other  is 
good  or  ill  ?  You  who  are  skilled  in  other  fabrics  and  com- 
positions,  both  of  art  and  nature,  have  you  considered  of  the 
fabric  of  the  mind,  the  constitution  of  the  soul,  the  connection 
and  frame  of  all  its  passions  and  affections ;  to  know  accordingly 
the  order  and  symmetry  of  the  part,  and  how  it  either  improves 
or  suffers ;  what  its  force  is  when  naturally  preserved  in  its 
sound  state,  and  what  becomes  of  it  when  corrupted  and 
abused  ?  Till  this,  my  friend,  be  well  examined  and  understood, 
how  shall  we  judge  either  of  the  force  of  virtue  or  power  of 
vice  ?  Or  in  what  manner  either  of  these  may  work  to  our 
happiness  or  undoing  ? 

"  Here,  therefore,  is  that  inquiry  we  should  first  make.  But 
who  is  there  can  afford  to  make  it  as  he  ought  ?  If  happily  we 
are  born  of  a  good  nature  ;  if  a  liberal  education  has  formed  in 
us  a  generous  temper  and  disposition,  well-regulated  appetites, 
and  worthy  inclinations,  'tis  well  for  us ;  and  so  indeed  we 
esteem  it.  But  who  is  there  endeavours  to  give  these  to 
himself,  or  to  advance  his  portion  of  happiness  in  this  kind  ? 
AVho  thinks  of  improving,  or  so  much  as  of  preserving  his 
share  in  a  world  where  it  must  of  necessity  run  so  great  a 
hazard,  and  where  we  know  an  honest  nature  is  so  easily 
corrupted  ?  All  other  things  relating  to  us  are  preserved  with 
care,  and  have  some  art  or  economy  belonging  to  them  ;  this 
which  is  nearest  related  to  us  and  on  which  our  happiness 
depends,  is  alone  committed  to  chance,  and  temper  is  the  only 
thing  ungoverned,  whilst  it  governs  all  the  rest. 

"  Thus  we  inquire  concerning  what  is  good  and  suitable  to 
our  appetites  ;  but  what  appetites  are  good  and  suitable  to  us 
is  no  part  of  our  examination.  We  inquire  what  is  according 
to  interest,  policy,  fashion,  vogue;  but  it  seems  wholly  strange 

C   and  out  of  the  way  to  inquire  Avhat  is  according  to  Nature. 

"  The  balance  of  Europe,  of  trade,  of  power,  is  strictly  sought 

68 


THE    .AlORAIJSTS 

after;  while  few  have  heard  of  the  balance  of  their  passions,  or 
thought  of  holding  these  scales  evenT"  Few  are  acquainted  with 
this  province,  or  knowing  in  these  affairs.  But  were  we  more 
so  (as  this  inquiry  would  make  us)  we  should  then  see  beauty 
and  decorum  here,  as  well  as  elsewhere  in  Nature  ;  and  the  order 
of  the  moral  woi-ld  would  equal  that  of  the  natural.  By  this 
the  beauty  of  virtue  would  appear,  and  hence  (as  has  been  shoAvn) 
the  supreme  and  sovereign  beauty,  the  original  of  all  which  is 
good  or  amiable. 

"  But  lest  I  should  appear  at  last  too  like  an  enthusiast,  I 
choose  to  express  my  sense,  and  conclude  this  philosophical 
sermon  in  the  words  of  one  of  those  ancient  j)hilologists,  whom 
you  are  used  to  esteem.  For  divinity  itself,  says  he,  is  surely 
beauteous,  and  of  all  beauties  the  brightest;  thoudi  not  a 
beauteous  body,  but  that  from  whence  the  beauty  of  bodies  is 
derived ;  not  a  beauteous  plain,  but  that  from  whence  the  plain 
looks  beautiful.  The  river's  beauty,  the  sea's,  the  heaven's,  and 
heavenly  constellations  all  flow  from  hence  as  from  a  source 
eternal  and  incorruptible.  As  beings  partake  of  this,  they  are 
fair,  and  flourishing,  and  happy;  as  they  are  lost  to  this,  they 
are  deformed,  perished,  and  lost." 

"\\'hen  Theocles  had  thus  spoken  he  was  formally  compli- 
mented by  our  two  companions.  I  was  going  to  add  something 
in  the  same  way,  but  he  presently  stopped  me  by  saying  he 
should  be  scandalised,  if  instead  of  commending  him,  I  did  not, 
according  to  my  character,  choose  rather  to  criticise  some  part 
or  other  of  his  long  discourse. 

If  it  nuist  be  so  then,  replied  I,  in  the  first  })lace  give  me 
leave  to  wonder  that,  instead  of  the  many  arguments  connnonly 
brought  for  jn-oof  of  a  deity,  you  make  use  only  of  one  single 
one  to  build  on.  I  expected  to  have  heard  from  vou,  in 
customary  form,  of  a  first  cause,  a  first  being,  and  a  beginning 
of  motion.  How  clear  the  idea  was  of  an  in)matei-ial  substance, 
and  how  plainly  it  appeared,  that  at  some  time  or  other  matter 
must  have  been  created.     But  as  to  all  this  vou  arc  silent.     As 

09 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

for  what  is  said  of  "  A  material  unthinking  substance  being 
never  able  to  have  produced  an  immaterial  thinking  one,""  I 
readily  grant  it,  but  on  the  condition  that  this  great  maxim 
of  nothing  being  ever  made  from  nothing  may  hold  as  well  on 
my  side  as  my  adversary's.  And  then,  I  suppose,  that  whilst 
the  world  endures,  he  will  be  at  a  loss  how  to  as  sign  a  beginning 
to  matter,  or  how  to  suggest  a  possibility  of  annihilating  it. 
The  spiritual  men  may,  as  long  as  they  please,  represent  to  us 
in  the  most  eloquent  manner,  "  That  matter  considered  in  a 
thousand  different  shapes,  joined  and  disjoined,  varied  and 
modified  to  eternity,  can  never,  of  itself,  afford  one  single 
thought,  never  occasion  or  give  rise  to  anything  like  sense  or 
knowledge."  Their  argument  will  hold  good  against  a  Demo- 
critus,  an  E})icurus,  or  any  of  the  elder  or  latter  atomists.  But 
it  will  be  turned  on  them  by  an  examining  Academist,  and 
when  the  two  substances  are  fairly  set  asunder,  and  considered 
apart  as  different  kinds,  'twill  be  as  strong  sense,  and  as  good 
argument,  to  say  as  well  of  the  immaterial  kind  :  "  That  do 
with  it  as  you  please,  modify  it  a  thousand  ways,  purify  it, 
exalt  it,  sublime  it,  torture  it  ever  so  much  or  rack  it,  as  they 
say,  with  thinking,  you  will  never  be  able  to  produce  or  force 
the  contrary  substance  out  of  it."  The  poor  dregs  of  sorry 
matter  can  no  more  be  made  out  of  the  simple  pure  substance 
of  immaterial  thought,  than  the  high  spirits  of  thought  or 
reason  can  be  extracted  from  the  gross  substance  of  heavy 
matter.  So  let  the  dogmatists  make  of  this  argument  what 
they  can. 

But  for  your  j)art,  continued  I,  as  you  have  stated  the 
cpiestion,  'tis  not  about  what  was  first  or  foremost,  but  what  is 
instant  and  now  in  being.  "  For  if  deity  be  now  really  extant, 
if  by  any  good  token  it  appears  that  there  is  at  this  present  a 
universal  mind,  'twill  easily  be  yielded  there  ever  was  one."  .  .  . 
This  is  your  argument.  .  .  .  You  go  (if  I  may  say  so)  upon 
fact,  and  would  prove  that  things  actually  are  in  such  a  state 
and  condition,  which  if  they  really  were,  there  would  indeed  be 

70" 


THE   MORALISTS 

no  dispute  left.  Your  union  is  your  main  support.  Yet  how 
is  it  you  prove  this  ?  What  demonstration  have  you  given  ? 
What  have  you  so  much  as  offered  at,  beyond  bare  probability  ? 
So  far  are  you  from  demonstrating  anything,  that  if  this  uniting 
scheme  be  the  chief  argument  for  deity  (as  you  tacitly  allow) 
you  seem  rather  to  have  demonstrated,  "  that  the  case  itself  is 
incapable  of  demonstration."  For,  "  how,  say  you,  can  a  narrow 
mind  see  all  things  ?"".  .  .  And  yet  if  in  reality  it  sees  not  all, 
it  had  as  good  see  nothing.  The  demonstrable  part  is  still  as 
far  behind.  For  grant  that  this  all,  Avhich  lies  within  our  view 
or  knowledge,  is  orderly  and  united,  as  you  suppose  ;  this  mighty 
all  is  a  mere  point  still,  a  very  nothing  compared  to  what 
remains.  "  'Tis  only  a  separate  by-world  (we'll  say)  of  which 
perhaps  there  are,  in  the  wide  waste,  millions  besides,  as  horrid 
and  deformed  as  this  of  ours  is  regular  and  proportioned.  In 
length  of  time,  amidst  the  infinite  hurry  and  shock  of  beings, 
this  single  odd  world,  by  accident,  might  have  been  struck  out, 
and  cast  into  some  form  (as  among  infinite  chances  what  is 
there  which  may  not  happen  ?).  But  for  the  rest  of  matter,  'tis 
of  a  different  hue.  Old  Father  Chaos  (as  the  poets  call  him)  in 
these  wild  spaces  reigns  absolute,  and  upholds  his  realms  of 
darkness.  He  presses  hard  upon  our  frontier,  and  one  day, 
belike,  shall  by  a  furious  inroad  recover  his  lost  right,  conquer  his 
rebel  state,  and  reunite  us  to  primitive  discord  and  confusion." 

This,  said  I,  Theocles  !  (concluding  my  discourse)  is  all  I 
dare  offer  in  opposition  to  your  philosophy.  I  imagined,  indeed, 
you  might  have  given  me  more  scope  ;  but  you  have  retrenched 
yourself  in  narrower  bounds.  So  that,  to  tell  you  truth,  I  look 
upon  your  theology  to  be  hardly  so  fair  or  open  as  that  of  our 
divines  in  general.  They  are  strict,  it  is  true,  as  to  names,  but 
allow  a  greater  latitude  in  things.  Hardly  indeed  can  they 
bear  a  home-charge,  a  downright  questioning  of  deity ;  but  in 
return  they  give  always  fair  play  against  Nature,  and  allow  her 
to  be  challenged  for  her  failings.  She  may  freely  err,  and  we  as 
freely  censure.     Deity,  they  think,  is  not  accountable  for  her. 

71 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Only  .she  for  herself,     13 ut  you  are  straiter,  and  more  precise  in 
this  point.     You  have  unnecessarily  brought  Nature   into  the 

/  controversy,  and  taken  upon  you  to  defend  her  honour  so  highly 
L^  that  I  know  not  whether  it  may  be  safe  for  me  to  question  her. 
Let  not  this  trouble  you,  replied  Theocles,  but  be  free  to 
censure  Nature,  Avhatever  may  be  the  consequence.  'Tis  only  my 
hypothesis  can  suffer.  If  I  defend  it  ill,  my  friends  need  not  be 
scandalised.  They  are  fortified,  no  doubt,  Avith  stronger  argu- 
ments for  a  deity,  and  can  well  employ  those  metaphysical 
weapons,  of  whose  edge  you  seem  so  little  apprehensive.  I  leave 
them  to  dispute  this  ground  with  you,  whenever  they  think  fit. 
For  my  own  arguments,  if  they  can  be  supposed  to  make  any 
]iart  of  this  defence,  they  may  be  looked  upon  only  as  distant 
lines,  or  outworks,  which  may  easily  perhaps  be  won,  but  with- 
out any  danger  to  the  body  of  the  place. 

Notwithstanding,  then,  said  I,  that  you  are  willing  1  should 
attack  Nature  in  form,  I  choose  to  spare  her  in  all  other  subjects, 
except  man  only.  How  comes  it,  I  entreat  you,  that  in  this 
noblest  of  creatures,  and  worthiest  her  care,  she  should  appear 
so  very  weak  and  impotent ;   whilst  in   mere  brutes,  and   the 

S  irrational  species,  she  acts  with  so  much  strength,  and  exerts 
such  hardy  vigour  ?  Why  is  she  spent  so  soon  in  feeble  man, 
who  is  found  more  subject  to  diseases,  and  of  fewer  years  than 
many  of  the  wild  creatures  ?  They  range  secure,  and  proof 
against  all  the  injuries  of  seasons  and  weather,  want  no  helj) 
from  art,  but  live  in  careless  ease,  discharged  of  labour,  and  freed 
from  the  cumbersome  bajjjTacTe  of  a  necessitous  human  life.  In 
infancy  more  hel])ful,  vigorous  in  age,  with  senses  quicker,  and 
more  natural  sagacity,  they  pursue  their  interests,  joys,  recrea- 
tions, and  cheaply  purchase  both  their  food  and  maintenance, 
clothed  and  armed  by  Nature  herself,  who  ]irovides  them  both  a 
couch  and  mansion.  So  has  Nature  ordered  for  the  rest  of 
creatures.  Such  is  their  hardiness,  robustness,  vigour.  Why 
not  the  same  for  man  ?  .   .  . 

And  do  you  stop  thus  short,  said  Theocles,  in  your  expostu- 

72 


THE   MORALISTS 

lation  ?  Methinks  "'twere  as  easy  to  proceed,  now  vou  are  in  the 
way ;  and  instead  of  laying  claim  to  some  few  advantages  of 
other  creatures,  you  might  as  well  stand  for  all,  and  complain 
"  that  man,  for  his  part,  should  be  anything  less  than  a  con- 
summation of  all  advantages  and  privileges  which  Nature  can 
afford."'  Ask  not  merely,  why  man  is  naked,  why  unhoofed, 
why  slowei'- footed  than  the  beasts  ?  Ask  "  why  he  has  not 
wings  also  for  the  air,  fins  for  the  water,  and  so  on — that  he  / 
might  take  possession  of  each  element,  and  reign  in  all  ?"" 

Not  so,  said  I,  neither.  This  would  be  to  rate  him  high 
indeed !  As  if  he  were,  by  nature,  lord  of  all,  which  is  more 
than  I  could  willingly  allow, 

'Tis  enough,  replied  he,  that  this  is  yielded.  For  if  we  allow 
once  a  subordination  in  his  case ;  if  Nature  herself  be  not  for  s  \rj 
man,  but  man  for  Nature ;  then  must  man,  by  his  good  leave, 
submit  to  the  elements  of  Nature,  and  not  the  elements  to  him. 
Few  of  these  are  at  all  fitted  to  him,  and  none  perfectly.  If  he 
be  left  in  air,  he  falls  headlong,  for  wings  were  not  assigned  him. 
In  water  he  soon  sinks.  In  fire  he  consumes.  AVithin  earth 
he  suffocates.  .   .  . 

As  for  what  dominion  he  may  naturally  have  in  other 
elements,  said  I,  my  concern  truly  is  not  very  great  in  his  be- 
half, since  by  art  he  can  even  exceed  the  advantages  Nature  has 
given  to  other  creatures.  But  for  the  air,  methinks  it  had  been 
wonderfully  obliging  in  Nature  to  have  allowed  him  wings. 

And  what  would  he  have  gained  by  it,  replied  Theocles .? 
For  consitler  what  an  alteration  of  form  must  have  ensued. 
Observe  in  one  of  those  winged  creatures  whether  the  whole 
structure  be  not  made  subservient  to  this  purpose,  and  all  other 
advantages  sacrificed  to  this  single  operation.  The  anatomy  of 
the  creature  shows  it,  in  a  manner,  to  be  all  wing,  its  chief  bulk 
being  composed  of  two  exorbitant  nniscles,  which  exhaust  the 
strength  of  all  the  other,  and  engross  (if  I  may  say  so)  the  whole 
economy  of  the  frame.  'Tis  thus  the  aerial  racers  are  able  to 
perform  so  ra))id  and  strong  a  motion,  bevond  comparison  with 

73 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

any  other  kind,  and  far  exceeding  their  little  share  of  strength 
elsewhere ;  these  parts  of  theirs  being  made  in  such  superior 
proportion,  as  in  a  manner  to  starve  their  companions.  And  in 
man's  architecture,  of  so  different  an  order,  were  the  flying 
engines  to  be  affixed,  must  not  the  other  members  suffer,  and 
the  multi[)lied  parts  starve  one  another?  What  think  you  of 
the  brain  in  this  partition  ?  Is  it  not  like  to  prove  a  starveling? 
Or  would  you  have  it  be  maintained  at  the  same  high  rate,  and 
draw  the  chief  nourishment  to  itself,  from  all  the  rest  ?  .   .   . 

I  understand  you,  said  I,  Theocles  (interrupting  him) :  the 
brain  certainly  is  a  great  starver  where  it  abounds,  and  the 
thinking  people  of  the  world,  the  philosophers  and  virtuosi 
especially,  must  be  contented,  I  find,  with  a  moderate  share  of 
bodily  advantages  for  the  sake  of  what  they  call  parts  and 
capacity  in  another  sense.  The  parts,  it  seems,  of  one  kind 
<  agree  ill  in  their  economy  with  the  parts  of  the  other.  But  to 
make  this  even  on  both  sides,  let  us  turn  the  tables,  and  the 
case,  I  suppose,  will  stand  the  same  with  the  ]\Iilos  of  the  age, 
the  men  of  bodily  prowess  and  dexterity.  For  not  to  mention 
a  vulgar  sort,  such  as  wrestlers,  vaulters,  racers,  hunters ;  what 
shall  we  say  of  our  fine-bred  gentlemen,  our  riders,  fencers, 
dancers,  tennis-players,  and  such  like  ?  'Tis  the  body  surely  is 
the  starver  here ;  and  if  the  brain  were  such  a  terrible  devourer 
in  the  other  way,  the  body  and  bodily  parts  seem  to  have  their 
reprisals  in  this  rank  of  men. 

If  then,  said  he,  the  case  stands  thus  between  man  and  man, 
how  must  it  stand  between  man  and  a  quite  different  creature  r 
If  the  balance  be  so  nice  that  the  least  thing  breaks  it,  even  in 
creatures  of  the  same  frame  and  order,  of  what  fatal  effect 
nmst  it  be  to  change  the  order  itself,  and  make  some  essential 
alteration  in  the  frame  ?  Consider  therefore  how  it  is  avc 
censure  Nature  in  these  and  such-like  cases.  "  Why,"  says  one, 
"  was  I  not  made  by  Nature  strong  as  a  horse  ?  Why  not  hardy 
and  robust  as  this  brute-creature  ?  or  nimble  and  active  as  that 
other?"".   .   .  And  vet  when  uncommon  strength,  agility,  and 

74 


THE   MORALISTS 

feats  of  body  are  subjoined,  even  in  our  own  species,  see  what 
befalls !  So  that  for  a  person  thus  in  love  with  an  athletic 
Milonean  constitution,  it  were  better,  methinks,  and  more 
modest  in  him,  to  change  the  expostulation  and  ask, "  Why  was 
I  not  made  in  good  earnest  a  very  brute  ?  '^  For  that  would 
be  more  suitable. 

I  am  apt,  indeed,  said  I,  to  think  that  the  excellence  of  man 
lies  somewhat  different  from  that  of  a  brute ;  and  that  such 
amongst  us  as  are  more  truly  men  should  naturally  aspire  ti) 
manly  qualities,  and  leave  the  brute  his  own.  But  Nature,  I 
see,  has  done  well  to  mortify  us  in  this  particular  by  furnishing 
us  with  such  slight  stuff,  and  in  such  a  tender  frame,  as  is 
indeed  wonderfully  commodious  to  support  that  man-excellence 
of  thought  and  reason,  but  wretchedly  scanty  and  ineffectual 
for  other  purposes.  As  if  it  were  her  very  design  "  to  hinder 
us  from  aspiring  ridiculously  to  what  was  misbecoming  our 
character.'" 

I  see,  said  Theocles,  you  are  not  one  of  those  timorous 
arguers  who  tremble  at  every  objection  raised  against  their 
opinion  or  belief,  and  are  so  intent  in  upholding  their  own  side 
of  the  argument  that  they  are  luiable  to  make  the  least  con- 
cession on  the  other.  Your  wit  allows  you  to  divert  yourself 
with  whatever  occurs  in  the  debate :  and  you  can  pleasantly  im- 
prove even  what  your  antagonist  brings  as  a  support  to  his  own 
hypothesis.  This,  indeed,  is  a  fairer  sort  of  ])ractice  than  wiiat 
is  connnon  nowadays.  IJut  'tis  no  more  than  suitable  to  your 
character.  And  were  I  not  afraid  of  speaking  with  an  air  of 
compliment  in  the  midst  of  a^  philosophical  debate,  I  should 
tell  you,  perhaps,  what  I  thought  of  the  becoming  manner  of 
your  scepticism  in  o])])osition  to  a  kind  of  bigot-scc|)tics,  who 
forfeit  their  right  to  the  philoso})hit  character,  and  retain 
hardly  so  much  as  that  of  the  gentleman  or  good  companion. 
.  .  .  But  to  our  argument.   .   .   . 

Such  then,  continued  he,  is  the  admirable  distribution  of 
Nature,  her  adapting  and  adjusting  not  only  the  stuff  or  matter 

75 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

to  the  shape  and  form,  and  even  the  shape  itself  and  form  to 
the  circumstance,  place,  element,  or  region ;  but  also  the  affec- 
tions, appetites,  sensations,  mutually  to  each  other,  as  well  as 
to  the  matter,  form,  action,  and  all  besides :  "  All  managed 
for  the  best,  with  jierfect  frugality  and  just  reserve ;  profuse 
.  to  none,  but  bountiful  to  all ;  never  employing  in  one  thing 
J  more  than  enough,  but  with  exact  economy  retrenching  the 
superfluous,  and  adding  force  to  what  is  principal  in  every 
thing/''  ^Viid^^s^iipt  thought  and  reason  principal  in  man? 
^^^ould  he  have  no  reserve  for  these  ?  no  saving  for  this  part 
of  his  engine  ?  Or  would  he  have  the  same  stufl^'  or  matter,  the 
same  instrvnnents  or  organs  serve  alike  for  different  purposes, 
and  an  ounce  be  ecjuivalent  to  a  pound  ?  ...  It  cannot  be. 
AN'hat  wonders,  then,  can  he  expect  from  a  few  ounces  of  blood 
in  such  a  narrow  vessel,  fitted  for  so  small  a  district  of  Nature  ? 
Will  he  not  rather  think  highly  of  that  Nature  which  has  thus 
managed  his  portion  for  him  to  best  advantage,  with  this  happy 
reserve  (happy  indeed  for  him,  if  he  knows  and  uses  it!)  by 
which  he  has  so  much  a  better  use  of  organs  than  any  other 
creature  ?  by  which  he  holds  his  reason,  is  a  man,  and  not 
a  beast  ? 

But  beasts,^  said  I,  have  instincts  which  man  has  not. 
True,  said  he,  they  have  indeed  perceptions,  sensations,  and 
pre-sensations  -  (if  I  may  use  the  expression)  which  man,  for  his 
part,  has  not  in  any  proportionable  degree.  Their  females, 
newly  pregnant,  and  before  they  have  bore  young,  have  a  clear 
prospect  or  pre-sensation  of  their  state  which  is  to  follow ; 
know  what  to  provide,  and  how,  in  what  manner,  and  at  what 
time.  How  manv  things  do  they  ])reponderate  ?  ^  How  many 
at  once  comprehend  ?  The  seasons  of  the  year,  the  country, 
climate,  place,  aspect,  situation,  the  basis  of  their  building,  the 
materials,  architecture;  the  diet  and  treatment  of  their  offspring, 
in  short,  the  whole  economy  of  their  nursery ;  and  all  this  as 

1  Inqxdrxj,  I)k.  ii.  p;irt  i.  §  3 ;  part  ii.  §  1  ;  and  M\sc.  iv.  ch.  ii. 
2  Infra,  part  iii.  §  '1.  "'  [/.*'.  pre-poiider,  pre-consider.] 

70 


THE   JMORATJSTS 

j)erfectly  at  first,  and  when  inexperienced,  as  at  any  time  of 
their  life  afterwards.  And  "  why  not  this,  say  you,  in  human 
kind  ?  "  Nay,  rather,  on  the  contrary,  I  ask  "  why  this  ?  where 
was  the  occasion  or  use  ?  where  the  necessity  ?  why  this  sagacity 
for  men  ?  Have  they  not  what  is  better,  in  another  kind  ? 
have  they  not  reason  and  discourse  ?  does  not  this  instruct 
them  ?  what  need  then  of  the  other  ?  where  w  ould  be  the 
prudent  management  at  this  rate  ?  where  the  reserve  ?  " 

The  young  of  most  other  kinds,  continued  he,  are  instantly 
helpful  to  themselves,  sensible,  vigorous,  know  to  shun  danger 
and  seek  their  good.  A  human  infant  is  of  all  the  most  help- 
less, weak,  infirm.  And  wherefore  should  it  not  have  been 
thus  ordered  ?  Where  is  the  loss  in  such  a  species  .^  Or  w  hat 
is  man  the  worse  for  this  defect,  amidst  such  large  supplies  ? 
Does  not  this  defect  engage  him  the  more  strongly  to  society, 
and  force  him  to  own  that  he  is  purposely,  and  not  by  accident, 
made  rational  and  sociable  ;  and  can  no  otherwise  increase  or 
subsist  than  in  that  social  intercourse  and  connnunity  which  is 
his  natural  state  ?  Is  not  both  conjugal  affection  and  natural 
affection  to  parents,  duty  to  magistrates,  love  of  a  connnon  city, 
community,  or  country,  with  the  other  duties  and  social  parts 
of  life,  deduced  from  hence  and  founded  in  these  very  wants  H 
What  can  be  happier  than  such  a  deficiency  as  is  the  occasion 
of  so  much  good  ?  What  better  than  a  want  so  abundantly 
made  up,  and  answered  by  so  many  enjoyments  ?  Now  if  there 
are  still  to  be  found  among  mankind,  such  as  even  in  the  midst 
of  these  wants  seem  not  ashamed  to  affect  a  right  of  inde- 
pendency, and  deny  themselves  to  be  by  nature  sociable ;  w  here 
would  their  shame  have  been  had  Nature  otherwise  su})plied 
these  wants  .^  What  duty  or  obligation  had  been  ever  thought 
of?  What  respect  or  reverence  of  parents,  magistrates,  their 
country,  or  their  kind  ?  Would  not  their  full  and  self-sufficient 
state  more  strongly  have  determined  them  to  throw  ofi'  Nature, 
and  deny  the  ends  and  author  of  their  creation  H 

Whilst   Theodes  argued   thus  concerning  Nature,  the   old 

77 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

gentleman,  my  adversary,  expressed  great  satisfaction  in  hearing 
me,  as  he  thought,  refuted,  and  my  opinions  exposed.  For  he 
would  needs  believe  these  to  be  strongly  my  opinions,  which  I 
had  only  started  as  objections  in  the  discourse.  He  endeavoured 
to  reinforce  the  argument  by  many  particulars  from  the  common 
topics  of  the  schoolmen  and  civilians.  He  added,  withal,  "  That 
it  was  better  for  me  to  declare  my  sentiments  openly,  for  he 
was  sure  I  had  strongly  imbibed  that  principle,  that  the  state 
of  Nature  was  a  state  of  war.""  i 

That  it  was  no  state  of  government  or  public  rule,  replied 
I,  you  yourself  allow.  I  do  so.  Was  it  then  a  state  of  fellow- 
ship or  society  ?  "  No  ;  for  when  men  entered  first  into  society 
they  passed  from  the  state  of  nature  into  that  i\ew  one  which 
is  founded  upon  compact."  And  was  that  former  state  a 
tolerable  one  ?  Had  it  been  absolutely  intolerable,  there  had 
never  been  any  such.  Nor  could  we  properly  call  that  a  state, 
which  could  not  stand  or  endure  for  the  least  time.  If  man, 
therefore,  could  endure  to  live  without  society,  and  if  it  be  true 
that  he  actually  lived  so  when  in  the  state  of  nature,  how  can 
it  be  said  "  that  he  is  by  nature  sociable  "  ? 

The  old  gentleman  seemed  a  little  disturbed  at  my  question, 
but  having  recovered  himself,  he  said  in  answer,  "That  man 
indeed,  from  his  own  natural  inclination,  might  not,  perhaps, 
have  been  moved  to  associate,  but  rather  from  some  particular 
circumstances." 

His  nature  then,  said  I,  was  not  so  very  good,  it  seems,  since 
having  no  natural  affection  or  friendly  inclination  belonging  to 
him,  he  was  forced  into  a  social  state  against  his  will ;  and  this 
not  from  any  necessity  in  respect  of  outward  things  (for  you 
have  allowed  him  a  tolerable  subsistence),  but  in  probability 
from  such  inconveniences  as  arose  chiefly  from  himself  and  his 
own  malignant  temper  and  principles.  And  indeed  'twas  no 
wonder  if  creatures  who  were  naturally  thus  unsociable,  should 
be  as  naturally  mischievous  and  troublesome.  If  according  to 
1    Wit  and  TJumoiir,  ])art  iii.  §  1. 

78 


THE   MORALISTS 

their  nature  they  could  live  out  of  society  with  so  little  affec- 
tion for  one  another's  company,  'tis  not  likely  that  upon  occasion 
they  would  spare  one  another's  persons.  If  they  were  so  sullen 
as  not  to  meet  for  love,  'tis  more  than  probable  they  -svbuld 
fight  for  interest.  And  thus  from  your  own  reasoning  it  appears 
f'that  the  state  of  nature  must  in  all  likelihood  have  been 
little  different  from  a  state  of  war," 

He  was  going  to  answer  me  with  some  sharpness,  as  by  his 
looks  appeared,  when  Theocles,  interposing,  desired  that  as  he 
had  occasioned  this  dispute  he  might  be  allowed  to  try  if  he 
could  end  it  by  setting  the  question  in  a  fairer  light.  You 
see,  said  he  to  the  old  gentleman,  what  artifice  Philocles  made 
use  of,  when  he  engaged^  you  to  allow  that  the  state  of  nature 
and  that  of  society  were  perfectly  distinct.  But  let  us  question 
him  now  in  his  turn,  and  see  whether  he  can  demonstrate  to  us, 
"That  there  can  be  naturally  any  human  state  which  is  not 
social." 

What  is  it  then,  said  the  old  gentleman,  which  we  call  the 
state  of  nature  ? 

Not  that  imperfect  rude  condition  of  mankind,  said  Theocles, 
which  some  imagine ;  but  which,  if  it  ever  were  in  nature,  could 
never  have  been  of  the  least  continuance,  or  any  way  tolerable, 
or  sufficient  for  the  support  of  human  race.  Such  a  condition 
cannot  indeed  so  properly  be  called  a  state.  For  what  if, 
speaking  of  an  infant  just  coming  into  the  world,  and  in  the 
moment  of  the  birth,  I  should  f:\ncy  to  call  this  a  state,  would 
it  be  proper  ? 

Hardly  so,  I  confess. 

Just  such  a  state,  therefore,  was  that  which  we  suppose  of 
man  ere  yet  he  entered  into  society,  and  became  in  truth  a 
human  creature.  'Twas  the  rough  draught  of  man,  the  essay 
or  first  effort  of  Nature,  a  species  in  the  birth,  a  kind  as  yet 
unformed ;  not  in  its  natural  state,  but  under  violence,  and  still 
restless,  till  it  attained  its  natural  perfection.  '- 

And  thus,  said  Theocles  (addressing  still  more  particularly 

79 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

to  the  old  gentleman),  the  case  must  necessarily  stand,  even  on 
the  supposal  "  that  there  was  ever  such  a  condition  or  state  of 
men,  when  as  yet  they  were  unassociated,  unacquainted,  and 
consequently  without  any  language  or  form  of  art."  But 
"  that  it  was  their  natural  state  to  live  thus  separately,""  can 
never  without  absurdity  be  allowed.  For  sooner  may  you  divest 
the  creature  of  any  other  feeling  or  affection  than  that  towards 
society  and  his  likeness.  Allowing  you,  however,  the  power  of 
tlivesting  him  at  pleasure,  allowing  you  to  reduce  even  whole 
jjarts  and  members  of  his  present  frame,  would  you  transform 
him  thus  and  call  him  still  a  man  ?  Yet  better  might  you  do 
this  indeed  than  you  could  strip  him  of  his  natural  affections, 
separate  him  from  all  his  kind,  and  enclosing  him  like  some 
solitary  insect  in  a  shell,  declare  him  still  a  man.  So  might 
you  call  the  human  egg  or  embryo  the  man.  The  bug  which 
breeds  the  butterfly  is  more  properly  a  fly,  though  without 
wings,  than  this  imaginary  creature  is  a  man.  For  though 
his  outward  shape  were  human,  his  passions,  a])petites,  and 
organs  must  be  wholly  different.  His  whole  inward  make  must 
be  reversed,  to  fit  him  for  such  a  recluse  economy  and  separate 
subsistence. 

To  explain  this  a  little  further,  continued  he,  let  us  examine 
this  pretended  state  of  nature ;  how  and  on  what  foundation  it 
must  stand.  "  For  either  man  must  have  been  from  eternity  or 
not.  If  from  eternity,  there  could  be  no  primitive  or  original 
state,  no  state  of  nature  other  than  we  see  at  present  before 
our  eyes.  If  not  from  eternity,  he  arose  either  all  at  once  (and 
consequently  he  was  at  the  very  first  as  he  is  now)  or  by  degrees, 
through  several  stages  and  conditions,  to  that  in  which  he  is  at 
length  settled,  and  has  continued  for  so  many  generations."'"' 

For  instance,  let  us  suppose  he  sprang,  as  the  old  poets 
feigned,  from  a  big-bellied  oak,  and  then  belike  he  might  re- 
semble more  a  mandrake  than  a  man.  Let  us  suppose  him  at 
first  with  little  more  of  life  than  is  discovered  in  that  plant 
which  they  call  the  sensitive.     But  when  the  mother-oak  had 

80 


THE   MORALISTS 

been  some  time  delivered,  and  the  false  birth  by  some  odd 
accident  or  device  was  wrought  into  form,  the  members  were 
then  fully  displayed,  and  the  organs  of  sense  began  to  unfold 
themselves.  "  Here  sprang  an  ear ;  there  peeped  an  eye. 
Perhaps  a  tail  too  came  in  company.  P'or  what  superfluities 
Nature  may  have  been  charged  with  at  first  is  difficult  to 
determine.  They  dropped  off,  it  seems,  in  time ;  and  happily 
have  left  things  at  last  in  a  good  posture,  and  (to  a  wonder  ! ) 
just  as  they  should  be." 

This  surely  is  the  lowest  view  of  the  original  affairs  of 
human  kind.  For  if  a  providence,  and  not  chance,  gave  man 
his  being,  our  argument  for  his  social  nature  must  surely  be  the 
stronger.  But  admitting  his  rise  to  be  as  we  have  described, 
and  as  a  certain  sort  of  j^hilosophers  would  needs  have  it,  NMure 
has  then  had  no  intention  at  all,  no  meanino-  or  desiirn  in  this 
whole  matter.  So  how  anything  can  be  called  natural  in  the 
case,  how  any  state  can  be  called  a  state  of  Nature,  or  according 
to  Nature,  one  more  than  another,  I  know  not. 

Let  us  go  on,  however,  and  on  their  hypothesis  consider 
which  state  we  may  best  call  Nature's  own.  "  She  has  by 
accident,  through  many  changes  and  chances,  raised  a  creature 
which,  springing  at  first  from  rude  seeds  of  matter,  proceeded 
till  it  became  what  now  it  is,  and  arrived  where  for  many 
generations  it  has  been  at  a  stay."  In  this  long  procession  (for 
I  allow  it  any  length  whatever)  I  ask,  "  Where  was  it  that 
this  state  of  Nature  could  begin  ? "  The  creature  must  have 
endured  many  changes ;  and  each  change,  whilst  he  Avas  thus 
growing  up,  was  as  natural  one  as  another.  So  that  either  there 
must  be  reckoned  a  hundred  different  states  of  Nature,  or  if  one, 
it  can  be  only  that  in  which  Nature  was  perfect,  and  her  growth 
complete.  Here  where  she  rested  and  attained  her  end,  here 
must  be  her  state,  or  nowhere. 

Could  she  then  rest,  think  you,  in  that  desolate  state  before 
society  ?     Could  she  maintain  and  propagate  the  species,  such 
as  it  now  is,  without  fellowship  or  community .''     Show  it  us 
VOL.  II  81  G 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

in  fact  anywhere,  amongst  any  of  our  own  kind.  For  as  for 
creatures  which  may  much  resemble  us  in  outward  form,  if  they 
differ  yet  in  the  least  part  of  their  constitution,  if  their  inwards 
are  of  a  different  texture,  if  their  skin  and  pores  are  otherwise 
formed  or  hardened ;  if  they  have  other  excrescences  of  body, 
another  temper,  other  natural  inseparable  habits  or  affections, 
they  are  not  truly  of  our  kind.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  their 
constitution  be  as  ours,  their  natural  parts  or  inward  faculties 
as  strong,  and  their  bodily  frame  as  weak  as  ours  ;  if  they  have 
memory,  and  senses,  and  affections,  and  a  use  of  organs  as  ours : 
"'tis  evident  they  can  no  more  by  their  goodwill  abstain  from 
society  than  they  can  possibly  preserve  themselves  without  it. 

And  here,  my  friends,  we  ought  to  remember  what  we  dis- 
coursed a  while  since,  and  was  advanced  by  Philocles  himself, 
concerning  the  weakness  of  human  bodies  ^  and  the  necessitous 
state  of  man  in  respect  of  all  other  creatures ;  "  his  long  and 
helpless  infancy,  his  feeble  and  defenceless  make,  by  which  he  is 
more  fitted  to  be  a  prey  himself  than  live  by  prey  on  others."" 
Yet  "'tis  impossible  for  him  to  subsist  like  any  of  those  grazing 
kinds.  He  must  have  better  provision  and  choicer  food  than 
the  raw  herbaoe  :  a  better  couch  and  coverinff  than  the  bare 
earth  or  open  sky.  How  many  conveniences  of  other  kinds 
does  he  stand  in  need  of?  What  union  and  strict  society  is 
required  between  the  sexes  to  preserve  and  nurse  their  growing 
offspring  ?  This  kind  of  society  will  not,  surely,  be  denied  to 
man,  which  to  every  beast  of  prey  is  known  proper  and  natural. 
And  can  we  allow  this  social  part  to  man,  and  go  no  further  ? 
Is  it  possible  he  should  pair,  and  live  in  love  and  fellowship 
with  his  partner  and  offspring,  and  remain  still  wholly  wild  and 
speechless,  and  without  those  arts  of  storing,  building,  and  other 
economy,  as  natural  to  him,  surely,  as  to  the  beaver,  or  to  the 
ant  or  bee  ?  AVhere,  therefore,  should  he  break  off  from  this 
society  if  once  begun  't  For  that  it  began  thus,  as  early  as 
generation,  and  grew  into  a  household  and  economy,  is  plain. 

1  P.  72. 
82 


THE   MORALISTS 

Must  not  this  have  groAvn  soon  into  a  tribe  ?  and  this  tribe  into 
a  nation  ?  Or  though  it  remained  a  tribe  only,  was  not  this 
still  a  society  for  mutual  defence  and  common  interest?  In 
short,  if  generation  be  natural,  if  natural  affection  and  the  care 
and  nurture  of  the  offspring  be  natural,  things  standing  as  thev 
do  with  man,  and  the  creature  being  of  that  form  and  constitu- 
tion he  now  is,  it  follows  "  that  society  must  be  also  natural  to 
him,"  and  "  that  out  of  society  and  community  he  never  did, 
nor  ever  can,  subsist.*" 

To  conclude,  said  he  (addressing  still  to  the  two  companions), 
I  will  venture  to  add  a  word  in  behalf  of  Philocles :  that  since 
the  learned  have  such  a  fancy  for  this  notion,  and  love  to  talk 
of  this  imaginary  state  of  Nature,  I  think  'tis  even  charity  to 
speak  as  ill  of  it  as  we  possibly  can.  Let  it  be  a  state  of  war, 
rajjine,  and  injustice.  Since  'tis  unsocial,  let  it  even  be  as 
uncomfortable  and  as  frightful  as  'tis  possible.  To  speak  well 
of  it  is  to  render  it  inviting  and  tempt  men  to  turn  hermits. 
Let  it,  at  least,  be  looked  on  as  many  degrees  worse  than  the 
worst  government  in  being.  The  greater  dread  we  have  of 
anarchy,  the  better  countrymen  we  shall  prove,  and  value  more 
the  laws  and  constitution  under  which  we  live,  and  by  which  we 
are  protected  from  the  outrageous  violences  of  such  an  unnatural 
state.  In  this  I  agree  heartily  with  those  transformers  of  human 
nature  who,  considering  it  abstractedly  and  apart  from  govern- 
ment or  society,  represent  it  under  monstrous  visages  of  dragons, 
leviathans,  and  I  know  not  what  devouring  creatures.  They 
would  have  done  well,  however,  to  have  exjiressed  themselves 
more  properly  in  their  great  maxim.  For  to  say  in  disparage- 
ment of  man  "  that  he  is  to  man  a  wolf"  appears  somewhat 
absurd,  when  one  considers  that  wolves  are  to  wohes  very  kind 
and  loving  creatures.  The  sexes  strictly  join  in  the  care  and 
nurture  of  the  young,  and  this  union  is  continued  still  betAveen 
them.  They  howl  to  one  another  to  bring  company,  whether 
to  hunt,  or  invade  their  prey,  or  assemble  on  the  discovery  of 
a  good  carcase.       Even   the  swinish   kinds  want  not  common 

8*3 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

affection,  and  run  in  herds  to  the  assistance  of  their  distressed 
fellows.  The  meaning,  therefore,  of  this  famous  sentence  (if  it 
has  any  meaning  at  all)  must  be,  "  That  man  is  naturally  to 
man  as  a  wolf  is  to  a  tamer  creature " ;  as,  for  instance,  to  a 
sheep.  But  this  will  be  as  little  to  the  purpose  as  to  tell  us 
that  "  there  are  different  species  or  characters  of  men ;  that  all 
have  not  this  wolfish  nature,^  but  that  one  half  at  least  are 
naturally  innocent  and  mild."  And  thus  the  sentence  comes  to 
nothing.  For  without  belying  nature  and  contradicting  what 
is  evident  from  natural  history,  fact,  and  the-  plain  course  of 
things,  "'tis  impossible  to  assent  to  this  ill-natured  proposition 
when  we  have  even  done  our  best  to  make  tolerable  sense  of  it. 
.  .  .  But  such  is  mankind !  And  even  here  human  nature 
shows  itself,  such  as  it  is,  not  perfect  or  absolutely  successful, 
though  rightly  tending  and  moved  by  proper  and  just  principles. 
'Tis  here,  therefore,  in  philosophy  as  in  the  common  conversa- 
tions of  the  world.  As  fond  as  men  are  of  company,  and  as 
little  able  to  enjoy  any  happiness  out  of  it,  they  are  yet  strangely 
addicted  to  the  way  of  satire.  And  in  the  same  manner  as  a 
malicious  censure,  craftily  worded  and  pronounced  with  assurance, 
is  apt  to  pass  with  mankind  for  shrewd  wit,  so  a  virulent  maxim 
in  bold  expressions,  though  without  any  justness  of  thought, 
is  readily  received  for  true  philosophy. 


Section   V 

In  these  discourses  the  evening  ended,  and,  night  advancing,  we 
returned  home  from  our  walk.  At  supper,  and  afterwards  for 
the  rest  of  that  night,  Theocles  said  little.  The  discourse  was 
now  managed  chiefly  by  the  two  companions,  who  turned  it 
upon  a  new  sort  of  philosophy,  such  as  you  will  excuse  me,  good 
Palemon,  if  I  pass  over  with  more  haste. 

There  was  much  said,  and  with  great  learning,  on  the  nature  of 

^    Wit  (Hid  Humour,  part  ii.  §  1  ;  part  iii.  §  3. 

84 


THE   MORALISTS 

spirits  and  apparitions,  of  whicli  the  most  astonishing  accounts 
were  the  most  ravishing  with  our  friends,  who  endeavoured  to 
exceed  one  another  in  this  admirable  way,  and  performed  to 
a  miracle  in  raising  one  another's  amazement.  Nothing  was  so~ 
charming  with  them  as  that  which  was  disagreeing  and  odd ; 
nothing  so  soothing  as  that  which  moved  horror.  In  short, 
whatever  was  rational,  plain,  and  easy  bore  no  relish ;  and 
nothing  came  amiss  which  was  cross  to  nature,  out  of  sort  and 
order,  and  in  no  proportion  or  harmony  with  the  rest  of  things. 
^Monstrous  births,  prodigies,  enchantments,  elementary  ^  wars  and 
convulsions  were  our  chief  entertainment.  One  would  have 
thought  that  in  a  kind  of  rivalship  between  Providence  and 
Nature,  the  latter  lady  was  made  to  appear  as  homely  as  possible, 
that  her  deformities  might  recommend  and  set  off  the  beauties 
of  the  former.  For  to  do  our  friends  justice,  I  must  own  I 
thought  their  intention  to  be  sincerely  religious.  But  this  was 
not  a  face  of  religion  I  was  like  to  be  enamoured  with.  It  was 
not  from  hence  I  feared  being  made  enthusiastic  or  superstitious. 
If  ever  I  became  so,  I  found  it  would  rather  be  after  Theocles's 
manner.  The  monuments  and  churchyards  were  not  such 
powerful  scenes  Avith  me  as  the  mountains,  the  plains,  the 
solemn  woods  and  groves,  of  whose  inhabitants  I  chose  much 
rather  to  hear  than  of  the  other.  ^Vnd  I  Mas  readier  to  fancy 
truth  in  those  poetical  fictions  which  Theocles  made  use  of 
than  in  any  of  his  friend's  ghastly  stories,  so  pompously  set  off*, 
after  the  usual  way,  in  a  lofty  tone  of  authority  and  with  an 
assuming  air  of  truth. 

You  may  imagine,  Palemon,  that  my  scepticism,-  with  \\  Inch 
you  so  often  reproach  me,  could  not  well  forsake  me  here ;  nor 
could  it  fail  to  give  disturbance  to  our  companions,  especially  to 
the  grave  gentleman  who  had  clashed  with  me  some  time  before. 
He  bore  with  me  awhile,  till  having  lost  all  patience,  "One  must 
certainly,'"'  said  he,  "  be  master  of  no  small  share  of  assurance  to 
hold  out  against  the  common  opinion  of  the  world  and  deny 
'  [I.e.  elemental.]  -  Mhc.  ii.  ch.  ii.  ;  v.  cli.  i.  iii. 

85 


L 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTEKISTTCS 

things  which  are  known  by  the  report  of  the  most  considerable 
part  of  mankind.'' 

This,  said  I,  is  far  from  being  my  case.  You  have  never  yet 
heard  me  deny  anything,  though  I  have  questioned  many.  If  I 
suspend  my  judgment,  'tis  because  I  have  less  sufficiency  than 
others.  There  are  people,  I  know,  who  have  so  great  a  regard 
to  every  fancy  of  their  own,  that  they  can  believe  their  very 
dreams.  But  I,  who  could  never  pay  any  such  deference  to  my 
sleeping  fancies,  am  a])t  sometimes  to  question  even  my  waking 
thoughts  and  examine  "  whether  these  are  not  dreams  too,'' 
since  men  have  a  faculty  of  dreaming  sometimes  with  their  eyes 
open.  You  will  own  'tis  no  small  pleasure  with  mankind  to 
make  their  dreams  pass  for  realities,  and  that  the  love  of  truth 
is,  in  earnest,  not  half  so  prevalent  as  this  passion  for  novelty 
and  surprise,  joined  with  a  desire  of  making  impression  and 
being  admired.  However,  I  am  so  charitable  still  as  to  think 
there  is  more  of  innocent  delusion  than  voluntary  imposture  in 
the  world,  and  that  they  who  have  most  imposed  on  mankind 
have  been  happy  in  a  certain  faculty  of  imposing  first  upon 
themselves,  by  Avhich  they  have  a  kind  of  salvo  for  their  con- 
sciences, and  are  so  much  the  more  successful,  as  they  can  act 
their  })art  more  naturally  and  to  the  life.  Nor  is  it  to  be 
esteemed  a  riddle  that  men's  dreams  should  sometimes  have  the 
good  fortune  of  passing  with  them  for  truth,  when  we  con- 
sider that  in  some  cases  that  which  was  never  so  much  as 
dreamt  of,  or  related  as  truth,  comes  afterwards  to  be  believed 
'^by  one  who  has  often  told  it. 

So  that  the  greatest  impostor  in  the  world,  replied  lie,  at 
this  rate  may  be  allowed  sincere. 

As  to  the  main  of  his  imposture,  said  I,  perhaps  he  may, 
notwithstanding  some  pious  frauds  made  use  of  between  whiles 
in  behalf  of  a  belief  thouoht  o-ood  and  wholesome.  And  so  very 
natural  do  I  take  this  to  be,  that  in  all  religions  except  the 
true  I  look  upon  the  greatest  zeal  to  be  accompanied  with  the 
strongest  inclination  to  deceive.     For  the  design  and  end  being 

86 


THE   IVrORxVLTSTS 

the  truth,  'tis  not  customary  to  hesitate  or  he  scrupulous  ahout 
the  choice  of  means.  AVhether  this  he  true  or  no,  I  aj^peal  to 
the  experience  of  the  last  age,  in  which  "'twill  not  he  difficult  to 
find  very  remarkable  examples,  where  imposture  and  zeal, 
bigotry  and  hypocrisy,  have  lived  together  in  one  and  the  same 
character. 

Let  this  be  as  it  will,  replied  he,  I  am  sorry,  upon  the  whole, 
to  find  you  of  such  an  incredulous  temper. 

"Tis  just,  said  I,  that  you  should  pity  me  as  a  sufferer  for 
losing  that  pleasure  which  I  see  others  enjoy.  For  what  stronger 
pleasure  is  there  with  mankind,  or  what  do  they  earlier  learn 
or  longer  retain,  than  the  love  of  hearing  and  relating  things 
strange  and  incredible  .^  How  wonderful  a  thing  is  the  love  of 
wondering  and  of  raising  wonder !  'Tis  the  delight  of  children 
to  hear  tales  they  shiver  at,  and  the  vice  of  old  age  to  abound 
in  strange  stories  of  times  past.  We  come  into  the  world 
wondering  at  everything,  and  when  our  wonder  about  common 
things  is  over,  we  seek  something  new  to  wonder  at.  Our  last 
scene  is  to  tell  wonders  of  our  own  to  all  who  will  believe  them. 
And  amidst  all  this,  'tis  well  if  truth  comes  off  but  nioderately 
tainted. 

'Tis  well,  replied  he,  if  with  this  moderate  faith  of  yours 
you  can  believe  any  miracles  whatever. 

No  matter,  said  I,  how  incredulous  I  am  of  modern  miracles, 
if  I  have  a  right  faith  in  those  of  former  times  by  paying  the-^ 
deference  due  to  sacred  writ.  'Tis  here  I  am  so  much  warned 
against  credulity,  and  enjoined  never  to  believe  even  the  greatest, 
miracles  which  may  be  wrought,  in  opposition  to  what  has  been 
already  taught  me.  And  this  injunction  I  am  so  well  fitted  to 
coni])ly  with,  that  I  can  safely  engage  to  keep  still  in  the  same 
faith  and  promise  never  to  believe  amiss. 

But  is  this  a  promise  which  can  well  be  made  ? 

If  not,  and  that  my  belief  indeed  does  not  al)solutely  depend 
upon  myself,  how  am  I  accountable  for  it.-^  I  may  be  justly 
punished  for  actions  in  which  mv  will  is  free,  but  with  what 

8?" 


k 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

justice  can  I  be  challenged  for  my  belief,  if  in  this  I  am  not  at 
my  liberty  ?  If  credulity  and  incredulity  are  defects  only  in  the 
judgment ;  and  the  best-meaning  person  in  the  world  may  eiT 
on  either  side,  whilst  a  much  worse  man,  by  having  better  parts, 
may  judge  far  better  of  the  evidence  of  things;  how  can  you 
punish  him  who  errs,  unless  you  would  punish  weakness  and 
say  'tis  just  for  men  to  suffer  for  their  unhappiness,  and  not 
their  fault  ? 

I  am  apt  to  think,  said  he,  that  very  few  of  those  Avho  are 
punished  for  their  incredulity  can  be  said  to  be  sufferers  for 
their  weakness. 

Taking  it  for  granted  then,  replied  I,  that  simplicity  and 
weakness  is  more  the  character  of  the  credulous  than  of  the  un- 
believing, yet  I  see  not  but  that  even  this  wav  still  we  are  as 
liable  to  suffer  by  our  weakness  as  in  the  contrary  case  by  an 
over-refined  wit.  For  if  we  cannot  command  our  own  belief, 
how  are  we  secure  against  those  false  pi'ojjhets  and  their  delud- 
ino;  miracles  of  which  we  have  such  warning  given  us  ?  Hoav 
are  we  safe  from  heresy  and  false  religion  ?  Credulity  being 
that  which  delivers  us  up  to  all  impostures  of  this  sort,  and 
which  actuall}'  at  this  day  hold  the  Pagan  and  Mahometan  world 
in  error  and  blind  superstition.  Either,  therefore,  there  is  no 
punishment  due  to  wrong  belief,  because  we  cannot  believe  as 
we  will  ourselves,  or  if  we  can,  why  should  we  not  promise  never 
r  to  believe  amiss  ?  Now  in  respect  of  miracles  to  come,  the  surest 
way  never  to  believe  amiss  is  never  to  believe  at  all.  For  being 
satisfied  of  the  truth  of  our  religion  by  past  miracles,  so  as  to 
need  no  other  to  confirm  us,  the  belief  of  neAv  may  often  do  us 
harm,  but  can  never  do  us  good.  Therefore  as  the  truest  mark 
of  a  believing  Christian  is  to  seek  after  no  sign  or  miracle  to 
come,  so  the  safest  station  in  Christianity  is  his  who  can  be 
moved  by  nothing  of  this  kind,  and  is  thus  miracle-proof.  For 
if  the  miracle  be  on  the  side  of  his  faith,  'tis  superfluous,  and  he 
needs  it  not ;  if  against  his  faith,  let  it  be  as  great  as  possible, 
he  will  never  regard  it  in  the  least,  or  believe  it  any  other  than 

88 


THE   MORALISTS 

imposture,  though  coming  from  an  angel.  So  tliat  with  all  that 
incredulity  for  which  you  reproach  me  so  severely,  I  take  myself 
to  be  still  the  better  and  more  orthodox  Christian.  At  least  I 
am  more  sure  of  continuing  so  than  you,  who  with  your  credulity 
may  be  imposed  upon  by  such  as  are  far  short  of  angels.  For 
having  this  preparatory  disposition,  'tis  odds  you  may  come  in 
time  to  believe  miracles  in  any  of  the  different  sects  who,  we 
know,  all  pi'etend  to  them.  I  am  persuaded,  therefore,  that  the 
best  maxim  to  go  by  is  that  common  one,  "  That  miracles  are 
ceased."  And  I  am  ready  to  defend  this  opinion  of  mine 
to  be  the  most  probable  in  itself,  as  Mel  I  as  most  suitable  to 
Christianity. 

This  question,  upon  further  debate,  happened  to,  divide  our 
two  companions.  For  the  elderly  gentleman,  my  antagonist, 
maintained  "  that  the  giving  up  of  miracles  for  the  time 
present  would  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  atheists."  The 
younger  gentleman,  his  companion,  questioned  "  whether  the 
allowino'  them  mig-ht  not  be  of  as  crreat  advantao-e  to  the 
enthusiasts  and  sectaries  ag-ainst  the  national  church ;  this  of 
the  two  being  the  greatest  danger,  he  thought,  both  to  religion 
and  the  state."  He  was  resolved,  therefore,  for  the  future  to 
be  as  cautious  in  examining  these  modern  miracles  as  he  had 
before  been  eager  in  seeking  them.  He  told  us  very  pleasantly 
what  an  adventurer  he  had  been  of  that  kind,  and  on  how 
many  parties  he  had  been  engaged,  with  a  sort  of  people  who 
were  always  on  the  hot  scent  of  some  new  prodigy  or  apparition, 
some  upstart  revelation  or  prophecy.  This,  he  thought,  was 
true  fanaticism  errant.  He  had  enough  of  this  visionary  chase, 
and  would  ramble  no  more  in  blind  corners  of  the  world,  as  he 
had  been  formerly  accustomed,  in  ghostly  company  of  spirit- 
hunters,  witch -finders,  and  layers-out  for  hellish  stories  and 
diabolical  transactions.  There  was  no  need,  he  thought,  of 
such  intelligences  from  hell  to  prove  the  power  of  heaven  and 
beins:  of  a  God.  And  now^  at  last  he  began  to  see  the  ridicule 
of  laying  such   a   stress  on   these  matters,  as   if  a   providence 

89 


SHAFTESEITRY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

depended  on  tlieni  and  religion  were  at  stake  when  any  of  these 
wild  feats  were  questioned.  He  was  sensible  there  were  many 
good  Christians  who  made  themselves  sti'ong  partisans  in  this 
cause,  though  he  could  not  avoid  wondering  at  it,  now  he 
began  to  consider  and  look  back. 

The  heathens,  he  said,  who  wanted  Scripture,  might  have 
recourse  to  miracles ;  and  Providence  perhaps  had  allowed  them 
their  oracles  and  jirodigies  as  an  imperfect  kind  of  revelation. 
The  Jews  too,  for  their  hard  heart  and  harder  imderstanding, 
had  this  allowance,  when  stubbornly  they  asked  for  signs  and 
wonders.  But  Christians,  for  their  parts,  had  a  far  better  and 
truer  revelation  ;  they  had  their  plainer  oracles,  a  more  rational 
/  I  \  law  and  clearer  Scripture,  carrying  its  own  force,  and  withal  so 
well  attested  as  to  admit  of  no  dispute.  And  were  I,  continued 
he,  to  assign  the  exact  time  when  miracles  probably  might  first 
have  ceased,  I  should  be  tempted  to  fancy  it  was  when  sacred 
writ  took  place  and  was  completed. 

This  is  fancy  indeed,  replied  the  grave  gentleman,  and  a 
very  dangerous  one  to  that  Scripture  you  pretend  is  of  itself  so 
well  attested.  The  attestation  of  men  dead  and  gone,  in  behalf 
of  miracles  past  and  at  an  end,  can  never  surely  be  of  equal 
force  with  miracles  present ;  and  of  these,  I  maintain,  there  are 
never  wanting:  a  number  sufficient  in  the  world  to  warrant  a 
divine  existence.  If  there  were  no  miracles  nowadays,  the 
world  would  be  apt  to  think  there  never  were  any.  The 
present  must  answer  for  the  credibility  of  the  past.  This  is 
"  God  witnessing  for  himself,""  not  "  men  for  God."  For  who 
shall  witness  for  men,  if  in  the  case  of  religion  they  have  no 
testimony  from  heaven  in  their  behalf? 

What  it  is  may  make  the  report  of  men  credible,  said  the 
younger  gentleman,  is  another  question.  Ikit  for  mere  miracles, 
it  seems  to  me,  they  cannot  be  properly  said  "  to  witness  either 
for  God  or  men."  For  who  shall  witness  for  the  miracles  them- 
selves ^  And  what  though  they  are  ever  so  certain  ?  What 
security  have  we  that  they  are  not  acted  })y  demons  ?     AVhat 

90 


THE   MOHATJSTS 

proof  that  they  are  not  wrought  by  magic  ?  In  shoit,  "  what 
trust'  is  there  to  anything  above  or  below,  if  tlie  signs  are  only 
of  power  and  not  of  goodness  ? '' 

And  are  you  so  far  improved  then,  repHed  the  severe 
companion,  under  your  new  sceptical  master  (pointing  to  me) 
that  you  can  thus  readily  discard  all  miracles  as  useless  ?  .  .  . 
The  young  gentleman,  I  saw,  was  somewhat  daunted  with 
this  rough  usage  of  his  friend,  who  was  going  on  still  with  his 
invective.  Nay  then,  said  I,  interposing,  'tis  I  who  am  to 
answer  for  this  young  gentleman,  whom  you  make  to  be  my 
disciple.  And  since  his  modesty,  I  see,  will  not  allow  him  to 
jiursue  what  he  has  so  handsomely  begun,  I  will  endeavour  it 
myself,  if  he  will  give  me  leave. 

The  young  gentleman  assented,  and  I  went  on  representing 

_  his  fair  intention  of  establishing  in  the  first  place  a  rational  and 
just  foundation  for  our  faith,  so  as  to  vindicate  it  from   the 

~  reproach  of  having  no  immediate  miracles  to  support  it.  He 
w^ould  have  done  this,  I  said,  undoubtedly  by  showing  how 
good  proof  we  had  already  for  our  sacred  oracles  from  the 
testimonv  of  the  dead,  Avhose  characters  and  lives  might  answer 
for  them  as  to  the  truth  of  what  they  reported  to  us  from  God. 
This,  however,  was  by  no  means  "  witnessing  for  God,"  as  the 
zealous  gentleman  had  hastily  expressed  himself,  for  this  w-as 
above  the  reach  either  of  men  or  miracles.  Nor  could  God 
witness  for  himself,  or  assert  his  being  any  other  way  to  men, 
than  "  by  revealing  himself  to  their  reason,  appealing  to  their 
judgment,  and  submitting  his  ways  to  their  censure  and  cool 
deliberation."'"'  The  contemplation  of  the  universe,  its  laws  and 
government,  was,  I  averred,  the  only  means  which  could  establish 

^the  sound  belief  of  a  Deity.  For  what  though  innumerable 
1  miracles  from  every  part  assailed  the  sense  antl  gave  the 
trembling  soul  no  respite.''  AVhat  though  the  sky  should 
suddenly  open  and  all  kinds  of  prodigies  appear,  voices  be 
heard  or  characters  read  ?  What  would  this  evince  more  than 
"  that    there   were  certain   powers  could    do  all    this "  ?      lUit 

91 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

"  what  jiowers,  whether  one  or  more,  whether  superior  or 
subaltern,  mortal  or  immortal,  wise  or  foolish,  just  or  unjust, 
good  or  batr';  this  would  still  remain  a  mystery,  as  would  the 
true  intention,  the  infallibility  or  certainty  of  whatever  those 
powers  asserted.  Their  word  could  not  be  taken  in  their  own 
case.  They  might  silence  men  indeed,  but  not  convince  them  ; 
since  "  power  can  never  serve  as  ]iroof  for  goodness,^  and  'good- 
ness is  the  only  pledge  of  truth."  By  goodness  alone  trust  is 
created.  By  goodness  superior  powers  may  win  belief.  They 
must  allow  their  works  to  be  examined,  their  actions  criticised  ; 
and  thus,  thus  only,  they  may  be  confided  in ;  "  When  by 
repeated  marks  their  benevolence  is  proved,  and  their  character 
of  sincerity  and  truth  established."  To  whom  therefore  the  laws 
of  this  universe  and  its  government  appear  just  and  uniform, 
to  him  they  speak  the  government  of  one  Just  One ;  to  him 
they  reveal  and  witness  a  God  ;  and  laying  in  him  the  founda- 
tion of  this  first  faith,  they  fit  him  for  a  subsequent  one.^  He 
can  then  hearken  to  historical  revelation,  and  is  then  fitted  (and 
not  till  then)  for  the  reception  of  any  message  or  miraculous 
notice  from  above,  where  he  knows  beforehand  all  is  just  and 
true.  But  this  no  power  of  miracles,  nor  any  power  besides 
his  reason,  can  make  him  know  or  apprehend. 

But  now,  continued  I,  since  I  have  been  thus  long  the 
defendant  only,  I  am  resolved  to  take  up  offensive  ai-ms  and  be 
aggressor  in  my  turn,  provided  Theocles  be  not  angry  with  me 
for  borrowing  ground  from  his  hvpothesis. 

Whatever  you  borrow  of  his,  replied  my  antagonist,  you  are 
pretty  sure  of  spoiling  it ;  and  as  it  passes  through  your  hands 
you  had  best  beware  lest  you  seem  rather  to  reflect  on  him 
than  me. 

I'll  venture  it,  said  I,  whilst  I  maintain  that  most  of  those 
maxims  you  build  upon  are  fit  only  to  betray  your  own  cause. 
For  whilst  you  are  labouring  to  unhinge  Nature,  whilst  you  are 

^    Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  Misc.  v.  ch.  iii. 
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  1  ;  and  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3. 

92 


THE   MORALISTS 

searching  heaven  and  earth  for  prodigies,  and  studying  how  to 
miracuHse  everything,  you  bring  confusion  on  the  world,  you 
break  its  uniformity  and  destroy  that  admirable  simplicity  of 
order  from  whence  the  one  infinite  and  perfect  principle  is 
known.  Perpetual  strifes,  convulsions,  violences,  breach  of  laws, 
variation  and  unsteadiness  of  order,  show  either  no  control,  or 
several  uncontrolled  and  unsubordinate  powers  in  Nature.  We 
have  before  our  eyes  either  the  chaos  and  atoms  of  the  atheists, 
or  the  magic  and  demons  of  the  polytheists.  Yet  is  this 
tumultuous  system  of  the  universe  asserted  with  the  highest 
zeal  by  some  who  would  maintain  a  Deity.  This  is  that  face  of 
things,  and  these  the  features  by  which  they  represent  divinity. 
Hither  the  eyes  of  our  more  inquisitive  and  ingenuous  youth 
are  turned  with  care,  lest  they  see  anything  otherwise  than  in 
this  perplexed  and  amazing  view.  As  if  atheism  were  the  most 
natural  inference  which  could  be  drawn  from  a  regular  and 
orderly  state  of  things  !  But  after  all  this  mangling  and  dis- 
figurement of  Nature,  if  it  happens  (as  oft  it  does)  that  the 
amazed  disciple,  coming  to  himself  and  searching  leisurely  into 
Nature's  ways,  finds  more  of  order,  uniformity,  and  constancy 
in  things  than  he  suspected,  he  is,  of  course,  driven  into 
atheism ;  and  this  merely  by  the  impressions  he  received  from 
that  preposterous  system  which  taught  him  to  seek  for  Deity 
in  confusion,  and  to  discover  Providence  in  an  irregular  dis- 
jointed world. 

And  when  you,  replied  he,  with  your  newly-espoused  system, 
have  brought  all  things  to  be  as  uniform,  plain,  regular,  and 
simple  as  you  could  wish,  I  suppose  you  will  send  your  disciple 
to  seek  for  Deity  in  mechanism ;  that  is  to  say,  in  some 
excpiisite  system  of  self-governed  matter.  For  what  else  is  it 
you  naturalists  make  of  the  world  than  a  mere  machine  ? 

Nothing  else,  replied  I,  if  to  the  machine  you  allow  a  mind. 
For  in  this  case  'tis  not  a  self-governed  but  a  God-governed 
machine. 

And  what  are  the  tokens,  said  he,  which  should  convince 

93 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

us  ?     What  signs  should  this  dumb  machine  give  of  its  being 
thus  governed  ? 

The  present,  replied  I,  are  sufficient.  It  cannot  possibly 
give  stronger  signs  of  life  and  steady  thought.  Compare  our 
own  machines  with  this  great  one,  and  see  whether  by  their 
order,  management,  and  motions  they  betoken  either  so  perfect 
a  life  or  so  consummate  an  intelligence.  The  one  is  regular, 
steady,  permanent ;  the  other  are  irregular,  variable,  inconstant. 
In  one  there  are  the  marks  of  wisdom  and  determination ;  in 
the  other  of  whimsy  and  conceit :  in  one  there  appears  judg- 
ment ;  in  the  other,  fancy  only :  in  one,  will ;  in  the  other, 
caprice  :  in  one,  truth,  certainty,  knowledge ;  in  the  other,  error, 
folly,  and  madness.  But  to  be  convinced  there  is  something 
above  which  thinks  and  acts,  we  want,  it  seems,  the  latter  of 
these  signs,  as  supposing  there  can  be  no  thought  or  intelligence 
beside  what  is  like  our  own.  We  sicken  and  grow  weary  with 
the  orderly  and  regular  course  of  things.  Periods,  and  stated 
laws,  and  revolutions,  just  and  proportionable,  work  not  upon 
us,  nor  win  our  admiration.  We  must  have  riddles,  prodigies, 
matter  for  surprise  and  horror !  By  harmony,  order,  and 
concord  we  are  made  atheists ;  by  irregularity  and  discord  we 
are  convinced  of  Deity  !  "  The  world  is  mere  accident  if  it 
])roceeds  in  course,  but  an  effect  of  wisdom  if  it  runs  mad  ! " 

Thus  I  took  upon  me  the  part  of  a  sound  theist  whilst  I 
endeavoured  to  refute  my  antagonist  and  show  that  his 
principles  favoured  atheism.  The  zealous  gentleman  took  high 
offence,  and  we  continued  debating  warmly  till  late  at  night. 
But  Theocles  was  moderator,  and  we  retired  at  last  to  our 
repose,  all  calm  and  friendly.  However,  I  was  not  a  little 
rejoiced  to  hear  that  our  companions  were  to  go  away  early  the 
next  morning  and  leave  Theocles  to  me  alone. 

For  now,  Palemon,  that  morning  was  approaching  for  which 
I  so  much  longed.  AVhat  your  longing  may  prove  I  may  have 
reason  to  fear.  You  have  had  enough,  one  would  think,  to 
turn    the    edge    of    yoiu*   curiosity    in    this    kind.     Can    it    be 


THE   .MORALISTS 

imagined  that  after  the  recital  of  two  such  days  ah'eady  past 
you  can  with  patience  hear  of  another  yet  to  come,  more 
j)hilosophical  than  either  ?  .  .  .  IJut  you  have  made  me  promise; 
and  now,  whatever  it  cost,  take  it  you  must,  as  follows.       >< 


PART   III 

Sectiox   I 

Philode.s  to  Palcmon 

li  was  yet  deep  night  (as  I  imagined)  when  I  waked  with  the 
noise  of  jieople  up  in  the  house.  I  called  to  know  the  matter, 
and  was  told  that  Theocles  had  a  little  before  parted  with  his 
friends,  after  which  he  went  out  to  take  his  morning  walk, 
but  would  return,  they  thought,  pretty  soon  :  for  so  he  had 
left  word,  and  that  nobody  in  the  meantime  should  disturb 
my  rest. 

This  was  disturbance  sufficient  when  I  heard  it.  I  presently 
got  up,  and  finding  it  light  enough  to  see  the  hill,  which  was 
at  a  little  distance  from  the  house,  I  soon  got  thither,  and  at 
the  foot  of  it  overtook  Theocles,  to  whom  I  complained  of  his 
unkindness.  For  I  was  not  certainly  (I  told  him)  so  effeminate 
and  weak  a  friend  as  to  deserve  that  he  should  treat  me  like 
a  woman ;  nor  had  I  shown  such  an  aversion  to  his  manners  or 
conversation  as  to  be  thought  fitter  for  the  dull  luxury  of  a 
soft  bed  and  ease  than  for  business,  recreation,  or  study  with 
an  early  friend.  He  had  no  other  way,  therefore,  of  making  me 
amends  than  by  allowing  me  henceforward  to  be  a  jmrty  with 
him  in  his  serious  thoughts,  as  he  saw  I  was  resolved  to  be  in 
his  hours  and  exercises  of  this  sort. 

Vou  have  foi'got  then,  said  Theocles,  the  assignation  you  had 

95 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

yesterday  with  the  silvan  nymphs  at  this  place  and  hour  ?  No, 
truly,  said  I,  for,  as  you  see,  I  am  come  punctually  to  the  })lace 
ajjpointed.  But  I  never  expected  you  should  have  come  hither 
without  me.  Nay  then,  said  Theocles,  there  is  hope  you  may 
in  time  become  a  lover  with  me,  for  you  already  begin  to  show 
jealousy.  How  little  did  I  think  these  nymphs  could  raise  that 
passion  in  you  't  Truly,  said  I,  for  the  nymphs  you  mention, 
I  know  little  of  them  as  yet.  My  jealousy  and  love  regard  you 
only.  I  was  afraid  you  had  a  mind  to  escape  me ;  but  now 
that  I  am  again  in  possession  of  you,  I  want  no  nymph  to  make 
me  happy  here,  unless  it  were  perhaps  to  join  forces  against 
you,  in  the  manner  your  beloved  poet  makes  the  nymph  .Egle 
join  with  his  two  youths  in  forcing  the  god  Silenus  to  sing  to 
them. 

I  dare  trust  your  gallantry,  replied  Theocles,  that  if  you 
had  such  fair  company  as  you  speak  of,  you  would  otherwise 
bestow  your  time  than  in  an  adventure  of  philosophy.  But  do 
you  expect  I  should  imitate  the  poefs  God  you  mentioned,  and 
sing  "  the  rise  of  things  from  atoms,  the  birth  of  order  from 
confusion,  and  the  origin  of  union,  harmony,  and  concord 
from  the  sole  powers  of  chaos  and  blind  chance  "  't  The  song 
indeed  was  fitted  to  the  God.  For  what  could  better  suit  his 
jolly  character  than  such  a  drunken  creation,  which  he  loved 
often  to  celebrate  by  acting  it  to  the  life  ?  But  even  this  song 
was  too  harmonious  for  tthe  night's  debauch.  Well  has  our 
poet  made  it  of  the  morning  when  the  God  was  fresh ;  for 
hardly  should  we  be  brought  ever  to  believe  that  such  har- 
monious numbers  could  arise  from  a  mere  chaos  of  the  mind. 
But  we  must  hear  our  poet  speaking  in  the  mouth  of  some 
soberer  demi-god  or  hero.  He  then  presents  us  with  a  different 
principle  of  things,  and  in  a  more  proper  order  of  precedency 
gives  thought  the  upper  hand.  He  makes  mind  originally  to 
have  governed  body,  not  body  mind ;  for  this  had  been  a  chaos 
everlasting,  and  must  have  kept  all  things  in  a  chaos-state  to 
this  day,  and  for  ever,  had  it  ever  been.     But 

96 


THE   MORALISTS 

The  active  mind,  infused  through  all  the  space. 
Unites  and  mingles  with  the  mighty  mass  ; 
Hence  men  and  beasts.^ 

Here,  Philocles,  we  shall  find  our  sovereign  genius,  if  we 
can  charm  the  genius  of  the  place  (more  chaste  and  sober  than 
your  Silenus)  to  inspire  us  with  a  truer  song  of  Nature,  teach  us 
some  celestial  hymn,  and  make  us  feel  divinity  present  in  these 
solemn  places  of  retreat. 

Haste  then,  I  conjure  you,  said  I,  good  Theocles,  and  stop 
not  one  moment  for  any  ceremony  or  rite.  For  well  I  see, 
methiniis,  that  without  any  such  preparation  some  divinity 
has  approached  us  and  already  moves  in  you.  We  are  come  to 
the  sacred  groves  of  the  Hamadryads,  which  formerly  were  said 
to  render  oracles.  We  are  on  the  most  beautiful  part  of  the 
hill,  and  the  sun,  now  ready  to  rise,  draws  off  the  curtain  of 
night  and  shows  us  the  open  scene  of  Nature  in  the  plains 
below.  Begin :  for  now  I  know  you  are  full  of  those  divine 
thoughts  which  meet  you  ever  in  this  solitude.  Give  them  but 
voice  and  accents ;  you  may  be  still  as  much  alone  as  you  are 
used,  and  take  no  more  notice  of  me  than  if  I  were  absent. 

Just  as  I  had  said  this,  he  turned  away  his  eyes  from  me, 
musing  awhile  by  himself;  and  soon  afterwards,  stretching  out 
his  hand,  as  pointing  to  the  objects  round  him,  he  began : — 

"Ye  fields  and  woods,  my  refuge  from  the  toilsome 
world  of  business,  receive  me  in  your  quiet  sanctuaries,  and 
favour  my  retreat  and  thoughtful  solitude.  Ye  verdant  plains, 
how  gladly  I  salute  ye  !  Hail  all  ye  blissful  mansions  !  known 
seats !  delightful  prospects !  majestic  beauties  of  this  earth, 
and  all  ye  rural  powers  and  graces !  Blessed  be  ye  chaste 
abodes  of  happiest  mortals,  who  here  in  peaceful  innocence 
enjoy  a  life  unenvied,  though  divine  ;  whilst  with  its  blessed 
tranquillity  it  affbrds  a  happy  leisure  and  retreat  for  man,  who, 
made   for  contemplation,  and   to   search   his   own   and   other 

1  [Virgil,  Aeneid,  vi,  726-728.] 
VOL.  II  97  H 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

natures,  may  here  best  meditate  the  cause  of  things,  and,  placed 
amidst  the  various  scenes  of  Nature,  may  nearer  view  her 
works. 

"  O  glorious  nature  !  supremely  fair  and  sovereignly  good  ! 
all-loving  and  all-lovely,  all-divine  !  whose  looks  are  so  be- 
coming and  of  such  infinite  grace  ;  M'hose  study  brings  such 
wisdom,  and  whose  contemplation  such  delight ;  whose  every 
single  work  affords  an  ampler  scene,  and  is  a  nobler  spectacle 
than  all  which  ever  art  presented  !  O  mighty  Nature !  wise 
substitute  of  Providence  !  impowered  creatress  !  Or  -  thou 
impowering  Deity,  supreme  creator !  Thee  I  invoke  and  thee 
alone  adore.  To  thee  this  solitude,  this  place,  these  rural 
meditations  are  sacred  ;  whilst  thus  inspired  with  harmony  of 
thought,  though  unconfined  by  words,  and  in  loose  numbers,  I 
sino;  of  Nature's  order  in  created  being-s,  and  celebrate  the 
beauties  which  resolve  in  thee,  the  source  and  principle  of  all 
beauty  and  perfection. 

"  Thy  being  is  boundless,  unsearchable,  impenetrable.  In 
thy  immensity  all  thought  is  lost,  fancy  gives  over  its  flight, 
and  Avearied  imagination  spends  itself  in  vain,  finding  no  coast 
nor  limit  of  this  ocean,  nor,  in  the  widest  tract  through  which 
it  soars,  one  point  yet  nearer  the  circumference  than  the  first 
centre  whence  it  parted.  Thus  having  oft  essayed,  thus  sallied 
forth  into  the  wide  expanse,  when  I  return  again  within  myself, 
struck  with  the  sense  of  this  so  narrow  being  and  of  the  fulness 
of  that  immense  one,  I  dare  no  more  behold  the  amazing 
depths  nor  sound  the  abyss  of  Deity. 

"  Yet  since  by  thee,  O  sovereign  mind,  I  have  been  formed 
such  as  I  am,  intelligent  and  rational,  since  the  peculiar 
dignity  of  my  nature  is  to  know  and  contemplate  thee,  permit 
that  with  due  freedom  I  exert  those  faculties  with  which  thou 
hast  adorned  me.  Bear  with  my  venturous  and  bold  approach. 
And  since  nor  vain  curiosity,  nor  fond  conceit,  nor  love  of  aught 
save  thee  alone  inspires  me  with  such  thoughts  as  these,  be 
thou    my   assistant   and   guide    me    in    this   pursuit,   whilst    I 

98 


THE   MORALISTS 

venture  thus  to  tread  the  labyrinth  of  wide  Nature  and 
endeavour  to  trace  thee  in  thy  works." 

Here  he  stopped  short,  and  starting  as  out  of  a  dream  : 
now,  Philocles,  said  he,  inform  me,  how  have  I  appeared  to  you 
in  my  fit?  Seemed  it  a  sensible  kind  of  madness,  like  those 
transports  which  are  permitted  to  our  poets  ?  or  was  it  down- 
right raving  ? 

I  only  wish,  said  I,  that  you  had  been  a  little  stronger  in 
your  transport,  to  have  proceeded  as  you  began,  without  ever 
minding  me.  For  I  was  beginning  to  see  wonders  in  that 
Nature  you  taught  me,  and  was  coming  to  know  the  hand  of 
your  divine  Artificer.  But  if  you  stop  here  I  shall  lose  the 
enjoyment  of  the  pleasing  vision.  And  already  I  begin  to  find 
a  thousand  difficulties  in  fancying  such  a  universal  genius  as 
you  describe. 

Why,  said  he,  is  there  any  difficulty  in  fancying  the  universe 
to  be  one  entire  thing  .?  Can  one  otherwise  think  of  it,  by  what 
is  visible,  than  that  all  hangs  together  as  of  a  piece  ?  Grant 
it ;  and  what  follows  ?  Only  this,  that  if  it  may  indeed  be  said 
of  the  world  "  that  it  is  simply  one,"  there  should  be  something 
belono;ing  to  it  which  makes  it  one.  As  how  ?  No  otherwise 
than  as  you  may  observe  in  everything.  For  to  instance  in 
what  we  see  before  us ;  I  know  you  look  upon  the  trees  of  this 
vast  wood  to  be  different  from  one  another ;  and  this  tall 
oak,  the  noblest  of  the  company,  as  it  is  by  itself  a  different 
thing  from  all  its  fellows  of  the  wood,  so  with  its  own  wood  of 
numerous  spreading  branches  (which  seem  so  many  different 
trees)  "'tis  still,  I  suppose,  one  and  the  self-same  tree.  Now 
should  you,  as  a  mere  caviller,  and  not  as  a  fair  sceptic,  tell  me 
that  if  a  figure  of  wax,  or  any  other  matter,  were  cast  in  the 
exact  shape  and  colours  of  this  tree,  and  tempered,  if  possible, 
to  the  same  kind  of  substance,  it  might  therefore  possibly  be  a 
real  tree  of  the  same  kind  or  species,  I  would  have  done  with 
you,  and  reason  no  longer.  But  if  you  questioned  me  fairly, 
and  desired  I  should  satisfy  you  what  I  thought  it  was  which 

99 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

made  this  oneness  or  sameness  in  the  tree  or  any  other  plant, 
or  by  what  it  differed  from  the  waxen  figure,  or  from  any  such 
figure  accidentally  made,  either  in  the  clouds,  or  on  the  sand 
by  the  sea  shore,  I  should  tell  you  that  neither  the  wax,  nor 
sand,  nor  cloud  thus  pieced  together  by  our  hand  or  fancy  had 
any  real  relation  within  themselves,  or  had  any  nature  by  which 
they  corresponded  any  more  in  that  near  situation  of  parts 
than  if  scattered  ever  so  far  asunder.  But  this  I  should  affirm, 
"  that  wherever  there  was  such  a  sympathising  of  parts  as  we 
saw  here  in  our  real  tree,  wherever  there  was  such  a  plain 
concurrence  in  one  common  end,  and  to  the  support,  nourish- 
ment, and  propagation  of  so  fair  a  form,  we  could  not  be 
mistaken  in  saying  there  was  a  peculiar  nature  belonging  to 
this  form,  and  common  to  it  with  others  of  the  same  kind/'' 
By  virtue  of  this,  our  tree  is  a  real  tree,  lives,  flourishes,  and  is 
still  one  and  the  same  even  when  by  vegetation  and  change  of 
substance  not  one  particle  in  it  remains  the  same. 

At  this  rate  indeed,  said  I,  you  have  found  a  way  to  make 
very  adorable  places  of  these  sylvan  habitations.  For  besides 
the  living  genius  of  each  place,  the  woods  too,  which  by  your 
account  are  animated,  have  their  Hamadryads,  no  doubt,  and 
the  springs  and  rivulets  their  nymphs  in  store  belonging  to 
them,  and  these  too,  by  what  I  can  apprehend,  of  immaterial 
and  immortal  substances. 

We  injure  them  then,  replied  Theocles,  to  say  "they  belong 
to  these  trees,''"'  and  not  rather  "  these  trees  to  them,""  But 
as  for  their  immortality,  let  them  look  to  it  themselves,  I  only 
know  that  both  theirs  and  all  other  natures  must  for  their 
duration  depend  alone  on  that  Nature  on  which  the  world 
depends  ;  and  that  every  genius  else  must  be  subordinate  to 
that  one  Good  Genius,  whom  I  would  willingly  persuade  you  to 
think  belonging  to  this  world,  according  to  our  present  way  of 
speaking. 

Leaving,  therefore,  these  trees,  continued  he,  to  personate 
themselves  the    best   they  can,   let  us  examine  this    thing  of 

100 


THE   MORALISTS 

personality  between  you  and  me,  and  consider  how  you, 
Philocles,  are  you,  and  I  am  myself.  For  that  there  is  a 
sympathy  of  parts  in  these  figures  of  ours  other  than  in  those 
of  marble  formed  by  a  Phidias  or  Praxiteles,  sense,  I  believe, 
will  teach  us.  And  yet  that  our  own  marble  or  stuff  (whatever 
it  be,  of  which  we  are  composed)  wears  out  in  seven,  or  at  the 
longest  in  twice  seven  years,  the  meanest  anatomist  can  tell  us. 
Now  where,  I  beseech  you,  will  that  same  one  be  found  at  last, 
supposing  it  to  lie  in  the  stuff  itself,  or  any  part  of  it  ?  For 
when  that  is  wholly  spent,  and  not  one  particle  of  it  left,  we 
are  ourselves  still  as  much  as  before. 

What  you  philosophers  are,  replied  I,  may  be  hard  perhaps 
to  determine,  but  for  the  rest  of  mankind,  I  dare  affirm,  that 
few  are  so  long  themselves  as  half  seven  years.  'Tis  good 
fortune  if  a  man  be  one  and  the  same  only  for  a  day  or  two. 
A  year  makes  more  revolutions  than  can  be  numbered. 

True,  said  he  ;  but  though  this  may  happen  to  a  man,  and 
chiefly  to  one  whose  contrary  vices  set  him  at  odds  so  often  with 
himself,  yet  when  he  comes  to  suffer  or  be  punished  for  those 
vices,  he  finds  himself,  if  I  mistake  not,  still  one  and  the  same. 
And  you,  Philocles,  who,  though  you  disown  philosophy,  are 
yet  so  true  a  proselyte  to  Pyrrhonism,  should  you  at  last,  feeling 
the  power  of  the  Genius  I  preach,  be  wrought  upon  to  own  the 
divine  hypothesis,  and  from  this  new  turn  of  thought  admit  a 
total  change  in  all  your  principles  and  opinions,  yet  would  you 
be  still  the  self-same  Philocles,  though  better  yet,  if  you  will 
take  my  judgment,  than  the  present  one,  as  much  as  I  love  and 
value  him.  You  see,  therefore,  there  is  a  strange  simplicity  in 
this  you  and  me,  that  in  reality  they  should  be  still  one  and  the 
same,  when  neither  one  atom  of  body,  one  passion,  nor  one 
thought  remains  the  same.  And  for  that  poor  endeavour  of 
making  out  this  sameness  or  identity  of  being,  from'some  self- 
same matter  or  particle  of  matter,  supposed  to  remain  with  us 
when  all  besides  is  changed,  this  is  by  so  much  the  more  con- 
temptible, as  that  matter  itself  is  not  really  capable  of  such 

101 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAUACTERISTICS 

simplicity.  For  I  dare  answer,  you  will  allow  this  you  and  me 
to  be  each  of  us  simply  and  individually  one,  better  than  you 
can  allow  the  same  to  anything  of  mere  matter,  unless,  quitting 
your  inclination  for  scepticism,  you  fall  so  in  love  with  the  notion 
of  an  atom  as  to  find  it  full  as  intelligible  and  certain  to  you 
as  that  you  are  yourself. 

But  whatever,  continued  Theocles,  be  supposed  of  uncom- 
pounded  matter  (a  thing  at  best  pretty  difficult  to  conceive), 
yet  being  compounded  and  put  together  in  a  certain  number 
of  such  parts  as  unite  and  conspire  in  these  frames  of  ours,  and 
others  like  them,  if  it  can  present  us  with  so  many  innumerable 
instances  of  particular  forms,  who  share  this  simple  principle, 
by  which  they  are  really  One,  live,  act,  and  have  a  nature  or 
genius  peculiar  to  themselves,  and  provident  for  their  own 
welfare,  how  shall  we  at  the  same  time  overlook  this  in  the 
whole,  and  deny  the  great  and  general  Oxe  of  the  world  ? 
How  can  we  be  so  unnatural  as  to  disown  divine  Nature,  our 
common  parent,  and  refuse  to  recognise  the  universal  and 
sovereign  Genius  ? 

Sovereigns,  said  I,  require  no  notice  to  be  taken  of  them 
when  they  pass  incog^tiHo,  nor  any  homage  where  they  appear 
not  in  due  form.  We  may  even  have  reason  to  presume  they 
should  be  displeased  with  us  for  being  too  officious  in  en- 
deavouring to  discover  them  when  they  keep  themselves  either 
wholly  invisible  or  in  very  dark  disguise.  As  for  the  notice 
we  take  of  these  invisible  powers  in  the  connnon  way  of  our 
religion,  we  have  our  visible  sovereigns  to  answer  for  us.  Our 
laAvful  superiors  teach  us  what  we  are  to  own  and  to  perform 
in  worship.  And  we  are  dutiful  in  complying  with  them  and 
following  their  example.  But  in  a  philosophical  way  I  find  no 
warrant  for  our  being  such  earnest  recognisers  of  a  controverted 
title.  However  it  be,  you  must  allow  one  at  least  to  understand 
the  controversy  and  know  the  nature  of  these  2)owers  described. 
May  one  not  inquire  "what  substances  they  are  of.^  whether 
material  or  immaterial  ? " 

102 


THE   MORALISTS 

May  one  not  on  the  other  hand,  rephed  Theocles,  inquire 
as  well  "  what  substance,  or  which  of  these  two  substances,  you 
count  your  real  and  proper  self."  Or  would  you  rather  be  no 
substance,  but  choose  to  call  yourself  a  mode  or  accident  ? 

Truly,  said  I,  as  accidental  as  my  life  may  be,  or  as  random 
that  humour  is  which  governs  it,  I  know  nothing,  after  all,  so 
real  and  substantial  as  myself.  Therefore  if  there  be  that 
thing  you  call  a  substance,  I  take  for  granted  I  am  one.  But 
for  anything  further  relating  to  this  question,  you  know  my 
sceptic  principles  ;  I  determine  neither  way. 

Allow  me  then,  replied  he,  good  Philocles,  the  same 
privilege  of  scepticism  in  this  respect,  since  it  concerns  not  the 
affair  before  us,  which  way  we  determine,  or  whether  we  come 
to  any  determination  at  all  in  this  point.  For  be  the  difficulty 
ever  so  great,  it  stands  the  same,  you  may  perceive,  against 
your  own  being  as  against  that  which  I  am  pretending  to 
convince  you  of.  You  may  raise  what  objections  you  please  on 
either  hand,  and  your  dilemma  may  be  of  notable  force  against 
the  manner  of  such  a  supreme  Being''s  existence.  But  after  you 
have  done  all,  you  will  bring  the  same  dilemma  home  to  you, 
and  be  at  a  loss  still  about  yourself  when  you  have  argued  ever 
so  long  upon  these  metaphysical  points  of  mode  and  substance, 
and  have  philosophically  concluded  from  the  difficulties  of  each 
hypothesis  "  that  there  cannot  be  in  Nature  such  a  universal^ 
One  as  this'';  you  must  conclude  from  the  same  reasons  "that 
there  cannot  be  any  such  particular  one  as  yourself."  But  that 
there  is  actually  such  a  one  as  this  latter,  your  own  mind,  'tis 
hoped,  may  satisfy  you.  And  of  this  mind  'tis  enough  to  say 
"  that  it  is  something  which  acts  upon  a  bodv,  and  has  some- 
thing passive  under  it  and  subject  to  it;  that  it  has  not  only 
body  or  mere  matter  for  its  subject,  but  in  some  respect  even 
itself  too,  and  what  proceeds  from  it ;  that  it  superintends  and 
manages  its  own  imaginations,  appearances,  fancies,  correcting, 
working,  and  modelling  these  as  it  finds  good,  and  adorning 
and  accomplishing  the  best  it  can  this  composite  order  of  body 

103 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

and  understanding."  Such  a  mind  and  governing  part  I  know 
there  is  somewhere  in  the  world.  Let  Pyrrho,  by  the  help  of 
such  another,  contradict  me  if  he  pleases.  We  have  our  several 
understandings  and  thoughts,  however  we  came  by  them.  Each 
understands  and  thinks  the  best  he  can  for  his  own  purpose  ; 
he  for  himself,  I  for  another  self.  And  who,  I  beseech  you,  for 
the  whole  ?  .  .  .  No  one  ?  Nothing  at  all  ?  .  .  .  The  world, 
perhaps,  you  suppose  to  be  mere  body,  a  mass  of  modified 
matter.  The  bodies  of  men  are  part  therefore  of  this  body. 
The  imaginations,  sensations,  apprehensions  of  men  are  included 
in  this  body  and  inherent  in  it,  produced  out  of  it  and  resumed 
again  into  it,  though  the  body,  it  seems,  never  dreams  of  it ! 
The  world  itself  is  never  the  wiser  for  all  the  wit  and  wisdom  it 
breeds  !  It  has  no  apprehension  at  all  of  what  is  doing ;  no 
thought  kept  to  itself,  for  its  own  proper  use  or  purpose ;  not 
a  single  imagination  or  reflection  by  which  to  discover  or  be 
conscious  of  the  manifold  imaginations  and  inventions  which  it 
sets  afoot  and  deals  abroad  with  such  an  open  hand  !  The 
goodly  bulk,  so  prolific,  kind,  and  yielding  for  every  one  else,  has 
nothing  left  at  last  for  its  own  share,  having  unhappily  lavished 
all  away !  ...  By  what  chance  ?  I  would  fain  understand. 
"  How  ?  or  by  what  necessity  ?  .  .  ,  Who  gives  the  law  ?  .  .  . 
Who  orders  and  distributes  thus  ? "  Nature,  say  you.  And 
what  is  Nature  .''  Is  it  sense  ?  Is  it  a  person  ?  Has  she  reason 
or  understanding  ?  No.  Who  then  understands  for  her,  or  is 
interested  or  concerned  in  her  behalf  ?  No  one ;  not  a  soul. 
But  every  one  for  himself, 
^  Come  on  then.  Let  us  hear  further,  Is  not  this  Nature  still 
a  self  ?  Or  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  how  are  you  one  ?  By  what 
token?  Or  by  virtue  of  what?  "By  a  principle  which  joins 
certain  parts,  and  which  thinks  and  acts  consonantly  for  the  use 
and  purpose  of  those  parts,"  Say,  therefore,  what  is  your  whole 
system  a  part  of?  Or  is  it,  indeed,  no  part,  but  a  whole,  by 
itself,  absolute,  independent,  and  unrelated  to  anything  besides  ? 
If  it  be  indeed  a  part,  and  really  related,  to  what  else,  I  beseech 

104 


THE   MORALISTS 

you,  than  to  the  whole  of  Nature  ?  Is  there  then  such  a  uniting 
principle  in  Nature  ?  If  so,  how  are  you  then  a  self,  and  Nature 
not  so  ?  How  have  you  something  to  understand  and  act  for 
you,  and  Nature,  who  gave  this  understanding,  nothing  at  all 
to  understand  for  her,  advise  her,  or  help  her  out  (poor  being !) 
on  any  occasion,  whatever  necessity  she  may  be  in  ?  Has  the 
world  such  ill-fortune  in  the  main  ?  Are  there  so  many  par- 
ticular understanding  active  principles  everywhere  ?  And  is 
there  nothing  at  last  which  thinks,  acts,  or  understands  for  all  ? 
Nothing  which  administers  or  looks  after  all  ? 

No  (says  one  of  a  modern  hypothesis),  for  the  world  was  from 
eternity  as  you  see  it,  and  is  no  more  than  barely  what  you 
see  :  "  Matter  modified ;  a  lump  in  motion,  with  here  and  there 
a  thought  or  scattered  portion  of  dissoluble  intelligence.""  ,  .  . 
No  (says  one  of  an  ancienter  hypothesis),  for  the  world  was  once 
without  any  intelligence  or  thought  at  all :  "  Mere  matter, 
chaos,  and  a  play  of  atoms,  till  thought,  by  chance,  came  into 
play,  and  made  up  a  harmony  which  was  never  designed  or 
thought  of."  .  .  .  Admirable  conceit !  Believe  it  who  can. 
For  my  own  share  (thank  Providence),  I  have  a  mind  in  my 
possession  which  serves,  such  as  it  is,  to  keep  my  body  and  its 
affections,  my  passions,  appetites,  imaginations,  fancies,  and  the 
rest  in  tolerable  harmony  and  order,  liut  the  order  of  the 
universe,  I  am  persuaded  still,  is  much  the  better  of  tlie  tw'o. 
Let  Epicurus,  if  he  please,  think  his  the  better,  and,  believing 
no  genius  or  wisdom  above  his  own,  inform  us  by  what  chance 
^twas  dealt  him,  and  how  atoms  came  to  be  so  wise. 

In  fine,  continued  Theocles  (raising  his  voice  and  action), 
being  thus,  even  by  scepticism  itself,  convinced  the  more  still 
of  my  own  being  and  of  this  self  of  mine  "  that  'tis  a  real  self 
drawn  out  and  copied  from  another  principal  and  original  self 
(the  Great  One  of  the  world),"  I  endeavour  to  be  really  one 
with  it,  and  conformable  to  it  as  far  as  I  am  able.  I  consider 
that,  as  there  is  one  general  mass,  one  body  of  the  whole,  so  to 
this  body  there  is  an  order,  to  this  order  a  mind ;  that  to  this 

105 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

general  mind  each  particular  one  must  have  relation,  as  being 
of  like  substance  (as  much  as  we  can  understand  of  substance), 
alike  active  upon  body,  original  to  motion  and  order;  alike 
simple,  uncompounded,  individual ;  of  like  energy,  effect,  and 
operation  ;  and  more  like  still,  if  it  co-operates  with  it  to 
general  good,  and  strives  to  will  according  to  the  best  of  wills. 
So  that  it  cannot  surely  but  seem  natural  "  that  the  particular 
mind  should  seek  its  happiness  in  conformity  Avith  the  general 
one,  and  endeavour  to  resemble  it  in  its  highest  simplicity  and 
excellence." 

Therefore,  now,  said  I,  good  Theocles,  be  once  again  the 
enthusiast,  and  let  me  hear  anew  that  divine  song  wdth  which 
I  was  lately  charmed.  I  am  already  got  over  my  qualm,  and 
begin  better  than  ever  to  fancy  such  a  nature  as  you  speak  of; 
insomuch  that  I  find  myself  mightily  in  its  interest,  and  con- 
cerned that  all  should  go  happily  and  w'ell  with  it.  Though 
at  the  rate  it  often  runs,  I  can  scarce  help  being  in  some  pain 
on  its  account. 

Fear  not,  my  friend,  replied  he.  For  know  that  every 
particular  nature  certainly  and  constantly  ]:)roduces  what  is  good 
to  itself,  unless  something  foreign  disturbs  or  hinders  it,  either 
by  overpowering  and  corrupting  it  within,  or  by  violence  from 
without.  Thus  Nature  in  the  patient  struggles  to  the  last  and 
strives  to  throw  off  the  distemjier.  Thus  even  in  these  plants 
we  see  round  us,  every  particular  nature  thrives  and  attains  its 
perfection,  if  nothing  from  without  obstructs  it  nor  anything 
foreign  has  already  impaired  or  wounded  it ;  and  even  in  this 
case  it  does  its  utmost  still  to  redeem  itself.  What  are  all 
weaknesses,  distortions,  sicknesses,  imperfect  births,  and  the 
seeming  contradictions  and  perversities  of  nature  other  than  of 
this  sort  H  And  how  ignorant  must  one  be  of  all  natural  causes 
and  operations  to  think  that  any  of  these  disorders  happen  by 
a  miscarriage  of  the  particular  nature,  and  not  by  the  force  of 
some  foreign  nature  which  overpowers  it.  If,  therefore,  every 
particular  nature   be   thus   constantly  and  unerringly  true  to 

106 


THE   MORALISTS 

itself,  and  certain  to  produce  only  what  is  good  for  itself  and 
conducing  to  its  own  right  state,  shall  not  the  general  one,  the 
nature  of  the  whole,  do  full  as  much  ?  shall  that  alone  miscarry 
or  fail  ?  Or  is  there  anything  foreign  which  should  at  any  time 
do  violence  upon  it  or  force  it  out  of  its  natural  way  ?  If  not, 
then  all  it  produces  is  to  its  own  advantage  and  good,  the  good 
of  all  in  general ;  and  what  is  for  the  good  of  all  in  general  is 
just  and  good. 

'Tis  so,  said  I,  I  confess. 

Then  you  ought  to  rest  satisfied,  replied  he ;  and  not  only 
so,  but  be  pleased  and  rejoice  at  what  happens,  knowing  whence 
it  comes,  and  to  what  perfection  it  contributes. 

Bless  me,  said  I,  Theocles,  into  what  a  superstition  are  you 
like  to  lead  me  !  I  thought  it  heretofore  the  mark  of  a  super- 
stitious mind  to  search  for  Providence  in  the  common  accidents 
of  life,  and  ascribe  to  the  Divine  Power  those  common  disasters 
and  calamities  which  nature  has  entailed  on  mankind.  But 
now  I  find  I  must  place  all  in  general  to  one  account,  and 
viewing  things  through  a  kind  of  magical  glass,  I  am  to  see  the 
worst  of  ills  transformed  to  good,  and  admire  equally  whatever 
comes  from  one  and  the  same  perfect  Hand.  But  no  matter, 
I  can  surmount  all.  Go  on,  Theocles,  and  let  me  advise  you 
in  my  own  behalf,  that  since  you  have  rekindled  me,  you  do  not 
by  delaying  give  me  time  to  cool  again. 

I  would  have  you  know,  replied  he,  I  scorn  to  take  the 
advantage  of  a  warm  fit  and  be  beholden  to  temper  or  imagina- 
tion for  gaining  me  your  assent.  Therefore  ere  I  go  yet  a 
step  farther,  I  am  resolved  to  enter  again  into  cool  reason  with 
you  and  ask  if  you  admit  for  proof  what  I  advanced  yesterday 
upon  that  head,  "  of  a  universal  union,  coherence,  or  sympathis- 
ing of  things  ^  ? 

By  force  of  probability,  said  I,  you  overcame  me.  Being 
convinced  of  a  consent  and  correspondence  in  all  we  saw  of 
things,  I  considered  it  as  unreasonable  not  to  allow  the  same 
throughout. 

107 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Unreasonable  indeed  !  replied  he.  For  in  the  infinite  residue, 
were  there  no  principle  of  union,  it  would  seem  next  to  im- 
possible that  things  within  our  sphere  should  be  consistent 
and  keep  their  order.  "For  what  was  infinite  would  be  pre- 
dominant." 

It  seems  so. 

Tell  me  then,  said  he,  after  this  union  owned,  how  you 
can  refuse  to  allow  the  name  of  demonstration  to  the  remain- 
ing arguments,  which  establish  the  government  of  a  perfect 
mind. 

Your  solutions,  said  I,  of  the  ill  appearances  are  not  perfect 
enough  to  pass  for  demonstration.  And  whatever  seems  vicious 
or  imperfect  in  the  creation  puts  a  stop  to  further  conclusions 
till  the  thing  be  solved. 

Did  you  not  then,  said  he,  agree  with  me  when  I  averred 
that  the  appearances  must  of  necessity  stand  as  they  are,  and 
things  seem  altogether  as  imperfect  even  on  the  concession  of 
a  perfect  supreme  mind  existent  ? 

1  did  so. 
__  And  is  not  the  same  reason  good  still  ?    viz.  "  that  in  an 
infinity   of  things,  mutually  relative,  a  mind   which  sees  not 
infinitely  can  see  nothing  fully,  and  must  therefore  frequently 
see  that  as  imperfect  which  in  itself  is  really  perfect.'"'' 

The  reason  is  still  good. 

Are  the  appearances,  then,  any  objection  to  our  hypothesis  ? 

None,  whilst  they  remain  appearances  only. 

Can  you  then  prove  them  to  be  any  more  ?  For  if  you  can- 
not, you  prove  nothing.  And  that  it  lies  on  you  to  prove 
you  plainly  see,  since  the  appearances  do  not  only  agree  with 
the  hypothesis,  but  are  a  necessary  consequence  from  it.  To 
bid  me  prove,  therefore,  in  this  case  is  in  a  manner  the  same 
as  to  bid  me  be  infinite.  For  nothing  beside  what  is  infinite 
can  see  infinite  connections. 

The  presumption,  I  must  confess,  said  I,  by  this  reckoning 
is  wholly  on  your  side.     Yet  still  this  is  only  presumption. 

108 


THE   MORALISTS 

Take  demonstration  then,  said  he,  if  you  can  endure  I  should 
reason  thus  abstractedly  and  drily.  The  appearances  of  ill,  you 
say,  are  not  necessarily  that  ill  they  represent  to  us. 

I  own  it. 

Therefore  what  they  represent  may  possibly  be  good. 

It  may. 

And  therefore  there  may  possibly  be  no  real  ill  in  things, 
but  all  may  be  perfectly  concurrent  to  one  interest,  the  interest 
of  that  universal  Oxe. 

It  may  be  so. 

Why,  then,  if  it  may  be  so  (be  not  surprised),  "  it  follows 
that  it  must  be  so,"  on  the  account  of  that  great  unit  and 
simple  self-principle  which  you  have  granted  in  the  whole.  For 
whatever  is  possible  in  the  whole,  the  nature  or  mind  of  the 
whole  will  put  in  execution  for  the  whole's  good ;  and  if  it  be 
possible  to  exclude  ill,  it  will  exclude  it.  Therefore,  since  not- 
withstanding the  appearances,  'tis  possible  that  ill  may  actu- 
ally be  excluded,  count  upon  it  "  that  actually  it  is  excluded." 
For  nothing  merely  passive  can  oppose  this  universally  active 
principle.  If  anything  active  oppose  it,  'tis  another  principle. 
I  allow  it. 

'Tis  impossible.  For  were  there  in  nature  two  or  more 
principles,  either  they  must  agree  or  not.  If  they  agree  not, 
all  must  be  confusion  till  one  be  predominant.  If  they  agree, 
there  must  be  some  natural  reason  for  their  agreement,  and  this 
natural  reason  cannot  be  from  chance,  but  from  some  particular 
design,  contrivance,  or  thought,  which  brings  us  up  again  to 
Oxe  principle,  and  makes  the  other  two  to  be  subordinate.  And 
thus  when  we  have  compared  each  of  the  three  opinions,  viz. 
"  That  there  is  no  designing  active  principle  ;  that  there  is  more 
than  one " ;  or  "  that  finally  there  is  but  Oxe,"  we  shall  per- 
ceive that  the  only  consistent  opinion  is  the  last.  And  since 
one  or  other  of  these  opinions  must  of  necessity  be  true,  what 
can  we  determine  other  than  that  the  last  is,  and  must  be  so, 
demonstrably .''  if  it  be  demonstration,  "  that  in  three  opinions, 

109 


IV 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

one  of  which  must  necessarily  be  true,  two  being  plainly  absurd, 
the  third  must  be  the  truth." 

Enough,  said  I,  Theocles.  My  doubts  are  vanished.  Malice 
and  chance  (vain  phantoms  !)  have  yielded  to  that  all-prevalent 
wisdom  which  you  have  established.  You  are  conqueror  in  the 
cool  way  of  reason,  and  may  with  honour  now  grow  warm  again 
in  your  poetic  vein.  Return  therefore,  I  entreat  you,  once  more 
to  that  perfection  of  being,  and  address  yourself  to  it  as  before 
on  our  approaches  to  these  sylvan  scenes  where  first  it  seemed 
to  inspire  you.  I  shall  now  no  longer  be  in  danger  of  imagining 
either  magic  or  superstition  in  the  case,  since  you  invoke  no 
other  power  than  that  single  Oxe  which  seems  so  natural. 

Thus  I  continue  then,  said  Theocles,  addressing  myself  as  you 
would  have  me,  to  that  guardian  deity  and  inspirer  Avhom  we 
are  to  imagine  present  here,  but  not  here  only.  For,  "  O  mighty 
Genius  !  sole  animating  and  inspiring  power !  author  and  sub- 
ject of  these  thoughts  !  thy  influence  is  universal,  and  in  all 
things  thou  art  inmost.  From  thee  depend  their  secret  springs 
of  action.  Thou  movest  them  with  an  irresistible  unwearied 
force,  by  sacred  and  inviolable  laws,  framed  for  the  good  of  each 
particular  being,  as  best  may  suit  with  the  perfection,  life,  and 
vigour  of  the  whole.  The  vital  principle  is  widely  shared  and 
infinitely  varied,  dispersed  throughout,  nowhere  extinct.  All 
lives,  and  by  succession  still  revives.  The  temporary  beings  quit 
their  borrowed  forms  and  yield  their  elementary  substance  to 
new-comers.  Called  in  their  several  turns  to  life,  they  view  the 
light,  and  viewing  pass,  that  others  too  may  be  spectators  of 
the  goodly  scene,  and  greater  numbers  still  enjoy  the  privilege 
of  Nature.  Munificent  and  great,  she  imparts  herself  to  most 
and  makes  the  subjects  of  her  bounty  infinite.  Nought  stays 
her  hastening:  hand.  No  time  nor  substance  is  lost  or  unim- 
proved.  New  forms  arise,  and  when  the  old  dissolve,  the  matter 
whence  they  were  composed  is  not  left  useless,  but  wrought  with 
equal  management  and  art,  even  in  corruption,  Nature's  seeming 
waste  and  vile  abhorrence.     The  abject  state  appears  merely  as 

110 


THE   MORALISTS 

the  way  or  passage  to  some  better.  But  could  we  nearly  view 
it,  and  with  indifference,  remote  from  the  antipathy  of  sense, 
we  then  perhaps  should  highest  raise  our  admiration,  convinced 
that  even  the  way  itself  was  equal  to  the  end.  Nor  can  we 
judge  less  favourably  of  that  consummate  art  exhibited  through 
all  the  works  of  Nature,  since  our  weak  eyes,  helped  by  mechanic 
art,  discover  in  these  works  a  hidden  scene  of  wonders,  worlds  ^"^ 
within  worlds  of  infinite  minuteness,  though  as  to  art  still  equal 
to  the  greatest,  and  pregnant  with  more  wonders  than  the  most 
discerning  sense,  joined  with  the  greatest  art  or  the  acutest 
reason,  can  penetrate  or  unfold. 

"But  'tis  in  vain  for  us  to  search  the  bulky  mass  of  matter, 
seeking  to  know  its  nature ;  how  great  the  whole  itself,  or  even 
how  small  its  parts. 

"  If,  knowing  only  some  of  the  rules  of  motion,  we  seek  to 
trace  it  further,  'tis  in  vain  we  follow  it  into  the  bodies  it  has 
reached.  Our  tardy  apprehensions  fail  us,  and  can  reach  nothing 
beyond  the  body  itself,  through  which  it  is  diffused.  Wonderful 
being  (if  we  may  call  it  so),  which  bodies  never  receive  except 
from  others  which  lose  it,  nor  ever  lose,  unless  by  imparting  it 
to  others.  Even  without  change  of  place  it  has  its  force,  and 
bodies  big  with  motion  labour  to  move,  yet  stir  not,  whilst  they 
express  an  energy  beyond  our  comprehension. 

"  In  vain,  too,  we  pursue  that  phantom  time,  too  small,  and 
yet  too  mighty  for  our  grasp,  when,  shrinking  to  a  narrow  point, 
it  escapes  our  hold,  or  mocks  our  scanty  thought  by  swelling  to 
eternity,  an  object  unproportioned  to  our  capacity,  as  is  thy 
being,  O  thou  ancient  cause  !  older  than  time,  yet  young  with 
fresh  eternity. 

"  In  vain  we  try  to  fathom  the  abyss  of  space,  the  seat  of  thy 
extensive  being,  of  which  no  place  is  empty,  no  void  which  is 
not  full. 

"  In  vain  we  labour  to  understand  that  principle  of  sense  and 
thought,  which  seeming  in  us  to  depend  so  much  on  motion,  yet 
differs  so  much  from  it  and  from  matter  itself  as  not  to  suffer 

111 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


^' 


^% 


I 


us  to  conceive  how  thought  can  more  result  from  this  than  this 
arise  from  thought.  But  thought  we  own  pre-eminent,  and 
confess  the  realest  of  beings,  the  only  existence  of  which  we  are 
made  sure  by  being  conscious.  All  else  may  be  only  dream  and 
shadow.  All  which  even  sense  suggests  may  be  deceitful.  The 
sense  itself  remains  still ;  reason  subsists,  and  thought  maintains 
its  eldership  of  being.  Thus  are  we  in  a  manner  conscious  of 
that  original  and  eternally  existent  thought  whence  we  derive 
our  own.  And  thus  the  assurance  we  have  of  the  existence  of 
beings  above  our  sense  and  of  thee  (the  great  exemplar  of  thy 
works)  comes  from  thee,  the  all  true  and  perfect,  who  hast  thus 
communicated  thyself  more  immediately  to  us,  so  as  in  some 
manner  to  inhabit  within  our  souls,  thou  who  art  original 
soul,  diffusive,  vital  in  all,  inspiriting  the  whole. 

"  All  Nature's  wonders  serve  to  excite  and  perfect  this  idea 
of  their  author.  'Tis  here  he  suffers  us  to  see,  and  even  con- 
verse with  him  in  a  manner  suitable  to  our  frailty.  How 
glorious  is  it  to  contemplate  him  in  this  noblest  of  his  works 
apparent  to  us,  the  system  of  the  bigger  world  ! "" 

Here  I  must  own,  'twas  no  small  comfort  to  me  to  find  that, 
I  as  our  meditation  turned,  we  were  likely  to  get  clear  of  an  en- 
tangling abstruse  philosophy.  I  was  in  hopes  Theocles,  as  he 
proceeded,  might  stick  closer  to  Nature,  since  he  was  now  come 
upon  the  borders  of  our  world.  And  here  I  would  willingly 
have  welcomed  him,  had  I  thought  it  safe  at  present  to  venture 
the  least  interruption. 

"  Besides  the  neighbouring  planets  (continued  he,  in  his 
rapturous  strain)  what  multitudes  of  fixed  stars  did  we  see 
sparkle  not  an  hour  ago  in  the  clear  night,  which  yet  had  hardly 
yielded  to  the  day  ?  How  many  others  are  discovered  by  the 
help  of  art  ?  Yet  how  many  remain  still  beyond  the  reach  of 
our  discovery  !  Crowded  as  they  seem,  their  distance  from  each 
other  is  as  unmeasurable  by  art  as  is  the  distance  between  them 
and  us.  Whence  we  are  naturally  taught  the  immensity  of  that 
being  who,  through  these  immense  spaces,  has  disposed  such  an 

112 


THE    MORALISTS 

infinity  of  bodies,  belonging  each  (as  we  may  well  presume)  to      /, 
systems  as  com})lete  as  our  own  world,  since  even  the  smallest 
spark  of  this  bright  galaxy  may  vie  with  this  our  sun,  which 
shining  now  full  out,  gives  us  new  life,  exalts  our  spirits,  and    , 
makes  us  feel  divinity  more  present.  \ 

"  Prodigious  orb !    bright  source  of  vital   heat,  and  spring^! 
of  day  !    .    .    .    Soft  flame,  yet  how  intense,  how  active  !    how 
diffusive,  and  how  vast  a  substance ;   yet  how   collected   thus  ** 

within  itself,  and  in  a  glowing  mass  confined  to  the  centre  of 
this  planetary  world  !  .  .  .  Mighty  being !  brightest  image  and 
representative  of  the  Almighty  !  supreme  of  the  corporeal  worl4.,L-J 
unperishing  in  grace,  and  of  undecaying  youth  !  fair,  beautiful, 
and  hardly  mortal  creature  !  By  what  secret  ways  dost  thou 
receive  the  supplies  which  maintain  thee  still  in  such  unwearied 
vigour  and  unexhausted  glory  ;  notwithstanding  those  externally 
emitted  streams  and  that  continual  expense  of  vital  treasures 
which  enlighten  and  invigorate  the  surrounding  worlds  ?  .  .  . 

"Around  him  all  the  planets,  with  this  our  earth,  single, 
or  with  attendants,  continually  move,  seeking  to  receive  the 
blessing  of  his  light  and  lively  warmth !  Towards  him  they 
seem  to  tend,  with  prone  descent,  as  to  their  centre,  but  happily 
controlled  still  by  another  impulse,  they  keep  their  heavenly 
order;  and  in  just  numbers  and  exactest  measure,  go  the 
eternal  rounds. 

But,  O  thou  who  art  the  author  and  modifier  of  these 
various  motions  !  O  sovereign  and  sole  mover,  by  whose  high  art 
the  rolling  spheres  are  governed,  and  these  stupendous  bodies  of 
our  world  hold  their  unrelenting  courses !  O  wise  economist, 
and  powerful  chief,  whom  all  the  elements  and  powers  of  Nature 
serve !  how  hast  thou  animated  these  movina'  worlds  ?  what 
spirit  or  soul  infused .''  Avhat  bias  fixed  ?  or  how  encompassed 
them  in  liquid  ether,  driving  them  as  with  the  breath  of  living 
winds,  thy  active  and  unwearied  ministers  in  this  intricate  and 
mighty  work  ? 

"Thus  powerfully  are  the  systems  held  entire,  and   kept 

VOL.  II  113  I 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

from  fatal  interfering.  Thus  is  our  ponderous  globe  directed 
in  its  annual  course,  daily  revolving  on  its  own  centre,  whilst 
the  obsequious  moon  with  double  labour,  monthly  surrounding 
'  this  our  bigger  orb,  attends  the  motion  of  her  sister  planet, 
and  pays  in  common  her  circular  homage  to  the  sun. 

"  Yet  is  this  mansion-globe,  this  man-container,  of  a  much 
narrower  compass  even  than  other  its  fellow-wanderers  of  our 
system.  How  narrow  then  must  it  appear  compared  with  the 
capacious  system  of  its  own  sun  ?  And  how  narrow,  or  as 
nothing,  in  respect  of  those  innumerable  systems  of  other 
suns  ?  Yet  how  immense  a  body  it  seems  compared  with  ours 
of  human  form,  a  borrowed  remnant  of  its  variable  and  oft- 
converted  surface  ?  though  animated  with  a  sublime  celestial 
spirit  by  which  we  have  relation  and  tendency  to  Thee  our 
Heavenly  Sire,  centre  of  souls,  to  whom  these  spirits  of  ours  by 
nature  tend,  as  earthly  bodies  to  their  proper  centre.  O  did 
they  tend  as  unerringly  and  constantly  !  .  .  .  But  thou  alone 
composest  the  disorders  of  the  corporeal  world,  and  from  the 
restless  and  fighting  elements  raisest  that  peaceful  concord  and 
conspiring  beauty  of  the  ever-flourishing  creation.  Even  so 
canst  thou  convert  these  jarring  motions  of  intelligent  beings, 
and  in  due  time  and  manner  cause  them  to  find  their  rest; 
making  them  contribute  to  the  good  and  perfection  of  the 
universe,  thy  all-good  and  perfect  Avork." 

Here  again  he  broke  off",  looking  on  me  as  if  he  expected  I 
should  speak,  which  when  he  found  plainly  I  would  not,  but 
continued  still  in  a  posture  of  musing  thought :  AVhy,  Philocles  ! 
said  he,  with  an  air  of  wonder ;  what  can  this  mean,  that  you 
should  suffer  me  thus  to  run  on  without  the  least  inteiTuption  ? 
Have  you  at  once  given  over  your  scrupulous  philosophy,  to  let 
me  range  thus  at  pleasure  through  these  aerial  spaces  and 
imaginary  regions  where  my  capricious  fancy  or  easy  faith  has 
led  me  ?  I  would  have  you  to  consider  better,  and  know,  my 
Philocles,  that  I  had  never  trusted  myself  with  you  in  this  vein  of 
enthusiasm,  had  I  not  relied  on  you  to  govern  it  a  little  better, 

ii4 


THE   MORALISTS 

I  find,  then,  said  I  (rousing  myself  from  my  musing  posture), 
you  expect  I  should  serve  you  in  the  same  capacity  as  that 
musician,  whom  an  ancient  orator  made  use  of  at  his  elbow,  to 
strike  such  moving  notes  as  raised  him  when  he  was  perceived 
to  sink ;  and  calmed  him  again  when  his  impetuous  spirit  was 
transported  in  too  high  a  strain. 

You  imagine  right,  replied  Theocles ;  and  therefore  I  am 
resolved  not  to  go  on  till  you  have  promised  to  pull  me  by  the 
sleeve  when  I  grow  extravagant.  Be  it  so,  said  I ;  you  have 
my  promise.  But  how  if  instead  of  rising  in  my  transports 
I  should  grow  flat  and  tiresome ;  what  lyre  or  instrument  would 
you  employ  to  raise  me  ? 

The  danger,  I  told  him,  could  hardly  be  supposed  to  lie 
on  this  hand.  His  vein  was  a  plentiful  one,  and  his  enthusiasm 
in  no  likelihood  of  failing  him.  His  subject,  too,  as  well  as  his 
numbers,  would  bear  him  out.  And  with  the  advantage  of 
the  rural  scene  around  us,  his  numbered  prose,  I  thought, 
supplied  the  room  of  the  best  pastoral  song.  For  in  the 
manner  I  was  now  wrought  up,  'twas  as  agreeable  to  me  to 
hear  him,  in  this  kind  of  passion,  invoke  his  stars  and  elements, 
as  to  hear  one  of  those  amorous  shepherds  complaining  to  his 
flock,  and  making  the  woods  and  rocks  resound  the  name  of 
her  whom  he  adored.  .  .  .  Begin  therefore,  continued  I,  still 
pressing  him,  begin  anew,  and  lead  me  boldly  through  your 
elements.  Wherever  there  is  danger,  be  it  on  either  hand,  I 
promise  to  give  you  warning  when  I  perceive  it. 
';,  Let  us  begin,  then,  said  he,  with  this  our  element  of  earth,  »  ^' 
— which  yonder  we  see  cultivated  with  such  care  by  the  early 
swains  now  working  in  the  plain  below — "  Unhappy  restless 
men,  who  first  disdained   these  peaceful   labours,  gentle   rural  1 

tasks,  performed  with  such  delight !  AVhat  pride  or  what 
ambition  bred  this  scorn  ?  Hence  all  those  fatal  evils  of  your 
race,  enormous  luxury,  despising  homely  fare,  ranges  through 
seas  and  lands,  rifles  the  globe ;  and  men,  ingenious  to  their 
misery,  work  out  for  themselves  the  means  of  heavier  labour, 

115 


v^ 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

anxious  cares,  and  sorrow.  Not  satisfied  to  turn  and  manure 
for  their  use  the  wholesome  and  beneficial  mould  of  this  their 
earth,  they  dig  yet  deeper,  and  seeking  out  imaginary  wealth, 
they  search  its  very  entrails. 

"  Here,  led  by  curiosity,  we  find  minerals  of  different  natures 
which,  by  their  simplicity,  discover  no  less  of  the  divine  art 
than  the  most  compounded  of  nature's  works.  Some  are  found 
capable  of  surprising  changes ;  others  as  durable,  and  hard  to 
be  destroyed  or  changed  by  fire,  or  utmost  art.  So  various  are 
the  subjects  of  our  contemplation,  that  even  the  study  of  these 
inglorious  parts  of  nature  in  the  nether  world  is  able  itself 
alone  to  yield  large  matter  and  employment  for  the  busiest 
spirits  of  men,  who  in  the  labour  of  these  experiments  can 
willingly  consume  their  lives.  But  the  noisome  poisonous 
steams  which  the  earth  breathes  from  these  dark  caverns 
where  she  conceals  her  treasures,  suffer  not  Jurying  mortals  to 
live  long  in  this  search. 

"  How  comfortable  is  it  to  those  who  come  out  hence  alive 
to  breathe  a  purer  air !  to  see  the  rejoicing  light  of  day !  and 
tread  the  fertile  ground  !  How  gladly  they  contemplate  the 
surface  of  the  earth,  their  habitation,  heated  and  enlivened  by 
the  sun,  and  tempered  by  the  fresh  air  of  fanning  breezes ! 
These  exercise  the  resty  plants,  and  scour  the  unactive  globe. 
And  when  the  sun  draws  hence  thick  clouded  steams  and 
vapours,  'tis  only  to  digest  and  exalt  the  unwholesome  particles, 
and  commit  them  to  the  sprightly  air,  which,  soon  imparting 
its  quick  and  vital  spirit,  renders  them  again  with  improvement 
to  the  earth  in  gentle  breathings,  or  in  rich  dews  and  fruitful 
showers.  The  same  air,  moving  about  the  mighty  mass,  enters 
its  pores,  impregnating  the  whole.  And  both  the  sun  and  air, 
conspiring  to  animate  this  mother-earth,  that  though  ever 
breeding  her  vigour  is  as  great,  her  beauty  as  fresh,  and  her 
looks  as  charming  as  if  she  newly  came  out  of  the  forming 
hands  of  her  creator. 

"  How  beautiful  is  the  water  among  the  inferior  earthly 

116 


THE   MORALISTS 

works !  Heavy,  liquid,  and  transparent,  without  the  springing 
vigour  and  expansive  force  of  air,  but  not  wdthout  activity. 
Stubborn  and  unyielding  when  compressed,  but  placidly  avoiding 
force,  and  bending  every  way  with  ready  fluency  !  Insinuating, 
it  dissolves  the  lumpish  earth,  frees  the  entangled  bodies, 
procures  their  intercourse,  and  summons  to  the  field  the  keen 
terrestrial  particles,  whose  happy  strifes,  soon  ending  in  strict 
union,  produce  the  various  forms  which  we  behold.  How  vast 
are  the  abysses  of  the  sea,  where  this  soft  element  is  stored ; 
and  whence  the  sun  and  winds  extracting,  raise  it  into  clouds ! 
These,  soon  converted  into  rain,  water  the  thirsty  ground,  and 
supply  afresh  the  springs  and  rivers,  the  comfort  of  the  neigh- 
bouring plains,  and  sweet  refreshment  of  all  animals. 

"  But  whither  shall  we  trace  the  sources  of  the  light  ?  or 
in  what  ocean  comprehend  the  luminous  matter  so  wide  diffused 
through  the  immense  spaces  which  it  fills  ?  What  seats  shall 
we  assign  to  that  fierce  element  of  fire,  too  active  to  be  confined 
within  the  compass  of  the  sun,  and  not  excluded  even  the 
bowels  of  the  heavy  earth  ?  The  air  itself  submits  to  it,  and 
serves  as  its  inferior  instrument.  Even  this  our  sun,  with  all 
those  numerous  suns,  the  glittering  host  of  Heaven,  seem  to 
receive  from  hence  the  vast  supplies  which  keep  them  ever  in 
their  splendid  state.  The  invisible  ethereal  substance,  penetrat- 
ing both  liquid  and  solid  bodies,  is  diffused  throughout  the 
universe.  It  cherishes  the  cold  dull  massy  globe,  and  warms  it 
to  its  centre.  It  forms  the  minerals ;  gives  life  and  growth  to 
vegetables ;  kindles  a  soft,  invisible,  and  vital  flame  in  the 
breasts  of  living  creatures ;  frames,  animates,  and  nurses  all  the 
various  forms ;  sparing,  as  well  as  em])loying  for  their  use,  those 
sulphurous  and  combustible  matters  of  which  they  are  composed. 
Benign  and  gentle  amidst  all,  it  still  maintains  this  happy 
peace  and  concord,  according  to  its  stated  and  peculiar  laws. 
But  these  once  broken,  the  actjuitted  being  takes  its  course 
unruled.  It  runs  impetuous  through  the  fatal  breach,  and 
breaking  into  visible  and  fierce  flames,  passes  triumphant  over 

117 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

the  yielding  forms,  converting  all  into  itself,  and  dissolving  now 
those  systems  which  itself  before  had  formed.     'Tis  thus  ■".... 
Here  Theocles  stopped  on  a  sudden,  when  (as  he  imagined) 
I  was  putting  my  hand  out  to  lay  hold  on  his  sleeve. 

0  Philocles,  said  he,  'tis  well  remembered.  I  was  growing 
too  warm,  I  find  ;  as  well  I  might  indeed,  in  this  hot  element. 
And  here  perhaps  I  might  have  talked  yet  more  mysteriously, 
had  you  been  one  who  could  think  otherwise  than  in  the 
common  way  of  the  soft  flames  of  love.  You  might,  perhaps, 
have  heard  wonders  in  this  kind  :  "  how  all  things  had  their 
being  hence,  and  how  their  noblest  end  was  to  be  here  wrapt  up, 
consumed  and  lost.""  But  in  these  high  flights  I  might  possibly 
have  gone  near  to  burn  my  wings. 

Indeed,  said  I,  you  might  well  expect  the  fate  of  Icarus  for 
your  high-soaring.  But  this,  indeed,  was  not  what  I  feared. 
For  you  were  got  above  danger ;  and,  with  that  devouring 
element  on  your  side,  had  mastered  not  only  the  sun  himself, 
but  every  thing  which  stood  in  your  way.  I  was  afraid  it 
might,  in  the  issue,  run  to  what  they  tell  us  of  a  universal 
conflagration ;  in  which  I  knew  not  how  it  might  go,  possibly, 
with  our  Genius. 

1  am  glad,  said  he,  Philocles,  to  find  this  grown  such  a 
concern  with  you.  But  you  may  rest  secure  here,  if  the  case 
you  meant  were  that  periodical  conflagration  talked  of  by  some 
philosophers.  For  there  the  Genius  would  of  necessity  be  all 
in  all ;  and  in  those  intervals  of  creation,  when  no  form  nor 
species  existed  anywhere  out  of  the  divine  mind,  all  then  was 
Deity ;  all  was  that  One,  collected  thus  within  itself,  and 
subsisting  (as  they  imagined)  rather  in  a  more  simple  and 
perfect  manner,  than  when  multiplied  in  more  ways ;  and 
becoming  productive,  it  unfolded  itself  in  the  various  map  of 

I  Nature  and  this  fair  visible  world. 

But  for  my  part,  said  I  (interrupting  him),  who  can  much 
better  see  divinity  unfolded  than  in  that  involved  and  solitary 
state  before  creation,  I  could  wish  you  would  go  a  little  further 

118 


THE   MORALISTS 

with  me  in  the  map  of  Natm-e,  especially  if,  descending  from 
your  lofty  flights,  you  would  be  content  to  pitch  upon  this 
humble  spot  of  earth,  where  I  could  better  accompany  you, 
wherever  you  led  me. 

But  you,  replied  he,  who  would  confine  me  to  this  heavy 
earth,  must  yet  allow  me  the  same  wings  of  fancy.  How  else 
shall  I  fly  with  you  through  different  climates,  from  pole  to 
pole,  and  from  the  frigid  to  the  torrid  zone  ? 

Oh,  said  I,  for  this  purpose  I  will  allow  you  the  Pegasus  of 
the  poets,  or  that  winged  Griffin  which  an  Italian  poet  of  the 
moderns  gave  to  one  of  his  heroes ;  yet  on  this  condition,  that 
you  take  no  such  extravagant  flight,  as  his  was,  to  the  moon ; 
but  keep  closely  to  this  orb  of  earth. 

Since  you  will  have  it  so,  replied  Theocles,  let  us  try  first 
on  the  darkest  and  most  imperfect  parts  of  our  map,  and  see 
how  you  can  endure  the  prospect.  "  How  oblique  and  faintly 
looks  the  sun  on  yonder  climates,  far  removed  from  him  !  How 
tedious  are  the  winters  there  !  How  deep  the  horrors  of  the 
night,  and  how  uncomfortable  even  the  light  of  day  !  The 
freezing  winds  employ  their  fiercest  breath,  yet  are  not  spent 
with  blowing.  The  sea,  which  elsewhere  is  scarce  confined 
within  its  limits,  lies  here  immured  in  walls  of  crystal.  The 
snow  covers  the  hills,  and  almost  fills  the  lowest  valleys.  How 
wide  and  deep  it  lies,  incumbent  over  the  plains,  hiding  the 
sluggish  rivers,  the  shrubs  and  trees,  the  dens  of  beasts  and 
mansions  of  distressed  and  feeble  men  !  .  .  .  See !  where  they 
lie  confined,  hardly  secure  against  the  raging  cold  or  the  attacks 
of  the  wild  beasts,  now  masters  of  the  wasted  field,  and  forced 
by  hunger  out  of  the  naked  woods.  ,  .  .  Yet  not  disheartened 
(such  is  the  force  of  human  breasts)  but  thus  provided  for  by 
art  and  prudence,  the  kind  compensating  gifts  of  heaven,  men 
and  their  herds  may  wait  for  a  release.  For  at  length  the  sun, 
approaching,  melts  the  snow,  sets  longing  men  at  liberty,  and 
affords  them  means  and  time  to  make  provision  against  the 
next  return   of  cold.      It  breaks  the  icy  fetters  of  the  main, 

119 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAHACTERISTICS 

where  vast  sea-monsters  pierce  through  floating  islPvnds,  with 
arms  which  can  withstand  the  crystal  rock ;  whilst  others,  who 
of  themselves  seem  great  as  islands,  are  by  their  bulk  alone 
armed  against  all  but  man,  whose  superiority  over  creatures  of 
such  stupendous  size  and  force  should  make  him  mindful  of  his 
privilege  of  reason,  and  force  him  humbly  to  adore  the  great 
composer  of  these  wondrous  frames,  and  author  of  his  own 
superior  wisdom, 

"  But  leaving  these  dull  climates,  so  little  favoured  by  the 
sun,  for  those  happier  regions,  on  which  he  looks  more  kindly, 
making  perpetual  summer ;  how  great  an  alteration  do  we  find  ? 
His  purer  light  confounds  weak-sighted  mortals,  pierced  by  his 
scorching  beams.  Scarce  can  they  tread  the  glowing  ground. 
The  air  they  breathe  cannot  enough  abate  the  fire  which  burns 
within  their  panting  breasts.  Their  bodies  melt ;  overcome 
and  fainting  they  seek  the  shade,  and  wait  the  cool  refreshments 
of  the  night.  Yet  oft  the  bounteous  creator  bestows  other 
refreshments.  He  casts  a  veil  of  clouds  before  them  and  raises 
gentle  gales ;  favoured  by  which  the  men  and  beasts  pursue 
their  labours,  and  plants  refreshed  by  dews  and  showers  can 
gladly  bear  the  warmest  sunbeams. 

"  And  here  the  varying  scene  opens  to  ncAv  wonders.  We 
see  a  country  rich  with  gems,  but  richer  with  the  fragrant 
spices  it  affords.  How  gravely  move  the  largest  of  land  creatures 
on  the  banks  of  this  fair  river  !  How  ponderous  are  their  arms, 
and  vast  their  strength,  with  courage  and  a  sense  superior  to 
the  other  beasts !  Yet  are  they  tamed  (we  see)  by  mankind, 
and  brouo;ht  even  to  fio-ht  their  own  battles,  rather  as  allies 
and  confederates  than  as  slaves.  .  .  .  But  let  us  turn  our  eyes 
towards  these  smaller  and  more  curious  objects,  the  numerous 
and  devouring  insects  on  the  trees  in  these  wide  plains.  How 
shining,  strong,  and  lasting  are  the  subtle  threads  spun  from 
their  artful  mouths.  Who,  beside  the  all-wise,  has  taught  them 
to  compose  the  beautiful  soft  shells,  in  which  recluse  and  buried, 
yet  still  alive,  they  undergo  such  a  surprising  change,  when  not 

120 


THE   MORALISTS 

destroyed  by  men,  who  clothe  and  adorn  themselves  with  the 
labours  and  lives  of  these  weak  creatures,  and  are  proud  of 
wearing  such  inglorious  spoils  ?  How  sumptuously  apparelled, 
gay,  and  splendid  are  all  the  various  insects  which  feed  on  the 
other  plants  of  this  warm  region  !  How  beautiful  the  plants 
themselves  in  all  their  various  growths,  from  the  triumphant 
palm  down  to  the  humble  moss  ! 

"  Now  may  we  see  that  happy  country  where  precious  gums 
and  balsams  flow  from  trees,  and  Nature  yields  her  most 
delicious  fruits.  How  tame  and  tractable,  how  patient  ot 
labour  and  of  thrift  are  those  large  creatures,  who,  lifting  up 
their  lofty  heads,  go  led  and  loaden  through  these  dry  and 
barren  places  !  Their  shape  and  temper  show  them  framed  by 
Nature  to  submit  to  man,  and  fitted  for  his  service,  who  from 
hence  ouoht  to  be  more  sensible  of  his  wants  and  of  the  divine 
bounty  thus  supplying  them. 

"  But  see,  not  far  from  us,  that  fertilest  of  lands,  watered 
and  fed  by  a  friendly  generous  stream,  which,  ere  it  enters  the 
sea,  divides  itself  into  many  branches,  to  dispense  more  equally 
the  rich  and  nitrous  manure  it  bestows  so  kindly  and  in  due 
time  on  the  adjacent  plains.  .  .  .  Fair  image  of  that  fruitful 
and  exuberant  nature,  who  with  a  flood  of  bounty  blesses  all 
things,  and,  parent-like,  out  of  her  many  breasts  sends  the 
nutritious  draught  in  various  streams  to  her  rejoicing  offspring ! 
.  .  .  Innumerable  are  the  dubious  forms  and  unknown  species 
which  drink  the  slimy  current ;  whether  they  are  such  as,  leaving 
the  scorched  deserts,  satiate  here  their  ardent  thirst,  and  pro- 
miscuouslv  engendering,  beget  a  monstrous  race ;  or  whether 
(as  it  is  said)  by  the  sun's  genial  heat,  active  on  the  fermenting 
ooze,  new  forms  are  generated  and  issue  from  the  river's  fertile 
bed.  .  .  .  See  there  the  noted  tyrant  of  the  flood  and  terror 
of  its  borders,  when  suddenly  displaying  his  horrid  form,  the 
amphibious  ravagcr  invades  the  land,  quitting  his  watery  den, 
and  from  the  deep  emerging  with  hideous  rush  sweeps  over  the 
trembling  plain.     The  natives   from  afar  behold  with  wonder 

121 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTEKISTICS 

the  enormous  bulk,  sprung  from  so  small  an  egg.  With  horror 
they  relate  the  monster"'s  nature,  cruel  and  deceitful ;  how  he 
with  dire  hypocrisy  and  false  tears  beguiles  the  simple-hearted  ; 
and  inspiring  tenderness  and  kind  compassion,  kills  with  pious 
fraud.  .  .  .  Sad  emblem  of  that  spiritual  plague,  dire  super- 
stition !  native  of  this  soil,  where  first  religion  ^  grew  unsociable, 
and  among  different-  worshippers  bred  mutual  hatred  and 
abhorrence  of  each  other's  temples.  The  infection  spreads ; 
and  nations  now  profane  one  to  another  war  fiercelier,  and  in 
religion''s  cause  forget  humanity  :  whilst  savage  zeal,  with  m^ek 
and  pious  semblance,  works  dreadful  massacre ;  and  for  heaven's 
sake  (horrid  pretence  !)  makes  desolate  the  earth.  .  .  . 

"  Here  let  us  leave  these  monsters  (glad  if  we  could  here 
confine  them  !)  and  detesting  the  dire  prolific  soil,  fly  to  the 
vast  deserts  of  these  parts.  All  ghastly  and  hideous  as  they 
appear,  they  want  not  their  peculiar  beauties.  The  wildness 
pleases.  We  seem  to  live  alone  with  Nature.  We  view  her  in 
her  inmost  recesses,  and  contemplate  her  with  more  delight  in 
•^^^^iJ^  jl  these  original  wilds  than  in  the  artificial  labyrinths  and  feigned 
I  r  wildernesses  of  the  palace.  The  objects  of  the  place,  the  scaly 
^  serpents,  the  savage  beasts,  and  poisonous  insects,  how  terrible 
soever,  or  how  contrary  to  human  nature,  are  beauteous  in 
themselves,  and  fit  to  raise  our  thoughts  in  admiration  of  that 
divine  wisdom,  so  far  superior  to  our  short  views.  Unable  to 
declare  the  use  or  service  of  all  things  in  this  universe,  we  are 
yet  assured  of  the  perfection  of  all,  and  of  the  justice  of  that 
economy  to  which  all  things  are  subservient,  and  in  respect  of 
which  things  seemingly  deformed  are  amiable,  disorder  becomes 
regular,  corruption  wholesome,  and  poisons  (such  as  these  we 
have  seen)  prove  healing  and  beneficial. 

"  But  behold  !   through  a  vast  tract  of  sky  before  us,  the 

mighty  Atlas  rears  his  lofty  head  covered  with  snow  above  the 

clouds.     Beneath  the  mountain's  foot  the  rocky  country  rises 

into  hills,  a  proper  basis  of  the  ponderous  mass  above,  where 

^  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i. 

122 


THE   MORALISTS 

huge  embodied  rocks  lie  piled  on  one  another,  and  seem  to  prop 
the  high  arch  of  heaven.  .  .  .  See  !  with  what  trembling  steps 
poor  mankind  tread  the  narrow  brink  of  the  deep  precipices, 
from  whence  with  giddy  horror  they  look  down,  mistrusting 
even  the  ground  which  bears  them,  whilst  they  hear  the  hollow 
sound  of  torrents  underneath,  and  see  the  ruin  of  the  impending 
rock,  with  falling  trees  which  hang  with  their  roots  upwards 
and  seem  to  draw  more  ruin  after  them.  Here  thoughtless 
men,  seized  with  the  newness  of  such  objects,  become  thoughtful, 
and  willingly  contemplate  the  incessant  changes  of  this  earth's 
surface.  They  see,  as  in  one  instant,  the  revolutions  of  past  ages, 
the  fleeting  forms  of  things,  and  the  decay  even  of  this  our 
globe,  whose  youth  and  first  formation  they  consider,  whilst  the 
apparent  spoil  and  irreparable  breaches  of  the  wasted  mountain 
show  them  the  world  itself  only  as  a  noble  ruin,  and  make  them 
think  of  its  approaching  period.  .  .  .  But  here,  mid -way  the 
mountain,  a  spacious  border  of  thick  wood  harbours  our  wearied 
travellers,  who  now  are  come  among  the  ever  green  and  lofty 
pines,  the  firs,  and  noble  cedars,  whose  towering  heads  seem 
endless  in  the  sky,  the  rest  of  the  trees  appearing  only  as  shrubs 
beside  them.  And  here  a  different  horror  seizes  our  sheltered 
travellers  when  they  see  the  day  diminished  by  the  deep  shades 
of  the  vast  wood,  which,  closing  thick  above,  spreads  darkness 
and  eternal  night  below.  The  faint  and  gloomy  light  looks 
horrid  as  the  shade  itself;  and  the  profound  stillness  of  these 
places  imposes  silence  upon  men,  struck  with  the  hoarse  echoings 
of  every  sound  within  the  spacious  caverns  of  the  wood.  Here 
space  astonishes;  silence  itself  seems  pregnant,  whilst  an  un- 
known force  works  on  the  mind,  and  dubious  objects  move  the 
wakeful  sense.  Mysterious  voices  are  either  heard  or  fancied, 
and  various  forms  of  deity  seem  to  jiresent  themselves  and 
appear  more  manifest  in  these  sacred  silvan  scenes,  such  as  of 
old  gave  rise  to  temples,  and  favoured  the  religion  of  the  ancient 
world.  Even  we  ourselves,  who  in  plain  characters  may  read 
divinity  from  so  many  bright  parts  of  earth,  choose  rather  these 

123 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

obscurer  places  to  spell  out  that  mysterious  being,  which  to  our 
weak  eyes  appears  at  best  under  a  veil  of  cloud.  .  .  ." 

Here  he  paused  a  while  and  began  to  cast  about  his  eyes, 
which  before  seemed  fixed.  He  looked  more  calmly,  with  an 
open  countenance  and  free  air,  by  which,  and  other  tokens,  I 
could  easily  find  we  were  come  to  an  end  of  our  descriptions, 
and  that  whether  I  would  or  no,  Theocles  was  now  resolved  to 
take  his  leave  of  the  sublime,  the  morning  being  spent  and  the 
forenoon  by  this  time  well  advanced. 

Section   II 

Methixks,  said  he,  Philocles  (changing  to  a  familiar  voice),  we 
had  better  leave  these  unsociable  places  whither  our  fancy  has 
transported  us,  and  return  to  ourselves  here  again  in  our  more 
conversable  woods  and  temperate  climates.  Here  no  fierce 
heats  nor  colds  annoy  us,  no  precipices  nor  cataracts  amaze  us. 
Nor  need  we  here  be  afraid  of  our  own  voices  whilst  we  hear 
the  notes  of  such  a  cheerful  choir,  and  find  the  echoes  rather 
agreeable  and  inviting  us  to  talk. 

I  confess,  said  I,  those  foreign  nymphs  (if  there  were  any 
belonging  to  those  miraculous  woods)  were  much  too  awful 
beauties  to  please  me.  I  found  our  familiar  home -nymphs  a 
great  deal  more  to  my  humour.  Yet  for  all  this,  I  cannot  help 
being  concerned  for  your  breaking  off  just  when  we  were  got 
half  the  world  over,  and  wanted  only  to  take  America  in  our 
way  home.  Indeed,  as  for  Europe,  I  could  excuse  your  making 
any  great  tour  there,  because  of  the  little  variety  it  would  afford 
us.  Besides  that,  it  would  be  hard  to  see  it  in  any  view  without 
meeting  still  that  politic  face  of  affairs  which  would  too  much 
disturb  us  in  our  philosophical  flights.  But  for  the  western 
tract,  I  cannot  imagine  why  you  should  neglect  such  noble 
subjects  as  are  there,  unless  perhaps  the  gold  and  silver,  to 
which  I  find  you  such  a  bitter  enemy,  frighted  you  from  a 
mother-soil  so  full  of  it.     If  these  countries  had  been  as  bare 

124 


THE    MORALISTS 

of  those  metals  as  old  Sparta,  we  might  have  heard  more 
perhaps  of  the  Perus  and  Mexicos  than  of  all  Asia  and  Africa. 
We  might  have  had  creatures,  plants,  woods,  mountains,  rivers, 
beyond  any  of  those  we  have  passed.  How  sorry  am  I  to  lose 
the  noble  Amazon  !     How  sorry 

Here,  as  I  would  have  proceeded,  I  saw  so  significant  a  smile 
on  Theocles's  face  that  it  stopped  me,  out  of  curiosity,  to  ask 
him  his  thought. 

Nothing,  said  he  ;  nothing  but  this  very  subject  itself.  Go 
on — I  see  you'll  finish  it  for  me.  The  spirit  of  this  sort  of 
prophecy  has  seized  you.  And  Philocles,  the  cold  indifferent 
Philocles,  is  become  a  pursuer  of  the  same  mysterious  beauty. 

'Tis  true,  said  I,  Theocles,  I  own  it.  Your  genius,  the 
genius  of  the  place,  and  the  Great  Genius  have  at  last  prevailed. 
I  shall  no  longer  resist  the  passion  growing  in  me  for  things  of 
a  natural  kind,  where  neither  art  nor  the  conceit  or  caprice  of 
man  has  spoiled  their  genuine  order  by  breaking  in  upon  that 
primitive  state.  Even  the  rude  rocks,  the  mossy  caverns,  the 
irreoular  unwrouo-lit  crottos  and  broken  falls  of  waters,  with  all 
the  horrid  graces  of  the  wilderness  itself,  as  representing  Nature 
more,  will  be  the  more  engaging,  and  appear  with  a  magnificence 
beyond  the  formal  mockery  of  princely  gardens.  .  .  .  But  tell  me, 
I  entreat  you,  how  comes  it  that,  excepting  a  few  philosophers 
of  your  sort,  the  only  people  who  are  enamoured  in  this  way, 
and  seek  the  woods,  the  rivers,  or  seashores,  are  your  poor 
vulgar  lovers  ? 

Say  not  this,  replied  he,  of  lovers  only.  For  is  it  not  the 
same  with  poets,  and  all  those  other  students  in  nature  and  the 
arts  which  copy  after  her  ?  In  short,  is  not  this  the  real  case 
of  all  who  are  lovers  either  of  the  Muses  or  the  Graces  ? 

However,  said  I,  all  those  who  are  deep  in  this  romantic 
way  are  looked  upon,  you  know,  as  a  people  either  plainly  out 
of  their  wits,  or  overrun   with    melancholy    and   enthusiasm.^ 

^  See  Letter  of  Enthimuum,  towards  tlie  end.  See  also  above,  Inquiry, 
bk.  i.  part  iii.  §  3  ;  aud  Mine.  ii.  ch.  1. 

125 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

We  always  endeavour  to  recall  them  from  these  solitary  places. 
And  I  must  own  that  often  when  I  have  found  my  fancy  iiin 
this  way,  I  have  checked  myself,  not  knowing  what  it  was 
possessed  me,  when  I  was  passionately  struck  with  objects  of 
this  kind. 

No  wonder,  replied  he,  if  we  are  at  a  loss  when  we  pursue 
the  shadow  for  the  substance.     For  if  we  may  trust  to  what 
our  reasoning  has  taught  us,  whatever  in  Nature  is  beautiful  or  j 
charming  is  only  the  faint  shadow  of  that   first  beauty.     So  | 
that  every  real  love  depending  on  the  mind,  and  being  only  the 
contemplation  of  beauty  either  as  it  really  is  in  itself  or  as  it  ' 
appears  imperfectly  in  the  objects  which  strike  the  sense,  how 
can  the  rational  mind  rest  here,  or  be  satisfied  with  the  absurd 
enjoyment  which  reaches  the  sense  alone  ? 

From  this  time  forward  then,  said  I,  I  shall  no  more  have 
reason  to  fear  those  beauties  which  strike  a  sort  of  melancholy, 
like  the  places  we  have  named,  or  like  these  solenni  groves.  No 
more  shall  I  avoid  the  moving  accents  of  soft  music,  or  fly  from 
the  enchanting  features  of  the  fairest  human  face. 

If  you  are  already,  replied  he,  such  a  proficient  in  this  new 
love  that  you  are  sure  never  to  admire  the  representative 
beauty  except  for  the  sake  of  the  original,  nor  aim  at  other 
enjoyment  than  of  the  rational  kind,  you  may  then  be  confident. 
I  am  so,  and  presvmie  accordingly  to  answer  for  myself.  How- 
ever, I  should  not  be  ill  satisfied  if  you  explained  yourself  a 
little  better  as  to  this  mistake  of  mine  you  seem  to  fear. 
Would  it  be  any  help  to  tell  you,  "  That  the  absurdity  lay  in 
seeking  the  enjoyment  elsewhere  than  in  the  subject  loved".'' 
The  matter,  I  nmst  confess,  is  still  mysterious.  Imagine  then, 
good  Philocles,  if  being  taken  with  the  beauty  of  the  ocean, 
which  you  see  yonder  at  a  distance,  it  should  come  into  your 
head  to  seek  how  to  command  it,  and,  like  some  mighty  admiral, 
ride  master  of  the  sea,  would  not  the  fancy  be  a  little  absurd  ? 

Absurd  enough,  in  conscience.  The  next  thing  I  should 
do,  'tis  likely,  upon  this  frenzy,  would  be  to  hire  some  bark 

126 


THE   MORALISTS 

and  go  in  nuptial  ceremony,  Venetian-like,  to  wed  the  gulf, 
which  I  might  call  perhaps  as  properly  my  own. 

Let  who  will  call  it  theirs,  replied  "^riieocles,  you  will  own 
the  enjoyment  of  this  kind  to  be  very  different  from  that  which 
should  naturally  follow  from  the  contemplation  of  the  ocean's 
beauty.  The  bridegroom-Doge,  Avho  in  his  stately  Bucentaur 
floats  on  the  bosom  of  his  Thetis,  has  less  possession  than  the 
poor  shepherd,  who  from  a  hanging  rock  or  point  of  some  high 
promontory,  stretched  at  his  ease,  forgets  his  feeding  flocksy 
while  he  admires  her  beauty.  But  to  come  nearer  home,  and 
make  the  question  still  more  familiar.  Suppose  (my  ]*hilocles) 
that,  viewing  such  a  tract  of  country  as  this  delicious  vale  we 
see  beneath  us,  you  should,  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  prospect, 
require  the  property  or  possession  of  the  land. 

The  covetous  fancy,  replied  I,  would  be  as  absurd  altogether 
as  that  other  ambitious  one. 

0  Philocles !  said  he,  may  I  bring  this  yet  a  little  nearer, 
and  will  you  follow  me  once  more  ?  Suppose  that,  being 
charmed  as  you  seem  to  be  with  the  beauty  of  those  trees 
under  whose  shade  we  rest,  you  should  long  for  nothing  so 
much  as  to  taste  some  delicious  fruit  of  theirs ;  and  having 
obtained  of  Nature  some  certain  relish  by  which  these  acorns  or 
berries  of  the  wood  became  as  palatable  as  the  figs  or  peaches 
of  the  garden,  you  should  afterwards,  as  oft  as  you  revisited 
these  groves,  seek  hence  the  enjoyment  of  them  by  satiating 
yourself  in  these  new  delights. 

The  fancy  of  this  kind,  replied  I,  would  be  sordidly  luxurious, 
"\and  as  absurd,  in  my  opinion,  as  either  of  the  former. 
-*       Can  you  not  then,  on  this  occasion,  said  he,  call  to  mind 
some  other  forms  of  a  fair  kind  among  us,  where  the  admiration 
of  beauty  is  apt  to  lead  to  as  irregular  a  consequence  ? 

1  feared,  said  I,  indeed,  where  this  would  end,  and  was 
apprehensive  you  would  force  me  at  last  to  think  of  certain 
powerful  forms  in  human  kind  which  draw  after  them  a  set  of 
eager   desires,    wishes,    and    hopes ;    no    way    suitable,    I    nmst 

127 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

confess,  to  your  rational  and  refined  contemplation  of  beauty. 
The  proportions  of  this  living  architecture,  as  wonderful  as 
they  are,  inspire  nothing  of  a  studious  or  contemplative  kind. 
The  more  they  are  viewed,  the  further  they  are  from  satisfying 
by  mere  view.  Let  that  which  satisfies  be  ever  so  disproportion- 
able  an  effect,  or  ever  so  foreign  to  its  cause,  censure  it  as  you 
please,  you  must  allow,  however,  that  it  is  natural.  So  that 
you,  Theocles,  for  aught  I  see,  are  become  the  accuser  of 
Nature  by  condemning  a  natural  enjoyment. 

Far  be  it  from  us  both,  said  he,  to  condemn  a  joy  which  is 
from  Nature.  But  when  we  spoke  of  the  enjoyment  of  these 
woods  and  prospects,  we  understood  by  it  a  far  different  kind 
from  that  of  the  inferior  creatures,  who,  rifling  in  these  places, 
find  here  their  choicest  food.  Yet  we  too  live  by  tasteful  food, 
and  feel  those  other  joys  of  sense  in  common  with  them.  But 
'twas  not  here  (my  Philocles)  that  we  had  agreed  to  place  our 
good,  nor  consequently  our  enjoyment.  We  who  were  rational, 
and  had  minds,  methought,  should  place  it  rather  in  those 
minds  which  were  indeed  abused,  and  cheated  of  their  real 
good,  when  drawn  to  seek  absurdly  the  enjoyment  of  it  in  the 
objects  of  sense,  and  not  in  those  objects  they  might  properly 
call  their  own,  in  which  kind,  as  I  remember,  we  comprehended 
all  which  was  truly  fair,  generous,  or  good. 

So  that  bea.uty,  said  I,  and  good  with  you,  Theocles,  I 
perceive,  are  still  ^  one  and  the  same. 

'Tis  so,  said  he.  And  thus  are  we  returned  again  to  the 
subject  of  our  yesterday's  morning  conversation.  Whether  I 
have  made  good  my  promise  to  you  in  showing  -  the  true  good, 
I  know  not.  But  so,  doubtless,  I  should  have  done  with  good 
success  had  I  been  able  in  my  poetic  ecstasies,  or  by  any  other 
efforts,  to  have  led  you  into  some  deep  view  of  Nature  and  the 
sovereign  genius.  We  then  had  proved  the  force  of  divine 
beauty,  and  formed  in  ourselves  an  object  capable  and  worthy 
of  real  enjoyment. 

1  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  1.  ^  lb. 

128 


THE    MORALISTS 

O  Theocles !  said  I,  well  do  I  remember  now  the  terms  in 
which  you  engaged  me  that  morning  when  you  bespoke  my 
love  of  this  mysterious  beauty.  You  have  indeed  made  good 
your  part  of  the  condition,  and  may  now  claim  me  for  a 
proselyte.  If  there  be  any  seeming  extravagance  in  the  case  I 
must  comfort  myself  the  best  I  can,  and  consider  that  all  sound 
love  and  admiration  is  enthusiasm  :  ^  "  The  transports  of  poets, 
the  subhme  of  orators,  the  rapture  of  musicians,  the  high 
strains  of  the  virtuosi — all  mere  enthusiasm  !  Even  learning 
itself,  the  love  of  arts  and  curiosities,  the  spirit  of  travellers 
and  adventurers,  gallantry,  war,  heroism — all,  all  enthusiasm  !  " 
'Tis  enough ;  I  am  content  to  be  this  new  enthusiast  in  a  way 
unknown  to  me  before. 

And  I,  replied  Theocles,  am  content  you  should  call  this 
love  of  ours  enthusiasm,  allowing  it  the  privilege  of  its  fellow- 
passions.  For  is  there  a  fair  and  plausible  enthusiasm,  a 
reasonable  ecstasy  and  transport  allowed  to  other  subjects,  such 
as  architecture,  painting,  music ;  and  shall  it  be  exploded  here  'i 
Are  there  senses  by  which  all  those  other  graces  and  perfections 
are  perceived,  and  none  by  which  this  higher  perfection  and 
grace  is  comprehended .''  Is  it  so  preposterous  to  bring  that 
enthusiasm  hither,  and  transfer  it  from  those  secondary  and 
scanty  objects  to  this  original  and  comprehensive  one  ?  Observe 
how  the  case  stands  in  all  those  other  subjects  of  art  or  science. 
\Vhat  difficulty  to  be  in  any  degree  knowing  !  How  long  ere  a 
true  taste  is  gained  !  How  many  things  shocking,  how  many 
offensive  at  first,  which  afterwards  are  known  and  acknowledged 
the  highest  beauties !  For  'tis  not  instantly  we  acquire  the 
sense  by  which  these  beauties  are  discoverable.  Labour  and 
pains  are  recjuired,  and  time  to  cultivate  a  natural  genius  ever 
so  apt  or  forward.  But  who  is  there  once  thinks  of  cultivating 
this  soil,  or  of  improving  any  sense  or  faculty  which  Nature 
may  have  given  of  this  kind.''  And  is  it  a  wonder  we  should 
be  dull  then,  as  we  are,  confounded  and  at  a  loss  in  these 
^  LatU'.r  of  Eiithiisirtsm,  towards  tlic  end. 
VOL.  II  129  K 


J 


/y 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

affairs,  blind  as  to  this  higher  scene,  these  nobler  representa- 
tions ?  Which  way  should  we  come  to  understand  better  ? 
which  way  be  knowing  in  these  beauties  ?  Is  study,  science, 
or  learning  necessary  to  understand  all  beauties  else  ?  And 
for  the  sovereign  beauty,  is  there  no  skill  or  science  required  P 
In  painting  there  are  shades  and  masterly  strokes  which  the 
vulgar  understand  not,  but  find  fault  with ;  in  architecture 
there  is  the  rustic ;  in  music  the  chromatic  kind,  and  skilful 
mixture  of  dissonancies  :  and  is  there  nothing  which  answers  to 
this  in  the  whole  ? 

I  must  confess,  said  I,  I  have  hitherto  been  one  of  those 
vulgar  who  could  never  relish  the  shades,  the  rustic,  or  the 
dissonancies  you  talk  of.  I  have  never  dreamt  of  such  master- 
pieces in  Nature.  'Twas  my  way  to  censure  freely  on  the  first 
view.  But  I  perceive  I  am  now  obliged  to  go  far  in  the  pursuit 
of  beauty,  which  lies  very  absconded  and  deep ;  and  if  so,  I  am 
well  assured  that  my  enjoyments  hitherto  have  been  very  shallow. 
1  have  dwelt,  it  seems,  all  this  while  upon  the  surface,  and 
enjoyed  only  a  kind  of  slight  superficial  beauties,  having 
never  gone  in  search  of  beauty  itself,  but  of  what  I  fancied 
such.  Like  the  rest  of  the  unthinking  world,  I  took  for  granted 
that  what  I  liked  was  beautiful,  and  what  I  rejoiced  in  was  my 
good.  I  never  scrupled  loving  Avhat  I  fancied,  and  aiming  only 
at  the  enjoyment  of  what  I  loved  ;  I  never  troubled  myself  with 
examining  what  the  subjects  were,  nor  ever  hesitated  about 
their  choice. 

Begin  then,  said  he,  and  choose.  See  what  the  subjects  are, 
and  which  you  would  prefer,  which  honour  with  your  admiration, 
love,  and  esteem.  For  by  these  again  you  Avill  be  honoured  in 
your  turn.  Such,  Philocles,  as  is  the  worth  of  these  companions, 
such  will  your  worth  be  found.  As  there  is  emptiness  or  fulness 
here,  so  will  there  be  in  your  enjoyment.  See  therefore  where 
fulness  is,  and  where  emptiness.  See  in  what  subject  resides  the 
chief  excellence,  where  beauty  reigns,  where  'tis  entire,  perfect, 
absolute  ;  Avhere  broken,  imperfect,  short.     View  these  terrestrial 

130 


THE   MORALISTS 

beauties  and  whatever  has  the  appearance  of  excellence  and  is 
able  to  attract.  See  that  which  either  really  is,  or  stands  as  in 
the  room  of  fair,  beautiful,  and  good.  "  A  mass  of  metal,  a  tract 
of  land,  a  number  of  slaves,  a  pile  of  stones,  a  human  body  of 
certain  lineaments  and  proportions."  Is  this  the  highest  of  the 
kind  ?  Is  beauty  founded  then  in  body  only,  and  not  in  action, 
life,  or  operation  ?  .  .  . 

Hold  !  hold !  said  I,  good  Theocles,  you  take  this  in  too 
high  a  key  above  my  reach.  If  you  would  have  me  accompany 
you,  pray  lower  this  strain  a  little,  and  talk  in  a  more  familiar 
way. 

Thus  then,  said  he  (smiling),  whatever  passion  you  may  have 
for  other  beauties,  I  know,  good  Philocles,  you  are  no  such 
admirer  of  wealth  in  any  kind  as  to  allow  much  beauty  to  it, 
especially  in  a  rude  heap  or  mass.  But  in  medals,  coins,  embossed 
work,  statues,  and  well-fabricated  pieces,  of  whatever  sort,  you 
can  discover  beauty  and  admire  the  kind.  True,  said  I,  but  not 
for  the  metal's  sake.  'Tis  not  then  the  metal  or  matter  which 
is  beautiful  with  you  ?  No.  But  the  art  .^  Certainly.  The  art 
then  is  the  beauty  ?  Right.  And  the  art  is  that  which 
beautifies  ?  The  same.  So  that  the  beautifying,  not  the 
beautified,  is  the  really  beautiful  ?  It  seems  so.  For  that 
which  is  beautified,  is  beautiful  only  by  the  accession  of  some- 
thing beautifying,  and  by  the  recess  or  withdrawing  of  the  same, 
it  ceases  to  be  beautiful  ?  Be  it.  In  respect  of  bodies  therefore, 
beauty  comes  and  goes  ?  So  we  see.  Nor  is  the  body  itself  any 
cause  either  of  its  coming  or  staying  ?  None.  So  that  there  is 
no  jn-inciple  of  beauty  in  body  ?  None  at  all.  For  body  can  no 
way  be  the  cause  of  beauty  to  itself.^  No  way.  Nor  govern  nor 
regulate  itself.^  Nor  yet  this.  Nor  mean  nor  intend  itself.^ 
Nor  this  neither.  INIust  not  that,  therefore,  which  means  and 
intends  for  it,  regulates  and  orders  it,  be  the  principle  of 
beauty  to  it  ?  Of  necessity.  And  what  must  that  be  ?  IVIind, 
I  suppose,  for  what  can  it  be  else  ? 

Here  then,  said  he,  is  all  I  would  have  explained  to  you 

131 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAEACTERISTICS 

"^  before.  "  That  the  beautiful,  the  fail",  the  comely,  were  never 
in  the  matter,  but  in  the  art  and  design ;  never  in  body  itself, 
but  in  the  form  or  forming  power."  Does  not  the  beautiful 
form  confess  this,  and  speak  the  beauty  of  the  design  whenever 
it  strikes  you  .^      What  is  it   but  the  design   which   strikes .'' 

IAVhat  is  it  you  admire  but  mind,  or  the  effect  of  mind  ?  Tis 
mind  alone  which  forms.  All  which  is  void  of  mind  is  horrid, 
and  matter  formless  is  deformity  itself. 

Of  all  forms  then,  said  I,  those  (according  to  your  scheme) 
are  the  most  amiable,  and  in  the  first  order  of  beauty,  which 
have  a  power  of  making  other  forms  themselves.  From  whence 
methinks  they  may  be  styled  the  forming  forms.  So  far  I  can 
easily  concur  with  you,  and  gladly  give  the~ advantage  to  the 
human  form,  above  those  other  beauties  of  man''s  formation. 
The  palaces,  equipages  and  estates  shall  never  in  my  account  be 
brought  in  competition  with  the  original  living  forms  of  flesh 
and  blood.  And  for  the  other,  the  dead  forms  of  Nature,  the 
metals  and  stones,  however  precious  and  dazzling,  I  am  resolved 
to  resist  their  splendour,  and  make  abject  things  of  them,  even 
in  their  highest  pride,  when  they  pretend  to  set  off  human 
beauty,  and  are  officiously  brought  in  aid  of  the  fair. 

Do  you  not  see  then,  replied  Theocles,  that  you  have  estab- 
lished three  degrees  or  orders  of  beauty  ?  As  how  'i  AVhy  first, 
-  the  dead_  forms,  as  you  properly  have  called  them,  which  bear  a 
fashion,  and  are  formed,  whether  by  man  or  Nature,  but  have  no 
forming  power,  no  action,  or  intelligence.  Right.  Next,  and 
as  the  second  kind,  the  forms  which  form,  that  is,  which  have 
intelligence,  action,  and  operation.  Right  still.  Here  therefore 
is  double  beauty.  For  here  is  both  the  form  (the  effect  of 
mind)  and  mind  itself.  The  first  kind  low  and  despicable  in  re- 
spect of  this  other,  from  whence  the  dead  form  receives  its  lustre 
and  force  of  beauty.  For  what  is  a  mere  body,  though  a  human 
one,  and  ever  so  exactly  fashioned,  if  inward  form  be  wanting, 
and  the  mind  be  monstrous  or  imperfect,  as  in  an  idiot  or  savage? 
This  too  I  can  apprehend,  said  I,  but  where  is  the  third  order .'' 

132 


THE   MORALISTS 

Have  patience,  replied  he,  and  see  first  whether  you  have 
discovered  the  whole  force  of  this  second  beauty.  How  else 
should  you  understand  the  force  of  love,  or  have  the  power  of 
enjoyment?  Tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  when  first  you  named 
these  the  forming*  forms,  did  you  think  of  no  other  productions 
of  theirs  besides  the  dead  kinds,  such  as  the  palaces,  the  coins, 
the  brazen  or  the  marble  figures  of  men  ?  Or  did  you  think  of 
something;  nearer  life  ? 

I  could  easily,  said  I,  have  added,  that  these  forms  of  ours 
had  a  virtue  of  producing  other  living  forms  like  themselves. 
But  this  virtue  of  theirs,  I  thought,  was  from  another  form  above 
them,  and  could  not  properly  be  called  their  virtue  or  art,  if  in 
reality  there  was  a  superior  art  or  something  artist-like,  Avhich 
guided  their  hand,  and  made  tools  of  them  in  this  specious  work. 

Happily  thought,  said  he ;  you  have  prevented  a  censure 
which  I  hardly  imagined  you  could  escape.  And  here  you  have 
unawares  discovered  that  third  order  of  beauty,  which  forms  not 
only  such  as  we  call  mere  forms  but  even  the  forms  Avliich  form. 
For  we  ourselves  are  notable  architects  in  matter,  and  can  show 
lifeless  bodies  brought  into  form,  and  fashioned  by  our  own 
hands,  but  that  which  fashions  even  minds  themselves,  contains 
in  itself  all  the  beauties  fashioned  by  those  minds,  and  is  conse- 
quently the  principle,  source,  and  fountain  of  all  beauty. 

It  seems  so. 

Therefore  whatever  beauty  appears  in  our  second  order  of 
forms,  or  whatever  is  derived  or  jiroduced  from  thence,  all  this 
is  eminently,  principally,  and  originally  in  this  last  order  of 
supreme  and  sovereign  beauty. 

True. 

Thus  architecture,  music,  and  all  which  is  of  human  iuAcn- 
tion,  resolves  itself  into  this  last  order. 

Right,  said  I ;  and  thus  all  the  enthusiasms  of  other  kinds 
resolve  themselves  into  ours.  The  fashionable  kinds  borrow 
from  us,  and  are  nothing  without  us.  We  have  undoubtedly 
the  honour  of  being;  originals. 

133 


y 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Now  therefore  say  again,  replied  Theocles  :  whether  are 
those  fabrics  of  architecture,  sculjiture,  and  the  rest  of  that  sort 
the  greatest  beauties  which  man  forms,  or  are  there  greater  and 
better  ?  None  which  I  know,  rephed  I.  Think,  think  again, 
said  he ;  and  setting  aside  those  prockictions  which  just  now 
you  excepted  against,  as  masterpieces  of  another  hand ;  think 
what  there  are  which  more  immediately  proceed  from  us,  and 
may  more  truly  be  termed  our  issue.  I  am  barren,  said  I,  for 
this  time  ;  you  must  be  plainer  yet,  in  helping  me  to  conceive. 
How  can  I  help  you  ?  replied  he.  Would  you  have  me  be 
conscious  for  you,  of  that  which  is  immediately  your  own,  and 
is  solely  in  and  from  yourself?  You  mean  my  sentiments,  said 
I.  Certainly,  replied  he,  and  together  with  your  sentiments, 
your  resolutions,  principles,  determinations,  actions  ;  whatsoever 
is  handsome  and  noble  in  the  kind  ;  whatever  flows  from  your 
good  understanding,  sense,  knowledge,  and  will ;  whatever  is 
engendered  in  your  heart  (good  Fhilocles  ! )  or  derives  itself 
from  your  parent-mind,  which,  unlike  to  other  parents,  is  never 
spent  or  exhausted,  but  gains  strength  and  vigour  by  producing. 
So  you,  my  friend,  have  proved  it,  by  many  a  work,  not  suffer- 
ing that  fertile  part  to  remain  idle  and  unactive.  Hence  those 
good  parts,  which  from  a  natural  genius  you  have  raised  by  due 
/improvement.  And  here,  as  I  cannot  but  admire  the  pregnant 
jgenius  and  parent-beauty,  so  am  I  satisfied  of  the  offspring,  that 
i  it  is  and  will  be  ever  beautiful. 

I  took  the  compliment,  and  wished  (I  told  him)  the  case 
were  really  as  he  imagined,  that  I  might  justly  merit  his  esteem 
and  love.  My  study  therefore  should  be  to  grow  beautiful,  in 
his  way  of  beauty,  and  from  this  time  forward  I  would  do  all 
I  could  to  propagate  that  lovely  race  of  mental  children, 
happily  sprung  from  such  a  high  enjoyment  and  from  a  union 
with  what  was  fairest  and  best.  But  'tis  you,  Theocles,  con- 
tinued I,  must  help  my  labouring  mind,  and  be  as  it  were  the 
midwife  to  those  conceptions ;  which  else,  I  fear,  will  ]>rove 
abortive. 

134 


THE   MORALISTS 

You  do  well,  replied  he,  to  give  me  the  midwife^s  part  only; 
for  the  mind  conceiving  of  itself,  can  only  be,  as  you  say, 
assisted  in  the  birth.  Its  pi-ognancy  is  from  its  nature.  Nor 
could  it  ever  have  been  tlius  impregnated  by  any  other  mind  vCAv^CT 
than  that  which  formed  it  at  the  beginning ;  and  which,  as  we  iy-. 
have  already  proved,  is  original  to  all  mental  as  well  as  other 
beauty. 

Do  you  maintain  then,  said  I,  that  these  mental  children, 
the  notions  and  principles  of  fair,  just,  and  honest,  with  the  rest 
of  these  ideas,  are  innate  ? 

Anatomists,  said  he,  tell  us  that  the  eggs,  which  are  prin- 
ciples in  body,  are  innate,  being  formed  already  in  the  foetus 
before  the   birth.     But  when   it  is,  whether  before,  or  at,  or 
after  the  birth,  or  at  what  time  after,  that  either  these  or  other 
principles,   organs  of  sensation,   or   sensations   themselves,  are 
first  formed  in  us,  is  a  matter,  doutbless,  of  curious  speculation,    j 
but   of  no  great  importance.      The  question  is,   whether  the    I 
principles  spoken  of  are  from  art  or  Nature  ?     If  from  Nature 
purely,  "'tis  no  matter  for  the  time ;  nor  would  I  contend  with 
you  though  you  should  deny  life  itself  to  be  innate,  as  imagin-     ' 
ing  it  followed    rather  than  preceded    the   moment  of  birth.     \ 
But  this  I  am  certain   of,  that  life  and  the  sensations  which 
accompany  life,  come  when  they  will,  are  from  mere  Nature,  and 
nothing  else.     Therefore  if  you  dislike  the  word  innate,  let  us 
change  it,  if  you  will,  for  instinct,  and  call  instinct  that  Avhich    \ 
Nature  teaches,  exclusive  of  art,  culture,  or  discipline. 

Content,  said  I. 

Leaving  then,  replied  he,  those  admirable  speculations  to 
the  virtuosi,  the  anatomists,  and  school  divines.  We  may  safely 
aver,  with  all  their  consents,  that  the  several  organs,  particularly 
those  of  generation,  are  formed  by  Nature.  Whether  is  there 
also  from  Nature,  think  you,  any  instinct  for  the  after  use  of 
them?  or  whether  must  learning  and  experience  imprint  this 
use  ?  'Tis  imprinted,  said  I,  enough  in  conscience.  The  im- 
pression or  instinct  is  so  strong  in  the  case,  that  'twould   be 

135 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

absurdity  not  to  think  it  natural,  as  well  in  our  own  species  as 
in  other  creatures,  amongst  whom  (as  you  have  already  taught 
me)  not  only  the  mere  engendering  of  the  young,  but  the 
various  and  almost  infinite  means  and  methods  of  providing  for 
them,  are  all  foreknown.  For  thus  much  we  may  indeed  discern 
in  the  preparatory  labours  and  arts  of  these  wild  creatures, 
which  demonstrate  their  anticipating  fancies,  pre-conceptions,  or 
pre-sensations,  if  I  may  use  a  word  you  taught  me  yesterday.^ 

1  allow  your  expression,  said  Theocles,  and  will  endeavour 
to  show  you  that  the  same  pre-conceptions,  of  a  higher  degree, 
have  place  in  human  kind.  Do  so,  said  I,  I  entreat  you ;  for 
so  far  am  I  from  finding  in  myself  these  pre-conceptions  of  fair 
and  beautiful,  in  your  sense,  that  methinks,  till  now  of  late,  I 
have  hardly  known  of  anything  like  them  in  Nature.  How 
then,  said  he,  would  you  have  known  that  outward  fair  and 
beautiful  of  human  kind,  if  such  an  object  (a  fair  fleshly  one) 
in  all  its  beauty  had  for  the  first  time  appeared  to  you,  by 
yourself,  this  morning,  in  these  groves  ?  Or  do  you  think 
perhaps  you  should  have  been  unmoved,  and  have  found  no 
difference  between  this  form  and  any  other,  if  first  you  had  not 
been  instructed  ? 

I  have  hardly  any  right,  replied  I,  to  plead  this  last  opinion, 
after  what  I  have  owned  just  before. 

Well  then,  said  he,  that  I  may  appear  to  take  no  advantage 
against  you,  I  quit  the  dazzling  form  which  carries  such  a  force 
of  complicated  beauties,  and  am  contented  to  consider  separately 
each  of  those  simple  beauties,  which  taken  all  together  create 
this  wonderful  effect.  For  you  will  allow,  without  doubt,  that 
in  respect  of  bodies,  whatever  is  commonly  said  of  the  unex- 
pressible,  the  unintelligible,  the '  I-know-not-what  of  beauty, 
there  can  lie  no  mystery  here,  but  what  plainly  belongs  either 
to  figure,  colour,  motion  or  sound.  Omitting  therefore  the 
three  latter,  and  their  dependent  charms,  let  us  view  the  charm 
in  what  is  simplest  of  all,  mere  figure.     Nor  need  we  go  so  high 

P.  76. 
136 


THE   MORALISTS 

as  sculpture,  architecture,  or  the  designs  of  those  who  from  this 
study  of  beauty  have  raised  such  dehghtful  arts.  'Tis  enough 
if  we  consider  the  simplest  of  figures,  as  either  a  round  ball,  a 
cube,  or  dye.  AVhy  is  even  an  infant  pleased  with  the  first  view 
of  these  proportions  P  ^Vhy  is  the  sphere  or  globe,  the  cylinder 
and  obelisk  preferred ;  and  the  irregular  figures,  in  respect  of 
these,  rejected  and  despised  ? 

I  am  readv,  replied  I,  to  own  there  is  in  certain  figures  a 
natural  beaut v,^  which  the  eye  finds  as  soon  as  the  object  is 
presented  to  it. 

Is  there  then,  said  he,  a  natural  beauty  of  figures .''  and  is 
there  not  as  natural  a  one  of  actions  ?  No  sooner  the  eye  opens 
upon  figures,  the  ear  to  sounds,  than  straight  the  beautiful 
results  and  grace  and  harmony  are  known  and  acknowledged. 
No  sooner  are  actions  viewed,  no  sooner  the  human  affections 
and  passions  discerned  (and  they  are  most  of  them  as  soon 
discerned  as  felt)  than  straight  an  inward  eye  distinguishes,  and 
sees  the  fair  and  shapely,  the  amiable  and  admirable,  apart 
from  the  deformed,  the  foul,  the  odious,  or  the  despicable. 
How  is  it  possible  therefore  not  to  own  "  that  as  these  dis- 
tinctions have  their  foundation  in  Nature,  the  discernment  itself 
is  natural,  and  from  Nature  alone  "".'^ 

If  this,  I  told  him,  were  as  he  represented  it,  there  could 
never,  I  thought,  be  any  disagreement  among  men  concerning 
actions  and  behaviour,  as  which  was  base,  which  worthy ;  which 
handsome,  and  which  deformed.  But  now  we  found  perpetual 
variance  among  mankind,  whose  differences  were  chiefly  founded 
on  this  disagreement  in  opinion  ;  "  The  one  affirming,  the  other 
denying  that  this,  or  that,  was  fit  or  decent." 

Even  by  this,  then,  replied  he,  it  appears  there  is  fitness 
and  decency  in  actions ;  since  the  fit  and  decent  is  in  this 
controversy  ever  pre-supposed.  And  whilst  men  are  at  odds 
about  the  subjects,  the  thing  itself  is  universally  agreed.  For 
Jieither  is  there  agreement  in  judgments  about  other  beauties. 
Jnquirii,  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  3. 

137 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

'Tis  controverted  "which  is  the  finest  ])ile,  the  lovehest  shape 
or  face":  but  without  controversy  'tis  allowed  "there  is  a 
beauty  of  each  kind."  This  no  one  goes  about  to  teach  :  nor  is 
it  learnt  by  any,  but  confessed  by  all.  All  own  the  standard, 
rule,  and  measure :  but  in  applying  it  to  things  disorder  arises, 
ignorance  prevails,  interest  and  passion  breed  disturbance.  Nor 
can  it  otherwise  happen  in  the  affairs  of  life,  whilst  that  which 
iutercsts  and  enfi^a^es  men  as  ffood,  is  thouo-ht  different  from 
that  which  they  admire  and  praise  jis  honest.  But  with  us, 
Philocles,  'tis  better  settled,  since  for  our  parts  we  have  already 
decreed  "  that  beauty  and  good  are  still  the  same." 

I  remember,  said  I,  what  you  forced  me  to  acknowledge 
more  than  once  before.  And  now,  good  Theocles,  that  I  am 
become  so  willing  a  disciple,  I  want  not  so  much  to  be  con- 
vinced, methinks,  as  to  be  confirmed  and  strengthened.  And  I 
hope  this  last  work  may  prove  your  easiest  task. 

Not  unless  you  help  in  it  yourself,  replied  Theocles,  for  this 
is  necessary  as  w^ll  as  becoming.  It  had  been  indeed  shameful 
for  you  to  have  yielded  without  making  good  resistance.  To 
help  oneself  to  be  convinced  is  to  prevent  reason,  and  bespeak 
error  and  delusion.  But  upon  fair  conviction  to  give  our  heart 
up  to  the  evident  side,  and  reinforce  the  impression,  this  is  to 
help  reason  heartily.  And  thus  we  may  be  said  honestly  to 
persuade  ourselves.  Show  me  then  how  I  may  best  persuade 
myself. 

Have  courage,  said  he,  Philocles  (raising  his  voice),  be  not 
offended  that  I  say,  have  courage  !  'Tis  cowardice  alone  betrays 
us.  For  whence  can  false  shame  be,  except  from  cowardice .'' 
To  be  ashamed  of  what  one  is  sure  can  never  be  shameful,  must 
needs  be  from  the  want  of  resolution.  We  seek  the  rioht  and 
wrong  in  things ;  we  examine  what  is  honourable,  what  shame- 
ful ;  and  having  at  last  determined,  we  dare  not  stand  to  our 
own  judgment,  and  are  ashamed  to  own  there  is  really  a 
shameful  and  an  honourable.  "  Hear  me "  (says  one  who 
pretends  to  value  Philocles,  and  be  valued  by  him),  "there  can 

138 


THE   MORALISTS 

bo  no  such  thing  as  real  valuableness  or  worth ;  nothing  in  . 
itself  estimable  or  amiable,  odious  or  shameful.  All  is  oj)inion.  I  l^ 
'Tis  opinion  which  makes  beauty,  and  unmakes  it.  The  ' 
graceful  or  ungraceful  in  things,  the  decorum  and  its  contrary, 
the  amiable  and  unamiable,  vice,  virtue,  honour,  shame,  all  this 
is  founded  in  opinion  only.  Opinion  is  the  law  and  measure. 
Nor  has  opinion  any  rule  besides  mere  chance,  which  varies  it, 
as  custom  varies  ;  and  makes  now  this,  now  that,  to  be  thought 
worthy,  according  to  the  reign  of  fashion  and  the  ascendant 
power  of  education."  What  shall  we  say  to  such  a  one .?  How 
represent  to  him  his  absurdity  and  extravagance  ?  Will  he 
desist  the  sooner  ?  Or  shall  we  ask,  what  shame,  of  one  who 
acknowledges  no  shameful "'!  Yet  he  derides,  and  cries, 
ridiculous  !  By  what  right  .^  what  title  1:  For  thus,  if  I  were 
Philocles,  would  I  defend  myself:  "  Am  I  ridiculous  .^  As  how  .? 
What  is  ridiculous.^  Everything.?  or  nothing.?"  Ridiculous 
indeed  !  But  something,  then,  something  there  is  ridiculous ; 
and  the  notion,  it  seems,  is  right,  "  of  a  shameful  and  ridiculous 
in  things." 

How  then  shall  we  apply  the  notion  ?  For  this  being  wrong 
applied,  cannot  itself  but  be  ridiculous.  Or  will  he  who  cries 
.shame  refuse  to  acknowledge  any  in  his  turn  'i  Does  he  not 
blush,  nor  seem  discountenanced  on  any  occasion .?  If  he  does, 
the  case  is  very  distinct  from  that  of  mere  grief  or  fear.  The  \ 
disorder  he  feels  is  from  a  sense  of  what  is  shameful  and  odious 
in  itself,  not  of  what  is  hurtful  or  dangerous  in  its  consequences. 
For  the  o-reatest  danoer  in  the  world  can  never  breed  shame ; 
nor  can  the  opinion  of  all  the  world  compel  us  to  it,  where  our 
own  opinion  is  not  a  party.  We  may  be  afraid  of  appearing 
impudent,  and  may  therefore  feign  a  modesty.  But  we  can 
never  really  blush  for  anything  beside  what  we  think  truly 
shameful,  and  what  we  should  still  blush  for  were  we  ever  so 
secure  as  to  our  interest,  and  out  of  the  reach  of  all  incon- 
venience which  could  haj)pen  to  us  from  the  thing  we  were 
ashamed  of. 

139 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Thus,  continued  he,  should  I  be  able  by  anticipation  to 
defend  myself,  and  looking  narrowly  into  nien''s  lives,  and  that 
which  influenced  them  on  all  occasions,  I  should  have  testimony- 
enough  to  make  me  say  within  myself,  "  Let  who  will  be  my 
adversary  in  this  opinion,  I  shall  find  him  some  way  or  other 
prepossessed  with  that  of  which  he  would  endeavour  to  dis- 
possess me."  Has  he  gratitude  or  resentment,  pride  or  shame  ? 
Whichever  way  it  be,  he  acknowledges  a  sense  of  just  and 
unjust,  worthy  and  mean.  If  he  be  grateful  or  expects 
gratitude,  I  ask  "  why  ?  and  on  what  account  ? "  If  he  be 
angry,  if  he  indulges  revenge,  I  ask  "  how  ?  and  in  what  case  ? 
Revenged  of  what  ?  of  a  stone,  or  madman  ?  "  Who  is  so  mad  ? 
"  But  for  what  ?  For  a  chance  hurt  ?  an  accident  against 
thought  or  intention?''  AVho  is  so  unjust?  Therefore  there 
is  just  and  [unjust;  and  belonging  to  it  a  natural  presumption 
or  anticipation  on  which  the  resentment  or  anger  is  founded. 
For  what  else  should  make  the  wickedest  of  mankind  often 
prefer  the  interest  of  their  revenge  to  all  other  interests,  and 
even  to  life  itself,  except  only  a  sense  of  wrong  natural  to  all 
men,  and  a  desire  to  prosecute  that  wrong  at  any  rate  ?  Not 
for  their  own  sakes,  since  they  sacrifice  their  very  being  to  it, 
but  out  of  hatred  to  the]  imagined  wrong  and  from  a  certain 
love  of  justice,  which  even  in  unjust  men  is  by  this  example 
shown  to  be  beyond  the  love  of  life  itself. 

Thus  as  to  pride,  I  ask,  "  why  proud  ?  why  conceited  ?  and 
of  what  ?  Does  any  one  who  has  pride  think  meanly  or  indif- 
ferently of  himself?"  No;  but  honourably.  And  how  this, 
if  there  be  no  real  honour  or  dignity  pre-supposed  ?  For  self- 
valuation  supposes  self-worth ;  and  in  a  person  conscious  of 
real  worth,  is  either  no  pride,  or  a  just  and  noble  one.  In  the 
same  manner  self-contempt  supposes  a  self-meanness  or  de- 
fectiveness;  and  may  be  either  a  just  modesty  or  unjust 
humility.  But  this  is  certain,  that  whoever  is  proud  must  be 
proud  of  something.  And  we  know  that  men  of  thorough 
pride  will   be  proud   even   in   the   meanest   circumstances,  and 

140 


THE   MORALISTS 

when  there  is  no  visible  subject  for  them  to  be  proud  of.  But 
they  descry  a  merit  in  themselves  which  others  cannot :  and  'tis 
this  merit  they  admire.  No  matter  whether  it  be  really  in 
them,  as  they  imagine,  it  is  a  worth  still,  an  honour  or  merit 
which  they  admire,  and  would  do,  wherever  they  saw  it,  in  any 
subject  besides.  For  then  it  is,  then  only,  that  they  are 
humbled,  "  when  they  see  in  a  more  eminent  degree  in  others 
what  they  respect  and  admire  so  much  in  themselves.""  And 
thus  as  long  as  I  find  men  either  angry  or  revengeful,  proud  or 
ashamed,  I  am  safe.  For  they  conceive  an  honourable  and  dis- 
honourable, a  foul  and  fair,  as  well  as  I.  No  matter  where  they 
place  it,  or  how  they  are  mistaken  in  it,  this  hinders  not  my  being 
satisfied  "that  the  thing  is,  and  is  universally  acknowledged; 
that  it  is  of  nature's  impression,  naturally  conceived,  and 
by  no  art  or  counter-nature  to  be  eradicated  or  destroyed." 

And  now,  what  say  you,  Philocles  (continued  he),  to  this 
defence  I  have  been  making  for  you  't  Tis  grounded,  as  you 
see,  on  the  supposition  of  your  being  deeply  engaged  in  this 
philosophical  cause.  But  perhaps  you  have  yet  many  difficulties 
to  get  over,  ere  you  can  so  far  take  part  with  beauty  as  to 
make  this  to  be  your  good. 

I  have  no  difficulty  so  great,  said  I,  as  not  to  be  easily 
removed.  My  inclinations  lead  me  strongly  this  way,  for  I  am 
ready  enough  to  yield  there  is  no  real  good  beside  the  enjoy- 
ment of  beauty.  And  I  am  as  ready,  replied  Theocles,  to  yield 
there  is  no  real  enjoyment  of  beauty  beside  what  is  good. 
Excellent !  but  upon  reflection  I  fear  I  am  little  beholden  to 
you  for  your  concession.  As  how  't  Because  should  I  offer  to 
contend  for  any  enjoyment  of  beauty  out  of  your  mental  way, 
you  would,  I  doubt,  call  such  enjoyment  of  mine  absurd,  as  you 
did  once  before.  Undoubtedly  I  should.  For  what  is  it  should 
enjoy  or  be  capable  of  enjoyment,  except  mind  ?  or  shall  we 
say,  body  enjoys .?  By  the  help  of  sense,  perhaps,  not  otherwise. 
Is  beauty,  then,  the  object  of  sense  ?  Say  how  .^  Which  way  .^ 
For  otherwise  the  help  of  sense  is  nothing  in  the  case ;  and  if 

141 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

body  be  of  itself  incapable,  and  sense  no  help  to  it  to  apprehend 
or  enjoy  beauty,  there  remains  only  the  mind  which  is  capable 
either  to  ajiprehend  or  to  enjoy. 

True,  said  I,  but  show  me,  then,  "  Why  beauty  may  not  be 
the  object  of  the  sense  ?  "  Show  me  first,  I  entreat  you,  "  Why, 
where,  or  in  what  you  fancy  it  may  be  so  ? "  Is  it  not  beauty 
which  first  excites  the  sense,  and  feeds  it  afterwards  in  the 
passion  we  call  love  ?  Say  in  the  same  manner,  "  That  it  is 
beauty  first  excites  the  sense,  and  feeds  it  afterwards  in  the 
passion  we  call  hunger."  .  .  .  You  will  not  say  it.  The 
thought,  I  perceive,  displeases  you.  As  great  as  the  pleasure 
is  of  good  eating,  you  disdain  to  apply  the  notion  of  beauty 
to  the  good  dishes  Avhich  create  it.  You  would  hardly  have 
applauded  the  preposterous  fancy  of  some  luxurious  Romans 
of  old,  who  could  relish  a  fricassee  the  better  for  hearing  it  was 
composed  of  birds  which  wore  a  beautiful  feather  or  had  sung 
deliciously.  Instead  of  being  incited  by  such  a  historical 
account  of  meats,  you  would  be  apt,  I  believe,  to  have  less 
appetite  the  more  you  searched  their  origin,  and  descended 
into  the  kitchen  science,  to  learn  the  several  forms  and  changes 
they  had  undergone  ere  they  were  served  at  this  elegant 
voluptuous  table.  But  though  the  kitchen  forms  be  ever  so 
disgraceful,  you  will  allow  that  the  materials  of  the  kitchen, 
such,  for  instance,  as  the  garden  furnishes,  are  really  fair  and 
beautiful  in  their  kind.  Nor  will  you  deny  beauty  to  the  wild 
field,  or  to  these  flowers  which  grow  around  us  on  this  verdant 
couch.  And  yet,  as  lovely  as  are  these  forms  of  Nature,  the 
shining  grass  or  silvered  moss,  the  flowery  thyme,  Avild  rose  or 
honeysuckle ;  'tis  not  their  beauty  allures  the  neighbouring 
herds,  delights  the  browsing  fawn  or  kid,  and  spreads  the  joy 
we  see  amidst  the  feeding  flocks ;  'tis  not  the  form  rejoices, 
but  that  which  is  beneath  the  form ;  'tis  savouriness  attracts, 
hunger  impels,  and  thirst  better  allayed  by  the  clear  brook 
than  the  thick  puddle,  makes  the  fair  nymph  to  be  preferred, 
whose  form  is  otherwise  slighted.     For  never  can  the  form  be 

142 


THE   MORALISTS 

of  real  force  where  it  is  uncontemplated,  un judged  of,  un- 
examined, and  stands  only  as  the  accidental  note  or  token  of  / 
what  appeases  provoked  sense,  and  satisfies  the  brutish  part. 
Are  you  persuaded  of  this,  good  Philocles  ?  or,  rather  than  not 
give  brute:i  the  advantage  of  enjoyment,  will  you  allow  them 
also  a  mind  and  rational  part  ? 

Not  so,  I  told  him. 

If  brutes,  therefore,  said  he,  be  incapable  of  knowing  and 
enjoying  beauty,  as  being  brutes,  and  having  sense  only  (the 
brutish  part)  for  their  own  share,  it  follows  "  that  neither  can 
man  by  the  same  sense  or  brutish  part  conceive  or  enjoy  beauty; 
but  all  the  beauty  and  good  he  enjoys  is  in  a  nobler  way,  and  ^ 
by  the  help  of  what  is  noblest,  his  mind  and  reason."  Here  , 
lies  his  dignity  and  highest  interest,  here  his  capacity  toward  )  \/^J 
good  and  happiness.  His  ability  or  incompetency,  his  power  • 
of  enjoyment  or  his  impotence,  is  founded  in  this  alone.  As 
this  is  sound,  fair,  noble,  worthy,  so  are  its  subjects,  acts  and 
employments.  For  as  the  riotous  mind,  captive  to  sense,  can 
never  enter  in  competition,  or  contend  for  beauty  with  the 
virtuous  mind  of  reason's  culture  ;  so  neither  can  the  objects 
Which  allure  the  former  compare  with  those  which  attract  and 
charm  the  latter.  And  when  each  gratifies  itself  in  the  enjoy- 
ment and  possession  of  its  object,  how  evidently  fairer  are  the 
acts  which  join  the  latter  pair,  and  give  a  soul  the  enjoyment 
of  what  is  generous  and  good  ?  This  at  least,  Philocles,  you 
will  surely  allow,  that  when  you  place 'a  joy  elsewhere  than  in 
the  mind,  the  enjoyment  itself  will  be  no  beautiful  subject,  nor 
of  any  graceful  or  agreeable  appearance.  But  when  you  think 
how  friendship  is  enjoyed,  how  honour,  gratitude,  candour, 
benignity,  and  all  internal  beauty ;  how  all  the  social  pleasures, 
society  itself,  and  all  which  constitutes  the  worth  and  happiness 
of  mankind  ;  you  will  here  surely  allow  beauty  in  the  act,  and 
think  it  \\orthy  to  be  viewed  and  passed  in  review  often  by 
the  glad  mind,  happily  conscious  of  the  generous  part,  and  of 
its  own  advancement  and  growtii  in  beauty. 

143 


V 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Thus,  Philocles  (continued  he,  after  a  short  pause),  thus 
have  I  presumed  to  treat  of  beauty  before  so  great  a  judge,  and 
such  a  skilful  admirer  as  yourself.  For,  taking  rise  from  Nature's 
beauty,  which  transported  me,  I  gladly  ventured  further  in  the 
chase,  and  have  accompanied  you  in  search  of  beauty,  as  it 
relates  to  us,  and  makes  our  highest  good  in  its  sincere  and 
natural  enjoyment.  And  if  we  have  not  idly  spent  our  hours, 
nor  ranged  in  vain  through  these  deserted  regions,  it  should 
appear  from  our  strict  search  that  there  is  nothing  so  divine 
as  beauty,  which  belonging  not  to  body,  nor  having  any  prin- 
ciple or  existence  except  in  mind  and  reason,  is  alone  discovered 
and  acquired  by  this  diviner  part,  when  it  inspects  itself,  the  only 
object  worthy  of  itself.  For  whatever  is  void  of  mind,  is  void 
and  darkness  to  the  mind's  eye.  This  languishes  and  grows 
dim  whenever  detained  on  foreign  subjects,  but  thrives  and 
attains  its  natural  vigour  when  employed  in  contemplation  of 
what  is  like  itself.  'Tis  thus  the  improving  mind,  slightly 
surveying  other  objects,  and  passing  over  bodies  and  the  common 
,  forms  (where  only  a  shadow  of  beauty  rests),  ambitiously  presses 
j  onward  to  its  source,  and  views  the  original  of  form  and  order 
i  in  that  which  is  intelligent.  And  thus,  O  Philocles,  may  we 
improve  and  become  artists  in  the  kind;  learning  "to  know 
ourselves,  and  what  that  is,  which  by  improving,  we  may  be 
sure  to  advance  our  worth  and  real  self-interest."  For  neither 
is  this  knowledge  acquired  by  contemplation  of  bodies,  or  the 
outward  forms,  the  view  of  pageantries,  the  study  of  estates 
and  honours;  nor  is  he  to  be  esteemed  that  self-improving 
artist  who  makes  a  fortune  out  of  these,  but  he  (he  only)  is  the 
wise  and  able  man,  who  with  a  slight  regard  to  these  things, 
applies  himself  to  cultivate  another  soil,  builds  in  a  different 
matter  from  that  of  stone  or  marble  ;  and  having  righter  models 
in  his  eye,  becomes  in  truth  the  architect  of  his  own  life  and 
fortune,  by  laying  within  himself  the  lasting  and  sure  founda- 
tions of  order,  peace,  and  concord.  .  .  .  But  now  'tis  time  to 
think  of  returning  home.     The  morning  is  far  spent.     Come ! 

144 


THE   MORALISTS 

let  us  away  and  leave  these  uncommon  subjects,  till  we  retire 
again  to  these  remote  and  unfrequented  places. 

At  these  words  Theocles,  mending  his  pace,  and  going  down 
the  hill,  left  me  at  a  good  distance,  till  he  heard  me  calling 
earnestly  after  him.  Having  joined  him  once  again,  I  begged 
he  would  stay  a  little  longer,  or  if  he  were  resolved  so  soon  to 
leave  both  the  woods  and  that  philosophy  which  he  confined  to 
them,  that  he  would  let  me,  however,  part  with  them  more 
gradually,  and  leave  the  best  impression  on  me  he  could  against 
my  next  return.  For  as  much  convinced  as  I  was,  and  as  great 
a  convert  to  his  doctrine,  my  danger  still,  I  owned  to  him,  was 
very  great,  and  I  foresaw  that  when  the  charm  of  these  places 
and  his  company  was  ceased,  I  should  be  apt  to  relapse  and 
weakly  yield  to  that  too  powerful  charm,  the  world.  Tell  me, 
continued  I,  how  is  it  possible  to  hold  out  against  it  and  with- 
stand the  general  opinion  of  mankind,  who  have  so  different  a 
notion  of  that  which  we  call  good  ?  Say  truth  now,  Theocles, 
can  anything  be  more  odd  or  dissonant  from  the  common  voice 
of  the  world  than  what  we  have  determined  in  this  matter  ? 

AVhom  shall  we  follow,  then  ?  replied  he.  "Whose  judgment 
or  opinion  shall  we  take  concerning  what  is  good,  what  contrary  ? 
If  all  or  any  part  of  mankind  are  consonant  with  themselves, 
and  can  agree  in  this,  I  am  content  to  leave  philosophy  and 
follow  them.  If  otherwise,  why  should  we  not  adhere  to  what 
we  have  chosen  ?  .  .  .  Let  us,  then,  in  another  view  consider 
how  this  matter  stands. 

Section   III 

We  then  walked  gently  homewards  (it  being  almost  noon),  and 
he  continued  his  discourse. 

One  man,  said  he,  affects  the  hero,  esteems  it  the  highest 
advantage  of  life  to  have  seen  war  and  been  in  action  in  the 
field.     Another  laughs  at  this  humour,  counts  it  all  extrava- 
gance and  folly,  prizes  his  own  wit  and  prudence,  and  would 
VOL.  II  145  L 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

take  it  for  a  disgrace  to  be  thought  adventurous.  One  person 
is  assiduous  and  indefatigable  in  advancing  himself  to  the 
character  of  a  man  of  business.  Another,  on  the  contrary, 
thinks  this  impertinent ;  values  not  fame  or  a  character  in  the 
world,  and  by  his  goodwill  would  always  be  in  a  debauch,  and 
never  live  out  of  the  stews  or  taverns,  where  he  enjoys,  as  he 
thinks,  his  highest  good.  One  values  wealth  as  a  means  only 
to  indulge  his  palate  and  to  eat  finely.  Another'  loathes  this, 
and  affects  popularity  and  a  name.  One  admires  music  and 
paintings,  cabinet  curiosities  and  in-door  ornaments.  Another 
admires  gardens,  architecture,  and  the  pomp  of  buildings. 
Another,  who  has  no  guster  of  either  sort,  believes  all  those 
they  call  virtuosi  to  be  half-distracted.  One  looks  upon  all 
expense  to  be  madness,  and  thinks  only  wealth  itself  to  be  good. 
One  games ;  another  dresses  and  studies  an  equipage ;  another 
is  full  of  heraldry,  points  of  honour,  a  family,  and  a  blood. 
One  recommends  gallantry  and  intrigue ;  another,  ordinary 
good-fellowship ;  another,  buffoonery,  satire,  and  the  common 
wit  ;  another,  sports  and  the  country  ;  another,  a  court  ; 
another,  travelling  and  the  sight  of  foreign  parts ;  another, 
poetry  and  the  fashionable  learning.  .  .  .  All  these  go  different 
ways.  All  censure  one  another,  and  are  despicable  in  one 
another''s  eyes.  By  fits  too  they  are  as  despicable  in  their  own, 
and  as  often  out  of  conceit  with  themselves  as  their  humour 
changes  and  their  passion  turns  from  one  thing  to  another.  .  .  . 
What  is  it,  then,  I  should  be  concerned  for  ?  AVhose  censure 
do  I  fear,  or  by  whom,  after  all,  shall  I  be  guided  ? 

If  I  ask,  "Are  riches  good  when  only  heaped  up  and  un- 
employed ? ""  one  answers,  "  They  are."  The  rest  deny.  "  How 
is  it,  then,  they  are  to  be  employed  in  order  to  be  good  ? " 
All  disagree.  All  tell  me  different  things.  "  Since,  therefore, 
riches  are  not  of  themselves  good  (as  most  of  you  declare),  and 
since  there  is  no  agreement  among  you  which  way  they  become 
good,  why  may  not  I  hold  it  for  my  opinion  that  they  are  neither 
good  in  themselves  nor  directly  any  cause  or  means  of  good  ?  " 

146 


THE    MORALISTS 

If  there  be  those  who  wholly  despise  fame,  and  if  among 
those  who  covet  it  he  who  desires  it  for  one  thing  despises  it 
for  another,  he  who  seeks  it  with  some  men  despises  it  with 
others,  why  may  not  J  say  "  that  neither  do  I  know  how  any 
fame  can  be  called  a  good  "  ? 

If  of  those  who  covet  pleasure,  they  who  admire  it  in  one 
kind  are  superior  to  it  in  another,  why  may  not  I  say  "that 
neither  do  I  know  which  of  these  pleasures,  or  how  pleasure 
itself,  can  be  called  good  "  ? 

If  among  those  who  covet  life  ever  so  earnestly,  that  life 
which  to  one  is  eligible  and  amiable  is  to  another  despicable 
and  vile,  why  may  not  I  say  "that  neither  do  I  know  how 
life  itself  can  of  itself  be  thought  a  good  "  ? 

In  the  meantime  this  I  know  certainly,  "that  the  neces- 
sary consequence  of  esteeming  these  things  highly  is  to  be 
a  slave,  and  consequently  miserable."  But  perhaps,  Philocles, 
you  are  not  yet  enough  acquainted  with  this  odd  kind  of 
reasoning  ? 

More,  said  I,  than  I  believe  you  can  easily  imagine.  I 
perceived  the  goodly  lady,  your  celebrated  beauty,  was  about  to 
appear  anew,  and  I  easily  knew  again  that  fair  face  of  liberty 
which  I  had  seen  but  once  in  the  picture  ^  you  drew  yesterday 
of  that  moral  dame,  I  can  assure  you  I  think  of  her  as  highly 
as  possible,  and  find  that  without  her  help  to  raise  one  above 
these  seemingly  essential  goods,  and  make  one  more  easy  and 
indifferent  towards  life  and  towards  a  fortune,  'twill  be  the 
hardest  thing  in  the  world  to  enjoy  either.  Solicitude,  cares, 
and  anxiety  will  be  multiplied  ;  and  in  this  unhappy  dependency 
'tis  necessary  to  make  court  and  be  not  a  little  servile.  To 
flatter  the  great,  to  bear  insults,  to  stoop  and  fawn  and  abjectly 
resign  one's  sense  and  manhood — all  this  must  courageously  be 
endured,  and  carried  off  with  as  free  an  air  and  good  counte- 
nance as  possible  by  one  who  studies  greatness  of  this  sort,  who 
knows  the  general  way  of  courts,  and  how  to  fix  unsteady 
^  Moralhts,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  and  Mhc.  iv.  cb.  i.  ;  v.  cli.  iii. 

147 


SHxVFTESBURY'S    CHARACTEKISTICS 

fortune.     I  need  not  mention  the  envyings,  the  mistrusts,  and 

jealousies 

No,    truly,   said    he   (interrupting   me),   neither   need    you. 

But  finding  you  so  sensible,  as  I  do,  of  this  unhappy  state,  and 

of  its  inward  sores  (whatever  may  be  its  outward  looks),  how 

is  it  possible  but  you  must  find   the  happiness  of  that  other 

contrary  state  ?     Can  you  not  call  to  mind  what  we  resolved 

concerning  Nature  ?     Can  anything  be  more  desirable  than  to 

follow  her  ?     Or  is  it  not  by  this   freedom   from  our  passions 

\  and  low  interests  that  we  are  reconciled  to  the  goodly  order  of 

\the  universe,  that  we  harmonise  with  Nature,  and  live  in  friend- 

'ship  both  with  God  and  man  .'' 

Let  us  compare,  continued  he,  the  advantages  of  each  state, 
and  set  their  goods  one  against  another.  On  one  side,  those 
which  we  found  were  uncertainly  so,  and  depended  both  on 
fortune,  age,  circumstances,  and  humour ;  on  the  other  side, 
those  which,  being  certain  themselves,  are  founded  on  the 
contempt  of  those  others  so  uncertain.  Is  manly  liberty, 
generosity,  magnanimity,  not  a  good  ?  May  we  not  esteem  as 
happiness  that  self-enjoyment  which  arises  from  a  consistency 
of  life  and  manners,  a  harmony  of  affections,  a  freedom  from 
the  reproach  of  shame  or  guilt,  and  a  consciousness  of  worth 
and  merit  with  all  mankind,  our  society,  country,  and  friends — 
all  which  is  founded  in  virtue  only  ?  A  mind  subordinate  to 
reason,  a  temper  humanised  and  fitted  to  all  natural  affections, 
an  exercise  of  friendship  uninterrupted,  a  thorough  candour, 
benignity,  and  good  nature,  with  constant  security,  tranquillity, 
equanimity  (if  I  may  use  such  philosophical  terms),  are  not 
these  ever  and  at  all  seasons  good .''  Is  it  of  these  one  can  at 
any  time  nauseate  and  grow  weary  ?  Are  there  any  particular 
ages,  seasons,  places,  circumstances,  which  must  accompany 
these  to  make  them  agreeable  ?  Are  these  variable  and  incon- 
stant ?  Do  these,  by  being  ardently  beloved  or  sought,  occasion 
any  disturbance  or  misery  .'*  Can  these  be  at  any  time  over- 
valued, or,  to  say  more  yet,  can  these  be  ever  taken  from  us,  or 

148 


THE    MOllALISTS 

can  we  ever  be  hindered  in  the  enjoyment  of  them  unless  by 
ourselves  ?  How  can  we  better  praise  the  goodness  of  Providence 
than  in  this,  "  That  it  has  placed  our  happiness  and  good  in 
things  we  can  bestow  upon  ourselves  "  ? 

If  this  be  so,  said  I,  I  see  no  reason  we  have  to  accuse 
Providence  on  any  account.  But  men,  I  fear,  will  hardly  be 
brought  to  this  good  temper  while  their  fancy  is  so  strong 
as  it  naturally  is  towards  those  other  movable  goods.  And, 
in  short,  if  we  may  depend  on  what  is  said  commonly,  "All 
good  is  merely  as  we  fancy  it.  'Tis  conceit  which  makes  it. 
All  is  opinion  and  fancy  onlv.'' 

Wherefore,  then,  said  he,  do  we  act  at  any  time  ?     Why 
choose,  or  why  prefer  one  thing  to  another  ?     You  will  tell  me, 
I  suppose,  'tis  because  we  fancy  it,  or  fancy  good  in  it.     Are  we 
therefore  to  follow  every  present  fancy,  opinion,  or  imagination 
of  good  ?     If  so,  then  we  must  follow  that  at  one  time  which 
we  decline  at  another,  approve  at  one  time  what  we  disapprove 
at  another,  and  be  at  perpetual  variance  with  ourselves.     But 
if  we  are  not  to  follow  all  fancy  or  opinion  alike,  if  it  be  allowed 
"that  of  fancies,  some  are   true,  some  false,"  then  we  are  to 
examine  every  fancy ;  and  there  is  some  rule  or  other  by  which 
to  judge  and  determine.     Twas  the  fancy  of  one  man  to  set 
fire  to  a  beautiful  temple,  in  order  to  obtain  immortal  memory 
or  fame.     'Twas  the  fancy  of  another  man  to  conquer  the  world 
for  the  same  reason,  or  what  was  very  like  it.     If  this  were  really 
the  man's  good,  why  do  we  A\onder  at  him  ?     If  the  fancy  were 
wrong,  say  plainly  in  what  it  was  so,  or  why  the  subject  was 
not  good  to  him  as  he  fancied  ?     Either,  therefore,  "  that  is 
every  man's  good  which  he  fancies,  and  because.he  fancies  it  and 
is  not  content  without  it,"  or  otherwise,  "  there  is  that  in  which 
the   nature  of  man  is  satisfied,  and  which  alone  must  be   his 
good."     If  that  in  which  the  nature  of  man  is  satisfied  and  can 
rest  contented  be  alone  his  good,  then  he  is  a  fool  who  follows 
that  with  earnestness  as  his  good  which  a  man  can  be  without, 
and  yet  be  satisfied  and  contented.     In  the  same  manner  is  he 

14-9 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

a  fool  who  flies  that  earnestly  as  his  ill  which  a  man  may 
endure  and  yet  be  easy  and  contented.  Now  a  man  may 
possibly  not  have  burnt  a  temple  (as  Erostratus)  and  yet  may 
be  contented.  Or  though  he  may  not  have  conquered  the  world 
(as  Alexander)  yet  he  may  be  easy  and  contented,  as  he  may 
still  without  any  of  those  advantages  of  power,  riches,  or 
renown,  if  his  fancy  hinders  not.  In  short,  we  shall  find  "  that 
without  any  one  of  those  which  are  commonly  called  goods,  a 
man  may  be  contented.""  As,  on  the  contrary,  "  he  may  possess 
them  all,  and  still  be  discontented  and  not  a  jot  the  happier." 
If  so,  it  [follows  "  that  happiness  is  from  within,  not  from 
without.'**  A  good  fancy  is  the  main.  And  thus  you  see  I 
agree  with  you  "  that  opinion  is  all  in  all."  ^  But  what  is  this, 
Philocles,  which  has  seized  you .''  You  seem  of  a  sudden  groAvn 
deeply  thoughtful. 

To  tell  you  truth,  said  I,  I  was  considering  what  would 
become  of  me  if  after  all  I  should,  by  your  means,  turn  philo- 
sopher. The  change,  truly,  would  be  somewhat  extraordinary, 
replied  Theocles.  But  be  not  concerned.  The  danger  is  not 
so  great.  And  experience  shows  us  every  day  that  for  talking 
or  writing  ])hilosophy,  people  are  not  at  all  the  nearer  being 
philosophers. 

But,  said  I,  the  very  name  is  a  kind  of  reproach.  The  word 
idiot  stood  formerly  as  the  opposite  to  philosopher,  but  now- 
adays it  means  nothing  more  commonly  than  the  philosopher 
himself.  , 

Yet,  in  effect,  replied  he,  what  else  is  it  we  all  do  in  general 
than  philosophise  .^  If  philosophy  be,  as  we  take  it,  the  study 
of  happiness,  must  not  every  one,  in  some  manner  or  other,  either 
skilfully  or  unskilfully  philosophise  "t  Is  not  every  deliberation 
concerning  our  main  interest,  every  correction  of  our  taste, 
every  choice  and  preference  in  life  to  be  reckoned  of  this  kind  .'* 
For  "if  happiness  be  not  allowed  to  be  from  self  and  from 
within,  then  either  is  it  from  outward  things  alone,  or  from  self 
^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  iii.  §  2  ;  Misc.  iv.  ch.  i. 

150 


THE   MORALISTS 

and  outward  things  together."  If  from  outward  things  alone, 
show  it  us  in  fact  "  that  all  men  are  happy  in  proportion  to 
these,  and  that  no  one  who  possesses  them  is  ever  miserable  by 
his  own  fault. '^  But  this,  it  seems,  hardly  any  one  will  pretend 
to  evince.  All  own  the  contrary.  Therefore  "  if  happiness  be 
partly  from  self,  partly  froiti  outward  things,  then  each  must 
be  considered,  and  a  certain  value  set  on  the  concerns  of  an 
inward  kind,  and  which  depend  on  self  alone."  If  so,  and  that 
I  consider  "  how,  and  in  what  these  are  to  be  preferred ;  when 
and  on  what  occasion  they  are  in  season  or  out  of  season ;  when 
properly  to  take  place,  when  to  yield,"  what^s  this  after  all  but 
to  philosophise  ?  Yet  even  this,  still,  is  enough  to  put  one  out 
of  the  ordinary  way  of  thinking,  and  give  one  an  unhappy  turn 
for  business  and  the  world.  Right !  For  this  also  is  to  be 
considered  and  well  weighed.  And  therefore  this  still  is  philo- 
sophy, "  to  inquire  where,  and  in  what  respect  one  may  be  most 
a  loser;  which  are  the  greatest  gains,  the  most  profitable 
exchanges,"  since  everything  in  this  world  goes  by  exchange. 
Nothing  is  had  for  nothing.  Favour  requires  courtship ;  interest 
is  made  by  solicitation ;  honours  are  acquired  with  hazard ; 
riches  with  pains ;  learning  and  accomplishments  by  study  and 
application.  Security,  rest,  indolence  are  to  be  had  at  other 
prices.  They  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  to  come  easy.  For 
"  what  hardship  is  there  ?  Where  is  the  harm  ?  'Tis  only  to 
abate  of  fame  and  fortune.  'Tis  only  to  waive  the  point  of 
honour  and  share  somewhat  less  of  interest.  If  this  be  easy, 
all  is  well.  Some  patience,  you  see,  is  necessary  in  the  case. 
Privacy  must  be  endured ;  even  obscurity  and  contempt.  Such 
are  the  conditions.  And  thus  everything  has  its  condition. 
Power  and  preferments  are  to  be  had  at  one  rate,  pleasures  at 
another,  liberty  and  honesty  at  another.  A  good  mind  must 
be  paid  for  as  other  things. 

But  we  had  best  beware  lest,  perhaps,  we  pay  too  dear  for 
it.  Let  us  be  assured  we  have  a  good  bargain.  Come  on  then. 
.  .  .  Let  us  account.  ..."  What  is  a  mind  worth  ?     AVhat 

151 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

allowance  may  one  handsomely  make  for  it?  or  what  may  one 
well  afford  it  for  ? "  .  ,  .  If  I  part  with  it,  or  abate  of  it,  "'tis 
not  for  nothing.  Some  value  I  must  needs  set  upon  my  liberty, 
some  upon  my  inward  character.  Something  there  is  in  what 
we  call  worth,  something  in  sincerity  and  a  sound  heart. 
Orderly    affections,    generous    thoughts,    and    a    commanding 

.  reason  are  fair  possessions,  not  slightly  to  be  given  up.  I  am 
to  consider  first  "  what  may  be  their  equivalent  ?  Whether  I 
shall  find  my  account  in  letting  these  inward  concerns  run  as 
they  please,  or  whether  I  shall  not  be  better  secured  against 
fortune  by  adjusting  matters  at  home,  rather  than  by  making 
interest  abroad,  and  acquiring  first  one  great  friend,  then 
another,  to  add  still  more  and  more  to  my  estate  or  quality  ?  " 
P'or  where  am  I  to  take  up  ?  Begin  and  set  the  bounds.  Let 
me  hear  positively  "  how  far  I  am  to  go,  and  why  no  further  ?  " 
What  is  a  moderate  fortune,  a  competency,  and  those  other 
degrees  commonly  talked  of.-^  Where  is  my  anger  to  stop.'*  or 
how  high  may  I  suffer  it  to  rise  ?  How  far  may  I  engage  in 
love  ?  How  far  give  way  to  ambition  ?  How  far  to  other 
appetites  ?  Or  am  I  to  let  all  loose  ?  Are  the  passions  to  take 
their  swing,  and  no  application  to  be  given  to  them,  but  all  to 
the  outward  things  they  aim  at  ?  Or  if  any  application  be 
requisite,  say  plainly  "  how  much  to  one,  and  how  much  to 
the  other  ? "  How  far  are  the  appetites  to  be  minded,  and  how- 
far  outward  things .''  Give  us  the  measure  and  rule.  See 
whether  this  be  not  to  philosophise  ?  and  whether  willingly  or 
unwillingly,  knowingly  or  unknowingly,  directly  or  indirectly, 
every  one  does  not  as  much  ?  "  Where,  then,  is  the  difference  ? 
Which  manner  is  the  best  ? "  Here  lies  the  question.  This  is 
what  I  would  have  you  weigh  and  examine.  "  But  the  ex- 
amination (say  you)  is  troublesome,  and  I  had  better  be  without 
it."  Who  tells  you  thus  ?  Your  reason,  you  say,  whose  force, 
of  necessity,  you  must  yield  to."     Tell  me,  therefore,  have  you 

[fitly  cultivated  that  reason  of  yours,  polished  it,  bestowed  the 
necessary  pains  on  it,  and  exercised  it  on  this  subject  .'*     Or  is 

152 


THE   MORALISTS 

it  like  to  determine  full  as  well  when  unexercised  as  when 
thoroughly  exercised  or  ever  so  expert?  Consider,  pray,  in 
mathematics  whose  is  the  better  reason  of  the  two,  and  fitter 
to  be  relied  on  ?  The  practiser's,  or  his  who  is  unpractised  ? 
Whose  in  the  way  of  war,  of  policy,  or  civil  affairs  ?  Whose  in 
merchandise,  law,  physic  ?  And  in  morality  and  life,  I  ask 
still,  whose  ?  May  he  not,  perhaps,  be  allowed  the  best  judge 
of  living  who  studies  life  and  endeavours  to  form  it  by  some 
rule  ?  Or  is  he  indeed  to  be  esteemed  most  knowing  in  the 
matter  who  slightly  examines  it,  and  who  accidentally  and 
unknowingly  philosophises  ? 

Thus,  Philocles,  said  he,  concluding  his  discourse,  thus  is 
philosophy  established.  For  every  one,  of  necessity,  must  reason 
concerning  his  own  happiness  "  what  his  good  is  and  what  his 
ill."  The  question  is  only  "  who  reasons  best  ?  "  For  even  he 
who  rejects  this  reasoning  or  deliberating  part  does  it  from  a 
certain  reason,  and  from  a  persuasion  "  that  this  is  best." 

By  this  time  we  found  ourselves  insensibly  got  home.     Our 
philosophy  ended,  and  we  returned   to   the  common  affairs  of      j 
life. 


153 


J 


TREATISE   VI 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

On  the  preceding  Treatises,  etc. 


Scilicet  uui  aequus  Virtuti  atque  ejus  amicis. 

Hor.  Sat.  i.  ii. 


Printed  first  in  the  year  MDCCXI.^ 


'  [In  many  of  the  later  editions  this  date  is  wrongly  given  as  171-1. 
The  Miscellaneous  Reflections  actually  appeared  in  1711,  making  the  third 
volume  of  the  Characteristics.^ 


MISCELLANY   I 


CHAPTER   I 

Of  the  nature,  rise,  and  establishment  of  Miscellanies — Tlie  subject  of 
these  wliich  follow — Intention  of  the  writer. 

Peace  be  with  the  soul  of  that  charitable  and  courteous  author 
who,  for  the  common  benefit  of  his  fellow-authors,  introduced 
the  ingenious  way  of  miscellaneous  writing  !  It  must  be  owned 
that  since  this  happy  method  was  established,  the  harvest 
of  wit  has  been  more  plentiful,  and  the  labourers  more  in 
number  than  heretofore.  'Tis  well  known  to  the  able  practi- 
tioners in  the  writing  art  "  that  as  easy  as  it  is  to  conceive 
wit,  'tis  the  hardest  thing  imaginable  to  be  delivered  of  it, 
upon  certain  terms."'''  Nothing  could  be  more  severe  or  rigid 
than  the  conditions  formerly  prescribed  to  writers,  when 
criticism  took  place,  and  regularity  and  order  were  thought 
essential  in  a  treatise.  The  notion  of  a  genuine  work,  a 
legitimate  and  just  piece,  has  certainly  been  the  occasion  of 
great  timidity  and  backwardness  among  the  adventurers  in  wit ; 
and  the  imposition  of  such  strict  laws  and  rules  of  composition 
has  sat  heavy  on  the  free  spirits  and  forward  geniuses  of  mankind. 
'Twas  a  yoke,  it  seems,  which  our  forefathers  bore,  but  wliich, 
for  our  parts,  we  have  generously  thrown  off.  In  effect,  the 
invidious  distinctions  of  bastardy  and  legitimacy  being  at  length 
removed,  the  natural  and  lawful  issue  of  the  brain  conies  with 

157 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

like  advantage  into  the  world,  and  wit  (mere  wit)  is  well 
received  without  examination  of  the  kind  or  censure  of  the 
form. 

This  the  miscellaneous  manner  of  writing,  it  must  be  owned, 
has  happily  effected.  It  has  rendered  almost  every  soil  pro- 
ductive. It  has  disclosed  those  various  seeds  of  wit  which  lay 
suppressed  in  many  a  bosom,  and  has  reared  numberless  con- 
ceits and  curious  fancies  which  the  natural  rudeness  and 
asperity  of  their  native  soil  would  have  withheld,  or  at  least  not 
have  permitted  to  rise  above  the  ground.  From  every  field, 
from  everv  hedge  or  hillock,  we  now  gather  as  delicious  fruits 
and  fragrant  flowers  as  of  old  from  the  richest  and  best 
cultivated  gardens.  Miserable  were  those  ancient  planters  who, 
understanding  not  how  to  conform  themselves  to  the  rude  taste 
of  unpolished  mankind,  made  it  so  difficult  a  task  to  serve  the 
world  with  intellectual  entertainments,  and  furnish  out  the 
repasts  of  literature  and  science. 

There  was  certainly  a  time  when  the  name  of  author  stood 
for  something  considerable  in  the  world.  To  succeed  happily  in 
such  a  labour  as  that  of  writing  a  treatise  or  a  poem  was  taken 
as  a  sure  mark  of  understanding  and  good  sense.  The  task 
was  painful,  but,  it  seems,  'twas  honourable.  How  the  case 
happened  in  process  of  time  to  be  so  much  reversed  is  hard  to 
say.  The  primitive  authors  perhaps  being  few  in  number  and 
highlv  respected  for  their  art,  fell  under  the  weight  of  envy. 
Being  sensible  of  their  misfortune  in  this  respect,  and  being 
excited,  as  'tis  probable,  by  the  example  of  some  popular  genius, 
they  quitted  their  regular  schemes  and  accurate  forms  of  work- 
manship in  favour  of  those  wits  who  could  not  possibly  be  received 
as  authors  upon  such  difficult  terms.  'Twas  necessary,  it  seems, 
that  the  bottom  of  wit  should  be  enlarged.  'Twas  advisable 
that  more  hands  should  be  taken  into  the  work,  and  nothing 
could  better  serve  this  popular  purpose  than  the  way  of 
miscellany  or  common  essay,  in  which  the  most  confused  head, 
if  fraught  with  a  little  invention  and  provided  with  common- 

158 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

place  book  learning,  might  exert  itself  to  as  much  advantage  as 
the  most  orderly  and  well-settled  judgment. 

To  explain  the  better  how  this  revolution  in  letters  has  been 
effected,  it  may  not  perhaps  be  indecent  should  we  offer  to 
compare  our  writing  artists  to  the  manufacturers  in  stuff  or 
silk.  For  among  these  'tis  esteemed  a  principal  piece  of  skill 
to  frame  a  pattern  or  plan  of  workmanship  in  which  the 
several  colours  are  agreebly  disposed,  with  such  proportionable 
adjustment  of  the  various  figures  and  devices  as  may,  in  the 
whole,  create  a  kind  of  harmony  to  the  eye.  According  to  this 
method  each  piece  must  be  in  reality  an  original.  For  to 
copv  what  has  gone  before  can  be  of  no  use.  The  fraud  would 
easily  be  perceived.  On  the  other  side,  to  work  originally,  and 
in  a  manner  create  each  time  anew,  must  be  a  matter  of  press- 
ing weight,  and  fitted  to  the  strength  and  capacity  of  none 
besides  the  choicest  workmen. 

A  manner  therefore  is  invented  to  confound  this  simplicity 
and  conformity  of  design  ;  patchwork  is  substituted  ;  cuttings 
and  shreds  of  learning,  with  various  fragments  and  points  of  wit, 
are  drawn  together  and  tacked  in  any  fantastic  form.  If  the}- 
chance  to  cast  a  lustre  and  spread  a  sort  of  sj^rightly  glare,  the 
miscellany  is  approved  and  the  complex  form  and  texture  of 
the  work  admired.  The  eye,  which  before  was  to  be  won  by 
regularity,  and  had  kept  true  to  measure  and  strict  proportion, 
is  by  this  means  pleasingly  drawn  aside  to  commit  a  kind  of 
debauch  and  amuse  itself  in  gaudy  colours  and  disfigured 
shapes  of  things.  Custom  in  the  meanwhile  has  not  only 
tolerated  this  licentiousness,  but  rendered  it  even  commend- 
able, and  brought  it  into  the  highest  repute.  The  wild  and 
whimsical,  under  the  name  of  the  odd  and  pretty,  succeed  in  the 
room  of  the  graceful  and  the  beautiful.  Justness  and  accuracy 
of  thought  are  set  aside  as  too  constraining  and  of  too  painful 
an  aspect  to  be  endured  in  the  agreeable  and  more  easy  com- 
merce of  gallantry  and  modern  wit. 

NcAv  since  it  has  been  thought  convenient  in  these  latter 

159 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

ages  to  distinguish  the  provinces  of  wit  and  wisdom  and  set 
apart  the  agreeable  from  the  useful,  'tis  evident  there  could  be 
nothing  devised  more  suitable  to  the  distinct  and  separate 
interest  of  the  former  of  these  provinces  than  this  complex 
manner  of  performance  which  we  call  miscellany.  For  whatever 
is  capricious  and  odd  is  sure  to  create  diversion  to  those  who 
look  no  further.  And  where  there  is  nothing  like  nature,  there 
is  no  room  for  the  troublesome  part  of  thought  or  contempla- 
tion. ""Tis  the  perfection  of  certain  grotesque  painters  to  keep 
as  far  from  nature  as  possible.  To  find  a  likeness  in  their 
works  is  to  find  the  greatest  fault  imaoinable.  A  natural  con- 
nection  is  a  slur.  A  coherence,  a  design,  a  meaning  is  against 
their  purpose,  and  destroys  the  very  spirit  and  genius  of  their 
workmanship. 

I  remember  formerly  \\'hen  I  was  a  spectator  in  the  French 
theatre  I  found  it  the  custom  at  the  end  of  every  grave  and 
solemn  tragedy  to  introduce  a  comic  farce  or  miscellany  which 
they  called  the  little  piece.  We  have  indeed  a  method  still  more 
extraordinary  upon  our  own  stage,  for  we  think  it  agreeable 
and  just  to  mix  the  little  piece  or  farce  with  the  main  plot  or 
fable  through  every  act.  This  perhaps  may  be  the  rather 
chosen,  because  our  tragedy  is  so  much  deeper  and  bloodier 
than  that  of  the  French,  and  therefore  needs  more  immediate 
refreshment  from  the  elegant  way  of  drollery  and  burlesque 
wit,  which,  being  thus  closely  interwoven  with  its  opposite, 
makes  that  most  accomplished  kind  of  theatrical  miscellany, 
called  by  our  poets  a  tragi-comedy. 

I  could  go  further  perhaps,  and  demonstrate  from  the 
writings  of  many  of  our  grave  divines,  the  speeches  of  our 
senators,  and  other  principal  models  of  our  national  erudition 
"  that  the  miscellaneous  manner  is  at  present  in  the  highest 
esteem."  But  since  my  chief  intention  in  the  following  sheets 
is  to  descant  cursorily  upon  some  late  pieces  of  a  British 
author,  I  will  presume  that  what  I  have  said  already  on  this 
head  is  sufficient,  and  that  it  will  not  be  judged  improper  or 

IGO 


MISCELLANEOUS   KEFLECTIONS 

absurd  in  me,  as  I  proceed,  to  take  advantage  of  this  miscel- 
laneous taste  which  now  evidently  prevails.  According  to  this 
method,  whilst  I  serve  as  critic  or  interpreter  to  this  new  writer, 
I  may  the  better  correct  his  flegm,  and  give  him  more  of  the 
fashionable  air  and  manner  of  the  world,  especially  in  what 
relates  to  the  subject  and  manner  of  his  two  last  pieces,  which  are 
contained  in  his  second  volume.  For  these  being  of  the  more 
regular  and  formal  kind  may  easily  be  oppressive  to  the  airy 
reader,  and  may  therefore  with  the  same  assurance  as  tragedy 
claim  the  necessary  relief  of  the  little  piece  or  farce  above 
mentioned. 

Nor  ought  the  title  of  a  miscellaneous  writer  to  be  denied 
me  on  the  account  that  I  have  grounded  my  miscellanies  upon 
a  certain  set  of  treatises  already  published.  Grounds  and 
foundations  are  of  no  moment  in  a  kind  of  work  which,  accord- 
ing to  modern  establishment,  has  properly  neither  top  nor 
bottom,  beginning  nor  end.  Besides  that,  I  shall  no  way  confine 
myself  to  the  precise  contents  of  these  treatises,  but,  like  my 
fellow-miscellanarians,  shall  take  occasion  to  vary  often  from 
my  proposed  subject,  and  make  what  deviations  or  excursions  I 
shall  think  fit,  as  I  proceed  in  my  random  essays. 


CHAPTER  II 

Of  controversial  writings  :  answers  :  replies — Polemic  divinity,  or  the 
writing-  Church  militant — Philosophers,  and  bear  garden — Authors 
paired  and  matched  —  The  matchmakers  —  Football  —  A  dialogue 
between  our  author  and  his  bookseller. 

Amoxg  the  many  improvements  daily  made  in  the  art  of  writing, 
there  is  none  perhaps  which  can  be  said  to  have  attained  a 
greater  height  than  that  of  controversy  or  the  method  of  answer 
and  refutation.  'Tis  true  indeed,  that  anciently  the  wits  of 
men  were  for  the  most  part  taken  up  in';  other  employment. 
VOL.  II  ICl  M 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

If  authors  writ  ill  they  were  despised,  if  well  they  were  by  some 
party  or  other  espoused.  For  parties  there  would  necessarily 
be,  and  sects  of  every  kind  in  learning  and  philosophy.  Every 
one  sided  with  whom  he  liked,  and  having  the  liberty  of  hearing 
each  side  speak  for  itself,  stood  in  no  need  of  express  warning 
pieces  against  pretended  sophistry  or  dangerous  reasoning. 
Particular  answers  to  single  treatises  were  thought  to  be  of 
little  use.  And  it  was  esteemed  no  compliment  to  a  reader  to 
help  him  so  carefully  in  the  judgment  of  every  piece  which 
came  abroad.  Whatever  sects  there  were  in  those  days,  the 
zeal  of  party-causes  ran  not  so  high  as  to  give  the  reader  a 
taste  of  those  personal  reproaches  which  might  pass  in  a  debate 
between  the  diiferent  party-men. 

Thus  miatters  stood  of  old,  when  as  yet  the  method  of 
writing  controversy  was  not  raised  into  an  art,  nor  the  feuds  of 
contendino;  authors  become  the  chief  amusement  of  the  learned 
world.  But  we  have  at  present  so  high  a  relish  of  this  kind, 
that  the  writings  of  the  learned  are  never  truly  gustful  till  they 
are  come  to  what  we  may  properly  enough  call  their  due  ripe- 
ness, and  have  begot  a  fray.  When  the  answer  and  reply  is 
once  formed  our  curiosity  is  excited ;  we  begin  then,  for  the 
first  time,  to  whet  our  attention  and  apply  our  ear. 

For  example,  let  a  zealous  divine  and  flaming  champion  of 
our  faith,  when  inclined  to  show  himself  in  print,  make  choice 
of  some  tremendous  mystery  of  religion,  opposed  heretofore  by 
some  damnable  heresiarch,  whom  having  vehemently  refuted,  he 
turns  himself  towards  the  orthodox  opinion,  and  supports  the 
true  belief,  with  the  highest  eloquence  and  profoundest  erudi- 
tion ;  he  shall,  notwithstanding  this,  remain  perhaps  in  deep 
obscurity,  to  the  great  affliction  of  his  bookseller  and  the  regret 
of  all  who  bear  a  just  veneration  for  Church  history  and  the 
ancient  purity  of  the  Christian  faith.  But  let  it  so  happen  that 
in  this  prosecution  of  his  deceased  adversary  our  doctor  raises 
up  some  living  antagonist,  who,  on  the  same  foot  of  orthodoxy 
with  himself,  pretends  to  arraign  his  expositions,  and  refute  the 

162 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

refuter  upon  every  article  he  has  advanced ;  from  this  moment 
the  writing  gathers  Kfe,  the  pubhc  hstens,  the  boolcseller  takes 
heart,  and  when  issue  is  well  joined,  the  repartees  grown  smart, 
and  the  contention  vigorous  between  the  learned  parties,  a  ring 
is  made  and  readers  gather  in  abundance.  Every  one  takes 
party,  and  encourages  his  own  side.  "This  shall  be  my 
champion  !  This  man  for  my  money  !  Well  hit,  on  our  side  ! 
Again,  a  good  stroke !  There  he  was  even  with  him  !  Have 
at  him  the  next  bout ! "  Excellent  sport !  And  when  the 
combatants  are  for  a  while  drawn  off  and  each  retired  with 
his  own  companions,  what  praises  and  congratulations  !  what 
applauses  of  the  supposed  victor !  And  how  honourably  is  he 
saluted  by  his  favourers,  and  complimented  even  to  the  dis- 
turbance of  his  modesty  !  "  Nay,  but  gentlemen  !  Good 
gentlemen  !  do  you  really  think  thus .?  Are  you  sincere  with 
me  ?  Have  I  treated  my  adversary  as  he  deserves  ?  Never  was 
man  so  mauled.  Why,  you  have  killed  him  downright.  O 
sirs  !  you  flatter  me.  He  can  never  rise  more.  Think  ye  so 
indeed  ?  Or  if  he  should,  'twould  be  a  pleasure  to  see  how  you 
would  handle  him." 

These  are  the  triumphs.  This  is  what  sets  sharp  ;  this  gives 
the  author  his  edge  and  excites  the  reader's  attention,  when  the 
trumpets  are  thus  sounded  to  the  crowd,  and  a  kind  of  amphi- 
theatrical  entertainment  exhibited  to  the  multitude  by  these 
gladiatorian  penmen. 

The  author  of  the  preceding  treatises  being  by  profession  a 
nice  inspector  into  the  ridicule  of  things,  must  in  all  probability 
have  raised  to  himself  some  such  views  as  those  which  hindered 
him  from  engaging  in  the  way  of  controversy.  For  when,  by 
accident,  the  first  of  these  treatises  ^  (a  private  letter,  and  in 
the  writer's  esteem  little  worthy  of  the  public's  notice)  came  to 
be  read  abroad  in  copies,  and  afterwards  in  jjrint,  the  smartest 
answers  which  came  out  against  it  could  not,  it  seems,  move 
our  author  to  form  any  reply.  All  he  was  heard  to  say  in 
^  Viz.  the  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm. 

163 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

return  was,  "  that  he  thought  whoever  had  taken  upon  him  to 
pubHsh  a  book  in  answer  to  that  casual  piece,  had  certainly 
made  either  a  very  high  compliment  to  the  author,  or  a  very  ill 
one  to  the  public." 

It  must  be  owned  that  when  a  writer  of  any  kind  is  so 
considerable  as  to  deserve  the  labour  and  pains  of  some  shrewd 
heads  to  refute  him  in  public,  he  may,  in  the  quality  of  an 
author,  be  justly  congratulated  on  that  occasion.  'Tis  supposed 
necessarily  that  he  must  have  written  with  some  kind  of  ability 
or  wit.  But  if  his  original  performance  be  in  truth  no  better 
than  ordinary,  his  answerer's  task  must  certainly  be  very  mean. 
He  must  be  very  indifferently  employed  who  would  take  upon 
him  to  answer  nonsense  in  form,  ridicule  what  is  of  itself  a  jest, 
and  put  it  upon  the  world  to  read  a  second  book  for  the  sake 
of  the  impertinencies  of  a  former. 

Taking  it,  however,  for  granted  "  that  a  sorry  treatise  may 
be  the  foundation  of  a  considerable  answer,"  a  reply  still  must 
certainly  be  ridiculous  whichever  way  we  take  it.  For  either 
the  author,  in  his  original  piece,  has  been  truly  refuted  or  not. 
If  refuted,  why  does  he  defend  ?  If  not  refuted,  Avhy  trouble 
himself.'*  What  has  the  public  to  do  with  his  private  quarrels 
or  his  adversary's  impertinence  ?  Or  supposing  the  world,  out 
of  curiosity,  may  delight  to  see  a  pedant  exposed  by  a  man  of 
better  wit,  and  a  controversy  thus  unequally  carried  on  between 
two  such  opposite  parties,  how  long  is  this  diversion  likely  to 
hold  good  ?  And  what  will  become  of  these  polemic  writings 
a  few  years  hence  ?  What  is  already  become  of  those  mighty 
controversies  with  which  some  of  the  most  eminent  authors 
amused  the  world  within  the  memory  of  the  youngest  scholar .'' 
An  original  work  or  two  may  perhaps  remain ;  but  for  the 
subsequent  defences,  the  answers,  rejoinders,  and  replications, 
they  have  been  long  since  paying  their  attendance  to  the  pastry- 
cooks. Mankind  perhaps  were  heated  at  that  time  when  first 
those  matters  were  debated ;  but  they  are  now  cool  again. 
They  laughed ;  they   carried   on  the  humour ;   they  blew  the 

164 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

coals ;  they  teased,  and  set  on  maliciously,  and  to  create  them- 
selves diversion.  But  the  jest  is  now  over.  No  one  so  much 
as  inquires  where  the  wit  was,  or  where  possibly  the  sting 
should  lie  of  those  notable  reflections  and  satirical  hints  which 
Avere  once  found  so  pungent,  and  gave  the  readers  such  high 
delight.  Notable  philosophers  and  divines,  who  can  be  con- 
tented to  make  sport,  and  write  in  learned  Billinsgate  to  divert 
the  coffee-house,  and  entertain  the  assemblies  at  booksellers'' 
shops  or  the  more  airy  stalls  of  inferior  book  retailers  ! 

It  must  be  allowed  that  in  this  respect  controversial  writing 
is  not  so  wholly  unprofitable,  and  that  for  book-merchants,  of 
whatever  kind  or  degree,  they  undoubtedly  receive  no  small 
advantage  from  a  right  improvement  of  a  learned  scuffle. 
Nothing  revives  them  more,  or  makes  a  quicker  trade,  than  a 
pair  of  substantial  divines  or  grave  philosophers,  well  matched 
and  soundly  backed,  till  by  long  Avorrying  one  another  they 
are  grown  out  of  breath  and  have  almost  lost  their  force  of 
biting.  "  So  have  I  known  a  crafty  glazier,  in  time  of  frost,  \ 
procure  a  footmll  to  draw  into  the  street  the  emulous  chiefs  of 
the  robust  youth.  The  tumid  bladder  bounds  at  every  kick, 
bursts  the  withstanding  casements,  the  chassies,^  lanterns,  and 
all  the  brittle  vitreous  ware.  The  noise  of  blows  and  outcries 
Alls  the  whole  neighbourhood,  and  ruins  of  glass  cover  the 
stony  pavements,  till  the  bloated  battering  engine,  subdued  by 
force  of  foot  and  fist,  and  yielding  up  its  breath  at  many  a 
fatal  cranny,  becomes  lank  and  harmless,  sinks  in  its  flight,  and 
can  no  longer  uphold  the  spirit  of  the  contending  parties." 

This  our  author  supposes  to  have  been  the  occasion  of  his 
being  so  often  and  zealously  complimented  by  his  amanuensis 
(for  so  he  calls  his  bookseller  or  printer  -)  on  the  fame  of  his 
first  piece.  The  obliging  craftsman  has  at  times  presented  him 
with  many  a  handsome  book,  set  oft'  with  titles  of  remarks, 
reflections,  and  the  like,  Avhich,  as  he  assured  him,  were  answers 
to  his  small  treatise.     "  Here,  sir,  says  he,  you  have  a  consider- 

^  [I.e.  window-frames.      Fr.  chas.sr.]  -  Vol.  i.  p.  108. 

1G5 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

able  hand  has  undertaken  you  ! — This,  sir,  is  a  reverend ;  this 
a  right  reverend ;  this  a  noted  author.  Will  you  not  reply, 
sir  ?  O'  my  word,  sir,  the  world  is  in  expectation.  Pity  they 
should  be  disappointed  !  A  dozen  sheets,  sir,  would  be 
sufficient !  You  might  dispatch  it  presently.  Think  you  so  ? 
1  have  my  paper  ready — and  a  good  letter.  Take  my  word 
for  it.  You  shall  see,  sir !  Enough.  But  hark  ye  (Mr. 
A-a-a-a),  my  worthy  engineer  and  manager  of  the  war  of 
letters,  ere  you  prepare  your  artillery  or  engage  me  in  acts  of 
hostility,  let  me  hear,  I  entreat  you,  whether  or.no  my  adversary 
be  taken  notice  of.  Wait  for  his  second  edition,  and  if  by 
next  year,  or  a  year  or  two  after,  it  be  known  in  good  company 
that  there  is  such  a  book  in  being,  I  shall  then  perhaps  think 
it  time  to  consider  of  a  reply." 


CHAPTER   III 

Of  the  letter  concerning;  Enthusiasm  —  Foreign  critics — Of  letters  in 
general,  and  of  the  epistolary  style  —  Addresses  to  great  men — 
Authors  and  horsemanship — The  modern  amble — Further  explana- 
tion of  the  miscellaneous  manner. 

As  resolute  as  our  author  may  have  shown  himself  in  refusing 
to  take  notice  of  the  smart  writings  published  against  him  by 
certain  zealots  of  his  own  country,  he  could  not,  it  seems,  but 
out  of  curiosity  observe  what  the  foreign  and  more  impartial 
critics  might  object  to  his  small  treatise,  Avhich  he  was  surprised 
to  hear  had  been  translated  into  foreio-n  languages  soon  after  it 
had  been  published  here  at  home.  The  first  censure  of  this 
kind  which  came  to  our  author  s  sight  was  that  of  the  Paris 
Journal  des  Savans}  Considering  how  little  favourable  the 
author  of  the  letter  had  shown  himself  towards  the  Romish 
Church  and  policy  of  France,  it  must  be  owned  those  journalists 

1  Du  2o  mars  1709. 

166 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

have  treated  him  with  sufficient  candour,  though  they  failed 
not  to  take  what  advantages  they  well  could  against  the  writing, 
and  particularly  arraigned  it  for  the  want  of  order  and  method.^ 

The  Protestant  \\  riters,  such  as  live  in  a  free  country,  and 
can  deliver  their  sentiments  without  constraint,  have  certainly  ^ 
done  our  author  more  honour  than  he  ever  presumed  to  think 
he  could  deserve.  His  translator,  indeed,  who  had  done  him 
the  previous  honour  of  introducing  him  to  the  acquaintance  of 
the  foreign  world,  represents  particularly,  by  the  turn  given  to 
the  latter  end  of  the  letter,  that  the  writer  of  it  was,  as  to  his 
condition  and  rank,  little  better  than  an  inferior  dependent  on 
the  noble  Lord  to  whom  he  had  addressed  himself.  And  in 
reality  the  original  has  so  much  of  that  air  that  I  wonder  not, 
if  what  the  author  left  ambiguous,  the  translator  has  determined 
to  the  side  of  clientship  and  dependency. 

But  whatever  may  have  been  the  circumstance  or  character 
of  our  author  himself,  that  of  his  great  friend  ought  in  justice 
to  have  been  considered  by  those  former  critics  above  mentioned. 
So  much,  at  least,  should  have  been  taken  notice  of,  that  there 
was  a  real  great  man  characterised  and  suitable  measures  of 
address  and  style  preserved.  But  they  who  would  neither 
observe  this  nor  apprehend  the  letter  itself  to  be  real,  were 
insufficient  critics,  and  unqualified  to  judge  of  the  turn  or 
humour  of  a  piece  which  they  had  never  considered  in  a  proper 
light. 

'Tis  become  indeed  so  common  a  practice  among  authors  to 
feign  a  correspondency,  and  give  the  title  of  a  private  letter  to 
a  piece  addressed  solely  to  the  public,  that  it  would  not  be 
strange  to  see  other  journalists  and  critics,  as  well  as  the  gentle- 
men of  Paris,  pass  over  such  particularities,  as  things  of  form. 

^  "  Ses  pensees  ne  sembleiit  occuper  dans  son  ouvrage  que  la  place  (lue 
le  hazard  leur  a  donnee."     Ih.  p.  181. 

-  (1)  Btbliothcque  Choisie,  aunee  1709,  tome  xix.  p.  427.  (-)  Hi'Sfoire 
des  Ouvrages  des  Savans,  mois  d'octobre,  uovembi-e,  et  de'cembre  1708, 
p.  514.     (3)  Nouvelles  de  la  R^publique  des  Lettre.i,  mois  de  mars  1710. 

167 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

This  prejudice,  however,  could  not  misguide  a  chief  critic  of  the 
Protestant  side,  when  mentioning  this  letter  concerning  En- 
thusiasm,^ he  speaks  of  it  as  a  real  letter  (such  as  in  truth  it 
was),  not  a  precise  and  formal  treatise  designed  for  public  view.^ 
It  will  be  owned  surely,  by  those  who  have  learnt  to  judge 
of  elegancy  and  wit  by  the  help  merely  of  modern  languages, 
that  we  could  have  little  relish  of  the  best  letters  of  a  Balsac 
or  Voiture,  were  we  wholly  ignorant  of  the  characters  of  the 
principal  persons  to  whom  those  letters  were  actually  written. 
But  much  less  could  we  find  pleasure  in  this  reading,  should  we 
take  it  into  our  heads  that  both  the  personages  and  corre- 
spondency itself  were  merely  fictitious.  Let  the  best  of  Tully's 
Epistles  be  read  in  such  a  narrow  view  as  this,  and  they  will 
certainly  prove  very  insipid.  If  a  real  Brutus,  a  real  Atticus 
be  not  supposed,  there  will  be  no  real  Cicero.  The  elegant 
writer  will  disappear,  as  will  the  vast  labour  and  art  with  which 
this  eloquent  Roman  writ  those  letters  to  his  illustrious  friends. 
There  was  no  kind  of  composition  in  which  this  great  author 
prided  or  pleased  himself  more  than  in  this,  where  he  en- 
deavoured to  throw  off  the  mien  of  the  philosopher  and  orator, 
whilst  in  effect  he  employed  both  his  rhetoric  and  philosophy 
with  the  greatest  force.  They  who  can  read  an  epistle  or  satire 
of  Horace  in  somewhat  better  than  a  mere  scholastic  relish,  will 
comprehend  that  the  concealment  of  order  and  method  in  this 
manner  of  writing  makes  the  chief  beauty  of  the  work.  They 
will  own  that  unless  a  reader  be  in  some  measure  apprised  of 
the  characters  of  an  Augustus,  a  Maecenas,  a  Florus,  or  a 
Trebatius,  there  will  be  little  relish  in  those  satires  or  epistles 

1  "  Ceux  qui  Font  lue  out  pu  voir  en  general,  que  Fauteur  ne  s'y  est 
pas  propose  un  certain  plan  pour  traiter  sa  matiere  methodiquement ; 
parceque  c'est  une  lettre,  et  iion  un  traite."  Bibliotheque  Choisie,  tome 
xix.  p.  328. 

2  If  in  this  joint  edition,  with  other  woi'ks,  the  letter  be  made  to  pass 
under  that  general  name  of  treatise,  'tis  the  bookseller  must  account  for 
it.  For  the  author's  part,  he  considers  it  as  no  other  than  what  it  origin- 
ally was. 

168 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

addressed  in  particular  to  the  courtiers,  ministers,  and  great 
men  of  the  times.  Even  the  satiric  or  miscellaneous  manner  of 
the  polite  ancients,  required  as  much  order  as  the  most  regular 
pieces.  But  the  art  was  to  destroy  every  such  token  or  ajipear- 
ance,  give  an  extemporary  air  to  what  was  writ,  and  make  the 
effect  of  art  be  felt  without  discovering  the  artifice.  There 
needs  no  further  explanation  on  this  head.  Our  author  himself 
has  said  enough  in  his  Advice  to  an  Authoi\^  particularly  where 
he  treats  of  the  simple  style,  in  contradistinction  to  the  learned, 
the  formal,  or  methodic. 

"'TIS  a  different  case  indeed  when  the  title  of  Epistle  is  im- 
properly given  to  such  works  as  were  never  writ  in  any  other 
view  than  that  of  being  made  public,  or  to  serve  as  exercises  or 
specimens  of  the  wit  of  their  composer.  Such  were  those  infinite 
numbers  of  Greek  and  Latin  Epistles,  writ  by  the  ancient 
sophists,  grammarians,  or  rhetoricians,  where  we  find  the  real 
character  of  the  Epistle,  the  genuine  style  and  manners  of  the 
corresponding  parties  sometimes  imitated,  but  at  other  times 
not  so  much  as  aimed  at,  nor  any  measures  of  historical  truth 
preserved.  Such  perhaps  we  may  esteem  even  the  letters  of  a 
Seneca  -  to  his  friend  Lucilius.     Or  supposing  that  philosophical 

1  Vol.  i.  pp.  107-169. 

-  'Tis  not  the  person^  character,  or  genius,  hut  tlie  style  and  manner  of 
this  great  man  which  we  presume  to  censure.  We  acknowledge  his  noble 
sentiments  and  worthy  actions.  We  own  the  patriot  and  good  minister  ; 
but  we  reject  the  writer.  He  was  the  first  of  any  note  or  worth  who  gave 
credit  to  that  false  style  and  manner  here  spoken  of.  He  might  on  this 
account  be  called  in  reality  the  corrupter  of  Roman  eloquence.  This 
indeed  could  not  but  naturally,  and  of  itself,  become  relax  and  dissolute, 
after  such  a  relaxation  and  dissolution  of  manners,  consecjuent  to  the  change 
of  Government,  and  to  the  horrid  luxury  and  effeminacy  of  the  Roman  court 
even  before  the  time  of  a  Claudius  or  a  Nero.  There  was  no  more  pos- 
sibility of  making  a  stand  for  language  than  for  liberty.  As  the  world 
now  stood,  the  highest  glory  which  could  be  attained  by  mortal  man  was 
to  be  mitigator  or  moderator  of  that  universal  tyranny  already  established. 
To  this  1  must  add  that  in  every  city,  principality,  or  smaller  nation, 
where  single  will  prevails,  and  court-power,  instead  of  laws  or  constitutions, 

169 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

courtier  had  really  such  a  correspondency,  and,  at  several  times, 
had  sent  so  many  fair  Epistles,  honestly  signed  and  sealed,  to 
his  country  friend  at  a  distance ;  it  appears,  however,  by  the 
Epistles  themselves,  in  their  proper  order  (if  they  may  be  said 
to  have  any),  that  after  a  few  attempts  at  the  beginning,  the 
author  by  degrees  loses  sight  of  his  correspondent,  and  takes 
the  world  in  general  for  his  reader  or  disciple.  He  falls  into 
the  random  way  of  miscellaneous  writing,  says  everywhere  great 

guides  the  State,  'tis  of  the  highest  difficulty  for  the  best  minister  to  pro- 
cure a  just  or  even  a  tolerable  administration.  AV'here  such  a  minister  is 
found,  who  can  but  moderately  influence  the  petty  tyranny,  he  deserves 
considerable  applause  and  honour.  But  in  the  case  we  have  mentioned, 
where  a  universal  monarchy  was  actually  established,  and  the  interest  of  a 
whole  world  concerned,  he  surely  must  have  been  esteemed  a  guardian- 
angel  who,  as  a  Prime  Minister,  could  for  several  years  turn  the  very 
worst  of  courts,  and  worst  conditioned  of  all  princes,  to  the  fatherly  care 
and  just  government  of  mankind.  Such  a  minister  was  Seneca  under  an 
Agrippina  and  a  Nero.  And  such  he  was  acknowledged  by  the  ancient 
and  never-sparing  satii'ists,  who  could  not  forbear  to  celebrate  withal  his 
generosity  and  friendship  in  a  private  life  : — 

Nemo  petit  modicis  quae  mittebantur  amicis 
A  Seneca ;  quae  Piso  bonus,  quae  Cotta  solebat 
Largiri  :  namque  et  titulis,  et  fascibus  olim 
Major  habebatur  donandi  gloria. 

[''No  one  asks  for  what  used  to  be  sent  to  his  clients  by  Seneca,  or 
what  good-natured  Piso  or  Cotta  used  to  give  ;  for  the  glory  of  liberality 
was  once  reckoned  greater  than  inscriptions  recoi'ding  your  high  office." — 
Juvenal,  v.  108-llL] 

Quis  tam 
Perditus,  ut  dubitet  Senecam  praeferre  Neroni .'' 

["  AVlio  is  so  abandoned  as  to  liesitate  to  set  Seneca  above  Nero  ? " — 
Juvenal,  viii.  212.] 

This  remark  is  what  I  have  been  tempted  to  make  by  the  way  on  the 
character  of  this  Roman  author,  more  mistaken  (if  I  am  not  very  much  so 
myself)  than  any  other  so  generally  studied.  As  for  the  philosophic 
cliaracter  or  function  imputed  to  him,  'twas  foreign,  and  no  way  proper  or 
peculiar  to  one  who  never  assumed  so  much  as  that  of  sophist  or  pensionary 
teacher  of  philosophy.     He  was  far  wide  of  any  such  order  or  profession. 

170 


MISCELLANEOUS   UEFLECTIONS 

and  noble  things,  in  and  out  of  the  way,  accidentally  as  words 
led  him  (for  with  these  he  plays  perpetually),  with  infinite  wit, 
but  with  little  or  no  coherence,  without  a  shape  or  body  to  his 
work,  without  a  real  beginning,^  a  middle,  or  an  end.  Of  a 
hundred  and  twenty-four  Epistles,  you  may,  if  you  please,  make 
five  hundred,  or  half  a  score.  A  great  one,  for  instance,  you 
may  divide  into  five  or  six.  A  little  one  you  may  tack  to 
another,  and  that  to  another,  and  so  on.  The  unity  of  the 
writing  will  be  the  same ;  the  life  and  spirit  full  as  well  pre- 
served. 'Tis  not  only  whole  letters  or  pages  you  may  change 
and  manage  thus  at  pleasure ;  every  period,  every  sentence 
almost,  is  independent,  and  may  be  taken  asunder,  transposed, 
postponed,  anticipated,  or  set  in  any  new  order,  as  you  fancy. 

This  is  the  manner  of  writing  so  much  admired  and  imitated 
in  our  age,  that  we  have  scarce  the  idea  of  any  other  model. 
AVe  know  little,  indeed,  of  the  difference  between  one  model  or 
character  of  writing  and  another.  All  runs  to  the  same  tune, 
and  beats  exactly  one  and  the  same  measure.  Nothing,  one 
would  think,  could  be  more  tedious  than  this  uniform  pace. 
The  common  amble  or  canterbury  is  not,  I  am  persuaded,  more 
tiresome  to  a  good  rider  than  this  see-saw  of  essay  writers  is  to 
an  able  reader.  The  just  composer  of  a  legitimate  piece  is  like 
an  able  traveller,  who  exactly  measures  his  journey,  considers 

Tliere  is  great  difference  between  a  courtier  who  takes  a  fancy  for  philo- 
sophy and  a  pliilosopher  who  should  take  a  fancy  for  a  court.  Now  Seneca 
was  born  a  courtier,  being  son  of  a  court  rhetor  ;  himself  bred  in  the  same 
manner,  and  taken  into  favour  for  his  wit  and  genius,  his  admired  style 
and  eloquence,  not  for  his  learning  in  the  books  of  philosophy  and  the 
ancients.  For  this  indeed  was  not  very  profound  in  him.  In  short,  he 
was  a  man  of  wonderful  wit,  fluency  of  thought  and  language,  an  able 
minister,  and  honest  courtier.  And  what  has  been  delivered  down  to  his 
prejudice,  is  by  the  common  enemy  of  all  the  free  and  generous  Romans, 
that  apish  shallow  historian  and  court  flatterer,  Dion  Cassius,  of  a  low  age, 
when  barbarism  (as  may  be  easily  seen  in  his  own  work)  came  on  apace, 
and  the  very  traces  and  features  of  virtue,  science,  and  knowledge  were 
wearing  out  of  the  world. 

^  Infra,  Misc.  v.  ch.  i.,  in  the  notes;  and  Wit  and  Humour,  part.  iv.  §3. 

171 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

his  ground,  premeditates  his  stages  and  intervals  of  relaxation 
and  intention  to  the  very  conclusion  of  his  undertaking,  that 
he  happily  arrives  where  he  first  proposed  when  he  set  out. 
He  is  not  presently  upon  the  spur,  or  in  his  full  career,  but 
walks  his  steed  leisurely  out  of  his  stable,  settles  himself  in  his 
stirrups,  and,  when  fair  road  and  season  offer,  puts  on  perhaps 
to  a  round  trot,  thence  into  a  gallop,  and  after  a  while  takes 
up.  As  down  or  meadow  or  shady  lane  present  themselves, 
he  accordingly  suits  his  pace,  favours  his  palfrey  ;  and  is  sure 
not  to  bring  him  puffing,  and  in  a  heat,  into  his  last  inn.  But 
the  post-way  is  become  highly  fashionable  with  modern  authors. 
The  very  same  stroke  sets  you  out  and  brings  you  in.  Nothing 
stays  or  interrupts.  Hill  or  valley,  rough  or  smooth,  thick  or 
thin ;  no  difference,  no  variation.  When  an  author  sits  down 
to  write  he  knows  no  other  business  he  has  than  to  be  witty, 
and  take  care  that  his  periods  be  well  turned,  or,  as  they 
commonly  say,  run  smooth.  In  this  manner  he  doubts  not  to 
gain  the  character  of  bright.  When  he  has  writ  as  many  pages 
as  he  likes,  or  as  his  run  of  fancy  would  permit,  he  then  perhaps 
considers  what  name  he  had  best  give  to  his  new  writing ; 
whether  he  should  call  it  letter,  essay,  miscellany,  or  aught 
else.  The  bookseller  perhaps  is  to  determine  this  at  last,  when 
all  besides  the  preface,  epistle  dedicatory,  and  title-page  is 
dispatched. 

.   .  .  Incertus  scamnum  faceretne  Priapum. 
.  .  .  Deus  hide  ego !  ^ 

^  ["  Hesitating'  whether  he  should  make  a  bench  or  a  Priapus.  ...   So 
I  am  a  God  ! "     Horace^  Sat.  i  viii.  2,  .3.  ] 


172 


MISCELLANY  II 


CHAPTER  I 

Review  of  Enthusiasm — Its  defence,  praise — Use  in  business  as  well  as 
pleasure — Operation  by  fear.  Love — Modifications  of  enthusiasm  ; 
magnanimity ;  heroic  virtue ;  honour  ;  public  zeal  ;  religion 
superstition  ;  persecution  ;  martyrdom  —  Energy  of  the  ecstatic 
devotion  in  the  tender  sex  —  Account  of  ancient  priesthood — 
Religious  war — Reference  to  a  succeeding  chapter. 

Whethee,  in  fact,  there  be  any  real  enchantment,  any  influence 
of  stars,  any  power  of  demons  or  of  foreign  natures  over  our 
own  minds,  is  thought  questionable  by  many.  Some  there  are 
who  assert  the  negative,  and  endeavour  to  solve  the  appearances 
of  this  kind  by  the  natural  operation  of  our  passions  and  the 
common  course  of  outward  things.  For  my  own  part,  I  cannot 
but  at  this  present  apprehend  a  kind  of  enchantment  or  magic 
in  that  which  we  call  enthusiasm ;  since  I  find  that,  jhaving 
touched  slightly  on  this  subject,  I  cannot  so  easily  part  with  it 
at  pleasure. 

After  having  made  some  cursory  reflections  on  our  author's 
letter,-  I  thought  I  might  have  sufficiently  acquitted  myself  on 
this  head,  till  passing  to  his  next  treatise  I  found  myself  still 
further  engaged.  I  perceived  plainly  that  I  had  as  yet  scarce 
entered  into  our  authors  humour,  or  felt  anything  of  that 
passion  which,  as  he  informs  us,  is  so  easily  communicable 
and  naturally  engaging.     But  what  I  had  passed  over  in  my 

*  Viz.  Letter  Concerning  Enthusiasm,  above. 

173 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

first  reflections  I  found  naturally  rising  in  me  upon  second 
thoughts.  So  that  by  experience  I  proved  it  true  what  our 
author  says,  "  That  we  all  of  us  know  something  of  this 
principle.""  And  now  that  I  find  I  have  in  reality  so  much  of  it 
imparted  to  me,  I  may  with  better  reason  be  pardoned  if,  after 
our  author  s  example,  I  am  led  to  write  on  such  subjects  as  these 
with  caution,  at  different  reprises ;  and  not  singly,  in  one  breath. 
I  have  heard  indeed  that  the  very  reading  of  treatises  and 
accounts  of  melancholy  has  been  apt  to  generate  that  passion 
in  the  over-diligent  and  attentive  reader.  And  this,  perhaps, 
may  have  been  the  reason  why  our  author  himself  (as  he  seems 
to  intimate  towards  the  conclusion  of  his  first  letter)  cared  not 
in  reality  to  grapple  closely  with  his  subject,  or  give  us  at  once 
the  precise  definition  of  enthusiasm.  This,  however,  we  may, 
with  our  author,  presume  to  infer  from  the  coolest  of  all  studies, 
even  from  criticism  itself  (of  which  we  have  been  lately  treating), 
"  that  there  is  a  power  in  numbers,  harmony,  proportion,  and 
beauty  of  every  kind,  which  naturally  captivates  the  heart,  and 
raises  the  imagination  to  an  opinion  or  conceit  of  something 
!^    majestic  and  divine.'" 

Whatever  this  subject  may  be  in  itself,  we  cannot  help 
being  transported  with  the  thought  of  it.  It  inspires  us  with 
something  more  than  ordinary,  and  raises  us  above  ourselves. 
Without  this  imagination  or  conceit  the  Avorld  would  be  but  a 
dull  circumstance,  and  life  a  sorry  pastime.  Scarce  could  we  be 
said  to  live.  The  animal  functions  might  in  their  coiu'se  be 
carried  on  ;  but  nothing  further  sought  for  or  regarded.  The 
gallant  sentiments,  the  elegant  fancies,  the  belles  passions  which 
have,  all  of  them,  this  beauty  in  view,  would  be  set  aside,  and 
leave  us  probably  no  other  employment  than  that  of  satisfying 
our  coarsest  appetites  at  the  cheapest  rate,  in  order  to  the  attain- 
ment of  a  supine  state  of  indolence  and  inactivity. 

Slender  would  be  the  enjoyments  of  the  lover,  the  ambitious 
man,  the  warrior,  or  the  virtuoso  (as  our  author  has  elsewhere^ 
^  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  2.  "--5 

174 


MISCELLANEOUS   KEFLECTIONS 

intimated),  if  in  the  beauties  which  they  admire  and  passion- 
ately pursue  there  were  no  reference  or  regard  to  any  higher 
majesty  or  grandeur  than  what  simply  results  from  the  particular 
objects  of  their  pursuit.  I  know  not,  in  reality,  what  we  should 
do  to  find  a  seasoning  to  most  of  our  pleasures  in  life,  were  it 
not  for  the  taste  or  relish  which  is  owing  to  this  particular 
passion,  and  the  conceit  or  imagination  which  supports  it. 
Without  this,  we  could  not  so  much  as  admire  a  poem  or  a 
picture ;  a  garden  or  a  palace ;  a  charming  shape  or  a  fair  face. 
Love  itself  would  appear  the  lowest  thing  in  Nature  when  thus 
anticipated,  and  treated  according  to  the  anti- enthusiastic 
poet's  method  : — 

Et  jacere  humorem  collectum  in  corpora  quaeque.^ 

How  heroism  or  magnanimity  must  stand  in  this  hypothesis 
is  easy  to  imagine.  The  Muses  themselves  must  make  a  very 
indifferent  figure  in  this  philosophical  draught.  Even  the 
prince  of  poets  ^  would  prove  a  most  insipid!  writer  if  he  were 
thus  reduced.  Nor  could  there,  according  to  this  scheme,  be 
yet  a  place  of  honour  left  even  for  our  Latin  poet,^  the  great 
disciple  of  this  un-polite  philosophy,  who  dares  with  so  little 
equity  employ  the  Muses'  art  in  favour  of  such  a  system.  But 
in  spite  of  his  philosophy  he  everywhere  gives  way  to  admira- 
tion and  rapturous  views  of  Nature.  He  is  transported  with 
the  several  beauties  of  the  world,  even  whilst  he  arraigns  the 
order  of  it,  and  destroys  the  principle  of  beauty  from  whence  in 
ancient  languages  the  world  ^  itself  was  named. 

'  Lucretius,  iv.  106.5. 

-  ovdev  /if'pos  'Ofirjpuj  8.0eov,  ov5k  dvvdcrrov  6.vopov,  ov5i  dpxv^  ^pij/xov,  aXXa  Trdvra 
tieard  deiuv  ovo/j-aTuv  /cat  deiwi'  \6-/uv,  Kal  Oelas  rexi'V^-  \_"  No  part  in  Homer  is 
devoid  of  Gods,  or  bare  of  princes,  or  destitute  of  magistrates  ;  but  all  is 
full  of  names  and  speeches  and  art  of  Gods. " — Maximus  Tyrius,  Dissert.  16.  ] 

2  Viz.  Lucretius,  as  above,  Treatise  i.  §  G,  end. 

*  Kda-fjLos,  mundus.  From  whence  that  expostulation,  iv  <toI  /xiv  rts  k6(t/j.os 
iKp'ujTaadai.  bvvaTai,  iv  Si  tuj  TravTl  d.Koafj.ia ;  ["  Or  can  a  certain  order  subsist 

175 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

This  is  what  our  author  advances :  when  in  behalf  of 
enthusiasm  he  quotes  its  formal  enemies,  and  shows  that  they 
are  as  capable  of  it  as  its  greatest  confessors  and  assertors. 
So  far  is  he  from  degrading  enthusiasm  or  disclaiming  it  in 
himself,  that  he  looks  on  this  passion,  simply  considered,  as  the 
most  natural,  and  its  object  as  the  justest  in  the  world.  Even 
virtue  itself  he  takes  to  be  no  other  than  a  noble  enthusiasm 
justly  directed  and  regulated  by  that  high  standard  which  he 
supposes  in  the  nature  of  things. 

He  seems  to  assert  ^  "  that  there  are  certain  moral  species 
or  appearances  so  striking  and  of  such  force  over  our  natures, 
that  when  they  present  themselves  they  bear  down  all  contrary 
opinion  or  conceit,  all  opposite  passion,  sensation,  or  mere 
bodily  affection."  Of  this  kind  he  makes  virtue  itself  to  be 
the  chief,  since  of  all  views  or  contemplations  this,  in  his 
account,  is  the  most  naturally  and  strongly  affecting.  The 
exalted  part  of  love  is  only  borroM'ed  hence.  That  of  pure 
friendship  is  its  immediate  self.  He  who  yields  his  life  a 
sacrifice  to  his  prince  or  country ;  the  lover  who  for  his 
paramour  performs  as  much ;  the  heroic,  the  amorous,  the 
religious  martyrs,  who  draw  their  views,  whether  visionary  or 
real,  from  this  pattern  and  exemplar  of  divinity;  all  these, 
according  to  our  author''s  sentiment,  are  alike  actuated  by  this 
passion,  and  prove  themselves  in  effect  so  many  different 
enthusiasts. 

Nor  is  thorough  honesty,  in  his  hypothesis,  any  other  than 
zeal  or  passion  moving  strongly  upon  the  species  or  view  of  the 
decorum  and  sublime  of  actions.     Others  may  pursue  ^  different 

within  thee,  and  none  in  the  universe  .'* " — Marcus  Aurelius,  iv.  27.]  And 
that  other  allusion  to  the  same  word,  Kbafiov  8'  irvfius  rb  (xifiirav,  a\X  ovk 
aKojfiiav  dvo/j-daais  &v.  ["  We  might  with  correct  etymology  call  the  uni- 
verse an  order,  but  not  a  disorder." — Aristotle,  -rrepi  Koaixov,  c.  6.]  Below, 
Misc.  V.  ch.  i.  in  the  notes. 

1    Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Inquiry,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  1. 


2  Moralists,  part  iii.  §  3. 


17G 


'% 


MISCELLANEOUS   KEFLECTIONS 

forms  and  fix  their  eye  on  different  species  (as  all  men  do  on 
one  or  other).  The  real  honest  man,  however  plain  or  simple  ; 
he  appears,  has  that  highest  species,  honesty  itself,^  in  view ; 
and  instead  of  outward  forms  or  symmetries,  is  struck  with  that 
of  inward  character,  the  harmony  and  numbers  of  the  heart  and 
beauty  of  the  affections,  which  form  the  manners  and  conduct 
of  a  truly  social  life. 

'Tis  indeed  peculiar  to  the  genius  of  that  cool  philosophy 
above  described,'  that  as  it  denies  the  order  or  harmony  of 
things  in  general,  so  by  a  just  consequence  and  truth  of  reason- 
ing it  rejects  the  habit  of  admiring  or  being  charmed  with 
whatever  is  called  beautiful  in  particular.  According  to  the 
regimen  prescribed  by  this  philosophy,  it  must  be  acknowledged 
that  the  evils  of  love,  ambition,  vanity,  luxury,  with  other 
disturbances  derived  from  the  florid,  high,  and  elegant  ideas 
of  things,  must  in  appearance  be  set  in  a  fair  way  of  being 
radically  cured. 

It  need  not  be  thought  surprising  that  religion  itself  should 
in  the  account  of  these  philosophers  be  reckoned  among  those 
vices  and  disturbances  which  it  concerns  us  after  this  manner 
to  extirpate.  If  the  idea  of  majesty  and  beauty  in  other 
inferior  subjects  be  in  reality  distracting,  it  must  chiefly  prove 
so  in  that  principal  subject,  the  basis  and  foundation  of  this 
conceit.  Now  if  the  subject  itself  be  not  in  nature,  neither  the 
idea  nor  the  passion  grounded  on  it  can  be  properly  esteemed 
natural ;  and  thus  all  admiration  ceases,  and  enthusiasm  is  at 
an  end.  But  if  there  be  naturally  such  a  passion,  'tis  evident 
that  religion  itself  is  of  the  kind,  and  must  be  therefore  natui'al     .  , 

to  man.  /^ 

We    can    admire    nothing    profoundly    without    a    certain    d^  t^ 
religious  veneration.     And   because  this   borders  so   much  on 
fear,  and  raises  a  certain  tremor  or  horror  of  like  appearance, 
'tis  easy  to  give  that  turn  to  the  affection,  and  represent  all 

^  The  honestum,  pulchrum,  t6  koXw,  vpi-Kov.     Infra,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  ii. 

-  Supra,  p.  175  ;  Treatise  i.  §  G  ;  and  Treatise  ii.  part  iii.  §  3. 
VOL.  II  177  N 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

enthusiasm  and  religious  ecstasy  as  the  product  or  mere  effect 
of  fear : 

Primus  in  orbe  deos  fecit  timoi-. 

But  the  original  passion,  as  appears  plainly,  is  of  another  kind, 
and  in  effect  is  so  confessed  by  those  who  are  the  greatest 
opposers  of  religion,  and  who,  as  our  author  observes,  have 
shown  themselves  sufficiently  convinced,  "  that  although  these 
ideas  of  divinity  and  beauty  were  vain,  they  were  yet  in  a 
manner  innate,  or  such  as  men  were  really  born  to  and  could 
hardly  by  any  means  avoid."  ^ 

Now  as  all  affections  have  their  excess,  and  require  judgment 
and  discretion  to  moderate  and  govern  them,  so  this  high  and 
noble  affection,  which  raises  man  to  action  and  is  his  guide  in 
business  as  well  as  pleasure,  requires  a  steady  rein  and  strict 
hand  over  it.  All  moralists,  worthy  of  any  name,  have  recog- 
nised the  passion,  though  among  these  the  wisest  have  prescribed 
restraint,  pressed  moderation,  and  to  all  tyros  in  philosophy 
forbid  the  forward  use  of  admiration,  rapture,  or  ecstasy,  even 
in  the  subjects  they  esteemed  the  highest  and  most  divine. 
They  knew  very  well  that  the  first  motion,  appetite,  and  ardour 
of  the  vouth  in  general  towards  philosophy  and  knowledge 
depended  chiefly  on  this  turn  of  temper :  -  yet  were  they  well 
apprised,  Avithal,  that  in  the  progress  of  this  study,  as  well 
as  in  the  affairs  of  life,  the  florid  ideas  and  exalted  fancies  of 
this  kind  became  the  fuel  of  many  incendiary  passions ;  and 
that,  in  religious  concerns  particularly,  the  habit  of  admiration 
I  and  contemplative  delight  would,  by  over-indulgence,  too  easily 
{  mount  into  high  fanaticism  or  degenerate  into  abject  superstition. 
1         Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  according  to  our  author,  enthusi- 

^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  6. 

^  So  the  Stagirite  :  otd  yap  to  6av/xa^eii>  ol  di/dpuiroi  Kal  uvv  koI  rb  irpwrou 
ijp^avTo  (piXocrocpe'ii'.  ["  For  it  was  through  wonder  that  men  first  began,  and 
do  still  begin,  to  philosophise." — Arist.  Metaph.  i.  ii.  982  b.]  See  below, 
Misc.  iv.  ch.  i. ,  in  the  notes. 

178 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

asm  is  in  itself  a  very  natural  honest  passion,  and  has  properly 
nothing  for  its  object  but  what  is  good  and  honest.^     ""Tis  apt 
indeed,  he  confesses,  to  run  astray.     And  by  modern  example 
we  know,  perhaps  yet  better  than  by  any  ancient,  that  in  religion 
the  enthusiasm  which  works  by  love  is  subject  to  many  strange 
irregularities,  and  that  A\hich  works  by  fear  to  many  monstrous 
and  horrible  superstitions.     Mystics  and  fanatics  are  known  to 
abound  as  well   in  our  reformed   as  in   the  Romish  churches. 
The  pretended  floods  of  grace  poured  into  the  bosoms  of  the 
quietists,  pietists,  and  those   who  favour  the   ecstatic  way  of 
devotion,  raise  such  transports  as  by  their  own  proselytes  are 
confessed  to  have  something  strangely  agreeable,  and  in  common 
vnth  what  ordinary  lovers  are  used  to  feel.     And  it  has  been 
remarked  by  many  that  the  female  saints  have  been  the  greatest 
improvers  of  this  soft  part  of  religion.     What  truth  there  may 
be  in  the  related  operations  of  this  pretended  grace  and  amorous 
zeal,  or  in  the  accounts  of  what  has  usually  passed  between  the 
saints  of  each  sex,  in  these  devout  ecstasies,  I  shall  leave  the 
reader  to  examine,   supposing    he   will   find    credible  accounts 
sufficient  to  convince  him  of  the  dangerous  progress  of  enthusi- 
asm in  this  amorous  lineage. 

There  are  many  branches  indeed  more  vulgar,  as  that  of  fear, 
melancholy,  consternation,  suspicion,  despair.  And  when  the 
passion  turns  more  towards  the  astonishing  and  frightful  than 
the  amiable  and  delightful  side,  it  creates  rather  what  we  call 
superstition  than  enthusiasm.  I  must  confess,  Avithal,  that  what 
we  commonly  style  zeal  in  matters  of  religion,  is  seldom  without 
a  mixture  of  both  these  extravagancies.  The  ecstatic  motions 
of  love  and  admiration  are  seldom  unaccompanied  with  the 
horrors  and  consternations  of  a  lower  sort  of  devotion.  These 
paroxysms  of  zeal  are  in  reality  as  the  hot  and  cold  fits  of  an 
ague,  and  depend  on  the  different  and  occasional  views  or  aspects 
of  the  divinity,  according  as  the  worshipper  is  guided  from 
without,  or  affected  from  within,  by  his  particular  constitution.'- 
1  TO  KaXov  Kal  dyadof.  -  Infra,  Mine.  ii.  ch.  iii. ,  end. 

179 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

Seldom  are  those  aspects  so  determinate  and  fixed  as  to  excite 
constantly  one  and  the  same  spirit  of  devotion.  In  religions, 
therefore,  which  hold  most  of  love,  there  is  generally  room  left 
for  terrors  of  the  deepest  kind.  Nor  is  there  any  religion  so 
diabolical  as,  in  its  representation  of  divinity,  to  leave  no  room 
for  admiration  and  esteem.  Whatever  personage  or  spectre  of 
divinity  is  worshipped,  a  certain  esteem  and  love  is  generally 
affected  by  his  worshippers.  Or  if,  in  the  devotion  paid  him, 
there  be  in  truth  no  real  or  absolute  esteem,  there  is  however 
a  certain  astonishing  delight  or  ravishment  excited. 

This  passion  is  experienced  in  common  by  every  worshipper 
of  the  zealot  kind.  The  motion,  when  unguided  and  left  wholly 
to  itself,  is  in  its  nature  turbulent  and  incentive.  It  disjoints 
the  natural  frame  and  relaxes  the  ordinary  tone  or  tenor  of  the 
mind.  In  this  disposition  the  reins  are  let  loose  to  all  passion 
which  arises ;  and  the  mind,  as  far  as  it  is  able  to  act  or  think 
in  such  a  state,  approves  the  riot,  and  justifies  the  wild  effects  by 
the  supposed  sacredness  of  the  cause.  Every  dream  and  frenzy 
is  made  inspiration,  every  affection,  zeal.  And  in  this  persuasion 
the  zealots,  no  longer  self-governed,  but  set  adrift  to  the  Avide 
sea  of  passion,  can  in  one  and  the  same  spirit  of  devotion  exert 
the  opposite  passions  of  love  and  hatred,  unite  affectionately  and 
abhor  furiously,  curse,  bless,  sing,  mourn,  exult,  tremble,  caress, 
assassinate,  inflict  and  suffer  martyrdom,^  with  a  thousand  other 
the  most  vehement  efforts  of  variable  and  contrary  affections. 

The  common  heathen  religion,  especially  in  its  latter  age, 
when  adorned  with  the  most  beautiful    temples  and  rendered 

^  A  passage  of  history  comes  to  my  miiid^  as  it  is  cited  by  an  eminent 
divine  of  our  own  Cliurcli^  with  regard  to  that  spirit  of  martyrdom  M'hich 
furnishes,  it  seems^  such  solid  matter  for  the  opinion  and  faith  of  many 
zealots.  The  story,  in  the  words  of  our  divine,  and  with  his  own  reflec- 
tions on  it,  is  as  follows  :  "Two  PVanciscans  offered  themselves  to  the  fire 
to  prove  Savonarola  to  be  a  heretic  ;  but  a  certain  Jacobine  offered  him- 
self to  the  fire  to  prove  that  Savonarola  had  true  revelations,  and  was  no 
heretic.  In  the  meantime  Savonarola  preached,  but  made  no  such  con- 
fident offer,  nor  durst  he  venture  at  that  new  kind  of  fire-ordeal.     And 

180 


J 


MISCELLANEOUS   KEFLECTIONS 

more  illustrious  by  the  munificence  of  the  Roman  senate  and 
succeeding  emperors,  ran  wholly  into  pomp,  and  was  supported 
chiefly  by  that  sort  of  enthusiasm  which  is  raised  from  the 
external  objects  of  grandeur,  majesty,  and  what  we  call  august.^ 
On  the  other  side,  the  Egyptian  or  Syrian  religions,  which  lay 
more  in  mystery  and  concealed  rites,  having  less  dependence  on 
the  magistrate  and  less  of  that  decorum  of  art,  politeness,  and 
magnificence,  ran  into  a  more  pusillanimous,  frivolous,  and  mean  , 
kind  of  superstition  :  "  The  observation  of  days,(the  forbearance  ' 
of  meats,  and  the  contention  about  traditions,  seniority  of  laws, 
and  priority  of  godships.''' ^ 

Summus  utrinque 
Inde  furor  viilgo,  quod  numina  vicinorum 
Odit  uterque  locus,  quum  solos  credat  habendos 
Esse  deos,  quos  ipse  colit.'^ 

History,  withal,  informs  us  of  a  certain  establishment  in 
Egypt  which  was  very  extraordinary,  and  must  needs  have  had 
a  very  uncommon  effect,  no  way  advantageous  to  that  nation 
in  particular,  or  to  the  general  society  of  mankind.  We  know 
very  well  that  nothing  is  more  injurious  to  the  police  or 
municipal  constitution  of  any  city  or  colony  than  the  forcing  of 
a  particular  trade.  Nothing  more  dangerous  than  the  over- 
peopling  any  manufacture,  or  multij^lying  the  traders  or  dealers, 
of  whatever  vocation,  beyond  their  natural  proportion  and  the 
public  demand.     Now  it  happened  of  old,  in  this  motherland  of 

put  case,  all  four  had  passed  through  the  fire  and  died  in  the  flames,  what 
would  that  have  proved?  Had  he  heeu  a  heretic,  or  no  heretic,  tlie  more 
or  the  less,'for  the  confidence  of  these  zealous  idiots  ?  If  we  mark  it,  a  great 
many  arguments  whereon  many  sects  rely  are  no  hetter  prol)ation  than 
this  comes  to." — Bishop  Taylor  in  his  dedicatory  discourse,  hefore  his 
Libert !i  of  Prophesying.     See  Letter  of  Enthnaicmn ,  §  ,3. 

1  Infra,  Misc.  ii.  eh.  ii.  2  ggg  Moralists,  ])t.  iii.  §  1. 

^  ["  Hence  a  raging  madness  is  ahroad  on  both  sides,  iiecause  each 
place  hates  its  neighbours'  deities,  since  it  believes  that  only  its  own  objects 
of  worship  are  Gods." — Juv.  xv.  3o-8.] 

181 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

superstition,  that  the  sons  of  certain  artists  were  by  law  obliged 
always  to  follow  the  same  calling  with  their  fathers.^  Thus  the 
son  of  a  priest  was  always  a  priest  by  birth,  as  was  the  whole 
lineage  after  him,  without  interruption.  Nor  was  it  a  custom 
with  this  nation,  as  with  others,  to  have  only  one  single  priest 
or  priestess  to  a  temple  ;  but  as  the  number  of  Gods  and  temples 
was  infinite,  so  was  that  of  the  priests.-  The  religious  foundations 
were  without  restriction,  and  to  one  single  worship  or  temple  as 
many  of  the  holy  order  might  be  retainers  as  could  raise  a 
maintenance  from  the  office. 

Whatever  happened  to  other  races  or  professions,  that  of  the 
priest,  in  all  likelihood,  must  by  this  regulation  have  propagated 

^  ^UTi  5^  AiyvTrTiuu  eTrrd.  yivea.'  Kal  tovtwv  ol  /J.iv,  ip^es,  ol  de,  /xaxi- fJ-Oi 
KetcXiarai. — ov5^  tovtolulv  i^ean  rex^V  (TraaKijaai.  ovdepiirjv,  dWa  to.  is  woXefjiOv 
iira<TKiovffL  fxovva,  Trats  irapa  Trarpos  eKOeKo/xevos.  [' "  The  Egj^tians  are  divided 
into  seven  classes — one  of  priests,  one  of  warriors,  etc.  .  .  .  The  warriors 
may  not  practise  any  craft,  hut  only  that  of  war,  which  they  inherit  hy 
birth."— Herodot.  ii.  164,  166.] 

iparai  5^  oi'/c  e^s  eKaarov  tu>v  OeQiv,  dWa  iroWol  .  .  eTre di'  Oe  ris  OLTrodavrj,  tovtov  6 
Trats  cLVTiKaTiaraTaL.  ['^  Not  one  priest,  but  a  whole  college  of  priests,  is 
consecrated  to  each  god,  .  .  .  and  when  one  priest  dies  his  son  is  con- 
secrated in  his  place." — Ihld.  ii.  .37.] 

2  T?7S  5^  x^P°-^  airda-qs  eb  Tpia  fj-eprj  8iripT]/j.€vr]s,  etc.  Cum  tota  regio  in  tres 
partes  divisa  sit,  primam  sibi  portionem  vendicat  ordo  sacerdotum,  magiia 
apud  indigenas  auctoritate  pollens,  tum  ob  pietatem  in  deos,  turn  quod 
multam  ex  eruditione  scientiam  ejusmodi  homines  afferunt.  Ex  reditibus 
autem  suis  cuncta  per  Aegyptum  sacrificia  procurant,  ministros  alunt ;  et 
propriis  commoditatibus  ancillantur,  rais  t'Skts  xpe'a's  xop'^ToCcriv.  Non  enim 
(Aegyptii)  existimant  fas  esse  deorum  honores  mutari,  sed  semper  ah  eisdem 
eodem  ritu  peragi ;  necjue  eos  necessariorum  copia  destitui  qui  in  com- 
mune omnibus  consulunt.  In  universum  namque  de  maximis  rebus  con- 
sulentes,  indesinenter  regi  praesto  sunt,  in  nonnullis  tanquam  participes 
imperii,  in  aliis  reges,  duces  et  magistri  (cri'vepyoi,  elariyrjTai,  diddaKaXoi) 
existentes.  Ex  astrologia  quoque  et  sacrorum  inspectione  futura  prae- 
dicunt,  atque  e  sacrorum  librorum  scriptis  res  gestas  cum  utilitate  con- 
junctas  praelegunt.  Non  enim,  ut  apud  Graecos,  unus  tantummodo  vir 
aut  foemina  una  sacerdotio  fungitur ;  sed  complures  sacrificia  et  honores 
deum  obeuntes  liberis  suis  eandem  ^•itae  rationem  ([uasi  per  manus  tradunt. 
Hi  autem  cuuctis  oneribus  sunt  immunes,  et  primos  post  regem  honoris 

182 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

the  most  of  any.  'Tis  a  tempting  circumstance  to  have  so  easy 
a  mastery  over  the  world,  to  subdue  by  wit  instead  of  force,  to 
practise  on  the  passions  and  triumph  over  the  judgment  of 
mankind,  to  influence  private  famiUes  and  public  councils, 
conquer  conquerors,  control  the  magistrate  himself,  and  govern 
without  the  envy  which  attends  all  other  government  or 
superiority.  No  wonder  if  such  a  profession  was  apt  to  multiply, 
especially  when  we  consider  the  easy  living  and  security  of  the 
professors,  their  exemption  from  all  labour  and  hazard,  the 
supposed  sacredness  of  their  character,  and  their  free  possession 
of  wealth,  grandeur,  estates,  and  women. 

There  was  no  need  to  invest  such  a  body  as  this  with  rich 
lands  and  ample  territories,  as  it  happened  in  Egypt.  The 
generation  or  tribe  being  once  set  apart  as  sacred,  would  without 
further  encoui'agement  be  able,  no  doubt,  in  process  of  time  to 
establish  themselves  a  plentiful  and  growing  fund  or  religious 
land-bank.  'Twas  a  sufficient  donative  to  have  had  only  that 
single  privilege  from  the  law,^  "  that  they  might  retain  what 

et  potestatis  gradus  obtinent.  ["  The  whole  country  being  divided  into 
three  parts,  the  order  of  priests  claims  the  first  part.  It  enjoys  great 
authority  among  the  people,  both  for  its  piety  toward  the  Gods  and  for  its 
profound  learning.  Out  of  their  revenues  the  priests  find  all  the  sacrifices 
for  Egypt,  pay  their  servants,  and  meet  their  own  expenses.  For  the 
Egyptians  do  not  think  it  lawful  to  change  the  rites  of  the  Gods,  but  hold 
that  they  must  be  carried  on  unchanged  by  the  same  class  of  persons,  and  that 
those  who  watch  for  all  must  not  lack  bread.  For  the  priests,  perpetually 
watching  for  the  general  good,  are  ever  by  the  king's  side  ;  and  in  some 
matters  they  share  his  power,  in  some  they  act  as  fellow-workers,  advisers, 
teachers.  They  also  foretell  the  future  from  astronomy  and  from  the 
examination  of  victims,  and  from  their  sacred  books  they  give  useful 
teaching  in  history.  P"'or  it  is  not  as  with  the  Greeks,  among  whom  one 
man  or  one  woman  holds  a  priesthood,  but  several  Egyptian  priests  attend 
to  sacrifices  and  ritual,  and  they  pass  on  the  same  way  of  life  by  inheritance 
to  their  children.  They  are  exempted  from  all  taxes,  and  they  enjoy  the 
first  rank  and  dignity  after  the  king." — Diod.  Sic.  i.  73.  Shaftesbury 
chooses  to  cite  this  Greek  author  in  a  Latin  version.] 
1  Infra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii. 

183 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

they  could  get,  and  that  it  might  be  lawful  for  their  order  to 
receive  such  estates  by  voluntary  contribution,  as  could  never 
afterwards  be  converted  to  other  uses," 

Now  if,  besides  the  method  of  propagation  by  descent,  other 
methods  of  increase  were  allowed  in  this  order  of  men,  if 
volunteers  were  also  admitted  at  pleasure,  without  any  stint  or 
confinement  to  a  certain  number,  'tis  not  difficult  to  imagine 
how  enormous  the  growth  would  be  of  such  a  science  or  pro- 
fession, thus  recognised  by  the  magistrate,  thus  invested  with 
lands  and  power,  and  thus  entitled  to  whatever  extent  of 
riches  or  possessions  could  be  acquired  by  practice  and  influence 
over  the  superstitious  part  of  mankind. 

There  were,  besides,  in  Egypt  some  natural  causes  of  super- 
stition, beyond  those  which  were  common  to  other  regions. 
This  nation  might  well  abound  in  prodigies,  when  even  their 
country  and  soil  itself  was  a  kind  of  prodigy  in  nature.  Their 
solitary  idle  life  whilst  shut  up  in  their  houses  by  the  regular 
inundations  of  the  Nile ;  the  unwholesome  vapours  arising  from 
the  new  mud  and  slimy  relicts  of  their  river  exposed  to  the 
hot  suns ;  their  various  meteors  and  phenomena,  with  the  long 
vacancy  they  had  to  observe  and  comment  on  them ;  the 
necessity,  withal,  which,  on  the  account  of  their  navigation 
and  the  measure  of  their  yearly  drowned  lands,  compelled  them 
to  promote  the  studies  of  astronomy  and  other  sciences,  of 
which  their  priesthood  could  make  good  advantages — all  these 
may  be  reckoned  perhaps  as  additional  causes  of  the  immense 
growth  of  superstition,  and  the  enormous  increase  of  the  priest- 
hood in  this  fertile  land. 

''Twill,  however,  as  I  conceive,  be  found  unquestionably  true, 
according  to  political  arithmetic,  in  every  nation  whatsoever, 
"  that  the  quantity  of  superstition  (if  I  may  so  speak)  will  in 
proportion  nearly  answer  the  number  of  priests,  diviners, 
soothsayers,  prophets,  or  such  who  gain  their  livelihood  or 
receive  advantages  by  officiating  in  religious  afFairs.*"  For  if 
these  dealers  are  numerous,  they  will  force  a  trade.     And  as 

184 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

the  liberal  hand  of  the  magistrate  can  easily  raise  swarms  of 
this  kind  where  they  are  already  but  in  a  moderate  proportion, 
so  where  through  any  other  cause  the  number  of  these,  increas- 
ing still  by  degrees,  is  suffered  to  grow  beyond  a  certain 
measure,  they  will  soon  raise  such  a  ferment  in  men's  minds  as 
will  at  least  compel  the  magistrate,  however  sensible  of  the 
grievance,  to  be  cautious  in  proceeding  to  a  reform. 

We  may  observe  in  other  necessary  professions,  raised  on 
the  infirmities  and  defects  of  mankind  (as,  for  instance,  in  law 
and  physic),  "that  with  the  least  help  from  the  bounty  or 
beneficence  of  the  magistrate,  the  number  of  the  professors  and 
the  subject-matter  of  the  profession  is  found  over  and  above 
increasing."  New  difficulties  are  started,  new  subjects  of  con- 
tention ;  deeds  and  instruments  of  law  grow  more  numerous  and 
prolix,  hypotheses,  methods,  regimens,  more  various,  and  the 
materia  medica  more  extensive  and  abundant.  What,  in 
process  of  time,  must  therefore  naturally  have  happened  in  the 
case  of  religion  among  the  Egyptians  may  easily  be  gathered. 

Nor  is  it  strange  that  we  should  find  the  property^  and 
power  of  the  Egyptian  priesthood  in  ancient  days  arrived  to 
such  a  height  as  in  a  manner  to  have  swallowed  up  the  state 
and  monarchy.  A  worse  accident  befel  the  Persian  crown,  of 
which  the  hierarchy  having  got  absolute  possession,  had  once 
a  fair  chance  for  universal  empire.  Now  that  the  Persian  or 
Babylonian  hierarchy  was  much  after  the  model  of  the  Egyptian, 
though  different  pei'haps  in  rites  and  ceremonies,  we  may  well 

^  VHiich  was  one-third.  fiovXo/j.ei'rip  oe  ttjc  "Io-li>,  etc.  Sed  cum  Isis 
lucro  etiani  sacerdotes  invitare  vellet  ad  cultus  istos  (nempe  Osiridis, 
mariti  fato  fuiicti)  tertiam  eis  terrae  partem  eh  Trpoaddovs,  ad  deorum 
ministeria  et  sa(!ra  munia^  frueudam  donavit.  ["But  as  Isis  wished  to 
encourag-e  the  priests  by  gain  also  to  the  worship  of  her  dead  liusband 
Osiris,  slie  granted  them  one-third  of  the  country,  to  employ  its  revenues 
for  divine  duties  and  sacrifices." — Diod.  Sic.  i.  21.]  A  remarkable  effect 
of  female  superstition  !  See  also  the  passage  of  the  same  historian,  cited 
above,  p.  182,  in  the  notes. 

185 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

judge,  not  only  from  the  history  of  the  Magi,^  but  from  what 
is  recorded  of  ancient  colonies  sent  long  before  by  the  Egyptians 
into  Chaldea^  and  the  adjacent  countries.  And  whether  the 
Ethiopian  model  was  from  that  of  Egypt,  or  the  Egyptian 
from  that  of  Ethiopia  (for  each  nation  had  its  pretence  ^),  we 
know  by  remarkable  effects*  that  the  Ethiopian  empire  was 
once  in  the  same  condition,  the  state  having  been  wholly 
swallowed  in  the  exorbitant  power  of  their  landed  hierarchy. 
So  true  it  is,  "  That  dominion  nmst  naturally  follow  property." 
Nor  is  it  possible,  as  1  conceive,  for  any  state  or  monarchy  to 
withstand  the  encroachments  of  a  growing  hierarchy,  founded 
on  the  model  of  these  Egyptian  and  Asiatic  priesthoods.  No 
superstition  will  ever  be  wanting  among  the  ignorant  and 
vulgar  whilst  the  able  and  crafty  have  a  power  to  gain  inherit- 
ances and  possessions  by  working    on    this    human    weakness. 

1  See  Treatise  ii.  part  ii.  §  1.  Herodotus  gives  us  the  history  at 
length  in  his  third  book. 

2  Diod.  Sic.  i.  28,  81. 

3  Herodot.  ii.  30,  104  ;  and  Diod.  Sic.  iii.  .3. 

•*  Kara  Tr]v  MepoTjv  ol  Trepl  ras  tQi/  de(>iv  OepaTreias  re  Kal  Tifihs  ^Larpl^ovTei 
iepeh,  etc.  Qui  in  Meroe  (urbe,  et  insula  primaria  Aetliiopum)  deorum 
cultus  et  honores  administrant  sacerdotes  (ordo  autem  hie  maxima  pollet 
auctoritate),  quandocumque  ipsis  in  mentem  venerit,  niisso  ad  regem 
nuntio,  vita  se  ilium  abdicare  jubent.  Oraculis  enim  deorum  hoc  edici : 
nee  fas  esse  ab  uUo  mortalium,  quod  dii  immortales  jusserint,  contemni. 
["  The  priests  who  look  after  the  ritual  and  worsliip  of  the  Gods  at  Meriie 
(and  very  great  is  the  authority  of  this  order)  send  word  to  the  king, 
whenever  they  think  fit,  that  he  must  die  ;  for  so  (they  say)  the  oracles 
of  the  Gods  enjoin,  and  wliat  Gods  command  no  mortal  must  disobey." — 
Diod.  Sic.  iii.  6.]  So  much  for  their  kings  ;  for  as  to  subjects,  the  manner 
was  related  a  little  before.  Unus  ex  lictoribus  ad  reum  mittitur,  signum 
mortis  praeferens  :  quo  ille  viso  domum  abiens  sibi  mortem  consciscit. 
[''  One  of  their  attendants  is  sent  to  the  accused,  bearing  a  sign  of  death  ; 
whereupon  the  accused  goes  home  and  kills  himself." — Diod.  Sic.  iii.  .5.] 
This  the  people  of  our  days  would  call  passive  obedience  and  priestcraft, 
with  a  witness.  But  our  historian  proceeds  :  Et  per  superiores  quidem 
aetates,  non  armis  aut  vi  coacti,  sed  merae  superstitionis  vw  'avTrjs  ttjs 
BeiaLdaifMovias  fascino  mente  capti  reges,  sacerdotibus   morem   gesserunt ; 

186 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

This  is  a  fund  which,  by  these  allowances,  will  prove  inexhaust- 
ible. New  modes  of  worship,  new  miracles,  new  heroes,  saints, 
divinities  (which  serve  as  new  occasions  for  sacred  donatives),  will 
be  easily  supplied  on  the  part  of  the  religious  orders,  whilst  the 
civil  magistrate  authorises  the  accumulative  donation,  and  neither 
restrains  the  number  or  possessions  of  the  sacred  body. 

We  find,  withal,  that  in  the  early  days  of  this  ancient 
priestly  nation  of  whom  we  have  been  speaking,  'twas  thought 
expedient  also,  for  the  increase  of  devotion,  to  enlarge  their 
system  of  deity,  and  either  by  mystical  genealogy,  consecration, 
or  canonisation,  to  multiply  their  revealed  objects  of  worship 
and  raise  new  personages  of  divinity  in  their  religion.  They 
proceeded,  it  seems,  in  process  of  time,  to  increase  the  number 
of  their  Gods,^  so  far  that  at  last  they  became  in  a  manner 
numberless.  What  odd  shapes,  species,  and  forms  of  deity 
were  in  latter  times  exhibited  is  well  known.  Scarce  an  animal 
or  plant  but  was  adopted  into  some  share  of  divinity. 

O  sanctas  genteSj  quibus  haec  nascuntur  in  hortis 

Numina !  - 

donee  Erg-amenes,  Aethiopum  rex  (Ptolemaeo  secundo  rerum  potiente), 
Graecorum  disciplinae  et  pliilosophiae  particeps^  mandata  ilia  primus 
adspernari  ausus  fuit.  Nam  hie  animo,  qui  regem  deceret,  sumto,  cum 
militum  manu  in  locum  inaccessum,  ul)i  aureum  fuit  templum  Aethiopum, 
profectus  :  omnes  illos  sacrificos  jugulavit,  et  abolito  more  pristino,  sacra 
pro  arbitrio  suo  instauravit.  ["  In  former  generations  the  kings,  not 
forced  by  arms,  but  simply  bewitclied  by  superstition,  obeyed  the  priests. 
But  Ergamenes,  king  of  the  Ethiopians  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy  II.,  who 
was  initiated  into  Greek  philosopliy,  was  the  first  to  despise  their  orders. 
^V'itll  kingly  courage  he  marclied  liis  soldiers  uj)on  the  inaccessible  spot 
where  stood  the  golden  temple  of  the  Ethiopians,  cut  down  all  the  priests, 
abolished  the  old  usage,  and  rearranged  the  ritual  to  his  own  liking." — 
Diod.  Sic.  iii.  6.] 

^  (is  5^  avTol  X^yovai,  ^red  iari  eTrraKiaxL^ia  Kal  fxvpia  t^' Kfiacnv  jBaaiXei'ffafTa, 
e'Tre/  re  iK  tCiv  6/cra;  dedov  oi  SvwBeKa  deol  iyivovro.  ["  By  the  Egyptians'  own 
story  it  is  17,000  years  from  the  time  when  the  eight  (iods  grew  into 
twelve  down  to  the  reign  of  Amasis." — Herodot.  ii.  4.3.] 

^  \."  O  pious  nation,  for  whom  Gods  like  these  grow  in  the  garden  !" 
— Juv.  XV.  10.] 

187 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTETMSTICS 

No  wonder  if  by  a  nation  so  abounding  in  religious  orders, 
spiritual  conquests  Avere  sought  in  foreign  countries,  colonies 
led  abroad,^  and  missionaries  detached  on  expeditions  in  this 
prosperous  service.  ""Twas  thus  a  zealot  people,  influenced  of 
old  by  their  very  region  and  climate,  and  who  through  a  long 
tract  of  time,  under  a  peculiar  policy,  had  been  raised  both  by 
art  and  nature  to  an  immense  growth  in  relig-ious  science  and 
mystery,  came  by  degrees  to  spread  their  variety  of  rites  and 
ceremonies,  their  distinguishing  marks  of  separate  worships 
and  secret  communities,  through  the  distant  World,  but  chiefly 
through  their  neighbouring  and  dependent  countries. 

We  understand  from  history  that  even  when  the  Egyptian 
state  was  least  powerful  in  arms,  it  Avas  still  respected  for  its 
religion  and  mysteries.  It  drew  strangers  from  all  parts  to 
behold  its  wonders.  And  the  fertility  of  its  soil  forced  the 
adjacent  people,  and  wandering  nations  who  lived  dispersed  in 
single  tribes,  to  visit  them,  court  their  alliance,  and  solicit  a 
trade  and  commerce  with  them,  on  whatsoever  terms.  The 
strangers,  no  doubt,  might  well  receive  religious  rites  and 
doctrines  from  those  to  whom  they  owed  their  maintenance  and 
bread. 

Before  the  time  that  Israel  was  constrained  to  go  down  to 
Egypt  and  sue  for  maintenance  to  these  powerful  dynasties  or 

^  ot  5e  ovv  AlyvTTTioi.,  etc.  Aegyptii  plurinias  colonias  ex  Aegypto  in 
orbem  terraruni  disseminatas  fuisse  dicuiit.  In  Babylonem  colonos 
deduxit  Belus,  qui  Neptuni  et  Libyae  filius  habetur :  et  posita  ad 
Euphratem  sede,  instituit  sacerdotes  ad  morem  Aeoryptiorum  exemptos 
impensis  et  oiieribus  publicis^  quos  Babylonii  vocant  Chaldaeos,  qui, 
exemplo  sacerdotum  et  physicorum^  astrologorumque  in  Aegypto^  ob- 
servant Stellas.  ["  Tlie  Egyptians  say  that  very  many  colonies  were 
scattered  over  the  world  from  Egypt.  Belus,  who  is  reputed  son  of 
Poseidon  and  Libya^  led  colonists  to  Babylon.  After  planting  his  town 
on  the  Euphrates^  he  instituted  priests  after  the  Egyptian  fashion, 
exempt  from  taxes  and  public  burdens  ;  these,  whom  the  Babylonians  call 
Chaldeans,  like  the  priests  and  the  men  of  science  and  the  astronomers  in 
Egypt,  watch  the  stars." — Diod.  Sic.  i.  28,  also  81.] 

188 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

lowland  states,  the  holy  patriarch  Abraham  himself  had  been 
necessitated  to  this  compliance  on  the  same  account.^  He 
applied  in  the  same  manner  to  the  Egyptian  court.  He  was  at 
first  well  received  and  handsomely  presented,  but  afterwards 
ill-used  and  out  of  favour  with  the  prince,  yet  suffered  to  depart 
the  kingdom  and  retire  with  his  effects,  without  any  attempt 
of  recalling  him  again  by  force,  as  it  happened  in  the  case  of 
his  posterity.  'Tis  certain  that  if  this  holy  patriarch,  who  first 
instituted  the  sacred  rite  of  circumcision  within  his  own  family 
or  tribe,  had  no  regard  to  any  policy  or  religion  of  the  Egyptians, 
yet  he  had  formerly  been  a  guest  and  inhabitant  in  Egypt 
(where  historians  mention  this  to  have  been  a  national  rite-), 
long  ere  he  had  received  any  divine  notice  or  revelation  con- 
cerning this  affair.^  Nor  was  it  in  religion  merely  that  this 
reverend  guest  was  said  to  have  derived  knowledge  and  learning 
from  the  Egyptians.  'Twas  from  this  parent-country  of  occult 
sciences  that  he  was  presumed,  together  with  other  wisdom,  to 
have  learnt  that  of  judicial  astrology,*  as  his  successors  did 
afterwards  other  prophetical  and  miraculous  arts,  proper  to  the 
Magi  or  priesthood  of  this  land. 

One  cannot  indeed  but  observe,  in  after  times,  the  strange 

^  Gen.  xii.  10,  etc. 

-  Abramus,  quando  Aegyptum  ingressus  est,  nonduni  circunicisus  erat, 
neque  per  auiios  amplius  viginti  post  reditum.  .  .  .  Illius  poster!  circumcisi 
sunt,  et  ante  introituni,  et  dum  in  Aegypto  commorati  sunt :  post  exitum 
vero  nou  sunt  circumcisi,  quamdiu  vixit  Moses.  ''Fecit  itaque  Josue  cultros 
lapideos,  et  circumcidit  filios  Israel  in  colle  praeputiorum.  Factum  Deus 
ratum  habuit,  dixitcjue,  Hodie  a^etXoj'  rbv  dveiSicfibv  Aiyinrrov  acp'  v/xQv,  abstuli 
opprobrium  Aegypti  a  vobis."  Josue,  v.  3.  Tarn  Aegyptiis  quam  Judaeis 
opprobrio  erant  incircumcisi.  Apud  Aegyptios  circumcidendi  ritus  vetus- 
tissimus  fuit,  et  dw'  dpxv^  ab  ipso  initio  iustitutus.  Illi  nuUorum  aliorum 
liominum  institutis  uti  volunt.  Herodot.  ii.  91.  rd  aldoia  (^  dWoi  nh  iuxn  Jjs 
iyevovTo,  TrXr^v  baoi  dno  tovtwv  ^/xadov '  AiyvirTioi  5i  TrepiTd/jLVOvTai.  ["  The 
Egyptians  practise  circumcision,  but  no  other  people  do  so  except  those 
who  have  learned  it  from  the  Egyptians."— Herodot.  ii.  3G.]— Marsliami 
Chronkns  Canon,  p.  72.  3  q^^    j.^,jj_ 

*  Julius  Firmicus,  apud  Marshamum,  pp.  4.52,  4.5o. 

189 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

adherence  and  servile  dependency  of  the  whole  Hebrew  race  on 
the  Egyptian  nation.  It  appears  that  though  they  were  of  old 
abused  in  the  person  of  their  grand  patriarch ;  though  after- 
wards held  in  bondage,  and  treated  as  the  most  abject  slaves ; 
though  twice  expelled,  or  necessitated  to  save  themselves  by 
flight  out  of  this  oppressive  region,  yet  in  the  very  instant  of 
their  last  retreat,  whilst  they  were  yet  on  their  march,  conducted 
by  visible  Divinity,  supplied  and  fed  from  heaven,  and  supported 
by  continual  miracles,  they  notwithstanding  inclined  so  strongly 
to  the  manners,  the  religion,  rites,  diet,  customs,  laws  and  con- 
stitutions of  their  tyrannical  masters,  that  it  was  with  the 
utmost  difficulty  they  could  be  withheld  from  returning  again 
into  the  same  subjection.^     Nor  could  their  great  captains  and 

^  It  can  scarce  be  said  in  reality,  from  what  appears  in  Holy  "SFrit^  that 
their  retreat  was  voluntary.  And  for  the  historians  of  other  nations^  they 
have  presumed  to  assert  that  this  people  was  actually  expelled  Egypt  on 
account  of  their  leprosy,  to  which  the  Jewish  laws  appear  to  have  so  great 
a  reference.  Tlius  Tacitus  :  Plurimi  auctores  consentiunt,  orta  per 
Aegyptum  tabe,  quae  corpora  foedaret,  regem  Occhorim,  adito  Hammonis 
oraculoj  remedium  peteuteni,  purgari  regnum,  et  id  genus  hominum  ut 
invisum  deis,  alias  in  terras  avehere  jussum.  Sic  conquisitum  coUec- 
tumque  vulgus,  .  .  .  Mosen  unum  monuisse,  etc.  ["  Several  authors 
agree  that  when  a  disfiguring  disease  spread  among  the  Egyptians,  king 
Bocchoris  consulted  the  oracle  of  Hammon,  and  was  bidden  to  purge  the 
kingdom  and  remove  from  it  that  class  of  men  (the  sick)  as  offensive  to 
the  Gods.  So  when  the  mob  was  hunted  up  and  got  together  .  .  .  Moses 
alone  advised,"  etc. — Tacitus,  ///*■/.  v.  .'3.]  Aegyptii,  quum  scabiem  et 
vitiliginem  patereutur,  responso  mouiti  eum  (Mosen)  cum  aegris,  ne  pestis 
ad  plures  serperet,  terminis  Aegypti  pellunt.  Dux  igitur  exulum  factus, 
sacra  Aegyptiorum  furtoabstulit :  quae  repetentes  armis  Aegyptii,  domum 
redire  tempestatibus  compulsi  sunt.  ["  ^Vllen  the  Egyptians  were  suffer- 
ing from  leprosy  they  were  warned  by  an  oracle  to  expel  Moses  and  the 
sick  from  Egypt,  lest  the  disease  should  spread  further.  Becoming  there- 
fore leader  of  the  exiles,  Moses  stole  the  sacred  objects  of  the  Egyptians ; 
and  when  tlie  Egyptians  tried  to  recapture  these,  they  were  driven  home 
by  storms." — Justin,  xxxvi.  2,]  And  in  Marsham  we  find  this  remarkable 
citation  from  Manetho  :  Amenophin  regem  affectasse  OeQv  yepiadai  dear-qv, 
wcnrep  ''Qp  ets  tu>v  irpb  avrov   /3e/3acrtXei'K6rwv,    deorum   esse   comtemplatorem, 

190 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

lef^islators  prevent  their  relapsing  perpetually  into  the  same 
worship  to  which  they  had  been  so  long  accustomed.^ 

How  far  the  divine  Providence  might  have  indulged  the 
stubborn  habit  and  stupid  humour  of  this  people,  by  giving 
them  laws  (as  the  Prophet  says^)  which  he  himself  approved 
not,  I  have  no  intention  to  examine.     This  only  I  pretend  to 

sicut  Orum  quendam  regum  priorum.  Cui  responsum  est^  6Vt  Swijo-erat 
deovs  iS{?v,  quod  posset  videre  deos^  si  regionem  a  leprosis  et  immundis 
liomiiiibus  purgaret.  ["That  king  Ameiiophis  desired  to  see  the  Gods, 
like  Orus,  an  earlier  king,  and  received  the  answer  from  an  oracle  that  he 
miglit  see  the  Gods  if  he  cleared  the  country  of  filthy  lepers." — Chronicus 
Canon,  p.  52.] 

^  See  what  is  cited  above  (p.  189,  in  the  notes  from  Marsham)  of  the 
Jews  returning  to  circumcision  under  Joshua,  after  a  generation's  inter- 
mission ;  tliis  being  approved  by  God,  for  the  reason  given,  "  That  it  was 
taking  from  them  the  reproach  of  the  Egyptians,  or  what  rendered  them 
odious  and  impious  in  the  eyes  of  that  people."  Compare  with  this  the 
passage  concerning  Moses  himself,  Exod.  iv.  18,  25,  26  (together  with 
Acts  vii.  30,  34),  where  in  regard  to  the  Egyptians,  to  whom  he  was  now 
retui'ning  when  fourscore  years  of  age,  he  appears  to  have  circumcised  liis 
children,  and  taken  off  this  national  reproacli  ;  Zipporah,  his  wife,  never- 
theless, reproaching  liim  with  the  bloodiness  of  the  deed,  to  which  she 
appears  to  have  been  a  party  only  through  necessity,  and  in  fear  rather  of 
her  husband  than  of  God. 

2  Ezek.  XX.  25  ;  Acts  xv.  10.  Of  these  Egyptian  institutions  received 
amongst  the  Jews,  see  our  Spencer.  Cum  morum  quorundam  antifiuorum 
toleratio  vi  magna  polleret,  ad  Hebraeorum  auimos  Dei  legi  et  cultui  con- 
ciliandos,  et  a  reformatione  Mosaica  invidiam  omnem  amoliretur  ;  maxime 
conveniebat,  ut  Deus  ritus  aliquos  antiquitus  usitatos  in  sacrorum  suorum 
numerum  assumeret,  et  lex  a  Mose  data  speciem  ali(iuam  cultus  olim  re- 
cepti  ferret.  .  .  .  Ita  nempe  nati  factique  erant  Israelitae,  ex  Aegypto 
recens  egressi,  quod  Deo  pene  necesse  esset  (humanitus  loqui  fas  ,sit) 
rituum  aliijuorum  veterum  usum  iis  indulgere,  et  illius  instituta  ad  eorum 
morem  et  modulum  accommodare.  Nam  populus  erat  a  teneris  Aegypti 
moribus  assuetus,  et  in  iis  multorum  annorum  usu  confirmatus.  .  .  . 
Hebraei,  non  tantum  Aegypti  moribus  assueti,  sed  etiam  refractarii  fuerunt. 
.  .  .  Quemadmodum  cuj usque  regionis  et  terrae  po])ulo  sua  sunt  ingenia, 
moresijue  proprii,  ita  natura  gentem  Hebraeorum,  praeter  caeteros  orbis 
incolas,  ingenio  moroso,  difficili,  et  ad  infamiam  usque  pertinaci,  finxit. 
.  .  .   Cum  itaque  veteres  Hebraei  moribus  essent  asperis  et  efferatis  adeo, 

191 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

infer  from  what  has  been  advanced,  "  that  the  manners,  opinions, 
rites,  and  customs  of  the  Egyptians  had,  in  the  earhest  times 
and  from  generation  to  generation,  strongly  influenced  the 
Hebrew  people  (their  guests  and  subjects),  and  had  undoubtedly 
gained  a  powerful  ascendency  over  their  natures." 

How  extravagant  soever  the  multitude  of  the  Egyptian 
superstitions  may  appear,  'tis  certain  that  their  doctrine  and 
wisdom  were  in  high  repute,  since  it  is  taken  notice  of  in  Holy 
Scripture  as  no  small  advantage  even  to  Moses  himself,  "  that 
he  had  imbibed  the  wisdom  of  this  nation,"  V  which,  as  is  well 
known,  lay  chiefly  among  their  priests  and  Magi. 

Before  the  time  that  the  great  Hebrew  legislator  received 
his  education  among  these  sages,  a  Hebrew  slave,^  who  came 

populi  conditio  postulavit,  ut  Deos  ritus  aliquos  usu  veteri  lirmatos  iis  con- 
cederet,  et  vo/jliktjv  \a.Tpeiav  ry  eavruv  aadeveia  avfi^alvovaav  (uti  loquitur 
Tlieodoretus)  cultum  legalem  eorum  infirmitati  accommodatum  iustituerit. 
.  .  .  Hebraei  superstitiosa  gens  eraut,  et  omni  peiie  literatura  destituti. 
Quam  alte  gentium  superstitionibus  immergebantur,  e  legibus  intelligere 
licet,  quae  populo  tanquam  remedia  superstitionis  iniponebantur.  Con- 
tumax  autem  bellua  superstitio,  si  praesertim  ab  ignorantiae  tenebris 
novam  ferociam  et  contumaciam  liauserit.  Facile  vero  credi  potest, 
IsraelitaSj  nuper  e  servorum  domo  liberatos,  artium  humaniorum  rudes 
fuisse,  et  vix  quiccjuam  supra  lateres  atque  allium  Aegypti  sapuisse. 
Quando  itaque  Deo  jam  uegotium  esset,  cum  populo  tarn  barbaro,  et 
superstitioni  tam  impense  dedito  ;  pene  necesse  fuit,  ut  alicjuid  eorum 
infirmitati  daret,  eostjue  dolo  quodam  (uou  argumentis)  ad  seipsum  alli- 
ceret.  Nullum  animal  superstitioso,  rudi  praecipue,  morosius  est,  aut 
majori  arte  ti'actandum. — Spencerus,  De  Leg.  Hebr.  pp.  C27,  028,  629. 

1  (1)  /cat  €TraiOev6r)  Mwcr^j  wdaj]  ao(piq.  AiyvirTiwv'  ^v  de  dwarbs  iv  \6701s 
Kal  ev  ipyoLS.     Act.  Apost.  vii.  22. 

(2)  Exod.  vii.  11,  22. 

(;3)  Ibid.  viii.  7. 

(4)  Justin,  xxxvi.  2. 

-  Gen.  xxxix.,  etc.     Minimus  aetata  inter  fratres  Joseph  fuit,  cujus 

excellens  iugenium  veriti  fratres  clam  interceptum  peregrinis  mercatoribus 

veudiderunt.     A  quibus  deportatus  in  Aegyptum,  cum  magicas  ibi  ai*tes 

solerti  ingenio  percepisset,  brevi  ipsi  regi  percarus  fuit.     ["^^  Joseph  was 

he  youngest  of  the  brothers,  and  they,  fearing  his  cleverness,  kidnapped 

192 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

a  youth  into  the  Egyptian  Court,  had  ah'eady  grown  so  powerful 
in  this  kind  of  wisdom,  as  to  outdo  the  chief  diviners,  prognos- 
ticators  and  interpreters  of  Egypt.  He  raised  himself  to  be 
chief  minister  to  a  prince,  who,  following  his  advice,  obtained 
in  a  manner  the  whole  property,  and  consequently  the  absolute 
dominion  of  that  land.  But  to  what  height  of  power  the 
established  priesthood  was  arrived  even  at  that  time,  may  be 
conjectured  hence:  "that  the  crown  (to  speak  in  a  modern 
style)  offered  not  to  meddle  with  the  church  lands "" ;  and  that 
in  this  great  revolution  nothing  was  attempted,  so  much  as  by 
way  of  purchase  or  exchange,^  in  prejudice  of  this  landed  clergy, 
the  prime  minister  himself  having  joined  his  interest  with  theirs, 
and  entered  by  marriage  into  their  alliance.'-  And  in  this  he 
was  followed  by  the  great  founder  of  the  Hebrew  state.  For 
he  also  matched  himself  with  the  priesthood  of  some  of  the 
neighbouring  nations  ^  and  traders  "^  into  Egypt,  long  ere  his 
establishment  of  the  Hebrew  religion  and  commonwealth.  Nor 
had  he  perfected  his  model  till  he  consulted  the  foreign  priest, 
his  father-in-law,5  to  whose  advice  he  paid  such  remarkable 
deference. 

But  to  resume  the  subject  of  our  speculation  concerning  the 
wide  diffusion  of  the  priestly  science  or  function,  it  appears 
from  what  has  been  said,  that  notwithstanding  the  Egyptian 
priesthood  was  by  ancient  establishment  hereditary,  the  skill 
of  divining,  soothsaying,  and  magic  was  communicated  to  others 
besides  their  national  sacred  body ;  and  that  the  wisdom  of  the 
magicians,  their  power  of  miracles,  their  interpretation  of  dreams 
and  visions,  and  their  art  of  administering  in  divine  affairs, 
were  entrusted  even  to  foreigners  who  resided  amongst  them, 
him  and  sold  him  to  foreign  merchants.  These  men  carried  him  to  Egypt^ 
where  he  (juickly  learned  magic  and  rose  to  high  favour  even  with  the 
king." — Justin,  xxxvi.  2.] 

1  Gen.  xlvii.  22,  26.  2  Qg,,    ^jj    4.5 

^  Exod.  iii.  1,  and  xviii.  1,  etc. 

*  Such  were  the  Midianites,  Gen.  xxxvii.  28,  30. 

°  Exod.  xviii.  17-24. 

VOL.  II  193  o 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

It  appears  withal,  from  these  considerations,  how  apt  the 
rehgious  profession  was  to  spread  itself  widely  in  this  region 
of  the  world,  and  what  efforts  would  naturally  be  made  by 
the  more  necessitous  of  these  unlimited  professors  towards 
a  fortune  or  maintenance,  for  themselves  and  their  suc- 
cessors. 

Common  arithmetic  will,  in  this  case,  demonstrate  to  us 
"  that  as  the  proportion  of  so  many  laymen  to  each  priest  grew 
every  day  less  and  less,  so  the  wants  and  necessities  of  each  priest 
must  grow  more  and  more."  The  magistrate  too,  who,  according 
to  this  Egyptian  regulation,  had  resigned  his  title  or  share  of 
right  in  sacred  things,  could  no  longer  govern  as  he  j^leased  in 
these  affairs,  or  check  the  growing  number  of  these  professors. 
The  spiritual  generations  were  left  to  prey  on  others,  and  (like 
fish  of  prey)  even  on  themselves,  when  destitute  of  other  capture 
and  confined  within  too  narrow  limits.  ^Vhat  method  therefore, 
was  there  left  to  heighten  the  zeal  of  worshippers  and  augment 
their  liberality,  but  "  to  foment  their  emulation,  prefer  worship 
to  worship,  faith  to  faith,  and  turn  the  spirit  of  enthusiasm  to 
the  side  of  sacred  horror,  religious  antipathy,  and  mutual  discord 
between  worshippers ''''  ? 

Thus  provinces  and  nations  were  divided  by  the  most 
contrary  rites  and  customs  which  could  be  devised  in  order  to 
create  the  strongest  aversion  possible  between  creatures  of  a  like 
species.  Yov  when  all  other  animosities  are  allayed,  and  anger 
of  the  fiercest  kind  appeased,  the  religious  hatred,  we  find, 
continues  still,  as  it  began,  without  provocation  or  voluntary 
offence.  The  presumed  misbeliever  and  blasphemer,  as  one 
rejected  and  abhorred  of  God,  is,  through  a  pious  imitation, 
abhorred  by  the  adverse  worshipper  whose  enmity  must  naturally 
increase  as  his  religious  zeal  increases. 

From  hence  the  opposition  rose  of  temjile  against  temple, 
proselyte  against  proselyte.  The  most  zealous  worship  of  one 
God  was  best  expressed  (as  they  conceived)  by  the  open  defiance 
of  another.     Surnames  and  titles  of  divinity  passed  as  watch- 

194 


( 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

words.     He  who  had  not  the  symbol  nor  could  give  the  word 
received  the  knock. 

Down  Avith  him  !     Kill  him  !     Merit  heaven  thereby ; 

as  our  poet  has  it  in  his  American  tragedy.^ 

Nor  did  philosophy,-  when  introduced  into  religion,  ex- 
tinguish but  rather  inflame  this  zeal,  as  we  may  show  perhaps 
in  our  following  chapter  more  particularly,  if  we  return  again, 
as  is  likely,  to  this  subject.  For  this,  we  perceive,  is  of  a  kind 
apt  enough  to  grow  upon  our  hands.  We  shall  here  therefore 
observe  only  what  is  obvious  to  every  student  in  sacred  anti- 
(juities,  that  from  the  contentious  learning  and  sophistry  of  the 
ancient  schools  (when  true  science,  philosophy,  and  arts  were 
already  deep  in  their  decline^)  religious  problems  of  a  like 
contentious  form  sprang  up,  and  certain  doctrinal  tests  were 
framed  by  which  religious  parties  were  engaged  and  listed  against 
one  another,  with  more  animosity  than  in  any  other  cause  or 
quarrel  had  been  ever  known.  Thus  religious  massacres  began 
and  were  carried  on ;  temples  were  demolished,  holy  utensils 
destroyed,  the  sacred  pomp  trodden  under-foot,  insulted,  and 
the  insulters  in  their  turn  exposed  to  the  same  treatment  in 
their  persons  as  well  as  in  their  worship.  Thus  madness  and 
confusion  were  brought  upon  the  world,  like  that  chaos  which 
the  poet  miraculously  describes  in  the  mouth  of  his  mad  hero, 
when  even  in  celestial  places  disorder  and  blindness  reigned ; 
"  No  dawn  of  light  *" — 

"  No  glimpse  or  starry  spark, 
But  Gods  met  Gods,  and  justled  in  the  dark."  ' 

*  Dryden,  Indian  Emperor,  Act  v.  Sc.  2. 
^  Infra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii. 

•^  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  1  ;    and  part  iii.  §  3   in  tlie  notes.      Infra, 
Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii. 

*  Oedipus  of  Dryden  and  Lee. 

195 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


CHAPTER   II 

Judgment  of  divines  and  grave  authors  concerning  enthusiasm — Reflec- 
tions upon  scepticism — A  sceptic  Christian — Judgment  of  the  inspired 
concerning  their  own  inspirations — Knowledge  and  l)elief — History 
of  religion  resumed — ^Zeal  offensive  and  defensive — A  Church  in 
danger — Persecution — Policy  of  the  Church  of  Rome. 

What  I  had  to  remark  of  my  own  concerning  enthusiasm  I 
have  thus  dis})atched ;  what  others  have  remarked  on  the  same 
subject  I  may,  as  an  apologist  to  another  author,  be  allowed  to 
cite,  especially  if  I  take  notice  only  of  what  has  been  dropped 
very  naturally  by  some  of  our  most  approved  authors  and 
ablest  divines. 

It  has  been  thought  an  odd  kind  of  temerity  in  our  author 
to  assert,^  "  that  even  atheism  itself  was  not  wholly  exempt 
from  enthusiasm,  that  there  have  been  in  reality  enthusiastical 
atheists,  and  that  even  the  spirit  of  martyrdom  could,  upon 
occasion,  exert  itself  as  well  in  this  cause  as  in  any  other.'' 
Now,  besides  what  has  been  intimated  in  the  preceding  chapter, 
and  what  in  fact  may  be  demonstrated  from  the  examples  of 
Vaninus  and  other  martyrs  of  a  like  principle,  we  may  hear  an 
excellent  and  learned  divine,^  of  highest  authority  at  home  and 
fame  abroad,  who  after  having  described  an  enthusiastical  atheist 
and  one  atheistically  inspired,  says  of  this  very  sort  of  men 
"  that  they  are  fanatics  too,  however  that  word  seem  to  have  a 
more  peculiar  respect  to  something  of  a  deity  ;  all  atheists  being 
that  blind  Goddess  Nature's  fanatics.'" 

And  again,  "  All  atheists,""  says  he,  "  are  possessed  with  a 
certain  kind  of  madness  that  may  be  called  pneumatophobia,^ 

1  Viz.  in  his  Letter  concernitig  Entkusiaam. 

2  Dr.  Cud  worth's  Intellectual  System,  p.  134. 

2  The  good  doctor  makes  use  here  of  a  stroke  of  raillery  against  the 
over-fi'ighted  anti-superstitious  gentlemen,  with  whom  our  author  reasons 

19G 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

that  makes  them  have  an  irrational  but  desperate  abhorrence 
from  spirits  or  incorporeal  substances ;  they  being  acted  also, 
at  the  same  time,  with  an  hylomania,  whereby  they  madly  dote 
upon  matter,  and  devoutly  worship  it  as  the  only  numen." 

What  the  power  of  ecstasy  is,  whether  through  melancholy, 
wine,  love,  or  other  natural  causes,  another  learned  divine  ^  of 
our  church,  in  a  discourse  upon  enthusiasm,  sets  forth,  bringing 
an  example  from  Aristotle  "  of  a  Syracusean  poet  who  never 
versified  so  well  as  when  he  was  in  his  distracted  fits."  But  as 
to  poets  in  general,  compared  with  the  religious  enthusiasts,  he 
says,  there  is  this  difference,  "  that  a  poet  is  an  enthusiast  in 
jest,  and  an  enthusiast  is  a  poet  in  good  earnest." 

"  'Tis  a  strong  temptation,  says  the  doctor,^  with  a  melan- 
cholist,  when  he  feels  a  storm  of  devotion  and  zeal  come  upon 
him  like  a  mighty  wind,  his  heart  being  full  of  affection,  his 

at  lar^e  in  liis  second  Treatise  (part  ii.  §  1).  'Tis  indeed  tlie  nature  of 
fear,  as  of  all  other  passions,  when  excessive,  to  defeat  its  own  end  and 
prevent  us  in  the  execution  of  what  we  naturally  propose  to  ourselves  as 
our  advantage.  Superstition  itself  is  but  a  certain  kind  of  fear,  which 
possessing  us  strongly  with  the  apprehended  wrath  or  displeasiu-e  of 
divine  powers,  hinders  us  from  judging  what  those  powers  are  in  them- 
selves, or  what  conduct  of  ours  may,  with  best  reason,  be  thought  suitable 
to  such  highly  rational  and  superior  natures.  Now  if  from  the  experience 
of  many  gross  delusions  of  a  superstitious  kind  the  course  of  this  fear 
begins  to  turn,  'tis  natural  for  it  to  run  with  equal  violence  a  contrary 
way.  The  extreme  passion  for  religious  objects  passes  into  an  aversion. 
And  a  certain  horror  and  dread  of  imposture  causes  as  great  a  disturbance 
as  even  imposture  itself  had  done  before.  In  such  a  situation  as  this, 
the  miiul  may  easily  be  blinded,  as  well  in  one  respect  as  in  the  other. 
'Tis  plain  l)()th  these  disorders  carry  something  with  them  which  discovers 
us  to  be  in  some  manner  beside  our  reason,  and  out  of  the  right  use  of 
judgment  and  understanding.  For  how  can  we  be  said  to  intrust  or  use 
our  reason  if  in  any  case  we  fear  to  be  convinced  ?  How  are  we  masters 
of  ourselves  when  we  have  acquired  the  habit  of  bringing  horror,  aversion, 
favour,  fondness,  or  any  other  temper  than  that  of  mere  indifference  and 
impartiality  into  the  judgment  of  opinions  and  search  of  truth  ? 

1  Dr.  More,  §§11,  19,  20,  and  so  on. 

2  §  16. 

197 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

head  pregnant  with  clear  and  sensible  representations,  and  his 
mouth  flowing  and  streaming  with  fit  and  powerful  expressions, 
such  as  would  astonish  an  ordinary  auditory';  ^  'tis,  I  say,  a 
shrewd  temptation  to  him  to  think  it  the  very  spirit  of  God 
that  then  moves  supernaturally  in  him,  whenas  all  that  excess 
of  zeal  and  affection  and  fluency  of  Avords  is  most  palpably  to 
be  resolved  into  the  power  of  melancholy,  which  is  a  kind  of 
natural  inebriation." 

The  learned  doctor,  with  much  pains  afterwards,  and  by 
help  of  the  peripatetic  philosophy,  explains  this  enthusiastic 
inebriation,  and  shows  in  particular-  "how  the  vapours  and 
fumes  of  melancholy  partake  of  the  nature  of  wine."" 

One  might  conjecture  from  hence  that  the  malicious  opposers 
of  early  Christianity  were  not  unversed  in  this  philosophy,  when 
they  sophistic-ally  objected  against  the  apparent  force  of  the 
divine  spirit  speaking  in  divers  languages,  and  attributed  it  "  to 
the  power  of  new  wine."  ^ 

But  our  devout  and  zealous  doctor  seems  to  go  yet  further. 
For  besides  what  he  says  of  the  enthusiastic  power*  of  fancy 
in  atheists,  he  calls  melancholy^  a  pertinacious  and  religious 
complexion,  and  asserts  "that  there  is  not  any  true  spiritual 
grace  from  God,  but  this  mere  natural  constitution,  according 
to  the  several  tempers  and  workings  of  it,  will  not  only  resemble, 
but  sometimes  seem  to  outstrip."  And  after  speaking  of 
prophetical  enthusiasm,^  and  establishing  (as  our  author^  does) 
a  legitimate  and  a  bastard  sort,  he  asserts  and  justifies  the 
devotional  enthuiasm  ^  (as  he  calls  it)  of  holy  and  sincere  souls, 
and  ascribes  this  also  to  melancholy. 

^  It  appears  from  hence  that  in  tlie  notion  wliioh  tliis  learned  divine 
gives  us  of  entlmsiasnij  he  comprehends  the  social  or  popular  genius  of 
the  passion  ;  agreeably  with  what  our  author  in  his  Letter  concerning 
Enthnsiaftm  has  said  of  the  influence  and  power  of  the  assembly  and 
auditory  itself,  and  of  the  communicative  force  and  rapid  progress  of  this 
ecstatic  fervour,  once  kindled  and  set  in  action. 

2  §§  20,  22,  23,  20.  ^  Acts  ii.  18.  "  §  j,  ^  %  U. 

6  §§  30  and  57.  '  Treatise  i.  §  G.  *  §  G3. 

198 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

He  allows  "  that  the  soul  may  sink  so  far  into  phantasms 
as  not  to  recover  the  use  of  her  free  faculties,  and  that  this 
enormous  strength  of  imagination  does  not  only  heget  the  belief 
of  mad  internal  apprehensions,  but  is  able  to  assure  us  of  the 
presence  of  external  objects  which  are  not."  He  adds,  "that 
what  custom  and  education  do  by  degrees,  distempered  fancy 
may  do  in  a  shorter  time."  And  speaking  of  ecstasy  ^  and  the 
power  of  melancholy  in  ecstatic  fancies,  he  says  "  that  what  the 
imagination  then  puts  forth,  of  herself,  is  as  clear  as  broad  day, 
and  the  perception  of  the  soul  at  least  as  strong  and  vigorous 
as  at  any  time  in  beholding  things  awake. "" 

From  whence  the  doctor  infers  "  that  the  strength  of  per- 
ception is  no  sure  ground  of  truth." 

Had  any  other  than  a  reverend  father  of  our  church  ex- 
pressed himself  in  this  manner,  he  must  have  been  contented 
perhaps  to  bear  a  sufficient  charge  of  scepticism. 

'Twas  a  good  fortune  in  my  Lord  Bacon's  case  that  he 
should  have  escaped  being  called  an  atheist  or  a  sceptic,-  when, 
speaking  in  a  solemn  manner  of  the  religious  passion,  the  ground 
of  superstition  or  enthusiasm  (which  he  also  terms  a  panic  ^),  he 
derives  it  from  an  imperfection  in  the  creation,  make,  or  natural 

^  §28. 

2  [As  a  matter  of  fact  he  did  not  escape  it.  See  the  preface  (Author  to 
Reader)  to  Francis  Oshora's  MiscelUmy  of  Sundry  Essays,  etc.^  in  his  ^V'orksJ 
7th.  ed.,  1G7;3.] 

^  Natura  rerum  omnihus  viventibus  indidit  metum  et  formidineni, 
vitae  atque  esseutiae  suae  conservatricem^  ac  mala  in^ruentia  vitantem  et 
depellentem.  \'erumtamen  eadem  natura  modum  tenere  nescia  est,  sed 
timoribus  salutaribus  semper  vanos  et  inanes  admiscet :  adeo  ut  omnia 
(si  intus  conspici  darentur)  panicis  terroribus  plenissima  sint,  praesei'tim 
humana  ;  et  maxime  omnium  apud  vulgum,  qui  superstitione  ((juae  vere 
nihil  aliud  quam  panicus  terror  est)  in  immensum  laborat  et  a^ritatur  ; 
praecipue  temporibus  duris  et  trepidis  et  adversis. — Franciscus  Bacon  de 
Augment.  Sclent.,  lib.  ii.  c.  L'>. 

The  author  of  the  letter,  I  dare  say,  would  have  expected  no  quarter 
from  his  critics,  had  he  expressed  himself  as  this  celebrated  author  here 
quoted,  who  by  his  Natura  Rerum  can  mean  nothing  less  than  the  universal 

199 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

constitution  of  man.  Hoav  far  the  author  of  the  letter  ^  differs 
from  this  author  in  his  opinion  both  of  the  end  and  foundation 
of  this  passion,  may  appear  from  what  has  been  said  above. 
And,  in  general,  from  what  Ave  read  in  the  other  succeeding 
treatises  of  our  author  we  may  venture  to  say  of  him  with 
assurance,  "  that  he  is  as  little  a  sceptic  (according  to  the  vulgar 
sense  of  that  word)  as  he  is  Epicurean  or  atheist."  This  may  be 
proved  sufficiently  from  his  jjhilosophy  ;  and  for  anything  higher, 
'tis  what  he  nowhere  presumes  to  treat,  having  forborne  in  par- 
ticular to  mention  any  holy  mysteries  of  our  religion,  or  sacred 
article  of  our  belief. 

As  for  what  relates  to  revelation  in  general,^  if  I  mistake 
not  our  author"'s  meaning,  he  professes  to  believe,  as  far  as  is 
possible  for  any  one  who  himself  had  never  experienced  any 
divine  communication,  whether  by  dream,  vision,  apparition,  or 
other  supernatural  operation ;  nor  was  ever  present  as  eye- 
witness of  any  sign,  prodigy,  or  miracle  whatsoever.  Many  of 
these,^  he  observes,  are  at  this  day  pretendedly  exhibited  in 
the  world  with  an  endeavour  of  giving  them  the  perfect  air  and 
exact  resemblance  of  those  recorded  in  Holy  Writ.  He  speaks 
indeed  with  contempt  of  the  mockery  of  modern  miracles  and  in- 
spiration. And  as  to  all  pretences  to  things  of  this  kind  in  our 
present  age,  he  seems  inclined  to  look  upon  them  as  no  better 
than  mere  imposture  or  delusion.  But  for  what  is  recorded  of 
ages  heretofore,  he  seems  to  resign  his  judgment,  with  entire 
condescension,  to  his  superiors.  He  pretends  not  to  frame  any 
certain  or  positive  opinion  of  his  own,  notwithstanding  his  best 
searches  into  antiquity  and  the  nature  of  religious  record  and 
traditions ;    but  on   all   occasions  submits   most  willingly,  and 

dispensing  Nature,  erring  blindly  in  tlie  very  first  design,  contrivance,  or 
original  frame  of  things,  according  to  tlie  opinion  f»f  Epicurus  himself, 
wliom  this  author  immediately  after  cites  with  praise. 

1  Viz.  the  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm,  above. 

-  Infra,  Misc.  v.  'S. 

^  Letter  concer)iing  Ettthasiasm,  §  H  ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  .5. 

200 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

with  full  confidence  and  trust,  to  the  opinions  ^  by  law  estab- 
lished. And  if  this  be  not  sufficient  to  free  him  from  the 
reproach  of  scepticism,  he  must,  for  aught  I  see,  be  content  to 
undergo  it. 

To  say  truth,  I  have  often  wondered  to  find  such  a  disturb- 
ance raised  about  the  simple  name  of  sceptic.^  'Tis  certain 
that,  in  its  original  and  plain  signification,  the  word  imports  no 
more  than  barely  "  that  state  or  frame  of  mind  in  which  every 
one  remains  on  every  subject  of  which  he  is  not  certain."  He 
who  is  certain,  or  presumes  to  say  he  knows  is  in  that  particular, 
whether  he  be  mistaken  or  in  the  right,  a  dogmatist.  Between 
these  two  states  or  situations  of  mind  there  can  be  no  medium. 
For  he  who  says  "  that  he  believes  for  certain,  or  is  assured  of 
what  he  believes,"  either  speaks  ridiculously  or  says  in  effect 
"  that  he  believes  strongly,  but  is  not  sure."  So  that  whoever  is 
not  conscious  of  revelation,  nor  has  certain  knowledge  of  any 
miracle  or  sign,  can  be  no  more  than  sceptic  in  the  case ;  and 
the  best  Christian  in  the  world,  who  being  destitute  of  the 
means  of  certainty  depends  only  on  history  and  tradition  for 
his  belief  in  these  particulars,  is  at  best  but  a  sceptic  Christian. 
He  has  no  more  than  a  nicely  critical  ^  historical  faith,  subject 
to  various  speculations,  and  a  thousand  different  criticisms  of 
languages  and  literature. 

This  he  will  naturally  find  to  be  the  case  if  he  attempts  to 
search  into  originals  in  order  to  be  his  own  judge,  and  proceed 
on  the  bottom  of  his  own  discernment  and  understanding.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  is  no  critic,  nor  competently  learned  in 
these  originals,  'tis  plain  he  can  have  no  original  judgment  of 
his  own,  but  must  rely  still  on  the  opinion  of  those  who  have 
opportunity  to  examine  such  matters,  and  whom  he  takes  to 
be  the  unbiassed  and  disinterested  judges  of  these  religious 
narratives.     His  faith  is  not  in  ancient  facts  or  persons,  nor  in 

'  Advice  to  an  Author,  towards  the  end  ;  Mi.sc.  ii.  3  ;  v.  1,  :l 

^  Moralists,  part  i.  §  2  ;  Misc.  v.  3. 

3    Wit  and  lliniioiir,  part  iv.  §  8  ;  Misc.  v.  .3. 

201 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAKACTERISTICS 

the  ancient  wi'it,  or  primitive  recorders ;  nor  in  the  successive 
collators  or  conservators  of  these  records  (for  of  these  he  is  un- 
ahle  to  take  cognisance).  But  his  confidence  and  trust  must 
be  in  those  modern  men,  or  societies  of  men,  to  whom  the 
pubhc  or  he  himself  ascribes  the  judgment  of  these  records, 
and  commits  the  determination  of  sacred  writ  and  genuine 
story. 

Let  the  person  seem  ever  so  positive  or  dogmatical  in  these 
high  points  of  learning,  he  is  yet  in  reality  no  dogmatist,  nor 
can  any  way  free  himself  from  a  certain  kind  of  scepticism. 
He  must  know  himself  still  capable  of  doubting ;  or  if,  for  fear 
of  it,  he  strives  to  banish  every  opposite  thought,  and  resolves 
not  so  much  as  to  deliberate  on  the  case,  this  still  will  not 
acquit  him.  So  far  are  we  from  being  able  to  be  sure  when  we 
have  a  mind ;  that  indeed  we  can  never  be  thoroughly  sure,  but 
then  only  when  we  can't  help  it,  and  find  of  necessity  we  must 
be  so,  whether  we  will  or  not.  Even  the  highest  implicit  faith 
is  in  reality  no  more  than  a  kind  of  passive  scepticism  ;  "  a 
resolution  to  examine,  recollect,  consider,  or  hear  as  little  as 
possible  to  the  prejudice  of  that  belief,  which  having  once 
espoused  we  are  ever  afterwards  afraid  to  lose," 

If  I  might  be  allowed  to  imitate  our  author,  in  daring  to 
touch  now  and  then  upon  the  characters  of  our  divine  worthies, 
I  should,  upon  this  subject  of  belief,  observe  how  fair  and 
generous  the  great  Christian  convert  and  learned  apostle  has 
shown  himself  in  his  sacred  writings.  Notwithstanding  he  had 
himself  an  original  testimony  and  revelation  from  heaven  on 
which  he  grounded  his  conversion ;  notwithstanding  he  had  in 
his  own  person  the  experience  of  outward  miracles  and  inward 
communications;  he  condescended  still,  on  many  occasions,  to 
speak  sceptically,  and  with  some  hesitation  and  reserve,  as  to  the 
certainty  of  these  divine  exhibitions.  In] his  account  of  some 
transactions  of  this  kind,  himself  being  the  witness,  and  speak- 
ing (as  we  may  presume)  of  his   own  person  and  proper  vision,^ 

1  2  Cor.  xii.  2,  3. 

202 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

he  says  only  that  "  he  knew  a  man,  whether  in  the  body  or  out 
of  it,  he  cannot  tell.  But  such  a  one  caught  up  to  the  third 
heaven  he  knew  formerly,  he  says,  above  fourteen  years  before 
his  then  writing/"'  And  when  in  another  capacity  the  same 
inspired  writer,  giving  precepts  to  his  disciples,  distinguishes 
what  ^  he  writes  by  divine  commission  from  what  he  delivers  as 
his  own  judgment  and  private  opinion,  he  condescends  neverthe- 
less to  speak  as  one  no  way  positive,  or  master  of  any  absolute 
criterion  in  the  case.  And  in  several  subsequent  -  passages  he 
expresses  himself  as  under  some  kind  of  doubt  how  to  judge 
or  determine  certainly,  "  whether  he  writes  by  inspiration  or 
otherwise.  He  only  "  thinks  he  has  the  spirit."  He  "  is  not  sure," 
nor  would  have  us  to  depend  on  him  as  positive  or  certain  in  a 
matter  of  so  nice  discernment. 

The  holy  founders  and  inspired  authors  of  our  religion 
required  not,  it  seems,  so  strict  an  assent,  or  such  implicit  faith 
in  behalf  of  their  original  writings  and  revelations,  as  later  un- 
inspired doctors,  without  the  help  of  divine  testimony  or  any 
miracle  on  their  side,  have  required  in  behalf  of  their  own 
comments  and  interpretations.  The  earliest  and  worst  of 
heretics,  'tis  said,  were  those  called  Gnostics,  who  took  their 
name  from  an  audacious  pretence  to  certain  knowledge  and 
comprehension  of  the  greatest  mysteries  of  faith.  If  the  most 
dangerous  state  of  opinion  was  this  dogmatical  and  presump- 
tuous sort,  the  safest,  in  all  likelihood,  must  be  the  sceptical  and 
modest. 

There  is  nothing  more  evident  than  that  our  holy  religion, 
in  its  original  constitution,  was  set  so  far  apart  from  all 
philosophy  or  refined  speculation,  that  it  seemed  in  a  manner 
diametrically  opposed  to  it.  A  man  might  have  been  not  only 
a  sceptic  in  all  the  controverted  points  of  the  academies  or 
schools  of  learning,  but  even  a  perfect  stranger  to  all  of  this 
kind ;  and  yet  complete  in  his  religion,  faith,  and  worship. 

Among   the    polite   heathens    of  the   ancient  world,  these 
1  1  Cor.  vii.  10,  12.  -  1  Cor.  vii.  40. 

203 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

different  provinces  of  religion  and  philosophy  were  ujiheld,  we 
know,  without  the  least  interfering  with  each  other.  If  in  some 
barbarous  nations  the  philosopher  and  priest  were  joined  in  one, 
'tis  observable  that  the  mysteries,  whatever  they  were,  which 
sprang  from  this  extraordinary  conjunction  were  kept  secret 
and  undivulged,  'Twas  satisfaction  enough  to  the  priest- 
philosopher,  if  the  initiated  pai'ty  preserved  his  respect  and 
veneration  for  the  tradition  and  worship  of  the  temple,  by  com- 
plying in  every  respect  with  the  requisite  performances  and  rites 
of  worship.  No  account  was  afterwards  taken  of  the  philosophic 
faith  of  the  proselyte  or  worshipper.  His  opinions  were  left  to 
himself,  and  he  might  philosophise  according  to  what  foreign 
school  or  sect  he  fancied.  Even  amongst  the  Jews  themselves, 
the  Sadducee  (a  materialist  and  denier  of  the  soul's  immortality) 
was  as  Avell  admitted  as  the  Pharisee ;  who  from  the  schools  of 
Pythagoras,  Plato,  or  other  latter  philosophers  of  Greece,  had 
learnt  to  reason  upon  immaterial  substances,  and  the  natural 
immortality  of  souls. 

'Tis  no  astonishing  reflection  to  observe  how  fast  the  world 
declined  in  wit  and  sense,^  in  manhood,  reason,  science,  and  in 
every  art  when  once  the  Roman  Empire  had  prevailed  and 
spread  an  universal  tyranny  and  oppression  over  mankind. 
Even  the  Romans  themselves,  after  the  early  sweets  of  one 
peaceful  and  long  reign,  began  to  groan  under  that  yoke  of 
which  they  had  been  themselves  the  imposers.  How  much 
more  must  other  nations  and  mighty  cities  at  a  far  distance 
have  abhorred  this  tyranny,  and  detected  their  common  servitude 
under  a  people  who  were  themselves  no  better  than  mere  slaves  ? 

It  may  be  looked  upon,  no  doubt,  as  providential,  that  at 
this  time,  and  in  these  circumstances  of  the  world,  there  should 
arise  so  high  an  expectation  of  a  divine  deliverer;  and  that 
from  the  eastern  parts  and  confines  of  Judea,  the  opinion 
should  spread  itself  of  such  a  deliverer  to  come,  with  strength 
from  heaven  sufficient  to  break  that  Empire,  which  no  earthly 
'  Advice,  part  ii.  §  1,  and  in  the  preceding  chapter,  at  the  end. 

204 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

power  remaining  could  be  thought  sufficient  to  encounter. 
Nothing  could  have  better  disposed  the  generality  of  mankind 
to  receive  the  evangelical  advice  whilst  they  mistook  the  news, 
as  many  of  the  first  Christians  plainly  did,  and  understood  the 
promises  of  a  Messias  in  this  temporal  sense,  with  respect  to 
his  second  coming  and  sudden  reign  here  upon  earth. 

Superstition,^  in  the  meanwhile,  could  not  but  naturally 
prevail,  as  misery  and  ignorance  increased.  The  Roman 
emperors,  as  they  grew  more  barbarous,  grew  so  much  the  more 
superstitious.  The  lands  and  revenues  as  well  as  the  numbers 
of  the  heathen  priests  grew  daily.  And  when  the  season  came, 
that  by  means  of  a  convert-emperor  the  heathen-  church- 
lands,  with  an  increase  of  power,  became  transferred  to  the 
Christian    clergy,    'twas    no    wonder    if   by    such    riches    and 

'    Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  1,  and  below,  p.  213. 

2  How  rich  and  vast  these  were,  especially  in  the  latter  times  of  that 
Empire,  may  be  judged  from  what  belonged  to  the  single  order  of  the 
vestals,  and  what  we  read  of  the  revenues  belonging  to  the  temples  of  the 
sun  (as  in  the  time  of  the  monster  Heliogabalus)  and  of  other  donations 
by  other  emperors.  But  what  may  give  us  yet  a  greater  idea  of  these 
riches,  is,  that  in  the  latter  heathen  times,  which  grew  more  and  more 
superstitious,  the  restraining  laws  (or  statutes  of  Mortmain)  by  which 
men  had  formerly  been  withheld  from  giving  away  estates  by  will  or 
otherwise  to  religious  uses  were  repealed  ;  and  the  heathen  church  left  in 
this  manner  as  a  bottomless  gulf  and  devouring  receptacle  of  land  and 
treasure.  Senatus-consulto,  et  constitutionibus  priucipum,  haeredes 
instituere  concessum  est  Apollinem  Didymaeum,  Dianam  Ephesiam, 
matrem  deorum,  etc.      lUpianus  post  Cod.  Theodos.  j).  92,  apud  Marsh. 

This  answers  not  amiss  to  the  modern  practice  and  expression  of 
making  our  son  our  heir,  giving  to  God  what  has  been  taken  sometimes 
with  freedom  enough  from  man,  and  conveying  estates  in  such  a  manner 
in  this  world  as  to  make  good  interest  of  them  in  another.  The  reproach 
of  the  ancient  satirist  is  at  present  out  of  doors.  'Tis  no  affront  to  religion 
nowadays  to  compute  its  profits.  And  a  man  might  well  be  accounted 
dull,  who,  in  our  present  age,  should  ask  the  question,  Dicite,  pontifices,  in 
sacro  quid  facit  aurum  }  ["  Reverend  pontiffs,  tell  us  what  good  gold  can  do 
in  a  holy  place .'' "  Persius,  ii.  01),  Conington's  translation.]  See  below, 
p.  213,  and  ch.  iii.,  in  the  notes,  and  p.  211. 

205 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

authority  they  were  in  no  small  measure  influenced  and  cor- 
rupted, as  may  be  gathered  even  from  the  accounts  given  us  of 
these  matters  by  themselves. 

When,  together  with  this,  the  schools  of  the  ancient 
philosophers,^  which  had  been  long  in  their  decline,  came  now 
to  be  dissolved,  and  their  sophistic  teachers  became  ecclesiastical 
instructors,  the  unnatural  union  of  religion  and  ]  philosophy 
was  comjileted,  and  the  monstrous  product  of  this  match 
appeared  soon  in  the  world.  The  odd  exterior  shapes  of 
deities,  temples,  and  holy  utensils,  which  by  the  Egyptian 
sects  -  had  been  formerly  set  in  battle  against  each  other,  were 
now  metamorphosed  into  philosophical  forms  and  phantoms ; 
and,  like  flags  and  banners,  displayed  in  hostile  manner,  and 
borne  offensively  by  one  party  against  another.  In  former 
times  those  barbarous  nations  above  mentioned  were  the  sole 
warriors  in  these  religious  causes  ;  but  now  the  whole  world 
became  engaged  when  instead  of  storks  and  crocodiles  other 
ensigns  were  erected ;  when  sophistical  chimeras,  crabbed 
notions,  bombastic  phrases,  solecisms,  absurdities,  and  a  thou- 
sand monsters  of  a  scholastic  brood  were  set  on  foot,  and  made 
the  subject  of  vulgar  animosity  and  dispute. 

Here  first  began  that  spirit  of  bigotry  which  broke  out  in 
a  more  raging  manner  than  had  been  ever  known  before,  and 
was  less  capable  of  temper  or  moderation  than  any  species, 
form,  or  mixture  of  religion  in  the  ancient  world.  Mysteries 
which  were  heretofore  treated  with  profound  respect,  and  lay 
unexposed  to  vulgar  eyes,  became  public  and  prostitute,  being 
enforced  with  terrors,  and  urged  with  compulsion  and  violence 
on  the  unfitted  capacities  and  apprehensions  of  mankind.  The 
very  Jewish  traditions  and  cabalistic  learning  underwent  this 
fate.  That  which  was  naturally  the  subject  of  profound  specula- 
tion and  inquiry  was  made  the  necessary  subject  of  a  strict  and 
absolute  assent.     The  allegorical,  mythological  account  of  sacred 

^  As  above,  cli.  i.  end. 
2  Supra,  ch.  i.,  and  Advice,  part  ii.  §  3,  in  the  notes. 

206 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

things  was  wholly  inverted;  liberty  of  judgment  and  exposition 
taken  away ;  no  ground  left  for  inquiry,  search,  or  meditation, 
no  refuge  from  the  dogmatical  spirit  let  loose.  Every  quarter 
A\as  taken  up  ;  every  portion  prepossessed.  All  was  reduced  to 
article  and  proposition.^ 

Thus  a  sort  of  philosophical  enthusiasm  overspread  the 
world.  And  bigotry  ^  (a  species  of  superstition  hardly  known 
before)  took  place  in  men's  affections,  and  armed  them  with  a 
new  jealousy  against  each  other.  Barbarous  terms  and  idioms 
were  every  day  introduced,  monstrous  definitions  invented  and 
imposed,  new  schemes  of  faith  erected  from  time  to  time,  and 
hostilities,  the  fiercest  imaginable,  exercised  on  these  occasions. 
So  that  the  enthusiasm  or  zeal,  which  was  usually  shown  by 
mankind  in  behalf  of  their  particular  worships,  and  which  for 
the  most  part  had  been  hitherto  defensive  only,  grew  now  to  be 
universally  of  the  offensive  kind. 

It  may  be  expected  of  me  perhaps,  that  being  fallen  thus 
from  remote  anti(|uity  to  later  periods,  I  should  speak  on  this 
occasion  with  more  than  ordinary  exactness  and  regularity.  It 
may  be  urged  against  me  that  I  talk  here  as  at  random  and 
without  book  ;  neglecting  to  produce  my  authorities  or  continue 
my  ([notations,  according  to  the  professed  style  and  manner  in 
which  I  began  this  present  chapter.  But  as  there  are  many 
greater  privileges  by  way  of  variation,  interruption,  and  digres- 
sion allowed  to  us  writers  of  Miscellany,  and  especially  to  such 
as  are  commentators  upon  other  authors,  I  shall  be  content  to 
remain  mysterious  in  this  respect,  and  explain  myself  no  further 
than  by  a  noted  story,  which  seems  to  suit  our  author*'s  purpose, 
and  the  present  argument. 

'Tis  observable  from  Holy  Writ,  that  the  ancient  Ephesian 

1  Infra,  Misc.  v.  ch.  iii.  in  the  notes  ;  et  supra,  p.  1!).5. 

'  Let  any  one  who  considers  distinctly  the  meaning  and  force  of  the  word 
hifi^otry,  endeavour  to  render  it  in  either  of  the  ancient  languages,  and  he 
will  find  how  peculiar  a  passion  it  implies ;  and  how  different  from  the 
mere  affection  of  enthusiasm  or  superstition. 

207 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

worshijjpers,  however  zealous  or  enthusiastic  they  appeared,  had 
only  a  defensive  kind  of  zeal  in  behalf  of  their  temple  ;  ^  when- 
ever they  thought  in  earnest,  it  was  brought  in  danger.  In  the 
tumult  ^  which  happened  in  that  city  near  the  time  of  the  holy 
apostle's  retreat,  we  have  a  remarkable  instance  of  what  our 
author  calls  a  religious  panic.  As  little  bigots  as  the  people 
were,  and  as  far  from  any  offensive  zeal,  yet  when  their  estab- 
lished church  came  to  be  called  in  question,  we  see  in  what  a 
manner  their  zeal  began  to  operate.^  All  with  one  voice,  about 
the  space  of  two  hours,  cried  out,  saying,  ".  Great  is  Diana 
of  the  Ephesians.'"  At  the  same  time  this  assembly  was  so 
confused,  that  the  greater  part  knew  not  wherefore  they  were 
come  together ;  ^  and  consequently  could  not  understand  why 
their  church  was  in  any  danger.  But  the  enthusiasm  was  got 
up,  and  a  panic  fear  for  the  church  had  struck  the  nmltitude. 
It  ran  into  a  popular  rage  or  epidemical  frenzy,  and  was  com- 
municated (as  our  author  expresses  it  ^)  "  by  aspect,  or,  as  it 
were,  by  contact  or  sympathy." 

It  must  be  confessed  that  there  was  besides  these  motives  a 
secret  spring  which  forwarded  this  enthusiasm.  For  certain 
parties  concerned,  men  of  craft,  and  strictly  united  in  interest, 
had  been  secretly  called  together,  and  told,  "  Gentlemen  !  ^  (or 

^  Tlie  magnificence  and  beauty  of  that  temple  is  well  known  to  all  who 
have  formed  any  idea  of  the  ancient  Grecian  arts  and  workmanship.  It 
seems  to  me  to  be  remarkable  in  our  learned  and  elegant  apostle^  that 
though  an  enemy  to  this  mechanical  spirit  of  religion  in  the  Ephesians, 
yet  according  to  his  known  character  he  accommodates  himself  to  their 
humour^  and  the  natural  turn  of  their  enthusiasm^  by  writing  to  his  con- 
verts in  a  kind  of  architect  style,  and  almost  with  a  perpetual  allusion  to 
building,  and  to  that  majesty,  order,  and  beauty  of  which  their  temple 
was  a  masterpiece.  ^woiKodofj.rjd^i'Tes  ewl  tQ  0e/xe\iiii  tQv  dTrocrTdXuv  Kal  wpo<pT]TU)v, 
61/Tos  oiKpoyuviaiov  avroD  Xpiffrov  IrjcroO  iv  y  iraaa  i]  olKo8ofj.r]  crvvapfio\oyov- 
fiivT]  af^et  eis  vabv  dyiov  iv  Kvplcj),  ev  (p  Kal  ii/JieU  avvoiKoSop-elade  ds  KaTOiK-qTripiov 
Tov  Qiov  eV  TTvevjuLaTL.  Eph.  ii.  20,  21,  22  ;  and  so  iii.  17,  18,  etc.  ;  and  iv. 
16,  29. 

'  Act.  Apost.  xix.  2o.  ^  Jb.  xix.  28,  34.  *  lb.  xix.  32. 

^  Letter  0/  Enthusiasm,  §  2.  ^  Act.  Apost.  xix.  25,  etc. 

208 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

sirs !)  Ye  know  that  by  this  mystery  or  craft  we  have  our 
wealth.  Ye  see  withal  and  have  heard  that  not  only  here  at 
Ephesus,  but  almost  throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  has  per- 
suaded and  turned  away  many  people,  by  telling  them,  they  are 
no  real  Gods  who  are  figured  or  wrought  with  hands,  so  that 
not  only  this  our  craft  is  in  danger,  but  also  the  temple  itself." 

Nothino;  could  be  more  moderate  and  wise,  nothino-  more 
agreeable  to  that  magisterial  science  or  policy  which  our  author 
recommends,^  than  the  behaviour  of  the  town  clerk  or  recorder 
of  the  city,  as  he  is  represented  on  this  occasion  in  Holy  Writ. 
I  must  confess  indeed,  he  went  pretty  far  in  the  use  of  this 
moderating  art.  He  ventured  to  assure  the  people,  "  that 
every  one  acquiesced  in  their  ancient  worship  of  the  great  God- 
dess, and  in  their  tradition  of  the  image  which  fell  down  from 
Jupiter ;  that  these  were  facts  undeniable,  and  that  the  new 
sect  neither  meant  the  pulling  down  of  their  church,  nor  so 
much  as  offered  to  blaspheme  or  speak  amiss  of  their  Goddess." 

This,  no  doubt,  was  stretching  the  point  sufficiently,  as  may 
be  understood  by  the  event  in  after  time.  One  might,  perhaps, 
have  suspected  this  recorder  to  have  been  himself  a  dissenter, 
or  at  least  an  occasional  conformist,  who  could  answer  so 
roundly  for  the  new  sect,  and  warrant  the  church  in  being 
secure  of  damage  and  out  of  all  danger  for  the  future.  Mean- 
while the  tumult  was  appeased ;  no  harm  befell  the  temple  for 
that  time.  The  new  sect  acquiesced  in  what  had  been  spoken 
on  their  behalf.  They  allowed  the  apology  of  the  recorder. 
Accordingly,  the  zeal  of  the  heathen  church,  which  was  only 
defensive,  gave  way,  and  the  new  religionists  were  prosecuted 
no  further. 

Hitherto,  it  seems,  the  face  of  persecution  had  not  openly 
shown  itself  in  the  wide  world.  "'Twas  sufficient  security  for 
every  man  that  he  gave  no  disturbance  to  what  was  publiclv 
established.  But  when  offensive  zeal  came  to  be  discovered  in 
one  party,  the  rest  became  in  a  manner  necessitated  to  be 
^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  2. 

VOL.  II  209  p 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

aggressors  in  their  turn.  They  who  observed  or  had  once  experi- 
enced this  intolerating  spirit  could  no  longer  tolerate  on  their 
part.^     And  they  who  had  once  exerted  it  over  others,  could 

^  Thus  the  controversy  stood  before  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Julian, 
when  blood  had  been  so  freely  drawn  and  cruelties  so  frequently  exchanged 
not  only  between  Christian  and  heathen,  but  between  Christian  and 
Christian,  after  the  most  barbarous  manner,  ^\'hat  the  zeal  was  of  many 
early  Christians  against  the  idolatry  of  tlie  old  heathen  church  (at  that 
time  tlie  established  one)  may  be  coni])rehended  by  any  person  who  is  ever 
so  slenderly  versed  in  the  history  of  those  times.  Nor  can  it  be  said 
indeed  of  us  moderns,  that  in  the  (juality  of  good  Christians  (as  tliat 
character  is  generally  understood)  we  are  found  either  backward  or 
scrupulous  in  assigning  to  perdition  such  wretches  as  we  pronounce  guilty 
of  idolatry.  The  name  idolater  is  sufficient  excuse  for  almost  any  kind  of 
insult  against  the  person,  and  much  more  against  the  worship  of  such  a 
misbeliever.  The  very  word  Christian  is  in  common  language  used  for 
man,  in  opposition  to  l)rute-beast,  without  leaving  so  much  as  a  middle 
place  for  the  poor  heathen  or  pagan,  who,  as  the  greater  beast  of  the  two, 
is  naturally  doomed  to  massacre,  and  his  Gods  and  temples  to  fracture  and 
demolishment.  Nor  are  we  masters  of  this  passion  even  in  our  best 
humour.  The  French  poets,  we  see,  can  with  great  success  and  general 
applause  exhibit  this  primitive  zeal  even  on  the  public  stage  :  Polyeucte, 
Act  ii.  Sc.  6  : — 

Ne  perdons  plus  de  temjjs,  le  sacrifice  est  pret, 
AUons-y  du  vrai  Dieu  soutenir  I'interet ; 
Allons  fouler  aux  pieds  ce  foudre  ridicule 
Dont  arme  un  bois  pourri  ce  peuple  trop  cre'dule  ; 
Allons  en  eclairer  I'aveuglement  fatal, 
Allons  briser  ces  Dieux  de  pierre  et  de  metal ; 
Abandonnons  nos  jours  a  cette  ardeur  celeste, 
Faisons  triompher  Dieu  ;  qu'il  dispose  du  reste. 

I  should  scarce  have  mentioned  this,  but  that  it  came  into  my  mind 
how  ill  a  construction  some  people  have  endeavoured  to  make  of  what  our 
author,  stating  the  case  of  heathen  and  Christian  persecution  in  his  Letter 
of  Enthusiasm,  has  said  concerning  the  Emperor  Julian.  It  was  no  more 
indeed  than  had  been  said  of  that  virtuous  and  gallant  Emperor  bv  his 
greatest  enemies,  even  by  those  who  (to  the  shame  of  Christianity)  boasted 
of  his  having  been  most  insolently  affronted  on  all  occasions,  and  even 
treacherously  assassinated  by  one  of  his  Christian  soldiers.     As  for  such 

210 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

expect  no  better  quarter  for  themselves.  So  that  nothing  less 
than  mutual  extirpation  became  the  aim  and  almost  open 
profession  of  each  religious  society. 

autliors  as  tliese^  sliould  I  cite  tliem  in  their  ])r()])er  iuvecti\e  style  and 
saint-like  phrase,  tliey  would  make  no  very  ajrreeable  appearance,  especially 
in  Miscellanies  of  tlie  kind  we  have  here  undertaken.  But  a  letter  of  that 
elegant  and  witty  Emperor  may  not  be  improperly  placed  amongst  our 
citations  as  a  pattern  of  his  humour  and  genius,  as  well  as  of  his  principle 
and  sentiments  on  this  occasion.     Julian's  Epistles,  No.  52. 

JlLIAX    TO    THE    BOSTRKXS 

"  I  should  have  thought,  indeed,  that  the  Galilsean- leaders  would  have 
esteemed  themselves  more  indebted  to  me  than  to  him  who  preceded  me 
in  the  administration  of  the  Empire.  For  in  his  time  many  of  them 
suffered  exile,  persecution,  and  imprisonment.  Multitudes  of  those  whom 
in  their  religion  they  term  heretics  were  put  to  the  sword  ;  insomuch 
tliat  in  Samosata,  Cyzicum,  Paphlagonia,  Bithynia,  Galatia,  and  many 
other  countries,  whole  towns  were  levelled  with  the  earth.  The  just 
reverse  of  this  has  been  ol)served  in  my  time.  The  exiles  have  been  re- 
called, and  the  proscribed  restored  to  the  lawful  possession  of  their  estates. 
But  to  that  height  of  fury  and  distraction  are  this  people  arrived,  that 
being  no  longer  allowed  the  privilege  to  tyrannise  over  one  another,  or 
persecute  either  their  own  sectaries,  or  the  religious  of  the  lawful  church, 
thev  swell  with  rage,  and  leave  no  stone  unturned,  no  opportunity  unem- 
ployed of  raising  tumult  and  sedition  ;  so  little  regard  have  they  to  true 
piety,  so  little  obedience  to  our  laws  and  constitutions,  however  humane 
and  tolerating.  For  still  do  we  determine  and  steadily  resolve  never  to 
suffer  one  of  them  to  be  drawn  involuntarily  to  our  altars.  ...  As  for 
the  mere  people,  indeed,  they  appear  dri\'en  to  these  riots  and  seditions 
by  those  amongst  them  whom  they  call  clerics,  who  are  now  enraged  to 
find  themselves  restrained  in  the  use  of  their  former  i)ower  and  intemperate 
rule.  .  .  .  They  can  no  longer  act  the  magistrate  or  civil  judge,  nor 
assume  authority  to  make  people's  wills,  supplant  relations,  possess  them- 
selves of  other  men's  patrimonies,  and  by  specious  pretences  transfer  all 
into  their  own  ])ossession.  .  .  .  For  this  reason  I  have  thought  fit  l)y  tliis 
public  Edict  to  forewarn  the  people  of  this  sort,  that  they  raise  no  more 
commotions,  nor  gather  in  a  riotous  manner  about  their  seditious  clerics, 
in  defiance  of  the  magistrate,  who  has  been  insulted  aiul  in  danger  of  being 
stoned  by  these  incited  rabbles.  In  their  congregations  they  may,  not- 
withstanding, assemble  as  they  please,  and  crowd  about  their  leaders, 
performing  worship,  receiving  doctrine,  and  praying,  according  as  thev 

211 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

In  this  extremity,  it  might  well  perhaps  have  been  esteemed 
the  happiest  wish  for  mankind,  that  one  of  these  contending 
parties  of  incompatible  religionists  should  at  last  prevail  over 
the  rest,  so  as  by  an  universal  and  absolute  power  to  determine 
orthodoxy,^  and  make  that  opinion  effectually  catholic  which 
in  their  particular  judgment  had  the  best  right  to  that  denomi- 
nation. And  thus  by  force  of  massacre  and  desolation,  peace 
in  worship,  and  civil  unity  by  help  of  the  spiritual,  might  be 
presumed  in  a  fair  way  of  being  restored  to  mankind. 

I  shall  conclude  with  observing  how  ably  the  lioman- 
Christian  and  once  catholic  church,  by  the  assistance  of  their 
converted  emperors,^  proceeded  in  the  establishment  of  their 
growing  hierarchy.  They  considered  wisely  the  various  super- 
stitions and  enthusiasms  of  mankind,  and  proved  the  different 
kinds  and  force  of  each.  All  these  seeming  contrarieties  of 
human  passion  they  knew  how  to  comprehend  in  their  jiolitical 

are  by  them  taught  and  conducted  ;  but  if  with  any  tendency  to  sedition, 
let  them  ])evvare  how  they  hearken  or  give  assent,  and  remember  'tis  at 
their  peril  if  1)y  these  means  they  are  secretly  wrought  up  to  mutiny  and 
insurrection.  .  .  .  Live  therefore  in  peace  and  quietness,  neither  spite- 
fully opposing  or  injuriously  treating  one  another.  You  misguided 
people  of  the  new  way,  beware,  on  your  side  ;  and  you  of  the  ancient  and 
established  church,  injure  not  your  neighbours  and  fellow-citizens,  who  are 
enthusiastically  led  away  in  ignorance  and  mistake  rather  than  with  design 
or  malice  I  'Tis  by  discourse  and  reason,  not  by  blows,  insults,  or  violence 
that  men  are  to  be  informed  of  truth  and  convinced  of  error.  Again 
therefore  and  again  I  enjoin  and  charge  the  zealous  followers  of  the  true 
religion,  no  way  to  injure,  molest,  or  affront  the  Galila^an  people."  Thus 
the  generous  and  mild'  Emperor,  whom  we  may  indeed  call  he.athen,  but 
not  so  justly  apostate,  since  being  at  different  times  of  his  youth  transferred 
to  different  schools  or  universities,  and  bred  under  tutors  of  each  religion, 
as  well  heathen  as  Christian,  he  happened,  when  of  full  age,  to  make  his 
choice  (though  very  unfortunately)  in  the  former  kind  and  adhered  to  the 
ancient  religion  of  his  country  and  forefathers.  See  the  same  Emperor's 
letters  to  Artabius,  No.  7,  and  to  Hecebolus,  No.  43,  and  to  the  people  of 
Alexandria,  No.  10.     See  Treatise  i.  §  3. 

1  Infra,  at  the  end. 

2  ^y\t  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  1,  end  ;  xupra.  Mine,  ii.  ch.  ii, 

212 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

model  and  subservient  system  of  divinity.  They  knew  how  to 
make  advantage  both  from  the  high  speculations  of  philosophy 
and  the  grossest  ideas  of  vulgar  ignorance.  They  saw  there  was 
nothing  more  different  than  that  enthusiasm  which  ran  upon 
spirituals,  according  to  the  simpler  views  of  the  divine  existence,^ 
and  that  which  ran  upon  external  proportions,^  magnificence 
of  structures,  ceremonies,  processions,  choirs,  and  those  other 
harmonies  which  captivate  the  eye  and  ear.  On  this  account 
they  even  added  to  this  latter  kind,  and  displayed  religion  in  a 
yet  more  gorgeous  habit  of  temples,  statues,  paintings,  vest- 
ments, copes,  mitres,  purple,  and  the  cathedral  pomp.  AVith 
these  arms  they  could  subdue  the  victorious  Goths,  and  secure 
themselves  an  Attila  when  their  Caesars  failed  them.^ 

The  truth  is,  'tis  but  a  vulgar  species  of  enthusiasm  which 
is  moved  chiefly  by  show  and  ceremony  and  wrought  upon  by 
chalices  and  candles,  robes  and  figured  dances.  Yet  this,  we 
may  believe,  was  looked  upon  as  no  slight  ingredient  of  devotion 
in  those  days,  since  at  this  hour  the  manner  is  found  to  be  of 
considerable  efficacy  with  some  of  the  devout  amongst  ourselves, 
who  pass  the  least  for  superstitious,  and  are  reckoned  in  the 
number  of  the  polite  world.  This  the  wise  hierarchy  duly  pre- 
ponderating,^ but  being  satisfied  withal  that  there  were  other 
tempers  and  hearts  which  could  not  so  easily  be  captivated  by 
this  exterior  allurement,  they  assigned  another  part  of  religion 
to  proselytes  of  another  character  and  complexion,  who  were 

^  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  3. 

2  Supra,  Misc.  i.  ch.  ii. 

2  When  this  victorious  ravaj^er  was  in  full  march  to  Ronie^  St.  Leon 
(the  then  pope)  went  out  to  meet  him  in  solemn  pomp.  The  Goth  was 
struck  with  the  appearance,  obeyed  the  priest,  and  retired  instantly  with 
his  whole  army  in  a  panic  fear,  alleging?  that  among  the  rest  of  the  ponti- 
fical train  lie  had  seen  one  of  an  extraordinary  form  who  threatened  him 
with  death  if  he  did  not  instantly  retire.  Of  this  important  encounter 
there  are  in  St.  Peter's  Church,  in  the  Vatican,  and  elsewhere  at  Rome, 
many  fine  sculptures,  paintings,  and  representations,  deservingly  made  in 
honour  of  the  miracle.  ^  [/.c.  considering.] 

213 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

allowed  to  proceed  on  a  quite  different  bottom,  by  the  inward 
way  of  contemplation  and  divine  love. 

They  are  indeed  so  far  from  being  jealous  of  mere  enthusiasm 
or  the  ecstatic  manner  of  devotion,  that  they  allow  their  mystics 
to  write  and  preach  in  the  most  rapturous  and  sera])hic  strains. 
They  suffer  them  in  a  manner  to  supersede  all  external  worship 
and  triumph  over  outward  forms,  till  the  refined  religionists 
proceed  so  far  as  either  expressly  or  seemingly  to  dissuade  the 
practice  of  the  vulgar  and  established  ceremonial  duties.  And 
then,  indeed, 1  they  check  the  supposed  exorbitant  enthusiasm, 
which  would  prove  dangerous  to  their  hierarchal  state. 

If  modern  visions,  prophecies,  and  dreams,  charms,  miracles, 
exorcisms,  and  the  rest  of  this  kind  be  comprehended  in  that 
which  we  call  fanaticism  or  superstition,  to  this  spirit  they 
allow  a  full  career ;  whilst  to  ingenuous  writers  they  afford  the 
liberty,  on  the  other  side,  in  a  civil  manner,  to  call  in  question 
these  spiritual  feats  performed  in  monasteries,  or  up  and  down 
by  their  mendicant  or  itinerant  jjriests  and  ghostly  missionaries. 

This  is  that  ancient  hierarchy  which,  in  respect  of  its  first 
foundation,  its  policy,  and  the  consistency  of  its  whole  frame 
and  constitution,  cannot  but  appear  in  some  respect  august  and 
venerable,  even  in  such  as  we  do  not  usually  esteem  weak  eyes. 
These  are  the  spiritual  conquerors,  who,  like  the  first  Ca?sars, 
from  small  befjinnings  established  the  foundations  of  an  almost 
universal  monarchy.  No  wonder  if  at  this  day  the  inmiediate 
view  of  this  hierarchal  residence,  the  city  and  court  of  Rome, 
be  found  to  have  an  extraordinary  effect  on  foreigners  of  other 
latter  churches.  Xo  wonder  if  the  amazed  surveyors  are  for 
the  future  so  a])t  cither  to  conceive  the  horridest  aversion  to  all 
]n"iestly  government,  or,  on  the  contrary,  to  admire  it  so  far  as 
even  to  wish  a  coalescence  or  reiuiion  with  this  ancient  mother 
church. 

In    reality,    the    exercise    of    power,    however    arbitrary    or 

^  W^itness  the  case  of  Moliiios,  and  of  the  pious,  worthy,  and  ingenious 
Abhc  Fench)U,  now  Archbishop  of  C'anibray. 

214 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

despotic,  seems  less  intolerable  under  such  a  spiritual  sovereignty, 
so  extensive,  ancient,  and  of  such  a  long  succession,  than  under 
the  petty  tyrannies  and  mimical  polities  of  some  new  pretenders. 
The  former  may  even  persecute  with  a  tolerable  grace ;  ^  the 
latter,  who  would  willingly  derive  their  authority  from  the 
former,  and  graft  on  their  successive  right,  must  necessarily 
make  a  very  awkward  figure.  And  whilst  they  strive  to  give 
themselves  the  same  air  of  independency  on  the  civil  magistrate, 
whilst  they  affect  the  same  authority  in  government,  the  same 
grandeur,  magnificence,  and  pomp  in  worship,  they  raise  the 
highest  ridicule  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  have  real  discernment, 
and  can  distinguish  originals  from  copies  : — 

O  iniitatores,  servum  pecus  !  '^ 


CHAPTER   III 

Of  the  force  of  humour  in  religion — Support  of  our  author's  argument 
in  his  essay  on  the  freedom  of  wit  and  raillery^Zeal  discussed. 
Spiritual  surgeons;  executioners;  carvers  —  Original  of  human 
sacrifice — Exhilaration  of  religion  —  Various  aspects  from  outward 
causes. 

The  celebrated  wits  of  the  miscellanarian  race,  the  essay  writers, 
casual  discoursers,  reflection  coiners,  meditation  founders,  and 
others  of  the  irregular  kind  of  writers,  may  plead  it  as  their 
peculiar  advantage  "that  they  follow  the  variety  of  Nature.'' 
And  in  such  a  chmate  as  ours  their  plea,  no  doubt,  may  be  very 
just.  We  islanders,  famed  for  other  mutabilities,  are  particu- 
larly noted  for  the  variableness  and  inconstancy  of  our  weathej'. 
And  if  our  taste  in  Letters  be  found  answerable  to  this  tempera- 
ture of  our  climate,  "'tis  certain  a  writer  must,  in  our  account, 
be  the  more  valuable  in  his  kind,  as  he  can  agreeably  surprise 

1  Infra,  p.  :224.  -  Hor.  Ep.  i.  xix.  11). 

215 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

his  reader  by  sudden  changes  and  transports  from  one  extreme 
to  another. 

Were  it  not  for  the  known  prevalency  of  this  relish,  and 
the  apparent  deference  paid  those  geniuses  who  are  said  to 
elevate  and  surprise,  the  author  of  these  Miscellanies  might,  in 
all  probability,  be  afraid  to  entertain  his  reader  with  this 
multifarious,  complex,  and  desultory  kind  of  reading.  'Tis 
certain,  that  if  we  consider  the  beginning  and  process  of  our 
present  work,  we  shall  find  sufficient  variation  in  it.  From  a 
professed  levity  we  are  lapsed  into  a  sort  of  gravity  unsuitable 
to  our  manner  of  settino;  out.  We  have  steered  an  adventurous 
course,  and  seem  newly  come  out  of  a  stormy  and  rough  sea. 
^Tis  time  indeed  we  should  enjoy  a  calm,  and  instead  of  expand- 
ing our  sails  before  the  swelling  gusts,  it  befits  us  to  retire 
under  the  lee-shore  and  ply  our  oars  in  a  smooth  water. 

'Tis  the  philosopher,  the  orator,  or  the  poet  whom  we  may 
compare  to  some  first-rate  vessel  which  launches  out  into  the 
wide  sea,  and  Avith  a  proud  motion  insults  the  encountering 
surges.  We  essay- writers  are  of  the  small  craft  or  galley  kind. 
We  move  chiefly  by  starts  and  bounds,  according  as  our  motion 
is  by  frequent  intervals  renewed.  We  have  no  great  adventure 
in  view,  nor  can  tell  certainly  whither  we  are  bound.  We 
undertake  no  mighty  voyage  by  help  of  stars  or  compass,  but 
row  from  creek  to  creek,  keep  up  a  coasting  trade,  and  are 
fitted  only  for  fair  weather  and  the  summer  season. 

Happy  therefore  it  is  for  us  in  particular,  that  having 
finished  our  course  of  Enthusiasm,  and  pursued  our  author  into 
his  second  treatise,^  we  are  now  at  last  obliged  to  turn  towards 
pleasanter  reflections,  and  have  such  subjects  in  view  as  must 
naturally  reduce  us  to  a  more  familiar  style.  Wit  and  humour 
(the  professed  subject  of  the  treatise  now  before  us)  will  hardly 
bear  to  be  examined  in  ponderous  sentences  and  poised  discourse. 
We  might  now  perhaps  do  best  to  lay  aside  the  gravity  of  strict 
argument  and  resume  the  way  of  chat,  which,  through  aversion 
^  Viz.  Essay  on  the  Freedom  of  Wil  and  Humour. 

216 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

to  a  contrary  formal  manner,  is  generally  relished  with  more 
than  ordinary  satisfaction.  For  excess  of  physic,  Ave  know,  has 
often  made  men  hate  the  name  of  wholesome.  And  an  abund- 
ancy  of  forced  instruction  and  solemn  counsel  may  have  made 
men  full  as  averse  to  any  thing  delivered  with  an  air  of  high 
wisdom  and  science,  especially  if  it  be  so  high  as  to  be  set  above 
all  human  art  of  reasoning,  and  even  above  reason  itself,  in  the 
account  of  its  sublime  dispensers. 

However,  since  it  may  be  objected  to  us  by  certain  formalists 
of  this  sort  "  that  we  can  prove  nothing  duly  without  proving 
it  in  form,"'''  we  may  for  once  condescend  to  their  demand,  state 
our  case  formally,  and  divide  our  subject  into  parts,  after  the 
precise  manner  and  according  to  just  rule  and  method. 

Our  purpose,  therefore,  being  to  defend  an  author  who  has 
been  charged  as  too  presumptuous  for  introducing  the  way  of 
wit  and  humour  into  religious  searches,  we  shall  endeavour  to 
make  apjiear  : — 

1st.  That  wit  and  humour  are  corroborative  of  religipn,  and 
promotive  of  true  faith, 

2nd.  That  they  are  used  as  proper  means  of  this  kind  by 
the  holy  founders  of  religion. 

3rd.  That  notwithstanding  the  dark  complexion  and  sour 
humour  of  some  religious  teachers,  we  may  be  justly  said  to 
have  in  the  main  a  witty  and  good-humoured  religion. 

Among  the  earliest  acquaintance  of  my  youth,  I  remember, 
in  particular,  a  club  of  three  or  four  merry  gentlemen,  who  had 
long  kept  company  with  one  another,  and  were  seldom  separate 
in  any  party  of  pleasure  or  diversion.  They  happened  once  to 
be  u})on  a  travelling  adventure,  and  came  to  a  country  where 
they  were  told  for  certain  they  should  find  the  worst  entertain- 
ment, as  well  as  the  worst  roads  imaginable.  One  of  the 
gentlemen,  who  seemed  the  least  concerned  for  this  disaster, 
said  slightly  and  without  any  seeming  design,  "that  the  best 
expedient  for  them  in  this  extremity  would  be  to  keep  them- 
selves in  high  humour,  and  endeavour  to  commend  everything 

217 


SHAFTESEURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

which  the  place  afforded."  The  other  gentlemen  immediately 
took  the  hint,  but,  as  it  happened,  kept  silence,  passed  the 
subject  over  and  took  no  further  notice  of  what  had  been 
proposed. 

Being-  entered  into  the  dismal  country,  in  which  they  j)ro- 
ceeded  without  the  least  complaint,  'twas  remarkable,  that  if 
by  great  chance  they  came  to  any  tolerable  bit  of  road  or  any 
ordinary  prospect,  they  failed  not  to  say  something  or  other  in 
its  praise,  and  would  light  often  on  such  pleasant  fancies  and 
representations,  as  made  the  objects  in  reality  agreeable. 

AVhen  the  greatest  part  of  the  dav  was  thus  spent,  and  our 
gentlemen  arrived  where  they  intended  to  take  their  quarters, 
the  first  of  them  who  made  trial  of  the  fare,  or  tasted  either 
glass  or  dish,  recommended  it  with  such  an  air  of  assurance 
and  in  such  lively  expressions  of  approbation,  that  the  others 
came  instantly  over  to  his  opinion,  and  confirmed  his  relish  with 
many  additional  encomiums  of  their  own. 

Many  ingenious  reasons  were  given  for  the  several  odd 
tastes  and  looks  of  things  which  were  presented  to  them  at 
table.  "  Some  meats  were  wholesome,  others  of  a  high  taste, 
others  according  to  the  manner  of  eating  in  this  or  that  foreign 
country.""  Every  dish  had  the  flavour  of  some  celebrated 
receipt  in  cookery ;  and  the  wine  and  other  liquors  had,  in  their 
turn,  the  advantage  of  being  treated  in  the  same  elegant  strain. 
In  short,  our  gentlemen  ate  and  drank  heartily,  and  took  up 
with  their  indifferent  fare  so  well,  that  "'twas  apparent  they  had 
wrought  upon  themselves  to  believe  they  were  tolerably  well 
served. 

Their  servants,  in  the  meantime,  having  laid  no  such  plot 
as  this  against  themselves,  kept  to  their  senses,  and  stood  it 
out,  "that  their  masters  had  certainly  lost  theirs.  For  how 
else  could  they  swallow  so  contentedly  and  take  all  for  good 
which  was  set  before  them  ? '"' 

Had  I  to  deal  with  a  malicious  reader,  he  might  perhaps 
pretend  to  infer  from  this  story  of  my  travelling  friends,  that  I 

218 


\ 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

intended  to  represent  it  as  an  easy  matter  for  people  to  persuade 
themselves  into  what  opinion  or  belief  they  pleased.  But  it 
can  never  surely  be  thought  that  men  of  true  judgment  and 
understanding  should  set  about  such  a  task  as  that  of  perverting 
their  own  iudfrment  and  sivins;  a  wrons:  bias  to  their  reason. 
They  must  easily  foresee  that  an  attempt  of  this  kind,  should 
it  have  the  least  success,  would  prove  of  far  worse  consequence 
to  them  than  any  perversion  of  their  taste,  ajjpetite,  or  ordinary 
senses. 

I  must  confess  it,  however,  to  be  my  imagination  that  where 
fit  circumstances  concur,  and  many  inviting  occasions  offer  from 
the  side  of  men's  interest,  their  humour,  or  their  passion,  'tis  no 
extraordinary  case  to  see  them  enter  into  such  a  plot  as  this 
against  their  own  understandings,  and  endeavour  by  all  possible 
means  to  persuade  both  themselves  and  others  of  what  they 
think  convenient  and  useful  to  believe. 

If  in  many  particular  cases,  where  favour  and  affection 
prevail,  it  be  found  so  easy  a  thing  with  us  to  impose  u})on 
ourselves ;  it  cannot  surely  be  very  hard  to  do  it  where,  we 
take  for  granted,  our  highest  interest  is  concerned.  Now  it  is 
certainly  no  small  interest  or  concern  with  men  to  believe  what 
is  by  authority  established,  since  in  the  case  of  disbelief  there 
can  be  no  choice  left  but  either  to  live  a  hy])ocrite  or  be 
esteemed  profane.  Even  where  men  are  left  to  themselves,  and 
allowed  the  freedom  of  their  choice,  they  are  still  forward 
enough  in  believing,  and  can  officiously  endeavour  to  persuade 
themselves  of  the  truth  of  any  flattering  imposture. 

Nor  is  it  unusual  to  find  men  successful  in  this  endeavour; 
as,  among  other  instances,  may  appear  by  the  many  religious 
faiths  or  opinions,  however  preposterous  or  contradictory, 
which,  age  after  age,  we  know  to  have  been  raised  on  the 
foundation  of  miracles  and  pretended  commissions  from  heaven. 
These  have  been  as  generally  espoused  and  passionately  cherished 
as  the  greatest  truths  and  most  certain  i-evelations.  'Tis  hardly 
to  be  supposed  that   such  combinations  should   be  formed,  and 

219 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

forgeries  erected  with  such  success  and  prevalency  over  the 
understandings  of  men,  did  not  they  themselves  co-operate,  of 
their  own  accord,  towards  the  imposture,  and  show  "  that  by  a 
good-will  and  hearty  desire  of  believing,  they  had  in  reality  a 
considerable  hand  in  the  deceit/'' 

'Tis  certain  that  in  a  country  where  faith  has  for  a  long 
time  gone  by  inheritance,  and  opinions  are  entailed  by  law, 
there  is  little  room  left  for  the  vulgar  to  alter  their  persuasion, 
or  deliberate  on  the  choice  of  their  relieious  belief.  When- 
soever  a  government  thinks  fit  to  concern  itself  with  men's 
ojiinions,  and  by  its  absolute  authority  impose  any  particular 
belief,  there  is  none  ])erhaps  ever  so  ridiculous  or  monstrous  in 
which  it  needs  doubt  of  having  good  success.  This  we  may  see 
thoroughly  effected  in  certain  countries  by  a  steady  policy  and 
sound  application  of  punishment  and  reward,  with  the  assistance 
of  particular  courts  erected  to  this  end,  peculiar  methods  of 
justice,  peculiar  magistrates  and  officers,  proper  inquests  and 
certain  wholesome  severities,  not  slightly  administered  and 
played  with  (as  certain  triflers  propose),  but  duly  and  properly 
enforced,  as  is  absolutely  requisite  to  this  end  of  strict  conform- 
ity, and  unity  in  one  and  the  same  profession  and  manner  of 
worship. 

But  should  it  happen  to  be  the  truth  itself  which  was  thus 
effectually  propagated  by  the  means  we  have  described,  the 
very  nature  of  such  means  can,  however,  allow  but  little  honour 
to  the  propagators,  and  little  merit  to  the  disciples  and  believers. 
'Tis  certain  that  Mahometism,  Paganism,  Judaism  or  any  other 
belief  may  stand  as  well  as  the  truest  upon  this  foundation. 
He  who  is  now  an  orthodox  Christian,  would  by  virtue  of  such 
a  discipline  have  been  infallibly  as  true  a  Mussulman  or  as  errant 
a  heretic,  had  his  birth  happened  in  another  place. 

For  this  reason  there  can  be  no  rational  belief  but  where 
comparison  is  allowed,  examination  permitted,  and  a  sincere 
toleration  established.  And  in  this  case,  I  will  presume  to  say, 
"  that  whatever  belief  is  once  espoused  or  countenanced  by  the 

220 


IMTSCELLANEOUS   REFT.ECTIONS 

magistrate,  it  will  have  a  suflicient  advantage,  without  any  help 
from  force  or  menaces  on  one  hand,  or  extraordinary  favour  and 
jiartial  treatment  on  the  other."  If  the  belief  be  in  any  measure 
consonant  to  truth  and  reason,  it  will  find  as  much  favour  in 
the  eyes  of  mankind  as  truth  and  reason  need  desire.  What- 
ever difficulties  there  may  be  in  any  particular  speculations  or 
mysteries  belonging  to  it,  the  better  sort  of  men  will  endeavour 
to  pass  them  over.  They  wi^l  believe  (as  our  author  ^  says)  to 
the  full  stretch  of  their  reason,  and  add  spurs  to  their  faith,  in 
order  to  be  the  more  sociable,  and  conform  the  better  with 
what  their  interest,  in  conjunction  with  their  good -humour, 
inclines  them  to  receive  as  credible,  and  observe  as  their  religious 
(hity  and  devotional  task. 

Here  it  is  that  good-humour  will  naturally  take  place,  and 
the  hospitable  disposition  of  our  travelling  friends  above  re- 
recited  will  easily  transfer  itself  into  religion,  and  operate  in 
the  same  manner  with  respect  to  the  established  faith  (however 
miraculous  or  incomprehensible)  under  a  tolerating,  mild,  and 
gentle  government. 

Evei'y  one  knows,  indeed,  that  by  heresy  is  understood  a 
stubbornness  in  the  will,  not  a  defect  merely  in  the  under- 
standing. On  this  account  'tis  impossible  that  an  honest  and 
good-humoured  man  should  be  a  schismatic  or  heretic,  and 
affect  to  separate  from  his  national  worship  on  slight  reasons  or 
without  severe  provocation. 

To  be  pursued  by  petty  inquisitors ;  to  be  threatened  with 
punishment  or  penal  laws ;  to  be  marked  out  as  dangerous  and 
suspected ;  to  be  railed  at  in  high  places  with  all  the  studied 
wit  and  art  of  cahnnny,  are  indeed  sufficient  provocations  to 
ill-humour,  and  may  force  people  to  divide  who  at  first  had 
never  any  such  intention.  But  the  virtue  of  good-humour  in 
religion  is  such  that  it  can  even  reconcile  persons  to  a  belief 
in  which  they  were  never  bred,  or  to  which  they  had  conceived 
a  former  prejudice. 

*  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  4. 

221 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

From  these  considerations  we  cannot  but  of  course  conclude, 
"  That  there  is  nothing  so  ridiculous  in  respect  of  policy,  or  so 
wrong  and  odious  in  respect  of  common  humanity,  as  a 
moderate  and  half-way  persecution/''  It  only  frets  the  sore ; 
it  raises  the  ill-humour  of  mankind  ;  excites  the  keener  spirits  ; 
moves  indignation  in  beholders ;  and  sows  the  very  seeds  of 
schism  in  men^s  bosoms.  A  resolute  and  bold-faced  persecution 
leaves  no  time  or  scope  for  these  engendering  distempers  or 
gathering  ill-humours.  It  does  the  work  at  once,  by  extirpa- 
tion, banishment,  or  massacre ;  and,  like  a  bold  stroke  in 
surgery,  dispatches  by  one  short  amputation  what  a  bungling 
hand  would  make  worse  and  worse,  to  the  perpetual  sufferance 
and  misery  of  the  patient. 

If  there  be  on  earth  a  proper  way  to  render  the  most  sacred 
truth  suspected,  'tis  by  supporting  it  with  threats,  and  pretend- 
ing to  terrify  people  into  the  belief  of  it.  This  is  a  sort  of  daring 
mankind  in  a  cause  where  they  know  themselves  superior,  and 
out  of  reach.  The  weakest  mortal  finds  within  himself  that 
though  he  may  be  outwitted  and  deluded,  he  can  never  be 
forced  in  what  relates  to  his  opinion  or  assent.  And  there  are 
few  men  so  ignorant  of  human  nature,  and  of  what  they  hold 
in  common  with  their  kind,  as  not  to  comprehend  "  that  where 
great  vehemence  is  expressed  by  any  one  in  what  relates  solelv  to 
another,  'tis  seldom  without  some  private  interest  of  his  own.'' 

In  common  matters  of  dispute,  the  angry  disputant  makes  the 
best  cause  to  appear  the  worst.  A  clov\'n  once  took  a  fancy  to 
hear  the  Latin  disputes  of  doctors  at  a  university.  He  was  asked 
what  pleasure  he  could  take  in  viewing  such  combatants,  when 
he  could  never  know  so  much  as  which  of  the  parties  had  the 
better.  "  For  that  matter,"  replied  the  clown,  "  I  a'n't  such  a 
fool  neither,  but  I  can  see  who's  the  first  that  puts  t'other  into 
a  passion."  Nature  herself  dictated  this  lesson  to  the  clown, 
that  he  who  had  the  better  of  the  argument,  would  be  easy  and 
well-humoured  ;  but  he  who  was  unable  to  support  his  cause 
by  reason,  would  naturally  lose  his  temper  and  grow  violent. 

222 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Were  two  travellers  agreed  to  tell  their  story  separate  in 
public,  the  one  being  a  man  of  sincerity,  but  positive  and 
dogmatical;  the  other  less  sincere,  but  easy  and  good-humoured; 
though  it  happened  that  the  accounts  of  this  latter  gentleman 
were  of  the  more  miraculous  sort,  they  would  yet  sooner  gain 
belief,  and  be  more  favourably  received  by  mankind,  than  the 
strongly  asserted  relations  and  vehement  narratives  of  the  other 
fierce  defender  of  the  truth. 

That  good -humour  is  a  chief  cause  of  compliance  or 
acquiescence  in  matters  of  faith,  may  be  proved  from  the  very 
spirit  of  those  whom  we  commonly  call  critics.  'Tis  a  known 
prevention  against  the  gentlemen  of  this  character,  "  that  they 
are  generally  ill-humoured  and  splenetic."  The  world  will 
needs  have  it  that  their  spleen  disturbs  [them.  And  I  must 
confess  I  think  the  world  in  general  to  be  so  far  right  in  this 
conceit,  that  though  all  critics  perhaps  are  not  necessarily 
splenetic,  all  splenetic  people  (whether  naturally  such,  or  made 
so  by  ill-usage)  have  a  necessary  propensity  to  criticism  and 
satire.  When  men  are  easy  in  themselves  they  let  others 
remain  so,  and  can  readily  comply  with  what  seems  plausible, 
and  is  thought  conducing  to  the  quiet  or  good  corres])ondence 
of  mankind.  They  study  to  raise  no  difficulties  or  doubts. 
And  in  religious  affairs  'tis  seldom  that  they  are  known  forward 
to  entertain  ill  thoughts  or  surmises,  whilst  they  are  unmolested. 
But  if  disturbed  by  groundless  arraignments  and  suspicions,  by 
unnecessary  invectives  and  bitter  declamations,  and  by  a  con- 
tentious quarrelsome  aspect  of  religion,  they  naturally  turn 
critics,  and  begin  to  question  everything.  The  spirit  of  satire 
rises  with  the  ill  mood  ;  and  the  chief  passion  of  men  thus 
diseased  and  thrown  out  of  good  humour  is  to  find  fault, 
censure,  unravel,  confound,  and  leave  nothing  without  exception 
and  controversy. 

These  are  the  sceptics  or  scrupulists,  against  whom  there  is 
such  a  clamour  raised.  'Tis  evident  in  the  meanwhile  that 
the  very  clamour  itself,  joined  with  the  usual  menaces  and  show 

223 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

of  force,  is  that  which  cliiefly  raises  this  sceptical  spirit,  and 
helps  to  multiply  the  number  of  these  inquisitive  and  ill- 
humoured  critics.  Mere  threats,  without  power  of  execution, 
are  only  exasperating  and  provocative.  They  ^  \\  ho  are  masters 
of  the  carnal  as  well  as  spiritual  weapon  may  apply  each  at 
their  jileasure,  and  in  what  proportion  they  think  necessary. 
But  where  the  magistrate  resolves  steadily  to  reserve  his  fasces 
for  his  own  proper  province,  and  keep  the  edge-tools  and  deadly 
instruments  out  of  other  hands,  'tis  in  vain  for  spiritual 
pretenders  to  take  such  magisterial  airs.  It  can  then  only 
become  them  to  brandish  such  arms  when  they  have  strength 
enough  to  make  the  magistrate  resign  his  office,  and  become 
provost  or  executioner  in  their  service. 

Should  any  one  who  happens  to  read  these  lines  perceive 
in  himself  a  rising  animosity  against  the  author  for  asserting 
thus  zealously  the  notion  of  a  religious  liberty  and  mutual 
toleration,  'tis  wished  that  he  would  maturely  deliberate  on 
the  cause  of  his  disturbance  and  ill-humour.     AVould  he  deimi 

o 

to  look  narrowly  into  himself,  he  would  undoubtedly  find  that 
it  is  not  zeal  for  religion  or  the  truth  which  moves  him  on  this 
occasion.  For  had  he  happened  to  be  in  a  nation  where  he  was 
no  conformist,  nor  had  any  hope  or  expectation  of  obtaining 
the  precedency  for  his  own  manner  of  worship,  he  would  have 
found  nothing  preposterous  in  this  our  doctrine  of  indulgence. 
'Tis  a  fact  indisjiutable,  that  whatever  sect  or  religion  is  under- 
most, though  it  may  have  persecuted  at  any  time  before,  yet 
as  soon  as  it  begins  to  suffer  persecution  in  its  turn  it  recurs 
instantly  to  the  principles  of  moderation,  and  maintains  this 
our  plea  for  complacency,  sociableness,  and  good  humour  in 
religion.  The  mystery  therefore  of  this  animosity  or  rising 
indignation  of  my  devout  and  zealous  reader  is  only  this : 
"That  being  devoted  to  the  interest  of  a  party  already  in 
possession  or  expectation  of  the  temporal  advantages  annexed 
to  a  particular  belief,  he  fails  not,  as  a  zealous  party-man,  to 
1  Supra,  Misc.  ii.  ch.  ii.,  end. 

224 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

look  with  jealousy  on  every  unconformable  opinion,  and  is  sure 
to  justify  those  means  which  he  thinks  proper  to  prevent  its 
growth.""  He  knows  that  if  in  matters  of  religion  any  one 
believes  amiss,  'tis  at  his  own  peril.  If  opinion  damns,  vice 
certainly  does  as  much.  Yet  will  our  gentleman  easily  find,  if 
he  inquires  the  least  into  himself,  that  he  has  no  such  furious 
concern  for  the  security  of  men's  morals,  nor  any  such  violent 
resentment  of  their  vices,  when  they  are  such  as  noway  in- 
commode him.  And  from  hence  it  will  be  easy  for  him  to 
infer  "  that  the  passion  he  feels  on  this  occasion  is  not  from 
pure  zeal,  but  private  interest  and  worldly  emulation." 

Come  we  now  (as  authentic  rhetoricians  express  themselves) 
to  our  second  head,  which  we  should  again  subdivide  into  firsts 
and  seconds  but  that  this  manner  of  carving  is  of  late  days 
grown  much  out  of  fashion. 

'Twas  the  custom  of  our  ancestors,  perhaps  as  long  since  as 
the  days  of  our  hospitable  King  Arthur,  to  have  nothing  served 
at  table  but  what  was  entire  and  substantial.     'Twas  a  whole 
boar  or  solid  ox  which   made  the    feast.     The  figure  of  the 
animal  was  preserved  entire,  and  the  dissection  made  in  form 
by  the  appointed  carver,  a  man  of  might  as  well  as  profound 
craft  and   notable  dexterity,  who  was  seen  erect,  with  goodly 
mien    and    action,    displaying    heads    and    members,    dividing 
according   to   art,    and    distributing    his    subject   matter   into 
proper  parts,  suitable  to  the  stomachs  of  those  he  served.     In 
latter  days  'tis  become  the  fashion  to  eat  with  less  ceremony 
and   method.     Every  one  chooses  to  carve  for  himself.     The 
learned  manner  of  dissection  is  out  of  request ;  and  a  certain 
method  of  cookery  has  been  introduced,  by  which  the  anatomical 
science  of  the  table  is  entirely  set  aside.     Ragouts  and  fricassees 
are  the  reigning  dishes,  in  which  everything  is  so  dismembered 
and  thrown  out  of  all  order  and  form  that  no  part  of  the  mass 
can  properly  be  divided,  or  distinguished  from  another. 

Fashion  is  indeed  a  powerful  mistress,  and  by  her  single 
authority  has  so  far  degraded  the  carving  method  and  use  of 
VOL.  II  225  Q 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

solids,  even  in  discourse  and  writing,  that  our  religious  pastors 
themselves  have  many  of  them  changed  their  manner  of  dis- 
tributing to  us  their  spiritual  food.  They  have  quitted  their 
substantial  service  and  uniform  division  into  parts  and  under- 
parts,  and  in  order  to  become  fashionable,  they  have  run  into 
the  more  savoury  way  of  learned  ragout  and  medley.  'Tis  the 
unbred  rustic  orator  alone  who  presents  his  clownish  audience 
with  a  divisible  discourse.  The  elegant  court  divine  exhorts  in 
miscellany,  and  is  ashamed  to  bring  his  twos  and  threes  before  a 
fashionable  assembly. 

Should  I  therefore,  as  a  mere  miscellanarian  or  essay  writer, 
forgetting  what  I  had  premised,  be  found  to  drop  a  head  and 
lose  the  connecting  thread  of  my  present  discourse,  the  case 
perhaps  would  not  be  so  preposterous.  For  fear,  however,  lest 
I  should  be  charged  for  being  worse  than  my  word,  I  shall 
endeavour  to  satisfy  my  reader  by  pursuing  my  method  pro- 
posed, if  peradventure  he  can  call  to  mind  what  that  method 
was.  Or  if  he  cannot,  the  matter  is  not  so  very  important  but 
he  may  safely  pursue  his  reading  without  further  trouble. 

To  proceed,  therefore.  Whatever  means  or  methods  may 
be  employed  at  any  time  in  maintaining  or  propagating  a 
religious  belief  already  current  and  established,  'tis  evident 
that  the  first  beginnings  must  have  been  founded  in  that 
natural  complacency  and  good  humour  which  inclines  to  trust 
and  confidence  in  mankind.  Terrors  alone,  though  accompanied 
with  miracles  and  prodigies  of  whatever  kind,  are  not  capable 
of  raising  that  sincere  faith  and  absolute  reliance  which  is 
required  in  favour  of  the  divinely  authorised  instructor  and 
spiritual  chief.  The  affection  and  love  which  procures  a  true 
adherence  to  the  new  religious  foundation  must  depend  either 
on  a  real  or  counterfeit  goodness  ^  in  the  religious  founder. 
Whatever  ambitious  spirit  may  inspire  him,  whatever  savage 
zeal  or  persecuting  principle  may  lie  in  reserve  ready  to  disclose 
itself  when  authority  and  power  is  once  obtained,  the  first  scene 
^  Wit  and  Humour,  part  ii.  §  2  ;  Moralists,  part  ii.  §  5. 

226 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

of  doctrine,  however,  fails  not  to  present  us  with  the  agreeable 
views  of  joy,  love,  meekness,  gentleness,  and  moderation. 

In  this  respect  religion,  according  to  the  common  practice 
in  many  sects,  may  be  compared  to  that  sort  of  courtship  of 
which  the  fair  sex  are  known  often  to  complain.  In  the 
beginning  of  an  amour,  when  these  innocent  charmers  are  first 
accosted,  they  hear  of  nothing  but  tender  vows,  submission, 
service,  love.  But  soon  afterwards,  when  won  by  this  appear- 
ance of  gentleness  and  humility,  they  have  resigned  themselves, 
and  are  no  longer  their  own,  they  hear  a  different  note,  and 
are  taught  to  understand  submission  and  service  in  a  sense  they 
little  expected.  Charity  and  brotherly  love  are  very  engaging 
sounds ;  but  who  would  dream  that  out  of  abundant  charity 
and  brotherly  love  should  come  steel,  fire,  gibbets,  rods,  and 
such  a  sound  and  hearty  application  of  these  remedies  as  should 
at  once  advance  the  worldly  greatness  of  religious  pastors  and 
the  particular  interest  of  private  souls,  for  which  they  are  so 
charitably  concerned  ? 

It  has  been  observed  by  our  author  ^  "  that  the  Jews  were 
naturally  a  very  cloudy  people."  That  they  had  certainly  in 
religion,  as  in  everything  else,  the  least  good-humour  of  any 
people  in  the  world  is  very  apparent.  Had  it  been  otherwise, 
their  holy  legislator  and  deliverer,  who  was  declared  the  meekest 
man  on  earth,-  and  who  for  many  years  together  had  by  the 
most  popular  and  kind  acts  endeavoured  to  gain  their  love  and 
affection,  would  in  all  probability  have  treated  them  afterwards 
with  more  sweetness,  and  been  able  with  less  blood  and  massacre  ^ 
to  retain  them  in  their  religious  duty.  This,  however,  we  may 
observe,  that  if  the  first  Jewish  princes  and  celebrated  kings 
acted  in  reality  according  to  the  institutions  of  their  great 
founder,  not  only  music  but  even  play  and  dance  were  of  holy 
appointment  and  divine  right.    The  first  monarch  of  this  nation, 

^  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  2  ;  and  above.  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i. 

^  Num.  xii.  3. 

2  Exod.  xxxii.  21 ,  etc.  ;  and  Num.  xvi.  41. 

227 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

though  of  a  melancholy  complexion,  joined  music  with  his 
spiritual  exercises,  and  even  used  it  as  a  remedy  under  that 
dark  enthusiasm  or  evil  spirit,^  which  how  far  it  might  resemble 
that  of  prophecy,  experienced  by  him  -  even  after  his-  apostasy, 
our  author  ^  pretends  not  to  determine.  'Tis  certain  that  the 
successor  of  this  prince  was  a  hearty  espouser  of  the  merry 
devotion,  and  by  his  example  has  shown  it  to  have  been  funda- 
mental in  the  religious  constitution  of  his  people.  The  famous 
entry  or  high  dance  *  performed  by  him,  after  so  conspicuous  a 
manner,  in  the  procession  of  the  sacred  cofferj  shows  that  he 
was  not  ashamed  of  expressing  any  ecstasy  of  joy  or  play  some 
humour^  which  was  practised  by  the  meanest  of  the  priests  or 
people  on  such  an  occasion.^ 

Besides  the  many  songs  and  hymns  dispersed  in  Holy  Writ, 
the  Book  of  Psalms  itself.  Job,  Proverbs,  Canticles,  and  other 
entire  volumes  of  the  sacred  collection,  which  are  plainly  poetry 
and  full  of  humorous  images  and  jocular  wit,  may  sufficiently 
show  how  readily  the  inspired  authors  had  recourse  to  humour 
and  diversion  as  a  proper  means  to  promote  religion  and 
strengthen  the  established  faith. 

1  1  Sam.  xviii.  10 ;  and  xix.  9.  2  jf,   23,  24, 

3  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  6.  M  Sam,  vi.  5,  14,  16.  ^  Ih.  22. 

^  Though  this  dance  was  not  performed  quite  naked,  the  dancers,  it 
seems,  were  so  slightly  clothed  that,  in  respect  of  modesty,  they  might  as 
well  have  worn  nothing,  their  nakedness  appearing  still  by  means  of 
their  high  caperings,  leaps,  and  violent  attitudes  which  were  proper  to 
this  dance.  Tlie  reader,  if  he  be  curious,  may  examine  what  relation 
this  religious  ecstasy  and  naked  dance  had  to  the  naked  and  processional 
prophecy  (1  Sam.  xix.  28,  24),  where  prince,  priest,  and  people  prophesied 
in  conjunction,  the  prince  himself  being  both  of  the  itinerant  and  naked 
party.  It  appears  that  even  before  he  was  yet  advanced  to  the  throne  he 
had  been  seized  with  this  prophesying  spirit,  errant,  processional,  and 
saltant,  attended,  as  we  find,  with  a  sort  of  martial  dance  performed  in 
troops  or  companies,  with  pipe  and  tabret  accompanying  the  march, 
together  with  psaltry,  harp,  cornets,  timbrels,  and  other  variety  of  music. 
See  1  Sam,  x.  5 ;  xix.  23,  etc,  ;  2  Sam,  vi.  5  ;  and  above,  Letter  of 
Enthusiasm,  §  6. 

228 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

When  the  affairs  of  the  Jewish  nation  grew  desperate,  and 
everything  seemed  tending  to  a  total  conquest  and  captivity, 
the  style  of  their  holy  writers  and  prophets  might  well  vary 
from  that*  of  earlier  days  in  the  rise  and  vigour  of  their  common- 
wealth, or  during  the  first  splendour  of  their  monarchy,  when 
the  princes  themselves  prophesied  and  potent  kings  were  of  the 
number  of  the  sacred  penmen.  This  still  we  may  be  assured 
of,  that  however  melancholy  or  ill-humoured  any  of  the  prophets 
may  appear  at  any  time,  'twas  not  that  kind  of  spirit  which 
God  was  wont  to  encourage  in  them.  Witness  the  case  of  the 
prophet  Jonah,  whose  character  is  so  naturally  described  in 
Holy  Writ. 

Pettish  as  this  prophet  was,  unlike  a  man,  and  resembling 
rather  some  refractory  boyish  pupil,  it  may  be  said  that  God, 
as  a  kind  tutor,  was  pleased  to  humour  him,  bear  with  his 
anger,  and  in  a  lusory  manner  expose  his  childish  frowardness 
and  show  him  to  himself. 

"  Arise  (said  his  gracious  Lord),  and  go  to  Nineveh."  ^  "  No 
such  matter,"  says  our  prophet  to  himself,  but  away  over  sea 
for  Tarshish.  He  fairly  plays  the  truant,  like  an  arch  school- 
boy, hoping  to  hide  out  of  the  way.  But  his  Tutor  had  good 
eyes  and  a  long  reach.  He  overtook  him  at  sea,  where  a 
storm  was  ready  prepared  for  his  exercise,  and  a  fish's  belly  for 
his  lodging.  The  renegade  found  himself  in  harder  durance 
than  any  at  land.  He  was  sufficiently  mortified.  He  grew 
good,  prayed,  moralised,  and  spoke  mightily  against  lying 
vanities.- 

Again  the  prophet  is  taken  into  favour,^  and  bid  go  to 
Nineveh  to  foretell  destruction.  He  foretells  it.  Nineveh 
repents ;  God  pardons,  and  the  prophet  is  angry. 

"  Lord  !  did  I  not  foresee  what  this  would  come  to  ?  Was 
not  this  my  saying  when  I  was  safe  and  quiet  at  home  ?  A\'^hat 
else  should  I  have  run  away  for  ?  As  if  I  knew  not  how  little 
dependence  there  was  on  the  resolution  of  those  who  are  always 

^  Jonah  i.  etc.  -  Ih.  ii.  8.  ''  lb.  iii.  1,  etc. 

229 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

so  ready  to  forgive  and  repent  of  what  they  have  determined. 
No  !     Strike  me  dead  !     Take  my  hfe  this  moment.     'Tis  better 

for  me.     If  ever  I  prophesy  again "  ^ 

"  And  dost  thou  well  then  to  be  thus  angry,  Jonah  ?  Con- 
sider with  thyself  Come !  Since  thou  wilt  needs  retire  out  of 
the  city  to  see  at  a  distance  what  will  come  of  it,  here,  take  a 
better  fence  than  thy  own  booth  against  the  hot  sun  which 
incommodes  thee.     Take  this  tall-  plant  as  a  shady  covering 

for   thy   head.      Cool    thyself,    and    be    delivered    from    thy 
grief.'' 2 

^Vhen  the  Almighty  had  shown  this  indulgence  to  the 
prophet  he  grew  better-humoured,  and  passed  a  tolerable  night. 
But  the  next  morning  the  worm  came  and  an  east  wind ;  the 
arbour  \vas  nipped,  the  sun  shone  vehemently,  and  the  prophet's 
head  was  heated  as  before.  Presently  the  ill  mood  returns,  and 
the  prophet  is  at  the  old  pass.  "  Better  die  than  live  at  this 
rate.  Death — death  alone  can  satisfy  me.  Let  me  hear  no 
longer  of  living.     No  !     'Tis  in  vain  to  talk  of  it."  ^ 

Again  God  expostulates  ;  but  is  taken  up  short,  and 
answered  churlishly  by  the  testv  prophet.  "Angry  he  is, 
angry  he  ought  to  be,  and  angry  he  will  be  to  his  death.""* 
But  the  Almighty,  with  the  utmost  pity  towards  him  in  this 
melancholy  and  froward  temper,  lays  open  the  folly  of  it,  and 
exhorts  to  mildness  and  good  humour  in  the  most  tender 
manner  and  under  the  most  familiar  and  pleasant  images ; 
whilst  he  shows  expressly  more  regard  and  tenderness  to  the 
very  cattle  and  brute-beasts  than  the  prophet  to  his  own  human 
kind,  and  to  those  very  disciples  whom  by  his  preaching  he  had 
converted.^ 

In  the  ancienter  parts  of  sacred  story,  where  the  beginning 
of  things  and  origin  of  human  race  are  represented  to  us,  there 
are  sufficient  instances  of  this  familiarity  of  style,  this  popular 
pleasant  intercourse  and  manner  of  dialogue  between  God  and 

1  Jouah  iv.  1,  2,  3.  "-  lb.  i,  5,  6.  ^  //,    7^  g, 

*  lb.  9.  ^  See  the  last  verse  of  this  prophet. 

230 


iMISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

man ;  ^  I  might  add,  even  between  man  and  beast ;  -  and  what 
is  still  more  extraordinary,  between  God  and  Satan.^ 

Whatsoever  of  this  kind  may  be  allegorically  understood, 
or  in  the  way  of  parable  or  fable,  this  I  am  sure  of,  that  the 
accounts,  descriptions,  narrations,  expressions,  and  phrases  are  in 
themselves  many  times  exceedingly  pleasant,  entertaining,  and 
facetious.  But  fearing  lest  I  might  be  misinterpreted  should  I 
offer  to  set  these  passages  in  their  proper  light,  which,  however, 
has  been  performed  by  undoubted  good  Christians  and  most 
learned  and  eminent  divines  of  our  own  church,^  I  forbear  to  go 
any  further  into  the  examination  or  criticism  of  this  sort. 

As  for  our  Saviour's  style,  'tis  not  more  vehement  and 
majestic  in  his  gravest  animadversions  or  declamatory  discourses 
than  it  is  sharp,  humorous,  and  witty  in  his  repartees,  reflections, 
fabulous  narrations,  or  parables,  similes,  comparisons,  and  other 
methods  of  milder  censure  and  reproof,  his  exhortations  to 
his  disciples,  his  particular  designation  of  their  manners,  the 
pleasant  images  under  which  he  often  couches  his  morals  and 
prudential  rules ;  even  his  miracles  themselves  (especially  the 
first  he  ever  Avrought^)  carry  with  them  a  certain  festivity, 
alacrity,  and  good  humour  so  remarkable  that  I  should  look 
upon  it  as  impossible  not  to  be  moved  in  a  pleasant  manner  at 
their  recital. 

Now,  if  what  I  have  here  asserted  in  behalf  of  pleasantry 
and  humour  be  found  just  and  real  in  respect  of  the  Jewish 
and  Christian  religions,  I  doubt  not  it  will  be  yielded  to  me,  in 
respect  of  the  ancient  heathen  establishments,  that  the  highest 
care  was  taken  by  their  original  founders  and  following  reformers 
to  exhilarate  religion,  and  correct  that  melancholy  and  gloomi- 
ness to  which  it  is  subject,  according  to  those  different  modifica- 
tions of  enthusiasm  above  specified.^ 

^  Gen.  iii.  9-,  etc.  -  Num.  xxii.  28,  etc. 

3  (1)  Job  i.,  ii.  ;  (2)  2  Chron.  xviii.  18,  etc. 

*  See  Burnet,  Archccol.  cap.  7,  p.  280,  etc. 

"  St.  John  ii.  11.  ^  Above,  cli.  i.,  ii. 

231 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Our  author,  as  I  take  it,  has  elsewhere  ^  shown  that  these 
founders  were  real  musicians  and  improvers  of  poetry,  music, 
and  the  entertaining  arts,  which  they  in  a  manner  incorporated 
with  religion  ;  not  without  good  reason,  as  I  am  apt  to  imagine. 
For  to  me  it  plainly  appears,  that  in  the  early  times  of  all 
religions,  when  nations  were  yet  barbarous  and  savage,  there 
was  ever  an  aptness  or  tendency  towards  the  dark  part  of 
superstition,  which  among  many  other  horrors  produced  that 
of  human  sacrifice.  Something  of  this  nature  might  possibly 
be  deduced  even  from  Holy  Writ.^  And  in  other  histories  we 
are  informed  of  it  more  at  large. 

Every  one  knows  how  great  a  part  of  the  old  heathen 
worship  consisted  in  play,  poetry,  and  dance.  And  though 
some  of  the  more  melancholy  and  superstitious  votaries  might 
approach  the  shrines  of  their  divinities  with  mean  grimaces, 
crouchings,  and  other  fawning  actions  betraying  the  low 
thoughts  they  had  of  the  divine  nature ;  yet  'tis  well  known 
that  in  those  times  the  illiberal  sycophantic^  manner  of  devo- 


^  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §  2. 

^  Gen.  xxii.  \,  2,  etc.  ;  and  Judges  xi.  30,  31,  etc. 

These  places  relating  to  Abraham  and  Jephthah  are  cited  only  with 
respect  to  the  notion  which  these  primitive  warriors  may  be  said  to  have 
entertained  concerning  this  horrid  enormity,  so  common  among  the 
inhabitants  of  Palestine  and  other  neighbouring  nations.  It  appears  that 
even  the  elder  of  these  Hebrew  princes  was  under  no  extreme  surprise  on 
this  trying  revelation.  Nor  did  he  think  of  expostulating  in  the  least  on 
this  occasion,  when  at  another  time  he  could  be  so  importunate  for  the 
pardon  of  an  inhospitable,  murderous,  impious,  and  incestuous  city,  Gen. 
xviii.  23,  etc.  See  Marsham's  Citations,  pp.  70,  77  :  "  ex  istis  satius  est 
colligere  hanc  Abrahami  tentationem  nou  fuisse  KeKaivovpynfj.^i'rjv  irpa^tv, 
actionem  innovatam ;  non  recens  excogitatam,  sed  adjpristinos  Cananaeorum 
mores  designatam."  See  the  learned  Capel's  Dissertation  upon  Jephthah, 
"ex  hujus  voti  lege  (Lev.  xxvii.  28,  29)  Jephte  filiam  omnino  videtur 
immolasse,  hoc  est,  morte  affecisse^  et  executus  est  in  ea  votum  quod 
ipse  voverat,  Jud.  xi.  89." 

3  See  Letter  of  Enthusiasm,  §  4. 

232 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

tion  was   by   the  wiser    sort    contemned  and  oft  suspected  as 
knavish  and  indirect.^ 

How  different  an  air  and  aspect  the  good  and  virtuous  were 
presumed  to  carry  with  them  to  the  temple,  let  Plutarch  singly, 
instead    of   many  others,  witness   in  his   excellent  treatise-  of 

1  .  .  .  Non  tu  prece  poscis  emaci^  etc. 

Haud  cuivis  promptum  est,  murmurque  liumilesque  susurros 

Tollere  de  templis.  .  ,   . 

De  Jove  quid  sentis  ?     Estue,  ut  praeponere  cures 

Hunc  cuinam  ?  .   .   . 

.  .  .  Qua  tu  mercede  deorum 

Enieris  auriculas  ?  .  .   . 

O  curvae  in  terris  aniniae  et  coelestium  iiianes  ! 

Quid  juvat  hoc,  templis  nostros  immittere  mores, 

Et  bona  diis  ex  hac  scelerata  ducere  pulpa  ? 
["  You  are  not  the  man  to  make  higgling  prayers.  ...  It  is  not  every- 
one who  is  ready  to  do  away  with  muttering  and  whispering  from  our 
temples.  .  .  .  AMiat  is  your  view  of  Jupiter?  May  1  assume  that  you 
would  think  of  putting  him  above — '  above  whom .'' '  .  .  .  What  is  the 
price  you  pay  for  the  ears  of  the  Gods .''...  O  ye  souls  that  cleave  to 
earth  and  have  nothing  heavenly  in  you  !  How  can  it  answer  to  introduce 
the  spirit  of  the  age  into  the  temple-service,  and  infer  what  the  Gods  like 
from  this  sinful  pampered  flesh  of  ours  ? " — From  Persius,  Sat.  2  ;  Coning- 
ton's  translation.] 

Non  est  meum,  si  mugiat  Africis 
Malus  procellis,  ad  miseras  preces 
Decurrere.   .  .   . 
["  It  is  not  for  me  to  betake  myself  to  pitiful  entreaties  if  my  mast 
roar  with  the  south-west  wind." — Horace,  Od.  iii.  xxix.  57-59.] 

See  Wit  and  Humour,  part  iii.  §  1  ;  and  above,  p.  205,  in  the  notes. 
^  S)  ^ap^ap  i^€vpbvT€s"'EiWT}Vis  Kara  rfj  BeLcnSai/xoviq.,  TrrjXJjcreis,  Kara^ap^apuaeis, 
(Ta^paTLcriJovs,  plipeis  eirl  TrpSawirop  aiVxpas,  vpocTKadiaeLS,  iWoKdrovs  wpoaKwrjaeis, 
etc.  "  O  wretched  Greeks  (says  he,  speaking  to  his  then  declining 
countrymen),  who  in  a  way  of  superstition  run  so  easily  into  the  relish 
of  barbarous  nations,  and  bring  into  religion  that  friglitful  mien  of  sordid 
and  vilifying  devotion,  ill-favoured  humiliation  and  contrition,  abject  looks 
and  countenances,  consternation,  prostrations,  disfigurations,  and  in  the 
act  of  worship,  distortions,  constrained  and  painful  postures  of  the  body, 
wry  faces,  beggarly  tones,  mumpings,  grimaces,  cringings,  and  the  rest  of 
this  kind.  ...  A  shame  indeed  to  us  Grecians  !  .   .  .   For  to  us  (we  know)^ 

233 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

superstition,  and    in    another  against    the  Epicurean  atheism, 

'tis  prescribed  from  of  old  by  our  peculiar  laws  concerning  music  and  tbe 
public  choruses,  that  we  should  perform  in  the  handsomest  manner,  and 
with  a  just  and  manly  countenance,  avoiding  those  grimaces  and  contortions 
of  which  some  singers  contract  a  habit.  And  shall  we  not  in  the  more  im- 
mediate woi'ship  of  the  Deity  preserve  this  liberal  air  and  manly  appear- 
ance ?  or,  on  the  contrary,  whilst  we  are  nicely  observant  of  other  forms 
and  decencies  in  the  temple,  shall  we  neglect  this  greater  decency  in  voice, 
words,  and  manners,  and  with  vile  cries,  fawnings,  and  prostitute  behaviour 
betray  the  natural  dignity  and  majesty  of  that  divine  religion  and  national 
worship  delivered  down  to  us  by  our  forefathers,  and  purged  from  every- 
thing of  a  barbarous  and  savage  kind  ?  " 

What  Plutarch  mentions  here  of  the  just  countenance  or  liberal  air, 
the  crrbtxa  bUaiov,  of  the  musical  performer,  is  agreeably  illustrated  in  his 
Alcibiades.  'Twas  that  heroic  youth,  who,  as  appears  by  this  historian, 
first  gave  occasion  to  the  Athenians  of  the  higher  rank  wholly  to  abandon 
the  use  of  flutes  ;  which  had  before  been  highly  in  favour  with  them.  The 
reason  given,  was ''^ the  illiberal  air  which  attended  such  performers,  and  the 
unmanly  disfiguration  of  their  looks  and  countenance  which  this  piping  work 
produced."  As  for  the  real  figure  or  plight  of  the  superstitious  mind,  our 
author  thus  describes  it  :  "  Gladly  would  the  poor  comfortless  mind  by 
whiles  keep  festival  and  rejoice ;  but  sucli  as  its  religion  is,  there  can  be 
no  free  mirth  or  joy  belonging  to  it.  Public  thanksgivings  are  but  private 
mournings.  Sighs  and  sorrows  accompany  its  praises.  Fears  and  horrors 
corrupt  its  best  afi'ections.  \Vhen  it  assumes  the  outward  ornaments  of 
best  apparel  for  the  temple,  it  even  then  strikes  melancholy  and  appears 
in  paleness  and  ghastly  looks.  AVhile  it  worships,  it  trembles.  It  sends 
up  vows  in  faint  and  feeble  voices,  with  eager  hopes,  desires,  and  passions, 
discoverable  in  the  whole  disorder  of  the  outward  frame  ;  and,  in  the 
main,  it  evinces  plainly  by  practice,  that  the  notion  of  Pythagoras  was  but 
vain,  who  dared  assert  that  we  were  tlien  in  the  best  state,  and  carried  our 
most  becoming  looks  with  us,  when  we  approached  the  Gods.  For  tlien 
above  all  other  seasons  are  the  superstitious  found  in  the  most  abject 
miserable  state  of  mind,  and  with  the  meanest  presence  and  behaviour, 
approaching  the  sacred  shrines  of  the  Divine  Powers  in  the  same  manner  as 
they  would  the  dens  of  bears  or  lions,  the  caves  of  basilisks  or  dragons,  or 
other  hideous  recesses  of  wild  beasts  or  raging  monsters.  To  me  therefore 
it  appears  wonderful,  that  we  should  arraign  atheism  as  impious,  whilst 
superstition  escapes  the  charge.  Shall  he  wlio  holds  there  are  no  Divine 
Powers  be  esteemed  impious,  and  shall  not  he  be  esteemed  far  more  impious 
who  holds  the  Divine  Beings  such  in  their  nature  as  the  superstitious 

234 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

where  it  will  plainly  enough  appear^  what  a  share  good 
humour  had  in  that  which  the  politer  ancients  esteemed  as 
piety  and  true  religion. 

But  now,  methinks,  I  have  been  sufficiently  grave  and 
serious  in  defence  of  what  is  directly  contrary  to   seriousness 

believe  aud  represent  ?  For  my  own  part,  I  had  rather  men  should  say  of 
me,"  etc.  See  Treatise  i.  §  5  in  the  notes.  Nothing-  can  be  more  remark- 
able than  what  our  author  says  again,  a  little  below.  "  The  atheist  believes 
there  is  no  Deity,  the  religionist  or  superstitious  believer  wishes  there  were 
none.  If  he  believes,  'tis  against  his  will ;  mistrust  he  dares  not,  nor  call 
his  thought  in  question.  But  could  he  with  security,  at  once,  throw  off 
that  oppressive  fear  which  like  the  rock  of  Tantallus  impends  and  presses 
over  him,  he  would  with  equal  joy  spurn  his  enslaving  thought,  and  em- 
brace the  atheist's  state  and  opinion  as  his  happiest  deliverance.  Atheists 
are  free  of  superstition,  but  the  superstitious  are  ever  willing  atheists, 
though  impotent  in  their  thought,  and  unable  to  believe  of  the  Divine 
Being  as  they  gladly  would,  wvl  Be  tQ  jxev  dOeip  Seio-idai/j.oi'lai  ovdef  ixerecTTLv, 
6  5^  5ei(n5ai/jLwi'  rrj  Trpoaipecrei  ddeos  ibv,  dudeveaTepd's  iariv  fj  rod  do^d^eiv  irepl  OeOiv  6 
/Soi^Xerat."     See  Treatise  i.  §  4-5. 

^  Where  speaking  of  religion  as  it  stood  in  the  heathen  church  and 
in  his  own  time,  he  confesses  "That  as  to  the  vulgar  disposition  there  was 
no  remedy.  Many  even  of  the  better  sort  would  be  found,  of  course,  to 
intermix  with  their  veneration  and  esteem  something  of  terror  or  fear  in 
their  religious  worship,  which  might  give  it  perhaps  the  character  of 
superstition  ;  but  that  this  evil  was  a  thousand  times  over-balanced  by  the 
satisfaction,  hope,  joy,  and  delight  which  attended  religious  worship. 
This  (says  he)  is  plain  and  evident  from  the  most  demonstrable  testimonies, 
for  neither  the  societies  or  public  meetings  in  the  temples,  nor  the 
festivals  themselves,  nor  any  other  diverting  parties,  sights,  or  entertain- 
ments, are  more  deliglitful  or  rejoicing  than  what  we  ourselves  behold, 
and  act  in  the  divine  worship  and  in  the  holy  sacrifices  and  mysteries 
which  belong  to  it.  Our  disposition  and  temper  is  not,  on  this  occasion, 
as  if  we  were  in  the  presence  of  worldly  potentates,  dread  sovereigns,  and 
despotic  princes.  Nor  are  we  here  found  meanly  luuiibling  ourselves, 
crouching  in  fear  and  awe,  and  full  of  anxiety  and  confusion  as  would  be 
natural  to  us  in  such  a  case.  But  where  the  divinity  is  esteemed  the 
nearest  and  most  immediately  present,  there  horrors  and  amazements  are 
the  furthest  banislied  ;  there  the  heart,  we  find,  gives  freest  way  to 
pleasure,  to  entertainment,  to  play,  mirth,  humour,  and  diversion,  and 
this  even  to  an  excess." 

235 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

and  gravity.  I  have  very  solemnly  pleaded  for  gaiety  and 
good  humour;  I  have  declaimed  against  pedantry  in  learned 
language,  and  opposed  formality  in  form ;  I  now  find  myself 
somewhat  impatient  to  get  loose  from  the  constraint  of  method ; 
and  I  pretend  lawfully  to  exercise  the  privilege  which  I  have 
asserted  of  rambling  from  subject  to  subject,  from  style  to 
style,  in  my  miscellaneous  manner  according  to  my  present  pro- 
fession and  character. 

I  may,  in  the  meanwhile,  be  censured  probably  for  passing 
over  my  third  head.  But  the  methodical  reader,  if  he  be 
scrupulous  about  it,  may  content  himself  with  looking  back, 
and  if  possibly  he  can  pick  it  out  of  my  second,  he  will  forgive 
this  anticipation  in  a  writing  which  is  governed  less  by  form 
than  humour,  I  had  indeed  resolved  with  myself  to  make  a 
large  collection  of  passages  from  our  most  eminent  and  learned 
divines,  in  order  to  have  set  forth  this  latter  head  of  my 
chapter,  and  by  better  authority  than  my  own  to  have  evinced 
"that  we  had  in  the  main  good-humoured  religion."  But 
after  considering  a  little  while,  I  came  to  this  short  issue  with 
myself,  "  that  it  was  better  not  to  cite  at  all  than  to  cite 
partially."  Now  if  I  cited  fairly  what  was  said  as  well  on  the 
melancholy  as  the  cheerful  side  of  our  religion,  the  matter,  I 
found,  would  be  pretty  doubtfully  balanced,  and  the  result  at 
last  would  be  this,  "  that,  generally  speaking,  as  oft  as  a  divine 
was  in  good  humour,  we  should  find  religion  the  sweetest  and 
best  humoured  thing  in  nature,  but  at  other  times  (and  that 
pretty  often)  we  should  find  a  very  different  face  of  matters." 

Thus  are  we  alternately  exalted  and  humbled,  cheered  and 
dejected,  according  as  our  spiritual^  director  is  himself  in- 
fluenced, and  this,  peradventure  for  our  edification  and 
advantage  "  that  by  these  contrarieties  and  changes  we  may  be 
rendered  more  supple  and  compliant."  If  we  are  very  low  and 
down  we  are  taken  up,  if  we  are  up  and  high  we  are  taken 
down.  This  is  discipline,  this  is  authority  and  command.  Did 
1  Supra,  p.  179. 
236 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

religion  carry  constantly  one  and  the  same  face,  and  were  it 
always  represented  to  us  alike  in  every  respect,  we  might 
perhaps  be  overbold  and  make  acquaintance  with  it  in  too 
familiar  a  manner ;  we  might  think  ourselves  fully  knowing  in 
it  and  assured  of  its  true  character  and  genius.  From  whence 
perhaps  we  might  become  more  refractory  towards  the  ghostly 
teachers  of  it,  and  be  apt  to  submit  ourselves  the  less  to  those 
who  by  appointment  and  authority  represent  it  to  us  in  such 
lights  as  they  esteem  most  proper  and  convenient. 

I  shall  therefore  not  only  conclude  abruptly  but  even 
sceptically  on  this  my  last  head,  referring  my  reader  to  what 
has  been  said  already  on  my  preceding  heads  for  the  bare 
probability  "  of  our  having  in  the  main  a  witty  and  good- 
humoured  religion." 

This,  however,  I  may  presume  to  assert,  that  there  are  un- 
doubtedly some  countenances  or  aspects  of  our  religion  which 
are  humorous  and  pleasant  in  themselves,  and  that  the  sadder 
representations  of  it  are  many  times  so  over-sad  and  dismal, 
that  they  are  apt  to  excite  a  very  contrary  passion  to  what  is 
intended  by  the  representers. 


237 


MISCELLANY   III 


CHAPTER   I 

Further  remarks  ou  the  author  of  the  treatises — His  order  and  design — 
His  remarks  on  tlie  succession  of  wit,  and  progress  of  letters,  and 
philosophy — Of  words,  relations,  affections — Countrymen  and  country 
— Old  England — Patriots  of  the  soil — Virtuosi  and  philosophers — A 
taste. 

Having  already  asserted  my  privilege  as  a  miscellaneous  or 
essay  writer  of  the  modern  establishment,  to  write  on  every 
subject  and  in  every  method  as  I  fancy,  to  use  order  or  lay  it 
aside  as  I  think  fit,  and  to  treat  of  order  and  method  in  other 
works,  though  free  perhaps  and  unconfined  as  to  my  own ;  I 
shall  presume,  in  this  place,  to  consider  the  present  method  and 
order  of  my  author's  treatises  as  in  this  joint  edition  they  are 
ranged. 

Notwithstanding  the  high  airs  of  scepticism  which  our 
author  assumes  in  his  first  piece,  I  cannot,  after  all,  but  imagine 
that  even  there  he  proves  himself  at  the  bottom  a  real 
dogmatist,  and  shows  plainly  that  he  has  his  private  opinion, 
belief,  or  faith,  as  strong  as  any  devotee  or  religionist  of  them 
all.  Though  he  affects  perhaps  to  strike  at  other  hypotheses 
and  schemes,  he  has  something  of  his  own  still  in  reserve,  and 
holds  a  certain  plan  or  system  peculiar  to  himself,  or  such  at 
least  in  which  he  has  at  present  but  few  companions  or 
followers. 

On  this  account  I  look  upon  his  management  to  have  been 

238 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

much  after  the  rate  of  some  ambitious  architect,  who  being 
called  perhaps  to  prop  a  roof,  redress  a  leaning  wall  or  add  to 
some  particular  apartment,  is  not  contented  with  this  small 
specimen  of  his  mastership  ;  but  pretending  to  demonstrate  the 
unserviceableness  and  inconvenience  of  the  old  fabric,  forms  the 
design  of  a  new  building,  and  longs  to  show  his  skill  in  the 
principal  part  of  architecture  and  mechanics. 

'Tis  certain  that  in  matters  of  learning  and  philosophy  the 
practice  of  pulling  down  is  far  pleasanter  and  affords  more 
entertainment  than  that  of  building  and  setting  up.  Many 
have  succeeded  to  a  miracle  in  the  first,  who  have  miserably 
failed  in  the  latter  of  these  attempts.  We  may  find  a  thousand 
engineers  who  can  sap,  undermine,  and  blow  up  with  admirable 
dexterity,  for  one  single  one  who  can  build  a  fort  or  lay  the 
platform  of  a  citadel.  And  though  compassion  in  real  war 
may  make  the  ruinous  practice  less  delightful,  'tis  certain  that 
in  the  literate  warring-world,  the  springing  of  mines,  the  blow- 
ing up  of  towers,  bastions,  and  ramparts  of  philosophy  with 
systems,  hypotheses,  opinions  and  doctrines  into  the  air,  is  a 
spectacle  of  all  other  the  most  naturally  rejoicing. 

Our  author,  we  suppose,  might  have  done  well  to  consider 
this.  AVe  have  fairly  conducted  him  through  his  first  and 
second  letter,  and  have  brought  him,  as  we  see  here,  into  his 
third  piece.  He  has  hitherto,  methinks,  kept  up  his  sapping 
method  and  unravelling  humour  with  tolerable  good  grace. 
He  has  given  only  some  few  and  very  slender  hints  ^  of  going 
further  or  attempting  to  erect  any  scheme  or  model  which  may 

^  Viz.  in  the  Letter  of  Enthudasm,  §§  5  and  6  ;  so  again,  Treatise  ii. 
part  i.  §  6 ;  and  iii.  §  3 ;  and  again,  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  1  ;  where  the 
inquiry  is  proposed  and  the  system  and  genealogy  of  the  affections 
previously  treated  ;  with  an  apology  (p.  202)  for  the  examining  practice 
and  seeming  pedantry  of  the  method.  And  afterwards  the  apology  for 
Treatise  iv.  in  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  3.  Concerning  this  series  and  de- 
pendency of  these  joint  treatises  see  more  particularly  below,  Misc.  iv. 
beginning. 

239 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

discover  his  pretence  to  a  real  architect-capacity.  Even  in  this 
his  third  piece  he  carries  with  him  the  same  sceptical  mien,  and 
what  he  offers  by  way  of  project  or  hypothesis  is  very  faint, 
hardly  spoken  aloud,  but  muttered  to  himself  in  a  kind  of 
dubious  whisper  or  feigned  soliloquy.  What  he  discovers  of 
form  and  method  is  indeed  so  accompanied  with  the  random 
miscellaneous  air,  that  it  may  pass  for  raillery  rather  than 
good  earnest.  'Tis  in  his  following  treatise  -  that  he  discovers 
himself  openly  as  a  plain  dogmatist,  a  formalist,  and  man  of 
method ;  with  his  hypothesis  tacked  to  him,-  and  his  opinions 
so  close  sticking;  as  would  force  one  to  call  to  mind  the  figure 
of  some  precise  and  strait-laced  professor  in  a  university. 

What  may  be  justly  pleaded  in  his  behalf  when  we  come  in 
company  with  him  to  inquire  into  such  solemn  and  profound 
subjects,  seems  very  doubtful.  Meanwhile  as  his  affairs  stand 
hitherto  in  this  his  treatise  of  advice,  I  shall  be  contented  to 
yoke  with  him  and  proceed  in  my  miscellaneous  manner,  to  give 
my  advice  also  to  men  of  note,  whether  they  are  authors  or 
politicians,  virtuosi  or  fine  gentlemen  ;  comprehending  him,  the 
said  author,  as  one  of  the  number  of  the  advised,  and  myself 
too  (if  occasion  be)  after  his  own  example  of  self-admonition 
and  private  address. 

But  first  as  to  our  author's  dissertation  in  this  -  third 
treatise,  where  his  reflections  upon  authors  in  general  and  the 
rise  and  progress  of  arts  make  the  inlet  or  introduction  to  his 
philosophy  ;  we  may  observe  that  it  is  not  without  some  appear- 
ance of  reason  that  he  has  advanced  this  method.  It  must  be 
acknowledged  that  though  in  the  earliest  times  there  may  have 
been  divine  men  of  a  transcending  genius  Avho  have  given  laws 
both  in  religion  and  government  to  the  great  advantage  and 
improvement  of  mankind ;  yet  philosophy  itself  as  a  science 
and  known  profession  worthy  of  that  name,  cannot  with  any 
probability  be  supposed  to  have  risen  (as  our  author  shows)  till 

*  Viz.  Treatise  v.  the  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue. 
2  Part  ii,  §  2. 

240 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

other  arts  had  been  raised,  and  in  a  certain  proportion  advanced 
before  it.  And  as  this  was  of  the  greatest  dignity  and  weight, 
so  it  came  last  into  form.  It  was  long  clearing  itself  from  the 
affected  dress  of  sophists,  or  enthusiastic  air  of  poets,  and 
appeared  late  in  its  genuine,  simple,  and  just  beauty. 

The  reader  perhaps  may  j  ustly  excuse  our  author  for  having 
in  this  place  so  overloaded  his  margin  with  those  weighty 
authorities  and  ancient  citations,^  when  he  knows  that  there 
are  many  grave  professors  in  humanity  and  letters  among  the 
moderns  who  are  puzzled  in  this  search,  and  write  both  re- 
pugnantly to  one  another  and  to  the  plain  and  natural  evidence 
of  the  case.  The  real  lineage  and  succession  of  wit  is  indeed 
plainly  founded  in  Nature,  as  our  author  has  endeavoured  to 
make  appear  both  from  history  and  fact.  The  Greek  nation, 
as  it  is  original  to  us  in  respect  to  these  polite  arts  and  sciences, 
so  it  was  in  reality  original  to  itself.  For  whether  the  Egyptians, 
Phoenicians,  Thracians,  or  barbarians  of  any  kind  may  have  hit 
fortunately  on  this  or  that  particular  invention,  either  in  agri- 
culture, building,  navigation,  or  letters,  whichever  may  have 
introduced  this  rite  of  worship,  this  title  of  a  deity,  this  or  that 
instrument  of  music,  this  or  that  festival,  game,  or  dance  (for 
on  this  matter  there  are  high  debates  among  the  learned),  'tis 
evident,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the  arts  and  sciences  were  formed 
in  Greece  itself.  'Twas  there  that  music,  poetry,  and  the  rest 
came  to  receive  some  kind  of  shape  and  be  distinguished  into 
their  several  orders  and  degrees.  Whatever  flourished  or  was 
raised  to  any  degree  of  correctness  or  real  perfection  in  the 
kind  was  by  means  of  Greece  alone,  and  in  the  hand  of  that 
sole  polite,  most  civilised,  and  accomplished  nation. 

Nor  can  this  appear  strange  when  we  consider  the  fortunate 
constitution  of  that  people.  For  though  composed  of  different 
nations,  distinct  in  laws  and  governments,  divided  by  seas  and 
continents,  dispersed  in  distant  islands,  yet  being  originally  of 
the  same  extract,  united  by  one  single  language,  and  animated 
1  Advice  to  an  Author,  part  ii.  §  2. 
VOL.  II  241  E 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

by  that  social  public  and  free  spirit  which,  notwithstanding 
the  animosity  of  their  several  warring  states,  induced  them  to 
erect  such  heroic  congresses  and  powers  as  those  which  consti- 
tuted the  Amphictyonian  councils,  the  Olympic,  Isthmian,  and 
other  games,  they  could  not  but  naturally  polish   and  refine 
each  other,     'Twas  thus  they  brought  their  beautiful  and  com- 
y  prehensive  language  to  a  just  standard,  leaving  only  such  variety 
\  in  the  dialects  as  rendered  their  poetry,  in  particular,  so  much 
the  more  agreeable.     The  standard  was  in  the  same  proportion 
carried  into  other  arts ;    the  secretion  was  made ;   the  several 
species  found  and  set  apart ;    the  performers  and  masters  in 
every  kind  honoured  and  admired  ;  and,  last  of  all,  even  critics 
themselves  acknowledged  and  received  as  masters  over  all  the 
rest.     From  music,  poetry,  rhetoric,  down  to  the  simple  prose 
of  history,  through  all  the  plastic  arts  of  sculpture,  statuary, 
painting,    architecture,    and   the   rest;    everything    muse-like, 
graceful,  and  exquisite  was  rewarded  with  the  highest  honours 
and  carried  on  with  the  utmost  ardour  and  emulation.     Thus 
Greece,  though  she  exported  arts  to  other  nations,  had  properly 
for  her  own  share  no  import  of  the  kind.     The  utmost  which 
could  be  named  would  amount  to  no  more  than  raw  materials  of 
a  rude  and  barbarous  form.     And  thus  the  nation  was  evidently 
original  in  art ;  and  with  them  every  noble  study  and  science 
was  (as  the  great  master,  so  often  cited  by  our  author,  says  of 
certain  kinds  of  poetry)  self-formed,^  wrought  out  of  Nature, 
and  drawn  from  the  necessary  operation  and  course  of  things, 
working,  as  it  were,  of  their  own  accord  and  proper  inclination. 

1  avToa-x^diaaTLKri.  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  2.  'Tis  in  this  sense  of  the 
natural  production  and  self-formation  of  the  arts,  in  this  free  state  of 
ancient  Greece,  that  the  same  great  master  uses  this  word  a  little  before, 
in  the  same  chapter  of  his  Poetics,  viz.  the  4th,  speaking  in  general  of  the 
poets  :  Arara  fUKpbv  irpodyovres,  iyivvqtrav  Tr}i>  TrolrjcrLv,  £k  twv  ai/roirxeSta- 
an6.TU)v.  ["  Advancing  step  by  step  they  produced  poetry  out  of  their  im- 
provisations."— Arist.  Poet.  iv.  6.]  And  presently  after,  Xe'ffws  6f  yevotxivt)^, 
avTT]  7)  (pvcns  to  oIk€iov  fiirpov  evpe.  [''A\'hen  dialogue  was  introduced.  Nature 
herself  found  out  the  appropriate  metre." — lb.  iv.  14.] 

242 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Now,  according  to  this  natural  growth  of  arts  pecuHar  to  Greece, 
it  would  necessarily  happen  that  at  the  beginning,  when  the 
force  of  language  came  to  be  first  proved,  when  the  admiring 
world  made  their  first  judgment  and  essayed  their  taste  in  the 
elegancies  of  this  sort,  the  lofty,  the  sublime,  the  astonishing 
and  amazing  would  be  the  most  in  fashion  and  preferred. 
Metaphorical  speech,  multiplicity  of  figures  and  high-sounding 
words  would  naturally  prevail.  Though  in  the  commonwealth 
itself  and  in  the  affairs  of  government  men  were  used  originally 
to  plain  and  direct  speech,  yet  when  speaking  became  an  art 
and  was  taught  by  sojihists  and  other  pretended  masters,  the 
high  poetic  and  the  figurative  way  began  to  prevail  even  at  the 
Bar  and  in  the  public  assemblies,  insomuch  that  the  grand- 
master, in  the  above-cited  part  of  his  Rhetorics,  where  he  extols 
the  tragic  poet  Euripides,  upbraids  the  rhetoricians  of  his  own 
age,  who  retained  that  very  bombastic  style,  which  even  poets, 
and  those  too  of  the  tragic  kind,  had  already  thrown  off,  or  at 
least  considerably  mitigated.  But  the  taste  of  Greece  was  now 
polishing.  A  better  judgment  was  soon  formed  when  a  Demo- 
sthenes was  heard  and  had  found  success.  The  people  themselves 
(as  our  author  has  shown)  came  now  to  reform  their  comedy 
and  familiar  manner,  after  tragedy  and  the  higher  style  had 
been  brought  to  its  perfection  under  the  last  hand  of  an 
Euripides.  And  now  in  all  the  principal  works  of  ingenuity 
and  art,  simplicity  and  Nature  began  chiefly  to  be  sought ; 
and  this  was  the  taste  which  lasted  through  so  many  ages,  till 
the  ruin  of  all  things  under  a  universal  monarch. 

If  the  reader  should  perad venture  be  led  by  his  curiosity  to 
seek  some  kind  of  comparison  between  this  ancient  growth  of 
taste  and  that  which  we  have  experienced  in  modern  days  and 
within  our  own  nation,  he  may  look  back  to  the  speeches  of 
our  ancestors  in  Parliament.  He  will  find  them,  generally 
speaking,  to  have  been  very  short  and  plain,  but  coarse  and 
what  we  properly  call  home-spun,  till  learning  came  in  vogue 
and  science  was  known  amongst  us.     When   our  princes  and 

243 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

senators  became  scholars  tliey  spoke  scholastically.  And  the 
pedantic  style  was  prevalent  from  the  first  dawn  of  letters, 
about  the  age  of  the  Reformation,  till  long  afterwards.  AA'itness 
the  best  written  discourses,  the  admired  speeches,  orations,  or 
sermons,  through  several  reigns,  down  to  these  latter,  which  we 
compute  within  the  present  age.  'Twill  undoubtedly  be  found 
that  till  very  late  days  the  fashion  of  speaking  and  the  turn  of 
wit  was  after  the  figurative  and  florid  manner.  Nothing  was 
so  acceptable  as  the  high-sounding  phrase,  the  far-fetched  com- 
parison, the  capricious  point,  and  play  of  words ;  and  nothing 
so  despicable  as  what  was  merely  of  the  plain  or  natural  kind. 
So  that  it  must  either  be  confessed  that  in  respect  of  the 
preceding  age  we  are  fallen  very  low  in  taste,  or  that,  if  we  are 
in  reality  improved,  the  natural  and  simple  manner  which 
conceals  and  covers  art  is  the  most  truly  artful,  and  of  the 
genteelest,  truest,  and  best  studied  taste,  as  has  above  been 
treated  more  at  large. ^ 

Now,  therefore,  as  to  our  author's  philosophy  itself,  as  it  lies 
concealed  in  this  treatise,-  but  more  professed  and  formal  in 
his  next,^  we  shall  proceed  gradually  according  to  his  own 
method,  since  it  becomes  not  one  who  has  undertaken  the  part 
of  his  airy  assistant  and  humorous  paraphrast  to  enter  suddenly 
without  good  preparation  into  his  dry  reasonings  and  moral 
researches  about  the  social  passions  and  natural  affections,  of 
which  he  is  such  a  punctilious  examiner. 

Of  all  human  affections,  the  noblest  and  most  becoming 
human  nature  is  that  of  love  to  one's  country.  This,  perhaps, 
will  easily  be  allowed  by  all  men  who  have  really  a  country,  and 
are  of  the  number  of  those  who  may  be  called  a  people,*  as 

^  Mi.sc.  i.  3  ;  and  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  2. 

-  \'iz.  Soliloquy,  or  Advice  to  an  Author  ;  Treatise  in. 

^  Y'lz.  Inquiry,  etc.  ;  Treatise  iv. 

^  A  multitude  held  together  by  force,  though  under  one  and  the  same 
head,  is  not  properly  united.  Nor  does  such  a  body  make  a  people.  'Tis  the 
social  league,  confederacy,  and  mutual  consent,  founded  in  some  common 
good  or  interest,  which  joins  the  members  of  a  community  and  makes  a 

244 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

enjoying  the  happiness  of  a  real  constitution  and  pohty  by  which 
they  are  free  and  independent.  There  are  few  such  countrymen 
or  freemen  so  degenerate  as  directly  to  discountenance  or  con- 
demn this  passion  of  love  to  their  community  and  national 
brotherhood.  The  indirect  manner  of  opposing  this  principle 
is  the  most  usual.  We  hear  it  commonly  as  a  complaint,  "  That 
there  is  little  of  this  love  extant  in  the  world.""  From  whence 
'tis  hastily  concluded,  "  That  there  is  little  or  nothing  of  friendly 
or  social  affection  inherent  in  our  nature  or  proper  to  our 
species."  'Tis  however  apparent  that  there  is  scarce  a  creatm'e 
of  human  kind  who  is  not  possessed  at  least  of  some  inferior 
degree  or  meaner  sort  of  this  natural  affection  to  a  country. 

Nescioqua  natale  solum  dulcedine  captos 
Ducit.i 

'Tis  a  wretched  aspect  of  humanity  which  we  figure  to  our- 
selves when  we  would  endeavour  to  resolve  the  very  essence  and 
foundation  of  this  generous  passion  into  a  relation  to  mere  clay 
and  dust,  exclusively  of  anything  sensible,  intelligent,  or  moral. 
'Tis,  I  must  own,  on  certain  -  relations  or  respective  proportions 
that  all  natural  affection  does  in  some  measure  depend.  And  in 
this  view  it  cannot,  I  confess,  be  denied  that  we  have  each  of  us 
a  certain  relation  to  the  mere  earth  itself,  the  very  mould  or 
surface  of  that  planet  in  which,  with  other  animals  of  various 
sorts,  we  (poor  reptiles  !)  were  also  bred  and  nourished.  But  had 
it  happened  to  one  of  us  British  men  to  have  been  born  at  sea, 
could  we  not  therefore  properly  be  called  British  men  .'*  Could 
we  be  allowed  countrymen  of  no  sort,  as  having  no  distinct 
relation  to  any  certain  soil  or  region  ;  no  original  neighbourhood 
but  with  the  watery  inhabitants  and  sea-monsters  .?     Surely,  if 

people  one.  Absolute  power  annuls  the  public.  And  where  there  is  no 
public  or  constitution  tiiere  is  in  realitj-  no  nu)ther  country  or  nation.  See 
Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  1. 

1  Ovid,  Font.  i.  iii.  3.5.       ["  Our  own  country  charms  and  draws  us 
with  a  certain  sweetness."] 

2  TO,  KadriKOVTa  rais  ffx^cfcrt  Trapa/xfTpeTrat. 

245 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTEKISTICS 

we  were  born  of  lawful  parents,  lawfully  employed,  and  under 
the  protection  of  law,  wherever  they  might  be  then  detained,  to 
whatever  colonies  sent,  or  whithersoever  driven  by  any  accident, 
or  in  expeditions  or  adventures  in  the  public  service  or  that  of 
mankind,  we  should  still  find  we  had  a  home  and  country  ready 
to  lay  claim  to  us.  We  should  be  obliged  still  to  consider  our- 
selves as  fellow-citizens,  and  might  be  allowed  to  love  our  country 
or  nation  as  honestly  and  heartily  as  the  most  inland  inhabitant 
or  native  of  the  soil.  Our  political  and  social  capacity  would 
undoubtedly  come  in  view,  and  be  acknowledged  full  as  natural 
and  essential  in  our  species  as  the  parental  and  filial  kind,  which 
gives  rise  to  what  we  peculiarly  call  natural  affection.  Or 
supposing  that  both  our  birth  and  parents  had  been  unknown, 
and  that  in  this  respect  we  were  in  a  manner  younger  brothers 
in  society  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  yet  from  our  nurture  and 
education  we  should  surely  espouse  some  country  or  other,  and 
joyfully  embracing  the  protection  of  a  magistracy,  should  of 
necessity  and  by  force  of  nature  join  ourselves  to  the  general 
society  of  mankind,  and  those  in  particular  with  whom  we  had 
entered  into  a  nearer  communication  of  benefits  and  closer 
sympathy  of  affections.  It  may  therefore  be  esteemed  no 
better  than  a  mean  subterfuge  of  narrow  minds  to  assign  this 
natural  passion  for  society  and  a  country  to  such  a  relation  as 
that  of  a  mere  fungus  or  common  excrescence  to  its  parent- 
mould  or  nursing  dunghill. 

The  relation  of  countryman,  if  it  be  allowed  anything  at  all, 
must  imply  something  moral  and  social.  The  notion  itself  pre- 
supposes a  naturally  civil  and  political  state  of  mankind,  and  has 
reference  to  that  particular  part  of  society  to  which  we  owe  our 
chief  advantages  as  men  and  rational  creatures,  such  as  are^ 
naturally  and  necessarily  united  for  each  other's  happiness 
and  support,  and  for  the  highest  of  all  happinesses  and 
enjoyments,  "  the  intercourse  of  minds,  the  free  use  of  our 
reason,  and  the  exercise  of  mutual  love  and  friendship.'" 
^  Treatise  ii.  part  iii.  §  1  ;  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  4. 

24G 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

An  ingenious  physician  among  the  moderns,  having  in  view 
the  natural  dependency  of  the  vegetable  and  animal  kinds  on  their 
common  mother  earth,  and  observing  that  both  the  one  and  the 
other  draw  from  her  their  continual  sustenance  (some  rooted  and 
fixed  down  to  their  first  abodes,  others  unconfined  and  wandering 
from  place  to  place  to  suck  their  nourishment),  he  accordingly, 
as  I  remember,  styles  this  latter  animal  race,  her  released  sons, 
filios  terrae  emancipatos.  Now  if  this  be  our  only  way  of 
reckoning  for  mankind,  we  may  call  ourselves  indeed  the  sons  of 
earth  at  large,  but  not  of  any  particular  soil  or  district.  The 
division  of  climates  and  regions  is  fantastic  and  artificial ;  much 
more  the  limits  of  particular  countries,  cities,  or  provinces.  Our 
natale  solum,  or  mother  earth,  must  by  this  account  be  the  real 
globe  itself  which  bears  us,  and  in  respect  of  which  we  must 
allow  the  common  animals,  and  even  the  plants  of  all  degrees, 
to  claim  an  equal  brotherhood  with  us  under  this  common 
parent. 

According  to  this  calculation  we  must  of  necessity  carry  our 
relation  as  far  as  to  the  whole  material  world  or  universe,  where 
alone  it  can  prove  complete.  But  for  the  particular  district  or 
tract  of  earth,  which  in  a  vulgar  sense  we  call  our  country, 
however  bounded  or  geographically  divided,  we  can  never,  at 
this  rate,  frame  any  accountable  relation  to  it,  nor  consequently 
assign  any  natural  or  proper  affection  towards  it. 

If,  unhappily,  a  man  had  been  born  either  at  an  inn  or  in 
some  dirty  village,  he  would  hardly,  I  think,  circumscribe  him- 
self so  narrowly  as  to  accept  a  denomination  or  character  from 
those  nearest  appendices  or  local  circumstances  of  his  nativity. 
So  far  should  one  be  from  making  the  hamlet  or  parish  to  be 
character! stical  in  the  case,  that  hardly  would  the  shire  itself,  or 
county,  however  rich  or  flourishing,  be  taken  into  the  honorary 
term  or  appellation  of  one's  country. 

"  What,  then,  shall  we  presume  to  call  our  country  ?  Is  it 
Eno-land  itself  ?  But  what  of  Scotland  ?  Is  it  therefore  Britain  ? 
But  what  of  the  other  islands,  the  Northern  Orcades,  and  the 

247 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Southern  Jersey  and  Guernsey  ?     What  of  the  Plantations  and 
poor  Ireland  ?  "     Behold,  here,  a  very  dubious  circumscription  ! 

But  what,  after  all,  if  there  be  a  conquest  or  captivity  in  the 
case  ?  a  migration  ?  a  national  secession,  or  abandonment  of  our 
native  seats  for  some  other  soil  or  climate  ?  This  has  happened, 
we  know,  to  our  forefathers.  And  as  great  and  powerful  a 
people  as  we  have  been  of  late,  and  have  ever  shown  ourselves 
under  the  influence  of  free  councils  and  a  tolerable  ministry, 
should  we  relapse  again  into  slavish  principles,  or  be  administered 
long  under  such  heads  as,  having  no  thought  of  liberty  for  them- 
selves, can  have  much  less  for  Europe  or  their  neighbours,  we  may 
at  last  feel  a  war  at  home,  become  the  seat  of  it,  and  in  the  end  a 
conquest.  We  might  then  gladly  embrace  the  hard  condition 
of  our  predecessors,  and  exchange  our  beloved  native  soil  for  that 
of  some  remote  and  uninhabited  part  of  the  world.  Now  should 
this  possibly  be  our  fate,  should  some  considerable  colony  or 
body  be  formed  afterwards  out  of  our  remains,  or  meet  as  it 
were  by  miracle  in  some  distant  climate,  would  there  be  for 
the  future  no  Englishman  remaining  ?  No  common  bond  of 
alliance  and  friendship  by  which  we  could  still  call  countrymen,  as 
before  ?  How  came  we,  I  pray,  by  our  ancient  name  of  English- 
men ?  Did  it  not  travel  with  us  over  land  and  sea  ?  Did  we 
not  indeed  bring  it  with  us  heretofore  from  as  far  as  the 
remoter  parts  of  Germany  to  this  island  ? 

I  must  confess,  I  have  been  apt  sometimes  to  be  very  angry 
with  our  language  for  having  denied  us  the  use  of  the  word 
Patria,  and  afforded  us  no  other  name  to  express  our  native 
community  than  that  of  country,  which  already  bore  two  differ- 
ent significations  abstracted  from  mankind  or  society.^  Reign- 
ino-  words  are  many  times  of  such  force  as  to  influence  us 
considerably  in  our  apprehension  of  things.  Whether  it  be 
from  any  such  cause  as  this,  I  know  not,  but  certain  it  is,  that 
in  the  idea  of  a  civil  state  or  nation  we  Englishmen  are  apt  to 
mix  somewhat  more  than  ordinary  gross  and  earthy.  No  people 
1  rus  and  regio,  in  French  campagne  and  pagn. 

248 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

who  owed  so  much  to  a  constitution,  and  so  little  to  a  soil  or 
climate,  were  ever  known  so  indifferent  towards  one,  and  so 
passionately  fond  of  the  other.  One  would  imagine  from  the 
common  discourse  of  our  countrymen  that  the  finest  lands  near 
the  Euphrates,  the  Babylonian  or  Persian  paradises,  the  rich 
plains  of  Egypt,  the  Grecian  Tempe,  the  Roman  Campania, 
Lombardy,  Provence,  the  Spanish  Andalusia,  or  the  most 
delicious  tracts  in  the  Eastern  or  Western  Indies  were  con- 
temptible countries  in  respect  of  Old  England. 

Now  by  the  good  leave  of  these  worthy  patriots  of  the  soil, 
I  must  take  the  liberty  to  say,  I  think  Old  England  to  have 
been  in  every  respect  a  very  indifferent  country,  and  that  Late 
England,  of  an  age  or  two  old,  even  since  Queen  Bess's  days, 
is  indeed  very  much  mended  for  the  better.  We  were,  in 
the  be^innino;  of  her  grandfather's  reign,  under  a  sort  of  Polish 
nobility,  and  had  no  other  liberties  than  what  were  in  common 
to  us  with  the  then  fashionable  monarchies  and  Gothic  lordships 
of  Europe.  For  religion,  indeed,  Ave  were  highly  famed  above 
all  nations,  by  being  the  most  subject  to  our  ecclesiastics  at 
home,  and  the  best  tributaries  and  servants  to  the  Holy  See 
abroad. 

I  must  go  further  yet,  and  own  that  I  think  Late  England, 
since  the  Revolution,  to  be  better  still  than  Old  England  by 
many  a  degree,  and  that  in  the  main  we  make  somewhat  a 
better  figure  in  Europe  than  we  did  a  few  reigns  before.  But 
however  our  people  may  of  late  have  flourished,  our  name  or 
credit  have  risen,  our  trade  and  navigation,  our  manufactures 
or  our  husbandry  been  improved,  'tis  certain  that  our  region, 
climate,  and  soil  is  in  its  own  nature  still  one  and  the  same. 
And  to  whatever  politeness  we  may  suppose  ourselves  already 
arrived,  we  must  confess  that  we  are  the  latest  barbarous,  the 
last  civilised  or  polished  people  of  Europe.  We  must  allow 
that  our  first  conquest  by  the  Romans  brought  us  out  of  a  state 
hardly  equal  to  the  Indian  tribes,  and  that  our  last  conquest  by 
the  Normans  brought  us  only  into  the  capacity  of  receiving  arts 

"  249 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

and  civil  accomplishments  from  abroad.  They  came  to  us  by 
degrees  from  remote  distances,  at  second  or  third  hand ;  from 
other  courts,  states,  academies,  and  foreign  nurseries  of  wit  and 
manners. 

Notwithstanding  this,  we  have  as  overweening  an  opinion 
of  ourselves  as  if  Ave  had  a  claim  to  be  original  and  earth  born. 
As  oft  as  we  have  changed  masters,  and  mixed  races  with  our 
several  successive  conquerors,  we  still  pretend  to  be  as  legitimate 
and  genuine  possessors  of  our  soil  as  the  ancient  Athenians  ac- 
counted themselves  to  have  been  of  theirs.  '  ""Tis  remarkable, 
however,  in  that  truly  ancient,  wise,  and  witty  people,  that  as 
fine  territories  and  noble  countries  as  they  possessed,  as  indis- 
putable masters  and  superiors  as  they  were  in  all  science,  wit, 
politeness,  and  manners,  they  were  yet  so  far  from  a  conceited, 
selfish,  and  ridiculous  contempt  of  others,  that  they  were  even, 
in  a  contrary  extreme,  "  admirers  of  whatever  was  in  the  least 
degree  ingenious  or  curious  in  foreign  nations."  Their  great  men 
were  constant  travellers.  Their  legislators  and  philosophers  made 
their  voyages  into  Egypt,  passed  into  Chaldea  and  Persia,  and 
failed  not  to  visit  most  of  the  dispersed  Grecian  governments 
and  colonies  through  the  islands  of  the  ^gean,  in  Italy,  and  on 
the  coasts  of  Asia  and  Africa.  'Twas  mentioned  as  a  prodigy, 
in  the  case  of  a  great  philosopher,  though  known  to  have  been 
always  poor,i  "  that  he  should  never  have  travelled,  nor  had 
ever  gone  out  of  Athens  for  his  improvement."  How  modest  a 
reflection  in  those  who  were  themselves  Athenians ! 

For  our  part,  we  neither  care  that  foreigners  should  travel 
to  us,2  nor  any  of  ours  should   travel   into  foreign  countries. 

1  Socrates. 

2  An  ill  token  of  our  beinj;  tlioroug-hly  civilised,  since  in  the  judgment 
of  the  polite  and  wise  this  inhospitable  disposition  was  ever  reckoned 
among  the  principal  marks  of  barbarism.  So  Strabo,  from  other  preceding 
authors,  Koifdv  /xev  elvai  to?s  ^ap^dpois  iraaiv  Wos  ti]v  ^evrjXaa-iav.  ["The  ex- 
pulsion of  foreigners  is  a  common  measure  with  all  barbarians." — Erato- 
sthenes in  Strabo,  xvii.  i.  802.] 

Tlie  Zei'j  Sej-ios  of  the  ancients  was  one  of  the  solemnn  characters  of 

250 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Our  best  policy  and  breeding  is,  it  seems,  "  to  look  abroad  as 
little  as  possible,  contract  our  views  within  the  narrowest  com- 
pass, and  despise  all  knowledge,  learning,  or  manners  which  are 
not  of*  a  home  growth."  For  hardly  will  the  ancients  themselves 
be  regarded  by  those  who  have  so  resolute  a  contempt  of  what 
the  politest  moderns  of  any  nation  besides  their  own  may  have 
advanced  in  the  way  of  literature,  politeness,  or  philosophy. 

This  disposition  of  our  countrymen,  from  whatever  causes  it 
may  possibly  be  derived,  is,  I  fear,  a  very  prepossessing  circum- 
stance against  our  author,  whose  design  is  to  advance  something 
new,  or  at  least  something  different  from   what  is   commonly 

diviuit_v  :  the  ijeculiar  attribute  of  the  supreme  Deity,  benign  to  mankind, 
and  recommending-  universal  love,  mutual  kindness,  and  benignity  between 
the  remotest  and  most  unlike  of  human  race.  ITius  their  divine  poet,  in 
harmony  with  their  sacred  oracles,  which  were  known  frequently  to  con- 
firm this  doctrine — 

^eTv',  OIL/'  fMoi  OifiLS  'i(TT  ,  ov5'  el  KaKiuiv  criOev  i\6oL, 
^eivov  aTL/xfjcrai.'  Trpbs  yap  Ai6s  eicni'  aTracres 
^eivoL. 

["  My  guest,  I  may  not  slight  a  strangei',  even  if  he  were  a  meaner 
man  than  thou  art;  for  from  Zeus  are  all  strangers." — Homer,  Odyssey, 
xiv.  oC),  .58.]     Again, — 

01)5^  Tis  &/Mfj.i  ^poTuv  eirt/jiiayeTai  dWos. 
dW  6Se  ris  Bvctttjvos  aXw/xevos  ivddd'  iKavei, 
Tbv  vvv  xpv  KopL^eiv'  irpos  yap  Ai6s  elaiu  diravTes 
^eivoi. 

["  And  no  other  mortals  hold  intercourse  with  us.  But  this  is  some 
luckless  man  who  has  come  hitlier  in  his  wanderings,  and  we  must  tend  him 
well,  for  from  Zeus  are  all  strangers." — Odyssey,  vi.  20.5-208.]    And  again, — 

d<pv€Lbs  ^LOTOto,  (piXos  d'  Tjv  dpOpuJiroicn' 
Trdvras  yap  (piXeecKeu  65a3  ^vl  OLKia  vaiuv. 

["  Ricli  he  was,  and  beloved  among  men,  f»)r  he  lived  by  the  roadside 

and  entertained  all."— Homer,  Iliad,  vi.  14,  1.5.] 

See  also  Odyssey,  lib.  iii.  M,  etc.,  and  67,  etc.  ;  lib.  iv,  30,  etc.,  and  GO, 
Such  was  ancient  heathen  charity  and  pious  duty  towards  the  whole 

of  mankind,  both  those  of  different  nations  and  different  worships.      See 

Inquiry  concerning  Virtue,  bk.  ii.  part  ii.  §  3. 

251 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

current  in  philosophy  and  morals.     To  support  this  design  of 
his  he  seems  intent  chiefly  on  this  single  point,  "  to  discover  how 
we  may  to  best  advantage  form  within  ourselves  what  in  the , 
polite  world  is  called  a  relish  or  good  taste."  ' 

He  begins,  it  is  true,  as  near  home  as  possible,  and  sends  us  to 
the  narrowest  of  all  conversations,  that  of  soliloquy  or  self-dis- 
course. But  this  correspondence,  according  to  his  computation, 
is  wholly  impracticable  without  a  previous  commerce  with  the 
world ;  and  the  larger  this  commerce  is,  the  more  practicable 
and  improving  the  other,  he  thinks,  is  likely  to  prove.  The 
sources  of  this  improving  art  of  self-correspondence  he  derives 
from  the  highest  politeness  and  elegance  of  ancient  dialogue  and 
debate,  in  matters  of  wit,  knowledge,  and  ingenuity.  And 
nothing,  according  to  our  author,  can  so  well  revive  this  self- 
corresponding  practice  as  the  same  search  and  study  of  the 
highest  politeness  in  modern  conversation.  For  this,  we  must 
necessarily  be  at  the  pains  of  going  further  abroad  than  the 
province  we  call  home.  And  by  this  account  it  appears  that 
our  author  has  little  hopes  of  being  either  relished  or  compre- 
hended by  any  other  of  his  couiitrymen  than  those  Avho  delight 
in  the  open  and  free  commerce  of  the  w^orld,  and  are  rejoiced  to 
gather  views  [and  receive  light  from  every  quarter  in  order  to 
judge  the  best  of  what  is  perfect,  and  according  to  a  just 
standard  and  true  taste  in  every  kind. 

It  may  be  proper  for  us  to  remark,  in  ftivour  of  our  author, 
that  the  sort  of  ridicule  or  raillery  which  is  apt  to  fall  upon 
philosophers  is  of  the  same  kind  with  that  Avhich  falls  commonly 
on  the  virtuosi  or  refined  wits  of  the  age.  In  this  latter  general 
denomination  Ave  include  the  real  fine  gentlemen,  the  lovers  of 
art  and  ingenuity,  such  as  have  seen  the  world,  and  informed 
themselves  of  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  several  nations  of 
Europe ;  searched  into  their  antiquities  and  records  ;  considered 
their  police,  laws,  and  constitutions ;  observed  the  situation, 
strength,  and  ornaments  of  their  cities,  their  principal  arts, 
studies,  and  amusements ;  their  architecture,  sculpture,  paint- 

252 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

ing,  music,  and  their  taste  in  poetry,  learning,  language,  and 
conversation. 

Hitherto  there  can  lie  no  ridicule,  nor  the  least  scope  for 
satiric  wit  or  raillery.  But  when  we  push  this  virtuoso 
character  a  little  further  and  lead  our  polished  gentleman  into 
more  nice  researches,  when  from  the  view  of  mankind  and  their 
affairs,  our  speculative  genius  and  minute  examiner  of  Nature's 
works  proceeds  with  equal  or  perhaps  superior  zeal  in  the  con- 
templation of  the  insect  life,  the  conveniencies,  habitations,  and 
economy  of  a  race  of  shell-fish ;  when  he  has  erected  a  cabinet  in 
due  form,  and  made  it  the  real  pattern  of  his  mind,  replete  with 
the  same  trash  and  trumpery  of  correspondent  empty  notions 
and  chimerical  conceits,  he  then  indeed  becomes  the  subject  of 
sufficient  raillery,  and  is  made  the  jest  of  common  conversations.     ^ 

A  worse  thing  than  this  happens  commonly  to  these  inferior 
virtuosi.  In  seeking  so  earnestly  for  rarities  they  fall  in  love 
with  rarity  for  rareness'  sake.  Now  the  greatest  rarities  in  the  \ 
world  are  monsters.  So  that  the  study  and  relish  of  these 
gentlemen,  thus  assiduously  employed,  becomes  at  last  in  reality 
monstrous ;  and  their  whole  delight  is  found  to  consist  in  select- 
ing and  contemplating  whatever  is  most  monstrous,  disagreeing, 
out  of  the  way,  and  to  the  least  purpose  of  anything  in  Nature. 

In  philosophy,  matters  answer  exactly  to  this  virtuoso 
scheme.  Let  us  suppose  a  man  who,  having  this  resolution 
merely,  how  to  employ  his  understanding  to  the  best  purpose, 
considers  "  who  or  what  he  is ;  whence  he  arose  or  had  hi^i 
bcino; ;  to  what  end  he  Avas  designed ;  and  to  what  course  of 
action  he  is  by  his  natural  frame  and  constitution  destined "" ; 
should  he  descend  on  this  account  into  himself  and  examine  his 
inward  powers  and  faculties,  or  should  he  ascend  beyond  his  own 
immediate  species,  city,  or  community,  to  discover  and  recognise 
his  higher  polity  or  community  (that  common  and  universal  one 
of  which  he  is  born  a  member),  nothing  surely  of  this  kind  could 
reasonably  draw  upon  him  the  least  contempt  or  mockery.  On 
the  contrary,  the  finest  gentleman  must  after  all  be  considered 

253 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

but  as  an  idiot,  who,  talking  much  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
world  and  mankind,  has  never  so  much  as  thought  of  the  study 
or  knowledge  of  himself,  or  of  the  nature  and  government  of 
that  real  public  and  world  from  whence  he  holds  his  being. 

Quid  sumus,  et  quidnam  victuri  gignimur  ?  ^ — 

"  AMiere  are  we  ?  under  what  roof?  or  on  board  what  vessel  ? 
whither  bound?  on  what  business?  under  whose  pilotship, 
government,  or  protection  ?  ^  are  questions  which  every  sensible 
man  would  naturally  ask  if  he  were  on  a  sudden  transported 
into  a  new  scene  of  life.  'Tis  admirable,  indeed,  to  consider,  that 
a  man  should  have  been  long  come  into  a  world,  carried  his 
reason  and  sense  about  with  him,  and  yet  have  never  seriously 
asked  himself  this  single  question,  "  where  am  I  ?  or  what  ? "" 
but,  on  the  contrary,  should  proceed  regularly  to  every  other 
study  and  inquiry,  postponing  this  alone,  as  the  least  consider- 
able, or  leaving  the  examination  of  it  to  others  commissioned, 
as  he  supposes,  to  understand  and  think  for  him  upon  this  head. 
To  be  bubbled,  or  put  upon  by  any  sham  advices  in  this  affair, 
is,  it  seems,  of  no  consequence.  We  take  care  to  examine 
accurately,  by  our  own  judgment,  the  affairs  of  other  people, 
and  the  concerns  of  the  world  which  least  belong  to  us.  But 
what  relates  more  immediately  to  ourselves,  and  is  our  chief 
self-interest,  we  charitably  leave  to  others  to  examine  for  us, 
and  readily  take  up  Avith  the  first  comers,  on  whose  honesty  and 
good  faith  'tis  presumed  we  may  safely  rely. 

Here,  methinks,  the  ridicule  turns  more  against  the  philo- 
sophy-haters than  the  virtuosi  or  philosophers.  Whilst  philo- 
sophy is  taken  (as  in  its  prime  sense  it  ought)  for  mastership  in 
life  and  manners,  'tis  like  to  make  no  ill  figure  in  the  world, 
whatever  impertinencies  may  reign,  or  however  extravagant  the 
times  may  prove.  But  let  us  view  philosophy,  like  mere 
virtuosoship,  in  its  usual  career,  and  we  shall  find  the  ridicule 
rising  full  as  strongly  against  the  professors  of  the  higher 
1  Pers.  -S'«^  iii.  07- 

254- 


4 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

as  the  lower  kind.  Cockle-shell  abounds  with  each.  Many 
things  exterior  and  without  ourselves,  of  no  relation  to  our 
real  interests  or  to  those  of  society  and  mankind,  are  diligently 
investigated ;  Nature''s  remotest  operations,  deepest  mysteries 
and  most  difficult  phenomena  discussed  and  whimsically  ex- 
plained ;  hypotheses  and  fantastic  systems  erected,  a  universe 
anatomised,  and  by  some  notable  scheme  ^  so  solved  and  reduced 
as  to  appear  an  easy  knack  or  secret  to  those  who  have  the  clue. 
Creation  itself  can,  upon  occasion,  be  exhibited  ;  transmutations, 
projections,  and  other  philosophical  arcana,  such  as  in  the 
corporeal  world  can  accomplish  all  things ;  whilst  in  the  intel- 
lectual a  set  frame  of  metaphysical  phrases  and  distinctions  can 
serve  to  solve  whatever  difficulties  may  be  propounded  either 
in  logics,  ethics,  or  any  real  science  of  whatever  kind. 

It  appears  from  hence  that  the  defects  of  philosophy  and 
those  of  virtuosoship  are  of  the  same  nature.  Nothing  can  be 
more  dangerous  than  a  wrong  choice  or  misapplication  in  these 
affairs.  But  as  ridiculous  as  these  studies  are  rendered  by  their 
senseless  managers,  it  appears,  however,  that  each  of  them  are,! 
in  their  nature,  essential  to  the  character  of  a  fine  sentleman  i 
and  man  of  sense.  ' 

To  philosophise,   in   a  just    signification,   is    but   to  carry 
good -breeding   a   step   higher.       For    the    accomplishment   of 
breeding  is,  to  learn  whatever  is  decent  in  company  or  beautiful 
in  arts;  and  the  sum  of  philosophy  is,  to  learn  what  is  just  in  I 
society  and  beautiful  in  Nature  and  the  order  of  the  world.  I 

'Tis  not  wit  merely,  but  a  temper  which  must  form  the  well- 
bred  man.      In  the  same  manner,  'tis  not  a  head  merely,  but  a  \ 
heart  and  resolution  which  must  complete  the  real  philosopher,  i 
Both  characters  aim  at  what  is  excellent,  aspire  to  a  just  taste,| 
and  carry  in  view  the  model  of  what  is  beautiful  and  becoming. 
Accordingly,  the  respective   conduct  and   distinct   manners  of 
each  party  are  regulated ;  the  one  according  to  the  perfectest 
ease  and  good  entertainment  of  company,  the  other  according 
^  Moralists,  part  i.  §  1. 

255 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

to  the  strictest  interest  of  mankind  and  society  ;  the  one  accord- 
ing to  a  man's  rank  and  quahty  in  his  private  station,  the  other 
according  to  his  rank  and  dignity  in  Nature. 

Whether  each  of  these  offices  or  social  parts  are  in  them- 
selves as  convenient  as  becoming,  is  the  great  question  which 
must  some  way  be  decided.  The  well-bred  man  has  already 
decided  this  in  his  own  case,  and  declared  on  the  side  of  what 
is  handsome ;  for  whatever  he  practises  in  this  kind,^  he 
accounts  no  more  than  what  he  owes  purely  to  himself,  without 
regard  to  any  further  advantage.  The  pretender  to  philosophy, 
who  either  knows  not  how  to  determine  this  affair,  or  if  he  has 
determined,  knows  not  how  to  pursue  his  point  with  constancy 
and  firmness,  remains  in  respect  of  philosophy  what  a  clown  or 
coxcomb  is  in  respect  of  breeding  and  behaviour.  Thus,  accord" 
ing  to  our  author,  the  taste  of  beauty  and  the  relish  of  what  is 
decent,  just,  and  amiable  perfects  the  character  of  the  gentle- 
man and  the  philosopher.  And  the  study  of  such  a  taste  or 
relish  will,  as  we  suppose,  be  ever  the  great  employment  and 
concern  of  him  who  covets  as  well  to  be  wise  and  good  as 
agreeable  and  polite.  -^ 

Quid  varum  atque  decens  euro  et  rogOj  et  omnis  in  hoc  sum.^ 


CHAPTER   II 

Explanation  of  a  taste  continued — Ridiculers  of  it — Their  wit  and  sin- 
cerity— Application  of  the  taste  to  affairs  of  government  and  politics. 
— Imaginary  characters  in  the  State— Young  nobility  and  gentry — 
Pursuit  of  beauty — Preparation  for  philosophy. 

By  this  time,  surely,  I  must  have  proved  myself  sufficiently 
engaged  in  the  project  and  design  of  our  self-discoursing  author, 
whose  defence  I  have  undertaken.     His  pretension,  as  plainly 

1    Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  1. 
-  Hor.  Epist.  I.  i.  11. 

256 


MISCELT.ANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

appears  in  this  third  treatise  ^  is  to  recommend  morals  on  the 
same  foot  with  what  in  a  lower  sense  is  called  manners,  and  to 
advance  })liilosophy  (as  harsh  a  subject  as  it  may  appear)  on  the 
very  foundation  of  what  is  called  agreeable  and  polite.  And 
'tis  in  this  method  and  management  that,  as  his  interpreter  or 
paraphrast,  I  have  proposed  to  imitate  and  accompany  him,  as 
far  as  my  miscellaneous  character  will  permit. 

Our  joint  endeavour,  therefore,  must  appear  this :  to  show 
"  that  nothing  which  is  found  charming  or  delightful  in  the 
polite  world,  nothing  which  is  adopted  as  pleasure  or  entertain- 
ment, of  whatever  kind,  can  any  Avay  be  accounted  for,  supported, 
or  established,  without  the  pre-establishment  or  supposition  of 
a  certain  taste."  Now  a  taste  or  judgment,  'tis  supposed,  can 
hardly  come  ready  formed  with  us  into  the  world.  Whatever 
principles  or  materials  of  this  kind  we  may  jiossibly  bring  with 
us,  whatever  good  faculties,  senses,  or  anticipating  sensations 
and  imaginations  may  be  of  Nature's  growth,  and  arise  properly 
of  themselves,  without  our  art,  promotion,  or  assistance,  the 
general  idea  which  is  formed  of  all  this  management  and  the 
clear  notion  Ave  attain  of  what  is  preferable  and  principal  in  all 
these  subjects  of  choice  and  estimation  will  not,  as  I  imagine, 
by  any  person  be  taken  for  innate.  Use,  practice,  and  culture 
must  precede  the  understanding  and  wit  of  such  an  advanced 
size  and  growth  as  this.  A  legitimate  and  just  taste  can  neither 
be  begotten,  made,  conceived,  or  produced  without  the  ante-j 
cedent  labour  and  pains  of  criticism. 

For  this  reason  we  presume  not  only  to  defend  the  cause  of 
critics,  but  to  declare  open  war  against  those  indolent  supine 
authors,  performers,  readers,  auditors,  actors  or  spectators 
who,  making  their  humour  alone  the  rule  of  what  is  beautiful 
and  agreeable,  and  having  no  account  to  give  of  such  their 
humour  or  odd  fancy,  reject  the  criticising  or  examining  art, 
by  which  alone  they  are  able  to  discover  the  true  beauty  and 
worth  of  every  object. 

1  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  3. 

VOL.  II  257  s 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

According  to  tliat  afiected  ridicule  which  these  insipid 
remarkers  pretend  to  throw  upon  just  critics,  the  enjoyment 
of  all  real  arts  or  natural  beaut v  would  be  entirely  lost ;  even 
in  behaviour  and  manners  we  should  at  this  rate  become  in 
time  as  barbarous  as  in  our  pleasures  and  diversions,  I  would 
presume  it,  however,  of  these  critic -haters,  that  they  are  not 
yet  so  uncivilised  or  void  of  all  social  sense  as  to  maintain 
"  that  the  most  barbarous  life  or  brutish  jileasure  is  as  desirable 
as  the  most  polished  or  refined.'''' 

For  my  o\\n  ])art,  when  I  have  heard  sometimes  men  of 
reputed  ability  join  in  with  that  effeminate  plaintive  tone  of 
invective  against  critics,  I  have  really  thought  they  had  it  in 
their  fancy  to  keep  down  the  growing  geniuses  of  the  youth, 
their  rivals,  by  turning  them  aside  from  that  examination  and 
search,  on  which  all  good  performance  as  well  as  good  judgment 
depends.  I  have  seen  many  a  time  a  well-bred  man,  who  had 
himself  a  real  good  taste,  give  way  with  a  malicious  com- 
plaisance to  the  humoui'  of  a  company,  where,  in  favour  chiefly 
of  the  tender  sex,  this  soft  languishing  contempt  of  critics  and 
their  labours  has  been  the  subject  set  afoot.  "  Wretched 
creatures  !  (says  one)  impertinent  things,  these  critics,  as  ye 
call  them  !  As  if  one  could  not  know  what  was  agreeable  or 
]iretty  without  their  help.  ""Tis  fine,  indeed,  that  one  should  not 
be  allowed  to  fancy  for  oneself.     Now  should  a  thousand  critics 

tell  me  that  Mr.  A 's  new  })lay  was  not  the  wittiest  in  the 

world,  I  would  not  mind  them  one  bit.'" 

This  our  real  man  of  wit  hears  patiently,  and  adds,  perhaps 
of  his  own,  "  that  he  thinks  it  truly  somewhat  hard,  in  what 
relates  to  people's  diversion  and  entertainment,  that  they  should 
be  obliged  to  choose  w^hat  pleased  others  and  not  themselves."" 
Soon  after  this  he  goes  himself  to  the  play,  finds  one  of  his 
effeminate  companions  commending  or  admiring  at  a  wrong 
place.  He  turns  to  the  next  person  who  sits  by  him,  and  asks  | 
privately,  "  what  he  thinks  of  his  companion's  relish."" 

Such  is  the  malice  of  the  world  !     They  who  by  pains  and 

258 


INIISCELT.ANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

industry  have  acquired  a  real  taste  in  arts,  rejoice  in  their 
advantage  o\ev  others,  who  have  either  none  at  all  or  such  as 
renders  them  ridiculous.  At  an  auction  of  books  or  pictures, 
you  shall  hear  these  gentlemen  persuading  every  one  "to  bid 
for  what  he  fancies.""  But  at  the  same  time  thev  would  be 
soundly  mortified  themselves  if,  by  such  as  they  esteemed  good 
judges,  they  should  be  found  to  have  purchased  by  a  wrong 
fancy  or  ill  taste.  The  same  gentleman  who  connnends  his 
neighbour  for  ordering  his  garden  or  apartment  as  his  humour 
leads  him,  takes  care  his  own  should  be  so  ordered  as  the  best 
judgments  would  advise.  Being  once  a  judge  himself,  or  but 
tolerably  knowing  in  these  affairs,  his  aim  is  not  "  to  change 
the  being  of  things,  and  bring  truth  and  Nature  to  his  humour ; 
but,  leaving  Nature  and  truth  ju^t  as  he  found  them,  to  accom- 
modate his  humour  and  fancy  to  their  standard."'  Would  he 
do  this  in  a  yet  higher  case,  he  might  in  reality  become  as  wise 
and  great  a  man  as  he  is  already  a  refined  and  polished  gentle- 
man. By  one  of  these  tastes  he  understands  how  to  lay  out  his 
garden,  model  his  house,  fancy  his  equipage,  appoint  his  table ; 
by  the  other  he  learns  of  what  value  these  amusements  are  in 
life,  and  of  what  importance  to  a  man's  freedom,  happiness,  ajid 
self-enjoyment.  For  if  he  would  try  efJ'ectually  to  acquire  the 
real  science  or  taste  of  life,  he  would  certainly  discover  "  that 
a  right  mind  and  generous  affection  had  more  beauty  and  charm 
than  all  other  symmetries  in  the  world  besides."  And  "  that 
a  grain  of  honesty  and  native  worth  was  of  more  value  than 
all  the  adventitious  ornaments,  estates,  or  preferments;  for  the 
sake  of  which  some  of  the  better  sort  so  oft  turn  knaves,  for- 
saking their  principles  and  quitting  their  honour  and  freedom 
for  a  mean,  timorous,  shifting  state  of  gaudy  servitude." 

A  little  better  taste  (were  it  a  very  little)  in  the  affair  of 
life  itself  would,  if  I  mistake  not,  mend  the  manners  and 
secure  the  happiness  of  some  of  our  noble  countrymen,  who  come 
with  high  advantage  and  a  worthy  character  into  the  public. 
But  ere  they  have  long  engaged  in  it,  their  worth  unhappily 

259 


SHAFTESBUKY'S    CHARACTEIITSTICS 

becomes  venal.  Equipages,  titles,  precedencies,  staffs,  ribbons, 
and  other  such  olitterino;  ware  are  taken  in  exchange  for  inward 
merit,  honour,  and  a  character. 

This  they  may  account  perhaps  a  shrewd  bargain.  But 
there  will  be  found  very  untoward  abatements  in  it  when  the 
matter  comes  to  be  experienced.  They  may  have  descended  in 
reality  from  ever  so  glorious  ancestors,  patriots,  and  sufferers 
for  their  nation^s  liberty  and  welfare ;  they  may  have  made  their 
entrance  into  the  world  upon  this  bottom  of  anticipated  fame 
and  honour ;  they  may  have  been  advanced  on  this  account  to 
dignities  which  they  were  thought  to  have  deserved.  But  when 
induced  to  change  their  honest  measures,  and  sacrifice  their 
cause  and  friends  to  an  imaginary  private  interest,  they  will 
soon  find,  by  experience,  that  they  have  lost  the  relish  and 
taste  of  life ;  and  for  insipid  wretched  honours  of  a  deceitful 
kind  have  unhappily  exchanged  an  amiable  and  sweet  honour, 
of  a  sincere  and  lasting  relish  and  good  savour.  They  may, 
after  this,  act  farces  as  they  think  fit,  and  hear  qualities  and 
virtues  assigned  to  them  under  the  titles  of  graces,  excellencies, 
honours,  and  the  rest  of  this  mock  praise  and  mimical  appella- 
tion. They  may  even  with  serious  looks  be  told  of  honour  and 
worth,  their  principle,  and  their  country ;  but  they  know 
better  within  themselves,  and  have  occasion  to  find  that  after 
all  the  world  too  knows  better,  and  that  their  few  friends 
and  admirers  have  either  a  very  shallow  wit  or  a  very  profound 
hypocrisy. 

'Tis  not  in  one  party  alone  that  these  purchases  and  sales 
of  honour  are  carried  on.  I  can  represent  to  myself  a  noted 
patriot  and  reputed  pillar  of  the  religious  part  of  our  constitu- 
tion, who  having  by  many  and  long  services  and  a  steady 
conduct  gained  the  reputation  of  thorough  zeal  with  his  own 
party,  and  of  sincerity  and  honour  with  his  very  enemies,  on  a 
sudden  (the  time  being  come  that  the  fulness  of  his  reward  was 
set  before  him)  submits  complacently  to  the  proposed  bargain, 
and  sells  himself  for  what  he  is  worth,  in  a  vile,  detestable  old 

260 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

age,  to  which  he  has  reserved  the  infamy  of  betraying  both  his 
friends  and  country. ^ 

I  can  imagine,  on  the  other  side,  one  of  a  contrary  party, 
a  noted  friend  to  hberty  in  Church  and  State ;  an  abhorrer  of 
the  slavish  dependency  on  courts,  and  of  the  narrow  principles 
of  bigots.  Such  a  one,  after  many  public  services  of  note,  I  can 
see  wrought  upon,  by  degrees,  to  seek  court  preferment,  and 
this  too  under  a  patriot  character.  But  having  perhaps  tried 
this  way  with  less  success,  he  is  obliged  to  change  his  character, 
and  become  a  royal  flatterer,  a  courtier  against  his  nature ; 
submitting  himself  and  suing,  in  so  much  the  meaner  degree,  as 
his  inherent  principles  are  well  known  at  court  and  to  his  new 
adopted  party,  to  whom  he  feigns  himself  a  proselyte. 

The  greater  the  genius  or  character  is  of  such  a  person,  the 
greater  is  his  slavery  and  heavier  his  load.  Better  had  it  been 
that  he  had  never  discovered  such  a  zeal  for  public  good,  or 
signalised  himself  in  that  party  which  can  with  least  grace  make 
sacrifices  of  national  interests  to  a  crown,  or  to  the  private  will, 
appetite,  or  pleasure  of  a  prince.  For  supposing  such  a  genius 
as  this  had  been  to  act  his  part  of  courtship  in  some  foreign 
and  absolute  court,  how  much  less  infamous  would  his  part 
have  proved .''  how  much  less  lavish,  amidst  a  people  who  were 

^  [The  reference  is  presumably  to  Harley,  "ho,  coming  of  a  Puritan 
family,  set  out  as  a  strong  A\'hig-,  had  come  round  to  Toryism,  ivas  made 
successively  Secretary  of  State  and  Cliaiicellor  of  the  Hvcliequer,  and  in 
1711  was  raised  to  tlie  peerage  as  Earl  of  Oxford  and  appointed  L(U"d 
High  Treasurer.  iMacaulay  (chap.  xx. ,  Student's  ed.,  ii.  464-4(i7)  mentions 
two  other  noted  converts  from  AMiiggism  to  Toryism,  Foley  and  Howe  ; 
l)ut  tlie  passage  in  the  text  fits  only  Harley  in  full,  his  foreign  policy 
Iieing  regarded  by  Shaftesbury  as  a  betrayal  of  his  country.  Macaulay 
tells  (p.  403)  how  Shaftesbury  was  bewildered  by  the  different  case  of 
Wharton,  whom  he  described  as  "^the  most  mysterious  of  human  beings, 
as  a  strange  compouiul  of  best  and  worst,  of  private  depravity  and  public 
virtue,  and  owned  himself  unal)le  to  understand  how  a  man  utterly  without 
principle  in  everything  but  politics  should  in  ])olitics  be  true  as  steel." 
The  case  indeed  failed  to  chime  with  Sliaftesbury's  general  theory  of 
human  nature.] 

261 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHAKACTERISTICS 

all  slaves  ?  Had  he  peradventure  been  one  of  that  forlorn 
begging  troop  of  gentry  extant  in  Denmark  or  Sweden,  since 
the  time  that  those  nations  lost  their  liberties ;  had  he  lived 
out  of  a  free  nation  and  happily  balanced  constitution  ;  had  he 
been  either  conscious  of  no  talent  in  the  affairs  of  government 
or  of  no  opportunity  to  exert  any  such  to  the  advantage  of 
mankind  :  where  had  been  the  mighty  shame,  if  perhaps  he  had 
employed  some  of  his  abilities  in  flattering  like  others,  and 
paying  the  necessary  homage  required  for  safety's  sake  and 
self-preservation,  in  absolute  and  despotic  governments  ?  The 
taste,  perha])s,  in  strictness,  might  still  be  wrong,  even  in  this 
hard  circumstance ;  but  how  inexcusable  in  a  ([uite  contrary 
one  !  For  let  us  suppose  our  courtier  not  only  an  iMiglishman, 
but  of  the  rank  and  stem  of  those  old  English  patriots  who 
were  wont  to  curb  the  licentiousness  of  our  court,  arraign  its 
flatterers,  and  purge  away  those  poisons  from  the  ear  of  princes ; 
let  us  suppose  him  of  a  competent  fortune  and  moderate 
appetites,  without  any  apparent  luxury  or  lavishment  in  his 
manners :  what  sl^dl  we,  after  this,  bring  in  excuse,  or  as  an 
apology,  for  such  a  choice  as  his  ?  How  shall  we  explain  this 
preposterous  relish,  this  odd  ])reference  of  subtlety  and  in- 
directness to  true  wisdom,  o})cn  honesty,  and  uprightness  ?  ^ 

""Tis  easier,  I  confess,  to  give  account  of  this  corruption  of 
taste  in  some  noble  youth   of  a  more  sumptuous,   gay  fancy ; 

^  [The  referonce  liere  is  doubtless  to  II;irley's  collejigue,  Henry  St. 
John,  aftervvMi-fls  Mscount  Boliiijihroke.  His  family  and  circumstances 
and  early  leaniiifrs  answer  to  the  description  in  the  text ;  and  he  is  the 
only  puhlic  man  of"  the  day  descrihahle  as  a  i;vnius.  Shaftesbury  aiul  he, 
so  sym])athetic  in  their  ])hiIos()j)hical  opinions,  had  prohahly  heea  ac- 
([uaintances  ;  ;iiid  his  and  llarley's  deliberate  adoption,  in  1710,  of  a  Hij^h 
C'hurch  policy,  as  well  as  his  previous  support  of  tlie  Occasional  Conformity 
Bill,  fits  closely  with  tlie  description  of  a  "  prefei'cnce  of  subtlety  and 
indirectness  to  true  wisdom,  open  honesty,  and  uprij^htness. "  After 
such  a  criticism  it  is  (|uite  intelligible  that  Bolinjfbroke  should  make 
no  acknowledgment  of  liis  philosophical  debt  to  the  author  of  the 
Chin'drtcn.sfic.s.] 

262 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

supposing  him  born  truly  great  and  of  honourable  descent, 
with  a  generous  free  mind,  as  well  as  ample  fortune.  Even 
these  circumstances  themselves  may  be  the  very  causes  perhaps 
of  his  being  thus  ensnared.  The  elegance^  of  his  fancy  in 
outward  things  may  have  made  him  overlook  the  worth  of 
inward  character  and  proportion  :  and  the  love  of  grandeur  and 
magnificence,  wrong  turned,  may  have  possessed  his  imagination 
over  -  strongly  with  such  things  as  frontispieces,  parterres, 
equipages,  trim  varlets  in  parti  -  coloured  clothes,  and  others 
in  gentlemen's  apparel, — magnanimous  exhibitions  of  honour 
and  generosity  !  "  In  town,  a  palace  and  suitable  furniture  ! 
In  the  country  the  same,  with  the  addition  of  such  edifices  and 
gardens  as  were  unknown  to  our  ancestors,  and  are  lumatural  to 
such  a  climate  as  Great  Britain  ! " 

Meanwhile  the  year  runs  on,  but  the  year's  income  answers 
not  its  expense.  For  "  which  of  these  articles  can  be  re- 
trenched ?  Which  way  take  up,  after  having  thus  set  out  ? ''' 
A  princely  fancy  has  begot  all  this,  and  a  princely  slavery  and 
court  dependence  must  maintain  it. 

The  young  gentleman  is  now  led  into  a  chase,  in  which  he 
will  ha^'e  slender  capture,  though  toil  sufficient.  He  is  himself 
taken.  Nor  will  he  so  easily  get  out  of  that  labyrinth,  to  which 
he  chose  to  commit  his  steps,  rather  than  to  the  more  direct 
and  plainer  paths  in  which  he  trod  before.  "Farewell  that 
generous,  proud  spirit,  which  was  wont  to  speak  only  what  it 
apjiroved,  conmiend  only  whom  it  thought  worthy,  and  act 
only  what  it  thought  right!  Favourites  must  be  now  ob- 
served ;  Httle  engines  of  power  attended  on  and  loathsomely 
caressed ;  an  honest  man  dreaded,  and  every  free  tongue  or  pen 
abhorred  as  dangerous  and  reproachful.""  For  till  our  gentle- 
man is  become  wholly  prostitute  and  shameless;  till  he  is 
brought  to  laugh  at  public  virtue,  and  the  very  notion  of 
common  good ;  till  he  has  openly  renounced  all  ])rinciples  of 
honour  and  honesty,  he  must  in  good  policy  avoid  those  to 
1    117/  aiirl  Humour,  part  iv.  §  2. 

263 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

whom  he  lies  so  much  exposed,  and  shun  that  commerce  and 
familiarity  which  was  once  his  chief  delight. 

Such  is  the  sacrifice  made  to  a  wrong  pride  and  ignorant 
self-esteem,  by  one  whose  inward  character  must  necessarily, 
after  this  manner,  become  as  mean  and  abject  as  his  outward 
behaviour  insolent  and  intolerable. 

There  are  another  sort  of  suitors  to  powers,  and  traffickers 
of  inward  worth  and  liberty  for  outward  gain,  whom  one  Mould 
be  naturally  drawn  to  compassionate.  They  are  themselves  of 
a  humane,  compassionate,  and  friendly  nature,  well-wishers  to 
their  country  and  mankind.  They  could,  perhaps,  even  embrace 
poverty  contentedly  rather  than  submit  to  anything  diminutive 
either  of  their  inward  freedom  or  national  liberty.  But  what 
they  can  bear  in  their  own  persons  they  cannot  bring  them- 
selves to  bear  in  the  persons  of  such  as  are  to  come  after  them. 
Here  the  best  and  noblest  of  affections  are  borne  down  by  the 
excess  of  the  next  best,  those  of  tenderness  for  relations  and 
near  friends. 

Such  captives  as  these  would  di.sdain,  however,  to  devote  them- 
selves to  any  jmnce  or  ministry  whose  ends  were  wholly  tyrannical 
and  irreconcilable  with  the  true  interest  of  their  nation.  In 
other  cases  of  a  less  degeneracy,  they  may  bow  down  perhaps  in 
the  temjile  of  Rimmon,  support  the  weight  of  their  supine  lords, 
and  prop  the  steps  and  ruining  credit  of  their  corrupt  })atrons. 

This  is  di'udgery  sufficient  for  such  honest  natures,  such  as 
by  hard  fate  alone  could  have  been  made  dishonest.  But  as 
for  pride  or  insolence  on  the  account  of  their  outward  advance- 
ment and  seeming  elevation,  they  are  so  far  from  anything 
resembling  it  that  one  mav  often  observe  what  is  very  contrary 
in  these  fjiirer  characters  of  men.  For  though  perhaps  they 
were  known  somewhat  rigid  and  severe  before,  you  see  them 
now  grown  in  reality  submissive  and  obliging.  Though  in 
conversation  formerly  dogmatical  and  overbearing  on  the  points 
of  State  and  government,  they  are  now  the  patientest  to  hear, 
the  least  forward  to  dictate,  and  the  readiest  to  embrace  any 

264 


MISCELT.AXEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

entertaining  subject  of  discourse,  rather  than  that  of  the  pubhc 
and  their  own  personal  advancement. 

Nothing  is  so  near  virtue  as  this  behaviour ;  and  nothinor 
so  remote  from  it,  nothing  so  sure  a  token  of  the  most  profligate 
manners,  as  the  contrary.  In  a  free  government,  'tis  so  much 
the  interest  of  every  one  in  place,  who  profits  by  the  public,  to 
demean  himself  with  modesty  and  submission,  that  to  appear 
immediately  the  more  insolent  and  haughty  on  such  an  ad- 
vancement is  the  mark  only  of  a  contemptible  genius,  and  of  a 
want  of  true  understanding,  even  in  the  narrow  sense  of  interest 
and  private  good. 

Thus  we  see,  after  all,  that  "'tis  not  merely  what  we  call 
principle,  but  a  taste  which  governs  men.  They  may  think  for 
certain,  "  this  is  right,  or  that  wrong  "  :  they  may  believe  "  this 
a  crime,  or  that  a  sin  ;  this  punishable  by  man,  or  that  by  God ""  : 
yet  if  the  savour  of  things  lies  cross  to  honesty ;  if  the  fancy  be 
florid  and  the  a})petite  high  towards  the  subaltern  beauties  and 
lower  order  of  worldly  symmetries  and  proportions,  the  conduct 
will  infallibly  turn  this  latter  way. 

Even  conscience,  I  fear,  such  as  is  owing  to  religious  dis- 
cipline, will  make  but  a  slight  figure  where  this  taste  is  set 
amiss.  Among  the  vulgar,  perhaps,  it  may  do  wonders.  A 
devil  and  a  hell  may  prevail  where  a  jail  and  gallows  are  thought 
insufficient.  But  such  is  the  nature  of  the  liberal,  polished, 
and  refined  part  of  mankind.  So  far  are  they  from  the  mere 
simplicity  of  babes  and  sucklings  that,  instead  of  applying  the 
notion  of  a  future  reward  or  punishment  to  their  immediate 
behaviour  in  society,  they  are  apt  nuuli  rather,  through  the 
whole  course  of  their  lives,  to  show  evidently  that  they  look  on 
the  pious  narrations  to  be  indeed  no  better  than  children's  tales 
or  the  amusement  of  the  mere  vulgar  : — 

Esse  aliquos  Manes,  et  siibterranea  vcfrna, 

Nee  pueri  credunt,  nisi  qui  nondum  aere  lavantur.^ 

'  ["'Fliat  our  ghosts  exist  and  realms  below  the  earth  .   .   .   not  even 

265 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

Something  therefore  should,  methinks,  be  further  thought 
of  in  behalf  of  our  generous  youths  towards  the  correcting  of 
their  taste  or  relish  in  the  concerns  of  life.  For  this  at  last  is 
what  will  influence.  And  in  this  respect  the  youth  alone  are 
to  be  regarded.  Some  hopes  there  may  be  still  conceived  of 
these.  The  rest  are  confirmed  and  hardened  in  their  way.  A 
middle-aged  knave  (however  devout  or  orthodox)  is  but  a 
common  wonder ;  an  old  one  is  no  wonder  at  all ;  but  a  young 
one  is  still  (thank  heaven  !)  somewhat  extraordinarv.  And  I 
can  never  enough  admire  what  was  said  once  by  a  worthy  man 
at  the  first  appearance  of  one  of  these  voung  able  prosti- 
tutes, '•  that  he  even  trembled  at  the  sight,  to  find  nature 
capable  of  being  turned  so  soon ;  and  that  he  boded  greater 
calamity  to  his  country  from  this  single  example  of  young 
villany  than  from  the  practices  and  arts  of  all  the  old  knaves 
in  being." 

Let  us  therefore  proceed  in  this  view,  addressing  ourselves 
to  the  grown  youth  of  our  polite  world.     Let  the  appeal  be  to 
these  whose  relish  is  retrievable,  and  whose  taste  may  yet  be  I 
formed  in  morals,  as  it  seems  to  be  already  in  exterior  manners 
and  behaviour. 

That  there  is  really  a  standard  of  this  latter  kind  will 
immediately,  and  on  the  first  view,  be  acknowledged.  The 
contest  is  only,  "  which  is  right ;  which  the  unaffected  carriage 
and  just  demeanour;  and  which  the  affected  and  false.'"'  Scarce 
is  there  any  one  who  pretends  not  to  know  and  to  decide  A\hat 
is  well-bred  and  handsome.  There  are  few  so  affectedly  clownish 
as  absolutely  to  disown  good  breeding,  and  renounce  the  notion 
of  a  beauty  in  outward  manners  and  dejiortment.  With  such 
as  these,  wherever  they  should  be  found,  I  must  confess  I 
could  scarce  be  tempted  to  bestow  the  least  pains  or  labour 
towards  convincing  them  of  a  beautv  in  inward  sentiments 
and  principles. 

cliildreu  lielieve,  oxcopt  tliose  who  ;iro  too  young-  to  jniy  ;it  tlio  I);iths. " 
Juv.  ii.  Ul-l.")!.] 

266 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Whoever  has  any  impression  of  what  we  call  gentility  or 
politeness  is  already  so  acquainted  with  the  decorum  and  grace 
of  things  that  he  will  readily  confess  a  pleasure  and  enjoyment 
in  the  very  survey  and  contemplation  of  this  kind.  Now  if  in 
the  way  of  polite  pleasure  the  study  and  love  of  beauty  be 
essential,  the  study  and  love  of  symmetry  and  order,  on  which 
beauty  depends,  must  also  be  essential  in  the  same  respect.  i 

'Tis  impossible  we  can  advance  the  least  in  any  relish  or 
taste  of  outwai'd  symmetry  and  order,  without  acknowledging 
that  the  proportionate  and  regular  state  is  the  truly  prosperous  | 
and  natural  in  every  subject.  The  same  features  which  make 
deformity  create  incommodiousness  and  disease.  And  the  same 
shapes  and  proportions  which  make  beauty  afford  advantage  by 
adapting  to  activity  and  use.  Even  in  the  imitative  or  designing- 
arts  (to  which  our  author  so  often  refers)  the  truth  or  beauty 
of  every  figure  or  statue  is  measured  from  the  perfection  of 
Nature  in  her  just  adapting  of  every  limb  and  proportion  to 
the  activity,  strength,  dexterity,  life  and  vigour  of  the  particular 
species  or  animal  designed. 

Thus  beauty  and  truth  are  plainly  joined  with  the  notion 
of  utility  and  convenience,^  even  in  the  apprehension  of  every 
ingenious  artist,   the   architect,'^  the  statuary,  or  the  painter. 

*  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  .">. 

^  In  Graecis  operibus  nenu)  suh  niutiild  deiiticiilos  coustituit,  etc. 
Quod  erfj-o  sii])r;b  cautherios  et  templa  in  veritate  (lel)et  esse  collocatuni, 
id  in  imapiiihus,  si  infra  constitutum  fuerit^  mendosani  hahebit  operis 
rationeni.  Etiamque  antitjui  non  probaverunt,  neque  instituerunt,  etc. 
I  til  quod  non  potest  in  veritate  fieri,  id  non  putaverunt  in  ima^inibus 
factum,  posse  cerbim  rationem  habere.  Onniia  enini  certa  j)roprietate 
et  a  veris  naturae  deductis  nioribus  traduxerunt  in  oporuin  j)erfectiones  : 
et  ea  proba\erunt  <|uoruni  explicationes  in  disjtutationibus  rationem 
possunt  habere  veritatis.  Ita(iuc  ex  eis  ori}rinil)us  symmetrias  et  pro- 
portiones  uniuscujusqiu*  generis  ronstitutas  reli(iuerunt.  ["In  (ireek 
buildini^s  no  one  placed  denticules  under  nnitules.  .  .  .  \\'hat  tlierefore 
oujrbt  in  reality  to  be  put  above  beams  and  small  timbers  will,  if  in  imita- 
tions it  be  put  below,  be  faulty  in  theory  :  aiul  so  the  ancients  did  not 
;i])l)rovc  of  this  or  practise  it.   .   .   .   Thus  they  thought  that  what  cannot 

267 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

'Tis  the  same  in  the  physician's  way.  Natural  health  is  the 
just  proportion,  truth,  and  regular  course  of  things  in  a  con- 
stitution. 'Tis  the  inward  beauty  of  the  body.  And  when  the 
harmony  and  just  measures  of  the  rising  pulses,  the  circulating 
humours,  and  the  moving  airs  or  spirits,  are  disturbed  or  lost, 
deformity  enters,  and  with  it,  calamity  and  ruin. 

Should  not  this  (one  would  imagine)  be  still  the  same  case 
and  hold  equally  as  to  the  mind  ?  Is  there  nothing  there  which 
tends  to  disturbance  and  dissolution  ?  Is  there  no  natural 
tenour,  tone,  or  order  of  the  jjassions  or  affections  ?  No  beauty 
or  deformity  in  this  moral  kind  ?  Or  allowing  that  there  really 
is,  must  it  not,  of  consequence,  in  the  same  manner  im})ly  health 
or  sickliness,  prosperity  or  disaster  ?  Will  it  not  be  found  in 
this  respect,  above  all,  "  that  what  is  lieautiful  is  harmonious 
and  proportionable ;  ^   what  is  harmonious  and  proportionable 

be  (lone  in  reality  cannot  be  c(»rrect  if  done  in  a  copy  thereof.  For  they 
transferred  e\erything  to  their  perfect  works  with  exact  accuracy  aiid 
attention  to  the  true  laws  of  Nature^  and  approved  only  those  points  the 
explanation  of  which  can,  when  discussed,  show  truthfulness.  And  so 
from  this  beginning  they  left  us  proportions  and  canons  ready  established 
in  every  kind."]  \'itruvius,  iv.  2,  whose  commentator  Philander  may 
be  also  read  on  this  place.  See  above,  Treatise  iii.  part  i.,  end;  part 
iii.  §  3  ;  and  I>elow,  Mi.<fc.  v.  ch.  i. 

1  This  is  the  honestum,  the  j)ulc]irum,  to  Ka\6v,  on  which  our  author 
lays  the  stress  of  virtue,  and  the  merits  of  this  cause  ;  as  well  in  his  other 
Treatises  as  in  this  of  So/iloqui/  here  commented.  This  beauty  the  Roman 
orator,  in  his  rhetorical  way,  and  in  the  majesty  of  style,  could  express  no 
otherwise  than  as  a  mystery.  "  Ilonestum  igitur  id  intelligimus,  quod 
tale  est,  ut,  detracta  omni  utilitate,  sine  ullis  praemiis  fructil)usve,  per 
seipsum  possit  jure  huulari.  Quod  quale  sit,  non  tarn  definitione  qua  sum 
usus  intelligi  potest  (<|uan(iuam  ali(|uantum  potest)  (juam  communi  omnium 
judicio,  et  optimi  cujusque  stiuliis,  atque  factis  ;  (jui  permulta  ob  eam 
unam  causam  faciunt,  quia  decet,  quia  rectum,  quia  honestum  est ;  etsi 
nullum  consecuturum  emolumentum  vident."  ["By  right  therefore  I 
understand  what  is  such  that,  apart  from  expediency,  without  any  reward 
or  profit,  it  can  properly  be  praised  on  its  own  account.  AVhat  sort  of 
thing,  that  is,  may  be  understood,  not  so  much  from  the  definition  I  have 
given  (though  to  some  extent  it  may  be   so   understood)  as  from   the 

268 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

is  true ;  and  what  is  at  once  both  beautiful  and  true  is,  of 
consequence,  agreeable  and  good  ? " 

general  agreement  of  all^  and  from  the  enthusiasm  and  acts  of  tlie  best 
men  ;  they  do  many  a  thing  for  this  one  reason,  that  it  is  becoming,  is 
])roper,  is  right,  even  thougli  they  see  no  gain  likely  to  follow." — Cicero, 
De  Finibus,  ii.  45.]  Our  author,  on  the  otlier  side,  having  little  of  the 
orator,  and  less  of  the  constraint  of  formality  belonging  to  some  graver 
characters,  can  be  more  familiar  on  this  occasion  ;  and  accordingly  descend- 
ing without  the  least  scruple  into  whatever  style  or  humour,  he  refuses 
t(»  make  the  least  difficulty  or  mystery  of  this  matter.  He  pretends,  on 
tliis  head,  to  claim  the  assent  not  only  of  orators,  poets,  and  the  higher 
virtuosi,  but  even  of  the  beaux  themselves,  and  such  as  go  no  farther  than 
the  dancing-master  to  seek  for  grace  and  beauty.  He  pretends,  we  see, 
to  fetch  this  natural  idea  from  as  familiar  amusements  as  dress,  equipage, 
the  tiring-room,  or  toy-shop.  And  thus  in  his  proper  manner  of  soliloquy 
or  self-discourse,  we  may  imagine  him  running  on,  beginning  perhaps 
with  some  particular  scheme  or  fancied  scale  of  beauty,  Mliich,  according 
to  his  philosophy,  he  strives  to  erect  by  distinguishing,  sorting,  and 
dividing  into  things  animate,  inanimate,  and  mixed,  as  thus  : — 

In  tlie  inanimate  :  beginning  from  those  regular  figures  and  symmetries 
with  which  cliildren  are  delighted,  and  proceeding  gradually  to  the  pro- 
portions of  architecture  and  the  other  arts.  The  same  in  respect  of  sounds 
and  music.  From  beautiful  stones,  rocks,  minerals,  to  vegetables,  woods, 
aggregate  parts  of  the  world,  seas,  rivers,  mountains,  vales.  The  globe. 
Celestial  bodies  and  their  order.  The  higher  architecture  of  Nature. 
Nature  herself  considered  as  inanimate  and  passive. 

In  the  animate  :  from  animals  and  their  several  kinds,  tempers, 
sagacities,  to  men.  And  from  single  persons  of  men,  their  private  char- 
acters, understandings,  geniuses,  dispositions,  manners,  to  public  societies, 
communities  or  commonwealths.  From  flocks,  herds,  and  other  natural 
assemblages  or  groups  of  living  creatures,  to  human  intelligencies  and 
correspondencies,  or  whatever  is  higher  in  the  kind.  The  correspondence, 
union  and  harmony  of  Nature  herself,  considered  as  animate  and  intelligent. 

In  the  mixed  :  as  in  a  single  person  (a  body  and  a  mind)  the  union 
and  harmony  of  this  kind,  which  constitutes  the  real  person  ;  and  the 
friendship,  love,  or  whatever  other  affection  is  formed  on  such  an  object. 
A  household,  a  city  or  nation,  with  certain  lands,  buildings,  and  other 
appendices  or  local  ornaments  which  jointly  form  that  agreeable  idea  of 
home,  family,  country. 

"And  what  of  this?"  says  an  airy  spark,  no  friend  to  meditation  or 
deep  thought.      "  ^\'hat  means  this  catalogue  or  scale,  as  you  are  pleased 

269 


v/ 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTEllISTICS 

AVhere  then  is  this  beauty  or  harmony  to  be  found  ?  How- 
is  this  synnnetry  to  be  discovei'ed  and  applied  ?  Is  it  any  other 
art  tlian  that  of  })hilosophy  or  the  study  of  inward  numbers  and 
proportions  which  can  exhibit  this  in  life  ?  If  no  other,  wlio 
then  can  possibly  have  a  taste  of  this  kind,  without  being 
beholden  to  philosophy  ?  AVho  can  admire  the  outward  beauties 
and  not  recur  instantly  to  the  inward,  which  are  the  most  real 

to  call  it?  Only,  sir,  to  satisfy  myself  that  I  am  not  alone  or  sing-le  in  a 
certain  fancy  I  have  of  a  tliiiijj-  called  heauty ;  that  I  have  almost  the 
whole  world  for  my  companions  ;  and  that  each  of  us  admirers  and  earnest 
pursuers  of  heauty  (sucli  as  in  a  manner  we  all  are)  if  ])erad\'enture  we 
take  not  a  certain  sagacity  along  with  us,  we  must  err  widely,  range  ex- 
travagantly, and  run  ever  upon  a  false  scent.  'W^e  may  (in  the  spi»rtsman's 
phrase)  have  many  liares  afoot,  hut  shall  stick  to  no  real  game,  nor  Ite 
fortunate  in  any  capture  which  nuiy  content  us. 

"See  with  «hat  ardour  and  vehemence  the  young  man,  neglecting  his 
proper  race  and  fellow-creatures,  aiul  forgetting  what  is  decent,  handsome, 
or  becoming  in  human  affairs,  pursues  these  species  in  those  common 
ol)jects  of  his  affection,  a  horse,  a  liound,  a  hawk  !  ^Vhat  doting  on  these 
beauties  !  ^Vhat  admiration  of  the  kind  itself !  Aiul  of  the  particular 
animal,  what  care,  and  in  a  manner  idolatry  and  consecration,  when  the 
beast  beloved  is  (as  often  haj)pens)  even  set  a])art  from  use,  and  only  kept 
to  gaze  on  and  feed  the  enamoured  fancy  with  highest  delight  !  See  in 
another  youth,  not  so  forgetful  of  human  kind,  but  remembering  it  still 
in  a  wrong  way  !  a  (pL\6Ka\os  t>f  another  sort,  a  C'haerea.  Quam  elegans 
ft)rmarum  spect.itor  !  See  as  to  otlier  beauties,  where  there  is  no  posses- 
sion, no  enjoyment  or  reward,  but  barely  seeing  and  admiring ;  as  in  the 
virtuoso-passion,  the  love  of  painting  and  the  designing  arts  of  every  kind 
so  often  observed.  How  fares  it  with  our  princely  genius,  our  grandee 
wlio  assembles  all  these  beauties,  and  within  the  bounds  of  his  sumptuous 
palace  incloses  all  these  graces  of  a  thousand  kinds  .'^  "NVhat  pains  !  study! 
science  !  Behold  the  disposition  and  order  of  these  finer  sorts  of  apart- 
ments, gardens,  ^■illas  !  The  kind  of  harmony  to  the  eye  from  tlie  various 
shapes  and  colours  agreeably  mixed  and  ranged  in  lines,  intercrossing 
without  confusion,  aiul  fortunately  coincident.  A  parterre,  cypresses, 
groves,  wildernesses.  Statues  here  and  there  of  virtue,  fortitude,  temper- 
ance. Heroes'  busts,  philosophers'  heads,  with  suitable  mottoes  and  in- 
scriptions. Solemn  representations  of  things  deeply  natural — caves, 
grottoes,  rocks,  urns  and  obelisks  in  retired  places  and  disposed  at  proper 
distances  and   points  of  sight,  with  all  those  svmmetries  which  silently 

270 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

and  essential,  the  most  naturally  affecting,  and  of  the  highest 
pleasure,  as  well  as  profit  and  advantage  ? 

In  so  short  a  compass  does  that  learning  and  knowledge  lie 
on  which  manners  and  life  depend.  'Tis  we  ourselves  create 
and  form  our  taste.  If  we  resolve  to  have  it  just,  'tis  in  our 
power.     ^Ve  may  esteem  and  resolve,  approve  and  disapprove, 

express  a  reii-iung-  order,  peace,  harmony,  and  beauty  !  .  .  .  But  what  is 
there  answerable  to  this  in  the  minds  of  the  possessors  ?  W'liat  possession 
or  propriety  is  theirs?  AMiat  constancy  or  security  of  enjoyment.^  AMiat 
peace,  what  harmony  within  ?  " 

Thus  our  monohjgist,  or  self-discoursinj;'  author,  in  liis  usual  strain, 
when  incited  to  the  search  of  Beauty  and  tlie  Decorum  by  vulgar  admira- 
tion and  tlie  universal  acknowledgment  «)f  the  species  in  outward  things, 
and  in  the  nu'aner  and  subordinate  sul»jects.  Jiy  this  inferior  species,  it 
seems,  our  strict  inspector  disdains  to  be  allured  ;  and  refusing  to  be 
captivated  by  anything  less  than  the  superior,  original,  aiul  genuine  kind, 
he  walks  at  leisure,  without  emotion,  in  deep  philosophical  reserve, 
through  all  these  pompous  scenes  ;  passes  unconcernedly  l)y  those  court 
jjageants,  tlie  illustrious  and  much  envied  potentates  of  the  place  ;  over- 
looks the  rich,  the  great,  and  even  the  fair,  feeling  no  other  astonishment 
than  wliat  is  accidentally  raised  in  him  by  the  view  of  these  impostures 
and  of  this  specious  snare.  For  here  he  ol)serves  those  gentlemen  chiefly 
to  be  caught  and  fastest  held  who  are  the  highest  ridiculers  of  such 
reflections  as  his  own,  and  who  in  the  very  height  of  this  ridicule  prove 
themselves  the  impotent  contemners  of  a  species  which,  whether  they 
will  or  no,  they  ardently  pursue,  some  in  a  face  and  certain  regular  lines 
or  features,  others  in  a  palace  and  apartments,  others  in  an  equipage  and 
dress.  "  O  efl'eminacy,  eft'eminacy  !  \Mio  would  imagine  this  could  be 
the  vice  of  such  as  ap})ear  no  inconsiderable  men  }  But  person  is  a  sul)ject 
of  flattery  which  reaches  bejond  the  bloom  of  youth.  The  experienced 
senator  and  aged  general  can  in  our  days  dispense  with  a  toilet  and  fcike 
his  outward  form  into  a  very  extraordinary  adjustment  and  regulation. 
All  embellishments  are  affected,  besides  the  true.  And  thus,  led  liy 
example,  whilst  we  run  in  search  of  elegancy  and  neatness,  pursuing 
beauty,  and  adding,  as  we  imagine,  more  lustre  and  value  to  four  own 
person,  we  grow,  in  our  real  character  and  true  self,  deformed  aiuI  mon- 
strous, servile  and  abject,  stooping  to  the  lowest  terms  of  courtship,  and 
sacrificing  all  internal  proportion,  all  intrinsic  and  real  beauty  and  worth 
for  the  sake  of  things  which  carry  scarce  a  shadow  of  the  kind."  Sajjra, 
Morulistn,  part  iii.  §  2  ;    Wit  and  Humour,  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Advice,  part  iii.  §  '6. 

271 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

as  we  would  wish.  For  who  \\oulcl  not  rejoice  to  be  always 
equal  and  consonant  to  himself,  and  have  constantly  that  opinion 
of  things  which  is  natural  and  proportionable  ?  But  who  dares 
search  opinion  to  the  bottom,  or  call  in  question  his  early  and 
prepossessing  taste?  Who  is  so  just  to  himself  as  to  recall  his 
fancy  from  the  power  of  fashion  and  education  to  that  of  reason  ? 
Could  we,  however,  be  thus  courageous,  we  should  soon  settle  in 
ourselves  such  an  opinion  of  good  as  would  secure  to  us  an  in- 
variable, agreeable,  and  just  taste  in  life  and  manners. 

Thus  have  I  endeavoured  to  tread  in  my  author's  steps,  and 
prepare  the  reader  for  the  serious  and  downright  philosophy 
which  even  in  this  ^  last  commented  treatise,  our  author  keeps 
still  as  a  mystery  and  dares  not  formally  profess.  His  pretence 
has  been  to  advise  authors  and  polish  styles,  but  his  aim  has 
been  to  correct  manners  and  regular  lives.  He  has  affected 
soliloquy,  as  pretending  only  to  censure  himself,  but  he  has  taken 
occasion  to  bring  others  into  his  company  and  make  bold  with 
personages  and  characters  of  no  inferior  rank.  He  has  given 
scope  enough  to  raillery  and  humour,  and  has  intrenched  very 
largely  on  the  province  of  us  miscellanarian  writers.  But  the 
reader  is  ^  now  about  to  see  him  in  a  new  aspect,  "  a  formal  and 
professed  philosopher,  a  system-writer,  a  dogmatist  and  ex- 
pounder."    Habes  confitentem  reum. 

So  to  his  philosophy  I  commit  him.  Though,  according  as 
my  genius  at  present  disposition  will  permit,  I  intend  still  to 
accompany  him  at  a  distance,  keep  him  in  sight,  and  convoy  him, 
the  best  I  am  able,  through  the  dangerous  seas  he  is  about  to  pass. 

1  Treatise  ni.  {Advice  to  an  Author). 
2  Treatise  iv.  (The  luquiry). 


272 


MISCELLANY   IV 


CHAPTER   I 


Connection  and  union  of  the  subject-treatises  —  Philosophy  in  form  — 
Metaphysics — Egoity — Identity — Moral  footing- — Proof  and  discipline 
of  the  fancies — Settlement  or  opinion — Anatomy  of  the  mind — A 
fable. 

We  have  already,  in  the  beginning  of  our  preceding  Miscellany, 
taken  notice  of  our  author's  plan  and  the  connection  and 
dependency  of  his  joint  tracts,^  comprehended  in  two  preceding 
volumes.  We  are  now,  in  our  commentator  capacity,  arrived 
at  length  to  his  second  volume,  to  Avhich  the  three  pieces  of 
his  first  appear  pre])aratory.  That  they  were  really  so  designed, 
the  advertisement  to  the  first  edition  of  his  Soliloquy  is  a 
sufficient  proof.  He  took  occasion  there,  in  a  line  or  two 
under  the  name  of  his  printer,  or  (as  he  otherwise  calls  him)  his 
amanuensis,  to  prepare  us  for  a  more  elaborate  and  methodical 
piece  which  was  to  follow.  AVe  have  this  system  now  before  us. 
Nor  need  we  wonder,  such  as  it  is,  that  it  came  so  hardly  into 
the  world,  and  that  our  author  has  been  delivered  of  it  with  so 
much  difficulty  and  after  so  long  a  time.  His  amanuensis  and 
he  were  not,  it  seems,  heretofore  upon  such  good  terms  of 
correspondence.  Otherwise  such  an  unshapen  foetus  or  false 
birth  as  that  of  which  our  author  in  his  title-page  -  complains 
had    not   formerly  appeared  abroad.      Nor  had  it  ever  risen 

*  Above,  p.  230 ;  ag-ain  below,  Mist:  v.  2. 
-  Viz.  to  the  Inquiry  (Treatise  i\.). 

VOL.  II  273  T 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

again  in  its  more  decent  form  but  for  the  accidental  publication 
of  our  author's  first  letter,^  which,  by  a  necessary  train  of  conse- 
quences, occasioned  the  revival  of  this  abortive  piece,  and  gave 
usherance  to  its  companions. 

It  will  appear,  therefore,  in  this  joint  edition  of  our  author's 
Five  Treatises  that  the  three  former  are  preparatory  to  the 
fourth,  on  which  we  are  now  entered,  and  the  fifth  (with  which 
he  concludes)  a  kind  of  apology  for  this  revived  Treatise  con- 
cerning virtue  and  religion. 

As  for  his  Apology,  particularly  in  what  relates  to  revealed 
relig-ion  and  a  world  to  come,  I  commit  the  reader  to  the 
disputant  divines  and  gentlemen  whom  our  author  has  intro- 
duced in  that  concluding  piece  of  dialogue  writing  or  rhapsodical 
philosophy.  INIeanwhile  we  have  here  no  other  part  left  us 
than  to  enter  into  the  dry  philosophy  and  rigid  manner  of  our 
author,  without  any  excursions  into  various  literature,  Avithout 
help  from  the  comic  or  tragic  muse,  or  from  the  flowers  of 
poetry  or  rhetoric. 

Such  is  our  present  pattern  and  strict  moral  task,  which 
our  more  humorous  reader,  foreknowing,  may  immediately,  if 
he  pleases,  turn  over,  skipping  (as  is  usual  in  many  grave  works) 
a  chapter  or  two  as  he  proceeds.  We  shall,  to  make  amends, 
endeavour  afterwards,  in  our  following  Miscellany,  to  entertain 
him  again  with  more  cheerful  fare,  and  afford  him  a  dessert  to 
rectify  his  palate,  and  leave  his  mouth  at  last  in  good  relish. 

To  the  patient  and  grave  reader,  therefore,  who  in  order  to 
moralise  can  afford  to  retire  into  his  closet,  as  to  some  religious 
or  devout  exercise,  we  presume  thus  to  offer  a  few  reflections  in 
the  support  of  our  author's  profound  inquiry.  And,  accordingly, 
we  are  to  imagine  our  author  speaking  as  follows. 

How    little    regard    soever    may    be   shown  to    that    moral 

speculation  or  inquiry  which  we  call  the  study  of  ourselves,  it 

must,  in  strictness,  be  yielded  that  all  knowledge  whatsoever 

depends  upon  this  previous  one,  "  and  that  we  can  in  reality 

1  Viz.  Letter  of  Enthusiasm. 

274 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

be  assured  of  nothing  till  we  are  first  assured  of  what  we  are 
ourselves."  P'or  by  this  alone  we  can  know  what  certainty  and 
assurance  is. 

That  there  is  something  undoubtedly  which  thinks,  our 
very  doubt  itself  and  scrupulous  thought  evinces.  But  in  what 
subject  that  thought  resides,  and  how  that  subject  is  continued 
one  and  the  same,  so  as  to  answer  constantly  to  the  supposed 
train  of  thoughts  or  reflections  which  seem  to  run  so  harmoni- 
ously through  a  long  course  of  life,  with  the  same  relation  still 
to  one  single  and  self-same  person,  this  is  not  a  matter  so  easily 
or  hastily  decided  by  those  who  are  nice  self  -  examiners  or 
searchers  after  truth  and  certainty. 

'Twill  not,  in  this  respect,  be  sufficient  for  us  to  use  the 
seeming  logic  of  a  famous  modern,^  and  say,  "  We  think, 
therefore  we  are."  Which  is  a  notably  invented  saying,  after 
the  model  of  that  like  philosophical  proposition,  that  "  What 
is,  is."  JNIiraculously  argued !  "  If  I  am,  I  am."  Nothing 
more  certain  !  For  the  Ego  or  I  being  established  in' the  first 
part  of  the  proposition,  the  ergo,  no  doubt,  must  hold  it  good 
in  the  latter.  But  the  question  is,  "  What  constitutes  the  AVe 
or  I  ? "  and  "  whether  the  I  of  this  instant  be  the  same  with 
that  of  any  instant  preceding  or  to  come ':: "  For  we  have 
nothing  but  memory  to  warrant  us,  and  memory  may  be  false. 
\V^e  may  believe  we  have  thought  and  reflected  thus  or  thus ; 
but  we  may  be  mistaken.  We  may  be  conscious  of  that  as 
truth  which  perhaps  was  no  more  than  dream,  and  we  may 
be  conscious  of  that  as  a  past  dream  which  perhaps  was  never 
before  so  much  as  dreamt  of. 

This  is  what  metaphysicians  mean  when  they  say  "  that 
identity  can  be  proved  only  by  consciousness,  but  that  con- 
sciousness, withal,  may  be  as  well  false  as  real  in  respect  of  what 
is  past."  So  that  the  same  successional  AV'e  or  I  nmst  remain 
still,  on  this  account,  undecided. 

To  the  force  of  this  reasoning  I  confess  I  must  so  far  submit 
1  Monsieur  Des  Cartes. 

275 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

as  to  declare  that,  for  my  own  part,  1  take  my  being  upon  trust. 
Let  others  philosophise  as  they  are  able :  I  shall  admire  their 
strength  when,  upon  this  topic,  they  have  refuted  what  able 
metaphysicians  object  and  Pyrrhonists  plead  in  their  own  behalf. 

Meanwhile  there  is  no  impediment,  hindrance,  or  suspension 
of  action  on  account  of  these  wonderfully  refined  speculations. 
Argument  and  debate  go  on  still.  Conduct  is  settled.  Rules 
and  measures  are  given  out  and  received.  Nor  do  we  scruple 
to  act  as  resolutely  upon  the  mere  supposition  that  we  are,  as 
if  we  had  effectually  proved  it  a  thousand  times,  to  the  full 
satisfaction  of  our  metaphysical  or  Pyrrhonean  antagonist. 

This  to  me  appears  sufficient  ground  for  a  moralist.  Nor 
do  I  ask  more  when  I  undertake  to  prove  the  reality  of  virtue 
and  morals. 

If  it  be  certain  that  I  am,  'tis  certain  and  demonstrable 
who  and  what  I  ought  to  be,  even  on  my  own  account,  and  for 
the  sake  of  my  own  private  happiness  and  success.  For  thus  I 
take  tlie  liberty  to  proceed. 

The  affections  of  which  I  am  conscious  are  either  jjrief  or 
joy,  desire  or  aversion.  For  whatever  mere  sensation  I  may 
experience,  if  it  amounts  to  neither  of  these,  'tis  indifferent  and 
no  way  affects  me. 

That  which  causes  joy  and  satisfaction  when  present  causes 
grief  and  disturbance  when  absent ;  and  that  which  causes 
grief  and  disturbance  when  present  does,  when  absent,  by  the 
same  necessity  occasion  joy  and  satisfaction. 

Thus  love  (which  implies  desire,  with  hope  of  good)  nnist 
afford  occasion  to  grief  and  disturbance  M'hen  it  acquires  not 
what  it  earnestly  seeks.  And  hatred  (which  im})lies  aversion 
and  fear  of  ill)  nmst,  in  the  same  manner,  occasion  grief  and 
calamity  when  that  which  it  earnestly  shunned,  or  would  have 
escaped,  remains  present  or  is  altogether  unavoidable. 

That  which  being  present  can  never  leave  the  mind  at  rest, 
but  must  of  necessity  cause  aversion,  is  its  ill.  But  that  which 
can  be  sustained  without  anv  necessary  abhorrence  or  aversion 

276 


SHArTESRUllY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

is  not  its  ill,  but  remains  incliftbrcnt  in  its  own  nature,  the  ill 
being  in  the  affection  only,  which  wants  redress. 

In  the  same  manner,  that  which  being  absent  can  never 
leave  the  mind  at  rest,  or  without  disturbance  and  regret,  is  of 
necessity  its  good.  But  that  which  can  be  absent  without  any 
present  or  future  disturbance  to  the  mind,  is  not  its  good,  but 
remains  indifferent  in  its  own  nature.  From  whence  it  must 
follow,  that  the  affection  towards  it,  as  sup})osed  good,  is  an  ill 
affection,  and  creative  only  of  disturbance  and  disease.  So  that 
the  affections  of  love  and  hatred,  liking  and  dislike,  on  which 
the  hap})iness  or  prosperity  of  the  person  so  much  depends, 
being  influenced  and  governed  by  opinion,  the  highest  good  or 
liaj^piness  must  de])end  on  right  opinion  and  the  highest  misery 
be  derived  from  \\  rong. 

To  explain  this,  I  consider,  for  instance,  the  fancy  or 
imagination  I  have  of  death,  accortling  as  I  find  this  subject 
naturally  passing  in  my  mind.  To  this  fancy,  })erhaps,  I  find 
united  an  opinion  or  apprehension  of  evil  and  calamity.  Now^ 
the  more  my  apprehension  of  this  evil  increases,  the  greater  I 
find  my  disturbance  proves  not  only  at  the  approach  of  the 
supposed  evil,  but  at  the  very  distant  thought  of  it.  Besides 
that,  the  thought  itself  will  of  necessity  so  much  the  oftener 
recur,  as  the  aversion  or  fear  is  violent  and  increasing. 

From  this  supposed  evil  I  must,  however,  fly  with  so  much 
the  more  earnestness  as  the  ojiinion  of  the  evil  increases.  Now  if 
the  increase  of  the  aversion  can  be  no  cause  of  the  decrease  or 
diminution  of  the  evil  itself  but  rather  the  contrary,  then  the 
increase  of  the  aversion  must  necessarily  prove  the  increase  of 
disappointment  and  disturbance.  And  so,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  diminution  or  decrease  of  the  aversion  (if  this  may  any  way 
be  effected)  must  of  necessity  prove  the  diminution  of  inward 
disturbance,  and  the  better  establishment  of  inward  cpiiet  and 
satisfaction. 

Again,  I  consider  w^ith  myself,  that  I  have  the  imagination  ^ 

'  Of  tlie  necessary  beiuj;  and  prevalency  of  some  sueli  imagination  or 

277 


MISCETJ.ANEOUS   KEFLECTTONS 

of  something  beautiful,  great,  and  becoming  in  things.  This 
imagination  I  apply  jierhaps  to  such  subjects  as  plate,  jewels, 
apartments,  coronets,  patents  of  honour,  titles,  or  precedencies. 
I  must  therefore  naturally  seek  these,  not  as  mere  conveniencies, 
means,  or  helps  in  life  (for  as  such  my  passion  could  not  be 
so  excessive  towards  them),  but  as  excellent  in  themselves, 
necessarily  attractive  of  my  admiration,  and  directly  and  im- 
mediately causing  my  happiness  and  giving  me  satisfaction. 
Now  if  the  passion  raised  on  this  opinion  (call  it  avarice,  pride, 
vanity,  or  ambition)  be  indeed  incapable  of  any  real  satisfaction, 
even  under  the  most  successful  course  of  fortune ;  and  then  too, 
attended  with  perpetual  fears  of  disappointment  and  loss,  how 
can  the  mind  be  other  than  miserable  when  possessed  by  it .'' 
But  if  instead  of  forming  thus  the  opinion  of  good,  if  instead 
of  placing  worth  or  excellence  in  these  outward  subjects  we 
place  it,  where  it  is  truest,  in  the  affections  or  sentiments,  in  the 
governing  part  and  inward  character,  we  have  then  the  full 
enjoyment  of  it  within  our  power;  the  imagination  or  opinion 
remains  steady  and  irreversible,  and  the  love,  desire,  and  appetite 
is  answered,  without  apprehension  of  loss  or  disappointment. 

Here,  therefore,  arises  work  and  employment  for  us  within, 
"  to  regulate  fancy  and  rectify  opinion,^  on  which  all  depends.'" 

sense  (natui'al  and  common  to  all  men,  irresistible,  of  original  growth  in 
the  mind,  the  guide  of  our  affections,  and  the  ground  of  our  admiration, 
contempt,  shame,  honour,  disdain,  and  other  natural  and  unavoidable  im- 
pressions), see  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  3  ;  Treatise 
IV.  bk.  i.  part  ii.  §  3  ;  Treatise  v.  part  iii.  §§  2,  3  ;  and  above.  Misc.  ii.  ch,  i.  ; 
iii.  ch.  ii.  in  the  notes. 

^  OTi.  Trdcra  17  VTr6\ri\pLS,  Kai  avrrj  evl  aol.  apov  ovv  ore  OeXeis  rr^v  vwbXyi^pLV,  Kal 
wawep  Ko.jj.'ij/avTi  ttju  aKpav  yaXrivrj,  aradepa  Travra  Kal  koXttos  clkv/jluv,  [''  W^hat 
view  you  take  is  everything,  and  your  view  is  in  j'our  power.  Remove  it 
then  when  you  choose,  and  then,  as  if  you  had  rounded  the  cape,  come 
calm  serenity,  a  waveless  bay." — Marcus  Aurelius,  xii.  22.] 

oTov  €(TTLv  7]  XeKavT]  Tou  v8aTos,  TOLovTov  T)  ^vxv-  o^o"  V  o.vy7]  7]  TrpoffTritTTOvaa  Tt^ 
vSari,  TOLOVTOI/  ai  (pavracriai..  orav  ovv  to  vdup  KLvqdrj,  doKel  fi^v  Kal  t)  avyrj  KiveiffOai. 
ov  fxivToi  Kivelrai:  Kal  orav  roivvv  ffKorudrj  rls,  ovx  0.I  Tix^o-i  Kal  al  dperal  crvyxeofTai^ 
dWd  TO  TTvevixa  €<p'  ov  elai-   Karaaravro'S  5e,   KadiararaL  KaKuva.      ["  As  is  the 

278 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

For  if  our  loves,  desires,  hatreds,  and  aversions  are  left  to 
themselves,  we  are  necessarily  exposed  to  endless  vexation  and 
calamity ;  but  if  these  are  found  capable  of  amendment  or  in 
any  measure  flexible  or  variable  by  opinion,  we  ought,  methinks, 
to  make  trial,  at  least,  how  far  we  might  by  this  means  acquire 
felicity  and  content. 

Accordingly,  if  we  find  it  evident  on  one  hand,  that  by 
indulging  any  wrong  appetite  (as  either  debauch,  malice,  or 
revenge)  the  opinion  of  the  false  good  increases,  and  the  appetite, 
which  is  a  real  ill,  grows  so  much  the  stronger,  we  may  be  as 
fully  assured,  on  the  other  hand,  that  by  restraining  this  affec- 
tion and  nourishing  a  contrary  sort  in  opposition  to  it,  we  can- 
not fail  to  diminish  what  is  ill,  and  increase  what  is  properly 
our  happiness  and  good. 

On  this  account  a  man  may  reasonably  conclude,  "  that  it 
becomes  him,  by  working  vipon  his  own  mind,  to  withdraw  the 
fancy  or  opinion  of  good  or  ill  from  that  to  which  justly  and 
by  necessity  it  is  not  joined,  and  apply  it  with  the  strongest 
resolution  to  that  with  which  it  naturally  agrees."  For  if  the 
fancy  or  opinion  of  good  be  joined  to  what  is  not  durable  nor 
in  my  power  either  to  acquire  or  to  retain ;  the  more  such  an 
opinion  prevails,  the  more  I  nmst  be  subject  to  disappointment 
and  distress.  But  if  there  be  that  to  which,  whenever  I  apply 
the  opinion  or  fancy  of  good,  I  find  the  fancy  more  consistent, 
and  the  good  more  durable,  solid,  and  within  my  power  and 
command,  then  the  more  such  an  opinion  prevails  in  me  the 
more  satisfaction  and  happiness  I  must  experience. 

Now,  if  I  join  the  opinion  of  good  to  the  possessions  of  the 

water-disli,  so  is  the  soul ;  as  is  the  ray  whicli  falls  on  the  water,  so  are 
the  appeaz-aiices.  When  then  the  water  is  moved  the  ray  too  seems  to  be 
moved,  yet  is  not.  And  when,  accordingly,  a  man  is  giddy,  it  is  not  the 
arts  and  the  virtues  which  are  thrown  into  confusion,  but  the  spirit  to 
which  they  belong;  and  when  he  is  recovered  so  are  tliey." — Epictetus, 
Diss.  iii.  ;3.]  See  Treatise  m.  part  i.  §  2  ;  part  iii.  §§1,2;  Treatise  v.  part 
iii.  §  3. 

279 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

mind,  if  it  be  in  the  affections  themselves  that  I  place  my 
highest  joy,  and  in  those  objects,  whatever  they  are,  of  inward 
worth  and  beauty  (such  as  honesty,  faith,  integrity,  friendship, 
honour),  'tis  evident  I  can  never  possibly,  in  this  respect,  rejoice 
amiss  or  indulge  myself  too  far  in  the  enjoyment.  The  greater 
my  indulgence  is,  the  less  I  have  reason  to  fear  either  reverse  or 
disappointment. 

This,  I  know,  is  far  contrary  in  another  regimen  of  life. 
The  tutorage  of  fancy  and  pleasure,  and  the  easy  philosophy 
of  taking  that  for  good  which  pleases  me,^  or .  which  I  fancy 
merely,  will  in  time  give  me  uneasiness  sufficient.  'Tis  plain, 
from  what  has  been  debated,  that  the  less  fanciful  I  am  in  what 
relates  to  my  content  and  happiness,  the  more  powerful  and 
absolute  I  nmst  be  in  self-enjoyment,  and  the  possession  of  my 
good.  And  since  'tis  fancy  merely  which  gives  the  force  of 
good,  or  power  of  passing  as  such,  to  things  of  chance  and 
outward  dependency,  'tis  evident  that  the  more  I  take  from 
fancy  in  this  respect  the  more  I  confer  upon  myself.  As  I  am 
less  led  or  betrayed  by  fancy  to  an  esteem  of  what  depends  on 
others,  I  am  the  more  fixed  in  the  esteem  of  what  depends  on 
myself  alone.  And  if  I  have  once  gained  the  taste  of  liberty,- 
I  shall  easily  understand  the  force  of  this  reasoning  and  know- 
both  my  true  self  and  interest. 

The  method,  therefore,  required  in  this  my  inward  economy, 
is  to  make  those  fancies  themselves  the  objects  of  my  aversion 
which  justly  deserve  it,  by  being  the  cause  of  a  wrong  estima- 
tion and  measure  of  good  and  ill,  and  consecpiently  the  cause  of 
my  unhappiness  and  disturbance. 

Accordingly  (as  the  learned  masters  in  this  science  advise) 
we  are  to  begin  rather  by  the  averse  ^  than  by  the  prone  and 
forward  disposition.     We  are  to  work  rather  by  the  w-eaning 

^  Treatise  iii.  part  iii.  §  2  ;  Treatise  v.  part  ii.  §  1. 
^  Treatise  v.  part  iii.  §  .3  ;  and  below,  Misc.  v.  '3. 

3  S,poi>  ouv  TT]v  iKKXiaiv  dirb  iravTWv  tCiv  oi/K  i(p'  Vfuv,  Kal  fierddes  iiri  to.  itapa 
<pvaiv  tQv  i(p'  r]tuv.     ["  Give  up  then  aversion  from  all  things  which  are  not 

280 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

than  the  engaging  passions ;  since  if  we  give  Avav  chiefly  to 
incHnation,  by  loving,  applauding,  and  admiring  what  is  great 
and  good,  we  may  possibly,  it  seems,  in  some  high  objects  of 
that  kind,  be  so  amused  and  ecstasied  as  to  lose  ourselves  and 
miss  our  proper  mark  for  want  of  a  steady  and  settled  aim. 
But  being  more  sure  and  infalliable  in  what  relates  to  our  ill, 
we  should  begin,  they  tell  us,  by  applying  our  aversion  on  that 
side  and  raisinjj  our  indignation  against  those  meannesses  of 

c?  O  o 

opinion  and  sentiment  which  are  the  causes  of  our  subjection 
and  perplexity. 

Thus  the  covetous  fancy,  if  considered  as  the  cause  of  misery 
(and  consequently  detested  as  a  real  ill),  must  of  necessity  abate  ; 
and  the  ambitious  fancy,  if  opposed  in  the  same  manner  with 
resolution,  by  better  thought,  must  resign  itself  and  leave  the 
mind  free  and  disencumbered  in  the  pursuit  of  its  better  objects. 

Nor  is  the  case  different  in  the  passion  of  cowardice  or  fear 
of  death.  For  if  we  leave  this  passion  to  itself  (or  to  certain 
tutors  to  manage  for  us)  it  may  lead  us  to  the  most  anxious 
and  tormenting  state  of  life.  But  if  it  be  opposed  by  sounder 
opinion  and  a  just  estimation  of  things,  it  must  diminish  of 
course,  and  the  natural  result  of  such  a  practice  nnist  be  the 

in  our  power  ;  transfer  it  to  tlie  things  contrary  to  nature  wliicli  are  in  our 
power."— p4)ictetus,  Ench.  ii.] 

ope^LV  Spat  (T€  del  TravreXQs,  eKK\i.(nv  t-jrl  /xova  p.eradeiyaL  to.  irpoaipeTLKO.. 
[''  You  must  do  away  with  desire  altogether,  and  transfer  aversion  to  those 
things  only  which  are  within  the  scope  of  the  will." — Epictetus,  Dls.s.  iii. 
22.]  This  suhdued  or  moderated  admiration  or  zeal  in  the  higliest  subjects 
of  virtue  and  divinity,  the  pliilosopher  calls  avfifierpov  Kai  KadtaTa/xevriv  Ty\v 
ipe^Lv.  ['"Desire  settled  and  proportioned  to  its  objects." — Epict.  Diss.  iv. 
1.]  'JTlie  contrary  disposition,  rha\oyov  Kal  (hariKov.  ['' Unreasonable  and 
pushing." — Epict.  Diss.  '\v.  1.]  The  reason  why  this  over-forward  ardour 
and  pursuit  of  high  subjects  runs  naturally  into  enthusiasm  and  disorder 
is  shown  in  what  succeeds  the  first  of  the  passages  here  cited,  viz. ,  tQiv  ok 
i(p'  il/Mv,  ocrav  6p(yecr6ai  KaXbv  av,  ovMv  ovoeiru  croi  Trdpecm.  \"  And  of  things  in 
our  power,  such  as  it  would  be  well  to  desire,  no  one  is  yet  set  before 
you." — Epict.  Ench.  ii.]  And  hence  the  repeated  injunction,  dirdaxov  nore 
TrairdTracnv  ope'^ews,  'iva.  irori  Kal  fvXoyus  opexOijsri  ti   5'  ev\6yw?.  orav  fxV^  ''"'   ^^ 

281 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

rescue  of  the  mind  from  numberless  fears  and  miseries  of 
other  kinds. 

Thus  at  last  a  mind,  by  knowing  itself  and  its  own  proper 
powers  and  virtues,  becomes  free  and  independent.  It  sees  its 
hindrances  and  obstructions,  and  finds  they  are  wholly  from 
itself,  and  from  opinions  wrong  conceived.  The  more  it 
conquers  in  this  respect  (be  it  in  the  least  particular)  the  more 
it  is  its  own  master,  feels  its  own  natural  liberty,  and  con- 
gratulates with  itself  on  its  own  advancement  and  prosperity. 

AVhether  some  who  are  called  philosophers  have  so  applied 
their  meditations  as  to  understand  anything  of  this  language, 

ffeavTu  dyadov  e!)  opexOwv-  [''Keep  away  altogether  from  desire^  in  order 
tliat  you  may  some  day  have  a  desire  witli  good  reason  ;  and  if  with  good 
reason^  when  you  have  anything  good  in  you,  you  will  desire  well." — Epict. 
Uiss.  iii.  1:3.]  To  this  Horace,  in  one  of  his  latest  epistles  of  the  deeply 
philosophical  kind,  alludes. 

Insani  sapiens  nomen  ferat,  aequus  ini(|ui. 

Ultra  quam  satis  est  virtutem  si  petat  ipsam. — Epist.  i.  vi. 

["  Tlie  wise  man  must  be  called  mad,  the  fair  man  unfair,  if  he  seek 
even  virtue  too  keenly."] 

And  in  the  beginning  of  the  epistle, — 

Nil  admirari  prope  res  est  una,  Numici, 

Solaque  quae  posset  facere  et  servare  beatum. — lb. 

[''Not  to  admire  is  all  the  art  I  know. 

To  make  men  happy  and  to  keep  them  so." — Pope's  version.] 

J'or  though  these  first  lines  (as  many  other  of  Horace's  on  the  subject  of 
philosophy)  have  the  air  of  the  Epicurean  discipline  and  Luci-etian  style  ; 
yet,  by  the  whole  taken  together,  it  appears  evidently  on  what  system  of 
ancient  philosophy  this  epistle  was  formed.  Nor  was  this  prohibition  of 
tlie  wondering  or  admiring  habit  in  early  students  peculiar  to  one  kind  of 
philosophy  alone.  It  was  common  to  many,  however  the  reason  and 
account  of  it  might  differ  in  one  sect  from  the  other.  The  Pythagoreans 
sufficiently  checked  their  tyros  by  silencing  them  so  long  on  their  first 
courtship  to  philosophy.  And  though  admiration,  in  the  Peripatetic  sense, 
as  above  mentioned,  may  be  justly  called  the  inclining  principle  or  first 
motive  to  philosophy,  yet  this  mistress,  when  once  espoused,  teaches  us  to 
admire  after  a  diiferent  manner  from  what  we  did  before.  See  above, 
J/wc.  ii.  ch.  i.  ;  and  Treatise  i.  §  0. 

282 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

I  know  not.  But  well  I  am  assured  that  many  an  honest  and 
free-hearted  fellow,  among  the  vulgar  rank  of  people,  has 
naturally  some  kind  of  feeling  or  apprehension  of  this  self- 
enjoyment  when,  refusing  to  act  for  lucre  or  outward  profit 
the  thing  which  from  his  soul  he  abhors  and  thinks  below  him, 
he  goes  on,  with  harder  labour,  but  more  content,  in  his  direct 
plain  path.  He  is  secure  w  ithin,  free  of  what  the  world  calls 
policy  or  design,  and  sings  (according  to  the  old  ballad) — 
My  mind  to  me  a  kingdom  is,  etc. 
Which  in  Latin  we  may  translate, — 

Et  mea 
Virtute  me  involvo,  probnmque 
Paiiperiem  sine  dote  qiiaero.^ 

But  I  forget,  it  seems,  that  I  am  now  speaking  in  the  })erson 
of  our  grave  inquirer.  I  should  consider  I  have  no  right  to 
vary  from  the  pattern  he  has  set,  and  that  whilst  I  accompany 
him  in  this  particular  treatise,  I  ought  not  to  make  the  least 
escape  out  of  the  high  road  of  demonstration  into  the  diverting 
paths  of  poetry  or  humour. 

As  grave  however  as  morals  are  presumed  in  their  own 
nature,  I  look  upon  it  as  an  essential  matter  in  their  delivery 
to  take  now  and  then  the  natural  air  of  pleasantry.  The  first 
morals  which  were  ever  delivered  in  the  world  were  in  parables, 
tales,  or  fables.  And  the  latter  and  most  consummate  dis- 
tributers of  morals,  in  the  very  politest  times,  were  great  tale- 
tellers and  retainers  to  honest  ^^^sop. 

After  all  the  regular  demonstrations  and  deductions  of  our 
grave  author,  I  daresay  'twould  be  a  high  relief  and  satisfaction 
to  his  reader  to  hear  an  apologue  or  fable  well  told,  and  with 
such  humour  as  to  need  no  sententious  moral  at  the  end  to 
make  the  application. 

As  an  experiment  in  this  case,  let  us  at  this  instant  imagine 

'  Hor.    0(1.   in.   xxix.     ["  I  wrap  myself  in  my  own  merits  and  seek 
as  my  bride  lionest  poverty,  undowered."] 

283 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

our  grave  inquirer  taking  pains  to  show  us,  at  full  length,  the 
unnatural  and  unhappy  excursions,  rovings,  or  expeditions  of 
our  ungoverned  fancies  and  opinions  oyer  a  world  of  riches, 
honours,  and  other  ebbing  and  flowing  goods.  He  performs 
this,  we  will  suppose,  with  great  sagacity,  to  the  full  measure 
and  scope  of  our  attention.  Meanwhile,  as  full  or  satiated  as 
we  might  find  ourselves  of  serious  and  solid  demonstration,  "'tis 
odds  but  we  might  find  vacancy  still  sufficient  to  receive 
instruction  by  another  method.  And  I  dare  answer  for  success 
should  a  merrier  moralist  of  the  .'Esopean  school  present 
himself,  and,  hearing  of  this  chase  described  by  bur  philosopher, 
beg  leave  to  represent  it  to  the  life  by  a  homely  cur  or  two  of 
his  master's  ordinary  breed. 

"Two  of  this  race,"  he  would  tell  us,  "having  been  daintily 
bred  and  in  high  thoughts  of  what  thev  called  pleasure  and 
good  living,  travelled  once  in  quest  of  game  and  rarities,  till 
they  came  by  accident  to  the  seaside.  They  saw  there,  at  a 
distance  from  the  shore,  some  floating  pieces  of  a  wreck,  which 
they  took  a  fancy  to  believe  some  wonderful  rich  dainty,  richer 
than  ambergris  or  the  richest  ])roduct  of  the  ocean.  They 
could  prove  it  by  their  appetite  and  longing  to  be  no  less  than 
quintessence  of  the  main,  ambrosial  substance,  the  repast  of 
marine  deities  surpassing  all  which  earth  afforded.  .  .  .  By 
these  rhetorical  arguments,  after  long  reasoning  M'ith  one 
another  in  this  florid  vein,  they  proceeded  from  one  extravagance 
of  fancy  to  another,  till  they  came  at  last  to  this  issue.  Being 
unaccustomed  to  swimming,  they  would  not,  it  seems,  in  prudence, 
venture  so  far  out  of  their  depth  as  was  necessary  to  reach  their 
imagined  prize,  but  being  stout  drinkers,  they  thought  with 
themselves  they  might  compass  to  drink  all  which  lay  in  their 
way,  even  the  sea  itself,  and  that  by  this  method  they  might 
shortlv  brino;  their  jjoods  safe  to  drv  land.  To  work  therefore 
they  went,  and  drank  till  they  were  both  burst."' 

For  my  own  part  I  am  fully  satisfied  that  there  are  more 
sea-drinkers  than  one  or  two  to  be  found  among  the  principal 

284 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

personages  of  mankind,  and  that  if  these  dogs  of  ours  were  silly 
curs,  many  who  pass  for  wise  in  our  own  race  are  little  wiser, 
and  may  properly  enough  be  said  to  have  the  sea  to  drink. 

'Tis  pretty  evident  that  they  who  live  in  the  highest  sphere 
of  human  affairs  have  a  very  uncertain  view  of  the  thing  called 
happiness  or  good.  It  lies  out  at  sea,  far  distant,  in  the  offing, 
where  those  gentlemen  ken  it  but  very  imperfectly,  and  the 
means  they  employ  in  order  to  come  up  with  it  are  very  wide 
of  the  matter,  and  far  short  of  their  proposed  end.  "  First  a 
general  acquaintance.  Visits,  levees.  Attendance  upon  the 
great  and  little.  Popularity.  A  place  in  Tarliament.  Then 
another  at  Court.  Then  intrigue,  corruption,  prostitution. 
Then  a  higher  place.  Then  a  title.  Then  a  remove.  A  new 
Minister !  Factions  at  court.  Shipwreck  of  Ministries.  The 
new,  the  old.  Engage  with  one,  piece  up  with  t'other. 
Bargains,  losses,  after-games,  retrievals."  Is  not  this  the  sea 
to  drink  ? 

At  si  divitiae  prudeutem  reddere  possent. 

Si  cu})idum  timidumque  minus  te ;  nempe  ruberes, 

V^iveret  in  terris  te  si  quis  avarior  uno.^ 

But  lest  I  should  be  tempted  to  foil  into  a  manner  I  have  been 
obliged  to  disclaim  in  this  part  of  my  miscellaneous  performance, 
I  shall  here  set  a  period  to  this  discourse,  and  renew  my  attempt 
of  serious  reflection  and  grave  thought  by  taking  up  my  clue 
in  a  fresh  chapter. 

^  Ilor.  Ep.  n.  ii.  ["But  if  riches  could  make  you  vvise^  if  they  couhi 
make  you  less  lustful,  less  easily  frifrhteued,  of  course  you  would  blush 
to  have  any  one  alive  more  avaricious  than  you."] 


285 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


CHAPTER   II 

Passage  from  terrd  incoijiiita  to  the  visible  world  —  Mistress -ship  of 
Nature — Animal  confederacy,  degrees,  subordination — -Master  animal 
man — Privilege  of  his  birth — Serious  countenance  of  the  author. 

As  heavily  as  it  went  with  us  in  the  deep  philosophical  part  of 
our  preceding  chapter,  and  as  necessarily  engaged  as  we  still  are 
to  prosecute  the  same  serious  inquiry,  and  search  into  those 
dark  sources;  "'tis  hoped  that  our  remaining  philosophy  may 
flow  in  a  more  easy  vein,  and  the  second  running  be  found 
somewhat  clearer  than  the  first.  However  it  be,  we  may  at 
least  congratulate  with  ourselves  for  having  thus  briefly  passed 
over  that  metaphysical  part  to  which  we  have  paid  sufficient 
deference.  Nor  shall  we  scruple  to  declare  our  opinion  "  that 
it  is  in  a  manner  necessary  for  one  who  would  usefully 
philosophise,  to  have  a  knowledge  in  this  part  of  philosophy 
sufficient  to  satisfy  him  that  there  is  no  knowledge  or  wisdom 
to  be  learnt  from  it.""  For  of  this  truth  nothing  besides 
experience  and  study  will  be  able  fully  to  convince  him. 

When  we  are  even  past  these  empty  regions  and  shadows  of 
])hilosophy,  'twill  still  perhaps  appear  an  uncomfortable  kind  of 
travelling  through  those  other  invisible  ideal  worlds,  such  as  the 
study  of  morals,  we  see,  engages  us  to  visit.  ;  Men  must  acquire 
a  very  peculiar  and  strong  habit  of  turning  their  eye  inwards 
in  order  to  explore  the  interior  regions  and  recesses  of  the 
mind,  the  hollow  caverns  of  deep  thought,  the  private  seats  of 
fancy,  and  the  wastes  and  wildernesses,  as  well  as  the  more 
fruitful  and  cultivated  tracts  of  the  obscure  climate. 

But  what  can  one  do .''  Or  how  dispense  with  these  darker 
disquisitions  and  moonlight  voyages,  when  we  have  to  deal  with 
a  sort  of  moon-blind  wits,  who  though  very  acute  and  able  in 
their  kind,  may  be  said  to  renounce  daylight  and  extinguish  in 
a  manner  the  bright  visible  outward  world,  by  allowing  us  to 

286 


MISCELLANEOUS    REP^LECTIONS 

know  nothing  beside  what  we  can  prove  by  strict  and  formal 
demonstration  ? 

'Tis  therefore  to  satisfy  such  rigid  inquirers  as  these,  that 
we  ha^•e  been  necessitated  to  proceed  by  the  inward  way ;  and 
that  in  our  preceding  chapter  we  have  built  only  on  such 
foundations  as  are  taken  from  our  very  perceptions,  fancies, 
appearances,  affections  and  opinions  themselves,  without  regard 
to  anything  of  an  exterior  world,  and  even  on  the  supposition 
that  there  is  no  such  world  in  being. 

Such  has  been  our  late  dry  task.  No  wonder  if  it  carries, 
indeed,  a  meagre  and  raw  appearance.  It  may  be  looked  on  in 
})hilosophy  as  worse  than  a  mere  Egyptian  imposition.  For  to 
make  brick  without  straw  or  stubble  is  perhaps  an  easier 
labour  than  to  prove  morals  without  a  world,  and  establish  a 
conduct  of  life  without  the  supposition  of  anything  living  or 
extant  besides  our  immediate  fancy  and  world  of  imagination. 

But  having  finished  this  mysterious  work  we  come  now  to 
open  day  and  sunshine,  and  as  a  poet  perhaps  might  express 
himself,  we  are  now  ready  to  quit 

The  dubious  labyrinths,  and  PyiThonean  cells 
Of  a  Cimmerian  darkness. 

AVe  are  henceforward  to  trust  our  eyes  and  take  for  real  the 
whole  creation,  and  the  fair  forms  which  lie  before  us.  We  are 
to  believe  the  anatomy  of  our  own  body,  and  in  proportionable 
order  the  shapes,  forms,  habits,  and  constitutions  of  other 
animal  races.  Without  demurring  on  the  profound  modern 
hypothesis  of  animal  insensibility,  we  are  to  believe  firmly  and 
resolutely  "  that  other  creatures  have  their  sense  and  feeling, 
their  mere  passions  and  affections,  as  well  as  ourselves."  And 
in  this  manner  we  proceed  accordingly,  on  our  author's  scheme, 
to  inquire  what  is  truly  natural  to  each  creature,  and  whether 
that  which  is  natural  to  each,  and  is  its  perfection,  be  not 
withal  its  happiness  or  good." 

To  deny  there  is  anything  properly  natural  (after  the  con- 

287 


SHAFTESBURY  S   CHARACTERISTICS 

cessions  already  made)  would  be  undoubtedly  very  preposterous 
and  absurd.  Nature  and  the  outward  world  being  owned 
existent,  the  rest  must  of  necessity  follow.  The  anatomy  of 
bodies,  the  order  of  the  spheres,  the  proper  mechanisms  of  a 
thousand  kinds,  and  the  infinite  ends  and  suitable  means 
established  in  the  general  constitution  and  order  of  things ;  all 
this  being  once  admitted  and  allowed  to  pass  as  certain  and  un- 
questionable, ^tis  as  vain  afterwards  to  except  against  the  phrase 
of  natural  and  unnatural,  and  question  the  propriety  of  this 
speech  applied  to  the  particular  forms  and  beings  in  the  world, 
as  it  would  be  to  except  against  the  conmiou  appellations  of 
vigour  and  decay  in  plants,  health  or  sickness  in  bodies, 
sobriety  or  distraction  in  minds,  prosperity  or  degeneracy  in 
any  variable  part  of  the  known  creation. 

We  may,  perhaps,  for  humour^s  sake,  or  after  the  known 
way  of  disputant  hostility,  in  the  support  of  any  odd 
hypothesis,  pretend  to  deny  tliis  natural  and  unnatural  in 
things.  'Tis  evident,  however,  that  though  our  humour  or 
taste  be  by  such  affectation  ever  so  much  dc})raved,  we  cannot 
resist  our  natural  ^  anticipation  in  behalf  of  nature  ;  according 
to  whose  supposed  standard  we  })erpetually  approve  and  dis- 

1  See  what  is  said  above  on  the  word  sensus  communis,  in  that  second 
Treatise,  part  iii.  §§  1,  2  ;  part  iv.  §  2  ;  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  ;3  ;  Treatise 
v.  part.  ii.  §  4  ;  part  iii.  §  2,  etc.,  concerning  tlie  natural  ideas,  and  the 
preconceptions  or  presensations  of  this  kind  ;  the  vpoK-qfus,  of  which  a 
learned  critic  and  master  in  all  philosopli y,  modern  and  ancient,  takes 
notice  in  his  lately  published  volume  of  Socratic  dialogues,  where  he  adds 
this  reflection,  with  respect  to  some  philosophical  notions  much  in  vogue 
amongst  us  of  late  here  in  England.  Obiter  dumtaxat  addemus, 
Socraticam  quam  exposuimus  doctrinam  magno  usui  esse  posse,  si  probe 
expendatur,  dirimendae  inter  viros  doctos  controversiae,  ante  paucos 
anuos,  in  Britannia  praesertim,  exortae,  de  ideis  innatis,  quas  dicere 
possis  ifj.<pvTovs  evvolas.  Quamvis  enim  nullae  sint,  si  adcurate  loquamur, 
notiones  a  natura  animis  nostris  infixae  ;  attameu  nemo  negarit  ita  esse 
facultates  animorum  uostrorum  natura  adfectas,  ut  quam  primum  ratione 
uti  incipimus,  verum  a  falso,  malum  a  bono  aliquo  modo  distinguer^ 
incipiamus.      Species   veritatis    nobis    semper    placet ;    displicet    contra 

288 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

approve,  and  to  whom  in  all  natural  appearances,  all  moral 
actions  (whatever  we  contemplate,  whatever  we  have  in  debate) 
we  inevitably  appeal,  and  pay  our  constant  homage  with  the 
most  apparent  zeal  and  passion. 

Tis  here,  above   all    other  places,  that  we  say  with  strict 
justice — 

meiidacii  :  inio  et  hoiiestum  iuhonesto  praeferimus ;  ob  semina  nobis 
iiulita,  quae  turn  demum  in  hicem  prodeunt,  cum  ratiocinari  possumus, 
eoque  uberiores  fructus  proferunt^  quo  melius  ratiocinamur,  ad  curatioreque 
institutione  adjuvamur.  Ae-sch.  Dial,  cum  Sik'is  Philol.  Jo.  Cler.  ann. 
1711,  p.  176.  They  seem  indeed  to  be  but  weak  philosophers,  though 
able  sophists,  and  artful  confounders  of  words  and  notions,  who  would 
refute  Jsature  and  common  sense.  But  Nature  will  be  able  still  to  shift  for 
lierself,  and  get  the  better  of  those  schemes,  which  need  no  other  force 
against  them  than  that  of  Horace's  single  verse  : — 

Dente  lupus,  cornu  taurus  petit :  unde,  nisi  intus 
Monstratum  ? 

["  The  wolf  bites,  the  bull  tosses  you  :  how  did  they  learn  it,  but  by 
instinct?" — Sat.  11.  i.  52.] 

An  ass  (as  an  English  author  says)  never  butts  with  his  ears  ;  though 
a  creature  born  to  an  armed  forehead  exercises  his  butting  faculty  long 
ere  his  horns  are  come  to  him.  And  perhaps  if  the  philosopher  would 
accordingly  examine  himself  and  consider  his  natural  passions,  he  would 
find  there  were  such  belonged  to  him  as  Nature  had  premeditated  in  his 
behalf,  and  for  which  she  had  furnished  him  with  ideas  long  before  any 
particular  practice  or  experience  of  his  own.  Nor  would  he  need  be 
scandalised  with  the  comparison  of  a  goat  or  boar  or  other  of  Horace's 
premeditating  animals,  who  have  more  natural  wit,  it  seems,  than  our 
philosopher;  if  we  may  judge  of  him  by  his  own  hypothesis,  which  denies 
the  same  implanted  sense  aiul  natural  ideas  to  his  own  kind. 

Cras  donaberis  haedo, 

C'ui  frous  turgida  cornibus 
I'rimis  et  venerem  et  proelia  destinat. 

["To-morrow  a  kid  shall  be  sacrificed  to  you,  a  kid  whose  brow  just 
sprouting  with  horns  promises  him  a  life  of  love  and  fighting." — Od.   m. 
xiii.  3-5.] 
And 

Verris  obliquum  meditantis  ictum. 

["The  boar  who  practises  his  side-long  slash." — Ofl.  \ii.  xxii.  7  1 

VOL.  n  289  u 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Naturam  expellas  furca,  tamen  usque  recurret.^ 

The  airy  gentlemen,  who  have  never  had  it  in  their  thoughts 
to  study  Nature  in  their  own  species,  but  being  taken  with  other 
loves,  have  applied  their  parts  and  genius  to  \,h.e  same  study  in 
a  horse,  a  dog,  a  game-cock,  a  hawk,  or  any  other  animal  -  of 
that  degree,  know  very  Avell  that  to  each  species  there  belongs 
a  several  humour,  temper,  and  turn  of  in^^'d  disposition,  as 
real  and  peculiar  as  the  figure  and  outward  shape  which  is  with 
so  much  curiosity  beheld  and  admired.  If  there  be  anything 
ever  so  little  amiss  or  wrong  in  the  inward  frame,  the  humour 
or  temper  of  the  creature,  'tis  readily  called  vicious ;  and  when 
more  than  ordinarily  wrong,  unnatural.  The  humours  of  the 
creatures,  in  order  to  their  redress,  are  attentively  observed, 
sometimes  indulged  and  flattered,  at  other  times  controlled  and 
checked  with  proper  severities.  In  short,  their  affections, 
passions,  appetites,  and  antipathies  are  as  duly  regarded  as 
those  in  human  kind  under  the  strictest  discipline  of  education. 
Such  is  the  sense  of  inward  proportion  and  regularity  of  affec- 
tions, even  in  our  noble  youths  themselves,  who  in  this  respect 
are  often  known  expert  and  able  masters  of  education,  though 
not  so  susceptible  of  discipline  and  culture  in  their  own  case, 
after  those  early  indulgences  to  which  their  greatness  has 
entitled  them. 

As  little  favourable,  however,  as  these  sportly  gentlemen  are 
presumed  to  show  themselves  towards  the  care  or  culture  of 
their  own  species ;  as  remote  as  their  contemplations  are  thought 
to  lie  from  Nature  and  philosophy,  they  confirm  plainly  and 
establish  our  philosophical  foundation  of  the  natural  ranks, 
orders,  interior  and  exterior  proportions  of  the  several  distinct 
species  and  forms  of  animal  beings.  Ask  one  of  these  gentlemen, 
unawares,   when   solicitously   careful    and    busied   in   the  great 

1  ["  You  may  turn  out  nature  with  a  pitchfork^  yet  back  she  will  keep 
coming." — Horace,  Ep.  i.  x.  24.] 

2  Treatise  iv.  bk.  ii.  part  i.  §  3 ;  part  ii.  §  1  ;  Treatise  \-.  part  ii.  §  4. 

290 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

concerns    of    his    stable    or   kennel,    "whether    his    hound    or 
greyhound-bitch   who   eats    her  puppies   is   as  natural    as   the 
other  who  nurses  them  ? ""  and  he  will  think  you  frantic.     Ask 
him  again,  "  whether  he  thinks  the  unnatural  creature  who  acts 
thus,  or  the  natural  one  who  does  otherwise,  is  best  in  its  kind 
and  enjoys  itself  the  most?"  and  he  will  be  inclined  to  think 
still  as  strangely  of  you.     Or  if  perhaps  he  esteems  you  worthy 
of   better  information,  he   will   tell    you   "  that  his  best-bred 
creatures  and  of  the  ti'uest  race  are  ever  the  noblest  and  most 
generous  in  their  natures ;  that  it  is  this  chiefly  which  makes 
the  difference  between  the  horse  of  good  blood  and  the  arrant 
jade  of  a  base  breed ;  between  the  game-cock  and  the  dunghill 
craven ;  between  the  true  hawk  and  the  mere  kite  or  buzzard ; 
and  between  the  right  mastiff",  hound,  or  spaniel  and  the  very 
mongrel/''     He  might,  withal,  tell  you  perhaps  with  a  masterly 
air  in  this  brute-science,  "  that  the  timorous,  poor-spirited,  lazy 
and  gluttonous  of  his  dogs  were  those  whom  he  either  suspected 
to  be  of  a  spurious  race,  or  who  had  been  by  some  accident 
spoiled  in  their  nursing  and  management,  for  that  this  was  not 
jSiatural  to  them.     That  in  every  kind  they  were  still  the  miser- 
ablest  creatures  who  were  thus  spoiled ;  and  that  having  each 
of  them  their  proper  chase  or  business,  if  they  lay  resty  and 
out  of  their  game,  chambered  and  idle,  they  were  the  same  as 
if  taken  out  of  their  element.     That  the  saddest  curs  in  the 
world  were  those  who  took  the  kitchen  chimney  and  dripping- 
pan  for  their  delight,  and  that  the  only  happy  dog  (were  one 
to  be  a  dog  oneself)  was  he  who  in  his  proper  sport  and  exercise, 
his  natural  pursuit  and  game,  endured  all  hardships  and  had  so 
much  delight  in  exercise  and  in  the  field  as  to  forget  home  and 
his  reward." 

Thus  the  natural  habits  and  affections  of  the  inferior 
creatures  are  known,  and  their  unnatural  and  degenerate  part 
discovered.  Depravity  and  corruption  is  acknowledged  as  real 
in  their  affections  as  when  any  thing  is  misshapen,  wrong,  or 
monstrous  in  their  outward  make.     And  notwithstanding  nuich 

291 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAEACTERISTICS 

of  this  inward  depravity  is  discoverable  in  the  creatures  tamed 
by  man,  and  for  his  service  or  pleasure  merely  turned  from 
their  natural  course  into  a  contrary  life  and  habit ;  notwith- 
standing that,  by  this  means,  the  creatures  who  naturally  herd 
with  one  another  lose  their  associating  humour,  and  they  who 
naturally  pair  and  are  constant  to  each  other  lose  their  kind 
of  conjugal  alliance  and  affection ;  yet  when  released  from 
human  servitude  and  returned  again  to  their  natural  wilds  and 
rural  liberty,  they  instantly  resume  their  natural  and  regular 
habits,  such  as  are  conducing  to  the  increase  and  prosperity  of 
their  own  species. 

Well  it  is  perhaps  for  mankind  that  though  there  are  so 
many  animals  who  naturally  herd  for  company ^s  sake  and 
mutual  affection,  there  are  so  few  Avho  for  conveniency  and  by 
necessity  are  obliged  to  a  strict  union  and  kind  of  confederate 
state.  The  creatures  who,  according  to  the  economy  of  their 
kind,  are  obliged  to  make  themselves  habitations  of  defence 
against  the  seasons  and  other  incidents ;  they  Avho  in  some 
parts  of  the  year  are  deprived  of  all  subsistence,  and  are  there- 
fore necessitated  to  accumulate  in  another,  and  to  provide 
withal  for  the  safety  of  their  collected  stores,  are  by  their 
nature  indeed  as  strictly  joined,  and  with  as  proper  affections 
towards  their  public  and  community,  as  the  looser  kind,  of  a 
more  easy  subsistence  and  support,  are  united  in  what  relates 
merely  to  their  offspring  and  the  propagation  of  their  species. 
Of  these  thoroughly  associating  and  confederate  animals,  there 
are  none  I  have  ever  heard  of  who  in  bulk  or  strength  exceed 
the  beaver.  The  major  part  of  these  political  animals  and 
creatures  of  a  joint  stock  are  as  inconsiderable  as  the  race  of 
ants  or  bees.  But  had  Nature  assigned  such  an  economy  as 
this  to  so  puissant  an  animal,  for  instance,  as  the  elephant, 
and  made  him  withal  as  prolific  as  those  smaller  creatures 
commonly  are,  it  might  have  gone  hard  perhaps  with  mankind ; 
and  a  single  animal,  who  by  his  proper  might  and  prowess  has 
often  decided  the  fate  of  the  greatest  battles  which  have  been 

292 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

fought  by  human  race,  should  he  have  grown  up  into  a  society, 
with  a  genius  for  architecture  and  mechanics  proportionable  to 
what  we  observe  in  those  smaller  creatures ;  we  should,  with  all 
our  invented  machines,  have  found  it  hard  to  dispute  with  him 
the  dominion  of  the  continent. 

Were  we  in  a  disinterested  view,  or  with  somewhat  less 
selfishness  than  ordinary,  to  consider  the  economies,  parts, 
interests,  conditions  and  terms  of  life,  which  Nature  has  dis- 
tributed and  assigned  to  the  several  species  of  creatures  round 
us,  we  should  not  be  apt  to  think  ourselves  so  hardly  dealt  Avith. 
But  whether  our  lot  in  this  respect  be  just  or  equal,  is  not  the 
question  with  us  at  j)resent.  ^Tis  enough  that  we  know  "  there 
is  certainly  an  assignment  and  distribution  ;  that  each  economy 
or  part  so  distributed  is  in  itself  uniform,  fixed,  and  invariable ; 
and  that  if  anything  in  the  creature  be  accidentally  impaired, 
if  anything  in  the  inward  form,  the  disposition,  temper  or 
affections,  be  contrary  or  unsuitable  to  the  distinct  economy  or 
part,  the  creature  is  wretched  and  unnatural.'" 

The  social  or  natural  affections,  which  our  author  considers 
as  essential  to  the  health,  wholeness,  or  integrity  of  the  particular 
creature,  are  such  as  contribute  to  the  welfare  and  prosperity 
of  that  whole  or  species,  to  which  he  is  by  Nature  joined.  All 
the  affections  of  this  kind  our  author  comprehends  in  that 
single  name  of  natural.  But  as  the  design  or  end  of  Nature  in 
each  animal  system  is  exhibited  chiefly  in  the  support  and 
propagation  of  the  particular  species,  it  happens,  of  consequence, 
that  those  affections  of  earliest  alliance  and  mutual  kindness 
between  the  parent  and  the  offspring  are  known  more  particu- 
larly by  the  name  of  natural  affection.^  However,  since  it  is 
evident  that  all  defect  or  depravity  of  affection  which  counter- 
works or  opposes  the  original  constitution  and  economy  of  the 
ci'eature,  is  unnatural,  it  follows  "  that  in  creatures  who  bv 
their  particular  economy  are  fitted  to  the  strictest  society  and 
rule  of  common  good,  the  most  unnatural  of  all  affections  are 
1  (jTopy^.     For  which  we  have  no  particular  name  in  our  language. 

293 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

those  which  separate  from  this  community ;  and  the  most  truly 
natural,  generous  and  noble  are  those  which  tend  towards 
public  service  and  the  interest  of  the  society  at  large." 

This  is  the  main  problem  which  our  author  in  more  philo- 
sophical terms  demonstrates  in  this  treatise,^  "  that  for  a 
creature  whose  natural  end  is  society,  to  operate  as  is  by  Nature 
appointed  him  towards  the  good  of  such  his  society,  or  whole, 
is  in  reality  to  pursue  his  own  natural  and  proper  good.  And 
that  to  operate  contrariwise,  or  by  such  affections  as  sever  from 
that  common  good  or  public  interest,  is  in  reality  to  work, 
towards  his  own  natural  and  proper  ill.'"  Now  if  man,  as  has 
been  proved,  be  justly  ranked  in  the  number  of  those  creatures 
whose  economy  is  according  to  a  joint-stock  and  public  weal ; 
if  it  be  understood,  withal,  that  the  only  state  of  his  affections 
which  answers  rightly  to  this  public  weal  is  the  regular,  orderly, 
or  virtuous  state ;  it  necessarily  follows  "  that  virtue  is  his 
natural  good,  and  vice  his  misery  and  ill."" 

As  for  that  further  consideration,  "  whether  Nature  has 
orderly  and  justly  distributed  the  several  economies  or  parts, 
and  whether  the  defects,  failures,  or  calamities  of  particular 
systems  are  to  the  advantage  of  all  in  general,  and  contribute 
to  the  perfection  of  the  one  common  and  universal  system  *" ; 
we  must  refer  to  our  author's  profounder  speculation  in  this 
his  Inquiry,  and  in  his  following  philosophic  dialogue.  But  if 
what  he  advances  in  this  respect  be  real,  or  at  least  the  most 
probable  by  far  of  any  scheme  or  representation  which  can  be 
made  of  the  universal  nature  and  Cause  of  things ;  it  will  follow 
"  that  since  man  has  been  so  constituted,  by  means  of  his  rational 
part,  as  to  be  conscious  of  this  his  more  immediate  relation  to 
the  universal  system  and  principle  of  order  and  intelligence ; 
he  is  not  only  by  Nature  sociable  within  the  limits  of  his  own 
species  or  kind,  but  in  a  yet  more  generous  and  extensive 
manner.  He  is  not  only  born  to  virtue,  friendship,  honesty, 
and  faith ;  but  to  religion,  piety,  adoration,  and  a  generous 
^  Viz,  the  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue. 

294 


MISCELLANEOUS   KEFLECTIONS 

surrender  ^  of  his  mind  to  whatever  happens  from  that  Supreme 
Cause  or  order  of  things,  which  he  acknowledges  entirely  just 
and  perfect."" 

These  are  our  author's  formal  and  grave  sentiments,  which 
if  they  were  not  truly  his  and  sincerely  espoused  by  him  as  the 
real  result  of  his  best  judgment  and  understanding,  he  would 
be  guilty  of  a  more  than  common  degree  of  imposture.  For, 
according  to  his  own  rule,"  an  affected  gravity  and  feigned 
seriousness  carried  on  through  any  subject,  in  such  a  manner  as 
to  leave  no  insight  into  the  fiction  or  intended  raillery,  is  in 
truth  no  raillery  or  wit  at  all ;  but  a  gross,  immoral,  and 
illiberal  way  of  abuse,  foreign  to  the  character  of  a  good  writer, 
a  gentleman,  or  man  of  worth. 

But  since  we  have  thus  acquitted  ourselves  of  that  serious 
part,  of  which  our  reader  was  beforehand  well  apprised,  let  him 
now  expect  us  again  in  our  original  miscellaneous  manner  and 
capacity.  "'TIS  here,  as  has  been  explained  to  him,  that  raillery 
and  humour  are  permitted,  and  flights,  sallies,  and  excursions  of 
every  kind  are  found  agreeable  and  requisite.  Without  this, 
there  might  be  less  safety  found,  perhaps,  in  thinking.  Every 
light  reflection  might  run  us  up  to  the  dangerous  state  of 
meditation.  And  in  reality  profound  thinking  is  many  times 
the  cause  of  shallow  thoughts.  To  prevent  this  contemplative 
habit  and  character,  of  which  we  see  so  little  good  effect  in  the 
world,  we  have  reason  perhaps  to  be  fond  of  the  diverting 
manner  in  writing  and  discourse,  especially  if  the  subject  be  of  a 
solemn  kind.  There  is  more  need,  in  this  case,  to  interrupt  the 
long-spun  thread  of  reasoning,  and  bring  into  the  mind,  by  many 
different  glances  and  broken  views,  what  cannot  so  easily  be 
introduced  by  one  steady  bent  or  continued  stretch  of  sight. 

^  Treatise  iv.  bk.  i.  part  iii.  §  ^,  near  end. 
-  Treatise  ii.  part  i.  §  2. 


295 


MISCELLANY   V 


CHAPTER   I 

Ceremonial  adjusted  between  author  and  reader  —  Affectation  of  pre- 
cedency in  the  former  —  Various  claims  to  inspiration  —  Bards, 
prophets.  Sibylline  Scripture  — ^Fritteu  oracles,  in  verse  and  prose 
— Common  interest  of  ancient  letters  and  Christianity^State  of  wit, 
elegance,  and  correctness — Poetic  truth — Preparation  for  criticism 
on  our  author  in  his  concluding  treatise. 

Of  all  the  artificial  relations  formed  between  mankind,  the  most 
capricious  and  variable  is  that  of  author  and  reader.  Our 
author,  for  his  part,  has  declared  his  opinion  of  this,  where  he 
gives  his  advice  to  modern  authors.^  And  though  he  supposes 
that  every  author  in  form  is,  in  respect  of  the  particular  matter 
he  explains,  superior  in  understanding  to  his  reader,  yet  he 
allows  not  that  any  author  should  assume  the  upper  hand,  or 
pretend  to  withdraw  himself  from  that  necessary  subjection  to 
foreign  judgment  and  criticism,  which  must  determine  the  place 
of  honour  on  the  reader''s  side. 

'Tis  evident  that  an  author's  art  and  labour  are  for  his 
reader''s  sake  alone.  'Tis  to  his  reader  he  makes  his  application, 
if  not  openly  and  avowedly,  yet  at  least  with  implicit  courtship. 
Poets  indeed,  and  especially  those  of  a  modern  kind,  have  a 
peculiar  manner  of  treating  this  affair  with  a  high  hand.  They 
pretend  to  set  themselves  above  mankind,  "Their  })ens  are 
sacred,  their  style  and  utterance  divine."     They  write  often  as 

^  Vh.  Treatise  in. 

296 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

in  a  language  foreign  to  human  kind,  and  would  disdain  to  be 
reminded  of  those  poor  elements  of  speech,  their  alphabet  and 
grammar. 

But  here  inferior  mortals  presume  often  to  intercept  their 
flight  and  remind  them  of  their  fallible  and  human  part.  Had 
those  first  })oets  who  began  this  pretence  to  inspiration  been 
taught  a  manner  of  communicating  their  rapturous  thoughts 
and  high  ideas  by  some  other  medium  than  that  of  style  and 
language,  the  case  might  have  stood  otherwise.  But  the  inspiring 
divinity  or  muse  having,  in  the  explanation  of  herself,  submitted 
her  wit  and  sense  to  the  mechanic  rules  of  human  arbitrary 
composition ;  she  must  in  consequence  and  by  necessity  submit 
herself  to  human  arbitration  and  the  judgment  of  the  literate 
world.  And  thus  the  reader  is  still  superior  and  keeps  the 
upper  hand. 

'Tis  indeed  no  small  absurdity  to  assert  a  work  or  treatise, 
written  in  human  language,  to  be  above  human  criticism  or 
censure.  For  if  the  art  of  writino;  be  from  the  orammatical 
rules  of  human  invention  and  determination  ;  if  even  these  rules 
are  formed  on  casual  practice  and  various  use,  there  can  be  no 
scripture  but  what  must  of  necessity  be  subject  to  the  reader's 
narrow  scrutiny  and  strict  judgment,  unless  a  language  and 
grammar,  different  from  any  of  human  structure,  were  delivered 
down  from  heaven,  and  miraculously  accommodated  to  human 
service  and  capacity. 

'Tis  no  otherwise  in  the  grammatical  art  of  characters  and 
painted  speech  than  in  the  art  of  painting  itself.  I  have  seen, 
in  certain  Christian  churches,  an  ancient  piece  or  two,  affirmed, 
on  the  solemn  faith  of  priestly  tradition,  "  to  have  been  angelic- 
ally and  divinely  wrought  by  a  supernatural  hand  and  sacred 
pencil.'"  Had  the  piece  happened  to  be  of  a  hand  like  RaphaePs 
I  could  have  found  nothing  certain  to  oppose  to  this  tradition. 
But  having  observed  the  whole  style  and  manner  of  the  pretended 
heavenly  workmanshij}  to  be  so  indifferent  as  to  vary  in  many 
particulars  from  the  truth  of  art,  I  ])resumed  within  myself  to 

297 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

beg  pardon  of  the  tradition  and  assert  confidently, "  that  if  the 
pencil  had  been  heaven-guided  it  could  never  have  been  so  lame 
in  its  performance."  It  being  a  mere  contradiction  to  all  divine 
and  moral  ti'uth  that  a  celestial  hand,  submitting  itself  to  the 
rudiments  of  a  human  art,  should  sin  against  the  art  itself,  and 
express  falsehood  and  error  instead  of  justness  and  proportion. 

It  may  be  alleged,  perhaps,  "  that  there  are  however  certain 
authors  in  the  world  Avho,  though  of  themselves  they  neither 
boldly  claim  the  privilege  of  divine  inspiration  nor  carry  indeed 
the  least  resemblance  of  perfection  in  their  style  or  composition, 
yet  they  subdue  the  reader,  gain  the  ascendant  over  his  thought 
and  judgment,  and  force  from  him  a  certain  implicit  veneration 
and  esteem.""  To  this  I  can  only  answer,  "  that  if  there  be 
neither  spell  nor  enchantment  in  the  case,  this  can  plainly  be 
no  other  than  mere  enthusiasm " ;  except,  perhaps,  where  the 
supreme  powers  have  given  their  sanction  to  any  religious  record 
or  pious  writ.  And  in  this  case,  indeed,  it  becomes  immoral 
and  profane  in  any  one  to  deny  absolutely  or  dispute  the  sacred 
authority  of  the  least  line  or  syllable  contained  in  it.  But  should 
the  record,  instead  of  being  single,  short,  and  uniform,  appear  to 
be  multifarious,  voluminous,  and  of  the  most  difficult  interpreta- 
tion, it  would  be  somewhat  hard,  if  not  wholly  impracticable  in 
the  magistrate  to  suffer  this  record  to  be  universally  current, 
and  at  the  same  time  prevent  its  being  variously  apprehended 
and  descanted  on  by  the  several  differing  geniuses  and  contrary 
judgments  of  mankind. 

'Tis  remarkable,  that  in  the  politest  of  all  nations  the 
writings  looked  upon  as  most  sacred  were  those  of  their  great 
poets,  whose  works  indeed  were  truly  divine  in  respect  of  art  and 
the  perfection  of  their  frame  and  composition.  But  there  was 
yet  more  divinity  ^  ascribed  to  them  than  what  is  comprehended 
in  this  latter  sense.  The  notions  of  vulgar  religion  were  built 
on  their  miraculous  narrations.  The  wiser  and  better  sort  them- 
selves paid  a  regard  to  them  in  this  respect,  though  thev 
^  Supra,  p.  251  in  the  notes. 

298 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

interpreted  them  indeed  more  allegorically.  Even  the  philo- 
sophers who  criticised  them  with  most  severity  were  not  their 
least  admirers,  when  they  ascribed  ^  to  them  that  divine  inspira- 
tion or  sublime  enthusiasm  of  which  our  author  has  largely 
treated  elsewhere.- 

It  would,  indeed,  ill  become  any  pretender  to  divine  writing 
to  publish  his  work  under  a  character  of  divinity,  if,  after  all 
his  endeavours,  he  came  short  of  a  consummate  and  just  per- 
formance. In  this  respect  the  Cumean  Sibyl  was  not  so  indiscreet 
or  frantic  as  she  might  appear,  perhaps,  by  writing  her  prophetic 
warnings  and  pretended  inspirations  upon  joint  leaves,  which, 
immediately  after  their  elaborate  superscription,  were  torn  in 
pieces  and  scattered  by  the  wind. 

Insanam  vatem  aspicies  ;  quae  rupe  sub  ima 
Fata  canit,  foliisque^  notas  et  noniina  mandat. 
Quaecunque  in  foliis  descripsit  carmina  virgo, 
Digerit  in  numerum,  atque  anti'o  seelusa  relinquit. 
Ilia  manent  immota  locis,  neque  ab  ordine  cedunt. 
Verum  eadem,  verso  tenuis  cum  cardine  ventus 
Inpulit,  et  teneras  turbavit  janua  frondes  ; 
Nunquam  deinde  cavo  volitantia  prendere  saxo. 
Nee  revocare  situs,  aut  jungei-e  carmina  curat. 
Inconsulti  abeunt,  sedemque  odere  Sibyllae.^ 

'Twas  impossible  to  disprove  the  divinity  of  such  writings 
whilst  they  could   be   perused   only  in  fragments.     Had   the 

^  Treatise  i.  end. 

2  Viz.  Letter  of  Enthusiasm.     And  above^  Misc.  ii.  ch.  i.  2. 

^  ["  You  will  see  an  inspired  prophetess,  who  chants  destiny  at  the 
foot  of  her  rock  and  entrusts  her  marks  and  words  to  leaves.  ^Vhatever 
lines  the  maid  has  written  on  the  leaves,  she  sorts  into  order  and  shuts 
them  within  her  cave.  There  they  remain  unmoved  nor  shift  from  their 
order.  Yet  when  the  hinge  turns  and  a  breath  of  wind  has  stirred  them, 
and  the  door  has  disordered  the  light  leaves,  never  thereafter  does  she 
trouble  to  capture  them  as  they  flutter  in  her  cavern  or  to  restore  their 
order  or  join  the  leaves.  Away  men  go  without  advice  and  hate  the 
Sibyl's  home." — Virgil,  Aeneid,  iii.  44.3-452.] 

299 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAIIACTERISTICS 

sister  priestess  of  Delphos,  who  delivered  herself  in  audible 
plain  metre,  been  found  at  any  time  to  have  transgressed  the 
rule  of  verse,  it  would  have  been  difficult  in  those  days  to 
father  the  lame  poetry  upon  Apollo  himself  But  where  the 
invention  of  the  leaves  prevented  the  reading  of  a  single  line 
entire,  whatever  interpretations  might  have  been  made  of  this 
fragile  and  volatile  scripture,  no  imperfection  could  be  charged 
on  the  original  text  itself. 

What  those  volumes  ^  may  have  been  which  the  disdainful 
Sibyl  or  prophetess  committed  to  the  flames,  or  what  the 
remainder  was  which  the  Roman  prince  received  and  con- 
secrated, I  will  not  pretend  to  judge;  though  it  has  been 
admitted  for  truth  by  the  ancient  Christian  fathers,  that  these 
writings  Avere  so  far  sacred  and  divine  as  to  have  prophesied  of 
the  birth  of  our  religious  founder,  and  bore  testimony  to  that 
Holy  Writ  which  has  preserved  his  memory,  and  is  justly  held  in 
the  hiohest  deg^ree  sacred  among  Christians. 

The  policy,  however,  of  old  Rome  was  such  as  not  absolutely 
to  rest  the  authority  of  their  religion  on  any  composition  of 
literature.  The  Sibylline  volumes  were  kept  safely  locked,  and 
inspected  only  by  such  as  were  ordained  or  deputed  for  that 
purpose.  And  in  this  policy  the  new  Rome  has  followed  their 
example  in  scrupling  to  annex  the  supreme  authority  and  sacred 
character  of  infallibility  to  Scripture  itself,  and  in  refusing  to 
submit  that  Scripture  to  public  judgment,  or  to  any  eye  or 
ear  but  what  they  qualify  for  the  inspection  of  such  sacred 
mysteries. 

^  Libri  tres  in  sacrarium  couditi,  Sibylliui  appellati.  Ad  eos  quasi  ad 
oraculum  quiiidecimviri  adeunt,  cum  dii  immortales  publice  consulendi 
sunt.  Aul.  Gell.  i.  19;  Plin.  xiii.  13.  ["The  three  books  were 
placed  in  a  shrine  and  called  the  Sibyl's  books.  Tlie  College  of 
Fifteen  consults  them,  like  an  oracle,  wllene^•er  the  Gods  have  to  be 
consulted  by  the  state."]  But  of  this  first  Sibylline  scripture,  and  of 
other  canonised  books  and  additional  sacred  writ  among  the  Romans,  see 
what  Dionysius  Halicarnasseus  cites  (from  Varro's  Roman  Theologies)  in  his 
History,  iv.  02. 

300 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

The  Mahometan  clergy  seem  to  have  a  different  poHcy. 
They  boldly  rest  the  foundation  of  their  religion  on  a  book  : 
such  a  one  as  (according  to  their  pretension)  is  not  only  perfect, 
but  inimitable.  Were  a  real  man  of  letters  and  a  just  critic 
permitted  to  examine  this  scripture  by  the  known  rules  of  art, 
he  would  soon  perhaps  refute  this  plea.  But  so  barbarous  is 
the  accompanying  policy  and  temper  of  these  Eastern  religion- 
ists that  they  discourage  and  in  effect  extinguish  all  true 
learning,  science,  and  the  politer  arts,  in  company  with  the 
ancient  authors  and  languages,  which  they  set  aside ;  and  by 
this  infallible  method  leave  their  sacred  writ  the  sole  standard 
of  literate  performance.  For  being  compared  to  nothing  besides 
itself,  or  what  is  of  an  inferior  kind,  it  must  undoubtedly  be 
thought  incomparable. 

'Twill  be  yielded,  surely,  to  the  honour  of  the  Christian 
world,  that  their  faith  (especially  that  of  the  Protestant 
churches)  stands  on  a  more  generous  foundation.  They  not 
only  allow  comparison  of  authors,  but  are  content  to  derive 
their  proofs  of  the  validity  of  their  sacred  record  and  revelation 
even  from  those  authors  called  profane ;  as  being  well  apprised, 
(according  to  the  maxim  of  our  Divine  Master  ^)  "  that  in  what 
we  bear  witness  only  to  ourselves,  our  witness  cannot  be 
established  as  a  truth."  So  that,  there  being  at  present  no 
immediate  testimony  of  miracle  or  sign  in  behalf  of  Holy  Writ, 
and  there  being  in  its  own  particular  composition  or  style 
nothino;  miraculous  or  self-convincing ;  if  the  collateral  testi- 
mony  of  other  ancient  records,  historians,  and  foreign  authors 
were  destroyed  or  wholly  lost,  there  would  be  less  argument  or 
plea  remaining  against  that  natural  susjjicion  of  those  who  are 
called  sceptical,  "  that  the  holy  records  themselves  were  no 
other  than  the  pure  invention  or  artificial  compilement  of  an 
interested  party  in  behalf  of  the  richest  corporation  and  most 
profitable  monopoly  which  could  be  erected  in  the  world." 

Thus,  in  reality,  the  interest  of  our  pious  clergy  is  necessarily 
1  John  V.  31. 

301 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

joined  with  that  of  ancient  letters  and  pohte  learning.  By  this 
they  perpetually  refute  the  crafty  arguments  of  those  objectors. 
When  they  abandon  this,  they  resign  their  cause.  When  they 
strike  at  it,  they  strike  even  at  the  root  and  foundation  of  our 
holy  faith,  and  weaken  that  pillar  on  which  the  whole  fabric  of 
our  religion  depends. 

It  belongs  to  mere  enthusiasts  and  fanatics  to  plead  the 
sufficiency  of  a  reiterate  translated  text,  derived  to  them  through 
so  many  channels  and  subjected  to  so  many  variations,  of  which 
they  are  wholly  ignorant.  Yet  would  they  persuade  us,  it 
seems,  that  from  hence  alone  they  can  recognise  the  Divine 
Spirit  and  receive  it  in  themselves,  unsubject  (as  they  imagine) 
to  any  rule,  and  superior  to  what  they  themselves  often  call 
the  dead  letter  and  unprofitable  science.  This,  any  one  may 
see,  is  building  castles  in  the  air  and  demolishing  them 
again  at  pleasure,  as  the  exercise  of  an  aerial  fancy  or  heated 
imagination. 

But  the  judicious  divines  of  the  established  Christian 
churches  have  sufficiently  condemned  this  manner.  They  are 
far  from  resting  their  religion  on  the  common  aspect  or  obvious 
form  of  their  vulgar  Bible,  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  printed 
copy  or  modern  version.  Neither  do  they  in  the  original 
itself  represent  it  to  us  as  a  very  masterpiece  of  writing,  or  as 
absolutely  perfect  in  the  purity  and  justness  either  of  style  or 
composition.  They  allow  the  holy  authors  to  have  written 
according  to  their  best  faculties,  and  the  strength  of  their 
natural  genius :  "  A  shepherd  like  a  shepherd ;  and  a  prince 
like  a  prince.  A  man  of  reading,  and  advanced  in  letters,  like 
a  proficient  in  the  kind ;  and  a  man  of  meaner  capacity  and 
reading,  like  one  of  the  ordinary  sort,  in  his  own  common  idiom 
and  imperfect  manner  of  narration." 

'Tis  the  substance  only  of  the  narrative,  and  the  principal 
facts  confirming  the  authority  of  the  revelation,  which  our 
divines  think  themselves  concerned  to  prove,  according  to  the 
best  evidence  of  which  the  matter  itself  is  capable.     And  whilst 

302 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

the  sacred  authors  themselves  allude  not  only  to  the  annals  and 
histories  of  the  heathen  world,  but  even  to  the  philosophical 
works,  the  regular  poems,^  the  very  plays  and  comedies  -  of  the 
learned  and  polite  ancients,  it  must  be  owned  that,  as  those 
ancient  writings  are  impaired  or  lost,  not  only  the  light  and 
clearness  of  Holy  Writ,  but  even  the  evidence  itself  of  its  main 
facts,  must  in  proportion  be  diminished  and  brought  in  question. 
So  ill  advised  were  those  devout  churchmen  ^  heretofore,  who  in 

*  Aratus,  Acts  xvii.  28;  and  Epimeiiides,  Titus  i.  12^  "even  one  of 
their  own  prophets  "  ;  for  so  the  holy  apostle  deij^ned  to  speak  of  a  heathen 
poet,  a  physiologist,  and  divine,  who  prophesied  of  events,  wrought 
miracles,  and  was  received  as  an  inspired  writer  and  author  of  revelations 
in  the  chief  cities  and  states  of  Greece. 

2  Menander,  1  Cor.  xv.  33. 

^  pjven  in  the  sixth  century  the  famed  Gregorius,  Bishop  of  Rome, 
who  is  so  highly  celebrated  for  having  planted  the  Christian  religion  by 
his  missionary  monks  in  our  English  nation  of  heathen  Saxons,  was  so  far 
from  being  a  cultivator  or  supporter  of  arts  or  letters,  that  he  carried  on  a 
kind  of  general  massacre  upon  every  product  of  human  wit.  His  own 
words  in  a  letter  to  one  of  the  French  bishops,  a  man  of  the  highest  con- 
sideration and  merit  (as  a  noted  modern  critic  and  satirical  genius  of  that 
nation  acknowledges),  are  as  follow  : — Perveuit  ad  nos  quod  sine  verecundia 
memorare  non  possumus,  fraternitatem  tuam  grammaticam  (juibusdam 
exponere.  Quam  rem  ita  moleste  suscepimus,  ac  sumus  vehementius 
aspernati,  ut  ea  (juae  prius  dicta  fuerunt,  in  gemitum  et  tristitiam  ver- 
teremus,  quia  in  uno  se  ore  cum  Jovis  laudibus  Christi  laudes  non  capiunt. 
.  .  .  Uude  si  post  hoc  evidenter  ea  cjuae  ad  nos  perlata  sunt,  falsa  esse 
clarueriut,  nee  vos  uugis  et  secularibus  Uteris  studere  contigerit,  Deo 
nostro  gratias  agimus,  qui  cor  vestrum  maculari  blasphemis  nefandorum 
laudibus  nou  permisit. — Gregorii  Opera,  Epixt.  xlviii.  'J,  Paris,  ann. 
1533.  [*'  A  story  has  reached  me  which  I  am  ashamed  to  mention,  that 
your  brotherhood  teaches  certain  pupils  grammar  !  This  news  I  received 
with  such  grief  and  rejected  with  such  scoi-n  that  1  turned  what  was  said 
before  into  groans  and  lamentations ;  for  one  mouth  cannot  hold  the 
praise  of  Jupiter  and  of  Christ  too.  ...  So  if  hereafter  the  news  ])roves 
false,  and  you  have  not  spent  your  time  upon  trifles  and  worldly  literature, 
I  return  thanks  to  God,  who  would  not  have  your  hearts  stained  with  the 
blasphemous  praise  of  the  wicked."]  And  in  his  dedication,  or  first 
preface  to  ;his  Morals,  after  some  very  insipid  rhetoric  and  figurative 
dialect,  employed  against  the  study  and  art  of  speech,  he  has  another  fling 

303 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

the  height  of  zeal  did  their  utmost  to  destroy  all  footsteps  of 
heathen  literature,  and  consequently  all  further  use  of  learning 
or  antiquity. 

But  happily  the  zeal  of  this  kind  is  now  left  as  proper  only 
to  those  despised  and    ignorant  modern   enthusiasts  we  have 

at  the  classic  authors  and  discipline,  betraying  his  inveterate  hatred  to 
ancient  learning,  as  well  as  the  natural  effect  of  this  zealot-passion,  in  his 
own  barbarity  both  of  style  and  manners.  His  words  are  : — Unde  et 
ipsam  artem  loquendi,  quam  magisteria  disciplinae  exterioris  insinuant, 
servare  despexi.  Nam  sicut  hujus  quoque  epistolae  tenor  euunciat,  non 
metacismi  collisionem  fugio ;  non  barbarismi  coufusionem  devito,  situs 
motus(|ue  praepositionum  casus(|ue  servare  contemno ;  quia  indignum 
vehementer  existimo,  ut  verba  coelestis  oraculi  restringam  sub  regulis 
Donati.  ["  So  I  think  scorn  of  observing  even  the  art  of  speech,  which  the 
wider  education  is  bringing  in  upon  us.  For,  as  the  course  of  this  letter 
shows,  I  do  not  avoid  the  frecjuent  use  of  M  ;  I  do  not  shun  barbarisms ; 
I  despise  rules  about  the  position  or  the  changing  or  the  cases  of  preposi- 
tions :  for  I  strongly  hold  it  to  be  unfitting  to  bind  the  words  of  heaven 
by  the  rules  of  Donatus."]  'lliat  he  carried  this  savage  zeal  of  his  so  far 
as  to  destroy  (what  in  him  lay)  the  whole  body  of  learning,  with  all  the 
classic  authors  then  in  being,  was  generally  believed.  And  (what  was  yet 
more  notorious  and  unnatural  in  a  Roman  ])ontiff)  the  destruction  of  the 
statues,  sculptures,  and  finest  pieces  of  antiquity  in  Rome,  was  charged  on 
him  by  his  successor  in  the  see  ;  as,  besides  Platina,  another  writer  of  his 
life,  without  the  least  apology,  confesses.  See  in  the  above-cited  edition 
of  St.  Gregory's  works,  at  the  beginning,  viz.  Vita  D.  Gregorii  ex  Joan. 
Laziardo  Coelestiuo.  'Tis  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  other  writers  have 
given  account  of  that  sally  of  the  prelate's  zeal  against  the  books  and 
learning  of  the  ancients,  for  which  the  reason  alleged  was  very  extra- 
ordinary, "  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  would  be  the  better  relished  and 
receive  a  considerable  advantage  by  the  destruction  of  these  rivals."  It 
seems  they  had  no  very  high  idea  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  when  they 
supposed  them  such  losers  by  a  comparison.  However,  'twas  thought 
advisable  by  other  fathers  (who  had  a  like  view)  to  frame  new  pieces  of 
literature  after  the  model  of  these  condemned  ancients.  Hence  those 
ridiculous  attempts  of  new  heroic  poems,  new  epics  and  dramatics,  new 
Homers,  Euripides,  Meuanders,  which  were  with  so  much  pains  and  so 
little  effect  industriously  set  afoot  by  the  zealous  priesthood ;  when 
ignorance  prevailed,  and  the  hierarchal  dominion  was  so  universal.  But 
though  their  power  had  well  nigh  compassed  the  destruction  of  those 

304 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

described.  The  Roman  Church  itself  is  so  recovered  from  this 
primitive  fanaticism  that  their  great  men,  and  even  their 
pontiffs,  are  found  ready  to  give  their  helping  hand,  and  confer 
their  bounty  liberally  towards  the  advancement  of  all  ancient 
and  polite  learning.^  They  justly  observe  that  their  very 
traditions  stand  in  need  of  some  collateral  proof.  The  con- 
servation of  these  other  ancient  and  disinterested  authors  they 
wisely  judge  essential  to  the  credibility  of  those  principal  facts, 
on  which  the  whole  religious  history  and  tradition  depend. 

'Twould  indeed  be  in  vain  for  us  to  bring  a  Pontius  Pilate 
into  our  Creed,  and  recite  what  happened  under  him  in  Judea, 
if  we    knew   not   "  under  whom   he   himself  governed,   whose 

great  origintils,  they  were  far  from  being  able  to  procure  any  reception 
for  tlieir  puny  imitations.  The  mock  works  have  hiin  in  their  deserved 
obscurity,  as  will  all  otlier  attempts  of  that  kind,  concerning  which  our 
author  has  already  given  his  opinion.  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  3.  But  as  to  the 
ill  policy  as  well  as  barbarity  of  this  zealot — enmity  against  the  works 
of  the  ancients,  a  foreign  Protestant  divine,  and  most  learned  defender  of 
religion,  making  the  best  excuse  he  can  for  the  Greek  Fathers,  and 
endeavouring  to  clear  them  from  this  general  charge  of  havoc  and  massacre 
committed  upon  science  and  erudition,  has  tliese  words  :  "  Si  cela  est, 
voila  encore  un  nouveau  sujet  de  mepriser  les  patriarches  de  Constanti- 
nople qui  n'etoient  d'ailleurs  rien  moins  que  gens  de  bien  ;  mais  j'ai  de  la 
peine  a  le  croire,  parce  qu'il  nous  est  reste  de  poetes  inliuiment  plus  sales 
que  ceux  qui  se  sont  perdus.  Personne  ne  doute  qu'Aristophane  ne  soit 
beaucoup  plus  sale  que  n'etoit  Menandre.  Plutarque  en  est  un  bon 
temoin  dans  la  comparaison  qu'il  a  faite  de  ces  deux  poetes.  II  pourroit 
etre  neanmoins  arrive,  que  quelques  eccle'siastiques  emiemis  des  belles 
lettres  en  eussent  use  comme  dit  Chalcondyle,  sans  penser  (ju'en  con- 
servant  toute  I'antiquite'  grecque,  ils  conserveroient  la  langue  de  leurs 
predecesseurs  et  une  infinite  de  faits  qui  servoient  beaucoup  a  I'intelligence 
et  a  la  confirmation  de  I'histoire  sacrce,  et  meme  de  la  religion  chrc'tienne. 
Ces  geus-la  devoient  au  moins  nous  conserver  les  histoires  anciennes  des 
Orientaux,  comme  des  Chalde'ens,  des  Tyriens,  et  des  Lgyptiens  ;  mais  ils 
agissoient  plus  par  ignorance  et  par  negligence  que  par  raison."—  Bibl. 
Chois.,  xiv.  131,  132,  133. 

*  Such  a  one  is  the  present  prince,  Clement  XI. ,  au  encourager  of  all 
arts  and  sciences. 

VOL.  II  305  X 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

authority  he  had,  or  what  character  he  bore  in  that  remote 
country  and  amidst  a  foreign  people."  In  the  same  manner, 
'twould  be  in  vain  for  a  Roman  pontiff  to  derive  his  title  to 
spiritual  sovereignty  from  the  seat,  influence,  power,  and  dona- 
tion of  the  Roman  Caesars  and  their  successors,  if  it  appeared 
not  by  any  history  or  collateral  testimony  "  who  the  first 
Caesars  were,  and  how  they  came  possessed  of  that  universal 
power  and  long  residence  of  dominion." 

My  reader,  doubtless,  by  this  time  must  begin  to  wonder 
through  what  labyrinth  of  speculation  and  odd  texture  of 
capricious  reflections  I  am  offering  to  conduct  him.  But  he 
will  not,  I  presume,  be  altogether  displeased  with  me  when  I 
give  him  to  understand  that,  being  now  come  into  my  last 
Miscellany,  and  being  sensible  of  the  little  courtship  I  have 
paid  him,  comparatively  with  what  is  practised  in  that  kind  by 
other  modern  authors,  I  am  willing,  by  way  of  compensation, 
to  express  my  loyalty  or  homage  towards  him,  and  show  by  my 
natural  sentiments  and  principles  "  what  particular  deference 
and  high  respect  I  think  to  be  his  due." 

The  issue  therefore  of  this  long  deduction  is,  in  the  first 
place,  with  due  compliments,  in  my  capacity  of  author,  and  in 
the  name  of  all  modest  workmen  willingly  joining  with  me  in 
this  representation,  to  congratulate  our  English  reader  on  the 
establishment  of  what  is  so  advantageous  to  himself — I  mean 
that  mutual  relation  between  him  and  ourselves,  which  naturally 
turns  so  much  to  his  advantage  and  makes  us  to  be  in  reality 
the  subservient  party.  And  in  this  respect  'tis  to  be  hoped  he 
will  long  enjoy  his  just  superiority  and  privilege  over  his 
humble  servants  who  compose  and  labour  for  his  sake.  The 
relation,  in  all  likelihood,  must  still  continue  and  be  improved. 
Our  common  religion  and  Christianity,  founded  on  letters  and 
Scripture,  promises  thus  much.  Nor  is  this  hope  likely  to  fail 
us  whilst  readers  are  really  allowed  the  liberty  to  read — that  is 
to  say,  to  examine,  construe,  and  remark  with  understanding. 
Learning   and   science   must   of  necessity   flourish,  whilst  the 

306 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

lano'uaffe  of  the  wisest  and  most  learned  of  nations  is  acknow- 
ledged  to  contain  the  principal  and  essential  part  of  our  holy 
revelation.  And  criticism,  examinations,  judgments,  literate 
lahours,  and  inquiries  must  still  be  in  repute  and  practice, 
whilst  ancient  authors,  so  necessary  to  the  support  of  the  sacred 
volumes,  are  in  request,  and  afford  employment  of  such  infinite 
extent  to  us  moderns,  of  whatever  degree,  avIio  are  desirous  to 
signalise  ourselves  by  any  achievement  in  letters,  and  be  con- 
sidered as  the  investigators  of  knowledge  and  politeness. 

I  may  undoubtedly,  by  virtue  of  my  preceding  argument  in 
behalf  of  criticism,  be  allowed,  without  suspicion  of  flattery  or 
mere  courtship,  to  assert  the  reader's  privilege  above  the  author, 
and  assign  to  him,  as  I  have  done,  the  upper  hand  and  place  of 
honour.  As  to  fact,  we  know  for  certain  that  the  greatest  of 
philosophers,  the  very  founder  of  philosophy  itself,^  was  no 
author.  Nor  did  the  Divine  Author  and  Founder  of  our  religion 
condescend  to  be  an  author  in  this  other  respect.  He  who 
could  best  have  given  us  the  history  of  his  own  life,  with  the 
entire  sermons  and  divine  discourses  which  he  made  in  public, 
was  pleased  to   leave  it  to  others  "  to   take  in  hand."  -      As 

1  Socrates. 

2  So  Luke  i.  1,  2,  3,  4  :  "(1)  Forasmuch  as  many  have  taken  in  hand 
to  set  forth  in  order  a  declaration  (exposition  or  narrative,  dirjyrjaiv)  of 
those  things  whicli  are  most  surely  belie\'ed  among  (or  were  fulfilled  in 
or  among)  us,  (2)  Even  as  they  delivered  them  unto  us,  which  from  the 
beginning  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the  word  ;  (.■])  It  seemed 
good  to  me  also,  having  had  perfect  understanding  of  all  things  from  the 
very  first  (or  having  looked  back  and  searched  accurately  into  all  matters 
from  the  beginning  or  highest  time,  TrapijKoXovdrjKdTi  SLvudev  iracxLv  aKpi^ws), 
to  write  unto  thee  in  order,  most  excellent  Theophilus,  (4)  That  thou 
mightest  know  the  certainty  (or  validity,  sound  discussion,  do-^aXftac)  of 
those  things  wherein  tliou  hast  been  instructed  (or  catechised),  vepl  wv 
KaTTfxvSv^-"  ^V  hether  the  words  Tre-n-X-ijpocpoprj/xii'wi'  ec  tj/xli'  in  the  first  verse 
should  be  rendered  "believed  among,"  or  "fulfilled  in,"  or  "among  us," 
may  depend  on  the  difl^erent  reading  of  the  original.  For  in  some  copies  the 
iv  next  following  is  left  out.  However,  the  exact  interpreters  or  verbal 
translators  render  it  "fulfilled"  :  ride  Ar.  Montan.,  edit.  Plantin.,  1584. 

307 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

there  were  many,  it  seems,  long  afterwards,  who  did,  and  under- 
took accordingly  "  to  write  in  order,  and  as  seemed  good  to 
them,  for  the  better  information  of  particular  persons,  what 
was  then  believed  among  the  initiated  or  catechised  from 
tradition  and  early  instruction  in  their  youth,  or  what  had 
been  transmitted  by  report  from  such  as  were  the  presumed 
auditors  and  eye-witnesses  of  those  things  in  former  time." 

Whether  those  sacred  books  ascribed  to  the  divine  lesis- 
lator  of  the  Jews,  and  which  treat  of  his  death,  burial,  and 
succession,^  as  well  as  of  his  life  and  actions,  are  strictly  to  be 
understood  as  coming  from  the  immediate  pen  of  that  holy 
founder,  or  rather  from  some  other  inspired  hand  guided  by 
the  same  influencing  spirit,  I  will  not  presume  so  much  as  to 
examine  or  inquire.  But  in  general  we  find  that,  both  as  to 
public  concerns,  in  religion,  and  in  philosophy,  the  great  and 
eminent  actors  were  of  a  rank  superior  to  the  writing  worthies. 
The  great  Athenian  legislator,^  though  noted  as  a  poetical 
genius,  cannot  be  esteemed  an  author  for  the  sake  of  some 
few  verses  he  may  occasionally  have  made.  Nor  was  the  great 
Spartan  founder^  a  poet  himself,  though  author  or  redeemer 
(if  I  may  so  express  it)  to  the  greatest  and  best  of  poets,'*  who 
owed  in  a  manner  his  form  and  being  to  the  accurate  searches 
and  collections  of  that  great  patron.  The  politicians  and  civil 
sages,  who  were  fitted  in  all   respects  for  the  great  scene  of 

In  verse  4  the  word  certainty,  aacpaXeiav,  is  interpreted  aKpi^eiav,  validity, 
soundness,  good  foundation,  from  the  sense  of  the  preceding  verse.  See 
the  late  edition  of  our  learned  Dr.  Mill,  ex  recensione  Kusteri,  Rot.  1710. 
For  the  word  catechised,  kutyixvOv^  (the  last  of  the  fourth  verse),  Rob. 
Constantine  has  this  explanation  of  it :  "  Priscis  theologis  apud  Aegyptios 
mos  erat,  ut  niysteria  voce  tantum,  veluti  per  manus,  posteris  relin- 
querent.  Apud  Christianos,  qui  baptismatis  erant  candidati,  iis,  viva 
voce,  tradebantur  fidei  Christianae  mysteria,  sine  scriptis  :  quod  Paulus  et 
Lucas  KaTTjxe'iv  vocant.  Unde  qui  docebantur,  catechumeui  vocabantur, 
qui  docebant,  catechistae." 

1  Deut.  xxxiv.  5,  0,  7,  etc.  ^  Solon. 

•^  Lycurgus.  *  Homer. 

308 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

business,  could  not,  it  seems,  be  well  taken  out  of  it  to  attend 
the  slender  and  minute  affairs  of  letters  and  scholastic  science. 

'Tis  true,  indeed,  that  without  a  capacity  for  action  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  world  and  mankind  there  can  be  no  author 
naturally  qualified  to  write  with  dignity,  or  execute  any  noble 
or  great  design.  But  there  are  many  who,  with  the  highest 
capacity  for  business,  are  by  their  fortune  denied  the  privilege  of 
that  higher  sphere.  As  there  are  others  who,  having  once  moved 
in  it,  have  been  afterwards,  by  many  impediments  and  obstructions, 
necessitated  to  retire,  and  exert  their  genius  in  this  lower  degree, 

'Tis  to  some  catastrophe  of  this  kind  that  we  owe  the  noblest 
historians  (even  the  two  princes  and  fathers  of  history^)  as  well 
as  the  greatest  philosophical  writers,  the  founder  of  the  academy- 
and  others,  who  were  also  noble  in  respect  of  their  birth,  and 
fitted  for  the  highest  stations  in  the  public,  but  discouraged 
from  engaging  in  it,  on  account  of  some  misfortunes  experienced 
either  in  their  own  persons  or  that  of  their  near  friends. 

'Tis  to  the  early  banishment  and  long  retirement  of  a  heroic 
youth  out  of  his  native  country  that  we  owe  an  original  system 
of  works,  the  politest,  wisest,  usefullest,  and  (to  those  who  can 
understand  the  divineness  of  a  just  simplicity)  the  most  amiable 
and  even  the  most  elevating  and  exalting  of  all  uninspired  and 
merely  human  authors.^ 

To  this  fortune  we  owe  some  of  the  greatest  of  the  ancient 
poets.  ""Twas  this  chance  which  produced  the  muse  of  an 
exalted    Grecian    lyric,^    and    of  his    follower    Horace,^    whose 

*  Herodotus  and  Thucydides.  2  pjato. 

3  Tov  7JSia-Toi>   Kai  xo^pi-^i^TaTov  'S.evocpQvTa,  as  Athenaeus  calls  him,  xi.      See 
Treatise  iii.  j>art  ii.  §  2. 

■*  Et  te  sonaiitem  plenius  aureo, 
Alcaee^  plectro  dura  navis, 
Dura  fugae  mala,  dura  belli. 
[''And  thou,  Alcaeus,  who  tellest  in  a  fuller  tone  on  a  lyre  of  gold 
the  hardships  of  the  sea,  of  exile,  and  of  \var."^Hor. ,  Od.  11.  xiii.  26-28.] 
•''...     Age  die  Latinum, 
Barbite,  carmen, 

309 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTEIIISTICS 

character,  though  easy  to  be  gathered  from  history  and  his  own 
works,  is  Httle  observed  by  any  of  his  commentators.  The 
general  idea  conceived  of  him  being  drawn  chiefly  from  his 
precarious  and  low  circumstances  at  court,  after  the  forfeiture 
of  his  estate,  under  the  usurpation  and  conquest  of  an  Octavius 
and  the  ministry  of  a  Maecenas,  not  from  his  better  condition 
and  nobler  employments  in  earlier  days,  under  the  favour  and 
friendship  of  greater  and  better  men,  whilst  the  Roman  state 
and  liberty  subsisted.  For  of  this  change  he  himself,  as  great  a 
courtier  as  he  seemed  afterwards,  gives  sufficient  intimation.^ 

Lesbio  primum  modulate  civi, 
Qui  ferox  bello,  etc. 
["  Come,  my  lyre,  utter  for  me  a  Latin  song,  though  thou  vvert  first 
tuned  by  a  citizen  of  Lesbos,"  etc. — Hor.,  Od.  i.  xxxii.  3-5.] 
1  Dura  sed  emoyere  loco  me  tempora  grato, 
Civilisque  rudem  belli  tulit  aestus  in  arma, 
Caesaris  Augusti  non  responsura  lacertis. 
Unde  simul  primum  me  dimisere  Philippi, 
Decisis  liumilem  pennis,  inopemque  paterni 
Et  laris  et  fundi,  paupertas  impulit  audax 
Ut  versus  facerem. 
["  But  the  cruel  times  tore  me  away  from  that  ])leasant  spot,  and  civil 
strife  hurried  me,  with  all  my  ignorance  of  war,  to  take  up  those  arms 
wliich  wei'e  to  be  no  match  for  the  might  of  Augustus  Caesar.     As  soon  as 
Philippi  set  me  free  from  arms,  humbled,  my  wings  clipped,  my  father's 
house  and  estate  lost,  the  fearlessness  of  a  poor  man  drove  me  to  write 
verses." — Hor,,  Ej).  ii.  ii.  46-52.] 

At  olim 
Quod  mihi  pareret  legio  Romana  tribuno. 

["A  legion  of  Roman  soldiers  obeyed  me  as  its  officer." — Hor.,  Sut.  i. 
vi.  47,  48.] 

Viz.  under  Brutus.      Whence  again  that  natural  boast : 

Me  primis  urbis  belli  placuisse  domique. 
["  I  pleased  the  first  men  of  the  city  in  war  and  peace." — Hor.,  Epii^t.  i. 
XX.  23.] 

And  again. 

Cum  magnis  vixisse  invita  fatebitur  usque 
luvidia. 

310 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Let  authors  therefore  know  themselves,  and  though  conscious 
of  worth,  virtue,  and  a  genius,  such  as  may  justly  place  them 

["  Envy  shall  confess  against  her  will  that  I  have  ever  lived  with  the 
great." — Hor. ,  Sat.  ii.  i.  76,  77.] 

Adhere  the  vixisse  shows  plainly  whom  he  principally  meant  by  his 
magni,  his  early  patrons  and  great  men  in  the  State  ;  his  apology  and 
defence  here  (as  well  as  in  his  fourth  and  sixth  satires  of  his  first  book, 
and  his  second  epistle  of  his  second  and  elsewhere)  being  supported  still  by 
the  open  and  bold  assertion  of  his  good  education  (equal  to  the  highest 
senators,  and  under  the  best  masters),  his  employments  at  home  and 
abroad,  and  his  early  commerce  and  familiarity  with  former  great  men, 
before  these  his  new  friendships  and  this  latter  court  acquaintance,  which 
was  now  envied  him  by  his  adversaries. 

Nunc  quia  sim  tibi,  Maecenas,  convictor  :  at  olim 
Quod  mihi  pareret  legio  Romana  tribuno. 

["  Now  they  envy  me  because  I  live  familiarly  with  thee,  Maecenas, 
but  formerly  because  a  legion  of  Roman  soldiers  obeyed  me  as  officer." 
Hor.,  Sat.  i.  vi.  47,  48.] 

Tlie  reproach  now  was  with  respect  to  a  Maecenas  or  Augustus.  Twas 
the  same  formerly  with  respect  to  a  Brutus  and  those  who  were  then  the 
principal  and  leading  men.  The  complaint  or  murmur  against  liim  on 
account  of  his  being  an  upstart  or  favourite  under  a  Maecenas  and  Augustusj 
could  not  be  answered  by  a  vixisse  relating  to  the  same  persons,  any  more 
than  his  placuisse  joined  with  his  belli  domique  could  relate  to  those  under 
whom  he  never  went  to  war  nor  would  ever  consent  to  bear  any  honours. 
For  so  he  himself  distinguishes  {Sat.  vi.  to  Maecenas) — 

Quia  uon,  ut  forsit  honorem 
Jure  mihi  invideat  quivis,  ita  te  quoque  amicum. 

["  The  two  reasons  are  unlike  because,  though  perhaps  a  man  might 
fairly  grudge  me  my  commission,  yet  he  cannot  fairly  grudge  me  your 
friendship  too." — Sat.  i.  vi.  49,  50.] 

He  was  formerly  an  actor,  and  in  the  ministery  of  affairs  ;  now  only 
a  friend  to  a  minister,  himself  still  a  private  and  retired  man.  'I'hat  he 
refused  Augustus's  offer  of  the  secretaryship  is  well  known.  But  in  these 
circumstances,  the  politeness  as  well  as  artifice  of  Horace  is  admirable, 
in  making  futurity  or  posterity  to  be  the  speaking  party  in  both  those 
places,  where  he  suggests  his  intimacy  and  favour  with  the  great,  that 
there  might  in  some  measure  be  room  left  (though  in  strictness  there  was 
scarce  any)  for  an  Octavius  and  a  Maecenas  to  be  included.  See  Treatise 
III.  part  ii.  §  3,  in  the  notes. 

311 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

above  flattery  or  mean  courtship  to  their  reader,  yet  let  them 
reflect  that  as  authors  merely  they  are  but  of  the  second  rank 
of  men.  And  let  the  reader  withal  consider,  "  that  when  he 
unworthily  resigns  the  place  of  honour,  and  surrenders  his  taste 
or  judgment  to  an  author,  of  ever  so  great  a  name  or  venerable 
antiquity,  and  not  to  reason  and  truth,  at  whatever  hazard,  he 
not  only  betrays  himself  but  withal  the  common  cause  of  author 
and  reader,  the  interest  of  letters  and  knowledge,  and  the 
chief  liberty,  privilege,  and  prerogative  of  the  rational  part  of 
mankind." 

'Tis  related  in  history  of  the  Cappadocians,  that  being 
offered  their  liberty  by  the  Romans  and  permitted  to  govern 
themselves  by  their  own  laws  and  constitutions,  they  were  much 
terrified  at  the  proposal,  and  as  if  some  sore  harm  had  been 
intended  them,  humbly  made  it  their  request,  "  that  they  might 
be  governed  by  arbitrary  power,  and  that  an  absolute  governor 
might  without  delay  be  appointed  over  them  at  the  discretion 
of  the  Romans.""  For  such  was  their  disposition  towards  mere 
slavery  and  subjection,  that  they  dared  not  pretend  so  much  as 
to  choose  their  own  master.  So  essential  they  thought  slavery, 
and  so  divine  a  thing  the  right  of  mastership,  that  they  dared 
not  be  so  free  even  as  to  presume  to  give  themselves  that  bless- 
ing, which  they  choose  to  leave  rather  to  Providence,  fortune,  or 
a  conqueror  to  bestow  upon  them.  They  dared  not  make  a 
king,  but  would  rather  take  one  from  their  powerful  neighbours. 
Had  they  been  necessitated  to  come  to  an  election,  the  horror 
of  such  a  use  of  liberty  in  government  would  perhaj^s  have 
determined  them  to  choose  blindfold,  or  leave  it  to  the  decision 
of  the  commonest  lot,  cast  of  die,  cross  or  pile,  or  whatever  it 
were  which  might  best  enable  them  to  clear  themselves  of  the 
heinous  charge  of  using  the  least  foresight,  choice,  or  prudence 
in  such  an  affair. 

I  should  think  it  a  great  misfortune  were  my  reader  of  the 
number  of  those  who,  in  a  kind  of  C'appadocian  spirit,  could 
easily  be  terrified  with  the  proposal  of  giving  him  his  liberty, 

312 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

and  making  him  his  own  judge.  IVIy  endeavour,  I  must  confess, 
has  been  to  show  him  his  just  prerogative  in  this  respect,  and 
to  give  him  the  sharpest  eye  over  his  author,  invite  him  to 
criticise  honestly,  without  favour  or  affection,  and  with  the 
utmost  bent  of  his  parts  and  judgment.  On  this  account  it 
may  be  objected  to  me,  perhaps,  "  that  I  am  not  a  little  vain 
and  presumptuous  in  my  own  as  well  as  in  my  author's  behalf, 
who  can  thus,  as  it  were,  challenge  my  reader  to  a  trial  of  his 
keenest  wit.'"' 

But  to  this  I  answer,  that  should  I  have  the  good  fortune 
to  raise  the  masterly  spirit  of  just  criticism  in  my  readers  and 
exalt  them  ever  so  little  above  the  lazy,  timorous,  over-modest, 
or  resigned  state  in  which  the  generality  of  them  remain,  though 
by  this  very  spirit  I  myself  might  possibly  meet  my  doom,  I 
should,  however  abundantly  congratulate  with  myself  on  these 
my  low  flights,  be  proud  of  having  plumed  the  arrows  of  better 
wits,  and  furnished  artillery  or  ammunition  of  any  kind  to  those 
powers  to  which  I  myself  had  fallen  a  victim. 

Fungar  vice  cotis.^ 

I  could  reconcile  my  ambition  in  this  respect  to  what  I  call 
my  loyalty  to  the  reader,  and  say  of  his  elevation  in  criticism 
and  judgment  what  a  Roman  princess  said  of  her  son's  advance- 
ment to  empire,  "  occidat,  dum  imperet.'"  - 

Had  I  been  a  Spanish  Cervantes,  and  with  success  equal  to 
that  comic  author,  had  destroyed  the  reigning  taste  of  Gothic 
or  Moorish  chivalry,  I  could  afterwards  contentedly  have  seen 
my  burlesque  work  itself  despised  and  set  aside,  when  it  had 
wrought  its  intended  effect  and  destroyed  those  giants  and 
monsters  of  the  brain,  against  which  it  was  originally  designed. 
Without  regard,  therefore,  to  the  prevailing  relish  or  taste 
Avhich,  in  my  own  person,  I  may  unhappily  experience,  when 

1  ["  I  will  play  the  part  of  h  \vliotst(»iie." — Hor.,  De  arte  poet.  804.] 

2  ["  Let  him  kill  me,  so  loiifj  as  he  comes  to  tlie  throne." — Tacitus, 
Annalu,  xiv.  0.] 

313 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

these  my  miscellaneous  works  are  leisurely  examined,  I  shall 
proceed  still  in  my  endeavour  to  refine  my  reader's  palate, 
whetting  and  sharpening  it  the  best  I  can  for  use  and  practice 
in  the  lower  subjects,  that  by  this  exercise  it  may  acquire  the 
greater  keenness,  and  be  of  so  much  the  better  effect  in  subjects 
of  a  higher  kind  which  relate  to  his  chief  happiness,  his  liberty 
and  manhood. 

Supposing  me  therefore  a  mere  comic  humorist  in  respect 
of  those  inferior  subjects,  which  after  the  manner  of  my  familiar 
prose  satire  I  presume  to  criticise ;  may  not  I  be  allowed  to  ask, 
"  whether  there  remains  not  still  among  us  noble  Britons  some- 
thing of  that  original  barbarous  and  Gothic  relish  not  wholly 
purged  away,  when,  even  at  this  hour,  romances  and  gallantries 
of  like  sort,  together  with  works  as  monstrous  of  other  kinds, 
are  current  and  in  vogue,  even  with  the  people  who  constitute  , 
our  reputed  polite  world  ?  "  Need  I  on  this  account  refer  again 
to  our  author,^  Avhere  he  treats  in  general  of  the  style  and 
manner  of  our  modern  authors,  from  the  divine  to  the  comedian? 
What  person  is  there  of  the  least  judgment  or  understanding, 
who  cannot  easily,  and  without  the  help  of  a  divine  or  rigid 
moralist,  observe  the  lame  condition  of  our  English  stage,  which 
nevertheless  is  found  the  rendezvous  and  chief  entertainment  of 
our  best  company,  and  from  whence  in  all  probability  our  youth 
will  continue  to  draw  their  notion  of  manners  and  their  taste 
of  life  more  directly  and  naturally  than  from  the  rehearsals  and 
declamations  of  a  graver  theatre  ? 

Let  those  whose  business  it  is  advance,  as  they  best  can,  the 
benefit  of  that  sacred  oratory  which  we  have  lately  seen  and 
are  still  like  to  see  employed  to  various  purposes  and  further 
designs  than  that  of  instructing  us  in  religion  or  manners. 
Let  them  in  that  high  scene  endeavour  to  refine  our  taste  and 
judgment  in  sacred  matters.  'Tis  the  good  critic's  task  to 
amend  our  common  stage,  nor  ought  this  dramatic  performance 
to  be  decried  or  sentenced  by  those  critics  of  a  higher  sphere. 
1  Viz.  iu  his  Advice  to  Authors,  Treatise  in. 

314 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

The  practice  and  art  is  honest  in  itself.  Our  foundations  are 
well  laid.  And  in  the  main  our  English  stage  (as  has  heen 
remarked  ^)  is  capable  of  the  highest  improvement,  as  well  from 
the  present  genius  of  our  nation  as  from  the  rich  ore  of  our 
early  poets  in  this  kind.  But  faults  are  easier  imitated  than 
beauties. 

We  find,  indeed,  our  theatre  become  of  late  the  subject  of  a 
growing  criticism.  We  hear  it  openly  complained  "  that  in  our 
newer  plays  as  well  as  in  our  older,  in  comedy  as  well  as  tragedy, 
the  stage  presents  a  proper  scene  of  uproar, — duels  fought, 
swords  drawn,  many  of  a  side,  wounds  given  and  sometimes 
dressed  too,  the  surgeon  called  and  the  patient  probed  and 
tented  upon  the  spot.  That  in  our  tragedy  nothing  is  so 
common  as  wheels,  racks,  and  gibbets  properly  adorned,  execu- 
tions decently  performed,  headless  bodies  and  bodiless  heads 
exposed  to  view,  battles  fought,  murders  committed,  and  the 
dead  carried  off  in  great  numbers.""     Such  is  our  politeness  ! 

Nor  are  these  plays,  on  this  account,  the  less  frequented  by 
either  of  the  sexes,  which  inclines  me  to  favour  the  conceit  our 
author-  has  suggested  concerning  the  mutual  correspondence 
and  relation  between  our  royal  theatre  and  popular  circus  or 
bear-garden.  For  in  the  former  of  these  assemblies,  'tis  un- 
deniable that  at  least  the  two  upper  regions  or  galleries  contain 
such  spectators  as  indifferently  frequent  each  place  of  sport. 
So  that  'tis  no  wonder  we  hear  such  applause  resounded  on  the 
victories  of  an  Almanzor,  when  the  same  parties  had  possibly, 
no  later  than  the  day  before,  bestowed  their  applause  as  freely 
on  the  victorious  butcher,  the  hero  of  another  stage;  where 
amidst  various  frays,  bestial  and  human  blood,  promiscuous 
wounds  and  slaughter,  one  sex  are  observed  as  frequent  and  as 
pleased  spectators  as  the  other,  and  sometimes  not  spectators 
only,  but  actors  in  the  gladiatorian  parts.  These  congregations, 
which  we   may  be  apt  to  call   heathenish   (though  in  reahty 

1  Treatise  ni.  part  ii.  §§  1,  2,  3. 
2  Treatise  lu.  part  ii.  §  3. 

315 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

never  known  among  the  politer  heathens)  are,  in  our  Christian 
nation,  unconcernedly  allowed  and  tolerated  as  no  way  injurious 
to  religious  interests,  whatever  effect  they  may  be  found  to  have 
on  national  manners,  humanity,  and  civil  life.  Of  such  in- 
dulgences as  these  we  hear  no  complaints.  Nor  are  any 
assemblies,  though  of  the  most  barbarous  and  enormous  kind, 
so  offensive,  it  seems,  to  men  of  zeal,  as  religious  assemblies  of  a 
different  fashion  or  habit  from  their  own. 

I  am  sorry  to  say  that,  though  in  the  many  parts  of  poetry 
our  attempts  have  been  high  and  noble,  yet  in  general  the  taste 
of  wit  and  letters  lies  much  upon  a  level  with  what  relates  to 
our  stage. 

I  can  readily  allow  to  our  British  genias  what  was  allowed 
to  the  Roman  heretofore  : — 

Natura  sublimis  et  acer  : 
Nam  spirat  tragicum  satis  et  feliciter  audet.^ 

But  then  I  must  add  too,  that  the  excessive  indulgence  and 
favour  shown  to  our  authors,  on  account  of  what  their  mere 
genius  and  flowing  vein  afford,  has  rendered  them  intolerably 
supine,  conceited,  and  admirers  of  themselves.  The  public 
having  once  suffered  them  to  take  the  ascendant,  they  become, 
like  flattered  princes,  impatient  of  contradiction  or  advice. 
They  think  it  a  disgrace  to  be  criticised,  even  by  a  friend,  or  to 
reform  at  his  desire  what  they  themselves  are  fully  convinced 
is  negligent  and  uncorrect. 

Sed  turpem  putat  in  scriptis  metuitque  lituram.2 

The  limae  labor  ^  is  the  great  grievance  with  our  country- 
men.    An  English  author  would  be  all  genius.     He  would  reap 

1  ["  By  nature  full  of  elevation  and  passion  ;  for  he  has  tragic  inspira- 
tion enough  and  happy  holdness." — Hor.  Epist.  ii.  i.  1G.5,  1G6.] 
-[''...   wanted  or  forgot 
The  last  and  greatest  art,  the  art  to  l)lot." 

Ilor.  Epi.st.  II.  i.  167,  Pope's  imitation.] 
3  Ars  Poet. 

316 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

the  fruits  of  art,  but  without  study,  pains,  or  application.  He 
thinks  it  necessary,  indeed  (lest  his  learning  should  be  called  in 
question),  to  show  the  world  that  he  errs  knowingly  against  the 
rules  of  art.  And  for  this  reason,  whatever  piece  he  publishes 
at  any  time,  he  seldom  fails,  in  some  prefixed  apology,  to  speak 
in  such  a  manner  of  criticism  and  art  as  may  confound  the 
ordinary  reader,  and  prevent  him  from  taking  up  a  part  which, 
should  he  once  assume,  would  prove  fatal  to  the  impotent  and 
mean  performance. 

'Twere  to  be  wished,  that  when  once  our  authors  had  con- 
sidered of  a  model  or  plan,  and  attained  the  knowledge  of  a 
whole  and  parts ;  ^    when   from  this  beginning  they  had  pro- 

*  6\ov  8'  i<jTL  TO  ^x°^  ^PXV''  KO.I-  fJ-ecrov  Kal  TeXevrrjv.  dpxv  Se  iarcv  8  aiJro  fxiw 
fii]  (^  dvdyKT]^  fj-er'  &\\o  ecrri,  /xer'  CKeivo  5'  eTepov  ■Ke<t>VKiv  eTvai  fj  yiveaOai.  TiXevTij 
8^  TovvavTiov  6  aiiTO  fier'  dWo  ire(pvKev  ehai  ij  e£  d.vdyKT]S  ?)  ws  enl  to  woXv,  fieTO.  8e 
TovTO  dWo  ovdev.  fxeaov  de  6  /cat  avTO  /xer'  &\\o  Kal  jjut  iKeivo  erepov.  ["  A  wlutle 
is  that  which  lias  beginning,  middle,  and  end.  A  beginning  is  that  which 
does  not  itself  follow  on  anything  by  necessity,  but  after  which  something 
else  naturally  is  or  arises.  On  the  contrary,  an  end  is  that  which  naturally 
follows  on  something  else,  either  of  necessity  or  as  a  rule,  while  it  is 
followed  by  nothing.  A  middle  is  that  which  itself  follows  on  something 
else,  and  has  something  following  on  it." — Arist.  De  poet.  ch.  7.]  And  in 
the  following  chapter,  /aO^os  5'  {(ttIv  eh  ovx  Cicnrep  Tivh  otovTai  edv  irepl  'iva  rj, 
etc.  ["  Unity  of  plot  is  not,  as  some  people  think,  secured  by  having  unity 
of  hero."] 

Denique  sit  quod  vis  simplex  duntaxat  et  unum. 

["  Let  it  be  what  you  will,  provided  only  it  he  consistent  and  uniform." 
Hor.  De  arte  poet.  23.]     See  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3. 

'Tis  an  infallible  proof  of  the  want  of  just  integrity  in  every  writing, 
from  the  epopee  or  heroic  poem  down  to  the  familiar  epistle  or  slightest 
essay,  either  in  verse  or  prose,  if  every  several  part  or  portion  fits  not  its 
proper  place  so  exactly  that  the  least  transposition  would  be  impracticable. 
Whate\er  is  episodic,  though  perhaps  it  be  a  whole  and  in  itself  entire, 
yet  being  inserted  as  a  part  in  a  work  of  greater  length,  it  must  appear 
only  in  its  due  place.  And  that  place  alone  can  be  called  its  due  one  which 
alone  befits  it.  If  there  be  any  passage  in  the  middle  or  end  which  might 
have  stood  in  the  beginning,  or  any  in  the  beginning  which  might  have 
stood  as  well  in  the  middle  or  end,  there  is  properly  in  such  a  piece  neither 
beginning,  middle,  or  end.     'Tis  a  mere  rhapsody,  not  a  work.      And  the 

317 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

ceeded  to  morals,  and  the  knowledge  of  what  is  called  poetic 
manners    and    truth ;  ^     when    they   had   learnt  to    reject  false 

more  it  assumes  the  air  or  appearance  of  a  real  vvork^  the  more  ridiculous 

it  becomes.     See  above,  p.  173 ,  and  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  8.  ^ 

1  Respicere  exemplar  vitae  morumque  jubebo 
Doctum  imitatorem  et  veras  hinc  ducere  voces. 

[''  I  shall  bid  the  well-trained  imitator  look  to  the  pattern  which  life  pre- 
sents, and  there  learn  the  language  of  reality." — Hor.  De  arte  poet.  317,318.] 
The  chief  of  ancient  critics,  we  know,  extols  Homer  above  all  things,  for 
understanding  how  "  to  lie  in  perfection,"  as  the  passage  shows  which  we 
have  cited  above.  Treatise  iii.  part  iii.  §  3.  His  lies,  according  to  that 
master's  opinion,  and  the  judgment  of  many  of  the  gravest  and  most 
venerable  writers,  were  in  themselves  the  justest  moral  truths,  and  ex- 
hibitive  of  the  best  doctrine  and  instruction  in  life  and  manners.  It  may 
be  asked,  perhaps,  "  how  comes  the  poet,  then,  to  draw  no  single  pattern  of 
the  kind,  no  perfect  character,  in  either  of  his  heroic  pieces  ?  "  I  answer, 
that  should  he  attempt  to  do  it  he  would  as  a  poet  be  preposterous  and 
false.  'Tis  not  the  possible  but  the  probable  and  likely  which  must  be  the 
poet's  guide  in  manners.  By  tliis  he  wins  attention  and  moves  the  con- 
scious reader  or  spectator,  who  judges  best  from  within,  ])y  what  he  natur- 
ally feels  and  experiences  in  his  own  heart.  The  perfection  of  virtue  is 
from  long  art  and  management,  self-control,  and,  as  it  were,  force  on 
nature.  But  the  common  auditor  or  spectator,  who  seeks  pleasure  only, 
and  loves  to  engage  his  passion  by  view  of  other  passion  and  emotion, 
comprehends  little  of  the  restraints,  allays,  and  corrections  which  form 
this  new  and  artificial  creature.  For  such  indeed  is  the  truly  virtuous 
man,  whose  art,  though  ever  so  natural  in  itself  or  justly  founded  in 
reason  and  nature,  is  an  improvement  far  beyond  the  common  stamp  or 
known  character  of  human  kind.  And  thus  the  completely  virtuous  and 
perfect  character  is  unpoetical  and  false.  Effects  must  not  appear  w  here 
causes  must  necessarily  remain  unknown  and  incomprehensible.  A  hero 
without  passion  is  in  poetry  as  absurd  as  a  hero  without  life  or  action. 
Now  if  passion  be  allowed,  passionate  action  must  ensue.  The  same  hei-oic 
genius  and  seeming  magnanimity  which  transport  us  when  beheld,  are 
naturally  transporting  in  the  lives  and  manners  of  the  great  who  are 
described  to  us.  And  thus  the  able  designer  who  feigns  in  behalf  of  truth 
and  draws  his  characters  after  the  moral  rule,  fails  not  to  discover  Nature's 
propensity,  and  assigns  to  these  high  spirits  their  proper  exorbitancy  and 
inclination  to  exceed  in  that  tone  or  species  of  passion  which  constitutes 
the  eminent  or  shining  part  of  each  poetical  character.     The  passion  of  an 

318 


MISCELT.ANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

thought,  embarrassing  and  mixed  metaphors,  the  ridiculous 
point  in  comedy,  and  the  false  sublime  and  bombast  in  heroic, 
they  would  at  last  have  some  regard  to  numbers,  harmony,  and 

Achilles  is  towards  tliat  glory  which  is  acquired  by  arms  and  personal 
valour.  In  favour  of  this  character  we  forgive  the  generous  youth  his 
excess  of  ardour  in  the  field,  and  his  resentment  when  injured  and  pro- 
voked in  council  and  by  his  allies.  The  passion  of  an  Ulysses  is  towards 
that  glory  which  is  acquired  by  prudence,  wisdom,  and  ability  in  affairs. 
'Tis  in  favour  of  this  character  that  we  forgive  him  his  subtle,  crafty,  and 
deceitful  air ;  since  the  intriguing  spirit,  the  over-reaching  manner,  and 
over-refinement  of  art  and  policy  are  as  naturally  incident  to  the  ex- 
perienced and  thorough  politician  as  sudden  resentment,  indiscreet  and 
rash  behaviour,  to  the  open  undesigning  character  of  a  warlike  youth. 
The  gigantic  force  and  military  toil  of  an  Ajax  would  not  be  so  easily 
credible  or  engaging,  but  for  the  honest  simplicity  of  his  nature  and  the 
heaviness  of  his  parts  and  genius.  For  strength  of  body  being  so  often 
noted  by  us  as  unattended  with  equal  parts  and  strength  of  mind,  when 
we  see  this  natural  effect  expressed  and  find  our  secret  and  malicious  kind 
of  i-easoning  confirmed  on  this  hand,  we  yield  to  any  hyperbole  of  our 
poet  on  the  other.  He  has  afterwards  his  full  scope  and  liberty  of  enlarg- 
ing and  exceeding  in  the  peculiar  virtue  and  excellence  of  his  hero.  He 
may  lie  splendidly,  raise  wonder,  and  be  as  astonishing  as  he  pleases, 
Everji;hing  will  be  allowed  him  in  return  for  this  frank  allowance.  Thus 
the  tongue  of  a  Nestor  may  work  prodigies,  whilst  the  accompanying  allays 
of  a  rhetorical  fluency  and  aged  experience  are  kept  in  view.  An 
Agamemnon  may  be  admired  as  a  noble  and  wise  chief,  whilst  a  certain 
princely  haughtiness,  a  stiffness  and  stately  carriage  natural  to  the  char- 
acter, are  represented  in  his  person  and  noted  in  their  ill  effects.  For  thus 
the  excesses  of  every  character  are  by  the  poet  redressed.  And  the  mis- 
fortunes naturally  attending  such  excesses  being  justly  applied,  our  passions, 
whilst  in  the  strongest  manner  engaged  and  moved,  are  in  the  wholesomest 
and  most  effectual  manner  corrected  and  purged.  \\'ere  a  man  to  form  , 
himself  by  one  single  pattern  or  original,  however  perfect,  he  Mould  him- 
self be  a  mere  copy.  But  whilst  he  draws  from  various  models,  he  is 
original,  natural,  and  unaffected.  We  see  in  outward  carriage  and 
behaviour  how  ridiculous  any  one  becomes  who  imitates  another,  be  he 
ever  so  graceful.  They  are  mean  spirits  who  love  to  copy  merely,  nothing 
is  agreeable  or  natural  but  what  is  original.  Our  manners,  like  our  faces, 
though  ever  so  beautiful,  must  differ  in  their  beauty.  An  ovwj^egularity 
is  next  to  a  deformity.      And  in  a  poem  (whether  epic  or  dramatic)  a  com- 


{aki 


J-CiX.    L*4  0--^^^ 


319 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

an  ear,^  and  correct,  as  far  as  possible,  the  harsh  sounds  of  our 
language,  in  poetry  at  least,  if  not  in  prose. 

But  so  much  are  our  British  poets  taken  up  in  seeking  out 
that  monstrous  ornament   which   we  call  rhyme,-  that  'tis  no 

plete  and  perfect  character  is  the  greatest  monster^  and  of  all  poetic 
fictions  not  only  the  least  engaging  hut  the  least  moral  and  improving. 
Thus  much  hy  way  of  remark  upon  poetical  truth  and  the  just  fiction  or 
artful  lying  of  the  ahle  poet,  according  to  the  judgment  of  the  master- 
critic.  AVhat  Horace  expresses  of  the  same  lying  virtue  is  of  an  easier 
sense,  and  needs  no  explanation. 

Atque  ita  mentitur,  sic  veris  falsa  remiscet ; 
Primo  ne  medium,  medio  ne  discrepet  imum. 
["  Such  is  his  use  of  fiction,  such  his  combination  of  true  and  false,  that 
the  middle  does  not  clash  with  the  beginning  or  the  end  with  the  middle.' 
— Hor.  De  arte  poet.  151,  152.] 

The  same  may  be  observed  not  only  in  heroic  draughts,  but  in  the  in- 
ferior characters  of  comedy. 

Quam  similis  uter(|ue  est  sui  ! 

["  How  like  himself  each  man  acts"  ! — Terence,  Phorni.  in.  ii.  10.] 

See  Treatise  i.  §  1 ;  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.  §  3 ;  Treatise  in.  part  iii.  §  3, 
in  the  notes  at  the  end. 

^  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  1. 

2  llie  reader,  if  curious  in  these  matters,  may  see  Is.  Vossius  De  viribun 
rhythmi,  and  what  he  says  withal  of  ancient  music,  and  the  degrees  hy 
which  they  surpass  us  moderns  (as  has  been  demonstrated  by  late  mathema- 
ticians of  our  nation),  contrary  to  a  ridiculous  notion  some  have  had,  that 
because  in  this,  as  in  all  other  arts,  the  ancients  studied  simplicity  and  affected 
it  as  the  highest  perfection  in  their  performances,  they  were  therefore 
ignorant  of  parts  and  symphony.  Against  this.  Is.  Vossius,  amongst  other 
authors,  cites  the  ancient  Peripatetic  irepl  K6a-fiov  at  the  beginning  of  his 
fifth  chapter.  To  which  he  might  have  added  another  passage  in  chapter 
vi.  The  suitableness  of  this  ancient  author's  thought  to  what  has  been 
often  advanced  in  the  philosophical  parts  of  these  volumes,  concerning  the 
universal  symmetry  or  union  of  the  whole,  may  make  it  excusable  if  wo 
add  here  the  two  passages  together,  in  their  inimitable  original,  taws  oi 
Kal  Tu)v  ivavriwv  i]  (pvais  -/Xt'xexat,  Kal  e'/c  tovtujv  aTroreXuv  to  avfKpwvov,  oijK  €k  tQiv 
ofioluv,  wavep  aufKu  to  appev  avvrjyaye  irpos  rd  drfKv,  koX  ovx  eKOLTepov  irpbs  to 
bixb(j>v\ov,  Kal  ttjv  wpuTrjv  o/xofOLav  Stdrwv  ivavriuvlcriiVTi^l/ev ,  ov  dia  tuv  6/j.oluy.  loiKe 
Si  Kal  7]  Tex^'V  '^V"  <pi"^i-v  fup.ovfX€V7]  tovto  woutv.  ^uyypa(pla  fxev  yap,  XevKwv  re 
Kal  fxeXdvojv,  Cixpwv  re  Kal  epvdpuv  xP^f^'^''''^''  iyKepaaafievri  (pvaas  rds  e'tKoyas  Toh 

320 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

wonder  if  other  ornaments  and  real  graces  are  unthought  of 
and  left  unattempted.  However,  since  in  some  parts  of  poetry 
(especially  in  the  dramatic)  we  have  been  so  happy  as  to  triumph 
over  this  barbarous  taste,  'tis  unaccountable  that  our  poets,  who 
from  this  privilege  ought  to  undertake  some  further  refinements, 
should  remain  still  upon  the  same  level  as  before.  'Tis  a  shame 
to  our  authors  that,  in  their  elegant  style  and  metred  prose, 
there    should    not   be    found    a    peculiar    grace    and   harmony 

irpo-rfyovfj.ei'OLS  dwer^Xecre  (rvficpuivovs.  /u,oi'crt/C7j  5^,  o^ds  d/xa  Kal  ^apeh,  /xaKpovs 
re  Kal  (Bpax^s  <pd6yyovs  /xi^aaa,  iv  diacpopois  cpuvah,  /xlav  direTiXfcrei'  dpfioviav. 
ypafiixaTiKTj  8e,  e'/c  <pwv7)ivT0}v  koX  afpufwu  ypaf-iixaTui/  Kpdcriv  iroirjcra/j.ei'rj,  rrjv  oXt/j/ 
rix^'H^  ^'"''  o-vtQv  crvveaTTjcraTO.  Taiirb  8e  tovto  rjv  Kal  to  irapa  tw  aKOTCLViZ  \ey6- 
fievou  'HpaKXeLTuj.  (Tvvd\f/€La^  ovXa  Kal  o^X'  ovXa,  avp.(pep6iJ.€vov  Kal  diatpepo/Jievoi', 
ffvfadov  Kal  dcadov,  Kal  eV  irdfTwi'  eV,  Kal  i^  ivbs  Travra.  And  ill  the  following 
passage,  A"'<x  oe  £k  irdvTWv  dp/xovia  avya86vTUP  Kal  xo/seuofTwv  Kara  rhv  ovpavov,  i^ 
ei'os  re  yiverat,  Kal  eiS  iv  diroXriyei.  Kbcixov  S'  ^tv/jlus  to  avfiirav,  dX\'  oi5x  aKoapiiav 
ovofidaaLS  dv.  KaOdirep  8^  iv  X'^PV  Kopvcpaiov  Kardp^avTos,  avveirrixei  Tras  6  xopdj 
dvbpCbv,  €(t6'  ore  /cat  yvvaLKUv,  iv  di.a(p6pois  (puvals  o^vripai^  Kal  ^apvripais,  fiiav 
dpuoviav  e/x/xeX^  Kepavvvvroiv,  oi'tws  ^x^'  '<^'-  f""'  '''O^  '''^  avfXTrav  diiirovTOi  Qeov. 
["  And  perhaps  Nature  wants  opposites  too,  and  wants  to  make  harmony  out 
of  them,  not  out  of  similars  ;  as,  for  instance,  she  brings  the  male  to  the 
female  and  not  each  of  these  to  one  of  his  or  her  own  sex  ;  and  she  made 
tlie  first  concord  by  means  of  opposites,  not  similars.  Art  too  seems  to  do 
tliis  ill  imitation  of  nature.  For  painting,  by  combining  the  natures  of 
Mack  and  white,  yellow  and  red,  makes  its  representations  correspond  with 
their  types.  Music,  uniting  sharp  and  grave  notes,  and  long  and  short 
syllables,  makes  one  harmony  among  different  sounds.  Grammar  too, 
bringing  together  vowels  and  consonants,  I>uilds  her  whole  art  up(»n  them. 
Tliis  is  the  very  point  which  was  given  forth  by  Heraclitus  the  Obscure, 
who  said,  "  combine  wholes  and  parts,  that  which  is  dispersed  and  that 
which  is  united,  that  which  makes  discord  and  that  which  is  in  unison,  and 
iMit  of  all  comes  one  and  out  of  one  comes  all."  .  .  .  There  is  one  harmony 
arising  from  all  the  bodies  which  sound  together  and  circle  in  the  sky,  and 
it  springs  from  one  thing  and  ends  in  one.  We  might  with  correct 
etymology  call  the  universe  an  order,  but  not  a  disorder.  And,  just  as  in 
a  chorus,  when  the  leader  has  led  off,  all  the  band  of  men  (and  sometimes 
women)  joins  in,  making  by  combination  of  different  voices,  higher  and 
Itiwer,  one  harmony  in  unison,  so  it  is  also  in  the  case  of  the  Deity  who 
controls  the  universe." — Ps.-Arist.  I)e  Mundo,  cc.  5,  0.]  See  Treatise  v. 
part  i.  §  3  ;  and  above,  pp.  2G8-270,  in  the  notes. 

VOL.  II  321  Y 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

resulting  from  a  more  natural  and  easy  disengagment  of  their 
periods,  and  from  a  careful  avoiding  the  encounter  of  the 
shocking  consonants  and  jarring  sounds  to  which  our  language 
is  so  unfortunately  subject. 

They  have  of  late,  'tis  true,  reformed  in  some  measure  the 
gouty  joints  and  darning -work  of  whereunto"'s,  whereby 's, 
thereofs,  therewith's,  and  the  rest  of  this  kind,  by  Avhich 
complicated  periods  are  so  curiously  strung  or  hooked -on  one 
to  another,  after  the  long-spun  manner  of  the  bar  or  pulpit. 
But  to  take  into  consideration  no  real  accent  or  cadency  of 
words,  no  sound  or  measure  of  syllables,  to  put  together,  at  one 
time,  a  set  of  compounds  of  the  longest  Greek  or  Latin  termina- 
tion, and  at  another  to  let  Avhole  verses,  and  those  too  of  our 
heroic  and  longest  sort,  pass  currently  in  monosyllables,  is, 
methinks,  no  slender  negligence.  If  single  verses  at  the  head, 
or  in  the  most  emphatical  places  of  the  most  considerable  works 
can  admit  of  such  a  structure  and  pass  for  truly  harmonious  and 
poetical  in  this  negligent  form,  I  see  no  reason  why  more  verses 
than  one  or  two  of  the  same  formation  should  not  be  as  well 
admitted,  or  why  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  these  well- 
strung  monosyllables  might  not  be  allowed  to  clatter  after  one 
another,  like  the  hammers  of  a  paper  mill,  without  any  breach 
of  music  or  prejudice  to  the  harmony  of  our  language.  But  if 
persons  who  have  gone  no  farther  than  a  smith's  anvil  to  gain 
an  ear  are  yet  likely,  on  fair  trial,  to  find  a  plain  defect  in  these 
ten-monosyllable  heroics,  it  would  follow,  methinks,  that  even 
a  prose  author,  who  attempts  to  write  politely,  should  endeavour 
to  confine  himself  within  those  bounds,  which  can  never  without 
breach  of  harmony  be  exceeded  in  any  just  metre  or  agreeable 
pronunciation. 

Thus  have  I  ventured  to  arraign  the  authority  of  those 
self- privileged  writers  who  would  exempt  themselves  from 
criticism  and  save  their  ill-acquired  reputation  by  the  decrial 
of  an  art  on  which  the  cause  and  interest  of  wit  and  letters 
absolutely  depend.    Be  it  they  themselves,  or  their  great  patrons 

332 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

in  their  behalf,  who  would  thus  arbitrarily  support  the  credit  of 
ill  writings,  the  attempt,  I  hope,  will  prove  unsuccessful.  Be 
thev  moderns  or  ancients,  foreigners  or  natives,  ponderous  and 
austere  writers  or  airy  and  of  the  humorous  kind,  whoever 
takes  refuge  here  or  seeks  protection  hence,  whoever  joins  his 
party  or  interest  to  this  cause,  it  appears  from  the  very  fact 
and  endeavour  alone  that  there  is  just  ground  to  suspect  some 
insufficiency  or  imposture  at  the  bottom.  And  on  this  account 
the  reader,  if  he  be  wise,  will  the  rather  redouble  his  application 
and  industry  to  examine  the  merit  of  his  assuming  author.  If, 
as  reader  and  judge,  he  dare  once  assert  that  liberty  to  which 
we  have  shown  him  justly  entitled,  he  will  not  easily  be 
threatened  or  ridiculed  out  of  the  use  of  his  examining  capacity 
and  native  privilege  of  criticism. 

'Twas  to  this  art,  so  well  understood  and  practised  heretofore, 
that  the  wise  ancients  owed  whatever  was  consummate  and 
perfect  in  their  productions.  'Tis  to  the  same  art  we  owe  the 
recovery  of  letters  in  these  latter  ages.  To  this  alone  we  must 
ascribe  the  recognition  of  ancient  manuscripts,  the  discovery  of 
what  is  spurious  and  the  discernment  of  whatever  is  genuine  of 
those  venerable  remains  which  have  passed  through  such  dark 
periods  of  ignorance  and  raised  us  to  the  imjirovements  we  now 
make  in  every  science.  'Tis  to  this  art  that  even  the  sacred 
authors  themselves  owe  their  highest  purity  and  correctness. 
So  sacred  ought  the  art  itself  to  be  esteemed,  when  from  its 
supplies  alone  is  formed  that  judicious  and  learned  strength  by 
which  the  defenders  of  our  holy  religion  are  able  so  successfully 
to  refute  the  heathens,  Jews,  sectarians,  heretics,  and  other 
enemies  or  opposers  of  our  jn'imitive  and  ancient  faith. 

But  having  thus,  after  our  author's  example,  asserted  the  use 
of  criticism  in  all  literate  works,  from  the  main  frame  or  plan  of 
every  Avriting  down  to  the  minutest  particle,  we  may  now 
proceed  to  exercise  this  art  upon  our  author  himself,  and  by 
I  his  own  rules  examine  him  in  this  his  last  treatise,  reserving 
still  to  ourselves  the  same  privilege  of  variation  and  excursion 

323 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

into    other   subjects,  the  same  episodic   liberty    and    right   of 
wandering  which  we  have  maintained  in  the  preceding  chapters. 


CHAPTER  II 

Generation  and  succession  of  our  national  and  modern  wit — Manners 
of  the  proprietors — Corporation  and  joint  stock  —  Statute  against 
criticism — A  coffee-house  committee — Mr  Bays — Other  Bays'  in 
divinity — Censure  of  our  author's  dialogue  piece,  and  of  the  manner 
of  dialogue  writing  used  by  reverend  wits. 

According  to  the  common  course  of  practice  in  our  age,  we 
seldom  see  the  character  of  writer  and  that  of  critic  united  in 
the  same  person.  There  is,  I  know,  a  certain  species  of  authors 
who  subsist  wholly  by  the  criticising  or  commenting  practice 
upon  others,  and  can  appear  in  no  other  form  besides  what  this 
employment  authorises  them  to  assume.  They  have  no  original 
character  or  first  part,  but  wait  for  something  which  may  be 
called  a  work  in  order  to  graft  upon  it,  and  come  in  for  shares 
at  second  hand. 

The  penmen  of  this  capacity  and  degree  are,  from  their 
function  and  employment,  distinguished  by  the  title  of  answerers. 
For  it  happens  in  the  world  that  there  are  readers  of  a  genius 
and  size  just  fitted  to  these  answering  authors.  These,  if  thcv 
teach  them  nothing  else,  will  teach  them,  they  think,  to  criticise. 
And  though  the  new  practising  critics  are  of  a  sort  unlikely 
ever  to  understand  any  original  book  or  writing,  they  can 
understand  or  at  least  remember  and  (|Uote  the  subsequent 
reflections,  flouts,  and  jeers  which  may  accidentally  be  made  on 
such  a  piece.  AVherever  a  gentleman  of  this  sort  happens  at 
any  time  to  be  in  company,  you  shall  no  sooner  hear  a  new 
book  spoken  of,  than  "twill  be  asked,  "  Who  has  answered  it  ?  " 
or,  "  When  is  there  an  answer  to  come  out  ? """  Now  the  answer, 
as  our  gentleman  knows,  must  needs  be  newer  than  the 
book  ;  and  the  newer  a  thing  is,  the  more  fashionable  still  and 

324 


I 


MISCELLANEOUS   llEFLECTIOXS 

the  genteeler  the  subject  of  discourse.  For  this  the  bookseller 
knows  how  to  fit  our  gentleman  to  a  nicety,  for  he  has  commonly 
an  answer  ready  besjioke,  and  perhaps  finished  by  the  time  his 
new  book  comes  abroad.  And  'tis  odds  but  our  fashionable 
gentleman,  who  takes  both  together,  may  read  the  latter  first 
and  dro])  the  other  for  good  and  all. 

But  of  these  answering  wits,  and  the  manner  of  rejoinders 
and  reiterate  replies,  we  have  said  what  is  sufficient  in  a  former 
jNIiscellany.^  We  need  only  remark  in  general,  "that  'tis 
necessary  a  writing  critic  should  understand  how  to  write.  And 
though  every  writer  is  not  bound  to  show  himself  in  the  capacity 
of  critic,  every  writing  critic  is  bound  to  show  himself  ca])able  of 
being  a  writer.  For  if  he  be  apparently  impotent  in  this  latter 
kind,  he  is  to  be  denied  all  title  or  character  in  the  other." 

To  censure  merely  what  another  person  writes ;  to  twitch, 
snap,  snub-up  or  banter ;  to  torture  sentences  and  phrases,  turn 
a  few  expressions  into  ridicule,  or  write  what  is  nowadavs 
called  an  answer  to  any  piece,  is  not  sufficient  to  constitute  what 
is  pro})erly  esteemed  a  writer  or  author  in  due  form.  For  this 
reason,  though  there  are  many  answerers  seen  abroad,  there  are 
few  or  no  critics  or  satirists.  But  whatever  may  be  the  state  of 
controversy  in  our  religion  or  politic  concerns,  'tis  certain  that 
in  the  mere  literate  world  affairs  are  managed  with  a  better 
understanding  between  the  principal  parties  concerned.  The 
writers  or  authors  in  ])ossession  have  an  easier  time  than  any 
ministry  or  religious  party  which  is  uppermost.  They  have 
found  a  way,  by  decrying  all  criticism  in  general,  to  get  rid  of 
their  dissenters,  and  prevent  all  pretences  to  further  reformation 
in  their  state.  The  critic  is  made  to  appear  distinct  and  of 
another  species,  wholly  different  from  the  writer.  None  who 
have  a  genius  for  writing  and  can  jKn-form  with  any  success  are 
presumed  so  ill-natured  or  illiberal  as  to  endeavour  to  signalise 
themselves  in  criticism. 

'Tis  not  difficult,  however,  to  imagine  why  this  ])ractical 
^  ^'iz.  siipru,  Misc.  i.  cli.  ii. 

325 


SHAFTESIUJRY'S   CHAllACTEUISTICS 

difference  between  writer  and  critic  has  been  so  generally 
established  amongst  us  as  to  make  the  provinces  seem  wholly 
distinct  and  irreconcilable.  The  forward  wits  who,  without 
waiting  their  due  time  or  performing  their  requisite  studies,  start 
up  in  the  workl  as  authors,  having  with  little  pains  or  judgment 
and  by  the  strength  of  fancy  merely  accpiired  a  name  with 
mankind,  can  on  no  account  afterwards  submit  to  a  decrial  or 
disparagement  of  those  ra\\'  ^^■orks  to  which  they  o\sed  their 
early  character  and  distinction.  Ill  would  it  fare  with  them, 
indeed,  if  on  these  tenacious  terms  they  should  venture  upon 
criticism,  or  offer  to  move  that  spirit  which  would  infallibly  give 
such  disturbance  to  their  established  title. 

Now  we  may  consider  that  in  our  nation,  and  es])ecially  in 
our  present  age,  whilst  wars,  debates,  and  public  convulsions 
turn  our  minds  so  wholly  upon  business  and  affairs,  the  better 
geniuses  being  in  a  manner  necessarily  involved  in  the  active 
sphere,  on  which  the  general  eye  of  mankind  is  so  strongly  fixed, 
there  must  remain  in  the  theatre  of  wit  a  sufficient  vacancy  of 
place,  and  the  quality  of  actors  upon  that  stage  must  of  con- 
sequence be  very  easily  attainable,  and  at  a  low  price  of  ingenuity 
or  understanding. 

The  persons,  therefore,  who  are  in  possession  of  the  prime 
parts  in  this  deserted  theatre,  being  sufl'ered  to  maintain  their 
ranks  and  stations  in  full  ease,  have  naturally  a  good  agreement 
and  understandinij  with  their  fellow- wits.  Being  indebted  to 
the  times  for  this  happiness,  that  with  so  little  industry  or 
ca})acity  they  have  been  able  to  serve  the  nation  with  wit,  and 
supply  the  place  of  real  dispensers  and  ministers  of  the  muses"' 
treasures,  they  must  necessarily,  as  they  have  any  love  for  them- 
selves or  fatherly  affection  for  their  works,  conspire  with  one 
another  to  preserve  their  connnon  interest  of  indolence  and 
justify  their  remissness,  uncorrectness,  insipidness,  and  downright 
ignorance  of  all  literate  art  or  just  poetic  beauty. 
Magna  inter  molles  concordia.^ 
'  Juveii.  Sat.  ii.  47.     ["  Great  is  the  unity  of  the  effeminate."] 

326 


I 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

For  this  reason  you  see  them  mutually  courteous  and 
benevolent,  gracious  and  obliging  beyond  measure ;  compliment- 
ing one  another  interchangeably,  at  the  head  of  their  works,  in 
recommendatory  verses,  or  in  separate  panegyrics,  essays,  and 
fragments  of  poetry ;  such  as  in  the  Miscellaneous  Collections 
(our  yearly  retail  of  wit)  we  see  curiously  compacted  and  accom- 
modated to  the  relish  of  the  world.  Here  the  tyrocinium  of 
geniuses  is  annually  displayed.  Here,  if  you  think  fit,  you  may 
make  acquaintance  with  the  young  offspring  of  wits  as  they  come 
up  gradually  under  the  old ;  with  due  courtship  and  homage 
paid  to  those  high  predecessors  of  fame  in  hope  of  being  one 
day  admitted,  by  turn,  into  the  noble  order  and  made  wits  by 
patent  and  authority. 

This  is  the  young  fry  which  you  may  see  busily  surrounding 
the  grown  poet  or  chief  playhouse  author,^  at  a  coffee-house. 
They  are  his  guards,  ready  to  take  up  arms  for  him,  if  by  some 
presumptuous  critic  he  is  at  any  time  attacked.  They  are  indeed 
the  very  shadows  of  their  immediate  predecessor,  and  represent 
the  same  features,  with  some  small  alteration  perhaps  for  the 
worse.  They  are  sure  to  aim  at  nothing  above  or  beyond  their 
master,  and  would  on  no  account  give  him  the  least  jealousy  of 
their  aspiring  to  any  degree  or  order  of  writing  above  him. 
From  hence  that  harmony  and  reciprocal  esteem,  which,  on  such 
a  bottom  as  this,  cannot  fail  of  being  perfectly  well  established 
among  our  poets :  the  age,  meanwhile,  being  after  this  manner 
hopefully  provided  and  secure  of  a  constant  and  like  succession 
of  meritorious  wits,  in  every  kind  ! 

If  by  chance  a  man  of  sense,  unapprised  of  the  authority  of 
these  high  powers,  should  venture  to  accost  the  gentlemen  of 
this  fraternity,  at  some  coffee-house  connnittee,  whilst  they  were 
taken  up  in  mutual  admiration  and  the  usual  praise  of  their 

^  [In  view  of  the  references  to  "ten-monosyllable  heroics"  above 
(p.  322),  and  to  "Mr.  Bays"  in  the  sequel,  it  is  probable  that  here  also 
Dryden  is  aimed  at.  As  he  died  in  1700,  there  is  room  for  a  presumption 
that  this  portion  of  the  3Ii.^cellank's  had  been  written  before  that  date.] 

327 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

national  and  co-temporary  wits,  'tis  possible  he  might  be  treated 
with  some  civility,  whilst  he  inquired,  for  satisfaction  sake,  into 
the  beauties  of  those  particular  works  so  unanimously  extolled. 
But  should  he  presume  to  ask  in  general,  "  Why  is  our  epic  or 
dramatic,  our  essay  or  common  prose  no  better  executed  ? "  Or, 
"  Why,  in  particular,  does  such  or  such  a  reputed  wit  write'  so 
incorrectly,  and  with  so  little  regard  to  justness  of  thought  or 
language  ? ""  The  answer  would  presently  be  given,  "  That  we 
Englishmen  are  not  tied  up  to  such  rigid  rules  as  those  of  the 
ancient  Grecian  or  modern  French  critics/*' 

"  Be  it  so,  gentlemen !  'Tis  your  good  pleasure.  Nor  ought 
any  one  to  dispute  it  with  you.  You  are  masters,  no  doubt,  in 
your  own  country.  But,  gentlemen,  the  question  here  is  not 
what  your  authority  may  be  over  your  own  writers :  you  may 
have  them  of  what  fashion  or  size  of  wit  you  please,  and  allow 
them  to  entertain  you  at  the  rate  you  think  sufficient  and 
satisfactory.  But  can  you,  l)y  your  good  pleasure,  or  the 
approbation  of  your  highest  patrons,  make  that  to  be  either  wit 
or  sense,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  bombast  and  con- 
tradiction ?     If  your  poets  are  still  Mr.  BaysV  and  your  prose 

^  To  see  the  iucorrigibleuess  of  our  poets  in  their  pedantic  manner, 
their  vanity,  defiance  of  criticism,  their  rliodoniontade  and  poetical  bravado, 
we  need  only  turn  to  our  famous  poet-laureate  (the  very  Mr.  Bays  himself) 
in  one  of  his  latest  and  most  valued  pieces,  writ  many  years  after  the 
ingenious  author  of  the  Rehearsal  had  drawn  his  picture.  "  I  have  been 
listening"  (says  our  poet  in  his  preface  to  Don  Sebastian)  "  what  objections 
had  been  made  against  the  conduct  of  the  play,  but  found  them  all  so 
trivial,  that  if  I  should  name  them  a  true  critic  would  imagine  that  I  played 
booty.  .  ,  .  Some  are  pleased  to  say  the  writing  is  dull.  But  aetatem 
habet,  de  se  loquatur.  Others,  that  the  double  poison  is  unnatural.  Let 
the  common  received  opinion,  and  Ausomus  his  famous  epigram,  answer 
that.  Lastly,  a  more  ignorant  sort  of  creatures  than  either  of  the  former 
maintain  that  the  character  of  Uorax  is  not  only  unnatural  but  inconsistent 
with  itself.  Let  them  read  the  play  and  think  again.  A  longer  reply 
is  what  these  cavillers  deserve  not.     But  I  will  give  them  and  their  fellows 

to  understand,  that  the  Earl  of was  pleased  to  read  the  tragedy  twice 

over  before  it  was  acted,  and  did  me  the  favour  to  send  me  word  that  I  had 

328 


I 


MlSCELLANEOl^S   REFLECTIONS 

authors  Sir  Rogers,  without  offering  at  a  better  manner,  nuist 
it  follow  that  the  manner  itself  is  wood  or  the  wit  genuine  ? 
What  say  you,  gentlemen,  to  this  new  jiiece  ?  Let  us  examine 
these  lines  which  you  call  shining !  This  string  of  sentences 
which  you  call  clever !  This  pile  of  metaphors  which  vou  call 
sublime !  Are  you  unwilling,  gentlemen,  to  stand  the  test  ? 
Do  you  despise  the  examination  ? 

"  Sir !  since  you  are  pleased  to  take  this  liberty  with  us,  may 
we  presume  to  ask  you  a  question  ?  Oh,  gentlemen  !  as  many  as 
you  please :  I  shall  be  highly  honoured.  Why  then,  })ray  sir ! 
inform  us  whether  you  have  ever  writ  ?  V  cry  often,  gentlemen, 
especially  on  a  post-night.  13ut  have  you  writ,  for  instance, 
sir,  a  play,  a  song,  an  essay,  or  a  jiaper,  as,  by  way  of  eminence, 
the  current  ])ieces  of  our  weekly  wits  are  generally  styled  ? 
Something  of  this  kind  I  may  perha])s,  gentlemen,  have 
attempted,  though  without  publishing  my  work.  But  pray, 
gentlemen,  what  is  my  writing  or  not  writing  to  the  question  in 
hand  ?  Only  this,  sir,  and  you  may  fairly  take  our  words  for  it, 
that  whenever  you  publish  you  will  find  the  town  against  you. 
Your  piece  will  infallibly  be  condemned.  So  let  it.  But  for 
what  reason,  gentlemen  ?     I  am  sure  you  never  saw  the  piece. 

written  Ijeyond  any  of  my  former  plays,  aud  that  he  was  displeased  any- 
thing- slioukl  he  cut  away.  If  I  have  not  reason  to  prefer  liis  single  judg- 
ment to  a  whole  faction,  let  the  world  be  judge  :  for  the  opposition  is  the 
same  with  that  of  Lucan's  hero  against  an  ai-my,  concurrere  bellum  atfjue 
virum.     I  think  I  may  modestly  conclude,  etc." 

Thus  he  goes  on  to  the  very  end  in  the  self-same  strain,  ^^'llo,  after 
this,  can  ever  say  of  the  Rehearml  author  that  his  picture  of  our  poet  was 
over-charged,  or  the  national  humour  wrong  descril)ed  ? 

[Shaftesbury  might  have  mentioned  tliat  Uryden  in  his  closing  paragraj)h 
writes,  "  At  least,  if  I  appear  too  positive,  I  am  growing  old,  and  thereby  in 
possession  of  some  experience,  which  men  in  years  will  always  assume  for  a 
right  of  talking."  He  had,  besides,  l»een  deprived  of  his  offices  of  poet- 
laureate  and  historiographer-royal  at  the  Revolution,  and  being  forced  to 
return  to  play-writing  for  a  livelihood,  after  having  given  it  up  for  eight 
years,  saw  in  the  attacks  on  Don  Sebastian  an  ungenerous  hostility  to  himself. 
The  play  was  published  in  l(ji)0,  his  fifty-ninth  year.] 

329 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Xo,  sir.  But  you  are  a  critic.  And  we  know  bv  certain  ex- 
perience that,  when  a  critic  writes  according  to  rule  and  method, 
he  is  sure  never  to  hit  the  English  taste.  Did  not  Mr.  Rymer, 
who  criticised  our  English  tragedy,  write  a  sorry  one  of  his 
own  ?  If  he  did,  gentlemen,  'twas  his  own  fault,  not  to  know 
his  genius  better.  But  is  his  criticism  the  less  just  on  this 
account  ?  If  a  musician  ])erforms  his  part  well  in  the  hardest 
symphonies  he  nuist  necessarily  know  the  notes  and  understand 
the  rules  of  harmony  and  music.  But  must  a  man,  therefore, 
who  has  an  ear,  and  has  studied  the  rules  of  music,  of  necessity 
have  a  voice  or  hand  .''  Can  no  one  possibly  judge  a  fiddle  but 
who  is  himself  a  iiddler.''  Can  no  one  judge  a  picture  but  who 
is  himself  a  layer  of  colours  ?  " 

Thus  far  our  rational  gentleman  ])erha})s  might  venture 
before  his  coffee-house  audience.  Had  I  been  at  his  elbow  to 
prompt  him  as  a  friend,  I  should  hardly  have  thought  fit  to 
remind  him  of  any  thing  further.  On  the  contrary,  I  should 
have  rather  taken  him  aside  to  inform  him  of  this  cabal  and 
established  corporation  of  wit,  of  their  declared  aversion  to 
criticism,  and  of  their  known  laws  and  statutes  in  that  case 
made  and  provided.  I  should  have  told  him,  in  short,  that 
learned  arguments  would  be  misspent  on  such  as  these,  and  that 
he  would  find  little  success,  though  he  should  ever  so  plainl}' 
demonstrate  to  the  gentlemen  of  this  size  of  wit  and  understand- 
ing, "  that  the  greatest  masters  of  art,  in  every  kind  of  writing, 
were  eminent  in  the  critical  practice."  But  that  they  really 
were  so,  witness,  among  the  ancients,  their  greatest  philo- 
sophers,^ whose  critical  pieces  lie  intermixed  with  their  profound 
philosophical  works  and  other  politer  tracts  ornamentally  writ  ^ 
for  public  use.  AVitness,  in  history  and  rhetoric,  Isocrates, 
Dionysius  Halicarnasseus,  Plutarch,  and  the  corrupt  Lucian 
himself;    the    only  one    perhaps   of  these   authors  -whom    our 

^  Viz.  PlatOj  Aristotle.     See  in  particular  tlie  Phuedrus  of  the  former^ 
where  an  entire  piece  of  the  orator  Lysias  is  criticised  in  form. 

-  The  distinction  of  treatises  was  into  the  aKpoa/xarLKoi  and  i^uTepiKol. 

330 


MISCEIXANEOUS    RP^FLECTIOXS 

gentlemen  niav,  in  some  modern  translation,  have  looked  into 
with  any  curiosity  or  delight.  To  these  among  the  llomans  we 
may  add  Cicero,  Varro,  Horace,  Qnintilian,  Pliny,  and  many 
more. 

Amono"  the  modei*ns,  a  Boileau  and  a  Corneille  are  sufficient 
precedents  in  the  case  before  us.  They  applied  their  criticism 
with  just  severity,  even  to  their  own  works.  This  indeed  is  a 
manner  hardly  practicable  with  the  poets  of  our  own  nation. 
It  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  of  them  that  they  should 
bring  such  measures  in  use  as,  being  ap})lied  to  their  works, 
would  discover  them  to  be  wholly  deformed  and  disproportion- 
able.  'Tis  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  we  have  so  little  of  this 
critical  genius  extant  to  guide  us  in  our  taste.  'Tis  no  wonder 
if  what  is  generally  current  in  this  kind  lies  in  a  manner  buried, 
and  in  disguise  under  burlesque,  as  particularly  in  the  witty 
comedy  ^  of  a  noble  author  of  this  last  age.  To  the  shame,  how- 
ever, of  our  professed  wits  and  enterprisers  in  the  higher  spheres 
of  poetry,  it  may  be  observed  that  they  have  not  wanted  good 
advice  and  instruction  of  the  graver  kind  from  as  high  a  hand 
in  respect  of  quality  and  character;  since  one  of  the  justest  of 
our  modern  poems,  and  so  confessed  even  by  our  poets  them- 
selves, is  a  short  criticism,  an  Art  of  Poetry  ;  -  by  which,  if  they 
themselves  were  to  be  judged,  they  nmst  in  general  appear  no 
better  than  mere  bunglers,  and  void  of  all  true  sense  and 
knowledge  in  their  art.  But  if  in  reality  both  critic  and  poet, 
confessing  the  justice  of  these  rules  of  art,  can  afterwards  in 
practice  condemn  and  approve,  perform  and  judge  in  a  quite 
different  manner  from  what  they  acknowledge  just  and  true;  it 
plainly  shows  that  though  perhaps  we  are  not  indigent  in  wit, 
we  want  what  is  of  more  consequence,  and  can  alone  raise  wit  to 
any  dignity  or  worth,  even  plain  honesty,  manners,  and  a  sense 
of  that  moral  truth  on  which  (as  has  been  often  expressed  in 

^  The  Reheamil.     See  Treatise  in.  part  ii.  §  2  ;  and  just  above,  p.  328. 
-  Or  Rs.s(n/  on  Poetry,   by   J.   Sheffiebl,    Duke   of  Buckiugliamsliire. 
[Note  in  small  ed.  of  17oo.] 

331 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAIIACTERISTICS 

these  volumes)  ^  poetic  truth  and  hcautv  must  naturally  depend. 

Qui  didicit,  patriae  quid  debeat  et  quid  aniicis. 
Quo  sit  amore  parens^  quo  frater  ainandus  et  hospes. 
Quod  sit  conscripti,  quod  judicis  otficium, 

.   .  .  ille  profecto 
Reddere  personae  scit  convenieutia  cuique.^ 

As  for  this  species  of  morality  which  distinguishes  the  civil 
offices  of  life  and  describes  each  becoming  personage  or  character 
in  this  scene,  so  necessary  it  is  for  the  poet  and  polite  author 
to  be  apprised  of  it,  that  even  the  divine  himself  may  with  juster 
pretence  be  exempted  from  the  knowledge  of  this  sort.  The 
composer  of  religious  discourses  has  the  advantage  of  that  higher 
scene  of  mystery,  which  is  abo\e  the  level  of  human  connnerce. 
'Tis  not  so  much  his  concern  or  business  to  be  agreeable.  And 
often  when  he  would  endeavour  it,  he  becomes  more  than 
ordinarily  displeasing.  His  theatre  and  that  of  the  polite 
world  are  very  different,  insomuch  that  in  a  reverend  author  or 
declaimer  of  this  sort,  we  naturally  excuse  the  ignorance  of 
ordinary  decorum,  in  what  relates  to  the  affairs  of  our  inferior 
temporal  world.  But  for  the  poet  or  genteel  writer,  who  is  of 
this  world  merely,  'tis  a  different  case.  He  must  be  perfect  in  this 
moral  science.  We  can  easily  bear  the  loss  of  indifferent  poetry 
or  essay.  A  good  bargain  it  were,  could  ^e  get  rid  of  every 
moderate  performance  in  this  kind.  But  were  Me  obliged  to 
hear  only  excellent  sermons,  and  to  read  nothing  in  the  Avay  of 
devotion  which  was  not  well  writ,  it  might  possibly  go  hai'd 
with  many  Christian  people  who  are  at  present  such  attentive 
auditors  and  readers.     Established  jmstors  have  a  right  to  be 

1  Viz.  Treatise  iii.  part  i.  §  3 ;  part  ii.  §  .3  ;  part  iii.  §  3.  So  above, 
p.  318,  and  in  the  notes. 

"  ["  The  man  who  has  learned  what  are  liis  duties  to  liis  fatherland  or 
to  his  friends  ;  wliat  affection  is  due  to  a  fatlier,  a  brotlier,  or  a  guest ; 
what  is  tlie  duty  of  a  senator,  wliat  of  a  juryman,  ...  he  to  be  sure  knows 
how  to  find  suitable  language  for  each  character," — Hor.  De  arte  poet., 
312-310.] 

332 


MISCELLANEOUS   llEFLECTIOXS 

indifferent.  But  voluntary  discourses  and  attempters  in  wit 
or  poetry  are  as  intolerable,  \\  hen  they  are  indifferent,  as  either 
fiddlers  or  painters  : — 

Poterat  duci  quia  coena  sine  istis.^ 

Other  Bays"*  and  poetasters  may  be  lawfully  baited,  though  we 
patiently  submit  to  our  Bays'  in  divinity. 

Had  the  author  of  our  subject  treatises-  considered 
thoroughly  of  these  literate  affairs,  and  found  how  the  interest 
of  wit  stood  at  present  in  our  nation,  he  would  have  had  so 
much  regard  surely  to  his  own  interest,  as  never  to  have  writ 
unless  either  in  the  single  ca])acity  of  mere  critic,  or  that  of 
author  in  form.  If  he  had  resolved  never  to  produce  a  regular 
or  legitimate  piece,  he  might  jiretty  safely  have  writ  on  still 
after  the  rate  of  his  first  volume  and  mixed  manner.  He 
might  have  been  as  critical,  as  satirical,  or  as  full  of  raillery  as 
he  had  pleased.  But  to  come  afterwards  as  a  grave  actor  upon 
the  stage,  and  expose  himself  to  criticism  in  his  turn,  by  giving 
us  a  work  or  two  in  form,  after  the  regular  manner  of  composi- 
tion, as  we  see  in  his  second  volume ;  this  I  think  was  no 
extraordinary  proof  of  his  judgment  or  ability,  in  what  related 
to  his  own  credit  and  advantage. 

One  of  these  formal  pieces  (the  Incjuiry,  already  examined) 
we  have  found  to  be  wholly  after  the  manner  which  in  one  of 
his  critical  ])ieces  he  calls  the  methodic.  But  his  next  piece 
(the  INIoralists,  which  we  have  now  before  us)  must,  according  to 
his  own  rules,^  be  reckoned  as  an  undertaking  of  greater  weight. 
'Tis  not  only  at  the  bottom  as  systematical,  didactic,  and  pre- 
ceptive as  that  other  piece  of  formal  structure ;  but  it  assumes 
withal  another  garb  and  more  fashionable  turn  of  wit.  It  con- 
ceals what  is  scholastical  under  the  appearance  of  a  polite  work. 
It  aspires  to  dialogue,  and  carries  with  it  not  only  those  })oetic 

^  ['' Because  a  diiiuer  could  he  carried  on  without  them." — Ilor.  De 
arte  poet. ,  37(5. 

-  Supra,  Misc.  iii.  ch.  i.  ;    iv.  ch.  i. 
^  Treatise  in.  part  i.  §  ."5 ;  i)art  ii.  S  -. 

333 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

features  of  the  pieces  anciently  called  mimes  ;  but  it  attempts  to 
unite  the  several  personages  and  characters  in  one  action  or 
story,  within  a  determinate  compass  of  time,  regularly  divided 
and  drawn  into  different  and  proportioned  scenes ;  and  this, 
too,  with  variety  of  styles ;  the  simple,  comic,  rhetorical,  and 
even  the  poetic  or  sublime,  such  as  is  the  aptest  to  run  into 
enthusiasm  and  extravagance.  So  much  is  our  author,  by  virtue 
of  this  piece,^  a  poet  in  due  form,  and  by  a  more  apparent 
claim  than  if  he  had  writ  a  play  or  dramatic  piece  in  as  regular 
a  manner,  at  least,  as  any  known  at  present  on  our  stage. 

It  appears,  indeed,  that  as  high  as  our  author  in  his  critical 
capacity  would  pretend  to  carry  the  refined  manner  and 
accurate  simplicity  of  the  ancients,  he  dares  not,  in  his  own  model 
and  principal  performance,  attempt  to  unite  his  philosophy  in 
one  solid  and  uniform  body,  nor  carry  on  his  argument  in  one 
continued  chain  or  thread.  Here  our  author's  timorousness  is 
visible.     In  the  very  plan  or  model  of  his  work,  he  is  apparently 

^  Tli;it  he  is  conscious  of  tliis,  we  may  gather  from  that  Hue  or  t^u  of 
advertisement,  which  stands  at  the  heginning  of  his  first  edition.  ''As 
for  the  characters  and  incidents,  tliey  are  neither  wholly  feigned,"  says  he, 
"  nor  wholly  true  ;  but  according  to  the  liberty  allowed  in  the  way  of 
dialogue,  the  principal  matters  are  founded  upon  truth,  and  the  rest  as 
near  resembling  as  may  be.  'Tis  a  sceptic  recites,  and  the  hero  of  the 
piece  passes  for  an  enthusiast.  If  a  perfect  character  be  wanting,  'tis  the 
same  case  here  as  with  the  poets  in  some  of  their  best  pieces.  And  this 
surely  is  a  sufficient  warrant  for  the  author  of  a  philosophical  romance." 
Thus  our  author  himself,  who  to  conceal,  however,  his  strict  imitation  of 
the  ancient  poetic  dialogue,  has  prefixed  an  auxiliary  title  to  his  work, 
and  given  it  the  surname  of  Rhapsody.  As  if  it  were  merely  of  tliat  essay 
or  mixed  kind  of  works,  which  come  abroad  with  an  affected  air  of 
negligence  and  irregularity.  But  whatever  our  author  may  have  affected 
in  his  title  page,  'twas  so  little  his  intention  to  write  after  that  model  of 
incoherent  workmanship,  that  it  appears  to  be  sorely  against  his  will  if 
this  dialogue  piece  of  his  has  not  the  just  character  and  correct  form  of 
those  ancient  poems  described.  He  would  gladly  have  constituted  one 
single  action  and  time,  suitable  to  the  just  simplicity  of  those  dramatic 
works.     And  this,  one  Mould   think,  was  easy  enough  for  him   to  have 

334 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

put  to  a  hard  shift  to  contrive  how  or  with  what  probabihty  he 
might  introduce  men  of  any  note  or  fashion,  reasoning  expressly 
and  purposely,^  without  play  or  trifling,  for  two  or  three  hours 
together  on  mere  philosophy  and  morals.  He  finds  these 
subjects  (as  he  confesses)  so  wide  of  common  conversation, 
and  by  long  custom  so  appropriated  to  the  school,  the 
university  chair  or  pulpit,  that  he  thinks  it  hardly  safe  or 
practicable  to  treat  of  them  elsewhere  or  in  a  different  tone. 
He  is  forced  therefore  to  raise  particular  machines,  and  con- 
strain his  principal  characters  in  order  to  carry  a  better  face 
and  bear  himself  out  against  the  appearance  of  pedantry. 
Thus  his  gentleman  philosopher  Theocles,  before  he  enters  into 
his  real  character,  becomes  a  feigned  preacher.  And  even  when 
his  real  character  comes  on,  he  hardly  dares  stand  it  out ;  but 
to  deal  the  better  with  his  sceptic  friend  he  falls  again  to  per- 
sonating, and  takes  up  the  humour  of  the  poet  and  enthusiast. 
Palemon  the  man  of  quality,  and  who  is  first  introduced  as 
speaker  in  the  piece,  must,  for  fashion-sake,  appear  in  love,  and 
under  a  kind  of  melancholy  produced  by  some  misadventures  in 
the  world.  How  else  should  he  be  supposed  so  serious 't 
Philocles  his  friend  (an  airy  gentleman  of  the  world  and  a 
thorough  railleur'")  must  have  a  home  charge  upon  him,  and  feel 
the  anger  of  his  grave  friend  before  he  can  be  supposed  grave 

doue.  He  needed  only  to  have  brought  liis  first  speakers  immediately 
into  action,  and  saved  the  narrative  or  recitative  part  of  Philocles  to 
Palemon,  by  producing  them  as  speaking  personages  upon  his  stage. 
The  scene  all  along  might  have  been  the  park.  From  the  early  evening 
to  the  late  hour  of  night,  that  the  tw(»  gallants  witlidrew  to  their  town 
apartments,  there  was  sufficient  time  for  the  narrator  Philocles  to  have 
recited  tlie  whole  transaction  of  the  second  and  third  part,  which  would 
have  stood  throughout  as  it  now  does ;  only  at  the  conclusion,  when  the 
narrative  or  recitative  part  had  ceased,  the  simple  and  direct  dialogue 
would  have  again  returned  to  grace  the  exit.  By  this  means  the  temporal 
as  well  as  local  unity  of  the  piece  had  been  preserved.  Nor  had  our 
author  been  necessitated  to  connnit  that  anachronism,  of  making  his  first 
part  in  order  to  be  last  in  time. 

^  Treatise  ii.  part  i.  §  3.  -  [Sliaftesbury  wrote  "Raillyer."] 

335 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

enough  to  enter  into  a  philosophical  discourse.  A  quarter  of 
an  hour's  reading  must  serve  to  represent  an  hour  or  two"'s 
debate.  And  a  new  scene  presenting  itself,  ever  and  anon,  must 
give  refreshment,  it  seems,  to  the  faint  reader,  and  remind  him 
of  the  characters  and  business  going  on. 

'Tis  in  the  same  view  that  we  miscellanarian  authors,  being 
fearful  of  the  natural  lassitude  and  satiety  of  our  indolent  reader, 
have  prudently  betaken  ourselves  to  the  ways  of  chapters  and 
contents,  that  as  the  reader  proceeds,  by  frequent  intervals  of 
repose  contrived  on  purpose  for  him,  he  may  from  time  to  time 
be  advertised  of  what  is  yet  to  come,  and  be  tem})ted  thus  to 
renew  his  application. 

Thus  in  our  modern  ])lavs  we  see,  almost  in  every  other  leaf, 
descriptions  or  illustrations  of  the  action,  not  in  the  poem  itself, 
or  in  the  mouth  of  the  actors,  but  by  the  poet  in  his  own 
person ;  in  order,  as  appears,  to  help  out  a  defect  of  the  text 
by  a  kind  of  marginal  note  or  connnent,  which  renders  these 
pieces  of  a  mixed  kind  between  the  narrative  and  dramatic. 
'Tis  in  this  fashionable  style  or  manner  of  dumb  show  that  the 
reader  finds  the  action  of  the  piece  more  amazingly  ex])ressed 
than  he  ])ossibly  could  by  the  lines  of  the  drama  itself,  where 
the  parties  alone  are  suffered  to  be  speakers. 

'Tis  out  of  the  same  regard  to  ease,  both  in  resjiect  of  writer 
and  reader,  that  we  see  long  characters  and  descrijitions  at  the 
head  of  most  dramatic  pieces,  to  inform  us  of  the  relations, 
kindred,  interest,  and  designs  of  the  dramatis  personae ;  this 
being  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  reader,  that  .he  may  the 
better  understand  the  plot,  and  find  out  the  principal  characters 
and  incidents  of  the  })iece,  which  otherwise  could  not  possibly 
discover  themselves  as  they  are  read  in  their  due  order.  And 
to  do  justice  to  our  play-readers,  they  seldom  fail  to  humour 
our  poets  in  this  respect,  and  read  over  the  characters  with  strict 
application,  as  a  sort  of  grammar  or  key,  before  they  enter  on 
the  piece  itself.  I  know  not  whether  they  would  do  so  much 
for  any  philosophical  piece  in   the  world.     Our  author  seems 

336 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

very  much  to  question  it,  and  has  therefore  made  that  part  easy 
enough  which  relates  to  the  distinction  of  his  characters,  by 
making  use  of  the  narrative  manner.  Though  he  had  done  as 
well,  perhaps,  not  to  have  gone  out  of  the  natural  plain  way  on 
this  account.  For  wuth  those  to  whom  such  philosophical 
subjects  are  agreeable,  it  could  be  thought  no  laborious  task  to 
give  the  same  attention  to  characters  in  dialogue  as  is  given  at 
the  first  entrance  by  every  reader  to  the  easiest  play  composed 
of  fewest  and  plainest  personages.  But  for  those  who  read 
these  subjects  with  mere  supineness  and  indifference,  they  will 
as  much  begrudge  the  pains  of  attending  to  the  characters  thus 
particularly  pointed  out  as  if  they  had  only  been  discernible  by 
inference  and  deduction  from  the  mouth  of  the  speaking  parties 
themselves. 

JNIore  reasons  are  given  by  our  author  ^  himself  for  his  avoid- 
ing the  direct  way  of  dialogue,  which  at  present  lies  so  low,  and  is 
used  only  now  and  then  in  our  party-pamphlets  or  new-fashioned 
theological  essays.  For  of  late,  it  seems,  the  manner  has  been 
introduced  into  Church  controversy,  with  an  attempt  of  raillery 
and  humour,  as  a  more  successful  method  of  dealing  with  heresy 
and  infidelity.  The  burlesque  divinity  grows  mightily  in  vogue. 
And  the  cried-up  answers  to  heterodox  discourses  are  generally 
such  as  are  written  in  drollery  or  with  resemblance  of  the 
facetious  and  humorous  language  of  conversation. 

Joy  to  the  reverend  authors  who  can  afford  to  be  thus  gay, 
and  condescend  to  correct  us  in  this  lay-wit.  The  advances  they 
make  in  behalf  of  piety  and  manners  by  such  a  popular  style 
are  doubtless  found  upon  experience  to  be  very  considerable. 
As  these  reformers  are  nicely  t;[ualified  to  hit  the  air  of  breeding 
and  gentility,  they  will  in  time,  no  doubt,  refine  their  manner 
and  improve  this  jocular  method,  to  the  edification  of  the  j)olite 
world,  who  have  been  so  long  seduced  by  the  way  of  raillery 
and  wit.  They  may  do  wonders  by  their  comic  muse,  and  may 
thus,  perhaps,  find  means  to  laugh  gentlemen  into  their  religion 
^  Treatise  v.  part  i.  §  1. 

VOL.  II  337  z 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHAKACTERISTICS 

who  h;ive  unfortunately  been  laughed  out  of  it.  For  what 
reason  is  there  to  suppose  that  orthodoxy  should  not  be  able 
to  laugh  as  agreeably,  and  with  as  much  refinedness,  as  heresy 
or  infidelity  ? 

At  present,  it  must  be  owned,  the  characters  or  personages 
employed  by  our  new  orthodox  chalogists  carry  with  them  little 
proportion  or  coherence,  and  in  this  respect  may  be  said  to  suit 
])erfectly  with  that  figurative  metaphorical  style  and  rhetorical 
manner,  in  which  their  logic  and  arguments  are  generally 
couched.  Nothing  can  be  more  com})Iex  or  multiform  than 
their  moral  draughts  or  sketches  of  humanity.  •  These,  indeed, 
are  so  far  from  representing  any  particular  man  or  order  of  men, 
that  they  scarce  resemble  anything  of  the  kind.  'Tis  by  their 
names  only  that  these  characters  are  figured.  Though  they 
bear  different  titles  and  are  set  up  to  maintain  contrary  points, 
they  are  found,  at  the  bottom,  to  be  all  of  the  same  side ;  and, 
notwithstanding  their  seeming  variance,  to  co-operate  in  the 
most  officious  manner  with  the  author,  towards  the  display  of 
his  own  proper  wit,  and  the  establishment  of  his  j)rivate  opinion 
and  maxims.  They  are  indeed  his  very  legitimate  and  obse- 
quious puppets,  as  like  real  men  in  voice,  action,  and  manners 
as  those  wooden  or  wire  engines  of  the  lower  stage.  Philotheus 
and  Philatheus,  Philautus  and  Philalethes  are  of  one  and  the 
same  order :  just  tallies  to  one  another ;  questioning  and 
answering  in  concert,  and  with  such  a  sort  of  alternative  as  is 
known  in  a  vulgar  play,  where  one  person  lies  down  blindfold 
and  presents  himself,  as  fair  as  may  be,  to  another,  who  by  favour 
of  the  company  or  the  assistance  of  his  good  fortune,  deals  his 
companion  many  a  sound  blow,  without  being  once  challenged, 
or  brought  into  his  turn  of  lying  down. 

There  is  the  same  curious  mixture  of  chance  and  elegant 
vicissitude  in  the  style  of  these  mock  personages  of  our  new 
theological  drama;  with  this  difference  only,  "that  after  the 
poor  phantom  or  shadow  of  an  adversary  has  said  as  little  for 
his  cause  as  can  be  imagined,  and   given   as  many  opens  and 

338 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

advantages  as  could  be  desiretl,  he  lies  down  for  good  and  all, 
and  passively  submits  to  the  killing  strokes  of  his  unmerciful 
conqueror."" 

Hardly,  as  I  concei\e,  will  it  be  objected  to  our  moralist 
(the  author  of  the  philosophic  dialogue  above)  "  that  the  per- 
sonages who  sustain  the  sceptical  or  objecting  parts,  are  over- 
tame  and  tractable  in  their  disjiosition."  Did  I  ])erceive  any 
such  foul  dealing  in  his  piece,  I  should  scarce  think  it  worthy  of 
the  criticism  here  bestowed.  For  in  this  sort  of  writing,  where 
personages  are  exhibited  and  natural  conversation  set  in  view ; 
if  characters  are  neither  tolerably  preserved  nor  manners  with 
any  just  similitude  described,  there  remains  nothing  but  what  is 
too  o-ross  and  monstrous  for  criticism  or  examination. 

""Twill  be  alleged,  ]Derha])s,  in  answer  to  what  is  here  ad- 
vanced, "  that  should  a  dialogue  be  wrought  up  to  the  exactness 
of  these  rules,  it  ought  to  be  condenmed  as  the  worse  piece,  for 
affording  the  infidel  or  sceptic  such  good  quarter  and  giving  him 
the  full  advantage  of  his  argument  and  wit."" 

But  to  this  I  reply,  that  either  dialogue  should  never  be 
attempted,  or,  if  it  be,  the  parties  should  apj^ear  natural  and 
such  as  they  really  are.  If  we  paint  at  all,  we  should  endeavour 
to  paint  like  life  and  draw  creatures  as  they  are  knowable,  in 
their  proper  shapes  and  better  features,  not  in  metamorphoses, 
not  mangled,  lame,  distorted,  awkward  forms,  and  impotent 
chimeras.  Atheists  have  their  sense  and  w'its  as  other  men, 
or  why  is  atheism  so  often  challenged  in  those  of  the  better 
rank  ?  Why  charged  so  often  to  the  account  of  wit  and  subtle 
reasoning  ? 

Were  1  to  advise  these  authors,  towards  whom  I  am  ex- 
tremely well-affected  on  account  of  their  good-humoured  zeal 
and  the  seeming  sociableness  of  their  religion,  I  should  say  to 
them,  "  gentlemen !  be  not  so  cautious  of  furnishing  your 
representative  sceptic  with  too  good  arguments  or  too  shrewd 
a  turn  of  wit  or  humour.  Be  not  so  fearful  of  giving  quarter. 
Allow  your  adversary  his  full  reason,  his  ingenuity,  sense,  and 

339 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHAllACTERTSTICS 

art.  Trust  to  the  chief  character  or  hero  of  vour  piece.  Make 
him  as  dazzhng  bright  as  you  are  able.  He  will  undoubtedly 
overcome  the  utmost  force  of  his  opponent,  and  dispel  the 
darkness  or  cloud  which  the  adversary  may  unluckily  have 
raised.  But  if  when  you  have  fairly  wrought  up  your  antagonist 
to  his  due  strength  and  cognisable  proportion,  your  chief  char- 
acter cannot  afterwards  prove  a  match  for  him  or  shine  with  a 
superior  brightness  ;  whose  fault  is  it  ?  The  subject's  ?  This, 
I  hope,  you  will  never  allow.  Whose,  therefore,  beside  your 
own 't  Beware  then,  and  consider  well  your  strength  and 
mastershi})  in  this  manner  of  writing,  and  in'  the  qualifying- 
practice  of  the  polite  world,  ere  you  attempt  these  accurate  and 
refined  linniings  or  portraitures  of  mankind,  or  offer  to  bring 
gentlemen  on  the  stage.  For  if  real  gentlemen  seduced,  as  you 
})retend,  and  made  erroneous  in  their  religion  or  philosophy, 
discover  not  the  least  feature  of  their  real  faces  in  your  looking- 
glass,  nor  know  themselves  in  the  least  by  your  description, 
they  will  hardly  be  apt  to  think  they  are  refuted.  How  wittily 
soever  your  comedy  may  be  wrought  up,  they  will  scarce  appre- 
hend any  of  that  wit  to  fall  upon  themselves.  They  may  laugh 
indeed  at  the  diversion  you  are  pleased  to  give  them,  but  the 
laugh  jjerhaps  may  be  different  from  what  you  intend.  They 
may  smile  secretly  to  see  themselves  thus  encountered ;  when 
they  find,  at  last,  your  authority  laid  by  and  your  scholastic 
weapons  quitted,  in  favour  of  this  weak  attempt  to  master  them 
by  their  own  arms  and  proper  ability." 

Thus  we  have  performed  our  critical  task,  and  tried  our 
strensth  both  on  our  author  and  those  of  his  order,  who 
attempt  to  write  in  dialogue  after  the  active  dramatic,^  mimical, 
or  personating  way,  according  to  which  a  writer  is  properly 
poetical. 

What  remains,  we  shall  examine  in  our  succeeding  and  last 
chapter. 

1  See  Treatise  iii.  part  i.  §  3. 

340 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 


CHAPTER    III 

Of  extent  or  latitude  of  thought — Free-thinkers — Their  cause  and  char- 
acter— Dishonesty,  a  half-thought — Short-thinking,  cause  of  vice  and 
bigotry — Agreement  of  slavery  and  superstition — Liberty,  civil,  moral, 
spiritual — Free-thinking  divines — Representatives  incognito — Ambas- 
sadors from  the  moon — Effectual  determination  of  Christian  contro- 
versy and  religious  belief. 

Beikg  now  come  to  the  conclusion  of  my  work,  after  havino- 
defended  the  cause  of  critics  in  general,  and  employed  what 
strength  I  had  in  that  science  upon  our  adventurous  author  in 
particular ;  I  may,  according  to  equity  and  with  the  better 
grace,  attempt  a  line  or  two  in  defence  of  that  freedom  of 
thought  which  our  author  has  used,  particularly  in  one  of  the 
personages  of  his  last  dialogue  treatise. 

There  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that,  however  equably 
framed  or  near  alike  the  race  of  mankind  may  appear  in  other 
respects,  they  are  not  always  equal  thinkers,  or  of  a  like  ability 
in  the  management  of  this  natural  talent  which  we  call  thought. 
The  race,  on  this  account,  may  therefore  justly  be  distinguished, 
as  they  often  are,  by  the  appellation  of  the  thinking  and  the 
unthinking  sort.  The  mere  unthinking  are  such  as  have  not 
yet  arrived  to  that  happy  thought  by  which  they  should 
observe  "  how  necessary  thinking  is,  and  how  fatal  the  want 
of  it  must  prove  to  them.""  The  thinking  part  of  mankind,  on 
the  other  side,  having  discovered  the  assiduity  and  industry 
requisite  to  right  thinking,  and  being  already  commenced 
thinkers  upon  this  foundation,  are  in  the  progress  of  the  affair 
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  thinking  to  good  purpose  and 
carrying  the  work  to  a  thorough  issue.  They  know  that  if 
they  refrain  or  stop  once  upon  this  road,  they  had  done  as  well 
never  to  have  set  out.  They  are  not  so  supine  as  to  be  with- 
held by  mere  laziness,  when  notliing  lies  in  the  way  to  interru])t 
the  free  course  and  progress  of  their  thought. 

341 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

Some  obstacles,  'tis  true,  may  on  this  occasion  be  pretended. 
Spectres  may  come  across  and  shadows  of  reason  rise  up  against 
reason  itself.  But  if  men  have  once  heartily  espoused  the 
reasoning  or  thinking  habit,  they  will  not  easily  be  induced  to 
lay  the  practice  down ;  they  will  not  at  an  instant  be  arrested 
or  made  to  stand  and  yield  themselves  when  they  come  to  such 
a  certain  boundary,  landmark,  j)ost,  or  pillar,  erected  here  or 
there  (for  what  reason  may  probably  be  guessed)  with  the 
inscription  of  a  ne  plus  iiltra. 

'Tis  not,  indeed,  any  authority  on  earth,  as  we  are  well 
assured,  can  stop  us  on  this  road,  unless  we  please  to  make  the 
arrest  or  restriction  of  our  own  accord.  'Tis  our  own  thovight 
which  must  restrain  our  thinking.  And  whether  the  restraining 
thought  be  just,  how  shall  we  ever  judge,  without  examining  it 
freely  and  out  of  all  constraint  ?  How  shall  we  be  sure  that 
we  have  justly  quitted  reason  as  too  high  and  dangerous,  too 
aspiring  or  presumptive ;  if  through  fear  of  any  kind  or  sub- 
mitting to  mere  command  we  cpiit  our  very  examining  thought, 
and  in  the  moment  stop  short,  so  as  to  put  an  end  to  further 
thinking  on  the  matter  ?  Is  there  nuich  difference  between  this 
case  and  that  of  the  obedient  beasts  of  burden,  who  stop  pre- 
cisely at  their  ap])ointed  inn,  or  at  whatever  point  the  charioteer 
or  governor  of  the  reins  thinks  fit  to  give  the  signal  for  a  halt  ? 

I  cannot  but  from  hence  conclude  that  of  all  species 
of  creatures  said  connnonly  to  have  brains,  the  most  insipid, 
Avretched,  and  preposterous  are  those  whom  in  just  propriety  of 
speech  we  call  half- thinkers. 

I  have  often  known  pretenders  to  wit  break  out  into  admira- 
tion on  the  sight  of  some  raw,  heedless,  unthinking  gentleman, 
declaring  on  this  occasion  that  they  esteemed  it  the  happiest 
case  in  the  world,  "  never  to  think  or  trouble  one's  head  with 
study  or  consideration."  This  I  have  always  looked  upon  as 
one  of  the  highest  airs  of  distinction  which  the  self-achniring 
wits  are  used  to  give  themselves  in  public  company.  Now  the 
echo  or  antiphony  which  these  elegant  exclaimers  hope,  by  this 

342 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

reflection,  to  draw  necessarily  from  their  audience,  is  "  that  they 
themselves  are  over-freighted  with  this  merchandise  of  thought, 
and  have  not  only  enough  for  ballast,  but  such  a  cargo  over  and 
above  as  is  enough  to  sink  them  by  its  weight."  I  am  apt, 
however,  to  imagine  of  these  gentlemen  that  it  was  never  their 
over-thinking  which  oppressed  them,  and  that  if  their  thought 
had  ever  really  become  oppressive  to  them,  they  might  thank 
themselves  for  having  under-thought  or  reasoned  short,  so  as  to 
rest  satisfied  with  a  very  superficial  search  into  matters  of  the 
first  and  highest  importance. 

If,  for  example,  they  overlooked  the  chief  enjoyments  of  life, 
which  are  founded  in  honesty  and  a  good  mind ;  if  ,they  pre- 
sumed mere  life  to  be  fully  worth  what  its  tenacious  lovers  are 
pleased  to  rate  it  at ;  if  they  thought  public  distinction,  fame, 
power,  an  estate  or  title  to  be  of  the  same  value  as  is  vulgarly 
conceived,  or  as  they  concluded  on  a  first  thought  without 
further  scepticism  or  after-deliberation  ;  'tis  no  wonder,  if  being 
in  time  become  such  mature  dogmatists  and  well-practised 
dealers  in  the  affairs  of  what  they  call  a  settlement  or 
fortune,  they  are  so  hardly  put  to  it  to  find  case  or  rest  within 
themselves. 

These  are  the  deeply-loaded  and  over-pensive  gentlemen, 
who,  esteeming  it  the  truest  wit  to  pursue  what  they  call  their 
interest,  wonder  to  find  they  are  still  as  little  at  ease  when  they 
have  succeeded  as  when  they  first  attempted  to  advance. 

There  can  never  be  less  self-enjoyment  than  in  these  supposed 
wise  characters,  these  selfish  computers  of  happiness  and  private 
good,  whose  piu-suits  of  interest,  whether  for  this  world  or 
another,  arc  attended  with  the  same  steady  vein  of  cunning  and 
low  thought,  sordid  deliberations,  perverse  and  crooked  fancies, 
ill  dispositions  and  false  relishes  of  life  and  manners.  The 
most  negligent,  undcsigning,  thoughtless  rake  has  not  only  more 
of  sociableness,  ease,  tranquillity  and  freedom  from  worldly 
cares,  but  in  reality  more  of  worth,  virtue,  and  merit  than  such 
grave  plodders  and  thoughtful  gcnllenien  as  these. 

343 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

If  it  happens,  therefore,  that  these  graver,  more  circumspect, 
and  deeply  interested  gentlemen  have,  for  their  soul's  sake  and 
through  a  careful  provision  for  hereafter,  engaged  in  certain 
speculations  of  religion,  their  taste  of  virtue  and  relish  of  life 
is  not  the  more  improved  on  this  account.  The  thoughts  they 
have  on  these  new  subjects  of  divinity  are  so  biassed  and  per- 
plexed by  those  half-thoughts  and  raw  imaginations  of  interest 
and  worldly  affairs,  that  they  are  still  disabled  in  the  rational 
pursuit  of  happiness  and  good ;  and  being  necessitated  thus  to 
remain  short-thinkers,  they  have  the  power  to  go  no  further 
than  they  are  led  by  those  to  whom,  under  such  disturbances 
and  perplexities,  they  apply  themselves  for  cure  and  comfort. 

It  has  been  the  main  scope  and  principal  end  of  these 
volumes,  "  to  assert  the  reality  of  a  beauty  and  charm  in  moral 
as  well  as  natural  subjects,  and  to  demonstrate  the  reasonable- 
ness of  a  proportionate  taste  and  determinate  choice  in  life  and 
manners."  The  standard  of  this  kind  and  the  noted  character 
of  moral  truth  appear  so  firmly  established  in  Nature  itself,  and 
so  widely  displayed  through  the  intelligent  world,  that  there  is 
no  genius,  mind,  or  thinking  principle  Avhich  (if  I  may  say  so) 
is  not  really  conscious  in  the  case.  Even  the  most  refractory 
and  obstinate  understandings  are  by  certain  reprises  or  returns 
of  thought  on  every  occasion  convinced  of  this  existence,  and 
necessitated,  in  common  with  others,  to  acknowledge  the  actual 
right  and  wrong. 

'Tis  evident  that  whensoever  the  mind,  influenced  by  passion 
or  humour,  consents  to  any  action,  measure,  or  rule  of  life 
contrary  to  this  governing  standard  and  primary  measure  of 
intelligence,  it  can  only  be  through  a  weak  thought,  a  scantiness 
of  judgment,  and  a  defect  in  the  application  of  that  unavoidable 
imjiression  and  first  natural  rule  of  honesty  and  worth,  against 
which  whatever  is  advanced  will  be  of  no  other  moment  than 
to  render  a  life  distracted,  incoherent,  full  of  irresolution, 
repentance,  and  self-disapprobation. 

Thus  every  innnorality  and  enormity  of  life  can  only  happen 

344 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

from  a  partial  and  narrow  view  of  happiness  and  good.  What- 
ever takes  from  the  largeness  or  freedom  of  thought  must  of 
necessity  detract  from  that  first  relish  or  taste  on  which  virtue 
and  worth  depend. 

For  instance,  when  the  eye  or  appetite  is  eagerly  fixed  on 
treasure  and  the  monied  bliss  of  bags  and  coffers,  'tis  plain 
there  is  a  kind  of  fascination  in  the  case.  The  sight  is  instantly 
diverted  from  all  other  views  of  excellence  or  worth.  And  here, 
even  the  vulgar,  as  well  as  the  more  liberal  part  of  mankind, 
discover  the  contracted  genius  and  acknowledge  the  narrowness 
of  such  a  mind. 

In  luxury  and  intemperance  we  easily  apprehend  how  far 
thought  is  oppressed  and  the  mind  debarred  from  just  reflection, 
and  from  the  free  examination  and  censure  of  its  own  opinions 
or  maxims,  on  which  the  conduct  of  a  life  is  formed. 

Even  in  that  complicated  good  of  vulgar  kind  which  we 
commonly  call  interest,  in  which  we  comprehend  both  pleasure, 
riches,  power  and  other  exterior  advantages,  we  may  discern 
how  a  fascinated  sight  contracts  a  genius,  and  by  shortening  the 
view  even  of  that  very  interest  which  it  seeks,  betrays  the  knave, 
and  necessitates  the  ablest  and  wittiest  proselyte  of  the  kind 
to  expose  himself  on  every  emergency  and  sudden  turn. 

But  above  all  other  enslaving  vices  and  restrainers  of  reason 
and  just  thought,  the  most  evidently  ruinous  and  fatal  to  the 
uuderstanding  is  that  of  superstition,  bigotry,  and  vulgar 
enthusiasm.  This  passion,  not  contented  Hke  other  vices  to 
deceive  and  tacitly  supplant  our  reason,  professes  open  war, 
holds  up  the  intended  chains  and  fetters,  and  declares  its 
resolution  to  enslave. 

The  artificial  managers  of  this  human  frailty  declaim  against 
free-thought  and  latitude  of  understanding.  'J'o  go  beyond 
those  bounds  of  thinking  which  they  have  prescribed  is  by  tbem 
declared  a  sacrilege.  To  them  freedom  of  mind,  a  mastery  of 
sense,  and  a  liberty  in  thought  and  action  imply  debauch,  cor- 
ruption, and  depravitv. 

345 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

In  consequence  of  their  moral  maxims  and  political 
establishments  they  can  indeed  advance  no  better  notion  of 
human  happiness  and  enjoyment  than  that  which  is  in  every 
respect  the  most  opposite  to  liberty.  'Tis  to  them  doubtless  that 
we  owe  the  opprobriousness  and  abuse  of  those  naturally  honest 
appellations  of  free-livers,  free-thinkers,  latitudinarians,  or  what- 
ever other  character  implies  a  largeness  of  mind  and  generous 
use  of  understanding.  Fain  would  they  confound  licentiousness 
in  morals  with  liberty  in  thought  and  action,  and  make  the 
libertine,  who  has  the  least  mastery  of  himself,  resemble  his 
direct  opposite.  For  such  indeed  is  the  man  of  resolute  purpose 
and  immovable  adherence  to  reason  against  everything  which 
passion,  prepossession,  craft  or  fashion  can  advance  in  favour 
of  aught  else.  But  here,  it  seems,  the  grievance  lies.  'Tis 
thouoht  dangerous  for  us  to  be  over-rational  or  too  much 
masters  of  ourselves  in  what  we  dra^v  by  just  conclusions  from 
reason  only.  Seldom  therefore  do  these  expositors  fail  of 
bringing  the  thought  of  liberty  into  disgrace.  Even  at  the 
expense  of  virtue  and  of  that  very  idea  of  goodness  on  which 
they  build  the  mysteries  of  their  })rofitable  science,  they  derogate 
from  morals  and  reverse  all  true  philosophy,  they  refine  on 
selfishness  and  explode  generosity,  promote  a  slavish  obedience 
in  the  room  of  voluntary  duty  and  free  service,  exalt  blind 
ignorance  for  devotion,  reconmiend  low  thought,  decry  reason, 
extol  voluptuousness,^  wilfulness,  vindicativeness,  arbitrariness, 
vain  glory,  and  even  deify  those  weak  passions  which  are  the 
disgrace  rather  than  ornament  of  human  nature.- 

But  so  far  is  it  from  the  nature  of  liberty  to  indulge  such 
passions  as  thcse,^  that  whoever  acts  at  any  time  under  the 
power  of  any  single  one  may  be  said  to  have  already  provided 
for  himself  an  absolute  master.  And  he  who  lives  under  the 
power  of  a  whole  race  (since  "'tis  scarce  possible  to  obey 
one  without   the   other)   nuist   of  necessity   undergo   the  worst 

^  Mordlists,  part  ii.  §  2,  iiiid  below,  ]>.  "A?>.        -  Treatise  i.  ?  1,  end. 
•^  MoraHsf-s,  part  ii.  S  -  ;  l>;irt  iii.  §  o. 

346 


IVITSCELLANEOUS   IIEFLECTIONS 

of    servitudes,    under   the    most    capricious    and    domineering 
lords. 

That  this  is  no  paradox  even  the  writers  for  entertainment 
can  inform  us,  however  others  may  moralise  who  discourse  or 
write  (as  they  pretend)  for  profit  and  instruction.  The  poets 
even  of  the  wanton  sort  give  ample  testimony  of  this  slavery 
and  ^^■retchedness  of  vice.  They  may  extol  voluptuousness  to 
the  skies  and  point  their  wit  as  sharply  as  they  are  able  against 
a  virtuous  state.  But  when  they  come  afterwards  to  pay  the 
necessary  tribute  to  their  commanding  pleasures,  we  hear  their 
pathetic  moans  and  find  the  inward  discord  and  calamity  of 
their  lives.  Their  example  is  the  best  of  precepts,  since  they 
conceal  nothing,  are  sincere,  and  speak  their  passion  out  aloud. 
And  'tis  in  this  that  the  very  worst  of  poets  may  justly  be 
preferred  to  the  generality  of  modern  philosophers  or  other 
formal  writers  of  a  yet  more  specious  name.  The  muses'  pupils 
never  fail  to  express  their  passions  and  write  just  as  they  feel. 
'Tis  not,  indeed,  in  their  nature  to  do  otherwise,  whilst  they 
indulo-e  their  vein  and  are  under  the  ])ower  of  that  natural 
enthusiasm  which  leads  them  to  what  is  highest  in  their  per- 
formance. They  follow  Nature.  They  move  chiefly  as  she 
moves  in  them,  without  thought  of  disguising  her  free  motions 
and  genuine  operations,  for  the  sake  of  any  scheme  or  hypothesis 
which  they  have  formed  at  leisure  and  in  particular  narrow 
views.  On  this  account,  though  at  one  time  they  quarrel 
perhajis  with  virtue  for  restraining  them  in  their  forbidden 
loves,  they  can  at  another  time  make  her  sufficient  amends, 
when  with  indignation  they  complain  "  that  merit  is  neglected, 
and  their  worthless  rival  preferred  before  them."  ^ 
C'ontrane  lucrum  nil  valerc  caiulidum 
Pauperis  ina^enium  ?  - 

And   thus  even   in   common  elegiac,  in  song,  ode,  or  epigram 

^  Treatise  ii.  part  iv.    2. 

2  ["To  think  that  the  honest  lieart  of  a   |)oor   man    should   liave    no 
weight  ajjainst  ^ohl  !" — Ilor.,  K/iorl.  xi.  11,  12.] 

347 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTEETSTICS 

consecrated  to  pleasure  itself,  we  may  often  read  the  dolorous 
confession  in  behalf  of  virtue,  and  see  at  the  bottom  how  the 
case  stands : — 

Nam  verae  voces  tum  demiim  pectove  ab  imo 
Eliciiintur.i 

The  airy  poets  in  these  fits  can,  as  freely  as  the  tragedian, 
condole  with  virtue,  and  bemoan  the  case  of  suffering  merit : — 

The  oppressor's  wrong,  the  proud  man's  eontmnely, 
The  insolence  of  office,  and  the  spurns 
That  patient  merit  of  the  unworthy  takes. 

The  poetic  chiefs  may  give  what  reason  they  think  fit  for 
their  humour  of  representing  our  mad  a])petites,  especially  that 
of  love,  under  the  shape  of  urchins  and  wanton  boys  scarce  out 
of  their  state  of  inf;\ncy.  The  original  design  and  moral  of  this 
fiction,  I  am  persuaded,  was  to  show  us  how  little  there  was  of 
great  and  heroic  in  the  government  of  these  pretenders,  how 
truly  weak  and  childish  they  were  in  themselves,  and  how  nuich 
lower  than  mere  children  we  then  became  when  we  submitted 
ourselves  to  their  blind  tutorage.  There  was  no  fear  left  in 
this  fiction  the  boyish  nature  should  be  misconstrued  as  in- 
nocent and  gentle.  The  storms  of  passion,  so  well  known  in 
every  kind,  kept  the  tyrannic  quality  of  this  wanton  race 
sufficiently  in  view.  Nor  could  the  poetical  description  fail  to 
bring  to  mind  their  mischievous  and  malignant  play.  But 
when  the  image  of  imperious  threatening  and  absolute  connnand 
was  joined  to  that  of  ignorance,  puerility,  and  folly,  the  notion 
was  completed  of  that  wretched  slavish  state  which  modern 
libertines,  in  conjunction  with  some  of  a  graver  character,  admire 
and  represent  as  the  most  eligible  of  any.  "  Happy  condi- 
tion ! ""   says  one.     "  Happy  life,  that  of  the  indulged  passions, 

*  ["  For  llion  and  then  only  are  tlie  \\()r(ls  of  triitli  (li-a\Mi  from  the 
bottom  of  a  man's  heart." — Lucretius,  iii.  57.] 

348 


MTSCELLANF.OUS    REFLECTIONS 

niio-ht  we  piusue  it  !  Miserable  condition  !  miserable  life,  that 
of  reason  and  virtue,  \\  liich  we  are  bid  pursue  ! "  ^ 

'Tis  the  same,  it  seems,  with  men  in  morals  as  in  politics. 
AVhen  they  have  been  unhaj^pily  born  and  bred  to  slavery, 
they  are  so  far  from  being  sensible  of  their  slavish  course  of  life, 
or  of  that  ill  usage,  indignity,  and  misery  they  sustain,  that 
they  even  admire  their  own  condition,  and  being  used  to  think 
short,  and  carry  their  views  no  further  than  those  bounds  which 
were  early  prescribed  to  them,  they  look  upon  tyranny  as  a 
natural  case,  and  think  mankind  in  a  sort  of  dangerous  and 
degenerate  state  when  under  the  power  of  laws,  and  in  the 
possession  of  a  free  government. 

We  may  by  these  reflections  come  easily  to  apprehend  what 
men  they  were  who  first  brought  reason  and  free  thought  under 
disgrace,  and  made  the  noblest  of  characters  (that  of  a  free 
thinker)  to  become  invidious.  'Tis  no  wonder  if  the  same 
interpreters  would  have  those  also  to  be  esteemed  free  in  their 
lives,  and  masters  of  good  living,  who  are  the  least  masters  of 
themselves,  and  the  most  impotent  in  passion  and  humour  of 
all  their  fellow-creatures.  But  far  be  it,  and  far  surely  will  it 
ever  be  from  any  worthy  genius  to  be  consenting  to  such  a 
treacherous  language  and  abuse  of  words.  For  my  own  part,  I 
thoroughly  confide  in  the  good  powers  of  reason,  "  that  liberty 
and  freedom  shall  never  by  any  artifice  or  delusion  be  made  to 
pass  with  me  as  frightful  sounds,  or  as  reproachful,  or  invidious, 
in  any  sense."" 

I  can  no  more  allow  that  to  be  free  living,  where  unlimited 
passion  and  unexamined  fancy  govern,  than  I  can  allow  that  to 
be  a  free  government  where  the  mere  people  govern,  and  not 
the  laws.  For  no  people  in  a  civil  state  can  possibly  be  free, 
when  they  are  otherwise  governed  than  by  such  laws  as  they 
themselves  have  constituted,  or  to  which  they  have  freely  given 
consent.  Now,  to  be  released  from  these,  so  as  to  govern  them- 
selves by  each  day's  will  or  fancy,  and  to  vary  on  every  turn  the 
^  Morulints,  part  ii.  §  2. 

349 


SHAITESEURY'S   CHAllACTERTSTICS 

rule  and  measure  of  government,  without  res{)ec't  to  any  ancient 
constitutions  or  establishments,  or  to  the  stated  and  fixed  rules 
of  equity  and  justice,  is  as  certain  slavery  as  it  is  violence,  dis- 
traction, and  misery,  such  as  in  the  issue  nnist  prove  the  estab- 
lishment of  an  irretrievable  state  of  tyranny  and  absolute 
dominion. 

In  the  determinations  of  life,  and  in  the  choice  and  govern- 
ment of  actions  he  alone  is  free  who  has  A\ithin  himself  no 
hindrance  or  control  in  acting  \\hat  he  himself,  by  his  best 
judgment  and  most  deliberate  choice,  approves.  Could  vice 
agree  possibly  with  itself,  or  could  the  \  icious  any  way  reconcile 
the  various  judgments  of  their  inward  counsellors,  they  might 
with  justice  perhaps  assert  their  liberty  and  independency.  But 
wliilst  they  are  necessitated  to  follow  least  wliat,  in  their  sedate 
hours,  they  most  appro\e,  whilst  they  are  jiassively  assigned 
and  made  over  from  one  ])ossessor  to  another^  in  contrary 
extremes,  and  to  different  ends  and  j)ur})oses  of  which  they  are 
themsehes  wholly  ignorant,  'tis  evident  that  the  more  they  turn 
their  eyes  -  (as  many  times  they  are  obliged)  towards  virtue  and 
a  free  life,  the  more  they  must  confess  their  misery  and  subjec- 
tion. They  discern  their  own  ca})tivity,  but  not  with  force  and 
resolution    sufficient    to    redeem   themselves  and    become   their 

1  Huuccine  an  liuuc  sequeris.^     Subeas  alteruus  oportet 
Aiicipiti  obsequio  dominos. 

[''Are  you  for  followinu-  this  hook  or  tliat?  You  must  submit  to  each 
master  in  turn,  with  waveriuj^  allegiance."] — Pers.,  Sat,  v.  155,  156.  See 
Treatise  ni.  part  iii.  §§  1,  2,  etc. 

^  Magne  pater  divumj  saevos  punire  tyraunos 
Haud  alia  ratione  velis,  cum  dira  libido 
Moverit  ingenium  ferventi  tinctsi  veneno, 
Virtutem  videant,  intabescantque  relictii. 

["  Great  father  of  the  Gods,  condescend  to  punish  the  cruelty  of  tyrants 
in  no  other  way,  when  fierce  passion  dipped  in  fiery  poison  has  stirred 
their  souls.  Let  them  look  upon  virtue  and  pine  to  think  that  they  have 
abandoned  her." — Persius,  iii.  35-38.] 

350 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

own.  Such  is  the  real  tragic  state,  as  the  old  tragedian 
represents  it  : —  ^ 

Video  nieUora  pi'oboque, 
Deteriora  sequor."- 

And  thus  the  highest  spirits  and  most  refractory  wills  con- 
tribute to  the  lowest  servitude  and  most  submissive  state. 
Reason  and  virtue  alone  can  bestow  liberty.  Vice  is  unworthy, 
and  unhappy  on  this  account  only,  "  that  it  is  slavish  and 
debasing." 

Thus  have  we  pleaded  the  cause  of  liberty  in  general,  and 
vindicated  withal  our  authors  particular  freedom  in  taking 
the  person  of  a  sceptic,  as  he  has  done  in  this  last  treatise,"  on 
which  we  have  so  largely  paraphrased.  AVe  may  now  perhaps, 
in  compliance  with  general  custom,  justly  presume  to  add  some- 
thing in  defence  of  the  same  kind  of  freedom  we  ourselves  have 
assumed  in  these  latter  miscellaneous  comments,  since  it  would 
doubtless  be  very  unreasonable  and  unjust  for  those  who  had  so 
freely  played  the  critic  to  expect  anything  less  than  the  same 
free  treatment  and  thorough  criticism  in  return. 

As  for  the  style  or  language  used  in  these  comments,  'tis 
very  different,  we  find,  and  varies  in  proportion  with  the  author 
commented,  and  with  the  different  characters  and  persons  fre- 
(luently  introduced  in  the  original  treatises.  So  that  there  will 
undoubtedly  be  scope  sufficient  for  censure  and  correction. 

As  for  the  observations  on  antiquity,  we  have  in  most 
passages,  except  the  very  common  and  obvious,  produced  our 
vouchers  and  authorities  in  our  own  behalf.  VMiat  may  be 
thought  of  our  judgment  or  sense  in  the  application  of  these 
authorities,  and    in    the   deductions   and    reasonings    we    have 

'  Kal  fxavdavu  /xtv  ola  ToK/jLTjau}  KaKo.'  ^Uyuos  5^  Kpeiaatov  tQv  ijxuiv  ^ov\€Vfj.6.Tuv. 
I"  Aud  well  I  know  the  crime  I  shall  commit,  jet  rage  is  stronger  than 
all  counsel."— Eur.,  Med.  1078,  1079.] 

2  ["I  see  aud  I  esteem  the  better  course,  I  follow  the  worse." — Ovid, 
Metamorphoses,  vii.  21.] 

•''  Viz.  The  Moralists  or  Philosophic  Dialogue  recited  in  tlie  person  of 
a  sceptic,  under  the  name  of  Philocles.     See  Treatise  v.  part  i.  g  2, 

Sol 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

formed   froui   such    learned   topics,   must   be   submitted   to   the 
opinion  of  the  wise  and  learned. 

In  morals,  of  which  the  very  force  lies  in  a  love  of  discipline 
and  in  a  willingness  to  redress  and  rectify  false  thought  and 
erring  views ;  we  cannot  but  patiently  wait  redress  and  amicable 
censure  from  the  sole  competent  judges,  the  wise  and  good  ; 
whose  interest  it  has  been  our  whole  endeavour  to  advance. 

The  only  subject  on  which  we  are  perfectly  secure,  and  with- 
out fear  of  any  just  censure  or  rejjroach,  is  that  of  faith  and 
orthodox  belief.  For  in  the  first  place  it  will  appear  tliat 
through  a  profound  respect  and  religious  veneration,  we  have 
forborne  so  much  as  to  name  any  of  the  sacred  and  solemn 
mysteries  of  revelation.^  And  in  the  next  place,  as  we  can  with 
confidence  declare  that  we  have  never  in  any  writing,  public 
or  private,  attempted  such  high  researches,  nor  have  ever  in 
practice  acquitted  ourselves  otherwise  than  as  just  conformists 
to  the  lawful  church ;  so  we  may,  in  a  proper  sense,  be  said 
faithfully  and  dutifully  to  embrace  those  holy  mysteries,  even 
in  their  minutest  particulars,  and  without  the  least  exception  on 
account  of  their  amazing  depth.  And  though  we  are  sensible 
that  it  would  be  no  small  hardship  to  deprive  others  of  a 
liberty  of  examining  and  searching,  with  due  modesty  and  sub- 
mission, into  the  nature  of  those  subjects ;  yet  as  for  ourselves, 
who  have  not  the  least  scruple  whatsoever,  we  pray  not  any 
such  grace  or  favour  in  our  behalf,  being  fully  assured  of  our 
own  steady  orthodoxy,  resignation,  and  entire  submission  to  the 
truly  Christian  and  catholic  doctrines  of  our  holy  church  as  by 
law  established. 

""Tis  true,  indeed,  that  as  to  critical  learning  -  and  the  ex- 
amination of  originals,  texts,  glosses,  various  readings,  styles, 
compositions,  manuscripts,  compilements,  editions,  publica- 
tions, and  other  circumstances  such  as  are  common  to  the  sacred 
books  with  all  other  writings  and  literature,  this  we  have  con- 

^  Supra,  Mine.  i.  ch.  ii. 
2  Treatise  ii.  part  iv,  §  3. 

352 


MISCELT.ANEOUS   HEFT.ECTIONS 

fideiitly  asserted  to  be  a  just  and  lawful  study.  We  have  even 
represented  this  species  of  criticism  as  necessary  to  the  preserva- 
tion and  purity  of  Scripture ;  that  Sacred  Scripture  which  has 
been  so  miraculously  preserved  in  its  successive  copies  and 
transcriptions  under  the  eye  (as  we  nmst  needs  suppose)  of  holy 
and  learned  critics,  through  so  many  dark  ages  of  Christianity 
to  these  latter  times,  in  which  learning  has  been  happily  revived. 

But  if  this  critical  liberty  raises  any  jealousy  against  us,  we 
shall  beg  leave  of  our  offended  reader  to  lay  before  him  our 
case  at  the  very  w^orst ;  that  if  on  such  a  naked  exposition  it 
be  found  criminal,  we  may  be  absolutely  condemned  ;  if  other- 
wise, acquitted,  and  with  the  same  favour  indulged  as  others  in 
the  same  circumstances  have  been  before  us. 

On  this  occasion,  therefore,  we  may  be  allowed  to  borrow- 
something  from  the  form  or  manner  of  our  dialogue  author,  and 
represent  a  conversation  of  the  same  free  nature  as  that  recited 
by  him  in  his  night  scene,^  where  the  supposed  sceptic  or  free- 
thinker delivers  his  thoughts  and  reigns  in  the  discourse. 

'Twas  in  a  more  considerable  company,  and  before  a  more 
numerous  audience  that,  not  long  since,  a  gentleman  of  some 
rank  (one  who  was  generally  esteemed  to  carry  a  sufficient 
caution  and  reserve  in  religious  subjects  of  discourse,  as  well  as 
an  apparent  deference  to  religion,  and  in  particular  to  the 
national  and  established  Church)  having  been  provoked  by  an 
impertinent  attack  of  a  certain  violent  bigoted  party,  was 
drawn  into  an  open  and  free  vindication  not  only  of  free-think- 
ing but  free  professing  and  discoursing  in  matters  relating  to 
religion  and  faith. 

Some  of  the  company,  it  seems,  after  having  made  bold 
with  him  as  to  what  they  fancied  to  be  his  principle,  began  to 
urge  "  the  necessity  of  reducing  men  to  one  profession  and 
belief"  And  several  gentlemen,  even  of  those  who  passed  for 
moderate  in  their  way,  seemed  so  far  to  give  in  to  this  zealot 
opinion  as  to  agree,  "  that  notwithstanding  the  right  method 
^  Treatise  \'.  part  ii.  §  5. 

VOL.  II  35l^  2  A 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

was  not  yet  found,  'twas  highly  requisite  that  some  way  should 
be  thought  on  to  reconcile  differences  in  opinion  ;  since  so  long 
as  this  variety  should  last,  religion  they  thought  could  never  be 
successfully  advanced." 

To  this  our  gentleman  at  first  answered  coldly,  that 
"  what  was  impossible  to  be  done,  could  not  he  thought  be 
properly  pursued  as  necessary  to  be  done.""  But  the  raillery 
being  ill  taken,  he  was  forced  at  last  to  defend  himself  the  best 
he  could  upon  this  point,  "  that  variety  of  opinion  was  not  to 
be  cured.''''  And  "that  'twas  impossible  all  should  be  of  one 
mind."" 

"  I  well  know,"  said  he,  "  that  many  pious  men,  seeing  the 
inconveniences  which  the  disunion  of  persuasions  and  opinions 
accidentally  produces,  have  thought  themselves  obliged  to  stop 
this  inundation  of  mischiefs,  and  have  made  attempts  accord- 
ingly. Some  have  endeavoured  to  unite  these  fractions  by  pro- 
pounding such  a  guide  as  they  were  all  bound  to  follow,  hoping 
that  the  unity  of  a  guide  would  have  produced  unity  of  minds. 
But  who  this  guide  should  be,  after  all,  became  such  a  question 
that  'twas  made  part  of  that  fire  itself  which  was  to  be  ex- 
tinguished. Others  thought  of  a  rule.  This  was  to  be  the 
effectual  means  of  union  !  This  was  to  do  the  work  or  nothing 
could !  But  supposing  all  the  world  had  been  agreed  on  this 
rule,  yet  the  interpretation  of  it  was  so  full  of  variety,  that  this 
also  became  part  of  the  disease." 

The  company,  upon  this  preamble  of  our  gentleman,  pressed 
harder  upon  him  than  before,  objecting  the  authority  of  Holy 
Scripture  against  him,  and  affirming  this  to  be  of  itself  a 
sufficient  guide  and  rule.  They  urged  again  and  again  that 
known  saying  of  a  famed  controversial  divine  of  our  Church 
against  the  divines  of  another,  "  that  the  Scripture,  the  Scripture 
was  the  religion  of  Protestants." 

To  this  our  gentleman  at  first  replied  only  by  desiring  them 
to  explain  their  word  Scripture,  and  by  inquiring  into  the 
original  of  this  collection  of  ancienter  and  later  tracts,  which 

354 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

in  general  they  comprehended  under  that  title  :  whether  it  were 
the  apocryphal  Scripture  or  the  more  canonical  ?  The  full 
or  the  half-authorised  ?  The  doubtful  or  the  certain  ?  The 
controverted  or  un  controverted  ?  The  singly-read  or  that  of 
various  reading  ?  The  text  of  these  manuscripts  or  of  those  ? 
The  transcripts,  copies,  titles,  catalogues  of  this  Church  and 
nation,  or  of  that  other  ?  of  this  sect  and  party  or  of  another  ? 
of  those  in  one  age  called  orthodox,  and  in  possession  of 
power,  or  of  those  who  in  another  overthrew  their  predecessors'* 
authority,  and  in  their  turn  also  assumed  the  guardianship  and 
power  of  holy  things  ?  For  how  these  sacred  records  were 
guarded  in  those  ages,  might  easily  (he  said)  be  imagined  by 
any  one  who  had  the  least  insight  into  the  history  of  those 
times  which  we  called  primitive,  and  those  characters  of  men 
whom  we  styled  Fathers  of  the  Church. 

"  It  must  be  confessed,"  continued  he,  "  "'twas  strange  industry 
and  unlucky  diligence  which  was  used,  in  this  respect,  by  these 
ecclesiastical  forefathers.  Of  all  those  heresies  which  a:ave  them 
employment,  we  have  absolutely  no  record  or  monument  but 
what  themselves  who  were  adversaries  have  transmitted  to  us ; 
and  we  know  that  adversaries,  especially  such  who  observe  all 
opportunities  to  discredit  both  the  persons  and  doctrines  of 
their  enemies,  are  not  always  the  best  recorders  or  witnesses 
of  such  transactions.  We  see  it,"  continued  he,  in  a  very  em- 
phatical  but  somewhat  embarrassed  style,  "  we  see  it  now  in 
this  very  age,  in  the  present  distemperatures,  that  parties  are 
no  good  registers  of  the  actions  of  the  adverse  side :  and  if  we 
cannot  be  confident  of  the  truth  of  a  story  now  (now,  I  say, 
that  it  is  possible  for  any  man,  especially  for  the  interested 
adversary,  to  discover  the  imposture),  it  is  far  more  unlikely 
that  after-ages  should  know  any  other  truth  than  such  as  serves 
the  ends  of  the  representers." 

Our  gentleman  by  these  expressions  had  already  given  con- 
siderable offence  to  his  zealot  auditors.  They  plied  him  faster 
with   passionate    reproaches    than   with  arguments   or  rational 

355 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHAIIACTETIISTICS 

answers.  This,  however,  served  only  to  animate  him  the  more, 
and  made  him  proceed  the  more  boldly,  with  the  same  assumed 
formality  and  air  of  declamation,  in  his  general  criticism  of  holy 
literature. 

"  There  are,"  said  he,  "  innumerable  places  that  contain  (no 
doubt)  great  mysteries,  but  so  wrapped  in  clouds  or  hid  in 
umbrages,  so  heightened  with  expressions  or  so  covered  with 
allegories  and  garments  of  rhetoric,  so  profound  in  the  matter 
or  so  altered  and  made  intricate  in  the  manner,  that  they  may 
seem  to  have  been  left  as  trials  of  our  industry,  and  as  occasions 
and  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  mutual  charity  and  tolera- 
tion, rather  than  as  the  repositories  of  faith  and  furniture  of 
creeds.  For  when  there  are  found  in  the  explications  of  these 
writings  so  many  commentaries,  so  many  senses  and  interpreta- 
tions, so  many  volumes  in  all  ages,  and  all  like  men's  faces,  no 
one  exactly  like  another :  either  this  difference  is  absolutely  no 
fault  at  all,  or  if  it  be,  it  is  excusable.  There  are,  besides,  so 
many  thousands  of  copies  that  were  writ  by  persons  of  several 
interests  and  persuasions,  such  different  understandings  and 
tempers,  such  distinct  abilities  and  weaknessess,  that  'tis  no 
wonder  there  is  so  great  variety  of  readings  .  .  .  whole  verses 
in  one  that  are  not  in  another  .  .  .  whole  books  admitted  by 
one  church  or  communion  which  are  rejected  by  another :  and 
whole  stories  and  relations  admitted  by  some  Fathers  and  re- 
jected by  others.  ...  I  consider,  withal,  that  there  have  been 
many  designs  and  views  in  expounding  these  writings;  many 
senses  in  which  they  are  expounded  ;  and  when  the  grammatical 
sense  is  found  out,  we  are  many  times  never  the  nearer.  Now 
there  being  such  variety  of  senses  in  Scripture,  and  but  few- 
places  so  marked  out  as  not  to  be  capable  of  more  than  one ; 
if  men  will  write  commentaries  by  fancy,  what  infallible  criterion 
will  be  left  to  judge  of  the  certain  sense  of  such  places  as  have 
been  the  matter  of  question  ?  I  consider  again,  that  there  are 
indeed  divers  places  in  these  sacred  volumes,  containing  in  them 
mysteries  and  questions  of  great  concernment ;  yet  such  is  the 

356 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

fabric  and  constitution  of  the  whole,  that  there  is  no  certain 
mark  to  determine  whether  the  sense  of  these  passages  should 
be  taken  as  literal  or  figurative.  There  is  nothing  in  the  nature 
of  the  thing  to  determine  the  sense  or  meaning ;  but  it  must 
be  gotten  out  as  it  can.  And  therefore  'tis  unreasonably 
required,  that  what  is  of  itself  ambiguous  should  be  understood 
in  its  own  prime  sense  and  intention,  under  the  pain  of  either 
a  sin  or  an  anathema.  \'ery  wise  men,  even  the  ancient  Fathers, 
have  expounded  things  allegorically,  when  they  should  have 
expounded  them  literally.  Others  expound  things  literally 
when  they  should  understand  them  in  allegory.  If  such  great 
spirits  could  be  deceived  in  finding  out  what  kind  of  senses 
were  to  be  given  to  Scriptures,  it  may  well  be  endured  that  we 
who  sit  at  their  feet  should  be  subject  at  least  to  equal  failure. 
If  we  follow  any  one  translation,  or  any  one  man's  commentary, 
what  rule  or  direction  shall  we  have  by  which  to  choose  that 
one  aright  ?  Or  is  there  any  one  man  that  hath  translated 
perfectly,  or  expounded  infallibly  ?  If  we  resolve  to  follow  any 
one  as  far  only  as  we  like  or  fancy,  we  shall  then  only  do  wrong 
or  right  by  chance.  If  we  resolve  absolutely  to  follow  any  one 
whithersoever  he  leads,  we  shall  })robably  come  at  last  where,  if 
we  have  any  eyes  left,  we  shall  see  ourselves  become  sufficiently 
ridiculous."" 

The  reader  may  here,  perhaps,  by  his  natural  sagacity, 
remark  a  certain  air  of  studied  discourse  and  declamation,  not 
so  very  proper  or  natural  in  the  mouth  of  a  mere  gentleman, 
nor  suitable  to  a  company  where  alternate  discourse  is  carried 
on  in  unconcerted  measure  and  unpremeditated  language. 
Something  there  was  so  very  enq:)hatical,  withal,  in  the 
delivery  of  these  words  by  the  sceptical  gentleman,  that  some  of 
the  company  who  were  still  more  incensed  against  him  for  these 
expressions,  began  to  charge  him  as  a  preacher  of  pernicious 
doctrines,  one  who  attacked  religion  in  form,  and  carried  his 
lessons  or  lectures  about  with  him  to  repeat  by  rote,  at  anv 
time,  to  the  ignorant  and  vulgar,  in  order  to  seduce  them. 

357 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

'Tis  true,  indeed,  said  he,  gentlemen,  that  what  I  have  here 
ventured  to  repeat  is  addressed  chiefly  to  those  you  call 
ignorant ;  such,  I  mean,  as  being  otherwise  engaged  in  the 
world,  have  had  little  time,  perhaps,  to  bestow  upon  inquiries 
into  divinity  matters.  As  for  you,  gentlemen,  in  particular, 
who  are  so  much  displeased  with  my  freedom,  I  am  well  assured 
you  are  in  effect  so  able  and  knowing,  that  the  truth  of  every 
assertion  I  have  advanced  is  sufficientlv  understood  and  ac- 
knowledged by  you,  however  it  may  happen  that,  in  your  great 
wisdom,  you  think  it  proper  to  conceal  these  matters  from  such 
persons  as  you  are  ])leased  to  style  the  vulgar. 

""Tis  true,  withal,  gentlemen,  continued  he,  I  will  confess  to 
you,  that  the  words  you  have  heard  repeated  are  not  my  own. 
They  are  no  other  than  what  have  been  publicly  and  solemnly 
delivered   even   by   one  ^  of  the   episcopal   order,   a   celebrated 

^  The  pious  and  learned  Bishop  Taylor^  in  his  treatise  On  the  Liberty  oj 
Prophesying,  printed  in  his  collection  of  Polemical  and  Moral  Discourses, 
anno  1G57.  The  pajjres  answering  to  the  places  above  cited  are,  401,  402 
(and  in  the  epistle  dedicatory,  three  or  four  leu\es  before),  438,  439-444, 
4.51,  452.  After  which,  in  the  succeeding  page,  he  sums  up  his  sense  on 
this  subject  of  sacred  literature,  and  the  liberty  of  criticism,  and  of  private 
judgment  and  opinion  in  these  matters,  in  the  following  words:  "Since 
there  are  so  many  copies,  with  infinite  varieties  of  reading  ;  since  a  various 
interpunction,  a  parenthesis,  a  letter,  an  accent,  may  much  alter  the 
sense ;  since  some  places  have  divers  literal  senses,  many  have  spiritual, 
mystical,  and  allegorical  meanings ;  since  there  are  so  many  tropes, 
metonjTTiies,  ironies,  hyperboles,  proprieties  and  improprieties  of  language, 
whose  understanding  depends  upon  such  circumstances,  that  it  is  almost 
impossible  to  know  the  proper  interpretation,  now  that  the  knowledge  of 
such  circumstances  and  particular  stories  is  irrecoverably  lost ;  since  there 
are  some  mysteries,  which  at  the  best  advantage  of  expression  are  not 
easy  to  be  apprehended,  and  whose  explication,  l)y  reason  of  our  imper- 
fections, must  needs  be  dark,  sometimes  weak,  sometimes  unintelligible  : 
and  lastly,  since  those  ordinary  means  of  expounding  Scripture,  as 
searching  the  originals,  conference  of  places,  parity  of  reason,  and  analogy 
of  faith  are  all  dubious,  uncertain,  and  very  fallible  ;  he  that  is  the 
wisest,  and  by  consequence  the  likeliest  to  expound  truest,  in  all  proba- 
bility of  reason  will  be  very  far  from   confidence,  because  every  one  t)f 

358 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

Chui'chman,  and  one  of  the  highest  sort,  as  appears  by  his  many 
devotional  works,  which  carry  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  pomp 
of  worship  with  the  honour  and  dignity  of  the  priestly  and 
episcopal  order  to  the  highest  degree.  In  effect,  we  see  the 
reverend  doctor''s  treatises  standing,  as  it  were,  in  the  front  of 
this  order  of  authors,  and  as  the  foremost  of  those  good  books 
used  by  the  politest  and  most  refined  devotees  of  either  sex. 
They  maintain  the  principal  place  in  the  study  of  almost  every 
elegant  and  high  divine.  They  stand  in  folios  and  other 
volumes,  adorned  with  variety  of  pictures,  gildings,  and  other 
decorations,  on  the  advanced  shelves  or  glass-cupboards  of  the 
ladies''  closets.  They  are  in  use  at  all  seasons  and  for  all  places, 
as  well  for  church-service  as  closet-preparation ;  and,  in  short, 
may  vie  with  any  devotional   books   in   British   Christendom. 

these,  ami  many  more,  are  like  so  many  degrees  of  improbability  and 
uncertainty,  all  depressing-  our  certainty  of  finding  out  truth  in  such 
mysteries  and  amidst  so  many  difficulties.  iVud,  therefore,  a  wise  man 
that  considers  this,  would  not  willingly  be  prescribed  to  by  others  ;  for  it 
is  best  every  man  should  be  left  in  that  liberty,  from  which  no  man  can 
justly  take  him,  unless  he  could  secure  him  from  error."  Tlie  Reverend 
Prelate  had  but  a  few  pages  before  (viz.  p.  427)  acknowledged,  indeed, 
"  that  we  had  an  apostolical  warrant  to  contend  earnestly  for  the  faith. 
But  then,"  says  the  good  bishop,  very  candidly  and  ingeniously,  ''as 
these  things  recede  farther  from  the  foundation,  our  certainty  is  the  less. 
.  .  .  And  therefore  it  were  very  fit  that  our  confidence  should  be 
according  to  our  evidence,  and  our  zeal  according  to  our  confidence." 
He  adds,  p.  507,  "all  these  disputes  concerning  tradition,  councils. 
Fathers,  etc.,  are  not  arguments  against  or  besides  reason,  but  contesta- 
tions and  pretences  of  the  best  arguments,  and  the  most  certain  satisfaction 
of  our  reason.  But  then  all  these  coming  into  question  submit  themselves 
to  reason,  that  is,  to  be  judged  by  human  understanding,  upon  the  best 
grounds  and  information  it  can  receive.  So  that  Scripture,  tradition, 
Councils  and  Fathers  are  the  evidence  in  a  cjuestion,  but  reason  is  the 
judge  :  that  is,  we  being  the  persons  that  are  to  be  persuaded,  we  must 
see  that  we  be  persuaded  reasonably  ;  aiul  it  is  unreasonable  to  assent  to 
a  lesser  evidence  when  a  greater  and  clearer  is  propounded  ;  but  of  that 
every  man  for  himself  is  to  take  cognisance,  if  he  be  able  to  judge  ;  if  he 
be  not,  he  is  not  bound  under  the  tie  of  necessity  to  know  anything  of  it." 

359 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTEllIS  J  ICS 

And  for  the  life  and  character  of  the  man  liiinself,  I  leave  it 
to  you,  gentlemen  (you,  I  mean,  of  the  zealot  kind),  to  except 
against  it,  if  you  think  proper.  'Tis  your  manner,  I  know,  and 
what  you  never  fail  to  have  recourse  to  when  any  authority  is 
produced  against  you.  Personal  reflection  is  always  seasonable 
and  at  hand  on  such  an  occasion.  No  matter  what  virtue, 
honesty,  or  sanctity  may  lie  in  the  character  of  the  person  cited. 
No  matter  though  he  be  ever  so  much,  in  other  respects,  of  your 
own  party  and  devoted  to  your  interest.  If  he  has  indiscreetly 
spoken  some  home  truths,  or  discovered  some  secret  which 
strikes  at  the  temporal  interests  of  certain  spiritual  societies,  he 
is  quickly  doomed  to  calumny  and  defamation. 

I  shall  try  this  experiment,  however,  once  more  (continued 
our  gentleman),  and  as  a  conclusion  to  this  discourse  will  venture 
to  produce  to  you  a  further  authority  of  the  same  kind.  You 
shall  have  it  before  you  in  the  exact  phrase  and  words  of  the 
great  author  in  his  theological  capacity,  since  I  have  now  no 
further  occasion  to  conceal  my  citations,  and  accommodate  them 
to  the  more  familiar  style  and  language  of  conversation. 

Our  excellent  Archbishop  ^  and  late  ]*'ather  of  our  church, 
when  expressly  treating  that  very  subject  of  a  rule  in  matters 

of  belief,  in  opposition  to  Mr.  S and  Mr.  R ,  his  Romish 

antagonists,  shows  plainly  how  great  a  shame  it  is  for  us  Protest- 
ants at  least,  whatever  the  case  may  be  with  Romanists,  to  dis- 
allow difference  of  opinions  and  forbid  ])rivate  examination  and 
search  into  matters  of  ancient  record  and  Scriptural  tradition, 
Avhen  at  the  same  time  we  have  no  pretence  to  oral  or  verbal ; 
no  claini  to  any  absolute  superior  judge  or  decisive  judgment  in 
the  case ;  no  polity,  church,  or  comnnmity ;  no  ]iarticular  man 
or  number  of  men  who  are  not,  even  by  our  own  confession, 
plainly  fallible  and  subject  to  error  and  mistake. 

"  The  Protestants,"  says  his  Grace  (speaking  in  the  person  of 

Mr.  S— and  the  Romanists),  "cannot  know  how  many  the 

books  of  Scripture  ought  to  be ;  and  which  of  the  many  con- 
1  Viz.  Archbishop  Tillotsou  in  his  Rule  nf  Faith,  p.  077. 

300 


MISCELLANEOUS    REFLECTIONS 

troverted  ones  may  be  securely  put  in  that  catalogue,  which 
not.  But  I  shall  tell  him  (replies  his  Grace)  that  we  know  that 
just  so  many  ought  to  be  received  as  uncontro verted  books, 
concerning  which  it  cannot  be  shown  there  was  ever  any  con- 
troversy.""   It  was  not  incumbent  perhaps  on  my  lord  Archbishop 

to  help  Mr.  S so  far  in  his  objection  as  to  add,  that  in 

reality  the  burning,  suppressing,  and  interpolating  method,  so 
early  in  fashion  and  so  tightly  practised  on  the  epistles,  com- 
ments, histories,  and  writings  of  the  orthodox  and  heretics  of 
old,  made  it  impossible  to  say  with  any  kind  of  assurance, 
"  what  books,  copies,  or  transcripts  those  were,  concerning  which 
there  was  never  any  controversy  at  all."  This  indeed  would  be 
a  point  not  so  easily  to  be  demonstrated.  But  his  Grace  proceeds 
in  showing  the  weakness  of  the  Romish  ])iilar,  tradition.  "For 
it  must  either,"  says  he,  "  acknowledge  some  books  to  have  been 
controverted,  or  not.  If  not,  why  doth  he  make  a  supposition 
of  controverted  books  ?  If  oral  tradition  acknowledges  some 
books  to  have  been  controverted,  then  it  cannot  assure  us  that 
they  have  not  been  controverted,  nor  consequently  that  they 
ought  to  be  received  as  never  having  been  controverted ;  but 
only  as  such,  concerning  Avhich  those  Churches  who  did  once 
raise  a  controversy  about  them,  have  been  since  satisfied  that 
they  are  canonical.^  AVhere  is  then  the  infallibility  of  oral 
tradition  ?  How  does  the  living  voice  of  the  present  Church 
assure  us  that  what  books  are  now  received  by  her  were  ever 
received  by  her.^     And  if  it  cannot  do  this,  but   the   matter 

^  His  (irace  sultjoins  imnicdiatel}' :  "The  traditionary  Church  ii(»w 
receives  tlie  Epistle  to  the  Ilelircws  as  canonical.  I  ask,  do  they  receive 
it  as  exev  deli\ered  for  such  .^  That  they  must,  if  they  receive  it  from 
oral  tradition,  which  conveys  things  to  them  under  this  notion  as  ever 
delivered  ;  and  yet  St.  Ilierom  (speakiiii;  not  as  a  speculator  hut  a  testifier) 
says  expressly  of  it  that  the  custom  of  the  Latin  Church  doth  not  receive  it 

anionfr  the  Canonical  Scriptures.      A\'liat  saitli  Mr.  S to  this?     It  is 

clear  from  this  testimony  that  the  Roman  Church  in  St.  Hierom's  time  did 
not  acknowledf^e  this  ejjistle  for  canonical ;  and  'tis  as  plain  that  the 
present  Roman  Church  doth  receive  it  for  canoin'cal." 

361 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

must  come  to  be  tried  by  the  best  records  of  former  ages  (which 
the  Protestants  are  AvilHng  to  have  the  catalogue  tried  by),  then 
it  seems  the  Protestants  have  a  better  way  to  know  what  books 
are  canonical  than  is  the  infallible  way  of  oral  tradition.  And 
so  long  as  'tis  better,  no  matter  though  it  be  not  called  in- 
fallible." 

Thus  the  free  and  generous  archbishop.  For,  indeed,  what 
greater  generosity  is  there  than  in  owning  truth  frankly  and 
openly,  even  where  the  greatest  advantages  may  be  taken  by 
an  adversary  ?  Accordingly,  our  worthy  Archbishop  speaking 
again  immediately  in  the  person  of  his  adversary,  "  the  Pro- 
testants,"'^  says  he,  "cannot  know  that  the  very  original,  or  a 
perfectly  true  copy  of  these  books,  hath  been  preserved.  Nor 
is  it  necessary,"  replies  the  archbishop,  "  that  they  should  know 
either  of  these.  It  is  sufficient  that  they  know  that  those 
copies  which  they  have  are  not  materially  corrupted.  .  .  .  But 
how  do  the  Church  of  Kome  know  that  they  have  perfectly  true 
copies  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  original  languages  ?  They  do 
not  pretend  to  know  this.  The  learned  men  of  that  Church 
acknowledge  the  various  readings  as  well  as  we,  and  do  not 
pretend  to  know,  otherwise  than  by  probable  conjecture  (as  we 
also  may  do)  which  of  those  readings  is  the  true  one."  - 

1  P.  678. 

'■^  The  reader  perhaps  may  find  it  worth  while  to  read  after  this  what 
the  Archbishop  represents  (pp.  716^  etc.)  of  the  plausible  introduction  of  the 
grossest  article  of  belief  in  the  times  when  the  habit  of  making  creeds 
came  in  fashion.  And  accordingly  it  may  be  miderstood  of  what  effect 
the  dogmatising  practice  in  divinity  has  ever  been.  "  We  will  suppose, 
then,  that  about  the  time  when  universal  ignorance  and  the  genuine 
daughter  of  it  (call  her  devotion  or  superstition)  had  overspread  the  world, 
and  the  generality  of  people  were  strongly  inclined  to  believe  strange 
things,  and  even  the  greatest  contradictions  were  recommended  to  them 
under  the  notion  of  mysteries,  being  told  by  their  priests  and  guides  that 
the  more  contradictious  anything  is  to  reason,  the  greater  merit  there  is 
in  believing  it,  I  say,  let  us  suppose  that  in  this  state  of  things  one  or 
more  of  the  most  eminent  then  in  the  Church,  either  out  of  design  or  out 
of  superstitious  ignorance  and  mistake  of  the  sense  of  our  Saviour's  words 

362 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

And  thus,  continued  our  lay-gentleman,  1  have  finished  my 
quotations,  which  I  have  been  necessitated  to  bring  in  my  own 
defence  to  prove  to  you  that  I  have  asserted  nothing  on  this 
head  of  religion,  faith,  or  the  sacred  mysteries  which  has  not 
been  justified  and  confirmed  by  the  most  celebrated  churchmen 
and  respected  divines.  You  may  now  proceed  in  your  invectives; 
bestowing  as  free  language  of  that  kind  as  your  charity  and 
breeding  will  permit.  And  you,  reverend  sirs,  who  have  assumed 
a  character  which  sets  you  above  that  of  the  mere  gentlemen, 
and  releases  you  from  those  decorums  and  constraining  measures 
of  behaviour  to  which  we  of  an  inferior  sort  are  bound,  you 
may  liberally  deal  your  religious  compliments  and  salutations 
in  what  dialect  you  think  fit,  since,  for  my  own  part,  neither  the 
names  of  heterodox,  schismatic,  heretic,  sceptic,  nor  even  infidel 
or   atheist   itself  will    in    the    least   scandalise  me,   whilst  the 

used  ill  the  consecration  of  the  Sacrament^  shouhl  advance  this  new 
doctrine,  that  tlie  w^ords  of  consecration,  etc.  .  .  .  Such  a  doctrine  as 
tliis  was  very  likely  to  be  advanced  by  the  ambitious  clerg-y  of  that  time 
as  a  probable  means  to  draw  in  the  people  to  a  greater  veneration  of  them. 
.  .  .  Nor  was  such  a  doctrine  less  likely  to  take  and  prevail  among-  the 
people  in  an  age  prodigiously  ignorant  and  strongly  inclined  to  sui)erstition, 
and  thereby  well  prepared  to  receive  the  grossest  absurdities  under  tlie 
notion  of  mystery.  .  .  .  Now  supposing  such  a  doctrine  as  this,  so  fitted 
to  the  humour  and  temper  of  the  age,  to  be  once  asserted  either  by  chance 
or  out  of  design,  it  would  take  like  wildfire,  especially  if  by  some  one  or 
more  who  bore  sway  in  the  Church  it  were  but  recommeiuled  witli  con- 
venient gravity  and  solemnity.  .  .  .  And  for  the  contradictions  contained 
in  this  doctrine,  it  was  but  telling  the  people  then  (as  they  do  in  effect 
now)  that  contradictions  ought  to  be  no  scruple  in  tlie  way  of  faith  ;  that 
the  more  impossible  anything  is  'tis  the  fitter  to  be  believed  ;  that  it  is  not 
praiseworthy  to  believe  plain  possibilities,  but  this  is  the  gallantry  and 
heroical  power  of  faith,  this  is  the  way  to  oblige  (Jod  Almiglity  for  ever 
to  us,  t()  believe  flat  and  downright  contradictions.  .  .  .  llie  more  absurd 
and  unreasonable  anything  is,  it  is  for  tliat  very  reason  the  more  proper 
matter  for  an  article  of  faitli.  And  if  any  of  these  innovations  be  objected 
against  as  contrary  to  former  belief  ami  practice,  it  is  but  putting  forth  a 
lusty  act  of  faith  and  believing  another  contradiction,  that  thougli  they 
be  contrary  yet  they  are  the  same."     Above,  i)p.  200-208. 

363 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 

sentence  comes  only  from  your  mouths.  On  the  contrary,  I 
rather  strive  with  myself  to  suppress  whatever  vanity  might 
naturally  arise  in  me  from  such  favour  bestowed.  For  whatever 
may  in  the  bottom  be  intended  me  by  such  a  treatment,  'tis 
impossible  for  me  to  term  it  other  than  favour,  since  there  are 
certain  enmities  which  it  will  be  ever  esteemed  a  real  honour  to 
have  merited. 

If,  contrary  to  the  rule  and  measure  of  conversation,  I  have 
drawn  the  company's  attention  towards  me  thus  long,  without 
affording  them  an  intermission  during  my  recital,  they  will,  I 
hope,  excuse  me,  the  rather  because  they  heard  the  other  recitals 
and  were  witnesses  to  the  heavy  charge  and  personal  reflection 
which,  without  any  real  provocation,  was  made  upon  me  in 
public  by  these  zealot  gentlemen  to  whom  I  have  thus  replied. 
And  notwithstanding  they  may,  after  such  breaches  of  charity 
as  are  usual  with  them,  presume  me  equally  out  of  charity  on 
my  own  side,  I  will  take  upon  me,  however,  to  give  them  this 
good  advice  at  parting :  "  that  since  they  have  of  late  been  so 
elated  by  some  seeming  advantages  and  a  prosperity  which  they 
are  ill  fitted  to  bear,  they  would  at  least  bcAvare  of  accumulating 
too  hastily  those  high  characters,  appellations,  titles,  and  ensigns 
of  power,  which  may  be  tokens,  perhaps,  of  what  they  expect 
hereafter,  but  which,  as  yet,  do  not  answer  the  real  power  and 
authority  bestowed  on  them."  The  garb  and  countenance  will 
be  more  graceful  when  the  thino-  itself  is  secured  to  them  and 
in  their  actual  possession.  IMeanwhile,  the  anticipation  of  high 
titles,  honours,  and  nominal  dignities  beyond  the  common  style 
and  ancient  usage,  though  it  may  be  highly  fashionable  at 
jiresent,  may  not  prove  beneficial  or  advantageous  in  the  end. 

I  would,  in  particular,  advise  my  elegant  antagonists  of  this 
zealot-kind,  that  among  the  many  titles  they  assume  to  them- 
selves they  would  be  rather  more  s])aring  in  that  high  one  of 
ambassador,  till  such  time  as  they  have  just  means  and  founda- 
tion to  join  that  of  plenipotentiary  together  with  it.  For  as 
matters    stand    hitherto    in    our    British    world,    neither    their 

364 


MTSCET.T.ANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

coiuniission  from   the   sovereign    nor   tliat  which   they  pi'etencl 
from  lieaveii,  amounts  to  any  absohite  or  determinino-  power. 

The  first  holy  messengers  (for  that  1  take  to  be  the  highest 
apostoHc  name)  brought  with  them  their  proper  testimonials  in 
their  lives,  their  manners,  and  behaviour,  as  well  as  in  powerful 
works,  miracles,  and  signs  from  heaven.  And  though,  indeed, 
it  might  well  be  esteemed  a  miracle  in  the  kind,  should  our 
present  messengers  go  about  to  represent  their  predecessors  in 
any  part  of  their  demeanour  or  conversation,  yet  there  are 
further  miracles  remaining  for  them  to  perform  ere  they  can  in 
modesty  plead  the  apostolic  or  messenger  authority.  IA)r  though 
in  the  torrent  of  a  sublime  and  figurative  style  a  holy  apostle 
may  have  made  use,  perhaps,  of  such  a  phrase  as  that  of  embassy 
or  ambassador  to  express  the  dignity  of  his  errand,  'twere  to  be 
wished  that  some  who  were  never  sent  of  any  errand  or  message 
at  all  from  God  himself,  would  use  a  modester  title  to  exjiress 
their  voluntary  negotiation  between  us  and  heaven. 

I  must  confess,  for  my  own  part,  that  I  think  the  notion  of 
an  embassy  from  thence  to  be  at  best  somewhat  high  strained 
in  the  metaphorical  way  of  speech.  But  certain  I  am  that  if 
there  be  any  such  residentship  or  agentship  now  established, 
'tis  not  immediately  from  God  himself,  but  through  the 
magistrate  and  by  the  prince  or  sovereign  power  here  on  earth, 
that  these  gentlemen  agents  are  appointed,  distinguished,  and 
set  over  us.  They  have  undoubtedly  legal  charter  ^  and  character, 
legal  titles  and  precedencies,  legal  habits,  coats  of  arms,  colours, 
badges.  But  they  may  do  well  to  consider  that  a  thousand 
badges  or  liveries  bestowed  by  men  merely  can  never  be  sufficient 
to  entitle  them  to  the  same  authority  as  theirs  who  bore  the 
immediate  testimony  and  miraculous  signs  of  j)ower  from  above. 
For  in  this  case  there  was  need  only  of  eyes  and  ordinary  senses 
to  distinguish  the  commission  and  acknowledge  the  embassy  or 
message  as  divine. 

But  allowing  it  ever  so  certain   a  truth,  ''  that   there   has 
*  Treatise  in.  near  tlie  end. 

305 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

been  a  thousand  or  near  two  thousand  years'"  succession  in  this 
commission  of  embassy,"  where  shall  we  find  this  commission  to 
have  lain  ?  How  has  it  been  supplied  still,  or  renewed  ?  How 
often  dormant  ?  How  often  divided,  even  in  one  and  the  same 
species  of  claimants  ?  What  party  are  they  among  moderns 
who  by  virtue  of  any  immediate  testimonial  from  heaven  are 
thus  entitled  ?  Where  are  the  letters  patent  ?  the  credentials  ? 
For  these  should  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  be  open,  visible,  and 
apparent. 

A  certain  Indian  of  the  train  of  the  ambassador  princes  sent 
to  us  lately  from  some  of  those  pagan  nations,  being  engaged 
one  Sunday  in  visiting  our  churches  and  happening  to  ask  his 
interpreter,  "  who  the  eminent  persons  were  whom  he  observed 
haranguing  so  long,  with  such  authority  from  a  high  place  ? '' 
was  answered,  "  they  were  ambassadors  from  the  Almighty,  or 
(according  to  the  Indian  language)  from  the  sun."  AVhether 
the  Indian  took  this  seriously  or  in  raillery  did  not  appear. 
But  having  afterwards  called  in,  as  he  went  along,  at  the 
chapels  of  some  of  his  brother-ambassadors  of  the  Romish 
religion,  and  at  some  other  Christian  dissenting  congregations, 
where  matters,  as  he  perceived,  were  transacted  with  greater 
privacy  and  inferior  state,  he  asked  "  whether  these  also  were 
ambassadors  from  the  same  place."  He  was  answered  "  that 
they  had  indeed  been  heretofore  of  the  embassy,  and  had 
possession  of  the  same  chief  places  he  had  seen,  but  they  were 
now  succeeded  there  by  others."  "  If  those,  therefore,"  replied 
the  Indian,  "  were  ambassadors  from  the  sun,  these,  I  take  for 
granted,  are  from  the  moon." 

Supposing,  indeed,  one  had  been  no  pagan  but  a  good 
Christian,  conversant  in  the  original  Holy  Scriptures  but 
unacquainted  with  the  rites,  titles,  habits,  and  ceremonials,  of 
which  there  is  no  mention  in  those  writings,  might  one  not 
have  inquired,  with  humble  submission,  into  this  affair  ?  Might 
one  not  have  softly  and  at  a  distance  applied  for  information 
concerning  this  high  embassy,  and  addressing  perhaps  to  some 

36G 


MISCELLANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

inferior  officer  or  livery-man  of  the  train  asked  modestly,  "  How 
and  whence  they  came  ?  whose  equipage  they  appeared  in  ? 
at  whose  charges  they  were  entertained  ?  and  by  whose  suffrage 
or  command  appointed  and  authorised  ?  Is  it  true,  pray  sirs  ! 
that  their  Excellencies  of  the  present  establishment  are  the 
sole-commissioned  ?  or  are  there  as  many  real  commissioners 
as  there  are  pretenders  ?  If  so,  there  can  be  no  great  danger 
for  us,  whichever  way  we  apply  ourselves.  We  have  ample 
choice,  and  may  adhere  to  which  commission  we  like  best.  If 
there  be  only  one  single  true  one,  we  have  then,  it  seems,  good 
reason  to  look  about  us,  search  narrowly  into  the  affair,  be 
scrupulous  in  our  choice,  and  (as  the  current  physic  bills 
admonish  us)  beware  of  counterfeits,  since  there  are  so  many 
of  these  abroad  with  earthly  powers  and  temporal  commissions 
to  back  their  spiritual  pretences."" 

'Tis  to  be  feared,  in  good  earnest,  that  the  discernment  of 
this  kind  will  jirove  pretty  difficult,  especially  amidst  this 
universal  contention,  embroil,  and  fury  of  religious  challengers, 
these  high  defiances  of  contrary  believers,  this  zealous  opposition 
of  commission  to  commission,  and  this  din  of  hell,  anathemas, 
and  damnations  raised  everywhere  by  one  religious  party  against 
another. 

So  far  are  the  pretendedly  commissioned  parties  from  pro- 
ducing their  commission  openly,  or  proving  it  from  the  original 
record  or  court-rolls  of  heaven,  that  they  deny  us  inspection 
into  these  very  records  they  plead,  and  refuse  to  submit  their 
title  to  human  judgment  or  examination. 

A  poet  of  our  nation  insinuates  indeed  in  their  behalf,  that 
they  are  fair  enough  in  this  respect.  For  when  the  murmuring 
people,  speaking  by  their  chosen  orator  or  spokesman  to  the 
priests,  says  to  them, — 

With  ease  you  take  what  we  provide  with  care. 
And  we  who  your  legation  must  maintain. 

Find  all  your  tribe  in  the  commission  are, 

And  none  but  Heaven  could  send  so  large  a  train, 

307 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 

the  apologist,  afterwards  excusing  this  boldness  of  the  people 
and  soothing-  the  incensed  priests  with  fairer  words,  says  to 
them,  on  a  foot  of  moderation,  which  he  presumes  to  be  their 
character : — 

You  with  such  temper  their  intemperance  beai', 

To  show  your  solid  science  does  rely 
So  on  itself  as  you  no  trial  fear  : 

For  arts  ai'e  w^eak  that  are  of  sceptics  shy.^ 

The  poet,  it  seems,  never  dreamt  of  a  time  when  the  very 
countenance  of  moderation  should  be  out  of  fashion  with  the 
gentlemen  of  this  order,  and  the  word  itself  exploded  as 
imworthy  of  their  profession.  And,  indeed,  so  far  are  they  at 
present  from  bearing  with  any  sceptic  or  inquirer,  ever  so 
modest  or  discreet,  that  to  hear  an  argument  on  a  contrary  side 
to  theirs,  or  read  whatever  may  be  writ  in  answer  to  their 
particular  assertions,  is  made  the  highest  crime.  Whilst  they 
have  among  themselves  such  differences  and  sharp  debates  about 
their  heavenly  commission,  and  are  even  in  one  and  the  same 
connnunity  or  establishment  divided  into  different  sects  and 
headships,  they  will  allow  no  particular  survey  or  inspection 
into  the  foundations  of  their  controverted  title.  They  woukl 
have  us  inferior  passive  mortals,  amazed  as  we  are,  and  behold- 
ing with  astonishment  from  afar  these  tremendous  subjects  of 
dispute,  wait  blindfold  the  event  and  final  decision  of  the 
controversy.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  are  merely  passive. 
'Tis  required  of  us,  that  in  the  midst  of  this  irreconcilable 
debate  concerning  heavenly  authorities  and  powers,  we  should 
be  as  confident  of  the  veracity  of  some  one,  as  of  the  imposture 
and  cheat  of  all  the  other  pretenders ;  and  that,  believing  firmly 
there  is  still  a  real  commission  at  the  bottom,  we  should  endure 
the  misery  of  these  conflicts  and  engage  on  one  side  or  the  other 
as  we  happen  to  have  our  birth  or  education,  till  by  fire  and 
sword,  execution,  massacre,  and  a  kind  of  depopulation  of  this 

'   Gondibert,  bk.  ii.  canto  1. 

868 


IMISCEI.LANEOUS   REFLECTIONS 

earth,  it  be  determined  at  last  amongst  us,i  "  Which  is  the  true 
commission,  exclusive  of  all  others  and  superior  to  the  rest." 

Here  our  secular  gentleman,  who  in  the  latter  end  of  his 
discourse  had  already  made  several  motions  and  gestures  which 
betokened  a  retreat,  made  his  final  bow  in  form  and  quitted  the 
place  and  company  for  that  time,  till  (as  he  told  his  auditors) 
he  had  another  opportunity  and  fresh  leisure  to  hear,  in  his 
turn,  whatever  his  antagonists  might  anew  object  to  him  in  a 
manner  more  favourable  and  moderate,  or  (if  they  so  approved) 
in  the  same  temper  and  with  the  same  zeal  as  they  had  done 
before. 

^  Supra,  p.  212. 


VOL.  II  369  2  B 


INDEX 


Abraham,  ii.  232 
Absolutism,  i.  lil 
Academic  Philosopliy,  ii.  9,  309 
Addison,  i.  xv,  xvi,  xix,  xlv 
Admiration,  ii.  177,  178 
Advice  to  an  Author,  i.  103 
Advice,  i.  103 
Affectation,  ii.  53 

Affection,  natural,  public,  and  private,  i 
74-81,   82-85,   247-250,   280-336  ;   ii. 
77,  291-294 
AiNSWORTH,  M.,  i.  xliii 
Alchemy,  ii.  10 
Alcibiades,  ii.  234 
Ambition,  i.  210,  327 
Anacharsis,  i.  61 
Anatomy,  ii.  6;'.,  73,  135 
Anger,  i.  99,  320 
Animals,  i.   245,   285,   314  ;  ii.  72,   74 

76,  120,  287,  289 
Apelles,  i.  220 
Apollo,  i.  7 

Appetite  and  Reason,  i.  123 
Abatds,  ii.  303 
Architecture,  ii.  133,  208 
Aristophanes,  i.  160  ;  ii.  305 
Aristotle,  i.  xxii,  52,  94,  96,  129,  156 

163,  223  ;  ii.  243    ^   • 
Art  and  Nature,  ii.  135 
Art,  Shaftesbury's  views  of,  i.  xliii,  132 

218,  219,  227;  ii.  11,  267,  317-321 
Arthur,  ii.  225 
Arts  and  Morality,  i.  217,  227 
Arts  and  Sciences,  promotion  of,  i.  145- 

149,  151-157 
Atellan  plays,  i.  164 
Atheism,  i.  240,  241,  257,  261,  275  ;  ii. 
47,  49,  89,  93,  196,  339 


Athens,  i.  161,  162  ;  ii.  242,  243 
Augustus,  i.  148,  175 
Authors,  i.  104-112,  127,  131,  139,  172, 
179,  197,  223  ;  ii.  316,  322 

Babylonian  empire,  ii.  188 

Bacchic  worship,  i.  33 

Bacon,  ii.  199 

Bart'lemy  Fair,  i.  21 

Baumgarten,  i.  xliii 

Bays,  Mr.,  ii.  328,  329,  333 

Beauty,  i.  90,  91,  94  ;  ii.  20,  21  69 
125,  126,  128,  130-137,  141-144; 
147,  268 

Beggars,  i.  26 

Belief,  ii.  219-221 

Berkeley,  i.  xxv,  xlv 

Bible,  i.  229-231  ;  ii.  228-232,  302 
Bigotry,  i.  307  ;  ii.  207,  345 

Blank  verse,  i.  142 

Blount,  C,  i.  238 

BoiLEAU,  i.  142  ;  ii,  331 

Bolingbroke,  i.  xxvi,  xxviii  ;  ii.  282 

Bossu,  i.  94 

Boyle,  ii.  10 

Breeding,  i.  86 

Britain,   i.  73,  139,  143,   175,   177  ;  ii 

215,  247-249 
Brown,  J.,  i.  xv,  xxvii,  xxxviii,  xxxix, 

52 
Browning,  i.  xxxiv 
Buffoonery,  i.  50,  51,  85 
Bury,  Rev.  A.,  i.  238 

Cabala,  ii.  206 
Caesar,  i.  146,  149 
Cantouising,  i.  76 
r'APPADOCIANS,  ii.  312 


371 


SHAFTESBURY'S    CHARACTERISTICS 


Cabaccio,  i.  218 

Caruiva],  i.  58 

Casaubons,  i.  70,  226 

Catechisms,  i.^197 

Catholicism.     See  Rome 

Cervantes,  ii.  313 

Chance,  i.  29 

Charles  I.,  i.  140 

Charity,  ii.  227 

Chivalry,  i.  177 

Christianity,  i.  xxiii.  19  ;  ii.  19,  51,  55, 

201,  306 
Church  and  Clergy,  ii.  363-369 
Cicero,  ii.  168 
Circumcision,  ii.  189 
Club  methods,  i.  53 
Collins,  A.,  i.  xxviii 
Comedy,  i.  157-160,  164,  165,  166,  169 
Common  sense,  i.  55,  69 
Conscience,  i.  305 

Controversy,  i.  47,  48  ;  ii.  161,  223 
Conversation,  polite,  ii.  6 
COBNEILLE,  ii.  210,  331 
Courage,  i.  79 
Credulity,  i.  222  ;  ii.  8§^ 
Criticism,  i.  30,  150,  152,  lo6,  170  ;  ii. 

258,  313,  324-331 
CoDWORTH,  ii.  50,  196 
Cumberland,  i.  xxxii,  xxxvii 
Cybele,  ii.  45 

Daemons,  i.  112,  116,  240 

Dancing,  ii.  228 

Death,  i.  203 

Defoe,  i.  223 

Deism,  i.  238  ;  ii.  19,  53 

Deity,  i.   240,  242,   258-265,    266-280, 

305  :  ii.    57,    91,   93,   98,    103,    110, 

113,  114 
Demosthenes,  ii.  243 
Descartes,  i.  xxxiii,  191  ;  ii.  275 
Despotism,  i.  72,  144.  155 
Dialogue,  i.  51, 132,  133  ;  ii.  9,  337-340 
Diana,  ii.  208 
Dion  Cassius,  ii.  171 
Dogmatism,  ii.  238 
Drama,  ii.  160,  315.     See  Comedy  and 

Tragedy 
Dryden,  \.  XV,  xvii,  142  ;  ii.  322,  327- 

329.     See  Bays 

Education,  i.  82,  125,  215,  331 
Egypt,   Priesthood  of,  ii.   181-185,  188- 
194,  206 


England  and  Englishmen,  i.  73, 141, 175  ; 

ii.  215,  248,  315-320 
Enthusiasm,  Letter  concerniag,  1.  4 
Enthusiasm,  i.  12,  32,  35  ;  ii.  54,  129, 

173,  179,  198 
Ephesians,  ii.  208 
Epicurus  and  Epicureanism,  ii.  41,  42, 

53 
Epimenides,  ii.  303 
Ethiopia,  ii.  186 
EUPHRANOK,  i.  219 

Euripides,  i.  157  ;  ii.  243 

Fables,  ii.  283 
Faction,  i.  76 

Fairies,  i.  7 

Fanaticism,  ii.  89,  195,  196.     See  Zeal 

and  Bigotry 
Fancy,  i.  122,  201,  208-210,  218,  302  ; 

ii.  149,  278,  349 
Fear,  i.  191 
Fenelon,  ii.  214 
Fowler,  Bishop,  i.  7 
Fowler,  Prof.,  i.  x,  xix,  xxiv,  xl,  xliii 
Free  thought,  ii.  341-353 
Free  trade,  i.  46 
French  literature,  i,  142,  216 
Friendship,  i.  67,  68  ;  ii.  37,  41 
Futurg  state,  j.  26S-277»;  ii.  59 

Gatakeb,  i.  70 

Genius.     See  Deity 

Genius,  i.  127,  151 

Gnostics,  ii.  203 

Goiulibert,  ii.  368 

GoRGiAS,  i.  52 

Gospels,  ii.  307 

Gothicism,  i.  141,  153,  227  ;  ii.  313 

Government,  i.  15,  74,  138,  155,  272 

Gravity  and  fi'aud,  i.  44,  52 

Greek   culture,   i.    145,   161,   163,    178; 

ii.  241-243 
Gregory  the  Great,  ii.  303,  304 

Harley,  ii.  261 
Heart,  wisdom  of,  i.  180 
Helmont,  Van,  i.  186 
Herbert  of  Cherbury,  i.  238 
Herder,  i.  ix 
Herodotus,  ii.  309 
History,  i.  146 

Hobbes,   i.    xix,   xxviii,    xxxiii,   xxxvii, 
61,  79,  238,  281 


372 


INDEX 


Homer,  i.  129,  157,  160,   166;  ii.  17, 

26,  175,  318 
Honesty,   i.  69,  83.  114,   171  ;  ii.  17o, 

177 
Honour,  i.  81,  S3 

Horace,  i.  70,  211  ;  ii.  168,  282,  310 
Hume,  i.  xxxvii,  xli 
Humour,  i.  17  ;  ii.  337 
HUTCHESON,  i.  xiv,  xxxvii,  xxxviii 

Inquiry  concerning  Virtve,  etc.,  i.  237 

Inspiration,  i.  32 

Instinct,    i.   248,    250,    257,   259,    288, 

289  ;  ii.  76 
Insularity,  English,  ii.  251 
Interest,  self,  i.  77,  80,  183 
Intolerance,  i.  16,  22 
Isis,  ii.  185 
Italians,  i.  51,  216 

James  I.,  i.  140 

Jephthah,  ii.  232 

Jews,  i.   xxiii,  22,   23,  69  ;  ii.   188-193. 

204,  227,  229 
Job,  i.  xxxiii,  25 
Jonah,  ii.  229 
Joseph,  ii.  192,  193 
Joshua,  i.  229,  230 
Julian,  ii.  210-212 
Jupiter,  i.  262 

Kant,  i.  xiv 

'•  Kind,"  instinct  of,  i.  74 

King,  Archbishop,  i.  xxxi 

Kings,  i.  138 

Knavery,  i.  64,  87,  113,  136 

Knights  Templars,  i.  59 

Lamb,  i.  xv 

Leclebc,  ii.  288,  305 

Leibnitz,  i.  xiv,  xxvi,  xxxi,  187 

Leon,  St.,  ii.  213 

Liberty,  i.  144,  145,  155-219  ;  ii.  44 

Life,  love  of,  i.  317-319 

Light,  ii.  117 

LiVY,  cited,  i.  33 

Locke,  i.  x,  xi,  xx,  xxxvii,  xxxviii,  223 

Love,  i.  116-121,  200,  213,  311  ;  ii.  125 

Lucian,  i.  xxii ;  ii.  330 

Lucretius,  i.  34,  37  ;  ii.  175 

Luke,  ii.  307 

Lycurgus,  ii.  308 


Macaulay,  i.  xi 

Magi,  i.  59,  60 

Magic,  ii.  193 

Mahometanisni,  i.  227  ;  ii.  301 

Mandeville,  i.  xxxviii-xli 

Marsham,  ii.  189-191 

Martineau,  Dr.,  i.  xxxiv 

Mathematics,  i.  188 

Melancholy,  i.  12,  24  ;  ii.  198 

Menander,  i.  160,  167  ;  ii.  305 

Messiah,  ii.  205 

Metaphysics,  i.  188  ;  ii.  275 

Milton,  i.  141,  142,  180 

Miracles,  i.  222  ;  ii.  87,  90,  200,  201 

Miscellaneous  Reflections,  ii.  157 

MoLiNOS,  ii.  214 

Montaigne,  i.  ix,  xv,  331 

Montesquieu,  i.  ix 

Moralists,  The,  ii.  3 

Morals,  and  art,  i.  171,  179,  181  ;  ii.  217, 

227 
Morals,  basis  of,  i.  63-93,  227-338  ;  ii.  137 
Moral  sense,  i.  262 
More,  Dr.  H.,  i.  xxxiii  ;  ii.  197 
Moses,  ii.  190-193,  227 
Muses,  the.  i.  5-8,  142,  204  ;  ii.  175 
Music,  i.  152-154,  227 
Mystery  in  religion,  ii.  206 
Mysticism,  ii.  55 

Nature,  i.  78,  95,  215,  228,  240,  243, 
260,  261,  314,  324  ;  ii.  10,  14,  22, 
39,  62,  71-84 

Nature,  state  of,  i.  73  ;  ii.  78-84 

Nero,  ii.  169 

Novels,  i.  222-225 

Nymjyholepti,  i.  35 

Olympic  games,  i.  179 
Opinion,  ii.  139,  146,  152 
Oracles,  ii.  90 

Oratory,  i.  49,  155  ;  ii.  243,  244 
Orthodoxy,  ii.  220 

Painting,  i.  xliii,  132 

Pan,  i.  12 

Panegyric,  i.  175 

Panics,  i.  13 

Parody,  i.  130,  160 

Pascal,  i.  xxvii 

Passion,s,  the,  i.  62,  289-293,  297,  320, 

321,  330  ;  ii.  348 
Patria,  ii.  248 


373 


SHAFTESBURY'S   CHARACTERISTICS 


Patriots,  ii.  244-250,  262 
Patrons,  i.  147,  148,  149,  181,  197 
Paul,  St.,  i.  xxiii,  23  ;  ii.  202,  209 
Persecution,  ii.  209,  220-224 
Persians,  i.  60  ;  ii.  185,  186 
Persuasion,  i.  154 
Petronius,  cited,  i.  126 
Philosophy,  i.  82-88,  156,  166, 186,  187, 

193,  194,  225  ;  ii.  3-9,  195,  240,  255 
Phonetics,  i.  187 
Plato,  i.  38,  161  ;  ii.  309 
Pleasure,  ii.  29-33,  147,  280,  349 
Pliny,  i.  219 

Plutarch,  i.  29,  38  ;  ii.  233 
Poets  and  Poetry,  i.  5,  129,   135,  136, 

157,  166  ;  ii.  197,  320 
Polytheism,  i.  241 
Pope,  i.  ix,  xxv-xxvii,  xxxiii-xxxv 
Pre-sensation,  ii.  76 
Press,  i.  198 
Priests   and    Priesthoods,    ii.     181-185, 

188-194,  205 
Prometheus,  ii.  15,  16 
Prophecy,  i.  32 
Prophets,  French,  i.  20,  31 
Property  and  dominion,  ii.  185,  186 
Protestantism,  i.  19  ;  ii.  360 
Public  spirit,  i.  27,  66,  85,  287  ;  ii.  38 
Punning,  i.  46,  141 
Puppet-shows,  i.  21,  22 
Pyrrho  and  Pyrrhonism,  ii.  101,  104 
Pythagoreanism,  i.  14  ;  ii.  234,  282 

Quietists,  ii.  214 

Raillery,  i.  43-65,  85,  238 

Reason,  i,  49,  54,  62,  123 

Rehearsal,  The,  i.  169 

Religion,  1.   17,  232,  237,   273,  303  ;  ii. 

85,  90,  177,  179,  231-235 
Revelation,  ii.  90 
Revenge,  i.  320 
Rewards  and  punishments,  i.  268-277  ;  ii. 

59 
Rhyme,  ii.  320 

Ridicule,  1.  9-11,  81  ;  ii.  253,  254 
ROBtNSON,  H.  C,  i.  xl 

Rochefoucauld,  i.  80 
Rochester,  i.  79 

Rome,  Clnirch  of,  i.  20,  22  ;  ii.  212,  214, 
305,  306,  361 
"^Rome,  empire  and  civilisation  of,  i.  143- 
145,  164,  176,  219  ;  ii.  204,  205 


Rymer,  ii.  330 

Sacheverel,  i.  xlii 

Sadducees,  ii.  204 

Salmasius,  i.  70 

Satire,  i.  173  ;  ii.  84 

Saul,  i.  32,  68 

Scepticism,  ii.   17-20,  34,   53,  85,   103, 

105,  201,  202,  238 
Scholarship,  i.  215 
Scriptures,  ii.  298-300 
Self  and  selfishness,  i.  81,  247-250,  329 
Seneca,  ii.  169 
Sensus  Communis,  i.  43 
Shakspere,  i.  xvi,  xviii,  141,  179,  224 
Sibyls,  i.  33  ;  ii.  299 
Society,  rise  and  basis  of,  i.  74  ;  ii.  82 
Socrates,  i.  23  ;  ii.  307 
Soliloquy,  i.  101 

Soliloquy,  practice  of,  i.  105-112 
Solitude,  i.  113 
SOMERS,  i.  8 
Sophists,  i.  156,  167 
Sophocles,  i.  157 

Species,  i.  74,  246,  249  ;  ii.  289,  293 
Spencer,  J.,  cited,  ii.  191,  192 
Spicker,  i.  xxix 
Spinoza,  i.  xxxi-xxxiv,  243,  269,  280, 

302  ;  ii.  10 
Spirits,  i.  33 
Spirits,  animal,  i.  50 
Strabo,  i.  136,  164 
Style,  i.  142,  151,  161, 168  ;  ii.  169,  171, 

243 
Sublime,  the,  i.  165,  169 
Superstition,  ii.  122,  184 
Swift,  i.  xix,  xlv 

Taste,  i.  216-228  ;  ii.  243,  252-256,  257 
Taylor,  Bishop,  cited,  i.    67  ;  ii.   180, 

181,  358,  359 
Theism,  i.  240,  241,  261-265,  266-280  ; 

ii.    19,    52,    54-59,   91,    93,    94,    98, 

103-124 
Thucydides,  ii.  309 
TiLLOTSON,  ii.  360-363 
TiNDAL,  i.  xiv 

Toland,  i.  xii,  xxiv,  xliii,  238 
Toleration,  i.  21  ;  ii.  354,  sq. 
Tragedy,  i.  157,  161,  164,  165,  180 
Trajan,  i.  148 
Truth,  i.  94-98  ;  ii.  220,  259 
Turks,  i.  148 
Tyranny,  i.  72,  144,  155 


374 


INDEX 


Uniformity,  iu  religion,  i.   15  ;  ii.   353- 

369 
Unitarianisni,  i.  xxxvi,  238 
Universe.     See  Xature 
Universities,  i.  215 

Vaninus,  ii.  196 

Vice,  i.  310,  323 

Virgil,  ii.  27 

Virtue,  Inquiry  concerning,  etc.,  i.  237  ; 

ii.  50 
Virtue,   basis  of,   i.   83,    171,    252-258, 

265-338  ;  ii.  58,  291 
Virtuosoship.     See  Taste 
Vossius,  ii.  320 

War,  i.  75 


Warbcrton,  i.  xxvii 
Water,  ii.  117 
Wharton,  ii.  261 
Whichcote,  i.  xii 
Will,  freedom  of,  i.  122 
Will  to  believe,  ii.  219-221 
Wit  and  Humour,  i.  43 
Wit,  i.  46,  52,  53,   56,   65,  80,   165  ;  ii, 

216,  231 
Women,  i.  80,  177,  178 
Worldliuess,  ii.  263,  285 
Worship,  public,  i.  14 

Xenophon,  i.  146,  167  ;  ii.  309 

Zeal  and  zealotry,   i.    46,    48,  98,    110, 
307  ;  ii,  122,  162,  197,  181,  353-369 


THE    END 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


f) 


r 


'«««'~esecr.     PEB28,j^a 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


1335  Coo^er'^'''""''   -^thony  Ashley 

1900^  Characteristics  of  nen 

cop.  2 


^7 


