IN  THE  CUSTODY  OE  TME 

BOSTON     PUBLIC   LIBRARY. 


SHELF    N° 


FN909    5.12,37 :    150 


(3pie  {Kit/ /it  X^oizaral'le  ^svnthonu ^If/ifeu 
C(rc^er~oadofJhcTftejln/ryXoafV7i  ^djhleif  of 
^ItinlroumJ.  (fUej,  ds^Cord  Coupe r  ofxrans/eff. 


J.C/irjterman  tyinx-. 


Charafterifticks 

O  F 

Men,  Manners,  Opinions,  Times. 

In  THREE  VOLUMES. 

By  the  Right  Honourable 
ANTHONY,  Earl  of  Shaftesbury. 

The  Fifth  Edition. 


.  .< 


Vo/ .  JU 


fculps; 


P  197 ,  igt). 


B  IR  MING  HAM: 

Printed  by  John  Baskerville, 


M.DCC.LXXIII. 


-**■    \f 


Ou. 


VOL.     I. 

A  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm. 

Sen/us  Communis;  an  Effay  on  the  Freedom 
of  Wit  and  Humour. 

Soliloquy,  or  Advice  to  an  Author. 

VOL.     II. 

An  Inquiry  concerning  Virtue  and  Me- 
rit. 

The  Moralists  ;  a  Philofophical  Rhap- 
fody. 

VOL.     III. 

Miscellaneous  Reflections  on  the  faid 
Treatifes,  and  other  critical  Subjects. 

A  Notion  of  the  Hiftorical  Draught,  or 
Tablature  of  the  Judgment  of  Hercu- 
les. 


A3 


Chara6terifticks. 


VOLUME  I. 


A  Letter  concerning  Enthusiasm. 


Sen/us  Communis;  an   Eflay  on  the  Freedom  of 
Wit  and  Humour. 

Soliloquy,  or  Advice  to  an  Author. 


Printed  in  the  Year  M.DCG.XXVII. 

A  4 


4*i 


.1 
IT.  I 


Ill 


PREFACE. 


/F  the  Author  of  thefe  united  Tracts  had 
been  any  Friend  to  Prefaces,  he  woud 
probably  have  made  his  Entrance  after  that 
manner ',  in  one  or  other  of  the  Five  Trea- 
tifes  formerly  publifid  apart.  But  as  to  all 
Prefatory  or  Dedicatory  Difcourfe,  he  has 
told  us  his  Mind  fujficiently ,  in  that  Trea- 
tife  which  he  calls  Soliloquy.  Being  f a- 
tisfyd  however,  that  there  are  many  Perform 
who  efleem  thefe  Introductory  Pieces  as 
very  effential  in  the  Conflitution  of  a  Work; 
he   has   thought  fit ,   in   behalf  of  his  honefl 

Printer, 


iv         PREFACE. 

Printer,  to  Jubjlitute  thefe  Lines  under  the 
Title  o/aPreface;  and  to  declare,  "  That 
(according  to  his  bejl  Judgment  and  Au- 
c  thority)  thefe  Presents  ought  to  pafs,  and 
be  receivd,  conflrud,  and  taken,  as  fa- 
tisfaflory  in  full,  for  all  Preliminary  Com- 
pofition,  Dedication,  diredl  or  indirect 
'  Application  for  Favour  to  the  Publick,  or 
'  to  any  private  Patron,  or  Party  whatso- 
ever:  Nothing  to  the  contrary  appearing 
'  to  him,  from  the  fide  of  Truth,  or  Rea- 
'  fon".  Witnefs  his  Hand,  Jhis  Fifth  Day 
of  December,    1710. 

A.A.C.A.N.A.iE. 
C.M.D.C.L.X.XJ. 


TREATISE   I. 

V  1  X, 
A 


L  E  T  T  E 


CONCERNING 

ENTHUSIASM, 

T  O 

My  Lord  *****. 

Ridentem  dicer e  Verum 

Quidvetat?  Hor.  Sat.  1. 

Printed  firft  in  the  Year  M.DCC.VIIL 


LETTER,     he, 


My  Lord, 


Sept.   1707, 


NOW,  you  are  return'd  to and  be- 
fore the  Seafon  comes  which  mufl  en- 
gage you  in  the  weightier  Matters  of  State; 
if  you  care  to  be  entertain'd  a-while  with  a 
fort  of  idle  Thoughts,  fuch  as  pretend  only  to 
Amufement,  and  have  no  relation  to  Bufinefs 
or  Affairs,  you  may  call  your  Eye  nightly  on 
what  you  have  before  you ;  and  if  there  be 
any  thing  inviting,  you  may  read  it  over  at 
your  leifure, 

It 


4        a     l  e  r  r  E  R 

I  t  has  been  an  eftablifh'd  Cuftom  for  Poets, 
at  the  entrance  of  their  Work,  to  addrefs 
themfelves  to  fome  Mufe:  and  this  Practice  of 
the  Antients  has  gain'd  fo  much  Repute,  that 
even  in  our  days  we  find  it  almoft  conftantly 
imitated.  I  cannot  but  fancy  however,  that 
this  Imitation,  which  paffes  fo  currently  with 
other  Judgments,  muft  at  fome  time  or  other 
have  fluck  a  little  with  your  Lordfhip ;  who 
is  us'd  to  examine  Things  by  a  better  Standard 
than  that  of  Fafhion    or    the   common  Tafte. 

* 

You  mud  certainly  have    obferv'd    our   Poets 
under  a  remarkable  Conftraint,  when  oblig'd 
to  affume  this  Character:  and  you   have  won- 
derd,    perhaps,    why  that  Air    of  Enthufiafm, 
which  fits  fo  gracefully  with  an  Antient,  fhou'd 
be  fo  fpiritlefs  and  aukard  in  a  Modern.     But 
as  to  this  Doubt,  your  Lordfhip   wou'd   have 
foon  refolvd  your-felf:  and  it  cou'd  only  ferve 
to  bring  a-crofs  you  a  Reflection  you  have  of- 
ten   made,    on    many  occafions  befides;   That 
Truth  is  the  mqfl  powerful   thing  in    the   Worlds 
fmce  even  Ficlion  *  it-felf  muft  be  govern'd  by 
it,  and   can   only  pleafe   by  its   refemblance. 
The  Appearance    of  Reality   is    neceffary    to 
make  any  Paflion  agreeably  reprefented  ;    and 
to  be  able  to    move    others,    we  muft  firft  be 
mov'd  ourfelves,  or  at  leaft  feem   to  be  fo,  up- 
on fome  probable  Grounds.      Now  what  pof- 

*  Infra,  p.  142,  Sec.   aud  VOl^.  111.  p.  260,  Sec. 

ability 


Concerning  EXTHU  SIAS  M.    5 

fibility  is  there  that  a  Modern,  who  is  known 
never  to  have  worfhip'd  Apollo,  or  own'd 
any  fuch  Deity  as  the  Mufes,  fhou'd  perfuade 
us  to  enter  into  his  pretended  Devotion,  and 
move  us  by  his  feign'd  Zeal  in  a  Religion  out 
of  date?  But  as  for  the  Antients,  'tis  known 
they  derivd  both  their  Religion  and  Polity 
from  the  Mufes  Art.  How  natural  therefore 
mud  it  have  appear'd  in  any,  but  efpecially  a 
Poet  of  thofe  times,  to  addrefs  himfelf  in  Rap- 
tures of  Devotion  to  thofe  acknowledge  Pa- 
troneffes  of  Wit  and  Science  ?  Here  the  Poet 
might  with  probability  feign  an  Extafy,  tho  he 
really  felt  none:  and  fuppofmg  it  to  have  been 
mere  Affeclation,  it  wou'd  look  however  like 
fomething  natural,  and  coud  not  fail  of  pleafmg. 

But  perhaps,  my  Lord,  there  was  a  further 
My  fiery  in  the  cafe.  Men,  your  Lord  (hip 
knows,  are  wonderfully  happy  in  a  Faculty  of 
deceiving  themfelves,  whenever  they  fet  hear- 
tily about  it;  and  a  very  fmall  Foundation  of 
any  Paffion  will  ferve  us,  not  only  to  a6l  it 
well,  but  even  to  work  our-felves  into  it  be- 
yond our  own  reach.  Thus,  by  a  little  Affec- 
tation in  Love-Matters,  and  with  the  help  of 
a  Romance  or  Novel,  a  Boy  of  Fifteen,  or  a 
grave  Man  of  Fifty,  may  be  fure  to  grow  a 
very  natural  Coxcomb,  and  feel  the  Belle  Paf- 
Jwn   in   good    earneft.     A   Man   of   tolerable 

Good- 


6  A      LETTER 

Good-Nature,  who  happens  to  be  a  little 
piqu'd,  may,  by  improving  his  Refentment, 
become  a  very  Fury  for  Revenge.  Even  a 
good  Chriftian,  who  wou'd  needs  be  over- 
good,  and  thinks  he  can  never  believe  enough, 
may,  by  a  fmall  Inclination  well  improv'd, 
extend  his  Faith  fo  largely,  as  to  comprehend 
in  it  not  only  all  Scriptural  and  Traditional 
Miracles,  but  a  folid  Syftem  of  Old-Wives  Sto- 
rys.  Were  it  needful,  I  cou  d  put  your  Lord- 
fhip  in  mind  of  an  Eminent,  Learned,  and 
truly  Chriftian  Prelate  you  once  knew,  who 
coud  have  given  you  a  full  account  of  his  Be- 
lief in  Fairys.  And  this,  methinks,  may  ferve 
to  make  appear,  how  far  an  antient  Poet's 
Faith  might  poflibly  have  been  rais'd,  together 
with  his  Imagination. 

But  we  Chriflians,  who  have  fuch  ample 
Faith  our-felves,  will  allow  nothing  to  poor 
Heathens.  They  mull  be  Infidels  in  every 
fenfe.  We  will  not  allow  em  to  believe  fo 
much  as  their  own  Religion;  which  we  cry 
is  too  abfurd  to  have  been  credited  by  any 
befides  the  mere  Vulgar.  But  if  a  Reverend 
Chriftian  Prelate  may  be  fo  great  a  Volunteer 
in  Faith,  as  beyond  the  ordinary  Prescription 
of  the  Catholick  Church,  to  believe  in  Fairys; 
why  may  not  a  Heathen  Poet,  in  the  ordinary 
way  of  his  Religion,  be  allow'd  to   believe  in 

Mufes  ? 


.      Concerning  ENTHUSIASM,    y 

Alufes?  For  thefe,  your  Lordfhip  knows,  were 
fo  many  Divine  Perfons  in  the  Heathen  Creed, 
and  were  eflential  in  their  Syftem  of  Theology. 
The  Goddeffes  had  their  Temples  and  Wor- 
ihip,  the  fame  as  the  other  Deitys  :  And  to  dis- 
believe the  HolyJS'ine,  or  their  Apollo,  was  the 
fame  as  to  deny  Jove  himfelf;  and  muft  have 
been  efleem'd  equally  profane  and  atheiftical 
by  the  generality  of  fober  Men.  Now  what  a 
mighty  advantage  muft  it  have  been  to  an  an- 
tient  Poet  to  be  thus  orthodox,  and  by  the  help 
of  his  Education,  and  a  Good-will  into  the 
bargain,  to  work  himfelf  up  to  the  Belief  of  a 
Divine  Prefence  and  Heavenly  Infpiration? 
It  was  never  furely  the  bufinefs  of  Poets  in 
thofe  days  to  call  Revelation  in  queftion,  when 
it  evidently  made  fo*  well  for  their  Art.  On 
the  contrary,  they  cou'd  not  fail  to  animate 
their  Faith  as  much  as  poflible ;  when  by  a 
fingle  Act  of  it,  well  inforc'd,  they  cou'd  raife 
themfelves  into  fuch  Angelical  Company. 

How  much  the  Imagination  of  fuch  a  Pre- 
fence muft  exalt  a  Genius,  we  may  obferve 
merely  from  the  Influence  which  an  ordinary 
Prefence  has  over  Men.  Our  Modern  Wits  are 
moreorlefs  rais'd  by  the  Opinion  they  have  of 
their  Company,  and  the  Idea  they  form  to 
themfelves  of  the  Perfons  to  whom  they  make 
their  AddrefTes.  A  common  Actor  of  the  Stage 

Vol.  I.  B  will 


A     LETTER 

will  inform  us  how  much  a  full  Audience  of 
the  Better  Sort  exalts  him  above  the  com- 
mon pitch.  And  you,  my  Lord,  who  are  the 
noblefl  Aclor,  and  of  the  nobleft  Part  affign'd 
to  any  Mortal  on  this  earthly  Stage,  when  you 
are  acling  for  Liberty  and  Mankind;  does  not 
the  publick  Prefence,  that  of  your  Friends,  and 
the  Well-wifhers  to  your  Caufe,  add  fomething 
to  your  Thought  and  Genius?  Or  is  that  Sub- 
lime of  Reafon,  and  that  Power  of  Eloquence, 
which  you  difcover  in  publick,  no  more  than 
what  you  are  equally  Mailer  of,  in  private ;  and 
can  command  at  any  time,  alone,  or  with  in- 
different Company,  or  in  any  eafy  or  cool 
hour?  This  indeed  were  more  Godlike ;  but 
ordinary  Humanity,  I  think,  reaches  not  fo  high. 

For  my  own  part,  my  Lord,  I  have  really 
fo  much  need  of  fome  confiderable  Prefence 
or  Company  to  raife  my  Thoughts  on  any  oc- 
calion,  that  when  alone,  I  mufl  endeavour  by 
Strength  of  Fancy  to  fupply  this  want;  and 
in  default  of  a  Mufe,  mud  inquire  out  fome 
Great  Man  of  a  more  than  ordinary  Genius, 
whofe  imagin'd  Prefence  may  infpire  me  with 
more  than  what  I  feel  at  ordinary  hours.  And 
thus,  my  Lord,  have  I  chofen  to  addrefs  my- 
felf  to  your  Lordfhip;  tho  without  fubfcribing 
my  Name :  allowing  you  as  a  Stranger,  the 
full  liberty  of  reading  no  more  than  what  you 

mav 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.     9 

may  have  a  fancy  for;  but  referving  to  my- 
felf  the  privilege  of  imagining  you  read  all,  with 
particular  notice,  as  a  Friend,  and  one  whom 
I  may  juftiflabiy  treat  with  the  Intimacy  and 
Freedom  which  follows. 

SECT.     II. 

IF  the  knowing  well  how  to  expofe  any  In- 
firmity or  Vice  were  a  fufficient  Security 
for  the  Virtue  which  is  contrary,  how  excel- 
lent an  Age  might  we  be  prefum'd  to  live  in  t 
Never  was  there  in  our  Nation  a  time  known, 
when  Folly  and  Extravagance  of  every  kind 
were  more  fharply  infpecled,  or  more  wittily 
ridicul'd.  And  one  might  hope  at  leafl  from 
this  good  Symptom,  that  our  Age  was  in  no  de- 
clining ftate;  fince  whatever  our  Diftempers  are, 
we  (land  fo  well  affeclcd  to  our  Remedys.  To 
bear  the  being  told  of  Faults,  is  in  private 
Perfons  the  bell  token  of  Amendment.  'Tis 
feldom  that  a  Publick  is  thus  difposd.  For 
where  Jealoufy  of  State,  or  the  ill  Lives  of  the 
Great  People,  or  any  other  Caufe  is  powerful 
enough  to  reftrain  the.  Freedom  ofCenfure  in  any 
part,  it  in  efTecl:  deftroys  the  Benefit  of  it  in  the 
whole.  There  can  be  no  impartial  and  free 
Cenfure  of  Manners  where  any  peculiar  Cuitom 
or  National  Opinion  is  fet  apart,  and  not  only 
exempted  from  Criticifm,  but  even  flatter'd 
with  the  higher!  Art.      'Tis  only  in  a  free  Na. 

B  2  tion 


io         a   l  e  r  r  E  R 

tion,  fuch  as  ours,  that  Impofture  has  no  Pri- 
vilege; and  that  neither  the  Credit  of  a  Court, 
the  power  of  a  Nobility,  nor  the  Awefulnefs 
of  a  Church  can  give  her  Protection,  or  hin- 
der her  from  being  arraign'd  in  every  Shape 
and  Appearance,  Tis  true,  this  liberty  may 
feem  to  run  too  far.      We  may  perhaps  be  faid 

to  make  ill  ufe  of  it. So  every  one  will  fay, 

when  he  himfelf  is  touch'd,  and  his  Opinion 
freely  examin'd.  But  who  fliall  be  Judge  of 
luhat  may  be  freely  examin'd,  and  tuhat  may 
not?  Where  Liberty  may  be  us'd;  and  where 
it  may  not  ?  What  Remedy  fhall  we  prefcribe 
to  this  in  General?  Can  there  be  a  better  than 
from  that  Liberty  it-felf  which  is  complain'd 
of?  If  Men  are  vitious,  petulant  or  abufive ; 
the  Magiftrate  may  correct  them  :  But  if  they 
reafon  ill,  'tis  Reafon  lull  mud  teach  'em  to  do 
better.  Juftnefs  ofThought  and  Style,  Refine- 
ment in  Manners  good  Breeding,  and  Polite- 
nefs  of  every  kind,  can  come  only  from  the 
Trial  and  Experience  of  what  is  beft.  Let  but 
the  Search  go  freely  on,  and  the  right  Meafure 
of  every  thing  will  foon  be  found.  Whatever 
Humour  has  got  the  Hart,  if  it  be  unnatural, 
it  cannot  hold  ;  and  the  Ridicule,  if  ill  plac'd 
at  firft,  will  certainly  fall  at  lafl  where  it  deferves. 

I  Have  often  wonder'd  to  fee  Men  of  Senfe 
fo  mightily  alarm'd  at   the   approach  of  any . 

thing 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM,     n 

thing  like  Ridicule  on  certain  Subjects;  as  if 
they  miftrufted  their  own  Judgment.  For  what 
Ridicule  can  lie  againfl  Reafon?  Or  how  can 
any  one  of  the  lean  Junnefs  of  Thought  en- 
dure a  Ridicule  wrong  plac'd  ?  Nothing  is  more 
ridiculous  than  this  it-felf.  The  Vulgar,  in- 
deed, may  fwallow  any  fordid  Jeft,  any  mere 
Drollery  or  Buffoonery ;  but  it  mud  be  a  finer 
and  a  truer  Wit  which  takes  with  the  Men  of 
Senfe  and  Breeding.  How  comes  it  to  pafs 
then,  that  we  appear  fuch  Cowards  in  reafon- 
ing,  and  are  fo  afraid  to  ftand  the  Tejl  of  Ri- 
dicule?  O!   fay  we,    the  Subjects  are    too 

grave. Perhaps  fo:  but  let  us  fee  firft  whe- 
ther they  are  really  grave  or  no :  for  in  the 
manner  we  may  conceive  'em,  they  may  per- 
adventure  be  very  grave  and  weighty  in  our 
Imagination ;  but  very  ridiculous  and  imper- 
tinent in  their  own  nature.  Gravity  is  of  the 
very  Efience  of  Impofture.  It  does  not  only 
make  us  miftake  other  things,  but  is  apt  per- 
petually almoft  to  miftake  it-felf.  For  even  in 
common  Behaviour,  how  hard  is  it  for  the 
grave  Character  to  keep  long  out  of  the  limits 
of  the  formal  one?  We  can  never  be  too  grave, 
if  we  can  be  aifur'd  we  are  really  what  we  fup- 
pofe.  And  we  can  never  too  much  honour  or 
revere  any  thing  for  grave  ;  if  we  are  aftur'd  the 
Thing  is  grave,  as  we  apprehend  it.  The  main 
Point,  is  to  know  always  true  Gravity  from  the 

'  B  3  falfe: 


i%  A     L  E  T  TE  R 

falfe :  and  this  can  only  be,  by  carrying  the  Rule 
constantly  with  us,  and  freely  applying  it  not 
only  to  the  Things  about  us,  but  to  our-felves. 
For  if  unhappily  we  lofe  the  Meafure  in  our- 
felves,  we  fhall  foon  lofe  it  in  every  thing  be- 
fides.  Now  what  Rule  or  Meafure  is  there  in 
the  World,  except  in  the  confidering  of  the  real 
Temper  of  Things,  to  find  which  are  truly  fe- 
rious  and  which  ridiculous?  And  how  can 
this  be  done,  unlefs  by  *  applying  the  Ridicule, 
to  fee  whether  it  will  bear?  But  if  we  fear 
to  apply  this  Rule  in  any  thing,  what  Security 
can  we  have  againft  the  Impofture  of  Forma- 
lity in  all  things?  We  have  allow'd  our-felves 
to  be  FormaUJls  in  one  Point ;  and  the  fame 
Formality  may  rule  us  as  it  pleafes  in  all  other. 

'Tis  not   in  every  Difpofition   that   we  are 
capacitated  to  judge   of  things.    We  muft  be- 
forehand judge  of  our  own  Temper,  and  accord- 
ingly of   other   things  which    fall  under   our 
Judgment.      But  we  muft  never  more  pretend 
to  judge  of  things,  or  of  our  Temper  in  judging 
them,  when  we  have  given  up  our  preliminary 
Right  of  Judgment,  and  under  a  Prefumption 
of  Gravity,  have  allow'd  our-felves  to  be  raoft 
ridiculous,  and  to  admire  profoundly  the  molt 
ridiculous  things  in  nature,  at  leaft  for  ought 
we  know.     For  having  refolv'd   never  to  try, 
we  can  never  be  fure 

*  Infra,  pag.  Gi,  74. 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.    i3 

* Ridiculum  acri 

Fortius  et  melius  magnas  plerumque  fecat  res. 

This,  my  Lord,  I  may  fafely  aver,  is  fo  true  in 
itfelf,  and  fo  well  known  for  Truth  by  the  cun- 
ning Formali/ls  o£  the  Age,  that  they  can  better 
bear  to  have  their  Impoftures  rail'd  at,  with 
all  the  Bitternefs  and  Vehemence  imaginable, 
than  to  have  them  touch'd  ever  fo  gently  in 
this  other  way.  They  know  very  well,  that 
as  Modes  and  Fafhions,  fo  Opinions,  tho  ever 
fo  ridiculous,  are  kept  up  by  Solemnity:  and 
that  thofe  formal  Notions  which  grew  up  pro- 
bably in  an  ill  Mood,  and  have  been  conceiv'd 
in  fober  Sadnefs,  are  never  to  be  remov'd  but 
in  a  fober  kind  of  Chearfulnefs,  and  by  a  more 
eafy  and  pleafant  way  of  Thought.  There  is 
a  Melancholy  which  accompanies  all  Enthufiafm. 
Be  it  Love  or  Religion  (for  there  areEnthufiafms 
in  both)  nothing  can  put  a  flop  to  the  grow- 
ing mifchief  of  either,  till  the  Melancholy  be 
remov'd,  and  the  Mind  at  liberty  to  hear  what 
can  be  faid  againfl  the  Ridiculoufnefs  of  an 
Extreme  in  either  way. 

It  was  heretofore  the  Wifdom  of  fome  wife 
Nations,  to  let  People  be  Fools  as  much  as  they 
pleas'd,  and  never  to  punifh  ferioufly  what  de- 

'  Hor.  Sat.  10. 

B  4  ierv'd 


14         a   l  e  r  r  E  R 

ferv'd  only  to  be  laugh'd  at,  and  was,  after  all, 
bed  curd  by  that  innocent  Remedy.      There 
are   certain  Humours    in  Mankind,   which  of 
neceffity  muff  have  vent.     The  Human  Mind 
and  Body  are  both  of  'em  naturally  fubjec"l  to 
Commotions :    and  as    there  are    ftrange  Fer- 
ments in  the  Blood,  which  in  many  Bodys  oc- 
cafion  an  extraordinary  Discharge;  fo  in  Rea- 
fon  too,  there  are  heterogeneous  Particles  which 
mud  be  thrown  off  by  Fermentation.     Shou'd 
Phyficians  endeavour  abfolutely  to  allay  thofe 
Ferments  of  the  Body,   and  ftrike  in  the   Hu- 
mours which  difcover  themfelves  in  fuch  Erup- 
tions, they  might,    inftead  of  making  a  Cure, 
bid  fair  perhaps  to  raife  a  Plague,  and  turn  a 
Spring-Ague  or  an  Autumn-Surfeit  into  an  epi- 
demical malignant  Fever.     They  are  certain- 
ly as  ill   Phyficians  in    the  Body -Politick,  who 
wou'd   needs  be  tampering  with  thefe  mental 
Eruptions ;  and  under  the  fpecious  pretence  of 
healing   this  Itch    of  Superftition,    and  faving 
Souls  from  the  Contagion  of  Enthufiafm,  fhou'd 
fet  all  Nature  in  an  uproar,  and  turn  a  few  in- 
nocent Carbuncles  into  an  Inflammation  and 
mortal  Gangrene. 

We  read  *  in  Hiftory  that  Pan,  when  he 
accompany'd  Bacchus  in  an  Expedition  to 
the  Indies,  found  means  to  ftrike  a  Terror  thro' 

i 

*  polyseui  Strateg.  lib.  i.  c.  2. 

a 


Concerning  EXTH  U  SI  AS  M.    15 

a  Hoft  of  Enemys,  by  the  help  of  a  fmall  Com- 
pany, whole  Clamors  he  manag'd  to  good  ad- 
vantage among  the  echoing  Rocks  and  Caverns 
of  a  woody  Vale.  The  hoarfe  bellowing  of  the 
Caves,  join'd  to  the  hideous  afpeel  of  fuch  dark 
and  defart  Places,  rais'd  fuch  a  Horror  in  the 
Enemy,  that  in  this  (late  their  Imagination 
help'd  'em  to  hear  Voices,  and  doubtlefs  to 
fee  Forms  too,  which  were  more  than  Human  : 
whilft  the  Uncertainty  of  what  they  fear'd  made 
their  Fear  yet  greater,  and  fpread  it  fader  by 
implicit  Looks  than  any  Narration  cou'd  con- 
vey it.  And  this  was  what  in  after-times  Men 
calld  a  Panic k.  The  Story  indeed  gives  a  good 
Hint  of  the  nature  of  this  Paflion,  which  can 
hardly  be  without  fome  mixture  of  Enthufiafm, 
and  Horrors  of  a  fuperftitious  kind. 

One  may  with  good  reafon  call  every  Paf- 
fion  Panick  which  is  rais'd  in  a*  Multitude, 
and  convey'd  by  Afpecl:,  or  as  it  were  by  Con- 
tact or  Sympathy.     Thus  popular  Fury  may 
be  call'd  Panick,  when  the  Rage  of  the  People, 
as  we  have  fometimes  known,  has  put  them 
beyond  themfelves;  efpecially  where  *  Religi- 
on has  had  to  do.     And   in  this    ftate  their 
very    Looks    are  infectious.     The  Fury   flies 
from   Face  to  Face  :  and  the  Difeafe  is  no  foon- 
er  feen  than  caught.     They  who  in  a   better 

*  Infra,  p.  43.  and  VOL.  III.  p.  66.  in  the  Notes. 

Situation 


16  a    l  e  r  T  E  R 

Situation  of  Mind  have  beheld  a  Multitude 
under  the  power  of  this  Paffion,  have  own'd 
that  they  faw  in  the  Countenances  of  Men 
fomething  more  ghaftly  and  terrible  than  at 
other  times  is  exprefsd  on  the  mod  paflionate 
occafion.  Such  force  has  *  Society  in  ill,  as 
well  as  in  good  Paflions  :  and  fo  much  flronger 
any  Affection  is  for  being  Jocial  and  communica- 
tive. 

Thus,  my  Lord,  there  are  many  Panicks  in 
Mankind,  befides  merely  that  of  Fear.  And 
thus  is  Religion  alfo  Panick;  when  Enthufiafm 
of  any  kind  gets  up ;  as  oft,  on  melancholy  oc- 
canons,  it  will.  For  Vapours  naturally  rife ; 
and  in  bad  times  efpecially,  when  the  Spirits 
of  Men  are  low,  as  either  in  publick  Calami- 
tys,  .or  during  the  Unwholefomnefs  of  Air  or 
Diet,  or  when  Convulfions  happen  in  Nature, 
Storms,  Earthquakes,  or  other  amazing  Prodi- 
gys :  at  this  feafon  the  Panick  mult  needs  run 
high,  and  the  Magiflrate  of  neceffity  give  way 
to  it.  ;  For  to  apply  a  ferious  Remedy,  and 
bring  the  Sword,  or  Fafces,  as  a  Cure,  mud 
make  the  Cafe  more  melancholy,  and  increafe 
the  very  Caufe  of  the  Diftemper.  To  forbid 
Mens  natural  Fears,  and  to  endeavour  the  over- 
powering them  by  other  Fears,  mud  needs  be 
a  mofl  unnatural  Method.     The  Magiflrate,  if 

*  Infra,  p.  no,  kc.  and  VOL.  II.  p.  ioo,  106,  &c.  127,  8cc. 

he 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM   17 

he  be  any  Artift,  fhou'd  have  a  gentler  hand; 
and  inftead  of  Cauilicks,  Incifions,  and  Ampu- 
tations, fhou'd  be  ufmg  the  fofteft  Balms  ;  and 
with  a  kind  Sympathy  entering  into  the  Con- 
cern of  the  People,  and  taking,  as  it  were,  their 
Paffion  upon  him,  fhou'd,  when  he  has  footh'd 
and  fatisfy'd  it,  endeavour,  by  chearful  ways, 
to  divert  and  heal  it. 

This  was  antient  Policy:  and  hence  (as  a 
notable  *  Author  of  our  Nation  expreffes  it) 
'tis  neceffary  a  People  fhou'd  have  a  Publick 
Leading  in  Religion.  For  to  deny  the  Magif- 
trate  a  Worfhip,  or  take  away  a  National 
Church,  is  as  mere  Enthufiafm  as  the  Notion 
which  fets  up  Perfecution.  For  why  fhou'd 
there  not  be  publick  Walks,  as  well  as  pri- 
vate Gardens  ?  Why  not  publick  Librarys,  as 
well  as  private  Education  and  Home-Tutors  ? 
But  to  prefcribe  bounds  to  Fancy  and  Specu- 
lation, to  regulate  Mens  Apprehenfions  and  re- 
ligious Beliefs  or  Fears,  to  fupprefs  by  Violence 
the  natural  Paffion  of  Enthufiafm,  or  to  endea- 
vour to  afcertain  it,  or  reduce  it  to  one  Spe- 
cies, or  bring  it  under  any  one  Modification, 
is  in  truth  no  better  Senfe,  nor  deferves  a  bet- 
ter Characler,  than  what  the  t  Comedian  de- 
clares of  the  like  Projecl  in  the  Affair  of  Love — ■ 


HA  RRIXGTO  JV.  f  Ter .  Eun .  Ail  i .  Sc.  i . 

— Xihilo 


i8  A     L  E  7   T  E  R 

— Nihilo  plus  a  gas 


Quam fides  operam  ut cum  ratione  infanias. 

Not  only  the  Vifionarys  and  EnthufiafU 
of  all  kinds  were  tolerated,  your  Lordlhip 
knows,  by  the  Antients ;  but  on  the  other  fide, 
Philofophy  had  as  free  a  courfe,  and  was  per- 
mitted as  a  Balance  againll  Superitition.  And 
whilft  fome  Seels,  fuch  as  the  Pythagorian  and 
latter  Platonick,  join'd  in  with  the  Superitition 
and  Enthufiafm  of  the  Times;  the  Epicurean, 
the  Acadcmick,  and  others,  were  allow'd  to  ufe 
all  the  Force  of  Wit  and  Raillery  againll  it. 
And  thus  matters  were  happily  balanc'd;  Rea- 
fon  had  fair  Play;  Learning  and  Science  flou- 
rifh'd.  Wonderful  was  the  Harmony  and 
Temper  which  arofe  from  all  thefe  Contra- 
rietys.  Thus  Superitition  and  Enthufiafm  were 
mildly  treated;  and  being  let  alone,  they  never 
rag'd  to  that  degree  as  to  occafion  Bloodfhed, 
Wars,  Perfecutions  and  Devaluations  in  the 
World.  But  a  new  fort  of  Policy,  which  ex- 
tends it-felf  to  another  World,  and  confiders 
the  future  Lives  and  Happinefs  of  Men  rather 
than  the  prefent,  has  made  us  leap  the  Bounds 
of  natural  Humanity ;  and  out  of  a  fuper- 
natural  Charity,  has  taught  us  the  way  of 
plaguing  one  another  mod  devoutly.  It  has 
rais'd  an  ""Antipathy  which  no  temporal  In- 

•:VOL.  III.  p.  59,  60,  &:c.  80,  8i,8cc. 

tereft 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM,     ig 

tereft  cou'd  ever  do;  and  entail'd  upon  us  a 
mutual  Hatred  to  all  Eternity.  And  now  Uni- 
formity in  Opinion  (a  hopeful  Projecl!)  is  look'd 
on  as  the  only  Expedient  againft  this  Evil. 
The  faving  of  Souls  is  now  the  heroick  Paffion 
of  exalted  Spirits;  and  is  become  in  a  manner 
the  chief  Care  of  the  Magifirate,  and  the  very 
End  of  Government  it-felf. 

If  Magiflracy  fliou'd  vouchfafe  to  interpofe 
thus  much  in  other  Sciences,  I  am  afraid  we 
ihou'd  have  as  bad  Logick,  as  bad  Mathema- 
ticks,  and  in  every  kind  as  bad  Philofophy,  as 
we  often  have  Divinity,  in  Countrys  where  a 
precife  Orthodoxy  is  fettled  by  Law.  'Tis  a 
hard  matter  for  a  Government  to  fettle  Wit. 
If  it  does  but  keep  us  fober  and  honeft,  'tis 
likely  we  fhall  have  as  much  Ability  in  our 
fpiritual  as  in  our  temporal  Affairs :  and  if 
we  can  but  be  trufted,  we  fhall  have  Wit 
enough  to  fave  our-felves,  when  no  Prejudice 
lies  in  the  way.  But  if  Honefty  and  Wit  be 
infufficient  for  this  faving  Work,  'tis  in  vain 
for  the  Magiflrate  to  meddle  with  it:  fince  if 
he  be  ever  fo  virtuous  or  wife,  he  may  be  as 
foon  miftaken  as  another  Man.  I  am  hire  the 
only  way  to  fave  Mens  Senfe,  or  preferve  Wit 
at  all  in  the  World,  is  to  give  Liberty  to  Wit. 
Now  Wit  can  never  have  its  Liberty,  where 
the    Freedom  of  Raillery  is  taken    away:    For 

againft 


20 


A     LETTER 


againfl  ferious  Extravagances   and  fplenetick 
Humours  there  is  no  other  Remedy  than  this. 

We  have  indeed  full  Power  over  all  other 
Modifications  of  Spleen.  We  may  treat  other 
Enthufiafms  as  we  pleafe.  We  may  ridicule 
Love,  or  Gallantry,  or  Knight-Errantry  to  the 
utmoft ;  and  we  find,  that  in  thefe  latter  days 
of  Wit,  the.  Humour  of  this  kind,  which  was 
once  fo  prevalent,  is  pretty  well  declin'd.  The 
Crufades,  the  refcuing  of  Holy  Lands,  andfuch 
devout  Gallantrys  are  in  lefs  requeft  than  for- 
merly :  But  if  fomething  of  this  militant  Religi- 
on, fomething  of  this  Soul-refcuing  Spirit,  and 
Saint-Errantry  prevails  full,  we  need  not  won- 
der, when  we  confider  in  how  folemn  a  man- 
ner we  treat  this  Diftemper,  and  how  prepof- 
teroufly  we  go  about  to  cure  Enthufiafm. 

I  Can  hardly  forbear  fancying,  that  if  we 
had  a  fort  of  Inquifition,  or  formal  Court  of 
Judicature,  with  grave  Officers  and  Judges, 
erecled  to  reftrain  Poetical  Licence,  and  in 
general  to  fupprefs  that  Fancy  and  Humour 
of  Verfification ;  but  in  particular  that  moft 
extravagant  Paflion  of  Love,  as  it  is  fet  out  by- 
Poets,  in  its  Heathenifh  Drefs  of  Venus's  and 
Cupids:  if  the  Poets,  as  Ringleaders  and 
Teachers  of  this  Herefy,  were,  under  grievous 
Penaltys,  forbid  to  enchant  the  People  by  their 

vein 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.   21 

vein  of  Rhyming ;  and   if  the  People,  on  the 
other  fide,  were,  under  proportionable  Penal- 
tys,  forbid  to  hearken  to  any  fuch  Charm,  or 
lend  their  Attention  to  any  Love-Tale,  fo  much 
as  in  a  Play,   a  Novel,  or  a  Ballad ;  we  might 
perhaps  fee  a  new  Arcadia  arifmg  out  of  this 
heavy  Persecution :    Old    People  and    Young 
would  be  feiz'd  with  a  verfrfying  Spirit :   We 
fhou'd  have  Field-Conventicles  of  Lovers  and 
Poets :   Forefts  wou'd  be  fill'd  with  romantick 
Shepherds  and  ShepherdelTes;   and  Rocks   re- 
found  with  Echoes  of  Hymns  and  Praifes   of- 
fer'd  to  the  Powers  of  Love.  We  might  indeed 
have  a  fair  Chance,  by  this  Management,  to 
bring  back  the  whole  Train  of  Heathen  Gods, 
and  fetour  cold  Northern  Ifland  burning  with 
as  many  Altars  to  Venus  and  Apollo,  as 
were  formerly  in  Cyprus,  Delos,  or  any  of  thofe 
warmer  Grecian  Climates. 


SECT.     III. 

BU  T,  my  Lord,  you  may  perhaps  wonder, 
that  having  been  drawn  into  fuch  a  fe- 
rious  Subjecl  as  Religion,  I  fhou'd  forget  my 
felf  fo  far  as  to  give  way  to  Raillery  and  Hu- 
mour. I  muft  own,  my  Lord,  'tis  not  merely 
thro'  Chance  that  this  has  happen'd.  To  fay 
truth,   I  hardly  care  fo  much  as  to  think  on 

this 


22 


ALE  T  T  E  R 


this  Subject,  much  lefs  to  write  on  it,  without 
endeavouring  to  put  my-felf  in  as  good  Hu- 
mour as  is  pomble.  People  indeed,  who  can 
endure  no  middle  Temper,  but  are  all  Air  and 
Humour,  know  little  of  the  Doubts  and  Scru- 
ples of  Religion,  and  are  fafe  from  any  imme- 
diate Influence  of  devoid  Melancholy  or  Enthu- 
Jiqfm;  which  requires  more  Deliberation  and 
thoughtful  Practice  to  fix  it-felf  in  a  Temper, 
and  grow  habitual.  But  be  the  Habit  what  it 
will;  to  be  deliverd  of  it  at  fo  fcd  a  Cod  as 
Inconfideratenefs,  or  Madnefs,  is  what  I  wou'd 
never  wifh  to  be  my  Lot.  I  had  rather  (land 
all  Adventures  with  Religion,  than  endeavour 
to  get  rid  of  the  Thoughts  of  it  by  Diverfion. 
All  I  contend  for,  is  to  think  of  it  in  a  right 
Humour:  and  that  this  sroes  more  than  half- 
way  towards  thinking  rightly  of  it,  is  what  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  demonftrate. 

Good  Humour  is  not  only  the  bed  Se- 
curity againft  Enthit/iafm,  but  the  belt  Founda- 
tion of  Piety  and  true  Religion:  For  if  right 
Thoughts  and  worthy  Apprehenfions  of  the 
Supreme  Being,  are  fundamental  to  all  true 
Worfhip  and  Adoration ;  'tis  more  than  pro- 
bable, that  we  (hall  never  mifcarry  in  this  re- 
fpecl:,  except  thro'  ill  Humour  only.  Nothing 
befide  ill  Humour,  either  natural  or  forc'd, 
can  bring  a   Man  to  think   ferioully  that  the 

World 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM   23 

World  is  govern'd  by  any  devilifh  or  malici- 
ous Power.  I  very  much  queftion  whether  any 
thing,  befides  ill  Humour,  can  be  the  Caufe 
of  Atheifm.  For  there  are  fo  many  Argu- 
ments to  perfuade  a  Man  in  Humour,  that,  in 
the  main,  all  things  are  kindly  and  well  dif- 
pos'd,  that  one  wou'd  think  it  impoflible  for 
him  to  be  fo  far  out  of  conceit  with  Affairs, 
as  to  imagine  they  all  ran  at  adventures;  and 
that  the  World,  as  venerable  and  wife  a  Face 
as  it  carry'd,  had  neither  Senfe  nor  Mean- 
ing in  it.  This  however  I  am  perfuaded  of, 
that  nothing  befides  ill  Humour  can  give  us 
dreadful  or  ill  Thoughts  of  a  Supreme  Mana- 
ger. Nothing  can  perfuade  us  of  Sullennefs 
or  Sournefs  in  fuch  a  Being,  befides  the  aclual 
fore-feeling  of  fomewhat  of  this  kind  within 
our-felves :  and  if  we  are  afraid  of  brinQ-ing 
good  Humour  into  Religion,  or  thinking  with 
Freedom  and  Pleafantnefs  on  fuch  a  Subject 
as  God;  'tis  becaufe  we  conceive  the  Subject 
fo  like  our-felves,  and  can  hardly  have  a  No- 
tion of  Majejiy  and  Greatnefs,  without  Statelinefs 
and  Morojenefs  accompanying  it. 

This,  however,  is  the  juft  Reverie  of  that 
Character,  which  we  own  to  be  mod  divinely 
Good,  when  we  fee  it,  as  we  fometimcs  do,  in 
Men  of  higher!  Power  among  us.  If  they  pafs 
for  truly  Good,  we  dare  treat  them  freely,   and 

Vol.  I.  C  are 


24  A     LETTER 

are  fare  they  will  not  be  difpleas'd  with  this 
Liberty.  They  are  doubly  Gainers  by  this 
Goodnefs  of  theirs.  For  the  more  they  are 
fearch'd  into,  and  familiarly  examin'd,  the  more 
their  Worth  appears,  and  the  Difcoverer, 
charm'd  with  his  Succefs,  efteems  and  loves 
more  than  ever,  when  he  has  prov'd  this  ad- 
ditional Bounty  in  his  Superior,  and  reflects 
on  that  Candor  and  Generofity  he  has  expc- 
rienc'd-  Your  Lordfhip  knows  more  perhaps 
of  this  Myfiery  than  any-one.  How  elfe  fhou'd 
you  have  been  fo  belov'd  in  Power,  and  out 
of  Power  fo  adher'd  to,  and  ftill  more  belov'd? 

Thank  Heaven!  there  are  even  in  our 
own  Age  fome  fuch  Examples.  In  former  Ages 
there  have  been  many  fuch.  We  have  known 
mighty  Princes,  and  even  Emperors  of  the 
World,  who  cou'd  bear  unconcernedly,  not 
only  the  free  Cenfure  of  their  Aclions,  but  the 
mod  fpiteful  Reproaches  and  Calumnys,  even 
to  their  faces.  Some  perhaps  may  wifli  there 
had  never  been  fuch  Examples  found  in  Hea- 
thens :  but  more  efpecially,  that  the  occafion 
had  never  been  given  by  Chriftians.  'Twas 
more  the  Misfortune  indeed  of  Mankind  in 
general,  than  of  Chriftians  in  particular,  that 
fome  of  the  earlier  Roman  Emperors  were  fuch 
Monrlers  of  Tyranny,  and  began  a  Perfecution, 
not  on  religious  Men  merely,  but  on  all  who 

were 


Concerning  E XT H  U S IAS M.    q5 

were  fufpe&ed  of  Worth  or  Virtue.  What 
cou'd  have  been  a  higher  Honour  or  Advan- 
tage to  Chriftianity,  than  to  be  perfecuted  by 
a  Nero?  But  better  Princes,  who  came  after, 
were  perfuaded  to  remit  thefe  fevere  Courfes. 
'Tis  true,  the  Magiftrate  might  poffibly  have 
been  furpriz'd  with  the  newnefs  of  a  Notion, 
which  he  might  pretend,  perhaps,  did  not  on- 
ly deftroy  the  Sacrednefs  of  his  Power,  but 
treated  him  and  all  Men  as  profane,  impious, 
and  damn'd,  who  enter'd  not  into  certain  par- 
ticular Modes  ofWorfhip;  of  which  there  had 
been  formerly  fo  many  thoufand  inflituted,  all 
of  'em  compatible  and  fociable  till  that  time. 
However,  fuch  was  the  Wifdom  of  fome  fuc- 
ceeding  Miniftrys,  that  the  edge  of  Perfecu- 
tion  was  much  abated;  and  even  that  *  Prince, 
who  was  efteem'd  the  greatefl  Enemy  of  the 
Chriftian  Seel,  and  who  himfelf  had  been  edu- 
cated in  it,  was  a  great  Reftrainer  of  Perfecu- 
tion,  and  wou'd  allow  of  nothing  further  than 
a  Refumption  of  Church-Lands  and  publick 
Schools,  without  any  attempt  on  the  Goods 
or  Perfons  even  ofthofewho  branded  the  State- 
Religion,  and  made  a  Merit  of  affronting  the 
publick  Worfhip. 

'Tis  well  we  have  the  Authority  of  a  facred 
Author  in  our  Religion,  to  affure  us,  that  the 

*  See  VOL.    111.  p.  87,  SS,  89.   in  the  Notes. 

C  2  Spirit 


26  A     L  E  T  T  E  R 

Spirit  of*  Love  and  Humanity  is  above  that  of 
Martyrs.  Otherwife,  one  might  be  a  little 
fcandaliz'd,  perhaps,  at  theHiftory  of  many  of 
our  primitive  Confeffors  and  Martyrs,  even 
according  to  our  own  accounts.  There  is 
hardly  now  in  the  World  fo  good  a  Chriflian 
(if  this  be  indeed  the  Mark  of  a  good  one)  who, 
if  he  happen'd  to  live  at  Conjlantinople,  or  elfe- 
where  under  the  Protection  of  theTiuks,  wou'd 
think  it  fitting  or  decent  to  give  any  Diftur- 
bance  to  their  Mofque-\V  or  [hip.  And  as  good 
Proteftants,  my  Lord,  as  you  and  I  are,  we 
fhou'd  confider  him  as  little  better  than  a  rank 
Enthufiaft,  who,  out  of  hatred  to  the  Romifli 
Idolatry,  fhou'd,  in  time  of  high  Mafs  (where 
Mafs  perhaps  was  by  Laweftablifh  d)  interrupt 
the  Prieft  with  Clamours,  or  fall  foul  on  his 
Images  and  Relicks. 

.  There  are  fome,  it  feems,  of  our  good 
Brethren,  the  French  Proteflants,  lately  come 
among  us,  who  are  mightily  taken  with  this 
Primitive  way.  They  have  fet  a-foot  the  Spi- 
rit of  Martyrdom  to  a  wonder  in  their  own 
Country;  and  they  long  to  be  trying  it  here, 
if  we  will  give  'em  leave,  and  afford  em  the 
Occafion :    that  is  to  fay,    if  we   will  only  do 

em  the   favour  to  hang   or  imprifon    'em ;   if 


I  Cor.  ch.  xiii,  ycr.  3. 

we 


Concerning  E  NTH  US  IAS  M.    2  7 

we  will  only  be  fo  obliging  as  to  break  their 
Bones  for  'em,  after  their  Country-fafhion, 
blow  up  their  Zeal,  and  flir  a-frefh  the  Coals 
of  Perfecution.  But  no  fuch  Grace  can  they 
hitherto  obtain  of  us.  So  hard-hearted  we 
are,  that  notwithftanding  their  own  Mob  are 
willing  to  bellow  kind  Blows  upon  'em,  and 
fairly  flone  'em  now  and  then  in  the  open 
Street ;  tho  the  Priefls  of  their  own  Nation 
wou'd  gladly  give  'em  their  defir'd  Discipline, 
and  are  earned  to  light  their  probationary  Fires 
for  'em ;  we  EngUJh  Men,  who  are  Mailers  in 
our  own  Country,  will  not  fuffer  the  Enthu- 
fiafts  to  be  thus  us'cl.  Nor  can  we  be  fuppos'd 
to  acl;  thus  in  envy  to  their  Pkenix-Sed.,  which 
it  feems  has  rifen  out  of  the  Flames,  and  wou'd 
willingly  grow  to  be  a  new  Church  by  the 
fame  manner  of  Propagation  as  the  old  one, 
whofe  Seed  was  truly  faid  to  be  from  the  Blood 
of  the  Martyrs. 

But  how  barbarous  (till,  and  more  than 
heathenifhly  cruel,  are  we  tolerating  Englijh 
Men !  For,  not  contented  to  deny  thefe  pro- 
phefying  Enthufiafts  the  Honour  of  a  Perfecu- 
tion, we  have  deliver'd  'em  over  to  the  cruelieft 
Contempt  in  the  World.  I  am  told,  for  cer- 
tain, that  they  are  at  *  this  very  time  the  Sub- 


*  Viz.   Anno  1707. 

(vol.  i)  c  ,3  jeel 


28  A    L  E  r  r  E  R, 

jecl  of  a  choice  Droll  or  Puppet-Show  at  Bar  tie- 
tfzj-Fair.  There,  doubtlefs,  their  ftrange  Voices 
and  involuntary  Agitations  are  admirably  well 
acled  by  the  Motion  of  Wires,  and  Infpiration 
of  Pipes.      For  the  Bodys   of  the  Prophets,   in 
their  State  of  Prophecy,    being   not    in    their 
own  power,  but  (as  they  fay  themfelves)  mere 
pafTive  Organs,  actuated  by  an  exterior  Force, 
have  nothing  natural,  or  refembling  real  Life, 
in  any  of  their  Sounds   or   Motions:   fo  that 
how  aukardly  foever  a  Puppet-Showmay  imi- 
tate other  Aclions,    it   mufl   needs   reprefent 
this  Paflion  to  the  Life.    And  whilfl  Bartlemy- 
Fair  is  in  poffelTion  of  this   Privilege,    I  dare 
Hand  Security   to   our  National  Church,  that 
no  Seclof  Enthuftafts,  no  new  Venders  of  Pro- 
phecy or  Miracles,  (hall  ever  get  the  (tart,  or 
put  her  to  the  trouble  of  trying  her  Strength 
with  'em,  in  any  Cafe. 

Happy  it  was  for  us,  that  when  Prophecy- 
had  got  poffeflion,  Smithjicld  was  us'd  in  a  more 
tragical  way.  Many  of  our  firft  Reformers, 
'tis  fear'd,  were  little  better  than  Enthufiafls: 
and  God  knows  whether  a  Warmth  of  this 
kind  did  not  confiderably  help  us  in  throw- 
ing off  that  fpiritual  Tyranny.  So  that  had 
not  the  Priefts,  as  is  ufual,  prefer'd  the  love 
of  Blood  to  all  other  Pafllons,  they  might  in 
a  merrier  way,  perhaps,  have  evaded  the  great- 
eft 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.    29 

eft  Force  of  our  reforming  Spirit.  I  never 
heard  that  the  antient  Heathens  were  fo  well 
advis'd  in  their  ill  Purpofe  of  Supprefling  the 
Chriftian  Religion  in  its  firfl  Rife,  as  to  make 
ufe,  at  any  time,  of  this  Barf  lemy-Y  a.iv  Method. 
But  this  I  am  perfuaded  of,  that  had  the  Truth 
of  the  Gofpel  been  any  way  furmountable, 
they  wou'd  have  bid  much  fairer  for  the  fi- 
lencing  it,  if  they  had  chofen  to  bring  our 
primitive  Founders  upon  the  Stage  in  a  plea- 
fanter  way  than  that  of  Bear-Skins  and  Pitch- 
Barrels. 

The  Jews  were  naturally  a  very  *  cloudy 
People,  and  wou'd  endure  little  Raillery  in  any 
thing;  much  lefs  in  what  belong'd  to  any  re- 
ligious Doctrines  or  Opinions.  Religion  was 
look'd  upon  with  a  fullen  Eye;  and  Hanging 
was  the  only  Remedy  they  cou'd  prefcribe  for 
any  thing  which  look'd  like  fetting  up  a  new 
Revelation.  The  fovereign  Argument  was, 
Crucify,  Crucify.  But  with  all  their  Malice  and 
Inveteracy  to  our  Saviour,  and  his  Apoftles 
after  him,  had  they  but  taken  the  Fancy  to  acl: 
fuch  Puppet-Shows  in  his  Contempt,  as  at 
this  hour  the  Papifts  are  acling  in  his  Honour; 
I  am  apt  to  think  they  might  poflibly  have  done 

*  Our  Author  having  been  cenfur'd  for  this  and  fome  following  Paf- 
fages  concerning  the  Jews,  the  Reader  is  refer'd  to  the  Notes  and  Cita- 
tions in  VOL.  111.  p.  53,  4,5,6.  And,  ibid.  115,  116,  3cc.  See 
alfo  below,  p.  2 82,  283* 

C  4  our 


3o  A     L  E  r  T  E  R 

our  Religion    more  harm,   than  by   all  their 
other  ways  of  Severity. 

I  believe  our  great  and  learned  Apoftle 
found  lefs  *  Advantage  from  the  eafy  Treat- 
ment of  his  Athenian  Antagonifts,  than  from 
the  furly  and  curft  Spirit  of  the  mod  persecu- 
ting Jewifri  Citys.  He  made  lefs  Improvement 
of  the  Candor  and  Civility  of  his  Roman  Judges, 
than  of  the  Zeal  of  the  Synagogue,  and  Vehe- 
mence of  his  National  Priefts.  Tho  when  I 
confider  this  Apoftle  as  appearing  either  before 
the  witty  Athenians,  or  before  a  Roman  Court  of 
Judicature,  in  the  Prefence  of  their  great  Men 
and  Ladys,  and  fee  how  handfomly  he  accom- 
modates himfelf  to  the  Apprehenfions  and 
Temper  of  thofe  politer  People:  I  do  not  find 
that  he  declines  the  way  of  Wit  or  good  Humour ; 
but,  without  fufpicion  of  his  Caufe,  is  willing 
generoufly  to  commit  it  to  this  Proof,  and  try 
it  againftthe  Sharpnefs  of  any  Ridicule  which 
might  be  offer'd. 

But  tho  the   Jews  were  never   pleas'd  to 
try  their  Wit  or  Malice  this  way  againft  our 


*  What  Advantage  he  made  of  his  Sufferings,  and  how  pathetically 
his  Bo'ids  and  Stripes  were  fet  to  view,  and  often  pleaded  by  him,  to  raife 
his  Character,  and  advance  the  Interefi  of  Chriftianity,  any  one  who  reads 
his  Epiftles,  and.  is  well  acquainted  with  his  Manner  and  Style,  may 
cafilyobferve. 

Saviour 


Concerning    ENTHUSIASM.     31 

Saviour  or  his  Apoflles;  the  irreligious  part  of 
the  Heathens  had  try'd  it  long  before  againfl 
the  befl  Doctrines  and  belt  Characters  of  Men 
which  had  ever  arifen  amongft  'em.  Nor  did 
this  prove  in  the  end  any  Injury,  but  on  the 
contrary  the  higheft  Advantage  to  thofe  very 
Characters  and  Doclrines,  which,  having  flood 
the  Proof,  were  found  fo  folid  and  juft.  The 
divineft  Man  who  had  ever  appeard  in  the 
Heathen  World,  was  in  the  height  of  witty 
Times,  and  by  the  wittiefl  of  all  Poets,  moll 
abominably  ridiculd,  in  a  whole  Comedy  writ 
and  acled  on  purpofe.  But  fo  far  was  this 
from  finking  his  Reputation,  or  fuppreffing 
his  Philofophy,  that  they  each  increasd  the 
more  for  it;  and  he  apparently  grew  to  be 
more  the  Envy  of  other  Teachers.  He  was 
not  only  contented  to  be  ridiculd;  but,  that 
he  might  help  the  Poet  as  much  as  poffible, 
he  prefented  himfelf  openly  in  the  Theater ; 
that  his  real  Figure  (which  was  no  advanta- 
geous one)  might  be  compar'd  with  that  which 
the  witty  Poet  had  brought  as  his  Reprefenta- 
tive  on  the  Stage.  Such  was  his  good  Humour! 
Nor  cou'd  there  be  in  the  World  a  greater 
Teflimony  of  the  invincible  Goodnefs  of  the 
Man,  or  a  greater  Demonflration,  that  there 
was  no  Impofture  either  in  his  Character  or 
Opinions.  For  that  Impofture  fhou'd  dare  fuf- 
tain  the  Encounter  of  a  grave   Enemy,  is  no 

wonder 


32  A     L   E   T  T  E   R 

wonder.  A  folemn  Attack,  fhe  knows,  is  not 
of  fuch  danger  to  her.  There  is  nothing  fhe 
abhors  or  dreads  like  Pleafantnefs  and  good 
Humour. 

S  E  C  T.     IV. 

IN  short,  my  Lord,  the  melancholy  way 
of  treating  Religion  is  that  which,  accord- 
ing to  my  apprehenfion,  renders  it  fo  tragical, 
and  is  the  occafion  of  its  acling  in  reality  fuch 
difmal  Tragedys  in  the  World.  And  my  No- 
tion is,  that  provided  we  treat  Religion  with 
good  Manners,  we  can  never  ufe  too  much 
good  Humour,  or  examine  it  with  too  much 
Freedom  and  Familiarity.  For,  if  it  be  genuine 
and  fincere,  it  will  not  only  ftand  the  Proof, 
but  thrive  and  gain  advantage  from  hence  : 
if  it  be  fpurious,  or  mix'd  with  any  Impofture, 
it  will  be  detected  and  exposd. 

The  melancholy  way  in  which  we  have 
been  taught  Religion,  makes  us  unapt  to  think 
of  it  in  good  Humour.  'Tis  in  Adverfity  chief- 
ly, or  in  ill  Health,  under  Affliction,  or  Dif- 
turbance  of  Mind,  or  Difcompofure  of  Tem- 
per, that  we  have  recourfe  to  it.  Tho  in  re- 
ality we  are  never  fo  unfit  to  think  of  it  as  at 
fuch  a  heavy  and  dark  Hour.  We  can  never 
be  fit  to  contemplate  any  thing  above  us,  when 

we 


Concerning   ENTHUSIASM.    33 

we  are  in  no  condition  to  look  into  our-felves, 
and  calmly  examine  the  Temper  of  our  own 
Mind  and  PafiTions.  For  then  it  is  we  fee  Wrath, 
and  Fury,  and  Revenge,  and  Terrors  in  the 
Deity  ;  when  we  are  full  of  Disturbances  and 
Fears  within,  and  have,  by  Sufferance  and 
Anxiety,  loft  fo  much  of  the  natural  Calm  and 
Eafinefs  of  our  Temper. 

We  mud  not  only  be  in  ordinary  good 
Humour,  but  in  the  ben  of  Humours,  and  in 
the  fweeteft,  kindeft  Difpofition  of  our  Lives, 
to  underfland  well  what  true  Goodnefs  is,  and 
what  thofe  Attributes  imply,  which  we  afcribe 
with  fuch  Applaufe  and  Honour  to  the  Deity. 
We  mail  then  be  able  to  fee  beft,  whether 
thofe  Forms  of  Juftice,  thofe  Degrees  of  Punifh- 
ment,  that  Temper  of  Refentment,  and  thofe 
Meafures  of  Offence  and  Indignation,  which  we 
vulgarly  fuppofe  in  God,  are  futable  to  thofe 
original  Ideas  of  Goodnefs,  which  the  fame  Di- 
vine Being,  or  Nature  under  him,  has  im- 
planted in  us,  and  which  we  mud  neceffarily 
prefuppofe,  in  order  to  give  him  Praife  or  Ho- 
nour in  any  kind.  This,  my  Lord,  is  the  Se-  . 
curity  againfl  all  Superftition:  To  remember, 
that  there  is  nothing  in  God  but  what  is 
Godtike ;  and  that  He  is  either  not  at  all,  or 
truly  and  perfectly  Good.  But  when  we  are  afraid 
to  life  our  Reafon  freely,    even  on  that  very 

Queftion, 


34  A     L   E   T  T  E   R 

Queftion,  tc  Whether  He  really  be,  or  not;' 
we  then  actually  prefume  him  bad,  and  flatly 
contradict  that  pretended  Character  of  Good- 
nefs  and  Greatnefs ;  whilfl  we  difcover  this  Mif- 
flrufl  of  his  Temper,  and  fear  his  Anger  and 
Refentment,  in  the  cafe  of  this  Freedom  o/Tn- 

We  have  a  notable  Inftance  of  this  Free- 
dom in  one  of  our  facred  Authors.  As  patient 
as  Job  is  faid  to  be,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
he  makes  bold  enough  with  God,  and  takes 
his  Providence  roundly  to  tafk.  His  Friends, 
indeed,  plead  hard  with  him,  and  ufe  all  Ar- 
guments, right  or  wrong,  to  patch  up  Objec- 
tions, and  fet  the  Affairs  of  Providence  upon 
an  equal  Foot.  They  make  a  merit  of  faying 
all  the  Good  they  can  of  God,  at  the  very 
ftretch  of  their  Reafon,  and  fometimes  quite 
beyond  it.  But  this,  in  Job's  Opinion,  is  *  flat- 
tering God,  accepting  of  God's  Per/on,  and 
even  mocking  him.  And  no  wonder.  For,  what 
merit  can  there  be  in  believing  God,  or  his 
Pi  evidence,  upon  frivolous  and  weak  grounds  ? 
What  Virtue  in  affuming  an  Opinion  contrary 
to  the  appearance  of  Things,  and  refolving  to 
hear  nothing  wrhich  may  be  faid  againfl  it  ? 
Excellent  Character  of  the  God  of  Truth!  that 
he  fhou'd  be  offended  at  us,  for  having  refus'd 

■■*■"'■  "'  "  '  I  ...  Ill    '111    IL«JI  _      .  II  I.  I 

*  Chap.  XIII.  vc-r.  7,  8,  o,  and  10. 

to 


Concerning    ENTHUSIASM.    35 

to  put  the  lye  upon  our  Underftandings,  as 
much  as  in  us  lay,  and  be  fatisfy'd  with  us  for 
having  believ'd  at  a  venture,  and  againft  our 
Reafon,  what  might  have  been  the  greateft 
Falfhood  in  the  world,  for  any  thing  we  cou'd 
bring  as  a  Proof  or  Evidence  to  the  contrary! 

It  is  impomble  that  any  befides  an  ill-na- 
tur'd  Man  can  wifh  againft  the  Being  of  a  God  : 
for  this  is  wifhing  againft  the  Publick,  and  even 
againft  one's  private  Good  too,  if  rightly  un- 
derftood.  But  if  a  Man  has  not  any  fuch  Ill- 
will  to  ftifle  his  Belief,  he  muft  have  furely  an 
unhappy  Opinion  of  G  o  d,  and  believe  him  not 
fo  good  by  far  as  he  knows  Himfelf  to  be,  if  he 
imagines  that  an  impartial  Ufe  of  his  Reafon, 
in  any  matter  of  Speculation  whatfoever,  can 
make  him  run  any  rifle  Hereafter;  and  that  a 
mean  Denial  of  his  Reafon,  and  an  Affedlation  of 
Belief  in  any  Point  too  hard  for  his  Underftand- 
ing,  can  intitle  him  to  any  Favour  in  another 
World.  This  is  being  Sycophants  in  Religion, 
mere  Parqfites  of  Devotion.  Tis  ufing  God  as 
the  crafty  *  Beggars  ufe  thofe  they  addrefs  to, 
when  they  are  ignorant  of  their  Quality.  The 
Novices  amongft  em  may  innocently  come  out, 
perhaps,  with  a  GoodSir,  or  a  Good  Forfooth!  But 
with  the  old  Stagers,  no  matter  whom  they  meet 


*  VOL.  III.  p.   125,6,  7,  s. 

in 


36  A     L   E   T  r  E   R 

in  a  Coach,  'tis  always  Good  your  Honour1,  or 
Good  your  Lordfhip!  or  your  Lady/Iiip!  For  if  there 
fhou'd  be  really  a  Lord  in  the  cafe,  we  fhou'd 
be  undone  (fay  they)  for  want  of  giving  the 
Title :  but  if  the  Party  fhou'd  be  no  Lord,  there 
wou'd  be  no  Offence;  it  wou'd  not  be  ill 
taken. 

And  thus  it  is  in  Religion.  We  are  high- 
ly concern'd  how  to  beg  right;  and  think  all  de- 
pends upon  hitting  the  Title,  and  making  a  good 
Guefs.  'Tis  the  mod  beggarly  Refuge  imagi- 
nable, which  is  fo  mightily  cry'd  up,  and  (lands 
as  a  great  Maxim  with  many  able  Men  ;  tl  That 
4t  they  fhou'd  ftrive  to  have  Faith,  and  believe 
V  to  the  utmoft:  becaufe  if,  after  all,  there  be 
"  nothing  in  the  matter,  there  will  be  no  harm 
"  in  being  thus  deceiv'd;  but  if  there  be  any 
"  thing,  it  will  be  fatal  for  them  not  to  have 
tc  believ'd  to  the  full."  But  they  are  fo  far 
miftaken,  that  whilfl  they  have  this  Thought, 
'tis  certain  they  can  never  believe  either  to  their 
Satisfaction  and  Happinefs  in  this  World,  or 
with  any  advantage  of  Recommendation  to 
another.  For  befides  that  our  Reafon,  which 
knows  the  Cheat,  will  never  reft  thorowly  fa- 
tisfy'd  on  fuch  a  Bottom,  but  turn  us  often  a- 
drift,  and  tofs  us  in  a  Sea  of  Doubt  and  Per- 
plexity; we  cannot  but  actually  grow  tuorfe  in 
our  Religion,  and  entertain  a  worfe  Opinion 

ft  ill 


Concerning     ENTHUSIASM.    37 

ftill  of  a  Supreme  Deity,  whilft  our  Belief  is 
founded  on  fo  injurious  a  Thought  of  him. 

To  love  thePublick,  to  ftudy  univerfal  Good, 
and  to  promote  the  Intereft  of  the  whole  World, 
as  far  as  lies  within  our   power,  is  furely  the 
Height  of  Goodnefs,   and  makes  that  Temper 
which  we  call   Divine.      In  this   Temper,  my 
Lord,  (for  furely  you  fhou  d  know  it  well)  'tis 
natural  for  us  to  wifh  that  others  fliou'd  par- 
take with  us,  by  being  convinc'd  of  the  Sin- 
cerity of  our  Example.      Tis  natural  for  us  to 
wifh  our  Merit,  fhou'd  be  known ;   particular- 
ly, if  it  be  our  fortune  to  have  ferv'd  a  Nation 
as  a  good  Minifter ;  or  as  fome  Prince,  or  Father 
of  a  Country,  to  have  render'd  happy  a  confi- 
derable  Part  of  Mankind  under  our  Care.     But 
if  it  happend,  that  of  this  number  there  fhou'd 
be  fome  fo  ignorantly  bred,  and  of  fo  remote 
a  Province,  as  to  have  lain  out  of  the  hearing 
of  our  Name  and  Aclions ;  or  hearing  of  'em, 
fhou'd  be  fo  puzzld  with  odd  and  contrary  Sto- 
rys  told  up  and  down  concerning  us,  that  they 
knew  not  what  to  think,  whether  there  were 
really  in  the  World  any  fuch  Perfon  as  our- 
felf :  Shou'd  we  not,  in  good  truth,  be  ridicu- 
lous to    take  offence  at  this  ?  And  fliou'd   we 
not  pafs  for  extravagantly   morofe  and  ill-hu- 
mour'd,  if  inftead  of  treating  the  matter  in  Rail- 
lery, we  fliou'd  think  in  earneft  of  revenging  our- 

Jdves 


3s        a    l  e  r  r  E  R 

Jelves  on  the  offending  Partys,  who,  out  of  their 
ruftick  Ignorance,  ill  Judgment,  or  Increduli- 
ty, had  detracted  from  our  Renown  ? 

How  fhall  we  fay  then  ?  Does  it  really  de- 
ferve  Praife  to  be  thus  concern'd  about  it  ?  Is 
the  doing  Good  for  Glory  s  fake,  fo  divine  a  thing? 
or,  Is  it  not  diviner,  to  do  Good  even  where  it 
may  be  thought  inglorious,  even  to  the  Ingrate- 
ful,  and  to  thofe  who  are  wholly  infenfible  of 
the  Good  they  receive?  How  comes  it  then, 
that  what  is  fo  divine  in  us,  ftiou'd  lofe  its  Cha- 
racter in  the  Divine  Being?  And  that  according 
as  the  Deity  is  reprefented  to  us,  he  fhou'd 
more  refemble  the  weak,  *  womanifh,  and  im- 
potent part  of  our  Nature,  than  the  generous, 
manly,  and  divine  ? 

SEC  T.     V. 

ON  E  wou'd  think,  my  Lord,  it  were  in  rea- 
lity no  hard  thing  to  know  our  own  Weak- 
neffes  at  firft  fight,  and  diftinguifh  the  Features 
of  human  Frailty,  with  which  we  are  fo  well 
acquainted.  One  wou'd  think  it  were  eafy  to 
underfland,  that  Provocation  and  Offence,  An- 
ger, Revenge,  Jealoufy  in  point  of  Honour  or 
Power,  Love  of  Fame,  Glory  and  the  like,  be- 
long only  to  limited  Beings,  and  are  neceffa- 

*   Infra,  p.   331.      And  VOL.    III.  i\  306. 

rib 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.    39 

rily  excluded  a  Being  which  is  perfecl  and 
univerfal.  But  if  we  have  never  fettled  with 
our-felves  any '  Notion  of  what  is  morally 
excellent;  or  if  we  cannot  truft  to  that  Reafon 
which  tells  us,  that  nothing  befide  what  is  Jo, 
can  have  place  in  the  Deity;  we  can  neither 
truft  to  any  thing  which  others  relate  of  him, 
or  which  he  him-felf  reveals  to  us.  We  muft 
be  fatisfy'd  before-hand,  that  he  is  good,  and 
cannot  deceive  us.  Without  this,  there  can 
be  no  real  religious  Faith,  or  Confidence. 
Now,  if  there  be  really  fomething  previous 
to  Revelation,  fome  antecedent  Demonftra- 
tion  of  Reafon,  to  afTure  us  that  God  is,  and 
withal,  that  he  is  Jo  good  as  not  to  deceive 
us  ;  the  fame  Reafon,  if  we  will  truft  to  it, 
will  demonftrate  to  us,  that  God  is y^  good  as 
to  exceed  the  very  bed  of  us  in  Goodnejs.  And 
after  this  manner  we  can  have  no  Dread  or 
Sufpicion  to  render  us  uneafy  :  for  it  is  Malice 
only,  and  not  Goodnejs,  which  can  make  us 
afraid.    ~ 

There  is  an  odd  way  of  reafoning,  but 
in  certain  Diftempers  of  Mind  very  fovereign 
to  thofe  who  can  apply  it;  and  it  is  this: 
"  There  can  be  no  Malice  but  where  Inte- 
41  refts  are  oppos'd.  A  univerfal  Being  can 
"have    no    Intereft  oppoiite ;    and   therefore 

Vol.  I.  D  "  can 


A     LET  I   E  R 

lt  can  have  no  Malice."  If  there  be  a  general 
Mind,  it  can  have  no  particular  Intereft:  But 
the  general  Good,  or  Good  of  the  Whole, 
and  its  own  private  Good,  mufl  of  neceffity 
be  one  and  the  fame.  It  can  intend  nothing 
befides,  nor  aim  at  any  thing  beyond,  nor  be 
provok'd  to  any  thing  contrary.  So  that  we 
have  only  to  confider,  whether  there  be  really 
fuch  a  thing  as  a  Mind  ivliich  has  relation  to  the 
Whole,  or  not.  For  if  unhappily  there  be  no 
Mind,  we  may  comfort  our  felves,  however, 
that  Nature  has  no  Malice:  If  there  be  really 
a  Mind,  we  may  reft  fatisfy'd,  that  it  is  the 
befi  natter  d  one  in  the  World.  The  lafl  Cafe7 
one  wou'd  imagine,  fhou'd  be  the  mod  com- 
fortable :  and  the  Notion  of  a  common  Parent 
lefs  frightful  than  that  of  forlorn  Nature,  and 
a  fatherlefs  World.  Tho,  as  Religion  flands 
amongft  us,  there  are  many  good  People  who 
wou'd  have  lefs  Fear  in  being  thus  expos'd ; 
and  wou'd  be  eafier,  perhaps,  in  their  Minds, 
if  they  were  affur'd  they  had  only  mere  Chance 
to  trull  to.  For  no  body  trembles  to  think  there 
fhou'd  be  no  God;  but  rather  that  there  Jlioud 
be  one.  This  however  wou'd  be  otherwife,  if 
Deity  were  thought  as  kindly  of  as  Humanity; 
and  we  cou'd  be  perfuaded  to  believe,  that 
if  there  really  was  a  God,  the  higheft  Goodnefs 
rauft    of    neceffity    belong    to    him,    without 

any 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.   41 

any  of  thofe  *  Defecls  of  Paffion,  thofe  Mean- 
nefles  and  Imperfections  which  we  acknow- 
ledge fuch  in  our-felves,  which  as  good  Men 
we  endeavour  all  we  can  to  be  fuperior  to,  and 
which  we  find  we  every  day  conquer  as  we 
grow  better. 

Met h inks,  my  Lord,  it  wou'd  be  well  for 
us,  if  before  f  we  afcended  into  the  higher  Re- 
gions of  Divinity,  we  wou'd   vouchfafe   to  de- 
fcend  a  little  into  our-felves,  and  bellow  lb  me 
poorThoughts  upon  plain  honeit  Morals.  When 
we  had  once  look'd  into  our-felves,  and  diftin- 
guifli'd  well  the  nature  of  our  own  Affections, 
we  fhou'd  probably  be  fitter  Judges  of  the  Di- 
vinenefs  of  a  Character,  and  difcern  better  what 
Affections  were  futable  or  unfutable  to  a  per  fed 
Being.     We  might  then  underfland  how  to  love 
and  praife,  when  we  had  acquird  fome  confif- 
tent   Notion  of  what    was    laudable   or   lovely. 
Otherwife  we  might  chance  to  do  God  little 
Honour,  when  we  intended  him  the  mofl.   For 
'tis  hard  to  imagine  what  Honour  can  arife  to 
the  Deity  from  the  Praifes  of  Creatures,  who 


*  For  my  own  part,  fays  honefi  Plutapch,  I  had  rather  Men 
fhou'd  fav  of  me,  "  That  there  neither  is,  nor  ever  was  fuch  a  one  as 
"  Plutarch;"  than  they  fhou'd  fay,  "  There  was  a  Plutarch, 
"  an  imneaddy,  changeable,  eafiiy  provokable,  and  revengeful  Man-; 
'*  "Av^anr©-  alos&M©*,  ev/aet«£>A©-,  b;#giQS  vagls  qjFw,  [mx%q  vir^,  8cc. 
"  Plutarch,  de  Superftitione.      See  V  O  L.  III.  p,  127. 

f  VOL.    III.  p.  37.  and  202,  203.  in  the  Notes. 

D  2  are 


42  a    l  e  r  T  E  R 

are  unable  to  difcern  what  is  praife-worthy  or 
excellent  in  their  own  kind. 

If  a  Mufician  were  cry'd  up  to  the  Skys  by 
a  certain  Set  of  People  who  had  no  Ear  in  Mu- 
fick,  he  wou'd  furely  be  put  to  the  blufh ;  and 
cou'd  hardly,  with  a  good  Countenance,  accept 
the  Benevolence  of  his  Auditors,  till  they  had 
acquir'd  a  more  competent  Apprehenfion  of 
him,  and  cou'd  by  their  own  Senfes  find  out 
fomething  really  good  in  his  Performance.  Till 
this  were  brought  about,  there  wou'd  be  little 
Glory  in  the  cafe ;  and  the  Mufician,  tho  ever  fo 
vain,  wou'd  have  little  reafon  to  be  content- 
ed. 

They  who  affect  Praife  the  mod,  had  rather 
not  be  taken  notice  of,  than  be  impertinently 
applauded.  I  know  not  how  it  comes  about, 
that  He  who  is  ever  faid  to  do  Good  the  moft 
difmterefledly,  fhou'd  be  thought  defirous  of 
being  prais'd  fo  lavifhly,  and  be  fuppos'd  to 
fet  fo  high  a  Rate  upon  fo  cheap  and  low  a 
Thing,  as  ignorant  Commendation  and  fore' d  Ap~ 
plaufe. 

'Ti  s  not  the  fame  with  Goodnefs  as  with  other 
Qualitys,  which  we  may  underfland  very  well, 
and  yet  not  poffefs.     We  may  have  an  excel- 
lent Ear  in  Mufick  without  being  able  to  per- 
form 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.    43 

form  in  any  kind.  We  may  judge  well  of 
Poetry,  without  being  Poets,  or  poffefTirig  the 
leaf!  of  a  Poetick  Vein:  But  we  can  have  no 
tolerable  Notion  of  Goodnefs,  without  being 
tolerably  good.  So  that  if  the  Praife  of  a  Di- 
vine Being  be  fo  great  a  part  of  his  Worfhip, 
we  fhou  d,  methinks,  learn  Goodnefs,  were  it 
for  nothing  elfe  than  that  we  might  learn,  in 
fome  tolerable  manner,  how  to  praife.  For  the 
praife  of  Goodnefs  from  an  unfound  hollow 
Heart,  mull  certainly  make  the  greateft  Diffo- 
nance  in  the  world. 

• 

S  E  C  T.     VI. 

OTHER  Reafons,  my  Lord,  there  are, 
why  this  plain  home-fpun  Philofophy, 
of  looking  into  our-felves,  may  do  us  wondrous 
fervice,  in  rectifying  our  Errors  in  Religion. 
For  there  is  a  fort  of  *Enthufiafm  of  fecond 
hand.  And  when  Men  find  no  original  Com- 
motions in  them-felves,  no  preporTeffing  Panick 
which  bewitches  'em;  they  are  apt  full,  by 
the  Teftimony  of  others,  to  be  impos'd  on, 
and  led  creduloufly  into  the  Belief  of  many 
falfe  Miracles.  And  this  Habit  may  make  'em 
variable,  and  of  a  very  inconftant  Faith,  eafy 
to  be  carry  d  away  with  every  Wind  of  Doc- 
trine, and  addicted  to  every  up-ftart  Sect  or 
Superftition.      But  the  knowledge  of  our  Paf- 

D  3  fions 


44  A     L  E  r  t  E  R 

hobs  in  their  very  Seeds,  the  meafuring  well 
the  Growth  and  Progrefs  of  Enthufiafm,  and 
the  judging  rightly  of  its  natural  Force,  and 
what  command  it  has  over  our  very  *  Senfes, 
may  teach  us  to  oppofe  more  fuccefsfully 
thofe  Delufions  which  come  arm'd  with  the 
fpecious  Pretext  of  moral  Certainty,  and  Mat- 
ter of  Fact. 

The  new  prophefying  Seel,  I  made  mention 
of  above,  pretend,  it  feems,  among  many 
other  Miracles,  to  have  had  a  moil  fignal  one, 
acled  premeditately,  and  with  warning,  be- 
fore many  hundreds  of  People,  who  actually 
give  Teftimony  to  the  Truth  of  it.  But  I 
wou'd  only  afk,  Whether  there  were  prefent, 
among  thofe  hundreds,  any  one  Perfon,  who 
having  never  been  of  their  Sect,  or  addicted 
to  their  Way,  will  give  the  fame  Teftimony 
with  them?  I  mud  not  be  contented  to  afk, 
Whether  fuch  a  one  had  been  wholly  free  of 
that  particular  Enthufiafm?  but  Whether,  be- 
fore that  time,  he  was  efteem'd  of  fo  found  a 
Judgment,  and  clear  a  Head,  as  to  be  wholly 
free  of  Melancholy,  and  in  all  likelihood  inca- 
pable of  all  Enthufiafm  befides  ?  For  other- 
wife,  the  Panick  may  have  been  caught;  the 
Evidence   of  the  Senfes   loft,   as   in  a  Dream ; 


VOL.  III.  p.  39,  40.  8:66,67,  6S, 

and 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.    45 

and  the  Imagination  fo  inflam'd,  as  in  a  mo- 
ment to  have  burnt  up  every  Particle  of  Judg- 
ment and  Reafon.  The  combuftible  Matters 
lie  prepar'd  within,  and  ready  to  take  fire  at 
a  Spark;  but  chiefly  in  a*  Multitude  feiz'd 
with  the  fame  Spirit.  No  wonder  if  the  Blaze 
rifes  fo  of  a  fudden ;  when  innumerable  Eyes 
glow  with  the  Paffion,  and  heaving  Breads 
are  labouring  with  Infpiration:  when  not  the 
Afpect  only,  but  the  very  Breath  and  Exha- 
lations of  Men  are  infectious,  and  the  infpiring 
Difeafe  imparts  it-felf  by  infenfible  Tranfpi- 
ration.  I  am  not  a  Divine  good  enough  to 
refolve  what  Spirit  that  was  which  prove!  fo 
catching  among  the  antient  Prophets,  that 
even  the  profane  f  Saul  was  taken  by  it. 
But  I  learn  from  holy  Scripture,  that  there  was 
the  f  eyil,  as  well  as  the  good  Spirit  of  Prophecy. 
And  I  find  by  prefent  Experience,  as  well  as 
by  all  Hiflorys,  Sacred  and  Profane,  that  the 
Operation  of  this  Spirit  is  every  where  the 
fame,  as  to  the  bodily  Organs. 

A  Gentleman  who  has  writ  lately  in  de- 
fence of  reviv'd  Prophecy,  and  has  fmce  fallen 
himfelf  into  the  prophetick  Extafys,  tells  us, 
41  That  the  antient  Prophets  had  the  Spirit  of 

L    *VOL.    III.  p.  66.   in  the  Notes, 

t  See  1  Kings  ch.  xxii.  ver.  20,  8cc.    2  Chren.  ch.  xvlii.  ver.   ig,  8cc. 
And  VOL.  III.  p.  116,  117. 

D4  "  God 


46  A     L  E  T  r  E  R 

"  God  upon  them  under  Extajy,  with  divers 
"  ftrange  Geftures  of  Body  denominating  them 
tc  Madmen, (or Enthufiafts)asappearsevidently, 
11  fay  she,  in  the  Inftances  of  Balaam,  Saul, 
tc  David,  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  &c"  And  he 
proceeds  tojuftify  this  by  the  Practice  of  the 
Apoilolick  Times,  and  by  the  Regulation  which 
the  *  ApofUe  himfelf  applies  to  thefe  feemingly 
irregular  Gifts,  fo  frequent  and  ordinary  (as 
our  Author  pretends)  in  the  primitive  Church, 
on  the  hrft  rife  and  fpreading  of  Chriflianity. 
But  I  leave  it  to  him  to  make  the  Refemblance 
as  well  as  he  can  between  his  own  and  the 
Apoilolick  way.  I  only  know,  that  the  Symp- 
toms he  defcribes,  and  which  himfelf  (poor 
Gentleman!)  labours  under,  are  as  Heathenifh 
as  he  can  poffibly  pretend  them  to  be  Chrjftian. 
And  when  I  faw  him  lately  under  an  Agitation 
(as  they  call  it)  uttering  Prophecy  in  a  pom- 
pous Latin  Style,  of  which  out  of  his  Extafy, 
it  feems,  he  is  wholly  incapable;  it  brought 
into  my  mind  the  Latin  Poet's  Defcription  of 
the  Sibyl,  whofe  Agonys  were  fo  perfeclly 
like  thefe. 

f  — r — Subito  non  vultus,  non  color  units, 
Non  comptce  manfere  comae ;  Jed  pectus  anhelum, 
Et  rabie  fera  cordatument;  major  que  videri 


*  i  Cor.  ch.  xiv.  f  Virg,   iEn.  lib.  6. 

Nee 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM.   47 

Nee  mortale  fonans :  afflata  ejl  Numine  quando 
Jam  propiore  Dei 

And  again  prefently  after: 

Immanis  in  antro 


Bacchatur  Fates,  magnum  Ji  peflore  pojfit 
Excufffje  Deum:  tanto  magis  Ille  fatigat 
Os   iabidum,  jera    cor  da   domans,    Fingitque 
Pre  men  do. 

Which  is  the  very  Style  of  our  experiene'd 
Author.  tl  For  the  infpir'd  (fays  he)  undergo 
lt  a  Probation,  wherein  the  Spirit,  by  frequent 
"  Agitations,  forms  the  Organs,  ordinarily  for 
41  a  Month  or  two  before  Utterance^ 

The  Roman  Hiflorian,  fpeaking  of  a  moft 
horrible  Enthufiafm  which  broke  out  in  Rome 
long  before  his  days,  defcribes  this  Spirit  of 
Prophecy ;  Viros  velut  mente  capta,  cum  pacta- 
iione  fanatic  a  corporis  vaticinari.  Li  v.  30.  The 
deteftable  things  which  are  further  related  of 
thefe  Enthufiafts,  I  wou'd  not  willingly  tran- 
fcribe:  but  the  Senate's  mild  Decree  in  fo  ex- 
ecrable a  Cafe,  I  can't  omit  copying;  being 
fatisfy'd,  that  tho  your  Lordlniphas  read  it  be- 
fore now,  you  can  read  it  again  and  again  with 
admiration :  In  reliquum  deinde  (fays  LivyJ  S.  C. 
cautum  eft,  &c.  Si  quis  tale  facr  urn  folenne  et  neceffa- 

rium 


48  A     L  E  T  r  E  R 

rium  duceret,  nee  fine  Religione  et  Piaculo  fe  id 
omittere  poffe;  apud  Prcelorem  Urbanum  prqfitere- 
lur :  Prcetor  Senalum  confuleret.  Si  eipermij/um  ef- 
fet,  cum  in  Scnatu  centum  non  minus  efjent,  ita  id 
facrum facer et;  dumne  plus  quinque Jacrificio  inte- 
reffent,,neu  qua  pecunia  communis,  neu  quis  Ma- 
gifier  facrorum,  aut  Sacerdos  efjet. 

So   neceffary  it    is  to  give  way  to  this  Dif- 
temper  of  Enthifiafm,  that  even  that  Philofo- 
pher  who  bent  the  whole  Force  of  his  Philo- 
fophy  againft  Superftition,  appears  to  have  left 
room  for  vifionary  Fancy,  and  to  have   indi- 
rectly tolerated  Enthufiafm.     For  it  is  hard  to 
imagine,  that  one  who  had  fo  little  religious 
Faith  as   Epicurus,  fhou'd  have  fo  vulgar  a 
Credulity,    as  to    believe   thofe    accounts    of 
Armys  and  Caftles  in  the  Air,   and  fuch  vifi- 
onary Phenomena.     Yet  he  allows  them ;  and 
then  thinks  to  folve  'em   by  his  Effluvia,  and 
Aerial  Looking- glaffes,  and  I  know  not  what 
other  fluff:  which  his  Latin  Poet,  however,  fets 
off  beautifully,  as  he  does  all. 


*■ 


■Rcrurn  Simulacra  vagari 


Multa,  modis  multis,  in  cunflas  undique  parteis 
Tenuia,  qua  facile  inter  Je  junguntur  in  auns, 


*  Luc  ret.   lib.   4. 

Obvia 


Concerning   ENTHUSIASM.  49 

Obvia  cum  veniunt,  ut  aranea  bracleaque  auri 

Centauros  itaque,  et  Scyllarum  Membra  videmus, 
Ccrbcrcafque  canumfacies,Jimulacraque  eorum 
Quorum  morte  obit  a  tellus  ampleflitur  ojja: 
Ornne  genus  quoniam  pajjim  finulacra  feruntur, 
Partim  jponte  jua  qucejiunt  acre  in  ipjo ; 
Partim  quae  variis  ab  rebus  cumque  recedunt. 

« 

Twas  a  fign  thisPhilofopher  believ'cl  there 

was  a  good  Stock  of  Vifionary  Spirit  originally 

in   Human  Nature.      He  was  fo  fatisfy'd  that 

Men  were  incline!  to  fee  Vifions,   that  rather 

than  they  fhou'd  go  without,  he  chofe  to  make 

'em  to  their  hand.      Notwithftanding  he  de- 

ny'd  the  Principles  of  Religion  to  be  *  natural, 

he    was  fore'd    tacitly    to   allow  there   was  a 

wondrous  Difpofition  in  Mankind  towards  Ju- 

pernatural  Objects;  and  that  if  thefe  Ideas  were 

vain,   they  were  yet   in  a  manner   innate,  or 

fuch  as    Men  were  really  born  to,  and  cou'd 

hardly    by  any  means    avoid.      From   which 

Concedion,  a  Divine,  methinks,  might  raife  a 

good  Argument  againft  him,    for  the  Truth  as 

well  as  the  Ujefulnefs  of  Religion.      But  fo 

it  is:  whether  the   Matter  of  Apparition   be 


*  Infra,  pag.    117. 

true 


5o  A     LETTER 

true  or  falfe,  the  Symptoms  are  the  fame,  and 
the  Paffion  of  equal  force  in  the  Perfon  who 
is  Vifion-flruck.  The  Lymphatici  of  the  Latins 
were  the  Nymphcl  pti  ol  the  Greeks.  They  were 
Perfons  faid  to  have  feen  fome  Species  of  Di- 
vinity, as  either  fome  rural  Deity ,  or  Nymph; 
which  threw  them  into  fuch  Tranfports  as 
overcame  their  Reafon.  The  Extafys  exprefs  d 
themfelves  outwardly  in  Quakings,  Tremb- 
lings, TofTmgs  of  the  Head  and  Limbs,  Agita- 
tions, and  (as  Livy  calls  them)  Fanatical  Throws 
or  Convulfions,  extemporary  Prayer,  Prophe- 
cy, Singing,  and  the  like.  All  Nations  have 
their  Lymphaticks  of  fome  kind  or  another ; 
and  all  Churches,  Heathen  as  well  as  Chrif- 
tian,  have  had  their  Complaints  againft  Fa- 
naticifm. 

One  wou'd  think  the  antients  imagin'd  this 
Difeafe  had  fome  relation  to  that  which  they 
call'd  Hydrophoby.  Whether  the  antient  Lym- 
phaticks had  any  way  like  that  of  biting,  to 
communicate  the  Rage  of  their  Diftemper,  I 
can't  fo  pofitively  determine.  But  certain  Fa- 
naticks  there  have  been  fmce  the  time  of  the 
Antients,  who  have  had  a  mofl  profperous  Fa- 
culty of  communicating  the  Appetite  of  the 
Teeth.  For  fince  firfl  the  fnappifh  Spirit  got 
up  in  Religion,  all  Seels  have  been  at  it,  as 
the    faying  is,  Tooth  and  Nail;  and  are  never 

better 


Concerning    ENTHUSIASM.   51 

better  pleas'd,  than  in  worrying  one   another 
without  mercy. 

So  far  indeed  the  innocent  kind  of  Fana- 
ticifm  extends  it-felf,  that  when  the  Party  is 
flruck  by  the  Apparition,  there  follows  always 
an  Itch  of  imparting  it,  and  kindling  the  fame 
Fire  in  other  Breads.  For  thus  Poets  are  Fa- 
naticks  too.  And  thus  Horace  either  is, 
or  feigns  himfelf  Lymphatick,  and  (hews  what 
an  Effect  the  Vifion  of  the  Nymphs  and  Bac- 
chus had  on  him. 

*   Bucchum  in  remotis  carmina  rupibus 

Vidi  docentem,  credite  pojleri, 

XT  MP  PI  A  Sque  difcentes 

Eva!  recenti  mens  trepidat  metu, 

Plenoque  Bacchi  peflore  turbidum 

t  I  TMPHATUR as 

Heinfius  reads. 

No  Poet  (as  I  venturd  to  fay  at  firft  to  your 
Lordfhip)  can  do  any  thing  great  in  his  own 
way,  without  the  Imagination  or  Suppofition 
of  a  Divine  Prefence,  which  may  raife    him  to 

*  Od.  19.  lib.  2. 

t  So  again,  Sat.  5.  vex.  gj .  Gnalia  Lymphis  Iratis  Exjlmfla:  Where 
Horace  wittily  treats  the  People  of  Gnatia  as  Lymphaticks  and  En- 
thufiafls,  for  believing  a  Miracle  of  their  Priefts:  Credat  Juddus  Apella. 
Hor.  ibid.  SeeHEiNsius  and  Torrensius;  and  the  Quotation  in 
the  following  Notes,  vvo  t«»  Hv^uv,  8cc. 

fome 


52  A     L  E  T  T  E  R 

fome  degree  of  this  PafTion  we  are  fpeaking 
of.  Even  the  cold  Lucretius  *  makes  ufe 
of  Infpiration,  when  he  writes  againft  it;  and 
is  forc'd  to  raife  anApparation  of  Nature,  in  a 
Divine  Form,  to  animate  and  conducl  him  in 
his  very  Work  of  degrading  Nature,  and  de- 
fpoiling  her  of  all  her  feeming  Wifdom  and 
Divinity. 

f   Alma  Venus,  call  Jubter  labentia  figna 

Quce  mare  navigerum,  quce  terras  frugiferentcis 

Concelebras ■ 

Quce  quoniam  rerum  naluram  fola  gubemas, 
Nee  fine  te  quidquam  dias  in  luminis  or  as 
Exoritur,  ne  que  Jit  latum  neque  amabile  quidquam : 
Te  fociam  Jludeo  fcribundis  verjibus  ejje, 
Qitos  Ego  de  rerum  natura  pangere  conor 
Memmiadae  nqflro. 

SECT.     VII. 

TH  E  only  thing,  my  Lord,  I  wou'd  infer 
from  all  this,  is,  that  Enthusiasm  is 
wonderfully  powerful  and  extenfive  ;  that  it  is 
a  matter  of  nice  Judgment,  and  the  harder! 
thing  in  the  world  to  know  fully  and  diftinctly : 
fince  even^Atheifm  is  not  exempt  from  it.  For, 
as  fome  have  well  remark'd,  there  have  been 


*  VOL.  III.  p.  32.  f  Lucret.  lib.  1. 

tVOL.    III.  p.  63,  64. 


En- 


Concerning  ENTHUSIASM    53 

-Entliufiajlkal  Jthei/is.  Nor  can  Divine  I nfpi ra- 
tion, by  its  outward  Marks,  be  eafily  diflin- 
guifh'd  from  it.  For  Infpiration  is  a  real  feel- 
ing of  the  Divine  Prefence,  and  Enthufiafm  a 
jalfe  one.  .  But  the  Paffion  they  raife  is  much 
alike.  For  when  the  Mind  is  taken  up  in  Vi- 
rion, and  fixes  its  view  either  on  any  real  Ob- 
ject, or  mere  Specter  of  Divinity ;  when  it  fees, 
or  thinks  it  fees  any  thing  prodigious,  and  more 
than  human;  its  Horror,  Delight,  Confufion, 
Fear,  Admiration,  or  whatever  Paffion  belongs 
to  it,  or  is  uppermoft  on  this  occafion,  will 
have  fomething  vaft,  immane,  and  (as  Painters 
fay)  beyond  Life.  And  this  is  what  gave  occa- 
fion to  the  name  of  Fanatic ij m,  as  it  was  us'd  by 
the  Antients  in  its  original  Senfe,  for  an  Appa- 
rition tranfporting  the  Mind. 

Something  there  will  be  of  Extravagance 
and  Fury,  when  the  Ideas  or  Images  receiv'd 
are  too  big  for  the  narrow  human  VefTel  to 
contain.  So  that  Infpiration  may  be  juflly  call'd 
Divine  Enthusiasm:  For  the  Word  it-felf  fig- 
nines  Divine  Prefence,  and  was  made  ufe  of  by 
the  Philofopher  whom  the  earlier!  Chriitian  Fa- 
thers calld  Divine,  to  exprefs  whatever  was 
fublime  in  human  Paffions  *       This  was  the 


\juit  aa  :£)  6T»  OT?.siw  l'%a  M.avixq  ytw|*s'vjj j «Vo Beat  "Key&v \Y.ctku,  ipyce.ee.  Phasdr. 
Kxi  t«5  CToAtTfxa?  v%  'vara  tutuv  <p.a7jASt  uv ©;.'»$  Tt  ftj>«»xJ'li>6«or»a'£«»-  Meno. 

Spirit 


54  A     L  E  T  r  E  R 

Spirit  he  allotted  to  Heroes,  State/men,  Poets* 
Orators,  Muficians,  and  even  Philofophers  them- 
felves.  Nor  can  we,  of  our  own  accord,  for- 
bear afcribing  to  a  *  noble  Enthusiasm,  what- 
ever is  greatly  perform'd  by  any  of  Theje.  So 
that  almoft  all  of  us  know  fomething  of  this 
Principle.  But  to  know  it  as  we  fhou'd  do, 
and  difcern  it  in  its  feveral  kinds,  both  in  our- 
felves,  and  others ;  this  is  the  great  Work,  and 
by  this  means  alone  we  can  hope  to  avoid  De- 
lufion.  For  to  judge  the  Spirits  whether  they  are 
of  God,  we  muft  antecedently  judge  our  own  Spi- 
rit; whether  it  be  of  Reafon  and  found  Senfe; 
whether  it  be  fit  to  judge  at  all,  by  being  fedate 
cool,  and  impartial;  free  of  every  byafling  Paf- 
fion,  every  giddy  Vapor,  or  melancholy  Fume. 
This  is  the  firft  Knowledge  and  previous  Judg- 
ment: "  To  underftand  our -felves,  and  know 
'■'  what  Spirit  we  are  of."  Afterwards  we  may 
judge  the  Spirit  in  others,  confider  what  their 
perfonal  Merit  is,    and  prove  the  Validity  of 


Elvuv  av  dv  Xj  <me^  iuv  luowruv  h  o\'\ycj  t^to  on  a  aaplec  znoioav,  dxxd.  (pvcrst 
T*u  >£)  'En9acr»a^oi/7e5  wWeo  01  §to^aLv\ei<;  ttj  ^ijcr^a^o;.  Apol.  In  particular 
as  to  Philof.p/iers,  Plutarch  tells  us,  'twas  the  Complaint  of  fome  of 
the  four  old  Romans,  when  Learning  came  to  them  from  Greece,  that  the 
Youth  grew  Enthufiajlick  with  Philofophy.  For  fpeaking  of  one  of  the 
Philofophers  of  the  Athenian  Embaffy,  he  fays,  "Egwra  $&w  IvtSeGXvuts  toJj 
ceo*;  tup'  «  tcov  a.7\Kut  qSovuv  k^  ttixr^i&ui  'wnriaovlis  'Ei/Qacnwcr*  'mg)  QiXorofiatr. 
Plut.  in  vit.  Cat.  Major. 

*  Of  this  Paffion,  in  the  nobler  and  higher  fenfe,  fee  more,  VO  I.  II. 
P-  75'  76,  393,  394,  &c.  and  VOL.  III.  p.  30,  33,  34,  37. 

their 


Concerning  EJVTHU  SIA  S  M.  55 

their  Teflimony  by  the  Solidity  of  their  Brain. 
By  this  means  we  may  prepare  our-felves  with 
fome  Antidote  againfl.  Enthufiafm.  And  this  is 
what  I  have  dar'd  affirm  is  belt  perform'd  by 
keeping  to  Good  Humour.  For  otherwife 
the  Remedy  it-felf  may  turn  to  the  Difeafe. 

And  now, my  Lord,  having,  after  all,  in  fome 
meafure juftify'd Enthusiasm,  and own'd the 
Word;  if  I  appear  extravagant,  in  addrefling 
to  you  after  the  manner  I  have  done,  you  mufl 
allow  me  to  plead  an  Impulfe.  You  mufl;  fup- 
pofe  me  (as  with  truth  you  may)  moil  paffio- 
nately  yours ;  and  with  thatKindnefs  which  is 
natural  to  you  on  other  occafions,  you  mufl 
tolerate  your  Enlhifiajlick  Friend,  who,  except- 
ing only  in  the  cafe  of  this  over-forward  Ajal, 
mufl  ever  appear,  with  the  highefl:  Refpecl:, 

My  Lord, 

Tour  LordJIiip's,  fac. 


Vol.    I.  E  TREA- 


59 


II.  p  .  jx,  sn.ss.  ffg,  fv<ji 


S:(/ribcLinJ'culpt, 


A  N 


ESSAY,      he. 


PART       I. 


?>*Si 


SECT.     I. 

I  HAVE  been  confidering  (my  Friend!) 
what  your  Fancy  was,  to  exprefs  fuch  a 
furprize  as  you  did  the  other  day,  when  I  hap- 
pen'd  to  fpeak  to  you  in  commendation  of 
Raillery,  Was  it  poffible  you  fhou'd  fuppofe 
me  fo  grave  a  Man,  as  to  diflike  all  Conver- 
Vol.  I.  [E]  fation 


60     An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

fation  of  this  kind  ?  Or  were  you  afraid  I  fhou'd 
not  (land  the  trial,  if  you  put  me  to  it,  by 
making  the  experiment  in  my  own  Cafe? 

I  Must  confefs,  youhadreafon  enough  for 
your  Caution;  if  you  cou'd  imagine  me  at  the 
bottom  fo  true  a  Zjalot,  as  not  to  bear  the 
lead  Raillery  on  my  own  Opinions.  'Tis  the 
Cafe,  I  know,  with  Many.  Whatever  they 
think  grave  or  folemn,  they  fuppofe  mufl  ne- 
ver be  treated  out  of  a  grave  and  folemn  way : 
Tho  what  Another  thinks  fo,  they  can  be  con- 
tented to  treat  otherwife ;  and  are  forward  to 
try  the  Edge  of  Ridicule  againfl  any  Opinions 
befides  their  own. 

The  Oueftion  is,  Whether  this  be  fair  or 
no?  and,  Whether  it  be  not  juit  and  reafon- 
able,  to  make  as  free  with  our  own-  Opinions, 
as  with  thole  of  other  People?  For  to  be  fpa- 
ring  in  this  cafe,  may  be  look'd  upon  as  a  piece 
of  Selfifhnefs.  We  may  be  charg'd  perhaps 
with  wilful  Ignorance  and  blind  Idolatry,  for 
having  taken  Opinions  upon  Truft,  and  confe- 
crated  in  our-felves  certain  //^/-Notions,  which 
we  will  never  fuffer  to  be  unveild,  or  feen 
in  open  light.  They  may  perhaps  be  Mon- 
gers, and  not  Divinitys,  or  Sacred  Truths, 
which  are  kept  thus  choicely,  in  fome  dark 
Corner  of  our  Minds :   The  Speclers  may  im~ 

pofe 


of  WIT  and  HUMOU  R.      61 

pofe  on  us,  whilfl  we  refufe  to  turn  'em  every 
way,  and  view  their  Shapes  and  Complexions 
in  every  light.  For  that  which  can  be 
(hewn  only  in  a  certain  Light  is  questionable. 
Truth,  'tis  fuppos'd,  may  bear  all  Lights :  and 
one  of  thofe  principal  Lights  or  natural  Me- 
diums, by  which  Things  are  to  be  view'd,  in 
order  to  a  thorow  Recognition,  is  Ridicule  it- 
felf,  or  that  Manner  of  Proof  by  which  we 
difcern  whatever  is  liable  to  juft  Raillery  in 
any  Subject.  So  much,  at  leafl,  is  allow'cl  by 
All,  who  at  any  time  appeal  to  this  Criterion. 
The  graven"  Gentlemen,  even  in  the  gravefl 
Subjects,  are  fuppos'd  to  acknowledge  this  : 
and  can  have  no  Right,  'tis  thought,  to  deny 
others  the  Freedom  of  this  Appeal;  whilfl  they 
are  free  to  cenfure  like  other  Men,  and  in  their 
gravefl  Arguments  make  no  fcruple  to  afk,  Is 
it  not  Ridiculous? 

O  f  this  Affair,  therefore,  I  defignyou  fhou'd 
know  fully  what  my  Sentiments  are.  And  by 
this  means  you  will  be  able  to  judge  of  me  ; 
whether  I  was  fmcere  the  other  day  in  the 
Defence  of  Raillery,  and  can  continue  jflill  to 
plead  for  thofe  ingenious  Friends  of  ours,  who 
are  often  cenfur'd  for  their  Humour  of  this 
kind,  and  for  the  Freedom  they  take  in  fuch 
an  airy  way  of  Converfation  and  Writing. 

% 

[E  2]  SECT. 


62     An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 


SECT.     II. 

IN  GOOD  earned,  when  one  conftders 
what  ufe  is  fometimes  made  of  this  Species 
of  Wit,  and  to  what  an  excefs  it  has  rifen  of 
late,  in  fome  Characters  of  the  Age  ;  one  may 
be  nartled  a  little,  and  in  doubt,  what  to  think 
of  the  Practice,  or  whither  this  rallying  Hu- 
mour will  at  length  carry  us.  It  has  pafs'd 
from  the  Men  of  Pleafure  to  the  Men  of  Bufi- 
nefs.  Politicians  have  been  infected  with  it : 
and  the  grave  Affairs  of  State  have  been  treat- 
ed with  an  Air  of  Irony  and  Banter.  The  ablefl 
Negotiators  have  been  known  the  notableft 
Bujjoons:  the  moll  celebrated  Authors,  the 
greateft  Mailers  of  Burlefque. 

There  is  indeed  a  kind  of  defenfive  Raillery 
(if  I  may  fo  call  it)  which  I  am  willing  enough 
to  allow  in  Affairs  of  whatever  kind;  when 
the  Spirit  of  Curiofity  wou'd  force  a  Difcovery 
of  more  Truth  than  can  conveniently  be  told. 
For  we  can  never  do  more  Injury  to  Truth, 
than  by  difcovering  too  much  of  it,  on  fome 
occafions.  Tis  the  fame  with  Underftandings 
as  with  Eyes :  To  fuch  a  certain  Size  and  Make 
jufl  fo  much  Light  is  neceffary,  and  no  more. 
Whatever  is  beyond,  brings  Darknefs  and 
Confufion. 

Tis 


TREATISE   II. 

VI  £• 

Senfus  Communis: 

A  N 

ESSAY 

ON    THE 

FREEDOM 

O  F 

W  /  T   and    HUMOUR. 

In  a  LETTER  to  a  Friend. 


-Hac  urget  Lupus,  hac  canis — 

Hor.  Sat.  2.  Lib.  2. 


Printed  firft  in  the  Year  M.DCC.IX. 

E2 


of  WI  r  and  H  U  M  0  U  R       63 

'Tis  real  Humanity  and  Kindnefs,  to  hide 
ftrong  Truths  from  tender  Eyes.  And  to  do 
this  by  a  pleafant  Amufement,  is  eafier  and 
civiller,  than  by  a  harm  Denial,  or  Remark- 
able Referve.  But  to  go  about  induftrioufly 
to  confound  Men,  in  amyflerious  manner,  and 
to  make  advantage  or  draw  pleafurefrom  that 
Perplexity  they  are  thrown  into,  by  fuch  un- 
certain Talk;  is  as  unhandfom  in  a  way  of 
Raillery,  as  when  done  with  the  greatefl  Seri- 
oufnefs,,  or  in  the  mofl  folemn  way  of  Deceit. 
It  may  be  neceffary,  as  well  now  as  heretofore, 
for  wife  Men  to  fpeak  in  Parables,  and  with  a 
double  Meaning,  that  the  Enemy  may  be  a- 
mus'd,  and  they  only  who  have  Ears  to  hear,  may 
hear.  But  'tis  certainly  a  mean,  impotent, 
and  dull  fort  of  Wit,  which  amufes  all  alike, 
and  leaves  the  molt  fenfible  Man,  and  even  a 
Friend,  equally  in  doubt,  and  at  a  lofs  to  un- 
derfland  what  one's  real  Mind  is,  upon  any 
Subject. 

This  is  that  grofs  fort  of  Raillery,  which  is 
fo  offenfive  in  good  Company.  And  indeed 
there  is  as  much  difference  between  one  fort  and 
another,  as  between  Fair-dealing  and  Hypo- 
crify  ;  or  between  the  genteelefl.  Wit,  and  the 
mofl  fcurrilous  Buffoonery.  But  by  Freedom 
of  Converfation    this  liberal  kind  of  Wit  will 

E  3  lofe 


64     An  E  S  S  AY  on  the  Freedom 

lofe  its  Credit.  For  Wit  is  its  own  Remedy. 
Liberty  and  Commerce  bring  it  to  its  true 
Standard.  The  only  danger  is,  the  laying 
an  Embargo.  The  fame  thing  happens  here, 
as  in  the  Cafe  of  Trade.  Impofitions  and  Re- 
ftriclions  reduce  it  to  a  low  Ebb  :  Nothing  is 
fo  advantageous  to  it  as  a  Free  Port. 

We  have  feen  in  our  own  time  the  Decline 
and  Ruin  of  a  falfe  fort  of  Wit,  which  fo  much 
delighted  our  Anceftors,  that  their  Poems  and 
Plays,  as  well  as  Sermons,  were  full  of  it. 
All  Humour  had  fomething  otthe  Quibble.  The 
very  Language  of  the  Court  was  Punning.  But 
'tis  now  banifh'd  the  Town,  and  all  good 
Company:  There  are  only  fome  few  Foot- 
fteps  of  it  in  the  Country;  and  it  feems  at 
laft  confin'd  to  the  Nurferys  of  Youth,  as  the 
chief  Entertainment  of  Pedants  and  their  Pu- 
pils. And  thus  in  other  refpecls  Wit  will  mend 
upon  our  hands,  and  Humour  will  refine  it-felf; 
if  we  take  care  not  to  tamper  with  it,  and 
bring  it  under  Conflraint,  by  fevere  Ufage 
and  rigorous  Prefcriptions.  All  Politenefs  is 
owing  to  Liberty.  We  polifh  one  another, 
and  rub  off  our  Corners  and  rough  Sides  by 
a  fort  of  amicable  Collijwn.  To  reftrain  this,  is 
inevitably  to  bring  a  Ruft  upon  Mens  Under- 
(landings.     "Lis  a  deftroying  of  Civility,  Good 

Breeding 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.       6$ 

Breeding,  and  even  Charity  it-felf,  under  pre- 
tence of  maintaining  it. 

.SECT.     III. 

TO  defcribe  true  Raillery  wou'd  be  as  hard 
a  matter,  and  perhaps  as  little  to  the 
purpofe,  as  to  define  Good  Breeding.  None  can 
underfland  the  Speculation,  befide  thofe  who 
have  the  Practice.  Yet  every-one  thinks  him- 
felf  well-bred:  and  the  formallefl  Pedant  ima- 
gines he  can  railly  with  a  good  Grace  and  Hu- 
mour. I  have  known  fome  of  thofe  grave 
Gentlemen  undertake  to  correct  an  Author 
for  defending  the  Ufe  of  Raillery,  who  at  the 
fame  time  have  upon  every  turn  made  ufe  of 
that  Weapon,  tho  they  were  naturally  fo  very 
aukard  at  it.  And  this  I  believe  may  be  ob- 
ferv'd  in  the  Cafe  of  many  Zealots,  who  have 
taken  upon  'em  to  anfwer  our  modern  Free- 
Writers.  The  Tragical  Gentlemen,  with  the 
grim  Afpecl  and  Mein  of  true  Inquifitors,  have  but 
an  ill  Grace  when  they  vouchfafe  to  quit  their 
Aufterity,  and  be  jocofe  and  pleafant  with  an 
Adverfary,  whom  they  wou'd  chufe  to  treat 
in  a  very  diiferent  manner.  For  to  do  'em 
juftice,  had  they  their  Wills,  I  doubt  not  but 
their  Conducl  and  Mein  wou'd  be  pretty  much 
of  a-piece.  They  wou'd,  in  all  probability, 
foon  quit    their   Farce,    and   make  a  thorow 

E  4  Tra- 


66     An  E  S  S  AT  on  the  Freedom 

Tragedy.  But  at  prefent  there  is  nothing  fo 
ridiculous  as  this  JANUS-Face  of  Writers,  who 
with  one  Countenance  force  a  Smile,  and  with 
another  fhow  nothing  befide  Rage  and  Fury. 
Having  enterd  the  Lifts,  and  agreed  to  the 
fair  Laws  of  Combat  by  Wit  and  Argument, 
they  have  nofoonerprovd  their  Weapon,  than 
you  hear  em  crying  aloud  for  help,  and  deli- 
vering over  to  the  Secular  Arm. 

There  can't  be  a  more  prepofterous  Sight 
than  an  Executioner  and  a  Merry- An  drew 
acling  their  Part  upon  the  fame  Stage.  Yet  I 
am  perfuaded  any-one  will  find  this  to  be  the 
real  Piclure  of  certain  modern  Zealots  in  their 
Controversial  Writings.  They  are  no  more  Maf- 
ters  of  Gravity,  than  they  are  of  Good  Hu- 
mour. The  firfl  always  runs  into  harm  Se- 
verity, and  the  latter  into  an  aukard  Buffoon- 
ery. And  thus  between  Anger  and  Pleafure, 
Zeal  and  Drollery,  their  Writing  has  much 
fuch  a  Grace  as  the  Play  of  humourfom  Chil- 
dren, who,  at  the  fame  inftant,  are  both  pee- 
vifli  and  wanton,  and  can  laugh  and  cry  almoft 
in  one  and  the  fame  breath. 

How  agreeable  fuch  Writings  are  like  to 
prove,  and  of  what  effect  towards  the  winning 
over  or  convincing  thofe  who  are  fuppos'd  to 
be  in  Error,  I  need  not  go  about  to  explain. 

Nor 


of  WIT  and  HUM  OUR.       67 

Nor  can  I  wonder,    on    this  account,   to  hear 
thofe    publick  Lamentations  of  Zealots,    that 
whilft  the  Books  of  their    Adverfarys   are   fo 
current,  their  Anfwers  to  'em  can  hardly  make 
their  way  into   the  World,   or   be  taken    the 
leafl  notice  of.      Pedantry  and  Bigotry  are  Mill- 
nones  able  to  fink  the   belt  Book,    which  car- 
ries the  lean  part  of  their  dead  weight.     The 
Temper  of  the  Pedagogue  futes  not  with  the 
Age.     And  the  World, .  however    it    may  be 
taught,  will   not   be    tutor  d.     If  a  Philofopher 
fpeaks,  Men  hear  him  willingly,  while  he  keeps 
to  his  Philofophy.     So   is    a    Chriftian  heard, 
while  he  keeps   to  his  profefs'd    Charity  and 
Meeknefs.     In  a  Gentleman  we  allow  of  Plea- 
fantry  and  Raillery,  as  being  manag'd  always 
with  good  Breeding,  and  never  grofs  or  clown- 
ifh.     But  if  a   mere  Scholaflick,    intrenching 
upon  all   thefe   Characters,  and  writing   as  it 
were  by  Starts  and  Rebounds  from  one  of  thefe 
to  another,  appears  upon  the  whole  as    little 
able  to  keep   the  Temper  of  Chriftianity,  as 
to  ufe   the   Reafon   of  a  Philofopher,    or  the 
Raillery  of  a  Man  of  Breeding;  what  wonder 
is  it,  if  the  monftrous  Producl  of  fuch  a  jum- 
bled Brain  be  ridiculous  to  the  World? 

If  you  think  (my  Friend!)  that  by  this  De- 
scription I  have  done  wrong  to  thefe  Zealot- 
Writers  in  religious  Controverfy;   read  only  a 

few 


68     An  ESSAY  on  the  Freedom 

few  Pages  in  any  one  of  'em  (even  where  the 
Conteft  is  not  Abroad,  but  within  their  own 
Pale)  and  then  pronounce. 


SECT     IV. 

BUT  now  that  I  have  laid  thus  much  con- 
cerning Authors  and  Writings,  you  (hall 
hear  my  Thoughts,  as  you  have  defir'd,  upon 
the  Subject  of  Converjation,  and  particularly  a 
late  One  of  a  free  kind,  which  you  remember 
I  was  prefent  at,  with  fome  Friends  of  yours, 
whom  you  fancy 'd  I  fhou'd  in  great  Gravity 
have  condemn'd. 

Twas,  I  mult  own,  a  very  diverting  one,  and 
perhaps  not  the  lefs  fo,  for  ending  as  abrupt- 
ly as  it  did,  and  in  fuch  a  fort  of  Confufion, 
as  almoft  brought  to  nothing  whatever  had 
been  advanc'd  in  the  Difcourfe  before.  Some 
Particulars  of  this  Converfation  may  not  per- 
haps be  fo  proper  to  commit  to  Paper.  Tis 
enough  that  I  put  you  in  mind  of  the  Con- 
verfation in  general.  A  great  many  line 
Schemes,  'tis  true,  were  deftroy'd;  many  grave 
Reafonings  overturn'd:  but  this  being  done 
without  offence  to  the  Partys  concern  d,  and 
with  improvement  to  the  good  Humour  of  the 
Company,  it  fet   the  Appetite   the  keener  to 

fuch 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.  69 

fuch  Converfations.  And  I  am  perfuaded,  that 
had  Reafon  herfelf  been  to  judge  of  her  own 
Intereft,  fhe  wou'd  have  thought  flie  receiv'd 
more  advantage  in  the  main  from  that  eafy 
and  familiar  way,  than  from  the  ufual  ftiff  Ad- 
herence to  a  particular  Opinion. 

But  perhaps  you  may  (till  be  in  the  fame 
humour  of  not  believing  me  in  earned.  You 
may  continue  to  tell  me,  I  affect  to  be  paiadox- 
ical,  in  commending  a  Converfation  as  advan- 
tage ous  to  Reafon,  which  ended  in  fuch  a  total 
Uncertainty  of  what  Reafon  had  feemingly  fo 
well  eftablifh'd. 

To  this  I  anfwer,  That  according  to  the  No- 
tion I  have  of  Reafon,  neither  the  written  Trea- 
tifes  of  the  Learned,  nor  the  fet  Difcourfes  of 
the  Eloquent,  are  able  of  themfelves  to  teach 
the  ufe  of  it.  'Tis  the  Habit  alone  of  Reafon- 
ing,  which  can  make  a  Reafoner.  And  Men 
can  never  be  better  invited  to  the  Habit,  than 
when  they  find  Pleafure  in  it.  A  Freedom  of 
Raillery,  a  Liberty  in  decent  Language  to 
queftion  every  thing,  and  an  Allowance  of  un- 
ravelling or  refuting  any  Argument,  without 
offence  to  the  Arguer,  are  the  only  Terms 
which  can  render  fuch  fpeculative  Converfati- 
ons anyway  agreeable.  For  to  fay  tiuth,  they 
have  been  render'd   burdenlbm  to  Mankind 

by 


jo     Aii  E  S  S  AY  on  the  Freedom 

by  the  Striclnefs  of  the  Laws  prefcrib'd  to  em, 
and  by  the  prevailing  Pedantry  and  Bigotry 
of  thofe  who  reign  in  em,  and  affume  to  them- 
felves  to  be  Dictators  in  thefe  Provinces. 

*  Semper  ego  Auditor  tantuml  is  as  natural 
a  Cafe  of  Complaint  in  Divinity,  in  Morals, 
and  in  Philofophy,  as  it  was  of  old,  the  Sati- 
ri/l's,  in  Poetry.  Viciffitude  is  a  mighty  law  of 
Difcourfe,  and  mightily  longd  for  by  Mankind. 
In  matter  of  Reafon,  more  is  done  in  a  minute 
or  two,  by  way  of  Queftion  and  Reply,  than 
by  a  continu'd  Difcourfe  of  whole  Hours.  Ora- 
tions are  fit  only  to  move  the  Paffions :  And  the 
Power  of  Declamation  is  to  terrify,  exalt,  ravifh, 
or  delight,  rather  than  fatisfy  or  inftrucl.  A 
free  Conference  is  a  clofe  Fight.  The  other 
way,  in  comparifon  to  it,  is  merely  a  Brandifh- 
ing,  or  Beating  the  Air.  To  be  obftrucled  there- 
fore and  manacled  in  Conferences,  and  to  be 
confin'd  to  hear  Orations  on  certain  Subjects, 
muft  needs  give  us  a  Diftafle,  and  render  the 
Subjects  fo  manag'd,  as  difagreeable  as  the  Ma- 
nagers. Men  had  rather  reafon  upon  Trifles, 
fo  they  may  reafon  freely,  and  without  the  Im- 
pofition  of  Authority,  than  on  the  ufefulleft 
and  belt  Subjects  in  the  world,  wThere  they  are 
held  under  a  Reftraint  and  Fear. 


Juv.  Sal,  i. 

Nor 


of  W 1 1    and  H  U  M  OUR.       71 

Nor  is  it  a  wonder  that  Men  are  generally 
fuch  faint  Reafoners,  and  care  fo  little  to  argue 
ftriclly  on  any  trivial  Subject  in  Company; 
when  they  dare  fo  little  exert  their  Reafon  in 
greater  matters,  and  are  forc'd  to  argue  lame- 
ly, where  they  have  need  of  the  greateft  Acti- 
vity and  Strength.  The  fame  thing  therefore 
happens  here  as  in  ftrong  and  healthy  Bodys, 
which  are  debar'd  their  natural  Exercife,  and 
confin'd  in  a  narrow  Space.  They  are  forc'd 
to  ufe  odd  Geflures  and  Contortions.  They 
have  a  fort  of  Aclion,  and  move  fall,  tho  with 
the  word  Grace  imaginable.  For  the  animal 
Spirits  in  fuch  found  and  active  Limbs  cannot 
lie  dead,  or  without  Employment.  And  thus 
the  natural  free  Spirits  of  ingenious  Men,  if 
imprifon'd  and  controul'd,  will  find  out  other 
ways  of  Motion  to  relieve  themfelves  in  their 
Conjiraint:  and  whether  it  be  in  Burlefque,  Mi- 
mickry  or  Buffoonery,  they  will  be  glad  at  any 
rate  to  vent  themfelves,  and  be  reveng'd  on 
their  Conftrainers, 

I*  Men  are  forbid  to  fpeak  their  minds  fe- 
rioufly  on  certain  Subjects,  they  will  do  it  iro- 
nically. If  they  are  forbid  to  fpeak  at  all  up- 
on fuch  Subjects,  or  if  they  find  it  really  dan- 
gerous to  do  fo ;  they  will  then  redouble  their 
Difguife,  involve  themfelves  in  Myfterioufnefs, 

and 


j2      An  E  S  SAT  on  the  Freedom 

and  talk  fo  as  hardly  to  be  underftood,  or  at 
leaft  not  plainly  interpreted,  by  thofe  who  are 
difpos'd  to  do  'em  a  mifchief.  And  thus  Rail- 
lery is  brought  more  in  fafhion,  and  runs  into 
an  Extreme.  'Tis  the  perfecuting  -Spirit  has 
rais'd  the  bantering  one:  And  want  of  Liberty 
may  account  for  want  of  a  true  Politenefs,  and 
for  the  Corruption  or  wrong  Ufe  of  Pleaiantry 
and  Humour. 

If  in  this  refpecl:  we  (train  the  juft  meafure 
ofwThat  we  call  Urbanity,  and  are  apt  fometimes 
to  take  a  Buffooning  Ruflick  Air,  we  may  thank 
the  ridiculous  Solemnity  and  four  Humour  of 
our  Pedagogues :  or  rather,  they  may  thank  them- 
felves,  if  they  in  particular  meet  with  the  hea- 
vieft  of  this  kind  of  Treatment.  For  it  will  na- 
turally fall  heavieft,  where  the  Conftraint  has 
been  the  feverefl.  The  greater  the  Weight  is, 
the  bitterer  will  be  the  Satire.  The  higher 
the  Slavery,  the  more  exquifite  the  Buffoon- 
ery. 

That  this  is  really  fo,  may  appear  by  look- 
ing on  thofe  Countrys  where  the  fpiritual  Ty- 
ranny is  higher!.  For  the  greater!  of  Buffoons 
are  the  Italians:  and  in  their  Writings,  in 
their  freer  fort  of  Converfations,  on  their  Thea- 
tres, and  in  their  Streets,  Buffoonery  and  Bur- 
lefque  are  in  the  highefl  vogue.    'Tis  the  only 

manner 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.       ?3 

manner  in  which  the  poor  cramp'd  Wretches 
can  difcharge  a  free  Thought.  We  muft  yield 
to  'em  the  Superiority  in  this  fort  of  Wit.  For 
what  wonder  is  it  if  we,  who  have  more  of 
Liberty,  have  lefs  Dexterity  in  that  egregious 
way  of  Raillery  and  Ridicule  ? 

SECT.     V. 

TIS  for  this  reafon,  I  verily  believe,  that 
the  Antients  difcover  fo  little  of  this  Spi- 
rit, and  that  there  is  hardly  fuch  a  thing  found 
as  mere  Burlefque  in  any  Authors  of  the  poli- 
ter Ages.  The  manner  indeed  in  which  they 
treated  the  very  graveft  Subjects,  was  fomewhat 
different  from  that  of  our  days.  Their  Trea- 
tifes  were  generally  in  a  free  and  familiar  Style. 
They  chofe  to  give  us  the  Reprefentation  of 
real  Difcourfe  and  Converfe,  by  treating  their 
Subjects  in  the  way  of*  Dialogue  and  free  De- 
bate. The  Scene  was  commonly  laid  at  Ta- 
ble, or  in  the  publick  Walks  or  Meeting- 
places  ;  and  theufualWit  and  Humour  of  their 
real  Difcourfes  appear'd  in  thofe  of  their  own 
compofmg.  And  this  was  fair.  For  without 
Wit  and  Humour,  Reafon  can  hardly  have  its 
proof,  or  be  dininguifli'd.  The  Magifterial 
Voice  and  high  Strain  of  the  Pedagogue,  com- 


'"  See  the  following  Treatife,  viz.  Soliloquy,  Part  I.  Seel.  3. 

mands 


74     An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

mands  Reverence  and  Awe.  'Tis  of  admirable 
ufe  to  keep  Underflandings  at  a  diftance,  and 
out  of  reach.  The  other  Manner,  on  the  con- 
trary, gives  the  fairefl  hold,  and  furfers  an  An- 
tagonift  to  ufe  his  full  Strength  hand  to  hand, 
upon  even  ground. 

'Tis  not  to  be  imagin'd  what  advantage 
the  Reader  has,  when  he  can  thus  cope  with 
his  Author,  who  is  willing  to  come  on  a  fair 
Stage  with  him,  and  exchange  the  Tragick 
Bufkin  for  an  eafier  and  more  natural  Gate 
and  Habit.  Grimace  and  Tone  are  mighty 
Helps  to  Impofture.  And  many  a  formal 
Piece  of  Sophiftry  holds  Proof  under  a  fevere 
Brow,  which  wou'd  not  pafs  under  an  eafy 
one.  'Twas  the  Saying  of  *  an  antient  Sage, 
11  That  Humour  was  the  only  Teft  of  Gravity; 
et  and  Gravity,  of  Humour.  For  a  Subject 
"  which  wou'd  not  bear  Raillery,  was  fufpi- 
M  cious;  and  a  Jell;  which  wou'd  not  bear  a 
iL  ferious  Examination,  was  certainly  falfe  Wit." 

But  fome  Gentlemen  there  are  fo  full  of 
the  Spirit  of  Bigotry,  and  falfe  %eal,  that  when 
they  hear  Principles  examin'd,  Sciences  arid 
Arts  inquir'd  into,  and  Matters  of  Importance 

*Gorgias  Leontinus,  apud  Arift.  Rhetor,  lib.  3.  cap.  18.  Ti?» 
j*»  orw«&j»  &a^0«gny  ytXurt,  tov  $e  yeXura.  <r7ra£»ii ;  which  the  Translator 
j-aiders,  Seria  Rifu,  Rij'um  Seriis  difcukre. 

treated 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     75 

treated  with  this  franknefs  of  Humour,  they 
imagine  prefently  that  all  Profeftions  muft  fall 
to  the  ground,  all  Eftablifhments  come  to  ruin, 
and  nothing  orderly  or  decent  be  left  (landing 
in  the  world.  They  fear,  or  pretend  to  fear, 
that  Religion  it-felf  will  be  endanger'd  by  this 
free  way ;  and  are  therefore  as  much  alarm'd 
at  this  Liberty  in  private  Converfation,  and 
under  prudent  Management,  as  if  it  were  grofly 
us'd  in  publick  Company,  or  before  the  folemn- 
eft  AfTembly.  But  the  Cafe,  as  I  apprehend 
it,  is  far  different.  For  you  are  to  remember 
(my  Friend!)  that  I  am  writing  to  you  in  de- 
fence only  of  the  Liberty  of  the  Club,  and  of  that 
fort  of  Freedom  which  is  taken  amongft  Gen- 
tlemen  and  Friends,  who  know  one  another  per- 
fectly well.  And  that  'tis  natural  for  me  to  de- 
fend Liberty  with  this  renriclion,  you  may  in- 
fer from  the  very  Notion  I  have  of  Liberty  it- 
felf. 

'Tis  furely  a  Violation  of  the  Freedom  of 
publick  AiTemblys,  for  any  one  to  take  the 
Chair,  who  is  neither  calld  nor  invited  to  it. 
To  (tart  Queftions,  or  manage  Debates,  which 
offend  the  publick  Ear,  is  to  be  wanting  in  that 
Refpect  which  is  due  to  common  Society.  Such 
Subjects  fhou'd  either  not  be  treated  at  all  in 
publick,  or  in  fuch  a  manner  as  to  occafion  no 
Scandal  or  Difturbance.     The  Publick  is  not, 

Vol.  I.  F  on 


76     An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

on  any  account,  to  be  laugh'd  at,  to  its  face; 
or  fo  reprehended  for  its  Follys,  as  to  make  it 
think  it-felf  contemn'd.  And  what  is  contra- 
ry to  good  Breeding,  is  in  this  refpecl  as  con- 
trary to  Liberty.  It  belongs  to  Men  of  flavifh 
Principles,  to  affect  a  Superiority  over  the  Vul- 
gar, and  to  defpife  the  Multitude.  The  Lovers 
of  Mankind  refpecl  and  honour  Conventions 
and  Societys  of  Men.  And  in  mix'd  Compa- 
ny, and  Places  where  Men  are  met  promifcu- 
oufly  on  account  of  Diverfion  or  Affairs,  'tis 
an  Impofition  and  Hardihip  to  force  'em  to 
hear  what  they  diflike,  and  to  treat  of  Matters 
in  a  Dialed,  which  many  who  are  prefent  have 
perhaps  been  never  usd  to.  Tis  a  breach  of 
the  Harmony  of  publick  Converfation,  to  take 
things  in  fuch  a  Key,  as  is  above  the  common 
Reach,  puts  others  to  filence,  and  robs  them 
of  their  Privilege  of  Tarn.  But  as  to  private 
Society,  and  what  palfes  in  felecl  Companys, 
where  Friends  meet  knowingly,  and  with  that 
very  defign  of  exercifing  their  Wit,  and  look- 
ing freely  into  all  Subjecls;  I  fee  no  pretence 
for  any  one  to  be  offended  at  the  way  of  Rail- 
lery and  Humour,  which  is  the  very  Life  of 
fuch  Conversations ;  the  only  thing  which  makes 
good  Company,  and  frees  it  from  the  Forma- 
lity of  Bufinefs,  and  the  Tutorage  and  Dogma- 
ticalnefs  of  the  Schools. 

SECT. 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.       77 
SECT.     VI. 

TO  return  therefore  to  our  Argument.     If 
the  bed  of  our  modern  Converfations  are 
apt  to  run  chiefly  upon  Trifles;  if  rational  Dif- 
courfes  (efpecially  thofe  of  a  deeper  Speculati- 
on) have  loft  their  credit,  and  are  in  difgrace 
becaufe  of  their  Formality;  there  is  reafon  for 
more  allowance    in    the  way  of  Humour  and 
Gaiety.   An    eafier    Method    of  treating   thefe 
Subjects,   will    make  em  more  agreeable  and 
familiar.    To   difpute   about  'em,  will  be  the 
fame  as  about  other  Matters.   They  need  not 
fpoil  good  Company,  or  take  from  the  Eafe  or 
Pleafure  of  a  polite   Converfation.    And   the 
oftner   thefe  Converfations   are  renew'd,    the 
better  will    be   their  Effecl:.     We   fhall  grow 
better  Reafoners,  by  reafoning  pleafantly,  and 
at  our  eafe;    taking  up,  or  laying  down  thefe 
Subjects,  as  we  fancy.  So  that,  upon  the  whole, 
I  mud  own  to  you,  I  cannot  be  fcandaliz'd  at 
the  Raillery  you   took  notice  of,    nor    at  the 
Effecl;  it  had  upon  our  Company.      The  Hu- 
mour  was    agreeable,  and  the  pleafant  Con- 
fufion  which  the  Converfation  ended  in,  is  at 
this  time  as  pleafant  to  me  upon  Reflection ; 
when  I  confider,  that  inftead  of  being  difcou- 
rag'd   from  refuming  the  Debate,  we  were  fo 
much  the  readier  to  meet  again  at  any  time, 

F  2  and 


jS     An  ESSAY  on  the  Freedom 

and    difpute   upon   the  fame   Subjects,    even 
with  more  eafe  and  fatisfa&ion  than  before. 

We  had  been  a  long  time  entertain'd,  you 
know,  upon  the  Subjecl  of  Morality  and  Reli- 
gion. And  amidft  the  different  Opinions  dart- 
ed and  maintain'd  by  feveral  of  the  Partys 
with  great  Life  and  Ingenuity;  one  or  other 
wou'd  every  now  and  then  take  the  liberty  to 
appeal  to  Common  Sense.  Every-one  allow'd 
the  Appeal,  and  was  willing  to  (land  the  trial. 
No-one  but  was  affur'd  Common  Senfe  wou'd 
juftify  him.  But  when  Iffue  was  join'd,  and 
the  Caufe  examin'd  at  the  Bar,  there  cou'd  be 
no  Judgment  given.  The  Partys  however  were 
not  lefs  forward  in  renewing  their  Appeal, 
on  the  very  next  occafion  which  prefented. 
No-one  wou'd  offer  to  call  the  Authority  of 
the  Court  in  queftion;  till  a  Gentleman,  vvhofe 
good  Underuanding  was  never  yet  brought  in 
doubt,  defir'd  the  Company,  very  gravely, 
that  they  wou'd  tell  him  what  Common  Senfe 
was. 


41  If  by  the  word  Senfe  we  were  to  under- 
ftand  Opinion  and  Judgment,  and  by  the 
word  common  the  Generality  or  any  consi- 
derable part  of  Mankind  ;  'twou'd  be  hard, 
he  faid,  to  difcover  where  the  Subject  of 
common  Senfe  cou'd  lie.    For  that  which 

was 


M 

t  t 

«  i 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      79 

ct  was  according  to  the  Senfe  of  one  Part  of 
"  Mankind,  was  againfi  the  Senfe  of  another. 
Cl  And  if  the  Majority  were  to  determine  com- 
"  mon  Senfe,  it  wou'd  change  as  often  as  Men 
,L  chang'd.  That  which  was  according  to  com- 
'*  mon  Senfe  to  day,  wou'd  be  the  contrary 
c'  to  morrow,  or  foon  after." 

But  notwithftanding  the  different  Judg- 
ments of  Mankind  in  moll  Subj eels,  there  were 
fome  however  in  which  'twas  fuppos'd  they 
all  agreed,  and  had  the  fame  Thoughts  in  com- 
mon.  The  Queflion  was  afk'd  ftill,  Where? 

\'  For  whatever  was  of  any  moment,  'twas 
41  fuppos'd  might  be  redue'd  under  the  head 
"  of  Religion,  Policy,  or  Morals. 

44  Of  the  Differences  in  Religion  there 
'  was  no  occafion  to  fpeak ;  the  Cafe  was  fo 
1  fully  known  to  all,  and  fo  feelingly  under- 
4  flood  by  Chriftians,  in  particular,  among 
1  themfelves.  They  had  made  found  Experi- 
4  ment  upon  one  another;  each  Party  in 
'  their  turn.  No  Endeavours  had  been  want- 
4  ing  on  the  fide  of  any  particular  Seel.  Which- 
1  ever  chane'd  to  have  the  Power,  fail'd  not 
c  of  putting  all  means  in  execution,  to  make 
1  their  private  Senfe  the  publick  one.  But  all 
1  in  vain.  Common  Senfe  was  as  hard  ftill  to 
1  determine  as  Catholick  or   Orthodox.    What 

F  3  with 


8o     An  E  S  SA  T  on  the  Freedom 

41  with  one  was  inconceivable  Myftery,  to  a- 
"  nother  was  of  eafy  Comprehenfion.  What 
'■*  to  one  was  Abfurdity,  to  another  was  De- 
44  monflration. 


44  As  for  Po l i  c  y ;  What  Senfe or whofe  cou'd 
1  be  call'd  common,  was  equally  a  queflion. 
'  If  plain  Britijh  or  Dutch  Senfe  were  right, 
4  Turkifh  and  French  Senfe  muft  certainly  be  ve- 

*  ry  wrong.  And  as  mere  Nonfenfe  as  Paflive- 
4  Obedience  feemd;  we  found  it  to  be. the 
1  common  Senfe  of  a  great  Party  amongft 
'  our-felves,  a  greater  Party  in  Europe,  and 
'  perhaps  the  greateft  Part  of  all  the'  World 

*  beiides. 

ct  As  for  Morals;  The  difference  if  pof- 
'•  fible,  was  dill  wider.  For  without  confider- 
c  ing  the  Opinions  and  Cufloms  of  the  many 
1  barbarous  and  illiterate  Nations;  we  faw 
1  that  even  the  few  who  had  attain'd  to  riper 
1  Letters,  and  to  Philofophy,  cou'd  never  as 
'  yet  agree  on  one  and  the  fame  Synem,  or 
1  acknowledge  the  fame  moral  Principles.  And 
1  fome  even  of  our  moll  admir'd  modern  Phi- 
'  lofophers  had  fairly  told  us,  that  Virtue  and 
c  Vice  had,  after  all,  no  other  Law  or  Meafure, 
1  than  mere  Fajhion  and  Vogue" 


It 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     81 

It  might  have  appear'd  perhaps  unfair  in 
our  Friends,  had  they  treated  only  the  graver 
Subjects  in  this  manner;  and  fuffer'd  the 
lighter  to  efcape.  For  in  the  gayer  Part  of  Life, 
our  Follys  are  as  folemn  as  in  the  moft  ferious. 
The  fault  is,  we  carry  the  Laugh  but  half-way. 
The  falfe  Earned  is  ridicul'd,  but  the  falfe  Jejl 
pafles  fecure,  and  becomes  as  errant  Deceit  as 
the  other.  Our  Diverfions,  our  Plays,  our  A- 
mufements  become  folemn.  We  dream  of  Hap- 
pineffes  and  PofTefTions,  and  Enjoyments  in 
which  we  have  no  Underflanding,  no  Cer- 
tainty; and  -yet  we  purfue  thefe  as  the  befl 
known  and  moft  certain  things  in  the  World. 
There  is  nothing  fo  foolifh  and  deluding  as  a 
*  partial  Scepticifm.  For  whilfl  the  Doubt  is  call 
only  on  one  fide,  the  Certainty  grows  fo  much 
llronger  on  the  other.  Whilfl  only  one  Face 
of  Folly  appears  ridiculous,  the  other  grows 
more  folemn  and  deceiving. 

But  'twas  not  thus  with  our  Friends.  They 
feem'd  better  Criticks,  and  more  ingenious, 
and  fair  in  their  way  of  queftioning  receiv'd 
Opinions,  and  expofing  the  Ridicule  of  Things. 
And  if  you  will  allow  me  to  carry  on  their 
Humour,  I  will  venture  to    make  the  Experi- 


*  VO  L.   II.  pag.  230,   231. 

F  4  ment 


82     An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

ment  throughout;  and  try  what  certain  Know- 
ledge or  Alfurance  of  things  may  be  recover'd, 
in  that  very  way,  by  which  all  Certainty,  you 
thought,  was  loft,  and  an  endlefs  Scepticijm  in- 
troduc'd. 

PART         II. 

SECT.     I.      " 

IF  a  Native  of  Ethiopia  were  on  a  fud- 
den  tranfported  into  Europe,  and  placed 
either  at  Paris  or  Venice  at  a  time  of  Car- 
nival, when  the  general  Face  of  Mankind  was 
difguis'd,  and  almoil  every  Creature  wore  a 
Mads.;  'tis  probable  he  wou'd  for  fome  time 
be  at  a  (land,  before  he  difcoverd  the  Cheat : 
not  imagining  that  a  whole  People  cou'd  be 
fo  fantauical,  as  upon  Agreement,  at  an  ap- 
pointed time,  to  transform  themfelves  by  a 
Variety  of  Habits,  and  make  it  a  folemn  Prac- 
tice to  impofe  on  one  another,  by  this  uni- 
verfal  Confufion  of  Characters  and  Perfons. 
Tho  he  might  at  firft  perhaps  have  look'd  on 
this  with  a  ferious  eye,  it  wou'd  be  hardly 
pofhble    for   him    to  hold   his  Countenance, 

when 


of  W/ rand    HUMOUR.      83 

when  he  had  perceiv'd  what  was  carrying  on. 
The  Europeans,  on  their  fide,  might  laugh 
perhaps  at  this  Simplicity.  But  our  Ethio- 
pian wou'd  certainly  laugh  with  better  rea- 
fon.  Tis  eafy  to  fee  which  of  the  two  wou'd 
be  ridiculous.  For  he  who  laughs,  and  is  him- 
felf  ridiculous,  bears  a  double  (hare  of  Ridi- 
cule. However,  fliou'd  it  fo  happen,  that  in 
the  Tranfport  of  Ridicule,  our  Ethiopian, 
having  his  Head  ftill  running  upon  Mqfks,  and 
knowing  nothing  of  the  fair  Complexion  and 
common  Drefs  of  the  Europeans,  fliou'd  up- 
on the  fight  of  a  natural  Face  and  Habit, 
laugh juft  as  heartily  as  before;  wou'd  not  he 
in  his  turn  become  ridiculous,  by  carrying 
thejefltoo  far;  when  by  a  filly  Prefumptionhe 
took  Nature  for  mere  Art,  and  miftook  perhaps 
a  Man  of  Sobriety  and  Senfe  for  one  of  thofe 
ridiculous  Mummers  ? 

There  was  a  time  when  Men  were  ac- 
countable only  for  their  Actions  and  Behavi- 
our. Their  Opinions  were  left  to  themfelves. 
They  had  liberty  to  differ  in  thefe,  as  in  their 
Faces.  Every  one  took  the  Air  and  Look 
which  was  natural  to  him.  But  in  procefs  of 
time,  it  was  thought  decent  to  mend  Mens 
Countenances,  and  render  their  intellectual 
Complexions  uniform  and  of  a  fort.  Thus  the 
Magiurate  became  a  Dreffer,   and  in  his  turn 

was 


84   An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

was  drefsd  too,  as  he  deferv'd;  when  he  had 
given  up  his  Power  to  a  new  Order  of  Tire- 
Men.  But  tho  in  this  extraordinary  con- 
juncture 'twas  agreed  that  there  was  only 
one  certain  and  true  Drefs,  one  Jingle  pecu- 
liar Air,  to  which  it  was  necefTary  all  People 
ihou'd  conform ;  yet  the  mifery  was,  that  nei- 
ther the  Maoiftrate  nor  the  Tire-Men  them- 
•  felves,  cou'd  refolve,  which  of  the  various 
Modes  was  the  exacl  true-one.  Imagine  now, 
what  the  Effecl  of  this  mud  needs  be;  when 
Men  became  perfecuted  thus  on  every  fide 
about  their  Air  and  Feature,  and  were  put  to 
their  fliifts  how  to  adjuft  and  compofe  their 
Mein,  according  to  the  right  Mode  ;  when  a 
thoufand  Models,  a  thoufand  Patterns  of  Drefs 
were  current,  and  alter'd  every  now  and  then, 
upon  occafion,  according  to  Fafldon  and  the 
Humour  of  the  Times.  Judge  whether  Mens 
Countenances  were  not  like  to  grow  con- 
ftrain'd,  and  the  natural  Vifage  of  Mankind, 
by  this  Habit,  diftorted,  convuls'd,  and  ren- 
der'd  hardly  knowable. 

But  as  unnatural  or  artificial  as  the  gene- 
ral Face  of  things  may  have  been  render  d  by 
this  unhappy  Care  of  Drefs,  and  Over-Tender- 
nefs  for  the  Safety  of  Complexions ;  we  muft  not 
therefore  imagine  that  all  Faces  are  alike  be- 
fmear'd  or  plaifterd.   All  is  not  Fucus,  or  mere 

Varnifh, 


of  W /rand  HUMOUR.      85 

Varnifh.  Nor  is  the  Face  of  Truth  lefs  fair  and 
beautiful,  for  all  the  counterfeit  Vizards  which 
have  been  put  upon  her.  We  muft  remember 
the  Carnival,  and  what  the  Occafion  has  been 
of  this  wild  Concourfe  and  Medly ;  who  were 
the  inftitutors  of  it ;  and  to  what  purpofe  Men 
were  thus  fet  a-work  and  amus'd.  We  may 
laugh  fufficiently  at  the  original  Cheat ;  and, 
if  pity  will  fuffer  us,  may  make  our-felves  di- 
verfion  enough  with  the  Folly  and  Madnefs 
of  thofe  wrho  are  thus  caught,  and  practis'd 
on,  by  thefe  Impoftures.  But  we  muft  remem- 
ber withal  our  Ethiopian,  and  beware,  left 
by  taking  plain  Nature  for  a  Vizard,  we  be- 
come more  ridiculous  than  the  People  whom 
we  ridicule.  Now  if  a  Jeft  or  Ridicule  thus 
ftrain'd,  be  capable  of  leading  the  Judgment 
fo  far  aftray;  'tis  probable  that  an  Excefs  of 
Fear  or  Horror  may  work  the  fame  Effect. 

Had  it  been  your  fortune  (my  Friend!)  to 
have  liv'd  in  A  s  1 A  at  the  time  when  the  *  Ma- 
gi by  an  egregious  Impofture  got  pofleilion 
of  the  Empire  ;  no  doubt  you  wou'd  have  had 
a  deteftation  of  the  Acl :  And  perhaps  the  very 
Perfons  of  the  Men  might  have  grown  fo  odi- 
ous to  you,  that  after  all  the  Cheats  and  A- 
bufes  they  had  committed,  you  might  have 
feen  'em  difpatch'd  with  as  relentlefs  an. eye 

*  VOL.  III.  p.  48,49. 

as 


86      An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

as  our  later  European  Anceflors  faw  the  De- 
ftruction  of  a  like  politick  Body  of  Conjurers, 
the  Knights  Templars ;  who  were  almoft  become 
an  Over-Match  for  the  civil  Sovereign.  Your 
Indignation  perhaps  might  have  carry'd  you 
to  propofe  the  raziiig  all  Monuments  and 
Memorials  of  thefe  Magicians.  You  might  have 
refolvd  not  to  leave  fo  much  as  their  Houfes 
(landing.  But  if  it  had  happen'd  that  thefe 
Magicians,  in  the  time  of  their  Dominion,  had 
made  any  Collection  of  Books,  or  compii'd  any 
themfelves,  in  which  they  had  treated  of  Phi- 
lofophy,  or  Morals,  or  any  other  Science,  or 
Part  of  Learning;  wou'd  you  have  carry'd 
your  Refentment  fo  far  as  to  have  extirpated 
thefe  alfo,  and  condemn'd  every  Opinion  or 
Doclrine  they  had  efpous'd,  for  no  other  rea- 
fon  than  merely  becaufe  they  had  efpous'd  it? 
Hardly  a  Scythian,  aTARTAR,  or  a  Goth, 
wou'd  act  or  reafon  fo  abfurdly.  Much  lefs 
wou'd  you  (my  Friend!)  have  carry'd  on  this 
Ma  go  phony,  or  Priefl-Majjacre,  with  fuch  a 
barbarous  Zeal.  For,  in  good  earned,  to  de- 
ftroy  a  Philofophy  in  hatred  to  a  Man,  implies 
as  errant  a  7m  tar-Notion,  as  to  deitroy  or  mur- 
der a  Man  in  order  to  plunder  him  of  his  Wit, 
and"  get  the  inheritance  of  his  Underftanding. 

I  Must  confers  indeed,  that  had  all  the  In- 
ftitutions,    Statutes,    and  Regulations  of  this 

antient 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.       87 

antient  Hierarchy,  refembled  the  fundamental 
*one,  of  the  Order  it-ielf,  they  might  with  a 
great  deal  of  Juftice  have  been  fupprefs'd:  For 
one  can't  without  fome  abhorrence  read  that 
Law  of  theirs ; 

f  Nam  Magus  ex  Matre  et  Gnalo  gignatur  oportet. 

But  the  Conjurers  (as  we'll  rather  fuppofe) 
having  confider'd  that  they  ought  in  their 
Principle  to  appear  as  fair  as  poffible  to  the 
World,  the  better  to  conceal  their  Practice, 
found  it  highly  for  their  Intereft  to  efpoufe 
fome  excellent  moral  Rules,  and  eftablifh  the 
very  beft  Maxims  of  this  kind.  They  thought 
it  for  their  advantage  perhaps,  on  their  firft 
fetting  out,  to  recommend  the  greateft  Purity 
of  Religion,  the  greateft  Integrity  of  Life  and 
Manners.  They  may  perhaps  too,  in  general, 
have  preach'd  up  Charity  and  Good-will. 
They  may  have  fet  to  view  the  faireft  Face  of 
human  Nature ;  and  together  with  their  By- 
Laws,  and  political  Inftitutions,  have  inter- 
wove the  honefteft  Morals  and  beft  Doctrine 
in  the  World. 

How  therefore  fhou'd  we  have  behav'd  our- 
felves  in  this   Affair;   How   fhou'd   we   have 


ris^craj  06  H3  fjuccX^a,  dvruv  o»  aotpiccn  dcxei*  coxbYlei  9t  Motyoi,  yuy^cTi  T«; 
#j?TS£«{,  Scxt.  Lmpir.  Pyr.  Lib.  3.  cap.  24. 
t  GatulJ.  87. 

carry'd 


88    An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

carry'd  our-felves  towards  this  Order  of  Men, 
at  the  time  of  Difcovery  of  their  Cheat,  and 
Ruin  of  their  Empire  ?  Shou'd  we  have  fall'n 
to  work  inflantly  with  their  Syfiems,  (truck  at 
their  Opinions  and  Doctrines  without  diftinc- 
tion,  and  erected  a  contrary  Philofophy  in 
their  teeth?  Shou'd  we  have  flown  at  every  re- 
ligious and  moral  Principle,  deny'd  every  na- 
tural and  focial  Affeclion,  and  renderd  Men 
as  much  *  Wolves  as  was  poflible  to  one  ano- 
ther, whilft  we  defcrib'd  'em  fuch ;  and  endea- 
vour'd  to  make  them  fee  themfelves  by  far  more 
monftrous  and  corrupt,  than  with  the  worft 
Intentions  it  was  ever  polfible  for  the  worft  of 

'em  to  become  ? This,  you'll  fay,  doubtlefs 

wou'd  have  been  a  very  prepoflerous  Part,  and 
cou'd  never  have  been  acted  by  other  than 
mean  Spirits,  fuch  as  had  been  held  in  awe, 
and  over-frighted  f  by  the  Magi. 

And    yet    an   J  able    and    witty    Philofo- 
pher  of  our  Nation  was,    we  know,  of  late 

*  Infra,  p.  118.    and  VOL.  II.  p.  320. 

t  VOL.  III.  p.  64,65.  in  the  Notes. 

J  Mr.  H  o  b  b  e  s ,  who  thus  expreffes  himfelf :  By  reading  oflhefe  Greek 
and  Latin  Authors,  Men  from  their  Childhood  have  gotten  a  Habit  (under  a 
falfefhew  of  Liberty)  offavouring  Tumults  and  of  licentious  controlling  the  Actions 
of  their  Sovereigns.  Leviathan,  Part  2.  ch.  qi.  p.  hi.  Bv  this  Rea- 
foning  of  Mr.  Hobbis  it  fhou'd  follow,  that  there  can  never  be  any 
Tumults  or  depofing  of  Sovereigns  at  Conflautinople,  or  in  Mogol.  See 
again,  p.  171,  and  377.  and  what  he  intimates  to  his  Prince  (p.  193.) 
concerning  this  Extirpation  of  antient  Literature,  in  favour  of  his  Levi- 
suhan-Hypothefis,   and  new  Philofophy. 

Years, 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      89 

Years,  fo  poflefs'd  with  a  Horror  of  this  kind, 
that  both  with  refpecl;  to  Politicks  and  Morals, 
he  directly  acled  in  the  Spirit  of  Maffacre.  The 
Fright  he  took  upon  the  Sight  of  the  then  go- 
verning Powers,  who  unjuftly  alTum'd  the  Au- 
thority of  the  People,  gave  him  fuch  an  Ab- 
horrence of  all  popular  Government,  and  of 
the  very  Notion  of  Liberty  it-felf ;  that  to  ex- 
tinguifli  it  for  ever,  he  recommends  the  very 
extinguifhing  of  Letters,  and  exhorts  Princes 
not  to  fpare  fo  much  as  an  antient  Roman  or 
Greek  Hiftorian. — Is  not  this  in  truth  fome- 
what  Gothick?  And  has  not  our  Philofopher, 
in  appearance,  fomething  of  the  Savage,  that 
he  fhou'd  ufe  Philofophy  and  Learning  as  the 
Scythians  are  faid  to  have  us'd  Ana- 
char  sis  and  others,  for  having  vifited  the 
Wife  of  Greece,  and  learnt  the  Manners  of 
a  polite  People? 

H 1  s  Quarrel  with  Religion  was  the  fame  as 
with  Liberty.  The  fame  Times  ,gave  him  the 
fame  Terror  in  this  other  kind.  He  had  no- 
thing before  his  Eyes  befide  the  Ravage  of  En- 
thujiafm,  and  the  Artifice  of  thofe  who  rais'd 
and  conducted  that  Spirit.  And  the  good  fo- 
ciable  Man,  as  favage  and  unfociable  as  he 
wou'd  make  himfelf  and  all  Mankind  appear 
by  his  Philofophy,  expos'd  himfelf  during  his 
Life,  and  took  the  utmofl  pains,  that  after  his 

Death 


go    An  ESSAY  on  the  Freedom 

Death  we  might  be  deliver'd  from  the  occa-* 
fion  of  thefe  Terrors.  He  did  his  utmofl  to 
fhew  us,  ut  That  both  in  Religion  and  Morals 
u  we  were  impose!  on  by  our  Governors; 
11  that  there  was  nothing  which  by  nature  in- 
cc  clin'd  us  either  way;  nothing  which  natu- 
64  rally  drew  us  to  the  Love  of  what  was  with- 
"  out,  or  beyond  *  ourf elves :"  Tho  the  Love 
of  fuch  great  Truths  and  fovereign  Maxims 
as  he  imagin'd  thefe  to  be,  made  him  the  mod 
laborious  of  all  Men  in  compofing  Syftems  of 
this  kind  for  our  Ufe ;  and  fore'd  him,  not- 
withflanding  his  natural  Fear,  to  run  con- 
tinually the  higheft  rifk  of  being  a  Martyr  for 
our  Deliverance. 

Give  me  leave  therefore  (my  Friend!)  on 
this  occafion,  to  prevent  your  Serioufnefs, 
and  allure  you,  that  there  is  no  fuch  mighty 
Danger  as  we  are  apt  to  imagine  from  thefe 
fierce  Profecutors  of  Superilition,  who  are  fo 
jealous  of  every  religious  or  moral  Principle. 
Whatever  Savages  they  may  appear  in  Philofo- 
phy,  they  are  in  their  common  Capacity  as  Civil 
Perfons,  as  one  can  wifli.  Their  free  commu- 
nicating of  their  Principles  may  witnefs  for 
them.  'Tis  the  height  of  Sociablenefs  to  be 
thus  friendlv  and  communicative. 


*  VOL.  II.  p.  8©. 

If 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      91 

If  the  Principles,  indeed,  were  concealed 
from  us,  and  made  a  Myftery;  they  might  be- 
come confiderable.  Things  are  often  made  fo, 
by  being  kept  as  Secrets  of  a  Seel:  or  Party ;  and 
nothing  helps  this  more  than  the  Antipathy  and 
Shynefs  of  a  contrary  Party.  If  we  fall  prefent- 
ly  into  Horrors,  and  Confternation,  upon  the 
hearing  Maxims  which  are  thought  poifonous; 
we  are  in  no  difpofition  to  ufe  that  familiar 
and  eafy  part  of  Reafon,  which  is  the  bed  An- 
tidote. The  only  Poifon  to  Reafon,  is  Pajjwn. 
For  falfe  Reafoning  is  foon  redrefs'd,  where 
Paffion  is  removd.  But  if  the  very  hearing 
certain  Proportions  of  Philofophy  be  fufficient 
to  move  our  Paffion ;  'tis  plain,  the  Poifon  has 
already  gain'd  on  us,  and  we  are  effectually 
prevented  in  the  ufe  of  our  reafoning  Facul- 
ty- 

Were  it  not  for  the  Prejudices  of  this  kind ; 
what  fhou'd  hinder  us  from  diverting  our-felves 
with  the  Fancy  of  one  of  thefe  modern  Reformers 
we  have  been  fpeaking  of?  What  fhou'd  we  fay 
to  one  of  thefe  Anti-zealots,  who,  in  the  Zeal  of 
fuch  a  cool  Philofophy,  fhou'd  affure  us  faith- 
fully, tl  That  we  were  the  molt  miftaken  Men 
"  in  the  world,  to  imagine  there  was  any  fuch 
41  thing  as  natural  Faith  or  Juftice?  For  that 

Vol.  1.  G  "  it 


t  c 
(I 
11 

tC 

t  c 
1 1 


92    An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

it  was  only  Force  and  Power  which  conftitu- 
ted  Right.  That  there  was  no  fuch  thing  in 
reality  as  Virtue;  no  Principle  of  Order  in 
things  above,  or  below;  no  fecret  Charm  or 
Force  of  Nature,  by  which  every-one  was 
made  to  operate  willingly  or  unwillingly  to- 
wards publick  Good,  and  punihVd  and  tor- 

■'  mented  if  he  did  otherwife." Is  not 

this  the  very  Charm  it-felf?  Is  not  the  Gentle- 
man at  this  inftant  under  the  power  of  it  ? 

Sir !  The  Philofophy  you  have  condefcended 
to  reveal  to  us,  is  mod  extraordinary.  We 
are  beholden  to  you  for  your  Inftruclion. 
But,  pray,  whence  is  this  Zeal  in  our  behalf? 
What  are  We  to  You?  Are  You  our  Father? 
Or  if  You  were,  why  this  Concern  for  Us  ? 
Is  there  then  fuch  a  thing  as  natural  Affecti- 
on? If  not;  why  all  this  Pains,  why  all 
this  Danger  on  our  account?  Why  not 
keep  this  Secret  to  Your-felf?  Of  what 
advantage  is  it  to  You,  to  deliver  us 
from  the  Cheat?  The  more  are  taken  in  it, 
the  better.  'Tis  directly  againft  your  Inte- 
reft  to  undeceive  Us,  and  let  us  know  that 
only  private  Interefl  governs  You ;  and  that 
nothing  nobler,  or  of  a  larger  kind,  fhou'd 
govern  us,  whom  you  converfe  with.  Leave 
us  to  our-felves,  and  to  that  notable  Art  by 
which  we  are  happily  tam'd,   and  renderd 

"  thus 


It 
u 
ti 

a 


of  WIT  and  HUMO  U R.       93 

thus  mild  d.ndjheepifli.  Tis  not  fit  we  fhou'd 
know  that  by  Nature  we  are  all  Wolves.  Is 
it  poffible  that  one  who  has  really  difcoverd 
himfelf  fuch,  fhou  d  take  pains  to  commu- 
nicate fuch  a  Difcovery?" 

SECT.     II. 


IN  reality  (my  Friend!)  a  fevere  Brow  may 
well  be  fpar'd  on  this  occafion ;  when  we 
are  put  thus  upon  the  Defence  of  common  Ho- 
nejly,  by  fuch  fair  honeft  Gentlemen,  who  are 
in  Practice  fo  different  from  what  they  wou'd 
appear  in  Speculation.  Knaves  I  know  there 
are  in  Motion  and  Principle,  as  well  as  in  Practice: 
who  think  all  Honefty  as  well  as  Religion  a 
mere  Cheat ;  and  by  a  very  confluent  reafon- 
ing,  have  refolvd  deliberately  to  do  whatever 
by  Power  or  Art  they  are  able,  for  their  private 
Advantage.  But  fuch  as  thefe  never  open 
themfelves  in  Friendfnip  to  others.  They  have 
no  fuch  Paffion  for  Truth,  or  Love  for  Man- 
kind. They  have  no  Quarrel  with  Religion 
or  Morals;  but  know  what  ufe  to  make  of  both, 
upon  occafion.  If  they  ever  difcover  their 
Principles,  'tis  only  at  unawares.  They  are 
fure  to  preach  Honefly,  and  go  to  Church. 


G  2  On 


94    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

On  the  other  fide,  the  Gentlemen  for  whom 
I  am  apologizing,  cannot  however  be  call'd 
Hypocrites.  They  fpeak  as  ill  of  themfelves  as 
they  poftibly  can.  If  they  have  hard  Thoughts 
of  human  Nature;  'tis  a  Proof  flill  of  their  Hu- 
manity, that  they  give  fuch  Warning  to  the 
World.  If  they  reprefent  Men  by  Nature  trea- 
cherous and  wild,  'tis  out  of  care  for  Mankind; 
left  by  being  too  tame  and  trii/ling,  they  ihou'd 
eafily  be  caught. 

Impostors  naturally  fpeak  the  beft  of  hu- 
man Nature,  that  they  may  the  eafier  abufe  it. 
Thefe  Gentlemen,  on  the  contrary,  fpeak  the 
worft;  and  had  rather  they  themfelves  fhou'd 
be  cenfur'd  with  the  reft,  than  that  a  Few  fhou'd 
by  impofture  prevail  over  the  Many.  For  'tis 
Opinion  of  Gcodnefs  *  which  creates  Eafinefs 
of  Truft :  and  by  Trujl  we  are  betray'd  to  Pow - 
er;  our  very  Reajon  being  thus  captivated  by 
thofe  in  whom  we  come  infenfibly  to  have  an 
implicit  Faith.  But  fuppofing  one  another  to  be 
by  Nature  fuch  very  Savages,  we  fhall  take  care 
to  come  lefs  in  one  another's  Power :  and  ap- 
prehending Power  to  be  infatiably  coveted  by  all, 
we  (hall  the  better  fence  againft  the  Evil ;  not 
by  giving  all  into  one  Hand  (as  the  Champion 


*  VOL.  II.  /'  334.  and  VOL.  III.  f.  114. 

of 


of  Wl  rand  HUMOUR.       95 

of  this  Caufe  wou'd  have  us)  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, by  a  right  Divifion  and  Balance  of  Pow- 
er, and  by  the  Reftraint  of  good  Laws  and  Li- 
mitations, which  may  fecure  the  publick  Li- 
berty. 

Shou'd  you  therefore  afk  me,  whether  I  re- 
ally thought  thefe  Gentlemen  were  fully  per- 
fuaded  of  the  Principles  they  fo  often  advance 
in  Company?  I  fhou'd  tell  you,  That  tho  I 
wou'd  not  abfolutely  arraign  the  Gentlemens 
Sincerity;  yet  there  was  fomething  of  Myflery 
in  the  Cafe,  more  than  was  imagin'd.  The 
Reafon,  perhaps,  why  Men  of  Wit  delight  fo 
much  to  efpoufe  thefe  paradoxical  Syitems,  is 
not  in  truth  that  they  are  fo  fully  fatisfy'd  with 
'em ;  but  in  a  view  the  better  to  oppofe  fome 
other  Syftems,  which  by  their  fair  appearance 
have  help'd,  they  think,  to  bring  Mankind  un- 
der Subjection.  They  imagine  that  by  this  ge- 
neral Sceptiafm,  which  they  wou'd  introduce, 
they  fhall  better  deal  with  the  dogmatical  Spi- 
rit which  prevails  in  fome  particular  Subjects. 
And  when  they  have  accuftom'd  Men  to  bear 
Contradiction  in  the  main,  and  hear  the  Nature 
of  Things  difputed,  at  large;  it  may  be  fafer 
(they  conclude)  to  argue fcparately,  upon  certain 
nice  Points  in  which  they  are  not  altogether  fo 
well  fatisfy'd.      So  that  from  hence,  perhaps, 

G  3  you 


g6     An  E  S  S  A  X  on  the  Freedom 

you  may  ftill  better  apprehend  why,  in  Con- 
verfation,  the  Spirit  of  Raillery  prevails  fo  much, 
and  Notions  are  taken  up  for  no  reafon  befides 
their  being  odd,  and  out  of  the  way. 

SECT.     III. 

BUT  let  who  will  condemn  the  Humour  thus 
defcrib'd;  for  my  part,  I  am  in  no  fuch 
apprehenfion  from  this  fceptical  kind  of  Wit. 
Men  indeed  may,  in  a  ferious  way,  be  fo  wrought 
on,  and  confounded,  by  different  Modes  of  Opi- 
nion, different  Syftems  and  Schemes  imposd  by 
Authority,  that  they  may  wholly  lofe  all  Notion 
or  Comprehenfion  of  Truth.  I  can  eafily  ap- 
prehend what  Effed  Awe  has  over  Mens  Under- 
ftandings.  I  can  very  well  fuppofe  Men  may 
be  frighted  out  of  their  Wits :  But  I  have  no 
apprehenfion  they  fhou'd  be  laugh'd  out  of 
'em.  I  can  hardly  imagine  that  in  a  plea- 
fant  way  they  fhou'd  ever  be  talked  out  of 
their  Love  for  Society,  or  reafon'd  out  of  Hu- 
manity and  common  Senfe.  A  mannerly  Wit  can 
hurt  no  Caufe  or  Interefl  for  which  I  am  in  the 
leaft  concern'd :  And  Philofophical  Speculati- 
ons, politely  manag'd,  can  never  furely  render 
Mankind  more  un-fociable  or  un-civiliz'd.  This 
is  not  the  Quarter  from  whence  I  can  pofTibly 
expecl  an  Inroad  of  Savagenefs  and  Barbarity. 
And  by  the  ben"   of  my  Obfervation,   I  have 

learnt, 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      97 

learnt,  that  Virtue  is  never  fuch  a  Suffeier, 
by  being  contejled,  as  by  being  betray  d.  My 
Fear  is  not  fo  much  from  its  witty  Antagonifts, 
who  give  it  Exercife,  and  put  it  on  its  De- 
fence, as  from  its  tender  Nurfes,  who  are 
apt  to  over-lay  it,  and  kill  it,  with  Excefs  of 
Care  and  Cherifhing. 

I  Have  known  a  Building,  which  by  the  Of- 
ficioufnefs  of  the  Workmen  has  been  fojhord, 
and  fcrew'd  up,  on  the  fide  where  they  pretend- 
ed it  had  a  Leaning,  that  it  has  at  lad  been 
turn'd  the  contrary  way,  and  overthrown. 
There  has  fomething,  perhaps,  of  this  kind 
happen'd  in  Morals.  Men  have  not  been  con- 
tented to  (hew  the  natural  Advantages  of 
Honefty  and  Virtue.  They  have  rather  lef- 
fen'd  thefe,  the  better,  as  they  thought,  to  ad- 
vance another  Foundation.  They  have  made 
Viitue  fo  mercenary  a  thing,  and  have  talk'd 
fo  much  of  its  Rewards,  that  one  can  hardly  tell 
what  there  is  in  it,  after  all,  which  can  be 
worth  rewarding.  For  to  be  brib'd  only  or  ter- 
rify'd  into  an  honeft  Praclice,  befpeaks  little 
of  real  Honefty  or  Worth.  We  may  make,  'tis 
true,  whatever  Bargain  we  think  fit;  and  may 
beftow  in  favour  what  Overplus  we  pleafe. 
But  there  can  be  no  Excellence  or  Wifdom  in 
voluntarily  rewarding  what  is  neither  efti- 
mable,  nor  deferving.  And  if  Virtue  be  not  re- 

G  4  ally 


98    An    E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

ally  eftimable  in  it-felf,  I  can  fee  nothing  efti- 

mab] 

gain. 


mable  in  following  it  for  the  fake  of  a  Bar- 


I  f  the  Love  of  doing  good,  be  not,  of  it- 
felf,  a  good  and  right  Inclination ;  I  know  not 
how  there  can  poffibly  be  fuch  a  thing  as  Good- 
nejs  or  Virtue.  If  the  Inclination  be  right;  'tis 
a  perverting  of  it,  to  apply  it  folely  to  the  Re- 
ward, and  make  us  conceive  fuch  Wonders  of 
the  Grace  and  Favour  which  is  to  attend  Vir- 
tue; when  there  is  fo  little  (hewn  of  the  in- 
trinfick  Worth  or  Value  of  the  Thing  it-felf. 

I  cou'd  be  almoft  tempted  to  think,  that 
the  true  Reafon  why  fome  of  the  moft  heroick 
Virtues  have  fo  little  notice  taken  of  'em  in 
our  holy  Religion,  is,  becaufe  there  wou'd  have 
been  no  room  left  for  Difinterejlednefs,  had  they 
been  intitled  to  a  fhare  of  that  infinite  Reward, 
which  Providence  has  by  Revelation  affign'd 
to  other  Dutys.   *  Private  Fricndjhip,  and  Tjai 

for 


By  Private  Friendjlip  no  fair  Reader  can  here  fuppofe  is  meant  that 
common  Benevolence  and  Charity  which  every  Chrifiian  is  obligd  to  fhew 
towards  ail  Men,  and  in  particular  towards  his  Fellow-Chriftians,  his 
Neighbour,  Brother,  and  Kindred,  o('  whatever  degree;  but  that  pecu- 
liar Relation  which  is  form'd  by  a  Confent  and  Harmony  of  Minds,  by 
mutual  Efteem,  and  reciprocal  Tendernefs  and  AffecHon  ;  and  which 
we  emphatically  call  aFRIENDSHIP.  Such  was  that  between  the  two 
jewi/h  Heroes  after  mention'd  whofe  Love  and  Tendernefs  wzsfurfajfing 

that 


of  WI T  and  II UMOU  R.      99 

for  the  Pablick,  and  cur  Ccimtry,  are  Virtues 
purely  voluntary  in  a  Chriftian.  They  are  no 
elTential  Parts  of  his  Charily.  He  is  not  fo  ty'd 
to  the  Affairs  of  this  Life;  nor  is  he  oblig'd  to 
enter  into  fuch  Engagements  with  this  lower 
World,  as  are  of  no  help  to  him  in  acquiring 
a  better.  His  Converfation  is  in  Heaven.  Nor 
has  he  occafion  for  fuch  fupernumerary  Cares 

or 


that  o/H'omen,  (2  Samuel,  ch.  1.)  Such  were  thofe  Friendfliips  defcrib'd 
fo  frequently  by  Poets,  between  Pylades  and  Oxestes,  Theseus 
and  Pirithous,  with  many  others.  Such  were  thofe  between  Philo- 
fophers, -Heroes,  and  the  greateft  of  Men;  between  Socrates  and  An - 
tist  h  exes,  Plato  and  Dion,  Epaminondas  and  Pelopibas, 
Sci  no  and  Laelius,  Cato  and  Brutus,  Thrasea  and  Helvi- 
bius.  And  luch  there  may  have  lately  been,  and  are  ftill  perhaps  in 
our  own  Age;  tho  Envy  fufferj  not  the  few  Examples  of  this  kind  to  be 
remark'd  in  pubiick.  The  Author's  Meaning  is  indeed  fo  plain  of  it- 
felf,  that  it  needs  no  explanatory  Apology  to  fatisfyan  impartial  Reader. 
As  for  others  who  object  the  Singularity  of  the  AiTertion,  as  differing 
(they  fuppofe)  from  what  our  Reverend  Doclors  in  Religion  commonly 
maintain,  they  may  read  what  the  learned  and  pious  Bifhop  Taylor  fays 
in  his  Treatife  of  Friendship.  "You  inquire,  fays  he,  how  far  a  dear 
"  and  a  perfect  Friendfhip  isauthoriz'd  by  the  Principles  of  Chriftianity  ? 
"  To  this  I  anfwer,  That  the  woid  FriendJJiip  in  the  Senfewe  commonly 
"  mean  by  it,  is  not  fo  much  as  nam'd  in  the  New  Tefiament ;  and  our 
4<  Religion  takes  no  notice  of  it.  You  think  it  urange  ;  but  read  on, 
"  before  you  fpend  fo  much  as  the  beginning  of  a  Paffion  or  a  Wonder 
,l  upon  it.  There  is  mention  of  Friend/hip  of  the  World;  and  it  is  faid 
"  to  be  Enmity  with  God:  but  the  Word  is  no  where  elfe  nam'd,  or  to 
"  any  other  purpofe,  in  all  the  New  Tehament.  It  fpeaks  of  Friends 
"  often  ;    but  by  Fiiends  are  meant  our  Acquaintance,  or  our  Kindred, 

"  the  Relatives  of  our  Family,  or  our  Fortune,  or  our  Seel,  be. ■ 

''  And  I  think  I  have   Reafon  to  be  confident,   that  the  word  Friend 

"  (fpeaking 


log   An  E  S  S  SA  T  on  the  Freedom 

or  Embaraflments  here  on  Earth,  as  may  ob- 
ftru6t  his  way  thither,  or  retard  him  in  the 
careful  Tafk  of  working  out  his  own  Salva- 
tion. If  neverthelefs  any  Portion  of  Reward  be 
referv'd  hereafter  for  the  generous  Part  of  a 
Patriot,  or  that  of  a  thorow  Friend;  this  is  dill 
behind  the  Curtain,  and  happily  conceaFd 
from  us  ;  that  we  may  be  the  more  deferving 
of  it,  when  it  comes. 


44  (fpeaking  of  human  Intercourfe)  is  no  otherways  tis'd  in  the  Gofpels, 
44  or  Epiftles,  or  A&s  of  the  Apofties.''  And  afterwards,  "  Chriltian 
t4  Charity  (fays  he)  is  Friendship  to  all  the  World.;  and  when  Friend- 
44  fhips  were  the  noblefl  things  in  the  World',  Charity  was  little,  like 
44  the  Sun  drawn  in  at  a  Chink,  or  his  Beams  drawn  into  the  Center  of 
"  a  Burning-glafs:  But  Chrillian  Charity  is  Friendfhip  expanded  like 
44  the  Face  of  the  Sun,  when  it  mounts  above  the  EaPtern  Hills.  *  In  re- 
ality the  good  Bifhop  draws  all  his  Notions  as  well  as  Examples  of  pri- 
vate Friendfhip  from  the  Heathen  World,  or  from  the  Times  preceding 
Chriflianity.  And  after  citing  a  Greek  Author,  he  immediately  adds: 
"  Of  ftich  immortal,  abftracted,  pure  Friendfhips,  indeed  there  is  no 
44  great  plenty  ;  but  they  who  are  the  fame  to  their  Friend  aVo7rpo0e», 
*4  when  he  is  in  another  Country,  or  in  another  World,  are  fit  to  pre- 
44  ferve  the  facred  Fire  for  eternal  Sacrifices,  and  to  perpetuate  the  Me- 
41  mory  of  thofe  exemplary  Friendfhips  of  the  beft  Men,  which  have 
"■  fill'd  the  World  with  Hiftory  and  Wonder:  for  in  no  other  fenfe  but 
14  this  can  it  be  true,  that  Friendfhips  are  pure  Loves,  regarding  to  do 
44  good  more  than  to  receive  it.  He  that  is  a  Friend  after  Ee.ith,  hopes 
44  not  for  a  Recompence  from  his  Friend,  and  makes  no  bargain  either 
44  for  Fame  or  Love;  but  is  rewarded  with  the  Confcience  and  Satisfac 
*'  tion  of  doing  bravely. 


It 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      101 

I  t  appears  indeed  under  the  Jewijh  Dif- 
penfation,  that  each  of  thefe  Virtues  had  their 
illuftrious  Examples,  and  were  in  fome  man- 
ner recommended  to  us  as  honourable,  and 
worthy  our  Imitation.  Even  Saul  himfelf, 
as  ill  a  Prince  as  he  is  reprefented,  appears 
both  living  and  dying  to  have  been  refpecled 
and  prais'd  for  the  Love  he  bore  his  native 
Country.  And  the  Love  which  was  fo  remark- 
able between  his  Son  and  his  Succeflbr,  gives 
us  a  noble  View  of  a  difinterefled  Friendfhip, 
at  lead  on  one  fide.  But  the  heroick  Virtue 
of  thefe  Perfons  had  only  the  common  Re- 
ward of  Praife  attributed  to  it,  and  cou  d  not 
claim  a  future  Recompence  under  a  Religion 
which  taught  no  future  State,  nor  exhibited 
any  Rewards  or  Punilhments,  befides  fuch  as 
were  Temporal,  and  had  refpecl  to  the  written 
Law. 

And  thus  the  Jews  as  well  as  Heathens  were 
left  to  their  Philofophy,  to  be  infuucled  in  the 
fublime  part  of  Virtue,  and  induc'd  by  Rea- 
fon  to  that  which  was  never  injoin'd  'em  by 
Command.  No  Premium  or  Penalty  being 
inforc'd  in  thefe  Cafes,  the  difmterefted  Part 
fubfiued,  the  Virtue  was  a  free  Choice,  and 
the  Magnanimity  of  the  Act  was  left  intire. 
He  who  wou'd  be  generous,  had  the  Means. 
He    who   wou'd    frankly  ferve   his  Friend,  or 

Country, 


102    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

Country,  at  the  *  expence  even  of  his  Life, 
might  do  it  on  fair  Terms.  +  Dulce  et  de- 
corum est  was  his  fole  Reafon.  'Twas  In- 
viting and  Becoming.  'Twas  Good  and  Honejl. 
And  that  this  is  ftill  a  good  Reafon,  and  ac- 
cording to  Common  Senfe,  I  will  endeavour  to 
fatisfy  you.  For  I  fhou'd  think  my-felf  very 
ridiculous  to  be  angry  with  any-one  for  think- 
ing me  difhoneft;  if  I  cou'd  give  no  account 
of  my  Honefty,  nor  fliew  upon  what  Principle 
I  differ'd  from  J  a  Knave. 


*  Peradventure  (fays  the  holy  ApoMc)  for  a  good  Man  one  wou'deven  dare 
todie,  t*'x«  ft?  k}  Totyia,  Sec.  Rom.  ch.  5.  ver.  7.  This  the  Apoftlejudi- 
cioufly  f up  poles  to  belong  to  human  Nature :  tho  he  is  fo  far  from  found- 
ing any  Precept  on  it,  that  he  ulhers  his  private  Opinion  with  a  very 
dubious  Peradventure. 

+  Ho  rat.  Lib.  3.  Od.  2. 

X  Inf.  p.  130,  131,  Sec.  172. 


PART 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     103 


PART      III. 

SECT.     I. 

TH  E  Roman  Satirift  may  be  thought  more 
than  ordinarily  fatirical,  when  fpeaking 
of  the  Nobility  and  Court,  he  is  fo  far  from  al- 
lowing them  to  be  the  Standard  of  Politenefs 
and  good  Senfe,  that  he  makes  'em  in  a  man- 
ner the  Reverfe, 

*Rarus  enim  ferme  Senfus  communis  in  ilia 
Fortuna 

Some  of  the  f  mod  ingenious  Commentators, 
however,  interpret  this  very  differently  from 
what  is  generally    apprehended.    They  make 

this 


*  Juv.  Sat.  8.  v.  73, 

t  Viz.  The  two  Cafaubons,  If.  and  Mer.  Salmajius,  and  our  Engli/h 
Gataker :  See  the  firftin  Capiiolinus,  Vit.  M.  Ant.  Jubfnem.  The  fecond 
in  his  Comment  on  M.  Ant.  lib.  I.  feci.  13,  8c  16.  Gataker  on  the  fame 
place;  and  Salmajius  in  the  lame  Life  of  Capitol 'inns,  at  the  end  of  his  An- 
"otations.  The  Greek  word  Ko(»o»o^o<7t/'n),  which  Salmajius  interprets, 
_   moderatam,  ufitatam  et  ordinariam  hominis  mentern  qua  in  commune 

"  quo- 


104  An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

this  Common  Senfe  of  the  Poet,  by  a  Greek  De- 
rivation, to  fignify  Senfe  of  Publick  Weal>  and  of 
the  Common  Inter  eft ;  Love  of  the  Community  or 
Society,  natural  Affection,  Humanity,  Qbliging- 
nefs,  or  that  fort  of  Civility  which  rifes  from  a 
juft  Senfe  of  the  common  Rights  of  Mankind, 
and  the  natural  Equality  there  is  among  thofe 
of  the  fame  Species. 

And  indeed  if  we  confider  the  thing  nicely, 
it  mud  feem  fomewhat  hard  in  the  Poet,  to 
have  deny'd  Wit  or  Ability  to  a  Court  fuch  as 

that 


"  quodammodo  confulit,  nee  omnia  ad  comraodum  fuum  refert,  refpec- 
lt  tnmque  etiam  habet  eorum  cum  quibus  verfatur,  modefte,  modicequc 
"  de  fe  fentiens.     At  contra  inflati  et  fitDerbi  omnes  fe  fibi  tantum  fuif- 

£ 

"  que  commodis  natos  arbitrantur,  et  pra;  fe  cateros  contemnunt  et  neg- 
"  ligunt;  et  hi  funtqui  Senjum  Communem  non  habere  re£te  dici  pofiunt. 
**  Nam  ita  Senfum  Communem.  accipit  Juvenalis,  Sat.  S.  Rants  enim  ferine 
"SENSUS  COMMUNIS,  be.  *>\xfyuvim  et  X?»roWa  Ga- 
4t  lenus  vocat,  quam  Marcus  de  fe  loquens  K-wovompotTVir,* ;  et  alibi,  ubi 
"  de  eadem  re  loquitur,  MeT^arrircc,  x£  Evfju^ovvvnv,  qua  gratiam  illi  fa- 
"  cerit  Marcus  fimul  eundi  ad  Germanicum  Bellum  ac  fequendi  fe. "  In 
the  fame  manner  Ifaac  Cafaubon :  Herodianus  (fays  he)  calls  this  the  to 
jA.irpoy  kJ  ia6[/.tT%ov.  "  Snbjicit  vero  Antoninus  quafi  hanc  vocem  inter pre- 
"  tans,  xj  to  e<p«cr9ai  t»*s  QiXois  pyre  a-vt^etirmv  ccv'tv  ibxv\o><;,  jujjts  ervrxiro- 
tl  o\j«fti<  s7T«Wxe$  . "  This,  lam  perfuaded,  is  the  Senjus  Communis  of  Ho- 
race (Sat.  3.  lib.  1.)  which  has  been  unobferv'd  (as  far  as  I  can  learn) 
by  any  of  his  Commentators:  it  being  remarkable  withal,  that  in  this 
early  Satire  of  Hor  a  ce,  before  his  latter  days,  and  when  his  Philofophy 
as  yet  inclin'd  to  the  lefs  rigid  Affertors  of  Virtue,  he  puts  this  Expref- 
fion  (as  may  be  feen  by  the  whole  Satir  taken  together)  into  the  Mouth 
ofa  Crifpinus,  or  fome  ridiculous  Mimick  of  that  fevere  Philofophy,  to 
which  the  Coinage  of  the  word  Konovov^ocrvyri  properly  belong'd.     For 

fo 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     105 

that  of  Rome,  even  under  a  Tiberius  or  a 
Nero.  But  for  Humanity  or  Senfe  of  Publuk 
Good,  and  the  common  Inter  eft  o£  Mankind,  'twas 
no  fuch  deep  Satir  to  queftion  whether  this 
was  properly  the  Spirit  of  a  Court.  'Twas  diffi- 
cult to  apprehend  what  Community  fubfifted 
among  Courtiers ;  or  what  Publick  between 
an  abfolute  Prince  and  his  Slave-Subjecls. 
And  for  real  Society,    there  cou'd  be  none  be- 


fo  the  Poet  again  {Sat.  4.  v.  77.)  ufes  the  word  SENSUS,  fpeaking  of 
thofe  who  without  Senfe  of  Manners,  or  common  Society,  without  the 
leaft  refpecl  or  deference  to  others,  prefs  rudely  upon  their  Friends,  and 
upon  all  Company  in  general,  without  regard  to  Time  or  Place,  or  any 
thing  befides  their  feififh  and  brutifh    Humour: 

Hand  Mud  qu&rentes,  numjine  S  E  N  S  £/, 

Tempore  num  faciant  alieno. avaiaflww?, 

as  old  Lambin  interprets  it,  tho  without  any  other  Explanation ;  refer- 
ring only  to  the  S.enjus  Communis  of  Horace  in  that  other  Satir.  Thus 
Senega  (Epift.  105.)  Odium  autem  ex  offenfaficvitabis,  neminem  lacejjendo 
gratuiio :  a  quo  te  S  E  JV  S  V  S  COMMUNIS  iuebitur.  And  C 1  - 
cero  accordingly,  JiiftitiiZ  paries  funt,  nonviolare  homines:  Verecundice, 
non  ojfendere.  Lib.  I .  de  Off.  It  may  be  objected  poffibiy  by  fome,  par- 
ticularly vers  d  in  the  Philofophy  above-mention 'd,  that  the  KoU&  Na«, 
to  which  the  KoHovori^oavvyj  feems  to  have  relation,  is  of  a  different  mean- 
ing. But  they  will  confider  withal  how  fmall  tiie  diftincliion  was  in  that 
Philofophy,  between  the  viroM^',  ■,  and  the  vulgar  ato-fltjat; ;  how  gene- 
rally PqJJion  was  by  thofe  Philofophers  brought  under  the  Head  of  Opi- 
nion. And  when  they  confider,  befides  this,  the  very  Formation  of  the 
word  Kaivotovpoauvi)  upon  the  Model  of  the  other  femaiiz'd  Virtues,  the 
EvfyuiAQtTotr),  £wf  jjscry>>j,   Aix«*ccn,'v>),    ire.    they  will   no  longer  hefitate  on 

this  Interpretation. The   Reader   may   perhaps   by   this  Note  fee 

better  why  the  Latin  Title  of  Senjus  Communis  has  been  given  to  this  fe- 
cond  Treatife.  He  may  obferve,  withal,  how  the  fame  Poet  Juvenal 
ufes  the  word  Seufus,  in  Sat.  15.  H&c  no/lri pars  optima  Seifus. 

tween 


io6  An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

tween  fuch  as  had  no  other  Senfe  than  that  of 
private  Good. 

Our  Poet  therefore  feems  not  fo  immoderate 
in  his  Cenfure;  if  we  conlider  it  is  the  Heart, 
rather  than  the  Head,  he  takes  to  tafk  :  when 
reflecting  on  a  C<n/r/-Education,  he  thinks  it 
unapt  to  raife  any  Aifeclion  towards  a  Country; 
and  looks  upon  young  Princes,  and  Lords,  as 
the  young  Mq/iers  of  the  World  ;  who  being  in- 
dulg'd  in  all  their  Paflions,  and  train'd  up  in  all 
manner  of  Licentioufnefs,  have  that  thorow 
Contempt  and  Difregard  of  Mankind,  which 
Mankind  in  a  manner  deferves,  where  Arbitra- 
ry Power  is  permitted,  and  a  Tyranny  ador'd. 

*  Heccfatis  ad  Juvenem,  quern  nobis  fama  fuper  bum 
Tradit,  et  inflatum,  plenumque  Nerone  propin- 
quo. 

A  publick  Spirit  can  come  only  from  a  fa- 
cial Feeling  or  Senfe  of  Partnerfhip  with  human 
Kind.  Now  there  are  none  fo  far  from  being 
Partners  in  this  Senfe,  or  Sharers  in  this  common 
Affection,  as  they  who  fcarcely  know  an  Equal, 
nor  confider  themfelves  as  lubjecl  to  any  Law 
of 'Fellowfhip  or  Community.  And  thus  Morali- 
ty and  good  Government  go  together.     There 

*Juv.  Sat.  8. 

is 


of  WIT  and  HUM  OU  R.      107 

is  no  real  Love  of  Virtue,  without  the  know- 
ledge of  Publick  Good.  And  where  abfolute 
Power  is,  there  is  no  Publick. 

They  who  live  under  a  'tyranny  and  have 
learnt  to  admire  its  Power  as  Sacred  and  Di- 
vine, are  debauch'd  as  much  in  their  Religion, 
as  in  their  Morals.  Publick  Good,  according  to 
their  apprehenfion,  is  as  little  the  Meafure  or 
R.ule  of  Government  in  the  Univerfe,  as  in  the 
State.  They  have  fcarce  a  Notion  of  what  is 
good  or  juft,  other  than  as  mere  Will  and.  Power 
have  determin'd.  Omnipotence,  they  think, 
wou'd  hardly  be  it-felf,  were  it  not  at  liberty  to 
*  difpenfe  with  the  Laws  of  Equity,  and  change 
at  pleafure  the  Standard  of  moral  Reclitude. 

But  notwithstanding  the  Prejudices  and 
Corruptions  of  this  kind,  'tis  plain  there  is 
fomething  (till  of  a  publick  Principle,  even  where 
it  is  mod  perverted  and  deprefs'd.  The  word 
of  Magiftracys,  the  mere  Defpotick  kind,  can  fhew 
fufficient  Inflances  of  Zeal  and  AfFeclion  to- 
wards it.  Where  no  other  Government  is 
known,  it  feldom  fails  of  having  that  Alle- 
giance and  Duty  paid  it,  which  is  Owing  to  a 
better  Form.  The  Eaflern  Countrys,  and  many 
barbarous  Nations,  have  been  and  flill  are 
Examples  of  this  kind.     The  pcrfonal  Love 

*  Inf.  pag.  298. 

Vol.  I.  H  the\ 


io8    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

they  bear  their  Prince,  however  fevere  towards 
them,  may  fhew  how  natural  an  Affection 
there  is  towards  Government  and  Order  a- 
mong  Mankind.  If  Men  have  really  no  pub- 
lick  Parent,  no  Magiftrate  in  common  to  che- 
rifli  and  protect  'em,  they  will  flill  imagine 
they  have  fuch  a  one;  and,  like  new-born 
Creatures  who  have  never  feen  their  Dam, 
will  fancy  one  for  themfelves,  and  apply  (as  by 
Nature  prompted)  to  fome  like  Form,  for  Fa- 
vour and  Protection.  In  the  room  of  a  true 
Fqfler-Falher,  and  Chief,  they  will  take  after  a 
falfe  one;  and  in  the  room  of  a  legal  Govern- 
ment  and  jiift  Prince,  obey  even  a  Tyrant,  and 
endure  a  whole  Lineage  and  Succeffion  of  fuch. 

As  for  us  Britons,  thank  Heaven,  we 
have  a  better  Senfe  of  Government  deliver' d 
to  us  from  our  Anceftors.  We  have  the  No- 
tion of  a  Public  k,  and  a  Constitution; 
how  a  Legijhtive,  and  how  an  Executive  is  mo- 
del'd.  We  underiland  Weight  and  Meafure  in 
this  kind,  and  can  reafon  juflly  on  the  Balance 
of  Poioer  and  Property.  The  Maxims  we  draw 
from  hence,  are  as  evident  as  thofe  in  Mathe- 
maticks.  Our  increafing  Knowledge  fliews  us 
everyday,  more  and  more,  what  Common 
Sense  is  in  Politicks:  And  this  mull  of  ne- 
ceffity  lead  us  to  underftand  a  like  Senfe  in 
Morals ;   which  is  the  Foundation. 

Tis 


of  WIT  and  HUM  OU  R     109 

Tis  ridiculous  to  fay,  there  is  any  Obliga- 
tion on  Man  to  act  fociably,  or  honeftly,  in  a 
form'd  Government ;  and  not  in  that  which  is 
commonly  call'd  *  the  State  of  Nature.  For,  to 
fpeak  in  the  fafhionable  Language  of  our  mo- 
dern Philofophy :  l '  Society  being  founded  on  a 
1 1  Compact ;  the  Surrender  made  of  every  Man's 
"  private  unlimited  Right,  into  the  hands  of 
"  the  Majority,  or  fuch  as  the  Majority  fhou'd 
lc  appoint,  was  of  free  Choice,  and  by  a  Pro- 
"  mife."  Now  the  Promife  it-felf  was  made  in  the 
State  of  Nature :  And  that  which  cou'd  make  a 
Promife  obligatory  in  the  State  of  Nature,  mull 
make  all  other  A61s  of  Humanity  as  much  our 
real  Duty,  and  natural  Part.  Thus  Faith,  Juf 
tice,  Honefly,  and  Virtue,  muft  have  been  as 
early  as  the  State  of  Nature,  or  they  cou'd  ne- 
ver have  been  at  all.  The  Civil  Union,  or  Confe- 
deracy, cou'd  never  make  Right  or  Wrong; 
if  they  fubtifled  not  before.  He  who  was  free 
to  any  Villany  before  his  Contract,  will,  and 
ought  to  make  as  free  with  his  Contracl,  when 
he  thinks  fit.  The  Natural  Knave  has  the  fame 
reafon  to  be  a  Civil  one;  and  may  difpenfe  with 
his  politick  Capacity  as  oft  as  he  fees  occafion : 

'Tis   only   his  Word  Hands  in  his  way. A 

Man  is  oblig'd  to  keep  hisWord.  Why?  Becaufe 


VOL.  II.  pi  306,  310,  be. 

H2  he 


no    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

he  has  given  his  Word  to  keep  it. Is  not  this 

a  notable  Account  of  the  Original  of  moral 
Juftice,  and  the  Rife  of  Civil  Government  and 
Allegiance! 


SECT.     II. 

BUT  to  pafs  by  thefe  Cavils  of  a  Philofo- 
phy,  which  fpeaks  fo  much  of  Nature  with 
fo  little  meaning;  we  may  with  juftice  furely 
place  it  as  a  Principle,  "  That  if  any  thing  be 
"  natural,  in   any  Creature,  or  any  Kind;    tis 
"  that  which  is  prefervative  of  the  Kind  it-felf, 
ct  and  conducing  to  its  Welfare  and  Support.  ' 
If  in  original  and  pure  Nature,  it  be  wrong  to 
breakaPromife,  or  be  treacherous  ;  'tis  as  truly 
wrong  to  be  in  any  refpecl  inhuman,  or  any  way 
wanting  in  our  natural  part   towards  human 
Kind.   I£ Eating  and  Drinking  be  natural,  Herd- 
ing is  fo  too.   If  any  Appetite  or  Senfe  be  natural, 
the  Senfe  of  Fellonfhip  is  thefame.    If  there  be  any 
thing  of  Nature  in  that  Affeclion  which  is  be- 
tween the  Sexes,  the  Affeclion  is  certainly  as  na- 
tural towards  the  confequent Offspring;  andfo 
again  between  theOffspringthemfelves,  as  Kin- 
dred and  Companions,   bred  under  the  fame 
Difcipline  and  Oeconomy.   And  thus  a  Clan  or 
"Tribe  is  gradually  form'd ;  a  Publick  is  recogniz'd : 
and  befides  the  Pleafure  found  in   focial  En- 
tertainment, Language,  and  Difcourfe,  there 

is 


•  of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.       in 

is  fo  apparent  a  Neceffity  for  continuing  this 
good  Correfpondency  and  Union,  that  to  have 
no  Senfe  or  Feeling  of  this  kind,  no  Love  of 
Country,  Community,  or  any  thing  in  common, 
wou'd  be  the  fame  as  to  be  infenfible  even  of 
the  plained  Means  of  Sclf-Prefervation,  and  moft 
neceffary  Condition  of  Self- Enjoyment. 

How  the  Wit  of  Man  fhou'd  fo  puzzle  this 
Caufe,  as  to  make  Civil  Government  and  So- 
ciety appear  a  kind  of  Invention,  and  Creature 
of  Art,  I  know  not.  For  my  own  part,  rae- 
thinks,  this  herding  Principle,  and  ajjociating 
Inclination,  is  feen  fo  natural  and  flrong  in 
mofl  Men,  that  one  might  readily  affirm,  'twas 
even  from  the  Violence  of  this  Paffion  that  fo 
much  Diforder  arofe  in  the  general  Society  of 
Mankind. 

Universal  Good,  or  the  Intereft  of  the 
World  in  general,  is  a  kind  of  remote  philofo- 
phical  Objecl.  That  greater  Community  falls  not 
eafily  under  the  Eye.  Nor  is  a  National  Inte- 
reft, or  that  of  a  whole  People,  or  Body  Politick, 
fo  readily  apprehended.  In  lefs  Party s,  Men 
may  be  intimately  converfant  and  acquainted 
with  one  another.  They  can  there  better  tafte 
Society,  and  enjoy  the  common  Good  and  In- 
tereft of  a  more  contracted  Publick,  They  view 
the  whole  Compafs  and  Extent  of  their  Com- 

H  3  munitv  • 


ii2    An  E  S  SA  T  on  the  Freedom 

munity;  and  fee,  and  know  particularly  whom 
they  ferve,  and  to  what  end  they  ajfociate  and 
confpire.  All  Men  have  naturally  their  (hare  of 
this  combining  Principle :  and  they  who  are  of 
the  fprightlieft  and  molt  aclive  Facultys,  have 
fo  large  a  (hare  of  it,  that  unlefs  it  be  happi- 
ly directed  by  right  Reafon,  it  can  never  find 
Exercifefor  it-felf  in  fo  remote  a  Sphere  as  that 
of  the  Body  Politick  at  large.  For  here  per- 
haps the  thoufandth  part  of  thofe  whofe  Inte- 
refts  are  concern'd,  are  fcarce  fo  much  as  known 
by  fight.  No  vifible  Band  is  form'd;  no  ftricl 
Alliance :  but  the  Conjunction  is  made  with 
different  Perfons,  Orders,  and  Ranks  of  Men; 
not  fenfibly,  but  in  Idea;  according  to  that 
general  View  or  Notion  of  a  State  or  Common- 
wealth. 

Thus  the  focial  Aim  is  difturb'd,  for  want 
of  certain  Scope.  The  clofe  Sympathy  and  con- 
Jpiring  Virtue  is  apt  to  lofe  it-felf,  for  want  of 
Direction,  in  fo  wide  a  Field.  Nor  is  the  Paf- 
fion  any-where  fo  ftrongly  felt,  or  vigoroufly 
exerted,  as  in  a.£t\ial  Conjpiracy  or  War;  in  which 
the  higheft  Genius's  are  often  known  the  for- 
warded to  employ  themfelves.  For  the  moft 
generous  Spirits  are  the  moft  combining.  They 
delight  mod  to  move  in  Concert;  and  feel  (if 
I  may  fo  fay)  in  the  flrongen  manner,  the 
force  of  the  confederating  Charm. 

Tis 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      113 

'Tis  flrange  to  imagine  that  War,  which  of 
all  things  appears  the  mofl  favage,  fhou'd  be 
the  Paffion  of  the  mofl  heroick  Spirits.  But 
'tis  in  War  that  the  Knot  of  FellouJJiip  is  clofeft 
drawn.  'Tis  in  War  that  mutual  Succour  is 
mofl  given,  mutual  Danger  run,  and  common 
Affection  mofl  exerted  and  employ 'd.  For  He- 
roifm  and  Philanthropy  are  almofl  one  and  the 
fame.  Yet  by  a  fmall  mif-guidance  of  the  Af- 
fection, a  Lover  of  Mankind  becomes  a  Rava- 
ger :  A  Hero  and  Deliverer  becomes  an  Op- 
preffor  and  Deflroyer. 

Hence  other  Divifions  amongfl Men.  Hence, 
in  the  way  of  Peace  and  Civil  Government,  that 
Love  of  Party,  and  Subdivifion  by  Cabal.  For 
Sedition  is  a  kind  of  cantonizing  already  begun 
within  the  State.  To  cantonize  is  natural ;  when 
the  Society  grows  va(l  and  bulky  :  And  power- 
ful States  have  found  other  Advantages  in  fend- 
ing Colonys  abroad,  than  merely  that  of  ha- 
ving Elbow-room  at  home,  or  extending  their 
Dominion  into  diflant  Countrys.  Vail  Em- 
pires are  in  many  refpecls  unnatural :  but  par- 
ticularly in  this,  That  be  they  ever  fo  well  con- 
flituted,  the  Affairs  of  many  mufl,  in  fuch  Go- 
vernments, turn  upon  a  very  few ;  and  the  Re- 
lation be  lefs  fenfible,  and  in  a  manner  loft,  be- 
tween the  Magiflrate  and  People,  in  a  Body  fo 

H  4  unwieldy 


ii4     ^n  ESSAY  on  the  Freedom 

unwieldy  in  its  Limbs,  and  whofe  Members 
lie  fo  remote  from  one  another,  and  diftant 
from  the  Head. 

'Ti  s  in  fuch  Bodys  as  thefe  that  ftrong  Fac- 
tions are  apteft  to  engender.  The  affociating 
Spirits,  for  want  of  Exercife,  form  new  Move- 
ments, and  feek  a  narrower  Sphere  of  Activity, 
when  they  want  Action  in  a  greater.  Thus  we 
have  Wheels  within  Wheels.  And  in  fome  Nati- 
onal Conftitutions  (notwithftanding  the  Ab- 
furdity  in  Politicks)  we  have  one  Empire  within 
another.  Nothing  is  fo  delightful  as  to  incor- 
porate. Dflinctions  of  many  kinds  are  invented. 
Religious  Society s  are  form'd.  Orders  are  e  reeled ; 
and  their  Intcrefts  efpous'd,  and  ferv'd,  with  the 
utmoft  Zeal  and  Pamon.  Founders  and  Patrons 
of  this  Sort  are  never  wanting.  Wonders  are 
perform'd  in  this  wrong  focial  Spirit,  by  thofe 
Members  of  feparate  Societys.  And  the  offici- 
ating Genius  of  Man  is  never  better  prov'd,  than 
in  thofe  very  Societys,  which  are  form'd  in  op- 
pofition  to  the  general  one  of  Mankind,  and 
to  the  real  Interefl  of  the  State. 

In  fhort,  the  very  Spirit  of  Faction,  for  the 
grcateft  part,  feems  to  be  no  other  than  the 
Abufe  or  Irregularity  of  that  focial  Love,  and 
common  Ajfeffiion,  which  is  natural  to  Mankind. 
For  the   Oppofite  of  Sociablenefs   is   Sclfifhnefs. 

And 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      115 

And  of  all  Characters,  the  thorow-felfifh.  one 
is  the  leaft  forward  in  taking  Party.  The  Men 
of  this  fort  are,  in  this  refpecl,  true  Men  of  Mo- 
deration. They  are  fecure  of  their  Temper; 
and  poiTefs  themfelves  too  well,  to  be  in  dan- 
ger of  entering  warmly  into  any  Caufe,  or  en- 
gaging deeply  with  any  Side  or  Faclion. 

SECT.     III. 

YOU  have  heard  it  (my  Friend!)  as  a  com- 
mon Saying,  that  Inter efl  governs  the  World. 
But,  I  believe,  whoever  looks  narrowly  into 
the  Affairs  of  it,  will  find,  that  Pajfion,  Humour, 
Caprice,  "X^eal,  Faction,  and  a  thoufand  other 
Springs,  which  are  counter  to  Self- Inter ejl,  have 
as  confiderable  a  part  in  the  Movements  of  this 
Machine.  There  are  more  Wheels  and  Coun- 
ter-Poifes  in  this  Engine  than  are  eafily  imagin'd. 
'Tis  of  too  complex  a  kind,  to  fall  under  one 
fimple  View,  or  be  explain'd  thus  briefly  in  a 
word  or  two,  The  Studiers  of  this  Mechanifm 
mull  have  a  very  partial  Eye,  to  overlook  all 
other  Motions  befides  thofe  of  the  loweft  and 
narroweft  compafs.  Tis  hard,  that  in  the  Plan 
or  Defcription  of  this  Clock-work,  no  Wheel 
or  Balance  fliou'd  be  allow'd  on  the  fide  of 
the  better  and  more  enlarg'd  Affeclion ;  that 
nothing  fhou'd  be  underilood  to  be  done  in 

Kindnefs 


n6    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

Kindnefs  or  Generofdy;  nothing  in  pure  Good-Na- 
ture or  Friendjhip,  or  thro'  any  Jbcial  or  natural 
Affection  of  any  kind  :  when,  perhaps,  the  main 
Springs  of  this  Machine  will  be  found  to  be 
either  thefe  very  natural  Affections  themfelves, 
or  a  compound  kind  deriv'd  from  them,  and 
retaining  more  than  one  half  of  their  Nature. 

But  here  (my  Friend!)  you  muft  not  expect 
that  I  fhou'd  draw  you  up  a  formal  *  Scheme 
of  the  PaJJions,  or  pretend  to  fhew  you  their 
Genealogy  and  Relation;  how  they  are  interwo- 
ven with  one  another,  or  interfere  with  our 
Happinefs  and  Intereft.  'Twou'd  be  out  of 
the  Genius  and  Compafs  of  fuch  a  Letter  as 
this,  to  frame  a  juft  Plan  or  Model;  by  which 
you  might,  with  an  accurate  View,  obferve 
what  Proportion  the  friendly  and  natural  Affec- 
tions feem  to  bear  in  this  Order  of  Architecture. 

Modern  Projectors,  I  know,  wou'd  willing- 
ly rid  their  hands  of  thefe  natural  Materials ; 
and  wou'd  fain  build  after  a  more  uniform  way. 
They  wou'd  new-frame  the  human  Heart ;  and 
have  a  mighty  fancy  to  reduce  all  its  Motions, 
Balances  and  Weights,  to  that  one  Principle 
and  Foundation  of  a  cool  and  deliberate  SelfiJIi- 
nefs.     Men,    it   feems,   are    unwilling  to  think 


*  See  the  fourth  Treatife,  viz.  Inquiry  concerning  Yirlure :   VOL.  II. 

they 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     117 

they  can  be  fo  outwitted,  and  impos'd  on  by 
Nature,  as  to  be  made  to  ferve  her  Purpofes, 
rather  than  their  own.  They  are  afham'd  to 
be  drawn  thus  out  of  themfelves,  and  forc'dfrom 
what  they  efleem  their  true  Inter  eft. 

There  has  been  in  all  times  a  fort  of  nar- 
row-minded Philofophers,  who  have  thought 
to  fet  this  Difference  to  rights,  by  conquering 
Mature  in  themfelves.  A  primitive  Father  and 
Founder  among;  thefe,  faw  well  this  Power  of 
*  Nature,  and  underftood  it  fo  far,  that  he  ear- 
neftly  exhorted  his  Followers  neither  to  beget 
Children,  nor  ferve  their  Country.  There 
was  no  dealing  with  Nature,  it  feems,  while 
thefe  alluring  Objecls  flood  in  the  way.  Re- 
lations, Friends,  Countrymen,  laws,  Politick  Con- 
Jlitutions,  the  Beauty  oj  Order  and  Government, 
and  the  Inter  eft  of  Society  and  Mankind,  were  Ob- 
jects which,  he  well  faw,  wou'd  naturally  raife 
a  ftronger  Affection  than  any  which  was 
grounded  upon  the  narrow  bottom  of  mere 
Self.  His  Advice,  therefore,  not  to  marry, 
nor  engage  at  all  in  the  Publick,  was  wife, 
arid  futable  to  hisDehgn.  There  was  no  way 
to  be  truly  a  Difciple  of  this  Philofophy,  but 
to  leave  Family,  Friends,  Country,  and  So- 
ciety, to  cleave  to  it. And,  in  good  earned, 


*  Supra,  pag.  49.  AndVOh.   II.  So.  VOL.   III.  52,  35,  &c. 

who 


n8    An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

who  wou'd  not,   if  it  were  Happinefs  to  do  fo  ? 
— The  Philofopher,  however,  was  kind,  in  tel- 
ling us  his  Thought.      'Twas   a  Token  of  his 
fatherly  Love  of  Mankind. 

*  Tu  Pater,  et  rcrum  Inventor  I  Tu  patria  nobis 
Suppeditas  prcecepta ! — 

But  the  Revivers  of  this  Philofophy  in  lat- 
ter Days,  appear  to  be  of  a  lower  Genius. 
They  feem  to  have  underflood  lefs  of  this  force 
of  Nature,  and  thought  to  alter  the  Thing,  by 
drifting  a  Name.  They  wou'd  fo  explain  all 
the  focial  PafTions,  and  natural  Affections,  as 
to  denominate  'em  oft  the  Jelfifli  kind.  Thus 
Civility,  Hofpitality,  Humanity  towards  Stran- 
gers or  People  in  diftrefs,  is  only  a  more  delibe- 
rate Selfiflmefs.  An  honed  Heart  is  only  a  more 
cunning  one :  and  Honefty  and  Good-Nature, 
a  more  deliberate,  or  be  Iter -regulated  Self- Love. 
The  Love  of  Kindred,  Children  and  Pofterity, 
is  purely  Love  of  Self  and  of  ones  own  immediate 
Blood :  As  if,  by  this  Reckoning,  all  Mankind 
were  not  included;  All  being  of  one  Blood,  and 
join'd  by  Inter-Marriages  and  Alliances;  as 
they  have  been  tranfplanted  in  Colonys,  and 
mix  d  one  with  another.      And  thus  Love  of 


*  Lucret.  lib.   3, 


t  Supra,  p.  SS.      And  VOL.  II.  p.  yio . 

ones 


of  W 1 1  and  HUMOUR.     119 

dies  Country,  and  Love  of  Mankind,  muft  alfo 
be  Self-Love.  Magnanimity  and  Courage,  no 
doubt,  are  Modifications  of  this  univerfal  Self- 
Love  I  For  *  Courage  (fays  our  modern  Philofo- 
pher)  is  conflant  Anger.  And  all  Men  (fays  t  a 
witty  Poet)  woud  be  Cowards  if  they  durfl. 

That  the  Poet,  and  the  Philofopher  both, 
were  Cowards,  may  be  yielded  perhaps  without 
difpute.  They  may  have  fpoken  the  bed  of  their 
Knowledge.  But  for  true  Courage,  it  has  fo 
little  to  do  with  Anger,  that  there  lies  always 
the  nrongeft  Sufpicion  againft  it,  where  this 
Paflion  is  higheft.  The  true  Courage  is  the 
cool  and  calm.  The  braved  of  Men  have  the 
leaf!  of  a  brutal  bullying  Infolence;  and  in 
the  very  time  of  Danger  are  found  the  moft 
ferene,  pleafant,  and  free.  Rage,  we  know, 
can  make  a  Coward  forget  himfelf  and  fight. 
But  what  is  done  in  Fury  or  Anger,  can  never 
be  plac'd  to  the  account  of  Courage.  Were 
it  otherwife,  Womankind  might  claim  to  be 
the  floutcfl  Sex:  for  their  Hatred  and  Anger 
have  ever  been  allow'd  the  dronged  and  moft 
lading. 

*  Sudden  Courage  (fays  Mr.  Hosbes,  Lev.  chap  6.)  is  Anger.  There- 
fore Courage  confider'd  as  conflant,  and  belonging  to  a  Character,  muft, 
in  his  account,  be  defin'd  conjiant  Anger,   or  Anger  conjlantly  returning. 

t  Lord  Rochester.    Satir  agab'Ji  Man. 

O  T  H  E  R 


120     An  E  S  SAT  on  the  Freedom 

Other  Authors  there  have  been  of  a  yet 
inferior  kind  :  a  fort  of  *  Diftributers  and  petty 
Retailers  of  this  Wit;  who  have  run  Changes, 
and  Divifions,  without  end,  upon  this  Article 
of  Self-Love.  You  have  the  very  fame  Thought 
fpun  out  a  hundred  ways,  and  drawn  into 
Motto's,  and  Devifes,  to  fet  forth  this  Riddle; 
That  "  act  as  difintereftedly  or  generoufly  as 
tl  you  pleafe,  Srtfiftijl  is  at  the  bottom,  and 
L'-  nothing  elfe."  Now  if  thefe  Gentlemen,  who 
delight  fo  much  in  the  Play  of  Words,  but  are 
cautious  how  they  grapple  clofely  with  Defini- 
tions, wou'd  tell  us  only  +  what  Self-Inter eft 
was,  and  determine  Happinefs  and  Good,  there 
wou'd  be  an  end  of  this  enigmatical  Wit.  For 
in  this  we  fhou'd  all  agree,  that  Happinefs  was 
to  be  purfu'd,  and  in  fact  was  always  fought 
after:  but  whether  found  in  following  Mature, 
and  giving  way  to  common  Affection;  or  in 
fuppreffing  it,   and  turning   every   Paffion  to* 


*  The  French  Translator  fuppofes  with  good  reafon,  That  our  Author, 
in  this  Paffage,  had  an  eye  to  thofe  Sentences,  or  Maxims,  which  pal's 
under  the  name  of  the  Duke  d  e  La  Roc h e fouc au lt .  He  has  added, 
withal,  the  Cenfure  of  this  kind  of  Wit,  and  of  thefe  Maxims  in  parti- 
cular, bv  fome  Authors  of  the  fame  Nation.  The  Paffages  are  too  long 
to  infert  here:  tho  they  arc  othcrwife  very  juft  and  entertaining.  That 
which  he  has  cited  of  old  Mont  a  i  gne,  is  from  the  firft  Chapter  of  his 
fecond  Effay. 

f  VOL.  II.  p.  22,  23,  &c.  7S,  79,  80,  8cc.  87,  Sec.  iog, 
140,   &c. 

wards 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     121 

wards  private  Advantage,  a  narrow  Self-End, 
or  the  Prefervation  of  mere  Life;  this  wou'd  be 
the  matter  in  debate  between  us.  The  Quef- 
tion  wou'd  not  be,  "■  Who  lovd  himfelf,  or 
lt  Who  not;"  but  "  Who  lov'd  and  ferv'dhim- 
"  felf  the   rightefl,   and  after   the   trueft   raan- 


"  ner. 


'Tis  the  height  of  Wifdom,  no  doubt,  to  be 
rightly  felffli.  And  to  value  Life,  as  far  as  Life 
is  good,  belongs  as  much  to  Courage  as  to  Dif- 
cretion.  But  a  wretched  Life  is  no  wife  Man's 
wifh.  To  be  without  Honcjly,  is,  in  effect,  to 
be  without  natural  Affection  or  Scciablenefs  of  any 
kind.  And  a  Life  without  natural  Affection, 
Friendpiip,  or  Sociablenefs,  wou'd  be  found  a 
wretched  one,  were  it  to  be  try  d.  'Tis  as 
thefe  Feelings  and  Affections  aie  intrinfecally 
valuable  and  worthy,  that  Self  Inter  efl  is  to  be 
rated  and  efteem'd.  A  Man  is  by  nothing  fo 
much  himfelf,  as  by  his  Temper,  and  the  Character 
of  his  Paffwns  and  Affections.  If  he  lofes  what 
is  manly  and  worthy  in  thefe,  he  is  as  much 
loft  to  himfelf  as  when  he  lofes  his  Memory 
and  Underftanding.  The  leaft  flep  into  Vil- 
lany  or  Bafenefs,  changes  the  Character  and 
Value  of  a  Life.  He  who  wou'd  preferve  Life 
at  any  rate,  muft  abufe  himfelf  more  than  any- 
one can  abufe  him.  And  if  life  be  not  a  dear 
thing  indeed,  he  who  has  refus'd  to  live  a  Vil- 
lain. 


122    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

lain,   and  has  preferd  Death  to  a  bafe  Aclion. 
has  been  a  gainer  by  the  bargain. 

S  E  C  T.     IV. 

">r  1  *IS  well  for  you  (my  Friend!)  that  in 
JL  your  Education  you  have  had  little  to 
do  with  the  *  Philofophy  or  Philofopliers  of  our 
days.  A  good  Poet,  and  an  honeft  Hiflorian, 
may  afford  Learning  enough  for  a  Gentleman. 
And  fuch  a  one,  whilft  he  reads  thefe  Authors 
as  his  Diverfion,  will  have  a  truer  relifti  of 
their  Senfe,  and  underftand  'em  better  than  a 
Pedant,  with  all  his  Labours,  and  the  afliftance 
of  his  Volumes  of  Commentators.  I  am  fen- 
fible,  that  of  old  'twas  the  cuftom  to  fend  the 
Youth  of  higheft  Quality  to  Philofopliers  to  be 
form'd.  Twas  in  their  Schools,  in  their  Com- 
pany, and  by  their  precepts  and  Example, 
that  the  illuurious  Pupils  were  inur'd  to  Hard- 
fhip,  and  exercis'd  in  the  fevereu  Courfes  of 
Temperance  and  Self-denial.  By  fuch  an 
early  Difcipline,  they  were  fitted  for  the  Com- 
mand of  others;  to  maintain  their  Country's 
Honour  in  War,  rule  wifely  in  the  State,  and 
fight  againft  Luxury  and  Corruption  in  times 


Our  Author,  it  fcems,  writes  at  prefcnt  as  to  a  young  Gentleman 
chiefly  of  a  Court-Breeding.  See,  however,  his  further  Sentiments  more 
particularly  in  Treatife  3.  'viz.  SOLILOQUY  infra,  pae.  ooo,  &c. 
m  the  Notes. 

Of 


of  IV IT, and  HUMOUR.      123 

of  Profperity  and  Peace.  If  any  of  thefe  Arts 
are  comprehended  in  Univetfity- Learning,  'tis 
well.  But  as  fome  Univerfitys  in  the  World 
are  now  model'd,  they  feem  not  fo  very  effec- 
tual to  thefe  Purpofes,  nor  fo  fortunate  in  pre- 
paring for  a  right  Practice  of  the  World,  or  a 
juft  Knowledge  of  Men  and  Things.  Had  you 
been  thorow-pac'd  in  the  Ethicks  or  Politicks  of 
the  Schools,  I  fhou'd  never  have  thought  of 
writing  a  word  to  you  upon  Common  Senfe,  or 
the  Love  of  Mankind.  I  fhou'd  not  have  cited 
*  the  Poet's  Dulce  et  Decorum.  Nor,  if  I  had 
made  a  Character  for  you,  as  he  for  his  noble 
Friend,  fhou  d  I  have  crown'd  it  with  his 

f  Non  Me  pro  caris  Amicis, 
Aut  Patria  timulus  perire. 

Our  Philofophy  nowa-days  runs  after  the 
manner  of  that  able  Sophiiter,  who  faid,  J 
lt  Skin  for  Skin:  All  that  a  Man  has  will  he  give 
"for  his  Life"  'Tis  orthodox  Divinity,  as  well 
as  found  Philofophy,  with  fome  Men,  to  rate 
Life  by  the  Number  and  Exquifitenefs  of  the 
pleafmg  Senfations.  Thefe  they  conftantly  let 
in  oppofition  to  dry  Virtue  and  Honejiy.  And 
upon  this  foot,  they  think  it  proper  to  call  all 
Men  Fools,  who  wou'd  hazard  a  Life,  or  part 

*  Sup.  pag.  102.  tHor.  Lib.  4.  Od.  9. 

+  Job.  ch.  ii.  vcr.  4. 

Vol.   I.  I  with 


1 24     An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

with  any  of  thefe  pleqfing  Sulfations;  except  on 
the  condition  of  being  repaid  in  the  fame  Coin, 
and  with  good  Intereil  into  the  bargain.  Thus, 
it  feems,  we  are  to  learn  Virtue  by  Ufury ; 
and  inhance  the  Value  of  Life,  and  of  the  Plea- 
Jure s  of  Senfe,  in  order  to  be  wife  and  to  live 
well. 

But  you  (my  Friend!)  are  nubborn  in  this 
Point :  and  inllead  of  being  brought  to  think 
mournfully  of  Death,  or  to  repine  at  the  Lofs 
of  what  you  may  fometimes  hazard  by  your 
Honefty,  you  can  laugh  at  fuch  Maxims  as 
thefe;  and  divert  your- felf  with  the  improv'd 
Selfifhnefs,  and  philofophical  Cowardice  of 
thefe  fafhionable  Moralifts.  You  will  not  be 
taught  to  value  Life  at  their  rate,  or  degrade 
Honesy  as  they  do,  who  make  it  only  a  Name. 
You  are  perfuaded  there  is  fomething  more  in 
the  Thing  than  Fafliion  or  Applaufe;  that 
Worth  and  Merit  are  fubflantial,  and  no 
way  variable  by  Fancy  or  Will;  and  that  Hon- 
our is  as  much  it-felf,  when  acling  by  it~felj\ 
and  wife en,  as  when  feen,  and  applauded  by 
all  the  World. 

Shou'd  one,  who  had  the  Countenance  of 
a  Gentleman,  afk  me  "  Why  I  wou'd  avoid 
41  being  nafly,  when  nobody  was  prefent?1'  In 
the  firft  place  I  fhou'd  be  fully  fatisfy'd  that  he 

himfelf 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     125 

himfelf  was  a  very  nafty  Gentleman  who  cou'd 
afk  this  Queftion;  and  that  itwou'd  be  a  hard 
matter  for  me  to  make  him  ever  conceive  what 
true  Clcanlinefs  was.  However,  I  might,  not- 
withftanding  this,  be  contented  to  give  him  a 
flight  Anfwer,  and  fay,  "  'Twas  becaufe  I  had 
Nofe."  Shou'd  he  trouble  me  further,  and 

afk  again,  tc  What  if  I  had  a  Cold?  Or  what 
"  if  naturally  I  had  nofuchnice  Smell?" 
I  might  anfwer  perhaps,  tc  That  I  card  as  lit- 
■c  tie  to  fee  my-felf  nqfiy,  as  that  others  fhou'd 
tc  fee  me  in  that  condition."  But  what  if 

it  were    in   the  dark?  Why   even  then, 

tho  I  had  neither  Nofe,  nor  Eyes,  my  Senfe  of 
the  matter  wou'd  full  be  the  fame ;  my  Nature 
wou'd  rife  at  the  Thought  of  what  was  fordid: 
or  if  it  did  not,  I  fhou'd  have  a  wretched  Na- 
ture indeed,  and  hate  my-felf  for  a  Beaft.  Hon- 
our my-felf  I  never  cou'd  ;  whilft  I  had  no  bet- 
ter a  fenfe  of  what,  in  reality,  I  ow'd  my-felf, 
and  what  became  me,  as  a  human  Creature. 

Much  in  the  fame  manner  have  I  heard  it 
afk'd,  Why  fJwud  a  Man  be  honefl  in  the  dark? 

What  a  Man  mufl  be  to  afk  this  Queftion, 
I  won't  fay.  But  for  thofe  who  have  no  bet- 
ter a  Reafon  for  being  honefl  than  the  fear  of 
a  Gibbet  or  a  Jail;  I  fhou'd  not,  I  confefs  much 
covet  their  Company,  or  Acquaintance.  And 
if  anv   Guardian   of  mine  who  had   kept  his 

I  2  Truft, 


iu6   An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

Truft,  and  given  me  back  my  Eftate  when  I 
came  of  Age,  had  beendifcover'dto  haveacled 
thus,  thro'  Fear  only  of  what  might  happen  to 
him ;  I  fhou'd  for  my  own  part,  undoubtedly, 
continue  civil  and  refpeclful  to  him  :  but  for 
my  Opinion  of  his  Worth,  it  wou'd  be  fuch 
as  the  Pythian  God  had  of  his  Votary,  who 
devoutly  feard  him,  and  therefore  reftor'd  to  a 
Friend  what  had  been  depofited  in  his  hands. 

*  Reddidit  ergo  metu,    non  moribus ;  et  tamen 

omnem 
Vocem  adyti  dignam  templo,  veramque  probavit, 
Ext  infills  tota  par  iter  cum  prole  domoque. 


I  know  very  well  that  many  Services  to 
the  Publick  are  done  merely  for  the  fake  of  a 
Gratuity;  and  that  Informers  in  particular  are 
to  be  taken  care  of,  and  fometimes  made  Pen- 
Jioners  of  State.  But  I  muu  beg  pardon  for  the 
particular  Thoughts  I  may  have  of  thefe  Gen- 
tlemens  Merit;  and  fhall  never  bellow  my 
Efteem  on  any  other  than  the  voluntary  Difco- 
verers  of  Villany,  and  hearty  Profecutors  of 
their  Country's  InterefL  And  in  this  refpecl, 
I  know  nothing  greater  or  nobler  than  the 
undertaking   and  managing  fome    important' 


'•■"Jur.  Sat.  13, 

Ac- 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      127 

Accufation  ;  by  which  fome  high  Criminal  of 
State,  or  fome  form'd  Body  of  Confpirators 
againft  the  Publick,  may  be  arraign'd  and 
brought  to  Punifhment,  thro'  the  honed  Zeal 
and  publick  Affection  of  a  private  Man. 

I  know  too,  that  the  mere  Vulgar  of  Man- 
kind often  fland  in  need  of  fuch  a  rectifying 
Object  as  the  Gallows  before  their  Eyes.  Yet 
I  have  no  belief,  that  any  Man  of  a  liberal 
Education,  or  common  Honefly,  ever  needed 
to  have  recourfe  to  this  Idea  in  his  Mind,  the 
better  to  reftrain  him  from  playing  the  Knave. 
And  if  a  Saint  had  no  other  Virtue  than 
what  was  rais'd  in  him  by  the  fame  Objects 
of  Reward  and  Punifhment,  in  a  more  diftant 
State;  I  know  not  whofe  Love  or  Efleem  he 
might  gain  befides :  but  for  my  own  part,  I 
fliou'd  never  think  him  worthy  of  mine. 

Nee  fur  turn  feci,  nee  fugi.fi  mild  dicat 
Servus:  Habes  pretium,   loris  non  uteris,  did. 
Non  hominem  occidi:  Non  pafces  in  cruce  corvos. 
Sum  bonus  et  frugi:  Renuit,    negat  atque  Sa~ 
bellus.  Hor.   Epift.  i(v 


I  3  PART 


128     An  E  S  S  AT  on  the  Freedom 

PART        IV. 

SECT.     I. 

BY  this  time  (my  Friend !)  you  may  poffibly, 
I  hope,  be  fatisfy'd,  that  as  I  am  in  earn- 
ed in  defending  Raillery,  fo  I  can  be  fober  too 
in  the  Ufe  of  it.   Tis  in  reality  a  ferious  Stu- 
dy, to  learn  to  temper  and  regulate  that  Hu- 
mour which   Nature  has  given  us,  as   a  more 
lenitive   Remedy  againft   Vice,  and  a  kind  of 
Specifick  againft  Superftition  and  melancholy 
Delufion.  There  is  a  great  difference  between 
feeking  how  to  raife  a  Laugh  from  every  thing ; 
and  feeking,  in  every  thing,  what  juftly  maybe 
laugh'd  at.      For  nothing  is  ridiculous  except 
what  is  deform'd :   Nor  is  any  thing  proof  a- 
gainft   Raillery,    except  what   is  handfom   and 
juft.  And   therefore    'tis  the  harden  thing  in 
the  World,  to  deny  fair  Honesty  the  ufe  of 
this  Weapon,  which  can  never  bear  an  Edge 
againft  her-felf,  and  bears  againft  every   thing 
contrary. 

IE 


of  W 1 T  and  HUMOU  R.      129 

If  the  very  Italian  Buffoons  were  to  give  us 
the  Rule  in  thefe  cafes,  we  fhou'd  learn  bv 
them,  that  in  their  loweft  and  mofl  fcurrilous 
way  of  Wit,  there  was  nothing  fo  fuccefsfully 
to  be  play'dupon,  as  the  Paflions  of  Cowardice 
and  Avarice.  One  may  defy  the  World  to  turn 
real  Bravery  or  Generqfity  into  Ridicule.  A 
Glutton  or  mere  Senfualilt  is  as  ridiculous  as 
the  other  two  Characters.  Nor  can  an  unaf- 
fected Temperance  be  made  the  Subject  of  Con- 
tempt to  any  befides  the  groffefl  and  mofl  con- 
temptible of  Mankind.  Now  thefe  three  Ingre- 
dients make  up  a  virtuous  Character:  as  the 
contrary  three  a  vicious  one.  How  therefore 
can  we  poflibly  make  a  Jell:  of  Honefty? — ■ 
To  laugh  both  ways,  is  nonfenfical.  And  if  the 
Ridicule  lie  againft  Sotti/Jinefs,  Avarice,  and  Cow- 
ardice; you  fee  the  Confequence.  A  Man  muff 
be  foundly  ridiculous,  who,  with  all  the  Wit 
imaginable,  wou'd  go  about  to  ridicule  Wif- 
dom,  or  laugh  at  Honefty,  or  Good  Manners. 

A  Man  of  thorow  *  Good-Breeding,  what- 
ever elfe  he  be,  is  incapable  of  doing  a  rude 
or  brutal  Aclion.  He  never  deliberates  in  this 
cafe,  or  confiders  of  the  matter  by  prudential 
Rules  of  Self-Intereft  and  Advantage.  He  acls 
from  his  Nature,  in  a  manner  neceffarily,  and 

-VOL.  III.  p.  161,  162. 

I  4  without 


130    An  E  S  S  A  Y  on  the  Freedom 

without  Reflexion :  and  if  he  did  not,  it  were 
impoffible  for   him   to  anfwer  his   Character, 
or  be  found  that  truly  well-bred  Man,  on  every 
occafion.    'Tis    the   fame  with  the  honejl  Man. 
He  can't  deliberate  in  the  Cafe  of  a  plain  Vil- 
lany.    A  Plum   is  no  Temptation  to  him.    He 
likes    and   loves   himfelf  too  well,  to  change 
Hearts  with  one  of  thofe  corrupt  Mifcreants, 
who  amongfl  'em  gave  that  name  to  a  round 
Sum  of  Money  gain'd  by  Rapine  and  Plunder 
of  the  Commonwealth.    He  who  wou'd  enjoy 
a  Freedom  of  Mind,  and  be  truly  PoJJcJjbr  of  him- 
felf, mud  be  above  the  thought  of  (looping  to 
what  is  villanous  or    bafe.     He,   on  the  other 
fide,  who  has  a  Heart  to  Hoop,  mull  necedarily 
quit  the  thought  of  Manhnejs,  Refolution,  Friend- 
fnp,   Merit,   and    a    Character  with    himfelf  and 
others:  But  to  affecl  thefe  Enjoyments  and  Ad- 
vantages, together  with  the  Privileges  of  a  li- 
centious Principle;   to  pretend  to  enjoy  Society, 
and  a  free  Mind,  in  company    with  a  knavifli 
Heart,  is  as  ridiculous  as  the  way  of  Children, 
who  eat  their  Cake,  and  afterwards  cry  for  it. 
When  Men  begin  to  deliberate  about  Diihonefty, 
and  finding  it  go  lefs  againft  their  Stomach, 
afk  flily,    li  Why  they  fhou'd  flick  at  a  good 
41  Piece  of  Knavery,  for  a  good  Sum?"  They 
fhou'd  be  told,  as  Children,  that  They  cant  eat 
their  Cake,  and  have  iU 

When 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      131 

When  Men,  indeed,  are  become  accompliflid 
Knaves,  they  are  pail  crying  for  their  Cake.  They 
know  them/elves,  and  are  known  by  Mankind. 
'Tis  not  thefe  who  are  fo  much  envy'd  or  ad- 
mir'd.  The  moderate  Kind  are  the  more  taking 
with  us.  Yet  had  we  Senfe,  we  mould  confi- 
der  'tis  in  reality  the  thorow  profligate  Knave, 
the  very  compleat  unnatural  Villain  alone,  who 
can  any  way  bid  for  Happinefs  with  the  ho- 
neft  Man.  True  Intereft  is  wholly  on  one  Tide, 
or  the  other.  All  between  is  *  Inconfiilency,  Ir- 
refolution,  Remorfe,  Vexation,  and  an  Ague- 
Fit:  from  hot  to  cold;  from  one  Paffion  to  a- 
nother  quite  contrary;  a  perpetual  Difcord  of 
Life ;  and  an  alternate  Difquietand  Self-diflike. 
The  only  Reft:  or  Repofe  mull  be  thro'  one,  de- 
termin'd,  confiderate  Refolution :  which  when 
once  taken,  mufl  be  courageoufly  kept ;  and 
thePaffions  and  Affections  brought  under  obe- 
dience to  it;  the  Temper  fleel'd  and  harden'd 
to  the  Mind;  the  Difpofition  to  the  Judgment. 
Both  muft  agree;  elfe  all  muft  be  Diiturbance 
and  Confufion.     So   that  to  think  with  one's 


"  Our  Author's  French  Tranflator  cites,  on  this  occafion,  very  aptly 
thole  Verfes  of  Horace,  Sat.  7.  Lib.  2. 

-Qjianto  conjlantior  idem 


In  vitiis,  tanto  levius  mifer,  ac  prior  il/o 
Qui  jam  conttnto,  jam  laxofune  laborat. 

felf 


132     An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

felf,  in  good  earrncft,  "  Why  may  not  one  do 
41  this  little  Villany,  or  commit  this  one  Trea- 
"  chery,  and  but  for  once-"  is  the  mofl  ridicu- 
lous Imagination  in  the  World,  and  contrary 
to  Common  Sense.  For  a  common  honefl 
Man,  whilfi  left  to  himfelf,  and  undifturb'd  by 
Philofophy  and  fubtle  Reafonings  about  his 
Intereft,  gives  no  other  Anfwer  to  the  thought 
of  Villany,  than  that  he  cant  pojfiblyfind  in  his 
heart  to  fet  about  it,  or  conquer  the  natural 
Averlion  he  has  to  it.  And  this  is  natural 
and  jyft. 

The  truth  is;  as  Notions  ftand  now  in  the 
world,  with  refpecl  to  Morals,  Honefty  is  like 
to  gain  little  by  Philofophy,  or  deep  Specula- 
tions of  any  kind.  In  the  main,  'tis  beft  to 
flick  to  Common  Senfe,  and  go  no  further.  Mens 
firft  Thoughts,  in  this  matter,  are  generally 
better  than  their  fecond:  their  natural  No- 
tions better  than  thofe  refin'd  by  Study,  or 
Confultation  with  Cafuifts.  According  to  com- 
mon Speech,  as  well  as  common  Senfe,  Honefty 
is  the  beft  Policy:  But  according  to  refin'd  Senfe, 
the  only  well-advisd  Perfons,  as  to  this  World, 
are  errant  Knaves;  and  they  alone  are  thought 
to  ferve  themfelves,  who  ferve  their  Paffions, 
and  indulge  their  loofefl  Appetites  and  De- 
fires. Such,  it  feems,  are  the  Wife,  and  fuch 

the  Wifdom  of  this  World! 

An 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     133 

An  ordinary  Man  talking  of  a  vile  A&ion, 
in  a  way  of  Common  Senfe,  fays  naturally  and 
heartily,  lt  He  wou'd  not  be  guilty  of  fuch  a 
"  thing  for  the  whole  World/'  But  Jpeculative 
Men  find  great  Modifications  in  the  cafe ;  many 
ways  of  Evafion;  many  Remedys ;  many  Al- 
leviations. A  good  Gift  rightly  apply'd;  a  right 
Method  of  fuing  out  a  Pardon;  good  Alms- 
Houfes,  and  charitable  Foundations  erecled 
for  right  Worfhippers ;  and  a  good  Zeal  (hewn 
for  the  right  Belief',  may  fufficiently  atone  for 
one  wrong  Practice;  efpecially  when  it  is  fuch 
as  raifes  a  Man  to  a  confiderable  power  (as 
they  fay)  of  doing  good,  andferving  the  true  Caufe. 

Many  a  good  Eftate,  many  a  high  Station 
has  been  gain'd  upon  fuch  a  Bottom  as  this. 
Some  Crowns  too  may  have  been  purchas'd  on 
thefe  Terms:  and  fome  great  *  Emperors  (if  I 
miftake  not)  there  have  been  of  old,  who  were 
much  affifted  by  thefe  or  the  like  Principles  ; 
and  in  return  were  not  ingrateful  to  the  Caufe 
and  Party  which  had  affifled  'era.  The  Forgers 
of  fuch  Morals  have  been  amply  endowed: 
and  the  World  has  paid  roundly  for  its  Phi- 
lofophy;  fince  the  original  plain  Principles  of 
Humanity,  and  the  fimple  honeft  Precepts  of 


xVOL.  111.^.78,79,90,91.. 

Peace 


134   An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

Peace  and  mutual  Love,  have,  by  a  fort  of  fpi- 
ritual  Chymifts,  been  fo  fublimated,  as  to  be- 
come the  higheft  Corrofives ;  and  paffing  thro' 
their  Limbecks,  have  yielded  the  ftrongeft  Spi- 
rit of  mutual  Hatred  and  malignant  Perfecution. 

SECT.     II. 

UT  our  Humours  (my  Friend!)  incline  us 
not  to  melancholy  Reflections.  Let  the 
[olemn  Reprovers  of  Vice  proceed  in  the  man- 
ner mod  futable  to  their  Genius  and  Cha- 
racter. I  am  ready  to  congratulate  with  'em 
on  the  Succefs  of  their  Labours,  in  that  autho- 
ritative wav  which  is  allow'd  'em.  I  know  not, 
in  the  mean  while,  why  others  may  not  be  al- 
low'd to  ridicule  Folly,  and  recommend  Wif- 
dom  and  Virtue  (if  poflibly  they  can)  in  a  way 
of  Pleafantry  and  Mirth.  I  know  not  why  Po- 
ets, or  fuch  as  write  chiefly  for  the  Entertain- 
ment of  themfelves  and  others,  may  not  be  al- 
low'd this  Privilege.  And  if  it  be  the  Com- 
plaint of  our  Jlanding  Reformers,  that  they  are 
not  heard  lb  well  by  the  Gentlemen  of  FaJJiion; 
if  they  exclaim  againfl  thofe  airy  Wits  who  fly 
to  Ridicule  as  a  Protection,  and  make  fuccefs- 
ful  Sallys  from  that  Quarter;  why  fhou'd  it  be 
deny'd  one,  who  is  only  a  Volunteer  in  this 
Caufe,  to  engage  the  Adverfary  on  his  own 
terms,  and  expofe  himfelf  willingly  to  fuch  At- 
tacks, 


of  W I T  and  HUMOUR.      135 

tacks,  on  the  (ingle  condition  of  being  allow'd 
fair  Play  in  the  fame  kind? 

By  Gentlemen  of  Fafhion,  I  underftand  thofe 
to  whom  a  natural  good  Genius,  or  the  Force 
of  good  Education,  has  given  a  Senfe  of  what  is 
naturally  graceful  and  becoming.  Some  by  mere 
Nature,  others  by  Art  and  Practice,  are  Matters 
of  an  Ear  in  Mufick,  an  Eye  in  Painting,  a  Fan- 
.cy  in  the  ordinary  things  of  Ornament  and 
Grace,  a  Judgment  in  Proportions  of  all  kinds, 
and  a  general  good  Tafte  in  mod  of  thofe  Sub- 
jects which  make  the  Amufement  and  Delight 
of  the  ingenious  People  of  the  World.  Let 
fuch  Gentlemen  as  thefe  be  as  extravagant  as 
they  pleafe,  or  as  irregular  in  their  Morals ; 
they  muff  at  the  fame  time  difcover  their  In- 
confiflency,  live  at  variance  with  themfelves, 
and  in  contradiction  to  that  Principle,  on  which 
they  ground  their  higheft  Pleafure  and  Enter- 
tainment. 

Of  all  other  Beautys  which  Virtuofos  purfue, 
Poets  celebrate,  Muficians  fing,  and  Architects  or 
Artifls,  of  whatever  kind,  defcribe  or  form;  the 
mofl  delightful,  the  mod  engaging  and  pathe- 
tick,  is  that  which  is  drawn  from  real  Life,  and 
from  the  PaJJions.  Nothing  affecls  the  Heart  like 
that  which  is  purely  from  it-Jelf  and  of  its  own 
nature;  fuch  as  the  Beauty  of  Sentiments,  the  Grace 

of 


136    An  E  S  S  SA  T  on  the  Freedom 

of Actions,  the  Turn  of  Characters,  and  the  Propor- 
tions and  Features  of  a  hu?nan  Mind.  This  LefTon 
of  Philofophy,  even  a  Romance,  a  Poem,  or  a 
Play  may  teach  us ;  whilft  the  fabulous  Author 
leads  us  with  fuch  pleafure  thro'  the  Labyrinth 
of  the  Affections,  and  intereils  us,  whether  we 
will  or  no,  in  the  Paffions  of  his  Heroes  and 
Heroines : 


■Angit, 


Irritat,  muled,  faljis  terroribus  implet, 
Ut  Magus. 

Let  Poets,  or  the  Men  of  Harmony,  deny, 
if  they  can,  this  Force  of  Nature,  or  withfland 
this  moral  Magick.  They,  for  their  parts,  car- 
ry a  double  portion  of  this  Charm  about  'em, 
For  in  the  firft  place,  the  very  Paffion  which 
infpires  'em,  is  it-felf  the  Love  of  Numbers,  De- 
cency and  Proportion;  and  this  too,  not  in  a  nar- 
row fenfe,  or  after  a  felfifli  way,  (for  who  of 
them  compofes  for  JwnfelffJ  but  in  a  friendly 
focial  View ;  for  the  Pleafure  and  Good  of  others; 
even  down  to  Polferity,  and  future  Ages.  And 
in  the  next  place,  'tis  evident  in  thefe  Perform- 
ers, that  their  chief  Theme  and  Subject,  that 
which  raifes  their  Genius  the  moft,  and  by 
which  they  fo  effectually  move  others,  is  pure- 
ly Manners,   and  the  moral  Part.     For  this  is 

*  Hot.  E0.   1.  lib.  *. 

the 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     i37 

the  Effecl,  and  this  the  Beauty  of  their  Art ; 
"  in  vocal  Meafures  of  Syllables,  and  Sounds, 
tl  to  exprefs  the  Harmony  and  Numbers  of  an 
il  inward  kind;  and  reprefent  the  Beautys  of 
Ci  a  human  Soul,  by  proper  Foils,  and  Con- 
tl  trarietys,  which  ferve  as  Graces  in  this  Lim- 
41  ning,  and  render  this  Mufick  of  the  Paffions 
lt  more  powerful  and  enchanting." 

The  Admirers  of  Beauty  in  the  Fair  Sex, 
wou'd  laugh,  perhaps,  to  hear  of  a  moral  Part 
in  their  Amours.  Yet,  what  a  ftir  is  made  about 
a  Heart!  What  curious  fearchof  Sentiments,  and 
tender  Thoughts'.  What  praifes  of  a  Humour,  a 
Senfe,  a  je-ne-fcai-quoi  of  Wit,  and  all  thofe 
Graces  of  a  Mind  which  thefe  Virtuofo-Lovers 
delight  to  celebrate !  Let  them  fettle  this  mat- 
ter among  themfelves ;  and  regulate,  as  they 
think  fit,  the  Proportions  which  thefe  different 
Beautys  hold  one  to  another:  They  muft  allow 
ftill,  there  is  a  Beauty  of  the  Mind;  and  fuch  as 
is  effential  in  the  Cafe.  Why  elfe  is  the  very 
Air  of  Foolijlmefs  enough  to  cloy  a  Lover,  at  firft 
fight  ?  Why  does  an  Idiot- Look  and  Manner  de- 
ftroy  the  Effecl;  of  all  thofe  outward  Charms, 
and  rob  the  Fair-One  of  her  Power;  tho  regu- 
larly arm'd,  in  all  the  Exaclnefs  of  Features  and 
Complexion  ?  We  may  imagine  what  we  pleafe 
of  a  fubftantial  folid  part  of  Beauty:  but  were 
the  Subject  to  be  well  criticiz'd,  we  fliou'd  find, 

perhaps 


138    An  E  S  SA  ¥  on  the  Freedom 

perhaps,  that  what  we  moft  admir'd,  even  in 
the  turn  of  outward  Features,  was  only  a  myfte- 
rious  Expreflion,  and  a  kind  of  Shadow  of 
fomething  inward  in  the  Temper :  and  that  when 
we  were  ftruck  with  a  majejlick  Air,  zfprightly 
Look,  an  Amazon  bold  Grace,  or  a  contrary  70/* 
and  gentle  one ;  'twas  chiefly  the  Fancy  of  thefe 
Characters  or  Qualitys  which  wrought  on  us : 
our  Imagination  being  bufy'd  in  forming  beau- 
teous Shapes  and  Images  of  this  rational  kind, 
which  entertain'd  the  -  Mind,  and  held  it  in 
admiration;  whilfl  other  Paflions  of  a  lower 
Species  were  employ'd  another  way.  The  pre- 
liminary Addrefles,  the  Declarations,  the  Ex- 
planations, Confidences,  Clearings;  the  De- 
pendence on  fomething  mutual,  fomething  felt 
by  way  of  return ;  the  Spes  animi  credula  mutui: 
all  thefe  become  neceflary  Ingredients  in  the 
Affair  of  Love,  and  are  authentically  eftablifh'd 
by  the  Men  of  Elegance  and  Art  in  this  way 
of  Paffion. 

Nor  can  the  Men  of  cooler  Paflions,  and 
more  deliberate  Purfuits,  withftand  the  Force 
of  Beauty,  in  other  Subjects.  Every-one  is  a 
Virtuofo,  of  a  higher  or  lower  degree  :  Every-one 
purfues  a  Grace,  and  courts  a  *  Venus  of 
one  kind  or  another.  The  Venufium,  the  Ho- 
nejlum,  the  Decorum   of  Things,    will  force   its 

*  I»/m,pag.  337. 

way. 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     i39 

way.  They  who  refufe  to  give  it  fcope  in  the 
nobler  Subjecls  of  a  rational  and  moral  kind, 
will  find  its  Prevalency  elfewhere,  in  an  *  in- 
ferior Order  of  Things.     They  who  overlook 
the  main  Springs    of  Aclion,    and  defpife   the 
Thought  of  Numbers  and  Proportion  in  a  Life 
at  large,  will  in  the  mean   Particulars  of  it,  be 
no  lefs  taken  up,  and  engag'd;  as  either  in  the 
Study  of  common  Arts,  or  in  the  Care  and  Cul- 
ture of  mere  mechanick  Beautys.    The  Models 
of  Houfes,  Buildings,  and  their  accompanying 
Ornaments;   the  Plans  of  Gardens,  and  their 
Compartments;  the  ordering  of  Walks,  Plan- 
tations, Avenues ;  and  a  thoufand  other  Sym- 
metrys,  will  fucceed  in  the  room  of  that  hap- 
pier and  higher  Symmetry  and  Order  of  a  Mind. 
The  t  Species  of  Fair,  Noble,  Handfom,  will  dif- 
cover  it-felf  on  a  thoufand  Occafions,  and  in  a 
thoufand  Subjecls.    The  Specler  ftill  will  haunt 
us,  in  fome  fhape  or  other:   and  when  driven 
from  our  cool  Thoughts,  and  frighted  from  the 
Clojet,  will  meet  us  even  at  Court,   and  fill  our 
Heads  with  Dreams  of  Grandure,  Titles,  Hon- 
ours, and  a  falfe  Magnificence  and  Beauty; 
to  which  we  are  ready  to  facrifice  our  higheft 
Pleafure  and  Eafe;  and  for  the  fake  of  which, 
we  become  the  mereft  Drudges,  and  mod  ab- 
jecl  Slaves. 

*  VOL.  III.  J.  173. 

t  VOL.  III.  J.  33.  iSa 186. 

Vol.  1.  K  The 


J 40   An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

The  Men  of  Pleafure,  who  feem  the  greater! 
Contemners  of  this  philofophical  Beauty,  are 
forc'd  often  to  confefs  her  Charms.  They  can 
as  heartily  as  others  commend  Hone/ly,  and  are 
as  much  flruck  with  the  Beauty  of  a  generous 
Part.  They  admire  the  Thing  it-felf,  tho  not 
the  Means.  And,  if  pollible,  they  wou'd  fo  or- 
der it,  as  to  make  Probity  and  Luxury  agree. 
But  the  Rules  of  Harmony  will  not  permit  it. 
The  Diflonancys  are  too  ftrong.  However, 
the  Attempts  of  this  kind  are  not  unpleafant 
to  obferve.  For  tho  fome  of  the  voluptuous 
are  found  fordid  Pleaders  for  Bafenefs  and  Cor- 
ruption of  every  fort :  yet  others,  more  gene- 
rous, endeavour  to  keep  meafures  with  Honef- 
ty ;  and  underflanding  Pleafure  better,  are  for 
bringing  it  under  fome  Rule.  They  condemn 
this  manner:  they  praife  the  other.  "  So  far  was 
11  right:  but  further,  lurong.  Such  a  Cafe  was. 
li  allowable:  but  fuch  a  one  not  to  be  admit- 
"  ted."  They  introduce  a  Jujlice,  and  an  Or- 
der in  their  Pleafures.  They  wou'd  bring  Rea- 
Jon  to  be  of  their  Party,  account  in  fome  man- 
ner for  their  Lives,  and  form  themfelves  to  fome 
kindofCoilfonancy,  and  Agreement :  Or  fliou'd 
they  find  this  impracticable  on  certain  terms, 
they  wou'd  chufe  to  facrifice  their  other  Plea- 
fures to  thofe  which  arife  from  a  generous  Be- 
haviour. 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.     141 

haviour,  a  Regularity  of  Conducl,  and  a  Con- 
fiftency  of  Life  and  Manners : 

*  Et  verce  numerofque  modofque  edifcere  vita. 

Other  Occafions  will  put  us  upon  this 
Thought :  but  chiefly  a  flrong  View  of  Merit, 
in  a  generous*  Character,  oppos'd  to  fome  detef- 
tably  vile  one.  Hence  it  is  that  among  Poets, 
the  Satirifts  feldom  fail  in  doing  Juftice  to  Vir- 
tue. Nor  are  any  of  the  nobler  Poets  falfe 
to  this  Caufe.  Even  modern  Wits,  whofe  Turn 
is  all  towards  Gallantry  and  Pleafure,  when 
bare-fac'd  Villany  (lands  in  their  way,  and  brings 
the  contrary  Species  in  view,  can  hng  in  paffio- 
nate  drains  the  Praifes  of  plain  Honejly. 

W  h  e  N  we  are  highly  Friends  with  the  World, 
fuccefsful  with  the  Fair,  and  profperous  in  the 
poffeflion  of  other  Beautys ;  we  may  perchance, 
as  is  ufual,  defpife  this  fober  Miftrefs.  But 
when  we  fee,  in  the  iffue,  what  Riot  and  Excefs 
naturally  produce  in  the  World ;  when  we  find 
that  by  Luxury  s  means,  and  for  the  fervice  of 
vile  Interefts,  Knaves  are  advanc'd  above  us, 
and  the  f  vileft  of  Men  prefer'd  before  the  ho- 
nefteft ;  we  then  behold  V 1  r  t  u  e  in  a  new  Light, 
and  by  the  afliftance  of  fuch  a  Foil,   can  dif- 

*  Hor.  Epift.  2.  lib.  2. 

f  VOL.  III. /of.  308,  309. 

K  2  cern 


142   An    E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

cern  the  Beauty  of  Honejly,  and  the  reality  of 
thofe  Charms,  which  before  weunderuood  not 
to  be  either  natural  or  powerful. 

SECT.     III. 

AN  D  thus,  after  all,  the  moft  natural  Beau- 
ty in  the  World  is  Honejly,  and  moral  Truth. 
For  all  Beauty  is  Truth.  True  Features  make 
the  Beauty  of  a  Face;  and  true  Proportions  the 
Beauty  of  Architecture ;  as  true  Meafures  that 
of  Harmony  and  Mufick.  In  Poetry,  which  is 
all  Fable,  Truth  ftill  is  the  Perfection.  And 
whoever  is  Scholar  enough  to  read  the  anti- 
ent  Philofopher,  or  his  *  modern  Copifls,  up- 
on the  nature  of  a  Dramatick  and  Epick  Poem, 
will  eafily  underftand  f  this  account  of  Truth. 

A  Painter,  if  he  has  any  Genius,  under- 
ftands  the  Truth  and  Unity  of  Defign ;  and  knows 
he  is  even  then  unnatural,  when  he  follows  Na- 
ture too  clofe,  and  nrictly  copys  Life.  For  his 
Art  allows  him  not  to  bring  All  Nature  into  his 


*  The  French  Tranflator,  no  doubt,  has  juftly  hit  our  Author's 
Thought,  by  naming  in  his  Margin  the  excellent  Bossu  du  Pccme  Ej.ique; 
who  in  that  admirable  Comment  and  Explanation  of  Aristotle,  has 
"perhaps not  only  fhewn  himfelf  the  greater!  of  the  French  Criticks,  but 
prefented  the  World  with  a  View  of  antient  Literature  and  juft  Writing, 
beyond  any  other  Modern  of  whatever  Nation. 

f  V  O  L.  III.  p.  iSo,  i8i,  1S2,  183,  260, 8cc. 

Piece, 


of  WIT  and  HUMO  UR.     143 

Piece,  but  a  Part  only.  However,  his  Piece, 
if  it  be  beautiful,  and  carrys  Truth,  muft  be  a 
Whole,  by  it-felf,  compleat,  independent,  and 
withal  as  great  and  comprehenfive  as  he  can 
make  it.  So  that  Particulars,  on  this  occafion, 
mull  yield  to  the  general  Defign ;  and  all  things 
be  fubfervient  to  that  which  is  principal :  in 
order  to  form  a  certain  Eqfinefs  of  fight;  a  fim- 
ple,  clear,  and  *  united  View,  which  wou'd  be 
broken  and  difturb'd  by  the  Expreffion  of  any 
thing  peculiar  or  diflincl. 

Now 


*  The  to  'Ewronofl-lon ;  as  the  great  Matter  of  Arts  calls  it,  in  his  Po- 
eticks,  ck.  23-  but  particularly  cli.  7.  where  he  (hews,  "  That  the  to  KaAon, 
44  the  Beautiful,  or  the  Sublime,  in  thefe  above-mention'J  Arts,  is  from 
44  the  Expreffion  of  Greatnefs  with  Order  :  that  is  to  fay,  exhibiting  the 
*•  Principal  or  Main  of  what  is  defign'd,  in  the  very  larger!  Proportions 
•'  in  which  it  is  capable  of  being  view'd.  For  when  it  is  gigantick,  tis 
l*  in  a  manner  out  of  fight,  and  can  be  no  way  comprehended  in  that 
44  fimple  and  united  View.  As,  on  the  contrary,  when  a  Piece  is  of  the 
"  Miniature-kind;  when  it  runs  into  the  Detail,  and  nice  Delineation  of 
44  every  little  Particular;  'tis,  as  it  were,  invifible,  for  the  fame  reafon  ; 
"  becaufe  the fummary  Beauty,  the  WHOLE  it-felf,  connot  be  compre- 
"  hended  in  that  ONE  united  View;  which  is  broken  and  loft  by  the 
41  neceffary  attraction  of  the  Eye  to  every  fmall  and  fubordinate  Part.  In 
44  a  poetick  Syftem,  the  fame  regard  muft  be  had  to  the  Memory,  as  in 
44  Painting  to  the  Eye.  The  Dramatick  kind  is  confin'd  within  the  con- 
«4  venient  and  proper  time  of  aSpeclacle.  The  Epick  is  left  more  at  large. 
14  Each  Work,  however,  muft  aim  at  Vaftnefs,  and  be  as  great  and  of  as 
44  long  duration  as  poffible;  but  fo  as  to  becompiehended  (as  to  the  main 
44  of  it)  by  oneeafy  Glance  or  Retrofpeft  of  Memory.  And  this  the  Phi- 
41  lofopher  calls,  accordingly,  the  tj 'Eu^v^mihtov.  I  cannot  better 
tranflate  the  Paffage  than  as  I  have  done  in  thefe  explanatory  Lines. 
Tor  betides  what  relates  to  mere  Art,  the  philofophical  Senfe  of  the  Ori- 
ginal is  fo  majeftick,  and  the  whole  Treatifc  fo  mafterly,  that  when  I  find 

K3  even 


144    An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

Now  the  Variety  of  Nature  is  fuch,  as  to 
diftinguifh  every  thing  fhe  forms,  by  a  peculiar 
original  Character;  which,  if  ftri&ly  obferv'd, 
will  make  the  Subject  appear  unlike  to  any 
thing  extant  in  the  World  befides.  But  this 
Effect  the  good  Poet  and  Painter  feek  induftri- 
oufly  to  prevent.  They  hate  Minutenefs,  and 
are  afraid,  of  Singularity;  which  woud  make 
their  Images,  or  Characters,  appear  capricious 
and  fantaftical.  The  mere  Face-Painter,  in- 
deed, has  little  in  common  with  the  Poet;  but, 
like  the   mere  Hiftorian,  copys  what  he  fees, 


even  the  Latin  Interpreters  come  fo  fhort,  I  {hou'd  be  vain  to  attempt 
any  thing  in  our  own  Language.  I  wou'd  only  add  a  fmall  remark  of 
my  own,  which  may  perhaps  be  notie'd  by  the  Studiers  of  Statuary  and 
Painting:  That  the  greateft  of  the"  antient  as  well  as  modern  Artifts, 
were  ever  inclin'd  to  follow  this  Rule  of  the  Philofopher;  and  when, 
they  err 'd  in  their  Defigns,  or  Draughts,  it  was  on  the  fide  of  Greatnefst 
by  running  into  the  unfizable  and  gigantick,  rather  than  into  the  minute 
and  delicate.  Of  this  Mich.  Angelo,  the  great  Beginner  and  Foun- 
der among  the  Moderns,  and  Zeuxis  the  fame  among  the  Antients,  may 
ferve  as  Inflances.  See  Pliny,  lib.  35.  cap.  g.  concerning  Zeuxis, 
and  the  Notes  of  Father  Harduin  in  his  Edition  in  ufum  Delphini, 
p.  200.  on  the  words,  Deprehenditur  tamen  Zeuxis,  he.  And  again  Piinv 
himfelf  upon  Euphranor,  in  the  fame  Book,  cap.  11.  p.  226.  Doci/is 
«c  laboriqfus,  ante  omnes,  et  in  quocumque  genere  excellent,  ac  Jibi  xqualis .  Hie 
primus  videiur  exprejfiffe  Dignitates  Her  own,  el  iijurpajje  Sjmmetriam.  Scd 
fiat  univerfitate  corporum  exilior,  capitibus  articulifque  grandior.  Volwnina  quo- 
flue  empofuii  de  Symmetria  et  Coloribus,  tc..  Vid.  infra,  p.  340,341, 
342.  in  the  Notes, 


and 


of  WI T  and  HUMOUR.     145 

and  minutely  traces  every  Feature,  and  odd 
Mark.  'Tis  otherwife  with  the  Men  of  Inven- 
tion and  Defign.  'Tis  from  the  many  Objects 
of  Nature,  and  not  from  a  particular-one,  that 
thofe  Genius's  form  the  Idea  of  their  Work. 
Thus  the  belt  Artifts  are  faid  to  have  been  in- 
defatigable in  ftudying  the  beft  Statues :  as 
efteeming  them  a  better  Pvule,  than  the  per- 
fecleft  human  Bodys  cou'd  afford,  And  thus 
fome  *  confiderable  Wits  have  recommended 
the  beft  Poems,  as  preferable  to  the  beft  of 
Hiftorys;  and  better  teaching  the  Truth  of 
Characters,  and  Nature  of  Mankind. 

Nor  can  this  Criticifm  be  thought  high- 
ftrain'd.  Tho  few  confine  themfelves  to  thefe 
Rules,  few  are  infenfible  of  'em.  Whatever 
quarter  we  may  give  to  our  vicious  Poets,  or 
other  Compofers  of  irregular  and  fhort-liv'd 
Works ;  we  know  very  well  that  the  {landing 
Pieces  of  good  Artifts  muft  be  form'd  after  a 
more  uniform  way.  Every  juft  Work  of  theirs 
comes  under  thofe  natural  Rules  of  Proportion 
and  Truth.  The  Creature  of  their  Brain  muft 
be  like  one  of  Nature's  Formation.  It  muft 
have  a  Body  and  Parts  proportionable:   or  the 


*  Thus  the  great   Mafter  himfelf  in  his  Poeticks,  above   cited  ;     A<&  *J 

K  4  very 


146  An  E  S  S  A  T  on  the  Freedom 

very  Vulgar  will  not  fail  to  criticize  the  Work, 
when  it  has  neither  *  Head  nor  Tail.  For  fo  Com- 
mon Senfe  (according  to  jufl  Philofophy)  judges 
of  thofe  Works  which  want  the  Juflnefs  of  a 
Whole,  and  (hew  their  Author,  however  curi- 
ous and  exact  in  Particulars,  to  be  in  the  main 
a  very  Bungler : 

f  Infelix  operis  Summa,  quia  ponere  Totum 
Nefcit. 

Such  is  poetical,  and  fuch  (if  I  may  fo  call 
it)  graphical  or  plqftick  Truth.  Narrative,  or  h f- 
torical  Truth,  mufl  needs  be  highly  eflimable ; 
efpeciallywhenwe  confider  how  Mankind,  who 
are  become  fo  deeply  interefled  in  the  Subject, 
have  fullered  by  the  wantofClearnefs  in  it.  'Tis 
it-felf  a  part  oimoral  Truth.  To  b'e  ajudge  in  one, 
requires  a  Judgment  in  the  other.  The  Morals, 
the  Character,  and  Genius  of  an  Author  mufl  be 
thorowly  confider'd:  And  the  Hiftorian  or  Re- 
later  of  Things  important  to  Mankind,  mufl, 
whoever  he  be,  approve  himfelf  many  ways  to 
us;  both  in  refpecl  of  his  Judgment,  Candor, 
and  Difintereflednefs;  ere  we  are  bound  to 
take  any  thing  on  his  Authority.  And  as  for 
%  critical  Truth,  or  the  Judgment  and  Determi- 


*  VOL.  IH.  p.  25,  259,  260.         t  Hor.  Epiji.  3.  lib. 
+  VOL.  111.  p.  316,320,321,  See. 


nation 


of  WIT  and  HUMOUR.      147 

nation  of  what  Commentators,  Tranflators, 
Paraphrafts,  Grammarians,  and  others  have, 
on  this  occafion,  deliver'd  to  us ;  in  the  midfl 
of  fuch  variety  of  Style,  fuch  different  Read- 
ings, fuch  Interpolations,  and  Corruptions  in 
the  Originals  ;  fuch  Miflakes  of  Copifts,  Tran- 
fcribers,  Editors,  and  a  hundred  fuch  Acci- 
dents, to  which  antient  Books  are  fubjecl:  it 
becomes,  upon  the  whole,  a  Matter  of  nice  Spe- 
culation ;  confidering,  withal,  that  the  Reader, 
tho  an  able  Linguift,  muft  be  fupported  by  fo 
many  other  Helps  from  Chronology,  natural 
Philofophy,  Geography,  and  other  Sciences. 

And  thus  many  previous  Truths  are  to  be 
examin'd,  and  underflood,  in  order  to  judge 
rightly  of  h'florical  Truth,  and  of  the  pad  Acti- 
ons and  Circumflances  of  Mankind,  as  deli- 
ver'd to  us  by  antient  Authors  of  different  Na- 
tions, Ages,  Times,  and  different  in  their  Cha- 
racters and  Interefts.  Some  moral  and  philofo- 
phical  Truths  there  are  withal  fo  evident  in 
themfelves,  that  'tvvou'd  be  eafier  to  imagine 
half  Mankind  to  have  run  mad,  andjoin'd  pre- 
cifely  in  one  and  the  fame  Species  of  Folly, 
than  to  admit  any  thing  as  Truth,  which  (liou'd 
be  advane'd  againfl  fuch  natural  Knowledge ,  fun- 
damental Reafon,  and  common  Safe. 


This 


148   An  E  S  S  A  r  on  the  Freedom 

This  I  have  mention'd  the  rather,  becaufe 
fome  modern  Zealots  appear  to  have  no  better 
knowledge  of  Trut  h,  nor  better  manner  of 
judging  it,  than  by  counting Nofes.  By  this  Rule, 
if  they  can  poll  an  indifferent  number  out  of  a 
mob,  if  they  can  produce  a  Set  of  Lancashire 
Noddles,  remote  provincial  Head-pieces,  or 
vifionary  Aflemblers,  to  atteft  a  Story  of  a  Witch 
upon  a  Broomjlick,  and  a  Flight  in  the  Air;  they 
triump  in  the  folid  Proof  of  their  new  Pro- 
digy, and  cry,  Magna  eft  Veritas  ct  pmvalebit  I 

Religion,  no  doubt,  is  much  indebted  to 
thefe  Men  of  Prodigy;  who,  in  fuch  a  clifcern- 
ing  Age,  wou'd  fet  her  on  the  foot  of  popular 
Tradition ;  and  venture  her  on  the  fame  bot- 
tom with  Parifli -Tales,  and  goffiping  Storys  of 
Imps,  Goblins,  and  Demoniacal  Pranks,  invented 
to  fright  Children,  or  make  Practice  for  com- 
mon Exorcifts,  and  Cunning-Men!  For  by  that 
Name,  you  know,  Country  People  are  us'd  to 
call  thofe  Dealers  in  Myflery,  who  are  thought 
to  conjure  in  an  hoiujl  way,  and  foil  the  Devil 
at  his  own  Weapon. 

And  now  (my  Friend!)    I  can  perceive  'tis 
time   to  put  an  end  to  thefe  Rerleclions ;  left 
by  endeavouring   to  expound  things  any  fur- 
ther, I  fliou'd  be  drawn  from  my  way  of  Hu- 
mour, 


olWlT  and  HUMOUR.     149 

mour,  to  harangue  profoundly  on  thefe  Sub- 
jects. But  fhou'd  you  find  I  had  moraliz'd  in 
any  tolerable  manner,  according  to  Common 
Senfe,  and  without  Canting;  I  cou'd  be  fatisfy'd 
with  my  Performance,  fuch  as  it  is,  without 
fearing  what  diflurbance  I  might  poffibly  give 
to  fome  formal  Cenjors  of  the  Age;  whofe  Dif- 
courfes  and  Writings  are  of  another  ftrain.  I 
have  taken  the  liberty,  you  fee,  to  laugh,  up- 
on fome  occafions  :  And  if  I  have  either  laugh'd 
wrong,  or  been  impertinently  ferious ;  I  can 
be  content  to  be  lauglid  at,  in  my  turn.  If 
contrarywife  I  am  rail'd  at,  I  can  laugh  (till, 
as  before;  and  with  frefh  advantage  to  my 
Caufe.  For  tho,  in  reality,  there  cou'd  be  no- 
thing lefs  a  laughing  matter,  than  the  pro- 
vok'd  Rage,  Ill-will,  and  Fury  of  certain  zea- 
lous Gentlemen,  were  they  arm'd  as  lately 
they  have  been  known;  yet  as  the  Magiflrate 
has  fmce  taken  care  to  pare  their  Talons,  there 
is  nothing  very  terrible  in  their  Encounter. 
On  the  contrary,  there  is  fomething  comical  in 
the  cafe.  It  brings  to  one's  mind  the  Fancy  of 
thofe  Grotefque  Figures,  and  Dragon-Faces, 
which  are  feen  often  in  the  Frontifpiecc,  and 
on  the  Corner-Stones  of  old  Buildings.  They 
feem  plac'd  there,  as  the  Defenders  and  Sup- 
porters of  the  Edifice;  but  with  all  their  Gri- 
mace, are  as  harmlefs  to  People  without,  as 
they  are  ufelefs  to  the  Building  within.   Great 

Efforts 


150  An  E  S  S  A  r,  ire. 

Efforts  of  Anger  to  little  purpofe,  ferve  for 
Pleafantry  and  Farce.  Exceeding  Fiercencfs, 
with  perfect  Inability  and  Impotence,  makes  the 
higheft,  Ridicule. 

I  am,  Dear  Friend, 

Affectionately  Yours  fac. 


TREA- 


*53 


ADVICE,    be. 

PARTI. 


SECT.     I. 

I  HAVE  often  thought  how  ill-natur'd  a 
Maxim  it  was,  which,  on  many  occafions, 
I  have  heard  from  People  of  good  underftand- 
ing ;  "  That,  as  to  what  related  to  private  Con- 
"  duel,  No-one  was  ever  the  better  for  Advice." 
But  upon  farther  Examination,  I  have  refolv'd 
with  my-felf,  that  the  Maxim  might  be  admit- 
ted without  any  violent  prejudice  to  Mankind. 
Vol.  I.  i  For 


154      ADVICE    to  an  Author. 

For  in  the  manner  Advice  was  generally  given, 
there  was  no  reafon,  I  thought,  to  wonder  it 
ihou'd  be  fo  ill  receiv'd.  Something  there  was 
which  flrangely  inverted  the  Cafe,  and  made 
the  Giver  to  be  the  only  Gainer.  For  by  what 
I  cou'd  obferve  in  many  Occurrences  of  our 
Lives,  That  which  we  call'd  giving  Advice,  was 
properly,  taking  an  occafion  to  fliew  our  own 
Wifdom,  at  another's  expence.  On  the  other 
fide,  to  be  inftrucled,  or  to  receive  Advice  on  the 
terms  ufually  prefcrib'd  to  us,  was  little  better 
than  tamely  to  afford  another  the  Occafion  of 
railing  himfelf  a  Characler  from  our  Defecls. 

In  reality,  however  able  or  willing  a  Man 
may  be  to  advife,  'tis  no  eafy  matter  to  make 
Advice  a  free  Gift.  For  to  make  a  Gift  free 
indeed,  there  mult  be  nothing  in  it  which  takes 
from  Another,  to  add  to  Our-felf.  In  all  other 
refpecls,  to  give,  and  to  difpenfe,  is  Generofity, 
and  Good- will :  but  to  bellow  Wifdom,  is  to 
gain  a  Maflery  which  can't  fo  eafily  be  allow'd 
us.  Men  willingly  learn  whatever  elfe  is  taught 
'em.  They  can  bear  a  Mqfter  inMathematicks, 
in  Mufick,  or  in  any  other  Science ;  but  not 
in  Under/landing  and  Good  Senfe. 

Tis   the  hardefl   thing  imaginable   for  an 
Author  not  to  appear  alTuming  in  this  re- 
fpecl.     For  all  Authors  at  large  are,  in  a  man- 
ner. 


TREATISE  III. 


viz.. 


SOLILOQUY: 


O  R, 


ADVICE 


T  O  A  N 


AUTHOR. 


Nee  TE  quafweris  extra. 

Perf.  Sat.  i. 


Printed  firft  in  the  Year  M.DCC.X, 
Vol.  I. 


ADVICE    to  an  Author        155 

ner,  profefs'd  Maflers  of  Under/landing  to  the  Age. 
And  for  this  reafon,  in  early  days,  Poets  were 
look'd  upon  as  authentick  Sages,  for  dictating 
Rules  of  Life,  and  teaching  Manners  and  good 
Senfe.  How  they  may  have  loft  their  Preten- 
fion,  I  can't  fay.  'Tis  their  peculiar  Happi- 
nefs  and  Advantage,  not  to  be  oblig'd  to  lay 
their  Claim  openly.  And  if  whilft  they  pro- 
fefs  only  to  pleafe,  they  fecretly  advife,  and  give 
Inftruclion ;  they  may  now  perhaps,  as  well  as 
formerly,  be  efteem'd,  with  juftice,  the  bed  and 
mod  honourable  among  Authors. 

Mean  while:  "  H  dictating  and  prefer ibing 
"  be  of  fo  dangerous  a  nature,  in  other  Au- 
*'  thors;  what  mult  his  Cafe  be,  who  dictates 
"  to  Authors  themfelvesV' 

To  this  I  anfwer;  That  my  Pretention  is  not 
fo  much  to  give  Advice,  as  to  confider  of  the  Way 
and  Manner  of  advifmg.  My  Science,  if  it  be 
any,  is  no  better  than  that  of  a  Language-Maf- 
ter,  or  a  Logician.  For  I  have  taken  it  ftrong- 
ly  into  my  head,  that  there  is  a  certain  Knack 
or  Legerdemain  in  Argument,  by  which  we  may 
fafely  proceed  to  the  dangerous  part  of  advifmg, 
and  make  hire  of  the  good  fortune  to  have  our 
Advice  accepted,  if  it  be  any  thing  worth. 


My 


k6       A  DV  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 


\) 


My  Propofal  is  to  confider  of  this  Affair, 
as  a  Cafe  of  Surgery.  'Tis  Practice,  we  all 
allow,  which  makes  a  Hand.  "  But  who,  on 
"•  this  occafion,  will  he  practised  on?  Who  will 
CL  willingly  be  the  firft  to  try  our  Hand,  and 
u  afford  us  the  requifite  Experience?"  Here 
lies  the  Difficulty.  For  fuppofing  we  had 
Hofpitals  for  this  fort  of  Surgery,  and  there 
were  always  in  readinefs  certain  meek  Patients 
who  wou'd  bear  any  Incifions,  and  be  prob'd 
or  tented  at  our  pleafure ;  the  advantage  no 
doubt  wou'd  be  confiderable   in   this    way  of 

J 

Practice.  Some  Infight  muff  needs  be  ob- 
tain'd.  In  time  a  Hand  too  might  be  acquir'd; 
but  in  all  likelyhood  a  very  rough  one:  which 
wou'd  by  no  means  ferve  the  purpofe  of  this 
latter  Surgery.  For  here,  a  'Tendernefs  oj  Hand 
is  principally  requifite.  No  Surgeon  will  be 
call'd,  who  has  not  Feeling  and  Compaffion. 
And  where  to  find  a  Subject  in  which  the 
Operator  is  likely  to  preferve  the  higheft  Ten- 
dernefs, and  yet  acl;  with  the  greater!  Refolution 
and  Boldnefs,  is  certainly  a  matter  of  no  flight 
Confideration. 

I  am  fenfible  there  is  in  all  confiderable 
Proje6ts,  at  firfl;  appearance,  a  certain  Air  of 
chimerical  Fancy  and  Conceit,  which  is  apt 
to  render   the   Projectors   fomewhat   liable  to 

ridicule. 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.  157 

ridicule.  I  wou'd  therefore  prepare  my  Rea- 
der againft  this  Prejudice;  by  alluring  him, 
that  in  the  Operation  propos'd,  there  is  nothing 
which  can  juftly  excite  his  Laughter;  or  if 
there  be,  the  Laugh  perhaps  may  turn  againft 
him,  by  his  own  confent,  and  with  his  own 
concurrence  :  Which  is  a  Specimen  of  that  very 
Art  or  Science  we  are  about  to  illuitrate. 

Accordingly,  if  it  be  objected  againft 
the  abpve-mention'd  Praflice,  and  Art  of  Sur- 
gery, "  That  we  can  no-where  find  fuch  a 
ct  meek  Patient,  with  whom  we  can  in  reality 
"  make  bold,  and  for  whom  nevert'helefs  we 
tl  are  fure  to  preferve  the  greateji  Tendcrnefs  and 
"  Regard:"  I  aftertthe  contrary;  and  fay,  for 
inftance,  That  we  have  each  of  us  Our  Selves 
to  prafiife  on.  tl  Mere  Quibble!  (you'l  fay:) 
"  For  who  can  thus  multiply  himfelf  into  two 
"  Per  Jons,  and  be  his  own  Subjefl?  Who  can 
lt  properly  laugh  at  himfelf,  or  find  in  his  heart 
41  to  be  either  merry  orfevere  on  fuch  an  oc- 
"  cafion?"  Go  to  the   Poets,    and   they 

will  prefent  you  with  many  Inftances.  Nothing 
is  more  common  with  them,  than  this  fort  of 
Soliloquy.  A  Perfon  of  profound  Parts, 
or  perhaps  of  ordinary  Capacity,  happens,  on 
fome  occafion,  to  commit  a  Fault.  He  is  con- 
cern'd  for  it.   Becomes  alone  upon  the  Stage  ; 

looks 


158       A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

looks  about  him,  to  fee  if  any  body  be  near ; 
then  takes  himfelf  to  talk,  without  fparing 
himfelf  in  the  leaft.  You  wou'd  wonder  to 
hear  how  clofe  he  pufhes  matters,  and  how 
thorowly  he  carrys  on  the  buhnefs  of  Self-diJ~ 
J'eciwn.  By  virtue  of  this  Soliloquy  he  be- 
comes two  diftincl  Perfons.  lie  is  Pupil  and 
Preceptor.  He  teaches,  and  he  learns.  And 
in  good  earned:,  had  I  nothing  elfe  to  plead 
in  behalf  of  the  Morals  of  our  modern  Drama- 
tick  Poets,  I  fhou'd  defend  'em  dill  againft 
their  Accufers  for  the  fake  of  this  very  Prac- 
tice, which  they  have  taken  care  to  keep  up 
in  its  full  force.  For  whether  the  Praclice  be 
natural  or  no,  in  refpecl  of  common  Cuftom 
and  Ufage;  I  take  upon  me  to  aifert,  that  it 
is  an  honeft  and  laudable  Praclice;  and  that 
if  already  it  be  not  natural  to  us,  we  ought 
however  to  make  it  fo,  by  Study  and  Appli- 
cation. 

"Are  we  togo  therefore  to  the  Stage  for 
"  Edification?  muft  we  learn  our  Catechifm 
11  from  Poets?  And,  like  the  Players,  fpeak 
"  aloud,  what  we  debate  at  any  time  with  our- 
lt  felves  alone  ?"  Not  absolutely  fo,  perhaps. 
Tho  where  the  harm  wou'd  be,  of  fpending 
fbme  Difcourfe,  and  bellowing  a  little  Breath 
and  clear  Voice  purely  upon  our-felves,  I  can't 
fee.     We  might   peradventure    be  lefs  noify 

and 


■^ 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         159 

and  more  profitable  in  Company,  if  at  conve- 
nient times,  we  difcharg'd  fome  of  our  articu- 
late Sound,  and  fpoke  to  our-felves  viva  voce 
when  alone.  For  Company  is  an  extreme 
Provocative  to  Fancy;  and,  like  a  hot  Bed  in 
Gardening,  is  apt  to  make  our  Imaginations 
fprout  too  faff.  But  by  this  anticipating  Remedy 
of  S  o  l  1  l  o  qjj  y,  we  may  effectually  provide 
againft  the  Inconvenience. 


WE  HAVE  an  account  in  Hiflory  of  a 
certain  Nation,  who  feem  to  have  been  ex- 
tremely apprehenfive  of  the  Effects  of  this  Fro- 
thinefs  or  Ventofity  in  Speech,  and  were  ac- 
cordingly refolv'd  to  provide  thorowly  againft 
the  Evil.  They  carry  d  this  Remedy  of  ours 
fo  far,  that  it  was  not  only  their  Cuftorn,  but 
their  Religion  and  Law,  to  fpeak,  laugh,  ufe 
Action,  geniculate,  and  do  all  in  the  fame  man- 
ner when  by  themfelves,  as  when  they  were 
in  Company.  If  you  had  ftol'11  upon  'era  un- 
awares at  any  time,  when  they  had  been  a- 
lone,  you  might  have  found  'era  in  high  Dif- 
pute,  arguing  with  themfelves,  reproving, 
counfelling,  haranguing  themfelves,  and  in 
the  moft  florid  manner  accofiinor  their  own 
Perfons.  In  all  likelihood  they  had  been  once 
a  People  remarkably  fluent  in  Expreflion,  much 
pefter'd  with  Orators  and  Preachers,  and  might- 

Vol.  I.  L  ilv 


160        A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

ily  fubjecl:  to  thatDifeafe  which  has  been  fince 
call'd  the  Leprofy  of  Eloquence;  till  fome  fage 
Legiflator  arofe  amongft  'em,  who  when  he 
cou'd  not  oppofe  the  Torrent  of  Words,  and 
flop  the  Flux  of  Speech,  by  any  immediate 
Application,  found  means  to  give  a  vent  to 
the  loqacious  Humour,  and  broke  the  force 
of  the  Diitemper  by  eluding  it. 

Our  prefent  Manners,  I  mult  own,  are  not 
fo  well  calculated  for  this  Method  of  Soli lo- 
qjjy,  as  to  fuffer  it  to  become  a  national  Prac- 
tice. 'Tis  but  a  fmall  Portion  of  this  Regimen, 
which  1  wou'd  willingly  borrow,  and  apply 
to  private  ufe ;  efpecially  in  the  cafe  of  Au- 
thors. I  am  fenfible  how  fatal  it  might  prove 
to  many  honourable  Perfons,  fhou'd  they  ac- 
quire fuch  a  Habit  as  this,  or  offer  to  praclife 
fuch  an  Art;  within  reach  of  any  mortal 
Ear.  For  'tis  well  known,  we  are  not  many 
of  us  like  that  Roman,  who  wifli'd  for  Win- 
dows to  his  Bread,  that  all  might  be  as  con- 
fpicuous  there  as  in  his  Houfe,  which  for 
that  very  reafon  he  had  built  as  open  as  was 
poffible.  I  wou'd  therefore  advife  our  Probati- 
oner, upon  his  firft  Exercife,  to  retire  into 
fome  thick  Wood,  or  rather  take  the  Point  of 
fome  high  Hill ;  where,  befides  the  Advantage 
of  looking  about  him  for  Security,  he  wou'd 
find  the  Air  perhaps  more  rarefy'd,  and  futable 

to 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        161 

to  the  Perfpiration  requir'd,    efpecially  in  the 
cafe  of  a  Poetical  Genius. 

*  Scriptorum  chorus  omnis  amat  nemus,  et  fugit 
urbes. 

Tis  remarkable  in  all  great  Wits,  that  they 
have  own'd  this  Practice  of  ours,  and  generally 
defcrib'd  themfelves  as  a  People  liable  to  fuf- 
ficient  Ridicule,   for  their  great  Loquacity  by 
themfelves,  and  their  profound  Taciturnity  in 
Company.     Not  only  the  Poet  and  Philofopher, 
but  the  Orator  himfelf  was  wont    to  have    re- 
course to  our  Method.     And  the  Prince  of  this 
latterTribe  maybeprov'd  to  have  been  a  great 
Frequenter  of  the  Woods   and  River-Banks ; 
where  he  confum'd    abundance  of  his  Breath, 
fuffer'd   his    Fancy  to  evaporate,    and  reduc'd 
the  vehemence  both  of  his   Spirit  and  Voice. 
If  other   Authors  find  nothing   which  invites 
'em    to   thefe  ReceJJes,    'tis    becaufe  their  Ge- 
nius is  not  of  force  enough :   Or  tho   it   be, 
their  Character,  they  may  imagine,  will  hard- 
ly bear  em  out.      For  to  be  furpriz'd   in  the 
odd  Aclions,    Geftures,   or  Tones,  which   are 
proper  to  fuch  Afceticks,  I  muft  own  wou'd  be 
an  ill   Adventure  for   a  Man   of  the   World. 
But  with   Poets   and  Philojophers   'tis  a   known 
Cafe : 

W  I.I...—  ■■!.■-  I  ■■■—■■■.■  |  !■■■■■■  II  ■  Ml        — 

*  Hot.    Epijt.  2../ii  2. 

L  2  Aut 


162        ADVICE  to  an  Author, 


*  Aid  infanit  Homo,  aid  vcrfus  facit- 


Composing  and  Raving  mud  neceflarily, 
we  fee,  bear  a  refemblance.  And  for  thofe 
Compofers  who  deal  in  Syftems,  and  airy  Spe- 
culations, they  have  vulgarly  pafs'd  for  a  fort 
of  Profe-Poets.  Their  fecret  Practice  and  Habit 
has  been  as  frequently  noted : 

f  Murmura  cum  jc cum  et  rabiofajilentia  rodwit. 

Both  thefe  forts  are  happily  indulg'd  in  this 
Method  of  Evacuation.  They  are  thought  to 
acl  naturally,  and  in  their  proper  way,  when 
they  aflume  thefe  odd  Manners.  But  of  other 
Authors  'tis  expecled  they  fhou'd  be  better 
bred.  They  are  oblig'd  to  preferve  a  more  con- 
verfable  Habit;  which  is  no  fmall  misfortune 
to  'em.  For  if  their  Meditation  and  Refvery 
be  obflrucled  by  the  fear  of  a  nonconforming 
Mein  in  Converfation,  they  may  happen  to  be 
fo  much  the  worfe  Authors  for  being  finer  Gen- 
tlemen. Their  Fervency  of  Imagination  may 
poffibly  be  as  flrongas  either  the  Philofopher's 
or  the  Poet's.  But  being  deny'd  an  equal  Be- 
nefit of  Difcharge,  and  with-held  from  the 
wholefom  manner  of   Relief  in  private ;    'tis 


;   Hor.  S.U.  -j.  lib,  2.  I  Perf.  Sat.  3. 

no 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,        163 

no  wonder  if  they  appear  with  fo  much  Froth 
and  Scum  in  publick. 

'Tis  obfervable,  that  the  Writers  of  Me- 
moirs and  Essays  are  chiefly  fubjecl  to  this 
frothy  Diflemper.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that 
this  is  the  true  Reafon  why  thefe  Gentlemen 
entertain  d  the  World  fo  lavifhly  with  what 
relates  to  them/elves.  For  having  had  no  oppor- 
tunity of  privately  converfing  with  themfelves, 
or  exercifing  their  own  Genius,  fo  as  to  make 
Acquaintance  with  it,  or  prove  its  Strength ; 
they  immediately  fall  to  work  in  a  wrong 
place,  and  exhibit  on  the  Stage  of  the  World 
that  Praclice,  which  they  fhou'd  have  kept  to 
themfelves  ;  if  they  defign'd  that  either  they, 
or  the  World,  fhou'd  be  the  better  for  their  Mo- 
ralitys.  Who  indeed  can  endure  to  hear  an  Em- 
pirick  talk  of  his  own  Conftitution,  how  he  go- 
verns and  manages  it,  what  Diet  agrees  bed  with 
it,  and  what  his  Practice  is  with  himfelf? 
The  Proverb,  no  doubt,  is  very  juft,  Phyfician 
cure  thy-Jelf.  Yet  mathinks  one  fhou'd  have  but 
an  ill  time,  to  be  prefent  at  thefe  bodily  Ope- 
rations. Nor  is  the  Reader  in  truth  any  bet- 
ter entertain'd,  when  he  is  oblig'd  to  adift  at 
the  experimental  Difcuffions  of  his  praclifing 
Author,  who  all  the  while  is  in  reality  doing  no 
better,  than  taking  his  Phyfick  in  publick- 

L  3  For 


164        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

For  this  reafon,  I  hold  it  very  indecent  for 
any  one  to  publifli  his  Meditations,  Occqfional 
Reflexions,  Solitary  Thoughts,  or  other  fuch  Ex- 
ercifes  as  come  under  the  notion  of  this  felf- 
difcourfmg  Practice.  And  the  modelled  Title 
I  can  conceive  for  fuch  Works,  wou'd  be  that 
of  a  certain  Author,  who  call'd  them  his  Cru- 
dity 5.  'Tis  the  Unhappinefs  of  thofe  Wits,  who 
conceive  fuddenly,  but  without  being  able  to 
go  out  their  full  time,  that  after  many  Mifcar- 
riages  and  Abortions,  they  can  bring  nothing 
well-fhapen  or  perfect  into  the  World.  They 
are  not  however  the  lefs  fond  of  their  Offspring, 
which  in  a  manner  they  beget  in  publick. 
For  fo  publick-fpirited  they  are,  that  they  can 
never  afford  themfelves  the  leaf!  time  to  think 
in  private,  for  their  own  particular  benefit  and 
ufe.  For  this  reafon,  tho  they  are  often  retir'd, 
they  are  never  by  themfelves.  The  World  is 
ever  of  the  Party.  They  have  their  Author- 
Character  in  view,  and  are  always  confidering 
how  this  or  that  Thought  wou'd  ferve  to  com- 
pleat  (bme  Set  of  Contemplations,  or  furnifh  out 
the  Common-Place-Book,  from  whence  thefe 
treafur'd  Riches  are  to  flow  in  plenty  on  the 
neceflitous  World. 

But  if  our  Candidates  for  Authorfhip  hap- 
pen to  be  of  the fanclifyd  kind  ;   'tis  not  to  be 

imagin'd 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         165 

imagin'd  how  much  farther  (till  their  Charity 
is  apt  to  extend.  So  exceeding  great  is  their 
Indulgence  and  Tendernefs  for  Mankind,  that 
they  are  unwilling  the  lead  Sample  of  their 
devout  Exercife  fhou'd  be  loft.  Tho  there  are 
already  fo  many  Formularys  and  Rituals  ap- 
pointed for  this  Species  of  Soliloquy;  they  can 
allow  nothing  to  lie  conceal'd,  which  paffes  in 
this  religious  Commerce  and  way  of  Dialogue 
between  them  and  their  Soul. 

These  may  be  term'd  a  fort  of  Pfeudo-Afce- 
ticks,  who  can  have  no  real  Converfe  either 
with  themfelves,  or  with  Heaven ;  whilft  they 
look  thus  a-fquint  upon  the  World,  and  carry 
Titles  and  Editions  along  with  'em  in  their  Me- 
ditations. And  altho  the  Books  of  this  fort, 
by  a  common  Idiom,  are  call'd  good  Books;  the 
Authors,  for  certain,  are  a  forry  Race:  For 
religious  Cruditys  are  undoubtedly  the  worft  of 
any.  *  A  &?mZ- Author  of  all  Men  leaft  values 
Politenefs.  He  fcorns  to  confine  that  Spirit, 
in  which  he  writes,  to  Rules  of  Criticifm  and 
profane  Learning.  Nor  is  he  inclin'd  in  any 
refpecl  to  play  the  Critick  on  himfelf,  or  re- 
gulate his  Style  or  Language  by  the  Standard 
of  good  Company,  and  People  of  the  better 
fort.      He  is  above  the  Confideration  of  that 

'"VOL.    III.  jb.  239,240,241.   in  the  Notes. 

L  4  which 


1 66        A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

which  in  a  narrow  fenfe  we  call  Manners.  Nor 
is  he  apt  to  examine  any  other  Faults  than 
thofe  which  he  calls  Sins:  Tho  a  Sinner  againft 
Good-Breeding,  and  the  Laws  of  Decency, 
will  no  more  be  efteem'd  a  good  Author,  than 
will  a  Sinner  againft  Grammar,  good  Argu- 
ment, or  good  Senfe.  And  if  Moderation  and 
'Temper  are  not  of  the  Party  with  a  Writer ;  let 
his  Caufe  be  ever  fo  good,  I  doubt  whether  he 
will  be  able  to  recommend  it  with  great  ad- 
vantage to  the  World. 

On  this  account,  I  wou'd  principally  re- 
commend our  Exercife  of  Self-Converfe  to  all 
fuch  Perions  as  are  addicled  to  write  after  the 
manner  of  holy  Advifers;  efpecially  if  they  lie 
under  an  indifpenlible  Neceffity  of  being  Talk- 
er's or  Haranguers  in  the  fame  kind.  For  to 
difcharge  frequently  and  vehemently  in  pub- 
lick  is  a  great  hinderance  to  the  way  of, private 
Exercife;  which  confifts  chiefly  in  Coniroul. 
But  where,  inflead  of  Controul,  Debate  or 
Argument,  the  chief  Exercife  of  the  Wit  con- 
fifts in  uncontroulabie  Harangues  and  Reafon- 
ings,  which  rnuft  neither  be  queftion'd  nor 
contradicted;  there  is  great  danger,  left  the 
Partv,  thro'  this  Habit,  (hou'd  fuffer  much  bv 
Cruditys,  Indigeftions,  Choler,  Bile,  and  parti- 
cularly by  a  certain  Tumour  or  Flatulency,  which 
renders  him  of  all  Men  the  leaft  able  to  apply 

the 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        167 

the  wholefom  Regimen  of  Self-Practice.  'Tis 
no  wonder  if  fuch  quaint  Practitioners  grow 
to  an  enormous  Size  of  Abfurdity,  whilfl  they 
continue  in  the  reverfe  of  that  Practice,  by 
which  alone  we  correct  the  Redundancy  of 
Humours,  and  chaften  the  Exuberance  of  Con- 
ceit and  Fancy. 

J 

A  remarkable  Inftance  of  the  want  of 
this  fove reign  Remedy  may  be  drawn  from 
our  common  great  Talkers,  who  engrofs  the 
greateit  part  of  the  Converfations  of  the  World, 
and  are  the  forwarded  to  fpeak  in  publick  Af- 
femblys.  Many  of  thefe  have  a  fprightly  Ge- 
nius, attended  with  a  mighty  Heat  and  Ebul- 
lition of  Fancy.  But  'tis  a  certain  Obfervation 
in  our  Science,  that  they  who  are  great  Talk- 
ers in  Company,  have  never  been  any  Talkers 
by  themfdvcs,  nor  us'd  to  thefe  private  DifcuiTi- 
ons  of  our  home  Regimen.  For  which  reafon 
their  Froth  abounds.  Nor  can  they  difcharge 
any  thing  without  fome  mixture  of  it.  But 
when  they  carry  their  Attempts  beyond  or- 
dinary Difcourfe,  and  wou'd  rife  to  the  Capa- 
city of  Authors,  the  Cafe  grows  worfe  with  'em. 
Their  Page  can  carry  none  of  the  Advantages 
of  their  Per/on.  They  can  no-way  bring  into 
Paper  thofe  Airs  they  give  themfelves  in  Dif- 
courfe. The  Turns  of  Voice  and  Action,  with 
which   they  help  out  many  a  lame  Thought. 

and 


168       A  DVI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

and  incoherent  Sentence,  muff  here  be  laid 
afide;  and  the  Speech  taken  to  pieces,  com- 
par'd  together,  and  examin'd  from  head  to 
foot.  So  that  unlefs  the  Party  has  been  us'd 
to  play  the  Critick  thorowly  upon  himfelf,  he 
will  hardly  be  found  proof  againft  the  Criti- 
cifms  of  others.  His  Thoughts  can  never  ap- 
pear very  correcl:;  unlefs  they  have  been  us'd 
to  found  Correction  by  themfelves,  and  been 
well  form'd  and  difciplin'd  before  they  are 
brought  into  the  Field.  Tis  the  hardefl  thing 
in  the  world  to  be  a  good  Thinker,  without  be- 
ing a  ftrong  Self-Examiner,  and  thorowpacd 
Dialcgifl,  in  this  folitary  way. 

SEC  T.     II. 

UT  to  bring  our  Cafe  a  little  clofer  ftill 
to  Morals.  I  might  perhaps  very  juftifi- 
ably  take  occafion  here  to  enter  into  a  fpacious 
Field  of  Learning,  to  fliew  the  Antiquity  of 
that  Opinion,  tl  That  we  have  each  of  us  a 
tc  Duemon,  Genius,  Angel,  or  Guardian-Spirit,  to 
"•  whom  we  were  ftrictly  join'd,  and  commit- 
41  ted,  from  our  earlieft  Dawn  of  Reafon,  or 
"  Moment  of  our  Birth."  This  Opinion,  were 
it  literally  true,  might  be  highly  ferviceable, 
no  doubt,  towards  the  Eftablifhment  of  our 
Syflem  and  Doclrine.  For  it  wou'd  infallibly 
be  provd  a   kind  of  Sacrilege  or  Impiety  to 

(light 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        i6g 

flight  the  Company  of  fo  Divine  a  Gueft,  and 
in  a  manner  banifh  him  our  Breaft,  by  re- 
fufing  to  enter  with  him  into  thofe  fecret  Con- 
ferences, by  which  alone  he  cou'd  be  enabled 
to  become  our  Advifer  and  Guide.  But  I  fhou'd 
efleem  it  unfair  to  proceed  upon  fuch  an  Hy- 
pothecs as  this  :  when  the  very  utmoft  the  wife 
Antients  ever  meant  by  this  7)^mo/i-Compa- 
nion,  I  conceive  to  have  been  no  more  than 
enigmatically  to  declare,  "  That  we  had  each 
"  of  us  a  Patient  in  our -f elf;  that  we  were  pro- 
"  perly  our  own  Subjects  of  Practice;  and  that 
ct  we  then  became  due  Practitioners,  when  by 
"  virtue  of  an  intimate  Recefs  we  cou'd  difcover 
lc  a  certain* Duplicity  of  Soul,  and  divide  our- 
tc  felves  into  two  Partys."  One  of  thefe,  as 
they  fuppos'd,  wou'd  immediately  „  approve 
him-felf  a  venerable  Sage;  and  with  an  air  of 
Authority  erect  himfelf  our  Counfellor  and* 
Governor;  whiiit  the  other  Party,  who  had 
nothing  in  him  beficles  what  was  bafe  and^r- 
vile,  wou'd  be  contented  to  follow  and  obey. 

According  therefore  as  this  Recefs  was 
deep  and  intimate,  and  the  Dual  Number  prac- 
tically form'd  in  Us,  we  were  fuppos'd  to  ad- 
vance in  Morals  and  true  Wifdom.  This,  they 
thought,  was  the  only  way  of  compofing  Matters 
in  our  Breaft, and  eftablifhing  that  Subordinacy, 
which  alone  cou'd  make  Us   agree  with  our- 

felves, 


170        A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

felves,  and  be  of  a-piece  within.  They  efteem'd 
this  a  more  religious  Work  than  any  Prayers, 
or  other  Duty  in  the  Temple.  And  this  they 
advis'd  Us  to  carry  thither,  as  the  befl  Offering 
which  cou'd  be  made  : 

*  CompofUum  jus,  fafquc  animi,  janBqfque  rccrjfus 

Mentis . ■ 

This  was,  among  the  Antients,  that  celebra- 
ted Delphick  Infcription,   Recognize  Your- 
sele:   which  was  as  much  as    to   fay,    Divide 
your-Jelf  or  Be  Two.     For  if  the  Divifionwere 
rightly  made,  all  within  woud  of  courfe,   they 
thought,  be  rightly  underftood,  and  prudently 
manag'd.     Such  Confidence  they  had  in   this 
Home-Dialefl  of  Soliloqjj  y.     For  it  was  ac- 
counted the  peculiar  of  Philofophers  and  wife 
Men,  to  be  able  to  hold  themfelves  in  Talk.    And 
it  was  their  Boafton  this  account,  ct  That  they 
"  were  never  lefs  alone  than  when  by  themfelves  " 
A  Knave,  they  thought,  cou'd  never  be  by  him- 
[elf.      Not  that  his  Confcience  was  always  fure 
of  giving  him    Difturbance ;   but  he  had  not, 
they   fuppos'd,  fo  much  Interefl  with  himfeif, 
as  to  exert  this  generous  Faculty,    and    raife 
himfeif  a    Companion;  who    being   fairly    ad- 
mitted into  Partnerfhip,  woud  quickly  mend 
his  Partner,  and  fet  his  Affairs  on  a  right  foot. 

*  Pnf.    Sat.  2. 

One 


ADVICE  to  an  Author. 


171 


One  wou'd  think,  there  was  nothing  eafier 
for  us,  than  to  know  our  own  Minds,  and  un- 
derhand what  our  main  Scope  was;  what  we 
plainly  drove  at,  and  what  we  propos'd  to  our- 
felves,  as  our  End,  in  every  Occurrence  of  our 
Lives.  But  our  Thoughts  have  generally  fuch 
an  obfcure  implicit  Language,  that  'tis  the  hard- 
eft  thing  in  the  world  to  make  'em  fpeak  out 
diftinclly.  For  this  reafon,  the  right  Method  is  to 
give  em  Voice  and  Accent.  And  this,  in  our 
default,  is  what  the  Morahjls  or  Philojophers  en- 
deavour to  do,  to  our  hand ;  when,  as  is  ufu- 
al,  they  hold  us  out  a  kind  of  vocal  Looking- 
Glafs,  draw  Sound  out  of  our  Breaft,  and  in- 
ftrucl  us  to  perfoliate  our-felves,  in  the  plain- 
eft  manner. 

*  Illafibi  introrfum,  et  jab  Lingua  immurmurat: 

oft 
Ebullit  Patrui  prceclarum  fumis! 

A  certain  Air  of  Pleafantry  and  Humour, 
which  prevails  now-a-days  in  the  fafhionable 
World,  gives  a  Son  the  alfu ranee  to  tell  a  Fa- 
ther, he  has  liv'd  too  I0112: :  and  a  Hnfband  the 
privilege  of  talking  of  his  Second  Wife  before 
his  Fuji.     But  let  the  airy  Gentleman,  who 


*Perf.  Sat.  2. 

makes 


172      AD  VICE  to  an  Author.' 

makes  thus  bold  with  others,  retire  a-whiie  out 
of  Company;  and  he  fcarce  dares  tell  himfelf 
his  Wifhes.  Much  lefs  can  he  endure  to  carry 
on  his  Thought,  as  he  neceffarily  mull,  if  he 
enters  once  thorowly  into  Himfelf,  and  proceeds 
by  Interrogatory  to  form  the  Home-Acquain- 
tance and  Familiarity  requir'd.  For  thus,  af- 
ter fome  druggie,  we  may  fuppofe  him  to  ac- 
cod  himfelf.  Ci  Tell  me  now,  my  honed 

1  Heart !  Am  I  really  honejt,  and  of  fome  worth  ? 
4  or  do  I  only  make  a  fair  (how,  and  am  intrin- 
4  fecally  no  better  than  a  Rafcalf  As  good  a 
'  Friend,  a  Country-man,  or  a  Relation,  as  I 
'  appear  outwardly  to  the  World,  or  as  I  wou'd 
1  willingly  perhaps  think  my-felf  to  be  3  fhou'd 
c  I  not  in  reality  be  glad  they  were  hang  d, 
'  any  of  them,  or  broke  their  Necks,  who  hap- 
1  pen'd  to  dand  between  Me  and  the  lead  por- 
1  tion  of  an  Edate?  Why  not?  fmce  'tis  my 
4  Inter  eft.  Shou'd  I  not  be  glad  there- 

1  fore  to  help  this  matter  forwards,  and  pro- 
1  mote  my  Inter  eft,  if  it  lay  fairly  in  my  power? 
No  doubt :    provided  I  were  fure  not 
;  to  be  punifli'd  for  it.  And  what  rea- 

1  (on  has  the  greated  Rogue  in  Nature  for  not 
1  doing  thus?  The  fame  reafon,  and  no 

1  other.  Am  I  not  then,  at  the  bottom, 

1  the  fame  as  he  ?  The  fame  :   an  arrant 

'  Villain ;    tho  perhaps  more  a    Coward,  and 
'  not  fo  perfect  in  my  kind.        If  Inter  eft  there- 
fore 


A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author.         173 

1  fore    points    me   out    this    Road;     whither 
1  would  Humanity  and  Companion  lead  me  ? 
1  Quite  contrary.  Why  therefore  do  I 

1  cherifh  fuch  Weakneffes  ?  Why  do  I  fympa- 
1  thize  with  others?  Why  pleafe  myfelfinthe 
1  Conceit  of  Worth  and  Honour  ?  a  Character , 
4  a  Memory,  an  IJfue,  or  a  Name?  What  elfe 
4  are  thefe  but  Scruples  in  my  way?  Where- 
1  fore  do  I  thus  bely  my  own  Interefl,  and  by 
'  keeping  my-felf  half-Knave,  approve  my-felf 
'  a  thorow  Fool?" 


This  is  a  Language  we  can  by  no  means 
endure  to  hold  with  our-felves ;  whatever  Rail- 
lery we  may  ufe  with  others.  We  may  defend 
Villany,  or  cry  up  Folly,  before  the  World: 
But  to  appear  Fools,  Mad-men,  or  Varlets,  to 
our-felves;  and  prove  it  to  our  own  faces,  that 
we  are  really  fuch,  is  infupportable.  For  fo 
true  a  Reverence  has  every-one  for  himfelf, 
when  he  comes  clearly  to  appear  before  his 
clofe  Companion,  that  he  had  rather  profefs 
the  vileft  things  of  himfelf  in  open  Company, 
than  hear  his  Character  privately  from  his 
own  Mouth.  So  that  we  may  readily  from 
hence  conclude,  That  the  chief  Intereft  of  Am- 
bition, Avarice,  Corruption,  and  every  fly  infinu- 
ating  Vice,  is  to  prevent  this  Interview  and 
Familiarity   of  Difcourfe  which  is  confequent 

upon 


174        ADVICE  to  an  Author, 

upon  clofe  Retirement  and  inward  Recefs.  Tis 
the  grand  Artifice  of  Villany  and  Leudncfs,  as 
well  as  of  Superjiiti&n  and  Bigotry,  to  put  us 
upon  Terms  of  greater  Diftance  and  Formality 
with  our-felves,  and  evade  our  proving  Me- 
thodof  Soliloquy.  And  for  this  reafon^  how 
fpecious  foever  may  be  the  Inftruclion  and 
Doctrine  of  FormaliJU ;  their  very  Manner  it- 
felf  is  a  fufficient  Blind  or  Remora  in  the  way 
of  Honefty  and  good  Senfe. 

I  am  fenfible,  that  fhou'd  my  Reader  be 
peradventure  a  Lover,  after  the  more  profound 
and  folemn  way  of  Love,  he  wou'd  be  apt  to 
conclude,  that  he  was  no  Stranger  to  our  pro- 
posal Method  of  Practice  ;  being  confcious  to 
himfelf  of  having  often  made  vigorous  Excur- 
fions  into  thofe  folitary  Regions  above-menti- 
on'd ;  where  Soliloquy  is  upheld  with  mod  ad- 
vantage. He  may  chance  to  remember  how 
he  has  many  times  addrefs'd  the  Woods  and 
Rocks  in  audible  articulate  Sounds,  and  feem- 
ingly  expoftulated  with  himfelfin  fuch  a  man- 
ner, as  if  he  had  really  form'd  the  requifite 
Diftintlion,  and  had  the  Power  to  entertain 
himfelf  in  due  form.  But  it  is  very  apparent, 
that  tho  all  were  true  we  have  here  fuppos'd, 
it  can  no  way  reach  the  Cafe  before  us.  For 
a  paffionate  Lover,  whatever  Solitude  he  may 
affecl,  can  never  be  truly  by  himfelf.    His   Cafe 

is 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,        175 

is  like  the  Authors  who  has  begun  his  Court- 
fhip  to  the  Publick,  and  is  embark'd  in  an  In- 
trigue which  fufficiently  amufes,  and  takes 
him  out  of  himfelf.  Whatever  he  meditates 
alone,  is  interrupted  dill  by  the  imagin'd  Pre- 
fence  of  the  Miftrefs  hepurfues.  NotaThought, 
not  an  Expreffion,  not  a  Sigh,  which  is  purely 
for  himfelf.  All  is  appropriated,  and  all  de- 
voutly tender'd  to  the  Object-  of  his  Paflion. 
Infomuch  that  there  is  nothing  ever  fo  trivial 
or  accidental  of  this  kind,  which  he  is  not  de- 
firous  fhou'd  be  witnefs'd  by  the  Party,  whofe 
Grace  and  Favour  he  folicits. 

Tis  the  fame  Reafon  which  keeps  the  ima- 
ginary Saint,  or  My/lick,  from  being  capable 
of  this  Entertainment.  Inflead  of  looking  nar- 
rowly into  his  own  Nature  and  Mind,  that  he 
may  be  no  longer  a  Myllery  to  himfelf,  he  is 
taken  up  with  the  Contemplation  of  other  ■ 
myflerious  Natures,  which  he  can  never  ex-  - 
plain  or  comprehend.  He  has  the  Specters  of 
his  Zeal  before  his  Eyes;  and  is  as  familiar 
with  his  Modes,  Eflences,  Perfonages,  and  Ex- 
hibitions of  Deity,  as  the  Conjurer  with  his 
different  Forms,  Species,  and  Orders  of  Genii 
or  Daemons.  So  that  we  make  no  doubt  to 
affert,  th^t  not  fo  much  as  a  reclufe  Religi- 
onifl,  a  Votary,  or  Hermit,  was  ever  truly  by 
himfelf.   And   thus  fince  neither  Lover,  Author, 

Vol.  I.  M  MyJiicK 


ij6       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Myftick,  or  Conjurer  (who  are  the  only  Clai- 
mants) can  truly  or  juflly  be  entitled  to  a 
Share  in  this  Self-entertainment;  it  remains 
that  the  only  Perfon  intitled,  is  the  Man  of 
Senfe,  the  Sage,  or  Philofopher.  However,  fince 
of  all  other  Characters  we  are  generally  the 
moll  inclin'd  to  favour  that  of  a  Lover,  it 
may  not,  we  hope,  be  impertinent,  on  this 
occafion,  to  recite  the  Story  of  an  Amour. 


A  VIRTUOUS  young  Prince  of  a  he- 
roick  Soul,  capable  of  Love  and  Friendfhip," 
made  war  upon  a  Tyrant,  who  was  in  every 
refpect  his  Reverfe.  'Twas  the  Happinefs  of 
our  Prince  to  be  as  great  a  Conqueror  by  his 
Clemency  and  Bounty,  as  by  his  Arms  and 
military  Virtue.  Already  he  had  won  over  to 
his  Party  feveral  Potentates  and  Princes,  who 
before  had  been  fubjecl  to  the  Tyrant.  Among 
thofe  who  adher'd  ftill  to  the  Enemy,  there 
was  a  Prince,  who  having  all  the  advantage 
of  Perfon  and  Merit,  had  lately  been  made 
happy  in  the  PofTefKon  and  mutual  Love  of 
the  mofl  beautiful  Princefs  in  the  World.  It 
happen  d  that  the  Occafions  of  the  War  call'd 
the  new-marrvd  Prince  to  a  diftance  from  his 
belov'd  Princefs.  He  left  her  fecure,  as  he 
thought,   in  a  ftrong  Caflle,    far   within  the 

Country : 


A  D\V  I  C  E  to  an  Author,        ijj 

Country  :  but  in  his  abfence  the  Place  was 
taken  by  furprize,  and  the  Princefs  brought 
a  Captive  to  the  Quarters  of  our  heroick 
Prince. 

There  was  in  the  Camp  a  young  Noble- 
man, Favourite  of  the  Prince;  one  who  had 
been  educated  with  him,  and  was  full  treated 
by  him  with  perfect  Familiarity.  Him  he  im- 
mediately fent  for,  and  with  uricl  Injunctions 
committed  the  captive  Princefs  to  his  charge ; 
refolvihg  fhe  fliou'd  be  treated  with  that  Re- 
fpecl:  which  was  due  to  her  high  Rank  and 
Merit.  'Twras  the  fame  young  Lord,  who  had 
difcover'd  her  difguis'd  among  the  Prifoners, 
and  learnt  her  Story;  the  particulars  of  which 
he  now  related  to  the  Prince.  He  fpoke  in 
Extafy  on  this  occafion;  telling  the  Prince 
how  beautiful  fhe  appear'd,  even  in  the  midft 
of  Sorrow  ;  and  tho  difguis'd  under  the  mean- 
eft  Habit,  yet  how  diflinguifhable,  by  her  Air 
and  Manner,  from  every  other  Beauty  of  her 
Sex.  But  what  appear'd  Itrange  to  our  young 
Nobleman,  was,  that  the  Prince,  during  this 
whole  relation,  difcover'd  not  the  lead  Inten- 
tion of  feeing  the  Lady,  or  fatisfying  that  Cu- 
riofity,  which  feem'd  fo  natural  on  fuch  an 
occafion.  He  prefs'd  him;  but  without  fuc- 
cefs.      "  Not   fee  her,  Sir!    (faid  he,   wonder- 

M  2  4i  ing) 


4  S. 


178      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

"■  ing)  when  fhe  is  fo  handfom,  beyond  what 
"  you  have  ever  feen!" 

"For  that  very  reafon,  reply'd  the  Prince, 
ct  I  wou'd  the  rather  decline  the  Interview.. 
M  For  fhou'd  I,  upon  the  bare  Report  of  her 
M  Beautv,  be  fo  cha-rm'd  as  to  make  the  firft 
Vifit  at  this  urgent  time  of  Bufinefs;  I  may 
upon  fight,  with  better  reafon,  be  induc'd 
*'  perhaps  to  vifit  her  when  I  am  more  at 
"  leifure:  and  fo  again  and  again;  till  at 
"  lad  I  may  have  no  leifure  left  for  my  Af- 
"  fairs." 

"■  Wou'd  you,  Sir!  perfuade  me  then,  raid- 
"  the  young  Nobleman,  fmiling,  that  a  fair 
ct  Face  can  have  fuch  Power  as  to  force  the 
"  Will  it-felf,  and  conRrain  a  Man  in  any  re- 
"  fpecl  to  acl  contrary  to  what  he  thinks  be- 
tc  coming  him?  Are  we  to  hearken  to  the  Po- 
"  ets  in  what  they  tell  us  of  that  Incediary 
11  Love,  and  his  irrefiuible  Flames?  A  real 
L'-  Flame,  we  fee,  burns  all  alike.  But  that  ima- 
"  ginary  one  of  Beauty  hurts  only  thofe  who 
"  are  confenting.  It  affecls  noothervvife,  than 
as  we  ourfelves  are  pleas'd  to  allow  it.  In 
many  Cafes  we  abfolutely  command  it :  as 
where  P*.elation  and  Confanguinity  are  in 
the  neareft  degree.  Authority  and  Law, 
we  fee,  can  mailer  it.   But  'twou'd  be  vain 


C  I 


C4i 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       170, 

44  as  well  as  unjuft,  for  any  Law  to  intermed- 
44  die  or  prefcribe,  were  not  the  Cafe  volun- 
44  tary,  and  our  Will  entirely  free." 

44  How  comes  it  then,  reply'd  the  Prince, 
that  if  we  are  thus  Mailers  of  our  Choice, 
and  free  at  firft  to  admire  and  love  where 
we  approve,  we  cannot  afterwards  as  well 
ceafe  to  love  whenever  we  fee  caufe?  This 
latter  Liberty  you  will  hardly  defend.  For  I 
doubt  not,  you  have  heard  of  many,  who  tho 
they  were  us'd  to  fet  the  higheft  value  upon 
Liberty  before  they  lov'd,  yet  afterwards 
were  necejfitated  to  ferve  in  the  mod  abjecl 
manner:  finding  themfelves  conflrain'd  and 
bound  by  a  ftronger  Chain  than  any  of  Iron, 
or  Adamant." 

44  Such  Wretches,  reply'd  the  Youth,  I 
*;  have  often  heard  complain;  who,  if  you 
44  will  believe 'em,  are  wretched  indeed,  with- 
11  out  Means  or  Power  to  help  themfelves.  You 
44  may  hear  'em  in  the  fame  manner  complain 
*c  grjevoufly  of  Life  it-felf.  But  tho  there  are 
ct  Doors  enow  to  go  out  of  Life,  they  find  it 
"  convenient  to  keep  ftill  where  they  are. 
"  They  are  the  very  fame  Pretenders,  who 
44  thro'  this  Plea  of  irrejijlible  JVeceJfity  make 
44  bold  with  what  is  another's,  and  attempt 
44  unlawful  Beds.      But  the  Law,    I  perceive, 

M  3  4l  makes 


180       A  DVI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

makes  bold  with  them  in  its  turn,  as  with 
other  Invaders  of  Property.  Neither  is  it 
your  Cuftom,  Sir,  to  pardon  fuch  GfFences. 
So  that  Beauty  it-feif,  you  mud  allow,  is 
innocent  and  harmlefs,  and  can  compel  no- 
one  to  do  any  thing  amifs.  The  Debauc'd 
compel  themfelves,  and  unjuflly  charge  their 
Guilt  on  Love.  They  who  arehoneft  and 
jun,  can  admire  and  love  whatever  is  beau- 
tiful; without  offering  at  any-thing  beyond 
what  is  allow'd.  How  then  is  it  poflible, 
Sir,  that  one  of  your  Virtue  fhou'd  be  in 
pain  on  any  fuch  account,  or  fear  fuch  a 
Temptation  ?  You  fee,  Sir,  I  am  found  and 
whole,  after  having  beheld  the  Princefs. 
I  have  convers'd  with  her;  I  have  admir'd 
her  in  the  higheft  degree :  Yet  am  my-jelf 
full,  and  in  my  Duty;  and  fhall  be  ever  in 
the  fame  manner  at  your  command." 

"  'Tis  well  (reply'd  the  Prince:)  Keep 
4t  your-felf  fo.  Be  ever  the  fame  Man:  and 
"  look  to  your  Charge  carefully,  as  becomes 
41  you.  For  it  may  fo  happen  in  the  prefent 
tl  pofture  of  the  War,  that  this  Fair  Captive 
"  may  ft*  and  us  in  good  flead." 


With 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       1S1 

With  this  the  young  Nobleman  departed 
to  execute  his  Commiflion :  and  immediately 
took  fuch  care  of  the  captive  Princefs  and  her 
Houlhold,  that  (he  feem'd  as  perfectly  obey'd, 
and  had  every  thing  which  belonged  to  her 
in  as  great  Splendor  now,  as  in  her  Principa- 
lity, and  in  the  height  of  Fortune.  He  found 
her  in  every  refpecl  deferving,  and  faw  in  her 
a  Generohty  of  Soul  which  was  beyond  her 
other  Charms.  His  Study  to  oblige  her,  and 
foften  her  Diftrefs,  made  her  in  return  defirous 
to  exprefs  a  Gratitude ;  which  he  eafily  per- 
ceiv'd.  She  fhew'd  on  every  occafion  a  real 
Concern  for  his  Interefi ;  and  when  he  hap- 
pen'd  to  fall  ill,  fhe  took  fuch  tender  care  of 
him  her-felf,  and  by  her  Servants,  that  he 
feem'd  to  owe  his  Recovery  to  her  Friend- 
fhip. 

From  thefe  Beginnings,  infenfibly,  and 
by  natural  degrees  (as  may  eafdy  be  con- 
ceiv'd)  the  Youth  fell  defperately  in  love.  At. 
firft  he  offer'd  not  to  make  the  leafl  mention  of 
his  Paflion  to  the  Princefs.  For  he  fcarce 
dard  tell  it  to  himjelf.  But  afterwards  he  grew 
bolder.  She  receiv'd  his  Declaration  with  an 
unaffecled  Trouble  and  Concern,  fpoke  to 
him  as  a  Friend,  to  diffuade  him  as  much  as 
poffible  from    fuch  an  extravagant    Attempt. 

M  4  But 


182        A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

But  when  he  talk'd  to  her  of  Force,  flie  imme- 
diately fent  away  one  of  her  faithful  Bomef- 
ticks  to  the  Prince,  to  implore  his  Protection. 
The  Prince  receiv'd  the  Meflage  with  the  ap- 
pearance of  more  than  ordinary  Concern : 
fent  inftantly  for  one  of  his  firftMinifters;  and 
bid  him  go  with  that  Domeflick  to  the  young 
Nobleman,  and  let  him  underfland,  "  That 
"  Force  was  not  to  be  offer'd  to  fuch  a  Lady; 
•'  Perjiiajion  he  might  ufe,  if  he  thought  fit." 

The  Minifter,  who  was  no  Friend  to  the 
young  Nobleman,  fail'd  not  to  aggravate  the 
MefTage,' inveigh'd  publickly  againft  him  on 
this  occafion,  and  to  his  face  reproach 'd  him 
as  a  Traitor  and  Difhonourer  of  his  Prince 
and  Nation  :  with  all  elfe  which  cou'd  be  faid 
againft  him,  as  guilty  of  the  highefl  Sacrilege, 
Perfidioufnefs,  and  Breach  of  Truft.  So  that 
in  reality,  the  Youth  look'd  upon  his  Cafe  as 
defperate,  fell  into  the  deeped  Melancholy, 
and  prepar'd  himfelf  for  that  Fate,  which  he 
thought  he  well  deferv'd. 

In  this  Condition  the  Prince  fent  to  fpeak 
with  him  alone :  and  when  he  faw  him  in  the 
utmoft  Confufion,  V  I  find,  Jaird  he,  my  Friend, 
^  I  am  now  become  dreadful  to  you  indeed; 
<l  fmce  you  can  neither  fee  me  without  Shame, 
•*  nor  imagine  me  to  be  without  Refentment. 

But 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         183 

'  But  away  with  all  thofe  Thoughts  from  this 
'  time  forwards.  I  know  how  much  you  have 
4  fuffer'd  on  this  occafion.  I  know  the  Power 
'  of  Love,  and  am  no  otherwife  fafe  my-felf, 
4  than  by  keeping  out  of  the  way  of  Beauty. 
4  -Twas  I  who  was  in  fault;  'twas  I  who 
4  unhappily  match'd  you  with  that  unequal 
4  Adversary, 'and  gave  you  that  impracticable 
4  Tafk  and  hard  Adventure,  which  no-one 
'  yet  was  ever  flrong  enough  to  accomplifh." 

44  In  this,  Sir,  reply'd  the  Youth,  as  in  all 
44  elfe,  you  exprefs  that  Goodnefs  which  is  fo 
44  natural  to  you.  You  have  Companion,  and 
44  can  allow  for  human  Frailty;  but  the  reft 
V  of  Mankind  will  never  ceafe  to  upbraid  me. 
44  Nor  (hall  I  ever  be  forgiven,  were  I  able  ever 
44  to  forgive  myfelf.  I  am  reproach'd  by  my 
44  nearer!  Friends.  I  mufl  be  odious  to  all 
44  Mankind,  wherever  I  am  known.  The  leaft 
44  Puniffiment  I  can  think  due  to  me,  is  Ba- 
**  nifhment.  for  ever  from  vour  Prefence." 

"Think  not  of  fuch  a  thing  for  ever,  fa  id 
44  the  Prince,  but  truft  me:  if  you  retire  only 
"for  a  while,  I  (hall  fo  order  it,  that  you  (hall 
44  foon  return  again  with  the  Applaule,  even 
44  of  thofe  who  are  now  your  Enemys,  when 
44  they  find  what  a  coniiderable  Service  you 
44  fhall  have  render'd  both  to  them  and  Me." 

Such 


184       A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Such  a  Hint  was  fufficient  to  revive  the 
Spirits  of  our  defpairing  Youth.  He  was  tranf- 
ported  to  think,  that  his  Misfortunes  cou'd  be 
turn'd  any  way  to  the  Advantage  -of  his  Prince : 
he  enter'd  with  Joy  into  the  Scheme  the  Prince 
had  laid  for  him,  and  appear'd  eager  to  de- 
part, and  execute  what  was  appointed  him. 
41  Can  you  then,  faid  the  Prince,  refolve  to 
li  quit  the  charming  Princefs  ?" 

44  O  Sir!  reply'd  the  Youth,  well  am  I  now 
fatisfy'd,  that  I  have  in  reality  within  me 
two  dijtintlfeparate  Souls.  This  Leflbn  of  Phi- 
lofophy  I  have  learnt  from  that  villanous  So- 
phifter  Love.  For  'tis  impoflTible  to  believe, 
that  having  one  and  the  fame  Soul,  it  fhou'd 
be  actually  both  Good  and  Bad,  paffionate 
44  for  Virtue  and  Vice,  defirous  of  Contrarys. 
44  No.  There  mud  of  neceflity  be  Two:  and 
41  when  the  Good  prevails,  'tis  then  we  acl  hand- 
44  fomly;  when  the  III,  then  bafely  and  villa- 
tc  noufly.  Such,  was  my  Cafe.  For  lately  the 
III  Soul  was  wholly  Mailer.  But  now  the 
Good  prevails,  by  your  affiftance ;  and  I  am 
plainly  a  new  Creature,  with  quite  ano- 
ther Apprehenfwn,  another  Rcajon,  another 
Will." 


THUS 


it 

u 
1 1 

4  4 
4  4 
6  4 


I.  4 
4  4 
i.  L 

C4 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         18 


THUS  it  may  appear  how  far  a  Lover  by 
his  own  natural  Strength  may  reach  the  chief 
Principle  of  Philofophy,  and  underftand  our 
Doclrine  of  Two  Ptrfons  in  one  individual  Self. 
Not  that  our  Courtier,  we  fuppofe,  was  able, 
of  himfelf,  to  form  this  Dijlinclion  juflly  and  ac- 
cording to  Art.  For  cou'd  he  have  effected 
this,  he  wou'd  have  been  able  to  cure  himfelf, 
without  the  afiinance  of  his  Prince.  However 
he  was  wife  enough  to  fee  in  the  iifue,  that  his 
Independency  .and  Freedom  were  mere  Gloffes, 
and  Refolution  a  Nofe  of  Wax.  For  let  Will 
be  ever  fo  free,  Humour  and  Fancy,  we  fee,  go- 
vern it.  And  thefe,  as  free  as  we  fuppofe  'em, 
are  often  changd  we  know  not  how,  without 
afkingour  confent,  or  giving  us  any  account. 
If  *  Opinion  be  that  which  governs,  and  makes 
the  change;  'tis  it-felf  as  liable  to  be  govern'd, 
and  vary'd  in  its  turn.  And  by  what  I  can 
obferve  of  the  World,  Fancy  and  Opinion  (land 
pretty  much  upon  the  fame  bottom.  So  that 
if  there  be  no  certain  Infpeclor  or  Auditor  eflab- 
lifh'd  within  us,  to  take  account  of  thefe  Opi- 
nions and  Fancys  in  due  form,  and  minutely 
to  animadvert  upon  their  feveral  Growths  and 
Habits,  we  are  as  little  like  to  continue  a  Day 
in  the  fame  Will,  as  a  Tree,  during  a  Summer, 

*  Injra,  p.  524.      And  VOL.  III.  p.   HjS,   mjj. 

in 


186        A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

in  the  fame  Shape,  without  the  Gard'ner's  Aflif- 
tance,  and  the  vigorous  Application  of  the 
Sheers  and  Pruning-Knife, 

A  s  cruel  a  Court  as  the  Inquifition  appears ; 
there  rauft,  it  feems,  be  full  as  formidable  a 
one,  erecled  in  our-felves ;  if  we  wou'd  pre- 
tend to  that  Uniformity  of  Opinion  which  is 
neceffary  to  hold  us  to  one  Will,  and  preferve 
us  in  the  fame  mind,  from  one  day  to  another. 
Philofophy,  at  this  rate,  will  be  thought  per- 
haps little  better  than  Perfecution :  and  a  Su- 
preme Judge  in  matters  of  Inclination  and  Ap- 
petite, mull  needs  go  exceedingly  againfl  the 
Heart.  Every  pretty  Fancy  is  diflurb'd  by  it : 
Every  Pleafure  interrupted  by  it.  The  Courfe 
of  good  Humour  will  hardly  allow  it :  And 
the  Pleafantry  of  Wit  almoft  abfolutely  rejecls 
it.  It  appears,  befides,  like  a  kind  of  Pedantry, 
to  be  thus  magifterial  with  our-felves;  thus 
ftricl;  over  our  Imaginations,  and  with  all  the 
airs  of  a  real  Pedagogue  to  be  folicttoufly  taken 
up  in  the  four  Care  and  Tutorage  of  fo  many 
boyifh  Fancys,  unlucky  Appetites  and  Defires, 
which  are  perpetually  playing  truant,  and 
need  Correction. 

We  hope,  however,  that  by  our  Method  of 
Practice,  and  the  help  of  the  grand  Arcanum, 
which  we  have  profefs'd  to  reveal,  this  Regimen 

or 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  187 

or  Difcipline  of  the  Fancys  may  not  in  the  end 
prove  fo  fevere  or  mortifying  as  is  imagin'd. 
We  hope  alfo  that  our  Patient  (for  fuch  we  na- 
turally fuppofe  our  Reader)  will  confider  duly 
with  himfelf,  that  what  he  endures  in  this  Ope- 
ration is  for  no  inconfiderable  End :  fi'nce  'tis 
to  gain  him  a  Will,  and  infure  him  a  certain 
Refo-lution;  by  which  he  (hall  know  where  to 
find  himfelf;  be  fure  of  his  own  Meaning  and 
Defign;  and  as  to  all  his  Defires,  Opinions,  and 
Inclinations,  be  warranted  one  and  the  fame  Per- 
fon  to  day  asyefterday,  and  to  morrow  as  to  day. 

This,  perhaps,  will  be  thought  a  Miracle, 
by  one  who  well  confiders  the  Nature  of  Man- 
kind, and  the  Growth,  Variation,  and  Inflec- 
tion of  Appetite  and  Humour.  For  Appetite, 
which  is  elder  Brother  to  Reason,  being  the 
Lad  of  ftronger  growth,  is  fure,  on  every  Con- 
teft,  to  take  the  advantage  of  drawing  all  to 
his  own  fide.  And  Will,  fo  highly  boafted,  is, 
at  belt,  merely  a  Top  or  Foot-Ball  between 
thefe  Youngfters,  who  prove  very  unfortuna- 
tely match'd;  till  the  youngelt,  inftead  of  now 
and  then  a  Kick  or  Laftibeftow'd  to  little  pur- 
pofe,  forfakes  the  Ball  or  Top  it-felf,  and  be- 
gins to  lay  about  his  elder  Brother.  'Tis  then 
that  the  Scene  changes.  For  the  elder,  like  an 
arrant  Coward,  upon  this  Treatment,  prefent- 
ly  grows  civil,  and  affords  the  younger  as  fair 
Play  afterwards  as  he  can  defire. 


i88        A  DV I  C  E  to   an  Author. 

And  here  it  is  that  our  Sovereign  Remedy 
and  Gymnajlkk  Method  of  Solii.oq.uy  takes 
its  rife :  when  by  a  certain  powerful  Figure  of 
inward  Rhetorick,  the  Mindapo/lropkizes  its  own 
Fancys,  raifes  em  in  their  proper  Shapes  and 
Perfonages,  and  addrefles  'em  familiarly,  with- 
out the  leaf!  Ceremony  or  Refpecl.  By  this 
means  it  will  foon  happen,  that  Two  form'd 
Partys  will  erecl  themfelves  withm.  For  the  Ima- 
ginations or  Fancys  being  thus  roundly  treat- 
ed, are  forc'd  to  declare  themfelves,  and  take 
party.  Thofe  on  the  fide  of  the  elder  Brother 
ApPETiTE,areflrangely  fubtleand  infmuating. 
They  have  always  the  Faculty  to  fpeak  by  Nods 
and  Winks.  By  this  practice  they  conceal  half 
their  meaning,  and,  like  modern  Politicians, 
pafs  for  deeply  wife,  and  adorn  themfelves  with 
the  nneft  Pretext  and  mofl  fpecious  GlofTes  ima- 
ginable; till  being  confronted  with  their  Fel- 
lows of  a  Plainer  Language  and  Expreffion, 
they  are  forc'd  to  quit  their  myflerious  Man- 
ner, and  difcover  themfelves  mere  Sophiflers  and 
Impoftors,  who  have  not  the  leafl  to  do  with  the 
Party  of  Reason  and  good  Senje. 

Accordingly  we  might  now  proceed  to 
exhibit  diftindly,  and  in  due  method,  the 
Form  and  Manner  of  this  Probation,  or  Exer-- 

cife% 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       189 

cife,  as  it  regards  all  Men  in  general.  But  the 
Cafe  of  Authors,  in  particular,  being,  as  we 
apprehend,  the  mon  urgent;  we  (hall  apply 
our  Rule  in  thenrft  place  to  thefe  Gentlemen, 
whom  it  fo  highly  imports  to  know  them- 
felves,  and  underfland  the  natural  Strength 
and  Powers,  as  well  as  the  Weaknejfes  of  a  hu- 
man Mind.  For  without  this  Underftanding, 
the  Hijloriaris  Judgment  will  be  very  defective; 
the  Politicians  Views  very  narrow,  and  chime- 
rical ;  and  the  Poet's  Brain,  however  ftock'd 
with  Ficlion,  will  be  but  poorly  furnifh'd ;  as 
in  the  fequel  we  (hall  make  appear.  He  who 
deals  in  Characters,  muft  of  neceffity  know  his 
own;  or  he  will  know  nothing.  And  he  who 
wou'd  give  the  World  a  profitable  Entertain- 
ment of  this  fort,  fhou'd  be  hire  to  profit,  firft, 
by  himfelf.  For  in  this  fenfe,  Wijdom  as  well 
as  Charity  may  be  honeftly  faid  to  begin  at  home. 
There  is  no  way  of  eftimating  Manners,  or  ap- 
prizing the  different  Humours,  Fancy  s,  Pajfions 
and  Apprehenfions  of  others,  without  firfl  taking 
an  Inventory  of  the  fame  kind  of  Goods 
within  ourfelves,  and  furveying  our  domeuick 
Fund.  A  little  of  this  Home-?r&&icz  will  ferve 
to  make  great  Difcoverys. 

Tecum  habit  a,  et  nor  is  qnam  fit  tibi  cur  ta  fup  el- 
lex.  Perf.  Sat.  4. 

S  E  G  T. 


i go      A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 
.SECT.     III. 

WHOEVER  has  been  an  Obferver  of 
Action  and  Grace  in  human  Bodys,  niuft 
of  neceffity  have  difcoverd  the  great  difference 
in  this  refpecl  between  fuch  Perfons  as  have 
been  taught  by  Nature  only,  and  fuch  as  by 
Reflection,  and  the  affiftance  of  Art,  have 
learnt  to  form  thofe  Motions  which  on  expe- 
rience are  found  the  ealieft  and  mo  ft  natural. 
Of  the  former  kind  are  either  thofe  good 
Rufticks,  who  have  been  bred  remote  from  the 
form'd  Societys  of  Men ;  or  thofe  plain  Arti- 
zans,  and  People  of  lower  Rank,  who  living  in 
Gitys  and  Places  of  refort,  have  been  neceffi- 
tated  however  to  follow- mean  Imployments, 
and  wanted  the  Opportunity  and  Means  to 
form  themfelves  after  the  better  Models.  There 
are  fome  Perfons  indeed  fo  happily  form'd  by 
Nature  herfelf,  that  with  the  greater!  Simpli- 
city or  Rudenefs  of  Education,  they  have  ftill 
fomething  of  a  natural  Grace  and  Comelinefs 
in  their  Action :  And  there  are  others  of  a  better 
Education,  who  by  a  wrong  Aim  and  injudi- 
cious Affectation  of  Grace,  are  of  all  People 
the  farther!  remov'd  from  it.  'Tis  undeniable 
however,  that  the  Perfection  of  Grace  and 
Comelinefs  in  Action  and  Behaviour,  can  be 
found  only  among  the  People  of  a  liberal  Edu- 
cation. 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,        igi 

cation.  And  even  among  the  graceful  of  this 
kind,  thofe  ftill  are  found  the  gracefulleft,  who 
early  in  their  Youth  have  learnt  their  Exerci- 
fes,  and  form'd  their  Motions  under  the  bell 
Majlers. 

Now  fuch  as  thefe  Majlers  and  their  Leffons 
are  to  a  fine  Gentleman,  fuch  are  Phi  lof op  hers,  and 
Philofophy,  to  an  Author.  The  Cafe  is  the  fame 
in  the  fajhionable,  and  in  the  literate  World.  In 
the  former  of  thefe  'tis  remark'd,  that  by  the 
help  of  good  Company,  and  the  force  of  Ex- 
ample merely,  a  decent  Carriage  is  acquird, 
with  fuch  apt  Motions  and  fuch  a  Freedom  of 
Limbs,  as  on  all  ordinary  occafions  may  en- 
able the  Party  to  demean  himfelf  like  a  Gentle- 
man. But  when  upon  further  occafion,  trial 
is  made  in  an  extraordinary  way ;  when  Exer- 
cifes  of  the  genteeler  kind  are  to  be  perform 'd 
in  publick,  'twill  eafily  appear  who  of  the  Pre- 
tenders have  been  form'd  by  Rudiments,  and 
had  Mailers  in  private;  and  who,  on  the  other 
fide,  have  contented  themfelves  with  bare  Imi- 
tation, and  learnt  their  Part  cafually  and  by 
rote.  The  Parallel  is  eafily  made  on  the  fide 
of  Writers.  They  have  at  leaft  as  much  need 
of  learning  the  feveral  Motions,  Counter-poifes 
and  Balances  of  the  Mind  and  Paffions,  as  the 
other  Students  thofe  of  the  Body  and  Limbs. 

Vol.  I.  N  Scribendi 


192        A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 


•v 


Scribendi  rette,  fapere  ejl  et  principium  et  forts. 
Rem    tibi   Socraticae  poterunt    oflendere 
Chartae. 


The  Gala?it,  no  doubt,  may  pen  a  Letter  to 
his  Miftrefs,  as  the  Courtier  may  a  Compliment 
to  the  Minifler,  or  the  Minifter  to  the  Favourite 
above  him,  without  going  fuch  vaft  Depths  in- 
to Learning  or  Philofophy.  But  for  thefe  pri- 
vilegd  Gentlemen,  tho  they  fet  Fafhions  and 
prefcribe  Rules  in  other  Cafes,*  they  are  no 
Controulers  in  the  Commonwealth  of  Letters. 
Nor  are  they  prefum'd  to  write  to  the  Age,  or 
for  remote  Posterity.  Their  Works  are  not  of 
a  nature  to  intitle  'em  to  hold  the  Rank  of  Au- 


*  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet      See  even   the  diflblute  Petronius's  Judgment 
of  a  Writer. 

Artisfeirneji  qris  amat  effeclus, 
Mentemque  magnis  appl'/cat ;  prius  more 
Frugalitatis  lege  polleal  cxacla ; 

A  ec  caret  alto  regiam  trucemvullu. 

*  *     ******** 

neve  plaufor  in  Scana 

Sedeat  redemptus,  Hijlrionite  addiElus. 
********** 

*  *     *     *     *     *     )fr     *     -x-     * 

Mox  et  Socratico  plains  grege,  mutet  habenas 
Liber,  et  ingentis  quatiat  Denuflhenis  arma. 

•X-        *        -X-        *        -X-         *        *        *       *        *  . 

-X-        *       *       -X-       *        *       *       -X-       -X-       * 

•  His  animum  Jiiccinge  bonis ,  fie  Jlumine  larg* 
Plenus,  Pierio  defimdes peftore  verba. 


tkors 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       193 

thors,  or  be  ftyl'd  Writers  by  way  of  Excellence 
in  the  kind.  Shou'd  their  Ambition  lead  'em 
into  fuch  a  Field,  they  wou'd  be  oblig'd  to  come 
otherwife  equip'd.  They  who  enter  the  pub- 
lick  Lifts,  muft  come  duly  train'd,  and  exer- 
cis'd,  like  well  appointed  Cavaliers,  expert  in 
Arms,  and  well  inftrucled  in  the  Ufe  of  their 
Weapon,  and  Management  of  their  Steed.  For 
to  be  well  accouter'd,  and  well  mounted,  is 
not  fufficient.  The  Horfe  alone  can  never  make 
the  Horjeman;  nor  Limbs  the  Wrejiler  or  the  Dan- 
cer. No  more  can  a  Genius  alone  make  a  Po- 
et; or  good  Parts  a  Writer,  in  any  considerable 
kind.  The  Skill  and  Grace  of  Writing  is  found- 
ed,  as  our  wife  Poet  tells  us,  in  Knowledge  and 
good  Senfe':  and  not  barely  in  that  Knowledge, 
which  is  to  be  learnt  from  common  Authors, 
or  the  general  Converfation  of  the  World;  but 
from  thofe  particular  Rules  of  Art,  which  Phi- 
lofophy  alone  exhibits. 

The  Philofophical  Writings,  to  which  our 
Poet  in  his  Art  oj  Poetry  refers,  were  in  them- 
felves  a  kind  of  Poetry,  like  the  *  Mimes,  or  per- 
fonated  Pieces  of  early  times,  before  Philofophy 
was  in  vogue,  and  when  as  yet  Dramatical  Imi- 
tation was  fcarce  form'd ;   or  at  leaft,  in  many 


Infra,- f>ag.  254.  in  the  Notes. 

N  2  Parts, 


i g4      A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author, 

Parts,  not  brought  to  due  perfection.  They 
were  Pieces  which,  befides  their  force  of  Style, 
and  hidden  Numbers,  carry'd  a  fort  of  Action 
and  Imitation,  the  fame  as  the  Epick  and  Dra- 
matirk  kinds.  They  were  either  real  Dialogues, 
or  Pcecitals  of  fuch  pcrjonated  Difcourfes;  where 
the  Perfons  themfelves  had  their  Characters  pre- 
fervd  thro'-out;  their  Manners,  Humours,  and 
diftincl  Turns  of  Temper  and  Understanding 
maintain'd,  according  to  the  moft  exacl; poetical 
Truth.  Twas  not  enough  that  thefe  Pieces  treat- 
ed  fundamentally  of  Mot  als,  and  in  confequence 
pointed  out  real  Characters  and  Manners:  They 
exhibited  em  alive,  and  fet  the  Countenances 
and  Complexions  of  Men  plainly  in  view.  And 
by  this  means  they  not  only  taught  Us  to  know 
Others ;  but,  what  was  principal  and  of  highefl 
virtue  in  'em,  they  taught  us  to  know  Our- 
J  elves. 

The  Philofophical  Here  of  thefe  Poems,  whofe 
Name  they  carry'd  both  in  their  Body  and  Front, 
and  whofe  Genius  and  Manner  they  were  made 
to  repiefent,  was  in  himfelf  a  perfect  Char  after ; 
yet,  in  fome  refpecls,  fo  veil'd,  and  in  a  Cloud, 
that  to  the  unattentive  Surveyor  he  feem'd  of- 
ten to  be  very  different  from  what  he  really 
was  :  and  this  chiefly  by  reafon  of  a  certain  ex- 
quifite  and  refin'd  Raillery  which  belong'd  to 
his  Manner,  and  by  virtue  of  which  he  cou'd 

trca?: 


ADVICE    to  an  Author,       1Q5 

treat  the  higheft  Subjects,  and  thofe  of  the 
commoneft  Capacity  both  together,  and  ren- 
der em  explanatory  of  each  other.  So  that  in 
this  Genius  of  writing,  there  appear'd  both 
the  heroick  and  tkejimple,  the  iragick,  and  the  co- 
mick  Van.  However,  it  was  fo  order 'd,  that 
notwithfianding  the  Oddnefs  or  Myfteriouf- 
nefs  of  the  principal  Character,  the  Under- 
pcrts  or Jecond  Characters  fhew'd  human  Nature 
more  dillinclly,  and  to  the  Life.  We  might 
here,  therefore,  as  in  a  Looking-Glafs,  difcover 
-  our-felves,  and  fee  our  minuted  Features  nice- 
ly delineated,  and  futed  to  our  own  Appre- 
henfion  and  Cognizance.  No-one  who  was  ever 
fo  little  a-while  an  Infpeclor,  cou'd  fail  of  be- 
coming acquainted  with  his  own  Heart.  And, 
what  was  of  {insular  note  in  thefe  magical 
Glaffes,  it  wou'd  happen,'  that  by  conflant  and 
long  Infpeclion,  the  Partys  accuftom'd  to  the 
Practice,  wou'd  acquire  a  peculiar  fpeculative 
Habit;  fo  as  virtually  to  carry  about  with  'em 
a  fort  of  Pocket- Mir r our,  always  ready,  and  in 
ufe.  In  this,  there  were  Tim  Faces  which  wou'd 
naturally  prefent  themfelves  to  our  \iew  :  One 
of  them,  like  the  commanding  Genius,  the 
Leader  and  Chief  above-mention'd;  the  other 
like  that  rude,  undifciplin'd  and  head-nrong 
Creature,  whom  we  our-felves  in  our  natural 
Capacity  mod  exactly  refembled.  Whatever 
we  were  emplov'd  in,  whatever  we  fet  about; 

N3  if 


196        A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

if  once  we  had  acquir'd  the  habit  of  this  Mir* 
rour;  we  fhoud,  by  virtue  of  the  double  Re- 
flection, diftinguim  our-felves  into  two  diffe- 
rent Party s.  And  in  this  Dramatick  Method, 
the  Work  of  Self-lnfpeclion  wou'd  proceed  with 
admirable  Succefs. 

Tis  no  wonder  that  the  primitive  Poets 
were  eneem'd  fuch  Sages  in  their  Times ;  fince 
it  appears,  they  were  fuch  well-praclis'd  Dia- 
logifls,  and  accuftom'd  to  this  improving  Me- 
thod, before  ever  Philofophy  had  adopted  it. 
Their  Mimes  or  characleriz'd  Difcourfes  were 
as  much  relifh'd,  as  their  mofl  regular  Poems; 
and  were  the  Occafio'n  perhaps  that  fo  many 
of  thefe  latter  were  form'd  in  fuch  perfection. 
For  Poetry  it-felf  was  defin'd  an  Imitation  chief- 
ly of  Men  and  Manners :  and  was  that  in  an 
exalted  and  noble  degree,  which  in  a  low  one 
we  call  Mimic kry.  'Tis  in  this  that  the  great 
*  Monographer,  the  Father  and  Prince  of  Poets, 
excels  fo  highly;  his  characters  being  wrought 
to  a  Likenefs  beyond  what  any  fucceeding 
Mailers  were  ever  able  to  defcribe.  Nor  are 
his  Works,  which  are  fo  full  of  Aclion,  any 
other  than  an   artful  Series  or  Chain  of  Dia- 


OfA--3fo=  0£  u7<ha.  T£  >mo\Xa  a.^o<;  Ivruivno-Qou,-  t£  &}  xj  on  pt,6vo^  run  vrowrm, 
UK  cc\voH  o  oh  tsoteiv  dvrov.  ' Avtov  ycl%  £«  'tjjk  eron5T»}y  sAa^ira  hiys-iv'  «  ycip 
i'r»  x-z-Tv.  rxvrcc  [/.ifivum'  it  fA.lv  in  «Mo»,  dvroi  ph  <V  oh*  uywntyvlca,  fupiivlou 
$1  oh'.yx  >£  oAiya'^ij,     Arifl.  de  Poet.  cap.  24. 

logues, 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        197 

logues,  which  turn  upon  one  remarkable  Cata- 
jtrophe  or  Event.  He  defcribes  no  Qualitys  or 
Virtues ;  cenfures  no  Manners :  makes  no 
Encomiums,  nor  gives  Characters  himfelf;  but 
brings  his  Actors  full  in  view.  'Tis  they  who 
fhew  themfelves.  Tis  they  who  fpeak  in  fuch 
a  manner,  as  diflinguifhes  'em  in  all  things 
from  all  others,  and  makes  'em  ever  like  them- 
felves. Their  different  Compofitions  and  Al- 
lays fo  juftly  made,  and  equally  carry'd  on, 
thro'  every  particle  of  the  Action,  give  more 
Inftruction  than  all  the  Comments  or  Gloffes 
in  the  world.  The  Poet,  inftead  of  giving  him- 
felf thofe  dictating  and  mafterly  Airs  of  Wif- 
dom,  makes  hardly  any  figure  at  all,  and  is 
fcarce  discoverable  in  his  Poem.  This  is  be- 
ing truly  a  Mqfter.  He  paints  fo  as  to  need  no 
Infcription  over  his  Figures,  to  tell  us  what 
they  are,  or  what  he  intends  by  em.  A  few 
words  let  fall,  on  any  flight  occafion,  from 
any  of  the  Partys  he  introduces,  are  fufficient 
to  denote  their  Manners  and  difUnct  Charac- 
ter. From  a  Finger  or  a  Toe,  he  can  repre- 
fent  to  our  Thoughts  the  Frame  and  Fafhion 
of  a  whole  Body.  He  wants  no  other  help  of 
Art,  to  perfonate  his  Heroes,  and  make  'em 
living.  There  was  no  more  left  for  Tragedy 
to  do  after  him,  than  to  erect  a  Stage,  and 
draw  his  Dialogues  and  Characters  into  Scenes; 
turning  in  the  fame  manner,  upon  one  prin- 

N  4  cipal 


igS      ADVICE   to  an  Author. 

cipal  A&ion  or  Event,  with  that  regard  to 
Place  and  Time  which  was  futable  to  a  real 
Speclacle.  Even  *  Comedy  it-felf  was  adjudged 
to  this  great  Matter;  it  being  deriv'd  from 
thofe  Parody s  or  Mock-Humours,  of  which  he 
had  given  the  +  Specimen  in  a  conceal'd  fort 
of  Raillery  intermix'd  with  the  Sublime — A 
dangerous  Stroke  of  Art!  and  which  requir'd 
a  mafterly  Hand,  like  that  of  the  philofophi- 
cal  Hero,  whofe  Character  was  reprefented  in 
the  Dialogue-Writings  above-mention'd. 

From  hence  poflibly  we  may  form  a  No- 
tion of  that  Refemblance,  which  on  fo  many 
occafions  was  heretofore  remark'd  between  the 
Prince  of  Poets,  and  the  Divine  Philofopher, 
who  was  faid  to  rival  him,  and  who  together 
with  his  Contemporarys  of  the  fame  School, 
writ  wholly  in  that  manner  of  Dialogue 
above-defcrib'd.  From  hence  too  we  may 
comprehend  perhaps,  why  the  Study  of  Dia- 
logue was  heretofore  thought  fo  advantageous 
to  Writers,  and  why  this  manner  of  Writing 
was  judg'd  fo  difficult,  which  at  firft  fight,  it 
mud  be  own'd,  appears  the  eafieft  of  any. 

I  H A v e  formerly  wonderd  indeed  why  a 
Manner,  which  was  familiarly  us'd  in  Treatifes 

*    Infra,  pag.  246,  253.   in  the  Notes. 

i  No:  only  in  his  Margites,  but  even  in  his  Iliad  and  OdyJJee. 

upon 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       199 

upon  mofl  Subjects,  with  fo  much  Succefs  a- 
mong  the  Antients,  fliou'd  be  fo  infipid  and 
of  little  efteem  with  us  Moderns.  But  I  after- 
wards perceive!,  that  befides  the  difficulty  of 
the  Manner  it-felf,  and  that  Mirr our- Fatuity, 
which  we  have  obferv'd  it  to  carry  in  refpecl 
of  our-felves,  it  proves  alfo  of  neceflity  a  kind 
of  Mirrour  or  Looking-Glafs  to  the  Age. 
If  fo;  it  fhou'd  of  confequence  (youl  fay)  be 
the  more  agreeable  and  entertaining. 
True ;  if  the  real  View  of  our-felves  be  not 
perhaps  difpleafmg  to  us.  But  why  more 

difpleafing  to  Us  than  to    the    Antients  ? 

Becaufe  perhaps  they  cou'd  with  jufl  reafon 
bear  to  fee  their  natural  Countenances  repre- 
sented. And  why  not  We  the  fame  ? 
What  fliou'd  difcourage  us  ?  For  are  we  not 
as  handfom,  at  leaft  in  our  own  Eyes?  Per- 
haps not :  as  we  fhall  fee,  when  we  have  con- 
fider'd  a  little  further  what  the  force  is  of  this 
Mirrour-Writing,  and  how  it  differs  from  that 
more  complaifant  modifli  way,  in  which  an 
Author,  inflead  of  presenting  us  with  other  na- 
tural Characters,  fets  off  his  own  with  the  utmoft 
Art,  and  purchafes  his  Reader's  Favour  by  all 
imaginable  Compliances  and  Condcfcenfions. 


AN    AUTHOR  who  writes  in  his  own 
Perfon,  has    the  advantage   of  being  who   or 

what 


f 


200     A  D  VICE  to  an  Author. 

what  he  pleafes.  He  is  no  certain  Man,  nor 
has  any  certain  or  genuine  Character:  but 
futes  himfelf,  on  every  occafion,  to  the  Fancy 
of  his  Reader,  whom,  as  the  faihion  is  now-a- 
clays,  he  conftantly  careffes  and  cajoles.  All 
turns  upon  their  two  Perfons.  And  as  in  an 
Amour,  or  Commerce  of  Love-Letters;  fo  here 
the  Author  has  the  Privilege  of  talking  eter- 
nally of  himfelf,  dreffing  and  fprucing  himfelf 
up;  whilft  he  is  making  diligent  court,  and 
working  upon  the  Humour  of  the  Party  to 
whom  he  addrefles.  This  is  the  Coquetry  of  a 
modern  Author;  whofe  Epiftles  Dedicatory, 
Prefaces,  and  Addrefles  to  the  Reader,  are  fo 
many  affecled  Graces,  defign'd  to  draw  the  At- 
tention from  the  Subject,  towards  Himfelf;  and 
make  it  be  generally  obferv'd,  not  fo  much 
what  he  fays,  as  what  he  appears,  or  is,  and  what 
figure  he  already  makes,  or  hopes  to  make,  in 
the  fafhionable  World. 

These  are  the  Airs  which  a  neighbouring: 
Nation  give  themfelves,  more  particularly  in 
what  they  call  their  Memoirs.  Their  very  Ef- 
fays  on  Politicks,  their  Philofophical  and  Criti- 
cal Works,  their  Comments  upon  antient  and 
modern  Authors,  all  their  Treatifes  are  Memoirs. 
The  whole  Writing  of  this  Age  is  become  in- 
deed a  fort  of  Memoir '-Writing.  Tho  in  the  re- 
al Memoirs  of  the  Antients,   even  when  they 

writ 


AD  VI  C  E  to  an  Author,         201 

writ  at  any  time  concerning  themfelves,  there 
was  neither  the  /  nor  Thou  thro'out  the  whole 
Work.  So  that  all  this  pretty  Amour  and 
Intercourfe  of  Careffes  between  the  Author 
and  Reader  was  thus  intirely  taken  away. 

Much  more  is  this  the  Cafe  in  Dialogue. 
For  here  the  Author  is  annihilated ;  and  the 
Reader  being  no  way  apply'd  to,  ftand  for  No- 
body. The  felf-interefling  Partys  both  vanifh 
at  once.  The  Scene  prefents  it-felf,  as  by 
chance,  and  undefign'd.  You  are  not  only 
left  to  judge  coolly,  and  with  indifference,  of 
the  Senfe  deliver  d  ;  but  of  the  Character,  Ge- 
nius, Elocution,  and  Manner  of  the  Perfons 
who  deliver  it.  Thefe  two  are  mere  Stran- 
gers, in  whofe  favour  you  are  no  way  engag'd. 
Nor  is  it  enough  that  the  Perfons  introdue'd 
fpeak  pertinent  and  good  Senfe,  at  every  turn. 
It  muft  be  feen  from  what  Bottom  they  fpeak  ; 
from  what  Principle,  what  Stock  or  Fund  of 
Knowledge  they  draw ;  and  what  Kind  or  Spe- 
cies of  Underftanding  they  poftefs.  For  the 
Underftanding  here  muft  have  its  Mark,  its 
characleriftick  Note,  by  which  it  may  be  cM- 
tinguifli'd.  It  muft  be  fuch  and  juch  an  Under- 
Jlanding;  as  when  we  fay,  for  inftance, -fuck  or 
Juch  a  Face :  fmce  Nature  has  chara&eriz'd 
Tempers  and  Minds  as  peculiarly  as  Faces. 
And  for  an  Artift  who  draws  naturally,  'tis  not 


enough 


202       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

enough  to  (hew  us  merely  Faces  which  may  be 
call'd   Mens:    Every  Face  mud  be  a  certain 

Maris. 

Now  as  a  Painter  who  draws  Battles  or 
other  Actions  of  Chriftians,  Turks,  Indians,  or 
anydinincl  and  peculiarPeople,  muff  of  necef- 
fity  draw  the  feveral  Figures  of  his  Piece  in 
their  proper  and  real  Proportions,  Geflures, 
Habits,  Arms,  or  at  leaft  with  as  fair  refem- 
blance  as  poffible;  fo  in  the  fame  manner  that 
Writer,  whoever  he  be,  among  us  Moderns, 
who  (hall  venture  to  bring  his  Fellow- Moderns 
into  Dialogue^  mud  introduce  'em  in  their  pro- 
per Manners,  Genius,  Behaviour  and  Humour. 
And  this  is  the  Mirrour  or  Looking-Glajs  above 
defcribd. 

For  indance,  a  Dialogue,  we  will  fuppofe, 
is  fram'd,  after  the  manner  of  our  antient  Au- 
thors. In  it,  a  poor  Philofopher,  of  a  mean 
figure,  accofts  one  of  the  powerfulleft,  wittier!, 
handfomeft,  and  richeft  Noblemen  of  the  time, 
as  he  is  walking  leifurely  towards  the  Temple. 
"  .You  are  going  then,  fays  he,  (calling  him 
"•  by  his  plain  name)  to  pay  your  Devotions 
at  yonder  at  the   Temple?  I  am  fo. 

"  But  with  an  Air  methinks,  as  if  fome Thought 
"■  perplex'dyou.  What  is  there  in  the  Cafe 

UL  which  fhou'd  perplex  one  ?  The  Thought 

cw  perhaps 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       203 

'  perhaps  of  your  Petitions,  and  the  Confider- 
4  ation  what  Vows  you  had  bed  offer  to  the 
1  Deity.  Is  that  fo  difficult?  Can  any  one 
1  be  fo  foolifh  as  to  afk  of  Heaven  what  is  not 
1  for  his  Good?  Not,  if  he  underflands  what 
1  his  Good  is.  Who  can  miftake  it,  if  he 

1  has  commom  Senfe,  and  knows  the  difference 
'  between  Profperity  and  Adverfity?.  'Tis 
'  Profperity  therefore  you  wou'd  pray  for. 
1  Undoubtedly.  For  inftance,  that  abfoluteSo- 
'  vereign,  who  cammands  all  things  by  virtue 
'  of  his  immenfe  Treafures,  and  governs  by 
'  his  fole  Will  and  Pleafure,  him  you  think 
'  frofperous,  and  his  State  happy." 

Whilst  I  am  copying  this  (for  'tis  no  more 
indeed  than  a  borrow'd  Sketch  from  one  of 
thole  Originals  before-mention'd)  I  fee  a  thou- 
fand  Ridicules  ariiing  from  the  Manner,  the 
Cii  cumltances  and  Action  it-felf,  compar'd  with 
modern  Breeding  and  Civility. — Let  us  there- 
fore mend  the  matter,  if  poffible,  and  introduce 
the  fame  Philofopher,  addrefling  himfelf  in  a 
more  obfequious  manner,  to  his  Grace,  his  Ex- 
cellency, or  his  Honour;  without  failing  in  the 
leaft  tittle  of  the  Ceremonial.  Or  let  us  put 
the  Cafe  more  favourably  Mill  for  our  Man  of 
Letters.  Let  us  fuppofe  him  to  be  incognito, 
without  the  leaf!  appearance  of  a  Character, 
which  in    our  Age  is  fo  little  recommending. 

Let 


204       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Let  his  Garb  and  Aclion  be  of  the  more  mo- 
difh  fort,  in  order  to  introduce  him  better,  and 
gain  him  Audience.  And  with  thefe  Advan- 
tages and  Precautions,  imagine  Hill  in  what 
manner  he  muff,  accofl  this  Pageant  of  State, 
if  at  any  time  he  finds  him  at  leifure,  walking 
in  the  Fields  alone,  and  without  his  Equipage. 
Confider  how  many  Bows,  and  fimpering  Fa- 
ces !  how  many  Preludes,  Excufes,  Compli- 
ments ! — Now  put  Compliments,  put  Ceremony  in- 
to a  Dialogue,  and  fee  what  will  be  the  Eifecl! 

This  is  the  plain  Dilemma  againft  that  an- 
tient  manner  of  Writing,  which  we  can  nei- 
ther well  imitate,  nor  tranflate;  whatever  Plea- 
fure  or  Profit  we  may  find  in  reading  thofe  Ori- 
ginals. For  what  fhall  we  do  in  fuch  a  Cir- 
cumftance?  What  if  the  Fancy  takes  us,  and 
we  refolve  to  try  the  Experiment  in  modern 
Subjects  ?  See  the  Confequence! — If  we  avoid 
Ceremony,  we  are  unnatural :  if  we  ufe  it,  and 
appear  as  we  naturally  are,  as  we  falute,  and 
meet,  and  treatone  another,  wehatetheSight. — 
What's  this  but  hating  our  own  Faces  ?  Is  it  the 
Painters  Fault?  Shou'd  he  paint  falfly,  or  af- 
fecledly ;  mix  Modern  with  Antient,  join  Shapes 
preponeroufly,  ,and  betray  his  Art  ?  If  not ;  what 
Medium  is  there?  What  remains  for  him,  but 
to  throw   away  the    Pencil? ——No  more  de- 

figning 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         205 

figning  after  the  Life:  no  more  Mirrour-Wri- 
ting,  or  perfonal  Reprefentation  of  any  kind 
whatever. 


THUS  Dialogue  is  at  an  end.     The  Anti- 

ents  cou'd  fee  their  own  Faces  ?  but  we  can  t. 

And  why  this  ?  Why,  but  becaufe 

we    have  lefs  Beauty:   For   fo    our   Looking- 

Glafs  can  inform  us. Ugly  Inflrument! 

And  for  this  reafon  to  be  hated. Our  Com- 
merce and  manner  of  Converfation,  which  we 
think  the  politefl  imaginable,  isfuch,  it  feems, 
as  weour-felves  can't  endure  to  fee  represented 
to  the  Life.  'Tis  here,  as  in  our  real  Portrai- 
tures, particularly  thofe  at  full  Length,  where 
the  poor  Pencil-man  is  put  to  a  thoufand  fhifts, 
whilft  he  ftrives  to  drefs  us  in  affecled  Habits, 
fuch  as  we  never  wore ;  becaufe  Ihou'd  he 
paint  us  in  thofe  we  really  wear,  they  wou'd 
of  neceffity  make  the  Piece  to  be  fomuch  more 
ridiculous,  as  it  was  more  natural,  and  re- 
femblinsr. 


O" 


Thus  much  for  Antiquity,  and  thofe  Rules 
of  Art,  thofe  Philojophicat  Sen-Cards,  by  which 
the  adventurous  Genius's  of  the  Times  were 
wont  to  fleer  their  Courfes,  and  govern  their 
impetuous  Mufe.  Thefe  weie  the  Chartae 
of  our  Roman  M after-Poet,  and  theie  the  Pieces 

of 


206       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

of  Art,  the  Mirrours,   the  Exemplars  he  bids  us 
place  before  our  Eyes 

* — . — fas  Exemplar ia  Grccca 
JSockirna  v  erf  ate  manu,  verfate  diurna. 

And  thus  Poetry  and  the  Writer s  Art,  as 
in  many  refpecls  it  refembles  the  Statuary  s  and 
the  Painters,  fo  in  this  more  particularly,  that 
it  has  its  original  Draughts  and  Models  for  Study 
and  Practice;  not  for  Orientation,  to  be  Ihown 
abroad,  or  copy'd  for  publick  view.  Thefe 
are  the  antient  Bufls ;  the  Trunks  of  Statues  ; 
the  Pieces  of  Anatomy;  themafterly  rough  Draw- 
ings which  are  kept  within  ;  as  the  fecret  Learn- 
ing, the  Myflery,  and  fundamental  Knowledge 
of  the  Art.  There  is  this  eflfential  difference 
however  between  the  Artiits  of  each  kind;  that 
they  who  defign  merely  after  Bodys,  and  form 
the  Graces  of  this  fort,  can  never,  with  all 
their  Accuracy,  or  Correclnefs  of  Defign,  be 
able  to  reform  themfelves,  or  grow  a  jot  more 
ihapely  in  their  Perfons.  But  for  thofe  Art- 
ids  who  copy  from  another  Life,  who  ftudy 
the  Graces  and  Perfeclions  of  Minds,  and 
are  real  Mafxers  of  thofe  Rules  which  confti- 
tute  this  latter  Science;  'tis  impoilible  they 
fhou'd  fail  of  being  themfelves  improv'd,  and 
amended  in  their  better  Pari. 

•lor.  de  Arte  Poet.   v.  26S. 


ADVICE  to  an  Author. 


207 


I  Must  confefs  there  is  hardly  any   where 
to  be   found  a  more  infipid   Race  of  Mortals, 
than  thofe   whom  we  Moderns  are  contented 
to  call  Poets,    for  having  attain'd  the  chiming 
Faculty   of  a  Language,    with  an    injudicious 
random  ufe  of  Wit  and  Fancy.      But  for  the 
Man,  who  truly  and  in  a  juft  fenfe  deferves  the 
Name  of  Poet,  and  who  as  a  real  Mailer,  or  Ar- 
chitect in  the  kind,  can  defcribe  both  Men  and 
Manners,  and  give  to  an  A&ion  its  juft  body  and 
Proportions ;  he  will  be  found,  if  I  miftake  not, 
a  very  different  Creature.  Such  a  Poet  is  indeed  a 
fecond  Maker;  a  j  uft  P  ro  m  e  t  h  e  u  s , under  J  ove. 
Like  that  Sovereign  Artift  or  univerfal  Plaftick 
Nature,  he  forms  a  Whole,  coherent  and  propor- 
tion^ in  it-felf,  with  due  Subjection  and  Su- 
bordinacy of  conflituent  Parts.      He  notes  the 
Boundarys  of  the  Paffions,  and  knows  their  ex- 
act Tones  and  Meajures ;  by  which  he  juftly  re- 
prefents  them,  marks  the  Sublime  of  Sentiments 
and  Action,  and  diltinguifhes  the  Beautiful  from 
the  Deform  cU  the  Amiable  from  the  Odious.     The 
moral  Artift,  who  can   thus  imitate  the  Crea- 
tor, and  is  thus  knowing  in  the  inward  Form 
and  Structure  of  his  Fellow-Creature,  will  hard- 
ly, I  prefume,  be  found  unknowing  in  Himfelf 
or  at  a  lofs  in  thofe  Numbers  which  make  the 
Harmony  of  a  Mind.     For  Knavery  is  mere  Dif 
funance  and   Difproportion.      And  tho   Villains 
Vol.  I.  O  may 


2o8       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

may  have  flrong  Tones  and  natural  Capacitys 
of  Action;  'tis  impoflible  that  *  true  Judgment 
and  Ingenuity  fhou'd  refide,  where  Harmony  and 
Honejly  have  no  being. 


*  The  Maxim  will  hardly  be   difprov'd  by  Fac"l  or  Hiftory,  either  in 
rcfpe£l  of  Philofophers  themlelves,  or  others  who  were  the  great  Genius  s 
or  Mafters  in  the  Liberal  Arts.      The  Characters  of  the  two  belt  Roman 
Poets  are  well  known.      Thole  of  the  antient  Tragedians  no  lefs.      And 
the  great  Epick  Mailer,  thoofan  obfeure  and  remoter  Age,  was  ever  pre- 
fum'd  to  be  far  enough  from  a  vile  or  knavilh  Character.      The  Roman 
as  well  as  the  Grecian  Orator  was  true  to  his  Country;    and  died  in  like 
manner  a   Martyr  for    its  Liberty.      And   thofc  Hifiorians  who  are  of 
higheft   value,    were   either    in  a    private    Life   approv'd  good    Men,    or 
noted  fuch  by  their  Aclions  in  the  Pnblick.      As  for  Poets  in  particular 
(fays  the  learned  and  wile  Strabo)    "  Can  we   poffibly  imagine,  that 
"  the  Genius,   Power,  and    Excellence  of  a    real  Poet   conlilts  in  ought 
"  elfe  than  the  juft   Imitation  of  Life,   in  form'd    Difcourfe   and  Num- 
k'  bers  ?  But  how  fhou'd  he  be  that  juft  Imitator  of  Life,  whilll  he  hiinfelf 
41  knows  not  its  Meafures,  nor  how  to  guide  himfelf  by  Judgment  and 
tl  Underftanding?  For  we  have  not  furely  the  fame  Notion  of  the  Poet's 
**  Excellence  as  of  the  ordinary   Craftfman's,  the  Subjecl  of  whofe  Art 
"  is  fenfelefs  Stone  or  Timber,  without  Life,  Dignity,  or  Beauty  :  whilll 
"  the  Poet's  Art  turning  principally  on   Men  and   Maimers,  he  has  his 
"  Virtue  and  Excellence,  as  Poet,   naturally  annex'd  to   human  Excel- 
41  lence,  and  to   the  Worth  and  Dignity  of  Men.      Infomuch  that  'tis- 
"  impolfible    he   fhou'd   be   a  great  and  worthy  Poet,  who  is  not  firft  'a 
tl   worthy    and   good   Man.''       Ov  yag Sru  <paf/.sv  tsj»  run  riowrijii  a^ri.v  <•% 
y>  rixlovw  r>  ^u>Mtuv,  &:c.  »  SI  TOojrjra  avH^;v>clut  ty)  rS  'Av^uttS'  xj  a%  o»ov  Tt 
aya&ov  yina^ou  <s:owt%v,  (av  taf-ciTtgov  ytvrdQivl(z.  avfya.  uyaQov.    Lib.    i.    See  be- 
/owpag.  278,  337.   and  350,   351.  in   the  Notes.    And  V  O  L.    III. 
fag.  247,  248,  249,273,  2S2. 


BUT 


ADVICE  to  an  Author. 


209 


BUT  having  enter'd  thus  ferioufly  into  the 
Concerns  of Authors,  and  (hewn  their  chief  Foun- 
dation and  Strength,  their  preparatory  Difci- 
pline,  and  qualifying  Method  of  Self -Examina- 
tion; 'tis  fit,  ere  we  difclofe  this  Myjiery  any  fur- 
ther, we  fhou'd  confider  the  Advantages  or  Dif- 
advantages  our  Authors  may  poffibly  meet  with, 
from  abroad:  and  how  far  their  Genius  may  be 
deprefs'd  or  rais'd  by  any  external  Caufes, 
arifing  from  the  Humour  or  Judgment  of  the 
World. 

Whatever,  it  be  which  influences  in  this 
refpect,  mud  proceed  either  from  the  Gran- 
dees and  Men  in  Power,  the  Criticks  and 
Men  of  Art,  or  the  People  themfelves,  the  com- 
mon Audience,  and  mere  Vulgar.  We  Ihall  begin 
therefore  with  the  Grandees,  and  pretended  Maf- 
ters  of  the  World :  taking  the  liberty,  in  favour 
of  Authors,  to  beftow  fome  Advice  alfo  on  thefe 
high  Perfons ;  if  poffibly  they  are  difpos'd  to 
receive  it  in  fuch  a  familiar  way  as  this. 


O2  PART 


510        A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

PART         II. 

SECT.     I. 

AS  ufual  as  it  is  with  Mankind  to  acl  abfo- 
lutely  by  Will  and  Pleafure,  without  re- 
gard to  Counfel,  or  the  rigid  Method  of  Rule 
and  Precept ;  it  mufl  be  acknowledg'd  never- 
thelefs,  that  the  good  and  laudable  Cuftom  of 
a/king  Advice,  is  (till  upheld,  and  kept  in  fafhi- 
on,  as  a  matter  of  fair  Repute,  and  honour- 
able Appearance :  Infomuch  that  even  Mo- 
narchs,  and  abfolute  Princes  themfelves,  dif- 
dain  not,  we  fee,  to  make  profefiion  of  the 
Practice. 

'Tis,  I  prefume,  on  this  account,  that  the 
Royal  Perfons  are  pleas'd,  on  publick  Occafi- 
ons,  to  make  ufe  of  the  noted  Style  of  W  E  and 
US.  Not  that  they  are  fuppos'd  to  have  any 
Converfe  with  Themfelves,  as  being  endow'd  with 
the  Privilege  of  becoming  Plural,  and  enlarging 
their  Capacity,  in  the  manner  above  defcribd. 
Single  and  abfolute  Perfons  in  Government, 

I'm 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  211 

I'm  fenfible,  can  hardly  be  confider'd  as  any- 
other  than  Jingle  and  cibfolute  in  Morals.  They 
have  no  Inmat  e-Gontxou\ev  to  cavil  with  'em, 
or  difpute  their  Pleafure.  Nor  have  they,  from 
any  Practice  abroad,  been  able  at  any  time  to 
learn  the  way  of  being  free  and  familiar  with 
themfelves,fl£/w/72£.  Inclination  and  Will 
in  fuch  as  thefe,  admit  as  little  Reflraint  or 
Check  in  private  Meditation  as  in  publick 
Company.  The  World,  which  ferves  as  a  Tu- 
tor to  Perfons  of  an  inferior  rank,  is  fubmif- 
five  to  thefe  Royal  Pupils;  who  from  their  ear- 
lier! days  are  us'd  to  fee  even  their  Injlrudors 
bend  before  'em,  and  hear  every  thing  ap- 
plauded which  they  themfelves  perform. 

For  fear  therefore,  left  their  Humour  mere- 
ly, or  the  Caprice  of  fome  Favourite,  fliou'd 
be  prefum'd  to  influence  'em,  when  they  come 
to  years  of  princely  Difcretion,  and  are  ad- 
vanc'd  to  the  Helm  of  Government;  it  has 
been  efteem'd  a  neceffary  Decency  to  fum- 
raon  certain  Advifers  by  Profejfwn,  to  affift  as 
Attendants  to  the  Jingle  Per/on,  and  be  join'd 
with  him  in  his  written  Edicls,  Proclamations, 
Letters-Patent,  and  other  Inftruments  of  Re- 
gal Power.  For  this  ufe,  Privy-Counfellors  have 
been  erecled ;  who  being  Perfons  of  confider- 
able  Figure  and  wife  Afpecl,  cannot  be  fup- 
pos'd  to    ftand    as    itatues    or  mere    Cyphers 

O  3  in 


212       A  D  VICE  to  an  Author, 

in  the  Government,  and  leave  the  Royal  Acts 
erroneoufly  and  falfly  defcrib'd  to  us  in  the 
Plural  Number;  when,  at  the  bottom,  zfingle 
Will  or  Fancy  was  the  fole  Spring  and  Motive. 

Foreign  Princes  indeed  have  mofl  of  'em 
that  unhappy  Prerogative  of  acting  unadvifedly 
and  wilfully  in  their  national  Affairs :  But  'tis 
known  to  be  far  otherwife  with  the  legal  and 
jufl  Princes  of  our  Ifland.  They  are  fui  round- 
ed with  the  befl  of  Counfellors,  the  Laws. 
They  adminifler  Civil  Affairs  by  Legal  Of- 
ficers, who  have  the  Direction  of  their  Pub- 
lick  Will  and  Confcience :  and  they  annually 
receive  Advice  and  Aid,  in  the  mofl  effectual 
manner,  from  their  good  People.  To  this 
wife  Genius  of  our  Constitution  we  may  be 
juflly  faid  to  owe  our  wifeft  and  beft  Princes; 
whofe  High  Birth  or  Royal  Education  cou  d 
not  alone  be  fuppos'd  to  have  given  'em  that 
happy  Turn :  fince  by  experience  we  find, 
that  thofe  very  Princes,  from  whofe  Conduct 
the  World  abroad,  as  well  as  We  at  home, 
have  reap'd  the  greateft  Advantages,  were  fuch 
as  had  the  mofl  controverted  Titles ;  and  in 
their  youth  had  flood  in  the  remoter  Profpects 
of  Regal* Power,  and  liv'd  the  nearefl  to  a 
private  Life. 


Other 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        213 

Other  Princes  we  have  had,  who  tho  dif- 
ficult perhaps  in  receiving  Counfel,  have  been 
eminent  in  the  Practice  of  applying  it  to  others. 
They  have  lifted  themfelves  Advifers  in  form,  and 
by  publishing  their  admonitory  Works,  have 
added  to  the  number  of  thofe,  whom  in  this 
Treatife  we  have  prefum'd  to  criticize.  But 
our  Criticifm  being  withal  an  Apology  {ox  Au- 
thors, and  a  Defence  of  the  literate  Tribe;  it 
cannot  be  thought  amifs  in  us,  to  join  the 
Rpyal  with  the  Plebeian  Penmen,  in  this  com- 
mon Caufe. 

Twou'd  be  a  hard  Cafe  indeed,  fhou'd  the 
Princes  of  our  Nation  refufe  to  countenance 
the  induftrious  Raceof^w//zon;  lince  their  Roy- 
al Anceftors,  and  PredeceiTors,  have  had  fuch 
Honour  deriv'd  to  'em  from  this  Profeflion.  'Tis 
to  this  they  owe  that  bright  Jewel  of  their 
Crown,  purchasd  by  a  warlike  Prince ;  who 
having  affum'd  the  Author,  and  effay'd  his 
Strength  in  the  polemick  Writings  of  the  School- 
Divines,  thought  it  an  Honour  on  this  account 
to  retain  the  Title  of  Defender  of  the 
Faith. 

Another  Prince,  of  a  more  pacifick  Na- 
ture and  fluent  Thought,  fubmitting  Arms  and 
martial  Difcipline  to  the  Gown;  and  canfiding 

O  4  in 


2i4       A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

in  his  princely  Science  and  profound  Learn- 
ing, made  his  Style  and  Speech  the  Nerve  and. 
Sinew  of  his  Government.  He  gave  us  his 
Works  full  of  wife  Exhortation  and  Advice  to 
his  Royal  Son,  as  well  as  of  Inftruction  to  his 
good  People ;  who  cou'd  not  without  admira- 
tion obferve  their  ^/for-Sovereign,  thus  ftu- 
dious  and  contemplative  in  their  behalf.  'Twas 
then,  one  might  have  feen  our'Nation  growing 
young  and  docile,  with  that  Simplicity  of 
Heart,  which  qualify'd  'em  to  profit  like  ^Scho- 
lar- People  under  their  Royal  Preceptor-  For  wi$h 
abundant  Eloquence  he  graciouily  gave  Leffons 
to  his  Parliament,  tutor'd  his  Minifters,  and 
edify'd  the  greateft  Church-men  and  Divines 
themfelves ;  by  who  fe  Suffer  age  heobtamd  the 
higher!  Appellations  which  cou'd  be  merited 
by  the  acuteft  Wit,  and  trueft  Underftanding. 
From  hence  the  Britijh  Nations  were  taught  to 
own  in  common  a  Solomon  for  their  joint 
Sovereign,  the  Founder  of  their  latecompleat- 
ed  Union.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that  the 
pious  Treatife  of  Self-Difcoiirfe  afcrib'd  to  the 
fucceeding  Monarch,  contributed  in  a  great 
meafure  to  his  glorious  and  never-fading  Ti- 
tles of  Saint,  and  Martyr. 

However  it  be,  I  wou'd  not  willingly 
take  upon  me  to  recommend  this  Author -Charac- 
ter to  our  future  Princes.      Whatever  Crowns 

or 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        215 

or  Laurels  their  renown'd  Predeceffors  may 
have  gather'd  in  this  Field  of  Honour;  I  fhou'd 
think  that  for  the  future,  the  fpeculative  Pro- 
vince might  more  properly  be  committed  to 
private  Heads.  'Twou'd  be  a  fufficient  En- 
couragement to  the  learned  World,  and  a  fure 
Earnefl  of  the  Increafe  and  Flourifhing  of  Let- 
ters in  our  Nation,  if  its  Sovereigns  wou'd  be 
contented  to  be  the  Patrons  of  Wit,  and  vouch - 
fafe  to  look  gracioufly  on  the  ingenious  Pupils 
of  Art.  Or  were  it  the  Cuftom  of  their  Prime- 
Miniflers,  to  have  any  fuch  regard ;  it  wou'd 
of  it-felf  be  fufficient  to  change  the  Face  of 
Affairs.  A  fmall  degree  of  Favour  wou'd  in- 
fure  the  Fortunes  of  a  diftrefs'd  and  ruinous 
Tribe,  whofe  forlorn  Condition  has  help'd  to 
draw  Difgrace  upon  Arts  and  Sciences,  and  kept 
'em  far  off  from  that  Politenefs  and  Beauty, 
in  which  they  wou'd  foon  appear,  if  the  afpi- 
ring  Genius  of  our  Nation  were  forwarded  by 
the  lead  Care  or  Culture. 

There  fhou'd  not,  one  wou'd  think,  be 
any  need  of  Courtfhip  or  Perfiiafion  to  engage 
our  Grandees  in  the  Patronage  of  Arts  and  Let- 
ters. For  in  our  Nation,  upon  the  foot  Things 
ftand,  and  as  they  are  likely  to  continue;  'tis 
not  difficult  to  forefee  that  Improvements 
will  be  made  in  every  Art  and  Science.     The 

Muses 


216        A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Muses  will  have  their  Turn;  and  with  or 
without  their  Maecenas's  will  grow  in  Credit 
and  Efleem;  as  they  arrive  to  greater  i'erFec- 
tion.  and  excel  in  every  kind.  There  will  a- 
rife  fuch  Spirits  as  wou'd  have  credited  their 
Court-Patrons,  had  they  found  any  fo  wife  as 
to  have  fought  'em  out  betimes,  and  contri- 
buted to  their  rifing  Greatnefs. 

'Tis  fcarce  a  quarter  of  an  Age  fmce  fuch 
a  happy  Balance  of  Power  was  fettled  between 
our  Prince  and  People,  as  has  firmly  fecur'd 
our  hitherto  precarious  Libertys,  and  remov'd 
from  us  the  Fear  of  Civil  Commotions,  Wars 
and  Violence,  either  on  account  of  Religion 
and  Worfhip,  the  Property  of  the  Subjecl,  or 
the  contending  Titles  of  the  Crown.  But  as 
the  greateft  Advantages  of  this  World  are  not 
to  be  bought  at  eafy  Prices;  we  are  ftill  at  this 
moment  expending  both  our  Blood  and  Trea- 
fure,  to  fecure  to  our -felves  this  ineflimable 
Purchafe  of  our  Free  Government  and  National 
Conjliiution.  And  as  happy  as  wre  are  in  this 
Euablifhment  at  home;  we  are  flill  held  in  a 
perpetual  Alarm  by  the  Afpecl  of  Affairs  a- 
broad,  and  by  the  Terror  of  that  Power,  which 
ere  Mankind  had  well  recover'd  the  Mifery  of 
thofe  barbarous  Ages  confequent  to  the  Roman 
Yoke,  has  again  threaten'd  the  World  with  a 

Uni- 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        217 

Univerfal  Monarchy,    and  a  new  Abyfs  of  Ig- 
norance and  Superftition. 

The  British  Muses,  in  this  Dinn  of 
Arms,  may  well  lie  abject  and  obfcure;  efpe- 
cially  being  as  yet  in  their  mere  Infant-State. 
They  have  hitherto  fcarce  arriv'd  to  any-thing 
of  Shapelinefs  orPerfon.  They  lifp  as  in  their 
Cradles:  and  their  Hammering  Tongues,  which 
nothing  befides  their  Youth  and  Rawnefs  can 
excufe,  have  hitherto  fpoken  in  wretched  Pun 
and  Quibble.  Our  Dramatick  Shakespear, 
our  Fletcher,  Johnson,  and  our  Epick 
Milton  preferve  this  Style.  And  even  a  lat- 
ter Race,  fcarce  free  of  this  Infirmity,  and  aim- 
ing at  a  falfe  Sublime,  with  crouded  Simile,  and 
mix'd  Mataphor,  (the  Hobby-Horfe,  and  Rattle 
of  the  Muses)  entertain  our  raw  Fancy,  and 
unpractis'd  Ear;  which  has  not  as  yet  had  lei- 
fure  to  form  it-felf,  and  become  *  truly  muficaL 

But  thofe  reverend  Bards,  rude  as  they 
were,  according  to  their  Time  and  Age,  have 
provided  us  however  with  the  richefl  Ore.  To 
their  eternal  Honour  they  have  withal  been 
the  firft  of  Europeans,  who  fince  the  Go- 
thick  Model  of  Poetry,  attempted  to  throw 
off  the  horrid  Difcord  of  jingling  Rhyme.  They 


VOL.  Ul.  p.  263,  261. 

have 


218      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

have  afferted  antient  Poetick  Liberty,  and  have 
happily  broken  the  Ice  for  thofe  who  are  to 
follow  'em ;  and  who  treading  in  their  Foot- 
fleps,  may  at  leifure  polifh  our  Language,  lead 
our  Ear  to  finer  Pleafure,  and  find  out  the  true 
Rhythmus,  and  harmonious  Numbers,  which 
alone  can  fatisfy  a  jufl  Judgment,  and  Mufe? 
like  Apprehenfion. 

'Tis  evident,  our  natural  Genius  fliines  a- 
bove  that  airy  neighbouring  Nation  ;  of  whom, 
however,  it  muft  be  confefs'd,  that  with  truer 
Pains  and  Induury,  they  have  fought  Politene.fi, 
and  fludy'cl  to  give  the  Muses  their  due  Body 
and  Proportion,  as  well  as  the  natural  Orna- 
ments of  Correclnefs,  Chaftity,  and  Grace  of 
Style.  From  the  plain  Model  of  the  Antients, 
they  have  rais'd  a  noble  *  Satirijh  In  the  Epick 
Kind  their  Attempts  have  been  lefs  fuccefsful. 
In  the  Dramatick  they  have  been  fo  happy,  as 
to  raife  their  Stage  to  as  great  Perfection,  as 
the  Genius  of  their  Nation  will  permit.  But 
the  high  Spirit  of  Tragedy  can  ill  fubfifl  where 
the  Spirit  of  Liberty  is  wanting.  The  Genius  of 
this  Poetry  confifts  in  the  lively  Reprefentation 
of  the  Diforders  and  Mifery  of  the  Great;  to  the 
end  that  the  People  and  thofe  of  a  lower  Condi- 
tion may  be  taught  the  better  to  content  them- 
felves  with   privacy,    enjoy  their  fafer    State, 

*   BoiLLAU. 

and 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  219 

and  prize  the  Equality  and  Juflice  of  their 
Guardian  Laws.  If  this  be  found  agreeable 
to  the  juft  Tragic k  Model,  which  the  Antients 
have  deliver'd  to  us ;  'twill  eafily  be  conceiv'd 
how  little  fuch  a  Model  is  proportion'd  to  the 
Capacity  or  Tafte  of  thofe,  who  in  a  long  Se- 
ries of  Degrees,  from  the  loweft  Peafant  to  the 
high  Slave  of  Royal  Blood,  are  taught  to  ido- 
lize the  next  in  Power  above  em,  and  think 
nothing  fo  adorable  as  that  unlimited  Great- 
nefs,  and  tyrannick  Power,  which  is  rais  d  at 
their  own  Expence,  and  exercis'd  over  them/elves. 

'Tis  eafy,  on  the  other  hand,  to  apprehend 
the  Advantages  of  our  Britain  in  this  par- 
ticular ;  and  what  effecl  its  eflablifh'd  Liberty 
wTill  produce  in  every  thing  which  relates  to 
Art;  when  Peace  returns  to  us  on  thefe  happy 
Conditions.  'Twas  the  Fate  of  Rome  to  have 
fcarce  an  intermediate  Age,  or  fmgle  Period 
of  Time,  between  the  Rife  of  Arts  and  Fall  of 
Liberty.  No  fooner  had  that  Nation  begun 
to  lofe  the  Roughnefs  and  Barbarity  of  their 
Manners,  and  learn  of  Greece  to  form  their 
Heroes,  their  Orators  and  Poets  on  a  right  Mo- 
del, than  by  their  unjuft  Attempt  upon  the 
Liberty  of  the  World,  they  juftly  loll  their 
own.  With  their  Liberty  they  loft  not  only 
their  Force  of  Eloquence,  but  even  their  Style 
and  Language  it-felf.  The  Poets  who  after- 
wards 


220      A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

wards  arofe  among  them,  were  mere  unnatural 
and  forc'd  Plants.  Their  Two  moftaccomplifh'd, 
who  came  laft,    and   closd   the  Scene,   were 
plainly  fuch  as  had  feen  the  Days  of  Liberty, 
and  felt  the  fad  Effects  of  its  Departure.     Nor 
had  thefe  been  ever  brought  in  play,   other- 
wife   than    thro'  the   Friend  (hip  of  the   fam'd 
Maecenas,  who  turn'd  a  *  Prince  naturally 
cruel  and   barbarous  to  the  Love  and  Court- 
fhip  of  the  Muses.  Thefe  Tutor  eJJ'es  form'd  in 
their  Royal  Pupil  a  new  Nature.    They  taught 
him  how   to    charm    Mankind.     They  were 
more  to  him  than  his  Arms  or mlitary  Virtue; 
and,  more  than  Fortune  herfelf,  affined  him  in 
his  Greatnefs,  and  made  his  ufurp'd  Dominion 
fo  inchanting  to  the  World,   that  it  cou'd  fee 
without  regret  its   Chains  of  Bondage  firmly 
riveted.     The    corrupting    Sweets    of  fuch  a 
poifonous  Government  were  not  indeed  long- 
liv'd.    The  Bitter  foon  fucceeded.   And,  in  the 
iflue,  the  World  was  forc'd   to  bear  with  pa- 
tience  thofe   natural    and   genuine  Tyrants, 
who  fucceeded  to  this  fpecious  Machine  of  Ar- 
bitrary and  Univerfal  Power. 

And  now  that  I  am  fall'n  unawares  into 
fuch  profound  Refleclions  on  the  Periods  of 
Government,  and  the  Flourifhing  and  Decay 
of  Liberty    and   Letters;  I  can't    be  contented 

,f  Infra,  p.  269,  270.    in  the  Notes. 

to 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        221 

to  confider  merely  of  the  Inchantment  which 
wrought  fo  powerfully  upon  Mankind,  when 
firft  this  Univerfal  Monarchy  was  eflabliOYd. 
I  mufl  wonder  full  more,  when  I  coniider  how 
after  the  Extinction  of  this  Caesarean  and 
Claud ian  Family,  and  a  (hort  Interval  of 
Princes  rais'd  and  deflroy  d  with  much  Dis- 
order and  publick  Ruin,  the  Romans  fhou'd 
regain  their  perifhing  Dominion,  and  ret-rieve 
their  finking  State,  by  an  after-Race  of  wife 
and  able  Princes  fucceffively  adopted,  and  ta- 
ken from  a  private  State  to  rule  the  Empire  of 
the  World.  They  were  Men  who  not  only 
pofTefs'd  the  military  Virtues,  and  fupported 
that  fort  of  Difcipline  in  the  higheft  degree; 
but  as  they  fought  the  Intereft  of  the  World, 
they  did  what  was  in  their  power  to  reftore 
Liberty,  and  raife  again  the  perifhing  Arts,  and 
decay'd  Virtue  of  Mankind.  But  the  Seafonwas 
now  pad!  The  fatal  Form  of  Government  was 
become  too  natural :  And  the  World,  which 
had  bent  under  it,  and  was  become  flavifh  and 
dependent,  had  neither  Power  nor  Will  to 
help  it-felf.  The  only  Deliverance  it  cou'd 
expecl,  was  from  the  mercilefs  hands  of  the 
Barbarians,  and  a  total  DiiTolution  of  that  enor- 
mous Empire  and  defpotick  Power,  which 
the  beft  Hands  cou'd  not  preferve  from  be- 
ing deflruclive  to  human  Nature.  For  even 
Barbarity   and  Gotkicifm    were   already  enter  d 

into 


222        A  D  VIC  E  to  an  Author. 

into  Arts,  ere  the  Savages  had  made  any  Im- 
preffion  on  the  Empire.  All  the  advantage 
which  a  fortuitous  and  almoft  miraculous  Suc- 
ceffion  of  good  Princes  cou'd  procure  their 
highly  favour' d  Arts  and  Sciences,  was  no 
more  than  to  preferve  during  their  own  time 
thofe  *  perilhing  Remains,  which  had  for  a- 
while  with  difficulty  fubfifled,  after  the  Decline 
of  Liberty.  Not  a  Statue,  not  a  Medal,  not  a 
tolerable  Piece  of  Architecture  cou'd  (hew  it- 
felf  afterwards.  Philofophy,  Wit  and  Learn- 
ing, in  which  fome  of  thofe  good  Princes  had 
themfelves  been  fo  renown'd,  fell  with  them : 
and  Ignorance  and  Darknefs  overfpread  the 
World,  and  fitted  it  for  the  Chaos  and  Ruin 
which  enfu'd. 


WE  ARE  now  in  an  Age  when  Liberty 
is  once  again  in  its  Afcendent.  And  we  are 
our-felves  the  happy  Nation,  who  not  only 
enjoy  it  at  home,  but  by  our  Greatnefs  and 
Power  give  Life  and  Vigour  to  it  abroad;  and 
are  the  Head  and  Chief  of  the  European 
League,  founded  on  this  Common  Caufe.  Nor 
can  it,  I  prefume,  be  jullly  fear'd  that  we 
ihou'd  lofe  this  noble  Ardour,  or  faint  under 
the  glorious  Toil;  tho,  like  antient  Greece, 
we  fhou'd  for  fucceeding  Ages  be  contending 

*  Infra,  p.  239,  341,  342.    in  the  Notes. 

with 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       223 

with  a  foreign  Power,  and  endeavouring  to  re- 
duce the  Exorbitancy  of  a  Grand  Monarch.  'Tis 
with  us  at  prefent,  as  with  the  Roman  People 
in  thofe  *  early  Days,  when  they  wanted  only 
repofe  from  Arms  to  apply  themfelves  to  the 
Improvement  of  Arts  and  Studys.  We  fhou'd, 
in  this  cafe,  need  no  ambitious  Monarch  to  be 
allurd,  by  hope  of  Fame  or  fecret  views  of  Pow- 
er, to  give  Penfions  abroad,  as  well  as  at  home, 
and  purchafe  Flattery  from  every  Profedion 
and  Science.  We  fhou'd  find  a  better  Fund 
within  ourfelves ;  and  might,  without  fuch  Af- 
fiftance,  be  able  to  excel,  by  our  own  Virtue 
and  Emulation. 

Well  it  wou'd  be  indeed,  and  much  to  the 
Honour  of  our  Nobles  and  Princes,  wou'd  they 
freely  help  in  this  Affair;  and  by  a  judicious 
Application  of  their  Bounty,  facilitate  this  hap- 
py Birth,  of  which  I  have  ventur'd  to  fpeak  in 
a  prophetick  Style.  'Twou'd  be  of  no  fmall 
advantage  to  'em  during  their  Life ;  and  wou'd 
more  than  all  their  other  Labours  procure  'em 
an  immortal  Memory.  For  they  mud  remem- 
ber that  their  Fame  is  in  the  hands  of  Penmen; 
and  that  the  greateft  Aclions  lofe  their  Force, 


*  Serus  enim  Gr<zcis  admovit  acumina  Charlis; 
Et  poji  Punka  Bella  quietus,  qu&rere  capit, 
Quid  Sophocles  et  Thejpis  et  JEfchyliis  utile  fervent. 

Hor.  Epift.  I.  Lib.  2. 

Vol.  I.  P  and 


224       A  DV I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

and  perifh  in  the  cuftody  of  unable  and  mean 
Writers. 

Let  a  Nation  remain  ever  fo  rude  or  bar- 
'barous,  it  mull  have  its  Poets,  Rhapfoders,  Hijlo- 
riographers,  Antiquarys  of  fome  kind  or  other, 
vvhofe  bufmefs  it  will  be  to  recount  its  remark- 
able Tranfac~lions,   and  record  the  Achieve- 
ments of  its  Civil  and  Military  Heroes.    And  tho 
the  Military  Kind  may  happen  to  be  the  furtheu 
remov'd  from  any  acquaintance  with   Letters, 
or  the  Muses;    they  are   yet,  in  reality,    the 
molt  interefled  in  the  Caufe  and  Party  of  thefe 
Remembrancers.    The  greater!  mare  of  Fame  and 
Admiration  falls  naturally  on  the  amid  Wor- 
thy's.    The  Great  in  Council  are  fecond  in  the 
Muses  Favour.     But  if  worthy  poetick  Geni- 
us's are  not  found,  nor  able  Penmen  rais'd,  to 
rehearfe  the  Lives,  and  celebrate  the  high  Ac- 
tions of  great  Men,  they  mult  be  traduc'd  by 
fuch  Recorders  as  Chance  prefents.     We  have 
few  modern  Heroes,  who  like  Xenophon  or 
Caesar  can  write  their  own  Commentary's.   And 
the  raw  Memoir-Writings  and  unform'd  Pieces 
of  modern    Statefmen,  full   of  their  interefted 
and  private  Views,  will  in  another  Age  be  of 
little  fervice  to  fupport  their  Memory  or  Name; 
fince  already  the  World  begins  to  ficken  with 
the  Kind.     'Tis  the  learn'd,  the  able,  and  dif- 
interefled  Hijlorian,  who  takes  place  at  lad.  And 

when 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        225 

when  the  fignal  Poet,  or  Herald  of  Fame  is  once 
heard,  the  inferior  Trumpets  (ink  in  Silence  and 
Oblivion. 

But  fuppofing  it  were  poflible  for  the  Hero 
or  State/man,  to  be  absolutely  unconcern'd  for 
his  Memory,  or  what  came  after  him ;  yet  for 
the  prefent  merely,  and  during  his  own  time, 
it  muft  be  of  importance  to  him  to  ftand  fair 
with  the  Men  of  Letters  and  Ingenuity,  and  to 
have  the  Character  and  Repute  of  being  favour- 
able to  their  Art.      Be  the  illuftrious  Perfon 
ever  fo  high  or  awful  in  his  Station ;   he  muft 
have  Descriptions  made  of  him,  in  Verfe,  and 
Profe,  under  feign'd,  or  real  Appellations.     If 
he  be  omitted-  in    found  Ode,  or   lofty  Epick; 
he  muft  be  fung  at  leaft   in  Doggrel  and  plain 
Ballad.    The  People  will  needs  have  his  Effigies; 
tho  they  fee  his  Perfon  ever  fo  rarely :   And  if 
he  refufes  to  fit  to  the  good  Painter,  there  are 
others  who,  to  oblige  the  Publick,  will  take  the 
Defign  in  hand.     We  {hall  take  up  with  what 
prefents ;  and  rather  than  be  without  the  illuf- 
trious  Phyfiognomy  of  our  great  Man,  fhall  be 
contented  to  fee  him  portraitur'd  by  the  Artift 
who  ferves  to  illuftrate  Prodigys  in  Fairs,  and 
adorn  heroick  Sign-Pojls.     The  ill  Paint  of  this 
kind  cannot,  it's  true,  difgrace  his  Excellency ; 
whofe  Privilege    it  is,    in   common  with    the 

P  2  Royal 


226       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Royal  I  flue,  to  be  rais'd  to  this  degree  of  Honour, 
and  to  invite  the  PafTenger  or  Traveller  by  his 
fignal  Reprefentative.  Tis  fuppos'd  in  this 
Cafe,  that  there  are  better  Pictures  current  of 
the  Hero ;  and  that  (itch  as  thefe,  are  no  true 
or  favourable  Representations.  But  in  another 
fort  of  Limning,  there  is  great  danger  left  the 
Hand  fhou'd  difgrace  the  Subjecl.  Vile  Enco- 
miums, and  wretched  Panegyricks  are  the  worfl 
of  Satirs:  And  when  fordid  and  low  Genius's 
make  their  Court  fuccefsfully  in  one  way,  the 
generous  and  able  are  aptefl  to  revenge  it  in 
another. 


ALL  THINGS  confider  d,  as  to  the  Inte- 
reft  of  our  Potentates  and  Grandees,  they  ap- 
pear to  have  only  this  Choice  left  'em ;  either 
wholly,  if  poflible,  to  fupprefs  Letters;  or  give  a 
helping  hand  towards  their  Support.  Wherever 
the  Author -VidL&icz  and  Liberty  of  the  Pen  has  in 
the  leaft  prevailed,  the  Governors  of  the  State 
muft  be  either  confiderable  Gainers,  or  Suffer- 
ers by  its  means.  So  that  'twou'd  become  them 
either,  by  a  right  TurkiJJi  Policy,  to  ftrike  di- 
reclly  at  the  Profejfton,  and  overthrow  the  very 
Art  and  Myftery  it-felf,  or  with  Alacrity  to  fup- 
port  and  encourage  it,  in  the  right  manner, 
by  a  generous  and  impartial  regard  to  Merit. 

To 


A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author.         227 

To  acl  narrowly,  or  by  halves ;  or  with  indif- 
ference and  coolnefs ;  or  fantaftically,  and  by 
humour  merely ;  will  fcarce  be  found  to  turn 
to  their  account.  They  mult  do  JuRice;  that 
Juftice  may  be  done  them,  in  return.  Twill 
be  in  vain  for  our  Alexanders  to  give  or- 
ders that  none  befides  a  Lysippus  fhou'dmake 
their  Statue,  nor  any  befides  ariApELLES  lhou'd 
draw  their  Picture.  Infolent  Intruders  will  do 
themfelves  the  honour  to  praclife  on  the  Fea- 
tures of  thefe  Heroes.  And  a  vile Chaerilus, 
after  all,  (hall,  with  their  own  Gonfent  perhaps, 
fupply  the  room  of  a  deferving  and  noble  Ar- 
fift. 

In  a  Government  where  the  People  are 
Sharers  in  Power,  but  no  Diftributers  or  Dif- 
penfers  of  Rewards,  they  expect  it  of  their 
Princes  and  Great  Men,  that  they  lhou'd  fupply 
the  generous  Part;  and  beftow  Honour  and 
Advantages  on  thofe  from  whom  the  Nation 
k-felf  may  receive  Honour  and  Advantage. 
Tis  expecled  that  they  who  are  high  and  emi- 
nent in  the  State,  fhou'd  not  only  provide  for 
its  neceffary  Safety  and  Subfiuence,  but  omit 
nothing  which  may  contribute  to  its  Dignity 
and  Honour.  The  Arts  and  Sciences  mud  not  be 
left  Patron-lefss  The  Publick  it-felf  will  join 
with  the  good  Wits  and  judges,  in  the  refent- 
ment  of  fuch  a   Neglecl.      'Tis  no   fmall  ad- 

P  3  vantage, 


228       A  D  VI  C  E  to   an  Author. 

vantage,  even  in  an  abfolute   Government,  for  a 
Miniflry  to  have  Wit  on  their  fide,  and  engage 
the  Men  of  Merit  in  this  kind   to   be   their 
Well- withers  and  Friends.    And  in  thofe  States 
where    ambitious   Leaders  often  contend  for 
the    fupreme   Authority,    'tis    a    confiderable 
advantage  to  the  ill  Caufe  of  fuch  Pretenders, 
when  they    can   obtain  a  Name  and  Intereft 
with  the  Men  of    Letters.     The  good  Empe- 
ror Trajan,  tho  himfelf  no  mighty  Scholar, 
had  his  due  as  well   as  an  Augustus;    and 
was  as  highly  celebrated  for  his  Munificence, 
and  juft  Encouragement  of  every  Art  and  Vir- 
tue.    And  Caesar,  who  cou'd  write  fo  well 
himfelf,  and  maintain'd  his  Caufe  by  Wit  as 
well  as    Arms,    knew   experimentally  what  it 
was  to  have  even  a  Catullus    his  Enemy: 
and  tho  lafh'd  fo  often  in  his  Lampoons,  con- 
tinu'd  to  forgive   and  court  him.      The  Trai- 
tor knew  the  Importance  of  this  Mildnefs.   May 
none  who  have  the  fame  Defigns,  underftand 
fo  well  the  advantages  of  fuch  a  Conduct!    I 
wou'd  have   requir'd  only  this  one  Defecl;   in 
Caesar's   Generofity,  to  have  been  fecure  of 
his  never  rifing  to  Greatnefs,  or  enflaving  his 
native  Country.    Let  him  have  fhewn  a  Rug- 
gednefs  and  Auflerity  towards    free  Genius's, 
or  a  neglect  or  Contempt  towards  Men  of  Wit; 
let  him  have  trufted  to  his  Arms,  and  declar'd 
againft  Arts  and  Letters;  and  he  wou'd  have 

prov'd 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.      229 

prov'd  a  fecond  Marius,  or  a  Catiline  of 
meaner  Fame,  and  Character. 

'Tis,  I  know,  the  Imagination  of  fome  who 
are  call'd  Great  Men,  that  in  regard  of  their 
high  Stations  they  may  be  efleem'd  to  pay  a 
fufficient  Tribute  to  Letters,  and  difcharge 
themfelves  as  to  their  own  part  in  particular ; 
if  they  chufe  indifferently  any  Subjecl  for 
their  Bounty,  and  are  pleas'd  to  confer  their 
Favour  either  on  fome  one  Pretender  to  Art, 
or  promifcuoufly  to  fuch  of  the  Tribe  of 
Writers,  whofe  chief  Ability  has  lain  in 
making  their  court  well,  and  obtaining  to  be 
introduc'd  to  their  Acquaintance.  This  they 
think  fufficient  to  inftal  them  Patrons  of  Wit, 
and  Matters  of  the  literate  Order.  But  this 
Method  will  of  any  other  the  leaft  ferve  their 
Intereft  or  Defign.  The  ill  placing  of  Rewards 
is  a  double  Injury  to  Merit;  and  in  every 
Caufe  or  Intereft,  pafles  for  worfe  than  mere 
Indifference  or  Neutrality."  There  can  be  no 
Excufe  for  making  an  ill  Choice.  Merit  in 
every  kind  is  eafdy  difcoverd,  when  fought. 
The  Publick  it-felf  fails  not  to  give  fufficient 
indication  ;  and  points  out  thofe  Genius  s  who 
want  only  Countenance  and  Encouragement 
to  become  confiderable.  An  ingenious  Man 
never  flarves  unknown :  and  Great  Men  muft 
wink  hard,  or  'twou'd  be  impoffible  for  'em  to 

P  4  mifs 


230       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

mifs  fuch  advantageous  Opportunitys  of  (hew- 
ing their  Generofity,  and  acquiring  the  Uni- 
verfal  Efteem,  Acknowledgments,  and  good 
Wifhes  of  the  ingenious  and  learned  part  of 
Mankind. 


•       S    E    C    T     II. 

WHAT  Judgment  therefore  we  are  to 
form,  concerning  the  Influence  of  our 
Grandees  in  matters  of  Art,  and  Letters,  will 
eafily  be  gather  d  from  the  Reflections  already 
made.  It  may  appear  from  the  very  Freedom 
we  have  taken  in  cenfuring  thefe  Men  of  Power, 
what  little  reafon  Authors  have  to  plead  'em 
as  their  Excufe  for  any  Failure  in  the  Im- 
provement of  their  Art  and  Talent.  For  in  a 
free  Country,  fuch  as  ours,  there  is  not  any 
Order  or  Rank  of  Men,  more  free  than  that  of 
Writers:  who  if  they  have  real  Ability  and 
Merit,  can  fully  right  themfelves  when  in- 
jur'd ;  and  are  ready  furnilh'd  with  Means, 
furhcicnt  to  make  themfelves  confider'd  by  the 
Men  in  higher!  Power. 

Nor  'fhou'd  I  fufpecl  the  Genius  of  our 
Writers,  or  charge  'era  with  Meannefs  and 
Infufficiency  on  the  account  of  this  Low-fpi- 
ritednefs    which  they  difcover ;    were  it  not 

for 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        231 

for  another  fort  of  Fear,  by  which  they  more 
plainly  betray  themfelves,  and  feem  confcious 
of  their  own  Defect  The  C  r  i  t  i  c  k  s,  it  feems, 
are  formidable  to 'em.  The  Critic ks  are 
the  dreadful  Spetlers,  the  Giants,  the  Enchanter s% 
who  traverfe  and  difturb  'em  in  their  Works. 
Thefe  are  the  Perfecutors,  for  whofe  fake 
they  are  ready  to  hide  their  heads ;  begging 
refcue  and  protection  of  all  good  People;  and 
flying  in  particular  to  the  Great,  by  whofe  Fa- 
vour they  hope  to  be  defended  from  this 
mercilefs  examining  Race.  "  For  what  can  be 
more  cruel,  than  to  be  forc'd  to  fubmit  to 
the  rigorous  Laws  of  Wit,  and  write  under 
fuch  fevere  Judges  as  are  deaf  to  all  Court- 
fhip,  and  can  be  wrought  upon  by  no  In- 
fmuation  or  Flattery  to  pafs  by  Faults,  and 
pardon  any  Tranfgreflion  of  Art  f 


4  1 
44 
i  4 
It 

'.  C 
44 


To  judge  indeed  of  the  Circumftances  of  a 
modern  Author,  by  the  Pattern  of  his  *  Prefaces, 
Dedications,  and  Introductions,  one  wou'd  think 
that  at  the  moment  when  a  Piece  of  his  was 
in  hand,  fome  Conjuration  was  forming  againft 
him,fome  diabolical  Powers  drawing  together 
to  blaft  his  Work,  and  crofs  his  generous  De- 
fign.     He    therefore  rouzes   his    Indignation, 


*  Infra,  p.  329,  330.     And  VOL.  III.  p.  259,  277.  in  the  Notes. 

hardens 


232 


ADVICE  to  an  Author. 


hardens  his  Forehead,  and  with  many  furious 
Defiances  and  Avant-S  at  an  s  !  enters  on  his  Bu- 
finefs ;  not  with  the  lead  regard  to  what  may 
juflly  be  objected  to  him  in  a  way  of  Criti- 
cism; but  with  an  abfolute  Contempt  of  the 
Manner  and  Art  it-felf. 


Odi pro] anum  vulgus  et  arceo,  was  in  its  time, 
no  doubt,  a  generous  Defiance.  The  Avantl 
was  natural  and  proper  in  its  place  ;  efpecially 
where  Religion  and  Virtue  were  the  Poet's 
Theme.  But  with  our  Moderns  the  Cafe  is 
generally  the  very  Reverfe.  And  accordingly 
the  Defiance  or  Avant  fhou'd  run  much  after  this 
manner  :  "As  for  you  vulgar  Souls,  mere  Natu- 
1  rals,  who  know  no  Art,  were  never  admitted 
1  into  the  Temple  of  Wifdom,  nor  evervifited 
1  the  Sancluarys  of  Wit  or  Learning,  gather 
'  your-fblves  together  from  all  Parts,  andhear- 
1  ken  to  the  Song  or  Tale  I  am  about  to  utter. 
1  But  for  you  Men  of  Science  andUnderfland- 
1  ing,  who  have  Ears  and  Judgment,  and  can 
1  weigh  Senfe,  fcan  Syllables,  and  meafure 
4  Sounds  ;  You  who  by  a  certain  Art  diftinguifh 
'•  jalfe  Thought  from  true,  Correcinefs  from  Rude- 
1  nefi,  and  Bombajl  and  Chaos  from  Order  and  the 
1  Sublime;  Away  hence  !  or  (land  aloof !  whilft  I 
'  praclife  upon  the  Eafinefs  of  thofe  mean  Ca- 
1  pacitys  and  Apprehenfions,  who  make  the 

mod 


I  t 
CI 

I I 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         233 

"  moft  numerous  Audience,  and  are  the  only 
**  competent  Judges  of  my  Labours." 

5Tis  flrange  to  fee. how  differently  the  Va- 
nity of  Mankind  runs,  in  different  Times  and 
Seafons.  'Tis  at  prefent  the  Boafl  of  almoft 
every  Enterprizer  in  the  Muses  Art,  "That 
11  by  his  Genius  alone,  and  a  natural  Rapidity 
of  Style  and  Thought,  he  is  able  to  carry 
all  before  him  ;  that  he  plays  with  his  Bufi- 
nefs,  does  things  in  palling,  at  a  venture, 
and  in  the  quickeft  period  of  Time."  In  the 
days  of  Att  ick  Elegance,  as  Works  were  then 
truly  of  another  Form  and  Turn,  fo  Workmen 
were  of  another  Humour,  and  had  their  Vani- 
ty of  a  quite  contrary  kind.  They  became  ra- 
ther affecled  in  endeavouring  to  difcover  the 
pains  they  had  taken  to  be  correct.  They 
were  glad  to  infmuate  how  laborioufly,  and 
with  what  expence  of  Time,  they  had  brought 
the  fmallefl  Work  of  theirs  (as  perhaps  a  fin- 
gle  Ode  or  Satir,  an  Oration  or  Panegyrick)  to 
its  perfection.  When  they  had  fo  poliuYd 
their  Piece,  and  rendered  itfo  natural  andeafy, 
that  it  Jeemd  only  a  lucky  Flight,  a  Hit  of 
Thought,  or  flowing  Vein  of  Humour ;  they 
were  then  chiefly  concern'd  left  it  fhou'd  in 
reality  pafs  for  fuch,  and  their  Artifice  remain 
undifcover'd.  They  were  willing  it  fhou'd 
be  known   how  ferious    their  Play  was ;   and 

how 


234     ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

how  elaborate  their  Freedom  and  Facility: 
that  they  might  fay  as  the  agreeable  and  polite 
Poet,  glancing  on  himfelf, 

*  Ludentis  Jpeciem  dabit  et  torqucbitur ■ 

And, 


f  Utfibi  qu'wis 


Speret  idem,  fudet  multum,  frujlraque  laboret 
Aitjus  idem,  tantumferies  junciuraque  pollet. 

Such  Accuracy  of  Workmanfhip  requires 
a  Critic k's  Eye.  Tis  loft  upon  a  vulgar 
Judgment.  Nothing  grieves  a  real  Artifl  more 
than  that  indifference  of  the  Publick,  which 
fuffers  Work  to  pafs  uncriticizd.  Nothing,  on 
the  other  fide,  rejoices  him  more  than  the 
nice  View  and  Infpeclion  of  the  accurate  Ex- 
aminer and  Judge  of  Work.  Tis  the  mean  Ge- 
nius, the  flovenly  Performer,  who  knowing  no- 
thing of  true  Workmanfaip,  endeavours  by  the 
belt  outward  Glofs  and  dazling  Shew,  to  turn 
the  Eye  from  a  direcl;  and  fleddy  Survey  of 
his  Piece. 

What  is  there  which  an  expert  Mufician 
more  earneflly  defires,  than  to  perform  his 
part  in  the  prefence  of  thofe  who  are  knowing 
in  his  Art?  'Tis   to  the  Ear   alone   he  applies 

*  Hor.  Epijt.  2.  lib.  2.  f  Id  de  Arte  Poet . 

him- 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.       235 

himfelf;  the  critical,  the  nice  Ear.  Let  his 
Hearers  be  of  what  Character  they  pleafe  :  Be 
they  naturally  auflere,  morofe,  or  rigid ;  no 
matter,  fo  they  are  Criticks,  able  to  cenfure, 
remark,  and  found  every  Accord  and  Sym- 
phony. What  is  there  mortifies  the  good  Painter 
more,  than  when  amidft  his  admiring  Specta- 
tors there  is  not  one  prefent,  who  has  been 
us'd  to  compare  the  Hands  of  different  Maf- 
ters,  or  has  an  Eye  to  diftinguifh  the  Advan- 
tages or  Defecls  of  every  Style  ?  Thro'  all  the 
inferior  Orders  ofMechanieks,  the  Rule  is  found 
to  hold  the  fame.  In  every  Science,  every 
Art,  the  real  Majlers  or  Proficients,  rejoice  in 
nothing  more,  than  in  the  thorow  Search  and 
Examination  of  their  Performances,  by  all  the 
Rules  of  Art  and  niceft  Criticifm.  Why  there- 
fore (in  the  Muses  name!)  is  it  not  the  fame 
with  our  Pretenders  to  the  Writing  Art,  our 
Poets,  and  Profe- Authors  in  every  kind  ?  Why  in 
this  Profeflion  are  we  found  fuch  Cr itick- Hater s% 
and  indulgd  in  this  unlearnd  Averfion ;  un- 
lefs  it  be  taken  for  granted,  that  as  Wit  and 
Learning  ftand  at  prefent  in  our  Nation,  we 
are  ftill  upon  the  foot  of  Empiricks  and  Mounte- 
banks. 

From  thefe  Confiderations,  I  take  upon 
me  abfolutely  to  condemn  the  fafhionable  and 
prevailing  Cuftom  of  inveighing  againft  Cri- 

ticks, 


236       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

ticks,  as  the  common  Enemys,  thePefts,  and 
Incendiarys  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Wit  and 
Letters.  I  affert,  on  the  contrary,  that  they 
are  the  Props  and  Pillars  of  this  Building ;  and 
that  without  the  Encouragement  and  Propaga- 
tion of  fuch  a  Race,  we  fhou'd  remain  as  Go- 
thick  Architecls  as  ever. 


*  I N  THE  weaker  and  more  imperfect  So- 
cietys  of  Mankind,  fuch  as  thofe  compos'd  of 
federate  Tribes,  or  mix'd  Colonys,  fcarce  fettled 
in  their  new  Seats,  it  might  pafs  for  fufficient 
Good-fortune,  if  the  People  provd  only  fo  far 
Matters  of  Language,  as  to  be  able  to  under- 
ftand  one  another,  in  order  to  confer  about 
their  Wants,  and  provide  for  their  common 
Neceffitys.  Their  expos'd  and  indigent  State 
cou'd  not  be  prefum'd  to  afford  'em  either 
that  full  Leifure,  or  eafy  Difpofition  which  was 
requifite  to  raife  'em  to  any  Curiofity  of  Spe- 
culation. They  who  were  neither  fafe  from 
Violence,  nor  fecure  of  Plenty,  were  unlikely 
to  engage  in  unneceffary  Arts.  Nor  cou'd  it 
be  expected  they  fhou'd  turn  their  Attention 
towards  the  Numbers  of  their  Language,  and 
the  harmonious  Sounds  which  they  acciden- 
tally emitted.   But  when,  in  procefs  of  time,  the 

*  As   to  this,    and   what  remains  of  the  Se&ion ,    fee    VOL.   III.  p. 
136,  8cc. 

Affairs 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         237 

Affairs  of  the  Society  were  fettled  on  an  eafy 
and  fecure  Foundation;  when  Debates  and 
Dijcourfes  on  thefe  Subjects  of  common  Intereft, 
and  publick  Good,  were  grown  familiar;  and 
the  Speeches  of  prime  Men,  and  Leaders,  were 
confider'd,  and  compar'd  together :  there  wou'd 
naturally  be  obferv  d  not  only  a  more  agree- 
able Meafure  of  Sound,  but  a  happier  and 
more  eafy  Rangement  of  Thoughts,  in  one 
Speaker,  than  in  another. 

It  may  be  eafily  perceiv'd  from  hence,  that 
the  Goddefs  Persuasion  mud  have  been  in  a 
manner  the  Mother  of  Poetry,  Rhetorick,  Mufick, 
and  the  other  kindred  Arts.  For  'tis  apparent, 
that  where  chief  Men,  and  Leaders  had  the 
ftrongefl  Intereft  to  perfuade;  they  us'd  the  high- 
eft  endeavours  to  plecije.  So  that  in  fuch  a  State 
or  Polity  as  has  been  defcrib'd,  not  only  the 
belt  Order  of  Thought,  and  Turn  of  Fancy, 
but  the  moft  foft  and  inviting  Numbers  muft 
have  been  employ 'd,  to  charm  the  Publick  Ear, 
and  to  incline  the  Heart,  by  the  Agreeablenefs 
of  Expreffion. 

Almost  all  the  antient  Majlers  of  this  fort 
were  faid  to  have  been  Musicians.  And 
Tradition,  which  foon  grew  fabulous,  cou  d 
not  better  reprefent  the  nrft  Founders  or  Ejla- 
bliJJiers  of  thefe  larger   Societys,   than  as  real 

Song- 


238        AD  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Songflers,  who  by  the  power  of  their  Voice 
and  Lyre,  cou'd  charm  the  wildeft  Beafts,  and 
draw  the  rude  Forefts  and  Rocks  into  the  Form 
of  faireft  Citys.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that 
the  fame  Artifts,  who  fo  induftrioufly  apply'd 
themfelves  to  ftudy  the  Numbers  of  Speech, 
mult  have  made  proportionable  Improvements 
in  the  Study  of  mere  Sounds  and  natural  Har- 
mony; which,  of  it-felf,  muft  have  considerably 
contributed  towards  the  foftning  the  rude  Man- 
ners and  harfh  Temper  of  their  new  People. 

I  f  therefore  it  fo  happen'd  in  thefe  free  Com- 
munitys,  made  by  Confent  and  voluntary  Af- 
fociation,  that  after  a-while,  the  Power  Of  One, 
or  of  a  Few,  grew  prevalent  over  the  reft ;  if 
Force  took  place,  and  the  Affairs  of  the  So- 
ciety were  adminifter'd  without  their  Concur- 
rence, by  the  influence  of  Awe  and  Terror:  it 
follow'd,  that  thefe  pathetick  Sciences  and 
Arts  of  Speech  were  little  cultivated,  fince 
they  were  of  little  ufe.  But  where  Persua- 
sion was  the  chief  means  of  guiding  the  So- 
ciety ;  where  the  People  were  to  be  convincd 
before  they  acled  ;  there  Elocution  became  con- 
siderable ;  there  Orators  and  Bards  were  heard ; 
and  the  chief  Genius's  and  Sages  of  the  Nation 
betook  themfelves  to  the  Study  of  thofe  Arts, 
by  which  the  People  were  render'd  more  treat- 
able  in  a  way  of  Reafon  and  Underftanding, 

and 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         039 

and  be  more  fubjecl:  to  be  led  by  Men  of  Sci- 
ence and  Erudition.  The  more  thefe  Artifts 
courted  the  Publick,  the  more  they  inflrucled 
it.  In  fuch  Confiitutions  as  thefe,  'twas  the  Inte- 
reft  of  theWife  and  Able,  that  the  Community 
fhou'd  be  Judges  of  Ability  and  Wifdom.  The 
high  Efteem  of  Ingenuity  was  what  advanc'd 
the  Ingenious  to  the  greateft  Honours.  And 
they  who  rofe  by  Science,  and  Politenefs  in 
the  higher  Arts,  cou'd  not  fail  to  promote  that 
Tajle  and  Relijli  to  which  they  ow'd  their  per- 
fonal  Diftinclion  and  Pre-eminence. 

Hence  it  is  that  thofe  Arts  have  been  de- 
liver'd  to  us  in  fuch  perfection,  by  free  Nations; 
who  from  the  Nature  of  their  Government,  as 
from  a  proper  Soil,  produc'd  the  generous 
Plants :  whilft  the  mightieft  Bodys  and  vafteft 
Empires,  govern  d  by  Force  and  a  defpotick 
Power,  cou'd,  after  Ages  of  Peace  and  Leifure, 
produce  no  other  than  what  was  deform'd 
and  barbarous  of  the  kind. 

When  the  per -fun/we  Arts  were  grown  thus 
into  repute,  and  the  Power  of  moving  the  Af- 
fections become  the  Study  and  Emulation  of 
the  forward  Wits  and  afpiring  Genius  s  of  the 
Times  ;  it  wou'd  neceffarily  happen  that  many 
Genius's  of  equal  fize  and  flrength,  tho  lefs 
covetous  of  publick  Applaufe,  of  Power,  or  of 

Vol.  I.  Q,  In- 


240     ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Influence  over  Mankind,  wou'd  content  them- 
felves  with  the  Contemplation  merely  of  thefe 
enchanting  Arts.  Thefe  they  wou'd  the  bet- 
ter enjoy,  the  more  they  refm'd  their  Tqfle, 
and  cultivated  their  Ear.  For  to  all  Mufick 
there  mull  be  an  Ear  proportionable.  There 
muft  be  an  Art  of  Hearing  found,  ere  the  per- 
forming Arts  can  have  their  due  eft  eel,  or  any 
thing  exquifite  in  the  kind  be  felt  or  compre- 
hended. The  juft  Performers  therefore  in  each 
Art,  wou'd  naturally  be  the  moft  defnous  of 
improving  and  refining  thepublickEar ;  which 
they  cou'd  noway  fo  well  effect  as  by  the  help 
of  thofe  latter  Genius's,  who  were  in  a  manner 
their  Interpreters  to  the  People;  and  who  by 
their  example  taught  the  Publick  to  difcover 
what  was  juft  and  excellent  in  each  Perfor- 
mance. 

Henc  e  was  the  Origin  of  C  r  1 T i  c  k  s  ;  who, 
as  Arts  and  Sciences  advanc'd,  wou'd  necef- 
farily  come  withal  into  repute;  and  being 
heard  with  Satisfaction  in  their  turn,  were  at 
length  tempted  to  become  Authors,  and  appear 
in  publick.  Thefe  were  honour'd  with  the 
Name  of  SopJiiJh:  A  Characler  which  in  early 
times  was  highly  refpecled.  Nordic!  the  gra- 
vel! Philofophers,  who  were  Cenfors  of  Man- 
ners, and  Criticks  of  a  higher  degree,  dif- 
dain  to  exert  their  Criticifm  in  the  inferior  Arts ; 

efpeciallv 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       241 

efpecially  in  thofe  relating  to  Speech,    and  the 
power  of  Argument  and  Perjuajwn. 

When  flich  a  Race  as  this  was  once  rifen, 
'twas  no  longer  poffible  to  impofe  on  Man- 
kind, by  what  was  fpecious  and  pretending. 
The  Publick  wou'd  be  paid  in  no  falfe  Wit, 
or  jingling  Eloquence.  Where  the  learned 
Cri ticks  were  fo  well  receiv'd,  and  Philqfo- 
phers  themfelves  difdain'd  not  to  be  of  the 
number;  there  cou'd  not  fail  to  arife  Criticks 
of  an  inferior  Order,  who  wou'd  fubdivide  the 
feveral  Provinces  of  this  Empire.  Etymologifls% 
Philologijls,  Grammarians,  Rhetoricians,  and  others 
ol  confiderable  note,  and  eminent  in  their  de- 
gree, wou'd  every  where  appear,  and  vindi- 
cate the  Truth  and  Juflice  of  their  Art,  by 
revealing  the  hidden  Beautys  which  lay  in 
the  Works  of  juR  Performers ;  and  by  expofing 
the  weak  Sides,  falfe  Ornaments,  and  affected 
Graces  of  mere  Pretenders.  Nothing  of  what 
we  call  Sophiflry  in  Argument,  or  Bombajl  in 
Style ;  nothing  of  the  effeminate  Kind,  or  of 
the  falfe  Tender,  the  pointed  Witticifm,  the  dif- 
jointed  Thought,  the  crouded  Simile,  or  the 
mix'd  Metaphor,  cou'd  pafs  even  on  the  com- 
mon Ear:  whilft  the  Notarys,  the  Expo- 
sitors, and  Prompters  above-mention'd, 
were  every  where  at  hand,  and  ready  to  ex- 
plode the  unnatural  Manner. 

Q,2  Tis 


242  ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Tis  eafy  to  imagine,  that  amidft  the  feve- 
ral  Styles  and  Manners  of  Difcourfe  or  Wri- 
ting, the  eafieft  attain'd,  and  earlieft  praclis'd, 
was  the  Miraculous,  the  Pompous,  or  what  we 
generally  call  the  Sublime.  Ajlouifument  i§ 
of  all  other  Paffions  the  eafieft  rais'd  in  raw 
and  unexperienc'd  Mankind.  Children  in 
their  earliefl  Infancy  are  entertain'd  in  this 
manner :  And  the  known  way  of  pleafmg  fuch 
as  thefe,  is  to  make  'em  wonder,  and  lead  the 
way  for  'em  in  this  Paftion,  by  a  feign'd  Sur- 
prize at  the  miraculous  Objecls  we  fet  before 
em.  The  beft  Mufick  of  Barbarians  is  hideous 
and  aftonifhing  Sounds.  And  the  fine  Sights 
of  Indians  are  enormous  Figures,  various  odd 
and  glaring  Colours,  and  whatever  of  that  fort 
is  amazingly  beheld,  with  a  kind  of  Horror 
and  Confternation. 

In  Poetry  and  ftudy'd  Profe,  the  ajloni/liing 
Part,  or  what  commonly  palfes  for  Sublime,  is 
form'd  by  the  variety  of  Figures,  the  multi- 
plicity of  *  Metaphors,  and  by    quitting    as 

much 


*   Aihuq  $1  a£J}T»  cra^ij   ^    (/.v  rccxmrfl)  tout.      "Saferajv  (*■(>  «»  «$"*»  1  «* 

tut  kvpiuv  liou.dtuv,  x\"kx  Tcnre.w.  *  *  *  Sejxv^  ^kJ  I|aX^aYl«<7&  to  Jstw- 
tjxo;,  %  to<?  %zvixo~i  xix^yuew  Zinx.lv  Ss  Xiyco,  yXwtlxv,  v$  [/.nxfo^nv,  Kj 
tTrtKlacrui,  iCj  oai  to  ©'^«  to  xt^isv.  'AM  xv  tk  «,f*  xirxflx  tx  TOixvta, 
GJtive'n,   v   a'l'nFux   £r«»3   v  fiafQacic-pin;.     "Av  ph    «»  Ik  perx^o^uv,     ahfl/xx' 

tat* 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.      343 

much  as  pofTible  the  natural  and  eafy  way  of 
Expreflion,  for  that  which  is  raoft  unlike  to 
Humanity,  or  ordinary  Ufe.  This  the  Prince 
of  Criticks  afTures  us  to  have  been  the  Man- 
ner of  the  earlieft  Poets,  before  the  Age  of 
Homer  ;  or  till  fuch  time  as  this  Father-Poet 
came  into  Repute,  who  depos'd  that  fpurious 
Race,  and  gave  rife  to  a  legitimate  and  ge- 
nuine Kind.  He  retain'd  only  what  was  de- 
cent of  the  figurative  or  mctaphorick  Style,  in- 
troduc'd  the  natural  and  fimple ;  and  turn'd 
his  thoughts  towards  the  real  Beauty  of  Com- 
pofition,  the  Unity  of  Defign,  the  Truth  of 
Characters,  and  the  juft  Imitation  of  Nature 
in  each  particular. 


Ixv  $1  Iz  •yXo-rlwv,  k)  fixfix^upi;.  Arid,  de  Poet,  cap  22.  This  the 
fame  Mafler-Critick  explains  further  in  his  Rhetorich,  Lib.  3.  cap.  1, 
■where  he  refers  to  thefe  Paffages  of  his  Poe'ich.  'En-a  SI  ot  TlwiTxt  Aeyowej 
d$ri,  Jta  t*iv  Xs|w  ifioxuv  tsog'iaxaQxi  t'/Jk  S\  i%v  oo^xv,  otx  tuto  OTotww  tu^utt) 
iyinro  v|»?j  *  *  *  *  «j  vv*  e't»  ot  ttoMo*  twv  xitaioiv'ruv,  Tfej  Toiara?  otovlai 
hx^iyta^xi  xx\l  irx'  t«to  if  ux  ir-v.  *  '  *  Ovoi.  yx%  0*  t«V  v^xyahxt  «rot- 
i]]^,  eri  %p«v]ai  to'j  xvrln  t^othv.  A?>>i  ccaire^  tCj  ix  iuy  rir^x^ir^uiv  e-.<;  To 
Xay&eiw  ptt'&naa.v,  Six  to  tu>  hoyu  Taro  tvv  (/.hguv  o[A.oio?xtgv  uvxt  run  a/^?•<y^• 
Sru  >c,  tuv  cvojaxtuv  dip-nxxaiv,   cax  csxgx  tv»  oix7\tKlo»   If  i»"  Kai  sti 

run  oi  rx  l*il[Airox  tsotSvli^,  x<prixx<?i.  Ato  y^o~ov  (/.^/.z^cruxi  mrac,  ci  xvrai 
ix  rn  x^lai  e«ew  tw  Tpe?rw.  That  among  the  early  Reformers  of  this 
iom^id  Manner,  he  places  Homer  as  the  Chief,  we  may  fee  eafily 
in  his  Poeticks.  As  particularly  in  that  Paffage  (cap.  24.)  "£ti  tx\ 
havoiai  tcj  tw  Xsfiv  £%«»  xaAsJf,  cT;  botjih  "O/arjp^  x/^r;T«i,  xj  wj&jt©*  »jJ 
Ixatw:.    *  *  *    riro?  81  rs-ret;  *jf«  j£  &«yo»«  waft]*?  usegG/wiwe. 


The 


244      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

The  Manner  of  this  Father-Poet  was  after- 
wards varioufly  imitated,  and  divided  into  fe- 
veral  Shares ;  efpecially  when  it  came  to  be  co- 
py'd  in  Dramatick.  Tragedy  came  firft;  and 
took  what  was  mofi folemn  and  jublime.  In  this 
part  the  Poets  fucceeded  fooner  than  in  Co- 
medy or  the  facetious  Kind;  as  was  natural  in- 
deed to  fuppofe,  fince  this  was  in  reality  the 
eafieit  Manner  of  the  two,  and  capable  of  be- 
ing brought  the  fooneft  to  perfection.  For  fo 
the  fame  Prince  of  Criticks  *  fufficientlv  informs 
us.  And 'tis  highly  worth  remarking,  what  this 
mighty  Genius  and  Judge  of  Art  declares  con- 
cerning Tragedy;  that  whatever  Idea  might 
be  form'd  of  the  utmoft  Perfection  of  this  kind 
of  Poem,  it  cou'd  in  practice  rile  no  higher  than 
it  had  been  already  carry'd  in  his  time  ;  +  ' 4  Ha- 
41  ving  at  lenght  (fays  he)  attained  its  Ends,  and 

lt  being 


*  TivofAtv/);  uv  aV  af%^  «WTo^8^«<r»xr;>  *%  dvvn  >£  i  Ku^uoioc,  Sec.  Dc 
Poet.  cap.  4.  When  he  has  compar'd  both  dm  andTragedy  together,  he 
recapitulates  in  his  nex  Chapter,  "At  ftw  §»  t«j  T^xyuSictf  /xETa£«V«c, 
xj  &'  uv  lyeiwlo,  «  tetoQxo-w,  'H  <5j  Ka//awc\'a,  hd  to  /ajj  awuoxgiafka  i| 
*%xvu  tAaOsx.  K«»  yxq  x°?ov  Kw(*^«»  theorem  0  "a^«v  'i^unea,  Sec.  Cap.  5. 
See  VOL.    III.  />.   139.  in  the  Notes. 

Tr)e  ia,vT*s<pvo-n>.  Cap.  4.  So  true  a  Prophet  as  well  as  Critick  was  this  great 
Man.  Eor  by  the  Event  it  appear'd  that  Tragedy  being  rais'd  to  its  height 
by  Sophocles  and  Euripides,  and  no  room  left  for  further  Excellence 
or  Emulation ;   there  were  no  more  tragick  Poets  betides  thefe  endur'd, 

after 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        245 

"  being  apparently  confummate  in  it-felf:" 
But  for  Comedy,  it  feems,  'twas  flill  in  hand. 
It  had  been  already  in  fome  manner  reduc'd : 
but,  as  he  plainly  infmuates,  it  lay  yet  unfi- 
nifh'd ;  notwithftanding  the  witty  Labours  of 
an  Aristophanes,  and  the  other  comick  Po- 
ets of  the  fir  ft  Manner,  who  had  flourifli'd  a 
whole  Age  before  this  Critick.  As  perfect  as 
were  thofe  Wits  in  Style  and  Language;  and 
as  fertile  in  all  the  Varietys  and  Turns  of  Hu- 
mour; yet  the  Tiuth  of  Characters,  the  Beau- 
ty of  Order,  and  the  fimple  Imitation  of  Na- 
ture were  in  a  manner  wholly  unknown  to  em; 
or  thro'  Petulancy,  or  Debauch  of  Humour, 
were,  it  feems,  neglected  and  fet  afide.   A  Me- 


after  the  Author's  time.  Whilfl.  Comedy  went  on,  improving  dill  to  the 
fecond  and  thiid  degree  ;  Tragedy  fmifh'd  its  courfe  under  Eur  ipides: 
whom,  thoourgreat  Author  criticizes  with  the  utmoft  Severity  in  his  Po- 
tlicks,  yet  he  plainly  enough  confelfes  to  have  carry'd  the  Style  ofTrage-' 
dy  to  its  full  Height  and  Dignitv.  For  as  to  the  Reformation  which  that 
Poet  made  in  the  ufe  of  the  fublime  and  figurative  Speech,  in  general  ;  fee 
what  our  difcerning  Author  fays  in  his  Rhcloricks :  where  he  ftrives  to  fliew 
the  impertinence  and  Naufeoufnefs  of  the  florid  Speakers,  and  fuch  as  un- 
derftood  not  the  Ufe  of  the  fimple  and  natural  Maimer.  "  The  juft  Maf- 
"  teis  and  right  Managers  of  the  Poelick  or  High  Style,  fliou'd  learn  (fays 
'  he)  how  to  conceal  the  Manner.as  much  as  poffible."  Aio  0i7  XocvQziietv 
VJOtit'Act.s,  Kj  (/.Hi  tiuxiTv  hiysw  mat'/  acrptvas,  uTShx  'zsi^x.x.ojuq'  tuto  yece  <andu>li/' 
iKi.v-j  ot.  7it.il/Kov.  'n±  ydg  •ngot;  lirrfoe \evsiloe.  5i«&»/*Xa»la»,  na^jnng  •s^aj  las 
Oittii  Ta,"  f.LZfAiyul:8s.  K<s.i  oic/p  vi  &idouifH  Wuvii  vs&iromt  >as£>cl  tijv  t»»  u'.'Ku) 
VTroxgirwv  >j  fAv  ycl(>,  tS  hiyofl©*  t<iix.tv  e'.visct-  eti  i°  aXh'jTPiUi'  x.Xi7flsTec.i  $  tu 
t«»  n$  ix.  77;,-  uoiOy.'a?  MuXexlu  lK7\iyut  cwhOj)'  69r«g  'EYPHII'AHE  TOoief,  x^ 
»ws3m|s «;^t©*.      Rhet.  Lib.  3.  cap.  2. 

N  A  N  JD  E  R 


246        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

nander  had  not  as  yet  appear  d ;  who  arofe 
foon  after,  to  accomplifh  the  Prophecy  of  our 
grand  Matter  of  Art,  and  confummate  Philolo- 

Comedy  *  had  at  this  time  done  little  more 
than  what  the  antient  t  Parodys,  had  done  be- 
fore it.  'Twas  of  admirable  ufe  to  explode  the 
falfe  Sublime  of  early  Poets,  and  fuch  as  in  its 
own  Age  were  on  every  occafion  ready  to  re- 
lapfe  into  that  vicious  Manner.  The  good  Tra- 
gedians themfelves  cou'd  hardly  efcape  its 
Lafhes.  The  pompous  Orators  were  its  never- 
failing  Subjecls.  Every  thing  which  might  be 
impofing,  by  a  falfe  Gravity  or  Solemnity,  was 
forc'd  to  endure  the  Trial  of  this  Touchflone. 
Manners  and  Characlers,  as  well  as  Speech  and 
Writings,  were  difcus'd  with  the  greateft  free- 


*  v£lairt!>  St  k)  t«  a-7raSa.7oc   /xol^trct  otoh;t>?s  "0/au£<^  W   ffto»^  yoig  &%  on 

iv,   «M'  *ti  K)   f/tfAycreiS  fya.(/.ciTiKct<;  l'?ro\'nat)  Sru  v£  rat  t>k  KujAuhx<;  t?y/ty.t£\x 

tz£wt<&-  vvriiu^a.     Arih.    Poet.  cap.  4.     No  wonder  if,  in  this  Defcent, 

Comedy  came  late.      See  below,  p.  253.    in  the  Notes.      And  above, /». 

198. 

f  The  PARODYS  were  very   antient:  but  they  were   in  reality  no 

other  than  mere.  Burlejque  or  Farce.  COMEDY  which  borrow'd  f'ome- 
thing  from  thofe  Humours,  as  well  as  from  the  Fhallica  below-mention  d, 
was  not,  however,  rais'd  to  any  Form  or  Shape  of  Art  (as  laid  above)  till 
about  the  time  of  Aristophanes,  who  was  of  the  jirft  model,  and  a  Be- 
ginner of  the  kind  ;  at  the  fame  time  that  TRAGEDY  had  undergone 
all  its  Changes,  and  was  already  come  to  its  Ian  perfection  ;  as  the  grand 
Critick  has  fhevvn  us,  and  as  our  other  Authorirys  plainly  evince. 

dom. 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.       247 

dom.  Nothing  cou'd  be  better  fitted  than  this 
Genius  of  Wit,  to  unmafk  the  face  of  things, 
and  remove  thofe  Larva  naturally  form'd  from 
theTragick  Manner,  and  pompous  Style,  which 
had  preceded : 

*  Et  docuit  magnumque  loqni,  nitique  Cothurno. 
Successit  vetus  his  Comoedia. ■ 

Twas  not  by  chance  that  this  Succcjfwn  hap- 
pen d  in  Greece,  after  the  manner  defcrib'd; 
but  rather  thro'  Neceffity,  and  from  the  Reafon 
and  f  Nature  of  Things.  For  in  healthy  Bo- 
dys,  Nature  dictates  Remedys  of  her  own,  and 
provides  for  the  Cure    of  what    has  happen'd 


'■'■'  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet.     The  immediate  preceding  Verfes  of  Horace, 
after  his  having  fpoken  of  the  firft  Tragedy  under  Tn  espi  s,  are-, 

Pq/i  hunc  perfontB  pa/Lcque  reperlor  honefla 

JEJchylus,  if  modicis  injlravit  pulpila  I  ignis, 

Ta  docuit,  ire. 
F>efor«  the  time  of  Th  e  sp  is,  Tragedy  indeed  was  faid  to  be,  as  Horac  e 
calls  it  here  (in  a  concife  way]  ignetum  genus.  It  lay  in  a  kind  of  Chaos 
intermix'd  with  other  Kinds,  and  hardly  diftinguifhable  by  its  Gravity 
and  Pomp  from  the  Humours  which  gave  rife  afterwards  to  Comedy, 
But  in  a  ftricl  hiitorical  Senfe,  as  we  find  Plato  fpeaking  in  his  Mi- 
nos, Tragedy  was  of  antienter  date,  and  even  of  the  very  antienteft  with 
the  Athenians.      His  words  are,     H  $1  T^yiy^ia  In  <srciXxilv  wQslh,  y'%,   ui 

+  Of  this  Subject  fee  more  in  VOL.  III.  pag.   136,  7,  S,  Sec. 

[  QJ  amifs 


248      A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

amifs  in  the  Growth  and  Progrefs  of  a  Con- 
flitution.  The  Affairs  of  this  free  People  be- 
ing in  the  Increafe  ;  and  their  Ability  and  Judg- 
ment every  day  improving,  as  Letters  and  Arts 
advanc'd ;  they  wou'cl  of  courfe  find  in  them- 
felves  a  Strength  of  Nature,  which  by  the  help 
of  good  Ferments,  and  a  wholefom  oppofition 
of  Humours,  wou'd  correct  in  one  way  what- 
ever was  exceffive,  ox  peccant  (as  Phyficians  fay) 
in  another.  Thus  the  florid  and  over-fanguine 
Humour  of  the  high  Style  was  allay'd  by  fome- 
thing  of  a  contrary  nature.  The  Comic k  Ge- 
nius was  apply'd,  as  a  kind  otCavjlick,  to  thofe 
Exuberances  ami  Fungus's  of  the  fwoln  Dialect, 
and  magnificent  manner  of  Speech.  But  af- 
ter a-while,  even  this  Remedy  it-felf  was  found 
to  turn  into  a  Difeafe :  as  Medicines,  we  know, 
grow  corrofive,  when  the  fouler  Matters  on 
which  they  wrought  are  fufficiently  purg'd, 
and  the  Obftruclions  remov'd. 

* — In  vitium  Libertas  excidit,  6*  Vim 
Dignam  Lege  regi. — + 

Tis  a  great  Error  to  fuppofe,  as  fome  have 
done,  that  the  reftraining  this  licentious  man- 


*  Hor.  de  Arte  Poet. 

f  It  follows Lex  eft  accepta,  Chorufque 

Tur Inter  obticuit,  Jublato  jure  nocaidi. 

ner 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        249 

iier  of  Wit,  by  Law,  was  a  Violation  of  the  Li- 
berty of  the  Athenian  State,  or  an  Effect, 
merely  of  the  Power  of  Foreigners ;  whom  it 
little  concern'd  after  what  manner  thofe  Citi- 
zens treated  one  another  in  their  Comedys ; 
or  what  fort  of  Wit  or  Humour  thev  made 
choice  of,  for  their  ordinary  Diverlions.  If 
upon  a  Change  of  Government,  as  during  the 
Ufurpation  of  the  Thirty^  or  when  that  Nation 
was  humbled  at  any  time,  either  by  a  Philip, 
an  Alexander,  or  an  An  tip  ate  r,  they  had 
been  forc'd  againfl  their  Wills,  to  enact  luch 
Laws  as  thefe  ;  'tis  certain  they  wou'd  have  foon 
repeal'd  'em,  when  thofe  Terrors  were  remov'd. 
(as  they  foon  were)  and  the  People  reftor'd  to 
their  former  Libertys.  For  notwithnanding 
what  this  Nation  fuffer'd  outwardly,  by  feveral 
Jhoeks  receive!  from  foreign  States  ;  notwith- 
ftanding  the  Dominion  and  Power  they  loft 
abroad,  they  preferv'd  the  fame  Government 
at  home.  And  how  pafTionately  interefled  they 
were  in  what  concern'd  their  Diverfions  and 
publick  Spectacles ;  how  jealous  and  full  of 
Emulation  in  what  related  to  their  Poetry,  IVit, 
Mvfick,  and  other  Aits,  in  which  they  excell'd 
all  other  Nations ;  is  well  known  to  Perfons  who 
have  any  comprehenfion  of  antient  Manners, 
or  been  the  lead  converfant  in  Hi  (lory. 


Q,s  ]  Nothing 


250      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Nothing  therefore  cou'd  have  been    the 
Caufe  of  thefe  publick  Decrees,  and  of  this  gra- 
dual Reform  in  the  Common- wealth  of  Wit, 
befide  the  real  Reform  of  Tafie  and  Humour  in 
the    Commonwealth    or    Government   it-felf. 
Inftead  of  any  Abridgment,  'twas  in  reality  an 
Increafe  of  Liberty,  an  Enlargement  of  the  Se- 
curity of  Property,  and  an  Advancement  of  pri- 
vate Eafe  and  per  tonal  Safely,  to  provide  againft 
what  was  injurious  to  the  good  Name  and  Re- 
putation of  every  Citizen.   As  this  Intelligence 
in  Life  and  Manners  grew  greater  in  that  ex- 
perienc'd  People,  fo  the  Relifh  of  Wit  and  Hu- 
mour wou'd  naturally  in  proportion  be  more 
rehn'd.    Thus  Greece  in  general  grew  more 
and  more  polite  ;  and  as  it  advanc'd  in  this  re- 
fpect,  was  more  averfe  to  the  obfcene  buffoon- 
ins;  manner.     The  Athenians  ftill  went  be- 
fore  the  reft,  and  led  the  way  in  Elegance  of 
every  kind.      For  even  their  firfl  Comedy  was 
a  Refinement  upon  fome  irregular  Attempts 
which  had  been  made  in  that  dramatick  way. 
And  the  grand  *  Critick  fhews  us,  that  in  his 
own  time  the  Phallic  a,  or  J cur rilous  and  ob- 
fcene Farce,  prevail'd  ftill,  and  had  the  Coun- 


*  Li'),  de  Poet.  cap.  4.   de   Tragoedia  et  Comoedia,  fcilicet,  Ka.1  v  p.U 
awo  twv  icccf^otlu'v  7iv  diUvgo.y.'cc-Vi  r,  de  wno  rut  t«  paX^txa,  u.    en  «?  vjv  e»  cro.V 

/«SOJ  TfcV  ITOXiUV  OtCC^Jvii  VO[A^Q[t,lVX,    KO.T&    UIXPM   SJl'^WJ) ,      &CC. 

tenance 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  261 

tenance  of  the  Magiftrate,  in  fome  Citys  of 
Greece,  who  were  behind  the  reft  in  this 
Reform  of  Tafle  and  Manners. 

But  what  is  yet  a  more  undeniable  Evi- 
dence of  this  natural  and  gradual  Refinement 
of  Styles  and  Manners  among  the  Antients, 
particularly  in  what  concern'd  their  Stage, 
is,  that  this  very  Cafe  of  Prohibition,  and 
Reftraint  happen'd  among  the  Romans  them- 
felves;  where  no  Etlecls  of  foreign  Power, 
or  of  a  home  Tyranny  can  be  pretended. 
Their  Fescennin,  and  Atellan  way  of 
Wit,  was  in  early  days  prohibited,  and  Laws 
made  againft  it,  for  the  PMicKs  fake,  and  in 
regard  to  the  Welfare  of  the  Community  :  fuch 
Licentioufnefs  having  been  found  in  reality  con- 
trary to  the  juft  Liberty  of  the  People. 

* , Doluere  cruento 


Dente  laceffiti:  fuit  intatiis  quoque  Cura 
Conditione  Juper  Communi.      Quin  etiam 

Lex 
Pcenaque  lata  malo   qua  nollet  Carmine  quemquam 
Defer  ibi. 

In    defence    of    what    I    have    here    ad- 
vane'd,     I   cou  d,   befides    the    Authority    of 

*  iior.  I,i  hi.  1.  (ib.  '2. 

grave 


252        A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

grave  *  Hiftorians  and  Chronologifls,  produce 
the  Teftimony  of  one  of  the  wifeft,  and  moft 
ferious  of  antient  Authors ;  vvhofe  fmgle  Au- 
thority wou'd  be  acknowledged  to  have  equal 
force  with  that  of  many  concurring  Writers. 
He  fhews  us  that  this  t  firjt  jorrrid  Comedy  and 
Scheme  oi  ludicrous  Wit,  was  introduced  upon 
the  neck  of  the  Sublime.  The  familiar  airy 
Mufe  was  privileg'd  as  a  fort  of  Counter-Peda- 
gogue, againft  the  Pomp  and  Formality  of  the 
more  folemn  Writers.  And  what  is  his;hlv 
remarkable,    our   Author  mews   us,    that    in 


*  To  confirm  what  is  faid  of  this  natural  Succejjion  of  Wit  and  Style, 
according  to  the  fereral  Authoritys  above-cited  in  the  immediate  pre- 
ceding Notes;  fee  Stxabo,  Lib.  1.  'O?  o'  uirtTy,  0  ize£o<;  Aoyoj  oye  xa- 
Ttaktv.icrjj.£vo$,  p.i/x»5f*a  t«  •E;ot»j1i«a  eri  w^'nrsi  ydg  y  ■jtohj7»K'/?  xdaaxnvn 
<53a.^fih§iv  «?  To  [Aioov  Kjivoo:ci[j.r,3-i'j.  ' Eira  Ixeaw  <,  tyt£ff*;yo»,  hvo-uvltq  to  ustpcv 
t'  aXXa  $e  <pv7id£,av\t<;  rd  tsouflixd ,  avvil^a-^ccv  of  kip)  Kxtifiop,  x^  !pigixvclr,i/,  *1 
' Ex.uJ.a7ot'  eiTa  of  vregov,  aQccigviirts  aei  t*  w  toMtuv,  ef;  to  tvt  e.$o$  xctryyot- 
yov,  u<;  dv  d'sso  &\]/b;  tivoi;.  KxdxTrep  an  tk  ^  T^v  K.x^llccv  (paly  XocQhv  T5j\ 
crirxcrw  dno  tv);  T^ayua.ui,  >£  t5  xxt  a^rnv  iVjyj,  xalaQiQaaBnaaii  ft'j  to  Ao- 
yoHoa^  hm  x»*hifA.svov. 

■f  n^WTOK  06*  T^a^wJia*  'Rapyxfiricrxv  fST0jt*v?jr»*at  run  c-vpfixwovlui,  x}  ot« 
TotuTa  stw  Gfipvxs  ywio-Qxi,  tCj  or*  o<s  eV*  t>jc  ax-/i'jv<;  TrcrvxayuyucrQi,  tbto»?  /u'<5 
a'p^GtjGs  Itt*  tsj;  iah^ovI^  axwvs-  '"    Metos  oe  t^  T^scyuoiat  -n  ap^ata 

K.u{A.u^lcc  B7a§5J%9j9,  ,C7ai^c«7a>y»xn\  wa'p  puc-iav  t'^sa-a,  xj  t^j  drv!pia<;  xx  dxpy\. 
f-w?  c;  dvrni  t»j  It'Gf  p  fv}[A.c<rv»yi<;  I'doixtjAVVcxxcra.'  tspui;  oton  Ti  x^  Aioyevtii  txvtI 
r. a^ih.a^Zavn'  pird  ravra  tU  n  [/Jari  K^y^'st,  xj  Mmov  05  tia,  Sec.  M«£. 
A>1.  |3k£.  »as. 

'Oflwj  dtTciJag  oAon  to"  vaiov  'wotetv,  iCj  oV«  ,\(«v  a|io7rtroTa:Ta  >mpdyu.xla  (Dcct- 
mafyi'ixi.  d.7royv[Mbv  dura,  xj  7W  ivriXcixv  dvruv  xxQigdv,  xj  t«»  irop'iav,  vQ1  v 
c-ty.YWtlxt,  ntiP}a\p>Hv'  &ito;  yd(>  0  TtJpoj  maQahvyiffrii .  Kai  oVe  oo^ej?  [/.d^ifcc 
ijs^>  rd  wnxoata  xar,ay'ivio$ui,  toty>  /xd?\irx  xdlayotTtiH'  o^cc  ySv  0  K'drtig,  7] 
tt:p1  dvri*  tS  ~sv<.x~r-''~z$hiyei.       Id.  ft?.  5". 

Phi- 


ADVICE  to    an  Author.       253 

Philofophy  it-felf  there  happen'd,  almoft  at  the 
very  fame  time,  a  like  Succejfion  of  Wit  and 
Humour;  when  in  oppofition  to  the  fublime 
Philofopher,  and  afterwards  to  his  *  grave 
Difciple  and  Succeffor  in  the  Academy,  there 
arofe  a  Comtek  Philofophy,  in  the  Perfon  of 
another  Mailer  and  other  Difciples ;  who  per- 
sonally, as  well  as  in  their  Writings,  were  fet 
in  direcl  oppofition  to  the  former:  not  as  dif- 
fering in  f  Opinions  or  Maxims,  but  in  their 
Style  and  Manner;  in  the  Turn  of  Humour, 
and  method  of  Inftruclion. 


'TIS  PLEASANT  enough  to  conhder 
how  exacl  the  refemblance  was  between  the 
Lineage  of  Philofophy  and  that  of  Poetry;  as  de- 
riv'd  from  their  two  chief  Founders  or  Patri- 
archs ;  in  whofe  Loins  the  feveral  Races  lay 
as  it  were  inclos'd.  For  as  the  J  grand  poetick 
Sire  was,  by  the  confent  of  all  Antiquity,  al- 
lowed to  have  furnifh'd  Subje6t  both  to  the 
Tragick,    the  Comtek,  and   every  other  kind  of 


*  See  the  Citations  immediately  preceding. 

+  Tunica  diflantia Juv.  Sat.  13.  ver.  222. 

t  See  above  page  246.  in  the  Notes.  According  to  this  Homeric  at 
Lineage  of  Poetry,  Comedy  wou'd  naturally  prove  the  Drama  oflatei! 
Birth.  For  tho  Aristotle,  in  the  fame  place,  cites  Homer's  Mar- 
rites  as  analogous  to  Comedy,  yet  the  Iliad  and  Odyffee,  in  which  the  he- 
roick  Style  prevails,  having  been  ever  higher!  in  elteein,  were  likeliefl  to 
be  fir  ft  wrought  and  cultivated. 


genuine 


254      A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

genuine  Poetry ;  fo  the  philosophical? A  triarch, 
in  the  fame  manner,  containing  within  him- 
felf  the  feveral  Genius's  of  Philofophy,  gave 
rife  to  all  thofe  feveral  Manners  in  which  that 
Science  was  deliver'd. 

His  Difciple  of  noble  Birth  and  lofty  Ge- 
nius, who  afpir'd  to  *  Poetry  and  Rhetorick, 
took  the  Sublime  part,  and  fhone  above  his  other 
Condifciples.  He  of  mean  Birth,  and  poorefl 
Circumflances,  whofe  Conflitution  as  well  as 
Condition  inclin'd  him  moft  to  the  way  we 
call  Satirick,  took  the  reproving  part,  which 
in  his  better  humour'd  and  more  agreeable 
SuccelTor,  turn'd  into  the  Comick  kind,  and 
went  upon  the  Model  of  that  t  antient  Come- 
dy which  was  then  prevalent.  But  another 
noble  Diiciple,  whofe  Genius  was  towards 
Action,  and  who  prov'd  afterwards  the  great- 


*  rlis   Dialogues  were   \cA  P  O  E  M  S  (as  lias  been  fhewn  above,  pag. 
i     ),  8cc.)     This  may  eafily  be    collected  from  the  Poeticks  of  the  grand 
Mailer.      We  may  add   what  is  cited    by   Athen aeus  from    another 
Treatife  of  that  Author.      'O  Tyf  dhXas  clvjxZ  d'w'Kuq  xxxofcyri<rsts,  h  piv  t»j 
oroXfleia "Opyqw)  ix£d?\Xuii,  xj  tw  fjn^vjluvt  tsoivunv,   duro;  di  [Hhdruv]   ts?  Ata_ 
KiytK  fjuuuyltxui;  yqdisqa.^  uv  TAJ  'i$e»i    Ho'   dvrof  Itgslrg    £r».      Tl^o  y&%  ctvrS 
tkO'  et?gs   to    e$&  tvv  yoAowv    b  T^'i®-  'AXeZdpsv©',  uf  N»xt«?  o  Ntxat uj  irogs; 
x}  Eulvgiov.   'A^rorsTwis  &  l*  tw  areg*woiUT-«»  Sruiy^apet'  "  'OvxSt  bTi  1/*(aet§8« 
"  tb;  KaAa/*s»a;  Ew^gov©?  Miu«;,  f*»j  <p<u[Acv  eijsh  Xs'yaj  xj   p»f**i0"«s,  *i  t«s  AAe^- 
'  afjiivn    t5  1  y;i«  raj  «7pwt«?  ygatftvlcis   rav    Tuxgdlixuv  ouzfayvv;       Avtm^vs 
tpdaxvv  b  <mGhvpctSi<TTd\@*  v' A^ototsTwS  tt^o  rfoaTW!/©-  A./zhiye-  yi\ga.$ivcn  tov 
^duvjvav.      Allien.  Lib.  II. 
t  According  to  the  two  iaft  Citations,  pag.  252. 

eft 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        255 

eft  Hero  of  his  time  took  the  genteeler  Part,  and 
J&fter  Manner.  He  joind  what  was  deepeit 
and  moft  folid  in  Philofophy,  with  what  was 
eafieft  and  moft  refin'd  in  Breeding,  and  in 
the  Character  and  Manner  of  a  Gentleman. 
Nothing  coud  be  remoter  than  his  Genius 
was,  from  the  fcholaftick,  the  rhetorical,  or 
mere  poetick  kind.  He  was  as  diftant,  on 
one  hand,  from  the  fonorous,  high,  and  pom- 
pous Strain;  as,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the 
ludicrous,  mimical,  or  fatirick. 

This  *was  that  natural  and Jimple  Genius 
of  Antiquity,  comprehended  by  fo  few,  and  fo 
little  reliih'd  by  the  Vulgar.  This  was  that 
philofophical  Menander  of  earlier  Time, 
whofe  Works  one  may  wonder  to  fee  preferv'd 
from  the  fame  Fate ;  fince  in  the  darker  Ages 
thro'  which  they  pafs'd,  they  might  probably 
be  alike  neglecled,  on  the  account  of  their  like 
Simplicity  of  Style  and  Compofition. 

There  is,  befides  the  feveral  Manners  of 
Writing  above  defcrib'd,  another  of  confider- 
able  Authority  and  Weight,  which  had  its  rife 
chiefly  from  the  critical  Art  it-felf,  and  from 
the  more  accurate  Infpeclion  into  the  Works 
of  preceding  Mailers.      The  grand  Critick,  of 


*  VOL.  III.  p.  248. 

Vol.  I.  Pv  whom 


256       A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

whom  we  have  already  fpoken,  was  a  Chief 
and  Leader  in  this  Order  of  Pen-men.  For 
tho  the  Sophists  of  elder  time  had  treated 
many  Subjects  methodically,  and  in  form;  yet 
this  Writer  was  the  firfl  who  gain'd  Repute  in 
the  methodick  kind.  As  the  Talent  of  this  great 
Man  was  more  towards  polite  Learning,  and 
the  Arts,  than  towards  the  deep  and  folid  parts 
of  Philolophy,  it  happen'd  that  in  his  School 
there  was  more  care  taken  of  other  Sciences, 
than  of  Ethicfa,  Dialect  or  Logic k\  which  Pro- 
vinces were  chiefly  cultivated  by  the  Succef- 
fors  of  the  Academy  and  Porch. 

It  has  been  obfervd  of  this  methodick  or 
fcholajlick  Manner,  that  it  naturally  befitted  an 
Author,  who  tho  endow'd  with  a  comprehen- 
five  and  ftron-g  Genius,  was  not  in  himfelf  of 
a  refin'd  Temper,  blefs'd  by  the  Graces,  or  fa- 
vour'd  by  any  MuJ'e ;.  one  who  was  not  of  a 
fruitful  Imagination,  but  rather  dry  and  rigid; 
yet  withal  acute  and  piercing,  accurate  and 
diflinct.  For  the  chief  Nerve  and  Sinew  of 
this  Style  confiils  in  the  clear  Divifion  and 
Partition  of  the  Subjects.  Tho  there  is  nothing 
exalting  in  the  Manner,  'tis  naturally  powerful 
and  commanding)  and,  more  than  any  other, 
fubdues  the  Mind,  and  ftrengthens  its  Deter- 
minations. 'Tis  from  this  Genius  that  firm 
Gonclufions  and  fteady  Maxims  are  bed  form'd  : 

which 


ADVICE   to  an  Author.       1^7 

which  if  folidly  built,  and  on  fare  ground, 
are  the  fliortefl  and  beft  Guides  towards  Wif- 
dom  and  Ability,  in  every  kind;  but  if  defec- 
tive, or  unfound,  in  the  leaftpart,  mud  of  ne- 
ceflity  lead  us  to  the  groffeft  Abfurditys,  and 
ftiffeft  Pedantry  and  Conceit. 

Now  tho  every  other  Style  and  genuine 
Manner  of  Compofition  has  its  Order  and  Me- 
thod, as  well  as  this  which,  in  a  peculiar  fenfe, 
we  call  the  Methodick;  yet  it  is  this  Manner 
alone  which  profeffes  Method,  diflecls  it-felf 
in  Parts,  and  makes  its  own  Anatomy.  The 
Sublime  can  no  way  condefcend  thus,  or  bear 
to  be  fufpended  in  its  impetuous  Courfe.  The 
Comtek,  or  derifory  Manner,  is  further  full  from 
making  mew  of  Method.  'Tis  then,  if  ever, 
that  it  prefumes  to  give  it-felf  this  wife  Air, 
when  its  Defign  is  to  expofe  the  Thing  it-felf, 
and  ridicule  the  Formality  and  Sophiftry  fo 
often  fheltcrd  beneath  it.  The  Simple  Manner, 
which  being  the  ftricleft  Imitation  of  Nature, 
fliou'd  of  right  be  the  compleatefl,  in  the  Dif- 
tribution  of  its  Parts,  and  Symmetry  of  its 
Whole,  is  yet  fo  far  from  making  any  often- 
tation  of  Method,  that  it  conceals  the  Ar- 
tifice as  much  as  poffible :  endeavouring  only 
to  exprefs  the  effect  of  Art,  under  the  appear- 
ance of  the  created  Eafe  andNe^li^ence.  And 
even  when  it  a  flumes  the  cen faring  or  reprov- 

Pv  2  ing 


*5$      ADVICE  to  an  Author.. 

ing  part,  it  does  it  in  the  mod  eonceai'd  and 
gentle  way. 

The  Authors  indeed  of  our  Age  are  as  lit- 
tle capable  of  receiving,  as  of  giving  Advice, 
in  fuch  a  way  as  this :    So  little  is  the  generai 
Palat  fbrm'd,  as  yet,  to  a Tafte  of  real  Simpli- 
city.    As  for  the  Sublime,   tho  it  be  often 
the  Subject  of  Criticifm ;   it  can  never  be  the 
Manner,    or  afford  the  Means.     The  Way  of 
Form  and  Method,   the  didatiive  ox  preceptive 
Manner  as  it  has  been  ufually  practis'd  araongft 
us,  and  as  our  Ears  have  been  long  accunom'd, 
has  fo  little   force   towards    the    winning   our 
Attention,  that  it  is  apter  to  tire  usT  than  the 
Metre  of  an  old  Ballad.     We   no  fooner  hear 
the  Theme   propounded,    the  Subjecl  divided 
and  fubdivided,  (with  jirjl  of  the  jirjl,   and  fo 
forth,  as  Order  requires)  than  inflantly  we  be- 
gin a  Strife  with  Nature,  who  otherwife  might 
furprize  us  in  the  foft  Fetters  of  Sleep ;   to  the 
great  Difgrace  of  the  Orator,   and  Scandal  of 
the  Audience.    The  only  Manner  left,  in  which 
Criticifm  can  have  its  juit  Force  amongft   us, 
is  the  antient  Comick;   of  which  kind   were 
the  firfl  Roman  Mifcellanvs,  or  Satirick  Pieces  : 
a  fort  of  original  Writing  of  their  own,  refind 
afterwards  by  the    bell   Genius,    and    politeit 
Poet  of  that  Nation;   who,    notwithfianding, 
owns  the  Manner  to  have  been  taken  from  the 

Greek 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        259 

Greek  Comedy  above-mention'd.  And  if  our 
home- Wits  wou'd  refine  upon  this  Pattern, 
they  might  perhaps  meet  with  confiderable 
Succefs. 

In  erTecl,  we  may  obferve,  that  in  our  own 
Nation,  the  mofl  fucCefsful  Criticijm,  or  Method 
of  Refutation,  is  that  which  borders  mofl  on 
the  manner  of  the  earlier!  Greek  Comedy.  The 
highly-rated  *  burlefque  Poem,  written  on  the 
Subject  of  our  religious  Controverfys  in  the 
laft  Age,  is  a  fufficient  Token  of  thrs  kind. 
And  that  juftly  admir'd  Piece  of  f  Comick  Wit, 
given  us  fome  time  after  by  an  Author  of  the 
higheft  Quality,  has  furnifh'd  our  befl  Wits  in 
all  their  Controverfys,  even  in  Religion  and 
Politicks,  as  well  as  in  the  Affairs  of  Wit  and 
Learning,  with  the  moll  effectual  and  enter- 
taining Method  of  expofmg  Folly,  Pedantry, 
falfe  Reafon,  an  ill  Writing.  And  without 
fome  fuch  tolerated  manner  otCriticiJm  as  this, 
how  grofly  we  might  have  been  impos'd  on, 
and  fhou'd  continue  to  be,  for  the  future,  by 
many  Pieces  of  dogmatical  Rhetorick,  and  pe~ 
dantick  Wit,  may  eafily  be  apprehended  by 
thofe  who  know  any  thing  of  the  State  of  Let- 


*  HuDIBRAS. 

"    +  The  Rehearsal.      SecVOL.    III.  p.    277.    in  the  Notes,  anJ 
Ibid,  p,  281. 

R  3  ters 


260      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

ters  in  our  Nation,  or  are  in  the  lead  fitted 
to  judge  of  the  Manner  of  the  common  Poets, 
or  formal  Authors  of  the  Times. 

In  what  Form,  or  Manner  foever,  Criticifm 
may  appear  amongfl  us,  orCRiTiCKS  chufe 
to  exert  their  Talent;  it  can  become  none  be- 
fides  the  grofly  fuperflitious,  or  ignorant  to  be 
alarm'd  at  this  Spirit.  For  if  it  be  ill  manag'd, 
and  with  little  Wit ;  it  will  be  deftroy'd  by 
fomething  wittier  in  the  kind  :  If  it  be  witty 
it-felf,  it  mutt  of  neceffity  advance  Wit. 

And  thus  from  the  Confideration  of  anti- 
ent  as  well  as  modern  Time,  it  appears  that 
the  Caufe  and  Inter  eft  ofCRiTicKS  is  the 
fame  with  that  of  Wit,  Learning,  and  good 
Senfe. 

SEC  T.     III. 


u- 


THUS  we  have  furvey'd  the  State  of  A 
thors,  as  they  are  influenc'd  from  without ; 
either  by  the  Frowns  or  Favour  of  the  Great, 
or  by  the  Applaufe  or  Cenfure  of  the  Criticks. 
It  remains  only  to  confider,  how  the  People, 
or  World,  in  general,  fland  affected  towards 
our  modern  Pen-men;  and  what  occafion 
thefe  Adventurers  may  have  of  Complaint,  or 

Boaft, 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        261 
Boafl,    from  their  Encounter  with  the  Pub- 


lic k. 


There  is  nothing  more  certain,   than  that 
a  real  Genius,    and  thorow  Aritji,    in  whatever 
kind,  can    never,  without  the  greateft  Unwil- 
lingnefs  and  Shame,  be  indued   to  act  below 
his   Character,    and  for  mere    Intereft  be  pre- 
vail'd  with  to  profUtute  his  Art  or  Science,  by 
performing  contrary  to  its  known  Rules.  Who- 
ever has  heard  any  thing   of  the  Lives  of  fa- 
mous Statuary's,  Architects,  or  Painters,  .will  call 
to    mind  many  Inflances  of  this  nature.      Or 
whoever  has  made  any  acquaintance  with  the 
better  fort  of  Mechanicks,  fuch  as  are  real  Lov- 
ers of  their  Art,  and  Majiers  in  it,   mull  have 
obferv'd  their  natural  Fidelity  in  this  refpecl. 
Be  they  ever  fo  idle,  dilfolute,   or  debauch'd; 
how   regardlefs   foever   of  other  Rules ;    they 
abhor  any  TranfgrefTion  in  their  Art,  andwou'd 
chufe  to  lofe  Cullomers  and  ilarve,  rather  than 
by  a  bafe  Compliance   with   the  World,  to 
acl  contrary  to  what  they  call  the  Jujinejs  and 
Truth  of  Work. 

c'  Sir,  (fays  a  poor  Fellow  of  this  kind,  to 
his  rich  Cuflomer)  ct  you  are  miilaken  in  cora- 
"  ing  to  me,  for  fuch  a  piece  of  Workman- 
"  fiiip.  Let  who  will  make  it  for  you,  as  you 
"fancv;   I  know   it  to  be  wrong.     Whatever 

R4  "I 


262        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

tl  I  have  made  hitherto,  has  been  true  Work. 
*'  And  neither  for  your  fake  or  any  body's 
61  elfe,  fhall  I  put  my  hand  to  any  other." 

This  is  Virtue!  real  Virtue,  and  Love  of 
Truth;  independent  of  Opinion,  and  above  the 
World.  This  Difpofition  transfer'd  to  the 
whole  of  Life,  perfecls  a  Character,  and  makes 
that  Probity  and  Worth  which  the  Learned  are 
often  at  fuch  a  lofs  to  explain.  For  is  there 
not  a  Workmanfiip  and  a  Truth  in  Actions? 
Or  is  the  Workmanfiip  of  this  kind  lefs  becom- 
ing, or  lefs  worthy  our  notice  ;  that  we  Ihou'd 
not  in  this  cafe  be  as  furly  at  lead  as  the  ho- 
neft  Artizan,  who  has  no  other  Philojophy,  than 
what  Nature  and  his  Trade  have  taught  him  ? 

When  one  confiders  this  Zeal  and Honefly 
of  inferior  Artifts,  one  wou'd  wonder  to  fee 
thole  who  pretend  to  Skill  and  Science  in  a 
higher  kind,  have  fo  little  regard  to  Trut h,  and 
the  Perfection  of  their  Art.  One  wou'd  expect 
it  of  our  Writers,  that  if  they  had  real  Ability, 
they  ffiou'd  draw  the  World  to  them;  and 
not  meanly  fute  themfelves  to  the  World,  in  its 
weak  State.  We  mayjuftly  indeed  make  al- 
lowances for  the  Simplicity  of  thofe  early  Ge- 
nius $  of  our  Nation,  who  after  fo  many  bar- 
barous Ages,  when  Letters  lay  yet  in  their 
Hums,    made    bold  Excurfions  into  a  vacant 

Field, 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        165 

Field,  to  feize  the  Polls  of  Honour,  and  attain 
the  Stations  which  were  yet  unpofTefs'd  by  the 
Wits  of  their  own  Country.  But  fince  the  Age 
is  now  fo  far  advancd ;  Learning  eflablifh'd  ; 
the  Rules  of  Writing  Rated;  and  the  Truth  of 
Art  fo  well  apprehended,  and  every  where 
confefs'd  and  own 'd:  'tis  ftrange  to  fee  our 
Writers  as  unfhapen  ftill  and  monftrous  in  their 
Works,  as  heretofore.  There  can  be  nothing 
more  ridiculous  than  to  hear  our  Poets,  in 
their  Prefaces,  talk  of  Art  and  Structure  :  whilfl 
in  their  Pieces  they  perform  as  ill  as  ever,  and 
with  as  little  regard  to  thofe  profefs'd  Rules  of 
Art,  as  the  honed  Bards,  their  Predeceifors, 
who  had  never  heard  of  any  fuch  Rules,  or  at 
leaf!  had  never  own  d  their  Juftice  or  Vali- 
dity. 

Had  the  early  Poets  of  Greece  thus  com- 
plimented their  Nation,  by  complying  with 
its  fait  R.elifh  and  Appetite ;  they  had  not 
done  their  Countrymen  fuch  Service,  northem- 
felves  fuch  Honour  as  we  find  they  did,  by 
conforming  to  Truth  and  Nature.  The  gene- 
rous Spirits  who  firft  effay'd  the  Way,  had  not 
always /fo  World  on  their  fide:  but  foon 
drew  after  'em  the  beft  Judgments ;  and  foon  af- 
terwards the  World  it-felf.  Theyforcd  their 
way  into  it,  and  by  weight  of  Merit  turn'd 
jts  Judgment  on  their  fide.    They  form'd  their 

Audi- 


264       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Audience  ;  polifh'd  the  Age  ;  refin'd  the  pub- 
lick  Ear,  and  fram'd  it  right;  that  in  return 
they  might  be  rightly  and  lailingly  applauded. 
Nor  were  they  difappointed  in  their  Hope. 
The  Applaufe  foon  came,  and  was  lading  ;  for 
it  was  found.  They  have  Juftice  done  them  at 
this  day.  They  have  furviv'd  their  Nation  ; 
and  live,  tho  in  a  dead  Language.  The  more 
the  Age  is  enlighten'd,  the  more  they  mine. 
Their  Fame  muft  neceffarily  laft  as  long  as  Let- 
ters ;   and  Pofterity  will  ever  own  their  Merit. 

Our  modern  Authors,  on  the  contrary,  are 
turn'd  and  model'd  (as  themfelves  confefs)  by 
the  Publick  Relifh,  and  current  Humour  of 
the  Times.  They  regulate  themfelves  by  the 
irregular  Fancy  of  the  World;  and  frankly 
own  they  are  prepofterous  and  abfurd,  in  or- 
der to  accommodate  themfelves  to  the  Genius 
of  the  Age.  In  our  Days  the  Audience  makes  the 
Poet;  and  the  Bookjellcr  the  Author:  with  what 
Profit  to  the  Publick,  or  whatProfpecl  of  lading 
Fame  and  Honour  to  the  Writer,  let  any  one 
who  has  Judgment  imagine. 

But  tho  our  Writers  charge  their  Faults 
thus  freely  on  //#  Publick  ;  it  will,  I  doubt, 
appear  from  many  Inflances,  that  this  Practice 
is   mere   Impofture :    fince   thofe    Abfurditys, 

which 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       265 

which  they  are  the  aptefl  to  commit,  are  far 
from  being  delightful  or  entertaining.  We  are 
glad  to  take  up  with  what  our  Language  can 
afford  us  ;  and  by  a  fort  of  Emulation  with 
other  Nations,  are  forc'd  to  cry  up  fuch  Wri- 
ters of  our  own,  as  may  belt  ferve  us  for  Com- 
panion. But  when  we  are  out  of  this  Spirit, 
it  muft  be  own'd,  we  are  not  apt  to  difcover 
any  great  Fondnefs  or  Admiration  of  our  Au- 
thors. Nor  have  we  any,  whom  by  mutual 
Confent  we  make  to  be  our  Standard.  We  go 
to  Plays,  or  to  other  Shows;  and  frequent  the 
Theater,  as  the  Booth.  We  read  Epicks  and 
Dramaticks,  as  we  do  Satirs  and  Lampoons.  For 
we  muft  of  neceffity  know  what  Wit  as  well  as 
what  Scandal  is  ftirring.  Read  we  muft ;  let 
Writers  be  ever  fo  indifferent.  And  this  per- 
haps may  be  fome  occafion  of  the  Lazinefs  and 
Negligence  of  our  Authors ;  who  obferving 
this  Need,  which  our  Curiofity  brings  on  us, 
and  making  an  exacl  Calculation  in  the  way 
of  Trade,  to  know  juftly  the  Quality  and 
Quantity  of  the  publick  Demand,  feed  us  thus 
from  hand  to  mouth ;  refolving  not  to  over- 
ftock  the  Market,  or  be  at  the  pains  of  more 
Correclnefs  or  Wit  than  is  abfolutely  neceffary 
to  carry  on  the  Traffick. 


Our 


266       A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Our  Satir  therefore  is  fcurrilous,  buffoon- 
ing, and  without  Morals  or  Inftruction,  which 
is  the  Majefty  and  Life  of  this  kind  of  writing. 
Our  Encomium  or  Panegyrick  is  as  fulfora 
and  difpleafing,  by  its  proftitute  and  abandon'd 
manner  of  Praife.  The  worthy  Perfons  who 
are  the  Subjects  of  it,  may  well  be  efteem'd  Suf- 
ferers by  the  Manner.  And  the  Publick,  whe- 
ther it  will  or  no,  is  forcd  to  make  untoward 
Reflections,  when  led  to  it  by  fuch  Jatirizing 
Panegyrijls.  For  in  reality  the  Nerve  and  Si- 
new of  modern  Panegyrick  lies  in  a  dull  kind 
of  Satir;  which  the  Author,  it's  true,  intends 
fhou'd  turn  to  the  advantage  of  his  Subject ;  but 
which,  if  I  miftake  not,  will  appear  to  have  a 
very  contrary  Effect. 

The  ufual  Method,  which  our  Authors  take, 
when  thev  wou'd  commend  either  a  Brother- 

J 

Author,  a  Wit,  a  Hero,  a  Philojopher,  or  a  States- 
man, is  to  look  abroad,  to  find  within  the  nar- 
row compafs  of  their  Learning,  fome  eminent 
Names  of  Perfons,  who  anfwer'd  to  thefe  Cha- 
racters in  a  former  time.  Thefe  they  are  hire 
to  lafh,  as  they  imagine,  with  fome  fharp  ftroke 
of Satir.  And  when  they  have  ilrippd  thefe  re- 
verend Perfonages  of  all  their  fhare  of  Merit, 
they  think  to  clothe  their  Hero  with  the  Spoils. 

Such 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       267 

Such  is  the  Sterility  of  thefe  Encomiqftsl  They 
know  not  how  to  praife,   but  by  Detra6Uon. 
If  a  Fair-One  is  to  be  celebrated,  Helen  mufl 
in  comparifon  be  deform'd ;  Venus  her-felf  de- 
graded.   That  a  Modern  may  be  honourd,  fome 
Antient  muft  be  facrific'd.     If  a  Poet  is  to  be  ex- 
tol'd;  down  with  a  Homer  or  a  Pindar.      If 
an  Orator,  or  Philefopher;  down  with  Demos- 
thenes,  Tully,    Plato.      If  a  General  of 
our  Army;  down  with  Tiny  Hero  whatever   of 
Time  paft.   "  The  Romans  knew  no  Difcipline ! 
"  The    Grecians    never    learnt     the     Art     of 
*  War !" 

Were  there  an  Art  of  Writing  to  be  form'd 
upon  the  modern  Practice  ;  this  Method  we 
have  defcribd  might  perhaps  be  mTd  the  Rule 
of  D  if  patch,  or  the  Herculean  Law;  by  which 
Encomia/Is,  with  no  other  Weapon  than  their 
fingle  Club,  may  filence  all  other  Fame,  and 
place  their  Hero  in  the  vacant  Throne  of  Ho- 
nour. I  wou'd  willingly  however  advife  thefe 
CeLbrators  to  be  a  little  more  moderate  in  the 
ufe  of  this  Club-method.  Not  that  I  pretend 
to  alk  quarter  for  the  Anticnts.  But  for  the  fake 
merely  of  thofe  Moderns,  whom  our  Panegyrifts 
undertake  to  praife,  I  wou'd  wifli  'em  to  be  a 
little  cautious  of  comparing  Characters.  There 
is  no  need  to  call  up  a  Publicola,  or  a  Sci- 

PIO, 


268      ADVICE    to  an  Author. 

pio,  an  Aristides,  or  a  Cato,  to  ferve  as 
Foils.  Thefe  were  Patriots  and  good  Generals 
in  their  time,  and  did  their  Country  honed  fer- 
vice.  No  offence  to  any  who  at  prefent  do  the 
fame.  The  Fabricius's,  the  Jlmilius's,  the 
Cincinnatus's  (poor  Men!)  may  be  fuffer'd 
to  red  quietly:  or  if  their  Ghods  fhou  d,  by  this 
unlucky  kind  of  Inchantment,  be  rais'd  in 
Mockery  and  Contempt ;  they  may  perhaps 
prove  troublefom  in  earned,  and  cad  fuch  Re- 
flections on  our  Pancoynfls,  and  their  modern  Pa- 
trons, as  may  be  no- way  for  the  advantage  of 
either.  The  well-deferving  Antients  will  have 
always  a  drong  Party  among  the  Wife  and 
Learned  of  every  Age.  And  the  Memory  of 
foreign  Worthys,  as  well  as  thofe  of  our  own 
Nation,  will  with  gratitude  be  cherifli'd  by  the 
nobler  Spirits  of  Mankind.  The  Intereft  otthe 
Dead  is  not  fo  disregarded,  but  that  in  cafe  of 
violence  offer'd  'em,  thro'  partiality  to  the  Li- 
ving, there  are  Hands  ready  prepar'd  to  make 
diffident  Reprifals. 

'Twas  in  times  when  Flattery  grew  much 
in  fafhion,  that  the  Title  of  Pane gy rick  was  ap- 
propriated to  fuch  Pieces  as  contain'd  only  a 
profufe  and  unlimited  Praife  of  fome  (ingle  Per- 
fon.  The  antient  Panegyricks  were  no  other 
than  merely  fuch  Writings,  as  Authors  of  eve- 
ry 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         269 

ry  kind  recited  at  the  folemn  AlTemblys  of  the 
People.  They  were  the  Exercifes  of  the  Wits, 
and  Men  of  Letters,  who  as  well  as  the  Men 
of  bodily  Dexterity  bore  their  part  at  the 
Olympic k,  and  other  National  and  Panegyrick 
Games. 

The  British  Nation,  tho  they  have  no- 
thing of  this  kind  ordain'd  or  eftablifh'd  by  their 
Laws,  are  yet  by  Nature  wonderfully  inclin'd 
to  the  fame  Panegyrick  Exercifes.  At  their  Fairs, 
and  during  the  time  of  publick  Fcflivals,  they 
perform  their  rude  Olympicks,  and  fhew  an  Ac- 
tivity, and  Addrefs,  beyond  any  other  modern 
People  whatever.  Their  Trials  of  Skill,  it's  true,  are 
wholly  of  the  Body,  not  of  the  Brain.  Nor  is  it  to 
be  wonder'dat,  if  being  left  to  themfelves,  and 
no  way  affifledby  the  Laws  or  Magiftrate,  their 
bodily  Exercifes  retain  fomething  of  the  Barba- 
rian Chara&er,  or,  at  lead,  fhew  their  *  Man- 
ners 


*  Whoever  has  a  thorow  Tajie  of  the  Wit  and  Manner  of  Horace,  if 
he  only  compares  his  Epiftle  to  Augustus  (lib.  2)  with  the  fecret  Cha- 
radler  of  that  Prince  from  Suetonius  and  other  Authors,  will  eafdy  find 
vhat  Judgment  that  Poet  made  oi  the  Roman  Tuj'e,  even  in  the  Perfon  of 
his  fovereign  and  admir'd  Roman  Prince;  whofc  natural  Love  of  Amphi-. 
theatrical  Spectacles,  and  other  Entertainments  (little  accommodated  to  the 
Intereft  olthc  Mufes)  is  there  iufficiently  infinuated.  The  Prince  indeed 
was  (as  'tis  faid  above,  p.  220.)  oblig'd  in  the  higheft  degree  to  Iris  poe- 
tical and  witty  Friends,  for  guiding  hisTrdle,  and  forming  his  Manners; 

as 


207        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

ners  to  hold  more  of  t  Rome  than  Greece, 
The  Gladiatorial/.,  and  other  fanguinary  Sports, 
which  we  allow  our  People,  difcover  fuffici- 
ently  our  National  Tafte.  And  the  Baitings 
and  Slaughter  of  To  many  forts  of  Creatures, 
tame  as  well  as  wild,  for  Diverfion  merely,  may 
witnefs  the  extraordinary  Inclination  we  have 
for  Amphitheatrical  Spectacles. 

I  know  not  whether  it  be  from  this  killing 
Difpofitionremark'din  us,  that  our  Satirifls  prove 
fuch  very  Slaughter-men ;  and  even  our  Pane- 
gyrick  Authors,  or  Encomiajls,  delight  fo  much 
in  the  difpatching  Method   above  defcrib'd: 


as  they  really  did,  with  good  effeft,  and  great  advantage  lo  his  Iijtereft. 
Witnefs  what  even  that  flattering  Court-Hiftorian,  Dion,  relates  ot  the 
frank  Treatment  which  that  Prince  receiv'd  from  his  Friend  Maecenas* 
who  was  fore'd  to  draw  him  from  his  bloody  Tribunal,  and  murderous 
Delight,  with  the  Reproach  of  Surge  vero  tandem,  Carnifex  !  ButHoRACE, 
according  to  his  Character  and  Circumftances,  was  obligd  to  take  a  finer 
and  more  conceal'd  Manner,  both  with  the  Prince  and  Favourite. 

Omne  vafer  vitium  ridendi  Flaccus  amico 
Tangil,  el  admijjus  circum  pr<rcordia  ludit. 

Perf.  Sat.  I. 

See  below,  VOL.  III.  p.  249.  in.  the  Notes. 

f  We  may  add  to  this  Note  what  Ta  c  i t us  6r  Qv  mrttt  AH  remarks 
on  the  Subject  of  the  Roman  Tafte:  Jam  vero  propria  -et  peculiaria  hujus  Urbis 
T'itiaptxne  in  utero  matris  concipi  miki  videntur.  hijlrionalis  favor,  et  gladiatorura 
cquorumque  fludia  :  quibus  occupatus  et  obfejfus  animus  qtwmtulum  loci  bonis  artibus 
relinquit?     Dial,  de  Oratoribu.i,  cap.  29. 

But 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         271 

But  fure  I  am,  that  our  *  dramatick  Poets  Rand 
violently  affecled  this  way ;  and  delight  to 
make  Havock  and  Dejlruflion  of  every  kind. 

'Tis  alledg'd  indeed  by  our  Stage-Poets,  in 
excufe  for  vile  Ribaldrv  and  other  srrofs  Irre- 
gularitys,  both  in  the  Fable  and  Language  of 
their  Pieces  ;  that  their  Succefs,  which  depends 
chiefly  on  the  Ladys,  is  never  fo  fortunate,  as 
when  this  Havock  is  made  on  Virtue  and  good 
Senfe,  and  their  Pieces  are  exhibited  publickly 
in  this  monitrous  Form.  I  know  not  how 
they  can  anfvver  it  to  the  Fair  Sex,  to  fpeak 
(as  they  pretend)  experimentally,  and  with  fuch 
nice  diftinclion  of  their  Audience.  How  far 
this  Excufe  may  ferve  'era  in  relation  to  com- 
mon Amours  and  Love- Adventures,  I  will  not  take 
upon  me  to  pronounce.  But  I  muft  own,  I 
have  often  wonder'd  to  fee  our  * fighting  Plays 
become  fo  much  the  Entertainment  of  that 
tender  Sex. 

They  who  have  no  help  from  Learning  to 
obferve  the  wider  Periods  or  Revolutions  of 
human  Kind,  the  Alterations  which  happen 
in  IVJanners,  and  the  Flux  and  Reflux  of  Po- 
litenefs,  Wit,  and  Art  ■  are  apt  at  every  turn 
to  make  the  prefent  Age  their  Standard,  and 

*  VOL.  lit.  fag.  256. 

Vol.  I.  S  ima- 


272      ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

imagine  nothing  barbarous  or  favage,  but 
what  is  contrary  to  the  Manners  of  their  own 
Time.  The  fame  pretended  Judges,  had  they 
flourifli'd  in  our  Britain  at  the  time  when 
Caesar  made  his  firft  Defcent,  wou'd  haVe 
condemn'd,  as  a  whinificalCritick,  the  Man  who 
fhou'd  have  made  bold  to  cenfure  our  defici- 
ency of  Clothing,  and  laugh  at  the  blue  Cheeks 
and  party-colour'd  Skins  which  were  then  in 
fafhion  with  our  Anceftors.  Such  mud  of  ne- 
ceflity  be  the  Judgment  of  thofe  who  are  only 
Criticks  by  fafhion.  But  to  a  juft  Naturalifi  or 
Iiumarujl,  who  knows  the  Creature  Man,  and 
judges  of  the  Growth  and  Improvement  in 
Society,'  it  appears  evidently  that  we  Britifli 
Men  were  as  barbarous  and  uncivilizd  in  re- 
fpect  of  the  Romans  under  a  Caesar,  as  the 
Romans  themfelves  were  in  refpect  of  the  Gre- 
cians, when  they  -invaded  that  Nation  under  a 

Mu  MMIUS. 

The  noble  Wits  of  a  Court-Education,  who 
can  go  no  further  back  into  Antiquity  than 
their  Pedegree  will  carry  'em,  are  able  how- 
ever to  call  to  mind  the  different  State  of  Mat- 
ters in  fome  few  Reigns  pari,  when  Chivalry 
was  in  fuch  repute.  The  Ladys  were  then 
Spectators  not  only  of  feign'd  Combats  and 
martial  Exercifes,  but  of  real  Duels  and  bloody 
Feats  of  Arms.  They  fat  as  Umpires  and  Judges 

of 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  273 

of  the  doughty  Frays.  Thefe  were  the  Saint- 
Proteclrices,  to  whom  the  Champions  chiefly 
paid  their  Vows,  and  to  whom  they  recom- 
mended themfelves  by  thefe  galante  Quarrels, 
and  elegant  Decifions  of  Right  and  Juftice. 
Nor  is  this  Spirit  fo  entirely  loft  amongft  us, 
but  that  even  at  this  hour  the  Fair  Sex  infpire 
us  ftill  with  the  Fancy  of  like  Gallantrys. 
They  are  the  chief  Subject  of  many  fuch  civil 
Turmoils,  and  remain  Mill  the  fecret  influenc- 
ing Conftellation  by  which  we  are  engag'd  to 
give  and  afk  that  SatisfcSion,  which  is  peculiar 
to  the  fine  Gentlemen  of  the  Age.  For  thus  a 
certain  Galante  of  our  Court  exprefs'd  the 
Cafe  very  naturally,  when  being  afk'd  by  his 
Friends,  why  one  of  his  eftablifh'd  Character 
for  Courage  and  good  Senfe,  wou'd  anfvver 
the  Challenge  of  a  Coxcomb ;  he  confefsd, 
41  That  for  his  own  Sex,  he  cou'd  fafely  truft 
tl  their  Judgment:  But  how  Ihou'd  he  appear 
41  at  night  before  the  Maids  of  Honour?" 

Such  is  the  different  Genius  of  Nations; 
and  of  the  fame  Nation  in  different  Times  and 
Seafons.  For  fo  among  the  Antients,  fome 
have  been  known  tender  of  the  *  Sex  to  fuch 


*  Contra,  ea  pleraque  nqftris  moribus  ora,  quit  apud  illos  turpia  pu- 

fantur.     Quern  enim  Romanorum  pudel  uxorem  ducere  in  convivium?  Aui 

S  2  mjtn 


274       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

a  degree,  as  not  to  fuffer  'em  to  expofe  theiu 
Modefty,  by  the  View  of  Mafculine  Games,  or 
Theatrical  Reprefentations  of  any  kind  what- 
ever. Others,  on  the  contrary,  have  intro- 
duc'd  them  into  their  Amphitheaters,  andmade 
'em  Sharers  in  the  cruelleft  Spe&acles. 

But  let  our  Authors  or  Poets  complain 
ever  &*  much  of  the  Genius  of  our  People,  'tis 
evident,  we  are  not  altogether  fo  Barbarous  or 
Gothick  as  they  pretend.  We  are  naturally  no 
ill  Soil ;  and  have  mufical  Parts  which  misjht 
be  cultivated  with  great  advantage,  if  fhefe 
Gentlemen  wou'd  ufe  the  Art  of  Matters  in 
their  Compofition.    They  have  power  to  work 


cujus  mater  jamill as  non  pi  imam  locum  lout  tedium,  atque  in celebritate  verjatu;? 
quodmullo  fd  aliter  in  Graecia.  Nam  ne que  in  conviiium  adhibetur,  nifi 
propinquonim,  neque  fddet,  nifi  in  interiore  parte  tedium,  qua  gpiaconitis  appe'la- 
lur :  quo  nemo  acccdii,  nifi  propinqua  cognations  conjuniius.  Corn.  Nep. 
in  Pisfat.  See  alfo  JLlian,  Cap.  i.  Lib.  10.  and  the  Lav/ in  Pau- 
sanias,  Lib.  5  Cap.  6'.' and  the  Story  of  .El  i  a  n  better  related,  ns  to 
the  Circumflances.  Hinc  defaxo  Famines  dejicere  Lexjubet,  q  ue  ad  Olym- 
picos  Ludoi  penetrate  deprekenfa  Juerint,  vtl  qua  omnino  Alpha  u  intranfmiferinly 
quibus  e/i  eis  interdiclum  diebus  :  Non  tamen  deprehenfam  ejje  ultam  perhibent 
prater  imam  Callipatiram,  quota  alii  Pherenicem  nominant.  Hac  viro  morlvo 
turn  virili  ornalu  exercilationumfc  mag'tjlrum Jimulant,  Pijidorum  Filium  in  cer- 
tamen  deduxit ;  jamque  eo  vincenle  fej.  ,  .id  quo  Magifirosfedufas  habentv 

tranfiluit  vefie  amijja.  Inde  Fceminam  agnilam  omni  crimine  iiberarunt.  Da- 
tum hoc  ex  Judicium  aquitate,  Patris,  Fiatrmn,  te  Fiiii  gloria ;  qui  omnes  ex 
Olympicis  Ludis  vitlores  alierant.  Ex  eolegefantilum,  id  nudali  adejfenl  ludis 
ipji  etiam  Magijiri . 

upon 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         275 

•upon  our  better  Inclinations,  and  may  know 
by  certain  Tokens,  that  their  Audience  is  dif- 
pos'd  to  receive  nobler  Subjects,  and  tafte  a  bet- 
ter Manner,  than  that  which,  thro'  indulgence 
to  ihemfelves  more  than  to  the  World,  they  are 
generally  pleas'd  to  make  their  choice. 

Besides  fome  laudable  Attempts  which 
have  been  made  with  tolerable  Succefs,  of 
late  years,  towards  a'juft  manner  of  Writing, 
both  in  the  heroick  and  familiar  Style ;  we 
have  older  Proofs  of  a  right  Difpofition  in  our 
People  towards  the  moral  and  inflrucliveWay. 
Our  *  old  dramatick  Poet  may  witnefs  for  our 
good  Ear  and  manly  Relifli.  Notwithstanding 
his  natural  Rudenefs,  his  unpolifh'd  Style,  his 
antiquated  Phrafe  and  Wit,  his  want  of  Me- 
thod and  Coherence,  and  his  Deficiency  in  al- 
moft  all  the  Graces  and  Ornaments  of  this 
kind  of  Writings ;  yet  by  the  Juftnefs  of  his 
Moral,  the  Aptnefs  of  many  of  his  Descrip- 
tions, and  the  plain  and  natural  Turn  of  feve- 
ral  of  his  Characters,  he  pleafes  his  Audience, 
and  often  gains  their  Ear,  without  a  fmgle 
Bribe  from  Luxury  or  Vice.  That  +  Piece  of 
his,   which  appears  to  have  mod  affected  Eng- 


*  Shakespear 
r  The  Tragedy  of  Hamlet. 


up. 


576       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

Ufa  Hearts,  and  has  perhaps  been  oftneft  acled 
of  any  which  have  come  upon  our  Stage,  is 
almoft  one  continu'd  Moral;  a  Series  of  deep 
Reflections,  drawn  from  one  Mouth,  upon  the 
Subject  of  one  fmgle  Accident  and  Calamity,  na- 
turally fitted  to  move  Horror  and  Companion. 
It  may  be  properly  faid  of  this  Play,  if  I  mif- 
take  not,  that  it  has  only  On  e  Char  after  ox  prin- 
cipal Part.  It  contains  no  Adoration  or  Flat- 
tery of  the  Sex:  no  ranting  at  the  Gods:  no 
bluftring  Heroifm  :  nor  any  thing  of  that  curi- 
ous mixture  of  the  Fierce  and  Tender,  which 
make  the  hinge  of  modern  Tragedy,  and  nice- 
ly varies  it  between  the  Points  of  Love  and 
Honour. 

Upon  the  whole:  fmce  in  the  two  great 
poetick  Stations,  the  Epick  and  Dramatick,  we 
may  obferve  the  moral  Genius  fo  naturally 
prevalent:  fince  our  *  mofl  approv'd  heroick 
Poem  has  neither  the  foftnefs  of  Language,  nor 
the  fafhionable  Tilrn  of  Wit;  but  merely  folid 
Thought,  ftrong  Reafoning,  noble  Paffion,  and 
a  continu'd  Thred  of  moral  Doclrine,  Pity, 
and  Virtue  to  recommend  it ;  we  may  juftly 
infer,  that  it  is  not  fo  much  the  publick  Ear!>  as 
the  ill  Hand  and  vitious  Manner  of  our  Poets, 
which  needs  redrefs. 


Mij-ion'j  Paradifc  Loft . 

AND 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        277 


AND  thus,  at  laft,  we  are  return'd  to  our 
old  Article  of  Advice;  that  main  Prelimina- 
ry of  Self-Jludy  and  inward,  Converfe,  which  we 
have  found  fo  much  wanting  in  the  Authors 
of  our  Time.  They  fhou'd  add  the  Wifdom 
of  the  Heart  to  the  Tafk  and  Exercife  of  the 
Brain,  in  order  to  bring  Proportion  and  Beauty 
into  their  Works.  That  their  Compofition  and 
Vein  of  Writing  may  be  natural  and  free,  they 
fhou'd  fettle  matters,  in  the  firft  place,  with 
them/elves.  And  having  gain'd  a  Maftery  here; 
they  may  eafily,  with  the  help  of  their  Genius, 
and  a  right  ufe  of  Art,  command  their  Audi- 
ence, and  eftablifh  a  good  lajle. 

'Tis  on  Them/elves,  that  all  depends.  We 
have  confider'd  their  other  Subjects  of  Excufe. 
We  have  acquitted  the  Great  Men,  their 
prefumptive  Patrons;  whom  we  have  left  to 
their  own  Difcretion.  Wre  have  prov'd  the 
Critic ks  not  only  an  inoffenfive,  but  highly 
ufefulRace.  And  for  the  Audience,  we  have 
found  it  not  fo  bad  as  might  perhaps  at  firft 
be  apprehended. 

It  remains  that  we  pafs  Sentence  on  our 
Authors ;  after  having  precluded  'em  their  lafl 
Refuge.      Nor  do  we   condemn  'em  on  their 

S4  want 


278       A  DV I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

want  of  Wit  or  Fancy ;  but  of  Judgment  and 
Correclnefs;  which  can  only  be  attain'd  by 
thorow  Diligence ,  Study,  and  impartial  Cenjure 
cj  themf elves.  'Tis  *  Manners  which  is  want- 
ing. 'Tis  a  due  Sentiment  of  Morals  which 
alone  can  make  us  knowing  in  Order  and  Pro- 
portion, and  give  us  the  juft  Tone  and  Mea- 
fure  of  human  Pailion. 

So  much  the  Poet  mult  necelTarily  borrow  of 
the  Philojoplier,  as  to  be  Matter  of  the  common 
Topic ks  of  Morality.  He  mull  at  lead  be 
fpecioiifly  honeft,  and  in  all  appearance  a  Friend 
to  Virtue,  thro'out  his  Poem.  The  Good  and 
Wife  will  abate  him  nothing  in  this  kind.  And 
the  People,  tho  corrupt,  are,  in  the  main,  belt 
fatisfy'd  with  this  Conducl, 

Speciofa  Log  is,  moFata^  rifle 


Fabula,  nullius  veneris,  Jine  ponder e  et  arte, 
Valdius  obleclat  populum,  meliujque  moralur, 
Quam  verjus  inopes  rerum,  nugaque  canorce. 

Hor.  de  Arte  Poet. 


*  Supra,    pag.  208.   et  Infra,  p.  337,  350,  351.  in  the  Notes.     And 
VOL.  111. fag.  247,  248,  249,  273,  282. 


PART 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         279 

PART         III. 

SECT.     I. 

' r  I  s  I S  efteem'd  the  higheft  Compliment  which 
A  can  be  paid  a  Writer,  on  the  occafion  of 
fome  new  Work  he  has  made  publick,  to  tell 
him,  ' '  That  he  has  undoubtedly/wr^/i'd  Hi  m- 
41  self."  And  indeed  when  one  obferves  how 
well  this  Compliment  is  receiv'd,  one  wrou'd 
imagine  it  to  contain  fome  wonderful  Hyperbole 
of  Praife.  For  according  to  the  Strain  of  mo- 
dern Politenefs  ;  'tis  not  an  ordinary  Violation 
of  Truth,  which  can  afford  a  Tribute  fuffici- 
ent  to  anfwer  any  common  degree  of  Merit.  Now 
'tis  well  known  that  the  Gentlemen  whofe  Me- 
rit lies  towards  Authorjhip,  are  unwilling  to  make 
the  leaf!  abatement  on  the  foot  of  this  Ceremo- 
nial. One  wou'd  wonder  therefore  to  find  era 
fo  entirely  fatisfy'd  with  a  Form  of  Praife,  which 
in  plain  fenfe  amounts  to  no  more  than  a  bare 
Affirmative,  lt  That  they  have  in  fome  man- 
fri  ner  differ  d  from  themlelves,  and  are  become 

;i  fome  what 


*8o       A  DVI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

tc  fomewhat  worfe  or  better,  than  their  common 
"  rate."  For  if  the  vileft  Writer  grows  viler 
than  ordinary,  or  exceeds  his  natural  pitch  on 
either  fide,  he  is  juftly  faid  to  exceed,  or  go  be- 
yond himfelf. 

We  find  in  the  fame  manner,  that  there  is 
no  expreflion  more  generally  usd  in  a  way  of 
Compliment  to  great  Men  and  Princes,  than 
that  plain  one,  which  is  fo  often  verify  d,  and 
may  be  fafely  pronounc'd  for  Truth,  on  mofl 
occafions;  '<*  That  they  have  acled  like  themjelves, 
41  and  futably  to  their  own  Genius  and  Cha- 
'■'  racier."  The  Compliment,  it  muft  beown'd, 
founds  well.  No  one  fufpecls  it.  For  what 
Perfon  is  there  who  in  his  Xm agination  joins 
not  fomething  worthy  and  deferving  with  his 
true  and  native  Self,  as  oft  as  he  is  refer'd  to 
it,  and  made  to  confider,  Who  he  is?  Such  is  the 
natural  Affeclion  of  all  Mankind  towards  moral 
Beauty  and  Perfection,  that  they  never  fail  in 
making  this  Prefumption  in  behalf  of  them- 
felves :  ct  That  by  Xature  they  have  fomething 
"  eftimable  and  worthy  in  refpecl  of  others  of 
ct  their  Kind ;  and  that  their  genuine,  true,  and 
4t  natural  Self,  is,  as  it  ought  to  be,  of  real  va- 
*l  lue  in  Society,  and  juflly  honourable  for  the 
"  fake  of  its  Merit,  and  good  Qualitys."  They 
conclude   therefore  they   have  the   height   of 

Praife 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.        281 

Praife  allotted  'em,  when  they  are  affurd  by 
any-one,  that  they  have  done  nothing  below 
themfelves,  or  that  in  fome  particular  Aclion, 
they  have  exceeded  the  ordinary  Tenor  of  their 
Character. 

Thus  is  every:one  convinc'd  of  the  Reality 
of  a  better  Self,  and  of  the  Cult  or  Homage 
which  is  due  to  It.  The  misfortune  is,  we  are 
feldom  taught  to  comprehend  this  Self,  by  pla- 
cing it  in  a  dininct  View  from  its  Representa- 
tive or  Counterfeit.  In  our  holy  Religion, 
which  for  the  greater!  part  is  adapted  to  the 
very  meaner!  Capacitys,  'tis  not  to  be  expecled 
that  a  Speculation  of  this  kind  fliou'd  be  open- 
ly advancd.  'Tis  enough  that  we  have  Hints 
given  us  of  a  nobler  Self,  than  that  which  is 
commonly  fuppos'd  the  Bafis  and  Foundation 
of  our  Aelions.  S 'elf- Inter eft  is  there  taken,  as 
it  is  vulgarly  conceiv'd.  Tho  on  the  other  fide 
there  are,  in  the  moil  *  facred  Characlers,  Ex- 
amples given  us  of  the  highefl  Contempt- of  all 
fuch  interefted  Views,  of  a  Willingnefs  to  fuf- 
fer  without  recompence  for  the  fake  of  others, 
and  of  a  defire  to  part  even  with  Life  and  Be- 
ing it-felf,  on  account  of  what  is  generous  and 
worthy.      But  in  the  fame  manner  as  the  ce- 


*  Exod.  Ch.  xxxii.  ver.  31,  32,  be.   and  Rom.  Cli.  ix.  ver.  1,  2, 

leflial 


S82        A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

leftial  Phenomena  are  in  the  Sacred  Volumes 
generally  treated  according  to  common  Ima- 
gination, and  the  then  current  Syftem  of  Auro- 
nomy  and  natural  Science ;  fo  the  moral  Appear- 
ances are  in  many  places  preferv'd  without  Al- 
teration, according  to  vulgar  Prejudice,  and 
the  general  Conception  of  Inter  eft  and'  Self-g&od. 
Our  real  and  genuine  S  e  l  f  is  fometimes  fupposd 
that  ambitions  one  which  is  fond  of  Power  and 
Glory,  fometimes  that  childifti  one  which  is  ta- 
ken with  vain  Shew,  and  is  to  be  invited  to  Obe- 
dience by  promife  of  finer  Habitations,  preci- 
ous Stones  and  Metals,  fhining  Garments, 
Crowns,  and  other  fuch  dazling  Beautys,  by 
which  another  Earth,  or  material  City,  is  repre- 
fented. 

It  mult  be  own'd,  that  even  at  that  time, 
when  a  greater  and  purer  Light  difclos'd  it-felf 
in  the  chofen  Nation  ;  their  natural  *  Gloomi- 
nefs  appear'd  flill,  by  the  great  difficulty  they 
had  to  know  themfelves,  or  learn  their  real  Inter  eft, 
after  fuch  long  Tutorage  and  Inftruction  from 
above.  The  Simplicity  of  that  People  muff 
certainly  have  been  very  great ;  when  the  bed 
Doctrine  cou'd  not  go  down  without  a  Treat, 
and  the  bed  Difciples  had  their  Heads  fo  run- 


*  Supra,  p.  29.  8c  VOL.  III.  p.  53- 56.  8c  115.  8cc. 


nmg 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        283 

ning  upon  their  Loaves,  that  they  were  apt  to 
conflrue  every  divine  Saying  in  a  *  Belly-Senk, 
and  thought  nothing  more  felf-conftituent  than 
that  inferior  Receptacle.  Their  Tafte  in  Mo- 
rals cou'd  not  fail  of  being  futable  to  this  ex- 
traordinary Eftimation  of  them/elves.  No  won- 
der if  the  better  and  nobler  Self  was  left  as  a 
My  fiery  to  a  People,  who  of  all  human  Kind 
were  the  moft.  grofly feljjjli,  crooked  and  perverfe. 
So  that  it  mud  neceflarily  be  confefs'd,  in  ho- 
nour of  their  divine  Legiflators,  Patriots,  and 
Inftructors ;  that  they  exceeded  all  others  in 
Goodnefs  and  Generofity;  fince  they  cou'd  fo 
truly  love  their  Nation  and  Brethren,  fuch  as 
they  were ;  and  cou'd  have  fo  generous  and 
difinterefted  Regards  for  thofe  who  were  in  them- 
felves  fo  fordidly  interefted  and  undeferving. 

But  whatever  may  be  the  proper  EffecT:  or 
Operation  of  Religion,  'tis  the  known  Province 
of  Philofophy  to  teach  us  our -f elves,  keep  us  the 
Jelj-Jame  Perfons,  and  fo  regulate  our  governing 
Fancy's,  Paffions,  and  Humours,  as  to  make  us 
comprehenfible  to  our-felves,  and  knowable  by 
other  Features  than  thofe  of  a  bare  Counte- 
nance. For  'tis  not  certainly  by  virtue  of  our 
Face  merely,   that  we  are  our-felves.     'Tis  not 


*  Mat.  Ch.  xvi.  ver.  6,  7,8,  See. 

WE 


S84     A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author.     • 

WE  who  change,  when  our  Complexion  or 
Shape  changes.  But  there  is  that,  which  be- 
ing wholly  metamorphos'd  and  converted, 
WE  are  thereby  in  reality  transform'd  and 
loft. 

Shou'd  an  intimate  Friend  of  ours,  who 
had  endur'd  many  Sicknefles,  and  run  many 
ill  Adventures  while  he  traveld  thro'  the  re- 
moteft  parts  of  the  Eaft,  and  hotted  Countrys 
of  the  South,  return  to  us  fo  alter'd  in  his 
whole  outward  Figure,  that  till  we  had  for  a 
time  convers'd  with  him,  we  cou'd  not  know 
him  again  to  be  the  fame  Perfon;  the  matter 
wou'd  not  feem  fo  very  flrange,  nor  wou'd  our 
concern  on  this  account  be  very  great.  But 
fhou'd  a  like  Face  and  Figure  of  a  Friend  re- 
turn to  us  with  Thoughts  and  Humours  of  a 
ftrange  and  foreign  Turn,  with  Paflions,  Af- 
fections, and  Opinions  wholly  different  from 
any  thing  we  had  formerly  known ;  we  fhou'd 
fay  in  earneft,  and  with  the  greater!  Amaze- 
ment and  Concern,  that  this  was  another  Crea- 
ture, and  not  the  Friend  whom  we  once  knew 
familiarly.  Nor  fhou'd  we  in  reality  attempt 
any  renewal  of  Acquaintance  or  Correfpon- 
dence  with  fuch  a  Perfon,  tho  perhaps  he  might 
preferve  in  his  Memory  the  faint  Marks  or 
Tokens  of  former  Tranfaclions  which  had 
pafsd  between  us. 

When 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         285 

When  a  Revolution  of  this  kind,  tho  not 
fo  total,  happens  at  any  time  in  a  Character ; 
when  the  Paffion  or  Humour  of  a  known  Perfon 
changes  remarkably  from  what  it  once  was ; 
'tis  to  Philofophy  wre  then  appeal.  'Tis  either 
the  Want  or  Weaknefs  of  this  Principle,  which 
is  charg'd  on  the  Delinquent.  And  on  this 
bottom  it  is,  that  we  often  challenge  our- 
felves,  when  we  find  fuch  variation  in  our 
Manners;  and  obferve  that  it  is  not  always 
the  fame  Self,  nor  the  fame  Inter  eft  we  have  in 
view ;  but  often  a  direct  contrary-one,  which 
we  ferve  ftill  with  the  fame  Pailion  and  Ar- 
dour. When  from  a  noted  Liberality  we 
change  perhaps  to  as  remarkable  a  Parfimony; 
when  from  Indolence  and  Love  of  Reft  we 
plunge  into  Bufinefs;  or  from  a  bufy  and  fe- 
vere  Character,  abhorrent  from  the  tender 
Converfe  of  the  fair  Sex,  we  turn  on  a  fudden 
to  a  contrary  Paffion,  and  become  amorous 
or  uxorious:  we  acknowledge  the  Weaknefs; 
and  charging  our  Defect  on  the  general  want 
of  Philo/ophy,  we  fay  (fighing)  ct  That,  indeed, 
"  we  none  of  us  truly  know  our-Jelves."  And 
thus  we  recognize  the  Authority  and  proper 
Object  of  Philofophy ;  fo  far  at  lead,  that  tho 
we  pretend  not  to  be  compleat  Philojophers,  we 
confefs,  tl  That  as  we  have  more  or  !efs  of 
M  this    Intelligence  or  Comprehenfion  of  cur- 

felves, 


286       AD  VIC  E  to  an  Author. 

ct  felves,  we  are  accordingly  more  or  lefs  truly 
'■'•  Men,  and  either  more  or  lefs  to  be  depended 
tc  on,  in  Friendfhip,  Society,  and  the  Gorn- 
(t  merce  of  Life." 

.  The  Fruits  of  this  Science  are  indeed  the 
faireft  imaginable ;  and,  upon  due  trial,  are 
found  to  be  as  well  relifh'd,  and  of  as  good 
favour  with  Mankind.  But  when  invited  to 
the  Speculation,  we  turn  our  Eyes  on  that 
which  we  fuppoie  the  Tree,'  'tis  no  wonder  if 
we  flight  the  Gardener/hip,  and  think  the  man- 
ner of  Culture  a  very  contemptible  Myftery. 
-•'  Grapes,  'tis  faid,  are  not  gather  d  from  Thorns; 
"■  nor  Figs  from  Thtftles."  Now  if  in  the  lite- 
rate World  there  be  any  choking  Weed,  any 
thing  purely  Thorn  or  Tjiifde,  'tis  in  all  likely- 
hood  that  very  kind  of  Plant  which  Hands  for 
*  Philojophy  in  fome  famous  Schools.  There 
can  be  nothing  more  ridiculous  than  to  expect 
that  Manners  or  Underfianding  fhou'd  fprout 
from  fuch  a  Stock.  It  pretends  indeed  fome 
relation  to  Manners,  as  being  definitive  of  the 
Natures,  EfTences,  and  Property's  of  Spirits; 
and  fome  relation  to  Reafon,  as  defcribing  the 
Shapes  and  Forms  of  certain  Inftruments  im- 
ploy  d  in  the  reafoning  Art.  But  had  the 
craftieft  of  Men,  for  many  Ages  together, 
been    imployd    in  finding  out   a  method  to 

*  Infra,  p.  333,  334,335-  and  VO  L.  III.  p.  184,  185,  186. 

confound 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.       287 

confound  Re  of  on,  and  degrade  the  Under/land- 
ing  of  Mankind ;  they  coud  not  perhaps  have 
fucceeded  better,  than  by  the  Eftablifhment 
of  fuch  a  Mock-Science. 

I  knew  once  a  notable  Enthufuijloi  the  ite- 
nerant kind,  who  being  upon  a  high  Spiritual 
Adventure  in  a  Country  where  prophetick 
Millions  are  treated  as  no  Jell,  was,  as  he  told 
me,  committed  a  clofe  Prifoner,  and  kept  for 
feveral  months  where  he  faw  no  manner  of 
Light.  In  this  Banifhment  from  Letters  and 
Difcourfe,  the  Man  very  wittily  invented  an 
Amufement  much  to  his  purpofe,  and  highly 
prefervative  both  of  Health  and  Honour.  It 
may  be  thought  perhaps,  that  of  all  Seafons 
orCircumflances  here  was  one  the  molt  futable 
to  our  oft-mention'd  practice  of  Soliloquy; 
efpecially  fince  the  Prifoner  was  one  of  thole 
whom  in  this  Age  we  ufually  call  P/iilofophers, 
a  Succeffor  of  Paracelsus,  and  a  Mailer  in 
the  occult  Sciences.  But  as  to  Moral  Science, 
or  any  thing  relating  to  Selfcprtverfe,  he  was 
a  mere  Novice.  To  work  therefore  he  went, 
after  a  different  method.  He  tun'd  his  na- 
tural Pipes  not  after  the  manner  of  a  Mufi- 
cian,  to  praclife  what  was  melodious  and 
agreeable  in  Sounds,  but  to  fafhion  and  form 
all  forts  of  articulate  Voices  the  moll  diftin&ly 
that  was  poffible.      This  he  perform 'd  by  llre- 

Vol.  I.  T  nuoufly 


288       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

nuoufly  exalting  his  Voice,   and  efTaying  it  in 
all  the  feveral  Difpofitions  and  Configurations 
of  his  Throat  and  Mouth.      And  thus  bellow- 
ing,   roaring,    marling,    and    otherwife   vari- 
oufly   exerting  his  Organs  of  Sound,   he  en- 
deavour'd  to  difcover  what  Letters  of  the  Al- 
phabet cou'd  beft  defign  each  Species,  or  what 
new  Letters  were  to  be  invented,  to  mark  the 
undifcover  d  Modifications.  He  found,  for  in- 
ftance,  the  Letter  A  to  be  a  mo  ft  genuine  Cha- 
racter,  an  original  and  pure  Vowel,  and  juftly 
plac'd  as  principal  in  the  front  of  the  alphabe- 
tick    Order.      For    having  duly   extended  his 
under  Jaw  to  its  utmoft  diftance  from  the  up? 
per;   and  by  a  proper  Infertion  of  his  Fingers 
provided  againft  the  Contraction  of  either  Cor- 
ner of  his  Mouth ;  he  experimentally  difcover'd 
it  impoffible  for  human  Tongue  under   thefe 
Circumftances  to  emit  any  other  Modification 
of  Sound  than  that  which  was   defcrib'd   by 
this  primitive  Character.     The  Vowel  0  was 
form'd   by   an   orbicular    Difpofition    of   the 
Mouth;   as  was  aptly  delineated  in  the  Cha- 
racter it-felf.     The  Vowel  U  by  a  parallel  Pro- 
trufion  of  the  Lips.     The  other  Vowels   and 
Confonants  by  other  various  Collifions  of  the 
Mouth,   and  Operations  of  the  active  Tongue 
upon  the  paflive    Gum  or  Palat.     The  Refult 
of  this  profound  Speculation  and  long  Exer- 
cife  of  our  Prifoner,  was  a  Philojophical  Irea- 

life, 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       289 

life,  which  he  compos'd  when  he  was  fet  at 
liberty.  He  efteem'd  himfelf  the  only  Matter 
of  Voice  and  Language  on  the  account  of  this 
his  radical  Science,  and  fundamental  Knowledge 
of  Sounds.  But  whoever  had  taken  him  to 
improve  their  Voice,  to  teach  'em  an  agreeable 
or  jufl  manner  of  Accent  or  Delivery,  wou'd, 
I  believe,  have  found  themfelves  considerably 
deluded. 

Tis  not  that  I  wou'd  condemn  as  ufelefs 
this  fpeculative  Science  of  Articulation.  It  has 
its  place,  no  doubt,  among  the  other  Sciences, 
and  may  ferve  to  Grammar,  as  Grammar  ferves 
to  Rhetorick,  and  to  other  Arts  of  fpeech  and 
Writing.  The  Solidity  of  Mathematicks,  and 
its  Advantage  to  Mankind,  is  prov'd  by  ma- 
ny effects  in  thofe  beneficial  Arts  and  Sciences 
which  depend  on  it :  tho  Aflrologers,  Hor  of  co- 
pers, and  other  fuch,  are  pleas'd  to  honour 
themfelves  with  the  Title  of  Mathematicians.  As 
for  Metaphyficks,  and  that  which  in  the  Schools 
is  taught  for  Logick  or  for  Ethicks;  I  (hall  wil- 
lingly allow  it  to  pafs  for  Philofophy,  when  by 
any  real  effecls  it  is  prov'd  capable  to  refine 
our  Spirits,  improve  our  Understandings,  or 
mend  our  Manners.  But  if  the  defining  ma- 
terial and  immaterial  Sub/lances,  and  diftinguifh- 
ing  their  Propertys  and  Modes,  is  recommended 
to  us,   as  the  right   manner  of  proceeding  in 

T  2  the 


ago        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

the  Difcovery  of  our  own  Natures,  I  fliall  be 
apt  to  fufpecl  fuch  a  Study  as  the  more  delu- 
five  and  infatuating,  on  account  of  its  magni- 
ficent Pretention, 

The  Study  of  Triangles  and  Circles  inter- 
feres not  with  the  Study  of  Minds.  Nor  does 
the  Student  in  the  meanwhile  fuppofe  himfelf 
advancing  in  Wifdom,  or  the  Knowledge  of 
Himfelf  or  Mankind.  All  he  defircs,  is  to 
keep  his  Head  found,  as  it  was  before.  And 
well,  he  thinks  indeed,  he  has  comeoff,  if  by 
good  fortune  there  be  no  Crack  made  in  it. 
As  for  other  Ability  or  Improvement  in  the 
Knowledge  of  human  Nature  or  the  World ; 
he  refers  himfelf  to  other  Studys  and  Practice. 
Such  is  the  Mathematicians  Modefty  and  good 
Senfe.  But  for  the  Philofopher,  who  pretends 
to  be  wholly  taken  up  in  confidering  his  higher 
Facultys,  and  examining  the  Powers  and  Prin- 
ciples of  his  Underftanding ;  if  in  reality  his 
Philofophy  be  foreign  to  the  Matter  pro- 
fefs'd  ;  if  it  goes  befide  the  mark,  and  reaches 
nothing  we  can  truly  call  our  Intereft  or  Con- 
cern ;  it  mult  be  fomewhat  worfe  than  mere 
Ignorance  or  Idiotifm.  The  moil  ingenious 
way  of  becoming  foolifli,  is  by  a  Syjiem.  And 
the  furelt  Method  to  prevent  good  Senfe,  is  to 
fet  up  fomething  in  the  room  of  it.  The  liker 
any   thing  is  to  Wifdom,   if  it  be  not  plainly 

the . 


A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author.         291 

the  thing   il-Jdf,   the  more   direclly  it  becomes 

its  oppofite. 

One  wou'd  expecl  it  of  thefe  Phyfwlogijls and 
fearchers  of  Modes  and  Sub/lances,  that  being  fo 
exalted  in  their  Underftandings,  and  inrich'd 
with  Science  above  other  Men,  they  fhou'd 
be  as  much  above  'em  in  their  PafTions  and 
Sentiments.  The  Confcioufnefs  of  beingr  ad- 
mitted  into  the  fecret  Receffes  of  Nature  and 
the  inward  Refources  of  a  human  Heart, 
fhou'd,  one  wou'd  think,  create  in  thefe  Gen- 
tlemen a  fort  of  Magnanimity,  which  might 
diftinguifh  'em  from  the  ordinary  Race  of  Mor- 
tals. But  if  their  pretended  Knowledge  of 
the  Machine  of  this  World,  and  of  their  own 
Frame,  is  able  to  produce  nothing  beneficial 
either  to  the  one  or  to  the  other;  I  know  not 
to  what  purpofe  fuch  a  Philofophy  can  ferve, 
except  only  to  fliut  the  door  againfl  better 
Knowledge,  and  introduce  Impertinence  and 
Conceit  with  the  beit  Countenance  of  Autho- 
rity. 

'Tis  hardly  poffible  for  a  Student,  but  more 
efpecially  an  Author,  who  has  dealt  in  Ideas, 
and  treated  formally  of  the  PaJJions,  in  a  way 
of  natural  Philofophy,  not  to  imagine  himfelf 
more  wife  on  this  account,  and  more  know- 
ing in  his  own  Character,  and   the  Genius  of 

T3  Mankind. 


292      A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Mankind.  But  that  he  is  miuaken  in  his  Cal- 
culation, Experience  generally  convinces  us : 
none  being  found  more  impotent  in  them- 
felves,  of  lefs  command  over  their  Paffions,  lefs 
free  from  Superftition  and  vain  Fears,  or  lefs 
fafe  from  common  Impoflure  and  Delufion, 
than  the  noted  Head-pieces  of  this  damp.  Nor 
is  this  a  wonder.  The  Speculation  in  a  man- 
ner befpeaks  the  Practice.  There  needs  no 
formal  Deduction  to  make  this  evident.  A 
fmall  Help  from  our  familiar  Method  of  Solilo- 
quy may  ferve  turn :  and  we  may  perhaps  de- 
cide this  matter  in  a  more  diverting  way ;  by 
confronting  this  fuper-fpeculative  Philofophy 
with  a  more  practical  fort,  which  relates  chiefly 
to  our  Acquaintance,  Friendfhip,  and  good 
Correfpondence  with  our-f elves. 

On  this  account,  it  may  not  be  to  my  Pleader's 
difadvantage,  if  forgetting  him  for  a-while, 
I  apply  chiefly  to  my-Jelf;  and,  as  occafion 
offers,  attumethatfelf-converfantPraflice,  which 
I  have  pretended  to  difclofe.  'Tis  hop'd  there- 
fore, he  will  not  efteem  it  as  ill  Breeding,  if 
I  lofe  the  ufual  regard  to  his  Prefence.  And 
fhou'd  I  fall  infenfibly  into  one  of  the  Pa- 
roxyfms  defciib'd;  and  as  in  a  fort  of  Phrenzy, 
enter  into  high  Expoflulation  with  my-felf; 
he  will  not  furely  be  offended  with  the  free 
Language,   or  even   with   the   Reproaches  he 

hears 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        293 

hears  from  a  Perfon  who  only  makes  bold  with 
whom  he  may. 


I F  A  Paftenger  fhou'd  turn  by  chance  into 
a  Watchmaker's  Shop,  and  thinking  to  inform 
himfelf  concerning  Watches,  fhou'd  inquire,  of 
what  Metal,  or  what  Matter,  each  part  was 
compos'd ;  what  gave  the  Colours,  or  what 
made  the  Sounds ;  without  examining  what 
the  real  Ufe  was  of  fuch  an  Inftrument; 
or  by  what  Movements  its  End  was  be  ft  at- 
tain'd,  and  its  perfection  acquir'd :  'tis  plain 
that  fuch  an  Examiner  as  this,  wou'd  come 
fhort  of  any  Underftanding  in  the  real  Nature 
of  the  Inftrument.  Shou'd  a  Philofopher,  af- 
ter the  fame  manner,  employing  himfelf  in 
the  Study  of  human  Nature,  difcover  only, 
what  Effects  each  Paflion  wrought  upon  the 
Body  ;  what  change  of  Afpect  or  Feature  they 
producd;  and  in  what  different  manner  they 
affected  the  Limbs  and  Mufcles ;  this  might 
poffibly  qualify  him  to  give  Advice  to  an 
Anatomift  or  a  Limner,  but  not  to  Mankind 
or  to  Himfelf:  Since  according  to  this  Survey 
he  confider'd  not  the  real  Operation  or  Ener- 
gy of  his  Subject,  nor  contemplated  the  Man, 
as  real  Man,  and  as  a  human  Agent;  but  as 
a  Watch  or  common  Machine. 

T4  -The 


294     ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

ct  The   PafTion  of  Fear  (as  a  *  modern   Phi- 
"  lofopher  informs  me)    determines   the   Spi- 
tc  rits  to  the  Mufcles  of  the  Knees,  which  are 
44  inflantly  ready  to  perform  their  Motion;  by 
"  taking  up  the  Legs  with  incomparable  Ce- 
14  lerity,   in  order  to  remove  the  Body  out  of 
"  harm's  way."  —  Excellent  Mechanifm !   But 
whether  the  knocking  together  of  the  Knees  be 
any  more  the  cowardly  Symptom  of  Flight, 
than    the  chattering  of  the  Teeth  is  the  flout 
Symptom  of  Refinance,   I  fhall  not  take  upon 
me  to  determine,   in  this  whole  Subject  of  In- 
quiry I    fhall    find   nothing  of  the  leaft   Stif- 
concernment.      And  I  may   depend  upon  it, 
that  by  the  moil   refin'd    Speculation  of  this 
kind,  I  fhall  neither  learn  todiminifh  my  Fears, 
or  raife  my  Courage.      This,  however,    I  may 
be  afford  of,  that  'tis  the  Nature  of  Fear,  as 
well  as  of  other  Paflions,  to  have  its  Increafe 
and  Decreafe,   as  it  is  fed  by  Opinion,    and  in- 
fluenc'd  by  Cuftom  and  Practice. 

These   Paflions,    according   as   they   have 
the    Afcendency  in  me,   and  differ  in  propor- 
tion  with    one  another,   affect  my  Character, 
and  make  me  different  with  refpect  to  my-felf 
and  others.   I  mufti  therefore,  of  neceffity  find 


*  MoTiGfur  Des   Cartes,  in  his  Treatife  of  the  Paffions. 

Redrefs 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,       295 

Redrefs  and  Improvement  in  this  cafe,  by  re- 
flecting juftiy  on  the  manner  of  my  own  Motion, 
as  guided  by  Affections  which  depend  fo  much 
on  Apprehenfion  and  Conceit.  By  examining 
the  various  Turns,  Inflections,  Declenfions,  and 
inward  Revolutions  of  the  PaJJions,  I  muft  un- 
doubtedly come  the  better  to  underftand  a  hu- 
man Breaft,  and  judge  the  better  both  of  others 
and  my-Jelf.  'Tis  impoflible  to  make  the  leafl 
advancement  in  fuch  a  Study,  without  acquir- 
ing fome  Advantage,  from  the  Regulation  and 
Government  of  thofe  Paffions,  on  which  the 
Conduct  of  a  Life  depends. 

For  inftance,  if  Superstition  be  the  fort 
of  Fear  which  mod  opprefles ;  'tis  not  very  ma- 
terial to  inquire,  on  this  occafion,  to  what  Parts 
or  Districts  the  Blood  or  Spirits  are  immedi- 
ately detachd,  or  where  they  are  made  to  ren- 
devouz.  For  this  no  more  imports  me  to  un- 
derftand, than  it  depends  on  me  to  regulate  or 
change.  But  when  the  Grounds  of  this  fuper- 
ftitious  Fear  are  confider'd  to  be  from  Opini- 
on, and  the  Subjects  of  it  come  to  be  thorowly 
fearch'd  and  examin'd ;  the  Paffion  it-felf  muft 
neceffarily  diminim,  as  I  difcover  more    and 

J  * 

more  the  Impoflure  which  belongs  to  it. 


In 


296      A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

In  the  fame  manner,  if  Vanity  be  from 
Opinion,  and  I  confider  how  Vanity  is  conceiv'd, 
from  what  imaginary  Advantages,  and  incon- 
fiderable  Grounds ;  if  I  view  it  in  its  exceflive 
height,  as  well  as  in  its  contrary  o'epreffion; 
'tis  impoffible  I  fhou'd  not  in  fome  meafure  be 
reliev'd  of  this  Diflemper. 

*  Laudis  amore  tumes  ?  Sunt  ccrta  Piacula 

Sunt  verba  et   voces  quibus  hunc  lenire   dole- 

rem 
PoJJis,  et  magnam  morbi  deponere  partem. 

The  fame  muft  happen  in  refpect.  of  Anger, 
Ambition,  Love,  Dcfire,  and  the  other  Paffions 
from  whence  I  frame  the  different  Notion  I 
have  of  Interejl.  For  as  thefe  Paflions  veer,  my 
Inter ejl  veers,  my  Steerage  varys  and  I  make  al- 
ternately, now  this,  now  that,  to  be  my  Courfe 
and  Harbour.  The  Man  in  Anger,  has  a  dif- 
ferent Happinefs  from  the  Man  in  Love.  And 
the  Man  lately  become  covetous,  has  a  diffe- 
rent Notion  of  Satisfaclion  from  what  he  had 
before,  when  he  was  liberal.  Even  the  Man 
in  Humour,  has  another  Thought  of  Interejl 
and   Advantage  than  the  Man  out  of  Humour, 


Hor.  Epift.  1.  lib.  1. 

or 


ADVICE    to  an  Author.       297 

or  in  the  lead  diflurb'd.  The  Examination, 
therefore,  of  my  Humours,  and  the  *  Inojjiry 
after  my  PaJJions  muft  necelTarily  draw  along 
with  it  the  Search  and  Scrutiny  of  my  Opinions, 
and  the  fincere  Consideration  of  my  Scope  and 
End.  And  thus  the  Study  of  human  Affection 
cannot  fail  of  leading  me  towards  the  Know- 
ledge of  human  Nature,  and  of  My-self. 

This  is  the Philofophy,  which,  by  Nature,  has 
the  Pre-eminence  above  all  other  Science  or 
Knowledge.  Nor  can  this  furely  be  of  the  fort 
call'd  t  vain  or  deceitful;  fince  it  is  the  only  means 
by  which  I  can  difcover  Vanity  and  Deceit. 
This  is  not  of  that  kind  which  depends  on  f 
Genealogy s  or  Traditions,  and  t  mini/lers  Quejlions 
and  vain  Jangling.  It  has  not  its  Name,  as  other 
Philofophys,  from  the  mere  Subtlety  and  Ni- 
cety of  the  Speculation  ;  but,  by  way  of  Excel- 
lence, from  its  being  fuperior  to  all  other  Spe- 
culations ;  from  its  prefiding  over  all  other 
Sciences  and  Occupations ;  teaching  the  Mea- 
fure  of  each,  and  afligning  the  juft  Value  of 
every-thing  in  Life.  By  this  Science  Religion 
it-felf  is  judg'd,  Spirits  are  fearch'd,  Prophecys 
prov'd,  Miracles  diftinguiuYd  :  the  fole  Meafure 


*  See  Inquiry,  viz.  Tieatlfe  IV.  of  thefe  Volumes. 

T  Goloss.  Ch.  ii.  ver.  8.     Tit.  Gh.'iii.'ver.  9.      iTiw.Ch.  i. 

ver.  4,  Sc  6-  and  Ch.  vi.  ver.  20. 

and 


298     A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

and  Standard  being  taken  from  moral  Rectitude, 
and  from  the  Difcernment  of  what  is  found  and 
juft  in  their  Affeclions.  For  if  the  *  Tree  is  known 
only  by  its  Fruits;  my  full  Endeavour  muft  be 
to  diftinguifh  the  true  Tafte  ot  Fruits,  refine  my 
Palat,  and  eftablifh  a  juil  Relifh  in  the  kind. 
So  that  to  bid  me  judge  Authority  by  Morals^ 
whilft  the  Rule  of  Morals,  is  fuppos'd  f  de- 
pendent on  mere  Authority  and  Will;  is  the 
fame  in  reality  as  to  bid  me  fee  with  my 
Eyes  fliut,  meafure  without  a  Standard,  and 
count  without  Arithmetick. 

And  thus  Philosophy,  which  judges  both 
of  her-felf,  and  of  every  thing  befides ;  difcovers 
her  own  Province,  and  chief  Command  ;  teaches 
me  to  diftinguifh  between  her  Perfon  and  her 
Likenefs;  and  fhews  me  her  immediate  and 
real  felf,  by  that  fole  Privilege  of  teaching  me 
to  know  my-jdf,  and  what  belongs  to  me.  She  gives 
to  every  inferior  Science  its  juft  rank;  leaves 
fome  to  meafure  Sounds;  others  to  fcan  Syllables; 
others  to  weigh  Vacuums,  and  define  Spaces,  and 
Extenjions:  but  referves  to  her-felf  her  due  Au- 
thority, and  Majefty ;  keeps  her  State,  and 
antient  Title  of  Vita  Dux,  Virtutis  Indagatrix,  and 


'  Lu  se,  Ch.  vi.  ver.  43,  44.  and  Mat.  Ch.  vii.  ver.  16.  See  VOL. 
II.  p.  269,  334. 
7  Surra,  pag.  107. 

the 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       ggg 

the  reft  of  thofe  juft  Appellations  which  of  old 
belong'd  to  her;  when  (he  merited  to  be  apof- 
trophiz'd,  as-  (he  was,  by  the  *  Orator:  4t  Tu 

"■  Lwentrix  Icgum,  tu  Magi/Ira  mortem  et  dijapli- 
"  ncu.  *  *  *  EJl  autein  units  dies  bene  et  ex  prcecep- 
' '  lis  tins  actus,  peccanti  immortalitali  anteponendus.'' * 
Excellent  Miftrefs !  but  eafy  to  be  miftaken  .r 
whilll  fo  many  Handmaids  wear  as  illuftrious 
Apparel;  and  fome  are  made  to  outfhine  her 
far,  in  Drefs,  and  Ornament. 

In  reality,  how  fpecious  a  Study,  how  ta- 
le mn  an   Amufement  is  rais'd   from  what  we 

call  Philosophical  Speculations  I the  Formality  s 

oj  Ideas their  Compofitions,    Comparifons,  A- 

greement,  and  Difagreement'l — —What  can  have 
a  better  Appearance,  or  bid  fairer  for  genuine 
and  true  Philosophy?  Come  on  then. 

Let  me  philofophize  in  this  manner;  if  this 
be  indeed  the  way  I  am  to  grow  wife.  Let  me 
examine  my  Ideas  of  Space  and  '  Subjlance:  Let 
me  look  well  into  Matter  and  its  Modes;  if  this 
be  looking  into  My-self;  if  this  be  to  im- 
prove my  Under/landing,  and  enlarge  my  Mind. 
For  of  this  I  may  foon  be  fatisfy'd/  Let  me 
obferve  therefore,  with  diligence,  what  pafles 
here;  what  Connexion  and  Confiftency,  what 
Agreement    or    Difagreement   I    find    within: 


*  Cicero,  TvJc,  Qucji.  lib.  3. 

Whether, 


*  1 


300       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

44  Whether  according  to  my  prefent  Ideas, 
'.'  that  which  I  approve  this  Hour,  I  am  like 
"  to  approve  as  well  the  next:  And  in  cafe  it 
' t  be  otherwife  with  me  ;  how  or  after  what 
14  manner,  I  fhall  relieve  my-felf;  how  afcer- 
tv  tain  my  Ideas,  and  keep  my  Opinion,  Liking, 
41  and  Efteem  of  things,  the  fame."  If  this  re- 
mains unfolv'd:  if  I  am  ftill  the  fame  Myf- 
tery  to  my-felf  as  ever  :  to  what  purpofe  is  all 
this  reafoning  and  acutenefs  ?  wherefore  do  I 
admire  my  Philofopher,  or  Study  to  become 
fuch  a  one,   my-felf? 

To-day  things  have  fucceeded  well  with  me; 
confequently  my  Ideas  are  rais'd:  4t  'Tis  a  Ene 
44  World!  AH  is  glorious!  Every  thing  de- 
44  lightful  and  entertaining !  Mankind,  Con- 
44  verfation,  Company,  Society;  What  can  be 
14  more  defirable?"  To-morroio  comes  Difap- 
pointment,  CrofTes,  Difgrace.  And  what  fol- 
lows? 44  O  miferable  Mankind!  Wretched 
44  State!  Who  wou'd  live  out  of  Solitude? 
"  Who  wou'd  write  or  act  for  fuch  a  World?" 
Philofopher!  where  are  thy  Ideas?  Where  is 
Truth,  Certainty,  Evidence,  fo  much  talk'd  of? 
'Tis  here  furely  they  are  to  be  maintain'd,  if 
any  where,  'Tis  here  I  am  to  preferve  fome 
jiijt  DijHnfiions,  and  adequate  Ideas;  which  if  I 
cannot  do  a  jot  the  more,  by  what  fuch  a 
Philofophy  can  teach  me,   the  Philofophy  is  in 

this 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         301 

this  refpecl  impofing,  and  delufive.  For  what- 
ever its  other  Virtues  are  ;  it  relates  not  to  Me 
my-felf,  it  concerns  not  the  Man,  nor  any  other- 
wife  affecls  the  Mind  than  by  the  conceit  of 
Knowledge,  and  the  falfe  AfTurance  rais'd  from 
a  fuppos'd  Improvement. 

Again.  What  are  my  Ideas  of  the  World, 
of  Pleafure,  Riches,  Fame,  Life?  What  Judg- 
ment am  I  to  make  of  Mankind  and  human 
Affairs?  what  Sentiments  ami  to  frame?  What 
Opinions?  what  Maxims  ?  If  none  at  all;  why 
do  I  concern  my-felf  in  Speculations  about  my 
Ideas  f  What  is  it  to  me,  for  inftance,  to  know 
what  kind  of  Idea  I  can  form  of  Space?  44  Di- 
44  vide  a  folid  Body  of  whatever  Dimention, 
44  (fays  a  renown'd  modern  Philofopher:)  And 
14  'twill  be  impomble  for  the  Parts  to  move 
11  within  the  bounds  of  its  Superficies;  if  there 
44  be  not  left  in  it  *  a  void  Space,  as  big  as 
44  the  lead  part  into  which  the  faid  Body  is 
'■  divided.'' 

Thus  the  Atomifl,  or  Epicurean,  pleading  for 
a  Vacuum.  The  Plenitudinarian,  on  the  other 
fide,  brings  his  Fluid  in  play,  and  joins  the 
Idea  of  Body  and  Extenfwn.  44  Of  this,  fays  one, 
44  I  have  clear  Ideas.   Of  this,  fays  the  other,  I 


Tbefe  are  the  words  of  the  paiticular  Author  cited, 

can 


302      ADVICE    to  an  Author. 

cc  can  be  certain.  And  what,  fay  I,  if  in  the 
ct  whole  matter  there  be  no  certainty  at  all?" 
For  Mathematicians  are  divided :  and  Mechanicks 
proceed  as  well  on  one  Hypothecs  as  on  the 
other.  My  Mind,  I  am  fatisfy'd,  will  proceed 
either  way  alike:  For  it  is  concern'd  on  nei- 
ther fide. "  Philofopher!  let  me  hear  con- 

ct  cernins  what  is  of  fome  moment  to  me." 
"  Let  me  hear  concerning  Life;  what  the  right 
tl  Notion  is;  and  what  I  am  to  (land  to,  upon 
lt  occafion :  that  I  may  not,  when  Life  feems 
tl  retiring,  or  has  run  it-felf  out  to  the  very 
*'  Dregs,  cry  Vanity!  condemn  the  World,  and 
"  at  the  fame  time  complain,  that  Life  is  jliort 
tl  and  paffmgV  For  why  fo  fiiort  indeed,  if  not 
found  Jiueel  f  Why  do  I  complain  both  ways  ? 
Is  Vanity,  mere  Vanity,  a  Happinefs?  Or  can 
Mifery  pajs  away  too  foon  ? 

This  is  of  moment  to  me  to  examine.  This 
is  worth  my  while.  If,  on  the  other  fide,  I 
cannot  find  the  Agreement  or  Difagreement  of 
my  Ideas  in  this  place ;  if  I  can  come  to  no- 
thing certain  here  ;  what  is  all  the  reft  to  me  ? 
What  fignifys  it  how  I  come  by  my  Ideas,  or 
how  compound  'em  ;  which  zrefmple,  and  which 
complex?  If  I  have  a  right  Idea  of  Life,  'now 
when  perhaps  I  think  nightly  of  it,  and  re- 
iolve  with  my-felf,  lt  That  it  may  eafily  be 
'■'•  laid  down  on  any    honourable  occafion   of 

cc  Service 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         303 

"  Service  to  my  Friends,  or  Country  ;"  teach 
me  how  I  may  preferve  this  Idea:  or,  at  lead, 
how  I  may  get  fafely  rid  of  it;  that  it  may 
trouble  me  no  more,  nor  lead  me  into  ill  Ad- 
ventures. Teach  me  how  \  came  by  fuch  an 
Opinion  of  Worth  and  Virtue;  what  it  is,  which 
at  one  time  raifes  it  fo  high,  and  at  another 
time  reduces  it  to  nothing ;  how  thefe  Diftur- 
bances  and  Fluctuations  happen;  ■'  By  what 
"  Innovation,  what  Compoftion,  what  Inierven- 
"  tion  of  other  Ideas."  If  this  be  the  Subject 
of  the  Philofophical  Art;  I  readily  apply  to  it, 
and  embrace  the  Study.  If  there  be  nothing 
of  this  in  the  Cafe;  I  have  no  occafion  for 
this  fort  of  Learning ;  and  am  no  more  defi- 
rous  of  knowing  how  I  form  or  compound  thofe 
Ideas  which  are  mark'd  by  Words,  than  I  am 
of  knowing  how,  and  by  what  Motions  of  my 
Tongue  or  Palat,  I  form  thofe  articulate  Sounds* 
which  I  can  full  as  well  pronounce,  without 
any  fuch  Science  or  Speculation. 

SECT.     II. 

UT  here  it  may  be  convenient  for  me  to 
quit  my-felf  a-while,  in  favour  of  my 
Reader  ;  left  if  he  prove  one  of  the  uncourteous 
fort,  he  fhou'd  raife  a  confiderable  Objection 
in  this  place.  He  may  aOc  perhaps,  "  Why 
tl  a  Writer  for  Self-entertainment  fhou'd  not  keep 
Vol.  I.  U  "  his 


304  ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

4t  his  Writings  to  himfelf,   without  appearing 

tl  in  Public k  or  before  the  World." 

In  anfwer  to  this  I  fliall  only  fay,   that  for 
appearing  in  Publick,  or  before  the  World,  I  do 
not  readily  conceive  what  our  worthy  Objeclor 
may  underfland   by  it.      I  can  call  to  mind, 
indeed,  among  my  acquaintance,  certain  Mer- 
chant-Adventurers in    the  Letter-Trade,  who- 
in    correfpondence    with    their    Faclor-Book- 
feller,  are  enter'd  into    a  notable  Commerce 
with  the  World.  They  have  directly,  and  in  due 
Form  of  Preface,  and  Epijlle  Dedicatory,  folicited 
the  'Publick,   and  made   Intereft  with  Friends 
for   Favour   and   Protection  on  this  account. 
They   have   ventur'd,   perhaps,   to  join  fome 
great  Man's  Reputation  with  their  own  ;  having 
obtain'd  this  Permimon  to  addrefs  a  Work  to 
him,  on  prefumption  of  its  palling  for  fome- 
thing   confiderable   in   the   Eyes  of  Mankind. 
One   may  eafily  imagine  that  fuch  patroniz'd 
and  avow'd  Authors  as  thefe,  wou'd  be  fhreudly 
difappointed  if  the   Publick   took    no  notice  of 
their   Labours.      But  for  my  own  part,  'tis  of 
no  concern  to  me,   what  regard  the  Publick  be- 
llows on  my  Amufements ;  or  after  what  man- 
ner it  comes    acquainted   with  what  I  write 
for  my  private  Entertainment,   or   by  way   of 
Advice  to  fuch  of  my  Acquaintance  as  are  thus 
defperately  embark'd. 

Tis 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       305 

'Tis  requifite,  that  my  Friends,  who  perufe 
thefe  Advices,  fhou'd  read  'em  in  better  Cha- 
racters than  thofe  of  my  own  Hand-writing. 
And  by  good  luck  I  have  a  very  fair  Hand 
offer'd,  which  may  fave  me  the  trouble  of  re- 
copying,  and  can  readily  furnilh  me  with  as 
many  handfom  Copys  as  I  wou'd  defire,  for  my 
own  and  Friends  Service.  I  have  not,  indeed, 
forbid  my  Amanuenfs  the  making  as  many  as 
he  pleafes  for  his  own  Benefit.  What  I  write 
is  not  worth  being  made  a  My  fiery .  And  if 
it  be  worth  any  one's  purchafmg ;  much  good 
may  do  the  Purchafer.  Tis  a  frajfck  I  have 
no  (hare  in ;  tho  I  accidentally  furnifh  the 
Subject  matter. 

And  thus  am  I  no  wife  more  an  Author, 
for  being  in  Print.  I  am  confcious  of  no  ad- 
ditional Virtue,  or  dangerous  Quality,  from 
having  lain  at  any  time  under  the  weight  of 
that  alphabetick  Engine  call'd  the  Prefs.  I  know 
no  Conjuration  in  it,  either  with  refpecl  to 
Church,  or  State.  Nor  can  I  imagine  why  the 
Machine  fhou'd  appear  fo  formidable  to  Scho- 
lars, and  renown'd  Clerks;  whofe  very  Myf- 
tery  and  Foundation  depends  on  the  Letter- 
Manufaclure.  To  allow  Benefit  of  Clergy,  and 
to  refrain  the  Prefs,  feems  to  me  to  have  fome- 
thing  of  Crofs-purpofe   in    it.      I   can   hardly 

U  2  think 


306        A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author: 

think  that  the  Quality  of  what  is  written  can 
be  alter'd  by  the  Manner  of  Writing ;  or  that 
there  can  be  any  harm  in  a  quick  way  of  copy- 
ing fair,  and  keeping  Copys  alike.  Why  a 
Man  may  not  be  permitted  to  write  with  Iron 
as  well  as  Quill,  I  can't  conceive;  or  how  a 
Writer  changes  his  Capacity,  by  this  new 
Drefs,  any  more  than  by  the  wear  of  Wove- 
Stockins,  after  having  worn  no  other  Manu- 
facture than  the  Knit. 


SO  MUCH  for  my  Reader;  if  perchance 
I  have  any  befides  the  Friend  or  two  above- 
mention'd.  For  being  engag'd  in  Morals,  and 
indue  d  to  treat  fo  rigorous  a  Subject,  as  that 
of  Self-examination;  1  naturally  call  to  mind 
the  extreme  Delicacy  and  Tendernefs  of  mo- 
dern Appetites,  in  refpecl  of  the  Philqfophy  of 
this  kind.  What  Dillafle  poffrbly  may  have 
arifen  from  fome  medicinal  Dofes  of  a  like  na- 
ture, adminifter'd  to  raw  Stomachs,  at  a  very 
early  Age,  I  will  not  pretend  to  examine. 
But  whatever  Manner  in  Philofophy  happens 
to  bear  the  ieafl  refemblance  to  that  of  Cate- 
ckifm,  cannot,  I'm  perfuaded,  of  it-felf,  prove 
very  inviting.  Such  a  fmart  way  of  quellion- 
ing  our-leives  in  our  Youth,  has  made  our 
Manhood  more  averfe  to  the  expoftulatory  Dif- 
cipline.      And   tho   the  metaphyseal  Points  of 

our 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        307 

our  Belief  are  by  this  method,  with  admirable 
Care  and  Caution,  inflill'd  into  tender  Minds; 
yet  the  manner  of  this  anticipating  Philofophy, 
may  make  the  After-work  ofReafon,  and  the  in- 
ward Exercife  of  the  Mind, at  a  riper  Age,proceed 
the  more  heavily,  and  with  greater  reluctance. 

It  muO;  needs  be  a  hard  Cafe  with  us,  after 
having  pafs'd  fo  learn'd  a  Childhood,  and 
been  inftrucled  in  our  own  and  other  higher 
Natures,  Efjences,  incorporeal  Sub/lances,  Perfona- 
lilys,  and  the  like;  to  condefcend  at  riper  Years 
to  ruminate  and  con  over  this  Leflbn  a  fecond 
time.  'Tis  hard,  after  having,  by  fo  many  per- 
tinent Interrogatorys,  and  decifive  Sentences, 
declar'd  Who  and  What  we  are;  to  come  lei- 
furely,  in  another  view,  to  inquire  concern- 
ing our  real  Self,  and  End,  the  Judgment 
we  are  to  make  of  Interest,  and  the  Opinion 
we  Jhoud  have  of  Advantage  and  Good  : 
which  is  what  mult  neceffarily  determine  us 
in  our  Conduct,  and  prove  the  leading  Prin- 
ciple of  our  Lives. 

Can  we  bear  looking  a-new  into  thefe  Myf- 
terys  ?  Can  we  endure  a  new  Schooling,  after 
having  once  learnt  our  Leffon  from  the  World? 
Hardly,  I  prefume.  For  by  the  Lef- 
fon of  this  latter  School,  and  according  to  the 
Senfe  I   acquire  in   Converfe  with  prime  Men; 

U  3  flioud 


308       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

fhou'd  I  at  any  time  afk  my-felf,  What  govern  d 
me  ?     I  fhou'd  anfwer  readily,  My  interefl. 
44  But  what  is  Inter ejif     And  how  govern  d? 
44         By    Opinion    and    Fancy.  Is  every 

14  thing  therefore  my  Interefl  which  I  fancy 
44  fuch?  Or  may  my  Fancy  poflibly  be  wrong? 
It  may.  If  my  Fancy   of  Interefl 

therefore  be  wrong ;   can  my  Purfuit  or  Aim 
be  right  ?  Hardly  fo.  Can  I  then 

be   fuppos'd  to    hit,  when  I    know   not,   in 
reality,  fo  much  as  how  to  aim?" 


i  i 


< '. 


e  t 


My  chief  Interefl,  it  feems  therefore,  mufl 
be  to  get  an  Aim;  and  know  certainly  where 
my  Happinefs  and  Advantage  lies. 
44  Where  elfe  can  it  lie,  than  in  my  Pleafure; 
ct  fince  my  Advantage  and  Good  mufl  ever  be 
"  pleafing:  and  what  is  p leafing,  can  never  be 
"  other  than  my  Advantage  and  Good? 
11  Excellent!  Let  Fancy  therefore  govern,  and 
"  Inter  eft  be  what  toe  pleafe.  For  if  that  which 
"  pleafes  us  be  our  Good,  *  becauje  it  pleafe s  us; 
lt  any-thingmaybe  our  Interest  or  Good. 
"  Nothing  can  come  amifs.  That  which  we 
41  fondly  make  our  Happinefs  at  one  time,  we 
41  may  as  readily  un-make  at  another.  No- 
'  one  can  learn  what  real  Goon  is.  Nor  can 
41  any-one  upon  this  foot  be  faid  to  underftand 
44  his  Interest." 

*  VOL.   II.  p.  227.  and  VOL.  III.  p.   200.  " 

Here, 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  309 


Here,    we  fee,   are  ftrange  Embroils! 


But  let  us  try  to  deal  more  candidly  with  our- 
felves,  and  frankly  own  that  *  Pleajure  is  no 
rule  of  Good  ;  fmce  when  we  follow  Pleafure 
merely,  we  are  difgufled,  and  change  from 
one  fort  to  another:  condemning  that  at  one 
time,  which  at  another  we  earneflly  approve ; 
and  never  judging  equally  of  Happinefs,  whilft 
we  follow  Pajjion  and  mere  Humour. 

A  Lover,  for  inftance,  when  {truck  with 
the  Idea  or  Fancy  of  his  Enjoyment,  promifes 
himfelf  the  highefl  Felicity,  if  he  fucceeds  in 
his  new  Amour. — He  fucceeds  in  it;  finds  not 
the  Felicity  he  expected :  but  promifes  himfelf 
the  fame  again  in  fome  other. — The  fame  thing 
happens:  He  is  difappointed  as  before;  but 
(till  has  Faith. — Weary  d  with  this  Game,  he 
quits  the  Chace;  renounces  the  wz*yof  Court- 
fhip  and  Intrigue,  and  detefls  the  Ceremony 
and  Difficulty  of  the  Pleafure. A  new  Spe- 
cies of  Amours  invites  him.  Here  too  he  meets 

the   fame    Inquietude    and  Inconftancy.- 

Scorning  to  grow  fottijh,  and  plunge  in  the 
loweft  Sink  of  Vice,  he  fhakes  off  his  Intem- 
perance; defpifes  Gluttony  and  Riot;  and  hear- 
kens to  Ambition.  He  grows  a  Man  of  Bufi- 
nefs,  and  feeks  Authority  and  Fame. 

U  4  Quo 


310       ADVICE   to  an  Author. 


* 


Quo  Uneam  vultus  mutantem  Pro  tea  nodof 


Lest  this  therefore  fhou'dbe  my  own  cafe; 
let  me  fee  whether  I  can  controul  my  Fancy, 
and  fix  it  if  poflible,  on  fomething  which  may 

hold  good. When  I  exercife  my  Reafon  in 

moral  Subjects;  when  I  employ  my  Affection 
in  friendly  and  focial  Actions,  I  find  I  can  fin- 
cerely  enjoy  my  f elf.  If  there  be  a  Pleafuue 
therefore  of  this  kind ;  why  not  indulge  it  ? 
or  what  harm  wou'd  there  be,  fuppofmg  it 
fhou'd  grow  greater  by  Indulgence;  If  I  am 
lazy,  and  indulge  my-felf  in  the  languid  Plea- 
fure ;  I  know  the  harm,  and  can  forefee  the 
Drone.  If  I  am  luxurious,  I  know  the  harm 
of  this  alfo,  and  have  the  plain  profpecl  of  the 
Sot.  If  Avarice  be  my  Plcafure;  the  End,  I 
know,  is  being  a  Mifer.  But  if  Honesty  be 
my  Delight,  I  know  no  other  confequence  from 
indulging  fuch  a  Paffion,  than  that  of  growing 
better  naturd,  and  enjoying  more  and  more  the  Plea- 
fur  es  of  Society.  On  the  other  hand,  if  this  honed 
Pleafure  be  loft  by  knavifh  Indulgence,  and 
Immorality,  there  can  hardly  be  a  Satisfaction 
left  of  any  kind;  fince  Good-nature  and  tfocial 


Hot.   Epiji.  j.  lib.   i,  +VOL.  II.  p.  127. 

Affection 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        311 

Affeclion  are  fo  efTential  even  to  the  Pleafures 

of  a  Debauch. 

If  therefore  the  only  Pleafure  I  can  freely 
and  without  referve  indulge,  be  that  of  the 
honcji  and  moral  kind ;  if  the  rational  and  fa- 
cial Enjoyment  be  fo  conflant  in  it-felf,  and 
fo  effential  to  Happinefs ;  why  fhou'd  I  not 
bring  my  other  Pleafures  to  correfpond  and 
be  Friends  with  it,  rather  than  raife  my-felf 
other  Pleafures,  which  are  deftruclive  of  this 
Foundation,  and  have  no  manner  of  Corre- 
fpondency  with  one  another? 

Upon  this  bottom  let  me  try  how  I  can  bear 
the  Aflault  of  Fancy,  and  maintain  my-felf 
in  my  moral  Fortrefs,  againft  the  Attacks 
which  are  rais'd  on  the  fide  of  corrupt  Inter eji 
and  a  wrrong  Self.  When  the  Idea  of  Pleafure 
itrikes,  I  afk  my-felf:  tl  Before  I  was  thus 
"  flruck  by  the  Idea,  was  any  thing  a  mifs 
lt  with  me?  No.  Therefore  remove  the 
'■'•  Idea,  and  I  am  well.  But  having  this 
M  Idea  fuch  as  I  now  have,  I  cannot  want 
14  the  Thing,   without  regret.  See,  there- 

"  fore,  which  is  befl :  either  to  fuffer  under 
"  this  Want,  till  the  Idea  be  remov'd ;  or  by 
11  fatisfying  the  Want,  confirm  not  only  this 
,,L  Idea,  but  all  of  the  fame  ftamp!" 

In 


312     A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author, 

In  reality,  has  not  every  Fancy  a  like  Pri- 
vilege of  palling;  if  any  Jingle  one  be  admitted 
upon  its  own  Authority  ?  And  what  mull  be 
the  Iflue  of  fuch  an  OEconomy,  if  the  whole 
fantaflick  Crew  be  introduc'd,  and  the  Door 
refus'd  to  none?  What  elfe  is  it  than  this  Ma- 
nagement which  leads  to  the  moit  diflolute 
and  profligate  of  Characters?  What  is  it,  on 
the  contrary,  which  raifes  us  to  any  degree 
of  Worth  or  Steddinefs,  befides  a  di reel  con- 
trary Practice  and  Conduct ;  Can  there  be 
Strength  of  Mind;  can  there  be  Command  over 
ones  felf;  if  the  Ideas  of  Pleafure,  the  Sug- 
geftions  of  Fancy,  and  the  ftrong  Pleadings  of 
Appetite  and  Defire  are  not  often  withftood, 
and  the  Imaginations  foundly  reprimanded,  and 
brought  under  fubjection  ? 

Thus  it  appears  that  the  Method  of  exa- 
mining our  Ideas  is  no  pedantick  Practice. 
Nor  is  there  any  thing  un-galante  in  the  man- 
ner of  thus  queftioning  the  Lady-Fancys,  which 
prefent  themfelves  as  charmingly  drefs'd  as  pof- 
fible  tofolicit  their  Caufe,  and  obtain  a  Judg- 
ment, by  favour  of  that  worfe  Part,  and  corrupt 
Self,  to  whom  they  make  their  Application. 

It  may  be  juftly  faidofthefe,  that  they 
are   veiy   powerful   Solicitrejf&s.     They   never 

feem 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        313 

feem  to  importune  us;  tho  they  are  ever  in 
our  eye,  and  meet  us  whichever  way  we  turn. 
They  undernand  better  how  to  manage  their 
Appearance,  than  by  always  throwing  up 
their  Veil,  and  (hewing  their  Faces  openly  in 
a  broad  Light,  to  run  the  danger  of  cloying 
our  Sight,  orexpoiing  their  Features  to  a  Uriel; 
Examination.  So  far  are  they  from  fuch  for- 
wardnefs,  that  they  often  (land  as  at  a  dif- 
tance;  fuffering  us  to  make  the  nrft  advance, 
and  contenting  themfelves  with  difcovering  a 
Side-face,  or  bellowing  now  and  then  a  glance 
in  a  myfterious  manner,  as  if  they  endeavour'd 
to  conceal  their  Perfons. 

One  of  the  raoft  dangerous  of  thefe  Enchan- 
trejfes  appears  in  a  fort  of  difmal  Weed,    with 
the  moll  mournful  Countenance   imaginable  ; 
often  calling  up  her  Eyes,    and  wringing  her 
Hands;  fo  that  'tis  impoflible  not  to  be  mov'd 
by  her,   till   her  Meaning   be  confider'd,  and 
her  Impofture  fully  known.    The  Airs  fhe  bor- 
rows, are  from  the  tragickMufe Melpomene. 
Nor  is  me  in  her  own  Perfon  any  way  amiable 
or  attractive.      Far  from  it.      Her   Art  is    to 
render  her-felf  as  forbidding  as  poflible ;  that 
her  Sifters  may  by  her   means  be  the  more 
alluring.      And    if    by   her    tragick    Afpecl, 
and  melancholy  Looks,  fhe  can  perfuade  us 
that  Death  (whom  fhe  reprefents)    is    fuch    a 

hideous 


314        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

hideous  Form  ;  fhe  conquers  in  behalf  of  the 
whole  fantaftick  Tribe  of  wanton,  gay,  and 
fond  Defires.  Effeminacy  and  Cowardice  in- 
itantly  prevail.  The  poo  reft  Means  of  Life 
grow  in  repute,  when  the  Ends  and  yufi  Con- 
ditions of  it  are  fo  little  known,  and  the  Dread 
of  parting  with  it,  rais'd  to  fo  high  a  degree. 
The  more  eagerly  we  grafp  at  Life,  the  more 
impotent  we  are  in  the  Enjoyment  of  it.  By 
this  Avidity,  its  very  Lees  and  Dregs  are  fwal- 
low'd.  The  Ideas  of  fordid  Pleafure  are  ad- 
vanc'd.  Worth,  Manhood,  Generofity,  and 
all  the  nobler  Opinions  and  Sentiments  of  ho- 
neft  Good,  and  virtuous  Pleafure.  difappear,  and 
fly  before  this  Queen  of  Terrors. 

'Tis  a  mighty  Delight  which  a  fort  of 
Counter-Philofophers  take  in  feconding  this 
Phantom,  and  playing  her  upon  our  Under- 
ftandings,  whenever  they  wou'd  take  occafion 
to  confound  em.  The  vicious  Poets  employ 
this  Spedler  too  on  their  fide ;  tho  after  a  diffe- 
rent manner.  By  the  help  of  this  tragick 
Aclrefs,  they  gain  a  fairer  Audience  for  the 
luxurious  Fancys,  and  give  their  Erato's, 
and  other  playlom  Mufes  a  fuller  Scope  in  the 
fupport  of  Riot  and  Debauch.  The  gloomy 
Erofpecl  of  Death  becomes  the  Incentive  to  Plea- 
fures  of  the  ioweit  Order.  AJIies  and  Shade,  the 
Tomb  and  Cyprefs,  are   made  to  ferve  as  Foils  to 

Luxury . 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.        315 

Luxury.  The  Abhorrence  of  an  infenfible  State 
makes  mere  Vitality  and  Animal-Senfation 
highly  cherifh'd. 

*  Indulge  Genro:  carpamus  dulcia,  noftrum  eft 
Quod  v wis:  Cum,  et  Manes,  el  Fabula  fies. 

Tis  no  wonder  if  Luxury  profits  by  the  De- 
formity of  this  Specter-Opinion.  She  fup- 
portsherlntereu  by  this  childifh Bugbear;  and 
like  a  mother  by  her  Infant,  is  hugg'd  fo  much 
the  clofer  by  her  Votary,  as  the  Fear  preffes 
him,  and  grows  importunate.  She  invites 
him  to  livefqfl,  according  to  her  bed  meafure 
of  Life.  And  welline  may.  Who  wou'd  not  wil- 
lingly make  Life  pafs  away  as  quickly  as  was 
poffible;  when  the  nobler  Pleafures  of  it  were 
already  loft  or  corrupted  by  a  wretched  Fear 
of  Death?  The  intenfe  Selhfhnefs  and  Mean- 
nefs  which  accompanys  this  Fear,  mult  reduce 
us  to  a  low  ebb  of  Enjoyment;  and  in  a  man- 
ner bring  to  nothing  that  main  Sum  of  fatis- 
faclory  Senfation,  by  which  we  vulgarly  rate 
the  Happinefs  of  our  private  Condition  and 
Fortune. 

But  fee!  A  lovely  Form  advances  to  our 
Affiftance,  introduc'd  by  the  prime  Mufe,  the 
beauteous  Calliope!  She  (hews  us  what  real 

*  Peri'.  Sat.  5. 

Beauty 


316       A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Beauty  is,  and  what  thofe  Numbers  are,  which 
make  Life  perfect,  and  bellow  the  chief  Enjoy- 
ment. She  fets  Virtue  before  her  Eyes,  and 
teaches  us  how  to  rate  Life,  form  the  Experi- 
ence of  the  moft  heroick  Spirits.  She  brings 
her  Sifters  Clio  and  Urania  to  fupport 
her.  From  the  former  fhe  borrows  whatever 
is  memorable  in  Hiftory,  and  antient  Time, 
to  confront  the  Tragick  Specter,  and  mew  the 
fix'd  Contempt  which  the  happieft  and  freeft 
Nations,  as  well  as  fmgle  Heroes,  and  private 
Men  worthy  of  any  Note,  have  ever  exprefs'd 
for  that  Impoftrefs.  From  the  latter  fhe  bor- 
rows what  is  fublimeft  in  Philofophy,  to  ex- 
plain the  Laws  of  Nature,  the  Order  of  the 
Univerfe,  andreprefent  to  us  the  Juftice  of  ac- 
companying this  amiable  Adminiftration.  She 
fhews  us,  that  by  this  jufl  Compliance  we  are 
made  happieft :  and  that  the  meafure  of  a  hap- 
py Life  is  not  from  the  fewer  or  more  Suns  we 
behold,  the  fewer  or  more  Breaths  we  draw, 
or  Meals  we  repeat;  but  from  the  having  once 
livd  well,  acted  our  Part  handfomly,  and  made 
our  Exit  chearfully,  and  as  became  us. 

Thus  we  retain  on  Virtues  fide  the  nobleft 
Party  of  the  Mufes.  Whatever  is  auguft  a- 
mong  thofe  Sifters,  appears  readily  in  our  be- 
half. Nor  are  the  more  jocund  Ladys  want- 
ing in  their  Aftiftance,  when  they  acl  in   the 

perfection 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.         317 

perfection  of  their  Art,  and  infpire  fome  bet- 
ter Genius's  in  this  kind  of  Poetry.  Such  were 
the  nobler  Lyricks,  and  thofe  of  the  latter,  and 
more  refirid  Comedy  of  the  Antients.  TheTHA- 
lia's  the  Polyhymnia's,  the  Terpsy- 
chore's,  the  Euterpe's  willingly  join 
their  Parts;  and  being  alike  interefted  in  the 
Caufe  of  Numbers,  are  with  regret  employ'd 
another  way,  in  favour  of  Diforder.  Inflead 
of  being  made  Syrens  to  ferve  the  Purpofes  of 
Vice,  they  wou'd  with  more  delight  accom- 
pany their  elder  Sifters,  and  add  their  Graces 
and  attractive  Charms  to  what  is  moft  harmo- 
nious, Mufe-like,  and  divine  in  human  Life. 
There  is  this  difference  only  between  thefe 
and  the  more  heroick  Dames ;  that  they  can 
more  eafily  be  perverted,  and  take  the  vici- 
ous Form.  For  what  Perfon  of  any  Genius 
or  mafterly  Command  in  the  Poetick  Art, 
cou'd  think  of  bringing  the  Epick  or  Tragick 
Mufe  to  act.  the  Pandar,  or  be  fubfervient  to 
Effeminacy  and  Cowardice?  'Tis  not  againft 
Death,  Hazards  or  Toils,  that  Tragedy  and 
the  heroic  Fable  are  pointed.  'Tis  not  mere 
Life  which  is  here  exalted,  or  has  its  Price  en- 
hanc'd.  On  the  contrary,  its  Calamitys  are 
expos'd :  the  Diforders  of  the  Paffions  fet  to 
view :  Fortitude  recommended :  Honour  ad- 
vanc'd  :  the  Contempt  of  Death  placd  as  the 
peculiar  Note  of  every  generous  and    Jiappy 

Soul ; 


\ 

/ 


318       A  DV I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Soul ;    and  the  tenacious  Love  of  Life,  as  the 
trueft  Character  of  an  abjecl  Wretch. 


* 


Ufque  adeone  mori  miferum  eft? — 


'Tis  not  to  be  imagin'd  how  eafdy  we  deal 
with  the  deluding  Apparitions  and  falfe  Ideas  of 
Happinefs  and  Good ;  when  this  frightful  Specler 
of  Mifery  and  111,  is  after  this  manner  well  laid, 
and  by  honeft  Magick  conjurd  down ;  fo  as 
not  to  give  the  lead  amftance  to  the  other  tempt- 
ing Forms.  This  is  that  occult  Science,  or  fort 
of  Counter- Necromancy,  which  inftead  of  Ghaft- 
linefs  and  Horror,  infpires  only  what  is  gentle 
and  humane,  and  difpels  the  impofing  Phan- 
toms of  every  kind.  He  may  pafs  undoubted- 
ly, for  no  mean  Conjurer,  who  can  deal  with 

Spirits    of  this   fort. -But  hold! Let  us 

try  the  Experiment  in  due  form,  and  draw  the 
magick  Circle.  Let  us  obferve  how  the  infe- 
rior Imps  appear;  when  the  Head-GoWm  is  fe- 
curely  laid. 

See!  The  Enchantrefs  Indolence  prefents 
her-felf,  in  all  the  Pomp  of  Eafe  and  lazy  Lux- 
ury. She  promifes  the  fweeteft  Life,  and  in- 
vites us  to  her  Pillow:  injoins  us  to  expofe 
our-felves,  to  no  adventurous  Attempt ;  and 
forbids  us  any  Engagement  which  may  bring 

*  Virg.  yEncid.  Lib.  12. 

US 


C  4 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        319 

us  into  Action.  44  Where,    then,  are  the 

Pleafures  which  Ambition  promifes,  and  Love 
affords?  How  is  the  gay  World  enjoy'd? 
Or  are  thofe  to  be  efteem'd  no  Plea/nres,  which 
are  loft   by  Dulnefs  and  Inaction?  But 

Indolence  is  the  higheft  Pleafure.  To  live, 

44  and  not  to  feel !  To  feel  no  Trouble. 

14  What  Good  then?  Life  it-felf.  And 

14  is  this  properly  to  live?  Is  deeping  Life? 
44  Is  this  what  I  fhou'd  fludy  to  prolong? — " 
Here  the  faniajiick  Tribe  it-felf  feems  fcan- 
daliz'd.  A  Civil  War  begins.  The  major 
part  of  the  capricious  Dames  range  themfelves 
on  Reafons  fide,  and  declare  againft  the  lan- 
guid Syren.  Ambition  blufhes  at  the  offer'd 
fweet.  Conceit  and  Vanity  take  fuperior  Airs. 
Even  Luxury  herfelf,  in  her  polite  and  elegant 
Humour,    reproves    the    Apoftate-Sifter,    and 

marks  her  as  an    Alien  to  true   Pleafure ■ 

44  Away,  thou  droufy  Phantom!  Haunt  me  no 
44  more.  For  I  have  learn'd  from  better  than 
44  thy  Siflerhood,  that  Life  and  Happinefs 
*4  confifl  in  Action  and  Employment." 

But  here  a  bufy  Form  folicits  us;  active, 
induftrious,  watchful,  and  defpifmg  Pains  and 
Labour.  She  wears  the  ferious  Countenance 
of  Virtue,  but  with  Features  of  Anxiety  and 
Difquiet.  What  is  it  (he  mutters  ?  What  looks 
fhe  on,  with  fuch  Admiration    and    Aftonifh- 

Vol.  I.  X  ment? 


it 


520      A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author, 

merit  ? — Bags ?  Coffers !  Heaps  of  finning  Me- 
tal! "  What!  for  the  Service  of  Luxury?  For 
t  c  her  thefe  Preparations  ?  Art  thou  then  her 
4t  Friend  (grave  Fancy!)  is  it  for  her  thou 
toilfl?  No,    but    for    Provifion   againft 

Want.  But,  Luxury  apart,  tell  me  now, 
1,1  haft  thou  not  already  a  Competence?  'Tis- 
ct  good  to  be  fecure  againft  the  fear  of  Starv- 
'■'  ing.  Is  there  then  no  Death  befide  this? 

"  No  other  Paffa^e  out  of  Life?  Are  other 
*.'  Doors  fecur  d,  if  this  be  barr'd?  Say,  Ava- 
tc  rige!  (thou  emptied  of  Phantoms)  is  it  not 
ct  vile  Cowardice  thou  fervft?  What  further 
"  have  I  then  to  do  with  thee  (thou  doubly 
^  vile  Dependent  L)  when  once  I  have  difmifs  d 
4t  thy  Patronefs,   and  defpis'd  her  Threats." 

Thus  I  contend  with  Fancy  and  *  Opi- 
nion; and  fearch  the  Mint  and  Founder  of 
Imagination.  For  here  the  Appetites  and  De- 
fires  are  fabricated.  Hence  they  derive  their 
Privilege  and  Currency.  If  I  can  flop  the 
Mifchief  here,  and  prevent  falfe  Coinage;  I 
am  fafe.  "  Idea  t  wait   a-while   till  I  have 

"  examin'd  thee,  whence  thou  art,  and  to 
"  whom  thou  retain'it.  Art  thou  of  Ambitions 
"  Train?  Or  doft  thou  promife  only  Pleafure? 
tc  Say!   what    am  I  to  facrifke    for   thy  fake? 


VOL.  LIT.  jb.  kjS,  199,  Sec. 

What 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        321 

\  What  Honour?  What  Truth?  What  Man- 

4  hood? What   Bribe  is  it   thou  bring'ft 

<  along  with  thee?  Defcribe  the  flattering Ob- 
'ject;  but  without  Flattery;  plain,  as  the 
1  thing  is;  without  addition,  without  fparing 

0  or  referve.  Is  it  Wealth?  is  it  a  Repot tf  a 
4  Title ?  or  a  Female?  Come  not  in  a  Troop, 
■  (ye  Fancys!)  Bring  not  your  Objects  croud  . 
'  ing,  to  confound  the  Sight.      But  let  me  ex- 

1  amine  your  Worth  and  IVeight  diHin&ly .  Think 
'  not  to  raife  accumulative  Happineis.  For 
1  if  feparately,  you  contribute  nothing;  in 
1  conjunction,  you  can  only  amufe." 


WFIILST  I  am  thus    penning  a  Soliloquy 

in    form,   I    cant    forbear    reflecting    on    my 

Work.     And  when  I  view  the  Manner   of  it 

with  a  familiar  Eye;   I  am  readier,   I  find,    to 

make  my-felf  Diverfion  on  this  occafion,    than 

to  fuppofe  I  am  in  good  earner!  about  a  Work 

of  confequence.        "  What!   Am  I  to  be  thus 

1  fantaflical  ?  Mud  I  bufy  my-felf  with  Phan- 

•  toms  ?    light    with    Apparitions    and    Chi- 

1  meras?  For  certain:    Or  the  Chimeras 

c  will  be  before-hand  with  me,  and  bufy  them- 

4  felves  fo  as  to  get  the  better  of  my  Under- 

'  Handing.  What!    Talk   to    my-felf  like 

1  fome  Madman,  in  different  Perfons,  and  un- 

X  2  st  der 


322        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

M  der  different  Characters !  Undoubtedly:  or 
lt  'twill  be  foon  feen  who  is  a  real  Madman, 
"  and  changes  Character  in  earned,  without 
"  knowing  how  to  help  it." 

This  indeed  is  but  too  certain;  That  as 
long  as  we  enjoy  a  Mind,  as  long  as  we  have 
Appetites  and  Senfe,  the  Fancys  of  all  kinds  will 
be  hard  at  work;  and  whether  we  are  in  com- 
pany, or  alone,  they  muft  range  {till,  and  be 
aclive.  They  muft  have  their  Field.  The 
Queftion  is,  Whether  they  fhall  have  it  wholly 
to  themfelves  ;  or  whether  they  fhall  acknow- 
ledge fome  Contr  outer  or  Manager.  If  none; 
'tis  this,  I  fear,  which  leads  to  Madnefs.  'Tis 
this,  and  nothing  elfe,  which  can  be  call'd 
Madnefs  or  Lofs  of  Reafon.  For  if  Fancy  be 
left  Judge  of  any  thing,  (lie  muft  Judge  of  all. 
Every-thing  is  right,  if  any  thing  be  fo,  be* 
caufe  I  fancy  it.  "  The  HOufe  turns  round. 
"  The  Profpecl  turns.  No,   but  my  Head 

tlr  turns  indeed:  1  have  aGiddinefs;  that's  all. 
"  Fancy  \vo\i&  perfuade  me  thus  and  thus:  but 
"  I  know   better."  Tis  by  means  there- 

fore of  a  Contr ouler  or  Corrector  of  Fancy,  that 
I  am  fav'd  from  being  mad.  Otherwife,  'tis 
the  Houfe  turns,  when  I  am  giddy.  'Tis  Things 
which  change  (for  fo  I  muft  fuppofe)  when  my 
Pajfwn  merely,   or  Temper   changes.  "  But 

"  I  was  out  of  order.     I  dreamt.        Who  tells 


Ll  me 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        323 

*l  me   this?  Who    befides   the    Correc- 

"  trice,    by  whofe  means  I  am  in  my  Wits, 
4i  and  without  whom  I  am  no  longer  my-felf?" 

Every  Man  indeed  who  is  not  abfolutely 
befides  himielf,  muit  of  neceffity  hold  his  Fan- 
cys  under  fuch  kind  of  Difcipline  and  Ma- 
nagement. The Jkidier.  this  Difcipline  is,  the 
more  the  Man  is  rational  and  in  his  Wits. 
The  loofer  it  is,  the  more  fantaftical  he  mult 
be,  and  the  nearer  to  the  Madman's  State. 
This  is  a  Bufinefs  which  can  never  (land  Hill. 
I  mull  always  be  Winner  or  Lofer  at  the  Game. 
Either  I  work  upon  my  Fancys,  or  They  on 
Me.  If  I  give  Quarter,  They  won't.  There 
•can  be  no  Truce,  no  Sufpenfion  of  Arms  be- 
tween us.  The  one  or  the  other  mult  be  fupe- 
rior,  and  have  the  Command.  For  if  the 
Fancys  are  left  to  themfelv.es,  the  Govern- 
ment mull  of  courfe  be  theirs.  And  then, 
what  difference  between  fuch  a  State  and 
Madnefs. 

The  Queftion  therefore  is  the  fame  here, 
as  in  a  Family,  or  Houjfiold,  when  'tis  afk'd, 
44  Who  rules'?  or  Who  is  MafterT'  Learn  by 

the  Voices.  Obferve  who  fpeaks  aloud,  in  a 
commanding  Tone :  Who  talks,  who  quef- 
lions  ;  or  who  is  talk'd  with,  and  who  quef- 
tion d.      For  if  the    Servants  take  the  former 

X  3  part ; 


324       A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

part;  they  are  the  Mailers,  and  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  Houfe  will  be  found  fuch  as  na- 
turally may  be  expecled  in  thefe  Circumftances. 

How  Hands  it  therefore,  in  my  own  O Eco- 
nomy, my  principal  Province  and  command? 
How  (land  my  Fancys  f  How  deal  they  with 
me?  Or  do  I  take  upon  me  rather  to  deal 
with  Them  ?  Do  I  talk,  queftion,  arraign  ?  Or 
am  I  talk'd  with,  arraign'd,  and  contented  to 
hear,  without  giving  a  Reply  ?  If  I  vote  with 
Fancy,  refign  my  *  Opinion  to  her  Command, 
and  judge  of  Happinefs  and  Mifery  as  Jlie 
judges;   how  am  I  my-fel-f? 

He  who  in  a  Plain  imagines  Precipices  at  his 
Feet,  impending  Rocks  over  his  Head;  fears 
burning  Clouds  in  a  clear  Sky;  cries  Fire! 
Deluge!  Earthquake,  or  Thunder!  when  all  is 
quiet:  does  he  not  rave?  But  one  whofe  Eyes 
feemingly  ftrike  fire,  by  a  Blow;  one  whofe 
Head  is  giddy  from  the  Motion  of  a  Ship,  after 
having  been  newly  fet  afhore ;  or  one  who  from 
a  Diflemper  in  his  Ear  hears  thundring  Noifes; 
can  readily  redrefs  thefe  feveral  Apprehen- 
fions,  and  is  by  this  means  fav'd  from  Madnefs. 


*  VOL.  111.  pag.  igg.'&c. 

A 


A  DV  I  C  E  to  an  Author.         325 

A  Distemper  in  my  Eye  may  make  me  fee 
the  flrangeft  kind  of  Figures :  And  when  Ca- 
taracls  and  other  Impuritys  are  gathering  in 
that  Organ;  Flys,  Infecls,  and  other  various 
Forms,  ieem  playing  in  the  Air  before  me.  But 
let  my  Senfes  err  ever  fo  widely ;  I  am  not  on 
this  account  befide  My-felf:  Nor  am  I  out  of  my 
own  Poffemon,  whilft  there  is  a  Perfon  left  with- 
in ;  who  has  Power  to  dijpute  the  Appearances, 
and  redrcjs  the  Imagination. 

I  am  accofled  by  Ideas  and  finking  Appre- 
kenfions:  But  I  take  nothing  on  their  Report. 
I  hear  their  Story,  and  return  'em  Anfwer,  as 
they  deferve.  Fancy  and  I  are  not  all  one. 
The  Dif  agreement  makes  me  my  own.-  When, 
on  the  contrary,  I  have  no  Debate  with  her, 
no  Controverfy,  but  take  for  Happinejs  and  Mi- 
fcry,  for  Good  and  ///,  whatever  (lie  prefents  as 
fuch ;  I  mull  then  join  Voices  with  her,  and 
cry  Precipice!  Fire  I  Cerberus!  Elyziuml 

'*  Sandy  Defarts  I  flowery  Fields  I 
L-  Seas  of  Milk,  and  Ships  of  Amber!" 

A  G  r  e  c  1  a n  Prince,  who  had  the  fame  Mad- 
nefs  as  Alexander,  and  was  deeply  flruck 
with  the  Fancy  of  conquering  Worlds,  wras  in- 

X  4  genioully 


326       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

genioufly  fhewn  the   Method  of  expoflulating 
with   his  Lady-Governefs ;   when  by   a  difcreet 
Friend,  and  at  an  eafy  Hour,  he  was  afk'd  lit-  , 
tie  by  little  concerning  hisDefign,  and  the  final 
Purpofe,  and  promis'd  Good  which  the  flatter- 
ing Dame  propos'd  to  him.    The  Story  is  fuf- 
ficiently  noted.      All  the  Artifice  employ'd  a- 
gainft  the  Prince  was  a  well-manag'd  Interro- 
gatory of  what  next?  Lady-FANCY  was  not  aware 
of  the  Defign  upon  her ;  but  let  her-ielf  be  worm'd 
out,  by  degrees.    At  nrft,  fhe  faid  the  Prince's 
defign  was  only  upon  a  Tracl  of  Land,  which 
flood  out  like  a  Promontory  before  him,  and 
feem'd  to  eclipfe  his  Glory.    A  fair  rich  Illand, 
which  was  clofe  by,  prefented  it-felf  next,  and 
as  it  were  naturally  invited  Conqueft.     The 
oppofite  Coaft  came  next  in  view.      Then  the 
Continent  on  each  fide  the  larger  Sea.      And 
then  (what  was  eafieft  of  all,  and  woud  follow 
ofcourfe)  the  Dominion  both  of  Sea  and  Land. 
44  And  What  next?  reply 'd  the  Friend.    What 
4 4  fhall  we  do,  when  we  are  become  thus  happy, 
44  and  have  obtain'd  our  highefl  Wifh  ?    Why 
44  then,  we'll  fit  down  peaceably,  and  be  good 
41  Company  over  a  Bottle.        Alas,  Sir!  What 
44  hinders  us  from   doing ^the  fame,  where  we 
44  now  are?  Will  our  Humour,  or  our  Wine 
44  grow  better?  Shall  we  be  more  fecure,  or  at 
44  Heart's  Eafe?  What  you  may  poffibiy  lofe  by 

tc  thefe 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        327 

41  thefe  Attempts,  is  eafy  to  conceive.  But 
"  which  way  you  will  be  a  Gainer,  your  own 
"  Fancy  (you  fee)  cannot  fo  much  as  fuggeft." 
Fancy  in  the  mean  while  carry'd  her  point : 
For  {he  was  abfolute  over  the  Monarch ;  and 
had  been  too  little  talk'd  to  by  her-felf,  to  bear 
being  reprov'd  in  Company.  The  Prince  grew 
fullen ;  turn'd  the  Difcourfe  ;  abhor'd  the  Pro- 
fanation offer'd  to  his  Sovereign-Emprefs ;  de- 
liver'd  up  his  Thoughts  to  her  again  with  deep 
Devotion,  and  fell  to  conquering  with  all  his 
Might.  The  Sound  of  Vitlory  rung  in  his  Ears. 
Laurels  and  Crowns  play'd  before  his  Eyes. — 
What  was  this  befide  Giddinefs  and  Dream? 
Appearances  uncorrected?  "  Worlds  dancing? 
"  Phantoms  playing? 

"  Seas  of  Milk,  and,  Ships  of  Amber  T 

'Tis  eafy  to  bring  the  Hero's  Cafe  home  to 
our-felves ;  and  fee,  in  the  ordinary  Circum- 
ftances  of  Life,  how  Love,  Ambition,  and  the  gayer 
Tribe  of  Fancy s  (as  well  as  the  gloomy  and  dark 
Specters  of  another  fort)  prevail  over  our  Mind. 
'Tis  eafy  to  obferve  how  they  work  on  us,  when 
we  refufe  to  be  before-hand  with  'em,  and  be- 
llow repeated  Leffons  on  the  encroaching  Sor- 
cerejfes.  On  this  it  is,  that  our  offer'd  Advice, 
and  Method  of  Soliloquy  depends.     And 

whether 


328        A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

whether  this  be  of  any  ufe  towards  making  us 
either  wifer,  or  happier;  I  am  confident,  it 
mud  help  to  make  us  wittier  and  politer.  It 
mvift,  beyond  any  other  Science,  teach  us  the 
Turns  of  Humour  and  Paf/ion,  the  Variety  of 
Manners,  the  Juflnefsof  Characters,  and  Truth 
of  Things  ;  which  when  we  rightly  underftand, 
we  may  naturally  defcribe.  And  on  this  de- 
pends chiefly  the  Skill  and  Art  of  a  good  Wri- 
ter. So  that  if  to  write  well  be  a  juil  pretence 
to  Merit;  'tis  plain,  that  Writers*,  who  are  apt 
to  let  no  fmall  Value  on  their  Art,  mull  con- 
fefs  there  is  fomething  valuable  in  this  felf-exr 
amining  Practice,  and  Method  of  inward  Collo- 
quy. 

As  for  the  Writer  of  thefe  Papers  (as  modern 
Authors  are  pleas'dmodeitly  to  nyle  themfelves) 
he  is  contented,  for  his  part,  to  take  up  with 
this  Practice,  barely  for  his  own  proper  Bene- 
fit ;  without  regard  to  the  hisrh  Function  or  Ca- 
pacity  of  Author.  It  may  be  allow'd  him,  in 
this  particular,  to  imitate  the  bed.  Genius  and 
mod  Gentleman-like  of  Roman  Poets.  And  tho 
by  an  Excefs  of  Dulnefs,  it  fhou'd  be  his  mis- 
fortune to  learn  nothing  of  this  Poets  Wit,  he 
is  perfuaded  he  may  learn  fomething  of  his  Ho- 
nefty  and  good  Humour. 


-Xeque 


* 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,        329 

Neque  enim,  cum  leclulus,  aut  Me 

Porticus  excepit,     dejum   Mi  hi    "  Reciius  hoc 

"eft: 

4t  Hoc faciens,  vivam  melius: fie  clulcis:  Amicis 

lc  Occur  ram." Hcec  Ego  Mecum 

Comprejjis  agito  labris. + 


SECT.     III. 

WE  are  now  arriv'd  to  that  part  of  our 
Performance,  where  it  becomes  us  to 
caft  our  Eye  back,  on  what  has  already  pafs'd. 
The  Obfervers  of  Method  generally  make 
this  the  place  of  Recapitulation.  Other  Artifts 
have  fubflituted  the  Practice  of  Apology, 
or  Extenuation.  For  the  anticipating  Manner 
of  prefatory  Difcourfe,  is  too  well  known,  to 
work  any  furprizing  efFecl;  in  the  Author's  be- 
half:    Preface   being  become  only  another 


*  Hor.  Sat.  4.  lib.  1. 
t  And  again  : 

Qiiocirca  Mecum  loquor  Iitec,  taciliifque recorder : 

Si  tibi  nulla  Jitimfiniret  copia  fymplue, 

Narrarcs  ?ncdicis  :   quod  quanta  plura  parafli, 
Tanlo plura  cupis,  nulline  fatcrier  audes? 

*       *       *        *       *        ■;':       *       •;■:-       *        * 

Non  es  avarus :  abi.  quid?  calerajamfimulijlo 
Cum  wtiofugere?  caret  tihi peflus  inani 
Ambitiorie?  Caret  mortisformidine  et  iraf 

Id.  Epift.  2.  lib.  q. 

word 


330        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

word  to  fignify  Excufe.  Befides  that  the  Au- 
thor is  generally  the  moft  ftraiten'd  in  that  pre- 
liminary Part,  which  on  other  accounts  is  too 
apt  to  grow  voluminous.  .He  therefore  takes 
the  advantage  of  his  Corollary  or  Winding-up; 
and  ends  pathetically,  by  endeavouring  in  the 
fofteft  manner  to  reconcile  his  Reader  to  thofe 
Faults  which  he  chufes  rather  to  excufe  than 
to  amend. 

General  Practice  has  made  this  a  necef- 
fary  Part  of  Elegance,  hardly  to  be  pafs'd 
over  by  any  Writer.  *  'Tis  the  chief  Strata- 
gem by  which  he  engages  in  perfonal  Confe- 
rence with  his  Reader;  and  can  talk  immode- 
rately of  Himfelf,  with  all  the  feeming  Modefly 
of  one  who  is  the  furthefl  from  any  felfifh 
Views,  or  conceited  Thoughts  of  his  own 
Merit.  There  appears  fuch  a  peculiar  Grace 
and  Ingenuity  in  the  method  of  confefling 
Lazinefs,  Precipitancy,  Carelefnefs,  or  whatever 
other  Vices  have  been  the  occafion  of  the  Au- 
thor s  Deficiency ;  that  it  wou'd  feem  a  Pity, 
had  the  Work  it-felf  been  brought  to  fuch 
Perfection  as  to  have  left  no  room  for  the  pe- 
nitent Party  to  enlarge  on  his  own  Demerits. 
For  from  the  multiplicity  of  thefe,  he  finds 
Subject  to  ingratiate  himfelf  with  his  Reader; 
who  doubtlefs  is  not  a  little  rais'd  by  this 
Submiffion  of  a  conjejjing  Author ;  and  is  ready, 

on 


A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author,      331 

on  thefe  terms,  to  give  him  Abfulation,  and  re- 
ceive him  into  his  good  Grace  and  Favour. 

In  the  galante  World,  indeed,  we  eafily 
find  how  far  a  Humility  of  this  kind  prevails. 
They  who  hope  to  rife  by  Merit,  are  likelieft 
to  be  difappointed  in  their  Pretenfions.  The 
confefling  Lover,  who  afcribes  all  to  the  Boun- 
ty of  the  Fair-one,  meets  his  Reward  the  foon- 
er,  for  having  ftudy'd  lejs  how  to  deferve  it. 
For  Merit  is  generally  thought  prefumptiious, 
and  fuppos'd  to  carry  with  it  a  certain  Aflu- 
rance  and  Eafe,  with  which  a  Mijlrefs  is  not 
fo  well  contented.  The  Claim  of  well-deferv- 
ing  feems  to  derogate  from  the  pure  Grace 
and  Favour  of  the  Benefaclrice ;  who  then  ap- 
pears to  her-felf  mod  fovereign  in  Power,  and 
likelieft  to  be  obey'd  without  referve,  when 
fhe  bellows  her  Bounty,  where  there  is  leafl 
Title,  or  Pretenfion. 

Thus  a  certain  Adoration  of  the  Sex  which 
pafTes  in  our  Age  without  the  leaft  Charge  of 
Profanenefs,  or  Idolatry,  may,  according  to 
vulgar  Imagination,  ferve  to  juftify  thefe  ga- 
lante Fotarvs,  in  the  imitation  of  the  real  Reli- 
gious  and  Devout.  The  method  of*  Self-abaie- 
ment  may  perhaps  be  thought  the  properefl 

*  Supra,  p.  38. 

to 


332        ADVICE   to  an  Author, 

to  make  Approaches  to  the  facred  Shrines: 
And  the  intire  Resignation  of  Merit,  in  each 
Cafe,  may  be  efteem'd  the  only  ground  of  well- 
deferving.  But  what  we  allow  to  Heaven,  or 
the  Fair,  fhou'd  not,  rnethinks,  be  made  a  Pre- 
cedent, in  favour  of  the  World.  Whatever 
Deference  is  due  to  that  Body  of  Men  whom 
we  call  Readers;  we  may  be  fuppos'd  to  treat 
'em  with  fufficient  Honour,  if  with  thorow 
Diligence,  and  Pains,  we  endeavour  to  ren- 
der our  Works  per/eel;  and  leave  em  to  judge 
of  the  Performance  as  thev  are  able. 

However  difficult  or  defperate  it  may  ap- 
pear in  any  Artift  to  endeavour  to  bring  Per- 
fection into  his  Work ;  if  he  has  not  at  leait 
the  Idea  ^/Perfection  to  give  him  Aim,  he 
will  be  found  very  defective  and  mean  in  his 
Performance.  Tho  his  Intention  be  to  pleafe 
the  World,  he  muft  neverthelefs  be,  in  a  man- 
ner, above  it;  and  fix  his  Eye  upon  that  con- 
fummate  Grace,  that  Beauty  of  Nature,  and 
that  Perfection  of  Numbers,  which  the  reft  of 
Mankind,  feeling  only  by  the  Effect,  whilft 
ignorant  of  the  Caufe,  term  the  Je-ne-fcay-quoy, 
the  unintelligible,  or  the  I  know  not  what; 
and  fuppofe  to  be  a  kind  of  Charm,  or  Inchant- 
ment,  of  which  the  Artift  himfelf  can  give  no 
account. 

BUT 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        333 


BUT  HERE,  I  find,  I  am  tempted  to  do 
what  I  have  my-felf  condemn'd.  Hardly  can 
I  forbear  making  fome  Apology  for  my  frequent 
Recourfe  to  the  Rules  of  common  Artifts,  to 
the  Matters  of  Exercife,  to  the  Academys  of 
Painters,  Statuarys,  and  to  the  reft  of  the  Vir- 
tuofo-T ribe.  But  in  this  I  am  fo  fully  fatisfy'd 
I  have  Reafon  on  my  fide,  that,  let  Cuftom  be 
ever  fo  flrong  againfi  me,  I  had  rather  repair 
to  thefe  inferior  Schools,  to  fearch  for  Truth, 
and  Nature;  than  to  fome  other  Places, 
where  higher  Arts  and  Sciences  are  pro- 
fefs'd. 

I  am  perfuaded  that  to  be  a  Virtuofo  (fo  far 
as  befits  a  Gentleman)  is  a  higher  Hep  towards 
the  becoming  a  Man  of  Virtue  and  good 
Senfe,  than  the  being  what  in  this  Age  we 
call  *  a  Scholar.    For  even  rude  Nature  it-felf, 

in 


*  It  fcems  indeed  fotnewhat  improbable,  that  according  to  modem 
Erudition,  and  as  Science  is  now  distributed,  our  ingenious  and  noble 
Youths  fliou'd  obtain  the  full  advantage  of  a  juft  and  liberal  Education, 
by  uniting  the  Scholar-part  with  that  of  the  real  Gentleman  and  Man  of 
Breeding.  Academys  for  Exercifes,  fo  ufeful  to  the  Publick,  and  effen- 
tial  in  the  formation  of  a  genteel  and  liberal  Ch.uacler,  are  unfortunate'} 
ne<iiett<-d.  Letters  are  indeed  banifh'd,  I  know  not  where,  in  diftant 
CloiRers-and  unfrraflis'd  Cells,  as  our  Poet  has  it,  confin  d  to  the  Com- 
merce and    mean   FeUovj/hfp  of  bearded   Boys.     The  fprightly  Arts  and 

Sciences 


334        ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

in  its  primitive  Simplicity,  is  a  better  Guide 
to  Judgment,  than  improv'd  Sophiftry,  and 
pedantick  Learning.  The  Faciunt,  nee,  intelle- 
gendo,  ut  nihil  intellegant,  will  be  ever  apply 'd 
by  Men  of  Difcernment  and  free  Thought  to 
fuch  Logick,  fuch  Principles,  fuch  Forms  and 
Rudiments  of  Knowledge,  as  are  eflablifli'd  in 
certain  Schools  of  Literature  and  Science.  The 
cafe  is  fufficiently  underflood  even  by  thofe 
who  are  unwilling  to  confefs  the  Truth  of  it. 
Effects  betray  their  Caufes.  And  the  known 
Turn  and  Figure  of  thofe  Underftandings, 
which  fprout  from  Nurferys  of  this  kind,  give 
a  plain  Idea  of  what  is  judg'd  on  this  occa- 
fion.      'Tis  no    wonder,    if  after   fo  wrong  a 

ground 


Sciences  are  fever'd  from  Philofophy  ,whichconfequently  muft  grow  dronifh, 
infipid,  pedantick,  ufelefs,  and  directly  oppofite  to  the  real  Knowledge 
and  Practice  of  the  World  and  Mankind.  Our  Youth  accordingly  feem 
to  have  their  only  Chance  between  two  widely  different  Roads  ;  either 
that  of  Pedantry  and  School- Learning,  which  lies  amidft  the  Dregs  and 
,moft  corrupt  part  of  antient  Literature  ;  or  that  of  the  fajliionable  illiterate 
World,  which  aims  merely  at  the  Character  of  the  f.ne  Gentleman,  and 
takes  up  with  the  Foppery  of  modern  Languages  and  foreign  Wit.  The 
frightful  Afpect  of  the  former  of  thele  Roads  makes  the  Journey  appear 
defperate  and  impracticable.  Hence  that  Averfion  fo  generally  con- 
ceiv'd  againft  a  learned  Character,  wrong  turn'd,  and  hideoufly  fet  out, 
under  fuch  Diffkultys,  and  in  fuch  feeming  Labyrinths,  and  mylterious 
Forms.  As  if  a  Homer  or  a  Xe.nophon  imperfectly  learnt,  in  raw 
Years,  might  not  afterwards,  in  a  riper  Age,  be  fludy'd,  as  well  in  a 
Capital  City  and  amidft  the  World,  as  at  a  College,  or  Country-Town  !  Or  as 
if  a  Plutarch,  a  Tci.  ly,  or  a   Horace    cou'd    not    accompany  a 

young 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       335 

ground  of  Education,  there  appears  to  be  fuch 
need  of  Redrefs,  and  Amendment,  from  that 
excellent  School  which  we  call  the  World.  The 
mere  Amufements  of  Gentlemen  are  found  more 
improving  than  the  profound  Refearches  of 
Pedants.  And  in  the  Management  of  our 
Youth,  we  are  forc'd  to  have  recourfe  to  the 
former;  as  an  Antidote  againfl  the  Genius  pe- 
culiar to  the  latter.  If  the  Formalijis  of  this 
fort  were  erected  into  Patentees,  with  a  fole 
Commiffion  of  Author/hip ;  we  fhou'd  undoubt- 
edly fee  fuch  Writing  in  our  days,  as  wou'd 
either  wholly  wean  us  from  all  Books  in  ge- 
neral, or  at  leafl  from  all  fuch  as  were  the  pro- 
duel  of  our  own  Nation,  under  fuch  a  fubor- 
dinate  and  conforming  Government. 


young  Man  in  liis  Travels,  at  a  Court,  or  (if  occafion  were)  even  in  a  Camp  ! 
The  Cafe  is  not  without  Precedent.  Leifure  is  found  fufficient  for  other 
Reading  of  numerous  modern  Tranflations,  and  worfe  Originals,  of 
Italian  or  French  Authors,  who  are  read  merely  for  Amufement.  The 
French  indeed  may  boaft  of  fome  legitimate  Authors  of  a  juft  Relifh, 
correct,  and  without  any  mixture  of  the  affected  or  fpurious  kinds;  the 
falfe  Tender,  or  the  falfe  Suhlime ;  the  conceited  Jingle,  or  the  ridiculous 
Point.  They  arc  fuch  Genius's  as  have  been  form'd  upon  the  natural 
Model  of  the  Antients,  and  willingly  own  their  Debt  to  thofe  great  Maf- 
ters.  But  for  the  reft,  who  draw  from  another  Fountain,  as  the  Italian 
Authors  in  particular;  they  may  be  reckon'd  no  better  than  the  Cor- 
rupters of  true  Learning  and  Erudition  ;  and  can  indeed  be  relifh'd  by 
thofe  alone,  whole  Education  has  unfortunately  deny'd  'em  the  Fami- 
liarity of  the  noble  Antients,  and  the  Praflice  of  a  better  and  more  na- 
tiualTi/le.     See  above,  />.  286,  kc  and  VOL.  II.  p.   1S4,  185,  186. 

Vol.  I.  Y  How- 


336       A  D  V  I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

However  this  may  prove,  there  can  be  no 
kind  of  Writing  which  relates  to  Men  and  Man- 
ners, where  it  is  not  neceffary  for  the  Author 
*to  underftand  Poetical  and  Moral  Truth,  the 
Beauty  of  Sentiments,  the  Sublime  of  Charac- 
ters ;  and  carry  in  his  Eye,  the  Model  or  Ex- 
emplar of  that  natural  Grace,  which  gives  to 
every  Action  its  attractive  Charm.  If  he  has 
naturally  no  Eye,  or  Ear,  for  thefe  interior 
Numbers;  'tis  not  likely  he  fhou'd  be  able  to 
judge  better  of  that  exterior  Proportion  and  Sym- 
metry of  Compofition,  which  conftitutes  a  le- 
gitimate Piece. 

Cou'd  we  once  convince  our-felves  of  what 
is  in  it-felf  fo   evident;   f  lt  That  in  the  very 
"  nature  of  Things  there  rauft  of  neceffity  be 
11  the  Foundation  of  a  right  andwrongTASTE, 
tu  as  well  in  refpecl  of  inward  Characters  and 
"  Features,  as  of  outward  /Perfon,  Behaviour, 
"  and  Action;"  we  fhou'd  be  far  more  afliam'd 
of  Ignorance  and  wrong  Judgment  in  the  for- 
mer,  than   in    the   latter   of  thefe    Subjects. 
Even  in  the  Arts,  which  are  mere  Imitations 
of  that   outward    Grace    and  Beauty,  we  not 
only  confefs  a  Tajle;  but  make  it  a  part  of  re- 
fin'd  Breeding,  to  difcover,  amidft  the  many 

*  Supra,  p.  20S. 

f  VOL.  III.  p.  164,  179,  8cc. 

falfe 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.      337 

falfe  Manners  and  ill  Styles,  the  true  and  na- 
tural one,  which  reprefents  the  real  Beauty 
and  *  Venus  of  the  kind.  Tis  the  like  moral 
Grace,  and  Venus,  which  difcovering  it- 
felf  in  the  turns  of  Character,  and  the  variety 
of  human  Affefiion,  is  copy'd  by  the  writing 
Artift.  If  he  knows  not  this  Venus,  thefe 
Graces,  nor  wras  ever  ftruck  with  the  Beauty, 
the  Decorum  of  this  inward  kind,  he  can  nei- 
ther paint  advantageoufly  after  the  Life,  nor 
in  a  feign'd  Subjecl,  where  he  has  full  fcope. 
For  f  never  can  he,  on  thefe  Terms,  reprefent 
Merit  and  Virtue,  or  mark  Deformity  and  Ble~ 
mifti.  Never  can  he  with  Juftice  and  true  Pro- 
portion affign  the  Boundarys  of  either  Part, 
or  feparate  the  diltant  Characters.  The  Schemes 
muft  be  defective,  and  the  Draughts  confus'd, 
where  the  Standard  is  weakly  eftablifh'd,  and 
the  Meafure  out  of  ufe.  Such  a  Defigner  who 
has  fo  little  Feeling  of  thefe  Proportions,  fo  little 
Confcioufnefs  of  this  Excellence,  or  thefe  Per- 
fections, will  never  be  found  able  to  defcribe 
a  perfect  Character ;  or,  what  is  more  according 
to  Art  J,  tl  exprefs  the  effect  and  force  of  this 
11  Perfection,  from  the  Refult  of  various  and  mixt 
tc  Characters  of  Life."     And   thus   the  Senfe 


*  Supra,  p.  138,  ire. and  VOL.  III.  p.  182,3,  4,  5,  6.  in  the  Notes. 

i  Supra,  p.  208. 

+  VO  L.  III.  p.  260,  261,  2,  3.  in  the  Notes. 

Y  2  of 


33 S      ADVICE   to  an  Author, 

of  inward  Numbers,  the  knowledge  and  Prac- 
tice of  the  focial  Virtues,  and  the  Familiarity 
and  Favour  of  the  moral  Graces,  are  eifen- 
tial  to  the  Characler  of  a  deferving  Artift,  and 
juft  Favourite  of  the  Muses.  Thus  are  the 
Arts  and  Virtues  mutually  Friends  :  and  thus 
the  -Science  of  Virtuojos  and  that  of  Virtue 
it-felf,  become,  in  a  manner,  one  and  the 
fame. 

One  who  afpires  to  the  Characler  of  a 
Man  of  Breeding  and  Politenefs,  is  careful  to 
form  his  Judgment  of  Arts  and  Sciences  up- 
on right  Models  of  Perfection.  If  he  travels  to 
Rome,  he  inquires  which  are  the  trued  Pieces 
of  Architecture,  the  belt  Remains  of  Statues, 
the  bed  Paintings  of  a  Raphael,  or  a  Ca- 
rache.  However  antiquated,  rough,  or  dif* 
mal  they  may  appear  to  him,  at  firfh  fight ;  he 
refolves  to  view  'em  over  and  over,  till  he  has 
brought  himfelf  to  relifh  'em,  and  finds  their 
hidden  Graces  and  Perfections.  He  takes  particu- 
lar care  to  turn  his  Eye  from  every  thing  which 
is  gaudy,  lufcious,  and  of  a  falfe  Tafte.  Nor  is 
he  lefs  careful  to  turn  his  Ear  from  every  fort 
of  Mufick,  befides  that  which  is  of  the  bed 
Manner,  and  trueft  Harmony. 

'Tw  e  r  e  to  be  wifh'd  we  had  the  fame  re- 
gard to  a  right  Taste  in  Life  and  Manners. 

What 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       339 

What  Mortal  being  once  convinc'd  of  a  diffe- 
rence in  inward  Character,  and  of  a  Preference 
due  to  one  Kind  above  another;  wou'd  not  be 
concern'd  to  make  his  own  the  bell  ?  If  Civi- 
lity and  Humanity  be  a  Taste;  l£ Brutality,  In- 
Jolence,  Riot,  be  in  the  fame  manner  aTASTE; 
who,  if  he  cou'd  reflect,  wou'd  not  chufe  to 
formhimfelfonthe  amiable  and  agreeable,  ra- 
ther than  the  odious  and  perverfe  Model? 
Who  wou'd  not  endeavour  to  force  Nature 
as  well  in  this  refpect,  as  in  what  relates  to  a 
Tajle  or  Judgment  in  other  Arts  and  Sciences  ? 
For  in  each  place  the  Force  on  Nature  is 
us'd  only  for  its  Redrefs.  If  a  natural  good 
Taste  be  not  already  form'd  in  us;  why 
fhou'd  not  we  endeavour  to  form  it,  and  be- 
come natural? — 

44  I  like!      I  fancy!     I  admire!  How? 

44  By  accident:     or  as   I pleafe. 

44  No.  But  I  learn  to  fancy,  to  admire,  to 
44  pleafe ',  as  the  Subjects  themfelves  are  deferv- 
44  ing,  and  can  bear  me  out.  Otherwife,  I 
44  like  at  this  hour,  but  diflike  the  next.  I 
44  fhall  be  weary  of  my  Purfuit,  and,  upon  ex- 
*'  perience,  find  little  *  Pleafiire  in  the  main, 
44  if  my  Choice  and  Judgment  in  it  be  from  no 
44  other  Rule    than   that  fmgle  one,    becaufe  I 


*  Supis,   p.  309.  and  VOL.  II.  p.  227,  Sec. 

Y3  "pleafe, 


340     ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

"  pleafe.     Grotefque   and  monftrous    Figures 
lt  often  pleafe.      Cruel  fpeclacles,    and  Barba- 
tc  ritys  are  alfo  found  to  pleafe,    and,  in  fome 
"  Tempers,   to  pleafe   beyond  all  other  Subjects. 
4t  But  is  this  Pleafure  right?     And  (hall  I  fol- 
"■  low  it,  if  it  prefents?     Not  ftrive  with  it, 
"  or  endeavour  to  prevent  its  growth  or  pre- 
"  valency  in  my  Temper  ? — How  ftands  the 
16  cafe  in  a   more   foft   and  flattering   kind  of 
"  Pleafure  ? — Effeminacy  pleafes  me.     The  In- 
11  dian   Figures   the    Japan-Work,   the  Enamel 
"  flrikes  my  Eye.     The  lufcious  Colours  and 
gloffy  Paint  gain  upon  my  Fancy.   A  French 
or  Flemifli  Style  is  highly  lik'd  by  me,  at  firfl 
fight ;   and  I  purfue  my  liking.      But  what 
enfues? — Do  I  not  for  ever  forfeit  my  good  ' 
ct  Relifh?     How  is    it  poffible  I    (hou'd   thus 
4*  come  to  tafte  the  Beautys  of  an  Italian  Maf- 
il  ter,  or  of  a  Hand  happily  form'd  on  Nature 
"  and  the  Antients?   'Tis  not  by  Wantonnefs 
*■'  and    Humour  that  I  fhali   attain    my  End, 
"  and    arrive    at   the    Enjoyment   I    propofe. 
"  The   Art   it-felf  is  *  fevere:   the  Rules  rigid. 

"■  And 


u 

1 1 


*  Thus  Pliny,  fpeaking  with  a  mafterly  Judgment  of  the  Dignity  of 
the  then  declining  Art  of  Painting  (de  Digiiilaie  Arlis  morieniisj  fhews.it  to 
be  not  only  fevere  in  refpect  of  the  Difcipline,  Style,  Defign,  but  of  the 
Characlers  and  Lives  of  the  noble  Mailers:  not  only  in  the  EHec~t,  but 
even  in  the  very   Materials  of  the  Art,  the  Colours,   Ornaments,   and 

particular 


A  D  V I  C  E !  to  an  Author.        341 

"  And  if  I  expect  the  Knowledge  fhou'd  come 
"  to  rne  by  accident,  or  in  play  ;  I  mail  be 
lt  grofly  deluded,  and  prove  my-felf,  at  bell, 
"  a  Mock-Fir  tuofo,  or  mere  Pedant  of  the 
kind." 


HERE  therefore  we  have  once  again  exhi- 
bited our  moral  Science  in  the  fame  Method 
and  Manner  of  Soliloquy  as  above.  To 
this  Correction  of  Humour  and  Formation  of 
a  Tafle,  our  Reading,  if  it  be  of  the  right  fort, 
muft  principally  contribute.  Whatever  Com- 
pany 


particular  Circumftances  belonging  to  the  Profeffion. — Euphranoris 
Difcipulus  Ant  i  dotus,  diligenlior  quam  numerofior,  et  in  cobribus /eve- 
nts.-  Ni  c  1  a  e  comparator,  el  aliquanlo  prsfertur  At  hinio  n  Maronites, 

Gi.aucionis  Corinthii  Difcipulus,  et  auflerior  colore,  el  in  aujleritale  jucun- 
dior,  ut  in  ipfa  pitlura  Eruditio  eluceat.  *  *  *  Quod  nifi  injuuenta  obiiffet,  nemo 

ei  compararelur. Pa  umae  et  Fil'tus  el  Difcipulus  Aristolaus  efeve. 

rijfnnis  pifloribus  fuit. — — -  Fuil  et  nuper  gravis  ac  fverus  pichr  Amulitjs. 
■*  *  -.-.-  paucjs  du,j  koris  pingcbat,  id  quoqitf  cum  gravitate,  qued  femper  togatus, 
quamquam  inmachinis.  One  of  the  mortal  Symptoms  upon  which  Pliny 
pronounces  the  fare  Death  of  this  noble  Art,  not  long  furvivoT  to  him, 
was  what  belong'd  in  common  to  all  the  other  perifhing  Arts  after  the 
Fall  of  Liberty;  I  mean  the  Luxury  of  the  Roman  Court,  and  the 
Change  of  Tafle  and  Manners  naturally  confequent  to  fuch  a  Change  of 
Government  and  Dominion.  This  excellent,  learned,  and  polite  Cri- 
tick  reprefents  to  us  the  falfe  Tafle  fpringing  from  the  Court  it-felf,  and 
from  that  Opulence,  Splendor,  and  Affectation  of  Magnificence  and  Ex- 
pence  proper  to  the  place.  Thus  in  the  Statuary  and  Architecture  then 
in  vogue,  nothing  cou'd  be  admird  befide  what  was  coaly  in  the  mere 

Y  4  Matter 


342       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

pany  we  keep ;  or  however  polite  and  agree- 
able their  Characters  may  be,  with  whom  we 
converfe,  or  correfpond:  if  the  Authors  we 
read  are  of  another  kind,  we  fhall  find  our 
Palat  ftrangely  turnd  their  way.  We  are  the 
unhappier  in  this  refpecl,  for  being  Scholars; 
if  our  Studys  be  ill  chofen.  Nor  can  I,  for  this 
reafon,  think  it  proper  to  call  a  Man  well-read 
who  reads  many  Authors;  fmce  he  muft  of  ne- 
ceiTity  have  more  ill  Models,  than  good;  and 
be  more  fluff  d  with  Bombaft,  ill  Fancy,   and 


Matter  or  the  Subflance  of  the  Work.  Precious  Rock,  rich  Metal,  glit- 
tering Stones,  and  other  lufcious  Wire,  poifonous  to  Art,  came  every 
day  more  into  requefl,  and  were  impos'd,  as  neceffary  Materials,  on  the 
belt  Mafters.  'Twas  in  favour  of  thefe  Court-Beautys  and  gaudy  Ap- 
pearances, that  all  good  Drawing,  juft  Defign,  and  Truth  of  Work  began 
to  be  defpis'd.  Care  was  taken  to  procure  from  dillaut  Parts,  the  mod 
gorgeous  fplendid  Colours,  of  the  moll  coflly  Growth  or  Compofition: 
not  fuch  as  had  been  us'd  by  Apelles  and  the  great  Mafters,  who  are 
juflly  fevere,  loyal,  and  faithful  to  their  Art.  This  newer  Colouring  our 
Critick  calls  the  florid  hind.  The  Materials  were  too  rich  to  be  fur- 
nifh'd  bv  the  Painter,  but  were  befpoke  or  furnifh'd  at  the  coil  of  the 
Perfon  who  employ  d  him  ;  (qjws  Damiuus  pingenti  praflat.)  The  other 
he  calls  the  aiifl ere  kind.  And  thus  (fays  he)  "  Rerum,  non  Animi  pretiis 
*•'  excubatur;  The  Cofl,  and  not  the  Life,  and  Art,  is  lludy'd."  He  {hews, 
on  the  contrary,  what  care  Apelles  took  to  fubdue  the  florid  Colours, 
by  a  darkening  Varnifh. ;  uleadtm  res  (fays  he)  nimisfloridis  coloribus  Aujle- 
rilatem  occulle  darei.  And  he  fays  juft  before,  of  fome  of  the  fineft  Pieces 
of  Apelles,  "'That  they  were  wrought  in  four  Colours  only."  So 
great  and  venerable  was  SIMPLICITY  held  among  the  Antients, 
I  and  fo  certain  was  the  Ruin  of  all  true  Elegance  in  Life  or  Art,  where 
this  Miftrcfs  was  once  quitted  or  contemn'd  !  See  Pliny,  Lib.  35,  Sec 
alfo  above. p.  144.  in  the  Notes  ;   and  p.  22  2. 

wry 


ADVICE  to  an  Author,         343 

wry  Thought;   than    fill'd   with  folid  Senfe, 
and  jufl  Imagination. 

But  notwithftanding  this  hazard  of  our 
Tqfte,  from  a  Multiplicity  of  Reading ;  we  are 
not,  it  feems,  the  leafl  fcrupulous  in  our  choice 
of  fubjecl:.  We  read  whatever  comes  next  us. 
What  was  firft  put  into  our  hand,  when  we 
were  young,  ferves  us  afterwards  for  ferious 
Study,  and  wife  Refearch,  when  we  are  old. 
We  are  many  of  us,  indeed,  fo  grave  as  to 
continue  this  Exercife  of  Youth  thro'  our  re- 
maining Life.  The  exercifmg- Authors  of  this 
kind  have  been  above  *  defcrib'd,  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  Treatife.  The  Manner  of  Ex- 
ercife is  call'd  Meditation,  and  is  of  a  fort  fo 
folemn  and  profound,  that  we  dare  not  fo 
much  as  thorowly  examine  the  Subject  on 
which  we  are  bid  to  meditate.  This  is  a  fort 
of  77//7^-JR.eading,  in  which  a  Taste  is  not 
permitted.  How  little  foever  we  take  of  this 
Diet;  'tis  fufficient  to  give  full  Exercife  to 
our  grave  Humour,  and  allay  the  Appetite  to- 
wards further  Refearch  and  folid  Contempla- 
tion. The  reft  is  Holiday,  Diverfion,  Play, 
and  Fancy.  We  reject  all  Rule:  as  thinking 
it  an  Injury  to  our  Diverfions,  to  have  regard 
to  Truth  or  Mature:  without  which,  however, 


*Pag.  16  j,  165,  6-c. 

nothing 


344       A  &  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

nothing  can  be  truly  agreeable,  or  entertain- 
ing; much  lefs,  inftruclive,  or  improving. 
Thro'  a  certain  *  Surfeit  taken  in  a  wrong 
kind  of  Jerious  Reading,  we  apply  our-felves, 
with  full  content,  to  the  moft  ridiculous.  The 
more  remote  our  Pattern  is  from  any  thing 
moral  or  profitable ;  the  more  Freedom  and 
Satisfaction  we  find  in  it.  We  care  not  how 
Gothick  or  Barbarous  our  Models  are;  what  ill- 
defign'd  or  monftrous  Figures  we  view;  or 
what  falfe  Proportions  we  trace,  or  fee  defcribd 
in  Hiftory,  Romance,  or  Fi&ion.  And  thus 
our  Eye  and  Ear  is  loft.  Our  Relifli  or  Tqjle 
mult  of  neceflity  grow  barbarous,  whilft  Bar- 
barian Cuftoms,  Savage  Manners,  Indian  AYars, 
and  Wonders  of  the  Terra  Incognita,  employ 
our  leifure  Hours,  and  are  the  chief  Materials 
to  furnifh  out  a  Library. 

These  are  in  our  prefent  Days,  what  Books 
cj  Chivalry  were,  in  thofe  of  our  Forefathers, 
I  know  not  what  Faith  our  valiant  Anceftors 
may  have  had  in  the  Storys  of  their  Giants, 
their  Dragons,  and  St.  George's.  But  for 
our  Faith  indeed,  as  well  as  our  Tqjle,  in  this 
other  way  of  reading;  I  muft  confefs  I  can't 
confider  it,  without  Aftonifhment. 


*  Supra%}>.  71,72.  * 

It 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        345 

It  mull  certainly  be   fomething  elfe  than 
Incredulity,  which  fafhions  the  Tafte  and  Judg- 
ment of  many  Gentlemen,  whom  we  hearcen- 
fur'd  as  Atheijls,  for  attempting  to  philofophize 
after  a  newer  manner  than  any  known  of  late. 
For  my  own   part,    I  have  ever  thought  this 
fort  of  Men  to  be  in  general  more  credulous, 
tho  after  another  manner,  than  the  mere  Vul- 
gar.     Befides  what    I   have  obferv'd  in  Con- 
verfation  with   the  Men  of  this  Character,  I 
can  produce    many    anathematiz'd    Authors, 
who  if  they  want  a  true  Ifraclitijli  Faith,  can 
make  amends  by  a  Chinefe  or  Indian  one.      If 
They  are  fhort  in  Syria  or   the  Palcjline;  they 
have  their   full  meafure   in  America,  or  Japan. 
Hiflorys  of  Incas  or  Iroquois,  written  by  Fryers 
and  Miflionarys,  Pirates  and  Renegades,  Sea- 
Captains  and  trufty  Travellers,   pafs    for  au- 
thentick  Records,  and   are   canonical  with  the 
Virtuojos  of  this  fort.     Tho  Chrijlian  Miracles 
may  not  fo  well  fatisfy  'em;  they  dwell  with 
the  higheft  Contentment  on    the  Prodigys  of 
MooriJJi  and  Pagan  Countrys.     They  have  far 
more  Pleafure  in  hearing  the  monftrous  Ac- 
counts of  monftrous  Men,  and  Manners;  than 
the  politeft  and  befl  Narrations  of  the  Affairs, 
the  Governments,  and  Lives  of  the  wifefl  and 
mod  poliftYd  People. 

Tis 


346     ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

'Tis  the  fame  Tq/le  which  makes  us  prefer 
a  Turkifh  Hi  (lory  to  a  Grecian,  or  a  Roman ;  an 
Ariosto  to  a  Virgil  ;  and  a  Romance,  or 
Novel,  to  an  Iliad.  We  have  no  regard  to  the 
Character  or  Genius  of  our  Author :  nor  are 
fo  far  curious,  as  to  obferve  how  able  he  is  in 
the  Judgment  of  Faffs,  or  how  ingenious  in 
the  Texture  of  his  Lyes.  For  Faffs  unably  re- 
lated, tho  with  the  greateft  Sincerity,  and  good 
Faith,  may  prove  the  worft  fort  of  Deceit : 
And  mere  Lyes,  judicioufly  compos'd,  can 
teach  us  the  *  Truth  of  Things,  beyond  any 
other  manner.  But  to  amufe  our-felves  with 
fuch  Authors  as  neither  know  how  to  lye,  nor 
tell  truth,  difcovers  a  Taste,  which  methinks 
one  fhou'd  not  be  apt  to  envy.  Yet  fo  en- 
chanted we  are  with  the  travelling;  Memoirs  of 
any  cafual  Adventurer;  that  be  his  Character, 
or  Genius,  what  it  will,  we  have  no  fooner 
turn'd  over  a  Page  or  two,  than  we  begin  to 
interefl  our-felves  highly  in  his  Affairs,  No 
fooner  has  he  taken  Shipping  at  the  Mouth 
of  the  Thames,  or  fent  his  Baggage  before  him 
to  Grave/end,  or  Buoy  in  the  JVore,  than  ffrait  our 


*  The  greateft  of  Criticks  fays  of  the  greateft  Poet,  when  he  extols 
him  the  higheft,  "  That  above  all  others  he  underftood  hoioTO  LYE: 
lt  A£§'iS'a%i  £s  ^aA*j-a  "Of*rj^  xj  -ra?  a,Xht>$  -^tv%  hiyetv  at;  $h.  '  Arift.  de 
Poetica,  cap.  24. See  VOL.  III.  p.  260.  in  the  Notes. 

Attention 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       347 

Attention  is  earneftly  taken  up.  If  in  order 
to  his  more  diftant  Travels,  he  takes  fome 
Part  of  Europe  in  his  way;  we  can  with  pa- 
tience hear  of  Inns  and  Ordinarys,  Paflage- 
Boats  andFerrys,  foul  and  fair  Weather;  with 
all  the  Particulars  of  the  Authors  Diet,  Habit 
of  Body,  his  perfonal  Dangers  and  Mifchances, 
on  Land,  and  Sea.  And  thus,  full  of  defire 
and  hope,  we  accompany  him,  till  he  enters 
on  his  great  Scene  of  Aclion,  and  begins  by 
the  Defcription  of  fome  enormous  Fifti  or  Beajl. 
From  monftrous  Brutes  he  proceeds  to  yet  more 
monfirous  Men.  For  in  this  Race  of  Authors, 
he  is  ever  compleateft,  and  of  the  firft  Rank, 
who  is  able  to  fpeak  of  Things  the  moft  unna- 
tural and  monftrous. 

This  Humour  our  *  old  TragickPoet  feems 
to  have  difcover'd.  He  hit  our  Tqfte  in  giv- 
ing us  a  Moorijh  Hero,  full  fraught  with  Pro- 
digy: a  wondrous  Story-teller  I  But  for  the  at- 
tentive Part,  the  Poet  chofe  to  give  it  to  Wo- 
man-kind. What  paflionate  Reader  of  Tra- 
vels, or  Student  in  the  prodigious  Sciences,  can 
refufe  to  pity  that  fair  Lady,  who  fell  in  Love 
with  the  miraculous  Moor  ;  efpecially  confider- 
ing  with  what  futable  grace  fuch  a  Lover 
cou'd  relate  the   mod   monftrous  Adventures, 


*  Shakespear. 

and 


348       A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

and  fatisfy  the  wondring  Appetite  with  the 
moft  wondrous  Tales  ;  Wherein  (fays  the  Hero- 
Traveller) 

Of  Antars  vafl,  and  Defarts  idle, 

It  was  my  Hint  to  fpeak: 

And  of  the  Cannibals  that  each  other  eat  I 

The  Anthropophagie!   and  Men  whoje  Heads 

Do  grow  beneath  their  Shoulders.     Theje  to  hear 

Woud  Desdemona  Jerioufly  incline. 

Seriously,  'twas  a  woful  Tale !  unfit,  one 
wou'd  think,  to  win  a  tender  Fair-one.  It's 
true,  the  Poet  fufficiently  condemns  her  Fancy, 
and  makes  her  (poor  Lady!)  pay  dearly  for  it, 
in  the  end.  But  why,  amongft  his  Greek 
Names,  he  fhou'd  have  chofen  one  which  de- 
noted the  Lady  Superjlitious,  I  can't  imagine: 
unlefs  as  Poets  are  fometimes  Prophets  too,  he 
fhou'd  figuratively,  under  this  dark  Type,  have 
reprefented  to  us,  That  about  a  hundred  Years 
after  his  Time,  the  Fair  Sex  of  this  Ifland 
fhou'd,  by  other  monftrous  Tales,  be  fo  fe- 
duc'd,  as  to  turn  their  Favour  chiefly  on  the 
Perfons  of  the  Tale-tellers ;  and  change  their 
natural  Inclination  for  fair,  candid,  and  cour- 
teous Knights,  into  a  Paflion  for  a  myflerious 
Race  of  black  Enchanters  :  fuch  as  of  old  were 
J  aid  to  creep  into  Houjes,  and  lead  captive  filly 
Women . 

'Tis 


A  D  V  I  C  E   to  an  Author.       349 

'Tis  certain  there  is  a  very  great  Affinity 
between  the  Paffion  of  Superjlition,  and  that  of 
Tales.  The  Love  of  ftrange  Narrations,  and 
the  ardent  Appetite  towards  unnatural  Objects, 
has  a  near  Alliance  with  the  like  Appetite 
towards  the  fuper  natural  kind,  fuch  as  arecall'd 
prodigious  and  of  dire  Omen.  For  fo  the  Mind 
forebodes,  on  every  fuch  unufual  Sight  or  Hear- 
ing. Fate,  Defliny,  or  the  Anger  of  Heaven, 
feems  denoted,  and  as  it  were  delineated,  by 
the  monftrous  Birth,  the  horrid  Facl,  or  dire 
Event.  For  this  reafon  the  very  Perfons  of 
fuch  Relators  or  Tale-tellers,  with  a  fmall  help 
of  difmal  Habit,  futable  Countenance  and 
Tone,  become  facred  and  tremendous  in  the 
Eyes  of  Mortals,  who  are  thus  addicled  from 
their  Youth.  The  tender  Virgins,  lofmg  their 
natural  Softnefs,  affume  this  tragick  Paffion, 
of  which  they  are  highly  fufceptible,  efpecially 
when  a  futable  kind  of  Eloquence  and  Aclion 
attends  the  Characlerof  the  Narrator.  A  thou- 
fand  Desdemona's  are  then  ready  to  prefent 
themfelves,  and  wou'd  frankly  refign  Fathers, 
Relations,  Country-men,  and  Country  it-felf, 
to  follow  the  Fortunes  of  a  Hero  of  the  black 
Tribe. 

But  whatever  monftrous    Zeal,    or  fuper- 
ftitious  Paffion,  the  Poet  might  foretel,  either 

in 


350       ADVICE    to  an  Author. 

in  the  Gentlemen,  Ladys,  or  common  People, 
of  an  after  Age;  'tis  certain  that  as  to  Books, 
the  fame  MooriJJi  Fancy,  in  its  plain  and  literal 
fenfe,  prevails  flrongly  at  this  prefent  time. 
Monfters  and  Monfter-Lands  were  never  more 
in  requeft:  And  we  may  often  fee  a  Philofo- 
pher,  or  a  Wit,  run  a  Tale-gathering  in  thofe 
idle  Dejarts,  as  familiarly  as  the  fillieft  Woman, 
or  the  mereft  Boy. 


ONE  WOU'D  imagine  that  *  our  Philo- 
fophical  Writers,  who  pretend  to  treat  of  Morals, 

fliou'd 


,:  Confideringwhat  has  been  fo  often  faid  on  this  Subject  of  Philofophy, 

Learning  and  the  Sifter-  Arts,   after  that  antient  Model    which  has  fince 

been'fo  much  corrupted  ;  it  may  not  be  amifs  perhaps  to  hear  the  Confef- 

fion  of  one  of  the  greateft  and  moft  learned  of  Moderns,  upon  this  Head. 

"  Scilicet  affenfuri  ifti  font  veteribus  Sapientibus,  Poeticam  tvi  aspolaW  <?'- 

*'  7\octo<P'kx,<;  wa.\  avwciov,  feveriffima;  PhilofophiiEContubernalem  effe  ;  quos 

"  videmus  omni  cura  morum  pofthabita,  qu<s  vera  Philojophia  ijl,  in  nefcio  qui- 

"  bus  argumentathinculis,  in  nugis  fophifticis,  in  puerilibus  argutiolis,  ko- 

"  CoTj    denique  'fwpalioi;  t£j  Sia>,ncliKvt,  quod fua  jam  estate  Euphiades  The- 

"  miftius  conquerebalur,JummamJapienliamponere!  Scilicet facundia  persii 

1 1  virile  robur,  aut  recondila  ilia  eruditio  eos  capiet,  quibus  priftinam  barbariem 

41  mordicus  retinere,  et  in  Ankquitatis    totius  ignoralione  verfari,  potius  videlur 

'  effe  ac  melius,  quam  pqffejjionem  litcrarmn,  olimfvmilifocordia  extintfarum, 

'  memoria  vero palrum  magno  Dei  immortalis  beneficio  in  luccm  revocalarum  ex 

'  alia  hominum  cb!ivione,fibi  vindicare,  ctprofua  quemquevirili  pqfteris  affere- 

'  re !  *   *   *   *   *   *   *   Scribit  vero   arrianus,  fapientiffimumfenem  il- 

'  lum  epictetum,    impielatis  in  Deum  eos  vifimulaffe,   qui  in  Phi/ofoph'ue 

l,,Jiudiis  rnt  «7raJy!/tf»x?ji>  $vv»uiv,Jive  Ser mortis  curam  tanquam  rem  levem  aj'pcr- 

' '  narenln : 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        351 

fhou'd  far  out-do  mere  Poets,  in  recommend- 
ing Virtue,  and  reprefenting  what  was  fair 
and  amiable  in  human  Actions.  One  wou'd 
imagine,    that   if  they    turn'd   their    Eye   to- 


"  narentur  :   quoniam  quidern,  aiebat  vir  divinus,  ctatQSs  irtv  dvfywira  iu\  ma^a 
"  r5  Ga'a^agiTa?  «T»^a^  etv.   En  Qermanum  Philbfophum  !  En  vocem  auream  .' 
41  JVcc  minus  memorabile  Synefli  Philof ophi  pne/tantifjimi  vaticinlum  trifti  even- 
"  Jm  confirmatum,  quod  mullo  ante  ab  ipfo  eft  edhum,  cumrationemfudiorumfi- 
"  mililer  perverti  ab  eequalibus  fuis  cerneret.      D if pulans  enim  contra  eos  qui  ai 
41  fanblijjimte  Theologies  Jiudia  Infantiam  el  Sophifiicenprofolidaeruditione  af- 
"  fervent,  fa'idicam  banc  quqfifortem  edidit.      KivSvv®-;  inquit,  «'?  aQva&ov  ti- 
41  >/x  q».vx%ist;  l[A7riaov]cc:TiiT8$  SiztpQu^waS    Pcriculum  eft  ne  ejufmodi  homines 
"  in  abyffum  quandam  ineptiarum  delapji  penilus  corrumpantur .    Utinam  defuiffet 
**  huic    Oracuh  fides.      Sed  profeclo,   depravalioni  UU,  et  hujus  Scientiarum 
44  Regin<e,  et  omnium  aliarum,  que  pofiea  accicLt,  occafionem  quidem  Gottlio- 
*'  rum  et  Alanorum  vwafioncs  prcsbuerunt :  at  caufa  illius  propior  ac  vera  eft, 
"  ratio Jiudiorum  peiverfa,  et  in  liberalibus  Difciplinis  prava  Inflitutio,  ac  Lin- 
*'  guarumfimul etuniverfe  litera'.ura  mclioris  ignoratio .      *****     Atqui 
%i  non  in  eum  eerie  f.nem  viri  magni  et  pnecepta  et  cxempla  virtulum  memories 
"  commendala  ad  pcftcros  tra?ifmiferunt,  ut  ad  inanem    aurium  obleclaiionem,  vel 
"  jaStufionem  vanam  inuiifis  eruditionis,   ea  cognofceremus  :  verumut  fuis  7ios 
"  lucubrationibus   cxciuire.it  ad  ejfodienda  et  in  actum  producenda  RECTI 
"  HO  N EST ' Ique  femina;  quiz  cum  a   JVatura  accepijfemus,   titiis    tamen 
"  circumfufa,  et  iantum  non  obncta,fic  in  noftris  animis,  nifi  cuttura  melior  ac- 
"  cedat,  latent,  qziafi  in  a!i::m  quendam  Jcrobem penifus  defojfa.      Hue  fpeSlanl 
41  tot  ilia  Volumina  quiz  de  Alorali  Difciplina  Philqfopfii  confecerunt.      Tendit 
codem  et  Gr^corum  Latinorum^z<r  Poeiarum  plcraque  manus ;  fed  itineri- 
*'  bus  diverfis.      Qiwt  Junt  enim  Poetarum  genera  ifunt  autem   quamplurima)  tot 
*'  fere  diverticula  etviarum  ambages  eo  dv.centium."   If.  Cafaub.  in  Preffattone 
Commentarii  ad  Perf.  See  above,  pag.   190,  igi,  8cc.  and  207,  SoS,  286. 
and  2gS,  299.   and  333,    8cc.   and  33S,  Sec.    And  V  O  L.  III.  p.  61, 
78,  79,  Sec.  and  239,  240,  241.  in  the  Notes. 


Vol.   I.  Z  wards 


352         A  D  V I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

wards  remote  Countrys  (of  which  they  affect 
fo  much  to  fpeak)  they  ftiou'd  fearch  for  that 
Simplicity  of  Manners,  and  Innocence  of  Be- 
haviour, which  has  been  often  known  among 
mere  Savages;  ere  they  were  corrupted  by  our 
Commerce,  and,  by  fad  Example,  inftrucled 
in  all  kinds  of  Treachery  and  Inhumanity. 
'Twou'd  be  of  advantage  to  us,  to  hear  the 
Caufe  of  this  flrange  Corruption  in  ourfelves, 
and  be  made  to  confider  of  our  Deviation  from 
Nature,  and  from  that  juft  Purity  of  Manners 
which  might  be  expecled,  efpecially  from  a 
People  fo  aflifted  and  enlighten'd  by  Religion. 
For  who  wou'd  not  naturally  expecl  more  Juf- 
tice,  Fidelity,  Temperance,  and  Honefty,  from 
Chrijlians,  than  from  Mahometans,  or  mere  Pa- 
gans?  But  fo  far  are  our  modern  Moralifts  from 
condemning  any  unnatural  Vices,  or  corrupt 
Manners,  whether  in  our  own  or  foreign  Cli- 
mates, that  they  wou'd  have  Vice  it-felf  ap- 
pear as  natural  as  Virtue;  and  from  the 
word  Examples,  wou'd  reprefent  to  us,  "That 
"  all  Actions  are  naturally  indifferent;  that  they 
lt  have  no  Note  or  Character  of  Good,  or  111, 
14  in  them/elves ;  but  are  diftinguifh'd  by  mere 
"Fashion,  Law,  or  arbitrary  Decree." 
Wonderful  Philofophy  !  rais'd  from  the  Dregs 
of  an  illiterate  mean  kind,  which  was  ever  de- 
fpis'd  among  the  great  Antients,  and  rejected 

by 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       353 

by  all  Men  of  Aclion,  or  found  Erudition ; 
but,  in  thefe  Ages,  imperfeclly  copy'd  from 
the  Original,  and,  with  much  Difadvantage, 
imitated  and  affum'd,  in  common,  both  by 
devout  and  indevout  attempters  in  the  moral 
kind. 

Shou'd  a  Writer  upon  Mufick,  addreffing 
himfelf  to  the  Students  and  Lovers  of  the  Art, 
declare  to  'em,  4C  That  the  Meafure  or  Rule 
tk  of  Harmony  was  Caprice  or  Will,  Humour  or 
"  Fajliion;'  'tis  not  very  likely  he  fhou'd  be 
heard  with  great  Attention,  or  treated  with 
real  Gravity.  ForMARMONY  is  Harmony  by 
Nature,  let  Men  judge  ever  fo  ridiculoufly  of 
Mufick.  So  is  Symmetry  and  Proportion  founded 
ftill  in  Nature,  let  Mens  Fancy  prove  ever  fo 
barbarous,  or  their  Fafhions  ever  fo  Gothick 
in  their  Architecture,  Sculpture,  or  what- 
ever other  defigning  Art.  'Tis  the  fame  cafe, 
where  Life  and  Manners  are  concern'd. 
Virtue  has  the  fame  fix'd  Standard.  The  fame 
Numbers,  Harmony,  and  Proportion  will  have 
place inMoRALS;  and  are  difcoverable  in  the 
Characters  and  Affections  of  Mankind ;  in  which 
are  laid  the  juft  Foundations  of  an  Art  and 
Science,  fuperior  to  every  other  of  human 
Practice  and  Comprehenfion. 

Z  2  This, 


354      A  DV I  C  E  to  an  Author. 

This,  I  fuppofe  therefore,  is  highly  necef- 
fary,  that  a  Writer  fhou'd  comprehend.  For 
Things  are  ftubborn,  and  will  not  be  as  we 
fancy  'em,  or  as  the  Fafhion  varys,  but  as  they 
(land  in  Nature.  Now  whether  the  Writer 
be  Poet,  Philofopher,  or  of  whatever  kind;  he  is 
in  truth  no  other  than  a  Copift  after  Nature. 
His  Style  may  be  differently  futed  to  the  diffe- 
rent Times  he  lives  in,  or  to  the  different  Hu- 
mour of  his  Age  or  Nation  :  His  Manner,  his 
Drefs,  his  Colouring  may  vary.  But  if  his 
Drawing  be  uncorrecl,  or  his  Dejign  contrary 
to  Nature  ;  his  Piece  will  be  found  ridiculous, 
when  it  comes  thorowly  to  be  examin'd  For 
Nature  will  not  be  mock'd.  The  Prepoffeffion 
againft  her  can  never  be  very  lading.  Her  De- 
crees and  Infiincis  are  powerful;  and  her  Senti- 
ments in-bred.  She  has  a  ftrong  Party  abroad; 
and  as  ftrong  a  one  within  our-felves  :  And  when 
any  Slight  is  put  upon  her,  fhe  can  foon 
turn  the  Reproach,  and  make  large  R.eprifals 
on  the  Tajle  and  Judgment  of  her  Antagonifls. 

Whatever  Philofopher,  Ci  itiek,  or  Author  is 
convinc'd  of  this  Prerogative  of  Nature,  will  ea- 
hly  be  perfuaded  to  apply  himfelf  to  the  great 
Work  of  reforming  his  Taste  ;  which  he  will 
have  reafon  to  fufpecl,  if  he  be  not  fuch  a  one 
as  has  deliberately   endeavour'd  to  frame  it  by 

the 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.        355 

the  juft  Standard  of  Nature.  Whether  this  be 
his  Cafe,  he  will  eafily  difcover,  by  appealing 
to  his  Memory.  For  Cvftom  and  Fajhion  are 
powerful  Seducers :  And  he  muff  of  neceflity 
have  fought  hard  againft  thefe,  to  have  at- 
tain'd  that  Juftnefs  of  Tqfte,  which  is  requir'd 
in  one  who  pretends  tofollvw  Nature,  But  if  no 
fuch  Conflict  can  be  call'd  to  mind ;  'tis  a  cer- 
tain token  that  the  Party  has  his  Tajie  very 
little  different  from  the  vulvar.  And  on  this 
account  he  fhou'd  inftantly  betake  himfelf  to 
the  wholefom  Practice  recommended  in  this 
Treatife.  He  fhou'd  fet  afoot  the  powerfullefl 
Facultys  of  his  Mind,  and  aflemble  the  beft 
Forces  of  his  Wit  and  Judgment,  in  order  to 
make  a  formal  Defcent  on  the  Territorys  of 
the  Heart:  refolving  to  decline  no  Combat,  nor 
hearken  to  any  Terms,  till  he  had  pierc'd  in- 
to its  inmoft  Provinces,  and  reach'd  the  Seat 
of  Empire.  No  treatys  fhou'd  amufe  him;  no 
Advantages  lead  him  afide.  All  other  Specu- 
lations fhou'd  be  fufpended,  all  other  Myfterys 
refign'd;  till  this  neceffary  Campaign  was 
made,  and  thefe  inward  Conflicts  learnt;  by 
which  he  wou'd  be  able  to  gain  at  leaft  fome 
tolerable  infight  into  himfelf,  and  Knowledge 
of  his  own  natural  Principles. 

IT  MAY  here    perhaps  be  thought,  that 
notwithstanding  the  particular  Advice  we  have 

given 


356       A  D  VIC  E  to  an  Author. 

given,  in  relation  to  the  forming  of  a  Taste 
in  natural  Characters  and  Manners ;  we  are 
(till  defective  in  our  Performance,  whilft  we  are 
filent  on  flip ernatural  Cafes,  and  bring  not  in- 
to our  confideration  the  Manners  and  Cha- 
racters deliver'd  us  in  Holy  Writ.  But  this  Ob- 
jection will  foon  vanifh,  when  we  confider, 
that  there  can  be  no  Rules  given  by  human 
Wit,  to  that  which  was  never  humanly  con- 
ceivd,   but  divinely  dictated,   and  infpir'd. 

For  this  Reafon,  'twou'd  be  in  vain  for 
any  *Poet,  or  ingenious  Author,  to  form  his 
Characters,  after  the  Models  of  our  facred 
Penmen.  And  whatever  certain  Criticks  may 
have  advanc  d  concerning  the  Structure  of  a 
heroick  Poem  of  this  kind  ;  I  will  be  bold  to 
prophefy,  that  the  Succefs  will  never  be  an- 
fwerable  to  Expectation. 

It  mud  be  own'd,  that  in  our  facred  Hifto- 
ry  wre  have  both  Leaders,  Conquerors,  Foun- 
ders of  Nations,  Deliverers,  and  Patriots,  who, 
even  in  a  human  Senfe,  are  no  way  behind 
the  chief  of  thofe  fo  much  celebrated  by  the 
Antients.  There  is  nothing  in  the  Story  of 
jEneas,  which  is  not  equal'd  or  exceeded  by 
aJosHUA  or  a  Moses.  But  as  illuflrious  as 
are  the  Acts  of  thefe  facred  Chiefs,  'twou'd  be 

*VOL.  III.  p.  240,  241.  in  the  Notes. 

0  '  hard 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  357 

hard  to  copy  them  in  juft  Heroick.  'Twou'd 
be  hard  to  give  to  many  of  'em  that  grateful 
Air,  which  is  neceffary  to  render  'em  natu- 
rally pleafing  to  Mankind;  according  to  the 
Idea  Men  are  univerfally  found  to  have  of 
Heroifm,   and  Generofity. 

Notwithstanding  the  pious  Endea- 
vours which,  as  devout  Chriftians,  we  may 
have  usd  in  order  to  feparate  ourfelves  from 
the  Interefts  of  mere  Heathens  and  Infidels'?  not- 
withnanding  the  true  pains  we  may  have  taken, 
to  arm  our  Hearts  in  behalf  of  a  chofen  People, 
againft  their  neighbouring  Nations,  of  a  falfe 
Religion,  and  Worfhip;  there  will  be  (till 
found  fuch  a  Partiality  remaining  in  us,  to- 
wards Creatures  of  the  fame  Make  and  Figure 
with  our-felves,  as  will  hinder  us  from  view- 
ing with  Satisfaction  the  Punifhments  inflicled 
by  human  Hands  on  fuch  Aliens  and  Idolaters. 

In  mere  Poetry,  and  the  Pieces  of  Wit  and 
Literature,  there  is  a  Liberty  of  Thought  and 
Eafmefs  of  Humour  indulg'd  to  us,  in  which 
we  are  not  fo  well  able  to  contemplate  the  Di- 
vine Judgments,  and  fee  clearly  into  the  Juf- 
tice  of  thofe  Ways',  which  are  declar'd  to  be 
fo  far  from  our  Ways,  and  above  our  higheft 
Thoughts  or  Underftandings.  In  fuch  a  Si- 
tuation of  Mind,  we  can  hardly  endure  to  fee 

Heathen 


358     A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

Heathen  treated  as  Heathen,  and  the  Faithful 
made  the  Executioners  of  the  Divine  Wrath. 
There  is  a  certain  perverfe  Humanity  in  us, 
which  inwardly  refifts  the  Divine  Commiflion, 
tho  ever  fo  plainly  reveal'd.  The  Wit  of  the 
heft  Poet  is  not  fufficient  to  reconcile  us  to  the 
Campaign  of  a  Joshua,  or  the  Retreat  of  a 
Moses,  by  the  afliftance  of  an  Egyptian 
Loan.  Nor  will  it  be  poffible,  by  the  Mufes 
Art,  to  make  that  Royal  Hero  appear  amiable 
in  human  Eyes,  who  found  fuch  favour  in  the 
Eye  of  Heaven.  Such  are  mere  human  Hearts; 
that  they  can  hardly  find  the  leaft  Sympathy 
with  that  only  one  which  had  the  Character 
of  being  after  the  Pattern  of  the  Almighty's. 

'Tis  apparent  therefore  that  the  Manners, 
Actions,  and  Characters  of  Sacred  Writ,  are  in 
no  wife  the  proper  Subjecl  of  other  Authors 
than  Divines  themfelves.  They  are  Matters 
incomprehenfible  in  Philofophy :  They  are 
above  the  pitch  of  the  mere  human  Hijiorian, 
the  Politician,  or  the  Aloralift;  and  are  too  fa- 
cred  to  be  fubmitted  to  the  Poet's  Fancy,  when 
infpir'd  by  no  other  Spirit  than  that  of  his  pro- 
fane Miftrefles,  the  Muses. 

I  shou'd  be  unwilling  to  examine  rigo- 
roufly  the   Performance  of  our  great  *  Poet, 

*  Milton. 

who 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.       359 

\yho  fung  fo  pioufly  the  Fall  of  Man.  The  War 
in  Heaven,  and  the  Catajircphe  of  the  original 
Pair  from  whom  the  Generations  of  Mankind 
were  propagated,  are  Matters  fo  abflrufely  re- 
veal'd,  and  with  fuch  a  refemblance  of  Mytho- 
logy, that  they  can  more  eafily  bear  what  fi- 
gurative Conftruction  or  fantaflick  Turn  the  Po- 
et may  think  fit  to  give  'em.  But  fhou'd  he 
venture  farther,  into  the  Lives  and  Characters 
of  the  Patriarchs,  the  holy  Matrons,  Heroes 
and  Heroines  of  the  chofen  Seed ;  fhou'd  he 
employ  the  facred  Machine,  the  Exhibitions 
and  Interventions  of  Divinity,  according  to 
Holy  Writ,  to  fupport  the  Action  of  his  Piece; 
he  wou'd  foon  find  the  Weaknefs  of  his  pre- 
tended Orthodox  Muse,  and  prove  how  little 
thofe  Divine  Patterns  were  capable  of  human 
Imitation,  or  of  being  rais'd  to  any  other  Ma- 
jefly,  or  Sublime,  than  that  in  which  they  ori- 
ginally appear. 

The  Theology,  or  T  h  e  o  g  o  n  y,  of  the  Hea- 
thens cou'd  admit  of  fuch  different  Turns  and 
figurative  Expreffions,  as  futed  the  Fancy  and 
Judgment  of  each  Philosopher  or  Poet.  But 
the  Purity  of  our  Faith  will  admit  of  no  fuch 
Variation.  The  Chrijlian  Theology;  the 
Birth,  Procedure,  Generation,  and  Perfonal  Dif- 
tintlion  of  the  Divinity,  areMyflerys  only  to 
be  determin'd  by  the  initiated,    or  ordain  d;  to 

whom 


318       A  D  VI  C  E  to  an  Author. 

whom  the  State  has  affign'd  the  Guardianfhip 
and  Promulgation  of  the  Divine  Oracles.  It 
becomes  not  thofe  who  are  un-infpird  from 
Heaven,  and  un-commiflion'd  from  Earth,  to 
fearch  with  Curiofity  into  the  Original  of  thofe 
holy  Rites  and  Records,  by  Law  eJlabliJKd. 
Should  we  make  fuch  an  Attempt,  we  mould 
in  probability  find  the  lefs  Satisfaction,  the 
further  we  prefum'd  to  carry  our  Speculations. 
Having  dar'd  once  to  quit  the  Authority  and 
Direction  of  the  Law,  we  ffiou'd  eafily  be  fub- 
ject  to  Heterodoxy  and  Error,  when  we  had  no 
better  Warrant  left  us  for  the  Authority  of 
our  facred  Symbols,  than  the  Integrity, 
Candour,  and  Difintereftednefs  of  their  Com- 
pilers, and  Regijlers.  How  great  that  Can- 
dour and  Difintereftednefs  may  have  been, 
we  have  no  other  Hiflorys  to  inform  us,  than 
thofe  of  their  own  licenfing  or  compofmg.  But 
bufy  Perfons,  who  officioufly  fearch  into  thefe 
Records,  are  ready  even  from  hence  to  draw 
Proofs  very  Difadvantageous  to  the  Fame  and 
Character  of  this  Succejfwn  of  Men.  And  Per- 
fons moderately  read  in  thefe  Hiflorys,  are 
apt  to  judge  no  otherwife  of  the  Temper  of  an- 
tient  Councils,  than  by  that  of  later  Synods  and 
modern  Convocations. 

When  we  add  to  this  the  melancholy  Gon- 
fideration   of  what    Difturbances    have   been 

rais'd 


ADVICE  to  an  Author.  361 

rais'd  from  the  Difputes  of  this  kind;  what 
Effufion  of  Blood,  what  Devaluations  of  Pro- 
vinces, what  Shock  and  Ruin  of  Empires  have 
been  occafion'd  by  Controverfys,  founded  on 
the  niceft  Dininclion  of  an  Article  relating  to 
thefe  Myjlerys;  'twill  be  judg'd  vain  in  any 
Poet,  or  polite  Author,  to  think  of  rendering 
himfelf  agreeable,  or  entertaining,  whilft  he 
makes  fuch  Subjects  as  thefe  to  be  his  Theme. 

But  tho  the  Explanation  of  fuch  deep  Myf- 
terys,  and  religious  Dutys,  be  allotted  as  the 
peculiar  Province  of  the  J racred  Order;  'tis  pre- 
fum'd,  neverthelefs,  that  it  may  be  lawful  for 
other  Authors  to  retain  their  antient  Privilege 
of  inftruclmg  Mankind,  in  a  way  of  Pleafure, 
and  entertainment.  Poets  may  be  allow'd 
their  Ficlions,  and  Philqfophers  their  Syflems. 
'Twoud  go  hard  with  Mankind,  fhou'd  the 
Patentees  for  Religion  be  commiffion'd  for  all 
Inftruclion  and  Advice,  relating  to  Manners, 
or  Converfation.  The  Stage  may  be  allow'd 
to  inftrucl;  as  well  as  the  Pulpit.  The  way  of 
Wit  and  Humour  may  be  ferviceable,  as  well 
as  that  of  Gravity  and  Serioufnefs:  And  the  way 
of  plain  Reafon  as  well  as  that  of  exalted  Re* 
velation.  The  main  matter  is  to  keep  thefe 
Provinces  diftincl,  and  fettle  their  juft  Boun- 
darys.      And   on  this  Account  it  is  that  we 

have 


362       ADVICE   to  an  Author. 

have  endeavour'd  to  reprefent  to  modern  Au- 
thors the  neceflity  of  making  this  Separation 
juftly,  and  in  due  form. 

'T  would  be  fomewhat  hard,  methinks,  if 
Religion,  as  by  Lata  ejlablifad,  were  not  al- 
low'd  the  fame  Privilege  as  Heraldry.  'Tis 
agreed  on  all  hands,  that  particular  Perfons 
may  defign  ox  paint,  in  their  private  Capacity, 
after  what  manner  they  think  fit:  But  they 
muft  blazon  only  as  the  Pubiick  direcls.  Their 
Lion  or  Bear  muft  be  figur'd  as  the  Science  ap- 
points; and  their  Supporters  and  Creji  muft  be 
fuch  as  their  wife  and  gallant  Anceflors  have 
procurd  for  'em.  No  matter  whether  the 
Shapes  of  thefe  Animals  hold  juft  Proportion 
with  Nature.  No  matter  tho  different  or  con- 
trary Forms  are  join'd  in  one.  That  which 
is  deny'd  to  Painters,  or  Poets,  is  permitted  to 
Heralds.  Naturalijls  may,  in  their  feparate 
and  diclincl:  Capacity,  inquire,  as  they  think 
fit,  into  the  real  Exiftence  and  natural  Truth 
of  Things :  But  they  mufl  by  no  means  dif- 
pute  the  authorizd  Forms.  Mermaids  and 
Griffins  were  the  Wonder  of  our  Forefathers  ; 
and,  as  fuch,  deliver'd  down  to  us  by  the  au- 
thentick  Traditions  and  Delineations  above- 
mention'd.  We  ought  not  fo  much  as  to  cri- 
ticize the  Features  or  Dimentions  of  a  Saracens 

*  VOL.  Ill-,  p.  71,  231,337. 

Face, 


ADVICE  to  an   Author.       363 

Face,  brought  by  our  conquering  Anceflors 
from  the  holy  Wars ;  nor  pretend  to  call  in 
queftion  the  Figure  or  Size  of  a  Dragon,  on 
which  the  Hiftory  of  our  national  Champion, 
and  the  Eftablifhment  of  a  high  Order,  and 
Dignity  of  the  R.ealm,  depends. 

But  as  wormipful  as  are  the  Perfons  of  the 
illuftrious Heralds  Clare ncieux,  Garter, 
and  the  reft  of  thofe  eminent  fuftainers  of  Bri* 
tijli  Honour,  and  Antiquity;  'tis  to  be  hop'd 
that  in  a  more  civiliz'd  Age,  fuch  as  at  pre- 
fent  we  have  the  good  fortune  to  live  in,  they 
will  not  attempt  to  ftrain  their  Privileges  to  the 
fame  height  as  formerly.  Having  been  reduc'd 
by  Law,  or  fettled  Practice,  from  the  Power 
they  once  enjoyd,  they  will  not,  'tis  prefum'd, 
in  defiance  of  the  Magiftrate  and  Civil  Power, 
erecl  anew  their  Stages,  and  Lifts,  introduce 
the  manner  of  civil  Combat,  fet  us  to  Tilt  and 
Turnament,  and  raife  again  thofe  Defiances, 
and  mortal  Frays,  of  which  their  Order  were 
once  the  chief  Managers,  and  Promoters. 


TO  CONCLUDE:  The  only  Method 
which  can  juftly  qualify  us  for  this  high  Pri- 
vilege of  giving  Advice,  is,  in  the  firft  place, 
to  receive  it,  our/elves,  with  due  Submiftion  ; 
where  the  Publick  has  vouchfaf 'd  to  give  it  us, 

by 


364       ADVICE  to  an  Author. 

by  Authority.  And  if  in  our  private  Capa- 
city, we  can  have  Refolution  enough  to  criti- 
cize our-felves,  and  call  in  queftion  our  high 
Imaginations,  florid  Defires,  and  fpecious  Sen- 
timents, according  to  the  manner  of  Soli- 
loquy above  prefcrib'd;  we  mall,  by  the  na- 
tural courfe  of  things,  as  we  grow  wifer,  prove 
lefs  conceited ;  and  introduce  into  our  Cha- 
racter that  Modefly,  Condejcenfion,  and  juft  Hu- 
manity which  is  effential  to  the  fuccefs  of  all 
friendly  Counfel  and  Admonition.  An  honeft 
//o^-Philosophy  muft  teach  us  the  whole- 
fom  Practice  within  our-felves.  Polite  Read- 
ing, and  Converfe  with  Mankind  of  the  better 
fort,   will  qualify  us  for  what  remains. 


The  End  of  the  Fir  ft  Volume. 


